INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OB 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homileiic. 

Gatibefed  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Fdreign  Ltteratttfey 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

R«7al  OetaT*.  Cleth.  each  about  659  pages,  per  VolaoM,  $2.00. 


"Ko  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  s^es  this  work  will  want  it."— Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet" — Christian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v/ords,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an* 
ecdotea  with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
In  one,  giving  the  resulte  reached  by  many  learned  experts."— If efTi- 
94i4t  Rwi^te. 

"There  Is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Chriatian  Intelligencer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 


Gbitssis,  Vol.  x. 

I.  and   II 

Chronicles,      Isatah.  Vol.  I:  i-xxx. 

Gbnbsis.  Vol.  2. 

Ezra,    Nehemiah    a.nd      Jeremiah.  Vol.  I:  i-xxii. 

Exodus. 

Esther. 

Jeremiah,    Vol.    II:   xxiii- 

Leviticus  an9  Numbehs. 

Proverbs. 

lii. 

Deuteronomy. 

The    Psalms,  Vol.  I:  i-      Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I. 

Joshua.  Judges  and  Ruth. 

Mvi. 

Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  IL 

,  NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES; 

St.  Matthew. 

Philippians  and  CoLeesiAMs. 

8t.  Mark. 

THE5«8AL0NIANS. 

St.  Lwkb,  Vol.  1. 

First  Timothy. 

St.  Luke,  Vou  2. 

Second  Timothy,   Trros,   and 

St.  Luke,   Vol.  3. 

Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol.  1. 

Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol.  2. 

Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3. 

3^AMES. 

Acts,  Vol.  1. 

First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2. 

First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3. 

Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  L 

First  and  Second  Peter. 

Romans.  Vol.  2. 

First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

Galatianb. 

and  Judb. 

Epheslans. 

Revelation. 

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 
8m4  for  •ur  eireular  gidtig  special  offers. 

FLEMING    H.    REVELL     COMPANY 

NBV     YORK:    158   Fdth.  Avtouz  CHICAGO:   80  Wabash  Avenue 

TORONTO  LONDON  EDINBURGH 


THE  ^<l$iCGiGAL__^ 

Biblical  Illustrator 


09i 


Anecdotes,  Simfles,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
literature,    on  the    Verses   of   the    Bible 


BY      , 

Riv.  JOSEPH  S.  KXELL,  M.A. 


SJINT  MJRK 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell   Company 

London    anb    Edinburgh 


INTBODnonON  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MARK. 

loBMAnoii  or  SHI  Go8RU.-~Ghriit  oar  Lord  wii  the  great  labjeet  of  the  teaoh- 
tngoltheapoetlea.  Th^j  began,  generallj  speaking,  m  we  lee  them  in  the  il6<«o/tA« 
ApoitUit  with  His  resurrection  from  the  dead;  they  knew  His  resorreotion  to  be 
efleeted,  from  personal  ezperienoe;  and  bj  saying  over  and  oyer  again  that  they 
had  seen  Him  risen,  they  earned  eonTiction  at  last  to  the  minds  of  their  hearers. 
Then  they  went  on  to  deseribe  His  onxoifizion,  and  its  wonderful  meaning  for  the 
lost  taee  of  man.  Besides  this,  they  appear  to  haye  repeated,  in  a  simple  way, 
what  th^  had  seen  onr  Lord  do,  and  had  heard  TTim  say,  during  the  years  of  their 
companionship  with  Him,->thas  giving,  indirectly,  bnt  most  folly,  a  complete  im- 
pression of  His  character.  And  here,  as  it  seems,  we  have  the  true  account  of  the 
way  in  which  the  experience  came  to  be  written.  Looking  to  the  composition  of 
the  Gospels,  looking  to  their  stmctnral  method,  it  is  hardly  probable  that  each 
evangelist  sat  down  one  day  to  write  his  narrative  straight  off,  as  a  modem  writer 
might  sit  down  to  write  a  book  from  memory,  or  oat  of  the  contents  of  old  dooa- 
ments  lying  before  him.  The  Gospels  are  evidently  made  np  of  the  contemporary 
preaching  of  the  apostles,  and  their  difference  in  method  and  style  is  largely  to  be 
aocoanted  for  by  the  difference  in  the  andienees  the  apostles  addressed.  St.  Matthew , 
BO  doabt,  preached  in  Jadea,  and  to  popalations  who  required,  first  of  all,  to  be  satis- 
fled  that  Jesas  corresponded  to  the  Messiah  of  prophepy ;  hence  his  freqaent "  that  it 
might  be  falfilled  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the  prophet."  St.  Mark  takes 
Botes  from  the  preaching  of  St  Peter  to  audiences  which  were  still  Jewish,  but 
more  in  contact  than  those  of  Judea  with  the  Greek  and  Boman  world.  St  Luke 
grouped  together  those  features  of  our  Lord's  work  and  teaching,  which  were 
repeated  agam  and  again  in  the  cities  of  Greece  and  Asia  Minor,  as  illustrating  the 
aspects  of  the  redemption  especially  insisted  on  l>y  St  PauL  St  John  supplies 
what  earlier  narratives  had  omitted ;  in  his  Gospel  we  have  the  record  of  a  teach- 
ing addressed  to  the  populations,  whether  at  Ephesus  or  elsewhere,  deeply  in- 
fluenced by  Alexandrian  modes  of  thought.  The  Gospels,  as  we  have  them,  grew 
out  of  the  oral  teaching  of  the  apostles,  and  were  reduced  to  writing,  to  order,  to 
qrstem,  either  (as  in  the  case  of  the  first  and  the  last)  by  the  apostles  themselves, 
or  (as  in  that  <A  the  other  two)  by  persons  in  their  confidence.  This  will  explain 
differences  of  order  in  the  narratives,  the  repetitions,  the  expansions,  even  some  of 
the  apparent  discrepancies.  The  Gospels  are  not  systematised  narratives;  they 
are  collections  of  popular  instructions  on  the  birth,  work,  words,  death,  resurrection, 
and  ascension  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  addressed  by  those  who  had  lived  with 
Bim  from  His  baptism  to  His  ascension,  to  the  various  populations  whose  con- 
version OK  edification  they  were  engaged  in  promoting.    {Canon  Liddon,) 

Tbs  Obal  Aim  TBI  WuTTBH  GospxLB.— We  may  fairly  take  the  following  eoncln- 
sions  as  established.  That  the  apostles  of  Christ  felt  it  to  be  their  main  duty  topr«ac/i 
Christ  not  to  write  about  Him ;  that  they  were  disposed  to  speak  rather  than  to 
write,  by  character,  by  habit,  by  all  the  influences  of  their  time  and  race;.  That 
tonaeqaently,  the  original  Gospel  was  rather  an  oral  tradition  than  a  written  book: 


»i  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MARK, 

That  this  oral  tradition  was  kUtorie,  setting  forth  in  a  lively  and  natural  way  the 
tilings  which  Jeans  said  and  did :  That  it  was  the  theme  and  sabstanoe  of  their  Dis- 
eonrsea  and  of  their  Epi^es  :  That  the  constant  delivery  of  this  oral  Gospel  was  a 
Divine  expedient  for  teaching  them  what  of  all  they  remembered  oonoeming  Ghrisi 
was  most  potent  on  the  hearts  and  minds  of  men,  and  so  for  securing  a  more  per- 
fect written  Gospel  when  the  time  for  writing  had  oome :  That  in  the  four  written 
Gospels — four  and  yet  one — we  have  a  record  of  the  deeds  and  words  of  Christ  in 
the  follest  accord  with  the  message  originally  delivered  by  the  apostles :  And  that 
whosoever  believes  in  the  blameless  life  and  beneficent  ministry  of  CShrist,  in  Hia 
death  for  onr  sins,  and  in  His  resurrection  as  the  crowning  proof  of  life  everlasting, 
holda  a  true  and  adequate  GospeL    {8,  0*m  /)  p.) 

GoflPSL  AKD  QofiPXLfl. — ^It  IS  a  matter  of  interest  and  signifloanoe  that,  in  tha 
biblical  records,  we  have  not  only  gotpel  but  Oo$peli,  We  have  gotpelt  running 
like  a  golden  thread  through  the  whole  Bible,  connecting  history,  precept,  proverb, 
prophecy,  and  binding  the  entire  constituents  of  **  the  volume  of  the  Book  '*  into 
unity.  We  should  certainly  have  had  no  Bible  at  all  had  there  been  no  go$pel. 
But  in  particular  portions  of  the  progressive  revelation  the  golden  gospel  line 
becomes  doubled  as  it  were,  or  trebled,  or  multiplied  in  some  still  higher  ratio. 
Tha  whole  texture  of  certain  paragraphs  or  large  sections  gleams  and  glows  with 
gapel.  Such  are  the  Messianic  Psalms.  Such  is  the  fifty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah. 
And  tuch,  of  course,  are  the  four  Gospels  of  the  New  Testament.  The  gotpel  ia  so 
efflorescent  in  these  QotpeU  that  the  lovers  of  the  Bible  have,  from  a  very  early 
period  of  the  Christian  era,  agreed  to  oall  them,  *par  azoellenoo,'  th»  QotptU. 
{Jama  MoruoUt  jD.D.) 

Obioinb.— People  are  eager  to  hear  about  the  latest  excavations  at  Pompeii  and 
Herculaneum,  cities  on  the  slopes  of  Vesuvius,  which  were  destroyed  (before  the 
end  of  St.  Paul's  life)  in  k,i>,  63.  The  Gospel  documents  are  of  more  oonsequence 
than  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum.  They,  too,  have  been  dug  out,  in  a  sense,  almost 
within  the  memory  of  man.  History  is  the  field  of  their  excavation.  The  ashes 
of  exploded  theories — ^the  lava-streams  of  controversy  and  dogma — ^have,  in  times 
past,  submerged  the  origin  of  the  New  Testament ;  indeed,  I  think  they  have 
scarcely  cooled  down  yet,  for  the  angiy  subsoil  still  smoulders  with  theological 
rancour  whenever  it  is  stirred.  Still,  there  is  at  length  a  set  resolve  on  the  part 
of  the  people  to  get  at  what  lies  beneath  the  surface.  The  Christian  world  of  the 
nineteenth  century  is  asking — ^not  what  it  is  possible  to  induce  people  to  believe 
about  the  Christian  records  of  the  first  and  second  centuries,  chief  among  which 
stand  the  four  (Gospels — but  what  is  true.  Now,  what  is  true  is,  to  some  extent, 
eertaifdy  known,  and  may,  to  some  extent,  be  probably  inferred.  We  must  trans- 
port  ourselves  in  imagination  to  Jerusalem  in  the  first  century ;  we  must  follow  the 
written  rills  of  narrative,  then  the  oral  freshets  of  tradition  wherever  we  come  upon 
them;  we  must  take  our  divining-rod  of  sound  historical  criticism  and  mark 
jealously  the  spots  where  the  living  streams  g^^sh  forth ;  we  must  follow  the  direction 
th^  take,  until,  in  a  few  short  years,  they  are  seen  to  converge  and  swell  into  the 
Gospel  rivers  of  Matthevo^  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  The  Crucifixion  took  plaoe 
about  A.i>.  83,  in  the  reign  of  Tiberias  CsBsar — up  to  that  time  there  is  no  trace  of  a 
written  Gospel.  The  Acts  give  a  retrospect  from  83  to  about  63  when  Nero's  mon* 
strous  reign  was  drawmg  to  a  close.  The  main  oints  stand  out  with  considerable 
distinctness.  We  note  the  Church's  comparative  peace — the  rise  of  persecution,  the 
first  martyrdom,  the  first  imprisonments,  the  gr  wing  differences  between  the  old 
Jews  and  the  Jndeo-Chxistians  —  between  the  Jndeo-Ohristians  like  James  of 
Jemsalem,  and  the  Greek  and  Boman  Christians  like  Paol  and  his  followen.  BtOl 
ftlMra  ii  BO  written  GoepeL    St.  Paul  soonrs  the  Meditenaneaa  from  64  to  e7-tt| 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  8T,  MARK.  vB 

foimdB  his  ehnrohes  in  Asia  Minor  and  at  Borne,  writes  his  Epistles,  and  disappean 
about  68-9.  Still  there  is  no  written  Gospel.  Meanwhile,  what  was  going  on  at 
Jenisalem  7  .  .  .  .  Early  in  68  the  little  hand  of  Christians  fled  to  the  moontaini 
beyond  Jordan,  and  settled  on  the  other  side  of  the  Peraea  hills,  at  Pella.  .... 
Shall  we  look  once  more  and  for  the  last  time  npon  the  faces  of  that  saintly  gnmp 
— upon  the  aged  mother  of  our  Lord — upon  Lazarus,  perchance  upon  Nicodemns, 
Nathaniel,  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  and  the  Marys  who  ministered  unto  Jesus  in 
the  days  of  His  earthly  career  r  Some,  if  not  all,  of  these,  must  have  been  among 
the  refugees  at  Pella.  Undoubtedly  they  had  the  evangelic  tradition  —  chaste 
guardians  of  the  sacred  relics,  second  founders  of  Christianity — and  all  who  wished 
to  know  about  Jesus  would  make  a  pilgrimage  to  visit  these  holy  personages,  around 
whose  heads  the  aureole  was  already  beginning  to  gather.  Apostles  and  evangelists 
must  have  been  there — ^remnants  of  the  twelve  and  of  the  seventy  sent  out  two  and 
two— and  Peter  must  have  paid  his  farewell  visit,  previous  to  his  departure  for 
Italy.  Matthew  may  have  been  there  more  than  once  when  collecting  materials  for 
a  Gbspel,  or  perchance  the  Loffia^  "  sayings,"  of  Christ  which  went  by  his  name.  O 
far-off  light  that  for  ever  hangs  over  those  distant  Peraean  hills  t  O  heavenly 
radiance  that  for  ever  rests  upon  those  saintly  faces  I  0  distant  voices  still  echoing 
down  the  ages,  ye  will  be  for  ever  dear  and  sacred  to  all  who  love  the  Divine 
Master !  Truly  as  we  follow  in  imagination  that  little  group  of  obscure  Jews,  in 
that  lonely  mountain  village,  we  can  almost  see  the  springs  of  evangelic  history 
bubbling  up  from  the  virgin  soil,  a  thousand  little  rills  of  tradition  flowing  from 
those  distant  hills,  until  they  find  their  congenial  channels,  and  flow  forth  to  line 
with  their  four  silver  streaks  the  whole  field  of  future  history.  From  mouth  to 
mouth  were  the  words  and  deeds  of  Jesus  passed  by  the  Christian  exiles  of  Pella. 
The  little  forms  of  oft-repeated  words  (bunches  of  sentences)  would  have  a  ten- 
dency to  fix  themselves.  The  most  happy  and  expressive  would  be  apt  to  suffer  but 
little  variation,  but  no  one  would  be  in  a  hurry  to  write  them  down — ^what  is  deeply 
engraved  upon  the  heart  need  not  be  written.  We  do  not  write  down  our  eentral 
thoughts  for  fear  of  forgetting  them ;  but  we  are  ready  to  repeat  them  at  any  time. 
As  one  after  another  Evangelist  or  Apostle  passed  out  into  the  world  to  teach,  he 
might  bear  with  him  little  **  forma  of  sound  words  ** ;  the  oft-repeated  sentences 
would  doubtless  get  written  down  in  time,  especially  when  Epistles  came  to  be  sent 
round.  Between  the  years  66  and  70  there  were  probably  a  great  many  of  these  groups 
of  evangelic  sentences — acts,  incidents  of  Christian  life — ^floating  about  all  over  Asia 
Minor,  along  the  line  of  Paul's  great  missionary  voyages.  Not  a  Jewry  from 
Jerusalem  to  Borne  (and,  even  before  the  dispersion  of  the  Jews,  little  Jewish 
quarters  were  to  be  found  in  most  Greek  and  Boman  cities)  but  would  have  some 
bunches  of  sayings,  miracles,  parables,  anecdotes,  episodes  in  the  life  of  Jesus.  .  .  . 
At  onoe  we  see  that  dislocated  fragments  of  the  same,  or  similar,  utterances  have 
been  in  the  hands  of  the  different  compilers,  sometimes  with  a  context,  sometime^; 
without ;  that  selections  more  or  less  appropriate  have  been  made,  according  to  the 
method,  opportunity,  capacity,  or  even  literary  taste,  or  absence  of  literary  taste,  in 
the  sacred  oompUer.    {H.  R,  Hawei»t  M.A.) 

Thx  Stnoptio  Gospxls.— The  writers  of  the  first  three  Gospels  deal  in  the  main 
with  the  same  parts  of  our  Lord's  life-history,  and  hence  their  writings  may  be 
read  side  by  side  for  illustration  of  each  other.  For  t  is  reason  these  Gospels  have 
been  called  tynoptie^  t.«.,  comprehended  in  one  view.  They  narrate  events  which 
took  place  for  the  most  part  in  Galilee  and  the  lands  jacent  thereto,  and  speak  of 
no  visit  made  by  Jesus  to  Jerusalem,  except  that  fin  1  one,  which  was  terminated 
by  the  Crucifixion.  For  the  history  of  His  other  vi  ts  to  the  Holy  City,  we  have 
only  the  aoooonts  given  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.  The  qneetioB  arises.  How  ean 
4his  similarity  be  aeoonnted  for  r    And  how,  with      much  similarity,  does  it 


▼ffl  JHTBODUCTION  TO  THE  Q08PSL  OF  8T.  MARK. 

topsMfhatihertftrBiaehgrMtdifferenoMt  Pint  of  all,  fhe  raMmblAnoM  an  ■» 
rnanj  and  so  eloae,  that  we  moat  admit  at  onea,  in  apita  of  the  different  anaoga- 
ment  of  the  materials,  that  what  we  are  reading  waa  in  some  way  drawn  bj  tha 
three  erangelista  from  a  oommon  aooroe.  Bat  tha  differenoea  in  their  narratitea 
are  also  rerj  striking.  In  those  portions  which  are  most  oompletely  oommon  to  all 
three,  eaoh  writer  omits  some  things  and  adds  others  which  give  a  special  character 
to  his  Tersion  of  the  Gospel  history.  Compare,  e.g.,  the  three  accounts  of  tha 
Transfiguration.  In  the  seven  or  eight  verses  devoted  to  this  event  by  each 
evangelist,  the  great  lines  of  the  picture  are  the  same  in  aU.  Tet  St.  Matthew 
alone  tells  of  the  shining  of  the  face  of  Jesus,  and  that  He  touched  the  disciples 
to  rouse  them  after  the  vision  was  over.  It  is  St.  Mark  alone  who  compares  tha 
whiteness  of  the  Lord's  raiment  to  snow,  and  adds  the  graphic  detaU,  "so  aa  no 
fuller  on  earth  ean  white  them  " ;  while  St.  Luke  is  the  only  one  who  records  that 
the  visit  to  the  mount  of  Transfiguration  was  made  for  the  purpose  of  private 
prayer;  that  Moses  and  Elias,  in  their  discourse,  spake  of  our  Lord's  approaching 
Passion ;  and  that  the  disciples  of  Jesus  were  overcome  by  sleep.  Yet  amid  these 
and  other  minor  variations,  what  we  may  term  the  salient  points  of  the  historyt 
the  expression  of  St.  Peter  that  it  was  good  to  be  there,  and  the  words  spoken  by 
the  heavenly  voice,  ara  in  such  close  accord  that  they  might  be  supposed,  if 
standing  alone,  to  have  been  drawn  from  the  same  document,  or  at  all  events,  to  be 
different  close  translations  of  the  same  originaL  Hence  some  have  suggested  an 
original  Gospel  in  Aramaic,  as  a  means  of  accounting  for  such  exact  agreement 
where  it  exists.  But  such  near  resemblances  are  but  few  in  each  section  of  tha 
common  story,  while  the  variations  are  numerous.  We  cannot,  therefore,  believe 
that  the  form  of  the  synoptic  Gospels  is  to  be  explained  by  supposing  that  the 
writers  had  some  eonunon  materials  from  which  to  translate.  And  in  the  setting 
(as  we  may  name  it)  of  the  events  which  he  relates,  each  evangelist  differs  so  much 
from  his  fellows,  that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  that  any  of  the  three  made,  after 
any  sort,  a  copy  from  the  others.  We  are  therefore  driven  to  consider  the  way  in 
which  the  Gospel  narrative  was  first  published,  to  see  if  that  may  help  us  to  an 
explanation.  The  first  converts  heard  Christ's  life-history  by  word  of  mouth.  After 
the  day  of  Pentecost  the  apostles  and  disciples  went  forth  preaching,  but  did  not 
at  once  set  about  writing  a  Gospel.  As  they  preached,  they  would  tell,  now  of  one 
phase  of  the  Lord's  words  and  works,  and  now  of  another,  aa  best  suited  their 
purpose,  adding  such  exhortations  as  seemed  needful.  That  this  was  so  we  can  see 
from  Aet$,  When  the  hearers  of  these  first  Christian  sermons  became  interested, 
that  which  they  would  most  desire  to  remember  would  be  what  the  Master  had  said 
and  done.  Of  these  things  narratives  would  from  time  to  time  be  written ;  bat  aa 
the  speakers  would  not  always  in  the  same  account  preserve  exactly  the  same 
phraseology,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  narratives  might  bec<Kne  current,  varying,  within 
ceitain  limits,  in  their  words.  The  chief  matters,  and  those  on  which  lessons 
were  to  be  specially  founded,  would  be  kept  always  very  much  the  same,  but  the 
rest  of  the  diction  might  be  modified  in  various  ways.  The  variations  which 
appear  in  parallel  portions  of  these  three  Gospels  are  just  such  as  oral  teaching, 
oft  repeated,  might  be  expected  to  exhibit ;  for  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  the  oral 
tradition  of  the  Gospel  history  was  different  from  any  other  oral  tradition  with  which 
we  are  acquainted.  It  was  not  the  transmission  of  a  narrative  through  different 
mouths,  and  at  distant  intervals  of  time ;  it  was  a  repetition,  by  the  same  persons, 
of  the  same  story,  almost  day  by  day.  And  thus,  from  the  preaching  of  tha 
apostles,  resulted  the  close  resemblances  in  the  separate  histories  of  Jesus.  The 
Gospels,  in  their  variety  and  in  their  simplicity,  are  a  true  picture  of  what  the  lint 
teachers  must  have  spoken ;  and  the  differences  which  we  thus  accept,  in  the 
language  used  by  those  who  were  eye-witnesses  of  Christ's  life,  and  fitted  by  His 
Spirit  to  be  miniatem  of  the  Word,  are  not  without  their  lesson.    They  tel'T 


INTBODUaTIOH  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  8T.  MABK,  ii 

•f  imitj,  Imt  ihow  that  uifonnity  if  bj  no  meani  neeeiiuy  thereto.    (/.  R, 
f.D.I>.) 


BsLinov  TO  St.  Mitthsit  ahd  St.  Luxb.— The  Oospelg  of  St  Mark  and  St. 
Matthew  have  so  mnoh  in  common,  sometimes  with  eaoh  other  only,  sometimes 
with  St.  Lake  also,  that  it  i  clear  that  they  mast  have  drawn  more  or  less  from  a 
common  scarce.  Nothing  however,  can  be  more  against  the  whole  tenor  of 
internal  evidence  than  the  hypothesis  that  St.  Mark  epitomised  from  St.  Matthew, 
or  that  St.  Matthew  expanded  from  St.  Mark.  The  narrative  of  the  second  (Gospel 
is  in  almost  every  instance  fuller  than  that  of  the  first,  and  its  brevity  is  obtained 
only  by  the  absence  of  the  discoarses  and  parables  which  occupy  so  Uurge  a  portion 
of  the  other.  On  either  of  these  assumptions  the  perplexing  variations  in  the 
order  of  events  are  altogether  inexplicable ;  comp.  e.g..  Matt.  viii.  with  Mark  i. 
4,  6.  What  is,  with  our  canty  data,  the  most  probable  explanation  is,  that  the 
matter  common  to  both  r  presents  the  substance  of  the  instruction  given  orally  to 
disciples  in  the  Churoh  of  Jerusalem  and  other  Jewish-Christian  communities 
coming,  directly  or  indire  tly,  under  the  influence  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  James,  as 
the  apostles  of  the  Cir  umcision  (Gal.  ii.  9).  The  miracles  that  had  most 
impressed  themselves  on  the  minds  of  the  disciples,  the  simplest  or  most  striking 
parables,  the  narratives  of  the  Passion  and  Kesurrection,  would  naturally  make  up 
the  main  bulk  of  that  instruction.  St.  Matthew,  the  publican  apostle,  conversant 
with  clerkly  cultnre,  writii  g  for  his  own  people,  closely  connected  with  James,  the 
Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  wou  d  naturally  be  one  exponent  of  that  teaching.  St.  Mark, 
the  disciple  and  **  interpreter,"  or  secretary,  of  St.  Peter,  would  as  naturally 
be  another.  That  they  wrote  independently  of  each  other  is  seen,  not  only 
in  the  addition  of  new  facts,  the  graphic  touches  of  description,  but  from 
variations  which  would  b  inexplicable  on  any  other  assumption ;  such,  e.g.,  as 
Mark's  Dalmanutfia  for  Matthew's  Magdala,  Syro-Phatnieian  woman  for  Canaanite, 
Levi,  the  mm  of  Alphmu,  fo.  Matthew.  Short  as  the  Gospel  is,  too,  there  is  one 
parable  in  it  (iv.  26-29),  and  one  miracle  (vii.  31-87),  which  are  not  found  in  St. 
Matthew.  It  is  remarkable,  moreover,  that  there  are  some  incidents  which  St. 
Mark  and  St.  Luke  have  in  common,  and  which  are  not  found  in  St.  Matthew :  that 
of  the  demoniac  in  chap.  i.  *3-27 ;  Luke  iv.  83-37 ;  the  journey  through  Galilee ; 
the  pursoit  of  the  disciples ;  the  prayer  of  the  demoniac ;  the  complaint  of  John 
against  one  that  oast  oat  devi  s ;  the  women  bringing  spices  to  the  sepulchre.  Of 
these  phenomena  we  find  a  natural  and  adequate  explanation  in  the  fact  that  the 
two  evangelists  were,  at  least  at  one  period  of  their  lives,  brought  into  contact  with 
each  other  (CoL  iv.  10, 14 ;  Pnilem.  verse  24).  It  is  probable  that  neither  wrote  his 
Gospel  in  its  present  form  mtil  the  two  great  apostles  whom  they  served  had 
entered  on  their  rest ;  bat  when  they  met  each  must  have  had  the  plan  formed  and 
the  chief  materials  collected,  and  we  may  well  think  of  them  as  comparing  notes, 
and  of  the  one,  whose  life  hs^  led  to  less  culture,  and  whose  temperament  disposed 
him  to  record  facts  rather  tlian  parables  or  discourses,  as  profiting  by  his  contact 
with  the  other,  and  while  content  to  adhere  to  the  scope  and  method  which  he  had 
before  marked  out  for  himself,  adding  here  and  there  what  he  learnt  from  his 
fellow-worker  whose  **  praise  was  in  the  Gospel "  (2  Cor.  viii.  18).    {Deam  Pbtmptre.) 

Thb  Ssoond  Gospxl  Convibhs  ths  FmsT. — In  those  passages  where  St.  Mark's 
narrative  coincides  in  substance  and  language  with  that  of  St.  Matthew,  he  rarely 
fails  to  introduce  some  slight  ncident,  marking  his  own  minute  personal  acquaint- 
ance with  what  he  is  relating.  Consequently,  he  repeats  St.  Matthew,  not  because 
he  does  not  know,  of  his  own  individual  knowledge,  the  truth  of  what  he  is  writing, 
but  because  he  does  know  it ;  and  because  he  also  knows  that  his  predecessor  St. 
Mattkew  has  given  a  faithful  account  of  it :  and  therefor f  he  adopts  that  aooonnt; 


X  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MARK, 

and  this  adoption,  by  sneh  •  writer,  is  the  strongest  eonfirmation  of  the  troth  of 
the  narrative  of  St.  Matthew  which  he  adopts.  Sarely  this  was  a  wise  conrsa  of 
procedure.  It  was  one  that  might  well  have  been  suggested  to  the  evangelist  St. 
Mark  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  truth.  The  Holy  Ghost  Himself  had  inspired  th« 
Evangelist  St.  Matthew,  who  had  proved  his  love  for  Christ  by  leaving  all  for  Hia 
sake ;  and  who,  as  one  of  the  chosen  Twelve,  was  a  constant  companion  of  Christ, 
and  thus,  in  human  respects,  was  a  competent  witness  of  His  actions ;  and  who 
received  the  supernatural  effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and 
was  led  by  Him  into  all  truth,  and  was  enabled  by  Him  to  remember  what  Chn&i 
had  said  to  the  apostles.  Therefore  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  was  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Doubtless  the  Apostle  St.  Matthew  was  chosen  by  Divine  providence, 
on  account  of  his  personal  graces  and  qualifications,  as  a  fit  instrument  for  the 
work  of  an  evangelist ;  but  in  writing  a  Gospel  for  the  perpetual  edification  of  the 
Church,  he  wrote  as  he  was  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  accordingly  his  Gospel 
has  ever  been  acknowledged  by  the  Spirit  of  Gk>d,  speaking  in  the  Church,  and 
receiving  that  Gospel  as  divinely-inspired  Scripture.  In  like  manner,  St.  Mark  was 
prepared  for  the  work  of  an  evangelist  by  human  discipline  and  earthly  oppor< 
tunities ;  but  his  Gospel  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  should  therefore  be 
taking  a  low  and  erroneous  view  of  the  subject  if  we  were  to  say  that  St.  Mark 
copied  St.  Matthew,  or  that  the  Holy  Spirit  transcribed  any  passage  of  a  human 
writer.  The  true  statement  of  the  case  is  this.  The  Holy  Spirit,  Who  had  been 
pleased  to  choose  and  to  employ  the  appropriate  instrumentality  of  St.  Matthew  to 
write  the  first  of  the  four  Gospels,  chose  also  and  employed  the  appropriate  agency 
of  St.  Mark  for  the  work  of  an  evangelist ;  and  by  his  instramentality  He  vouch- 
safed to  repeat  some  portions  of  that  sacred  message  which  He,  the  same  Spirit, 
had  been  pleased  to  deliver  by  St.  Matthew ;  and  thus,  by  choosing  fit  instruments 
for  the  work.  He  condescended  to  give  such  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  Gtospel 
as  would  be  of  weight  with  reasonable  men,  arguing  on  earthly  premises  and  oon- 
siderationa ;  and  at  the  same  time  by  repeating  in  a  second  Gospel  what  He  had 
spoken  in  a  preceding  one,  He  imparted  greater  solemnity  to  what  had  been 
uttered,  and  gave  to  the  world  the  strongest  assurance  of  its  troth  by  this 
reiteration,  and  showed  by  this  specimen  that  though  the  Gospels  written  by  St. 
Matthew  and  St.  Mark  had  not  only  a  general  design  for  the  edification  of  all,  bat 
also  a  special  purpose  and  peculiar  direction — the  one  being  intended  particularly 
for  Jewish  readers,  the  other  specially  for  Bomans,  and  for  a  mixed  society  of 
Gentiles  and  Jews ;  yet  that  in  substance,  and  also  in  great  measure  in  letter,  there 
is  one  and  the  same  Gospel  for  aU.  This  process  of  repetition  is  by  no  means 
derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  one  of  the 
characteristics  of  Inspiration.  It  pervades  the  whole  volume  of  Bevelation.  It  is 
a  consequence  of  the  dignity  of  the  subject,  and  of  the  love  of  God,  who  desires  to 
afford  the  clearest  proofs  of  the  troth  of  what  He  delivers,  and  of  its  nnspeakable 
importance  to  man.    {Bishop  Christopher  Wordsworth,) 

TiTLB. — ^The  Gospel  ascribed  to  St.  Mark  was  neither  by  himself,  nor  by  the 
subsequent  compilers  of  the  New  Testament  canon,  designated  the  Qospel  **  of**  Mark. 
The  word  gospel  was  not  specifically  employed,  in  the  time  of  the  evangelists,  to 
denote  a  particular  kind  of  book  or  biography.  It  had  a  more  generic  import.  It 
meant  good  news  ;  and  just  because  it  had  that  meaning,  it  was  specially  applied  by 
Christians  to  the  best  of  all  good  news,  the  news  regarding  Jesus  Christ  as  the 
Divine  Saviour  of  sinners.  Hence  the  united  compositions  of  the  four  evangelists 
were  often,  in  the  post-apostolic  ages,  called  collectively  the  Qospel,  And  each 
evangelical  record  in  particular  was  the  gospel  *  according  to**  the  particular  evan- 
gelist who  compiled  it.  The  gospel  in  each  case  was  on«,  '*  the  gospel  of  Jesns 
Christ,  the  Bon  of  God  *'  (Hark  i.  1) ;  bat  it  was  that  jne  gospel  nndar  the  pecoliaf 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MARK,  si 

phase  of  a  particnlar  biographical  presentation.  Hence  the  phrase  "  according  to." 
It  is  not,  as  some  have  contended,  precisely  equivalent  to  "  o/,"  for  the  gospel  waa 
not  regarded  as  an  emanation  from  the  mind  of  the  writer.  It  was  not,  in  its 
essence,  the  product  of  any  human  compiler  or  composer ;  bat,  as  delivered  by  the 
evangelists,  it  assmned  in  its  form  as  distinguished  from  its  essence,  a  peculiar 
phase  in  harmony  with  the  size,  shape,  and  symmetry  of  "  the  earthen  vessels  "  in 
which  it  was  "  handed  out,"  that  it  might  be  "  handed  on."  In  the  great  majority 
of  manuscripts,  the  title  of  this  Gospel  is  either  substantially,  or  entirely,  the  same 
as  in  our  common  English  version.  In  the  Syriac  Philoxenian  version  the  word 
holy  is  introduced  before  the  word  Qospel^  and  the  phrase  according  to  is  merged : 
the  Holy  Gospel  of  Mark.  In  the  Syriac  Peshito  version  there  was  an  attempt, 
though  not  remarkably  felicitous,  to  do  more  justice  to  the  idea  suggested  by  the 
preposition :  the  Holy  Ootpel,  the  Announcement  of  Mark  the  Evangeliet,  (/.  Mori- 
eon,  D,D.) 

Thk  nams  "  Mask." — Marcus  or  Mark  was  a  Latin  name,  and  became  a  common 
Latin  prcenomen,  as,  for  instance,  **  Marcus "  Tullius  Cicero.  The  diminutivd 
Maroellus  was  a  surname  of  the  Glandian  family.  A  distinguished  member  of  that 
family,  Marcus  Claudius  Marcellus,  defeated  Hannibal  at  Nola.  Cicero  has  an 
oration  "  Pro  Marco  Marcello. "  The  Evangelist  Mark,  however,  was,  notwithstanding 
his  Latin  name,  a  Jew.  His  entire  Gospel  bewrays  his  nationality,  and  breathes 
the  spirit  of  an  Israelite  who,  though  delivered  from  Jewish  narrowness  and  bigotry, 
was  still  **  an  Israelite  indeed."  In  the  letter  too,  as  well  as  the  spirit  of  his  com- 
position, the  mark  of  a  Jewish  mind  is  indelibly  impressed.  The  reason  why  the 
evangelist  either  assumed,  or  got  imposed  on  him  his  Latin  name,  is  now  unknown ; 
probably  he  found  it  convenient,  when  out  in  the  wide  world,  to  wear  a  Gentile 
name.  It  might  be  even  to  himself,  as  well  as  to  his  friends,  and  to  all  with  whom 
he  had  to  do,  a  significant  badge,  indicating  that  he  was  now  a  Christian  cosmo- 
politan. {J.  Moriton,  D.D.)  The  name  of  Mark  is  by  some  supposed  to  be 
derived  from  the  Latin  '*  marcus,"  a  hammer ;  not  **  marcellus,"  a  little  hammer, 
but  "  marcus,"  a  strong  hammer,  able  to  crush  the  flinty  rock,  and  thus  indicative 
of  the  spiritual  power  wielded  by  the  evangelist,  and  enabling  him  to  break  the 
stony  hearts  of  the  Gentiles,  and  to  rouse  them  to  penitence  and  faith  and  a  holy 
life.    (Dean  Biekenteth.) 

AuTHOB John  Mark  was  the  son  of  one  Mary,  who  dwelt  at  Jerusalem.    There 

he  was  probably  bom  (Acts  xii.  12).  He  was  the  cousin  of  Barnabas  (Col.  iv.  10). 
The  theory  that  he  was  one  of  the  seventy  disciples  has  no  warrant.  His  mother 
seems  to  have  been  a  person  of  some  means  and  influence,  and  her  house  a  ralljing- 
point  for  Christians  in  those  dangerous  days.  Her  young  son,  already  an  inquirer, 
would  soon  become  more  anxious  to  work  for  Christ.  He  went  with  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas as  their  ** minister"  on  their  first  journey;  but  at  Perga  he  turned  back 
(Acts  xii.  25;  xlii.  13).  On  the  second  journey  St.  Paul  would  not  accept  him  again 
as  a  companion,  but  Barnabas  his  kinsman  was  more  indulgent ;  and  thus  he 
became  the  cause  of  the  memorable  sharp  contention  between  them  (Acts.  xv.  36-40). 
Whatever  were  the  reasons  for  Mark's  infirmity  of  purpose,  they  did  not  separate 
him  for  ever  from  Paul,  for  we  find  them  together  at  Bome  (Col.  iv.  10;  Philem.  24). 
St  Paul  speaks  of  a  possible  journey  of  Mark  to  Asia.  Somewhat  later  he  is  with 
61  Peter  at  Babylon  (1  Peter  v.  13).  Of  this  journey  we  have  no  more  evidence ; 
of  its  date,  causes,  results,  we  know  nothing.  It  may  be  conjectured  that  Mark 
journeyed  to  Asia  Minor  (Col.  iv.  10),  and  thence  went  on  to  join  Peter  at  Babylon. 
On  his  return  to  Asia  he  seems  to  have  been  with  Timothy  at  Ephesus  when  Paul 
wrote  to  him,  during  his  seoond  imprisonment,  and  Paol  was  anxious  for  his  return 
to  Bome  (2  Tizn.  iv  11).    (Arehbp.  Wm,  Thomson.)        According  to  the  testimony 


xii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MARK, 

ot  St.  Jerome,  St.  Mark  wrote  a  short  Gospel  at  Borne,  at  the  reqaMt  of  tht 
brethren  there ;  and  St.  Peter,  when  he  had  heard  it,  approved  of  it,  and  appointed 
it  to  be  read  in  the  churches  by  his  authority.  St.  Jerome  says,  further,  that  St 
Mark  took  this  Gospel  and  went  into  Egypt ;  and,  being  the  first  preaoner  of  Cbiial 
at  Alexandria,  established  a  Church  with  so  much  moderation  of  doctrine  and  of 
life,  that  he  constrained  all  those  who  had  opposed  Christ  to  follow  his  example. 
Eusebius  states  that  he  became  the  first  bishop  of  that  Church,  and  that  the  cate- 
chetical school  at  Alexandria  was  founded  under  his  authority.  It  is  further  stated 
that  he  ultimately  died  a  martyr's  death  at  Alexandria.  But  the  evidence  upon  this 
latter  point  is  not  sufficiently  trustworthy.  Tradition  says  that  the  body  of  St. 
Mark  was  translated  by  certain  merchants  from  Alexandria  to  Venice,  a.d.  827, 
where  he  was  much  honoured.  The  Venetian  Senate  adopted  the  emblem  of 
St.  Mark — the  lion — for  their  crest;  and  when  they  directed  anything  to  be  done, 
they  aifirmed  that  it  was  by  the  order  of  St.  Mark.    {Dean  Biekertteth,) 

Mabk,  thb  CrnzBN.--John,  alitu  Mark,  was  essentially  a  man  of  towns.  Id 
early  life  he  was  known  as  John  of  Jerusalem ;  he  was  at  one  time  a  dose  adherent 
of  Paul,  and  to  the  end,  notwithstanding  their  early  differences  of  opinion,  he 
remained  in  the  eyes  of  that  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles  profitable  to  the  ministry. 
Later  in  life  he  was  known  as  Mark  of  Bome,  where  tradition  declares  him  to  haye 
been  the  near  friend  and  secretary  of  Peter,  the  substance  of  whose  teaching  is 
generally  admitted  to  be  set  down  in  Mark's  Gospel,  which  was  written  from 
memory  after  Peter's  death.  Mark's  mother,  Mary,  seems  to  have  been  a  person 
in  comfortable  circimistances.  The  family  lived  at  Jerusalem,  and  Mary's  house 
was  much  frequented  by  St.  Peter  and  his  adherents.  It  was  probably  the  attrae- 
tion  of  Mary's  home,  with  its  friendly  circle  of  reformed  Jews — ^its  social  gatherings 
and  stirring  routine  of  city  life— that  attracted  Mark,  the  citizen,  when  he  left  Paul 
and  Barnabas  to  plunge  by  themselves  into  the  wild  regions  of  Pamphylia  and 
Lycaonia.  He  attached  himself  to  Peter.  Peter  never  had  Paul's  passion  for 
travelling,  though  necessity  drove  him  now  and  again  up  and  down  Palestine,  and, 
in  all  probability,  once  at  least — and  once  too  often — to  Bome,  where  Mark  was 
still  his  faithful  companion.  There  he  may  have  seen  the  last  of  Peter,  omoified 
head  downwards;  perhaps,  too,  of  Paul—after  his  second  trial  before  Nero— 
beheaded  outside  Bome.  He  himself  disappears,  and  makes  no  sign — leaving 
behind  him,  however,  a  name  associated  with  the  greatest  of  the  Jewish  Apostles, 
and  with  the  greatest  of  all  Apostles ;  and  a  Gospel— derived  from  Peter— but  not 
untouched  with  the  spirit  of  Paul.    {H,  R,  HatoeiM,  M,A.) 

Date  ov  Publication.— It  is  not  possible,  at  present,  to  determine  the  particular 
year  of  the  publication  of  this  Gospel.  Not  even  is  it  possible  to  determine  the 
decade  of  years  within  which  the  publication  must  have  taken  place.  All  is  mere 
conjecture  regarding  years  and  decades.  Still  there  are  certain  data  on  which  an 
approximate  date  may  be  assigned.  The  succession  of  Patristic  testimonies  back 
to  Papias  makes  it  certain  that  the  Gospel  was  in  existence,  and  well  known,  in  the 
first  century.  Since,  moreover,  it  is  all  but  certain  that  the  John  Mark  of  the  AcU 
was  the  writer  of  the  Grospel,  and  since  it  is  probable  that  he  was  quite  "  a  young 
man  "  at  the  time  of  the  crucifixion,  and  consequently  still  young  when  he  was 
assumed  by  Paul  and  Barnabas  as  their  ministerial  attendant,  we  may  reasonably 
suppose  that  he  would  not  defer  the  composition  of  his  Crospel  till  he  was  over- 
taken by  extreme  old  age.  If  he  did  not,  then  we  have  something  like  a  foothold 
on  which  to  reach  some  data  for  an  approximate  date.  It  is  not  likely,  at  all  events, 
that  the  composition  of  the  Gospel  would  be  deferred  to  a  period  Uter  than  the 
year  70,  the  date  of  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem.  Indeed,  it  is  most  unlikely  thai 
It  would  be  de  fenred  till  that  period.    If  St.  Mark  was  about  twenty  years  of  ■§§ 


UfTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MARK.  xiil 

At  the  time  of  the  eraoifixlon,  he  would  be  nearly  sixty  about  the  year  70.  Besides, 
there  seems  to  be,  in  the  peculiar  inter>stratifioation  of  the  contents  of  chap.  xiii.» 
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  statement  in  chap.  ix.  1,  eyidenoe  on  which  we  may, 
with  probability,  support  the  conclusion  that  Mark,  at  the  time  he  composed  his 
Gospel,  connected  in  his  mind,  as  a  matter  of  **  private  interpretation  "  and  expec- 
tation, the  glorious  personal  appearing  of  our  Lord  with  the  anticipated  destruction 
of  Jerusalem.  The  precise  **  times  and  seasons  "  were  not  distinctly  and  minutely 
onrolled  to  the  eyes  of  evangelists  and  apostles.  The  prophetical  perspective  did 
not  show  the  length  of  the  intervals  that  intervened  along  the  path  of  the  future, 
and  the  inspired  writers  were  consequently  left,  like  the  prophets  of  old,  to  search 
**  what  and  what  manner  of  times  "  were  referred  to.  This  being  the  case,  there 
is,  in  the  inter-stratification  referred  to,  evidence  that  increases  the  probability  that 
the  Gospel  must  have  been  written  before  the  year  70.  There  is  another  incidental 
item  of  evidence  that  leans  and  leads  toward  the  same  conclusion.  Why  should 
the  evangelist  (chap.  xv.  21)  particularize  the  fact  that  Simon  of  Gyrene  was  the 
father  of  Alexander  and  Ruftu  f  Obviously  because  Alexander  and  Bufus  were 
living  at  the  time  when  the  Gospel  was  published.  Simon  himself  seems  to  have 
been  deceased.  His  identity  is  remembered  by  means  of  his  surviving  sons.  He 
would  probably  be  in  middle  life,  or  beyond  it,  when  he  undertook  his  journey  to 
the  city  of  his  fathers  to  celebrate  the  passover.  But  it  was  "the  beginning  of 
days  "  to  him ;  and  not  to  himself  only,  it  would  appear,  but  to  all  his  household. 
His  sons  became  men  of  mark  in  the  Christian  circle.  It  would,  however,  be  quite 
improbable  and  unnatural  to  go  forward  to  a  period  near  the  close  of  the  century 
for  the  time  of  their  prominence.  A  period  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  is 
far  more  likely  to  have  been  the  season  when  they  were  conspicuous.  At  all  events, 
we  could  not,  with  the  least  shadow  of  probability,  pass  the  terminating  decades  of 
the  first  century  and  go  over  into  the  second.    {J,  Morison,  D.D.) 

Thx  nnsT  bxadbbb  ov  thb  Gospel. — The  position  which  St.  Mark  oeeupied  in 
relation  both  to  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter— his  connection  with  the  former  being 
resumed  after  a  long  interval — ^would  make  it  probable  that  he  would  write  with  a 
special  eye  to  (Gentile  rather  than  Jewish  readers ;  and  of  this  the  Gospel  itself 
supplies  sufficient  evidence  in  the  full  explanation  of  the  customs  of  the  Jews  as  to 
ablutions  and  the  like  in  vii.  3,  4,  in  the  explanation  of  the  word  corban  in  vii.  11, 
perhaps  also  in  his  description  of  "the  river  of  Jordan"  in  i.  6.  A  closer  study 
suggests  the  thought,  in  full  agreement  with  the  traditional  testimony,  that  he  wrote 
with  a  special  view  to  Christians  of  the  Roman  Church.  He  alone  describes  Simon 
the  Cyrenian  as  the  father  of  Alexander  and  Bufus  (xv.  21),  as  though  that  fact 
had  a  special  interest  for  his  readers.  There  is  but  one  Bufus  mentioned  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  he  meets  us  in  Bom.  xvi  18  as  one  who  was  prominent 
enough  in  the  church  of  that  city  for  St.  Paul  to  send  a  special  message  of  remem- 
brance to  him ;  and  it  may  be  inferred,  with  some  likelihood,  that  the  wife  or  widow 
of  Simon  of  Cyrene  (having  previously  met  St.  Paul  at  Corinth,  for  some  personal 
knowledge  is  implied  in  the  words  **  his  mother  and  mine  ")  had  settled  with  her 
two  sons  in  the  imperial  city,  and  had  naturally  gained  a  position  of  some  im- 
portance. The  very  name  of  Marcue  indicates  some  Latin  affinities ;  and  it  is  notice- 
able, in  this  connection,  that  a  larger  number  of  words  Latin  in  their  origin  appear 
in  this  Gospel  than  in  any  of  the  others.    {Dean  Plumptre.) 

BsuLTioK  or  Tnis  Gospel  to  St.  Peteb.— The  Holy  Scripture  teUs  ni  nothing 
whatsoever  respecting  the  writing  of  this  Gospel.  There  is  no  preface  to  it  fixing 
its  authorship,  as  in  the  case  of  St.  Luke's  Gospel,  of  the  Acts,  and  of  most  of  the 
Epistles ;  but  if  there  be  one  single  fact  of  the  early  Church  more  certain  from  the 
united  concurrence  of  all  Church  history  than  any  other,  it  is  that  the  composition 


«!▼       INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MARK. 

of  his  Gospel  was  occasioned  by,  and  closely  connected  with,  St.  Mark's  intimaay 
with  St.  Peter.  Papias,  Justin  Martyr,  Irenseas,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Tertallian« 
Origen,  and  Easebius  are  alike  in  their  testimony  on  this.  .  .  .  They  all  testify  to 
the  same  fact,  which  is  the  entire  dependence  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel  on  the  preaching 
of  St.  Peter.  Most  of  them  teach  that  it  was  an  acoorate  reprodaotion,  and  yet 
there  is  sufficient  discrepancy  between  them  to  show  that  they  were  not  all  derived 
from  the  same  source.  The  differences  in  the  statements  are  principally  upon  the 
matter  of  the  extent  of  St.  Peter's  superintendence,  from  that  of  Origen,  who  telk  ns 
that  St.  Peter  "  guided  "  St.  Mark  in  his  composition,  to  that  of  one  of  the  state« 
ments  of  Clement,  *'  which  when  Peter  understood,  he  directly  neither  hindered  nor 
encouraged  it," — but  this  latter  seems  to  refer  rather  to  the  publication  than  to  the 
writing.  The  contents  fully  bear  out  the  external  evidence  for  the  Petrine  origin  of 
this  Gospel,  for  they  present  the  extraordinary  phenomenon  of  one  who  was 
certainly  not  an  eye-witness  of  the  acts  of  the  Lord,  describing  them  as  if  he  had 
not  only  been  an  eye-witness,  but  a  very  observant  one.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact 
that  St.  Mark's  real  Gospel,  *.«.,  that  which  presents  hia  peculiarities  of  elose  ob- 
servance and  faithfulness  in  minute  detail,  really  commences  with  St.  Peter's  first 
entrance  into  close  companionship  with  the  Lord,  i.e.,  at  chap.  i.  18.  Immediately 
following  upon  this,  we  find  a  very  detailed  description  of  a  miracle  of  the  casting 
out  of  an  evil  spirit  in  the  synagogue,  an  account  only  found  in  Mark ;  then  the 
going  to  Peter's  house,  and  the  healing  of  his  wife's  mother,  present  two  or  three 
slight  touches  true  to  nature  which  are  not  in  St.  Matthew.  Then  the  sojoom  in 
Peter's  house  is  given  with  many  details,  which  would  not  be  preserved  in  a  body 
of  tradition,  but  which  would  abide  in  a  loving  memory,  such  as  that  the  Lord  rose 
up  early,  a  great  while  before  day,  and  went  out  to  a  solitary  place  to  pray.  Again, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  next  chapter  we  have  the  healing  of  the  sick  of  the  palsy, 
"  borne  of  four,"  given  with  a  fulness  of  incidental  detail  which  is  in  extreme 
contrast  with  the  somewhat  bare  and  hurried  notice  of  the  same  in  St.  Matthew. 
For  another  thing,  St  Mark  more  than  any  other  Evangelist,  notices  the  looks  and 
gestures  of  the  Lord :  He  looked  round  about  to  see  her  that  had  done  this  thing ; 
He  beheld  the  rich  young  ruler,  and  loved  him ;  He  looked  round  about  upon  His 
disciples  when  He  warned  them  of  the  danger  of  riches.  Whether,  then,  we  look 
to  the  extraordinary  unanimity  in  ecclesiastical  records,  or  to  the  contents  of  the 
Gospel,  nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  it  is  based  upon  the  teaching  and 
preaching  of  St.  Peter,  and  indeed  reproduces  it,  so  that  we  may  adopt  the  worda  ol 
Tertullian :  "  The  Gospel  which  Mark  published  may  be  affirmed  to  be  Peter's, 
whose  interpreter  Mark  was,"  and  of  Origen, "  Mark  composed  it  as  Peter  guided  him." 
{M.F.  Sadler ^M.A»)  Mark  is  more  engaged  with  the  acts  than  with  the  dis- 
courses of  our  Lord.  Why?  Perhaps  because  the  events  struck  Peter's  mind  forcibly, 
but,  being  an  uneducated  man,  his  account  of  worda  and  speeches  was  somewhat 
imperfect ;  his  memory  for  anything  hke  a  sustained  sermon  was  not  good.  But 
the  life  of  love  was  all  in  all  to  him.  That  he  could  not  help  remembering.  One 
act  of  mercy  and  pity  and  wonder  is  set  down  after  another,  until  Mark's  sacred 
gallery  is  hung  with  vivid  pictures,  unconnected,  indeed,  with  each  other,  but  all 
marked  by  the  central  presence  of  the  same  Divine  Figure,  who  went  in  and  out 
amongst  men  doing  good.  Now  it  is  the  synagogue  thronged  with  eager  faees,  but 
the  sermon  has  been  forgotten ;  or  a  house  in  Capernaum  besieged  by  an  impatient 
crowd  outside ;  a  poor  creature,  who  could  not  be  got  in  at  the  door,  suddenly  let 
down  in  the  midst  of  the  astonished  assembly,  through  the  mud  roof.  Or  it  is 
iUBset,  after  the  heat  of  the  day,  in  the  sudden  twihght,  with  the  last  red  streak 
dying  out  of  the  sky,  the  sick  are  brought  on  mats  and  laid  about  in  the  open  streets 
and  bazaars,  and  the  work  of  healing  is  prolonged  by  the  glare  of  torches  or  the 
dazzling  light  of  the  Syrian  moon  far  into  the  night.  It  is  ever  the  sweet  and  tender 
nature  of  the  Son  of  Man  which  impresses  Peter,  the  ragged  fisherman,  and  which 


DiTBODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MARK.  xi 

if  held  ap  before  ns.  The  good  Physician,  who  confined  not  His  attention  to  the 
■onl,  bnt  ministered  also  to  the  body ;  the  kind  Jewish  Babbi,  who  had  a  word  ol 
sympathy  even  for  the  Gentile  woman,  a  friendly  greeting  for  the  oatoasta  of  the 
oity,  and  a  healing  touch  for  the  lepers.  Aye,  and  Peter  was  touched,  too, 
■ympathetically  by  his  Master's  feelings  ;  he  watched  His  looks,  he  caught  the  ebb 
and  flow  of  His  Divine  emotions.  And  Mark  has  set  it  aU  down  for  as.  He  has 
told  OB  how  the  beloved  Teacher's  eye  flashed  with  anger  upon  those  who  wonld 
have  interfered  with  the  core  of  palsied  men;  how  He  sighed  deeply  over  the 
■tnpidity  and  insensibility  of  His  hearers,  and  at  once  set  to  work  with  some  still 
more  simple  parable ;  how  He  could  not  bear  to  see  any  one  suffer  without  hastening 
to  their  relief ;  and  how  He  was  moved  with  compass  ion  when  He  saw  the  poor 
people  dropping  by  the  wayside  with  hunger  and  fatigue.  Who,  as  he  reads,  might 
not  well  lift  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  say,  **  So  would  I  have  seen  my  Lord,  so 
would  I  have  marked  the  mercy-posts  of  His  earthly  career,  so  would  I  have  beheld 
Him  sigh  and  weep,  and  work  and  suffer,  and  pray  for  man,  so  may  I  even  now 
listen  to  the  words  of  Him  who  spake  as  never  man  spake,  as  they  drop  from  the 
lips  of  the  aged  Peter,  and  are  recorded  for  me  by  John  Mark,  his  faithful  interpreter 
and  friend."  Too  brief,  but  infinitely  precious  is  that  record — Mark,  earliest  and 
most  undogmatio  of  Gospels,  yet  containing  all  that  it  is  vital  for  us  to  know  about 
Christianity.  {H,  B.  Haweis^  M.A.)  A  question  naturally  suggests  itself  here. 
If  St.  Mark's  (Jospel  was  written  under  the  inspection  of  St.  Peter,  and,  as  some 
ancient  writers  have  said,  from  his  dictation,  why  was  it  not  rather  inscribed  with 
the  name  of  that  apostle  ?  Would  it  not  have  had  greater  weight,  if  it  had  borne 
that  namef  Perhaps,  with  reverence  be  it  said,  the  Holy  Spirit  may  have  intended 
to  teach  some  practical  lessons  by  this  arrangement.  St.  Mark  is  known  from  Holy 
Scripture  as  '*  the  son "  of  St.  Peter.  The  Gospel  written  by  St.  Mark's  instru- 
mentality has  ever  been  regarded  by  the  Church  as  having  been  composed  under  the 
sanction  and  authority  of  his  spiritual  father.  It  may  be  considered  virtually  as 
much  the  Gospel  of  St.  Peter  as  if  St.  Peter's  name  were  prefixed  to  it.  It  there- 
fore, in  fact,  possesses  the  weight  of  that  apostolic  name.  But  the  adoption  of 
another  name  in  its  title  has  its  proper  use  and  significance.  It  may  be  recognized 
as  a  silent  token  of  the  humility  of  the  Apostle  St.  Peter,  not  ambitious  for  the 
exhibition  of  his  own  name  in  the  eye  of  the  world.  Perhaps  also  he  was  of  opinion 
that,  as  one  (Gospel  had  been  already  written  by  an  apostle,  St.  Matthew,  it  might 
be  more  conducive  to  the  edification  of  the  Church,  if  the  next  gospel  were  not 
designated  with  the  name  of  any  of  the  apostolic  body,  lest  it  might  be  imagines! 
by  some  that  the  graces  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  gift  of  inspiration  were  limitetl 
to  particular  persons ;  or  that  the  apostles  of  Christ  had  a  Gk>spel  of  their  own, 
which  was  not  equally  received  by  the  whole  body  of  believers.  The  Holy  Spirit 
might  deem  it  expedient  to  employ  St.  Mark,  who  was  not  an  apostle,  in  delivering 
the  same  Gospel  as  had  been  preached  by  word  of  mouth  and  in  writing  by  apostles, 
in  order  to  show  the  unity  and  universality  of  that  Gospel ;  and  that  it  sigaifies 
little  who  the  organ  is,  by  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  speaks,  or  who  the  instrument  is, 
by  which  He  writes ;  but  that  the  main  thing  to  be  considered  is,  what  is  spoken 
and  wJiat  is  written,  and  from  whom  the  message  comes.  Who  is  Paul  f  Who  is 
Apollos  t  Who  is  Cephas  t  Who  is  Mark  ?  but  ministers,  by  whom  ye  believed,  as 
the  Lord  gave  to  every  man.    {Bishop  Christopher  Wordsworth,) 

Plak. — Only  the  public  ministry  of  Christ  is  here  recorded.  This  is  presented  in 
two  portions — the  first  giving  the  whole  ministry  in  Galilee  to  its  close  (chaps,  i.-ix.), 
and  the  second  the  last  ministry  in  Jerusalem  to  the  ascension  (x.-xvi).  In  each  of 
these  there  are  three  parts.  The  first  part  of  the  first  book  is  a  brief  introduction 
to  the  whole,  noticing  the  preaching  of  John,  the  baptism,  and  the  temptation  of 
Christ.    In  the  second  part  the  ministry  in  Galilee  is  given,  until  the  mission  of  the 


Xfi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  8T.  MARK, 

mpos&ei ;  there  being  after  the  Mooant  of  ft  few  dayi  in  Oftpemanm,  an  Mooimt  of 
the  first  joam^  in  Oalilee,  when  four  diseiplea  aooompanied  their  Lord ;  and  then 
an  aoconnt  of  a  leoond  joorney  with  the  twelye  apoitlea.  Before  thia  ia  related, 
some  aeoonnt  ia  given  of  the  opposition  of  the  Soribea  and  Pharieaea,  whioh, 
appearing  immediately  after  the  retom  to  Oapemaom  from  the  first  jonmey,  was 
renewed  on  other  occasions.  The  mission  of  the  twelve  for  a  few  weeks  separates 
the  two  parts  of  the  ministry  in  Galilee ;  the  acooimt  of  the  later  period  beginning 
with  the  death  of  John  the  Baptist  and  the  return  of  the  apostles.  At  this  time  tha 
increased  opposition  of  the  rulers  led  to  many  removals  from  Qalilee ;  first  to  tha 
other  side  of  the  lake,  then  to  the  GtontQes  in  the  district  near  Tyn,  and  afterwards 
to  the  country  about  CaBsarea  Philippi.  The  occasions  of  these  changes  are  related, 
and  some  of  ihe  miracles  and  discourses  which  belonged  to  the  different  journeys. 
The  Transfiguration  of  Christ,  at  the  close  of  this  period,  was  one  of  a  series  of 
events  manifesting  His  glory,  and  foreshadowing  His  death.  The  second  book 
begins,  after  an  interval  of  several  months,  with  the  last  joomey  to  Jerusalem, 
ohiefiyon  the  other  side  the  Jordan.  Here,  too,  the  first  part  is  introductory, 
presenting  in  a  series  of  incidents  and  discourses  the  lessons  on  self-denial  and  love 
which  our  Lord  gave  the  disciples  when  on  the  way;  these  lessons  having  respect 
to  family  relations,  to  outward  riches,  and  to  worldly  ambition.  The  next  part 
contains  an  account  of  the  ministry  of  Ohrist  when  He  oame  to  Jerusalem.  Soma 
important  events  are  first  given,  and  then  a  series  of  disoourses,  controversial  and 
didactic,  belonging  to  the  first  three  days  of  the  week ;  which  are  followed  by  the 
predictions  spoken  afterwards  to  a  few  of  the  apostles.  The  last  part  of  the  history 
gives  the  humiliation  and  exaltation  of  Christ.  Preceding  preparatory  events  being 
first  recorded,  the  last  evening  with  the  disciples  is  then  related.  This  is  followed 
by  the  aoconnt  of  the  two  trials — ^before  the  Jewish  sanhedrin,  and  the  Boman 
governor.  The  last  two  divisions  give  the  death  and  burial  of  Christ,  His  resur- 
rection and  ascension.  Certainly  no  part  is  without  order ;  the  chronological  order 
is  followed,  with  a  few  exceptions  easily  explained.  Selection  and  purpose  may  be 
discerned  everywhere ;  an  order  befitting  the  subject  and  object,  both  human  and 
Divine.    {J.  H,  Godwin,) 

CoHmiTB.— The  contents  of  the  Oospel  may  be  divided  generally  into  fov 
sections.  L  The  Introduction  (i.  1>18).  H.  The  works  of  Jesus,  ihe  Son  ol 
Qod,  in  Galilee  (i.  14-ix.  50).  UL  A  journey  to  Jerusalem,  and  residenoe  there 
(X.  1-xiii  87).  IV.  The  sufferings,  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  tha  Lord. 
{Arehbithof  Wm,  Thomson.) 

LsAnzHo  InxAs.— I.  Jenu  U  Lord,  not  only  of  natore  and  the  world  of  spirits, 
not  only  of  storms  and  diseases,  but  of  the  sick,  stormy,  guilty,  sorrowing, 
passionate,  ignorant,  yet  yearning  heart  of  man.  He  speaks,  men  ara  **  astonished 
and  amazed.'*  He  moves  from  place  to  place;  wherever  He  goes.  He  is  the 
magnet  of  the  human  soul.  "All  men  seek  for  Him.'*  Even  when  He  is 
Bhrouded  far  in  the  silence  of  the  desert,  even  when  He  is  in  the  house,  **  He 
cannot  be  hid."  Still  as  He  walks  His  way  of  life,  rays  of  supernatural  light 
stream  from  the  sky,  that  is  usually  so  cold  and  passionless,  round  the  pathway 
of  the  Galilean  peasant.  They  fear,  as  we  all  fear,  when  the  sound  of  the  tide  of 
eternity  suddenly  breaks  upon  our  ear,  and  we  see  for  a  moment  the  heaving  and 
glimmer  of  its  awful  waves.  **  They  fear  exceedingly,**  and  **  are  astonished  with 
a  great  astonishment,"  and  "  are  sore  amazed  in  themselves.**  As  that  master  hand 
sweeps  without  effort  the  chords  of  the  human  soul,  its  deepest  and  finest  tones — 
amazement,  wonder,  reverence,  trust,  adoration — answer  to  the  marvellous  touch. 
IL  Th«  Ufe  of  Jesus  is  one  of  aUemate  rest  and  victory,  teithdratPtU  and  working. 
So,  tn  diap.  i,  we  find  the  retirement  in  Nazareth,  tha  coming  forth  to  ba 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST,  MARK,  XTil 

IwptiBed;  the  withdrawal  into  the  wilderness,  the  walk  in  Galilee ;  the  rest  in  the 
eool  sanotaary,  where  the  dawn  breaks  upon  the  kneeling  man,  and  the  going  forth 
to  preach  to  the  heated  and  struggling  crowd.  Thus,  once  more,  the  withdrawal 
to  the  Mount  of  Olives  is  followed  by  the  great  conflict  of  the  Redeeming  Passion, 
while  that  is  sncoeeded  by  the  withdrawal  into  the  Sepulchre.  It  is  the  book  of 
the  wan  of  the  Lord,  and  the  rest  of  the  Lord.  The  Erst  rest  was  in  Nazareth  ; 
the  first  trophies  were  the  four  apostles.  The  last  rest  is  in  the  heaven  of  heavens, 
in  the  privacy  of  glorious  light ;  the  last  victory  (for  this  great  book  never  ended 
with  the  words  •*  they  were  afraid  ")  is  diffused  over  all  time — "  the  Lord  working 
with  them,  and  oonfiiming  the  word  with  signs  following."  {BUhop  WilUam 
Alexander,) 

pBOUUABmBS  OT  THIS  GosPBiu — ^I.  Satinos  oj  Jesus.  Without  this  Gospel  we 
■honld  not  have  possessed  the  great  axiom  (the  safeguard  at  once  against  super- 
stition and  irreverence  in  regard  to  all  positive  institutions  whatever),  "  The 
Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  not  man  for  the  Sabbath."  The  two  great  words 
would  be  away,  "  Peace,  be  still  I  **  Something  surely  would  be  wanting  to  the 
Parables,  if  we  had  lost  that  exquisite  illustration  of  the  development  of  God's 
kingdom — the  seed  growing,  not  mechanically,  or  in  virtue  of  cultivation,  but 
from  within  outwardly,  by  the  energy  of  its  hidden  life.  Here,  too  ("  cleansing  all 
meats :  *'  vii.  19),  we  see  one  ray  of  moral  light,  falling  upon  the  corruption  from 
which  the  fastidious  imagination  turns  away  sickened.  Here,  again,  in  its  fullest 
and  most  emphatic  form,  stands  that  saying  which  has  nerved  so  many  of  God's 
children  to  face  the  syllogism,  the  epigram,  and  the  scaffold.  In  St.  Lnke,  "  who- 
foever  shall  be  ashamed  of  Me  and  Mine ; "  in  St.  Mark,  **  Whosover  shall  be 
ashamed  of  Me  and  of  My  words,  in  this  adulterous  and  sinful  generation."  In  this 
Gospel  only,  the  dosing  words  of  Isaiah  are  taken  up  and  thrice  repeated,"  Where  their 
worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched."  Here  alone  occurs  that  awful  image 
taken  at  once  from  the  Jewish  ritual,  and  from  the  realm  of  nature.  The  Judge  of 
mankind  tells  ns  that  as  every  offering  was  offered  with  salt,  so  every  human  soul 
most  be  seasoned  by  the  flame  of  self-sacrifice  and  sanctified  suffering,  or  by  that 
of  wrath ;  that  it  must  be  bathed  in  heavenly  fire,  or  preserved  undying  in  the 
fire  of  hell  (ix.  44,  60).  Peculiar  to  St.  Mark's  version  of  the  discourse  upon  the 
last  things,  is  that  sudden  reiterated  note  as  of  a  trumpet,  or  tolling  as  of  a  bell, 
**Take  ye  heed,  watch  ye  therefore,  watch  and  pray,  watch**  (xiii).  In  the  same 
connection  we  must  not  forget  three  memorable  words.  He  who  in  the  unity  of  that 
undivided  Person  is  God  and  Man,  sometimes  speaks  as  if  (to  use  human  language) 
He  forgot  that  He  was  not  in  heaven,  looking  npon  all  things  in  the  calmness  of 
the  perfect  and  eternal  Ught :  sometimes,  again,  as  if  earth  were  indeed  His  home 
tat  a  season,  as  if  His  prospects  were  bounded  for  a  while  by  our  lower  horizon : 
"  Of  that  day  or  hour  knoweth  none,  neither  angel  in  heaven,  nor  the  Sont  but 
the  Father  only  "  (xiii.  32).  Let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  the  word  of  eommenda- 
tion  is  found  in  these  pages  exclusively,  which,  even  within  the  last  few  years, 
dwelt  as  a  burning  fire  in  one  woman's  heart  (Agnes  Jones) ;  enabling  her  to 
persevere  in  a  work  for  the  pauper-sick,  which  will  never  pass  away,  *'  She  hath 
done  what  she  could."  Here,  also,  we  find  the  definite  prediction  to  St.  Peter, 
"  Even  in  this  night,  before  the  cock  orow  twice."  H.  Incidbnt8.  The  second 
Adam  with  the  wild  beasts  in  the  wilderness,  while  the  whole  forty  days  are  filled 
op  with  one  long  silent  suggestion  of  the  evil  one;  EUs  mother  and  brethren 
taking  steps  to  arrest  Him,  on  the  score  of  ecstatic  absorption ;  His  sleeping  in  the 
storm  on  the  pillow ;  that  one  ray  of  light  in  the  other  storm,  **  He  $aw  them 
toiling  in  rowing  " ;  the  restoration  of  the  deaf  man  with  an  impediment  in  hii 
speech,  and  of  the  blind  man  at  Bethsaida;  His  design  of  remaining  hidden 
in  a  house ;  His  return  to  the  sea  of  Galilee ;  the  disciplea  having  one  loaf  with 

1* 


xyiii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST,  MARK, 

them  in  the  Bhip;  t  e  history  of  His  work  along  the  Gaolonite  range,  east  of 
Jordan ;  His  speaking  openly  the  layings  about  His  Passion ;  the  sndden  disap- 
pearing of  the  heavenly  visitants  from  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration;  "the 
questioning  one  with  another  what  the  rising  from  the  dead  should  mean ;  *'  the 
awe  of  the  multitude  at  the  yet  uo  faded  brightness  of  His  countenance ;  the 
ioving  displeasure  against  the  disoip  es  who  forbade  the  little  children  to  come 
to  Him;  the  not  suffering  any  vessel  to  be  carried  through  the  Temple;  the 
breaking  of  the  alabaster  box  in  the  noble  extravagance  of  love ;  the  emphatic 
record  that  all  drank  of  the  Eucharistio  cup;  the  repetition  of  the  words  in 
Gethsemane ;  the  young  man,  probably  St.  Mark  himself,  who  left  the  linen  cloth, 
and  fled  away  naked ;  the  High  Priest  standing  in  the  midst ;  Peter  beneath  in 
the  palace ;  the  first  crowing  of  the  cook ;  the  bowing  of  the  soldier's  knees  in 
mockery ;  the  names  of  the  sons  of  the  Gyrenian ;  and,  finally,  the  special  appear- 
ance  to  Mary  Magdalene  after  the  Besarreotion.    {Bishop  Wm,  Alexander.) 

St.  Mark's  the  Gospel  of  Incidents. — ^It  is  particularly  mentioned  by  Papiaft 
that  St.  Peter  gave  Mark  such  instruction  as  was  necessary,  but "  not  to  give  a  history 
(or  connected  narrative)  of  out  Lot  '»  discourses."    Now  it  is  the  characteristic 
of  St.  Mark's  Gospel  to  be  a  gospel  of  incidents,  particularly  miracles,  but  not  of 
discourses  or  parables  as  St.  Matthew's.    St.  Mark  gives  only  four  parables,  while 
St.  Matthew  gives  fourteen;   and  yet  they  both  alike  record  that  "without  a 
parable  spake  He  not  unto  them."    Ihe  omission  then  of  so  many  parables  must 
have  been  intentional  on  the  part  o.   St.  Mark  or  St.  Peter.    Then  there  is  not  a 
single  line  in  St.  Mark's  Gospel  of  the  sort  of  teaching  which  we  have  in  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount,  whereas  in  St.  Luke's  Gospel  we  have  much  of  the  teaching  of  that 
Sermon  reproduced.    Take,  again,  tke  charge  of  the  apostles.    In  St.  Matthew  x.  it 
occupies  thirty-six  verses.    In  St.  Mark  vi.  7-11,  it  occupies  four  or  five.    Take, 
again,  the  denunciation  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees.    In  St.  Matthew  it  runs  over 
a  chapter  of  thirty -nine  verses.    In  St.  Mark  it  occupies  but  three  verses  of  chapter 
xii.    I  need  scarcely  mention  that  St.  John's  Gospel  is  principally  ^a  Gospel  of 
discourses.    So  that,  compared  with  the  other  three  Gospels,  St.  Mark's  is  so 
absolutely  without  didactic  matter  that  it  must  have  been  intentionally  omitted. 
To  have  given  more  could  not  have  fallen  in  with  the  plan  of  St.  Mark,  or  St. 
Peter.    Now  why  was  this?    Evidently  because  in  the  body  of  tradition  whidt 
St.  Peter  preached,  which  is  virtually  the  same  as  St.  Matthew's  Gospel  as  w© 
now  have  it,  there  was  sufficient  didactic  instruction,  and  that  given  in  as  perfect 
a  form  as  possible,  whereas  in  t]|at  same  body  of  tradition,  the  incidents  of  the 
Lord's  life  were  not  given  in  as  graphic  and  full  a  manner  as  they  might  have  been. 
The  hearers  of  Peter  had  been  particularly  struck  with  this.    The  Apostle  Peter 
in  his  teaching  added  nothing  to  the  discourses  of  the  Lord,  as  embodied  in  the 
tradition  reproduced  in  St.  Matthew  (or  in  some  collection  of  tradition  answering  to 
it,  but  now  lost),  whereas  he  did  add  very  materially  to  the  account  of  the  incidenta 
and  miracles  of  the  Lord's  life.    He  added  those  details,  those  touches  of  nature 
which  made  his  accounts  that  p  otographic  representation,  if  one  may  reverently 
use  the  expression,  which  we  have  in  this  Gospel,  as  compared  with  St.  Matthew. 
God,  who  gives  to  each  man  his  particular  gift,  one  after  this  manner,  another 
after  that,  may  have  given  to  St.  Matthew  a  retentive  memory  to  reproduce  faith, 
fully  parables  and  long  discourses.    He  gave  to  St.  Peter  an  eye  observant  of  all 
the  lesser  details  which  add  lifelike  charm  to  a  narrative.    And  these  it  was  which 
the  Roman  Christians  desired  to  have  preserved,  and  so  they  begged  St.  Mark  ta 
reproduce  the  accounts  of  miracl    and  incident,  and  as  the  oldest  historian  tell* 
OS,  "  not  to  give  a  history  of  our     ord's  disoonrses."     (If.  F,  Sadler,  M.A,) 

Chasaotkbistios. — The  key  to  t  is  Gospel  seems  to  be  that  the  writer  was  minded 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST,  MARK.  xix 

to  write  an  Moount  of  the  wonderful  life  and  power  of  Jeans,  the  Son  of  God.  He 
conveys,  and  in  a  marked  manner,  the  shortness  of  the  time  in  which  all  was 
transacted,  and  the  rapidity  and  wonderful  activity  of  this  great  life.  Doctrinal 
discoorses  are  foreign  to  this  purpose.  The  relation  of  Jesus  to  the  Jewish  Scrip 
tures  is  likewise  made  less  prominent.  The  word  "  straightway,**  or  *'  immediately/' 
is  used  forty-one  times  in  this  shortest  Gospel ;  a  marked  peculiarity.  The  wonder- 
working Son  of  Gbd  sweeps  over  His  kingdom,  swiftly  and  meteor-like ;  and  men 
are  to  wonder  and  adore.  His  course  is  sometimes  represented  aa  ahmpt,  mys- 
terious, awful  to  the  disciples ;  He  leaves  them  at  night ;  conceals  Himself  from 
them  on  a  journey.  The  disciples  are  amazed  and  afraid  (z.  24,  32).  And  the 
evangelist  means  the  same  impression  of  awe  to  be  imparted  to  the  reader.  Periods 
of  solitude  and  rest  are  interposed  in  this  stormy,  hurried  life.  .  .  .  Some  speak 
slightly  of  this  picture  of  what  is  called  a  **  restless  "  career,  rad  contrast  it  with 
the  calmer  and  more  sculpture-like  representation  which  they  pretend  to  find  in  St. 
Matthew.  But  the  sketch  in  this  Gospel  is  true  to  history.  The  constant  persecu- 
tions, from  which  it  was  needful  to  flee,  even  sometimes  beyond  the  bounds  of 
Herod's  kingdom,  to  Tyre,  or  to  some  solitary  spot  on  the  sea-shore ;  the  crowds 
that  followed  Him  in  wonder,  forgetful  of  food  and  shelter,  that  they  might  see  with 
eyes  what  others  told  in  their  ears ;  the  pitiable  cases  of  sickness  and  mutilation 
from  which  that  loving  eye  is  never  turned  away ;  the  constant  presence  of  the 
twelve  disciples,  with  all  their  doubts,  and  crude  beliefs,  and  problems  to  solve  :  a 
life  made  up  of  such  elements  must  have  been  one  of  constant  pressure,  not  indeed 
of  "hurry"  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  word;  for  if  there  is  one  truth  more  than 
another  that  we  may  learn  from  the  lives  of  those  who  have  lived  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  it  is  that  the  soul  may  be  kept  in  peace  in  the  midst  of  great  outward  pressure. 
Hence,  the  representation  of  this  Gk)spel  can  be  seen  to  be  true  and  faithful,  if  only 
it  be  granted  that  Jesus  lived,  and  that  in  a  ministry  of  three  years  He  went  about 
teaching,  and  preaching,  and  healing,  the  object  of  constant  persecution,  yet  never 
abating  His  zeal  on  account  of  His  enemies.    {Archbishop  Wm,  Thomson.) 

ObABAOTBBISTIOS — WITH  SPBOIAL  BXlVBBMOa  TO  THS  LAST  TWELVB  VBBSS8. — What 

St.  Mark  brings  out,  with  those  swift  and  vivid  touches  which  all  careful  readers  of 
his  Gospel  have  noticed,  is  the  personal  action  and  work  of  the  Son  of  God  as  Lord 
of  the  world,  and  conqueror  of  the  hearts  and  faith  of  men.  He  represents  Him  as 
establishing  an  increasing  dominion  over  evil  and  over  nature,  and  overcoming  the 
powers  that  oppose  Him  till  at  last  He  rises  from  the  grave.  He  recalls  the  words 
of  oommand  addressed  to  the  raging  evil  spirits,  to  the  wild  and  overwhelming 
waves,  to  the  barren  yet  leafy  fig  tree.  As  he  goes  on,  he  describes  the  works  of 
healing  and  of  power  wrought  by  the  Son  of  God  over  more  violent  or  more  subtle 
forms  of  evil.  First,  a  devil  is  cast  out— then  it  is  a  legion  and  army  of  devils. 
First,  a  fever  is  assuaged — then  it  is  a  vehement  storm  that  is  stilled.  First,  a  leper 
is  cleansed,  whose  outward  man  is  tainted — then  a  poor  woman  suffering  for  many 
years  an  inward  plague.  First,  a  paralytic,  with  suspended  energy,  is  restored — 
then  the  daughter  of  Jairus  is  brought  back  from  actual  death.  And  this  gradual 
revelation  by  potent  word  and  mighty  work,  goes  on  side  by  side  with  another.  Our 
Lord  must  indeed  conquer  the  spirits  of  evil,  and  prove  Himself  the  God  of  Nature, 
but  He  has  also,  and  as  His  chief  work,  to  achieve  dominion  over  the  wills  and 
affections  of  mankind.  And  here  there  is  a  different  method  to  be  put  in  practice. 
He  will  only  conquer  those  who  trill  receive  Him.  He  could,  indeed,  force  belief,  as 
He  drove  the  legion  to  acknowledge  Him,  and  as  He  rebuked  the  wind,  and  said  to 
the  waves,  **  Peace,  be  still."  But  this  is  not  the  method  of  His  wisdom.  There  is, 
it  wcold  seem,  in  the  eyes  of  Gtod,  and  under  the  rule  of  the  laws  by  which  He 
gOToma  the  human  race,  no  value  but  in  willing  service — ^in  service  where  the  man 
«>naentB,  even  though  he  do  it  with  difiSculty  and  labour.    And  so  St.  Mark  sen 


tx  JNTBODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MARK. 

before  ns  how  the  Son  of  God  gradaally  reveals  Himself  in  opposition  to  doIneM  of 
perception  and  want  of  faith,  and  bow  some  accept  Him  after  long  and  patient 
edacation,  and  some  to  the  end  ref  OM.  How,  then,  does  the  last  chapter  fit  on,  u 
a  oondnsion  to  the  body  of  the  Qospel  ?  With  a  perfect  and  exact  harmony,  wa 
reply,  such  as  no  mere  compiler  eoold  have  attained,  and  it  continues,  withoat  a 
break,  all  the  threads  which  ran  through  the  main  teztore  of  the  book.  It  describes, 
in  short,  how  even  after  the  Besorreotion,  the  faith  of  the  disciples  still  was  slow, 
and  their  hearts  still  hard.  How  the  women  at  the  tomb  fled  in  trembling  and 
amazement.  How  the  disciples  disbelieved  Mary  Magdalene.  How  the  two  who 
met  Him  going  into  the  oomitry  failed  to  convince  the  rest.  How  at  last  Ha 
appeared  to  all  Himself,  and  upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief  and  hardness  of 
heart,  and  thus  finally,  and  after  a  long  and  gradual  process,  gained  a  conquest  over 
their  wills.  Then  it  was  that  He  addressed  them  with  the  discourse  at  the  dose  of 
the  book,  bidding  them  go  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature,  offering  salvation 
to  believers,  and  threatening  condenmation  to  disbelievers.  Promising  fourfold 
powers  like  His  own  to  those  who  believe — a  power  over  spiritual  evil,  an  increase  of 
natural  gifts,  a  superiority  to  physical  dangers,  and  a  virtue  of  healing  diseases.  Then, 
and  not  till  then  (when  He  reveals  His  f  uU  majesty  by  the  transfer  of  these  graoes  to 
others),  does  He  receive  the  title  of  Lord.  "  The  Lord  (it  is  said),  after  He  had  spoken 
with  them,  was  received  up  to  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  And  they 
— they  are  now  no  longer  faithless,  but  believing.  Having  convinced  and  gained 
them,  He  has  gained  the  instrument  which  He  came  r'own  on  earth  to  fashion,  the  only 
instrument  which  in  His  wisdom  He  thinks  fit  to  use  in  the  conversion  of  the  world 
— the  instrument  of  personal  faith  begetting  faith.  And  thus  endowed,  they  go 
forth  and  preach  everywhere,  but  not  in  their  own  strength,  but  His,  for  the  Lord 
works  ever  with  them,  and  confirms  their  doctrine  by  means  of  suitable  miradea, 
just  as  in  His  own  ministry  He  worked  such  marvds  as  had  a  moral  relation  to  the 
truths  He  came  to  teach.  **  And  they  went  forth  (we  read)  and  preached  every 
where,  the  Lord  working  with  them,  and  confirming  the  word  with  signs  following.** 
Any  one  who  will  read  this  last  chapter  carefully,  will  observe  how  it  gathers  up  in 
a  wonderful  way  the  chief  points  of  the  whole  GospeL  The  lives  whioh  mn 
through  it  are  brought  to  a  point;  and  there  is,  as  it  were,  an  onveiling  ci  Um 
aystea  ol  which  they  are  the  eonstmoting  elements.    {Jolm  Wordtwartk,  MJL^ 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTMTOR. 

ST.  MARK. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Ver.  1.  The  beginning. — The  beginning  of  the  gospel  of  Jesui  ChrUtt^-X,  Id 
John's  way  of  living  there  was  the  beginning  of  a  gospel  spirit,  (a)  Self  deniaL 
(6)  Nonconformity  to  the  world.  II.  In  John's  preaching  and  baptizing  there  was 
the  beginning  of  the  gospel  doctrines  and  ordinances,  (a)  Remission  of  sin  upon 
a  true  repentance.  (6)  Christ — His  pre-eminence,  power,  and  promises.  III.  In 
John's  success  there  was  the  beginning  of  a  gospel  church.  [M.  Henry.)  The 
beginning  of  the  gospel : — This  expression  suggests — I.  Unexampled  lovb.  II.  A 
glorious  EPOCH.  To  it  all  the  old  converge,  from  it  all  the  old  radiate.  It  was  the 
planting  of  a  moral  sun  in  man's  heavens,  the  opening  of  a  living  fountain  in  man's 
desert.  III.  A  magnificent  progress.  The  beginning  seemed  very  unpropitions 
and  unpromising.  For  remedial  truth  was  shut  up  in  the  breast  of  one  lonely  man, 
and  He  the  son  of  a  Jewish  peasant.  But  what  has  it  become  ?  The  solitary  seed 
covers  many  acres  with  precious  grain,  the  little  spring  has  swollen  into  a  majestic 
river,  bearing  on  its  bosom  the  soul  of  the  world  to  a  higher  civilization,  a  purer 
faith,  and  a  diviner  morality.     {Anon.)  The  beginning  of  the  gospel : — ^I.  A 

WONDERFUL  THING  HERE  BEGUN.  The  gospel — good  uews,  &0,  One  might  have 
expected  justice  and  wrath  to  make  an  end  of  sin  and  sinners,  instead  of  a  begin- 
ning  of  a  new  dispensation  of  mercy  and  love.  II.  A  wonderful  bboinnino  of 
this  wonderful  thing.  So  unostentatious — one  man  preaching  in  a  wilderness ;  so 
tolemn — one  voice  disturbing  the  silence ;  so  novel — a  way  prepared  for  another 
man ;  so  strangely  answering  to  ancient  prophecy.  HI.  This  wonderful  beginning 
of  the  wonderful  new,  was  the  beginnino  of  the  end  of  the  wonderful  old. 
Yet  no  one  thought  that  a  dispensation  so  solemnly  inaugurated,  marked  by 
prophets,  sustained  by  miracles,  was  having  its  death-knell  tolled  by  that  one  man 
in  the  wilderness.  {J.  G.  Gray.)  The  gospel  ofJesue  Christ : — L  Our  first  theme 
is  the  GOSPEL.  1.  What  is  the  gospel  7  (1)  That  the  word,  both  in  Greek  and 
English,  originally  means  good  news,  glad  tidings.  Gospel  is  good  news  in  the 
same  sense  tbat  it  was  good  news  when  you  heard  of  the  recovery  of  a  parent  or 
child.  (2)  That  it  is  good  news  from  God  to  man — from  heaven  to  earth—from 
the  infinitely  holy  to  the  lowest  depths  of  human  wretchedness  and  sin.  It  is  not 
good  news  from  America  to  Europe ;  it  is  a  voice  from  heaven,  breaking  through 
the  silence  or  discord  of  our  natural  condition.  Oh,  could  the  tumult  of  this  life 
cease  to  fill  our  ears,  we  might  hear  another  sound — good  news  from  God  to  each 
of  us.  (3)  That  it  is  good  news  in  relation  to  your  sins,  salvation,  and  eternity. 
It  remedies  the  greatest  evils  and  supplies  the  deepest  wants  of  man.  2.  Whose 
gospel  it  is.  It  is  not  an  impersonal  or  abstract  gospel ;  it  is  not  the  gospel  of  » 
man,  nor  yet  of  a  distant  God ;  it  is  the  gospel  born  of  God  and  man ;  it  m 
described  as  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God.  (1)  It  is  "  the  gospel  of 
Jesus,"  that  is,  the  good  nevvs  of  a  Saviour.  (2)  But  it  is  also  the  gospel  of  Christ : 
the  anointed  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King  of  His  people.  (3)  But  who  is  sufficient 
for  these  things,  or  who  is  equal  to  the  great  work  shadowed  forth  by  these  titles  ? 
The  necessity  of  a  Divine  Person  to  assume  this  trust  is  evident  from  the  nature 
of  the  trust  itself;  the  Son  of  God  is  the  Saviour  and  Prophet.  H.  Thj 
beginning  of  the  GOSPEL.     1.  Where  did  it  begin  of  old?    (1)  That  the  gospel  af 

I 


ft  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

a  message  of  Balvation  may  be  said  to  have  begun  in  the  eternal  connsel  of  the 
Divine  will ;  in  the  eternal  purpose  of  the  God  who  sent  it.  We  must  not  regard 
the  gospel  as  a  sort  of  after-thought  to  make  good  the  failure  of  another  method 
of  Balvation.  (2)  That  the  beginning  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  was  not  in 
the  New  Testament,  but  in  the  Old ;  it  began  in  the  simple  first  promise  to  ota 
first  parents.  (3)  The  gospel  may  be  said  to  have  had  a  new  beginning  in  the 
preparatory  ministry  of  John  the  Baptist.  2.  Where  does  this  gospel  begin  now  ? 
(1)  That  it  begins  for  the  most  part  in  religious  education — in  the  simple  teaching 
at  maternal  knees.  (2)  In  the  moving  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (3)  There  are  provi- 
dential recommencements  of  the  gospel  both  to  communities  and  to  individuals. 
{J.  A.  Alexander^  D.D.)  The  great  scheme  started : — I.  The  most  wonderful  epoch 
in  the  annals  of  time.  II.  The  most  wonderful  production  in  the  realm  of 
LiTBRATO-A*.  All  the  Bible  is  inspired  :  both  Old  and  New  Testaments :  1.  By  the 
meaning  of  the  language  used  in  the  Bible  when  speaking  of  itself.  2.  From  the 
unity  of  idea  underlying  the  entire  record.  3.  From  the  teaching  of  Christ  in 
regard  to  it.  This  gospel  is  the  most  wonderful  production  in  the  realm  o 
literature.  1.  Because  of  the  age  of  the  book.  2.  Because  of  the  number  o 
men  who  took  part  in  its  authorship.  3.  The  scope  and  spirit  of  its  teaching 
4.  Because  of  its  universal  adaptation.  6.  Because  of  the  effects  it  produces. 
(T.  Kelly.)  The  origin  of  the  gospel: — This  short  verse  contains  four  great 
wonders.  1.  The  greatest  wonder  of  heaven— "the  Son  of  God."  2.  The  greatest 
wonder  of  humanity — '*  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God."  3.  The  greatest  wonder  of 
all  knowledge — "the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ."  4.  The  most  wonderful  era — •*the 
beginning  of  the  gospel."  I.  There  was  an  abstract  or  absolute  beginning  to  the 
gospel  in  the  Divine  mind.  The  love,  pity,  wisdom  of  God  were  the  sources  of  the 
gospel.  II.  The  gospel  had  a  prophetic  beginning  in  the  first  revelations  made  to 
Adam,  the  patriarchs  and  prophets.  **  To  Him  gave  all  the  prophets  witness. " 
III.  The  gospel  had  its  actual  beginning  in  the  ministry  of  John  and  the  incarna- 
tion of  Jesus.  rV.  The  gospel  had  an  efficacious  beginning  which  is  to  be  dated 
from  the  death  of  Christ.  Until  then  nothing  efficient  was  done.  V.  The  gospel 
had  an  operative  or  practical  beginning  in  the  commission  given  to  the  apostles 
after  the  resurrection — *•  Beginning  at  Jerusalem."  VI.  The  gospel  viewed  in  its 
whole  history,  hitherto  is  but  yet  at  its  beginning.  It  has  only  begun  to  bless 
and  save  mankind.  VII.  When  the  great  consummation  of  its  triumph  is  come 
we  shall  only  be  at  the  beginning  of  the  gospel.  It  will  have  no  end.  Has 
it  had  a  beginning  in  you  ?    {The  Evangelist.)  Unity  and  progress  of  Divine 

dispensations: — I.  Thk  gospel  has  had  three  beginnings,  yet  each  of  them  may 
be  spoken  of  as  the  beginning.  1.  In  the  Divine  counsels,  when  it  was  but  a 
thought.  2.  In  the  incarnation,  when  it  became  a  Person.  3.  In  believers,  when 
it  becomes  a  new  creation.  II.  One  beginning  of  the  gospel  is  always 
introductory  to  another.  1.  The  thought.  2.  The  agent  or  representative. 
3.  The  result.     Divine  revelation  is  always  consistent  and  progressive.    HI.    No 

BEGINNING  OF  THE  GOSPEL    CAN    BE    TRUE    AND   EFFECTUAL  EXCEPT  AS  IT  LEADS  TO  A 

spiritual  CONSUMMATION.  The  prophets  pointed  to  John,  John  to  Jesus,  Jesus  to 
the  Holy  Ghost,  This  shows  (1)  The  transitoriness  of  all  mere  ceremony  ;  (2)  the 
uselessness  of  all  mere  knowledge  ;  (3)  the  possibility  of  the  highest  fellowship 
with  God.  IV.  Lesson  to  pioneers.  A  man  only  works  well  in  proportion  as  he 
knows  the  measure  of  his  power  and  the  hmit  of  his  mission.  When  the  frame- 
maker  mistakes  himself  for  the  painter,  art  is  degraded.  It  does  not  follow  that 
because  a  man  knows  the  alphabet,  he  can  write  a  book.  The  pioneer  must  never 
go  in  the  king's  clothes.  April  cannot  do  the  work  of  August.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  commencement  of  the  gospel: — I.  Contemplate  the  gospel  as  a  progressive  revela- 
tion. II.  This  commencement  of  the  gospel  was  important  (1)  As  the  only  true  reve- 
lation of  God ;  (2)  as  the  only  true  revelation  of  man.  III.  The  commencement  of 
the  gospel  was  happy.  1.  Because  the  commencement  of  the  gospel  delivered  from  the 
tyranny  of  the  law.  8.  Because  it  provided  an  escape  from  the  dire  consequences  of 
sin.  3.  Because  it  unfolded  the  happy  destiny  of  the  race.  IV.  The  commencement 
of  the  gospel  was  hopeful.  Learn — 1.  God's  consideration  for  the  need  of  man.  2. 
The  self -consistency  of  a  gospel  thus  gradually  unfolded.  8.  That  it  should  be  our 
continued  endeavour  to  reproduce  the  gospel  in  our  lives.  (Joseph  8.  Exell,  31.  A.) 
Beginnings: — The  first  sentence  of  this  gospel  is  the  title  to  the  whole  of  it — *•  The 
beginning  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God."  Here  again  is  a 
characteristic  form  of  expression.  This  evangehst  uses  the  word  "began"  over 
ftnd  over  again,  a  score    of  times   at  least.      Jesus  *'  began  to  teach "  (iv.  1) ; 


ST.  MARK. 


the  multitude  •* began  to  implore  Him  to  depart"  (v.  17);  the  leper  "began 
to  publish "  the  miracle  (i.  45) ;  Christ  "  began  to  send  out "  the  twelve 
{vi.  7) ;  the  soldiers  "began  to  mock  Him"  (xv.  18);  revilera  "began  to  spit 
on  Him  "  (xiv.  65).  The  tale  is  just  full  of  "  beginnings "  aU  through  to  the 
end.  I.  It  began  first  in  the  purpose  of  the  Almighty  Father.  See  how  Mark 
brings  this  out  by  his  double  quotation  from  the  old  and  long-dead  prophets. 
There  was  certainly  a  plan  of  redemption  before  a  man  was  redeemed — "  Known 
onto  God  are  all  His  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world."  We  cannot  help 
thinking  Mark  knew  in  the  outset  what  wonderful  matters  he  had  to  record.  For 
here,  all  driven  up  compactly  together,  is  found  the  finest  group  of  first  things  in 
the  New  Testament :  the  first  sermon  on  repentance,  the  first  baptism  of  a  convert, 
the  first  sensible  manifestation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  first  voice  from  heaven  in 
recognition  of  Jesus'  office  and  glory,  the  first  fight  with  Beelzebub,  and  the  first 
victory  over  temptation.  This  did  not  happen  so ;  it  must  have  been  ordered  so. 
Thus  the  gospel  began  in  God's  purpose.  II.  It  had  a  second  beginning  in  thb 
ADVENT  OF  ouB  SAviouB  JESUS  CHRIST.  III.  It  had  another  also  in  the  wobk  of 
THE  HOLT  OHOST.  See  how  Mark  shows  this  clearly  by  the  witness  of  the  dove  on 
the  head  of  Christ  as  He  comes  up  from  the  Jordan,  and  by  the  use  of  the  energetic 
word  ♦'  drive  **  when  describing  the  urgency  with  which  our  Lord  was  constrained  to 
endure  the  temptation.  The  good  news  of  salvation  began  to  be  told  in  the 
moment  when  Satan  received  his  defeat ;  it  was  the  Spirit  of  God  which  here 
brought  on  the  conflict  and  crowned  the  Victor  with  success.  It  is  at  this  special 
point  that  the  admonition  reaches  ourselves.  The  question  above  all  others  for  us 
to  ask  and  to  answer  is  this :  How  does  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  effect  the 
beginning  of  the  gospel  in  the  soul  of  an  unregenerate  man  ?  The  reply  to  this 
is  not  difficult.  Sometimes  by  a  strange  disturbance,  a  sovereignly  wrought  un- 
easiness in  the  heart  and  conscience;  the  sinner  does  not  know,  perhaps,  the 
explanation  of  his  restlessness,  but  he  becomes  sure  that  his  peace  is  not  made, 
and  that  it  ought  to  be  made,  with  an  offended  God.  Then  also  sometimes  the  Spirit 
uses  the  quiet  communication  of  truth.  By  the  slower  processes  of  patient  education 
a  child  is  led  on  up  into  the  knowledge  of  God.  Then  the  Holy  Ghost  moves  that 
awakened  life,  and  unites  it  savingly  to  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Eedeemer.  And  some- 
times this  same  Divine  Agent  of  regeneration  employs  dispensations  of  providence, 
prosperous  or  adverse.  Some  practical  lessons  are  taught  us  here,  and  they  will  be 
remembered  better  if  they  are  stated  in  order.  1.  Every  good  and  great  thing 
originates  in  a  purpose  as  certainly  as  God's  gospel  did  in  God's  purpose.  Every 
enterprise  exists  as  a  thought  before  it  exists  as  a  realization.  No  man  ever 
became  a  Christian  without  as  definite  a  purpose  to  begin  the  gospel  in  his  heart 
as  Mark  had  when  he  commenced  to  write  his  gospel  in  the  Bible.  2.  So  there  is  a 
second  lesson  to  learn :  every  true  life  must  have  a  plan.  Christ's  life  had  God's 
plan.  Any  life  will  accomplish  more  if  it  finds  the  Divine  plan  and  accepts  it.  If 
an  author  is  compelled  to  plan  a  story  with  characters  in  it,  in  order  to  even 
moderate  success  in  managing  the  unities,  must  he  not  likewise  be  forced  to  plan  a 
career  which  he  proposes  to  live  out  ?  3.  Put  alongside  of  this  another  lesson : 
eminence  and  excellence  come  from  consistency  in  matching  ends  to  beginnings. 
Human  beings  are  reached  and  moved  best  by  long  and  steady  forces,  rather 
than  by  those  which  are  intermittent.  4.  Now  for  the  best  lesson  of  all :  when 
once  the  gospel  has  had  its  real  beginning  in  any  energetic  life,  nothing  can  take 
it  away  at  the  end.  Heaven  is  the  end.  (C.  S.  Robins&nf  D.D.)  The  Genesis 
of  the  New  Kingdom: — Intense  interest  fastens  upon  "beginnings."  There 
is  large  scope  for  the  play  of  imagination.  We  gaze  with  exquisite  plea- 
sure on  the  laughing  face  of  a  royal  babe,  or  on  the  launch  of  a  maU-ship,  or 
on  the  babbling  rise  of  some  historic  river.  Human  life  is  fall  of  "  beginnings." 
I.  Christ's  incarnation  was  a  great  beoinnino  fob  humanity.  II.  This  be- 
ginning HAD  ITS  hidden   BOOTS  IN    THE    PAST.      HI.   ThIS    NEW    CBEATION    IS    BOTH 

LIKE  AND  UNLIKE  THE  OLD.  It  is  Uke^  in  that  it  opens  with  a  voice.  It  is  unlike 
in  the  fiat  uttered.  Attention  here  is  challenged  for  the  message,  not  for  the 
man :  it  is  a  voice.  The  man  is  a  cipher,  the  doctrine  everytJ^ing.  IV.  Be- 
ginnings ABE  OFTEN  ATTENDED  WITH  PAIN.  The  dcscrt  life  of  Johit,  with  its 
ascetic  austerities,  was  painful.  It  was  painful  to  the  natural  man — ^to  his  social 
tendencies.  Each  day  begins  in  midnight  darkness.  Each  year  is  bom  in  wintry 
cold  and  gloom.  The  life  of  the  plant  opens  with  the  fracture  of  the  seed.  And 
the  beginning  of  the  gospel's  life  in  individual  s  uls  is  attended  with  sorrow 
and  mortification.      V.  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  a  beginning  withcct  am  sink. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 


In  the  kingdom  of  Messiah,  the  prophecy  becomes  fact — "  Thy  sun  shall  no  more 
go  down."  Prophets  foresaw  the  fall  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem ;  no  prophet  ha» 
ever  foreseen  the  decay  of  the  heavenly.  The  gospel  is  power — infinite  power. 
Is  there  no  limit  to  man's  development  ?  None.  By  virtue  of  Christ's  gospel,  we 
are  always  beginning.  (D.  Davies^  M.A.)  Of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
author  and  subject  of  the  gospel  : — I.  Christ  Jesus  is  thk  author  of  this 
oosPEL.  How  great,  then,  is  the  sin  of  those  who  despise,  or  refuse  to  believe  and 
obey  the  gospel.  They  reject  Christ  Himself.  Take  heed  we  be  not  guilty  of  this 
gin,  for  God  will  severely  punish  it.  Yet,  how  common  is  this  contempt  of  the 
gospel  nowadays  1  How  little  do  some  care  to  hear  it  unfolded  in  the  public  ministry  : 
a  amall  matter  hinders  them.  One  cause  of  such  contempt  is  this,  that  men 
are  not  yet  thoroughly  persuaded  that  the  doctrine,  delivered  by  a  frail  man  like 
themselves,  is,  and  can  be,  the  doctrine  of  Christ  Himself ;  they  neither  see  nor 
feel  any  Divine  power  of  Christ  working  in  and  by  this  doctrine  when  it  is 
delivered;  therefore  they  think  it  to  be  the  word  of  a  man,  not  the  word  of  Christ 
Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  But  know  this,  that  Christ  Jesus  uses  the  ministry  of 
weak  men,  yet  the  word  and  message  which  they  bring  is  the  message  of  Christ 
Himself.  And  what  if  we  bring  this  treasure  to  5  ou  in  earthen  vessels  f  Yet 
the  treasure  is  not  the  less  worth.  II,  Christ  is  ai.so  the  chief  subject, 
MATTER,  AND  ARGUMENT  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  Whatever  is  taught  in  the  gospel  is 
either  (1)  concerning  the  Person  of  Christ ;  or  (2)  concerning  His  offices,  as  Ha 
is  our  Priest,  Prophet  and  King  ;  or  (3)  concerning  the  benefits  we  have  by  Him, 
Buch  as  justification,  salvation,  <fec. ;  or  (4)  touching  the  means  of  enjoying  these 
benefits  from  Christ,  as  faith  and  repentance.  So  that  Christ  Jesus  is  the  sum 
and  main  scope  of  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  (O.  Fetter.)  How  to  receive  the 
gospel : — How  gladly  do  we  entertain  good  news  touching  our  body,  goods,  friends, 
or  outward  estate  1  How  welcome  is  it  to  us  1  (Pro v.  xxv.  25.)  And  shall  not  this 
blessed  tidings  of  the  salvation  of  our  souls  by  Christ,  which  is  brought  to  us 
in  the  gospel,  be  much  more  welcome  to  us  ?  Is  not  the  news  of  liberty  welcome 
to  the  prisoner ;  the  news  of  a  pardon  from  the  prince,  welcome  to  the  condemned 
malefactor  ?  And  what  are  we  by  nature,  but  prisoners  under  the  bondage  of  sin 
and  Satan — malefactors  and  traitors  before  God,  guilty  of  eternal  damnation? 
Oh,  then,  let  us  joyfully  embrace  the. doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  brings  to  us  the 
news  of  spiritual  freedom  from  sin  and  Satan,  purchased  by  Christ,  and  of  the 
pardon  of  our  sins  procured  for  us  by  Him.  How  highly  should  we  prize  this 
doctrine ;  how  happy  should  we  think  ourselves,  when  we  may  enjoy  the  preaching 
of  it ;  and  how  far  should  we  be  from  despising  or  neglecting  so  great  salva- 
tion I  (Ibid,)  The  substance  and  design  of  the  gospel: — I.  Its  substance. 
1.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Great  Teacher.  2.  The  Great  Atoner.  3.  The  Great 
Example.  His  life  was  in  harmony  with  His  teaching;  reflecting,  like  a  stainless 
mirror,  the  purity  and  benevolence  of  His  precepts.  II.  Its  Desion.  1.  To  re- 
veal the  heavenly  world.  2.  To  prepare  us  for  that  world.  Enlightenment,  for- 
giveness, and  sanctity,  are  the  antecedents  of  glorification.  These  things  come 
to  us  through  the  teaching,  atonement,  and  example  of  Jesus.  Thus  the  gospel 
makes  us  meet  for  joyful  fellowship  with  holy  angels,  before  the  throne  of  God  and 
the  Lamb.  {P.J.  Wright.)  The  gospel: — The  gospel  is  an  anthem  fiom  the  harps  of 
heaven ;  the  music  of  the  River  of  Life  washing  its  shores  on  high,  and  pouring 
in  cascades  upon  the  earth.  Not  so  cheerful  was  the  song  of  the  morning  stars ; 
nor  the  shout  of  the  sons  of  God  so  joyful.  Gushing  from  the  fountains  of 
eternal  harmony,  it  was  first  heard  on  earth  in  a  low  tone  of  soiemu  gladness, 
uttered  in  Eden  by  the  Lord  God  Himself.  This  gave  the  key-note  of  the 
gospel-song.  Patriarchs  caught  it  up,  and  taught  it  to  the  generations  following. 
It  breathes  from  the  harp  of  the  Psalmist,  and  rang  like  a  clarion  from  tower  and 
mountain-top,  as  prophets  proclaimed  the  year  of  Jubilee.  Fresh  notes  from 
heaven  have  enriched  the  harmony  as  the  Lord  of  Hosts  and  His  angels  have 
revealed  new  promises,  and  called  on  the  suffering  children  of  Zion  to  be  joyful  in 
their  King.  From  bondage  and  exile,  from  dens  and  caves,  from  bloody  fields  and 
fiery  stakes,  and  peaceful  deathbeds,  have  they  answered,  in  tones  which  have 
cheered  the  disconsolate,  and  made  cppressors  shake  upon  their  thrones;  while 
sun,  and  moon,  and  all  the  stars  of  light,  stormy  wind  fulfilling  His  words,  the 
roaring  sea  and  the  fulness  thereof,  mountains  and  hills,  fruitful  fields,  and  all 
the  trees  of  the  wood,  have  rejoiced  before  the  Lord,  and  the  coming  of  His 
Anointed  for  the  redemption  of  His  people,  and  the  glory  of  His  holy 
Name.      {Dr    Hog-;.)  One  gospel :— There  is  only  one   gospel.      There    are 


CHAP.  1.]  ST.  MARK. 


many  religions  amongst  men :  almost  all  of  them  are  Laws — codes  of  precepti 
for  the  guidance  of  life ;  but  Christianity  is  pure  gospel — glad  tidings  of  great  joy. 
The  angels  gave  it  that  name  (Luke  ii.  10),  and  the  experience  of  multitudes 
that  none  can  number  has  approved  it.  {R.  Glover.)  The  Bible  wWumt 
Chnst: — Take  Christ  away  from  the  Bible  and  it  is  immediately  destroyed. 
In  ancient  times  a  celebrated  artist  made  a  most  wonderful  shield,  and  worked 
his  own  name  into  it  so  that  it  could  not  be  removed  without  destroying 
the  shield.  It  is  just  so  with  the  Bible  and  Christ.  {Fogter).  The  Son  of 
God. — Chrisfs  Divinity  practically  proved: — The  Deity  of  the  Son  of  God  is, 
to  me,  not  proved  merely  in  propositions.  I  believe  that  he  who  believes  in 
the  Godhead  of  Jesus  Christ  has  all  history,  all  etymology,  all  philosophy,  and 
all  true  reading  of  the  case  entirely  on  his  side.  But  I  do  not  look  to  propositions, 
to  logical  formulae,  to  any  bare  statements,  however  exact,  for  the  proof  and  con- 
firmation that  this  claim  is  founded  in  righteousness.  Do  you  think  that  I  build 
my  hopes  cf  eternity  upon  some  little  etymological  technicality  ?  Do  you  suppose 
that  my  dependence  is  founded  altogether  upon  the  construction  of  a  phrase  or  the 
mood  and  tense  of  a  verb  ?  We  have  nothing  to  fear  from  that  side  of  the  argument, 
BO  far  as  1  have  been  able  to  collate  the  testimonies  of  competent  men.  But  I  do 
not  rely  upon  it  in  preaching  the  Deity  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  in  committing 
myself  to  the  great  claim  which  Jesus  makes  on  behalf  of  His  own  nature.  What 
do  I  trust  then  ?  The  moral  reach,  the  spiritual  compass,  the  indefinable  and 
inexpressible  sympathy  of  the  Man.  When  He  touched  my  heart  into  life,  I  did 
not  say,  '*  Hand  me  down  the  Greek  grammar  and  the  Hebrew  lexicon,  and  three 
volumes  of  the  encyclopaedia,  to  see  how  this  really  stands."  I  knew  it  to  be  a  fact. 
Nobody  ever  did  for  me  what  He  has  done.  Once  I  was  blind  ;  now  I  see.  I  go  to 
other  men — writers,  speakers,  teachers — hear  what  they  have  to  say,  and,  behold, 
they  are  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no  water.  I  go  to  the  Son  of  God,  whose 
teaching  is  written  in  the  New  Testament,  and  it  gets  into  the  deep  places  of  my 
life ;  it  redeems  me ;  it  goes  further  than  any  other  influence,  and  does  more  for 
me  than  any  other  attempt  that  ever  was  made  to  recover  and  bless  my  life.  It  is, 
therefore,  in  this  great  sweep  of  His,  in  this  reply  to  every  demand  that  is  made 
upon  His  resources,  this  infinite  sufficiency  of  BLis  grace,  that  I  find  the  exposition 
and  the  defence  of  His  Godhead.  Some  things  must  be  felt ;  some  things  must  be 
laid  hold  of  by  sympathy,  affection,  sensibility.  The  heart  is  in  some  cases  a 
greater  interpreter  than  the  understanding.  There  is  a  time  when  logic  has  to  say, 
*•  I  can  do  no  more  for  you ;  do  the  best  you  can  for  yourself ! "  Then  love  goes 
forward,  and  necessity  feels  it ;  and  it  is  in  that  further  insight  and  penetration 
that  the  Godhead  of  the  Nazarene,  as  it  appears  to  me,  is  vindicated  and  glorified. 
....  As  I  looked  upon  the  sun  this  November  morning,  shining  through  some 
beautiful  blue  clouds,  a  man  called  upon  me  to  prove  that  that  sun  was,  in  his 
judgment,  as  far  as  he  could  make  out  by  "  the  tables,"  about  sufficient  to  light  the 
world.  He  turned  over  long  pages  of  logarithms,  and  tables  of  various  kinds, 
fractions  and  decimals,  and  long  processions  of  figures;  he  asked  me  for  a  slate 
and  a  pencil,  and  he  was  going  to  make  it  out  to  my  satisfaction  that  the  sun  was 
just  about  suflicient  to  enlighten  a  hemisphere  at  a  time.  I  ordered  him  off  1 
Why  ?  I  saw  it ;  I  felt  it ;  the  whole  thing  was  before  me,  and  if  that  man  had 
never  been  bom,  and  the  slate  had  never  been  made,  I  should  have  known  that  this 
great  sun  poured  light  upon  the  earth  until  there  was  not  room  enough  to  receive 
it,  and  that  the  splendour  ran  off  at  the  edges  and  flamed  upon  other  stars  I  And 
yet  sometimes  men  call  upon  us  with  slates,  pencils,  sponpes,  for  the  purpose  of 
showing  us  by  their  calculations  that  Jesus  Christ  cannot  be  God  the  Son.  I  have 
lived  long  enough  to  know  that  He  is  God  enough  for  me.  What  more  can  I  want? 
He  raises  the  dead  ;  He  redeems  my  life  from  destruction ;  He  tills  the  mouth  with 
good  things ;  He  numbers  the  hairs  of  my  bead  ;  He  carries  me  up-hill  many  a  time 
when  I  am  weary  and  the  wind  is  bleak  ;  He  visits  me  in  my  distress  and  my  afflic- 
tion. My  Lord  !  my  God  1  I  will  not  receive  Thee  merely  through  grammars  and 
technical  discussions.  I  will  receive  Thee  because  when  Thou  dost  come  into  my 
heart,  I  know  that  all  the  heaven  that  I  can  contain  is  already  within  me  when 
Thou  art  near.  My  Lord !  and  my  God  !  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  T)ie  Son  of 
God : — The  Son  of  God  is  no  voluntary  effect  of  the  Father's  power  and  wisdom, 
like  the  created  universe,  which  once  did  not  exist,  and  might  never  have  existed, 
and  must  necessarily  be  ever  confined  within  the  bounds  of  time  aud  space.  He  is 
the  natural  and  necessary,  and  therefore  the  eternal  and  iufinite,  birth  of  the  Divine 
fecundity,  the  boundless  overflow  of  the  Eternal  Fountain  of  all  existence  and  per- 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

fection,  the  infinite  splendour  of  the  Eternal  Sun,  the  unspotted  mirror,  and  com- 
plete and  adequate  image  in  Whom  may  be  seen  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead. 
{R.  Watson.)  Christ  not  a  Son,  but  the  Son: — This  implies  something  other  than 
that  general  fatherly  relation  which  God  sustains  to  all  His  intelligent  creatures. 
Even  among  the  heathen,  great  kings,  heroes,  lawgivers,  and  patriots  are  thought 
to  be  somehow  sons  of  God.  There  was  also  the  Oriental  mystic,  who,  imagining 
himself  a  part  of  the  universal  all,  a  drop  in  the  great  ocean  of  being,  was  fond  of 
calling  himself  a  son  of  God.  But  Jesus  is  "  the  Son."  And  one  has  not  to  read 
far,  in  either  of  the  Gospels,  to  be  able  to  discover  that  here  the  phrase  is  used  in 
a  very  definite  sense.  He  is  not  so  named  as  one  who,  Uke  other  men,  bears  the 
Divine  image ;  nor  as  the  object  of  special  affection ;  nor  as  the  greatest  being  in 
the  universe  next  to  God.  He  bears  to  the  Father  a  more  intimate  relation.  To- 
gether with  the  Father,  He  is  the  object  of  trust,  love,  and  worship  ;  the  same  in 
power  and  glory ;  to  be  honoured  of  all  men,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father.  The 
evangelist  starts  with  this  view.  He  whose  story  he  is  now  to  relate,  is  the  in. 
carnate  Son  of  God.  (If.  M.  Grout,  D.D.)  The  Divinity  of  Christ: — A  Divine 
Christ  is  the  central  son  of  Christianity ;  quench  it,  and  all  is  confusion  worse 
oonfoonded.    {J,  Cumming^  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Ab  it  Is  written  In  the  prophets. — The  appropriateness  of  this  double 
prophecy  : — ^Its  authors  were — L  The  fibst  prophet  (Isa.  xl.  3)  and  the  last 
(Mai.  iii.  1.)  who  wrote.  John  was  the  last  prophet  of  the  old  dispensation  and  the 
first  of  the  new  who  spoke.  H.  The  one  like  John  was  a  prophet  of  hope  ;  the  other 
like  him  again  was  the  prophet  of  despaib.  IH.  Isaiah  set  the  door  ajar  for  Chris- 
tianity wldch  John  flung  wide  open  :  Malachi  began  to  shut  the  door  on  Judaism 
which  John  closed.  {Anon.)  Which  shall  prepare  Thy  way  before  Thee. — 
Need  of  preparation  for  Christ: — In  the  East,  few  good  roads  are  ever  made ;  and 
such  roads  as  have  been  made  are  generally  kept  in  most  wretched  repair.  Hence, 
when  a  sovereign  is  about  to  visit  any  part  of  his  dominions,  it  is  requisite  that  a 
messenger  be  sent  on  before  to  get  the  way  made  ready.  Such,  in  things  spiritual, 
was  John's  mission.  Men's  ways  were  in  a  wretched  state.  Encumbrances  and 
stumbling-blocks  lay  everywhere  scattered  about.  Mud  and  mire  were  the  order  of 
the  day.  It  seemed  impossible  for  any  one  to  get  along  through  life  with  unpolluted 
garments,  or  without  stumbling  and  falling,  and  getting  bruised  and  broken. 
The  real  preparation  that  was  needed  was  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  {J.  Morison^ 
DJ).)  How  to  prepare  the  way  for  Christ : — How  was  John  to  prepare  the  people 
to  receive  Christ  ?  1.  By  foretelling  them  that  Christ  was  to  come  immediately 
after  him.  2.  By  preaching  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  touching  His  Person  and 
offices.  8.  By  preaching  the  doctrine  of  faith  in  Christ,  stirring  up  the  people  to 
believe  in  Him  as  the  Messiah.  4.  By  preaching  repentance,  exhorting  them  to 
torn  nnto  God  from  their  sin,  that  so  they  might  be  fit  to  receive  Christ.  6.  By 
administering  baptism.  {O.  Fetter).  Man's  part  in  the  work  of  spiritual  pre- 
paration : — Though  the  preparation  of  the  heart  for  Christ  is  the  special  work  of 
God's  Spirit,  yet  He  requires  that  we  also  should  do  that  which  lieth  in  us  toward 
this  preparing  of  ourselves :  though  God  only  can  work  this  preparation,  yet  He 
will  have  us  use  the  means  by  which  it  may  come  to  be  wrought.  He  does  not 
work  in  us,  as  in  stocks  and  stones  that  have  no  sense  or  motion  ;  but  He  first  moves 
ns  by  His  Spirit,  and  enables  us  to  the  preparation  of  our  hearts,  so  that  we  bein^ 
moved  by  Him  may,  after  a  sort,  move  ourselves  in  using  the  means  to  prepare  our 
hearts.  1.  We  must  labour  to  be  truly  humbled  in  the  sense  of  our  sins,  and  of 
our  natural  misery  without  Christ.  We  are  never  fit  to  embrace  Him,  till  we  feel 
how  wretched  we  are  without  Him.  2.  We  must  labour  to  forsake  all  sin  in  heart 
and  affection,  and  we  must  purge  the  love  of  it  out  of  our  hearts.  3.  We  must 
get  a  hungering  and  thirsting  desire  after  Christ.  4.  We  must  use  all  means  to 
get  faith,  whereby  to  receive  Christ  into  our  hearts.  (Ibid.)  The  heart  prepared 
to  receive  Christ : — Labour  we  daily  in  preparing  our  hearts  unto  Christ :  strive  we 
to  make  Him  a  plain  way,  and  a  straight  path  into  our  heart.  To  this  end,  remove 
the  annoyances  of  this  way  of  Christ :  thy  sins  and  corruptions  are  the  hindrances : 
take  away  these  by  true  repentance,  that  they  stop  not  up  the  way  of  Christ,  and 
bar  Him  out  of  thy  heart.  Labour  also  for  true  faith  in  Christ,  that  by  it  thou 
mayest  be  fitted  to  receive  Him,  and  that  He  may  come  to  dwell  in  thee.  Do  not 
think  that  ever  Christ  will  come  into  thy  heart  to  dwell  there,  or  that  thou  canst 
ever  be  fit  to  receive  Him,  if  thou  be  not  careful  of  preparing  thyself  to  entertain 
Him.     Will  any  earthly  prince  go  to  take  up  his  lodging  in  such  a  house  or  city. 


CHAP.  1.]  ST.  MARK. 


where  he  knows  there  will  be  no  preparation  for  his  entertainment  f  No  more  will 
Christ  in  a  heart  unready  to  receive  Him.  (Ibid.)  Preparing  the  way  of  the 
Lord : — The  reference  may  be  to  the  state  of  the  Jewish  Church  and  the  Gentile 
nations.  But  what  is  applied  generally  to  the  nations  is  equally  applicable  to  every 
human  heart.  I.  Theee  abb  formidable  obstacles  to  be  removed.  1.  Prejudice. 
The  gospel  is  often  viewed  under  a  false  light,  or  through  a  perverting  medium. 
The  self-denial,  the  purity,  the  separation  from  the  world  which  Christianity  incul- 
cates begets  prejudice  in  many.  2.  CarnaUty.  Base  desires,  carnal  affections, 
<fec.,  present  formidable  obstacles  to  the  claims  of  the  Lord  (Luke  xiv.  18-20).  3. 
Hardness  of  heart.  By  nature  impenitent,  blind  to  its  own  extreme  sinfulness, 
and,  even  after  confession  of  sin,  unwillingness  to  forsake  them  (Isa.  xlvi.  12,  13 ; 
Ezek.  xi.  19).  4.  Self-righteousness.  Though  spiritually  diseased  and  dying,  men 
imagine  themselves  •*  whole,"  and  without  need  of  a  physician.  They  will  not 
accept  salvation  by  simple  faith  in  the  merits  of  another  (Kom.  x.  1,  2^.  H.  Re- 
pentance 18  NECESSARY  TO  THE  REMOVAL  OP  THESE  OBSTACLES.     (A .  Tucker.)       CfirUVs 

way  to  be  prepared,  not  ours : — See  what  all  ministers  of  the  Word  must  chiefly 
labour  in,  even  to  prepare  men  for  Christ ;  and  this  is  the  main  thing  to  be  aimed 
at  in  our  preaching — we  are  not  to  preach  ourselves,  but  Christ ;  we  are  not  to 
prepare  our  own  way,  or  the  way  of  any  other,  but  the  way  of  Christ  in  the  hearts 
of  our  people.  To  this  end,  we  are  to  speak  so  to  the  consciences  of  our  hearers 
that  we  may  (if  possible)  by  our  ministry  work  faith  and  repentance  in  them,  and 
60  make  way  for  Christ  to  enter  into  their  hearts.  {O.  Fetter.)  Preparatory 
work  needful  for  spiritual  progress : — "When  you  see  a  party  of  men  engaged  in 
taking  levels  and  measuring  distances  along  a  particular  line  of  country,  and  a 
little  afterwards,  other  men  laying  rails,  and  building  bridges,  and  cutting  tunnels, 
it  is  not  difficult  to  guess  that  the  great  tide  of  commerce  is  about  to  surge  over  that 
region.  When  loads  of  wood  and  stone  are  laid  down  on  a  vacant  lot,  it  is  at  once 
evident  that  a  building  is  about  to  be  erected.  So  the  Old  Testament  prophecies 
and  John's  preaching  showed  that  the  way  was  being  prepared  for  the  coming  of 
Jesus.  After  the  Romans  had  reduced  a  country  to  the  position  of  a  province,  one 
of  their  first  cares  was  to  construct  a  strong  military  road  into  it.  Thus  the  way 
was  always  prepared  for  their  legions.  Li  the  East  when  some  great  chief  is  pass- 
ing through  the  country,  it  is  not  uncommon  to  make  new  ways  for  his  ps^sage. 
Travellers  in  unsettled  parts  of  the  country  soon  learn  to  appreciate  as  never  before 
the  advantages  of  having  roads  along  which  to  journey.  Ways  must  be  constructed 
for  the  progress  of  Christ's  truth  in  the  world  and  in  the  heart.  {The  American 
Sunday  School  Times).  Road  building  in  the  East: — To  "prepare  the  way  " 
b^ore  a  sovereign  is,  and  always  has  been,  so  universal  a  practice  in  the  East  that 
wherever  an  unusually  good  spot  of  road  is  found,  or  indeed  any  piece  of  way  that 
shows  signs  of  labour,  a  tradition  or  fable  is  almost  invariably  found  to  lie  along  it 
to  the  effect  that  that  piece  of  road  was  built  expressly  for  the  passage  of  such  a 
royal  personage,  either  the  sovereign  of  the  realm  which  includes  the  territory,  or 
one  of  his  guests  of  equal  exaltation.  On  going  from  Cairo  to  the  pyramids,  over 
an  exceptionally  good  road,  the  traveller  will  not  fail  to  be  told  that  it  was  built  for 
the  Prince  of  Wales,  or  for  the  Empress  Eugenie,  or  for  the  Khedive  himself,  or 
even,  rarely,  for  Napoleon  the  Great.  (Ibid.)  The  law  of  preparation : — God 
doesn't  need  man's  help  in  anything  ;  but  He  chooses  to  call  for  it  in  a  great  many 
things.  And  when  God  does  leave  a  place  for  man's  work,  man  must  do  his  part — 
or  take  the  consequences.  God  is  ready  to  give  a  crop  to  the  farmer ;  but  He  calls 
on  the  farmer  to  plough  and  plant  and  harrow  and  hoe  in  preparing  the  way  for 
God's  sun  and  shower,  and  power  of  increase.  If  the  farmer  fails  to  so  prepare  the 
way  of  the  Lord  for  a  harvest,  he  must  prepare  for  a  famine — or  starve.  God  is 
ready  to  give  a  blessing  on  our  homes ;  but  we  must  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord  for 
a  blessing  there,  by  our  love  and  our  faithfulness  and  our  industry.  It  is  not 
enough  to  hang  up  a  framed  chromo  on  the  dining-room  walls:  ''God  bless  our 
home !  '*  As  in  the  field  and  in  the  home,  so  in  our  hearts.  If  we  want'  God's 
presence  and  blessing  there,  we  must  prepare  the  way  for  them.  We  must  plan  to 
find  room  for  the  Lord  in  our  hearts.  We  must  make  ready  to  do  His  bidding. 
We  must  decide  to  give  up  all  habits  of  life  that  are  inconsistent  with  His  service. 
We  must  make  a  proffer  of  ourselves,  of  our  time,  of  our  talents,  of  all  our  possee- 
fiions,  to  the  Lord.  If  we  refuse  to  do  this,  we  must  not  wonder  that  whoever  elsa 
has  a  blessing  we  are  without  it.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  3.  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness. — Ministerial  teal  and  bold- 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ne8»: — I.  Ministf.rs  ought  to  show  zeaJj  and  earnestness  in  their  offiob 
(Isa.  Iviii.  1. ;  Hosea  viii.  1. ;  2  Tim.  iv.  2).  A  minister  of  the  Word  mast  not  do  the 
work  of  the  Lord  negligently  or  coldly,  but  with  zeal  and  fervency  of  spirit.  This  zeal 
and  earnestness  consists  chiefly  in  (1)  being  affected  and  moved  in  his  own  heart 
with  that  which  he  delivers,  feeling  the  power  of  it  in  himself ;  (2)  labouring  so  to 
speak  as  to  affect  and  move  his  hearers  to  the  embracing  of  that  which  is  taught. 
This  is  done  by  the  particular  applying,  and  earnest  urging  and  pressing  of  the 
doctrine  taught,  to  the  consciences  of  the  hearers ;  when  it  is  not  only  delivered  in 
general  manner,  and  bo  left,  but  particularly  applied,  for  the  reproving  and  con- 
vincing of  sin  in  people,  and  for  the  stirring  of  them  up  to  good  duties  (Eccles.  xii.  11). 
The  doctrine  of  the  Word  (preached  by  the  ministers  of  it)  is  compared  to  nails 
fastened,  to  show  that  it  must  be  driven  home,  and  up  to  the  head  (as  it  were),  by 
the  hammer  of  application.  II.  Ministers  should  also,  with  courage  and  bold- 
ness OF  SPIRIT,    DELIVER    THE    WORD    AND    MESSAGE    OF    THE    LoRD    (Eph.    vi.    20  ; 

Jer.  i.  17. ;  Ezek.  iii.  9).  "We  deliver  not  our  own  message,  but  that  of  God  ;  we 
speak  not  in  our  own  name,  but  in  the  Name  of  the  Almighty.  Let  us  then, 
with  aU  boldness,  deliver  God's  message,  not  forbearing  to  reprove  sin,  nor  con- 
cealing any  part  of  the  truth,  for  fear  of  men's  displeasure.  (G.  Fetter.)  God'$ 
use  of  man' 8  voice: — The  highest  praise  of  a  prophet  is  that  he  should  be  simply  a 
•♦  voice  *'  employed  by  God.  God  borrows  voices  still.  While  the  weapons  of  our 
warfare  are  heavenly,  the  weapons  of  His  warfare  are  earthly.  For  the  human  lips 
a  Divine  message  must  be  sought ;  for  the  Divine  message  human  lips  are  requisite. 
Consecrate  thy  lips  to  Him,  and  He  will  pour  grace  into  them.  {R.  Glover.) 
The  preacher  a  voice: — A  preacher  should,  if  possible,  be  nothing  but  a  voice, 
which  should  be  always  heard  and  never  seen.  To  cry  is  to  preach  with  such 
force  as  is  worthy  of  the  truth,  without  lowering  the  voice  through  complaisance. 
To  this  end  he  must  not  be  a  man  of  the  world,  but  one  who  comes,  as  it  were,  oat 
of  the  wilderness,  without  relations,  without  friends,  without  secular  engagements, 
which  may  thwart  and  obstruct  his  ministry.  The  first  man  who  appears  in  the 
gospel  is  one  entirely  dedicated  to  repentance :  the  first  example  and  the  first  pre- 
cept are  an  example  and  a  precept  of  repentance — so  necessary  is  this  to  salvation ! 
(Quesnel.)  Novelty  and  mystery  : — I.  A  wonderful  preacher.  1.  The  subject 
of  prophecy.  2.  The  last  of  the  prophets.  3.  Choosing  a  strange  place  to  preach 
in.     4.    Adopting  an  antiquated  garb  and  manner.     II.  A  wonderful  sermon. 

I.  Not  the  exposition  of  a  creed.  2.  Not  concerning  traditions  and  ceremonies. 
8.  Personal — as  repentance  is  a  personal  duty.  4.  Practical — as  leading  to 
▼isible  results.  III.  A  wonderful  congregation.  1.  Strangely  composed — of 
dty  and  country  people.  2.  All  travelling  a  great  distance  to  hear  the  preacher. 
8.  All  yielding  to  the  truth — confessing  their  sins.  4.  All  submitting  to  the  rite 
imposed  by  the  desert  preacher.  {J.  C.  Gray.)  Chrisfs  public  entrance  upon  His 
ministry : — I.  The  need  of  the  human  herald  of  Christ.  Though  our  Lord  came 
in  the  fulness  of  the  time,  the  time  was  not  ready  for  Him,  so  far  as  His  own  people 
were  concerned.  The  popular  heart  was  intensely  cold  and  unrepentant.  A 
certain  measure  of  national  disaster  will  bring  repentance  and  reformation.  People 
read  chastisement  in  their  sorrows.  But  without  spiritual  guides  there  comes  on 
religious  indifference.  The  popular  heart  was  softened.  It  was  prepared  for  the 
truth,  and  to  be  an  honest  witness  of  Christ's  miracles.  Here  lies  the  whole  philosophy 
of  the  Christian  ministry.  Christ  could  operate  directly  on  the  heart  without  the 
human  instrument.  But  He  requires  of  man  that  he  go  before  Him,  and  do  all  that 
the  human  voice  can  do,  and  then  He  comes  to  complete  the  order  of  salvation. 
He  gives  man  as  much  as  he  can  do  and  bear  in  the  great  work  of  saving  men. 

II.  The  human  preparation  of  Christ  for  His  work.  HI.  The  subjection  of 
THE  servant  to  THE  MASTER.  {J.  F.  Hurst,  D.D.)  A  rough  man  for  rough 
work : — He  had  rough  work  to  do  ;  therefore  a  man  of  refined  taste  and  delicate 
organization  could  not  perform  it.  John  is  fitted  for  his  work — a  coarse  man 
levelling  mountains  and  filling  up  valleys,  sternness  in  his  looks,  vehemence  in  his 
voice.  The  truth  is — Reformers  must  despise  the  conventionalities  of  society. 
They  have  rude  work  to  do,  and  they  must  not  be  too  dainty  respecting  the  means 
they  adopt  to  effect  it.  Adorn  your  frontispieces,  embellish  your  comer- stones,  but 
let  the  foundations  be  as  rugged  as  you  please.  Decorations  are  for  the  super- 
structure, strength  and  solidity  for  the  base.  Luther  has  often  been  charged  with 
rudeness,  coarseness,  and  even  scurrility.  The  indictment  contains,  perhaps,  too 
much  truth  for  us  successfully  to  gainsay.     But  we  should  not  forget  that  he  had  a 

age  to  deal  with,  coarse  enemies  to  contend  with,  coarse  sins  to  battle  with. 


CHAP.  1.]  ST.  MARK. 


Coarse  or  not  coarse,  the  question  is — Did  he  do  his  work  ?  If  he  did  that,  who 
are  we  to  cavil  at  the  means  he  used?  Would  our  smooth  phrases  and  rounded 
periods  accomplish  the  task  of  regenerating  half  Europe,  and  of  giving  the  other 
h)i,l{  a  shaking  from  which  it  has  not  yet  recovered,  nor  is  likely  to  recover 
this  century?  Regenerate  half  Europe  indeed  1  Shame  upon  ual  We 
cannot  regenerate  half  a  parish,  and  who  are  we  to  find  fault  with  a  man 
who  regenerated  half  a  continent?  Who  will  go  to  fell  forest  trees  of  a 
tnousand  years'  standing  with  a  superfine  razor?  Is  not  the  heavy  az6 
the  fit  tool  wherewith  to  cut  them  down  ?      {J.  C.  Jones.) 

Ver.  4. — John  did  baptize  In  the  wilderness. — The  age  in  which  the  Baptist 
ministered: — The  age  of  Tiberius,  spiritually  speaking,  was  not  unlike  the  Victorian 
age.  Some  people  were  still  satisfied  with  the  old  religious  forms.  Their  piety 
still  flowed  through  the  time-worn  channels  of  creeds  and  catechisms.  There  will 
always  be  these  survivals,  what  we  call  ••  old-fashioned  people  " ;  they  belong  to 
the  past,  let  them  alone,  they  will  get  to  heaven  in  their  own  way.  Others — in  the 
days  of  Tiberias  and  Victoria — respectable  but  heartless  formalists,  really  without 
religion,  but  apparently  full  of  it,  cling  to  the  orthodox  forms.  You  will  always 
find  such  wooden-headed,  stony-hearted  supporters  of  things  as  they  are,  without 
a  breath  of  the  new  life  in  them,  boasting  that  they  are  Abraham's  children.  But 
a  surging  crowd  of  restless,  eager  spirits,  sons  of  the  new  time,  impatient  of  worn- 
out  creeds,  churches,  establishments,  orthodoxies,  what  shall  I  say  of  these  ?  Ah  I 
these  are  the  disciples  of  John.  These  wait  for  the  inner  personal  appeal, 
"repent;  "  the  fresh  symbol,  "baptism  " ;  the  spiritual  emancipation,  •♦  remission 
of  sins  " ;  the  new  Divine  Man ;  the  holy  effluence ;  the  fiery  chrism.  {H.  R.  Haweis, 
M.A.)  The  Baptist's  training  : — Bepides  baptizing,  he  did  a  good  deal  else  there ; 
Cor  he  was  *'  in  the  deserts  till  the  day  of  his  showing  forth  unto  Israel."  He  had 
the  usual  good  education  of  a  priest's  son,  and  would  know  most  of  the  Bible  by 
heart.  His  father  and  mother  had  taught  him,  as  only  saintly  hearts  can  teach  ^ 
child,  the  wealth  of  God's  mercy,  the  grievousness  of  sin,  the  promises  of  God  to 
His  people,  the  hope  of  a  great  Redeemer.  They  had  told  him  the  wonders  con- 
nected with  his  birth  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  mova  his  oonceit,  but  to  charge  his 
conscience  with  the  sense  of  a  high  calling  awaiting  him.  They  had  told  him  of  a 
miraculous  birth  of  One  whom  Anna  and  Simeon  and  themselves  had  been  moved 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  hail  as  the  Promised  Christ.  He  had  from  time  to  time 
gone  up  to  Jerusalem  to  the  feasts,  and  had  thus  seen  and  heard  enough  of  the 
miseries  of  his  people,  and  of  the  hypocrisy  and  worldliness  of  their  priests  and 
leaders,  to  make  him  long  for  the  appearing  of  the  promised  Redeemer.  So  he 
sought  calmness  and  strength  and  light  in  the  desert  with  his  God.  The  desert 
dangers  destroyed  all  fear ;  the  hardness  of  the  desert  fare,  all  love  of  ease.  The 
writings  of  the  great  prophets  of  the  past  were  the  friends  whose  companionship 
moulded  him.  Prayer  for  his  people  arose  perpetually  from  his  priestly  heart. 
Increasingly  he  felt  that  the  one  misery  of  man  was  sin  ;  and  the  one  need  of  man 
a  Saviour,  whose  sacrifice  would  take  away  its  guilt,  and  whose  baptism  of  fire  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  would  destroy  evil  and  create  good  in  them.  In  the  wilderness 
the  great  temptations  had  their  fiercest  force,  but  were  fought  and  conquered  ;  the 
temptation  to  shrink  from  the  tremendous  task  ;  the  temptation  to  despair  of  men 
hearing  his  message  or  obeying  his  call ;  the  temptation  to  fear  his  own  break-down 
in  faith  ;  the  temptations  of  darkness  and  doubt,  all  assailed  him  there.  He  could 
not  have  come  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  to  his  work,  unless  victory  over  such 
assaults  had  strengthened  him.  He  knew  that  death  was  the  reward  which  the 
world  had  always  given  God's  prophets.  He  faced  till  he  ceased  to  fear  it.  So, 
clad  in  the  single  garment,  still  worn  by  tbe  poorest  Bedouin ;  living  on  locusts 
and  wild  honey,  as  the  extremely  poor  sometimes  still  do  in  the  same  region  ;  he 
walked  and  talked  with  God  until  tbe  time  was  ripe  for  his  coming  forth.  (li. 
Olover.)  Solitary  communion  with  God : — Every  preacher  and  teacher,  to  do  nis 
work  aright,  must  go  into  the  wilden)ess.  There  would  be  more  prophecy  if  there  was 
more  privacy.  An  ounce  of  truth  discovered  by  yourself  has  more  power  in  it  than 
a  pound  imparted  to  yon  by  some  one  else.  Do  not  grudge  the  time  you  spend  alone 
with  God.  He  wUl  teach  all  His  scholars  what  none  others  can  impart.  (Ibid.) 
The  Baptism  of  John: — Ablutions  in  the  East  have  always  been  more  or  less  a  part 
of  religious  worship — easily  performed,  and  always  welcome.  Every  synagogue,  il 
possible,  was  by  the  side  of  a  stream  or  spring  ;  every  mosque  still  requires  a  foun- 
tain  or  basin   for  lustrati'ms.     But  John  needed  more  than  this.     No  common 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTxIATOR.  [chap.  i. 

spring  or  tank  would  meet  the  necessities  of  the  multitudes  who  resorted  to  him 
for  haptism.    The  Jordan  now  seemed  to  have  met  \iith  its  fit  purpose.     It  was  the 
one  river  of  Palestine,  sacred  in  its  recollections,  abundant  in  its  waters  ;  and  yet, 
at  the  same  time,  the  river,  not  of  cities,  but  of  the  wilderness  ;  the  scene  of  the 
preaching  of  those  who  dwelt  not  in  kings'  palaces,  nor  wore  soft  clothing.     On  the 
banks  of  the  rushing  stream  the  multitudes  gathered — the  priests  and  scribes  from 
Jerusalem,  down  the  pass  of  Adunimim ;  the  publicana  from  Jericho  on  the  south, 
and  the  lake  of  Gennesareth  on  the  north ;  the  soldien?  on  their  way  from  Damas- 
cus to  Petra,  through  the  Ghor,  in  the  war  with  the  Arab  chief,  Hareth  ;  the  peasants 
from  Galilee,  with  One  from  Nazareth,  through  the  opening  of  the  plain  of  Esdra- 
elon.    The  tall  ••  reeds  "  in  the  valleys  waved,  '•  shaken  by  the  wind  " ;  the  pebbles 
of  the  bare  elay  hills  lay  around,  to  which  the  Baptist  pointed  as  capable  of  being 
transformed  into  **  children  of  Abraham "  ;    at  their  lEeet  rushed  the  refreshinc 
stream  of  the  never-failing  river.     There  began  that  sacred  rite  which  has  since 
spread  throughout  the  world.     {Bean  Stanley.)        The  ministry  of  John  the  Bap- 
tist: — I.  His  Qualoications  for  his  ministry.     *'He  was  in  the  deserts,"  etc. 
He  was  a  meditative  man.    This  love  of  retirement  into  nature's  places  of  im- 
pressive  solitude  is  good  for  the  soul.     The  fountains  of  thought  and  religioui 
feeling  are  best  filled  thus.    The  best  poems,  speeches,  sermons,  are  bom  under 
such   conditio  18.      John  possessed  another  good  qualification  for  his  ministry 
in  the  simplidity  of  his  tastes  and  habits.      '*  A  man  who  has  no  wants,"  says 
Burke,  "has  obtained  great  freedom  and  firmness,  and  even  dignity."    II.  The 
DOCTBiNB  of  his  ministry.    He  proclaimed  the  need  of  repentance.    Where  one  man 
objects  to  the  ]preaching  of  searching  truth,  ten  will  approve  it    Confession  of  sin 
is  humbling  but  salutary.    He  told  them  of  Christ  who  was  about  to  come  and 
complete  his  imperfect  work.     Without  Christ  repentance  is  superficial.    HL  The 
CHABACTEBisTics  of  his  ministry.    From  its  extraordinary  effect,  that  mysterious  in- 
fluence of  the  Spirit,  which  gives  the  unction  characteristic  of  all  mighty  preachersi, 
must  have  distinguished  John's  ministry.    The  tones  of  the  Holy  Christ,  with  which 
he  was  filled  from  his  mother's  womb,  were  heard  in  his  preaching.    Joined  to  this 
supreme  quality  of  the  preacher,  John  had  other  qualities  of  a  remarkable  kind. 
He  was  a  direct  preacher.     He  was  a  plain  and  faithful  preacher.    He  magnified 
Christ  to  the  forgetfulness  of  himself.     {A.  H.  Currier.)        Nature's  solitude 
refreshing : — There  is  something  in  nature's  solitudes  most  congenial  and  refreshing 
to  souls  of  the  larger  mould.    Of  William  the  Conqueror  it  is  said  that  "  he  found 
society  only  when  he  passed  from  the  palace  to  the  loneliness  of  the  woods.    He 
loved  the  wild  deer  as  though  he  had  been  their  own  father."    (Ibid.)        A  faithful 
ministry  beneficent : — Such  plainness  of  dealing  may  appear,  at  first  thought,  harsh 
and  repulsive.    But  before  this  judgment  is  given,  it  is  well  to  inquire  whether 
plainness  and  fidehty  on  the  part  of  the  preacher  are  any  proof  of  unkindness.    Is 
the  keeper  of  a  weather-signal  station  unkind,  who  hoists  the  storm-signal,  that  tha 
shipping  may  stay  in  the  harbour,  or  fly  to  its  shelter,  when  word  comes  to  him  from 
his  chief  that  a  storm  is  at  hand  t    Let  him  fail  once  to  do  his  duty.     Instead  of  a 
plain  and  truthful  signal,  let  him  put  out  an  ambiguous  or  an  unmeaning  one,  and 
let  the  ships,  which  fill  the  harbour  or  cover  the  adjacent  sea,  sail  forth  and  go  on 
in  entire  security,  until  the  tempest  comes  and  catches  them  in  its  irresistible  grip 
and  scatters  their  wrecks  along  the  shore.    Then  see  the  widows  wring  their  hands 
and  wail,  and  their  fatherless  children  cry  over  the  lifeless  dead,  which  lie  stark 
and  cold  on  the  sand,  and  say  whether  it  was  kind  and  good  to  keep  back  the 
warning  that  might  have  prevented  such  iU.    A  child  may  complain  of  the  robin 
whose  boding  note  prognosticates  the  rain  which  interferes  with  its  play,  but  a  man, 
able  to  understand  that  God  sends  the  rain,  wUl  thank  the  bird  for  the  warning. 
{Ibid.)         It  i$  not  wise  to  disregard  a  faithful  ministry  : — They  had  the  good 
sense  to  perceive  that  the  truth,  though  sometimes  severe  and  painful,  is  neverthe- 
less truth,  and  not  to  be  run  away  from.    As  wisely  might  the  sailor  on  a  dangerous 
coast,  befogged  in  mist  and  xmcertain  of  the  way,  close  his  ears  to  the  fog-bell  which 
warns  him  of  the  rocks,  as  for  a  sinful  man  to  find  fault  with  and  avoid  the  messen- 
ger of  God,  who  proclaims  that  truth  by  which  his  soul  is  saved.    Better  is  it  tc 
charge  the  messenger  to  hold  back  nothing.     A  reasonable  soul  fears  nothing  sc 
much  as  those  false  delusions  of  the  mind  which  soothe  men's  alarms  and  lull 
concern  to  sleep — at  last  to  destroy  them.     {Ibid.)         John   the  fulfilment   oj 
prophecy  : — The  Old  Testament  is  full  of  prophetic  intimations  and  clear  predictiom 
concerning  the  coming  Saviour.     Beginning  faintly  and  far  away,  they  grow  ir 
distinetness  and  fulness,  until  John  ushers  in  the  long-expected  Kedeem^r.    Likt 


CHAP.  1.]  ST.  MARK.  H 

the  chorng  of  bird-songs  which  herald  the  dawn,  which,  beginning  with  the  soft 
chirp  of  a  half-awakened  songster,  gradually  increases  and  swells  till  the  whole  air 
throbs  with  melody,  so  the  prophetic  strain  which  tells  the  coming  Christ  rises  in 
strength  until  He  appears.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  6.    And  there  went  out  to  him  all  the  land  of  JuAtBSL.—The  BaptUVs 

audience  : — It  was  a  mixed  multitude  of  almost  every  class.  The  other  Evangelists 
help  us  to  realize  its  heterogeneous  character.  There  were  Pharisees,  whose 
scrupulous  routine  of  external  observance  had  woven  around  them  a  web  of  self- 
satisfied  pride ;  and  Sadducees,  whose  reaction  from  superstition  had  landed  them 
in  a  cold  and  heartless  infidelity.  Among  these  there  would  be  followers  of 
Shammai,  cleaving  to  tradition  and  rigidly  orthodox ;  sympathisers  also  with  his 
opponent  Hillel,  just  emerging  from  that  slavery  to  the  letter  which  had  taken  the 
very  life  out  of  their  religion.  There  were  soldiers,  too,  who,  through  the  lawless 
rapacity  of  their  generals,  had  learned  to  think  only  of  loot  and  plunder ;  and  the 
hated  publicans,  with  their  overreaching  and  fraudulent  exactions,  the  byword  for 
all  that  was  lowest  and  most  contemptible— all  were  there,  and  for  all  he  had  the 
same  message,  **  Bepent."  The  Eabbis  have  a  wonderful  comment  on  the  import 
of  that  message.  "If,"  they  say,  •'Israel  would  repent,  they  would  be  redeemed." 
{H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  What  induced  them  to  flock  to  him  thusf — 1.  The 

excellency  of  his  person.  2.  The  novelty  of  his  doctrine.  3.  The  zeal  and 
earnestness  of  his  preaching.  4.  The  strangeness  of  the  place  where  he  preached. 
5.  The  austerity  and  strictness  of  his  life.  (G.  Fetter.)  The  crowd  going  out  to 
the  lonely  man : — Notice,  the  man  of  the  crowd  goes  to  the  man  of  the  desert.  The 
publican,  the  soldier,  even  the  Pharisee.  Strange  attraction  this,  yet  recurrent. 
He  who  knows  most  of  himself,  he  who  has  learned  himself  in  solitude,  will  know 
most  of  others.  It  has  ever  been  thus.  The  world  has  gone  to  the  cloister,  noft 
the  cloister  to  the  world ;  the  city  findB  solace  in  the  desert,  never  the  desert  in 
the  city.  A  few  years  ago,  all  Paris  flocked  to  the  Cnr§  d'Axs — an  obscure  pro- 
vincial priest,  without  much  learning  or  preaching  power  either,  but  they  found  in 
him  the  fresh  springs  of  comfort,  the  word  of  prophecy,  the  call  to  repentance, 
which  in  every  soul's  solitude  is  the  cry  most  certain  to  pierce.  (H.  R.  Haweis^ 
M.A.)  Secret  of  John  Baptist's  influence  : — In  one  word,  it  was  **  reality."  In 
an  age  of  hollowness  and  hypocrisy  never  equalled  before  or  since,  such  a  character- 
istic was  bound  to  startle  men  and  arrest  their  attention.  The  Baptist,  if  any  one, 
practised  what  he  preached.  His  protest  against  sin  was  embodied  by  his  example. 
Take  a  single  illustration  from  his  habit  and  dress.  He  came  to  denounce  luxury 
and  soft  clothing  and  sumptuous  fare,  and  he  was  a  living  example  of  the  austerity 
which  he  called  for.  {H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  Coniessing  sin  : — Steps  towards 
conversion.  1.  To  seek  an  enlightened  guide.  2.  To  open  our  heart  to  him,  by 
acquainting  him  with  our  manner  of  life.  8.  To  receive  directions  concerning 
repentance  from  him.  4.  To  baptize  ourselves,  as  it  were,  by  his  advice,  in  team 
and  works  of  mortification.  It  is  an  instinct  and  a  duty  which  is,  so  to  ipeak, 
natural,  for  a  man  to  confess  his  sins,  and  to  humble  himself  for  them,  when  once 
he  is  touched  with  a  true  contrition ;  but  to  do  this  is  not  at  all  natural  to  human 
pride.  Bepentance  is  a  pool,  or  rather  a  river,  which  carries  our  impurities  far 
from  us,  so  as  never  to  be  resumed  again.  Lord,  Thou  art  the  only  one  who  can 
put  us  into  it  I  {QuesneL)  The  necessity  of  confession  of  sins : — There  is  a  two- 
fold  confession  of  sins  necessary  in  the  practice  of  repentance.  L  To  God.  1.  It 
must  come  from  a  feeling  heart,  touched  with  sense  of  sin  and  grieved  for  it :  not 
verbal,  or  from  the  teeth  outward.  2.  It  must  come  from  a  hatred  and  loathing  of 
the  sins  confessed,  not  from  fear  of  punishment  merely.  Saul.  Pharaoh.  3.  From 
hope  of  mercy,  else  we  witness  against  ourselves.  Judas.  4.  Free  and  voluntary, 
not  forced  from  us.  God  requires  a  freewill  offering,  else  it  is  not  pleasing  to  Him. 
5.  It  must  not  be  only  in  general  terms,  but  there  must  be  a  laying  open  of  our 
particular  known  sins,  so  far  as  we  can  remember  them.  U.  To  men.  Not  always 
necessary,  but  in  some  cases  only.  1.  When  by  our  sins  we  have  offended  and 
Bcandahzed  men — either  the  Church  in  general,  or  some  particular  persons.  2. 
When  any  sin  lies  heavy  on  our  conscience,  so  that  we  cannot  find  ease  or  comfort. 
In  this  case,  it  is  necessary  to  open  our  hearts,  and  to  acknowledge  that  sin  which 
troubles  us,  to  some  faithful  pastor,  or  other  Christian  brother,  who  may  minister 
spiritual  advice  and  comfort  to  us.  {G.  Fetter.)  John  the  Baptist: — L  Thb 
PEEACHER.  Fearless,  honest,  earnest ;  and  these  characteristics  are  sure  to  attract 
pubUo  notice  and  confidence.    The  secret  of  bis  power  over  men  seems  to  have 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

been  that  he  was  fully  convinced  that  he  was  sent  on  a  Divine  mission,  and  was  so 
engrossed  in  fulfilling  it,  that  he  cared  little  for  anything  else.  What  John  the 
Baptist  was  was  quite  as  effective  preaching  as  anything  he  said.  II.  But  if  the 
preacher  was  notable,  his  pkeaching  was  equally  so.  The  man's  words  caught  the 
colour  of  his  character.  They  were  positive,  straightforward,  unmistakable.  He 
aimed  directly  at  the  great  need  of  his  generation.  It  was  not  a  pleasing  style  of 
address.  When  the  Church  preaches  the  simple  gospel,  men  stop  to  listen  and 
prepare  themselves  to  welcome  Christ.  The  majority  of  men  are  not  influenced  by 
mere  doctrinal  speculation,  any  more  than  a  sham  fight  can  determine  the  fortunes 
of  a  nation.  {Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)  The  inspiration  of  work  for  God: — 
When  he  is  conscious  that  he  is  sent  of  God  as  a  messenger  of  glad  tidings  to 
the  poor  and  needy,  how  relatively  unimportant  all  other  business  appears  I  When 
he  realizes  that  all  the  wealth  and  blessings  of  the  kingdom  of  God  are  to  be  his 
for  ever,  how  trifling  are  the  few  temporary  burdens  he  is  called  to  bear  1  how  petty 
the  sacrifices  he  is  asked  to  make  1  It  is  said  that  when  Pliny  saw  from  a  distance 
the  eruption  of  Vesuvius,  he  forsook  his  occupation  and  launched  his  boat  and 
rowed  toward  the  flaming  mountain,  forgetting  the  labour  and  the  peril  in  the  fasci- 
nation of  the  sight ;  and  when  one  sees,  even  from  afar,  the  light  of  the  city  of 
God,  there  is  such  longing  to  get  nearer  the  brightness,  that  approach,  at  any  cost, 
seems  cheap.  You  remember  the  old  legend,  which  has  been  so  beautifully  done 
into  verse  by  one  of  our  poets,  of  the  monk  who  was  charmed  from  his  cell-door 
by  the  singing  of  a  bird,  and,  though  the  sweetness  of  the  song  was  such  that  it 
seemed  to  him  that  he  only  walked  an  hour,  yet  on  his  return  he  found  that  a 
himdred  years  had  passed.  W^hen  we  are  in  such  spiritual  condition  that  we  hear 
heavenly  voices  calling  us,  no  way  of  duty  seems  long  or  hard.  The  most  exhaust- 
ing service  is  a  delight.  What  the  Church  wants  is  to  know,  like  John  the  Baptist, 
that  its  responsibility  is  its  privilege,  and  then  it  will  have  zeal  enough  for  ita 
opportunity.  What  the  individual  Christian  wants  is  to  realize  the  grandeur  of  his 
position  and  the  greatness  of  his  mission,  and  he  will  need  no  other  urgency  to 
faitbfolness.      (Ibid.)  Efficiency  more  than   refinement  in  work  for   God: — 

Napoleon  was  once  told  by  certain  professionals  that  his  impetuous  methods  were 
uncivil  and  contrary  to  all  military  traditions.  His  reply  to  his  critics  was : 
*'  Gentlemen,  battles  are  not  to  be  won  by  compliance  with  the  rules  of  etiquette, 
by  postponing  action  until  the  enemy  is  drawn  up  in  line,  and  his  officers,  having 
put  on  their  gloves,  stand  hat  in  hand,  saying,  •  We  are  ready.  Will  you  please  to 
fire  first  ? ' — and  to  win  the  battle  is  what  I  am  after."  There  is  danger  that  the 
Church  may  lay  so  much  stress  on  what  it  calls  the  amenities  and  proprieties,  that 
it  may  fail  to  win  the  battle — the  one  thing  which  God  has  put  it  into  the  world 
to  do.     (Ibid,) 

Ver.  6.  And  John  was  clothed  with  earners  hair. — Rules  for  tobriety  in  diet  i — 
1.  It  must  not  exceed  our  means.  2.  It  must  not  exceed  our  station,  3.  It  is  to 
be  taken  at  fit  times — when  hunger  dictates  (Psa.  cxlv.  16  ;  Eccl.  x.  16,  17).  4. 
We  must  use  such  food  as  may  serve  to  maintain  strength  and  health  of  body,  not 
such  as  tends  to  the  hurt  and  overthrow  of  our  health.  6.  Our  food  should  be 
such  as  may  make  us  more  fit  for  performance  of  the  duties  of  our  calling  and 
of  God's  service.       (G.  Fetter.)  The  BaptisVs  plain  fare  : — Coarse  meat  they 

were  (locusts),  but  nature  is  content  with  little,  grace  with  less.  Bread  and  water 
with  the  gospel  are  good  cheer.  Our  Saviour  hath  taught  us  to  pray  for  bread, 
not  for  manchet  or  junkets,  but  downright  household  bread ;  and  Himself  gave 
thanks  for  barley-bread  and  broiled  fishes.  A  little  of  the  creature  will  serve  turn 
to  carry  thee  through  thy  pilgrimage.  One  told  a  philosopher.  If  you  will  be  con- 
tent to  please  Dionysius,  you  need  not  feed  upon  green  herbs.  He  replied,  And  if 
you  can  feed  upon  green  herbs,  you  need  not  please  Dionysius ;  you  need  not 
flatter,  comply,  be  base,  &c.  {John  Trapp.)  Why  did  John  Baptist  use  such 
mean  apparel  and  diet : — 1.  It  was  agreeable  to  the  custom  of  the  place  were  he 
lived,  and  easy  to  be  had  there.  2.  That  he  might  resemble  Ehas,  in  whose  spirit 
he  was  to  go  before  Christ.  3.  Because  he  was  a  Nazarite  from  his  mother|a 
womb.  4.  Preaching  the  doctrine  of  repentance,  he  practised  mortification  in  his 
own  person.  6.  That  he  might  procure  reverence  to  his  person,  and  authority  to 
his  ministry,  6.  To  leave  us  a  pattern  and  example  of  sobriety  and  temperance. 
{G.  Fetter.)  Rule»  to  be  used  in  the  use  of  apparel,  that  it  nuiy  be  sober  and 

moderate: — 1.  According  to  our  ability  and  maintenance  in  goods  or  lands.  2. 
Answerable  to  our  station  and  dignity,  in  that  place  and  callinp'  wherein  we  liv«. 


I-J 


ST.  MARK.  1« 


8.  According  to  the  laudable  oastom  of  that  country  where  we  live.  4.  Snoh  as 
may  serve  to  express  the  inward  graces  and  virtues  of  the  mind,  such  as  modesty, 
humility,  <feo.  Therefore  it  must  be  comely  and  decent,  not  gaudy  or  garish.  6. 
Following  the  example  of  the  most  grave  and  sober  men  and  women  that  live  in 
the  Church  and  are  of  our  own  rank ;  not  after  that  of  the  lightest  and  vainest  lort 
of  the  people.  6.  Our  apparel  must  be  worn  and  used  to  the  right  ends  for  which 
it  is  appointed  by  God.      {Ibid.)  Wild  honey : — A  good  old  French  bishop,  in 

paying  his  annual  visit  to  his  clergy,  was  very  much  afflicted  by  the  representa- 
tions they  made  of  their  extreme  poverty,  which  indeed  the  appearance  of  their 
houses  and  families  corroborated.  While  he  was  deploring  the  state  of  things 
which  had  reduced  them  to  this  sad  condition,  he  arrived  at  the  house  of  a  curate, 
who,  living  amongst  a  poor  set  of  parishioners,  would,  he  feared,  be  in  a  still  more 
awful  plight  than  the  others.  Contrary,  however,  to  his  expectations,  he  found  ap- 
pearances  very  much  improved.  Everything  about  the  house  wore  the  aspect  of  com- 
fort and  plenty.  The  good  bishop  was  amazed.  "  How  is  this,  my  friend  ?  "  said 
he ;  *'  you  are  the  first  man  I  have  met  with  a  cheerful  face  and  a  plentiful  board. 
Have  you  any  income  in  addition  to  the  stipend  of  your  cure  f  "  "Yes,  sir,"  said 
the  clergyman,  *•  I  have ;  my  family  would  starve  on  the  pittance  I  receive  from 
the  poor  people  I  instruct.  Come  with  me  into  the  garden,  and  I  will  show  you 
the  stock  that  yields  me  an  excellent  interest."  On  going  to  the  garden,  he  showed 
the  bishop  a  large  range  of  bee-hives.  **  There  is  the  bank  from  which  I  draw  an 
annual  dividend.    It  never  stops  payment." 

Ver.  7.  There  cometh  one  mightier  than  I  after  me.— (7ftmf  mightier  than 
I  the  Baptist: — This  not  then  apparent.  As  the  two  met  on  the  banks  of  the  Jor- 
1  dan  it  appeared  the  reverse :  John  the  embodiment  of  matured  strength  ;  mighty 
I  in  word,  wondrously  successful ;  the  great  man  of  the  epoch.  Jesus  had  given  no 
I  evidence  of  greatness.  But  things  are  not  what  they  seem.  Jesus  is  mightier  than 
John.  I.  In  His  person.  "The  power  of  God."  H.  In  His  pbeachino. 
'i  Neither  in  manner  nor  matter  did  John  "  astonish"  as  Christ  did.  Christ's  words 
I  were  spirit  and  life.  III.  In  His  wobks.  John  did  no  miracle.  IV.  In  thb  pbb- 
MANENCB  OF  His  MiNisTBY.  We  hear  the  last  of  John's  disciples  in  Acts  xix.  1-7. 
Christ's  disciples  are  an  ever-increasing  body  to-day.  V.  In  His  death.  Christ's 
death  really  began  His  ministry :  John's  closed  his.  VI.  In  His  poweb  oveb  the 
HUMAN  HEART.  John  could  only  move  its  fears  while  he  was  here  ;  Christ  can  win 
its  love  and  devotion  now  that  He  has  gone.  {Anon.)  Unloosing  Eastern  sandals : — 
The  custom  of  loosing  the  sandals  from  off  the  feet  of  an  Eastern  worshipper  was 
ancient  and  indispensable.  It  is  also  commonly  observed  in  visits  to  great  men. 
The  sandals,  or  slippers,  are  pulled  off  at  the  door,  and  either  left  there  or  given  to 
a  servant  to  bear.  The  person  to  bear  them  was  an  inferior  domestic,  or  attendant 
upon  a  man  of  high  rank,  to  take  care  of  and  to  return  them  to  him  again.  This 
was  the  work  of  servants  among  the  Jews,  and  it  was  reckoned  so  servile  that  it  was 
thought  too  mean  for  a  scholar  or  disciple  to  do.  The  Jews  say :  •*  All  services  which 
a  servant  does  for  a  master,  a  disciple  does  for  his  master,  ei^cept  unloosing  his 
Bhoes."  John  thought  it  was  too  great  an  honour  for  him  to  do  that  for  Christ, 
which  was  thought  too  mean  for  a  disciple  to  do  for  a  wise  man.  {Burder.) 
The  Baptist's  humility  : — The  highest  buildings  have  the  lowest  foundations.  As 
the  roots  of  a  tree  descend  so  the  branches  ascend.  The  lower  the  ebb  the 
higher  the  tide.  Those  upon  the  mountains  see  only  the  fog  beneath  them, 
whilst  those  in  deep  pits  see  the  stars  above  them.  The  most  fruitful 
branches  bow  the  lowest.  The  best  trees  refused  to  be  king,  but  the  bramble 
effected  it  (Judg.  ix).  {Trapp.)  Betiring  with  humility  in  favour  of  another: — 
He  retired  with  dignity  and  ease,  and  with  a  glowing  tribute  to  our  Lord's 
Divinity.  He  had  the  instinct  of  the  true  teacher.  That  one  who  would  not 
rather  see  his  disciple  surpass  him  in  memorable  service  for  humanity  is  far 
too  small  for  his  position.  Michael  Angelo's  monument  in  the  Westminster 
Abbey  of  Florence  is  magnificent,  and  attracts  all  eyes  ;  but  his  humble  teacher  lies 
beneath  a  slab  of  the  church  floor,  and  the  very  name  is  worn  by  the  feet  of  wor- 
shippers during  the  centuries.  Who  will  complain  that  the  two  are  misplaced  ? 
The  teacher  did  his  work  well,  and  shines  too  in  the  fame  of  the  master.  But  the 
disciple  had  what  the  master  never  had.  So  He  who  had  been  baptized  by  John, 
possessed  what  John  did  not  have,  and  the  beauty  of  John's  ministry  lay  in  m 
recognition  of  this  fact.  He  knew  as  well  how  to  close  his  life  as  he  had  known  how 
to  begin  it.     {Amer.  Sunday  School  Times.)        Shoe-strings;  humble  service : — Thif 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ig  what  John  understood,  and  what  you  must  understand,  that  it  is  an  honour  to 
be  permitted  to  do  the  humblest  work  for  Jesus  Christ.  If  when  the  queen  was 
aiding  through  our  streets,  with  soldiers  before  her  and  soldiers  behind,  and  orowde 
of  people  all  along  the  way,  you  stood  there  with  a  little  bunch  of  flowers  in  your 
hand  and  offered  them  to  her,  and  she  took  them  and  thanked  you  with  a  smile,  I 
fancy  you  would  be  very  proud  because  the  queen  had  been  pleased  to  accept  your 
little  service.  It  was  so  John  the  Baptist  felt :  he  felt  that  there  were  great,  strong 
angels  who  would  have  reckoned  it  an  honour  to  be  allowed  to  untie  the  Lord's 
shoe-latchets,  and  while  the  Lord  could  have  such  pure  servants  as  these,  he 
felt  that  he  was  unworthy  the  honour.     {J,  B.  Howat.) 

Vers.  9, 10.  Jesxus  came  from  Nazareth. — Nazareth  of  Galilee :  The  fitnett  of  the 
gpot : — 1.  Its  seclusion.  It  lies  in  a  narrow  cleft  in  the  limestone  hills  which  form  the 
boundary  of  Zabulon,  entirely  out  of  the  ordinary  roads  of  commerce,  so  that  none 
could  say  that  our  Lord  had  learnt  either  from  Gentiles  or  from  rabbis.  2.  Its  beauty 
and  peacefulness.  The  flowers  of  Nazareth  are  famous,  and  the  appearance  of  its 
inhabitants  shows  its  healthiness.  It  was  a  home  of  humble  peace  and  plenty. 
The  fields  of  its  green  valley  are  fruitful,  and  the  view  from  the  hill  which  over- 
shadows it  is  one  of  the  loveliest  and  most  historically  striking  in  all  Palestine, 
(F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.)  Nazareth: — The  village  of  Nazareth  is  reached  by  a  nar- 
row, steep,  and  rough  mountain  path.  But  the  distant  view  of  the  village  itself, 
in  spring,  is  beautiful.  Its  streets  rise  in  terraces  on  the  hill-slopes  toward  the 
north-west.  The  hills  rise  above  it  in  an  amphitheatre  around  to  a  height  of  five 
hundred  feet,  and  shut  it  in  from  the  bleak  winds  of  winter.  The  flat-roofed  houses, 
built  of  yellowish -white  limestone  of  the  neighbourhood,  shine  in  the  sun  with  a 
dazzling  brightness,  from  among  gardens  and  fig-trees,  olives,  cypresses,  and  the 
white  and  scarlet  blossoms  of  the  orange  and  pomegranate.  (C.  Geikie,  D.D.) 
Hidden  worth: — Oh  how  much  hidden  worth  is  there,  which,  in  this  world,  is  either 
lost  in  the  dust  of  contempt  and  cannot  be  known,  or  wrapt  up  in  the  veil  of  humi- 
lity and  will  not  be  known  I  But  sooner  or  later  it  sTuill  be  known,  as  Christ's  was 
{M.  Henry.)  Jesus  ChrisVs  early  youth  and  baptism : — I.  There  is  here  an  inti- 
mation of  the  fact,  that  Christ  had  hitherto  resided  in  the  city  of  Nazareth,  in 
lower  Galilee.  1.  The  name  of  this  city  attached  itself  to  Jesus  Christ  as  a  term  of 
reproach.  2.  In  this  city  Christ  lived  thirty  years  in  seclusion,  Ac. — discharging 
the  humble  and  homely  duties  of  His  station — thus  obeyed  the  law  in  all  its  pre- 
cepts. II.  When  Christ  was  about  to  show  Himself  to  Israel,  He  came  to  John 
TO  BE  baptized.  He  thus  acknowledged  the  appointment  of  John,  and  honoured 
his  office.  He  was  made  subject  to  the  law.  He  thus  dedicated  Himself  to  the 
service  of  God.  HI.  The  baptism  of  Christ  was  signaUzed  by  several  miraculous 
AND  striking  ACCOMPANIMENTS.  1.  The  heavcus  were  opened.  2.  The  Spirit  de- 
scended. 3.  There  was  a  voice  from  heaven.  (Expository  Outlines.)  And  was 
baptized  of  John  In  Jordan. — Our  Lord's  baptism: — It  is  not  possible  for  us  to 
understand  the  whole  mystery  of  this  act,  but  we  may  reverently  consider  some  of 
the  motives  which  prompted  the  amazing  condescension.  1.  It  may  have  been  to 
consecrate  water  for  the  remission  of  sins.  Just  as  the  brooding  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
upon  the  face  of  the  waters  at  the  first  creation  reduced  order  out  of  chaos,  and 
prepared  that  element  for  all  the  purifications  of  the  first  dispensation ;  so  when 
the  moral  re-creation  of  the  world  was  inaugurated  the  operation  of  the  same  Blessed 
Agent,  descending  upon  our  Lord  in  the  river  Jordan,  sanctified  water  to  the 
mystical  washing  away  of  sin.  3.  It  may  also  have  been  that  He  designed  thereby 
to  be  made  one  with  His  brethren,  or  to  taste  for  their  sakes  at  the  outset  of  Hi? 
ministry  that  curse  of  sin  which  He  felt  in  all  its  intolerable  burden  at  the  close, 
before  His  cry  of  desolation.  3.  Another  motive  He  has  expressly  revealed.  When 
the  Baptist  shrank  back  from  an  act  that  must  have  seemed  profane,  He  pointed 
out  that  it  was  incumbent  on  Him  to  show  an  example  of  perfect  obedience  to  His 
Father's  will.  4.  Underlying  this  resolution  of  obedience  was  the  consciousness  of 
a  deep  humiliation.  His  self-abasement  reached  its  lowest  depth  in  His  baptism. 
To  be  misinterpreted  and  misunderstood  at  every  step  was  bad  enough ;  but  to  be 
told  that  by  His  own  confession  He  was  a  sinner,  one  with  publicans  and  harlots, 
and  that  by  His  own  act  and  deed  He  admitted  His  guilt  and  sought  to  have  it 
removed — such  self-abasement  is  more  than  man  can  either  measure  or  conceive.  {H. 
M.  Luckock,  D.D,)  The  public  commencement  of  a  great  life: — I.  That  it  emerged 
FROM  comparative  OBSCURITY.  '*  From  Nazareth  of  Galilee."  Christ's  coming  from 
Nazareth  would  tend — 1.  To  correct  the  proud  notions  of  those  to  whom  He  came 


CHAP.  X.}  ST.  MAR^,  15 

2.  It  wonld  be  a  means  of  self -discipline.  11.  That  it  was  charactebized  bt  TBim 
HUMiLrrT.  1.  Humility  was  shown  in  appreciating  the  worth  of  another  man's 
work.  2.  By  giving  pre-eminence  to  a  man  of  inferior  moral  worth.  3.  By  sub- 
mitting to  the  ceremoniaUsms  of  life.  HI.  That  it  was  favoubed  with  euppt 
VISIONS — **  He  saw  the  heavens  opened."  1.  Christ  was  favoured  with  a  revelation 
of  the  unseen  world.  2.  This  revelation  was  given  in  the  performance  of  a  com- 
paratively trivial  duty.  IV.  Chsist  was  honoubbd  by  a  Divine  commendation — 
*'  This  is  my  beloved  son/*  Ao.  1.  This  commendation  was  paternal.  2.  It 
was  sympathetic.  Learn :  1.  Comparative  solitude  is  the  best  preparation  for  a  life 
of  public  usefulness.  2.  That  men  are  not  to  be  judged  by  the  surroundings  of 
their  childhood.  3.  That  humility  is  the  true  adornment  of  a  young  man  about  to 
commence  public  life.  4.  The  happy  interchange  of  sympathy  between  heaven  and 
a  truly  pious  soul.  {Joseph  S,  Exell^  M.A.)  The  baptism  of  Christ: — Note,  L 
The  time  of  it — "In  those  days,"  a.d.  28,  Jesus  thirty  years  of  age,  the  age  at 
which  the  Levites  began  their  ministry.  II.  The  piiAOB  of  it.  Either  the  ancient 
ford  at  Succoth  or  near  Jericho.  HI.  The  manneb  of  it.  Of  John.  In  Jordan.  To 
fulfil  all  righteousness.  IV.  The  blessing  that  followed  it.  Credentials  of  Messiah- 
ship.  Anointing  for  ministry  with  power  (Of.  Bom.  i,  4 ;  Acts  x.  38).  Tranquility 
(Dove ;  see  Isa.  vi.  6).  Expression  of  Divine  favour.  {H.  Thome.)  The  baptism 
of  Christ:  Its  significance .'—JeBua  was  baptized  by  His  forerunner,  who  was  both 
the  representative  of  the  old  economy  and  the  preacher  of  repentance  for  the  new. 
I.  In  the  former  relation  the  Baptist  performed  on  the  person  of  the  Christian  High 
Priest  the  washing  which  preceded  His  anointing  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  typical 
high  priests  were  washed  before  their  anointing.  II.  In  the  latter  relation  the 
preacher  of  repentance  administered  the  pledge  of  penitent  washing  for  the  Messiah 
to  One  who  was  also  the  representative  of  sinful  man.  Two  ends  were  thus  accom- 
plished. 1.  Christ  was  baptized  as  the  Head  and  Surety  of  the  human  race ;  assum- 
ing  in  its  symbol  the  transgression  of  mankind.  2.  He  was  designated  as  the 
Messiah,  in  whom  were  combined  all  the  offices  to  which  His  types  were  of  old 
anointed.  In  the  former  sense,  His  baptism  represented  a  sin  assumed  but  not 
shared ;  He  was  "  numbered  with  the  transgressors,"  and  "  came  by  water  "  before 
He  came  by  "  blood."  In  the  latter  it  represented  the  perfect  purity  which  His 
pre-eminent  ministry  required ;  the  water  represented  not  the  cleansing,  but  the 
absense  of  the  need  of  purification.  {W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  The  Baptism  of  Jesus  : — 
If  we  can  distinguish  between  the  important  and  the  nnimportant  in  this  scene, 
between  the  transient  and  the  permanent,  we  shall  not  study  it  in  vain.  Essential 
truths  do  not  grow  old.  1.  Applying  this  test  we  find  that  one  of  the  unessential 
truths  eonceming  Christ's  baptism  is  its  mode.  The  exact  mode  could  not  be  re- 
produced ;  none  of  us  can  have  the  Jordan  ford  for  our  baptismal  font.  2.  The 
heavenly  phenomena  accompanying  the  baptism  are  not  among  its  essential  features. 
The  accessories  cannot,  from  their  very  nature,  be  universaL  What  then  were  the 
essential  features  ?  I.  Chbist  oub  Lobd  there  set  fob  us  k  pebfect  example  ov 
PEBFECT  obedience.  Baptism  was  an  ordinance  of  Ood ;  Christ  will  not  exempt 
Himself  from  any  duty.  Why  should  I  be  baptized?  Because  God  commands  it 
Have  you  less  need  than  Christ  ?  The  King  of  Glory  did  not  despise  it  as  ♦♦  a  mere 
form  of  the  Church."  He  received  baptism  as  ratifying  the  mission  of  His  great 
forerunner,  and  He  also  received  it  as  the  beautiful  symbol  of  moral  purification  and 
the  humble  inauguration  of  a  ministry  which  came  "  not  to  destroy  the  law  but  to 
fulfil."  n.  That  it  was  His  way  of  publicly  benouncing  sih  and  publicly  pbo- 
FB88INO  BELiGioN.  Christ  is  our  Example  as  well  as  Eedeemer.  Every  true  follower 
of  Christ  must  publicly  renounce  his  sins  and  confess  his  faith.  III.  The  evident 
APpBOVAii  OF  THE  Fatheb  IN  HEAVEN.  {Sermous  by  the  Monday  Club.)  The  baptism 
of  Jesus : — I.  The  baptism  of  Jesus  was  the  sign  of  the  close  of  John's  commis- 
sion AS  THE  FOBERUNNEB.  Evcry  ministry  has  its  culmination.  Well  if  it  be  borne 
with  John's  self-abnegation  and  humility  1    II.  The  baptism  of  Jesus  was  the  sign 

OP  THE  OPENING  OF   ChRIST'S  COMMISSION   AS  THE   ReDEEMBB.      III.   ThE   BAPTISM   OF 

Jesus  was  the  sign  of  a  new  era  of  spiritual  influence.  This  gift  now  was  the 
prelude  and  foretoken  of  that  great  pentecostal  bestowment.  IV.  The  B4Pti8M  of 
Jesus  was  the  sign  of  the  speedy  fulfilment  of  the  Father's  great  design  of 
REDEEMING  LOVE.  V.  I*BA0TiCAL  LESSONS.  1.  It  should  cnhauce  OUT  love  to  Jesus 
to  see  Him  identifying  Himself  with  all  His  sinful  people.  2.  We  have  an  example 
of  reverance  for  all  God's  ordinances.  3.  Baptism  significant  in  connection  with 
Christ's  own  baptism.  When  it  is  more  than  a  mere  ceremony  it  is  our  burial  with 
Christ  into  His  death,  pledges  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness.    4.  Christ  kept  His 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

baptismal  tow.  He  has  falfilled  all  righteonBness,  not  for  Himself  alone,  bnt  for 
His  people  also.    {Anon.)       The  Saviour^ $  consecration  to  His  work  : — I.  Our  Lord 

WAS  CONSECKATED  TO  HiS  WORK   BT  Hl8  BAPTISM   BY    THE   FOBERDNNEB.      The   inferior 

started  the  superior  on  His  public  work.  Many  a  man  has  received  the  first  open 
recognition  of  his  mission  from  one  mentally  and  spiritually  lower  than  himself, 
II.  Our  Lord  was  consecrated  to  His  wore  bt  prater.  St.  Luke,  who  calls  atten- 
tion frequently  to  the  prayers  of  Jesus,  alone  mentions  this  important  fact.  No 
great  work  should  be  entered  on  without  prayer,  especially  no  work  connected  with 
God's  kingdom.  IH.  Oub  Lord  was  consbobated  to  His  work  bt  thb  onrr  of  the 
Spirit.  Outward  ordinances,  as  the  laying  on  of  hands,  &g.,  are  for  this  end,  &c. 
rV.  Our  Lord  was  consecrated  to  His  work  bt  the  approval  or  the  Father.  The 
approval  and  blessing  of  God  are  essential  to  a  true  work.  {Anon.)  The  corona- 
tion of  the  King : — The  baptism  was,  on  His  part,  the  assumption  of  His  Messianic 
office ;  and  on  God's,  His  anointing  or  coronation  as  the  King.  There  are  three 
stages  in  this  lesson :  The  preUminary  dialogue,  which  explains  the  paradox  of  the 
baptism  of  the  sinless  by  and  with  the  sinful,  the  Divine  anointing  of  the  King,  and 
the  Divine  proclamation.  I.  The  becomingness  op  the  apparentlt  unbecomino 
BAPTISM.  The  stem  preacher  bows  in  lowliest  abasement  before  his  carpenter 
cousin,  and  feels  that  his  own  character  shows  black  against  that  lustrous  whiteness. 
Who  would  have  thought,  when  John  was  flashing  and  thundering  against  sin,  that 
such  sense  of  his  own  evil  underlay  his  boldness  ?  He  clearly  feels  that  Jesus  is 
his  superior,  and  needs  no  baptism  of  repentance.  How  had  he  come  to  this  con- 
viction ?  Difficulties  have  been  raised  as  to  the  consistency  of  these  words  with  his 
declaration  that  he  *♦  knew  Him  not."  But,  not  to  dwell  on  the  fact  that  anticipa- 
tions and  expectations  are  not  knowledge,  why  should  this  insight  into  the  character 
of  Jesus  not  have  then  been  granted  to  him  by  prophetic  intuition,  as  he  gazed  on 
the  gentle  face  ?  Why  should  not  the  Divine  voice  V)ave  then  for  the  first  time 
sounded  in  John's  heart,  "Arise,  anoint  Him:  f  or  tKiii  is  He"?  It  is  a  pure  as- 
sumption that  John  had  previous  knowledge  of  Jesus.  The  city  in  the  hill  country 
of  Judaea  where  his  boyhood  had  possibly  been  passed,  was  far  from  Nazareth,  and 
he  had  very  early  betaken  himself  to  the  desert  and  its  isolation.  The  circum- 
stances of  the  nativity  may,  or  may  not,  have  been  known  to  him ;  but  there  is  no 
reason  to  explain  this  conviction  of  the  inappropriateness  of  his  baptism  of  Jesus  by 
previous  knowledge.  The  other  explanation  seems  to  me  both  more  probable  and 
more  accordant  with  his  prophetic  office.  Christ  accepts  without  demur  the  place 
which  John  gives  Him.  He  ^ways  accepted  the  highest  place  which  any  man  put 
Him  in,  and  never  rebuked  any  estimate  of  Himself  as  enthusiastic  or  too  lofty. 
If  Jesus  had  not  up  till  that  moment  lived  a  perfectly  sinless  life,  He  committed  a 
black  sin  in  tacitly  endorsing  this  estimate  of  Him.  If  He  had  lived  such  a  life,  on 
what  theory  of  His  nature  is  it  explicable  ?  A  sinless  man  must  be  more  than  man. 
The  fame  consciousness  of  blamelessness  is  put  into  plain  words  in  His  answer  to 
John,  which  is  Jesus'  own  explanation  of  His  baptism.  It  was  an  act  of  obedience 
to  a  Divine  appointment,  and  therefore  it  "  became"  Him.  It  was  the  fulfilment  of 
"righteousness; "  that  is  to  say,  Jesus  did  not  confess  sin,  but  professed  sinlessness 
in  His  baptism,  and  submitted  to  it,  not  because  He  needed  cleansing,  but  because 
it  was  appointed  as  the  duty  for  the  nation  of  which  He  was  a  member.  Why, 
then,  was  He  baptized  ?  For  the  same  reason  for  which  He  was  found  in  the  like- 
ness of  the  flesh  of  sin,  and  submitted  to  other  requirements  of  the  law  from  which 
as  Son  He  was  free,  and  bore  the  sorrows  which  were  not  the  issue  of  His  own  sins, 
and  went  down  at  last  to  the  other  baptism  with  which  He  had  to  be  baptized, 
though  His  pure  life  had  for  itself  no  need  to  pass  through  that  awful  submersion 
beneath  the  black,  cold  waters  of  death.  The  whole  mystery  of  His  identification 
of  Himself  with  sinful  men,  and  of  His  being  "  made  sin  .  .  .  for  ns,  who  knew  no 
sin,"  lies  in  germ  in  His  baptism  by  John.  No  other  conception  of  its  meaning 
does  justice  to  the  facts.  H.  We  have  next  the  Divine  anointing  or  coronation. 
The  •ymbol  of  the  dove  seems  to  carry  allusions  to  the  grand  image  which  repre- 
sents the  Spirit  of  God  as  "  brooding  over  chaos,  and  quickening  hfe,  as  a  bird  in 
its  nest  by  the  warmth  of  its  own  soft  breast ;  to  the  dove  which  bore  the  olive- 
branch,  first  messenger  of  hope  to  the  prisoners  in  the  ark ;  to  the  use  of  the  dove 
AS  clean,  in  sacrifice ;  to  the  poetical  attribution  to  it,  coaimon  to  many  nations,  of 
meek  gentleness  and  faithful  love.  Set  side  by  side  with  that,  John's  thought  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  as  fire,  and  we  get  all  the  beauty  of  both  emblems  increased,  and 
understand  how  much  the  stem  ascetic,  whose  words  burned  and  blistered,  had  to 
learn.     He  knew  "what  manner  of  spirit"  the  King  possessed  and  bestowed. 


CHAP.  I.]  ST.  MARK.  17  ' 

Meekness  is  throned  now.  Gentleness  is  stronger  than  force.  The  dove  conqnerB 
Eome's  eagles  and  every  strong- taloned,  sharp-beaked  bird  of  prey.  **  The  Prince 
of  the  kings  of  the  earth"  is  anointed  by  the  descending  dove,  and  His  second 
coronation  is  with  thorns,  and  a  reed  is  His  sceptre ;  for  His  kingdom  is  based  on 
parity  and  meekness,  is  won  by  suffering,  and  wielded  in  gentleness.  As  ii  the 
King,  8o  are  His  subjects,  whose  only  weapons  He  has  assigned  when  He  bids  them 
be  "  harmless  as  doves."  The  purpose  of  this  descent  of  the  Spirit  on  Jesus  was 
twofold.  In  John's  Gospel  it  is  represented  as  principally  meant  to  certify  the 
Baptist  of  the  identity  of  the  Messiah.  But  we  cannot  exclude  its  effect  on  Jesus. 
For  Him  it  was  the  Divine  anointing  for  His  mediatorial  work.  A  king  is  king  before 
he  is  anointed  or  crowned.  These  are  but  the  signs  of  what  we  may  call  the  official 
assumption  of  His  royalty.  We  are  not  to  conceive  that  Jesus  then  began  to  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit,  or  Uiat  absolutely  new  powers  were  given  to  Him  then.  No 
doubt  the  anointing  did  mark  a  stage  in  His  human  development,  and  the  accession 
to  His  manhood  of  all  that  was  needed  to  equip  it  for  His  work.  But  the  Spirit  of 
God  had  formed  His  pure  manhood  ere  He  was  bom,  and  had  dwelt  in  growing 
measure  in  His  growing  spirit,  through  all  His  sinless  thirty  years.  Since  He  was 
a  man,  He  needed  the  Divine  Spirit.  Since  He  was  a  sinless  man,  He  was  capable 
of  receiving  it  in  perfect  measure  and  unbroken  continuity.  Since  His  baptism 
began  His  public  career.  He  needed  then,  and  then  received,  the  anointing  which  at 
once  designated  and  fitted  Him  for  His  work  of  witnessing  and  atonement.    IH.  Wb 

nkYJt  riNALLY  THB  DiVINB  PROCLAMATION.       GOD  HlMSEI<r  TAKES  THK  HEBALd's  OFFICE. 

The  coronation  ends  with  the  solemn  recitation  of  the  style  and  title  of  the  King. 
Two  Old  Testament  passages  seem  to  be  melted  together  in  it :  that  in  the  second 
Psalm,  which  says  to  the  Messianic  King,  ♦*  Thou  art  My  Son ; "  that  in  Isaiah  xlii.  1, 
which  calls  on  the  nations  to  **  behold  .  .  .  Mine  elect,  in  whom  My  soul  de- 
lighteth."  God  speaks  from  heaven,  and  quotes  a  psalm  and  a  prophet.  Why 
shonld  He  not  speak  from  heaven  an  illuminating  word,  which  interprets  whole 
regions  of  the  Old  Testament  ?  This  Divine  testimony  touches  first  the  mystery  of 
our  Lord's  nature.  *•  Son  of  God  "  is  not  merely  a  synonym  of  Messiah,  but  it 
includes  the  distinct  conception  of  Divine  origin  and  of  consequent  Divine  nature. 
The  name  implies  that  the  relation  between  Him  and  the  Father  is  unique.  The 
voice  attests  the  Divine  complacency  in  Him.  The  form  of  the  verb  in  the  Greek 
implies  a  definite  past  delight  of  the  Father  in  the  Son,  and  carries  back  ouz 
thoughts  to  that  wonderful  intercourse  of  which  Jesus  lets  us  catch  some  faint 
glimpse  when  He  says,  "  Thou  lovedst  Me  before  the  foundation  of  the  world." 
From  eternity  the  mysterious  depths  of  the  Divine  nature  moved  in  soft  waves  of 
love,  and  in  its  solitude  there  was  society.  Nor  can  we  leave  out  of  view  the  thought 
that  the  Father's  delight  in  the  Son  is  through  the  Son  extended  to  all  who  love 
and  trust  the  Son.  In  Jesna,  God  is  well  pleased  towards  us.  That  complacent 
delight  embraces  ua  too,  if  we  become  sons  through  faith  in  the  only  begotten  Son. 
The  dove  that  rested  on  His  head  will  come  and  nestle  in  our  hearts,  and  brood 
there,  OTcr  their  chaos,  if  we  have  faith  in  Christ.    {A,  McLareUt  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  The  lieayens  opened. — The  Divine  Trinity : — This  was  the  inauguration 
and  proclamation  of  the  Messias,  when  He  began  to  be  the  great  Prophet  of  the 
New  Covenant.  And  this  was  the  greatest  meeting  that  ever  was  upon  the  earth, 
where  the  whole  cabinet  of  the  mysterious  Trinity  was  opened  and  shown,  as  much 
as  the  capacities  of  our  present  imperfections  will  permit ;  the  Second  Person  in  the 
veil  of  humanity ;  the  Third  in  the  shape,  or  with  the  motion,  of  a  dove :  but  the 
First  kept  His  primitive  state ;  and  as  to  the  Israelites  He  gave  notice  by  way  of 
caution,  '*  Ye  saw  no  shape,  but  ye  heard  a  voice,"  so  now  also  God  the  Father 
gave  testimony  to  His  Holy  Son,  and  appeared  only  in  a  voice,  without  any  visible 
representment.  (Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor.)  The  Spirit  like  a  dove. — Like  a  dove: — 
A  most  captivating  symbol.  The  eagle,  too,  was  in  our  Lord ;  everything  about 
Him  was  mingled  with  the  sublime ;  but  the  dove  was  predominant.  Not  only 
while  on  earth,  but  all  along  the  ages,  it  is  the  power  of  His  gentleness  and 
tenderness  and  meekness — His  love,  in  short,  that  has  been  victorious.  He  has 
••wooed  "and  "won."  (J.  Morison^  D.D.)  Dovelike  propertiei  in  Christ: — I. 
IjfNocENT  and  harmless  (Heb.  vii.  26).  XL  Lovino  and  tender-hearted  (Eph.  iii. 
19).  lU.  Meek  and  gentle  (Matt  xi.  29).  This  is  matter  of  singular  comfort  to 
the  faithful  members  of  Christ :  for  Chnst  being  innocent  and  harmless  like  the 
dove,  yea,  pure  from  all  spot  of  sin,  this  His  purity  and  holiness  is  imputed  to  so 
many  as  truly  believe  in  Him;  and  by  it  they  are  accepted,  as  holy  and  pure 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

through  Christ,  though  in  themselves  they  are  polluted  and  sinful.  Again,  Christ 
being  also  a  loving,  gentle,  and  meek  Saviour,  He  will  not  deal  with  us  in  rigour 
or  wrath  ;  but  in  compassion,  love,  and  gentleness,  accepting  our  weak  endeavours 
in  His  service,  pardoning  our  wants  and  infirmities,  and  cherishing  in  us  the 
smallest  beginnings  of  grace  (Isaiah  xlii.  2,  3).  Strive  we  to  imitate  our  Saviour 
Christ  in  these  properties  of  the  dove.  (G.  Fetter.)  The  dove  temper  in  the 
Church: — The  Holy  Spirit  came  as  a  dove,  a  gentle,  joyous  creature,  with  no 
bitterness  of  gall,  no  fierceness  of  bite,  no  violence  of  rending  claws,  loving  human 
houses,  associating  within  one  home ;  nurturing  their  young  together ;  when  they 
fly  abroad,  hanging  in  their  flight  side  by  side  ;  leading  their  life  in  mutual  inter- 
course ;  giving  in  concord  the  kiss  of  peace  with  the  biU ;  in  every  way  fulfilling 
the  law  of  unanimity.  This  is  the  singleness  of  heart  that  ought  to  be  in  the 
Church ;  this  is  the  habit  of  love  that  must  be  obtained.  (Cyprian.)  How  to 
improve  our  baptism: — To  quicken  you  to  improve  your  baptism  consider — I. 
Baptism  is  a  PEEPETUAii  bond  obliginq  us  to  repentance  and  a  holy  utb  (Rom.  vi. 
2-4 ;  Col.  iii.  8,  9).  II.  The  dipbovement  op  baptism  is  the  best  pbepabation  op 
THE  Lobd's  Sdppeb  (Johu  xiii.  8).  Before  the  Church,  none  but  baptized  persons 
have  a  right  to  the  Lord's  Table ;  before  God,  none  but  those  who  have  the  fruit 
of  baptism  have  a  right  to  the  benefit  thereof.  III.  If  we  improve  it  not,  baptism 
wHiii  BE  A  WITNESS  AGAINST  US.  One  ElpidophoTUS  relapsed  into  Arianism,  and  the 
deacon  who  baptized  him  showed  him  the  garments  in  which  he  had  been  baptized, 
and  said,  ••  These  shall  be  a  witness  against  thee  to  all  eternity."  But  how  shall 
we  improve  it  f  1.  We  must  personally  and  solemnly  own  the  covenant  made  with 
God  in  infancy.  What  was  then  done  for  us  must  now  be  done  by  us.  2.  Renew 
often  the  sense  of  obligation  to  God,  and  keep  a  constant  reckoning  of  obedience 
(2  Pet.  i.  9).  3.  Use  frequent  self-reflection  to  know  whether  you  are  indeed 
washed  from  the  guilt  and  filth  of  sin  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  4.  Use  it  as  a  great  help  in 
all  temptations  (1  Cor.  vi.  15) .  Dionysia  comforted  her  son  Majoricus,  an  African 
martyr,  with  this  speech,  "  Remember,  my  son,  that  thou  art  baptized  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  and  be  constant."  Luther,  when  tempted  to 
despair,  used  to  say,  "  I  am  baptized,  and  believe  in  Christ  crucified."  {T.  Manton.) 
After  baptism: — ^I.  New  revelations  gained — "The  heavens  were  opened."  II. 
New  GIFTS  iupabted — *•  The  Spirit."  III.  New  witness  enjoyed — '•  Thou  art  My 
beloved  Son."  IV.  New  tbial  imposed — "  Tempted  of  Satan."  V.  New  tbiumphb 
SECUBED.  VI.  New  pbivileges  confebbed — *'  And  angels  ministered  onto  Him." 
VII.  Nbw  work  assigned—"  Preaching  the  gospeL" 

Yer.  11.  Thou  art  My  beloved  Son. — Humiliation  and  exaltation: — It  will  be 
well  for  us  to  remember  that  our  great  Example  was  most  highly  exalted  just  when 
His  humiliation  was  deepest ;  that  it  was  when  He  had  made  Himself  one  with  the 
sons  of  men  that  He  was  declared  to  be  the  Son — the  beloved  Son — of  God.  It  is 
a  pledge  that  the  lowly,  submissive  spirit  will  be  greatly  sanctified,  and  that  there 
is  no  surer  way  to  win  the  approval  of  God  than  by  yielding  our  wills  to  the 
authority  of  those  set  over  us  by  the  Lord,  and  striving  to  c&Tvy  out  the  rules  of 
the  Church  in  the  spirit  of  Him  who  accepted  at  once  what  His  Father  had 
appointed.  "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to  the  humble. "  {H.  M. 
Luekock,  D.D.)  "  My  beloved  Son  "; — L  An  expbession  of  afpection  and  appboval. 
The  Father  bore  witness  to  the  Son.  Not  for  Christ's  sake  only,  but  for  ours,  came 
that  voice,  approving  the  character  and  authenticatiug  the  mission  of  the  Son  of 
God.  II.  Ax  implicit  and  authobitative  appeal  for  human  faith,  attachment, 
and  obedience.  He  of  whom  the  Father  thus  speaks,  is  worthy  of  all  our  honour, 
gratitude,  and  devotion.    (Family  Churchman.) 

Vers.  12, 13. — The  Spirit  driveth  Him  into  the  wilderness. — T?ie  temptation  of 
Christ : — An  awful  and  mysterious  passage  in  the  life  of  One  whose  tastes  and 
habits  were  the  very  opposite  of  those  of  the  prophet  of  the  desert — One  who  loved 
men  and  cities,  free  social  intercourse,  and  scenes  of  active  usefulness.  No  sooner 
does  Jesus  undergo  the  high  consecration  of  baptism  than,  instead  of  stepping  forth 
into  public  life,  He  flees  to  solitude.  We  cannot  unveil  the  deep  mystery  of  this 
season  of  thought  and  trial.  But  may  we  not  suppose  that  when  the  Spirit 
descended  on  Christ,  He  who  had  so  suffered  the  limitations  of  humanity  as 
already  to  have  need^  to  grow  in  wisdom  and  strength,  may  first  have  realized,  in 
His  hnman  thought,  the  tremendous  import  of  His  mission,  and  at  the  same  time 


CHAP.  I.}  8T,  MARK.  1% 

may  first  have  grasped  the  superhuman  powers  with  which  to  work  miracles  ?    If 
80,  overwhelmed  with  the  vision  before  Him,  He  may  well  have  sought  solitude  to 
meditate  on  His  great  work,  to  obtain  inward  mastery  of  His  own  stupendoaa 
powers,  and  to  wrestle  with  and  conquer  the  fearful  temptations  that  would  rise  up, 
urging  Him  to  desecrate  those  powers  to  selfish  purposes.     I.  Christ  was  tempted. 
He  was  not  only  tested  as  by  a  touchstone,  but  by  the  more  searching  ordeal  of  a 
direct  persuasion  to  evil.     In  all  there  is  a  lower  as  well  as  a  higher  nature,  a  self- 
interest  as  well  as  a  conscience  of  duty.    If  Christ  was  tempted,  it  follows  that  (1) 
no  innocence  and  no  strength  can  make  a  soul  unassailable  by  temptation,  and  (2) 
to  feel  the  force  of  temptation  is  no  proof  of  guilty  compliance.    II.  Christ  was 
tempted  by  Satan.    Temptation  arises  from  without  as  well  as  from  our  own  hearts. 
This  is  why  the  purest  mind  is  liable  to  it.    III.  Christ  was  tempted  at  the  com- 
mencement OF  His  mission.     The  greatest  obstacles  often  beset  the  first  steps  of  a 
new  course — in  attempting  a  new  work,  in  first  attacking  a  bad  habit,  in  entering 
on  the  Christian  life.     This  tests  genuineness  and  teaches  humility,  self-diffidence, 
and  reliance  on  God.    It  is  a  great  thing  to  begin  the  Christian  campaign  with  a 
victory  in  the  first  battle.    IV.  Christ  was  tempted  when  undeb  high  spibitual 
INFLUENCES.    *'  The  Spirit  driveth  Him."     1.  God  permits,  nay,  requires,  us  to  pass 
through  the  fire  of  temptation.    2.  Great  spiritual  elation  is  often  followed  by  deep 
depression.     3.  New  endowments  bring  new  dangers.    They  who  stand  highest  are 
in  danger  of  falling  lowest.    V.  Christ  was  tempted  in  the  wildebness,     1.  John 
found  the  desert  the  best  scene  for  his  life  and  work,  Christ  found  it  a  region  of  evil 
influences.     As  one  man's  paradise  may  be  the  purgatory  of  another,  so  the  haven 
of  refuge  of  one  may  be  his  brother's  most  dangerous  snare.    2.  Christ  was  tempted 
in  a  solitary  place.    We  cannot  escape  temptation  by  fleeing  from  the  world ;  we 
carry  the  world  with  us  to  our  retreat.     {W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)         The  wilderness  : — 
This  wilderness  has  been  identified,  by  the  voice  of  tradition,  in  the  Greek  and 
Latin  Churches,  as  that  wild  and  lonely  region  between  Jerusalem  and  the  Dead 
Sea,  called  in  modem  geography,  Quarantania.    It  is  an  extensive  plateau,  elevated 
to  a  considerable  height  above  the  plain  of  Jericho  and  the  west  bank  of  the  Jordan ; 
and  hence  the  literal  accuracy  of  the  expression  in  St.  Matthew,  that  Jesus  was  ••  led 
up  *'  into  the  wilderness.    Travellers  have  described  it  as  a  barren,  sterile  waste  of 
painful  whiteness,  shut  in  on  the  west  by  a  ridge  of  grey  limestone  hills,  moulded 
into  every  conceivable  shape  ;  while  on  the  east  the  view  is  closed  by  the  gigantic 
wall  of  the  Moab  mountains,  appearing  very  near  at  hand,  but  in  reality  a  long  way 
off,  the  deception  being  caused  by  the  nature  of  the  intervening  ground,  which 
possesses  no  marked  features,  no  difference  of  colour  on  which  to  fix  the  eye  for  the 
purpose  of  forming  an  estimate  of  distance.     Over  this  vast  expanse  of  upland 
country  there  are  signs  of  vegetation  only  in  two  or  three  places,  where  winter 
torrents  have  scooped  out  a  channel  for  themselves,  and  stimulate  year  after  year 
into  brief  existence  narrow  strips  of  verdure  along  their  banks.    The  monotony  of 
the  landscape  and  the  uniformity  of  its  colouring  are  varied  only  when  the  glaring 
afternoon  sun  projects  the  shadows  of  the  ghostly  rocks  across  the  plain,  or,  at  rare 
intervals,  when  a  snowy  cloud,  that  seems  as  if  bom  of  the  hills  themselves,  sails 
across  the  deep  blue  sky  and  casts  down  on  the  desolate  scene  the  cool  dark  mantle 
of  its  shade.    ▲  more  dreary  and  lonely  scene  it  is  impossible  to  imagine.     {U, 
Macmillan^  LL.D,)        Man  led  into  temptation  for  his  good: — Here  we  learn  that 
God  is  our  Leader  into  all  things  which  are  good  for  our  souls,  and  that  even  temp- 
tation may  be  good  for  us.    The  same  Holy  Spirit  who  led  Jesus  into  the  wilderness 
leads  us  thither  too.     1.  Christ  went  into  a  desert  to  make  expiation  for  the  sins 
which  are  committed  in  society.     2.  He  went  to  endure  fasting  for  man's  luxury  ; 
to  suffer  want  for  man's  extravagance.    3.  He  went  into  the  wilderness  immediately 
after  His  baptism,  teaching  us  thereby  that  those  who  are  baptized  should  die  from 
sin  and  rise  again  unto  righteousness.    4.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  for  us  all  some- 
times to  stand  aside  from  the  busy  crowd,  and  to  seek  quiet  and  retirement  for 
prayer  and  self-examination,  without  which  our  spiritual  life  must  grow  feebler  and 
fainter  till  it  dies.     {H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton,  M.A.)         Temptation  follows  blessing  : — 
Note  that  it  was  immediately  after  His  baptism  our  Lord  was  led  into  the  wilderness 
to  be  tempted.     Satan,  like  a  pirate,  sets  on  a  ship  that  is  richly  laden  ;  so  when  a 
soul  hath  been  laden  with  spiritual  comforts,  now  the  devil  will  be  shooting  at  him 
to  rob  him  of  all.    The  devil  envies  to  see  a  soul  feasted  with  spiritual  joy.    Joseph's 
parti-coloured  coat  made  his  brethren  envy  him  and  plot  against  him.    After  David 
had  the  good  news  of  the  pardon  of  his  sin  (whic    must  needs  fill  vrith  consolation), 
Satan  presently  tempted  him  to  a  new  sin  in  numbering  the  people  ;  and  so  all  his 


aO  rfl^  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

comfort  leaked  out  ard  was  spilt.  {T.Wat$on.)  Satanic  temptations: — I.  That 
THEY  COME  TO  THE  BEST  OF  MEN.  1.  To  test  the  wotk  and  progress  of  their  moral 
character.  2.  To  impart  to  moral  character  new  traits  of  beauty.  II.  That  thby 
OFTEN  FOLiiOw  TIMES  OF  HAPPY  COMMUNION  WITH  GoD.  1.  Thesc  altered  conditions 
of  soul  are  often  sudden.  2.  They  are  disciplinary.  3.  They  are  unwelcome. 
III.  That  they  makk  important  ceises  ut  the  spiritual  history  of  the  coon. 
1.  They  aid  self-interpretation.  2.  They  give  insight  into  the  problem  of  sin.  3. 
They  afford  an  opportunity  of  asserting  moral  supremacy.    IV.  That  they  abx 

FREQUENTLY  FOLLOWED  BY  THE  SOOTHING  MINISTRIES  OF  HEAVEN.     1.   These  ministries 

are  angelic.  2.  They  are  personal.  3.  They  are  opportune.  4.  They  are  soothing. 
Lessons  :  1.  That  temptation  should  not  cause  us  to  depreciate  the  worth  of  our 
moral  character.  2.  That  temptation  should  increase  our  knowledge  of  self,  and 
enhance  the  progress  of  our  being.  3.  That  the  devotions  of  the  good  should  pre- 
pare them  for  struggle  with  evil.  4.  That  solitude  is  no  safeguard  against  tempta- 
tion. 5.  That  heavenly  ministries  are  at  the  disposal  of  a  tempted,  but  prayerful,  soul, 
6.  That  man  has  the  power  to  resist  the  strongest  opposition  of  hell.  {Joseph  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)  The  temptation  of  Christ : — It  was  not  a  vision  but  an  actual  occur- 
rence between  a  personal  Saviour  and  a  personal  devil.  I.  The  CiRCUMSTANCBa. 
1.  The  time.  After  His  baptism.  Before  His  public  ministry.  2.  The  place.  It 
was  solitary,  dreary,  dangerous.  3.  The  Divine  agency.  Appointed  and  regulated 
by  God.  4.  Angelic  ministrations.  IL  Th«  details.  1.  To  the  use  of  unlawful 
means  of  extrication  from  difficulties.  2.  To  presumption  on  Divine  support  under 
self-sought  dangers.  3.  To  spiritual  idolatry.  lU.  Its  uses.  1.  It  tried  His 
character  as  a  man  and  as  a  Mediator.  2.  It  showed  His  power  to  overcome  the 
devil.  3.  It  qualified  Him  to  sympathize  with  His  people.  IV.  Its  lessons. 
1.  From  the  contrast  between  the  issues  of  the  temptation  in  paradise  and  of  that 
in  the  wilderness.  2.  From  the  instrument  which  was  used  in  repelling  the  tempta- 
tion. The  sword  of  the  Spirit.  3.  From  the  hopes  it  inspires  of  victory  over  all 
our  enemies.      (Various.)  Jordan  exchanged  for  the  toildemess: — From  the 

baptism  He  went  ap,  as  it  were,  towards  God  as  the  "  Beloved  Son ;  "  but  from  the 
temptation  He  comes  earthward  as  the  Son  of  Man.  The  Jordan  lies  on  the 
heavenly,  the  wilderness  on  the  earthly,  side  of  Christ.  There  is  a  "river," 
but  there  is  no  wilderness,  in  heaven.  {Dr.  Parker.)  Christ  tempted  of  the 
devil: — I.  Christ,  having  received  the  Spirit,  ever  after  lived  under  His  im- 
MEDIATE  auiDANCB.  1.  Everything  that  Christ  said  and  did  expressed  the  mind 
of  the  Spirit.  In  this  respect  He  is  an  example.  2.  The  intensity  with  which  Christ 
acted  is  expressed  by  the  word  "  driveth."  3.  The  Spirit,  as  a  leader,  often  takes  into 
the  wilderness.  IL  Christ  having  been  formally  anointed  to  His  offices,  prepares 
HiMSEU  BY  FASTING  AND  PRAYER  FOB  His  WORK.  It  was  after  Christ  had  spent  forty 
days  in  this  employment  that  He  was  tempted.  He  afterwards  acted  in  the  same 
manner.  Our  example.  III.  Christ  having  retired  into  the  wilderness,  Hb 
▲zxowED  Himself  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil.  IV.  The  temptation  of  Christ  fol- 
lowed CLOSE  UPON  THE  ENJOYMENT  OF  THE  HIGHEST  RELIGIOUS  PRIVILEGES.     V.  Christ 

was  tempted  in  a  place  into  which  the  Spirit  eiad  led  Him.  VL  It  is  stated  that 
Christ,  during  His  stay  in  the  wilderness,  was  with  the  wild  beasts.  VII.  On  this 
and  other  occasions  angels  ministered  to  Christ.  {Expository  Outlines.)  Satanic 
agency  : — I.  Satan,  the  prince  of  devils.  Numbers  of  his  agents.  His  apostasy, 
and  ruin  of  man.  His  power  on  earth,  a  kingdom.  Organized.  Long  almost 
undisputed.  II.  Christ  came  to  dispute  his  authorttt.  Took  an  affecting  view 
of  human  vassalage.  lU.  Satan,  aware  of  His  advent,  undertook  to  conduct  His 
TEMPTATION.  Made  His  life  an  incessant  conflict.  IV.  The  defeat  of  Satan  quite 
reconcilable  with  his  present  prevalence.  V.  Galled  a  spirit,  to  excite  oub 
VIGILANCE.  An  unclean  spirit,  to  awaken  our  antipathy.  His  influence  over  the 
heart,  great.  But  only  exercised  with  our  consent.  VI.  The  period  of  his  reign 
LIMITED.  (i7.  HarriSt  D.D.)  Solitude  : — 1.  Its  perils.  Eve  was  tempted  when 
she  was  alone ;  the  suicide  succumbs  when  he  is  pushed  with  the  last  degree  ol 
loneUness ;  the  darkest  thoughts  of  the  conspirator  becloud  the  mind  when  he  has 
most  deeply  cut  the  social  bond ;  when  man  is  alone  he  loses  the  check  of  com- 
parison with  others  ;  he  miscalculates  his  force,  and  deems  too  little  the  antagonism 
that  force  may  excite.  II.  Its  advantages.  The  risks  of  sohtude  are  in  proportion 
to  its  value.  Man  cannot  reach  his  full  stature  in  the  market-place  or  in  association 
with  the  excited  throng.  The  desert  was  to  Christ  a  holy  place  after  the  initial 
battle.  In  the  flrst  instance  He  was  led  up  into  it  to  be  tempted;  but  often 
afterwards  to  be  comforted.      {Ecce  Deus.)        Life  not   all   wilderness: — Som« 


OHAY.  z.]  ST.  MARK.  21 

people  see  nothing  in  the  world  but  the  wilderness,  the  devil,  and  the  wild 
beasts.  Besist  these  temptations,  and  thou  wilt  find  it  full  of  angels.  {R.  Glover.) 
Tempted  of  Satan. — The  number  forty  in  Scripture: — The  number  forty  seems 
to  have  had  a  special  mystical  meaning.  Nine  instances  in  the  Bible  of  events 
which  occurred  for  forty  days  or  years.  1.  The  Flood.  2.  Bodies  embalmed  forty 
days  before  burial.  3.  Israel's  wanderings.  4.  Goliath's  defiance  of  IsraeL  6. 
Elijah  fasted.  6.  Ezekiel  bore  the  iniquity  of  Judah.  7.  Bepentance  of  Nineveh. 
8.  Our  Lord's  temptation.  9.  Interval  between  resurrection  and  ascension.  (JJ. 
J.  Wilmot  Buxtorit  M.A.)  Temptation: — The  word  temptation  has  three  mean* 
ings  in  the  Bible.  1.  A  trial  of  our  faith,  to  bring  out  some  hidden  virtue.  Thus 
Abraham  was  tempted  of  God.  2.  A  provoking  to  anger.  Thus  we  tempt  Gk>d 
(Psalms  zcv.  9,  cvi.  14).  So  we  say  of  a  provoking  person  that  he  has  a  trying 
temper.  3.  A  leading  into  sin.  Thus  we  are  tempted  of  the  devil.  {Ibid.)  Why 
does  God  allow  u$  to  be  tempted  1 — 1.  To  strengthen  our  faith.  The  unused  limb 
becomes  weak  and  tender ;  the  neglected  instrument  of  music  gets  out  of  tune ;  the 
untouched  weapon  loses  its  keen  edge.  So,  many  a  man  knows  nothing  of  self- 
denial  until  God  tries  him  by  a  great  sorrow.  2.  To  bring  out  latent  good  qualities. 
3.  To  make  us  watchful.  We  must  prove  our  armour.  We  must  learn  our  weak 
points.  4.  That  He  may  one  day  give  us  our  reward  (James  i.  12).  {Ibid.) 
Ghrist*t  stuceptibility  to  temptation : — ^Did  Christ,  then,  merely  suffer  in  the  wilder- 
ness as  any  other  man  has  done  ?  Suffering  is  a  question  of  nature.  The  edu- 
cated man  suffers  more  than  the  uneducated  man  ;  the  poet  probably  suffers  more 
than  the  mathematician ;  the  commanding  of&cer  suffers  more  in  a  defeat  than  the 
common  soldier.  The  more  life,  the  more  suffering :  the  billows  of  sorrow  being  in 
proportion  to  the  volume  of  our  manhood.  Now  Jesus  Christ  was  not  merely  a  man, 
He  was  Man  ;  and  by  the  very  compass  of  His  manhood.  He  suffered  more  than  any 
mortal  can  endure.  The  storm  may  pass  as  fiercely  over  the  shallow  lake  as  over 
the  Atlantic,  but  by  its  very  volume  the  latter  is  more  terribly  shaken.  No  other 
man  had  come  with  Christ's  ideas;  in  no  other  man  was  the  element  of  sell  so 
entirely  abnegated ;  no  other  man  had  offered  such  opposition  to  diabolic  rule ;  all 
these  circumstances  combine  to  render  Christ's  temptation  unique,  yet  not  one  of 
them  puts  Christ  so  far  away  as  to  prevent  us  finding  in  His  temptation  unfailing 
solace  and  strength.  {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Satan's  opportunity : — No  sooner 
was  Christ  out  of  the  water  of  baptism  than  He  is  thrust  into  the  fire  of  temptation. 
So  David,  after  his  anointing,  was  hunted  as  a  partridge  upon  the  mountains. 
Israel  is  no  sooner  out  of  Egypt  than  Pharaoh  pursues  them.  Hezekiah  had  no 
sooner  left  that  solemn  passover  than  Sennacherib  comes  up  against  him.  St.  Paul 
is  assaulted  with  vile  temptations  after  the  abundance  of  his  revelations  ;  and  Christ 
teaches  us,  after  forgiveness  of  sins,  to  look  for  temptations,  and  to  pray  against 
them.  While  Jacob  would  be  Laban's  drudge  and  packhorse,  all  was  well ;  but 
when  once  he  began  to  flee,  he  makes  after  him  with  all  his  might.  All  was  quiet 
enough  at  Ephesus  before  St.  Paul  came  thither ;  but  then  '*  there  arose  no  small 
stir  about  ♦  the  way.'  *'  All  the  while  our  Saviour  lay  in  His  father's  shop,  and 
meddled  only  with  carpenter's  chips,  the  devil  troubled  Him  not ;  but  now  that  He 
is  to  enter  more  publicly  upon  His  oflEice  of  mediatorship,  the  tempter  pierceth  His 
tender  soul  with  many  sorrows  by  solicitation  to  sin.  {John  Trapp.)  Satan*$ 
wilinesi: — The  lion  is  said  to  be  boldest  in  the  storm.  His  roar,  it  is  said, 
never  sounds  so  loud  as  in  the  pauses  of  the  thunder ;  and  when  the  lightning 
flashes,  brightest  are  the  flashes  of  his  cruel  eye.  Even  so  he  who  goeth  about  as 
a  roaring  lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,  often  seizes  the  hour  of  nature's 
greatest  distress  to  assault  us  with  his  fiercest  temptations.  He  tempted  Job  when 
he  was  bowed  down  with  grief.  He  tempted  Peter  when  he  was  weary  with  watch- 
ing and  heart-broken  with  sorrow.  And  here,  too,  he  tempts  Jesus  Christ  when  He 
is  faint  with  hunger.  {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Subtlety  of  Satan'i  temptations : — 
Satan  will  lie  in  wait  for  the  Christian  in  his  time  of  weakness,  even  as  the  wild 
beasts  do  at  the  water  side  for  the  cattle  coming  to  drink.  Nay,  when  having  re- 
sisted manfully,  the  Christian  has  driven  off  the  enemy,  he  should  look  well  that 
he  be  not  wounded  by  the  vanquished  foe,  who  often  makes  a  Parthian  retreat.  {J. 
G.  Pilkington.)  Temptation  not  necessarily  hurtful : — It  is  when  a  child  of  Qod 
is  fullest  of  grace ;  when  he  has  been  declared  to  be  a  "  son,"  even  a  •*  beloved  son  " 
of  (;h)d ;  when  he  has  made  a  public  profession  of  Christianity,  that  he  is  most  of 
all  exposed  to  temptation.  It  seems  strange,  at  first  thought,  that  it  should  be  so ; 
but  a  little  reflection  dissipates  the  strangeness.  Let  me  try  to  illustrate  this.  A 
toolmaker,  I  suppose,  has  finished  an  instrument,  but  it  is  not  yet  sent  forth.  Why  T 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t. 

Because  he  has  not  " tested "  it.  "Weill  Enter  we  his  workshop.  Ton  look  in 
and  observe  the  process.  Your  first  impression  is,  he  is  going  to  break  it.  But  it 
is  not  so.  Testing  is  not  an  injury.  The  perfect  weapon  comes  out  the  stronger, 
and  receives  the  stamp  that  will  carry  it  over  the  world.  Even  so  the  testing  and 
trying  of  the  Christian  is  not  an  injury.  He  who  has  formed  the  believer  for  Him- 
self is  not  going  to  break  or  destroy  the  work,  the  beautiful  work  of  His  own  hands. 
He  is  purifying,  fitting,  fashioning,  polishing.  Carry  this  along  with  you,  and  you  will 
understand  how  it  comes  about  that  at  the  very  moment  of  your  being  '*  full  "  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  at  the  very  moment  of  your  announced  sonship,  you  are  most  violently 
assailed.  {A.  B.  Grosart,  D.D.)  I.  Sonship  does  not  exempt  from  temptation. 
II.  Temptation  does  not  invalidate  sonship.  III.  Temptation,  bightly  considered, 
makes  sonship  a  life  and  power.  [J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Our  relation  to  Adam's  temp- 
tation and  to  GhrisVs: — Adam  yielded;  Christ  overcame.  Adam's  sin  contains  all  the 
sin  of  his  children  ;  Christ's  victory  contains  all  the  victories  of  His  people.  There 
was  the  vice  of  all  sinning  in  the  one,  and  there  was  the  virtue  of  all  oonqnering  in  the 
other,  When  we  sin  we  go  down  to  that  sin  by  the  same  steps  which  Adam  trod, 
and  when  we  foil  the  tempter,  we  do  so  with  the  same  weapons  that  Christ  wielded. 
{Dean  Vauglian.)  Why  men  are  tempted : — Man  is  like  iron  fresh  from  the  mine. 
The  worker  of  the  rude  metal  will  thrust  a  crude  bar  of  it  into  the  blazing  furnace, 
and  turn  it  hither  and  thither  in  the  glowing  fires,  and  then  lay  it  on  the  anvil,  and 
beat  it  with  innumerable  blows,  and  crush  it  between  inexorable  rollers,  and  plunge 
it  into  the  smothering  charcoal,  and  turn  and  thrust  and  temper  it,  till  at  length  it 
is  DO  longer  the  hard,  brittle,  half  earthy  material,  but  something  different — 
tougher,  stronger,  purer,  and  more  valuable.  He  does  this  that  the  worthless  may 
become  useful,  and  that  iron  ore  may  be  converted  into  steel.  {S.  Greg.)  An 
important  interview : — At  one  o'clock  precisely  on  the  25th  of  Jane,  1807,  two  boats 
put  off  from  opposite  banks  of  the  Niemen,  at  the  little  town  of  Tilsit.  They  rowed 
towards  a  raft  in  the  middle  of  the  river.  Out  of  each  stepped  a  single  individual, 
and  the  two  met  in  a  small  wooden  apartment  on  the  raft,  while  cannon  thundered 
from  either  shore,  and  the  shout  of  the  great  armies  on  either  side  drowned  the  roar 
of  artillery.  The  two  persons  were  the  Emperors  Napoleon  and  Alexander,  met  to 
arrange  the  destinies  of  the  human  race.  But  how  vastly  more  important  the  inter- 
view  of  the  text ;  in  the  persons  employed  in  it,  in  the  nature  of  the  transaction,  in 
the  result.  (T.  Collins.)  Good  stronger  than  evil : — Satan  would  convert  Christ ; 
darkness  would  blot  out  the  light,  or  throw  at  least  a  shadow  on  its  brightness ; 
foulness  would  cast  a  stain  on  the  white  robe  of  purity ;  evil  would  triumph  over 
good.  But  no  1  Light  is  stronger  than  darkness ;  good  than  evil.  The  Son  looks 
up  to  the  Father,  and  in  that  Divine  strength  casts  the  evil  one  behind  Him,  and  is 
left  alone  on  the  field,  more  than  conqueror.  (S.  Greg.)  Sinlessness  unfolds  into 
holiness : — Sinlessness  is  negative,  holiness  is  positive ;  and  it  was  requisite  that  the 
**  second  Adam,"  like  the  first,  should  encounter  the  devil  before  His  sinlessness 
could  unfold  into  holiness.  ( J,  C.  Jones.)  The  force  of  temptation : — Run  with 
the  wind  and  you  hardly  know  it  is  blowing.  Eun  against  it,  and  you  are  con- 
vinced of  the  existence  of  a  resisting  medium,  and  in  direct  proportion  to  the  speed 
with  which  you  run,  wiU  be  your  consciousness  of  the  foree  by  which  you  are 
opposed.  Thus  as  long  as  you  run  with  the  devil  and  promptly  do  his  behests,  you 
may  be  inchned  to  deny  his  existence ;  disobey  him,  and  you  will  be  made  painfully 
aware  of  his  presence,  and  his  endeavours  to  thwart  all  your  efforts  after  good.  (Jhid.) 
With  the  wild  beasts. — Christ  with  the  wild  beasts: — Is  this  only  one  of  those 
graphic  touches  which  this  vivid  writer  so  often  gives  us  ?  Was  it  a  forcible  way  of 
describing  a  total  absence  of  human  sympathy  ?  No  doubt  it  served  this  purpose, 
but  this  was  not  all.  When  we  recognise  the  correspondence  between  this  and 
Adam's  temptation,  our  thoughts  fly  at  once  to  Paradise,  and  we  remember  that  he 
too  was  with  the  wild  beasts,  and  that  God  had  given  him  dominion  over  them,  and 
that  during  the  brief  duration  of  his  innocence  he  must  have  exercised  it  unfearing 
and  unfeared.  And  we  fancy  we  can  see  in  this  short  but  pregnant  sentence  a  hint 
that  He  who  came  to  inaugurate  an  era  of  restoration,  and  bring  back  the  timps  of 
man's  innocence,  was  not  unmindful  of  the  lower  creatures  and  their  subjection  to 
vanity.  It  was  a  promise  of  what  should  one  day  come  to  pass  when  broken  har- 
monies should  be  restored,  and  the  prediction  in  Job  v.  23,  receive  its  fufilment.  It 
matters  little  that  we  can  point  to  no  evidence  of  its  accomplishment  as  yet,  because 
with  the  Lord  a  thousand  years  are  but  as  one  day,  and  one  day  as  a  thousand 
years.  There  is  no  question  that  the  hope  was  created,  and  that  it  laid  hold  upon 
the  mind  of  the  early  Christians,  in  support  of  which  we  have  the  testimony  of  tha 


CHAP.  I.]  ST.  MARK. 


Catacombs,  where  our  Lord  is  so  frequently  represented  in  the  character  of  Orpheus 
attracting  wild  animals  of  divers  kinds  by  the  sound  of  his  lyre.  The  same  was 
perpetuated  by  later  legends,  which  made  the  surpassing  goodness  of  St.  Francia 
thri>w  a  spell  of  mysterious  influence,  not  only  over  his  fellow-creatures,  but  over 
birds  of  the  air  and  beasts  of  the  field.  {U,  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  The  power  of 
goodness  to  tame  the  animal  creation : — Before  the  fall  Adam  dwdt  with  the  beasts 
on  terms  of  closest  friendship ;  but  on  the  entrance  of  evil  man  grew  cruel  and 
beasts  grew  fiercer.  But  when  Christ  appeared,  free  from  the  taint  of  sin,  the  old 
relationship  revived.  The  disturbed  harmony  of  Eden  was  restored  in  the  wilder- 
ness. Goodness  is  an  unrivalled  tamer  of  the  animal  creation,  and  Christ's  sojourn 
with  savage  beasts  is  an  infallible  pledge  of  the  millenium.  (J.  C.  Jones. )  And 
the  angels  ministered  onto  Him. — Reasonableness  of  belief  in  the  existence  of 
angels  : — There  are  many  who  deny  the  existence  of  any  spiritual  beings  save  God 
and  man.  The  wide  universe  is  to  them  a  solitary  land,  without  inhabitants.  There 
is  but  one  filled  with  living  creatures.  It  is  the  earth  on  which  we  move ;  and  we, 
who  have  from  century  to  century  crawled  from  birth  to  death,  and  fretted  out  our 
little  lives  upon  this  speck  of  star-dust  which  sparkles  amid  a  million,  million  othern 
upon  the  mighty  plain  of  infinite  space,  we  are  the  only  living  spirits.  There  Ib 
something  pitiable  in  this  impertinence.  It  is  a  drop  of  dew  in  the  lonely  cup  of  a 
gentian,  which  imagines  itself  to  be  all  the  water  in  the  universe.  It  is  the  summer 
midge  which  has  never  left  its  forest  pool,  dreaming  that  it  and  its  companions  are 
the  only  hving  creatures  in  earth  or  air.  There  is  no  proof  of  the  existence  of  other 
beings  than  ourselves,  but  there  is  also  no  proof  of  the  contrary.  Apart  from  revela- 
tion, we  can  think  about  the  subject  as  we  please.  But  it  does  seem  incredible  that 
we  alone  should  represent  in  the  universe  the  image  of  God ;  and  if  in  one  solitary  star 
another  race  of  beings  dwell,  if  we  concede  the  existence  of  a  single  spirit  other  than 
ourselves,  we  have  allowed  the  principle.  The  angelic  world  of  which  the  Bible 
speaks  is  possible  to  faith.  (Stopford  Brooke.)  How  little  we  know  of  the  angels  : — 
Little  is  said  [in  the  Bible]  of  angels.  They  are  like  the  constellations  in  space ; 
there  is  light  enough  to  reveal,  to  show  that  they  are ;  but  more  is  needed  to  reveal 
all  their  nature  and  functions.  {Henry  Batchelor.)  Association  of  the  angels 
with  Christ : — Their  airy  and  gentle  commg  may  well  be  compared  to  the  glory  of 
colours  flung  by  the  sun  upon  the  morning  clouds,  that  seem  to  be  bom  just  where 
they  appear.  Like  a  beam  of  light  striking  through  some  orifice,  they  shine  upon 
Zacharias  in  the  temple.  As  the  morning  light  finds  the  flowers,  so  they  found  the 
mother  of  Jesus ;  and  their  message  fell  on  her,  pure  as  dewdrops  on  the  lily.  To 
the  shepherds'  eyes,  they  filled  the  midnight  arch  like  auroral  beams  of  light ;  bat 
not  as  silently,  for  they  sang  more  marvellously  than  when  the  morning  stars  sang 
together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy.  They  communed  with  the 
Saviour  in  His  glory  of  transfiguration,  sustained  EQm  in  the  anguish  of  the 
garden,  watched  Him  at  the  tomb ;  and  as  they  thronged  the  earth  at  His  coming, 
so  they  seem  to  have  hovered  in  the  air  in  multitudes  at  the  hour  of  His  ascension. 
Beautiful  as  they  seem,  they  are  never  mere  poetical  adornments.  The  occasions  of 
their  appearing  are  grand,  the  reasons  weighty,  and  their  demeanour  suggests  and 
befits  the  highest  conception  of  superior  beings.  Their  very  coming  and  going  is 
not  with  earthly  movement.  They  are  suddenly  seen  in  the  air,  as  one  sees  white 
clouds  round  out  from  the  blue  sky  in  a  summer's  day,  that  melt  back  even  while 
one  looks  upon  them.  We  could  not  imagine  Christ's  history  without  angelic 
love.  The  sun  without  clouds  of  silver  and  gold,  the  morning  on  the  fields  without 
dew-diamonds,  but  not  the  Saviour  without  His  angels.  (H.  W.  Beecher,) 
Spiritual  visitants  : — I  have  ever  with  me  invisible  friends  and  enemies.  The  con- 
sideration of  mine  enemies  shall  keep  me  from  security,  and  make  me  fearful  of 
doing  aught  to  advantage  them.  The  consideration  of  my  spiritual  friends  shall 
comfort  me  against  the  terror  of  the  other ;  shall  remedy  my  solitariness ;  shall 
make  me  wary  of  doing  aught  indecently ;  grieving  me  rather  that  I  have  ever 
heretofore  made  them  turn  away  their  eyes  for  shame  of  that  whereof  I  have  not 
been  ashamed ;  that  I  have  no  more  enjoyed  their  society ;  that  I  have  been  no 
more  affected  with  their  presence.  What,  though  I  see  them  not  ?  I  believe  them. 
I  were  no  Christian  if  my  faith  were  not  as  sure  as  my  sense.  {Bp.  Hall.) 
Ministry  of  angels : — It  would  require  the  tongue  of  angels  themselves  to  recite  all 
that  we  owe  to  these  benign  and  vigilant  guardians.  They  watch  by  the  cradle  of 
the  newborn  babe,  and  spread  their  celestial  wings  round  the  tottering  steps  of 
infancy.  If  the  path  of  life  be  diflScult  and  thorny,  and  evil  spirits  work  us  shame 
and  woe,  they  sustain  as  ;  they  bear  the  voice  of  our  complaining,  our  supplication: 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

onr  repentance,  np  to  the  foot  of  God's  throne,  and  bring  us  back  in  return  % 
pitying  benediction  to  stren^ithen  and  to  cheer.  When  passion  and  temptation 
strive  for  the  mastery,  thev  encourage  us  to  resist  :  when  we  conquer,  they  crown 
us ;  when  we  falter  and  fail,  they  compassionate  and  grieve  over  us ;  when  we  are 
obstinate  in  polluting  our  own  souls,  and  perverted  not  only  in  act  but  in  will,  they 
leave  us ;  and  woe  to  them  that  are  so  left !  But  the  good  angel  does  not  quit  hia 
charge  until  his  protection  is  despised,  rejected,  and  utterly  repddiated.  Wonderful 
the  fervour  of  their  love,  wonderful  their  meekness  and  patience,  who  endure  from 
day  to  day  the  spectacle  of  the  unveiled  human  heart  with  all  its  miserable  weak- 
nesses and  vanities,  its  inordinate  desires  and  selfish  purposes  I  Constant  to  us  in 
death,  they  contend  against  the  powers  of  darkness  for  the  emancipated  spirit. 
{Mr»,  Jameson.) 

Ver.  14.  Now  after  that  Jolin  was  put  In  prison Hindrances  no  injury  :—■ 

But  John  had  been  doing  a  good  work,  doing  an  important  work,  doing  the  very 
work  that  God  had  planned  for  him  to  do.  Why  did  the  Lord  let  him  be  put  in 
prison?  Just  such  interruptions  as  that  to  the  best  men's  work,  and  just  sucb 
trials  as  this  to  the  best  of  men,  are  in  the  Lord's  plan  of  the  progress  of  his  work, 
and  of  the  training  of  His  people.  When  old  Father  Mills,  of  Torringford,  Con- 
necticut, heard  that  his  son,  Samuel  J.  Mills,  "  the  father  of  foreign  missions  in 
America,"  had  died  at  sea  while  his  work  was  at  its  brilliant  starting,  the  quaint 
old  Yankee  preacher  said  wcnderingly :  "  Well,  I  declare  1  The  fat's  all  in  the  fire 
again."  And  it  did  look  that  way,  didn't  it?  We  can't  understand  all  this;  but 
we  can  see  its  commonness.  John  the  Baptist  was  a  child  of  promise  and  a  child 
of  prophecy.  Jesus  says  of  him :  "  Among  them  that  are  bom  of  women  there  hath 
not  arisen  a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist."  Yet  just  as  he  was  fairly  inaugurating 
the  Messiah's  dispensation,  and  his  work  seemed  more  important  than  almost  any 
one's  else  on  earth,  ♦•  John  was  put  in  prison."  Until  you  can  see  just  why  IJdat 
thing  was  permitted,  don't  worry  yourself  over  some  of  your  little  hindrances,  or 
those  of  your  neighbours,  asking — as  if  half  in  doubt  whether  or  not  there  is  » 
God,  or  whether  He  cares  for  the  interests  of  His  cause  and  its  best  friends — 
"  What  did  the  Lord  let  this  happen  for  ?  "  {Sunday  School  Times.)  The  silencing  of 
ChrisV$  ministers  not  the  suppressing  of  Christ^s  gospel : — Out  of  the  ashes  of  a  Faith- 
ful God  raises  up  a  Hopeful ;  for  the  immortal  dreamer  says :  "  Now  I  saw  in  my  dream 
that  Christian  went  not  forth  alone ;  for  there  was  one  whose  name  was  Hopeful 
who  joined  himself  unto  him,"  Though  the  enemy  bum  a  John  Huss  God  is  able 
to  raise  up  a  Martin  Luther  to  take  his  place  :  and  the  martyrdom  of  Ridley  and 
Latimer  does  but  "  light  a  candle  in  England  which  shall  never  be  put  out."  The 
easting  of  the  Baptist  into  prison  signalized  the  commencement  of  that  ministry 
which  unhinged  the  gates  of  hell.  {Anonym,ou^.)  Impediment  changed  into  new 
impetus : — I.  We  see  a  boyal  ambassadob  silenced.    II.  We  see  a  worthier  envoy 

■UBSTITXJTED.  HI.      Wb  SEE  THE  DEATHLESS  ENERGY  OF  TRUTH.      No  poWCr  kuOWU  OD 

earth  can  stop  her  silvery  tongue.  (D.  Daviesy  M.A.)  Christ's  preaching  : — 
John's  position  had  been  one  of  honour.  We  now  contemplate  him  as  the  occupant 
of  a  dungeon.  I.  The  history  or  John's  connection  with  Herod  is  very 
INSTRUCTTVE.  It  shows — 1.  The  feeling  of  the  world  in  certain  cases  towards  the 
truth  of  its  teachers — they  "hear  it  gladly."  2.  The  experience  of  the  faithful 
reprovers  of  human  sin — a  prison.  3.  A  leading  feature  of  that  kingdom  which 
John  introduced.  4.  This  was  fitted  to  undeceive  the  Jews.  Are  you  satisfied 
with  the  gospel  economy  7  II.  Mo  sooner  was  John  cast  into  prison  than  Jesus 
Himselv  began  to  preach  the  gospel.  1.  When  a  servant  of  God  has  finished 
his  work,  he  must  be  satisfied  to  retire.  We  think  ezperience,  &g.  ,  lost ;  but  no. 
2.  The  world  will  never  succeed  in  suppressing  the  truth.  Let  us  not  be  oppressed 
with  anxiety !  III.  The  Evangelist  records  the  substance  as  well  as  the  fact  of 
Christ's  preaching.  IV.  As  soon  as  Christ  began  to  preach  the  gospel  He  galled 
His  disciples.  1.  On  the  fact  of  His  calling  His  disciples  we  may  remark  :  (1)  He 
made  provision  for  the  perpetuity  of  His  kingdom  ;  (2)  He  brought  those  who  were 
to  be  main  pillars  in  the  Church  under  His  own  training — spiritually;  (3)  He 
placed  the  apostles  in  circumstances  which  qualified  them  to  be  witnesses  to  facts. 
2.  On  the  manner  of  His  calling  His  disciples,  we  may  remark :  (1)  He  honoured 
diligence  in  humble  employment ;  (2)  He  chose  seemingly  weak  instruments ;  (3) 
He  taught  that  we  must  leave  aU  in  order  to  follow  Him ;  (4)  He  furnished  an 
example  of  effectual  calling.  Have  you  "left  all"?  (Expository  Discourses.) 
Jesus  came  into  Qalilee : — The  season  was  the  spring,  with  its  bright  heaven,  it« 


OHAP.  I.]  ST.  MARK.  25 

freflh  sweet  earth,  its  gladsome,  soft,  yet  strengthening  air,  its  limpid  living  water. 
And  within  as  without  all  was  springtime,  the  season  of  million-fold  forces,  gladly 
and  grandly  creative,  of  sunlight  now  clear  and  blithesome,  and  now  veiled  with 
clouds  that  came  only  to  break  in  fruitful  showers.  (Principal  A.  M,  Fairbaim.) 
The  vicissitudes  of  a  Godly  life,:^I.  That  good  men  abb  often  made  the  su:  tect 
OF  social  reproach.  "John  was  put  in  prison."  1.  Because  the  inner  meaning 
of  their  lives  is  frequently  misunderstood.  2.  Because  the  moral  beauty  of  their 
character  excites  the  envy  of  the  wicked.  3.  Because  they  are  often  called  to 
rebuke  the  wickedness  of  those  around  them.    II.  That  useful  men  are  often 

BENDERED  INCAPABLE   OF  WORK  THROUGH  THE    TTBANNT    OF    OTHERS.       1.  The  pOWer 

of  regal  authority  to  hinder  the  labours  of  the  morally  useful  is  only  partial.  2.  It 
is  often  capable  of  wise  explanation — (1)  It  proved  that  the  Baptist  was  capable  of 
suffering  as  well  as  work;  (2)  That  the  history  of  the  Baptist  might  the  more 
easily  merge  into  that  of  our  Lord  ;  (3)  To  give  him  rest  before  entering  the 
solemnities    of    eternity.      3.  It  is  deeply  responsible.      III.  That  though  one 

SERVANT  OF  TRUTH   MAY  BB   REMOVED  ANOTHER    IS    IMMEDIATELY  FOUND   TO   TAKE    HIS 

PLACE.  IV.  That  thb  ministry  called  forth  by  the  embbqenoy  is  often 
BETTER  than  thb  ONE  BBMOVED.  {Joseph  S.  ExeU,  M.A.)  Preaching^  the 
g^ospel  of  the  kingdom  of  God. — The  scope  of  our  Lord's  ministry : — I.  The 
KINGDOM  herb  SPOKEN  OF.  1.  It  was  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  It  was  at  that  time 
to  be  established.  II.  What  must  we  do  to  become  subjects  of  this  kingdom  ? 
1.  Repent  of  sin.  2.  Beheve  the  gospel.  Application :  (1)  Inquiry ;  (2)  Humili- 
ation; (3)  Thankfulness.  (0.  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  kingdom  of  Ood: — This  term 
is  used  m  various  senses  in  the  New  Testament.  1.  The  presence  of  Christ  upon 
earth.  2,  The  second  coming  of  Christ.  3.  His  influence  upon  the  heart.  4, 
Christianity  as  a  Church.  6.  Christianity  as  a  faith.  6.  The  life  eternal.  It 
points  out  sin  to  be  turned  from  in  sorrow :  Christ  to  be  believed  in  with  joy. 
{T.  M.  Lindsay,  D.D.)  The  kingdom  of  God :  God  reigning  in  men's  hearts : — 
There  is  great  meaning  in  the  words  that  Jesus  was  continually  using  to  describe 
the  work  that  He  did  for  men's  souls.  He  brought  them  into  "  the  kingdom  of 
God.*'  The  whole  burden  of  His  preaching  was  to  establish  the  kingdom  of  God. 
The  purpose  of  the  new  birth  for  which  He  laboured  was  to  make  men  subjects  of 
the  kingdom  of  God.  Is  it  not  clear  what  it  means  ?  The  kingdom  of  God  for  any 
soul  is  that  condition,  anywhere  in  the  universe,  where  God  is  that  soul's  king, 
where  it  seeks  and  obeys  the  highest,  where  it  loves  truth  and  duty  more  than 
comfort  and  luxury.  Have  you  entered  into  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  Oh,  how  much 
that  means  1  Has  any  love  of  God  taken  possession  of  you,  so  that  you  want  to  do 
His  will  above  all  things,  and  try  to  do  it  all  the  time  ?  Has  Christ  brought  you 
there  ?  If  He  has,  how  great  and  new  and  glorious  the  life  of  the  kingdom  seems. 
No  wonder  that  He  said  you  must  be  bom  again  before  you  could  enter  there.  How 
poor  life  seems  outside  that  kingdom.  How  beautiful  and  glorious  inside  its  gates ! 
If  I  tried  to  tell  you  how  Christ  brings  us  there,  I  should  lepeat  to  you  once  more 
the  old,  familiar  story.  He  comes  and  lives  and  dies  for  us.  He  touches  us  with 
gratitude.  He  sets  before  our  softened  lives  His  life.  He  makes  us  see  the  beauty 
of  holiness,  and  the  strength  of  the  spiritual  life  in  B[im.  He  transfers  His  life  to 
us  through  the  open  channel  of  faith,  and  so  we  come  to  live  as  He  lives,  by  every 
word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God.  How  old  the  story  is,  but  how 
endlessly  fresh  and  true  to  Him  whose  own  career  it  describes.  {Phillips  Brooks, 
D.D.)  The  kingdom  of  God  an  inward  state : — Many  people  seem  to  suppose  this 
means  some  realm  after  death,  where  those  who  have  done  nothing  but  mortify 
themselves  here  shall  do  nothing  but  enjoy  themselves  hereafter.  But  what  Christ 
meant  by  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  a  life  begun  here,  passing  through  the  grave 
and  gate  of  death  without  any  breach  of  spiritual  continuity.  Unchanged  in 
essence  was  the  life  of  His  kingdom — changeable  only  in  outward  accidents.  Its 
essence  depended  always  not  on  where,  but  on  what  you  were.  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  was  always  a  state  within,  not  a  place,  though  it  worked  itself  out  here 
below  in  a  visible  Church.  (H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  The  Galilean  ministry  ;— 
I.  When.  After  John's  imprisonment.  One  witness  of  the  truth  silenced ;  but 
another  raised  up.  After  Moses,  Joshua;  after  Stephen,  Paul.  II.  Where. 
Galilee.  Where  eould  He  find  work  so  readily  as  amidst  the  ceaseless  toil  and 
turmoil  of  these  teeming  villages?  III.  What.  1.  Gospel  of  kingdom  of  God. 
Spiritual  (1  Cor.  xv.  50) ;  righteous  (Rom.  xiv.  17) ;  near  (Luke  xxi.  31) ;  inward 
(Luke  xvii.  20,  21).  2.  Repentance  and  faith  :  thus  completing  the  work  of  John. 
{H.   Thome.)         Christ  the  Evangelical  minister:—!.  Thb   prkaohbb—" Jesus." 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

But  Jesns  differed  from  all  other  preachers.  1.  He  was  Divine.  2.  He  was 
infallible.  3.  He  was  sympathetic.  4.  He  was  most  clear  and  simple.  '•  Common 
people  heard  him  gladly,"  &c.  6.  He  was  most  interesting.  6.  Most  faithful  and 
earnest.  7,  He  preached  most  affectionately  and  tenderly.  One  of  His  very  last 
appeals — **  0  Jerusalem,"  <fcc.     He  wept  over  it,  &c.    H.  His  theme.     The  gospel. 

1.  He  was  the  subject  of  His  own  ministry.  2.  He  also  proclaimed  the  kingdom  of 
God.  3.  The  near  approach  of  this  kingdom.  4.  The  sphere  of  His  ministry  at 
this  time  was  GalUee.  Now  the  world  is  the  field  of  the  gospel — "  Go  ye  into  all 
the  world,"  &c.     HI.  The   special  appeal  He  made.     1.  He  urged  repentano*. 

2.  He  demanded  faith.  The  gospel  news  must  be  heard  and  received  as  true. 
Learn  :  1.  We  have  the  same  Saviour.  2.  The  same  gospel — now  complete  by  His 
resurrection  and  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  Its  blessings  are  ours  on  the  same 
terms.    4.  Men  perish  by  not  believing  the  gospel  of  Christ.    (J.  Burns,  D,D.) 

Yer.  15.  And  saying,  The  time  Is  folfllled. — Repentance  and  faith : — I.  Thb 
XMFOKT  or  the  exhortation.  1.  By  the  repentance  to  which  we  are  exhorted  we 
are  not  to  understand  merely  an  external  reformation.  To  the  Pharisees  such  an 
exhortation  would  have  been  inappropriate  and  useless.  Their  outward  conduct 
was  exemplary.  Nor  can  we  suppose  that  the  repentance  to  which  we  are  ex- 
horted is  a  mere  sense  of  sorrow  and  regret  on  account  of  the  afflictive  and  penal 
consequences  to  which  our  transgressions  may  expose  us,  either  in  the  present  life 
or  in  that  which  is  to  come.  True  repentance  is  **  towards  God " — "  for  the 
remission  of  sins  " — '*  unto  salvation."  Putting  all  these  explanatory  terms  together, 
we  are  led  to  the  conclusion  that  repentance  consists  in  a  sorrowful  conviction  of 
our  having  grieved  and  provoked  God,  and  in  an  earnest  desire  and  endeavour  to  be 
reconciled  to  Him,  and  to  secure  by  the  remission  of  our  sins  the  salvation  of  our 
souls.  These  convictions  and  desires  must  be  substantially  the  same  in  character 
in  all  true  penitents,  but  are  not  in  all  cases  equal  in  degree.  Sometimes  the 
heart  is  rather  melted  than  broken.  2.  But  by  the  faith  to  which  we  are  exhorted 
we  are  not  to  understand  merely  a  general  belief  in  God  as  the  Almighty  Creator, 
and  the  gracious  Governor  of  aU  things.  It  is  not  merely  a  faith  in  the  Divine 
mission  and  authority  of  Christ,  and  in  the  truth  of  that  system  of  doctrine  which 
He  taught.  The  exhortation  is  *'  Believe  the  gospel  "—that  which  is  peculiar  to 
the  gospel.  Those  whom  our  Lord  addressed  believed  in  God  as  the  Creator,  in  the 
truth  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures ;  making  it  a  boast  that  they  were  "  Moses's 
disciples."  It  must  therefore  have  been  something  more  particularly  pertaining  to 
the  gosi  ol  which  they  were  now  exhorted  to  believe,  namely,  the  doctrine  of  salva- 
tion by  Him  as  their  Eedeemer — the  testimony  that  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling 
the  world  unto  Himself,"  &o.  We  must  do  more  than  yield  assent  with  the  under- 
standing to  this  great  doctrine ;  as  it  is  with  a  "  broken  and  contrite  heart "  that 
man  repents,  so  "  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."  It  is,  in  other 
words,  to  feel  what  we  believe,  or  to  exercise  a  sure  trust  and  confidence  in  that 
which  we  acknowledge  to  be  true.  3.  We  have  already  noticed  the  close  and 
intimate  sequence  with  which  the  exhortation  to  faith  in  the  gospel  follows  the 
exhortation  to  repentance  ;  and  we  may  now  further  remark  upon  that  head,  that 
the  one  is  thus  inculcated  in  connection  with  the  other — 1.  Because  for  all  true 
penitents  there  is  a  gospel,  or  a  message  of  good  news.  Had  it  been  otherwise 
repentance  would  have  been  a  dreadful  thing.  Are  you  guilty  ?  Here  is  *♦  a 
fountain  opened  for  sin."  In  a  word,  are  you  entirely  lost  ?  Here  is  a  Saviour 
**  able  to  save  even  to  the  uttermost,"  &c.  2.  This  faith  is  inculcated  in  connection 
with  repentance,  because  it  is  in  the  act  of  cordially  believing  what  the  gospel  says, 
that  we  receive  the  blessings  which  the  gospel  offers.  II.  The  arguments  ob 
MOTIVES  BY  which  THE  EXHORTATION  IS  SUPPORTED.  1.  The  oxhortatiou  to  repen- 
tance may  be  regarded  as  being  urged  by  the  assurance  that  **  the  time  is  fulfilled." 
To  all  who  have  not  repented  "  the  time  is  fulfilled  " — the  time,  place,  and  subject 
we  are  considering  are  all  favourable.  May  it  not  be  said  of  you  that  "  the  time  " 
of  your  own  solemn  promise  and  engagement  ♦'  is  fulfilled."  "  The  time  "  of  God'a 
special  influence  and  grace  is  "  now  fulfilled."  In  the  case  of  some  of  yon  it  may 
probably  be  said,  "  the  time  is  fulfilled,"  as  you  are  very  near  the  period  when  time 
is  to  be  exchanged  for  eternity.  "  Your  days  are  fulfilled,  for  your  end  is  come." 
2,  Upon  the  supposition  that  you  are  already  penitent,  you  are  encouraged  to  faith 
in  the  gospel  by  the  assurance  that  "  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand."  This  king- 
dom is  at  hand  as  all  things  needful  for  its  establishment  have  been  abundantly 
provided-    Indeed,  if  truly  penitent,  you  are  already  in  a  state  of  preparation  foi 


CHAP.  I.]  ST.  MARK.  27 

being  made  by  faith  the  subjects  of  His  "kingdom."  If  you  are  truly  penitent, 
•'  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand,"  for  God  is  this  moment  waiting  to  set  up  that 
kingdom  in  your  hearts.  Let  repentance  and  faith  ever  be  connected.  There  are 
persons  who,  in  a  certain  sense,  "  believe  the  gospel "  without  having  ever  truly 
repented ;  they  have  a  speculative  faith  in  the  gospel.  On  the  other  hand  are 
persons  resting  in  repentance,  and  on  the  mere  ground  of  their  repentance  are 
looking  to  be  admitted  into  heaven.  Let  one  foUow  the  other  in  the  order  in  which 
Christ  has  placed  them.    {J.  Crowther.)    Remark — I.  The  insufficiency  of  bbpen- 

TANCB  BY  ITSELF  TO  PROCURE  THE  FOROIVENESS  OF  SIN.  11.  ThB  SUITABLENESS  OF  FAITH 
TO  THE  BEINO  ASSOCIATED  WITH  REPENTANCE  AS  A  CONDITION.  III.  ThB  THOROUGH 
HARMONY    OF  BOTH  CONDITIONS   WITH   THE   BLESSED   FACT   THAT   ETERNAL  LIFE   IS    THB 

FREE  GIFT  OF  GoD  THROUGH  OUR  LoRD  Jesus  Christ.  {H.  MelvUl,  B,D.)  Repen- 
tance : — Many  persons  who  appear  to  repent  are  like  sailors  who  throw  their  goods 
overboard  in  a  storm,  and  wish  for  them  again  in  a  calm.  (Mead.)  A  saint's 
tears  are  better  than  a  sinner's  triumphs.  (Seeker.)  The  tears  of  penitents  are 
the  wine  of  angels.  {Bernard.^  Repentance  begins  in  the  humiliation  of  the 
heart,  and  ends  in  the  reformation  of  the  life.  (Mason.)  There  is  no  going  to 
the  fair  haven  of  glory  without  sailing  through  the  narrow  strait  of  repentance. 
{Dyer.)  Preaching  repentance: — In  1680,  Mr.  Philip  Henry  preached  on  the 
doctrine  of  faith  and  repentance  from  several  texts  of  scripture.  He  used  to  say 
that  he  had  been  told  concerning  the  famous  Mr.  Dod,  that  some  called  him  m 
scorn  "  Faith  and  Repentance,"  because  he  insisted  so  much  upon  these  two  in  all 
his  preaching.  "  But,"  says  he,  •♦  if  this  be  to  be  vUe,  I  will  be  yet  more  vile,  for 
faith  and  repentance  are  all  in  all  in  Christianity.*'  Concerning  repentance  he  has 
sometimes  said,  *♦  If  I  were  to  die  in  the  pulpit,  I  would  desire  to  die  preaching 
repentance,  as  if  I  were  to  die  out  of  the  pulpit  I  would  desire  to  die  practising 
repentance."  Repentance  a  reversal  of  conduct: — A  locomotive  is  rushing  at 
express  speed  along  the  main  line  of  a  railway,  when  suddenly,  by  a  pointsman's 
mistake,  it  is  switched  off  into  a  side-line.  Instantly  the  brakes  are  applied,  and 
the  moving  mass  is  brought  to  a  standstill.  Then  the  engineer  lays  his  hand  upon 
a  lever,  the  motion  of  the  engine  is  reversed,  and  the  train  moves  back  to  the  main 
line,  and  continues  on  its  course.  In  human  life,  such  an  abandoning  of  the  main 
line  is  transgression ;  such  a  reversal  is  repentance.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  like 
a  walled  city  with  a  single  gate,  to  which  outsiders  can  only  approach  by  one  path. 
That  gate  is  faith  ;  that  path  is  repentance.  An  old  tower  in  one  of  the  southern 
counties  of  Scotland  goes  by  the  name  of  The  Tower  of  Repentance.  A  herd-boy 
was  one  day  lying  in  a  field  near  it,  reading  his  New  Testament,  when  an  irreligious 
gentleman  of  the  neighbourhood  stopped  and  asked  him  what  book  he  was  reading. 
On  being  informed,  he  said  with  a  sneer,  "  Perhaps,  then,  you  can  tell  me  the  way 
to  heaven?"  "Oh,  yes,"  replied  the  boy,  "you  must  go  up  through  that  tower." 
This  quaint  way  of  expressing  the  truth,  sent  the  inquirer  oflf  in  a  more  thoughtful 
mood  than  when  he  came.  If  a  man  is  running  from  the  kingdom  of  God,  it  is 
obvious  that  he  must  just  turn  roimd  and  run  for  it,  if  he  wishes  to  reach  it.  Just  as 
soon  as  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  reach  the  top  of  a  hill  by  running  down- hill,  will 
it  be  possible  for  the  sinner  to  enter  God's  kingdom  without  repentance.  {Sunday 
School  Times.)  Repentance  and  faith : — From  these  words  we  learn  what  it  is  to 
preach  the  gospel.  I.  We  are  to  prove  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  He  that  should 
come — He  of  whom  all  the  prophets  did  write — the  very  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the 
world.  "  The  time  is  fulfilled  and  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand."  II.  We  are  to 
teach  men  how  to  receive,  and  how  to  act,  under  these  good  tidings — "  Repent  ye," 
&e.  1.  Repentance:  Its  importance  and  necessity.  Its  nature.  2.  Our  Lord 
preached  not  only  repentance,  but  also  faith.  So  the  apostles.  In  every  saved 
soul  these  two  must  and  do  meet  together.  Not  that  God  deals  alike  with  every 
saved  souL  "  Believe  the  gospel," — come  to  Jesus,  that  you  may  have  a  free 
pardon,  &o.  (R.  Dixon,  D.D.)  Repentance  not  immediatclij  followed  by  faith: — 
I  have  known  instances  where  for  years  there  have  been  right  \'iew8  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  of  the  nature  of  holinees,  and  a  desire  after  holiness— and  what  is  this  but 
reptmtanoe?  imperfect  it  may  be,  but  still  repentance  at  least  in  its  beginnings: 
imperfect,  it  went  not  far  enough,  inasmuch  as  it  was  without  faith.  I  knew  a  man. 
a  pubho  character,  who  wrote  to  me,  iu  youth,  many  an  instructive  letter,  a  man  of 
no  common  intellect,  who,  when  only  a  boy,  on  reading  Martin  Luther's  book  on 
the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  absolutely  rolled  in  agony  on  the  floor,  under  a  seuRe 
of  sin  and  the  wrath  of  God  ;  and  though  his  home  influence  and  his  occupation  in 
after  life  were  opposed  to  his  spiritual  progress,  he  never  lost  his  reverence  for  the 


S8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i 

Bible  and  his  desire  to  be  religioas.  It  is  a  fact  that  it  was  his  habit  to  read  the 
Bible  with  a  commentary  of  a  night,  after  he  had  left  his  occupation,  which  was 
eminently  worldly ;  and  he  used  to  say,  "  it  was  his  greatest  comfort  in  life."  I 
have,  as  a  boy,  Ustened  to  his  reverential  reading  of  the  Bible  and  that  commentary 
to  his  family.  But  the  error  of  seeking  salvation  by  the  works  of  the  law  prevented 
his  enjoyment  of  peace,  or  sense  of  pardon.  It  was  not  till  the  later  years  of  his 
life,  when  the  providence  of  God  had  removed  him  from  his  ensnaring  and  worldly 
occupation,  that  he  attained  to  what  the  Scripture  calls  faith — salvation  by  grace 
through  the  faith  of  Christ — a  simple,  childlike  trust  in  Christ,  as  made  sin  for 
him,  that  he  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ.  For  several  years 
of  his  later  time,  Archbishop  Leighton's  works,  especially  his  commentary  on  St. 
Peter's  first  epistle,  one  of  the  noblest  works  which  ever  came  from  uninspired  man, 
V  as  his  daily  companion,  from  which  he  seemed  never  weary  of  making  large  ex- 
t]  a ;  ts  :  and  he  owned  that  he  now  apprehended  faith  as  he  had  never  done  before. 
LiJie  many  others,  in  his  zeal  for  good  works  he  had  thought  that  such  sweeping 
statements  about  faith  alone  being  needful  for  salvation  were  contrary  to  good  works. 
Whereas  he  Uved  to  see  and  know  and  feel  that  faith  in  Christ  works  by  love,  and 
is  the  fruitful  source  of  all  good  and  holy  works.  He  found  that  the  Twelfth 
Article  of  our  Church  is  the  truth  of  God.  "  Albeit  that  good  works,  which  are  the 
fruits  of  faith,  andfollowafter  justification,  cannot  put  away  our  sins,  and  endure  the 
severity  of  God's  judgment ;  yet  are  they  pleasing  to  God  in  Christ,  and  do  spring  out 
neeesaarily  of  a  true  and  lively  faith ;  insomuch  that  by  them  a  lively  faith  may  be 
as  evidently  known  as  a  tree  discerned  by  the  fruit."  I  have  no  doubt  that  in  the 
case  of  my  departed  friend,  as  in  many  others,  the  Holy  Spirit  was  slowly  bringing 
about  His  purpose  of  mercy,  through  the  workings  of  repentance ;  and  when 
he  had  been  brought  to  see  that  there  was  no  good  in  him,  and  that  all  his 
strivings  after  holiness  were  altogether  vain,  then  came  the  gift  of  faith,  and  he 
beUeved  to  the  saving  of  his  soul.  As  another  example  of  the  long  separation 
between  faith  and  repentance,  in  some  souls,  I  cannot  withhold  from  you  the  case 
of  one  of  our  greatest  literary  characters,  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson.  His  writings 
have  been  my  companion  from  my  youth  up ;  I  early  conceived  a  great  admiration 
of  him,  not  only  for  his  large  intellectual  powers,  but  because  he  stood  forth  in  an 
immoral  age  as  a  friend  of  revealed  religion,  and  and  an  earnest  teacher  of  morals. 
I  am  fully  aware  of  the  defects  of  his  character, — they  were  many  and  great ;  but 
these  imperfections  were  balanced  by  some  great  and  noble  qualities,  accompanied 
by  an  intellect  of  the  highest  order,  which  to  use  his  own  words,  at  the  close  of  his 
Rambler,  he  vigorously  employed,  "  to  give  ardour  to  virtue  and  confidence  to  truth." 
Let  me  briefly  sketch  his  soul's  religious  history.  As  a  young  man  at  Oxford  he 
took  up  Law's  Serious  Call  to  the  Unconverted,  expecting  to  find  it  a  dull  book,  and 
perhaps  to  laugh  at  it.  But  he  found  Law  an  overmatch  for  him,  ••  This,"  he  says, 
**  was  the  first  occasion  of  my  thinking  in  earnest  about  religion,  after  I  became 
capable  of  rational  inquiry."  Nor  did  he  conceal  his  convictions.  He  attended 
ehurch  with  much  regularity ;  he  was  indignant  when,  for  political  reasons,  there 
was  some  hesitatioa  about  giving  the  Highlanders  of  Scotland  the  Scriptures  in 
Gaelic ;  he  would  allow  no  profane  swearing  in  his  presence,  and  he  sternly  rebuked 
any  one  who  ventured  to  utter  in  his  presence  impure  or  profane  language.  ^  To  a 
young  clergyman  he  gave  this  admirable  advice,  that  "  all  means  must  be  tried  by 
which  souls  may  be  saved"  ;  and  in  one  of  his  writings  he  declares,  that,  compared 
with  the  conversion  of  sinners,  propriety  and  elegance  in  preaching  are  less  than 
nothing.  Tet,  with  all  this  honest  earnestness,  his  religion  gave  him  no  peace. 
His  views  of  the  gospel  were  very  defective,  and  partook  very  largely  of  that  legal 
spirit  so  natural  to  man.  He  rested,  as  he  himself  says,  his  hope  of  salvation  on 
his  own  obedience  by  which  to  obtain  the  application  of  the  Saviour's  mediation  to 
himself,  and  then  to  repentance  to  make  up  for  the  defects  of  obedience.  "I 
cannot  be  sure,"  he  said,  "  that  I  have  fulfilled  the  conditions  in  which  salvation 
is  granted ;  I  am  afraid  I  may  be  one  of  those  who  should  be  condemned."  He 
never  could  be  sure  that  he  had  done  enough.  And  yet  no  one  can  read  his  medita- 
tions and  prayers  and  not  be  convinced  that  he  had  a  deep  sense  of  sin  and  an 
earnest  desire  for  holiness,  accompanied  with  great  self-abasement  before  God  :  but 
aU  in  vain  ;  there  was  no  peace  ;  there  was  repentance,  but  no  faith.  He  had  yet 
to  learn  that  "  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God."  And  he  was 
taught  this  blessed  truth  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  last  illness.  All  his  life  long  he 
had  looked  upon  death  with  the  greatest  terror ;  but  though  late,  relief  was  granted 
to  him.    At  evening  time  it  was  light.    It  appears  that  a  clergyman  was  the  main 


CHAP.  1.]  ST.  MARK,  as 

instrument  in  bringing  his  mind  to  a  quiet  trust.  In  answer  to  the  anxious  ques. 
tion,  written  to  him  by  the  dying  moralist,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved,"  the 
clergyman  wrote,  "  I  say  to  you,  in  the  language  of  the  Baptist,  •  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world.'  "  That  passage  had  been 
often  read  by  him,  and  made  but  a  slight  impression ;  but  now  pressed  home  by 
the  gracious  Spirit,  it  went  straight  to  his  heart.  He  interrupted  the  friend  who 
was  reading  the  letter.  *'  Does  he  say  so?  Read  it  again  !  "  Comfort  came  and 
peace.  His  biographer  tells  us,  *'  for  some  time  before  his  death  all  his  fears  were 
calmed  and  absorbed  by  the  prevalence  of  his  faith  and  his  trust  in  the  merits 
and  propitiation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Now  all  those  years  of  darkness,  fear,  and  dis- 
quiet, would  have  been  saved  had  he  known  and  received  the  free  grace  of  God  in 
Christ — ^in  other  words,  if  he  had  not  only  repented,  but  also  believed  the  gospel 
{Ibid.)  The  call  to  repentance  and  faith : — I.  A  motive  to  genuine  repentance,  and 
cordial  faith  in  the  gospel,  may  be  drawn  from  the  consideration  of  that  appalhng 
misery  which  awaits  the  impenitent  and  unbelieving.  II.  A  motive  may  be 
gathered  from  the  riches  of  God's  goodness,  especially  as  dispensed  through  the 
merits  and  intercession  of  Christ.  III.  A  motive  may  be  gathered  from  the 
promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  from  the  countless  instances  which  prove  that 
promise  to  have  been  actually  fulfilled  down  to  this  day.  {J.  Thornton.)  Christ 
preaching  repentance: — I.  Christ  preached  the  natubb  of  repentance.  II.  Christ 
preached  the  mecessitt  of  repentance.  1.  The  universal  necessity  may  be  shown 
from  the  character  of  God,  as  the  Buler  of  the  world.  2.  It  may  be  shown 
from  the  state  of  man.  3.  From  the  fact  that  an  impenitent  sinner  is  unfit  for 
heaven.  III.  Christ  preached  the  dutt  of  repentance.  He  pressed  it  home  upon 
every  man's  conscience.  He  enforced  it  by  rewards  and  punishments  (Matt. 
xi.  20,  22 ;  xii.  41).  He  encouraged  men  to  it.  (J.  Carter.)  Gist  of  th$ 
Saviour's  teaching :  —  The  whole  gospel  is  practically  reduced  to  repentance. 
Christ  joins  it  to  the  hope  of  heaven,  as  being  the  only  means  of  arriving  there. 
Here  are  four  points  in  His  teaching.  1.  That  His  Father  does  everything  accord- 
ing to  the  order  of  His  adorable  designs,  in  the  time  prefixed  in  His  eternal  pre- 
destination,  and  in  the  manner  described  in  the  Scriptures,  prefigured  in  the  shadows 
of  the  law,  foretold  by  the  prophets,  and  included  in  the  promises,  the  time  where- 
of is  now  fulfilled  at  His  coming.  2.  That  sin  has  reigned  under  the  law,  bat 
that  God  is  to  reign  under  grace  and  by  it,  and  that  the  time  of  this  kingdom  of 
grace  and  mercy  is  at  hand.  3.  That  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  His  reign  by  grace, 
begins  with  repentance  for  pt^t  sins.  4.  That  it  is  estabhshed  by  submission  to 
the  yoke  of  faith,  and  of  the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  and  by  the  hope  and  love  of 
eternal  enjoyments  which  it  reveals  and  promises.  {Quesnel.)  Nature  and 
evidence  of  repentance: — I.  Repentance  is  a  change  of  mind  concerning  (1)  God; 
(2)  the  law;  (3)  sin;  (4)  self;  (5)  Christ;  (6)  hohness.  II.  Repentance  is  mani- 
fested by  its  effects :  (1)  Contrition ;  (2)  confession ;  (3)  self-abhorrence ;  (4)  self- 
abandonment.  (W.  W.  Whythe.)  Tokens  of  repentance: — The  signs  of  true 
repentance  are— (1)  Carefulness  not  to  fall  into  oar  former  sins  again ;  {2\  holy 
indignation  against  ourselves  for  oar  sins  past ;  ^3)  a  greater  hatred  of  all  sin, 
than  we  ever  had  a  love  for  it;  (4)  constant  striving  against  secret  sins;  (5) 
thorough  obedience  rendered  cheerfully  to  all  God's  conunands.  {O.  Fetter.) 
Jesus  in  Oalilee : — I.  The  pbeachino  of  Jesus  was  spiRiruAii.  His  theme  was  the 
"kingdom  of  God.*'  Galilee  was  full  of  rabbis  who  taught  for  doctrines  the  com- 
mandments of  men.  Jesus  held  the  minds  of  men  to  spiritual  themes.  His  coming 
was  the  setting  up  on  earth  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  countrymen  of  Jesus 
looked  for  that  kingdom  as  one  of  worldly  magnificence.  Nothing  could  deter  Him 
from  unfolding  its  spiritual  nature.  II.  Jesus  preached  with  authority.  He 
commanded  men  to  repent  (verse  16.)  He  same  to  be  King  as  well  as  Saviour.  III. 
Jesus  required  not  only  acceptance  of  Hjs  doctrines  but  of  Himself  also — 
*•  Gome  ye  after  Me."  IV  Jesus  proffers  laroe  reward  to  His  followers — '*I 
will  make  you  fishers  of  men."  V.  Jesus'  words  and  acts  were  a  revelation  of 
His  Divine  poweb.  Rebuking  the  evil  spirit.  He  bade  him  "  hold  his  peace  and 
come  out  of  him."  That  word  was  irresistible.  Lessons :  1.  The  way  to  spread  the 
gospel  is  to  tell  what  Jesus  does.  2.  If  one  agency  fails  to  bring  men  to  Christ,  let 
others  be  employed.  3.  Opportunities  for  greatest  duties  are  found  in  the  discharge 
of  ordinary  ones.  Jesus  was  in  the  synagogue  on  the  Sabbath,  and  while  there 
occasion  was  afforded  for  healing  a  demoniac.  4.  A  broad  estimate  should  be 
had  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  How  vast  was  Christ's  view  of  the  kingdom  He  came  to 
set  ap.    Beings  of  both  worlds  were  interested  in  it.     {Sermons  by  Monday  Club.) 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Jesus  in  Galilee : — I.  The  enteance  to  the  kingdom.  For  a  sinful  man  the  only  way 
into  a  kingdom  of  righteousness,  is  through  repentance  and  renewal.  II.  The 
MIN19TBY  of  the  kingdom.  Discipleship  means  ministry.  III.  The  demonstratio 
of  the  kingdom.  The  gospel  of  the  kingdom  is  good  news  for  the  whole  man ; 
mind,  heart,  will,  soul  and  body.  At  last  the  gospel  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  in 
its  full  realization,  shall  be  only  a  renewal  of  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  that  was 
epoken  in  Galilee.  "  And  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying." 
(Rid.)  Repent  and  believe. — Adams  likens  Faith  to  a  great  queen  in  her  progress, 
having  repentance  as  her  messenger  going  before  her,  and  works  as  the  attendants 
following  in  her  train.  {J.  O.  Pilkington.)  The  look  of  repentance  backward  and 
forward  :— Like  Janus  Bifrons,  the  Roman  god  looking  two  ways,  a  true  repentance 
not  only  bemoans  the  past  but  takes  heed  to  the  future.  Repentance,  Uke  the  lights 
of  a  ship  at  her  bow  and  her  stern,  not  only  looks  to  the  track  she  has  made,  but  to 
the  path  before  her.  A  godly  sorrow  moves  the  Christian  to  weep  over  the  failure 
of  the  past,  but  his  eyes  are  not  so  blurred  with  tears  but  that  he  can  look  watchfully 
into  the  future,  and,  profiting  by  the  experience  of  former  failures,  make  straight 
paths  for  his  feet.  {Ibid.)  Repentance  lifelong : — •*  Sir,"  said  a  young  man  to 
Philip  Henry,  ••  how  long  should  a  man  go  on  repenting?  How  long,  Mr. 
Henry,  do  you  mean  to  go  on  repenting  yourself?"  "  Sir,"  was  the  reply,  •♦  I  hope 
to  carry  my  repentance  to  the  very  gates  of  heaven.  Every  day  I  find  I  am  a  sinner, 
and  every  day  I  need  to  repent.  I  mean  to  carry  my  repentance,  by  God's  help,  up 
to  the  very  gates  of  heaven.'*  May  this  be  your  divinity  and  mine  1  May  repen- 
tance towards  God,  and  faith  towards  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  be  Jachin  and  Boaz — 
the  two  great  pillars  before  the  temple  of  our  religion,  the  comer-stones  in  our 
system  of  Christianity.  {Bishop  Ryle.)  Repentance  and  faith  inseparable : — 
Here  is  the  sum  and  substanceof  Christ's  whole  teaching — the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  His 
entire  ministry  ;  and  coming  from  the  lips  of  such  an  one  and  at  such  a  time  (just 
after  His  baptism),  we  should  give  the  most  earnest  heed  to  it.  I.  The  gospel  which 
Christ  preached  was,  very  plainly,  ▲  command.  He  didn't  condescend  to  reason 
about  it.  Why  is  thds  ?  1.  To  ensure  its  being  attended  to.  Many  would  never 
venture  to  believe  at  all  if  it  were  not  made  penal  to  refuse  to  do  so.  2.  That  men 
may  be  without  excuse  if  they  neglect  it.  II.  This  command  is  twofold.  It  explains 
itself  :  repent  and  believe.  1.  Repentance.  Abhorrence  of  one's  past  life,  because 
of  the  love  of  Christ  which  has  pardoned  it.  Avoidance  of  present  sin,  because  not 
one's  own,  but  bought  with  a  price.  Resolution  to  live  henceforth  like  Jesus.  This 
is  the  only  repentance  we  have  to  preach  and  to  practise :  not  law  and  terrors,  not 
despair,  not  driving  men  to  self-murder — this  is  the  sorrow  of  the  world,  which 
worketh  death  :  go<2y  sorrow  is  a  sorrow  unto  salvation  through  Christ.  2.  Faith. 
That  is,  trust  in  Christ.  This  goes  hand-in-hand  with  repentance.  Neither  will  be 
of  any  use  without  the  other.  Trust  Christ  to  save  you,  and  lament  that  you  need 
to  be  saved,  and  monm  because  this  need  of  yours  has  put  the  Saviour  to  open 
shame,  frightful  sufferings,  and  a  terrible  death.  IH.  This  command  is  a  most 
REASONABLE  ONE.  God  Only  asks  of  ycu  that  which  your  heart,  if  it  were  in  a  right 
state,  would  rejoice  to  give.  You  can't  expect  to  be  saved  while  you  are  in  your 
sins,  any  more  than  you  can  expect  to  have  a  healthy  body  while  there  is  poison  in 
your  veins.  And  then,  as  to  faith,  God  surely  has  a  right  to  demand  of  the  creature 
He  has  made,  that  he  shall  believe  what  He  tells  him;  IV.  This  is  a  command 
which  DEMANDS  IMMEDIATE  OBEDIENCE.  The  danger  is  real ;  the  necessity  is  urgent. 
To-day  is  the  time  God  graciously  gives  you  ;  to-morrow  He  may  claim  as  His  own. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Low  in  repentance,  high  in  faith  :— An  old  saint,  on  his 
sick-bed,  once  used  this  remarkable  expression :  "  Lord,  sink  me  low  as  hell  in  re- 
pentance, but" — and  here  is  the  beauty  of  it — "lift  me  high  as  heaven  in  faith.** 
The  repentance  that  sinks  a  man  low  as  hell  is  of  no  use  except  there  is  the  faith 
also  that  lifts  him  as  high  as  heaven,  and  the  two  are  perfectly  consistent  the  one 
with  the  other.  Oh,  how  blessed  it  is  to  know  where  these  two  lines  meet — the 
stripping  of  repentance,  and  the  clothing  of  faith  I  {Ibid.)  Repentance  dear 
to  the  Christian  : — Rowland  Hill,  when  he  was  near  death,  said  he  had  one 
regret,  and  that  was  that  a  dear  friend  who  bad  lived  with  him  for  sixty  years, 
would  have  to  leave  him  at  the  gate  of  heaven.  "  That  dear  friend,"  said  he,  "  is 
repentance ;  repentance  has  been  with  me  all  my  life,  and  I  think  I  shall  drop  a 
tear  as  I  go  through  the  gates,  to  think  that  I  can  repent  no  more."  Repentance 
hears  sweet  fruit : — The  sweetness  of  the  apple  makes  up  for  the  bitterness  of  the 
root,  the  hope  of  gain  makes  pleasant  the  perils  of  the  pea,  the  expectation  of  health 
mitigates  the  naiiseousneas  of  medicine.    He  who  desires  the  kernel,  breaks  the  nut; 


CHAP.  I.]  ST.  MARK.  31 

so  be  who  desires  the  joy  of  a  holy  conscience,  swallows  down  the  bitterness  ol 
penance.  [Scholiast  in  J erovie .)  Repentance  and  faith  twin  duties  : — Faith  and 
repentance  keep  up  a  Christian's  life,  as  the  natural  heat  and  radical  moisture  do 
the  natural  life.  Faith  is  like  the  innate  heat ;  repentance  like  the  natural  moisture. 
And,  as  the  philosopher  saith,  if  the  innate  heat  devour  too  much  the  radical 
moisture,  or,  on  the  contrary,  there  breed  presently  diseases;  so,  if  believing  make 
a  man  repent  less,  or  repenting  make  a  man  believe  less,  this  turneth  to  a  distemper. 
Lord,  cast  me  down  (said  a  holy  man  upon  his  death-bed)  as  low  as  hell  in  repent- 
ance; and  lift  me  up  by  faith  into  the  highest  heavens,  in  confidence  of  Thy 
salvation.  (John  Trapp.)  Repentance  a  daily  duty  : — He  that  repents  every  day 
for  the  sins  of  every  day,  when  he  comes  to  die  will  have  the  sins  of  only  one  day 
to  repent  of.  Short  reckonings  make  long  friends.  [M.  ILnry.)  The  time  ful- 
filled : — The  same  thought  as  St.  Paul's  "  fulness  of  time."  (Gal.  iv.  4  ;  Eph.  i.  10). 
The  kingdom  of  god  and  of  heaven.  These  two  formulae  are  used  with  a  slight 
difference  of  meaning.  1.  "The  kingdom  op  heaven"  stands  opposed  to  the 
KINGDOMS  OF  EARTH  :  the  great  world-empires  that  lived  and  ruled  by  the  strength 
of  their  armies  and  that  were,  in  means  and  ends,  in  principles  and  practices,  bad. 
These  had  grown  out  of  the  cruel  ambitions,  jealousies,  and  hatreds  of  men  and 
States ;  had  created  war,  bloodshed,  famine,  pestilence,  the  oppression  which 
crushed  the  weak,  and  the  tyranny  which  exalted  the  strong.  But  the  kingdom  from 
above  was  the  descent  of  a  spiritual  power,  calm  and  ubiquitous  as  the  sun- 
to  light :  plastic,  penetrative,  pervasive,  silently  changing  from  ill  to  good,  from  chaos 
order,  both  man  and  the  world.  2.  "  The  kingdom  of  ood  "  has  its  opposite  in  the 
KINGDOM  of  eviij  OR  SATAN,  the  great  empire  of  darkness  and  anarchy,  creative  of 
misery  and  death  to  man.  It  belonged  to  God,  came  from  Him,  existed  to  promote 
His  ends,  to  vanquish  sin,  and  to  restore  on  earth  an  obedience  that  would  make  it 
happy  and  harmonious  as  heaven.     {Principal  A.  M.  Fairbaim.) 

Vers.  16-18. — Now  as  He  walked  by  the  Sea  of  GalUee. — The  call  of  the  first 
apostles : — The  call  of  these  men  is  a  strange  thing.  It  is  strange  that  He  begins 
with  winning  disciples,  not  working  miracles.  And  it  is  more  strange  still  that  in 
our  poor  human  nature  He  should  find  any  fitness  to  aid  Him  in  His  work.  You 
would  have  thought  only  heaven  could  have  given  the  Saviour  fellow-workers  that 
would  be  a  comfort  and  a  help  to  Him.  But  man  can  be  a  worker  together  with 
God.  Several  things  are  noteworthy  in  connection  with  this  group  of  apostles.  I. 
They  are  not  theologians.  We  do  not  need  high  education  to  fit  us  to  do  good. 
II.  But  they  had  benefited  by  an  excellent  training.  They  came  from  pious 
homes ;  they  had  good  schooling  and  good  knowledge  of  the  Bible ;  also  the  ex- 
cellent training  that  lies  in  learning  a  trade  reqoiring  diligence  and  endurance. 
What  special  further  fitness  they  needed  for  their  work  would  come  from  inter- 
course with  Christ.  III.  They  were  found  in  groups.  Ties  of  friendship  may 
assist  both  consecration  and  power.  IV.  They  are  enlisted  gradually.  In  no 
religious  matters  should  we  act  with  haste.  Be  ••  like  the  stars,  hasting  not,  lingering 
not."  Life  is  not  long  enough  to  let  us  postpone  the  discharge  of  duty  a  single 
day  after  its  discovery ;  bat  it  is  quite  long  enough  to  give  us  time  to  reach  calmly 
every  conclusion  on  which  we  have  to  act.  {R.  Glover.)  JesuSy  as  Head  of  the 
kingdom,  calling  His  helpers : — Note — I.  The  peremptoriness  of  the  call — "  Come 
ye  after  Me."  II.  The  inducement  to  obey — "I  will  make  you,"  &c.  III.  The 
promptness  of  their  obedience — *'  And  straightway,"  &o.  IV.  The  order  in  which 
they  were  called — "  Simon  Peter  "  first.  V.  The  kind  of  men  called.  Not  idlers. 
(D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A,)  Busy  men: — God  calls  men  when  they  are  busy ;  Satan, 
when  they  are  idle.  For  idleness  is  the  hour  of  temptation,  and  an  idle  person 
the  devil's  tennis-ball,  which  he  tosses  at  pleasure,  and  sets  to  work  as  he  likes 
and  lists.  {John  Trapp.)  Why  should  the  Lord  choose  His  foremost  apostle»from 
among  fishermen  1  1.  Their  calling  had  inured  them  to  hardship  and  danger— the 
lake  on  which  they  exercised  their  craft  being  exposed  to  sudden  and  violent  storms. 
2.  Their  calling,  demanding  a  constant  exercise  of  patience  and  watchfulness,  and 
being  very  precarious  besides,  had  made  them  familiar  with  disappointment,  so 
that  they  would  not  be  discouraged  by  it.  Thus  their  worldly  calling  would  be 
the  best  discipline  for  their  spiritual  work.  They  must  be  prepared  to  endure 
hardness,  for  tiiey  had  no  settled  incomes ;  they  must  be  ready  to  face  death,  for 
at  any  moment  a  storm  of  bloody  persecution  might  arise ;  they  must  be  patient, 
both  towards  churches  and  souls  ;  and  they  must  be  content  at  times  with  taking 
a  few  converts  in  their  nets,  where  they  might  have  expected  abundant  draughts. 


•1  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

(if,  F,  Sadler,  M.A.)  The  Lord  chose — I.  Unlearned  and  ignorant  men,  that  Hia 
grace  might  be  made  perfect  in  their  weakness.  That  the  then  known  world 
should  have  been,  in  two  or  three  centuries,  subdued  to  the  faith  by  such  men,  and 
by  such  as  succeeded  them,  was,  next  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  the  greatest 
miracle  of  Christianity ;  II.  Religious  men.  They  had  *'  justified  God "  by- 
attaching  themselves  to  the  ministry  of  the  Baptist.  But  they  were  neither  (1) 
prejudiced  Pharisees,  who  would  have  had  a  world  of  traditional  interpretation  to 
unlearn ;  nor  (2)  superstitious  men,  or  they  would  have  shown  themselves  far 
readier  to  look  for  supernatural  action  from  their  Master.  (Ibid.)  The  call  to 
service: — I.  Honest  tou.  is  a  peeparation  for  nobler  work.  II.  Following  Christ 
CONSECRATES  BVERY  VOCATION.    Earthly  pursuits  are  the  pattern  of  the  hea\enly. 

lU.  SeCULAB  PARTNERSHIPS  ABE  TRANSLATED  TO  A  HIGHER  SPHERE.  IV.  TrUE 
OBEDIENOB    IS    PROMPT     AND     PRACTICAL.  V.   ChRIST'S    SERVICE     ALWAYS    INVOLVES 

SACRIFICE.  (D.  DavieSt  M.A.)  The  manner  in  which  Christ  attracted  men  to  Himself 
by  making  their  secular  calling  typical  of  spiritual  work.     I.  That  good  men  should 

TAKE  EVERY  OPPORTUNITY  FOR   SEEKINO  THE   MORAL  WELFARE   OF    THOSE  WITH   WHOM 

THEY  ABB  BROUGHT  INTO  INCIDENTAL  CONTACT.  II.  That  good  men  in  embracing 
every  opportunity  for  the  moral  welfare  of  others,  might  with  great  advantage 

APPEAL    TO    THEM    THROUGH    THEIB    SECULAR     GALLING,    MAKING     IT    SYMBOLICAL     OF 

RELIGIOUS  WORK  AND  TRUTH.  **  I  will  make  you  to  become  fishers  of  men."  1. 
This  method  of  appeal  is  attractive.  2.  It  may  be  opportune.  3.  It  is  effective. 
{Joseph  S.  Exellf  M.A.)  Christ's  election  of  disciples : — I.  Whom    did   Hb 

OHOOSB  ?  Not  the  wise  and  learned ;  they  would  have  worried  the  simplicity  with 
endless  commentaries,  have  wrought  it  into  intellectual  puzzles,  so  that  the  shep- 
herd on  the  hill  could  not  have  understood  it.  He  did  not  choose  the  rich ;  they 
would  have  weighted  His  goodness  with  the  cares  of  wealth.  Did  He  choose  re- 
ligious leaders  P  They  would  dissolve  His  charity,  mercy,  in  the  acid  of  their 
theological  hatreds.  Did  He  choose  the  politicians  ?  He  would  not  use  political 
craft.  II.  "Come,"  He  said,  ♦*!  will  make  you  fishers  of  men.  And  they  left  all 
and  followed  Him."  He  was  not  wrong  then  in  His  choice.  These  men  who 
gave  np  all  at  once  for  Him,  had  impulse,  heart,  impetuosity,  love ;  and  these 
were  the  main  things  He  wanted  for  His  work.  It  would  be  a  hard  task,  and  no 
faint-heartedness  or  questioning  could  bear  its  trials.  It  was  this  intensity  of 
spirit  that  Christ  stirred  in  men.  When  He  spoke  men  arose  from  the  dead.  The 
source  of  His  influence  was  partly  personal ;  also  it  was  weighted  with  infinite. 
Divine,  ideal  thoughts ;  He  established  living  truths  in  the  hearts  of  men.  That 
was  His  real  power.  As  life  went  on  His  thoughts  grew  before  them.  So  in- 
spired, they  went  forth  into  the  world.  They  saw  before  them  a  vast  ocean,  in 
whose  depths  men  were  lost  in  ignorance  and  misery.  {^S.  A.  Brooke^  M.A.) 
Christ  calling  men: — I.  This  call  was  imperative.  II.  It  is  first  given  to  two 
obscure  men.  III.  It  is  a  spoken,  not  a  written,  call.  IV.  They  are  commanded 
to  follow  a  person,  not  a  creed.  Y.  This  call  is  abrupt.  YI.  In  all  revolutionary 
movements  there  have  been  men  who  have  heard  nothing  but — **  Follow.*'  YH. 
Those  who  are  called  are  not  such  at  first  sight  as  might  have  been  expected  ;  yet 
on  examination  it  will  be  found  that  they  were  the  only  persons  who  could  have 
been  called,  in  harmony  with  the  whole  ministry  of  Jesus  Christ.  {Dr.  Parker.) 
Forsaking  all  to  follow  Christ: — It  is  said  that  the  magnet  will  not  draw  in  the 
presence  of  the  diamond :  the  world  cannot  hold  that  soul  that  is  susceptible  to 
the  superior  power  of  Christ.  The  eye  dazzled  with  the  glare  of  the  sun  sees 
darkness  everywhere  else.  Leather  and  iron  money  was,  in  the  early  ages,  soon 
cast  aside  for  gold  and  silver.  How  soon  we  part  with  lamps  and  candles  when 
the  Bun  rises.  {T.  Brooks.)  Heart  responsive  to  heart : — The  call  met  a  deep 
craving  of  the  heart,  and  at  once  they  joined  Christ  the  man,  without  knowing  any- 
thing of  Christ  the  doctrine.  The  heart  wanted  a  heart ;  life  demanded  life.  The 
world  had  lived  long  enough  on  written  promises ;  the  cold  parchment  was  be- 
coming colder  day  by  day.  There  was  an  aching  at  the  heart  of  society — a  great 
trouble— an  exciting  wonder.  The  call  had  a  peculiar  charm  about  it  in  so  far  as 
it  demanded  attachment  to  a  visible  person.  Not  a  creed  but  a  Life  bade  them 
"  follow."  {Dr.  Parker.)  The  gospel  as  a  fishing  net : — The  net  to  fish  for  men 
is  commonly  the  word  truly  preached  ;  the  threads  are  the  words  of  persuasion ; 
the  knots  the  arguments  of  reason  ;  the  plummets  are  the  articles  and  grounds  of 
the  faith.  This  net  is  to  be  wove  with  study  and  pains,  to  be  let  down  and  loosed 
by  preaching,  to  be  gathered  up  by  calling  men  to  account  of  what  was  heard, 
what  ihejf  haTe  done  upon  it ;  it  is  washed  and  cleansed  by  our  tears  and  prayers, 


CHAP,  z.}  ST.  MARK, 


and  spread  and  dried  by  onr  charity  and  mortified  affections.  And  this  is  the 
net  that  we  must  let  down,  **  though  it  catoh  nothing,"  and  **  at  His  word  it  is  to 
be  let  down."  His  word  is  to  be  the  length  and  breadth,  the  whole  rule  and 
measure  of  all  our  sermons,  all  your  actions.  Leave  o£E  our  work  we  must  not, 
because  it  does  not  answer  us  with  success ;  but  do  our  work  again,  and  see  where 
we  erred,  and  mark  it ;  find  what  was  the  occasion  of  onr  ill  success,  onr  taking 
nought,  and  avoid  it.  {Dr.  Mark  Frank.)  The  estimate  Jems  Christ  had  of 
humanity  in  contrast  with  all  the  other  objecti  that  engaged  His  attention : — The 
more  you  study  Christ's  life  the  more  yon  will  see  how  in  comparison  with  the 
claims  of  man  everything  else  was  regarded  as  subsidiary  and  comparatively  un- 
important. For  rank,  for  wealth,  for  fame,  for  all  the  pursuit  of  which  fills  men 
with  fever  and  the  possession  of  which  leaves  them  in  unrest,  Christ  cared  not  a 
jot.  But  for  man  He  cared  everything.  He  might  be  poor,  despised,  wretched ; 
no  matter,  he  was  a  man  1  And  when  He  viewed  him  thus  as  a  king,  though  dis- 
crowned, as  an  heir  whose  birthright  was  immortality,  as  a  brother  of  the  sera- 
phim, though  bowed  in  the  ruin  of  a  crushing  overthrow,  His  whole  nature  went 
out  to  him  in  a  passionate  intensity  of  tenderness,  and  in  His  annunciation  that 
He  had  come  to  seek  and  save  the  lost,  Christ  bat  proclaimed  His  estimate  of  the 
greatness  of  humanity.  The  first  thing  which  any  one  of  us  must  seek  to  possess 
as  a  qualification  for  Christian  work  is  the  same  overmastering  sense  of  the 
preciousness  of  humanity.  We  shall  work  for  man  in  proportion  as  we  feel  that. 
Get  this  thought,  then,  written  in  your  heart,  fixed  in  yonr  memory  as  with  a 
diamond,  that  to  consecrate  your  energy,  to  devote  your  might  to  do  the  work  of 
Christ,  as  it  bears  npon  the  elevation  and  salvation  of  man,  will  do  more  to 
replenish  your  soul  with  happiness,  and  to  crown  your  life  with  honour,  than  to 
reap  a  harvest  of  wealth  or  fame.  To  bring  a  little  child  as  a  lamb  to  the  fold  of 
the  Good  Shepherd,  to  raise  the  fallen  out  of  the  mire  to  the  level  of  a  purer  life, 
and  to  bring  men  under  the  saving  infiuences  of  Christ's  gospel,  is  a  work  which 
angel  minds  would  fain  engage  in,  and  one  which  demands  and  deserves  the 
highest  devotion  we  can  bring  to  bear  upon  it.  (W.  Kelynack. )  Primary  and 
subordinate  qualijications  that  are  important  to  be  possessed  by  all  those  who  essay 
to  do  good  to  others : — And  I  would  remark  of  all  knowledge  the  most  important 
that  must  be  possessed  by  him  who  seeks  to  influence  others  for  good  is  the  know, 
ledge  of  man.  To  know  books  is  much,  to  be  familiar  with  things  is  well ;  but 
large  wisdom  in  these  particulars  may  consist  with  much  ignorance  in  dealing 
with  human  nature.  To  know  man,  to  work  with  success  on  man,  you  must  know 
his  susceptibilities  as  well  as  his  aversions,  his  merits  as  well  as  his  failings. 
And  you  must  know  this  in  order  satisfactorily  to  deal  with  the  question  how  best 
human  nature  may  be  approached,  and  how  most  effectually  it  may  be  converted 
to  the  OSes  you  contemplate.  To  give  shape  to  an  iron  bar  you  need  a  sledge- 
hammer stroke  of  power.  To  give  form  to  clay,  you  need  but  the  deft  movements 
of  a  vigorous  hand.  And  so,  in  dealing  with  human  nature ;  the  knowledge  on 
which  1  insist,  leading  out  to  the  employment  of  the  right  means,  is  one  of  great 
moment  in  the  success  of  our  task.  It  is  of  no  use  for  any  one  of  us  to  go 
through  life  with  a  little  code  of  action  like  a  two -foot  rule  to  be  the  measure  of  all 
character.  We  must  deal  with  men  according  to  their  individual  character.  Some 
men  we  must  approach  through  the  medium  of  their  hope,  and  some  through  the 
medium  of  their  fear.  Some  we  must  strike,  but  as  the  bee  strikes  the  flower 
when  he  draws  the  honey  from  its  heart ;  and  others  we  must  shape  as  the  sculptor 
shapes  the  block,  which  he  strikes  again  and  again  to  disemprison  the  angel  that 
lies  hidden  in  the  slab.  Now  in  this,  and  then  in  that  form,  Christian  workers 
will  adjust  their  movements,  guided  by  the  knowledge  of  human  nature  of  which 
we  are  speaking,  knowing  that  if  men  are  sought  in  the  right  way,  and  at  the  right 
time,  like  fish  you  may  catch  them,  but  that  if  you  neglect  these  very  primary 
qualities,  you  may  almost  forecast  failure  where  you  should  expect  success.  (Ibid.) 
The  making  of  men-catchers : — Conversion  is  most  fully  displayed  when  it  leads 
converts  to  seek  the  conversion  of  others :  we  most  truly  follow  Christ  when  we 
become  fishers  of  men.  The  great  question  is  not  so  much  what  we  are  naturally, 
as  what  Jesus  makes  us  by  His  grace  :  whoever  we  may  be  of  ourselves,  we  can,  by 
following  Jesus,  be  made  useful  in  His  kingdom.  Our  desire  should  be  to  be  men- 
catchers  ;  and  the  way  to  attain  to  that  sacred  art  is  to  be  ourselves  thoroughly 
captured  by  the  great  Head  of  the  college  of  fishermen.  When  Jesus  draws  us  we 
shall  draw  men.  I.  Something  to  bk  done  by  us — "Come ye  after  Me."  1,  We 
must  be  separated  to  Him,  that  we  may  pursue  His  object.    2.  We  must  abide  with 

S 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Him,  that  we  may  catch  His  spirit.    3.  We  must  obey  Him,  that  we  may  learn  His 
method.    4.  We  must  believe  Him,  that  we  may  beUeve  true  doctrine.     5.  We 
must  copy  His  life,  that  we  may  win  His  blessing  from  God.     H.  Something  to 
BB  DONE  BY  HiM — "I  will  make  you."     Our  following  Jesus  secures  our  education 
for  Boul -winning.    1.  By  our  following  Jesus,  He  works  conviction  and  conversion 
in  men :  He  uses  our  example  as  ameans  to  that  end.    2.  By  our  discipleship  the 
Lord  makes  us  fit  to  be  used.     3.  By  our  personal  experience  in  following  Jesus, 
He  instructs  us  until  we  become  proficient  in  soul-winning.   4.  By  inward  monitions 
He  guides  us  what,  when,  and  where  to  speak.     5.  By  His  Spirit  He  qualifies  us  to 
reach  men.     6.  By  His  secret  working  on  men's  hearts  He  speeds  us  in  our  work. 
III.  A  nouBB  iNSTBUCTiNO  US — "  Fishcrs  of  men."    A  fisher  is  (1)  dependent  »nd 
trustful ;  (2)  diligent  and  persevering ;  (3)  intelligent  and  watchful ;  (4)  laborious 
and  self-denying;  (6)  daring,  and  not  afraid  to  venture  upon  a  dJangerous  sea; 
(6)  successful.    He  is  no  fisher  who  never  catches  anything.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  higher  discipleship : — Following  Christ,  if  rightly  understood,  is  the  destruction 
of  selfishness.     It  casts  off  the  idols  of  worldly  prudence  and  worldly  maxims 
from  the  heart,  and  puts  there  instead  the  supreme  self-sacrifice  of  Christ.    Well 
might  these  two  plain  men  have  said,  ♦*  What  1  leave  all  and  follow  Thee  f  leave 
our  nets  and  boats  that  we  have  bought  with  our  few  savings  ?  ruin  our  worldly 
chances,  and  go  forth  to  we  know  not  what — all  for  the  hope  of  doing  good  f    Where 
is  the  gain,  where  is  the  advantage  to  ourselves  ?  "    But  the  man  who  receives 
Christ  into  his  heart  cannot  reason  in  that  way.     Tell  him  that  he  is  giving  up  his 
worldly  chances,  that  he  is  injuring  his  strength,  that  he  is  working  without  hope 
of  reward  on  earth  ;  and  he  must  still  reply,  ••  My  aim  is  not  the  gratitude  of  men, 
but  the  favour  of  God.    I  am  not  working  for  the  regard  of  men,  but  for  the  *  Well 
done  •  of  my  Master."    To  do  that  which  pleasure  prompts,  to  do  that  which  does 
not  clash  with  our  inclinations — even  the  world  can  go  as  far  as  that.     But  the 
true  disciple  is  he  who  leaves  his  nets  and  boats  at  the  command  of  Christ ;  the 
man  who  goes  out  to  a  foreign  land,  leaving  kindred  and  home  that  he  may  preach 
the  misearchable  riches  of  Christ ;  the  Sunday-school  teacher  who  gives  up  the  hour 
needed,  perchance,  for  rest,  that  the  ignorant  may  be  taught,  and  the  feet  of 
children  led  into  the  narrow  way.    Christ  calls  us  to  the  higher  discipleship,  becauBe 
it  is  His  purpose  that  we,  under  God,  should  bring  back  the  world  to  His  sway.  ,  . 
Let  us  rise  above  the  low  level  where  we  can  only  read  the  word  •'  duty,"  to  that 
grander  height  where  we  can  see  that  all  Christian  service  is  a  privilege  and  a  joy  ; 
and  though  heart  and  flesh  fail  sometimes,  let  us  walk  as  seeing  the  invisible.    The 
divinest  life  that  ever  the  world  knew  carried  its  cross  every  step  of  the  way,  and 
your  life  will  not  be  worth  much  unless  you  carry  your  cross  too.    Nothing  great  or 
good  is  ever  born  into  the  world  without  travail  and  pain.     (J.  H,  Shakespeare^ 
M.A.)        The  ministerial  office  : — In  fishing,  whether  in  sea  or  among  men,  there  is 
wanted — 1.  A  net.     The  gospel.    2.  Casting  the  net.    Andrew  did  this  first  when  he 
caught  Peter  his  brother  (John  i.  41) ;   Peter  did  this  most  energetically  afterwards 
with  his  splendid  work  of  preaching.    In  doing  this,  Christ  directs  where ;  other- 
wise we  may  toil  all  night  in  vain.  3.  Dragging  the  net  to  land.  Confessional;  inquiry- 
room,    c    4.  Mending  the  nets.    Heretics  and  schismatics  unite  against  it,  and  ro 
break  the  net.     Inside  foes  are  the  worst — the  dog-fish  and  sharks  of  the  gospel- 
net.    Hence  a  mender  is  wanted.     5.  Counting  the  fish  (John  xxi.  11).    The  elect 
and  chosen  are  many  and  great ;  and  these  do  not  break  the  nets.         The  apoxtles* 
change  of  employment  a  gain  to  them: — Did  those  skilled  fishermen  gain  or  lose  in 
leaving  the  lake,  the  boat,  and  the  net,  and  becoming  the  Lord's  apostles?    Was  it 
to  their  loss  or  advantage  that  they  sacrificed  the  wealth  gathered  by  the  net  for 
the  privilege  of  saving  men  ?    Ask  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost :  ask  him  when 
by  his  lips  the  gospel  is  first  preached  to  the  Gentiles,  and  he  gathers  the  first-fruits 
of  a  world-wide  harvest.    Ask  John  when,  at  the  close  of  a  long  life,  on  the  isle  of 
Patmos  the  heavens  opened  to  him,  and  the  scroll  of  the  future  is  unrolled,  and  he 
with  rapt  vision  is  permitted  to  see  the  triumphs  of  the  gospel  he  was  called  to 
preach.     Ask  them  now,  their  names  having  gone  through  the  world  closely 
associated  with  Christ,  pillars  of  the  Church  on  earth,  and  for  eighteen  centuries 
sharing  with  their  Lord  the  glory  of  the  Church  above.     {P.  B.  Davis.)        The 
minister  is  a  fisherman : — As  such  he  must  fit  himself  for  his  employment.    If  iome 
fish  will  bite  only  by  day,  he  must  fish  by  day ;  if  others  will  bite  only  by  moon- 
light, he  must  fish  for  them  by  moonlight.    {R.  Cecil.)        Bait  to  catch  fish: — Mu 
Jesse  relates  that  certain  fish  give  preference  to  bait  that  has  been  perfumed.  When 
the  prinoe  of  evil  goes  forth  in  quest  of  victims,  there  does  not  need  mach  allure* 


€HA».  I.]  ST,  MARK.  83 

ment  added  to  the  common  temptations  of  life  to  make  them  effective.  Fishers  of 
men,  however,  do  well  to  employ  all  the  skill  they  can  to  suit  the  minds  and  tastes 
of  those  whom  they  seek  to  gain.  {G.  McMichael.)  Rules  for  fishing: — I 
watched  an  old  man  trout  fishing  the  other  day,  pulling  them  out  one  after  another 
briskly.  "You  manage  it  cleverly,  old  friend,"  I  said;  "I  have  passed  a  good 
many  below  who  don't  seem  to  be  doing  anything."  The  old  man  lifted  himself  up, 
and  stuck  his  rod  in  the  ground.  •'  Well,  you  see,  sir,  there  be  three  rules  for  trout 
fishing,  and  'tis  no  good  trying  if  you  don't  mind  them.  The  first  is,  keep  your- 
self out  of  sight ;  and  the  second,  keep  yourself  further  out  of  sight ;  and  the  third 
is,  keep  yourself  further  still  out  of  sight.  Then  you'll  do  it."  '•  Good  for  catching 
men,  too,"  thought  I.  {Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  Catching  fish  a  preparation  for 
Hatching  men  : — Every  quaUty  of  mind  which  these  fishermen  had  cultivated  will 
serve  the  higher  purpose  now.     Their  vocation  had — I.  Called  out  their  patience. 

II.  Made  a  large  demand  on  their  inventiveness.    Catching  men  needs  sagacity. 

III.  Kept  in  lively  exercise  their  observant  watchfulness.  They  found  it  needful 
to  study  all  the  changes  of  light  and  shade ;  the  aspects  of  sky  and  sea.  To  save 
souls  we  must  be  "  all  eye."  IV.  Had  inured  them  to  disappointment.  (D.  Davie$^ 
M.A.)  Grippers : — I  have  known  a  congregation  so  full  of  kindly  Christian 
workers  that  in  the  low  neighbourhood  in  which  they  worked  they  got  the  nick-name 
of  **  Grippers.^*  Lowe,  hearing  the  name,  thought  it  must  be  a  new  sect,  but  it 
only  marked  the  old  apostolic  quality.  All  Christians  ought  to  pray  for  this  power 
of  catching  souls.  It  is  not  violence,  loudness,  or  terror  that  gives  it,  but  love, 
goodness,  tiie  clear  and  strong  convictions  that  oome  from  following  Christ.  (R, 
Glover.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  And  when  He  had  gone  a  little  fiarther  thence,  He  saw  James.— 

The  call  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee : — I.  Our  first  question  is,  What  manner  op  mem 
WERE  James  and  John  when  Jesus  summoned  them  to  His  service?  Is  it  not 
suggested  that  they  were  free  from  gross  vices  ;  open-eyed  to  truth  and  righteous- 
ness? Converted  profligates  have  rendered  eminent  service  in  the  kingdom  of 
God ;  yet  the  best  achievements  have  usually  come  from  men  who  have  not  saturated 
their  natures  with  vicious  indulgences.  Secular  experience  had  helped  to  make 
the  brothers  fit  for  Christ's  call.  The  stormy  wind  was  fulfiling  Christ's  word, 
and  He  was  coming  to  His  men  walking  on  the  waves  of  the  sea.  The  qualities  of 
character  produced  by  toil  upon  the  deep  were  caught  up  and  transfigured  in  the 
fulfilment  of  apostolic  tasks.  We  are  shaped  by  circumstances  which  look  common- 
place for  future  usefulness.  James  and  John  had  reason  to  be  thankful  for  helpful 
communion  with  others.  Their  parents  must  have  been  a  worthy  couple,  and  their 
companions,  Peter  and  Andrew,  were  like-minded  with  themselves.  Their  thoughts 
went  beyond  boats  and  nets.  Their  lives  looked  upward.  To  the  youthful  fishermen 
Christ  had  already  revealed  Himself.    His  spell  was  on  their  hearts.    II.  The  call 

POR    WHICH    such   varied  PREPARATIONS  HAD  BEEN  MADE  WAS  HEARD  IN  DUE  COURSE — 

*'  He  called  them,"  &c.  Though  we  take  it  as  a  matter  of  course  that  James  and 
John  should  make  a  prompt  response,  there  was  the  possibility  of  reluctance  and 
bargaining.  Jonah  fied.  Prompt  be  our  obedience.  The  call  that  was  heeded 
involved  a  purifying  fellowship.  The  men  who  were  named  "  Boanei^es  "  had  dis- 
positions which  might  have  made  them  men  of  violent  deeds  had  not  Christ  assumed 
the  task  of  refining  without  weakening  the  powerful,  passionate  natures  that  He 
won.     To  be  much  with  Christ  is  essential  to  doing  well  in  His  kingdom.     III. 

The  SERVICE  for  which  the  CAIiL  AND  CULTURE  PREPARED  THE  WAY.     IV.  ThE  SACRiriCES 

WHICH  THE  SERVICE  REQUIRED.  Zcbcdce  Rud  Salomc  had  their  share.  For  their  sons 
they  had  made  plans  with  which  Christ  interfered.  Their  home  was  to  lose  some 
light.  The  youths  themselves  had  to  endure  hardship,  but  they  had  love  to  help 
them.  {W.  J.  Henderson^  B.A.)  The  beneficent  influence  of  a  Christ-attracted 
life  : — Anything  but  beneficent  those  lives  might  have  been.  Let  the  seawater  which 
would  madden  those  who  drink  it  be  drawn  heavenward,  and  it  will  descend  as 
wholesome  refreshment  for  beast  and  bird  and  tree  and  man  ;  and  so  men  that  would 
make  the  world's  life  madder  become  fountains  of  sweet  water  after  Christ  has  drawn 
them  into  the  sky  of  oommuuion  with  Himself.  You  will  remember  that,  and  let 
Him  uplift  you.  To  be  much  with  Him  is  essential  to  doing  well  in  His  kingdom. 
(Ibid.)  A  call  to  discipleship  : — 1.  This  call  uttered  by  Christ  was  unique  in  its 
character.  2.  It  was  emphatic  in  its  authority.  3.  It  was  important  in  its  desig- 
nation. I.  The  call  to  discipleship  comes  to  men  pre-occupied  with  the  sboulab 
DUTIES  or  LiFB.     1.  Christ  does  not  often  call  idle  men  to  discipleship.     2.  If  men 


8S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  b. 

are  active  Christ  does  not  despise  the  meanness  of  their  toil.     II.  The  call  to 

discipleship  comes  to  sevekal  in  the  same  FAiniiY.  III.  It  involves  the  subordina- 
tion of  all  human  relationships.  1.  Of  trade  relationships.  2.  Of  domestic 
relationships.  {Joseph  S,  Exell,  M.A,)  ChrisV$  insight  into  character: — In  a 
rough  stone,  a  cunning  lapidary  will  easily  foresee  what  his  cutting,  and  his 
polishing,  and  his  art  will  bring  that  stone  to.  A  cunning  statuary  discerns  in  a 
marble-stone  under  his  feet,  where  there  will  arise  an  eye,  and  an  ear,  and  a  hand, 
and  other  lineaments  to  make  it  a  perfect  statue.  Much  more  did  our  Saviour  Christ, 
who  was  Himself  the  author  of  that  disposition  in  them  (for  no  man  hath  any  such 
disposition  but  from  God),  foresee  in  these  fishermen  an  inclinableness  to  become 
useful  in  that  great  service  of  His  Church.  Therefore  He  took  them  from  their 
own  ship,  but  He  sent  them  from  His  cross;  He  took  them  weatherbeaten  with 
north  and  south  winds,  and  rough-cast  with  foam  and  mud ;  but  He  sent  them 
back  Boupled,  and  smoothed,  and  levigated,  quickened,  and  inanimated  with  that 
spirit  which  He  had  breathed  into  them  from  His  own  bowels,  His  own  eternal 
bowels,  from  which  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeded ;  He  took  fishermen,  and  He  sent 
fishers  of  men.  (J.  Donne,  D.D.)  What  the  Gospel  ministry  is  : — 1.  Called  men: 
Said  to  Andrew,  Peter,  &c.,  "  Follow  me."  2.  Separated  men :  ••  They  left  all  and 
followed  Him."  3.  Commissioned  men:  "I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men."  4. 
Equipped  men :  with  His  presence — with  His  Spirit.    (The  Christian  Advocate.) 

Ver.  21.  And  they  went  Into  Capernaum. — Capernaum : — The  Teacher  of  humility 
begins  His  mission  at  a  town  where  pride  chiefly  reigned.  Preference  is  due  from 
ministers  to  the  greatest  need,  not  to  the  greatest  inclination.  A  minister  should 
always  begin  by  instructing,  in  imitation  of  God,  who  leads  men,  not  by  a  blind 
instinct,  but  by  instruction  and  knowledge,  by  the  external  light  of  His  Word,  and 
the  internal  light  of  His  grace.  {Quesnel.)  Capernaum  (the  field  of  repentance, 
or  city  of  comfort)  was  a  beautiful  little  town,  situated  on  tne  western  shore  of  the 
Galilean  Lake,  a  short  distance  from  its  head.  Though  small,  it  was  a  very  busy 
and  thriving  town  ;  the  leading  highway  to  the  sea  from  Damascus  on  the  east  to 
Accho  or  Ptolemais  on  the  Mediterranean  on  the  west,  ran  through  it,  thus  opening 
the  markets  of  the  coast  to  the  rich  yield  of  the  neighbouring  farms,  orchards,  and 
vineyards,  and  the  abundant  returns  of  the  fisheries  of  the  lake.  The  townsfolk, 
as  a  rule,  enjoyed  the  comfort  and  plenty  we  see  in  the  houses  of  Peter  and  Matthew. 
The  houses  were  built  of  black  lava,  though  most  of  them  were  relieved  of  their 
Bombreness  by  being  whitened  with  lime.  The  synagogue,  however,  which  was  the 
principal  architectural  ornament  of  the  town,  and  which  the  centurion  built  and 
presented  to  the  Jews  of  the  place,  was  of  white  limestone,  the  blocks  of  stone  being 
large  and  chiselled,  and  the  cornices,  architraves,  and  friezes  of  which,  as  evidenced 
by  the  ruins,  were  finely  carved.  The  streets  of  the  village  radiated  from  the 
synagogue,  and  stretched  up  the  gentle  slope  behind  it,  the  main  street  running 
north,  to  Chorazin,  a  neighbouring  town  not  far  distant.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.) 
The  synagogue : — The  synagogue  carries  us  back  for  its  origin  to  the  land  of  the 
exile.  Cut  off  from  the  sacrificial  worship  of  the  temple,  devout  Jews  gathered 
together  for  prayer  and  hearing  of  the  law,  and  little  sanctuaries  were  built  for  their 
meetings ;  and  after  the  return  from  captivity,  though  the  statelier  ritual  of  the 
temple  was  restored,  synagogues  in  towns  and  villages  became  an  integral  part  of 
the  ecclesiastical  system.  They  claim  our  interest,  not  only  from  their  association 
with  our  Lord's  preaching  and  miracles,  but  as  well  from  the  fact  that  it  was  from 
•♦the  eighteen  prayers"  which  were  read  therein  daily  except  on  the  Sabbath,  that 
Jesus  drew  the  chief  materials  for  that  which  the  Christian  Church  has  consecrated 
for  daily  use  as  "the  Lord's  Prayer."  Now,  of  all  the  synagogues  in  Palestine, 
perhaps  that  at  Capernaum  is  fullest  of  historic  reference.  Its  erection  at  the  sole 
expense  of  a  large-hearted  Koman  soldier  had  earned  for  him  the  affection  of  the 
inhabitants,  for  when  his  servant  was  sick  they  pleaded  with  Jesus  on  the  grounds 
that  the  petitioner  was  worthy  of  special  consideration,  because  "  beloved  the  people 
and  built  us  the  synagogue."  The  discovery  and  identification  of  its  ruins  in  later 
years  have  awakened  no  little  attention,  and  have  set  at  rest  a  long-standing  dispute 
as  to  the  site  of  Capernaum.  At  Tell  H^m,  on  the  lake,  remains  of  a  synagogue  of 
unusual  size  and  beauty  have  been  excavated,  the  style  of  which  belongs  to  the 
Herodian  period  of  architecture.  It  appears  to  have  been  a  common  custom  to 
carve  over  the  entrance  of  these  buildings  an  emblem,  which,  as  far  as  we  know, 
with  a  single  exception,  was  "  the  seven-branched  candlestick,"  indicating  that  they 
were  designed  mainly  for  illumination  or  teaching.    The  exceptional  instance  is  a 


0HAP.  z.]  ST,  MARK,  Vt 

Tell  n&m.  The  lintel  of  the  chief  doorway  has  a  oanring  in  the  centre,  of  **  the 
pot  of  manna,"  which  is  encircled  with  the  vine  and  clusters  of  grapes.  And  it  ii 
tins  which  enables  us  to  identify  "  Hia  own  city,"  as  well  as  the  building  where  He 
delivered  one  of  His  most  important  discourses.  ...  It  was  in  this  building  that 
our  Lord  spent  the  morning  of  His  first  Sabbath-day  in  Galilee,  and  He  taught  with 
Buch  novel  power  that  the  people  were  filled  with  amazement.  They  had  been  used 
to  the  teaching  of  the  scribes,  with  their  interminable  details  and  pueriUties,  and 
their  slavery  to  traditional  interpretation.  There  was  no  freedom  of  thought  or 
speech,  no  departure  even  by  a  hair's-breadth  from  the  decisions  of  the  doctors, 
nothing  but  the  dry  bones  of  Rabbinical  exposition,  and  we  are  not  surprised  that 
when  Christ  came  and  spoke  with  '•  thoughts  that  breathed  and  words  that  burned," 
and  drew  His  illustrations  from  the  sights  and  sounds  in  which  they  lived  and 
moved,  the  very  freshness  delighted  them,  and  they  exclaimed  at  the  novelty  and 
independence  of  His  teaching.  (H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  Christ  in  the  synagogue 
of  Capernaum : — I.  He  entered  into  the  synagogue  ow  thk  Sabbath-dat.  1.  The 
synagogue — origin  unknown.  There  were  two  divisions,  ten  officers,  &o.  The 
service — prayer,  <fco.  2.  The  Sabbath-day.  Christ  honoured  ordinances.  Sanctioned 
social  worship.  He  is  still  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  Where  will  you  find  Him 
on  the  Sabbath  ?  II.  In  the  synagogue  Chbist  tauoht.  Not  the  first  time.  His 
sermon  not  recorded.  The  Spirit  has  amply  provided  for  our  instruction.  Christ 
still  preaches.  III.  The  effect.  1.  They  were  astonished.  2.  They  were  not 
converted.  8.  Many  wonder,  who  do  not  believe.  IV.  The  chabacteristio  of 
Christ's  teachino  was  authority.  1.  The  scribes  employed  tradition.  2.  Christ 
spoke  assured  and  naked  truth— delivered  a  message  from  God — awakened  the 
testimony  of  conscience.    {Expository  Discourses.) 

Ver.  22.  For  He  taught  them  as  one  that  had  authority.— Conrfcfton  of  Christ's 
authority  through  His  servant's  teaching  : — Francis  Junius  the  younger  was  a  con- 
siderable scholar,  but  by  no  means  prejudiced  in  favour  of  the  Scriptures,  as  appears 
by  his  own  account,  which  is  as  follows  : — *•  My  father,  who  was  frequently  reading 
the  New  Testament,  and  had  long  observed  with  grief  the  progress  I  had  made  in 
infidelity,  had  put  that  book  in  my  way  in  his  library,  in  order  to  attract  my  atten- 
tion, if  it  might  please  God  to  bless  his  design,  though  without  giving  me  the  least 
intimation  of  it.  Here,  therefore,  I  unwittingly  opened  the  New  Testament,  thus 
providentially  laid  before  me.  At  the  very  first  view,  as  I  was  deeply  engaged  in 
other  thoughts,  that  grand  chapter  of  the  evangelist  and  apostle  presented  itself  to 
me  (John  i.) :  *  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,'  &c.  I  read  part  of  the  chapter 
and  was  so  affected  that  I  instantly  became  struck  with  the  divinity  of  the  argu- 
ment, and  the  majesty  and  authority  of  the  composition,  as  infinitely  surpassing 
the  highest  flights  of  human  eloquence.  My  body  shuddered,  my  mind  was  in 
amazement,  and  I  was  so  agitated  the  whole  day  that  I  scarcely  knew  who  I  was. 
Thou  didst  remember  me,  O  Lord  my  God,  according  to  Thy  boundless  mercy,  and 
didst  bring  back  the  lost  sheep  to  Thy  flock.  From  that  day  God  wrought  so 
mightily  in  me  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  that  I  began  to  have  less  relinh  for  all 
other  studies  and  pursuits,  and  bent  myself  with  greater  ardour  and  attention  to 
everything  which  had  a  relation  to  God."  An  earnest  Preacher  and  an  astonished 
congregation  :—-l.  The  babnebt  Preacher.  1.  He  recognized  the  Sabbath  as  the 
time  for  worship.  2.  He  recognized  instruction  as  the  best  method  of  preaching. 
3.  He  discarded  all  formality.  II.  An  astonished  conorboation.  "  Astonished 
at  His  doctrine."  1.  Because  it  was  new  to  them.  2.  Because  they  in- 
stinctively felt  it  to  be  true.  {Joseph  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  authority  of 
Christ : — I.  Let  us  ask  how  Christ's  authority  was  asserted  and  claimed.  1.  By 
the  tone  of  His  teaching.  2.  By  His  ministerial  acts,  e.g.^  the  cleansing  of  the 
temple.  This  assumption  of  rightful  power  led  to  the  inquiry  of  the  chief  priests 
and  elders — *'By  what  authority,"  <feo.  He  was  the  Lord  of  the  temple  because  He 
was  Son  of  God.  3.  By  His  miracles.  '*  With  authority  and  power  commaudeth 
He  the  unclean  spirits,  and  they  obey  Him."  4.  By  the  exercise  of  the  Divine 
prerogative  of  pardoning  sin,  e.g.,  in  the  cure  of  the  paralytic.  H.  Considbb  upon 
what  Christ's  AUTHORrrY  is  based.  Christ's  authority  is  not  based  upon  force,  or 
craft,  or  popular  regard ;  but  upon  right  and  upon  conscience.  When  questioned, 
He  answered  inquiry  by  inquiry,  and  boldly  declared,  "  Neither  tell  I  you  by  what 
authority  I  do  these  things."  1.  His  words  are  authoritative  because  they  are  true. 
9.  His  commands,  because  they  are  righteous.  8.  He  wields  the  personal  authority 
of  peerless  love.    In  all.  His  authority  is  Divine,  as  He  is.    III.  Inquirb  oveb  whom 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

JLND  ovBB  WHAT  Christ's  AUTHORITY  EXTENDS.  1.  Nature  knew  it.  2.  Satan  ooxi^ 
fessed  it.  3.  Angels  recognized  it,  ministered  to  His  wants,  and  stood  ready  to 
rescue  and  to  honour  Him.  4.  Men  felt  it.  IV.  Remark  the  advantaoes  which  follow 
THE  acknowledgment  OF  Christ's  AUTHORITY.  1.  For  the  individual,  the  fulfilment 
of  his  true  being,  the  harmony  of  obedience  with  liberty.  2.  For  the  human  race, 
its  one  only  sure  and  Divine  hope — "In  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow.'* 
V.  Observe  how  Christ's  authority  aitects  all  hearers  op  the  gospel.  The 
message  of  heaven  is,  indeed,  an  invitation  and  a  promise.  But  it  is  also  a  com- 
mand. {J.  R.  Thompson,  M.A.)  The  teaching  of  Christ : — I.  The  suhjects  He 
taught.  1.  He  taught  the  doctrines  of  religion.  2.  He  taught  the  nature  and 
necessity  of  experimental  religion.  3.  He  taught  the  necessity  of  practical  religion. 
He  stated  that  obedience  was  the  only  evidence  of  true  discipleship,  &c.  II.  How 
He  taught  these  things.  1.  With  direct  plainness.  2.  He  was  a  faithful  and 
earnest  teacher  (Matt,  xxiii.).  3.  He  was  an  affectionate  and  tender  teacher.  He 
did  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  &o.  4.  He  was  a  diligent  and  persevering  teacher. 
5.  He  embodied  all  His  instructions  in  His  own  blessed  example.  Application : 
1.  True  Christians  are  Christ's  disciples.  They  hear  Him.  This  is  both  a  duty  and 
a  privilege.  2.  Whosoever  will  not  hear  Him  must  perish — "  How  shall  we 
escape,"  <feo.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Christ  the  model  of  the  Christian  ministry  : — 
I.  His  doctrine.  1.  View  His  doctrine  of  God.  2.  His  doctrine  of  man.  (1) 
Responsibility.  (2)  Man's  corrupt  and  sinful  state.  II.  His  manner  was  in  perfect 
harmony  with  the  matter  of  His  instruction.  1.  The  leading  characteristic  of  our 
Saviour's  manner  as  a  public  teacher  was  earnestness.  2.  The  earnestness  of  Christ 
was  evinced  in  the  simplicity  of  His  teachings.  3.  The  earnestness  of  Jesus  was 
further  evinced  by  the  consistency  of  His  life  with  His  doctrine.  4.  The  earnest- 
ness of  Jesus  was  still  further  manifested  in  the  decision  and  boldness  of  His 
manner.  6.  His  tenderness.  {J.  A,  Copp.)  The  authority  of  our  Lord's  teach- 
ing : — I.  Authority  of  goodness.  Invitations.  Beatitudes.  H.  Authority  of 
GREATNESS.  Claims  universal  audience.  Superiority  to  Jonah,  Solomon,  and  all 
the  great  names  of  the  Jewish  Church.  Teaching  declarative  and  dogmatic.  III. 
Authority  of  solemnity.  His  peculiar  formula.  His  denunciations  of  woe.  IV. 
Legislative  authority.  Revises  the  Mosaic  code.  Asserts  His  superiority  to  law. 
Repeals  existing  economy.  Controls  laws  of  nature  Himself,  and  confers  the  power 
on  others.  '*  I  say  unto  you,"  His  new  commandment.  Not  only  enacts  laws,  but 
ensures  obedience.  Conclusion  :  His  teaching  exempt  from  all  supposable  circum- 
stances unfavourable  to  authoritative  teaching.  Taught  with  the  perfect  conviction  of 
the  truth  of  His  doctrine.  His  example  enforced  it.  Coi  dial  sympathy  with  it.  Knew 
the  ultimate  principles  on  which  His  doctrines  rested.  And  the  supreme  value  of  the 
truth  He  taught.  The  purity  of  His  motives.  The  ultimate  triumph  of  His 
doctrine.  All  this  must  have  clothed  His  teaching,  especially  when  contrasted 
witii  the  prevailing  mode  of  Jewish  instruction,  with  commanding  power.  His 
disciples  should  be  distinguished  by  reverence  and  docility.  These  dispositions  to  be 
sought  and  found  at  the  throne  of  grace.  (J.  Harris,  D.D.)  Christ's  authority 
largely  derived  from  His  moral  atmosphere : — The  weight  and  impressiveness  of  a 
man's  words  largely  depend  upon  his  air,  his  atmosphere,  the  mysterious  efflux, 
exhalation,  aerial  development  of  his  personality',  the  moral  aroma  of  his  character. 
This  subtle  influence  can  only  be  felt,  and  cannot  be  defined.  Enter  the  assembly 
when  young  Summerfield  is  speaking,  and  there  is  upon  you  a  power  which  it  is 
the  highest  luxury  and  dearest  blessing  to  feel.  There  is  incense  here,  and  the 
smell  of  sacrifice.  It  fills  the  entire  space  from  the  rafters  downwards  to  the  floor ; 
nay,  it  pierces  the  walls  and  issues  from  the  doors.  And  what  shall  we  imagine 
concerning  the  atmosphere  of  that  wonderful  Being,  who  spoke  as  never  man 
spake  ?  It  was  not  His  look,  nor  His  declamation,  nor  His  fine  periods ;  it  was 
not  even  His  prodigious  weight  of  matter ;  but  it  was  the  sacred  exhalation  of  His 
quality,  the  aroma,  the  auroral  glory  of  His  person.  This  is  what  invested  Him 
with  unimpeachable  authority,  lent  to  His  words  spirit  and  life,  and  gave  to  His 
doctrine  its  astonishing  power.  He  took  the  human  nature  to  exhale  an  atmo- 
sphere of  God  that  should  fill  and  finally  renew  the  creation,  bathing  all  climes,  and 
times,  and  ages  with  its  dateless,  ineradicable  power.  (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  Minis- 
tertal  authority: — I,  Men  will  teach  well  only  as  they  teach  under  Christ.  II. 
Authority  is  impossible  apart  from  association  with  the  Master.  HI.  Authority 
of  love  must  oomb  from  intensity  of  conviction.  IV.  Hearers  know  the  voicb 
OF  authority.  V.  The  Christian  teachb*  <s  xo  show  his  bufrsmaoy  ovsb  alXi 
OTHER  TEACHERS.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  I.]  ST.  MARK.  39 

Ver.  23. — A  man  with  an  unclean  spirit — Possessed  with  a  devil: — The  devil  ia 
always  endeavouring  to  work  on  us,  and  seizes  every  advantage  offered,  and  works 
through  (1)  a  darkened  mind,  or  (2)  disordered  nerves,  or  (3)  a  depraved  heart.  lu 
all  ages  you  find  him  oppressing  with  his  torture  all  that  are  so  conditioned,  espe- 
cially those  with  disordered  nerves  or  depraved  heart.  The  time  of  Christ  was  an 
age  of  wilduess  and  despair.  Oppression  drove  men  mad.  The  man  in  the  syna- 
gogue may  have  merely  had  disordered  nerves,  and  have  been  simply  a  good  man 
plunged  into  insane  melancholy ;  or  he  may  have  had  a  depraved  heart,  sinking  at 
last  through  remorse  into  despair.  For,  all  badness  tends  to  grow  into  madness. 
Some  sin  lies  at  the  root  of  five-sixths  of  all  our  English  madness.  Falsehood  and 
selfishness  make  men  madly  suspicious;  vice  softens  the  brain;  drunkenness 
especially  sinks  men  into  madness.  "  Whomsoever  we  obey,  his  servants  we  are," 
and  if  we  obey  the  devil  we  soon  give  him  the  upper  hand  over  us.  {R.  Glcver.) 
The  man  with  an  unclean  spirit : — I.  Thb  place  to  which  the  Savioub  game. 
**  And  they  went  into  Capernaum,"  &c.  1.  The  occasion  which  led  Him  hither  was 
strange  and  very  distressing.  In  Nazareth  He  was  in  danger  of  losing  His  life, 
they  •*  led  Him  unto  the  brow  of  the  hill  whereon  their  city  was  built,  that  they 
might  cast  Him  down  headlong,"  &c.  So  He  left  them,  and  directed  His  steps  to- 
wards Capernaum,  where  He  now  appears.  2.  The  object  which  brought  Him  here 
was  one  of  great  interest  and  importance.  He  came  to  Capernaum  to  make  it  His 
future  home.  As  His  headquarters,  during  His  public  ministry,  it  was  peculiarly 
adapted,  affording  facility  of  communication,  as  well  by  land  and  lake,  with  many 
flourishing  towns,  and  of  escape  into  more  secure  regions  in  case  of  threatened 
persecution.  8.  The  character  which  He  assumed  here  was  not  that  of  a  private 
citizen,  but  of  a  public  Teacher.  U.  The  individual  with  whom  oub  Lord  came 
IN  CONTACT.  1.  His  miserable  condition.  2.  The  language  which  this  evil  spirit 
employed.  (1)  His  request.  He  insisted  to  be  let  alone,  but  that  could  not  be. 
(2)  His  inquiries — "What  have  we  to  do  with  Thee?"  As  a  Saviour  they  had 
nothing  to  do  with  Him  ;  they  are  amenable  to  Him  as  their  Judge.  (3)  His  confes- 
sion— "  I  know  Thee  who  Thon  art."  This  unclean  spirit  makes  a  most  accurate, 
explicit,  and  full  confession  ;  it  was  also  full  of  alarm.  III.  The  wonderful  power 
which  Jesus  displayed.  We  have  here  to  consider — 1.  His  authoritative  command 
— "Holdthy  peace,"  (fee.  He  would  not  accept  the  commendation  of  devils.  He 
silenced  them.  2.  The  spirit's  reluctant  submission — "And  when  the  unclean 
spirit  had  torn  him,"  Ac.  In  vain  he  struggled  to  retain  his  hold  of  the  poor  victim. 
IV.  The  effects  which  the  memorable  act  produced.  1.  It  excited  the  greatest 
astonishment.  2.  It  caused  His  fame  to  be  widely  extended.  {Expository  Outlines.) 
The  devil  in  church  : — I.  A  devil  in  chubch.  Synagogue  means  church.  For  the 
time  being  it  was  a  Christian  church,  because  Christ  taught  in  it.  In  it  was  a  devil. 
Devils  are  found  in  strange  places.  In  Paradise.  "  Among  the  sons  of  God  "  (Job  i.). 
Notice  their  infinite  impudence.  Hard  to  say  whether  the  man  took  the  devil,  or 
the  devU  took  him.  Whichever  it  was,  illustrates  his  accommodating  character. 
So  now  a  self-righteous  devil  accompanies  men  to  puff  them  np  with  pride ;  a 
critical  devil  to  quarrel  with  the  doctrine  or  the  preacher.  Jl.  Thb  devil's  creed. 
The  demon  was  orthodox.  No  heresy  in  hell.  What  he  believed  he  publicly  pro- 
fessed. Many  have  a  better  faith  who  are  silent.  His  confession  was  rejected. 
Profession  worthless  without  submission.  Impiety  of  creed  without  conduct.  III. 
The  devil's  pbaier.  It  was  earnest  and  social,  like  that  of  Dives.  Possible  to  pray 
earnestly  and  benevolently  but  in  vain.  It  was  prompted  by  fear  and  by  wicked- 
ness. "  Leave  us  alone  "  to  sin  and  to  torment.  IV.  The  devil's  excommunica- 
tion. In  coming  out  he  "  tore  "  him,  Ac,  just  as  an  evil-disposed  out-going  tenant 
does  as  much  harm  as  possible  in  his  last  opportunity.  What  an  expulsion  I  Public ; 
by  a  word ;  in  vain,  the  devil  did  not  repent.  This  came  of  his  orthodoxy,  for  it 
was  without  fruit ;  and  of  his  prayer,  for  it  was  without  faith.  {A.  J.  Morris.) 
Holiness  is  eminently  characteristic  of  Christ : — 1.  As  He  is  God.  2.  As  through 
a  spotless  incarnation  He  was  the  grand  sacrifice  for  sin.  3.  As  His  own  pure  nature 
was  the  model  to  which  all  that  believe  in  Him  are  to  be  renewed  by  the  transform- 
ing power  of  His  grace.  4.  As  He  was  manifested  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil. 
{R.  Watson.)  Amazed  at  the  miracles  of  Christ : — Don't  be  startled  or  driven  into 
unbelief  by  miracles.  God  is  greater  than  these.  They  are  not  the  wonders,  but 
the  minor  incidents,  an  index  of  what  is  in  God,  and  not  the  full  power  of  God  pu« 
forth.  I  have  seen  a  teacher  of  physics  make  experiments  in  the  lecture-room  on 
the  electric  battery.  He  makes  the  miniature  flashes  crack  off  its  surface.  Verv 
interesting,  very  beautiful,  for  every  tiny  spark  is  the  same  as  the  lightning  flash 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  i. 

which  cleaves  the  clouds  like  the  sword  of  an  archangel.  The  same  f  Yes,  but  a 
very  small  part  of  the  terrific  force  which  awakens  the  echoes  of  heaven,  and  makes 
the  pillars  of  the  earth  tremble.  You  cannot  believe  in  miracles  »  They  are  nothing 
— experiments  in  the  lecture-room.  Lo  I  these  are  parts  of  His  ways ;  but  the 
thunder  of  His  power  who  can  understand.  (T.  Morlais  Jones.)  Christ  easts  out 
a  devil : — I,  Christ's  teaching  was  ENroRCED  by  a  miracle.  1.  Proved  His  com- 
zms3ion  and  His  benevolence  to  man.  2.  Ulustrated  the  objects  of  His  kingdom — 
"  to  destroy,"  &c.  Our  benevolence  should  aim  at  this  object.  3.  The  manner  ol 
the  miracle  showed  that  He  would  not  receive  the  testimony  of  devils,  even  to  the 
truth.  The  devil  is  a  liar — his  testimony  not  needed,  &o.  Let  us  be  as  careful  as 
to  the  means  employed  as  to  the  end.  4.  The  manner  of  the  miracle  shows  thai 
a  speculative  truth  may  be  in  a  devilish  mind.  6.  The  people  were  amazed,  but 
did  not  acknowledge  His  Messiahship.  We  wonder — we  need  not.  Let  us  be  oon^ 
vinced  of  the  need  of  Divine  power  to  enable  us  to  call  Jesus  the  Christ.  II.  Ghbist's 
FAME  SPREAD  ABROAD.  1.  This  resulted  from  His  teaching,  and  still  more  from 
His  miiucles — wonderful,  beneficent.  2.  The  gospel  has  always  united  temporal 
good  with  spiritual  good.  Man  has  sought  to  separate  them — to  take  one  and  reject 
the  other.  3.  The  fame  of  Christ  left  the  Jewish  nation  without  excuse.  {Exposi- 
tory   Discourses.)  The  two    antagonistic  powers  of  the  sanctuary: — I.  There 

is  the  SATANIC  POWBB  in  the  sanctuary.  1.  Satan  is  there  to  interrupt  the  service 
conducted  by  an  earnest  preacher.  2.  To  occasion  distress  to  human  souls.  3. 
He  is  entirely  subject  to  the  power  of  Christ  IL  There  is  the  Chbistlt  powsb 
in  the  sanctuary.  1.  To  instruct  souls.  2.  To  free  souls  from  the  tyranny  of  the 
devil.     {Joseph  S,  Exell,  M.A.) 

Yer.  24.  Let  ns  alone ;  what  have  wa  to  do  with  Thea  7 — The  happinesi  of  heaven 
can  only  be  appreciated  by  the  holy  : — Even  supposing  a  man  of  unholy  Ufe  were 
suffered  to  enter  heaven,  he  would  not  be  happy  there ;  so  that  it  would  be  no  meroy 
to  permit  him  to  enter.  For  heaven,  it  is  plain  from  Scripture,  is  not  a  place  where 
many  different  and  discordant  pursuits  can  be  carried  on  at  once,  as  is  the  case  in 
this  world.  Here  every  man  can  do  his  own  pleasure,  but  there  he  must  do  God's 
pleasure.  It  would  be  presumption  to  attempt  to  determine  the  employments  of 
that  eternal  life  which  good  men  are  to  pass  in  God's  presence,  or  to  deny  that  that 
state  which  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  mind  conceived,  may  comprise  an 
infinite  variety  of  pursuits  and  occupations.  Still,  so  far  we  are  distinctly  told  that 
that  future  life  will  be  spent  in  God's  presence,  in  a  sense  which  does  not  apply 
to  our  present  life ;  so  that  it  may  best  be  described  as  an  endless  and  uninterrupted 
worship.  Heaven,  then,  is  not  Hke  this  world  ;  I  wiU  say  what  it  is  much  more 
like — a  church.  For  in  a  place  of  worship  no  language  of  this  world  is  heard ;  there 
are  no  schemes  brought  forward  for  temporal  objects,  great  or  small ;  no  information 
how  to  strengthen  our  worldly  interests,  extend  our  influence,  or  establish  our  credit. 
These  things,  indeed,  may  be  right  in  their  way,  so  that  we  do  not  set  our  hearts 
upon  them  ;  still,  I  repeat,  it  is  certain  that  we  hear  nothing  of  them  in  a  church. 
Here  we  hear  solely  and  entirely  of  God.  We  praise  Him,  worship  Him,  sing  to 
Him,  thank  Him,  confess  to  Him,  give  ourselves  up  to  Him,  and  ask  His  blessing. 
And,  therefore,  a  church  is  like  heaven ;  viz.,  because  both  in  the  one  and  the 
other  there  is  one  single  sovereign  subject— rehgion — brought  before  us.  Supposing, 
then,  instead  of  it  being  said  that  no  irreligious  man  could  serve  and  attend  on  God 
in  heaven,  we  were  told  that  no  irreligious  man  could  worship  or  spiritually 
see  Him  in  church,  should  we  not  at  once  perceive  the  meaning  of  the  doctrine  ? 
viz.,  that  were  a  man  to  come  hither,  who  had  suffered  his  mind  to  grow  up  in  its 
own  way,  as  nature  or  chance  determined,  without  any  dehberate  habitual  effort 
after  truth  and  purity,  he  would  find  no  real  pleasure  here,  but  would  soon  get 
weary  of  the  place ;  because,  in  this  house  of  God,  he  would  hear  only  of  that  one 
subject  which  he  cared  little  or  nothing  about,  and  nothing  at  all  of  those  things 
which  excited  his  hopes  and  fears,  his  sympathies  and  energies.  If  then  a  man 
without  religion  (supposing  it  possible)  were  admitted  into  heaven,  doubtless  ha 
would  sustain  a  great  disappointment.  Before,  indeed,  he  fancied  that  he  could  be 
happy  there ;  but  when  he  arrived  there,  he  would  find  no  discourse  but  that  which 
he  had  shunned  on  earth,  no  pursuits  but  those  he  had  disliked  or  despised, 
nothing  which  bound  him  to  aught  else  m  the  universe,  and  made  him  feel  at  home, 
nothing  which  he  could  enter  into  and  rest  upon.  He  would  perceive  himself  to  be 
an  isolated  being,  out  away  by  supreme  power  from  those  objects  which  were  still 
entwined  around  his  heart.    Nay,  he  would  be  in  the  presence  of  that  Supreme 


CHAP.  I.]  8T.  MARK.  41 

Power,  whom  he  never  on  earth  could  bring  himself  steadily  to  think  upon,  and  whom 
now  he  regarded  only  as  the  Destroyer  of  all  that  was  precious  and  dear  to  him.  Ah  I 
he  could  not  bear  the  face  of  the  living  God ;  the  Holy  God  would  bene  object  of  joy 
to  him.  •♦  Let  us  alone  1  What  have  we  to  do  with  Thee  ?  "  is  the  sole  thought  and 
desire  of  unclean  souls,  even  while  they  acknowledge  His  Majesty.  None  but  the 
holy  can  look  upon  the  Holy  One ;  without  holiness  no  man  can  endure  to  see  the 
Lord.  {J,  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  The  Holy  One  of  God: — Some  rest  in  praising 
the  sermon  and  speaking  fair  to  the  preacher.  The  devil  here  did  as  rtuch  to 
Christ,  to  be  rid  of  him.  {Trapp.)  Jesus  rebuking  the  unclean  spirit: — ''Is 
Satan  bigger  than  me,  father  7  "  asked  a  child.  "  Yes,"  replied  the  father.  ••  Than 
you  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  Than  Jesus?  "  "  No."  "  Then,"  replied  the  child,  *•  I  don't 
fear   him."      (Anonymous.)  Jesus    not  wanted: — There    are   those  who   are 

possessed  by  the  devil  of  drunkenness,  or  of  lust,  or  of  foul  language,  or  of  dis- 
honesty, and  they  profess  not  to  believe  in  Jesus  and  the  gospel ;  but  it  is  not  they 
do  not  believe,  they  are  afraid  to  believe.  The  man  who  is  killing  himself  by  excess, 
is  told  by  the  doctor  that  he  must  change  his  life,  or  die.  He  laughs  at  the  advice, 
and  declares  that  he  does  not  believe  it.  But  he  does  believe  it,  only  he  is  afraid  to 
think  of  it.  So  it  is  with  many  who  are  styled  unbelievers.  I  have  heard  of  a  man 
who  said  to  God's  priest  who  visited  him — *•  We  don't  want  God  in  this  house." 
There  are  many  such  houses,  places  of  business  and  private  homes,  where,  if  people 
Bpoke  all  their  mind,  they  would  say,  ''Let  us  alone;  what  have  we  to  do  with 
Thee,  Thou  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ?  We  don't  want  God  in  this  house."  It  is  an  awful 
thought,  my  brothers,  that  sometimes  God  takes  ns  at  our  word.  It  is  written, 
"Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  idols,  let  him  alone."  Alas  for  those  who  find  in  the 
hour  of  sickness,  and  of  sorrow,  and  of  death,  that  God  ha<«  left  them  alone  I  I 
wonder  how  many  times  that  man  in  the  Gospel  had  attended  the  services  of  the 
synagogue  before  the  day  when  Jesus  healed  him.  Probably  he  was  a  regular  wor- 
i^pper  there,  but  he  brought  his  unclean  spirit  with  him.  That  is  just  what  so 
many  people  do  now.  They  come  to  the  church,  or  attend  their  meeting-house,  and 
go  through  the  outward  forms  of  religion,  but  the  unclean  spirit  goes  with  them. 
Satan  has  shut  the  door  of  their  heart,  and  no  holy  word,  no  pare  thought,  no 
tender  feeling  of  remorse  and  penitence  can  enter  in.  This  is  why  so  many  of  our 
religious  Bervices  bear  no  fruit.     (H.  J,  Wilmot  Buwton,  M.A.) 

Vers.  29-31.  But  Simon's  wife's  mother  lay  sick  of  a  fe^er.— 5{mon*«  vife: — 
The  Lord  chose  as  the  first  of  His  apostles  a  married  man,  and  after  his  election  to 
follow  the  Lord  he  did  not  separate  from  his  wife,  but  the  Lord  honours  the  family 
by  sometimes  dwelling  in  their  house.  St.  Paul  implies  (1  Cor.  ix.  6)  that  at 
times,  at  least,  she  accompanied  St.  Peter  in  his  journeys.  It  appears  from  a  very 
touching  account  given  by  Clement  of  Alexandria,  that  they  were  living  together 
when  she  was  called  to  martyrdom.  "  They  say,  accordingly,  that  Peter,  on  seeing 
his  wife  led  to  death,  rejoiced  on  account  of  her  call  and  conveyance  home,  and 
called  very  encouragingly  and  comfortingly,  addressing  her  by  name,  *  Remember 
thou  the  Lord.*  Such  was  the  marriage  of  the  blessed,  and  their  perfect  disposi- 
tion towards  those  dearest  to  them."  (M.  F.  Sadler.)  Miracles  are  instructive 
emblems  of  Scriptural  truth : — Spiritual  truth,  to  be  clearly  discerned,  often  needs 
to  be  embodied  in  the  more  significant  language  of  action.  Christ's  miracles  are 
like  mirrors — bringing  within  easy  view  objects  hard  to  see  or  quite  out  of  sight. 
The  famous  picture  of  Aurora  by  Guido  adorns  the  ceiling  of  one  of  the  palaces  of 
Rome.  The  discomfort  attending  the  effort  to  look  up,  for  the  length  of  time 
required  to  study  its  beauty,  is  so  great,  that  one  could  not  adequately  estimate  its 
merit  if  there  were  no  other  way  of  viewing  it.  But  a  mirror,  set  up  in  the  room  so 
as  to  reflect  the  picture,  permits  the  beholder  to  view  it  at  his  leisure  with  perfect 
ease.  So  the  great  miracle  of  the  renewing  of  the  soul  is  above  our  inspection,  but 
in  the  mirror-miracles  of  Jesus  we  have  reflections,  helping  us  to  the  better  under- 
standing of  that  spiritual  work.  Thus  we  may  gain  more  good  from  them,  than  was 
imparted  to  those  for  whose  special  benefit  they  were  originally  wronght.  {A.  H. 
Currier.)  The  Great  Physician's  skill : — We  have — I.  A  scene  of  domestic  trouble. 
1.  Trouble  is  -v  idespread  and  manifold.  2.  Earthly  kinships  are  sources  both  of  joy 
and  grief.  3.  Domestic  trouble  should  not  detain  us  from  God's  house.  II.  An 
APPLICATION  FOB  BELIEF— '-*  Auou  they  tell  Him  of  her."  1.  It  was  intercessory 
prayer.  2.  We  admire  the  simplicity  of  their  request.  8.  Nor  should  we  over- 
look their  promptness  of  suit.  III.  Gbaciods  iNTEBPOsrrioN.  1.  Here  is  a  nearer 
approach.    Though  Christ  has  come  near  to  us  He  can  come  nearer  yet.    2.  Jesuf 


43  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Christ  does  not  refrain  from  personal  contact.  3.  Christ's  gracious  touch  elevates 
prostrate  humanity — "He  lifted  her  up."  IV.  Grateful  recompense — "She 
ministered  unto  them."  1.  The  recipient  of  Christ's  grace  exhibits  gratitude  in  a 
practical  form.  2.  Unconsciously  she  performed  good  service  for  others.  3.  Jesus 
Christ  stoops  to  accept  service  from  all.  V.  Christ's  healing  virtue  brings  to 
LIGHT  society's  MANIFOLD  SORES.  1.  The  life  of  mcu  is  also  their  light.  Jesus 
revealed  to  men,  and  to  society,  their  needs.  Probably  no  one  knew  that  there  was 
a  demoniac  in  the  synagogue,  until  Jesus  began  to  teach.  Men  hide  their  deeper 
needs  even  from  themselves,  until  the  Healer  comes.  2.  Men's  minds  naturally 
reason  from  the  special  to  the  general.  3.  We  must  observe  how  tolerant  Christ  is 
of  human  prejudices  and  traditional  habits.  The  inhabitants  of  Capernaum  would 
not  bring  their  sick  until  the  sun  had  set,  i.«.,  until  the  Sabbath  had  closed. 
Towards  human  ignorance  He  is  inexpressibly  pitiful.  4.  The  rewards  of  faithful 
service  are  larger  service  yet.  Jesus  had  blessed  a  man,  a  family  ;  now  He  is  re- 
quired to  bless  a  city.  So  shall  it  be  in  heaven.  Fidelity  shall  be  honoured  by 
more  responsible  service — "  Be  thou  ruler  over  ten  cities."      VI.  The  manifold 

NEEDS  of  man  DISCLOSE  THE  HIDDEN  GLORY  OF  ChRIST.      VIL    ChRIST  IS  THE   HOPE  OF 

HUMANITY,  BUT  THE  TERROR  OF  DEMONS.  *'  The  wholo  city  was  gathered  to  Him  at 
the  door."  Men  are  more  conscious  of  bodily  evils,  than  of  soul  malady.  But  the 
goodness  that  attracts  men,  repels  demons.  (D.  Davies,  M.A.)  Jems  a» 
Healer : — ^Note — I.  The  variety  of  the  cases  of  healing.  Fever.  Divers  diseases,  de- 
moniacal possession.  Leprosy.  Christ  had  no  specialty ;  His  resources  were  varied ; 
He  can  touch  aU  classes  of  human  need.  II.  How  healing  was  effected  by  per- 
sonal contact — *•  Took  her  by  the  hand."  **  Put  forth  His  hand  and  touched  him. " 
III.  How  RAPIDLY  THE  PATIENTS  WERE  HEALED — "immediately."  Ordinarily  healing 
travels  slowly ;  here  as  if  by  lightning.  So  in  matters  spiritual.  IV.  How  manifest 
WAS  THE  BEALiTY  OF  THE  HEALING.  Petcr's  mother-in-law  "  ministered."  Work  of 
Christ  in  man  always  seen  in  its  effects.  Saul  (Gal.  i  23).  {H.  Thome.)  A 
domestic  drama : — I.  What  the  friends  of  the  sick  woman  did.  1.  They  told  Jesus 
of  her.  Worth  while  to  be  sick  to  be  brought  to  Him.  2.  Anon  they  told  Him  of 
her,  i.e.,  at  once.  3.  They  told  Him  of  her.  Often  what  is  everybody's  business  is 
nobody's.  4.  They  told  Biim  of  her.  Prayer  is  teUing  Jesus.  II.  What  Jesus  did. 
1.  He  came :  at  once,  but  not  always  at  once,  for  good  reasons .  2.  He  took  her  by 
the  hand.  Without  ceremony :  familiarly.  3.  He  lifted  her  up.  Gospel  always 
raises.  4.  He  healed  her  immediately.  Pardon  instantly  ours  when  we  grasp 
Christ's  hand.  HI.  What  the  restored  woman  did.  Ministered.  We  are  saved 
to  work :  by  precept  and  example.     (J.  S.  Swan.)        The  religious  wes  of  time : — 

I.  Social  service  (ver.  31).  II.  Public  ministry  (vers.  32-34).  III.  Private  devotion 
(ver.  35).  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christ's  public  and  private  ministry : — Jesus  had  a 
public  ministry  in  the  synagogue ;  a  private  ministry  in  the  domestic  circle.  L 
The  individual  case  as  well  as  that  of  the  multitudes  should  receive  atten- 
tion.   II.  Bodily  diseases  as  well  as  spiritual  ailments  are  within  the  sphere 

OF  OUB  SOLICITUDE.      III.  We  ABE  TO  PUT  OURSELVES  IN  PERSONAL  CONTACT  WITH  THE 

BUFFERING.     We  Can  do  little  by  proxy.     IV.  We  should  never  leave  a  house 

WITHOUT   LEAVING  A  BLESSING   BEHIND.      V.    OUR  VISITS,  LIKE   THE   MaSTEB'S,  SHOULD 

NOT  BE  MERE  VISITS  OF  COURTESY.  {Ibid.^  Simou's  toife's  mother  : — If  Peter  was 
the  first  Pope,  he  set  them  an  example  m  this  respect  which  all  the  popes  and  all 
the  clergy  would  have  been  wise  to  follow.  Nature  never  injures  grace.  It  is  not 
desirable  to  be  without  parents  in  our  youth,  or  without  wife  or  husband  in  our 
mature  life.  The  love  of  another  heart  is  not  only  a  quiet  resting-place,  but  a  great 
aid  to  goodness ;  and  he  who  loves  well  wife  or  child  will  love  God  better  for  doing 
BO.  (R.  Olover.)  Simon'i  wife's  mother: — I.  Let  us  ascertain  what  it  teaches 
CONCERNING  THIS  NOTED  APOSTLE,  SiMON  Pbtbb.  "  Marriage  is  honourable  in  all," 
**  Let  every  man  have  his  own  wife,  and  let  every  woman  have  her  own  husband." 

II.  What  do  we  know  of  this  woman  who  was  cured  ?  But  there  is  something  to 
be  said  concerning  the  wife  herself,  and  this  is  of  special  importance.  There  is 
reason  to  believe  that  she  remained  a  most  faithful  companion  and  fellow-worker 
with  Peter,  whom  Paul  always  calls  "  Cephas,"  down  to  the  end  of  her  life.  For 
in  one  of  Paul's  epistles  an  allusion  is  made  to  her :  he  says,  •*  Have  we  not  power 
to  lead  about  a  sister,  a  wife,  as  well  as  other  apostles,  and  as  the  brethren  of  the 
Lord,  and  Cephas  ? "  This  was  written  more  than  twenty  years  after  Christ's 
resurrection,  when  Peter  was  an  old  man.  As  a  comment  upon  the  verse,  Clement 
of  Alexandria  adds :  '♦  Peter  and  Philip  had  children,  and  both  took  about  their 
wives,  in  order  that  they  might  act  as  their  assistants  in  ministering  to  women  at 


CHAP.  I.]  ST,  MARK, 


their  own  homes ;  by  their  means  tbe  doctrine  of  th-  Lord  penetrated  without 
scandal  into  the  privacy  of  the  women's  apartments."  III.  What  do  we  know 
ABOUT  THE  OTHER  MEMBERS  OF  THIS  apostle's  FAMILY  ?  There  is  a  beautiful  little 
legend,  altogether  uninspired,  which  is  founr]  in  the  history  of  sacred  and  legendary 
art ;  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  its  being  true,  and  it  is  certainly  worth  telling. 
Tbe  story  relates  that  Peter  had  a  lovely  daughter,  born  in  lawful  wedlock,  who 
accompanied  him  in  his  journey  from  the  East.  At  Rome  she  fell  sick  of  a  griev- 
ous infirmity  which  deprived  her  of  the  use  of  her  limbs.  One  of  Simon's  disciplea 
sitting  at  meat  with  him  said  :  "  Master,  how  is  it  that  thou,  who  healest  the  in- 
firmities of  others,  dost  not  heal  thy  daughter  Petronilla  ?  "  *•  It  is  good  for  her  to 
remain  sick,"  replied  her  father,  perhaps  thinking  of  the  profitable  discipline  which 
the  pain  might  bring  to  her.  But  that  they  all  might  see  the  power  that  was  in  the 
word  of  God,  he  commanded  her  to  get  up  and  serve  them  at  table — which  she  did. 
Then  afterwards,  praying  fervently,  the  maiden  was  permanently  healed.  IV.  It 
is  refreshing  to  turn  from  the  mere  poetry  of  a  legend  to  the  serene  majesty  of 
nisTORY.  And  now  there  is  a  lesson  in  almost  every  particular.  1.  Was  this 
woman  sick  of  a  great  fever  ?  Then  we  see  how  Christ  is  the  only  help,  but  always 
the  sure  help,  in  desperate  cases.  He  is  able  to  save  bodies  and  souls  "  to  the 
uttermost."  2.  Did  the  disciples  go  and  tell  Jesus  of  her  ?  Then  we  may  note  the 
advantage  of  faith  in  the  Divine  and  sovereign  Saviour.  "  None  but  Jesus  can  do 
helpless  sinners  good."  S.  Are  we  told  that  those  home-friends  besought  the  Lord 
in  her  behalf  ?  Then  we  learn  how  necessary  is  fervent  prayer.  "  For  all  these 
things  will  I  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel."  4.  Did  our  Saviour  touch  this 
woman's  hand,  and  touch  it  only,  for  her  cure  ?  Then  observe  how  delicate  is  the 
ministration  of  Divine  grace  in  the  gospel,  and  let  us  be  gentle  with  souls.  5.  Was  it 
the  interposition  of  other  people  which  availed  to  bring  this  aick  creature  to  health  ? 
Then  how  fine  is  the  office  of  human  means  and  instruments  with  God.  There  is 
really  a  glorious  share  in  the  work  of  saving  souls  which  He  permits.  6.  Do  we 
notice  that  this  woman  was  also  lifted  up  by  Jesus  f  The  miracle  is  a  parable  ; 
God  never  lays  a  commandment  on  any  soul  which  He  does  not  aid  that  soul  in 
performing  for  Him.  7.  Did  the  cured  woman  rise  at  once  to  begin  her  grateful 
service  ?  It  is  by  that  we  know  her  healing  was  perfectly  done.  The  good  Lord 
never  leaves  body  or  soul  half- delivered  from  ill.  8.  Was  Simon's  wife's  mother 
satisfied  to  minister  to  Jesus  Christ  right  off  and  right  there  ?  Then  think  how 
much  valuable  time  some  impatient  people  waste  in  trying  to  find  a  field  of  work 
for  Christ,  when  most  likely  the  best  task  lies  nearest  at  hand.  This  woman  entered 
'*  the  ministry  "  just  as  truly  as  Simon  Peter  did  :  he  preached,  and  she  served  ; 
that  was  ministry.  9.  Were  these  wonderful  privileges  misused  and  perverted  by 
Capernaum  ?  Then  let  all  the  world  know  and  remember  that  it  is  pre-eminently 
a  dangerous  thing  to  do,  this  disregard  of  the  merciful  manifestations  of  the  Divine 
presence  among  men.  {G.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Peter's  mother-in-law  cured: — 
I.  The  sufferer.  II.  Her  complaint.  III.  Her  cure.  1.  That  there  was  no 
parade.  2.  There  was  no  delay.  3.  There  was  no  ground  for  doubting  its  reality. 
{Expository  Outlines.)  The  best  house  visitation  : — I.  How  grace  came  to  Peter's 
house.  II.  What  it  did  in  Peter's  house.  III.  How  it  flowed  forth  from  Peter's 
house.  {G.  U.  Spurgeon.)  Wherever  Christ  comes,  He  comes  to  do  good,  and 
will  be  sure  to  pay  richly  for  His  entertainment.  (M.  Henry.)  Domestic  afflic- 
tion healed  by  Ghrist : — I.  The  scene  of  this  domestic  affliction.  1.  The  home  of 
a  disciple.  2.  The  house  visited  by  Christ.  II.  The  healing  of  this  domestic 
affliction.  I.  It  was  done  tenderly.  2.  It  was  done  immediately.  3.  It  was  done 
easily.  4.  It  was  done  effectually.  III.  The  healing  was  followed  by  ministka- 
TiON.  1.  It  was  prompted  by  the  glad  impulse  of  her  new  strength.  2.  It  was 
obligated  by  a  remembrance  of  her  Benefactor.  3.  It  was  required  by  her  relatives. 
4,  It  was  not  avoided  by  unreal  excuses.  Lessons:  1.  Cultivate  in  your  homes 
the  feeling  of  discipleship  toward  Christ.  2.  Seek  Christ  as  a  constant  Visitor  to  your 
home.  S.  Tell  Christ  of  all  your  domestic  sorrows.  4.  Let  His  healing  touch  be 
immediately  followed  by  your  active  ministration.  {Joseph  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Mutual  benefits : — The  afflicted  should  receive  sympathy  and  succour,  and  return 
kindness  and  help.  {J.  H.  Godioin.)  Instant  healing  from  Ghrist : — By  Hia 
touch  He  restored  her  immediately  to  health  and  strength.  This  no  human 
physician  could  have  done.  After  a  fever  a  long  convalescence  ensues  before  health 
returns.  But  in  the  case  of  Christ's  miracles,  it  was  with  diseases  as  with  the  sea. 
After  a  storm  there  is  a  swell,  before  the  sea  sinks  into  a  calm.  But  Christ  reduced 
the  fury  of  the  sea  by  a  word  to  perfect  calm,  as  He  did  the  rage  of  the  fever  to 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  i. 

perfect  health.  She  arose  and  was  ministering  to  Him,  thus  proving  the  cure  and 
her  own  love  to  its  Author.      (Bishop  Chris.    Wordsworth.)  The  ministry  of 

women : — Became  a  servant  to  them.  Her  work  was  common  women's  work  which 
had  simply  to  do  with  the  physical  wants  of  Christ  and  His  disciples.  There  are 
a  few  women  who  are  called  by  God  to  work  publicly  for  Him :  bat  for  the  most 
part  the  ministry  of  women  lies  in  another  direction.  We  are  not  to  be  so  much 
like  Miriam  and  Deborah  as  like  Buth  and  Hannah.  If  we  cannot  preach  we  can 
work  for  the  poor  as  Dorcas  did  ;  we  may  lend  our  rooms  for  Bible  readings  and 
prayer  meetings,  as  did  Mary  the  mother  of  Mark ;  and  like  the  elect  lady  we  may 
bring  up  our  children  to  work  in  the  truth.  We  can  minister  to  the  disciples  who 
are  in  our  house  ;  to  ignorant  servants ;  to  the  sick,  and  old,  and  lonely  ;  to  thos6 
who  have  few  friends  and  whom  other  workers  overlook.  Whatever  we  are  we  may 
do  something  for  Christ.  Some  can  speak  for  Him,  more  can  sing  for  Him,  and 
more  still  can  smile  for  Him.  Willing  hands  will  not  remain  long  idle  if  wedded 
to  thoughtful  hearts  and  observant  eyes.    {MariauTie  Famingham.) 

Vers.  32-34.  And  at  even  when  the  son  did  set — In  ministering  to  the  eiek,  tog 
follow  and  find  Christ : — I.  Describe  the  scene  at  Capernaum  to  which  text  alludes. 
Presence  of  Christ  among  sick.  Wonderful  change  His  visit  wrought.  What 
happy  hearts  and  homes ;  what  prayers  and  praises  ;  what  jubilant  psalms.  II.  If 
we  be  true  Christians,  we  believe  we  shall  see  that  same  Jesus  coming  forth  to 
reward  those  who  have  done  works  of  mercy  in  His  name.  Such  works  are  the  only 
proof  of  our  possessing  that  charity  which  is  the  development  and  excellence  of 
faith  and  hope.  Such  works  are  within  the  reach  of  all.  III.  Of  such  works  none 
can  be  more  merciful  than  the  visitation  of  the  sick.  Let  ns  all  do  our  best  to 
prevent  disease.  Better  to  keep  sickness  away  than  to  repair  its  ravages.  IV.  Help 
those  who  help  themselves,  by  providing  against  the  time  of  sickness — life  assurance 
societies,  benefit  clubs,  &o.  V.  And  those  who  cannot  help  themselves.  The  parish 
doctor  should  have  less  work  and  more  pay.  VI.  Do  we  honour  the  physician  f 
VU.  And  those  who  nurse  and  wait  upon  the  sick  ?  VIII.  Do  we  ourselves  visit 
the  sick  f  So  finding  Jesus,  so  taught  to  suffer  and  to  die.  IX.  Appeal  in  His 
name  and  in  His  words,  (Canon  S.  R,  Hole,  M.A.)  Hospital  healing  : — When 
one  of  the  greatest  of  God's  heroes,  one  of  the  most  illustrious  saints  of  Christen* 
dom,  made  an  oration— preached,  as  we  should  say,  a  funeral  sermon — concerning 
a  brother,  holy  and  heroic,  whose  soul  was  in  Paradise — when  Gregory  of  Nazianzum 
would  show  unto  the  people  how,  though  Basil  rested  from  his  labours,  his  works 
did  follow,  and  he  being  dead  yet  spoke — he  pointed  towards  the  hospital  which 
Basil  had  built,  and  said,  *'  Go  forth  a  little  out  of  the  city,  and  see  the  new  city, 
his  treasure  of  godliness,  the  storehouse  of  alms  which  he  collected ;  see  the  place 
where  disease  is  relieved  by  charity  and  by  skill,  where  the  poor  leper  finds  at  last 
a  home  1  It  was  Basil  who  persuaded  men  to  care  for  others ;  it  was  Basil  who 
taught  them  thus  to  honour  Christ."  (Ibid.)  Power  to  heal: — I.  Its  desion  two- 
fold. 1.  To  do  good.  2.  To  prove  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  (John  xiv.  11).  II. 
Its  EFFECT  twofold.  1.  It  awakcncd  general  interest  in  Him.  2.  It  led  many  to 
believe  on  Him.  III.  Its  all-compbehensiveness.  1.  Over  material  nature — e.g., 
walking  on  the  water,  curing  diseases,  &o.  2.  Over  spiritual  nature— «.j7.,  expelling 
lemons,  &o.  IV.  Its  lessons  for  ns.  We  should  learn  from  the  miracle-working 
power  of  Jesus  (1)  His  real  and  personal  interest  in  us.  (2)  That  nothing  can 
baffle  His  skill  or  resist  His  power  if  we  put  our  case  in  His  hands.  (D.  C, 
Hughes,  M.A.)  Christ  the  restorer  of  humanity  : — If  we  may  reverently  compare 
this  scene  with  its  modem  analogies,  it  bears  less  a  resemblance  to  anything  tha^ 
occurs  in  the  life  of  a  clergyman,  than  to  the  occupation  of  a  physician  to  a  hos- 
pital on  the  day  of  his  seeing  his  out-patients.  There  is,  indeed,  all  the  difference 
in  the  world  between  the  best  professional  advice  and  the  summary  cure  such  as 
was  our  Lord's.  But  we  are,  for  the  moment,  looking  at  the  outward  aspects  of  the 
scene ;  and  it  shows  very  vividly  how  largely  Christ's  attention  was  directed  to  the 
well-being  of  the  bodily  frame  of  man.  Now  it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  sup- 
pose that  this  feature  of  our  Saviour's  ministry  was  accidental  or  inevitable. 
Nothing  in  His  work  was  accidental :  all  was  deliberate,  all  had  an  object.  Nothing 
in  His  work  was  inevitable,  except  so  far  as  it  was  freely  dictated  by  His  wisdom 
and  His  mercy.  To  suppose  that  this  union  in  Him  of  Prophet  and  Physician  was 
determined  by  the  necessity  of  some  rode  civilization,  such  as  that  of  certain  tribes 
in  Central  Africa  and  elsewhere,  or  certain  periods  and  places  in  medieeval  Europe 
when  knowledge  was  iBcantj,  when  it  was  easy  and  needful  for  a  single  person  at 


X.]  ST.  MARK.  46 

each  social  centre  to  master  all  that  was  known  on  two  or  three  great  Bubjeota — this 
is  to  make  a  supposition  which  does  not  apply  to  Palestine  at  the  time  of  oar  Lord's 
appearance.  The  later  prophets  were  prophets  and  nothing  more — ^neither  legis- 
lators, nor  statesmen,  nor  physicians.  In  John  the  Baptist  we  see  no  traces  of  the 
restorative  power  exerted  on  some  rare  occasions  by  Elijah  and  Elisha  ;  and  when 
our  Lord  appeared,  dispensing  on  every  side  oures  for  bodily  disease,  the  sight  was 
just  as  novel  to  His  contemporaries  as  it  was  welcome.  Nor  are  His  healing  works 
to  be  accounted  for  by  saying  that  they  were  only  designed  to  draw  attention  to  His 
message,  by  certificating  His  authority  to  deliver  it ;  or  by  saying  that  they  were 
only  symbols  of  a  higher  work  which  He  had  more  at  heart  in  its  many  and  vary- 
ing aspects — the  work  of  healing  the  diseases  of  the  human  soul.  True  it  is  that 
His  healing  activity  had  this  double  value :  it  was  evidence  of  His  authority  as  a 
Divine  Teacher ;  it  was  a  picture  in  detail,  addressed  to  sense,  of  what,  as  the 
Restorer  of  our  race,  He  meant  to  do  in  regions  altogether  beyond  the  sphere  of 
flense.  But  these  aspects  of  His  care  for  the  human  body  were  not,  I  repeat, 
primary ;  they  were  strictly  incidental.  We  may  infer  with  reverence  and  with 
certainty  that  His  first  object  was  to  show  Himself  as  the  Deliverer  and  Restorer 
of  human  nature  as  a  whole  :  not  of  the  reason  and  conscience  merely  without  the 
imagination  and  the  affections — not  of  the  spiritual  side  of  men's  nature,  without 
the  bodily ;  and,  therefore,  He  was  not  merely  Teacher,  but  also  Physician,  and 
therefore  and  thus  He  has  shed  upon  the  medical  profession  to  the  end  of  time  a 
radiance  and  a  consecration  which  is  ultimately  due  to  the  conditions  of  that 
redemptive  work,  to  achieve  which  He  came  down  from  heaven  teaching  and 
healing.  {Canon  Liddon.)  A  great  Jwspital  Sunday  near  a  great  city : — I.  This 
is  the  story  of  a  wondebpul  Sabbath— a  true  Sunday—-"  One  of  the  days  of  the 
Son  of  Man. "  H.  What  a  picture  it  gives  us  of  His  powbr  as  the  Healeb.  And 
do  not  these  healing  powers  exerted  by  Christ  declare  that  there  is  a  spiritual  order 
in  the  universe  outside  of  the  natural  order,  and  beneath  whose  powers  all  the 
natural  disorder  will  be  at  last  reduced  to  subjection.  These  miracles  are  illustra- 
tions of  the  character  and  intention  of  God  loving  us.    HI.  This  is  the  doctrine  ; 

BUT  WHAT  IB   ANY  DOOTBINB   WITHOUT  AN  APPLICATION  ?      What  is  the  USO  Of  faith  in 

Christ  without  appropriation  ?  Jesus  has  not  come  into  the  world  to  condemn,  but 
to  heal  and  save  it.  His  love  is  universal.  Fly  to  the  healing  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ. 
{E.  Paxton  Hood.)  The  house  of  mercy  : — Once  it  was  given  to  me  to  see  the 
soul  of  man  as  a  poor  creature  out  at  night  in  a  wild  storm  and  hurricane,  flying 
through  the  tempest  over  a  wild  moor  houseless ;  the  wild  lightnings  blazed  across 
the  heath,  and  revealed  one  house,  and  thither  fled  the  soul.  "  Who  lives  here  ?  " 
••  Justice."  •♦  Oh,  Justice,  let  me  in,  for  the  storm  is  very  dreadful."  But  Justice 
said,  *•  Nay,  I  cannot  shelter  thee,  for  I  kindled  the  lightnings  and  the  hurricanes 
from  whence  you  are  flying."  And  I  saw  the  poor  spirit  hastening  over  the  plain, 
and  the  storm-flash  lit  up  another  house,  and  thither  fled  the  soul.  *•  Who  lives 
here  ?  '  "  Truth."  ••  Oh,  Truth,  shelter  me."  "  Nay,"  said  the  white-robed 
woman.  Truth's  handmaid,  "  Hast  thou  loved  Truth  so  much  and  been  so  faithful 
to  her  that  thou  canst  fly  to  her  for  shelter?  Not  so ;  there  is  no  shelter  here." 
And  away  in  weariness  sped  the  soul  through  that  wild  night.  Still  through  tiie 
gleams  of  the  blue  heavens  looked  out  a  third  house  through  the  drenching  storm. 
"And  who  lives  here?"  said  the  lost  soul.  "Peace."  "  Oh,  peace,  let  me  inl  " 
"  Nay,  nay ;  none  enter  the  house  of  Peace  but  those  whose  hearts  are  Peace."  And 
then  near  to  the  house  of  Peace  rose  another  house,  white  and  beautiful  through 
the  livid  light.  "Who  lives  here?"  "Mercy.  Fly  thither,  poor  soul.  I  have 
been  sitting  up  for  thee,  and  this  house  was  built  for  thy  shelter  and  thy  home." 
I  read  and  hear  such  lessons  as  I  watch  Christ  moving  through  the  sick  multitude 
that  Sabbath  evening  in  that  old  city.  (Ibid.)  Christ*s  miracles : — These  may 
be  divided  into  distinct  classes.  I.  Miracles  of  bestobation.  Raising  up  the 
afflicted  from  a  helpless,  incapable  state,  to  a  condition  of  self-help  and  usefulness. 
This  Christ's  grace  is  continually  doing.  Sin  works  evil  results  on  man's  nature 
similar  to,  and  worse  than,  those  wrought  by  fever,  paralysis,  or  impotency,  making 
men  vicious,  shiftless,  indolent,  useless.  The  gospel  brings  back  our  fallen  nature 
to  its  proper  dignity  and  worth.  H.  Miracles  dbliverino  fbom  bvil  spibits.  Do 
we  not  Bometimes  feel,  even  the  best  of  us,  as  demoniacs  act?  The  power  of  Christ 
can  cure  us.  HL  Miracles  of  cleansino.  Sin  defiles  the  purity  of  the  soul,  and, 
•o  far  as  this  defilement  is  felt  and  perceived,  it  separates  the  sinner  from  others. 
He  feels  tbat  a  gulf  divides  him  from  the  pure  and  good ;  his  conscience  often  drives 
him  into  voluntary  solitude ;  and  if  his  sin  is  particularly  gross  and  shameful,  the 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  i. 

Bentiment  of  society  sends  him  into  banishment.  The  seeds  of  evil  which  produce 
this  defilement  are  hid  in  every  soul.  They  are  the  source  of  evil  thoughts  and 
base  suggestions  which  we  are  glad  are  not  visible  to  all.  Who  could  bare  to  expose 
his  secret  thoughts  to  the  gaze  of  the  world?  Who  has  not  need  to  pray,  "  Make 
and  keep  me  pure  within  ?  "  Christ's  grace  is  able  to  do  this.  He  cleanses  from 
the  foulest  leprosy  of  sin.     {A,  H.  Currier.)  There  is  in  man  something  akin  to 

the  diabolical : — He  is  subject  to  violent  and  wasting  passions,  often  dominated  by 
a  fierce  and  ungovernable  temper ;  exhibits,  upon  slight  provocation,  anger,  im- 
patience, hatred,  revenge;  is  ill-natured,  moody,  capricious,  sullen  ;  ready  at  times 
to  take  up  arms  against  all  the  world,  and  shunned  and  detested  in  turn  for  his 
spirit  of  malicious  mischief.  We  have  all  seen  pronounced  examples  of  this  sort — 
probably  have  suffered  from  their  malice  and  ill-temper.  They  may  be  persons  of 
great  energy  and  ability.  They  are  not  indolent  or  shiftless.  They  know  how  to 
make  money,  and  how  to  nse  it  for  their  own  advantage.  They  are  keen,  shrewd, 
and  successful  in  business.  Sometimes  they  bestow  magnificent  gifts — exhibit 
strange  freaks  of  generosity  ;  but  of  true  kindness  and  amiability,  or  the  disposition 
to  make  others  happy,  they  have  but  little.  They  seem,  in  short,  to  be  possessed  by 
a  devil.  The  fanlt  may  be  often  due  to  inherited  qualities,  or  to  neglect  of  early 
training.  They  were  not  disciplined  to  self-control.  One  of  the  princes  of  the  old 
French  monarchy  manifested  in  childhood  and  youth  an  unhappy  disposition  of 
this  kind.  But  he  was  placed  under  the  care  of  a  wise  and  pious  teacher,  who 
laboured  so  snccessfully  to  correct  his  violent  temper,  that  he  became  one  of  the 
most  amiable  of  men.  A  painstaking  Christian  mother  often  amends  the  faults  of 
nature.  {Ibid.)  Sun-set : — 1.  The  natural  sun  set,  but  the  Sun  of  Bighteous- 
ness  arose  with  healing  in  His  wings.  Evening  and  morning  Christ  was  at  work. 
S.  Men  oome  to  Christ  according  to  the  urgency  of  their  want.  Here  it  was  phy- 
sical. It  is  well  if  men  can  feel  their  need  of  Christ  at  any  point.  3.  When  men 
begin  with  their  lower  wants  they  should  ascend  to  the  higher.  {J,  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  attraction  of  Jesus : — Leaving  the  Paris  exhibition  as  the  sun  went  down, 
I  noted  an  electno  light  that,  revolving  round  and  round,  shot  its  ethereal  pencilled 
rays  far  across  the  sky,  touching  with  a  momentary  radiance  the  vegetation  or  the 
buildings  across  which  they  passed ;  and  looking  up  I  noted  innumerable  sparks 
wavering,  Tibrating  in  the  illumination.  For  a  moment  I  could  not  think  what 
this  meant,  for  there  is  scarcely  any  scintillation,  and  certainly  no  sparks,  thrown  off 
from  the  electric  light.  Then  in  an  instant  it  occurred  to  me  that  these  bright 
lights  were  myriads  of  insects  attracted  from  the  dark  ocean  of  air  around,  and 
which,  protected  from  the  burning  luminary  by  the  strong  glass,  were  safely 
rejoicing  in  the  ecstasy  of  those  beams.  So  here,  around  the  beams  of  spiritual 
light  and  love  that  radiate  from  the  Saviour,  the  i»numerable  hosts  of  suffering, 
struggling  men  and  women  of  that  day  come  within  the  field  of  our  vision.  (.7^, 
Allanson  Picton,  M.A.)  Diverse  elements  in  humanity  dealt  with  by  Christianity : — 
A  wild,  strange  flame  rages  in  human  nature,  that  in  combinations  of  great 
feeling  and  war  and  woe,  is  surpassed  by  no  tragedy  or  epic,  nor  by  all  tragedies 
and  epics  together.  In  the  soul's  secret  chambers  there  are  Fansts  more  subtle 
than  Faust,  Hamlets  more  mysterious  than  Hamlet,  Lears  more  distracted  and 
desolate  than  Lear ;  wills  that  do  what  they  allow  not,  and  what  they  would  not,  do ; 
wars  in  the  members ;  bodies  of  death  to  be  carried,  as  in  Paul ;  wild  horses  of  the 
mind,  governed  by  no  rein,  as  in  Plato;  subtleties  of  cunning,  plausibilities  of 
seeming  virtues,  memories  writ  in  letters  of  fire,  great  thoughts  heaving  under  thb 
brimstone  marl  of  revenges ;  pains  of  wrong,  and  of  sympathy  with  suflfering  wrong; 
aspirations  that  have  lost  courage ;  hates,  loves,  beautiful  dreams  and  tears ;  aU 
these  acting  at  cross  purposes,  and  representing  the  broken  order  of  the  mind.  If 
some  qualified  teacher  by  many  years  of  study  could  worm  out  a  thoroughly  per- 
eeptive  interpretation  of  sin,  or  lecture  on  the  working  or  pathology  of  mind  under 
evil,  he  would  offer  a  contribution  to  the  true  success  of  Christian  preaching, 
greater  than,  perhaps,  any  human  teacher  has  ever  yet  contributed.  {H.  Bush, 
nell,  D.D.)  Miracles  at  Capernaum : — I.  Christ  hbalino.  "And  at  even,  when 
the  sun  did  set,"  <fec.  1.  The  season  was  interesting.  It  was  on  a  Sabbath  even- 
ing.  2.  The  ailments  of  the  sufferers  were  various.  8.  The  excitement  produced 
•  /as  great.  4.  The  number  of  those  who  were  cured  was  considerable.  II.  Chbist 
/BATiMa.  1.  When  He  prayed.  2.  Where  He  prayed.  III.  Chbist  pbeachino. 
1.  The  importance  He  attached  to  it — "  For  therefore  came  I  forth."  2.  The  places 
in  which  He  exercised  His  ministry — '•  Throughout  all  Galilee."  3.  The  encouraging 
indications  which  appeared — "All  men  seek  for  Thee."    {Expository  Outlines.) 


CHAP.  I.]  ST.  MARK, 


Ver.  85.  And  In  tbe  morning,  rising:  np  a  great  while  before  day.— If  we  would 
jpray  well,  we  must  pray  early : — Christians  have  often  to  choose  between  the 
mdulgence  of  a  little  more  sleep  and  the  time  of  prayer  cnt  short,  and  scant  and 
harried  devotion,  or  between  a  little  self-denial  in  sleep  and  the  freshest  and  best 
hours  of  the  day  given  to  God,  and  God  blessing  the  self-denial  by  answering  the 
prayer.  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  Convenience  made  for  private  prayer : — Ghrist  had  no 
conveniences  for  securing  quiet,  but  He  made  them.  The  hill-top  was  His  chamber, 
and  darkness  His  bolted  door.  He  had  no  time  for  prayer,  but  He  made  time, 
rising  *•  a  great  while  before  day."  Say  not  yon  have  no  time  or  secret  place  for 
prayer.  Where  there  is  a  will  there  is  a  way  to  get  both  these  things.  {R,  Glover,) 
Jesus  in  tecret  prayer : — L  Thb  beabino  of  this  vaot  on  Himself.  1.  It  proves 
the  reality  of  His  human  nature.  2.  It  proves  that  as  man  He  was  subject  to  the 
same  limitations  and  moral  conditions  as  we  are.  8.  It  proves  that  even  sinless 
beings,  when  tried,  need  Divine  help.  II.  Trat  bbabino  of  this  fact  oh  ub.  1.  If 
Jesus  prayed,  it  is  neither  unscientific  nor  unbecoming  in  ns  to  pray.  2.  If  Jesus 
prayed,  no  disciple  can  become  so  strong  or  holy  as  to  be  beyond  the  need  of 
praying.  8.  Prayer  has  positive  power  with  God,  and  is  more  than  a  subjective 
influence.  4.  If  Jesus  prayed,  all  ought  and  need  to  pray.  5.  Having  the  name 
of  Jesus  to  plead,  every  one  may  be  assured  of  being  heard  and  answered.  (D.  C. 
HugheSf  M.A.)  Christ  praying: — ^What  an  example  of  swift,  unselfish  activity. 
The  Saviour  cannot  forego  prayer,  it  is  too  important  and  necessary ;  but  He  will 
not  let  it  interfere  with  His  activity  in  behalf  of  others.  Keep  this  in  mind  when 
tempted  to  neglect  prayer  because  time  so  much  taken  up  with  work.    I.  Only 

BY  COMBINING   PBAYEB  AND  WOBE  WILL  WOBE   BE   PBBVENTED   FBOM   INJUBINQ  VS.      1. 

Even  spiritual  work  may  not  always  be  beneficial ;  for  it  may  draw  as  away  from 
the  cultivation  of  our  own  personal  religious  life;  or  foster  within  us  the  spirit  of 
self-elation ;  or  beget  within  ns  a  feeling  of  despondency.  2.  Secular  work,  it  is 
easy  to  see,  is  likely  to  affect  ns  injuriously.  The  wear  and  tear  of  the  spirit,  in 
the  midst  of  the  rush  and  roar  of  the  world's  business  for  six  days  in  the  week, 
will  seriously  unfit  a  man  for  spiritual  exercises  on  the  seventh.  Transition  from 
one  order  of  occupation  to  the  other  will  require  an  effort  he  will  be  too  languid  to 
put  forth.  No  remedy  but  frequent  intercourse  with  God  in  the  midst  of  toil.  II. 
Only  thus  will  wobe  bring  tbue  blessing.  Prayer  brings  the  Divine  blessing 
down.  Even  Christ  sought  it  thus.  Do  all  work  for  CK)d,  and  seek  to  have  God 
with  you  in  it  all.  III.  Only  thus  will  wobe  become  a  nELiGHx  to  us.  This  is 
an  important  consideration,  since  with  most  of  ns  life  is  filled  with  work.  Would 
we  not  have  it  a  refreshment  rather  than  a  burden  ?  The  most  cheerful,  patient, 
and  heroic  toilers  are  those  who  are  most  constant  in  prayer.  Only  so  can  we  do 
our  work  as  it  ought  to  be  done,  and  get  from  it  all  the  good  it  is  intended  to  yield. 
{B.  Wilkinson,)  True  prayer  difficult ; — Christ  was  careful  to  use  the  best  out- 
ward helps  and  furtherances  to  prayer,  such  as  the  opportunity  of  the  morning  and 
the  privacy  of  the  place.  Whence  we  may  gather,  that  to  pray  aright  is  a  diScult 
work,  and  not  easy  to  perform.  If  it  were  an  easy  matter,  what  need  for  such 
helps  f  Ohrist,  indeed,  had  no  need  of  such  helps  for  Himself :  yet  He  used  them 
for  our  instruction,  to  show  us  what  need  we  have  of  them,  and  how  hard  a  thing 
it  is  to  pray  well.  1,  We  have  no  ability  of  ourselves  by  nature  to  perform  this 
duty  (Bom.  viiL  26).  2.  There  are  many  things  to  hinder  us  in  the  duty ;  especially 
Satan  labouring  continually  to  stir  up  hindrances  and  disturbances ;  also  our  own 
corrupt  hearts,  which  are  apt  to  be  taken  up  at  times  of  prayer  with  swarms  of  idle 
and  wandering  thoughts.  3.  It  is  a  duty  of  great  exceUenoe  and  profit,  much  and 
often  commended  in  Scripture :  no  wonder,  therefore,  if  it  be  difficult,  for  so  are  all 
excellent  and  precious  duties.  4.  Prayer  is  a  holy  conference  with  God ;  and  it  is 
hard  to  speak  to  God  as  we  ought.  Learn  from  all  this  the  ignorance  of  those  who 
think  it  so  easy  a  matter  to  pray.  Because  they  think  it  easy  they  go  about  it 
without  preparation,  without  watchfulness  over  their  hearts,  and  without  using 
any  helps  to  further  them  in  the  duty  ;  and  the  consequence  is  that  they  pray  in  a 
very  slight,  perfunctory  manner.  If  they  repeat  the  bare  words  of  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  or  some  other  prayer  (though  without  all  understanding  and  feeling),  they 
think  this  is  enough.  Indeed,  this  is  an  easy  kind  of  praying,  or  rather  saying  of 
a  prayer ;  for  it  is  not  rightly  called  praying,  when  only  the  words  of  a  prayer  are 
rehearsed.  Such  as  know  what  it  is  to  pray  aright  acknowledge  it  to  be  a  difficult 
work.  Let  ns  be  more  diligent  and  frequent  in  the  exercise  of  it,  that  it  may  become 
more  easy  to  us.  {O.  Fetter.)  Early  morning  communion  with  God : — Colonel 
Gardiner  used  constantly  to  rise  at  four  in  the  morning,  and  to  spend  his  time  <1U 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

six  in  the  secret  exercises  of  the  closet,  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer ;  in  -which  last 
he  acquired  such  a  fervency  of  spirit  as,  says  his  biographer,  "I  believe  few  men 
living  ever  attained.  This  certainly  very  much  contribated  to  strengthen  that  firm 
faith  in  God,  and  reverent,  animating  sense  of  His  presence,  for  which  He  was  to 
eminently  remarkable,  and  which  carried  him  through  the  trials  and  services  of  life 
with  such  steadiness  and  with  such  activity ;  for  he  indeed  endured  and  acted  as  if 
always  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible.  If  at  any  time  he  was  obliged  to  go  out  before  six 
in  the  morning,  he  rose  proportionally  sooner ;  so  that,  when  a  journey  or  a  march 
has  required  him  to  be  on  horseback  by  four,  he  would  be  at  his  devotions  by  two." 
The  pray  en  of  Christ : — Eighteen  times  our  Lord's  own  prayers  are  alluded  to  or 
quoted ;  but  those  passages  give  us  only  four  aspects  of  His  prayers.  I.  His  habit 
of  prayer.  In  five  passages  (Mark  i.  35 ;  Luke  vi.  12,  v.  16 ;  Matt.  xiv.  23  ;  Mark 
vi.  46)  we  have  our  Lord  withdrawing  for  prolonged  private  prayer;  at  a  time 
when  involved  in  the  whirl  of  public  work ;  before  appointing  Ilis  apostles  and 
establishing  His  kingdom.  In  a  sixth  passage  (Luke  xi.  1)  this  habit  so  impressed 
the  disciples  that  they  asked  Him  to  teach  them  how  to  pray.  II.  His  thankful- 
NESS  in  prayer.  In  five  more  passages,  three  (Matt.  xi.  25  ;  John  xi.  41 ;  Luke  x.  21) 
quote  an  ejaculation  of  gratitude.  The  others  (Luke  iii.  21,  ix.  28)  are  on  the 
occasions  of  His  baptism  and  transfiguration ;  the  one  initiating  Him  into  His 
mission  of  teaching,  the  other  into  His  mission  of  suffering.  IH.  His  intercession 
in  prayer.  1.  For  His  friends  (Luke  xxii.  32).  2.  For  His  enemies  (Luke  xxiii,  34). 
3.  For  Himself  and  His  disciplec  as  one  with  Him  (John  xvii.)  IV.  His  obediencb 
in  prayer  (Matt.  xxvi.  39 ;  Mark  xv.  34 ;  Luke  xxii.  42 ;  John  xii.  27).  We  may 
draw  from  these  prayers — 1.  An  argument  in  favour  of  our  Lord's  divinity.  There 
is  no  confession  of  sin.  He  prays  for,  never  with.  His  disciples.  2.  We  may  see 
an  example  for  ourselves  in  (1)  His  belief  in  the  habit  of  prayer ;  (2)  the  reverent 
limit  He  assigned  to  prayer — *♦  Not  My|will,"  &o. ;  (3^  His  practice  of  private  super- 
added to  public  prayer ;  (4)  His  joyful  continuance  in  prayer.  {Prof.  A.  S.  Farrar.) 
Prayer: — I.  Lonely.  II.  Pbeparatort.  HI.  Selp-denyino.  IV.  Leisurely.  V. 
Lingering.  VI.  Blisbtol.  (Vr''.  H.  Jellie.)  Secret  prayer: — I.  That  the  Saviour, 
though  perfectly  holy,  regarded  the  duty  of  secret  prayer  as  of  great  importance. 
II.  That  He  sought  a  solitary  place  for  it — far  away  from  the  world,  and  even  His 
disciples,  m.  That  it  was  early  in  the  morning — the  first  thing  after  rising — 
always  the  best  time,  and  a  time  when  it  should  not  be  omitted.  IV.  If  Jesus 
prayed,  how  much  more  important  is  it  for  us.  If  He  did  it  in  the  morning,  how 
much  more  important  is  it  for  tw,  before  the  world  gets  possession  of  our  thoughts ; 
before  Satan  fills  us  with  unholy  feelings  ;  when  we  rise  fresh  from  beds  of  repose, 
and  while  the  world  around  us  is  still  1  David  thus  prayed  (Psa.  v.  3).  He  that 
wishes  to  enjoy  religion  will  seek  a  place  of  secret  prayer  in  the  morning.  If  that  is 
omitted  all  will  go  wrong — our  piety  will  wither,  the  world  will  fill  our  thoughts, 
temptations  will  be  strong,  and  through  the  day  we  shall  find  it  impossible  to  raise 
our  feelings  to  a  state  of  proper  devotion.  The  religious  enjoyment  through  the 
day  will  be  according  to  the  state  of  the  heart  in  the  morning ;  and  can,  therefore, 
be  measured  by  our  faithfulness  in  early,  secret  prayer.  How  different  the  conduct 
of  the  Saviour  from  those  who  spend  the  precious  hours  of  the  morning  in 
sleep  1  He  knew  the  value  of  the  morning  hours,  &c.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  The 
devotions  of  Christ : — I.  The  fact  op  His  praying.  It  is  a  wonderful  fact  that  one 
like  Him  should  pray  at  all.  But  it  may  be  explained.  1.  He  prayed  as  a  Man. 
2.  He  prayed  as  Mediator.  3.  He  prayed  as  an  Example.  11.  The  circumstances 
OF  His  praying.  1.  Early.  ••  His  morning  smiles  bless  all  the  day."  2.  Frequent. 
8.  Long.  Much  of  the  heart  may  be  thrown  into  a  short  prayer.  (Various.) 
The  prayers  of  Jesus: — I.  The  mystery  of  the  prayers  of  Jesus.  If  Jesus  is  God, 
how  could  He  pray  to  God  ?  How  were  there  any  needs  in  His  nature  on  behalf  of 
which  He  could  pray  ?  A  partial  answer  is  found  in  the  truth  that  all  prayers  do 
not  spring  from  a  sense  of  need.  The  highest  form  of  prayer  is  conversation  with 
God — the  familiar  talk  of  a  child  with  his  Father.  Augustine's  ♦•  Confessions  '*  is 
an  example  of  this.  But  the  only  adequate  explanation  is  Christ's  humanity  ;  He 
was  wholly  man.  Human  nature  in  Him  was  a  tender  thing,  and  had  to  fall  back 
on  the  strength  of  prayer.  II.  His  habits  of  prayer.  He  went  into  the  solitudes 
of  nature.  There  is  a  solitude  of  time  as  well  as  of  ppace.  It  might  be  an  enriching 
discovery  to  find  out  the  solitudes  in  our  neighbourhood :  silent,  soothing  influence 
of  nature.  Christ  prayed  in  company  as  well  as  in  secret.  III.  The  occasions  on 
which  Hb  prayed.  1.  He  prayed  before  taking  an  important  step  in  life,  as  when 
Ha  ohose  which  men  to  be  with  Him.    2.  He  prayed  when  His  life  was  specially 


OHJLP.  X.]  ST,  MARK,  49 

busy ;  when  He  could  not  find  time  to  eat  He  found  time  to  pray.  We  make  that 
an  excuse  for  not  praying.  Christ  made  it  a  reason  for  praying.  3.  He  prayed 
before  entering  temptation.  4.  He  died  praying.  IV.  The  answer  to  His  prayers. 
1.  The  Transfiguration  was  an  answer  to  prayer — "As  He  prayed,"  &o.  2.  His 
baptism  was  an  answer  to  prayer.  Are  you  a  man  of  prayer?  (eT^.  Stalker^  M.A.) 
Je$us  rising  early  for  secret  prayer: — I.  How  diligent  the  Saviour  was  In  the 
improvement  of  His  time.  II.  That  no  crowd  of  company  or  calls  of  business 
could  divert  Jesus  from  His  daily,  stated  devotions.  III.  What  care  our  Lord  took 
to  find  a  place  of  solitude  for  His  prayers,  that  He  might  neither  meet  with 
disturbance,  nor  seem  ostentatious.  1.  One  reason  why  we  should  retire  to  a  secret 
place  for  sohtary  prayer  is,  that  we  may  avoid  the  appearance  of  ostentation.  2. 
That  we  may  be  undisturbed.  8.  That  our  minds  may  enjoy  greater  freedom  in 
communion  with  God.  {J,  Lathrop,  D.D.)  Jesus  in  prayer: — I.  As  simple 
INTEBCOUBSE  WITH  GoD.  II.  View  it  in  relation  to  His  work.  So  do  we  need 
constant  prayer  in  the  midst  of  our  work.  1.  For  calm  and  holy  review.  2.  For 
direction — asking  wisdom  of  God,  just  as  a  mariner  consults  his  compass.  3.  For 
qualifications — mental,  moral,  and  even  physical.  4.  For  success.  God  giveth  the 
increase.  6.  For  freedom  from  perverting  influences.  Our  motives  are  apt  to  get 
entangled  and  our  aims  confused.  In  prosperity  we  are  in  danger  of  waxing 
egotistic,  vain,  and  proud.  See  it  in  many  a  successful  business  man,  and  in  many 
B  popular  minister.  In  adversity  we  are  tempted  to  despond.  {The  Congregational 
Pulpit.)  Secret  devotion : — I.  To  explain  an  exercise  of  secret  devotion.  It 
is  little  we  know  of  the  private  life  of  Christ.  In  silence  there  is  much  instruction. 
He  was  often  in  private  retirement  (Luke  vi.  12 ;  Luke  xxi.  37 ;  Luke  xxii.  39 ; 
John  vi.  15).  1.  The  occasion  on  which  our  Lord  betakes  Himself  to  this  exercise 
of  secret  devotion.  You  observe  the  connection — after  a  day  of  laborious  occupa- 
tion in  the  public  exercises  of  religion,  He  sought  an  opportunity  for  secret 
devotion  :  the  one  no  excuse  for  the  neglect  of  the  other.  In  the  public  exercises 
of  religion  we  most  need  the  private  exercises  of  devotion.  There  are  reasons  for 
this.  It  is  in  private  that  the  impressions  of  the  public  ordinances  must  be 
maintained  on  the  mind.  It  prevents  relapse.  Besides,  this  is  a  time  of  peculiar 
temptation.  If  a  Christian  in  his  public  exercises  had  attained  to  high  enjoyment, 
every  stratagem  will  be  used  by  Satan  to  rob  him  of  his  treasure.  Besides,  it  ii 
necessary  to  follow  our  public  services  with  secret  exercises,  that  we  may  bring  the 
former  to  the  test.  In  public  we  are  apt  to  be  excited,  but  feelings  that  are  excited 
may  be  deceitful ;  and  every  wise  man  will  test  these  feelings  in  the  presence  of  God 
alone.  2.  The  next  circumstance  in  this  exercise  that  attracts  our  attention  is  the 
time  that  our  Lord  was  pleased  to  choose  for  it — "  In  the  morning."  His  self- 
denial.  The  morning  is  favourable  to  devotion,  our  minds  are  not  yet  disturbed  by 
the  cares  of  the  day.  What  anxiety  to  give  God  the  best  of  His  services.  3.  The 
place  He  sought  for  it.  The  works  of  the  Divine  hand  are  aids  to  devotion.  4. 
The  exercise  itself — "  He  prayed."  Christ  as  man  needed  to  pray.  We  can 
conceive  of  Adam  in  innocence  praying  ;  but  our  Lord  needed  prayer,  as  being  the 
subject  of  sinless  inflrmity ;  but  above  all  as  Mediator.  Suggest  a  few  aids  to 
secret  devotion — (1)  Self-examination ;  (2)  meditation ;  (3)  a  determination  of 
future  obedience.  Christ  came  out  of  His  solitude  with  pu^oses  to  do  the  will  of 
His  heavenly  Father.  II.  I  am  to  enforce  the  duty  of  secret  devotion  by  a 
CONSIDERATION  OF  ITS  BENEFITS.  1.  It  has  a  tendency  to  produce  godliness. 
Because  it  brings  us  into  contact  with  God.  It  produces  simplicity,  and  godly 
sincerity,  and  gentleness.  2.  Secret  devotion  is  most  favourable  to  the  comfort  of 
the  mind.  Devotion  soothes  the  mind ;  it  elevates  the  mind.  It  imparts  joy  in 
religion.  3.  Secret  devotion  is  most  favourable  to  usefulness.  The  secret  of 
usefulness  among  men  is  a  spirit  of  piety  toward  God.  {J.  Morgan.)  Secret 
prayer  aids  social  usefulness : — In  the  very  manner  in  which  he  speaks  to  every  one 
he  meets,  in  the  very  way  he  discharges  every  duty  to  which  he  is  called,  his  spirit 
is  as  it  ought  to  be,  and  therefore  the  man  is  walking  up  and  down  in  society, 
scattering  blessings  "on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left."  On  the  other  hand, 
suppose  him  to  have  neglected  the  exercises  of  secret  devotion,  he  comes  out  into 
society  with  a  ruffled  temper,  with  a  dissatisfied  spirit,  finding  fault  with  every 
body,  with  every  thing,  dissatisfied  with  all,  because  dissatisfied  with  himself, 
neglecting  opportunities,  doing  nothing  as  it  ought  to  be  done,  losing  the  oppor- 
tunity that  God  in  His  providence  gives  him.  Again,  look  at  the  spirit  in  which 
such  a  man  conducts  himself  towards  others.  The  spirit  of  the  man  of  God  is  a 
spirit  of  humility.     Think  of  the  language  of  the  126th  Psahn,  **  He  that  goetb 

4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

forth  and  weepeth,  bearing  precious  seed,  shall  doubtless  come  again  with  rejoicing, 
bringing  his  sheaves  with  him  " — the  man  that  goes  forth  in  genuine  humility  and 
true  modesty,  and  attempts  his  work,  not  in  the  spirit  of  intrusion  or  interference, 
but  simply  in  the  strength  of  God,  is  the  man  who  in  the  end  will  be  successful.  It 
is  not  only  the  spirit  which  he  cherishes  towards  man,  but  that  which  he  cherishes 
towards  God,  that  insures  success.  Towards  man,  his  spirit  is  modest  and  humble, 
towards  God  it  is  the  spirit  of  dependence.  And  then  you  observe  in  him  great 
steadfastness.  He  has  been  with  God  in  the  morning  in  the  exercise  of  secret 
devotion,  and  therefore  though  he  may  meet  with  difficulty  during  the  day,  he  is 
not  to  be  stumbled  by  it ;  it  may  retard  him,  it  may  distress  him,  but  he  knows  too 
well  what  he  was  to  expect,  to  be  overcome;  he  acts  on  that  principle  assured  of  its 
justice,  *'  therefore  be  ye  steadfast,  unmoveable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of 
the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  you  know  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  * 
{Ibid.)  Early  risers : — Dr.  Doddridge  tells  us  that  to  his  habit  of  early  rising 
the  world  is  indebted  for  nearly  the  whole  of  his  valuable  works.  The  well-known 
Bishop  Burnett  was  an  habitual  early  riser,  for  when  at  college  his  father  aroused 
him  to  his  studies  every  morning  at  four  o'clock ;  and  he  continued  the  practice 
during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  Sir  Thomas  More  also  made  it  his  invariable 
practice  to  rise  always  at  four,  and  if  we  turn  our  attention  to  royalty,  we  have, 
among  others,  the  example  of  Peter  the  Great,  who,  whether  at  work  in  the  docks 
at  London  as  a  ship  carpenter,  or  at  the  anvil  as  a  blacksmith,  or  on  the  throne  of 
Eussia,  always  rose  before  daylight.  Finding  a  place  to  pray  : — Dr.  Milne, 
afterwards  the  famous  missionary  in  China,  when  a  youth,  after  leaving  home,  was 
situated  in  an  ungodly  family.  So  he  used  to  retire  to  a  sheepcot,  where  the  sheep 
were  kept  in  winter,  and  there,  surrounded  by  the  sheep,  he  knelt  on  a  piece  of  turf 
which  he  kept  and  carried  with  him  for  the  purpose,  spending  many  an  hour  there, 
even  in  the  cold  of  winter,  in  sweet  communion  with  his  God.  (ATwn.)  Rising 
early  : — ^It  is  a  little  difficult,  especially  when  the  mornings  are  dark  and  cold,  to 
get  up  sufficiently  early  to  have  profitable  communion  with  God.  Ask  God  for 
getting-np  grace.  A  friend  told  us  a  few  days  since  that  she  traced  much  failure  in 
her  religious  life  to  late  rising,  but  God  had  given  her  victory  over  the  old  habit  of 
lying  in  bed  until  the  last  minute.  If  Jesus  Christ  found  it  necessary  to  rise  "  a 
great  while  before  day,"  and  depart  "  into  a  solitary  place  "  to  pray,  we  have  need 
to  be  with  God  before  the  work  of  the  day  begins.  Ward  Beecher  says :  "  Let  the 
day  have  a  blessed  baptism  by  giving  your  first  waking  thoughts  to  God.  The  first 
hour  of  the  morning  is  the  rudder  of  the  day."  Private  devotion: — I.  That 
private  prayer  SHouiiD  bb  enjoyes  im  the  eably  uobnino.  1.  Because  it  insures 
time  for  the  performance  of  prayer.  2.  Because  it  is  the  time  when  the  soul  is 
most  free  from  care  and  anxiety.  3.  Because  the  world  is  silent — favourable  to 
the  voice  of  prayer.  4.  Because  it  is  favourable  to  unostentation.  6.  Because  it 
is  a  good  husbanding  of  time.  II.  That  private  prayer  should  be  pebformed  by  the 
BUSIEST  LITE.  1.  The  neglect  of  private  devotion  by  a  busy  life  is  injudicious.  2. 
The  neglect  of  private  devotion  by  a  busy  life  is  inexcusable.  III.  I^vate  prayer 
■BonZiD  NOT  BB  INTERRUPTED  BY  POPULARITY.  IV.  Private  prayer  will  aid  and 
INSPIRE  IN  THE  CONTINUED  MINISTRY  OF  LIFE.  **  And  He  said  uuto  them.  Let  as  go 
unto  the  next  towns,  that  I  may  preach  there  also  "  (ver.  38).  1.  Thus  private 
prayer  stimulates  to  continued  activity  in  life.  2.  Private  prayer  enables  a  man 
to  awaken  the  moral  activity  of  others.  V.  Private  prayer  leads  to  a  high  appbb- 
oiATioN  or  THE  TRUE  MISSION  OF  LIFE.  Lcssous :  1.  That  early  morning  is  a  good 
time  for  prayer.  2.  That  solitude  is  favourable  to  devotion.  3.  That  the  best  men 
need  private  prayer.  4.  That  the  most  busy  men  have  no  excuse  for  the  neglect  of 
private  devotion.  6.  That  secret  prayer  is  the  strength  of  all  moral  life  and 
activity.  {J,  S,  Exell,  M.A.)  Early  morning  prayer : — The  most  orient  pearls 
are  generated  of  the  morning  dew.  Abraham  and  Job  both  rose  early  to  offer 
sacrifice.  The  Persian  magi  sang  hymns  to  their  gods  at  break  of  day,  and 
worshipped  the  rising  sun.  (Trapp.)  The  early  morning  a  friend  to  the  graces : — 
It  has  been  eaid,  The  morning  is  •  friend  to  the  muses,  and  it  is  no  less  so  to  the 
graoea.    (M.  Henry,) 

Vers.  86-39.  And  wben  they  had  found  Him. — The  desire  of  humanity  for 
Christ : — While  rejoicing  in  Divine  solitude,  the  loneliness  in  which  He  leit  the 
suffering,  toiling  people  was  indescribably  painful  to  them.  A  man  born  blind  does 
not  realize  his  deprivation,  but  if  there  is  given  him  a  brief  vision  of  daylight  how 
■nntterable  his  sense  of  loss  when  it  fades  away  again.    So  these  people  felt  them< 


CHAP,  u]  ST.  MARK.  $1 

3elve8  deprived  of  the  fresh  interest  and  hopes  with  which  they  had  been  inspired 
when  they  lost  the  society  and  communion  of  Jesus.  But  the  question  was  asked  by 
all  lips :  *'  Where  is  He  ?  "  And  most  true  is  it  to-day — be  man's  opinions  what  they 
may — there  is  no  more  universal  experience  of  human  kind,  whether  gentle  or  simple, 
scientific  or  ignorant,  barbarian  or  bond  or  free,  than  the  hunger  for  that  fulness 
of  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  {J.  A.  Picton,  M.A.)  An  unconscious  prophecy  : — 
What  the  disciples  said  in  their  wondering  delight,  shall  one  day  be  literally  true — 
all  men  will  be  in  search  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  In  the  first  instance  the 
Saviour  sought  all  men,  and  in  the  second  all  men  will  seek  the  Saviour.  "  We 
love  £Qm  because  He  first  loved  us."  (J.  Parker^  D.D.)  Christ  the  centre  of 
union  for  all  men  : — ••  All  men  seek  for  Thee."  Yes,  they  are  tired  of  their  sectarian 
wranglings ;  they  are  wearied  out  with  their  ineffectual  metaphysical  analysis;  they 
are  sick  of  the  poor  results  yielded  up  by  material  research  ;  they  have  lost  confi- 
dence in  their  own  self-will ;  they  prize  no  longer  their  self-conceit  ;  they  long  to 
be  brothers  in  the  embrace  of  one  common  Father,  and  none  can  bring  them  to- 
gether but  Christ.  "All  men  seek  for  thee."  Even  so,  come.  Lord  Jesus.  {J.  A.  Picton, 
M.A.)  The  reason  for  ChrisVs  apparently   unreasonable  departures : —Re  had 

spoken  to  the  people  because  He  desired  them  to  know  ;  and  again,  He  will  retire 
from  them,  and  have  His  heart  set  on  their  well-being  as  He  retires.  When  you 
and  I  have  heard  the  sermon,  what  remains  for  us  to  do  ?  Is  it  to  hear  more,  or 
to  think  about  what  we  have  heard  ?  You  can  learn  by  hearing,  but  yoa  can  be 
confused  by  hearing  too  much  ;  one  sermon  may  obliterate  the  effect  of  the  other. 
So  Christ  left  the  people  to  whom  He  had  been  so  acceptable,  that  in  the  quietude 
of  their  homes  they  might  thhik  of  that  which  they  had  both  heard  and  seen. 
{J.  Ogmore  Dairies.)  Christian  evangelization : — I.  That  this  Christian  evange- 
lization was  preceded  by  private  devotion.  II.  That  this  Christian  evangelization 
was  accompanied  by  an  earnest  preaching  of  the  truth.  III.  That  this  Christian 
evangelization  made  use  of  the  already  existing  agencies  of  the  Church.  IV.  That 
this  Christian  evangelization  was  just  in  its  conception  of  work,  in  that  it  cast  the 
devil  ont  of  men.  Lessons :  1.  That  evangelistic  work  requires  and  is  worthy 
of  the  best  talent  that  can  be  obtained.  2.  That  evangelistic  work  is  ennobling  to 
those  who  engage  in  it,  as  well  as  to  those  who  are  contemplated  by  it.  3.  That 
evangelistic  work  has  done  much  to  cast  the  devil  out  of  the  masses  of  our  large 
towns.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Christ,  a  home  missionary  : — ^From  these  words  I 
commend  to  your  notice — I.  The  besemblance  between  youb  own  laboubs,  and 

THE  PEBSONAL  MINI8TBT  OP  TOUB  LOBD  AND  SaVIOUB,  AS   PEBFOBMBD  IN  THE   FIELD   OW 

Home  Missions.  1.  In  the  scene  of  your  labours.  The  title  of  missionary  denotes 
one  sent  forth,  and  especially  belongs  to  one  whose  errand  is  to  propagate  religion. 
Christ  was  sent  from  God — "  The  great  Apostle  of  our  profession  "  (Heb.  iii.  1). 
To  bring  the  glad  message  to  our  earth  from  the  far  heavens,  He  emptied  Himself 
of  glory,  Ac.  It  was  to  an  alien  race  that  He  ministered.  His  personal  ministry 
was  far  more  limited  and  national  in  its  character  than  was  His  message.  What- 
ever His  intent,  in  narrowing  the  field  of  His  toils  as  a  preacher,  the  fact  is  evident 
that  to  the  land  of  Canaan,  or  the  bounds  of  His  native  country.  His  ministerial 
labours  were  confined,  and  Jesus  Christ,  while  upon  earth,  was  a  Home  Missionary. 
IJow  a  work  which  occupied  the  greatest  of  preachers  can  never  be  unimportant, 
SiO.  2.  In  the  commission  under  which  He  acted,  the  message  He  bore,  the 
manner  in  which  He  published  it,  and  the  mode  in  which  His  labours  were  sus- 
tained.     II.    The  CONSEQUENT  DUTT  OF  THE  ChUBCH  TO  CONTINUE  AND  ABOUND  IN  THE 

LIKE  GOOD  woBK.  Whether  we  look  to  the  advantages  which  our  nation  presents 
for  such  labour,  or  to  its  peculiar  necessities ;  to  our  duty  as  Christians,  or  our 
interests  as  men  loving  their  country  ;  to  the  general  obligations  of  the  Church,  or 
our  own  personal  and  special  privileges  and  responsibilities — on  every  hand  are 
teeming  incitements  to  energy  and  liberality,  to  perseverance  and  courageous  de- 
votedness.     {W.  E.  Williamson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  40-45.  And  there  came  a  leper  to  Him,  beseeching  Eim.— The  cured  leper 
still  rebellicms  :—l.  Hie  disease.  II.  His  application.  1.  We  have  here  an  intel- 
ligent appreciation  of  Christ  as  the  Healer.  2.  We  have  an  instance  of  genuine 
earnestness.  3.  We  see  here  the  marks  of  true  humility.  4.  A  sample  of  prayer 
for  a  special  gift.  6.  But  here  is  illustrated  a  very  unworthy  conception  of  Christ's 
love.  III.  His  CUBE—**  Jesus  spake  and  it  was  done."  1.  His  method  bears  proof 
of  Divinity — "  I  will,  be  thou  clean."  2.  The  cure  was  instantaneous.  3.  It  was 
complete.     4.  The  cure  must  have  been  welcome.     IV.  His  obligation.     1.  That 


5S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  & 

obligation  covered  the  whole  area  of  his  life.  2.  The  healer  always  becomes  the 
sovereign.  He  who  commanded  the  disease,  commanded  the  patient  also.  3.  The 
requirement  of  Clirist  was  founded  in  solid  reason.  4.  The  obligation  involved 
public  acknowledgment  and  substantial  gift.  V.  His  contumacy.  1.  Complete 
redemption  is  not  obtained  until  the  will  is  subdued.  2.  This  man's  contumacy 
was  thoughtless.  3.  This  contumacy  was  fraught  with  disastrous  effects.  (D.  Davies^ 
M.A.)  The  approach  of  a  needy  life  to    Christ:— I.  The  deep  kekd  of  this 

man's  lite — "And  there  came  a  leper  unto  Him."  1.  It  was  a  need  that  tilled 
the  life  of  this  man  with  intense  misery.  2.  It  was  a  need  from  which  no  human 
remedy  could  give  relief.  3.  It  was  a  need  that  brought  him  into  immediate  con- 
tact with  Christ.  II.  The  manner  in  which  this  needy  life  approached  the 
Saviour.  1.  His  appeal  to  Christ  was  characterized  by  a  truthful  apprehension  of 
his  need.  2.  His  appeal  to  Christ  was  characterized  by  an  acknowledgment  of 
the  Divine  sovereignty.  3.  His  appeal  to  Christ  was  characterized  by  great  earnest- 
ness. 4,  His  appeal  to  Christ  was  characterized  by  deep  humility.  5.  His  appeal 
to   Christ    was  characterized  by  simple  faith.      III.  The  response  which  thb 

appeal   or   THIS   NEEDY   LIFE   AWAKENED   IN   THE  BENEFICENT  HEART  OF  ChRIST.      1.   It 

awakened  tender  compassion.  2.  It  received  the  touch  of  Divine  power.  3.  It 
attained  a  welcome  and  effective  cure.  Lessons :  1.  That  it  is  well  for  a  needy  life 
to  approach  Christ.  2.  Chat  a  needy  life  should  approach  Christ  with  humility 
and  faith.  3.  The  marvellous  way  in  which  .Christ  can  supply  the  need  of  man. 
(.7.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Christ's  touch: — I.  Whatever  Diviner  and  sacreder  aspect 
there  may  be  in  these  incidents,  the  first  thing,  and,  in  some  senses,  the  most  pre- 
cious thing  in  them  is  that  they  are  the  natural  expression  of  a  truly  human 
TENDERNESS  AND  COMPASSION.  It  is  the  love  of  Christ  Himself — spontaneous, 
instinctive — without  the  thought  of  anything  but  the  suffering  it  sees — which 
gushes  out  and  leads  Him  to  put  forth  His  hand  to  the  outcast  beggars  and  lepers. 
True  pity  instinctively  leads  us  to  seek  to  come  near  those  who  are  its  objects. 
Christ's  pity  is  shown  by  His  touch  to  have  this  true  characteristic  of  true  pity, 
that  it  overcomes  disgust ;  He  is  not  turned  away  by  the  shining  whiteness  of  the 
leprosy.  Christ  loves  us,  and  will  not  be  turned  from  His  compassion  by  our  most 
loathsome  foulness.  II.  We  may  regard  the  touch  as  the  medium  of  His  miracu- 
lous POWER.  There  is  a  royal  variety  in  the  method  of  our  Lord's  miracles ;  some 
are  wrought  at  a  distance,  some  by  a  word  or  touch.  The  true  cause  in  every  case 
is  His  own  bare  will.  But  this  use  of  Christ's  touch,  as  apparent  means  for  con- 
veying His  miraculous  power,  illustrates  a  principle  which  is  exemplified  in  all  His 
revelation,  namely,  the  employment,  in  condescension  to  men's  weakness,  of  out- 
ward means  as  the  apparent  vehicles  of  His  spiritual  power.  ^  Sacraments,  out- 
ward ceremonies,  forms  of  worship,  are  vehicles  which  the  Divine  Spirit  uses  in 
order  to  bring  His  gifts  to  the  hearts  and  the  minds  of  men.  They  are  like  the 
touch  of  Christ  which  heals,  not  by  any  virtue  in  itself,  apart  from  His  will  which 
chooses  to  make  it  the  apparent  medium  of  healing.  All  these  externals  are 
nothing,  as  the  pipes  of  an  organ  are  nothing,  until  His  breath  is  breathed  through 
them,  and  then  the  flood  of  sweet  sound  pours  out.  Do  not  despise  the  material 
vehicles  and  the  outward  helps  which  Christ  uses  for  the  communication  of  His 
healing  and  His  life,  but  remember  that  the  help  that  is  done  upon  earth,  He  does  it 
all  Himself.  lU.  Consider  Christ's  touch  as  a  shadow  and  symbol  of  the  very  heabt 
OF  His  work.  Christ's  touch  was  a  Priest's  touch.  He  lays  His  hand  on  corrup- 
tion and  is  not  tainted.  It  becomes  purity.  This  was  His  work  in  the  world — 
laying  hold  of  the  outcast — His  sympathy  leading  to  His  identification  of  Himself 
with  us  in  our  misery.  That  sympathetic  hfe-long  touch  is  put  forth  once  for  aD 
in  His  incarnation  and  death.  Let  our  touch  answer  to  His ;  let  the  hand  of  faith 
grasp  Him.  IV.  We  may  look  upon  these  incidents  as  being  a  pattern  for  us. 
We  must  be  content  to  take  lepers  by  the  hand,  to  let  the  outcast  feel  the  warmth 
of  our  loving  grasp  if  we  would  draw  them  into  the  Father's  house.  (A.  McLaren^ 
D.D.)  Christ  touches  corruption  without  taint : — Just  as  He  touches  the  leper 
and  is  unpolluted,  or  the  fever  patient  and  receives  no  contagion,  or  the  dead  and 
draws  no  chill  of  mortality  into  His  warm  hand,  so  He  becomes  like  His  brethren 
in  all  things,  yet  without  sin.  Being  found  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh.  He  knows 
no  sin,  but  wears  His  manhood  unpolluted,  and  dwells  among  men  blameless  and 
harmless,  the  Son  of  God,  without  rebuke.  Like  a  sunbeam  passing  through  foul 
water  untarnished  and  unstained ;  or  like  some  sweet  spring  rising  in  the  midst  of 
♦he  salt  sea,  which  yet  retains  its  freshness  and  pours  it  over  the  surrounding 
l»i*t'w»iaaa,  go  Christ  takes  upon  Himself  our  nature  and  lays  hold  of  our  stained 


OHAV.  X.J  ST.  MARK, 


hands  with  the  hand  that  oontinues  pure  while  it  grasps  ns,  and  will  make  na 
purer  if  we  grasp  it.  (Ibid.)  Tlie  cleansing  of  the  leper : — I.  Let  us  put  together 
the  FACTS  of  the  case.     II.  The  principal  lessons  suggested  by  this  narrative. 

1.  Here  is  an  illustration  of  the  good  effects  of  speaking  about  religious  truth  in 
connection  with  Christ.  The  fame  of  Christ  was  spread  abroad  throughout  Syria, 
and  found  its  way  to  the  leper.  2.  That  doubts  are  no  reason  why  we  should  not  go 
to  Christ — *•  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,"  <fec.  3.  That  no  possible  circumstances  ought  to 
prevent  our  going  to  Christ  for  salvation.  4.  Christ's  love  and  willingness  to  save 
is  the  great  idea  of  the  gospel.  {W.  G.  Barrett.)  Cleansed  by  Christ : — A  nun  in 
an  Italian  convent  once  dreamed  that  an  angel  opened  her  spiritual  eyes,  and  she 
saw  all  men  as  they  were.  They  seemed  so  full  of  uncleanness  that  she  shrank 
back  from  them  in  horror.  But  just  then  Jesus  Christ  appeared  among  them  with 
bleeding  wounds,  and  the  nun  saw  that  whoever  pressed  forward  and  touched  the 
blood  of  Jesus,  at  once  became  white  as  snow.  It  is  so  in  every-day  Ufe.  It  was 
Jesus  who  cleansed  that  reformed  drunkard  from  the  stain  of  his  sin.  Years  ago  he 
was  poor  and  ragged  and  unclean.  To-day  he  is  clean  and  healthy  and  well 
dressed  ;  the  grace  of  Christ  has  been  manifested  in  the  cleansing  of  the  outer  as 
well  as  of  the  inner  man.  {Sunday  School  Times.)  Cleansing  of  the  leper : — I.  Thb 
PITIABLE  OBJECT  THAT  IS  HERE  PRESENTED.  The  malady  was  ouc  of  the  most  dis- 
tressing that  ever  seized  a  human  being.  It  was  usually  regarded  as  produced  by 
the  immediate  agency  of  the  Most  High.  The  rules  prescribed  for  its  treatment 
were  very  minute  and  stringent.  Among  the  many  immunities  with  which  we  are 
favoured  in  this  happy  land,  may  be  reckoned  the  entire  absence  of  leprosy.  But  if 
bodily  leprosy  is  unknown  among  us,  spiritual  leprosy  is  not.     1.  It  was  hereditary. 

2.  A  representation  of  sin  in  the  consequences  with  which  it  was  attended. 
U.  The  APPLICATION  which  he  biade.     1.  It  was  earnest.     2.  It  was  humble. 

3.  It  expressed  great  confidence  in  the  Saviour's  ability.  4.  It  indicated  some 
doubt  of  His  willingness  to  exert  the  power  He  possessed.  III.  The  response  he 
MET  with.  1.  The  emotion  which  the  Saviour  felt — ••Moved  with  compassion." 
2.  The  act  He  performed — "  Put  forth  His  hand,  and  touched  him."  3.  The  words 
He  uttered — "  I  will ;  be  thou  clean."  4.  The  effect  produced — "  The  leprosy 
departed  from  him."  lY.  The  directions  he  received.  1.  These  instructions 
were  necessary.  The  law  enjoined  that  the  priest  should  pronounce  the  leper 
clean  before  he  could  enjoy  the  privileges — whether  social,  civil,  or  religious — of 
which  he  had  been  deprived.  2.  However  needful  these  instructions  may  have 
been,  the  restored  leper,  in  the  fulness  of  his  joy  and  gratitude,  was  unable  to 
comply  with  them.  See  the  ability  of  Christ  to  save.  A  personal  application  to 
Him  is  necessary.  (Expository  Outlines.)  ChrisVs  relation  to  human  suffering  : — 
Christ  presented  to  us  in  three  aspects.  I.  As  a  worker — "  He  stretched  forth  His 
hand  and  touched  him."  This  act  was — 1.  Natural.  The  means  employed  were 
in  harmony  with  His  nature  as  a  human  being.  Christ  felt  His  oneness  with  the 
race.  3.  Profound.  A  common  thing  apparently,  yet  who  can  tell  what  power  was 
in  that  "  touch."  Doubtless  there  was  the  communication  of  a  power  invisible  to 
human  eyes.  3.  Beneficent.  Here  we  have  the  cure  of  an  incurable.  4.  Prompt. 
The  earnest  appeal  obtained  an  immediate  response.  This  was  characteristic  of 
Christ.  n.  As  A  speaker— "  And  saith,"  &c.  This  shows— 1.  His  Divine 
authority — **  I  will."  Such  a  fiat  could  have  come  only  from  the  lips  of  a  Divine 
person — '•  Never  man  spake,"  &o.,  "  With  authority  He  commandeth,"  &c.  (ver.  28). 
2.  His  consciousness  of  power.  Christ  fully  knew  what  power  He  possessed.  Not 
so  with  man ;  consequently  how  much  latent  energy  lies  dormant  in  the  Church  of 
Christ.  3.  His  possession  of  power — "  Be  thou  made  clean."  At  the  unfaltering 
tones  of  Christ's  voice  all  diseases  fled.  IH.  As  a  healer — '*  And  straightway  the 
leprosy  departed,"  &c.  This  healing  was — 1.  Instantaneous.  2.  Perfect.  {A.  Q 
Churchill.)  The  Saviour  and  the  leper : — No  one  afiflicted  with  this  loathsome  dis 
ease  was  allowed  to  enter  the  gates  of  any  city.  In  this  case,  however,  the  man's 
misery  and  earnestness  led  him  to  make  a  dangerous  experiment.  Persuaded  of  the 
Lord's  power  to  heal;  longing  to  put  it  to  the  test ;  almost  sure  cf  His  willingness  ;  he 
will  rush  into  the  city,  and  ere  ever  the  angry  people  have  had  time  to  recover  from 
their  astonishment  at  his  boldness,  he  hopes  to  find  himself  cured  and  whole  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus.  There  was  both  daring  and  doubting  in  his  action.  The  man's 
earnestness  is  seen  further  in  his  manner.  1.  He  knelt  before  the  Lord,  and  next 
fell  on  his  face — his  attitude  giving  emphasis  to  his  words.  2.  He  besought  Jesus 
— in  fear,  in  doubt,  in  secret  dread  lest  the  Lord  should  see  some  reason  for  with- 
holding the  boon  he  craved,  but  yet  in  faith.    And  his  faith  was  great.    He  did  not, 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  % 

like  Martha,  consider  Christ's  power  as  needing  to  be  sought  from  God  ;  he  believed 
it  to  be  lodged  already  in  Christ's  person  ;  and  he  also  believed  His  power  to  be 
great  enough  to  reach  even  his  case,  although  as  yet  no  leper  had  received  healing 
from  Christ.  3.  His  faith  was  be  warded.  Jesus  touched  him — no  pollution  passing 
from  the  leper  to  Him,  but  healing  going  from  Him  to  the  leper.  4.  Instantly  the 
leprosy  departed.  Nothing  is  a  barrier  to  the  Lord's  will  and  power.  {Andrew  A. 
Bonar.)  Leprosy  : — ^As  to  this  disease  observe  :  heat,  dryness,  and  dust,  predis- 
pose to  diseases  of  the  skin  everywhere,  and  all  these  causes  are  especially  operative 
in  Syria.  Insufficient  food  assists  their  action ;  and  boils  and  sores  are  apt  to 
fester  and  poison  the  system.  Leprosy  is  a  disease  found  over  a  large  tract  of  the 
world's  surface ;  it  is  found  all  round  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  from  Syria 
to  Spain,  in  a  virulent  form,  and  in  North  and  South  Africa.  It  was  carried  to 
various  countries  in  Europe  by  those  who  returned  from  the  crusades,  and  became 
prevalent  even  in  England,  in  the  times  when  our  forefathers  had  no  butcher  meat 
in  winter  but  what  was  salted,  and  little  vegetable  diet  with  it.  In  a  form  less 
virulent  than  in  Palestine,  it  exists  in  Norway,  where  the  government  supports 
several  hospitals  for  lepers,  and  seeks  to  prevent  the  spread  of  the  disease  by  re- 
quiring all  afflicted  with  it  to  live — unmarried — in  one  or  other  of  these.  Probably, 
salt  fish  in  Norway  forms  the  too  exclusive  food  of  the  poor,  as  it  also  probably  did 
in  Palestine  in  the  time  of  Christ.  Mrs.  Brassey  found  it  in  the  islands  of  the 
Pacific.  It  is  so  common  in  India  that  when  Lord  Lawrence  took  formal  possessiou 
of  Oude,  he  made  the  people  promise  not  to  burn  their  widows  nor  slay  their  chil- 
dren  (the  girls),  nor  bury  alive  their  lepers.  It  was  a  loathsome  disease,  eating 
away  the  joints,  enfeebling  the  strength,  producing  diseases  of  the  lungs,  almost 
always  fatal,  though  taking  years  to  kill.  It  was  the  one  disease  which  the  Mosaic 
law  treated  as  unclean ;  perhaps,  as  being  the  chief  disease,  God  wished  to  indicate 
that  all  outward  misery  had  originally  its  root  in  sin.  He  that  was  afflicted  with 
it  had  to  live  apart  from  his  fellows,  and  to  cry  out  "  unclean  *'  when  any  came 
near  him ;  often,  therefore,  could  do  no  work,  but  had  to  live  on  charity.  He  was  not 
permitted  to  enter  a  synagogue  unless  a  part  were  specially  railed  off  for  him,  and 
then  he  must  be  the  first  to  enter  and  the  last  to  quit  the  place.  It  was  as  fatal  as 
consumption  is  with  us ;  much  more  painful ;  loathsome  as  well,  infecting  the 
spirits  with  melancholy,  and  cutting  the  sufferer  off  from  tender  sympathies  and 
ministries  when  he  most  needed  them.  (JR.  Glover.)  The  leper's  prayer: — This 
prayer  is  very  remarkable.  For  observe — I.  The  cask  would  seem  absolutely 
HOPELESS.  Many  could  feel  that  for  a  Lordly  spirit  like  Christ's  to  have  control 
over  evil  spirits  was  natural,  but  would  have  held  the  cure  of  a  leper  an  impossi- 
bility ;  for  the  disease,  being  one  of  the  blood,  infected  the  whole  system !  If 
onlookers  might  so  think,  how  much  more  the  leper  himself  1  Every  organ  of  his 
body  infected  deeply,  how  wonderful  that  he  could  have  any  hope.  But  he  believes 
this  great  miracle  a  possibility.  Yet  note — II.  His  prayeb  is  wonderfully  calm. 
In  deepest  earnest  he  kneels.    But  there  is  no  wildness  nor  excitement.     Mark 

also — in.   How  A  GREAT  LAW  OF  COMPENSATION  BUNS  THROUGH   OUB  LIVES,  and  SOme- 

how  those  most  grievously  afflicted  are  often  those  most  helped  to  pray  and  trust.  I 
once  saw  a  leper  at  Genadenthal  in  South  Africa — an  old  woman.  •♦  Tell  him,"  said 
she  to  the  doctor,  who  took  me  to  see  her,  *'  I  am  very  thankful  for  my  disease  ;  it 
is  the  way  the  Lord  took  to  bring  me  to  Himself."  This  man  had  had  the  same 
sort  of  compensation,  and  while  the  outward  man  was  perishing  the  inward  man 
was  being  renewed  day  by  day.  Copy  his  prayer,  and  ask  for  mercies  though  they 
seem  to  be  sheer  impossibilities.  (Ibid.)  "  Can  "  and  "  will "  ; — It  is  an  old 
answer,  that  from  can  to  will,  no  argument  followeth.  The  leper  did  not  say  unto 
Christ,  "If  Thou  canst,  Thou  wilt;"  but,  "If  Thou  wilt,  Thou  canst."  (H. 
Smith.)  I.  The  cure  of  our  souls  is  the  pure  effect  of  the  goodness  and  free  mercy 
of  God.  n.  Jesus  Christ  performs  it  by  a  sovereign  authority.  III.  His  sacred 
hnmanitv  is  the  instrument  of  the  Divine  operation  in  our  hearts.  IV.  It  is  by  His 
will  that'His  merits  are  applied  to  us.  Fear,  for  He  does  not  put  forth  His  healing 
hand  and  touch  all ;  hope,  for  He  very  frequently  puts  it  forth,  and  touches  the 
most  miserable.  (Quesnel.)  The  world's  treatment  of  lepers,  and  Christ's : — 
You  remember  the  story  of  the  leper  which  the  poet  Swinburne  has  woven  into  one 
of  his  most  beautiful,  most  painfully  realistic,  poems.  He  tells  about  a  lady  at  the 
French  Coxirt  in  the  Middle  Ages,  who  was  stricken  with  leprosy.  She  had  been 
courted,  flattered,  idolized,  and  almost  worshipped  for  her  wit  and  beauty  by  th« 
king,  princes,  and  all  the  royal  train,  until  she  was  smitten  with  leprosy.  Then 
ber  very  lovers  hunted  her  forth  as  a  banned  and  Ood-forsaken  thing ;  ev^ry  doot 


CHAP.  I.]  ST.  MARK, 


in  the  great  city  of  Paris  was  slammed  in  her  face ;  no  one  would  give  her  a  drop 
of  water  or  piece  of  bread ;  the  very  children  spat  in  her  face,  and  fled  from  her  aa 
a  pestilential  thing,  until  a  poor  clerk,  who  had  loved  the  great  lady  a  long  way  oflf, 
and  had  never  spoken  to  her  until  then,  took  her  to  his  house  for  pity's  sake,  and 
nursed  her  until  she  died,  and  he  was  cast  out  and  cursed  himself  by  all  the  reli- 
gious  world  for  doing  it.  That  was  what  the  leper  had  become  in  the  Middle  Ages, 
and  something  like  that  he  was  among  the  Jews  of  our  Saviour's  time,  hated  by 
men  because  believed  to  be  hated  by  God,  carrying  in  his  flesh  and  skin  the  very 
marks  of  God's  anger,  contempt,  and  scorn,  the  foulest  thing  on  God's  fair  earth, 
whose  presence  meant  defilement,  and  whom  to  touch  was  sin.  That  was  the  thing 
that  lay  at  Christ's  feet,  and  on  which  that  pure,  gentle  hand  was  laid.  He 
stretched  forth  His  hand  and  touched  him,  and  said,  '•  I  will,  be  thou  clean  ;  "  and 
straightway  his  leprosy  was  cleansed.       {J.  O.  Greenhough,    31. A.)  Christ's 

taving  touch : — I.  The  wonderful  way  in  which  Christ  kindled  hope  in  these 
DESPERATE  WRETCHES.  He  helped  men  to  believe  in  themselves  as  well  as  in  Him- 
self.  We  cannot  see  how  it  was  done.  Nothing  had  been  said  or  done  to  give  thi^ 
confidence  in  his  recoverability,  yet  he  has  it.  You  can  show  a  man  in  a  score  of 
ways,  without  telling  him  in  so  many  words,  that  you  do  not  despair  of  him.  A 
glance  of  the  eye  is  enough  for  that.  The  first  step  in  saving  the  lost  is  to  persuade 
them  that  they  are  not  God-abandoned.  II.  Christ's  touch.  Christ  saved  men 
by  touching  them.  He  was  always  touching  men,  their  hands,  eyes,  ears,  lips. 
He  did  not  send  His  salvation ;  Ho  brought  it.  Gifts  demoralize  men  unless  we 
give  part  of  ourselves  with  them.  {Ibid.)  The  use  of  personal  contact : — Our 
gifts  only  demoralize  men  unless  we  give  part  of  ourselves  along  with  them.  Even  adog 
is  demoralized  if  you  always  throw  bones  to  it  instead  of  giving  them  out  of  your 
hand.  You  breathe  a  bit  ot  humanity  into  the  dog  by  letting  it  lick  your  hand,  and 
it  would  almost  rather  do  that  than  eat  your  bone.  What  have  we  done  to  save  men 
when  we  have  sent  them  our  charities  ?  Almost  nothing.  We  have  filled  their 
stomachs,  indeed,  and  lightened  their  material  wants,  but  have  sent  their  souls  still 
empty  away.  (Ibid.)  The  cleansing  of  the  leper : — There  are  in  this  case  ele- 
ments which  ought  to  be  found  in  any  man  who  is  suffering  from  soul  disease  and 
defilement.  I.  A  painful  consciousness  of  his  true  position.  He  looked  at  his 
leprosy  ;  felt  its  pain ;  knew  its  disabling  uncleanness.  The  sinner  sees  his  sin  as  a 
disgrace,  a  danger,  and  a  disgust.  II.  A  proper  sense  of  his  present  opportu- 
nity. Great  Healer  was  approaching ;  Lord  of  love  and  pity  was  here ;  representa- 
tive of  heaven  passed  by.  He  was  drawn  to  Jesus ;  prostrate  before  Jesus  ;  urgent 
upon  Jesus.  A  present  decision ;  a  present  acceptance ;  a  present  salvation.  III. 
A  plain  acknowledgment  of  the  Lord's  power.  "Thou  canst ;  "  I  can't ;  others 
can't;  but  Thou  canst,  I  know  it,  because  Thou  hast  cleansed  others;  hast  power 
to  cleanse ;  hast  come  forth  to  cleanse.  IV.  A  prhssino  urgency  concerning  the 
Lord's  pleasure.  ••  If  Thou  wilt."  Perhaps  I  am  too  vile.  It  may  be  my  sorrow 
may  plead.  In  any  case  I  will  take  my  refusal  only  from  Thee.  Observe — 1.  The 
leper  makes  no  prayer.  Readiness  to  receive  is  in  itself  a  prayer.  Uttered  prayer 
may  be  no  deeper  than  the  mouth  ;  unuttered  prayer  may  be  evidence  of  the  opened 
heart.  2.  The  leper  raises  no  difiicalty.  He  comes — worships — confesses  his 
faith — puts  himself  in  the  Lord's  hands.  3.  The  leper  has  no  hesitation  as  to  what 
he  needs — "  Make  me  clean."  As  to  whom  he  trasts — '•  Thou  canst."  As  to  how 
he  comes — "  A  leper."  Misery  in  the  presence  of  mercy — humility  pleading  with 
grace — faith  appealing  to  faithfulness — helplessness  worshipping  at  the  feet  of 
power.  Such  is  a  leper  before  the  Lord.  Such  is  a  sinner  before  the  Saviour.  Suoh 
should  we  be  to  this  day  of  grace.  {J.  Richardson,  BI.A.)  The  method  of  tviritnal 
salvation  illustrated  : — I.  The  leper  put  himself  unreservedly  in  the  hands  of  the 
Healer.  II.  Christ  instantly  gave  practical  expression  to  His  own  deep  pity. 
III.  The  completeness  of  Christ's  cure.  («7.  Parker,  D.D.)  Leprosy  a  sijmhnl 
of  sin : — T.  From  a  small  beginning  it  spreads  over  the  entire  man.      it.  Its 

CURE  is  beyond  THE  REACH  OF  HUMAN  SKILL  OR  NATURAL  REMEDIES.  HI.  It  IS 
PAINFUL,  LOATHSOME,  DEGRADING,  AND  FATAL.  IV.  It  SEPARATES  ITS  VICTIM  FROM 
THE     PURE     AND     DRIVES     HIM     INTO     ASSOCIATION   WITH     THE     IMPURE.  V.      It   IS   A 

FOE    TO   RELIGIOUS   PRIVILEGES.  IV.    It   CAN   BE    REMEDIED  BY  THE  INTERPOSITION  OP 

God.  (Anon.)  Christ's  pity  shown  more  in  deeds  than  in  words  : — 1  doubt  whether 
Christ  ever  said  anything  about  the  Divine  compassion  more  pathetic  or  more  per- 
fectly beautiful  than  had  been  said  by  the  writer  of  the  103rd  Psalm.  It  is  not  in 
the  words  of  Christ  that  we  find  a  fuller  and  deeper  revelation  of  the  Divine  com- 
passion, but  in  His  deeds.  *'  And  Jesus,  moved  with  compassion,  put  forth  His  hand 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  \ 

and  touched  him,"  touched  the  man  from  whom  his  very  kindred  had  shrunk. 
It  was  the  first  time  that  the  leper  had  felt  the  warmth  and  pressure  of  a  human 
hand  since  his  loathsome  disease  came  upon  him.  And  "Kaid,  "  I  will,  be  thou  clean." 
{R.  W.  Daley  LL.D.)  The  leper  cleansed: — I.  Sorrow  turns  instinctively  to  the 

supernatural.  II.  Christ  is  never  deaf  to  sorrow's  cry.  III.  Christ  is  superior 
aliie  to  material  contamination  and  legal  restriction.  {Dr.  Parker.)  Christ* s  mission 
a  protest  against  death : — Every  healed  man  was  Christ's  living  protest  against  death. 
The  mere  fact  of  the  miracle  was  but  a  syllable  in  Christ's  magnificent  doctrine  of 
life.  Christ's  mission  may  be  summed  up  in  the  word — Life ;  the  devil's,  in  the 
word — Death ;  so  that  every  recovered  limb,  every  opened  eye,  every  purified  leper, 
was  a  confirmation  of  His  statement,  "  I  have  come  that  they  might  have  life. "  {Ihid,  > 
The  cleansing  of  tlie  leper: — I.  A  melancholy  picture  to  be  studied.  II.  An 
excellent  example  to  be  copied.  1.  He  made  his  application  in  the  proper  quarter. 
He  "  came  to  Jesus."  2.  He  made  his  application  in  the  right  way,  3.  He  made 
his  application  in  the  proper  spirit,  "  kneeling."  III.  A  sweet  encouragement  to  be 
taken.  IV.  A  necessary  duty  to  be  performed.  Silence  and  the  olfering  of 
sacrifice.  Gratitude ;  penitence  ;  consecration.  V.  An  uncommon  mistake  to  be 
avoided.  *' He  began  to  blaze  abroad  the  matter."  {T.  WhitelaiOf  M.A.)  Reason* 
for  silence  respecting  Christ's  miracles: — Our  Lord  did  not  mean  that  the  man 
should  keep  it  only  to  himself,  and  that  he  should  not  at  all  make  it  known  to  any ; 
for  He  knew  that  it  was  fit  His  miracles  should  be  known,  that  by  them  His  Divine 
power  and  the  truth  of  His  doctrine  might  be  manifested  to  the  world ;  and  there, 
fore  we  read  that  at  another  time  He  was  willing  a  miracle  of  His  should  be  made 
known  (Mark  v.  19).  But  Christ's  purpose  here  is  to  restrain  him— I.  Froia 
publishing  this  miracle  rashly  or  unadvisedly,  and  in  an  indiscreet  manner.  II. 
From  revealing  it  to  such  persons  as  were  likely  to  cavil  or  take  exceptions  at  it. 
ni.  From  publishing  it  at  that  time,  which  was  unfit  and  anseasonable^(l)  Be- 
cause Christ  was  yet  in  the  state  of  His  abasement,  and  was  so  to  continue  till  the 
time  of  His  resurrection,  and  His  Divine  glory  was  to  be  manifested  by  degree* 
till  then,  and  not  all  at  once ;  (2)  Because  the  people  were  too  much  addicted  to 
the  miracles  of  Christ,  without  due  regard  to  His  teaching.  (G.  Fetter.)  With 
the  charge  to  tell  it  to  the  priest  the  Saviour  gave  the  charge  to  tell  it  to  no  one 
else.  L  Christ  did  not  want  a  crowd  of  wonder-seekers  to  clamour  for  a  sign,  but 
penitents  to  listen  to  the  tidings  of  salvation.  II.  The  man  would  be  spiritually 
the  better  of  thinking  calmly  and  silently  over  His  wondrous  mercy,  until  at  aU 
events  he  had  been  to  the  Temple  in  Jerusalem  and  back.  Do  not  tattle  about 
your  religious  experience ;  nor,  if  you  are  a  beginner,  speak  so  much  about  Qod's 
mercy  to  you  that  you  have  not  time  to  study  it  and  learn  its  lesson.  This  man, 
had  he  but  gone  into  some  retired  spot  and  mastered  the  meaning  of  His  mercy» 
might  have  become  an  apostle.  As  it  is,  he  becomes  a  sort  of  showman  of  himself. 
(R,  Glover,)        Unostentatious  philanthropy : — I,  This    unostentatious    philan- 

THBOPT  was  consequent  upon  a  REAIi  CUBE.      II.    WaS  ANIMATED  BT  ▲  TBUE  SPIRIT. 

Some  people  enjoin  silence  in  reference  to  their  philanthropy — 1.  When  they  do 
not  mean  it.  Mock  humihty.  2.  Lest  they  should  have  too  many  applicants  for 
it.  Selfishness  or  limited  generosity.  3.  Others  in  order  that  they  may  modestly 
and  wisely  do  good.  So  with  our  Lord.  Much  philanthropy  marred  by  its  talk- 
ativeness.  III.  Was  not  attended  with  success.  Hence  we  learn — 1.  That 
the  most  modest  philanthropy  is  not  always  shielded  from  public  observation.  2. 
That  there  are  men  who  will  violate  the  most  stringent  commands  and  the  deepest 
obligations.  Lessons :  1.  To  do  good  when  we  have  the  opportunity.  2.  Modestly 
and  wisely.  3.  Content  with  the  smile  of  God  rather  than  the  approval  of 
men.  (J.  S.  Exell^  M.A,)  The  judiciotu  reserve  which  should  characterize  the 
speech  of  the  newly  converted: — Observe:  I.  That  a  wise  reserve  should  bb 

EXERCISED  BY  THE    NEWLY  CONVERTED    IN  REFERENCE    TO    THE   INNER    BXPERIENCBS 

OF  THE  SOUL.  Bccausc  nnwise  talk  is  likely — 1.  To  injure  the  initial  culture  of 
the  soul.  2.  To  awaken  the  scepticism  of  the  worldly.  3.  To  be  regarded  hm 
boastful.     4.  To  impede  the  welfare  of  Divine  truth.    II.  That  this  wise  reservk 

MUST  NOT    interfere  WITH    THE     IMPERATIVE  OBLIGATIONS  OF    THE    SANCTUARY.       1. 

To  recognize  its  ordinances.  2.  To  perform  its  duties.  3.  To  manifest  in  its 
offerings  a  grateful  and  adoring  reception  of  beneficent  ministry.  With  this  no 
reserve  of  temperament  or  words  must  be  allowed  to  interfere.  III.  That  this  wish 

RESERVE   IS   SOMETIMES  VIOLATED   IN  A  MOST  FLAGRANT  MANNEB.      HoW  many  yOUUg 

converts  act  as  the  cleansed  leper.  We  must  be  careful  to  speak  at  the  right 
time,  in  the  right  maimer,  under  the  right  oiroum  stances.    'Ibid.)        Shew  thy' 


.  I.]  ST,  MARK,  67 

telf  to  the  priest : — The  reasons  for  the  command  are  not  far  to  seek.  1.  The 
offering  of  the  gift  was  an  act  of  obedience  to  the  law  (Levit.  xiv.  10,  21»  22), 
and  was  therefore  the  right  thing  for  the  man  to  do.  In  this  way  also  our  Lord 
showed  that  He  had  not  come,  as  far  as  His  immediate  work  was  concerned,  to 
destroy  even  the  ceremonial  law,  but  to  fulfil.  2.  It  was  the  appointed  test  of  the 
reality  and  completeness  of  the  cleansing  work.  8.  It  was  better  for  the  man's  own 
spiritual  life  to  oherieh  his  gratitude  than  to  waste  it  in  many  words.  (Dean 
Plumptre,) 

Ver.  45.  And  they  came  to  Him  from  every  qaarter. — Gathering  to  the  centre : — 
I.  Of  the  open  or  professional  coming  to  Christ.  The  gospel  when  it  is  preached 
draws  many  to  itself  who  are  not  saved  by  it.  Many  come  to  Christ  from  the 
lowest  motives  ;  to  receive  benefits  ;  some  out  of  transient  enthusiasm.  Out  of  the 
best  haul  a  fisherman  ever  makes,  there  is  something  to  throw  away.  H.  Of  the 
first  real  spiritual  coming  to  Christ  by  faith.  Let  us  try  to  help  those  who  are 
coming  to  Christ.  All  who  come  to  Christ  from  every  quarter  never  one  was  dis- 
appointed with  Him  yet.  III.  The  daily  coming  of  saved  souls  to  Jesus.  They 
come  from  every  quarter  as  to  mental  pursuits ;  from  all  points  of  theological 
thought ;  from  every  quarter  of  spiritual  experience.    IV.  That  great  gathebino 

WHICH   IS  APPROACHING  NEARER  EVERY  MOMENT.         SalntS    COmO    tO    JcSUS    in    glory 

from  every  quarter.  (C.  U.  Spurgeon.)  Coming  to  Christ  by  various  roads : — 
Seeking  rest  and  health  last  week,  I  seated  myself  for  a  little  while  near  a  very 
rustic  church  which  stands  embowered  in  a  wood,  and  as  I  sat  there  I  moralized 
upon  the  various  paths  which  led  up  to  the  church  porch.  Each  trackway  through  the 
grass  came  from  a  different  quarter,  but  they  all  led  to  one  point.  As  I  stood  there 
this  reflection  crossed  me  :  even  thus  men  come  to  Christ  from  all  quarters  of  the 
compass,  but  if  indeed  saved,  they  all  come  to  Him.  There  is  a  path  yonder  which 
rifjes  from  a  little  valley.  The  little  church  stands  on  the  hill  side,  there  is  a  brook 
at  the  bottom,  and  worshippers  who  come  from  the  public  road  must  cross  the 
rustic  bridge  and  then  ascend  the  hill.  Such  comers  rise  at  every  step  they  take. 
Full  many  burdened  ones  come  to  Christ  from  the  deep  places  of  self-abasement ; 
they  know  their  sinfulness  and  feel  it ;  their  self-consciousness  has  almost  driven 
them  to  despair ;  they  are  down  very  low,  and  every  step  they  take  to  Christ  is  a 
step  upwards.  They  have  a  little  hope  as  they  look  to  Him,  and  then  a  little 
more,  till  it  comes  to  a  humble  trust ;  then  from  a  feeble,  trembling  trust  it  rises 
to  a  simple  faith,  and  so  they  advance  till  when  they  stand  near  to  Jesus  they  even 
reach  to  the  full  assurance  of  faith.  Thus  from  soul  distress  and  self -despair  they 
come  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  He  receives  them  graciously.  Through  the  church- 
yard there  was  another  path,  and  it  ran  up-hill  from  where  I  stood,  and  therefore 
every  one  who  came  that  way  descended  to  the  church  door.  These  may  represent 
the  people  who  think  much  of  themselves ;  they  have  been  brought  up  in  morality 
and  lived  in  respectability  in  the  town  of  Legality  ;  they  have  never  turned  aside  to 
the  grosser  vices,  but  are  among  the  models  of  behaviour.  Every  step  these  good 
people  take  towards  Christ  is  downward ;  they  think  less  of  themselves  and  still 
less ;  regret  leads  to  repentance,  repentance  to  bitter  grief,  and  grief  leads  to  self 
abhorrence,  till  they  come  down  to  the  level  where  Jesus  meets  with  sinners,  by 
owning  that  they  are  nothing,  and  that  Christ  is  all.  The  two  paths  which  I  have 
mentioned  were  supplemented  by  a  third,  which  led  through  a  thick  and  tangled 
wood :  a  narrow  way  wound  between  the  oak  trees  and  the  dense  underwood,  and 
I  noticed  that  it  led  over  a  boggy  place,  through  which  stepping  stones  had  been 
carefuUy  placed  for  the  traveller,  that  he  might  not  sink  in  the  mire.  Many  a 
seeker  has  found  his  way  to  Jesus  by  a  similar  path.  Dark  with  ignorance,  and 
briary  with  evil  questionings,  the  path  winds  and  twists  about,  and  leads  through 
the  Slough  of  Despond,  wherein  a  man  had  need  pick  his  steps  very  carefully,  or  he 
may  sink  in  despair.  Those  whom  grace  leads  arrive  at  rest  in  Christ,  but  it  is 
through  the  wood  and  through  the  slough.  Once  more,  I  remarked  another  path, 
which  came  in  from  the  farmer's  fields,  through  lands  where  the  plough  and  the 
sickle  are  busy,  each  in  its  season ;  so  that  those  who  come  from  that  quarter  to 
worship  come  across  the  place  of  toil,  and  may  fitly  represent  those  who  are  full  of 
earnestness  and  effort,  but  have  as  much  need  of  Jesus  as  any.  They  do  not  know 
yet  the  way  of  salvation,  but  they  follow  after  righteousness  by  the  law,  and  strive 
to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate  in  their  own  strength.  But  if  they  ever  come  to 
Christ  they  will  have  to  leave  those  fields  and  the  plough  and  sickle  of  their  own 
strength,  and  submit  to  receive  Jesus  as  their  all.     {Ibid.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


^ 


CHAPTER  II. 

Vers.  1-12.  And  a^aln  He  entered  Into  Capernaum.  The  general  ministry  of 
Christ: — Christ's  apparent  delays  are  only  the  maturings  of  time — the  ripenings  of 
opportunity.  He  will  come,  not  when  impatient  men  think  best,  but  when  His 
wisdom  determines  :  neither  too  soon  nor  too  late.  I.  Where  Christ  is  desired 
Christ  oomeb.  He  visits  with  equal  readiness  every  willing  heart.  In  penitent 
and  submissive  natures  He  finds  His  favourite  haunts.  II.  Christ's  presence  in 
the  house  cannot  bb  concealed.  Holy  influences  emanate  from  Him,  freely  as 
light  from  the  sun.  III.  Christ  binds  together  all  classes.  IV.  Human 
LIMITS  ARK  too  NARROW  FOR  Christ's  KINGDOM.  God's  plaus  are  expausive;  let 
us  beware  of  trying  to  contract  them.  We  must  enlarge  our  ideas,  until  they  are 
commensurate  with  God's  truth  ;  we  must  enlarge  our  sympathies  until  they  em- 
brace every  human  need.  V.  Christ  improves  every  occasion.  Whatever  ie 
needed.  He  is  ready  to  supply.  Each  individual  in  that  crowd  had  some  special 
want,  but  not  one  was  making  special  application.  But  Christ  could  not  be  idle. 
His  business  was  to  minister.  If  they  did  not  want  a  word  of  healing,  they  all  wanted 
a  word  of  instruction.  (D.  Davies,  M.A.)  It  was  noised  tJiat  He  was  in  the 
house: — I.  Houses  where  Christ  will  dwell.  1.  The  human  heart.  2.  The 
Christian  family.  3.  A  spiritual  Church.  II.  The  chief  glory  of  a  Christian 
Church — ^not  the  building,  nor  the  form  of  service,  nor  the  social  position  of  its 
members,  nor  the  eloquence  of  the  preacher,  nor  its  past  history — but  the  Christ 
who  dwells  within  it.  III.  TnE  self-manifesting  nature  of  true  religion.  If 
Christ  be  within  the  heart,  the  family,  or  the  Church — the  fact  will  be  known 
abroad.  Though  the  rose  is  not  seen  its  fragrance  is  perceived.  Its  glitter  betrays 
the  presence  of  gold.  Clouds  cannot  conceal  the  sun,  for  the  day-light  declares  its 
ascendency.  IV.  Thb  chief  drawing  power  of  Christianity.  If  we  would 
draw  the  multitude  we  must  do  it,  not  so  much  by  eccentricities  —  advertise- 
ments, as  by  obtaining  the  presence  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  will  draw  all  men  unto 
Him.  Christ  within  will  attract  the  multitude  without  (L.  Palmer.)  The  king 
and  his  Court : — Where  the  king  is  there  is  his  Court.  {Anx)n.)  A  Jiappy  town: — 
Happy  town  in  such  an  inhabitant,  and  in  this  respect  lifted  up  to  heaven.  Indeed, 
in  this,  heaven  came  down  to  Capernaum.  (Trapp,)  Shiloh : — Where  Shiloh  is 
there  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be.    {M.  Henry.)         Christ  in  the  house : — 

1.  When  Christ  may  be  said  to  be  in  the  house.     1.  When  the  Bible  is  there. 

2.  When  a  good  man  enters  it  and  carries  with  him  the  savour  of  Christ.  3. 
When  He  dwells  in  the  heart  of  any  one  in  the  family — parent,  child,  servant,  Ac 
4.  Into  whatever  house  a  Christian  family  enters,  Christ  enters  with  it,  &o.  II. 
Some  of  the  advantages  of  having  Christ  in  the  house.  1.  If  it  be  noised 
that  Christ  is  in  the  house  good  men  will  be  drawn  to  it  and  bad  men  will  keep 
away.  2.  There  will  be  a  witness  for  God  there.  3.  There  is  a  direct  communica- 
tion between  it  and  the  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  4. 
That  house  is  under  the  peculiar  protection  of  Divine  Providence.  6.  The  sym- 
pathies  of  good  men  are  drawn  towards  it.  Conclusion  :  We  should  seek  Christ 
on  our  own  account ;  and  we  should  seek  Him  on  account  of  others.  {G.  Rogers.) 
Jesus  in  the  house :  piety  at  heme : — How  many  are  longing  for  grand  spheres  in 
which  to  serve  God.  They  admire  heroic  men  and  women  who  have  been  bold  for 
the  truth,  and  wish  they  had  some  daring  opportunity  in  which  to  exhibit  Chris- 
tian heroism  and  endurance.  St.  Paul  says  to  such  persons  (1  Tim.  v.  4),  "  I  will 
tell  you  of  a  place  where  you  can  show  forth  all  that  is  beautiful  and  glorious  in 
the  Christian  character,  and  that  place  is  the  domestic  circle;  "  "  Let  them  first 
learn  to  show  piety  at  home."  Indeed,  if  a  man  does  not  serve  God  on  a  small 
scale,  he  never  will  serve  Him  on  a  large  one.  {J.  N.  Norton.)  How  Christ  enters  tJie 
house  : — Christ  Jesus  gains  admission  to  the  house  in  various  ways.  Sometimes 
it  is  through  the  sweet  influence  of  a  little  child,  who  has  heard  of  Him  in  the 
Sunday-school.  Sometimes  Jesus  finds  His  way  into  the  house  through  the  agency 
of  a  good  book  or  a  tract.  Sometimes  He  leaves  the  fragrance  of  His  example  behind 
Him,  after  the  visit  of  a  friend.  Jesus  may  only  be  present  in  the  house  in  the 
person  of  the  humblest  servant,  and  yet  the  influence  of  that  servant  will  be  felt. 
(Ibid.)  Family  worship:  —  Bishop  Coxe,  in  the  preface  to  his  **  Covenant 
Prayer,"  gives  this  interesting  narrative.  •*  A  few  years  ago  I  visited  an  old  feudal 
castle  in  England.  One  of  its  towers  dates  from  King  John's  time ;  its  outer  walls 
bear  marks  of  siege  and  damage  from  the  gutis  of  Cromwell.     The  young  owner 


CHAP,  n.]  ST,  MARK,  5f 

lately  married,  was  beginning  his  housekeeping  aright,  and  when  I  came  down  into 
the  old  hall  to  breakfast,  his  servants  were  all  assembled  for  prayers  with  the 
family.  Though  I  was  asked  to  officiate,  I  reminded  my  kind  host  that  every  man 
is  a  priest  in  his  own  household,  and  I  begged  him  to  officiate  as  he  was  used  to  do. 
So  he  read  prayers  and  Holy  Scripture,  with  due  solemnity,  and  we  all  kneeled 
down.  Happening  to  lift  my  eyes,  I  observed  over  his  head,  upon  a  massive 
oaken  beam  that  spanned  the  hall,  an  inscription  in  old  English  : 

•*  *  That  house  shall  be  preserved,  and  never  shall  decay, 

Where  the  Almighty  God  is  worshipped,  day  by  day.    a.d.  1558/  ' 

{Ibid.)  Piety  in  the  house  proved  by  mrtue  in  the  children : — If  I  am  told  in 
general  terms  of  a  mother,  that  she  has  gone  to  the  studio  of  a  photographic  artist 
to  obtain  a  portrait  of  herself,  and  if  the  question  afterwards  arise,  did  she  sit  alone, 
or  did  she  group  the  children  round  her  feet,  and  hold  the  infant  on  her  knee  P  J 
do  not  know,  for  I  was  not  there ;  but  show  me  the  glass  which  the  artist  has  just 
taken  out  from  a  vessel  of  liquid  in  a  dark  room,  and  is  holding  up  to  the  light.  What 
figures  are  those  that  are  gradually  forming  upon  its  surface?  In  that  glass  rises 
the  outline  of  that  maternal  form ;  and  the  forms  of  the  children  come  gradually 
in,  variously  grouped  around  her.  Ah  1  I  know  now  that  this  mother  sat  not 
alone  when  the  sun  in  the  heavens  painted  her  picture  in  that  glass.  The 
character  and  condition  of  children,  through  all  their  after  life,  tell  plainly  who 
were  closest  to  her  heart,  and  whose  names  were  oftenest  on  her  lips,  when  the 
mother  held  communion  with  Jesus  in  the  house.  {Amot.)  Christly  influence  in 
the  home : — TraveUing  on  the  Lake  Lugano,  one  morning,  we  heard  the  swell  of 
the  song  of  the  nightingale,  and  the  oars  were  stilled  on  the  blue  lake  as  we 
listened  to  the  silver  sounds.  We  could  not  see  a  single  bird,  nor  do  I  know  that 
we  wished  to  see — we  were  so  content  with  the  sweetness  of  the  music :  even  so  it 
is  with  our  Lord ;  we  may  enter  a  house  where  He  is  loved,  and  we  may  hear 
nothing  concerning  Christ,  and  yet  we  may  perceive  clearly  enough  that  He  is 
there,  a  holy  influence  streaming  through  their  actions  pervades  the  household  ;  so 
that  if  Jesus  be  unseen,  it  is  clear  that  He  is  not  unknown.  Go  anywhere  where 
Jesus  is,  and  though  you  do  not  actually  hear  His  name,  yet  the  sweet  influence 
which  flows  from  His  love  will  be  plainly  enough  discernible.  (C.  H.  Sjnirgeon.) 
Christ  in  the  house : — I.  That  Christ  in  the  house  is  an  attraction — "  Many  were 
gathered  together."  II.  That  Christ  in  the  house  is  an  instbuction — ••He 
preached  the  word  unto  them."  III.  That  Christ  in  the  house  is  a  benbdiotion. 
1.  A  benediction  of  healing.  2.  A  benediction  of  pardon.  1.  That  Christ  is 
willing  to  dwell  in  the  homes  of  men.  2.  That  when  Christ  dwells  in  the  home  it 
is  visible  to  the  world  that  He  does  so.  3.  That  the  home-life  should  be  a  per- 
petual but  silent  sermon.    {J,  S,  Exell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  3.  And  they  come  unto  Him,  bringing  one  sick  of  the  palay,  which  ira« 
t>ome  of  four. — The  charities  of  the  poor: — "  Borne  of  four."  The  charities  of  the 
rich  are  published  far  and  wide,  and  all  men  talk  of  them.  Let  us  turn  from  them 
to  think  for  a  little  of  the  charities  of  the  poor.  But  how  do  we  know  that  the 
paralytic  in  this  story  belonged  to  the  poor?  From  St.  Mark.  When  he  says 
(ii.  4J  "  They  let  down  the  bed,"  he  employs  a  different  word  for  bed  from  St. 
Matthew,  viz.,  the  Greek  form  of  the  Latin  grabatus,  the  pallet  or  camp-bed  used  by 
the  poor  (Cf.  John  v.  8  ;  Acts  v.  15,  ix.  33).  This  is  one  of  those  graphic  touches 
by  which  he  so  often  gives  additional  interest  and  pictorial  vividness  to  his  narrative. 
(Cf.  in  the  context,  "Capernaum,"  ver.  1,  "about  the  door,"  ver.  2,  "broken  it 
up."  ver.  4,  "  son,"  ver.  6,  and  text,  "  borne  of  four.")  The  story  suj^gests  as  to  the 
charities  oif  the  poor — I.  That  thet  oenerally  sPRrNo  fbom  neighboubhood — 
I*  Four."  Who  were  they,  friends  or  kinsfolk  ?  Most  probably  neighbours.  There 
is  something  sacred  in  neighbourhood.  It  is  an  ordinance  of  God,  and  the  source 
of  countless  kindnesses  and  sweet  humanities.  II.  That  thky  abb  often  nameless— 
"Four."  The  deed  of  love  is  chronicled,  but  nothing  is  said  to  identify  the  doers. 
So  of  thousands.  Their  simple,  unostentatious  charities  are  unnamed  and  un- 
ht)noured.  But  their  record  is  on  high.  HI.  That  they  abe  caui^d  fobth  eh  cases 
OF  obeat  distbess — ••Palsy."  Type  of  many.  No  place  exempt  from  trouble. 
Multitudes  of  the  poor  suffer  grievously.  IV.  That  they  are  chabactebizkd  by 
MUCH  DisiNTEBESTEDNESS  AND  GENEROSITY.  Of  the  chnritics  of  the  poor  it  may  b« 
said,  as  Spenser  says  of  the  angels,  that  they  are  •'  all  for  love  and  nothing  for 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chaj.  n. 

toward.**  Y.  That  thet  abb  pxbsonallt  bxbbcised.  Most  of  the  rich  act  bj  proxy. 
How  different  with  the  poor.     They  act  for  themselves.     VI.  That  they  beach 

THXIB  mOHXST  TOBM  WHEN  THBT  ABE  THE  &IEANS  OF  BBINGINO  SOULS  TO  GhBIBT.      VII. 

That  thbt  bhaix  have  a  obxat  bbwabo.  Happy  day  for  this  poor  man  and  hia 
friends.  (W,  Forsyth,  M.A.)  Mutual  help : — '•  Two,"  says  Solomon,  •*  are  better 
than  one ;  for  if  one  fall  he  can  help  the  other,  but  woe  nnto  him  that  is  alone  when 
he  falleth  1  '*  The  cobbler  could  not  paint  the  picture,  but  he  could  tell  Apellea 
that  the  shoe-latchet  was  not  quite  right,  and  the  painter  thought  it  well  to  take 
his  hint.  Two  neighbours,  one  blind  and  the  other  lame,  were  called  to  a  place  at 
ft  great  distanca  What  was  to  be  done  ?  The  blind  man  could  not  see,  and  the 
lame  man  conld  not  walk !  Why,  the  blind  man  carried  the  lame  one ;  the  former 
assisted  by  his  legs,  the  other  by  his  eyes.  Say  to  no  one,  then,  '*  I  can  do  without 
you ; "  but  be  ready  to  help  those  who  ask  your  aid,  and  then,  when  it  is  needed, 
yon  may  ask  theirs.  {Smith.)  A  man  with  a  palsy  : — Learn :  I.  The  blessed- 
ness OF  faithful  friends.  II.  The  poweb  of  sin.  III.  The  besult  of  persbveb- 
ANCB.  IV.  The  philosophy  of  beligion — "  Seek  ye  first,"  &o.  {Anon.)  The  sick 
man  let  down  through  the  roof  to  Christ : — I.  Those  who  would  be  healed  by  Christ 
HUST  COME  TO  HiM.  Though  in  exceptional  cases  our  Lord  did  cure  sick  people  who 
were  at  a  distance  {e.g.  Luke  vii.  1-10),  His  general  rule  was  to  heal  by  look,  word, 
and  touch — by  the  giving  out  of  "  virtue  "  from  His  living  presence  (v.  30).  Thui 
in  the  case  before  us  the  man  was  not  cured  till  he  reached  Christ.  1.  It  is  not 
enough  to  hear  much  of  Christ.  It  is  not  enough  to  hear  of  a  surgeon ;  a  cure  can 
be  effected  only  by  personal  treatment.  2.  It  is  not  enough  to  seek  help  of  those 
who  are  near  to  Christ.    The  crowd  about  the  door  could  not  heal  the  sick  man. 

II.  ThEBB  abb  those  who  will  NEVEB  beach   GhBIST  unless  they  ABE   BBOUOHT  TO 

£[iM  BY  OTHEBS.  The  sick  man  was  **  borne  of  four,"  and  could  not  have  reached 
Jesus  without  this  help.  It  is  the  mission  of  the  Church  to  bring  to  Christ  those 
who  are  too  helpless  in  spiritual  indifference  to  seek  Him  of  their  own  accord  (Luke 
xiv.  21-23).  Note — 1.  The  Church  cannot  cure  the  world  of  its  sin.  2.  Those  who 
cannot  do  more,  may  be  able  to  bring  others  under  "the  sound  of  the  word," 
by  inducing  them  to  attend  places  of  worship,  &c.    IH.  Thb  selfishness  op  somb 

WHO  ABB  ENJOYING  ChBISTIAN  PBIVILEGES  IS  ONE  OF  THB  QBBATEST  IMPEDIMENTS  TO 
THB  SPREAD  OF  THE  BLESSINOS  OF  THE  GOSPEL  AMONG  THOSE  WHO  ABE  AS  YET   WITHOUT 

THEM.    The  selfish  crowd  would  not  give  place  for  the  sick  man.    IV.  Earnest 

PBBSEVERANOE  IN  SEEKING  ChRIST  WILL  OVERCOME  THE  QBBATEST  DIFFICULTIES.       The 

readiness  to  give  up  before  difficulties  is  a  sure  proof  of  half-heartedness.  It  is  the 
sluggard  who  says,  "There  is  a  lion  in  the  path."  Christ  is  always  accessible, 
though  not  always  with  ease.    V.  Though  the  way  of  coming  to  Chbist  may  bb 

XBREGULAR,  HiS  HEALING  BLESSING  WILL  BE  CERTAINLY  GIVBN  WHEN  ONCE  He  IS  TRULY 

FOUND.  There  are  cases  in  which  the  regular  methods  of  the  Church  fail,  and 
irregular  methods  seem  to  succeed.  {W.  F.  Adeney^  M.A,)  Healing  the  para- 
lytic : — ^I.  FoBGivBNESS  is  the  chief  blessing.  II.  Adoption — "  Son,'*  III.  Glad- 
ness— "Be  of  good  cheer."  IV.  Faith — "When  He  saw  their  faith."  (D. 
Brotchie.)  ChrisVs  way  of  dealing  with  sin: — I.  Thk  malady  pbesented  to 
Christ.  The  malady,  apparently,  was  nothing  more  than  palsy.  But  not  as  such 
did  Christ  treat  it.  As  with  their  faith,  so  it  was  here.  He  went  deeper  than  per- 
severance or  ingenuity.  He  goes  deeper  than  the  outward  evil ;  down  to  the  evil, 
the  root  of  all  evil,  properly  the  only  evil — sin.  Now  sin  has  a  twofold  set  of  con- 
sequences. 1.  The  naturiJ.  By  the  natural,  we  mean  those  results  which  come 
inevitably  in  the  train  of  vnrong-doing,  by  what  we  call  the  laws  of  nature  visiting 
themselves  on  the  outward  condition  of  a  sinner,  by  which  sin  and  suffering  are 
linked  together.  Here,  apparently,  palsy  had  been  the  natural  result  of  ein ;  for 
otherwise  the  address  of  Christ  was  meaningless.  These  natural  consequences  are 
often  invisible  as  well  as  inevitable.  Probably  not  one  of  the  four  friends,  or  even 
the  physician,  suspected  such  a  connection.  But  the  conscience  of  the  palsied  man 
and  the  all-seeing  eye  of  Christ  traced  the  connection.  Such  an  experience  is  true 
much  oftener  than  we  imagine.  The  irritable  temperament,  the  lost  memory,  are 
eonneoted  with  sins  done  long  ago.  For  nothing  here  stands  alone  and  causeless. 
The  Saviour  saw  in  this  palsied  man  the  miserable  wreck  of  an  ill-spent  life.  2. 
Now  quite  distinct  from  these  are  the  moral  consequences  of  guilt :  by  which  I  mean 
those  which  tell  upon  the  character  and  inward  being  of  the  man  who  sins.  In 
one  sense,  no  doubt,  it  is  a  natural  result,  inasmuch  as  it  is  by  a  law,  regular  and 
unalterable,  a  man  becomes  by  sin  deteriorated  in  character,  or  miserable.  Now 
are  twofold,  negative  and  positive — the  loss  of  some  blessing :  or  the  accruing 


CHAP.  11.]  ST,  MARK.  61 

of  some  evil  to  the  heart.  Loss — as  when  by  sinning  we  lose  the  capacity  for  all 
higher  enjoyments ;  for  none  can  sin  without  blunting  his  sensibilities.  He  has 
lost  the  zest  of  a  pure  lifp,  the  freshneps  and  the  flood  of  happiness  which  come  to 
every  soul  when  it  is  delicate,  and  pure,  and  natural.  This  is  no  light  loss.  K 
any  one  here  congratulates  himself  that  sin  has  brought  to  him  no  positive  misery, 
my  brother,  I  pray  you  to  remember  that  God's  worst  curse  was  pronounced  upon 
the  serpent  tempter.  Apparently  it  was  far  less  than  that  pronounced  on  the 
woman,  but  really  it  was  far  more  terrible.  Not  pain,  not  shame — no,  these  ara 
remedial,  and  may  bring  penitence  at  last — but  to  sink  the  angel  in  the  animal — 
the  spirit  in  the  flesh ;  to  be  a  reptile,  and  to  eat  the  dust  of  degradation  as  if  it 
were  natural  food.  Eternity  has  no  damnation  deeper  than  that.  Then,  again,  a 
positive  result — the  dark  and  dreadful  loneliness  that  comes  from  doing  wrong — a 
conscious  unrest  which  plunges  into  business,  or  pleasure,  or  society,  not  for  the 
loTe  of  these  things,  but  to  hide  itself  from  itself  as  Adam  did  in  the  trees  of  the 
garden,  because  it  dare  not  hear  the  voice  of  God,  nor  believe  in  His  presence.  II. 
Christ's  treatment  op  that  malady.  By  the  declaration  of  God's  forgiveness. 
The  forgiveness  of  God  acts  upon  the  moral  consequences  of  sin  directly.  Eemorse 
passes  into  penitence  and  love.  There  is  no  more  loneliness,  for  God  has  taken  up  His 
abode  there.  No  more  self-contempt,  for  he  whom  God  has  forgiven  learns  to  forgive 
himself.  There  is  no  more  unrest,  for  "  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with 
God."  Upon  the  natural  consequences,  not  directly,  but  indirectly  and  mediately. 
The  forgiveness  of  Christ  did  not  remove  the  palsy,  that  was  the  result  of  a  separate 
act  of  Christ.  It  is  quite  conceivable  that  it  might  not  have  been  removed  at  all. 
Consider  too,  that  without  a  miracle,  they  must  have  remained  in  this  man's  case. 
It  is  so  in  every-day  life.  If  the  intemperate  man  repents  he  will  receive  forgive- 
ness, but  will  that  penitence  give  him  back  the  steady  hand  of  youth  ?  Or  if  the 
suicide  between  the  moment  of  draining  the  poisoned  cup  and  that  of  death  repent 
of  his  deed,  will  that  arrest  the  operation  of  the  poison  ?  A  strong  constitution  or 
the  physician  may  possibly  save  life ;  but  penitence  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Say 
that  the  natural  penal  consequence  of  crime  is  the  scaffold : — Did  the  pardon  given 
to  the  dying  thief  unnail  his  hands?  Did  Christ's  forgiveness  interfere  with  the 
natural  consequences  of  his  guilt  f  And  thus,  we  are  brought  to  a  very  solemn  and 
awful  consideration,  awful  because  of  its  truth  and  simplicity.  The  consequences 
of  past  deeds  remain.  They  have  become  part  of  the  chain  of  the  universe — effects 
which  now  are  causes,  and  will  work  and  interweave  themselves  with  the  history  of 
the  world  for  ever.  You  cannot  undo  your  acts.  If  you  have  depraved  another's 
will,  and  injured  another's  soul,  it  may  be  in  the  grace  of  God  that  hereafter  you 
will  be  personally  accepted  and  the  consequences  of  your  guilt  inwardly  done  away, 
but  your  penitence  cannot  undo  the  evil  you  have  done,  and  God's  worst  punish- 
ment may  be  that  you  may  have  to  gaze  half  frantic  on  the  ruin  you  have  caused, 
on  the  evil  you  have  done.  And  yet  even  here  the  grace  of  God's  forgiveness  is  not 
in  vain ;  it  may  transform  the  natural  consequences  of  sin  into  blessings.  It  would 
give  meekness,  patience,  and  change  even  the  character  of  death  itself.  A  changed 
heart  will  change  all  things  around  us.  III.  Thb  tbub  aim  and  meanimo  or 
MIRACLES.  It  is  the  outward  manifestation  of  the  power  of  God,  in  order  that  we 
may  believe  in  the  power  of  God  in  things  that  are  invisible.  Miracles  were  no 
concession  to  that  infidel  spirit  which  taints  our  modern  Christianity,  and  which 
cannot  believe  in  God's  presence,  except  it  can  see  Him  in  the  supernatural. 
Rather,  they  were  to  make  us  feel  that  all  is  marvellous,  all  wonderful,  all  per- 
vaded with  a  Divine  presence,  and^that  the  simplest  occurrences  of  life  are  miracles. 
In  conclusion.  Let  me  address  those  who,  like  this  sufferer,  are  in  any  degree 
conscious  either  of  the  natural  or  moral  results  of  sin,  working  in  them.  My  Chris- 
tian brethren,  if  the  crowd  of  difiSculties  which  stand  between  your  soul  and  God 
succeed  in  keeping  you  away,  all  is  lost.  Right  into  His  presence  you  must  force 
your  way,  with  no  concealment.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.  A .)  Body  and  soul  cured : — 
I.  Pardon,  as  such,  is  not  a  prooressivk  thing.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  half  a 
pardon.  There  are  no  processes  of  forgiveness — *'  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.'* 
The  sense  of  pardon  will  progress  with  growing  holiness ;  but  not  the  pardon.    II, 

We  may  notice  further  that  the  forgiveness  op  sins  took  the   initiative   of   ALIj 

THE  BLESSINGS.  It  was  the  first  act  of  grace  which  led  on  to  all  the  rest.  Remem- 
ber,  we  do  not  work  up  to  our  pardon,  but  from  it.  We  receive  it  in  the  free,  un- 
deserved, sovereign  grace  of  God.  lU.  And  further,  we  gather  from  the  story,  that 
any  temporal  blessings  that  we  receive  may,  to  a  devout  mind,  give  kvidenok  of 

God'B  liOVB  TO  THX   SOUL,  AND   OF   HlS  POWKB  TO   BESTOW    FURTHEB  BPIBITUAL   OXFTA. 


es  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ik 

IV.  It  is  strengthening  and  assuring  also  to  see  by  what  tenures  we  hold  our 
PARDON — "The  Son  of  man,"  &c.  (J.  Vatighan,  M.A.)  The  paralytic  let  down 
through  the  roof: — The  scribes  were  right  in  their  instinctive  reflection,  that  none 
can  forgive  sins  but  God.  As  an  illustration  of  the  whole  covenant  of  our  redemp- 
tion from  guilt,  and  its  penal  consequences,  Christ  first  forgives  the  sins  of  the 
paralytic,  and  then  throws  health  into  every  fibre  of  his  body.  Does  it  not  intimate 
"that  all  judgment  hath  been  committed  unto  the  Son."  JDoes  it  not  cast  a  new 
light  upon  those  passages  of  Holy  "Writ,  in  which  the  prerogative  of  giving  life  is 
attributed  t6  Jesus,  as  though  He  were  the  original  source  of  vitality.  Let  ua 
regard  this  as  an  instance  of  Divine  faith ;  it  will  help  us  to  a  view  of  faith  as  con- 
trasted with  reason,  and  of  faith  exercised  in  its  proper  department ;  also  an  example 
of  the  moral  necessity  of  faith  to  the  obtaining  of  blessings  from  heaven.  I.  The 
consideration  of  the  text  will  help  us  to  a  right  view  of  faith  as  contrasted  with 
REASON.  It  was  clearly  faith  which  brought  the  men  to  the  city  where  our  Lord 
was ;  whereas  reason  might  have  kept  them  at  home.  Let  it  be  assumed  that  faith 
and  reason  are  independent  processes  of  the  mind,  as  being  exercised  on  different 
things ;  faith  •'  cometh  by  hearing,"  and  simply  accepting  testimony ;  reason,  on 
the  other  hand,  looks  rather  to  the  lessons  of  experience.  The  four  friends  of  the 
palsied  man  having  heard  of  the  cures  wrought  by  Jesus,  determined  at  all  hazards 
to  carry  their  friend  to  Him.    Now  we  call  the  moral  temper  which  so  influenced 

them it  may  be  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye — faith.    They  accepted  the  statements 

of  those  who  had  been  at  Capernaum.  They  did  not  argue  concerning  the  super- 
natural power  of  our  Lord,  or  inquire  whether  it  was  consonant  with  the  usual 
course  of  nature ;  such  would  have  been  the  exercise  of  reason.  Reason  would  have 
contended  that  no  force  of  words  could  restore  palsied  limbs  to  health.  Faith,  bo 
far  contrasted  with  reason,  was  ready  to  make  the  journey.  To  put  the  contrast  in 
another  view.  There  are  many  who  would  contend,  that  our  last  remark  goes  to 
depreciate  faith,  and  to  say  that  it  is  a  moral  quality,  lower  than  reason ;  dependent, 
after  all,  upon  it,  and  content  to  make  its  decisions  and  pursue  its  conduct  upon  a 
less  precise  and  more  vague  amount  of  evidence.  Nay,  more,  that  it  may  be  con- 
fused with  reason,  and  is  but  a  certain  form  or  process  of  reason.  This  is  practi- 
cally the  view  of  all  those  modem  thinkers,  who,  wanting  to  get  rid  of  the  motive 
powers  of  the  gospel,  seek  first  to  depreciate  the  very  principles  of  which  they  are 
constituted.  But  it  may  be  replied,  that  reason  is  not  the  origin  and  source  of 
faith,  because  it  sometimes  comes  in  to  test  and  verify  its  discoveries,  any  more 
than  the  judge  at  your  tribunals  is  the  origin  of  the  innocence  of  those  whom  he 
righteously  acquits ;  or  the  critic  who  decides  about  the  structure  and  the  plot  of  an 
epic,  is  to  be  confounded  with  the  poet,  from  the  depths  of  whose  abounding  genius 
its  ridi  thoughts  have  welled  forth.  From  what  we  have  said  it  may  be  presumed 
that  we  claim  for  faith  something  not  unlike  a  separate  identity  in  the  breast.  We 
think  that  we  hardly  disparage  conscience — itself  not  far  apart  from  reason,  as  ex- 
ercised in  a  high  and  holy  manner,  and  yet,  though  near,  distinct — ^if  we  seat  faith 
by  her  side,  in  the  banquet  of  the  soul's  uppermost  chamber :  if  we  claim  for  faith 
the  prerogatives  of  a  separate  instinct  and  power — a  moral  temper  and  standing^ 
apart  in  the  breast ;  and  coming  in  its  brighter  forms  not  merely  of  ourselves,  not 
as  a  natural  evolution  of  any  ordinary  inward  powers,  but  as  the  special  gift  of  God. 
Nor  is  this  to  confound  it  with  that  superstition  of  fanaticism  by  which  the  pre- 
tended votaries  of  faith  are  sometimes  led  away,  and  which  renders  it  so  obnoxious 
to  men  of  the  world.  But  not  to  continue  longer  this  desultory  contrast  of  faith 
and  reason  than  the  necessity  of  the  times  requires,  and  leaving  its  development 
rather  to  your  private  meditations,  we  shall  only  dwell  on  one  more  point,  as  dis- 
played in  the  case  of  the  earnest  friends  of  the  paralytic.  This  conduct  forms  a 
strong  illustration  of  the  truth  that  faith  is  a  principle  of  action,  as  reason  of 
minute  investigations.  We  may,  if  we  will,  think  that  such  investigations  are  of 
high  value ;  though,  in  truth,  they  have  a  tendency  to  blunt  the  practical  energy 
of  the  mind  while  they  improve  its  scientific  exactness.  This  remark  brings  us  to 
the  gist  of  our  whole  argument.  We  are  surrounded  by  men  who  would  persuade 
us  that  the  world  is  to  be  regenerated,  and  all  its  paralytic  prostrations  healed,  by 
the  careful  balancing  of  certain  philosophical  truths,  by  courses  of  speculative 
inquiry,  by  the  exercise  of  the  reason  alone.  Of  the  height  of  faith  in  its  higher 
forms  they  know  nothing.  We  venture  to  tell  them  that  whether  for  the  rescue  of 
a  pauper  or  a  world  their  plans  and  principles  are  powerless.  While  reason  is 
Bpeculating  and  balancing  things,  and  doubts  which  way  to  proceed,  faith  move* 
lapidly  and  majestically  forward,  and  sheds  blessings  at  every  footstep.     While 


CH^.  II.]  ST.  MARK.  61 

reason  inquires  whether  the  waters  can  possess  any  healing  power,  faith  steps  in, 
and  is  made  whole.  If,  then,  reason  and  faith  are  to  stand  opposed,  let  us  stand, 
with  the  just,  by  faith.  Keason,  set  up  in  denial  of  faith — in  morals,  gave  men  the 
fictions  of  Bousseau — in  religion,  of  Thomas  Paine— in  politics,  of  the  French 
Eevolution.  Irreverence,  captiousness,  the  spirit  of  division,  the  denial  of  the 
divinity  of  our  blessed  Lord  and  all  sacramental  mysteries,  the  sneers  at  prayer — 
these  are  the  genuine  products  of  reason,  attired  as  a  harlot,  carried  as  an  idol, 
and  set  in  antagonism  to  faith.  Of  extremes,  that  of  the  rationalist  is  the  worst 
I  had  rather  be  superstitious  than  sceptical.  Wherever  I  am,  oh  Jesus  Christ,  give 
me  the  spirit  of  simplicity,  learning,  and  loving ;  lest  Thou  shouldest  be  near,  and 
I  knew  it  not — lest  others  should  be  pressing  to  hear  Thy  words  and  seek  Thy  face, 
taking,  with  holy  "violence,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  force,"  and  I  should  linger 
apart  from  Thee ;  lest  mj  soul  should  be  left  with  its  leprous  taint  of  sin  uncured, 
while  others  came  from  Thy  presence,  with  souls  like  that  of  a  little  child ;  lest  my 
spiritual  powers  should  be  palsied  still,  while  others,  "borne"  by  the  faith  of 
•*  four,"  had  their  sins  forgiven,  their  maladies  healed,  and  took  up  their  bed,  and 
departed  to  their  house.  IL  Without  apologising  for  the  length  of  the  discussion 
just  closed — because  it  ieems  necessary  to  meet  the  rationalist  and  utilitarian 
direction  of  this  iron  age — we  turn  with  minds  relieved  and  rejoicing  to  a  few 
practical  reflections  immediately  suggested  by  the  text.  It  furnishes,  first,  an  ex- 
ample of  earnest  industry  on  the  part  of  the  friends  and  attendants  of  the  poor 
paralytic,  such  as  we  shall  do  well  to  imitate  as  well  as  admire.  Brethren,  beloved 
in  the  Lord,  is  your  substantiation  of  things  hoped  for  simple  and  uncompromising 
like  this  ?  Beheving,  as  we  trust  you  do,  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  do  ye  use  con- 
trivance as  earnest,  and  labour  as  hard,  in  fulfilling  that  best  office  of  friendship, 
which  places  the  diseased  in  the  presence  of  their  Saviour  ?  Do  you  send  up  their 
case  to  the  house  of  God,  that  it  may  be  borne,  as  it  were,  not  of  "  four,"  but  of 
many,  to  the  throne  of  heavenly  grace  ?  If  there  be  in  your  families  any  paralysed 
by  sin  and  wickedness,  men  whose  moral  principles  are  deadened,  and  sensibilities 
benumbed,  by  the  poison  of  licentiousness,  or  infidelity,  or  worldliness,  do  you 
try  by  importunate  application,  and  kind  but  constant  entreaty,  to  bring  them  to 
the  living  fountain,  open  for  sin  and  uncleanness?  Christ  is  in  His  Church; 
do  you  try  and  persuade  them  to  join  you  in  its  holy  services?  Do  you  ply 
them  with  every  kind  and  tender  office,  bearing  them,  as  it  were,  in  your  arms, 
that  your  importunity  may  be  successful  ?  Do  you  take  as  much  pains  fof 
their  soul's  health,  as  they  who  carried  the  palsied  cripple,  and  let  him  down 
through  the  roof  of  the  house  ?  And  you  cannot  but  remark  the  reward  which 
our  blessed  Lord  vouchsafes  to  their  exertions.  His  omniscient  eye  followed 
them  as  they  toiled  up  the  staircase  to  the  roof ;  He  perceived  their  confi- 
dence. It  is  not,  we  trust,  irreverent  to  suppose  that  His  spirit  rejoiced  within 
Him,  and  felt  serene  satisfaction  at  the  flow  of  faith  in  the  hearts  of  these  people. 
Mysteriously  restrained  or  free,  rapid  or  slow,  plenteous  or  frugal,  in  the  disbursal 
of  His  miraculous  blessings,  according  to  the  faith  of  those  around  Him,  grieved 
as  He  often  was  at  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts,  doing  here  and  there  "  not  many 
mighty  works,  because  of  their  unbelief ;  "  we  may  suppose  the  joyous  contrast  of 
emotion,  as  He  perceived  the  paralytic  let  down  in  His  presence.  Similar,  beloved 
brethren,  shall  be  your  reward ;  if  you,  with  the  same  quiet  constancy  and  stead- 
fastness, seek  to  bring  souls  to  Him,  who  is  the  good  Physician.  It  may  be,  that 
your  toil  will  long  appear  mere  unprofitable  waste.  You  will  long  wonder  at  the 
little  result  which  ensues  on  your  earnest  effort.  The  deeper  laws  of  God's  eternal 
kingdom,  the  manner  in  which  He  subdues  minds  to  Himself,  will  be  entirely 
hidden  from  your  most  searching  investigation.  Still,  with  faith,  toil  on ;  toil  on. 
Carry  your  wicked  and  morally  paralysed  friends,  on  the  arms  of  prayer,  to  Christ ; 
persuade  them,  if  possible,  to  seek  the  sacred  scenes  where  the  shadows  of  Christ'i 
mysterious  presence  fall ;  ••  in  due  time  ye  shall  reap,  if  ye  faint  not."  {T.  JaeksoHt 
M.A.) 

Ver.  4. — ^They  uncovered  the  roof  where  He  was. — Daring  faith : — These  roofi 
are  substantially  built,  as  they  need  to  be,  since  the  whole  family  habitually  walked 
and  slept  upon  them.  They  broke  up  and  uncovered  a  part  of  the  roof.  But  one 
would  have  thought  that  even  then  they  were  as  far  off  from  Jesus  as  ever.  It 
must  have  required  a  daring  faith  in  those  four  men  to  conceive  and  carry  out  the 
course  they  took.  They  let  down  their  neighbour  in  a  bed,  which  they  had  slung 
to  ropes,  into  the  room  where  Jesus  was  talking  with  rabbis  of  all  the  schooia,  but 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

they  uttered  no  request     One  would  like  to  know  the  names  of  these  four  good 
men,  good  neighbours,  good  friends.     The  fact  that  we  know  not  their  names 
suggests  to  us  that  Christ  cares  for  men  whose  names  the  world  has  never  heard  of, 
and  never  will  hear ;  for  the  lowly  and  inconspicuous,  no  less  than  for  the  famous 
and  the  great.     {S.  Cox^  D.D.)        Doing  difficult  work: — When  you  cannot  do 
a  good  thing,  then  is  the  very  time  to  do  it.    If  it  cannot  be  done  in  one  way, 
do  it  in  another.    If  there  is  no  way  of  doing  it  on  the  ground-level,  get  up  on  to 
the  roof  and  do  it.     •*  Where  there  is  a  will,  there  is  a  way."    The  best  work  done 
in  the  world  has  been  work  that  could  not  be  done ;  and  there  is  rarely  a  time 
when  you  ought  not  to  do  something  that  cannot  be  done — as  it  seems  to  you. 
(H.  (7.  Tnimbull.)        The  potency  of  faith  in  Christian  work  : — I.  True  faixh  is 
ALWAYS  CONCERNED  TOR  THE  WELFARE  OF  OTHERS.     Thcse  men  manifestly  worked 
disinterestedly.     So  faith  always  acts ;  like  the  sister  grace  of  charity,  she  "  seeketh 
not  her  own."     II.  Tuue  faith  always  looks  to  Christ  as  the  centre  op  its 
OPERATIONS.    Not  foHus  OT  cciemonies,  or  ministers,  or  churches,  or  even  the  Bible 
itself,  but  Christ  is  the  only  Saviour  of  the  lost     III.  True  faitb  is  fertile  in 
EXPEDIENTS   FOB    OVERCOMING    DIFFICULTIES.      Have  WO  exhausted  all  ingenuity 
in  seeking  souls  ?    IV.  True  faith  meets  with  its  appropriate  reward.     What 
a  reward  for  their  faith !    Here  is  infinitely  more  than  they  ever  expected  (Ephes. 
iii.  20).    Learn — that  faith  is  essentially  practical ;  that  religion  is  promoted  by 
the  exertions  of  believers ;  that  to  bring  others  to  Jesus  is  the  noblest  achievement 
of  man.    {W,  W,  Smith.)        Faith  seen  by  Christ: — On  none  of  these  qualities 
did  Christ  fix  as  an  explanation  of  the  fact.    He  went  deeper.     He  traced  it  to  the 
deepest  source  of  power  that  exists  in  the  mind  of  man.     "  When  Jesus  saw  their 
faith."     For  as  love  is  deepest  in  the  Being  of  God,  so  faith  is  the  mightiest 
principle  in  the  soul  of  man.    Let  us  distinguish  their  several  essences.     Love  is 
the  essence  of  the  Deity — that  which  makes  it  Deity.      Faith  is  the  essence 
of  Humanity,  which  constitutes  it  what  it  is.     And,  as  here,  it  is  the  warring 
principle  of  this  world  which  wins  in  life's  battle.    No  wonder  that  it  is  written  in 
Scripture—"  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."    No 
wonder  it  is  said,  "  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth."    It  is  that  which 
wrestles  with  difficulty,  removes  mountains,  tramples  upon  impossibilities.    It  is 
this  spirit  which  in  the  common  affairs  of  life,  known  as  a  "  sanguine  tempera- 
ment," never  says  "  impossible  "  and  never  believes  in  failure,  leads  the  men  of 
the  world  to  their  most  signal  successes,  making  them  believe  a  thing  possible 
because  they  hope  it;  and  giving  substantial  reality  to  that  which  before  was 
a  shadow  and  a  dream.    It  was  this  "  substance  of  things  hoped  for  "  that  gave 
America  to  Columbus,  when  billows,  miles  deep,  rose  between  him  and  the  land, 
and  the  men  he  commanded  well-nigh  rose  in  rebellion  against  the  obstinacy 
which  beheved  in  "  things  not  yet  seen."    It  was  this  that  crowned  the  Mahomme- 
dan  arms  for  seven  centuries  with  victory :  so  long  as  they  believed  themselves  the 
champions  of  the  One  God  with  a  mission  from  Him,  they  were  invincible.     And 
it  is  this  which  so  often  obtains  for  some  new  system  of  medicine  the  honour  of 
a  cure,  when  tiie  real  canse  of  oure  is  only  the  patient's  trust  in  the  remedies. 
(F.  W,  RoberUon,  M,A,) 

Ver.  6.  When  Jesus  ww  their  tallh.— Faith  for  others  .-—The  perfect  concur- 
rence  of  the  paralytic  cannot  be  doubted,  and  probably  he  had  already  poured  out 
his  soul  in  confession;  still,  we  have  no  right  to  ignore  what  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  here  recorded,  viz.,  that  it  was  the  sight  of  his  bearers'  faith  which  drew  from 
Christ's  lips  the  words  of  forgiveness.  It  is  a  fact  full  of  mystery,  but  full  also  of 
consolation,  that  not  a  few  of  the  gifts  of  healing  and  restoration — on  the  centu- 
rion's servant,  on  Jairus'  child,  on  the  blind  man  at  Bethsaida,  on  the  Syro-Phce- 
nician's  daughter — ^were  obtained  through  the  faith  and  prayers,  not  so  much  of 
the  eick  and  afflicted  themselves,  as  of  their  relations  and  friends.  Surely  this 
dependence  of  man  upon  his  fellow-creatures  was  intended  to  foreshadow  the  great 
mystery  of  Redemption  through  Another's  Blood.  It  may  well  have^  been  placed 
on  record  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  teach  us  that  whenever  we  try  to  bring  others  to 
the  feet  of  Jesus  to  be  healed  of  their  soul's  sickness — be  they  friends  or  enemies — 
whenever  we  offer  up  ••  the  prayer  of  faith,"  which  we  are  assured  ♦•  shall  save  the 
sick,"  we  are  associating  ourselves  in  deeds  of  mercy  and  acts  of  intercession  with 
the  Great  High  Priest  of  the  world—the  One  Mediator  between  God  and  Man— the 
Man  Christ  Jesus,  our  Lord.  (H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D,)  Faith  visible  :-^Fa.ith  is 
•ar«  to  be  visible  to  the  naked  eye.    That  which  never  manifests  itself  in  action 


CHAP,  n.]  ST,  MARK. 


is  not  the  faith  which  Jesas  sees  with  approval.  Faith  that  cannot  be  seen  is  dead 
faith — dead  and  buried,  (if.  G.  Trumbull.)  Jeaus  saw  their  faith : —Here  "vtab 
the  explanation  of  their  strange  conduct,  and  the  secret  motive  power  of  their 
determined  action.  The  crowd  saw  their  eccentricity,  Jesus  saw  their  faith.  If 
there  be  anything  good  within  us  Christ  will  be  sure  to  see  it.  Here,  then,  we  see 
the  power  of  faith.  I.  It  deepened  their  sympathy  for  this  sufferer.  If  they  pitied 
before,  they  would  have  a  keener  sympathy  now  they  believed  that  a  cure  was 
possible.  II.  It  devised  a  scheme  for  bringing  him  to  Christ.  IIL  It  carried 
out  that  scheme  in  the  most  extraordinary  way.  lY.  It  attracted  the  admiration 
of  Christ.  He  saw  their  faith.  V.  It  obtained  a  cure  for  the  sufferer.  Their 
faith.  {Anon.)  The  faith  of  a  child: — An  evangelist  of  to-day  tells  that,  after 
one  of  his  meetings,  he  observed  that  a  little  girl  kept  her  seat  after  all  others  had 
left.  Thinking  that  the  child  was  asleep,  he  stepped  forward  to  awaken  her,  but 
found  she  was  praying  that  God  would  send  her  drunken  father  to  that  meeting- 
house that  very  night,  there  to  be  converted.  The  evangelist  waited,  and  soon 
a  man  came  rushing  in  from  the  street,  and  knelt  tremblingly  at  the  child's  side. 
He  had  been  brouglit  thither  by  a  sudden  impulse  which  he  could  not  resist,  and 
then  and  there  he  found  Christ.  The  child's  faith  was  honoured  in  the  conversion 
of  her  father.  {The  Sunday  School  Times.)  A  paralytic  healed  on  the  faith  of 
others : — What  I  would  especially  remark  in  these  words,  is  the  benefit  which  this 
sick  man  received  from  the  faith  of  others.  He  was  healed  upon  the  faith  of  the 
men  who  brought  him  to  Jesus.  Several  instances  of  the  same  kind  occur  in 
the  history  of  Christ's  miracles.  The  conduct  of  the  Saviour,  in  these  instances, 
is  agreeable  to  the  general  plan  of  God's  moral  government.  As  He  has  placed 
mankind  in  a  state  of  mutual  dependence,  so  it  is  an  essential  part  of  the  constita- 
tion  of  His  government,  that  some  shall  be  benefited  by  the  faith  and  piety,  or 
shall  be  liable  to  suffer  by  the  vice  and  wickedness  of  others.  The  bestowment 
indeed  of  future  and  eternal  blessings  must  depend  on  personal  qualifications. 
Obserration  shows  us  that  this  is  no  uncommon  case.  The  virtue  and  happineai 
of  communities  greatly  depend  on  the  wisdom  and  integrity  of  rulers.  The  advan- 
tages  which  one  enjoys  by  his  connection  with  the  virtuous,  and  the  dangers  to 
which  another  is  exposed  by  his  connection  with  the  vicious,  are  not  always  owing 
merely  to  himself,  but  often  to  the  inmiediate  providence  of  God,  who  allots  to 
each  one  such  trials  and  such  assistances  as  His  wisdom  sees  fit.  From  this  part 
of  the  Divine  constitution  we  may  derive  some  useful  instructions.  I.  We  see  the 
reasonableness  of  intercession.  If  God  is  pleased  to  employ  some  men  as  visible 
instruments  of  general  good,  we  may  rationally  suppose  that  He  often,  in  a  more 
secret  and  invisible  manner,  connects  the  happiness  of  many  with  the  fervent 
prayers  of  a  few,  or  even  one  godly  soui  Of  the  Jews,  in  a  corrupt  period,  the 
apostle  says,  ••  they  were  beloved  for  their  fathers'  sake."  Some  will  ask,  perhaps, 
how  is  it  reasonable  that  our  future  happiness  should  be  made  to  depend  on 
another's  prayers  ?  We  have  not  the  command  of  their  hearts,  we  cannot  oblige 
them  to  pray  for  us  ;  why  should  we  be  exposed  to  suffer  for  their  neglect  ?  What 
if,  in  His  good  providence,  He  brings  you  in  the  way  of  some  useful  warnings  and 
instructions,  and  grants  you  some  awakened  and  convincing  influences  of  His  kind 
spirit,  when  you  have  not  sought  them  ?  And  what  if  He  does  this  in  answer  to 
the  fervent  prayers  of  others  ?  Will  you  say  that  all  this  is  wrong  ?  IL  We  see 
from  this  subject  that  the  doctrine  of  Scripture  concerning  our  being  involved  im 

THE   CONSEQUENCES   OF    THE    PBIMITIVE   APOSTAST    IS    AOBEEABLB   TO  THE  ANALOGY  OV 

PBOviOENCE.     III.  That  our  salvation  through  the  atonement  and  bighteous- 

KESS  OF  a  BeDEEMEB   APPEARS   TO   CORRESPOND  WITH   THE   GENERAL    CONSTITUTION   OV 

God's  moral  govern  uent.  It  is  an  essential  part  of  the  Divine  plan  that  the 
virtue  of  some  should  not  only  benefit  themselves,  but  extend  its  kind  and  salutary 
influence  to  others.  We  see  this  to  be  the  case  among  men ;  and  probably  it  is 
the  case  among  all  moral  beings  except  those  who  are  in  a  state  of  punishment. 
The  angels,  we  are  told,  are  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  to  the  heirs 
of  salvation.     IV.  Our  subject  removes  the  pbincipal  objection  ubged  against 

THE  DEDICATION   OF  INFANTS    TO    GOD    IN    THE    ORDINANCE   OF  BAPTISM.      For  it  shoWS 

that  some  may  be  benefited  by  the  faith  of  others.  It  is  often  asked,  "  What  ad- 
vantage is  baptism  to  infants  ?  They  have  no  knowledge  of  the  use  and  design 
of  it.  They  have  not  that  faith  which  is  required  to  baptism.  If  they  are  bap- 
tized, it  cannot  be  on  their  own  faith,  it  must  be  on  the  faith  of  their  parents ; 
and  what  benefit  can  they  derive  brom  the  faith  of  another?  "  But  this  is  no  moit 
an  objection  against  the  baptism  of  infants  than  against  intercession  for  infants. 

5 


66  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  n, 

V.   OUB    SUBJECT    TEACHES    US    THE    IMPORTANCE    OE   THE    STATION    IN   WHICH    WE   ARB 

piaACed.  We  are  acting  not  merely  for  ourselves,  but  for  others,  for  many  others* 
how  many  we  cannot  tell ;  for  we  know  not  how  many  are  connected  with  us ;  not 
how  extensive  may  be  the  influence  of  our  good  or  bad  conduct.  A  holy  and  re- 
ligious life  is  certainly  of  vast  importance  to  ourselves ;  for  on  this  depends  the 
happiness  of  our  existence  through  all  the  succeeding  ages  of  eternal  duration. 
Bat  when  we  consider  ourselves  as  standing  in  a  near  connection  with  our  fellow 
probationers ;  when  we  realize  how  much  good  a  sinner  may  destroy,  or  a  saint 
promote ;  how  many  souls  may  be  corrupted  by  the  example  of  the  one,  and  how 
many  may  be  converted  by  the  influence  of  the  other ;  the  importance  of  our 
personal  religion  rises  beyond  all  conception.  VI.  Wb  see  that  benevolence 
MUST  BE  AN  ESSENTIAL  PART  OF  TRUE  RELIGION.  If  God  has  placed  US  in  such  a 
connection  with  those  around  us  that  their  virtue  and  happiness  will  be  affected  by 
our  conduct,  we  are  evidently  bound  to  act  with  a  regard  to  their  interest.  {J. 
Lathrop,   D,D.)  Son,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee.      Power  of  these  words: — 

These  words,  so  it  is  recorded,  saved  the  life  of  that  zealous  minister  of  God, 
Donald  Cargill.  He  had  been  for  some  time  under  conviction  of  sin,  and  his 
mind  was  harassed  by  Satan's  assaults.  Being  naturally  reserved,  he  could 
not  prevail  upon  himself  to  lay  his  troubles  before  others.  At  last,  in  a 
paroxysm  of  despair,  he  resolved  to  bring  his  life  on  earth  to  a  close.  Again  and 
again  did  he  seek  the  banks  of  the  Clyde,  with  a  steadfast  resolution  to  drown 
himself ;  and  repeatedly  was  he  interrupted  by  meeting  persons  he  knew.  Not  to 
be  frustrated,  he  rose  one  morning  and  walked  to  an  old  coal-pit,  intending  to  throw 
himself  into  the  abyss.  At  the  verge,  the  words  above  quoted  flashed  across  his 
mind  ;  the  effect  was  powerful  and  instantaneous;  he  returned  to  praise  God  for  a 
free  salvation,  and  to  serve  Him  in  a  faithful  and  consistent  Christian  life. 

Ver.  6.  But  there  -were  certain  of  the  scribes  sitting  there,  and  reasoning*  in 
their  hearts. — Reasons  in  reserve : — All  true  religion  is  located  in  the  heart.  Where 
the  human  heart  goes  the  human  life  will  go.  The  New  Testament  is  a  revelation 
addressed  to  the  heart.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  **  set  for  the  fall  and  rising 
again  of  many  in  Israel,  and  for  a  sign  to  be  spoken  against,  that  the  thoughts  of 
many  hearts  may  be  revealed."  This  story  is  remarkable  for  the  exhibition  it 
makes :  (1)  Of  enterprise  in  bringing  a  helpless  soul  to  the  Saviour :  how  many 
ingenuities  there  are  for  reaching  men  when  only  the  friends  around  them  are  in 
earnest ;  (2)  of  the  intimate  connection  existing  between  sin  and  suffering :  our 
Lord's  action  in  bestowing  pardon  with  the  cure  was  strictly  logical ;  (3)  of  the 
great  advantage  it  is  to  any  man  to  have  Christians  for  companions  to  become 
friends  in  his  need :  this  palsied  creature  was  healed  because  of  the  faith  other 
people  had  ;  (4)  of  the  force  of  mean  motives  in  driving  men  to  reject  Christ :  these 
scribes  were  moved  by  arguments  which  they  cherished,  but  concealed  from  sight. 
Upon  this  last  point  it  seems  worth  while  to  dwell  for  a  little  while  just  by  itself. 
Let  ns  group  the  illustrations  of  the  narrative  around  two  simple  propositions  in 
turn.     I.  The  worst  opposition  which  Christians  have  to  meet  in  oftering  thk 

aOSPEL  TO   MEN   18    FOUND   IN    THE   MENTAL   RESERVATIONS  OF   ITS  REJECTORS,  and  the 

sullen  silence  of  their  hearts.  1.  To  begin  with,  there  are  unspoken  objections 
which  influence,  if  they  do  not  control,  one's  intellectual  views.  Men  insist  that 
there  are  discrepancies  in  the  records  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  which  vitiate 
their  truth,  and,  if  generally  known,  would  mock  their  claim  to  exact  inspiration. 
Other  men  make  great  parade  in  private  over  difficulties  in  doctrine,  and  challenge 
attention  to  the  fact  that  theologians  differ  in  relation  to  almost  all  the  cardinal 
points  of  what  is  called  the  evangelical  system.  Still  others  cavil  at  the  inconsis- 
tencies of  Church  members,  and  rail  out  against  them  for  hypocrisy,  if  only  they 
can  manage  to  secure  a  safe  and  credulous  audience  that  dares  not  contradict  them. 
Hints  and  innuendoes  are  the  usual  signs  of  this  disturbed  and  unwholesome  state 
of  mind.  Where  do  the  young  men  of  the  preseut  day  obtain  so  much  sceptical 
information  ?  It  is  thrust  in  upon  them  by  the  public  press.  Doubts  drop  down 
like  loose  feathers  wherever  croaking  ravens  are  wont  to  fly.  But  why  is  it  that 
these  reasons  are  so  often  held  in  reserve  ?  Why  does  the  man  preserve  his  sullen 
demeanour  without  a  word  T  (1)  Because  he  is  not  exactly  certain  he  can  state 
them:  it  is  not  everybody  who  can  say  clearly  what  he  does  not  believe;  (2)  because 
he  feels  a  misgiving  that  they  may  not  stand  when  some  one  a  little  more  scholarly 
gets  hold  of  them  ;  (3)  and  because  he  suspects  that  if  he  goes  so  far  in  his  small 
infidelity,  he  really  would  have  to  go  farther  or  give  it  up.   2.  There  are  unconscious 


OTAP.  n.j  ST.  MARK,  67 

prejudices  which  arouse  one's  temper.  Some  persons  oonceive  a  violent  spite  at 
what  they  assert  is  a  continuous  rebuke  whenever  Christian  life  is  praised  or  com- 
mended. This  is  not  a  new  thing  in  history.  Classic  annals  tell  us  that  an  unlet- 
tered countryman  gave  his  vote  against  Aristides  at  the  ostracism  because,  as  he 
frankly  said,  he  waa  tired  of  hearing  him  called  "The  Just."  Other  persona 
cherish  implacable  memories  of  indiscreet  zeal  practised  upon  them  by  those  who 
supposed  they  wet*  dutifully  obeying  the  command,  • '  Go,  speak  to  that  young 
man."  They  recite  the  grievance  of  revival  extravagances,  which  they  deemed 
offensive  and  never  to  be  forgotten.  They  rehearse  the  biographies  of  preachers 
who  bullied  the  patient  congregations,  and  then  ran  into  immorality  and 
deplorable  scandal.  They  plead  rashness  as  an  excuse  for  reserve.  8.  There  are 
unacknowledged  sins  which  sway  one's  career.  Come  back  to  the  story  here  in 
Mark's  narrative.  Hear  the  comments  of  these  scribes  accusing  Jesus  of  blasphemy  I 
Violent  clamours  for  moral  and  theological  perfectness  are  raised  by  many  whose 
sole  aim  is  to  divert  attention  from  some  secret  indulgences  of  their  own.  These 
people  reason  in  their  hearts.  Sometimes  in  modern  life  a  very  showy  conflict  with 
Satan  is  kept  up  before  the  public  in  order  to  conceal  the  fact  of  one's  friendship 
with  him.  It  reminds  us  of  plays  in  which  the  actors  personate  the  devil  fencing 
with  some  good  antagonist  behind  the  footlights,  a  knight,  perhaps,  the  pink  of 
virtue,  battling  fiercely  with  the  demon  clad  in  robe  of  fire.  No  one  engaged  for 
his  soul  could  appear  more  bravely  in  earnest.  But  we  are  struck  with  a  certain 
kind  of  wariness,  which  they  both  show  in  their  hitting.  Sparks  fly  from  the 
weapons,  but  blood  does  not  seem  to  be  drawn.  And  if  afterwards  we  were  to  go 
behind  the  scenes,  there  we  should  find  those  high-tempered  combatants  in  a  most 
surprising  state  of  reconciliation ;  honourable  knight  and  fiery  devil  seated  in  a 
friendly  way  at  the  table.  4.  There  results  an  unsubdued  will  sullenly  closing 
one's  lips.  Many  men  live  a  double  life ;  they  mean  to  be  courteous,  but  on  reli- 
gious matters  they  cultivate  a  cool,  proud  reserve.  It  often  surprises  us  to  find  our 
Christian  endeavours  so  ineffective  with  apparently  kind,  open,  intelligent  people. 
What  is  the  real  reason  ?  Because  the  heart  is  what  governs,  and  logic  is  not 
addressed  to  the  heart.  Argum€nts  are  made  and  meant  for  the  intellect,  and  lose 
weight  in  the  tenuous  atmosphere  of  the  feelings.  It  shows  no  difference  whether 
we  drop  down  feathers  or  dollars  through  the  vacuum  of  an  air-pump.  II.  Thus 
we  reach  our  second  proposition :  All  these  beasons  in  reserve  avail  nothino  to 

aiEN  THE  moment  THE  CONTEST  IS   SEEN   TO  BE,  AS   IT  ALWAYS  IS,  A  CONTEST  WITH   GoD, 

AND  NOT  MAN.  1.  Look  at  the  facts  here ;  first,  see  verse  8.  Jesus  understood  those 
scribes  (1)  divinely — He  "perceived  in  His  spirit."  He  understood  them  (2) 
thoroughly — ^He  saw  what  was  *♦  within  themselves.'*  He  understood  them  (3)  aft 
once;  note  that  old  word  "immediately."  God  ^ows  all  our  surmises  and  sus- 
picions.  Jesus  peremptorily  challenged  those  scribes  in  their  logic.  (1)  He 
announced  His  discovery.  They  were  "  amazed ;  "  literally,  thunderstruck.  (2) 
He  accepted  their  condition.  They  looked  on  while  He  healed  the  man  by  miracle, 
(3)  He  defeated  them  utterly.  We  read  that  "  they  aU  glorified  God."  2.  Now  let 
ns  draw  a  few  final  inferences  from  the  whole  story.  This  scene  is  repeated  every 
day  in  the  full  sight  of  a  patient  God.  Human  nature  is  always  the  same  along 
the  ages.  (1)  There  cannot  possibly  be  any  reasoning  in  one's  heart  which  our 
omniscient  Judge  is  not  able  instantly  to  perceive  and  to  answer.  Once  a  French 
soldier  fell  asleep  on  his  post,  and  was  brought  up  for  trial  by  court  martial.  The 
first  witness  called  was  the  Emperor  Napoleon.  **  I  was  visiting  the  sentinels' 
outposts,"  he  said;  "I  saw  this  soldier  myself."  (2)  True  prudence  consists  in 
outspoken  candour.  *♦  Come,  let  us  reason  together."  Sometimes  objections 
vanish  with  the  statement ;  for  they  seem  so  insignificant  when  expressed.  Mere 
articulation  of  diflficulties  often  clears  them  of  confusion.  (3)  Sullen  reserve  surely 
runs  to  swift  ruin.  The  difference  between  an  ignorant  prejudice  and  a  wilful 
conceit  is  shown  in  this :  ignorance  stands  with  its  back  to  the  sun,  and  so  if  it 
advances  moves  on  in  the  line  of  its  own  shadow  only  a  step  deeper ;  but  churlish 
conceit  walks  straight  away  into  a  forest  of  doubts,  till  its  own  shadow  is  darkened 
with  other  shadows  gloomier  still.  Hence,  a  confessed  ignorance  is  altogether 
more  hopeful  for  good  because  all  it  has  to  do  is  to  turn  to  the  light.  Sullen 
obstinacy  has  to  retrace  its  path,  and  so  journey  clear  back  to  where  it  started.  It 
was  considerations  of  this  sort  which  forced  the  bright  remark  that  *'  an  ingenuous 
intellect  is  often  better  than  an  ingenious  one."  (4)  Reasons  in  reserve  have  really 
nothing  to  do  with  actual  life  or  eternal  prospects.  (C.  -S.  Robinson^  D.D.)  I. 
An  importMnt  aspect  of  human  power.     Secrecy  and  mental  reservations,     II.  A 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Btartling  instance  of  Divine  insight  Our  silence  is  as  lond  as  thunder  to  God ! 
Our  heart-talk  is  overheard  1  III.  A  splendid  manifestation  of  Christ's  fearlessness. 
He  need  not  have  answered  more  than  was  spoken.  lY.  A  solemn  example  of  the 
confusion  which  will  fall  upon  all  Christ's  objectors.  Enquiry :  What  is  your 
unspoken  objection  ?  Doctrinal  ?  Disciplinary  ?  Philosophical  ?  Ethical  ?  Gram- 
matical ?  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  HuTnan  reasonings  about  Divine  forgiveness  : — L 
That  human  beasonings  abb  busy  with  the  fiat  of  the  Divine  FORorvENEsa. 
••  Why  doth  this  man  thus  speak  blasphemies  ?  Who  can  forgive  sins,  but  (Jod 
only  ?  "  1.  Some  men  question  the  ability  of  Christ  to  forgive  sin.  2.  Some  men 
seek  to  understand  the  process  by  which  sin  is  forgiven.  They  wish  to  understand 
the  mental  philosophy  of  forgiveness,  and  because  they  cannot  they  deride  it  as  a 
delusion.  Is  it  to  be  expected  that  men  shall  be  able  to  trace  the  Divine  action  in 
its  method  of  forgiveness  upon  the  human  soul  ?  Can  men  infallibly  submit  the 
subtle  influences  of  heaven  to  their  rude  and  vulgar  tests,  as  they  would  the 
thoughts  and  mental  actions  of  men  ?  No  1  Who,  by  searching,  can  find  out  God  ? 
And  certainly  in  His  forgiving  influence  upon  the  human  soul  He  is  an  unsearchable 
mystery.  3.  Some  men  repudiate  the  evidences  of  the  Divine  forgiveness.  They 
ask,  how  do  we  know  that  a  man  is  forgiven  ;  and  what  is  the  difference  between 
him  and  any  unforgiven  individual?  The  evidence  of  it  is  in  the  hatred  of 
sin,  and  in  the  purity  of  life  which  it  inspires.  And  this  witness  is  true.  The 
world  should  receive  it  as  such.  II.  That  Chbist  refutes  the  mental  reasonings 
OF  MEN  IN  reference  TO  THE  FIAT  OF  DiviNB  FORGIVENESS.  The  reasouiugs  of  thoso 
men  were  refuted :  1.  By  the  test  of  consciousness.  The  palsied  man  knew  that  his 
sins  were  forgiven  in  response  to  the  Divine  voice.  2.  By  the  miracle  of  healing. 
Forgiveness  heals  the  life.  Lessons :  1.  Not  to  cavil  at  the  method  of  the  Divine 
forgiveness.     2.  To  receive  it  with  adoring  gratitude.    3.  To  attest  it  by  a  holy  life. 

Vers.  7-11.  But  that  ye  may  know  that  the  Son  of  Man  hath  power  on  earth  to 
forgive  sins. — The  ease  of  Divine  power : — I  thinlc  it  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck 
with  this  narrative.  He  not  only  shows  His  power  here,  but  He  shows  an  un- 
rivalled and  infinite  ease  in  the  exercise  of  it.  For  He  lets  His  enemies  themselves, 
as  it  were,  choose  the  way  in  which  it  should  be  manifested ;  signifying  that  with 
Him  it  made  no  difference.  (J.  Miller.)  An  example  of  Christ's  supreme  power  : — 
I.  Power  to  FORGIVE  sin.  1.  This  Christ  plainly  assumes.  2.  This  power,  without 
a  Mosaic  sacrifice,  implies  that  Jesus  was  already  a  lamb  slain — ^in  the  purpose  of 
God.  II.  Power  to  heal  disease.  1.  This  is  a  legitimate  work  of  Jesus  as  Saviour, 
inasmuch  as  He  undertook  to  bear  our  infirmities  as  well  as  our  sins.  2.  The 
resurrection  will  be  the  consummation  of  this  power.  UI.  Power  to  bilenck 
CAVILLERS.  1.  These  cavillers  were  conquered.  2.  When  Jesus  sits  on  His  throne 
of  judgment  all  cavillers  will  be  put  to  shame.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A,)  Christ,  the 
Forgiver  of  sins : — A  poor  cobbler,  unable  to  read,  was  asked  by  an  Arian  how  he 
knew  that  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God.  •♦  Sir,"  he  replied,  *•  you  know  that 
when  I  first  became  concerned  about  my  soul  I  called  upon  you  to  ask  for  your 
advice,  and  you  told  me  to  go  into  company  and  spend  my  time  as  merrily  as  I 
could,  but  not  to  join  the  Christians.  Well,  I  followed  your  advice  for  some  time, 
but  the  more  I  trifled,  the  more  my  misery  increased ;  and  at  last  I  was  persuaded 
to  hear  one  of  those  ministers  who  came  into  our  neighbourhood  and  preached 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  Saviour.  In  the  greatest  agony  of  mind  I  prayed  to  Him  to 
save  me  and  to  forgive  my  sins ;  and  now  I  feel  that  He  has  freely  forgiven  them  ; 
and  by  this  I  know  that  He  is  the  Son  of  God  1  "  Christ  and  the  forgiveness  of 
sin : — What  is  the  forgiveness  of  sins  ?  1.  Two  words  in  the  New  Testament  denote 
this  marvellous  work.  The  meaning  of  the  one  is  literally  *•  to  bestow  grace — to 
grant  undeserved  favour."  "Dealing  out  grace  one  towards  another,  as  God,  for 
Christ's  sake,  deals  out  grace  towards  you."  The  other  means  literally  ••  to  send 
away,  to  make  to  depart,  to  set  out  of  sight  by  putting  away."  It  fixes  atten- 
tion  on  the  last  element  of  the  transaction,  the  release  from  penalties,  the  dread 
sentence  of  broken  law.  The  other  fixes  attention  on  the  first  element  of  the 
transaction,  that  sovereign  goodness  in  which  it  has  its  source.  But  what  do  we 
mean  by  the  consequences  of  sin  ?  Not  outward  inflictions.  But  (a)  Divine  depri- 
vations. Loss  of  spiritual  privileges  and  their  resulting  benefits.  (6)  Moral  results 
of  wrong-doing  in  its  subject.  As,  for  instance,  increased  disposition  to  sin;  facihty 
in  transgression ;  the  imprisonment  and  torment  of  evil  habit ;  upbraiding  of  the 
guilty  conscience ;  alienation  from  God ;  degradation  from  life ;  dread.  Forgive- 
ness lays  an  arresting,  healing  hand  on  each  of  these.    It  is  gracious  in  its 


iL]  ST,  MARK, 


beginnings ;  free  in  its  bestowment ;  complete  in  its  influence.    This  fact  remindi 
us — 1.  That  forgiveness  comes  to  as  out  of  the  plenitude  of  the  Divine  nature. 
He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive.     **  I  do  it  for  My  name's  sake."     2.   That 
this  forgiveness  reaches  human  hearts  through  the  Son  of   Man.    The  phrase 
designates  the  Redeemer  as  having  taken  humanity  into  association  with  Divinity. 
The  God-Man  is  the  forgiving  God.     Coming  to  Him,  and  resting  on  Him,  the 
chains  are  loosed.    The  Incarnate  life  bruises  the  serpent's  head.     3.  Spiritual 
activity  is  the   manifestation  and  proof  of  redemptive  forgiveness.     Impotence 
was  here  visibly  changed   into  strength;    helplessness  into   self -helpful  activity. 
Is   the  sinner  forgiven?     Behold  he  prayeth.     Behold  he  walks.      Behold  he 
triumphs.    4.  This  great  boon  is  freely  bestowed.     (Preacher's  Monthly.)      Christ's 
power    to   Jorgive : — No    wonder    Christ's  words    made    the    scribes    reason    in 
their  hearts,  and  ask  this  question.     They  were  astonishing  words,  and  strangely 
spoken.    I.  The  surprisb  of  the  scbibbs  was  matubal.      1.  Strange  that  Christ 
should  speak  to  this  man  about  his  sins.    He  seemed  to  need  bodily  healing  more 
than  anything  else,  and  it  was  for  that  he  had  been  brought  to  Jesus.     None  but 
Christ  could  see  that  his  need  was  deeper  than  this — that  his  moral  powers  were 
palsied,  his  soul  in  a  state  of  guilt.      2.  Christ's  assumption  of  power  to  forgive 
sins  appeared  blasphemous.     To  pronounce  another's  sins  forgiven,  one  must  have 
access  to  his  most  secret  thoughts.     Such  knowledge  only  God  possesses,  and  he  to 
whom  God  may  reveal  it.    H.  The  bionipicance  of  miracles.    They  signify  the 
special  presence  of  God,  and  are  warranted  only  as  a  seal  to  a  most  important  Divine 
message.     In  this  case  the  miracle  established  before  those  present  the  authority  of 
Jesus  to  forgive  sins.    The  Divine  control  over  nature  which  He  actually  exerted 
testified  to  the  truth  of  His  claim  rightfully  to  exercise  another  Divine  prerogative, 
the  effect  of  which  cannot  be  discerned  by  the  bodily  senses.    UI.  The  EviDENTiAii 
VALUE  OF  MIRACLES.    Important  to  remember  that  Christ  was  always  jealously 
watched  by  unfriendly  critics,  who  would  certainly  have  exposed  Him  had  His 
pretensions  to  miraculous  power  failed.    lY.  Effect  of  the  miracle.    The  out- 
easts  were  encouraged  to  come  to  one  so  powerful,  and  yet  so  merciful  and  kind. 
V.  The  object  of  the  Saviour's  mission.    It  is  because  our  wants  are  so  deep, 
that  He  has  descended  so  low.     {G.  F.  Wright.)        Power  to  forgive  sins : — L  It  is 
evident  that  Christ  considered  His  chief  claim  to  the  reverence  of  men  was 
His  power  to  fobqivb  sin.    There  is  no  want  of  man  so  central  as  his  need  to  be 
rid  of  the  power  and  guilt  of  sin.    What  costly  expedients  the  world  has  adopted 
in  the  endeavour  to  free  itself  from  the  burden  and  the  torture.     That  sense  of 
un worthiness  and  ill-desert  can  neither  be  cajoled  nor  hunted  out  of  our  being.    It 
may  not  be  an  ever-present  force.    There  are  times  when  in  the  engrossments  of 
business  and  the  excitement  of  pleasure  we  forget  what  we  really  are.    But  in  the 
depths  of  our  nature  the  serpent  lies  coiled,  only  silent  for  a  while,  not  destroyed, 
and  in  time  we  feel  the  old  sting.     Men  exalt  Christianity  as  the  great  civilizer, 
but  it  is  the  redemptive  power  of  the  gospel  that  sets  it  above  all  other  agencies. 
II.  Christ  evidenoes  His  power  to  forgive  sins  by  visible  miracles.    The  trans- 
forming influence  of  grace  is  seen  in  individual  character ;  also  in  the  history  of 
Christian  missions.     III.  If  Christ  has  "  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins,"  then 
Christ  is  Divinb.    No  man  and  no  wisdom  of  men  can  ever  effect  the  pardon  and 
deliverance  of  the  transgressor.     Science  has  no  remedies  strong  enough  to  expel 
the  poison  from  the  spiritual  nature.     By  doing  this  Christ  makes  good  His  claim 
to  be  Divine.    IV.  And  if  Jesus  Christ  has  ••  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins,"  then 
IT  is  our  duty  to  uroe  men  to  go  to  Christ  that  they  may  receive  the  blessing 
OF  PARDON,     {Monday  Club  Sermons. )        Sin  a  deep  disease  beyond  the  reach  of 
human  remedies : — One  of  our  modem  novelists  has  written  the  story  of  a  man 
who  was  haunted  with  remorse  for  a  particular  sin,  and  though  sometimes  weeks 
would  pass  without  the  thought  of  it,  yet  every  now  and  then  the  ghost  of  the  old 
transgression  would  rise  before  him  to  his  infinite  discomfort.     It  is  the  story  of 
almost  every  human  life.      Sin  is  not  something  which  a  man  commits  and  has 
done  with  it.    It  becomes  a  part  of  his  being.     His  motHl  fibre  is  changed,  his 
moral  stamina  is  weakened.     A  traveller  soon  drives  tlirough  the  malarious  air  of 
the  Roman  Campagna  and  is  out  of  the  poisonous  atmosphere ;  but  during  his 
brief  transit  disease  has  found  its  way  into  his  blood,  and  even  though  he  sits 
under  the  cool  shadow  of  the  Alps,  or  on  the  shore  of  the  blue  Mediterranean,  the 
inward  fever  rages  and  burns.     A  man  sins,  and  in  sinning  introduces  disease  into 
his  moral  nature,  and  even  though  he  abandons  his  evil  courses  the  old  malady 
works  on.     The  forgiveness  of  sin  which  is  so  thorough  and  central  that  it  rids  a 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

man  of  the  power  and  guilt  of  sin — who  is  competent  to  give  ns  that  ?  No  speoifio 
of  man's  devising,  no  course  of  moral  treatment,  can  effect  that.  There  is  only 
One,  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sin  in  that  complete  and 
eflScient  fashion.  And  that  is  His  chief  glory  and  constitutes  His  principal  claim 
upon  us.  It  is  to  say  but  little  of  Him,  to  say  that  He  is  the  wisest  and  purest 
and  best  that  ever  lived ;  that  He  is  the  perfect  example ;  that  He  is  the  Teacher 
who  makes  no  mistakes.  I  do  not  know  Jesus  Christ  until  I  know  Him  in  my 
experience  as  the  One  who  has  *'  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins."  And  that  also  is 
the  glory  and  the  commendation  of  the  religion  of  Christ's  gospel.  (Ibid.)  Pardon 
develops  manlwod : — Some  man  who  is  not  only  morally  corrupt,  but  also  a  mere  nega- 
tive quantity  in  society,  experiences  the  renewing  grace  of  God  and  comes  into  the 
consciousness  of  redemption  and  pardon.  Vastly  more  than  a  transformation  of 
moral  character  is  effected.  Numberless  dormant  powers  of  manhood  are  deve- 
loped. Unsuspected  strata  of  capacity  are  uncovered.  Thrift  and  intelligence  and 
enterprise  are  bom,  and  the  whole  nature  experiences  a  transformation  akin  to 
that  wrought  in  the  physical  world  by  the  coming  of  the  spring-time.  There  are 
numbers  of  such  men  in  every  community.  So  long  as  they  were  fettered  with 
the  consciousness  of  sin,  all  their  powers  and  faculties  were  cramped ;  but  when 
Christ  spoke  dehverancc  from  guilt,  their  whole  affectional  and  intellectual  being  felt 
the  thrill  and  stir  of  a  new  life,  and  widened  out  and  blossomed  in  most  marveUoua 
fashion.  There  is  an  infinite  breadth  to  the  assurance :  '*  If  therefore  the  Son 
shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  What  the  Scripture  calls  the 
••liberty"  of  the  children  of  God  is  not  the  little  narrow  ecclesiastical  matter 
which  so  many  people  think  it.  It  means  affluence  and  opulence  of  life  and 
possibility,  and  when  one  who  has  long  been  a  mere  cipher  in  the  community 
branches  out  into  all  manner  of  healthy  and  handsome  growths  under  the 
quickening  of  the  pardoning  love  of  Christ,  the  greatest  of  miracles  is  wrought 
before  our  eyes.  We  count  it  a  stupendous  achievement  of  genius  when  under 
the  cunning  hand  of  the  artist  the  rough  block  of  marble  grows  into  the  perfect 
statue  ;  but  what  is  that  compared  to  the  transfiguration  of  the  living  man  which 
is  so  often  effected  by  the  Divine  love  manifesting  itself  in  full  and  free  and  felt 
forgiveness  ?    It  is  quite  as  marvellous  as  a  new  creation.     (lUd.)  The  Divine 

Maker  of  man  the  only  Repairer  of  man : — The  legend  runs  that  there  once  stood 
in  an  old  baronial  castle  a  musical  instrument  upon  which  nobody  could  play.  It 
was  complicated  in  its  mechanism,  and  during  years  of  disuse  the  dust  had 
gathered  and  clogged  it,  while  dampness  and  variations  of  temperature  had  robbed 
the  strings  of  their  tone.  Various  experts  had  tried  to  repair  it,  but  without  suc- 
cess, and  when  the  hand  of  a  player  swept  over  the  chords  it  woke  only  harsh  dis- 
cords and  unlovely  sounds.  But  there  came  one  day  to  the  castle  a  man  of  another 
sort.  He  was  the  maker  of  the  instrument,  and  saw  what  was  amiss  and  what  was 
needed  for  its  repair,  and  with  loving  care  and  skill  he  freed  the  wires  from  the 
encumbering  dust  and  adjusted  those  which  were  awry  and  brought  the  jangling 
strings  into  tune,  and  then  the  hall  rang  with  bursts  of  exquisite  music.  And  so 
with  these  souls  of  ours,  so  disordered  by  sin  that  everything  is  in  confusion  and 
at  cross  purposes :  it  is  not  until  their  Divine  Maker  comes  and  attempts  the  task 
of  repair  and  re-adjustment  that  they  can  be  set  right  and  made  capable  of  the  har- 
monies for  which  they  were  originally  constructed.  Men  weary  themselves  in  vain 
with  their  various  expedients  for  securing  peace  of  mind  and  riddance  from  the 
sense  of  guilt.  Only  God  can  give  that,  and  when  Jesus  Christ  accomplishes  that 
in  us  we  must  needs  cry  out  to  Him,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God."  {Ibid,)  Christ' » 
prerogative  to  forgive  tins : — I.  Thk  astounding  prbbogaxive  that  Christ  Jesus 
AssuMXD.  The  despised  and  rejected  man  says,  "  The  Son  of  Man  hath  power," 
Ac,  •'  Who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only  ?  '*  In  the  nature  of  things,  it  is  only 
He  against  whom  the  crime  is  committed,  it  is  only  He  whose  majesty  is  violated, 
it  is  only  He  whose  law  is  broken,  that  hath  power  to  remit  the  penalty  that  He  has 
imposed  on  the  transgression  of  His  law,  the  infringement  of  His  majesty  and  the 
infraction  of  His  authority.  Even  amongst  the  chijdren  of  men  this  is  held  as  a 
sacred  and  inalienable  right;  insomuch  that  mercy  is  the  appropriate  and  inalien- 
able prerogative  of  the  Crown  ;  and  no  subject,  however  exalted  he  may  be  in  place 
or  power,  presumes  to  arrogate  to  himself — it  would  be  high  treason  were  he  to 
arrogate  to  himself — the  power  to  remit  the  sentence  of  the  law.  The  judge  may 
commend  to  mercy,  the  influential  may  interpose  their  interest ;  but  it  belongs  to 
the  sovereign  to  exercise  the  prerogative  of  the  Crown,  and  to  remit  the  sentence 
that  is  passed.     But  if  this  prerogative  even  among  the  children-of  men  be  inalien. 


CHAP,  n.]  ST,  MARK.  7! 

able,  how  much  more  must  the  prerogative  of  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords, 
who  **  is  not  a  man  that  He  should  lie,  nor  the  son  of  man  that  He  should  repent  " 
— how  much  more  must  His  prerogative  be  incommunicable,  indefeasible^  inalien- 
able ?  **  Who  can  forgive  sins,  but  God  only  7  "  IL  The  evidencb  that  He  oath 
in  demonstration  of  His  claim  is  clear  as  the  noon-day  sun,  and  as  irresistible  aa 
the  very  power  of  God.  Let  us,  then,  see  how  He  could  substantiate  so  stupendous  a 
claim  as  to  forgive  sins — all  sins  ;  forgive  them  in  His  own  right,  in  His  own  name, 
of  His  own  authority.  The  position  was  laid  down,  and  the  argument  for  its 
establishment  was  obvious.  It  was  not  intricate  and  dark,  requiring  a  mighty 
intellect  to  grasp  it,  or  a  penetrating  understanding  to  enter  into  its  process.  It 
was  an  appeal  to  every  man,  that  had  an  eye  to  see  and  a  mind  to  understand.  III. 
The  connection  between  the  human  natube  of  Christ,  and  this  wondrous  prerooa- 
^TivB  THAT  He  exercised — "  The  Son  of  Man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins." 
One  might  have  imagined  that  He  would  rather  have  said  in  this  connection,  "  The 
Son  of  God  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins ;  "  for  surely  it  was  only  as  He  was 
*♦  very  God  of  very  God,"  that  He  could  have  wielded  the  sceptre  of  the  eternal 
Jehovah.  But  there  is  a  beautiful  propriety,  there  is  a  touching  and  exquisite  fit- 
ness,  in  thus  designating  Himself  "the  Son  of  Man."  Therefore  it  was  not  simply 
or  80  much  as  the  Son  of  God  alone,  that  the  Saviour  had  this  wondrous  preroga- 
tive, but  as  the  Son  of  Man,  who  became  the  Surety  for  sinners,  who  took  the 
manhood  into  Godhead  that  He  might  be  the  Daysman  between  His  fallen  brethren 
and  His  unchangeable  Father — that  He  might  put  His  hand  on  both  and  so  make 
peace — that  He  might  bring  God  and  man  to  one,  and  yet  maintain  His  law  invio- 
late.  His  majesty  unsullied,  His  truth  unimpeached,  His  justice  uncompromised, 
and  all  His  attributes  invested  with  a  new  and  nobler  lustre  than  the  universe  had 
ever  before  beheld,  or  could  have  entered  into  created  mind  to  conceive.  Therefore, 
brethren,  it  was  not  by  a  simple  act  of  sovereignty  that  the  Saviour  forgave  sins. 
As  the  Centurion  said  to  Paul,  "With  a  great  price  bought  I  this  freedom,"  so  with 
a  great  price  the  incarnate  God  bought  the  glorious  and  benign  prerogative  of  for- 
giving sins.  He  bought  it  with  His  agony  and  blood.  He  bought  it  by  His  meri- 
torious and  spotless  obedience — by  His  glorious  resurrection  and  ascension.  By 
all  these  He  bought  this  glorious  prerogative  of  forgiving  sins.  So  that  '^weare 
not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things  as  silver  or  gold,  but  with  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot."  Perceive  you, 
brethren,  the  momentousness  and  meaning  of  this  distinction?  Let  me  by  a 
simple  illustration  make  it  more  clear  to  the  plainest  mind.  It  is  conceivable  that 
when  a  sovereign  had  arrived  at  an  age  to  assume  the  sceptre  of  a  nation,  and 
wished  to  grace  his  accession  to  the  throne  by  some  act  of  regal  munificence  and 
clemency,  he  might  proclaim  an  universal  exemption  from  all  debts  contracted  by 
any  inhabitants  of  that  land  in  days  gone  by.  It  is  conceivable  that  he  might  do 
this ;  but  if  he  did  so,  to  the  wrong  and  robbery  of  all  the  creditors  of  that  land, 
would  his  clemency,  do  you  think,  add  to  his  glory  ?  would  it  give  any  pledge  of 
his  justice,  integrity,  or  even  common  honesty  towards  his  subjects  ?  So  far  from 
it,  his  clemency  would  be  lost  sight  of  in  the  injury  and  the  wrong  he  had  done. 
But  if  that  prince,  being  desirous  to  grace  his  accession  to  the  throne  by  an  act  of 
clemency,  in  which  justice  should  likewise  shine,  were  from  his  own  private 
resources  to  liquidate  all  the  debts  of  all  those  imprisoned  for  debt  throughout  the 
length  and  breadth  of  the  land,  and  then  throw  open  the  prison  doors,  all  would 
applaud  the  deed  ;  all  would  admire  the  exercise  of  sovereign  clemency  in  perfect 
harmony  with  unimpeachable  justice.  So,  if  we  may  venture  by  low  and  earthly 
things  to  illustrate  things  sublime  and  heavenly,  the  blessed  Son  of  God,  the 
Prince  and  Saviom*  of  mankind,  "  exalted  to  give  repentance  unto  Israel,  and  the 
remission  of  sins,"  did  not  set  the  sinful  debtors  free,  that  owed  to  their  Father 
an  infinite  debt  which  they  had  no  power  to  pay — which  they  would  throughout 
eternity  have  been  paying  and  yet  had  throughout  eternity  to  pay — He  did  not  set 
them  free  by  a  simple  exercise  of  His  own  authority,  violating  the  obligations  of 
law,  the  demands  of  justice,  and  the  claims  of  the  unfallen  portion  of  the  subjects 
of  an  everlasting  Father.  But  He  paid  the  debt ;  He  became  Surety,  and  He  met 
the  claim  ;  He  paid  it  to  the  uttermost  farthing,  till  He  could  say  with  His  expinnj^ 
breath,  •'  It  is  finished !  " — till  He  had  "  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of 
sin  and  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness."  The  Father,  well  pleased  in  the 
full  expiation  accomplished  by  the  Son,  delights  to  forgive  through  that  Saviour's 
name — "  for  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we 
must  be  saved."    Christian  brethren,  if  the  Son  of  Man  had  "  power  on  earth  to 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

forgive  sins,"  how  much  more,  if  it  be  possible,  hath  He  power  in  heaven  to 
forgive  sins  ?    {H.  Stowell^  M.A.) 

Ver.  12.  We  never  saw  It  on  this  fuhlon. — The  new  fashion  : — ^I.  Do  mot  dis- 
believe THE  GosPEii  BECAUSE  IT  suBPRiBES  Tou.  1.  Nothing  stands  in  the  way  of 
real  knowledge  so  much  as  prejudice.  2.  Many  things  which  we  know  to  be  true 
would  not  have  been  believed  by  our  fathers  if  they  had  been  revealed  to  them.  3. 
There  are  many  things  which  are  undoubted  facts  which  certain  classes  of  men  find 
it  hard  to  believe.  4.  The  fact  that  a  gospel  statement  seems  new  and  astonishing 
ought  not  to  create  unbehef  in  the  mind.  II.  There  are  vert  singulab  and 
SURPRISING  THINGS  IN  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  That  the  gospel  should  come  to  people 
whom  it  regards  as  incapable.  2.  That  the  gospel  calls  upon  men  to  do  what  they 
cannot  do.  3.  That  whilst  the  gospel  bids  men  do  what  they  cannot  of  themselves 
do,  they  actually  do  it.  4.  This  paralyzed  man  was  healed— (a)  at  once,  (6)  with- 
out any  ceremony,  (c)  perfectly,  (d)  evidently.  So  is  it  when  the  gospel  saves  the 
Boul.  III.  If  it  be  so  with  you,  then  go  and  oLORinr  God.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Prejudice  a  stumbling  block : — Theories  are  the  nuisances  of  science;  the  rubbish  that 
must  be  swept  away  that  the  precious  facts  may  be  made  bare.  If  you  go  to  the 
study  of  a  subject,  saying  to  yourself,  "  This  is  how  the  matter  must  shape  itself," 
having  beforehand  made  up  your  mind  what  the  facts  ought  to  be,  you  will  have  put 
in  your  own  way  a  difiBculty  more  severe  than  the  subject  itself  could  place  there. 
Prejudice  is  the  stumbling-block  of  advance.  {Ibid.)  New  things  may  be  true 
things : — When  an  observer  first  discovered  that  there  were  spots  on  the  sun  he 
reported  it,  but  he  was  called  before  his  father  confessor  and  upbraided  for  having 
reported  anything  of  the  kind.  The  Jesuit  father  said  that  he  had  read  Aristotle 
through  several  times,  and  he  had  found  no  mention  in  Aristotle  of  any  spots  in  the 
sun,  and  therefore  there  could  be  no  such  things.  (Ibid.)  The  inconceivable  may 
be  true : — If  our  forefathers  could  have  been  informed  that  men  would  travel  at 
forty  or  fifty  miles  an  hour,  drawn  by  a  steam  engine,  they  would  have  shaken  their 
heads  and  laughed  the  prediction  to  scorn.  (Ibid.)  Sense  not  to  limit  faith : — 
Some  time  ago  a  missionary  had  told  his  black  congregation  that  in  the  winter 
time  the  water  in  England  became  so  hard  that  a  man  could  walk  upon  it.  Now 
they  beheved  a  good  deal  that  he  told  them,  but  they  did  not  believe  that.  One  of 
them  was  brought  over  to  England.  The  frost  came  at  length,  and  the  missionary 
took  his  black  friend  down  to  it ;  and  although  he  stood  upon  the  ice  himself  he 
could  not  persuade  the  negro  to  venture.  "  No,"  he  said,  *'  but  I  never  saw  it  so. 
I  have  lived  fifty  years  in  my  own  country,  and  I  never  saw  a  man  walk  on  a  river 
before."  {Ibid.)  God's  power  not  to  be  limited  by  human  calculation : — If  you  are 
longing  for  a  great  salvation  you  must  not  sit  down  and  calculate  the  Godhead  by 
inches,  and  measure  out  the  merit  of  Christ  by  ells,  and  calculate  whether  He  can 
do  this  or  do  that.  {Ibid.)  The  most  senseless  limit  of  evidence  is  the  limit  of  the 
senses : — But  there  is  a  great  proneness  to  fix  just  such  Umits  as  these.  Said  a  shrewd 
pastor  in  Massachusetts,  when  a  new  method  of  church  work  was  proposed  to  him 
by  a  visiting  brother,  ♦'  No,  no,  that  wouldn't  go  down  with  my  people ;  it's  too 
novel.  There  are  two  objections  which  my  people  raise  against  any  fresh  thing 
which  I  propose  to  them  ;  one  is,  We  never  tried  that  thing  here  :  the  other  is,  We 
tried  that  here  once,  and  it  didn't  go.  Either  of  these  objections  is  fatal." 
Such  people  as  that  don't  all  live  in  Massachusetts,  nor  in  Palestine.  {H,  C. 
Trumbull.) 

Ver.  13.  And  He  went  forth  again  by  the  Beaslde.— ^  walk  by  the  sea  :—l.  It 

WAS  not  a  WALK  OF  ABSP:NT  REVERIE.  11.  It  WAS  NOT  A  WALK  OF  SENTIMENTAL  AD- 
MIRATION, ni.  It  was  a  walk  hallowed  by  sacred  teachino.  We  should 
endeavour  to  make  our  walks  subservient  to  the  moral  good  of  men,  and  in  this 
incidental  manner  we  might  do  much  to  enhance  the  welfare  of  the  Redeemer's 
cause.      (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Christian  work  at  the  seashore: — Can  we  not  do 

something  for  Jesus  on  the  sands  ?  If  so,  let  us  not  miss  such  a  happiness.  What 
situation  and  surnmndings  can  be  better  for  earnest,  loving  conversation  with  our 
young  friends  concerning  their  souls'  best  interests  ?  A  few  words  about  the  sea  of 
eternity  and  its  greet  deeps,  a  sentence  or  two  upon  the  broken  shells  and  our 
frailty,  upon  the  Rook  of  Ages  and  the  sands  of  time,  may  never  be  forgotten,  es- 
pecially if  they  be  but  few,  and  those  pleasant,  solemn,  and  congruous  with  the 
occasion.  A  good  book  lent  to  a  lounger  may  also  prove  a  blessing.  A  handful  of 
interesting  pamphlets  scattered  discreetly  may  prove  to  be  fruitful  seed.      Souls 


CHAP.  II.]  ST.  MARK.  78 

are  to  be  oaagbt  by  the  seashore  and  in  the  boat :  gospel  fisherman,  take  yoornet 
with  you.     (C.  H.  Spur g eon.) 

Vers.  14, 15.  And  as  He  passed  by,  He  saw  Levi,  the  son  of  Alphssna,  slttinir  at 
tbe  receipt  of  custom. — The  call  of  Matthew  : — The  story  is  placed  immediately  after 
a  miracle,  as  if  to  hint  that  Matthew's  conversion  was  a  miracle.  There  are  points 
of  similarity  between  the  miracle  and  the  conversion.  Matthew  was  spiritnaily 
palsied  by  his  sins  and  his  money-making ;  hence  he  needed  the  Divine  command, 
*•  Arise  and  walk."  There  may  be  points  of  likeness  also  between  Matthew's  personal 
story  and  oar  own.  These  may  be  profitably  considered.  I.  His  caIiL  seemed 
ACciDBNTAii  AND  UNLIKELY.  1.  Jcsus  had  often  been  at  Capernaum,  which  He  had 
selected  to  be  **  His  own  city  ;  "  and  yet  Matthew  remained  unsaved.  Was  it  likely 
he  would  now  be  called?  Had  not  his  day  of  grace  closed?  2.  Jesus  was  about 
other  business ;  for  we  read,  "  As  He  passed  by."  Would  He  now  be  likely  to  call 
Matthew  ?  3.  Jesus  left  many  other  persons  uncalled  ;  was  it  not  highly  probable 
thft^ jthft  tftx.gq.thftrer  would  be  passed  b;^  ?  Yet  Jesus  called  to'  Himself,  **  Levi,  the 
Pgnof  AlphaBus,"  while  m^y' anotE'er  man  Had  rio  suchspeciaTcall.  Iir~EKg~cALL~' 
WASlCLTTOBTH'EB  UN  THOUGHT  OB""  INI)  TS^^tfGSWF.  1.  He  was  in  a  degrading  busmesa. 
None  but  the  lowest  of  tbe  Jews  would  care  to  gather  taxes  for  the  Boman  con- 
queror.  His  discipleabip.  Wv)uld  bring  no  honour  tp  Christ.  2.  He  was  in  an  en- 
snaring  business.  Money  is  bird-lime  to  the  soul.  3.  He  wouW  npt_have.iiatad-kju. 
follow  Jesus  even  if  he  had  wished  to  do  so.  ,He  felt  himself 'to  be  too  unworthy. 
4.  He  would  have  been  repulsed  by  the  otherSTsciples,  had  he  proposed  to  come 
without  the  Lord's  open  invitation.  6.  Me  made  no  sign  in  the  direction  of  Jesus,  z*"^ 
No  prayer  was  offered  by  him,  nor  wish  expressed  towards  better  things.    III.  His  fu^  j 

CALL  WAS  GIVEN  BY  THE  LORD,  WITH  PULL  KNOWLEDGE  OP  HIM.       **  He  SaW  Levi,"    and  ^«- — ^ 

called  him.  1.  He  saw  all  the  evil  that  bad  been  in  him  and  was  yet  there.  2.  He 
saw  his  adaptation  for  holyLBervice/as  a  recordei^nd  penman^  3.  He  saw  all  that 
He  meant  to  make  of  him,  4.  He  saw  m  him  tf^cEos^STffii'  redeemed,  gis  eon-^ 
^^rt.  His  disciple.  His  apostle,  His  biographer.  liry-Lordi  calls  as  He  pleasegrbntT 
He  sees  what  fle  is  doing.  Sovereignty  is  not  blind ;  but  acts  with  boundless 
wisdom.  IV.  His  call  was  oraciously  coNDESCKNDiNa.  1,  The  Lord  called  "  Levi, 
the  son  of  Alphaeus."  or,  as  he  himself  says,  "  a  man  named  Matthew," — that  was 
his  best.  2.  He  was  a  publican — that  may  not  have  been  his  worst.  3.  He  allowed 
fluch  a  sinner  to  be  His  personal  attendant ;  yea,  called  him  to  that  honour,  saying, 
«L*  Foljow  Jlf g."  4.  He  allowed  him  to  do  this  immediately,  without  putting  him  into 
quaraiatme.  V.  His  call  was  sublimely  bxhplb.  1.  Few  were  the  words — "  Follow 
Me."  It  is  very  tersely  ranrvri\p,i{ — »»  Rft  bhw  .  .  .  aaj^  .  .  .  and  he  arose  and  fol- 
^p^we4  iPftn/*  2.  Clear  was  the  direction.  3.  Personal  was  the  address.  47  BoyaT' 
was  the  command.  YI.  His  call  was  immediately  eppectual.  1.  Matthew  fol- 
lowed at  once.  2.  Ho  followed  spiritually  as  well  as  literally.  3.  He  followed 
wholly.  4.  He  followed  growingly.  5.  He  followed  ever  after,  never  deserted  his 
Leader.  VII.  His  call  wA8^.^^^flQBu  qil  hobr  job  ^thbbs.  1.  His  salvation  en- 
couraged other  publicans  to  come  to  Jesuil  2".  ±iis  open  nouse  gave  opportunity 
to  his  friends  to  hear  Jesus.  3.  His  personal  ministry  brought  others  to  the 
Saviour.  4.  His  written  Gospel  has  convinced  many,  and  will  always  do  so.  Apph- 
cation:  Are jyoM  u:BJLQ-gaHr  neck  in  business?  Are yoa  " sitting  at  the  jeoeipt-of 
csstom '•^?  Yet  may_a  call  come  to  you  at  once.  It  does  come.  Hear  it  atten- 
tively ;  rise  earnestly ;"  respond  immediately.  {C  37 Spurg'eott-^  Call  of  Levi: — 
Such  as  sit  at  the  receipt  of  custom  are  hard  to  be  tiohverted  ;  but  Jesus  manifests 
His  power  by  doing  it  with  one  word  alone.  Grace  disengages  Matthew  from  the 
love  of  money,  to  make  him  an  apostle ;  the  love  of  money  will  separate  Judas 
from  Christ,  to  make  him  an  apostate :  thus  our  Lord  makes  Himself  amends  before- 
hand. St.  Matthew's  example  had  no  influence  on  Judas,  though  perhaps  it  was 
Christ's  design  to  lay  it  before  his  eyes.  Let  us  profit  by  the  one  as  well  as  the 
other;  and  let  us,  with  fear  and  trembling,  adore  the  different  judgments  of  God  in 
relation  to  souls.  {Quesnel.)  Calls  to  duty  joyful : — When  the  Saviour  calls, 
follow  Him  gladly.  Never  regret  a  duty,  or  lament  a  responsibility,  or  grieve  over 
a  sacrifice  required.  If  we  were  as  wise  as  Matthew,  we  should  celebrate  with 
festive  joy  every  call  to  duty.  {R.  Olover.)  The  attraction  of  the  Divine  call : — 
We  read  in  classic  story,  how  the  lyre  of  Orpheus  enchanted  with  its  music,  not 
only  the  wild  beasts,  but  the  very  trees  and  rocks  upon  Olympus,  so  that  they 
moved  from  their  places  to  follow  him  ;  so  Christ,  our  heavenly  Orpheus,  with  the 
music  of  His  gracious  speech,  draws  after  Him  those  less  susceptible  to  benign 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

influences  than  beasts,  and  trees,  and  stones,  even  poor,  hardened,  senseless,  sinful 
Bouls.  Let  Him  but  strike  His  golden  harp,  and  whisper  in  thy  heart,  "  Come, 
follow  Me,"  and  thou,  like  another  Matthew,  shalt  be  won.  The  call  of  Levi : — 
Well  might  he  sit  down  here ;  for  he  had  a  great  weight  upon  him,  the  burden  of 
his  covetousness,  and  the  desires  of  gold,  bred  in  him  by  the  often  traffic  he  had 
with  it.  Gold  is  heaviest  of  all  metals ;  but  it  is  made  more  heavy  by  covetous- 
nesB.  For  it  more  oppresses  the  heart  of  him  that  loves  it,  than  the  back  of  him 
that  bears  it.  And  where  was  he  sitting?  At  the  receipt  of  custom.  "  If  it  be 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  certainly  to  be  a  receiver  of  extorted  oppres- 
sion from  the  grudging  people  must  be  no  happy  nor  blessed  thing.  This  custom  • 
bouse  was  such.  The  receiving  of  custom  breeds  a  custom  of  receiving ;  and  that» 
a  desire  still  to  receive  more ;  which  desire  worldly  men  will  ever  seek  to  satisfy, 
though  with  the  oppression  of  their  poor  brethren.  This  made  this  place  and  office 
hateful  to  the  people.  **  Pubhcans  and  sinners  "  went  ever  together  in  their  mouths. 
.  .  .  Christ  found  him,  as  he  was  Levi,  the  publican ;  but  looked  on  him,  as  he 
was  Matthew,  the  apostle.  ...  He  called  him  to  an  office  much  more  gain- 
ful ..  .  where  he  should  still  be  a  receiver,  and  a  gainer  too ;  but  not,  as  here,  ten 
or  fifteen  per  centun^;-b»t-where  one  should  ♦♦  bring  forth  thirty,  one  sixty,  one  an 
hundred-fold."  l^Prn.  Atistin.)^  God  often  calls  men  in  strange  places  : — Not  in 
the  house  of  prayerHQot4n  the  preaching  of  the  Word ;  but  when  all  these  things 
have  been  absent,  and  all  surrounding  circumstances  have  seemed  most  adverse  to 
the  work  of  grace,  that  grace  has  put  forth  its  power.  The  tavern,  the  theatre,  the 
gaming-house,  the  race-course,  and  other  similar  haunts  of  worldliness  and  sin, 
have  gnTnpf|iTn^ff  jj^flan  thfl  scene  of  God's  converting^grace.  As  an  old  writer  says, 
••  Our  oallmg  is  uncertam  xh  fBuyuul  uf  plttUe,  fOF  CroS^atls  some  from  their  ships, 
and  some  from  their  shops ;  some  from  under  the  hedges,  and  others  from  the 
market ;  so  tiiat,  if  a  man  can  but  make  out  unto  his  own  soul  that  he  is  certainly 
called,  Uie  time  when  and  the  place  where  matter  little."  The  call  of  Levi^  or 
Christ's  voice  to  the  soul : — I.  That  Christ  calls  men  to  follow  Him.  1.  That  the 
call  of  Christ  is  antecedent  to  any  human  endeavour  after  Him.  2.  That  it  is 
often  effectively  addressed  to  the  most  unlikely  men.  3.  That  it  is  addressed  to 
men  when  they  are  occupied  with  the  secular  duties  of  life.  4.  That  it  takes  men 
from  the  lower  duties  and  sends  them  to  the  higher.  U.  That  Christ's  call  to  mbk 
MUST  BB  iMMEDUTELY  OBEYED — '*  And  he  arosc  and  followed  Him.  "1.  That  obedience 
must  be  immediate.  (1)  Not  to  be  hindered  by  intellectual  perplexities.  (2)  Not 
to  be  hindered  by  commercial  or  domestic  anxieties.  2.  That  obedience  must  be 
self-sacrificing.  3.  That  it  must  be  willing.  4.  That  it  must  be  continuous.  Learn  : 
1.  To  heed  the  calls  of  Christ  to  the  soul.  2.  To  subordinate  the  secular  to  the 
moral.  3.  That  true  religion  consists  iQ_following  Christ.  4.  That  it  is  well  to 
speak  to  men  for  their  moral  good.  "^tTT^TlSxell,  M.I^  Matthew  the  'publican  : — 
iiJasI  tiiat  the  son  of  a  devout.  God-fearing  Israelite  should  have  fallen  so  low. 
Even  tiie  outcasts,  the  sons  of  Belial,  hesitated  long  before  they  thus  sold  them- 
selves to  work  iniquity.  But  he  had  gone  freely  and  voluntarily  into  the  service  of 
the  heathen.  A  father's  stem  commands,  a  mother's  earnest  pleadings,  the  en- 
treaties of  a  loving  sister  and  the  expostulations  of  manly  and  pure-hearted  brothers, 
the  fair  fame  of  the  family,  upon  whose  proud  escutcheon  no  such  blot  had  ever 
come  since  the  days  of  their  great  ancestor,  David — all  these  were  of  no  avail  to 
turn  this  wayward  young  man  &om  the  evil  course  he  had  chosen,  and  at  length  his 
name  had  been  blotted  from  their  record  and,  to  all  outward  seeming,  he  was  to 
them  as  if  he  had  never  lived.  The  neighbours  and  friends  left  out  his  name  when 
they  spoke  of  the  children  of  Klopas  (as  in  Mark  vi.  3),  and  at  morning  and  even- 
ing prayer  no  audible  petition  went  up  to  heaven  for  the  erring  and  sinful  one.  But, 
hardened  as  he  was,  and  great  as  was  the  distress  he  had  given  to  his  family,  Levi 
was  not  beyond  the  free  grace  of  the  Eedeemer  of  men.  Jesus  was  his  cousin, 
according  to  the  flesh,  and  though  He  knew  how  the  hearts  of  that  dear  family  at 
Nazareth  were  breaking  with  anguish  over  him  as  utterly  lost,  yet  He,  the  Divine 
Redeemer,  did  not  despair  of  his  recovery  from  the  depth  of  his  degradation  and 
sin.  Having  loved  him  with  an  everlasting  love,  He  would  draw  him  out  of  the 
depths  by  the  power  of  His  loving-kindness.  And  so  it  came  to  pass  that  when 
Jesus  had  left  Nazacreth  and  the  home  of  His  youth  for  busy,  bustling  Capernaum, 
because  there  He  could  accomplish  a  more  comprehensive  and  effective  work  in 
establishing  the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  His  eye  more  than  once  rested  on 
poor  Levi,  and  He  saw  that,  in  spite  of  his  bravado,  his  sins  were  making  him 
wretched.    And  when  on  that  bright  summer  morning  He  went  from  Peter's  honst 


CHAP.  II.]  ST.  MARK.  H 

to  His  work  of  teaching  and  healing  at  the  shore  of  the  lake,  as  He  passed  the  stall 
or  booth  where  Levi  was  receiving  the  tolls  and  taxes,  He  said  only,  "  Follow  me  ;  " 
and  the  tax-gatherer,  a  few  moments  ago  so  hardened  and  brusque,  instantly  aban- 
doned his  books  and  accounts,  his  money  and  receipts,  and,  rising  from  his  seat, 
lollowed  Jesus.     Nor  did  he  ever  return  to  the  base  employment  he  had  left.    The  ^ 
change  of  heart  and  purpose,  though  apparently  instantaneous,  was  thorougK  and  ^ 
permanent.   One  evicfence  of  its  tnorougFne¥s  was'mamfesledTn  his  desfre  to  bring"" 
others"  wHo"trad--ialten-"ihto  jthe  Bame'degVadatiorr  as  himself  tinker'  thg'gfffciDTrg- 
influencToI  ChiisfrtgacEIngs.  "  "  And'  Levi  made  "HTin''(i."«.,Chrrs^^^  the" 

evangelist  Lukg,  "  ft  great  feast  in  his  own  house ;  and  there  was  a  great  company  of 
publicans  and  of  others  that  sat  down  with  them."  To  these  sinful  souls  our  blessed 
Lord  spoke  words  of  forgiveness  and  pardon,  and  they  became,  as  St.  Mark  tells, 
His  followers  thenceforward.  As  for  Matthew,  he  undoubtedly  grew  in  grace,  and 
was  restored  to  the  loving  favour  of  his  ^""lilvji^r  it  wan,  at  the  farthest,  but  a 
very  few  months  later  f.Viat  Jagna-^l^nQo  h^m  ^gj^mSbf  the  twelve,  and  with  him  ^wn, 
and  po8siMyJhree_otJbij^^otheM,  thi>_deyou  James  the  Just  being 

one,  and  gave  him  his  new  name  '*  Majjlifig^"  "The  gift  of  God/[  Matthew's 
remembrance  of  his  early  history  and  sins  seems  To  have  tept'lElm  humblerand 
have  prevented  him  from  participating  in  those  unseemly  wrangles  as  to  who  should 
be  the  greatest,  in  which  some  of  the  others  indulged ;  but  he  was  a  keen  observer, 
and  from  the  day  when  he  abandoned  his  publican's  stall  to  his  death  he  must  have 
felt  more  profoundly  than  any  of  the  others  the  certainty  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of 
God  as  well  as  the  Son  of  Mary.     Some  practical  lessons :  L  Familt  pbidb  is  not 

▲    SUFFICIENT    PBESEBVATIVS    lailNST    DEEDS    OF   SHAHX.       II.   HaS   DISHONOUB    BEEN 

BBouoHT  UPON  YouB  FAMILY  NAMs  BT  A  PEODioAL?  Do  not  despair  of  him.  You 
have  a  great  burden  of  shame  and  grief  to  bear;  but  do  not  cease  to  love  the 
prodigal,  to  pray  for  him,  to  hope  for  him.  He,  like  St.  Matthew,  may  yet  hear  and 
obey  the  voice  of  Christ.  1.  If  yon  did  your  best  to  train  him  in  the  way  in  which 
he  should  go,  be  very  sure  that  the  healthful  influences  by  which  yon  surrounded  him 
are  still  with  him,  fighting  mightily  against  the  degrading  influence  by  whioh  he  is 
now  encompassed,  and  they  may  yet  prevail.  Not  in  vain  did  you  do  your  duty  in 
regard  to  him.  2.  Ah,  but  it  may  be  that  yon  cannot  recall  the  days  of  his  boy- 
hood  without  personal  shame.  You  permitted  many  things  to  prevent  you  from 
training  him  duly  in  godliness  and  true  manliness ;  the  example  you  set  before  him 
was  not  really  ennobling.  Well,  humble  yourself  before  God,  and  hope  in  God  for 
your  son  as  well  as  for  yourself.  He  may  yet  yield  to  the  persistent  drawings  of  the 
Divine  love.    III.  No  man  shouiiD  pebmit  his  business  ob  his  social  subboundinos 

TO  HINDEB  HIM  FBOM  FOLLOWING  ChEIST.  IV.  OnE  OF  THE  VEBT  BEST  EVIDENCES  OF 
A  man's  CONVXBSION  is  a  BEAL  MANIFESTATION  OF  CABE   FOB  TCTwjpTTtTTrriT.  wiyT.y^w  OF 

THOSE  OF  HIS  OWN  CLASS.  (^71071.)  The  Call  of  Levj.'—I.&he  pebson  called.^  A 
publioon,  Ae.  II.  The  mannebjii  which  he  is  called.  1.  Externally— by  the  Word. 
2.  Internally — by  Christ's  power  and  Spirit.    8.  These  two  must  ever  be  combined. 

III.  The  manneb  in  which  Levi  tbeated  the  gall.  1.  He  did  not  disregard  it,  as 
many.  2.  He  did  not  promise  a  compliance  hke  others-  .S.  He  inRtRntly  obeyed, 
and  is  thus  an  example  to  all  who  are  called.  <iy.  'IgK  call  ixsEug)  Christ  goes 
before — L  To  prepare  Himself  for  sympathy.  2^" JC!Lrj^*52l£3ouSts  as  fo  the  way. 
8. "  To  free  from  oppfessive  responsibility.  4.  To  show'how  we'T^reTowalk  in  tfie" 
way."  5.  To  remove  obstructions.  6.  To  be  a  companion.  Are  you  following 
Christ  T  Expository  Discourses.)  The  feast  of  Levi,  or  the  festival  of  a  renewed 
soul : — I.  It  was  a  festival  held  to  celebbate  the  most  impoetant  event  in  the 
HisTOBY  OF  A  SOUL.  1.  It  was  indicative  of  joy.  2.  It  was  indicative  of  gratitude. 
S.  It  was  indicative  of  worship.  The  newly  converted  soul  is  characterized  by 
devotion.  II.  It  was  held  to  intboduce  to  Chbist  those  who  webe  in  need  of 
His  loving  mercy.  1.  It  was  a  time  for  the  introduction  of  sinful  companions  to 
Christ.  2.  It  was  a  time  of  leave-taking  between  Levi  and  his  former  friends.  Not 
to  leave  the  old  life  in  a  hostile  spirit.  IH.  It  was  a  festival  too  lofty  in  moral 
sionificancb  to  be  biohtly  interpbeted  by  the  conventional  bigots  of  the  age. 

IV.  It  was  a  festival  beautifully  illustrative  of  Chbist's  mission  to  the  wobld. 
1.  We  see  from  this  festival  that  Christ  came  to  save  the  morally  Rinfnl  9  x^ft- 
£ee_  frogx  this. festiysJ  that  Christ'^came  to  heaTtEe  mnmllv  ^^iBfiftflfM^  Lessons  : 
1.  That  thelifeo£  the  renewed  soursEould  be  a  constant  festival  oiLjoy:.^  2.  That 
Christians  ihould  en^pftynnr  t.n  hrinpr  thpjr  comradea  to  the  Savionr.  3.  That 
humanity  has  a  Divine  Physician.     (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A, 


\  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

y«T.  16.  And  when  the  Bcrlbes  and  FharlseeB  saw  Him  eat  with  pnbllcana  and 
sinners. — The  curse  o/Jjifliztry-.:3scTlie-sia8  society- winka  at  arpi  wnrRR  than  ^ose  it 
censures.   , The  most  alarming  sin  is_the  self- delusion. that  wfi.>'«^ft  "f*  r^'"^     The 
ePr^~ 


pride  of  the  Pharisees  Had  made  themso  callous  tTiat  a  sharp  lancet  was  needed  to 
get  at  the  wound.  I.  Bigotby  bespatters  with  mire  the  eaibest  deed.  According 
to  its  creed,  better  that  a  tree  of  fruitful  goodness  should  not  grow  than  that  it 
should  depart  by  a  hairbreadth  from  the  prescribed  shape.  II.  Biootby  bmndfolds 
ITS  own  eyes.  It  can  only  see  sin  when  sin  wears  a  particular  hue.  It  can  sea 
avarice  or  theft,  but  not  insincerity  or  pride.  III.  Bigotry  seeks  its  bad  knds  Bt 
ceooked  ways.  These  scribes  lacked  courage,  so  instead  of  attacking  Christ  openly 
they  tried  to  undermine  His  authority  with  His  disciples.  IV.  Bigotry  cheats 
XTSEiiF  07  laboest  blebsino.  Christ  would  have  illuminated  and  enriched  these 
proud  Pharisees  if  they  had  allowed  Him  to.  But  they  were  too  proud  to  admit 
their  hunger,  and  so  they  starved.  He  who  thinks  himself  already  perfect  is  past 
improvement.  Like  hide-bound  animals  he  cannot  grow.  {D.  Davies,M.A.)  An 
implied  churge  set  aside : — Negatively:  1.  That  Christ  did  not  associate  with  pub- 
licans and  sinners  because  He  entertained  too  humble  an  opinion  of  Himself.  He 
knew  that  He  was  intellectually  and  morally  superior  to  them.  2.  That  Christ  did 
not  associate  with  publicans  and  sinners  because  He  was  not  choice  as  to  His 
society.  *♦  Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners."  3.  That  Christ  did  not 
associate  with  publicans  and  sinners  because  of  His  sympathy  with  them.  It  was 
not  their  wickedness  that  drew  Him  to  them ;  morally  He  had  nothing  in  common 
with  them.  Positively :  1.  That  to  have  refused  Levi's  invitation  would  not  have 
been  courteous.  2.  That  in  accepting  Levi's  invitation  Christ  displayed  a  spirit  of 
condescension.  8.  That  by  eating  and  drinking  with  publicans  and  sinners  Christ 
exhibited  a  friendly  disposition  towards  them.  4.  That  attending  Levi's  feast 
gave  Christ  an  excellent  opportunity  of  doing  Publicans  and  sinners  good.  {G. 
Cron.)  Christ's  relatioriM  toith  the  world  ;--To  come,  then,  to  the  root  of  the 
whole  matter ;  the  supreme  Lover  of  the  universe,  God,  is  in  the  tenderest  rela- 
tions to  everything  that  is.  Not  that  we  are  to  make  no  difference  between  good 
and  evil.  We  are  to  make  a  difference  between  them.  If  we  have  the  spirit  of  the 
Lord  Jesns  Christ  our  goodness  will  make  us  more  lenient,  more  charitable,  more 
patient  with  bad  men  and  bad  things.  And  remember  one  thing — that  no  human 
heart  is  ever  cured  till  yon  can  find  another  heart  to  brood  it ;  for  the  cure  of  the 
heart  is  of  the  heart,  and  a  loving  heart  cures  an  unloving  heart ;  and  as  God  lives 
by  His  purity  to  make  more  pure,  by  His  love  to  heal  men's  selfishness,  by  His 
beauty  and  majesty  and  power  to  draw  men  up  out  of  animal  life  into  spiritual  life; 
so  His  followers  may  imitate  Him  in  those  respects,  and  make  atonement  for  those 
who  are  ready  to  perish— the  atonement  that  love  is  always  making— and  as  far  as 
they  carry  that  out  they  may  redeem  men.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christ  welcoming 
sinners : — ^We  are  told  that  in  stormy  weather  it  is  not  unusual  for  small  birds  to 
be  blown  out  of  sight  of  land  on  to  the  sea.  They  are  often  seen  by  voyagers  out 
of  their  reckoning  and  far  from  the  coast,  hovering  over  the  masts  on  weary  wings 
as  if  they  wanted  to  alight  and  rest  themselves,  but  fearing  to  do  so.  A  traveller 
tells  us  tl»t  on  one  occasion  a  little  lark,  which  followed  the  ship  for  a  considerable 
distance,  was  at  last  compelled  through  sheer  weariness  to  alight.  He  was  so  worn 
out  as  to  be  easily  caught.  The  warmth  of  the  hand  was  so  agreeable  to  him  that 
he  sat  down  on  it,  burying  his  little  cold  feet  in  his  feathers,  and  looking  about 
with  his  bright  eye  not  in  the  least  afraid,  and  as  if  feeling  assured  that  he  h&i. 
been  cast  amongst  good  kind  people  whom  he  had  no  occasion  to  be  so  backward  in 
trusting.  A  touching  picture  of  the  soul  who  is  aroused  by  the  Spirit  of  God  and 
blown  out  of  its  own  reckoning  by  the  winds  of  conviction  ;  and  the  warm  reception 
which  the  weary  little  bird  received  at  the  hands  of  the  passengers  conveys  but  a 
faint  idea  of  that  welcome  which  will  greet  the  worn-out,  sin-sick  souls  who  will 
commit  themselves  into  the  hands  of  the  only  Saviour.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ 
in  company  with  sinners  ;  or,  the  law  of  social  intercourse  in  the  Christian  life  : — We 
have  in  this  narrative  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  law  of  social  intercourse  in  tha 
Christian  life,  given  by  Christ,  and  which,  therefore,  may  be  regarded  as  of 
authority.  We  observe — I.  That  ths  morally  good  must  associate  with  thb 
BOOiALiiT  DKPBATKD.  *'  How  IS  it  that  He  eateth  and  drinketh  with  publicans  and 
sinners  t  '*  1.  That  the  morally  good  may  take  part  in  the  eocial  festivals  of  tha 
depraved,  but  not  for  the  mere  purpose  of  social  enjoyment  or  intellectual  com< 
panionship.  Christ  did  not  go  to  the  house  of  Levi  merely  to  enjoy  a  sumptuous 
Mttqnet,  or  to  participate  in  the  festivities  of  unholy  men.    2.  The  morally  good 


flHAP.  II.]  ST.  MARK  7t 

may  associate  with  the  depraved  in  the  commercial  enterprise  of  life.  The  good 
mast  have  dealings  with  the  unholy  in  the  commerce  of  the  world.  The  tares  and 
the  wheat  must  grow  together  until  the  harvest.  3.  The  morally  good  are  some- 
times brought  into  incidental  companionship  with  the  depraved.     II.  That  thb 

MORALLY  GOOD  IN  COMPANIONSHIP  WITH  THE  SOCIALLY  £EPRAVED  MUST  BE  AMIMATED  BY 
BEMEDIAL  MOTIVES,  AND  MUST  QIVB  FORTH  INFLUENCES  Ba^NOBLINO  TO  THB  SOUL.     "They 

that  are  whole  have  no  need  of  the  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick."  1.  The 
Christian  must  go  into  the  company  of  the  morally  depraved  with  right  views  of 
their  sad  condition,  and  with  an  intense  desire  for  their  recovery.  2.  The  Christian 
can  give  forth  healing  influences  to  the  morally  depraved  by  kindly  words,  by  gentla 
disposition,  by  judicious  teaching,  and  by  unpretentious  example.  Lessons:  1, 
That  the  morally  good  must  go  into  the  company  of  the  socially  depraved.  2.  That 
the  morally  good  are  the  physicians  of  the  race ;  they  must  be  careful  not  to  take 
the  infection  of  sin,  and  to  exercise  judiciously  their  healing  art.  8.  That  society 
will  best  be  regenerated  by  individual  effort.    (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  They  that  are jthgje  have  no  need  of  the  physician.— i^or  vfhom  is  ths 
gospel  meant  f — I.  Even  a  superficial  glance  at  our  Lord's  mission  suffices  to  show 
that  His  work  was  fob  the  sinful.  His  descent  into  the  world  implied  that  men 
needed  deliverance.  The  bearing  of  the  gospel  covenant  is  towards  guilty  men. 
His  mission  is  described  as  one  of  mercy  and  grace.  The  gospel  turns  its  face 
always  towards  sin.  The  gospel  has  always  found  its  greatest  trophies  amongst 
the  most  sinful.  To  whom  else  could  it  look  ?  II.  The  more  closely  wb  look  the 
MORE  clear  this  FACT  BECOMES.  Christ  came  that  He  might  be  a  sin-bearer.  The 
gifts  of  the  gospel,  such  as  pardon  and  justification,  imply  sin.  The  great  deeds  of 
our  Lord,  such  as  His  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension,  all  bear  upon  sinners. 
III.  It  is  oub  wisdom  to  accept  the  situation.  Thf  very  best  thing  you  can  do, 
since  the  gospel  looks  towards  sinners,  is  to  get  where  the  gospel  looks.  You  will 
then  be  in  your  right  place.  This  is  the  safest  way  to  obtain  the  blessing.  This  j 
is  a  place  into  which  you  can  get  directly.  IV.  This  doctrine  has  a  obbat  sancti- 
FYiNQ  influence.  It  changcs  the  sinner's  thoughts  d  God.  It  inspires,  meltsj 
enUvens,  and  inflames  him.  It  deals  a  deadly  blow  at  h's  self-conceit.  It  produce/ 
a  sense  of  gratitude.  It  giakes  him^eady  to  forgive  others.  It  becomes  the  vei 
soul  of  enthusiasm.  ^(C.  H.  SpiiFgeon.J  \  Chris  fs  treatment  of  sinners 
I.  Sinners  in  their  natuRal  btai'id  uavjii  Mimo  of  repentance.  This  duty  is  often 
urged  in  Scripture  (Isaiah  Iv.  7  ;  Matt.  iii.  8  ;  Acts  ii.  3P).  1.  Without  repentance 
none  can  be  saved.  2.  Let  all,  therefore,  lay  hold  on  it  v/ithout  delay.  II.  Sinnbbs 
CANNOT  bepent  OF  THEMSELVES.    They  must  be  called  to  it  by  Christ.    IIL  Onk 

MAIN  END   OF  OhBIST's  COMING  INTO  THE   WORLD  WAS   TO   CALL  AND   CONVERT  SINNERS, 

AND  bbing  them  TO  REPENTANCE.  1.  This  should  encourage  sinners  to  come  to 
Christ  by  faith,  and  by  true  repentance  and  humiliation  for  their  sins,  in  hope  of 
mercy  and  pardon.  Since  He  came  for  this  purpose,  He  will  not  reject  any  who 
accept  His  invitation  and  hearken  to  His  calL  2.  How  excellent  a  work  it  must  be 
— since  Christ  Himself  came  to  begin  it — to  be  the  means  of  converting  sinners, 
and  drawing  them  to  repentance.  This  is  not  merely  the  duty  of  ministers  :  all 
Christians  may  take  part  in  it.  3.  If  Christ  came  to  call  sinners  to  repentance, 
then  He  did  not  come  to  give  liberty  to  any  to  live  in  sin,  or  to  commit  sin. 
Repentance  is  the  beginning  of  a  new  life — a  life  of  emancipation  from  the  power 
as  well  as  the  penalty  of  sin.  (G.  Petter.)  All  th  lessons  of  this  word  could  not 
be  even  named  here,  but  these  are  certainly  in  it.  ^L  Sin  is  sickness  of  the  worst 
kind.  II.  Repe^itance  and  forgiveness  are  the  heahng  of  the  soul.  HI.  Christ  is 
i h^  Soul's  Physician,  skilled  to  heal  all  its  diseases.  IV.  The  more  grave  our  case 
is,  the  more  eager  Jesus  is  to  cure  it.  What  should  we  have  done  had  this  not 
been  the  case?  Happily  He  still  stoops  to  closest,  tenderest  fellowship  with 
sinners.  He  pities  most  the  guiltiest,  and  ia  ever  nearest  to  the  neediest.  {R. 
Olover.)  Christ's  call : — I.  Christ  came  not  to  oall  the  righteous.  1.  Because 
there  were  no  righteous  to  call.  2.  Because  if  there  had  been  they  would  not  have 
needed  caUing.  H.  He  came  to  call  sinners.  1.  All  sinners.  2.  Especially 
those  conscions  oi  their  sins.  lU.  He  came  to  call  to  repentance.  His  call  is 
not  an  absolute  oall  to  the  privileges  of  the  sons  of  God,  but  to  the  fulfilment  of  a 
condition — repent,  and  believe.  (Anon,)  Wr  tchedness  a  plea  for  salvation  ;— 
On  entering  a  ragged  school  you  see  a  boy  who  can  spell  his  way  through  a  Bible-^ 
once  a  sealed  book  to  him ;  he  knows  now  of  a  Saviour,  of  whom  once  he  had 
never  heard  the  nama.     Clean,  sharp,  intelligent,  bearing  an  honest  air  with  him. 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

he  bespeaks  your  favour.  But  were  these  his  passport  to  the  asylum  ?  No.  He 
was  adopted  not  for  the  sake  of  these,  but  notwithstandiug  the  want  of  them.  It 
was  his  wretchedness  that  saved  him ;  the  clean  hands,  and  the  rosy  cheeks,  and 
all  that  won  our  favour,  are  the  results  of  that  adoption.  {Dr.  Guthrie.)  The 
spirit  in  which  to  seek  salvation: — On  one  occasion,  when  the  late  Duke  of  Kent 
expressed  some  concern  about  the  state  of  his  soul  in  the  prospect  of  death,  hia 
physioan  endeavoured  to  soothe  his  mind  by  referring  to  his  high  respectability 
and  hia  honourable  conduct  in  the  distinguished  situation  in  which  Providence  had 
placed  him ;  but  he  stopped  him  short,  saying,  *•  No ;  remember,  if  I  am  to  be 
saved,  it  is  not  as  a  prince,  but  as  a  sinner."  The  sinner's  Itope : — A  Hottentot 
of  immoral  character,  being  under  deep  conviction  of  sin,  was  anxious  to  know  how 
to  pray.  He  went  to  his  master,  a  Dutchman,  to  consult  with  him ;  but  his 
master  gave  him  no  encouragement.  A  sense  of  his  wickedness  increased,  and  ha 
had  no  one  near  to  direct  him.  Occasionally,  however,  he  was  admitted  with  the 
family  at  the  time  of  prayer.  The  portion  of  Scripture  which  was  one  day  read 
was  the  parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  publican.  While  the  prayer  of  the  Pharisee 
was  read,  the  poor  Hottentot  thought  within  himself,  ♦*  This  is  a  good  man;  here 
is  nothing  for  me ;  "  but  when  his  master  came  to  the  prayer  of  the  publican — 
**  God,  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner  "— ••  This  suits  me,"  he  cried ;  "  now  I  know 
how  to  pray."  With  this  prayer  he  immediately  retired,  and  prayed  night  and 
day  for  two  days,  and  then  found  peace.  Full  of  joy  and  gratitude  he  went  into 
the  fields,  and,  as  he  had  no  one  to  whom  he  could  speak,  he  exclaimed,  •'  Ye  hills, 
ye  rocks,  ye  trees,  ye  rivers,  hear  what  God  has  done  for  my  soul  1  He  has  been 
merciful  to  me,  a  sinner."  The  great  Physician  and  His  patients: — This  was 
Christ's  apology  for  mingling  with  the  publicans  and  sinners  when  the  Pharisees 
murmured  against  Him.  He  triumphantly  cleared  Himself  by  showing  that, 
according  to  the  fitness  of  things,  He  was  perfectly  in  order.  He  was  acting 
accordmg  to  His  oflicial  character.  A  physician  should  be  found  where  there  is 
work  for  him  to  do,  <fec.  I.  Mercy  obaciously  eboabds  sin  as  disbabk.  It  is  more  than 
disease,  but  mercy  leniently  and  graciously  chooses  to  view  it  as  such.  It  is  justified 
in  such  ajiew,  for  almost  everything  that  may  be  said  of  deadly  maladies  may  be  said 
of  sin.  /j«j^iD  is  mi  h«re^tary  disease.  The  taint  is  in  our  blood,  &o.  2.  Sin,  like 
sickness;  TOvery'cGsaWing^  Ilpre^pts  oiir  seryingjGrod.  We"cannot  pray  or  praise 
God  aright,  &c.  There  is  nota  single  moral  power  of  manhood  which  sin  has  not 
stripped  of  its  strength  and  glory.  3,  Sin  also,  like  certain  diseases,  is  a  very 
loathsome  thing.  4.  Fearfully  polluting.  Everything  we  do  and  think  of  grows 
polluted  through  our  corruption.  6,  Contagious.  A  man  cannot  be  a  sinner  alone. 
**  One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good."  6.  Very  painful ;  and  yet,  on  the  other 
hand,  at  certain  stages  it  brings  on  a  deadness,  a  numbness  of  soul,  preventing 
pain.  Most  men  are  unconscious  of  the  misery  ofthfiJall.  But  when  sin  is  really 
discerned,  then  it  becomes  painful  indeed.  Oh,  whaf  wretchedness  was  mine 
before  I  laid  hold  on  Christ.  7.  It  is  deep-seated,  and  has  its  throne  in  the  heart. 
The  skill  of  physicians  can  often  extract  the  roots  of  disease,  but  no  skill  can  ever 
reach  this.  It  is  in  its  own  nature  wholly  incurable.  Man  cannot  cure  himself. 
Jehovah  Rophi,  the  healing  Lord,  must  manifest  His  omnipotent  power.  8.  It  is 
a  mortal  disease.  It  kills  not  just  now,  but  it  will  kill  ere  long.  H.  It  pleases 
Divine  mercy  to  give  to  Christ  the  character  of  a  physicun.  Jesus  Christ  never 
came  into  the  world  merely  to  explain  what  sin  is,  but  to  inform  us  how  it  can  be 
removed.  As  a  Physician  Christ  is — 1.  Authorised,  2.  QuaUfied.  He  is,  experi- 
mentally as  well  as  by  education,  qualified  in  th^  Jbealing  art. — 5.-HaaJBL-wide 
practice.  4.  His  cures  arejgifia4Xjj»^.cal4„8ure.  I  His  medicine  is  Himself.j  O 
•RlPHRfl^  T>|^yj,^'^;o«  #^>  *,Mr^jispeTate  "disease  F  III.  i'hat  ni^ft  is  that  alonb 
whicJ*move8  ouB  oRAcTous  PhySICIAN  TO  COM^fiT'To  OUR  AID.  His  Saviourship  is 
based  upon  our  sinnership.  Need,  need  alone,  is  that  which  quickens  the  Physician's 
footsteps.     IV.  It  follows  therefore,  and  the  text  positively  asserts  it,  that  thb 

WHOLE — THAT  THOSE  WHO  HAVE   NO  GREAT  NEED,  NO  NEED  AT  ALL — WILL  BE   TTNAXDEO 

BY  Christ.  V.  It  follows,  then,  that  those  who  are  sick  shall  be  helped  by 
Jesus.  Are  yqn^^aek,  ulni^l,  &o.  T  He  loves  to  save.  He  can  save  the  vilest. 
Trust  Him.  (jp.  H.  Spurgiim^  The  Healer  of  souls : — It  is  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  facf&te  tbfi  ITTS  of  our  Lord  that  He  was  obliged  repeatedly  to  defend 
Himself  for  loving  the  sinful.  It  is  a  fact  by  which  we  may  measure  the  usual 
progress  of  the  world  under  the  infiuence  of  Christian  civilization.  Now,  philan- 
thropy is  generally  practised  and  held  in  high  esteem.  Yet  we  do  Christ's  censors 
injustice  by  looking  on  them  as  rare  monsters  of  inhumanity.     They  were  simply 


CHAP,  n.]  ST,  MARK,  7» 

men  whose  ihoughts  and  gympathies  were  dominated  by  the  spirit  of  their  age. 
For  the  love  of  the  sinfol  was  a  new  thing  on  the  earth,  whose  appearance  marked 
the  beginning  of  a  new  era,  well  called  the  era  of  grace.  Never  was  apology  more 
felicitous  pr  jqccessful — Christ  was  a  Physician.  The  defence  is  simple  and  irre- 
sistible,  fl.   THAT^iJHRIS'nAyiTY  IS^BEFOBB  ALL  THINGS  A  RBLIOION  OF  BBDEMPTION]^ 

If  such  be  its  character^  then  to  be  true  to  itselTXIhrisiianity  cannot  afford  to  Be 
nice,  dainty,  disdainful,  but  must  lay^Jt8.Jiealiiig..hand  on  the  most  repulsiva^ 
Rabbinism  may  be  exclusive,  but  not  the  religion  of  redemptibff.  It  is  biound  tobe 
a  religion  for  the  masses.  Christ  is  not  merely  an  ethical  Teacher,  or  Bevealer  of 
Divine  mysteries ;  He  ii,  in  the  first  place,  a  Bedeemer,  only  in  the  second  the 
Revealer.  II.  That  Chbistianitt  is  thb  bblioion  of  hope.  It  takes  a  cheerful 
view  of  the  capabilities  and  prospects  of  man  even  at  his  worst.  It  believes  that 
he  can  be  cured.  In  this  hopefulness  Christianity  stood  alone  in  ancient  times. 
It  needed  the  eye  of  a  more  than  earthly  love,  and  of  a  faith  that  was  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen,  to  discern  possibilities  of  goodness  even  in  the  waste  places  of 
society.  The.X)h3Kch_must Jb_ave  the  FhyBicitJQ's  confidence  in  His  healing  art' 
'  6e  inventive^  ,_SJ^Q  musf  have  8ympamy~Wltll"pBPple  for their'gdod^  '  She 
thezeaToflEose  wEb  would  try  new  experiments.    iH.  Chbis- 


y ust  not  gQjm  on  the  zeaToi  those  who  would  try  new  experiments 
tianitt  is  fit  and  wobthy  to  ;iiKTHE  universal  behgion.  (A,  B.  Brucef  DJ).) 
The  sickness — tJie  Physician  :'^1,  The  sickness  spoken  of.  1.  The  likenesi 
between  the  sickness  of  the  body  afid  that  of  the  soul.  As  sickness  is  a  disordered 
body,  so  is  sin  a  precious  soul  all  in  disorder.  Sickness  of  body,  not  healed,  will 
kill  the  body.  Sin,  not  healed,  not  pardoned,  will  kill  the  never-dying  soul.  Or, 
talie^any  of  the^garticiiarjdiseasesjwhich  Christ  healed  on  the  earth,  and  see  the 
likenesTftrthemTHe  healed  madnessT^Biii  is  madness — flying  in  the  face  of  God. 
He  healed  fevers.  Sin  is  a  fever — consuming,  burning  the  soul.  He  healed  palsies. 
Sin  is  a  palsy — laying  the  soul  prostrate.  He  healed  leprosy.  Sin  is  a  leprosy — 
very  foul  and  loathsome.  He  healed  deafness,  blindness.  The  sinner  is  deaf, 
blind — deaf  to  the  voice  of  God  and  of  his  own  conscience — ^blind  to  all  it  most 
concerns  him  to  see— to  himself,  God,  Christ.  2.  WeU,  sin  is  like  disease ;  but 
see  the  difference  :  sickness  is  usually  one  disease.  Sin  is  all  diseases  in  one---the 
madness,  the  fever,  the  deafness,  all  in  one  !  Men  wish  to  be  free  of  sickness  of  body. 
Alas  I  they  do  not  wish  to  >be<free  of  sin,  the  disease  of  the  soizi.  Sickness  is 
disease  ;  sin  is  crime — sin.  /^II.  jIhe  globious  Physician.  1.  Let  me  say  of  Him — 
there  is  no  other.  If  you  a¥e  sick  in  body  you  have  a  choice  of  physicians.  But 
for  the  terrible  sickness  of  sin  none  but  Christ — ••  Neither  is  there  sadvation  in  any 
other,"  Ac.  There  needs  no  other.  2.  That  He  knows  our  whole  case^^nr  whole 
diseaie,  and  so  is  able  to  deal  with  it.  Other  physicians  have  often  to  work  in  the 
dark,  xhey  are  nnoefUtiffwhat  the  disease  is,  and,  if  they  know,  may  be  unable 
to  heaL  8.  That  He  is  unspeakably  tender.  What  else  but  love  could  have 
brought  Him  into  this  leprous  world?  4.  That  He  is  a  mighty,  all-skilful 
Physician.  5.  That  He  is  a  faithful  Physician.  He  will  not  skin  over  your  wound 
and  say  that  it  is  healed — "I'^j^f^^"^^  '^Ifi"  vil^  I  give^pu,"  6.  He  is  a  Physician 
very  near  at  hand — *•  A  very  present  help  in^lkrouble."  (C.  J.  Brown,  D.D.) 
Christ  calling  sinners  to  repentance : — The  call  of  St.  Matthew  the  occasion  of 
these  words.  I.  The  obsebvations  natubally  abisino  fbom  the  sevebal  pabti- 
cuLAB  KXPBESSI0N8  MADE  USE  OF  IN  THB  TEXT.  1.  That  sin  is  to  the  soul  what 
disease  or  sickness  is  to  the  body.  2.  That  repentance  is  not  an  original  and 
primary  duty  of  religion,  only  of  secondary  intention,  and  of  consequential  obliga- 
tion. The  original  duty  of  all  rational  creatnrftH  ia  to  obQj  tbo  cgmTT^ffTlf^"^*^"^'*  Q^ 
God,  a^  such  as  have  always  lived  in  obedience  are  not  obliged  to  the  duty  of 
repentance!  IT  applies  to  those  who  have  sinned.  It  is  a  privilege  to  them  to  be 
permitted  to  perform  '*  (VitiP  ^'  "*")"  There  is  a  repentance  to  which  even  the 
best  of  men  are  continually  obliged.  But  this  is  not  that  repentance  to  which  oar 
Saviour  came  to  call  sinners.  3.  The  just  and  sharp  reproof  contained  in  thii 
answer  to  the  hypocritical  Pharisees.  II.  The  genebal  doctrine  of  rbpentancb 
AS  HEBE  LAID  DOWN  BY  ouB  LoRD.  The  design  of  His  preaching  was  to  call 
sinners  to  repentance.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Moral  sickness  : — For  as  the  natural 
health  of  the  body  consists  in  this  :  that  every  part  and  organ  regularly  and  duly 
piriforms  its  proper  function  ;  and,  when  any  of  these  are  disordered  or  perverted 
in  their  operations,  »Vi<^rQ  '^'?en?B  c^jpVT^Qc.c;  ov/^  /Ho/^«oao  .  gg  likewise,  with  regard  to 
the  spiritual  or  moral  state  of  the  mind  and  soul ;  when  every  faculty  is  employed 
in  its  natural  and  proper  mnnner,  and  with  a  just  direction  to  the  end  it  wa? 
designed  for ;  when  the  understaudin^  judges  of  things  according  to  reason  and 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  n. 

trnth,  without  jwrtialitv  and  without  prejudice  ;  when  the  will  is  in  its  action? 
directed  by  this  judgment  of  right,  without  obstinacy  or  wilfulness  ;  and  when  the 
passions  in  their  due  subordinate  station,  and  the  appetites  under  the  government 
of  sober  intention,  serve  only  to  quicken  the  execution  of  what  reason  directs  :  then 
is  the  mind  of  man  sound  and  whole ;  fit  for  all  the  operations  of  a  rational 
creature,  fit  for  the  employments  of  a  virtuous  and  religious  life.  On  the  contrary, 
the  abuse  or  misemployment  of  any  of  these  faculties,  is  the  disease  or  sickness  of 
the  soul.  And  when  they  are  all  of  them  perverted,  totally  and  habitually,  by  a 
general  corruption  and  depravation  of  manners  ;  then,  as  the  body,  by  an  incapacity 
of  all  its  organs  for  the  uses  of  natural  life,  dies  and  is  dissolved  ;  so  the  man  in 
his  moral  capacity,  by  an  habitual  neglect  and  dislike  of  all  virtuous  practices, 
becomes  (as  the  Scripture  elegantly  expresses  it)  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  And 
as,  in  bodily  diseases,  some  are  more  dangerous,  and  more  likely  to  prove  mortal, 
than  others ;  in  which  sense  our  Saviour  says  concerning  Lazarus,  "  This  sickness 
is  not  unto  death  "  (John  xi.  4) ;  so,  in  the  spiritual  sense,  the  same  apostle  St. 
John,  in  his  First  Epistle,  speaks  of  sins,  which,  according  as  there  be  any  or  no 
hope  of  men  recovering  from  them,  either  are  or  are  not  unto  death  (1  John  v.  16). 
{Ibid.)  Christ  came  to  call  the  sinner : — Christ  came  to  call  not.  the  righteous, 
but  sinners  to  repentance.  The  schoolmaster  does  not  gather  the  finest  scholars  in 
the  country  into  his  school,  and  try  to  teach  them ;  he  takes  those  who  know  little 
or  nothing  and  educates  them.  The  gardener  does  not  bind- up  the  strong,  hardy 
plants  ;  it  is  those  that  are  weak  and  slender,  those  that  have  been  broken  down  by 
the  wind,  that  he  trains  to  the  pcle  or  to  the  wall.  It  is  the  sick  people,  not  the 
well  people,  who  need  the  physician.  No  one  can  be  too  great  a  sinner  to  be 
beyond  the  need  of  Jesus  ;  it  was  to  save  sinners  that  Jesus  came.  {The  Sunday 
School  Times.)         T^"  "'^^'"e  <iPd  caya^^^^fy  (\f  "t'^piJ  mnr,  -—Tk-^  r^^'^S  *"  ^hft  IftWfff^- 

afrn-tnTp  nf  biinnnTi  rfl.tnrft,  (Thriat  fTuvft  a.  nftw  idni^  flf  \y\p.  vn1nft^t>£-^«uM»-^Pro  hnjjt.  ^ 

,Hpgdom  oot-ot-thej£lus.e^or^ciety.^  Tqcompare  small  things  with  great,  .it  has 
'been  pointedoutbyLord  MacaulajjJjSL  in  an  Enghsh  catEeSral  tHere  is  an 
exquisite.  8_tainea'"^mdow  wiiich  was  made  by  an  apprentice  out  of  the  pieces  of 
glass  which  had~been  refected  by  his  master,  and  it  was  so  far  superior  to  every 
other  in  the  church,  that,  according  to  tradition,  the  envious  artist  killed  himself 
with  vexation.  All  the  builders  of  society  had  rejected  the  •'  sinners,"  and  made 
the  painted  window  of  the  "  righteous."  A  new  Builder  came ;  His  plan  was 
original,  startling,  revolutionary ;  His  eye  was  upon  the  condemned  material ;  He 
made  the  first  last,  and  the  last  first,  and  the  stone  which  the  builders  rejected. 
He  made  the  headstone  of  the  comer.  He  always  especially  cared  for  the  rejected 
stone.  Men  had  always  cared  for  the  great,  the  beautiful,  the  *'  righteous  "  ;  it  was 
left  for  Christ  to  care  for  "  sinners."  {Dr.  Parker.)  Christ  an  authorised  Phrjsi- 
dan : — When  a  physician  presents  himself,  one  of  the  first  inquiries  is,  ••  Is  he  a 
regular  practitioner?  Has  he  a  right  to  practise?  Has  he  a  diploma?"  Very 
properly,  the  law  requires  that  a  man  shall  not  be  allowed  to  hack  our  bodies  and 
poison  us  with  drngs  at  his  own  pleasure  without  having  at  least  a  show  of  know- 
ing what  he  is  at.  It  has  been  tartly  said  that  "  a  doctor  is  a  man  who  pours  drugs, 
of  which  he  knows  little,  into  a  body  of  which  he  knows  still  less."  I  fear  that  is 
often  the  case.  Still  a  diploma  is  the  best  safeguard  mortals  have  devised.  Christ 
has  the  best  authority  for  practising  as  a  Physician.  He  has  a  Divine  diploma. 
Would  you  like  to  see  His  diploma  ?  I  will  read  you  a  few  words  of  it :  it  comes 
from  the  highest  authority,  not  from  the  College  of  Physicians,  but  from  the  God 
of  Physicians.  Here  are  the  words  of  it  in  the  sixty-first  chapter  of  Isaiah — "  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because  the  Lord  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  good 
tidings  unto  the  meek.  He  hath  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted."  He  has 
a  diploma  for  binding  up  broken  hearts.  I  should  not  like  to  trust  myself  to  a 
physician  who  was  a  mere  self-dubbed  doctor,  who  could  not  show  any  authoriza- 
tion; I  must  have  him  know  as  much  as  a  man  can  know,  little  as  I  believe  that 
wiU  probably  be.  He  must  have  a  diploma  ;  it  must  be  signed  and  sealed  too,  and 
be  in  a  regular  manner,  for  few  sensible  men  will  risk  their  lives  with  ignorant 
quacks.  Now  Jesus  Christ  has  His  diploma  and  there  it  is — God  hath  sent  Him 
to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted.  The  next  thing  you  want  in  a  physician  is  educa- 
tion ;  you  want  to  know  that  he  is  thoroughly  qualified  ;  he  must  have  walked  the 
hospitals.  And  certainly  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  done  so.  What  form  of 
disease  did  He  not  meet  with?  When  He  was  here  among  men  it  pleased  God  to 
let  the  devil  loose,  in  order  that  there  might  be  more  than  usual  venom  in  the  veins 
of  poor  diseased  manhood  ;  and  Christ  met  the  devil  at  his  darkest  hour  and 


n.]  ST.  MARK. 


fought  with  the  great  enemy  when  he  had  full  liberty  to  do  his  worst  with  Him, 
Jesus  did,  indeed,  enter  into  the  woes  of  men.  Walked  the  hospital  I  Why  the 
whole  world  was  an  infirmary,  and  Christ  the  one  only  Physician,  going  from  conch 
to  couch,  healing  the  sons  of  men.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  a  competent  Physi- 
cian : — His  cures  are  very  speedy — there  is  life  in  a  look  at  Him  ;  His  cores  are 
radical — He  strikes  at  the  very  centre  of  the  disease,  and  hence  His  cures  are  very 
sure  and  certain.  He  never  fails,  and  the  disease  never  returns.  There  is  no 
relapse  where  Christ  heals  ;  no  fear  that  one  of  His  patients  should  be  but  patched 
np  for  a  season,  He  makes  a  new  man  of  him  ;  a  new  heart  also  does  He  give  him, 
and  a  right  spirit  does  He  put  within  him.  He  is  a  Physician,  one  of  a  thousand, 
because  He  is  well-skilled  in  all  diseases.  Physicians  generally  have  some  spicialiti. 
They  may  know  a  little  about  almost  all  our  pains  and  ills,  but  there  is  usually  one 
disease  which  they  have  studied  the  most  carefully,  one  part  of  the  human  frame 
whose  anatomy  is  as  well-known  to  them  as  the  rooms  and  cupboards  of  their  own 
house.  Jesus  Christ  has  made  the  whole  of  human  nature  His  spScialitS. 
He  is  as  much  at  home  with  one  sinner  as  with  another  sinner,  and  never  yet  did 
He  meet  with  an  out  of-the-wav  ease  that  was  out  of  the  way  to  Him.    (Ibid,) 

Vers.  18-20.  And  the  disciples  of  John  and  of  the  Pharisees  used  to  fast.— 
Fasting  useful  or  baneful,  according  to  circumstances : — Men  of  opposing  faiths  are 
often  united  by  a  common  scare.  They  are  more  zealous  for  religious  custom  than 
for  the  interests  of  truth.  Jesus  here  puts  fasting  on  its  true  basis.  I.  Fabtino 
HAS  Ko  MOBAii  VALUE  IN  IT8ELP.  The  appetite  may  have  to  be  denied  from  pru- 
dential motives,  and  then  fasting  becomes  a  duty.  But  asceticism,  per  se,  is  not  A 
virtue.  It  is  the  negation  of  a  vice,  but  it  may  be  the  seed  of  twenty  others,  e.g., 
pride,  self-righteousness.    II.  Pkescribed  fabtino  may  be  injurious,  and  bob  thh 

PRACTICE   OF  ITS  REAi  VALUE.       HI.   FaSTINO  IS    IMPOSED  BY  SORROWFUL  EVENTS.      A 

natural  instinct  indicates  its  fitness.  IV.  Beneficial  fasting  comes  from  heavenly 
FBASTiNO.  It  is  the  time  for  special  activities  of  the  soul.  The  best  rule  is — so  far 
as  fasting  helps  you  in  the  elevation  a»d  improvement  of  your  highest  nature,  adopt 
it ;  BO  far  as  it  is  injurious  to  this,  avoid  it.  (D.  Davits,  M.A.)  I.  The  envious 
are  more  busied  in  censuring  the  conduct  of  others,  than  in  rectifying  their  own. 
This  is  one  vice  belonging  to  a  Pharisee,  and  which  is  very  common.  II.  It  it 
another,  to  desire  that  every  one  should  regulate  his  piety  by  ours,  and  embrace  our 
particular  customs  and  devotions.  III.  It  is  a  third,  to  speak  of  others,  only  that 
we  may  have  an  opportunity  to  speak  of  and  to  distinguish  ourselves.  It  is  very 
dangerous  for  a  man  to  make  himself  remarkable  by  such  devout  practices  as  are 
external  and  singular,  when  he  is  not  firmly  settled  and  rooted  in  internal  virtues, 
and,  above  all,  in  humility.  (Quesnel.)  Fasting : — Fasting  is  one  of  the  forgotten 
virtues,  from  the  neglect  of  which  probably  we  all  suffer.  The  practice  grew  from 
a  desire  to  keep  down  all  grossness  of  nature ;  to  give  the  soul  a  better  chance  in 
its  eonflict  with  the  body.  The  more  the  appetite  is  indulged,  the  less  the  soul  can 
act  with  energy,  and  the  more  the  man  shrinks  from  self-denial.  Gluttony  spoils 
sanctity,  while  self-denial  in  food  and  drink  aids  it.  Accordingly,  God  ordained 
fasting,  and  His  people  have,  in  most  ages,  practised  it.  But  in  the  nature  of 
things  it  yielded  most  advantage  when  it  was  (1)  occasional,  (2)  voluntary,  and  (3) 
private.  {R.  Glover.)  Fasting  determined  by  inward  sentiment : — Christ's  answer 
to  the  Pharisees'  objection  is  one  of  those  clear  and  unanswerable  statementa  of 
truth  which,  like  a  flash,  light  up  the  whole  dark  confused  realm  of  obligation, 
where  so  many  stumble  sadly  and  hopelessly.  Can  you  not  see  that  what  is  within 
must  determine  that  which  is  without  ?  The  law  of  appropriateness  is  supreme  in 
the  moral  and  religious  sphere  as  in  the  material.  (D«  Witt  S.  Clark.)  Routine 
fasting  formaif: — An  aroused,  loving,  penitent  nature  will  express  itself ;  but  a 
set  series  of  motions  will  not  quicken  the  torpid  spirit.  They  are  like  empty  shells, 
in  which  the  life  has  died,  or  out  of  which  it  has  crept.  They  are  curiosities.  The 
hermit-crab  may  tenant  in  them  ;  and  thence  come  the  useless  prayers,  the  languish- 
ing hosannas,  the  weary  exhortations,  while  the  world  rallies  the  Church 
as  to  the  reaUty  of  the  God  it  worships.  (Ibid.)  Fasting  : — I.  Its  nature. 
Fasting  in  a  religious  sense  is  a  voluntary  abstinence  from  food  for  a  religious 
pui-pose.  II.  Its  obligations.  IH.  Benefits  of  fasting.  1.  There  is  a  scriptural, 
a  psychological,  a  moral  and  religious  ground  for  fasting.  (1)  Each  act  of  self- 
denial,  the  refusal  to  gratify  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  even  when  natural  and 
proper,  is  an  assertion  of  the  supremacy  of  the  soul  over  the  body,  and  tends  to 
strengthen  its  authority.    (2)  It  is  a  general  law  of  our  nature  that  the  outward 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 


Bhoald  correspond  with  the  inward.  No  man  can  maintain  any  desired  state  of 
mind  while  his  bodily  condition  and  acts  are  not  in  accordance.  He  cannot  be  sor- 
rowful in  the  midst  of  laughter.  2.  There  is  also  the  further  ground  of  experience 
and  the  example  of  God's  people.  All  eminently  pious  persons  have  been  more  or 
less  addicted  to  this  mode  of  spiritual  culture.  (1)  It  must,  however,  be  sincere. 
The  hypocritical  fasting  of  the  Pharisees  is  at  once  hateful  and  destructive.  (2) 
It  must  be  regarded  as  simply  a  means  and  not  an  end.  (3)  It  must  be  left  free. 
((7.  Hodge.)  Why  the  disciples  of  Christ  did  not  fast: — Christ  went  in  the  face 
of  many  Jewish  customs  and  prejudices.  I.  The  Jews,  as  a  nation  and  church, 
had  many  fasts.  II.  The  disciples  of  John  fasted  often.  III.  The  Pharisees  and 
their  disciples  fasted  often — twice  in  the  week,  the  second  and  fifth  day.  Their  real 
state  of  mind  contrasted  with  this  exercise.  How  reason  staggers  in  the  things  of 
God.  IV.  These  parties  naturally  complained  of  the  disciples  of  Christ  for  not 
fasting.  1.  Fasting  seemed  so  essential.  2.  They  attributed  the  conduct  of  the 
disciples  of  Christ  to  Christ  Himself.  3.  In  this  instance,  Christ  gave  His  sanction 
and  defence  to  the  conduct  of  His  disciples.  His  vindication  was  : — He  was  with 
them — they  were  joyful,  fasting  not  suited,  Ac.  He  would  leave  them — they  would 
be  sorrowful,  fasting  then  suitable.     This  view  enforced  by  two  comparisons. 

1.  Christ  sanctions  fasting.  2.  The  time  for  fasting  should  be  decided  by  the 
fact  of  Christ's  presence  or  absence.  Beware  of  attaching  too  much  importance  to 
forms.  {Expository  Discourses.)  The  ceremonial  observames  of  the  Christian 
life: I.  That  the  same  cebbmonial  orsebvanceb  may  be  advocated  by  men  o» 

STRANGELY    DITTEBENT     CBEBDS      AND      CHARACTER,    ANIMATED      BY     VARIED     MOTIVES. 

••  And  the  disciples  of  John  and  of  the  Pharisees  used  to  fast ;  and  they  come  and 
say  unto  Him,  Why  do  the  disciples  of  John  and  of  the  Pharisees  fast,  but  Thy 
disciples  fast  not?  "  1.  That  weak,  but  well-meaning,  men  may  be  led  astray  in 
their  estimate  of  the  ceremonial  of  the  Christian  life  by  proud  and  crafty  religionists. 

2.  That  men  of  varied  creed,  character,  and  conduct  may  be  found  contending  for 
the  same  ceremonial  of  the  Christian  life.  8.  That  even  good  men  are  often  found 
in  open  hostility  because  of  their  varied  opinions  in  reference  to  the  mere  ceremonial 
of  the  Christian  life.    H.  That  men   may   be   bo   mindful  of   the  ceremonial 

OBSERVANCES   OF  THE   CHRISTIAN  LIFE  AS  TO  NEGLECT  THE   GREATER  TRUTHS  EMBODIED 

AND  SIGNIFIED.  1.  Men  are  in  danger  of  neglecting  the  deeper  truths  of  the 
Christian  ceremonial  because  they  are  generally  lacking  in  the  habit  of  penetrating 
its  unseen  and  hidden  meanings.  2.  Men  are  in  danger  of  neglecting  the  deeper 
truths  of  the  Christian  ceremonial  because  they  are  lacking  in  the  pure  sympathy 
needful  to  such  discovery.  3.  Men  are  in  danger  of  neglecting  the  deeper  truths  of 
the  Christian  ceremonial  because  they  are  lacking  in  that  diligence  needful  to  such 
discovery.  HI.  That  men  should  regulate  the  ceremonial  observances  or  the 
Christian  lifb  according  to  the  moral  experiences  of  the  soul.  "  And  Jesus  said 
unto  them,  can  the  children  of  the  bridechamber  fast  while  the  Bridegroom  is  with 
them?"  1.  That  Christ  is  the  Bridegroom  of  the  soul.  Christhad  just  revealed  Himself 
as  the  Great  Physician  of  the  soul.  But  this  is  a  more  endearing  and  condescending 
revelation  of  Himself.  He  loves  the  soul  of  man.  He  seeks  to  be  wedded  to  and 
to  endow  it  with  all  His  moral  wealth.  This  is  a  close  union.  2.  That  the  absence 
or  presence  of  Christ  the  Bridegroom  determines  largely  the  emotions  of  the  soul. 
8.  lliat  the  emotions  of  the  soul,  as  occasioned  by  the  absence  or  presence  of 
the  Divine  Bridegroom,  must  determine  the  ceremonial  of  the  Christian  life. 
Lessons :  1.  That  the  moral  character  cannot  be  infallibly  judged  by  an  attention 
to  the  outward  ceremony  of  the  Christian  life.  2.  That  if  we  would  cultivate  true 
moods  of  joy,  we  must  seek  habitual  communion  with  Christ.  3.  That  the  feeling 
of  the  soul  must  determine  the  religious  ceremony  of  the  hour.  (J,  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
The  secret  of  gladness ;— I.  The  Bridegroom.  The  singular  appropriateness  in  the 
employment  of  this  name  by  Christ  in  the  existing  circumstances.  The  Master  of 
these  very  disciples  had  said  ••  He  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom,"  &o. 
Our  Lord  reminds  them  of  their  own  Teacher's  words,  and  so  He  would  say  to 
them,  ''In  your  Master's  own  conception  of  what  I  am,  and  of  the  joy  that 
comes  from  My  presence,  you  have  an  answer  to  your  question."  We  cannot  but 
connect  this  name  with  a  whole  circle  of  ideas  found  in  the  Old  Testament ;  the 
onion  between  Israel  and  Jehovah  was  represented  as  a  marriage.  In  Christ  all 
this  was  fulfilled.  See  here  Christ's  self -consciousness ;  He  claims  to  be  the  Bride- 
groom of  humanity.  11.  The  presence  of  the  Bridegroom.  Are  we  in  the 
dreary  period  when  Christ  "  is  taken  away  "?  The  time  of  mourning  for  an  absent 
Christ  was  only  three  days.    "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway."     We  have  lost  the 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  MARK. 


manifestation  of  Him  to  the  sense,  but  have  gained  the  manifestation  of  Him  to 
the  spirit.  The  presence  is  of  no  use  unless  we  daily  try  to  realize  it.  III.  Thh  jot 
OF  THE  Bbidegboom's  puesence.  What  was  it  that  made  these  rude  lives  so  glad 
when  Christ  was  with  them  ?  The  charm  of  personal  character,  the  charm  of  con- 
tact with  one  whose  lips  were  bringing  to  them  fresh  revelations  of  truth.  There 
is  no  joy  in  the  world  like  that  of  companionship,  in  the  freedom  of  perfect  love, 
with  one  who  ever  keeps  us  at  our  best,  and  brings  the  treasure  of  ever  fresh  truth 
to  the  mind.  He  is  with  us  as  the  source  of  our  joy,  because  He  is  the  Lord  of 
our  lives,  and  the  absolute  Commander  of  our  wills.  To  have  one  present  with  na 
whose  loving  word  it  is  delight  to  obey,  is  peace  and  gladness.  He  is  with  us  as  the 
ground  of  perfect  joy  because  He  is  the  adequate  object  of  all  our  desires,  and  the 
whole  of  the  faculties  and  powers  of  a  man  will  find  a  field  of  glad  activity  in  lean* 
ing  upon  Him,  and  realizing  His  presence.  Like  the  apostle  whom  the  old  painters 
loved  to  represent  lying  with  his  happy  head  on  Christ's  heart,  and  his  eyes  closed 
in  tranquil  rapture  of  restful  satisfaction,  so  if  we  have  Him  with  us  and  feel  that  He  is 
with  ns,  our  spirits  may  be  still,  and  in  the  great  stillness  of  fruition  of  all  our 
wishes  and  the  fulfilment  of  all  our  needs,  may  know  a  joy  that  the  world  can 
neither  give  nor  take  away.  He  is  with  us  as  the  source  of  endless  gladness  in  that 
He  is  the  defence  and  protection  for  our  souls.  And  as  men  live  in  a  victualled 
fortress,  and  care  not  though  the  whole  surrounding  country  may  be  swept  bare  of 
all  provision,  so  when  we  have  Christ  with  us  we  may  feel  safe,  whatsoever  befallv 
and  *'  in  the  days  of  famine  we  shall  be  satisfied."  He  is  with  us  as  the  source  of 
our  perfect  joy  because  His  presence  is  the  kindling  of  every  hope  that  fills  the 
future  with  light  and  glory.  Dark  or  dim  at  the  best,  trodden  by  uncertain  shapes, 
casting  many  a  deep  shadow  over  the  present,  that  future  lies,  except  we  see  it 
illumined  by  Christ,  and  have  Him  by  our  side.  But  if  we  possess  His  com- 
panionship, the  present  is  but  the  parent  of  a  more  blessed  time  to  come ;  and  w* 
can  look  forward  and  feel  that  nothing  can  touch  our  gladness,  because  nothing  can 
touch  our  union  with  our  Lord.  So,  dear  brethren,  from  all  these  thoughts  and  a 
thousand  more  which  I  have  no  time  to  dwell  upon,  comes  this  one  great  con- 
sideration,  that  the  joy  of  the  presence  of  the  Bridegroom  is  the  victorioua 
antagonist  of  all  sorrow — •*  Can  the  children  of  the  bridechamber  mourn,"  &c. 
The  Bridegroom  limits  our  grief.  Our  joy  will  often  be  made  sweeter  by  the  very 
presence  of  the  mourning.  Why  have  so  many  Christian  men  so  little  joy  in  their 
lives  ?  They  look  for  it  in  wrong  places.  It  cannot  be  squeezed  out  of  worldly 
ambitions.  A  religion  like  that  of  John's  disciples  and  that  of  the  Pharisees  is 
poor ;  a  religion  of  laws  and  restrictions  cannot  be  joyful.  There  is  no  way  of 
men  being  happy  except  by  living  near  the  Master.  Joy  is  a  duty.  {Dr.  McLaren.) 
The  presence  of  the  Bridegroom  a  solace  in  grief : — ^And  we  have,  over  and  above 
them,  in  the  measure  in  which  we  are  Christians,  certain  special  sources  of  sorrow 
and  trial,  pecuhar  to  ourselves  alone ;  and  the  deeper  and  truer  our  Christianity  the 
more  of  these  shall  we  have.  But  notwithstanding  all  that,  what  will  the  felt 
presence  of  the  Bridegroom  do  for  these  griefs  that  will  come  t  Well,  it  will  limit 
them  for  one  thing ;  it  will  prevent  them  from  absorbing  the  whole  of  our  nature.  There 
will  always  be  a  Goshen  in  which  there  is  light  in  the  dwelling,  however  murky 
may  be  the  darkness  that  wraps  the  land.  There  will  always  be  a  little  bit  of  soil 
above  the  surface,  however  weltering  and  wide  may  be  the  inundation  that  drowns 
our  world.  There  will  always  be  a  dry  and  warm  place  in  the  midst  of  the  winter ; 
a  kind  of  greenhouse  into  which  we  may  get  from  out  of  the  tempest  and  the  fog. 
The  joy  of  the  Bridegroom's  presence  will  last  through  the  sorrow,  like  a  spring  of 
fresh  water  welling  up  in  the  midst  of  the  sea.  We  may  have  the  salt  and  the 
sweet  waters  mingling  in  our  lives,  not  sent  forth  by  one  fountain,  but  flowing  in 
one  channel.  {Ibid.)  A  cheerful  type  of  religion : — There  is  a  cry  amongst  oa 
for  a  more  cheerful  type  of  religion.  I  re-echo  the  cry,  but  am  afiaid  that  I  do  not 
mean  by  it  quite  the  same  thing  that  some  of  my  friends  do.  A  more  cheerful  type 
of  Christianity  means  to  many  of  us  a  type  of  Christianity  that  will  interfere  less 
with  any  amusements;  a  more  indulgent  doctor  that  will  prescribe  a  less  rigid 
diet  than  the  old  Puritan  type  used  to  do.  Well,  perhaps  they  went  too  far ;  I  do 
not  care  to  deny  that.  But  the  only  cheerful  Christianity  is  a  Christianity  that 
draws  its  gladness  from  deep  personal  experience  of  communion  with  Jesus  Christ. 
{Ibid.)  Liberty  and  discipline : — It  is  one  of  the  honourable  distinctions  of  Christ's 
doctrine  that  He  is  never  taken,  as  men  are,  with  a  half-truth  concerning  a  subject. 
If  there  is,  for  example,  a  free  element  in  Christian  Ufe  and  experience,  and  also 
a  restrictive  side,  He  comprehends  both  and  holds  them  in  a  true  adjustment  of 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

their  offices  and  relations.  His  answer  to  John's  disciples  amounts  to  thia 
Liberty  and  discipline,  movement  from  God's  centre,  and  movement  from  our  own 
sanctified  inclination  and  self-compelling  will,  are  the  two  great  factors  of  Chris- 
tian liie  and  experience.  It  is  obvious  that  both  these  conceptions  may  be  abused, 
as  they  always  are  when  taken  apart;  but  let  us  find  now  how  to  hold  with  Christ 
the  two  sides  at  once.     There  is  then — I.  A  bdlino  conception  of  the  Christian 

LIFE  WHICH  IS  CALLED  HAVING  THE  BRIDEOBOOM  PRESENT;  A  STATE  OF  BIOHT  IN- 
CLINATION    ESTABLISHED,    IN     WHICH     THE     SOUL     HAS     IMMEDIATE     CONSCIOUSNESS     OF 

God,  and  is  swayed  in  liberty  by  His  inspirations.  The  whole  aim  of  Chris- 
tianity  is  fulfilled  in  this  alone.  Discipline,  self -regulation,  carried  on  by  the 
will,  may  be  wanted,  as  I  shall  presently  show.  But  no  possible  amount  of  such 
doings  can  make  up  a  Christian  virtue.  Everything  in  Christianity  goes  for  the 
free  inclination.  Here  begins  the  true  nobility  of  God's  sons  and  daughters — when 
their  inclination  is  wholly  to  good  and  to  God.  The  bridegroom  joy  is  now  upon 
them  because  their  duty  is  become  their  festivity  with  Christ.     II.  What  then  is 

THE     PLACE    OR    VALUE     OP    THAT    WHOLE     SIDE     OF     SELF-DISCIPLINB    WHICH    ChBIST 

Himself  assumes  the  need  of,  when  the  bridegroom  is  to  be  taken  AWAxf 
There  is,  I  undertake  to  say,  one  general  purpose  or  office  in  all  doings  of  will, 
on  the  human  side  of  Christian  experience,  viz.,  the  ordering  of  the  soul  in  fit 
position  for  God,  that  He  may  occupy  it,  have  it  in  BUs  power,  away  it  by  Hia 
inspirations.  No  matter  what  the  kind  of  doing  to  which  we  are  called — self- 
government,  self-renunciation,  holy  resolve,  or  steadfast  waiting — the  end  is  the 
same,  the  getting  in  position  lor  God's  occupanoy.  As  the  navigator  of  a  ship 
does  nothing  for  the  voyage,  save  what  he  does  by  setting  the  ship  to  course  and 
her  sails  to  the  wind,  so  our  self-compelling  discipline  is  to  set  us  in  the  way  of 
receiving  the  actuating  impulse  of  God's  will  and  character.  All  that  we  can  do 
is  summed  up  in  self -presentation  to  God,  hence  the  call  to  salvation  ia  "  Come." 
And  as  it  is  in  conversion,  so  it  is  of  all  Christian  doings  afterward.  li,  by  reason 
of  a  still  partial  subjection  to  evil,  the  nuptial  day  of  a  soul's  liberty  be  succeeded 
by  a  void,  dry  state,  the  disciple  has  it  given  him  to  prepare  himself  for  God'a 
help  by  clearing  away  his  idols,  rectifying  his  misjudgments,  staying  his  resent- 
ments and  grudges,  and  mortifying  his  appetites.  There  will  be  a  certain  violence 
in  the  fight  of  his  repentances.  Let  none  object  that  all  such  strains  of  endeavour 
must  be  without  merit  because  they  are,  in  one  sense,  without  inclination.  Holy 
Scripture  commands  us  to  serve,  when  we  cannot  reign.  Do  we  "  mortify  our 
members,"  "  pluck  out  our  right  eye,"  by  inclination  f  Let  us  specify  some  humbler 
matters  in  which  it  must  be  done.  1.  How  great  a  thing  for  a  Christian  to  keep 
life,  practice,  and  business  in  the  terms  of  order.  2.  A  responsible  way  has  the 
same  kind  of  value ;  a  soul  that  stays  fast  in  concern  for  the  Church,  for  the 
salvation  of  men,  for  the  good  of  the  country,  is  ready  for  God's  best  inspirations, 
8.  Openness  and  boldness  for  God  is  an  absolute  requisite  for  the  effective  revela> 
tion  of  God  in  the  soul.  4.  Honesty,  not  merely  commercial,  but  honesty 
engaging  to  do  justice  everywhere,  every  way,  every  day,  and  specially  to  God's 
high  truth  and  God.  I  could  speak  of  yet  humbler  things,  such  as  dress  and 
society.  These  are  commonly  put  outside  the  pale  of  reUgious  responsibility. 
And  yet  there  is  how  much  in  them  to  fix  the  soul's  position  towards  God !  But 
what  of  fasting?  The  very  thing  about  which  my  text  is  concerned.  Does  it 
belong  to  Christianity  ?  I  think  so.  Christ  declared  that  His  disciples  should 
fast  when  He  was  gone.  He  began  His  great  ministry  by  a  protracted  fast,  and  He 
discourses  of  it  just  as  He  does  of  prayer  and  ahns.  A  certain  half-illuminated 
declamation  against  asceticism  is  a  great  mistake  of  our  time.  An  asceticism 
belonging  to  Christianity  is  described  when  an  apostle  says  :  "  I  exercise  myself  to 
have  a  conscience  void  of  offence."  If  we  cannot  find  how  to  bear  an  enemy,  if 
we  recoil  from  sacrifices  laid  upon  us,  we  shall  emulate  the  example  of  Cromwell's 
soldiers,  who  conquered  first  in  the  impassive  state,  by  fasting  and  prayer,  and 
then,  saihng  into  battle  as  men  iron-clad,  conquered  their  enemies;  or  those 
martyrs  who  could  sing  in  the  crisp  of  their  bodies  because  they  had  trained  them 
to  serve.  But  none  should  ever  go  into  a  fast  when  he  has  the  Bridegroom 
consciously  with  him,  and  it  must  never  amount  to  a  maceration  of  the  body — 
never  be  more  frequent  than  is  necessary  to  maintain,  for  the  long  run  of  time,  the 
clearest,  healthiest  condition  of  mind  and  body.  There  ought  to  be  a  fascination 
in  the  severities  of  this  rugged  discipline.  Our  modem  piety,  we  feel,  wants 
depth  and  richness,  and  it  cannot  be  otherwise,  unless  we  consent  to  endure  some 
hardness.    To  be  merely  wooed  by  grace,  and  tenderly  dewed  by  sentiment,  makes 


OHAP.  II.]  ST,  MARK, 


»  Christian  mushroom,  not  a  Christian  man.  So  mnoh  meaning  has  our  Master, 
when  charging  it  upon  us,  again  and  again,  without  our  once  conceiving  possibly 
what  depth  of  meaning  He  would  have  us  find  in  His  worda :  **  Deny  thyself, 
take  up  Uiy  cross  and  follow  Me."     (Horace  Bushnell,  D.D.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  No  man  also  seweth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  on  an  old  garment — 

New  cloth  on  an  old  garment : — God's  forces  not  to  be  fettered  by  man.  You  cannot 
thrust  life  into  human  moulds.  I.  Every  force  has  a  definite  mode  of  action. 
Spring  does  not  produce  the  same  results  as  autumn,  nor  can  young  converts 
yield  the  same  fruits  as  aged  saints.  U.  To  coerce  these  forces  into  human 
channels  is  impossible.  No  one  dress  will  fit  all  men.  If  you  want  to  alter  men's 
habits  begin  by  changing  their  principles.  IH,  It  is  only  wise  and  safe  to  act  with 
God.  Learn  the  methods  of  the  Spirit's  working  and  follow  them.  (D.  Davies^ 
M.J.)  The  new  supplanting  the  old: — A  missionary  in  India  writes  of  a  large 
tree  near  his  home,  in  whose  branches  a  second  top  of  entirely  different  species 
appeared.  The  old  was  the  ** bitter  nim,"  the  other  the  "  sacred  fig."  And  this, 
on  examination,  was  found  to  have  thrust  its  root  through  the  decaying  heart  of 
the  great  trunk  to  the  ground.  There,  like  a  young  giant  in  the  embrace  of  some 
huge  monster,  each  was  engaged  in  a  struggle  for  life.  If  the  old  could  tighten  its 
grasp,  the  young  tree  must  die.  If  the  young  continued  to  grow  it  must  at  last 
split  open  and  destroy  the  old.  This  it  seemed  already  to  be  doing.  So  with  the 
good  seed  of  the  gospel  dropped  into  the  rotten  heart  of  some  ancient  system  or 
practice.  Thrusting  its  root  downward  and  its  branches  upward,  it  is  gradually  to 
supplant  all  else  and  stand,  bearing  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  yielding  her  fruit 
every  month  ;  and  the  leaves  will  be  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  {De  W.  S. 
Clark.)  New  things  in  Christianity : — Christianity  sets  up  a  new  kingdom — a 
kingdom  within  men — a  reign  over  the  spiritual  in  man.  ••  The  kingdom  of  God 
is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost." 
It  publishes  a  **  new  law,"  and  gives  men  "  a  new  commandment."  "  Love  is  the 
fulfilling  of  the  law."  Christianity  introduces  us  into  a  "  New  Jerusalem,"  "  the 
Jerusalem  which  is  the  mother  of  us  all."  Everything  in  the  city  is  new.  The 
Temple  is  new ;  it  is  a  spiritual  temple  ;  spiritual  men  "  are  builded  together  for 
a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit."  *'  What  1  know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the 
temple  of  God  ?  "  The  Altar  is  new ;  "  we  have  an  altar  whereof  they  have  no 
right  to  eat  which  serve  the  tabernacle."  The  Sacrifice  is  new ;  it  is  the  "  offering 
up  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all."  The  Incense  is  new ;  "  the  sacrifice 
of  praise,  even  the  fruit  of  our  lips,  giving  thanks  to  His  name."  The  Priesthood 
is  new ;  "  we  have  a  great  High  Priest  who  is  passed  into  the  heavens  for  us,  even 
Jesus,  the  Son  of  God."  The  Way  into  the  ♦'  Holiest "  is  new ;  it  is  "  a  new  and 
living  way  consecrated  for  us."  The  Worship  is  new;  the  hour  has  come  when 
the  character,  and  not  the  scene  of  worship,  is  everything.  The  song  is  new  ;  we 
sing  "  a  new  song."  The  Eitualism  is  new  ;  "  for  in  Jesus  Christ  neither  circum- 
cision availeth  anything,  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creature."  God  sustains 
a  new  relation  to  ns ;  He  is  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We 
come  to  God  and  say,  "Doubtless  Thou  art  our  Father,  though  Abraham  be 
ignorant  of  us,  and  Israel  acknowledge  us  not."  ••  Christ  is  the  Mediator  of  the 
new  covenant."  The  days  have  come  when  God  has  made  a  new  covenant  with 
man.  The  Spirit  is  new ;  even  the  Comforter,  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the 
Son.  The  gospel  is  new;  "  God  hath  spoken  unto  us  by  His  Son."  The  phraseo- 
logy is  new ;  "  we  preach  Christ  crucified."  The  symbolism  is  new ;  ••  the  cross 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Since  everything  in  Christianity  is  new,  we  must  oar- 
selves  be  new ;  we  must  be  "  born  again."  There  must  be  the  passage  from  death 
to  life.  The  life  we  live  in  the  flesh  must  be  a  new  life.  "  Old  things  must  pass 
away;  all  things  must  become  new."  (U.  J.  Bevis.)  New  things  in  Chris- 
tianity : — I.  That  the  spirit  of  Christianity  is  new.  It  is  "  new  wine."  Judaism 
was  the  body ;  Christianity  is  the  soul.  The  one  was  materialism ;  the  other  is 
spiritualism.  The  one  was  *'  the  letter ; "  the  other  is  "  the  spirit."  The  one  was 
a  '  ministration  of  death  ;  "  the  other  a  •'  ministration  of  life."  "  The  law  came 
by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  by  Jesus  Christ."  We  have  got  beyond  the  shadow, 
we  have  the  substance.  "We  behold  with  unveiled  face  the  glory  of  the  Lord." 
II.  That  the  thoughts  and  wobds  of  Christianity  are  new.  New  thoughts  require 
new  utterances.  The  people  said  of  Christ,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man." 
New  things  want  new  words.  The  everlasting  Son  has  taken  our  nature  and 
b«M5ome  our  brother.     The  gospel  calls  this  "  the  mystery  of  godliness."     God  hatb 


S6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

given  His  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  Him  might  have  eternal  life.  Even 
the  gospel  seems  to  want  words  here,  and  can  only  say,  "  God  so  loved."  The 
gospel  takes  us  by  the  hand  and  leads  us  to  the  cross ;  and  as  we  look  on  the 
Crucified,  it  unfolds  the  record,  and  bids  us  read,  ♦•  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal 
life,  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son."  We  want  not  old  forms.  We  have  truth  for  the 
understanding;  we  have  love  for  the  heart.  We  have  new  thoughts  and  new 
words,  the  utterances  of  which  are  as  the  divinest  music  to  the  soul  that  is  seeking 
a  Saviour.  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  even  the  chief."  HI.  Thb  manifksta- 
TI0N8  OF  Christianity  abb  new,  *'  There  is  a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual 
body."  Christianity  is  from  heaven.  God's  work  is  not  to  be  improved  by  man. 
Where  there  is  real  religion  in  man,  its  own  manifestations  will  not  be  wanting  in 
a  Divine  life,  in  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  in  godiikeness.  IV.  The  ritualism  of 
Chbistianitt  is  new.  It  has  few  symbols,  but  these  are  most  expressive  and  appro- 
priate. It  meets  us  on  the  very  threshold  of  life  with  its  washing  of  water,  and 
water  is  the  universal  and  undying  type  of  purity.  It  gives  us,  as  Christians,  the 
memorials  of  Christ's  death.  The  ritualism  of  your  spirit  must  be  left  to  the 
moods  and  feelings  of  your  own  heart.  You  may  content  yourselves  with  mere 
outward  acts  of  reformation,  but  these  are  manifestly  insufficient.  This  is  but  a 
new  piece  of  cloth  on  an  old  garment.  This  is  the  world's  attempt  to  mend  human 
nature.  Christianity  requires  "  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit."  You  must  be  a 
"partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,"  **a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus,"  to  be  a 
Christian.  The  "inner  man"  must  have  its  new  attire.  You  must  put  off  the 
old  garment  and  put  on  the  new.  You  must  "  put  on  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  and 
walk  in  Him."  Do  not  try  to  mend  the  old  nature.  Seek  a  new  one.  Old  habits 
will  not  do  for  a  new  spirit,  and  yet  we  cling  to  them,  or  they  cling  to  us.  There 
is  often  httle  agreement  between  our  principles  and  our  practice.  (Ibid.)  Legal 
ceremonies  superseded :—P&vil  calls  legal  ceremonies  ''beggarly  rudiments;" 
such  are  the  popish — like  a  beggar's  doak,  full  of  patches.  When  the  debt  is  paid, 
it  is  unjust  to  keep  back  the  bond :  Christ  being  come,  and  having  discharged  all 
it  is  injurious  to  retain  the  bond  of  ceremonies.  In  the  spring  we  make  much 
of  buds  and  flowers  to  delight  the  eye  and  cheer  the  sense  of  smelling;  but  in 
autumn,  when  we  receive  the  fruits  to  content  our  taste  and  appetite,  and  to  nourish 
us,  the  other  are  nothing  worth.  The  affianced  virgin  esteems  every  token  her 
lover  sends  her,  and  solaceth  her  affections  with  those  earnests  of  his  love  in  his 
absence ;  but  when  she  is  married,  and  enjoys  himself,  there  is  no  regard  of  the 
tokens.  It  was  something  to  have  a  ceremony  or  a  sacrifice,  representing  a 
Saviour;  but  this  *•  made  nothing  perfect ; "  and  edl  the  life  which  those  things  had 
was  from  that  Saviour  whom  now  we  have.  {T.  Adams.)  Old  bottles  and  new 
wine  : — Christ  gave  his  replies  to  John's  disciples  and  the  Pharisees.  The  first  had 
a  temporary  application ;  the  other  a  permanent  one.  1.  Fasting  was  a  sign  of 
sorrow ;  but  how  could  these  disciples  sorrow  while  Jesus  was  with  them  ?  It  was 
like  trying  to  weep  in  the  midst  of  a  wedding  feast.  Christians  have  alternations 
of  experience.  Sometimes  the  Bridegroom  is  with  us ;  sometimes  far  away.  2. 
The  other  answer  sets  forth  the  essential  difference  between  the  new  dispensation 
and  the  impossibility  of  confining  it  by  the  old  forms  and  ceremonies  of  religion. 
Now,  these  bottles  represent  religious  forme,  and  wine  represents  religious  spirit  or 
life.  Consider— I.  The  superior  knerot  of  Christianity  over  Judaism.  It  is  new 
wine.  Judaism  was  wine ;  but  this  is  newer,  and  also  better.  But  this  is  not  the 
point  of  comparison.  The  point  is,  that  the  gospel  has  a  freshness,  expansiveness, 
and  power,  beyond  what  we  find  in  Judaism,  so  that  it  is  like  new,  working  and 
fermentiiig  wine  as  compared  with  old  acetic  wine,  now  cold  and  still.  See  it  in  a 
few  particulars  : — 1.  Its  earnest  aggressive  spirit  and  aim.  It  was  meant  for  the 
world,  to  go  out  to  all  nations.  Judaism  was  for  the  Jews,  or  if  for  Gtentiles,  it 
was  by  these  coming  to  the  Jews  as  proselytes.  Its  agency  is  the  same.  2.  Its 
potent  and  stimulating  motives.  Christ's  love  and  death  constrain  us ;  and  the 
apocalypse  of  the  eternal  world  is  made  more  impressive  and  influential.  Compare 
these  with  Jewish  types,  &o.  3.  The  ardour  of  affection  awakened  in  the  followers 
of  Christ.  Their  whole  nature  is  elevated  and  vivified  by  a  new  love  and  a  new 
hope.  4.  The  accompanying  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  H.  The  UNsurrABLENEfg 
or  OLD  Jewish  forms  to  the  new  Christian  spirit.  All  are  too  narrow,  cold,  ai  d 
cramping.  As  fastings,  sacrifices,  priestly  exclusiveness,  and  even  the  Sabbath. 
III.  Yet  Christianitt  has  its  own  forms.  The  wine  is  not  spilt  on  the  ground,  but 
kept   in   bottles — the   Christian    Church    in  its    New   Testament  simplicity,   th« 


CHAP.  IL]  ST.  MARK.  8? 

orcHnanoes,  the  Lord's  day,  spiritual  modes  of  worship.  All  these  naturally  eome 
out  of  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.  The  life  makes  its  own  body.  Truly,  this  law  has 
been  tampered  with  most  grievously  by  men,  and  the  energy  of  the  gospel  has  suf* 
fared  ;  its  freedom  has  been  trammelled,  and  its  life  deadened.  Lessons :  1.  Our 
supreme  concern  should  be  to  get  the  life  of  the  gospel  into  our  souls.  2.  We  should 
avoid  a  superstitious  stickling  for  mere  forms,  however  old  and  elegant,  if  they  are 
but  arbitrary  and  mechanical.  3.  We  should  be  willing  to  endorse  and  adopt  the 
simple,  natural,  and  living  forms  of  the  New  Testament — joining  the  church, 
engaging  in  worship,  &c.  4.  We  should  apply  it  to  our  whole  deportment  and  life 
— all  must  be  renewed,  and  new  wine  put  in  new  bottles.  Let  all  our  habits  be 
determined  and  controlled  by  the  inner  spirit  of  piety.  Things  once  pleasant  to 
us  will  now  be  unpleasant  and  irksome.  Many  amusements  and  pleasures  will  be 
instantly  abandoned,  when  we  have  got  the  right  spirit  within  us ;  whereas,  other- 
wise, it  would  be  vain  to  contend  and  argue  against  them.     (Congregational  Pulpit.) 

Vers.  23,  24,  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  He  vent  througrh  the  cornfields  on  tlie 
Sabbath  day. — A  knowUdge  of  the  law  without  the  true  spirit  of  the  law  : — He  who 
has  only  the  knowledge  without  the  spirit  of  the  law,  very  often  opposes  when  he 
thinks  he  is  defending  it.  Pharisaical  pride  makes  men  set  themselves  up  for 
judges  of  everything,  and  require  an  account  of  everything  to  be  given  them. 
When  a  man  is  once  full  of  himself,  he  decides  confidently,  especially  when  it  is  to 
condemn  others.  Those  who  love  to  domineer  are  not  content  to  exercise  their 
authority  upon  their  own  disciples,  but  would  fain  bring  those  of  others  under 
their  dominion.  (Quemel.)  Scrupulosity .—  Scrupulosity  is  considered  by  some 
as  identical  with  conscientiousness.  It  is  not  so.  It  is  a  tare  that  resembles  the 
wheat,  but  is  not  wheat ;  a  disease  of  the  conscience,  not  a  refinement  of  it.  You 
must  not  judge  an  eye  by  its  sensitiveness  to  light,  but  by  its  power  of  seeing. 
When  light  pains  the  eye  it  is  because  there  is  inflammation,  not  l^ause  the  organ 
is  a  fine  one.  So  it  is  with  conscience.  The  health  of  conscience  is  not  to  be 
measured  by  its  sensitiveness,  its  protests,  and  its  objections ;  but  by  its  power  to 
lead  a  man  into  all  genial  activities  and  self-denying  charities.  Conscientiousness 
is  a  happy  child,  whose  language  is — ••  What  shall  I  render  to  the  Lord  for  all  His 
benefits  ? "  Scrupulosity  is  a  slave,  whose  language  is — *♦  What  must  I  do  to  avoid 
God's  rebuke?  "  Conscientiousness  acts  on  great  principles ;  scrupulosity  on  little 
rules.  Conscientiousness  serves  God,  blesses  man,  and  protects  him  who  cherishes 
it ;  scrupulosity  is  often  useless  to  everybody.  Conscientiousness  makes  man  an 
Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile ;  but  scrupulosity  often  makes  him  an  Ish- 
maelite  indeed,  in  whom  there  is  often  a  good  deal.  The  Pharisees  were  full  of 
scrupulosity,  and  it  produced  in  them  all  uncharitableness.  (R,  Glover.)  Through 
the  cornfields: — Looking  out  upon  the  cornfields  of  wheat  we  see — I.  Unity  in 
VARIETY.  To  the  unaccustomed  eye  the  wheat  seems  one,  and  yet  it  is  various.  There 
is  the  white  wheat,  the  red  wheat,  and  beneath  these,  varie..  .s  and  sub-varieties  in 
great  number.  Yet  what  unity  in  the  variety.  Variety,  too,  meets  us  as  we  look  out 
upon  the  vast  field  of  humanity ;  yet  what  unity.  One  hand  has  made  us  all ;  in  Christ 
"  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  bond  nor  free."  In  Him  •'  all  we  are  brethren.*' 
IL  Fruitfulness  through  death  is  taught  us  by  the  fields  of  wheat.  The  field 
of  burial  shall  become  the  field  of  resurrection.  III.  The  permanence  oi 
character  is  suggested  to  us  by  the  ripening  fields  of  wheat — "  Whatsoever  a  man 
aoweth,  that  abal"  he  also  reap."  IV.  The  vast  PRODUCTrvENEss  op  good  is  sug- 
gested by  tae  fields  of  wheat — "And  bring  forth  fruit,  some  an  hundredfold." 
Christianity,  truth,  work  for  God,  yield  '•  much  fruit."  V.  Human  dkpehdkncb 
is  taught  us  by  the  cornfields ;  God  giveth  the  increase.     (O.  T.  Coster.) 

Vers.  25,  26.  And  He  said  unto  them.  Hare  ye  never  read  vhat  David  did  7— 
How  to  read  the  Bible  : — I.  In  order  to  the  true  reading  of  the  Scriptures  there 
MUST  BB  AN  UNDEHSTANDiNO  OP  THEM.  The  mind  must  be  well  awake  to  it.  We 
must  meditate  upon  it.  We  must  pray  about  it.  We  must  use  all  means  and 
helps.  II.  In  reading  we  ought  to  seek  out  the  spiritual  teaching  op  the 
Word.  This  should  be  the  case  in  reference  to  the  historical  passages,  ceremonial 
precepts,  and  doctrinal  statements.  lU.  Such  a  reading  of  Scripture  as  implies 
the  understanding  of,  and  the  entrance  into,  its  spiritual  meaning,  and  the  discovery 
of  the  Divine  Person,  who  is  the  spiritual  meaning,  is  propitable.  It  often  begets 
spiritual  life.  It  comforts  the  soul.  It  nourishes  the  soul.  It  guides  us.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)         Pedantic  Bible  readers: — The  scribes  and   Pharisees  were  great 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOli.  [chap.  u. 

readers  of  the  law.  They  made  notes  of  very  little  importance,  hut  still  very 
curious  notes — as  to  which  was  the  middle  verse  of  the  entire  Old  Testament, 
which  verse  was  half-way  to  the  middle,  and  how  many  times  such  a  word  occurred, 
and  the  size  of  the  letter,  and  its  peculiar  position.  According  to  Pharisaic  inter- 
pretation, to  rub  an  ear  of  corn  is  a  kind  of  threshing,  and,  as  it  is  very  wrong  to 
thresh  on  the  Sabbath-day,  therefore  it  must  be  very  wrong  to  rub  out  an  ear  or  two 
of  wheat  when  you  are  hungry  on  the  Sabbath  morning.  {Ibid.)  The  grace  of 
Bible  doctrine  : — The  doctrines  of  grace  are  good,  but  the  grace  of  the  doctrines  ia 
better.  (Ibid.)  Living  in  God's  Word : — As  I  sat,  last  year,  under  a  wide- 
spreading  beech,  I  was  pleased  to  mark  witb  prying  curiosity  the  singular  habits  of 
that  most  wonderful  of  trees,  which  seems  to  have  an  iutelligence  about  it  which 
other  trees  have  not.  I  wondered  at,  and  admired  the  beech,  but  I  thought  to  my- 
self, I  do  not  think  half  as  much  of  this  beech-tree  as  yonder  squirrel  does.  I  see 
him  leap  from  bough  to  bough,  and  I  feel  sure  he  dearly  values  the  old  beech  tree, 
because  he  has  his  home  somewhere  inside  it,  in  a  hollow  place  ;  these  branches  are 
his  shelter,  and  these  beech-nuts  are  his  food.  He  lives  upon  the  tree.  It  is  his 
world,  his  playground,  his  granary,  his  home  ;  indeed  it  is  everything  to  him,  and 
it  is  not  so  to  me,  for  I  find  my  rest  and  food  elsewhere.  With  God's  Word  it  ii 
weU  for  us  to  be  like  squirrels,  living  in  it,  and  living  on  it.  (Ibid.)  Bible 
glancing  not  Bible  reading : — An  old  preacher  used  to  say :  The  Word  has  mighty 
free  course  among  many  nowadays,  for  it  goes  in  at  one  of  their  ears,  and  out  at 
the  other.  So  it  seems  to  be  with  some  readers — they  read  a  very  great  deal 
because  they  do  not  read  anything.  Their  eye  glances,  but  the  mind  never  rests. 
The  soul  does  not  light  upon  the  truth  and  stay  there.  It  flits  over  the  landscape 
as  a  bird  might  do,  but  it  builds  no  nest  therein,  and  finds  no  rest  for  the  sole  of 
its  foot.  Such  reading  is  not  reading.  (Ibid.)  An  interior  reading  of  Scripture : — 
In  prayer  there  is  such  a  thing  as  praying  in  prayer — a  praying  which  is  the  bowels 
of  the  prayer.  In  praise  there  is  a  praising  in  song,  an  inward  fire  of  intense  devo- 
tion, which  is  the  life  of  the  hallelujah.  It  is  even  so  with  the  reading  of  the 
Scriptures.  There  is  an  interior  reading,  a  kernel  reading;  and,  if  it  be  not  there, 
the  reading  is  a  mechanical  exercise,  and  profits  nothing.  (Ibid.)  Illumination 
necessary  to  emotion: — When  the  high  priest  went  into  the  holy  place  he  always  lit 
the  golden  candlestick  before  he  kindled  the  incense  upon  the  brazen  altar,  as  if  to 
show  that  the  mind  must  have  illumination  before  the  affections  can  rise  towards 
God.  {Ibid.)  Use  of  t?ie  Scriptures : — The  cause  of  so  many  gross  and  foolish 
opinions  which  many  amongst  us  hold  and  maintain,  is  nothing  else  but  their 
ignorance  of  the  Scriptures,  either  because  they  read  them  not  duly  and  diligently, 
or  else  because  they  understand  them  not  aright.  How  many  foolish  and  absurd 
opinions  are  held  by  ignorant  people  in  many  places  ?  Such  as  these  for  example : 
That  faith  is  nothing  but  a  man's  good  meaning:  That  God  is  served  by 
rehearsing  the  Ten  Commandments  and  the  Creed  instead  of  prayers :  That  the 
Sabbath  is  kept  well  enough  if  men  and  women  come  to  church,  and  be  present  at 
pnblio  prayers  and  at  the  sermon,  though  they  spend  the  rest  of  the  day  either 
idly  or  profanely :  That  the  Sabbath  is  well  enough  sanctified  by  bare  reading  of 
prayers,  and  so  much  preaching  is  needless :  That  it  is  lawful  to  swear  in  common 
talk  to  that  which  is  true :  That  in  religion  it  is  best  to  do  as  the  most  do :  That 
a  man  may  make  of  his  own  as  much  as  he  can :  That  such  as  are  not  book- 
learned  need  have  no  knowledge  of  religion.  These,  and  such-like  absurd  opinions, 
proceed  from  nothing  but  ignorance  of  the  Scriptures.  If  we  would  avoid  such 
errors,  and  be  led  into  all  truth  of  doctrine  necessary  to  salvation,  let  us  (1)  be 
frequent  and  diligent  in  hearing  the  Scriptures  explained  in  church ;  (2)  search 
them  diligently  and  often  in  private  reading ;  (3)  pray  daily  to  God  to  open  our 
understanding,  that  we  may  perceive  their  true  meaning ;  (4)  confer  with  others 
touching  those  things  which  we  read  and  hear.  {O.  Fetter.)  Mercy  better  than 
sacrifice : — When  the  Romans  had  ravaged  the  province  of  Azazane,  and  seven 
thousand  Persians  were  brought  to  Armida,  where  they  suffered  extreme  want, 
Aoases,  the  bishop  of  that  city,  observed  that  as  God  said,  "  I  love  mercy  better 
than  sacrifice,"  He  would  certainly  be  better  pleased  with  the  relief  of  His 
Buffering  creatures,  than  with  bemg  served  with  gold  and  silver  in  their  churches. 
The  clergy  were  of  the  same  opinion.  The  consecrated  vessels  were  sold,  and, 
with  the  proceeds,  the  seven  thousand  Persians  were  not  only  maintained  during 
the  war,  but  sent  home  at  its  conclusion  with  money  in  their  pockets.  Varenes, 
the  Persian  monarch,  was  so  charmed  with  this  humane  action,  that  he  invited 
the  bishop  to  his  capital,  where  he  received  him  with  the  utmost  reverence,  and 
for  hia  sake  conferred  many  favours  on  the  Christians. 


CHAP,  u.]  ST.  MARK,  «9 

Vers.  27,  28.  And  He  said  nnto  them,  the  Sabbath  wsa  made  for  man— T^ 

Sabbath  and  its  Lord : — "  l^he  Sabbath  was  made  for  man  " — not  for  the  Jews  only— 
not  a  mere  ceremonial  observance  for  the  time  ;  but  of  universal  obligation ;  made 
for  man  when  man  was  made.  I.  ♦♦  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man  "  as  a  woBKiNa 
man.  It  is  a  simple  fact  in  medical  science,  that  the  human  frame  is  not  made  so 
as  to  bear  up  under  constant  labour  without  rest.  He  can  no  more  do  it  than  he 
can  live  under  water ;  it  is  contrary  to  nature  ;  and  the  consequence  will  be  pre- 
mature decay ;  the  frame  will  break  down  and  wear  out  before  its  time.  This  is  a 
simple  fact  in  science.  Besides,  labour  is  God's  appointment,  His  wholesome  and 
needful  law.  But  did  He  mean  us  to  bear  the  drudgery  of  ceaseless  toil  ?  How 
wretched,  how  degrading,  how  brutalizing  1  And  God  has  not  appointed  it :  "  Six 
days  shalt  thou  labour."  But  on  this  head  I  need  say  no  more  ;  those  admirable 
Essays  by  Working  Men,  which  ought  to  be  in  everybody's  hands,  and  which  so 
vividly  portray  the  experience  of  those  who  have  kept  the  Sabbath,  exhaust  this 
part  of  the  subject.  II.  "  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,"  as  a  social  being. 
What  is  God's  great  instrument  for  promoting  the  temporal  good  of  His  creatures? 
It  is  the  family  tie.  What  is  the  great  stimulant  to  exertion  ?  What  the  great 
safeguard,  what  the  great  cordial  of  life — speaking  of  mere  human  things,  I  mean  ? 
It  is  to  be  found  in  the  word  *•  home."  My  experience  as  a  gaol  chaplain  convinces 
me  that  the  great  cause  of  crime  arises  from  the  breach  of  the  fourth  and  fifth 
commandments.  Let  but  the  family  tie  be  rent  asunder,  and  society  falls  to 
pieces.  And  how  can  this  be  maintained  without  a  Sabbath  ?  The  observation 
of  an  omnibus  conductor  the  other  day  sets  this  in  a  striking  light :  "  Sir, 
I  am  at  work  every  Sunday,  all  the  day,  as  well  as  on  week-days,  and  I  hardly 
know  the  face  of  my  own  children."  Then  what  must  become  of  those 
children?  And  why  should  they  be  deprived  of  a  father's  care,  and  he  of  hia 
children's  love?  And  how  has  God  provided  against  such  a  danger?  "The 
Sabbath  was  made  for  man."  Then  the  various  members  of  the  family,  scattered 
through  the  week,  are  once  more  united ;  the  mutual  feelings  of  affection  are 
elicited ;  they  are  excited  to  seek  each  other's  welfare,  and  to  value  each  other's 
good  opinion  and  esteem ;  and,  short  of  the  power  of  God's  grace,  there  is  no  bond 
half  so  strong,  no  security  half  so  certain,  that  they  will  fill  up  their  places  as  good 
members  of  society.  I  constantly  meet  with  those  who  are  lost  to  every  other 
feeling  of  shame  but  this.  HI.  ♦•  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,"  as  a  spibitual 
being.  Earthly  things  must  not  engross  all  the  time  and  thought  of  man.  God 
interposes,  "  The  seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God."  IV.  But  it  is 
not  enough  to  offer  man  the  blessing — it  is  made  imperative ;  it  is  confirmed  by  the 
sanction  which  is  added,  '•  The  Son  of  Man  is  Lord  also  of  the  Sabbath."  Jesus  is 
the  Lord  of  the  Sabbath,  the  Proprietor  of  it,  the  Owner  of  it,  the  Master  of  it. 
It  is  His.  It  was  made  for  man,  but  never  given  to  man.  The  six  days  were 
given  to  man — the  seventh  never  was.  He  is  •*  the  Lord  "  of  it.  It  is  at  His  dis- 
posal, not  at  yours,  nor  any  man's,  nor  any  body  of  men,  however  great  or  powerful. 
"  Will  a  man  rob  God  ?  "  Yes.  If  he  apply  to  his  own  purposes  that  which  does  not 
belong  to  him,  what  is  it?  Robbery.  You  have  no  right  over  another's  Sabbaths ; 
you  have  no  right  over  your  own.  It  is  the  Lord's  day.  It  is  for  Him  to  say  how 
the  day  shall  be  spent ;  and  man  has  no  more  the  right  to  alienate  that  day  from 
the  service  of  God  to  his  own  service  than  he  has  to  appropriate  his  neighbour's 
property  or  despoil  him  of  his  honour  for  his  own  behoof.  The  Sabbath  is  not 
man's,  but  the  Lord's,  and  you  can't  repeal  that  law,  no  more  than  you  can  change 
the  laws  of  motion  or  reverse  the  force  of  gravity.  You  may  arrest  it  for  a  time, 
but  it  will  prevail  at  last ;  the  laws  of  God  execute  themselves,  you  cannot  make 
them  inoperative  and  null.  V.  **  The  Son  of  Man  is  the  Lord  of  the  Sabbath"— 
the  Jtjdob  to  punish  the  breach  of  it.  Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  this  is 
one  of  the  sins  which  He  especially  requires  at  the  hands  of  men.  We  know  it 
from  His  dealings  with  Israel ;  Jeremiah  is  full  of  puch  declarations ;  so  are  many 
of  the  other  prophets  ;  to  refer  only  to  one,  Ezekiel  xx.  13,  16,  21,  24.  He  is  the 
Lord — the  Judge— to  vindicate  His  own  law.  And  why  ?  First,  Sabbath-breaking 
is  a  deliberate  sin.  And  then  Sabbath-breaking  is  (if  I  may  coin  such  an  expres- 
sion) a  fundamental  sin.  It  goes  to  the  root  of  all  godliness  ;  an  habitual  Sabbath- 
breaker  cannot  have  any  true  religion.  It  opens  the  door  of  his  heart  wide  to 
Satan.  VI.  •'  The  Son  of  Man  is  Lord  of  the  Sabbath  "—To  dibeot  the  modk  of 
its  observance.  It  is  the  Lord's  day — the  Lord  who  died  for  us.  He  claims  it,  to 
be  devoted  to  His  service  and  consecrated  to  His  honour.  VII.  Ajkd  is  it  not  the 
Lord's  day  ? — the  day  on  which  He  specially  manifests  Himsblv  to  His  neople ; 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ii 

when  He  inntes  them  to  draw  water  with  joy  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation.  {J. 
Cohen,  M.A.)  The  Sabbath  a  necessity  : — It  was  "  mad^  for  man,"  as  man ;  as  a 
thing  necessary,  suited,  essential  for  him.  Just  as  the  atmosphere  was  made  for 
man  to  breathe,  just  as  the  earth  was  made  for  him  to  cultivate,  just  as  the  seasons 
were  made  for  him — just  as  these  and  such-like  things  were  taken  into  account, 
when  man  was  put  upon  the  earth,  as  necessary  to  fit  it  for  man's  abode  physically, 
so  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  as  a  necessary  requisite  for  man  morally — and 
that,  when  man  was  unfallen,  a  holy  being,  like  unto  the  angels.  And  if  indis- 
pensable for  man's  moral  and  spiritual  health  then,  can  it  be  less  indispensable 
now  t  And  in  His  mercy  God  spared  it  to  us.  It  has  survived  the  fall — a  remnant 
of  paradise  lost,  and  the  best  help  to  paradise  regained.  {Ibid.)  The  working 
man  a  self  sovereign  on  the  Sabbath : — Now,  I  say  to  this  large  class  of  men,  the 
Babbath  comes  as  a  boon  from  God.  It  is  like  an  island  in  a  stormy  sea.  There  is 
a  way  in  which  poor  men,  for  the  most  part,  own  themselves.  The  man  whose 
horse  and  dray  are  imperatively  at  the  command  of  his  employer,  on  whose  favour 
he  depends,  who  says  to  him  on  Monday,  "  Go,"  and  he  goes,  and  that  from  day- 
light to  dark — ^it  being  the  same  on  Tuesday,  on  Wednesday,  on  every  day  of  the 
week,  80  that  the  man  cannot  go  out  of  Brooklyn  without  permission  of  his 
employer,  cannot  go  to  this  or  that  exhibition  unless  his  employer  gives  his  consent 
— that  man  has  sold  out  his  industry,  which  carries  his  person  with  it,  and  for  six 
days  in  the  week  he  is  restricted  by  the  will  of  another ;  but  when  the  seventh  day 
comes  round  he  says,  "  Thank  God,  I  have  nobody  to  ask  to-day.  I  am  free  to 
come  and  go.  I  can  rise  up  or  lie  down  as  I  please."  That  is  the  only  day  that 
the  poor  man  has  out  of  the  seven  in  which  he  has  absolute  ownership  of  his  body 
And  soul  in  the  thronging  industries  of  modem  civilized  society.  And  yet  it  is  this 
very  class  of  men  who  are  being  taught  to  throw  stones  at  the  Sabbath-day.  It  is 
precisely  the  same  thing  over  again  which  occurred  when  Moses  appeared  as  the 
deliverer  of  his  people  against  the  Egyptians,  and  sought  to  reconcile  the  quarrel 
which  had  arisen  between  the  two  peoples.  They  turned  against  him  and  said, 
*•  Who  art  thou?  "  And  he  had  to  run  for  his  life.  The  Sabbath  comes  to  men 
who  are  tied  hand  and  foot,  and  need  emancipation ;  and  upon  this  beneficent  day 
of  rest  for  them  they  turn  and  say,  "  It  is  the  priests'  day ;  it  is  the  church's  bon- 
dage ;  and  we  are  not  going  to  be  tied  up  to  any  Sunday."  Tied  up  I  It  is  the  only 
day  on  which  your  hands  are  untied.  It  is  the  only  day  on  which  the  poor  man  is 
sovereign.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  Sabbath  a  poetic  gift  to  the  mechanical  agent : — 
Well,  how  is  it  i^out  the  poor  man  ?  His  brain  is  not  taxed.  He  is  almost  a  mechani- 
cal agent.  That  part  of  a  man's  brain  which  has  cognisance  of  the  lower  functions 
only  is  overtaxed,  and  the  rest  which  is  wanted  in  his  case  is  the  transfer  of  excite- 
ment from  the  lower  part  of  the  brain  to  the  higher — to  the  realm  of  the  moral  and 
spiritual  elements.  It  is  needful  that  a  man  who  is  instructed  should  rise  up  into  the 
crystal  dome  of  his  house.  Ordinarily  he  is  working  on  the  ground  floor ;  but  there 
eomes  a  day  in  which,  if  he  improves  the  means  that  are  within  his  reach,  a  man  can 
cease  to  be  altogether  a  mechanical  agent,  can  cease  to  think  of  physical  qualities 
or  things,  and  rise  into  the  realm  of  ideas,  into  the  realm  of  social  amenities,  into 
the  realm  of  refined  and  purified  affections,  into  the  great  mysterious,  poetic  realms 
of  the  spirit.  And  is  there  any  class  that  need  that  more  than  poor  labouring  men  ? 
{Ibid.)  The  Sabbath  helpful  to  self-reject : — On  such  a  day  as  this  it  is  no  small 
means  of  grace  for  millions  of  men  in  this  world  to  have  a  chance  to  wash  them- 
selves clean.  You  smile  ;  but  washing  is  one  of  the  most  important  ordinances  of 
God  to  this  human  family.  It  is  said  that  cleanliness  is  next  to  godliness  ;  not  to 
men  that  are  godly,  but  to  men  that  are  on  their  way  toward  godliness.  When 
KafQrs  are  converted,  they  are  called  "  shirt-men,"  because  when  the  grace  of  God 
enters  their  heart  a  shirt  goes  over  their  bodies  for  the  first  time.  Wellmgton  said 
he  found  that  in  his  army  the  men  who  had  the  self-respect  which  is  indicated  by 
carefully  clothing  themselves,  were  the  best  men  he  had.  In  a  report  on  labour 
.  made  to  the  British  Parliament  by  one  of  the  largest  employers  of  men,  it  was  said 
that  a  workman  who  on  Sunday  did  not  wash  himself  and  dress  in  his  best  could  not 
be  depended  upon.  {Ibid.)  Stealing  the  Lord's  day  : — If  you  give  six  days  to 
worldly  success,  and  then  voluntarily  take  the  seventh  day,  which  God  demands 
for  His  worship  and  especial  service,  and  give  that  to  worldly  amusements,  then  you 
are  wrong ;  you  are  so  wrong  that  you  could  not  be  any  more  wrong.  If  I  say  my 
child  is  sick :  I  think  by  taking  it  to  the  beach  it  could  be  helped,  but  I  cannot 
take  it  except  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and  therefore  I  will  have  to  let  it  die,  then  I 
make  a  miserable  misinterpretation  of  the  text  in  one  direction.    Bat  if  you  say, 


«HAP.  n.]  ST,  MARK,  W 

*•  Come,  let  us  go  down  for  some  fine  sport ;  let  us  examine  the  pictnresqne  bathing- 
dresses  ;  let  us  have  a  jolly  time  with  our  friends,"  then  you  misinterpret  my  text 
in  the  other  direction.  The  fact  is  that  nine  out  of  ten  of  you — ^yea,  I  will  go 
further  than  that  and  say  that  ninety-nine  out  of  a  hundred  of  you — I  think  I  wlU 
go  one  step  farther  and  say  that  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  out  of  a  thousand  of 
you,  can  go  on  other  days  and  other  nights,  instead  of  the  Christian  Sabbath. 
Your  work,  your  business  engagement  ends  at  six  o'clock ;  that  is  true  with  the 
most  of  you.  In  a  flash  you  get  to  the  sea- shore :  in  a  flash  you  get  back.  You 
can  be  in  your  home  at  six  o'clock  and  ten  o'clock  the  same  evening,  and  in  the 
interregnum  have  spent  three  hours  in  looking  at  moonlight  on  the  sea.  Now,  if 
God  gives  you  during  the  week  opportunity  for  recreation,  is  it  not  mean  for  you  to 
take  Sunday  ?  If  I  am  a  poor  man,  and  I  come  into  your  store,  and  beg  some  socks 
for  my  children,  and  you  say,  •*  Yes,  I'll  give  you  six  pairs  of  socks,"  and  while  yon 
are  binding  them  up  in  a  bundle  I  steal  the  seventh  pair,  you  say,  ••  That  is  mean." 
If  you,  the  father,  have  seven  oranges,  and  you  give  to  your  ohild  six  of  them,  and 
he  steals  the  seventh,  that  is  mean.  But  that  is  what  every  one  does  who,  after  the 
Lord  gives  him  six  days,  steals  the  seventh.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  The  secularization 
of  the  Sabbath  inimical  to  the  spiritual  welfare  of  mankind : — I  also  oppose  this 
secularization  of  the  Christian  Sabbath  because  it  is  war  on  the  spiritual  warfare  of 
everybody.  Have  you  a  body?  Yes.  A  mind?  Yes.  A  soul?  Yes.  Do  you 
propose  to  give  them  a  chance  f  Yes,  Do  you  believe  that  all  these  Sunday  night 
concerts  will  prepare  a  single  man  for  the  song  of  the  one  hundred  and  forty  and 
four  thousand?  Have  you  any  idea  that  all  the  fifty-two  Sundays  of  secular 
amusements,  operatic  singing,  concerts,  and  theatres  would  prepare  in  a  thousand 
years  one  man  for  heaven  ?  Do  you  not  think  that  the  immortal  soul  ia  worth  at 
least  one-seventh  as  much  as  our  perishable  body?  Here  is  a  jeweller  who  has 
three  gems — a  camelian,  an  amethyst,  a  diamond.  He  has  to  cut  and  set  them. 
Upon  which  does  he  put  the  most  care  ?  The  diamond.  Now,  the  camelian  is  the 
body,  the  amethyst  is  the  mind,  the  diamond  is  the  souL  You  give  opportunity  to 
these  other  faculties  of  your  nature,  but  how  many  of  you  give  no  opportunity  to 
that  which  is  worth  as  much  more  than  all  other  interests  as  a  thousand  million 
dollars  are  more  tiian  one  cent  ?  {Ibid.)  The  Lord's  right  in  the  Sabbath  above 
that  of  the  people ;— We  hear  a  great  deal  about  the  people's  rights  in  selecting  their 
own  amusements  on  Sunday.  I  would  not  invade  the  people's  rights,  but  it  seemi 
to  me  that  the  Lord  has  some  rights.  You  are  at  the  head  of  your  family  ;  you 
have  a  right  to  govern  the  family.  The  Governor  is  at  the  head  of  the  State  ;  he 
governs  the  State.  The  President  is  at  the  head  of  the  nation ;  he  governs  the 
nation.  The  Lord  God  is  at  the  head  of  the  universe,  and  He  has  a  right  to  lay 
down  an  enactment :  ♦*  Remember  the  Sabbath  day,  to  keep  it  holy."  Whether 
popular  or  unpopular,  I  now  declare  that  the  people  have  no  rights  except 
those  which  the  Lord  God  Almighty  gives  them.  {Ibid.)  The  Lord's  Day  :— 
I.  We  must  consider  the  Lord's  day  as  ▲  gift,  eatheb  than  a  command.  So 
it  will  come  to  us  in  the  light  of  a  privilege.  No  laws  are  given  by  Christ 
or  by  His  apostles  concerning  the  forms  of  observance.  We  shall  become 
perplexed  if  we  attempt  to  rest  our  case  upon  simple  legal  enactment.  Our  safety 
in  such  discussions  consists  in  our  fastening  attention  upon  the  gracious  and 
benevolent  character  of  the  Divine  institution.  God  gives  us  this  one  day  of  the 
week  as  His  peculiar  offering  for  our  bodily  and  spiritual  need ;  He  does  not  order 
it  nor  claim  it  for  any  necessities  of  His  own.  II.  We  must  consider  the  Lord's 
day  AS  A  FREEDOM,  rather  than  a  restriction.  So  it  will  seem  to  us  a  gracious 
respite.  III.  This  leads  us  on  to  say  that  Christians  should  consider  the  Lord's 
day  as  a  rest  rather  than  a  dissipation.  So  it  will  become  a  recuperation  to  us 
from  its  chance  of  a  change.  The  original  idea  of  the  Sabbath  was  rest ;  the  word 
signifies  rest ;  the  fourth  commandment  gives  as  the  basis  of  the  law  the  fact  that 
God  rested  and  so  hallowed  the  rest-day.  We  come  up  to  the  end  of  the  week 
worn  and  excited.  Most  of  us  know  what  the  poet  Cowper  meant  when  he  wrote  to 
his  friend  John  Newton :  •♦  The  meshes  of  that  fine  net-work  the  brain  are  com- 
posed of  such  mere  spiders'  threads  in  me,  that  when  a  lonj?  thought  finds  its  way 
inio  them,  it  buzzes,  and  twangs,  and  bustles  about,  at  such  a  rate  as  seems  to 
threaten  the  whole  structure."  At  these  times  we  need  tranquil  hours  for  change 
of  occupation,  as  well  as  for  genial  and  agreeable  entertainment.  Dr.  Addison 
Alexander  used  to  say  he  found  bis  recreation  in  change  of  toil.  He  would  go  from 
the  study  of  languages  to  the  study  of  mathematics.  He  would  turn  from  writing 
commentaries  to  writing  sermons.     He  would  discuss  theology,  and  refresh  himself 


W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

after  hia  diy  work  by  composing  little  poems  for  children.  We  all  ought  to  know 
and  recognize  this  principle.  What  we  need  for  Sunday  rest  is  not  so  much  sleep 
as  something  to  do  different  from  what  we  do  during  the  week ;  and  what  we  should 
■hun  the  most  is  this  wear  and  tear  of  a  crowded  excursion.  A  real  rest  is  found 
in  variety  of  labour,  inside  of  exhaustion  and  fatigue.  Quiet  does  not  mean  stupid 
slumber  on  the  Lord's  day,  or  on  any  other.  The  best  relief  from  worldly  cares  is 
discovered  oftenest  in  the  gentle  industries  of  religious  work.  IV.  We  must  con- 
sider the  Lord's  day  as  a  benediction  rather  than  a  fbet.  Thus  we  shall  rebut 
the  charge  of  bigotry.  It  is  sometimes  claimed  that  Sabbath  laws  exasperate  men 
who  make  no  claim  to  religion,  and  this  is  a  free  country.  It  has  to  be  admitted 
that  there  are  always  some  people  who  grow  exasperated  whenever  the  subject  of 
law  is  naentioned.  But  liberty  is  not  licence,  nor  is  freedom  lawlessness.  This 
one  day  in  seven  is  no  less  a  blessing  because  some  men  do  not  think  so ;  it  is  not 
a  fret  because  they  are  fretted.  Even  decent  people  have  some  rights.  God  does 
not  engage  to  commune  with  His  children,  and  then  expect  them  to  allow  the 
interview  to  be  disturbed  by  the  rollicking  riot  of  a  beer  garden,  or  the  band  of 
target-shooting  parades.  V.  We  must  consider  the  Lord's  day  as  a  help  rather 
than  an  institution.  (C.  8.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Son  of  Man  is  Lord  of  the  Sab- 
bath : — Nothing  can  show  the  Divine  nature  of  our  Lord  more  clearly  than  that  He 
is  above  such  a  law  of  God,  so  that  He  should  modify  it,  relax  it,  change  it  at  His 
pleasure.  He  exercised  but  a  small  part  of  this  authority  when  He  freed  His  dis- 
ciples from  the  yoke  of  its  burdensome  pharisaic  observance.  He  exercised  His 
lordship  over  the  day  far  more  royally  when  He  by  His  Spirit  made  the  day  of  His 
resurrection  the  weekly  religious  festival  of  His  Church.  By  this  He  gave  it  alto- 
gether a  new  character.  Henceforth  it  is  a  day,  not  of  mere  rest,  but  of  renewed 
life,  the  life  of  His  own  resurrection ;  and  so  its  characteristic  ordinance  is  not  the 
slaying  of  beasts,  but  the  life-giving  celebration  of  the  sacrament  of  His  own  risen 
body.  (M.  F,  Sadler.)  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man: — I.  As  a  periodical 
reprieve  from  the  curse  of  labour.  II.  As  a  stated  season  for  attention  to  religious 
truths  and  interests.  HI.  As  a  day  of  holy  convocation  for  the  purpose  of  worship 
and  instruction.  IV.  As  an  emblem  and  an  earnest  of  the  saint's  everlasting  rest. 
(G.  Brooks.)  The  Son  of  Man  Lord  of  the  Sabbath:— I.  It  was  instituted  by 
Him.  II.  It  is  kept  on  a  day  which  is  fixed  by  His  authority.  III.  It  is  intended 
to  commemorate  His  resurrection.  IV.  It  ought  to  be  observed  with  a  special 
regard  to  His  will,  and  word,  and  work.  {Ibid.)  The  Sabbath  for  man  as  a  corn- 
flex  creature : — The  question  has  been  revived  in  our  own  generation:  "In  what 
spirit  is  that  day  which  has  superseded  the  Sabbath  to  be  kept,  especially  by  the 
working  classes  ?  "  This,  no  less  than  the  other,  "  was  made  for  man."  Now  man, 
it  must  be  remembered,  is  a  complex  creature.  He  has  a  tripartite  nature,  con- 
sisting of  body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  and  it  is  necessary  to  provide  for  him  as  such,  not 
ignoring  either  his  physical,  or  his  social,  or  his  religious  needs.  All  must  be 
kept  in  view.  It  is  a  manifest  duty  to  furnish  the  masses  with  the  means  of  bodily 
recreation,  and  to  draw  them  from  their  squalid  homes  into  the  pure  air  which  will 
invigorate  the  frame.  It  is  no  less  a  duty  to  elevate  their  tastes,  to  offer  them,  as 
far  as  possible,  variety  of  scene,  and  that  relief  from  the  monotony  of  labour  which 
the  rich  man  finds  in  his  club  or  library ;  but  all  must  be  subordinated  to  the  para- 
mount duty  of  worship.  That  is  due  from  every  creature  to  the  Great  Creator.  It 
is  that,  moreover,  in  which  he  may  find  his  highest  enjoyment.  No  scheme, 
therefore,  which  ignores  this  claim  can  possibly  carry  out  the  principle  here  laid 
down  by  Christ,  (if.  M.  Luckeocky  D.D.)  Man  cannot  do  without  the  Sabbath: — 
A  distinguished  merchant,  who  for  twenty  years  did  a  vast  amount  of  business, 
remarked  to  Dr.  Edwards,  ••  Had  it  not  been  for  the  weekly  day  of  rest,  I  have  no 
doubt  I  should  have  been  a  maniac  long  ago."  This  was  mentioned  in  a  company 
of  merchants,  when  one  remarked, "  That  is  the  case  exactly  with  a  poor  friend  of 
mine.  He  was  one  of  our  greatest  importers.  He  used  to  say  Sunday  was  the  best 
day  in  the  week  to  plan  successful  voyages ;  showing  that  his  mind  had  no  Sabbath. 
He  has  been  in  the  insane  hospital  for  years,  and  will  probably  die  there."  Many 
men  are  there,  or  in  the  maniac's  grave,  because  they  allowed  themselves  no  Sab- 
bath. They  broke  a  law  of  nature,  and  of  nature's  God,  and  found  "  the  way  of 
the  transgressor  is  hard."  The  Sabbath  a  service  to  the  State : — The  keeping  one 
day  in  seven  holy,  as  a  time  of  relaxation  and  refreshment  as  well  as  for  public 
worship,  is  of  admirable  service  to  a  state,  considered  merely  as  a  civil  institution. 
{Sir  W.  Blackstone.)  The  Sabbath  for  man's  happimss  : — The  usages  and  ordi- 
nances of  religion  ought  to  be  regulated  according  to  their  end,  which  is  the  hononr 


.  n.1  ST.  MARK, 


of  God  and  the  advantage  of  men.  It  ii  the  property  ol  the  religion  of  the  true 
God,  to  contain  nothing  in  it  but  what  is  beneficial  to  man.  Hereby  God  plainly 
idiows  that  it  is  neither  out  of  indigence,  nor  interest,  that  He  requires  men  to 
worship  and  obey  Him,  but  only  out  of  goodness,  and  on  purpose  to  make  them 
happy.  God  prohibited  work  on  the  Sabbath  day,  for  fear  lest  servants  should  be 
oppressed  by  the  hard-heartedness  of  their  masters,  and  to  the  end  that  men  might 
not  be  hindered  from  attending  upon  God  and  their  own  salvation.  {Quesnel.) 
The  Sabbath  law  fibred  in  the  nature  of  man  : — For  as  the  old  masters  put  their 
colours  upon  the  fresh,  damp  plaster  of  the  wall  until,  hardening  together,  picture 
and  plaster  were  one  in  their  witness  to  the  future  of  the  glories  of  the  past,  so 
fibred  in  the  need  and  future  of  man  is  the  law  of  the  Sabbath.  {Monday  Club 
Sermons.)  The  Sabbath  a  physical  necessity  : — The  testimony  is  cumulative,  from 
experience  and  careful  scientific  experiment,  that  in  all  departments  of  continuous 
work — as  mines,  factories,  railroads,  mechanic  arts,  telegraphy,  and  commercial 
pursuits — the  rest  of  the  night  does  not  restore  the  vitality  lost  in  the  day.  The 
New  York  Central  engineers,  who  petitioned  for  their  Sundays  on  the  ground  that 
they  could  do  more  and  better  work  in  six  tban  in  seven  days,  have  clearer  heads 
and  firmer  hands,  and  that  under  pressure  of  constant  service  age  came  on  pre* 
maturely,  put  on  record  their  own  experience.  In  a  paper  before  the  British  Asso- 
ciation it  was  stated  by  an  employer  of  labour  that  he  could  work  a  horse  eight  milei 
A  day  for  six  days  better  than  he  could  six  miles  a  day  for  seven  days ;  so  that  by 
not  working  on  Sunday  he  saved  12  per  cent.  (Ibid.)  Man  needs  the  rest  of  ths 
Sabbath  in  addition  to  the  rest  of  night : — In  the  same  line  of  witness  is  the  testi- 
mony  of  medical  and  scientific  experts,  that  the  rest  of  the  night  does  not  restore 
the  powers  of  mind  and  body  to  the  same  vitality  they  had  twenty-four  hours 
before,  and  that  the  natural  forces  run  steadily  lower  and  lower  from  Monday 
morning  until  Saturday  night,  until  these  powers  can  be  lifted  back  to  their  normal 
vitality  and  place  only  by  the  relaxation  and  rest  of  the  seventh  day.  It  is  a  curious 
scientific  fact  that  Proudhon,  the  great  socialistic  philosopher  of  France,  attempted 
to  work  out  mathematically  the  relative  ratio  of  work  to  rest,  which  ^ould  secure 
the  greatest  efficiency  and  the  largest  product.  Biased  by  no  reUgious  claim,  but 
rather  avowedly  hostile  to  such  influence,  he  found  that  six  days  of  work  and  one 
day  of  rest  was  the  only  right  proportion :  that  is,  to  shorten  the  present  working 
week  by  one  day  made  the  rest  too  much  for  the  labour,  while  adding  a  single  day 
(o  the  labouring  week  made  the  rest  too  small  for  complete  recuperation.  Humboldt, 
years  before,  arrived  at  the  same  mathematical  conclusion :  and  when  France,  loyal 
to  her  decimal  system,  put  the  tenth  day  in  the  place  of  the  seventh,  she  found  that 
the  working-man  took  two  holidays  instead  of  one,  and  thereby  entailed  a  loss  upon 
the  industrial  production  of  the  empire.  Therefore  Chevalier  rightly  said  :  "Let 
as  observe  Sunday  in  the  name  of  hygiene,  if  not  in  the  name  of  religion."  For 
Sunday  is  the  best  friend  of  the  working-man — his  defence  against  decay,  disease, 
and  premature  death.  And  every  railroad  corporation,  every  steamship  Une,  every 
factory  bell  which  calls  to  Sunday  labour,  every  lax  law  and  every  lax  practice— 
these  are  the  enemies  of  the  working-man,  aye,  every  poor  man !  The  rich  can  rest 
when  they  will ;  but  the  poor  man  cannot,  save  as  his  day  of  rest  is  conserved  by 
the  law  of  the  land  and  of  God.  (Ibid.)  The  Sabbath  is  a  social  necessity  : — What 
are  the  great  working  factors  of  society  ?  Why,  we  say,  the  family,  the  church,  and 
the  school — law  and  order.  Put  neglect  upon  any  of  these  great  fountains  and  the 
stream  grows  muddy  and  shallow,  and  yet  no  agency  is  more  potent  in  conserving 
these  social  factors  than  the  Sabbath.  It  acts  as  a  brake  npon  the  rush  and  roar 
of  traffic  and  self-interest,  which  for  six  days  engross  the  mind  and  busy  the  hand. 
It  bids  men  stop  and  breathe,  think  of  God  and  cultivate  the  social  amenities 
of  life,  and  thereby  makes  them  better  neighbours  and  better  citizens.  {Ibid.) 
Tlie  Sabbath  necessary  to  the  weary  man: — Wherever  mind  and  body  are  taxed 
and  exhausted  by  toil — and  it  is  meant  in  the  laws  of  our  being  that  they  shall 
everywhere  be  employed — there  the  Sabbath  is  destined  to  come  as  a  day  of 
rest.  The  ship,  indeed,  will  glide  along  at  sea,  for  its  course  cannot  be  arrested ; 
and  the  Sabbath  of  the  mariner  may  often  be  different  from  that  of  a  dweller 
in  a  palace  or  a  cottage,  and  different  from  that  wbich  the  seaman  feels  that 
he  needs.  The  sun  and  the  stars  will  hold  on  their  way,  and  the  grass  will 
grow,  and  the  flower  open  its  petals  to  the  light,  and  the  streams  will  roll  to 
the  ocean;  for  there  is  need  that  the  laws  of  nature  should  be  uniform,  and 
the  fibres  of  plants,  and  suns,  and  planets,  and  streams  experience  no  exhaustion, 
and  He  who  directs  them  all  **fainteth  not,  nor  is  weary:  "    but  man  is  weary 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR,  [chap.  u. 

and  needs  rest.  {A.  Barnes^  D.B,)  The  Sabbath  necessary  for  the  higher  bein^ 
of  man  : — Man,  with  these  relations,  and  these  high  powers  to  cultivate,  the  Sab- 
bath meets  as  a  day  of  leisure,  that  he  may  show  on  such  a  day  of  rest  that  he 
is  distinguished  from  beasts  of  burden,  and  creatures  governed  by  instinct,  and 
those  incapable  of  moral  feeling,  and  those  destined  to  no  higher  being,  and  those 
not  knowing  how  to  aspire  to  fellowship  with  God.  The  bird,  indeed,  will  build  its 
nest  on  the  Sabbath,  and  the  beaver  its  dam,  and  the  bee  its  cell,  and  the  lion  will 
huut  its  prey;  for  they  have  no  higher  nature  than  is  indicated  by  these  things. 
But  man  has  a  higher  nature  than  the  fowls  of  the  air  and  the  beasts  of  the  forest^ 
and  the  world  would  have  been  sadly  disjo  n  ed  and  incomplete,  if  there  had  been 
no  arrangements  to  develop  it.  The  Sabbatn  is  among  those  arrangements.  It  is, 
indeed,  a  simple  thing  merely  to  command  a  man  to  rest  one  day  in  seven ;  but 
most  of  the  great  results  which  we  see  depend  on  very  simple  arrangements.  The 
law  which  controls  the  falling  pebble  is  a  simple  law ;  but  all  these  worlds  are  kept 
by  it  in  their  places.  The  law  which  you  see  developed  in  a  prism,  bending  the 
diiferent  rays  in  a  beam  of  light,  is  a  simple  law ;  but  all  the  beauty  of  the  green 
lawn,  of  variegated  flowers,  of  the  clouds  at  evening,  of  the  lips,  the  cheek,  the 
eye,  and  all  that  we  admire  on  the  canvass  when  the  pencil  of  Rubens  or  Baphael 
touches  it,  is  to  be  traced  to  these  simple  laws.  It  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which 
nature  works  to  bring  out  most  wonderful  results  from  the  operation  of  the  simplest 
laws.     (Ibid.)  Exertion  demands  rest: — This  is  true,  as  we  all  know,  of  the 

muscular  system,  voluntary  and  involuntary.  In  breathing,  in  winking  of  the 
eyes,  in  the  beating  of  the  heart,  there  is  a  system  of  alternate  action  and  repose, 
each  brief  indeed  in  their  existence,  but  indispensable  to  the  healthy  action  of  the 
muscles,  and  to  the  continuance  of  life.  Each  one  of  these  organs,  too,  though 
they  seem  to  be  constantly  in  motion,  will  have  the  rest  which  nature  demands,  or 
disease  and  death  will  be  the  result.  The  same  is  true  of  our  voluntary  muscles. 
He  that  should  endeavour  to  labour  at  the  same  thing  constantly,  he  that  should 
attempt  to  nm  or  walk  without  relaxation,  he  that  should  exercise  the  same  class 
of  muscles  in  writing,  in  the  practice  of  music,  in  climbing,  or  in  holding  the  limb 
in  a  fixed  position,  would  soon  be  sensible  that  he  was  violating  a  law  of  nature, 
and  would  be  compelled  by  a  fearful  penalty  to  pay  the  forfeit.  Nay,  in  doing 
these  very  things,  in  running,  or  leaping,  or  climbing,  or  in  the  most  rapid  execu- 
tion  of  a  piece  of  music,  nature  has  provided  by  antagonist  muscles  that  the  great 
law  demanding  repose  shall  not  be  disregarded.  A  long-continued  and  uninter- 
mitted  tension  of  any  one  of  the  muscles  of  the  frame  would  soon  bring  us  into 
conflict  with  one  of  the  universal  laws  of  our  being ;  and  we  should  be  reminded 
of  the  existence  of  those  laws  in  such  a  way  that  we  should  feel  that  they  must  be 
observed.  Yet  the  operation  of  this  law  of  our  nature  is  not  enough.  We  need 
other  modes  of  rest  than  those  which  can  be  obtained  by  the  intermitted  action  of 
a  muscle  which  is  soon  to  be  resumed.  We  need  longer  repose ;  we  need  an  entire 
relaxation  of  the  system ;  we  need  such  a  condition  that  every  muscle  and  nerve 
shall  be  laid  down,  shall  be  relaxed,  shall  be  composed  to  rest,  and  shall  be  left  in 
an  undisturbed  position  for  hours  together,  where  there  shall  be  no  danger  of  its 
being  summoned  into  action.  Nature  has  provided  for  this  too,  and  this  law  must 
be  obeyed :  for  a  few  hours  only  can  we  be  employed  on  our  farms,  or  in  our  mer- 
chandise, and  then  the  sun  refuses  us  light  any  longer,  and  night  spreads  her 
sable  curtains  over  all  things,  and  the  affairs  of  a  busy  world  come  to  a  pause. 
Darkness  broods  on  the  path  of  man,  comes  into  his  counting-house  and  his 
dwelling,  meets  him  in  his  travels,  interrupts  his  busiest  employments,  wraps  the 
world  in  silence ;  and  he  himself  sympathizes  with  the  universal  stillness  of  nature, 
and  sinks  down  into  a  state  of  unconsciousness.  The  heart  continues,  indeed,  still 
to  beat,  but  more  gently  than  under  the  excitements  of  political  strife,  of  avarice 
and  revenge ;  the  lungs  heave,  though  more  gently  than  in  the  hurry  and  excite- 
ment of  the  chase,  or  in  the  anxious  <i£fort  for  gold.  But  the  eyelid  heavy  will  not 
suffer  the  eye  to  look  out  on  the  world,  and  even  its  involuntary  action  entirely 
ceases,  and  it  sinks  to  repose.  The  ear,  as  if  tired  of  hearing  so  many  jarring  and 
discordant  sounds,  hears  nothing ;  the  eye,  as  if  wearied  with  seeing,  sees  nothing; 
the  agitated  bosom  is  as  calm  as  it  was  in  the  slumberings  of  infancy  :  the  stretched 
and  weary  muscle  is  relaxed,  the  nerve  is  released  from  its  office  of  conveying  the 
intimations  of  the  will  to  the  distant  members  of  the  exhausted  frame.  The  storm 
may  howl  without,  or  the  ocean  roll  high  its  billows,  or  perhaps  even  the  thunder 
of  battle  may  be  near,  but  nature  will  have  repose.  Napoleon,  at  Leipsic,  ex- 
kausted  by  fatigue,  reposed  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  even  when  the  destiny  of  his 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  MARK.  »5 

empire  depended  on  the  issue  of  the  battle  ;  and  not  even  the  roaring  storm  at  sea 
can  prevent  compliance  with  this  necessary  law.  (Ibid.)  The  mighty  mind 
and  the  vigorous  frame  of  Napoleon  once  enabled  him  to  pass  four  days  and  nights 
in  the  exciting  scenes  of  an  active  campaign  without  sleep,  and  then  he  fell  asleep 
on  his  horse.  The  keenest  torture  which  man  has  ever  invented  has  been  a  device 
to  drive  sleep  from  the  eyes,  and  to  fix  the  body  in  such  a  position  that  it  cannot 
find  repose;  and  even  this  must  fail,  for  the  sufferer  will  find  repose  on  the  rack  or 
in  death.  The  same  law,  demanding  rest,  exists  also  in  relation  to  the  mind,  and 
is  as  imperious  in  regard  to  the  intellectual  and  moral  powers,  in  order  to  their 
permanent  and  healthful  action,  as  to  the  muscles  of  the  body.  No  man  can  long 
pursue  an  intellectual  effort  without  repose.  He  who  attempts  to  hold  his  mind 
long  to  one  train  of  close  thinking,  he  who  pursues  far  an  abstruse  proposition,  and 
he  who  is  wrought  up  into  a  high  state  of  excitement,  must  have  relaxation  and 
repose.  If  he  does  not  yield  to  this  law,  his  mind  is  unstrung,  the  mental  faculties 
are  thrown  from  their  balance,  and  the  frenzied  powers,  perhaps  yet  mighty,  move 
with  tremendous  but  irregular  force,  like  an  engine  without  balance  wheel  or 
*♦  governor,"  and  the  man  of  high  intellectual  powers,  like  Lear,  becomes  a  raving 
maniac.  So  with  our  moral  feelings.  The  intensest  zeal  will  not  always  be  on 
fire,  the  keenest  sorrow  will  find  intermission,  and  even  love  does  not  always  glow 
with  the  same  ardour  in  the  soul.  This  law,  contemplating  our  welfare,  cannot  be 
violated  without  incurring  a  fearful  penalty.      (Ibid.)  The  Sabhath  breaks  the 

monotony  of  lije : — The  mind  is  not  in  a  condition  for  its  best  development  when 
it  is  under  an  unbroken  influence  of  any  kind,  however  good  in  itself.  It  is  not 
made  for  one  thing,  but  for  many  things ;  not  for  the  contemplation  of  one  object, 
but  of  many  objects.  Life  is  not  all  one  thing ;  it  is  broken  up  into  many  interests, 
many  hopes,  many  anxieties,  many  modifications  of  sorrow  and  joy.  On  the  earth 
it  is  not  all  night  or  all  day,  all  sunshine  or  aU  shade,  all  hill  or  all  vale,  all 
spring  or  all  winter.  No  man  is  made  exclusively  for  any  one  pursuit,  or  for  the 
exercise  of  one  class  of  affections  or  feelings  only,  or  to  touch  on  society,  like  a 
globe  on  a  plain,  only  on  one  point.  Now  look  one  moment,  for  illustration,  at 
the  effect  of  unbroken  and  uninterrupted  worldliness  on  a  man's  mind.  The  man 
referred  to  may  develop,  in  the  highest  degree,  the  powers  of  mind  which  constitute 
the  successful  merchant ;  he  may  have  a  far-reaching  sagacity  in  business ;  he  may 
never  send  out  a  vessel  on  an  unsuccessful  adventure ;  he  may  possess  the  powers 
of  calculation  in  the  highest  degree ;  he  may  become  rich,  and  build  him  a  palace, 
and  be  •'  clothed  in  fine  linen  and  purple ;  "  but  what  is  he  then  ?  Is  he  a  man  in 
the  proper  sense  of  the  word  man  ?  There  is  but  one  single  class  of  his  faculties 
which  has  ever  been  developed,  and  he  is  not  a  man :  he  is  but  a  calculating 
machine,  though  the  powers  of  his  nature  may  have  been  carried  as  far  as  possible 
in  that  direction.  But  what  is  he  as  a  social  being  ?  Beyond  the  circle  of  the 
most  limited  range  of  topics  he  has  no  thoughts,  no  words.  What  is  he  as  an 
inteUeetual  being  T  Except  in  one  limited  department  of  the  intellectual  economy, 
his  mind  has  never  been  cultivated  at  alL  What  is  he  as  a  man  of  sensibility,  of 
refinement,  of  cultivated  tastes?  Not  one  of  these  things  has  been  cultivated,  and 
in  none  of  them,  unless  by  accident,  has  he  any  of  the  qualities  of  a  man.  He  is 
acquainted  with  the  world  for  commercial  purposes  only  ;  he  knows  its  geography, 
its  ports  of  entry,  its  consuls,  its  custom-house  laws ;  but  he  knows  not  the  world 
as  an  abode  of  suffering  and  of  wrong,  and,  I  may  add,  as  dressed  up  in  exquisite 
beauty  by  its  Maker.  Man,  in  the  costume  of  Chma  or  India,  he  knows  as  a  traf- 
ficker :  man,  as  made  in  the  image  of  God,  and  as  a  moral  being,  he  knows  not  in 
any  costume  or  land.  This  unbroken  influence  on  the  mind  the  Sabbath  is  adapted, 
without  perilhng  anything  good,  to  break  up.  {Ibid.)  The  Sabbath  nefd  not  be 
a  day  of  gloom : — There  is  enough  to  be  accomplished  in  every  soul  by  duties  appro- 
priate to  the  day,  to  rescue  every  moment  from  tedium  and  ennui.  If  it  were  as 
pleasant  to  man  to  cultivate  his  heart  as  it  is  his  intellectual  powers  ;  if  he  felt  it 
to  be  as  momentous  to  prepare  for  the  life  to  come,  as  for  the  present  world  ;  if  he 
delighted  in  the  service  of  his  Maker,  as  he  does  iu  the  society  of  his  friends  below — 
the  difficulty  would  not  be  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  fill  up  the  day,  but  that 
the  hours  on  the  Sabbath  had  taken  a  more  rapid  flight  than  on  other  days,  and 
that  the  shades  of  the  evening  came  around  us  when  our  work  was  but  half  done. 
Let  this  one  thought  be  borne  with  you  to  your  homes,  if  no  other,  that  the  appro- 
priate work  of  the  Sabbath  is  the  heart,  all  about  the  heart,  all  that  can  bear  upon 
it,  all  that  can  make  it  better ;  and,  I  am  persuaded,  you  will  see  no  want  of  appro- 
priate  employment  for  one  day  in  seven.     See  what  there  is  in  your  heart  perm** 


B6  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iu. 

nently  abiding  there  that  demands  correction.  See  what  an  accumulation  of  bad 
influences  there  may  be  during  the  toils  and  turmoils  of  the  week,  that  may  require 
removal.  See  how  in  the  business  of  the  world,  in  domestic  cares,  in  professional 
studies  or  duties,  the  heart  may  be  neglected,  and  there  may  arise  a  sad  dispropor- 
tion between  the  growth  of  the  intellect  and  the  proper  affections  of  the  sord.  See 
how,  in  the  gaieties  and  vanities  of  life,  the  pursuits  of  pleasure,  the  love  of  flattery 
and  applause,  there  may  have  been  a  steady  growth  of  bad  propensities  through 
the  week,  not,  for  one  moment,  broken  or  checked.  See  how  there  may  have  been 
a  silent  but  steady  gro\vth  of  avarice,  pride,  or  ambition,  all  through  the  week, 
riveting  the  fetters  of  slavery  on  the  soul,  and  bringing  you  into  perpetual  and 
ignoble  bondage.  See  the  tendency  of  all  these  things  to  harden  the  heart,  to 
chill  the  affections,  to  stifle  the  voice  of  conscience,  and  to  make  the  mind  grovel- 
ling and  worldly.  See  what  an  unnatural  growth  the  intellect  of  man  sometimes 
attains  to,  while  all  the  finer  feelings  of  his  nature,  like  fragrant  shrubs  and  beau- 
tiful flowers  under  the  dense  foliage  of  a  far-spreading  oak,  are  overshadowed  and 
stinted.  And  then  see  what  in  nature  and  in  grace  is  open  for  the  cultivation  of 
the  heart — the  worship  of  God  adapted  to  assimilate  the  soul  to  the  Creator,  the 
Bible  full  of  precepts  and  promises  bearing  directly  on  the  heart.      {Ibid.)  I. 

Thb  ©ay  designed.  '•  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man  "  by  Him  who  also  made 
man.  II.  The  day  pebvebted.  It  is  so,  and  variously,  by  different  people.  1.  These 
Pharisees  made  it  everything,  and  regarded  the  day  more  than  man,  and  his  need 
(to  supply  which  it  was  first  given).  2.  Others  pervert  it  by  regarding  it  as  a  day 
for  mere  physical  rest  and  recreation,  as  if  man  were  a  mere  animal.  Such  are 
Becxilarists  and  materialists,  &c.  3.  Others,  again,  pervert  the  day  who  make  it  a 
day  for  study,  as  if  man  were  a  purely  intellectual  being.  Such  would  open 
museums.  III.  The  day  changed.  Learn — 1.  Bightly  to  understand  the  Sabbath 
as  meeting  a  human  need.  2.  To  honour  the  Lord  of  the  Sabbath  by  preserving 
His  day  from  innovation,  and  by  services  of  religion  and  mercy.  "  It  is  lawful  to 
do  good  on  the  Sabbath  day."  3.  A  practical  reverence  for  the  Lord  of  the  day  is 
the  best  way  to  keep  the  day  from  being  stolen  from  us.     (C.  Gray.)  A  world 

without  a  5a66at/».---A  world  without  a  Sabbath  would  belike  a  man  without  a 
smile,  like  a  summer  without  flowers,  and  like  a  homestead  witboat  a  garden. 
It  is  the  joyooB  day  of  the  whole  week.    (H,  W»  Beecher.) 


CHAPTER   in. 

Tkb.  1-6.  And  there  was  a  man  there  which  had  a  withered  band.— T%« 
withered  hand  : — I.  What  the  witbebed  hand  may  be  said  to  syhbolizs.  1.  It 
represents  capacity  for  work.  By  the  hand  the  toiling  millions  earn  their  bread. 
S.  The  hand  stands  as  the  symbol  of  fellowship.  This  is  what  our  custom  of 
shaking  hands  expresses.  3.  There  is  one  more  thing  symbolized  by  the  hand — 
generosity.  By  the  hand  we  convey  our  gifts.  II.  The  causes  of  the  hand's 
wxthxbino.  1.  The  first  suggestion  is  that,  like  some  forms  of  blindness  and  cer- 
tain deformities,  it  is  sometimes  a  sad,  inexplicable  inheritance,  possessed  from 
birth.  2.  The  hand  would  become  withered,  I  should  think,  if  you  fastened  tight 
ligatures  or  bandages  round  the  arm  so  as  to  impede  the  free  circulation  of  blood. 
Our  narrowness  may  cause  the  same  result.  3.  And  then,  perhaps,  another  cause 
may  be  cited — disuse  of  the  hand,  if  long-continued.  Nature's  gifts  are  cancelled,  if 
not  made  use  of.  IH.  The  ueans  or  healing.  1.  The  man  is  made  to  *'  stand 
forth."  The  healthful  effects  which  flow  to  a  man  when  he  is  drawn  out  of  the 
solitude  of  a  self-shrouded  life,  and  constrained  by  force  of  circumstances  to  come  into 
contact  with  other  h^man  beings.  We  need  to  be  stored  up  with  all  sorts  of  social 
agencies.  2.  There  is  another  thing  in  this  narrative— obedience  to  Christ.  His 
obedience  evidenced  his  faith.  {W.  S.  Houghton.)  The  withered  hand : — ^I.  The 
MXANINO  or  THE  wiTHEBED  HAND.  The  diseasc  was  not  like  the  palsy,  a  type  of 
sniversal  inaction ;  it  was  not  like  some  consuming  fever,  a  type  of  the  way  in 
which  sin  and  vice  pervert  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul ;  but  there  was  a  vivid  pic- 
ture of  that  infirmity  which  destroys  a  man's  power  of  doing  anything  well  in  this 
world  of  ours.  The  hand  of  man  is  one  of  those  noble  physical  features  which 
distinguish  him  from  the  brute.  **  The  hand  "  is  but  another  name  for  human 
skill,  power,  and  usefulness,  and  for  the  studied  adaptation  of  means  to  ends.    1. 


CHAP,  m.]  ST,  MARK,  9T 

The  bigotry  of  these  Pharisees  rendered  them  nseless  in  the  great  kingdom  of  God, 
and  destroyed  their  power  of  serving  Christ.  Christ  did  not  keep  the  Sabbath  in 
their  way,  and  that  was  enough  for  their  malice.  That  man  with  a  ••  withered 
hand  "  was  an  apt  picture  of  the  way  in  which  their  bigotry  had  incapacitated  them 
for  any  holy  service.  Bigotry  ties  up  men's  hands  still.  2.  Prejudices  wither  up 
Bome  of  the  energies  of  men.  By  prejudices  I  mean  opinions  taken  up  without 
sufficient  reasons,  and  maintained  with  obstinacy ;  opinions  that  rest  on  feelings 
rather  than  on  facts.  There  are  many  men — and  professing  Christians,  too — who  are  so 
full  of  obstinate  prejudices  that  they  invariably  find  fault  with  every  good  work  that 
has  to  be  done,  and  with  every  possible  way  of  doing  it ;  but  who  very  seldom  do 
anything  themselves.  Their  hand  is  withered.  3.  Past  inconsistencies  often  wither 
up  the  power  of  service.  It  is  a  mournful  truth  that  if  a  man  has  once  forfeited 
his  character  for  integrity,  or  Christian  prudence,  he  may  have  repented ;  but  still 
his  power  for  service  is  crippled.  4.  Easily-besetting  sins  will  paralyze  the  useful- 
ness of  any  man  who  does  not  with  earnestness  wage  war  against  them.  Let  a  man 
yield  himself  indolently  to  the  slavery  of  an  evil  habit,  idle  talk,  vain  thoughts,  he 
will  soon  find  that  his  hand  is  withered,  that  his  power  of  serving  God  is  gone. 
Indolence,  fear  of  man,  ungovemed  temper,  paralyze  our  energies.  II.  The  heal- 
XNO  OF  THE  WITHERED  HAND.  Christ  Came  into  this  world  not  mainly  to  set  men 
free  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  but  to  emancipate  all  his  faculties  for  holy  service. 
There  are  three  lessons  we  may  learn  from  this  narrative.  1.  We  may  gather  Christ'i 
willingness  to  heal  us.  2.  The  way  in  which  we  are  to  make  use  of  Divine  strength. 
When  the  man  willed  to  stretch  forth  his  hand,  God  willed  in  him ;  the  communi- 
cation  of  Divine  strength  was  granted  to  him  at  the  very  moment  when  he  deter- 
mined to  obey  the  conmiand  of  Christ,  If  we  will  we  may  make  the  Divine  strength 
our  own.  Verily  while  we  "  work  out  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  God  is 
working  "  within  us  both  to  will  and  do  of  His  good  pleasure."  3.  Here  is  the 
great  rule  by  which  at  all  times,  through  the  help  of  God's  grace,  we  may  overcome 
our  listlessness  and  uselessness  in  His  service.  It  is  by  our  own  vigorous 
effort  to  overcome  the  withering  up  of  our  faculties  that  we  shall  test  the  worth  of 
Divine  promises.  {H.  JR.  Reynolds^  B,A.)  Restoring  of  the  man  with  the  withered 
hand  .-—The  scene  or  this  mibaclb — ♦*  He  went  into  their  synagogue."  We  often 
find  our  Saviour  in  the  synagogue.  1.  To  show  respect  for  Divine  institutions. 
Places  of  worship  may  be  despised  by  some,  but  not  by  Christ  who  came  to  do  His 
Father's  will.  2.  To  secure  the  great  objects  of  His  own  mission.  He  appeared 
as  a  Divine  Teacher,  and  frequented  the  synagogue  in  order  to  make  known  the 
glad  tidings  of  His  kingdom.  H.  The  pebson  on  whou  this  mibacle  was  wbouoht. 
We  are  first  shown — 1.  The  nature  of  his  complaint.  He  was  not  affected  in  his 
whole  body,  but  in  one  of  his  members.  2.  Something  similar  to  this  was  occasion- 
ally inflicted  as  a  Divine  judgment.  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xiii.).  3.  This  case  may 
be  regarded  as  a  representation  of  man's  spiritual  condition.  By  sin  the  powers  of 
his  soul  have  been  paralyzed.  IH.  The  dispute  bt  which  this  mibacle  was 
PBECSDSD.  1.  The  question  proposed — "  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  Sabbath 
day?"  2.  The  conclusive  reply — "What  man  shall  there  be  among  you,  <feo." 
Interest  is  a  very  decisive  casuist,  and  removes  men's  scruples  in  a  moment.  It  is 
always  soonest  consulted  and  most  readily  obeyed,  3.  The  verdict  pronounced — 
•*  The  Son  of  man  is  Lord  even  of  the  Sabbath."  IV.  The  manneb  xn  which  thb 
uiBACLB  WAS  PERFORMED.  1.  An  authoritative  mandate — **  Stretch  forth  thine 
hand."  2.  An  instant  compliance.  3.  A  gratifying  result — "  And  it  was  restored 
whole,  like  the  other."  (Expository  Outlines.)  Withered  hands : — If  there  were 
no  withered  hearts  there  would  be  no  withered  hands — make  the  fountain  clear,  and 
the  stream  will  be  pure.  {Dr.  Parker.)  TJie  human  side  of  a  miracle: — No  great 
stretch  of  imagination  is  needed  to  see  in  this  narrative  a  picture  of  man's  spiritual 
state.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  not  merely  tells  us  what  we  ought  to  be,  but  gives  the 
power  by  which  we  actually  become  that  which  it  requires.  There  have  been  many 
teaching  gospels,  but  this  is  the  only  transforming  gospel.  But  the  strength  of 
grace  is  bestowed  upon  conditions,  and  these  seem  to  be  set  forth  in  the  text, 
"  Stretch  forth  thine  hand."  By  the  command  of  the  text  three  conditions  were 
demanded.  I.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  there  was  faith  required.  His  faith  had  much 
to  encourage  it;  yet  he  would  perhaps  feel  something  of  that  diffidence  which 
makes  it  hard  to  realize  as  possible  to  oneself  the  blessings  which  have  come  to 
others.  His  faith  would  also  be  somewhat  severely  tested  by  the  manner  in  which 
the  Saviour  dealt  with  him.  Moreover,  it  appears  that  there  was  no  outward  act  on 
the  part  of  our  Lord.      It  was  merely  bv  a  word  that  the  invisible  power  was  com- 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

mnnioaled.  This  faith  was  indispensable.  It  was  a  condition  invariably  demanded. 
Without  it  Jesus  wrought  no  miracles.  Unbelief  hinders  His  merciful  designs. 
Faith  is  the  mysterious  moral  force  which  thrusts  out  the  hand  of  humanity  to  take 
the  gift  Divine.  II.  The  faith  of  this  man  was  accompanied  by  obedience.  The 
commands,  "  Stand  forth,"  *'  Stretch  forth  thine  hand,"  were  by  no  means  easy  to 
obey.  But  undaunted  he  obeyed,  and  in  the  very  act  of  obedience  he  found  the 
blessing  that  he  craved.  This  obedience  was  the  fruit  of  his  faith,  and  the  faith  which 
does  not  produce  obedience  is  of  little  worth.  Saving  faith  is  always  obedient  faith, 
III.  It  seems  evident  that  there  was  needed  in  the  case  of  this  man  a  strong  resolu- 
tion. This  may  appear  from  what  has  been  already  said.  Still  more  if  we  consider 
the  act  which  was  required  of  him.  But  he  found  that  the  law  of  Christ  is,  Obey, 
and  thou  hast  the  power.  (S.  S.  Bosward.)  Analogies  of  faith: — You  say,  "I 
have  no  faith."  We  answer,  "  Believe,  and  faith  is  yours."  Does  it  seem  a  para- 
dox. But  paradoxes  are  often  great  truths,  and  are  only  hard  to  us  because  they 
come  to  us  from  a  higher  region,  where  our  poor  logic  is  of  small  account.  But  how 
many  analogies  there  are  of  this  paradox  of  faith  even  in  the  lower  spheres  of  life  I 
How  often  is  the  ability  to  perform  an  act,  not  merely  revealed,  but  actually  deve- 
loped or  even  created  by  the  very  effort  to  accomplish  it  1  How  many  works  exist 
to-day  as  monuments  of  genius  which  never  would  have  existed  if  their  authors 
had  waited  till  they  had  the  necessary  power.  So  it  is  in  the  matter  of  salvation. 
You  can  never  have  it  till  you  take  it.  You  will  never  have  the  gift  of  faith 
until  you  believe.  Your  will  is  all  God  waits  for.  He  speaks  by  His  prophet 
thus:  •♦  Hear,  ye  deaf,  that  ye  may  hear;  and  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  see." 
And  by  His  incarnate  Son  He  says  to  every  impotent  soul,  "  Stretch  forth  thine 
hand  I"  {Ibid.)  Stretch  forth  thine  hand : — I.  Christ  sometimes  enjoins  what 
seems  to  be  impossible.  II.  Faith  is  shown  in  doing  what  He  commands,  even 
when  it  seems  to  be  impossible.  III.  Where  there  is  the  •' obedience  of  faith," 
power  will  be  granted.  {A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.)  Divine  kindne$s  amid  human  opposi- 
tion : — The  destructive  effects  of  sin  are  abundantly  seen  in  this  life.  It  destroys 
men's  mental  eyesight,  making  them  blind  to  their  own  best  interests.  Notice 
here  —  I.  The  Divine  Healeb  seeking  opportunity  to  do  good.  1.  The  path- 
way of  filial  obedience  is  the  pathway  of  useful  service.  Jesus  went  to  the  synagogue 
because  there  He  was  sure  to  meet  with  human  needs.  He  went  to  do  good  as  well  as 
to  get  good.  These  two  things  are  identical  at  the  root.  2.  The  comprehensiveness 
of  God's  purpose  puts  to  shame  the  selfish  narrowness  of  man's.  No  place  or  day  can 
be  too  sacred  for  giving  free  play  to  the  love  of  God.  H.  The  Divinb  Healer 
disciplining  the  faith  of  the  distressed.  The  measure  of  our  present  strength 
is  not  the  limit  of  what  we  can  do.  Divine  help  supplements  human  endeavour. 
III.  The  Divine  Healer  provoking  the  hostility  of  the  proud.  1.  It  is 
possible  for  man's  will  to  resist  Divine  influence.  2.  The  choicest  blessing  can  be 
perverted  into  the  direst  curse.  3.  Contact  with  Jesus  makes  men  either  better  or 
worse.  The  ice  that  is  not  melted  by  the  midsummer  sun  is  greatly  hardened 
thereby.  IV.  The  Divine  Healeb  doing  good,  heedless  of  His  own  interests. 
Come  what  may,  Jesus  Christ  must  do  good.  It  was  the  natural  forth-putting  of 
His  inexhaustible  love.  It  is  as  natural  for  Christ  to  show  unmerited  kindness  as 
for  the  sun  to  shed  its  light,  the  rose  to  diffuse  its  fragrance.  (D.  DavieSy  M.A.) 
A  withered  hand  : — We  may  behold  our  own  weakness  in  this  emblem,  which  repre- 
sents that  total  inability  of  doing  good  to  which  sin  has  reduced  mankind.  A 
withered  hand,  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  in  the  eyes  of  faith,  is — (1)  a  covetous 
wretch,  who  bestows  on  the  poor  Uttle  or  no  alms  at  all ;  (2)  a  lukewarm  and  negli- 
gent Christian,  who  performs  no  good  works  ;  (3)  a  magistrate  or  person  in  authority, 
who  takes  no  care  to  maintain  order  and  justice  ;  (4)  a  great  man  who  abandons 
the  innocent  when  oppressed.  None  but  Thou,  0  Lord,  can  heal  this  withered 
hand,  because  its  indisposition  proceeds  from  the  heart,  and  Thou  alone  canst  apply 
Thy  healing  and  almightyhand  to  that.  {Quesncl.)  Publicity  : — There  is  no  public 
action  which  the  world  is  not  ready  to  scan  ;  there  is  no  action  so  private  which  the 
evil  spirits  are  not  witnesses  of.  I  will  endeavour  so  to  live,  as  knowing  that  I  am 
ever  in  the  eyes  of  mine  enemies.  {Bishop  Hall.)  The  good  eye  and  tlie  evil 
eye: — "  They  watched  Him."  And  He  watched  them.  But  with  what  different 
eyes!  The  evil  eye,  like  the  eye  of  the  serpent,  confuses  with  distress,  overcomes  by 
pain ;  and  a  good  eye,  like  the  eye  of  man  fronting  the  wild  beast  of  the  forest, 
subdues.  But  the  evil  eye  makes  us  a  prey;  the  good  eye  subdues  the  beast 
of  prey  itself.  If  we  can  but  gaze  calmlv  on  the  angry  face  of  the  world,  we  have 
already  half  tamed  that  great  foe.     Christ  went  on  His  daily  course  surrounded 


fBAT.  m.]  ST.  MARK.  99 

with  evO  eyes.  He  did  indeed  face  the  angry  world.  Men  quailed  before  Him,  mul- 
titudes hushed,  and  enemies  whose  tongue  was  arrogantly  loud,  were  silenced.  But 
think  not  that  courage  can  be  exerted  even  by  the  best  without  frequent  anguish. 
To  be  watched  by  the  unkind,  even  if  we  can  maintain  our  composure  and  good 
will,  inflicts  a  pang ;  and  to  be  watched  in  time  of  festive  and  unsuspicious  pleasure 
by  the  enemy,  instead  of  being  permitted  to  utter  all  with  unusual  freedom  through 
the  presence  of  kind  sympathy — this  is  indeed  distressing.  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  •*  To 
save  life  or  to  kill  f  '* — The  man  was  not  in  danger  of  his  life,  and  he  would  have  sur- 
vived undoubtedly  had  no  cure  been  wrought.  But  that  question  implied,  that  not 
to  give  health  and  strength,  not  to  restore  the  vital  power  when  the  restoration  lies 
within  your  reach,  is  equivalent  to  taking  it  away.  To  leave  a  good  deed  undone  is 
hardly  less  sinful  than  doing  a  bad  one.  {H.  M.  Luckock,D.  D. )  The  sin  of  neglect- 
ing  to  do  good  : — In  God's  account  there  is  no  difference,  in  regard  of  simple  unlawful- 
ness, between  not  doing  good  to  the  body  or  life  of  our  neighbour,  in  the  case  of 
necessity,  and  doing  hurt  unto  them:  he  that  doth  not  good  to  the  body  and 
life  of  his  neighbour  (when  hia  necessity  requireth,  and  when  it  is  in  his  power) 
is  truly  said  to  do  hurt  unto  them,  at  least  indirectly  and  by  consequence.  The 
rich  glutton,  e.g-^  in  not  relieving  poor  Lazarus,  may  be  truly  said  to  have  murdered 
him.  The  reason  of  which  is,  because  both  these,  as  well  the  not  doing  of  good 
to  our  neighbour's  body  and  life,  as  the  doing  of  hurt  to  them,  are  forbidden  in  the 
sixth  commandment,  as  degrees  of  murder ;  therefore  he  that  doth  not  good,  he  that 
shows  not  mercy  to  his  neighbour's  body  in  case  of  necessity,  is  truly  said  to  do 
hurt,  and  to  show  cruelty  against  it.  How  deceived,  then,  are  those  who  think  it 
enough  if  they  do  no  harm  to  others,  if  they  do  not  wrong  or  oppress  them,  though 
they  take  no  trouble  to  relieve  or  help  them.  Let  us  clearly  understand  this :  that 
not  to  save  life  is  to  destroy  it,  though  not  directly,  yet  indirectly  and  by  conse- 
quence. They  are  both  degrees  of  murder,  though  the  latter  is  a  higher  degree 
than  the  former.  Let  this  move  us  not  only  to  forbear  hurting  our  neighbour,  but 
also  to  make  conscience  of  doing  good  to  him.  {O.  Fetter.)  Christ  and  the 
Sabbath: — They  watched  Him  with  an  evil  eye.  Not  to  understand  but  to 
bring  accusation  against  Him.  I.  The  world  watched  the  Savioub  ;  the  wobld 
WATCHES  THE  Saviour'b  DISCIPLES.  **  No  man  liveth  to  himself.**  The  eye 
of  the  world  is  always  on  the  Church,  on  every  disciple,  just  as  it  was  on  the 
Church*s  and  the  disciples'  Lord.  What  a  lesson  of  circumspection  this  should 
read !  IL  The  Saviour  did  good  on  the  Sabbath  day  ;  rr  is  the  duty  of  His 
DISCIPLES  TO  do  GOOD.  Did  men  expect  that  He  would  be  held  within  the  stone 
walls  of  Jewish  ceremonialism?        [J.  B.  Lister.)  Good  lawfully  done  on  the 

Sabbath:  or^  love  the  over-ruling  law: — At  other  times  the  defence  of  the  Lord 
was  based  on  the  nature  of  the  works  which  He  had  performed.  He  held 
snd  taught  that  "it  was  lawful  to  do  good  on  the  Sabbath  day.'*  Nay,  He 
went  farther,  and  maintained  that  there  is  a  class  of  duties  which  we  not  only 
may,  but  must  perform  on  that  day.  It  was  ordained  at  first  for  the  benefit 
of  man,  and,  therefore,  it  was  never  intended  that  it  should  operate  to  hia 
detriment.  Whenever,  therefore,  an  injury  would  be  inflicted  on  a  fellow-man  by 
our  refusing  to  labour  for  his  assistance  on  the  Sabbath,  we  are  bound  to  exert  our 
selves,  even  on  that  day,  for  his  relief.  Nay,  more ;  in  the  case  of  the  lower 
animals,  when  an  emergency  shall  arise  like  that  which  a  fire  or  a  flood  creates,  or 
when  a  necessity  exists  like  that  which  requires  that  they  shall  be  regularly  fed, 
the  higher  law  of  benevolence  comes  in  and  suspends,  for  the  moment,  the  lower 
law  of  rest.  There  are  thus  degrees  of  obligation  in  moral  duties.  As  a  general 
rule  children  are  bound  to  obey  their  parents ;  but  when  that  obedience  would 
interfere  with  their  duty  to  God,  the  stronger  obligation  comes  in  and  requires 
them  to  do  what  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  In  chemistry  you  may  have  a 
substance  which,  yielding  to  the  law  of  gravitation,  falls  to  the  bottom  of  the  vase ; 
but  when  you  introduce  another  ingredient,  you  shall  see  the  particles,  whose  weight 
formerly  held  them  down,  rising  in  obedience  to  the  mightier  principle  of  aflfinity, 
and  combining  to  produce  a  new  result.  Precisely  so  the  new  principle  of  love 
operates  in  the  interpretation  of  law.  All  law  is  for  the  good  of  man  and  the  glory 
of  God ;  and  when  the  highest  welfare  of  the  individual  creates  a  necessity,  love 
is  to  seek  to  meet  that  emergency,  even  though  in  doing  so  it  may  seem  to  be 
violating  the  Sabbath.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  power  of  the  human  hand : — 
The  hand  of  a  man  is  one  of  those  noble  physical  features  which  distinguish  him 
from  the  brute.  "  The  hand  "  is  but  another  name  for  human  skill,  -po-^er.  and 
usefulness,  and  for  the  studied  adaptation  of  means  to  ends.    By  his  hand,  as  the 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

servant  of  his  intellect  and  his  heart,  man  is  put  on  a  physical  level  with,  if  not  faf 
above,  all  other  living  beings,  in  respect  of  his  power  to  defend  himself  against  the 
formidable  creatures  who  are  furnished  by  nature  with  ponderous  and  deadly  weapons, 
both  of  attack  and  resistance.  By  the  aid  of  this  wonderful  instrument,  he  can 
cover  his  nakedness,  he  can  build  for  himself  a  home,  and  make  the  whole  world 
do  his  bidding ;  he  can  subdue  it  unto  himself,  and  fill  it  with  the  trophies  of  hia 
mastery.  The  houses,  the  roads,  the  bridges,  the  fleets,  the  palaces,  the  temples, 
the  pyramids,  of  earth,  have  all  been  wrought  by  the  little  hands  of  men.  The 
agriculture  and  industry  by  which  the  whole  habitable  face  of  our  globe  has  been 
fashioned  into  '*  the  great  bright  useful  thing  it  is,"  have  been  the  work  of  man'a 
hand.  While  the  working-man's  hand  is  his  sole  capital,  the  hand  of  man  is 
constantly  used  as  the  symbol  of  power  and  the  type  of  developed  and  practical 
wisdom.  The  hand  conmiits  thought  to  paper,  and  imagination  to  marble  and  to 
canvas.  Literature,  science,  and  art  are  as  dependent  on  its  service,  as  are  the 
toils  of  the  labourer,  or  the  fabric  of  the  artizan.  If  manual  toil  is  economized  by 
machinery,  still  man's  hand  is  essential  for  the  construction  of  the  machine,  and 
for  its  subsequent  control,  so  that  the  hand  is  the  symbol  and  the  instrument  of  all 
the  arts  of  human  life.  We  can,  therefore,  scarcely  refrain  from  the  thought  that 
that  "  withered  hand  "  in  the  synagogue  was  a  type  of  uselessuess  and  feebleness; 
and  that  "  right  hand,"  as  St.  Luke  describes  it,  robbed  of  its  nourishment, 
hanging  helplessly  in  a  sling,  was  a  picture  of  whatever  deprives  a  man  of  the 
power  of  holy  work,  and  renders  him  an  encumbrance,  if  not  a  mischief,  in  God'i 
great  kingdonu     (H,  R,  Reynolds,  B.A,) 

Ver.  6.  Being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts. — The  anger  of  Christ  .•— 
I.  But  is  anger  a  passion  which  it  was  bight  fob  Chbist  to  show  and  to  feel  f 
And  if  it  were  right  for  Christ,  is  it  equally  right  for  us  ?  The  answer  to  the  first 
question  is  simple  enough.  As  the  Holy  One,  the  very  presence  of  evil  must  be 
abhorrent  to  Him.  He  may  be  reconciled  to  the  sinner,  but  He  can  never  be 
reconciled  to  sin.  His  whole  nature  revolts  from  the  evil  thing.  It  was  not  then 
the  mere  ebullition  of  passion.  It  was  not  a  sudden  outburst  of  rage.  It  was 
righteous  wrath.  It  was  the  emotion  which  stirred  His  whole  being,  just  because 
sin  is  the  utterly  opposite  of  Himselt  The  trained  eye  is  offended  with  that  which 
is  distorted  and  ugly ;  the  trained  ear  is  pained  beyond  expression  with  that  which 
violates  the  very  elements  of  harmony ;  and  the  perfect  heart  loathes  and  cannot 
but  be  angry  with  sin.  Can  there  be  any  doubt  that  Christ's  anger  with  sin  in 
these  men  also  glanced  at  their  relations  with  other  men  ?  "  No  man  liveth  unto 
himself."  He  was  angry  at  the  blighting  influence  of  the  men's  lives.  Yet  there 
was  no  sin  in  Christ's  anger,  although  Christ  was  angry  with  sin.  While  His  anger 
was  strong  His  pity  was  yet  Divine.  He  was  sorrowful  at  the  thought  of  what  it 
all  meant,  and  would  yet  Himself  rescue  them  from  the  snare.  Anger  and  grief 
were  blent  together  in  the  same  mind,  just  because  in  His  mind  there  was  perfect 
holiness,  and  there  was  perfect  love ;  for  it  is  not  the  stirring  and  agitation  of 
the  waters  that  troubles  and  defiles  them,  but  the  sediment  at  the  bottom.  Where 
there  is  no  sediment,  mere  agitation  will  not  create  impurity.  There  was  none  in 
Christ.  His  anger  was  the  auger  of  a  holy  Being  at  sin,  at  the  devil's  corruption  of 
God's  creature.  His  grief  was  for  man,  God's  offspring.  He  hated  the  thing  which 
alienated  the  sons  from  the  Father.  The  anger  may  well  make  us  tremble,  but 
should  not  the  pity  make  us  trust  ?  II.  If  it  were  right  in  Christ  to  be  akgrt 
with  sin,  is  it  equally  bight  and  becoming  in  us  ?  We  are  always  right  in  being 
angry  with  sin.  But  just  here  is  the  difficulty.  We  are  angry  not  so  much  at  sin 
as  at  something  in  it  which  affects  and  inconveniences  us.  It  is  not  that  which  is 
opposed  to  the  holy  law  of  God  which  most  commonly  makes  us  angry,  but  that 
which  brings  us  some  petty  discomfort  and  trouble.  We  see  how  sin  injures  others. 
Purity  will  bring  its  own  anger.  Eemember,  however,  that  anger  with  sin  is  not 
something  permitted  ;  it  is  an  emotion  demanded.  "  Ye  that  love  the  Lord,  hate 
evil."  But  our  anger  must  be  interblent  with  pity.  Christ  sought  to  give  these 
hard-hearted  men  another  chance.  He  did  not  permit  them  to  hinder  His  work. 
He  would  have  won  them  if  only  they  would  have  opened  their  hearts  to  the  truth. 
It  is  Christ's  great  love  alone  which  can  fiU  our  souls  with  unwearied  compassion 
for  sinners.  Beware,  then,  of  thinking  that  anger  with  sin  is  enough.  It  is  but 
one-half  of  our  work.  Pity  is  the  other  half.  {J,  J.  Ooadby.)  Anger  against 
nn  blended  with  pity : — It  should  be  so  trained  in  us  by  our  docile  obedience  to 
Christ,  that  sin  should  always,  and  upon  the  instant,  fire  the  righteous  indignation 


CHAP,  m.]  ST.  MABK.  101 

of  our  hearts.    It  is  not  to  be  like  that  anger  which  one  of  the  ancients  describes 
as  the  fire  of  straw,  quickly  blazing  up,  and  as  quickly  extinguished.     It  is  rather 
to  become  an  unquenchable  fire.    The  other  half  of  our  duty  is  equally  binding — 
that  we  pity  the  sinner,  and  do  our  best  to  free  him  from  his  thraldom.     It  is  here 
that  so  much  yet  needs  to  be  done.    One  may  cheaply  earn,  to  our  own  satisfaction, 
a  passing  praise  for  righteousness,  by  anger  against  sin ;  but  the  best  proof  that  it 
is  the  hateful  thing  to  us  which  we  proclaim  it  to  be,  is  this,  the  efforts  we  make  to  get 
rid  of  it,  the  sacrifices  we  cheerfully  bear  to  snatch  men  from  its  bondage,  and  the 
earnestness  and  persistence  of  our  endeavours  to  secure  their  freedom.     {Ibid.) 
Rules  to  be  observed,  that  our  anger  against  sin  may  be  good  and  warrantable  : — 1. 
We  must  not  be  too  hasty  and  sudden  in  giving  way  to  our  anger,  without  duly 
considering  that  there  is  just  cause  for  it.     2.  We  must  distinguish  between  the 
offence  done  against  God  and  any  personal  indignity  we  may  have  suffered.    When 
these  two  are  combined,   as  often  happens,  our  anger  must  be  directed  chiefly 
against  the  sin ;  the  offence  against  ourselves  we  must  forgive.     3.  Our  anger  must 
be  properly  proportioned,  according  to  the  degree  of  sin.    4.  We  must  be  impartial, 
being  displeased  at  sin  wherever  and  in  whomsoever  we  find  it ;  as  well  at  our  own 
sins,  as  at  the  sins  of  others ;  as  well  at  the  faults  of  friends  as  of  enemies.    5.  Our 
anger  must  be  joined  with  grief  for  the  person  against  whose  sin  we  are  offended. 
6.  Our  anger  against  the  sin  must  be  joined  with  love  to  the  sinner,  making  us 
willing  and  desirous  to  do  him  any  good  we  can.     (G.  Fetter.)        Christ's  anger 
not  like  ours : — There  was  in  Christ  real  anger,  sorrow,  and  the  rest  of  the  passions 
and  affections  as  they  exist  in  other  men,  only  subject  to  reason.     Wherefore  anger 
was  in  Him  a  whetstone  of  virtue.    In  us  (says  F.  Lucas)  anger  is  a  passion  ;  in 
Christ  it  was,  as  it  were,  an  action.    It  arises  spontaneously  in  us ;  by  Christ  it  was 
stirred  up  in  Himself.    When  it  has  arisen  in  us  it  disturbs  the  other  faculties  of 
the  body  and  mind,  nor  can  it  be  repressed  at  our  own  pleasure ;  but  when  stirred 
up  in  Christ  it  acts  as  He  wills  it  to  act,  it  disturbs  nothing — in  fine,  it  ceases  when 
He  wills  it  to  cease.     {Cornelius  a  Lapide.)        Christ's  indignation : — The  anger 
here  mentioned  was  no  uneasy  passion,  but  an  excess  of  generous  grief  occasioned 
by  their  obstinate  stupidity  and  blindness.     From  this  passage  the  following  con- 
clusions may  be  drawn:  1.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian  to  sorrow  not  only  for  his 
own  sins,  but  also  to  be  grieved  for  the  sins  of  others.    2.  All  anger  is  not  to  be 
considered  sinful.    3.  He  does  not  bear  the  image  of  Christ,  but  rather  that  of  Satan, 
who  can  either  behold  with  indifference  the  wickedness  of  others,  or  rejoice  in  it.    4. 
Nothing  is  more  wretched  than  an  obdurate  heart,  since  it  caused  Him,  who  is  the 
source  of  all  true  joy,  to  be  filled  with  grief  in  beholding  it.    5.  Our  indignation 
against  wickedness  must  be  tempered  by  compassion  for  the  persons  of  the  wicked. 
{T.  H.  Home,  D.D.)        The  disposition  of  a  wise  minister: — This  conduct  and 
these  dispositions  of  Christ  ought  to  be  imitated  by  a  wise  minister.      1.  He 
ought  to  have  a  holy  indignation  against  those  who,  out  of  envy,  oppose  their  own 
conversion.    2.  A  real  affliction  of  heart  on  account  of  their  blindness.    3.  A  chari- 
table and  constant  application  to  those  whom  God  sends  to  him,  notwithstanding 
all  contradiction.    4.  He  must  incite  them  to  lift  up,  and  stretch  forth,  their  hands 
toward  God,  in  order  to   pray  to  Him  ;  toward  the  poor,  to  relieve  them ;  and 
toward  their  enemies,  to  be  reconciled  to  them.    {Quesnel.)      Hardness  of  heart  :— 
U.  Let  us  show  what  is  meant  by  hardness  of  heart.     A  hard-hearted  man,  in 
the  current  use  of  language,  means  a  man  void  of  humanity ;  a  man  of  cruel  habits. 
In  the  Bible  it  is  a  compound  of  pride,  perverseness,  presumption,  and  obstinacy. 
It  is  said  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  "that  when  his  heart  was  lifted  up,  and  his  mind 
hardened  in  pridfl,  he  was  deposed  from  his  kingly  throne,  and  they  took  away  his 
glory  from  him."     JI.  The  causes  of  hardness  of  heart.     1.  By  neglecting  the 
word  and  ordinances  of  God.     There  is  a  salutary  power  in  Divine  truth  of  which 
it  is  not  easy  to  give  adequate  ideas  (Psa.  Ixxxi.  11,  12).    2.  By  our  slighting  and 
despising  the  corrective  dispensations  of  Providence.    Wlr^n  painful  events  do  not 
rouse  to  seriousness,  and  fiery  trials  do  not  melt  to  tenderness,  we  generally  see 
increased  levity  and  obstinacy.    3.  By  cherishing  false  opinions  in  religion.     4.  By 
persisting  in  any  known  course  of  sin  (Deut  xxix.  10)-    HL  The  awful  conse- 
quences OF  hardness  of  heart.     1.  It  provokes  God  to  leave  men  to  their  own 
errors,  base  passions,  and  inveterate  passions.    2.  It  involves  men  in  utter  and  irre- 
trievable ruin.  •*  He  that  being  often  reproved,  harden^th  his  neck,  shall  suddenly 
be  destroyed,  and  tiiat  without  remedy."    Learn :  1.  How  much  guilt  there  is  in 
hardness  of  heart.     2.  Take  the  warnings  of  Scripture  against  hardness  of  heart, 
8.  Take  those  measures  which  are  absolutely  necessary  to  guard  you  against  ha*-*^! 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOIi.  LCflAP.  ui. 

neef  of  heart.  {J.  TJwmton.)  Hardness  of  heart : — I.  Thb  heabt — figuratively  tb« 
Beat  of  feeing,  or  affection.  II.  It  is  said  to  be  tbndbb  when  it  is  easily  a£fected  by  the 
Bufferings  of  others ;  by  our  own  sin  and  danger ;  by  the  love  and  commands  of  God — 
when  we  are  easily  made  to  feel  on  the  great  subjects  pertaining  to  our  interest 
(Ezek.  xi.  19,  20).  lU.  It  is  habd  when  nothing  moves  it ;  when  a  man  is  alike  insen- 
sible to  the  sufferings  of  others,  the  dangers  of  his  own  condition,  and  the  commands, 
the  love,  and  the  thieatenings  of  God.  It  is  most  tender  in  youth.  It  is  made  hard 
by  indiilgence  in  sin ;  by  long  resisting  the  offers  of  salvation.  Hence  the  most 
favourable  period  for  securing  an  interest  in  Christ,  or  for  becoming  a  Christian,  is 
in  youth — the  first,  the  tenderest,  and  the  best  days  of  life.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.) 
Hardness  of  the  heart : — Stones  are  charged  with  the  worst  species  of  hardness — 
"  as  stubborn  as  a  stone ;  *'  and  yet  the  hardest  stones  submit  to  be  smoothed  and 
rounded  under  the  soft  Miction  of  water.  Ask  the  myriads  of  stones  on  the  sea- 
shore what  has  become  of  all  their  angles,  once  so  sharp,  and  of  the  roughness  and 
unoouthness  of  their  whole  appearance.  Their  simple  reply  is,  "Water  wrought 
witii  us ;  nothing  but  water,  and  none  of  us  resisted."  If  they  yield  to  be  fashioned 
by  the  water,  and  you  do  not  yield  to  be  fashioned  by  God,  what  wonder  if  the  very 
stones  cry  out  against  you  ?  {Pulsford's  "  Quiet  Hours.^*)  Hardness  of  heart : — 
In  that  Qirist  mourned  in  Himself  for  this  hardness  of  their  hearts,  we  may  learn 
that  it  is  a  most  fearful  and  grievous  sin,  and  to  be  greatly  lamented  in  whomso- 
ever it  is  found.  It  is  that  sin  whereby  the  heart  of  man  is  so  rooted  and  settled 
in  the  corruption  of  sin,  that  it  is  hardly  or  not  at  all  withdravra  or  reclaimed  from 
it  by  any  good  means  that  are  used  to  that  end.  Two  kinds  are  to  be  distinguished. 
I.  When  tile  obstinacy  and  perverseness  of  the  heart  is  in  some  measure  felt  and 
perceived  by  those  in  whom  it  is,  and  also  lamented  and  bewailed  and  resisted. 
This  kind  of  hardness  may  be,  and  is,  found  more  or  less  in  the  best  saints  and 
children  of  God  (Mark  vi.  52 ;  xvi.  14).  II.  That  hardness  which  either  is  not 
felt  at  all,  or,  if  felt,  is  not  resisted.  This  is  found  only  in  wicked  men.  It  is  a 
feurful  and  dangerous  sin ;  for — 1.  It  keeps  out  repentance,  which  is  the  remedy  for 
sin.  2.  God  often  punishes  other  heinous  sins  with  this  sin  (Kom.  i.  28).  3.  God 
also  punishes  this  sin  with  other  sins  (Eph.  iv.  18).  4.  In  the  Bible  we  find  fearful 
threatenings  against  this  sin  (Deut.  xxix.  19) ;  Eom.  ii.  6).  (G.  Petter.)  Signs 
whereby  men  may  know  whether  their  hearts  are  hardened: — 1.  If  they  are  not 
moved  to  repentance  and  true  humiliation  for  sin,  by  seeing  or  hearing  of  the  judg- 
ments of  God  inflicted  on  themselves  or  others ;  or  if  they  are  a  little  moved  for  the 
time,  yet  afterwards  grow  as  bad  or  worse  than  before.  2.  If  the  mercies  of  God, 
shown  to  themselves  and  others,  do  not  affect  them  and  persuade  their  hearts  to  turn 
to  Gk)d  (Kom.  ii.  4).  3.  If  the  word  preached  fail  to  humble  them  in  the  sight  of 
God ;  but  the  more  the  hammer  of  the  Word  beats  on  their  hearts,  the  harder  they 
become,  like  the  smith's  anvil.  These  are  all  evident  signs  of  great  hardness  of 
heart,  in  whomsoever  they  are  found.  And  it  is  fearful  to  think  how  many  there 
are  of  this  rank  and  number.  Let  them  consider  how  fearful  their  case  is,  and  fear 
to  continue  in  it.  Let  them  be  humbled  for  it,  and  lament  it.  (Ibid.)  Remedies 
for  hard'heartedness : — I.  Pray  earnestly  to  God  to  soften  our  hearts  by  the  work 
of  His  Spirit,  to  take  away  our  stony  hearts  and  to  give  us  hearts  of  flesh.  He  only 
is  able  to  do  it,  and  He  has  promised  to  do  it  if  we  carefully  use  the  means  (Ezek, 
xxxvi.  26).  II.  Be  diligent  and  constant  in  hearing  the  Word  of  God.  This  is  the 
hammer  which  will  break  the  stone ;  the  fire  to  melt  and  thaw  the  heart  frozen  in 
sin.  ni.  Meditate  much  and  often  upon  God's  infinite  and  unspeakable  mercy  to- 
ward penitent  sinners  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6).  lY.  Meditate  seriously  upon  the  bitter 
sufferings  of  Christ.  It  is  said  that  tne  blood  of  a  goat,  while  it  is  warm,  will 
break  the  hardest  adamant ;  so  the  blood  of  Christ,  apprehended  by  faith,  and  applied 
to  the  conscience,  will  break  the  hardest  heart  in  pieces,  with  godly  sorrow  for  sin. 
V.  We  are  to  use  Christian  admonitions  and  exhortations  one  to  another :  if  we  see 
others  fall  into  any  sin,  point  it  out  to  them  in  a  loving  manner,  and  beseech  them 
to  repent  of  it ;  and  if  others  admonish  and  exhort  us,  let  us  hearken  to  it.  VI.  Be 
careful  to  avoid  the  causes  of  hardness  of  heart ;  viz. :  1.  Habitual  sin ;  for,  as  a 
way  or  path,  the  more  it  is  trodden  and  trampled  upon,  the  harder  it  gets,  so  the 
more  we  inure  ourselves  to  the  practice  of  any  sin,  the  harder  our  hearts  will  grow. 
It  is  said  of  Mithridates,  that  through  the  custom  of  drinking  poison,  he  became  so 
used  to  it  that  he  drank  it  without  danger ;  so  the  wicked,  by  habitual  indulgence 
in  Bwearing,  uncleanness,  <fec.,  make  these  sins  so  familiar  to  them,  that  they  can 
swallow  them  without  any  remorse  of  conscience.  2.  Take  heed  of  sinning  againet 
knowledge  and  the  light  cf  conscience.     3.  Guard  against  negligence  and  cotd- 


«HAP.  m.j  ST.  MARK.  iM 

neas  in  religious  exercises,  such  as  prayer,  hearing  and  reading  the  Word,  Aa. 
If  we  either  begin  to  omit,  or  else  carelessly  to  perform  these  duties,  by  which  our 
hearts  should  be  daily  softened  and  kept  tender,  then  by  little  and  little  we  shall  be- 
come dangerously  hardened.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  6.  How  they  might  destroy  Him.— T^i*  meannets,  evil,  and  tinfulne»$  of 
hatred  : — I.  The  meanness  of  haxbed  is  exhibited  in  the  conduct  of  the  Pharisees. 
1.  They  professed  to  be  peculiarly  holy  and  righteous  men.  But  here,  on  the  Sab- 
bath, in  the  synagogue,  they  watched  Jesus,  only  that  they  might  bring  an  accusa- 
tion against  Him.  2.  They  charged  the  Herodians  with  being  traitors  to  their 
countr>'.  Yet  now,  in  order  to  accomplish  their  murderous  purpose  on  Jesus,  they 
are  willing  to  join  hands  with  them.  II.  The  evil  of  hatred  is  here  seen.  1.  Its 
evil  effects  upon  themselves.  They  grew  more  and  more  bitter  towards  Jesus,  and 
their  hearts  and  consciences  more  and  more  seared.  2.  Its  evil  efifects  upon  society. 
They  ultimately  induced  the  people  in  a  fit  of  madness  to  demand  the  murder  of 
Jesus.  III.  The  sinfulness  of  hatred.  1.  The  Bible  denounces  it  as  murder 
(1  John  iii.  15).  2.  It  is  inconsistent  with  a  state  of  grace  (1  John  iii.  14 ;  iv.  8). 
(D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Sin  breeds  sin : — The  Pharisees  having  before  harboured 
malice  and  hatred  in  their  hearts,  now  show  it  by  seeking  Christ's  death.  From 
this  we  may  observe  the  policy  of  Satan,  tempting  and  drawing  men  to  the  practice 
of  sin  by  certain  steps  and  degrees — first  to  lesser  sins,  and  then  to  greater  and 
more  heinous  ones.  First  the  heart  is  drawn  away  and  enticed  by  some  sinful  ob- 
ject :  then  lust  conceives,  i.e.,  consent  is  given  to  the  sin  in  heart:  then  this  inward 
consent  brings  forth  actual  sin :  nor  does  the  sinner  stay  here,  but  proceeds  to  the 
finishing  or  perfecting  of  sin,  which  is  done  by  custom  and  continuance  in  it.  This 
should  teach  us  a  point  of  spiritual  wisdom,  viz.,  to  resist  sin  in  the  first  begin- 
nings of  it,  before  we  proceed  far  in  it.  Withstand  the  first  motions  of  sin  arising 
in  the  heart,  or  suggested  by  Satan ;  strive  and  pray  against  them  at  first ;  and 
labour  at  the  very  first  to  cast  them  out  of  the  heart  and  mind,  and  not  to  suffer 
them  to  lodge  or  take  possession  there.  Satan  and  sin  are  most  easily  resisted  at  first ; 
but  if  either  of  them  get  hold  in  us,  it  will  be  very  hard  afterwards  to  dispossess  them! 
Be  wise,  therefore,  to  resist  and  keep  them  out  betimes.  The  only  way  to  be  kept 
from  actual  committing  of  gross  sins  is  to  withstand  the  first  motions  of  those  sins. 
The  only  way  to  be  kept  from  the  fearful  sin  of  actual  murder  is,  to  guard  against  yield- 
ing to  unadvised  anger,  and  especially  to  take  care  not  to  harbour  malice  and  rancour 
in  our  hearts  against  such  as  ^sTong  us.  These  lower  degrees  of  murder  do  often  make 
way  to  the  highest  degree  of  that  bloody  sin ;  therefore,  as  thou  wouldst  be  pre- 
vented from  falling  into  the  latter,  beware  of  giving  way  to  tjie  former.  Once  give 
way  to  the  first  occasions  and  beginnings  of  any  sin,  and  it,  is  a  thousand  to  one  but 
thou  wilt  proceed  further  in  it ;  and  the  further  thou  goest  on  in  it,  the  worse  and 
the  harder  thou  wilt  find  the  return  by  repentance ;  therefore  resist  it  betimes.  We 
mast  deal  with  sin,  if  we  would  mortify  it  in  ourselves,  as  we  do  with  venomous 
creatures  such  as  adders  or  snakes ;  we  must  kill  the  young  brood.  If  we  could 
practise  but  this  one  point  of  resisting  the  first  beginnings  of  sin  in  ourselves,  how 
profitable  would  it  be.  How  many  dangerous  sins  might  we  be  kept  from  by  this 
means.  And  the  not  practising  of  this  has  been  the  cause  of  the  fearful  falls  of 
many  into  most  grievous  sins.  If  our  first  parents,  and  David,  Peter,  Judas,  had 
resisted  the  beginnings  of  those  sins  into  which  they  fell,  they  had  not  fallen  into 
them  so  dangerously  as  they  did.  Let  us  therefore  be  warned  by  their  harms,  and 
beware  of  giving  way  to  the  first  occasions  and  beginnings  of  any  sin,  lest  if  we  yield 
to  them,  the  devil  bring  us  by  degrees  to  the  highest  pitch  of  that  sin.  {G.  Fetter.) 
Hatred  of  Christ : — A  generous  nature  would  have  hoped  for  some  other  result  than 
is  here  described ;  that  on  reflection  they  would  mark  the  love,  the  omnipotence, 
the  courage  and  the  tenderness  of  Christ.  Marking  these  things  they  might  have 
learned  some  more  excellent  way  than  that  bondage  of  scrupulous  forms  under 
which  they  groaned.  But,  alas  I  theyjonly  feel  their  discomfiture— not  the  Saviour's 
greatness  ;  the  wound  given  to  their  pride — not  the  lesson  given  to  their  conscience. 
All  His  greatness  seems  to  them  a  reason  only  for  making  their  efforts  to  suppress 
Him  more  rigorous.  And  from  the  gracious  teaching  and  the  wondrous  works  of 
the  Saviour  they  gather  only  harm  and  hatred.  How  true  it  is  that  "the  carnal 
miiid  is  enmity  against  God."  There  is  in  all  of  us  something  which,  if  not 
checked,  will  grow  into  hatred  of  our  Saviour.  Our  envy  will  make  us  dislike  His 
goodness ;  our  pride,  His  authority ;  our  evil,  the  purity  of  His  precepts ;  while 
our  indolence  will  make  us  dislike  ELis  very  love,  because  of  the  obligations  under 
which  it  lays  us.     (B.  Olover.) 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  m. 

Vers.  7,  8.  Came  unto  Him. — A  powerful  reason  for  coming  to  Christ  : — I.  Tna 
ATTRACTION.  They  had  heard  wath  somewhat  of  a  believing  ear.  They  drew  from 
what  they  heard  an  argument  of  hope.  No  doubt  they  were  partly  urged  to  come 
to  Him  by  their  own  sad  condition.  They  also  perceived  that  Jesus  was  able  to 
meet  their  case.  II.  The  gatherino.  Hearing  did  not  content  them.  They  did 
not  wait  until  Jesus  came  to  them.  These  people  did  not  stop  at  His  disciples. 
These  people  who  came  to  Jesus  in  such  crowds  must  have  left  their  business.  Many 
of  them  came  from  a  great  distance.  They  came  with  all  their  ailments  about 
them.  III.  The  result.  Not  one  was  ever  repulsed.  All  were  cured.  The 
attraction,  therefore,  grew.  Therefore,  sinners  should  come  because — (a)  Jesus' 
name  invites  them ;  (b)  His  power  encourages  them ;  (c)  His  character  should 
allure  tbem ;  (d)  His  preparations  should  compel  them.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.) 
Christ  accepted  by  some  if  hated  by  others :  Christian  effort  not  all  in  vain : — 
All  the  world  is  not  bound  up  in  a  Pharisee's  phylactery,  nor  held  in  chains  by 
a  philosopher's  new  fancy.  If  some  will  not  have  the  Saviour,  others  will ;  God's 
eternal  purpose  will  stand,  and  the  kingdom  of  His  anointed  will  come.  (Ibid.) 
Flowers  after  showers : — I  would  have  you  count  upon  opposition,  and  regard  it  as 
a  token  of  comin;^  blessing.  Dread  not  the  black  cloud,  it  does  but  prognosticate  a 
shower.  March  may  howl  and  bluster  ;  April  may  damp  all  things  with  its  rains, 
but  the  May  flowers  and  the  autumn's  harvest  of  varied  fruits  will  come,  and  come 
by  this  very  means.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  9.  A  small  ship. — Christ  was  always  willing  to  accept  service : — He  borrowed 
a  boat,  an  ass,  a  grave.  He  accepted  a  draught  of  water  from  a  well,  a  few  fishes 
from  a  net,  and  the  money  of  those  women  who  ministered  unto  Him.  He  who 
loves  the  Saviour  wUl  be  surprised  to  find  how  many  things  there  are  that  He  can 
consecrate  and  that  Christ  can  use.  Some  persons  cannot  preach  unless  they  have 
a  proper  pulpit,  their  priestly  robe,  organ,  choir,  and  other  things  ;  but  Christ  is  at 
home  anywhere,  and  can  preach  afloat  as  well  as  in  the  synagogue.  Note  this 
characteristic  of  Christ.  The  late  Bishop  Selwyn,  who  was  a  devoted  missionary 
bishop  in  New  Zealand,  said  that  all  a  missionary  wanted  in  going  about  was  a 
blanket  and  a  frying  pan.  He  might  have  gathered  that  homely  ease  from  the 
example  of  the  great  Master  Himself.    (R,  Glover.) 

Ver.  10.  They  pressed  upon  Him  for  to  touch  Him. — Crowding  to  touch  the 
Saviour : — I.  The  PARAiiLEL  between  the  present  times  and  those  of  the  tsxt. 
Jesus  had  healed  many.  These  have  been  thoroughly  and  effectually  restored.  So 
far  the  parallel  exists,  but  here  is  the  marvel — that  those  who  know  this  do  not 
throng  to  Christ  to  obtain  the  self-same  blessing.  II.  What  are  the  sins  which 
PREVENT  the  CARRYING  OUT  OP  THIS  PARALLEL?  Ignorance.  Insensibility.  Indif- 
ference. Procrastination.  They  really  love  the  disease.  III.  The  grace  which 
INVITES  us  TO  COMPLETE  THE  PARALLEL  OF  THE  TEXT.  You  are  Spared  in  this 
world.  Spared  to  hear  the  gospel.  IV.  Two  cautions  which  seem  to  be  needful. 
Never  be  content  with  merely  pressing  upon  Christ.  Do  not  be  content  with 
touching  them  who  are  healed.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  desire  for  healing  an 
instinct  of  humanity  .'—As  many  as  had  plagues  came  to  Jesus,  that  they  might 
touch  Him  and  be  healed.  Tell  of  the  annual  pilgrimages  to  the  shrine  of  Thomas 
d,  Becket  at  Canterbury,  where  thousands  gathered  from  all  parts  of  England, 
believing  that  their  needs  could  be  supplied  and  their  diseases  healed  at  the  shrine 
of  the  saint.  It  is  their  needs  that  to-day  take  so  many  to  Lourdes  and  Knock, 
Two  centuries  ago — and  the  superstition  is  not  dead  yet — it  was  believed  that  the 
touch  of  a  king  could  heal  a  certain  painful  disorder ;  how  eagerly  people  sought 
for  th«)t  touch  is  peen  in  the  case  of  Charles  II.  of  England,  who,  in  his  reign, 
touched  over  a  hundred  thousand  persons  for  the  healing  of  the  ••  king's  evil." 
During  the  recent  famines  in  India  and  in  Turkey,  the  houses  of  the  missionaries 
were  besieged  by  crowds  of  hungry  people  seeking  relief.  Wheu  a  medical 
missionary  first  appears  in  a  new  district,  and  his  mission  is  made  known  to  the 
people,  the  sick  are  brought  to  him  from  all  the  country  around.  It  was  therefore 
one  of  the  commonest  instincts  of  humanity  that  brought  the  needy  to  Jesus,  in 
whom  only  they  could  find  all  that  they  sought. 

Ver.  11.  And  unclean  spirits,  when  they  saw  Him,  fell  down  before  Him.— 
Christ's  supremacy  over  evil  spirits  ; — Whence  the  commotion  in  the  intelligent 
oniyerse  when  the  Saviour  entered  on  His  puhUc  ministry  ?    The  diseased  crowded 


CHAP,  ni.]  ST,  MARK,  105 

around  Him  to  be  healed ;  the  teachable  to  hear  the  words  of  celestial  wisdom ; 
the  curious  to  witness  the  stupendous  miracles ;  and  the  captious  that  they  might 
entangle  Him  in  His  talk.  Nor  was  His  audience  composed  exclusively  of  men. 
Heaven  and  hell  waited  on  His  steps.  The  Father  spake  of  Him  from  the  excellent 
glory  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  upon  Him ;  sinless  angels  followed  in  His  train  ; 
and  the  demons  of  the  abyss  pronounced  His  eulogium,  and  deprecated  His  wrath. 
Why  this  mighty  congregation  streaming  from  the  remotest  points  of  the  universe 
to  meet  Him  ?  On  the  principle,  doubtless,  that  where  the  King  is,  there  is  the 
Court.  Every  type  of  moral  being  surrounded  our  Lord.  I.  Impiety  abashed  in 
THE  PRESENCE  OF  HOLINESS.  That  devils  are  conscious  of  their  own  character, 
and  that  they  are  correct  judges  of  the  character  of  other  beings,  must  be  admitted 
on  the  simple  ground  of  their  intelligence.  The  consciousness  of  their  awful 
degradation  remains  in  unblunted  keenness  ;  and  it  cowers  in  the  presence  of  moral 
purity.  Why  do  Ananias  and  Sapphira  fall  dead  beneath  the  calm  questions  of 
the  apostle  ?  It  is  falsehood  slain  by  the  glittering  sword  of  truth.  And  why  does 
Felix  tremble  when  Paul,  the  prisoner,  reasons  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and 
judgment  to  come  ?  No  external  force  is  brought  to  bear  upon  the  governor,  no 
visible  sword  hangs  over  his  head ;  and  yet  he  trembles ;  why  ?  He  is  shaken  like 
a  leaf  in  the  hurricane,  by  an  invisible  host  of  memories  more  powerful  far  than  a 
legion  of  visible  foes.  Evil  confesses  the  superiority  of  good ;  vice  crowns  virtue 
with  a  lasting  garland ;  sin  declares  holiness  to  be  infinitely  above  it.     H.  Divine 

TBUTH  MAT  BE  INTELLECTUALLY  BECOQNIZED  WITHOUT  THE  ACCOJttPANlMENT  OF  SAL- 
VATION. It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  vindicate  the  truth  against  all  opponents  with- 
out embracing  it ;  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  delivered  to  the  saints  without 
adopting  it ;  to  construct  an  elaborate  system  of  divinity  without  fellowship  with 
the  Saviour ;  and  to  preach  the  gospel  in  eloquent  language  without  either  part  or 
lot  in  the  matter.  III.  Here  are  devils  acknowledging  the  supremacy  of  the  Son 
OF  God  over  them.  The  supremacy  of  the  Son  of  God,  as  such,  over  all  creatures, 
without  respect  to  their  moral  character,  or  their  position  in  the  scale  of  being, 
must,  of  course,  be  freely  admitted.  But  this  is  not  the  point  here ;  for  first,  there 
is  the  acknowledgment  of  this  supremacy ;  and  second,  it  ie  the  Son  of  God  in  His 
character  of  the  Messiah,  whose  supremacy  they  acknowledge.  They  had  the 
strongest  reasons  for  not  looking  on  the  outward  appearance  but  on  tiie  reality. 
They  knew  Him,  and  believed,  and  confessed,  and  ♦*  trembled ! "  They  worshipped, 
but  it  was  in  demon  fashion,  the  worship  of  terror.  This  confession  of  supremacy, 
as  uttered  by  evil  spirits,  means  this:  "We  are  intruders  and  impostors,  having  no 
right  here.  This  is  Thy  world.  By  falsehood  have  we  gained  our  position  here, 
afflicting  the  bodies,  maddening  the  minds,  and  ruining  the  souls  of  men.  We  know 
our  doom,  and  that  Thou  wilt  pronounce  it ;  but  surely  not  so  soon."  It  was  a 
confession  of  defeat.    Lying  Ups  speak  sublime  truth  for  once.    IV.  He  whose 

SUPREMACY   is  ACKNOWLEDGED   BY  EVIL   SPIRITS  IS  YOUR  FRIEND  AND   SaVIOUR,  IF  YOU 

WILL  ACCEPT  Him  as  such.  Inferences  :  1.  In  the  kingdom  of  grace,  love  is  a 
greater  thing  than  knowledge.  Fallen  spirits  believe  and  tremble ;  worldly  men 
assent  and  are  indifferent  ;  Christians  believe  and  love.  Christ  seeks  our  affection. 
2.  Laying  hold  on  the  Bedeemer's  strength,  you  are  stronger  than  evil  spirits. 
They  are  conquered  foes ;  conquered  by  your  Saviour ;  on  your  account.  In  Christ 
you  have  not  only  righteousness,  but  strength.  3.  Following  the  Eedeemer,  you 
will  be  shortly  where  evil  spirits  cannot  follow  yon.     {W.  Leask,  D.D,) 

Ver.  12.  That  they  should  not  make  Him  known. — The  art  to  conceal  good 
deeds :— It  is  the  art  of  art  to  hide  art,  and  the  glory  of  glory  to  conceal  glory.  It 
is  only  the  Christ  who  can  charge  the  trophies  of  His  healing  power  that  they  should 
not  make  BUm  known.  (L.  Pabner.)  Creation's  glories  concealed : — Many  of  the 
most  glorious  works  of  God  in  creation  are  concealed  from  the  eye  of  man.  Some 
of  the  most  beautiful  forms  in  nature  are  the  shells  in  the  deepest  depths  of  the  sea. 
Nowhere  is  ornament  more  richly  seen  than  iu  the  insects  which  the  most  powerful 
microscopes  enable  only  a  few  to  see  just  ouce  in  their  lives.  Neither  in  nature  nor 
grace  does  the  Lord  parade  His  works  before  the  eyes  of  men.     {Anon.) 

Vers.  13-21.  And  He  ordained  twelve,  that  they  should  be  with  Eim.—ThU 
teas  the  third  stage  in  the  preparation  of  the  disciples  for  the  apostolate : — A  certain 
number  had  been  admitted  at  the  beginning  to  terms  of  intimacy  and  friendship 
with  Jesus.  Then  they  had  left  their  secular  calling  for  a  time  to  attend  upon  EUm. 
And  now  the  final  step  must  be  taken,  and  a  selection  made  of  such  as  would  giv« 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

themselves  wholly  to  the  ^ork,  and  go  no  more  back  to  the  world.  The  twelve 
apostles  are  divided  by  the  evangelists  into  three  groups.  I.  Notice  thb  manifoij> 
VABIETY  BEPRESENTED  AMONO  THEM.  1.  In  character.  Where  in  the  whole  world 
conld  we  find  dispositions  more  diverse  than  in  Peter  and  John — the  one  ardent 
and  impulsive,  the  very  embodiment  of  energy  and  vehemence ;  the  other  quiet  and 
contemplative,  fitted  for  nothing  so  well  as  the  life  of  a  recluse  ?  2.  In  calling. 
What  callings  could  be  more  incongruous  than  those  which  Simon  and  Matthew 
had  respectively  chosen  ?  The  fiery  patriot  could  brook  no  allegiance  to  an  earthly 
ruler,  but  would  do  and  dare  anything  to  resist  the  Koman  claim  to  impose  taxation 
upon  the  people  of  God.  But  his  fellow-apostle  had  degraded  himself,  of  his  own 
free-will,  to  exact  from  his  own  flesh  and  blood  the  obnoxious  tribute.  Yet  such  was 
the  comprehensive  work  which  lay  before  the  ministry  of  the  Church,  that  a  sphere 
was  found  in  it  for  the  ''tax-gatherer  "  no  less  than  the  "tax-hater ; "  fcr  the  Jew 
who  had  sold  his  birthright  as  well  as  for  their  reconcilable  naticnalist.  Jew  and 
Greek,  bond  and  free,  rich  and  poor,  men  of  every  type  and  people,  were  destined 
to  be  embraced  in  the  Catholic  Church ;  and  Jesus  Christ  foreshadowed  the  future 
when  He  welded  together  the  most  discordant  elements  in  that  first  society  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles.  IL  Another  thought  of  scarcely  less  importance  arises  out  of  thb 
BOGiAL  POSITION  FBOM  WHICH  He  MADE  His  CHOICE.  The  Jcwish  Eabbis  estimated  the 
weight  of  their  influence  by  the  rank  or  wealth  or  learning  of  the  pupils  who  sat  at  their 
feet.  The  first  Teacher  of  Christianity  aimed,  on  the  contrary,  at  attracting  the  poorest 
of  men.  It  may  be  urged  that  He  had  no  alternative ;  that  men  in  the  position  of 
Joseph  and  Nicodemus  were  so  reluctant  to  accept  the  call  that,  had  He  waited  for 
their  adherence,  the  apostolic  roll  would  never  have  been  filled  up  in  His  lifetime. 
But  His  choice  of  the  poor  and  despised,  the  ignorant  and  anleamed,  was  based 
upon  a  principle  which  governed  the  whole  of  His  life  on  earth ;  which  selected 
for  His  birthplace  the  manger  of  a  wayside  khan,  for  His  home  a  humble  cottage, 
and  for  His  early  occupation  the  trade  of  an  artizan,  among  a  people  intellectually 
of  the  lowest  type  in  Palestine.  It  was  in  perfect  consistency  with  all  that  had 
gone  before  that  He  should  associate  with  Himself  for  the  work  of  the  ministry  men 
of  the  humblest  rank,  who  probably  knew  little  more  than  their  letters,  and,  judged 
by  a  human  standard,  were  worthless  for  that  unto  which  they  were  called.  ... 
For  the  first  three  centuries  the  progress  of  Christianity  was  a  gradual  triumph  of 
the  lowly  over  the  great,  till,  by  the  irresistible  might  of  its  weakness,  it  shook  the 
world  and  compelled  •*  the  master  of  legions"  to  cast  his  crown  at  the  foot  of  the 
Cross.  Then  was  the  vdsdom  of  His  choice  demonstrated.  (H.  M.  Luekock,  D.D.) 
The  twelve : — 1.  The  sons  of  Jacob  were  twelve.  The  princes  of  the  children  of 
Israel  were  twelve.  The  fountains  of  Elim  were  twelve.  The  stones  in  Aaron's 
breastplate  were  twelve.  The  loaves  of  shewbread  were  twelve.  The  spies  sent 
by  Moses  into  Canaan  were  twelve.  The  stones  of  the  altar  were  twelve.  The 
stones  taken  out  of  Jordan  were  twelve.  The  oxen  which  supported  the  brazen 
Laver  in  the  temple  were  twelve.  The  stars  on  the  crown  of  the  woman  in  the 
Apocalypse  are  twelve.  The  foundations  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  are  twelve. 
The  gates  of  the  celestial  city  are  twelve.  The  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  were  the 
beginning  of  the  Old  Testament  Church :  the  twelve  apostles  were  the  beginning 
of  the  New  Testament  Church.  Hence  both  these  numbers  joined  together  describe 
the  four  and  twenty  elders,  representing  the  entire  Church  in  glory.  2.  We  have 
four  lists  of  the  apostles :  in  Matthew,  in  Mark,  in  Luke,  and  in  the  Acts.  The 
order  in  which  the  names  are  given  is  not  the  same  in  all.  It  has  been  suggested 
that  in  the  Gospels  of  Matthew  and  Luke  they  are  enrolled  chronologically  in  the 
order  of  their  calling :  whereas  in  Mark  and  in  Acts  the  matter  of  personal  in- 
fluence is  made  the  ground  of  that  order  which  places  Peter  always  first  and  Judas 
always  last.  I.  What  were  the  characteristics  of  the  twelve  as  a  body.  1.  They 
were  men  of  good  health.  Mr.  Talmage  says :  *♦  Christ  did  not  want  twelve  invalids 
hanging  about  Him,  complaining  all  th«  time  how  badly  they  felt.  He  leaves  the  deli- 
cate  students  at  Jerusalem  and  Eome  for  their  mothers  and  aunts  to  take  care  of,  and 
goes  down  to  the  sea-shore,  and  out  of  the  toughest  material  makes  an  apostleship. 
The  ministry  need  more  corporeal  vigour  than  any  other  class.  Fine  minds  and 
good  intentions  are  important,  but  there  must  be  physical  force  to  back  them.  The 
intellectual  mill-wheel  may  be  well  built  and  the  grist  good,  but  there  must  be 
enough  flood  in  the  mill-race  to  turn  the  one  and  to  grind  the  other."  And,  yet, 
how  many  invalids  in  the  pulpit  have  been  stars  of  the  first  magnitude  ?  Witness 
Robert  Hall,  McCheyne,  and  Robertson  of  Brighton,  England.  2.  They  were  men 
without  power.    They  had  no  social  or  political  rank.    3.  They  were  laymen.    This 


ifiiLp.  III.]  ST,  MARK.  Vn 

also  iB  significant.  Men  of  ecclesiastical  or  philosophical  influence,  who  are  com- 
mitted  to  the  support  of  a  certain  system  of  truth,  are  not  free  from  prejudice.  In 
the  seventeenth  century  William  Harvey  discovered  the  circulation  of  the  blood — 
a  fact  which  no  sane  man  disputes.  Arid  yet  no  physician  forty  years  of  age  in 
that  day  accepted  Harvey's  discovery.  So  great  is  the  power  of  prejudice  I  These 
laymen,  chosen  by  Christ,  were  imshackled  ecclesiastically  and  philosophically.  It 
appears  unfortunate  that  Martin  Luther  was  an  ecclesiastic.  His  work  had  been 
more  thorough,  but  for  certain  Church  shackles  which  even  his  great  soul  was 
unable  to  shake  off.  Witness  the  Lutheran  Creed  and  the  present  condition  of 
Germany.  4.  They  were  simple  men.  Now,  Mohammed,  for  example,  was  not 
a  simple  man.  He  was  a  dissembler.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  calls  no  man  common  or 
unclean,  -^sop  was  a  slave.  Protagoras  was  a  porter.  Terence  was  a  slave. 
Horace  was  the  son  of  a  slave.  Among  the  poets.  Gay  was  apprentice  to  a  draper 
and  Prior  was  a  tavern  boy.  Pope  was  the  son  of  a  draper,  Keats  of  a  livery-stable 
keeper,  and  Chatterton  of  a  sexton.  Ben  Jonson  worked  for  his  bread  as  a  brick- 
layer. II.  Why  did  the  Lord  choose  apostles  ?  1.  In  order  to  crowd  into  a  brief 
public  ministry  as  much  work  as  possible.  His  public  ministry  was  so  brief,  that 
but  for  the  co-operation  of  the  twelve  He  could  not  have  spoken  all  the  words  of 
wisdom  or  done  all  the  acts  of  mercy  which  crowned  and  crowded  that  eventful  life. 
In  the  great  religious  movement  of  the  last  century  in  England,  John  Wesley  evinced 
a  sagacity  superior  to  that  of  either  Whitefield  or  his  brother  Charles,  in  securing 
co-workers  and  doing  in  general  the  work  of  an  organizer.  AU  great  teachers  have 
done  the  same.  Witness  Socrates,  Peter  the  Hermit,  Luther,  Loyola,  and  Savonarola, 
of  Florence.  2.  In  order  to  provide  testimony  after  His  death.  The  apostles  were  to 
bear  public  witness  of  all  they  saw  and  heard  whilst  remaining  with  Him.  Chris- 
tianity then  is  historic,  and  is  a  system  of  doctrines  resting  upon  facts.  3.  In 
order  to  estabhsh  a  body  of  men  who  should  bear  the  public  seal  of  the  Church, 
viz. :  Miracles.  4.  To  shield,  by  miraculous  power,  feeble  Churches.  {W.  F.  Bishop.) 
The  ministerial  office: — ^Bishops  and  clergy  are  called  to  the  ministry  of  Jesus  Christ — 
1.  In  order  to  work  with  Him,  extend,  complete,  and  continue  His  priesthood  upon 
earth.  2.  To  preach  His  Word,  and  make  known  His  truth,  and  the  mysteries  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  All  ecclesiastical  functions  are  denoted  by  preaching, 
because  this  is  a  principal  duty  of  the  clergy,  and  it  is  by  means  of  the  Word  and 
instruction  that  the  Church  is  established  and  perpetuated.  3.  To  be  the  physicians 
of  souls,  and  apply  themselves  to  heal  their  diseases.  4.  To  wage  war  with  the 
devil,  and  destroy  his  kingdom.  Whoever  looks  upon  the  ministerial  office  as  a 
■tate  of  ease,  and  not  of  continual  labour,  understands  but  very  little  these  words  of 
Christ.  (Qtiesnel.)  Christ  and  His  disciples : — A  superhuman  worker  will  ha/e 
his  own  superhuman  methods.  I.  Christ's  methods.  No  man  would  have  begun 
in  such  a  way.  1.  He  wrote  nothing.  Plato  has  left  us  the  description  of  his 
*'  Ideal  Republic  " — so  men  have  always  done ;  but  the  King  of  the  only  enduring 
kingdom  wrote  only  once — in  the  sand,  and  not  on  parchment.  Seneca  penned  his 
book  on  Morals  for  men  to  ponder ;  but  the  Christ  who  knew  no  sin,  and  whose 
precepts  have  been  planted  in  every  Christian  civilization,  simply  spoke  the  precepts 
which  in  after  years  others  should  write  down.  The  heavenly  worker  wrought  in 
an  unearthly  way.  2.  He  chose  unlettered  men.  When  Carlyle  speaks  and 
Emerson  ponders,  the  world  puts  its  hand  to  its  ear  to  catch  even  the  lowest  spoken 
truths ;  but  it  may  be  that  some  fisherman  coasting  the  shore  of  Solway  Firth,  or 
some  sower  of  seed  on  the  fields  of  Concord,  shall  stand  higher  in  God's  view  than 
even  the  rugged  Scotchman  and  the  honoured  sage  of  America.  The  Saviour  of 
mankind,  the  Hevolutionist  of  the  ages,  the  Son  of  the  Highest  committed  Himself, 
His  power.  His  teachings,  to  twelve  plain  and  hitherto  unbonoured  men,  all  of 
them  common  people,  and  all  of  them  unlearned.  3.  The  character  of  the  twelve. 
Judged  from  a  human  point  of  view,  they  were  certainly  unpromising  men — slow 
of  heart,  dull  of  understanding,  weak  in  action,  and  one  false  at  heart.  But  time 
has  shown  that  Christ  made  no  mistake.  By  so  much  as  His  apostles'  characters 
were  incomplete,  and  in  so  far  as  the  Christian  faith  has  ruled  in  the  earth,  even  so 
His  mysterious  choice  is  vindicated  beyond  cavil.  Upon  them  He  stamped  His  own 
greatness.  11.  The  plan  involved  in  Christ's  methods.  Nothing  Divine  is  ever 
done  by  chance.  (G.  R.  Leavitt.)  The  twelve : — I.  Christ  thought  fit  to  employ 
human  agents  in  tne  promulgation  of  His  religion.  II.  Christ  selected  His  agents 
by  virtue  of  His  own  wisdom  and  authority.  HI.  Christ  chose  His  trusted  apostles 
from  a  lowly  position  of  society.  IV.  Christ  appointed  agents  with  various  gifts, 
qualifications,  and  character.    V.  Christ  recognized  and  employed  the  special  gifts 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra» 

of  His  disciples  in  His  own  service.      VI.  Christ  qualified  these  agents  by  keeping 
them  in  His  own  society  and  beneath  His  own  influence.     VH.  Christ  Himself 
commissioned  and  authorized  these  agents.      1.  To  preach  the  gospel.     2.  To  cast 
out  devils.     {J.  R.  Thomson,  M.A.)         Christ's  choice  of  His  helpers: — The  wholt 
instruction  of  this  story  for  our  use  now  turns  upon  the  word  ** chose;"  for  it 
reveala  the  fact  that  the  sovereignty  of  God  as  well  as  His  wisdom  was  in  the  pro- 
cedure.     So  our  several  lessons  need  only  to  be  stated  in  their  order.    I.  The 
earliest  matter  of  notice  is  this :  Our  Lord's  policy  was  one  op  continuous  becon- 
8TBUCT10N  fob  oub  ENTIRE  FALLEN  HUMANITY,  and  not  merely  an  expedient  for  Hia 
own  convenience.   1.  For  a  purpose,  He  might  have  chosen  death,  instead  of  which 
He  chose  life.    He  could  have  taken  the  best  of  the  race  up  into  the  air  higher  than 
Ararat,  and  held  them  safely,  as  it  were,  outside  of  the  world,  while  He  washed  the 
wicked  earth  beneath  them,  and  then  put  them  back.    He  did  that  once ;  but,  with 
a  rainbow  for  a  sign.  He  said  He  would  never  do  it  again.      He  evidently  planned 
now  to  redeem  binners,  not  to  destroy  them.     2.  For  a  method.  He  might  have 
chosen  a  permanent  incarnation  ;  instead  of  which  He  chose  a  book.     He  was  now 
finding  men  just  to  make  and  perpetuate  the  New  Testament.      Ours  is  a  "  book 
religion,"  as  cavillers  call  it.  Christianity  is  the  Bible,  and  the  Bible  is  Christianity, 
In  this  form  of  procedure  our  Lord  indicated  that  the  chief  of  all  approaches  to  the 
human  conscience  is  through  the  reason,  and  this  He  intended  to  use  for  His  end. 
8.  For  the  instruments,  He  might  have  chosen  angels,  instead  of  which  He  chose 
men.   We  see  that  He  selected  ordinary,  poor,  humble  individuals  from  the  lowliest 
callings.     Hence,  we  admit  they  are  suljject  to  the  same  laws  of  estimate  and  criti- 
cism as  other  men.     Not  even  inspiration  changed  their  peculiar  characteristics  or 
their  natural  temperaments.   4.  For  a  plan,  He  might  have  chosen  unofficial  repre- 
sentatives ;  instead  of  which  He  chose  ordained  officers,  and  organized  a  Church. 
Here,  then,  is  the  inalienable  warrant  for  a  fixed  ministry  in  the  Christian  Church 
through  all  time.     II.  The  second  matter  of  notice  for  ns  now  is,  that  our  Lord's 
selection  of  His  helpers  implied  obeat  vabieties  of  sebvice  m  EVANOELiziNa  thb 
WORLD,  BEQUiBiNa  DiVEBSiTiBS  OF  GIFTS.    1.  Observo  the  significant  number  of  these 
men.    It  was  large,  to  begin  with,  and  exceedingly  wide  in  its  representative  range. 
2.  Observe,  likewise,  the  special  histories  of  these  men.     3.  Observe  that  one  of 
these  men  was  a  treacherous  hypocrite,  known  from  the  beginning  of  his  career. 
III.  The  next  matter  of  notice  in  this  choice  is  that  Jesus  Christ  fixed  the  wise  order 
in  arrangement  that  discipleship  should  in  all  oases  comb  befobb  apostleship. 
1.  These  twelve  men  needed  knowledge  of  the  Divine  purposes.     That  must  be  the 
reason  why  for  so  many  months  they  were  kept  patiently  wandering  alongside  of 
oar  Lord,  as  He  advanced  in  His  public  work.     2.  They  needed  acquaintance  also 
with  human  nature.    They  were  to  deal  with  men,  women,  and  children.    3.  These 
men  needed  the  practical  exercise  of  their  teaching  gifts  under  their  Master's  eye. 
So  we  learn  that  Jesus  arranged  that  they  "  should  be  with  Him,"  before   He 
*'  might  send  them  forth  to  preach  "  (Mark  iii.  14).    4.  They  needed  experience  in 
actual  dealing  with  masses  of  unorganized  peopla.      IV.  Once  more,  it  is  a  matter 
of  notice  in  this  choice  of  helpers,  that  Jesus  showed  how  pbevious  gifts  and  edu- 
cation in  other  wobe  can  all  be  utilized  undeb  the  gospel  plan.     1.  Becall  the 
former  occupations  of  these  men.      2.  Bear  in  mind  with  what  painstaking  Christ 
impressed  on  them  the  one  principle  that  all  success  in  evangelical  work  demands 
immediate  and  entire  consecration  (Luke  v.  11, 28).     8.  Then  see  that  instantly, 
and  ever  afterwards,  their  training  told.     V,  Finally,  it  is  a  matter  of  notice  that 
in  His  choice  of  such  helpers  oub  Lobd  gate  the  best  of  all  counsel  and  examplb 
FOB  EVERY  MAN  WHO  SEEKS  TO  BE  USEFUL  IN  THB  Church  OF  GoD.      1.  Let  Christian 
people  remember  that  the  Divine  purpose,  the  plan  of  procedure,  the  end  to  be 
secured,  the  selection  of  instruments — all  these,  so  finely  illustrated  that  memorable 
morning  beside  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  remain  exactly  the  same,  unchanged  through  the 
ages.    The  conditions  of  effective  working  are  quite  unaltered.  Hence  this  primitive 
wisdom  is  priceless.     2.   Let  the  churches  have  confidence  in  their  own  machinery, 
and  be  content  with  New  Testament  methods  of  evangelization.   There  is  no  neces- 
■ity  for  fresh  excitements,  and  there  is  no  advantage  in  looking  for  them.      3.  Let 
those  who  desire  to  take  up  Christian  endeavour  for  a  life-work  bear  in  mind  that 
training  time  is  by  no  means  for  any  one  lost  time.     4.  Let  the  whole  world  know 
that  what  is  wanted  first  and  last  and  always  is  a  thorough  consecration  of  what 
one  has  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     {C.  S.  Robinson^  D.D.)  Christ's  worker* 

varied : — ^Note  the  variety  of  character  among  the  twelve  chosen.    Every  stone  in  a 
Imllding  is  not  alike,  yet  room  is  found  for  all — each  in  its  own  place.    A  painting 


•HAP.  m.]  ST.  MARK.  109 

if  made  ap  of  many  oolonrs.  Christ  will  find  room  in  His  temple  for  all  who  oome 
to  Blm.  (Anon.)  Ood  employs  little  and  lowly  apostles  : — ^Look  at  yonder  sun. 
Ood  made  it,  and  hnng  it  up  there  in  the  sky  that  it  might  give  light  to  our  world. 
But  the  light  whioh  this  sun  gives  comes  to  us  in  tiny  little  bits,  smaller  than  the 
point  of  the  finest  needle  that  ever  was  made.  They  are  so  small  that  hundreds  o£ 
them  can  rush  right  into  our  eyes,  as  they  are  doing  all  the  time,  and  not  hurt  them 
the  least.  Here  we  see  how  Ood  makes  use  of  little  things,  and  does  a  great  work 
with  them.  And  then  look  at  yonder  ocean.  The  waves  of  that  ocean  are  so 
powerful  that  they  can  break  in  pieces  the  strongest  ships  that  men  have  ever  built. 
And  yet,  when  God  wishes  to  keep  that  mighty  ocean  in  its  place.  He  makes  use  of 
little  grains  of  sand  for  this  purpose.  Here  again  we  see  how  God  employs  little 
things,  and  does  a  great  work  with  them.     And  we  find  God  working  in  this  way 

continually.     Let  us  look  at  one  or  two  illustrations.     What  a  plant  did  : A  little 

plant  was  given  to  a  sick  girl.  Ip  trying  to  take  care  of  it  the  family  made  changes 
in  their  way  of  living  which  added  greatly  to  their  comfort  and  happiness.  First 
they  cleaned  the  window,  that  more  light  might  come  in  to  the  leaves  of  the  plant. 
Then,  when  not  too  cold,  they  opened  the  window,  that  fresh  air  might  help  the 
plant  to  grow ;  and  this  did  the  family  good  as  well  as  the  plant.  Next,  the  clean 
window  made  the  rest  of  the  room  look  so  untidy,  that  they  washed  the  floor,  and 
cleaned  the  walls,  and  arranged  the  furniture  more  neatly.  This  led  the  father  of 
the  family  to  mend  a  broken  chair  or  two,  which  kept  him  at  home  several  even- 
ings. After  this  he  took  to  staying  at  home  with  his  family  in  the  evenings  instead 
of  spending  his  time  at  the  tavern ;  and  the  money  thus  saved  went  to  buy  comforts 
for  them  all.  And  then,  as  their  home  grew  more  pleasant,  the  whole  family  loved 
it  better  than  ever  before,  and  they  grew  healthier  and  happier  with  their  flowers. 
What  a  little  thing  that  plant  was,  and  yet  it  was  God's  apostle  to  that  family  I  It 
did  a  great  work  for  them  in  blessing  them,  and  making  them  happy.  And  that 
was  work  that  an  angel  would  have  been  glad  to  do.     {Dr.  Newton.)  Power  to 

cast  out  devils : — In  China,  both  heathen  and  Christian  agree  in  marking  oft 
certain  cases,  which  occur  not  infrequently,  as  distinctly  cases  of  ♦*  spiritual  pos- 
session." The  Chinese  have  names  for  insanity,  and  for  the  various  forms  of 
nervous  and  mental  disease,  and  they  distinguish  sharply  between  all  these  and 
another  very  different  condition  in  which  the  patient  is  said  to  be  "  possessed  of 
devils."  Miss  Gumming  tells  us  *♦  the  symptoms  are  so  precisely  those  which  were 
thus  described  in  Biblical  times,  that  foreigners,  after  vainly  seeking  for  some 
medical  term  to  express  the  condition  of  the  victim,  are  fain  to  accept  the  Chinese 
solution.  They  find  a  being  apparently  mad,  foaming  at  the  mouth,  tearing  off 
every  shred  of  raiment,  and  wildly  appealing  to  God  to  let  her  (or  him)  alone." 
These  poor  afflicted  ones  are  brought  to  the  Taouist  and  Buddhist  priests,  who 
perform  tedious  and  expensive  exorcisms,  which  are  continued  indeed  until  the 
paroxysm  abates,  and  are  renewed  after  the  same  fashion  when  it  returns.  Miss 
Gumming  says,  **  In  a  considerable  number  of  cases  such  as  these,  the  native 
Christians  have  been  appealed  to  by  their  heathen  neighbours  to  see  whether  they 
«oald  do  anything  to  help  them ;  and  these,  remembering  how  of  old  those  who  had 
faith  in  the  Master  were  enabled  to  *  cast  out  the  spirits  by  His  word,'  have  sought 
to  follow  in  their  wake, and,  taking  up  their  position  beside  'him  that  was  grievously 
tormented  with  a  devil,'  have  thus  wrestled  in  prayer  with  passionate  earnestness, 
pleading  that  the  true  God  would  reveal  His  power  in  the  presence  of  the  heathen, 
and  concluding  with  the  apostolic  words,  ♦  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  I  command 
thee  to  come  out.'  Again  and  again  their  prayer  has  been  granted,  the  wild  tempest 
has  been  allayed,  and  the  sufferer  lulled  to  a  condition  of  deep  peace,  whence,  after 
a  while,  he  has  arisen  to  go  forth  ♦  clothed  and  in  his  right  mind '  to  tell  his  heathen 
brethren  of  the  marvellous  way  in  which  he  has  been  cured,  and,  in  short,  to 
become  from  that  hour  a  faithful  worker  in  the  Master's  cause."  {See  **  Wanderings 
in  China,**  by  C,  F.  Gordon  Gumming^ 

Ver.  17.  And  He  sumamed  them  Boanerges,  which  is,  The  sons  of  thunder. — 
The  sons  of  thunder : — In  what  sense  this  name  was  applicable  to  the  character 
or  teaching  of  these  two  brethren  is  not  certain,  particularly  in  the  case  of 
St.  John,  the  apostle  of  gentleness  and  love.  Perhaps,  however,  if  we  had 
heard  him  preach,  we  should  have  discerned  in  a  moment  the  fitness  of  the 
name.  If  he  wrote  as  he  wrote  in  his  epistle,  there  would  be  much  to  vin- 
dicate the  title,  for  he  wrote  such  terrible  words  as,  *•  Who  is  a  liar,  but 
he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is   the  Christ?"      •*He  that  committeth   sin  ia  of 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

the  devil."  ••  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer,  and  ye  know  that 
no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him."  And  respecting  a  certain 
troubler  of  the  Church  he  writes,  "If  I  come,  I  will  remember  hia  deeds  which 
he  doeth."  We  must  remember,  too,  that  this  epistle  was  written  in  his  old 
age,  when  years  had  toned  down  his  decisiveness  and  vehemence.  Respecting 
the  preaching  of  the  other  brother  we  know  nothing  except  this,  that  when  Herod 
would  gratify  the  Jewish  hatred  of  the  gospel,  he  singled  out  James  as  his  first 
victim,  which  he  would  hardly  have  done  unless  this  apostle  also  had  been  foremost 
in  aggressive  energy  of  speech.  (M,  F.  Sadler.)  Gentleness  and  energy  of  Chris- 
tianity : — I.  We  will  consider  some  thinos  in  Christunity  that  are  adapted  to 
oiVB  gentleness  to  the  character.  1.  The  view  which  it  gives  a  person  of  himself. 
This,  you  know,  is  anything  but  flattering.  Christian  humility  certainly  tends  to 
promote  gentleness.  2.  I  mention  next  the  view  Christianity  gives  of  God  and  of 
eternity.  Not  only  is  a  person  who  has  felt  "  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  " 
apt  to  feel  that  the  paltry  interests  of  time  are  not  worth  contending  for,  but 
habitual  contemplation  of  eternal  realities,  and  of  Him  who  *•  inhabiteth  eternity," 
will  so  awe  and  elevate  the  spirit,  that  it  will  have  the  utmost  disrelish  for  con- 
tention. Would  it  not  be  strange  if  two  persona  should  quarrel  while  gazing 
together  at  the  cataract  of  Niagara,  listening  to  its  solemn  roar,  and  feeling  its 
solemn  tremor  f  la  it  possible  to  retain  anger  when  you  stand  at  a  window,  watch- 
ing the  coming  up  of  a  storm ;  or  at  the  foot  of  cliffs,  that  lift  themselves  ruggedly 
up  to  the  sky ;  or  on  the  shore  of  the  ocean,  stretching  away  beyond  the  utmost 
reach  of  vision,  endlessly  rolling  in  its  waves,  and  ceaselessly  lifting  up  its  voice  I 
Christianity,  studied,  believed,  embraced,  experienced,  causes  the  soul  to  dwell 
habitually  in  the  presence  of  sublimer  objects  than  these,  and  under  the  influence 
of  nobler  contemplations.  8.  The  character  of  Christ,  as  it  is  delineated  in  the 
Scriptures,  and  as  the  Christian  contemplates  it,  is  calculated  to  promote  gentleness. 
He  is  exhibited  as  "the  Lamb  of  God," — not  only  a  spotless  victim,  fit  for  the 
sacrifice,  but  dumb  and  unresisting  when  led  to  slaughter.     II.  Some  things  in 

ChRISTIANITT  that  ABE  ADAPTED  TO  QITB  ENEBOT  TO  THE  CHARACTEB.      1.  Look  at  the 

objects  of  eflEort  which  if  presents — all  that  is  involved  in  one's  own  eternal  salva- 
tion, and  all  that  tends  to  the  well-being  of  mankind  and  the  glory  of  God.  2. 
Look  at  the  motives  to  effort  which  Christianity  supplies.  3.  Consider  the 
examples  which  Christianity  exhibits.  I  hope  you  see  that  the  energy  which  Chris- 
tianity  inspires  does  not  mar  the  gentleness  which  is  so  beautiful  an  ornament  of 
character ;  and  that  the  gentleness  which  Christianity  cultivates  does  not  soften 
and  enervate  the  soul.  The  two  elements  do  most  harmoniously  blend,  balancing 
and  tempering,  not  at  all  hindering  each  other.  In  all  our  efforts  at  self-culture, 
let  us  seek  for  the  attainment  of  both  these  elements  in  scriptural  proportions  and  in 
scriptural  combination.       {H.  A.  Nelson,  D.D.)  Thunder  in  preaching : — If  we 

thunder  in  our  preaching  we  must  lighten  in  our  lives.  {Anon.)  Zeal  blended 
with  discretion.' — Barnabas  and  Boanerges,  *•  the  sons  of  consolation  and  of  thun- 
der "  make  a  good  mixture.  The  good  Samaritan  pours  in  wine  to  search  the 
wounds  and  oil  to  supple  them  Discretion  must  hold  zeal  by  the  heeL  These 
two  must  be  as  the  Hons  that  supported  Solomon's  throne.  He  that  hath  them 
may  be  a  Moses  for  his  meekness  and  a  Phinehas  for  his  fervour.  (Trapp.)  Be 
true  to  a  good  name  : — Names  were  given  that  they  might  be  stirred  up  to  verify 
the  meaning  and  signification  of  them.  Wherefore  let  every  Obadiah  strive  to  be 
a  servant  of  God ;  each  Nathanael  to  be  a  gift  of  God ;  Onesimus,  to  be  profitable  ; 
every  Roger,  quiet  and  peaceable ;  Robert,  famous  for  counsel ;  and  William,  a  help 
and  defence  to  many  .  .  .  that  they  may  be  incited  to  imitate  the  virtues  of  those 
worthy  persons  who  formerly  have  been  owners  and  bearers  of  them.  Let  all 
Abrahams  be  faithful;  Isaacs,  quiet;  Jacobs,  painful  (painstaking);  Josephs, 
chaste  ;  every  Louis,  pious ;  Edward,  confessor  of  the  new  faith  ;  William,  con- 
queror over  his  own  corruptions.  Let  them  also  carefully  avoid  those  sins  for 
which  the  bearers  of  the  names  stand  branded  to  posterity.  Let  every  Jonah  be- 
ware of  frowardness  ;  Thomas,  of  distrustfolness ;  Marliia,  of  worldliness ;  Mary, 
of  wantonness ;  <&o.,  <&c. 

Ver.  21.  He  Is  beside  Himself. — The  sinner  mad,  not  the  iaint : — I  find  St 
Paul  in  the  same  chapter  confesses  and  denies  madness  in  himself.  Whilst  he  was 
mad  indeed,  then  none  did  suspect  or  accuse  him  to  be  distracted ;  bat  when  con- 
verted, and  in  his  right  mind,  then  Festus  taxeth  him  of  madness.  (See  Acts 
xxvi.  11).     (Thomas  Fuller,  D.D.)       Mad  because  exceptional : — There  is  a  eoontry 


OHAi>.  lu.]  ST.  MARK.  Ill 

in  Africa  wherein  all  the  natives  have  pendnlons  lips,  hanging  down  like  •  dog*i 
ears,  always  raw  and  sore.  Here  only  such  as  are  handsome  are  pointed  at  for 
monsters.  {Ibid.)  Troubled  with  a  good  son;— When  the  son  of  Dr.  Innea 
became  a  missionary,  the  good  old  man,  who  sorely  grndged  parting  with  his  boy, 
said,  "  Some  people  are  troubled  with  a  bad  son,  but  I  am  troubled  with  a  good 
one." 

Vers.  22-26.  And  the  scribes  which  came  down  from  Jemsalem  said.  He  hath 
Beelzebub. — Scribes — a  literal  knowledge  of  Scripture  vain : — These  men  were  learned 
in  the  law  of  Moses,  having  great  knowledge  and  skill  in  the  letter  of  it ;  and  yet 
they  were  wicked  men,  and  blasphemers  of  Christ.  How  vain  a  thing  it  is,  then, 
for  any  to  glory  in  their  literal  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  as  if  this  alone  could 
make  them  good  Christians.  The  Jews  boasted  of  this — that  they  knew  the  wiD 
of  God,  and  were  instructed  in  the  law ;  and  thereupon  they  thought  themselves 
very  religious :  yet  for  all  that  they  were  wicked  hypocrites,  living  in  manifest 
breaches  of  the  law.  So  it  is  with  many  nowadays.  They  think  themselves  very 
religious,  becanse  they  have  knowledge  in  the  Scriptures,  and  can  discourse  of  them 
in  company,  and  make  a  great  show  of  acquaintance  with  God's  precepts.  To  these 
I  say,  it  is  well  that  they  have  knowledge,  and  I  wish  that  many  had  more  than  they 
have.  Tet  know  withal,  that  if  it  be  but  an  historical  or  literal  knowledge,  without 
a  sanctified  heart  to  embrace  what  thou  knowest,  it  shall  do  thee  no  good ;  thou 
mayest,  notwithstanding  all  thy  knowledge,  be  void  of  all  truth  of  sanctifying  grace. 
Beware,  then,  of  resting  in  this.  Labour  not  only  to  know  the  Word  of  God,  but 
for  a  sanctified  heart  to  yield  obedience  to  it.  Every  one  has  so  much  saving  know- 
ledge, as  he  has  grace  and  affection  of  heart  to  embrace  and  act  upon  what  he  knows ; 
and  without  this,  all  knowledge  is  ignorance  in  God's  reckoning.  The  smallest 
measure  of  knowledge  with  a  sanctified  heart  is  more  pleasing  to  God,  and  more 
available  to  thy  salvation,  than  all  the  learning  and  knowledge  of  the  scribes  without 
sanctifying  grace.  Look  to  thy  knowledge,  therefore,  that  it  be  such  as  not  only 
fioats  in  the  head  but  goes  down  to  the  heart,  and  causes  it  to  yield  obedience  to  the 
things  thou  hast  learned  out  of  the  Word  of  God.  Get  tbis  wisdom  above  all 
possessions,  and  thou  shalt  be  rich  and  learned  indeed.  (G.  Fetter.)  Interested 
lying : — From  the  accounts  of  Matthew  and  Luke  we  learn  that  Jesus  had  been 
easting  out  a  deaf  and  dumb  devil.  The  work  was  one  of  Divine  goodness  and 
mercy.  The  religious  world  of  the  period  looked  on  and  called  it  bad.  He  cast  ont 
devils,  they  said,  through  Beelzebub,  the  prince  of  the  devils.  Let  us  beware  of  thus 
giving  the  lie  to  the  moral  sense,  for  it  is  the  very  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
we  may  be  terribly  near  it  without  knowing  it.  The  tendency  is  a  common  one. 
If  goodness,  or  truth,  or  mercy  touch  my  pocket,  or  my  honour,  or  my  interest,  my 

51easnre8,  or  even  my  prejudices,  I  will  destroy  and  deny  them,  when  and  how  I  can. 
'hat  is  the  tendency.  These  are  spots  in  our  feasts  of  charity,  blots  on  our  profes- 
sions. I  have  known  medical  men  deny  cures  not  wrought  by  the  accredited  methods. 
The  disease  has  been  cast  out  by  fraud,  by  quackery,  or  not  cast  out  at  all,  say  they. 
When  I  was  in  Italy,  and  the  regular  Piedmontese  army  arrived  at  Naples  after 
Garibaldi  and  his  irregnlar  volunteers  had  done  all  the  work  down  south,  one  heard 
nothing  but  abuse  of  Garibaldi  and  his  men  by  the  king's  officers.  They  hated 
them,  they  cheapened  their  valour,  they  sneered  at  their  sacrifices,  even  denied  their 
exploits,  attributing  all  to  chance,  luck,  even  to  mistake.  General  Garibaldi  had 
won,  well,  in  spite  of  his  stupidity.  Such  interested  lying  is  not  confined  to  the 
doctor  or  the  soldier ;  it  is  found  in  the  Church.  I  have  heard  clergymen  deny  the 
good  work  and  righteous  fruits  of  congregations  opposed  to  them.  I  have  seen  in 
the  country  war  between  the  orthodox  rector,  who  could  not  fill  his  church,  and  the 
dissenting  baptist,  whose  church  over  the  way  was  crowded.  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit 
were  there,  the  devils  were  defeated  ;  but  the  rector  still  stood  out  that  it  was  by 
Beelzebub,  the  prince  of  the  devils.  {H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  Opposition  from  foes 
and  from  friends : — L  The  opposition.  1.  From  friends.  2.  From  foes.  II.  How 
He  met  the  opposition.  1.  The  opposition  of  foes.  (1)  He  shows  bow  unreason- 
able their  words  are.  (2)  He  makes  them  reflect  who  Ho  must  really  be.  (3)  He 
warns  them  of  the  danger  of  so  blaspheming.  2.  The  opposition  from  friends  (vers. 
3;^-35).  Conclusion :  On  which  side  are  we  ?  For  Christ,  or  against  Him  ?  Are  we 
His  open  enemies  ?  Are  we  His  half-hearted  friends  ?  Are  we  His  faithful  disciples  ? 
Fob  and  against — see  what  the  end  of  both  will  be  (Matt.  x.  32,  33).  {E.  Stock.) 
For  or  against : — L  Those  who  are  not  Christ's  fbiends  abb  to  be  esteemed  Hn 
foes:  "  He  that  is  not  with  Me  is  against  Me  "(Matt.  xii.  80).    1.  The  issue  is 


lia  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

clear.  Our  Lord  begins  with  saying  that  even  Beelzebub  would  fall  if  he  suffered 
his  kingdom  to  be  divided  against  itself.  2.  The  decision  must  be  clear.  3.  If  any 
one  refuses  this  issue,  and  defers  this  decision,  it  must  be  because  he  is  not  Christ's 
friend,  but  His  foe.  One  would  think  that  human  hearts  would  welcome  such  an 
offer,  and  would  stand  to  it  with  a  joyous  acceptance  unfalteringly  to  the  end. 
Alexander  the  Great  was  once  a£.ked  how  it  was  that  he  had  conquered  the  world ; 
and  he  answered,  '•  By  not  wavering."  If  men  had  only  held  the  faith  as  Jesus  has 
held  His  covenant,  the  whole  world  would  have  been  converted  long  ago.  II.  Those 
WHO  ABB  NOT  Chbist's  TOES  ARB  His  FRIENDS ;  SO  He  says  :  "  He  that  is  not  against 
OB  is  on  our  part "  (Mark  ix.  40).  III.  The  enemies  of  Christ  are  evidenced  by 
THEiB  KNMITT.  At  first  slght  this  would  seem  to  be  a  truism  :  let  us  see.  1.  An 
enemy  of  Christ  hates  the  notion  of  God's  being.  2.  An  enemy  of  Christ  hates  the 
notion  of  God's  character.  Holiness  is  the  most  unpopular  of  all  the  Divine  attri- 
butes. 3.  Anenemyof  Christ  hates  the  notion  of  God's  law.  lb  perplexes,  restrains, 
and  condemns  him.  4.  An  enemy  of  Christ  hates  the  notion  of  God's  plan  of 
redemption.  He  is  not  willing  to  admit  his  need,  and  take  his  pardon  as  a  lost 
■inner.  6.  An  enemy  of  Christ  hates  the  notion  of  God's  service.  6.  An  enemy  of 
Christ  hates  the  notion  of  God's  sovereignty.  IV.  The  friends  of  Christ  are 
BviDBNCED  BY  THEIB  OBEDIENCE — *•  Ye  are  My  frieuds,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command 
you."  This  wonderful  verse  (John  xv.  14)  will  bear  an  analysis.  1.  Obedience  to 
Christ  will  be  active  in  its  nature.  The  word  here  is  not  feel,  but  ♦•  do."  2. 
Obedience  to  Christ  will  be  universal  in  its  reach.  3.  Obedience  to  Christ  will  be 
submissive  in  its  temper.  4.  Obedience  to  Christ  will  be  affectionate  in  its  spirit. 
An  old  divine  says  "the  obedience  of  the  heart  is  the  heart  of  obedience."    V. 

It  is  wise  fob  all  immortal  BEINQS  to  settle  at  once   WHETHEB  they  ABE  FBIEKOS 

OB  ENEMIES  OF  Jebus  Chbist.  1,  No  neutrality  is  permitted  during  these  war  times 
in  the  universe.  No  negative  moral  state  is  possible  before  God.  2.  Those  who 
teach  truth  must  urge  immediate  decision  on  all  around  them.  3.  Any  enemy  of 
Christ  can  become  a  friend  in  an  instant,  if  he  will.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Satan 
not  self-destructive : — When  the  Netherlanders  broke  away  from  the  bondage  of 
Spain,  they  still  professed  to  be  loyal  subjects  of  King  Philip,  and,  in  the  king's 
name,  went  out  to  fight  against  the  king's  armies.  That  was  a  kind  of  loyalty  which 
King  Phihp  refused  to  recognize.  The  Pharisees  professed  to  beUeve  that  the  devil 
was  content  with  loyalty  like  this — that,  in  fact,  he  hugely  enjoyed  the  destruction 
of  his  own  works  by  Jesus,  and  supplied  our  Lord  with  all  the  help  he  wanted  in 
that  line.  A  sane  man  does  not  burn  his  insurance  policy,  and  then  set  fire  to  his 
house  as  a  means  of  providing  for  his  family.  A  loyal  soldier  will  not  undermine 
his  own  camp  and  blow  it  into  the  air  as  a  means  of  increasing  the  strength  of  that 
camp.  The  captain  who  is  anxious  for  the  safety  of  his  ship  will  not  step  down 
into  the  hold  and  bore  a  hole  through  the  ship's  bottom.  Nor  will  Satan  join  in 
destroying  his  own  kingdom.  That  Christ  came  and  destroyed  the  works  of  the 
devil  shows  that  He  is  Satan's  enemy  and  Satan's  conqueror. 

Ver.  27.  No  man  can  enter  into  a  strong  man's  house  and  spoil  his  goods. — Tfu 
deviVs  strength : — Christ  is  showing  that  He  casts  out  demons  by  a  greater  power 
than  Satan's,  viz.,  by  the  power  of  His  own  Godhead.  This  He  illustrates 
by  a  comparison  taken  from  one  who  forcibly  enters  the  house  of  a  strong  man, 
and  makes  spoil  of  it  by  violent  seizure  of  the  goods  and  weapons  that  he  had  in 
his  house.  Such  an  one  must  be  stronger  than  the  strong  man,  else  he  cannot  do 
it.  Even  so  (says  the  Saviour)  seeing  that  I  have  forcibly  entered  upon  Satan's 
possession,  and  have  bound  him  and  spoiled  his  goods,  i.e.,  taken  from  him  that 
power  and  tyranny  which  he  before  exercised  over  the  body  of  him  that  was  pof\. 
sessed;  and  seeing  I  have  also  cast  him  out  of  his  own  house,  i.e.,  out  of  the  person 
possessed ;  hence  it  may  appear  that  I  have  done  all  this  by  a  greater  power  than 
the  power  of  Satan  is,  even  by  the  power  of  My  Godhead.  Note  that — 1.  Cbrist 
likens  Satan  to  a  strong  man  well  armed,  and  furnished  with  weapons  to  defend 
himself  and  his  house  in  which  he  dwells.  2.  He  likens  Himself  to  One  that  is 
stronger  than  that  stroug  man.  3.  He  resembles  the  person  that  was  possessed 
with  the  demon  to  the  house  of  the  strong  man  in  which  he  holds  possession.  4, 
He  resembles  the  power  of  Satan  to  the  goods  and  weapons  of  the  strong  man.  5. 
He  compares  the  casting  out  of  Satan  by  Himself  to  the  entering  into  the  strong 
man's  house,  and  binding  of  him,  and  spoiling  of  his  house,  <&o.  (G.  Fetter.) 
Batan  being  likened  to  the  strong  man,  this  teaches  us  that  he  is  a  creature  of  great 
•toengih  and  power  (Luke  xi.  21 ;  1  Pet.  v.  8 ;  Eph.  vi.  12).    I.  Wherein  this 


OHAT.  m.]  ST.  MARK,  113 

rowER  OF  THE  DEVIL  18  MANIFESTED — 1.  In  working  upon  the  insensible  creatures — 
ftir,  earth,  water,  <feo.  2.  In  worldng  upon  those  sensible  creatures  that  want  reason 
—beasts,  birds,  fishes,  <fec.  He  is  able  to  enter  into  them  and  to  move  and  work  in 
khem.  3.  On  the  bodies  of  men ;  entering  into  them,  hurting  and  annoying  them, 
vexing  and  tormenting  them  with  pain  and  disease.  4.  On  the  minds,  hearts,  and 
affections  of  men,  in  tempting  them  inwardly,  and  soliciting  them  to  sin  by  inward 
8ngj;;estion.  This  he  does,  not  directly,  but  partly  by  the  outward  senses  repre- 
senimg  evil  objects  to  them  and  ko  conveying  evil  thoughts  to  the  mind,  and  partly 
by  insinuating  himself  into  the  fancy  or  imagination.  II.  What  kind  of  poweb  it 
IS.  Not  an  absolute  power,  but  limited.  III.  From  whence  he  derives  it.  From 
God  only ;  and  He  who  gave,  controls  it.  IV.  Why  God  gives  him  such  power. 
1,  That  His  own  Divine  power  may  the  more  appear  in  subduing  Satan.  2.  For 
the  trial  of  His  own  children.  3.  For  the  executing  of  His  heavy  vengeance  and 
punishment  on  the  wicked  by  Satan.  (Ibid.)  "  The  strong  man  armed: " — First, 
"  the  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  palace."  For  indeed  it  is  "  a  palace" — that 
soul  of  yours — made  to  be  a  royal  habitation ;  and  well  did  the  King  of  kings  furnish 
it  for  Himself.  He  had  supplied  it  marvellously  with  all  that  should  be  for  royal 
use  and  royal  glory,  and  He  had  decked  it  with  the  most  precious  ornaments,  and 
He  set  a  throne  there.  Is  it  empty  ?  No.  Who  sits  on  it  ?  Who  is  supreme 
there  over  the  affections  ?  Who  is  that  that  is  holding  his  silken  reins  that  are  as 
bands  of  iron?  *'  The  strong  one  " — none  know  how  " strong  "  but  those  who  try 
to  escape,  and  throw  off  his  tyranny ;  so  "  strong "  that  his  strength  is  unseen, 
while  in  stillness  and  in  silence  he  holds  his  own ;  so  "  strong  "  that  the  greatest 
determination  of  the  most  strong-minded  man,  unaided,  trying  to  break  any  one  of 
those  many  bonds,  would  be  as  if  he  were  to  try  to  uproot  a  mountain.  And  well 
is  that  strong  one  "armed."  Not  in  vain  has  he  been  reading  the  human  heart 
for  six  thousand  years ;  not  in  vain  are  all  his  vast  experiences.  Of  amazing  in- 
tellect is  he — of  immense  power — a  fallen  angel  of  light,  and  he  can  wear  all 
aspects,  and  he  can  bear  all  disguises.  Awful  the  thought — that  as  the  Lord  Jesus 
had  His  "  armour  "  so  has  that  strong  one — wherein  he  rightly  trusts.  There  are 
the  light,  glittering  "  darts  "  of  pleasure,  that  which  has  slain  many  a  mighty  one. 
And  there  is  the  heavy  '♦  sword  "  of  unsanctified  intellect  to  lay  low  the  strong- 
minded.  And  there  is  the  "  breast-plate  "  of  selfishness,  wrapping  the  heart  roand 
in  its  soft  indulgences.  And  there  is  "the  shield"  of  uncharitable  controversy, 
which  irritates  without  convincing.  And  there  is  *♦  the  helmet  "  of  bold  presump- 
tion, starting  high  in  its  false  prof  essions ;  and  "the  girdle  "of  infidelity — cramping, 
bin<^ng,  girding  the  very  loins  of  the  man  ;  and  "  the  shoes  "  that  walk  roughly, 
and  "  the  spirit "  that  takes  converse  only  with  itself.  So,  for  years  and  years, 
"  the  strong  one  armed  "  rules,  and  so  he  "  keeps  "  his  captives  quiet.  And  it  is  a 
weeping  sight  before  the  holy  angels — those  noble  courts  of  man's  immortality,  so 
trodden  down,  and  profaned,  and  desolate.  But  *'  the  stronger  "  comes ;  and  now 
the  fighting  begins.  Go  with  me  a  little  way ;  for,  thank  God  I  that  that  gentle 
One  who  is  so  tender  with  weak  and  child-like  hearts  that  "  He  will  not  bre^  the 
bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking  fax,"  is  yet  of  such  gigantic  might  that  He, 
stronger  than  tiie  strongest,  can  and  will  trample  down  all  His  enemies  and  ours 
under  His  feet,  "  till  He  brings  forth  judgment  unto  victory."  See,  then,  how  He 
"binds."  A  little  while  ago  some  straitening  circumstance  happened  to  you,  and 
you  felt  strangely  circumscribed.  Perhaps  you  were  confined  to  your  house; 
perhaps  you  were  laid  on  a  sick  bed — ^you  were  shut  out  from  the  scenes  you  loved 
BO  well — your  spirit  felt  cramped — your  life  became  as  a  gaUing  fetter — and  you 
chafed  against  the  restraint  which  you  felt,  but  could  not  overcome.  You  did  not 
know  or  think  at  that  time  that  this  was  the  very  way  by  which  that  "  stronger 
one"  was  proceeding  to  "bind"  that  old,  strong,  self-willed,  impetuous  nature  in 
you,  which,  rampant  so  many  years,  had  done  you  such  grievous  harm — you,  who 
were  the  slave  of  your  evil  passions  !  Or,  a  very  heavy  trial  almost  crushed  you — 
not  you,  but  the  old  habit — the  old  affection — the  old  man  in  you — which  many  a 
lighter  means  had  been  tried,  and  tried  in  vain,  to  subdue  and  to  destroy.  Or,  a 
very  deep  humiliation  visited  your  heart,  and  many  a  high  thought  of  your  youth 
was  brought  low — you  felt  it  very  hard ;  for  you  did  not  realize  into  what  pride 
"  the  strong  one"  was  lashing  you,  and  what  curbing  that  proud  heart  of  yours 
needed  before  it  could  be  broken.  And  remember,  even  the  knocking  off  the 
prisoner's  chains  will  give  him  pain,  and  the  longer  he  has  worn  the  chain  the 
greater  the  pain  of  loosening.  Now  mark  "  the  spoil."  "  He  will  bind  the  strong 
man,  and  then  He  will  spoil  his  honse."    The  habit  of  sin  broken,  the  soul  emanei- 

8 


lU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

pated ;  Christ  is  free  to  claim  His  own  property,  which  His  own  blood  has  pur- 
ehased,  and  His  own  right  hand  has  rescued.  He  had  restored  the  property  to  its 
rightful  owner.  And  wondrously,  in  His  infinite  love,  He  "  divides  the  spoils  " 
which  He  has  taken.  You,  He  gives  to  yourself,  so  that  that  is  which  was  not 
before,  nor  ever  could  be — He  has  made  you  your  own.  Nevertheless,  •*  you  are 
not  your  own,"  but  His — your  own,  because  you  are  His.  Your  heart,  which  Satan 
bound,  and  He  looses,  He  keeps  all  for  Himself.  Your  fellowships,  your  sympathies. 
He  allots  for  the  Church.  Your  time,  your  talents,  your  energies,  your  charities, 
for  the  world ;  your  highest  exercises  of  mind,  for  communion  with  Himself ;  your 
faith  for  the  promises ;  your  ambition  for  the  extension  of  the  truth,  and  the 
exalting  of  His  own  empire;  your  awe  and  love  for  holy  worship;  your  soul, 
"  bound  up  in  the  bundle  of  life,"  for  heaven,  and  for  eternity ;  your  knees  for 
prayer ;  your  tongue  for  holy  utterances  ;  your  ears  for  truth ;  your  eyes  to  receive 
and  ^  emit  sacred  influences ;  your  feet  for  mission ;  your  whole  body  for  saintly 
service.  So  He  **  divides  the  spoils ; "  and  yet  they  are  all  the  more  one,  because 
they  are  divided ;  for  it  is  all  for  all ;  and  all  for  aU  for  Him  ;  and  all  for  all  for 
Him  for  ever.    (J.  Vaughan^  M.A.) 

Vers.  28,  30.  All  sins  shall  be  forgiven  unto  the  sons  of  men. — Great  sin  not  un- 
pardonabUf  but  continuance  in  it : — There  is  great  comfort  to  be  derived  from  this 
statement,  for  such  as  are  tempted  by  Satan  to  think  their  sins  are  too  great  to  be 
forgiven.  Thus  thought  wicked  Cain,  and  thus  many  good  though  weak  Christians 
are  tempted  to  think  still.  Let  such  be  assured,  that  there  is  no  sin  so  great  but 
God's  mercy  is  sufficient  to  pardon  it,  and  the  blood  of  Christ  sufficient  to  purge 
away  the  guilt  of  it ;  neither  is  it  the  multitude  or  greatness  of  sins  simply,  that 
hinders  from  pardon,  but  impenitency  in  sins,  whether  many  or  few,  great  or  small. 
Therefore  look  not  only  at  the  greatness  of  thy  sins  with  one  eye,  as  it  were,  but 
look  also,  with  the  other,  at  the  greatness  of  God's  mercy  and  the  infinite  value  of 
Christ's  merits ;  both  which  are  sufficient  to  pardon  and  take  away  the  guilt  of  thy 
most  heinous  sins  if  truly  repented  of.  Look  therefore  at  this,  that  there  be  in  this 
a  great  measure  of  godly  sorrow  and  repentance  for  thy  great  sins ;  and  labour  by 
faith  to  apply  the  blood  of  Christ  to  thy  conscience  for  the  purging  of  thy  sins,  and 
thou  needest  not  doubt  but  they  shall  be  pardoned.  Whether  thy  sins  be  many  or 
few,  small  or  great,  this  makes  nothing  for  thee  or  against  thee  as  touching  the 
obtaining  of  pardon  ;  but  it  is  thy  continuing,  or  not  continuing  in  thy  sins  im- 
penitently,  that  shall  make  against  thee  or  for  thee.  To  the  impenitent  all  sins 
are  unpardonable ;  to  the  penitent  all  sins  are  pardonable,  though  never  so  great 
and  heinous.  Yet  let  none  abuse  this  doctrine  to  presumption  or  boldness  in 
sinning,  because  God's  mercy  is  great  and  sufficient  to  pardon  all  sins,  even 
the  greatest,  except  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  Beware  of  sinning 
that  grace  may  abound;  beware  of  turning  the  grace  of  God  into  wantonness, 
for  God  has  said  He  will  not  be  merciful  to  such  as  sin,  presuming  on  His 
mercy.  Besides,  we  must  remember  that,  although  God  has  mercy  enough 
to  pardon  great  sins,  yet  great  sins  require  a  great  and  extraordinary 
measure  of  repentance.  (O.  Fetter.)  Blasphemy : — In  that  our  Saviour,  setting 
out  the  riches  of  God's  mercy,  in  pardoning  all  sorts  of  sins,  though  never  so  great 
(except  that  against  the  Holy  Ghost),  doth  give  instance  in  blasphemy,  as  one  of 
the  greatest ;  hence  gather,  that  blasphemy  against  God  is  one  of  the  most  heinous 
sins,  and  very  hard  to  be  forgiven.  This  sin  is  committed  in  the  following  ways. 
1.  By  attributing  to  God  that  which  is  dishonourable  to  Him,  and  unbeseeming 
His  Majesty ;  e.g.,  to  say  He  is  unjust,  cruel,  or  the  author  of  sin,  <feo.  2.  By 
taking  from  God,  and  denying  unto  Him  that  which  belongs  to  Him.  3.  By 
attributing  the  properties  of  God  to  creatures.  4.  By  speaking  contemptibly  of 
Qoi,  Pharaoh  (Ex.  v.  2) ;  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iii.  15).  (Ibid.)  Remediet 
agaijut  this  sin  of  blasphemy  : — 1.  Consider  the  fearfulness  of  the  sm.  It  argues 
great  wickedness  in  the  heart  harbouring  it.  2.  Consider  how  God  has  avenged 
Himself  on  blasphemers,  even  by  temporal  judgments.  3.  Our  tongues  are  given 
as  to  bless  God  and  man.  4.  Labour  for  a  reverent  fear  of  God  in  our  hearts. 
6.  Take  heed  of  using  God's  Name  irreverently,  and  of  common  swearing.  {Ibid.) 
The  man  who  will  not  be  forgiven,  cannot  be  forgiven : — In  one  place  Jesus  seems  to 
speak  of  this  sin  as  an  action,  at  another  time  He  calls  it  speaking  a  word  against 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Is  there  any  one  word  or  action  that  a  man  or  woman  can  per- 
petrate which  will  for  ever  cut  them  off  from  God's  mercy  and  pardon  ?  Not  one ! 
Study  thia  phrase  of  the  scribes,  that  Jesus  cast  out  devils  by  Beelzebub,  for  it  was 


CHAP.  in. J  ST.  MARK.  Ill 

the  phrase  which  brought  them  under  sentence  for  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
you  will  understand  what  that  sin  of  theirs  really  was.  The  word  spoken  ui 
nothing  apart  from  the  state  of  heart  which  it  reveals.  It  has  only  power  to  save 
or  damn,  because  out  of  the  fulness  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh.  It  bears 
witness  to  that.  The  sin  is  not  a  word  or  an  action,  then,  but  a  state — a  state  of 
heart;  the  state  which  sees  good  and  denies  it;  which  turns  the  light  into  dark- 
ness; which  can  look  on  Jesus  and  still  lie.  Such  a  state  is  the  unforgiven  and 
Unforgivable  sin  in  this  world — in  the  eternity  that  now  is  or  in  that  which  is  to 
come.  Pardon  is  between  two  parties  ;  he  who  will  not  be  forgiven  cannot  be  for- 
given.  In  the  hardened  state  above  described — the  state  which  is  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost — you  will  not,  therefore  you  cannot,  be  forgiven.  As  long  as  you  are 
so,  that  wUl  be  so,  but  it  is  nowhere  said  that  you  shall  never  be  lifted  out  of  that 
state  ;  converted — awakened — aroused — saved — just  as  a  man  lying  down  with  the 
■now  torpor  upon  him,  which  means  coming  death,  may  be  kept  walking  about,  or 
lifted  out  of  that  torpor  and  saved  ;  but  as  long  as  he  is  in  it  he  cannot  be  saved — 
he  must  die.  (if.  JR.  Raweis,  M.A.)  The  unpardonable  sin  indescribable : — 
Explanation  of  this  mystery  there  is  probably  none.  It  best  explains  itself  by 
exciting  a  holy  fear  as  to  trespass.  Another  step— only  one— and  we  may  be  over 
the  line.  One  word  more,  and  we  may  have  passed  into  the  state  unpardonable. 
Do  not  ask  what  this  sin  is ;  only  know  that  every  other  sin  leads  straight  up  to  it; 
and  at  best  there  is  but  a  step  between  life  and  death.  From  what  the  merciful 
God  does  pardon,  we  can  only  infer  that  the  sin  which  hath  never  forgiveness  is 
something  too  terrible  for  full  expression  in  words.  He  pardons  "abundantly." 
He  pardoned  Nineveh ;  He  passed  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  His 
heritage ;  where  sin  abounded.  He  sent  the  mightiest  billows  of  His  grace ;  when 
the  enemy  would  have  stoned  the  redeemed,  by  reminding  them  of  sins  manifold, 
and  base  with  exceeding  aggravation,  behold  their  sins  could  not  be  found,  for  His 
merciful  hand  had  cast  them  into  the  sea.  Yet  there  is  one  sin  that  hath  never  for> 
giveness  1  As  it  is  unpardonable,  so  it  is  indescribable.  If  it  be  too  great  for  God's 
mercy,  what  wonder  that  it  should  be  too  mysterious  for  our  comprehension  f  My 
soul,  come  not  thou  into  that  secret.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Irreclaimable : — 
Those  who  make  the  best  things  effects  of  the  worst  are  irreclaimable.  {J,  H. 
Godwin.)  The  unforgivable  sin : — If  you  poison  the  spring,  the  very  source, 
you  must  die  of  drinking  the  water,  bo  long  as  the  poison  is  there.  And  if  you 
deny  and  blaspheme  the  very  essence  from  which  forgiveness  springs  and  flows, 
forgiveness  is  killed  (for  you)  by  your  own  hand.  There  can  be  no  remission,  no 
healing  for  that,  since  it  is  in  fact — "  Evil,  be  thou  my  good ;  good,  thou  art  evil !  " 
How  significant  it  is  that  it  is  the  attributing  goodness,  righteousness  of  word, 
life,  action,  "  good  works  "  in  short,  to  an  evil  source,  which  is  the  unpardonable 
sin — not  the  converse ;  not  the  ascribing  unworthy  things  to  the  source  of  good ; 
not  the  having  faulty  conceptions  of  Him.  If  it  were  t^bat,  who  among  us  would 
escape?  {Vita.)  Sin  against  consciousness  greater  than  against  sight: — Christ 
taught  that  a  word  spoken  against  the  Son  of  Man  would  be  forgiven,  but  that  a 
word  spoken  against  the  Holy  Ghost  would  not  be  forgiven  :  by  which  He  probably 
'  meant  that  in  His  visible  form  there  was  so  much  that  contravened  the  expecta- 
tions of  the  people,  that  they  might,  under  the  mistaken  guidance  of  their  carnal 
'feelings,  speak  against  One  who  had  claimed  kingly  position  under  a  servant's 
form  ;  but  that  in  the  course  of  events  He  would  appear  not  to  the  eye  but  to  the 
consciousness  of  men ;  and  that  when  He  came  by  this  higher  ministry,  refusal  of 
His  appeal  would  place  man  in  an  unpardonable  state.  The  vital  principle  would 
seem  to  be,  that  when  man  denies  his  own  consciousness,  or  shuts  himself  up  from 
such  influences  as  would  purify  and  quicken  his  consciousness,  he  cuts  himself  off 
from  God,  and  becomes  a  ••  son  of  perdition."  Speaking  against  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
speaking  against  the  higher  and  final  revelation  of  the  Son  of  Man.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
God  will  vindicate  His  honour: — During  the  prevalence  of  infidelity  in  America  after 
the  reign  of  terror  in  France,  Newbury,  New  York,  was  remarkable  for  its  abandon- 
ment.  Through  the  influence  of  •*  Blind  Palmer,"  there  was  formed  a  Druidical 
Society,  so  called,  which  had  a  high  priest,  and  met  at  stated  times  to  uproot  and 
destroy  aU  true  religion.  They  descended  sometimes  to  acts  the  most  infamous 
and  blasphemous.  Thus,  for  instance,  at  one  of  their  meetings  they  burned 
the  Bible,  baptized  a  cat,  partook  of  a  mock  sacrament,  and  one  of  the 
number,  with  the  approval  of  the  rest,  administered  it  to  a  dog.  Now,  mark  the  re- 
tributive judgments  of  God,  which  at  once  commenced  falling  on  these  blasphemers. 
In  the  evening  he  who  had  administered  this  mock  sacrament  was  attacked  with  • 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

Tiolent  inflammatory  disease;  his  inflamed  eyeballs  were  protruded  from  their 
sockets,  his  tongue  was  swollen,  and  be  died  before  the  following  morning  in  great 
bodily  and  mental  agony.  Another  of  the  party  was  found  dead  in  his  bed  the 
next  morning.  A  third,  who  had  been  present,  fell  in  a  lit,  and  died  immediately ; 
and  three  others  were  drowned  a  few  days  afterwards.  In  short,  within  five  year* 
from  the  time  the  Druidical  Society  was  organized,  all  the  original  members  met 
their  death  in  some  strange  or  unnatural  manner.  There  were  thirty-six  of  them  in 
all,  and  of  these  two  were  starved  to  death,  seven  drowned,  eight  shot,  five  com- 
mitted  suicide,  seven  died  on  the  gallows,  one  was  frozen  to  death,  and  three  died 
♦*  accidentally."  Of  these  statements  there  is  good  proof  ;  they  have  been  certified 
before  justices  of  peace  in  New  York.  The  unpardonable  sin  : — The  doctrine  of 
the  Trinity  is  the  foundation  of  Christianity,  both  as  a  system  of'  dootrinei 
and  as  a  religion.  We  stand  in  special  relation  to  the  several  persons  of  the 
Trinity.  All  sin  as  against  the  Father  or  the  Son  may  be  forgiven,  bat  the  sin 
against  the  Holy  Ghost  can  never  be  forgiven.  I.  Its  general  chabaotkb.  1.  That 
there  is  such  a  sin  which  is  unpardonable.  2.  It  is  an  open  sin,  not  a  sin  merely 
of  the  heart.  It  is  blasphemy.  It  requires  to  be  uttered  and  carried  out  in  act. 
8.  It  is  Erected  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  specifically.  It  terminates  on  Him.  It 
consists  in  blaspheming  Him,  or  doing  despite  unto  Him.  II.  Its  sPEOino 
CHABACTEB.  This  includes— 1.  Eegarding  and  pronouncing  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be 
evil ;  ascribing  the  effect  which  He  produces  to  Satan  or  to  an  evil,  impure  spirit. 
2.  The  rejection  of  His  testimony  as  false.  He  testifies  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  ol 
God.  The  man  guilty  of  this  sin  declares  Him  to  be  a  man  only.  He  testifies 
that  Jesus  is  holy.  The  other  declares  He  is  a  malefactor.  He  testifies  that  His 
blood  cleanses  from  all  sin.  The  other,  that  it  is  an  unclean  thing,  and 
tramples  it  under  foot.  3.  The  conscious,  deliberate,  mahcious  resistance 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  determined  opposition  of  the  soul  to  Him  and 
His  gospel,  and  a  turning  away  from  both  with  abhorence.  His  sin  supposes — 
1.  Knowledge  of  the  gospel.  2.  Conviction  of  its  truth.  8.  Experience  of  its 
power.  It  is  the  rejection  of  the  whole  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  and  rejection  ol 
Him  and  His  work,  with  malicious  and  outspoken  blasphemy.  It  is  by  a  com- 
parison of  Matt.  xii.  81,  and  the  parallel  passages  in  Mark  and  Luke,  with  Heb. 
vi.  6-10,  and  x.  26-29  that  the  true  idea  of  the  impardonable  sin  is  to  be  obtained. 
III.  The  consequence  of  this  sin  is  reprobation,  or  a  reprobate  mind.  IV.  Im- 
POBTANCB  OF  CLEAB  VIEWS  OF  THIS  SUBJECT.  1.  Bccause  crroneous  views  prevail,  a^ 
(1]  That  every  deliberate  sin  is  unpardonable,  as  the  apostle  says  "  He  who  sins 
wilfully."  (2)  Any  pecuHarly  atrocious  sin,  as  denying  Christ  by  the  lapsed.  (8) 
Post-baptismal  sins.  2.  Because  people  of  tender  conscience  often  are  unnecessarily 
tormented  with  the  fear  that  they  have  committed  this  sin.  It  is  hard  to  deal  with 
such  persons,  for  they  are  generally  in  a  morbid  state.  8.  Because  as  there  is  snob  a 
sin,  every  approach  to  it  should  be  avoided  and  dreaded.  4.  Because  we  owe  specific 
reverence  to  the  Holy  Ghost  on  whom  our  spiritual  life  depends.  (C7.  Hodge,  D.D.) 
The  unpardonable  sin: — L  Now,  what  is  foboiveness?  It  is  the  remifilon  of  the 
consequences  of  a  violation  of  law,  and  of  pains  and  penalties  of  every  kind  which 
arise  from  having  broken  a  law.  It  may  be  considered  as,  first,  organic.  In  other 
words,  far  away  from  human  society  the  Divine  will  expresses  itself  in  natural  law. 
Thus  a  man,  by  intemperance,  by  gluttony,  by  excess  of  activity,  by  violation  of 
physical  law,  may  disarrange  his  whole  structure.  His  head  may  suffer,  his  chest 
may  suffer,  any  part  of  his  body  may  suffer.  Violence  may  fracture  a  limb,  or 
some  sprain  may  distort  a  tendon  or  a  muscle  ;  and  everywhere  man,  as  a  physical 
organization,  is  in  contact  with  God's  organic  law  in  the  physical  world  in  which 
we  live.  II.  The  principle  of  forgiveness  buns  thbough  cbeation.  That  is  to  say, 
all  violations  of  law  are  not  fataJ.  They  may  inflict  more  or  less  pain;  they 
may  bring  upon  a  man  suffering  to  a  certain  extent ;  but  so  soon  as  a  man  finds 
that  the  derangement  of  his  stomach  has  arisen  from  eating  improper  food, 
aLaough  the  knowledge  and  the  reformation  do  not  take  away  the  dyspepsia,  yet, 
if  he  thoroughly  turns  away  from  the  course  he  has  been  pursuing,  and  pursues 
wholesome  methods,  in  time  he  will  recover.  Nature  has  forgiven  him.  Through- 
out the  physical  world  you  may  cure  fevers,  dropsies,  fractures,  derangements  of 
Tital  organs ;  yon  may  violate  all  the  multiplied  economies  that  go  to  constitute  the 
individual  physical  man,  and  rebound  will  bring  forgiveness ;  but  there  is  a  point 
beyond  which  if  you  go  it  will  not,  either  in  youth,  in  middle  life,  or  in  old  age. 
Many  a  young  man  who  spends  himself  until  he  has  drained  the  fountain  of  vitality 
dry  in  youth  is  an  old  man  at  thirty  years  of  age  ;  he  creeps  and  crawls  at  forty 


UHAP.  ixi.J  ST.  MARK.  Ill 

and  at  fifty,  if  he  is  alive,  he  is  a  wretch.  Nature  says,  *'  I  forgive  all  manner  of 
iniquity  and  transgression  and  sin  to  a  man  who  does  not  commit  the  unpardonable 
sin."  III.  Fob  there  is  an  unpardonable  sin,  phtsicallt  speaking,  that  is  possibli 
TO  EVERY  MAN.  If  a  thousand-pound  weight  fall  upon  a  man  so  that  it  grinds  the 
bones  of  his  leg  to  powder,  like  flour,  I  should  like  to  see  any  surgeon  that  conld 
restore  it  to  him.  He  may  give  him  a  substitute  in  the  form  of  wood  or  cork,  but 
be  cannot  give  him  his  leg  again.  There  is  an  unpardonable  sin  that  may  be  com- 
mitted in  connection  with  the  lungs,  with  the  heart,  or  with  the  head.  They  are 
strung  with  nerves  as  thick  as  beads  on  a  string ;  and  up  to  a  certain  point  of  excess 
or  abuse  of  the  nervous  system  if  you  rebound  there  will  be  remission,  and  you 
will  be  put  back,  or  nearly  back,  where  you  were  before  you  transgressed  nature's 
laws ;  but  beyond  that  point — it  differs  in  di:fferent  men,  and  in  different  parts  of 
the  same  man — if  you  go  on  transgressing,  and  persist  in  transgression,  yon  will 
never  get  over  the  effect  of  it  as  long  as  you  live.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  unpar- 
donable sin: — I,  What  are  the  signs?  This  I  speak  by  way  of  relief  to  many  and 
many  a  needlessly  tried  soul.  The  inevitable  sign  of  the  commission  of  the  un> 
pardonable  sin  is  a  condition  in  which  men  are  past  feeling ;  and  if  a  man  haa 
come  into  that  condition  in  which  he  is  unpardonable — incurable — the  sign  will  be 
that  he  does  not  care.  li  you  find  a  person  who  is  alarmed  lest  he  is  in  that  con- 
dition, his  very  alarm  is  a  sign  that  he  is  not  in  it.  I  know  not  what  was  the  par- 
ticular case  that  led  to  the  request  that  I  should  preach  on  the  subject ;  but  if  there 
be  those  that  are  suffering  because  they  fear  that  they  have  committed  the  unpar- 
donable sin,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  not  a  single  act,  it  is  a  condition  that 
men  come  into  by  education ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  that  condition  is  one 
in  which  there  is  a  cessation  of  sensibility.  It  is  a  want  of  spiritual  pulse. 
It  is  a  want  of  the  capacity  of  spiritual  suffering.  Therefore,  if  you  do  not 
suffer  at  all,  it  may  be,  it  is  quite  likely,  that  you  are  in  that  condition.  Those 
who  are  in  that  condition  are  never  troubled  about  their  spiritual  state.  But 
where  persons  are  anxious  on  the  subject  of  their  spiritual  state,  and  are  in  distress 
about  it,  and  talk  much  respecting  it,  they  are  the  very  ones  that  cannot  be  in  the 
unpardonable  condition.  What  would  you  think  of  a  man  who  should  anxiously 
go  around  asking  every  physician  if  he  did  not  think  he  was  blind,  when  the  reason 
of  his  anxiety  was  that  he  had  such  acuteness  of  vision  that  he  saw  everything  so 
very  plainly  and  continuously  ?  Acuteness  of  vision  is  not  a  sign  of  blindness. 
What  would  you  think  of  a  man  that  should  go  to  his  physician  to  ascertain  if  he 
was  not  growing  deaf,  because  his  hearing  was  so  good  ?  The  symptoms  of  deaf- 
ness do  not  go  that  way.  And  how  incompatible  with  the  condition  in  which  one 
has  committed  the  unpardonable  sin  is  fear  lest  one  has  committed  it.  That  con- 
dition is  one  in  which  a  person  is  past  all  feeling,  and  is  given  over  to  his  wicked- 
ness. U.  This  subject  will  lead  us  to  make  an  important  discrimination — one 
which  we  may  all  of  us  need — whether  we  are  in  a  sinful  state  or  are  beginning  to 
lead  a  Christian  life.  There  is  a  tendency  to  fear  great  sins,  and  a  tendency  to  be 
indifferent  to  little  ones.  Now,  there  are  certain  great  sins  that,  being  committed. 
may  give  such  a  moral  shock  to  a  man's  constitution  as  to  be  fatal  in  their  effects ; 
but  these  are  not  usually  fallen  into.  Men  are  not  very  much  in  danger  of  great 
sins.  They  are  ten  thousand  times  more  in  danger  of  little  ones.  Men  are  not  in 
danger  of  committing  perjury  as  much  as  they  are  of  telling  "  white  lies,"  as  they 
are  called.  Men  are  not  so  much  in  danger  of  counterfeiting  as  they  are  of  putting 
on  little  minute  false  appearances.  Men  are  not  so  much  in  danger  of  committing 
burglary  as  they  are  of  committing  the  myriad  infinitesimal  injustices  with  which 
life  is  filled.  Any  particular  act,  to  be  sure,  such  as  I  have  alluded  to,  which  of 
itself  is  simply  as  a  particle  of  dust,  is  not  so  culpable  as  a  great  sin  ;  but  what  is 
the  effect  on  the  constitution  of  a  series  of  these  offences  that  are  so  small  as  to 
be  almost  imperceptible  ?  It  is  these  little  sins,  continued  and  multiplied,  that  by 
friction  take  off  the  enamel  of  a  man's  conscience.  It  is  these  numberless  petty 
wrongs  that  men  do  not  fear,  persisted  in,  that  are  the  most  damaging.  I  should 
dread  the  incursion  into  my  garden,  in  the  night  time,  of  rooting  swine,  or  tramp  ■ 
ling  ox,  or  browsing  buffalo ;  but,  after  all,  aphides  are  worse  than  these  big  brutes. 
I  could  kill  any  one,  or  half  a  dozen,  or  a  score  of  them,  if  they  came  in  such 
limited  numbers  ;  but  when  they  swarm  by  the  bilUon  I  cannot  kill  one  in  ten  thou- 
•and  of  them— and  what  can  I  dot  Myriads  of  these  insignificant  little  insects 
will  eat  faster  than  I  can  work,  and  they  are  the  pest  and  danger  of  the  garden,  aa 
often  my  poor  asters  and  roses  testify.  There  is  many  and  many  a  flower  that  I 
would  work  bard  to  save,  but  the  fecundity  of  insect  life  will  quite  match  and  over 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

match,  any  maii*s  industry.  Weakness  multiplied  is  stronger  than  strength.  Now, 
that  which  does  the  mischief  is  these  aphides,  these  myriad  infinitesimal  worms, 
these  pestiferous  httle  sins,  every  one  of  which  is  called  white,  and  is  a  mere 
nothing,  a  small  point — a  mote,  a  speck  of  dust.  Why,  many  a  caravan  has  been 
overtaken,  smothered  and  destroyed  by  clouds  of  dust,  the  separate  particles  of 
which  were  so  minute  as  to  be  almost  invisible.  Many  men  are  afraid  that  they 
will  be  left  to  some  great  sin — and  they  ought  to  fear  tiiat ;  but  they  have  not  the 
slightest  fear  of  that  which  is  a  great  deal  more  likely  to  bring  them  to  condemna- 
tion— the  series  of  petty  violations  of  conscience,  and  truth,  and  duty,  with  which 
human  experience  is  filled.  Here  is  where  every  man  should  most  seriously  ponder 
his  condition,  and  ask  himself,  •'  What  is  the  effect  of  the  conduct  that  I  am  day 
by  day  evolving  ?  Am  I  educating  myself  toward  moral  sensibility,  or  away  from 
moral  sensibility  ?  "  III.  This  leads  me  to  say  xhat  evert  man  shoum>  take  heed 
lo  THE  WAY  m  WHICH  HE  TREATS  HIS  CONSCIENCE.  'If'the  TigHtm  Hm  be  (larkness, 
hdw^^eaTirthat^aarkhessV  When  we  put  a  lighthouse  on  the  coast,  that  in  the 
night  mariners  may  explore  the  dark  and  terrible  way  of  the  sea,  we  not  only  swing 
glass  around  it  to  protect  it,  but  we  enclose  that  glass  itself  in  a  network  of  iron 
wire,  that  birds  may  not  dash  it  in,  the  summer  winds  may  not  swoop  it  out,  and 
that  swarms  of  insects  may  not  destroy  themselves  and  the  light.  For  if  the  light 
in  the  lighthouse  be  put  out,  how  great  a  darkness  falls  upon  the  land  and  upon  the 
tea.  And  the  mariner,  waiting  for  the  light,  or  seeing  it  not,  miscalculates,  and 
perishes.  Now,  a  man's  conscience  ought  to  be  protected  from  those  influences 
that  would  diminish  its  light,  or  that  would  put  it  out ;  but  there  are  thousands  of 
men  who  are  every  day  doing  their  utmost  to  destroy  this  light.  When  they  do 
wrong,  their  conscience  rebukes  them,  and  they  instantly  attempt  to  suppress  it  and 
put  it  down.  They  undertake  to  excuse  themselves  and  palliate  the  wrong.  The 
next  day,  when  they  do  wrong,  the  same  process  goes  on,  and  they  make  a  delibe- 
rate war  against  their  conscience ;  for  it  is  a  very  painful  thing  for  a  man  to  do 
wrong  and  carry  the  hurt,  and  he  feels  that  he  must  overcome  this  tormentor  if  he 
would  have  any  peace.  A  great  many  men  not  only  are  making  war  against  the 
light  of  God  in  the  soul,  but  are  beginning  to  feel  the  greatest  complacency  in  tbeir 
achievements.  They  come  to  a  state  in  which  they  can  lie  and  not  feel  bad.  They 
come  to  a  state  in  which  they  can  do  a  great  deal  of  injustice,  and  not  have  it  strike 
them  any  mere  as  injustice.  Men  that  have  got  along  so  far  in  this  moral 
perversion  that  their  conscience  has  ceased  to  trouble  them,  and  they  think  of 
wrong-doing  merely  as  a  thing  that  is  in  the  way  of  business,  are  sometimes  sor- 
prised  as  their  mind  strikes  back  to  the  time  when  they  were  more  sensitive  to 
right,  and  they  say,  •*  I  recollect  that,  ten  or  fifteen  years  ago,  when  I  first  began  to 
do  such  things,  I  used  to  be  so  troubled  about  them  that  I  lay  awake  nights  ;  but 
it  is  a  long  time  since  they  have  given  me  any  trouble."  They  muse,  and  say, 
"  How  queer  it  is.  I  used  to  shrink  from  things  that  were  not  just  right,  and  to  be 
afraid  to  deviate  in  the  least  from  the  strictest  rectitude ;  but  I  have  got  over  it. 
Now  I  do  not  feel  so.  How  is  it?  I  wonder  what  has  happened  to  me."  Oh, 
yes ;  you  wonder  what  has  happened  to  you.  There  has  been  death  in  your  house. 
The  cradle  is  empty.  Souls  die.  The  moral  element  of  your  soul  is  dead.  Why, 
many  and  many  a  man,  who  used  to  be  sensitive  to  purity,  whose  cheek  used  to 
colour  at  the  allusion  to  impurity,  has  got  so  now  that  the  whole  literature  of  im- 
purity is  familiar  to  him.  Impure  scenes,  impure  narratives,  the  whole  morbid 
intercourse  of  impure  minds,  they  now  never  feel  any  skrinking  from.  Their  moral 
nature  is  seared  as  with  a  hot  iron.  There  are  men  that  come  not  only  to  be  wicked, 
but  to  be  struck  through  and  through  with  wickedness,  so  that  they  love  men  that  are 
wicked,  and  hate  men  that  are  not.  They  come  to  have  a  great  contempt  for  anything 
that  is  not  wickedness,  and  to  have  a  great  regard,  if  not  respect,  for  wickedness 
itseli  And  this  they  come  to  not  at  a  plunge.  Me^,  cey^fia,.(ipAYp^Buch  a  inoral 
precipice  headlong..^  They  go  down  by  degrees.  TEe  decline  from  a  state  of  moral 
BeftSitivenesB  is  very  gradual — so  gradual  that  it  does  not  seem  to  men  to  be  on  the 
downward  way.  Flowers  are  round  about  their  feet,  the  path  is  shaded  and  plea- 
sant, and  they  go  far  down  before  they  begin  to  have  any  sense  of  an  approaching 
change.  The  way  from  right  to  wrong  is  a  deceptive  way,  and  a  fatal  way,  and  on 
it  men  go  far  along  toward  destruction  before  their  suspicions  are  awakened. 
{Ibid.)  Warning  and  encouragement: — 1.  There  is  here  a  very  full  proclafiiation 
of  the  grace  of  the  gospel  —  the  efficacy  of  His  blood.  2.  A  particular  sin  is 
nevertheless  singled  out,  and  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  forgiveness.  Warned 
ftgainst  it  rather  than  charged  with  it.    It  seems  to  belong  to  the  gospel  dispensa* 


CHAP,  m.]  ST.  MARK,  119 

tion.  3.  Its  characteristics  are — It  is  committed  against  the  Spirit  personally, 
Hgainst  the  clearest  demonstration,  from  malice,  without  relenting  or  repentance. 
Repentance,  being  a  grace  of  the  Spirit,  would  show  that  it  had  not  been  committed. 
iJ.  Stewart.)  Despair  vanquished  by  prayer : — I  have  read  of  one  in  despair  whom 
Satan  persuaded  it  was  in  vain  to  pray  or  serve  God,  for  he  must  certainly  go  to 
hell ;  he  nevertheless  still  went  to  prayer,  and  begged  of  God  that  if  he  must  go  to 
hell  when  he  died,  yet  He  would  please  give  him  leave  to  serve  Him  whilst  he  Hved. 
Having  thus  prayed,  his  terrors  vanished,  being  clearly  convinced  that  none  eonld 
pray  that  prayer  who  had  sinned  against  the  Holy  Ghost.    (Sheffield,) 

Vers.  31-36.  There  came  then  His  brethren  and  His  mother. — Spiritual  kinship 
with  Christ : — See  the  honour  and  dignity  of  good  Christians  that  believe  in  Christ. 
There  is  a  most  near  union  between  Christ  and  them,  even  as  near  as  between 
natural  parents  and  children,  or  between  those  that  are  of  nearest  kindred  by 
natural  birth :  therefore  He  accounts  them  as  His  spiritual  kindred,  as  dear  and 
near  to  Him  as  His  mother  and  brethren.  And  what  an  honour  is  this,  to  be  of 
the  spiritual  kindred  of  Christ  Himself,  to  be  called  and  accounted  His  brother  or 
His  sister.  If  it  be  an  honour  to  be  of  the  blood-royal,  or  of  the  kindred  of  some 
noble  personage,  how  much  more  honourable  to  be  the  brother  or  sister  of  Christ 
Jesus  1  Let  all  believers  think  of  this  dignity  vouchsafed  to  them ;  and  let  it  com- 
fort them  (as  well  it  may)  against  all  the  contempt  they  meet  with  in  the  world. 
The  grace  of  faith  engrafts  the  believer  into  the  stock  of  Christ,  and  brings  him 
within  His  pedigree,  making  him  to  be  of  most  near  kindred  with  Him  in  a  spiritual 
manner :  it  makes  Christ  and  the  believer  as  near  to  each  other  as  natural  parents 
and  children  ;  yea,  as  husband  and  wife,  for  it  marries  them  together,  whence  it  is 
that  Christ  is  said  to  be  the  Husband  of  the  true  Church.  Let  this  move  us  to 
labour  for  true  faith  in  Christ.  If  we  had  been  born  and  lived  about  the  time 
when  He  was  upon  earth,  would  we  not  have  been  glad  to  be  in  the  number  of  His 
natural  brethren  and  sisters  ?  How  much  more  desirous  should  we  be  to  be  His 
brethren  and  sisters  by  faith?  Never  rest  till  thou  know  thyself  a  believer  in 
Christ,  and  one  of  His  kindred  spiritually  engrafted  into  Him ;  without  this  thou 
art  miserable,  though  thou  hast  kinship  by  natural  blood  with  all  the  princes  and 
great  men  in  the  world.  {G.  Fetter.)  The  result  of  relationship  with  Jesus : — 
The  tenderest  human  ties  were  used  by  the  Son  of  God  as  an  illustration  of  our 
Divine  relationship.  To  be  Christ's  disciple  is  to  belong  to  His  family.  Home, 
with  its  deep-rooted  sympathies  and  precious  endearments,  is  to  picture  our  union 
with  the  Lord.  Religion  is  as  personal  in  its  affections  as  in  its  duties.  Holiness 
may  seem  to  the  undeveloped  saint  an  almost  fearful  thing,  hard  to  imagine,  im- 
possible to  realize.  But  to  live  with  Jesus  and  love  Him  is  very  real  and  very 
glorious.  The  believer  finds  a  hand  to  clasp,  a  face  to  gaze  upon,  an  ear  for 
whispered  confidences.  How  strange  and  beautiful  the  words  must  have  sounded. 
It  is  as  if  a  prince  had  taken  by  the  hand  a  rude  and  ignorant  slave,  and  drawn  him 
into  the  dignity  and  affection  of  the  royal  household.  (C.  M.  Southgate.)  Doing 
the  will  of  God: — One  of  the  household  words  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  empha- 
tically teaches  that  there  are  but  two  divisions  of  mankind — those  who  do  the  will 
of  God,  and  those  who  disobey  that  will ;  and  that  not  even  the  closest  blood  rela- 
tionships (much  less  the  possession  of  national,  or  church,  or  religious  privilege^ 
can  in  the  slightest  degree  affect  the  distinctness  and  permanence  of  the  line  between 
these  divisions.  Of  all  relationships,  spiritual  ones  are  the  closest ;  and  there  is 
but  one  permanent  relationship  to  God,  which  is  conformity  to  His  will.  (M.  F. 
Sadler.)  Spiritual  relationship: — A  poor,  but  pious,  woman  called  upon  two 
wealthy  and  refined  young  ladies,  who,  regardless  of  her  poverty,  received  her  with 
Christian  affection,  and  sat  down  in  the  drawing-room  to  converse  with  her  upon 
religious  subjects.  While  thus  employed,  a  dashing  youth  by  chance  entered,  a»'d 
appeared  astonished  to  see  his  sisters  thus  engaged.  One  of  them  instantly  started 
up  and  exclaimed,  ♦'  Brother,  don't  be  surprised  ;  this  is  a  king's  daughter,  though 
she  has  not  yet  got  her  fine  clothing."  Divine  "'elatiomhips  : — Let  us  look  at 
this  subject  in  one  or  two  of  its  important  bearings  Tipon  some  of  the  relative  positions 

of  life.      I.    As  REGARDS  OUR  TIES  OF   NATURAL  RELATIONSHIP  ONE  TO  ANOTHER.      There 

is  a  bond  stronger  even  than  the  strongest  bond  of  nature.  We  may  not  say  that 
Christ,  as  Divine,  had  an  independence  of  natural  affections.  Yet  these  consider- 
ations are  not  to  diminish  the  duty  and  affection  which  are  to  fasten  relations  to- 
f:ether ;  no  book  invests  our  home  relationship  with  such  sweetness  and  power  as 
^e  Bible.    Tet  there  is  a  bond  stronger.    It  is  of  the  very  last  importance  that  th« 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

ties  which  fafiten  us  together  in  blood  and  kindred  should  be  exceedingly  and  para- 
mountly  strong.     What  parent  does  not  feel  it  with  his  child  ?     What  husband 
does  not  feel  it  to  hiH  wife  ?  Or  what  brother  and  sister  do  not  feel  it  one  to  another  f 
See,  then,  the  immense  necessity  that  the  spiritual  and  the  natural  attachment  run 
in  one.    Otherwise,  there  will  be  a  want  of  sympathy.     Otherwise,  look  at  your 
position,  worldly  parents,  if  you  have  a  pious  child ;  or  you,  worldly  children,  il 
you  have  pious  parents ;  or  worldly  brothers  and  sisters,  if  you  have  pious  ones, 
with  all  you  love,  there  is  an  influence  at  work  in  this  world— and  it  may  spring  up 
any  moment  in  your  family — which  may  clash  with  the  natural  affections  and  the 
human  obligations.    And  remember  (it  is  almost  awful  to  say  it),  remember,  it  has 
in  it  the  elements  of  an  infinite  separation  for  ever  and  ever.    Do  I  say,  that  if  your 
child  is  rehgious  he  will  love  you  less  ?    God  forbid.    But  this  I  say,  that  if  a 
worldly  parent  has  a  religious  child,  that  child  may  be,  and  indeed  sometimes  mus* 
be,  placed  in  the  most  difficult  and  perplexing  of  all  possible  relationships — a  rela- 
tionship of  which  the  result  may  be  most  disastrous  to  peace.    On  the  other  hand, 
what  and  if  the  tide  of  grace  rolls  into  the  current  of  nature  7    What  and  if  the 
omnipotence  of  a  heavenly  love  wrap  round  and  bind  the  human  attachment  ?  What 
and  if  relations  are  one  in  the  unity  of  the  mystical  body  of  Christ  ?    What  and  if 
we  have  our  natural  fathers  spiritual  fathers,  and  our  natural  children  spiritual 
children,  and  our  natural  brothers  and  sisters  brothers  and  sisters  in  Christ  ?   How 
exceedingly,  how  eternally  happy  the  bond  1    Now  then,  brethren,  if  it  be  so,  what 
an  argument  there  is  here  I    Never  voluntarily  form  any  connection  which  is  not 
"  in  the  Lord  I "    And  what  an  argument  is  here  for  continual,  earnest  prayer,  and 
efforts  for  the  conversion  and  salvation  of  those  who  are  nearest  and  dearest  to  us. 
For  then  are  they  fathers,  mothers,  brothers,  sisters,  children  indeed  when  the  one 
Christ  in  all  hearts  makes  one  body  and  one  soul ;  and  the  ray  from  heaven  meet- 
ing the  ray  from  earth,  they  blend  together,  till  they  glow  into  a  perfect  flame  of 
light  and  love.    But  there  is  another  relative  duty  which  necessarily  grows  out  of 
these  words.    II:  And  now,  God  is  gathering  such  a  family  around  Him,  and  all 
the  feelings  and  affections  which  He  has  planted  in  these  hearts  of  ours,  even  the 
fondest,  abb  only  the  dim  types  and  shadows  of  that  higher  life,  when 
before  admiring  hosts  He  shall  say,  •*  Behold  My  mother  and  My  brethren." 
But  who  are  they  who  are  so  very  dear  to  Christ?    Now  mark  everywhere  Christ's 
jealousy  for  the  Father's  glory,  "Whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  My  Father." 
That  is  the  road  to  the  heart  of  Christ — do  God's  will.    The  determining  question 
is,  What  is  the  will  of  God?    Am  I  doing  it?    {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)         The  dif- 
ferent phases  of  the  love  of  Christ : — And  so  it  is,  my  brethren.     The  love  of 
Christ  is  represented  to  us  in  the  text  as  comprising  within  itself  all  those  affee- 
tions  which  endetir  our  homes  to  us,  and  which,  being  all  derived  from  His  fulness, 
are  parted  in  a  fragmentary  state  among  the  various  relationships  of  human  life. 
Consider  the  manifoldness  of  aspect  under  which  this  love  is  represented  to  us. 
Christ  Himself  is  represented  to  us  under  manifold  aspects — each  aspect  suitable 
and  satisfying  to  some  want  of  the  human  mind.    There  are  four  portraitures  of 
Christ— four  gospels;  and  why?      Because  the  subject  to  be  apprehended  is  in- 
finitely grand,  and  the  mind's  capabihties  of  apprehension  limited.    It  is  with  the 
mind  as  with  the  eye.     If  an  object  be  real  and  substantial,  the  eye  does  not  take 
it  in,  in  its  integrity,  by  viewing  it  on  one  side  only.    Thus  it  is  with  a  house  or 
other  building.    You  survey  it  from  a  point  at  which  only  one  side  is  turned  towards 
you.    It  presents  certain  features,  a  certain  arrangement  of  buttress  and  arch,  door* 
way  and  window.    This,  however,  is  but  a  superficial  acquaintance  with  it.      Go 
round,  and  view  another  side.    You  discover  there  fresh  designs  of  architectural 
beauty,  or  fresh  adaptations  to  the  convenience  of  the  inmates.  And  now  a  third  side. 
It  is  in  shade  and  frowns — leaving  altogether  an  impression  on  the  mind,  totally 
different  from  that  upon  whose  white  marble  the  sunlight  was  sparkling.    When 
you  have  seen  the  fourth  side,  you  have  seen  all :  your  impression  is  complete--it 
IS  made  up  of  various  elements,  but  all  combine  to  form  one  whole.    Now  the  mind 
resembles  the  eye.    It  can  only  become  acquainted  with  objects — especially  with 
large  and  comprehensive  objects — piecemeal.    It  cannot  gain  the  whole  truth  from 
one  survey,  without  planting  itself  at  different  standing-points.    Even  so  it  will 
help  us  to  realize  the  love  of  Christ,  if  we  consider  one  by  one  its  various  elements, 
those  bright  lines  which  enter  into  its  composition.     I.  What  is  the  distinguish- 
ing  trait  of  a  brotheb's  love.    The  idea  is  not  congeniality  of  tastes  in  every 
respect,  but  active  support  in  all  the  struggles  and  difi&culties  of  life.    This,  then,  is 
the  first  phase  of  the  love  which  is  in  Christ— the  love  of  active  support     II.  '*  The 


CHAP.  lU.]  ST.  MARK.  121 

flame  is  My  sister.**  A  love  remarkable  for  its  tenderness  and  delicacy — different 
from  that  entertained  towards  a  brother.  This,  then,  is  the  second  phase  of  the  love 
which  is  in  Christ — the  being  sensitive  to  the  feelings  of  the  person  loved.  III. 
"  The  same  is  My  mother.'*  The  love  entertained  for  a  sister  and  mother  have  the 
one  element  in  common.  But  superadded  is  a  feeling  of  reverence,  honour,  and 
gratitude  (1  Kings  ii.  19).  "  Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour  "  (1  Sam.  ii.  30). 
That  God  and  Christ  will  honour  sinful  man  confers  great  dignity.  Such,  then,  are 
the  several  ingredients  of  the  love  of  Christ  towards  all  those  who  come  under  the 
terms  here  specified.  Nay,  all  love  and  affection,  existing  among  men,  in  whatever 
quarter  and  under  whatever  circumstances,  may  be  said  to  be  comprised  in  His  love, 
— to  be  a  mere  emanation  from  the  fulness  of  love  which  is  in  Him.  Again  I  recur 
to  my  image  of  the  light.  Light  is  one  thing,  though  comprising  in  itself  several 
hues.  All  the  fair  hues  of  nature  inhere  in  the  light — so  that  where  there  is  no 
light,  there  is  no  colour.  Wherever  the  light  travels,  it  disparts  its  colours  to 
natural  objects — to  one  after  this  manner,  to  another  after  that — the  emerald  green 
to  the  leaves — to  the  flowers  violet,  and  yellow,  and  crimson.  And  in  the  same 
manner  all  love  is  in  Christ,  and  is  from  Him,  as  its  Fountain-head  and  Centre, 
disparted  among  the  various  relations  of  human  life.  A  ray  from  His  light  struggles 
forth  in  the  care  of  the  father,  in  the  tenderness  of  the  mother,  in  the  active  support 
of  the  brother  or  friend,  in  the  sister's  refined  sympathy — nay,  in  the  affectionate 
homage  of  the  son.  And  this  whole  love,  in  all  its  manifold  elements,  is  brought 
to  converge,  with  unshorn  beams,  upon  that  thrice  happy  man  or  boy,  who  does  the 
will  of  God.     {E.  F,  Goulburn,  D.C.L.)        The  kinsmen  of  Christ:— I,  Christ 

DETERMINES  THE  CLAIMS  OF  EARTHLY  RELATIONSHIP,  WHEN  COMPARED  WITH  THE  CLAIMS 

OF  God  and  dutt.  1.  His  mother  and  brethren  presumed  on  their  relationship. 
2.  The  multitude  concurred.  3.  Christ  practically  declared  the  superior  claims  of 
duty — or  of  God,  to  those  of  earthly  relations.  Eelations  and  duty  often  clash. 
But  for  this  decision,  how  much  difficulty,  &c.  How  much  support  has  it  given. 
II.  The  weakness  or  the  ties  of  nature,  when  compared  with  those  ties  to 
WHICH  the  oosfel  GIVES  EXISTENCE.  1.  Christ  asked  who  His  mother  and  brethren 
were,  t.e.,  who  stood  to  Him  in  nearest  relation?  2.  He  answered  the  question — 
His  disciples.  The  one  temporary,  the  other  eternal.  3.  Their  comparative  strength 
has  been  tried.  4.  How  beautiful  when  united  1  III.  The  honourable  position 
OF  BELIEVERS — the  Musmen  of  Christ.  1.  He  has  entered  the  human  family.  2. 
He  has  introduced  them  into  the  Divine  family.  3.  As  a  kinsman  He  redeemed 
the  inheritance  which  was  lost.  4.  He  is  not  ashamed,  in  heaven,  to  call  them 
brethren.  6.  They  take  rank  from  Him,  not  He  from  them.  IV.  The  charaoteb 
OF  Christ's  kinsmen.  1.  It  is  in  respect  of  the  moral  nature  that  man  is  bom 
again.  2.  The  Divine  nature,  which  through  regeneration  is  imparted,  is  holiness. 
8.  Hence  the  family  likeness,  i.<.,  holiness.  {Expository  Discourses.)  Relation- 
ship to  Christ : — I.  Its  importance.  It  is  an  everlasting  relationship.  1.  It  delivers 
us  from  what  is  earthly  and  vain.  It  is  only  by  the  formation  of  a  higher  kins- 
manship  that  we  can  be  severed  from  the  drag  of  the  carnal.  2.  It  connects  with 
salvation  and  eternal  life.  It  is  the  grafting  into  the  living  stem  of  the  vine.  3. 
It  connects  ns  with  honour  and  glory.  All  that  our  kinsman  has  becomes  ours. 
II.  Its  formation  (John  i.  12).  This  is  the  first  point  at  which  we  commence 
doing  the  will  of  God.  III.  Its  Manifestation.  A  life  of  service,  of  doing  the 
Father's  will.  1.  Are  our  hearts  doing  the  Father's  will?  2.  Are  our  intfllects 
doing  the  Father's  will  ?  3.  Are  our  purposes  doing  the  Father's  will  ?  4.  Is  our 
life  doing  the  Father's  will  ?  6.  Is  our  family  doing  the  Father's  will  t  6.  Is  our 
business  life  doing  the  Father's  will?  Thus  let  us  test  our  relationship  to  Christ. 
{H.  Bonar^  D.D.)  The  test  of  relationship  : — If  you  go  out  into  the  woods  in 
the  summer,  you  may  see,  high  up  on  some  tree,  a  branch  with  dry  twigs  and 
withered  leaves.  It  seems  to  be  a  part  of  the  tree.  Yet  when  you  look  closer,  you 
find  it  has  been  broken  away,  and  now  it  is  only  a  piece  of  dead  wood  encumbering 
ft  living  tree.  The  test  of  relationship  with  the  tree  is  life — fruit-bearing.  That 
is  also  the  test  of  relationship  with  Christ.  The  power  which  binds  the  iron  to  the 
magnet  is  unseen,  but  real ;  the  iron  so  bound  becomes  itself  a  magnet :  the  power 
that  binds  believers  to  Christ  and  makes  them  members  of  Him,  is  as  real,  though 
ftlso  unseen. 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vers.  1,  2.  And  He  began  again  to  teach  by  the  seasldt. — ChrUt  teaching  ;— 

1.  The  PLACE  where  Christ  taught.  1.  By  the  Beaside.  Opposed  to  a  prevailing 
notion.  This  example  at  present  imitated.  2.  In  a  ship.  The  spread  of  the 
gospel  prefigured.     II.  Those  who  formed  His  audience.     1.  The  general  crowd. 

2.  The  apostles  and  disciples.  III.  The  manner  in  which  Christ  taught.  1,  He 
taught  the  multitudes  in  parables.  Remarkable  for  simplicity  when  understood. 
Very  apt  and  likely  to  be  misunderstood.  2.  He  explained  His  parables  to  His 
disciples,  but  this  was  accompanied  by  reproof.  IV.  The  beason  wht  Hi  taught 
THE  MULTITUDE  IN  PABABLE8.  1.  As  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  2 ; 
Matt.  xiii.  34,  36).  2.  In  consequence  of  the  moral  state  of  the  Jewish  nation 
(Isa.  vi.  9,  10 ;  Matt  xiii.  14,  16,  and  elsewhere).  3.  Originally,  and  as  quoted, 
describes  a  particular  moral  state,  in  which — The  Word  is  not  understood,  not  felt, 
does  not  convert,  is  not  heard.  This  state  is  ascribed  to  themselves,  to  the  prophet, 
to  God  (Matt.  xiii.  14,  16 ;  Isa.  vi.  9, 10 ;  John  xii.  40).  Learn  :  That  the  ungodly 
see  and  near  without  understanding ;  that  in  order  that  a  people  be  left  in  darkness, 
it  is  not  necessary  that  the  gospel  be  removed  ;  thut  when  a  faithful  ministry  is 
sent  to  a  people,  it  is  not  always  for  their  conversion ;  that  the  means  of  converting 
are  also  the  means  of  hardening.  V.  The  reason  why  Christ  taught  His 
DISCIPLES  MORE  DIRECTLY.  1.  A  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom 
was  a  gift  to  them.  2.  Instruction  was  the  mode  of  conveying  it.  {Expository 
I>isc(mr8e$.)  By  parables. — The  use  and  abuse  of  allegorical  instruction : — Lay 
down  some  rules  to  assist  in  the  interpretation  of  parables.  1.  The  first  and 
principal  one  I  shall  mention  is,  the  carefully  attending  to  the  occasion  of  them. 
No  one,  for  instance,  can  be  at  a  loss  to  explain  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son, 
who  considers  that  our  Lord  had  been  discoursing  with  publicans  and  sinners,  and 
that  the  proud  and  self-righteous  Pharisees  had  taken  offence  at  His  conduct. 
With  this  key  we  are  let  into  the  true  secret  of  this  beautiful  parable,  and  cannot 
mistake  in  our  comment  upon  it.  Understanding  thus  from  the  occasion  of  the 
parable  what  is  the  grand  truth  or  duty  meant  to  be  inculcated,  2.  Our  attention 
should  be  steadily  fixed  to  that  object.  If  we  suffer  ourselves  to  be  diverted  from  it 
by  dweUing  too  minutely  upon  the  circumstances  of  the  parable,  the  end  proposed 
by  BUm  who  spake  it  will  be  defeated,  and  the  whole  involved  in  obscurity.  For  it 
is  much  the  same  here  as  in  considering  a  fine  painting ;  a  comprehensive  view  ol 
the  whole  will  have  a  happy  and  striking  effect,  but  that  effect  will  not  be  felt  if  the 
eye  is  held  to  detached  parts  of  the  picture  without  regarding  the  relation  they  bear 
to  the  rest.  Were  a  man  to  spend  a  whole  hour  on  the  circumstances  of  the  ring 
and  the  robe  in  the  parable  just  referred  to,  or  on  the  two  mites  in  that  of  the  good 
Samaritan,  it  is  highly  probable  both  he  and  his  hearers  by  the  time  they  got  to  the 
close  of  the  discourse,  would  lose  all  idea  of  our  Saviour's  more  immediate  intent  in 
both  those  instructive  parables.  3.  That  great  caution  should  be  observed  in  our 
reasoning  from  ttie  parables  to  the  peculiar  doctrines  of  Christianity.  (1)  An 
intemperate  use  of  figures  tends  to  sensualize  the  mind  and  deprave  the  taste. 
Sensible  objects  engross  the  attention  of  mankind,  and  have  an  undue  influence  on 
their  appetites  and  passions.  They  walk  by  sight,  not  by  faith.  (2)  The  misappli- 
cation of  figures,  whereby  false  ideas  are  given  the  hearer  of  the  things  they  are 
made  to  stand  for.  It  ife  easy  to  conceive  how  men's  notions  of  the  other  world, 
invisible  spirits,  and  the  blessed  God  Himself,  may  in  this  way  be  perverted.  A 
licentious  imagination  has  given  rise  to  tenets  the  most  absurd  and  impious.  To 
this  the  idolatry  of  the  pagan  world  may  be  traced  up  as  its  proper  source  (Rom.  i. 
21-28).  (3)  The  reasoning  injudiciously  from  types  and  figures,  begets  a  kind  oi 
faith  that  is  precarious  and  ineffectual.  We  have  clear  and  positive  proofs  of  the 
facts  the  gospel  relates,  and  the  important  doctrines  that  are  founded  thereon. 
But  if,  instead  of  examining  these  proofs  to  the  bottom,  and  reasoning  with  men 
upon  them,  we  content  ourselves  with  mere  analogical  evidence,  and  rest  the  issue 
of  the  question  in  debate  upon  fanciful  and  imaginary  grounds,  our  faith  will  be 
continually  wavering,  and  produce  no  substantial  and  abiding  fruits.  An  enthusiast, 
struck  with  appearances,  instantly  yields  his  assent  to  a  proposition,  without  con- 
sidering at  all  the  evidence.  But  as  soon  as  his  passions  cool,  and  the  false  glare 
npon  his  imagination  subsides,  his  faith  dies  away,  and  the  fruit  expected  from  it 
proves  utterly  abortive.     (S.  StennetU  D.D.) 


.  !▼.]  ST.  MARK.  12S 

Ver.  3.  Hearken;  1>ebold,  tbere  went  ont  a  Bower  to  sow. — Parable  of  th4 
fower : — This  parable  is  both  a  solemn  lesson  and  warning,  and  also  a  description 
of  what  is  actually  taking  place  in  the  world.  There  are  calls  to  lead  a  holy  life 
perpetually  going  on ;  there  are  either  sudden  rejections  or  gradual  forgettings  of 
those  calls.  Such  calls  may  differ  in  degree,  and  strength,  and  strikingness 
of  the  impression,  but  they  are  all  calls ;  a  truth  is  distinctly  embraced  bv  the 
mind  of  the  person  at  the  time :  he  sees  that  something  is  true  which  he 
had  not  realized  to  be  true  before,  and  had  only  held  in  word.  That  perscc 
can  never  afterwards  say  he  did  not  know  or  was  not  made  fully  aware  of 
Christian  truth ;  or  that  it  was  always  brought  before  him  in  such  a  way  that  he 
could  not  recognize  it.  He  has  been  made  to  see  it,  and  to  recognize  it.  The 
point  with  which  this  parable  deals  is  the  various  kinds  of  treatment  accorded  by 
different  people  to  these  calls.  Let  us  look  at  the  several  classes.  I.  The  un- 
scBUPULOus.  By  a  bold,  proud,  sometimes  even  sudden  and  impulsive  act  of  sin, 
they  oast  out  of  their  hearts  something  which  incommodes  and  annoys  them,  and 
threatens  to  interfere  with  their  plan  of  enjoyment.  These  are  they  who  have 
made  up  their  minds  to  get  on  in  life,  and  they  refuse  to  let  anything  interfere  with 
the  realization  of  this  desire.  Judas.  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  I  do  not  say  that 
a  man  may  not  recover  spiritually  after  having  inflicted  such  a  blow  upon  himself, 
but  it  is  a  dreadful  act,  which  provokes  the  righteous  justice  of  God,  and  that  worst 
of  punishments,  a  hardened  heart.  II.  The  light-minded  and  cabeless.  These 
could  receive  the  Word,  because  that  merely  implies  the  capacity  of  being  acted 
upon  by  solemn  and  powerful  representations  of  the  truth ;  which  they  might  be, 
just  as  they  might  be  impressed  by  some  striking  scene  or  incident.  But,  being 
without  energy  of  their  own  to  take  hold  of  the  Word  and  extract  its  powers,  they 
soon  fall  away.  To  begin  a  thing,  and  to  go  on  with  it,  are  two  totally  different 
affairs.  The  commencement  is  in  its  own  nature  something  fresh ;  but  to  go  on 
with  an  undertaking  is  to  do  things  over  and  over  again,  when  all  the  freshness 
has  disappeared,  and  no  incentive  remains  but  the  sense  of  duty.  This  is  the  true 
test,  and  under  it  how  many  fail  1  Upon  how  many  do  we  count  for  continuing 
their  profession  under  different  circumstances  f  Is  there  not  a  regular  expectation 
formed  in  us,  when  we  estimate  the  manifestations  which  men  make,  that  they  will 
not  last ;  that  they  have  their  time,  like  the  seasons  or  periods  of  weather,  and  that 
they  will  end  as  naturally  as  they  have  begun?  Can  there  be  a  greater  contrast  to  the 
abiding  faithfulness  of  the  gospel  pattern  f  III.  The  worldlt.  These  are  not  light- 
minded  men  altogether ;  they  are  serious  as  regards  this  world,  calculating,  exer- 
cising forecast,  attentive,  persevering ;  but  it  is  solely  in  relation  to  this  world  that 
they  maintain  this  gravity  and  seriousness.  They  do  not  give  a  place  in  their  thoughts 
to  another  world.  What  a  common  mistake  with  regard  to  religion  this  is  I  Our 
Lord  says,  **  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon ;  "  and  yet  it  would  almost  appear 
as  if  one-half  of  mankind  had  determined  to  prove  Him  a  liar,  and  to  show  that 
that  is  possible  which  He  declared  was  not.  Each  one  thinks  that  in  his  own  par- 
ticular case  there  will  be  a  complete  agreement  in  these  two  great  aims  and  under- 
takings,  the  earthly  and  the  spiritual ;  that  others  may  have  missed  this  union,  but 
that  they  will  fix  upon  it.  They  enter  upon  their  course  in  life  with  a  swing. 
Feeling  no  hesitation  about  themselves,  they  plunge  into  the  thick  of  the  struggle 
for  the  world's  possessions,  they  are  carried  away  with  the  ardour  of  the  pursuit, 
and  they  do  not  imagine  at  all  that  they  are  injuring  or  suppressing  the  religious 
principle  in  them.  They  think  that  can  maintain  itself,  and  therefore  they  never 
think  of  looking  after  it,  to  see  how  it  is  faring.  And  so  the  stream  carries  them 
along,  being  interested  in  the  objects  of  the  world,  content  with  supposition  and 
doing  nothing  about  religion  ;  until  that  which  has  thriven  by  practice  has  com- 
pletely driven  out  the  principle  which  has  had  no  exercise,  and  the  result  is  a 
simple  man  of  the  world.  IV.  Opposed  to  all  thebe  is  the  treatment  gfven  to 
THE  Word  by  the  honest  and  oood  heart.  Not  sinning  against  light ;  not  abandon- 
ing  what  it  has  undertaken  ;  not  captivated  by  worldly  pomp  and  show ;  it  is  faith- 
ful to  God ;  it  knows  the  excellence  of  religion ;  it  is  able  to  count  the  cost,  and 
make  the  sacrifice  which  is  necessary  for  the  great  end  in  view.  Have  we  this  f 
We  cannot  be  certain  of  it  until  we  have  continued  and  persevered  to  the  end. 
Those  who  have  begun  well  may  boldly  cast  away  the  Spirit,  or  they  may  fall  away 
from  grace  because  they  have  no  root,  or  they  may  be  swallowed  up  by  the  cares 
and  aims  of  worldly  life.  We  kuow  not  what  we  are  till  we  have  been  tried  to 
that  extent  which  God  thinks  fit.  But  so  far  as  we  have  striven,  we  may  feel  a 
comfortable  sense  that  we  do  possess  that  heart;  and  certainly,  if  we  have  not  striven^ 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

we  cannot  give  onrselves  any  such  hope.  Let  as  strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait 
gate,  and  to  be  found  among  the  faithful.  (J.  B.  Mozley,  D.D.)  The  effect  oj 
Divine  truth  as  conditioned  by  the  state  of  men's  hearts  : — The  title  with  which  we 
are  familiar  is  almost  a  misnomer.  It  is  not  the  sower  who  is  most  prominent,  for 
the  seed  of  the  Word  is  a  more  important  factor ;  nor  yet  is  the  seed,  for  it  is  the 
foar  kinds  of  soil  into  which  it  shall  fall  that  determines  the  seed's  future.  If 
preachers  and  teachers  are  drawing  lessons  from  the  parable,  then  it  may  be  well 
called  the  Parable  of  the  Sower ;  but  if  the  hearers  of  the  Word  are  getting  their 
lessons  from  it,  they  will  find  the  greater  part  of  the  parable  telling  of  the  soil  and 
the  false  growths  therein  that  may  render  the  Word  unfruitful.  Jesus,  standing  by 
the  seashore,  and  surveying  the  motley  company  before  Him,  gives  us  a  prophecy 
of  the  future  of  His  truth  among  men.  It  cannot  win  an  easy  triumph.  The  seed 
is  God's  own,  but  it  does  not  create  its  own  soiL  It  drops  on  what  is  at  hand,  and 
is  to  be  scattered  broadcast,  to  meet  varied  fortunes.  {E,  N.  Packard.)  The 
soioer : — ^I.  The  function  of  the  sower,  not  destructive  but  constructive ;  not  to  root 
up  or  remove,  but  to  plant.  H.  The  loneliness  of  the  sower.  A  sower.  The 
reaper  may  work  amidst  a  company,  but  the  sower  is  always  alone.  Thousands 
reap  the  fruit  of  what  one  man  sows.  III.  The  season  when  he  goes  forth  to  sow. 
No  foliage,  no  verdure,  sky  cloudy,  and  air  cold.  IV.  Sowing  is  a  sorrowful  process. 
He  goes  forth  weeping.  He  must  part  with  a  certain  amount  of  present  good,  in 
order  to  obtain  a  larger  amount  of  future  good.  V.  The  nature  of  the  seed  which 
he  sows.  The  word  of  truth  must  be  the  word  of  life.  {Hugh  Macmillan.)  The 
sower : — ^I.  The  bower.  1.  Unity  of  purpose.  His  work  was  seed  sowing,  not  soil 
culture.  2.  Variety  of  results.  H.  The  seed.  1.  Its  origin.  Every  seed  was 
originated  by  Christ.  But  there  is  a  sense  in  which  every  man  originates  his  own 
seed.  This  he  does  when  he  is  true  to  his  individuality.  2.  Its  vitality.  3.  Its 
growth.  Man  can  sow,  God  alone  can  quicken.  4.  Its  identity.  The  seed  is  the 
same  in  all  ages  and  climes.  III.  The  soil.  1.  Hardness — •'  Some  seeds  fell  by 
the  wayside,"  &c.  2.  Shallowness — "  And  some  fell  upon  stony  places,"  &o.  8. 
Preoccupancy — "  And  some  fell  among  thorns,"  &o.  4.  Bichness — "  Other  fell 
into  good  ground,"  &o.  This  soil  contained  aU  the  qualities  essential  to  fruitfulness. 
Moisture,  depth,  cleanness,  and  quality.  {A.  G.  Churchill.)  The  leading  ideas  of 
the  parable  explained : — These  are — the  sower,  the  seed,  the  ground,  and  the  effect 
of  casting  the  seed  into  it.  I.  By  the  sower  is  meant  our  Saviour  Himself,  and 
all  those  whose  o£&oe  it  is  to  instruct  men  in  the  truth  and  duties  of  religion.  The 
business  of  the  husbandman  is,  of  all  others,  most  important  and  necessary, 
requires  much  skill  and  attention,  is  painful  and  laborious,  and  yet  not  without 
pleasure  and  profit.  A  man  of  this  profession  ought  to  be  well  versed  in  agricul- 
ture, to  understand  the  difference  of  soils,  the  various  methods  of  cultivating  the 
ground,  the  seed  proper  to  be  sown,  the  seasons  for  every  kind  of  work,  and  in 
short  how  to  avail  himself  of  aU  circumstances  that  arise  for  the  improvement  of 
his  farm.  He  should  be  patient  of  fatigue,  inured  to  disappointment,  and  unwearied 
in  his  exertions.  Every  day  will  have  its  proper  business.  Now  he  will  manure 
his  ground,  then  plough  it ;  now  cast  the  seed  into  it,  then  harrow  it ;  incessantly 
watch  and  weed  it ;  and  after  many  anxious  cares,  and,  if  a  man  of  piety,  many 
prayers  to  heaven,  he  will  earnestly  expect  the  approaching  harvest.  The  time  come, 
with  a  joyful  eye  he  will  behold  the  ears  fully  ripe  bending  to  the  hands  of  the 
reapers,  put  in  the  sickle,  collect  the  sheaves,  and  bring  home  the  precious  grain 
to  his  garner.  Hence  we  may  frame  an  idea  of  the  character  and  duty  of  a 
Christian  minister.  He  ought  to  be  well- skilled  in  Divine  knowledge,  to  have  a 
competent  acquaintance  with  the  world  and  the  human  heart,  <fco.  Of  these  sowers 
•ome  have  been  more  skilful,  and  successful,  and  laborious  than  others.  Among 
them  the  Apostle  Paul  holds  a  distinguished  rank.  But  the  most  skilful  and  painf lU 
of  aU  sowers  was  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  II.  The  Seed  sown,  which  our  Saviour 
explains  of  "  the  Word  of  the  Kingdom,"  or  as  St.  Luke  has  it,  "  the  Word  of  God." 
The  husbandman  wiU  be  careful  to  sow  his  ground  with  good  seed.  He  goeth  forth 
bearing  precious  seed.  By  "  the  Word  of  the  Kingdom  "  is  meant  the  gospel.  Let 
as  apply  it — 1.  To  personal  religion.  In  the  heart  of  every  real  Christian  a  kingdom 
is  established.  Now  the  seed  sown  in  the  hearts  of  men  is  the  Word  of  this  kingdom, 
or  that  Divine  instruction  which  relates  to  the  foundation,  erection,  principles, 
maxims,  laws,  immunities,  government,  present  happiness,  and  future  glory  of  this 
kingdom :  all  which  we  have  contained  in  our  Bibles.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  Christ. 
Again,  let  us  apply  the  idea  of  a  kingdom,  3.  To  the  Christian  dispensation,  or  the 
whole  yisible  church.    In  this  sense  it  is  nsed  by  John  the  Baptist,  "  Repent  ye : 


CHAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK.  125 

for  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  that  is,  the  gospel  dispensation,  ••  is  at  hand."  All 
who  profess  the  doctrine,  and  submit  to  the  institutions  of  Christ,  compose  one 
body  of  which  He  is  the  head,  one  kingdom  of  which  He  is  the  sovereign—'*  a  king- 
dom which,"  He  himself  tells  us,  •♦  is  not  of  this  world."  Now  the  gospel  is  the 
seed  of  this  kingdom,  as  it  gives  us  the  laws  by  which  it  is  to  be  regulated,  of  worship, 
ordinances,  discipline,  protection,  increase  and  final  glory.  Once  more,  the  term 
kingdom  is  to  be  understood  also,  3.  Of  heaven,  and  all  the  happiness  and  glory  to 
be  enjoyed  there.  The  gospel  is  the  Word  of  this  kingdom,  as  it  has  assured  us  upon 
the  most  certain  grounds  of  its  reality,  and  given  us  the  amplest  description  of  its 
glories  our  present  imperfect  faculties  are  capable  of  receiving.  III.  To  consider 
THK  GBOUND  iuto  which  the  seed  is  cast,  by  which  our  Saviour  intends  the  soul  of 
man,  that  is,  the  understanding,  judgment,  memory,  will,  and  affections.  The 
ground,  I  mean  the  earth  on  which  we  tread,  is  now  in  a  different  state  from  what 
it  was  in  the  beginning,  the  curse  of  God  having  been  denounced  upon  it.  In  like 
manner,  the  soul  of  man,  in  consequence  of  the  apostacy  of  our  first  parents,  is 
enervated,  polluied,  and  depraved.  It  shall  suffice  at  present  to  observe,  that  as 
there  is  a  variety  in  the  soil  of  different  countries,  and  as  the  ground  in  some  places 
is  less  favourable  for  cultivation  than  in  others,  so  it  is  in  regard  of  the  soul.  There 
is  a  difference  in  the  strength,  vigour,  and  extent  of  men's  natural  faculties ;  nor 
can  it  be  denied  that  the  moral  powers  of  the  soul  are  corrupted  in  some,  through 
sinful  indulgences,  to  a  greater  degree  than  in  others.  As  to  mental  abilities,  who 
is  not  struck  with  the  prodigious  disparity  observable  among  mankind  in  this 
respect  ?  Here  we  see  one  of  a  clear  understanding,  a  lively  imagination,  a  sound 
judgment,  a  retentive  memory,  and  there  another,  remarkably  deficient  in  each  of 
these  excellences,  if  not  wholly  destitute  of  them  all.  These  are  gifts  distributed 
among  mankind  in  various  portions.  But  none  possess  them  in  that  perfection 
they  were  enjoyed  by  our  first  ancestors  in  their  primeval  state.  The  ground  must 
be  first  made  good,  and  then  it  will  be  fruitful.  IV.  Consider  the  general  pbocess 
of  this  business,  as  it  is  either  expressly  described  or  plainly  intimated  in  the  parable. 
The  ground,  first  manured  and  made  good,  is  laid  open  by  the  plough,  the  seed  is 
cast  into  it,  the  eartib  is  thrown  over  it,  in  the  bosom  of  the  earth  it  remains 
awhile,  at  length,  mingling  with  it,  it  gradually  expands,  shoots  up  through  the 
olods,  rises  into  the  stalk  and  then  the  ear,  so  ripens,  and  at  the  appointed  time  brings 
forth  fruit.  Such  is  the  wonderful  process  of  vegetation.  Nor  can  we  advert  thus 
generally  to  these  particulars,  without  taking  into  view  at  once  the  exertions  of  the 
husbandman,  the  mutual  operation  of  the  seed  and  the  earth  on  each  other,  and  the 
seasonable  influence  of  the  sun  and  the  rain,  under  the  direction  and  benediction 
of  Divine  providence.  So,  in  regard  of  the  great  business  of  religion,  the  hearts  of 
men  are  first  disposed  to  listen  to  the  instructions  of  God's  Word ;  these  instructions 
are  then,  like  the  seed,  received  into  the  understanding,  will,  and  affections ;  and 
after  a  while,  having  had  their  due  operation  there,  bring  forth,  in  various  degrees, 
the  acceptable  fruits  of  love  and  obedience.  And  how  natural,  in  this  case,  as  in 
the  former,  while  we  are  considering  the  rise  and  progress  of  religion  in  the  soul,  to 
advert,  agreeable  to  the  figure  in  the  parable,  to  the  happy  concurrence  of  a  Divine 
influence,  with  the  great  truths  of  the  gospel,  dispensed  by  ministers,  and  with  the 
reasonings  of  the  mind  and  heart  about  them.  To  shut  out  all  idea  here  of  such 
influence  would  be  as  absurd  as  to  exclude  the  influence  of  the  atmosphere  and 
sun  from  any  concern  in  culture  and  vegetation.  Let  the  husbandman  lay  what 
manure  he  will  on  barren  ground,  it  can  produce  no  change  in  the  temperature  ol 
it,  unless  it  thoroughly  penetrates  it,  and  kindly  mingles  with  it ;  and  this  it  cannot 
do  without  the  assistance  of  the  falling  dew  and  rain,  and  the  genial  heat  of  the 
sun.  In  like  manner,  all  attempts,  however  proper  in  themselves,  to  change  the 
hearts  of  men,  and  to  dispose  them  to  a  cordial  reception  of  Divine  truths,  will  be 
▼ain  without  the  concurrence  of  Almighty  grace.  Eeflectiona  :  1.  How  honourable, 
important,  and  laborious  is  the  employment  of  ministers.  2.  What  a  great  blessing 
is  the  Word  of  God.  3.  What  cause  have  we  for  deep  humiliation  before  God,  when 
we  reflect  on  the  miserable  depravity  of  human  nature.  4.  How  great  are  our  obliga- 
tions to  Divine  grace  for  the  renewing  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Let  not  the 
regard  which  the  sower  pays  to  Divine  providence,  reproach  out  inattention  and 
insensibility  to  th^  more  noble  and  salutary  influences  of  Divine  grace.  (S.  Stennett, 
D.D.)  The  four  hinds  of  soil: — The  growth  of  the  seed  depends  always  on  the  qurtlity 
of  the  soil.  The  stress  of  the  story  lies  not  on  the  churacter  of  the  sower,  or  even 
on  the  quality  of  the  seed,  but  on  the  nature  of  the  soil.  The  character  of  the 
bearer  determines  the  effect  of  the  Word  upon  him.     We  should  cultivate  the  habit 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch^.  iy. 

of  profitable  hearing.  It  is  well  that  our  students  should  be  instructed  how  to 
preach,  but  it  is  equally  important  that  the  people  should  be  taught  how  to  hear ; 
for  if  it  be  true,  as  is  sometimes  cynically  said,  that  good  preaching  is  one  of  the 
lost  arts,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  good  hearing  also  has  too  largely  disappeared ;  and, 
wherever  the  fault  may  have  begun,  the  two  act  and  re-act  on  each  other.  A  good 
hearer  makes  a  lively  preacher,  just  as  really  as  a  poor  preacher  makes  a  dull 
hearer ;  and  eloquence  is  not  all  in  the  speaker.  To  use  Mr.  Gladstone's  illustra- 
tion, he  gets  from  his  hearers  in  vapour  that  which  he  returns  to  them  in  tiood^ 
and  a  receptive  and  responsive  audience  adds  fervour  and  intensity  to  his  utterance. 
Eloquent  hearing,  therefore,  is  absolutely  indispensable  to  effective  preaching;  and 
so  it  is  quite  as  necessary  that  listeners  should  be  taught  to  hear,  as  it  is  that 
preachers  should  be  taught  what  and  how  to  speak.  1.  Taking,  then,  first, 
the  things  to  be  guarded  against,  we  find  foremost  among  these  the  danger  of 
preventing  the  truth  from  getting  any  entrance  into  the  soul  at  all.  The  seed 
that  fell  upon  the  pathway  lay  on  the  outside  of  the  soil.  The  ground  had 
been  so  hardened  by  the  tread  of  many  feet,  that  the  grain  could  not  get  into  it. 
The  Boul  may  be  sermon-hardened  as  well  as  sin-hardened.  But  another  thing 
which  makes  a  foot- walk  over  the  soul  is  evil  habit.  2.  But  a  second  danger  to  be 
avoided  is  that  of  shallow  impulsiveness.  So  the  man  of  shallow  nature  makes  a 
great  show  at  first.  He  is  all  enthusiasm.  He  "  never  heard  sucli  a  sermon  in  aU 
his  life."  He  seems  greatly  moved,  and  for  a  time  it  looks  as  if  he  were  really 
converted ;  but  it  does  not  last.  It  is  but  an  ague-fever,  which  is  succeeded  by  a 
freezing  chill ;  and  by  and  by  some  new  excitement  follows,  to  give  place  in  its 
turn  to  another  alternation  into  cold  neglect.  He  lacks  depth  of  character,  for  he 
has  nothing  but  rock  beneath  the  surface.  He  seems  to  have  much  feeling,  indeed^ 
and  his  religion  is  all  emotional ;  but,  in  reality,  he  has  no  proper  feeling.  It  is  all 
superficial.  That  which  is  only  feeling,  will  not  even  be  feeling  long.  Now,  the 
fault  in  all  this  lies  in  a  lack  of  thoughtfulness,  or  a  neglecting  to  '*  count  the  cost." 
The  man  of  depth  looks  before  he  leaps.  He  will  not  commit  himself  until  he  has 
carefully  examined  all  that  is  involved ;  but  when  he  does  thus  commit  himself,  he 
does  so  irrevocably.  He  who  signs  a  document  without  reading  it  will  be  very  likely 
to  repudiate  it  when  any  trouble  comes  of  it ;  but  the  man  who  knew  what  he  was 
doing  when  he  appended  his  name  to  it,  if  he  be  a  true  man,  will  stand  to  his  bond 
at  all  hazards.  Now,  the  merely  impulsive,  shallow,  flippant  hearer  acts  without 
deliberation,  signs  his  bond  without  reading  it,  and  is  therefore  easily  discouraged. 
When  he  is  called  to  suffer  anything  unpleasant  for  his  confession,  he  breaks  down. 
He  had  not  calculated  on  such  a  contingency.  He  enlisted  only  for  the  review,  and 
not  for  the  battle ;  and  so,  on  the  first  alarm  of  war,  he  disappears  from  the  ranks. 
He  did  not  stop,  to  consider  all  that  his  enlistment  involved  ;  he  was  allured  only 
by  the  uniform,  and  the  gay  accessories  of  military  Ufe :  but,  when  it  came  to 
fighting,  he  deserted.  The  enthusiastic  convert  is  often  preferred  to  the  calm  and 
apparently  unimpassioned  disciple.  The  growth  in  the  one  seems  so  much  more 
rapid  than  in  the  other,  that  he  is  put  far  above  him.  But  when  affliction  cr 
persecution  arises,  what  a  revelation  it  makes  1  for  then  the  enthusiasm  of  the  one 
goes  out,  and  that  of  the  other  comes  out.  3.  But  we  must  look  to  the  kind  of 
thing  to  be  guarded  against,  which  we  may  call  the  pre-occupation  of  the  heart  by 
other  objects  than  the  word  heard  by  the  man.    II.  The  quamtibs  to  be  cdltivate& 

BY  GOSPEL  hearers,  AS  THESE  ABE   INDICATED  IN   THE    SaVIOUB'S  EXPLANATION  OF  THE 

SEED  WHICH  FELL  INTO  GOOD  SOIL.  1.  Attention :  they  hear.  2.  Meditation :  they 
keep.  3.  Obedience:  they  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience.  {W.  M.  Taylor^  D.D.j 
Eastern  cornfields: — Our  grain-fields  are  level,  and  covered  with  the  crop  from 
hedge  to  hedge.  But  theirs  were  broken  patches,  not  unlike  the  little  croft  yon 
may  see  before  a  Highland  cottage.  It  is  not  fenced  ;  the  footpath  to  the  moor, 
the  well,  or  the  village  runs  through  it ;  the  soil  is  wavy,  and  dotted  with  rocky 
hillocks ;  bushes  of  thorn  and  thistle  are  in  the  corner.  As  the  crofter  sows  his 
little  plot,  some  seeds  fall  on  the  footpath  and  its  hardened  margins,  some  on  the 
rocky  knolls,  and  some  among  the  thorns,  as  well  as  on  the  best  soil.  Such  uneven 
seed-fields  stretched  then  along  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  sloping  suddenly  up  from  the 
shore.  The  soil  was  deep  at  the  water's  edge,  but  grew  shallower  near  the  foot  of 
the  little  hills.  Very  likely  Christ's  hearers  were  then  standing  upon  or  within 
sight  of  such  a  field.  {J.  Wells.)  Life  in  the  seed : — Dry  and  dead  as  it  seems, 
let  a  s«»ed  be  planted  with  a  stone-flashing  diamond,  or  burning  ruby ;  and  while 
that  in  the  richest  soil  remains  a  stone,  this  awakes  and,  bursting  its  husky  shell, 
rises  from  the  ground  to  adorn  the  earth  with  beauty,  perfume  the  air  with  frag 


CHAP,  iv.j  ST.  MAHA.  127 

ranee,  or  enrich  men  with  its  frnit.  Such  life  there  is  in  all,  bat  especially  in 
gOBpel,  truth.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Force  in  the  seed : — ^Buried  in  the  ground  a 
seed  does  not  remain  inert — Ue  there  in  a  living  tomb.  It  forces  its  way  upward, 
and  with  a  power  quite  remarkable  in  a  soft,  green,  feeble  blade,  pushes  aside  the 
dull  clods  that  cover  it.  Wafted  by  winds  or  dropped  by  passing  bird  into  the 
fissure  of  a  crag,  from  weak  beginnings  the  acorn  grows  into  an  oak — growing  till, 
by  the  forth-putting  of  a  silent  but  continuous  force,  it  heaves  the  stony  table  from 
its  bed,  rending  the  rock  in  pieces.  But  what  so  worthy  to  be  called  tbe  power  aa 
well  as  the  wisdom  of  God  as  that  Word  which,  lodged  in  the  mind,  and  accom- 
panied by  the  Divine  blessing,  fed  by  showers  from  heaven,  rends  hearts,  harder 
than  the  rocks,  in  pieces  ?  (Ibid.)  Propagation  in  the  seed : — A  single  grain  of 
com  would,  were  the  produce  of  each  season  sown  again,  so  spread  from  field  to 
field,  from  country  to  country,  from  continent  to  continent,  as  in  the  course  of  a 
few  years  to  cover  the  whole  surface  of  the  earth  with  one  wide  harvest,  employing 
all  the  sickles,  filling  all  the  barns,  and  feeding  all  the  mouths  in  the  world.  (Ibid.) 
Varied  soils : — The  wayside  hearers  do  not  take  in  the  seed  at  all ;  the  rocky- 
ground  hearers  take  in  the  seed,  but  do  not  let  it  sink  deep  enough ;  the  thorny- 
ground  hearers  take  it  in,  but  take  in  bad  seeds  also ;  the  good-ground  hearers  take 
the  seed  into  their  deepest  heart,  and  take  in  nothing  else.  In  these  four  sorts  of 
soil  you  see  the  beginning  and  end  of  spring,  summer,  and  autumn.  In  the  first, 
the  seed  does  not  spring ;  in  the  second,  it  springs,  but  does  not  grow  up ;  in  the 
third,  it  grows  up,  but  does  not  ripen  ;  in  the  fourth,  it  ripens  perfectly.  [J.  Wells.) 
The  duty  of  the  sower: — ^A  pastor  or  preacher  is  a  workman  hired  and  sent  out  to 
sow  the  field  of  God ;  that  is,  to  instruct  souls  in  the  truths  of  the  gospel.  This 
workman  sins — 1.  When,  instead  of  going  to  the  field,  he  absents  himself  from  it ; 
nothing  being  more  agreeable  to  nature  and  Divine  law  than  for  a  servant  to  obey 
his  master,  for  a  seedsman  to  be  in  the  field  for  which  he  is  hired,  and  whither  he 
is  sent  to  sow.  2.  When  he  stays  in  the  field,  but  does  not  sow.  3.  When  he 
changes  his  master's  seed,  and  sows  bad  instead  of  good.  4.  When  he  affects  to 
cast  it  on  the  highway,  i.e.,  loves  to  preach  only  before  people  of  fashion  and 
influence.  6.  When  he  fixes  on  stony  ground,  from  whence  there  is  little  hope  of 
receiving  any  fruit.  If  interest,  inclination,  the  spirit  of  amusement,  or  self- 
satisfaction  determine  a  pastor  to  attend  chiefly  on  such  souls  who  seek  not  God, 
and  whose  virtue  has  no  depth,  he  has  but  little  regard  to  his  Master's  profit.  He 
must  not,  indeed,  neglect  any,  but  he  ought  not  to  base  his  preference  on  worldly 
motives.  6.  When  he  is  not  careful  to  pick  out  the  stones,  and  to  pluck  up  the 
thorns.  The  sower  complains  of  the  barrenness  of  the  field ;  and  perhaps  the  field 
will  complain,  at  the  tribunal  of  God,  of  the  negligence  of  the  sower,  in  not  pre- 
paring and  cultivating  it  as  he  ought.  7.  When  he  does  not  endeavour  to  make 
the  seed  in  the  good  ground  yield  fruit  in  proportion  to  its  goodness.  (Quesnel.)  Ir 
framing  this  parable,  our  Lord  classified  the  hearers  of  the  Word  according  to  His 
own  experience  as  a  preacher,  basing  His  classification  not  so  much  upon  generalities 
as  upon  well-remembered  illustrations.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  exempUfy  this, 
by  specimens  drawn  from  tbe  records  of  His  dealings  with  men  (Bruce,  e.g.  has 
found  examples  of  each  kind  of  hearer  in  St.  Luke  xii.  11,  13,  ix.  57,  61,  62,  and  in 
the  case  of  Barnabas).  It  will  suffice  at  present,  however,  to  give  point  to  His 
descriptions,  by  recalling  the  divers  effects  produced  by  His  claims  to  the  Messiah- 
ship.  1.  There  were  men  hardened  by  Jewish  prejudice,  and  seared  with  worldliness, 
who  looked  only  for  material  advancement  by  the  establishment  of  a  new  kingdom, 
and  yet  fiocked  to  hear  His  words,  meek  and  lowly  as  He  was.  They  might 
possibly  have  been  impressed,  had  not  the  Pharisaic  enemies  of  the  Cross,  the 
emissaries  of  Satan,  stepped  in  with  their  specious  arguments,  and  caught  away 
the  seed  before  ever  it  found  any  lodgment  in  their  hearts.  2.  There  were  others 
of  an  emotional  temperament,  who  were  carried  away  in  the  excitement  aroused  by 
His  sudden  popularity,  who,  when  they  witnessed  the  wonderful  works  that  He  did, 
would  have  taken  Him  by  force  and  made  Him  a  king ;  and  yet,  staggered  by  the 
first  check  their  enthusiasm  received,  within  twenty-four  hours  "  went  away  back- 
ward, and  walked  no  more  with  Him."  3.  There  was  another  class,  more  limited, 
no  doubt,  who  saw  in  Him  the  beauty  they  de?ired,  and  recognized  His  goodness ; 
men,  too,  whom  He  loved  in  return  for  all  that  was  best  in  their  lives ;  but  who 
failed  at  last  because  their  heart  was  not  whole.  Underneath  all  this  there  was 
•*a  root  of  bitterness" — love  of  riches,  or  pleasure,  or  even  distracting  cares  of 
home ;  and  though  for  a  time  these  blemishes  showed  no  vitality,  not  springing  up 
eimultaneously  with  the  crop  of  new  desires,  yet  by  the  rapidity  and  rankness  of 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

their  growth  they  just  spoiled  the  life  when  it  was  on  the  eve  of  bearing  fruit.  4. 
The  last  class  was  composed  of  those  whooe  hearts  the  Baptist  had  prepared,  and 
the  Lord  had  opened,  who  were  *•  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel : "  men 
like  Andrew,  John,  Nathanael,  or  women  like  the  devont  band  who  "  ministered  to 
Him  of  their  substance,"  and  in  varying  degrees  of  productiveness  bore  fruit  in  their 
lives.  (H,  M.  Lttckock,  D.D.)  Likeness  between  the  Word  and  seed: — God's 
Word  has  all  the  hidden  life  of  a  seed.  Take  up  a  grain  of  wheat  in  your  hand, 
and  ask  yourself  where  its  life  lies.  Not,  surely,  upon  the  surface ;  not  in  its 
inner  compartments  as  a  distinct  thing.  Chemistry  will  give  you  every  material 
element  it  contains,  and  you  will  be  as  far  as  ever  from  knowing  or  seeing  the  very 
thing  that  makes  it  a  seed — that  mysterious  something  we  call  its  life.  Within 
that  httle  mass  of  matter  there  lies  a  force  which  sun,  rain,  and  soil  shall  call  forth 
with  voices  it  will  hear  and  obey.  God  hath  given  it  a  body,  and  to  every  seed 
his  own  body.  Tlie  hidden  life  and  unwearied  force  of  the  wheat-grain  furnish 
analogies  to  the  Word  of  God.  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  the  Word 
of  Christ  shall  not  pass  away.  This  is  not  because  of  any  arbitrary  fiat  of  Omnipo- 
tence, any  mechanically  conferred  Banctity,  but  because  it  is  an  eternal  seed,  to 
which  God  has  given  eternal  form.  But  this  vitality  is  not  lodged  where  we  can 
■eeit.    {E.  N.  Packard.) 

Vers.  4-15.  Some  fell  by  the  way-aide,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air  came  and 
devoured  it  up. — Though  men  be  outward  hearers  of  the  Word,  and  do  also  in  some 
sort  understand  what  is  taught,  yet  if  their  hearts  be  so  hardened  in  sin  and  through 
Satan's  temptations  that  they  are  not  affected  and  moved  by  it,  it  can  never  profit 
them.  As  seed  sown  upon  a  beaten  path  or  highway  cannot  sink  into  the  earth  by 
reason  of  the  hardness  of  it,  nor  take  root  or  fructify ;  so  the  doctrine  of  the  Word 
being  preached  to  those  whose  hearts  are  hardened  in  sin  cannot  enter  into  them, 
and  therefore  cannot  profit  them.  If  the  seed  of  the  Word  be  only  sown  in  their 
outward  ears  and  in  their  minds;  if  it  lie  above  ground,  i.e. ,  if  it  swim  and  float  aloft 
in  their  brain  and  understanding  only,  and  do  not  enter  and  sink  into  their  hearts ; 
if  their  hearts  be  not  affected  to  love  and  embrace  it,  as  well  as  their  understandings 
enlightened  by  it,  it  will  never  take  root  or  bear  fruit  in  them.  (O.  Fetter.)  The 
character  of  inattentive  hearers  considered  : — 1.  These  persons  hear  the  Word.  They 
are  not  deaf,  and  so  utterly  incapable  of  hearing.  Nor  are  they  determined  that 
they  will  not  hear  (Jer.  xxii.  21).  2.  They  are  only  occasional  hearers  of  the  Word. 
They  are,  in  regard  of  the  assemblies  where  the  gospel  is  preached,  what  the  way- 
side is  to  ate  field  where  the  seed  is  sown,  ground  without  the  inclosure,  or  whereon 
the  seed  falls  as  it  were  accidentally  or  by  chance.  They  come  by  constraint  of 
conscience,  or  from  curiosity.  3.  They  are  not  at  all  prepared  for  hearing  the  Word. 
The  ground  is  beaten,  and  has  received  no  cultivation.  4.  That  they  hear  in  a 
heedless,  desultory  manner.  6.  They  remain  grossly  ignorant.  6.  But  some  in 
this  class  do  in  a  sense  understand  the  Word,  for  the  seed  is  said  to  be  sown  in 
their  hearts.  They  understand  speculatively.  7.  It  makes  no  abiding  impression 
on  the  heart.  8.  Our  Lord's  account  of  the  manner  in  which  these  impressions  are 
effaced — •'  the  fowls  of  the  air  came,"  &o.  I.  Who  is  this  wicked  onk,  akd  why  hx 
IS  BO  CALLED.  From  this  short  scriptural  account  of  Satan  it  appears  with  what 
propriety  he  is  here,  and  in  many  other  passages,  styled  emphatically  *♦  the  wicked 
one."  He  is  wicked  himself  in  ihe  highest  degree,  for  as  he  exceeds  all  others  in 
subtilty  and  power,  so  also  in  impiety  and  sin  ;  a  spirit  the  most  proud,  false, 
envious,  turbulent,  and  malignant  among  all  the  various  orders  of  fallen  spirits. 
He,  too,  is  the  author  of  all  wickedness,  the  contriver  and  promoter  of  every  species 
of  iniquity.  Whence,  the  infinitely  numerous  evils  that  prevail  in  our  world  are 
called  "  the  works  of  the  devil."  Such  is  the  character  of  this  first  apostate  arch- 
angel, the  grand,  avowed  enemy  of  God  and  man.  And  thus  are  we  led  to  our 
second  inquiry — H.  What  is  meant  by  his  "  catching  away  the  seed,"  and  how  is 
THIS  DOME  f  For  no  more  is  meant  by  the  influence  which  Satan  is  supposed  in 
eertain  cases  to  exert  over  the  mind,  than  what  is  similar  to  the  influence  which 
wicked  men  are  acknowledged  to  have  over  others,  to  allure  them  by  persuasions  to 
sin,  and  to  dissuade  them  by  menaces  from  their  duty.  It  cannot  force  them  into 
iin  against  the  consent  of  their  will ;  or,  in  other  words,  so  operate  on  their  minds 
as  to  deprive  them  of  that  freedom  which  is  necessary  to  constitute  them  account- 
able creatures.  This  mighty  adversary  watches  his  opportunity  to  prevent  the 
•alatary  effect  of  the  Word  upon  those  that  hear  it.  And  considering  what  is  the 
•baraoter  of  the  sort  of  bearers  we  are  here  speaking  of,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 


ST.  MARK.  129 


Miat  he  is  permitted  to  oatcb  away  the  seed  sown  in  their  hearts,  or  that  he  sncceedfl 
in  the  attempt.  For  if  their  motives  in  attending  upon  Divine  service  are  base  and 
unworthy,  if  they  address  themselves  to  the  duties  of  religion  without  any  previous 
preparation,  how  righteous  is  it  in  God  to  permit  Satan  to  use  every  possible  artifice 
to  defeat  the  great  and  good  ends  to  which  religious  instructions  are  directed  1 
1.  Satan  uses  his  utmost  endeavours  to  divert  men's  attention  from  the  Word  while 
they  are  hearing  it.  2.  Satan  uses  every  art  to  excite  and  inflame  men's  prejudices 
against  the  Word  they  hear.  3.  Another  artifice  Satan  uses  to  counteract  the 
influence  of  God's  Word  on  men's  hearts  is  to  prevent  their  recollecting  it  after  they 
have  heard  it.  (S.  Stennett,  D.D.)  Wasted  teed: — We  are  taught  to  regard 
waste  of  all  kinds  as  a  great  fault  and  sin.  Wasted  food,  wasted  money,  wasted 
health,  wasted  time,  wasted  instruction,  wasted  opportunities  of  doing  and  receiving 
good;  these,  in  their  several  ways,  are  all  sins  against  God  and  our  own  souls. 
While  we  are  young  we  are  punished  for  them  ;  when  we  are  older  we  suffer  for 
them  ;  the  consummation  of  them  at  last  is  the  loss  of  the  soul.  But  what  I  wish 
you  to  observe  is  that,  sinful  as  waste  of  any  kind  is  in  as,  there  is  in  nature,  in 
providence,  in  the  spiritual  world,  a  constant  waste  going  on,  suggesting  much  of 
anxious  and  painful  wonder.  (C,  J.  Vaughan,  D.D,)  The  plough  needed: — 
Nothing  is  needed  but  to  plough  it  up.  God  drives  a  deep  share  through  many  a 
wayside  heart,  and  the  coulter  of  affliction  breaks  up  many  a  spirit,  that  it  may 
afterwards  yield  "  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness."  And  if  He  does  that  for 
you,  bless  Him  for  His  mercy ;  but  do  not  wait,  for  you  can  get  rid  of  all  this 
insensibility  by  the  simple  effort  of  your  own  will.  {Dr.  McLaren.)  The  devil 
U  an  inveterate  enemy  to  the  hearing  of  the  Wordf  and  to  the  fruit  of  it: — He 
hinders  men  in  sundry  ways  from  profiting  by  the  Word.  1.  By  keeping  them 
from  hearing  it ;  stirring  up  occasions  of  worldly  business  or  some  other  imped  i- 
ments  on  the  Lord's  day  to  keep  them  away  from  church.  2.  By  keeping  them 
from  attending  to  it  when  they  do  hear  it.  3.  By  blinding  their  minds  ^at  thej 
may  not  understand  it.  4.  By  labouring  to  hold  them  in  infidelity  that  they  may 
not  believe  and  apply  the  Word  to  themselves.  5.  By  using  means  to  thrust  the 
Word  heard  out  of  their  minds  that  they  may  not  remember  it.  6.  By  keeping 
them  from  yielding  obedience  to  the  Word.  See  from  this  what  need  we  have  to 
be  watchful  over  ourselves  and  against  Satan  and  his  practices  when  we  are  to  hear 
the  Word.  How  needful  to  watch  before  we  hear,  that  he  may  not  lay  blocks  in  our 
way  to  hinder  us  from  hearing.  How  needful  in  time  of  hearing  to  watch  against 
Satan,  that  he  hinder  not  our  attention  by  suggesting  to  us  roving  thoughts.  How 
needful  to  pray  to  God  not  to  suffer  him  to  blind  our  minds  or  harden  our  hearts 
in  unbelief,  that  we  may  not  understand  or  believe  the  Word.  How  needful  also 
to  watch  against  Satan  after  we  have  heard,  that  he  do  not  quickly  thrust  the  Word 
out  of  our  minds  and  memories.  Look  to  these  things  therefore  every  one  that 
woold  profit  by  hearing.  The  more  malicious  and  politic  Satan  is  to  hinder  us 
from  profiting,  the  more  wise  must  we  be  and  careful  to  disappoint  him  of  his 
purpose.  (G.  Fetter.)  The  Satanic  hindering  of  the  Word  of  Ood  .'—The  Lord 
tells  us  that  this  indifference  to  the  Word,  by  which  it  faUs  to  convince  and  convert, 
is  brought  about,  not  through  natural,  but  through  supernatural,  agency.  An 
enemy  does  this.  In  our  present  fallen  state  h«  is  able  to  summon  up  thoughts 
which  may  distract  the  attention  from  the  thoughts  which  the  life-giving  Word 
suggests,  and  our  evil  will  falls  in  with  the  thoughts  which  he  instils.  These 
thoughts  may  not  always  be  evil  by  any  means,  but  they  do  his  work,  for  they  dis- 
tract the  attention,  and  being  far  more  in  accordance  with  the  bent  of  the  evil  heart 
the  good  thought  is  swallowed  up,  effaced,  and  forgotten.  I  think  that  no  minister 
who  comes  closely  into  contact  with  the  souls  of  men  for  their  conversion,  but  must 
be  aware  that  there  is  not  only  an  evil  principle  at  work  in  the  heart,  but  an  evil 
personal  agency  which  is  able  to  suggest  doubts  and  interpose  difficulties,  and  assist 
the  soul  in  barring  out  the  Word  by  placing  all  his  cunning  at  the  disposal  of  the 
evil  wilL  Satan  or  his  emissary,  the  evil  spirit  to  whom  he  has  conmiitted  the 
destruction  of  the  man's  soul,  cometh  immediately.  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  The  devil 
a  great  traveller : — The  devil  is  no  idle  spirit,  but  a  walker  and  vagrant  runagate 
walker,  like  Gain,  that  cannot  rest  in  a  place.  I  have  heard  of  travellers  that  have 
seen  many  parts  of  the  world,  but  never  any  perpetual  peripatetic  or  universal 
walker  but  Satan,  who  hath  travelled  all  coasts  and  comers  of  the  earth,  and  would 
of  heaven,  too,  if  he  might  be  admitted.  He  is  not  like  St.  George's  statue,  ever 
on  horseback  and  never  ridiug,  but,  as  if  he  were  knight-marshal  of  the  whole 
world,  he  is  ever  walking.    His  motion  is  circular,  and  his  unwearied  steps  know 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  it. 

no  rest.  He  hath  a  large  and  endless  circuit.  His  walk  is  a  siege,  that  goes  about 
the  fort  to  find  the  weakest  place  as  easiest  for  battery.  His  walks  are  the  circum- 
ferenoa,  and  man  the  centre.  The  motive,  cause,  and  main  intention  of  his  joumej 
is  to  win  man.  As  he  walks  through  the  streets  there  he  throws  a  short  measure, 
a  false  balance,  into  a  tradesman's  shop.  He  steps  into  a  drinking-house  and 
kindles  a  quarrel.  He  shoulders  to  the  bar  and  pops  in  a  forged  evidence,  a  coun- 
terfeit seal.  He  dares  enter  the  schools  and  commence  schisms  and  contentions, 
nay,  climb  up  into  the  pulpit  and  broach  sects  and  divisions.  He  travels  no  ground 
but,  like  a  stinking  fox  or  dying  oppressor,  he  leaves  a  scent  behind  him.  (T. 
Adams.) 

Vers.  5, 16,  17. — ^And  some  fell  on  stony  ground,  where  it  liad  not  much  earth. — 
The  seed  upon  stony  ground: — I.  A  brief  biography  of  certain  professors  i?» 
RELIGION.  They  heard  the  Word.  They  received  the  Word.  They  received  it 
immediately.  They  received  it  with  gladness.  They  made  rapid  progress.  In  du3 
time  came  trial.  Immediately  they  were  offended.  II.  Their  badicaIj  defect.  It 
lay  in  an  unbroken  heart.  This  led  to  want  of  depth.  They  lacked  moisture. 
III.  The  lessons  of  the  text.  Be  deeply  in  earnest.  Watch  the  effect  of  your 
own  daily  trials.  Constantly  examine  yourself.  Let  all  this  show  us  how  necessary 
it  is  that  we  cast  all  the  stress  and  burden  of  our  salvation  entirely  upon  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.      (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  character  of  enthusiastic  hearers  con- 

sidered:— I.  With  the  character  of  these  hearers  previous  to  their  hearing 
the  Word.  They  are  compared  to  stony  or  rocky  ground,  which  is  unfavourable  to 
cultivation ;  but  yet  has  a  little  mould  or  earth  cast  over  it,  suited  to  receive  seed, 
and  in  which  it  may  lodge  awhile,  and  disseminate  itself.  So  that  this  ground  is 
partly  bad  and  partly  good.  And  thus  are  very  aptly  described,  the  miserably  per- 
verse and  depraved  state  of  the  will  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  warmth  and 
liveliness  of  the  natural  passions  on  the  other.  These  qualities  often  meet  in  one 
and  the  same  person,  and  bear  a  different  aspect  to  religion,  the  one  being  un- 
favourable and  the  other  favourable  to  it.  1.  It  is  true  of  these  hearers  that  their 
will  is  wretchedly  depraved.  Stone  is  a  figure  used  in  Scripture  to  signify  the 
obstinate  aversion  of  the  mind  to  what  is  holy  and  good.  So  Ezekiel  speaks  of  a 
stony  heart  in  opposition  to  a  heart  of  flesh ;  and  Paul,  of  the  living  epistles  of 
Christ  being  written,  not  on  tables  of  stone,  but  fleshly  tables  of  the  heart.  And 
yet,  with  all  this  depravity  of  the  will,  they  have— 2.  Warm  and  lively  passions ;  a 
circumstance  in  itself  not  a  little  favourable  to  religion.  This  is  admirably 
expressed  by  the  earth  or  mould  said  to  be  cast  over  the  rock,  which  was  of  a  nature 
so  rich  and  luxuriant,  that  the  seed  instantly  mingled  with  it,  and  expanding, 
sprung  up,  and  created  a  beautiful  verdure  which  promised  great  fruitfulness. 
Nothing  was  wanting  to  produce  the  desired  effect  but  a  sufficient  depth  of  earth. 
Had  the  ground  at  bottom  been  properly  cultivated  this  fine  mould  cast  upon  it 
would  have  assisted  and  forwarded  vegetation  ;  but  that  remaining  hard  and  rocky, 
this  had  only  a  temporary  effect,  and  served  little  other  purpose  than  to  deceive  the 
expectation  of  the  husbandman.  Such  is  truly  the  case  in  the  matter  before  us.  The 
heart,  like  the  stony  ground,  is  indisposed  to  what  is  good ;  and  the  affections,  like 
the  earth  cast  over  it,  are  warm  and  lively ;  wherefore,  the  Word  not  entering  into 
the  former,  and  yet  mingling  with  the  latter,  produces  no  real  fruit,  but  only  the 
gay  and  splendid  appearance  of  an  external  profession.  And  here  it  is  further  to 
be  remarked,  that  however  the  passions  are  of  excellent  use  in  religion,  if  the  heart 
be  right  with  God  ;  yet,  this  not  being  the  case,  their  influence  is  rather  pernicious 
than  salutary :  indeed,  the  more  eager  and  impetuous  the  natural  temper,  the 
greater  evil  is  in  this  case  to  be  apprehended  from  it,  both  to  the  man  himself,  and 
to  those  with  whom  he  is  connected.  As  to  himself  mistaking  the  warm  efforts  of 
mere  passion  for  real  religion,  he  instantly  concludes,  that  he  is  without  doubt  a 
real  Christian,  and  so  is  essentially  injured  by  the  imposition  he  puts  upon  himself. 
But  it  will  be  proper,  before  we  pass  on,  to  examine  more  particularly  the  character 
of  the  enthusiast.  He  has  a  lively  imagination,  but  no  judgment  to  correct  it ; 
and  warm  feelings,  but  neither  wisdom  nor  resolution  to  control  them.  Struck 
with  appearances,  he  instantly  admits  the  reality  of  things,  without  allowing  him- 
self time  to  inquire  into  their  nature,  evidence  and  tendency.  And  impressions 
thus  recei-ved,  whether  from  objects  presented  to  the  senses,  or  representations  made 
to  the  fancy,  produce  a  mighty  and  instantaneous  effect  on  his  passions.  These 
Agitate  his  whole  frame,  and  precipitate  him  into  action,  without  any  interveuinjf 
eonsideratiou,  reflection,  or  prospect.     Av.\  Viis  actions,  under  the  impulse  of  a 


IT.]  ST.  MARK.  131 

heated  imagination,  are  either  right  or  wrong,  usefnl  or  pernioioua,  jnst  as  the 
actions  he  has  thus  hastily  adopted  happen  to  be  conformable  to  truth  or  error. 
So  we  shall  see  the  countenance  of  a  man  of  this  complexion  kindling  into  raptore 
and  ecstasy  at  the  idea  of  something  new  and  marvellous ;  a  flood  of  tears  stream- 
ing down  his  cheeks  at  the  representation  of  some  moving  scene  of  distress ;  his 
face  turning  pale,  and  his  limbs  trembling,  at  the  apprehension  of  some  impend- 
ing danger  ;  his  whole  frame  distorted  with  rage  at  the  hearing  of  some  instance  of 
cruelty ;  and  his  eye  sparkling  with  joy  in  the  prospect  of  some  fancied  bliss.     Nor 
is  it  to  be  wondered,  that  one  who  is  wholly  at  the  mercy  of  these  passions,  without 
the  guidance  of  a  sober  understanding,  and  the  control  of  a  well-disposed  heart, 
should,  as  is  often  the  case,  break  out  into  loud  and  clamorous  language,  assume 
the  most  frantic  gestures,  and  be  guilty  of  the  most  strange  and  extravagant 
actions.    1.  He  receives  the  Word.    Receiving  is  a  figurative  term,  and  may  here  be 
explained  of  what  is  the  consequence  of  admitting  any  doctrine  to  be  true,  that  is, 
the  professing  it.     It  is  used  in  Scripture  to  signify  faith  itself  (John  i.  12).     Now, 
as  faith  has  the  promise  of  salvation,  and  some  believe  who  yet  are  not  saved,  a 
distinction  becomes  necessary ;  and  the  common  one  of  historical  and  Divine  faith 
is  easy  and  natural.    Or  if  the  faith  is  genuine,  yet  his  notion  of  the  gospel  has  a 
great  deal  of  error  mingled  with  it.    ^d  then  he  receives  it  not  upon  the  Divine 
testimony,  or  a  clear  perception  of  the  internal  and  external  evidence  of  it ;  but  upon 
the  confident  assertions  of  others,  whose  eagerness  and  zeal,  expressed  by  their 
loud  voice  and  violent  gesture,  have  a  mighty  effect  upon  that  credulity  we  spoke 
of  under  the  former  head.     Further,  his  faith  is  not  cordial ;  it  has  not  the  hearty 
approbation  of  his  jtidgment  and  will.      Nor  does  it  produce  the  kindly  and 
acceptable  fruits  of  love  and  obedience.    Yet  it  is  not  without  its  effects,  for  being 
of  that  enthusiastic  turn  of  mind  before  described,  his  imagination  and  passions 
have  a  great  influence  on  his  profession.    Whence  those  strong  appearances  of 
sincerity,  earnestness,  and  zeal,  whereby  he  imposes  upon  himself  and  others. 
Now  he  loudly  afiirms  he  believes,  scarcely  admitting  that  man  to  be  a  Christian 
who  at  all  hesitates.       Then  he  treats  cool  reasoning,  and   calm  reflection,  as 
inimical  to  religion.    2.  He  receives  the  Word  immediately.     The  seed  is  said  in 
the  text  to  spring  up  forthwith,  and  so  the  idea  may  respect  the  quickness  of  the 
vegetation.     It  is  true  both  of  the  reception  and  operation  of  the  Word.      He 
receives  it  not  circuitously,  but  directly.    It  is  no  sooner  spoken  than  admitted  to 
be  true.     He  is  not  embarrassed  with  doubt,  and  does  not  hesitate,  reflect,  or  com- 
pare what  he  has  heard  with  the  Scriptures.    So  without  either  his  judgment  being 
informed,  or  his  will  renewed,  he  is  impetuously  carried  away  with  a  mere  sound. 
8.  His  receiving  the  Word  with  joy.    Joy  is  a  pleasing  elevation  of  the  spirits, 
excited  by  the  possession  of  some  present,  or  the  expectation  of  some  future,  good. 
Now,  the  gospel  is  good  news,  and  so  adapted  to  give  pleasure  to  the  mind.     He 
therefore  who  receives  it  with  joy,  receives  it  as  it  ought  to  be  received.    But  the 
man  our  Saviour  here  describes  is  not  a  real  Christian,  his  joy  therefore  must  have 
something  in  it,  or  in  the  circumstances  accompanying  it,  distinguishable  from 
that  of  a  genuine  believer.    Of  Herod  it  is  said  that  *'he  heard  John  gladly:'' 
and  from  the  story  it  clearly  appears  Herod  remained,  notwithstanding,  the  same 
profligate  man  he  was  before.    How,  then,  is  the  joy  of  the  one  to  be  distinguished 
from  that  of  the  other  7    1.  Let  us  consider  what  precedes  it.    The  real  Christian, 
previous    to    his    enjoying    sohd  peace,  is    usually    much    depressed    and    cast 
down.    Nor  is  his  dejection  the  effect  of  bodily  disorder,  or  an  ill-temperature  of 
the  animal  spirits,  or  of  something  he  can  give  no  rational  account  of.    It  is  an 
anxiety  occasioned  by  a  sense  of  sin.    But  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  joy  the 
heart  feels  must  bear  some  proportion  to  the  anxiety  it  has  suffered.     2.  Let  us 
inquire  what  it  is  that  excites  this  joy.    The  causes  of  that  elevation  of  the  spirits 
which  we  commonly  call  joy  are  various.     In  some  instances  it  is  the  Word  itself, 
the  mere  sound,  without  any  idea  affixed  to  it,  that  creates  joy.      The  effect  is 
instantly  and  mechanically  produced  by   the   tone  and  cadence   of   the    voice, 
Rccompanied  by  an   appearance,  attitude,  and   gesture,  that  happen   to    please. 
In  other  instances,  it  is  not  the  sound  only,  but  the  sense,  that  affects.    We  may 
easily  conceive  how   a   pleasing   kind    of  sensation,  excited  in   the   breast  by  a 
pathetic  description  of  misery,  particularly  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  may  be  mis- 
taken for  religion.     We  are  next  to  consider  (3)  what  are  the  effects  of  it  ?     The 
joy  a  real  Christian  feels,  is  sober,  rational,  well-grounded,  and  will  admit  of  the 
mo>:t  pleasing  reflections.     He  possesses  himself ;  he  can  calmly  reason  upon  tha 
ot  his  mind,  and  those  great  truths  and  objects,  the  contemplation  of  which 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaj.  it, 

makes  him  happy;  and  he  can  recollect  the  pleasnreB  he  has  enjoyed  on  some 
special  occasions  with  composure  and  satisfaction.  It  humbles  him.  The  higher 
he  ascends  the  mount  of  communion  with  God,  the  less  he  appears  in  his  own 
eyes.  Those  beams  of  the  sun  of  righteousness  which  gladden  his  heart,  throw 
a  light  upon  his  follies  and  sins.  With  Job,  "  he  abhors  himself,  and  repents  in 
dust  and  ashes."  And,  as  the  apostle  expresses  it,  "thinks  soberly  of  himself 
as  he  ought  to  think."  His  joy  inspires  him  with  meekness,  candour,  and 
benevolence.  It  allays,  if  not  entirely  extinguishes,  the  rage  of  violent  passion, 
fans  the  flame  of  fervent  charity,  and  puts  the  soul  into  a  temper,  to  unite 
cordially  with  all  good  men,  to  pity  the  bad,  and  to  forgive  its  bitterest  enemies, 
fiis  joy,  in  a  word,  makes  him  watchful  and  holy.  He  rejoices  with  trembling, 
is  upon  his  guard  against  everything  that  may  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  his 
mind,  holds  sin  at  a  distance  as  his  greatest  enemy,  and  aspires  with  growing 
ardour  to  the  likeness  of  the  ever-blessed  God.  On  the  contrary,  who  that  con- 
templates the  character  of  the  credulous,  self-deceived  enthusiast,  but  must  see 
what  has  been  said  of  the  real  Christian  awfully  reversed  in  his  temper  and  con- 
duct ?  Is  he  sober,  prudent  and  self-collected  ?  Ah  1  no.  He  is  httle  better  than 
a  madman,  or  one  drunk  with  wine  wherein  is  excess.  His  heaven  is  a  fool'a 
paradise,  and  his  account  of  it  as  unintelligible  as  the  frantic  talk  of  one  in  a 
delirium.  Is  he  humble?  Far  from  it.  The  pride  of  religious  frenzy  swells  him 
into  importance.  Imagining  himself  a  favourite  of  heaven,  he  looks  down  upon 
his  fellow-mortals  with  an  air  of  indifference,  if  not  contempt — "  Stand  at  a  dis- 
tance, I  am  holier  than  thou."  Is  he  meek,  candid,  and  benevolent?  So  mach 
the  reverse,  that  the  very  names  of  these  virtues  sound  harshly  in  his  ear,  and 
stand  for  little  else,  in  his  opinion,  than  pusillanimity,  formality,  and  hypocrisy. 
Is  he  conscientious  and  circumspect  in  his  deportment?  No.  Boasting  of  his 
freedom,  he  can  take  liberties  that  border  on  immorality,  and  treat  the  scruples  of 
a  weak  believer  as  indicating  a  legal  spirit.  II.  To  consider  the  lauentabuc 
APOSTASY  OF  THESB  DELUDED  MEN.  The  sccd  that  fell  upon  stony  places,  and  forth- 
with sprung  up,  in  a  little  time  "withered  away."  1.  The  term  of  his  profession 
is  short.  Enthusiastic  zeal,  like  inflammable  air,  quickly  evaporates.  The  sources  of 
that  pleasure  which  gives  existence  to  a  spurious  religion,  and  an  equivocal  devotion, 
are  soon  exhausted.  The  imagination  tires,  the  senses  are  palled,  and  the  passions,  for 
want  of  novelty  and  variety  to  keep  them  alive,  sink  away  into  a  languid,  unfeeling, 
torpid  state.  2.  In  what  manner  does  he  renounce  his  profession?  He  either  silently 
quits  it,  or  publicly  disavows  it.  He  is  offended,  stumbles,  falls,  falls  away.  III.  Thb 
CAUSE  or  THESE  mem'b  APOSTASY.  This  our  Saviour  explains  with  admirable  preci- 
sion, by  teaching  us  that  it  is  partly  owing  to  the  want  of  something  within,  essen- 
tially important  to  religion,  and  partly  to  a  concurrence  of  circumstances  from 
without  unfavourable  to  the  profession  of  it.  1.  Something  is  wanting  within.  The 
parable  says:  •'  The  seed  forthwith  sprung  up,  because  it  had  no  deepness  of  earth;** 
*'  and  it  withered  away  because  it  had  no  root,"  as  Mark  has  it ;  "  and  lacked 
moisture,"  as  is  expressed  in  Luke.  For  want  of  a  su£&cient  quantity  of  earth  the 
seed  did  not  sink  deep  enough  into  the  ground,  and  through  the  luxuriance  of  the 
mould  it  too  quickly  disseminated  and  sprung  up.  So  that  having  taken  root,  there 
was  no  source  whence  the  tender  grass  might  be  supplied  with  nourishment ;  and  of 
consequence  it  must  necessarily  in  a  little  time  wither  and  die.  Agreeably 
therefore  to  the  figure,  our  Lord,  in  His  explanation  of  the  parable,  speaks 
of  these  hearers  as  ♦*  having  no  root  in  themselves."  And  such  precisely  is  the 
case  of  the  sort  of  professors  we  are  discoursing  of.  They  have  no  principle 
of  religion  in  their  hearts.  Their  notions  are  not  properly  digested,  they  do 
not  disseminate  themselves  in  the  mind,  take  fast  hold  on  the  conscience,  and 
incorporate,  if  I  may  so  express  myself,  with  the  practical  powers  of  the  souL 
*♦  The  Word  preached  does  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with  faith ;  "  or,  as  per- 
haps it  might  be  rendered,  because  they  are  not  united  by  faith  to  the  word.  2.  To 
a  concurrence  of  circumstances  from  without  unfavourable  to  the  profession  of  reli- 
gion. These,  in  the  parable,  are  all  comprehended  under  the  idea  of  the  sun's 
scorching  the  springing  grass  ;  and,  in  our  Saviour's  exposition  of  it,  are  described 
by  the  terms  tribulation,  persecution,  affliction,  and  temptation,  all  which  arise  be- 
cause of  the  word,  or  are  occasioned  by  it.  Eeligion,  however,  is  not  to  be  blamed 
for  these  evils,  of  which  it  is  no  way  the  cause,  though  it  may  be  the  occasion  ;  they 
are  to  be  set  down  to  the  account  of  a  fatal,  but  too  frequent  combination  of  a  de- 
praved heart,  with  an  impetuous  natural  temper.  1.  What  a  striking  picture  has 
our  Saviour  here  given  us  of  human  nature.    2.  Of  what  importance  is  it  to  stud^ 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST,  MARK,  183 

ourselves,  and  to  keep  a  guard  upon  our  passions !  8.  We  see  what  kind  of  preach- 
ing is  to  be  coveted,  and  what  avoided.  4.  Our  Lord,  by  the  instruction  given  us 
in  our  text,  has  enabled  us  to  reply  to  an  objection  often  urged  against  the  doctrine 
of  the  saints'  final  perseverance.  We  are  frequently  reminded  of  persons  whose 
profession  for  a  time  was  fair  and  splendid,  but  who  in  the  end  renounced  it.  And 
no  doubt  this  has  been  the  fact  in  too  many  sad  instances.  Yet  what  does  it  prove  ? 
No  more  than  that  these  men  were  either  designing  hypocrites,  or  else  hastily  took 
upon  them  a  profession  of  what  they  did  not  rightly  understand,  truly  beUeve,  and 
cordially  approve.  5.  And  lastly,  let  not  the  mournful  subject  we  have  been  con- 
sidering create  any  discouragement  in  the  breast  of  the  truly  humble  but  weak 
Christian.      (S.  Stennett,  D.D.)  Rapid  growth  means  rapid  decay  : — Precocity 

^nd  rapid  growth  are  everywhere  the  forerunners  of  rapid  decay.  The  oak  that  is 
to  stand  a  thousand  years  does  not  shoot  up  like  the  hop  or  the  creeper.  {M.  Dods, 
D.D.)  Excited  but  not  converted : — The  short  and  pathetic  history  of  some  who 
are  called  revival  converts.  They  are  charmed  but  not  changed ;  much  excited, 
but  not  truly  converted.  These  are  they  that  "  have  no  root  in  themselves,  and  bo 
endure  but  for  a  time  "  (Mark  iv.  17).  Their  root  is  in  the  crowd,  the  fine  music,  tke 
lively  stir,  the  hearty  companionships  of  the  gospel-meeting.  The  Moravians  every 
Sabbath  offer  up  this  prayer,  "  From  light-minded  swarming,  deliver  us,  good  God." 
{J.  Welh.)  Perfect  too  soon: — Most  Christians  are  perfect  too  soon,  which  is  the 
reason  they  are  never  perfect.  {A.  Farindon.)  Fair-weather  Christians : — Some 
fresh-water  sailor,  standing  upon  the  shore  on  a  fair  day,  and  beholding  the  ship's 
top  and  top -gallant  sail  in  all  their  bravery,  riding  safely  at  anchor,  thinks  it  a 
brave  thing  to  go  to  sea,  and  will  by  all  means  aboard ;  but  being  out  a  league  or 
two  from  the  harbour,  and  feeling  by  the  rocking  of  the  ship  his  stomach  begin  to 
work,  and  his  soul  even  to  abhor  all  manner  of  meat — or  otherwise  a  storm  to  arise, 
the  wind  and  the  sea  as  it  were  conspiring  the  sinking  of  the  vessel — forthwith 
repents  his  folly,  and  makes  vows  that  if  he  but  once  be  set  ashore  again  he  will 
bid  an  eternal  farewell  to  all  such  voyages.  And  thus  there  be  many  faint-hearted 
Christians  to  be  found  amongst  us,  who,  in  calm  days  of  peace,  when  religion  is 
not  overclouded  by  the  times,  will  needs  join  themselves  to  the  number  of  the  peo- 
pie  of  God  ;  they  will  be  as  earnest  and  as  forward  as  the  best,  and  who  but  they  t 
Yet,  let  but  a  tempest  begin  to  appear,  and  the  sea  to  grow  rougher  than  at  the 
first  entry,  the  times  alter,  troubles  rise,  many  cross  winds  of  opposition  and 
gainsaying  begin  to  blow,  they  are  weary  of  their  course,  and  will  to  shore  again, 
resolving  never  to  thrust  themselves  into  any  more  adventures.  Christ  they  would 
have  by  all  means,  but  Christ  crucified  by  no  means.  If  the  way  to  heaven  be  by 
the  gates  of  hell,  let  who  will  they  will  not  go  that  way  ;  they  rather  sit  down  and 
be  quiet.  {Spencer.)  Religion  genuine  in  bad  times: — Many  men  owe  their  religion 
not  to  grace,  but  to  the  favour  of  the  times ;  'tis  in  fashion,  they  may  profess  it  a.\ 
a  cheap  rate,  because  none  contradict  it.  Indeed,  it  shows  that  they  are  extremely 
bad  when  they  may  be  as  good  without  any  loss  to  themselves,  but  it  does  not 
show  they  are  good  that  they  are  only  good  in  good  times.  Dead  fish  swim  with 
the  stream.  They  do  not  build  upon  the  rock,  but  set  up  a  shed  leaning  to  another 
man's  house,  which  costs  them  nothing ;  carried  with  a  multitude,  are  not  able  to 
go  alone  in  a  good  way ;  if  they  be  religious,  it  is  for  others'  sakes.  Then  is  integ- 
rity discovered,  when  persons  dare  be  good  in  bad  times,  as  Noah  was  said  to  be  an 
upright  man,  because  he  was  perfect  in  his  generation.     (T.  Manton,) 

Vers.  7,  18,  19.  And  some  fell  among  thorns,  and  the  thorns  grew  np  and 
ehoked  Itb — The  character  of  worldly -minded  hearers  considered: — 1.  The  treat- 
ment the  Word  meets  with  from  these  persons.  They  hear  and  receive  it.  2.  How 
this  salutary  operation  on  his  heart  is  obstructed  and  defeated.  3.  What  is  the 
event?      These  thorns  choke  the  Word.      I.  What   these   things  abb  which 

OBSTBUCT    THE   DUB     OPEBATION   OF    God's   WoBD  ON   THE     HEABTS     OF     THESE    MEN? 

1.  The  cares  of  the  world.  By  the  cares  of  the  world  He  means  criminal  anxieties 
about  secular  concerns.  (1)  They  relate  to  subsistence.  By  this  we  mean  the 
necessaries  of  life  ;  man  cannot  be  indifferent  to  these,  but  must  not  distrust  the 
providence  of  God.  (2)  They  relate  to  competence.  This  is  a  relative  term,  and 
nas  respect  to  capacity  and  desire.  But  such  as  is  suited  to  desires  not  regulated 
by  religion  and  reason,  is  an  equivocal  competence ;  all  care  about  it  is  criminal. 
A  prince  requires  more  than  his  subject;  desires  directed  to  this  object  are  com- 
mendable. But  even  though  the  object  be  right,  the  care  about  it  may  exceed,  and 
nnduly  engross  our  attention  and  time.    (3)  They  relate  to  affluence.    This  also 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Lchap.  iv, 

right ;  but  pride,  ambition,  and  the  gratification  of  vain  passions  must  be 
offensive  to  God.  Thus  these  cares,  like  thorns  in  the  soil,  will  stifle  every 
generous  sentiment.  2.  The  deceitfulness  of  riches.  Men  are  prone  to  reason 
mistakenly  about  riches.  Riches  are,  in  a  sense,  themselves  deceitful.  They 
assume  an  appearance  different  from  their  real  nature  and  use,  and  so  the 
unwajy  observer  is  imposed  upon.  Consider  the  false  reasonings  of  a  depraved 
heart :  (1)  As  to  wealth  itsell  Riches  may  be  a  blessing.  The  value  of  them 
is  chiefly  to  be  estimated  by  their  use.  Here  men  mistake  it.  Money  will 
purchase  delicate  food,  fine  mansions,  but  will  it  set  him  beyond  the  reach  of 
pain,  contempt  ?  (2)  Of  the  mode  of  acquiring  wealth  men  reason  very  mistakenly. 
They  too  often  ignore  the  providence  of  God,  so  He  blasts  their  schemes.  (3)  Men 
reason  deceitfully  concerning  the  term  of  enjoying  the  wealth  they  acquire.  8. 
The  pleasures  of  this  life,  or  *•  the  lusts  of  other  things."  Here  we  need  not  be 
very  particular,  for  as  riches  are  the  means  of  procuring  pleasures,  and  most 
generally  coveted  with  that  view,  the  same  folly  and  criminality  we  have  charged 
to  the  account  of  the  avaricious  is,  with  a  little  variation  of  circumstances,  to  be 
imputed  likewise  to  the  sensualist.  Pleasure  indeed,  abstractedly  considered,  is  a 
real  good ;  the  desire  of  it  is  congenial  with  our  nature,  and  cannot  be  eradicated 
without  the  destruction  of  our  very  existence.  This  is  not  therefore  what  our 
Lord  condemns.  He  well  knew  that  there  are  passions  and  appetites  proper  to 
men  as  men,  that  the  moderate  gratification  of  them  is  necessary  to  their  happi- 
ness, and  of  consequence  that  the  desire  of  such  gratification  is  not  sinful.  But 
the  pleasure  He  prohibits  is  that  which  results  from  the  indulgence  of  irregular 
desires,  I  mean  such  as  are  directed  to  wrong  objects,  and  such  as  are  excessive  in 
their  degree.  11.  To  show  how  they  obstbuct  the  due  operation  of  God's 
WoED  ok  the  heabt.  1.  As  to  these  of  the  first  description,  the  careful.  It 
involves  distrust  of  the  faithfulness  and  goodness  of  Divine  providence.  2.  As  to 
the  avaricious.  How  vain  such  desires,  expectations,  and  exertions.  Will  you 
suffer  such  noxious  weeds  to  grow  in  your  heart  ?  Wisdom  will  give  you  riches  and 
honour.  3.  As  to  the  voluptuous.  It  precipitates  into  extravagances  which  often 
prove  fatal  to  character.  There  is  no  profiting  by  the  Word  we  hear,  without 
duly  weighing  and  considering  it.  There  are  three  things  necessary  to  this :  1. 
Leisure.  Ground  choked  with  briers  and  thorns  affords  not  room  for  the  seed 
cast  upon  it  to  expand  and  grow.  In  like  manner,  he  whose  attention  is  wholly 
taken  up  with  secular  affairs  has  not  leisure  for  consideration.  Say,  you  who  are 
oppressed  with  the  cares,  or  absorbed  in  the  pleasures  of  life,  whether  this  is 
not  the  fact  ?  What  is  it  first  catches  your  imagination  when  you  awake  in  the 
morning  ?  What  is  it  engrosses  your  attention  all  the  day  ?  What  is  it  goes  with 
you  to  your  bed,  and  follows  you  through  the  restless  hours  of  night  ?  What  is  it 
you  are  constantly  thinking  of  at  home,  abroad,  and  in  the  house  of  God  ?  It  is 
the  world.  Oh  sad  !  not  a  day,  not  an  hour,  scarce  a  moment  in  reserve,  for  a 
meditation  on  God,  your  soul,  and  an  eternal  world  1  And  can  religion  exist  where 
it  is  never  thought  of,  or  gain  ground  in  a  heart  where  it  is  but  now  and  then 
ftd verted  to  ?  As  well  might  a  man  expect  to  live  without  sustenance,  or  get  strong 
without  digesting  his  food.  That  then,  which  deprives  men  of  time  for  consider, 
ation,  is  essentially  injurious  to  religion.  2.  Composure.  By  composure,  I  mean 
that  calmness  or  self-possession,  whereby  we  are  enabled  to  attend  soberly  and 
without  interruption  to  the  business  we  are  about.  Consideration  implies  this  in 
it ;  for  how  is  it  possible  that  a  man  should  duly  consider  a  subject,  whether  civil 
or  religious,  cooUy  reason  upon  it,  and  thoroughly  enter  into  the  spirit  of  it,  if  his 
mind  is  all  the  while  occupied  with  a  thousand  other  things,  foreign  to  the  matter 
before  him  ?  In  order,  therefore,  to  our  doing  justice  to  any  question  of  import- 
ance, we  must  rid  our  minds  of  all  impertinent  thoughts,  be  self-collected,  and  fix 
our  attention  steadily  to  the  point.  How  difficult  this  is  I  need  not  say.  Studious 
people  feel  the  difficulty ;  and  in  regard  of  religion,  the  best  of  men  are  sensible  of 
their  weakness  in  this  respect,  and  deeply  lament  it.  But  where  the  world  gains 
the  ascendant,  this  difficulty  is  increased,  and,  in  some  instances,  becomes  almost 
insuperable.  Let  me  here  describe  to  you,  in  a  few  words,  the  almost  incessant 
hurry  and  confusion  of  their  minds,  who  answer  to  the  three  characters  in  our 
text  of  the  careful,  the  covetous,  and  the  voluptuous.  So  you  will  clearly  see,  how 
impossible  it  is  for  persons  thus  circumstanced  to  pay  the  attention  to  religious 
•ubjects  which  is  necessary  in  order  to  their  being  profited  by  them.  1.  The 
case  of  him  who  is  swallowed  up  with  the  anxious  cares  of  life  is  truly  lament- 
able.      It  is    not  riches  the   unhappy  man   aims    at,   but    a    competence,   or 


\ 

«HAP.  XT.]  ST.  MARK.  I3i 

perhaps  a  mere  subsistenoe.  The  dread  of  being  reduced,  with  his  family, 
to  extreme  poverty,  harrows  up  his  very  soul.  The  horrid  spectres  of  contempt, 
famine,  and  a  prison,  haunt  his  imagination.  And  how  incapable  is  a  man,  thus 
circumstanced,  of  coolly  thinking  on  the  great  things  of  religion  1  Does  he  attempt 
in  his  retirement  to  fix  his  attention  to  some  Divine  subject  7  he  instantly  fails  in 
the  attempt,  cares  like  a  wild  deluge  rush  in  upon  his  soul,  and  break  all  the 
measures  he  had  taken  to  obtain  a  little  respite  from  his  trouble.  2.  The  like 
effect  hath  an  eager  desire  after  riches  to  disqualify  men  for  consideration.  When 
on  his  knees  he  is  still  in  the  world :  when  he  is  worshipping  God  in  his  family  he 
is  still  pursuing  his  gain.  His  closet  is  an  accompting  house,  and  his  church  an 
exchange.  3.  How  an  eager  attention  to  worldly  pleasures  must  have  the  like 
effect,  to  render  the  mind  incapable  of  serious  consideration.  Scenes  of  splendour 
and  sensual  delight  are  before  the  eyes  of  men  of  this  character.  How  is  it  possible 
for  a  mind  thus  hurried,  dissipated,  intoxicated  with  vain  amusements,  to  cultivate 
religion  ?  They  not  only  deprive  men  of  time,  composure  for  serious  consideration 
— 3.  But  of  all  inclination  to  it.  But  what  I  mean,  is  to  show  that  an  eager  atten- 
tion to  the  things  of  this  life  confirms  the  habit  of  inconsideration,  and  tends, 
where  there  is  an  aptitude  to  meditation,  to  weaken  and  deprave  it.  A  mind  wholly 
occupied  with  the  objects  of  sense,  is  not  only  estranged  from  the  great  realities  of 
religion,  but  averse  to  them.  As  it  has  neither  leisure  nor  calmness  for  sublime 
contemplations,  so  it  has  no  taste  or  relish  for  them.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity 
against  God."  And  the  more  carnal  it  grows  by  incessant  commerce  with  the 
world,  the  more  does  that  prejudice  and  enmity  increase.  What  violence  are  such 
men  obliged  to  put  upon  themselves,  if  at  any  time,  by  some  extraordinary  circum- 
stance, they  are  prevailed  on  to  think  of  the  concerns  of  their  souls  I  The  businesB 
is  not  only  awkward,  as  they  are  unaccustomed  to  it,  but  it  is  exceeding  irksome 
and  painful.  Now  if  a  hearty  inclination  to  any  business  is  necessary  to  capacity 
to  pursue  it  with  success,  whatever  tends  to  abate  that  inclination,  or  to  confirm 
the  opposite  aversion,  is  essentially  injurious  to  such  business.  In  like  manner, 
cares,  riches,  and  pleasures  of  the  world  choke  the  Word.  III.  The  sad  evbnt  ot 
SUCH  UNDUE  commerce  WITH  THE  WORLD.  The  Unhappy  man  not  having  leisure, 
calmness,  or  inclination  to  attend  to  the  Word.  1.  He  understands  not  the  Word  of 
the  kingdom.  He  has  a  speculative  acquaintance  with  the  truths  of  religion  ;  it 
cannot  be  experimental.  2.  He  does  not  believe  it.  He  who  believes  the  gospel 
to  the  salvation  of  his  soul  must  enter  into  the  spirit  of  it.  But  how  can  this  be 
the  case  with  a  man  whose  heart  is  possessed  by  the  god  of  this  world  ?  3.  Not 
rightly  understanding  or  believing  the  Word  of  the  kingdom,  he  is  not  obedient  to 
it.  4.  What  is  the  final  issue  of  all  ?  Why,  the  man  himself,  as  well  as  the  seed, 
is  choked  (Luke  viii.  14).  Exhortation :  1.  Let  the  professors  of  religion  have  no 
more  to  do  with  the  world  than  duty  clearly  requires.  •*  Be  not  conformed  to  this 
world ;  but  be  ye  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your  mind."  "  Come  out  from 
among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing."  "Have  no 
fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness."  2.  If  thorns  before  we  are 
aware  get  in,  let  us  instantly  root  them  out.  Exert  aU  the  power  of  Christian 
resolution.  3.  Keceive  the  good  seed.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  ground  is  cleared 
of  noxious  weeds,  if  it  be  not  sown  with  the  proper  grain.  Neither  is  it  suflScient 
to  guard  against  the  corrupt  maxims,  customs,  and  manners  of  the  world,  if  our 
hearts  are  not  impregnated  with  Divine  truth.  4.  And  lastly,  look  to  God  for  His 
blessing.  *'  Paul  may  plant,  and  Apollos  water  ;  but  it  is  God  that  giveth  the 
increase."  We  may  hear,  read,  meditate,  reflect,  watch,  and  use  many  good 
endeavours ;  but  if  no  regard  be  had  to  a  superior  influence,  all  will  be  vain. 
{S.  Stennett,  D.D.)  The  Word  choked : — Kobert  Bums — who  had  times  of  serious 
reflection,  in  one  of  which,  as  recorded  by  his  own  pen,  he  beautifully  compares 
himself,  in  the  review  of  his  past  life,  to  a  lonely  man  walking  amid  the  ruins  of  a 
noble  temple,  where  pillars  stand  dismantled  of  their  capitals,  and  elaborate  works 
of  purest  marble  lie  on  the  ground,  overgrown  by  tall,  foul,  rank  weeds — was  once 
brought,  as  I  have  heard,  under  deep  convictions.  He  was  in  great  alarm.  The 
seed  of  the  Word  had  begun  to  grow.  He  sought  counsel  from  one  called  a  minister 
of  the  gospel.  Alas,  that  in  that  crisis  of  his  history  he  should  have  trusted  the 
helm  to  the  hands  of  such  a  pilot  1  This  so-called  minister  laughed  at  the  poet's 
fears — bade  him  dance  them  away  at  balls,  drown  them  in  bowls  of  wine,  fly  from 
these  phantoms  to  the  arms  of  pleasure.  Fatal,  too  pleasant  advice  I  He  followed 
It :  and  ♦•  the  lusts  of  other  things  "  entering  in,  choked  the  word.  (T.  Guthrie.) 
The  insinuating  destruction  of  truth  in  the  soul : — In  the  gardens  of  Hampton 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  iv. 

Court  yoa  will  see  many  trees  entirely  vanquished  and  well-nigh  strangled  by  huge 
eoilsof  ivy,  which  arewound  about  them  like  the  snakes  aroundthe  unhappy  Laocoon ; 
there  is  no  untwisting  the  folds,  they  are  too  giant-like,  and  fast  fixed,  and  every 
hour  the  rootlets  of  the  climber  are  sucking  the  life  out  of  the  unhappy  tree.  ^  Yet 
there  was  a  day  when  the  ivy  was  a  tiny  aspirant,  only  asking  a  little  aid  in 
climbing ;  had  it  been  denied  then  the  tree  had  never  become  its  victim,  but  by 
degrees  the  humble  weakling  grew  in  strength  and  arrogance,  and  at  last  it 
assumed  the  mastery,  and  the  tall  tree  became  the  prey  of  the  creeping,  insinuating 
destroyer.  The  moral  is  too  obvious.  Sorrowfully  do  we  remember  many  noble 
characters  which  have  been  ruined  little  by  little  by  insinuating  habits.  Covetous- 
ness,  drink,  the  love  of  pleasure,  and  pride,  have  often  been  the  ivy  that  has 
wrought  the  ruin.  (T/ie  Sword  and  Tiowel.)  The  cares  of  wealth: — An 
emperor  once  said  to  his  courtiers :  "  You  gaze  on  my  purple  robe  and  golden 
crown,  but  did  you  know  what  cares  are  under  it,  you  would  not  take  it  up  from 
the  ground  to  have  it."  {Brooks.)  Gold  a  destroyer: — When  Arates  threw  his 
gold  into  the  sea,  he  cried  out,  ••  I  will  destroy  you,  lest  you  should  destroy  me." 
(Seeker.)  Prosperity  favourable  to  deception  .'—The  snow  covers  many  a  dung, 
hill,  and  so  doth  prosperity  many  a  rotten  heart.  It  is  easy  to  wade  in  a  warm 
bath,  and  every  bird  can  sing  on  a  sunshiny  day.  {Brooks.)  Remedies  against 
immoderate  care  for  temporal  things : — 1.  Consider  the  nature  of  these  things :  they 
are  vain,  transitory,  perishing ;  and  they  only  minister  to  our  earthly  life  which 
will  end  we  know  not  how  soon.  2.  By  all  our  care  we  cannot  help  or  profit 
ourselves,  without  God's  blessing  on  the  means  we  use.  3.  It  is  a  heathenish 
practice  thus  to  vex  and  trouble  ourselves  with  immoderate  cares  for  earthly 
things :  not  fit  for  Christians,  who  profess  faith  in  God's  Providence.  4.  We  are 
commanded  to  cast  our  cares  upon  God ;  and  He  has  promised  to  care  for  us,  and 
to  provide  for  us  all  things  necessary  for  this  life,  as  well  as  for  that  which  is  to 
come,  if  we  depend  on  Him  by  faith  (Psa.  Iv.  2 ;  1  Peter  v.  7).  6.  Consider  how 
God  provides  for  other  creatures,  of  less  value  and  worth  than  ourselves,  without 
their  care.  6.  Immoderate  cares  for  this  life  oppress  the  heart  and  mind  exceed- 
ingly, taking  them  up  so  that  they  cannot  be  free  to  meditate  on  spiritual 
and  heavenly  things:  hindering  men  also  from  daily  preparing  themselves  for 
death  and  judgment  (Luke  xxi.  34).  7.  Let  our  chief  care  be  for  heavenly  and 
spiritual  things,  which  concern  God's  glory  and  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  Thii 
will  moderate  and  slake  our  care  for  temporal  things.  {G.  Fetter.)  The  difficulty 
of  worldly  prosperity : — Great  skill  is  required  to  the  governing  of  a  plentiful 
and  prosperous  estate,  so  as  it  may  be  safe  and  comfortable  to  the  owner,  and 
beneficial  to  others.  Every  corporal  may  know  how  to  order  some  few  files ;  but 
to  marshal  many  troops  in  a  regiment,  many  regiments  in  a  whole  body  of  an 
army,  requu-es  the  skill  of  an  experienced  general.  {Hall.)  Prosperity  a  trial: — 
Life  is  a  time  for  the  getting  of  character,  and  for  the  trial  and  perfecting  of  it.  The 
world  is  a  moral  furnace,  in  which  God  searches  and  tests  us.  One  man  He  tries 
by  adversity,  another  by  prosperity.  And  the  latter  is  the  severer  of  the  two.  1.  A 
prosperous  man  has  little  time  to  spare  for  religion.  Every  effort  is  needed  to 
ensure  the  continued  success  of  his  worldly  enterprises.  Accordingly,  his  spiritual 
life  droops  and  withers.  2.  From  want  of  cultivation  his  taste  for  spiritual 
things  abates.  3.  Pride  is  apt  to  increase.  4.  Self-indulgence  creeps  in,  and  the 
lower  appetites  obtain  mastery  in  the  heart.  5.  The  result  is  a  thoroughly 
worldly  life — a  life  occupied  wholly  with  transitory  things,  a  life  in  which  religion 
has  no  part.  These  are  some  of  the  chief  dangers  which  appertain  to  a  state  of 
prosperity.  Beware  of  them  in  time.  They  encroach  very  gradually ;  and  before 
you  are  aware  of  it,  you  may  be  swallowed  up.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Ill  effects 
of  prosperity: — Generally  speaking,  the  sunshine  of  too  much  worldly  favour  weakens 
and  relaxes  our  spiritual  nerves ;  as  weather,  too  intensely  hot,  relaxes  those  of  the 
body.  A  degree  of  seasonable  opposition,  like  a  fine  dry  frost,  strengthens  and 
invigorates  and  braces  up.  {A,  M.  Toplady.)  Prosperity  causes  men  to  forget  God : — 
Prosperity  most  usually  makes  us  proud,  insolent,  forgetful  of  God,  and  of  aU  duties 
we  owe  unto  Him.  It  chokes  and  extinguishes,  or  at  least  cools  and  abates,  the  heat 
and  vigour  of  all  virtue  in  us.  And  as  the  ivy,  whilst  it  embraces  the  oak,  sucks  the 
sap  from  the  root,  and  in  time  makes  it  rot  and  perish ;  so  worldly  prosperity 
kills  ui  with  kindness  whilst  it  sucks  from  us  the  sap  of  God's  graces,  and  bo 
makes  our  spiritual  growth  and  strength  to  decay  and  languish.  Neither  do  men 
ever  almost  suffer  an  eclipse  of  their  virtues  and  good  parts,  but  when  they  are 
in  the  full  of  worldly  prosperity.    {Downam^.)        Worldliness  defined : — It  is  thr 


CHAP,  nr.]  ST.  MARK.  137 

(spirit  of  a  life,  not  the  objects  with  which  the  life  is  conversant.  It  is  not  the 
"  flesh,"  nor  the  •'  eye,"  nor  "  life  "  which  are  forbidden,  but  the  lust  of  these. 
It  is  not  this  earth  nor  the  men  who  inhabit  it,  nor  the  sphere  of  our  legitimate 
activity,  that  we  may  not  love ;  but  it  is  the  way  in  which  the  love  is  given 
which  constitutes  worldliness.  {F.  W.  Bohertson.)  Worldliness  i»  the  spirit  of 
childhood  carried  on  into  manhood.  The  child  lives  in  the  present  hour ;  to-day  to 
him  is  everything.  The  holiday  promised  at  a  distant  interval  is  no  hohday  at 
all — ^it  must  be  either  now  or  never.  Natural  in  the  child,  and  therefore  pardonable, 
this  spirit  when  carried  on  into  manhood  is  worldliness.  (Ibid.)  The  deceitfuU 
ness  of  riches :  Heathen  testimony  to  this : — When  Cyrus  received  intelligence 
that  the  Lydians  had  revolted  from  him,  he  told  a  friend,  with  much  emotion, 
that  he  had  almost  determined  to  make  them  all  slaves.  His  friend  expostulated, 
begging  him  to  pardon  them.  **But,"  he  added,  "that  they  may  no  more  rebel 
or  be  troublesome  to  you,  command  them  to  lay  aside  their  arms,  to  wear  long 
vests  and  buskins,  that  is,  to  vie  with  each  other  in  the  elegance  and  richness  of 
their  dress.  Order  them  to  drink,  and  sing,  and  play,  and  you  will  soon  see  their 
spirits  broken,  and  themselves  changed  to  the  effieminacy  of  women,  so  that  they 
will  no  more  rebel,  nor  give  you  any  further  uneasiness."  The  advice  was 
followed,  and  the  result  proved  how  politic  it  was.  While  the  advice  is  such  as  no 
good  man  could  consistently  follow,  the  incident  shows  the  deteriorating  influence 
of  luxury  in  a  very  striking  light.  The  lusts  of  other  things : — The  love  of 
pleasure,  of  amusements,  and  sensual  gratifications,  and  even  the  cultivation  of 
refined  tastes;  all  which  have  a  tendency  to  engross  the  mind,  and  induce  it 
quietly  to  take  up  with  a  world  which  yields  it  so  much  satisfaction.  (M.  F. 
Sadler.)  "  Entering  in : " — Very  suggestive  expression  ;  teaching  us  that  these 
eares  of  the  world,  and  deceitfulness  of  riches,  may  not  be  present  or  sensibly  felt 
when  the  Word  first  springs  up  in  the  heart ;  but,  when  opportunity  offers,  they 
may  make  their  appearance,  and  grow  far  faster  and  more  vigorously  than  the 
true  religious  life,  and  ultimately  destroy  it.    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  8,  20.  And  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  did  yield  fruit  that  sprang  up 
and  Increased. — The  character  of  sincere  hearers  considered: — 1.  That  these 
hearers  have  honest  and  good  hearts.  The  ground  must  be  properly  manured  and 
prepared,  before  the  seed  can  so  mingle  with  it  as  to  produce  fruit.  In  hke 
manner,  the  powers  of  the  soul  must  be  renewed  by  Divine  grace,  before  the 
instructions  of  God's  Word  can  so  incorporate  with  them  as  to  become  fruitful. 
Their  understanding  is  illuminated,  and  a  new  bent  is  given  to  their  will.  So, 
S.  They  hear  the  Word  after  a  different  manner,  and  to  a  very  different  purpose 
from  what  others  do,  and  from  what  they  themselves  formerly  did.  They  hear  it 
with  attention,  candour,  meekness,  and  simplicity ;  and  then — to  go  on  with  our 
Saviour's  account  of  these  hearers — they,  3.  Understand  the  Word.  This  is  not 
expressly  said,  as  I  remember,  of  either  of  the  former  characters.  Their  know- 
ledge is,  in  short,  experimental  and  practical.  4.  They  keep  the  Word.  The  seed 
once  lodged  in  the  heart  remains  there.  It  is  not  caught  away  by  the  wicked  one, 
it  is  not  destroyed  by  the  scorching  beams  of  persecution,  nor  is  it  choked  by  the 
thorns  of  worldly  cares  and  pleasures.  It  is  laid  up  in  the  understanding,  memory, 
and  affections;  and  guarded  with  attention  and  care,  as  the  most  invaluable 
treasure.  And,  indeed,  how  is  it  imaginable  that  the  man  who  has  received  the 
truth  in  the  love  of  it,  has  ventured  his  everlasting  all  on  it,  and  has  no  other 
ground  of  hope  whatever,  should  be  willing  to  part  with  this  good  Word  of  the 
grace  of  God  1  sooner  would  he  renounce  his  dearest  temporal  enjoyments,  yea, 
even  life  itself.  Again,  6.  They  bring  forth  fruit.  The  seed  springs  up,  looks 
green,  and  promises  a  ifair  harvest.  They  profess  the  Christian  name,  and  live 
answerable  to  it.  Their  external  conduct  is  sober,  useful,  and  honourable ;  and 
their  temper  is  pious,  benevolent,  and  holy.  The  fruit  they  bear  is  of  the  same 
nature  with  the  seed  whence  it  springs.  6.  They  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience.  It 
is  a  considerable  time  before  the  seed  disseminates,  rises  into  the  stalk  and  the  ear, 
and  ripens  into  fruit  (James  v.  7).  7.  And  lastly.  They  bring  forth  fruit  in  different 
degrees,  '*  some  thirty,  some  sixty,  and  some  an  hundred  fold."  And  now,  in 
order  to  the  fully  discussing  this  argument,  we  shall — I.  Show  the  nkcessitt  oi 
TffB  hbart's  being  madk  honest  and  good,  in  order  to  men's  duly  becsivino  thb 

WOan    AND    EEEPINO     IT;   THIS   WILL    CLEARLY     APPEAR    ON   A  LITTLE   BEFLECTION.      I 

suppose  it  will  scarce  be  denied  that  the  will  and  affections  have  a  considerable 
Influence  on  the  operations  of  the  understanding  ari  judgment.     To  a  mind. 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  it. 

therefore,  nnder  the  tyranny  of  pride  and  pleasure,  positions  that  are  hostile  to 
these  passions  will  not  easily  gain  admission.  Their  first  appearance  will  create 
prejudice.  And  if  that  prejudice  does  not  instantly  preclude  all  consideration,  it 
will  yet  throw  insuperable  obstructions  in  the  way  of  impartial  inquiry.  If  it  does 
not  absolutely  put  out  the  eye  of  reason,  it  will  yet  raise  such  dust  before  it  as  will 
effectually  prevent  its  perceiving  the  object.  What  men  do  not  care  to  believe, 
they  will  take  pains  to  persuade  themselves  is  not  true.  When  once  a  new  bias  is 
given  to  the  will  and  affections,  and  a  man,  from  a  proud,  becomes  a  humble  man, 
from  a  lover  of  this  world,  a  lover  of  God,  his  prejudices  against  the  gospel  will, 
instantly  subside.  The  thick  vapours  exhaled  from  a  sensual  heart,  which  had 
obscured  his  understanding,  will  disperse  ;  and  the  light  of  Divine  truth  shine  in 
upon  him  with  commanding  evidence.  He  will  receive  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it 
How  important,  then,  is  regeneration  1  This  leads  us— II.  To  describe  the  kind 
OF  rBuiT  WHICH  SUCH  PERSONS  WILL  BEAB.  It  is  good  fmit — frult  of  the  same  nature 
with  the  seed  whence  it  grows,  and  the  soil  with  which  it  is  incorporated :  of  the 
same  nature  with  the  gospel  itself  which  is  received  in  faith,  and  with  those 
holy  principles  which  are  infused  by  the  blessed  Spirit.  Here  let  us  dwell  a  little  more 
particularly  on  the  nature  and  tendency  of  the  gospel.  •*  God  is  in  Christ  recon- 
ciling the  world  to  Himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  to  them."  O  how 
inflexible  the  justice,  how  venerable  the  holiness,  and  how  boundless  the  goodness 
of  God  1  And  if  this  be  the  gospel,  who  can  hesitate  a  moment  upon  the  question 
respecting  its  natural  and  proper  tendency?  How  can  piety  languish  and  die 
amidst  this  scene  of  wonders  ?  How  can  the  heart,  occupied  with  these  sentiments, 
remain  unsusceptible  to  the  feelings  of  justice,  truth,  humanity,  and  benevolence  f 
How  can  a  man  believe  himself  to  be  that  guilty,  depraved,  helpless  wretch  which 
this  gospel  supposes  him  to  be,  and  not  be  humble  ?  How  can  he  behold  the 
Creator  of  the  world  expiring  in  agonies  on  the  cross,  and  follow  Him  thence  a 
pale,  breathless  corpse  to  the  tomb,  and  not  feel  a  sovereign  contempt  for  the 
pomps  and  vanities  of  this  transitory  state  ?  But  to  bring  the  matter  more  fully 
home  to  the  point  before  ns,  what  kind  of  a  man  is  the  real  Christian  ?  Let  ns 
contemplate  his  character,  and  consider  what  is  the  general  course  of  his  life. 
Instructed  in  this  Divine  doctrine,  and  having  his  heart  made  honest  and  good,  he 
will  be  a  man  of  piety,  integrity,  and  purity.  •*  The  grace  of  God,  which  bringeth 
salvation,  will  teach  him  to  deny  ungodliness,  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live  soberly, 
righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world  "  (Tit.  ii  11,  12).  As  to  piety.  A 
due  regard  to  the  authority  of  the  blessed  God  will  have  a  commanding  influence 
npon  his  temper  and  practice.  As  to  social  duties.  His  conduct  will  be  governed 
by  the  rule  his  Divine  Master  has  laid  down,  of  doing  to  others  as  he  would  have 
them  do  to  him.  As  to  personal  duties.  He  will  use  the  comforts  of  life,  which 
he  enjoys  as  the  fruits  of  Divine  benevolence,  with  temperance  and  moderation. 
Saoh  are  the  fruits  which  they  bring  forth,  who  hear  the  Word  in  the  manner  our 
Saviour  describes,  and  who  keep  it  in  good  and  honest  hearts  (Eph,  iv.  1 ;  Phil.  i.  27  *, 
Gal.  V.  22,  23).  But  it  is  not  meant  by  this  description  of  the  Christian  to  raise  him 
above  the  rank  of  humanity,  or  to  give  a  colouring  to  the  picture  which  it  will  not  bear. 
He  is  still  a  man,  not  an  angel.  To  fix  the  standard  of  real  religion  at  a  mark  to 
which  none  can  arrive,  is  to  do  an  injury  to  religion  itself,  as  well  as  to  discourage 
the  hearts  of  its  best  friends.  But  though  perfection,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
term,  is  not  to  be  admitted,  yet  the  fruit  which  every  real  Christian  bears  is  good 
fruit.  1.  How  gracious  is  that  influence  which  the  blessed  God  exerts,  to  make  the 
heart  honest  and  good,  and  so  dispose  it  to  receive  the  Word,  and  profit  by  it  t 
2.  From  the  nature  and  tendency  of  the  gospel,  which  has  been  just  delineated,  we 
derive  a  strong  presumptive  evidence  of  its  truth.  3.  Of  what  importance  is  it 
that  we  converse  intimately  with  the  gospel,  in  order  to  our  bringing  forth  the 
fruits  of  holiness  I  4,  And  lastly,  How  vain  a  thing  is  mere  speculation  in 
religion  I    We  have  discoursed  on  the  two  first  heads,  and  proceed  now — III.  To 

CONSIDER  THB  GREAT  VARIBTT  THERE  IS  AMONO  CHRISTIANS  IN  RBOARD  0» 
DEGREES      OP      PBUITFULNE8S,     AND     THB       REASONS      OP      IT.        First,      aS      tO      the 

fact  that  there  are  degrees  of  fruitfulness,  a  Uttle  observation  will  suflSciently 
prove  it.  Fruitfulness  may  be  considered  in  regard  both  of  the  devout  affections 
of  the  heart,  and  the  external  actions  of  the  life ;  in  each  of  which  views  it  wiW 
admit  of  degrees.  The  variety  is  prodigious.  What  multitudes  live  harmleiis, 
sober,  and  regular  lives.  Their  obedience  is  rather  negative  than  positive.  They 
bring  no  dishonour  on  their  profession,  nor  yet  are  they  very  ornamental  and 
exemplary.     Others  are  strictly  conscientious  and  circumspect  in  their  walk,  far 


OHAX>.  IT.]  ST.  MARK.  189 

removed  from  all  appearance  of  gaiety  and  dissipation,  and  remarkably  serious 
and  constant  in  their  attendance  upon  religious  duties ;  but,  for  want  of  sweetness 
of  temper,  or  of  that  Bprightliness  and  freedom  which  a  lively  faith  inspires,  the 
fruit  they  bear  is  but  slender,  and  of  an  unpleasant  flavour.  There  are  those, 
further,  in  whom  seriousness  and  cheerfulness  are  happily  united,  and  whose  con- 
duct is  amiable  in  the  view  of  all  around  them ;  but  then,  moving  in  a  narrow 
sphere,  and  possessing  no  great  zeal  or  resolution,  their  lives  are  distinguished  by 
few  remarkable  exertions  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  others.  And 
again,  there  are  a  number  whose  bosoms,  glowing  with  flaming  zeal  and  ardent 
love,  are  rich  in  good  works,  never  weary  in  well-doing,  and  full  of  the  fruits  of 
righteousness,  to  the  praise  and  the  glory  of  God.  In  the  garden  of  God  the*e 
are  trees  of  different  growth.  Some  newly  planted,  of  slender  stature  and  feeble 
make,  which  yet  bring  forth  good,  though  but  little,  fruit.  And  here  and  there  you 
see  one  that  out-tops  all  the  rest,  whose  roots  spread  far  and  wide,  and  whose 
boughs  are  laden  in  autumn  with  rich  and  large  fruit.  Such  variety  is  there 
among  Christians.  And  variety  there  is,  too,  in  the  different  species  of  good 
works.  Some  are  eminent  in  this  virtue,  and  some  in  that;  while  perhaps  a  few 
abound  in  every  good  word  and  work.  Whoever  consults  the  history  of  religion  in 
the  Bible  will  see  all  that  has  been  said  exemplified  in  the  characters  and  lives  of  a 
long  scroll  of  pious  men.  Not  to  speak  here  of  the  particular  excellences  that 
distinguished  these  men  of  God  from  each  other,  it  is  enough  to  observe  that  some 
vastly  outshone  others.  The  proportions  of  a  hundred,  sixty,  and  thirty  fold, 
might  be  applied  to  patriarchs,  prophets,  judges,  kings,  apostles,  and  the  Christians 
of  the  primitive  church.  Between,  for  instance,  an  Abraham  that  offered  up  his 
only  son,  and  a  righteous  Lot,  that  lingered  at  the  call  of  an  angel.  Secondly, 
inquire  into  the  grounds  and  reasons  of  this  disparity  among  Christians  respecting 
the  fruits  of  holiness.  These  are  of  very  different  consideration.  Many  of  them 
will  be  found  to  have  no  connection  at  all  with  the  inward  temper  of  the  mind  ;  a 
reflection,  therefore,  upon  them  will  give  energy  to  what  has  been  said  in  regard  of 
the  charity  we  ought  to  exercise  in  judging  of  others.  Let  us  begin,  then — 
1.  With  men's  worldly  circumstances.  The  a^uent  Christian  you  will  see  pouring 
his  bounty  on  all  around  him.  But  the  poor  Christian  can  render  few,  if  any,  of 
these  services  to  his  fellow-creatures.  2.  Opportunity  is  another  ground  of  dis- 
tinction among  Christians  in  regard  of  fruitfulness.  By  opportunity  I  mean 
occasions  of  usefulness,  which  arise  under  the  particular  and  immediate  direction 
of  Divine  Providence.  A  Daniel  shall  have  such  easy  access  to  the  presence  of  a 
mighty  tyrant  as  shall  enable  him  to  whisper  the  most  beneflcial  counsels  in  his 
ear ;  and  an  apostle,  by  being  brought  in  chains  before  a  no  less  powerful  prince, 
shall  have  an  opportunity  of  defending  the  cause  of  his  Divine  Master  in  the  most 
essential  manner.  3.  Mental  abilities  have  a  considerable  influence  in  this  matter. 
What  shining  talents  do  some  good  men  possess  1  They  have  extensive  learning, 
great  knowledge  of  m  inkind,  much  sagacity  and  penetration,  singular  fortitude,  a 
happy  manner  of  address,  flowing  language,  and  a  remarkable  sweetuess  of  temper. 
4.  The  different  means  of  religion  that  good  men  enjoy  are  another  occasion  of 
their  different  degrees  of  fruitfulness.  5.  That  the  comparative  different  state  of 
religion  in  one  Christian  and  another  is  the  more  immediate  and  direct  cause  of 
their  different  fruitfulness.  But  this  plain  general  truth  we  may  affirm,  leaving 
every  one  to  apply  it  to  himself,  that,  in  proportion  as  religion  is  on  the  advance  or 
decline  in  a  man's  heart,  so  will  his  external  conduct  be  more  or  hes  exemplary. 
6.  And  lastly,  the  greater  or  less  effusion  of  Divine  influences.  IV.  The  blessed- 
ness OF  THOSE  WHO,  HEABINO  THE  WOKD,  AMD  KEEPING  IT  IN  HONEST  AND  OOOD  HEABTS, 

BBiNO  FOBTH  THE  FBuiTS  OF  HOLINESS.  1.  As  to  the  pleasure  that  accompanies 
mgenuous  obedience.  "  Great  peace  have  they,"  says  David,  "  who  love  Thy  law, 
and  nothing  shall  offend  them  "  (Psa.  cxix.  165).  2.  Fruitfulness  affords  a  noble 
proof  of  a  man's  uprightness,  and  so  tends  indirectly,  as  well  as  directly,  to  pro- 
mote his  happiness.  3.  The  esteem,  too,  in  which  he  is  held  among  his  fellow- 
Cbristians  must  contribute  not  a  little  to  his  comfort.  4.  How  glorious  will  be  the 
rewards  which  the  fruitful  Christian  will  receive  at  the  hands  of  the  Great  Husband- 
man on  the  day  of  harvest  1  That  day  is  approaching.  **  Mark  the  perfect  man ; 
behold  the  upright ;  for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace."  Going  down  to 
death  like  a  shock  of  corn  fully  ripe,  the  precious  grain  shall  lie  secure  in  the  bosom 
of  the  earth ;  angels  shall  keep  their  vigils  about  it :  while  the  immortal  spirit, 
acquiring  its  highest  degree  of  perfection,  shall  join  the  company  of  the  blessed 
above.     (S.  Stennett,  D.D.)         "  Same  thirty-fold  "  ; — Every  one  has  observed  thf 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

difference  between  those  who  may  be  called  good  Christians,  in  the  matter  of  their 
good  works — how  some  seem  to  produce  twice  or  thrice  the  fruit  that  others  do. 
Some  are,  compared  with  others,  three  times  more  careful  in  all  the  trifling  matters 
which  make  up  so  much  of  life;  three  times  more  self-denying,  three  times  more 
liberal,  three  times  more  humble,  subdued,  and  thankful.  Dues  not  the  Lord 
recognize  this  difference  in  the  parable  of  the  pounds — when  the  nobleman,  in 
leaving,  gives  a  pound  to  each  of  his  servants;  and  one  servant  makes  it  ten 
pounds,  and  another  five  ;  and  he  commends  both,  but  gives  to  the  more  industrious 
worker  twice  the  reward  ?  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  Patience  : — Patience  is  power.  With 
time  and  patience  the  mulberry-leaf  becomes  satin,  {Eastern  Proverb.)  Never 
think  that  God's  delays  are  God's  denials.  Hold  on ;  hold  fast ;  hold  out :  Patience 
is  genius.  {Buffon,)  Meditation: — Meditation  is  partly  a  passive,  partly  an 
active  state.  Whoever  has  pondered  long  over  a  plan  which  he  is  anxious  to 
accomplish,  without  distinctly  seeing  at  first  the  way,  knows  what  meditation  is. 
The  subject  itself  presents  Itself  in  leisure  moments  spontaneously :  but  then  all 
this  sets  the  mind  at  work— contriving,  imagining,  rejecting,  modifying.  It  is  in 
this  way  that  one  of  the  greatest  of  English  engineers,  a  man  uncouth  and  un- 
accustomed to  regular  disoipUne  of  mind,  is  said  to  have  accomplished  his  most 
marvellous  triumphs.  He  threw  bridges  over  almost  impracticable  torrents,  and 
pierced  the  eternal  mountains  for  his  viaducts.  Sometimes  a  difficulty  brought  all 
the  work  to  a  pause  ;  then  he  would  shut  himself  up  in  his  room,  eat  nothing, 
speak  to  no  one,  abandon  himself  intensely  to  the  contemplation  of  that  on 
which  his  heart  was  set;  and  at  the  end  of  two  or  three  days,  would  come 
forth  serene  and  calm,  walk  to  the  spot,  and  quietly  give  orders  which  seemed  the 
result  of  superhuman  intuition.  This  was  meditation.  {F,  W.  Robertson,) 
The  numerical  relations  of  good  and  evil: — In  the  parable  of  the  four  sorts  of 
ground  whereon  the  seed  was  sown,  the  last  alone  proved  fruitful.  There  the  bad 
were  more  than  the  good.  But  amongst  the  servants,  two  improved  their  talents, 
or  pounds,  and  one  only  buried  them.  Here  the  good  were  more  than  the 
bad.  Again,  amongst  the  ten  virgins,  five  were  wise  and  five  were  foolish.  There 
the  good  and  bad  were  equal.  I  see,  that  concerning  the  number  of  the  saints  in 
comparison  to  the  reprobates,  no  certainty  can  be  collected  from  these  parables. 
Good  reason,  for  it  is  not  their  principal  purpose  to  meddle  with  that  point.  Grant 
that  I  may  never  rack  a  Scripture  simile  beyond  the  true  intent  thereof.  {Thomas 
Fuller.)  Favourable  moral  conditions : — A  great  deal  of  fire  falleth  upon  a  stone 
aod  it  Dometh  not,  but  a  dry  chip  soon  taketh  fire.    (T.  Manton.) 

Yer.  9.  Ee  tliat  hath  ears  to  hear. — The  duty  of  consideration  explained  and 
enforced: — 1.  Our  Lord  evidently  meant,  by  the  language  of  the  tez^  to  remind 
His  hearers  that  it  was  an  apologue,  fable,  or  parable  He  had  been  delivering.  2. 
By  this  mode  of  expression  they  were  further  reminded  that  the  several  truths 
veiled  under  this  parable  were  most  interesting  and  important.  8.  The  direct 
purport  of  the  exhortation  was,  to  persuade  them  to  consider  what  they  had  heard. 
4.  He  in  effect  tells  them  that  if  they  were  not  benefited  by  what  they  heard  the 
fault  was  rather  in  their  will  than  their  understanding.  "  Who  hath  ears  to  hear, 
let  him  hear."  I.  Let  us  consisbb  thb  dutt  oub  Savioub  xnculcatbs  om  those  to 
WHOM  THS  Word  is  preached.  1.  Let  us  take  care  to  digest  properly  in  our  own 
minds  the  subject  on  which  we  mean  to  discourse  to  others.  2.  Care  also  is  to  be 
taken  about  the  manner,  as  well  as  the  matter,  of  our  discourse.  3.  That  we  should 
look  well  to  our  aims  and  views  in  discoursing  of  the  great  things  of  God.  4.  T 
our  dependence  should  be  firmly  placed  on  the  gracious  and  seasonable  influences 
the  Holy  Spirit.  And  now,  thus  prepared,  we  have  a  right,  be  our  audience  who  they 
may,  to  adopt  the  language  of  our  Master,  and  with  authority  to  say,  "  Who  hath 
ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."  Upon  the  grounds  of  common  sense  as  well  as  religion, 
we  may  demand  their  most  serious  attention.    First,  some  kind  of  preparation 

Erevious  to  our  hearing  the  Word.  Secondly,  how  we  ought  to  behave  ourselves  in  the 
ouse  of  God.  Thirdly,  a  duty  lying  upon  us  after  we  have  heard  the  Word.  Recol- 
lection is  what  I  mean,  together  with  self -application  and  prayer.  1.  Avoid  as  much 
M  possible  everything  that  may  tend  to  dibsipate  the  mind,  and  render  it  incapable 
of  consideration  and  recollection.  2.  Be  not  fond  of  hearing  more  than  you  can 
retain  and  digest.  There  is  suoh  a  thing  as  intemperance  in  regard  of  the  mind 
M  wall  as  the  body  ;  and  if  excessive  eating  may  be  as  hurtful  to  the  constitution 
M  ezeessive  abstinence,  it  is  also  true  of  the  mind,  that  the  hearing  more  than  is 
Al  maj  be  very  nearly  as  injurious  as  the  not  hearing  at  all.    A  great  abundance 


«HAP.  iv.J  ST,  MARK.  141 

of  instruction  poured  into  the  ear,  without  sufficient  intermission  for  reflection  and 
practice,  is  extremely  prejudicial:  it  confounds  the  judgment,  overburdens  the 
memory,  and  so  jades  the  mind  as  to  render  it  incapable  of  recollecting  afterwarda 
what  it  had  heard,  and  of  calmly  deliberating  thereon.  3.  The  making  a  point  of 
retiring  at  the  close  of  the  day,  for  the  purpose  of  recollection  and  prayer.  II.  To 
ENFOBcs  WHAT  HAS  BEEN  BAiD  WITH  SUITABLE  MOTIVES.  And  our  first  argument  shall  be 
taken.  First,  from  the  decency  and  fitness  of  the  thing  itself.  Secondly,  let  me 
remind  yon  of  the  particular  obligations  you  owe  to  those  whose  ministrations  you 
attend.  Thirdly,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  preaching  is  a  Divine  institution  ; 
and  that  they  who  are  called  to  dispense  the  gospel,  have,  by  virtue  of  that  call,  a 
claim  to  the  attention  of  those  to  whom  they  are  sent.  Fourthly,  from  the 
momentous  nature  of  the  business  itself  on  which  we  are  sent  to  you.  Fifthly,  the 
necessity  of  consideration  in  order  to  ourprofiting  by  the  Word.  Sixthly,there  are  many 
obstructions  in  the  way  of  this  duty,  the  recollection  of  which  ought  to  have  the  force 
of  an  argument  to  excite  and  animate  us  to  it.  Seventhly,  the  authority  that  enjoins 
this  duty  upon  us  adds  infinite  weight  to  all  that  has  been  said.  Eighthly  and 
lastly,  |rom  the  advantage  to  be  expected  from  consideration.  (5.  Stennett,  D.D.) 
A  man  who  did  not  wish  to  hear  the  sermon : — An  innkeeper,  addicted  to  intemper- 
ance, on  hearing  of  the  particularly  pleasing  mode  of  singing  at  a  church  some 
miles  distant,  went  one  Sunday  to  gratify  his  curiosity,  but  with  a  resolution  not  to 
hear  a  word  of  the  sermon.  Having  with  difficulty  found  admission  into  a  narrow, 
open  pew,  as  soon  as  the  hymn  before  sermon  was  sung,  which  he  heard  with  great 
attention,  he  secured  both  his  ears  against  the  sermon  with  his  fore-fingers.  He 
had  not  been  in  this  position  many  minutes,  before  the  prayer  finished,  and  the 
sermon  commenced  with  a  powerful  appeal  to  the  consciences  of  his  hearers,  of  the 
necessity  of  attending  to  the  things  wLach  belonged  to  their  eternal  peace ;  and  the 
minister,  addressing  them  solemnly,  said  :  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
hear."  Just  the  moment  before  these  words  were  pronounced,  a  fly  having  fastened 
on  the  face  of  the  innkeeper,  and  stung  him  sharply,  he  drew  one  of  his  fingers 
from  his  ear  and  struck  off  the  painful  visitant.  At  that  very  moment  the  words, 
•♦He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear,"  pronounced  with  great  solemnity, 
entered  the  ear  that  was  opened,  like  a  clap  of  thunder.  It  struck  him  with 
irresistible  force  :  he  kept  his  hand  from  returning  to  his  ear,  and,  feeling  an 
impression  he  had  never  known  before,  he  presently  withdrew  the  other  finger,  and 
listened  with  deep  attention  to  the  discourse  which  followed.  A  salutary  change 
was  produced  on  him.  He  abandoned  his  former  evil  ways,  became  truly  serious, 
and  for  many  years  went,  in  all  weather,  six  miles  to  the  church  where  his  soul 
was  awakened  from  its  spiritual  slumber.  After  about  eighteen  years'  faithful  and 
dose  walk  with  God,  he  died,  rejoicing  in  the  hope  of  that  glory  which  he  now 
enjoys.  Hearing  the  gospel  not  to  be  vitiated  by  a  faulty  faculty : — The  eye, 
indeed,  is  seldom  blinded  to  exclude  the  most  trifling  object  that  might  afford  ua 
pleasure,  and  the  ear  is  never  shut  to  anything  that  might  contribute  to  our 
amusement ;  yet  reason  is  often  hoodwinked  to  the  precepts  of  virtue,  and  our 
consciences  are  suffered  to  slumber  and  to  sleep,  while  we  follow  the  gratificationa 
of  appetite  and  passion.  Thus  it  was  that  many,  fettered  with  prejudice  and 
superstition,  bUnded  by  ignorance  and  pride,  or  enslaved  to  the  world,  could  hear 
the  Son  of  God  Himself  inculcate  the  sublimest  truths,  and  teach  the  most  impor- 
tant duties,  with  insulting  scorn  or  listless  indifference.  Against  such  dreadful 
perversion  and  abuse  of  the  talent  entrusted  to  our  care  let  us  be  ever  on  our  guard. 
Let  us  consider  that,  on  the  due  improvement  of  our  faculties,  from  the  benefits  of 
experiencd,  and  the  discipline  of  religion,  every  real  blessing  is  founded.  (J, 
Howletty  B.D.)  Hearing  the  gospel  not  to  be  vitiated  by  moral  insensibility  ;— 
Perhaps  you  hear  with  comfort  and  satisfaction  those  vices  forbidden  of  which  yon 
are  in  no  danger,  from  inohnation,  from  your  natural  constitution,  or  from  some 
pecuUar  circumstance  of  life.  When  you  are  old,  you  might  with  pleasure  listen  to 
such  admonitions  as  chiefly  regard  the  errors  of  the  young ;  and  while  in  the  full 
enjoyment  of  happiness  and  prosperity,  you  might,  with  a  degree  of  self -approba- 
tion, join  in  the  condemnation  of  such  wickedness  and  disorder  as  relate  only  to 
the  wretched  and  the  poor.  On  such  occasions,  perhaps,  you  will  allow  the  Word 
of  God  to  resemble  *♦  a  two-edged  sword,"  and  to  speak  "with  power."  But  say, 
are  you  so  willing  to  hear  it,  when  it  calls  aloud  against  some  darling  vice  7  when 
it  arraigns  your  favourite  indulgences,  or  curtail  you  of  sinful  pleasures  ?  {Ibid.) 
Hearing  the  gospel  constant: — Farther,  if  we  are  really  interested  in  *♦  those  things 
which  belong  unto  our  peace,"  we  should  endeavour  to  make  that  interest  uniform 


142  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  if 

and  constant.  It  should  extend  to  all  our  actions ;  it  should  be  the  rule  and 
measure  of  our  conduct ;  and  its  influence  should  be  felt  as  a  gentle,  but  powerful, 
corrective  throughout  the  whole  system  of  life.  As  for  those  casual  emotions  which 
arise  only  during  the  moments  of  exhortation,  or  those  frail  resolutions  which  are 
formed  only  when  no  temptation  is  near,  and  which,  in  the  conflux  of  worldly 
passions  and  pleasures,  are  as  soon  lost  as  the  brook  that  mingles  with  the  ocean, 
of  what  avail  are  they  ?  (Ibid.)  Heedful  hearing : — I.  Let  us  seek,  in  the  begin- 
ning,  to  discriminate  and  classify  the  ordinary  hearers  of  the  Word  as  they  show 
THEMSELVES  IN  THE  SIGHT  OF  THE  PREACHEB.  1.  For  One  class,  he  would  be  sure 
to  see  the  listless  hearers.  He  might  discover  in  various  parts  of  the  audience-room 
those  whose  countenances  would  defy  all  study.  They  are  perfect  blanks.  No 
more  Hfe  appears  than  there  would  be  discovered  in  a  gallery  of  statuary.  Some 
will  be  asleep.  Some  there  will  be  who  hear  the  sound  of  the  words,  but  so 
inattentively  and  unintelligently  that  nothing  is  regarded  as  it  passes  their  ears. 
The  sentences  fall  on  their  organs  like  the  ordinary  ticking  of  a  clock ;  they  disturb 
no  sensibility  whatsoever.  We  should  judge  that  they  attracted  no  attention  of 
any  sort  if  it  were  not  that  the  eyes  flash  up  suddenly  with  an  eager  curiosity  if,  for 
some  reason,  the  sound  happens  to  stop.  2.  Next,  this  visitor  in  the  pulpit  would 
notice  the  criticising  hearers.  3.  Yet  a  third  class  might  be  singled  out:  the 
suspicious  hearers.  These  are  continually  on  the  look-out,  not  exactly,  in  our 
times,  for  heterodoxy,  but  for  eccentricities.  They  are  afraid  the  preacher  will 
say  something  inconsistent  with  the  established  views  they  cherish.  4.  Then  there 
is  a  fourth  class  :  the  distributing  hearers.  Some  most  devout  people  always  listen 
for  the  sake  of  the  rest  of  the  congregation.  II.  Let  us  seek  now,  in  the  second 
place,  to  discriminate  and  classify  the  ordinary  hearers  of  the  Word  as  thbt 
APPEAB  IN  THE  sioHT  07  THE  WORLD  AT  LABOE.  Here  comes  in  the  question  as  to 
results  rather  than  mere  behaviour.  We  fall  back  upon  the  parable  of  the  sower ; 
it  was  given  as  our  Saviour's  illustration  of  the  effect  of  the  truth  as  it  is  thrown 
upon  human  hearts  like  seed  upon  different  soils.  1.  To  begin  with,  there  are  the 
wayside  hearers.  Let  us  read  over  the  old  story,  and  lay  alongside  of  the  descrip- 
tion at  once  our  Lord's  interpretation.  {See  Mark  iv.  4,  15.)  King  Agrippa  (Acts 
xxvi.  28)  is  instanced  to  us  as  an  example.  He  went  with  great  pomp  to  hear  the 
Apostle  Paul  preach.  That  earnest  and  powerful  pleader  laid  the  truth  on  his 
heart,  as  if  he  would  plough  and  harrow  it  into  his  life.  But  the  devil's  birds  were 
near  to  pick  up  the  seed.  Pride  came  with  her  glittering  pinioni,  and  chirped  in 
his  ear,  **  Thou  art  a  king,  but  who  is  this  tent-maker  ?  "  Lust  croaked  behind 
Pride,  and  had  something  to  say  about  giving  up  Berenice.  So  they  came  one  after 
another,  picked  up  the  grain,  and  flew  away.  2.  Then  our  Lord  mentions  the 
stony-ground  hearers,  and  afterwards  tells  His  disciples  what  He  means.  (See  Mark 
iv.  5, 15.)  Paul  had  some  of  these  hearers  among  his  converts  in  Galatia  (Gal.  v. 
7).  Christ  had  some  among  His  followers  in  Galilee :  their  earth  was  only  surface 
soil  (John  vi.  66).  3.  Next,  our  Lord  classifies  the  thorn-choked  hearers.  A 
pecuHar  kind  of  thorn  in  that  country  grows  suddenly  and  rankly,  and  seems  to 
love  the  borders  of  wheat-fields  (Mark  iv.  7,  18).  Demas's  history  has  been 
offered  us  for  an  illustration  of  this  short-lived  sort  of  emotion,  in  one  melancholy 
sentence  cf  Paul's  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  (iv.  10).  Perhaps  the  saddest  of  all 
experiences  we  have  to  meet  is  found  in  this  watching  of  people  who  promise  so 
much  but  who  come  to  so  little.  4.  Then  our  Saviour  speaks  of  the  good-ground 
hearers  in  the  parable.  But  for  such,  seed-sowing  would  be  a  failure.  (See  Mark 
iv.  8,  20.)  The  great  source  of  comfort  to  a  preacher  of  the  gospel  is  found  here ; 
the  principal  field  of  his  labour  is  good  ground.  He  is  sustained  by  two  promises, 
one  about  the  seed  (Isa.  Iv.  10,  11),  and  one  about  the  sower  (Psa.  cxxvi.  5,  6).  lU. 
Let  us  now,  in  the  third  place,  look  upon  those  who  hear  the  Word  as  thkt 
APPEAR  IN  the  sioht  OF  Goo.     (C.  S,  i2o&tmon,  D.D.) 

Yer.  11.    Unto  you  It  is  given  to  know  the  mystery  of  the  Kingdom  of  God. 

Parables  for  two  multitudes  : — As  for  the  multitude,  if  you  strain  Christ's  language 
respecting  them,  you  might  say  they  were  punished  for  their  blindness  by  His 
making  dark  to  them  things  which  He  made  clear  to  others.  This  has  been  said. 
You  have  heard  of  judicial  blindness — blindness,  that  is  to  say,  inflicted  by  God  as 
the  punishment  of  unbelief  or  other  sin.  But  if  this  was  the  case,  why  did  He  speak 
to  them  at  all  r  Did  He  wish  only  a  dozen  men,  or  a  few  dozens,  to  understand 
what  He  said  f  If  then  it  was  not  to  hide  His  meaning  from  the  multitude  that 
Christ  taught  them  in  parables,  how  do  you  account  for  Bia  choosing  to  teach  them 


CHAP.  IV.]  ST,  MARK.  148 

in  that  way  ?  To  answer  this  question  we  have  to  consider  for  a  moment-.  J.  What 
A  PABABLE  IS.  Now  there  is  one  thing  certain  as  te  these  stories,  that  whatever 
might  be  His  intention  in  nsing  them,  they  do  clear  np  things  wonderfully.  It 
would  have  taken  a  long  discourse  on  true  piety  to  show  the  distinction  between  it 
and  false  piety,  which  is  shown  in  the  Publican  and  the  Pharisee ;  and  what  long 
discourse  would  have  shown  it  so  well  ?  Eemember  this  also,  in  regard  to  parables 
like  Christ's — they  keep  close  to  reality,  they  reproduce  nature  and  life.  Now  if 
we  take  all  this  into  consideration  as  to  the  nature  of  parables,  it  is  possible,  I 
think,  to  account  for  Christ's  speaking  to  the  multitude  in  parables,  and  parables 
alone.  In  the  first  place,  possibly  there  were  what  we  may  caU  considerations  of 
prudence  and  policy  in  favour  of  this  way  of  teaching.  Look  at  the  whole  set  of 
parables  in  this  chapter ;  they  all  relate  to  the  kingdom  of  God ;  and  one  thing 
they  all  more  or  less  distinctly  intimate,  and  it  is  that  the  establishment  of  that 
kingdom  must  be  a  work  of  time.  It  is  like  a  sower  who  goes  forth  to  sow  ;  it  is 
like  the  tares  and  the  wheat  which  must  grow  np  together  until  the  harvest.  As 
all  these  parables  here  suggest  to  us,  time  was  needed  for  truth  to  prevail  against 
error.  Direct  attack  upon  it  was  useless.  Christ  had  tried  that  and  found  it  un- 
profitable. And  here  the  parables  came  in  to  serve  the  purpose.  They  did  not 
assail  error  or  assert  truth  controversially.  Every  one  could  take  from  them  and 
make  of  them  what  he  pleased.  But  there  was  one  thing  certain  with  regard  to 
them,  and  it  was  that  they  were  certain  to  be  remembered.  They  were  sure  to  pass 
from  mouth  to  mouth,  and  travel  where  doctrine  however  clear,  or  precept  however 
just,  would  not  reach.  The  meaning  in  them  now  open  to  the  few  would  remstin, 
and  by  and  by  might  be  perceived  by  the  many.  Time  would  ripen  them  for  the 
purpose  of  instructing  the  multitude  as  well  as  the  disciples.  And  this  was  their 
special  virtue,  that  while  they  were  thus  fitted  to  preserve  truth  from  being  for- 
gotten, they  were  above  all  fitted  to  preserve  truth  from  being  corrupted.  Those 
whose  minds  were  filled  with  the  Pharisees'  ideas  of  religion  could  hardly  help 
misunderstanding  and  misrepresenting  the  doctrinal  sayings  of  Jesus.  But  it  is 
impossible  to  corrupt,  or  sophisticate,  or  distort  the  story  of  the  Prodigal  Son  or 
the  Good  Samaritan.  A  parable  cannot  be  qualified  like  a  saying  or  a  body  ol 
doctrine.  It  is  a  bit  of  fact,  and  cannot  be  qualified  by  words.  It  keeps  its  mean- 
ing pure  in  spite  of  every  effort  to  corrupt  it.  It  is  of  kin  with  nature,  which, 
whatever  yon  may  say  of  it  or  of  any  part  of  it,  remains  nature  still,  and  is  ti^e 
truth.  And  thus  it  was  for  one  thing  Christ  spoke  to  the  multitude  in  parables. 
His  purpose  was  to  teach  them  truth,  but  their  minds  being  filled  with  error,  they 
had  to  unlearn  that  first.  He  spoke  in  parables,  knowing  that  parables  would  last, 
and  that  while  they  lasted  and  were  working  their  work,  they  would  not,  because 
they  could  not,  be  corrupted.  But  the  great  thing  was  that  which  distinguishes 
parables  from  other  figures  of  speech — that  they  keep  close  to  reality,  to  nature, 
and  to  Ufe.  It  was  the  special  vice  of  the  religion  of  the  multitude  in  Christ's  day, 
that  it  was  wholly  artificial,  all  sacrifice  and  no  mercy.  Their  teachers  taught 
them  for  doctrine  the  commandments  of  men,  the  thousand  and  one  arbitrary  rules 
about  eating  and  drinking,  about  fasts  and  feasts,  about  offerings,  about  days, 
about  intercourse  with  Gentiles,  and  touching  the  dead.  The  scope  of  Christ's 
teaching  was  exactly  the  opposite  of  this.  He  was  for  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice ;  for 
righteousness,  and  not  mint  and  anise  and  cummin.  It  suited  His  doctrine,  there- 
fore, to  be  taught  in  parables.  The  world  itself,  if  your  doctrine  is  mercy,  is  one 
great  parable  ready  for  your  use.  Reality  of  any  kind  is  truth,  and  all  truth, 
from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  is  one ;  so  that  there  are  books  in  the  running 
brooks,  sermons  in  stones,  and  good  in  everything.  The  truth  of  things,  begin  with 
it  where  you  will,  if  you  follow  it  out  will  lead  you  up  to  God.  You  can  make  birds 
and  beasts,  and  virtues  and  vices  talk  what  you  please ;  but  you  cannot,  if  you  go 
to  nature  and  human  life  find  a  parable  to  fit  a  lie.  Christ  chose  that  form  of 
teaching  which  brought  men  face  to  face  with  nature  and  human  life,  because  the 
men  He  had  to  teach,  in  the  matter  of  their  religion  had  departed  as  far  as  was 
possible  from  the  truth  of  things,  and  had  lost  themselves  in  sayings  and  com- 
mandments and  traditions,  questions  and  strifes  of  words.  He  put  truth  into  a 
form  in  which  it  could  not  perish  or  be  corrupted  ;  He  turned  his  hearers'  minds  in 
the  direction  in  which  they  could  soonest  unlearn  their  errors  and  be  prepared  to 
receive  His  truth.  II.  Now^  consider  the  dutebent  effect  of  His  pabables 
UPON  THE  MULTITUDE  AND  THE  DISCIPLES,  As  for  the  multitude,  they  had  first  to 
begin  and  unlearn  everything  they  believed,  before  they  could  perceive  the  truth 
which  His  parables  ccntained.     Before  anything  in  this  particular  set  of  paraVlet 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip.   rr. 

here  as  to  the  kingdom  of  God  could  reach  their  minds,  they  had  to  unlearn  all 
that  they  had  learned  from  their  teachers  as  to  the  kingdom  of  God  being  a  Jewish 
commonwealth.  The  sower  going  forth  to  sow,  the  tares  and  the  wheat  growing  up 
together  until  the  harvest,  the  grain  of  mustard  seed,  the  leaven  hid  in  meal,  the 
net  dropped  into  the  sea — what  had  these  to  tell  them  of  their  ideal  Jewish 
commonwealth  ?  They  would  find  no  meaning  in  these,  as  far  as  that  kingdom  of 
heaven  was  concerned.  This,  to  be  sure,  was  not  to  be  the  final  effect  of  Christ's 
parables,  even  upon  the  multitude.  From  being  brought  into  this  school  of  nature 
and  life  some  of  them  at  least  would  begin  to  feel  its  influence  in  turning  them 
away  from  strifes  of  words  about  rites  and  ceremonies.  Contact  with  reality  could 
scarcely  fail  in  many  cases  to  engender  suspicion,  and  then  distrust,  of  all  that  was 
fictitious ;  and  so  in  the  decline  of  error  truth  would  have  its  day.  But,  while,  in 
course  of  time  this  might  be  the  effect  of  the  parables  upon  the  multitude,  the  im- 
mediate effect,  no  doubt,  was  to  confuse  and  darken  their  minds.  Turn,  on  the 
other  hand,  to  the  disciples.  They  had,  at  least  in  part,  unlearned  the  false. 
They  had  begun  to  appreciate  the  true.  To  the  minds  of  the  disciples,  alive  already 
to  the  value  of  righteousness  and  the  worthlessness  of  ceremonial  sanctity,  how  rich 
in  Instruction  and  in  comfort  the  story  of  the  Prodigal  Son ! — how  true  and  how 
glorious  its  representation  of  the  great  Father  as  one  who  is  never  so  happy  as 
when  He  has  to  welcome  back  to  the  home  of  eternal  goodness  and  eternal  blessed- 
ness the  erring  and  miserable  of  His  children !  To  their  minds  again  how  full  of 
meaning  and  of  comfort,  the  parable  of  the  Lost  Sheep ! — the  suggestion  of  the 
Eternal  Eighteousness  engrossed,  to  the  neglect  of  suns  and  solar  systems,  in  the 
recovery  of  one  soul  which  has  strayed  into  the  damnation  of  evil.  Think  that 
these  disciples,  like  the  multitude,  were  Jews,  and  held,  till  Christ  began  to  teach, 
the  religious  notions  of  the  multitude.  Then  consider  all  the  certainty  and  breadth 
and  fulness  which  these  parables  of  their  Master  could  not  but  give  to  their  new 
faith, — faith  in  God  as  good,  in  goodness  as  man's  true  life,  in  the  ultimate 
triumph  of  good  over  evil.  Consider  under  what  a  different  aspect  the  world  now 
presented  itself  to  their  minds.  He  said  to  His  disciples  in  reference  to  these 
parables,  *•  Blessed  are  your  eyes,  for  they  see,  and  your  ears,  for  they  hear ;  "  and 
also  when  he  added,  "  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  many  prophets  and  righteous 
men  have  desired  to  see  those  things  which  ye  see,  and  have  not  seen  them,  and  to 
hear  those  things  which  ye  hear,  and  have  not  heard  them."  I  conclude  with  two 
remarks,  the  first  of  which  is,  that  not  one  religion,  but  every  religion,  that  of 
Christ  included,  is  apt,  in  the  common  mind,  to  degenerate  into  ceremonialism 
and  strifes  of  words.  And,  in  that  case,  what  professes  to  be  light  becomes  the 
grossest  of  darkness.  It  was  not  for  an  age,  therefore,  but  for  all  time,  that  Christ 
spoke  in  parables  to  the  multitude.  These  parables  of  His,  bringing  us  into  contact 
with  nature  and  human  life,  furnish  us  with  a  resource  of  inestimable  value  against 
the  prevalence  of  irreligion,  error,  infidelity,  not  only  in  the  world,  but  in  the 
church.  Thus  the  parables  are  the  salt  of  Christianity  to  preserve  it  from  corrup- 
tion and  extinction ;  they  recall  us  from  all  this  barren  or  disgraceful  war  of  words 
to  the  sterling  virtue  of  the  Good  Samaritan,  and  the  substantial  goodness  of  the 
Prodigal's  Father.  Again,  I  remark,  the  blessedness  of  Christian  belief  is  that  it  is 
A  vision  of  the  universe  as  undivided.  What  did  the  disciples,  who  were  blessed  in 
their  seeing,  see?  When  it  was  given  to  them,  as  it  was  not  given  to  the  multitude, 
to  understand  these  parables,  what  did  they  hear  and  comprehend  ?  It  was  not 
that  their  own  souls  were  to  be  saved ;  it  was  not  that  the  Jews  were  to  be  converted, 
or  the  Gentiles  to  be  visited  by  Christian  missionaries.  It  was,  that  the  kingdom 
of  Gk)d,  the  Father  and  Saviour  of  all  men,  is  eternal ;  that  evil  here  and  every. 
where  is  temporary,  and  good  alone  is  for  ever  and  ever.    {J.  Service^  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  That  seeing,  they  may  see,  and  not  perceive. — The  derelict : — Terrible, 
but  just  and  adorable,  is  this  conduct  of  God  towards  those  who  have  deserved  to 
be  left  to  themselves.  This  dereliction  has  several  degrees — 1.  Their  being  aban- 
doned to  their  own  darkness.  2.  Their  not  being  able  to  underRtand  the  truths  of 
salvation.  3.  Their  not  obeying  them.  4.  Tlieir  remaining  in  their  sins.  6. 
Their  being  condemned.  God  is  pleased  to  give  examples  of  tbis,  that  the  children 
of  promise  may  know  how  much  they  owe  to  grace.  It  is  a  mistake  to  imagine 
that  whatever  appears  most  severe  and  rigorous  in  the  conduct  of  God  ought  to  be 
concealed  from  Christians.  He  Himself  instructs  us  in  it,  on  purpose  that  we 
■hould  take  great  notice  of  it  on  proper  occasions,  and  glorify  Him  on  the  account 
of  aU  the  good  we  do,  and  of  all  the  evil  which  we  avoid.     {Quesnel.) 


OBAT.  IT.]  ST,  MARK,  146 

Ver.  21.    Is  a  candle  brougrht  to  be  put  under  a  bnsliel,  or  under  a  bed  7— r*# 

extension  of  the  kingdom : — The  kingdom,  as  it  appeared  in  its  beginning,  is  like 
the  little  grains  of  wheat  cast  into  the  damp  soil  in  the  chilly  days  of  spring.  To 
the  mature  Christian  of  to-day  it  is  like  the  city  which  John  saw,  filling  all  his 
vision,  let  down  out  of  heaven  from  God,  glowing  with  strange  opaline  light,  so 
that  neither  sun  nor  moon  were  louger  needed,  with  jasper  walls  and  pavements 
of  transparent  gold,  and  great  gates,  each  a  single  pearl,  and  at  each  gate  a 
glorious  angel.  This  parable  teaches  ns  that  one  of  the  agencies  bringing  about 
this  result  is  man's  work  in  the  kingdom.  1.  To  make  known  its  character  and 
the  conditions  of  entrance  into  it.  Even  the  smallest  taper  is  lighted  in  order  that 
it  may  give  light.  The  youngest  disciple  is  to  shine  for  the  guidance  of  others. 
The  rays  of  one  little  lamp,  piercing  through  miles  of  gloom,  have  saved  noble 
ships  from  destruction,  with  all  their  precious  living  freight.  It  may  have  been 
only  such  a  lamp  as  lights  one  little  room;  but  it  was  surrounded  by  powerful 
reflectors,  which  sent  its  rays  afar,  and  multiplied  its  influence  a  hundredfold. 
S.  To  give  his  mind  and  heart  to  increase  his  knowledge  and  experience  of  the 
truth  by  which  the  kingdom  grows.  The  lighted  lamp  must  have  oil  to  feed  upon. 
We  cannot  be  making  known  the  character  of  the  kingdom  unless  our  knowledge 
of  it  is  growing.  Alas  for  him  before  whose  eyes  the  vision  of  the  heavenly  city, 
once  seen,  is  allowed  to  fade  and  disappear  I  On  the  other  hand,  the  more  brightly 
we  shine,  the  more  eagerly  we  seek  and  the  more  fully  we  receive  that  which  keeps 
the  light  burning.  The  more  generously  we  give  to  others  what  we  know  of  the 
gospel,  the  more  clearly  it  will  be  revealed  to  us.  (A.  E.  Dunning.)  The  Word 
not  to  he  hidden: — This  reproves  those  who  hide  their  knowledge  of  the  Word,  and 
keep  it  to  themselves  only,  shutting  up  this  light  within  their  own  breast,  as  it 
were,  as  in  a  close  and  private  place,  that  it  cannot  be  seen  of  others,  and  so  af 
others  have  no  benefit  by  it.  They  do  not  shine  to  others  by  the  light  of  that 
knowledge  which  is  in  them ;  they  show  forth  no  fruits  of  it  in  a  holy  conversa> 
tion ;  neither  are  they  careful  to  communicate  their  knowledge  to  others  by 
instruction  of  them  in  the  ways  of  God.  What  is  this  but  hiding  the  candle  under 
a  bushel,  or  setting  it  under  a  bed,  when  it  should  be  set  upon  a  candlestick,  that 
the  light  of  it  might  be  plainly  seen  by  those  in  the  house  ?  Let  such  consider  bow 
great  a  sin  it  is  to  hide  the  spiritual  gifts  bestowed  on  ns  by  God,  and  not  to  employ 
them  well  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  our  brethren.  If  thou  hast  never 
so  much  knowledge  in  the  Word,  and  yet  dost  hide  it  only  in  thine  own  breast,  and 
in  thine  own  head,  and  dost  not  shine  to  others  by  the  light  of  it,  then  thy  know- 
ledge is  no  sanctified  and  saving  knowledge ;  for  if  it  were,  it  could  not  thus  lie  hid 
and  buried  in  thee,  but  it  would  manifest  itself  toward  others  for  their  good :  it 
would  not  only  enlighten  thy  mind,  but  also  thy  whole  outward  life  and  conversa- 
tion, causing  thee  to  shine  as  a  light  or  candle  unto  others.  (Q.  Fetter.)  Sharing 
our  light : — It  might  seem  a  superfluous  thing  to  urge  the  communication  of  gospel 
hopes  and  comforts,  but  there  is  none  more  needed.  For  one  person  who  puts  the 
candle  on  a  candlestick,  there  are  twenty  that  put  it  under  a  bushel — a  dull  wooden 
measure  that  keeps  in  all  the  light.  There  are  many  sorts  of  bushels.  1.  One 
very  bad  one,  and  much  employed  to  cover  the  light,  is  modesty  (falsely  so  called). 
Modesty  pretends  to  be  not  good  enough  or  wise  enough  to  speak,  and  turns  the 
soul  into  a  dark  lantern.  2.  Selfishness  is  another  bushel  for  the  light ;  forbidding 
men  to  take  the  trouble  to  shed  it.  8.  Indolence.  4.  Fearfulness.  6.  Despair 
of  people  heeding.  6.  A  narrow  doctrine  of  salvation.  7.  Sometimes  a  little 
scientific  knowledge,  creating  conceit,  makes  a  bushel ;  men  being  so  anxious  to 
mix  the  earthly  with  the  heavenly  light  that  the  grave,  sweet  light  of  godly  know- 
ledge cannot  get  though  the  mistiness  of  the  earthly  mixture.     (B,  Olover,) 

Ver.  22.  For  there  Is  nothing  hid,  which  shall  not  be  manifested. — ImmediaU 
revelation  not  always  desirable  : — Here  our  Lord  is  justifying  the  parabolic  form  of 
teaching,  which  often  serves  to  veil  the  truth,  on  the  ground  that  immediate  reve- 
lation is  not  always  desirable.  Many  things  are  concealed,  both  in  nature  and  by 
art,  though  the  coiicealment  is  by  no  means  designed  to  be  permanent.  What 
striking  illustrations  of  this  principle  are  furnished  in  geology  1  Look  at  the 
almost  measureless  beds  of  coal,  hidden  for  ages  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  but 
designed  by  Providence  to  be  revealed  when  necetisity  should  arise.  The  precise 
time  for  the  unveiling  it  is  not  always  easy  to  decide,  because  man's  knowledge  is 
finite,  but  we  rest  assured  that  it  will  coincide  with  the  need  for  its  use.  It  is  a 
principle  worth  bearing  in  mind  when  human  efforts  fail ;  for  it  is  encouraging  to 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

know  that  such  a  result  may  be  due  simply  to  the  fact  that  we  have  tried  uncon- 
Boionsly  to  anticipate  the  fore-appointed  time.  {H.  M.  Ltickock,  D.D.)  Thinga 
brought  to  light  sooner  or  later  : — The  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ  has  nothing  in  it 
■which  fears  the  light ;  it  is  itself  the  light  which  must  enlighten  the  world.  Every- 
thing is  brought  to  light  sooner  or  later.  The  humble  person  conceals  his  virtue 
in  this  life,  but  God  will  disclose  it  at  the  day  of  eternity.  The  hypocrite  hides  his 
wickedness  here,  but  he  shall  suffer  an  eternal  confusion  for  it  in  th«  sight  of 
heaven  and  earth.  {Quesnel.)  Secret  sin  comes  out  at  the  judgment : — One  day 
Thomas  Edwards,  the  Scottish  naturalist,  went  out  on  one  of  his  expeditions  to 
search  for  insects.  He  had  on,  as  usual  on  such  occasions,  an  old  coat  with  many 
pockets,  and  each  pocket  held  a  goodly  store  of  chip  boxes  wherein  to  place  the 
various  specimens  of  the  insect-tribe  which  he  might  find.  He  had  a  most  success- 
ful day ;  met  with  many  curious  and  rare  insects,  all  of  which  he  duly  deposited 
each  in  its  own  little  box.  And  now  he  was  returning  home  laden  with  the 
spoils,  every  box  and  every  pocket  full,  when  suddenly  he  was  overtaken  by  a 
tremendous  storm.  The  thunder  roared,  the  lightning  blazed  around  him,  the 
rain  came  down  in  torrents,  like  water  from  a  bucket,  and  he  was  soon  drenched 
and  wet  to  the  skin.  Espying  a  farmhouse  at  a  short  distance,  he  made  for  it,  and 
begged  leave  to  shelter  himself  from  the  storm.  To  this  the  gudewife  readily 
assented,  made  up  a  blazing  fire,  threw  on  a  log,  and  told  him  to  draw  near  and 
dry  himself,  whilst  she  went  on  with  her  household  duties.  Accordingly  he  did  so, 
and  soon  his  benumbed  limbs  began  to  feel  the  pleasant  warmth  of  the  fire.  Pre« 
sently  the  housewife  returned,  uttered  a  loud  cry  of  horror  and  disgust,  caught  up  a 
broomstick,  and,  deaf  to  all  entreaties,  drove  him  forth  again  into  the  pitiless 
Btorm.  He  now  looked  at  himself,  and  soon  perceived  the  cause  of  this  strange 
treatment,  for  he  was  covered  from  head  to  foot  with  his  beloved  insects,  8o 
abhorred  by  others.  The  soaking  rain  had  loosed  and  destroyed  the  boxes,  and 
set  their  inhabitants  at  liberty,  and  they  remained  unseen  in  his  pockets  till  the 
warmth  of  the  fire  brought  them  out.  So  will  it  be  in  the  day  of  judgment :  men's 
darling  sins  will  come  forth  to  light,  and  cover  the  sinner  with  horror  and  confusion 
as  with  a  cloak.  The  fire  of  that  day  will  bring  them  forth,  and  then  the  sinner 
will  be  driven  out  by  the  Judge  into  the  fierce  tempest  of  God's  wrath. 

Vera.  23,  24.  Take  heed  what  y«  hear. — Instruction  from  the  Lord  to  hearers: — 
In  these  days  we  have  many  instructions  as  to  preaching ;  but  our  Lord  principally 
gave  directions  as  to  hearing.  The  art  of  attention  is  quite  as  difficult  as  that  of 
homiletics.  The  text  may  be  viewed  as  a  note  of  discrimination.  Hear  the  truth, 
and  the  truth  only.  Ee  not  indifierent  as  to  your  spiritual  meat,  but  use  discern- 
ment. We  shall  use  it  as  a  note  of  arousing.  When  you  do  hear  the  truth,  give 
it  such  attention  as  it  deserves.  Give  good  heed  to  it.  I.  Hebe  is  a  fbecept  : 
*•  Take  heed  what  ye  hear."  1.  Hear  with  discrimination,  shunning  false  doctrina 
(John  X.  6).  2.  Hear  with  attention  ;  really  and  earnestly  hearing  (Matt.  xiii.  23). 
3.  Hear  for  yourself,  with  personal  application  (1  Sam.  iii.  9).  4.  Hear  retentively, 
endeavouring  to  remember  the  truth.  6.  Hear  desiringly,  praying  that  the  Word 
may  be  blessed  to  you.  6.  Hear  practically,  obeying  the  exhortation  which 
has  come  to  you.  Note— this  hearing  is  to  be  given,  not  to  a  favonrite  set  of 
doctrines,  but  to  the  whole  of  the  Word  of  God  (Psa.  cxix.  128).  II.  Hebe  is  a 
pbovebb:  *'with  what  measure,"  &c.  In  proportion  as  you  give  yourself  to 
hearing,  you  shall  gain  by  hearing.  1.  Those  who  have  no  interest  in  the  Word 
find  it  uninteresting.     2.  Those  who  desire  to  find  fault,   find  faults  enough. 

3.  Those  who  seek  solid  truth,  learn  it  from  any  faithful  ministry.  4.  Those  who 
hunger  find  food.  6.  Those  who  bring  faith,  receive  assurance.  6.  Those  who 
come  joyfully  are  made  glad.  But  no  man  finds  blessing  by  hearing  error  ;  nor  by 
careless,  forgetful,  cavilling  hearing  of  the  truth.  III.  Hebe  is  a  pbomise  : 
"Unto  you  that  hear,"<fec.  You  that  hear  shall  have^l.  More  desire  to  hear. 
2.  More  understanding  of  what  ye  hear.      3.  More  convincement  of  its  truth. 

4.  More  personal  possession  of  the  blessings  of  which  you  hear.  5.  More  delight  in 
hearing.  6.  More  practical  benefit  from  it.  God  gives  more  to  those  who  value 
what  they  have.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  gospel  demands  and  deserves  attention : — 
I,  Hebe  is  implied  the  authoeity  of  the  Speaker.  1.  He  had  all  the  authority 
which  is  derived  from  knowledge.  Beligion  was  the  subject  He  came  to  teach. 
He  knew  the  whole  perfectly.  2.  He  had  the  authority  which  is  derived  from 
unimpeachable  rectitude.  3.  He  had  the  authority  flowing  from  "miracles, 
an    wondars,  and  signs."    4.  Consider  His  uncalculable  dominion.     There  is  na 


OHAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK.  147 

place  where  His  voice  does  not  reach.  5.  Consider  the  dignity  of  His  character— 
♦♦  Where  the  word  of  a  king  is  there  is  power."  6.  And  does  He  not  stand  in  rela- 
tions  the  most  intimate  and  affecting?  Shall  such  an  authority  he  despised f 
II.  The  importance  op  the  subject.  Jesus  Christ  is  not  afraid  to  awaken  atten- 
tion ;  He  knows  that  He  can  more  than  repay  it.  His  instructions  are  important. 
But  in  order  to  this,  they  must  be  true.  How  pleasing  is  truth.  Whether  we 
consider  the  gospel  with  regard  to  man  in  his  individual  or  social  existence,  it 
demands  attention.  IH.  It  is  an  appeal  to  impartial  consideration.  The  demand 
supposes  the  subject  to  be  accessible.  In  heathenism  there  were  many  mysteries 
from  a  knowledge  of  which  the  common  people  were  excluded.  Error  needs  dis- 
guise. Truth  glories  in  exposure.  Be  sure  that  it  is  the  gospel  you  are  conveying, 
and  not  any  corruptions  which  have  blended  with  it.  Nothing  is  more  adverse  to 
this  demand  than  dissipation.  Attention  is  necessary.  But  it  is  of  little  use  to 
apply  a  mind  already  biassed.  Impatience  disquahfies  us  from  religious  investiga- 
tion. So  does  pride.  Examine  the  character  given  by  the  sacred  writers  of  God. 
IV.  He  demands  a  practical  improvement  oe  His  word.  1.  The  danger  of  delu- 
sion. 2.  The  precarious  tenure  of  the  privileges.  3.  The  happiness  of  those  who 
receive  the  gospel  in  power.  4.  These  means  unimproved  will  be  found  injurious. 
{W.  Jay.)  Light  by  hearing  .-—The  increase  of  spiritual  knowledge  is  dependent 
upon  the  temper  in  which  we  approach  the  study  of  Christian  truth.  According 
to  the  measure  of  our  faithfulness  and  diligence  as  hearers  and  students  we  shall 
receive  illumination.  1.  There  must  be  intellectual  preparedness.  This  is  often 
wanting  in  those  who  listen  to  the  teachings  of  Christianity.  (1)  Sometimes 
the  world  and  its  cares  fill  the  mind  and  prevent  illumination  (Luke  xii.  13). 
(2)  Sometimes  our  intellectual  tastes  unfit  us  for  the  reception  of  spiritual  truth. 
This  is  an  age  of  study  and  reading ;  but  much  of  our  reading  unfits  us  for  the 
reception  of  Divine  light.  Thousands  cannot  get  at  the  truth  because  of  the 
fiction,  the  heresy,  the  jest-book,  which  is  so  constantly  in  their  hand.  Amid  the 
"  Vanity  Fair  "  of  the  mind,  with  its  leerings,  jesters,  and  scomers,  the  voice  of 
love,  truth,  purity,  cannot  be  heard.  To  ••  him  that  hath  "  seriousness,  sympathy, 
expectation,  "  it  shall  be  given."  2.  There  must  be  moral  preparedness.  Men  fail 
to  receive  truth  because  of  the  impurity  of  their  hearts.  {W.  L.  Watkimmi.)  A 
worldly  spirit  hinders  the  saving  power  of  the  gospel: — Preachers  are  often  blamed 
because  their  discourse  fails  to  impress,  but  the  great  Preacher  Himself  failed  to 
impress  secularized  minds  1  A  lay  preacher,  some  short  time  ago,  dreamed  a 
dream,  which  was  much  more  than  a  dream.  He  fancied  himself  in  the  pulpit 
before  ft  large  congregation,  and,  opening  the  Bible  to  give  out  his  text,  found,  to 
his  dismay,  that  it  was  not  the  Bible,  but  his  ledger,  that  he  had  brought  with  him 
in  mistake ;  in  confusion,  he  looked  round,  and  seized  what  seemed  the  genuine 
book,  but  it  was  his  stock-book ;  once  more  he  found  another  book  on  the  desk, 
but  on  opening  it,  to  his  horror,  found  it  was  his  cash-book,  and  awoke  to  find  it 
was  not  altogether  a  dream.  Is  it  not  often  true  that  we  cannot  get  at  the  gospel, 
and  its  saving  truths,  because  of  worldly  thoughts  and  sympathies  ?  The  Hebrews 
are  rebuked  because  they  "  were  dull  of  hearing ;  "  and  the  apostle  indicates  that 
they  had  become  worldly  in  heart  and  practice,  and  so  were  the  less  able  to  com- 
prehend and  receive  the  highest  truth.  (Ibid.)  A  spirit  susceptible  to  saving 
truth : — The  grace  and  light  of  God  come  where  there  is  a  preparedness  for  them. 
In  nature  the  dew  only  distils  where  it  is  useful — the  stones  are  dry,  the  plants  are 
wet ;  and  so  He,  "who  is  as  the  dew  unto  Israel,"  grants  His  truth  and  love  to 
susceptible  minds  and  hearts — to  those  only  which  are  ripe  to  profit.  (Ibid.) 
The  pure  heart  the  hearing  heart : — There  is  an  old  church  in  Germany  with  which 
a  singular  legend  is  connected.  In  this  church,  at  certain  times,  a  mighty  treasure 
is  said  to  become  visible  to  mortal  eyes.  Gold  and  silver  vessels,  of  great  magnificence 
and  in  great  abundance,  are  disclosed  ;  but  only  he  who  is  free  from  sin  can  hope  to 
secure  the  precious  vessels.  This  legend  shadows  a  great  truth.  In  the  temple  of 
God,  in  the  Word  of  God,  are  riches  beyond  gem  or  gold;  but  only  the  sincere,  the  pure 
in  purpose,  can  hope  to  realize  the  Divine  treasure.  There  must  be  in  the  truth- 
seeker  a  moral  susceptibility  and  jjassion  for  the  light.  Some  one  has  said  that  when 
he  goes  to  church  he  "  lies  back  and  thinks  of  nothing,"  and  this  saying  has  been 
eulogized  as  representing  the  true  attitude  of  a  hearer.  It  is  not  the  true  attitude. 
He  who  lies  back  and  thinks  of  nothing  would  most  probably  go  to  sleep  if  Jesus 
Christ  were  in  the  pulpit.  John  vii.  16,  17,  teaches  us  that  he  who  is  willing, 
desirous,  anxious  to  do  God's  will,  shall  know  the  doctrine  that  is  Divine.  Who- 
soever "  willeth  to  do  the  will  of  God,  shall  know  the  doctrine  that  it  is  of  God." 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  it. 

The  bent  of  the  will,  the  purity  of  the  purpose,  are  the  conditions  of  illumination. 
To  the  determined  lover  of  sin,  to  the  indifferent,  the  truth  is  hidden  from  their 
eyes.        Feel  the  vast  obligation  of  hearing: — It  is  a  serious  thing  to  preach. 
Robertson  said  that  "  he  would  rather  lead  a  forlorn  hope  than  mount  the  pulpit 
stairs."     Is  it  not  a  solemn  thing  to  hear  ?    Is  not  the  pew  as  terrible  as  the 
pulpit  ?    The  scientist  tells  us  that  no  substance  can  be  subjected  to  the  sun's  raya 
without  undergoing  an  entire  chemical  change  ;  and  it  is  equally  true  that  no  heart 
can  be  subjected  to  the  action  of  the  truth  without  undergoing  a  profound  moral 
change.     It  is,  indeed,  the  "  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death." 
Take  heed  wlmt  ye  hear : — Listen  for  the  voice  of  God.     In  many  places  we  are 
chiefly  interested  in  the  form  and  expression  of  things,  the  subject  is  quite  secon- 
dary.   If  we  Usten  to  a  great  orator,  the  subject  is  comparatively  immaterial ;  the 
voice,  the  elocution,  the  rhetoric,  the  presentment  of  the  subject  is  everythinj?.  So, 
in  music,  we  are  chiefly  occupied  with  the  style,  composition,  execution,  giving 
hardly  a  thought  to  the  theme.     So,  in  painting,  it  is  the  drawing,  colouring, 
grouping  which  monopolize  attention.    The  eesthetical  form,  sound,  colour,  engage 
attention  in  the  music  hall  or  chamber  of  arts.    But  not  thus  should  it  he  in  the 
temple.    There  the  subject  is  everything,  modes  of  presentment  httle  indeed.   Cere- 
monies, preachers,  buildings,  stay  not  with  these ;  listen  for  the  undertone  of  God,  and 
however  dull  your  senses,  however  dull  the  preacher,  you  shall  hear  that  still  small 
whisper  which  is  the  light  and  life  of  all  who  hear  it.        Take  heed  how  ye  hear  ;— 
Upon  the  how  depends  the  what.    Listen  for  God's  vcice  in  Christ ;  listen  with  meek- 
ness, with  sincerity  of  purpose,  with  practical  designs  to  do  as  you  gain  in  knowledge, 
and  you  shall  hear  the  voice  which  is  full  alike  of  majesty  and  mercy.    Light  shall 
enter  into  your  soul ;  that  light  shall  ever  brighten,  until  all  the  darkness  is  gone, 
and  we  find  ourselves  in  that  land  of  which  God  Himself  is  sun  and  moon.     {Ibid.) 
Light  by  obeying : — Thb  incbease  ojt  oub  spibitual  light   is  dependent  upon 
THE  MEASUBB  OF  OUE  PRACTICAL  FAiTHPULNEss.     If  WO  cousider  the  world  about  us, 
we  discover  the  importance  of  action  as  a  source  of  knowledge.    Men  do  not  expect 
a  fulness  of  light  before  they  proceed  to  action  ;  but,  with  a  little  knowledge,  they 
apply  themselves  to  action,  and  with  action  light  increases  and  problems  are  solved. 
And  it  is  this  testing  and  developing  ideas  by  action  which  distinguishes  between 
the  grand  benefactors  of  our  race,  and  the  mere  dreamers  of  dreams  of  progress. 
Such  men  as  Arkwright,  Watt,  Stephenson,  applied  their  knowledge ;  ever  verified* 
corrected,  developed  it  by  actual  experiment  and  use,  and  so  became  light-centres  to 
their  own  and  after  generations.    Action  kept  pace  with  speculation  in  these  great 
discoverers,  and  so  they  pushed  out  the  borders  of  science,  and  enriched  society 
with  a  thousand  blessings  ;  whilst  men  of  large  speculation  and  little  or  no  action 
pass  away,  their  splendid  dreamings  being  as  barren  as  splendid.    The  world  of 
knowledge  has  become  wider,  clearer,  richer  beyond  all  precedent,  in  these  modem 
times,  because  men  have  learned  that  knowledge  must  be  appUed  if  it  is  to  be  in- 
creased.   And  this  is  the  order  in  the  moral  universe.    The  Scriptures  associate 
knowledge  with  action  (Col.  i  9,  10 ;  Psa.  xxxiv.  8 ;  Prov.  i.  7 ;  John  vii.  ITJ. 
The  examples   of  Scripture  are  to  the  same  effect.     Men  acted  on  the  little 
light  they  had  and  received  more  (Acts  xviii.  24-28).     Observe:   1.  It  is  only 
through  obedience  that  we  get  knowledge.    It  is  only  in  obedience  that  light  passes 
into  Imowledge ;  otherwise  our  Ught  is  opinion,  imagination,  speculation,  sentiment. 
In  action — perception,  contemplation,  speculation — become  that  real,  solid,  in- 
fluential treasure  we  call  knowledge.    Any  one  can  easily  realize  the  truth  of  this 
who  passes  from  the  circle  of  speculative  and  controversial  writers  to  listen  to  the 
confessions  of  the  members  of  the  Christian  Church.    In  the  merely  literary  world 
what  universal  uncertainty  I    Philosophers  and  speculative  theologians  are  as  men 
"who  beat  the  air."    It  is  cloudland,  and  any  breath  of  wind  changes  the  entire 
aspect  of  the  misty  imagery ;  there  is  no  fixity,  no  solidity,  no  assurance.    Listen 
to  the  sincere,  earnest,  practical  members  of  the  Church,  and  they  speak  that  which 
"  they  do  know."    There  is  a  definitiveness,  depth,  certainty,  and  power  in  their 
convictions.     "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,"  &c.     ••  I  know  in  whom  I  have 
beUeved,  and  am  persuaded,"  &c.     *'  One  thing  I  know,  that  whereas  I  was  bUnd, 
now  I  see."     "  We  know  that  if  this  earthly  house  of  our  tabernacle  were  dis- 
solved," &c.    This  depth,  and  fulness,  and  blessedness  of  persuasion  can  only  be 
realized  through  obedience.     Do,  and  you  shall  know.      2.   It  is  only  through 
obedience  that  we  retain  knowledge.    Not  to  act  out  what  we  know  is  to  lose  it,  aa 
men  forget  a  language  they  cease  to  speak.     The  Apostle  recognizes  this:    **0I 
whom  we  have  many  things  to  say,  and  hard  to  be  uttered  (to  be  comprehended), 


BSAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK,  141 


seeing  ye  are  (have  become^  dull  of  hearing."  They  were  deficient  in  quickness  of 
spiritual  apprehenfiion,  and  lost  their  hold  upon  high  spiritual  truth,  and  this  was 
the  result  of  their  backsliding  life.  We  hold  the  light  on  the  condition  of  using  it ; 
and  neglecting  to  use  it,  the  "  light  within  us  becomes  darkness,"  and  of  all  dark- 
ness  that  darkness  is  the  most  intense  and  hopeless.  3.  It  is  only  through  obe- 
dience that  we  increase  spiritual  knowledge.  The  dawn  of  truth  will  pass  to  the 
noon,  only  whilst  we  do  the  work  God  gives  us  to  do.  Do  you  wish  to  comprehend 
more  clearly  the  love  of  God  in  dying  for  men  ?  You  will  not  gain  the  light  you 
covet  by  merely  studying  the  various  theories  of  the  Atonement.  Believe  in  God'a 
love  as  declared  in  the  cross  ;  imitate  the  principle  in  your  own  life,  and  you  "  ihall 
comprehend  with  all  saints  the  length,  and  breadth,  and  depth,  and  height,  and 
know  the  love  of  God  which  passeth  knowledge."  Do  you  wish  for  more  light  on 
the  question  of  the  Divine  element  in  the  Scriptures?  Commune  with  their 
doctrines  in  your  heart,  act  out  their  precepts,  and  you  shall  find  what  you  seek 
better  than  by  reading  a  thousand  philosophical  treatises  on  inspiration.  Do  you 
wish  to  understand  more  fully  the  essential  nature  of  morality  ?  Be  moral.  Be 
truthful,  honest,  just,  pure,  and  your  practical  goodness  wUl  shed  most  light 
on  the  true  theory  of  virtue.  {Ibid.)  Light  by  Evangelizing: — Some  of 
the  old  philosophers  taught  that  from  the  earth  continually  ascended  invisible 
exhalations,  and  these  vapours,  they  affirmed,  fed  the  sun  and  stars,  and  kept  them 
ever  bright  and  burning.  According  to  this  theory,  what  the  earth  gave  to  the  sky, 
the  sky  gave  back  again  to  the  earth  in  light  and  beauty.  Wrong  in  science,  but  a 
beautiful  parable  of  the  law  of  life — ^what  we  give  to  the  world  around  us  comes 
back  to  our  own  bosom  again  in  sevenfold  brightness  and  preciousness.  To  this 
law  Christ  refers  in  the  text :  ••  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you  again."  Ac- 
cording to  your  bounty  in  communicating  light  shall  be  the  measure  of  light  shed 
on  your  own  path.  Teach,  instruct,  give  forth  illumination,  and  as  you  do  so  your 
own  brain  shall  be  the  clearer,  your  own  knowledge  the  more  full  and  certain. 
Light  comes  through  evangelistic  work.  Evangelistic  work  is  necessary — I.  To  thb 
PBBSEBVATioN  OF  THE  TBDTH.  If  WO  do  uot  communicato  the  light  we  lose  it.  If 
we  seek  to  keep  the  truth  to  ourselves  we  lose  our  perception  of  it,  our  hold  upon  it 
—our  candle  goes  out  in  the  confined  air.  Thus  Moses  to  Israel :  "  Only  take  heed 
to  thyself,  and  keep  thy  soul  diligently,  lest  thou  forget  the  things  which  thine  eyes 
have  seen,  and  lest  they  depart  from  thy  heart  all  the  days  of  thy  life ;  but  teach 
them  thy  sons,  and  thy  son's  sons"  (Deut.  iv.  9).  If  you  are  not  to  forget — if 
you  are  not  to  lose  the  truth — ^you  must  teach  it.  Truth  unspoken  "  spoils,  like 
bales  unopened  to  the  sun."  To  seek  light  in  intellectual  pursuits  to  the  neglect  of 
evangelistic  work  is  to  commit  a  vital  error.  The  Church  needs  thinkers  and 
scholars,  but  it  needs,  with  a  more  imperative  necessity,  preachers,  teachers, 
visitors,  missionaries,  otherwise  the  intellectualists  would  soon  ruin  it.  A  merely 
speculative,  literary,  philosophizing  Church  would  soon  lose  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus,  and  substitute  the  unsubstantial  and  fantastic  shapes  of  dreamland.  If  a 
Church  thinks  and  works,  it  shall  be  well  with  it ;  its  actions  shall  correct  and 
chasten  its  thinking,  and  thus  it  shall  be  saved  from  rationalism  on  the  one  side, 
and  mysticism  on  the  other.  Unduly  exalt  intellectual  work,  and  the  Church  is 
forthwith  afflicted  with  all  kinds  of  theological  vagaries ;  give  the  first  and  largest 
place  to  the  practical  work  of  saving  the  souls  of  men  in  the  field  of  the  world,  and 
the  pure  gospel  shall  be  conserved,  a  light  and  a  salvation.  We  only  keep  the 
light  whilst  we  spread  it,  and  this  is  true  alike  of  Churches  and  of  individuals. 
Evangelistic  work  is  necessary — II.  To  thk  bbalization  of  the  tbuth.  In  active 
service  the  truth  is  defined  and  realized.  Earnestly  striving  to  save  the  souls  of 
men,  the  haziness  of  mere  opinion  passes  into  well-defined  and  strongly-held  know- 
ledge and  conviction.  Some  scientific  men  say  that  the  sun  is  a  dark  body,  and 
that  it  is  only  when  its  dark  radiations  touch  our  atmosphere  that  it  realizes 
itself — only  then  that  it  flashes  out  a  globe  of  glory,  only  then  that  its  beams 
become  luminous  and  vital.  So  it  is  when  the  thinker  leaves  his  solitude  and 
speculation,  and  comes  into  contact  with  society,  seeking  to  profit  andrbless,  that 
his  knowledge  realizes  itself,  that  it  becomes  defined,  and  bright,  and  vital. 
A  working  Church  knows,  as  no  merely  literary  Church  can  know.  A  working 
Christian  knows  as  no  mere  idealist  can  know.  The  **  full  assurance'*  for  which 
we  cry,  comes  through  the  constant  application  of  gospel  truth  to  the  world's 
wants  and  woes,  through  constantly  beholding  the  practical  triumphs  of  the  gospel 
in  the  hearts,  lives,  and  homes  of  the  people.  Livingstone  having  recorded  in  his 
diary  how  vividly  and  powerfully  he  had  recognized  some  commonplace  truth,  the 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 

editor  of  his  ♦•  Last  Journals  "  justly  observes :  ♦*  Men,  in  the  midst  of  their  hard, 
earnest  toil,  perceive  great  truths  with  a  sharpness  of  outline  and  a  depth  of  con. 
viction  which  is  denied  to  the  mere  idle  theorist."    Evangelistic  work  is  necessary— 
ni.  To  THE  DKVEiiOPMENT  OF  THE  TRUTH.    Working  for  God  in  the  salvation  of 
men,  we  shall  see  the  truth  more  clearly,  and  further  discoveries  of  it  shall  be 
granted.    Luther,  speaking  of  the  truth,  declared  that  he  would  not  "have  the 
eagle  put  in  a  sack."    And  ever  since  he  gave  freedom  to  the  truth,  and  insisted  on 
its  being  freely  and  fully  enforced  the  world  over,  the  ♦•  Eagle  "  has  spread  a  more 
majestic  wing,  its  golden  feathers  have  shone  with  a  rarer  glory,  and  its  eye  has 
kindled  into  a  subUmer  fire.     The  truth  spoken,  enforced,  has  grown.     More  light 
hai  shone  from  God's  holy  Word.    If  we  wish  to  know  more  we  must  teach  more, 
work  more.    The  men  who  gave  us  the  Epistles  were  not  students,  but  workers  and 
preachers,  and  light  came  from  their  work  as  the  wheel  kindles  as  it  turns.     Our 
missionaries  teach  the  same  lesson.     What  hght  they  have  poured  on  many  great 
and  obscure  questions  1    The  missionaries  diffusing  the  light,  working  to  compasa 
the  salvation  of  men,  have  poured  far  more  light  on  a  score  dark  problems  than 
they  could  possibly  have  done  had  they  remained  to  ponder  in  studies  and  cloisters. 
Teaching  the  pagan,  we  have  in  turn  been  taught.     The  light  we  communicated  to 
them  comes  back  to  us  as  from  a  poHshed  reflector.    **  We  are  debtors  both  to  the 
wise  and  the  unwise,  to  the  Greek  and  to  the  barbarian."   There  are  abounding  proofs 
that  love  to  others,  leading  us  to  instruct  and  serve  them,  is  a  precious  but  much 
neglected  source  of  illumination.    A  heart  full  of  pure  and  practical  charity  is  the 
east  window  in  the  temple  of  human  life,  whilst  dim  and  uncertain  is  the  light 
which  filters  through  a  cold  and  selfish  brain.     You  will  not  find  truth  through 
thinking  for  thinking's  sake ;  nay,  you  will  not  find  truth  through  seeking  for  it 
directly.     Truth,  like  happiness,  is  '•  found  of  them  that  seek  it  not "  directly  and 
selfishly,  but  who  find  it,  when  scarcely  thinking  of  it,  in  the  paths  of  charity  and 
duty.     Stirred  by  a  glorious  discontent  we  seek  to  know  more,  and  ever  more. 
Plants  turn  toward  the  light,  and  stretch  their  branches  to  reach  it ;  the  migration 
of  birds,  naturalists  tell  us,  is  the  result  of  an  intense  longing  for  the  light.    And 
so  the  same  instinct,  in  its  highest  manifestation,  works  in  man,  and  he  yearns 
towards  the  '*  Day-spring."    Hear,  with  a  true  heart ;  do,  with  a  sincere  and  loyal 
heart ;  give,  with  a  loving  heart  as  you  have  freely  received ;  and  the  **  light  of 
the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  the  light  of  the  sun  shall  be  seven, 
fold,  as  the  light  of  seven  days."    {Ibid.)        Hearing  but  not  heeding : — What  care 
I  to  see  a  man  run  after  a  sermon,  if  he  cozens  and  cheats  as  soon  as  he  comes 
home  7    {John  Selden.)        Heart-memory  needed : — A  heart-memory  is  better  than 
a  head-memory.    It  were  better  to  carry  away  a  little  of  the  life  of  God  in  our 
souls,  than  if  we  were  able  to  repeat  every  word  of  every  sermon  we  ever  heard. 
(De  Sales.)        Attention  given  more  to  worldly  than  spiritual  things : — ^Alas,  the 
place  of  hearing  is  the  place  of  sleeping  with  many  a  fine  professor  1    I  have  often 
observed  that  those  who  keep  shops  can  briskly  attend  upon  a  twopenny  customer, 
bat  when  they  come  themselves  to  God's  market,  they  spend  their  time  too  much 
in  letting  their  thoughts  wander  from  God's  commandments,  or  in  a  nasty,  drowsy 
way.    The  head,  also,  and  heart  of  most  hearers  are  to  the  Word  as  the  sieve  is  to 
water ;  they  can  hold  no  sermons,  remember  no  texts,  bring  home  no  proof,  produce 
none  of  the  sermon  to  the  edification  and  profit  of   others.     {John  Bunyan.) 
Eclectic  hearers : — Some  can  be  content  to  hear  all  pleasant  things,  as  the  promises 
and  mercies  of  God,  but  judgments  and  reproofs,  threats  and  checks,  these  they 
cannot  brook ;  like  unto  those  who,  in  medicine,  care  only  for  a  pleasant  smell  or 
appearance  in  the  remedy,  as  pills  rolled  in  gold,  but  have  no  regard  for  the  elfioacy 
of  the  physic.     Some  can  willingly  hear  that  which  concerns  other  men  and  their 
sins,  their  lives  and  manners,  but  nothing  touching  themselves  or  their  own  sins  ; 
as  men  can  willingly  abide  to  hear  of  other  men's  deaths,  but  cannot  abide  to  think 
of  their  own.      {R.  Stock.)        Whom  to  hear: — Ebenezer  Blackwell  was  a  rich 
banker,  a  zealous  Methodist,  and  a  great  friend  of  the  Wesleys.   "  Are  you  going  to 
hear  Mr.  Wesley  preach  ?  "  he  was  asked  one  day.  ♦•  No,"  he  replied,  "  I  am  going  to 
hear  God ;  I  listen  to  Him,  whoever  preaches ;  otherwise  I  lose  all  my  labour. "    Take 
heed  what  ye  hear : — I.  Faith  cometh  bt  heabh^q.    This  means — 1.  Faith  comes 
from  knowledge,  i.e.,  there  can  be  no  faith  without  knowledge.     *•  How  shall  they 
believe  in  Him  of  whom  they  have  not  heard?"    2.   It  means  that  the  living 
preacher,  as  opposed  to  mere  instruction  out  of  books,  is  the  great  means  of  pro- 
ducing faith.    This  does  not  mean  (1)  That  God  does  not  employ  His  written 
Word,  (fee ;    (2)  Nor  that  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  is  the  only  method  ol 


CHAP,  rvj  ST.  MARK.  161 

making  the  gospel  heard,  and  thus  of  producing  faith.  3.  It  means  that  the  in- 
struction by  the  ear,  as  coming  from  a  living  preacher,  is  the  ordinary  method  of 
salvation.  Proof  from  Scripture  and  experience.  II.  Wht  is  heabino  ob  thx 
LiviNO  PREACHER  NECESSARY  ?  Why  may  not  books  and  Bibles  answer  for  the  con- 
version of  men  ?  1.  The  sufficient  answer  to  the  question  is  the  Divine  appoint- 
ment. 2.  Because  from  the  constitution  of  our  nature,  what  is  addressed  to  the 
ear  has  more  power  in  arousing  attention,  in  producing  conviction,  and  exciting 
feeling,  than  what  is  addressed  to  the  eye.  3.  There  is  a  law  of  propagation  of 
Divine  life  analogous  to  the  propagation  of  vegetable  and  animal  life.  So  in  the 
Church  it  is  the  general  law  that  the  spiritual  life  is  communicated  through  and  by 
living  members  of  the  Church.    III.    Two  inferences  flow  from   this  truth. 

1.  That  we  should  hear  for  ourselves,  and  cause  others  to  hear,  the  gospel,  not 
being  content  in  either  case  with  books,  to  the  neglect  of  the  living  teacher, 

2.  That  we  should  be  careful  what  we  hear  and  how  we  hear.  (1)  The  object  ef 
hearing,  viz.,  salvation,  spiritual  edification  must  be  kept  in  view,  and  be  our 
governing  motive,  not  pleasure,  not  criticism.  (2)  The  mind  must  be  prepared  for 
the  reception  of  the  truth.  The  Scripture  tells  us  how  (1  Peter  it  1 ;  James  i.  21). 
This  with  prayer  includes  our  duty  as  to  hearing.  With  this  will  be  connected 
laying  the  truth  up  in  our  hearts,  and  practising  it  in  our  lives.    {C.  Hodge^  D.D.) 

Ver.  25.  For  he  that  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given, — The  law  of  increase: — The 
good  use  of  knowledge  and  grace  draws  down  more :  the  ill  use  leads  to  blindness 
and  hardness  of  heart.  The  one  is  an  effect  of  grace  itself ;  the  other,  an  effect  of 
a  depraved  will.  A  faithful  soul  has  a  great  treasure.  The  riches  which  it  heaps 
up  have  scarce  any  bounds,  because  it  puts  none  to  its  fidelity.  A  base  and  slothful 
soul  grows  poorer  every  day,  until  it  is  stripped  of  all.  Who  can  tell  the  pro- 
digious stock  which  is  acquired  by  an  evangelical  labourer,  a  zealous  missionary, 
who  crosses  the  seas  on  purpose  to  seek  souls  whom  he  may  convert,  and  is  intent 
on  nothing  but  the  salvation  of  sinners  1  The  greater  his  grace  is,  the  more  it 
increases  by  labour.  O  how  happy  and  holy  is  this  usury  of  a  faithful  soull 
{Quesnel.)  *^ Having'*  helps  the  '^getting'*: — Having  one  language  helps  the 
gaining  of  another.  Having  mathematics  helps  the  getting  of  science.  Capital 
tends  to  gather  more  wealth.  "  Nothing  succeeds  like  success."  One  victory  leads 
the  way  to  another.  The  knowledge  of  one  truth  ever  opens  the  mind  for  percep- 
tion of  another.  Grace  to  do  one  good  act  opens  the  heart  to  admit  gt&ce  to  do 
another.  If  but  a  beginning  is  made,  it  is  an  immense  assistance  to  attainment. 
If  converted,  do  not  undervalue  the  infinite  importance  of  the  beginning  thus  made. 
But  remember,  at  the  same  time,  that  none  can  keep  grace  except  on  the  condition 
that  he  employs  it.  Whatever  knowledge  of  truth,  whatever  feeling,  whatever 
power  of  obedience  you  possess,  you  will  lose  unless  you  employ  it.  (iJ.  Glover.) 
The  duty  of  faithfully  hearing  the  Word  of  God: — What  ye  hear  heed.  Not  with- 
out purpose  our  Lord  spoke  of  hearing.  All  success  on  the  part  of  the  teacher 
depends  upon  attention  on  the  part  of  the  hearer.  Though  Noah,  Moses,  Paul,  or 
even  Jesus  speak,  no  benefit  to  careless  hearer.  Whoso  has  a  great  truth  to  impart 
has  a  right  to  claim  a  hearing — how  much  more  He  who  is  the  Truth.    Consider — 

1.  The  ESPEciAii  evils  against  which  men  btcst  guard  in  hearing  the  word  ark 
THREE  : — 1.  Losing  the  Word  before  faith  has  made  it  fruitful  (Luke  viii.  11).  The 
peril  is,  it  may  be  lost  before  it  is  fruitful.     (1)  It  may  be  taken  out  of  the  heart. 

2.  A  merely  temporary  faith.  3.  Fruitlessness  of  Word  through  cares,  deceit  of 
riches,  lust  of  other  things  (vers.  18, 19 ;  Luke  viii.  14).  II.  The  reward  of  faith- 
ful HEARING  (vers.  20-25 ;  Luke  viii.  15).  The  lot  of  the  seed  describes  the  lot  cf 
him  who  receives  it.  "  Let  him  that  hath  " — as  the  fruit  of  his  using — this  his 
own  increase ;  "  shall  more  be  given  " — this  the  Lord's  increase  (cf.  parable  of 
talents).  Every  attainment  of  truth  a  condition  of  meetness  to  gain  other  and 
deeper  truth.  So  in  all  study  and  acquisition.  Truth  grows  to  its  *•  perfection  " 
in  the  "  good  "  "  honest."  III.  Condemnation  of  him  who  heareth  not  to  profit. 
••  Him  that  hath  not " — ^hath  nothing  more  than  was  first  given  to  him.  From 
him  shall  even  that  be  taken.  Any  one  can  "  have  "  what  is  given ;  only  the 
diligent  have  more.  1.  The  condemnation  assumes  the  form  of  a  removal  of  truth 
(Matt.  xiii.  13-15).  It  is  naturally  forgotten  by  him  who  does  not  use  his  under- 
standing upon  it.  Disregarded  truth  (and  duty)  becomes  disliked  truth.  2.  In 
carelessness  he  puts  it  away  from  him.  His  measure  is  small ;  he  metes  it  to 
himself.  The  eye  not  trained  to  see  beauties  and  harmonies  of  form  fails  to  see 
them  :   so  the  ear  music,  and  the  hand  skilfulness.     3.  To  hear  is  a  duty ;   Ic 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  if. 

neglect  duty  brings  God's  condemnation.  4.  He  who  does  not  receive  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  ipso  facto  in  the  kingdom  of  evil.  Continued  deiDartares  from  truth 
and  duty  leave  the  man  farther  from  God,  truth,  heaven.  5.  All  truth  is  in 
parables.  History  the  parable  of  Providence.  Ordinances  the  parables  of  grace. 
The  attentive  see  not  only  the  parable,  but  the  '•  things  "  also  ;  the  inattentive  see 
only  the  parable,  not  the  •'  tilings  "  (John  x.  6).  6.  Even  Christ  and  His  work  and 
His  gospel  may  be  mere  parables,  outward  things.  Men  seeing  see  not,  their  hearts 
being  gross,  their  ears  dull  of  hearing,  and  their  ej'es  closed.  We  see — 1.  The  ter- 
rible and  to  be  dreaded  consequence  of  not  heeding  the  Word  :  it  becomes  a  parable,  a 
dark  saying,  a  riddle.  2.  But  the  mercifulness  of  Him  who  would  hide  tnith  in  a 
beautiful  parable,  to  tempt  if  possible  the  careless  to  inquire,  that  they  may  be  saved. 
{Studies.)  The  law  and  the  gospel : — The  tendency  of  gifts,  powers,  possessions  to 
accmnulate  in  some  hands  and  dwindle  in  others  is  a  common  fact  of  observation. 
And  it  often  appears,  too,  that  when  accumulation  begms  it  goes  on  by  a  momentum 
of  its  own  ;  that  the  farther  it  goes  the  faster  it  goes  ;  and  on  the  other  hand  that 
losses  follow  the  same  law  ;  disaster  breeds  disaster,  and  misfortune  multiplies  by  a 
geometrical  law.  I.  We  bee  the  workings  of  this  law  in  the  conditions  of  oub 
PHisiCAL  LIVES.  Health  and  vigour  have  a  tendency  to  increase.  The  food  we  eat 
builds  up  the  body ;  active  exercise  confirms  its  strength  ;  the  cold  increases  its  power 
of  endurance;  the  summer  heat  nourishes  its  vitality.  Nature  brings  constant 
revenues  to  the  healthy  man  ;  all  things  work  together  for  his  good.  On  the  other 
hand  disease  and  physical  feebleness  have  a  tendency  to  increase.  The  food  that 
ought  to  nourish  the  system  irritates  and  oppresses  it ;  exertion  brings  to  the  body 
fatigue  and  enervation ;  cold  benumbs  it ;  heat  debilitates  it ;  nature  seems  to  be 
the  foe  of  feebleness ;  all  things  work  together  to  prevent  the  recovery  of  health 
when  once  it  is  lost ;  often  it  is  only  by  the  greatest  vigilance  and  patience  that  it 
can  be  regained.  II.  The  law  that  we  are  considerino  is  fulfilled  in  thb 
FACTS  OF  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER.  The  man  who  has  station  or  influence  or  wealth  or 
reputation  finds  the  current  flowing  in  his  favour ;  the  man  who  has  none  of  these 
things  soon  learns  that  he  must  stem  the  current.  Popularity  always  follows  thia 
law.  It  is  often  remarkable  how  small  a  saying  will  awaken  the  enthusiasm  of  the 
crowd  when  spoken  by  a  man  who  is  a  recognized  favourite  .•  and  how  many  great 
and  wise  utterances  fail  of  producing  any  effect  whatever  when  he  who  speaks  Qiem 
is  comparatively  unknown.  It  is  almost  impossible  for  one  who  has  gained  the 
reputation  of  being  a  wit  to  say  anything  at  which  his  auditory  will  not  laugh.  Hia 
most  sober  and  commonplace  speeches  will  often  be  greeted  as  great  witticisms.  Oa 
the  other  hand  the  purest  wit  and  the  choicest  humour,  if  it  happen  to  fall  from  the 
lips  of  a  plain,  matter-of-fact  individual,  will  often  be  received  with  funereal 
gravity  by  all  who  hear  it.  Men  are  apt  to  bestow  their  help  as  well  as  their 
applause  most  freely  on  those  who  need  it  least.  Those  who  have  gifts  to  bestow  often 
give  them  to  those  who  do  not  want  them,  passing  by  those  who  are  suffering  for 
the  lack  of  them.  "The  destruction  of  the  poor,"  the  wise  man  says,  "is  hia 
poverty."  Because  he  is  poor  he  cannot  get  the  credit,  the  privilege,  the  favour 
that  he  could  get|;if  he  were  rich.  The  narrowness  of  his  resources  cramps  him.  The 
church  that  has  the  rich  people  is  likely  to  attract  the  rich  people ;  the  weak 
churches  are  often  left  to  their  own  destruction,  while  those  that  are  strong  financi- 
ally  are  strengthened  by  constant  accessions.  What  is  this  law  that  we  are  study- 
ing r  It  is  nothing  else  than  what  some  philosophers  call  the  law  of  natural  selec- 
tion— the  law  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest ;  that  is,  in  most  cases,  the  strongest. 
When  a  tree  is  cut  down  in  the  forest  a  number  of  sprouts  frequently  spring  up 
from  the  stump,  and  these  grow  together  for  a  while  until  they  begin  to  crowd  one 
another.  There  is  not  room  for  a  dozen  trees  on  the  ground  where  one  tree  stood  ; 
there  is  only  room  for  one.  But  it  is  generally  the  case  that  one  of  these  shoots 
growing  from  the  root  of  the  old  tree  is  a  little  larger  than  the  rest,  and  this  one 
gradually  overshadows  the  rest,  takes  from  the  air  and  the  light  more  nourishment 
than  they  can  get — takes  that  which  belongs  to  them,  so  that  they  dwindle  and  die 
beneath  its  shadow  while  its  roots  reach  out  for  a  firmer  footing  in  the  soil  and  its 
branches  stretch  forth  with  loftier  pride  and  ampler  shade.  Nature  selects  the 
strongest  shoot  for  preservation,  and  destroys  the  others  that  it  may  live.  We  know 
that  man  adopts  this  method  of  selection  in  all  his  agricultural  operations  ;  in  the 
corn-field  and  in  the  fruit  nursery  it  is  the  likeliest  growths  that  are  choseu  and 
cultivated  ;  the  others  are  weeded  out  to  make  room  for  them.  But  some  of  you  are 
asking,  "  Is  this  law  of  natural  selection  God's  law  ?  "  To  this  question  there  is  but 
one  answer.    If  the  law  of  natural  selection  ia  the  law  of  nature,  then  it  is  God's 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST,  MARK,  15S 

law.  This  law  of  natural  Belection  is  a  natural  law,  and  not  a  moral  law.  We 
speak  of  it  as  a  law  in  the  sense  in  which  we  speak  of  the  law  of  heredity,  or  the 
law  of  gravitation,  or  the  law  of  supply  aud  demand.  This  law  is  announced  by  Christ 
but  it  is  not  enjoined  by  Him.  ••  This,"  He  says,  ••  is  the  way  things  are :  this  ig 
the  course  things  uniformly  take."  This  law  of  natural  selection  is  a  law  of  nature, 
ordained  by  God.  It  is  the  law  under  which  rewards  and  penalties  are  adminis> 
tered ;  it  is  a  retributive  law,  for  the  sanctions  of  the  moral  law  are  found  in  the 
natural  order.  But  some  of  you  are  protesting  that  this  cannot  be  true.  "  How  is 
it,"  you  ask,  "  that  the  natural  law  of  the  survival  of  the  strongest  tends  to  the 
rewarding  of  the  good  or  the  punishing  of  the  bad  ?  By  this  law  it  is  the  strong, 
rather  than  the  good  that  are  rewarded.  It  is  to  those  that  have,  rather  than  to 
those  that  deserve,  that  abundance  is  given."  True ;  but  this  is  only  an  illustra- 
tration  of  the  fact  that  a  dispensation  of  law  always  works  hardship.  Law  makes 
nothing  perfect;  it  hurts  some  that  need  help  and  it  helps  some  that  do  not 
deserve  it.  Law  must  be  uniform  and  inflexible  ;  it  cannot  adapt  itself  to  differing 
conditions  and  abilities.  Gravitation  is  a  good  law,  but  it  kills  thousands  of  inno> 
cent  people  every  year.  Yet  it  would  not  do  to  have  it  less  uniform  and  inflexible 
than  it  is.  The  universe  is  built  on  the  basis  of  universal  righteousness  and 
health :  its  laws  are  all  adapted  to  that  condition  of  things,  and  they  ought  to  be. 
If  all  men  were  good  and  wise  and  strong,  then  this  law  would  only  tend  to  increase 
the  virtue  and  the  wisdom  and  the  vigour  of  all  men.  It  would  be  seen,  then, 
that  this  is  a  good  law.  But  sin  has  entered  to  enfeeble  and  deprave  many,  and 
the  result  is  that  the  law  which  ought  to  be  a  savour  of  life  unto  life  to  them 
becomes  a  savour  of  death  nnto  death.  The  same'  forces  that  ought  to  build 
them  up  tend  to  destroy  them.  So  it  often  is  that  when  the  law  enters  offences 
abound,  and  hardships  are  suffered ;  under  its  severe  and  inflexible  rule  more  ia 
given  to  those  who  have  abundance  already,  while  those  who  have  but  little 
are  stripped  of  what  they  have.  Thus  we  see  that  the  natural  law,  which  is  the 
instrument  of  retribution,  inflicts  suffering  and  loss  not  only  upon  the  sinful,  but 
upon  the  weak,  the  unfortunate,  the  helpless ;  upon  those  who  have  fallen  behind 
in  the  race  of  life.  That  is  the  way  the  law  works.  But  remember  also  that  thert 
is  something  better  and  diviner  than  law  in  the  tidings  that  He  has  brought  us. 
What  the  law  could  not  do  He  came  to  do.  It  was  for  the  deliverance  and  the 
relief  of  those  who  are  being  pushed  to  the  wall  by  the  operation  of  these  retribu- 
tive forces  that  He  came.  His  life  proves  this.  He  did  not  fall  into  that  social 
order  that  we  have  seen  prevailing.  He  did  not  bestow  His  praise  upon  the  famous, 
cor  His  friendship  on  the  popular,  nor  His  benefactions  on  the  rich.  His  words  of 
applause  greeted  the  saints  who  in  obscurity  tried  to  live  virtuously ;  He  was  the 
Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners ;  He  was  the  constant  helper  of  the  poor.  It  was 
not  to  those  who  had  abundance  that  He  gave,  but  to  those  who  had  nothing. 
•*  They  that  be  whole,"  He  says,  "  need  not  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick.  I 
came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."  Nature  is  against  them  ; 
their  own  natures  are  infirm  and  corrupt ;  their  appetites  entice  them ;  their  selfish 
desires  mislead  them ;  but  He  assures  them  that  by  faith  in  Him  they  may  be 
made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  thus  be  reinforced  and  invigorated  for 
conflict  with  the  eviL  And,  mark  you,  in  doing  all  this  He  does  not  destroy  but 
fulfils  the  law.  And  what  Christ  does  ia  to  give  the  real  good  of  life,  the  moral 
strength  and  soundness  which  are  the  source  of  all  life's  real  good,  to  those  who 
have  nothing — who  are  so  reduced  in  moral  vigour  that  they  are  practically 
destitute ;  to  restore  to  them  that  which  they  have  lost,  so  that  they  shall  have ; 
and  then  this  law  is  a  minister  of  good  to  them  as  God  meant  it  to  be  to  all.  Here 
is  a  vine  that  has  fallen  from  its  trellis,  and  that  is  being  choked  by  the  weeds  that 
have  overgrown  it,  as  it  lies  prostrate  on  the  earth.  The  law  of  nature,  the  law  of 
vegetable  growth,  is  only  operating  to  destroy  it  so  long  as  it  remains  in  this  con- 
dition ;  for  the  sun  and  the  showers  nourish  the  weeds,  and  they  overshadow  the 
vine  more  and  more,  preventing  its  growth,  and  drawing  away  the  strength  from 
the  soil.  But  the  gardener  lifts  up  the  vine  and  fastens  it  to  the  trellis,  and  pulls 
up  the  weeds  that  are  stealing  its  nutriment,  and  than  the  laws  of  nature  promote 
the  growth  of  the  vine ;  the  same  laws  under  which  its  life  was  being  destroyed 
now  confirm  its  hfe  and  increase  its  growth.  Some  such  service  as  this  Christ 
renders  to  all  those  who  are  morally  weak  and  helpless ;  by  the  communication  to 
them  of  His  own  life  He  lifts  them  out  of  their  helplessness  into  a  condition  in 
which  all  things  that  were  working  together  against  them  shall  work  together  for 
their  good.    It  will  be  well  for  us  all  to  remember  that  if  we  are  Christians,  we  are 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

co-workers  with  Christ,  and  that  our  business,  therefore,  is  not  to  add  force  to  the 
law  whose  severities  bear  so  heavily  upon  many  of  our  fellow-men,  but  to  counter- 
act the  severities  of  the  law  by  ministries  of  sympathy  and  tenderness  and  help. 
{W.  Gladden.)  Addition  easy  : — And  it  is  always  easier  to  get  the  addition  than 
it  was  to  get  the  unit.  When  the  current  is  fairly  turned  in  our  direction,  the 
stream  keeps  running.  It  has  been  said  that  it  is  harder  for  a  man  to  get  his  first 
thousand  dollars,  than  any  subsequent  thousand.  The  more  wealth  a  man  ban, 
the  easier  it  is  for  him  to  increase  it.  So  of  knowledge ;  so  of  influence ;  so  c( 
affection.     So  also  of  spiritual  gifts. 

Vers.  26,  29.  So  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  if  a  man  should   cast  seed  Intc 

the  ground. — The  religion  of  Christ : — I.  The  religion  of  Christ  is  a  eeign.    It  ia 

not  a  creed,  or  a  sentiment,  or  a  ritualism,  but  a  regal  force,  a  power  that  holds 

sway  over  intellect,  heart,  and  will.    As  a  reign  ft  is — 1.  Spiritual.     Its  throne  ia 

within.    2.  Free.    3.  Constant.     II.  It  is  a  Divine  reign.    This  is  proved  by — 1. 

Its  congruity  with  human  nature.    It  accords  with  reason,  conscience,  and  the 

profoundest  cravings  of  the  soul.    2.  Its  influence  on  human  life.     It  makes  men 

righteous,  loving,  peaceful,  godUke.     III.  It  is  a  growing  reign.     It  grows  in  the 

individual  soul,  and  in  the  increase  of  its  subjects.     1.  This  growth  is  silent.    It 

does  not  advance  as  the  reign  of  human  monarchs,  by  noise  and  bluster,  by  social 

convulsion  and  bloody  wars.     It  works  in  the  mind  and  spreads  through  society, 

silent  as  the  distilling  dew  or  the  morning  beam.     2.  Gradual.     3.  Secret.    IV. 

Christ's  religion  may  be  promoted  bt  human  agency.  Whilst  man  cannot  in  nature 

create  the  crop,  no  crop  would  come  without  his  agency ;  so  Christ  has  left  the 

extension  of  His  religion  to  depend  in  some  measure  on  man.    V.  Human  effort  ia 

founded  on  confidence  in  Divine  laws.    (D.  Thamas^  D.D.)      The  kingdom  in  the 

heart : — I.  The  first  lesson  taught  us  here  is,  that  progress  in  personal  religion  ia 

TiTAii  and  not  mechanicaii  (Mark  iv.  26).     1.  The  "  seed  *'  contains  in  itself  the 

germ  of  all  the  future  growth.    Hence,  all  expectation  must  actually  begin  and 

end  with  the  grain  which  is  sown.    If  the  initial  impartationof  Divine  grace  in  the 

truth  through  the  Holy  Ghost  be  not  received,  it  will  do  no  good  whatsoever  to 

watch  and  hope  and  encourage  ourselves.   {See  John  vi.  65.)    2.  The  "  ground " 

develops  the  germ.     The  human  life  and  experience  which  the  seed  falls  into  haa 

to  be  prepared,  and,  of  course,  needa  to  be  cultivated ;  then  God  sends  His  celestial 

benediction  of  the  sunshine  and  the  showers.     But  the  fruit  "  the  earth  bringeth 

forth  of  herself."    This  union  of  human  fidelity  with  Divine  grace  constitutes  the 

oo-operation  with  which  the  mysterious  work  goes  on.    We  are  to  •'  add  "  to  our 

attainments,  "  giving  all  diligence  "  (2  Pet.  i.  6).    We  are  to  "  work  out "  our  own 

salvation  "  with  fear  and  trembling  "  (Phil.  ii.  12, 13).    3.  The  •*  man"  casts  the 

seed.    God  gives  it,  and  the  germ  of  salvation  is  in  what  God  gives.    But  a  free- 

wi^ed  man  must  let  it  sink  into  his  heart  and  life.    There  are  •'  means  of  grace ;  " 

haman  beings  must  put  themselves  in  the  way  of  them.     The  first  step  in  the 

new  life  is  displayed  in  the  willingness  to  take  every  other  step.  {See  2  Cor.  iii.  18, 

in  the  New  Revision.)    II.  Our  next  lesson  from  the  figure  which  Christ  uses  is 

this  :  progress  in  personal  religion  is  constant  and  not  spasmodic  (See  verses  26,  27.) 

1.  Observe  here  that  the  growth  of  the  seed  is  continued  through  the  *'  night  and 

day."    One  little  brilliant  touch  of  imagination  does  great  service  in  this  picture. 

The  man  rests ;  he  has  done  his  duty.    God,  the  unseen,  is  silently  keeping  Hia 

promise.     And  while  we  rejoice  in  the  sweet  helpful  sunshine,  and  thank  Him  for 

ft,  we  ought  to  thank  Him  too  for  these  heavy  moist  nights  of  gloom,  which 

surprise  us  often  with  their  darkness,  and  then  surprise  us  more  afterwards  with 

the  extraordinary  progiess  they  have  brought.  {See  Heb.  xii.  11.)    2.  Hence  also  we 

observe  that  even  hindrances  help  sometimes.     Those  are  the  hardiest  plants  which 

have  been  oftenest  shadowed ;  and  those  are  the  most  stable  trees  which  have  been 

oftenest  writhed  and  tossed  by  the  blasts  as  they  blustered  around  them.    3.  So, 

above  everything  else,  we  observe  that  here  we  are  taught  the  necessity  of  trust. 

No  one  thing  in  nature  is  more  pathetically  beautiful  than  the  behaviour  of  certain 

sensitive  plants  we  all  are  acquainted  with,  as  the  nightfall  approaches.    They 

tranquilly  fold  up  their  leaves,  as  if  they  were  living  beings,  and  now  knew  that 

from  the  evening  to  the  morning  again  they  would  have  to  live  just  by  faith  in  the 

Supreme  Hand  which  made  them.    We  must  make  up  our  minds  that  there  can  be 

never  any  healthy  growth  which  undertakes  to  move  forward  by  frantic  leaps  or 

spasms  of  progress.    We  must  trust  God ;  and  He  neither  dwarfs  nor  forces. 

Hothouse  shoota  are  proverbially  feeble,  and  almost  always  it  hap  been  found  that 


CHiJ.  IV.]  ST.  MARK.  15S 

conservatory  oranges  are  the  bitterest  sort  of  fruit.  III.  Once  more :  let  ua  learn 
from  the  figure  which  our  Lord  uses,  that  progress  in  personal  rehgion  is  spibitua& 
and  not  CONSPICUOUS.  The  seed  grows,  but  the  man  "knows  not  how.'*  1.  Th« 
man  cannot  possibly  "  know  bow."  Our  Saviour,  in  another  place,  gives  the  full 
reason  for  that  (Luke  xvii.  20,  21).  When  He  declares  "the  kingdom  of  God 
Cometh  not  with  observation,"  He  adds  at  once  His  sufficient  explanation;  "for, 
behold,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  yon."  We  are  unable  to  become  in  any  case 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  each  other.  We  are  often  mistaken  about  ourselves. 
The  most  we  can  hope  to  understand  is  to  be  found  in  grand  results,  and  not  in  the 
processes.  2.  The  man  does  not  need  to  "  know  how."  He  needs  only  to  keep 
growing,  and  all  will  be  right  in  the  end.  Christians  are  not  called  knowers,  bat 
"beUevers."  The  old  promise  is  that  •*  the  righteous  shall  flourish  like  the  palm- 
tree."  And  the  singularity  of  the  palm-tree  is  that  it  is  an  inside  grower;  it  ii 
always  adding  its  woody  layers  underneath  the  bark,  and  enlarging  itself  from  the 
centre  out  of  sight.  Botanically  speaking,  man  is  "endogenous."  Our  best 
attainments,  like  Moses'  shining  face,  are  always  gained  nnconsciously,  and  others 
see  them  first.  3.  Many  men  make  mistakes  in  trying  to  'know  how."  The 
religious  life  of  a  genuine  Christian  cannot  be  dealt  with  from  the  outside 
without  injury.  It  is  harmed  when  we  attempt  to  make  it  showy.  You  will  kill 
the  strongest  trees  if  you  seek  to  keep  them  varnished.  All  penances  and 
pilgrimages,  all  mere  rituals  and  rubrics,  all  legislations  and  reforms,  are  as 
powerless  to  save  the  soul  as  bo  many  carvings  and  statues  and  cornices  on  the 
exterior  of  a  house  would  be  to  give  health  to  a  sick  man  within.  Time  is  wasted 
in  efforts  to  help  men  savingly  in  any  other  way  than  by  teaching  them  to  "  grow 
np  in  all  things  into  Christ,  which  is  the  head  "  (Eph.  iv.  14-16).  IV.  Let  as 
learn,  in  the  fourth  place,  from  the  figure  our  Lord  uses,  that  progress  in  personal 
religion  is  natural  and  not  abtistio.  {See  ver.  28.)  1.  Our  Lord  Himself  was 
entirely  unconventional.  2.  Hence,  a  conventional  religion  cannot  be  Christian. 
For  it  is  not  possible  that  "  a  man  in  Christ "  should  be  artistic.  Fancy  forms  of 
devoteeism  are  simply  grotesque.  8.  The  "  beauty  of  holiness  "  will  not  stand 
much  millinery  of  adornment.  Naturalness  is  the  first  element  of  loveliness.  4. 
Meantime,  let  as  remember  that  all  Christ  seems  to  desire  of  His  followers  is  just 
themselves.  Timothy  was  not  set  to  find  some  extraordinary  attainment,  but  to 
"  stir  up  the  gift "  which  was  **  in  him."  Jesus  praised  the  misjudged  woman 
because  she  had  "  done  what  she  could."  V.  Finally,  we  may  learn  from  the 
figure  which  oar  Lord  uses,  that  progress  in  personal  religion  is  oabnebed  at  last, 
and  not  lost.  {See  ver.  29.)  1.  The  "fruit "  is  what  is  wanted.  And  the  gains  of  the 
growth  are  all  conserved  in  the  fruit.  Growth  is  for  the  sake  of  more  fruit.  Some 
might  say,  "  The  seed  that  we  cast  into  the  ground  is  quite  lost."  No ;  the  seed 
will  be  found  inside  of  every  fruit.  Others  might  say,  "  The  increase  in  size  and 
strength  is  certainly  all  lost."  No ;  the  increase  is  ten  or  a  hundred-fold  inside  of 
the  fruit  There  is  a  whole  field-full  of  living  germs  in  the  matured  fruit  of  each 
honest  life  for  God.  2.  The  "  harvest "  fixes  the  final  date  of  the  ingathering. 
There  does  not  appear  to  be  anything  like  caprice  in  God's  plan.  "  He  hath  made 
everything  beautiful  in  His  time."  And  in  the  harvest- time,  surely,  the  fields 
of  ripened  grain  are  loveliest.  3.  For  it  is  the  ripeness  of  the  fruit  which 
announces  the  harvest.  That  must  be  the  force  here  of  the  fine  and  welcome  word 
"  immediately."  When  the  believer  is  ready  to  go  to  his  home,  the  Lord  is  ready  to 
receive  him.  (C.  S.  Robinson.)  God's  work  in  tlie  kingdom: — I.  In  its  bk- 
GiNNiNOS.  God  permits  us  to  co-operate  with  Him ;  but  the  gre»vt  work  is  His.  We 
learn  the  truth  by  prayer,  and  study,  and  obedience.  We  make  it  known.  He 
gives  its  life.  As  the  farmer  can  only  sow  the  seed  he  has  obtained,  and  must 
depend  on  the  life  within  it,  and  the  earth  which  briugs  forth  fruit  of  herself,  so  we 
can  only  make  known  the  truth  we  have  received,  and  must  trust  entirely  to  God  to 
make  it  effective.  II.  In  its  gbowth.  God  advances  this  new  life  according  to  its 
own  laws.  We  need  not  be  impatient,  nor  attempt  to  force  unnatural  growth,  nor 
dig  it  up  to  see  if  it  is  growing.  But  we  must  make  the  utmost  of  our  own  powers 
to  aid  those  that  are  beyond  us.  As  it  requires  a  whole  man  to  make  a  successful 
farmer,  so  all  the  energies  of  character,  study,  and  devotion  are  needed  to  make  a 
successful  sower  of  the  seed  of  the  kingdom.  IIL  In  its  perfection.  There  is  a 
harvest-time.  God  completes  the  work  He  has  begun  in  each  soul ;  but  He  has 
made  us  so  interdependent  that  its  completion  calls  for  our  watchful  activity.  We 
are  not  responsible  for  the  laws  of  spiritual  growth  ;  but  we  are  commanded  to  be 
at  hand  to  watch  the  blade  as  it  appears,  to  welcome  the  ear  and  the  full  frait 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

(A.  E.  Dunning.)  Human  agency  likened  to  a  growing  plant : — I.  Man's  know, 
ledge  and  power,  in  matter  and  in  mind,  are  small,  yet  requisite.  II.  Natural 
powers  are  made  to  do  muoh  for  bim,  but  secretly  and  slowly.  III.  He  bas  to 
wait  in  patience,  and  then  to  take  possession.  {J.  H.  Godwin.)  The  growth  oj 
the  spiritual  life : — I.  Spibixuaii  goodness  is  a  obowth.  It  springs  and  grows  up. 
Cut  tbe  stone  and  carve  it,  so  it  remains  ;  cut  the  tree,  lop  o£F  its  branches,  and 
then  it  wiU  sprout.  Man  can  impart  motion,  and  make  automata,  but  he  cannot 
give  life.  The  test  of  real  life  is  growth.  U.  Spiritual  goodness  is  an  independent 
GROWTH.  Not  a  hot-house  plant.  Needs  no  petting.  Ministers  need  not  tormen 
themselves  about  the  issue  of  the  work :  God  gives  the  increase.  III.  Spiritua 
goodness  is  a  uystebious  gbowth.  The  law  of  development  is  hidden,  though  rea 
IV.  Spiritual  goodness  is  a  constant  growth.  Our  souls  do  not  rest.  Y.  Spirita 
goodness  is  a  PBOORESsrvE  growth.  The  blade  is  the  mark  of  tenderness ;  the  ea 
is  the  mark  of  full  vigour ;  the  full  com  in  the  ear  is  the  mark  of  maturity.  (F.  W 
Robertson,  M.A.)  The  power  of  growth  inherent  in  things  divine  : — ^The  hua 
bandman  has  only  two  functions  with  regard  to  the  seed — to  sow  it,  and  to  reap 
All  the  rest  the  seed  can  manage  for  itself.  So  in  spiritual  things,  we  need  only 
take  care  that  we  sow  good  seed — seed  of  truth,  seed  of  good  example,  seed  of 
loving  sympathy.  We  need  not  too  curiously  inquire  as  to  the  exact  attitude  of  the 
hearts  on  which  we  scatter  the  seed,  nor  ask  every  hour  as  to  the  appreciation 
which  the  seed  receives,  nor  use  a  microscope  to  measure  its  daily  growth,  nor 
keep  piling  on  the  simple  seed  undue  efforts  to  secure  its  fruitfulness.  {R.  Glover.) 
The  seed  growing  mysteriously : — Eemarkable  correspondence  between  history  of 
Ghnich  and  spiritual  life  of  individual  Christians.  Consider  in  this  connection :  L 
Tbb  growth  and  fbuitfulness  of  the  Divinb  Wobd  in  the  entire  HISTOBT  01 
THE  Chuboh.  1.  The  certain  growth  of  the  truth  through  this  dispensation. 
Christianity  is  always  spreading.  2.  The  orderly  development  of  the  truth. 
Providence  continually  brings  into  view  long-hidden  meanings  and  applications  of 
the  gospel.  3.  The  mystery  of  the  gospel's  extension  and  development.  Even  the 
wisest  are  far  from  understanding  the  true  reason  and  mode  of  its  growth.  11. 
The  gbowth  and  fbuitfulnesb  of  the  Divine  Word  in  iNDivmuAL  lives.  1. 
They  who  hear  the  gospel  should  consider  the  consequences  of  their  conduct  in 
relation  to  it.  The  honest  reception  of  it  is  the  beginning  of  a  life  of  holy  fruitful- 
ness to  the  glory  of  God.  The  rejection  involves  a  state  worse  than  barrenness. 
2.  This  parable  should  teach  cheerful  confidence  to  all  who  sow  the  good  seed — 
ministers,  teachers — all  who  speak  a  word  for  Christ.  The  result  is  beyond  their 
power  or  knowledge,  but  it  is  sure.  3.  It  should  produce  joy  in  all  Christian  hearts 
by  the  prospect  which  it  opens.  The  glorious  issue  of  each  Christian  life.  The 
blessed  consummation  of  the  world's  history.  The  final  rejoicing  of  all  who 
labour  in  the  gospel.  Above  all,  the  harvest-gladness  of  the  Lord.  (E.  Heath.) 
The  kingdoms  of  grace  and  glory: — These  two  kingdoms  differ  not  specifically,  but 
gradually ;  they  differ  not  in  nature,  but  only  in  degree.  The  kingdom  of  grace  is 
nothing  but  the  inchoation  or  beginning  of  the  kingdom  of  glory ;  the  kingdom  of 
grace  is  glory  in  the  seed,  and  the  kingdom  of  glory  is  grace  in  the  flower ;  the 
kingdom  of  grace  is  glory  in  the  daybreak,  and  the  kingdom  of  glory  is  grace  in  the 
full  meridian ;  the  kingdom  of  grace  is  glory  militant,  and  the  kingdom  of  glory  is 
grace  triumphant.  There  is  such  an  inseparable  connection  between  these  two 
kingdoms,  that  there  is  no  passing  into  the  one  but  by  the  other.  At  Athens  there 
were  two  temples — a  temple  of  virtue  and  a  temple  of  honour ;  and  there  was  no 
going  into  the  temple  of  honour  but  through  the  temple  of  virtue.  So  the  kingdoms 
of  grace  and  glory  are  so  joined  together,  that  we  cannot  go  into  the  kingdom  of  glory 
but  through  &e  kingdom  of  grace.  Many  people  aspire  after  the  kingdom  of  glory,  but 
never  look  after  grace;  but  these  two,  which  God  hath  joined  together,  may  not  be 
put  asunder.  The  kingdom  of  grace  leads  to  the  kingdom  of  glory.  {T.  Watson.) 
The  seed  in  the  heart : — The  ascendency  and  growth  of  true  religion.  1.  External 
agencies.  We  are  not  passive  and  powerless  recipients  of  heavenly  influences ;  we 
are  required  to  use  diligently  all  the  appliances  of  the  husbandman,  leaving  the  rest 
to  Him  who  disposes  all  things.  The  eye  of  God  marks  what  becomes  of  each 
grain  of  seed :  how  one  lies  disregarded  on  the  surface  of  the  worldly  heart,  and 
another  sinks  no  deeper  tiian  the  first  stratum  of  fitful  impulse  piety ;  how  the 
yonng  choke  the  seed  with  pleasures,  the  middle-aged  destroy  it  with  worldly 
ambitions,  and  the  old  stifle  it  with  corroding  cares ;  yet,  dead  as  this  seed  may 
■eem,  it  springeth  up,  ay,  and  will  spring  up  in  another  world,  if  not  in  this,  and 
bMr  its  testimony  against  all  who  neglect  or  despise  the  message  of  God.    2.  The 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  MARK.  167 

invisible  methods  of  its  succeeding  processes.  There  is  no  discovering  of  the  subtle 
law,  by  which  the  preaching  of  the  self-same  Word  becomes  powerless  here,  and 
effectual  there.  An  unperceived  influence  is  brought  to  bear  on  a  man's  heart, 
constraining  but  not  compelling  him,  causing  principles  and  desires  and  feelings  to 
spring  up  •'  he  knows  not  how."  It  is  for  him  to  yield  to  this  influence.  3.  The 
certain  progressiveness  of  true  religion.  No  standing  still.  All  religion  is  a 
spreading  and  an  advancing  thing.  God  leads  on  the  converted  soul  step  by  step ; 
He  restores  the  features  of  our  lost  spiritual  image  little  by  little ;  He  destroys  the 
dominant  passions  of  the  old  man  one  by  one ;  and  so  leads  us  on  from  strength  to 
strength,  till  in  the  perfect  righteousness  of  Ghtist  we  appear  before  Him  in  Zion. 
To  continue  babes  in  Christ,  would  be  like  saying  that  we  have  the  leaven  of  God 
within  us,  and  yet  that  it  is  not  affecting  the  surrounding  mass ;  that  the  fire  of  God 
is  within  our  hearts,  without  burning  up  the  dross  and  stubble ;  that,  aged  trees  aa 
we  are,  we  put  forth  nothing  but  the  tender  shoot,  and  patriarchs  as  we  should  be 
in  spiritual  things,  we  are  but  as  infants  of  a  day  old.  4.  The  end:  the  final 
gathering  of  the  ripe  sheaves  into  the  garner  of  life.  Here  our  progress  may  be 
slow;  there  is  an  infinitude  of  holy  attainment  beyond.  {Daniel  Moore,  M.A.) 
The  $ouVs  restoration  is  gradual : — It  is  one  of  the  severest  trials  of  our  faith,  to  go 
on  day  after  day  in  the  same  struggle  against  sin  and  self ;  and  it  is  a  sore  tempta- 
tion  to  many — because  they  do  not  see  any  striking  proofs  of  restoration,  any  rapid 
grovrth  in  grace,  any  marked  progress  in  the  heavenward  journey — to  doubt  whether 
progress  has  been  made.  It  is  Satan  who  makes  this  suggestion  to  them,  to  daunt 
and  to  destroy ;  but  it  is  a  lie  which  can  deceive  those  only  who  forget  or  distrust 
their  God.  The  farmer  who  goes  every  day  to  his  fields,  though  he  knows  that  in 
due  season  he  shall  reap,  does  not  notice  the  development  which  is  going  on  in  his 
wheat ;  but  they  who  pass  by  at  longer  intervals  observe  and  admire.  It  is  so  witk 
the  tme  Christian:  he  does  not  see  his  character  change,  the  kingdom  of  God 
cometh  not  with  observation  unto  him ;  but,  slowly  and  surely,  silently  ai  the  sap 
rises  in  the  trees,  as  the  leaves  unroll  and  the  blossom  bursts,  and  lo  1  the  fruit  is 
there ;  so  goes  on  the  restoration  of  grace — ^imperceptibly,  as  the  light  will  soon 
fade  into  darkness,  or  rather,  as  the  morning  shineth  more  and  more  ante  the 
perfect  day.  A  soid  can  no  more  be  restored  and  sanctified  for  heaven  at  once,  than 
a  tree  can  bear  fmit  without  the  blossom,  or  a  church  be  restored  without  cost  and 
toil.  Only  they  who  learn  to  labour  and  to  wait,  will  have  wages  from  the  Lord  of 
the  vineyard,  when  the  even  of  the  world  is  come,  and  to  him  that  overcometh  He 
shall  give  the  beautiful  crown.  (S.  R,  Hole,  M.A.)  The  patience  of  hope : — I. 
Do  not  worry  yourself  about  the  growth  of  grace  in  others.  Do  not  press  too  hardly 
lor  evidence  of  growth  in  your  children.  Confine  your  care  to  the  seed  you  sow, 
and,  calm  and  hopeful,  leave  the  rest  to  God.  II.  Be  not  too  anxious  about  the  work 
of  grace  in  your  own  soul.  It  grows  like  the  com ;  like  the  com  yon  cannot  see  it 
growing.  Take  care  of  your  action,  and  your  nature  will  take  care  of  itself. 
Harbour  no  thoughts  of  despair.  III.  Be  patient  with  yourself.  Plants  that  are 
meant  to  live  long  grow  slowly.  A  mushroom  grows  swiftly,  and  passes  away 
swiftly.  The  oak  grows  slow  to  stand  long.  Grace  is  meant  to  live  for  ever,  and 
grows,  therefore,  slowly.  Each  good  act  helps  it  a  little,  but  you  cannot  trace  the 
help.  If  God  has  patience  with  you,  have  patience  with  yourself ;  and  make  not 
your  grace  less  by  worrying  because  it  is  not  more.  {R.  Glover.)  Spiritual 
growth : — In  form  and  imagery  this  parable  is  exquisitely  simple ;  in  principle  and 
meaning  it  is  very  profound.  To  be  able  to  put  great  tmths  in  simple  language  is  a 
note  of  true  power.  Christ  was  a  master  of  this  art.  His  disciples  do  not  seem  to 
have  ever  attempted  it.  The  parable  was  too  Divine  a  thing  for  them  to  touch. 
The  idea  in  this  parable  is  distinct  and  beantifuL  The  seed  once  sown,  growB 
according  to  its  own  nature ;  it  has  life  in  itself;  and  when  once  fairly  deposited  in 
congenial  soil,  and  subjected  to  the  quickening  influences  of  heavenly  sunshine  and 
shower,  it  silently  and  mysteriously  develops  the  life  that  is  in  it,  according  to  the 
ordinary  principles  of  growth.  It  has  an  inherent  vitality,  a  growth-power,  which 
springs  up  ♦•  we  know  not  how  ; "  we  only  see  that  it  grows.  The  brown  clod  of  the 
field  is  first  tinged  with  virgin  green  ;  then  covered  as  with  a  carpet ;  then  waves, 
in  yielding  beauty  to  the  wind,  like  a  summer  sea,  and  rustles  in  ripening  music, 
like  a  forest.  So  is  the  kingdom  of  God ;  the  field  of  the  heart,  the  field  of  the 
world,  are  thus  covered  with  gracious  frait.      I.  This  orkat  law  of  spiRixuAii 

GROWTH    IS    NOT    ALWAYS    RKCOONIZEI),   NOR    ARE    MEN    ALWAYS    CONTENTED    WITH    IT. 

We  are  eager  for  quick  results ;  we  have  not  the  patience  to  wait  for  the  slow 
development  from  seed  to  fruit.    II.  But  this  is  God's  plan  in  all  things.    Ht 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOU.  [chap.  iv. 

produces  nothing  by  great  leaps  and  transitions ;  all  His  great  works  are  quiet 
processes.  Light  and  darkness  melt  into  each  other ;  the  seasons  change  by 
gradual  transition ;  all  life,  vegetable  and  animal,  grows  from  a  germ ;  and  the 
higher  and  nobler  the  type  of  life,  the  slower  and  more  gradual  is  the  process  of 
growtli.  The  oak  attains  to  maturity  more  slowly  than  the  flower;  man  than  the 
lower  animals ;  the  mind  than  the  body ;  the  soul  tban  the  mind.  III.  Applica- 
tion  TO   THE   CHABACTER  AND   COURSE   OF  THE   CHRISTIAN    LIFE.        1.    ItS    beginning. 

Only  a  blade,  hardly  to  be  discerned  above  the  soil,  or  distinguished  from  common 
grass.  We  may  often  confound  the  real  beginnings  of  religion  with  ordinary 
human  virtues.  2.  Its  progress.  We  look  for  the  formation  of  the  ear,  and  for 
the  full  com  in  the  ear.  A  child  of  God,  always  a  babe,  is  a  deformity.  3.  Its 
consummation.  How  fruitful  and  beautiful  it  should  be,  not  with  the  verdant 
beauty  of  the  blade,  but  with  the  golden  beauty  of  the  ripe  com.  {Henry  AlUm.) 
T}ie  blade,  the  ear,  the  full  corn  : — The  seed  in  the  ground.  ^  The  kingdom  of  God, 
or  religion  in  the  heart,  is  secret  in  its  beginnings.  This  is  suggested  by  the 
parable.  A  man  casts  seed  into  the  ground,  and  then  leaves  it  to  Nature — that  is, 
to  God.  Such  is  the  silence  and  secrecy  of  the  Divine  life  in  the  heart.  We  have 
the  trath  of  God  as  seed.  Compared  with  natural  or  scientiflc  truth  (which  yet  we 
would  not  disparage)  it  may  well  be  called,  as  in  one  of  the  Psalms,  "  precious 
seed,"  and  the  sowers  of  it  may  well  go  forth  *♦  weeping  " — i.e.  with  intensity  of 
will,  with  all  their  sensibilities  stirred  to  the  sowing  of  it ;  and  yet  let  them  know — 
it  is  well  for  us  all  to  know — that  a  sower  can  only  sow.  He  cannot  decompose  the 
grain.  He  cannot  vitalize  the  inward  germ.  He  must  leave  the  seed  with  God.  At- 
tempts are  made,  sometimes,  in  times  of  religious  revival  and  excitement,  to  force 
the  living  process,  and  even  to  have  essential  power  and  action  in  it ;  to  make  it  begin 
at  certain  times  and  in  certain  ways  ;  but  the  success  of  these  efforts  is  but  smalL 
Very  often  the  result  of  such  intrusive  violence  is  simply  this,  that  Nature  is  made 
to  look  like  grace  for  a  little  while,  only  to  sink  back  into  Nature  again.  We  are  only 
sowers.  We  "  cast  the  seed  into  the  ground,"  we  "  sleep  and  rise  night  and  day." 
We  go  about  oar  customary  avocations  and  know  nothing  for  certain  of  what  has 
become  of  the  seed  for  a  time.  By  and  by  we  shall  know  by  the  appearing  of  the 
blade  above  the  soil,  by  the  growing  and  by  the  ripening ;  but  at  first  we  know 
nothing.  The  blade. — Not  only  is  there  secrecy  at  the  beginning,  but  even  after 
life  is  begun  the  manifestations  of  it  are  very  slender  and  even  dubious.  Life  must 
appear  in  some  way,  else  we  cannot  apprehend  it.  We  know  life,  not  in  its  very 
substance,  but  only  in  its  attributes  and  fruits.  The  first  appearance  of  life  is 
therefore  a  time  of  great  interest ;  we  watch  it  as  the  farmer  watches  the  blade  when 
it  first  shows  above  the  soil.  It  does  not  then  look  at  all  like  the  com  it  ultimately 
becomes.  "  First  the  blade."  Take  it  when  it  is  just  visible  above  the  soil — tender, 
pale,  hardly  green  as  yet — and  compare  that  with  the  treasures  of  the  threshing 
floor.  What  a  difference  1  and  how  wonderful  it  seems  that  those  should  come 
from  that!  Not  only  is  the  first  appearance  small  and  slender,  but  to  the  unskilled 
eye  it  is  very  dubious  and  uncertain.  Even  so  1  The  springing  of  the  precious 
seed  of  Divine  truth  out  of  the  seoret  soul  into  the  visible  life,  is  known  at  first  often 
by  manifestations  very  slender  and  sensitive.  The  begun  life  is  so  feeble  that  you 
can  hardly  say  "  It  is  there."  A  flush  on  the  cheek  or  a  gleam  of  the  eye  betokens 
some  unusual  inward  feeling.  Something  is  done,  or  something  is  left  undone,  and 
that  is  all  1  A  Bible  is  kept  in  the  room,  and  sometimes  read  in  the  morning  or 
the  evening.  A  new  walk  is  taken  that  a  certain  person  may  be  met,  or  missed.  A 
letter  has  a  sentence  or  two  with  the  slightest  touch  of  a  new  tone  in  it.  Or  there 
is  some  other  faint  suggestion  of  a  change  of  mind  and  view.  And  if  one  should 
come  with  a  high  standard  and  a  strict  measuring  line  he  might,  of  course,  say,  "Is 
that  all  ?  "  Do  you  expect  that  to  endure  the  conflicts  and  tests  of  life,  and  over- 
come its  difficulties  ?  Do  you  look  for  golden  harvest  only  out  of  that  ?  And  yet 
that  young,  tender,  trembling  soul  will  grow  in  grace,  and  will  be  at  last  as  ripe  and 
mellow  and  ready  for  the  garner  as  the  other.  "  Then  the  ear." — God's  day  of  reve- 
lation.  Every  one  knows  com  in  the  ear — all  dubiety  is  over  when  we  look  on  the 
ear  of  com.  In  the  spike  that  holds  the  grain,  as  in  a  protective  loving  embrace, 
we  know,  although  we  do  not  see  it,  that  the  corn  is  enfolded.  And  when  the 
spike  expands  with  the  force  of  vegetation,  and  the  seeds  of  com  appear,  no  one 
can  deny  or  doubt  their  existence.  So  there  is  a  revealing  or  declaring  time  in 
the  spiritual  life.  Life,  hidden  beyond  the  proper  time  of  manifestation,  will 
die.  The  com  in  the  ear  cannot  be  preserved;  it  must  grow  on,  or  perish. 
••  The  full  com  in  the  ear." — The  work  of  grace  perfected,    Aa  the  result  of  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK.  169 


growing  comes  the  ripening,  or  what  is  here  called  "the  full  com  in  the  ear."  How 
little  there  is  of  man  1  How  much  of  God  I  Man  throws  the  seed  into  the  ground, 
as  one  might  throw  a  handful  of  pebhles  into  the  sea  I  and  months  afterwards  he 
comes,  and  carries  away,  by  reaping  and  harvesting,  thirty-fold  or  sixty-fold.  He 
throws  in  one  and  carries  away  thirty,  as  it  were  direct  from  the  hand  of  God.  It 
is  God  who  has  been  working  during  all  these  silent  months.  He  never  leaves  the 
field.  Down  beneath  the  red  mould  He  has  His  laboratory.  He  kindles  there  ten 
thousand  invisible  fires.  He  carries  on  and  completes  in  unreckonable  instances 
that  process  of  transmutation  which  is  the  most  wonderful  that  takes  place  beneath 
the  sun.  He  opens  in  every  field  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  fountains  of  life, 
and  out  of  these  living  fountains  spring  the  visible  forms,  blade,  and  sheath,  and 
ear,  and  ripened  com.  And  after  God  has  been  thus  working,  then  again  comes  the 
man,  with  his  baskets,  with  his  empty  garners,  and  God  fiUs  them.  Now  the  chief 
lesson — the  very  teaching  of  the  parable — ^is  this :  that  the  human  agency  is  no 
more  in  proportion  and  degree  within  the  '  *  kingdom  of  God  "  than  it  is  in  the  field 
of  corn.  ••  So  is  the  kingdom  of  God."  The  spiritual  Ufe  is  as  much  and  as  con- 
stantly under  God's  care  as,  in  the  natural  world,  is  the  field  of  growing  com.  In- 
deed, we  may  say  the  spiritual  life  has  more  of  His  care.  For,  whUe  the  man  has  the 
sowing  and  the  reaping  in  the  natural  field,  in  the  spiritual  field  he  has  the  sowing 
but  not  the  reaping.  "  The  angels  are  the  reapers."  Souls  ripened  for  heaven  are 
not  reaped  by  men  on  the  earth.  The  practical  uses  of  the  great  trath  taught  in  the 
parable  are  such  as  these.  It  teaches  us  a  lesson  of  diligence.  We  can  only  sow, 
therefore  let  us  sow.  A  lesson  of  reverence.  What  wonders  are  being  wrought 
very  near  to  us  in  silence  I  The  Spirit  of  God  is  striving  with  human  spirits  !  A 
lesson  of  abstinence.  Having  sown  the  seed,  leave  it  with  God.  Think — "  It  has 
passed  now  from  my  care  into  a  more  sacred  department,  and  into  far  higher  hands. 
With  Him  let  me  leave  it."  Finally,  a  lesson  of  trust.  (A.  Raleigh^  D.D.) 
The  different  stages  in  the  growth  of  Christian  life : — I.  Let  us  attend  to  the 
words  before  us,  by  observing  briefly  the  stages  ov  Christian  lifb  as  pbx* 
BENTEO  TO  US  BY  THEM.  A  tMng  of  cveuts  must  have  stages ;  a  thing  of  time 
must  also  have  its  stages;  so  must  all  things  of  growth  and  advancement. 
Christian  life  is  a  thing  of  events,  of  time,  and  of  growth ;  as  such,  it  has  its  stages 
of  development  and  maturity.  1.  There  is  the  blade  stage.  Human  life,  in  all  its 
forms,  has  its  blade  form  and  condition,  as  well  as  the  plant.  (1)  It  is  the  first  ex- 
pression of  life  to  human  sense.  It  is  not  the  first  stage  of  life  in  fact,  but  it  is  so 
in  appearance  and  visible  evidence.  (2)  The  blade  is  a  result  of  some  unseen  power 
behind  what  appears  to  sense.  The  blade  is  a  production,  produced  by  some  un- 
seen power  of  vitality  outside  itself  as  to  origin  and  law.  Clmstian  life,  as  well  as 
the  blade,  is  the  result  of  vital  power  higher  and  apart  from  itself.  (3)  The  blade 
form  is  a  stage  of  tendemess.  As  yet  it  is  not  hardened  in  its  fibre,  and  consoli- 
dated  in  its  root.  The  smallest  force  can  crush  it,  the  faintest  blight  can  destroy 
it.  Its  slenderness  may  have  one  advantage — there  is  only  a  small  quantity  of  the 
storm  that  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it  compared  with  what  would  be  if  it  were 
broader,  taller,  and  more  massive.  (4)  It  is  hopeful  as  to  future  prospects.  As  days 
and  nights  revolve  it  will  take  deeper  root,  and  spread  its  offshoots  on  every  hand. 
Its  appearance  is  a  promise,  and  its  feebleness,  with  careful  attention  to  the  order 
of  its  life,  will  gain  strength  and  tallness.  Take  care  of  the  convictions,  the  aspira- 
tions, the  promises,  and  the  small  expressions  of  goodness  and  godliness  in  life ; 
they  are  the  blades  of  true  and  Christian  life.  2.  Then  the  ear.  This  is  the  middle 
stage  of  Christian  life.  (1)  This  shows  a  life  partially  developed.  It  has  not 
reached  its  intended  ultimate  end,  but  has  made  considerable  progress  towards  it. 
The  dangers  which  surround  the  beginning  of  life  are  overcome.  (2)  It  is  a  life 
partly  consolidated  in  strength  and  maturity.  It  is  not  so  strong  as  to  be  out  of 
danger,  it  is  not  so  complete  as  to  be  perfect ;  yet  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  many  of 
the  smaller  forces  which  once  threatened  its  life  and  growth,  and  is  also  in  a  fair 
way  of  reaching  the  higher  perfection  which  it  aspires  after.  (3)  It  is  a  life  of 
greater  testedness  than  that  of  the  blade.  It  has  stood  the  test  of  storms  and 
frosty  nights ;  and  in  the  midst  and  through  them  all  it  has  grown,  and  stands  fair 
for  a  brighter  and  richer  future  still.  (4)  It  is  a  life  in  active  progress.  It  is  a  life 
of  history.  It  is  a  life  of  experience.  8.  The  full  com  in  the  ear.  (1)  It  is /i  con- 
dition of  substantial  possession.  It  is  not  a  life  of  uncertain  promise,  which  may 
never  be  fulfilled,  but  of  reality  and  substance.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  outward  form, 
but  one  of  precious  value — the  ear  is  full  of  com.  It  ia  a  life  of  weight,  of  value, 
and  of  fitness.     (2)  It  is  a  stage  of  maturity.     The  oi^ans  are  fully  developed,  and 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  vi^ 

the  end  is  fully  obtained.  It  comes  up  to  the  expectation  of  the  proprietor.  (3)  It 
is  a  state  of  triumph.  All  inherent  weakness  has  been  conquered,  and  a  mature  life 
has  been  gained.  Such  a  life  is  worth  the  aim  and  effort ;  it  is  the  end  of  all  agents 
and  means  of  God's  grace  and  providence.  4.  It  is  intended  to  show  us  a  life  having 
answered  its  right  end.  The  end  of  all  toil  and  culture  was  to  make  it  full  and  rich 
in  the  ear ;  that  period  has  arrived  without  a  failure,  and  all  rejoice  in  the  fact. 
Such  a  life  is  the  highest  thing  possible,  for  there  is  nothing  better  for  us  than  to 
answer  the  end  of  the  Divine  plan  of  wisdom  and  goodness.  II.  The  prooeess  of 
Chkistian  life.  Divine  order  is  one  of  progress.  Among  finite  imperfect  beings, 
this  is  a  necessity  in  law,  and  a  kindness  in  provision.  We  are  born  infants,  and 
we  gain  strength  and  knowledge  by  gradual  progression.  1.  It  is  a  progress  by 
events.  Sometimes  there  is  a  discovery  made  which  reveals  more  in  an  hoar  than 
otherwise  in  an  age.  We  on  a  sudden  rise  to  the  top  of  some  sunny  mountain, 
and  see  more  by  that  event  than  all  the  travel  in  the  valley  below  would  have  shown 
TIB  all  our  life — the  haziness  is  removed  from  the  vision  in  one  moment  by  the  re- 
velation of  events,  and  we  become  truer,  stronger,  and  happier,  as  by  the  magic  of 
lightning.  The  peeping  of  the  blade  through  the  earth,  the  forming  of  the  ear,  and 
the  filling  of  the  ear,  are  events  in  the  plant  which  show  its  advancement,  as  well 
as  being  the  means  of  its  progress.  Birth,  in  our  natural  life,  is  an  event  of  amazing 
progress ;  so  is  the  quickening  of  our  moral  sentiments  in  our  religious  life ;  and 
often  the  reading  of  a  book,  the  intercourse  with  a  superior  friend,  or  entrance  into 
a  school,  become  the  greatest  possible  events  in  our  mental  life.  Nature  is  full  of 
eyents,  bo  is  religion.  They  break  the  monotony  of  life,  and  give  freshness  and 
force  to  the  general  and  common  in  existence,  so  as  to  make  them  varied  and  attrao« 
live.  Let  us  not  think  that  they  are  not  of  Divine  ordination  by  reason  that  they 
are  only  rare  and  occasional ;  they  have  their  class,  laws,  and  work,  as  much  as  the 
common  in  every  day's  transaction.  2.  It  is  a  progress  of  law  and  order.  Progress 
is  only  possible  by  law ;  the  thing  that  does  not  advance  by  law  is  a  retrogression. 
We  may  not  be  able  to  understand  all  in  the  law  of  life,  but  we  can  follow  it,  for 
that  is  both  our  duty  and  privilege  alike.  The  law  of  progress  is  within  the  reach 
of  the  babe ;  by  submitting  to  it  he  advances  into  true  manhood.  It  is  the  fixing 
of  the  Boul  upon  high  objects,  using  all  means  given  ns  for  that  end,  and  unyielding 
perseverance  in  the  apphcation.  8.  It  is  a  progress  through  opposing  forces  and 
difficulties.  Nothing  escapes  the  opposing  powers  of  life.  If  the  little  blade  could 
give  us  the  history  of  days  and  nights,  oh  1  what  a  story  of  difficulties  and  dangers 
would  it  tell  ns  1  Can  sinful  man  expect  to  advance  more  easily  than  the  beautiful 
flower  or  the  innocent  blade  ?  Human  nature  is  weedy  and  thorny,  a  yery  uncon- 
genial soil  for  the  seed  of  life.  4.  It  is  a  progress  in  itself  imperceivable  in  its 
actual  process.  The  growth  of  the  blade  is  not  seen  in  itself,  it  is  only  seen  at  dif- 
ferent epochs.  6.  It  is  a  progress  hidden  in  mystery.  We  speak  of  things  as  if  we 
knew  them,  whereas  we  faiow  very  Httle  more  than  their  existence  and  their  names. 
No  physiologist  can  explain  all  the  laws  of  life  and  growth  in  the  plant ;  and  it 
can  be  no  amazement  if  we  know  as  little  in  the  greater  thing  of  spiritual  life  in 
the  soul.  6.  It  is  a  progress  of  gradual,  slow  development.  The  plant  does  not 
reach  its  maturity  in  one  hour,  but  it  is  the  growth  of  different  seasons,  treatment, 
night  and  day,  weeks  and  months.  Good  culture  can  only  bring  it  forward  more 
rapidly,  and  produce  a  better  quality ;  it  cannot  alter  the  law  of  gradual  advance- 
ment. Slow  and  gradual  development  of  Christian  life  in  our  heart  and  practice 
eorresponds  with  our  powers  to  bear  and  to  do.  If  it  were  all  at  once,  we  could  not 
bear  it ;  also  its  educational  power  over  our  patience  and  hope  would  be  of  little 
value,  as  well  as  the  perpetual  enjoyment  which  it  throws  over  the  whole  period  of 
gradual  growth.  It  is  dependent  upon  our  activity,  and  if  we  acted  more  earnestly 
it  would  be  much  faster  in  growth  than  it  is ;  but  if  we  acted  to  the  top  of  our 
strength,  used  all  means,  and  failed  in  nothing,  it  would  be  still  an  advancement  by 
degrees.  If  we  are  slow  in  the  cUmbing,  we  have  time  to  reflect  and  gain  wisdom 
as  we  proceed ;  if  it  is  gradual  and  tedious,  we  get  more  consolidated  in  the  growth 
and  soil.  Let  us  not  be  discouraged ;  this  is  not  an  exception  in  our  spiritual  Ufe, 
it  is  the  law  in  other  matters  much  the  same.  The  organs  of  our  bodies,  the  powers 
of  our  minds,  reach  their  full  height  and  maturity  little  by  little.  The  great  build- 
ing is  reared  by  Blow  and  gradual  advancement,  and  the  tall  and  broad  oak  reaches 
its  climax  maturity  through  very  slow  degrees.  We  have  no  reason  to  be  discouraged ; 
law  is  safe  and  sure ;  it  is  as  faithful  in  the  slow  process  as  it  is  in  the  event  of  the 
faster  advancement.  We  have  nothing  to  fear  apart  from  ourselves ;  enough  for  us 
to  know  that  it  will  be  finished  in  due  time  if  we  fail  not  to  give  all  diligence  to 


OHAP.  rr.^  8T,  MARK,  161 

geonre  the  happy  result.    HE.  Thb  coin>moNAJi  laws  of  Ghbistiam  lite,  bequxbbs 

IK  BVEBT  8TA.GE  OF  ITS  ADVANCEMENT,  AND  INVOLVED  EVEN  IN  THE  FACT  OF  ITS  EXIBTBNOa. 

1.  One  condition  in  the  life  and  growth  of  the  plant  is,  there  must  be  vital  seed.  No 
one  with  experience  thinks  of  planting  lifeless  particles,  for  experience  and  reason 
unite  to  proclaim  it  hopeless  and  nseless.  A  mere  form  or  appearance  of  life  is  not 
sufficient ;  it  must  be  real  in  the  heart  of  the  seed  to  give  life  to  the  plant.  Chris- 
tian truth  in  its  right  relation  is  life,  and  thus  planted  and  cultivated,  produces  life 
in  the  believing  mind  and  heart  that  receives  it.  2.  Another  condition  in  the  order 
of  law  is,  there  must  be  a  proper  soil  to  receive  the  seed.  To  receive  the  seed  of 
life,  there  is  a  fit  soil  required  in  our  mind,  heart,  and  conscience.  3.  Another 
law  in  the  growth  of  the  plant  is  the  one  of  means.  The  plant  you  must  cultivate, 
or  it  will  decline  into  feebleness,  and  will  die.  You  must  water  its  root,  remove  de- 
structive weeds  from  communion  with  it,  take  away  the  thing  that  shades  it,  and 
sometimes  yon  must  prop  it ;  these  are  the  means  of  law  and  life,  and  you  never 
say  they  are  hard  and  unreasonable ;  you  think  yourself  sufficiently  rewarded  for 
all  in  being  able  to  preserve  the  life  of  the  plant.  Think  not  that  spiritual  life 
requires  less  at  your  hands  than  that  of  the  plant.  4.  Another  law  in  the  advance- 
ment of  life,  both  of  the  plant  and  Christian,  is  variety  in  unity  of  operation.  Be< 
fore  a  little  plant  can  Uve  and  grow,  you  must  have  combination  of  elements 
operating  in  beautiful  harmony  for  the  purpose.  The  wind  must  blow,  the  rain 
must  fall ;  light,  heat,  and  gases  must  meet  in  nice  equality  and  harmonious  acti- 
vity. The  absence  of  one  would  make  the  process  imperfect ;  even  an  inequality 
would  impair  the  total  result  of  the  whole.  The  law  applicable  to  the  plant  is  ana- 
logically the  same  in  Christian  life.  As  in  the  life  of  the  plant,  so  there  are  various 
elements  and  agencies  required  to  sustain  and  carry  on  the  process  of  Christian  life 
to  its  full  beauty  and  perfection.  Light,  faith,  love,  hope,  patience,  action,  com- 
munion, perseverance,  and  sacrifice,  must  be  united  in  the  delicate  and  important 
woiiE  of  the  building  up  of  Christian  life.  6.  Another  law  in  the  economy  of  Life 
is  active  exercise.  Life  is  an  active  thing ;  it  is  preserved  and  advanced  by  nn- 
oeasing  activity.  To  preserve  Christian  life  in  full  and  healthy  vigour,  the  whole 
soul  must  be  in  full  exercise.  6.  Another  condition  I  shall  just  name — something 
supernatural,  and  above  and  behind  life,  is  required  for  its  existence  and  growth.  Life 
in  the  plant,  as  well  as  in  the  heart,  is  incapable  of  producing  itself,  and  the  source  of 
it  must  be  above  and  independent  of  the  means  which  produce  and  sustain  it.  (7. 
Hiighei.)  What  the  farm  labourers  can  do  and  what  they  cannot  do: — L  We  shall, 
first,  learn  from  our  text  what  we  can  do  and  what  ws  cannot  do.  "So  is  the  king- 
dom of  God,  as  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the  ground : "  this  the  gracious 
worker  can  do.  •*  And  the  seed  should  spring  and  grow  up,  he  knoweth  not  how : " 
this  is  what  he  cannot  do :  seed  once  sown  is  beyond  human  jurisdiction,  and  man 
can  neither  make  it  spring  nor  grow.  Notice,  then,  that  we  can  sow.  Any  man 
who  has  received  the  knowledge  of  the  grace  of  God  in  his  heart  can  teach  others. 
We  need  never  quarrel  with  God  because  we  cannot  do  everything,  if  He  only 
permits  us  to  do  this  one  thing ;  for  sowing  the  good  seed  is  a  work  which  will  need 
all  our  wit,  our  strength,  our  love,  our  care.  Still,  wise  sowers  discover  favourable 
opportunities  for  sowing,  and  gladly  seize  upon  them.  This  seed  should  be  sown 
often,  for  many  are  the  foes  of  the  wheat,  and  if  you  repeat  not  your  sowing  you 
may  never  see  a  harvest.  The  seed  must  be  sown  everywhere,  too,  for  there  are  no 
ohoice  corners  of  the  world  that  you  can  afford  to  let  alone,  in  the  hope  that 
they  will  be  self -productive.  You  may  not  leave  the  rich  and  intelligent  under  the 
notion  that  surely  the  gospel  will  be  found  among  them,  for  it  is  not  so  :  the  pride 
of  life  leads  them  away  from  God.  You  may  not  leave  the  poor  and  illiterate,  and 
say,  •♦  Surely  they  will  of  themselves  feel  their  need  of  Christ"  I  have  heard  that 
Captain  Cook,  the  celebrated  circumnavigator,  in  whatever  part  of  the  earth  he 
landed,  took  with  him  a  little  packet  of  English  seeds,  and  scattered  them  in  suit- 
able  places.  He  would  leave  the  boat  and  wander  up  from  the  shore.  He  said 
nothing,  but  quietly  scattered  the  seeds  wherever  he  went,  so  that  he  belted  the 
world  with  the  flowers  and  herbs  of  his  native  land.  Imitate  him  wherever  yon 
go  ;  sow  spiritual  seed  in  every  place  that  your  foot  shall  tread  upon.  Let  us  now 
think  of  what  you  cannot  do.  You  cannot,  after  the  seed  has  left  your  hand,  cause 
it  to  put  forth  life.  I  am  sure  you  cannot  make  it  grow,  for  you  do  not  know  how 
it  grows.  The  text  saith,  "  And  the  seed  should  spring  and  grow  up,  he  knoweth 
not  how."  That  which  is  beyond  the  range  of  our  knowledge  is  certainly  beyond 
the  reach  of  our  power.  Can  you  make  a  seed  germinate  f  Certainly  this  is  true 
of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  life  of  God  in  the  heart    It  enters  the  soul,  and 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

roots  itself  we  know  not  bow.  Naturally  men  hate  the  Word,  but  it  enters  and  it 
changes  their  hearts,  so  that  they  come  to  love  it ;  yet  we  know  not  bow.  Their 
whole  nature  is  renewed,  so  that  instead  of  producing  sin  it  yields  repentance,  faith, 
and  love ;  bat  we  know  not  how.  How  the  Spirit  of  God  deals  with  the  mind  ol 
man,  how  He  creates  the  new  heart  and  the  right  spirit,  how  we  are  begotten  again 
unto  a  lively  hope,  we  cannot  tell.  II.  Our  second  head  is  like  unto  the  first,  and 
consists  of  WHAT  WE  CAN  KNOW  AND  WHAT  WE  CANNOT  KNOW.  First,  what  WB  cau 
know.  We  can  know  when  we  have  sown  the  good  seed  of  the  Word  that  it  will 
grow ;  for  God  has  promised  that  it  shall  do  so.  Moreover,  the  earth,  which  is 
here  the  type  of  the  man,  "  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herself."  We  must  mind  what 
we  are  at  in  expounding  this,  for  human  hearts  do  not  produce  faith  of  themselves; 
they  are  as  hard  rock  on  which  the  seed  perishes.  But  it  means  this — that  as  the 
earth  under  the  blessing  of  the  dew  and  the  rain  is,  by  God's  secret  working  upon 
it,  made  to  take  up  and  embrace  the  seed,  so  the  heart  of  man  is  made  ready  to 
receive  and  enfold  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  within  itself.  Man's  awakened  heart 
wants  exactly  what  the  Word  of  God  supplies.  Moved  by  a  divine  influence  the  soul 
embraces  the  truth,  and  is  embraced  by  it,  and  so  the  truth  lives  in  the  heart,  and 
is  quickened  by  it.  Man's  love  accepts  the  love  of  God ;  man's  faith  wrought  in 
tiim  by  the  Spirit  of  God  believes  the  truth  of  God ;  man's  hope  wrought  in  him  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  lays  hold  upon  the  things  revealed,  and  so  the  heavenly  seed  grows 
in  the  soil  of  the  soul.  The  life  comes  not  from  you  who  preach  the  Word,  but  it 
is  placed  within  the  Word  which  you  preach  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  life  is 
not  in  your  hand,  but  in  the  heart  which  is  led  to  take  hold  upon  the  truth  by 
the  Spirit  of  God.  Salvation  comes  not  from  the  personal  authority  of  the 
preacher,  but  through  the  personal  conviction,  personal  faith,  and  personal 
love  of  the  hearer.  So  much  as  this  we  may  know,  and  is  it  not  enough  for  all 
practical  purposes  ?  Still,  there  is  a  something  which  we  cannot  know,  a  secret 
into  which  we  cannot  pry.  I  repeat  what  I  have  said  before :  you  cannot  look  into 
men's  inward  parts  and  see  exactly  how  the  truth  takes  hold  upon  the  heart,  or  the 
heart  takes  hold  upon  the  truth.  Many  have  watched  their  own  feelings  till  they 
have  become  blind  with  despondency,  and  others  have  watched  the  feelings  of  the 
yikung  till  they  have  done  them  rather  harm  than  good  by  their  rigorous  supervision. 
In  God's  work  there  is  more  room  for  faith  than  for  sight.  The  heavenly  seed 
grows  secretly.  III.  Thirdly,  our  text  tells  us  what  wb  may  expect  ip  we  wobk 
FOB  God,  and  what  we  may  not  expect.  According  to  this  parable  we  may  expect 
to  see  fruit.  But  we  may  not  expect  to  see  all  the  seed  which  we  sow  spring  up  the 
moment  we  sow  it.  We  are  also  to  expect  to  see  the  good  seed  grow,  but  not  always 
after  our  fashion.  Like  children  we  are  apt  to  be  impatient.  Your  little  boy  sowed 
mustard  and  cress  yesterday  in  his  garden.  This  afternoon  Johnny  will  be  turning 
over  the  ground  to  see  if  the  seed  is  growing.  There  is  no  probability  that  his 
mustard  and  cress  will  come  to  anything,  for  he  will  not  let  it  alone  long  enough 
for  it  to  grow.  So  is  it  with  hasty  workers ;  they  must  see  the  result  of  the  gospel 
directly,  or  else  they  distrust  the  blessed  Word.  Certain  preachers  are  in  such  a 
hurry  that  they  will  allow  no  time  for  thought,  no  space  for  counting  the  cost,  no 
opportunity  for  men  to  consider  their  ways  and  turn  to  the  Lord  with  full  purpose 
of  heart.  All  other  seeds  take  time  to  grow,  but  the  seed  of  the  Word  must  grow 
before  the  speaker's  eyes  like  magic,  or  he  thinks  nothing  has  been  done.  Such 
good  brethren  are  so  eager  to  produce  blade  and  ear  there  and  then,  that  they  roast 
their  seed  in  the  fire  of  fanaticism,  and  it  perishes.  We  may  expect  also  to  see  the 
seed  ripen.  Our  works  will  by  God's  grace  lead  up  to  real  faith  in  those  He  hath 
wrought  upon  by  his  Word  and  Spirit ;  but  we  must  not  expect  to  see  it  perfect  at 
first.  How  many  mistakes  have  been  made  here.  Here  is  a  young  person  under 
impression,  and  some  good,  sound  brother  talks  with  the  trembling  beginner,  and 
asks  profound  questions.  He  shakes  his  experienced  head,  and  knits  his  furrowed 
brows.  He  goes  into  the  corn-field  to  see  how  the  crops  are  prospering,  and  though 
it  is  early  in  the  year,  he  laments  that  he  cannot  see  an  ear  of  com  ;  indeed,  he 
perceives  nothing  but  mere  grass.  "  I  cannot  see  a  trace  of  corn,*'  says  he.  No, 
brother,  of  course  you  cannot ;  for  you  will  not  be  satisfied  with  the  blade  as  an 
evidence  of  life,  but  must  insist  upon  seeing  everything  at  full  growth  at  once.  If 
you  had  looked  for  the  blade  you  would  have  found  it;  and  it  woiild  have  encouraged 
you.  For  my  own  part,  I  am  glad  even  to  perceive  a  faint  desire,  a  feeble  longing, 
•  degree  of  uneasiness,  or  a  measure  of  weariness  of  sin,  or  a  craving  after  mercy. 
Will  it  not  be  wise  for  you,  also,  to  allow  tilings  to  begin  at  the  beginning,  and  to 
be  satisfied  with  their  being  small  at  the  first  ?    See  the  blade  of  desire,  and  then 


CHAP.  IV.  J  ST.  MARK.  16« 

watch  for  more.  Soon  you  shall  see  a  little  more  than  desire ;  for  there  shall  be 
conviction  and  resolve,  and  after  that  a  feeble  faith,  small  as  a  mustard  seed,  bat 
bound  to  grow.  Do  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things.  lY.  Under  the  last  head 
we  shall  consider  what  sleep  wobkebs  mat  take,  and  what  thet  mat  not  takb  ; 
for  it  is  said  of  this  sowing  man,  that  he  sleeps  and  rises  night  and  day,  and  the 
seed  springs  and  grows  up  he  knoweth  not  how.  But  how  may  a  good  workman 
for  Christ  lawfully  go  to  sleep  ?  I  answer,  first,  he  may  sleep  the  sleep  of  restful- 
ness  born  of  confidence.  Also  take  that  sleep  of  joyful  expectancy  which  leads  to 
a  happy  waking.  Take  your  rest  because  you  have  consciously  resigned  your  work 
into  God's  hands.  But  do  not  sleep  the  sleep  of  unwatchfulness.  A  farmer  sows 
his  seed,  but  he  does  not  therefore  forget  it.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  On  the 
analogies  which  obtain  between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  husbandry : — A 
man  may  be  qualified  for  practically  carrying  forward  a  process,  of  whose  hidden 
steps  and  of  whose  internal  workings  he  is  most  profoundly  ignorant.  This  is  true 
in  manufactures.  It  is  true  in  the  business  of  agriculture.  And  it  holds  eminently 
true  in  the  business  of  education.  How  many  are  the  efficient  artizans,  for  example, 
in  whose  hands  you  may  at  all  times  count  on  a  right  and  prosperous  result ;  but 
who  are  utterly  in  the  dark  as  to  the  principles  of  that  chemistry  in  their  respective 
arts  by  the  operation  of  which  the  result  is  arrived  at.  And  how  many  a  plough- 
man, who  knows  best  how  to  prepare  the  ground,  and  who  knows  best  how  to  deposit 
the  seed  for  the  object  of  a  coming  harvest ;  and  yet,  if  questioned  upon  the  arcana 
of  physiology,  or  of  those  secret  and  intermediate  changes  by  which  the  grain  in  the 
progress  of  vegetable  growth  is  transformed  into  a  complete  plant  ripened  and  ready 
for  the  use  of  man,  would  reply,  in  the  language  of  my  text,  that  he  knoweth  not 
how.  And,  in  like  manner,  there  is  many  a  vigorous  and  successful  educationist, 
who  does  come  at  the  result  of  good  scholarship,  whether  in  Christianity  or  in 
common  learning — and  that  without  ever  theorizing  on  the  latent  and  elementary 
principles  of  the  subject  upon  which  he  operates — without  so  much  as  casting  one 
glance  at  the  science  of  metaphysics — a  science  more  inscrutable  still  than  that  of 
physiology ;  and  which,  by  probing  into  the  mysteries  of  the  human  spirit,  would 
fain  discover  how  it  is  that  a  truth  is  first  deposited  there  by  communication,  and 
then  takes  root  in  the  memory,  and  then  warms  into  an  impression,  and  then  forms 
into  a  sentiment,  and  then  ripens  into  a  purpose,  and  then  comes  out  to  visible 
observation  in  an  effect  or  a  deed  or  a  habit  of  actual  performance.  There  are 
thousands  who,  in  the  language  of  our  text,  know  not  how  all  this  comes  about, 
and  yet  have,  in  point  of  fact  and  of  real  business,  set  the  process  of  it  effectively 
agoing.  We  cannot  afford  at  present  to  trace  all  the  analogies  which  obtain  between 
a  plant  from  the  germination  of  its  seed,  and  a  Christian  from  the  infancy  of  his 
first  principles.  We  shall,  in  the  first  place,  confine  ourselves  to  one  or  two  of  these 
analogies ;  and,  secondly,  endeavour  to  show  how  some  of  what  may  be  called  the 
larger  operations  of  Christian  philanthropy  admit  of  having  a  certain  measure  of 
light  thrown  upon  them,  by  the  comparison  which  is  laid  before  us  in  this  parable 
between  the  work   of  a  teacher  and   the  work  of   a  husbandman.     L  In  the 

AGBICULTUBAIi  PBOCESS  THERE  IS  MUCH  THAT  IS  LEFT  TO  BE  DONE  BT  NaTUBE,  AND  IN  A 
WAT   THAT   THE   WORKMAN   KNOWETH   NOT  HOW  ;    NOB  IS  IT  AT  ALL  NECESSABT  THAT  HE 

SHOULD.  He  puts  forth  his  hand  and  sets  a  mechanism  agoing — the  principles  of 
which  he,  with  his  head,  is  wholly  unable  to  comprehend.  The  doing  of  his  part  is 
indispensable,  but  his  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  Nature  doeth  her  part  is  not 
indispensable.  Now,  it  is  even  so  in  the  work  of  spiritual  husbandry.  There  is  an 
obvious  part  of  it  that  is  done  by  the  agency  of  man ;  and  there  is  a  hidden  part  of 
it  which  is  independent  of  that  agency.  What  more  settled  and  reposing  than  the 
faith  which  a  husbandman  has  in  the  constancy  of  Nature.  He  knows  not  how  it 
is ;  but,  on  the  strength  of  a  gross  and  general  experience,  he  knows  that  so  it  is. 
And  it  were  well  in  a  Christian  teacher  to  imitate  this  confidence.  There  is  in  it 
both  the  wisdom  of  experience  and  the  sublime  wisdom  of  piety.  But,  again,  it  is 
the  work  of  the  husbandman  to  cast  the  seed  into  the  ground.  It  is  not  his  work 
manufacture  the  seed.  This  were  wholly  above  him  and  beyond  him.  In  like 
anner,  to  excogitate  and  to  systematize  the  truths  which  we  are  afterwards  to 
deposit  in  the  minds  of  those  who  are  submitted  to  our  instruction,  were  a  task 
beyond  the  faculties  of  man.  These  truths,  therefore,  are  provided  to  his  hand. 
What  his  eye  could  not  see,  nor  his  ear  hear,  has  been  brought  within  his  reach  by 
a  communication  from  heaven;  and  to  him  nothing  is  left  but  a  simple  acquiescence 
in  his  Bible,  and  a  faithful  exposition  of  it.  Our  writers  upon  education  may  have 
done  something.     They  may  have  scattered  a  few  s  perficial  elegancies  over  tha 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

faoe  of  Bociety,  and  taught  the  lovely  daughters  of  acoomplishment  how  to  walk  in 
gracefulness  their  little  hour  over  a  paltry  and  perishable  scene.  But  it  is  only  in 
as  far  as  tbey  deal  in  the  truths  and  lessons  of  the  Bible  that  they  rear  any  plants 
for  heaven,  or  can  carry  forward  a  single  pupil  to  the  bloom  and  the  vigour  of 
immortality.  And  as  we  have  not  to  manufacture  a  seed  for  the  operations  of  our 
spiritual  husbandry,  so  neither  have  wo  to  mend  it.  It  is  not  fit  that  the  wisdom 
of  God  should  thus  be  intermeddled  with  by  the  wisdom  of  man.  But  again — we 
do  not  lose  sight  of  the  analogy  which  there  is  between  the  work  of  a  spiritual  and 
that  of  a  natural  husbandman — when,  after  having  affirmed  the  indispensableness 
of  casting  into  the  ground  of  the  human  heart  the  pure  and  the  simple  Word,  we 
further  affirm  the  indispensableuess  and  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  Even  after  that,  in 
the  business  of  agriculture,  man  hath  performed  his  handiwork  by  depositing  the 
seed  in  the  earth — he  should  acknowledge  the  handiwork  of  God,  in  those  high  and 
hidden  processes,  whether  of  the  atmosphere  above  or  of  the  vegetable  kingdom 
below,  which  he  can  neither  control  nor  comprehend.  By  the  work  of  diUgenoe 
which  he  does  with  his  hand,  he  fulfils  man's  parts  of  the  operation.  By  the  prayer 
of  dependence  which  arises  from  his  heart,  he  does  homage  and  recognition  to 
God's  part  of  it.  And  we  are  not  to  imagine  that  prayer  is  without  effect,  even  in 
the  processes  of  the  natural  economy.  The  same  God  who  framed  and  who  organized 
our  great  mundane  system  has  never  so  left  it  to  the  play  and  the  impulses  of  its 
own  mechanism  as  to  have  resigned  even  for  one  moment  that  mastery  over  it  which 
belongs  to  Him ;  but  He  knows  when  to  give  that  mysterious  touch,  by  which  He 
both  answers  prayer,  and  disturbs  not  the  harmony  of  the  universe  which  He  has 
formed.  It  is  when  man  aspires  upwards  after  fellowship  with  God,  and  looks  and 
longs  for  the  communications  of  light  and  of  power  from  the  sanctuary — it  is  then 
that  God  looks  with  fondest  complacency  upon  man,  and  lets  willingly  downward 
all  the  treasures  of  grace  upon  his  soul.  It  is  said  of  Ehjah  that,  when  he  prayed, 
the  heaven  gave  rain  and  the  earth  brought  forth  her  fruit.  II.  We  now  come  to 
the  second  thing  proposed,  which  was  to  show  how  sous  or  what  mat  be  called 

THE  LABGEE  OPEBATIONS  OP  CHRISTIAN  PHILANTHEOPT  ADMIT  OF  A  CERTAIN  MEASURE  OP 
LIGHT  BEIKG  THROWN  UPON  THEM  BY  THE  COMPARISON  MADE  IN  THIS  PARABLE  BETWEEN 
THE  WORE  OF  A  CHRISTIAN   TEACHER  AND   THE  WORK  OP  A  HUSBANDMAN.       And  first,  it 

may  evince  to  us  the  efficacy  of  that  Christian  teaching,  which  is  sometimes  under- 
taken by  men  in  humble  life  and  of  the  most  ordinary  scholarship.  Let  them  have 
but  understanding  enough  for  the  great  and  obvious  simplicities  of  the  Bible,  and 
let  them  have  grace  enough  for  devout  and  depending  prayer ;  and,  on  the  strength 
cf  these  two  properties,  they  are  both  wise  unto  salvation  for  themselves,  and  may 
become  the  instruments  of  winning  the  souls  of  others  also.  It  is  well  for  the 
families  of  our  land  that  the  lessons  of  eternity  can  fall  with  effect  even  from  the 
lips  of  the  cottage  patriarch.  But  this  brings  us  to  the  last  of  those  analogies 
between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  husbandry  which  we  shall  at  present  be  able 
to  overtake — an  analogy  not  certainly  suggested  by  the  text,  but  still  close  enough 
for  the  illustration  of  all  which  we  can  now  afford  to  say  in  defence  of  those 
parochial  establishments  which  have  done  so  much,  we  think,  both  for  the  Chris- 
tianity and  the  scholarship  of  our  people.  A  territorial  division  of  the  country  into 
parishes,  each  of  which  is  assigned  to  at  least  one  minister  as  the  distinct  and 
definite  field  of  his  spiritual  cultivation — this  we  have  long  thought  does  for  Chris- 
tianity what  is  often  done  in  agriculture  by  a  system  of  irrigation.  You  are  aware 
what  is  meant  by  this.  Its  use  is  for  the  conveyance  and  the  distribution  of  water» 
that  indispensable  sJiment  to  all  vegetation  over  the  surface  of  the  land.  It  is 
thus,  for  example,  that  by  the  establishment  of  ducts  of  conveyance  the  waters 
of  the  Nile  are  made  to  overspread  the  farms  of  Egypt — the  country  through 
which  it  passes.  This  irrigation,  you  will  observe,  does  not  supply  the  water. 
It  only  conveys  it.  It  does  not  bring  down  the  liquid  nourishment  from  heaven. 
It  only  spreads  it  abroad  upon  the  earth.  Were  there  no  descent  of  water  from 
above,  causing  the  river  to  overflow  its  banks,  there  is  nothing  in  the  irrigation, 
with  its  then  dry  and  deserted  furrows,  which  could  avail  the  earth  that  is  below. 
On  the  other  hand,  were  there  no  irrigation,  many  would  be  the  tracts  of 
country  that  should  have  no  agriculture  and  could  bring  no  produce.  Let  not, 
therefore,  our  dependence  on  the  Spirit  lead  us  to  despise  the  machinery  of  a 
territorial  establishment,  and  neither  let  our  confidence  in  machinery  lead  na 
to  neglect  prayer  for  the  descent  of  living  water  from  on  high.  {Dr.  Chalmen.) 
Myiterious  growth: — ^We  httle  think  how  much  is  always  going  on  in  what  we  may  call 
Ihe  underground  of  life ;  and  how  much  more  we  have  to  do  with  those  secret  processes 


«BAP.  lY.]  ST.  MARK.  165 

which  nnderlie  everything,  than  might,  at  first  sight,  appear.  We  are  all  casting 
live  seeds.  Every  word,  act,  look,  goes  down  into  somebody's  mind,  and  livef 
there.  Yon  said  something — ^it  was  false.  Ton  said  it  lightly.  But  some  one 
heard  it,  and  it  lodged  in  his  mind  ;  it  was  a  seed  to  him.  It  found  something  in 
that  man's  mind  that  was  congenial  to  it ;  and  so  it  struck  a  root ;  it  ramified ; 
it  fructified.  It  led  on  to  other  thoughts ;  then  it  became  a  word  or  an  action  in  that 
man's  life ;  and  his  word  and  act  did  to  another  heart  just  what  yours  did  to  him. 
This  is  the  dark  side  of  a  grand  truth.  Now  read  the  bright  side.  "  So  is  the 
kingdom  of  God,  as  if  a  man  should  cast  seed,"  &o.  The  sower  of  this  seed  is 
properly  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but  He  uses  men.  The  truth  in  a  man's  heart 
propagates — ^but  secretly.  We  are  to  believe  in  the  independent  power  that  there 
is  in  God's  Word  to  do  its  own  work  in  a  man's  heart.  There  is  something  kindred 
between  a  particular  word  and  some  affection  or  thought  in  a  man's  mind  before 
it  can  take  effect.  Perhaps  the  word  will  incline  a  man  to  give  up  some  sin  he  has 
previously  indulged ;  may  awaken  a  sense  of  dissatisfaction  with  the  world ;  may 
beget  a  painful  sense  of  sin.  However  it  be,  there  will  be  a  great  deal  passing  in  the 
mind  which  does  not  meet  the  eye.  Fathers  and  mothers,  who  have  cast  the  early 
seed,  you  have  slept  for  very  sorrow.  You  see  nothing.  Wait  on.  The  springing 
and  the  growing  will  be  you  know  not  where,  and  you  know  not  how.  {J.  Vaughan, 
M.A.)  The  seed  growing  secretly : — 1.  God  does  His  work  silently.  2.  God  does 
His  work  slowly.  3.  God  does  His  work  surely.  Underneath  all  apparent  disasters 
His  kingdom  comes.  I.  In  expounding  this  parable  observe  that  this  law  of  God 
supposes  HUMAN  EFFOBT.  II.  It  supposes  HUMAN  CONFIDENCE  quite  as  much  aa 
human  effort.  {W.  G.  Barrett.)  Progressive  religion: — I.  God  carries  on  His 
work  of  grace  by  the  instbumentality  of  men — "  As  if  a  man  should  cast  seed." 
II.  This  work  of  grace  is  often  for  some  time  unpebceived.  Thus  the  seed  of 
Divine  grace  sown  in  the  heart  is  frequently  there  when  not  discerned.  It  is  often 
concealed  owing  to  the  gradual  and  imperceptible  manner  in  which  it  is  produced; 
by  the  privacy  of  a  man's  situation,  and  because  of  the  natural  timidity  of  his 
temper.  It  should  excite  the  prayer,  **  Let  Thy  work  appear  unto  Thy  servant," 
&c.  HI.  Where  this  work  of  grace  exists  it  must  sooner  or  later  appbab — 
"  Springeth  and  groweth  up."  IV.  It  is  obadual  in  its  growth — "  First  the  blade," 
(fee.  For  some  time  knowledge,  faith,  love,  hope,  joy,  are  small  and  feeble.  But 
gradually  the  believer  gathers  strength.  He  grows  in  knowledge  and  hatred  of  sic. 
But  let  not  the  weakest  be  discouraged ;  the  tenderness  of  Jesus  is  a  strong  conso- 
lation. V.  The  work  of  grace  is  beneficial  in  its  peesent  effects — '♦  When 
the  fruit  is  brought  forth."  The  fruit  of  piety  towards  God  and  of  usefulness  to 
men.  VI.  This  work  of  grace  is  glorious  in  its  final  result — "  Immediately  he 
putteth  in  the  sickle,  because  the  harvest  is  come."  The  gathering  of  saints  to 
heaven  is  God's  harvest.  The  value  which  God  attaches  to  His  own  people,  and 
the  tender  care  which  He  exercises  over  them.  When  this  work  is  done  they  are 
gathered  into  heaven.  1.  Has  the  Word  of  God  been  sown  in  your  hearts  7  You 
have  it  in  your  Bibles,  but  have  you  received  it  ?  2.  You  that  seem  to  receive  the 
Word,  what  evidence  have  you  of  its  growth  ?  3.  What  prospect  have  you  of  this 
glorious  result?      {T.  Kidd.)  Changes  incident  to  Christian  growth: — 1.  The 

law  of  growth  is  one  of  the  necessary  laws  of  life.  All  life  must  be  actually  grow- 
ing.  2.  That  growth  in  Christian  life  involves  changes.  Our  views  of  God  may  be 
expected  to  change  and  grow ;  of  the  relationship  between  God  and  Christ ;  of  the 
relative  importance  and  the  proportions  of  different  doctrines ;  our  views  of  God's 
Word  will  change.  But  as  these  changes  pass  over  the  growing  Christian  he  is 
often  greatly  distressed.  Be  humble,  but  do  not  fear.  Some  of  the  changes  inci- 
dent to  Christian  growth  will  affect  our  views  of  religious  duties  and  the  religious 
life.  As  we  grow  we  form  a  different  estimate  of  the  active  and  passive,  of  the 
working  and  waiting.      (R.Tuck,B.A.)  Growth  through  change: — And  this  is 

the  peculiarity  of  growth  in  animal  Ufe — it  is  growth  through  change.  Think  of 
the  silkworm.  It  is  first  a  little  egg ;  within  it  life  is  developing ;  presently  the  worm 
comes  creeping  forth  ;  again  and  again  it  casts  its  skin,  changing  until  it  passes 
into  a  state  like  death,  changing  once  more  into  a  winged  form,  full  of  beauty. 
These  growings  by  change  have  been  illustrated  from  the  peculiarities  of  the  ride 
by  railway  into  the  City  of  Edinburgh.  Sometimes  the  train  passes  through  flat, 
well-populated  country.  Sometimes  it  hurries  through  the  busy  towns,  over  which 
the  dark  smoke  hangs.  Sometimes  it  passes  amid  the  hills,  up  winding  valleys, 
and  along  the  murmuring  shores,  and  the  travellers  are  enchanted  with  varying 
•eenes  of  natural  beauty.    Presently  it  nears  its  destination,  and  rushes  screaming 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vr, 

into  the  dark  tunnel,  which  shuts  oat  all  light  and  beauty.  That  is  the  last  change, 
and  soon  it  comes  forth  into  the  North  Loch,  and  all  the  full  glory  of  that  city  of 
monuments  and  mansions  breaks  upon  the  view.  Ever  advancing,  through  changinga 
and  growings,  we,  too,  shall  come  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  to  the  city  of 
the  great  King,  and  the  full  glory  of  holiness  and  the  smile  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Soul 
life  and  growth  imperceptible  : — When  a  man  is  building  a  house  he  can  see  it  as 
it  goes  on.  That  is  an  outside  matter.  There  is  seam  after  seam,  row  after  row 
of  stone  or  brick.  Gradually  the  form  of  the  window  or  the  door  rises.  The  second 
story,  the  third  story,  the  building  up  to  the  roof  appears.  He  can  see  it  day  by 
day.  A  man  goes  into  his  garden  and  plants,  for  spring,  the  early  lettuce,  or  radish, 
or  whatever  it  may  be.  He  may  sit  up  all  night  with  spectacles  and  a  lantern,  but  he 
will  not  see  anything  going  on ;  and  yet  there  is  something  going  on  which  is 
vitally  connected  with  the  whole  operation  of  vegetable  devdopment  The  seed 
has  not  been  in  the  ground  an  hour  before  it  feels  its  outward  husk  swelling  by 
imbibing  moisture.  It  has  not  been  for  ten  hours  in  the  warm  soil  before  it  begins 
to  feel  that  the  material  in  the  seed  itself  is  chemically  affected,  changed.  Many  a 
seed  has  not  been  twenty-four  hours  in  the  ground  before  there  is  an  impulse  in  it 
at  one  end  to  thrust  down  a  root,  and  at  the  other  end  to  thrust  up  a  plumule,  or 
the  beginning  of  a  visible  stalk;  but  it  makes  no  noise.  It  is  like  Solomon's 
Temple ;  it  is  a  structure  that  is  built  without  the  sound  of  a  hammer ;  and  what- 
ever it  may  come  to,  all  the  earlier  processes  of  germination  and  development  are 
invisible  and  are  silent ;  for  if  you  take  it  out  into  the  light  it  will  not  grow.  The 
seed  needs  warmth,  moisture,  and  luminous  darkness — ^that  is  to  say,  considerable 
darkness,  and  yet  a  little  invisible  light.  So  it  is  with  the  spiritual  life.  (H.  W. 
BeecJier.)  Christian  life  long  invisible  : — I  knew  a  young  man  in  Boston,  whose 
father  was  rich.  He  had  genius,  particularly  in  the  formative,  sculptural  art ;  and 
his  amusement  was  in  making  busts  and  little  clay  statues.  One  lucky  day,  the 
father  lost  all  his  property,  and  the  young  man  was  thrown  out  of  business,  and 
had  to  work  for  his  own  livelihood.  He  had  already  made  the  busts  of  friends, 
and  when  the  motives  to  indolence  were  taken  away  from  him,  when  the  golden 
ohair  was  broken,  and  he  had  to  get  up  and  go  to  work,  he  said  to  himself,  "What 
can  I  do  for  a  living  better  than  this  ?  "  Well,  he  has  come  to  the  artist  state 
already,  unconsciously,  not  expecting  to  be  a  professional  artist,  simply  following 
his  taste ;  but  the  moment  he  puts  out  his  sign,  showing  that  he  would  like  to  have 
custom  for  the  sake  of  self-support,  then  everybody  says,  "  He  has  become  an 
artist."  He  has  been  an  artist  a  good  while,  but  it  is  just  being  developed  before 
the  public.  The  roots  of  the  thing  were  in  him  long  ago.  (Ibid.)  Moral  changes 
iometimes  unconsciously  wrought : — When  I  travelled  in  Italy  I  knew  the  line  be- 
tween Italy  and  Austria.  We  all  had  to  go  out  and  have  our  trunks  examined  and 
our  passports  vitsid.  We  were  all  of  us  hurried  out  suspiciously,  as  if  we  were  con- 
trabands. Then  we  went  over,  and  I  knew  I  was  in  Austria.  But  in  America  yon 
can  go  from  one  State  to  another,  as  there  is  no  Custom  House,  thank  God,  on  the 
lines ;  as  there  are  no  passports  required ;  as  there  is  nothing  to  interrupt  the 
journey.  You  glide  into  the  State  of  New  York  from  Connecticut,  from  New  York 
into  Pennsylvania,  and  from  Pennsylvania  into  Ohio,  and  you  do  not  think  you 
have  made  any  change  in  the  State,  though  you  have  really.^  You  bring  a  person 
np  in  Christian  nurture,  and  in  the  admonition  of  the  Lord,  in  the  household,  and 
he  is  gaining  more  light ;  he  is  adapting  the  light  which  he  has ;  and  he  comes 
into  that  state  of  mind  in  which  all  he  wants  in  order  to  realize  that  he  is  a  Chris- 
tian is  to  wake  up  into  consciousness.  (Ibid.)  The  helplessness  of  the  spiritual 
husbandman : — We  have  in  this  a  most  simple,  yet  striking,  representation  of  the 
business  and,  at  the  same  time,  of  the  helplessness  of  the  spiritual  husbandman. 
Unto  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  who  are  the  great  moral  labourers  in  the  field  of 
tJie  world,  there  is  entrusted  the  task  of  preparing  the  soil  and  of  casting  in  the 
seed.  And  if  they  bring  to  this  task  all  the  fidelity  and  all  the  diligence  of  intent 
and  single-eyed  labourers ;  if  they  strive  to  make  ready  the  ground  by  leading  men 
to  clear  away  the  weeds  of  an  unrighteous  practice,  and  to  apply  the  spade  and 
ploughshare  of  a  resistance  to  evil,  and  a  striving  after  good  ;  and  if,  then,  by  a 
faitliful  publication  of  the  grand  truths  of  the  gospel,  they  throw  in  the  seed  of 
the  Word,  they  have  reached  the  boundary  of  their  office  and  also  of  their  strength ; 
and  are  to  the  full  as  powerless  to  the  making  the  seed  germinate,  and  send  forth 
a  harvest,  as  the  husbandman  to  the  causing  the  valleys  to  stand  thick  with  com. 
And,  indeed,  in  the  spiritual  agriculture,  the  power  of  the  husbandman  is  even 
more  circumscribed  than  in  the  natural.    With  all  the  pains  with  which  a  minister 


CHAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK.  161 

of  Christ  may  ply  at  the  dutiea  of  his  office,  he  can  never  be  sure  that  the  ground  is 
fit  for  receiving  the  grain  :  he  must  just  do  always,  what  the  tiller  of  the  natural 
soil  is  never  reduced  to  do,  run  the  risk  of  casting  the  seed  upon  the  rock,  or  of 
leaving  it  to  be  devoured  by  the  fowls  of  the  air.  {U.  Melvill.)  Seed  growing 
though  unrecognized: — Ministers  require  to  be  very  cautious  in  judging  as  to  the 
influence  of  the  truth  among  their  hearers.  Amidst  much  that  is  externally 
unfavourable,  and  even  hostile,  that  truth  may  be  operating,  producing  con- 
viction, checking  long-cherished  sins,  and  subduing  the  pride  of  the  corrupt  heart. 
It  is  a  very  agreeable  and  self -flattering  thing  for  a  man  to  say  that  because 
religion  does  not  manifest  itself  in  other  men  in  the  same  way  it  does  in  him, 
therefore  these  people  have  no  religion.  This  is  very  common,  and  is  in  reality 
but  a  branch  of  that  master  sin  of  intolerance,  which  has  so  often  been  crushing 
all  the  charities  of  our  nature ;  and  even  amidst  the  solemnity  of  devotional  exer- 
cises, despising  and  invading  the  conventional  decencies  of  life.  Often,  when  we 
do  not  see  it,  religion  is  at  work ;  often,  when  we  never  suspected  it,  it  has  made 
considerable  progress.  Its  influence  is  sweet,  makes  no  noise,  and  has  no  ostenta- 
tious signs.  We  must  not  forget  the  mistake  of  Elijah,  a  mistake  into  which 
ministers  and  others  have  not  unfrequently  fallen.  When  he  supposed  himself  to 
stand  alone  the  defender  of  the  truth,  there  were  seven  thousand  in  Israel  doing 
daily  homage  to  it.  If  he  had  been  told  seventy,  it  would  have  been  remarkable— 
if  seven  hundred,  more  so ;  but  seven  thousand  was  altogether  astonishing.  "  The 
kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation."  In  obscure  places,  in  noiseless 
retirements,  and  without  one  arresting  sign,  the  truth  takes  effect.  The  minister 
is  not  thinking  of  it.  The  very  members  of  the  family  are  not  thinking  of  it. 
Daily  companions  and  friends  are  not  thiiiking  of  it.  There  is  no  profession,  no 
controversy,  no  street-shouts,  no  exclusiveness,  no  badges  of  partizanship ;  bat 
nevertheless,  on  the  unseen  arena  of  thought,  the  truth  is  establishing  its  power, 
achieving  its  triumphs,  subduing  desire  after  desire,  purpose  after  purpose,  and  will 
at  last  yield  peace  and  joy  unspeakable.  {Archibald  Bennie.)  Growth  unex- 
plained : — Who  shall  scrutinize  the  agency  by  which  the  Word  is  applied  to  the 
conscience  ?  Who  shall  explain  how,  after  weeks,  it  may  be,  or  months,  or  years, 
during  which  the  seed  has  been  buried,  there  will  often  unexpectedly  come  a 
moment  when  the  preached  Word  shall  rise  up  in  the  memory,  and  a  single  text, 
long  ago  heard,  and  to  all  appearance  forgotten,  overspread  the  soul  with  the  big 
thoughts  of  eternity?  It  is  a  mystery  which  far  transcends  all  our  powers  of  inves- 
tigation, how  spirit  acts  upon  spirit,  so  that  whilst  there  are  no  outward  tokens  of 
an  applied  machinery,  there  is  going  on  a  mighty  operation,  even  the  effecting  a 
moral  achievement  which  far  surpasses  the  stretch  of  all  finite  ability.  We  are  so 
accustomed  to  that  change  which  takes  place  in  a  sinner's  conversion  that  we  do 
not  ascribe  to  it  in  right  measure  its  characteristic  of  wonderful.  Yet  wonderful, 
most  wonderful  it  is — wonderful  in  the  secrecy  of  the  process,  wonderful  in  the  nature 
of  the  result !  I  can  understand  a  change  wrought  on  matter ;  I  have  no  difficulty 
in  perceiving  that  the  same  substance  may  be  presented  in  quite  a  different  aspect, 
and  that  mechanical  and  chemical  power  may  make  it  pass  through  a  long  series 
of  transformations;  but  where  is  the  mechanism  which  shall  root  from  the  heart 
the  love  of  sin  ?  where  the  chemistry  which  shall  so  sublimate  the  affections,  that 
they  will  mount  towards  God  ?  It  is  the  eternal  revolution  which  I  have  no  power 
of  scrutinizing,  except  in  its  effect.  {H.  Melvill,)  Seed  never  idle: — Though 
it  is  very  slow  and  imperceptible  in  its  growth,  still  the  seed  never  really  lies 
idle.  From  the  moment  of  its  first  start  to  its  final  ripening,  it  is  always  on 
its  way;  it  never  once  stops,  far  less  does  it  ever  go  backward.  It  can  never 
return  into  the  blade  out  of  which  it  originally  sprang;  it  cannot  even  stand 
for  long  together  without  exhibiting  decided  signs  of  its  growth.  Now  and  then, 
perhaps,  the  weather  may  be  very  much  against  it,  still  it  keeps  waiting  for  the 
first  favourable  change ;  and  as  soon  as  ever  this  appears,  it  takes  immediate  advan- 
tage of  it,  and  starts  forward  again  on  its  way.  And  so,  too,  it  is  with  the  good 
seed  in  the  heart.  Trials  and  temptations  may  check  its  growth  there  for  a  while ; 
but  it  is  only  for  a  while ;  and  at  the  first  removal,  or  lessening  of  these,  it  again 
goes  on  its  way  as  before.  It  never  goes  back  any  more  than  the  ear  goes  back  into 
the  blade  out  of  which  it  has  sprung.  It  has  but  one  way  of  growing,  and  that  ia 
heavenwards.  (H.  Harris.)  Groicth  of  seed  mysterious : — In  saying  that  the 
seed  groweth  up  we  "  know  not  how,"  the  mysterious  nature  and  working  of  grac« 
is  hinted  at.  It  is  not  regulated  by  natural  laws,  though  they  afford  many  illustra- 
tive analogies.     It  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  science,  like  agriculture  or  mechanics. 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  !▼. 

There  is  no  philosophy  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Begeneration  is  not  the  result  of  any 
forces  which  human  reason  defines  and  gauges,  much  less  controls;  and  the  Divine 
life  which  is  breathed  into  the  soul  by  the  mysterious  visitation  of  the  Spirit,  blowing 
like  the  wind,  of  which  vve  cannot  tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it  goeth,  is 
afterwards  maintained  by  supernatural  supplies  from  the  same  invisible  source,  and 
is  "hid  with  Christ  in  God."  {Josiah  D.  Smith.)  The  truth  is  God'$  seed: — 
The  one  great  consideration  to  be  kept  in  view  is,  that  the  truth  is  God's  seed.  It 
is  no  theory  or  set  of  maxims  of  man's  devising — adapted  in  the  short-sighted  calcu- 
lations of  human  reason  to  certEtin  ends ;  but  it  is  God's  selected  instrument,  and  in 
that  very  fact  we  have  at  once  obligation  and  encouragement  to  use  it.  That  moral 
world  where  its  effects  are  produced  is  His,  as  well  as  the  firmament  of  heaven,  or 
the  green  fields  of  the  earth — naked  to  His  eye,  and  subject  to  His  control.  He 
has  adapted  it  to  the  end  which  He  has  in  view — He  who  poised  the  stars  in  their 
spheres,  and  so  skilfully  adjusted  the  exquisite  mechanism  of  man,  beast,  and  bird. 
Besides,  he  has  annexed  a  Divine,  ever-active,  ever-present  agency  to  the  use  of  it. 
It  is  not  left  to  force  its  way  amidst  obstructions ;  but,  while  Providence  often 
appears  to  pioneer  its  way  into  the  hearts  of  men,  that  gracious  Spirit  which  moved 
of  old  on  the  face  of  the  waters,  goes  forth  with  it,  gives  to  its  brief  sentences  the 
power  of  thunder,  and  to  its  appeals  the  withering  force  of  the  lightning  flash,  and 
makes  it  to  revolutionize  and  transform  the  whole  inner  world  of  thought  and 
desire.  Hence  the  rapid  and  extraordinary  triumphs  with  which  it  has  glorified 
the  annals  of  the  Church ;  the  temples  of  idolatry  shaken  to  their  foundations ; 
ancient  prejudices  melted  like  wax ;  proud  passions  crushed  and  eradicated ;  super- 
stition, pleasure,  philosophy,  all  put  to  flight.  The  power  of  opinion  is  not  un- 
frequently  greatly  extolled,  and  it  is  wonderful,  A  single  truth,  clearly  announced, 
troubles  a  continent.  A  small  thought  goes  forth  from  one  man's  breast,  and 
achieves  victories  denied  to  armed  hosts  and  costly  expeditions.  But  all  the 
triumphs  of  opinion  are  a  mere  trifle  compared  with  the  triumphs  of  the  truth  of 
Ood ;  truth,  whose  banners  have  been  planted  upon  the  domes  of  heathen  temples, 
have  waved  above  the  ruins  of  thrones,  and  have  been  borne  in  bloodless  fame  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth.  This  is  the  true  seed,  of  which  the  harvest  is  eternal  life. 
{Archibald  Bennie.)  Conversion  gradmil : — Is  there  not  a  great  deal  too  much 
anxiety  to  recognize  in  conversion  something  sudden  and  surprising,  some  word  or 
thing  arresting  or  transfixing  the  soul  ?  It  is  possible  by  electricity  to  make  seeds 
suddenly  germinate  and  prematurely  grow,  but  this  is  not  healthy,  fruitful  life. 
People  want  something  like  this  in  conversion ;  they  can  hardly  believe  in  a  new 
life  unless  it  begins  thus.  Conviction  must  come  Uke  lightning — a  blaze  in  the 
midst  of  a  great  darkness.  Is  it  not  better  to  come  like  sunlight — a  gradual,  illu- 
minating, diffusive  thing  7  If  it  do  come  like  lightning,  let  us  be  thankful  that 
God  does  so  break  in  upon  the  darkness  of  our  day.  Hardened,  immoral  men  are 
sometimes  thus  smitten  to  the  earth.  More  commonly  and  more  naturally  it  comes 
like  light  ♦♦shining  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  The  pious  nurture  of 
infancy  and  childhood  deepening  the  religious  heart,  and  developing  the  religious 
life — ♦♦first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear."  But  let 
it  begin  as  it  may,  the  process  is  one  of  continuous  growth,  innocence  maturing 
into  holiness,  passion  deepening  into  principle,  struggle  developing  strength, 
laborious  act  becomes  easy  habit ;  a  gracious  mellowing  influence  permeating  and 
glorifying  the  entire  life ;  the  life  of  the  soul  growing,  not  as  a  fragile  succulent 
gourd,  but  as  a  close-grained  tree,  every  day  and  every  experience  adding  growth 
and  strength.  (H.  Allon.)  The  order  of  growth : — Not  only  does  the  corn  always 
go  on  growing,  but  it  always  observes  the  same  order  and  succession  in  its  growth ; 
♦♦  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  ear."  This  is  an  order 
which  is  never  reversed  or  altered ;  it  is  always  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  which  is 
the  last  to  show  itself.  And  so  it  is  with  the  heart.  First,  it  is  always  repen- 
tance and  sorrow  for  sin;  then,  faith  in  Jesus  Christ;  then,  without  losing 
these,  any  more  than  the  grain  loses  the  protection  of  the  blade  and  the  ear, 
it  goes  on  to  holiness  of  life,  and  a  sure  hope  in  God's  promises;  and  last  of 
all  to  love,  love  the  ripened  com,  the  fulfilling  of  the  ear.  (E.  Harrii.) 
Hope  in  spite  of  sight : — This  is  a  parable  of  hope.  It  teaches  us  to  be  hopeful 
when  nothing  hopeful  is  seen.  The  earth  which  seems  the  grave  is  really  the  cradle 
of  the  seed,  and  its  death  is  its  life.  Except  it  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it 
abideth  alone.  It  is  God's  seed,  it  suits  the  soil,  the  sunshine  and  the  shower 
favour  it,  ever  so  many  mysteries  too  great  for  me  to  grasp  are  on  its  side,  and  God 
has  promised  the  harvest.    Why  lose  heart  then  7    The  reaping  time  shaU  come  by 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  MARK,  169 


and  by.  What  though  it  seems  unlikely  ?  Look  at  that  baie,  brown  field  in 
8{)ring.  What  more  unlikely  than  that  it  shall  wave  with  golden  grain  f  Every 
harvest  is  a  perfect  miracle.  You  see  a  foolish,  wicked  boy,  into  whose  heart  a  pray- 
ing mother  has  dropped  the  good  seed.  All  seems  lost ;  but  wait,  and  he  becomes 
a  great  Christian  like  John  Newton,  like  thousands  whose  biographies  are  the  best 
commentaries  upon  this  parable,  (j.  Wells ,  M.A.)  The  young  convert : — There 
is  first  the  convert  in  the  young  days  of  his  godliness — the  green  bladeR  just  break- 
ing through  the  soil,  and  giving  witness  to  the  germination  of  the  seed.  This  is 
ordinarily  a  season  of  great  promise.  We  have  not,  and  we  look  not  for  the  rich 
fruit  of  a  matured,  well-disciplined  piety,  but  we  have  the  glow  of  verdant  profession 
— everything  looks  fresh.  The  young  believer  scarcely  calculates  on  any  interruption, 
and  as  though  there  were  no  blighting  winds,  and  no  nipping  frosts,  and  no  sweep- 
ing hail  to  be  expected,  in  the  spiritual  agriculture,  the  tender  shoot  rises  from  the 
ground,  and  glistens  in  the  sunshine.  (H.  Melvill.)  The  anxieties  of  growth  in 
the  ear : — Next  comes  the  ear ;  and  this  is  a  season  of  weariness  and  of  watching. 
Sometimes  there  will  be  long  intervals  without  any  perceptible  growth  ;  sometimes 
the  com  will  look  sickly,  as  though  blasted  by  the  mildew ;  sometimes  the  storm 
will  rush  over  it,  and  almost  level  it  with  the  earth.  All  this  takes  place  in  the 
experience  of  the  Christian.  The  spiritual  husbandman  and  the  natural  know  the 
like  anxieties  in  observing  the  ear  of  which  they  have  sown  the  seed.  How 
slow  is  sometimes  the  growth  in  grace  I  how  slight  are  the  tokens  of  life !  how 
yellow  and  how  drooping  the  com  I  The  sudden  gust  of  temptation,  the  fatal  bhght 
of  worldly  association,  the  corroding  worm  of  indwelling  corraption, — all  these 
may  tell  powerfully  and  perniciously  on  the  rising  crop,  and  cause  that  often  there 
shall  scarcely  seem  reason  to  hope  that  any  fruit  will  eventually  be  yielded.  Who 
would  recognize  in  the  lukewarm,  the  half-and-half  professor,  the  ardent,  the 
active,  and  resolute  convert  ?  Who  would  know,  in  the  stunted  shrivelled  ear,  the 
green  blade  which  had  come  up  like  an  emerald  shoot  ?  We  do  not  indeed  say,  that 
in  every  case  there  will  be  these  various  interruptions  and  declensions.  You  may 
find  instances  wherein  godliness  grows  uniformly,  and  piety  advances  steadily,  and 
even  rapidly,  towards  perfection.  The  Christian  will  sometimes  ripen  for  heaven, 
as  though,  in  place  of  being  exposed  to  cold  air,  and  wind,  and  rain,  he  had  been 
treated  as  an  exotic,  and  had  always  been  kept  under  shelter.  But,  generally,  even 
with  those  who  maintain  the  most  consistent  profession,  the  Christian  life  is  the 
scene  of  anxiety  and  uncertainty ;  and  if  it  were  not  that  there  are  gracious  promises 
assuring  them  that  **the  bruised  reed  shall  not  be  broken,  nor  the  smoking  flax 
quenched,"  often  must  the  spiritual  husbandman  mourn  bitterly  over  the  apparent 
disappointment  of  all  his  best  hopes,  and  surrender  himselif  to  the  fear,  that  when 
the  great  day  of  harvest  breaks  on  this  creation,  the  field  which  had  once  worn  that 
lovely  enamel  which  gave  such  promise  of  an  abundant  ingathering,  will  yield 
nothing  to  the  reaper  but  the  dry  and  parched  stalks,  fit  only  to  be  bound  in  bundles 
for  the  burning.    {Ibid,)  Suffering  Christians  spared :  **  Immediately  he  putteth 

in  the  sickle  "  .'^-We  must  dwell  a  moment  longer  upon  this ;  it  is  a  matter  full  of 
interest  and  instruction.  It  seems  often,  as  we  have  said,  to  excite  surprise  both  in 
the  sufferer  himself  and  in  others,  when  a  Christian,  who  has  long  been  eminent  for 
piety,  and  whose  faith  had  been  conspicuous  in  his  works,  lingers  for  months,  per- 
haps even  years,  in  wearisome  sickness,  as  though,  notwithstanding  the  preparation 
of  a  righteous  life,  he  needed  protracted  trial  to  fit  him  for  the  presence  of  God. 
But  there  is,  we  believe,  altogether  a  mistake  in  the  view  which  is  commonly  taken 
of  old  age  and  lingering  sickness.  Because  a  man  is  confined  to  his  room  or  hia 
bed,  the  idea  seems  to  be  that  he  is  altogether  useless.  In  the  ordinary  phrase,  he 
is  *•  quite  laid  by,"  as  though  he  had  no  duties  to  perform  when  he  could  no  longer 
perform  those  of  more  active  life.  Was  there  ever  a  greater  mistake  ?  The  sick 
room,  the  sick  bed,  has  its  special,  its  appropriate  duties,  duties  to  the  full  as  diffi- 
«ult,  as  honourable,  as  remunerative,  as  any  which  devolve  on  the  Christian  whilst 
yet  in  his  unbroken  strength.  They  are  not  precisely  the  same  duties  as  belong  to 
him  in  health,  but  they  ^ffer  only  by  such  difference  as  a  change  in  outward  cir- 
cumstances and  position  will  always  introduce.  The  piety  which  he  has  to  cultivate, 
the  resignation  which  he  has  to  exhibit,  the  faith  which  he  has  to  exercise,  the 
example  which  he  has  to  set — oh,  talk  not  of  the  sick  man  as  of  a  man  laid  by! 
Harder  duties,  it  may  be,  ay,  deeds  of  more  extensive  usefulness,  are  required  from 
him  who  lingers  on  the  couch,  than  from  the  man  of  health  in  the  highest  and 
most  laborious  of  Christian  undertakings.  Is  there,  then,  any  caune  for  surprise 
if  a  Christian  be  left  to  linger  in  sickness,  to  wear  away  tedious  months  in  racking 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  vr, 

pain  and  slow  decay?  Is  it  at  all  in  contradiction  to  the  saying  that  "  so  soon  as 
the  fruit  is  ripe,  immediately  he  putteth  in  the  sickle  "  ?  Not  so !  The  fruit  is  not 
necessarily  ripe ;  the  man's  work  is  not  necessarily  done,  because  he  is  what  you 
call  ♦'  laid  by,"  and  can  take  no  part  in  the  weightier  bustle  of  life.  It  is  they  who 
turn  many  to  righteousness  that  are  "  to  shine  as  stars  in  the  firmament ; "  and  is 
there  no  sermon  from  the  sick  bed  7  Has  the  sick  bed  nothing  to  do  with  publishing 
and  adorning  the  gospel?  Tea,  I  think,  then,  an  awful  and  perilous  trust  is  com- 
mitted to  the  sick  Christian — friends,  children,  neighbours,  the  church  at  large,  look 
to  him  for  some  practical  exhibition  of  the  worth  of  Christianity.  If  he  be  fretful, 
or  impatient,  or  full  of  doubts  and  fears,  they  will  say — Is  this  all  that  the  gospel 
can  do  for  a  man  in  a  season  of  extremity  ?  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  be  meek  and 
resigned,  and  able  to  testify  to  God's  faithfulness  to  his  word,  they  will  be  taught — 
and  nothing  teaches  like  example — that  Christianity  can  make  good  its  pretensions  ; 
that  it  is  a  sustaining,  an  elevating,  a  death-conquering  religion.  And  who  shall 
calculate  what  may  be  wrought  through  such  practical  exhibitions  of  the  power  and 
preciousness  of  the  gospel  ?  I,  for  one,  will  not  dare  to  afiSrm  that  more  is  done 
towards  converting  the  careless,  confirming  the  wavering,  and  comforting  the 
desponding,  by  the  bold  champions  who  labour  publicly  in  the  making  Christ 
known ;  than  by  many  a  worn-down  invalid,  who  preaches  to  a  household  or  a 
neighbourhood  by  simple  unquestioning  dependence  on  God :  I,  for  one,  can  believe 
that  he  who  dies  the  death  of  trial,  passing  almost  visibly,  whilst  yet  in  the  exercise 
of  every  energy,  from  a  high  post  of  usefulness  to  the  kingdom  of  glory,  may  have 
fewer  at  the  judgment  to  witness  to  the  success  of  his  labours,  than  many  a  bel- 
ridden  Christian,  who,  by  a  beautiful  submission,  waited,  year  after  year,  his 
snmmona  to  depart.  (Ibid.)  Originality  in  character : — We  observe  the  sacred- 
ness  of  individual  character — of  originality.  It  bears  fruit  of  itself  in  its  own 
individual  development.  The  process  is  never  exactly  repeated.  Life  is  no 
mechanical  thing.  It  is  everywhere  alike,  yet  different.  Count  the  leaves  and 
grains,  measure  the  height  of  the  trees,  examine  the  leaves  of  an  oak.  So  in  the 
Christian  life.  No  two  men  think  the  same,  or  believe  the  same.  It  is  always  so 
in  the  highest  life,  and  in  national  character.  There  is  ever  a  beautiful  diversity.  {F. 
W,  Robertson.)  Life  expansion :  — Eeal  life  is  that  which  has  in  it  a  principle  of 
expansion.  It  "  springs  and  grows  up."  Moreover,  it  is  not  only  growth,  but  ten- 
dency ever  towards  a  higher  life.  Life  has  innate  energy,  and  will  unfold  itself 
according  to  the  law  of  its  own  being.  Its  law  is  progress  towards  its  own  possible 
completeness:  such  completeness  as  its  nature  admits  of.  By  this  we  distinguish 
real  life  from  seeming  life.  As  you  cut  the  stone  and  carve  it,  so  it  remains.  But 
cut  a  tree ;  lop  off  its  branches,  strip  it ;  it  will  shoot  and  sprout.  Only  deadness 
remains  unaltered.  Trees  in  winter  all  seem  alike.  Spring  detects  life.  Man  can 
impart  motion,  and  make  automatons.  Growth  and  power  he  cannot  give.  This 
is  the  principle  of  all  life.  And  in  the  higher  life  especially  there  is  not  only  ex- 
pansion but  progress.  The  limpet  on  the  rock  only  increases  in  volume.  The 
plant  develops  into  the  flower.  The  insect  develops  from  the  egg  into  the  caterpillar, 
grows,  spins  itself  a  coffin,  and  becomes  hard  and  shelly.  But  the  life  goes  on,  and 
it  emerges  a  brilliant  butterfly.  (Ibid.)  Hardihood  of  character : — Real  life  is 
that  which  has  individual,  independent  energy :  it  "  bears  fruit  of  itself."  Observe 
its  hardihood.  It  needs  no  petting.  It  is  no  hot-house  plant.  Let  the  wild  winds 
of  heaven  blow  upon  it,  with  frost,  scorching  sun,  and  storms.  Beligion  is  not  for 
a  cloister,  but  for  life,  real  hardy  life.  Observe  Christ's  religion,  and  compare  it 
with  the  fanciful  religion  of  cloistered  men.  Religious  books  which  speak  of 
fastidious,  retiring,  feeble  delicacy.  The  best  Christianity  grows  up  in  exposure. 
The  life  of  Christ  Himself  is  an  illustration  of  this.  So  too  that  of  the  apostles  in 
the  world,  and  that  of  a  Christian  in  the  army.  Again,  it  can  be  left  to  itself  safely. 
It  will  grow.  Ministers  need  not  torment  themselves  about  the  issue  of  their  work, 
for  God  gives  the  increase.  It  can  be  left :  for  it  is  God  in  the  soul.  When  once 
the  farmer  has  sown,  he  can  do  little  more  except  weed.  {Ibid.)  The  «ar;— The 
ear.  Marked  by  vigour  and  beauty.  Vigour  :  erect,  with  decision,  fixed  principles, 
and  views.  Beauty.  Describe  the  flowering  petals,  &c.  Solemn  season.  What 
promise  1  What  thoughtfulness.  Yet  blight  is  more  frequent  now — prostration. 
{Ibid.)  Moral  ripeness : — ^Full  corn  in  the  ear.  Marked  by  maturity  and  ripeness. 
It  has  no  further  stage  of  development  on  earth.  It  must  die  and  sprout  again. 
But  its  present  work  is  done.  What  is  ripeness  ?  Completeness,  all  powers  equally 
cultivated.  It  is  the  completion  of  the  principles,  feelings,  and  tempers.  This  period 
is  also  marked  by  humility  and  by  joy.    By  humility ;  the  head  hangs  gracef  oUy 


CHAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK.  171 

down  in  token  of  ripeness ;  always  so  with  men  of  great  attainments.  **  I  am  bni 
a  little  child,"  said  Newton,  "  picking  up  pebbles  on  the  shore  of  the  vast  ocean  of 
truth."  By  joy ;  the  happy  aspect  of  waving  com  I  But  its  beauty  is  chiefly  felt 
Oy  the  thoughtful  man.  It  is  the  calm  deep  joy  of  the  harvest  being  safe,  and 
famine  impossible.  The  food  of  a  nation  waves  before  him.  (Ibid.)  Growth  in 
the  natural  and  in  the  spiritual  world: — The  analogy  between  growth  in  the 
natural  world  and  growth  in  the  spiritual  world  must  be  maintained  in  its  integrity, 
with  regard  at  once  to  spontaneity,  slowness,  and  gradation.  Growth  in  the  spiritual 
world  as  in  the  natural  is  spontaneous,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  subject  to 
definite  laws  of  the  spirit  over  which  man's  will  has  small  control.  The  fact  is  one 
to  be  recognized  with  humility  and  thankfulness.  With  humility,  for  it  teaches  de- 
pendence on  God ;  a  habit  of  mind  which  brings  along  with  it  prayerfulness,  and 
which,  as  honouring  to  God,  is  more  likely  to  insure  ultimate  success  than  a  self- 
reliant  zeal.  With  thankfulness,  for  it  relieves  the  heart  of  the  too  heavy  burden 
of  an  undefined,  unlimited  responsibility,  and  makes  it  possible  for  the  minister  of 
the  Word  to  do  his  work  cheerfully,  in  the  morning  sowing  the  seed,  in  the  evening 
withholding  not  his  hand ;  then  retiring  to  rest  to  enjoy  the  sound  sleep  of  the 
labouring  man,  while  the  seed  sown  springs  and  grows  apace,  he  knoweth  not  how. 
Growth  in  the  spiritual  world,  as  in  the  natural,  is,  further,  a  process  which  demands 
time  and  gives  ample  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  patience.  Time  must  elapse  even 
between  the  sowing  and  the  brairding ;  a  fact  to  be  laid  to  heart  by  parents  and 
teachers,  lest  they  commit  the  folly  of  insisting  on  seeing  the  blade  at  once,  to  the 
probable  spiritual  hurt  of  the  young  intrusted  to  their  care.  Much  lonerer  time  must 
elapse  between  the  brairding  and  the  ripening.  That  a  speedy  sanctification  is  im- 
possible we  do  not  affirm ;  but  it  is,  we  believe,  so  exceptional  that  it  may  be  left 
altogether  out  of  account  in  discussing  the  theory  of  Christian  experience.  Once 
more,  growth  in  the  spiritual  world,  as  in  the  natural,  is  graduated ;  in  that  region  as 
in  this  there  is  a  blade,  a  green  ear,  and  a  ripe  ear.  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  Imper- 
ceptible  growth : — You  tell  your  child  that  this  pine-tree  out  here  in  the  sandy  field 
is  one  day  going  to  be  as  large  as  that  great  sonorous  pine  that  sings  to  every  wind 
in  the  wood.  The  child,  incredulous,  determines  to  watch  and  see  whether  the  field- 
pine  really  does  grow  and  become  as  large  as  you  say  it  will.  So,  the  next  morning, 
he  goes  out  and  takes  a  look  at  it,  and  comes  back  and  says,  **  It  has  not  grown  a 
bit."  The  next  week  he  goes  out  and  looks  at  it  again,  and  comes  back  and  says, 
"  It  has  not  grown  yet.  Father  said  it  would  be  a^  large  as  the  pine-tree  in  the 
wood,  but  I  do  not  see  any  likelihood  of  its  becoming  so."  How  long  did  it  take 
the  pine-tree  in  the  wood  to  grow  ?  Two  hundred  years>  Then  men  who  lived 
when  it  began  to  grow  have  been  buried,  and  generations  besides  have  come  and 
gone  since  then.  And  do  you  suppose  that  God's  kingdom  is  going  to  grow  so  that 
you  can  look  at  it,  and  see  that  it  has  grown  during  any  particular  day  ?  You 
cannot  see  it  grow.  All  around  you  are  things  that  are  growing,  but  that  yon 
cannot  see  grow.  And  if  it  is  so  with  trees,  and  things  that  spring  out  of  the 
ground,  how  much  more  is  it  so  with  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  That  kingdom  ii 
advancing  surely,  though  it  advances  slowly,  and  though  it  is  invisible  to  us.  .  -  . 
You  cannot  see  it,  even  if  you  watch  for  it ;  but  there  it  is  ;  and  if,  after  a  while, 
you  go  and  look  at  it,  you  will  be  convinced  that  it  has  been  advancing,  by  the 
results  produced.  You  will  find  that  things  have  been  done,  though  you  could  not 
see  them  done.  Men  are  becoming  better  the  world  over,  though  you  cannot  trace 
the  process  by  which  they  are  becoming  better.  Christ's  kingdom  goes  forward 
from  age  to  age,  though  you  cannot  discern  the  steps  bv  which  it  is  going  forward. 
While  men,  as  individuals,  pass  off  from  the  stage  of  life,  God's  work  does  not  stop. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  law  of  growth  in  the  kingdom  of  God :— I.  In  the  first 
place,  we  shall  see  that  we  ought  never  to  be  discouraf^ed  in  a  true  Christian  work, 
of  whatever  kind,  by  what  seems  a  slow  growth.  II.  We  may  see  that  we  are  never 
to  be  discouraged  in  our  efforts  for  Christ's  kingdom  by  adverse  circumstances ; 
nor  by  any  unexpected  combination  of  these,  and  their  prolonged  operation.  III. 
Let  us  remember  that  good  influences  are  linked  to  good  issues  in  this  world,  as 
the  seed  to  its  fruitage;  and  that  so  every  effort  for  the  good  of  mankind,  through 
the  kingdom  of  Christ,  shall  have  its  meet  result.  IV.  Let  us  remember,  too,  as  a 
thing  which  illustrates  all  the  rest,  that  God  is  within  and  behind  all  forces  that 
tend  to  enlarge  and  perfect  His  kingdom,  as  He  is  beneath  the  physical  forces  which 
bring  harvest  in  its  season,  and  set  on  the  springing  seed  its  coronal.  He  never 
forsakes  a  true  work  for  Himself,  and  is  certain  to  carry  it  to  ultimate  success.  V. 
Let  us  remember  what  the  glory  of  the  harvest  shall  be  in  this  developing  kingdom 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

of  God  ;  and  in  view  of  that  let  na  constantly  labour  with  more  than  fidelity,  with 
an  eager  enthuBiasm  that  surpasses  all  obstacles,  makes  duty  a  privilege,  and  trans- 
mutes toil  into  joy  I  (R.  S,  Storrs,  D.D.)  The  unfolding  seed: — ^What  a 
wonderful  thing  is  the  germination  of  a  seedl  Wiiat  scalpel  so  keen  as  to  lay 
bare,  what  microscope  so  searching  as  to  detect,  that  subtle  force  hidden  in  the 
elementary  initial  cell,  which  we  vaguely  call  the  principle  of  life  ?  Yet  there  it  is, 
lying  in  solemn  mystery,  ready  to  burst  forth  into  vigour  whenever  the  conditions 
of  life  are  fulfilled.  To  the  thoughtful  man  there  is  something  inexpressively  mar- 
vellous in  this  quickening  of  the  seed.  This  is  why  botany  is  a  more  wonderful 
science  than  astronomy,  the  violet  a  sublimer  thing  than  Alcyone.  All  that  the 
scientist  can  do  is  to  trace  sequences ;  he  cannot  explain  the  initial  force.  He  can 
describe  the  plant;  he  cannot  expound  the  plant.  The  seed  springeth  np  and 
groweth,  he  knoweth  not  how.  If  he  could  explain  it,  he  would  be  a  philosopher 
indeed.  In  this  particular,  at  least,  the  parable  in  Mark  iv.  26-29  is  fitly  styled, 
*'  The  parable  of  the  seed  growing  secretly."  Again :  Not  the  least  wonderful  of 
the  phenomena  of  plant  growth  is  this:  it  is,  at  least  apparently,  automatic. 
"The  earth  yieldeth  fruit  of  herself."  It  is  the  echo  of  the  divine  dixit  on  the 
third  day  of  the  creative  week :  *•  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  plants ;  and  the  earth 
brought  forth  plants."  Not  that  the  soil  is  the  source  of  vegetation — it  is  only  the 
Bphere  of  vegetation ;  not  that  the  soil  is  the  sire  of  the  plant — it  is  only,  so  to 
speak,  the  matrix  of  the  plant.  Nevertheless,  so  far  as  appearances  go,  it  does  seem 
as  though  the  soil  were  a  thing  of  life,  bringing  forth  fruit  of  herself.  There  lies 
the  seed  buried  in  the  ground.  It  needs  no  one  to  come  and  touch  its  pent-up 
potentialities.  It  springs  up  independently  of  man.  True,  it  is  for  man  to  plant 
the  seed,  and  supply  conditions  of  growth.  But  it  is  not  for  man  to  cause  the  seed 
to  germinate  or  to  fructify.  The  process,  so  far  as  man  is  concerned,  is  strictly 
automatic.  Verily,  the  plant  does  seem  to  be  a  living  person,  self-conscious 
and  self-regulating.  But  the  processes  of  vegetation  are  not  only  mysterious  and 
automatic,  they  are  also  gradual.  The  kernel  does  not  become  the  fidl  com  in  the 
ear  in  an  instant.  In  the  case  of  cereals,  months  intervene  between  the  sowing 
and  the  reaping ;  in  the  case  of  fruit  trees,  years  intervene  between  the  planting 
and  the  gathering.  Nature,  at  least  in  the  sphere  of  life  and  growth,  does  nothing 
by  leaps.  The  processes  of  vegetation  are  also  as  orderly  as  they  are  gradual! 
They  follow  each  other  in  due  and  regular  succession :  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear, 
then  the  full  com  in  the  ear.  The  kernel  does  not  become  the  plump  golden  com 
except  by  way  of  the  blade.  And  all  these  processes  issue  in  fruit.  The  harvest  is 
bat  the  unfolded  seed,  unfolding  in  orderly  succession  along  the  axis  of  growth ;  and 
the  axis  has  as  its  purpose  fruit.  It  is  the  very  nature  of  the  growth,  the  very  law 
of  the  seed,  to  unfold  and  culminate  in  crop.  And  now  our  farmer  comes  again  into 
view.  Having  sown  the  seed,  he  went  away,  confidently  leaving  it  to  its  own 
inherent  forces.  But  now  that  the  fruit  has  ripened,  he  reappears,  and,  putting  in 
bis  sickle,  he  shouts :  "  Harvest  home  1 "  Such  is  the  parable  of  the  unfolding 
seed.  And  now  let  us  ponder  the  meaning  of  the  parable.  In  other  words,  let  us 
trace  some  of  the  analogies  between  the  unfolding  seed  and  the  unfolding  kingdom 
of  God  and  Christianity.  I.  The  growth  of  Christianity  is  mystebious.  As  the 
seed  springs  up  and  grows,  we  know  not  how,  so  it  is  with  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Take,  for  example,  the  very  beginning  of  Christianity,  the  miraculous  conception 
n  Nazareth.  Who  is  there  that  can  understand  it  ?  Incomparably  more  mysterious 
is  it  than  the  germination  of  any  seed.  Or  take  the  problem  of  the  growth  of 
Christianity — I  mean  the  genuine,  original  Christianity,  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
Once,  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  it  was  the  smallest  of  seeds ;  but  now  it  has 
become  the  largest  of  herbs,  overshadowing  with  its  blessed  canopy  that  fairest 
portion  of  the  world  which  we  fondly  call  Christendom.  But  how  came  it  thus  to 
spread  ?  Because  the  doctrine  of  the  cross  has  been  preached.  And  the  doctrine 
of  the  cross  is  to  the  wise  men  of  this  world,  in  an  eminent  sense,  foolishness. 
Who  will  explain  this  mystery,  namely,  that  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than 
the  wisdom  of  man,  the  weakness  of  God  stronger  than  the  strength  of  men  ?  How 
elaborately  the  solution  of  this  problem  has  been  undertaken,  and  how  wretched 
the  failure,  is  strikingly  seen  in  the  famous  fifteenth  chapter  of  Gibbon's  "  Decline 
ftnd  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.*'  Or  take  the  growth  of  Christianity  in  the  case  of 
any  individual  soul.  How  secret  and  underground  is  the  process !  How  subtle  the 
workings  of  the  Divine  life  within  1  The  Christian  is  a  mystery  even  to  himself. 
Hii  life  is  a  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  U.  Again :  As  the  seed  obows  auto- 
:iT,  the  earth  yielding  fruit  of  herself,  so  obows  the  kingdom  or  Gon, 


CHAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK.  171 

Christianity  is  in  its  own  inherent  nature  self-vital  and  self-evolving.  See  how 
like  a  thing  of  life  it  is.  Behold  its  wondrously  absorbing  power,  subsidizing  to 
its  own  purposes,  and  assimilating  into  its  own  growing  structure,  whatever  there  if 
of  worth  in  learning,  or  wealth  or  influence,  or  statesmanship,  or  sect,  or  providences. 
III.  The  kingdom  of  God,  like  the  seed  which  grows  ORADUAiiLY,  stage  by  stage, 
does  not  burst  forth  full-grown,  like  panoplied  Minerva  from  the  cloven  brow  of 
Jove.  See  how  slow  has  been  the  growth  of  Christendom,  taken  as  a  matter  of 
geography.  Nearly  two  millenniums  have  rolled  away  since  the  heavenly  Sower 
declared  that  His  field  was  the  world ;  and  yet  by  far  the  larger  part  of  that  field 
is  still  heathen,  never  as  yet  sown  with  the  heavenly  seed.  Again:  See  how 
gradual  has  been  the  growth  in  respect  to  the  moral  character  of  Christendom. 
More  than  eighteen  centuries  have  swept  away  since  the  Lord  of  the  kingdom  pro- 
nounced His  Beatitudes,  and  yet  there  are  still  in  His  Church  the  proud,  and  the 
censorious,  and  the  avaricious,  and  the  quarrelsome,  and  the  revengeful.  Never- 
theless, for  let  us  be  just,  there  has  been  real  growth.  We  have  seen  idolatry 
shaken,  slavery  abolished,  intemperance  checked,  monopoly  curbed,  woman 
emancipated,  brotherhood  asserted,  war  preparing  to  go  into  perpetual  exile.  But 
how  tedious  has  been  the  growth.  In  like  manner,  how  slow  is  the  growth  in  the 
case  of  each  individual  Christian.  How  slow  this  unfolding  along  the  axis  of 
Christ's  character  I  In  this  is  seen  the  immense  advantage  of  early  piety,  for  it 
takes  a  long,  long  time  to  unfold  into  the  full-grown  man,  even  the  measure  of  the 
stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.  IV.  Just  as  the  seed  does  not  leap  instantly  or 
whimsically  into  the  fruit,  but  unfolds  itself  in  ordebly  succession — first  the 
tender  blade,  then  the  swelhng  ear,  then  the  ripe  grain  in  the  ear — so  it  is  with  the 
seed  ol  the  kingdom,  or  God's  truth.  This  is  true  in  respect  to  doctrine.  First 
Athanasius,  the  exponent  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ ;  then  Augustine,  the  exponent 
of  the  doctrine  of  Man ;  then  Anselm,  the  exponent  of  the  doctrine  of  Grace  ;  then 
Luther,  the  exponent  of  the  doctrine  of  Faith ;  even  faith  in  that  Divine  Christ  whose 
grace  saves  sinful  man.  Nor  has  the  growth,  or  advancing  order  of  due  succession, 
ceased.  The  problem  of  this  present  age  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church,  or  what 
constitutes  the  true  body  of  Christ.  And  even  now  we  see  faint  glimmers  of  the 
final  doctrine — the  parousia,  or  the  doctrine  of  last  things.  And  all  this  is  in  due 
succession ;  advancing  from  the  Christ  who  saves  to  the  heaven  which  is  the  issue 
of  His  saving.  And  this  law  of  orderly  unfolding  is  equally  true  in  respect  to  per- 
sonal character.  Do  not  be  so  unphilosophical,  then,  as  to  look  for  the  full-bearded 
grain  of  saintliness  preceding  the  blade  of  youthful  piety ;  the  ripe  fruits  of  the 
Spirit  clustered  around  the  subterranean  root.  First  little  children ;  then  young 
men ;  then  fathers.  But  there  is  one  more  likeness  of  the  kingdom  of  God  to  the 
seed.  v.  As  the  unfolding  seed  has  fruit  fob  its  issue,  so  it  is  with  the  seed  of  the 
kingdom,  or  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  When  the  fruit  is  ripe,  straightway  he  putteth 
forth  the  sickle,  because  the  harvest  is  come.  Christianity  means  something  more 
than  sowing :  it  also  means  reaping.  Do  not  be  over-anxious.  Christian  responsi- 
bility does  have  its  limits.  Beware  of  Uzziah's  sin  of  distrust.  Plant  faithfully 
the  seed,  and  then  go  trustfully  away.    (G.  D.  Boardmarij  D.D.) 

Vers.  80,  32.  It  Is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed. — The  parable  of  tlu  mustard 
teed : — In  the  parable  before  us,  the  unity  of  the  kingdom  becomes  conspicuous,  the 
individuality  of  its  members  subordinate.  The  figure  is  changed  accordingly.  ••  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  which  a  man  took  and  sowed 
in  his  field ;  which  indeed  is  the  least  of  all  seeds ;  but  when  it  is  grown,  it  is  the 
greatest  among  herbs,  and  becometh  a  tree."  The  kingdom  is  a  tree ;  its  subjects 
are  as  birds  sheltering  under  its  shadow.  As  it  grows  and  spreads  out  its  branches, 
it  is  shown  that  it  has  been  planted  by  God  for  the  spiritual  good  of  men.  The 
kingdom  here  appears  as  an  organic  whole,  a  source  of  blessing  for  all  who  come 
under  its  shade.  Taking  the  illustration  in  its  earliest  stages,  we  must  have  regard 
not  only  to  the  "  grain  of  mustard  seed,"  but  also  to  the  presence  and  action  of  the 
man  who  "  took  it  and  sowed  it  in  his  field."  That  the  agent  in  sowing  this  grain 
of  seed  is  the  Son  of  Man,  admits  of  no  doubt.  The  Saviour  is  not  here  represented 
by  the  tree ;  for  then  would  His  disciples  be  the  branches,  as  in  the  fifteenth  chapter 
of  John's  Gospel.  He  is  the  Man  who  sowed  His  seed  in  His  field.  Our  Lord  having 
thus  a  distinct  place  in  the  parable,  we  are  precluded  from  thinking  of  the  tree  ap.  «* 
symbol  for  Christ  Himself,  and  afterwards  for  His  people  collectively  as  His  repre- 
sentatives on  the  earth.  Further,  we  are  prevented  from  seeing  here  any  allusion 
to  the  lowliness  of  the  Saviour's  birth,  or  the  feebleness  of  His  infancy,  understood 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

by  Bome  to  be  implied  in  the  image  of  the  little  seed.  The  incongruity  of  the 
description,  **  the  least  of  all  seeds,"  as  attributed  to  the  Divine  Eedeemer,  is  so 
glaring  as  to  warn  us  against  such  methods  of  interpretation.  The  kingdom  is  here 
represented  as  something  to  which  men  come,  and  in  coming  to  which  they  receive 
shelter  and  comfort.  At  first  sight  this  might  seem  to  point  to  the  Church,  as  the 
outward  manifestation  of  the  kingdom — a  view  which  might  have  been  accepted,  had 
the  branches  of  the  tree  represented  the  members  of  the  Church.  But  when  the 
members  are  not  the  branches,  but  are  sheltered  among  the  branches,  something 
distinct  from  the  Church  seems  intended.  Both  in  this  parable,  and  in  that  of  the 
leaven,  the  reference  is  clearly  to  the  truth  of  the  kingdom,  as  in  the  parable  of  the 
sower  the  seed  is  the  Word  of  the  kingdom.  This  parable  is  concerned  with  the 
outward  exhibition  of  the  truth ;  the  leaven,  with  the  inward  and  hidden  application 
of  it.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  kingdom  of  truth ;  this  truth  is  displayed  to  the 
world  in  outward  manifestation,  and  also  applied  to  ihe  souls  of  men  as  an  unseen 
influence.  We  have  accordingly  two  parables :  the  one  representing  the  visible,  the 
other  the  hidden,  operation  of  the  truth  revealed  in  Jesus.  The  truth  of  the  gospel 
— the  truth  as  to  the  pardoning  mercy  and  renewing  grace  provided  in  Jesus,  was  as 
a  very  little  seed,  planted  in  the  earth  by  the  Messiah,  and  that  so  quietly  that  the 
act  hardly  attracted  the  attention  of  the  world.  The  significance  of  the  act  was  not 
understood  even  by  those  who  observed  it.  To  the  future  was  entrusted  the  discovery 
of  the  importance  for  the  world  of  this  little  seed.  It  was  destined  to  spring  up  and 
attain  a  great  stature,  spreading  itself  forth  on  every  side,  attracting  attention  all 
around.  {Dr.  Calderwood.)  An  encouraging  parable  : — No  doubt  other  figures 
might  have  been  chosen  in  abundance,  more  suggestive  of  the  great  after-develop- 
ment of  the  kingdom  of  Christ — such  forest-trees,  e.p.,  as  the  oak  of  Bashan  or 
cedar  of  Lebanon ;  but  the  acorn  and  cone  were  both  far  less  adapted  to  represent 
the  littleness  of  its  initial  state.  The  mustard  was  probably  the  smallest  seed  from 
which  so  large  a  shrub  or  tree  was  known  to  grow.  ...  It  is  not  without  a  purpose 
that  the  contrast  between  the  first  beginning  of  His  kingdom  and  its  expected  future 
should  have  been  put  before  the  apostles  in  such  a  striking  form.  The  parables 
which  had  preceded  it  must  have  had  a  most  depressing  effect  upon  their  minds. 
They  showed  that  of  the  seed  sown  in  men's  hearts,  three  parts  would  be  lost  to  one 
saved ;  and  that  the  field  carefully  planted  with  the  best  of  seeds  too  often  mocked 
all  the  husbandman's  hopes  of  a  goodly  crop  by  a  simultaneous  growth  of  noxious 
weeds.  Well  then  might  this  parable  be  spoken  to  encourage  them  in  their  despond- 
ency. No  doubt  the  main  object  of  the  parable  was  simply  to  predict  the  future 
increase  of  the  kingdom ;  but  there  is  surely  a  side-lesson  to  be  learned  from  the 
natural  properties  of  the  mustard- seed — from  its  internal  heat  and  pungency,  and 
from  the  fact  that  it  must  be  bruised  ere  it  yield  its  best  virtues.  Its  inherent 
stimulating  force  finds  its  parallel  in  the  quickening  vitality  and  vigour  derived  from 
the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  the  necessity  of  crushing  it  is  no  inapt  figure 
of  the  principle  which  has  been  embodied  in  the  familiar  proverb,  "  The  blood  of 
the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  {H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  The  mustard 
plant : — As  I  was  riding  across  the  plain  of  Akka,  on  the  way  to  Carmel,  I  perceived, 
at  some  distance  from  the  path,  what  seemed  to  be  a  little  forest  or  nursery  of  trees. 
I  turned  aside  to  examine  them.  On  coming  nearer,  they  proved  to  be  an  extensive 
field  of  the  plant  (mustard)  I  was  so  anxious  to  see.  It  was  then  in  blossom,  full 
grown,  in  some  cases  six,  seven,  and  nine  feet  high,  with  a  stem  or  trunk  an  inch 
or  more  in  thickness,  throwing  out  branches  on  every  side.  I  was  now  satisfied  in 
part.  I  felt  that  such  a  plant  might  well  be  called  a  tree,  and,  in  comparison  with 
the  seed  producing  it,  a  great  tree.  But  still  the  branches,  or  stems  of  the  branches, 
were  not  very  large,  nor,  apparently,  very  strong.  Can  the  birds,  I  said  to  myself, 
rest  upon  them?  Are  they  not  too  slight  and  flexible?  Will  they  not  bend  or 
break  beneath  the  superadded  weight?  At  that  very  instant,  as  I  stood  and 
revolved  the  thought,  lo !  one  of  the  fowls  of  heaven  stopped  in  its  flight  through  the 
air,  alighted  down  on  one  of  the  branches,  which  hardly  moved  beneath  the  shock, 
and  then  began,  perched  there  before  my  eyes,  to  warble  forth  a  strain  of  the  richest 
music.  All  my  doubts  were  now  charmed  away.  I  was  delighted  at  the  incident. 
It  seemed  to  me  at  the  moment  a  if  I  enjoyed  enough  to  repay  me  for  all  the  trouble 
of  the  whole  journey.  {H.  B.  Hackett,  D.D.)  Small  beginnings: — Some  few 
monks  came  into  Brittany  in  ages  past,  when  that  country  was  heathen.  They 
built  a  rude  shed  in  which  to  dwell,  and  a  chapel  of  moor  stones,  and  then  prepared 
to  till  the  soil.  But,  alas  1  they  had  not  any  wheat.  Then  one  spied  a  robin  red- 
breast sitting  on  a  cross  they  had  set  up,  and  from  his  beak  dangled  an  ear  of  wheat 


CHAP,  iv.]  ST.  MARK,  175 

They  drove  the  bird  away,  and  secured  the  grain,  sowed  it,  and  next  year  had  more; 
sowed  again,  and  so  by  degrees  were  able  to  sow  large  fields,  and  gather  abundant 
harvests.  If  you  go  now  into  Brittany,  and  wonder  at  the  waving  fields  of  golden 
grain,  the  peasants  will  tell  you  all  came  from  robin  redbreast's  ear  of  com.  And 
they  have  turned  the  redbreast's  ear  of  com  into  a  proverb.  {S.  Baring  Gould^  M.A.) 
The  Church  a$  an  organization  : — A  prophecy  which  has  been  fulfilled  to  the  letter. 
In  the  course  of  little  more  than  one  century  after  it  was  uttered,  there  was  not  a 
city  of  any  size  in  the  Roman  Empire  which  had  not  its  bishop,  with  his  priests  and 
deacons  preaching  the  Word  of  God,  baptizing  (and  so  admitting  men  into  the  new 
kingdom),  celebrating  the  Eucharist,  and  exercising  discipline  over  the  faithful.  It 
was  not  the  spread  of  a  philosophy,  or  of  a  system  of  opinions,  or  even  of  a  gospel 
only.  It  was  the  spread  of  an  organization  for  purposes  of  rule  and  discipline,  ol 
exclusion  of  the  unworthy,  and  of  pastoral  care  over  the  worthy.  And  it  went  on 
progressing  and  prospering  till  it  became  a  great  power  in  the  world,  though  not  of 
it.  For  centuries  emperors,  kings,  and  people  had  to  take  it  into  account  in  every 
department  of  government  and  civil  policy.  Its  present  weakness  is  a  reaction 
against  its  former  abuse  of  its  power  when  it  had  become  secular,  and  failed  to  fulfil 
some  of  the  chief  purposes  of  its  institution.  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  The  Church  giving 
rest  and  shelter : — In  all  ages  the  Church  has  afforded  to  men  what  the  Lord  foretold, 
rest  and  shelter.  No  human  philosophy  has  afforded  any  rest  or  refuge  for  the 
wandering  spirit.  Only  the  Church  has  done  this,  and  the  Church  has  been  able  to 
do  this  because  the  foundation  of  all  her  doctrine  has  been  the  Incarnation  of  her 
Lord.  She  teaches  the  soul  to  look  for  the  foundation  of  her  hope,  not  into  herself, 
her  frames  and  feehngs,  but  to  the  historical  facts  of  the  Incarnation,  Death,  and 
consequent  Eesurrection  and  Ascension  of  the  etemal  Son,  together  with  the  Church 
system  and  sacramental  means  which  are  the  logical  outcome  of  that  Incarnation  ; 
and  because  of  this,  and  this  only,  she  is  an  abiding  refuge.  {Ibid.)  The  seedling 
of  lona: — Far  out  in  the  western  main,  is  a  Httle  island  round  which  for 
nearly  half  the  year  the  Atlantic  clangs  his  angry  billows,  keeping  the  handful 
of  inhabitants  close  prisoners.  Most  of  it  is  bleak  and  barren ;  but  there  is  one 
little  bay  rimmed  round  with  silvery  sand,  and  reflecting  in  its  waters  a  slope  of 
verdure.  Towards  this  bay  one  autumn  evening,  1,300  years  ago,  a  rade  vessel 
steered  its  course.  It  was  a  flimsy  bark,  no  better  than  a  huge  basket  of  osiers 
covered  over  with  the  skins  of  beasts  ;  but  the  tide  was  tranquil,  and  as  the  boatmen 
plied  their  oars,  they  raised  the  voice  of  psalms.  Skimming  across  the  bay  they 
beached  their  coracle  and  stepped  on  shore — about  thirteen  in  number.  On  the 
green  slope  they  built  a  few  hasty  huts  and  a  tiny  Christian  temple.  The  freight  of 
that  little  ship  was  the  gospel,  and  the  errand  of  the  saintly  strangers  was  to  tell 
benighted  heathen  about  Jesus  and  His  love.  From  the  favoured  soil  of  Ireland 
they  had  brought  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  and  now  they  sowed  it  in  lona.  In  the 
conservatory  of  their  little  church  it  throve,  till  it  was  fit  to  be  planted  out  on  the 
neighbouring  mainland.  To  the  Picts  with  their  tattoed  faces,  to  the  Druids  peeping 
and  muttering  in  their  dismal  groves,  the  missionaries  preached  the  gospel.  That 
gospel  triumphed.  The  groves  were  felled,  and  where  once  they  stood  rose  the  house 
of  prayer.  Planted  out  on  the  bleak  moorland,  the  little  seed  became  a  mighty  tree, 
so  that  the  hills  of  Caledonia  were  covered  with  the  shade  ;  nor  must  Scotland  ever 
forget  the  seedling  of  lona,  and  the  labours  of  Columba  with  his  meek  Culdees. 
{James  Hamilton^  D.D.)  The  growth  of  the  little  seed : — This  suggests  the  treat- 
ment we  ourselves  should  give  the  truths  of  God.  An  acorn  on  the  mantelpiece, 
a  dry  bulb  in  a  dark  cupboard,  a  mustard-seed  in  your  pocket  or  in  a  pill-box,  won't 
grow.  So  texts  or  truths  in  the  memory  are  acorns  on  the  shelf,  seeds  in  the  pill- 
box. It  is  good  to  have  them,  but  don't  leave  them  there.  Ponder  over  it  till  it 
grows  wonderful— till  its  meaning  comes  out,  and  you  feel  some  amazement  at  its 
unsurmised  significance.  Ponder  it  till,  like  the  phosphorescent  forms  of  vegetation, 
the  light  of  its  expanding  falls  on  other  passages,  and  revelation  is  itself  revealed. 
{Ibid.)  The  small  germ  expanded : — This  is  a  great  encouragement  for  those  who 
are  trying  to  find  favour  for  any  useful  plan  or  good  idea.  As  long  as  it  remains  in 
your  own  mind  it  is  the  seed  in  the  mustard-pod  ;  but  cast  it  into  the  field,  the  gar- 
den, it  will  grow.  Thus  John  Pound's  httle  scapegrace,  bribed  by  a  hot  potato  to 
come  for  his  daily  lesson,  has  multipHed  into  our  Ragged  Schools,  with  their  thousand* 
of  teachers  and  myriads  of  scholars.  Thus  David  Nasmith's  notion  of  a  house-to- 
house  visitation  of  the  London  poor  has  grown  into  those  Town  and  City  Missions 
«rhich  are  the  salt,  the  saving  element,  in  our  overcrowded  centres.  {Ibid.) 
Spiritual  growth : — Impressions  growing  into  resolutions  constitute  conversion,  or 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0R,  [ohap.  iv. 

the  begmning  of  the  Divine  life  in  man.  These  impressions  may  appear  insigmfi« 
cant,  but  when  they  produce  thought,  and  thought  produces  action,  the  result  is  so 
great  that  it  creates  attention.  I.  Vitality.  The  small  seed  of  the  mustard  is 
brimful  of  Ufe.  This  we  discover  not  by  microscopical  analysis,  but  by  observing 
the  changes  that  are  wrought,  and  the  growth  which  follows.  The  gospel  is  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation.  Divine  thoughts  are  full  of  life  because  the  Spirit  of 
God  is  in  them.  11.  Assimilation.  The  seed  was  sown,  and  when  life  reappeared, 
the  properties  of  the  soil,  the  rain,  the  light,  and  the  air,  were  assimilated  to  build 
up  the  herb.  in.  Expansion.  The  statue  does  not  grow.  The  mountain  does  not 
expand.  Growth  is  a  quality  of  life  only.  The  process  is  hidden,  but  expansion  is 
manifest.  The  roots  spread  in  the  earth,  the  branches  in  the  air.  The  growth  of 
devotion  is  God- ward,  that  of  usefulness  man- ward.  The  power  of  the  gospel  creates 
intellectual,  moral,  and  social  expansion.  Christ  in  the  heart  enlarges  its  capacity 
for  purity,  love,  and  goodness.  "  Be  ye  also  enlarged."  IV.  Maturity.  There  are 
ends  to  piety ;  it  is  not  a  cycle  eternally  revolving  in  the  same  way,  but  a  definite 
action  with  definite  results.  The  life  of  the  believer  steps  forward,  by  slow  degrees, 
until  it  reaches  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  Christ.  There  are  initial  conditions 
of  faith,  but  these  make  way  for  the  stronger  stages  of  entire  consecration  to  God. 
(Anon.)  The  growth  of  the  kingdom : — I.  The  sinodom  of  heaven  was  small  at 
ITS  ESTABLISHMENT.  1.  Its  numbors  were  limited.  2.  Its  subjects  were  destitute  of 
resources  of  a  visible  Mnd.  3.  Its  smallness  only  disguised  its  real  resources.  The 
Church's  strength  is  not  to  be  judged  of  by  sense.  U.  In  the  end  it  shall 
BE  veby  great.  It  soon  grew  among  the  Jews — was  enlarged  to  embrace  the 
Gentiles — was  soon  spread  into  all  the  world — is  destined  to  a  great  enlarge- 
ment— ^its  magnitude  will  appear  at  the  last  day.  {Expository  Discournes.)  The 
design  of  the  parable  is  obvious;  the  underlying  thought  is  simple  and  single. 
A  little  germ  and  a  large  result,  a  small  commencement  and  a  conspicuous  growth, 
an  obscure  and  tiny  granule  followed  by  a  vigorous  vegetation,  the  "  least  of 
all  seeds,"  and  "the  greatest  of  all  herbs,"  such  is  the  avowed  contrast  of  the 
parable.  Is  it  not  so  when  we  glance  at  the  history  of  real  religion  ?  I.  In  the 
WORLD.  II.  In  COMMUNITIES.  III.  In  the  individual  soul.  {James  Hamilton^  D.D.) 
The  gospel  originally  small  and  ultimately  great : — The  gist  of  the  representation 
lies  in  the  largeness  of  the  produce  as  compared  with  the  smallness  of  the  original. 
Of  course,  had  our  Lord  merely  wished  to  show  that  the  gospel,  in  its  maturity  and 
efflorescence,  would  overtop  other  systems  and  overshadow  the  creation,  he  might 
have  led  His  hearers  into  the  forests  of  the  earth,  and  selected  some  monarch  of  the 
woods.  Even  in  Eastern  countries  the  mustard  plant,  though  it  reaches  a  size  and 
strength  unknown  in  our  own  land,  would  not  be  used  as  a  symbol  by  a  speaker 
whose  object  was  to  shadow  stateliness  and  dominion.  But,  when  you  compare  the 
size  of  the  seed  with  the  size  of  the  shrub — and  wish  to  illustrate  the  production  of 
great  things  from  small — it  would  seem  probable  that  in  the  whole  range  of  the 
vegetable  kingdom  there  is  not  to  be  found  a  more  apposite  image.  The  degree  in 
whioh  the  shrub  expands  in  size  as  compared  with  the  seed,  is,  perhaps,  greater  in 
the  ease  of  the  mustard  plant  than  in  any  other  instance.  And  in  this,  we  again 
say,  must  be  thought  to  lie  the  gist  of  the  parable — the  chief  object  of  Christ  being 
to  show  that  there  never  had  been  so  mighty  a  consummation  following  on  so 
inconsiderable  a  beginning ;  that  never  had  there  been  so  vast  a  disproportion 
between  a  thing  at  its  outset,  and  that  same  thing  at  its  conclusion,  as  was  to  be 
exhibited  in  the  case  of  that  kingdom  of  heaven,  the  setting  up  of  which  was  His 
business  on  earth.  {H.  Melvill^  Little  seeds  soul  saving : — But  to  pass  from 
these  general  observations  on  the  imagery  drawn  from  the  vegetable  world  to  that 
particular  figure  which  Christ  employs  in  our  text.  Observe,  we  pray  you,  the 
minuteness  of  the  seed,  which  is  ordinarily  first  deposited  by  God's  Spirit  in  man's 
heart.  If  you  examine  the  records  of  Christian  biography,  you  will  find,  so  far  as 
it  is  possible  to  search  out  such  facts,  that  conversion  is  commonly  to  be  traced  to 
inconsiderable  beginnings.  We  believe,  for  example,  that  proceeding  on  the  prin- 
ciple that  He  will  honour  what  He  has  instituted,  God  ordinarily  uses  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  as  His  engine  for  gathering  in  His  people.  But  then  it  is  perhaps  a 
single  sentence  in  a  sermon,  a  text  which  is  quoted,  a  remark  to  which,  probably,  if 
jou  had  asked  the  preacher  himself,  he  attached  less  consequence  than  to  any  other 
part  of  his  sermon — this  is  the  seed,  the  inconsiderable  grain,  which  makes  its  way 
Into  the  heart  of  the  unconverted  hearer.  We  just  wish  that  a  book  could  be  com- 
piled, registering  the  sayings,  the  words,  which,  falling  from  the  lips  of  preachers  in 
different  ages,  have  penetrated  that  thick  coating  of  indifference  and  prejudice  which 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST,  MARK.  177 

lies  naturally  on  every  man's  heart,  and  reached  the  soil  in  which  vegetation  is 
possible.  We  are  quite  persuaded  that  you  would  not  find  many  whole  sermons  in 
such  a  book,  not  many  long  pieces  of  elaborate  reasoning,  not  many  protracted 
demonstrations  of  human  danger  and  human  need  ;  we  have  a  thorough  belief  that 
the  volume  would  be  a  volume  of  little  fragments,  that  it  would  be  made  up  of 
simple  sentiments  and  brief  statements ;  and  that,  in  the  majority  of  instances,  a 
few  syllables  would  constitute  that  element  of  Christianity  which  gained  a  lodgment 
in  the  soul.  {Ibid.)  The  maxims  of  human  philosophy  not  so  productive  as  Divine 
truth : — We  shall  not  enlarge  further  on  the  parable  as  sketching  Christ's  religion  in 
its  dominion  over  the  individual.  We  can  only  remark,  in  passing,  that  none  of  the 
maxims  of  human  philosophy  have  shown  themselves  capable  of  yielding  such 
produce  as  we  thus  trace  to  the  seed  of  a  solitary  text.  There  is  much  truth  and 
beauty  in  many  of  those  sayings  with  which  writers  on  ethics  have  adorned  their 
pages  ;  but  the  most  weighty  proverbs  that  ever  issued  from  the  porch  of  the 
academy,  and  the  most  sententious  maxims  which  lecturers  on  morals  ever  delivered 
to  their  people,  have  always  failed  to  work  anything  approaching  to  that  renovation 
of  nature  which  can  distinctly  be  traced  to  some  gospel  truth  quoted  with  authority 
from  God.  Take  the  result  of  a  hiding  in  the  heart  a  sentence  which  asserts  the 
excellence  of  virtue,  and  one  which  sets  forth  God's  love  in  the  gift  of  His  Son. 
Now  sentences  may  be  likened  unto  seeds,  not  only  because  both  are  small,  but 
because,  if  rightly  planted  and  watered,  and  developed,  they  are  capable  of  producing 
fruit  in  the  life  and  conversation.  But  who,  unless  ignorant  of  facts,  or  determined 
to  be  deceived,  would  assert  the  holiness  of  the  best  heathenism  to  be  comparable 
to  the  holiness  of  Christianity,  or  who  that  has  ever  tried  theory,  by  the  touchstone 
of  experience,  would  declare,  that  a  man  who  was  a  cultivator  of  virtue,  because 
excellent  in  its  nature,  will  ever  reach  as  high  a  standard  of  morality  as  one  who, 
having  hope  in  Christ,  seeks  to  "  purify  himself  even  as  Christ  is  pure  ?  "  We  give 
it  as  a  truth,  which  the  history  of  the  world  presses  forward  to  substantiate,  that  no 
maxims,  except  Scriptural  maxims,  have  been  long  efficacious  in  withholding  man 
from  vice,  or  have  ever  nerved  him  to  the  striving  after  a  high-toned  and  elevated 
morality.  And  if,  then,  we  must  admit  that  the  sayings  of  a  sound  moral  philosophy 
may  be  figured  by  seeds,  because  they  contain  elements  which,  under  due  culture, 
may  be  expanded  into  something  like  righteousness  of  deportment,  we  still  contend 
that  when  the  amount  even  of  possible  produce  is  contrasted  with  the  original  grain, 
the  tree  which,  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  can  spring  from  the  seed, 
and  that  seed  itself — there  are  no  sayings,  but  those  of  Christianity,  just  as  there 
are  no  particles,  but  those  of  Divine  grace,  which  deserve  to  be  compared  with  the 
grain  of  mustard  seed;  for  in  no  case  but  that,  we  must  believe,  would  there  be  such 
disproportion  between  what  was  cast  into  the  soil  of  the  heart,  and  that  spreading 
over  of  the  whole  district  of  the  life,  as  to  warrant  the  employment  of  the  imagery 
whose  design  it  has  been  our  effort  to  delineate.  {Ibid.)  The  visible  growth  of 
the  gospel : — Christ's  kingdom  also  grows  outwardly  and  visibly  as  the  hidden 
mustard  seed  grows  into  a  great  tree.  Christ  not  only  taught  new  truth,  but  He  also 
founded  a  new  society,  which  is  to  be  like  a  living,  growing  tree.  That  society  is 
sometimes  called  the  Visible  Church,  and  it  is  very  visible  in  our  day,  quite  as 
visible  as  the  biggest  garden  tree  is  among  garden  plants.  (J.  Wells.)  Christ's 
religion  a  refuge  for  all : — As  the  tree  is  for  every  bird  from  any  quarter  of  heaven 
that  wishes  its  shelter,  so  Christ's  religion  is  for  all  sorts  of  people.  The  religion 
of  the  Chinese  is  only  for  the  Chinese ;  the  religion  of  Mahomed  is  only  for  those 
who  live  in  warm  countries ;  a  Hindoo  loses  his  religion  by  crossing  the  seas ;  but 
the  religion  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  for  people  of  every  class,  clime,  and  nation.  It 
is  like  the  tree  that  offers  lodging  to  all  the  birds  of  the  air.  {Ibid.)  Fiery 
energy : — Darius  sent  to  Alexander  the  Great  a  bag  of  sesame  seed,  symbolizing 
the  number  of  his  array.  In  return,  Alexander  sent  a  sack  of  mustard  seed,  show- 
ing not  only  the  numbers  but  the  fiery  energy  of  his  soldiers.  {D'Herbelot.) 
Building  and  growing  : — To  see  the  stateliest  pile  of  building  filling  the  space  which 
before  was  empty,  makes  an  appeal  to  the  imagination  :  that  kind  of  increase  we 
seem  to  understand;  stone  is  added  to  st'one  by  the  will  and  toil  of  man.  But  when 
we  look  at  the  deeply-rooted  and  wide-branching  tree,  and  think  of  the  tiny  seed 
from  which  all  this  sprang  without  human  will  or  toil,  but  by  an  internal  vitality  of 
its  own,  we  are  confronted  by  the  most  mysterious  and  fascinating  of  all  things,  the 
life  that  lies  unseen  in  nature.  {Marcus  Dods.)  The  mustard  seed  and  leaven  : — 
The  parable  of  the  grain  of  mustard  seed  must  be  taken  in  close  connection  with 
that  of  the  leaven,  and  both  are  meant  to  illustrate  the  small  beginnings,  the  sileal 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

growth,  and  the  final  victory  of  the  grace  of  God  in  the  hnman  soul.  But  they 
belong  to  different  points  of  view.  The  one  is  extensive,  the  other  intensive.  The 
parable  of  the  grain  of  mustard  seed  shows  us  the  origin  and  the  development  of 
the  kingdom  of  God,  in  communities  and  in  the  world :  the  parable  of  the  leaven 
shadows  forth  its  unimpeded  influence  in  the  soul  of  each  separate  man.  {Arch- 
deacon Farrar.)  All  great  movements  have  had  trivial  comm£ncements : — Look  at 
history,  and  see  how  true  the  doctrine  is,  not  only  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  of 
every  other  power  that  has  really  held  sway  among  men.  In  almost  all  cases  the 
great,  the  permanent  work  has  been  done,  not  by  those  who  seemed  to  do  very  much, 
but  by  those  who  seemed  to  do  very  little.  Our  Lord's  founding  of  the  Church  was 
but  the  most  Btriking  instance  of  a  universal  rule.  He  seemed  to  all  outside 
spectatorfl  to  do  almost  nothing.  The  Koman  rulers  hardly  knew  of  His  name. 
What  was  He  doing  ?  He  was  sowing  the  seed ;  the  seed  whose  fruit  was  not  yet, 
whose  perfect  fjuit  was  not  to  be  gathered,  as  it  has  since  turned  out,  for  many 
centuries ;  the  seed  which  seemed  small  and  perishable,  but  was  certain  to  grow 
into  a  great  tree.  All  the  greatest  work  has  been  done  both  before  and  after,  not 
often  by  producing  immediate  results,  but  by  sowing  seeds.  So  have  sciences  all 
grown,  not  from  brilliant  declarations  to  the  world,  but  from  patient  labour,  and 
quiet  thought,  and  language  addressed  to  the  few  who  think.     So  has  all  growth  in 

Eolitios  always  begun  in  the  secret  thoughts  of  men  who  have  found  the  truth,  and 
ave  committed  it  to  books  or  to  chosen  learners.  The  true  powers  of  human  life  are 
contained  in  those  seeds,  out  of  which  alone  comes  any  leal  and  permanent  good. 
(Bp,  Temple.) 

Yen.  33,  34.  Sat  without  a  parable  spake  He  not  nnto  thBm.-~Chrisft  economy 
of  teaching  ;— Not  as  He  was  able  to  have  spoken ;  He  could  have  expressed  Him- 
self at  a  higher  rate  than  any  mortal  can ;  He  could  have  soared  to  the  clouds  ;  He 
could  have  knit  such  knots  they  could  never  untie.  But  He  would  not.  He  dehghted 
to  speak  to  His  hearers'  shallow  capacities  (John  xvi.  12).  (r.  Brooks.)  Christ's 
method  of  teaching : — With  matter  Divine  and  manner  human,  our  Lord  descended 
to  the  level  of  the  humblest  of  the  crowd,  lowering  Himself  to  their  understandings, 
and  winning  His  way  into  their  hearts  by  borrowng  His  topics  from  familiar  cir- 
cumstances and  the  scenes  around  Him.  Be  it  a  boat,  a  plank,  a  rope,  a  beggar's 
rags,  an  imperial  robe,  we  would  seize  on  anything  to  save  a  drowning  man  ;  and  in 
His  anxiety  to  save  poor  sinners,  to  rouse  their  fears,  their  love,  their  interest,  to 
make  them  understand  and  feel  the  truth,  our  Lord  pressed  everything — art  and 
nature,  earth  and  heaven — into  His  service.  Creatures  of  habit,  the  servants  if  not 
the  slaves  of  form,  we  invariably  select  our  text  from  some  book  of  the  Sacred 
Scriptures.  He  took  a  wider,  freer  range  ;  and,  instead  of  keeping  to  the  unvarying 
routine  of  text  and  sermon  with  formal  divisions,  it  were  well,  perhaps,  that  we 
sometimes  ventured  to  follow  His  example ;  for  may  it  not  be  that  to  the  natural- 
ness of  their  addresses  and  their  striking  out  from  the  beaten  paths  of  texts  and 
sermons,  to  their  plain  speaking  and  home-thrusts,  to  their  direct  appeals  and 
homespun  arguments,  our  street  and  lay  preachers  owe  perhaps  not  a  little  of  their 
power  ?  Our  Lord  found  many  a  topic  of  discourse  in  the  scenes  around  Him ; 
even  the  humblest  objects  shone  in  His  hands,  as  I  have  seen  a  fragment  of  broken 
glass  or  earthenware,  as  it  caught  the  sunbeam,  light  up,  flashing  like  a  diamond. 
With  the  stone  of  Jacob's  Well  for  a  pulpit,  and  its  water  for  a  text.  He  preached 
salvation  to  the  Samaritan  woman.  A  little  child,  which  He  takes  from  its 
mother's  side,  and  holds  up  blushing  in  His  arms  before  the  astonished  audience,  is 
Hia  text  for  a  sermon  on  humility.  A  husbandman  on  a  neighbouring  height 
between  Him  and  the  sky,  who  strides  with  long  and  measured  steps  over  the  field 
he  sows,  supplies  a  text  from  which  He  discourses  on  the  gospel  and  its  effects  on 
different  clasbes  of  hearers.  In  a  woman  baking  ;  in  two  women  who  sit  by  some 
cottage  door  grinding  at  the  mill ;  in  an  old,  strong  fortahce  perched  on  a  rock, 
whence  it  looks  across  the  brawling  torrent  to  the  ruined  and  roofless  gable  of  a 
house  swept  away  by  mountain  floods — Jesus  found  texts.  From  the  birds  that 
sung  above  His  head,  and  the  lihes  that  blossomed  at  His  feet.  He  discoursed  on 
the  eare  of  God — these  His  text,  and  Providence  His  theme.  (T.  Guthrie, 
DJ).)  Illustrating :  —  I  have  generally  found  that  the  most  intellectual 
auditors  prefer  to  hear  a  simple  scriptural  and  spiritual  preaching.  The  late 
Judge  McLean,  of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court  once  said  to  me,  "  I  was  glad 
to  hear  you  give  that  solemn  personal  incident  in  your  discourse  last  night. 
MinlBterB  now-a-days  are  getting  above  telling  a  story  in  a  sermon  ;  but  I  like  it." 


«HAP.  IT.]  ST.  MARK,  179 

{T.  L.  Cuyler.)  "  Likes  "  in  a  sermon ;— "  Yon  have  no  •  likea  *  in  your  sermona," 
said  Robert  Hall  to  a  brother  minister ;  "  Christ  taught  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
was  '  like  leaven,'  tSrc.  You  tell  us  what  things  are,  but  never  what  they  are  like.** 
Parables  are  more  ancient  than  arguments.  {Lord  Bacon.)  And  when  they  were 
alone.  Christ  alone  with  His  disciples;  or,  the  parable  expounded: — I.  Thb  pab- 
ABLBS  A  PUZZLE.  It  is  Very  striking  that  the  very  means  of  instruction  should  have 
hid  the  truth,  and  even  from  His  followers.  The  parables  of  Christ  were  sometimes 
obscure  and  confounding  to  His  foes ;  that  is  not  strange.  Where  there  is  no  taste 
or  desire  for  instruction,  the  clearest  and  simplest  lessons  may  be  vain.  It  was  a 
judgment,  but  not  an  arbitrary  and  cruel  one.  It  was  a  punishment  which  the 
blinded  deserved,  and  it  was  one  which  they  inflicted  upon  themselves.  Parables 
were  among  the  easiest  and  most  interesting  methods  of  instruction.  They 
addressed  a  variety  of  powers ;  and  thus  were  suited  to  a  variety  of  minds,  and  a 
variety  of  faculties  in  the  same  mind.  But  if  the  eye  was  at  fault,  and  could  not 
see,  or  could  not  see  aright,  then  the  windows  had  no  use  ;  and  the  means  of  light 
conveyed  no  image,  or  a  false  one.  There  is  often,  and  especially  in  moral  matters, 
more  in  the  learner  than  the  lessons.  Parables  would  have  been  no  judgment,  if 
there  had  been  no  obtuseness  and  perverseness  in  the  hearers.  It  is  harder  to 
understand  how  '•  the  disciples,"  who  had  some  insight  and  sympathy,  should  have 
been  perplexed.  But  why  did  Christ  employ  a  method  which  had  the  effect  of  con- 
cealing what,  if  stated  without  a  parable,  they  must  have  seen  and  appreciated  at 
oncer  We  are  here,  my  brethren,  right  upon  a  great  and  blessed  truth.  The 
parable  taught  minds  by  taxing  them.  It  made  truth  plain  to  the  thoughtful ;  but 
required  sometimes  more,  sometimes  less  thought  for  its  comprehension.  It  was  a 
way  of  teaching,  but  by  calling  out  the  desire  and  effort  to  learn.  If  a  man  only 
heard  it,  the  truth  was  hidden ;  if  he  were  bent  on  getting  at  its  sense,  the  truth 
became  more  plain  and  powerful  by  its  means.  To  look  at  it  was  to  see  nothing  ; 
to  look  through  it  was  to  behold  most  beautiful  and  glorious  things.  ^  When  it  fell 
upon  a  passive  nature,  it  left  no  impression ;  when  it  fell  on  one  quick  and  active, 
and  in  quest  of  truth,  it  reaUzed  a  blessed  end.  As  soon  as  the  disciples,  failing  to 
apprehend  Christ's  sense,  came  to  the  prayer,  "  Declare  unto  ns  the  parable,"  they 
had  reached  the  highest  end  of  teaching :  they  not  only  were  in  the  way  to  know, 
they  were  exercising  the  powers  of  knowledge.  All  things  He  does  as  well  as  says, 
in  this  sense,  are  parables :  they  are  intended  to  teach,  but  they  teach  in  the  way 
of  training ;  they  have  in  them  an  element  of  difficulty  mercifully  fitted  to  make 
easy,  an  element  of  obscurity  mercifully  fitted  to  make  clear.  He  wishes  to  excite, 
to  awaken  the  dormant  and  stimulate  the  sluggish ;  to  call  out  our  powers ;  not 
only  to  bless  us,  but  to  bless  us  by  quickening  us ;  not  only  to  impart  knowledge, 
but  make  us  knowing ;  not  only  to  enrich  us  with  goodness  and  happiness,  but  to 
enlarge  our  capacity  for  both.  And  a  heaven  on  lighter  terms  would  be  a  heaven 
of  smaller  joy.  II.  The  diffebent  ways  in  which  the  pabables  webe  tbeated. 
Some  gaze  upon  the  mystery  scornfully  or  listlessly,  others  seek  with  deep  anxiety 
to  have  it  solved.  Difficulty  offends  or  disheartens  these,  but  stirs  up  those  to 
activity  and  zeal.  Truth  is  often  difficult.  What  is  needful  to  salvation  is  within 
the  reach  of  all,  for  an  inaccessible  boon  cannot  be  an  indispensable  blessing.  But 
truth  of  most  sorts,  as  well  as  religious,  is  not  unavoidable,  and  frequently  it  is  hard 
to  get.  And  if  we  pass  from  what  is  to  be  known  to  what  is  to  be  done,  from  the 
difficulty  of  apprehension  to  the  difficulty  of  the  performance,  tne  same  kind  of 
remark  applies,  "  Is  there  not  a  warfare  to  man  upon  the  earth?  "  Is  any  promise 
of  good  in  other  than  the  apocalyptic  form,  ♦*  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  "  f 
III.  The  pbivatb  solution  of  the  pabables.  When  the  multitude  were  sent  away, 
Matthew  says  that  the  disciples  came  to  Jesus,  requesting  an  explanation  of  Hu 
teaching.  This  is  not  the  only  occasion  mentioned  (Matt.  xv.  15),  and  we  may  be 
sure  there  were  many.  They  had  the  right,  and  availed  themselves  of  it.  And 
there  are  now  those  who  have  access,  so  to  speak,  to  the  solitude  of  the  Saviour. 
Many  only  know  Him  in  the  world,  and  the  face  of  day ;  in  His  written  word,  in 
His  general  providence;  as  the  Teacher  of  crowds,  as  the  Worker  of  wonders. 
They  might  know  Him  otherwise.  Had  this  multitude  oared  for  His  intimacy, 
they  might  have  had  it.  We,  like  the  disciples,  may  be  "  alone,"  and  alone  with 
Jesus.  It  is  not  necessary,  in  order  to  this,  that  we  should  be  absent  from  men. 
There  is  a  sohtude  of  the  flesh,  and  a  sohtude  of  the  spirit.  Christ  is  the  best 
revelation  of  spiritual  truth,  its  strongest  evidence,  and  its  only  quickening  force ; 
and  we  may  say  of  Him  and  Christianity,  what  Cowper  says  of  God  and  Provi* 
denoe — 

"  He  is  His  own  interpreter,  and  He  will  make  it  plain.** 


180  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  iv. 

Perhaps  your  parable  is  evil,  the  evil  in  the  world,  in  yourselves.  Christ  has  thli 
explanation.  And  the  same  remark  applies  to  duties.  More  faith  in  Him  will 
lighten  the  burden  and  ease  the  yoke,  however  hard  and  heavy.  **  I  can  do  all 
things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me."  He  is  model,  motive,  might  of  all 
obedience ;  and  the  life  we  live  is  His  life,  and  we  follow  Him,  and  all  we  do  is  from 
His  love  constraining  us.  There  is  a  lesson  for  all.  Some  are  painfully  exercised 
with  doubts  and  difficulties  "great  upon"  them.  They  "walk  in  darkness,"  ** a 
darkness  that  may  b«  felt."  Let  me  entreat  such  to  *'  come  to  Jesus  in  the  house ;  '* 
to  seek  the  secret  Saviour.     {A.  J.  Morris.) 

Vers.  35-41.  And  the  same  day,  when  the  eyen  was  come,  He  salth  unto 
them,  Let  us  pass  over  unto  the  other  side. — In  the  storm: — I.  The  influencb 
OF  DANGEB.  It  causcd  the  disciples  to  doubt  the  care  of  Christ  Why  is  it  we 
doubt  the  Lord  in  seasons  of  danger  ?  1.  Imperfect  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  2. 
Natural  impatience.  3.  Satanic  temptations.  U.  The  tolly  of  suspicion.  It  is 
groundless.  The  truth  is  ratified,  that  God  will  not  leave  us  to  perish.  Were  it 
not  stated  in  such  plain  terms,  we  might  infer  as  much  from — 1.  God's  formet 
dealings  with  ourselves  and  others.  2.  The  known  character  of  the  Lord.  8.  The 
relationship  in  which  we  stand  to  Him.  III.  The  secret  of  XBANQUiLLrrY.  1. 
Meditation.  2.  Prayer.  3.  Resignation.  IV.  The  blessedness  of  holy  con- 
riDENCs.  1.  It  honours  God.  2.  It  blesses  our  own  souls  afterward.  If  the 
record  had  run  thus,  "  And  there  arose  a  great  storm,  &c.,  but  the  disciples, 
believing  their  Master  would  not  suffer  them  to  perish,  watched  Him  until  He 
awoke.  And  when  Jesus  arose,  He  said,  Great  is  your  faith ;  and  He  saved  them,** 
what  joy  would  the  memory  have  brought  to  their  hearts  in  later  years  1  3.  Hereby 
we  obtain  more  speedy  relief.  Unbehef  causes  God  to  delay  or  deny  (Matt.  xiii.  68). 
(R.  A.  Oriffin.)  A  great  itorm  and  a  great  calm : — I.  The  first  aspect  of  Christ'i 
life  presented  to  us  in  this  wonderful  passage  of  Scripture  is  His  weabikess.  1.  It 
arose  from  incessant  labour.  2.  It  arose  from  laborious  work.  II.  The  second 
aspect  of  Christ's  life  brought  before  us  is  His  best.  We  regard  this  sleeping  of 
Christ — 1.  As  an  evidence  of  His  humanity.  2.  As  an  evidence  of  His  trustfulness. 
He  cast  Himself  upon  His  Father's  care,  and  was  not  afraid  of  Galilee's  stormy 
lake.  3.  As  an  evidence  of  His  goodness.  He  slept  like  one  who  had  a  good 
conscience.  UI.  But  all  too  soon  was  the  best  of  Chbisi  distubbed.  "And 
they  awoke  Him."  How  often  was  Christ's  repose  disturbed  1  Three  things  led  to 
the  disturbance  of  Christ's  rest :  1.  A  sudden  and  violent  storm.  2.  The  danger  of 
the  disciples.  3.  The  fears  of  the  disciples.  IV.  Then  followed  ▲  OLOBiona 
iiANXFEBTATioN  OF  THE  FOWEB  OF  Chbist.  1.  It  WBs  manifested  in  His  authority 
over  nature.  2.  It  was  manifested  in  His  rebuke  of  the  disciples.  3.  It  was  mani- 
fested in  His  evident  superiority  of  character.  "  What  manner  of  man  is  this  ?  " 
He  is  the  God-Man,  who  stands  equal  with  God  on  the  high  level  of  Deity,  and 
equal  with  man  on  the  low  level  of  humanity.  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me,  hath 
seen  the  Father."  {Joseph  Hughei.)  A  picture  of  the  Christian  life : — This 
narrative  is  a  touching  picture  of  the  Christian  life.  Following  its  leadings,  we 
contemplate  the  Christian  life  in  its  beginning,  in  its  progress,  in  its  issue.  I.  The 
BxoiNNiNO  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  Wc  go  out  OH  the  waves  of  life  and  have 
Christ  for  our  leader  in  the  days  of  our  childhood;  that  is,  where  we  have  the 
blessing  of  Christian  parents  and  teachers,  &o.  Oh  happy  years  of  childlike  faith  I 
How  merciless  they  who  could  rob  us  of  this  faith.  What  have  they  to  offer  in  its 
place  ?  No ;  we  will  not  be  robbed  of  it.  In  its  nature  and  essence  this  childlike 
faith  is  true  and  unchangeable ;  but  the  garment  by  which  it  is  covered,  the  veil  it 
carries  over  it,  must  be  torn  off.  The  childlike  faith  receives  the  Saviour  in  the 
only  vessel  in  which  the  child  can  receive  the  Divine — in  the  vessel  of  the  feelings. 
In  manhood  we  have  another  vessel  in  which  we  can  receive  Him — the  vessel  of  the 
understanding.  Not  that  we  should  loose  Him  from  the  vessel  of  the  feelings  as  we 
become  men,  but  that  our  manhood  should  receive  Him  into  the  understanding  as 
well  as  into  tiie  heart.  Our  childlike  faith  has  seen  the  Saviour  as  the  little  ship  of 
life  glided  over  the  smooth  waters  ;  it  has  not  yet  learnt  to  know  Him  in  the  storm 
and  the  tempest.  It  has  known  Hitti  in  His  kindness  and  love ;  He  is  not  yet 
revealed  in  His  wisdom  and  power.  II.  The  beginning  of  life  passes  by,  and  in  the 
progress  of  Ufe  Christ  slumbers  in  the  soul,  and  is  awakened  by  the  stobm.  That 
beautiful  childhke  sense  of  faith  slumbers — not  universally,  for  there  have  been 
favoured  souls  in  whom  Christ  has  never  slumbered,  who  have  retained  their 
ehi'lfiiyb  faith  to  their  ripe  manhood.    It  is  otherw^ao  in  times  of  conflict  like  these, 


OHAP.  IT.]  ST,  MARK.  181 

It  seems  that  in  these  troubled  times,  this  childlike  faith  mast  apparently  die»  t.e., 
must  thiow  off  its  veil  when  the  storm  rages,  and  rises  in  a  new  form.  Even  on 
tlie  sacred  floor  of  the  church  the  young  Christian  finds  doubt,  strife,  and  disunion, 
and  he  doubts.  The  Lord  awakes,  and  says,  "...  Canst  thou  believe  7  "  and  w« 
answer,  "...  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  There  is  faith  still, 
though  doubt  may  be  ever  so  strong  ;  there  is  still  an  anchor  firmly  fastened  in  ^e 
sanctuary  of  the  breast.  Faith  slumbers,  but  is  not  dead.  III.  That  will  be  the 
issue  if,  instead  of  yielding,  you  wrestle.  As  you  have  known  the  Saviour  earher  in 
His  kindness  and  love,  you  will  come  to  know  Him  in  His  wisdom  and  power.  Lift 
is  a  conflict.  Some  trifle  with  Ufe  ;  with  them  it  is  like  playing  with  soap  bubbles. 
They  have  never  looked  the  doubt  earnestly  m  the  face,  to  say  nothing  of  the  truth. 
God  will  not  send  the  noblest  of  His  gifts  to  laggards :  the  door  of  truth  closed 
against  those  who  would  willingly  enter  is  a  solemn  thought  (Matt.  xxv.  10, 11). 
{Dr.  Tholuch.)  The  disciples  in  the  storm : — I.  In  the  storm  while  peosecutino  thb 
Saviodb's  command — teaching.  1.  Implicit  obedience  does  not  exempt  from  trials. 
Joseph,  David,  Daniel,  St.  Paul,  &c.  2.  Trials  are  not  always  punitive,  but  always 
disciplinary.  This  trial  was  a  test  both  in  respect  to  faith  and  works,  (a)  Will 
they  beUeve  that  they  will  be  saved  ?  (&)  Will  they  go  on  in  their  line  of  duty  f 
II.  In  the  stobm  while  Jesus  was  with  them.  1.  Jesus  was  exposed  to  tiie 
same  fury  of  the  tempest,  and  to  the  same  upheavals  of  the  angry  waves,  (a)  Was 
there  ever  a  storm  in  which  Jesus  was  absent  from  His  disciples  ?  2.  Though  witii 
His  disciples.  He  was  fast  asleep,  (a)  A  symbol  of  what  frequently  occurs.  Let 
every  disciple  remember  that  a  sleeping  Christ  is  not  a  dead  Christ,  {b)  Though 
asleep,  He  has  not  forgotten  His  disciples.    III.  In  the  stobm  whilb  Jebus  was 

WITH   THEM,   AND  TET  THEY  HAD  TO    CBY    TO    HiM    FOB    DELIVEBANCB.      1.   PrayOt  IS 

the  disciples'  privilege  and  duty  at  all  times,  especially  in  times  of  trial  and  peril. 
2.  The  prayer  that  arises  from  a  believing  heart  can  never  go  imanswered.    IV.  In 

THE   STOBM  DELIVEBED   FBOM  THE   STOBM   IN  ANSWEB  TO  PBAYEB.      1.   Chlist'S  Divine 

power  was  not  affected  by  physical  fatigue.  2.  Jesus,  touched  by  the  cry  of  His 
disciples,  wields  a  power  before  which  nothing  can  stand.  V.  Delivebancb  fbom 
THE  STOBM  A  OBAND  MOBAL  powEB.  1.  It  cxcrcised  a  moral  power,  awakening 
deeper  reverence  for  Christ  as  Messiah.  2.  Awakening  greater  awe  for  Christ  as  the 
Son  of  God.  (D.  C.  Hughes^  M.A.)  God's  storms : — They  only  measure  Christ 
aright,  who  are  forced  to  carry  to  Him  some  great  grief,  and  find  by  experience  He 
is  great  enough  to  save  them.  It  is  when  men  have  weighed  Him  in  Uie  balances 
of  some  great  necessity,  and  found  Him  not  wanting,  that  they  believe  in  Him.  So 
the  disciples  are  sent  to  school.  Storm  and  danger  are  for  the  night  to  be  their 
schoolmasters,  bringing  them  to  Christ,  not  with  wonder  or  service  merely,  but  with 
suppliant  prayers.  So  starting,  they  get  on  their  journey  a  little  way,  hoping,  I 
suppose,  that  an  hour  and  a  half  will  see  them  comfortably  across ;  when  lo  1  this  gale 
breaks  on  them  with  the  fury  of  a  wild  beast.  They  are  stunned  with  its  suddenness. 
Doubtless  in  an  instant  the  sa'*  s  lowered,  oars  are  shipped,  and  carefully  keeping 
head  to  wind  or  giving  way  htt^nte  it,  they  seek  to  avoid  getting  broadside  on  to  the 
waves  in  the  dangerous  troag^a  of  the  sea.  It  is  touching  to  see  how  they  shrink 
from  waking  Him.  Pitiiul  for  His  weariness,  reverent  to  His  dignity,  they  run 
every  risk  they  dare  before  presuming  to  disturb  Him.  Yet  how  confused  they 
must  have  felt.  A  sleeping  Christ  seems  a  contradiction.  If  Saviour  of  men,  why 
does  He  not  rise  to  save  Himself  and  them  ?  If  He  is  ignorant  of  the  storm,  and 
about  to  be  drowned,  how  came  His  mighty  works  ?  Such  is  life  I  The  sea  calm 
— gleam  of  setting  sun  or  rising  stars  reflected  on  the  limpid  surface ;  no  occasion 
of  solicitude  disturbs  the  heart,  and  you  are  making  good  progress  to  some  haven 
of  rest,  when  suddenly  a  storm  of  cares  overwhelms  the  soul,  and  so  batters  and 
agitates  it  that  it  is  like  to  be  drowned  beneath  their  weight ;  or  a  storm  of  grief 
rises  from  some  bereavement,  and  threatens  to  overwhelm  aU  faith  or  hope  in  God ; 
or  a  storm  of  temptation  assails  and  seems  to  make  goodness  impossible,  and  ruin 
inevitable.  And  still  Christ  seems  asleep.  It  seems  as  if  He  must  be  either  igno- 
rant or  indifferent,  and  you  do  not  know  which  of  the  two  conclusions  is  sadder  to 
come  to.  Murmur  not.  Others  have  been  in  storms,  and  thought  the  Saviour 
listless  ;  but  He  is  never  beyond  the  call  of  faith.  (iJ.  Olover.)  Christ  in  trie 
storm : — It  is,  then,  no  freak  of  fancy  to  see  in  this  narrative  an  acted  parable,  if 
you  will,  an  acted  prophecy.  Again  and  again  the  Church  of  Christ  has  been  all 
but  engulfed,  as  men  might  have  deemed,  in  the  billows;  again  and  again  the 
storm  has  boen  calmed  by  the  Master,  who  had  seemed  for  awhile  to  sleep.  I. 
Often  has  Chbistianity  passed  XHBOuaH  the  tboubled  watebs  of  political  oppos^ 


182  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

TiON.  During  the  first  three  centuries,  and  finally  under  Julian,  the  heathen  Stat« 
made  repeated  and  desperate  attempts  to  suppress  it  by  force.  Statesmen  and 
philosophers  undertook  the  task  of  eradicating  it,  not  passionately,  but  in  the  same 
temper  of  calm  resolution  with  which  they  would  have  approached  any  other  well- 
considered  social  problem.  More  than  once  they  drove  it  from  the  army,  from  the 
professions,  from  the  public  thoroughfares,  into  secrecy  ;  they  pursued  it  into  the 
vaults  beneath  the  palaces  of  Eome,  into  the  catacombs,  into  the  deserts.  It  seemed 
as  if  the  faith  would  be  trodden  out  with  the  hfe  of  so  many  of  the  faithful :  but  he 
who  would  persecute  with  effect  must  leave  none  aHve.  The  Church  passed  through 
these  fearful  storms  into  the  calm  of  an  ascertained  supremacy  ;  but  she  had  scarcely 
done  so,  when  the  vast  poUtical  and  social  system  which  had  so  long  oppieeacd  her, 
and  which  by  her  persistent  suffering  she  had  at  length  made  in  some  sense  her 
own,  itself  began  to  break  up  beneath  and  around  her.  The  barbarian  invasions 
followed  one  upon  another  with  merciless  rapidity ;  and  St.  Augustine's  lamenta- 
tions upon  the  sack  of  Rome  express  the  feelings  with  which  the  higher  minds  in 
the  Church  must  have  beheld  the  completed  humihation  of  the  Empire.  Christi- 
anity  had  now  to  face,  not  merely  a  change  of  civil  rulers,  but  a  fundamental  recon- 
Btmction  of  society.  It  might  have  been  predicted  with  great  appearance  of 
probability  that  a  religious  system  which  had  suited  the  enervated  provincials  of 
the  decaying  empire  would  never  make  its  way  among  the  free  and  strong  races 
that,  amid  scenes  of  fire  and  blood,  were  laying  the  foundations  of  feudalism.  In 
the  event  it  was  otherwise.  The  hordes  wlach  shattered  the  work  of  the  Cflesars 
learnt  to  repeat  the  Catholic  Creed,  and  a  new  order  of  things  had  formed  itself, 
when  the  tempest  of  Mahomedanism  broke  upon  Christendom.  Politically  speak- 
ing, this  was  perhaps  the  most  threatening  storm  through  which  the  Christian 
Church  has  passed.  There  was  a  time  when  the  soldiers  of  that  stunted  and  im- 
moral caricature  of  the  Revelation  of  the  One  True  God,  which  was  set  forth  by  the 
false  prophet,  had  already  expelled  the  very  Name  of  Christ  from  the  country  of 
Cyprian  and  Augustine ;  they  were  masters  of  the  Mediterranean ;  they  had  desolated 
Spain,  were  encamped  in  the  heart  of  France,  were  ravaging  the  sea-board  of  Italy. 
It  was  as  if  the  knell  of  Christendom  had  sounded.  But  Christ,  '•  if  asleep  on  a 
pillow  in  the  hinder  part  of  the  ship,"  was  not  insensible  to  the  terrors  of  Hia 
servants.  He  rose  to  rebuke  those  winds  and  waves,  as  by  Charles  Martel  in  one 
ftge,  and  by  Sobieski  in  another;  it  is  now  more  than  two  centuries  since  Islam  inspired 
its  ancient  dread.  The  last  like  trial  of  the  Church  was  the  first  French  Revolution. 
In  that  vast  convulsion  Christianity  had  to  encounter  forces  which  for  awhile  seemed 
to  threaten  its  total  suppression.  Yet  the  men  of  the  Terror  have  passed,  as  the 
Cffisars  had  passed  before  them ;  and  like  the  Csesars,  they  have  only  proved  to  the 
world  that  the  Church  carries  vrithin  her  One  who  rules  the  fierce  tempests  in  which 
human  institutions  are  wont  to  perish.  II.  PoUtical  dangers,  however,  do  but  touch 
the  Church  of  Christ  outwardly ;  but  she  rests  upon  the  intelligent  assent  of  her 

children,  and  she  has  passed  AOAIN  and  again  THB0>1i»H  the  storms  op  INTELLECTUAIi 

OPPOSITION  OB  REVOLT.  Scarcely  had  she  steered  fcitt)  from  the  comparatively  still 
waters  of  Galilean  and  Hellenistic  devotion  than  she  ha  1  to  encounter  the  pitiless 
dialectic,  the  subtle  solvents,  of  the  Alexandrian  philosophy.  It  was  as  if  in  antici- 
pation of  this  danger  that  St.  John  had  already  baptized  the  Alexandrian  modifica- 
tion of  the  Platonic  Logos,  moulding  it  so  as  to  express  the  sublimest  and  most 
central  truth  of  the  Christian  Creed ;  while,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  Alex- 
andrian methods  of  interpretation  had  been  adopted  in  vindication  of  the  gospel. 
But  to  many  a  timid  believer  it  may  well  have  seemed  that  Alexandrianism  would 
prove  the  grave  of  Christianity,  when,  combining  the  Platonic  dialectics  with  an 
Eclectic  Philosophy,  it  endeavoured  in  the  form  of  Arianism  to  break  up  the  Unity 
of  the  Godhead  by  making  Christ  a  separate  and  inferior  Deity.  There  was  a  day 
when  Arianism  seemed  to  be  triumphant;  but  even  Arianism  was  a  less 
formidable  foe  than  the  subtle  strain  of  infidel  speculation  which  penetrated 
the  Christian  intellect  in  the  very  heart  of  the  Middle  Ages,  that  is  to  say, 
at  a  time  when  the  sense  of  the  supernatural  had  diffused  itself  throughout 
the  whole  atmosphere  of  human  thought.  This  unbelief  was  the  product  some- 
times of  a  rude  sensuality  rebelling  against  the  precepts  of  the  gospel ;  sometimes 
of  the  culture  divorced  from  faith  which  made  its  appearance  in  the  twelfth  century ; 
sometimes,  specificaUy,  of  the  influence  of  the  Arabian  philosophy  from  Spain ; 
sometimes  of  the  vast  and  penetrating  activity  of  the  Jewish  teachers.  It  revealed 
itself  constantly  nnder  the  most  unexpected  circumstances.  We  need  not  suppose 
that  the  great  Order  of  the  Templars  was  guilty  of  tb«  infidelity  that,  along  with  crimef 


tHAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK.  18t 

of  the  gravest  character,  was  laid  to  their  charge  ;  a  study  of  their  proceBsea  is  their 
best  acquittal,  while  it  is  the  condemnation  of  their  persecutors.  But  unbelief  most 
have  been  widespread  in  days  when  a  prominent  soldier,  John  of  Soissons,  oonld 
declare  that  "  all  that  was  preached  concerning  Christ's  Passion  and  Besurrection 
\  as  a  mere  farce ; "  when  a  pious  bishop  of  Paris  left  it  on  record  that  he  *•  died 
believing  in  the  Eesurrection,  with  the  hope  that  some  of  his  educated  but  seeptical 
friends  would  reconsider  their  doubts  ;  "  when  that  keen  observer,  as  Neander  terms 
him,  Hugh  of  St.  Victor,  remarks  the  existence  of  a  large  class  of  men  whose  faith 
consisted  in  nothing  eke  than  merely  taking  care  not  to  contradict  the  faith — 
"  quibus  credere  est  solum  fidei  non  contradicere,  qui  consuetudine  vivendi  magis, 
quam  virtute  credendi  fideles  nominantur."  The  prevalance  of  such  unbehef  is 
attested  at  once  by  the  fundamental  nature  of  many  of  the  questions  discussed  at 
the  greatest  length  by  the  Schoolmen,  and  by  the  unconcealed  anxieties  of  the  great 
spiritual  leaders  of  the  time.  After  the  Middle  Ages  came  the  Renaissance.  This 
is  not  the  time  or  place  to  deny  the  services  which  the  Renaissance  has  rendered  to 
the  cause  of  human  education,  and  indirectly,  it  may  be,  to  that  of  Christianity. 
But  the  Renaissance  was  at  first,  as  it  appeared  in  Italy,  a  pure  enthusiasm  for 
Paganism,  for  Pagan  thought,  as  well  as  for  Pagan  art  and  Pagan  hterature.  And 
the  Reformation,  viewed  on  its  positive  and  devotional  side,  was,  at  least  in  the 
South  of  Europe,  a  reaction  against  the  spirit  of  the  Renaissance :  it  was  the  Pa- 
ganism, even  more  than  the  indulgences  of  Leo  X.,  which  aUenated  the  Germans. 
The  reaction  against  this  Paganism  was  not  less  vigorous  within  the  Church  of 
Rome  than  without  it ;  Ranke  has  told  us  the  story  of  its  disappearance.  Lastly, 
there  was  the  rise  of  Deism  in  England,  and  of  the  Encyclopedist  School  in 
France,  followed  by  the  pure  Atheism  which  preceded  the  Revolution.  It  might 
well  have  seemed  to  fearful  men  of  that  day  that  Christ  was  indeed  asleep  to  wake 
no  more,  that  the  surging  waters  of  an  infidel  philosophy  had  well-nigh  filled  the 
ship,  and  that  the  Church  had  only  to  sink  with  dignity.  III.  Worse  than  the 
storms  of  political  violence  or  of  intellectual  rebellion,  have  been  the  tempests  of 

INSURGENT  IIIIIORAIJTT   THROUGH   WHICH    THE    ChURCH   HAS  PASSED.      In   the   agCS   of 

persecution  there  was  less  risk  of  this,  although  evan  then  there  were  scandals. 
The  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  reveal  beneath  the  very  eyes  of  the  Apostle  a  state 
of  moral  corruption,  which,  in  one  respect  at  least,  he  himself  tells  us,  had  fallen 
below  the  Pagan  standard.  But  when  entire  populations  pressed  within  the  fold, 
and  social  or  political  motives  for  conformity  took  the  place  of  serious  and  strong 
conviction  in  the  minds  of  multitudes,  these  dangers  became  formidable.  What 
must  have  been  the  agony  of  devout  Christians  in  the  tenth  century,  when  appoint- 
ments to  the  Roman  Chair  itself  were  in  the  hands  of  three  unprincipled  and  hcen- 
tious  women  ;  and  when  the  life  of  the  first  Christian  bishop  was  accounted  such 
that  a  pilgrimage  to  Rome  involved  a  loss  of  character.  Well  might  the  austere 
Bruno  exclaim  of  that  age  that  "  Simon  Magus  lorded  it  over  a  Church  in  which 
bishops  and  priests  were  given  to  luxury  and  fornication :  '*  well  might  Cardinal 
Baronius  suspend  the  generally  laudatory  or  apologetic  tone  of  his  Annals,  to 
observe  that  Christ  must  have  in  this  age  been  asleep  in  the  ship  of  the  Church  to 
permit  such  enormities.  It  was  a  dark  time  in  the  moral  life  of  Christendom  :  but 
there  have  been  dark  times  since.  Such  was  that  when  St.  Bernard  could  allow 
himself  to  describe  the  Roman  Curia  as  he  does  in  addressing  Pope  Engenius  III. ; 
such  again  was  the  epoch  which  provoked  the  work  of  Nicholas  de  Cleargis,  "  On 
the  Ruin  of  the  Church."  The  passions,  the  ambitions,  the  worldly  and  political 
interests  which  surged  around  the  Papal  throne,  had  at  length  issued  in  the  schism 
of  Avignon  ;  and  the  writer  passionately  exclaims  that  the  Church  had  fallen  pro- 
portiouately  to  her  corruptions,  which  he  enumerates  with  an  unsparing  precision. 
During  the  century  which  preceded  the  Reformation,  the  state  of  clerical  discipline 
in  London  was  such  as  to  explain  the  vehemence  of  popular  reaction  ;  and  if  in  the 
last  century  there  was  an  absence  of  grossness,  such  as  had  prevailed  in  previous 
ages,  there  was  a  greater  absence  of  spirituality.  Says  Bishop  Butler,  charging  the 
clergy  of  the  Diocese  of  Durham  in  1751 — '  *  As  different  ages  have  been  distinguished 
by  different  sortt*  of  particular  errors  and  vices,  the  deplorable  distinction  of  ours  is 
aji  avowed  scorn  of  religion  \n  some,  and  a  growing  disregard  to  it  in  the  generality." 
That  disregard,  bemg  in  its  essence  moral,  would  hardly  have  been  arrested  by  the 
cnltivateil  reasoners,  who  were  obliged  to  content  themselves  with  deistio  premises 
in  their  defences  of  Christianity  :  it  did  yield  to  the  fervid  appeals  of  Whitefield  and  of 
Wesley.  With  an  imperfect  idea  of  the  real  contents  and  genms  of  the  Christian 
Creed,  and  with  almost  no  iden  at  all  of  its  majestic  relations  to  history  and  to 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tf, 

thought,  these  men  struck  a  chord  for  which  we  may  well  be  grateful.  They  awoke 
Christ,  sleeping  in  the  conscience  of  England  ;  they  were  the  real  harbingers  of  a 
day  brighter  than  their  oun.  IV.  For  if  the  question  be  asked,  how  the  Church  ol 
Christ  has  surmounted  these  successive  dangers,  the  answer  is,  by  the  appeal  of 
PRAYER.  She  has  cried  to  her  Master,  who  is  ever  in  the  ship,  though,  as  it  may 
seem,  asleep  upon  a  pillow.  The  appeal  has  often  been  made  impatiently,  even 
violently,  as  on  the  waves  of  Gennesaret,  but  it  has  not  been  made  iu  vain.  It  has 
not  been  by  pohcy,  or  good  sense,  or  considerations  of  worldly  prudence,  but  by  a 
renewal  in  very  various  ways  of  the  first  fresh  Christian  enthusiasm  which  flowB 
from  the  felt  presence  of  Christ,  that  political  enemies  have  been  baffled,  and 
intellectual  difficulties  reduced  to  their  true  dimensions,  and  moral  sores  extirpated 
or  healed.  Christianity  does  thus  contain  within  itself  the  secret  of  its  perpetual 
youth,  the  certificate  of  its  indestructible  vitality ;  because  it  centres  in,  it  is  in- 
separable from,  devotion  to  a  living  Person.  No  ideal  lacking  a  counterpart  in  fact 
could  have  guided  the  Church  across  the  centuries.  Imagination  may  do  much  in 
quiet  and  prosperous  times ;  but  amid  the  storms  of  hostile  prejudice  and  passion, 
in  presence  of  political  vicissitudes  or  of  intellectual  onslaughts,  or  of  moral  rebel- 
lion or  decay,  an  unreal  Saviour  must  be  found  out.  A  Christ  upon  paper,  though 
it  were  the  sacred  pages  of  the  gospel,  would  have  been  as  powerless  to  save  Chris- 
tendom as  a  Christ  in  fresco  ;  not  less  feeble  than  the  Countenance  which,  in  the 
last  stages  of  its  decay,  may  be  traced  on  the  wall  of  the  Eefectory  at  Milan.  A 
living  Christ  is  the  key  to  the  phenomenon  of  Christian  history.  The  subject 
suggests,  among  others,  two  reflections  in  particular.  And,  first,  it  is  a  duty  to  be 
on  our  guard  against  panics.  Panics  are  the  last  infirmity  of  believing  souls.  But 
panics  are  to  be  deprecated,  not  because  they  imply  a  keen  interest  in  the  fortunes 
of  religion,  but  because  tJbey  betray  a  certain  distrust  of  the  power  and  hving  presence 
of  our  Lord.  Science  may  for  the  moment  be  hostile ;  in  the  long  run  it  cannot 
but  befriend  ns.  And  He  who  is  with  ns  in  the  storm  is  most  assuredly  beyond 
the  reach  of  harm  :  to  be  panic-stricken  is  to  dishonour  Him.  A  second  reflection 
is  this :  a  time  of  trouble  and  danger  is  the  natural  season  for  generous  devotion. 
To  generous  minds  a  time  of  trouble  has  its  own  attractions.  It  enables  a  man  to 
hope,  with  less  risk  of  presumption,  that  his  motives  are  sincere ;  it  fortifies  courage ; 
it  suggests  self -distrust ;  it  enriches  character ;  it  invigorates  faith.  {Canon  Liddon.) 
The  Ruler  of   the  waves: — I.  That  roLLowiNG   Christ  will  not  prevent  oub 

HATINO  earthly  SORROWS  AND  TROUBLES.  II.  ThAT  THE  LoRD  JeSUS  ChRIST  IS 
TRULY  AND  REALLY   MAN.       III.   ThAT  THERE   MAY  BE   MUCH  WEAKNESS  AND  INPIRMITY 

IN  A  TRUE  Christian.  "  Master,  carest  Thou  not  that  we  perish  ?  '*  1.  There  was 
impatience.  2.  There  was  distrust.  3.  There  was  imbelief.  Many  of  God's 
children  go  on  very  well  so  long  as  they  have  no  trials.  IV.  The  power  op  thb 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  His  power  in  creation.  2.  In  the  works  of  providence. 
8.  In  His  miracles.  Christ  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost "  (Heb.  vii.  25).  V.  How 

TENDERLY  AND    PATIENTLY  THB    LoRD   JeSUS    DEALS    WITH    WEAK     BELIEVERS.        The 

Lord  Jesus  is  of  tender  mercy.  He  will  not  cast  away  His  believing  people  because 
of  shortcomings.      {J.  G.  Ryle^  M.A.)        The  hurricane  : — I.  That  when  you  are 

GOING   to  take   a  VOYAGE   OP    ANY  KIND  YOU   OUGHT    TO    HAVE   ChRIST    IN    THE    SHIP. 

These  boats  would  aU  have  gone  to  the  bottom  if  Christ  had  not  been  there.  You 
are  about  to  voyage  out  into  some  new  enterprise ;  you  are  bound  to  do  the  best  you 
can  for  yourself ;  be  sure  to  take  Christ  in  the  ship.  Here  are  men  largely  prospered. 
They  are  not  puffed  up.  They  acknowledge  God  who  gives  them  their  prosperity. 
When  disaster  comes  that  destroys  others,  they  are  only  helped  into  higher  ex- 
periences. Christ  is  in  the  ship.  Here  are  other  men,  the  prey  of  uncertainties. 
in  the  storm  of  sickness  you  will  want  Christ.  II.  That  people  who  follow 
Christ  must  not  always  expect  smooth  sailing.  If  there  are  any  people  who 
you  would  think  ought  to  have  a  good  time  in  getting  out  of  this  world,  the  apostles 
of  Jesus  Christ  ought  to  have  been  the  men.  Have  you  ever  noticed  how  they  got 
out  of  the  world  ?  St.  James  lost  his  head.  St.  PMlip  was  hung  to  death  against 
a  pillar.  Matthew  was  struck  to  death  by  a  halberd.  Mark  was  dragged  to  death 
through  the  streets.  St.  James  the  Less  had  his  brains  dashed  out  with  a  fuller's 
club.  St.  MatthiM  was  stoned  to  death.  St.  Thomas  was  struck  through  with  a 
spear.  John  Huss  in  the  fire,  the  Albigenses,  the  Waldenses,  the  Scotch  Cove- 
nanters— did  they  always  find  smooth  sailing  ?  Why  go  so  far  ?  There  is  a  young 
man  in  a  store  in  New  York  who  has  a  hard  time  to  maintain  his  Christian  character. 
All  the  clerks  laugh  at  him,  the  employers  in  that  store  laugh  at  him,  and  when  he 
loses  his  patience  they  say :  **  You  are  a  pretty  Chrisiian."    Not  so  easy  is  it  foi 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  MARK,  185 

that  young  man  to  follow  Christ.  If  the  Lord  did  not  help  him  hour  by  hour 
be  would  fail.  III.  Tuat  good  pbople  sometimes  get  very  much  fbiohtened. 
And  80  it  is  now  that  you  often  find  good  people  wildly  agitated.  ♦♦  Oh  1  "  saya 
some  Christian  man,  "  the  infidel  magazines,  the  bad  newspapers,  the  spiritualistie 
societies,  the  importation  of  so  many  foreign  errors,  the  Church  of  God  is  going  to 
be  lost,  the  ship  is  going  to  founder !  The  ship  is  going  down  1  "  What  are  you 
frightened  about  ?  An  old  lion  goes  into  his  cavern  to  take  a  sleep,  and  he  lies  down 
until  his  shaggy  mane  covers  his  paws.  Meanwhile,  the  spiders  outside  begin  to 
spin  webs  over  the  mouth  of  his  cavern,  and  say :  •♦  That  lion  cannot  break  out 
through  this  web,"  and  they  keep  on  spinning  the  gossamer  threads  until  they  get 
the  mouth  of  the  cavern  covered  over.  "  Now,"  they  say,  "  the  lion's  done,  the 
lion's  done."  After  awhile  the  lion  awakes  and  shakes  himself,  and  he  walks  out 
from  the  cavern,  never  knowing  there  were  any  spiders'  webs,  and  with  his  voice  he 
shakes  the  mountain.  Let  the  infidels  and  the  sceptics  of  this  day  go  on  spinning 
their  webs,  spinning  their  infidel  gossamer  theories,  spinning  them  all  over  the 
place  where  Christ  seems  to  be  sleeping.  They  sav :  "  Christ  can  never  again  come 
out ;  the  work  is  done ;  He  can  never  get  through  this  logical  web  we  have  been 
spinning."  The  day  will  come  when  the  Lion  of  Judah's  tribe  will  rouse  Himself 
and  come  forth  and  shake  mightily  the  nations.  What  then  all  your  gossamer 
threads  ?  What  is  a  spider's  web  to  an  aroused  lion  t  Do  not  fret,  then,  about  the 
world's  going  backward.  It  is  going  forward.  IV.  That  Christ  can  hush  thb 
TEMPEST.  Christ  can  hush  the  tempest  of  bereavement,  loss  and  death.  {Dr, 
Talmage.)  The  toiling  Christ  : — I.  Point  out  some  of  the  significant  hints  which 
the  gospel  records  give  us  of  the  toilsomeness  of  Christ's  service.  In  St. 
Matthew's  Gospel  the  idea  of  the  king  is  prominent ;  in  St.  Mark's,  Christ  as  a 
servant.  Notice  the  traits  of  His  service  which  it  brings  out.  1.  How  distinctly 
it  gives  the  impression  of  swift,  strenuous  work.  Mark's  favourite  word  is  "  straight- 
way," "  immediately,"  "  forthwith,"  "  anon."  His  whole  story  is  a  picture  of  rapid 
acts  of  mercy  and  love.  2.  We  see  in  Christ's  service,  toil  prolonged  to  the  point  of 
actual  physical  exhaustion.  So  in  this  story.  He  had  had  a  long  wearying  day  of 
work.  He  had  spoken  the  whole  of  the  parables  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God. 
No  wonder  He  slept.  3.  We  see  in  Christ  toil  that  puts  aside  the  claims  of  physical 
wants.  *•  The  multitude  cometh  together  again  so  that  they  could  not  so  much  as 
eat  bread."  4.  We  see  in  Christ's  service  a  love  which  is  at  every  man's  beck  and 
call,  a  toil  cheerfully  rendered  at  the  most  unreasonable  and  unseasonable  times. 
II.  The  springs  of  this  wonderfuii  activity.  There  are  three  points  which  come 
out  in  the  Gospels  as  His  motives  for  such  unresting  toil.  The  first  is  conveyed  in 
such  words  as  these :  "  I  must  work  the  works  of  Hun  that  sent  Me."  This  motive 
made  the  service  homogeneous — in  all  the  variety  of  service  one  spirit  was  expressed, 
and  therefore  the  service  was  one.  The  second  motive  of  His  toil  is  expressed  in 
such  words  as  these :  "  While  I  am  in  the  world  I  am  the  light  of  the  world." 
There  is  a  final  motive  expressed  in  such  words  as  these :  "  And  Jesus,  moved  with 
compassion,"  &c.  The  constant  pity  of  that  beating  heart  moved  the  diligent 
hand.  III.  The  worth  of  this  toil  fob  us.  How  precious  a  proof  it  is  of 
Christ's  humanity.  Labour  is  a  curse  till  made  a  blessing  by  communion  with  God 
in  it.  1.  Task  all  your  capacity  and  use  every  minute  in  doing  the  thing  that  ia 
plainly  set  before  you.  2.  The  possible  harmony  of  communion  and  service.  The 
labour  did  not  break  His  fellowship  with  God.  3.  The  cheerful,  constant  postpone- 
ment  of  our  own  ease,  wishes,  or  pleasure,  to  the  call  of  the  Father's  voice.  4.  It 
is  an  appeal  to  our  grateful  hearts.  {Dr.  McLaren.)  The  great  calm  ;— "  He 
maketh  the  storm  a  calm."  The  "  calm  "  then  is  the  voice  of  God.  1.  Of  power. 
5.  Of  love.  3.  Of  peace.  4.  Of  warning.  No  earthly  calm  lasts.  I.  The  inner 
CALM.  In  every  soul  there  has  been  storm.  It  rages  through  the  whole  being. 
But  Jesus  is  the  stiller  of  this  storm  in  man.  1.  In  his  conscience.  2.  In  his 
heart.  3.  In  his  intellect.  II.  The  future  calm  for  earth.  In  every  aspect 
ours  is  a  stormy  world.  But  its  day  of  calm  is  coming.  Jesus  will  say  to  it,  Peace, 
be  still.  1.  As  a  Prophet.  2.  As  a  Priest.  3.  As  a  King,  to  give  the  calm  of 
heaven.  {H.  Bonar^  D.D.)  **  Peace,  be  still !  " ; — No  words  can  exaggerate  the 
value  and  importance  of  a  calm  mind.  It  is  the  basis  of  almost  everything  which 
is  good.  Well-ordered  reflections,  meditation,  influence,  wise  speech — all  embosom 
themselves  in  a  calm  mind.  Yet  a  state  of  agitation  is  with  many  the  rule  of  life. 
Consider  Jesus  as  the  stiller  of  the  heart.  He  was  most  eminently  a  still  character. 
The  greatest  force  of  energy  and  the  largest  activity  of  mind  and  body  are  not  only 
compatible  with  stillness,  but  they  go  to  make  it.    The  persons  of  the  largest  power 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

and  the  most  telling  action  are  generally  the  quietest.    TRey  may  owe  it  to 

discipline  and  drill — and  perhaps  Christ  Himself  did — but  they  show  themselves 

reined  in  and  well-ordered.     Just  as  it  was  in  the  lake:  the  wind  and  the  wares 

went  before,  and,  so  to  speak,  subdued  and  made  the  calm.    The  placidity  of  a 

fiery  and  passionate  nature  is  the  best  of  foundations  for  all  quietness.    And  this 

may  be  a  thought  of  strength  and  encouragement  to  some.     The  more  resolute  the 

will,  and  the  more  violent  the  passion.the  more  complete  may  be  the  victory,  and  the 

more  imperturbable  the  temper,  if  only  grace  do  its  proper  work.    Want  of  rehgious 

peace  lies  at  the  root  of  all  that  is  trouble  to  the  mind.    A  man  at  peace  with  God 

will  be  at  peace  with  his  own  conscience,  with  the  world ;  he  will  not  have  his 

feelings  greatly  aggravated  by  external  things.    Yon  won't  be  much  disturbed  by 

anything  if  you  feel  and  when  you  feel — "  My  Father  I    My  Father !    Jesus  is  mine, 

and  I  am  His  1  "    Next,  if  you  will  be  calm,  make  pictures  to  yourself  of  all  calm 

things — in  nature,  in  history,  in  people  you  know,  and  above  all,  in  Christ.    Take 

care  that  yon  do  this  at  the  moment  when  you  begin  to  feel  the  temptation  to  die- 

torbance.    But  still  more  realize  at  such  times  Cnrist's  presence.      Is  not  He 

with  yon  f — is  not  He  in  you  ? — and  can  restless,  miserable,  burning  feelings  dare 

to  live  in  snch  a  tenement  ?    Let  the  fiercest  thought  touch  Him,  and  by  a  strange 

fascination,  it  will  clothe  itself,  and  lie  at  His  feet.    And,  fourthly,  recognize  it  as 

the  very  office  and  prerogative  of  Christ  to  give  quietness.    And  if  He  gives  this, 

who  then  can  make  trouble  I    The  disciples  were  more  amazed  at  this  triumph 

of  Christ  over  the  elements,  with  which  they  were  so  familiar  in  their  sea  life, 

than  at  all  His  other  miracles.    And  it  is  not  too  much  for  me  to  say  that 

Toa  will  never  know  what  Jesus  is,  or  what  that  word  Saviour  means,  until  yoa 

have   felt  in  that  heart  of    yours — ^which  was  once  so  troubled,  so  heaving,  so 

tossed,  and  so  ill  at  ease — all  the  depth  and  the  calm,  and  all  the  beauty  and 

the  hush  which  He  has  given  yon.     {J.   Vaughan^  M.A.)        Consult  the  chart 

in  fine  at  well  as  in  stormy  weather: — ^Let  as  not  be  like  that  captain  of  whom 

we  lately  heard,  who  having  a  true   and  correct  chart  in  his  cabin,  failed  to 

consult  it  while  the  weather  was  calm,  but  went  below  to  look  for  it  only  when 

the  vdnd  and  tide  had  drifted  his  barque  upon  the  bar,  and  so,  with  his  eyes  upon 

the  course  he  should  have  steered,  felt  the  shock  which  in  a  few  moments  sent 

them  down  into  the  abyss.    Our  souls  are  like  a  ship  upon  the  deep,  and  as  we  sail 

over  the  waves  of  life,  we  must,  like  wary  mariners,  take  the  hints  given  us  in 

oar  nature.    If  we  see  on  the  horizon  a  cloud  of  some  possible  temptation  no  bigger 

than  a  man's  hand,  though  all  else  be  bright  and  clear — if  we  hear  but  the  first 

blast  of  some  probable  sin  hurtling  in  the  farthest  caverns  of  our  life  —  we  must 

beware,  for  in  that  speck,  in  that  distant  howl  may  couch  a  tempest  ready  to  spring 

up  and  leap  down  upon  our  souls.    Above  all  we  should  always  have  Christ  aboard 

with  ns ;  we  should  have  Him  formed  within  us  as  our  hope  of  glory ;  under  His 

ensign  we  should  sail,  as  our  only  hope  of  reaching  that  haven  for  which  we  are 

making.       {W.  B.  Philpot,  M.A.)  Utilizing   Christ's  presence: — Too  many 

Christians — nay,  almost  all  of  as  at  too  many  times,  though  we  have  Christ  with  us, 

do  not  profit  by  His  presence  nor  enjoy  Him  as  we  ought.     We  should  not  only 

have  Christ,  but,  having  Him,  ah  why  have  we  not  that  faitl),  that  assurance  of 

faith,  that  full  assurance  of  faith,  which  can  realize  and  utilize  His  presence  ?  {Ibid.) 

Christ  and  His  disciples  in  the  storm : — I.  The  apostles  were  not  exempted  from 

danger  because  they  were  the  attendants  of  Christ.    Believers,  look  for  storms  t 

II.  While  the  apostles  were  exposed  to  the  storm,  they  had  Christ  along  with  them 

in  the  vessel.    III.  The  conduct  of  Christ  during  the  storm  was  remarkable  and 

instructive.    He  was  asleep.    IV.  The  feelings  and  conduct  of  the  disciples  during 

the  storm  are  strongly  illustrative  of  human  character.    Their  faith  was  tried. 

They  were  afraid.    They  apply  to  Christ.    Prayer  not  always  the  language  of  faith. 

Y.  The  effect  of  this  application  of  the  disciples  to  Christ.    He  answered  their 

prayer,  though  their  faith  was  weak.    He  thus  revealed  His  Divine  power.    He 

unveiled  His  ordinary  agency.    VI.  Christ,  with  the  blessing,  administers  a  rebuke. 

Mark  your  conduct  under  trials.    VII.  The  disciples  came  out  of  the  trial  with 

increased  admiration  of  Christ.     (Expository  Discourses.)         Christ  asleep  in  the 

vessel : — I.  The  apparent  indifference  of  the  Lord  to  His  people,    n.  It  is  only 

apparent.    III.  He  has  a  real  care  for  them  at  times  when  He  seems  indifferent. 

IV.  They  shall  see  this  to  be  the  case  by  and  by.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon).        Trust  in 

God  often  the  last  extremity : — While  a  small    steam-packet    was    crossing    a 

stormy  bay,  the  engine  snddenly  stopped,  and  for  a  few  minutes  the  situation  was 

one  of  real  peril.    One  old  lady  rushed  to  the  captain  with  the  anxious  inquiry 


CHAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK.  l«f 

■whether  there  was  any  danger.    "  Madam,"  was  the  unoompromismg  reply,  "  we 
must  trust  in  God."     "  O  sir  I  "  wailed  the  inquirer,  •♦  has  it  come  to  that  ?  "    A 
good  many  Christians  feel  like  that  in  times  of  peril ;  they  are  willing  to  trust  in 
everything — except  God.    There  are  some  children  who  are  afraid  that  a  thunder - 
storm  is  about  to  burst  over  them  every  time  a  cloud  gathers  in  the  sky  ;  and  if 
the  sky  is  cloudless,  they  are  certain  that  it  is  only  the  calm  before  the  storm. 
They  can  always  see  the  coming  storms,  but  cannot  trust  the  goodness  that  sends 
them.        Help  in  answer  to  prayer: — A  fishing-boat  was  struggling  for  life  out  on 
the  sea,  and  the  skipper  had  lost   all  knowledge  of   where  the  land  was,  and 
whither  his  boat  was  driving.    In  his  despair,  the  strong  man  cried  to  God  for 
help.    Just  then  a  little  beam  from  a  window-light  shone  over  the  waters ;  the 
boat's  prow  was  turned,  and  after  a  little  more  manful  fighting,  she  reached  the 
haven.    Was  not  that  gleam  of  light  God's  answer  to  the  skipper's  prayer  ?    A 
missionary  was  returning  home,  and  just  as  he  was  nearing  the  coasts  of  his 
country,  a  terrible  storm  came  on,  and  threatened  to  break  the  ship  in  pieces. 
The  missionary  went  below,  and  prayed  to  God  earnestly  for  the  safety  of  the 
ship.    Presently  he  came  up  and  told  the  captain  with  quiet  confidence  that  the 
ship  would  Hve  through  the  storm.    Captain  and  crew  jeered  at  him ;  they  did  not 
believe  it.    Yet  the  ship  came  safely  to  port.    Was  the  missionary  wrong  when  he 
saw  in  this  an  instance  of  God's  readiness  to  give  the  help  His  children  ask  f 
Distrust  rebuked  by  God'i  constant  care  : — Every  miracle  of  God's  grace  is  a  stand- 
ing rebuke  of  distrust.  What  if  your  child,  whom  you  had  fed  and  clothed  and  housed 
for  years,  should  begin  to  be  anxious  as  to  where  his  next  meal  or  his  next  suit  of 
clothes  was  to  come  from,  and  whether  he  could  be  sore  of  having  a  roof  over  his  head 
for  another  night  ?    What  if  he  still  persisted  in  his  distrust,  although  you  told 
him  that  you  would  take  care  of  all  these  things?    If  you  can  imagine  your  child 
acting  in  so  foolish  a  way,  you  have  a  picture  of  how  most  of  us,  day  after  day, 
treat  the  God  who  cares  for  us,  and  who  has  promised  to  supply  us  with  all  things. 
"  Other  little  ahips  "  ; — ^Those  "  other  little  ships "  gained  a  great  deal  that  day 
from  Christ's  saying,  "  Peace  be  still ! "  which  we  do  not  discover  that  any  body 
was  candid  enough  to  acknowledge.    The  whole  sea  became  tranquil,  and  they  were 
saved.     The  world  receives  many  unappreciated    benefits  from  Jesus  Christ's 
presence  in  the  Church.    Men  are  just  so  many  little  ships,  taking  entire  benefit 
of  the  miracle  brought  from  God's  great  love  for  His  own.  Start  with  the  commonest 
gain  that  comes  to  the  world  through  the  Church.    1.  See  how  property  values 
are  lifted  by  every  kind  of  Christian  effort.    2.  See  what  the  gospel  does  towards 
lifting  a  low  and    depraved  neighbourhood  into  respectability.     8.  Sea  how  it 
enriches  education.  4.  See  how  it  elevates  woman.  5.  See  how  it  alleviates  sickness. 
There  is  no  need  of  pursuing  the  illustration  any  farther.     But  there  are  just 
three  lessons  which  will  take  force  from  the  figure,  perhaps ;  and  these  might  as 
well  be  stated.      1.  Why  do  not  men  of  the  world  recognize  what  the  Church 
of  Christ  is  doing  daily  and  yearly  for  them,  their  wives,  and  their  children  ? 
2.  Why  do  not  men  of  the  world  see  that  the  men  in  the  "  other  little  ships  "  were 
the  safer  from  the  storm  the  nearer  their  boats  were  to  that  Jesus  was  in  ?    8. 
Why  do  not  men  of  the  world  perceive  that  the  disciples  were  better  off  than  any- 
body else  during  that  awful  night  upon  Gennesareth  ?    Oh,  that  is  the  safest  place 
in  the  universe  for  any  troubled  soul  to  be  in — among  the  chosen  friends  of  Jesus 
Christ  the  Lord,  and  keeping  the  very  closest  to  His  side  I     {C.  S,  Robinson,  D.D.) 
Christ  the  Lord  of  nature : — Nature,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  now  use  it,  means  the 
world  of  matter,  and  the  laws  of  its  working.     If  Holy  Scripture  be  listened  to,  He 
is  so  of  right.     "All  things  were  made  by  Him,  and  without  Him  was  not  any  thing 
made  that  was  made."     ♦*  God  created  all  thinRS  by  Jesus  Christ."     There  is  no 
lordship  like  that  of  creation.      Christ  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  actually  gave  proof 
of  His  lordship  on  earth.     1.  There  is  a  class  of  miracles  which  had  their  place  in 
what  we  may  call  productive  nature  ;  in  those  processes  whiah  have  to  do  with  the 
supply  of  food  for  man's  life.     Wine  made  at  Cana ;  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  ; 
feeding  of  the  four  thousand.   2.  There  is  a  class  of  miracles  proving  the  dominion 
of  Christ  over  animated  nature.     The  draught  of  fishes  on  the  sea  of  Tiberias  ;  the 
piece  of  money  in  the  fish's  mouth.     3.  We  have  examples  of  the  sovereignty  of 
Christ  over  elemental  nature,  air,  and  sea.      4.  We  have  an  example  of  Christ's 
sovereignty  in  the  domain  of  morbid  nature,  disease  and  decay — '*  the  fig-tree  dried 
up  from  the  roots."     Clirist  the  Lord  of  nature.     1.  It  was  recessary  that  the  Son 
of  God  coming  down  from  heaven  for  the  redemption  of  men  should  prove  Him- 
self to  be  very  God  by  many  infallible  and  irresistible  signs.     It  was  in  mercy  as 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iy. 

wdl  as  in  wisdom  that  He  gave  this  demonstration.  2.  It  could  scarcely  be  but 
that  He  shonld  as  Son  of  Qoi  assert  below  His  dominion  over  God's  creatiou,  and 
over  the  processes  of  Qod's  providence.  8.  Let  ns  be  careful  how  we  speak  of 
miracles,  such  as  these,  as  if  they  were  contradictions  of  God's  natural  laws,  or  con- 
tradictions of  G^d's  providential  operations.  When  Christ  wrought  a  miracle  upon 
nature  it  was  to  give  a  glimpse  of  some  good  thing  lost,  of  some  perfect  thing  de> 
teriorated,  of  some  joyous  thing  spoilt,  by  reason  of  the  Fall,  and  to  be  given  back 
to  man  by  virtue  of  redemption.  4.  In  these  miracles  which  attest  the  sovereignty 
of  Christ  over  nature  we  have  one  of  the  surest  grounds  of  comfort  for  Christian 
souls.  (1)  In  their  literal  sense,  to  regard  Him  as  sovereign  of  the  universe  in 
which  tbey  dwell.  (2)  In  their  parabolic  significance  as  stilling  the  inward 
Btorm.  6.  Th6re  is  also  warning  for  the  careless  and  sinful.  Upon  His  bless- 
ing  or  curse  depends  all  that  makes  existence  a  happiness  or  misery.  The 
agencies  of  nature  as  of  grace  are  in  the  hands  of  Christ.  {G.  J,  Vaughan,  D.D.) 
Christ  asleep : — There  is  a  very  great  spiritual  importance  in  the  fact  that  Jesus 
sleeps.  In  this  sleep  of  Jesus,  a  vbby  great  mistake  into  which  we  ake  apt  to 
FALL  IS  coKBECTED  OB  PREVENTED  ;  the  mistake,  I  mean,  of  silently  assuming  that 
Christ,  being  Divine,  takes  nothing  as  we  do,  and  is  really  not  under  our  human 
conditions  far  enough  to  suffer  exhaustions  of  nature  by  work  or  by  feeling,  by  hun- 
ger, the  want  of  sleep,  dejections  or  recoils  of  wounded  sensibility.  Able  to  do  even 
miracles — to  heal  ttie  sick,  or  cure  the  bhnd,  or  raise  the  dead,  or  still  the  sea — we 
fall  into  the  impression  that  His  works  really  cost  Him  nothing,  and  that  while  His 
lot  appears  to  be  outwardly  dejected,  He  has,  in  fact,  an  easy  time  of  it.  Exactly 
contrary  to  this,  He  feels  it,  even  when  virtue  goes  out  only  from  the  hem  of  His  gar- 
ment.  And  when  He  gives  the  word  of  healing,  it  is  a  draft,  we  know  not  how  great, 
npon  His  powers.  In  the  same  way  every  sympathy  requires  an  expenditure  of 
strength  proportioned  to  the  measure  of  that  sympathy.  Every  sort  of  tension, 
or  attention,  every  argument,  teaching,  restraint  of  patience,  concern  of  charity,  is 
a  putting  forth  with  cost  to  Him,  as  it  is  to  us.    Notice  also  more  particularly  the 

CONDITIONS  OB  BESTOWMENTS  OF  THE  SLEEP  OP  JbSDS,  AND  ESPECIALLY  THEIB  COB- 

bespondencb  WITH  His  REDEMPTIVE  UNDERTAKiNO.  Saying  nothing  of  infants,  who 
in  a  certain  proper  sense  are  called  innocent,  there  have  been  two  examples  of  full- 
grown  innocent  sleep  in  our  world :  that  of  Adam  in  the  garden,  and  that  of 
Christ  the  second  Adam,  whose  nights  overtook  Him  with  no  place  where  to  bestow 
Himself.  And  the  sleep  of  both,  different  as  far  as  possible  in  the  manner,  is  yet  more 
exactly  appropriate,  in  each,  to  his  peculiar  work  and  office.  One  is  laid  to  sleep  in 
ft  paradise  of  beauty,  lulled  by  the  music  of  birds  and  running  brooks,  shaded  and 
sheltered  by  the  over-hanging  trees,  shortly  to  wake  and  look  upon  a  kindred  nature 
standing  by,  offered  him  to  be  the  partner  and  second  life  of  his  life.  The  other,  as 
pure  and  spotless  as  he,  and  ripe,  as  he  is  not,  in  the  unassailable  righteousness  of 
character,  tears  Himself  away  from  clamorous  multitudes  that  crowd  upon  Him  suing 
piteously  for  His  care,  and  djops,  even  out  of  miracle  itself,  on  the  hard  plank  deck, 
or  bottom,  of  a  fisherman's  boat,  and  there,  in  lightning  and  thunder  and  tempest, 
sheeted  as  it  were  in  the  general  wrath  of  the  waters  and  the  air.  He  sleeps — only  to 
wake  at  the  supplicating  touch  of  fear  and  distress.  One  is  the  sleep  of  the  world's 
Father ;  the  other  that  of  the  world's  Bedeemer.  One  has  never  known  as  yet  the 
way  of  sin,  the  other  has  come  into  the  tainted  blood  and  ruin  of  it,  to  bear  and 
suffer  under  it,  and  drink  the  cup  it  mixes ;  so  to  still  the  storm  and  be  a  reconciling 
peace.  Both  sleep  in  character.  Were  the  question  raised  which  of  the  two  will 
be  crucified,  we  should  have  no  doubt.  Visibly,  the  toil-worn  Jesus,  He  that  takes 
the  storm,  curtained  in  it  as  by  the  curse — He  is  the  Bedeemer.  His  sleep  agrees 
with  His  manger  birth,  His  poverty,  His  agony.  His  cross ;  and  what  is  more,  as  the 
cross  that  is  maddening  in  His  enemies  is  the  retributive  disorder  of  God's  just 
penalty  following  their  sin,  so  the  fury  of  that  night  shadows  it  all  the  more  fitly, 
that  what  He  encounters  in  it  is  the  wrathful  cast  of  Providence.  {Dr.  Bushnell.) 
The  ship  of  the  world : — In  one  of  the  prophets  we  have  the  picture  of  a  stately 
ship  which  is  a  type  of  the  world.  She  is  all  splendour  and  magnificence ;  she 
waUu  the  waters  like  a  thing  of  life.  The  fir-trees  of  Senir  and  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon  have  contributed  to  her  beauty ;  her  oars  are  wrought  from  the  oaks  of 
Baahan,  her  sails  are  of  fine  linen  and  broidered  work.  She  has  a  gay  and  gallant 
crew ;  the  multitudes  who  throng  her  decks  are  full  of  joy  and  thoughtless  of  danger. 
Out  they  sail  into  the  great  waters ;  her  rowers  bring  her  into  the  midst  of  the  sea ; 
and  when  the  east  wind  rises  she  is  broken  in  the  midst,  and  Ues  a  helpless  wreck 
upon  the  great  ocean  of  eternity.    There  was  no  Christ  in  the  ship  to  say,  •'  Peace, 


CHAP.  T.]  8T.  MARK,  189 


be  still;  "  no  pitying  Jesus  to  answer  the  bitter  cry  of  "Lord,  save  us,  we  perish." 
But  not  so  was  it  with  the  little  fisher-boat.  It  had  no  pomp  and  vanities  of  which 
to  boast,  no  tinselled  splendour ;  but  it  carried  Jesus  and  His  fortunes — One  who 
could  rebuke  the  waves  of  sin.  The  world,  wanting  Christ,  wanted  all  things  else 
and  was  lost ;  the  Church,  with  Christ  in  the  ship,  had  nothing  more  to  ask ;  it  was 
sure  to  be  saved  with  His  '•  Peace,  be  still."  (G.  F,  Cushinan^  D.D,)  The  strange 
inquiry  concerning  fear : — What  we  could  understand  well  enough  was  a  mystery  to 
Christ.  In  our  gUbness  we  could  have  explained  their  fear  clearly.  The  lake  was 
sixty  fathoms  deep ;  stoutest  swimmer  could  not  have  saved  his  life  in  such  a  sea ; 
some  were  married  men ;  life  is  sweet ;  a  storm  is  more  terrible  by  night  than  day ; 
and  so  on.  But  what  is  all  plain  to  every  one  was  a  mystery  Christ  could  not  solve. 
How  a  doubt  of  the  love  of  God  could  enter  a  soul  passed  His  comprehension.  Why 
men  should  be  afraid  of  the  Divine  ordinance  called  death.  He  could  not  understand. 
What  fear  was,  He  knew  not.  What  a  proof  of  Divine  sanctity  Ues  in  the  fact  that  all 
fear  and  doubt  were  mysteries  to  Him  1  (R.  Glover.)  From  one  fear  to  another:— 
I.  They  escaped  one  fear,  only  to  get  into  another ;  losing  the  fear  of  the  tempest, 
they  get  a  greater  fear,  that  of  the  Lord  of  the  tempest.  U.  They  lose  a  bad  fear 
to  get  a  good  one — a  fear  which  is  reverent,  and  one  which  has  as  mnoh  trust  as  ftwe 
in  it.    Such  fear  is  the  beginning  of  faith  in  Christ's  Godhead.    (Ibid,) 


CHAPTER  V. 

VzBS.  1-20.  Into  the  conntry  of  the  Gadarenes. — Tfie  country  of  the  Oadarenet: 

I  spent  a  night  and  part  of  two  days  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias.     Mj 
tent  was  pitched  near  the  Hot  Baths,  about  a  mile  south  of  the  town  of  Tiberias, 
and,  consequently,  near  the  south  end  of  the  lake.     In  looking  across  the  water  to 
the  other  side,  I  had  before  me  the  country  of  the  Gadarenes,  where  the  swine, 
impelled  by  an  evil  spirit,  plunged  into  the  sea.    I  was  struck  with  a  mark  of 
accuracy  in  the  sacred  writers  which  had  never  occurred  to  me  till  then.     They 
state  that  "the  swine  ran  violently  down  the  steep  place,  or  precipice  "  (the  article 
being  required  by  the  Greek),  ''and  were  choked  in  the  sea."    It  is  implied  here, 
first,  that  the  hills  in  that  region  approach  near  the  water ;  and,  secondly,  that 
they  fall  off  so  abruptly  along  the  shore  that  it  would  be  natural  for  a  writer 
familiar  with  that  fact  to  refer  to  it  as  well  known.    Both  these  implications  are 
correct.     A  mass  of  rocky  hills  overlook  the  sea  on  that  side,  so  near  the  water  that 
one  sees  their  dark  outline  reflected  from  its  surface,  while  their  sides  are  in 
general  so  steep  that  a  person  familiar  with  the  scenery  would  hardly  think  of 
speaking  of  a  steep  place  or  precipice,  where  so  much  of  the  coast  forms  but  one 
continuous  precipice.     Our  translators  omit  the  definite  article,  and  show,  by  this 
inadvertence,  how  naturally  the  more  exact  knowledge  of  the  evangelists  influenced 
their  language.     {H.  B.  Haekett,  D.D.)       The  tombs: — ^These  tombs  were  caverns, 
natural  or  artificial,  in  the  sides  of  the  rocks,  containing  cells  in  which  the  dead 
bodies  were  placed  and  closed  up.    The  entrance  to  the  cave  itself  was  not  closed, 
and  thus  it  might  be  used  as  a  habitation.    Such  ancient  tombs  still  exist  in  the 
hills  above  Gersa,  as  well  as  at  Gadara,  indeed  the  whole  region,  as  Mr.  Tristram 
remarks,  is  so  perforated  with  these  rock-chambers,  that  a  home  for  the  demoniac 
might  be  found,  whatever  locality  be  assigned  as  the  scene  of  the  miracle.     {Dean 
Mansel.)        Eastern  tombs : — In  the  East  the  receptacles  of  the  dead  are  aJways 
situated  at  some  distance  from  the  abodes  of  the  living ;  and  if  belonging  to  kings 
or  men  of  rank,  are  spacious  vaults  and  magnificent  structures,  containing,  besides 
the  crypt  that  contains  the  ashes  of  their  solitary  tenants,  several  chambers  or 
recesses  which  are  open  and  accessible  at  the  sides.   In  these  the  benighted  traveller 
often   finds  a  welcome  asylum ;   in  these  the  dervishes  and  santons,  wandering 
mendicants  that  infest  the  towns  of  Persia  and  other  eastern  countries,  generally 
establish  themselves,  and  they  are  often,  too,  made  the  haunts  of  robbers  and 
lawless  people,  who  hide  themselves  there  to  avoid  the  consequences  of  their  crimes. 
Nor  are  they  occupied  only  by  such  casual  and  dangerous  tenants.     When  passing 
through  a  desolate  village  near  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  Giovanni  Finati  saw  the  few 
inhabitants  living  in  the  tombs  as  their  usual  place  of  residence;  and  at  Thebes  the 
lame  traveller,  when  he  was  introduced  to  Mr.  Beechy,  the  British  Consul,  found 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha>.  ▼. 

that  gentleman  had  established  himself,  while  prosecuting  his  researches  among 
the  ruins  of  that  celebrated  place,  in  the  vestibule  of  one  of  the  tombs  of  the  ancient 
kings.  Captain  Light,  who  travelled  over  the  scene  of  our  Lord's  interview  with 
the  demoniac,  describes  the  tombs  as  still  existing  in  the  form  of  caverns  cut  in  the 
live  rock,  like  those  at  Petra — as  wild  and  sequestered  solitude?,  divided  into  a 
number  of  bare  and  open  niches,  well  suited  to  be  places  of  refuge  to  those  unhappy 
lunatics  for  whom  the  benevolence  of  antiquity  had  not  provided  a  better  asylum. 
{R.  Jamieson,  D.D.)  Power  of  evil  spirits,  and  poioer  over  them : — L  The  power 
OF  EVIL  SPIRITS.  1.  As  Seen  in  its  extensiveness.  Their  field  is  the  world.  2.  As 
seen  in  its  effects.  (1)  In  institutions  :  paganism ;  pseudo- Christian  forms  ;  govern- 
ments. (2) In  society:  amusements;  sentiments;  prejudices;  practices;  vices;  crimes; 
results.  II.  Christ's  power  over  evil  spiRira.  1.  Feared  by  them — "  I  adjure 
Thee  by  God,  torment  me  not."  2.  Hated  of  them — *'  What  have  we,"  &c.  3. 
Absolute  over  them — "  Come  out  of  him,  thou  unclean  spirit,"  <fec.  (1)  This  exer- 
cise of  Christ's  power  over  evil  spirits  a  prophecy  of  their  ultimate  subjection  to 
Him.  (2)  Christ  only  can  deliver  us  from  the  power  of  Satan.  (3)  The  contrast 
between  Satan's  power  and  Christ's  is  here  graphically  and  historically  delineated. 
(4)  The  power  of  worldUness  to  dry  up  human  sympathy  exemplified  in  the  Gerge- 
senes  sending  Jesus  away  from  their  coasts.  (5)  The  power  of  Christ  in  delivering 
us  from  the  power  of  evil  involves  grateful  obligations — "  Go  home  to  thy  friends," 
(fee  This  is  the  true  method  of  spreading  the  gospel.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.) 
Demoniacal  possession : — The  four  evangelists  give  themselves  very  little  concern 
about  pathology  and  diagnosis,  although  one  of  them  was  a  physician.  But  taking 
the  Gospels  as  an  honest  and  not  unintelligent  record  of  the  phenomena,  we  make 
out  two  points  very  clearly  concerning  this  demonism.  I.  It  was  not  mere  lxtnact 
OR  EPILEPSY,  for  these  diseases  are  recognized  and  clearly  distinguished  from  the 
work  of  the  evil  spirits.  There  are  patients  in  whom  the  work  of  the  infesting 
spirit  produces  symptoms  like  epilepsy,  and  other  patients  in  whom  it  produces 
symptoms  of  dumbness,  tind  there  are  still  other  manifestations,  but  beneath  these 
symptoms  they  detect  indications,  which  the  sufferer  himself  confirms,  of  some- 
thing different  from  the  mere  physical  diseases  of  like  symptoms  by  which  these 
cases  were  surrounded.  II.  As  this  demonism  was  not  mere  disease,  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  was  not  mere  wickedness — the  wilful  giving  up  of  one's  self  to  the 
instigation  of  the  devil — a  mistake  to  which  we  are  inclined  by  the  unhappy  mis- 
translation of  demon  into  devil.  It  is  always  spoken  of  and  dealt  with  as 
an  involuntary  affliction,  looked  upon  by  the  Lord  with  pity  rather  than 
censure.  Neither  is  it  treated  as  if  it  were  in  any  special  sense  a  visitation  for 
sin.  Doubtless  these  sufferers  were  sinners,  and  doubtless  their  sufferings  stood 
in  some  relation  to  their  sins,  but  it  was  not  this  relation,  that  they  were  "  sinners 
above  all  others."  The  truth  seems  to  be  this :  that  sin,  unbelief,  opened  the  way 
for  this  awful  curse,  and  that  when  the  alien  spirit  had  taken  hold  of  body  and 
mind  and  will,  it  had  the  power  of  plaguing  with  various  disorders — with  wild, 
moping,  melancholic  madness,  or  with  epileptic  convulsions,  or  blindness,  or 
dumbness.  Both  the  disciples  and  the  evangelists,  and  even  the  popular  apprehen- 
sion of  the  Jews,  distinguished  clearly  between  such  of  these  maladies  as  were 
merely  physical,  and  such  as  were  inflicted  by  malign  spirits.  (L.  W.  Bacon.) 
Christ  and  the  demoniac : — From  this  strange  but  suggestive  incident  we  may 
learn — I.  The  immediate  connection  of  the  world  of  darkness  with  the  evil 
heart.  To-day  men  break  through  moral  and  social  restraints,  and  with  else 
unaccountable  recklessness  destroy  their  every  interest ;  suffer  disgrace,  lose  their 
situations,  break  up  their  homes,  and  for  a  mess  of  pottage  sacrifice  all  their  hopes 
in  life.  Human  passion,  or  even  selfishness,  is  no  explanation  of  such  follies. 
They  have  a  demon;  they  are  possessed.  IL  The  great  power  of  the  inhabitants 
OF  DARKNESS  OVER  THE  EVIL  HEART.  To  drive  men  from  the  comforts  of  an 
honourable  life,  and  to  lead  them  to  seek  happiness  in  vagrancy ;  to  make  them 
think  they  are  aU  right,  though  daubed  with  dirt  and  pollution ;  to  cause  men  who 
are  sane  in  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life  to  frequent  such  places  and  cherish  such 
companions  as  reveal  to  others  their  moral  madness.   III.  The  utter  impotenct  of 

MAM  to  DELIVBB  THE  POSSESSED  FROM  THE  POWER  OF  THE  INHABITANTS  OP  DARKNESS. 
rV.  The  WEAKNESS  of  THE  POWERS  OF  DARKNESS   IN  CONFUCT  WITH  ChRIST.       A  leglon 

of  demons  expelled  by  a  word !  V.  Conclusion.  1.  Beware  of  tampering  with  evil. 
The  "  little  sin  "  may  open  the  door  of  the  heart  for  the  entrance  of  a  whole  legion 
of  demons.  2.  The  wish  of  evil  will  ever  be  self-destructive.  3.  If  Jesus  has  cured 
you,  show  it  by  causing  joy  and  gladness  where  you  have  caused  so  much  misery— 


CHAP,  v.]  ST.  MARK.  191 

in  your  home.  {F.  Wallace.)  The  demoniac  of  Gadara  : — I.  The  misebt  of  the 
man.  II.  The  majesty  of  Christ.  III.  The  mischief  of  the  devils.  {J.  B.)  The 
Gadarene  demoniac : — 1.  That  there  are  other  intelligent  and  finite  creatures  beside 
men.  2.  Some  of  these  are  wholly  wicked,  while  others  are  wholly  good.  8.  Wicked 
spirits  can  tempt  men  to  sin.  4.  Yet  it  is  conceivable  that  in  some  instances  they 
should  acquire  an  absolute  physical  control  over  a  human  being,  bo  as  to  coerce 
him  irresistibly  and  make  him  act  against  his  own  will.  6.  Gases  of  possession 
were  peculiarly  numerous  at  the  time  of  Christ's  ministry  upon  earth.  Lessons : 
1.  See  the  exceeding  terribleness  of  sin,  in  ruining  two  orders  of  creatures  and 
making  one  the  means  of  ruin  to  the  other.  2.  Be  thankful  to  be  saved  from  the 
physical  tyranny  of  the  devil.  He  would  make  us  all  howling  demoniacs  if  he 
could :  but  he  is  restrained  by  the  power  and  interference  of  Jesus  Christ. 
3.  Consider  the  dreadful  doom  of  sinners  who  hereafter  will  be  absolutely  under 
the  power  of  evil  spirits.  Hell  is  a  pandemonium  of  devils,  and  a  bedlam  of 
demoniacs.  4.  As  still  subject  to  the  moral  temptations  of  the  evil  one,  look 
fitedfastly  to  Jesus,  who  has  power  to  bring  you  off  more  than  conqueror  in 
every  conflict  with  the  powers  of  darkness.  {Congregational  Pulpit.)  Sin 
and  salvation : — I.  Some  aspects  of  sin.  1.  Its  contagiousness.  ^  The  man  was 
*'  possessed."  Evil  is  always  reaching  beyond  itself  for  something  of  which  it 
may  lay  hold,  and  which  it  may  drag  downwards.  2.  Its  anti-social  tendency. 
*'  Neither  abode  in  any  house,  but  in  the  tombs."  Iniquity  isolates  men,  as  ferocity 
does  the  wolf,  the  tiger,  the  eagle.  3.  Its  embrutalization  of  character.  (1)  Evi- 
denced in  the  man  ;  naked,  dwelling  like  a  beast  amongst  the  caves :  "  about  two 
thousand  "  demons  dwelling  in  one  man  1  (2)  Evidenced  in  the  evil  spirits.  Spirits, 
who  had  been  inhabitants  of  heaven,  fallen  so  low  that  they  desire  to  take  up  their 
abode  in  the  swine  1  4.  Its  dread  of  righteousness.  The  devils  cry  out  when  Christ 
draws  near.  Always  vice  fears  and  hates  virtue.  II.  Soms  aspects  of  salvation. 
1.  It  is  begun  in  the  expulsion  (not  repression)  of  evil  principles  and  desires.  2. 
God  accounts  as  nothing  whatever  material  loss  may  be  incurred  in  its  effectuation. 
Souls  are  more  to  Him  than  swine.  3.  Its  moral  and  spiritual  results  have  a  counter- 
part, and  external  evidence  in  improved  material  and  social  condition.  "  Clothed," 
Ac  4.  The  surest  proof  of  the  reality  of  its  accomplishment  is  renunciation  of 
personal  preferences  in  obedience  to  Christ's  command.  •*  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be 
done."  (The  Pulpit  Analyst.)  The  evil  spirits: — iTThe  pebsonalitt  of  evil  bpibits  : 
or,  in  otner  words,  that  they  are  distinct  personal  beings.  For  every  feature  of  the 
narrative  bespeaks  their  true  personality.  Their  first  meeting  with  our  Lord  ;  their 
direct  perception  that  He  was  their  great  antagonist ;  that  He  was  man,  and  yet 
that  in  some  way  He  was  the  Son  of  the  most  high  God :  that  He  was  of  the  race 
over  whom  they  had  of  old  triumphed,  and  yet  that  He  was  their  judge ;  their 
trembling  entreaty  that  the  appointed  time  of  their  full  sorrow  might  not  be  fore- 
stalled : — all  of  these  bespeak  the  manifest  meeting  of  the  person  of  the  Christ 
with  the  person  of  the  evil  one.  For  all  parts  of  this  narrative  are  equally  incom- 
patible with  the  supposed  solution  of  imaginative  language ;  and  all  equally  agree 
with  the  simple  meaning  of  the  declaration,  that  these  spirits  were  separate,  lost, 
personal  beings,  under  whose  strange  and  cruel  power  the  demoniac  had  been 
brought.  But,  above  all,  this  is  so  clearly  established  by  their  entering  into  the 
swine,  that  it  furnishes  us  with  the  most  probable  reason  for  that  permission.  II. 
And  as  their  personality,  so,  further,  theib  gbeat  kumbeb  is  established  by^  this 
history.  Their  name  was  Legion,  for  many  devils  had  entered  into  this  single 
victim :  a  clear  intimation  of  the  exhaustless  multitude  of  these  hosts  of  darkness. 
ni.  Again,  concerning  theib  condition  we  may  gather  much.  For  their  meeting 
with  Christ,  as  it  called  forth  their  name,  so  did  it  compel  the  disclosure  of  theii 
state.  We  see  them  wandering  restlessly  over  the  earth,  held  even  now  in  the  strong 
chain  of  an  ever  present  despair,  and  looking  on  to  the  full  accomplishment  of  their 
appointed  punishment.  So  that  their  present  condition  is  plainly  one  of  active,  un- 
resting, sinful  misery  ;  their  hell  is  already  within  them,  though  its  outer  bars  close 
not  utterly  around  them  until  the  accomplishment  of  all  things.  IV.  And  in  this 
condition  theib  poweb  is  manifestly  gbeat.  The  strength  which  they  administered 
to  this  their  victim,  by  which  "  chains  had  been  plucked  asunder  by  him,  and  fettern 
broken  in  pieces,"  was  but  the  outward  exhibition  of  the  awful  might  with  which 
he  was  himself  subdued  to  their  will.  For  what  is  meant  by  their  ♦*  entering  into 
him,"  save  that  they  had  the  mastery  over  him  ;  that  his  spirit  wa«  controlled  by 
theirs,  so  that  his  outer  actions  were  now  the  coming  forth  of  an  evil  power  within 
him  ?  In  this  sense  they  had  "  entered  into  him."   But  it  is  as  plain  that  this  power, 


191  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

great  as  it  was,  was  limited ;  for  they  could  do  no  more  than  they  were  Buffered. 
V.  And  but  for  this  gracious  help  of  the  Almighty,  surely  man  would  be  swept 
away  before  the  flood  of  their  bitter  hatred  ;  for  we  may  see  here  their  malignity 
as  plainly  as  their  power.  These  wretched  men,  with  their  foul  haunt  amidst  the 
pollutions  of  the  tomb,  who  wore  no  clothes,  but  were  "  always  night  and  day  crying 
out  and  cutting  themselves  with  stones  ;'*  how  plainly  do  they  bear  their  witness  to 
the  character  of  Satan's  rulel  What  else  was  all  this  their  proclaimed  misery  but  the 
evident  display,  in  those  given  over  utterly  to  him,  of  the  true  working  of  that  will 
of  his  which  is  now  making  men  sensual,  and  brutish,  and  violent,  and  fierce,  and 
dark  in  spirit  1  The  pleasant  baits  of  sin  are  cast  aside  as  soon  as  they  have  served 
their  turn,  and  an  absolute  malignity  seeks  to  overwhelm  his  prey  with  unmixed 
misery.  Surely  the  tender  mercies  of  that  wicked  one  are  cruel ;  he  hates  God 
without  measure,  and  therefore  hates  in  man  even  the  obscured  image  of  his 
heavenly  Father.  What  a  fearful  intimation  is  all  this  of  what  hell  shall  be,  where 
there  shall  be  no  limitation  to  his  power  of  tormenting  those  who  heretofore  have 
joined  him  in  rebeUion,  and  thereby  made  him  master  over  them  !  Lessons :  And, 
first,  we  may  see  here  the  greatness  of  our  redeemed  hfe.  Every  one  of  us,  how 
narrow  soever  be  his  sphere,  is,  as  it  were  the  champion  of  the  great  King.  There 
is  a  mighty  warfare  raging  throughout  all  His  wide  dominions.  The  hosts  are 
gathered  for  the  battle.  An  expectant  world  is  looking  on.  Not  men  only,  but  all 
the  armies  of  heaven,  are  ranged  on  this  side  and  on  that.  Our  common  temp- 
tations, they  are  these  times  of  triaL  In  them  we  either  maintain  God's  truth,  or 
go  basely  over  to  His  enemies.  And  if  there  be  this  greatness  in  our  redeemed 
life,  let  us  see  next  its  fearfulness.  For  who  are  we  that  we  should  have  to  face 
these  mighty  ones,  thus  armed  with  power,  thus  inevitable  in  presence,  thus  skilled 
in  the  arts  of  the  destroyer,  thus  malignant,  numerous,  nimble,  and  daring  from 
the  blackness  of  despair  and  the  bitterness  of  hatred?  Surely,  then,  our  life, 
which  leads  us  into  the  midst  of  them,  must  be  fearful.  Can  it  be  safe  for  such 
men  as  we  are  to  be  sleepy  and  careless ;  to  be  ungirded,  as  those  who  live  for 
pleasure ;  unarmed,  as  those  who  loll  idly,  courting  ease  or  slumber  ?  But  once 
more ;  see  not  only  the  greatness  and  the  fearfulness  of  the  life  which,  in  this  view, 
we  are  leading,  but  see  also  its  blessedness  and  true  security.  There  is,  indeed, 
this  enemy  to  meet ;  our  temptations  to  common  sins  involve  this  mighty  struggle 
as  coming  from  him  ;  but  there  is  also  great  joy  even  in  this  very  thought ;  for  aa 
we  cannot  doubt  the  presence  of  evil,  surely  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  know  that  it  is 
thus  a  temptation  cast  in  from  witiiout;  that  it  is  not  necessarily  part  of  us. 
**  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able  ;  but 
will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way  to  escape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it  '* 
(1  Cor.  x.  13).  We  are  Christ's  soldiers,  will  He  suffer  us  to  perish  ?  let  us  look  at 
His  cross,  that  we  may  deem  better  of  His  love.  We  know  not  how  greatly  we  are 
every  day  protected  by  His  present  might ;  we  know  not  how  He  has  already 
succoured  ns ;  how  He  has  curbed  the  power  of  the  enemy ;  we  know  not  how  to 
measure  aright  the  common  blessing  of  being  in  His  Church,  amongst  His  saints, 
where  the  power  of  Satan  even  now  is  manifestly  bound  and  straitened  ;  we  cannot 
tell  from  what  bodily  inflictions,  from  what  mental  struggles,  from  what  fearful 
falls  He  has  actually  kept  us.  {Bishop  Wilberforee.)  Nature  sitting  at  the 
feet  of  Je$u$: — I.  The    diffioulty   felt  by  bomb,    and    expressed   by  not  a 

FEW,  AS  to  THEBB  BEINO  OB  NOT  BEING  ANY  REAL  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  WHAT  ABB 
CALLED    DEMONIACAL   POSSESSIONS  IN  THE    NeW   TESTAMENT   AND   MANIA,   OB    MALADIES 

OF  VARIOUS  SORTS  AND  DEGREES  OF  INTENSITY.  1.  They  are  distinct  and  separate 
things  (Matt,  iv.  24,  viii.  16 ;  Mark  i.  32).  9.  The  language  of  our  Lord  on  the 
occasion  of  His  casting  out  devils  is  such  as  to  warrant  us  in  concluding  that  it 
was  an  actual  or  literal  demoniacal  possession.  The  theory  of  Strauss  and  the 
Rationalistic  school.  3.  These  demoniacs  were  not  necessarily,  or  in  every  instance, 
the  guiltiest  of  men,  but  they  were  in  all  instances  the  unhappiest  of  men.  There 
was  a  groaning  under  the  tyranny  they  endured.  4.  There  seemed  to  have  been 
two  wills  in  the  person — the  will  of  the  victim,  and  the  will  of  the  spirit  driving 
him  wherever  he  would.  II.  A  few  reasons  for  supposing  that  demoniac  posses- 
sions  MAY  HAVE  CEASED,  AND  SOME   REASONS  FOR  BELIEVING  IT   MAY  STILL  CONTINUB. 

1.  If  demoniac  possessions  were  in  those  days,  how  is  it  that  demoniac  possessions 
are  not  now  ?  How  is  it  that  epidemics  that  existed  once  do  not  exist  now  ?  <&c.  2. 
Why  does  God  suffer  it  to  be  so  ?  The  answer  to  that  difiSculty  is,  that  we  know 
▼ery  little  why  evil  was  introduced,  we  know  not  why  evil  is  continued,  Ac.  Evil  is 
•ot  onripe  good,  as  Emerson  and  others  of  his  school  allege.     3.  Another  reasoa 


CKiF.  T.]  Sr.  MARK,  193 

why  demoniac  possessions  may  have  ceased  is,  that  Satan,  beyond  all  dispute,  at 
oar  Bedeemer's  birth,  and  at  our  Redeemer's  atonement,  received  a  blow  from  wiiich 
he  has  never  recovered.     4.  And  there  remains  this  fact,  too — whatever  God  does 
in  the  world,  Satan  always  gets  up  something  very  like  it,  because  his  hope  of  pro- 
gress is  by  deception.     III.  The  speoial  and  individual  portrait  sketched  in  the 
TEXT.      1.  The  most  awful  specimen  of  demoniacal  poBsession  that  we  can  well 
imagine.     2.  It  is  very  remarkable  to  notice  the  contrast  in  his  character— the 
hnman  in  its  agony,  groaning  to  be  delivered,  and  the  fiendish  in  its  depravity, 
imploring  to  be  let  alone.    3.  It  appears  that  when  Jesus  drew  near  to  the  man  he 
was  not  delivered  of  the  demons  instantly,  but  underwent  a  tremendous  paroxysm 
of  suffering  and  distress.     4.  The  prayer  of  the  demons  occasion  a  great  deal  of 
difficulty  and  of  scoffing  (confer  Luke  viii.  31).     It  seems  to  us  a  mystery  that 
Christ  should  answer  the  prayer  of  the  demons  at  all.     If  there  is  any  other  way  of 
disposing  of  them,  why  let  the  demons  take  possession  of  the  swine,  and  why  let 
the  swine  be  thus  destroyed  ?  5.  The  Gadarenes  also  presented  a  petition  to  Christ ; 
and  what  is  that  petition  ?  (ver.  17.)    Strange,  startling,  painful  fact  1     And  yet  it 
is  possible  for  us  to  imitate  their  example.      {J,  Gumming ^  D.D.)     The  Gadarene 
detnoniac : — I.  Human  efforts  exerted.    Picture  his  state.     He  was  a  pest  to  his 
family  and  the  city.     So  are  great  sinners,  who  are  the  devil's  instruments  for  dis- 
turbing society.     Something  must  be  done.     But  what  7     Men  can  think  only  of 
fetters,  &o.   They  did  all  that  they  had  the  wit  to  devise,  or  the  power  to  accomplish. 
Perhaps  congratulated  themselves  on  having  done  so  much.   Notice  modern  human 
restraints.     Law,  prisons,  reformatories,  policemen,  and  punishments.     Besides 
these  there  are  public  opinion,  fashion,  custom.     These  are  often  used  to  keep  the 
unruly  in  check.     Suitable  efforts  employed  among  children.    Parental  restraints 
(Psa.  xxxii.  9)  hence  (Lam.  iii.  27).    II.  Human  efforts  frustrated.    No  restraints 
oould  be  found  that  were  strong  enough.     Apply  this  and  the  personal  injuries 
received  to  the  case  of  those,  especially  chil^en  and  young  people,  who  break 
through  restraints.     He  cut  himself  with  the  rocks ;  they  are  injured  by  contact 
with  evil  companions,  bad  habits,  &c.    Liberty  only  good  for  those  who  have  some 
power  of  self -controL     Observe  how  futile  are  human  efforts  in  restraining  sin. 
What  multitudes  break  through  every  restraint  I     This  to  be  prevented,  not  by 
strengthening  the  bonds,  but  by  removing  the  inclination.     This  was  what  Jesus 
did.    IIL  Human  efforts  superseded.    Jesus  did  not  rebuke  those  who  had  done 
tiieir  best,  but  He  did  something  better.     He  exorcised  the  evil  spirit.     The  man 
was  at  once  reduced  to  tractabihty ;  tamed  without  a  fetter.     Power  of  evil  spirits 
illustrated  by  the  fate  of  the  swine.     Superior  value  of  the  man  proved  by  the  per- 
mitted destruction  of  the  swine,  so  the  man  might  be  saved.     Selfishness  of  the 
Gadarenes  illustrates  that  of  the  world  in  general,  who  would  rather  preserve 
personal  property  than  sacrifice  it  for  the  religious  and  permanent  good  of  man. 
Learn — I.  The  malignity,  power,  craft,  and  blindness  of  evil  spirits.    II.  The 
wretched  state,  personally  and  relatively,  of  man  under  their  influence.     HL  The 
atter  helplessness  of  the  best-concerted  human  means  for  the  restraint  of  eviL    lY. 
The  Buffioiency  of  the  word  of  Jesus  (CoL  ii.  15).   (C  Gray.)      Our  great  enemy  : — 
From  this  history  we  learn  three  truths  of  great  importance.     I.  That  the  devil  is 
a  spirit  of  great  malice  and  power.     II.  That  both  his  malice  and  his  power  are 
altogether  under  the  government  of  God.     HI.  That  God  often  permits  him  to  do 
great  mischief,  for  the  profit  of  worldly  men  and  for  the  trial  of  the  faith  of  good 
men.      {Bishop   Wilson.)         The  dem^oniac  of  Gergesa: — I.  The  Geroesenb  in 
BONDAGE.     Was  he  not  a  free  man,  one  who  would  not  be  bound  by  others — would 
go  his  own  way  ?     Yet  he  was  a  miserable  slave  (vers.  15-18).     Here  was  one  who 
seemed  to  be  free,  yet  was  really  a  slave.     II.  How  the  Geeqesene  was  rescued. 
Gould  not  escape  himself — the  evil  spirit  too  strong.    Friends  could  not  rescue  him. 
Hopeless  until  some  one  stronger  than  the  devils  should  come — then  deliverance 
(compare  Luke  xi.  21,  22).     Jesus  not  only  stronger  than  one  evil  spirit — an  army 
of  them  here  (ver.  9).    Yet  see  His  supremacy.     1.  They  could  go  nowhere  against 
His  will.    2.  Besought  Him.  3.  Even  when  He  defeated  them.    III.  The  Geeqesene 
at  libebtt.     1.  Is  it  like  a  free  man  to  be  sitting  at  another's  feet  like  that  ?     2. 
What  does  he  ask  of  Jesus  ?    Would  it  be  freedom  to  have  to  follow  another  every- 
where f     3.  Jesus  gives  him  an  order ;  is  that  like  liberty,  to  obey  it  so  implicitly  ? 
Yes,  for  it  is  his  own  free  choice  to  be,  like  St.  Paul  afterwards,  the  **  slave  of 
Christ"  (Bom.  i.  1).     {E.  Stock.)        Sin  destructive  : — Satan's  work  is  a  work  of 
destruction.     Nearly  seven  hundred  years  ago,  Jenghis  Khan  swept  over  Central 
Asia,  and  it  is  said  that,  for  centuries  after,  his  course  could  be  traced  by  tbt 

18 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaf.  t. 

pyramids  of  human  bones— the  bones  of  slaaghtered  oaptives — which  his  armiea 
left  behind  them.  If  the  bones  of  Satan's  slain  captives  could  be  piled  op  in  oar 
sight,  what  a  pyramid  that  would  be  1  Self-mutilation  has  always  been  common 
among  the  worshippers  of  false  gods ;  to  this  day  the  fakirs  of  India  cut  and  gash 
themselves  with  knives.  The  devil  sets  his  servants  at  the  same  unprofitable  task. 
Alo-ed-Din,  the  chief  of  the  Afisassins,  succeeded  in  persuading  his  men  that  who> 
ever  would  fall  in  his  service  was  sure  of  Paradise ;  and  so,  at  a  nod  of  their  chief, 
the  poor  dupes  would  stab  themselves  to  the  heart,  or  fling  themselves  over  preci- 
pices. Satan's  one  aim  is  to  blind  his  captives,  and  lead  them  to  self-destruction. 
{Sunday  School  Times.)  A  man  in  ruins  : — Can  anything  be  more  sad  than  the 
wreck  of  a  man  ?  We  mourn  over  the  destruction  of  many  noble  things  tha^  have 
existed  in  the  world.  Men,  when  they  hear  of  the  old  Phidian  Jupiter — that  sat 
forty  feet  high,  carved  of  ivory  and  gold,  and  that  was  so  magnificent,  so  transcen- 
dent, that  all  the  ancient  world  counted  him  unhappy  that  died  without  having 
seen  this  most  memorable  statue  that  ever  existed  in  the  world — often  mourn 
to  think  that  its  exeeeding  value  led  to  its  destruction,  and  that  it  perished.  It  was 
a  great  loss  to  art  that  such  a  thing  should  perish.  Can  any  man  look  upon  the 
Acropohs — shattered  with  balls,  crumbled  by  the  various  influences  of  the  elements, 
and  utterly  destroyed — and  not  mourn  to  think  that  such  a  stately  temple,  a  temple 
so  unparalleled  in  its  exquisite  symmetry  and  beauty,  should  be  desolate  and 
scattered  ?  Can  there  be  anything  more  melancholy  than  the  destruction,  not  only 
of  such  temples  as  the  Acropolis  and  the  Parthenon,  but  of  a  whole  city  of  temples 
and  statues  ?  More  melancholy  than  the  deBtruotion  of  a  statue,  or  a  temple,  or  a 
city,  or  a  nation,  in  its  physical  aspects,  is  the  destruction  of  a  man,  the  wreck  of 
the  understanding,  the  ruin  of  the  moral  feelings,  the  scattering  all  abroad  of  those 
elements  of  power  that,  united  together,  make  man  fitly  the  noblest  creature  that 
walks  on  the  earth.  Thousands  and  thousands  of  men  make  foreign  pilgrimages  to 
visit  and  mourn  over  fallen  and  destroyed  cities  of  former  grandeur  and  beauty ;  and 
yet,  all  round  about  every  one  of  us,  in  every  street,  and  in  almost  every  neighbour- 
hood, there  are  ruins  more  stupendous,  more  pitiful,  and  more  heart-touching  than 
that  of  any  city.  And  how  strange  would  be  the  wonder  if,  as  men  wandered  in  the 
Orient,  there  should  come  some  one  that  should  call  from  the  mounds  all  the 
scattered  ruins  of  Babylon,  or  build  again  Tadmor  of  the  desert  I  How  strange  it 
would  be  to  see  a  city,  that  at  night  was  a  waste  heap,  so  restored  that  in  the 
morning  the  hght  of  the  sun  should  flash  from  pinnacle,  and  tower,  and  wall,  and 
roof  I  How  marvellous  would  be  that  creative  miracle  I  But  more  marvellous,  ten 
thousand  times,  is  that  Divine  touch  by  which  a  man,  broken  down  and  shattered, 
is  raised  up  in  his  right  mind,  and  made  to  sit,  clothed,  at  the  feet  of  Jesos.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.) 

Ver.  6.  But  when  he  saw  JesoB  afivr  off. — The  sinner**  place : — Jesus  is  afar  off 
in  the  sinner's  apprehension,  and  the  sinner  is  in  very  deed  far  off  from  God.  1. 
As  to  character.  What  a  difference  between  the  demoniac  and  Jesus.  2.  As  to 
knowledge.  The  demoniac  knew  Jesus,  but  knew  little  of  His  love.  8.  As  to  hope. 
This  man  had  no  hope  of  recovery,  or  but  a  faint  one,  and  that  hope  the  demons 
tried  to  extinguish.  4.  As  to  possession.  The  demoniac  had  no  hold  upon  the 
Saviour;  on  the  contrary,  he  cried,  "What  have  I  to  do  with  Thee?"  Im- 
measurable  is  the  distance  between  God  and  a  sinner ;  it  is  wide  as  the  gulf  between 
sin  and  holiness,  death  and  life,  hell  and  heaven.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  sinner*t 
wisest  course : — The  demoniac  was  all  in  confusion,  for  he  was  under  contending  in- 
fluences  :  his  own  spirit  and  the  evil  spirit  strove  together.  He  ran  towards  Jesus, 
and  worshipped  Him  ;  and  yet  in  the  same  breath  he  cried,  •'  What  have  I  to  do 
with  Thee  ?  "  Thus  are  sinners  tossed  about.  But  it  is  the  sinner's  wisest  course 
to  run  to  Jesus ;  for — 1.  He  is  the  Son  of  the  Most  High  God.  2.  He  is  the  great 
Enemy  of  our  enemy,  tJie  devil.  3.  He  is  abundantly  able  to  drive  out  a  legion  of 
devils.  4.  He  can  cause  us  to  be  clothed  in  our  right  mind.  6.  He  permits  us, 
even  now,  to  draw  near  and  worship  Him.  (Ibid.)  The  law  of  attraction : — A 
needle  will  move  towards  a  magnet,  when  once  a  magnet  has  moved  near  to  it.  Our 
heart  manifests  a  sweet  willingness  towards  salvation  and  holiness  when  the  great 
and  glorious  goodwill  of  the  Lord  operates  upon  it.  It  is  ours  to  run  to  Jesus  as  if 
all  the  running  were  ours ;  but  the  secret  truth  is  that  the  Lord  tons  towards  as, 
and  this  is  the  very  heart  of  the  business.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  What  haye  I  to  do  with  Thee,  Jesus,  Thou  Son  of  the  moat  bigh  Ood  7-— 


'.]  ST.  MARK.  195 

Juui  confronting  demons: — I.  The  okyil  cbies  out  against  thb  intbusion  of 
Ohbist.  1.  Chriat's  nature  is  so  contrary  to  that  of  the  devil,  war  is  inevitable 
when  they  meet.  2.  There  are  no  designs  of  grace  for  Satan ;  as,  therefore,  he  has 
nothing  to  hope  for  from  Jesas,  he  dreads  His  coming.  3.  He  wishes  to  be  let 
alone.  Thoughtlessness,  stagnation,  and  despair  suit  his  plans.  4.  He  knows  hi.4 
powerlessness  against  the  Son  of  the  Most  High  God,  and  has  no  wish  to  try  a  fall 
with  Him.  5.  He  dreads  his  doom :  for  Jesus  will  not  hesitate  to  torment  him  by 
the  sight  of  good  done  and  evil  overcome.  U.  Mbn  dnoeb  the  devil's  influence 
OBT  OUT  AGAINST  THE  INCOMING  07  Ghbist  bt  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  Gousoience  is  feared 
by  them  ;  they  do  not  wish  to  hav^3  it  disturbed,  instructed,  and  placed  in  power. 
2.  Change  is  dreaded  by  them ;  for  they  love  sin,  and  its  gains,  and  pleasures,  and 
know  that  Jesus  wars  with  these  things.  3.  They  claim  a  right  to  be  left  alone  : 
this  is  their  idea  of  religious  liberty.  They  would  not  be  questioned  either  by  God  or 
man.  4.  They  argue  that  the  gospel  cannot  bless  them.  They  are  too  poor,  too 
ignorant,  too  busy,  too  sinful,  too  weak,  too  involved,  perhaps  too  aged,  to  receive 
any  good  from  it.  6.  They  view  Jesus  as  a  tormeutor,  who  will  rob  them  of  plea- 
sore,  sting  their  consciences,  and  drive  them  to  obnoxious  duties.  (Ibid.)  Nothing 
to  do  with  Jems : — It  is  said  that  Voltaire,  being  pressed  in  his  last  moments  to 
acknowledge  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  turned  away,  and  said  feebly,  "  For  the  love  of 
<Jod  don't  mention  that  Man  ;  let  me  die  in  peace  1 "  The  antagonism  of  evil  pro- 
voked by  good  : — The  coming  of  Jesus  into  a  place  puts  all  into  a  commotion.  The 
gospel  is  a  great  disturber  of  sinful  peace.  Like  the  son  among  wild  beasts,  owls, 
and  bats,  it  creates  a  stir.  In  this  case,  a  legion  of  devils  began  to  move.  (Ibid.) 
Man  reiponsible : — Universally  we  judge  of  instincts,  or  the  qualities  and  disposi- 
tions  which  make  up  natural  character,  as  we  see  the  creature  brought  into  relation 
or  juxtaposition  with  something  else,  and  observe,  *•  What  it  will  do  with  it." 
Especially  is  this  true  of  man.  This  is  just  what  makes  up  his  probation.  God 
has  placed  him  in  this  world  that  he  may  show  forth  his  character,  and  work  out 
his  own  future  condition,  as  he  rightly  uses  or  abuses  it.  Different  men  use  the 
same  material,  or  implement,  or  opportunity  either  for  good  or  for  evil.  From  the 
same  forest  and  quarry  one  man  builds  a  hospital,  and  another  a  gambling  hell. 
Out  of  the  grain  from  the  same  harvest-field  one  man  leavens  wholesome  bread,  and 
another  distils  a  destroying  beverage.  With  the  same  ink  and  type  and  press,  one 
prints  Huxley's  blasphemies,  and  another  God's  Bibles.  And  while  in  all  this  per- 
haps few  men  are  conscious  that  they  are  achieving  their  probation,  yet  verily  tiiey 
are.  God  has  brought  them  into  these  conditions  that  the  universe  may  see  what 
the  man  "will do  with  them."  And  according  as  he  does  evil  or  good,  he  displays 
his  character  and  decides  his  own  destiny.     I.  Now  this,  in  begabd  or  all  things, 

BYXM  SECULAB  AND  SOCIAL,  18  THE  GREAT  LAW  OF  UFB.  BuT  HOW  MUCH  MOBS  IS  ITS 
SOLEMNITY  INCBEASBD  WHEN  IT   HAS  TO   DO  WITH   MATTBBS   BELIGIOUS  AND  SPIBITUAL  ? 

The  question,  in  its  first  connection,  was  addressed  to  Christ ;  and  its  most  signifi- 
eant  apphcation  is  to  the  case  of  impenitent  and  ungodly  men  who,  with  a  like 
question,  turn  away  from  the  gospel.  *'  Oh,"  say  some  men,  '*  I  have  nothing  to 
do  with  it  1  I  am  not  a  professing  Christian  !  I  never  joined  any  Church  I  What, 
then,  is  all  this  to  me?  What  have  I  to  do  with  the  gospel  of  Christ  ?  "  But, 
alas,  for  their  false  logic  1  they  have  something  to  do  with  it.  Their  indifference 
cannot  alter  their  relations  to  Uie  gospel.  Those  relations  grow  out  of  character  and 
condition.  I  can  imagine  a  foolish  man  cherishing  a  settled  dislike  to  the  great  law 
of  gravitation,  overlooking  its  beneficent  results  as  working  out,  from  the  rounding 
of  a  dew-drop  to  the  rounding  of  a  star — from  the  graceful  equipoise  of  a  lily's  leaf 
to  the  harmonies  of  the  stupendous  systems  of  the  universe — all  the  grand  and 
gracious  processes  and  phenomena  of  creation — overlooking  all  this,  and  thinking 
that  but  for  its  restraining  power  he  might  spring  up  as  a  pure  spirit  into  the  bound- 
less expanse  of  heaven,  and  wander  at  will  from  star  to  star  through  immensity.  I 
can  conceive  of  such  an  one  as  disliking  that  great  law,  and  in  his  insane  hate 
blaspheming  the  Omnipotence  which  devised  it.  But  what  of  that  ?  Can  the  man 
escape  from  it  ?  WiU  God  have  respect  to  his  perverted  taste,  and  annihilate  that 
glorious  force  whereon  depend  all  the  beauties  and  harmonies  of  the  universe  ?  Oh, 
surely  not.  And  just  so  it  is  of  religion.  It  is  that  irresistible  law  of  God  under 
which  all  immortal  creatures  live.  In  the  very  nature  of  things,  retribution  must 
follow  every  act  and  experience  of  probation.  Its  solemn  elements  are  twofold. 
First,  there  is  a  loss  of  all  the  unspeakable  blessings  which  the  gospel  offers.  Con- 
sider again  these  natnral  analogies.  Take  the  law  of  gravitation,  And  the  foolish 
man  says : — "  I  do  not  like  that  law  ;  it  is  the  law  of  falling  bodies  ;  it  dashes  mea 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  f« 

down  precipices ;  it  brings  the  destroying  avalanche  npon  human  habitations ;  1 
will  let  it  alone  1  **  But  not  so  a  wise  man.  He  says,  I  will  have  something  to  do 
with  it ;  it  makes  the  pendulum  vibrate  ;  I  will  set  it  to  keep  time  for  me ;  it  givei 
momentum  to  the  watercourses,  it  shall  grind  for  me  as  a  mill.  And  so  of  all  tiie 
natural  forces  of  the  universe :  by  diligently  working  with  them  we  secure  immense 
benefits.  What  if  a  child,  lost  in  a  dangerous  forest  in  the  stormy  night,  amid 
ravening  beasts  and  howling  tempests,  catching  through  the  darkness  the  gleam  ol 
torches  and  the  accents  of  gentle  voices,  and  beholding  the  face  of  the  father  who, 
in  agonizing  love,  had  come  forth  to  seek  and  save  him,  instead  of  springing  joy- 
fully into  those  outstretched  arms,  should  turn  away  with  the  despising  cry,  '•  What 
have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  "  What  would  you  call  it  but  madness  ?  And  yet  immea- 
surably greater  is  the  madness  of  the  impenitent  man  who  rejects  the  precious 
Saviour;  for  the  sinner's  danger  is  more  terrible,  and  the  Saviour's  love  more 
tender.  II.  In  this  rejection  or  the  gospel  tou  incur  tebriblb  guilt.  That 
gospel  is  not  merely  an  invitation,  but  as  well  a  sovereign  mandate.  The  gospel  is 
a  law,  and  no  law  of  God  is  ever  violated  with  impunity.  You  may  not  believe  in 
God's  ordinances  of  health ;  but  if  you  make  your  bed  in  a  lazar-house  you  will  be 
stricken  with  pestilence.  You  may  laugh  to  scorn  God's  law  of  great  forces ;  but  if 
you  launch  your  bark  above  Niagara,  it  will  sweep  you  to  destruction.  Alas  I  for  this 
folly  of  infidelity  and  atheism  1  It  may  be  effectual  in  persuading  its  abettor  to 
have  nothing  to  do  with  God,  but  is  utterly  powerless  in  persuading  God  to  have 
nothing  to  do  with  him.  Retribution  is  an  awful  thought,  and  an  awful  truth.  Bat 
the  aspect  in  which  our  text  sets  forth  the  neglect  of  the  gospel  is  that  ol  the  ntter 
folly  of  rejecting  a  great  blessing.     {C,  Wadswortht  D,D.) 

Ver.  9.  My  name  Is  Legion. — The  legion  of  sin: — Truly  the  name  of  sin  is  Legion. 

It  is  anger,  malice,  intemperance,  murder,  impurity,  unfaithfulness,  dishonesty, 
equivocation,  dissimulation,  falsehood,  hypocrisy,  ingratitude,  disobedience,  im- 
patience, discontentment,  envy,  covetousness ;  it  is  profanity,  formality,  super- 
stition, idolatry,  blasphemy,  and  atheism.  It  is  a  repudiation  of  the  authority, 
a  defiance  of  the  power,  a  slight  to  the  wisdom,  a  contempt  of  the  holiness,  and 
nnthankf ulness  for  the  goodness  of  God.  It  is  the  cause  of  all  the  error,  conflict, 
cruelty,  suffering,  weeping,  and  woe  that  exist  in  this  world.  Like  a  foul  demon, 
it  has  poisoned  and  polluted,  blighted  and  cursed  everything  it  has  touched.  It  has 
caused  man,  the  noblest  work  of  God,  to  become  the  destroyer  of  Ms  own  sool,  the 
murderer  of  his  brother,  the  enemy  of  his  God.    {Arthur  Thompson.) 

Vers.  11-14.    Send  ns  Into  the  swine,  that  we  may  enter  into  tbem. — The 

demonized  swine : — To  clear  away  the  difficulty  presented  by  this  miracle  of  judg- 
ment, we  must  remember — (1)  Pork  was  forbidden  for  food  to  Israel,  and  with  go^ 
reason.  The  pigs  and  the  dogs  are  the  scavengers  of  Syria ;  the  pig  itself  is  vastly 
inferior  to  the  animal  as  we  know  it,  and  furnishes  a  food  too  gross  for  such  a 
climate.  For  these  and  other  reasons  Moses  prohibited  its  use ;  for  similar  reason 
Mohammed  followed  his  example  in  doing  so ;  but  (2)  salt  pork  was  a  great  article 
of  food  with  the  Romans ;  and  therefore  (3)  many  who,  perhaps,  would  not  nse 
pork  for  their  own  food  had  no  objections  to  making  a  profit  by  breeding  some  for 
the  use  of  others.  It  was  contrary  to  the  whole  law,  but  it  was  remunerative.  So 
here  several  owners  have  together  as  many  as  two  thousand.  (4)  Where  Christ  comes 
in,  the  swine  must  go  out.  As  He  purged  the  temple  in  Jerusalem,  so  He  purges 
the  temple  of  nature  in  Gadara.  Men  must  part  with  their  sine,  if  they  want  to 
have  their  Saviour.  The  swine  will  be  driven  out  of  our  hearts,  if  Christ  enters 
them.  He  came  with  mercy  to  Gadara,  but  it  was  not  a  weak  but  a  purifying 
mercy.  (5)  God  is  perpetually  using  the  devil  as  His  whip,  with  which  He  corrects 
the  follies  of  our  heart,  no  evil  being  permitted  to  exist  which  Christ  cannot 
employ  in  some  way  for  good.  This  destruction  of  the  swine  is,  therefore,  a  call  to 
repentance ;  a  miracle  that  does  for  Christ  in  Gadara  what  John  the  Baptist  did  for 
Him  in  Judaea,  stimulating  conscience  and  awakening  solicitude.  It  is  a  message  to 
eonvinoe  of  sin.     {R.  Olover.) 

Vers.  16,  16.  Sitting,  and  (dothed,  and  In  his  right  mind.— TA«  joy  ofjreedom 
from  Satanic  tyranny : — At  the  death  of  Queen  Mary  of  England,  several  Protes- 
tants were  in  tiie  prisons  awaiting  martyrdom.  Who  can  tell  their  joy  when  it  waf 
annonnced  that  the  tyrant  was  dead  and  they  were  free  I  But  what  is  deliverance 
from  a  bodily  persecutor  in  comparison  with  the  deliverance  of  a  soul  from  the 


▼.]  8T.  MARK,  197 

bonds  of  Satan?  Jesns  Christ  comes  as  a  conqneror  to  destroy  the  works  of  the 
devil ;  at  His  word  the  bonds  of  Satan's  captives  fall  from  them,  and  they  are  free. 
{Sunday  School  Timei.)  The  magnitude  of  a  moral  change : — Whenever  a  man  is 
changed,  as  this  demoniac  was,  the  greatest  change  that  ever  can  happen  in  this 
world  takes  place — the  transformation  of  a  man  from  a  life  of  vulgarity,  of  passion, 
of  appetite,  of  selfishness,  of  pride,  and  his  translation  into  a  new  life,  in  which 
purity,  truth,  and  love  are  the  controlling  elements.  As  God  looks  upon  it  in  its 
bearings  and  relations  to  the  eternal  existence,  there  is  no  change  that  ever  takes 
place,  no  change  created  by  skill,  no  change  in  aesthetic  art,  so  great  and  beautiful 
as  this.  It  is  taking  place.  The  wonders  of  creation  are  not  in  Niagara,  nor  in  the 
Mammoth  Cave,  nor  on  the  stormy  ocean.  The  wonders  of  creation  are  silent.  All 
the  thunder  of  the  storm  has  not  in  it  the  power  of  one  blade  of  grass.  All  the 
winds  that  rock  the  oak,  and  make  it  groan,  are  not  to  be  compared  in  power  with 
the  suction  that  is  going  on  in  the  roots  of  that  one  single  oak.  The  powers  of 
nature  are  silent;  and  the  transformation  of  men  from  lower  and  vulgar  conditions  of 
mind  into  higher  and  spiritual  conditions  are  the  marvels,  as  God  looks  upon  them. 
They  are  the  marvels  of  power  in  this  world ;  and  not  all  the  creations  of  Phidias,  of 
Praxiteles,  of  Canova,  or  of  Ward  in  our  modem  day ;  not  all  that  Titian  could  do,  not 
all  that  Kaphael  could  do,  not  all  that  the  great  masters  on  canvas  could  do,  in  any  age 
since  the  world  began,  can  compare  with  it.  These  are  thin  and  superficial  pictures ; 
they  are  nothing  but  a  suggestion  of  what  it  is  when  a  man  is  translated  from  the 
power  of  sin  and  Satan  into  the  kingdom  of  light  and  glory.  The  earth  ought  to 
shake,  and  every  string  in  heaven  ought  to  quiver,  with  the  outblown  joy.  It  does ; 
for  there  is  more  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that 
repenteth  than  over  ninety  and  nine  persons  that  need  no  repentance.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Life  contrasts: — The  august  terror  of  the  one  experience,  and  the 
sweet  beauty  of  the  other,  are  almost  that  which  we  see  in  some  days  of  summer. 
The  olouds  bring  forth  their  thunder  and  their  lightning,  and  the  whole  earth 
shakes  and  quivers  at  the  awful  power  which  the  sweeping  tempest  exhibits.  But 
it  sweeps  on  ;  the  clouds  roll  away ;  the  thunder  grows  lower  and  lower,  and  more 
and  more  distant ;  the  sun  breaks  through ;  every  tree  and  shrub  is  apparelled  in 
jewels ;  the  birds  begin  to  sing ;  and  the  bright  blue  overarches  the  whole  heavens. 
As  between  the  terror  of  the  storm  and  the  clearing-up  of  the  storm  there  is  an 
analogy  of  beauty,  certainly,  with  this  terrible  experience  of  the  demoniac  in  the 
tombs,  and  his  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Christ  sweet  as  a  new-bom  child.  {Ibid.) 
Change  wrought  by  conversion : — A  young  man,  an  apprentice  in  an  extensive  tin 
factory  in  Massachusetts,  who  had  been  very  profligate,  but  was  converted  by 
reading  a  religious  tract,  having  appUed  for  admission  into  a  church,  the  minister 
called  on  his  master  to  inquire  whether  any  change  had  been  wrought  in  his  con- 
duct, and  whether  he  had  any  objection  to  his  reception.  When  the  minister  had 
made  the  customary  inquiries,  his  master,  with  evident  emotion,  though  he  was 
not  a  professor  of  religion,  replied  in  substance  as  follows :  Pointing  to  an  iron 
chain  hanging  up  in  the  room,  *•  Do  you  see  that  chain  ?  "  said  he.  ♦•  That  chain 
was  forged  for  W .  I  was  obliged  to  chain  him  to  the  bench  by  the  week  to- 
gether, to  keep  him  at  work.  He  was  the  worst  boy  I  had  in  the  whole  establish- 
ment.  No  punishment  seemed  to  have  any  salutary  influence  upon  him.  I  could 
not  trust  him  out  of  my  sight.  But  now,  sir,  he  is  completely  changed — he  has 
really  become  like  a  lamb.  He  is  one  of  my  best  apprentices.  I  would  trust  him 
with  untold  gold.  I  have  no  objection  to  his  being  received  into  communion.  I 
wish  all  my  boys  were  prepared  to  go  with  him." 

Ver.  17.  To  depart  out  of  their  coasts. — The  Saviour  sacrificed  rather  than  sinful 
fain : — A  great  many  men  cannot  afford  to  have  Christ.  Here  is  a  man  who  is 
renting  his  buildings  for  the  most  obscene  and  abominable  purposes  in  the  world; 
his  revenues  depend  upon  lust  and  vice ;  and,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  comes  to  regene- 
rate him,  he-cannot  afford  to  have  Christ  with  him.  If  he  does,  he  must  reform 
his  whole  revenue  system,  and  lose  much  possession ;  and  he  beseeches  Christ  to 
depart  out  of  his  coast.  He  does  not  want  Him.  There  are  a  great  many  men  who 
are  trafficking  in  intoxicating  liquors  in  such  a  way  that  they  know  in  their  own 
secret  consciences  that  they  are  living  upon  the  destruction  of  their  fellow-men ; 
and  they  cannot  a£ford  to  give  up  their  traffic  for  the  sake  of  becoming  Christians ; 
and  when  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  upon  them,  they  beseech  Christ  to  depart 
out  of  their  coast.  They  have  the  opportunity  of  reformation  and  rejuvenation  ; 
life,  and  immortality,  and  glory,  are  within  their  reach  ;  but  there  are  the  swine. 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohi».  ▼ 

In  order  that  they  may  sit  fti  the  feet  of  Christ,  they  most  lose  their  herds  oi  anelean 
beasts,  they  mast  lose  their  anjast  profits  and  wicked  pleasures ;  but,  rather  than 
lose  these,  they  will  sacrifice  the  Saviour.    So  it  was  in  this  case.    There  was  no 
doubt  as  to  the  miracle,  and  its  benefioenoe.     There  was  a  man  before  them  in  whom 
the  power  of  God  had  been  made  manifest,  and  they  began  to  pray  Christ,  through 
whose  instrumentality  this  power  had  been  made  manifest,  to  depart  out  of  their 
coast.    One  would  suppose  that  they  would  have  besought  Him  to  remain,  and  go 
on  with  His  works  of  mercy ;  but  no,  they  prayed  Him  to  depart.    {H,  W.  Beeeher.) 
Regret  for  contempt  of  religion : — Alas  1  how  many  will,  when  too  late,  regret  their 
neglect  of,  or  contempt  for,  religion  1    A  few  years  ago,  the  Prime  Minister  of 
England  stepped  across  Downing  Street  with  a  friend,  who  wanted  some  information 
from  one  of  the  Government  officials.    They  entered  the  particular  office,  and  on 
inquiring  for  the  Head  of  the  Department  they  were  curtly  told  to  *♦  wait"  by  an 
insolent  young  clerk,  who  did  not  even  look  up  from  his  newspaper,  and  presently 
added  an  order  to  "  wait  outside."    When  the  principal  official  returned,  he  was 
thunderstruck  to  find  the  Head  of  the  Government  sitting  with  his  friend  on  the 
steps  of  the  stone  staircase  I    Equally  surprised  was  the  clerk,  when,  to  his  dismay, 
he  learned  by  his  dismissal  the  result  of  his  careless  insolence.     In  earthly  things 
men  bitterly  regret  "  chances  "  lost  or  thrown  away,  and  yet  we  treat  with  indiffer- 
ence our  opportunities  in  the  spiritual  life  1    Witii  slow  and  sorrowful  steps  the 
compassionate  Saviour  obeyed  these  requests,  and  departed  from  those  souls  whom 
He  would  have  so  gladly  blessed.     {W.  Hardman,  M.A.)        The  man  with  an 
unclean  spirit : — In  view  of  this  narrative,  which  we  have  thus  very  briefiy  traced, 
I  remark — 1.  We  are  tempted  to  undervalue  man  just  as  much  as  these  men  were. 
The  point  of  the  narrative  was  that  they  were  supposed  to  be  civilized ;  that  they 
believed  tiiemselves  to  be  religious ;  that  they  beheld  the  miracle  that  Christ  wrought 
upon  this  man ;  and  that  their  ideas  of  the  worth  of  a  man  were  so  low  and  so 
vulgar,  that  they  were  not  in  the  slightest  degree  impressed  with  the  man's  restora- 
tion.    There  is  no  point  where  we  need  the  application  of  the  grace  of  God  more 
continuously  than  in  impressing  us  with  a  sense  of  the  Divine  value  of  men.    We 
behave  in  the  value  of  poets ;  of  philosophers ;  of  orators ;  of  men  that  have  some- 
thing pleasing  to  our  taste,  dazzling  to  our  intellect,  and  stimulating  to  our  affections ; 
of  eminent  men ;  of  men  of  power,  that  produce  impressions  upon  us.    We  believe 
in  manhood  that  shows  itself  in  attractive  forms.    But  for  man,  independent  of 
circumstances,  simply  as  a  creature  of  God,  as  an  heir  of  immortality,  and  as  one 
that  has  all  the  future  in  him — a  future  illustrious  as  heaven  or  painful  as  hell — 
for  man  as  man,  how  little  feeling  have  we  1     We  walk  the  streets  with  contempt 
for  this  one,  and  with  loathing  for  that  one.    We  despise  the  poor  sinners— the 
children  of  vice  and  crime — that  we  see  on  every  side  of  us.    2.  There  are  thousands 
of  men  yet  that  are  opposed  to  any  reformation  of  morals  that  would  conflict  with 
the  physical  prosperity,  or  the  supposed  physical  prosperity,  of  the  community  in 
which  they  dwell.    Men  are  numerous,  in  every  city  or  section  of  the  oonntry,  who 
vote  for  their  physical  welfare  against  their  spiritual.    (H.  W.  Beeeher.) 

Vers.  18,  20.  Prayed  Him  that  he  might  be  with  Him. — The  unanswered  pray er : — 
I.  The  probable  beasom  that  led  this  bebtobed  dehonuo  to  oftsb  thib  praykb. 
1.  A  vague  but  very  dreadful  fear  may  have  taken  possession  of  him  that,  perhaps, 
in  the  absence  of  Christ,  his  deliverer,  these  demoniac  powers  might  again  regain 
the  mastery  over  him.  Fear,  the  salutary  fear,  of  going  astray  may  often  assist 
the  soul ;  it  may  be,  and  has  often  been  our  wisdom  to  be  afraid  of  the  possibihty 
of  departure  from  Christ.  2.  And  there  may  have  been,  who  can  doubt  that  there 
was,  a  depth  of  gratitude  in  his  heart  towards  Christ,  that,  perhaps,  he  thought 
could  only  be  expressed  by  his  becoming  His  disciple.    II.  Some  of  thx  pbobablb 

REASONS  that  LED  TO  THE  REFUSAL  OF  THIS  PBATEB  BY  OUB   SaVIOUB.      "  Go  home  tO 

thy  friends,"  &o.  1.  Because,  perhaps,  it  was  better  for  the  healed  Gadarene  to  be 
a  Uving  witness  of  Christ's  goodness  and  power  amongst  his  countrymen.  2.  Be- 
cause young  converts  are  generally  unfit  to  choose  their  spiritual  vocation.  Many, 
in  the  freshness  of  their  love,  are  as  impetuous  and  misguided  as  a  mountain  stream 
bursting  from  its  hidden  prison.  {W,  O.  Barrett.)  Witnessing  for  Christ:— In 
general,  every  man  who  believes  himself  to  be  a  Christian,  is  bound  to  make  such 
pubUc  acknowledgment  that  men  shall  know  the  source  of  his  godly  life.  Every 
man  who  is  conscious  that  his  character  has  been  brought  under  the  power  of  tiie 
Spirit  of  God,  is  bonnd  to  let  men  know  that  the  life  which  is  flowing  out  from  him 
now  is  not  his  own  natnral  life,  but  one  which  proceeds  from  the  Spirit  of  God. 


T.]  8T,  MARK.  199 


^his  would  seem  too  obvions  for  remark,  did  not  facts  s/iow  that  maltitndea  of 
men  endeavour  to  live  Christianly,  but  are  very  cautious  about  saying  that  they 
^re  Christians — and  from  shame-faced  reasons,  sometimes ;  from  reasons  of  fear, 
sometimes ;  from  reasons  of  pride,  sometimes.  Men  who  are  endeavouring  to  live 
Christianly  say,  often,  "  Let  my  example  speak,  and  not  my  lips."  Why  should 
not  a  man's  lips  and  example  both  speak  ?  Why  should  not  a  man  interpret  hi!< 
example?  Why  should  a  man  leave  it  to  be  inferred,  in  this  world,  that  he  is  still 
living  simply  by  the  power  of  his  own  will  7  Why  should  he  leave  it  for  men  to 
point  to  him,  and  say,  "  There  is  a  man  of  a  well-regulated  life  who  holds  his  tem- 
per aright ;  but  see,  it  is  on  account  of  the  household  that  he  has  around  him ;  it  is 
on  account  of  the  companionship  that  he  keeps ;  it  is  on  account  of  the  valorous 
purpose  which  he  has  fashioned  in  his  own  mind  " — thus  giving  credit  to  these 
■econdary  causes,  and  not  to  that  Divine  inspiration,  that  power  from  on  high, 
which  gives  to  all  secondary  causes  their  efficiency  f  {H.  W.  Beeeher.)  Personal 
testimony  appreciated: — Two  men  come  together,  one  of  whom  is  shrunk  and  crip- 
pled with  a  rheumatic  affection,  and  the  other  of  whom  is  walking  in  health  and 
comfort ;  and  the  well  man  says  to  the  other,  "  My  friend,  I  know  how  to  pity  you. 
I  spent  fifteen  as  wretched  years  as  any  man  ever  spent  in  the  world.  I,  too,  was 
^  miserable  cripple,  in  the  same  way  that  you  are."  And  the  man  with  rheumatism 
at  once  says,  "  You  were? "  He  sees  him  walk;  he  sees  how  lithe  and  nimble  he 
ia;  he  sees  that  he  can  straighten  out  his  limbs,  and  that  his  joints  are  not  swollen ; 
he  sees  that  he  is  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  his  bodily  power ;  and  he  is  eager  to  know 
more  about  it.  "  Yes,  I  was  as  bad  off  as  you  are,  and  I  suffered  everything." 
"Tell  me  what  cured  you."  There  is  nothing  that  a  man  wants  to  hear  so  much 
aa  the  history  of  one  who  has  been  cured,  if  he  too  is  a  sufferer.  {Ibid.)  Personal 
testimony  hindered  by  the  fear  of  subsequent  failure : — When  a  watch-maker  sets  a 
watch,  he  almost  always  stops  it  first,  in  order  to  get  the  second-hand  right ;  and 
then,  at  the  right  second,  he  gives  it  a  turn,  and  starts  it.  But  suppose,  having 
itopped  a  watch,  he  should  lay  it  down,  and  should  not  start  it  till  he  faiew  whether 
it  would  keep  time  or  not,  how  long  would  he  wait  ?  There  are  a  great  many  men 
who  are  set  exactly  right,  and  all  that  is  wanted  is,  that  they  should  start,  and  go 
«!m  and  keep  time.  But  no,  they  are  not  going  to  tick  until  they  know  whether  they 
axe  going  to  continue  right  or  not.  And  what  is  needed  is,  that  somebody,  out  of 
hia  own  experience,  should  say  to  them,  "  You  are  under  an  illusion.  Your  reason - 
isg  is  false.  You  are  being  held  back  by  a  misconception.  You  have  enough  sense 
of  flin  to  act  as  a  motive.  If  you  have  wind  enough  to  fill  a  sail,  you  have  enough 
to  atart  a  voyage  with.  You  do  not  need  to  wait  for  a  gale  before  you  go  out  of  the 
harhpir.  If  you  have  enough  wind  to  get  steerage-way,  start  I "  And  if  a  man 
has  «ough  feeling  to  give  him  an  impulse  forward,  let  him  move.  After  that  he 
will  JUave- more  and  more  feeling.  {Ibid.)  Personal  testimony  permits  others  to 
shttiie  the  joy  i<  of  the  Christian  experience: — I  was  as  much  struck,  when  I  travelled 
in  flngland,  with  the  stinginess  of  the  people  there,  in  respect  to  their  gardens,  as 
witii  anything  else.  It  was  afterwards  explained  to  me,  as  owing  partly  to  condi- 
tion! of  olimate,  and  partly  to  the  notions  of  the  people.  I  travelled  two  miles 
along  a  park  shut  in  by  a  fence,  that  was  probably  twelve  feet  high,  of  solid  brick, 
and  coped  with  stone.  On  the  other  side  were  all  sorts  of  trees  and  shrubs,  and 
though  I  was  skirting  along  within  a  few  feet  of  them,  I  could  not  see  a  single  one 
of  them.  There  were  fine  gardens  in  which  almost  all  the  fruits  in  the  world  were 
cultivated,  either  under  glass,  or  against  walls,  or  out  in  the  open  air ;  and  a  man 
might  smell  something  in  the  air;  but  what  it  came  from,  he  had  to  imagine. 
There  were  plants  and  shrubs  drooping  to  the  ground  with  gorgeous  blossoms,  and 
there  might  just  as  well  as  not  have  been  an  open  iron  fence,  so  that  every  poor 
beggar  child  might  look  through  and  see  the  flowers,  and  feel  that  he  had  an  owner- 
ship in  them,  and  congratulate  himself,  and  say,  "  Are  not  these  mine  ?  "  Oh  I  I 
like  to  see  the  little  wretches  of  the  street  go  and  stand  before  a  rich  man's  house, 
and  look  over  into  his  grounds,  and  feast  their  eyes  on  the  trees,  and  shrubs,  and 
plants,  and  piebald  beds,  and  magnificent  blossoms,  and  luscious  fruit,  and  com- 
fort themselves  with  the  thought  that  they  can  see  everything  that  the  rich  man 
owns ;  and  I  like  to  hear  them  tell  what  they  would  do  if  they  were  only  rich.  And 
I  always  feel  as  though,  if  a  man  has  a  fine  garden,  it  is  mean  for  him  to  build 
around  it  a  close  fence,  so  that  nobody  but  himself  and  his  friends  can  enjoy  it. 
Bat  oh  1  it  is  a  great  deal  meaner,  when  the  Lord  has  made  a  garden  of  Edeu  in 
your  soul,  for  you  to  build  around  it  a  great  dumb  wall  so  close  and  so  high  that 
nobody  can  look  through  it  or  over  it,  and  nobody  can  hear  the  birds  singing  in  it. 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha». 

And  yet,  there  are  persons  who  carry  a  heart  full  of  sweet,  gardenesque  experiencai 
all  the  way  through  life,  only  letting  here  and  there  a  very  confidential  friend 
know  anything  about  the  wealth  that  is  in  them.     (Ibid.)        The  gospel  a  livina 
Christ  in  living  men : — Why,  then,  did  Christ  refuse  to  allow  the  man  to  go  wiA 
Him?    He  was  calling  disciples,  and  the  very  watchword  almost  was,  "Folio* 
Me."     But  now,  here  was  one  that  wanted  to  follow  Him,  doubtless  from  the  best 
motives,  and  He  says,  "  Go  home."  Why  ?    Well,  for  the  best  reason  in  the  worlds 
I  think.     The  man's  nature  was  so  transformed,  the  very  radiancy  of  his  joy  wai 
such  a  moral  power,  that  not  in  one  of  the  twelve  disciples  was  there  probably  sf 
much  of  the  gospel  as  this  man  had  in  his  new  experience ;  and  He  sends  him  oat 
thus  to  make  known  the  Christ ;  to  glow  before  men  with  trust,  with  gratitude,  and 
with  love.     He  was  a  glorious  manifestation  of  the  transforming  power  of  the  gosp^ 
upon  the  human  soul,  and  that  was  the  power  that  Christ  came  to  institute  in  tfaii 
world.    It  was  because  he  was  a  gospel.     The  gospel  never  can  be  preached.     Ths 
gospel  can  never  be  spoken.     It  is  a  thing  that  must  be  lived.    It  defies  letter*. 
It  is  a  living  soul  in  a  Christ-like  estate.     That  is  the  gospel.     That  can  be  maili- 
fested,  but  it  cannot  be  described.  No  philosophy  can  unfold  it     No  symbols  can 
demonstrate  it.     It  is  life  centred  on  love,  inflamed  by  the  conscious  presence  of 
the  Divine  and  the  eternal.     That  is  the  real  power  of  the  gospel.     (Ibid.)        Th$ 
potoer  of  God  working  through  man  vpon  men: — This  condition  of  the  human  soul 
carries  with  it  a  mysterious  power  which  all  ages  and  nations  have  associated  with 
the  Divine  presence.     A  man  living  in  that  high  state  of  purity,  rapture,  and  lo?e, 
always  seems  sacred.     He  is  like  a  man  standing  apart  and  standing  above,  and 
seems  to  have  been  one  informed  with  the  Divine  presence.     That  is  always  effiea- 
cious  upon  the  imagination  of  men,  whether  they  are  brutal,  vulgar,  or  heathen. 
Anything  that  seems  to  represent  the  near  presence  of  God  stops  them,  binds  the 
electrifies  them.    A  great  soul  carrying  itself  greatly  in  the  sweetness  and  puritj 
love,  in  the  power  of  intelligence,  and  with  all  other  implements  in  its  hand 
around  about  it,  suggests  more  nearly  the  sense  of  Divine  presence  than  any  othef 
thing  in  this  world.     When  the  human  faculties  are  centred  upon  love,  and  all'o! 
them  are  inflamed  by  it ;  when  conscience,  reason,  knowledge,  the  will  power,  aD 
skill,  all  taste,  and  all  culture  are  the  bodyguards  of  this  central  element  of  Chxia. 
tian  love,  they  are  really,  by  their  own  nature,  what  electricity  is  by  its  nature,  r« 
what  light  is  by  its  nature.    They  are  infectious.    If  you  want  to  move  upon  tlit 
human  mind,  that  is  the  one  force  that  all  men  everywhere  and  always  yieUl  tiO. 
The  glowing  enthusiastic  soul,  even  in  its  lowest  moods,  and  from  its  loiroat 
faculties,  has  great  contagions  power.    If  yon  raise  man  higher  along  the  IqMls  of 
wisdom  and  of  social  excellence,  still  more  powerful  is  he;  if  you  give  htm  the 
dimensions  of  a  hero  and  make  him  a  patriot,  and  give  him  the  disintereetfdneM 
of  a  glowing  love  of  country  and  a  love  of  mankind,  still  higher  he  rises  and  wider 
is  the  circle  that  he  shines  upon ;  but  if  yon  give  him  the  ineffable  preseneeof  (Sod, 
if  God  is  associated  in  his  thought  and  perception,  as  in  his  own  oonaeioifltoeM 
with  the  eternities,  if  he  has  in  himself  all  the  vigour  of  Divine  inspiration-  and 
walks  so  among  men,  there  is  no  other  power  Uke  it — no  crowned  power,  no 
sordid    power,  no  philosophic  power,   no   esthetic  power,  no  artistio    power. 
Nothing  on  earth  is  like  God  in  a  man.      {Ibid.)         Men  too  opaqut  to  let 
the  gospel  through  them : — Time  and  time  again  I  have  felt  as  though  I  were  a 
window  through  which  the  sun  struggled  to  come.    You  may  remembt  '  those  old 
bull's-eye  windows,  with  the  glass  bulging  in  the  centre  so  that  the  sun  could  not 
get  through  them  except  in  twilight.     I  have  felt  that  the  natural  man  in  me  waa 
so  strong  that  not  half  the  light  of  the  gospel  came  through.    Or,  as  yon  have  seen, 
in  an  attic  long  nnvisited  by  the  broom,  the  only  windows,  jutting  out  from  under 
the  gable,  have  been  taken  possession  of  by  dust  and  spiders,  until  a  veil  is  woven 
over  them,  and  the  sun  outside  cannot  get  inside  except  as  twilight  1    So  men, 
cumbered  with  care  and  worldly  conditions,  and  all  manner  of  worldly  ambitions, 
attempting  to  preach  the  doctrinal  Christianity,  are  too  opaque,  or  too  nearly 
opaque,  to  let  the  gospel  through.     (Ibid. )        The  testimony  of  a  gospel  life  toithin 
the  reach  of  every  variety  of  talent : — This  issue  comes  home  to  all  souls  alike.    It 
is  the  solvent  of  the  difficulties  which  we  feel  in  diversities  of  talent.    One  Chris- 
tian man  says,  "  How  can  I  be  expected  to  do  much  good?  I  am  not  eloquent,  I 
am  not  an  apostle,  I  am  not  Apollos,  I  am  not  a  Paul."    Another  man  says,  **! 
should  be  very  glad  if  I  were  a  man  of  aflairs  ;  I  should  like  to  live  a  Christian  lifb 
in  the  conduct  of  affairs ;  but  I  have  no  ability."    Now,  the  gospel  force  belongs  to 
every  man  alike.    If  yon  are  low  in  life,  yon  are  susceptible  of  living  like  Christ. 


.  f .]  ST,  MARK,  201 

If  you  are  very  high  in  life,  yon  are  sueceptible  of  living  a  Chriet-like  life.  If  you 
are  wise  and  educated,  that  is  the  life  for  you.  If  you  are  ignorant,  that  is  just  aa 
much  the  Ufe  for  you.  It  does  not  lie  in  those  gifts  that  the  world  prizes,  and 
justly  prizes,  too.  It  is  something  deeper  than  that,  far  more  interior  than  that ; 
and  it  is  clothed  by  the  creative  idea  of  God  with  an  influence  over  men's  souls 
greater  than  any  other.  Wherever  you  are ;  whether  you  are  poor,  obscure,  mean, 
even  sick  and  bedridden,  or  in  places  of  conspicuity,  the  highest,  the  lowest,  and 
the  middle,  all  come  to  a  gracious  unity.  Not  only  that,  but  they  all  feel  resting 
upon  them  the  sweet  obligations  of  the  duty  of  loving  Christ,  of  being  like  Christ, 
of  loving  our  fellow  men.  When  we  shall  become  communal,  whenever  the  coronal 
faculties  of  the  human  soul  are  in  ascendency  and  in  sympathetic  unity,  the  world 
will  not  linger  another  eighteen  hundred  years  before  it  will  be  illumined.  The 
new  heavens  will  come,  and  the  new  earth.  (Ibid.)  The  apostle  to  the 
Gadarenei : — Things  must  have  looked  perplexing  enough  to  this  poor  man  ! 
"Go  home  to  thy  friends  1 "  "But,  Lord,  I  have  no  friend  but  Thee.  I  have 
been  an  outcast  now  these  many  jears  —  a  dweller  in  unclean  sepulchres, 
•bhorred  of  men.  What  have  men  done  for  me  but  bind  me  in  chains  and  fetters 
of  iron  f  But  Thy  hand  hath  loosed  my  bonds  of  pain,  and  bound  me  with  Thy 
love.  Let  me  be  with  Thee  where  Thou  art  I  "  But  still  from  that  most  gracious 
One  came  the  inexorable  "  Go  back —  back  to  thy  friends  and  thy  father's  house. 
Go,  tell  them  what  the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee."  "  What  ?  I,  Lord  ?  I,  so  dis- 
used to  rational  speech?  whose  lips  and  tongue  were  but  now  the  organs  of 
demoniac  blasphemy  ?  I,  just  rallying  from  the  rending  of  the  exorcised  fiends  ? 
I,  surrounded  by  a  hostile  people  that  have  just  warned  away  my  Lord  and  Saviour 
from  their  coasts  ?  And  can  I  hope  that  they  will  hear  my  words,  who  turn  a  deaf 
and  rebellious  ear  to  Thee  ?  Nay,  Lord,  I  entreat  Thee  let  me  be  with  Thee, 
there  sitting  at  Thy  feet  clothed  and  in  my  right  mind,  that  men  may  look  and 
point  at  me  and  glorify  my  Lord,  my  Saviour  1  Let  them  go,  whose  zeal  to  tell  of 
Thee  even  Thy  interdict  cannot  repress — there  be  many  such,  send  them  I  But  let 
me  be  near  Thee,  be  with  Thee,  and  gaze,  and  love,  and  be  silent,  and  adore  I  " 
Was  ever  a  stronger  argument  of  prayer  ?  And  yet  the  little  boat  moves  off,  and 
Christ  departs,  and  the  grateful  believer  is  left  alone  to  do  the  work  for  which  he 
seems  so  insufficient  and  unfit  1  How  like  Christ's  dealing  is  to  His  Father's  I  To 
translate  the  story  into  the  terms  of  our  daily  life  it  shows  us — I.  That  the  path 

OF  DUTY  which  ChBIST  HAS  MASKED  OUT  rOB  US  MAY  BE  THE  OPPOSFTE  07  THAT  WHICH 
WE    NATURAIiLY   THINK    AND   ABDENTLY    DBSIBB.       All    OUT    natural    aptitudcS,    aS   We 

estimate  them,  yea,  our  purest  and  highest  religious  aspirations,  may  draw  us 
toward  a  certain  line  of  conduct,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  manifest  indications 
of  God's  Word  and  providence  inexorably  close  up  that  way  and  wave  us  off  in 
another  direction.     U.  When  belioious  pbivilbob  and  beligioub  duty  seem  to 

OONTLIOT,  THE  DUTY  IS  TO  BE  PBEFERBED  ABOVE  THE  PBIVILEOE.  III.  DUTY,  PBEFEBBED 
AND  FOLLOWED  INSTEAD  OF  PBIVILEOE,  BECOMES  ITSELF  THE  SUPBEME  PBIVILEGB.     The 

interests  of  the  soul  are  very  great,  but  they  are  not  supreme.  The  supreme 
interests  are  those  of  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  whoso,  for- 
getting the  interests  of  his  own  soul,  shall  follow  after  these,  shall  surely  find  that 
all  things  beside  are  added  unto  him.  {L.  W,  Bacon.)  Ooing  home— a  Christmas 
ttory : — I.  What  they  abe  to  tell.  Personal  experience.  A  story  of  free  grace. 
A  story  filled  with  gratitude.  II.  Why  they  abb  to  tell  it.  For  the  Master's 
sake.  To  make  others  glad.  HI.  How  is  this  stoby  to  be  told  ?  1.  Truthfully. 
3.  Humbly.  3.  Earnestly.  4.  Devoutly.  (C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  The  refused 
request : — It  was  a  natural  prayer  of  gratitude  and  sweetness.  Why,  when  Christ 
grants  the  bad  prayer  of  the  people,  does  He  deny  the  good  prayer  of  the  restored 
sufferer  ?  I.  Msboy  to  the  man  himself.  1.  To  teach  him  to  walk  by  faith,  not 
by  sight.  2.  To  leave  his  fears  of  a  return  of  his  affliction  unsanctioned.  3.  To 
indicate  that  Christ's  work  was  perfect,  not  in  danger  of  relapse.  4.  To  suggest 
tiiat  a  distant  Christ,  if  trusted,  is  as  strong  to  save  as  a  Christ  who  is  nigh  at  hand. 
11.  Meboy  to  the  Gebqesenes.  The  presence  of  the  Lord  oppressed  them.  The 
presence  of  a  disciple  among  them  was  (1)  a  link  to  Him,  and  (2)  a  testimony  of 
Him.  So  the  man  is  left,  a  living  gospel,  seeing  whom,  others  may  reflect,  repent, 
and  ultimately  believe.  III.  Mebcy  to  the  family  of  tee  bestobed  man.  His 
family  had  suffered  much  pain,  and  probably  poverty  ;  let  them  have  the  pleasure 
of  seeing  his  health  and  peace,  and  the  advantage  of  his  care.  For  wife 
and  children's  comfort  he  should  return.  How  thoughtful  is  Christ  of  our  best 
Interests,  even  when  He  is  crossing  our  wishes  1    How  merciful  in  leaving  aD 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  ▼ 

evangelist  with  those  on  whom  some  would  have  called  down  fire  from  heaven  ! 
{R.  Glover.)  Christ's  disinterestedness  : — Do  you  ever  find,  among  all  the  persons 
whom  Christ  miraculously  cured,  a  single  one  whom  He  retained  to  be  afterwards 
near  Him  as  His  disciple,  His  attendant.  His  votary  ?  .  .  .  Where  now  is  your 
worldly  friend  who  will  behave  himself  towards  you  in  this  fashion  ?  So  far  from 
it,  no  sooner  has  he  done  you  any  service,  however  trifling,  than  he  immediately 
lays  a  claim  upon  you  for  your  daily  attendance  upon  him.  He  requires  you  to  be 
henceforth  always  at  his  elbow,  and  to  be  giving  him  continually  every  possible 
proof  of  your  gratitude,  of  your  devoted  and  even  slavish  attachment  to  his  person. 
{Segneri.)  The  home  missionary  : — A  converted  man  should  be  a  missionary  to  hia 
fellow-men.  L  Christian  missionaby  wore,  the  duty  op  every  converted  mah, 
should  be  undertaken  (1)  out  of  gratitude  to  God  ;  (2)  from  regard  to  human  need; 
(3)  to  promote  the  glory  of  Christ.  II.  Christian  effort  should  begin  at  home. 
in.  Christian  usefulness  must  be  based  on  personal  experience.     IV.  Chbistiaii 

(OBEDIENCE  WILL   BE  CROWNED  WITH  THE    REWARD  OP   SUCCESS.       {H.  PhUUpS.)  The 

mission  oftlie  saved : — Men  saved  from  Satan— 1.  Beg  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet,  clothed, 
and  in  their  right  mind.  2.  Ask  to  be  with  Him  always,  and  never  to  cease  from 
personal  attendance  upon  Him.  3.  Go  at  His  bidding,  and  publish  abroad  what 
great  things  He  has  done  for  them.  4.  Henceforth  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  live 
ior  Jesus  and  for  Him  alone.  Come,  ye  despisers,  and  see  yourselves  as  in  a 
looking-glass.  The  opposite  of  all  this  is  true  of  you.  Look  until  you  see  your- 
selves transformed.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  restored  demoniac: — I.  An  in 
TERESTiNO  PRAYER  which  notwithstanding  was  rejected.  1.  The  prayer  itself — "  To 
be  with  Christ."  Was  not  this  the  end  of  Christ's  mission,  that  He  might  collect 
Bouls  to  Himself  ?  Gather  them  out  of  the  world,  <feo.  It  seems  evidently  a  wise 
and  proper  prayer,  a  pious  prayer,  the  sign  of  a  gracious  state  of  souL  2.  The 
probable  reasons  by  which  this  prayer  was  dictated.  It  might  be  the  result  (1)  Of 
holy  cautiousness  and  fear.  (2)  From  grateful  love  to  Jesus.  (3)  From  a  desire 
to  know  more  of  Christ.  3.  The  refusal  of  this  request.  "  But  Christ  sent  him 
away."  However  wise  and  proper  and  pious  the  man's  petition  appears,  Jesnt 
determined  and  directed  otherwise ;  his  suit  could  not  be  granted.  Here  let  as 
pause  and  learn  (1)  how  necessary  to  be  taught  rightly  to  pray.  We  know  not 
what  we  should  pray  for.  (2)  We  should  learn  to  be  satisfied  with  the  Lord's  good 
pleasure  whether  He  grants  our  requests  or  not.  IL  An  important  command  wbicb 
WAS  PIOUSLY  OBEYED.  "  Jcsus  Bcut  him,"  &0.  1.  The  nature  of  the  command. 
He  was  to  be  a  personal  witness  for  Christ ;  a  monument  of  Christ's  power  and 
compassion.  He  could  testify  ^1)  to  the  enthronement  of  reason.  (2)  To  emancipa- 
tion from  the  thraldom  of  evil  spirits.  (3)  To  restoration  to  happiness.  (4)  To 
the  Author  of  his  deliverance,  "Jesus,"  2.  The  obedience  which  was  rendered. 
(1)  It  was  prompt  and  immediate.  He  did  not  cavil,  nor  reason,  nor  refuse.  (2> 
It  was  decided  and  public.  Not  afraid,  nor  ashamed.  Application :  1.  The  end 
of  our  conversion  is  more  than  our  own  salvation.  (1)  We  must  testify  to  and  for 
the  benefit  of  others.  (2)  We  must  glorify  Christ.  2.  The  converted  should  not 
consult  merely  their  own  comfort.  3.  Christian  obedience  is  unquestioning  and 
exact.  4.  The  hearts'  desires  of  the  saints  shall  be  granted  in  a  future  state.  Be 
with  Jesus  for  ever,  Ac.  {J.  Bums,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  At  the  feet  of  Jesus  :— Two 
grand  features  in  the  close  of  the  parable.  I.  The  POsmoM  in  which  the  man  was 
FOUND.  1.  How  interesting  is  this  spectacle.  It  was  the  place  of  nearness  to 
Jesus  and  intimate  communion  with  Him.  Perhaps  he  selected  this  place  also  as 
the  site  of  safety,  or,  he  may  have  been  seeking  that  instruction  which  was 
requisite  to  guide  and  to  direct  him.  2.  What  took  place  in  the  cas^ 
of  the  demoniac  is  only  a  fore-light  of  what  will  take  place  in  the  caa 
of  all  creation.  U.  The  petition  that  hx  uioht  be  allowed  to  remain 
WITH  Him  OB  to  accompany  Him.  Why  ?  1.  Because  he  might  have  recol 
lected  the  fact  of  which  the  words  are  the  description  (Matt.  xii.  43).  If  wt 
have  obtained  anything  from  Christ  for  which  we  feel  thankful,  we  shall  b» 
jealous  lest  we  lose  it.  2.  To  give  expression  to  the  deep  love  that  he  felt  to  Him. 
III.  The  actual  answer  that  Christ  oavk  him.  Explain  the  seeming  contradiction 
between  this  and  Luke  viii.  56  and  others.  We  have  in  this  indirect  but  striking 
evidence  of  the  divinity  of  the  character  of  Jesus,  A  mere,  common  wonder-worker 
would  have  been  too  glad  of  having  a  livins  specimen  of  his  great  power  to  aooom- 
pany  him  into  all  lands,  &o.  We  have  these  great  lessons  taught  ni :  1.  That 
he  that  receives  the  largest  blessing  from  Christ  is  bound  to  go  and  be  the  largeU 
and  most  untiring  distributor  of  that  blessing.     We  receive  not  for  ourselves,  but 


.  ▼.]  ST.  MARK.  903 

for  diffusion,  Ac.  2.  That  the  way,  if  you  ar«  Chri>,tian8,  to  be  with  Christ,  and  t9 
be  with  Him  most  closely,  is  to  go  out  and  labour  for  Christ  with  the  greatest  dili- 
gence. We  are  never  so  near  to  Christ  as  when,  in  His  spirit  and  in  His  name, 
we  are  doing  His  work  and  fulfilling  His  will,  3.  That  labouring  for  Christ, 
according  to  Christ's  command,  is  the  very  way  to  enjoy  the  greatest  happiness 
that  results  from  being  with  Christ.  Labour  for  Christ  and  happiness  from  Christ 
are  twins  that  are  never  separated.  4.  That  as  Christ,  in  healing  the  demoniac, 
had  an  object  beyond  him,  so,  in  healing  us.  He  has  an  object  beyond  us,  6.  But 
there  is  something  very  instructive,  too,  in  the  place  that  the  Saviour  bade  this 
recovered  demoniac  go  to.  Go  to  the  sphere  in  which  providence  has  placed  you, 
and  into  that  sphere  bring  the  glorious  riches  with  which  grace  has  enriched  you, 
.  .  .  Test  your  missionary  powers  at  home  before  you  try  them  in  the  school,  &c. 
The  little  home,  the  family,  is  the  fountain  that  feeds  with  a  pure  and  noble 
population  the  large  home,  which  is  the  country.  Let  us  begin  at  home,  but 
let  us  not  stop  there.  6.  Conceive,  if  yon  can,  the  return  of  the  man  to  his 
home — the  picture  realized  in  his  reception.  (J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  The  power  of 
home  in  regenerating  society  : — Loyalty,  and  love,  and  happiness  in  Britain's 
homes,  will  make  loyalty,  and  happiness,  and  love  be  reflected  from  Britain's  altars 
and  from  Britain's  shores.  There  may  be  a  mob,  or  there  may  be  slaves ;  but  let 
statesmen  recollect  there  cannot  be  a  people  unless  there  be  a  home.  I  repeat,  there 
may  be  in  a  country  slaves,  or  there  may  be  mobs,  but  there  cannot  be  in  a  country  a 
people,  the  people,  unless  it  be  a  country  of  holy  and  happy  homes.  And  he  that 
helps  to  elevate,  sustain,  ennoble,  and  sanctify  the  homes  of  a  country,  con- 
tributes more  to  its  glory,  its  beauty,  its  permanence,  than  all  its  legislators,  its 
laws,  its  literature,  its  science,  its  poetry  together.  Our  Lord  began  at  the  first 
home  that  was  found  at  Bethabara  beyond  Jordan — the  home  of  Andrew  and 
Peter ;  and  starting  from  it,  he  carried  the  glorious  gospel  of  which  he  was  the 
author  into  the  home  of  Mary  and  Martha  at  Bethany,  of  Cornelius  the  centurion, 
of  Lydia,  of  the  gaoler  of  Philippi,  of  Crispus,  and  finally  of  Timothy ;  and 
these  consecrated  and  converted  homes  became  multiplying  foci  amid  the  world's 
darkness,  tUl  the  scattered  and 'ever  multiplying  lights  shall  be  gathered  one  day 
into  one  broad  blaze,  that  shall  illuminate  and  make  glad  the  wide  world.  Let  us 
begin  at  home,  but  let  us  not  stop  there.  It  is  groups  of  homes  that  make  a  con- 
gregation; it  is  clusters  of  congregations  that  make  a  country.  {J.  Gumming,  D.D.) 
The  return  of  the  cured  demoniac : — He  went  home,  and  proclaimed  not  only  there, 
but  in  all  Decapolis,  what  God^  had  done  for  him.  Conceive,  if  you  can,  the 
picture  realized  in  his  reception.  '  He  turns  his  face  quietly  to  his  home  the  first 
time,  perhaps,  for  years — the  first  time,  at  least,  that  he  recollects.  One  child  of 
his,  looking  from  the  casement,  sees  the  father  return,  and  gives  the  alarm  :  every 
door  is  doubly  bolted ;  the  mother  and  children  chng  together  in  one  group,  lest 
the  supposed  still  fierce  demoniac,  who  had  so  often  torn  and  assailed  them  before, 
should  again  tear  and  utterly  destroy  them.  But  a  second  child,  looking,  calls 
out,  "My  father  is  clothed;  before  he  was  not  clothed  at  all."  A  third  child 
shouts  to  the  mother,  *•  My  father  is  not  only  clothed,  but  he  comes  home  so 
quietly,  so  beautifully,  that  he  looks  ai  when  he  dandled  us  upon  his  knee,  kissed 
us,  and  told  us  sweet  and  interesting  stories  :  can  this  be  he  ?  "  A  fourth  exclaims, 
"  It  is  my  father,  and  he  seems  so  gentle,  and  so  quiet,  and  so  beautiful — come, 
my  mother,  and  see."  The  mother,  not  beheving  it  to  be  true,  but  wishing  it 
were  so,  runs  and  looks  with  sceptical  belief ;  and  lo  I  it  is  the  dead  one  alive,  it  is 
the  loit  one  found,  it  is  the  naked  one  clothed,  it  is  the  demon-possessed  one, 
holy,  happy,  peaceful ;  and  when  he  comes  and  mingles  with  that  glad  and  wel- 
ooming  household,  the  group  upon  the  threshold  grows  too  beautiful  before  my 
imagination  for  me  to  attempt  to  delineate,  and  its  hearts  are  too  happy  for  human 
language  to  express.  The  father  crosses  the  threshold,  and  the  inmates  welcome 
him  home  to  their  fire-side.  The  father  gathers  his  children  around  him,  while 
his  wife  sits  and  listens,  and  ie  not  weary  with  hstening  the  whole  day  and  the 
whole  night,  as  he  tells  them  how  One  who  proclaimed  Himself  to  be  the  Messiah, 
who  is  ^e  Prophet  promised  to  the  fathers,  the  Wonderful,  the  Counsellor,  the 
mighty  God,  the  everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  spake  to  him,  exorcised  the 
demons,  and  restored  him  to  his  right  mind,  and  made  him  happy.  (Ibid.)  Work 
for  Chri$t  the  way  to  retain  the  vision  of  Him  : — A  poor  monk,  who,  in  spite  ol  hif 
cowl,  seems  from  the  fact  to  have  been  one  of  God's  hidden  ones,  was  one  day, 
according  to  »  mediaeval  legend,  meditating  in  his  celL  A  glorious  vision  burst 
cpon  him,  it  is  recorded,  with  the  brilliancy  of  noon-day,  and  revealed  in  its 


204  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  ▼ 

bosom  the  **Man  of  Sorrows,"  the  "  acqnainted  with  grief."  The  monk  was 
gazing  on  the  spectacle  charmed,  delighted,  adoring.  The  convent  bell  rang ;  and 
that  bell  was  the  daily  signal  for  the  monk  to  go  to  the  poor  that  were  crowding 
round  the  convent  gate,  and  distribute  bread  and  fragments  of  food  among  them. 
The  monk  hesitated  whether  he  should  remain  to  enjoy  the  splendid  apocalypse, 
or  should  go  out  to  do  the  daily  drudgery  that  belonged  to  hun.  At  last  he  de- 
cided on  the  latter ;  he  left  the  vision  with  regret,  and  went  out  at  the  bidding  of 
the  bell  to  distribute  the  alms,  and  bread,  and  crumbs  among  the  poor.  He 
returned,  of  course  expecting  that,  because  of  his  not  seeming  to  appreciate  it,  the 
vision  would  be  darkened ;  but  to  his  surprise,  when  he  returned,  the  vision  was 
there  still,  and  on  his  expressing  his  amazement  that  his  apparent  want  of 
appreciating  it  and  being  thankful  for  it  should  be  overlooked,  and  that  the  vision 
should  still  continue  in  augmented  splendour,  a  voice  came  from  the  lips  of  the 
Saviour  it  revealed,  which  said,  "  If  you  had  stayed,  I  had  not."  This  may  be  a  legend 
but  it  teaches  a  great  lesson — that  active  duty  in  Christ's  name  and  for  Christ's  sake 
is  the  way  to  retam  the  vision  of  His  peace  in  all  its  permanence  and  power.  {Ibid.) 
The  three  prayers : — Here  are  three  prayers,  the  prayer  of  the  devils,  of  the  Gadarenes, 
and  of  the  demoniac  who  had  been  restored.  The  first  prayer  was  answered,  and 
the  devils  obtained  their  wish  ;  the  second  was  complied  with,  but  the  last  was  re- 
fused, though  all  he  asked  was  permission  to  be  with  Christ ;  surely  there  must  be 
something  very  instructive  in  all  this,  otherwise  it  would  not  have  been  registered. 
I.  "  And  all  the  devils  besouoht  Jesus,  bayino,  send  ub  into  thb  bwinb." 
Here,  the  devils  acknowledge  the  power  of  Christ  over  them  ;  they  cannot  injure 
even  »  brute  without  leave.  This  is  orthodox  so  far  as  it  goes,  and  even  beyond 
the  creed  of  many  who  profess  themselves  Christians.  None  of  the  devils  in  hell 
disbelieve  the  divinity  of  Christ.  But  cannot  faith  save  us  f  It  can,  but  not  such 
faith  as  is  purely  a  conviction  of  truth.  All  Christians  know  that  their  specula- 
lative  surpasses  their  experimental  and  practical  religion.  But  will  devils  pray  f 
and  will  they  be  heard  ?  Yes — "  and  forthwith  Jesus  gave  them  leave."  Their 
request  was  founded  on  malice  and  mischief,  in  order  to  render  Christ  obnoxious 
to  the  Gadarenes,  through  the  spoiling  of  their  goods.  Permission  was  given  in 
judgment.  Satan  killed  the  children  of  Job  ;  but  Job  triumphed  in  his  tried.  The 
t  ame  permission  was  given  to  Satan  to  tempt  the  Gadarenes,  how  different  the 
result ;  he  destroyed  their  property  and  them  with  it.  The  gold  will  endure  the 
furnace,  the  dross  will  not.    II.  They  baw  the  poob  wbetch  dispossessed,  and 

INSTEAD  OV   BBINGINO  ALL  THEIB    SICK    TO    BB   HEALED  BESOUOHT  JeSUB  TO  DEFABT. 

How  dreadful  was  this  prayer  i  Oh,  if  you  were  of  Moses  yon  would  say, 
"  If  Thy  presence  go  not  with  us,  suffer  us  not  to  go  np  hence."  David  said, 
•'  Cast  me  not  away  from  Thy  presence."  You  need  the  Saviour's  presence 
as  much  as  the  earth  needs  the  sun;  in  adversity,  death,  judgment.  Observe, 
you  may  pray  thus  without  words,  actions  speak  louder  than  words.  When 
you  would  tell  a  man  to  be  off,  it  is  done  without  speaking ;  an  eye,  a  finger, 
nay,  but  turning  your  back  will  effect  it.  God  interprets  your  meaning,  he  trans- 
lates your  actions  into  intelligible  language.  Wonder  not  if  God  takes  you  at  your 
word ;  He  punishes  sin  with  sin ;  sealing  men's  eyes  when  they  \nll  not  see ; 
withdrawing  grace  that  is  neglected.  III.  Thb  poob  patient  pbated  to  bs  with 
Christ.  I.  His  prayer  arose  from  fear.  2.  From  gratitude.  8.  From  love. 
Every  one  who  has  obtained  grace  prays,  "  Lord,  show  me  Thy  glory."  Learn : 
1.  To  think  correctly  of  answers  to  prayers — that  God  may  hear  in  wrath,  or  refuse 
a  petition  in  kindness.  God  can  distinguish  our  welfare  from  our  wishes.  2. 
There  is  no  ostentation  in  the  miracle.  The  pure  benevolence  of  Jesus  terminated 
with  the  individual.  The  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  calls  us  into  the  world,  as  well 
as  out  of  it.  It  calls  us  out,  as  to  its  spirit  and  maxims,  in,  as  the  sphere  of 
activity,  and  place  of  trial.  The  idea  of  living  among  the  wretched  Gadarenes 
nmst  have  been  uncomfortable  to  the  renewed  mind  of  the  poor  man,  yet  he  is 
directed  to  go,  without  murmuring  or  gainsaying ;  not,  indeed,  in  the  spirit  of  the 
Pharisee,  nor  of  the  rigid  professor,  who,  while  he  confesses  a  man  can  have 
nothing,  except  it  be  given  him  from  above,  is  occupied  all  the  day  in  maligning 
and  censuring  his  neighbours ;  but  to  display  the  meekness  and  gentleness  of 
Jesus  Christ  in  his  conduct  and  conversation,  to  relate  his  recovery,  to  honour  the 
Physician,  and  to  direct  others  unto  Him.  Oh,  if  there  were  a  history  of  all  whom 
the  Saviour  has  made  whole,  what  a  work  would  it  be.  {W,  Jay.)  Home 
piety  a  proof  of  real  religion: — He  that  is  not  relatively  godly,  is  not  really  so; 
a  man  who  is  bad  at  home  is  bad  throughout,  and  this  reminds  me  of  a  wise  reply 


T.]  8T.  MARK, 


of  Whitfield  to  the  qaestion  "  Is  such  a  one  a  good  man  ?  '*      "  How  should  I  know 
that?    I  never  lived  with  him."     {Ibid.)  The  recovered  demoniac: — I.  Ths 

man's  request.  We  cannot  wonder  that  his  mind  should  shrink  at  the  thought  of 
the  devil's  returning  in  the  absence  of  our  Lord.  He  may  have  heard  of  such 
oases.  **  When  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a  man  .  .  .  the  last  state  of  that 
man  is  worse  than  the  first."  Thus  the  soul  rescned  from  Satan  is  frequently  for 
a  time  unable  to  rejoice,  but  appears  to  "  receive  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to 
fear."  Our  feeHngs,  after  any  unexpected  deliverance  or  event,  are  such  that  we" 
find  it  difficult  to  believe  its  reality.  Go,  tell  the  mother  who  has  heard  of  the 
shipwreck  of  her  child,  that  her  son  who  was  dead  is  alive  again,  she  is  with 
difficulty  persuaded  of  its  truth.  And  when  so  much  is  at  stake  we  should  fear 
for  those  who  do  not  sometimes  fear  for  themselves.  Can  the  Christian,  harassed 
by  rising  corruption,  beset  with  temptation,  feel  no  concern  ?  II.  Oub  Lord's 
ANSWER.  We  might  have  supposed,  after  the  great  salvation  Jesus  had  wrought 
for  him.  He  would  not  have  been  reluctant  to  grant  him  any  favour,  especially 
when  the  request  was  dictated  by  gratitude.  1.  The  reply  showed  the  modesty  of 
the  Saviour.  2.  Also  His  compassion  for  the  man's  friends.  Mercy  to  one 
member  of  the  family  should  be  an  encouragement  to  all  the  rest.  3.  And  the 
great  object  which  every  man  truly  converted  to  God  will  keep  perpetually  in 
view  is,  the  promotion  of  the  Divine  glory,  and  the  extension  of  the  Redeemer's 
kingdom,  in  the  salvation  of  those  around  him.  The  wife  of  his  bosom,  the 
parent,  the  brother,  or  the  child  ;  reason,  as  well  as  affection,  points  out  these  as  the 
first  objects  of  our  concern.  Behgion  does  not  petrify  the  feelings,  and  make  us 
to  be  so  absorbed  in  seeking  our  own  safety,  as  to  be  indifferent  to  the  fate  of 
those  about  us ;  the  grace  of  God  does  not  annihilate  the  sympathies,  or  snap  the 
bonds  of  nature ;  no,  it  strengthens  and  refines  those  sympathies,  deepens  the 
channel  in  which  the  affections  flow,  and  purifies  and  consecrates  the  stream.  But 
are  there  not  some,  who,  instead  of  entreating  Jesus  that  they  may  go  with  Him, 
are  saying  of  the  world  and  of  the  flesh,  We  have  loved  these,  and  after  them  we 
will  go?  But,  fellow-sinners,  be  persuaded  it  is  the  way  of  transgression,  it  is 
hard.    {S,  Bridge,  M.A,) 

Vers.  21,  23,  86,  43.  Jalrua  by  name.— il  proper  prayer :— Better  prayers, 
perhaps,  had  been  offered.  He  would  have  shown  more  faith  if  he  had  prayed  like 
the  centurion  (Luke  vii.  7).  But,  though  he  does  not  show  such  strong  faith,  yet 
it  is  a  good  prayer.  For  it  is  (1)  humble :  he  falls  at  Christ's  feet;  (2)  believing : 
he  feels  Christ  is  omnipotent  to  heal ;  (8)  bold :  he  offers  it  in  face  of  all  the  people, 
many  of  whom  would  be  shocked  that  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue  should  acknowledge 
Jesus ;  (4)  loving,  springing  from  a  pure  affection.  Distress  is  a  great  schoolmaster. 
It  teaches  men  many  things ;  among  the  rest  the  greatest  of  all  attainments — the 
power  to  pray.  {R.  Olaver.)  A  revived  flower : — And  that  bright  flower  bloomed 
in  the  vase  of  that  happy  home,  more  beautiful  because  the  look  of  Jesus  had  given 
it  new  tints,  and  the  breath  of  Jesus  had  given  it  new  fragrance.  {J.  Cumming, 
D.D.)  Jairus*  daughter ;— Jairus  was  a  good  man.  His  light  was  small,  but 
real.  It  was  feeble,  but  from  heaven.  I.  Hb  had  mijoh  to  tbt  his  faith.  One 
seems  to  see  all  tiie  father  in  th#  tenderness  of  his  words.  Hope  was  over, — his 
daughter  was  dead.  Thus  is  it  with  the  behever.  Instead  of  the  rehef  he  hoped 
for,  all  seems  as  death.  Thus  does  the  Lord  try  the  faith  He  gives.  Thus  by 
causing  as  to  wait  for  the  blessing  does  He  endear  it.  H.  Thb  kftbct  of  this 
TRIAL  OF  FAITH.  He  did  not  distrust  the  power  or  willingness  of  the  compassionate 
Saviour.  His  faith  takes  no  denial,  he  still  continues  with  Jesus.  Faith  hopes 
against  hope.  True  faith  partakes  of  his  nature  who  exercises  it,  therefore  in  all, 
it  is  weak  at  times.  But  it  partakes  also  of  His  nature  who  gives  it,  and  therefore 
evinces  its  strength  in  the  very  midst  of  that  weakness.  IH.  But  wherever  found, 
IT  18  oraoiouslt  REWARDED.  The  scomers  are  without ;  but  believing  Jairus  and 
the  believing  mother  (ver.  40)  are  admitted.  They  see  the  mighty  power  of  God  put 
forth  on  behalf  of  their  daughter.  What  an  enoo  ragement  here  to  some  anxious 
parent  to  put  the  case  of  their  dear  child  in  the  ands  of  that  same  Jesus.  How 
often  has  domestic  affliction  been  the  means  of  bringing  the  soul  to  the  feet  of 
Jesus.  Mark  the  extreme  tenderness  of  Jesus,  ♦•  Fear  not,  only  believe."  Be  not 
afraid  convicted  sinner.  My  blood  is  sufficient,  My  grace  and  love  are  sufficient. 
(J.  H,  Evam,  M.A.)  The  Humane  Society  .—I.  Thb  partioulab  form  of  thb 
Budebmbb's  wobk.  1.  Bestoration  from  a  special  form  of  death.  8.  Here  was  tha 
veoognition  of  the  valne  of  life—"  She  shall  live."    It  is  not  mere  life  on  which 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  r. 

Christianity  has  ebed  a  richer  value.  It  is  by  ennobling  the  purpose  to  which  life 
is  to  be  dedicated  that  it  has  made  life  more  precious.  3.  We  consider  the  Saviour's 
direction  respecting  the  meaus  of  effecting  a  complete  recovery.  He  "  commanded 
that  something  should  be  given  her  to  eat."  His  reverential  submission  to  the 
laws  of  nature.  II.  Thk  spirit  of  the  Redeemer's  Work.  1.  It  was  love.  He 
did  good  because  it  was  good.  2.  It  was  a  spirit  of  retirir  j^  modesty.  He  did  not 
wish  it  to  be  known.  3.  It  was  a  spirit  of  perseveranoe.  Calm  perseverance 
amidst  ridicule.  {F.  W.  Robertsoii.)  Not  dead,  but  sleeping  : — Nature  puts  on  a 
shroud  at  seasons,  and  seems  to  glide  into  the  grave  of  winter.  Autumnal  blasts 
come  sobbing  through  the  trees,  and  leaf  after  leaf,  shrivelling  its  fibres  at  the 
killing  contact,  comes  drifting  to  the  ground.  The  hedgerows  where  the  May  flowers 
and  the  dog-rose  mixed  their  scents  are  stripped  and  bare,  and  lift  their  thorny  fingers 
up  to  heaven.  The  field  where  fat  and  wealthy-looking  crops  a  while  ago  promised 
their  golden  sheaves,  is  now  spread  over  with  a  coarse  fringe  of  stubble,  and  seems 
a  sort  of  hospital  of  vegetation.  The  garden  shows  no  more  its  beauties,  nor  sheds 
forth  its  scent,  but  where  the  coloured  petal  and  the  painted  cup  of  the  gay  flower 
were  seen,  there  stands  a  blighted  stem,  or  a  drooping  tuft  of  refuse  herbs.  The 
birds  which  carolled  to  the  summer  sky  have  fled  away,  and  their  note  no  longer 
greets  the  ear.  The  very  daisies  on  the  meadow  are  buried  in  the  snow-wreath,  and 
the  raw  blast  howls  a  sad  requiem  at  the  funeral  of  nature.  But  those  trees,  whose 
leafless  branches  seem  to  wrestle  with  the  rough  winds  that  toss  them,  are  not  dead. 
Anon,  and  they  shall  again  be  wreathed  in  verdure  and  bedecked  with  blossom. 
The  softened  breath  of  spring  shall  whisper  to  the  snowdrop  to  dart  forth  its 
modest  head,  and  shall  broider  the  garden-path  again  with  flowers ;  the  fragrance 
of  the  hawthorn  bloom  ere  long  shall  gush  froiXi  those  r.aked  hedge-rows,  and  the 
returning  lark  shall  wake  the  morning  with  a  new  and  willing  song.  No,  nature  is 
not  dead  !  There  is  a  resurrection  coming  on.  Spring  with  its  touch  of  wizardry 
shall  wake  her  from  her  slumbers,  and  sound  again  the  key-note  of  the  suspended 
music  of  the  spheres.  So  also  shall  there  arise  out  of  the  raging  conflagration,  in 
whose  fevered  heat  the  elements  shall  melt  and  shrivel  like  a  scroll — even  out  of 
the  very  ashes  which  betoken  its  consumption — a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth — an 
earth  as  ethereal  and  pure  as  heaven  itself — and  a  heaven  as  substantial  and  as 
living  as  the  earth.  And  consentaneously  with  the  arising  of  these  new  worlds,  the 
tombs  shall  open,  and  send  forth  the  shrouded  tenants,  to  enter  on  the  inheritance 
which,  in  that  new  economy,  shall  be  theirs.  Can  you  believe  that  faded  flowers  shall 
revive  at  the  blithe  beckoning  of  the  spring,  that  little  leaves  will  quietly  unfold  at 
the  mandate  of  the  morning,  and  yet  there  shall  be  no  spring  to  beckon  the  mortal 
back  to  life,  and  no  morning  to  command  the  clay  to  clothe  itself  with  the  garments 
of  a  quickening  spirit  ?  Can  you  beheve  that  the  great  temple  shall  arise  with  all 
its  shrines  rebuilded,  and  its  altars  purified  after  the  final  burning,  but  that  there 
shall  be  neither  voice  nor  trumpet  to  call  forth  the  high- priest  from  his  slumber  to 
worship  at  those  shrines,  and  to  lay  a  more  enduring  offering  upon  those  waiting 
altars?  Is  the  fuel  to  be  ever  laid,  and  none  to  kindle  the  burnt-offering?  Is  the 
sanctuary  to  be  prepared,  and  none  to  pay  the  service  ?  Is  the  bridegroom  to  stand 
alone  before  the  altar,  and  no  bride  to  meet  him  at  the  nuptials  ?  God  forbid !  The 
high-priest  is  not  dead — the  bride  has  not  perished — they  are  not  dead,  but  sleep. 
Sound  forth  the  tnmipet,  and  say  that  all  is  ready,  and  then  the  corruptible  will 
put  on  incorruption,  and  the  mortal  will  put  on  immortality.  Thus,  when  we  lay 
our  kindred  in  the  earth,  and  follow  to  their  final  resting-place  the  last  remains  of 
those  who  occupied  a  cherished  chamber  in  our  hearts — while  nature  finds  it  hard 
to  dry  the  tear  and  quench  the  sigh — faith  ever  lifts  the  spirit  from  its  sad  despon- 
dency, by  assuring  us  of  a  reunion  beyond  the  grave — and  robs  the  monster  of 
one-half  his  terrors — weakening  his  stroke  and  taking  away  his  sting,  by  changing 
the  mystic  trance  into  which  he  throws  his  victims  into  a  transient  sleep,  and 
speaking  of  a  waking-time  of  happiness  and  joy.  Nature  will  look  on  death  as  an 
assassin  who  murders  those  we  love ;  but  Faith  regards  him  as  a  nurse  who  hushes 
them  to  sleep,  and  sings  a  lullaby  and  not  a  requiem  beside  their  bed.  To  faith  it 
is  a  sleeping  draught  and  not  a  poison  which  the  visitor  holds  to  the  drinker's 
lips ;  for  it  hails  the  time  when  the  lethargy  of  the  sepulchre  shall  be  east  off,  and 
the  spirit  shall  arise  like  a  tired  slumberer  refreshed  by  sleep,  to  spend  an  endless 
morning  in  the  energy  of  an  ndless  youth.  (A.  Mursell.)  The  death  of  the 
young  eneourage$  a  spirit  of  dependence  on  Ood  in  the  home-life  of  this  world : — It 
brings  the  unseen  Hand  to  bear  very  directly  and  potently  on  the  soul's  deepest 
and  most  hidden  springs.    Let  us  suppose  for  a  moment  that  there  was  a  revealed 


T.]  8T.  MARK.  a07 

ordinance  of  heaven  that  every  human  being  bom  into  this  world  should  Uve  to 
three-BCore  years  and  ten,  and  then  quietly  lie  down  to  rest,  and  awake  in  eternity. 
Would  it  enrich  or  impoverish  the  life  of  the  human  world  ?  I  venture  to  think 
that  it  would  impoverish  it  unspeakably.  The  passage  of  these  little  ones  through 
the  veil,  of  infants  and  children,  of  young  men  and  maidens,  of  men  and  women 
in  their  prime,  brings  God's  hand  very  near,  and  keeps  its  pressure  on  the  most 
powerful  springs  of  our  nature,  our  warmest  affection,  and  our  most  constant  and 
active  care.  It  is  not  the  uncertainty  which  is  the  strongest  element  of  the  influence, 
though  no  doubt  that  keeps  ns  vigilant  and  anxious,  and  helps  to  maintain  the  full 
strain  of  our  power.  It  is  rather  the  constant  contact  with  a  Higher  Will,  which, 
keeps  us  in  humble,  hopeful  dependence,  which  gives  and  withbolds,  lends  and 
recalls,  by  a  wisdom  which  we  cannot  fathom,  but  which  demands  our  trust  on  the 
basis  of  a  transcendent  manifestation  of  all-suffering  and  aU-sacrificing  love.  (/. 
B.  Brown^  B.A.)  The  death  of  the  young  imparts  a  consecrating  influence  to  the 
home-life: — It  brings  heaven  all  round  ns  when  we  know  that  at  any  moment  the 
veil  may  be  lifted,  and  a  dear  life  may  vanish  from  our  sight,  not,  blessed  be  Christ, 
into  the  shades,  but  into  the  brightness  which  is  beyond.  And  when  the  life  hat» 
vanished  it  leaves  a  holy  and  consecrating  memory  in  the  home.  Something  is  in 
the  home  on  earth  which  also  belongs  to  the  home  on  high.  Never  does  the  home- 
life  and  all  its  relations  seem  so  beautiful,  so  profound,  so  sacred,  as  when  Death 
has  laid  his  touch  on  *•  a  little  one,"  and  gathered  it  as  a  starry  flower  for  the 
fields  of  light  on  high.  It  makes  the  Ufe  of  the  home  more  anxious,  more  bur- 
dened by  care  and  pain,  but  more  blessed.  The  nearness  at  any  moment  of 
resistless  Death  makes  us  find  a  dearer  meaning  in  the  word,  "  the  whole  family  in 
heaven  and  on  earth  " — a  thought  which  saturates  the  whole  New  Testament,  and 
is  not  dependent  on  one  text  for  its  revelation.  We  know  then  how  precious  is 
its  meaning,  and  earth  gains  by  its  loss  as  well  as  heaven.  (Ibid.)  The  death  of 
the  young  lends  a  tender,  home-like  interest  to  the  life  of  the  unseen  world: — The 
home,  remember,  is  where  the  children  are.  There  are  those  of  us  who  never  found 
the  deeper  meaning  of  the  Father's  love  and  the  everlasting  home  till  a  dear  child 
had  gone  on  before.  The  death  of  the  little  ones,  while  it  ought  to  make  the  earthly 
life  heaven-like  on  the  one  hand,  is  meant  to  make  heaven  home-Uke  on  the  other. 
The  Lord  dethroned  and  discrowned  Death  by  bearing  the  human  form,  living, 
through  His  realm  of  terror.  The  living  Lord  abolished  death  by  living  on  through 
death,  and  flawing  the  splendours  of  heaven  through  the  shades.  The  children, 
as  they  follow  Christ  through  the  gloom,  make  Death  seem  beautiful  as  an  angel. 
Thenceforth  we,  too,  have,  not  our  citizenship  only,  but  our  home-life  in  the  two 
worlds.  (Ibid.)  Jesus  stronger  than  death: — And  just  remember,  that  when 
Jesna  allows  death  to  knock  at  your  door,  and  to  come  in,  it  is  not  because  death 
is  stronger  than  He.  It  is  because  He  has  a  good  reason  for  permitting  it.  He  is 
BO  completely  the  Master  of  death  that  He  makes  it  His  messenger  to  do  His  bid- 
ding ;  and  when  death  comes  to  our  dwelling  and  takes  away  one  we  love,  let  ub 
bear  in  mind  that  death  is  not  Jesus'  enemy  but  His  messenger.  He  is  like  an 
angel ;  he  takes  away  our  friend  in  his  bosom.  He  has  no  power  at  all  over  us 
without  JesuB.  (Anon.)  The  healing  of  Jairus*  daughter! — I.  The  case  brought 
before  Jesus.  A  bodily  disease  as  usual.  No  spiritual  cases,  though  more  impor- 
tant, n.  The  persons  who  brought  it.  A  ruler,  &o.  He  had  heard  Christ's 
teaching.  He  had  seen  His  miracles.  No  mention  made,  &o.,  till  distress.  HI. 
The  character  in  which  he  came — a  parent.  IV.  The  manner  in  which  he  came. 
Reverently.  Earnestly.  Behevingly.  V.  At  the  request  of  Jairus,  Christ  arose 
and  accompanied  him.  Christ  encouraged  such  applications — He  does  so  still. 
{Expository    Discourses,)         I.    Chbist's    bestorattvk    powbb    tiunscbnds    tbck 

OBniKABY  EXPECTATIONS  OP  HANEIKD.      II.  ChBIST'S  BB8T0BAT1VK  POWEB  IS  BXEBTED  ON 

OBTAIN  CONDITIONS.  1.  Eamcst  entreaty.  2.  A  reverential  spirit.  III.  Chbist'b 
bestobativb  powbb  accomplishes  its  object  with  thb  greatest  ease.  ly. 
Chbist's  bestobativb  power  confounds  thb  scoffino  sceptic  with  its  bkbult. 
Scoffing  infidelity  is  destined  to  be  confounded.  There  were  scoffers  in  the  days  of 
Noah,  and  they  were  confounded  when  the  deluge  came.  There  were  scoffers  in 
the  days  of  Lot,  and  they  were  confounded  when  the  showers  of  fire  fell.  There  are 
scoffers  now,  and  when  they  shall  see  Him  "  coming  in  His  glory  with  all  His  holy 
angels,"  these  atheists,  deists,  and  materiahsts,  will  be  utterly  confounded.  (David 
Thomas,  DJ).)  Death  a  sleep : — Homer  fittingly  calls  sleep  **  the  brother  of  death  " ; 
they  are  so  much  alike.  On  the  lips  of  Jesus,  however,  the  word  sleep  acquires  a  richer 
and  mightier  import  than  it  ever  possessed  before.     Amply  has  BLis  use  of  the  tenn 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  v, 

been  justified  in  the  last  hour  of  tens  of  thousands  of  his  devout  foUov^ers.    Thsy 
laid  themselves  down  to  die,  not  as  those  who  dread  the  night  because  of  the 
remembrance  of  hours  when,  like  Job,  they  were  **  scared  with  dreams  "  and  •'  terri- 
fied through  visions,"  but  like  tired  labourers,  to  whom  night  is  indeed  a  season  of 
peaceful  refreshment.     And  how  imperceptibly  they  sank  into  their  last  slnmbei  I 
Their  transition  was  so  mild  and  gradual,  that  it  was  impossible  for  those  who  stood 
round  their  dying  pillow  to  say  exactly  when  it  took  place.    There  was  no  struggl-e, 
no  convulsion.    The  angel  of  death  spread  his  wide,  white  wings  meekly  ovwr 
them,  and  then,  with  a  smile  upon  their  pallid  countenance,  serene  and  lovely  »s 
heaven  itself,  they  closed  their  eyes  on  all  terrestrial  objects,  and  fell  asleep  ia 
Jesus.   And  that  sleep  is  as  profound  throughout  as  it  was  tranquil  at  the  beginning. 
The  happy  fireside  and  the  busy  exchange — the  halls  of  science  and  the  houses  of 
legislation — the  oft-frequented  walk  and  the  holy  temple — are  nothing  to  them  now. 
Suns  rise  and  set,  stars  travel  and  glisten ;  but  they  see  them  not ;  tempests  howl, 
thunders  roll  and  crash;  but  they  hear  them  not.     Nothing  can  disturb  those 
slumbers,  "  till  the  day  dawn  and  the  shadows  flee  away."    Then  will  the  voice  of 
the  archangel  sweep  over  God's  acre,  and  awake  them  all.    Oh,  wondrous  awaking  I 
what  momentous  consequences  hang  on  thee  1    (Edwin  Davies.)      Death  a  sleep  : — 
I.  Si-EEP  IB  REST,  or  gives  rest  to  the  body :  so  death.     1.  Rest  from  labour  and 
travail.  2.  Best  from  trouble  and  opposition.   3.  Best  from  passion  and  grief.  4.  Best 
from  sin,  temptation,  Satan,  and  the  law.    II.  Sleep  is  not  pebpetual  ;  we  sleep 
and  wake  again  ;  so,  though  the  body  lie  in  the  grave,  yet  death  is  but  a  sleep  ;  we 
shall  wake  again.     III.  The  sleep  op  some  men  differs  very  much  pbom  that 
OP  others  :  so  the  death  of  saints  differs  from  that  of  the  wicked.     1.  Some  men 
sleep  before  their  work  is  done ;  so  some  die  before  their  salvation  is  secured.     2. 
Some  fall  asleep  in  business  and  great  distraction,  others  in  peace.     3.  Some  dread 
the  thought  of  dying,  because  of  the  dangers  that  lie  beyond.     But  saints  have  no 
fear.    4.  Some  fall  asleep  in  dangerous  places,  and  in  the  midst  of  their  enemies — 
on  the  brink  of  hell,  surrounded  by  the  spirits  of  perdition.     But  saints  die  in  the 
view  of  Jesus;  in  the  love  and  covenant  of  Jesus.      IV.  A  mam  that  sleeps  is 
GENERALLY  KASiLY  AWAKENED :   SO  the  body  in  death  shall  be  much  more  easily 
awakened  at  the  last  day  than  the  soul  can  now  be  aroused  from  its  sleep  of  sin. 
(B.  Keach.)        Why  death  of  the  godly  is  called  sleep  : — The  reason  why  the  death 
of  the  godly  is  called  a  sleep  in  Scripture  is  this :  because  there  is  a  fit  resemblance 
between  it  and  natural  sleep  ;  which  resemblance  consists  chiefly  in  these  things. 
1.  In  bodily  sleep  men  rest  from  the  labours  of  mind  and  body.    So  the  faithful, 
dying  in  the  Lord,  are  said  to  rest  from  their  labours  (Bev.  xiv.  13).    2.  After 
natural  sleep  men  are  accustomed  to  awake  again ;  so,  after  death,  the  bodies  of 
the  saints  shall  be  awaked,  i.e.,  raised  up  again  to  life  out  of  their  graves  at  the 
last  day.     And  as  it  is  easy  to  awake  one  out  of  a  natural  sleep,  so  is  it  much  more 
easy  with  God,  by  His  almighty  power,  to  raise  the  dead  at  the  last  day.    8.  As 
after  natural  sleep  the  body  and  outward  senses  are  more  fresh  and  lively  than 
before ;  so  likewise  after  that  the  bodies  of  the  saints,  being  dead,  have  for  a  time 
slept  in  their  graves  as  in  beds,  they  shall  awake  and  rise  again  at  the  last  day  in 
a  far  more  excellent  state  than  they  died  in,  being  changed  from  corruption  to  in- 
corruption,  from  dishonour  to  glory,  from  weakness  to  power,  from  natural  to 
spiritual  bodies  (1  Cor.  xv.  42).     4.    As  in  natural  sleep  the  body  only  is  said 
properly  to  sleep,  not  the  soul  (the  powers  whereof  work  even  in  sleep  in  some 
sort,  though  not  so  perfectly  as  when  we  are  waking) :  so  in  death,  only  the  bodies 
of  the  saints  do  die  and  lie  down  in  the  graves,  but  their  souls  return  to  God  who 
gave  them  (Eccles.  xii.  7),  and  they  live  with  God  even  in  death  and  after  death. 
5.  As  sleep  is  sweet  to  those  who  are  wearied  with  labour  and  travail  (Eccles.  v.  12), 
so  also  death  is  sweet  and  comfortable  to  the  faithful,  being  wearied  and  turmoiled 
with  sin,  and  with  the  manifold  miseries  of  this  life.     (O.  Petter.)        Death  oj 
children : — God  cultivates  many  flowers,  seemingly  only  for  their  exquisite  beauty 
and  fragrance.    For  when,  bathed  in  soft  sunshine,  they  have  burst  into  blossom, 
then  the  Divine  hand  gathers  them  from  the  earthly  fields  to  be  kept  in  crystal 
vases  in  the  deathless  mansions  above.    Thus  little  children  die — some  in  the  sweet 
bud,  some  in  the  fallen  blossom ;  but  never  too  early  to  make  heaven  fairer  and 
sweeter  with  their  immortal  bloom.    {Wadsworth.)       Ooeth  in  where  the  child  was  : 
Christ  in  the  chamber  of  death : — I.  A  good  child  is  at  home  in  either  world,  not 
sorry  io  go  to  the  other  world  to  get  joy,  and  not  sorry  to  come  back  to  this  world 
to  give  it.    II.  We  know  not  where  the  other  world  is,  bat  it  is  evidently  within 
range  of  the  Savioox's  voice.    Our  dear  dead  are  therefore  safe,  and  aU  their  con- 


CHAP.  T.J  ST.  MARK,  209 


ditiong  ordered  by  the  Saviour's  mercy.  III.  Life  is  indestructible  by  death.  IV. 
On  a  universal  scale  Christ  will  be  found  to  be  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life  to  all 
who  love  Him.  V.  He  inflicts  bereavement,  but  sympathises  with  its  sorrow.  He 
relieves  these  mourners  here,  to  show  that  He  pities  all  mourners.  {R.  Olover.) 
TalitJia  eumi : — He  uses  what  were,  perhaps,  the  words  used  every  morning  by  her 
mother  on  waking  her— "Little  one,  get  up."  (Ibid.)  The  raising  of  Jairtu' 
daughter : — I.  The  application  which  Jesus  received.  1.  By  whom  it  was  made. 
8.  The  favour  he  implied.  8.  The  feeling  which  this  ruler  displayed.  (1)  His 
reverence.  (2)  His  importunity.  (3)  His  faith.  II.  The  ready  compliance  op 
ouB  Lord  with  the  request  made  to  Him.  But  as  He  went  we  are  called  upon— 
1.  To  witnees  a  strange  interruption.  3.  To  listen  to  what  seemed  very  discouraginc 
information — ••  Thy  daughter  is  dead."  HI.  The  wonderful  result  with  which 
this  visit  was  attended.  L  What  onr  Lord  saw.  2.  What  He  said.  8.  What 
He  did.    {Expository  Outlines.) 

Vers.  24, 34.  And  a  certain  woman,  which  bad  an  Issue  of  blood  twelve  years.— 
The  poioer  of  feeble  faith : — I.  Vert  imperteot  faith  may  be  genuine  faith.  It 
was  intensely  ignorant  trust.  Again,  her  trust  was  very  selfish.  It  was  also 
weakened  and  interrupted  by  much  distrust.  II.  Christ  answers  the  imperfect 
faith.  Christ  stoops  to  her  childish  thought  and  allows  her  to  prescribe  the  path 
by  which  His  gift  ehall  reach  her.  Christ's  mercy,  like  water  in  a  vase,  takes  the 
shape  of  the  vessel  that  holds  it.  On  the  other  hand,  Hia  grace  *♦  is  given  to  every 
one  of  us  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  Christ,"  with  no  limitation  but  His 
own  unlimited  fulness.  Therefore — 1.  Let  us  labour  that  our  faith  may  be  en- 
lightened, importunate,  and  firm.  2.  There  can  be  no  faith  so  feeble  that  Christ 
does  not  respond  to  it.  III.  Christ  corrects  and  confirms  an  imperfeot  faith  by 
THE  very  act  of  ANSWERING  IT.  Her  ignoraucc,  selfishness,  and  fear,  were  all 
removed.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  faculty  baffled— the  great  Physician 
successful : — I.  Let  me  expose  the  physicians  who  delude  so  many  by  their  vain 
PRETENSIONS.  Their  names  are,  Dr.  Sadducee,  Dr.  Legality,  Dr.  Ceremonial,  Dr. 
Ascetic,  Dr.  Orthodoxy,  and  Dr.  Preparation.  II.  What  is  the  reason  of  their 
FAILURE?  Because  they  do  not  understand  the  disease.  They  often  prescribe 
remedies  which  are  impossible  to  their  patients.  Many  of  their  medicines  do  not 
touch  the  disease  at  all.  III.  The  plight  of  the  patient  who  has  tried  these 
DECEIVERS.  She  lost  all  her  time.  She  was  no  better.  She  rather  grew  worse.  She 
spent  Edl  that  she  had.  IV.  How  a  cube  can  be  wrought.  I  must  press  to  get  near 
Him.  I  must  touch.  The  least  of  Christ  will  save.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
disease  of  humanity  incurable  except  by  Christ : — The  disease  of  fallen  humanity  is 
whoUy  incurable  except  by  the  hand  of  Omnipotence.  It  is  as  easy  for  as  to  create 
a  world  as  to  create  a  new  heart ;  and  a  man  might  as  well  hope  to  abolish  cold  and 
snow  as  hope  to  eradicate  sin  from  his  nature  by  his  own  power :  he  might  as  well 
say  to  this  round  earth,  "  I  have  emancipated  thee  from  the  curse  of  labour,"  as 
say  to  himself,  "I  will  set  myself  free  from  the  thraldom  of  sin."  {Ibid.) 
Determination  in  the  fa^e  of  tremendous  discouragements : — When  sinners  sweep  away 
every  other  delusion,  and  view  Jesus  as  the  only  Saviour  they  will  persevere  till 
they  find.  When  Cortez  went  to  conquer  Mexico,  he  found  that  the  soldiers  were 
few  and  dispirited.  The  Mexicans  were  many,  and  the  enterprize  hazardous.  The 
soldiers  would  have  gone  back  to  Spain,  but  Cortez  took  two  or  three  chosen  heroes 
wi.il  him,  and  went  down  to  the  seaside  and  broke  up  all  the  ships;  and  "now,"  he 
said,  "  we  must  conquer  or  die.  We  cannot  go  back."  When  it  is  death  or  life, 
hearen  or  hell,  pardon  or  condemnation,  the  sinner  will  be  as  determined  and 
courageous  as  these  poor  Spaniards  or  as  this  poor  woman.  {Anonynums.)  The 
touch: — I.  The  patient.  Note:  what  courage  and  spirit  she  displayed;  Her 
resolute  determination;  Her  marvellous  hopefulness.  U.  The  difficxtltixs  of 
this  woman's  faith.  The  disease  :  long-standing  :  incurable.  Her  frequent  disap- 
pointments.   Her  own  unworthiness.    Her  present  poverty.    Her  extreme  sickness. 

III.  The  vanishing  point  of  all  her  difficulties.  All  her  thoughts  have  gone 
toward  the  Lord  Jesus.  She  has  forgotten  herself;  forgotten  the  rampant  fury  of 
her  disease ;  forgotten  her  being  behind  and  out  of  sight :  and  even  her  own  touch 
of  Him  she  has  put  into  a  secondary  place.  All  that  she  looks  for  must  come  out 
of  Him.    If  seeking  sinners  would  but  think  more  of  Christ,  all  would  be  well. 

IV.  Heb  grand  success.  She  was  healed  immediately.  She  knew  that  she  was 
healed.  She  has  next  the  assurance  from  Christ  that  she  was  healed.  The  wine 
that  eometh  out  of  these  grapes  is  this :  the  sUghtest  connection  with  Jesoi  will 

14 


SIO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA*.  ▼. 

bleM  Of.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Apply  this  thought — I.  To  spiritual  existbnci>:8. 
If  I  touch  but  a  grain  of  sand  or  a  bud,  I  find  the  Mighty  One.  H.  To  thb  bghemb 
o»  spntiTUAL  PBOviDENCB.  Revlew  your  own  life  from  infancy.  III.  To  thb  pbo- 
CBSSES  OF  spiBiTUAL  EDUCATION.  It  Is  a  great  thing  to  see  God  in  heavens  rich 
with  systems  of  suns ;  it  is  a  grander  faith,  surely,  to  see  Him  in  a  speck  of  dust. 
IV.  To  THE  USES  OF  SPIRITUAL  ORDINANCES.  The  hymn,  the  prayer,  the  lesson,  the 
mere  form  itself  may  do  men  good.  Application :  The  hand  must  touch  Christ,  not  an 
apostle,  or  a  minister,  or  an  angel — ^but  God  the  Son.  You  may  have  touched  many 
without  benefit ;  touch  Him  and  you  will  live.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  ••  Who  hain 
touched  me  f*' — *'  Daughter,  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whcle."  It  requires  the  second 
sentence  to  complete  the  meaning  of  the  first.  In  the  days  of  the  semaphore  signals 
a  message  came  across  to  England  concerning  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  and  half 
the  message  was  read  as  it  appeared  upon  the  semaphore,  and  astonished  all 
England  with  the  sad  intelligence.  It  ran  thus,  "  Wellington  defeated."  Every- 
body was  distressed  as  they  read  it,  but  it  so  happened  that  they  had  not  seen  all 
the  message.  Fog  had  intervened,  and  when,  by  and  by,  the  air  was  clearer  and 
the  telegraph  flashed  out  a  second  time,  it  was  read  thus — "Wellington  defeated — the 
French,**  Thus  the  first  sentence  may  have  caused  dismay  in  the  poor  woman's 
heart,  but  if  the  first  appeared  to  kill,  the  second  would  make  alive.  {Anoyiymom.) 
A  diseased  woman  healed: — The  chief  design  of  our  Lord's  miracles  was  to  confirm 
His  pretensions.  But  they  were  more  than  this.  Benevolent,  for  the  greater  part 
in  their  character,  they  served  to  unfold  the  mercifulness  of  His  nature.  They  also 
shadowed  forth  His  mode  of  serving  us.  Viewed  in  this  light  there  is  wonderful 
variety  in  them.  I.  The  sad  condition  of  this  woman  when  she  came  to  Christ 
for  reUef.  Her  malady  was  an  inveterate  one.  We  are  all  sick  in  our  souls. 
There  is  a  disease  in  us  which  has  seized  on  the  noblest  part  of  us.  It  is  weakening, 
polluting,  and  destroying  our  immortal  spirits.  IL  The  state  of  this  woman's 
mind  in  this  sad  condition.  Had  it  been  a  despairing  state,  we  could  hardly  have 
blamed  her.  One  of  the  worst  features  in  a  penitent  sinner's  case,  is  frequently  a 
tendency  to  despair.  No  sin  so  great  as  despair.  Your  case  may  be  sad,  yet  not 
hopeless.  There  is  a  Physician  you  have  not  yet  tried,  or  have  never  tried  aright. 
III.  Heb  application  to  Him.  There  is  deep  humility  evident  here,  and  great  self- 
abasement.  Sin  is  a  loathsome  and  shameful  thing.  The  soul  would  hide  itself 
from  every  eye.  There  is  great  faith  :  *'  I  shall  be  whole  " — not  relieved.  What 
exalted  views  she  must  have  had  of  Jesus.  He  is  no  common  Saviour.  Bat  her 
faith  was  not  perfect.  It  settled  only  on  one  part  of  the  Lord's  character.  She 
believed  His  power,  but  distrusted  His  goodness.  This  mixture  of  faith  and  un- 
belief is  very  common  in  every  newly  converted  soul.  If  real  faith  be  in  us,  its  inferi- 
ority is  overlooked.  IV.  The  cure  this  sufferer  received.  1.  It  was  immediate. 
This  is  always  our  Lord's  mode  of  acting  with  one  class  of  persons  who  come  to 
Him — those  who  come  for  pardon — receive  it  at  once.  Those  who  oome  to  have 
the  power  of  sin  subdued  in  them,  are  often  kept  waiting  for  the  mercy  they  desire. 
Like  the  child  of  Jairus,  the  disease  grows  worse  while  seeking  the  remedy.  But 
the  help  sought  is  found  at  last.  2.  The  cure  of  this  woman  was  one  of  which  she 
and  our  Lord  were  both  conscious.  You  think  perhaps,  brethren,  that  it  is  a  small 
thing  with  Christ  whether  you  come  to  Him  or  not ;  you  conceive  that  He  on  His 
lofty  throne  has  not  a  look  or  thought  for  you ;  but  if  you  are  turning  to  Him  with 
a  broken  heart  for  salvation,  there  is  not  an  object  in  the  universe  He  thinks  of 
more  than  you,  there  is  not  a  moment  in  which  His  eye  is  off  you.  Great  as  is  His 
joy  now,  it  will  be  greater  still  when  you  touch  Him  and  are  made  whole.  He  will 
say  to  His  angels,  as  He  said  to  His  disciples  here,  "  Virtue  is  again  gone  out  of 
Me.  There  is  another  sinner  healed."  And  the  woman,  too,  was  aware  of  the  cure 
which  had  been  wrought  in  her ;  *•  She  felt  in  her  body  that  she  was  healed." 
Her  recovery,  however,  did  not  produce  in  her  at  first  the  joyous  feelings  we  might 
have  anticipated.  There  was  a  mixture  of  feeling  in  her.  She  feared  and 
trembled  after  she  was  healed,  as  many  a  pardoned  sinner  trembles  when  he  has 
reason  to  rejoice ;  but  healed  she  was,  and  she  knew  it.  And  it  is  not  easy  to  con- 
ceive how  any  one  oan  be  cured  of  the  dreadful  disease  of  sin,  and  yet  remain  long 
ignorant  or  doubtful  about  his  cure.  {C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  eonsciousnes*  o/ 
cure : — We  cannot  see  His  hand  as  it  passes  over  the  book  of  God,  and  blots  out  the 
dark  record  of  our  crimes  which  is  written  there ;  but  pardon  is  not  aU.  Sin  is 
more  than  a  crime  against  God  which  needs  to  be  forgiven,  it  is  a  disease  within  a 
man's  heart  to  be  subdued  and  healed.  And  if  we  go  on  always  doubting  whether 
this  ftiinaio  within  ns  is  in  a  way  of  being  healed,  the  probability  is  that  oar  fouls 


CMAP.  v.]  ST,  MARK.  211 

•re  Bick  aB  ever.  It  is  not  easy  when  a  man  is  ill  and  recoTering,  to  tell  the  exact 
moment  in  which  his  disease  gives  way  and  his  recovery  begins ;  but  it  is  soon 
seen  by  those  around  him  that  his  recovery  is  begun,  and  it  is  soon  felt  by 
himself.  Just  so  with  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  A  man  may  doubt  for  a 
time  at  his  first  return  to  Gk)d,  and  these  doubts  may  recur  again  and  again  at 
intervals  in  his  future  years ;  nay,  they  will  assuredly  recur  whenever  he  allows 
himself  to  wander  from  his  God;  but  the  habitual  frame  of  the  estabhshed 
Christian's  mind  is  not  one  of  doubt  and  uncertainty.  Christ  has  not  done  so 
little  for  him,  that  he  cannot  see  it.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  not  touched  his 
heart  so  slightly,  that  he  never  feels  His  hand.  The  gospel  is  not  so  poor  a 
medicine,  that  he  is  always  doubting  whether  it  has  done  him  any  good.  {Ibid.) 
A  woman  which  had  an  issue  of  blood  : — This  case  is  crowded  with  lessons.   I.  Note : 

How  MANY  UNKNOWN  8UFFEREB8  ABE  ABOUT  US.  II.  ChRIST  HAD  SENT  THIS  WOMAN 'g 
ILLNESS,  AND  WAS  AS  LOVING  IN  LATING  IT  ON  HEB  AS  IN  LIFTINO  IT  AWAY.  HI, 
She   18  ANOTHEB  INSTANCE   OF  THE    "  SWEET     USES    OF    ADVERSITY."        The    afflicted 

class  producing  then  and  now  more  believers  in  Christ  than  any  other.    IV.  There 

▲BE   MANY   HEMS    OF    THE    GABMKNT    THROUGH     WHICH     WE    CAN    TOUCH    THE   DiVINB 

OMNIPOTENCE  AND  MEBCY.  1.  Christ's  humanity  is  the  great  hem  of  the  garment, 
through  \*hich  we  can  touch  His  Godhead.  2.  A  word  of  Scripture  is  often  a  hem 
of  His  garment,  through  which  we  draw  in  salvation  to  our  soul.  3.  A  sacrament 
is  a  hem  of  Christ's  garment.  All  these  are  valueless  unless  our  touch  seeks  the 
Divine  Christ  within  them ;  but  they  are  saving  links  to  Christ  when  enlightened 
faith  seeks  Him.  V.  Thebb  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  between 
PRESSING  AND  CROWDING  ON  Christ,  AND  TOUCHING  HiM.  Many  crowd  Christ, 
reading  much,  attending  services,  singing  hymns,  and  making  impassioned  prayers, 
perhaps  fruitlessly ;  while  a  pubhcan  in  the  temple,  or  a  dying  thief — with  one 
word,  full  of  aim  and  meaning— finds  his  soul  saved.  Be  not  fussy  in  religion,  but 
calm  your  spirit,  and  speak  not  until  in  briefest  compass  you  can  name,  and  lodge, 
and  leave  your  request  with  God.  VI.  Let  mercies  received  be  duly  confessed. 
(R.  Glover.)  Twelve  years  I  Long  continuance  of  discipline : — It  pleases  God  to 
lay  long  and  tedious  afflictions  on  some  of  His  servants  in  this  life.  1.  To  mani- 
fest His  great  power,  strengthening  them  to  bear  such  long  afflictions.  2.  To 
magnify  His  mercy  in  delivering  them  at  length  out  of  them.  3.  That  He  may 
make  thorough  proof  and  trial  of  their  faith,  patience,  and  other  graces  of  His 
Spirit  in  them.  4.  To  wean  them  from  this  world,  and  to  stir  up  in  them  a  longing 
for  heaven,  6.  To  make  them  more  earnest  in  prayer  to  TTirn  for  deliverance.  It 
is  therefore  no  evidence  of  God's  wrath,  nor  any  sufficient  reason  to  prove  such  an 
one  to  be  out  of  His  favour,  whom  He  so  holds  for  a  long  time  under  the  cross. 
Be  well  content,  then,  to  bear  afflictions,  though  of  long  continuance ;  submitting 
in  this  matter  to  the  will  of  God,  who  knows  it  to  be  good  and  profitable  for  some 
to  be  kept  long  under  discipline.  (G.  Petter.)  A  variety  of  sufferers,  their  best 
meeting -place: — ^It  is  strange,  the  variety  of  sufferers  that  meet  each  other  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus  I  {R.  Glover.)  Coming  to  Christ ;— Come  to  Christ  Jesus  to  be 
cured  in  soul  and  conscience  of  your  sins.  Come  to  Him,  and  touch  Him  by  true 
faith,  as  this  diseased  woman  did,  and  thou  shalt  feel  Divine  virtue  to  come  from 
Him  to  heal  thee  of  thy  sins,  both  of  the  guilt  and  of  the  corruption  of  them. 
Thou  shalt  feel  His  Divine  power  healing  thee  of  the  guilt  of  thy  sins,  by  the 
merit  of  His  obedience  and  sufferings  applied  to  thy  conscience  by  faith ;  and  the 
same  Divine  power  healing  thee  of  the  corruption  of  sin,  that  is,  mortifying  thy 
sinful  lusts,  that  they  may  not  reign  in  thee  as  they  have  done,  and  as  they  do  in 
the  wicked  and  unbelievers.  Oh,  therefore,  thou  that  feelest  thy  soul  diseased  with 
sin,  make  haste  unto  Christ  to  be  cured  by  this  Divine  healing  virtue  that  is  in 
Him :  pray  Him  to  manifest  it  in  thee ;  and  withal,  labour  by  some  measure  of 
faith  to  apply  it  to  thyself,  as  this  woman  did :  then  shalt  thou  most  certainly  be 
healed  in  soul,  as  she  was  in  body.  And  let  not  the  grievousness  of  thy  disease 
hinder  thee  from  coming  to  Christ  to  be  cured,  but  rather  cause  thee  to  make  the 
more  speed  to  Him  by  faith :  for  be  assured,  there  is  virtue  enough  in  Him  to  heal 
all  thy  sins,  though  many  and  grievous,  if  tiiou  do  but  see  and  feel  them,  and  com- 
plain  of  them,  and  lay  them  open  to  Him,  and  seek  earnestly  to  Him  by  the  praver 
of  faith  to  be  cured  of  them.  Do  this  therefore,  and  do  it  speedily,  without  delay. 
As  in  a  dangerous  sickness  of  body,  thou  would'st  not  dare  to  put  off  sending  to  the 
physif^ian,  lest  it  cost  thee  thy  life:  so  much  less  must  thou  dare  to  delay  the  time 
in  seeking  to  Christ  to  be  healed  of  thy  sins,  lest  it  cost  thee  the  loss  of  eternal 
iile,  and  the  salvation  of  thy  aoul.     Be  careful,  therefore,  forthwith  to  seek  to 


tlfl  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  ft. 

Christ  to  be  healed  of  thy  sins.    The  rather,  beoaase  there  is  no  other  meani  or 
physio  in  the  world  to  onre  thee,  besides  the  Divine  healing  Tirtue  that  is  in  GhriBt 
Jesns :  no  power  or  virtue  that  is  in  any  herb,  precions  stone,  or  mineral,  can  onx* 
thee  of  thy  sins :  not  all  the  balm  in  Gilead ;  not  any  power  or  skill  of  man  or 
angel  can  cure  thy  diseased  conscience  of  one  sin :  only  this  Divine  virtue  that  it 
in  Christ  can  do  it :  and  therefore  seek  to  Him  alone  to  be  cured,  and  not  to  other 
vain  helps  and  remedies.     TMien  thou  feelest  thy  sins  lie  upon  thy  conscience,  seek 
not  (as  many  do)  to  be  cured  by  merry  company,  or  by  following  vain  sports  or 
recreations,  nor  by  going  to  the  bodily  physician  to  purge  melancholy  (as  if  this 
alone  would  cure  thee) :  all  these  are  in  this  case  physicians  of  no  value ;  therefore 
trust  not  to  them,  but  go  directly  to  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  healed  by  that  Divine  virtue 
which  is  in  him.     ((?.  Fetter.)        Majestic  faith : — Some  criticise  her  faith  un- 
favourably, as  if  she  had  a  superstitious  belief  in  Christ's  clothes.    Superstition 
does  not  act  as  she  did.     Her  faith  was  that  Christ's  anointing,  like  Aaron's,  goes 
to  the  skirts  of  His  garments.    One  less  believing  would  have  sunk,  murmuring  in 
despair,  quoting  dismal  proverbs  about  misfortunes  never  coming  single,  and  feel- 
ing  that  in  her  disease,  poverty,  shame,  loneliness,  she  was  specially  ill-nsed  by 
God.     Or,  if  not  despairing  altogether,  feeble  faith  would  have  faced  Christ,  and 
displayed  at  large  all  her  claims  for  help,  dwelling  on  the  length  of  her  sorrow,  and 
on  the  fortune  vainly  spent  in  endeavouring  to  regain  her  health.    But  calm,  trust- 
ful, feeling  Christ  so  willing  and  so  strong  to  help  that  there  is  no  reluctanee  in  Btts 
heart,  she  venti;ures  all  on  a  touch  of  faith.    There  is  a  heroism  here  worthy  of 
Abraham.    Full  of  this  faith,  she  elbows  her  way  through  the  crowd,  and  finding 
the  blue  hem  of  Christ's  garment  within  her  reach,  quietly — bo  that  none  observe 
her — she  touches  it ;  and  at  once  a  swift,  gentle  tide  of  health  flushes  through  all 
her  frame,  and  she  feels  she  has  got  what  she  desired.     (R.  Glover.)        Encourage- 
ment  to  faith : — If  you  have  faith,  though  but  in  its  infancy,  be  not  discouraged,  for 
— 1.  A  little  faith  is  faith,  as  a  spark  of  fire  is  fire.  2.  A  weak  faith  may  lay  hold  on 
a  strong  Christ ;  a  weak  hand  can  tie  the  knot  in  marriage  as  well  as  a  strong. 
She,  in  the  gospel,  who  but  touched  Christ,  fetched  virtue  from  Him.    8.  The 
promises  are  not  made  to  strong  faith,  but  to  true.     The  promise  does  not  say.  He 
who  hath  a  giant  faith,  who  can  believe  God's  love  through  a  frown,  who  can 
rejoice  in  affliction,  who  can  work  wonders,  remove  mountains,  stop  the  mouth  of 
lions,  shall  be  saved  ;  but,  whosoever  believes,  be  his  faith  never  so  small.    A  reed 
is  but  weak,  especially  when  it  is  bruised ;  yet  the  promise  is  made  to  it,  "  A 
bruised  reed  will  He  not  break."  4.  A  weak  faith  may  be  fruitful.    Weakest  things 
multiply  most.    The  vine  is  a  weak  plant,  but  it  is  fruitful.    The  thief  on  the  cross, 
who  was  newly  converted,  wad  but  weak  in  grace ;  but  how  many  precious  clusters 
grow  upon  that  tender  plant  I    5.  The  weakest  believer  is  a  member  of  Christ  as 
well  as  the  strongest ;  and  the  weakest  member  of  the  body  mystical  shall  not 
perish.      Christ  will  cut  off  rotten  members,   but  not  weak  members.      There- 
fore, Christian,  be  not  discouraged :  God,  who  would  have  as  receive  them  that  are 
weak  in  the  faith  (Bom.  xiv.  1),  will  not  Himself  refuse  them.   {Watson.)      Cominff 
to  Christ: — We  are  like  this  woman,  inasmuch  as — I.  We,  too,  have  a  need  of  Christ. 
He  alone  can  (1)  pardon  our  sins ;  (2)  renew  our  nature ;  (3)  strengthen  us  to  wage 
the  spiritual  oon^ct  with  success.  II.  We  should  have  a  sense  of  this  need.  As  long 
as  we  suppose  that  a  slight  change,  a  little  penitence  and  contrition,  will  suffice ; 
so  long,  not  heartily  applying  to  Christ  for  the  blessings  we  want,  we  shall  go 
empty  away.     III.  We  have  nothing  to  offer  for  the  blessing  we  desire.     Christ's 
people  receive  all,  and  return  nothing ;  for,  all  they  can  offer  is  already  His.    IV. 
We  come  to  a  willing  Benefactor.    He  is  more  ready  to  give  than  we  to  receive.    It 
is  as  natural  to  Christ  to  give  blessings  to  all  who  ask,  as  it  is  for  the  sun  to  diffuse 
its  beams  on  all  the  objects  beneath;  if  we  receive  not,  it  is  because  we  have 
intercepted  the  rays  flowing  from  the  Snn  of  Bighteousness.     Y.  In  the  exercise  of 
faith  we  are  sure  of  a  blessing.    All  spiritual  blessings  may  be  ours,  if  only  we 
will  believe  in  Christ's  goodness  and  grace,  and  come  to  Him.    YI.  The  blessing 
may  be  delayed ;  but  no  prayer  and  no  exercise  of  faith  is  ever  lost  (B.  W,  Noel,  M.A,) 
Told  Him  all  the  truth :  Be  open  with  Jesus : — This  woman  has  a  word  for  two 
classes.     She  urges  the  penitent  to  a  full  confession,  and  the  tme  convert  to  an 
open  profession.      I.  To   thb  penitent,  uboino  a  full  avowal  or  thxib  stati 
AKD  coNDmoN.     Tell  Jesus  all  the  truth  (1)  about  your  disease.     Show  yourself  in 
all  your  foulness  to  the  great  Physician.    Do  not  draw  the  picture  flatteringly  when 
yon  are  in  prayer.    Do  not  use  dainty  terms  ;  but  make  a  clean  breast  of  every  sin. 
(3)  about  yonr  sufferings.    Tell  how  your  heart  has  been  broken,  your  conscience 


▼.]  8T,  MARK,  til 

alarmed.  Let  your  sorrows  flow  in  briny  floods  before  the  Lord.  Though  ne 
other  can  understand  them,  He  can.  (3)  of  your  futile  attempts  after  a  cure ;  your 
wicked,  sinful  pride  in  seeking  a  rigbteousness  of  your  own,  instead  of  submitting 
to  that  of  Christ.  (4)  regarding  your  hopes.  (5)  and  your  fears.  II.  Reasons  vob 
THIS.  1.  The  Lord  knows  it  all  already.  It  would  be  folly  to  deny  or  attempt  to 
hide  what  He  has  seen.  2.  To  tell  Him  will  be  a  very  great  service  to  you.  It  wUl 
tend  to  make  you  feel  your  need  more.  While  you  are  in  the  act  of  opening  your 
heart  to  God,  He  will  pour  in  the  oil  and  wine  of  His  Divine  grace.    IIL  To  those 

WHO  ABE  COHYEBTED,   BUT  WHO   HAVE   NOT   TET  ACKNOWLEDGED    THEIB    FAITH   IN  THE 

PRESENCE  or  0THEB8.  1.  TMs  is  for  God's  glory.  The  Christian  is  not  to  be  always 
wishing  to  expose  what  is  in  him ;  that  were  to  make  himself  a  Pharisee ;  bnfc  ii 
God  has  put  in  you  anything  lovely,  beautiful,  and  of  good  report,  who  are  yoo 
that  you  should,  by  covering  it,  rob  EUm  of  His  praise  ?  2.  For  the  good  of  others. 
In  the  case  before  us,  the  woman's  confession  was  doubtless  intended  to  strengthen 
the  faith  of  Jairus,  who  was  sorely  tried  by  this  delay.  You  do  not  know  of  how 
much  service  your  open  confession  of  Christ  might  be  to  some  trembling  soul.  3. 
For  the  person's  own  sake.  I  have  no  doubt  this  was  the  main  reason.  Suppose 
Christ  had  let  her  go  home  quietly,  without  any  word  from  Him — when  she  reached 
home  she  would  have  said,  '•  Ah,  I  stole  that  cure;  I  am  so  glad  I  have  it."  But 
one  day  there  would  come  a  dark  thought,  "  What  if  it  should  die  away  after  a 
time ;  then  I  shall  be  as  bad  as  ever ;  for  I  never  asked  him."  Conscience  would 
say  to  her,  *'  Ah,  it  was  a  theft ;  "  and  though  she  might  t;xcuse  herself,  still  she 
would  not  be  easy.  Now  Christ  calls  her  up,  and  conscience  cannot  disturb  her, 
for  He  gave  her  the  cure  before  them  alL  She  need  not  be  afraid  of  the  return  of 
her  disease,  for  Jesus  has  said,  '*  Thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Salvation: — There  are  three  great  truths  which  are  illustrated  in  this  narrative.  I. 
Salvation  needed.  That  woman  needed  healing ;  we  need  saving.  The  gospel  is 
the  remedy,  and  the  fact  of  the  gospel  being  provided  is  a  sufllcient  proof  of  the 
necessity  of  it.  A  remedy  suggests  the  evil  which  is  to  be  remedied.  Justiflcation 
by  faith  is  a  remedy  to  meet  a  special  case  of  necessity.  The  most  obvious  and 
legitimate  method  of  being  justified  is  to  be  just ;  let  me  be  just,  and  I  am  justified 
in  the  eye  of  the  law.  So  the  angels  are  justified.  But  we  have  sinned.  How, 
then,  are  we  to  be  justified?  The  gospel  tells  us  we  are  to  be  justified  by  faith; 
we  are  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  on  the  ground  of  His  great  sacrifice  on  our 
behalf  we  shall  be  accepted  as  just,  though  we  ourselves  have  sinned.  If  you  see 
a  lifeboat  on  the  sea-shore,  it  suggests  storms  and  deaths;  so  the  gospel  suggests  the 
ruin  which  it  is  meant  to  remedy.  Look  abroad  on  the  world,  and  yon  will  see 
evidences  enough  of  the  necessity.  Consult  your  own  consciences  and  history,  and 
every  one  will  know  in  himself  that  there  was  need  for  such  a  remedy — that  **  all 
have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God.'*  Christ  has  come  into  the  world 
as  '*  a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  A  universal  remedy  indicates 
A  oniversal  necessity.  II.  Salvation  pbovided.  Jesus  obeyed  the  law  we  had 
broken ;  He  suffered  the  punishment  we  had  merited ;  He  obeyed  and  suffered  ob 
our  behall  **  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  He  was  bruised  for  our 
iniquities.*'  HI.  Salvation  obtained— obtained  by  faith.  We  accept  Christ  as  our 
representative.  (N»  Hall,  LL.B.)  The  resource  of  faith: — Here,  then,  is  aa 
ezhaustless  reservoir  of  power,  the  power  of  Omnipotence,  and  the  means  by  which 
it  may  all  be  made  available  to  feed  our  hves.  The  mill-owner  stores  up  in  a 
reservoir  on  the  heights  the  water  that  shall  run  his  mill.  Then  he  needs  only  a 
channel  or  sluice-way  that  shall  bring  the  water  to  his  wheels.  If  it  was  an 
ezhaustless  reservoir,  like  the  Atlantic  Ocean  for  extent,  he  would  have  no  fear  that 
his  mill  would  run  dry.  These  miracles  and  this  text  teach  the  Christian  that 
Omnipotence  and  Omniscience  alone  boxmd  the  reservoir  of  his  spiritual  graces, 
and  that  he  has  under  his  own  control  the  width  and  depth  of  the  channel  called 
faith  which  brings  them  into  his  life.  When  Franklin  grasped  the  principle  o< 
electricity,  he  could  not  only  draw  the  lightning  from  a  single  cloud:  all  the 
electricity  in  the  earth  and  in  all  the  clouds  was  at  his  command,  and  he  could  send 
it  upon  his  errands.  When  James  Watt  mastered  the  principle  of  the  expansive 
power  of  steam,  not  only  the  little  cloud  of  vapour  that  issued  from  his  mother's 
tea-kettle  was  under  his  control,  but  all  the  steam  that  could  be  generated  by  the 
itored-up  combustibles  of  the  world  was  really  his.  When  the  Christian  can 
grasp  this  truth  of  the  power  of  faith,  the  infinite  spiritual  resources  of  the  Father 
and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  his.  "  All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaves 
and  in  earth."    There  is  the  reservoir.    **  All  things,  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  ii 


n4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ▼. 

prayer,  belieTing,  ye  shall  receive."  There  is  the  channel  that  conveys  the  power 
into  oar  livei  and  makes  it  available.  {Sermons  by  Monday  Club.)  The  persutenet 
of  faith : — Again,  Jairus  and  the  woman  and  the  blind  men  teach  us  not  only  what 
faith  is,  but  what  it  inevitably  involves.  It  always  involves  a  persistent  effort. 
Even  though  death  has  stiffened  his  little  daughter's  limbs,  and  silenced  her  tongne, 
and  has  roUed  the  deep,  dark  stream  which  no  sonl  was  ever  known  to  recrosa 
between  her  and  him,  Jairus  will  still  persist.  He  will  not  give  over  his  efforts. 
♦•  Come  and  lay  Thy  hand  upon  her  and  she  shall  live,"  is  his  entreaty  stilL 
Though  the  invalid  for  twelve  years  has  tried  physician  after  physician  and  has 
received  no  help,  she  will  try  again.  It  could  not  have  been  easy  for  her  to  press 
through  that  curious  throng  of  stronger  ones,  but  she  does  it  until  she  even  grasps 
His  garment's  hem,  and  then  He  turns  and  speaks  the  healing  word.  Our  Lord 
at  first  seemed  to  take  no  notice  of  the  blind  men,  but  when  they  persistently 
followed  Him,  when  He  saw  that  the  rebuke  of  pitiless  bystanders  had  no  effect 
but  to  increase  their  effort  to  reach  Him,  when  they  followed  Him  into  the 
house,  then  He  touched  their  eyes.  Persistent  effort  is  not  true  faith,  but  it 
always  accompanies  true  faith.  Thunder  never  split  the  heart  of  the  oak-tree,  but  it 
always  accompanies  the  lightning's  flash,  and  tells  to  all  about  of  the  lightning's 
presence.  The  farmer  does  not  show  his  faith  by  lying  in  his  bed  and  waiting  for 
God  to  plough  and  harrow  his  field  and  sow  his  seed.  He  ploughs,  and  harrows,  and 
BOWS,  and  shows  his  faith  in  then  waiting  for  God  to  give  the  increase.  God's  winds 
are  always  blowing ;  the  man  of  faith  spreads  his  sail  before  God  can  fill  it.  (Ibid,) 
Gospel  pictures : — As  a  picture  from  a  magic  lantern  is  dashed  upon  the  screen,  is 
looked  at  for  a  moment,  then  vanishes,  and  is  gone,  so  different  persons  come 
upon  the  stage  in  the  narratives  of  the  Evangehsts,  enact  perfect  dramas,  exquisite 
in  texture  and  construction,  and  momentous  in  moral  bearing,  and  then  pass  away. 
There  is  no  lineage,  no  record,  no  name;  and  yet  all  is  so  vivid  and  powerfid. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  Sickness  spoils  life : — She  was  sick  ;  and  what  is  all  the  world 
worth  when  one  is  sick  ?  What  is  all  that  is  presented  to  the  eye,  what  is  the 
income  of  the  year,  what  are  all  the  treasures  of  life  worth  under  such  circum- 
stances ?  What  is  everything  that  can  be  desired  worth  when  one  is  thoroughly 
sick  ?  Sickness  takes  the  flavour  out  of  everything.  It  changes  the  whole  current 
and  course  of  desire  and  feeling.  She  had  long  been  sick.  She  had  worn  out  years 
in  sickness,  and  those  years  had  well-nigh  worn  her  out.  "All  that  a  man  hath  will 
he  give  for  his  life."  {Ibid.)  An  ungrateful  reception  of  healing : — Well,  ought 
she  not,  in  that  very  instant,  to  have  cried  out  ?  Ought  she  to  have  taken  such  bounty, 
and  to  have  borne  no  witness  to  it  ?  It  is  true  that  she  did  not  say  anything ;  but 
her  silence  was  not  idtogether  from  ingratitude.  It  may  have  been  a  relative  want 
of  appreciation  of  the  greatness  of  the  favour.  She  may  have  said  to  herself,  "  How 
do  I  know  that  it  is  anjrthing  more  than  my  imagination  ?  I  will  say  nothing  about 
it  until  I  am  sure ; " — just  as  a  great  many  persons,  when  they  begin  to  feel  the 
saving  power  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  their  souls  say,  "  I  will  not  speak  of  this ;  I 
will  wait ;  I  will  see  what  it  is."  She  may  have  said,  **  How  can  I  speak  of  this? 
My  lips  refuse  to  open ;  I  cannot  speak."  It  may  have  been  sensibihty,  delicacy  of 
feeling,  shrinkingness,  that  kept  her  from  speaking.  How  many  there  are  who 
believe  that  they  have  been  pardoiud,  and  that  the  blood  of  Christ  which  takes 
away  the  stain  of  sin  has  healed  them,  but  who  consult  their  sensibility  and  their 
shrinking  tastes,  and  say,  "  How  can  I  speak  of  this  ?  "  And  it  does  not  look  as 
though  it  were  wicked.  Yet,  if  there  be  anything  that  a  person  ought  to  acknow- 
ledge, it  is  obligations  which  touch  the  great  core  of  things.  He  who  has  been 
healed  by  a  faithful  physician  should  be  the  friend  of  that  physician  as  long  as  he 
lives.  It  may  be  that  he  acted  professionally  ;  it  may  be  that  he  took  his  fee ;  but 
money  never  pays  a  physician  who  performs  his  duty  faithfully.  If  your  child  has 
come  back  from  death,  never  forget  the  faithful  old  nurse  that  made  her  bosom  a 
cradle  in  which  the  child  rocked,  and  gave  her  days  and  nights  to  the  care  of  it. 
For  such  service  as  hers  nothing  material  can  be  an  adequate  compensation.  We 
are  ungrateful  in  a  thousand  ways  which  we  hardly  suspect.  We  do  not  pay  what 
we  owe  to  men  who  enfranchise  our  understanding.  Authors  who  give  ns  a 
higher  and  nobler  conception  of  life  ;  poeis  who  give  wings  to  our  fancy,  so  to 
speak,  enabling  us  to  fly  higher  than  ordinary  men,  who  stumble  and  fall  down  in 
the  midst  of  the  vulgarities  of  society ;  those  who  make  virtue  beauteous,  and  draw 
us  to  it, — who  can  repay  the  services  of  such  as  these  ?  Men  scarcely  know  what  they 
owe  to  those  who  fortify  them  in  virtue ;  to  those  who  make  it  plain  to  them  that 
integrity  is  safe  under  all  circumstances ;  to  those  who  have  walked  before  them  iu 


91UP.  ▼.]  ST,  MARK.  tlf 

the  beauty  of  holineai ;  to  those  who  have  redeemed  them  from  the  conception  that 
religion  is  a  bondage,  and  led  them  to  see  that  it  was  an  efflorescent  garden  fall  of 
sweet  delights.  There  is  among  men  a  great  lack  of  the  sense  of  their  obligation 
toward  those  who  have  served  them.  {Ibid.)  Unpurposed  healing  : — Ah !  it  ia 
a  good  thing  for  men  to  be  niled  with  grace  to  snch  a  degree  as  that  their  nncon. 
sciouB  moods  and  nnpurposed  influence  shall  be  healing,  as  well  as  the  things  which 
they  intend.  So  it  was  with  our  Master.  I^irposely  He  cast  out  demons.  He  set 
persons  free  from  insanities.  He  quenched  the  fire  of  fevers.  Dropsies  were  dried 
up  by  Him.  Men  were  brought  to  health  on  every  side  through  His  instrumeU' 
tality.  With  a  word,  with  a  gesture,  with  a  look,  with  a  touch.  He  did  great  works 
of  beneficence.  But  so  full  was  He  of  Divine  savour,  of  spiritual  power,  that  His 
very  garments,  as  it  were,  were  imbued  with  it ;  and  when  the  woman  stole  up  and 
touched  the  hem  of  His  garment,  straightway  she  experienced  a  joyful  release. 
Oh,  soul-filling  surprise  1  She  that  for  twelve  years  had  not  known  one  hour's 
exemption  from  disease,  felt  the  sovereign  balm  of  perfect  health  flow  through  her 
veins;  and  she  stood  restored  1  She  was  well!  {Ibid.)  Touchet  that  do  not 
touch ;  or  contact  without  sympathy : — There  seems  to  be  requisite,  then,  a  relation 
between  souls  before  the  real  and  rich  fruits  of  life  can  come  to  them  in  the  highest 
forma  of  Christian  experience.  Let  us  look  along  the  lines  of  analogy  a  little. 
Souls  touch  each  other  in  various  ways.  Life  touches  Ufe  variously.  People  live 
together  in  bodily  contact.  They  live  in  agreement  only  as  to  bodily  conditions. 
They  are  related  to  each  other  simply  by  the  necessity  of  food,  raiment,  warmth, 
protection.  Ten  thousand  wedded  souls  are  to  each  other  simply  as  a  blade  is  to  ft 
knife.  There  is  no  real  vitality  between  the  two.  Only  in  regard  to  provision  for 
worldly  wants  and  in  bodily  conditions  are  they  in  contact.  But,  then,  these  are 
the  lowest,  rudest  forms  of  contact ;  yet  there  are  people  that  are  more  in  sympathy. 
There  are  multitudes  that  come  into  sympathy  with  each  other  only  through  their 
children.  The  cradle  is  a  reconciler,  often,  between  husband  and  wife.  It  opens 
up,  in  the  rude,  hard  man,  streams  like  those  which  Moses  brought  forth  from  the 
rock.  For  the  child's  sake,  the  mother  becomes  dear  to  him.  There  is  mediation ; 
and  yet  how  little  of  life  is  theie  in  common  between  two  such  souls  1  Again, 
people  dwell  together  in  single  lines  of  mutuality.  Many  persons  live  together  in 
all  intellectual  qualities,  but  in  no  other  respects.  Many  dwell  together  being  in 
accord  in  their  tastes ;  but  in  no  other  regards.  Many  live  together  in  literature, 
in  history,  in  the  ordinary  and  easier  forms  of  knowledge  that  are  of  the  earth 
•arthy ;  but  they  never  rise  into  eminence,  aspiration,  glorification,  of  each  other, 
and  never  see  anything  in  each  other  except  that  which  the  bird  sees,  or  which  the 
animal  sees.  They  do  not  touch  each  other ;  and  yet  they  are  in  perpetual  contact. 
Higher  phenomena  of  life  there  are,  however ;  and  there  is  developed  heroism  at 
times.  There  is  a  coming  together  of  soul  with  soul,  not  through  the  ministration 
of  the  body,  nor  of  taste,  nor  of  thought,  nor  of  mutual  service,  alone,  but  by  that 
rare  inflammation  of  the  whole  soul  which  has  no  definition,  and  which  no  man 
can  describe.  It  is  not  needed  by  those  who  have  it ;  it  is  not  possible  to  those  who 
have  it  not.  Every  faculty  in  one,  then,  has  sympathy  with  every  faculty  in  the 
other.  Either  they  fit  each  other  by  exact  agreement,  or  the  positive  element  of 
one  is  just  adapted  for  the  absence  of  it  in  the  other.  Thus  souls  come  together  in 
an  indefinable  way.  They  are  conscious  that  their  lives  mingle  and  blend.  This 
is  the  rarest  and  highest  form  of  contact ;  and  yet  is  the  revelation  of  that  law  by 
which  men  can  rise  from  bodily  conditions  into  social,  and  from  those  conditions 
into  intellectual ;  but  the  consummation  lies  in  that  invisible,  indescribable  element 
which  inheres  in  every  man  and  woman — inheres  sometimes  only  aa  a  seed 
ongrown,  and  at  other  times  develops  and  is  full  of  fragrance,  and  then  is  full  of 
fruit.  {Ibid.)  The  survival  of  the  fittest  and  a  higher  law  .'—Jesus  did  not  say 
to  this  woman,  "  Go  away ;  you  are  too  weak  and  broken  to  hold  your  own  in  the 
world ;  best  for  you  to  be  down  and  wait  for  the  end,  while  others  take  your  place 
who  can  do  your  work."  That  would  have  been  a  sorrowful  word,  not  to  her  only, 
but  to  us  also ;  for  it  would  have  set  a  limit,  not  to  Christ's  power  merely,  but  to 
His  very  compassion,  and  therein  also  to  ours.  That,  however,  is  not  the  law 
which  human  hearts  acknowledge.  Our  power  may  easily  have  limits,  but  our  pity 
must  have  none ;  and  as  we  can  help  not  a  little  even  when  we  cannot  heal,  it  is 
bound  upon  our  conscience  never  to  be  inhuman.  The  bruised  reed  He  would  not 
break.  But  this,  while  it  is  the  supreme  law  of  man's  nature,  is  by  no  means  tha 
law  of  nature  elsewhere.  Nature  throws  away  her  broken  vessels  with  no  compunc- 
tion or  pity  whatever.  Everywhere  the  weak  and  sickly  among  the  lower  aj^iTnalg  are 


sit  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  r 

mthlessly  killed  off,  and  only  those  remain  which  are  able  to  do  for  themselyes. 
The  fit  survive — the  eeble  perish.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  lead  any  proof  of 
this.  The  stricken  deer  turns  aside  to  die,  while  the  fat  herd  sweeps  on  indifferent 
to  its  fate.  The  pack  of  lean  wolves  know  of  no  surgery  for  a  fainting  comrade, 
except  to  fall  on  him  and  rend  him  in  pieces.  The  frail  bird  that  cannot  fly  with 
the  rest  of  the  brood  is  tumbled  from  the  nest  and  left  to  its  fate.  Nature  has,^ 
indeed,  a  great  healing  power  for  the  strong  and  healthy  in  case  of  accident,  so  that 
wounds  and  broken  bones  soon  come  together  a^ain.  But  among  wild  animals 
sickness,  disease,  feebleness,  and  age  meet  with  no  compassion.  In  their  warfare 
it  is  still  Va  victis,  for  they  cannot  cumber  themselves  with  the  wounded.  The 
halt  and  the  blind  get  no  chance  at  all.  The  weak  and  sickly  are  left  to  their  fate» 
and  the  sooner  it  comes  the  better,  for  their  kindred  turn  from  them,  and  their 
friends  will  not  know  them.  Unfit  for  the  struggle  of  existence  which  is  their 
supreme  business,  they  perish  without  ruth  or  remorse.  Thus  everywhere  on  sea 
and  land,  and  in  the  lightsome  air,  among  all  creatures  that  swim,  or  fly,  or  creep, 
or  run,  we  find  this  law  working,  and  doubtless  working  for  the  general  good  of  the 
whole,  yielding  a  benevolent  harvest  of  health  and  comfort  to  the  unthinking 
creatures  of  God.  But  now,  when  we  pass  from  them  into  the  province  of  man,  we 
meet  at  once  with  a  law  which  breaks  in  upon  this,  and  controls  it.  The  struggle 
for  existence  goes  on  there  too,  but  it  is  no  longer  supreme  and  all  in  all. 
Everywhere  it  is  modified  by  ideas  that  are  confessedly  of  greater  moment  and 
higher  authority.  Sometimes  it  is  set  aside  altogether,  for  we  are  not  always 
bound  to  exist  if  wo  can,  but  we  are  always  bound  to  do  right.  Thus  the  moral 
rises  above  the  natural,  and  even  flatly  contradicts  it.  The  struggle  for  existence 
is  subordinated  to  the  struggle  for  a  higher  perfection.  Instead  of  the  survival  of 
the  fittest,  we  have  a  law  requiring  the  strong  to  help  the  weak,  the  healthy  to 
improve  their  health  for  the  sake  of  the  diseased,  and  even  those  who  are  hope- 
lessly stricken,  and  for  ever  invalided  from  the  battle  of  life,  are  cast  on  us  as  a 
peculiar  care,  to  neglect  which  were  to  outrage  the  noblest  instincts  of  humanity. 
The  natural  law,  everywhere  else  in  full  swing,  that  the  weak  and  sickly,  the  halt 
and  blind,  must  be  left  to  their  fate,  or  even  hurried  out  of  the  way,  not  only  does 
not  hold  among  us,  but  the  very  reverse  of  it  holds.  And  the  moral  principle  which 
thus  asserts  its  supremacy  vindicates  ics  claim  by  many  fruitful  results.  For  often- 
times the  poor  cripple  whom  natural  law  would  have  cast  away,  has  grown  up  to 
bless  the  world  with  wise  and  noble  counsel,  and  blind  men,  all  unfit  for  the  mere 
struggle  of  animal  life,  have  yet  done  brave  and  good  service  in  the  higher  warfare 
of  humanity ;  and  even  the  utterly  broken,  the  helplessly  disabled,  who  can 
"  only  stand  and  wait,"  have  yet,  by  their  meek  patience  under  affliction,  shown  us 
an  example  which  made  our  hearts  gentler,  humbler,  better,  and  was  well  worth  all 
the  care  we  bestowed  on  them.  So  it  is,  at  any  rate,  that  no  sooner  do  we  pass 
from  the  mere  natural  life  of  animals  to  the  moral  life  of  man,  than  we  find 
another  law  breaking  in  upon  the  law  of  survival  of  the  fittest—controlling, 
suspending,  even  utterly  reversing  it,  with  an  authority  which  cannot  be  gainsaid, 
without  forfeiting  all  that  is  most  nobly  and  distinctively  human.  {Walter  G. 
Smith,  D.D.)  ChrisVs  kindness  in  discipline : — It  is  not  often  that  we  are  able 
to  perceive  the  full  purpose  of  any  one  of  God'g  dealings.  Seldom  can  we  see  the 
perfect  fruit  of  the  chastisement  He  allots  us.  And  no  wonder:  the  life  of  man  is 
so  short ;  the  purposes  and  operations  of  God  are  so  vast.  I.  In  the  conduct  of  oar 
Lord  notice — 1.  Christ's  apparent  harshness.  He  insisted  on  the  woman's  coming 
forth  to  tell  her  shame.  But  see  Christ's  real  kindness.  It  was  not  in  mere  asser- 
tion of  authority  that  He  called  her  forth.  It  was  to  complete  the  blessing.  He 
would  give  her  His  benediction  before  she  went.  Again,  it  was  to  purify  and 
strengthen  her  faith.  He  would  prepare  her  to  confess  Him  elsewhere.  Christ 
alone  knew  the  trials  to  which  this  woman  would  be  exposed  at  home.  3.  So  in 
like  manner  and  with  like  purposes,  will  Christ  deal  with  you,  if  you  be  of  those 
who  have  come  to  Him  with  faith.  The  purpose  of  all  Christ'i  discipline — the 
discipline  that  we  experience — is  exemplified  in  His  conduct  to  this  woman.  First, 
we  noticed  that  He  called  her  forth  to  receive  further  blessing.  She  came  for 
healing  only,  but  He  would  give  her  spiritual  grace.  Like  her,  many  now  come  to 
the  Saviour,  barely  praying  for  pardon,  for  deliverance  from  punishment.  But 
Christ  did  not  achieve  redemption  merely  to  keep  men  out  of  hell — He  died  to  take 
them  to  heaven.  Now,  to  prepare  for  heaven  much  grace  is  necessary,  and  men 
must  be  summoned  to  return  to  Christ  again  and  again,  that  they  may  receive  far 
more  than  the  blessing  for  which  they  first  came.    Christ  has  yet  richer  fayoors  to 


T.]  ST.  MARK.  217 

bestow ;  and  if  His  people  do  not  apply  for  tbem  they  mast  be  placed  in  cironm- 
stances  where  they  will  feel  their  want  and  their  need,  and  hungrily  ask  Him  for 
more.  Next,  we  saw  that  He  called  her  forth  to  purify  and  strengthen  her  faith. 
There  is  no  need  for  me  to  tell  you  that  your  faith  is  both  imperfect  and  impure. 
Would  you  not  desire  your  faith  to  grow  stronger  and  larger  ?  Then  it  must  be 
nsed  and  tried,  exercised  and  trained.  Again,  we  noticed  that  Christ  was  probably 
preparing  this  woman  to  witness  for  Him  in  time  to  come.  He  requires  from  ail 
yjnen  the  public  profession  of  His  name.  Salvation  is  not  a  sort  of  spiritual  luxury 
to  be  enjoyed  in  private.  And,  further,  men  never  know  wliat  lies  before  them  as 
messengers  of  God ;  they  are  ignorant  of  the  high  and  arduous  service  to  which, 
may  be,  they  have  been  appointed.  But  Christ  kuows  it ;  and  He  prepares  them  and 
exercises  them  in  bearing  testimony  for  God  in  one  difficulty  and  trial  after 
another,  until  they  are  ready  for  the  work  tlaey  have  to  do.  Thus  does  He  grant  to 
His  applicants,  not  only  the  healing  they  pray  for,  but  also  the  strength  which 
they  are  content  to  lack.  As  in  the  experience  of  this  woman,  so  in  His  treatment 
of  us,  will  Christ  combine  apparent  harshness  with  real  kindness.  II.  For  the 
further  investigation  of  this  subject  shall  we  turn  from  the  Saviour  to  the  saved, 
and  try  to  trace  the  feelings  of  this  woman  as  the  black  cloud  of  Christ's  seeming 
displeasure  passed  over  her.  1.  We  find  her  full  of  sudden  joy  at  feeling  in  her 
body  that  she  was  healed  of  that  plague.  Twelve  years'  misery,  labour,  expense, 
and  disappointment  are  all  at  an  end.  How  universal  the  joy  must  have  been.  No 
fibre  of  her  frame  that  did  not  thrill  with  gladness.  And  there  was  another  cause 
of  joy  too ;  she  had  escaped  the  exposure  she  so  much  dreaded.  But  her  joy  was 
all  at  once  quenched  in  awe  and  fear  when  He  asked,  •♦  Who  touched  Me  f  "  and 
when  He  asked  again,  and  when  He  looked  round  about  with  a  gaze  that  showed 
He  knew  her  that  had  done  this  thing.  So  feeling,  for  a  moment,  she  comes  forward 
and  tells  Him  [all  the  truth.  But,  instead,  sounds  came  upon  her  ear  tenderer 
and  tenderer,  and  stronger  in  consolation:  "Courage,  daughter;  thy  faith  hath 
saved  thee,"  Ao,  Ah!  what  feelings  were  hers,  as  she  rose  and  departed. 
It  would  take  her  long  to  disentangle  all  their  varied  happiness.  Did  she 
not  feel  that  the  benediction  of  Christ  amply  made  ap  for  the  loss  of 
secrecy  ?  She  was  really  happier  for  the  discipline  through  which  He  made  her 
pass.  Had  she  gone  away  as  she  hoped  and  planned,  she  would  have  carried 
with  her  none  of  this  joy — the  love  of  Christ.  She  would  have  received  the 
cure,  and  that  alone.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  she  would  have  had  doubts  as  to 
Christ's  willingness  to  heal  her ;  doubts  as  to  His  forgiveness  of  her  intrusion  and 
underhand  application ;  doubts,  too,  as  to  the  permanence  of  the  cure — all  would 
have  been  in  uncertainty.  But  now  she  knew  that  His  will  healed  her.  His  kind- 
ness welcomed  her.  His  grace  blessed  her.  Moreover,  had  she  gone  away  as  she 
hoped,  she  would  have  retained  her  superstition  with  her  faith.  It  would  have 
cramped  and  enfeebled  it,  and  she  might  never  have  believed  in  Jesus  to  the  salva 
tion  of  her  soul.  And  the  weakness  that  made  her  come  to  Christ  in  the  crowd 
behind  might  have  betrayed  her  into  greater  fear  of  man  at  home,  and  she  might 
never  have  been  able  to  confess  His  name.  But  now  she  knew  Him,  and  believed 
in  Him — not  in  the  fringe  of  His  garment ;  now  she  had  confessed  Him  before  the 
multitude,  and  would  not  fear  to  confess  Him  before  her  friends.  Would  she  not 
be  sure  that  it  was  loving  wisdom  that  deprived  her  of  the  convenience  which  she 
had  yearned  for,  and  substituted  blessings  of  which  she  had  not  dreamed  ?  And, 
further,  was  she  not  glad  that  she  had  been  made  to  undergo  all  this  7  If  she  could 
have  had  her  choice,  and  it  were  all  to  do  over  again,  think  yon  she  would  have 
wished  to  go  away  secretly  without  seeing  Christ's  beaming  eye  and  hearing  His 
"  Courage,  daughter,  go  in  peace"?  Surely  not.  She  saw  now  that  Christ's  kindness, 
though  it  seemed  harsh  at  first,  was  wiser  than  her  own  selfish  cowardice,  and  secured 
her  greater  happiness.  2.  This  narrative  shows  us  also  a  person  undergoing  harsh 
discipline,  and  perceiving  herself  in  a  few  moments  the  kindness  which  appointed  it. 
Now  this  makes  it  specially  interesting.  It  is  so  seldom  we  can  see  both  sides  of 
»ny  dispensation — the  peaceable,  happy  fruit  as  well  as  the  present  grievousnesa — 
that  every  instance  in  which  we  can  do  so  ought  to  receive  most  careful  meditation. 
It  is  not  always  granted  to  Christians  to  see  this  happy  change  so  suddenly ;  and 
yet  some  time  or  other  in  the  experience  of  every  believer  as  swift  a  vision  of  God's 
kindness  in  discipline  is  accorded.  And  from  over  us  will  the  cloud  sometimes  pass 
as  quickly  as  in  this  case.  Many  a  discipline  which  we  think  harsh  we  shall  find  to 
be  kind.  Not  only  will  it  really  be  kind,  but  we  shall  know  it  to  be  ao,  and  shall 
receive  the  joy  of  experiencing  God's  goodness.    Many  an  eicpoeiue  or  trial  tb«t  if 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  ?. 

would  have  avoided  at  any  cost  will  tarn  oat  to  be  the  means  of  bringing  blessings 
which  we  shall  reckon  cheaply  bought.  Conclusion  :  It  is  painful  when  speaking  of 
privileges  and  securities,  to  think  thai  they  are  limited  to  a  few.  But  I  mast 
warn  you  that  noue  but  those  who  come  to  Christ  for  salvation  may  hope  that 
He  is  training  them  for  eternity.  Those  who  do  not  touch  Christ  by  faith, 
their  sorrows  are  but  sorrows,  their  disappointments  bring  no  outweighing  joy, 
their  troubles  are  not  trials,  only  calamities.  Of  how  much  are  yoa  de> 
piiving  yourselves  by  unbelief  I  Now  that  Jesus  is  near,  is  even  waiting  for 
you,  will  you  not  trust  in  Him  and  come  to  Him  to  be  healed?  (cT^.  Alden  Davies.) 
A  cure  by  the  way;— Jesus  was  pressing  through  the  throng  to  the  house  of  Jairus 
to  raise  the  ruler's  dead  daughter ;  but  He  is  so  profuse  in  goodness  that  He  works 
another  miracle  while  upon  the  road.  While  yet  this  rod  of  Aaron  bears  the 
blossoms  of  an  unaccomplished  wonder,  it  yields  the  ripe  almonds  of  a  perfect  work 
of  mfcrcy.  It  is  enough  for  us,  if  we  have  some  one  purpose,  straightway  to  go  and 
accomplish  it ;  it  were  imprudent  to  expend  our  energies  by  the  way.  Hastening  to 
the  rescue  of  a  drowning  friend,  we  cannot  afford  to  exhaust  our  strength  upon  an- 
other in  like  danger.  It  is  enough  for  a  tree  to  yield  one  sort  of  fruit,  and  for  a 
luau  to  fulfil  his  own  particular  calling.  But  our  Master  knows  no  limit  of  power 
or  boundary  of  mission.  He  is  so  prolific  of  grace,  that  Uke  the  sun  which  shines 
as  it  fulfils  its  course,  His  path  is  radiant  with  loving-kindness.  He  is  a  fiery  arrow 
of  love,  which  not  only  reaches  its  ordained  target,  but  perfumes  the  air  through 
which  it  files.  Virtue  is  always  going  out  of  Jesus,  as  sweet  odours  exhale  from 
the  fiowers ;  and  it  always  will  be  emanating  from  Him,  as  light  from  the  central 
orb.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Men  speak  of  killing  two  birds  with  one  stone,  but  my 
Lord  heals  many  souls  on  one  journey.  (Ibid.)  Tell  all  to  Jestu : — II  your  heart 
be  very  grieved,  do,  I  pray  you,  remember  that  compassion  ia  one  of  the  most  rapid 
ways  of  getting  reUef.  While  the  banks  hold  good  the  lake  swells ;  let  them  break, 
and  the  water  is  drained  off.  Let  a  vent  be  found  for  the  swollen  tarn  ap  yonder 
on  the  mountains,  and  the  mass  of  water  which  might  otherwise  inundate  the 
valleys  will  fiow  in  fertilizing  streams.  When  you  have  a  festering,  gathering 
wound,  the  surgeon  lets  in  the  lancet  and  gives  yon  ease.  So  confession  bring!^ 
peace.  (Ibid.)  Confessing  Christ : — Why  should  the  wonders  He  hath  wrought 
be  hid  in  darkness  and  foigot  ?  When  I  look  abroad  upon  nature,  it  is  true  I 
do  not  see  nature  fussily  trying  to  make  itself  tidy  for  a  visitor,  as  some  professors 
do,  who,  the  moment  they  think  they  are  going  to  be  looked  at,  trim  up  their  godli- 
ness to  make  it  look  smart.  But  on  the  other  hand.  Nature  is  never  bashful.  She 
never  tries  to  hide  her  beauties  from  the  gazer's  eye.  Yoa  walk  the  valley  ;  the  sun 
is  shining,  and  a  few  raindrops  are  falling  ;  yonder  is  the  rainbow ;  a  thousand  eyes 
gaze  at  it.  Does  it  fold  up  all  its  lovely  colours  and  retire  ?  Oh,  no  1  it  shrinks  not 
fi'om  the  eye  of  man.  In  yonder  garden  all  the  fiowers  are  opening  their  bejewelled 
cups,  the  birds  are  singing,  and  the  insects  humming  amid  the  leaves.  It  is  a 
place  so  beautiful  that  God  Himself  might  walk  therein  at  eventide,  as  He  did  in 
Eden.  I  look  without  alarming  the  bashful  beauties  of  the  garden.  Do  all  these 
insects  fold  theilr  wings  and  hide  beneath  the  leaves  ?  do  the  flowers  hang  down 
their  heads  ?  does  the  sun  draw  a  veil  over  his  modest  face  ?  does  nature  blush  till 
the  leaves  of  the  trees  are  scarlet  ?  Oh,  no  1  Nature  cares  not  for  gazers,  and  when 
they  come  to  look  upon  her,  she  doth  not  hasten  to  wrap  a  mantle  over  her  fair 
form,  or  throw  a  curtain  before  her  grandeur.  So  the  Christian  is  not  to  be  always 
wishing  to  expose  what  is  in  him ;  that  were  to  make  himself  a  Pharisee ;  yet,  on 
the  other  hand,  if  God  has  put  anything  that  is  lovely  and  beautiful  and  of  good 
report  in  you,  anything  that  may  glorify  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  make  the  angels 
happy  before  the  eternal  throne,  who  are  you  that  yoa  shouln  cover  it  f  Who  are 
you  that  you  should  rob  God  of  His  praise  ?  What  1  Would  you  have  all  Nature's 
beauties  hid?  Why,  then,  hide  the  beauties  of  grace?  (Ibid.)  Best  to  apply 
direct  to  the  Master : — A  tenant  farmer  on  a  rich  lord's  estate  had  been  refused  a 
renewal  of  his  lease  by  the  steward  of  the  estate.  Instead  of  giving  up,  the  farmer 
went  to  the  owner  himself,  laid  the  matter  before  him,  and  was  successful  in  getting 
his  renewal.  Why  r  He  had  gone  to  the  one  who  had  the  ultimate  power  to  grant 
or  refuse.  So  Jairus,  so  the  woman  with  the  bloody  fiux,  when  all  human  help 
failed,  went  to  Him  in  Whom  alone  was  the  power  to  heal  and  make  aUve.  AU 
the  bread  in  the  world  will  not  keep  you  from  starving,  if  it  is  shut  up  in  store- 
houses,  and  you  have  no  key.  There  ii.ay  be  water  enough  in  the  well,  but  if  yoo 
have  no  bucket  to  draw  it  with,  it  will  do  you  no  good.  And  all  Christ's  treasures 
of  healing  for  body  and  soul  will  be  nothmg  to  you,  if  you  do  not  go  to  Him  f oi 


.  ▼.]  8T.  MARK,  ail 

jowt  share  of  them.     {Sunday  School  Timet.)        The  $anetity  of  touch : — I.  How 

ABBAT  AKD  MT8TBBI0UB  THE  IMPOBTAKCB  ATXAOHINO  TO  TOUOH  IN  THB  OlD  TeSTAHBNT. 

1.  Thus  toaoh  is  pollation  (Hag.  ii.  12,  13).  2.  Thus  touch  is  oonseorstion  (Exod. 
zzz.  26,  29).  8.  Thus  touch  is  stiength  (Dan.  z.  10, 16,  18).  4.  Thus  touch  is 
wisdom  (Jer.  i.  9).    6.  Thus  touch  is  purity  (Isa.  tL  7).    U.  Thb  obxat  lesson  or 

THB  New  TBBTAMEirr  is  by  touch,  to  show  to  us  thb  ABSOLUTB  COHMUKICABIIilTT  OF 
THB  DlVINB  POWER  AND  HOLINESS  *,   IT  IB  THB  STOBY  AI.SO  OW  THB   VACCINATION   OV  THB 

woBLD.  The  Old  Testament  is  the  story  of  the  first  man,  and  how  one  sin  tainted 
the  world.  The  New  Testament  is  the  story  of  the  second  Man,  and  how  His  holi- 
ness purified  the  tainted  stream.  Jesus  went  about  tonohiDg.  The  holy  awakening 
of  Divine  grace  restores  man.  III.  Thebb  is  no  cube  without  contact.  You 
cannot  satisfy  hunger  without  eating,  although  your  table  be  covered  with  food. 
You  cannot  satisfy  thirst  without  drinking,  although  fountains  play  before  the 
eye.  You  cannot  satisfy  faith  by  reading  about  Christ,  or  by  knowing  Him — ^you 
must  appropriate  Him.  Imputed  righteousness  is  really  transferred  righteousness ; 
the  purity  of  the  Saviour  becomes  ours.  What  does  the  whole  teaching  and  miraca« 
lous  life  of  our  Lord  convey  to  as  but  this  doctrine — Transfusion.  Faith  is  the  finger 
by  which  man  touobes  God.  Meanwhile  it  is  not  faith  that  saves ;  it  is  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ.  We  are  not  saved  by  faith  as  an  act  of  the  mind,  but  by  faith  on  the 
object  of  the  mind.  It  is  not  the  faith,  but  the  Person.  No  cure  without  contact. 
Thus  if  man  cannot  eome  to  God,  Qod  must  come  to  man,  or  these  two  can  never 
meet.  This  is  the  meaning  of  Christ's  incarnation.  By  faith  we  come  into  contact 
with  God,  and  are  saved ;  by  sympathy,  we  come  in  contact  with  man  and  cure. 
{E.  P.  Hood.)  Touch  i$  the  key  to  all  the  terues : — Touch  is  the  principle  of  all 
the  senses.  Perhaps,  also,  I  shall  be  right,  if  I  say  that  it  is  the  most  subtle  of  all 
the  senses.  There  is  no  sensation  without  toadi;  sight  ii  touch;  fragrance  is 
touch ;  we  give  that  name  to  what  is  the  sense  of  resistance ;  but  all  things  are 
known  to  ns  and  are  related  to  us  by  touch.  Touch  is  the  internal  sensitive  principle 
— it  is  the  principle  of  communication,  and  of  reception,  and  of  translation.  We 
are  told  that  particles  are  constantly  floating  off  to  touch  the  sensitive  body,  to  bid 
the  door  of  sensation  spring  open  ;  and  I  think  you  must  have  felt  that  while  those 
avenues  are  touched  by  their  proper  affinities,  there  are  other  senses  within  which 
are  not  touched,  and  never  awakened,  but  which  might  own  and  yield  to  the  appro- 
priate key.  Touch  is,  to  me,  far  from  being  that  endorsement  of  materialism  it  has 
been  described  as  being ;  it  is  the  assurance  of  an  inhabitant  behind  the  gateway. 
Inded,  the  more  closely  I  look  into  any  of  the  senses,  the  more  spiritual  they  become. 
All  knowledge  is  by  contact ;  all  sympathy  is  in  contact ;  and  sin  and  purity,  and 
health  and  disease,  grow  in  contact.  How  true  it  is  that  there  is  no  cure,  no  healing, 
without  contact — that  is,  without  mutual  touching.  If  we  cannot  get  near  to  that 
which  heals,  how  can  it  heal  us  ?  Suppose  I  know  of  the  medicine  which  might 
cure  me,  but  I  am  in  England,  and  the  medicine  or  the  physician  is  in  America,  and 
it  is  the  only  medicine — how  can  I  be  cured  f  Hence,  then,  guard  the  avenues  of 
touch.  It  has  been  well  said  that  the  skin  isolates  the  man,  and  makes  him  world- 
tight;  but  it  is  necessary  that  the  world's  goods  should  come  into  his  house — neces- 
sary, too,  that  the  refuse  and  wear  and  tear  should  be  carried  forth,  and  that  he 
should  go  out  and  in  with  the  freedom  of  a  man.  The  skin  is  our  abode,  not  our 
prison  ;  and  the  porous  skin  has  its  bivalve  doors  and  windows,  to  admit  supplies 
from  without,  and  to  allow  the  spirit  to  steer  forth  from  within.  Some  things  we 
must  be  careful  to  touch  not.  {Ibid.)  Sin  spreading  by  contact : — It  contains 
also  the  history  of  the  transference  of  Divine  holiness,  but  it  is  especially  the 
history  of  the  inoculation  of  sin ;  it  is  the  history  of  the  drop  that  taints  and  rains 
the  race — the  fatal  virus  ;  it  is  not  inconceivable.  I  remember,  some  time  since, 
when  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  being  told  of  a  young  man  who  slightly 
touched  his  two  fingers  with  the  dissecting  knife,  they  were  instantly  cut  off  to  save 
his  life,  so  fatal  was  the  touch  of  corruption.  Such  is  the  corrosive  power  of 
poisonous  touch.  We  can  appreciate  the  touch  of  fire,  the  touch  of  caustic,  the 
touch  of  poison  ;  but  can  we  not  appreciate  the  touch  of  sin  ?  Can  we  not  so  far 
appreciate  it  as  to  know  its  power,  its  danger,  and  to  see  in  it  the  dreadful  virus 
tainting  and  damning  our  race  ?  {Ibid.)  Christianity  a  liealing  influence  : — Now 
it  is,  as  I  have  before  said,  not  difficult  to  perceive  to  what  teaching  all  the  doctrine 
concerning  touch  in  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  New,  points :  even  to  the  great 
doctrine  of  a  transferred  or  transfused  purity.  It  is  mournfully  true  that,  for  the 
most  part,  except  as  we  are  divinely  breathed  upon,  we  but  add  to  each  other's  im- 
purity.    Let  the  Book  be  removed  from  our  midst — let  all  churoh  ordinances 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼, 

expire  from  emong  us — ^let  every  opportnmfj  of  prayer  be  suspended  or  at  an 
end — and  all  the  of&ces  of  the  religious  life,  as  aided  and  inspired  by  the  sacred 
Soriptures,  and  then  what  shall  we  see  7  Still  man  would  exercise  his  powers 
as  an  artist — still  would  he  ntter  himself  in  poetry  and  in  song,  in  pamting  and  in 
sculpture.  Can  you  doubt  for  a  moment,  or  wonder,  what  would  be  the  nature  of 
those  performances?  Anacreon,  and  Juvezial,  and  universal  impurity  over  the  marble 
and  over  the  canvas.  When  ;^ou  think  of  man's  genius,  his  native  genius,  you  are  not 
to  think  of  it  as  you  behold  it  here,  but  as  it  was  in  the  day  in  which  the  apostle  bore 
his  witness  in  the  prison  at  Bome,  and  on  the  hill  of  Greece ;  and  you  must  see  how 
the  touch  of  holiness  transformed  all  that  impurity  into  the  holy  lights  of  virtue  and 
truth.  But  Greece,  and  Bome— what  power  had  tiiey  to  impart  purity  to  each  other  f 
Therefore  is  there  needed  another  ray,  another  touch,  another  hallowing  fire.  (Ibid.) 
*'  Twelve  yean  I  "  The  eontraste  of  life: — In  Capernaum  there  were  two  houses 
whose  inmates  are  strangely  linked  together  in  the  Gospel  history.  The  one  was  the 
house  of  Jairus,  which  perhaps  stood  on  the  rising  ground  fast  by  the  synagogue :  the 
other  was  the  house  in  which  the  nameless  woman,  with  the  issue  of  blood,  dwelt, 
which  probably  was  situated  in  the  poorer  part  of  the  city.  Let  us  mark  the  con- 
trasts of  life  presented  by  these  two  houses  in  the  "twelve  years"  twice  men- 
tioned by  Mark.  L  Hope  and  feab — There  was  a  day  when  a  great  event  took 
place  in  the  house  of  Jairus.  A  child  was  bom.  What  congratulations  of  friends, 
^c.  The  same  jear — ^perhaps  the  same  month  and  day — a  memorable  event  took 
place  in  the  house  of  a  poor  woman.  ••  Issue  of  blood  '*  (v.  25).  How  it  came  is 
not  told.  Such  contrasts  are  common.  In  one  home  they  are  lifted  up  with  hope 
and  joy ;  while  in  another  there  is  the  gloom  and  trouble.  U.  Health  Ain>  sick- 
ness. In  the  house  of  Jairus  aU  goes  well.  The  child  grows.  She  is  the  joy  of 
her  parents,  &o.  But  alas  1  how  different  have  been  the  circumstances  in  the  other 
house.  Perhaps  the  woman  thought  at  first  that  her  ailment  was  slight  and  tem- 
porary. Certainly  she  was  buoyed  up  with  the  hope  that  it  would  yield  to  the  ddll 
of  physicians.  But  disappointed.  III.  Comfobt  and  pentjbt.  Jairus  must  have 
held  a  good  position  i  he  was  wealthy.  As  to  the  woman,  we  cannot  tell  what  her 
original  condition  was.  At  any  rate,  she  soon  felt  the  pressure  of  adversity.  lY. 
Society  and  loneliness.  Jairus  had  wife  and  daughter,  and  many  friends.  If  he 
needed  sympathy,  there  would  be  always  people  ready  to  give  it.  Besides,  he  had 
his  place  and  his  duties,  as  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  to  furnish  him  with  honour- 
able employment  and  holy  rest.  But  how  different  with  the  poor  woman.  She  is 
represented  as  alone.    No  one  is  named  as  taking  interest  in  her  case.    V.  But 

THERE  CAME  A  TIMB  WHEN  THE  FOBTUNES  OF  THESE  TWO  PEOPLE  WEBB  STRANGELY 
assimilated,   and  when  in   their  extremity  they  MET  AND  FOUND  RELIEF  AX  THE 

FEET  OF  THE  SAME  SAVIOUR.  Lessous :  1.  Troublo  comes  to  all.  2.  Trouble  should 
drive  us  to  Christ.  8.  Trouble  should  bind  us  more  closely  in  sympathy  and  love 
with  our  brethren.  A,  Trouble  should  endear  to  us  the  more  the  hope  of  heaven. 
(TT.  Forsytht  M.A.)  Methods  of  spiritttal  treatment: — There  are  cases  in  which 
the  physicians  must  still,  to  save  Ufe,  resort  to  treatment  which  is  painfuL  But  it 
is  now  known,  it  is  now  conclusively  settled  among  physicians,  that  the  way  to 
master  disease  is  not  to  torture  the  patient  into  health  or  into  his  grave,  but  to  pro- 
vide that  those  miraculous  processes  of  nature  which  include  healing  should  as  far 
as  possible  have  fair  play,  to  make  art  the  handmaid  of  nature,  instead  of  offer- 
ing any  violence  to  nature  in  the  name  of  art  Now-a-days,  therefore,  your 
physician  who  is  not  "n  age  behind  his  age  does  not  give  you  drugs  in  doses  which 
horribly  aggravate  your  suffering — he  prescribes  fresh  air,  the  delights  of  travel, 
gentle  exercise,  good  diet,  warmth,  comfort,  suggests  that  pleasant  company  has 
its  own  benign  influence  on  body  and  mind,  recommends  innocent  amusement,  and, 
as  regards  the  welfare  of  this  mortal  tabernacle,  agrees  with  the  ancient  maxim  that 
godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain.  It  is  certain  that  more  cures  are  effected 
by  the  modem  system  of  medical  treatment,  while,  as  for  the  soothing  of  pain,  no 
comparison  is  possible  between  them.  The  difference  between  the  two  systems  is 
that  by  the  one  the  attempt  is  made  to  check  and  to  extirpate  disease  by  violence, 
by  the  other  to  aid  nature  by  gentle  methods  to  overcome  it.  From  doctors  for  the 
body  is  not  the  passage  easy  to  doctors  for  the  soul  ?  Among  them,  too,  the  curing 
of  disease  by  violence  has  been  much  and  long  in  vogue.  In  our  day,  it  is  true,  we 
hear  little  and  know  less  of  the  coarser  and  more  outrageous  means  which  were 
once  universally  approved  for  effecting  spiritual  cures.  We  don't  now  believe  that 
we  ean  save  souls  by  burning  the  bodies  belonging  to  them.  Looking  thus  to  the 
general  scope  of  the  teaching  of  Christ,  we  have  no  difficulty  in  seeing  what  religion 


T.j  ST,  Mark.  221 

wa8  meant  by  Him  to  be  in  relation  to  all  moral  and  spiritual  disabilily  and  disease. 
It  was  not  to  be  a  system  of  bleeding  and  blistering,  of  caring  by  counter-irritation, 
of  making  six  days  of  the  week  holy  by  making  the  seventh  miserable,  of  making 
earth  a  place  of  torment  in  order  to  render  heaven  accessible,  of  overcoming  one 
disease  by  the  production  of  another.  It  was  to  be  a  kindred  influence  with  the 
sunshine,  and  the  air  of  shores  and  hills,  and  the  kindly  ties  of  home,  and  the 
sympathy  which  is  born  of  comradeship  in  adversity  and  sorrow — it  was  to  be  an 
influence  kindred  with  all  these  in  restoring  to  health  those  that  were  ready  to 
perish.  Every  way  you  choose  to  look  at  it,  this  is  the  character  of  the  Christi- 
Bnity  of  Christ.  (J.  Service ^  D.D,)  Christ  discriminates  His  healing  virtue : — 
Who  would  not  think  that  a  man  might  ladle  up  a  dish  of  water  out  of  the  sea, 
without  its  being  missed  ?  Yet  that  water,  though  much,  is  finite ;  those  drops 
may  be  numbered :  that  art  which  hath  reckoned  how  many  grains  of  sand  would 
make  up  a  world,  could  more  easily  compute  how  many  drops  of  water  would  make 
np  an  ocean.  Whereas,  the  mercies  of  God  are  absolutely  inflnite,  and  beyond  all 
possibility  of  proportion ;  and  yet  this  bashful  soul  cannot  steal  one  drop  of  mercy 
from  this  endless,  boundless,  bottomless  sea  of  Divine  bounty,  but  it  is  felt  and 
questioned.  {Bp.  Hall.)  Virtue  had  gone  out  of  Him  1  Christ  an  inexhaustille 
reservoir  of  grace : — As  heat  goeth  out  of  the  sun  into  the  air,  water,  earth,  earthly 
bodies,  and  yet  remains  in  the  sun ;  so  here.  A  fountain  is  not  drawn  dry,  but 
cleared  ;  so  skill  is  not  lost  by  communicating  it  to  others,  but  increased.  (John 
Trapp.)  The  looks  of  Jesus  : — *'  And  He  looked  round  about  to  see  her  that  had 
done  this  thing."  The  record  in  this  Gospel  of  the  looks  of  Christ  is  very  remark- 
able. Let  us  gather  them  together  and  by  their  help  think  of  Him  whose  meek, 
patient  eye  is  still  upon  them  that  fear  Him.  I.  The  welcoming  look  of  love  and 
pity  to  those  who  seek  Him.  There  are  two  recorded  instances — that  of  our  text 
and  that  of  the  young  ruler.  11.  The  Lord's  looks  of  love  and  warning  to  those 
who  found  Him.  There  are  three  instances  of  this  class — Mark  iii.  34 ;  viii.  32 ; 
JL  23-27.  The  stooping  love  which  claims  us  for  His  brethren,  shines  in  His  regard 
none  the  less  tenderly  though  He  reads  and  warns  us  with  His  eye.  III.  The  Lord's 
look  of  anger  and  pity  on  His  opponents.  This  took  place  in  the  synagogue 
(Mark  iii.  1-6).  IV.  The  look  of  the  Lord  on  the  profaned  temple  (Mark  xi  11). 
How  solemn  that  careful,  all-oomprehending  somtiny  of  all  that  He  foond  there. 
{A,  Maclaren,  D,D,) 

Ver.  86.  Be  not  aftaid,  only  believe. — Only  believe  .•^Theebonmstanees  in  which 
onr  Lord  uttered  these  simple  but  memorable  words.  .  .  .  Did  He  say  this  for  the 
sake  of  Jairus  alone?  Nay,  surely  notl  I  take  these  precious  words  of  our  Lord, 
and  now  especially  apply  them  to  one  who  is  seeking  forgiveness,  bat  who  feels  as 
if  he  need  scarcely  hope,  as  if  he  could  never  be  a  child  of  Ood,  Ao,  If  you  have 
some  such  feelings,  it  is  just  to  you  I  say,  **  Be  not  afraid,  only  believe  I  "  1.  There 
are  some,  many,  alas  I  and  the  Bible  scarcely  contains  a  word  which  I  should  not 
sooner  think  of  addressing  to  them  than,  **  Be  not  afraid  I  '*  O  that  I  could  make 
them  be  afraid !  Who  are  they  ?  Persons  who  are  not,  and  perhaps  never  were, 
troubled  with  fear  about  their  souls.  Qod  is  too  merciful  to  cast  them  out,  or 
they  are  not  wicked  enough  to  be  lost,  or  they  are  sure  to  be  converted  before 
they  die,  or  they  can  make  up  for  past  defects  by  good  living  for  the  future.  2.  But 
to  tiiee  who  like  Jairus  art  troubled  in  heart  and  seeking  help  from  Christ,  and  over 
whose  hopes  dark  feelings  pass,  as  if  it  was  all  in  vain,  all  too  late— to  thee  I  say, 
**  Be  not  afraid  1  '*  While  a  man  remains  indifferent  as  to  his  soul,  the  great 
deceiver  seeks  to  persuade  him  that  nothing  is  so  easy  as  salvation;  but  the 
moment  conscience  becomes  awake,  and  the  man  begins  in  eameat  to  ask.  What  must 
I  do  to  be  saved  ?  the  deceiver  changes  his  voice.  Now,  nothing  is  so  dif&cult,  so 
impossible,  as  salvation.  Before,  it  was  too  soon ;  now,  it  is  too  late.  "  Be  not 
afraid,  only  believe  1  **  (1)  Be  not  afraid  that  the  day  of  grace  is  past.  Why  are 
von  thinking  apon  your  soul  ?  Because  God  is  still  calling  you,  &o.  While  you 
have  one  desire  in  your  heart  to  say,  ••  Lord  Jesus,  if  Thou  wilt  have  mercy  on  such 
as  I,  here  I  lay  me  at  Thy  feet,  O  save  me  I  "  your  day  of  grace  is  not,  cannot  be, 
past.  (2)  Be  not  afraid  that  your  sins  are  too  many.  I  do  not  believe  you  have 
any  idea  how  many  they  really  are.  But  yon  must  not  think  that  they  are  greater 
than  the  mercies  of  God.  8.  When  He  said  to  Jairus,  '*  Only  believe,"  what  idea  did  it 
oonvey?  Simply,  trust  to  Me.  Ton  are  not  walking  with  Him  side  by  side;  you 
cannot  look  into  Hii  countenance  or  hear  the  nnear&ly  power  of  His  words.  But 
He  is  aa  close  to  you  as  He  was  to  Jairas.     When  He  said  **  Only  believe."  the 


222  THB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  r. 

hopeless  father  had  no  alternative  bat  either  to  feel  He  is  not  tmsted,  or  to  feel  lie 
will  save  her  after  all.  Had  be  looked  down  to  the  ground,  probably  he  would  have 
felt  the  first.  If  he  looked  full  into  the  face  of  Jesus,  he  would  feel.  He  cannot  lie : 
it  seems  impossible,  but  I  must  trust  Thee.  So  with  you.  (1)  Believe  that  He  is 
able  to  save  thee.  Make  out  as  bad  a  case  against  yourself  as  ever  yon  can.  In  full 
knowledge  of  this,  fix  your  helpless  soul  upon  His  atonement,  upon  His  interces* 
sion.  (2)  Believe  that  He  is  willing  to  save  you.  The  Lord  has  eealed  His  willing- 
ness with  these  words,  "Him  that  cometh  to  Me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  (3) 
Beheve  that  He  is  ready  to  save  you.  *  *  But  I  am  not  prepared  " :  He  is.  (4) 
Believe  that  He  will  save  you.  This  you  must  do.  The  woman  came  saying,  "  If 
I  may  but  touch  the  hem  of  His  garment,  I  shall  be  made  whole."  It  was  this 
faith  that  saved  her.  (William  Arthur,  M.A.)  Be  not  afraid,  only  believe : — 
This  exhortation  has  two  sides — ^the  negative  and  the  positive.  I.  In  its  neoativh 
ASPECT  (1)  it  does  not  apply  to  the  reckless  and  the  ungodly,  for  there  is  never  a 
period  of  their  lives  in  which  they  ought  not  to  fear.  They  have  to  fear — ^life  and 
death,  present,  past,  and  future,  earth  and  heaven,  time  and  eternity.  The  very 
breath  they  breathe  may  be  charged  with  its  mission  of  judicial  punishment ;  (2) 
but  to  those  who  are  striving  to  live  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the 
Divine  will.  When  the  soul  has  found  her  foundation  to  be  the  Rock  of  Ages,  and 
her  rest  in  God ;  when  the  earnest  ot  the  Divine  Spirit  is  received  and  felt  as  a 
quickening  power,  then  there  is  no  need  for  alarm.  II.  In  its  positive  aspect  (1) 
it  indicates  a  means  by  which  we  may  obtain  release  from  causes  which  justify 
fear.  Christ  is  the  central  object  of  trust.  He  is  able  to  save,  and  He  is  willing. 
Here  is  a  strong  and  lasting  foundation  ;  (2)  it  is  just  the  message  needed  by  those 
who  are  turning  away  from  the  spirit  of  the  world,  who  feel  it  cannot  meet  their 
wants  when  the  heart  stoops  with  grief,  and  when  its  fondest  ties  are  being  broken. 
It  may  be,  that  when  they  turn  to  God,  great  difficulties  present  themselves.  Old 
habits  are  strong,  the  tendencies  of  the  passions  are  earthward,  and  religion  seems 
gloomy  and  unattractive.  Besides,  a  deep  sense  of  guilt  and  shame  oppress  the  souL 
Thus  the  trial  of  faith  is  severe.  Still  the  remedy  is  simple.  Trust  wholly  in 
God,  and  submit  yourself  to  Him.  **  Only  believe  "  is  to  acknowledge  God'e  power 
and  one's  own  helplessness.  It  is  a  thing  of  instinct  and  of  reason.  (W,  D, 
Horwood.)  Only  believe: — I.  Faith.  It  is  faith  that  sends  him  on  this  errand; 
faith  in  Jesus  as  a  healer,  for  at  first  his  faith  only  reached  thus  far.  But  Jesus 
leads  biTTi  on  ;  and  ends  with  realizing  in  Him  the  raiser  of  the  dead.  Faith  often 
begins  with  little  and  ends  in  much ;  it  begins  with  a  trickling  streamlet,  and  ends 
with  a  full  broad  river.  II.  Faith  oivino  way.  Does  not  faith  often  fail  thus  ? 
We  can  go  to  Him  for  a  little  thing ;  not  for  a  great.  Instead  of  feeling  that  the 
worse  the  case  the  greater  the  glory  to  His  power  and  love,  we  stop  short,  and  cease 
to  expect  anything  from  Him.  III.  Faith  stbbnqthened.  *•  Fear  not,"  &o.  IV. 
Faith  victokious.  The  victory  is  resurrection.  V.  Unbelief  bebukjbd.  Excluded 
from  the  glorious  spectacle.  (H.  BonaTy  D.D.)  Only  believe:—!.  CoNCKRNiNa 
this  feab.  1.  Fearfulness  is  common  in  applicants  to  the  Saviour,  and  it  springs 
from  such  sources  as  the  following :  (1)  Ignorance  of  the  power  and  resources  of  the 
Saviour.  We  may  believe  that  He  can  heal  disease,  but  doubt  that  He  can  raise 
the  dead.  (2)  From  morbid  imagination  of  danger  and  of  mischief.  These  we 
exaggerate.  (3)  Hardness  of  heart  towards  Christ's  chief  display  of  love,  especially 
that  manifestation  of  His  mercy  which  He  has  given  by  dying  for  us.  (4)  Then 
there  is  the  memory  and  the  consciousness  of  sin.  2.  There  can  be  nothing  in  the 
circumstances  of  an  applicant  to  Jesus  Christ  to  justify  fear.  Jesus  does  not  reject 
you  for  sin,  weakness,  sadness — nothing  is  difficult  to  Him.  He  will  do  all  at  the 
right  time.  8.  Fearfulness  when  cherished  is  positively  displeasing  to  the  Saviour. 
It  is  groundless,  dishonouring,  injurious  to  ourselves.  II.  Conceenino  trust.  1. 
Trust  in  Jesus  is  His  due.  2.  It  is  not  always  easy.  8.  Are  you  all  applicants  to 
Jesus  Christ?  •*  Be  not  afraid,**  Trust  for  the  knowledge  which  is  essential  to  life 
and  salvation.  (5.  Martin.)  The  charge  of  Christ  under  affliction  : — 1.  When 
difficulties  are  numerous  and  complicated.  2.  When  temptations  are  powerful  and 
malignant.  S.  When  sickness  occurs  and  is  continued.  4.  When  bereaving  pro- 
vidences are  experienced.  6.  What  is  the  character  and  influence  of  our  faith 
under  these  painful  circumstances  ?  (T.  Wallace.)  Faith  : — Much  is  said  in  the 
Word  of  God  of  the  principle  of  faith.  The  place  that  it  occupies  in  the  scheme  of 
redemption  is  a  very  important  one.  It  is  essential  to  salvation.  Without  it  we 
must  remain  destitute  of  all  its  blessings.  This  will  be  evident  if  we  apply  it — 
L  To  TBM  asNXBAi.  i>ociBiNX  OF  SALVATION.    To  every  inquirer  for  salvation  wt 


v.]  ST.  MARK.  22a 

Bay,  •*  Only  believe."  Not  that  faith  is  the  originating  eanm  of  salvation,  for  that 
were  to  deny  the  free  grace  of  God  ;  nor  that  faith  is  the  procaring  canse  of  salva- 
tion, for  that  were  to  set  aside  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  atonement ;  nor  that  faitli 
is  the  efficient  oanse  of  salvation,  for  that  were  to  set  aside  the  agency  of  the  Holy 
Spirit :  but  we  say  that  faith  is  the  instrumental  cause  of  salvation,  that  without  the 
exercise  of  which  no  individual  can  experience  salvation.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the 
gospel  (Acta  xvi.  31,  xiii.  39 ;  Eph.  ii  8 ;  Romans  iii.  20-28,  v.  1).  1.  This  method  of 
salvation  conveys  most  glory  to  God.  2.  This  method  of  salvation  alone  produces 
real  obedience.  8.  This  method  is  in  accordance  with  the  other  parts  of  redemption. 
Let  us  apply  the  principle  before  us — II.  To  the  cask  of  the  true  penitent.  III.  To 

GhBISTIAN    BEIilEVEBS.      IV.  To  THE   TBIAI.S  AND  8UFFEBINOB  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE. 

It  is  applicable— 1.  To  seasons  of  temptation.  2.  To  seasons  of  afflictive  providences^ 
(W.  M,  Bunting,)  Believing : — I.  The  pbbsomb  to  whom  the  text  is  applicable. 
The  case  of  Jairos.  There  was  an  evil  he  wanted  to  remove.  A  danger  he  wanted 
to  prevent.  A  blessing  he  wanted  to  procure.  1.  The  first  qualification  of  souls 
coining  to  Jesus  is  a  sense  of  want,  some  evil  to  be  removed,  &o.  2.  This  sense  of 
want  brings  us  out  of  ourselves — out  of  dependence  on  mere  external  means.  3. 
The  expression  of  our  wants  in  earnest  supplication.  4.  Jaims  came  to  Christ  in 
faith.  II.  The  natdbe  of  the  delightful  duty  and  pbivilbqe.  1.  Fear  is  a 
painful  feeling,  arising  from  the  apprehension  of  some  evil.  A  man  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus  need  not  indulge  in  tormenting  fear,  for  there  is  no  evil  he  is  in  danger  of  but 
he  may  be  saved  from — no  blessing  he  needs  but  he  may  secure.  **  Fear  not,'*  <&c. 
2.  What  is  this  believing — what  is  faith  ?  Sometimes  it  is  called  looking,  receiving, 
&o.  III.  The  bioht  you  have  to  all  the  encoubaqsmbnt  in  the  text.  1.  If  you 
have  the  sense  of  need,  and  if  you  are  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  then  you  have  an  abso- 
lute, personal.  Scriptural  right  to  appropriate  the  salvation  of  God  as  your  own. 
You  are  just  where  a  sinner  ought  to  be,  &o.  2.  You  have  a  right  because  you 
comply  witii  the  invitation.  3.  You  are  at  the  central  point  of  all  the  promises. 
All  "yea  and  amen  *'  in  Him.  4.  Will  you  still  indulge  in  tormenting  fear  ?  *'  Yes," 
says  one,  **  You  don't  know  what  reason  I  have  to  fear,"  &o.  Enumerate  the 
varions  sonrces  of  fear,  and  show  that  no  sinner  need  fear  who  is  truly  penitent 
and  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  (W,  Dawson.)  Only  believe: — Mr.  Moody  was  one 
night  preaching  in  Philadelphia ;  near  the  pulpit  sat  a  young  lady,  who  listened 
with  eager  attention,  drinking  in  every  word.  After  he  had  done  talking,  he  went 
to  her.  "Are  yon  a  Christian f"  "No,"  she  replied,  "I  wish  I  was;  I've  been 
seeking  Jesus  for  three  years."  Mr.  Moody  replied,  *'  There  must  be  some  mis- 
take." "Don't  you  believe  me?"  said  the  distressed  girl.  "  Well,  no  doubt  you 
think  you  have  been  seeking  Jesus ;  but,  believe  me,  it  don't  take  three  years  for  a 
seeking  soul  to  meet  a  seeking  Saviour."  "  What  am  I  to  do,  then  ?  "  "  You  have 
been  trying  to  do  long  enough ;  you  must  just  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ." 
"Oh!"  said  the  young  lady,  "lam  so  tired  of  that  word:  'Believe,'  *  believe,' 

*  believe  I  *    I  don't  know  what  it  means."    "  Then  we'll  change  the  word,  and  say, 

*  trust.' "  "  If  I  say,  *  I'll  trust  Him,'  will  He  save  me  ?  "  "I  don't  say  that,  for 
yon  may  say  ten  thousand  things ;  but  if  yon  do  trust  ELim,  He  certainly  will." 
"  Well,"  said  she,  "  I  do  trust  him ;  but  I  don't  feel  any  better  1 "  "  Ah  1 "  said 
Mr.  Moody,  "I  see ;  you've  been  looking  for  feelings  for  three  years,  instead  ot 
looking  to  Jesus."  If  the  translators  of  the  Bible  had  everywhere  inserted  "  feel- 
ings" instead  of  "faith,"  what  a  run  there  would  be  npon  the  book.  But  God 
does  not  say  a  word  about  feelings  from  (Genesis  to  Bevelation.  With  men  "  seeing 
is  believing  "  bnt  with  the  behever  "  believing  is  seeing."  An  orphan  child  was 
onoe  asked  by  her  little  friend,  "  What  do  you  do  without  a  mother  to  tell  your 
troubles  to  ? "  "  Mother  told  me  to  go  to  Jesus ;  He  was  mother's  Friend,  and 
He's  my  Friend  too,"  was  the  simple  reply.  "  But  He  is  a  long  way  eff ;  He  won't 
stop  to  mind  you."  Her  face  brightened,  as  she  said :  "I  don't  know  about  that, 
but  I  know  He  says  He  will,  and  that* f  enough  for  me."  And  should  not  that  be 
enough  for  you  and  me  t    {Anon*) 

Yer.  48.— SometbMsr  ilioiild  be  glren  h«r  to  MX.— Feeding  vpon  Chrut ;— A  obbax 
THmo  NBVBB  XADB  Chbist  foboet  k  LiTTXiB  THING.  This  Is  real  greatness.  Always 
as  yoo  go  np  to  the  highest,  yon  find  it  more  and  more  that  the  little  things  take  a 
larger  place.  The  disclosures  of  the  microscope  are  quite  as  wonderful  as  the  dis- 
coveries of  the  telescope.  And  if  any  thoughtful,  rehgions  man  had  to  tell  what 
bad  given  him  his  highest  idea  of  God,  and  made  the  deepest  impression  of  His  love, 
be  woold  probablj  imgle  oat  some  very  small  event  of  life.    It  was  so  wondaxfa^ 


3t4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ti. 

and  10  good,  that  the  great  Ood  ehoold  oare  to  notice,  and  superintend,  and  answez 
prayer,  about  snch  a  little  thing,  whioh  might  have  appeared  bo  very  insignificant. 
And,  correBpondingly,  that  is  the  greatest  faith  which  is  occupied  about  minutiaa. 
There  is  many  a  man  who  believes  that  he  is  saved  ;  but  yet  finds  it  very  hard  to 
trust  God  for  the  details  of  oommon  life.  God  alwats  febds  the  life  Hb  gives. 
I  see  it  in  creation.  The  light  and  air  created  before  vegetable  life ;  the  vegetable 
life  before  animal  life  ;  animal  life  before  human  life.  To  an  observant  eye,  the 
whole  earth  is  a  table  laid  out,  and  amply  spread  for  the  sustenance  of  everything 
whioh  God's  hand  has  made.  But  it  is  not  only  concerning  your  bodily  life,  that 
you  may  rest  secure  that  God  will  maintain  the  being  He  has  made :  there  is  the 
life  of  your  intellect ;  and  a  man's  mind  needs  food  as  much  as  his  body.  And  has 
not  God  secured  it?  Are  not  subjects  for  thought,  and  for  the  exercise  of  our 
rational  faculties,  in  every  place?  God'i  great  lesson-book  around  him,  and 
beneath  him,  and  above  him,  every  moment,  in  all  the  beauties  of  earth,  and  sky, 
and  air,  and  sea,  teeming  with  their  suggestive  wonders  and  their  great  teaching 
facts  ?  And  now  the  great  question  is,  '♦  What  is  it  which  He  gives  us  to  eat,  and 
which  is  the  vitality  of  a  soul?  and  how  is  it  communicated  ?  "  In  its  strictest  and 
truest  sense,  the  answer  to  that  question  is  only  one — *'  Christ  is  the  food  of  the 
soul."  Never  think  that  your  Bible  will  be  "  feeding  '*  of  itself.  Neither  its  words, 
nor  its  histories,  nor  its  doctrines,  nor  its  promises.  You  must  find  the  Christ  that 
is  in  it,  before  it  feeds  you.  And  the  more  Christ  you  find  in  the  word,  the  more 
that  word  will  feed  your  soul.  Secondly,  all  spiiitual  acts  between  the  soul  and 
God  feed.  Meditation — adoration — prayer — secret  converse.  For  the  Holy  Ghost 
IJows  through  means.  And  He  carries  Christ  into  the  very  currents  of  your  being, 
lill  Christ  mingles  with  your  very  life-blood.  And  each  time  that  happens,  it 
renews,  it  restores,  it  strengthens,  it  expands  some  part  of  the  inner  life ;  and  by 
continual  applications  you  have  "life,"  and  you  have  it  more  abundantly.'' 
Thirdly,  that  habit  formed,  and  that  communication  opened  to  the  heart,  there  is 
nothing  which  may  not  convey  nutriment  to  a  believer's  soul.  Everything  that  is 
beautiful — everything  that  is  loving — everything  that  is  wise— everything  that  is 
true — ^in  nature,  in  art,  in  science,  in  history,  and  in  Providence — every- 
thing may  be  an  element  of  nutrition.  It  may  all  turn  to  spiritual  nerve,  and 
power,  and  growth.  And  fourthly,  to  a  very  great  extent,  Christian  intercourse 
and  fellowship  feed.  And  you  must  remark  that  our  Lord  did  not  say  to  the 
damsel,  **  Eat,"  but  to  those  before  her,  "  Give  you  to  her  to  eat."  We  are  bound 
to  feed  one  another.  Whatever  knowledge,  or  grace,  or  peace,  or  comfort,  God  has 
given  yon,  He  says,  "  Feed,  with  this,  one  of  My  lambs."  But  fifthly,  and  especi- 
ally, the  Holy  Communion.  This  was  ordained  for  this  very  end.  It  is  essentially 
feeding.  It  is  the  feast  where  there  is  spread  the  richest,  the  sweetest,  and  the 
best!  How  can  some  of  you  expect  your  souls  to  live,  if  you  negleel  this  great 
Bustentation  of  all  spiritual  life  7    {J.  Vaughan,  MjL,) 


CHAPTEB  YL 

TsBfl.  1-^.  And  He  went  out  from  thence,  and  eame  Into  Bis  own  eonntry.— 
Jesiu  re-visits  Nazareth : — I.  Gbacious  gomdescbnsion.  Jesus,  although  He  had 
been  cruelly  treated  at  Nazareth,  once  more  turns  His  steps  homewards.  Jesus 
practised  what  He  preached  (Matt,  xviii.  21,  22).  Love  of  home  natural  to  men. 
Thoughts  suggested  by  visits  home.  How  shall  we  be  received — ^welcomed  or 
slighted?  Have  we  so  passed  our  time  since  we  left  home,  that  we  may  deserve  a 
cordial  reception  ;  or  may  even  some  poor  Nazareth  be  justifiably  ashamed  of  ns  7 
II.  Unwobthy  prejudices.  •*  He  came  to  His  own  and  His  own  received  Him  not." 
Neither  did  His  brethren  believe  in  Him  (John  vii.  5).  Why  ?  Because  He  was 
known  to  them  ;  and  was  poor  and  of  lowly  origin.  Some  look  at  religion  as  chil- 
dren at  books,  more  attracted  by  the  binding  than  the  contents.  III.  Fataii  rejso- 
TiOM.  Nazareth  turned  its  back  on  Jesus.  He  left  never  to  return.  Learn  :  I.  To 
do  good  to  those  who  despitefully  use  us  and  persecute  us.  II.  To  guard  against 
evil  and  ignorant  prejudices,  ill.  To  take  heed  how  we  reject  Jesus.  lY.  To 
beseech  Him  to  return  and  save  us,  if  we  have  thoughtlessly  or  wilfully  slighted 
Him.    (/.  O,  Qray.)        Christ's  return  to  Nazareth : — Was  it  not  a  strange  meta- 


CHAP.  Ti.]  8T.  MARK,  226 


morphosis  to  Him—once  a  peasant  lad ;  now  the  Light  of  the  world  I  And  yet  here 
Are  surroundings  unchanged,  and  natures  as  narrow  and  stupid  as  ever,  and  He, 
h*ving  moved  away  from  them  as  the  infinite  is  remote  from  the  finite ;  He,  able 
to  heal  the  sick  and  forgive  sins  by  a  word,  and  they  helpless  and  hopeless  in  both 
body  and  soul.  As  He  spoke,  authority  seemed  to  voice  itself  in  natural,  faultless 
utterance.  He  had  not  gained  this  gift  at  the  feet  of  any  sage.  Public  debate  oould 
not  confer  it.  The  people  were  ast  onished.  Such  wisdom  and  such  deeds  are  not 
in  the  carpenter's  line,  they  said.  I.  Thb  binnbb  cannot  undebstand  nob  endubb 
THB  SAINT.  Humanity  cannot  comprehend  divinity.  Now,  no  more  than  then,  is 
there  any  room  for  Christ  where  Satan  rules.  H.  God's  greatbst  blbssinqs  abb 
OFTEN  PREVENTED  BY  man's  distbdst.  Unbelief  forfeits  infinite  mercies.  So  does 
unauthorized  credulity.  {De  W.  S.  Clark.)  Unbelief  at  Nazareth  .-—Our  Lord 
may  have  had  two  reasons  for  leaving  Capernaum  and  for  visiting  Nazareth.  One, 
a  personal  reason — to  see  His  mother  and  His  sisters,  who  seem  to  have  been 
married  there.  The  other,  a  ministerial  reason — to  escape  from  the  busy  throogs 
who  resorted  to  Him  by  the  lake,  and  to  take  a  new  centre  for  evangehstic  labours 
on  the  part  of  Himself  and  His  disciples.  I.  The  uneeasonablbnbss  and  inex- 
cusablbness  of  unbelief  in  Chbist.  1.  He  was  well-known  to  them.  They  had 
hitherto  always  found  Him  true  and  upright ;  therefore  they  ought  to  have  candidly 
considered  His  claims.  2.  He  brought  with  Him  a  great  and  acknowledged  reputa- 
tion. 3.  He  came  to  Nazareth  and  taught  pubHcly,  thus  giving  His  townsmen  an 
opportunity  of  judging  for  themselves  of  His  wisdom  and  moral  authority.  II. 
The  grounds  of  unbelief  in  Chbist.  1.  Prejudice  on  account  of  His  origin  and 
circumstances.  2.  His  educational  deficiency.  He  had  not  been  trained  in  the 
rabbinical  schools,  so  they  thought  nothing  of  Him.  III.  The  rebuke  of  unbelief. 
"  A  prophet  is  not  without  honour,"  &c.  There  was  sadness  in  Christ's  language 
and  tone.  Yet  what  a  reproach  to  the  unbeheving !  They  might  be  offended ; 
there  were  others  who  would  believe,  evince  gratitude,  and  render  honour.  IV.  Thk 
consequences  of  unbelief.  1.  Christ  "  marvelled."  2.  The  results  to  the  people 
of  the  town  were  lamentable-— " He  could  do  no  mighty  work."  3.  Benefit  to 
others—"  He  went  round  about  the  villages,  teaching."  The  indifference  or  con- 
tempt of  the  unspiritual  and  Belf-suflfieient  may  be  the  occasion  of  enlightenment 
and  consolation  to  the  lowly,  receptive,  needy.  Application :  (a)  The  coming  of 
CbxiMi  to  a  wnl,  or  conmiunity,  is  a  moral  probation  involving  serious  responsi- 
bility. (6)  It  is  the  most  fatal  guilt  and  folly,  in  considering  the  claims  of  Christ, 
to  overlook  the  wisdom  and  grace  of  His  character  and  ministry,  and  to  regard  cir- 
cumstances at  which  the  superficial  and  carnal  may  take  offence.  {J,  R.  Thomson, 
M.A.)        Jesus  visiting  Hi$  own  country: — ^By  going  thither — I.  He  obatified  a 

HUMAN  TBABNINO.      II.  Hb  ILLUSTRATED  AFRESH  AN  OLD  AND  FAMILIAB  EXPERIENCE. 

1.  He  was  one  of  many,  yet  by  Himself  even  in  this.  3.  One  of  the  greatest  of 
griefs  to  a  pious  spirit,  to  be  hindered  from  doing  good  and  conferring  benefit.  3. 
A  greater  humiliation  than  His  human  birth,  because  a  moral  one  consciously  ex- 
perienced.  IH.  He  exhibited  Divinb  mebct,  1.  Past  offences  were  forgiven.  2. 
Although  conscious  of  restriction  because  of  their  unbelief  and  indifference,  He  still 
persisted  in  His  works  of  mercy.  {A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.)  Rejection  of  Christ:—!. 
iNDnmiBBMCE  TO  Chbibt  sometimes  arises  fbom  vamiliasity  with  His  bubround- 
iNOi,  Beware  of  that  familiarity  with  sacred  things  which  deadens  spiritual  sensi- 
bility. II.  Contempt  fob  Chbist  sometimes  spbinqs  fbom  association  with  His 
vbiends.  III.  The  bejection  of  Christ  brings  about  a  withdrawal  of  His  influ- 
bnoe — ••  He  could  not,"  Ac.  His  power  was  omnipotent,  but  it  conditioned  itself, 
as  infinite  power  always  does  in  this  world ;  and  by  this  limitation  it  was  not 
lessened,  but  was  glorified  as  moral  and  spiritual  power.  If  faith,  the  ethical  con- 
dition, be  absent,  we  bind  the  Saviour's  hands,  and  He  cannot  do  for  ns  what  He 
would.  He  does  not  wish  to  leave  us,  but  He  must ;  old  impressions  become  feebler, 
the  once  sensitive  heart  waxes  dull.  (A.  Rowland,  LL.B,)  Christ  at  home  :— 
I.  Thb  woNDEBfl  in  bvebt-day  life.  Growth  of  knowledge  and  experience ;  change 
of  circumstances,  Ac,  H.  The  jealousy  of  home-grown  greatness.  Tyranny  of 
custom.  Beware  of  egotism,  shutting  out  from  light  and  beauty,  divinity  and 
blessedness.  HI.  The  most  invincible  obstacle  is  thb  will  of  man.  Against 
stupidity  even  the  gods  fight  in  vain  1  When  the  business  of  the  kingdom  seems  at 
a  standstill,  ask  whether  the  cause  be  not  want  of  wish,  will,  prayer.  {E.  Johnson 
M.A.)  Detracting  from  the  Divine  greatness  of  Christ:— I.  How  thu  is  donb. 
1.  By  attributing  Divine  effects  to  secondary  causes.  2.  Absence  of  faith  and  spiri- 
tual sympathy.    8.  By  being  offended  at  the  mystery  of  His  humiliation,  either  in 

15 


226  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

Himself  or  in  His  followers.  U.  What  it  pboduoks.  1.  Unsatisfied  indeoision. 
2.  Hardening  of  heart.    3.  The  doubter's  own  loss.    (A.  F,  Muir,  M.A.) 

Vers.  3,4.    Is  not  this  the  carpenter  T    Jena  Christ,  the  carpenter : — ^I.  How 

THE   FACT   THAT  JeSUS  WAS  A  CABPENTEB  WAS    A    HINDBANCK    TO    THE    FAITH    OF  Hl8 

FELLOW-COUNTRYMEN.  1.  The  Objection  was  natural.  He  had  grown  up  among 
them.  They  had  become  familiar  with  His  ways.  2.  Yet  it  was  wrong  and 
unreasonable.  Their  intimacy  with  Him  ought  to  have  opened  their  eyes  to  His 
unique  character.  3.  The  objection  they  raise  against  His  claims  tells  really  in 
His  favour.  They  find  no  fault  in  His  character ;  they  can  only  complain  of  His 
trade.  High, unconscious  tribute  to  His  excellence.  H.  How  this  fact  should  be 
A  help  to  our  faith.  1.  It  is  a  sign  of  Christ's  humility.  2.  It  is  a  proof  that  He 
went  through  the  experience  of  practical  life.  Christ  knows  good  work,  for  He  looks 
at  it  with  a  workman's  eye.  3.  He  found  the  school  for  His  spiritual  training  in 
His  practical  work.  4.  This  sheds  a  glory  over  the  life  of  manual  industry.  5. 
This  should  attract  working-men  to  Christ.  {W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  The  dignity 
of  honest  labour : — If  labour  was  first  imposed  as  a  curse,  it  is  turned  truly  into  a 
blessing  by  this  example  of  Him  who  thus  wrought.  The  occupancy  of  a  sphere  of 
lowly  industry  by  Christ,  henceforth  consecrates  it  as — ^I.  A  suitable  occupation  o» 
TIME.  1.  Profitable.  2.  Healthful.  3.  Saves  from  bad  effects  of  indolence.  4.  A 
source  of  pure  and  useful  enjoyment.  II.  An  honourable  means  of  maintenance. 
1.  Nothing  degrading  in  it.  2.  Deserves  and  commands  fair  remuneration.  3. 
Preserves  a  man's  independence.  III.  A  worthy  service  to  others.  The  products 
of  industrial  toil,  especially  of  handicraft,  are  serviceable  in  the  highest  degree.  With- 
out them  the  comfort  of  large  communities  must  be  greatly  impaired.  He,  there- 
fore,  who  works  with  his  hands  the  thing  that  is  good,  is  a  useful  and  honourable 
servant  of  his  race.  1.  In  the  lowliest  spheres,  the  loftiest  powers  are  not  necessarily 
degraded.  2.  In  those  spheres  the  holiest  sentiments  may  be  cherished,  and  the 
holiest  character  remain  untarnished.  3.  Whilst  in  them  the  humblest  labourer 
may  know  that  his  toil  is  honoured,  for  it  was  shared  by  his  Lord.  (R.  Green.) 
Value  of  industrial  employments: — The  word  carpenter  was  given  as  an  alternative 
translation  by  Wycliffe,  and  has  descended  into  aU  the  succeeding  English  versions ; 
WycUffe's  primary  translation  was  smith,  the  word  that  was  used  in  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  version.  It  had  in  Anglo-Saxon  a  generic  meaning,  equivalent  to  artificer, 
A  worker  in  iron  was  called  in  Anglo-Saxon  iren-smith.  A  smith  is  one  who  smites  ; 
a  carpenter  is  one  who  makes  cars.  The  word  carpenter,  therefore,  must  be  a 
much  later  coinage  than  the  word  smith.  The  original  Greek  term  (rl/criyv)  means 
primarily  a  producer;  the  word  wright  very  nearly  corresponds  to  it,  as  being 
closely  connected  with  wrought  or  worked.  It  just  means  worker,  and  occurs  in 
Anglo-Saxon  in  the  two  forms  wryhta  and  wyrhta.  This  is  the  only  passage  in 
which  it  is  stated  that  our  Lord  worked  at  a  handicraft.  It  is  a  different  expression 
that  is  found  in  Matt.  xiii.  63,  "  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son  ? "  There  is  no 
contradiction,  however,  between  the  two  representations ;  both  might  be  coinci- 
dently  employed,  and  no  doubt  were,  when  the  Nazarenes  were  freely  and  frettingly 
canvassing  the  merits  of  their  wonderful  townsman.  Our  Lord  would  not  be  trained 
to  idleness ;  it  was  contrary  to  Jewish  habits,  and  to  the  teaching  of  the  best 
Jewish  rabbis.  It  would  have  been  inconsistent  moreover  with  the  principles  of 
true  civilization,  and  with  the  ideal  of  normal  human  development.  It  is  no  evidence 
of  high  civilization,  either  to  lay  an  arrest  on  full  physical  development  on  the  one 
hand,  or  on  the  other  to  encourage  only  those  modes  of  muscular  and  nervous 
activity  which  are  dissociated  from  useful  working  and  manufacturing  skill.  Society 
will  never  be  right  until  aU  classes  be  industrious  and  industrial :  the  higher  orders 
must  return  to  take  part  in  the  employments  of  the  lower  ;  the  lower  must  rise  up 
to  take  part  in  the  enjoyments  of  the  higher.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  The  village  car- 
penter in  our  Lord's  time  held  the  position  of  the  modem  village  blacksmith.  Almost 
«U  agricultural  instruments — ploughs.harrows,  yokes,  &c. — were  made  of  wood.  His 
workshop  was  the  centre  of  the  village  life.  {T.  M.  Lindsay,  D.D.)  Jesus  came 
from  amongst  the  labouring  classes: — That  Jesus  did  in  fact  spring  from  the 
labouring  class  of  the  population,  is  confirmed  by  the  language  of  His  discourses 
And  parables,  which  everywhere  refer  to  the  antecedents  and  relations  of  the 
ordinary  workman's  life,  and  betray  a  knowledge  of  it  which  no  one  could  have 
gained  merely  by  observation.  He  was  at  home  in  those  poor,  windowless,  Syrian 
hovels  in  which  the  housewife  had  to  light  a  candle  in  the  day-time  to  seek  for  her 
lott  piece  of  silver.    He  was  acquainted  with  the  secrets  of  the  bakehouse,  of  the 


n.]  ST.  MARK.  22T 


^rdener,  and  the  builder,  and  with  things  which  the  upper  classes  never  see — as 
"  the  good  measure  pressed  down  and  shaken  together  running  over  "  of  the  corn 
ehandier ;  the  rotten,  leaking  wine-skin  of  the  wine-dealer ;  the  patchwork  of  the 
peasant  woman ;  the  brutal  manners  of  the  upper  servants  to  the  lower, — these 
and  a  hundred  other  features  of  a  similar  kind  are  interwoven  by  Him  into  His 
parables.  Reminiscences  even  of  His  more  special  handicraft  have  been  found,  it 
is  believed,  in  His  sayings.  The  parable  of  the  splinter  and  the  beam  is  said  to 
recall  the  carpenter's  shop,  the  uneven  foundations  of  the  houses,  the  building 
yard,  the  cubit  which  is  added,  the  workshop,  and  the  distinction  in  the  appearance 
of  the  green  and  dry  wood,  the  drying-shed.  {Haiisrath.)  Self-respect  vital  to 
religion : — They  could  not  believe  in  any  Divine  inspiration  reaching  such  as  them- 
selves, and  therefore  resented  it  in  Christ  as  an  unjustifiable  pretension  of 
superiority.  They  had  no  proper  faith  in  themselves,  so  had  no  proper  faith  in 
God.  Self-respect  is  vital  to  religion.  They  believed  in  a  God  in  a  kind  of  way, 
but  not  in  a  God  who  touched  their  neighbourhood  or  entered  into  close  dealings 
with  Nazarenes.  They  were  not  on  the  outlook  for  the  beautiful  and  the  divine  in 
the  lives  of  men.  No  Nazarene  Wordsworth  had  shown  them  the  glory  of  common 
life,  the  beauty  and  divinity  that  exist  wherever  human  life  will  welcome  it.  {B. 
Glover.)  The  model  artisan: — These  words  reveal  to  us — I.  Chbist'b  social 
POSITION.  1.  That  he  sympathised  with  the  humblest  sons  of  men.  2.  That  social 
rank  is  no  criterion  of  personal  worth.  3.  That  moral  and  spiritual  excellence 
should  be  honoured  in  whomsoever  found.  II.  Chbist's  manual  labodb.  1.  That 
honourable  industry  and  holy  living  may  co-exist.  2.  That  mental  development 
and  physical  toil  may  be  associated.  Conclusion  :  Observe — (a)  That  labour  is 
essential,  not  only  to  existence,  but  to  happiness.  (6)  That  the  greater  our 
industry  the  fewer  our  temptations,  (c)  That  Christ  waits  to  sanctify  the  duties  of 
life  to  our  spiritual  interest.  {A.  G.  Churchill.)  The  Divine  Carpenter: — The 
Divine  Carpenter  applies  the  language  of  His  earthly  trade  to  the  spiritual  things 
He  has  created.  1.  He  has  built  a  Church.  2.  He  has  founded  the  resurrection — 
"  Destroy  tlds  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up."  3.  He  has  established 
His  divinity — "  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected  has  become  the  head  of 
the  comer."  4.  He  has  prepared  oui-  eternal  home — "In  My  Father's  house," 
&o.  5.  He  has  urged  earnest  heed  to  our  building.  (C  M.  Jones.)  Jesus  in 
the  workshop : — ^I.  We  see  Him  hebb  beabino  the  cuksb  op  the  fall — ••  In  the 
sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread,"  <fec.    H.  We  see  Him  hebe  BBiNOiNa 

HlMBBUP  NEAB  to  all  MEN.  HI.  He  BNTEBS  THE  W0BK8H0P  THAT  He  MAT  UNITE 
MEN  AS  BBETHBEN.      lY.   He  ENTEBS  THE  WOBESHOP  THAT   He  IXAY  SANCTIFT  ALL   8ECU- 

LAB  liiFB.  {J.  Johnston.)  Work  the  law  of  life : — From  that  tiny  fly  thus  at 
work  all  day  over  your  head,  to  the  huge  hippopotamus  of  the  Nile,  that  seems  to 
spend  its  life-time  half  asleep,  all  have  to  work.  But  emphatically  is  this  true  of 
man.  The  wild  Indian  huntsman,  as  he  plunges  over  the  prairie  armed  with 
tomahawk  or  rifle,  in  pursuit  of  the  thundering  buffalo ;  the  Bosjesman,  in  the 
impenetrable  thickets  of  Africa,  as  he  digs  with  hardened,  homy  Angers  for  the 
roots  on  which  he  lives ;  the  amphibious  South  Sea  Islander,  as  he  wages  perilous 
warfare  with  the  monsters  of  the  ocean ;  the  fur-clad  Esquimaux,  as  he  tracks  the 
bear  or  seal  of  the  icy  north ;  us  well  as  the  semi-civilized  myriads  of  Asia,  or  the 
more  advanced  peoples  of  Europe — all  find  this  world  is  a  workshop,  and  they  must 
toil  to  live.  And  the  exceptions  to  this  rule  are  fewer  than  at  first  sight  we  are  apt 
to  suppose.  It  is  not  only  the  artisan  who  has  to  work,  but  also  the  merchant 
amongst  his  wares,  the  authoi-  amongst  his  books,  the  statesman  with  the  aflairs  of 
the  nation,  and  the  sovereign  upon  his  throne.  Whether  impelled  by  the  neces- 
sities of  mere  existence,  or  by  the  necessities  of  position  and  spirit,  it  may  be  said 
of  all — "Men  must  work."  Onr  Lord,  therefore,  came  near  imto  us  when  Ha 
entered  the  workshop.  But  as  the  great  majority  must  gain  their  daily  bread  by 
manual  labour,  He  entered  even  into  that  condition  as  the  village  carpenter  of 
Nazareth.  Had  He  been  born  in  a  palace  and  to  a  throne,  or  even  into  the  estate 
of  a  wealthy  merchant,  He  would  have  been  separated,  not  in  His  feeling,  but  in 
theirs,  by  a  great  gulf  from  the  great  majority  of  men.  {Ibid.)  Manual  work 
redeemed : — ^See  how  our  whole  life  is  redeemed,  so  that  it  may  all  be  lived  unto  God 
and  for  eternity,  and  none  of  it  be  lost.  He  entered  the  kingdom  of  toil  and  sub- 
dued it  to  Himself  for  our  salvation,  so  that  toil  is  no  more  a  curse  to  the  Christian 
workman.  The  builder,  as  he  lays  brick  on  brick,  may  be  building  a  heavenly 
temple ;  the  carpenter,  as  he  planes  the  wood,  may  thereby  be  refining  his  own 
character  and  that  of  others  around  him  ;  the  merchant,  as  he  buys  and  sells,  may 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  n, 

be  bnyisg  the  pearl  of  great  price ;  the  statesman  may  be  directing  the  affairs  of  Ml 
eternal  kmgdom;  the  householder  may  be  setting  her  house  in  order  for  the  coming 
of  her  Lord.  As  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  was  put  not  only  upon  the  ear,  but  upon 
the  toe,  of  Aaron  and  his  sons,  so  oar  Lord  when,  by  entering  it,  He  sanctified 
human  life,  sanctified  its  meanest  and  most  secular  things,  spending  His  holy  and 
Divine  life  mostly  in  the  workshop.  Brethren,  whatever  our  station,  we  may  live 
a  holy,  god-hke,  useful  life.  {Ibid.)  The  royal  shipwright : — A  strange  workman 
took  his  place  one  day  amongst  the  shipwrights  in  a  building  yard  in  Amsterdam. 
Fit  only  for  the  rudest  work,  he  was  content  at  first  to  occupy  himself  with  the 
caulking  mallet,  hewing  of  wood,  or  the  twisting  of  ropes,  ;( et  displayed  the  keenest 
desire  to  understand  and  master  every  part  of  the  handicraft.  But  what  was  the 
astonishment  of  his  fellow- workmen  to  see  persons  of  the  highest  rank  come  to  pay 
their  respects  to  him,  approaching  him  with  every  mark  of  regard,  amid  the  dust 
and  confusion  of  the  workshop,  or  clambering  up  the  rigging  to  have  an  audienc« 
with  him  on  the  maintop.  For  he  was  no  less  a  personage  than  Peter  the  Great, 
founder  of  the  Kussian  Empire.  He  came  afterwards  to  England,  and  lodged 
amongst  the  workshops  in  Deptford.  Bishop  Burnet,  when  he  visited  him,  said  he 
had  gone  to  see  a  mighty  prince,  but  found  a  common  shipwright.  But  the  king 
who  had  invited  him  to  visit  this  country  understood  him  better.  He  was  the  ruler 
of  an  empire  vaster  in  extent  than  any  other  in  Europe,  but  as  far  behind  the  poorest 
financially  as  it  was  before  it  territorially.  It  was,  in  fact,  in  a  state  of  absolute 
barbarism.  Its  largest  ship  was  a  fishing-boat,  and  it  was  as  yet  destitute  of  almost 
all,  even  the  rudest  arts  of  civilization.  The  Czar,  determined  to  elevate  his  people, 
ordered  the  youth  of  the  nobihty  to  travel  in  lands  distinguished  by  wealth  and 
power,  and  become  qualified  to  take  part  in  the  regeneration  of  their  own  country, 
be  himself  showing  them  the  example.  It  was  thus  that  wonderful  spectacle  was 
seen  by  the  astonished  workmen,  ambassadors  waiting  in  state  on  a  man  in  the 
dress  and  at  the  work  of  a  common  shipwright.  (Ibid.)  Useful  refections  on 
Christ's  working  as  a  carpenter  : — I.  To  niLusxBATB  this  observable  cikcumstanck 
OF  OUR  Lord's  lite.  It  was  a  maxim  among  the  Jews,  that  every  man  should  bring 
up  his  son  to  some  mechanic  trade.  II.  To  suggest  some  useful  remarks  from 
THIS  OBSERVABLE  CIRCUMSTANCE  OF  ouB  Lord's  LIFE,  1.  A  porson's  Original,  his 
business  and  circumstances  in  life,  often  occasion  prejudices  against  him  :  against 
his  most  wise,  useful,  and  instructive  observations.  2.  Such  prejudices  are  very 
absurd,  unreasonable,  and  mischievous.  3.  The  condescension  of  the  Son  of  God 
in  submitting  to  such  humiliation,  demands  our  admiration  and  praise.  4.  The 
conduct  of  our  Lord  reflects  an  honour  upon  trade,  and  upon  those  who  are 
employed  in  useful  arts.  6.  This  circumstance  in  Christ's  life  furnisheth  aU, 
especially  young  persons,  with  an  example  of  diligence  and  activity.  6.  Persons 
may  serve  God  and  follow  their  trades  at  the  same  time.     (J.  Orton.)  Jesus  an 

offence  : — The  word  rendered  offended  is  scandalized  in  the  original.  It  is  a  very 
giaphic  word,  but  incapable  of  adequate  translation.  It  presents  to  view  a  com- 
plex picture.  Christ  was  to  His  kmsmen  and  townsmen  like  a  scandal,  or  catch- 
stick,  in  a  trap.  They  did  not  see  what  He  was.  They  hence  heedlessly  ran  up 
against  Him  and  struck  on  Him,  to  their  own  utter  ensnarement ;  they  were 
spiritually  caught ;  they  became  fixed  in  a  position  in  which  it  was  most  undesirable 
to  be  fixed ;  they  were  spiritually  hurt,  and  in  great  danger  of  being  spiritually 
destroyed.  Such  are  the  chief  elements  of  the  picture.  The  actual  outcome  of  the 
whole  complex  representation  may  be  given  thus:  They  spiritually  stumbled  on 
Jesus.  To  their  loss  they  did  not  accept  Him  for  what  He  really  was.  They  rejected 
Him  as  the  Lord  High  Commissioner  of  heaven.  They  came  into  collision  with 
Him,  and  were  ensnared,  by  suspecting  that  His  indisputable  superiority  to  ordinary 
men  in  word  and  work  was  owing  to  some  other  kind  of  influence  than  what  was 
right  and  from  above.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Offended  at  the  carpenter's  son : — People 
in  high  station  or  of  high  birth  are  very  often  displeased  if  one  of  humbler  posi- 
tion excels  them  in  anything.  The  nobles  of  Scotland  did  not  work  hand  in  hand 
with  Wallace,  because  he  had  not  such  good  blood  as  they  gloried  in.  Jealousy  of 
greatness  in  neighbours  : — Our  Lord  specifies  three  concentric  circles  of  persons  to 
whom  every  prophet  is  nearly  related.  There  is  (1)  the  circle  of  his  little  father- 
land, or  district  of  country,  or  township  ;  (2)  the  circle  of  his  relatives  or  "kin  ;  " 
(3)  the  circle  of  his  nearest  relatives,  the  family  to  which  he  belongs.  In  each  of 
these  circles  there  is  in  general  but  little  readiness  to  recognize  native  or  nascent 
superiority.  The  principles  of  self-satisfaction,  self-confidence,  self-complacency, 
come  in  to  lay  a  presumptive  interdict  upon  any  adjoining  self  rising  up  in  emineiMie 


n.]  8T,  MARK.  229 

above  the  my-self.  The  temporary  advantage  of  age,  and  thus  of  more  protracted 
experience,  asserts  to  itself  for  a  season  a  sort  of  coanter-superiority ;  and  the  mere 
fact  of  proximity  makes  it  easy  to  open  the  door  for  the  influence  of  envy,  an 
ignoble  vice  that  takes  effect  chiefly  in  reference  to  those  on  whom  one  can  actually 
look  (invidia^  in-vides).  In  the  long  run,  indeed,  real  superiority,  if  time  be  granted 
it,  will  vindicate  for  itself  its  own  proper  place  in  the  midst  of  all  its  concentric 
circles.  But,  in  general,  this  will  be  only  after  victories  achieved  abroad  have  made 
it  impossible  for  the  people  at  home  to  remain  in  doubt.    (J.  Morisoiit  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  6.  And  He  could  there  do  no  mighty  work. — The  unbelief  of  the  Naza- 
renei : — Our  plan  will  be  to  give  you  in  the  first  place  oebtain    reasons  wht, 

WHERE   THE   UNBEUEF   WAS   8TB0MOEST,  THE    MIRACLES   WERE   FEW  ;    and  then   in   the 

second  place,  to  examine  the  particular  terus  in  which  St.  Mark  speaks  of  oub 
Lord's  conduct  at  Nazareth.  Now  the  first  thing  to  be  observed  is,  that,  though 
our  Lord  wrought  not  many  miracles  among  His  countrymen,  He  wrought  some  : 
BO  that  they  were  not  wholly  without  the  means  of  conviction.  Undoubtedly  it 
is  altogether  a  mistake  to  imagine  that  miracles  give  evidence  in  proportion  as  they 
are  multiplied ;  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  prove,  that  the  reverse  of  this  is  nearer 
the  matter  of  fact.  But  if  more  and  greater  miracles  would  have  made  them  be- 
lievers,  why  did  He  not  work  more  and  greater  ?  Do  you  not  know  that  God  deals 
with  men  as  with  rational  creatures ;  and  that  if  He  were  to  make  proof  irresistible, 
men  would  virtually  cease  to  be  accountable.  It  is  God's  course  to  do  v,h&t  is 
sufficient  to  assist  you,  but  not  what  will  compel  you  to  be  saved.  But  we  do  not 
see  any  reason  to  suppose  that  it  was  exclusively  in  judgment,  and  in  order  to  punish 
the  obstinacy  of  His  countrymen,  that  our  Lord  refrained  from  working  miracles 
in  Nazareth.  Christ,  in  virtue  of  His  omniscience,  saw  that  He  should  be  rejected, 
even  if  He  wrought  many  wonders.  He  would  determine,  in  virtue  of  His  benevo- 
lence, to  work  only  few.  Yon  cannot  but  see  that  individuals  are  often  favoured  for 
a  time  with  spiritual  advantages,  and  then  placed  in  circumstances  where  those 
advantages  are  wanting.  But  we  shall  let  you  more  thoroughly  into  an  understand- 
ing of  the  conduct  of  our  Lord,  if  we  now  examine,  in  the  second  place,  more  par- 
ticularly, the  TERMS  IN  WHICH  THAT  CONDUCT  IS  DESCRIBED  IN  OUR  TEXT.     YoU  obserVO 

that  St.  Mark  represents  it  as  not  having  been  altogether  optional  with  Christ, 
whether  or  no  He  would  work  many  mighty  miracles  in  Nazareth ;  he  rather  speaks 
of  actual  inability :  ••  He  could  there  do  no  mighty  works."  "  He  was  unable,"  is 
the  original,  "  to  do  there  any  mighty  work."  In  what  sense,  then,  are  we  to  sup- 
pose that  He  was  unable  ?  We  are  sure  He  was  not  unable  in  the  sense  of  de- 
ficiency, so  that  the  inability  must  be  interpreted  as  meaning,  not  that  oar  Lord 
was  actually  unable,  but  unable  consistently  with  certain  fixed  principles,  with  what 
was  due  to  His  own  character  and  mission.  You  may  find,  indeed,  some  few  excep- 
tions to  this  rule  in  the  narratives  of  the  evangelists ;  but  ordinarily  you  will  per- 
ceive that  our  Lord  inquired  into  the  faith  of  the  party  before  He  made  that  party 
the  subject  of  a  miracle ;  as  though,  unless  two  things  concurred — power  on  one 
side,  and  belief  on  the  other — there  was  to  be  no  supernatural  working.  But  still, 
when  we  have  shown  that  our  Lord's  rule  throws  no  suspicion  on  His  miracles,  it 
will  naturally  be  inquired  why  such  a  rule  was  prescribed  and  enforced.  Say  what 
we  will,  the  miracle  would  have  been  more  striking  if  wrought  on  an  unbeliever ; 
and  it  seems  strange  to  ask  that  faith  as  a  preliminary,  which  you  are  accustomed 
to  look  for  as  a  consequence.  On  this  we  have  to  observe,  that  a  miracle,  though 
it  required  faith  in  its  actual  subject,  did  not  require  faith  in  the  bystanders,  and 
might,  therefore,  be  instrumental  in  subduing  their  unbelief.  But,  if  what  Christ 
did  for  a  diseased  body  were  emblematic  of  what  He  would  do  for  a  diseased  soul, 
how  natural,  how  necessary,  that  He  should  require  faith  in  those  who  sought  to 
be  healed.  Otherwise,  as  you  may  all  have  remarked,  it  might  have  been  thought 
that  Christ  would  heal  unconditionally  as  a  spiritual  physician.  If  faith  be  sur- 
prising from  what  its  possession  can  effect,  it  is  yet  more  surprising  from  what  its 
non-possession  can  effect.  And  shall  we  doubt,  men  and  brethren,  that  there  if 
much  the  same  baneful  energy  in  our  own  unbelief,  a.^  in  that  of  the  Nazarenes  7 
•*  The  Word  preached  did  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that 
heard  it."  So  that  even  as  the  want  of  faith  in  the  men  of  Nazareth  prevented 
Christ  from  showing  Himself  as  a  worker  of  miracles,  so  may  want  of  faith  in  our- 
selves,  prevent  Him  from  showing  Himself  as  the  Healer  of  souls.  {H.  Melvill, 
B.D,)  The  power  of  unbelief: — What  an  idea  it  gives  us  of  the  wonder-working 
power  of  JesQf — that  to  **  lay  His  hands  on  a  few  sick  folk,  and  heal  them,"  wag 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  n. 

not  aeeoanted  u  mnj  very  **  mighty  "  thing.    And  how  irrepressible  must  be  that 
grace  which,  even  where  it  was  restrained,  must  go  forth,  and  go  forth  savingly,  to 
some,  fiappy  some  1  who  in  the  midst  of  that  wilderness  of  faithlessness,  retained  their 
faith,  and  carried  off  faith's  reward.    A  type  of  that  little,  blessed  band  in  every 
age  whom  the  Lord  chooses,  and  the  Lord  heals — as  if  to  show  in  them  what  all  life 
had  been,  if  only  all  life  had  had  faith.     Great  and  many  are  the  things  which  God 
has  done  for  every  one  of  us,  they  are  but  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  what  He 
might  have  done,  and  would  have  done,  if  only  we  had  let  £Qm.     Now  remember 
that  the  place  was  Nazareth — the  most  privileged  spot  of  the  whole  earth ;  for  there, 
of  thirty-three  years,  Jesus  spent  nearly  thirty.     There,  His  holy  boyhood,  and  the 
piety  of  His  early  manhood,  had  shed  their  lustre.     And  now,  mark  this,  brethren — 
true  to  nature,  true  to  the  experience  of  the  Church — true  to  the  convictions  of 
every  heart — in  the  minds  of  the  men  of  Nazareth  there  was  an  unholy  familiarity 
with  holy  things — with  the  name,  and  the  person,  and  the  work,  and  the  truth  of 
Jesus  Christ.    Therefore,  in  the  minds  of  the  men  of  Nazareth,  there  was  the  usual 
consequence  of  that  kind  of  familiarity — they  looked  at  the  external,  till  they  were 
absorbed  in  the  external.    They  had  no  faith — the  material  view  destroyed  the 
spiritual.    They  grovelled  in  the  confidence  of  an  outside  knowledge  till  they  be- 
came steeped  in  unbelief.     Am  I  wrong  in  my  fear  that  the  more  light,  the  less  love ; 
and  that  faith  has  retired  as  knowledge  has  advanced  f     There  are  two  great  truths 
which  we  must  always  lay  down  as  fundamental  principles.    One  is,  that  the  love 
and  beneficence  of  God  are  always  welling  and  waiting,  like  some  gushing  fountain, 
to  pour  themselves  out  to  all  His  creatures.     And  the  other,  that  there  must  be  a 
certain  state  of  mind  to  contain  it — a  preparation  of  the  heart  to  receive  the  gift — 
both,  indeed,  of  grace,  but  the  one  the  moral  condition  of  the  soul  previous  and 
absolutely  necessary  to  the  other.    Before  you  can  have  the  gift,  you  must  believe 
the  Giver.     Continually  God  is  communicating  the  power  to  believe,  in  order  that 
afterwards  He  may  fill  the  vessel  of  your  belief  with  every  possible  good.  But  then, 
all  depends  on  the  way  in  which  you  welcome  and  cherish  that  first  imparting  of 
the  grace  of  the  Spirit.    Without  it,  not  another  drop  will  flow.    Tou  go  to  your 
knees  in  prayer,  and,  within  the  range  of  the  promises,  there  is  no  limit  to  the 
answers  which  God  has  covenanted  to  that  prayer.  (J.  Vaughafif  M.A.)       Unbelief 
jrreventing  the  mighty  works  of  Christ : — I.  The  mighty  works  wbought  bt  Ghbist. 
II.  The    beason   why    these    mighty    works    have    not  been   wrought   on  a 
LABGER  scAiiE.     1.  Is  it  becauso  God  is  unwilling  to  save  sinners  ?    His  nature, 
&c.,  forbid  such  an  idea.     2.  Is  it  that  God  is  unable  to  save?    3.  Is  it  that 
the  benefits  of  the  atonement  are  limited  to  a  few?    4.  Is  it  that  there  is  some 
defect   in  the  Gospel?     Man  is  the  cause — unbeliet      Conclusion:  1.  Unbelief 
is  absurd  and  unreasonable.    God  has  ever  kept  His  word.    2.  Unbelief  is  abso- 
lutely criminal.    Implies  forgetfulness  of  past  favours,  <feo.    8.  Unbelief  is  ruinous. 
It  prevents  man's  salvation,  <&c.    4.  The  great  importance  of  faith.     {A.  Weston.) 
Unbelief  a  wonder : — I.  It  is  irrational.    1.  Unlimited  and  perfect  knowledge 
belong  to  God  alone.    2.  Absolute  uncertainty  and  doubt  can  be  attributed  to  no 
intelligence  whatever.    Faith  is  a  necessary  condition  in  the  spiritual  life  and 
prayers  of  all  finite  intelligences.    IL  It  is  inconsistent.     1.  We  are  constantly 
exercising  faith  in  inferior  matters.     2.  The  evidence  of  the  gospel  is  of  the  highest 
and  most  satisfactory  kind.    lU.  It  is  criminal.     1.  If  it  is  the  result  of  non- 
examination  of  evidence,  there  is  sin  of  neglect.    2.  If  he  has  examined,  and  still 
does  not  believe,  there  must  be  mental  inaptitude  or  moral  resistance.    {Anon.) 
ChrisVi  wonder : — The  unbelief  of  the  Nazarenes  was  a  wonder  to  our  Lord.     The 
wonder  was  '•  real,"  says  Cardinal  Cajetan,  being  ••  caused  "  by  the  Saviour's 
**  experimental  inacquaintance  "  with  such  an  unreasonable  state  of  mind.    It  was 
*•  real "  on  another  account.    Unbelief  in  such  circumstances  as  those  of  the 
Nazarenes  was  actually  a  most  remarkable  thing.    It  had  a  cause  indeed ;  it  had 
occasions;  but  it  had  no  reason  for  its  existence.    Far  less  had  it  a  sufficient 
reason ;  it  was,  that  is  to  say,  utterly  unreasonable.    It  should  not  have  been ;  it 
was  an  utter  anomaly.    So  is  all  sin  i$ee  Jer.  ii.  12).    It  is  an  exceedingly  strange 
phenomenon  in  the  universe  of  God,  and  may  well  be  wondered  at.     If  wonder 
indeed  were  always  the  daughter  of  ignorance,  one  might  wonder  at  Christ's  wonder. 
Schleusner  and  KuinSl  wondered,  and  rendered  the  word,  not  wondered,  but  was 
angry,    Fritzsche,  too,  wondered,  and  while  too  precise  a  scholar  to  admit  that  the 
word  could  mean  was  angry  ^  he  proposed  that  we  should  correct  the  text  and  read 
it  thus,  and,  because  of  their  unbelief,  they  wondered  (viz.,  at  Jesus).    But  one  inay 
most  reasonably  wonder  at  such  feats  and  freaks  of  exegesis.    There  is  nothing 


▼I.]  ST.  MARK.  231 

really  wonderfnl  in  Christ's  wonder.  While  it  is  the  case  that  there  is  a  vnlgar 
wonder,  which  is  the  daughter  of  ignorance  and  dies  when  knowledge  is  attained,it 
is  also  the  case  that  there  is  another  wondler,  of  noble  origin,  the  daughter jf 
knowledge.  This  wonder  dwells  in  the  loftiest  minds,  and  is  immortal.  {J. 
Morison,  D.D.)  The  astonithment  of  Christ: — What  men  marvel  at  indicates 
their  character.  It  shows  what  manner  of  spirit  they  are  of,  on  what  level  they 
are  moving,  how  high  they  have  risen,  or  how  low  they  have  snnk  on  the  scale  of 
being.  And  I  do  not  know  that  we  ever  feel  the  immense  interval  between  our- 
aelves  and  the  Son  of  Man  more  keenly  than  when  we  compare  that  which 
astonishes  ns  with  that  which  astonished  Him.  To  ns,  as  a  rule,  the  word  miracles 
denotes  more  physical  wonders ;  and  these  are  so  wonderful  to  us  as  to  be  well- 
nigh  incredible.  But  in  Him  they  awake  no  astonishment.  He  never  speaks  of 
them  with  the  faintest  accent  of  surprise.  He  set  so  little  store  by  them  that  He 
often  seemed  reluctant  to  work  them,  and  openly  expressed  His  wish  that  those  on 
or  for  whom  they  had  been  wrought  would  tell  no  man  of  them.  .  .  .  What  does 
astonish  ELim  is  not  these  outward  wonders  so  surprising  to  ns,  but  that  inward 
wonder,  the  mystery  of  man's  soul,  the  miraculous  power  which  we  often  exercise 
without  a  thought  of  surprise,  the  power  of  shutting  and  opening  that  door  or 
window  of  the  soul  which  looks  heavenward,  and  through  which  alone  the  glories 
of  the  spiritual  world  can  stream  in  upon  us.  Only  twice  are  we  told  that  He 
marvelled  to  whom  all  the  secrets  of  Nature  and  Life  lay  open — once  at  the  unbelief 
of  men,  and  once  at  their  faith  (Matt.  viii.  10;  Luke  vii.  9).  {S.  Cox,  D.D.) 
The  possibility  of  unbelief: — God's  plan  of  impressing  spiritual  truths  is  not  by 
demonstration.  Christianity  has  no  irresistible  proof.  U  it  had,  there  would  be 
neither  unbelievers  nor  Christians,  for  in  such  a  case  there  would  be  no  such  thing 
as  faith,  but  only  knowledge,  and  a  Christian  is  a  man  who  has  knowledge  but  who 
also  lives  by  faith.  Beligion  would  be  pursued  and  practised  as  mathematics  are, 
or  as  science  is  when  mathematics  are  applied  to  it.  But  observe  under  what 
system  we  should  then  be  placed.  Man  wotdd  not  be  capable  of  moral  freedom  in 
conducting  his  life  and  forming  his  character.  He  would  think  of  God  and  of  his 
soul  and  its  interests  in  the  way  in  which  a  man  builds  np  the  propositions  of 
geometry ;  his  convictions  would  be  the  theorems,  and  his  actions  the  problems 
which  were  fastened  to  one  another  by  iron  links.  Man  would  be  a  creature  of 
mind,  but  where  would  there  be  room  for  his  heart  and  its  loving  surrender  to  God, 
for  his  will  and  its  resolve  to  listen  to  the  Divine  voice  and  obey  it  ?  These  can 
only  exist  where  man  has  power  to  give  himself  away,  i.«.,  where  he  has  moral 
freedom.  And  if  we  take  away  freedom  and  love  and  will  in  man's  relation  to  God, 
there  would  be  no  meaning  in  them  as  between  man  and  man.  II  we  destroy  the 
source  there  can  be  no  streams,  and  sympathy  and  love  and  gratitude,  the  feelings 
which  unite  men  in  famihes  and  friendships,  cease  to  exist ;  these  have  their  life, 
not  in  necessary  chains  of  reasoning,  but  in  the  free  exchange  of  the  souL  In  such 
a  world  God  might  be  a  supreme  architect  and  mechanician,  building  up  a  universe 
by  fixed  physical  laws  ;  He  might  even  be  an  author  of  scientific,  thought  leading 
forth  intellects  into  higher  and  wider  investigations  in  the  track  of  His  own 
creations ;  but  He  could  not  be  a  Father  and  Friend,  drawing  to  Him  the  love  of 
children  for  the  glimpses  they  have  of  the  supreme  beauty  of  BIb  purity,  and  the 
pulsations  that  come  throbbing  from  the  love  of  His  heart.  The  universe  might  be 
a  temple,  but  where  would  be  the  worshippers  with  songs  of  love  and  joy  and  self- 
devotion  f  .  ,  ,  Qod  could  not  make  spiritual  truths  subject  to  the  laws  of  mental 
demonstration,  without  making  them  no  more  spiritual — without  depriving  man  of 
his  freedom,  and  leaving  him  no  room  for  his  heart  and  conscience  and  spirit.  ^  If 
there  are  to  be  ties  of  sympathy  between  man  and  God,  and  an  inunortahty  which 
has  in  its  bosom  an  eternal  life,  man  must  be  dealt  with  as  capable,  not  only  oi 
knowledge,  but  of  the  choice  of  loTe.  God  has  made  man  capable  of  faith,  but 
therefore  also  of  unbelief ;  the  kind  of  proof  He  gives  him  may  persuade,  but  will 
not  constrain.  God  does  not  force  His  own  existence  upon  men.  (John  Ker,  D.D.) 
The  character  of  unoelitf : — We  begin,  then — I.  With  speculative  ukbelief  ; 
that  unbelief  which  shapes  itself  into  a  creed,  denying  either  the  being  of  a  God  or 
the  inspiration  of  the  Bible.  And  we  say  it  is  a  marvel,  whether  regarded  as  a 
matter  of  taste  or  of  judgment,  as  t*  matter  of  taste,  or  preference,  or  choice.  We 
are  astonished  that  any  man  should  be  willing  to  disbelieve  these  great  facts. 
Take  atheism.  Even  if  there  be  no  God,  still  we  should  suppose  that  any  intelli 
gent  being  would  wish  there  were  one.  The  simple  idea  of  living  in  a  world,  sus- 
tained and  managed  by  no  almighty  and  benevolent  intelligence,  and  which  the 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CHl».  fi. 

next  honr  some  tremendous  brute  and  blind  force  might  shatter  and  Bend  back  to 
the  old  primordial  chaos,  this  very  thought  is  so  dreadful  that  our  very  instinctf 
recoil  from  it.  Even  if  atheism  were  a  logical  belief,  we  should  expect  every  man 
to  argue  against  it — that  men  of  philosophy  and  science  would  go  abroad  through 
creation,  climbing  every  mountain,  traversing  every  desert,  sounding  every  ocean, 
descending  into  all  the  spectral  caverns  of  geology,  ascending  aU  the  sublime 
heights  of  astronomy,  questioning  all  phenomena,  or  forces,  or  forms  of  nature,  in 
the  intensest  agony  of  a  desire  to  find  evidences  for  a  God,  crying  in  the  words  and 
accents  of  a  child  searching  for  an  absent  father,  **  O  tell  me,  tell  me  I  have  yon 
not  seen  Him  ?  have  you  not  heard  Him  ?  In  all  these  broad  realms  is  there  no 
print  of  His  footsteps  ?  no  trace  of  His  handiwork  ?  Am  I,  indeed,  a  poor,  wretched, 
forlorn  orphan  ?  O  tell  me,  tell  me  1  is  there  not  a  God  ?  "  Now,  I  repeat  it,  all 
this  is  simply  marvellous.  It  is  marvellous  that  a  man  should  choose  rather  to  be 
a  creature  of  chance  than  child  of  Jehovah ;  and  more  marvellous  that  he  should 
take  testimony  rather  of  pulsating  spa^n  than  of  soaring  seraphim,  and  choose 
rather  to  follow  a  reptile's  trail  in  the  mire  to  God's  awful  grave,  than  mount 
j^xultingly  in  the  glorious  track  of  an  archangel  to  God's  everlasting  throne, 
II.  That  practicaIj  unbelief  which  consists  in  a  personal  rejection  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  as  manifest  in  the  man  who,  believing  in  God,  and  accepting  the  Bible  as 
His  inspired  Word,  yet  goes  on,  from  day  to  day,  putting  his  eternity  away  from 
him  as  carelessly — yea,  as  resolutely  as  ii  he  stood  boldly  forth  with  the  infidel, 
professing  to  believe  that  God  is  but  a  phantom,  and  the  Bible  a  lie.  We  say  the 
attitude  of  this  man  is  even  more  wonderful  than  the  other.  We  are  less  astonished 
at  an  intellectual  mistake  than  at  a  great  practical  blunder.  We  are  not  so  pro- 
foundly shocked  when  a  blind  man  walks  off  a  precipice  as  when  a  man  does  the 
thing  when  possessed  of  all  his  senses,  and  wiUi  his  eyes  wide  open.  To  believe 
that  in  this  world  of  probation  we  are  positively  working  out  our  own  salvation, 
absolutely  settling  the  question  whether  we  are  to  be  saved  or  whether  we  are  to  be 
lost ;  that  there  is  a  heaven  of  inconceivable  and  everlasting  happiness  and  glory, 
and  yet  turn  madly  away  when  its  gates  are  lifted  up  to  our  immortal  footsteps — 
is  to  make  exhibition  of  a  folly  immeasurable,  and  all  the  angels  of  heaven  must 
stand  astonished  at  the  spectacle,  and  the  omniscient  Son  of  God  "  marvels  at  our 
unbelief."  {G.  Wadsworth,  D.D.)  Jesus  wondering  at  man's  unbelief : — I.  Who 
marvelled  7  The  Son  of  God.  He  did  not  marvel  amiss.  II.  At  whom  did  He 
marvel  ?  At  the  men  of  Galilee.  He  had  been  brought  up  among  them.  III.  At 
WHAT  did  He  marvel  ?  Why,  at  their  unbelief.  1.  Because  it  was  so  unreasonable. 
He  had  done  everything  to  prevent  it.  2.  It  was  so  unkind.  He  had  yearned  over 
them.  3.  It  was  so  sinful.  4.  It  was  so  unprofitable.  5.  It  was  so  dangerous. 
6.  It  was  so  wilful.  1.  Sinner,  Jesus  marvels  at  your  unbelief.  2.  Anxious  soul, 
Jesus  marvels  at  your  unbelief.  3.  Backslider,  Jesus  marvels  at  your  unbelief. 
4.  Believer,  Jesus  marvels  at  your  unbelief.  {H,  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  sad  wonder: — L 
To  THB  PEOPiiK  OF  GoD.  1.  The  wonderful  forms  of  unbelief  that  are  found  among 
the  professed  people  of  God.  (a)  At  times  they  doubt  the  wisdom  of  providence. 
(&)  Mistrust  of  the  Divine  faithfulness,  (c)  The  efficacy  of  prayer  is  doubted. 
{d)  The  power  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  («)  The  efficacy  of  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ.  2.  Why  they  are  so  wonderful,  (a)  Because  of  believers'  relationship 
to  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus,  (b)  Because  faith  is  backed  up  by  such  won- 
derful historical  facts,  (c)  The  personal  experience  of  the  present,  (d)  It  is 
wonderful  when  we  consider  our  own  beliefs.  II.  To  thb  unconvbbtbd.  1.  You 
have  no  saving  trust  in  the  person  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Some  are  afraid 
theirs  is  an  exceptional  case.  3.  Such  unbelief  is  marvellous  because — (a)  The 
causae  is  inexcusable,  {b)  With  some  of  you  it  is  little  more  than  a  mere  whim. 
(f )  It  causes  you  so  much  grief,  {d)  It  has  existed  so  long.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Marvdlous  uiibelief : — Unbelief,  as  regards  Jesus  Christ,  is  surprising  because  of — 
I.  Man's  proneness  to  bxercisb  faith.  II.  The  numbeb  and  power  of  the 
EVIDENCES  WHICH  ENcouRAOB  FAITH  IN  HiH.  The  people  whoso  Unbelief  amazed 
Jesus  had  many  and  weighty  reasons  for  faith.  1.  His  holy  life.  2.  His  wise 
teaching  (ver.  2 ;  Luke  iv.  22).  3.  His  mighty  works  (ver.  2).  4.  The  agreement 
of  these  tilings  with  the  Messianic  predictions  (Luke  iv.  18-21).  III.  The  dbbad 
coNSEQUKNCKS  OF  SUCH  UNBELIEF.  By  unbehcf  man — 1.  Foregoes  the  most  pre- 
cious blessings.  3.  Incurs  the  most  terrible  condemnation  (John  iii.  16-19,  viii. 
24).  {W.  Jones.)  Unbelief: — I.  Unbelief  bestrains  Christ.  His  beneficence 
was  restrained  by  the  lack  of  faith.  While  Jesus  never  defined  faith.  He  did  not 
demand  great  faith  before  He  blessed  men,  but  responded  to  the  weakest.    But  the 


OUP.  ▼!.]  8T,  MARK,  233 

Absence  of  faith  restrained  Him.  The  reason  of  this.  Sceptics  sometimes  object 
that  Christ's  miracles  were  a  matter  of  'aith.  .  .  .  There  was  no  real  care.  .  .  . 
They  use  the  word  faith  as  if  synonymous  with  imagination,  excitement,  &o.  But 
ft  lame  man  cannot  possibly  imagine  himself  able  to  walk,  &o.  It  is  not  the  faith  of  a 
frenzied,  heated  imagination,  bat  the  faith  that  gave  ap  to  Christ  to  do  as  He 
pleased,  &<x.  This  was  essential.  Is  often  illustrated  in  common  life.  Ton  cannot 
know  the  skill  of  your  physician  until  you  trust  him.  You  cannot  know  the  full 
benefit  of  friendship  until  you  trust  your  friend.  A  regiment  cannot  prove  the 
military  skill  and  courage  of  their  captain  until  they  trust  him.  II.  Unbelief 
A8T0NI8HB8  Christ.  He  has  shown  His  power  in  manifold  ways.  He  has  promised 
His  grace  and  strength,  and  He  is  astonished  that  we  still  refuse  to  trust  Him.  The 
argument  for  trusting  Christ  gathers  strength  every  day.  The  reproach  of  unbelief 
gathers  strength  every  day,     (Colmer  B.  Symes^  B.A.)  Unbelief : — I.  The  evil 

OF  UNBELIEF.  1.  Unbelief  undervalues  all  the  perfections  of  Deity.  2.  Unbelief 
insults  all  the  persons  of  the  Godhead.  3.  Unbelief  renders  the  all-important 
work  of  salvation  impossible.  II.  The  causes  ov  unbelief.  1.  There  is  the 
natural  depravity  of  the  heart  (Heb.  iii.  12).  2.  There  is  ignorance,  or  blindness,  of 
mind.  3.  There  is  love  of  sin.  4.  There  is  satanio  influence  (2  Cor.  iv.  14).  5. 
There  is  the  pride  of  human  nature.  III.  The  effects  of  unbelief.  1.  It  keeps 
as  in  a  state  of  condemnation  before  God.  2.  It  renders  nseless  all  the  provisions 
of  the  gospel.  3.  It  is  a  sin  for  which  there  can  be  no  remedy.  4.  It  is  a  sin  pe- 
culiar to  those  favoured  with  the  light  of  the  gospel.  6.  A  sin  which,  if  not 
abandoned,  must  consign  to  eternal  remediless  perdition.  1,  Your  responsibility. 
God  calls  upon  you  to  believe.  2.  However  feeble  faith  is,  if  exercised,  it  shall  be 
increased.  3.  Let  it  be  exercised  now.  *'  The  word  is  nigh  thee,"  &c.  (Bom.  x. 
8-17).  (J,  Bums,  LL.D.)  The  sin  of  unbelief: — There  are  three  general  forms  of 
fmbelief.  1.  That  of  scepticism,  either  doubting  or  rejecting  the  truths  of  religion 
and  morals  in  general,  or  the  Divine  origin  and  authority  of  the  Bible  in  particular. 
3.  Want  of  faith  and  confidence  in  God,  in  His  promises  and  providence,  which 
may  and  often  does  co-exist  with  a  speculative  belief  of  the  Scriptures.  3.  The 
rejection  or  failure  to  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  He  is  revealed  and  offered  in 
the  Bible.  These  several  forms  of  nnbelief,  although  they  have  their  common 
source  in  an  evil  heart,  have,  nevertheless,  their  specific  causes  and  their  peculiar 
form  of  gnilt.  I.  Scepticism.  This  arises— 1.  From  pride  of  intellect ;  assuming 
to  know  what  is  beyond  our  reach,  and  refusing  to  receive  what  we  cannot  under- 
stand ;  setting  oorselves  up  as  capable  of  discerning  and  proving  all  truth.  2. 
From  the  neglect  of  our  moral  nature  and  giving  up  ourselves  to  the  guidance  of 
the  speculative  reason.  3.  From  the  enmity  of  the  heart  to  the  things  of  God ;  or 
opposition  in  our  tastes,  feelings,  desires,  and  purposes,  to  the  truths  and  require- 
ments of  the  things  of  religion.  4.  From  frivolous  vanity,  or  th^  desire  to  be 
thought  independent,  or  upon  a  par  with  the  illuminate.  The  sinfulness  of  this 
form  of  nnbelief  is  manifest.  (1)  As  pride,  self-exaltation  is  sinful  and  offensive 
in  such  a  feeble  insignificant  creature  as  man.  (2)  As  the  habitude  of  the  moral 
nature  which  makes  it  possible  to  believe  a  lie,  is  evidence  of  moral  degradation. 
(3)  As  opposition  to  the  truth  is  opposition  to  tiie  God  of  truth,  it  is  alienation 
from  Him,  in  which  all  sin  consists.  Hence  nnbelief  is  the  generic  form  of  sin.  It 
is  the  general  expression  of  aberration,  and  the  opposition  of  our  nature  to  His. 
It  is,  therefore,  the  source  of  all  other  sins.    II.  Unbxuef,  ob  want  of  confidence 

Of  THE  DOCTBIMES,  THB  PBOMXSBS,  AMD  PB0VIDEM0B8    OF  GOD.        This  may  exist  iu 

even  the  hearts  of  believers.  It  is  a  matter  of  degree.  It  arises  either — 1.  From 
the  entire  absence,  or  from  the  low  state,  of  religious  life.  2.  Or  from  the  habit  of 
looking  at  ourselves,  and  on  difficulties  about  us  rather  than  at  God.  3.  Or  from 
refusing  to  believe  what  we  do  not  see.  If  God  does  not  manifest  EKs  care,  does 
Dot  at  once  fulfil  His  promise,  then  our  faith  fails.  The  sinfulness  of  this  state  of 
mind  is  apparent.  1.  Becau<^e  it  evinces  a  low  state  of  Divine  life.  2.  Because  it 
dishonours  God,  refusing  to  Him  the  confidence  due  to  an  earthly  friend  and  parent, 
which  is  a  very  heinous  offence,  considering  His  greatness  and  goodness,  and  the 
evidences  which  He  has  given  of  His  fidelity  and  trustworthiness.  3.  Because  it  is 
a  manifestation  of  the  same  spirit  which  dominates  in  the  open  infidel.  It  is  un- 
belief in  a  form  which  it  assumes  in  a  mind  in  which  it  has  not  absolute  control. 
But  it  is  in  all  its  manifestations  hateful  to  God.  III.  Unbelief  im  befkrescb  to 
Cbbist.  This  is  a  refusing  to  recognize  and  receive  Him  as  being  what  He  claims 
to  be.  1.  As  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  2.  As  the  messenger  and  teacher  sent 
firoim  God.  8.  As  our  atoning  sacrifice  and  priest.  4.  As  having  rightfully  absolate 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ju 

proprietorship  in  ns  and  authority  over  us.  This  is  the  greatest  of  sins.  It  is  the 
condemning  sin.  Its  heiuousuess  consists — 1.  In  its  opposition  to  the  clearest 
iight.  He  who  cannot  see  the  sun  must  be  stone  blind.  2.  It  is  the  rejection  ol 
the  clearest  external  evidence  which  evinces  the  opposition  of  the  heart.  3.  It  if 
the  rejection  of  infinite  love,  and  the  disregard  of  the  greatest  obligation.  4.  It  ii 
the  deliberate  preference  of  the  kingdom  of  Satan  before  that  of  Christ— of  Belial  to 
Christ.     (C.  Hodge,  D,D,) 

Vers.  7-13.— And  He  called  onto  Him  theTwelye,  and  began  to  send  them  fortik 
by  two  and  two. — The  first  mission  of  the  twelve : — Christ  sends  them  forth.  L 
Obdebly.  1.  As  to  the  persous  evangelized.  To  the  Jew  first.  To  have  dia. 
regarded  that,  would  have  excited  most  bitterly  the  jealousy  of  His  countrymen,  as 
well  as  committed  the  apostles  to  a  work  for  which  they  were  by  no  means  pre- 
pared, because  their  national  antipathies  were  not  yet  eradicated.  2.  As  to  the 
persons  engaged  in  the  work  of  evangelization.  Two  and  two :  companionship — 
a  most  desirable  arrangement.  How  important  then  was  this  pairing  off,  enabling 
them  to  hold  sweet  converse  together,  and  strengthen  and  correct  one  another  when 
necessary.  II.  The  mission  was  m  a  sense  selt-suppobting.  They  were  to  go 
forth  in  simple  dependence  upon  their  Master,  and  He  would  put  it  into  men's 
hearts  to  supply  their  wants.  The  work  on  which  they  were  now  sent  demanded 
the  total  surrender  of  all  their  energy  and  will  for  Christ's  cause.  IH.  It  wab 
FBAUGHT  WITH  8EBI0US  coNSEQUKNCES.  Those  to  whom  they  addressed  the  gospel 
message  would  reject  it  at  their  own  peril ;  and  the  guilt  of  impenitence  would  be 
proportioned  to  the  force  with  which  the  truth  was  revealed.  {H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.) 
The  mission  of  the   Twelve : — L  Considbb  by  what  this  mission  was  pbecedbd. 

1.  By  a  return  to  Nazareth  where  His  life  was  once  threatened,  (a)  This  shows 
Christ's  readiness  to  forgive  and  to  do  good  to  His  enemies.  2.  By  graciously  seek- 
ing to  win  back  His  fellow  townsmen.  3.  By  another  scornful  rejection  of  Himself 
and  His  message.  II.  The  occasion  and  pubpose  of  this  mission.  1.  The  ooea- 
sion  {see  Matt.  ix.  36-38).  2.  The  purpose,  (a)  To  preach.  (6)  To  heal  the  sick, 
(c)  To  cleanse  the  lepers,  (d)  To  raise  the  dead.  IH.  The  conditions  undkb 
which  they  weee  to  go  forth.  1.  They  must  go  forth  without  taking  anything 
for  their  journey.  2.  If  rejected  in  one  city,  they  must  proceed  to  the  next.  "  They 
might  flee  from  danger,  but  not  from  duty  "  (Matt.  Henry).  3.  They  must  refrain 
from  all  resentments  and  retaliations.  4.  The  full  assurance  of  their  Lord'f 
assistance  in  every  trouble.  (D.  C.  Hughes^  M.A.)  Apostolic  labours  and  their 
reception : — I.  Christ's  ministers  receive  from  Him  power  for  their  appointed  work, 
n.  When  called  to  high  service,  they  need  not  care  for  common  wants.  HI.  The 
rejection  of  the  greatest  good  leads  to  the  greatest  ill.  (J.  H.  Godwin.)  Prepara- 
tions for  preaching : — Mark  significantly  says,  "Then  Jesus  began  to  send  them 
forth :  '*  for  ever  since  that  day  He  has  been  givmg  similar  work,  and  qualifving 
similar  representatives.  I.  To  go  forth  from  the  presence  of  Jesus.  II.  To  be 
willing  to  work  together.  III.  To  be  content  with  the  use  of  moral  influence. 
Men  are  to  be  urged,  not  forced.  IV.  To  exercise  self-denial  and  cheerful  trust  in 
God.  {A.  Rowland,  LL.B.)  The  apostolic  commission  .—The  grandest  com- 
mission ever  entrusted  to  man.  Consider — I.  Its  imposed  conditions.  1.  In 
company :  "  by  two  and  two."  Thus  for  mutual  encouragement  and  help.  Foi 
the  heart   of  the   strongest  may   fail  in  presence  of  danger,  difliculty,    death, 

2.  In  poverty.  Thus  was  it  shown  that  their  power  and  influence  with  men  was 
not  of  earth.  3.  In  danger.  Those  whom  they  went  to  bless  would  turn  against 
and  persecute  them.  3.  Yet  in  safety.  God  watching  over  and  protecting  them 
And  even  if  the  body  is  slain,  the  soul  will  be  safe,  and  the  confessor  of  Christ 
will  be  owned  by  Him  before  the  Father.  11.  Its  tbust  ;  or,  the  terms  of  the 
commission.  How  grand,  how  honourable,  how  precious  to  the  world— the  world  ol 
ignorant,  suffering,  sinful  men  1  The  great  mission  has  for  its  objecii;  the  removal 
of  the  evils  of  human  life.  Its  foulness,  its  suffering,  its  error,  its  subjugation  to 
evil,  are  all  to  be  combated.  III.  Its  limitation.  Only  to  the  Jews,  at  present* 
The  children  must  first  be  filled.  IV.  Its  success.  {R.  Oreen.)  Missionaries : — 
I.  Missionaries  must  not  be,  as  a  rule,  solitary  men.  For  counsel,  defence,  cheer- 
fulness, "  two  are  better  than  one  "  U.  Missionaries  must  be,  as  a  rule,  frugal 
men.  No  luxuries;  bare  necessaries.  Like  the  soldier  on  the  march,  or  the 
exploring  traveller.  lU.  Missionaries  must  not  be,  as  a  rule,  sedentary  men.  Sound 
the  trumpet  blast,  and  thei*  on  again.  IV.  Missionaries  must,  as  a  rule,  aet 
directly  aponn  the  conscience  of  men.     The  missionary's  work  is  to  break  up  the 


Ti.]  ST.  MARK.  255 

fallow  ground.  {E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Companionship  : — The  solitary  soul  on  a 
new  enterprise  is  apt  to  lose  heart,  and  not  half  perform  his  part.  With  no  coun- 
sellor, sympathizer,  helper,  he  goes  uncertainly.  Jesus  would  give  His  ambassadors 
all  advantage  of  fraternal  support,  that  in  this  "  apprenticeship,"  as  one  terms  it, 
they  might  not  falter.  The  confirming  word,  too,  is  of  might  when  the  message 
is  novel.  The  apostles  afterward  went  thus  in  pairs.  St.  Paul's  strongest  expres- 
sion of  regret  was  that,  on  any  part  of  his  journey,  he  must  be  left  alone.  Living- 
stone, in  the  depths  of  the  African  continent,  longed  for  the  society  and  cheer  of 
her  who  laid  down  her  life  on  the  way  thither ;  and,  as  the  end  drew  near,  he 
leaned  harder  on  the  Lord,  for  no  hand  but  God's  could  smooth  the  troubled  brow 
on  which  the  death-damps  gathered,  as  the  noble  man,  kneeling  at  his  bedside  in 
prayer,  bade  farewell  to  earth.  {De  W.  S.  Clark.)  Incumbrances  to  be  aban- 
doned : — Armies  most  amply  furnished  with  stores  and  comforts  are  most  inefficient, 
The  Zulu  hordes,  with  but  spear  and  shield,  held  long  at  bay  the  well-provisioned 
and  disciphned  troops  of  England.  Baggage  is  well  termed  "  impedimenta."  It 
checks,  by  just  so  much,  the  quickness,  and  fosters,  by  hardness.  The  soul  heavily 
freighted  with  the  luxuries  and  appliances  of  this  life  is  at  a  disadvantage  for 
the  sudden  movements  and  missions  on  which  the  great  Captain  would  send  it. 
(Ibid.)  **No  money:  •' — ^Literally,  no  copper,  for  that  is  the  metal  that  is  got  from 
the  bowels  of  the  earth.  Brass  is  an  artificial  alloy,  having  in  it  a  mixture  of  tin 
with  the  copper,  and  was  unknown,  as  is  supposed,  to  the  Hebrews.  The  word  is 
not  used  by  the  evangeUst  to  denote  any  particular  copper  coin,  but  simply,  though 
representatively,  copper  money  in  general.  The  underlying  idea  is  money  in 
general.  Not  even  coppers  would  be  needed,  not  to  speak  of  silver  and  gold. 
{J.  Morison^  D.D.)  Mutual  help  : — Why  did  Jesus  send  the  apostles  forth  "  by 
two  and  two  ?  "  The  answer  is,  in  order  that  they  might  be  helpmeets  for  each 
other.  A  father  was  walking  one  day  in  the  fields  with  his  two  children.  The 
wind  was  blowing  over  a  fine  field  of  ripe  corn,  and  making  the  beautiful  golden  ears 
wave  like  the  waves  of  the  sea.  ••  Is  it  not  sui-prising,"  said  one  of  the  children, 
"  that  the  wind  does  not  break  the  slender  stalks  of  the  corn  f  "  "  My  child,"  said 
the  father,  **  see  how  flexible  the  stalks  are  I  They  bend  before  the  wind  and  rise 
again  when  the  wind  has  passed  over  them.  See,  too,  how  tlaey  help  to  sup- 
port each  other.  A  single  stalk  would  be  soon  bent  to  the  ground,  but  so  many 
growing  close  together  help  to  keep  each  other  up.  If  we  keep  together  when  the 
troubles  of  life  oome  upon  us  like  a  stormy  wind,  we  shall  keep  each  other  up,  when 
one  trying  to  stand  alone  would  falL** 

Vers.  14-29.  And  kln^  Herod  beard  of  Him;  (for  Els  name  was  spread 
abroad:)  and  lie  said.  That  John  the  Baptist  was  risen  from  the  dead. — The 
sovereign  power  of  conscience : — I.  Now  we  are  to  begin  with  simply  considering 
Herod  as  acted  on  by  conscibncb  :  for  it  is  evident  that  nothing  but  the  workings 
of  a  mind  ill  at  ease  would  have  led  him  to  conjecture  that  Jesus  was  the  Baptist 
Conscience  was  continually  plying  Herod  with  the  truth,  that  a  record  had  been 
made  of  his  crime  by  a  Being  who  would  not  suffer  it  to  pass  unavenged,  but  who, 
sooner  or  later,  would  let  loose  His  judgments.  In  Uie  midst  of  his  revelry,  in  the 
midst  of  his  pomp,  there  was  a  boding  form  flitting  to  and  fro,  and  no  menace 
could  compel  it  to  depart,  and  no  enchantment  wile  it  from  the  scene.  It  came  in 
the  silence  of  the  midnight,  and  it  came  in  the  bustle  of  the  noon  ;  it  mingled  with 
the  crowd  in  the  city,  and  it  penetrated  the  solitude  of  the  chamber.  And  thus 
was  Herod  a  witness  to  himself  that  this  world  is  under  the  rule  of  a  supreme 
moral  Governor.  And  there  is  this  peculiarity  in  the  evidence  of  conscience,  that 
it  is  independent  of  observation,  it  is  independent  on  deduction :  it  asks  no  investi- 
gation, it  appeals  to  no  logic.  A  man  may  take  great  pains  to  stifle  conscience,  so 
that  its  voice  may  be  drowned  in  the  storm  and  in  the  mutiny  of  his  pas- 
sions ;  but  this  is  after  its  testimony  has  been  given.  He  could  do  nothing  to 
prevent  the  testimony  being  given.  He  must  receive  the  testimony,  for  it  is 
given  at  once  m  the  chambers  of  his  soul,  unlike  every  other  which  has  to  knock  at 
the  door,  and  to  which  if  he  will  the  man  may  refuse  audience.  Herod  might  have 
met  argument,  proof  by  proof,  had  it  depended  upon  the  result  of  a  controversy 
whether  he  was  to  admit  the  existence  of  a  Being  who  takes  cognizance  of  actions, 
and  that  too  for  the  very  purpose  of  awarding  them  their  just  retribution  ;  but  he 
•ould  do  nothing  with  reference  to  conscience.  Conscience  left  no  place  for 
subtleties:  conscience  allowed  no  room  for  evasions.  Conscience  was  ju'igment 
already  begun ;    and  what  had  the  most  ingenious  debater  to  say  against  that? 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  fl. 

And  if  there  be  one  of  you  in  this  crowded  gathering,  who  is  pursued  bj  the  remem- 
brance of  his  sin,  and  cannot  free  himself  from  dread  of  its  punishment,  he  is 
precisely  such  a  witness  as  was  Herod  to  the  retributive  government  beneath  which 
the  world  lies.  He  may  be  a  deist ;  it  matters  not ;  he  wants  no  external  revelation 
to  certify  him  that  there  is  a  God  who  will  take  vengeance :  the  revelation  is  within 
him,  and  he  cannot  disguise  it  if  he  would.  He  may  be  an  atheist — or  rather  let 
me  say  he  may  call  himself  an  atheist ;  he  may  tell  me  that  he  sees  no  foot-printa 
of  the  Deity  in  the  magnificent  spreadings  of  creation,  he  may  tell  me  that  he  hears 
no  voice  of  the  Deity,  either  in  the  melodies  or  the  tempests  of  nature :  it  matters 
not ;  the  foot-prints  are  in  his  own  soul,  the  voice  rings  in  his  own  breast.  A  being 
with  a  conscience  is  a  being  with  sufficient  witness  of  a  God.     II.  To  consider  him 

as    DRIVEN    IN     HIS    DISTRESS  TO  ACENOWLEDOE   A  TRUTH   WHICH     HE     HAD     BAMISHB]> 

FROM  HIS  CREED.  Conscience  is  not  to  be  stifled  with  bad  logic.  III.  There  is  yet 
one  more  point  of  view,  under  which  we  propose  to  regard  Herod ;  he  had  what 

anOHT  HAVE   passed  as  a    SPECIOUS    APOLOGY  FOB    HIL,    CONDUCT,   BUT    NEVEBTHELES8 

HE  WAS  UNABLE  (iT  APPEARS)  TO  QUIET  HIS  ANXIETIES.  No  doubt  Hcrod  pleaded 
the  oath  in  excuse  for  the  murder,  and  endeavoured  to  extenuate  his  crime  to  him- 
self by  representing  it  as  forced  upon  him  by  a  combination  of  circumstances. 
Our  wits  are  never  so  sharp,  as  when  our  vices  are  to  be  excused.  But  learn  ye 
from  the  instance  of  Herod,  that  all  the  wretched  sophistry,  in  whose  meshes  ye 
thus  entangle  conscience,  will  break  away,  as  a  thread  of  tow  when  it  touches  the 
fire,  as  soon  as  ye  shall  find  yourselves  within  the  view  of  death  and  judgment. 
God  allows  no  apology  for  sin ;  He  can  forgive  it,  He  can  forget  it,  He  can  blot  it 
out  as  a  clond,  and  boiy  it  in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  but  He  will  take  no  excuse  for  it. 
IH.  Melvillt  B.D.)  John  and  Herod  : — There  are  some  men  who  would  rather 
be  without  a  head  than  without  a  conscience ;  John  was  one  of  this  kind.  I.  A  belt- 
BETELATioM.  The  text  with  a  single  stroke  lays  open  before  us  the  mind  of  Herod. 
Deeper  than  mere  speculation,  below  all  the  apathy  of  worldliness,  there  exists  in 
man  some  conviction  of  spiritual  reality  and  of  moral  obligation.  The  awe  of 
Christ's '  marvellous  works  awoke  the  solemnities  of  even  that  debased  nature. 
Deep  called  unto  deep.  The  vibration  of  miraculous  power  brought  up  the  secret 
shapes  of  conscience,  as  it  is  said  the  vibration  of  cannon  will  bring  drowned  men 
to  the  surface  of  the  water.  Now,  this  spiritual  substance,  in  which  man  difCera 
widely  from  all  other  creatures,  and  in  which  all  men  are  most  alike,  is  both  a  point 
of  recovery  and  a  ground  of  condemnation.  I  say,  in  the  first  place,  this  is  a  point 
of  recovery.  In  the  worst  man — though  his  nature,  like  Herod's,  be  enslaved  to  pas- 
sion, though  his  hand,  like  Herod's,  be  stained  with  blood, — there  is  this  profound 
relation  to  spiritual  things.  In  some  way  they  are  acknowledged.  And,  however  vile 
the  man  may  be,  it  is  a  sign  of  hope  and  a  point  of  recovery.  But  this  spiritual 
consciousness  is  also  a  ground  of  condemnation.  Kesponsibilities  are  in  proportion  to 
capabilities.  In  the  reckoning  for  talents  used,  we  rate  as  a  decisive  element  the 
amount  of  talents  possessed.  The  depth  of  a  man's  fall  must  be  measured  by  the 
dignity  of  his  original  position.  Let  no  man  delude  himself,  by  any  manner  of  sophis- 
try, with  the  notion  that  the  evil  of  his  guilt  ends  with  the  guilty  act,  or  that  the 
wrong  which  he  has  done  lies  buried  in  his  memory  as  in  a  grave.  It  may  lie  as  in  a 
grave ;  but  there  will  be  trumpet-blasts  of  resurrection,  when  conscience  calls,  and 
memory  gives  up  its  dead.  *'  Confessions  of  faith,"  so  called,  may  be  sincere,  or 
they  may  be  heartless  and  formal.  Tet  the  most  genuine  confessions  of  faith  are 
not  expressed  in  any  creed  or  catechism,  but  in  utterances  of  the  moment,  that 
come  right  oat  of  the  heart.  So  Herod  made  his  confession  of  faith.  So  might 
any  man  be  startled  by  his  own  self-revelation.  II.  But  the  text  also  suggests  a 
point  of  ooNTBAST.  The  contrast  is  between  Herod,  and  John  whom  he  beheaded. 
Here  are  two  different  types  of  men, — a  type  of  worldliness,  and  a  type  of  moral 
heroism.  Two  different  types  of  men  ;  and  yet  let  it  not  be  considered  a  mere  play 
upon  words,  when  I  say  not  two  types  of  different  men.  Beneath  all  external  and 
all  moral  contrasts  lay  the  same  essential  humanity.  The  self-  willed  and  voluptuous 
king  was  forced  to  acknowledge  the  same  spiritual  realities  as  those  in  reference  to 
which  John  so  steadfastly  acted.  But  starting  from  this  common  root,  see  how 
anlike  these  two  men  were  in  the  branching  of  their  lives.  Herod  illustrates  the 
■enioality  of  the  world,  the  imperious  domination  of  appetite  and  passion.  He 
treated  the  world  as  a  mere  garden  for  the  senses.  But  there  appears  in  Herod 
M&other  phase  of  worldliness, — the  phase  of  policy.  I  do  not  mean  wise  policy,  but 
poliqr  divorced  from  principle.  Herod  had  no  honest  independence  :  he  vacillated 
with  the  wind.    Now,  I  suppose  there  are  a  great  many  sach  men  in  our  day, — men 


TX.]  ST.  MAUK,  237 

who,  on  the  vhole,  are  disposed  to  honour  truth,  to  eulogize  it,  even  to  put  it  fore- 
most, if  just  as  well  for  tbemselves.  But  they  would  imprison  it,  behead  it,  and 
send  the  desecrated  head  around  in  a  charger,  if  they  oould  gain  votes  or  get  pleasure 
by  doing  so.  Moreover,  Herod  was  obedient  to  a  false  code  of  honour.  *'  For  his 
oath's  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of  them  that  eat  with  him,"  he  commanded  that  John 
should  be  beheaded.  All  men,  however  faithful  and  earnest  tbey  may  be,  are  not 
oast  in  the  mould  of  John  the  Baptist,  or  tempered  to  such  a  quaUty.  But  such  a 
soul  crying  out  in  the  world  does  the  world  good.  It  is  refreshing  to  see  the  moral 
heroism  of  John  set  sharp  against  the  worldliness  of  Herod.  But,  in  closing,  let  us 
consider  the  fruit  and  consummation  of  these  two  lives  thus  brought  in  contrast. 
The  world's  power  triumphant.  0  sad  type  of  many  a  defeat  of  many  a  fallen 
cause  I  Such,  then,  is  the  upshot  of  these  two  lives, — Herod  victorious  in  his 
wickedness ;  John  in  his  moral  loyalty  defeated  and  slain.  But  we  do  not,  we  can- 
not,  say  this.  We  form  a  different  estimate  than  this  of  John  and  Herod.  Even 
in  the  conditions  of  this  world  and  of  time,  we  hear  the  tetrarch  crying  oat, 
"  It  is  John,  whom  I  beheaded :  he  is  risen  from  the  dead  1  "  We  see  hiin 
driven  into  exile,  and  dying  an  inglorious  death.  We  see,  too,  the  Baptist, 
in  the  processes  of  his  truth,  going  abroad  throughout  the  earth  in  *'  the  spirit  and 
power  of  Elias."  So,  in  other  instances,  we  are  to  judge  not  by  the  transient  event, 
or  the  aspect  of  the  hour,  but  by  the  prevailing  influence,  the  product  that  abides. 
Truth  conquers  in  the  long  run,  and  right  vindicates  itself  against  the  wrong,  as 
"John  risen  from  the  dead."  {E.  H.  CJiapin.)  On  the  character  of  Hercd 
Antipas : — I.  Contemplate   in   the   conduct   of  hebod  and  of  his  queen  the 

NATUBAL  PBOOBESB  OF  DEPBAVITT.  LOOE  PBIMABILY  TO  HEBODIAS.  II.  LeT  MB  ADD 
SOME   OBSERVATIONS,  APPLICABLE    TO  YOUB    OWN    CONDUCT,   WHICH   ARE    SUGGESTED   BY 

THE  HISTORY  BEFORE  US.  1.  In  the  first  place,  aUow  not  yourself  to  be  entrapped 
into  sin  by  the  solicitations  and  importunities  of  others,  not  even  of  your  friends  and 
your  nearest  relations,  should  you  be  unhappy  enough  to  perceive  tempters  among 
them.  2.  That  one  sin  naturally  leads  to  another :  that,  if  you  indulge  in  smaU 
offences,  you  will  be  carried  headlong  into  greater.  You  have  drawn  up  the  flood- 
gates :  and  who  shall  pronounce  where  the  torrent  shall  be  stayed?  How  frequently 
doth  a  similar  progress  occur.  In  the  humbler  ranks  of  life  you  see  a  man  begin- 
ning to  be  idle,  and  to  neglect  his  business.  This  evil  habit  grows  upon  him.  His 
time  soon  hangs  heavily  upon  his  hands :  and  he  fills  it  up  at  the  public  house ;  at 
first  going  thither  sparingly,  but  ere  long  to  be  found  there  almost  every  day. 
Now  drunkenness  is  added  to  idleness.  These  two  sins  speedily  make  him  poor : 
and  he  resorts  to  dishonest  means  of  gaining  money :  till  justice  overtakes  him,  and 
he  finishes  his  days  in  exile  or  on  the  gallows.  The  criminal  of  high  life,  in  tiie 
meantime,  pursues  a  kindred  career,  but  in  a  wider  and  a  more  splendid  circle.  He 
commences  with  fashionable  extravagance.  He  grows  hardened  through  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  sin.  Make  your  stand  through  Divine  grace  against  the  beginnings  of 
sin  :  for  you  know  not  what  will  be  the  end  thereof.  3.  Contemplate  the  incon- 
sistency, the  weakness  and  the  corruption  of  human  nature.  Herod  withstood  for 
a  season  the  arts  and  impoi-tunities  of  Herodias.  She  waited  until  she  found  a 
convenient  time ;  renewed  the  attempt  and  succeeded.  The  great  enemy  of  man 
is  ever  on  the  watch  to  betray  you.  He  is  waiting  for  the  hour  when  you  shall  no 
longer  be  on  your  guard ;  or  when  you  shall  have  grieved  by  a  recent  offence  the 
Spirit  of  God ;  or  when  a  concurrence  of  ensnaring  circumstances  shall  heighten 
the  allurements  of  sin.  The  birthday  of  Herod  shall  arrive.  Thy  heart  shall  be 
opened  to  enticement.  The  year  shall  not  revolve  without  bringing  the  convenient 
time.  Mirth  shall  render  thee  thoughtless :  or  sorrow  shall  bow  thee  to  despondence. 
Pride  shall  inflate  thee  with  confidence :  or  sloth  shall  indispose  thee  to  exertion. 
Then  shah  the  temptation  present  itself  afresh  :  perhaps  in  its  original  garb  ;  or, 
if  need  be,  in  colours  more  attractive.  4.  That  nothing  short  of  a  settled  determi- 
nation to  labour  to  avoid  all  sin,  joined  with  constant  apphcation  to  God,  through 
Christ,  for  the  influence  of  His  sanctifying  Spirit,  can  authorize  you  to  hope  that 
you  will  preserve  for  a  single  hour  a  conscience  void  of  offence.  (T.  Gisbomf 
M.A.)  Herod's  conjeeturet : — The  young  woman  retires  to  consult  her  mother.  It 
her  absence  behold  Herod  amusing  himself  with  conjectures  concerning  the  nature 
of  the  recompense  which  she  will  prefer.  "  Will  she  demand  a  jewelled  robe  ?  A 
sumptuous  palace  f  The  revenues  of  a  city?  The  government  of  a  province?" 
He  knows  not  what  is  passing  in  the  mind  of  Herodias.  He  knows  not  that  vanity  and 
pride  and  avarice  and  ambition  have  retired,  and  have  relinquished  the  whole  heart 
to  revenge.  His  speculations  are  interrupted  by  the  entrance  of  her  daughter.   Mirth 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  ti. 

and  curiosity  sparkle  in  her  eyes.  She  advances  straightway  with  haste.  All  is 
siilent.  She  requires  the  head  of  John  the  Baptist.  {Ibid.)  John  Baptist  and 
Herod: — I.  The  best  people  often  exterienck  ▲  hard  pate.  No  garland  of 
roses  for  the  foUowers  of  Him  Who  wore  the  crown  of  thorns.  Do  not  suppose  from 
this  that  God  is  indifferent  to  goodness.  He  is  with  His  people  when  they  are  in 
affliction,  even  more  than  at  other  times.  The  loss  of  material  comfort  is  made 
up  to  them  by  a  richer  spiritual  gain.  11.  Bad  men  have  oood  feelings  and 
PURPOSES.  The  spiritual  nature  may  be  repressed  and  brought  into  bondage  by  sin, 
but  it  cannot  be  destroyed.  Conscience  and  memory  make  themselves  felt  III. 
An  irresolute  mind  in  respect  to  good  is  the  cause  oy  great  mischief, 
Herod  was  but  the  tool  of  Herodias.  Although  he  did  not  originate  the  murder  of 
John,  he  executed  it.  Without  him  it  might  not  be  done.  IV.  The  danger  of 
dalliance  with  sin.  Herod  gladly  listened  to  John,  but  would  not  obey  him. 
Had  he  heeded  the  faithful  prophet  and  put  away  Herodias,  he  might  never  have 
had  the  sin  of  murder  to  answer  for.  No  safety  in  partial  courses.  We  must  not 
only  hear,  but  heed  the  warning  voice.  V.  The  haunting  alarms  op  guilt.  A 
Sadducee  conjuring  ap  a  ghost — what  a  contradiction  1  No  safeguard  can  protect 
a  wicked  man  from  the  most  absurd,  but  to  him  terrible,  alarms.  They  spring  up 
to  poison  his  enjoyment  in  unexpected  hours.  Never  again  would  Herod  enjoy  "  a 
happy  birthday."  There  is  no  misery  more  exquisite  than  that  proceeding  from  an 
evil  conscience.  Think  of  it  when  proceeding  to  sin.  This  sin  does  not  sink  into 
oblivion,  and  nothing  come  of  it.  Committed,  it  becomes  a  pursuing  vengeance. 
It  assumes  a  dreadful  voice  and  takes  to  itself  feet,  and,  like  a  blood-hound,  follows 
the  evil-doer,  baying  frightfully  on  his  track.  {A.  H.  Currier.)  ResultB  of 
Herod's  sin  .'—The  issues  of  the  act  are  not  all  seen  immediately.  But  it  is  worth 
noting  them.  1.  There  is  the  terror  that  seizes  him.  Haunted  with  feeling  that 
he  is  not  done  with  the  prophet  yet.  2.  He  gains  nothing  by  the  murder,  for  no 
sooner  is  John  slain  than  Jesus  rises  ominously  on  his  horizon.  3.  He  seals  in 
death  the  only  lips  that  could  teach  him  the  way  of  meroy.  4.  All  his  improve- 
ment at  once  evaporates,  and  he  Uves  to  mock  the  Saviour  (Luke  xxih.  11).  6. 
The  woman  whom  he  gratified  at  such  a  cost  became  his  ruin.  Her  ambition  moved 
her  to  long  for  a  higher  title  for  Herod  than  that  of  tetrarch.  Against  his  own  judg- 
ment Herod  permitted  himself  to  be  overborne,  and  going  to  Rome  to  ask  for 
higher  honour  he  found  himself  accused  before  Caligula.  They  were  banished  to 
Gaul,  and  died  in  obscurity  and  dishonour.  {R.  Glover.)  Herod — a  startled 
conscience : — I.  Tou  have  here  the  voice  of  a  startled  conscience.  We  all  of 
us  do  evil  things  that  it  is  not  hard  for  us  to  seem  to  forget,  and  with  regard  to 
which  it  is  not  hard  for  us  to  bribe  or  silence  memory  and  conscience.  The  hurry 
and  bustle  of  daily  life,  the  very  weakness  of  our  characters,  the  rush  of  sensuous 
delights,  may  make  us  bUnd  and  deaf  to  the  voice  of  conscience  ;  and  we  think  aU 
chance  of  the  evil  deed  rising  again  to  harm  us  is  past.  But  some  trifle  touches  the 
hidden  spring  by  mere  accident ;  as  in  the  old  story  of  the  man  groping  along  a  wall, 
till  his  finger  happened  to  fall  upon  one  inch  of  it,  and  immediately  the  hidden  door 
flies  open,  and  there  is  the  skeleton.  An  apparently  trivial  circumstance,  like  some 
hooked  pole  pushed  at  random  into  the  sea,  may  bring  up  by  the  locks  some  pale  and 
drowned  memory  long  plunged  in  an  ocean  of  oblivion.  II.  Hebe  is  an  example 
OF  A  conscience  AWAKENED  TO  THE  UNSEEN  WORLD.  Theoretical  disbelief  in  a 
future  life  and  spiritual  existence  is  closely  allied  to  superstition.  So  strong  is  the 
bond  that  unites  men  with  the  unseen  world,  that,  if  they  do  not  link  themselves 
with  that  world  in  the  legitimate  and  true  fashion,  it  is  almost  certain  to  avenge 
itself  upon  them  by  leading  them  to  all  manner  of  low  and  abject  superstitions. 
Spiritualism  is  the  disease  of  a  generation  that  does  not  beUeve  in  another  life. 
Hi.  An  illustration  of  a  conscience  which,  partially  stirred,  soon  went 
FINALLY  TO  SLEEP  AGAIN.  Do  not  tamper  with  a  partially  awakened  conscience; 
do  not  rest  untU  it  is  quieted  in  the  legitimate  way.  It  is  possible  so  to  lull  the 
conscience  into  indifference,  that  appeals,  threatenings,  pleadings,  mercies,  the 
words  of  men  and  the  gospel  of  God,  may  all  run  off  as  from  a  waterproof,  leaving 
it  dry  and  hard.  The  convictions  of  conscience  which  you  have  not  followed  out, 
like  the  ruins  of  a  bastion  shattered  by  shell,  protect  your  remaining  fortifications 
against  the  impact  of  God's  truth.       {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Conscience  removes 

illusions : — When  the  evil  deed  was  done,  Herod  scarcely  felt  uait  he  did  it.  There 
was  his  plighted  oath,  there  was  Herodias'  pressure,  there  was  the  excitement  of 
the  moment.  He  seemed  forced  to  do  it,  and  scarcely  responsible  for  doing  it 
And  no  doubt,  if  he  ever  thought  about  it  after,  he  shuffled  off  a  large  percentage  oi 


CHAP.  viO  8T.  MARK.  239 

the  responsibility  of  the  guilt  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  others.  Bat  when,  **  in 
the  silent  sessions  of  things  past,"  the  image  and  remembrance  of  the  deed  comes 
up  to  him,  all  the  helpers  and  tempters  have  disappeared,  and  *'  it  is  John  whom  I 
beheaded."  There  is  an  emphasis  in  the  Greek  upon  the  "I";  "whom  I  be- 
headed." «*Herodiaa  tempted  me!  Herodias'  daughter  titillated  my  lust;  I 
fancied  that  my  oath  bound  me ;  I  oonld  not  help  doing  what  would  please  those 
who  sat  at  the  table.  I  said  all  that  before  I  did  it.  But  now,  wh^n  it  is  done, 
they  have  all  disappeared,  every  one  of  them  to  his  quarter ;  and  I  and  the  ugly 
thing  are  left  there  together  alone.  It  was  I  who  did  it,  and  nobody  besides."  And 
the  blackness  of  the  crime  presents  itself  to  the  startled  conscience  as  it  did  not  in 
the  doing.  There  are  many  euphemisms  and  soft  words  in  which,  as  in  cotton  wool, 
we  wrap  our  evil  deeds,  and  so  deceive  ourselves  as  to  their  hardness  and  their  edge ; 
but  when  conscience  gets  hold  of  them,  and  they  pass  out  of  the  realm  of  fact  into 
the  mystical  region  of  remembrance,  all  the  wrap  pages  and  all  the  apologies  and  all 
the  soft  phrases  drop  away  ;  and  the  ugliest,  briefest,  plainest  word  is  the  one  by 
which  my  conscience  describes  my  own  evil.  I  beheaded  him !  I,  and  none  else, 
was  the  murderer.  (Ibid.)  The  storehouse  of  memory  : — Take  care  of  the  store- 
houses of  memory  and  of  conscience,  and  mind  what  kind  of  things  you  lay  up 
there.  (Ibid.)  Comeience : — I.  Thb  facts  of  conscienck.  1.  We  have  a  dis- 
eemment  of  the  difference  between  right  and  wrong.  2.  We  approve  of  the  one 
and  we  disapprove  of  the  other,  as  of  good  and  bad  laws.  3.  We  condemn  our- 
selves for  what  conscience  disapproves  in  our  states  and  acts.  4.  We  are  impelled 
by  conscience  to  do  what  is  right,  and  deterred  by  it  from  what  is  wrong.  U.  Of 
THIS  MYSTBBious  POWBB  THB  OBVIOUS  cHABAOTEBisTics  ABB  —  1.  That  it  is  inde- 
pendent of  the  understanding  and  will.  3.  It  is  authoritative.  3.  It  does  not 
speak  in  its  own  name.  The  authority  which  it  exercises  is  not  its  own.  4.  It  is 
avenging.  Bemorse  is  a  state  produced  by  conscience.  III.  Oob  duty  in  beoabd  to 
coNsoiKNOB.  1,  To  enlighten  it.  2.  To  obey  it.  3.  Not  only  to  obey  it  in  particular 
cases,  but  to  have  a  fixed  and  governing  purpose  to  permit  it  to  rule.  The  ground 
of  this  obligation  to  obey  conscience  is — 1.  The  authority  of  God  in  whose  name  it 
speaks.  2.  Bespect  for  our  own  dignity  as  rational  and  moral  beings.  [0,  Hodge, 
D.D.)        The  cause  and  manner  of  the  Baptist's  death : — ^L  An  exavplb  of  thb 

XiBNOTH  TO  WHICH  UNGODLY  XBN  WILL  00  IN  THB  WAT  OF  BELIOION.      Herod  feared 

and  honoured  John.  He  heard  him  preach — gladly.  Let  no  one  be  too  hasty  in 
ooneluding  that  he  is  religious.  U.  An  bxamflb  of  ministerial  FAirHFULMEss. 
III.  An  illustbation  of  the  obbtainty  and  thb  bbason  of  PEBSECirilioN.  The 
certainty — the  reproof.  The  reason — pride,  interest,  conscience.  The  favour  of 
worldly  men  worthless.  IV.  Wb  have  exemplified  thb  twofold  aspect  of  the 
wobld— to  its  own,  to  the  Church.  The  festival  for  the  one — the  dungeon  for  the 
other.  The  world  in  miniature.  V.  A  samplb  of  thb  world's  hiohest  pleasures. 
Masked  pride,  vanity,  envy.  Masked  misery.  VL  An  instance  of  an  abandoned 
pabbnt  SACBiFiciNa  HEB  CHILD.  YII.  An  instance  of  MmoLED  htpocriby  and 
cowabdicb.  Herod's  oath,  cowardice — through  fear.  {Expository  Discourses.) 
Remembrance  of  past  sin : — Henry  of  Essex,  struck  down  in  a  duel,  attributed  his 
defeat  t«  the  imagined  appearance  of  a  knight  whom  he  had  murdered,  standing  by 
the  side  of  his  adversary.  Speaking  of  the  man  who  planned  the  massacre  of 
Glencoe,  Macaulay  tells  us  that  Breadalbane  felt  the  stings  of  conscience.  He 
went  to  the  most  fashionable  coffee-house  in  Edinburgh,  and  talked  loudly  about 
what  he  had  done  among  the  mountains ;  but  some  of  his  soldiers  observed  that  all 
this  was  put  on.  He  was  not  the  same  man  that  he  had  been  before.  In  all  places, 
at  all  hours,  working  or  sleeping,  Glencoe  was  for  ever  before  him. 

Ver.  17.  For  Herodias'  sake. — Evil  effects  of  vice : — The  pleasures  which  chiefly 
affect  or  rather  bewitch  the  body,  and  by  so  doing  become  the  pest  and  poison  of 
the  nobler  and  intellectual  part  of  man,  are  those  false  and  fallacious  pleasures 
of  lust  and  intemperance.  Nothing  does  or  can  darken  the  mind  or  conscience  oi 
man  more.  Gould  Herod  have  ever  thought  himself  obliged  by  the  religion  of  an 
oath  to  murder  the  Baptist,  had  not  his  lust  and  his  Herodias  imprisoned  and 
murdered  his  conscience  first  ?  It  seems  his  besotted  conscience,  having  broken 
through  the  seventh  commandment,  the  sixth  stood  too  near  it  to  be  safe  long.  So  that 
it  was  his  lust  obstinately  continued  in  which  thus  darkened  and  deluded  his  con> 
science ;  and  the  same  will  no  doubt  darken,  delude,  and  in  the  end  extinguish  the 
conscience  of  any  man  breathing,  who  shall  surrender  himself  up  to  it.  {Dr.  South.) 
The  reciprocal  revenge  of  wrong : — There  is  another  point  that  should  be  brought 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  Tlr 

oat — the  power  which  one  nature  has  npon  another,  and  the  reciprocal  revenge  of 
wrong.  When  Herod  ensnared  his  brother's  wife,  when  he  tempted  her  into  adul- 
terous abandonment  of  her  husband  and  into  unlawful  intercourse  with  him,  he 
was  the  aggressor  and  she  was  the  partner ;  but  when  they  were  living  in  unholy 
concord  she  became  the  avenger,  and  her  influence  upon  him  led  him  into  this 
infamous  crime  and  this  damnable  cruelty.  He  destroyed  her  virtue,  and  she 
iestroyed  his  manhood ;  and  from  that  time  to  this  how  many  have  been  destroyed 
ay  those  who  should  have  been  their  protectors,  and  who  should  have  inspired  in 
4hem  purity  and  gentleness  and  forgivingness  1  Oh,  what  chance  was  there  for  sweet 
and  wholesome  water  to  come  out  of  such  fountains  1  But  they  rotted  together  and 
spoiled  each  other.  How  many  times,  if  we  could  look  into  the  secrets  of  the  house- 
hold, should  we  see  the  same  work  going  on  :  a  bad  man  lowering  the  tone  of  the 
woman  that  came  to  him  pure  and  simple-minded,  destroying  her  aspiration, 
familiarizing  her  with  vulgarity,  urging  all  his  influence  and  power  to  take  away 
from  her  the  fear  of  evil  and  wrong,  and  rather  rejoicing  as  every  barrier  is  broken 
down  to  bring  her  to  his  level  1  And  how  many  men  have  been  despoiled  by  hard, 
selfish,  and  ambitious  wives,  the  man  being  simple-minded,  and,  on  the  whole, 
having  right  notions,  and  the  woman  perpetually  employing  the  subtle  arts  of 
influence,  persuasion,  and  fascination,  and  all  of  them  in  the  direction  of  selfish- 
ness, and  oftentimes  in  the  direction  of  corruption  and  mahgnant  crime  I  {H.  W, 
Beecher,) 

Ver.  18.  For  Jolin  had  said  unto  Herod. — The  difficulty  of  wise  rebuke: — It  ia 

difficult  to  rebuke  well ;  i.e.,  at  a  right  time,  in  a  right  spirit,  and  in  a  right 
manner.  The  Baptist  rebuked  Herod  without  making  him  angry;  therefore  he 
must  have  rebuked  him  with  gravity,  temper,  sincerity,  and  an  evident  goodwill 
towards  him.  On  the  other  hand,  he  spoke  so  firmly,  sharply,  and  faithfully,  that 
his  rebuke  cost  him  his  life.  ...  He  reproved  him  under  the  prospect  of  suffering 
for  his  faithfulness ;  and  we  should  never  use  a  -strong  word,  however  true  it  be, 
without  being  willing  to  acquiesce  in  some  penalty  or  other,  should  it  so  happen, 
as  the  seal  of  our  earnestness.  (J.  H.  Neivman.)  Rebuke  of  sin  considered  in- 
delicate : — I  have  always  noticed  that  people  who  live  in  the  practice  of  vice  think 
the  servants  of  God  ought  not  to  allude  to  things  so  coarse.  We  are  allowed  to 
denounce  the  sins  of  the  man-in-the-moon  and  the  vices  of  savages  in  the  middle 
of  Africa ;  but  as  to  the  everyday  vices  of  this  city  of  London,  if  we  put  our  finger 
upon  them  in  God's  name,  then  straightway  some  one  cries,  "It  is  indelicate  to 
allude  to  these  things."    (C.  H.  Spurgeotu) 

Ver.  20.  Por  Herod  feared  John. — Better  to  fear  God  than  His  minister : — ^Herod 
feared  John,  and  did  many  things ;  had  he  feared  God,  he  would  have  laboured  to 
do  everything.  {Gurnall.)  Fear  versm  Love : — The  chains  of  love  are  stronger 
than  the  chains  of  fear.  Herod's  love  of  Herodias  was  too  hard  for  his  fear  of 
John.     (Ibid.)  What  moves  wicked  m£n  thus  to  affect  and  reverence  God's  faith- 

ful ministers  f — 1.  The  consideration  of  the  excellent  gifts  which  they  discern 
in  them,  especially  natural  gifts.  These  draw  them  into  admiration,  and  so 
cause  them  to  esteem  and  reverence  them.  2.  Some  worldly  good  or  benefit 
which  they  reap  by  the  acquaintance  or  society  of  such  faithful  ministers  of 
God.  3.  The  holy  lives  of  God's  faithful  ministers.  (G.  Fetter.)  Character  of 
Herod : — I.  How  mystebious  and  complex  is  the  characteb  or  man  1  In  the 
same  individual  what  a  variety  of  qualities,  apparently  the  most  opposite,  are 
sometimes  combined.  How  important  it  is  that  we  should  "  know  "  ourselves  and 
the  sins  which  so  easily  mislead  and  overcome  us ;  looking  meanwhile  for  guidance 
to  Him  who  searcheth  the  reins  and  trieth  the  hearts  of  men.    H.  How  stbono 

IS  THB  IMPBE86I0N  WHICH  BEAL  EXCELLENCK  OF  CHABACTEB  MAKES,  EVEN  ON  THE 

MINDS  OF  WICKED  MEN.  With  all  hls  abandonment  of  principle  and  looseness  of 
practice,  Herod  could  not  help  admiring  and  respecting  John.    III.  Yet  a  man  may  go 

FAB  IN  HIS  ADMIRATION  OF  GOODNESS,   WHILE  HE  BEMAIJSS  PBACTICALLY  UNAFFECTED  BY 

IT.  The  precise  extent  of  John's  moral  influence  over  Herod  we  do  not  know ;  but 
it  is  plain  that  he  did  follow  his  guidance  in  some  respects,  and,  so  far,  for  good ;  but, 
in  spite  of  all,  there  was  no  real,  decided,  permanent  change  in  his  heart  and  cha- 
racter. Hs  had  mistaken  the  semblance  of  religion  for  its  reality — the  husk  for  the 
kernel.  Consequently,  when  temptation  came,  it  made  him  tenfold  more  the  child  of 
Satan  than  before.  JV.  Leabn  fbom  this  the  dangeb  of  yielding  to  favoubitb  sins. 
XJntil  met  by  the  home-thrust,  **  It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have  her,"  all  went  on 


CBAV.  n.}  8T.  MARK,  241 

smoothly  and  pleasantly  between  Herod  and  John ;  bnt  the  exposure  of  his  darling 
vice  tnmed  his  friendship  into  enmity.  V.  Thk  danobb  or  TBiFLiNa  wixH  serious 
IMPRESSIONS,  AND  ACTiNo  CONTRARY  TO  CONSCIENCE.  Herod's  association  with  John 
oaght  to  have  brought  him  to  a  humbling  sense  of  sin  and  a  decided  change  of 
heart.  Bat  he  trampled  on  his  convictions  ;  and  fatal  was  the  result.  Let  us  be 
warned  by  his  example.  Every  funeral  that  passes,  solemn  and  slow,  along  the 
streets ;  every  visit  of  disease  and  death  to  your  family  circle ;  every  season  of  holy 
communion  with  God ;  every  prick  of  conscience ;  these  are  all  so  many  instruments 
which  God  puts  in  operation  for  your  well-being.  Attend  to  these  faithful  monitors  ; 
cherish  them  ;  and  they  will  be  productive  of  lasting  benefit  to  your  soul.  (R. 
Burnsy  D.D.)  Bad   men   with    better   moments: — This  wicked  and  despotic 

man,  though  he  appointed  for  himself  no  bounds  of  morality,  had  moral  sensibility 
lying  within  him.  In  the  midst  of  vice  and  crime  he  had  a  conscience.  More  than 
that:  this  man  whose  very  name  has  come  down  as  a  synonyna  of  all  that  is 
corrupt  and  oppressive,  had,  in  the  midst  of  vices  and  crimes,  a  kind  of  yearning 
for  goodness.  He  had  heard  John  ;  he  had  heard  him  gladly ;  he  wanted  to  hear 
him  again ;  and,  after  the  momentary  flash  of  passion  and  anger  was  over,  he 
wanted  to  save  him.  He  was  sorry  that  he  was  to  be  executed.  There  was  some- 
thing in  this  despotic  king  which  yearned  towards  justice  and  goodness.  And  woe 
be  to  every  wicked  man  who,  in  his  wickedness,  never  finds  a  single  spark  of  virtue 
to  illuminate  his  life.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  men  who  follow  vice  have 
hours  in  which  they  look  out  from  themselves  longingly,  and  wish  they  were  better ; 
and  that  men  who  are  given  over  to  the  power  of  their  passions  have  hours  and 
days  in  which  no  outward  condemnation  is  comparable  to  that  which  they  them- 
selves pass  on  themselves.  Men,  because  they  are  wicked,  are  not  necessarily  dead. 
Because  they  violate  rectitude,  they  do  not  necessarily  destroy  their  conscience 
utterly.  It  sleeps  or  is  drugged ;  but  it  has  its  revenge.  Nay,  more ;  it  is  this 
dormant  or  latent  sensibility  to  that  which  is  in  contrariety  to  their  whole  course 
of  life,  that  lays  the  foundation  for  hope  of  the  recovery  or  reformation  of  men. 
There  are  hours  when  many  a  man,  if  he  had  power  to  regenerate  himself,  would 
speedily  do  it.  Oh  1  that  we  only  knew  those  hours.  Oh  1  that  some  friend  could 
approach  every  such  man  at  those  periods  when  the  doors  of  his  prison  are  thrown 
open  for  a  time,  and  lead  him  by  the  hand.  How  many  men  might  be  rescued 
from  the  abyss  which  finally  overwhelms  and  destroys  them,  how  m&nj  men  might 
be  brought  up  from  their  degradation  and  peril,  if  only  we  were  wise,  to  seize  the 
hours  in  which  they  are  impressible.  The  acute  and  watchful  physician  knowa 
that  a  disease  runs  to  a  crisis,  and  that  there  are  points  of  time  when,  if  the  patient 
is  carefully  nursed  and  tended,  curative  tendencies  will  set  in,  and  his  health  may 
be  restored.  Now,  men  are  in  the  same  condition  spiritually ;  and  if  there  were 
only  some  oversight  of  them,  they  might  be  saved ;  but,  alas  I  they  themselves 
cannot  perpetuate  these  hours ;  they  will  not ;  and  we  stand  outside,  and  know 
nothing  of  them.  So  in  every  street,  and  in  every  community,  there  are  men  who 
are  secretly  burning  out  the  very  vital  substance  of  their  life ;  who  are  walking  in 
ways,  the  beginnings  of  which  are  pleasant,  but  the  ends  of  which  are  death  ;  who 
are  going  down  through  the  community,  moaning  as  they  go,  sighing  for  something 
better,  and  at  times  holding  up  hands  of  prayer  and  saying,  "  God,  help  me  1  " 
Nevertheless,  there  are  men  who,  with  all  these  experiences,  are  utterly  destroyed. 
Here  was  this  man  Herod— as  bad  a  man  as  could  well  be  pictured,  in  many  respects  ; 
and  yet  there  were  in  him  elements  that  could  have  reformed  and  restored  him. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Herod's  partial  repentance  ;— It  is  curious  and  instructive  to 
observe  that  Herod  is  set  before  us  here  in  the  good  points  of  his  character— at 
least,  in  the  best  points  that  he  had.  It  is  in  the  Holy  Gospels  that  one  of  the 
vilest  wretches  in  human  history  is  set  before  us  in  a  somewhat  amiable  and 
interesting  aspect.  He  feels  a  sincere  respect  for  religion.  He  is  not  so  far  gone 
but  that  he  knows  honesty  and  faith  and  self-devotion  when  he  sees  them  in  another 
man.  And  he  does  not  respect  these  the  less,  but  a  great  deal  the  more,  when  the 
just  and  holy  man  does  not  spare  his  own  sins,  but  denounces  them  to  his  face. 
Not  only  this,  but  he  takes  the  preacher  under  his  protection  ;  and  declares,  doubt 
less  with  much  hard  swearing,  when  one  and  another  of  the  courtiers  propose  to 
stop  the  prophet's  insolence  by  taking  his  life,  that  no  man  shall  hurt  a  hair  of  his 
head.  And  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  took  enormous  pride  in  it,  too,  as  many  a 
swearing,  drinking,  cheating  reprobate  nowadays  will  pride  himself  on  hiring 
a  pew  in  a  most  puritan  church,  where  righteousness  and  temperance  and  judgment 
are  faithfully  preached  to  him,  and  will  insist,  with  profuse  expletives,  that  no  man 

16 


MS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0R,  [chav.  vt. 

shall  say  a  word  against  his  minister.  The  case  is  common  enough.  But  we 
should  do  Herod  injustice  if  we  should  suppose  this  to  he  all.  Herod  listened  to 
the  preacher  of  righteousness  and  repentance  with  a  genuine  personal  and  practical 
interest.  He  appHes  John's  teaching  to  his  own  case — to  his  own  sins  and  his  own 
duties — so  far  as  asything  was  left  to  his  ingenuity  in  the  matter  of  application, 
for  John's  teaching  was  sufficiently  direct  and  pointed  in  itself.  Herod  did  lay  the 
word  of  the  Lord  to  heart  with  reference  to  his  own  amendment,  and  did 
obviously  begin  to  make  such  a  difference  in  his  course  of  life  as  to  give  Herodias 
reason  to  fear  that  he  would  not  make  an  end  of  reforming  until  he  had  reformed 
her  and  her  devil's  imp  of  a  daughter  out  of  the  palace  altogether.  "  He  did  many 
things  "  in  consequence  of  John's  preaching — many  just  and  upright  things  such 
as  were  strange  enough  to  hear  of  in  the  vice-regal  court  of  Palestine ;  beneficent 
and  public-spirited  things,  making  his  reign,  for  the  time,  a  less  unmitigated  curse 
to  that  afflicted  country  ;  merciful  things,  using  his  princely  wealth  and  power  for  the 
relief  of  the  distressed.  What  a  thing  to  give  thanks  for  was  even  this  partial  repen- 
tance of  Herod,  for  the  good  it  did,  for  the  pain  and  outrage  that  it  saved !  Let  no 
one  think  that  the  preaching  of  God's  kingdom  is  a  total  waste,  even  when  no  man 
yields  to  it  his  unreserved  submission.  The  whole  work  of  Christ's  gospel  in  any 
conmiunity  is  not  to  be  summed  up  in  the  net  number  of  converts  or  communicants. 
How  many  a  soul  is  saved  from  being  just  such  an  abandoned  wretch  as  Herod  was ; 
how  many  a  decent  home  from  being  such  a  sty  of  nncleanness  as  Herod's  palace  was ; 
how  many  a  State  from  being  defiled  with  blood  and  turbulent  with  wrong,  just 
through  some  men's  standing  in  awe  before  the  holiness  of  Christ,  and  hearing 
Him  gladly,  and  being  willing  to  "  do  many  things  "  I  (Leonard  W.  Bacon.)  In- 
sufficiency of  Herod's  right-doing : — In  all  his  doing  of  right  things,  Herod  doei 
nothing  right ;  for  in  all  that  he  does  he  is  Herod.  The  things  that  he  does  in 
obedience  to  John's  preaching  are  right  in  the  abstract,  considered  independently  of 
the  man  that  does  them.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  these  actions  in  the  abstract  never 
get  done  in  actual  Hfe.  We  can  think  about  them,  and  reason  about  them ;  but  we 
never  really  see  or  know  of  an  action  that  is  not  done  by  somebody.  The  action  is 
the  man  acting.  Strictly  speaking,  it  is  not  actions  that  are  right  or  wrong ;  it  is 
men.  And  when  the  question  is, — Did  the  man  do  right  7  we  have  to  look  at  the 
man  as  well  as  the  deed.  And  the  honest  conscience  has  no  doubt  on  this  point : 
No  man  is  right  in  his  doing,  so  long  as  he  is  cherishing  a  fixed,  conscious  purpose 
to  do  wrong,  or  not  to  do  altogether  right.  This  is  a  rule  that  does  not  work  both 
ways.  The  hidden  thought  of  the  heart  is  like  the  morsel  hidden  in  the  garment 
(Haggai  ii.  10-14) ;  it  can  pollute  a  good  act,  it  cannot  sanctify  an  evil  act.  Here 
is  Herod  resolutely  protecting  the  sternest  of  God's  prophets,  eagerly  listening  to 
him,  heeding  him,  obeying  him  in  many  things,  but  standing  out  obstinately  in  hia 
incestuous  and  adulterous  love  against  that  word  of  the  Lord,  "It  is  not  lawful  for 
thee  to  have  her."  How  does  the  case  stand  with  him,  just  now  ?  It  was  right, 
wasn't  it  ?  for  Herod  to  "  do  many  things  "  at  the  preaching  of  John.  He  was  a 
pretty  good  man  for  the  time  being,  wasn't  he  ?  Wasn't  it  quite  like  heroism — 
moral  heroism — ^backed  up  by  political  caution,  when  he  stubbornly  refased  to  per- 
mit the  killing  of  John,  and  said  to  Herodias,  "  No  I  I  will  not  1  I  will  agree  to 
lock  him  up  in  prison,  but  not  one  step  further  will  I  go !  "  Was  he  not  rather  the 
pattern  of  what  we  should  call  a  good  member  of  society — a  man  with  a  sincere 
regpect  lor  religion,  and  a  great  interest  in  the  church,  and  a  strong  attachment  to 
his  favourite  minister ; — a  man  who  is  willing  to  subscribe  handsomely,  and  do 
many  things,  and  deny  himself  many  things,  but  of  course,  not  everything  ?  Now 
I  do  not  find  that  the  gospel  has  any  dealings  with  this  kind  of  goodness.  It  does 
not  appear  that  Jesus  Christ  has  any  advice  or  encouragement  for  those  who  would 
like  to  be  rid  of  a  part  of  their  sins.  He  is  not  a  specialist  in  spiritual  maladies ; 
He  is  a  Great  Physician.  It  is  not  worth  your  while  to  go  to  Him  with  a  request 
for  partial  and  local  treatment — to  hold  up  before  Him  your  infected,  swollen  Umb, 
and  say,  "  There  1  give  me  something  for  that !  Don't  touch  the  rest  of  me.  I  am 
all  right.  I  only  want  that  arm  our^"  He  will  not  treat  the  case  on  any  such 
terms.  Tour  case  is  constitutional,  not  local.  If  you  would  have  the  help  of  Jesus 
Cnirist ;  you  must  surrender  the  case  to  Him ;  and  prepare  for  thorough  treatment, 
perhaps  for  sharp  surgery.  (Ibid.)  Character  a  power: — Your  success  is  very 
much  connected  with  your  personal  character.  Herod  "  heard  John  gladly,*'  and 
♦♦  did  many  things,*'  because  he  knew  the  preacher  to  be  a  just  and  holy  man.  Words 
ottered  from  the  heart  find  their  way  to  the  heart  by  a  holy  sympathy.  Character 
il  power.    (JB.  CeciL)       Inconstancy :— A  ship  that  is  not  of  the  right  make  can* 


.  ▼!.]  8T,  MARK.  J4S 


not  gail  trim,  and  a  clock  whose  spring  is  faulty  will  not  always  go  true ;  so  a 
person  of  unsound  principles  cannot  be  constant  and  even  in  his  practices.  The 
religion  of  those  that  are  inwardly  rotten,  is  like  a  fire  in  some  cold  climates,  which 
almost  fries  a  man  before,  when  at  the  same  time  he  is  freezing  behind  ;  they  are 
zealous  in  some  things,  as  holy  duties,  which  are  cheap  ;  and  cold  in  other  things, 
especially  when  they  cross  their  profit  or  credit ;  as  Mount  Hecla  is  covered  with  snow 
on  one  side,  when  it  burns  and  casts  out  cinders  on  the  other :  but  the  holiness  of 
them  that  are  sound  at  heart  is  like  the  natural  heat,— though  it  resorts  most  to 
the  vitals  of  sacred  performances,  yet,  as  need  is,  it  warms  and  has  an  influence 
%j3on  all  the  outward  parts  of  civil  transactions.  It  may  be  said  of  true  sanctity, 
atfK  the  sun,  "  There  is  nothing  hid  from  the  heat  thereof."  When  all  the  parts 
of  the1»djL,have  their  due  nourishment  distributed  to  them,  it  is  a  sign  of  a  healthy 
temper.  As  t^h^saint  is  described  sometimes  by  a  ♦*  clean  heart,"  so  also  sometimes  by 
*•  clean  hands,"  because  he  has  both ;  the  holiness  of  his  heart  is  seen  at  his  fingers' 
ends.  {G.  Swinnock.^  A  false  respect  for  religion ;— A  man  may  be  acknowledged  to 
be  just  and  holy,  and  for  that  very  reason  he  may  be  dreaded.  You  like  to  see  lions 
and  tigers  in  the  Zoological  Gardens,  but  you  would  not  like  to  see  them  in  your 
own  room ;  you  would  very  much  prefer  to  see  them  behind  bars  and  within  cages  ; 
and  so  very  many  have  respect  for  religion,  but  religious  people  they  cannot  bearl 
<C7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Wanting  to  go  to  heaven,  but  liking  the  way  to  hell  .-—Herod 
was  a  foxy  man.  We  sometimes  meet  with  these  foxy  people.  They  want  to  go  to 
heaven,  but  they  like  the  road  to  hell.  They  will  sing  a  hymn  to  Jesus,  but  a  good 
roaring  song  they  like  also.  They  will  give  a  guinea  to  the  church,  but  how  many 
guineas  are  spent  on  their  own  lust.  Thus  they  try  to  dodge  between  God  and 
Satan.  (Ibid.)  John  and  Herod : — I.  The  hopeful  points  in  Hbbod's  chasacteb. 
He  respected  justice  and  holiness.  He  admired  the  man  in  whom  he  saw  justice 
and  righteousness.  He  listened  to  John.  He  obeyed  the  word  to  which  he  hstened. 
He  continued  to  hear  the  preacher  gladly.  His  conscience  was  greatly  affected. 
n.  The  flaws  i»  the  oasb  of  hbbod.  Though  he  feared  John  he  never  looked 
to  John's  Master.  He  had  no  respect  for  goodness  in  his  own  heart.  He  never 
loved  the  Word  of  God  as  God's  Word.  He  was  under  the  sway  of  sin.  His  was 
a  religion  of  fear,  not  of  love.  m.  What  became  of  Hebod.  He  slew  the 
preacher  whom  he  respected.  This  Herod  Antipas  was  the  man  who  afterwardi 
mocked  the  Saviour.  He  soon  lost  all  the  power  he  possessed.  His  name  is  in- 
famous for  ever.  (Ibid.)  Limed  by  lust ;— He  was  Uke  a  bird  tak;en  with  lime- 
twigs  :  he  wanted  to  fly  ;  but,  sad  to  say,  he  was  willingly  held,  limed  by  his  lust. 
(Ibid.)  Preaching!  Man' 9  privilege  and  Ood's  power:-— ^1.  The  blessedness  of 
HEABiNo  THE  woBD.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel  is  represented  by  the  sowing  of  seed 
—casting  the  net  into  the  sea— it  is  the  bread  of  heaven— it  is  the  light  of  the  world. 
n.  The  besponsibilities  of  the  hsabbb  of  the  Wobd.  HI.  The  nbkdfdii  accom- 
paniments OF  HEABINO  THE  WoBD.  (Ibid. )  Transient  religious  impressums  .-—When 
you  take  hold  of  a  piece  of  india-rubber,  you  may  make  any  impression  that  you  like 
all  over  it,  but  after  all  it  resumes  its  old  shape.  There  are  hosts  of  hearers  of  that 
kind :  very  impressible,  but  they  quickly  return  to  their  old  tastes  and  habits.  (Ibid,) 
Why  Herod  feared  John  .-—Herod  was  a  king ;  John  was  a  subject.  Herod  was  in 
a  palace ;  John  was  in  a  prison.  Herod  wore  a  crown ;  John  most  probably  did 
not  even  own  a  turban.  Herod  wore  the  purple;  John  wore  camlet,  as  we  should 
call  it.  John  was  the  son  of  an  obscure  Jewish  country  priest  and  his  wife :  the 
child  of  their  old  age.  There  is  no  hint  that  John  had  any  wealth,  or  name,  or 
fame,  or  education,  or  influence,  when  he  began  his  life  as  a  man.  He  comes  on 
the  scene  as  a  rough,  angular  man,  with  not  many  words  and  not  many  friends. 
Herod  began  to  reign  just  about  when  John  began  to  live,  so  that  there  was  no 
preponderant  age  in  the  priest's  son  over  the  king's  son :  that  was  all  on  the 
other  side.  Indeed,  by  all  mere  surface  facts,  principles,  and  analogies,  John 
ought  to  have  feared  Herod  ;  he  ought  to  have  bated  his  breath  and  bent  his  head 
before  him.  Now,  I  propose  to  discuss  at  this  time  the  roots  of  this  power  and 
weakness,  to  see  what  made  Herod  so  weak  and  John  so  strong,  and  to  ask  this 
question.  What  can  we,  who  are  set  as  John  was,  in  the  advance  guard  of  re- 
formers, do  to  make  a  deep,  clear  mark  t  And  I  note  for  you  that  John  had 
three  great  roots  of  power :  First,  he  was  a  powebful  man  bt  obeation— a  man 
with  a  dear  head,  a  steady  nerve,  and  a  nature  set  in  a  deadly  antagonism  to  sin 
and  meanness  of  every  sort  and  degree.    He  was  t  e  Jewish  John  Knox,  or  Joha 

••  When  he  saw  a  thing  was  true. 
He  went  to  work  and  put  it  thxongh.** 


M4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  ▼!• 

He  conld  die,  bat  he  eonld   not  back  down.     Every  time  I  meet  a  man  who 
is  a  man,  and   not   a   stick,  I   ask  myself  one  question:   '*Why  are  yon  the 
man  yoa  are?    Whence  does  your  power  hint  itself  to  me?     Whence  does 
it    come."      And  while  the  ultimate  answer  has   never   oome   out  of   Phren- 
ology   or    Physiognomy,  or  any  of  the  sciences  that  profess  to  tell  you  what 
a  man  is  by  how  he  looks,  yet  the  indicative   answer  has  always  lain  in  that 
direction.    In  the  head,  and  face,  and  form  of  a  man  there  is  certainly  something 
that  impresses  you  in  some  such  way  as  the  weight,  colour,  and  inscription  of  a 
coin  reveal  to  you,  with  a  fair  certainty,  whether  it  be  gold,  or  silver,  or — brass ; 
and  it  is  possible,  too,  that  the  line  in  which  a  man  has  descended,  the  country 
in  which  he  is  bom,  the  climate,  the  sceneiy,  the  history,  the  poetry,  and  the 
society  about  him,  have  a  great  deal  to  do  with  tbe  man.    The  father,  in  Queen 
Elizabeth's  time,  as  I  have  known  in  old  English  families,  may  be  twenty-two 
carat  gold ;  and  the  children  in  Queen  Victoria's  time  may  be  no  better  than  lead. 
That  mysterious  antagonism  that  sows  tares  among  the  wheat,  sows  baseness  in 
the  blood ;  and  if  there  be  not  for  ever  a  careful  and  most  painful  dividing  and 
burning,  the  tares  will  in  time  come  to  nearly  all  there  is  on  the  soil.    But  still 
for  ever  the  great  mint  of  Providence  beats  on,  silently,  certainly,  continually, 
sending  its  own  new  golden  coins  to  circulate  through  our  human  life,  and  on 
each  of  them  stamping  the  infallible  image  and  superscription  that  tells  us  *♦  this 
is  gold."     Nay,  the  same  great  Providence  makes  not  only  gold  coins,  but  silver 
and  iron  too ;  and  if  they  are  true  to  their  ring,  they  are  all  Divine ;  as  ini^ 
great  houses  there  be  divers  vessels,  some  to  more  honour  and  some  to  less 
honour,  but  not  one  to  dishonour  if  it  be  true  to  its  purpose ;  for  while  the  golden 
vase  that  holds  the  wine  at  the  feast  of  a  king  is  a  vessel  of  honour,  so  is  the 
iron  pot  that  holds  the  meat  in  the  furnace ;  the  Parian  vase  that  you  fill  with 
flowers  is  a  vessel  of  honour,  and  so  is  the  tin  dipper  with  which  you  fill  it  at  the 
well.    For  me,  it  is  a  wonderful  thing  to  study  merely  the  pictures  of  great  men. 
There  is  a  power  in  the  very  shadow  tbat  makes  you  feel  they  were  bom  to  be 
kings  and  priests  unto  God.    But  if  you  know  a  great  man  personally,  you  find  a 
power  in  him  which  the  picture  can  never  give  you.     I  suppose  this  good  Jewish 
country  parson,  the  father  of  John,  from  the  little  we  can  glean  about  him,  was 
just  a  gentle,  timid,  pious,  retiring  man,  whose  mind  had  never  risen  above  the 
routine  of  his  humble  post  in  the  temple.    But  lo  1  God,  in  the  full  time,  drops 
just  one  golden  ingot  down  into  that  family  treasury,  pure,  ponderous,  solid  gold. 
Yet  I  need  not  tell  you  that  there  is  a  theory  of  human  nature  that  busies  itself 
for  ever  in  trying  to  prove  that  our  human  nature  in  itself  is  abominably  and 
naturally  despicable.    Now,  this  primitive  intrinsic  nature,  I  say,  was  the  first 
element  that  made  John  mightier  in  the  prison  than  Herod  was  in  the  palace. 
The  one  was  a  king  by  creation  ;  the  other  was  only  a  king  by  descent.    And 
then,  secondly,  there  comes  into  the  difference  another  element.    Herod  made 
the  purple  vile  by  his  sin ;  John  made  the  camel's  hair  radiant  by  his  holiness. 
And  in  that  personal  truth,  this  rightwiseness,  this  wholeness,  he  gained  every 
Divine  force  in  the  xmiverse  over  to  his  side,  and  left  to  Herod  only  the  infem^ 
forces.    It  was  a  question  of  power,  reaching  back  ultimately,  as  all  such  questions 
do,  to  God  and  the  devil.    So  the  fetter  was  turned  to  a  sceptre,  and  the  sceptre 
to  a  fetter,  and  the  soul  of  the  Sybarite  quailed,  and  went  down  before  the  soul  of 
the  saint.    Then  the  good  man,  the  true,  the  upright,  downright  man  of  power, 
goes  right  on  to  the  mark.     Let  me  tell  you  a  story  given  me  by  the  late  venerable 
James  Mott,  of  Philadelphia,  whose  uncle,  fifty  years  ago,  discovered  the  island 
in  the  Pacific  inhabited  by  Adams  and  his  companions,  as  you  have  read  in  the 
story  of  *•  The  Mutiny  of  the  Bounty."    I  was  talking  with  him  one  day  about  it, 
and  he  said  that,  after  staying  at  the  island  for  some  time,  his  uncle  turned  his 
vessel  homeward,  and  steered  directly  for  Boston, — sailing  as  he  did  from  your 
own  good  city, — eight  thousand  miles  distant.     Month  after  month  the  brave 
eraft  ploughed  through  storm  and  shine,  keeping  her  head  ever  homewards.    But 
as  she  came  near  home,  she  got  into  a  thick  fog,  and  seemed  to  be  sailing  by 
guess.    The  captain  had  never  sighted  land  from  the  time  they  started ;  but  one 
night  he  said  to  the  crew,  **  Now,  boys,  lay  her  to  !     I  reckon  Boston  harbour  must 
be  just  over  there  somewhere ;  but  we  must  wait  for  the  fog  to  clear  up  before 
we  try  to  run  in."    And  so,  sure  enough,  when  the  morning  sun  rose  it  hfted  the 
fog,  and  right  over  against  them  were  the  spires  and  homes  of  the  great  city  of 
Boston  I    So  can  men  go  right  onward  over  this  great  sea  of  hfe.     The  chart  and 
•ompass  are  with  them ;  and  the  power  is  with  them  to  observe  the  meridian  too 


Ti.]  ST.  MARK,  845 

and  the  eternal  stars.  Storms  will  drive  them,  currents  will  drift  them,  dangers  will 
beset  them ;  they  will  long  for  more  solid  certainties  ;  but  by  noon  and  by  night 
they  will  drive  right  on,  correcting  deflections,  resisting  adverse  influences,  and  then, 
at  the  last,  when  they  are  near  home,  they  will  know  it.  The  darkness  may  be  all 
about  them,  but  the  soul  shines  in  its  confldenoe ;  and  the  true  mariner  will  say 
to  his  soul,  "  I  will  wait  for  the  mist  to  rise  with  the  new  morning ;  I  know  home 
is  just  over  there."  Then  in  the  morning  he  is  satisfied;  he  wakes  to  see  the 
golden  light  on  temple  and  home.  So  God  brings  him  to  the  desired  haven. 
Now  John  was  one  of  those  right-on  men.  Had  there  been  a  crevice  in  John's 
armour,  Herod  would  have  found  it  out  and  laughed  at  him ;  but  in  the  presence 
of  that  pure  life,  that  deep,  conscious  antagonism  to  sin,  that  masterful  power, 
won  as  a  soldier  wins  a  hard  battle,  this  man  on  the  throne  was  abased  before  that 
man  in  the  prison.  Then  the  third  root  of  power  in  this  great  man,  by  which  he 
mastered  a  king, — by  which  he  became  a  king, — lay  in  the  fact  that  he  was  a  true, 
ciiKAB,  UNFLINCHING,  OUTSPOKEN  PREACHER  of  holiuess.  Somc  preachcrs  reflect  the 
great  verities  of  religion,  as  bad  boys  reflect  the  sun  from  bits  of  broken  glass.  They 
stand  just  on  one  side,  and  flash  a  blaze  of  fierce  light  across  the  eyes  of  their 
victim,  and  leave  him  more  bewildered  and  irritated  than  he  was  before.  Such 
a  one  is  your  fitful,  ohauging  doctrinaire,  whose  ideas  of  right  and  wrong,  or  sin 
and  holiness,  of  God  and  the  devil,  to-day,  are  not  at  all  as  they  were  last  Sunday  ; 
who  holds  not  that  blessed  thing,  an  ever-changing,  because  an  ever-growiug  and 
ripening  faith,  but  a  mere  sand-hill  of  bewilderment,  liable  to  be  blown  anywhere 
by  the  next  great  storm.  Then  there  is  another  sort  of  preacher,  who  is  like  the 
red  light  at  the  head  of  a  railway  night  train.  He  is  made  for  warning  ;  he  comes 
to  tell  of  danger.  That  is  the  work  of  his  life.  When  he  is  not  doing  that,  he 
has  nothing  to  do.  I  bear  friends  at  times  question  whether  this  man  has  a 
Divine  mission.  Surely,  if  there  be  danger  to  the  soul, — and  that  question  is  not 
yet  decided  in  the  negative, — then  he  has  to  the  inner  life  a  mission  as  Divine  as 
that  of  the  red  lamp  to  the  outer  life.  And  I  know  myself  of  men  who  have 
turned  sharp  out  of  the  track  before  his  fierce  glare,  who,  but  for  him,  had  been 
run  down,  and  into  a  disgraceful  grave.  But  the  true  preacher  of  holiness,  the 
real  forerunner  of  Christ,  is  the  man  who  holds  up  in  himself  the  Divine  truth,  as 
a  true  mirror  holds  the  light,  so  that  whoever  comes  to  him,  will  see  his  own 
character  just  as  it  is.  Such  a  man  was  this  who  mastered  a  king.  His  soul  was 
never  distorted  by  the  traditions  of  the  elders,  or  the  habits  of  "  good  society," 
as  it  is  called.  On  the  broad  clear  surface  of  his  soul,  as  on  a  pure  still  lake,  you 
saw  things  as  if  in  a  great  deep.  He  had  no  broken  lights,  for  he  held  fast  to  his 
own  primitive  nature,  and  to  his  own  direct  inspiration.     {R.  Colly er.) 

Ver.  26.  And  the  Wng  was  exceeding  sorry. — Crisis  hours: — The  acute  and 
watchful  physician  knows  that  a  disease  runs  to  a  crisis,  and  that  there  are  points 
of  time  when,  if  the  patient  is  carefully  nursed  and  oared  for,  curative  tendencies 
will  set  in,  and  his  health  may  be  restored.  Now,  men  are  in  the  same  condition 
spiritually,  and  if  there  were  only  some  oversight  of  them  they  might  be 
saved ;  but,  alas  I  they  themselves  cannot  perpetuate  these  hours ;  they 
will  not ;  and  we  stand  outside  and  know  nothing  of  them.  (H.  W,  Beecher.) 
Sorrow  not  always  Divine : — Herod  was  •♦  sorry  **  when  Salome  asked  for 
the  head  of  John.  But  *♦  sorry"  for  what?  Was  it  on  account  of  respect  and 
love  for  the  prophet?  or  was  he  sorry  because  he  feared  popular  indignation? 
or  because  he  felt  that  this  was  going  a  little  too  far  in  cruelty  and  injustice  ? 
Men  are  sorry  in  various  ways.  One  is  sorry  for  his  sins,  and  another  is  sorry  for 
his  scruples.  One  is  sorry  that  he  made  a  fraudulent  profit,  and  another  is  sorry 
that  he  did  not.  One,  with  strong  anguish,  mourns  the  loss  of  a  friend,  and 
another  the  loss  of  a  fortune.  One  sheds  drops  of  pity,  and  one  of  mortification. 
The  mother  is  sorry  for  her  dead  babe  that  lies  upon  her  breast  like  a  withered 
blossom,  and  the  miser  is  sorry  to  part  with  a  dollar.  Sorrow  is  not  always 
Divine,  and  tears  are  not  always  of  the  kind  that  consecrate.  In  Herod's  case  it 
is  quite  significant  that  we  cannot  exactly  tell  why  he  was  sorry.  One  thing  we 
know,  that  his  sorrow  was  not  strong  enough  to  stop  the  hand  of  the  executioner, 
and  keep  himself  from  crime.  It  was  not  strong  enough  to  resist  the  sense 
of  shame,  and  the  impulse  of  the  hour.      {E.  H.  Chapin.)  Conditions  of 

promise  keeping  .'—Must  a  man,  then,  always  keep  a  promise  7  I  say,  No.  Let 
ns  look  at  some  of  the  conditions.  1.  A  promise  of  that  which  in  itself  is 
impoMible,  I  need  not  bay,  a  mau  cannot  fulfil.  It  is  the  making  of  sueh  a  promise 


24«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  n. 

that  is  a  sin.  2.  When  the  fulfilment  of  a  promise  is  rendered  impoBsible  hj  the 
happening  of  subsequent  events,  a  man  who  makes  it  is  released  from  fulfilling  that 
promise — at  any  rate,  so  far  as  those  events  hinder  him  from  fulfilling  it.  Where 
a  man  promises  to  settle  upon  his  son-in-law  a  certain  stipulated  amount  in  case  of 
the  uniting  of  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  him,  if,  when  the  occasion  comes,  the 
father-in-law  is  bankrupt,  how  can  he  fulfil  his  promise  ?  Circumstances  have 
changed.  His  power  to  fulfil  his  promise  is  gone.  3.  When  the  thing  promised  ia 
contrary  to  the  law  of  the  land  it  is  void.  4.  Where  a  promise  is  made  which 
involves  a  violation  of  morality,  or  the  laws  of  God,  no  man  has  the  right  to  keep 
it.  And  this  is  exactly  the  case  that  Herod  found  himself  in.  He  was  a  fool  to 
make  the  promise  ;  he  was  a  demon  to  fulfil  it.  (fl.  W.  Beeeher.)  The  course  of 
xin: — Herod's  sin  began  in  a  very  common  place  for  the  beginning  of  deadly  sin. 
It  began  in  the  riot  and  levity  of  sensual  amusement.  The  fact  is,  that  Satan  only 
wants  the  occasion  of  a  beginning  of  a  sin  froni  as ;  however  slight  that  may  be, 
though  we  may  have  removed  from  the  sure  ground  of  a  clear  and  undefiled  con- 
science, by  a  step  of  a  hair's  breadth,  he  has  gained  all  that  he  wants.  He  haa 
removed  us  from  the  ground  where  we  could  watch  and  pray  :  he  has  put  the  fear 
of  God,  and  love  of  Christ,  out  of  our  hearts;  he  has  withdrawn  us  from  the 
presence  of  God,  tempted  us  to  come  forth  from  the  hiding-place  of  His  pavilion, 
and  the  secret  of  His  tabernacle ;  and  to  come  down  from  the  rock  on  which  we  had 
been  set  up  through  His  merciful  protection ;  and  then  we  are  completely  in  hia 
power.  Who,  then,  that  knowingly  begins  a  sin,  can  tell  where  it  will  end  ?  Most 
men  begin  it  with  a  notion  that  they  can  stop  in  its  course  when  they  like,  and  that 
they  will  have  the  opportunity  and  the  will  to  repent.  But  how  miserably  they  are 
mistaken  in  both  those  notions ;  they  hardly  need  even  Herod's  example  to  warn 
them.  We  have  seen  at  length  already,  how  utterly  unable  they  are  to  stop; 
and  a  very  few  considerations  will  show  how  little  reason  they  have  to  look  forward 
to  a  genuine  repentance.  They  forget,  in  the  first  instance,  the  nature  of  sin,  which 
is  to  harden  the  heart,  to  sear  the  conscience,  and  to  blind  the  understanding.  All 
these  effects  are  the  very  contrary  to  repentance.  And  they  may,  therefore  (since 
they  have  put  God  out  of  the  question),  as  well  expect  com  to  come  out  of  thistle 
seed  as  repentance  out  of  wilful  sin.  On  the  whole,  the  text  gives  ua  a  solemn 
warning  upon  the  nature  of  sin.  It  is  not  always  barefaced  and  audacious,  even 
when  most  heinous.  The  sinner  may  even  set  about  his  dreadful  taskwork  which 
Satan  has  set  him,  with  exceeding  sorrow,  as  did  Herod.  But  this  does  not  avail  to 
abate  its  violence,  or  to  lessen  their  guilt.  {R.  W.  Evans,  B.D.)  The  beginning 
of  evil  is  like  the  letting  out  of  water.  The  poet  tells  us  that  the  destruction  of  the 
lute  begins  with  the  first  rift ;  and  the  rottenness  of  the  fruit  with  the  first  speck. 
Rpsist,  I  pray  you,  the  first  temptation.  Endeavour  to  conquer  Herod.  (W.  Walters.) 
Tim  ejf'ects  of  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist  upon  Herod: — The  case  of  Herod 
and  Felix  much  alike.  We  are  not  told  of  Felix  that  he  ever  did  more  than 
tremble;  there  is  no  register  of  his  having  taken  any  steps  in  consequence  of  his 
conviction.  Herod  did  "  many  things  "  in  consequence  of  what  he  heard  from  the 
Baptist.  I.  Now  it  is  very  carefully  to  be  observed  (for  upon  this  we  shall  through- 
out have  to  lay  no  small  stress),  that  Hebod  feabed  John,  but  that  nothing  is  said 
FROM  WHICH  WE  CAN  iNFEB  THAT  Herod  FEABED  GoD.  Wc  are  uot,  pcrhapB,  awaro 
what  power  there  is  in  the  principle  of  the  fear  of  man,  for  it  will  often  cause  persona 
to  disobey  God,  and  peril  their  eternity,  rather  than  run  the  risk  of  a  frown;  And 
this  principle  may  operate  as  well  to  the  withdrawing  men  from  vice,  as  the  con- 
firming  them  in  it.  It  is  not  indeed  by  this  denunciation  of  sin  in  the  general,  that 
the  preacher  will  become  an  object  of  fear,  and  a  motive  to  reform  ;  for  a  man  will 
sit  with  the  greatest  complacence  under  the  universal  reproof,  and  think  it  nothing 
to  be  condemned  in  common  with  all.  But  when  he  denounces  particular  sins,  and 
thus,  as  it  were,  singles  out  a  few  from  the  mass,  he  may  cause  those  few  to  feel  so 
sensitively,  as  though  all  eyes  were  upon  them  ;  so  that  if  the  sina  be  such  as  may  be 
abandoned  without  great  pain,  they  will  be  likely  to  abandon  them  just  to  prevent 
the  being  again  thus  exposed.  They  give  up  one  thing  after  another,  according  as 
conscience  is  more  and  more  urgent ;  but  the  favourite  practice,  the  darling  passion, 
this  still  retains  its  mastery,  whilst  less  cherished  habits  are  broken,  and  less 
powerful  desires  are  subdued.  The  man  whose  master-passion  is  covetousness  may 
become  moat  rigidly  moral,  though  he  had  not  heretofore  been  distinguished  by 
purity  of  life ;  but  measured  morahty,  in  place  of  being  attended  with  diminished 
covetousness,  may  be  only  a  make  weight  with  conscience  against  the  abiding  and 
even  the  growing  eagerness  for  gain.   The  man  again,  whose  master-passion  is  sen- 


.  n.]  8T.  MARK.  247 

aaality,  may  give  much  in  alms  to  the  poor,  though  he  had  previoasly  been  accounted 
penurious ;  but  is  he,  therefore,  necessarily  less  the  slave  of  his  lust  7  Ah,  no.  He 
may  only  have  bought  himself  peace  in  the  Indulgence  of  his  appetites  by  liberality 
in  relieving  the  destitute.  It  is  the  same  in  the  case  of  every  other  master-passion. 
Unless  it  be  Herodias  that  is  put  away,  there  is  no  evidence  of  genuine  repentance ; 
all  that  is  surrendered  may  be  nothing  more  than  a  proof  of  the  value  put  upon 
what  is  retained.  And  therefore,  if  you  would  discriminate  between  reformation 
and  repentance,  if  yon  would  know  whether  you  have  limited  yourselves  to  the 
former  and  are  yet  strangers  to  the  latter,  examine  what  it  is  you  keep,  rather  than 
what  you  give  np.  Beformation  will  always  leave  what  you  love  best  to  the  last ; 
whereas  repentance  will  begin  with  the  favourite  sin,  or  go  at  once  to  the  root,  in 
place  of  cutting  off  the  branches.    II.  But  wb  said  that  it  was  a  tet  mobe  remabk- 

ABEL  statement,   IN  BErERENCB    TO    HeBOD,  KSPBCIALLT   AS   CONTRASTED   WITH  FeLIX, 

THAT  HE  HEARD  JoHN  GLADLY.  There  is  a  pleasure  in  being  made  to  feel  pain, 
even  where  a  loog  course  of  dissipation  has  not  generated  the  disease  of  ennui.  Is  it 
not  thus  with  the  frequenters  of  a  theatre,  who  flock  eagerly  to  their  favourite  amuse- 
ment when  some  drama  of  terror  and  crime  is  to  have  possession  of  the  stage  ?  They 
go  for  the  purpose  of  being  thrilled,  and  of  having  the  blood  made  to  creep,  and  of 
feeling  an  indefinable  horror  seize  upon  their  spirits.  They  are  altogether  disappointed 
if  no  such  effect  be  produced ;  and  unless  the  exhibition  of  fictitious  suffering  quite 
carry  them  away,  and  so  produce  all  the  emotions  which  witnessed  suffering  will  pro- 
duce, they  lay  blame  upon  those  who  have  conducted  the  mimicry,  and  count  them  de- 
ficient in  skill  and  in  power.  We  repeat,  then,  our  words,  that  there  is  a  pleasure  in 
being  made  to  feel  pain  even  with  those  who  cannot  be  said  to  have  worn  out  their 
sensibilities,  and,  of  course,  in  a  greater  measure  with  others  to  whom  such  descrip- 
tion applies.  And  would  it,  therefore,  follow  that  Herod  could  not  have  heard  John 
gladly  had  John  so  preached  as  to  make  Herod  tremble  ?  Oh  1  far  enough  from  this. 
It  may  just  have  been  the  fact  of  trembling  which  made  Herod  a  glad  hearer  of  the 
Baptist.  There  was  a  power  in  the  Baptist  of  exciting  the  torpid  feelings  of  a  jaded 
voluptuary.  Because  you  are  made  to  tremble,  and  because,  so  far  from  shrinking  at 
the  repetition  of  the  process,  you  come  with  eagerness  to  the  sanctuary  and  submit 
yourselves  again  to  the  same  overcoming  influence,  yon  may  easily  fancy  you  have 
a  just  apprehension  of  God's  wrath,  and  even  that  you  have  duly  prepared  yourselves 
for  a  day,  of  whose  terror  you  can  hear  with  something  of  pleasurable  emotion :  and 
therefore  we  have  laboured  to  show  you  that  there  may  be  a  complacency  and  glad- 
ness beneath  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  when  that  preaching  is  the  preaching  of 
vengeance,  which  is  whoUy  unconnected  with  any  effort  to  escape  what  is  threatened, 
bat  may  quite  consist  with  the  remaining  exposed  to  it  with  no  shelter  against  its  fury, 
no  real  dread  of  its  coming.  It  is  not  merely  possible,  but  in  a  high  degree  probable, 
that  a  man  addicted  to  gambUng  might  gaze  in  anguish  at  the  scenic  representation 
of  a  gambler,  hurried  on  ontil  utter  ruin  crushed  his  family  and  himself,  and  then 
pass  from  the  theatre  to  the  gambling-table,  and  there  stake  his  all  on  the  cast  of 
the  dice.  We  should  not  necessarily  conclude,  from  observing  the  frequency  with 
which  the  gambler  came  to  the  representation  of  the  gamester,  and  the  riveted 
interest  which  he  felt  in  the  harrowing  drama,  that  he  was  at  all  sensible  to  the 
evils  of  gambling,  or  would  at  all  endeavour  to  extricate  himself  from  its  fearful  fas- 
cinations ;  we  should,  on  the  contrary,  see  nothing  but  a  common  exhibition  of  our 
nature — a  nature  that  has  pleasure  in  excitement,  though  the  exciting  thing  be  its 
own  ruin,  if  we  knew  that  on  the  very  night,  after  listening  to  the  thrilling  cry  of 
the  maddened  victim  of  the  hazard  table,  he  hurried  to  the  scene  where  he  and  others 
did  their  best  towards  making  the  case  precisely  their  own.  We  need  not  draw  out 
a  parallel  between  such  an  instance  and  that  of  a  sinner,  who  can  listen  with  an  eager 
interest  to  the  descriptions  of  the  sinner's  doom,  and  then  depart  and  be  as  resolute 
as  ever  in  doing  evil  deeds.  The  parallel  must  be  evident  to  you  all,  and  we  only 
exhort  you  so  to  form  it  for  yourf^elves,  that  you  may  never  confound  the  haviwg 
pleasure  in  the  hearing  future  judgment  energetically  set  forth  with  the  being 
aUve  to  that  judgment,  and  watchful  to  remove  it  from  yourselves.  But  we  do 
not  design,  as  we  have  already  said,  to  ascribe  the  gladness  of  Herod  exclusively  to 
8Uoh  causes  as  we  have  alone  been  endeavouring  to  trace.  If  Herod  were  at  times 
made  to  tremble,  and  if  that  very  trembling  were  acceptable  as  a  species  of  animal 
excitement,  we  may  yet  suppose  that  this  was  not  the  only  account  on  which  he 
heard  the  Baptist  gladly.  Herod  had  "  done  many  things,"  and  it  is  therefore  likely 
that  he  thought  himself  sufficiently  righteous  and  secured  against  the  vengeance 
which  John  denounced  against  the  wicked.  He  may  have  become  that  most  finished 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n» 

of  all  hypocrites,  the  hypocrite  who  imposes  on  hitaself ;  and  having  wrought  him« 
self  into  a  persuasion  of  safety,  he  may  have  hearkened  with  great  delight  to  the 
descriptions  of  dangers  in  which  others  stood.  It  is  therefore  a  matter  of  prime 
moment,  that  we  warn  our  hearers  against  the  inferring  that  they  have  undergone  a 
moral  change,  from  the  finding  they  have  pleasure  in  listening  to  the  gospel.  For 
even  where  men  have  not,  like  Herod,  •♦  done  many  things,"  they  may,  like  Herod» 
"  hear  the  Baptist  gladly."  There  is  many  an  enthusiastic  lover  of  music,  who  mis- 
takes for  piety  and  religious  emotion,  the  feelings  of  which  he  is  conscious,  as  the 
sacred  anthem  comes  pealing  down  the  aisle  of  the  cathedral,  just  because  he  feels 
an  elevation  of  soul  and  a  kindhng  of  heart.  As  the  tide  of  melody  poured 
forth  from  the  orchestra  comes  floating  to  him,  he  will  imagine  that  he  has  really 
an  affection  towards  spiritual  things,  and  really  aspires  after  heaven.  Alas  I  alas  I 
though  music  be  indeed  an  auxiliary  to  devotion,  it  proves  no  devotion  that  you  can 
be  thrilled  and  lifted  out  of  yourselves  by  the  power  of  music.  It  is  altogether  on 
natural  feelings  and  sensibilities,  which  may  or  may  not  be  drawn  out  by  religion, 
that  the  lofty  strain  tells  with  so  subduing  an  effect ;  and  even  when  you  are  most 
carried  away  and  overcome  by  the  varied  notes,  I  see  no  reason  whatsoever,  why 
you  might  not  return  from  the  oratorio  of  the  "  Creation  "  and  ascribe  the  universe 
to  chance,  and  from  that  of  the  '*  Messiah  "  and  be  ready  with  the  Jews  to  crucify  the 
Christ.  The  case  is  altogether  the  same  with  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  In  sacred 
music,  it  is  not  the  words,  it  is  only  the  machine  by  which  the  words  are  conveyed, 
that  produces  feelings  which  the  man  mistakes  for  devotion.  He  may  be  without 
a  care  for  the  truth  which  is  uttered,  and  yet  be  fascinated  by  the  melodies  of  the 
utterance,  and  thus  take  the  fascination  as  proof  of  his  delight  in  spiritual  things. 
And  thus  in  the  case  of  preaching.  Indeed,  the  cases  are  so  identical,  that  it  was 
said  by  God  to  Ezekiel,  when  multitudes  of  the  impenitent  flocked  to  the  hearing 
of  him,  "  Thou  art  unto  them  as  a  very  lovely  song  of  one  that  has  a  pleasant  voice, 
and  can  play  well  upon  an  instrument."       (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Sin  haunting  the 

guilty  : — In  illustrating  how  Herod  was  haunted  by  the  ghost  of  his  sin — recall 
some  points  from  former  lessons,  as,  for  instance,  the  witness  of  Abel's  blood  from 
the  ground  against  Cain ;  and  the  self-reproaches  of  Joseph's  brethren,  when  the 
memory  of  their  sin  came  upon  them  in  after  years.  Beference  should  be  made  to 
the  poem  of  Eugene  Aram ;  to  the'night  scene  in  Macbeth,  where  Lady  Macbeth  tries 
to  cleanse  her  guilty  hands  ;  and  to  the  story  of  the  man  who,  to  gain  an  inheri- 
tance, flung  his  brother  into  the  sea,  and,  ever  after,  when  he  looked  upon  water,  saw 
his  brother's  dead  face  staring  up  from  the  depths.  There  is  one  stone  in  the  floor 
of  an  old  church  in  Scotland  which  stares  out  at  you  blood-red  from  the  gray  stonea 
around  it.  The  legend  tells  of  a  murder  committed  there,  and  of  repeated  fraitlegs 
attempts  to  cover  the  tell-tale  colour  of  that  stone.  Morally,  the  legend  is  true ; 
every  dead  sin  sends  its  ghost  to  haunt  the  soul  of  the  guilty.  The  progress 
of  sin : — A  drop  of  poison  is  poison  as  really  as  a  phial  of  it  is.  The  drop  and 
the  phial  differ  in  quantity,  not  quality.  Make  ever  so  slight  a  cut  on  your 
finger  with  a  poisoned  blade,  and  the  canker  is  carried  through  your  system,  pollut- 
ing all  your  blood.  The  leaven  put  into  the  meal  leavens  the  whole  lump.  The 
train  which  has  been  carelessly  left  to  stand  at  the  top  of  an  incline  begins  to  move 
down  slowly  at  first,  but  at  an  ever-increasing  speed,  till  at  last  it  thunders  down 
with  irresistible  swiftness,  carrying  destruction  to  whatever  opposes  it.  Trace  the 
progress  of  Herodias*  sin,  from  hate — which  is  latent  murder — to  actual  murder. 
The  sinful  snare: — When  we  wish  to  trap  an  animal,  we  hide  the  snare  and  show 
only  the  tempting  tit-bit.  We  hide  the  hook  beneath  the  bait.  Compare  Satan** 
trap  for  Herod — a  dancing  girl,  practising  her  seductive  arts. 

Vers.  30,  31.  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert  place. — TJie  8aviow'$ 

invitation  to  rest : — I.  Note  the  tenderness  of  Christ.  II.  Labour  lightened  u 
NOT  LOST.    III.  Spiritual  work  especially  needs  rest.   IV.  The  breezy  mountaim- 

BIDE,  AWAY  FROM  MEN,  STILL  OIVES  THE  FINEST  SORT  OF  REST.    V.  BeST  NEVER  SEEMS  TO 

BE  HAD  WHERE  YOU  ARE,  BUT  ALWAYS  OTHER-WHERB  *,  and  sometimcs  when  you  reach 
the  quietest  spot,  the  disturbing  element  has  gone  there  before  yon.  (JR.  Glover.) 
The  necessity  for  rest  .*— God  has  signified  this  to  us  in  His  material  creation.  He 
has  made  the  earth  to  revolve  on  her  axis  in  a  way  that  brings  her  at  stated  seasons 
nnder  light  and  shade ;  and  He  has  proportioned  the  strength  of  man  to  those 
seasons.  I.  We  need  rest  physically.  The  hands  begin  to  slacken  and  the  eyes 
to  close  when  God  draws  the  curtain.  It  is  one  of  those  adaptations  which  show 
God's  kindly  purpose.   The  thoughtless  or  ooyetous  over-tension  of  our  own  powers 


.  ru]  ST,  MARK,  249 

the  hard  driving  of  those  under  our  control,  the  feeling  that  we  can  never  get 
«nough  work  out  of  our  fellow-creatures,  the  evil  eye  cast  on  their  well-earned  rest 
or  harmless  recreation,  are  all  to  be  denounced  and  condemned.  U.  This  law  applies 
also  to  MENTAL  exertlon.  The  mind  must  at  times  look  away  from  things,  as 
well  as  at  them,  if  it  is  to  see  clearly  and  soundly.  This  is  not  necessarily  waste 
time ;  when  the  mind  is  lying  fallow  it  may  be  laying  up  capacity  of  stronger 
growth.  III.  The  spiritual  faculties  are  subject  to  the  same  law.  A  continual 
strain  of  active  rehgious  work  is  apt  to  deaden  feeling  and  produce  formality.  {John 
Ker^  D.D.)        Recreative  rest : — I.  Recreative  best  is  becognized  by  God  as  a 

NECESSITY  FOB  MAN.      IL  It  SHODLD  HAVE  A  JUST  RELATION  TO  EARNEST  WORK.     Rest  IS 

the  shadow  thrown  by  the  substance  work,  and  you  reach  the  shadow  when  you 
have  passed  by  the  substance  which  throws  it.  III.  It  is  intended  to  exercibr  a 
WHOLESOME  INFLUENCE  ON  OHABACTEB.  If  it  fits  US  for  doing  our  work  better,  it  is 
right ;  otherwise,  it  is  wrong.  The  test  is,  Can  we  engage  in  it  in  conscious  fellow- 
ship with  Christ  ?  {A,  Rowland,  LL.B.)  The  Christian  uses  of  leisure : — It  is 
not  an  indolent  animal  repose,  but  that  rest  of  refreshment  which  befits  those  who 
have  Bouls.  Its  elements  are — I.  Communion  with  outward  nature.  The  world 
was  made  not  merely  for  the  support  of  man's  body,  but  also  for  the  nurture  of  his 
mind  and  spirit.  What  architect  would  build  his  house  only  with  an  eye  to  stores 
and  animal  comforts,  paying  no  regard  to  its  being  a  home  for  a  man,  with  windows 
opening  on  wide  expanses  of  land  and  sea,  or  quiet  nooks  of  homely  beauty  ?  We 
should  endeavour  to  make  the  inner  world  of  our  thoughts  about  God  and  spiritual 
things  not  a  separate  thing  from  the  world  of  creation,  but  with  a  union  like  that 
between  body  and  soul.  If  we  could  learn  to  do  this  aright,  it  would  strengthen  ns 
in  good  thoughts,  and  relieve  doubts  and  calm  anxieties.  Nature  can  do  very  little 
for  us  if  we  have  no  perception  of  a  Divine  Spirit  breathing  through  it ;  but  very 
much  if  the  Great  Interpreter  is  with  us.  If  we  surrender  ourselves  to  this  Teacher 
He  can  show  us  wide  views  through  narrow  windows,  and  speak  lessons  of  deep  calm 
in  short  moments.  II.  Intebcoubsb  with  fellow-Christians.  There  will  always 
be  a  want  in  a  man's  religious  nature  if  he  has  not  come  into  contact  with  hearts 
around  him  that  are  beating  with  a  Divine  life  to  the  pulse  of  the  present  time. 
Every  age,  every  circle,  has  its  lessons  from  God,  and  no  one  can  learn  them  all 
alone.  Let  ns  be  more  frank  and  confidential,  also  more  natural,  in  our  talk  on 
these  matters  concerning  our  mutual  faith  and  hope.  IIL  A  closer  converse 
WITH  THE  Master.  When  we  are  doing  our  appointed  work  in  God's  world,  or 
labouring  actively  for  the  good  of  others,  our  minds  are  dispersed  among  outward 
employments ;  we  may  be  serving  God  very  truly  all  the  time,  but  we  are  careful 
about  many  things,  and  have  not  leisure  to  sit  at  His  feet  and  speak  to  Him  about 
our  own  individual  wants.  It  is  essential  that  we  should  from  time  to  time  secure 
leisure  for  this.  The  flame  of  devotion  will  not  bum  very  long  or  very  bright 
unless  you  have  oil  in  your  vessels  with  your  lamps.  {John  Ker,  D.D,)  Rest  by 
the  way : — Rest  is  an  absolute  necessity  of  life ;  without  it  the  body  dies.  The 
traveller  on  a  journey  looks  forward  to  some  spot  where  he  can  stay  a  while.  The 
sailor  has  his  haven  where  he  can  for  a  time  furl  his  sails  and  find  shelter  from  the 
storm  and  tempest.  The  wanderer  in  the  hot  desert  strains  his  eyes  to  see  the  one 
green  spot  in  all  that  sandy  waste  where  there  are  trees  and  water  and  the  promise 
of  rest.  And  the  sotd  needs  rest  as  well  as  the  body.  Just  as  too  much  excitement 
and  hurry  and  over-work  wear  out  our  bodily  strength,  so  our  spiritual  life,  the  life 
of  the  soul,  becomes  faint  and  weak  without  rest.  On  our  journey  from  earth  to 
heaven  we  need  some  quiet  harbours,  some  peaceful  spots,  where  we  can  find  rest. 
Jesus  has  built  such  cities  of  refuge  for  us.  His  pilgrims,  and  provided  quiet  havens 
for  His  people  as  they  pass  over  the  waves  of  this  troublesome  world,  L  The  sbb- 
▼ICE8  AND  BACBAMENTs  OF  THE  Chubch.  There  is  a  famous  bell  in  a  certain  church 
abroad  known  as  the  "Poor  Sinner's  Bell."  This  is  how  it  got  its  name.  Five 
hundred  years  ago  a  bell-founder  was  engaged  in  casting  this  bell.  For  a  few 
moments  he  left  a  boy  in  charge  of  the  fumase,  charging  him  not  to  touch  the 
apparatus  which  held  the  molten  metal  in  the  cauldron.  The  boy  disobeyed  his 
master,  and  meddled  with  the  handle.  Instantly  the  liquid  metal  began  to  pour 
into  the  mould.  The  terrified  boy  ran  to  tell  the  bell-founder,  who,  thinking  his 
great  work  was  ruined,  struck  the  boy  in  a  fit  of  passion,  and  killed  him.  When 
the  metal  was  cold,  the  bell,  instead  of  being  spoiled,  was  found  to  be  perfect  in 
shape  and  singularly  sweet  in  tone.  The  unhappy  bell-founder  gave  himself  up  for 
the  murder  of  the  boy,  and  as  he  was  led  to  execution  the  Poor  Sinner's  Bell  rang 
out  sweetly,  inviting  all  men  to  pray  for  the  doomed  man,  and  warning  all  men  of 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha».  n. 

the  effects  of  disobedience  and  anger.  la  there  no  Poor  Sinner'e  Bell  among  ntt 
Does  the  ohnrch  bell  bring  no  message  to  you  7  II.  Pbivatb  pbayeb.  IIL  Biblb 
KEADiMO.  Pat  your  heart  into  this,  and  yon  will  find  a  refreshment,  a  resting 
place.  It  will  take  you  for  a  time  out  of  the  world,  out  of  the  great,  busy,  noisy 
Vanity  Fair,  and  you  can,  as  it  were,  walk  in  God's  garden,  or  wander  through  Hu 
great  picture  gallery.  Men  or  women  who  have  lived  and  died  in  faith  will  be  your 
companions,  your  examples.  {H.  J.  Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.)  Rest  and  tpork : — 
I.  There  is  no  true  rest  which  has  not  been  earned  by  work.  IL  The  duty  of 
resting  has  the  same  reasons  as  the  duty  of  working.  III.  Solitude  is  the  proper 
refreshment  after  public  work,  and  preparation  for  it.  IV.  The  spirit  can  never  be 
at  leisure  from  compassion,  sympathy,  love.  {E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  No  leisure :  — 
Duty  of  religious  teachers  to  point  out  and  rebuke  social  evils.  One  of  these  is  the 
want  of  leisure.  A  fair  amount  of  labour  is  necessary  and  desirable,  but  when  work 
is  80  absorbing  that  mind,  afTections,  and  spiritual  life  are  neglected,  we  sin  against 
law  of  nature  and  God.  So  far  as  labour  out  of  doors  is  concerned.  God  Himself 
interposes  by  drawing  the  curtain  of  night ;  but  in  certain  trades,  through  the 
ambition  of  the  trader  or  the  carelessness  of  the  general  public,  young  people  are 
often  kept  on  their  feet  twelve  or  fifteen  hours,  with  scarcely  time  allowed  to  swallow 
a  morsel  of  food.  The  wrongs  of  these  silent  sufferers  ought  to  be  redressed.  Let 
us  not  forget — I.  That  earnest  wokk  is  Divinely  appointed.  Before  the  Fall  in 
the  Garden  of  Eden.  Afterwards  in  the  fourth  commandment.  Labour  and  rest 
are  linked  together  by  God  in  indissoluble  bonds.  Work  is  necessary  to  (1)  human 
progress ;  (2)  the  preservation  of  society ;  (3)  the  nobility  of  man.  I  confess  that 
I  gympatluze  very  much  with  the  American  who  was  told  by  an  English  tourist 
that  he  was  surprised  to  find  no  "  gentlemen  "  in  his  country.  "  What  are  they  ?  ** 
was  the  reply.  ♦•  Oh,"  said  he,  ••  people  who  don't  work  for  their  living.**  "  Yea, 
we  have  some  of  them,*'  replied  the  shrewd  New  Englander,  "  only  we  call  them 
tramps."  Thank  God  if  the  necessity  of  work,  and  the  opportunity,  and  the  power 
for  work  are  youra ;  and  in  whatever  sphere  of  life  you  are  placed,  pray  that  you 
may  deserve  at  last  the  epitaph  which  was  put,  at  his  own  request,  on  the  tomb 
of  one  of  the  bravest  and  most  brilliant  Christian  soldiers  England  ever  had : 
*'  Here  lies  Henry  Lawrence,  who  tried  to  do  his  duty."  II.  That  sditablk  leisubb 
IS  uiPEBATivELY  BEQUiBED.  Observc  the  evils  resulting  from  long  hours  of  labour. 
1.  Physical.  Constant  strain  and  tension.  2.  Mental.  Mo  chance  of  improving 
the  mind  by  reading,  classes,  societies,  <&o.  3.  Moral.  When  the  young  people  do 
get  free,  scarcely  anything  is  open  to  them  but  what  may  tend  to  their  corruption. 
And  the  temptation  comes  at  a  time  when  there  is  the  more  danger  of  yielding  to 
it,  from  the  reaction  which  follows  continuous  work  and  induces  a  craving  for 
excitement.  4.  Beligious.  Home-training  rendered  impossible.  Lord's  Day  almost 
necessarily  devoted  exclusively  to  bodily  rest  and  recreation,  and  so  worship 
neglected.  III.  That  this  just  claim  fob  leisubb  is  often  disbeoabded.  Things 
are,  in  some  respects,  much  better  than  they  were.  The  wholesale  houses,  and 
many  offices,  close  earlier  than  before,  and  Saturday  is  a  half-holiday.  But  this 
improvement  only  affects  certain  trades  and  districts.  Those  in  retail  shops — 
milliners,  dressmakers,  <fec.,  remain  unrelieved.  Leisure  is  the  more  required  now, 
because  work  is  done  much  more  strenuously  and  exhaustingly  than  hitherto.  IV. 
Eemedies.  1.  Combination  among  employSs,  2.  Agreement  among  employer!. 
It  is  for  their  own  interest.  3.  More  enlightened  public  opinion,  resulting  in  altered 
practice.  (1)  Give  up  late  shopping,  so  that  there  shall  no  longer  be  a  demand  for 
protracted  labour.  (2)  Encourage  employers  who  show  their  willingnesa  to  do  what 
is  right  in  this  matter.  (3)  Allow  a  reasonable  time  for  execution  of  orders,  bo  thai 
the  beautiful  dress  at  a  party  shall  not  be  hideous  in  the  sight  of  angels  by  the 
stains  of  tears  and  blood  they  alone  can  aee.  {A.  Rowland,  LL.B.)  A  victim  to 
want  of  leisure  : — A  well-known  visitor  among  the  poor  found  living  in  a  notorious 
court  a  woman  who  was  known  as  '*  the  Button-hole  Queen,"  who  often  gave  work 
away,  poor  though  she  was,  to  those  poorer  than  herself.  Beaerved  aa  she  appeared 
to  be,  she  was  at  last  induced  to  tell  her  story,  which  accounted  for  the  interest  ahe 
took  in  the  poor  girls  around  her ;  and  poor  they  were,  for  fancy  the  misery  of 
making  2,880  button-holes  in  order  to  earn  10s.,  and  having  "  no  time  even  to 
cry  I  "  Her  story  was  this  :  Her  daughter  had  been  apprenticed  to  a  milliner  at 
the  West  End.  She  was  just  over  sixteen,  and  a  bright  young  Christian,  She  got 
through  her  first  seaaon  without  breaking  down  ;  but  the  aecond  was  too  much  for 
hei.  She  did  not  complain,  but  one  day  she  was  brought  home  in  a  cab,  having 
broken  a  blood-vessel,  and  there  she  lay,  propped  up  by  pillows,  her  face  white  as 


n.]  ST,  MARK,  251 

death,  except  for  two  spots  where  it  had  been  flecked  by  her  own  blood.  To  ase 
the  mother's  own  words :  "  She  smiled  as  she  saw  me,  and  then  we  oarried  her  in, 
and  when  the  others  were  gone  she  clnng  ronnd  my  neck,  and  laying  her  pretty 
head  on  my  shoulder,  she  whispered,  *  Mother,  my  own  mother,  I've  come  home  to 
diet'"  Killed  by  late  hours  I  She  lingered  for  three  months,  and  then  she  passed 
away,  but  not  before  she  had  left  a  message  which  became  the  hfe-inspiration  of 
her  mother :  "  For  my  sake  be  kind  to  the  girls  like  me ; "  and  that  message,  with 
God's  blessing,  may  make  some  of  you  think  and  resolve,  as  it  did  the  poor 
•'Button-hole  Queen.*'  {Ibid.)  Ministen  need  rest: — The  apostles  were  well- 
nigh  overwhelmed  with  their  labours,  for  work  had  made  work :  they  were  cum- 
bered with  much  serving — not  preaching  the  gospel  only,  but  healing  and  exorcising ; 
their  meals  and  needful  rest  were  broken  in  upon  by  importxmate  crowds ;  and  so 
the  Lord,  to  teach  us  that  His  ministers  must  have  time  for  needful  refreshment, 
does  not  recruit  them  by  a  miracle,  but  insists  upon  their  using  natural  means. 
And  is  it  not  so  now?  Is  not  many  an  active  and  self-denying  minister  well-nigh 
broken  down  and  worn-out,  because  there  is  no  time  for  thought  and  rest,  and 
tranquil  meditation,  and  a  change  of  scene?  Bich  men,  with  many-roomed 
mansions,  could  not  do  a  greater  kindness  to  poor  over-worked  ministers  than  by 
inviting  them  from  their  crowded  streets  and  alleys  to  find  a  little  rest  and  leisure 
in  their  multitudes  of  unused  apartments.  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  Re$t  in  nature  : — 
For  all  organic  life  God  has  provided  periods  of  repose,  during  which  repair  goes 
on  in  order  to  counteract  the  waste  caused  liy  activity.  In  the  spring-time  we  see 
movement  and  stir  in  gardens,  fields,  and  hedgerows,  which  continues  till  the  fruits 
are  gathered  in  and  the  leaves  fall;  but  then  winter's  quiet  again  settles  down  over 
all,  and  nature  is  at  rest.  Even  the  flowers  have  their  time  for  closing  their  petals, 
and  their  sleeping  hours  come  so  regularly,  and  yet  are  so  varied  in  distribution 
among  them,  that  botanists  can  construct  a  floral  clock  out  of  our  English  wild- 
flowers,  and  tell  the  hour  of  night  or  day  by  their  opening  or  closing.  The  same 
God  who  created  the  flowers  and  appointed  the  seasons,  ordained  the  laws  of 
Israel,  and  by  these  definite  seasons  of  rest  were  set  apart  for  the  people — the 
Sabbath,  the  Jubilee  year,  and  the  annual  festivals.  Indeed,  in  every  age  and 
every  land,  the  coming  of  night  and  the  victory  of  sleep  are  hints  of  what  God  has 
ordained  for  man.  {A.  Rowland^  LL.B.)  The  seaaon  of  rest: — The  first  of  these 
principles  is  that  rest  is  the  result  and  the  fruit  of  labour  and  toil ;  it  is  the  right 
and  duty  of  workers.  The  second  principle  which  I  venture  to  lay  down  with 
reference  to  recreation  is  this — that  its  proper  object  is  to  prepare  us  for  further 
work.  There  is  yet  one  other  principle  to  be  noticed  in  connection  with  our  subject, 
viz.,  that  in  our  rest  and  recreation  we  should  maintain  a  consciousness  of  God's 
presence,  and  carry  out  the  apostolic  rule— whether  you  eat  or  drink,  or  whatever 
you  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  {J.  F.  Kitto^  M,A.)  Recreation : — Luther 
used  to  sport  with  his  children ;  Edmund  Burke  used  to  caress  his  favourite  horse ; 
Thomas  Chalmers,  in  the  dark  hour  of  the  Church's  disruption,  played  kite  for 
recreation — as  I  was  told  by  his  own  daughter ;  and  the  busy  Christ  said  to  the 
busy  apostles :  "  Come  ye  apart  awhile  into  the  desert  and  rest  yourselves. "  And 
I  have  observed  that  they  who  do  not  know  how  to  rest  do  not  know  how  to  work. 
{Dr.  Talmage.)  Seclusion  with  Christ : — It  was  a  time  of  mooming.  Our  Lord 
had  just  heard  of  the  death  of  a  near  kinsman ;  that  lion-hearted  man  who  had 
confronted  a  king  in  his  adultery,  and  had  given  his  Ufe  as  a  martyr.  His  death, 
with  its  circumstances,  affected  no  doubt  with  more  than  common  sorrow  the 
tender,  loving,  most  human  heart  of  Jesus.  Also  it  waa  one  of  those  dangerous 
times  in  human  life,  at  which  the  accomplishment  of  a  diflScult  duty  is  apt  to 
throw  us  off  our  guard,  and  through  self-complacency  to  induce  slumber.  The 
apostles  had  just  returned  from  a  difficult  mission,  and  had  come  back  to  report 
to  their  Master  both  what  they  had  done  and  what  they  had  taught.  And  for  this 
third  reason  also.  Theirs  was  a  busy  life,  a  life  of  great  unrest  at  all  times : 
'*  there  were  many  coming  and  going,  and  they  had  no  leisure  so  much  as  to  eat." 
For  some  purposes  indeed  the  world  cannot  be  too  much  with  us.  With  it  and  in  it 
lies  our  work.  To  encourage  the  activities,  to  direct  the  energies.  Besides  which, 
there  are  not  only  virtues  which  can  have  no  exercise  but  in  society — there  are 
also  many  faults  which  spring  up  inevitably  in  solitude.  There  are  some  influences 
of  the  world  which  need  a  strong  counteraction.  One  of  these  is  irritation.  Another 
of  these  evil  influences  is  what  must  be  called,  in  popular  language,  worldliness. 
And  there  is  this,  too,  in  the  presence  of  the  world,  that  it  keeps  under,  of  necessity, 
the  lively  action  of  conscience,  and  makes  any  direct  access  to  God  an  absolute 


25J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Tfc 

impossibility.  A  Christian  man  thinks  it  no  part  of  religion,  but  the  very  contrary, 
to  do  his  worldly  business  badly.  If  he  is  to  do  it  well,  he  must  give  his  thoughts 
to  it  If  he  is  to  give  his  thoughts  to  it,  the  lively  presence  of  high  and  holy  topics 
of  meditation  is  scarcely  possible.  The  correcting  necessity — "  Come  ye  yourselves 
apart  into  a  desert  place,  and  rest  awhile."  This  seciasion  mav  be  either  periodical 
or  occasional.  Think  what  night  is,  and  then  say  what  we  should  be  without  it. 
And  that  which  night  is,  in  one  aspect,  as  a  periodical  withdrawal  from  the 
injurious  influences  of  the  multitude,  that,  in  another  point  of  view,  and  yet  more 
impressively,  is  God's  day  of  rest,  tiie  blessed  Resurrection-day,  the  Christian 
Sunday.  One  He  visits  with  a  loss,  and  one  with  a  misfortune,  and  one  with  a 
bereavement,  and  one  with  disease.  But  there  remains  just  one  caution. 
We  must  not  wait  for  this  seclusion  by  Christ  Himself.  If  Christ  comes  not 
to  take  us  aside,  we  must  go  aside  to  Him.  {G.  J,  Vaughan,  D.D.)  The 
higher  use  of  retirement  .-—And  after  the  weary  six  days  have  seen  him 
burning,  glowing,  sacked,  replenished,  and  sacked  again,  Sunday  comes;  and 
thousands  of  men  do  on  Sunday  what  railroads  do— run  the  old  engine  into 
the  machine-shop,  and  make  the  needed  repairs,  that  it  may  be  fit  to  start 
again  on  Monday.  So  men,  dealing  in  the  affairs  of  life,  and  coming  under  its 
excitements,  go  into  retirement  purely  and  merely  to  rest,  simply  to  refit.  It  is  a 
life  that  is  not  worthy  of  a  man.  It  is  a  life  that  certainly  is  adverse,  in  all  its 
influences,  to  the  plenary  development  of  that  which  makes  man  the  noblest  animal 
on  the  globe.  We  do  not  need  retirement  because  we  are  so  weary :  we  need  it, 
and  enough  of  it,  and  we  need  it  under  certain  right  circumstances^  in  order  that 
we  may  think,  consider,  and  know  what  we  are,  where  we  are,  and  what  we  are 
doing.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Retirement  for  observation: — Then  we  need  these 
periods  of  rest  for  taking  new  observations.  Every  ship  that  makes  a  voyage,  after 
fogs  or  storms  obscured  the  sky,  seizes  the  first  moment  of  starlight  or  sunlight  to 
take  observations.  The  seamen  have  been  going  by  dead  reckoning  or  by  no 
reckoning,  but  when  they  get  an  opportunity  to  make  an  observation,  they  can 
very  soon  tell  by  computation  where  they  are.    {Ibid.)        Rest  from  one  set  oj 

ideai : One  fact  which  we  cannot  afford  to  overlook  is  that  the  instrument  of  the 

soul  in  all  its  mental  and  emotional  workings  is  a  material  brain,  undergoing  with 
each  modification  of  tiiought  and  play  of  feeling  a  corresponding  molecular  change. 
In  common  with  every  other  bodily  organ,  its  healthy  activity  is  limited  by  its  need 
of  nutrition  and  sleep.  Besides,  the  researches  of  men  like  Professor  Ferrier  have 
proved  that  there  is  a  localization  of  faculty  in  the  brain,  so  that  persevering  with- 
out intermission  in  one  set  of  ideas  has  an  effect  upon  it  corresponding  to  the 
exclusive  use  of  one  set  of  muscles  in  another  part  of  the  body,  with  similar  results 
also  of  disproportionate  development  and  consequent  incompleteness  of  mental 
chsu-acter.  These  are  only  physiological  explanations  of  the  well-established  facts 
of  experience,  that  work  without  play  induces  dulness,  that  the  bow  must  some- 
times be  unbent,  that  there  must  be  in  mental  culture  not  only  a  rotation  of  various 
crops,  but  periodical  fallows,  or  barrenness  will  be  the  result.  In  the  name  of 
morality  and  religion,  also,  a  protest  may  be  raised  against  unceasing  and  exclusive 
occupation  for  the  welfare  of  others,  as  the  ideal  of  a  worthy  life.  God  sent  us  into 
the  world  to  grow  and  realize  His  own  thought  in  creating  us.  If  human  welfare 
is  an  end  of  our  existence,  our  own  welfare  is,  at  least,  part  or  it.  But  it  is  incon- 
sistent with  our  welfare  to  dwarf  and  repress  any  part  of  our  God-given  nature. 
We  were  intended  to  grow  all  round,  on  our  north  side  as  well  as  on  the  side  that 
faces  the  sun.  The  sense  of  melody,  the  feeling  of  humour,  the  perception  of 
beauty  in  form  and  colour,  and  the  social  instinct,  are  as  much  from  God  as  our 
conscience  of  right  and  wrong.  They  are  of  immeasurably  less  importance,  but  of 
some  importance,  nevertheless.  Their  culture  cannot  be  neglected,  or  their 
cravings  repressed,  without  a  corresponding  loss  of  mental  symmetry  {E,  W, 
ShalderSf  B.A.)  The  richer  f&r  rest : — The  first  element  of  recreation  is  rest. 
Change  of  employment  brings  a  measure  of  relief,  but  no  change  of  employment 
will  dispense  with  the  necessity  there  is  for  rest.  To  suppose  that  the  time  spent 
in  it  is  so  much  deducted  from  the  world's  welfare  or  our  own  is  a  great  mistake. 
In  a  speech  delivered  by  Lord  Macaulay,  more  than  thirty  years  ago,  advocating 
a  shortening  of  the  hours  of  labour,  he  describes,  in  language  as  true  as  it  is 
eloquent,  the  material  advantages  this  country  has  derived  from  the  observance  ol 
the  Sabbath.  He  says:  *'The  natural  difference  between  Campania  and  Spitz- 
bergen  is  trifling  when  compared  with  the  difference  between  a  country  iimabited 
by  men  full  of  bodily  and  mental  vigour  and  a  country  inhabited  by  men  sunk  in 


«HAP.  V1.3  8T,  MARK.  253 

bodily  and  mental  decrepitnde.  Therefore  it  is  that  we  are  not  poorer,  but  richer, 
because  we  have,  through  many  ages,  rested  from  our  labour  one  day  in  seven. 
That  day  is  not  lost.  While  industry  is  suspended,  while  the  plough  lies  in  the 
furrow,  while  the  Exchange  is  silent,  while  no  smoke  ascends  from  the  factory,  a 
process  is  going  on  quite  as  important  to  the  wealth  of  nations  as  any  process 
which  is  performed  on  more  busy  days.  Man,  the  machine  of  machines,  the 
machine  compared  with  which  all  the  contrivances  of  the  Watts  and  the 
Arkwrights  are  worthless,  is  repairing  and  winding  up,  so  that  he  returns  to  his 
labours  on  the  Monday  with  clearer  intellect,  with  livelier  spirits,  with  renewed 
corporeal  vigour.  Never  will  I  believe  that  what  makes  a  population  stronger, 
and  healthier,  and  wiser,  and  better,  can  make  it  poorer."  (Ibid.)  Retirement 
tisential  to  the  growth  of  true  piety  : — There  were  two  classes  to  whom  this 
invitation  was  addressed — the  mourners  for  John  Baptist  {see  preceding  verses, 
and  Matt.  xiv.  12,  13)  and  the  triumphant  apostles,  exulting,  excited,  and  perhaps 
unduly  elated  (ver.  30).  I.  The  circumstances  in  which  the  Savioub  makes 
THIS  APPEAL.  1.  On  the  Lord's  day.  2.  Frequent  intervals  during  the  week.  3. 
Seasons  of  sickness.  4.  Various  relative  trials.  II.  The  nature  of  the  betire- 
MSNT  TO  WHICH  WB  ARE  INVITED.  1.  Not  simply  Withdrawal  from  others.  You 
may  live  aloof  from  the  world,  and  yet  not  be  with  Christ.  2.  Not  monkish  seclu- 
fiion.  It  was  only  ♦*  for  awhile."  Not  like  the  hermits  of  the  deserts.  3.  To  enjoy 
His  sympathy.  4.  To  listen  to  His  instructions ;  to  learn  His  truth.  5.  To  feel 
the  sanctifying  effect  of  His  presence.  III.  The  purposes  fob  which  this  betire- 
MBNT  IS  needed— "  They  had  not  leisure  so  much  as  to  eat."  1.  Our  physical 
nature  requires  it.  2.  For  our  spiritual  health.  The  late  Sir  E.  Parry  was  remark- 
able for  his  regular  observance  of  devotional  exercise  on  board  his  ship,  and  equally 
for  his  skill  and  presence  of  mind  in  times  of  danger.  •'  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love 
of  God."  There  is  much  growth  of  a  warm,  etill,  summer's  night,  when  the  dew  is 
quietly  descending  on  the  plant.  3.  To  prepare  us  for  usefulness.  Lamps  must  be 
secretly  fed  with  holy  oil.  4.  To  prepare  us  to  be  alone  with  Christ  at  last.  (1) 
Here  is  a  test  for  your  state.  Can  you  bear  His  presence  alone.  (2)  Secure  time 
for  being  alone  with  Christ.  By  rising  early ;  by  being  less  in  company  with  the 
world ;  by  planning  how  you  will  spend  a  day.  (3)  Assist  others  to  obtain  it.  Let  em- 
ployers afford  it  to  their  servants,  (Stiidies).  Rest  awhile : — It  will  amply  repay 
the  pilgrim  to  turn  aside  sometimes  from  the  beaten  track ;  for  the  incidental  teach- 
ings of  the  Blessed  Life,  like  the  wild  flowers  of  the  glen,  or  the  fern  sheltering  in  the 
fissure,  or  the  silver  stream  dripping  from  the  rock,  or  the  still  pool  with  its  myriad 
beauties,  are  no  inconsiderable  element  in  the  attainment  of  that  wisdom  whose  ways 
are  pleasantness,  and  whose  paths  are  peace.  The  lessons  of  the  story  are  broad  and 
obvious.  Foregoing  the  lessons  of  this  story  as  a  whole,  it  will  be  profitable  to  give 
our  attention  to  that  one  feature  of  it  which  is  enshrined  in  the  words :  "  Come  ye 
yourselves  apart  into  a  desert  place,  and  rest  awhile."  I.  For  with  what  graphic 
force  do  the  words  on  which  the  Master's  invitation  was  based  descbibb  thb  un- 
BEST  OF  To-DAT — '*  There  were  many  coming  and  going."  We  meet  it  everywhere. 
On  all  sides  one  is  brought  face  to  face  with  work— exciting,  bewildering,  exhaust- 
ing. This  is  not  an  eccentricity,  an  abnormal  and  therefore  transitional  phe- 
nomenon; it  is  a  necessity  of  the  times.  The  energy  which  at  one  time  com- 
manded a  fortune  is  now  needed  to  win  one's  daily  bread.  Inventions  which  once 
excited  the  wonder  of  the  world  are  now  regarded  as  curiosities.  The  scholarship 
which  a  century  ago  secured  a  European  reputation  now  provokes  a  smile.  This  is 
growing  upon  as.  Such  a  state  of  things  cannot  be  viewed  without  anxiety.  Physio- 
logically, or  from  the  standpoint  of  the  political  economist,  this  wear  and  tear  of 
life  is  serious.  In  the  home-life  of  to-day  the  absorbing  interests  of  the  outside 
world  are  telling  with  terrible  force.  Bat  it  is  in  its  influence  upon  the  moral  and 
religious  life  that  the  present  unrest  is  to  be  viewed  with  the  gravest  anxiety.  The 
claims  of  the  day  upon  a  man's  thought,  energy,  time,  are  not  only  perilous  ;  they 
are  fatal  to  the  true  and  healthy  growth  of  the  soul ;  and  where  there  is  no  growth 
there  is  decay.  IL  The  pbxservativb  against  the  danosbs  of  thb  pbevalent 
VRBBST  AKD  BxoiTBVENT  wblch  the  words  of  the  Master  suggest — **  Come  ye  .  .  . 
and  rest  awhile."  For  there  is  no  peril,  no  necessity,  to  which  the  resources  of 
Divine  grace  and  sympathy  are  not  adjusted.  It  might  seem  superfluous  to  dwell, 
tven  for  a  moment,  on  the  imperative  need  there  is  for  physical  rest  in  these  days 
when  there  are  **  many  coming  and  going."    {R.  N,  Young,  DJ),) 

Vers.  8S,  84^— lad  Jena,  wliea  H«  eam«  ont,  aaw  mneh  peopli^  and  wu  moTtd 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ^ 

with  compassion.    Christ's  teaching  the  world's  great  need, — I.  The  psopiiB.    1.  The 
people  saw  Him.     2.  They  knew  Him.    3.  They  ran  afoot  thither.    4.  They  out- 
ran and  reached  Him.     H.  Thb  Lobd.    1.  He  came.    2.  He  saw.     3.  He  pitied. 
4.  He  taught.     {R.  Bonar,  D.D.)        The  compassion  of  Christ ;— I.  Thb  compassiow 
OF  Jesus  Chbist.    Compassion  is  a  branch  or  modification  of  kindness  of  heart, 
or  of  benevolence.     Under  the  influence  of  it  we  enter  into  the  circumstances  and 
feelings  of  others;  prompted  to  aid  and  relieve  them.     The  terra  "compassion" 
signities  to  sympathize,  or  to  suffer  along  with  others ;  and,  therefore,  while  it  is  a 
most  lovely  affection,  and  the  exercise  of  it  yields  the  purest  delight  on  the  one 
hand  ;  yet,  on  tiie  other,  it  is  always  attended  with  uneasy  feelings  and  painful 
sensations,  and  that  in  exact  proportion  to  the  strength  of  our  compassion.     Hence 
you  will  see,  that  when  compassion  is  ascribed  in  Scripture,  as  it  often  is,  to  God, 
it  must  differ  in  some  essential  points  from  human  compassion.    We  are  compound 
beings,  having  not  only  bodies,  but  rational  souls ;  and  possessing  not  only  the 
powers  of  understanding,  vill,  and  conscience,  but  instincts,  affections,  or  passions. 
But  "  God  is  a  Spirit"  a  simple  uncompounded  being.    In  Him  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  passion  ;  and,  consequently,  no  uneasy  feelings  or  painful  sensations  can 
attend  the  exercise  of  compassion  in  Him.    It  is  the  benevolent  and  ready  tendency 
of  His  gracious  nature  to  pity  and  relieve  the  miserable,  when  this  is  consistent 
with  His  sovereign  and  wise  pleasure.     "  I  will  have  compassion  on  whom  I  will 
have  compassion."    This  ready  and  benevolent  tendency  of  nature,  to  pity  and 
relieve  the  miserable,  was  one  of  the  brightest  and  loveliest  features  in  the  character 
of  the  Saviour ;  and,  from  eternity,  and  as  He  was  a  Divine  person,  it  was  exactly 
the  same  in  Him  as  in  the  other  persons  of  the  adorable  Trinity.     But  in  the  person 
of  Jesus  Christ  are  now  closely  united  both  the  Divine  and  human  natures ;  and, 
thus,  when  He  was  in  this  world,  in  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  acting  and  suffering 
in  our  stead,  compassion  in  Him  partook  of  the  nature  and  properties  both  of 
Divine  and  human  compassion.    He  possessed  not  only  the  perfections  of  Godhead, 
but  the  sinless  feehngs  and  affections  of  manhood.     "In  all  things  it  behooved 
Him  to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren,  that  He  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful 
High  Priest  in  things  pertaining  to  God."    In  His  present  state  of  glory,  He  wears 
our  nature,  and  will  do  so  for  ever  ;  and  He  is  said  to  be  "  touched  with  the  feeling 
of  our  infirmities,"  yet,  as  His  humbled  suffering  state  is  completely  at  an  end.  He 
is  really  and  tenderly,  though  not  painfully,  impressed  with  our  weaknesses,  sorrows, 
and  dangers.    But  the  case  was  widely  different  with  Him  while  in  this  world.    It 
was  then  a  part  of  His  humbled  suffering  state  to  take  oar  infirmities  on  Him,  to 
bear  our  griefs  and  carry  our  sorrows.    La  His  human  nature.  He  felt  our  sorrows 
and  wretchedness  as  far  as  His  sinless  and  unsinning  nature  could  feel  them.    He 
was  then  literally  "  moved  with  compassion."    He  felt  as  a  shepherd  does  for  his 
straying  sheep  ;  as  a  compassionate  man  for  suffering  humanity ;  aa  the  incarnate 
Bon  of  God,  in  the  character  of  Redeemer,  for  perishing  sinners.    "  And  Jesos, 
when  He  came  out,  saw  much  people,  and  was  moved  with  compassion  toward 
them,  because  they  were  as  sheep  not  having  a  shepherd ;  and  He  began  to  teach 
them  many  things."  11. 1  shall  speak  of  tbs  objeois  of  the  Savioub'b  compassion  : — 
L  Sinners  of  the  human  race  were  the  objects  of  His  Divine  and  eternal  compassion. 
In  common  with  the  Father  and  Spirit,  "  He  remembered  us  in  our  low  estate ;  for 
His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."   His  compassion  was  not  of  the  sentimental  specula- 
tive kind,  which  leads  many  to  say  to  the  naked  and  destitute,  "  Depart  in  peace, 
be  ye  warmed  and  filled ; "  but  to  do  no  more.    No.    It  was  real,  deep,  operative.  He 
pitied  sinners,  "  and  so  He  was  their  Saviour,"  and  did  and  suffered  all  that 
infinite  wisdom  and  justice  saw  to  be  necessary  to  procure  eternal  redemption  for 
them.    2.  During  the  time  the  Saviour  was  in  this  world,  the  condition  of  sinners 
daily  moved  His  compassion.    When  He  saw  the  widow  of  Nain  following  the  bier 
of  her  only  son  to  the  grave,  "  He  had  compassion  on  her,  and  said  unto  her,  Weep 
not.'*    8.  All  His  people,  even  the  best  and  hoUest  in  this  world,  are  the  objects 
of  His  compassion.    All  need  it.    "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  either 
were  already  perfect."    •*  For  in  many  things  we  offend  all."    4.  The  w^e^  the 
timid  and  doubting,  are  peculiarly  the  objects  of  His  compassion — who  are  weak  in 
the  faith,  who  are  of  a  fearful  mind,  who  are  harassed  with  temptations,  and  borne 
down  with  poverty  and  oppression,  vexations  and  bereavements.    Application :  1. 
Do  you  wish  to  have  objects  of  c  mpassion  presented  to  your  view  f    Think  of  th« 
heathen.    2.  This  subject  reads  an  important  lesson  to  all  ministers  of  the  gospel. 
We  should  be  imitators  of  the  compassion  of  Christ.    3.  Will  sinners  have  no 
eompasaioB  on  themselvM?     4.  Let  weak  and  timid  Christiani  be  eacovage^ 


▼L]  8T,  MARK,  255 

We  have  set  before  you  the  compassionate  Saviour.  Put  your  case  into  His 
hands.  Trust  in  His  compassion.  {Scottish  Pulpit.)  Pity  more  unselfis/i 
than  love :  —  We  often  speak  of  love  as  the  ultimate  passion,  but  there  is  a 
depth  even  beyond  love.  For  love  is  largely  its  own  reward,  and  so  may  possibl^y- 
have  an  element  of  imperfection,  but  pity  or  compassion  has  not  only  all  the  glory 
or  power  of  love,  but  it  forgets  itself  and  its  own  returning  satisfactions,  and 
goes  wholly  over  into  the  sufferings  of  others,  and  there  expends  itself,  not  turning 
back  or  within  to  say  to  itself,  as  does  love,  "  How  good  it  is  to  love  !  "  It  may  be 
a  factor  in  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  evil  that  it  calls  out  the  highest  measure 
of  the  Divine  love ;  a  race  that  does  not  suffer  might  not  have  a  full  revelation  of 
God's  heart.  What  I  Create  a  race  miserable  in  order  to  love  it  1  Yes,  if  so 
thereby  its  members  shall  learn  to  love  one  another,  and  if  thus  only  it  may  know 
the  love  of  its  Creator.  In  the  same  way  it  is  man's  consciousness  of  misery,  or 
self-pity,  that  reveals  to  him  his  own  greatness — a  thought  that  Pascal  turns  over 
and  over.  Pity  is  love  and  something  more:  love  at  its  utmost^  love  with  its 
principle  outside  of  itself  and  therefore  moral,  love  refined  to  utter  purity  by  ab- 
sorption with  suffering.  A  mother  loves  her  child  when  it  is  well,  but  pities  it 
when  it  is  sick,  and  how  much  more  is  the  pity  than  the  love  I  How  much  nearer 
does  it  bring  her,  rendering  the  flesh  that  separates  her  from  it  a  hated  barrier 
because  it  prevents  absolute  oneness,  dying  out  of  her  own  consciousness,  and 
going  wholly  over  into  that  of  the  child  whose  pains  she  would  thus,  as  it  were, 
draw  off  into  her  own  body  I  To  die  with  and  for  one  who  is  loved — as  the  poets 
are  fond  of  showing — is  according  to  the  philosophy  of  human  nature.  Might  not 
something  like  it  be  expected  of  God,  who  is  absolute  love?  And  how  shall  He  love 
in  this  absolute  way  except  by  union  with  His  suffering  children  f  Such  is  the 
nature  of  pity ;  it  is  a  vicarious  thing,  which  bare  love  is  not,  because  it  creates 
identity  with  the  sufferer.  {T.  T.  Munger.)  Christ's  pity  embraced  the  uncon- 
scious suffering  of  men : — It  is  not  to  be  thought,  however,  that  this  Christly  pity 
embraced  only  the  conscious  suffering  of  men.  It  is  an  undiscerning  sympathy 
that  reaches  only  to  ills  that  are  felt  and  confessed.  We  every  day  meet  men  with 
laughter  on  their  lips,  and  unclouded  brows,  who  are  very  nearly  the  greatest 
claimants  oi  pity.  Pity  him  who  laughs  but  never  thinks.  Pity  the  men  or  women 
who  fritter  away  the  days  in  busy  idleness,  calling  it  society,  when  they  might  read 
a  book.  Pity  those,  who,  without  evil  intent,  are  making  great  mistakes,  who  live 
as  though  life  had  no  purpose  or  end,  who  gratify  a  present  desire  unmindful  of 
future  pain.  Pity  parents  who  have  not  learned  how  to  rear  and  train  their 
children :  pity  the  children  so  reared  as  they  go  forth  unto  life  with  undermined 
health  and  weakened  nerves,  prematurely  wearied  of  Society,  lawless  in  their  dis- 
positions, rude  and  inconsiderate  in  their  manners,  stamped  with  the  impress  of 
chance  associations  and  unregulated  pleasures.  *'  No  !  it  is  not  pain  that  is  to  be 
pitied  BO  much  as  mistake,  not  conscious  suffering,  but  courses  that  breed  future 
Buffering.  Who  then  calls  for  it  more  than  those  who  have  settled  to  so  low  and 
dull  a  view  of  life  as  not  to  feel  the  loss  of  its  higher  forms,  content  with  squalor 
and  ignorance  and  low  achievement  or  mere  sustenance  T  It  is  now  quite  common  to 
say  at  the  suggestion  of  some  very  earnest  philanthropists  that  the  poor  and  de- 
graded do  not  suffer  as  they  seem  :  that  they  get  to  be  en  rapport  with  their  sur- 
roundings, and  so  unmindful  of  their  apparent  misery.  This  may  be  so,  but  even 
if  the  wind  is  thus  tempered  to  these  shorn  lambs  of  adversity,  it  is  no  occasion  for 
withholding  pity.  Nay  1  the  pity  should  be  all  the  deeper.  The  real  misery  here 
is,  that  these  poor  beings  do  not  look  upon  their  wretched  condition  with  horror 
and  disgust,  that  they  are  without  that  sense  and  standard  of  life  which  would  lead 
them  to  cry,  "  This  is  intolerable ;  I  must  escape  from  it."  Hence,  the  discerning 
Christ-like  eye  will  look  through  all  such  low  contentedness  to  the  abject  spirit 
behind  it,  and  there  extend  its  pity.  Not  those  who  suffer  most,  but  oftener  those 
who  suffer  least,  are  the  most  pitiable.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  85-44.  He  answered  and  said  onto  them,  Give  ye  them  to  mit.— Miracle 
of  tlie  loaves  : — The  miracles  of  Christ  ought  to  be  considered ;  they  are  not  trifles, 
and  they  ought  not  to  be  passed  over  as  if  they  were  the  mere  commonplaces  of  a 
daily  newspaper.  Everything  that  has  to  do  with  the  Son  of  God  is  worthy  of 
deepest  study.  What  He  did  at  one  time  is  an  index  to  what  He  will  do  again  when 
need  arises.  He  is  grand  in  emergencies,  and  will  rather  feed  His  sheep  by  miracle 
than  let  them  starve.  I.  Thb  quests.  1.  Their  great  number.  Feasting  on  an 
imperial  scale.    Five  thousand  gathered  together,  and  all  as  easOy  provided  for  at 


266  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  vr. 

if  there  had  been  but  five  I  2.  The  strange  character  of  the  guests.  A  nondescript 
multitude,  collected  from  all  classes.  Little  good  could  be  said  of  them,  except  that 
they  had  an  ear  to  hear  Jesus  preach,  and  were  especially  glad  if  the  sermon  was 
the  first  course,  with  loaves  and  fishes  for  the  second.  But  Jesus  did  not  wait  until 
men  deserved  it,  before  blessing  them.  Bad  or  good,  the  generous  Saviour  fed  them 
all  ;  and  He  is  willing  to  do  so  still.  3.  What  the  guests  had  in  common.  All 
hungry,  and  all  poor.  Yet  Christ  invites,  and  He  provides  everything.  We  only 
need  to  receive,  to  partake  of  the  fruit  of  His  compassion.  II.  The  orderliness 
OF  THE  GUESTS.  They  sat  down  in  ranks.  How  were  they  marshalled  so  well  ?  The 
Lord  of  Hosts  was  there  ;  He  knows  how  to  marshal  armies.  Out  of  our  disorder, 
Christ  makes  His  order.  However  it  may  seem  to  us,  God's  purposes  are  being 
carried  out,  and  at  the  right  time  we  shall  see  that  all  has  been  done  wisely  and 
well.  III.  The  pare  set  before  thb  guests.  Bread  and  fish — a  relish  as  well  as 
a  Eufficiency.  Christ  is  not  content  to  give  what  is  barely  enough  ;  He  likes  to  give 
more  than  is  actually  required.  You  shall  find  in  your  dish  a  secret  something  which 
will  sweeten  all.  IV.  The  waiters  at  thb  fkast.  The  disciples.  He  employs  men  to 
minister  to  men.  What  condescension  !  And  what  a  blessed  occupation  for  those 
whom  He  thus  employs.  V.  The  blessing.  Nothing  without  worship  and  thanks. 
Jesus  must  bless  our  labour,  or  it  will  be  fruitless.  Always  give  that  look  upward 
before  you  begin  your  work.  VI.  The  eating.  When  Jesus  provides  spiritual  meat  He 
intends  it  to  be  used — eaten.  If  you  put  two  canaries  in  a  cage  to-night,  and  in  the 
morning  when  they  wake  they  see  a  quantity  of  seed  in  a  box, — what  will  the  birds 
do  ?  Will  they  stop  and  ask  what  the  seeds  are  there  for?  No,  but  they  each  reason 
thus  :  *'  Here  is  a  little  hungry  bird,  and  there  is  some  seed ;  these  two  things  go 
well  together.**  And  straightway  they  eat.  Even  thus,  if  in  your  right  senses,  and 
not  perverted  by  sin,  you  will  say,  "  Here  is  a  Saviour,  and  here  is  a  sinner  ;  these 
two  things  go  well  together  ;  dear  Saviour,  save  me  a  sinner.  Here  is  a  feast  of 
mercy,  and  here  is  a  hungry  sinner  ;  what  can  that  feast  be  for  but  for  the  hungry, 
and  I  am  such.  Lord,  I  will  even  draw  near  and  partake  of  this  blessed  feast  of 
Thine  ;  and  unless  Thou  come  and  tell  me  to  begone,  I  will  feast  till  I  am  full." 
We  need  fear  no  repulse.  Jesus  rejects  none  from  His  feast  of  love.  Come  and 
partake,  and  the  more  fully  the  better  pleased  will  He  be.  VII.  The  clearing 
AWAY.  This  teaches  economy  in  the  use  of  the  Lord's  goods.  And  when  properly 
used,  not  only  is  there  never  any  lack,  but  abundance  over.  Christ's  power  cannot 
be  exhausted,  no  matrer  what  the  demands  upon  it  may  be.  Come,  for  all  things 
are  ready.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Feeding  the  Jive  thousand  :  a  miracle  : — ^A 
grand  display  of — I.  Wisdom.  1.  A  practical  discipline  of  the  Church  in  its  great 
function  towards  the  world.  2.  A  demonstration  to  the  world  of  the  principles  and 
order  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  II.  Power.  1.  Creative.  2.  Multiplying  human 
resources.  HI.  Mercy.  1.  Bodily,  in  the  relief  of  the  hunger,  consideration  for 
the  weariness  of  the  multitude.  2.  Spiritual,  in  giving  spiritual  bread,  in  teaching 
dependence  upon  God,  and  in  enjoining  economy  of  Divine  gifts.  {A.  F.  ifuir,  ilf.il.) 
A  parable  in  a  miracle  : — No  less  significant  as  parable  than  as  miracle.  Perhaps, 
iadeed,  the  suggestion  of  spiritual  things  was  its  chief  aim.  It  sets  forth  the  physical 
and  spiritual  dependence  of  men  upon  God,  and  the  Father's  willingness  and  power 
to  provide  for  His  children  ;  also  the  nature  of  principles  of  Divine  mercy  to  man- 
kind are  suggested.  L  The  poverty  ot  the  Church.  1.  In  position.  Desert.  2. 
In  material  supplies.  3.  In  spiritual  resource.  II.  The  riches  ow  Christ.  1. 
Administered  through  the  appointed  means  of  grace.  2.  Abun4ant  to  satisfy  all 
demands.  III.  Conditions  of  Divine  communication  to  men.  1.  Obedience.  2. 
Order.  8.  Divinely  commissioned  service.  4.  Prayer.  6.  Faith.  {Ibid^) 
The  multitude  fed  ;— I.  The  compassion  of  Christ.  For  the  body  as  weJi 
as  the  BouL  Where  a  want  exists,  those  who  first  see  it  should  seek  to  supply  ik 
II.  Love  is  rich  in  resources.  If  the  best  use  is  made  of  existing  means,  they  will 
insensibly  multiply.  III.  Method  in  beneficence.  When  we  introduce  order  into 
our  works,  we  reflect  the  law  of  heaven  and  imitate  the  thought  of  God.  IV.  Im 
God's  feasts  there  is  ever  enough  and  to  spare.  (E.  Johnson,  M,A.)  The 
miracle  of  the  loaves  : — This  miracle  (1)  teaches  us  that  all  feeding  is  from  the 
Divine  hand  ;  (2)  declares  that  God  feeds  men  in  tenderness  and  compassion  ;  (3) 
points  to  those  many  processes  of  nature  which  are  (like  the  disciples  here)  employed 
by  Him  to  convey  to  us  His  gifts  ;  (4)  shows  that,  in  God's  gifts,  the  poverty  of 
human  means  and  natural  resources  hinders  not  the  fullest  satisfaction  of  our 
wants ;  (6)  illustrates  the  economy  which  reigns  in  God's  house  :  His  gifts  are 
preoiouB  in  His  own  sight  at  least ;  (6)  teaches  the  duty  of  thankful  reception  of  all 


▼L]  8T.  MARK,  357 

He  bestows.  {R.  Oreen.)  Christ  the  Sustainer  of  life  : — Jesus  here  manifests 
Himself  as  the  Sustainer  of  life.  As  such — 1.  He  works  by  making  use  of  what 
appear  to  us  to  be  ordinary  means.  No  striking  exhibition  of  supernatural  power 
here.  He  takes  the  common  food  which  God's  providence  had  supplied,  and  in  the 
distribution  of  that  the  whole  multitude  are  fed.  Possibly  many  present  never 
recognized  it  to  be  a  miracle  at  all.  2.  He  works  by  the  ministry  of  men.  Indeed, 
He  was  less  visibly  the  agent  in  this  miracle  than  were  His  disciples.  The  ignorant 
multitude  might  have  imagined  that  it  was  they  who  were  feeding  them.  But  the 
disciples  knew  that  it  was  Jesus  only,  and  that  they  were  but  His  ingtrumente>, 
CEtrrying  out  the  miracle  only  as  far  as  they  were  acting  in  simple  obedience  to  Him. 
8.  He  works  by  order  and  method.  4.  He  recognizes  that  all  must  be  done  in 
union  with  the  Father.  He  blesses  that  wherewith  He  would  work,  knowing  that 
what  the  Father  has  blessed  must  fulfil  its  purpose.  He  gives  thanks  for  it,  knowing 
that  to  give  thanks  for  a  little  is  the  way  to  make  it  become  more.  Application  :  (a) 
By  such  methods  the  Eternal  Word,  by  Whom  all  things  were  made,  sustains  the 
natural  Ufe  of  the  creatures  of  His  hand.  He  works  by  the  natural  laws  which  He 
has  Himself  provided,  and  so  withdraws  Himself  from  common  observation  that  the 
thoughtless  multitude  fail  to  recognize  His  presence,  and  regard  not  Him  who  is 
ever  for  their  sakes  multiplying  by  His  hidden  power  our  natural  sustenance.  He 
works  also  by  the  ministry  of  men,  thereby  teaching  us  our  mutual  dependence  on 
one  another.  This  we  further  learn  from  the  divisions  of  the  human  family  into 
nations  and  callings,  which  is  part  of  His  Divine  order.  All  this  sustaining  work  of 
the  Eternal  Word  is  done  in  union  with  the  Eternal  Father,  from  Whom  and  in 
Whom  are  all  things,  ^b)  By  like  methods  the  same  Eternal  Word  sustains  our 
spiritual  life.  By  the  simple  means  of  grace,  by  the  Communion  of  Saints,  by  the 
Divine  Order  of  the  Church  ;  by  all  these,  under  the  blessing  of  the  Father,  the 
life  of  His  Spirit  in  men's  souls  is  ever  being  nourished.  (Vernon  W.  Button,  B.A.) 
In  ranks  : — The  word  here  translated  "  ranks**  indicates  that  the  people  were  seated 
in  "  separate  detachments,**  with  sufficient  space  left  to  move  freely  between  them. 
According  to  another  etymology,  however,  it  signifies  *♦  a  bed  of  herbs  or  flowers," 
and  its  usage  would  then  illustrate  St.  Mark's  picturesqueness,  the  bright  Eastern 
costumes  of  the  compact  masses  upon  the  brilliant  green  having  suggested  to  an  eye- 
witness a  close  resemblance  to  a  bright  and  well-ordered  garden,  (if.  M.  Luckock^ 
D.D.)  Christ's  ability  to  do  much  with  little  : — It  is  true  that  we  have  but  our 
five  coarse  barley  loaves  and  two  small  fishes ;  in  themselves  they  are  useless.  Well, 
then,  let  us  give  them  to  Christ.  He  can  multiply  them,  and  can  make  them  more 
than  enough  to  feed  the  five  thousand.  A  cup  of  cold  water — what  a  little  thing  it 
is  !  Well,  but  will  the  world  ever  forget  one  cup  of  cold  water  which  David  would 
not  diink,  but  poured  upon  the  earth,  because  his  men  had  risked  their  lives  to 
fetch  it  him  ;  or  the  other  cup  of  cold  water  which  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  although 
dying  and  athirst,  gave  to  the  wounded  soldier  who  eyed  it  eagerly  at  the  battle  of 
Zutphen  T  A  grain  of  mustard  seed — can  anything  be  smaller  ?  Well,  but  when 
Zinzendorf  was  a  boy  at  school  he  founded  amongst  his  schoolfellows  a  little  guild 
which  he  called  the  "  Order  of  the  Grain  of  Mustard  Seed,*'  and  thereafter  that 
seedling  grew  into  the  great  tree  of  the  Moravian  Brotherhood  whose  boughs  were  a 
blessing  U>  the  world.  The  widow's  mite  I  When  they  laughed  at  St.  Theresa 
when  she  wanted  to  build  a  great  orphanage,  and  had  but  three  shillings  to  begin 
with,  she  answered,  ♦•  With  three  shillings  Theresa  can  do  nothing  ;  but  with  God 
and  her  three  shillings  there  is  nothing  which  Theresa  cannot  do.'*  Do  not  let  us 
imagine,  then,  that  we  are  too  poor,  or  too  stupid,  or  too  ignorant,  or  too  obscure 
to  do  any  real  good  in  the  world  wherein  God  has  placed  us.  Is  there  a  greater 
work  in  this  day  than  the  work  of  education?  Would  you  have  thought  that  the  chief 
impulse  to  that  work,  whereon  we  now  annually  spend  so  many  millions  of  taxation, 
was  given  by  a  poor,  illiterate  Plymouth  cobbler — John  Pounds  ?  Has  there  been  a 
nobler  work  of  mercy  in  modern  days  than  the  purification  of  prisons  ?  Yet  that 
was  done  by  one  whom  a  great  modem  writer  sneeringly  patronized  as  *•  the  dull, 
good  man,  John  Howard.'*  Is  there  a  grander,  nobler  enterprise  than 
missions  ?  The  mission  of  England  to  India  was  started  by  a  humble,  itinerant 
shoemaker,  William  Carey.  These  men  brought  to  Christ  their  humble  efforts, 
their  five  loaves,  and  in  His  hand  they  multiplied  exceedingly.  (Arehdeaeor 
Farrar.)  Looked  up  to  Heaven,  and  blessed  : — The  king  of  the  island  of  TooboM 
avowed  an  attachment  to  Christianity.  In  1823  he  went  on  board  a  British  vessel 
to  pay  a  visit  to  the  captain,  and  unconsciously  conveyed  a  very  forcible  practica 
reproof  to  the  party.    He  sat  down  at  table  to  partake  of  some  refreshment ;  but 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaf.  n. 

although  food  was  placed  before  him,  he  made  a  very  obserrable  pause  ;  and,  when 
asked  why  he  did  not  begin,  replied  that  he  was  waiting  till  a  blessing  had  been 
asked  upon  the  food.  The  reproof  was  felt,  and  the  party  were  ashamed  at  being 
rebuked  by  a  man  whose  intellectual  attainments  they  considered  far  inferior  to  their 
own.  They  rose,  and  the  king  asked  a  blessing  before  they  commenced  the  repast. 
Carefulness  even  in  small  things  : — Here  observe^l.  God  wastes  nothing — in  nature, 
in  providence,  in  grace.  2.  Thrift  is  duty.  The  wasteful  have  as  little  to  give  as 
the  penurious.  3.  Husbandry  of  joys  is  wisdom.  Too  late  to  begin  trying  to 
"  gather  up  the  fragments  "  when  calamity  has  come.  4.  Husbandry  of  time  is 
duty.  The  men  who  do  most  in  this  world  are  those  who  waste  least  time.  5. 
Those  who  give,  get  more  than  they  part  with.  Lend  a  boat  to  Christ,  and  you  get 
a  miraculous  draught  of  fishes.  Give  him  five  loaves,  and  He  will  give  you  twelve 
baskets  of  fragments  back.  He  that  saves  his  money  loses  it  ;  but  he  that  loses  it 
for  love's  sake,  will  keep  it.  {R.  Glover,)  Feeding  of  five  thousand  : — In  this 
narrative  we  may  note  the  following  points — I.  The  compassion  and  powee  of 
Chbist  webe  fob  the  bodies  and  minds  of  men.  II.  The  excitement  of  expecta- 
HON  pbepabes  fob  the  beception  of  good.    III.   Matebial  objects  and  human 

agency  ABE  employed  IN  THE  COMMUNICATION  OP  DlVINE  GIFTS.  IV.  ObDEB  SHOULD  BB« 
OBSEBVED,  GRATITUDE  EXPBESSED,   AND    LIBERALITY   BE    COMBINED    WITH  FBUGALITY,  IN 

coMMOM  MEALS.  (J^.  H.  Godwin.)  Our  duty  to  the  multitude: — Let  us  inquire 
what  that  part  is,  which  belongs  to  us,  analogous  to  that  which  devolved  upon  the 
disciples ;  and  let  us  learn  from  the  three  lessons  which  are  furnished,  to  magnify 
and  exalt  that  saving  mercy,  of  which  we  have  been  so  long  and  so  abundantly 
partakers.  I.  We  learn  from  the  text,  in  the  first  place,  then,  a  call  to  duty.  The 
advancement  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is,  or  ought  to  be,  the  first  object  of  every 
sincere  Christian.  II.  But  we  learn,  in  the  second  place,  a  call  to  paith.  There  is 
one  essential  difference,  without  doubt,  between  the  case  of  the  disciples  and  our  own ; 
the  difference,  I  mean,  of  miraculous  interposition.  In  the  case  of  the  disciples,  a 
miracle  was  necessary ;  in  our  case,  all  is  left  to  us.  Did  I  say,  all  ? — all  exertion, 
all  prayer,  and  all  faith  ;  but  the  blessing  must  unquestionably  be  added  from  above, 
or  all  is  in  vain.  UI.  But  I  am  anxious  to  summon  your  attention  to  the  third 
and  last  lesson  of  the  text,  namely,  its  call  fob  encoubagement.  How  great  is  our 
encouragement  I  Like  the  disciples,  we  have  the  Saviour,  to  whom  we  may  look  to 
bless  the  means  we  use,  and  to  make  the  results  glorious.  {W.  Harrison,  M.A.) 
The  multitude  fed  in  the  wilderness : — I.  The  mibacle.  1.  Power  over  the  material 
world.  This  to  material  beings  like  ourselves  is  a  concern  of  no  small  moment. 
Have  the  things  around  us  any  Master  ?  If  so,  who  is  He  ?  "  The  Lord  Christ," 
answers  the  gospel.  It  follows  that  He  can  never  be  at  a  loss  for  an  instant  to 
punish  us ;  also  that  the  stores  of  nature  are  to  us  just  what  He  pleases  to  make 
them.  In  the  material  world,  as  in  the  spiritual.  His  people  are  safe.  2.  Notice  also 
in  this  miracle  the  little  value  which  Christ  puts  on  sensual  gratifications,  on  luxuries 
and  what  we  call  comforts.  We  have  seen  His  power ;  it  was  evidently  boundless. 
A  word  from  His  hps  could  have  spread  before  this  multitude  all  the  delicacies  of 
the  East.  But  in  calling  His  omnipotence  into  exercise  for  them,  the  only  food  He 
provides  is  the  mean  fare  of  the  humblest  fisherman.    II.  Let  us  pass  on  now  to 

jL'HE   feelings   WITH    WHICH     THIS     MIBACLE   WAS    WBOUGHT.        1.     One    of     thcSO   WBS 

evidently  a  consciousness  of  power.  Not  that  it  was  wrought  ostentatiously,  for 
the  purpose  of  exciting  astonishment  or  applause ;  it  was  a  work  of  pure  compassion, 
with  no  vain  show  whatever  in  it ;  nay,  with  a  concealment  of  power,  rather  than 
a  display  of  it.  2.  We  have  thus  looked  at  the  author  of  this  miracle  as  God ;  but 
He  is  as  really  man  as  He  is  God,  and  he  feels  and  acts  here  like  a  dependent  man  ; 
for  mark  further  the  spirit  of  devotion  He  manifests.  "  When  He  had  taken  the 
6ve  loaves  and  the  two  fishes,"  the  evangelist  says,  '•  He  looked  up  to  heaven  and 
blessed."  Why  this  bringing  of  devotion  to  bear  upon  the  trifles  of  life  ?  Because 
God  is  in  all  these  trifles.  True  reUgion  is  not  an  act,  but  a  habit ;  not  an  impulse 
or  emotion,  but  a  principle ;  not  a  sudden  torrent,  produced  by  the  snows  of  winter 
or  the  thunder-storm  of  summer ;  it  is  a  stream  ever  running,  varying  indeed  in  its 
breadth  and  depth,  but  from  the  moment  of  its  rise,  ever  flowing  on  till  it  reaches 
the  ocean  of  everlasting  life.  Banish  God  from  your  meals,  or  habitually  from  any- 
thing, and  you  might  as  well  banish  Him  from  everything.  3.  Notice  also  the 
munificence,  the  Uberality,  with  which  our  Lord  spread  this  wide  board  for  this 
vast  multitude.  *'  The  two  fishes  divided  He  among  them  all ;  and  they  did  all 
■eat  and  were  filled.'*  None  were  excluded,  none  were  controlled,  none  went  away 
dissatisfied.     There  was  enough  and  to  spare.    And  think  not,  brethren,  that  yon 


Ti.]  ST,  MARK, 


«an  ever  exhaust  the  grace,  or  diminish  the  falness,  of  your  Almighty  Savionr. 
in.  The  time  chosen  fob  this  muuclb — *•  When  the  day  was  now  far  passed.'* 
The  disciples  were  thus  taught  that  they  could  do  nothing  for  the  hungry  crowd. 
This  mode  of  proceeding  runs  through  all  his  dealings  with  us,  whether  in  provi- 
dence or  in  grace.  He  humbles  us  •*  under  His  mighty  hand,"  before  He  exalts  us ; 
He  brejE^  our  hearts,  before  He  heals.  lY.  And  this  is  nearly  the  same  truth  that 
our  fourth  subject  will  suggest  to  us — thk  piiACB  wherb  this  mibaclb  was  pbb- 
roBMBD.  You  discover  then  at  once,  brethren,  the  lesson  we  have  to  learn  here— 
our  richest  supplies,  our  best  comforts,  are  not  the  growth  of  our  worldly  prosperity, 
nor  often  the  companions  of  our  worldly  ease  ;  they  come  to  us  in  situations  and 
cmder  circumstances,  which  seem  to  cut  us  off  from  every  comfort  and  supply. 
Think  of  the  deserts  in  which  you  have  wandered.  Outward  affliction  has  been  one 
of  these.  Spiritual  sorrow,  too,  conviction  of  sin,  is  another  wilderness ;  a  dark 
and  fearful  one ;  none  on  earth  more  fearful.  0  never  let  us  fear  the  desert,  as 
long  as  we  are  there  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (C  Bradley,  M.A.)  Food  for 
the  million: — I.  Jesus  Christ  affobds  us  all  oub  pood  for  bodily  sustenance. 
II.  Needful  food  is  ensured  to  His  true  disciples.  III.  See  how  Christ 
would  elave  us  receivb  our  food.  1.  With  thankfulness  and  decorum.  2.  With 
generous  distribution  of  it  to  others.     3.  With  frugal  care  of  it.     IV.  The  miracle 

IS  ▲    TYPE    OF  GOSPEL  PROVISIONS    FOR     THE     SOULS    OF    MEN.        1.     Christ    giveS   US 

spiritual  food  ;  as  truth,  righteousness,  and  love.  2.  He  distributes  it  through  His 
ministering  servants,  and  it  multiplies  in  their  hands.  3.  It  is  superabundantly 
enough  for  all  mankind.  Therefore — (1)  Come  and  eat  with  all  thankfulness.  (2) 
Freely  hand  it  round  to  others.  {Gangregational  Pulpit.)  Christ's  feast  free: — 
Christ's  banqueting-hall  was  an  open  field,  there  were  no  walls  or  doors,  or  persons 
guarding  the  entrance :  thus  free  is  His  feast  of  love  at  this  moment.  Whosoever 
will,  let  him  come.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Order  out  of  disorder : — The  original 
word  used  by  Mark  represents  them  as  divided,  like  beds  of  flowers,  with  walks 
between,  so  that  as  a  gardener  can  go  up  and  down,  and  water  all  the  plants,  so 
the  waiters  at  the  feast  could  conveniently  give  every  man  his  share  of  bread  and 
his  piece  of  fish  without  confusion.  They  sat  down  in  ranks  by  fifties  and  by 
hundreds.  Things  do  not  look  so  orderly  now,  do  they,  as  we  see  Christ  through 
His  Church  feeding  the  multitude  ?  There  is  a  good  work  going  on  in  the  North  of 
England,  there  is  a  revival  in  Scotland,  there  is  an  awakening  in  Ireland,  there  is 
a  stir  in  the  Midland  Counties ;  but  does  it  not  look  very  like  a  scramble  ?  Do  we 
not  seem  to  tumble  over  one  another,  instead  of  doing  our  work  in  soldierly 
order?  A  good  work  springs  up  in  one  place  on  a  sudden,  while  religion  is 
dying  out  in  other  quarters ;  the  people  are  satiated  yonder,  and  are  starving 
only  a  little  way  oS.  We  do  not  get  at  the  masses  as  a  whole,  or  see  the  Church 
progress  in  all  places.  Let  us  not,  however,  judge  too  hastily,  for  Jesus  makes 
His  order  out  of  our  disorder.  We  see  a  piece  of  the  puzzle,  but  when  the  whole 
shall  be  put  together  and  we  shall  see  the  end  from  the  beginning,  I  warrant  you 
we  shall  see  that  Christ's  great  feast  of  mercy,  with  its  myriads  of  guests,  has 
been  conducted  on  a  principle  of  order  as  mathematically  accurate  as  that 
which  guides  the  spheres  in  their  courses.  (Ibid.)  Salvation  for  us: — Why 
flows  the  river,  but  to  make  glad  your  fields  ?  Why  sparkles  the  fountain,  but  to 
quench  your  thirst  ?  Why  shines  the  sun,  but  for  your  eyes  to  be  blessed  with  his 
light  ?  As  you  breathe  the  air  around  you  because  you  feel  that  it  must  have  been 
made  for  you  to  breathe,  so  receive  the  full,  free  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ.  (Ibid.) 
Four  thousand  men  to  be  fed  in  the  wilderness : — My  brethren,  the  difficulty  urged 
by  the  disciples  is  one  not  of  begone  times  only.  I.  It  is  a  difficulty  arising  from 
numbers,  and  it  is  a  difficulty  arising  from  place.  When  from  any  unhappy  cause, 
such  as  that  terrible  and  most  wicked  war  which  is  at  this  time  raging  in  the  new 
world,  the  supplies  of  trade  and  commerce  are  suddenly  cut  oS  from  a  large 
portion  of  our  countrymen,  how  sad  a  meaning  is  given  even  in  a  Uteral  sense  to 
the  inquiry  in  the  text !  WTiat  a  burden  is  thrown  upon  private  charity,  what  a 
burden  is  thrown  upon  the  public  resources,  by  a  cry  for  bread,  for  the  food  of  the 
body,  going  up  from  destitute  thousands !  And  are  there  not  some  among  us 
capable  of  feeUng  the  same  weight  of  difficulty  in  reference  to  things  spiritual  ? 
And  when  our  thoughts  take  a  wider  range,  and  pass  towns  and  cities  in  our  own 
land  where  the  population  is  counted  not  by  hundre  s,  but  by  tens  of  thousands ; 
when  we  think  of  that  aggregate  of  ignorance,  ungodliness,  and  sin,  which  a  popu- 
lation of  a  hundred  thousand  or  of  a  million  of  souls  ust  present  to  the  eye  of  a  holy 
and  heart-searching  God,  and  then  compare  with  it  the  few  faithful  ministers  and 


260  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  n, 

servants  of  God  who  are  set  to  dispense  the  bread  of  life  amongst  that  mighty  mcfc 
titude.  The  least  we  expect  of  the  disciples  is  their  own  faith,  their  own  obedience. 
If  the  prospect  is  discouraging,  it  must  not  be  made  more  so  by  the  faithlessess  ol 
the  faithful :  they  at  least  must  eat  of  Christ's  bread,  and  assist  Him  in  the  distri- 
bution (so  far  as  it  will  go)  to  others.  II.  We  have  to  think  also  of  the  diflBculty 
arising  from  the  place ;  from  the  disparity  between  the  scene  which  was  before 
them  and  the  food  which  was  wanted.  Bread  here  in  the  wilderness.  When  we 
apply  this  to  spiritual  things,  two  remarks  will  suggest  themselves.  There  is  an 
apparent  contrariety  between  heavenly  supplies  and  our  earthly  condition.  We  are 
here  in  a  wilderness.  There  is  an  incongruity  between  the  place  and  the  promise. 
Eest  in  a  changing  world,  happiness  in  a  troublous  world,  the  ideas  are  inharmonious 
and  discordant.  I  appeal  to  some  of  you,  my  brethren,  to  testify  that,  though 
there  may  be  contrariety  in  the  ideas,  there  is  no  contradiction.  Some  of  you  have 
found  that,  though  all  else  changes,  God  changes  not ;  that,  though  all  else  ia 
unrest,  in  Christ  there  is  peace.  You  can  already  attest  the  truth  of  His  words, 
"These  things  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  that  in  Me  ye  might  have  peace.  In  the 
world  ye  sball  have  tribulation  :  bat  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  overcome  the  world." 
(C.  J.   Vaufjhan,  B.I).)  Important   lessons  from   ChrisVs  procedure: — 1.  The 

poverty  of  Christ.  2.  The  voluntary  character  of  His  privations.  3.  His  riches  for 
others  are  brought  into  contrast  with  the  poverty  of  His  own  estate.  4.  The  wants 
of  the  soul  are  first  to  be  attended  to — as  most  important.  5.  Christ  should  be 
trusted  with  our  temporal  affairs — He  has  sympathy  and  ability.  6.  Christ  wiD 
succour  us  under  the  difficulties  and  hardships  felt  in  following  Him.  7.  It  is 
when  the  sagacity  and  power  of  man  are  confessedly  inadequate  that  Christ  inter- 
poses. 8.  It  is  in  using  our  natural  resources  that  Christ  communicates  His 
gracious  aid.  9.  It  is  the  blessing  of  Christ  which  makes  anything  serve  its  proper 
end.  10.  The  richness  and  pleasures  of  an  entertainment  do  not  depend  on  the 
costliness  of  the  provision.  11.  We  can  never  come  to  Christ  at  a  wrong  time. 
12.  "  The  bread  of  hfe."  "  The  living  bread."  {J.Stewart.)  Miraculous  feed- 
ing of  five  thousand: — I.  A  striking  view  of  the  Saviour's  tender  compassion. 
Eegard*^it  in  connection  with — 1.  The  disciples.  "  When  I  sent  you  without  purse 
and  script  and  shoes,  lacked  ye  anything  ?  "  And  they  said,  "Nothing."  Now  they 
have  a  new  token  of  His  fidelity  and  love.  2.  The  multitude.  (1)  The  feehng  with 
which  they  were  regarded.  (2)  The  cause  of  this  feeling — "  They  were  as  sheep,' 
&c.  (3)  Its  consequences — "  And  He  began  to  teach  them  many  things."  II.  Thb 
display  He  gave  of  His  Almighty  power.  1.  There  was  no  misgiving.  2.  There 
was  no  confusion.  3.  There  was  no  parade.  4.  There  was  no  deficiency.  5.  There 
was  no  waste.      {Expository   Outlines.)  The   lad's  loaves  and  fishes : — This 

miracle  is  remarkable — I.  For  the  extraordinary  number  of  witnesses  therb 
WERE  to  it.  II.  For  the  mysierious  peculiarity  of  the  process  in  working. 
HI.  Fob  the  extraordinary  affluence  of  its  products.  IV.  Fob  the  profound 
fMPRESSiON  it  made,  AND  IS  YET  MAKING.  {€.  S.  Eobinsou,  D.D.)  Providential 
supply  of  food  : — Bishop  Bascom  was  preaching  on  one  occasion  in  a  cabin  which 
was  at  once  church  and  dwelling.  In  the  midst  of  the  sermon  his  host,  who  sat 
near  the  door,  suddenly  rose  from  his  seat,  snatched  the  gun  from  its  wooden 
brackets  upon  which  it  lay  against  the  joist,  went  hastily  out,  fired  it  off,  and 
returning,  put  the  gun  in  its  place,  and  quietly  seated  himself  to  hear  the  remainder 
of  the  sermon.  After  service  was  ended,  the  bishop  inquired  of  the  man  the  mean- 
ing of  his  strange  conduct.  '•  Sir,"  said  he,  "we  are  entirely  out  of  meat,  and  I 
was  perplexed  to  know  what  we  should  give  you  for  dinner ;  and  it  was  preventing  me 
from  enjoying  the  sermon,  when  God  sent  a  flock  of  wild  geese  this  way.  I 
haipened  to  see  them,  took  my  gun,  and  killed  two  at  a  shot.  My  mind  felt  e?iy, 
and  I  enjoyed  the  remainder  of  the  sermon  with  perfect  satisfaction.*'  (St  8. 
Teacher.) 

Vers.  45-51.  And  straightway  He  constrained  His  disciples  to  get  Into  the  shlp.-- 
Need  of  constraint  from  Christ: — This  does  cot  mean  that  our  Lord  forced  His 
disciples'  wills,  but  that  from  being  unwilling  He  made  them  willing  to  do  as  He 
desired.  Reasons  why  they  were  loath  at  first  to  take  ship  without  Him.  1. 
Because  His  society  was  very  amiable,  sweet,  and  comfortable  to  them,  as  they  had 
hitherto  found  by  experience ;  therefore  they  were  unwilling  to  part  from  Him, 
though  but  for  a  time.  2.  It  seemed  a  matter  against  reason  for  Him  to  stay 
behind  alone  in  a  desert  place,  especially  as  night  was  coming  on  ;  therefore  they 
irere  onwilling  to  leave  Ham  there.    3.  They  knew  there  was  in  that  plaoe  no  othei 


OHAP.  yi.]  BT.  MARK.  261 

«hip  or  boat  besides  the  one  in  which  they  were  to  pass  over  (John  ▼!.  22) ;  therefore 
they  would  have  had  Him  go  over  with  them  in  the  same  ship.  4.  It  may  be  also 
that  they  were  afraid  to  pass  over  without  Him,  lest,  if  a  storm  should  arise,  they 
should  be  in  danger.  Once  before,  they  had  been  in  danger  of  drowning  when  Christ 
was  with  them ;  much  more,  then,  might  they  now  fear  the  worst,  if  they  went 
without  Him.  (G.  Fetter.)  Backward  to  yield  obedience : — By  nature  the  best 
of  us  are  very  slack  and  backward  to  yield  obedience  to  the  will  of  Christ,  especially 
in  such  things  as  oppose  our  natural  reason,  will,  and  affections ;  in  such  com- 
mandments of  Christ,  we  have  much  ado  to  yield  obedience,  and  are  very  hardly 
brought  to  it.  Though  we  have  the  express  word  and  commandment  of  Christ,  yet 
when  the  things  commanded  are  contrary  to  our  reason  and  will,  we  draw  back,  and 
are  loath  to  obey  Christ's  will.  We  are  by  nature  so  wedded  and  addicted  to  our 
own  reason,  will,  and  affections,  that  we  find  it  exceedingly  hard  to  captivate  them 
in  obedience  to  the  will  of  Christ  as  we  ought.  1.  Labour  to  see  and  bewail  this 
our  natural  corruption.  2.  Pray  to  Christ  to  subdue  it,  and  to  frame  us  by  the 
power  of  His  Spirit  to  more  willing  and  cheerful  obedience.  (Ibid.)  The  Christian 
life: — I.  We  mat  take  this  as  a  picture  op  the  state  of  Chbist's  Church  between 
THE  Ascension  and  Pentecost.  The  disciples  were  then  for  the  first  time  launched 
without  Him  upon  the  sea  of  this  world — powerless  as  yet  to  run  the  race  set  before 
them,  and  in  darkness  and  uncertainty  as  to  what  might  be  their  Master's  grand 
design.  But  His  eye  noted  from  above  their  comfortless  condition,  and  soon  He 
came  to  them  in  the  person  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  be  not  only  their  far-off  Inter- 
cessor, but  their  present  Guide  and  Helmsman,  piloting  them  to  the  bright  shore 
of  eternal  life.    II.  We  may  also  see  in  the  little  fishino-boat,  tossed  on  the 

DARK  and  stormy  WAVE,  A  LIVELY  IMAOB  Ol*  THE  ChUROH  UNDEB  THE  PRESENT  DISPEN- 
SATION. There  is  usually  in  the  life  of  each  individual  Christian  a  period  of  striving 
after  grace,  life,  and  power,  which  have  not  yet  been  communicated  to  the  soul. 
But  Christ  will  come  it  the  soul  remain  stedfast.  And  then  shall  all  things  go  well. 
The  vessel,  freighted  with  the  presence  of  the  Incarnate  God,  shall  no  longer  be 
driven  back  by  tiie  violence  of  the  winds,  but  make  her  way  surely,  if  slowly,  to  the 
haven  where  she  would  be.  IH.  This  incident  may,  moreover,  be  regarded  as 
TYPICAL  OF  Christ's  second  advent.  Much  darkness  and  obscurity  and  perplexity 
now — the  necessary  tests  of  faithfulness  and  stabihty.  But  the  day  is  at  hand  when 
all  things  shall  be  manifested  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  Presence.  Watch  and 
prepare  for  that,  by  weaning  the  affections  from  earthly  things  and  fixing  them  on 
Christ ;  also  by  exerting  yourself  to  bring  others  into  such  a  state  as  that  they 
shall  be  found  of  Him  in  peace,  without  spot,  and  blameless.  {Dean  Goulburn.) 
Toiling  in  rowiny : — I.  Analogies  in  the  Christian's  voyage  through  life.  1. 
How  many  earnest  truth-seekers  have  been  thus  tossed  by  doubts  and  perplexities, 
with  scarce  one  ray  of  light  to  guide  them,  2.  How  many  in  the  hour  of  spiritual 
awakening  have  passed  through  similar  experience.  3.  How  many  reahze  this 
amid  the  difficulties  and  temptations  of  life.  4.  And  others  learn  it  in  the  hour  of 
sorrow  and  suffering.  II.  Consolations.  1.  Christ  knows  all.  2.  Christ  loves 
ceaselessly.  3.  Christ  prays  constantly.  4.  Christ  comes  with  deliverance  at  the 
right  time.  {M.  Hutchison.)  Religious  despondency  : — This  word  •'  toiling  "  is 
quite  inadequate  to  express  the  full  force  of  the  term.  One  of  the  oldest  of  English 
versions  has  it,  "harassing  themselves."  Tyndale  renders  it,  "troubled."  Alford 
suggests,  "  distressed,"  which  is  the  best  word  of  all,  and  the  one  which  our  new 
revision  adopts — "  distressed  in  rowing."  Those  skilled  fishermen  evidently  had  a 
hard  time  of  it.  They  needed  to  put  forth  the  most  violent  and  persistent  efforts 
in  order  to  keep  the  small  boat  from  being  dashed  to  pieces  before  the  hurricane. 
And  of  course  they  became  positively  tired  out,  and  their  faith  had  something  like 
a  melancholy  failure.  In  religious  experience  we  are  often  more  disheartened  than 
we  need  to  be,  because  some  perverse  disposition  misleads  us  to  contrast  our  states 
of  low  enjoyment  with  remembered  disclosures  of  high  exhilaration  under  extra- 
ordinary  excitement.  The  midnight  of  commonplace  rowing  appears  more  gloomy 
and  unwelcome  just  because  the  previous  noon  was  so  abundantly  blessed  with  gifts 
and  graces.  Our  favours  seem  hopelessly  dull,  simply  because  they  were  so  lately 
revived  into  unusual  strain,  and  are  now  worn  out  by  the  exalted  indulgence.  The 
changes  begun  in  the  circumstances  are  continued  in  our  bodies,  and  so  these  moods 
grow  reciprocally  depressing.  What  we  mourn  over  as  base  coldness,  sometimes  is 
nothing  but  natural  reaction.  Oftentimes  our  most  he.ivy  seasons  of  despondency 
are  brought  about  by  mere  physical  illness,  or  unusual  prostration  from  distemper 
or  overwork.    ((7.  8,  Robinson,  D,D.)        Christ  knows  who  liave  need  of  Him  :—> 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  n, 

**  He  saw  them  toilmg/'  so  we  read,  and  then  we  reflect  how  little  reason  these  men 
had  for  being  melancholy.  "  In  our  fluctuations  of  feeling,"  says  picas  Samuel 
Butherford,  •'  it  is  well  to  remember  that  Jesus  admits  no  change  in  His  affections ; 
your  heart  is  not  the  compass  Christ  saileth  by.**  Our  vicissitudes  toss  only  them- 
selves, and  overturn  only  our  pride,  and  that  not  perilously.  Jesus'  care  remains 
steady.  If  it  be  dark,  and  He  has  not  yet  arrived,  we  may  be  always  certain  it  ia 
because  He  pauses  among  the  trees  to  pray.  We  are  to  keep  working  and  watching  ; 
for  when  He  sees  we  are  ready  to  receive  Him,  He  will  start  directly  towards  us  on 
the  sea.  (Ibid.)  Christ  was  seen  in  the  storm : — There  was  more  dread  than  joy 
in  the  presence  of  the  Saviour.  They  would  not  have  been  so  much  afraid  had  they 
been  expecting  Him,  but  the  troubles  of  the  night  had  made  them  forget  His  promise. 
Their  terror  is  not,  however,  a  thing  altogether  unknown  in  the  deeper  religious 
experience.  For  when  a  trouble  comes  upon  the  pious  Christian,  what  is  felt  most 
sorely  is  not  the  outward  calamity  which  his  neighbours  see,  but  an  inward  wound 
which  comes  from  the  conviction  that  God  has  actually  forsaken  him  and  delivered  him 
over  to  the  assaults  of  an  unknown  hostile  spirit-power  armed  against  him.  There 
is  no  lesson  harder  to  understand  than  that  troubles  are  not  signs  of  the  wrath  of  God. 
Had  the  disciples  seen  that  it  was  Jesus  who  was  coming  to  them  through  the  storm, 
they  would  not  have  been  troubled ;  could  we  know  that  behind  the  storms  of  life 
there  is  the  Saviour  Himself  near  us,  we  should  not  have  that  vague  yet  bitter  sense 
of  the  presence  of  a  spirit  of  evil  who  is  seeking  to  overwhelm  us.  (T.  M.  Lindsay, 
D.D.)  Christ^s  absence : — I.  Separation  is  sometimes  required  to  prevent  improper 
sympathy.  II.  Difficulties  are  to  be  expected,  and  weakness  experienced,  in  the 
Christian  course.  HI.  Appearances  awaken  needless  fear  through  inconsideration. 
IV.  Christ  speaks  to  encourage,  and  comfort,  and  give  peace.  {J.  H,  Godwin.) 
The  voice  of  Jesus  in  the  storm  : — The  design  of  religion  is  to  make  us  of  good 
cheer.  We  are  surrounded  by  causes  of  alarm,  but  the  gospel  bids  us  fear  not. 
And  that  which  alone  can  enable  us  to  be  of  good  cheer  amid  sorrows  is  the  presence 
of  God  our  Sa\iour.  I.  The  disciples  in  a  stobm.  1.  It  is  most  likely  tiiat  they 
did  not  understand  the  reason  of  the  request  ^ver.  45).  But  they  were  commanded, 
and  this  was  sufficient.  It  is  the  duty  of  Christians  to  do  many  things  the  reason 
of  which  is  hidden  from  them.  Our  duty  may  even  sometimes  oppose  our  prefer- 
ences. However  delightful  the  company  of  Jesus  must  have  been,  the  disciples 
gained  far  more  by  being  obediently  absent  than  rebelliously  near.  Obedience  is 
the  best  kind  of  nearness.  2.  The  evening  on  which  the  disciples  embarked  was 
calm  and  fair.  But  the  finest  day  may  be  followed  by  the  stormiest  night.  3.  The 
frightened  disciples  in  their  storm- driven  boat  fitly  represent  the  circumstances  by 
which  beHevers  are  often  tried — disappointments,  losses,  cares,  Ac.  Christian 
discipleship  does  not  exempt  from  such  storms  (1  Cor.  x.  13  ;  1  Peter  iv.  12,  v.  9) 
These  storms  may  often  rise  against  us,  even  when  acting  in  direct  obedience  to  the 
will  of  Christ.  No  difficulty  must  daunt  us  in  the  way  of  obedience.  4.  While  the 
disciples  are  battling  with  the  winds  and  the  waves,  where  is  Jesus  ?  (ver.  46).  But 
they  were  not  forgotten,  nor  are  we.  He  watched  them  in  the  tempest,  and  He  sees 
His  storm-driven  followers  now.  5.  When  He  sees  the  fitting  season  has  arrived, 
He  will  appear  for  their  deliverance  (ver.  48).  He  may  delay  to  reveal  Himself, 
but  not  to  succour  and  support  them.  6.  When  He  did  appear  to  His  disciples,  the 
manner  of  His  coming  was  so  unexpected  and  strange  that,  instead  of  joy,  their 
first  emotion  was  terror.  Like  the  disciples,  we  often  mistake  the  form  and  pre- 
sence of  our  Lord  I  II.  The  tbbboe  of  the  disciples  allayed  by  the  ENCorBAoiNo 
VOICE  DF  Jesus.  '*  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid  I  "  In  eveiy  event,  important  or  trivial, 
in  the  estimation  of  man,  He  speaks,  and  says,  "  It  is  I."  Becognize  Christ  more 
vividly  in  all  your  troubles.  Look  away  from  inferior  agencies,  or  you  will  be  sure 
to  fear.  The  assurance  of  Christ's  presence  involves  everything  needed  to  calm  the 
fears,  and  soothe  the  sorrows  of  afflicted  beHevers.  2.  It  was  the  voice  of  power. 
3.  Of  love.  4.  Of  wisdom.  The  faith  which  recognizes  in  all  events  the  voice  of 
Jesus  is  the  true  alchemy  which  transmutes  all  baser  substances  into  gold.  The 
storm  is  terrible  in  appearance  onlv.  6.  The  voice  which  speaks  to  us  in  the  storm 
its  that  of  One  who  has  Himself  been  tempest-tost.  What  strong  consolation  is 
thus  presented  to  afflicted  disciples  1  Shall  we  wonder  or  repine  at  affliction  ?  6. 
The  disciples  had  often  witnessed  the  efficacy  of  His  voice.  Nor  is  it  altogether 
strange  to  us.  Has  never  spoken  in  vain.  All  anxieties  should  subside  at  the 
sound.  What  could  He  say  that  He  has  left  unsaid  to  calm  our  apprehensions  7 
Believe  the  promises,  and  there  will  be  a  great  calm.  Conclusion :  To  those  who 
are  not  disciples  He  does  not  say,  "  Be  of  good  cheer  1 "  You  are  in  awful  peril.   He 


OSAF.  rt] 


ST.  MARK,  WS 


Is  only  with  His  disciples  In  the  storm.    No  comfort  for  you  while  continuing  "  a« 
enemy  to  God."    Your  condition  and  character  must  be  changed.    Let  your  eye 
Mze  upon  Jesua  I    He  offers  to  screen  you  from  the  danger,  and  says  to  all  who 
flee  to  Him  for  safety,  "Be  of  good  cheer! "  (Nimman  HaU,  LL.B.)    ToUing  in 
rmoing:—!.  Chbist  sbbs  all  the  stbugglbs  op  human  life.    The  greatest  battlea 
are  not  those  fought  on  the  plains  of  the  world  and  recorded  in  history,  but  those 
fought  in  courts  and  alleys  by  unfortunate  men  and  women,  who  have  to  weather 
the  storm  of  life  without  a  friend.    Christ  sees  every  man's  circumstances  and 
heroism,  &c.    II.  Christ  sees  all  the  struggles  of  Christian  life.    They  are 
numerous  hard,  continuous.    He  does  not  permit  us  to  see  all  the  difficulties  ol 
the  future'.    Ply  your  oars.    Watch  and  pray.    III.  In  these  struggles,  human 
Aj«i>  Divine,  Christ  does  not  come  to  us  at  once.    There  was  time  for  the  devel- 
opment of  character,  for  the  exercise  of  faith,  patience,  &c.    Christians  often  com- 
plain that  Christ's  comforts  do  not  come  sooner.     It  is  not  when  we  will,  but 
Divine  love  is  never  late.    There  is  a  time  for  succour.    Times  and  seasons  are 
known  to  Him.     IV.  How  His  coming  affects  us.     He  did  not  perform  the 
miracle  first,  but  said,  "  Be  of  good  cheer."    The  Master's  "  good  cheer  "  suited  to 
all  classes  and  conditions  of  His  disciples,  especially  those  who  are  liable  to  be 
dull  morbid,  despondent,  fearful.   (W.  M.Statham.)     The  disciples  in  the  storm:— 
What  is  it  which  so  often  trouliles  our  faith  in  the  Divine  promises  ?    It  is  the  fact 
that  God  does  not  direct  events  and  things  for  the  triumph  of  His  cause,  and  that 
that  cause  seems  often  to  be  vanquished  by  fatality.    This  is  a  contradiction  which 
confounds  us.    God  wants  truth  to  prevail ;  He  commands  His  Church  to  announce 
It  to  the  world;  His  design  is  here  express  and  manifest,  and  when,  to  serve  Him, 
His  Church  puts  itself  to  the  work,  God  permits  circumstances  to  array  themselves 
against  it  and  hinder  it.    The  wind  was  contrary  I    How  many  times  have  believers 
felt  this  !    In  the  first  centuries  it  was  that  periodical  succession  of  implacable  per- 
secutions, scattering  the  flocks,  immolating  the  shepherds,  annihilating  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  destroying  in  one  dark  hour  the  harvest  of  which  the  world  had  seen 
the  admirable  firstf ruits.    The  wind  was  contrary  I    At  the  close  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  and  under  the  influence  of  the  scandals  displayed  in  Rome,  it  was  that 
mocking  and  profound  unbelief  which  secretly  undermined  the  Church  to  such  a 
degree  that,  without  a  religious  awakening,  the  world  would  seem  to  become 
heathen  again  under  the  breath  of  the  Renaissance.     The  wind  was  contrary  I 
Later  on  came  the  ardent  and  generous  passions  of  the  eighteenth  century  letting 
loose  on  the  worid  a  formidable  tempest.    In  our  days  listen.    Is  the  wind  which 
comes  down  from  the  icy  heights  of  positive  science  favourable  to  our  cause?    Is 
the  stream  which  comes  to  us  from  the  springs  of  our  democratic  societies  sympa- 
thetic ?    Are  you  not  often  scared  at  seeing  all  the  hostile  powers  which  combine 
against  Christianity  to-day?     Doctrines   openly  materialistic,  grave  or  cynical 
atheism,  harsh  and  disparaging  criticism,  rightful  complaints  too  well  justifled  by 
the  infidelities  of  believers,  prejudices,  misunderstandings,  blind  passions,— -do  not 
all  these  announce,  even  to  the  least  clear-sighted,  formidable  storms  to  which  our 
actual  strifes  are  only  as  child's  play  ?  Why  does  God  allow  His  cause  to  be  thus  com- 
promised?   Why  does  not  He,  who  is  the  Master  of  the  waves,  pacify  the  storms? 
That  is  one  of  those  grievous  questions  which  none  of  us  can  escape.    Scripture 
replies  to  it  in  some  measure.    It  has  pleased  God,  says  St.  Paul,  to  choose  the 
foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise.    One  would  say  that  He  wishes 
to  show  that  the  triumph  of  the  gospel  expects  nothing  from  external  things,  from 
the  impulse  which  comes  from  popular  currents.    We  forget  that  Christ  overcame 
the  world  only  by  raising  against  Him  all  its  resistance,  that  the  cross  has  been  a 
sign  of  triumph  only  because  It  has  been  an  instrument  of  punishment,  and  that  In 
its  apparent  impotence  and  ignominy  we  must  seek  the  secret  of  Its  power.    The 
wind  was  contrary  I    But  this  was  not  the  only  obstacle  the  disciples  encountered. 
Jesus  Christ  comes  to  them,  but  not  tQl  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night,  that  Is  to 
Bay,  near  to  the  morning.    TUl  then,  we  might  say,  He  has  forgotten  them.    It  is 
to  the  last  hour  that  He  comes  to  succour  them.    Hlstor}-  Is  like  a  night  stretching 
across  the  ases ;  In  all  times  believers  are  called  to  wait  for  God's  intervention,  but 
God  delays  to  come,  and  that  is  the  supreme  trial  of  faith,  greater  perhaps  than 
the  opposition  of  men  and  even  of  persecution.    The  first  Christians  believed  to 
the  immediate  return  of  Christ ;  that  hope  has  often  filled  a  generation  of  believers 
wltii  enthusiasm.    Already  they  saw  the  dawn  breaking,  they  saluted  the  King  ol 
glory  who  came  to  deliver  the  Church  and  to  subdue  humanity.    A  dangeroui 
excitement,  a  transitory  fever  to  which  imagination  had  more  share  than  faJih 


iU  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

On  coming  out  of  those  dreams,  the  enervated  Bonl  often  despairs,  and  in  » 
paroxysm  of  gloomy  discouragement  it  donbts  the  truth,  because  it  no  longer  ex- 
pects its  triumph.  It  must  be  said  that  God,  who  is  the  Master  of  time,  has 
reserved  to  Himself  to  fix  its  duration,  and  that  we  are  absolutely  forbidden  to  bind 
it  in  our  measures  and  limits.  Now  what  is  true  of  the  history  of  humanity  applies 
equally  to  each  of  us.  When  the  night  of  trial  begins,  we  want  deliverance  to  be 
announced  during  the  first  watch.  "Why  does  God  remain  inactive  and  silent  ?  Why 
those  long  delays  and  those  unanswered  prayers?  Why  that  tranquil,  slow, 
regular  course  of  second  causes  behind  which  the  First  Cause  remains  mute  and 
without  effect  ?  The  violent  emotions  of  great  trials  are  less  formidable  than  thai 
pitiless  monotony  which  enervates  and  wears  out  the  secret  springs  of  the  soul. 
Now,  precisely  because  this  danger  is  so  real  we  must  forecast  it.  Let  us  know, 
beforehand,  that  that  trial  is  in  store  for  us.  If  God  delays,  wait  for  Him.  At 
last  Christ  draws  near.  He  walks  on  the  waves  before  the  disciples,  but  they, 
frightened,  see  in  Him  only  a  phantom,  and  emit  a  cry  of  terror.  All  the  traits  of 
this  narrative  may  seem  those  of  a  striking  allegory,  and  this  last  still  more  than 
the  others.  Often  Christ  has  appeared  to  humanity  as  a  phantom.  That  pure  and 
holy  image,  all  whose  features  unite  in  the  eyes  of  faith  to  form  the  most  ravishing 
harmony,  that  face  which  surpasses  all  those  of  the  sons  of  men,  and  which  tra- 
verses the  centuries  surrounded  by  a  halo  of  righteousness,  of  purity,  of  infinite 
mercy,  that  being  at  once  so  real  and  so  ideal,  so  real  that  none  has  left  on  earth 
a  deeper  impression,  so  ideal  that  no  light  has  made  His  pale,  that  Christ  has 
often  awoke  in  those  who  beheld  Him  for  the  first  time  only  mistrust,  hostility, 
mockery,  and  more  than  one  generation  has  hailed  Him  with  a  repellent  cry.  Let 
the  writings  of  the  most  ancient  adversaries  of  Christianity  be  read.  Let  one  page 
be  quoted  to  me  in  which  a  trace  is  recognized  of  the  moral  impression  which  the 
life  of  Christ  produces  to-day  on  every  sincere  conscience.  We  believe  that  they 
never  contemplated  Him ;  that  their  look  was  never  stayed  on  Him  in  an  hour  of 
justice.  They  had  the  Gospels,  they  had  the  living  testimony  of  the  Church,  and  the 
history  of  Jesus  was  not  yet  disfigured  by  the  iniquities  of  its  defenders.  It  does 
not  matter,  they  saw  Him  only  through  the  thick  cloud  of  prejudice  and  hatred. 
It  was  a  phantom  they  fought  against.  The  Christ  of  Celsus  and  of  Julian,  the 
Christ  whom  anti-Christian  satire  mocks,  is  a  silly  Jew,  whose  greatness  no  one 
suspects  for  a  moment.  Our  century  has  seen  the  same  facts  reproduced  in  an 
entirely  different  form.  To  what  did  that  vigorous  and  learned  attack  against 
Christianity  tend,  so  cleverly  led  by  Strauss,  if  not  to  make  a  myth  of  Christ  and 
His  work ;  that  is  to  say,  a  mere  conception  of  the  human  consciousness  ?  Now  a 
mythical  personage  is  a  phantom  and  nothing  more.  The  supernatural  Christ  was 
to  them  only  a  phantom,  and  they  would  never  have  believed  then  that  one  day 
they  would  find  light  and  peace  at  His  feet.  But  in  the  midst  of  the  gloom  which 
envelops  the  disciples  a  voice  is  heard.  Jesus  Christ  has  spoken.  He  has  said, 
"  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid."  The  apostles  recognize  that  voice,  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  storm  their  hearts  are  penetrated  with  a  Divine  peace.  It  is  the  same  at  all 
seasons.  There  is  an  incomparable  emphasis  in  Christ's  sayings.  Yesterday  we 
were  in  trouble  and  anguish,  to-day  we  hear  and  are  subdued.  Explain  who  can 
this  phenomenon.  It  is  a  fact  for  which  witnesses  would  rise  to-day  in  all  parts  of 
the  world.  Here  is  the  tempest  of  doubt.  Here  around  you  and  into  your  very 
soul  another  night  descends,  envelops  and  penetrates  you.  It  is  the  night  of 
remorse,  the  memory  of  a  guilty  past  which  haunts  and  besets  the  human  con- 
science. Here  is  the  hour  of  suffering.  Finally,  here  is  death,  death  which  for 
many  of  our  travelling  companions  is  the  extreme  end  and  the  separation  without 
return.  He  has  spoken.  Will  you  pay  attention  to  this  ?  I  do  not  say,  **He  has 
reasoned,  He  has  argued.  He  has  proved."  I  simply  say,  "  He  has  spoken  1 "  Now 
H  is  found  that  everywhere  and  in  every  age  there  are  men  who  are  enlightened, 
soothed,  consoled  by  this  voice,  and  to  whom  it  gives  an  invincible  conviction,  an 
immortal  hope  I  {E.  Bersier,  D.D,)  The  contrary  currents  of  lije : — The  winds 
always  seem  contrary  to  those  who  have  any  high  and  earnest  purpose  in  life. 
Careless  sailors  afloat  on  the  currents,  with  do  aim  but  the  pleasure  of  motion,  who 
can  watch  the  play  of  the  wavelets,  and  hear  their  musical  splash,  or  gaze  on"  the 
tints  that  gleam  on  the  opalescent  sea,  find  life  a  pastime — for  a  time.  But  those 
who  have  a  course,  a  compass,  a  pilot,  and  are  in  haste  on  the  errand  of  heaven, 
are  kept  to  the  full  strain  of  vigilance  lest  winds  should  sweep  them  backwards ; 
and  often  hand-weary,  heart-weary,  they  are  tempted  to  give  up  all  effort  to  keep 
their  course,  content  to  drift  with  the  current  which  sets  back  again  to  the  for- 


«HAP.  vx.]  ST.  MARK.  265 

eaken  shore.  An  earnest  purpose  alone  gives  us  the  measure  of  the  influences  which 
surround  us.  I.  We  are  able  when  thinking  over  this  great  matter,  a  life-course 
and  its  issues,  to  remind  ourselves  of  the  great  life-couese  to  which  the  winds 
WEBB  EVER  coNTBABT,  which  Something  seemed  always  to  sweep  back  from  its  end. 
Without  question,  life  is  a  hard  matter  to  the  earnest ;  the  night  is  dark,  the  toil 
hard.  Often  the  main  support  of  faith  is  to  look  steadily  to  Him  to  whom  the 
night  was  darker,  the  toil  harder,  and  who  is  seated  now  a  radiant  Conqueror  at 
the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God.  II.  Let  us  look  at  the  broad  tact  of  tub 
CONTRARINESS  OF  THE  0UBBENT8  OF  LIFE.  I  am  uot  Speaking  of  storms,  but  of  the 
constant  steady  set  of  the  current,  which  seems  to  keep  us  under  perpetual  strain. 
With  some  there  is  a  lifelong  struggle  to  fulfil  the  duty  of  some  uncongenial  calling, 
which  yields  no  fair  field  of  activity  to  the  powers  which  they  are  conscious  are 
stirring  within.  There  are  others  who  are  crossed  in  their  dearest  hopes  ;  life  is 
one  long,  sad  regret.  There  are  others  with  a  weak  and  crippled  body  enshrining 
a  spirit  of  noblest  faculty  ;  with  intense  ardour  pent  up  within.     III.  The  beason 

AND  BIOHTNESS  OF  THIS  C0NTBABINE8S  OF  THE  CURRENTS  OF  LIFE.  God  SetS  things agalust 

QS  to  teach  ns  to  set  ourselves  against  things,  that  we  may  master  them.  We  are  kings, 
and  have  to  conquer  our  kingdom.  IV.  The  Master  is  watching  how  the  lesson 
PB0BPEB8.  Not  from  on  high  ;  not  from  a  safe  shore ;  but  there  in  the  midst  of  the 
storm  He  is  watching,  nay  is  walking,  drawing  nigh,  in  the  very  crisis  of  the  danger 
and  the  strain.  He  enters  the  ship ;  the  danger  is  over.  A  force  stronger  than  the 
cnrrent  is  there  to  bear  us  swiftly  to  the  shore.  {J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Toiling  in 
rowing : — I.  The  effect  of  rapid  transitions  in  outwabd  circumstances  upon  in- 
TBBNAL  beligious  expebience.  That  had  been  a  great  day  to  these  disciples.  Their 
enthusiasm  had  been  aroused  by  the  magnificent  miracle.  But  out  here  on  the 
water  they  had  no  cheering  alleviation  of  their  work.  Wet  to  the  skin  by  the 
spray,  cut  to  the  bone  by  the  wind,  we  cannot  wonder  that  they  speedily  became 
fatigued  and  disgusted.  IL  The  close  and  somewhat  humiliating  connection 
BETWEEN  wistful  bouls  AND  WEABT  BODIES  which  always  has  to  be  recognized.  Our 
most  heavy  seasons  of  despondency  are  often  brought  about  by  mere  physical  ill- 
ness, or  unusual  prostration  from  our  work.      III.  That  mebe  fbames  of  desolate 

FEBIINO  OXTB  BT  NO  MEANS  A  BELEASE  FROM  THE   PBESSUBB  OF   DILIGENT  DUTT.      They 

oould  not  let  the  boat  drift.    They  had  to  use  all  their  skill.    IV.  Jesus  Chbist, 

EVEN    IN   DABENESS,    KNOWS     WHO    HAVE    NEED   OF    HiM.  Y.   ThAT    JeSUS    GhBIST 

SOMETIMES  DELAYS  HiS  COMING  TO  BELIEVEBS  TILL  He  IS  SUBE  OF  A  WELCOME.      (C  S. 

Robinson^  D.D.)  Christ  walking  on  the  sea : — The  sovereignty  of  Christ  over 
the  forces  of  inanimate  natnre  is  the  general  truth  illustrated  in  this  miracle, 
which  may  be  taken  with  the  former  one,  also  wrought  upon  the  sea,  recorded  two 
chapters  before.  He  made  the  liquid  waves  a  pavement  for  His  feet ;  at  His  com- 
mand their  fury  ceased  ;  as  He  stepped  into  the  tossing  boat  there  was  a  great  calm. 
We  may  look  at  this  sovereignty  of  Christ  over  the  sea  in  three  ways — Uterally, 
spiritually,  prophetically,  in  each  case  drawing  a  lesson.  Let  me  try  in  a  few  words 
to  show  this.  1.  Literally.  There  can  be  no  force  of  nature,  however  untameable 
by  man,  which  is  beyond  His  control  If  it  was  so  in  the  day  of  His  humiliation, 
how  much  more  bo  now  in  His  glory  and  universal  sovereignty.  Under  His  rule 
now  must  lie  all  the  physical  elements  and  forces  which  play  such  an  important 
part  in  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  as  all.  Think  of  the  importance  of  this  fact. 
There  are  times  when  nature  seems  tyrannical,  remorseless.  The  earthquake 
crushes  hundreds  of  sleeping  families  beneath  the  ruins  of  their  shattered  dwel- 
lings. The  volcano  scorches  and  blasts  the  fair  scenes  of  human  industry.  The 
eiorm  strews  the  shore  with  wrecks  and  corpses  ;  the  hungry  sea  swallows  up  its 
thousands  of  victims.  Pestilence  depopulates  whole  districts ;  drought  and  mildew 
make  barren  the  fields,  and  leave  the  tillers  of  the  soil  to  starve.  Explosions, 
conflagrations,  collisions,  great  catastrophes  to  life  and  property,  happen  in  spite 
of  all  precautions,  and  scatter  around  wounds,  and  misery,  and  death.  It  might 
seem  as  if  nature  went  on  its  reckless  course,  heedless  of  human  cries,  rushing 
along  on  the  iron  lines  of  fate,  on  its  fickle  wheels  of  chance,  without  pity  and 
without  purpose.  Here  comes  in  the  first  lesson  of  the  miracle.  Despair,  fear,  even 
inquietude,  may  be  banished,  if  all  nature  be  in  the  hand  of  Him  who  died  to 
redeem  us.  2.  Let  us  view  the  miracle  spiritually.  Nature's  storms  are  emblems 
of  storms  in  man's  heart ;  and  Christ's  sovereignty  over  those  is  a  pledge  to  us  of 
His  power  to  control  these  also,  and  reduce  them  to  peace.  If  we  have  any  true 
knowledge  of  ourselves,  our  own  consciousness  will  tell  us  how  greatly  we  need  to 
•xperience  the  peace-giving  power  of  oar  Redeemer.     We  cannot  be  ignorant  that 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

human  nature  is  discordant  within  itself,  and  that  sin  has  set  its  facolties  at  war 
with  each  other.  Times  come  when  tempests  blow  in  our  own  souls — tempests  ol 
temptation,  and  trial,  and  unbelief  ;  times  when  our  passions  are  violent  and  break 
away  from  control,  or  our  fears  rise  and  sweep  wildly  over  us ;  times  when  inclina- 
tion and  self-interest  fight  fiercely  against  conscience,  or  guilt  stirs  up  shame  and 
remorse,  and  from  one  cause  and  another  we  are  unquiet,  restless,  tossed  to  and  fro, 
like  the  troubled  surface  of  the  sea  beneath  the  smiting  of  the  storm.  And  who 
shall  lay  to  rest  these  tempests  of  the  soul,  and  bring  us  to  a  holy  calm  and  har- 
mony within  ?  The  true  and  only  Peacemaker  is  He  who  stood  in  the  tempest- 
tossed  boat,  and  said  to  the  winds  and  the  sea,  '♦  Peace,  be  still."  3,  Once  more,  the 
miracle  has  a  lesson  for  us  when  viewed  in  its  prophetic  aspect.  Christ,  Lord  of 
the  raging  waters,  stilling  the  violence  of  the  storm,  and  bringing  peace  and  rest  to  the 
tempest-tossed  disciples,  images  His  final  victory  over  evil,  and  the  salvation  in  which 
His  redeeming  work  shall  at  last  be  completed.  {B.  Maitland,  M.A.)  Godpre- 
nent  though  not  seen : — In  the  novel,  ''Blessed  Saint  Certainty,"  a  student,  the  son  of  a 
white  father  and  an  Indian  mother,  retires  to  the  woods  to  seek  communion  with  the 
Power  above  him.  There,  after  many  days,  his  Indian  mother  finds  him  talking  to 
God,  and  crying  to  Him  to  reveal  Himself.  She  sees  that  it  would  be  a  mistake  to 
make  known  her  presence ;  so  she  lies  still  among  the  brushwood,  watching  his 
struggles  lovingly  and  sympathizingly,  yet  never  uttering  a  word  of  help,  And  at 
last,  when  she  judges  it  safe,  she  steals  quietly  away.  God  often  treats  His  chil- 
dren in  just  that  way.  He,  too,  often  sees  that  it  is  best  to  look  upon  the  strnggle, 
and  to  make  no  sign.  So  Jesus,  in  to-day's  lesson,  looked  down  from  the  hill  and 
saw  the  disciples  toiling  all  night  in  a  storm  which  a  word  of  His  would  have 
stilled.  He  meant  that  His  disciples  should  learn  a  lesson  from  that  storm.  Self- 
confidence  to  be  learnt : — It  is  usual,  in  some  swimming-schools,  to  teach  beginners 
by  sending  them  into  the  water  with  a  belt  around  their  waist,  to  which  is  attached 
a  rope  which  again  is  connected  with  an  overreaching  arm  of  wood.  This  is  under 
the  control  of  the  swimming-master,  and  it  is  used  at  first  to  support  the  learner 
in  the  water ;  but  as  the  learner  gains  confidence,  the  rope  is  sla^ened,  and  he  is 
left  to  support  himself  by  his  own  efforts.  The  master  stands  by,  watching  the 
boy's  struggles,  ready  to  note  any  sign  of  real  danger.  When  danger  is  seen,  the 
rope  is  again  tightened — at  the  right  moment,  not  before — and  the  boy  is  taken 
safely  out  of  the  water.  Jesus  knows  just  how  long  to  withhold  help,  and  just 
when  to  bring  it.  He  came  to  the  struggling  disciples  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night. 
Failing  to  recognize  Christ : — The  foolish  child  shrinks  with  terror  from  the  sight 
of  the  doctor  who  comes  to  bring  him  relief.  And  we,  sometimes,  as  foolishly  fail 
to  recognize,  and  shrink  from,  God's  greatest  blessings.  A  countryman  saw,  one 
morning,  a  gigantic  figure  coming  towards  him  through  the  mist.  He  was  about 
to  fiee  in  terror,  when  he  noticed  that  the  figure  grew  less  and  less  as  it  approached. 
So  he  waited  until  it  was  near ;  and  then  found  that  he  had  been  about  to  flee  from 
his  brother.  Christ's  dieciples,  through  the  mist  of  their  fears,  failed  to  recognize 
Him  as  He  walked  on  the  sea.  The  worth  of  absent  sympathy : — There  was  once 
a  young  officer  in  a  battle  in  India  who  was  terribly  wounded.  The  doctor  ordered 
both  his  legs  to  be  amputated  (this  was  before  the  days  of  chloroform) ;  and  after  the 
agonizing  operation  was  done,  and  when  the  poor  young  fellow  was  laid  exhausted 
on  his  bed,  he  at  once  asked  for  pen  and  paper,  and  wrote  a  letter  to  his  mother. 
Doubtless  during  his  sufferings  there  was  present  to  his  mind  to  strengthen  him 
the  thought  of  his  mother,  far  away  in  England,  and  how  she  would  feel  for  him. 
And  if  we  gain  strength  from  human  sympathy,  there  is  even  more  to  be  found  in 
the  assurance  of  Divine  sympathy  from  our  risen  Lord  and  Saviour,  who  can  send 
down  His  grace  and  the  strength  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  {W.  Hardmany  M.A.)  The 
Lord  can  bear  to  see  His  followers  distressed — to  see  them  engaged  in  sore  oonfliot 
with  the  enemies  of  His  salvation,  and  yet  not  fiy  to  their  immediate  succour ;  for 
secretly  He  is  helping  them.  His  tenderness  is  not  weak,  but  moves  according  to 
the  rules  of  perfect  wisdom.  (J.  W,  Pearson.)  You  are  appalled,  overwhelmed, 
and  cry  out  with  terror.  But  remember,  it  is  Christ  imperfectly  known  that  terri- 
fies :  once  understand  and  know  His  dispensations — once  be  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  amplitude  of  His  grace— once  perceive  how  immense  is  His  compassion 
towards  the  greatest  sinners,  how  full  and  complete  the  price  He  has  paid — and  all 
this  doubt  and  fear  will  vanish.  And  do  we  not  often  misunderstand  the  march  of 
Ctod's  Providence  ?  (Ibid.)  Observe,  moreover,  they  go  forward.  That  had  been 
a  sin,  a  capital  offence>  if  they  h  d  endeavoured  to  go  back  to  the  shore.  And 
^  et  they  were  but  a  little  way  from  it.    Happy  is  that  yoong  Ohristian  wiio,  t^ 


.  ▼!.]  8T.  MARK,  267 

after  engaging  in  a  coarse  of  real  practical  Christianity,  after  entering  in  the  paths 
of  piety  and  true  religion,  he  speedily  met  with  obstacles,  speedily  found  himself 
overtaken  with  difficulties  and  distresses,  still  determined  that  he  will  struggle 
against  them,  that  he  will  not  be  driven  back  by  any  difficulties,  but  that  he  will 
effect  the  good  pleasure  of  tbe  Lord,  convinced  that  He  will  never  forsake  those  that 
trust  in  Him.  They  might  indeed  have  said,  after  toiling  so  long,  •*  It  is  useless — 
we  labour  in  vain — we  spend  our  strength  for  nought — we  never  counted  on  this — 
we  never  imagined  we  were  to  engage  in  a  service  so  arduous."  O  no ;  this  is  not 
their  feeling  ;  but  having  once  engaged  in  it,  they  press  forward ;  and  He  who  com- 
manded them  to  enter  upon  it,  will  assuredly  succour  them  in  due  time.  (Ibid.) 
Be  of  good  cheery  it  U  1 : — Christ  would  accustom  them  to  hardship  by  degrees. 
They  had  before  this  been  in  danger  at  sea,  but  then  their  Lord  was  present  with 
them ;  and  though  He  was  asleep,  they  had  free  recourse  to  Him  to  awake  Him,  and 
did  so,  with  their  cries  (Matt.  vlii.  24,  25,  &c.).  But  now  they  were  without 
His  company.  But  though  their  fears  and  troubles  were  great  while  Christ  was  absent, 
they  were  increased  at  His  coming  to  them  in  so  wonderful  a  way,  walking  on  the 
sea  to  give  them  help.  And  how  ready  are  our  hearts  to  sink,  even  when  God  and 
Christ  are  about  accomplishing  our  deliverance  I  1.  The  Person  that  spake,  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Those  to  whom  He  spake,  viz.,  His  disciples  in  their 
present  distress;  and  by  them  to  all  true  Christians.  Their  thoughts  were  as 
much  troubled  even  as  the  sea.  8.  We  may  observe  the  kind  nature  and 
design  of  Christ's  speech  to  tiiem  at  this  time.  It  was  full  of  compassion,  and 
tending  to  their  support :  Be  of  good  cheer,  do  not  faint,  nor  be  afraid.  4.  The 
argument  He  used  to  silence  their  fears  and  doubts,  and  give  them  relief — '^It  is  I : " 
».«.,  One  whom  you  have  seen  and  known,  and  need  not  now  distrust;  One  whose 
power  and  grace  you  have  experienced,  and  on  which  you  may  still  rely.  5.  The 
time  when  He  spake  thus  comfortably  to  them — •'  Straightway.'*  In  their  greatest 
extremity  He  speedily  reveals  Himself  to  be  their  refuge ;  and  raises  their  hope 
when  their  hearts  are  ready  to  fail.  When  believers  are  ready  to  sink  under  their 
troubles,  'tis  the  most  powerful  argument  to  their  relief,  to  have  Christ  seasonably 
coming  in,  and  saying  to  them,  **  It  is  I."  I.  Whence  it  is  that  even  believebs  abs 
APT  TO  siKK  undeb  theib  tboubles.  'Tis  uo  uncommon  case  for  gracious  souls  to  be 
cast  down  and  disquieted  under  pressing  afflictions.  But  there  is  a  peculiar  anguish  in 
the  hour  of  death.  As  to  the  springs  of  this.  1.  We  are  too  prone  to  put  far  from  us 
the  evil  day.  2.  Death  may  find  us  in  the  dark  as  to  our  title  to  the  life  to  come, 
or  meetness  for  it.  8.  Conscience  in  oar  last  hours  may  be  awakened  to  revive  the 
sense  of  past  sins,  and  so  may  increase  our  horrors  and  terrors.  4.  Ratan  sometimes 
joins  in  with  an  awakened  conscience,  to  make  the  trial  the  more  sore.  Lastly,  God 
sometimes  withdraws  the  light  of  His  countenance  :  and  how  deplorable  is  the  case 
that  the  soul  must  then  be  in  !  '*  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  If  He 
speak  peace,  who  can  give  trouble?  And  who  could  keep  from  fainting,  did  not 
Christ  seasonably  interpose,  saying  by  His  word  and  Spirit,  *♦  Be  of  good  cheer,  it  is  I." 
To  proceed  to  the  second  thing.  IL  What  Chbist  thus  speaks  fob  the  belief  of  His 

PBESENT  disciples,  BELONGS  TO  ALL  THE  REST  OF  HiS  SERVANTS.  UI.  WhAT  IS  CAB- 
RIED  IN  THE  ARGUMENT   HERE   USED,   AND   WHAT  THE    SERVANTS  OP  ChRIST  MAT  GATHER 

FBOM  IT  FOB  THEIR  SUPPORT.  In  general,  it  notes  His  presence  with  them,  and  His 
wisdom,  power,  faithfulness,  and  love  to  be  engaged  for  them.  'Tis  the  Lord  that 
speaks :  and  so — 1.  'Tis  One  that  hath  an  unquestionable  right  to  take  from  me,  or 
lay  upon  me,  or  do  with  me,  what  He  pleases.  2.  'Tis  Christ  that  invites  our  re- 
gard to  Him  under  every  dispensation,  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge  (Col.  ii.  8).  8.  'Tis  He  that  steps  forth  and  offers  Himself  to  oar 
notice,  saying,  "  It  is  I ;  "  One  who  hath  purchased  heaven  for  His  believing  fol- 
lowers, and  is  preparing  them  for  it,  and  in  the  best  way  conducting  them  to  it.  4. 
He  that  thus  speaks  has  moreover  said,  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now  ;  but  thou 
shalt  know  hereafter"  (John  ziii.  7).  6.  In  Christ,  who  here  speaks,  all  the  promises 
of  God  are  Yea  and  Amen  :  and  He  has  bid  His  disciples  to  ask  what  they  will  in 
His  name,  and  He  will  do  it.  It  is  I,  your  only  and  all-sofficient  Bedeemer,  on 
whom  your  help  is  laid,  and  whose  business  and  delight  it  is  to  succour  and  save.  It 
is  I,  who  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  I  might  bring  yoa  to  God ;  and  who 
have  undertaken  that  you  shall  not  miscarry  or  lose  your  way.  It  is  I,  who  can 
bestow  whatever  you  need,  and  deliver  you  from  all  your  fears,  and  keep  what  you 
have  committed  to  me  against  that  day,  the  day  of  My  coming  to  judgment.  "  It  is 
I,  who  live,  and  was  dead ;  and  behold  I  am  alive  for  evermore.  Amen  ;  and  have 
Ibe  keys  of  hell  and  of  death  "  (Bev.  i.  18).  Fear  not  to  go  down  into  the  grave,  I  will 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap. 


be  with  thee,  and  surely  bring  thee  up  again.  It  is  I,  who  never  yet  failed  any  that 
trusted  Me,  and  am  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever.  It  is  I,  who  am 
the  resurrection  and  the  life,  with  whom  is  hid  your  life  in  God ;  and  though  you  lay 
down  your  bodies  in  the  dust,  when  I  who  am  your  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye 
also  appear  with  Me  in  glory.  A  few  words  by  way  of  use  shall  close  all.  1.  Are 
believers  themselves  so  ready  to  sink  under  their  burdens,  what  then  can  bear  up 
the  hearts  of  others  ?  • '  If  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly 
and  the  sinner  appear  ?  "  2.  Seeing  'tis  Christ's  voice  alone  that  can  comfort  the 
soul,  how  desirable  is  an  interest  in  Him,  and  how  earnestly  should  we  labour  after 
it?  Lastly,  let  the  disciples  of  Christ  in  all  His  dealings  with  them,  dismiss  their 
fears  at  His  kind  reviving  voice,  "  It  is  I."  It  is  I,  who  have  all  your  times  in  My 
hand,  and  your  safety  as  to  both  worlds  at  heart.  It  is  I,  whose  power  is  over  all 
things  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  that  power  is  by  unchangeable  love  engaged  for 
you  ;  and  if  this  be  enough  to  your  comfort,  be  of  good  cheer,  it  is  I,  who  call  you 
now  by  My  gospel  to  receive  the  benefit  of  it,  further  and  further.  It  is  I,  who  am 
entrusted  with  you,  and  may  be  trusted  by  you,  as  your  nearest,  best,  and  ever- 
lasting friend.     {D.  Wilcox.) 

Ver.  52.   For  tney  considered  not  the  miracle  of  the  loaves.— Tfc«  miraels  of 

the  loaves : — The  disciples  "  were  sore  amazed  in  themselves  beyond  measure,  and 
wondered."  Had  the  miracle  of  the  loaves  been  duly  considered,  the  inference  from 
it  must  have  been  that  He  who  had  wrought  it  must  be  Lord  over  the  whole  system 
of  nature,  and  could,  therefore,  whenever  He  pleased,  bend  the  elements  to  His  rule. 
I.  There  was  another  occasion  on  which  Christ  miraculously  fed  a  great  multitude. 
We  read  of  His  sustaining  four  thousand  men,  besides  women  and  children,  with 
seven  loaves  and  a  few  little  fishes.  Thebb  were  only  two  occasions  on  which 
THIS  WAS  DONE.  He  showcd  Himself  ready  to  heal  all  manner  of  sickness ;  but  He 
showed  no  readiness  to  provide  food  miraculously.  The  reason  is  not  far  to  seek.  It 
was  altogether  one  of  the  consequences  of  sin  that  men  were  afflicted  with  various  mala- 
dies and  pains,  and  that  disease  and  death  held  sway  in  this  creation.  But  it  was  not 
one  of  those  consequences,  that  men  had  to  labour  for  subsistence.  Labour  was 
God's  earliest  ordinance,  bo  that  Adam,  in  innocence,  was  placed  in  paradise  to  keep 
it.  Had  He  dealt  with  men's  want  as  He  dealt  with  disease,  removing  it  instantly  by 
the  exercise  of  miraculous  power.  He  would  have  pronounced  it  a  grievance  that 
labour  had  been  made  the  heritage  of  man ;  whereas,  by  the  course  which  He 
actually  took,  He  gave  all  the  weight  of  His  testimony  to  the  advantageousness  of 
the  existing  appointment.  Universal  plenty,  yielded  without  toil,  would  generate 
universal  dissoluteness.  IL  When  He  multiplied  the  scanty  provision,  and  made 
it  satisfy  the  wants  of  a  famishing  multitude.  He  designed,  we  may  believe,  to  nx 

ATTENTION   ON   HiMSELF,   AS  APPOINTED  TO  PBOVIDB,  OB  BATHBB  TO  BE   THE    SPIBITnAXt 

BU8TENANCB  OF  THE  WHOLE  ROMAN  BACB.  And  how  striking,  in  the  first  place,  the 
correspondence  between  Christ,  the  multiplier  of  a  few  loaves  and  fishes,  and  Christ 
the  expounder  of  the  commandments  of  the  moral  law.  It  might  almost  have  been 
excusable,  had  a  man  who  lived  under  the  legal  dispensation,  and  had  nothing 
before  him  but  the  letter  of  the  precepts,  imagined  the  possibility  of  a  perfect 
obedience  to  the  commandments  of  the  two  tables.  It  was  a  wonderful  amplification. 
The  statute-books  of  a  nation  are  numerous  and  ponderous  Volumes ;  various  oases 
as  they  arise  demand  fresh  laws,  and  legislatures  are  either  busy  in  making  new 
legislations,  or  modifying  old.  But  the  statutes  of  God,  though  intended  for  count- 
less ages,  contain  only  ten  short  commandments — the  whole  not  so  long  as  the 
preamble  to  a  single  act  of  human  legislation,  and  these  ten  oommaudments, 
breathed  on  by  Him  who  spake  as  never  man  spake,  amplify  themselves  into  innu- 
merable precepts,  so  that  every  possible  caSe  was  provided  for,  every  possible  sin, 
every  possible  duty  enjoined ;  and  who  can  fail  to  observe  how  aptly  Christ  repre- 
sented His  office  as  expounder  of  the  law,  when  He  fed  a  multitude  with  the  slendei 
provision  which  His  disciples  had  broaght  into  the  wilderness  ?  But  have  not  the 
virtues  of  the  single  death,  the  merits  of  the  one  work  of  expiation,  proved  ample 
enough  for  the  innumerable  company  which  have  gathered  round  Christ  and  applied 
to  Him  for  deliverance  ?  And  are  not — if  we  may  use  the  expression — are  not  the 
basketfuls  which  still  remain,  sufficient  to  preclude  the  necessity  for  any  fresh 
miracle,  though  those  who  should  crave  spiritual  food  for  ages  to  come  should 
immeasurably  exceed  those  who  have  already  been  satisfied  in  the  wilderness  ?    III. 

To  the  PRECISE  EFFECT  WHICH  A  WANT  OF  CONSIDERATION  PBODUCBD  IN  THE  CASH  OF 
VSS    AFOSTLBB,  AND    WHICH   IT  IB    JUST  AS  UKXLY    TO  PRODUCE  IN  ODB  OWH.        It  IS 


.  Tul  ST.  MARK.  269 

•▼ident  thai  the  miracle  of  the  loaves  is  referred  to  by  the  sacred  historian,  as  bo 
■igxial  a  display  of  Christ's  power  that  none  who  witnessed  it  ought  to  have  been 
•urpriBed  at  any  other.  The  thing  charged  against  the  apostles  is  that  they  were 
ftmazed  and  confounded  at  Christ  etilling  the  winds  and  the  waves,  though  they  had 
just  before  seen  Him  produce  food  for  thousands ;  and  the  thing  implied  is — for 
otherwise  there  would  be  no  ground  for  blame^that  the  miracle  of  the  loaves  should 
have  prepared  them  for  any  further  demonstration  of  lordship  over  nature  and  her 
laws.  Thus  the  miracle  of  the  loaves  should  have  sufficed  to  destroy  all  remains 
of  unbelief,  and  should  have  furnished  the  apostles  with  motives  to  confidence  under 
the  most  trying  circumstances,  and  a  simple  dependence  on  the  guardianship  of  the 
Saviour,  whatever  the  trials  to  which  they  were  exposed.  And  why  is  it  that  we 
ourselves  adopt  not  His  reasoning?  Why  is  it  that  we  do  not  similarly  argue  from 
the  loaves  to  the  storm — from  the  mighty  works  of  tha  atonement  to  the  manifold 
requirements  of  a  state  of  warfare  and  pilgrimage  ?  Ah,  if  we  did,  could  there  be 
that  anxiety,  that  mistrust,  those  fears,  those  tremblings,  which  we  too  often  mani- 
fest when  pains  and  troubles  come  thickly  upon  us  ?  No,  no;  it  is  because  we  look 
not  on  the  cross,  because  we  forget  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat  and  passion  of  the 
Redeemer,  that  we  shrink  from  the  storm  and  are  terrified  by  the  waves.  We  con- 
sider not  the  miracle  of  the  loaves,  and  then,  when  the  sky  is  dark,  and  the  winds 
fierce,  we  are  tempted  to  give  ourselves  up  for  lost  {H.  Melvill.)  Forgotten 
mercies : — Hard  hearts  and  painful  unbeliefs  spring  up  in  the  waste  places  where  we 
bury  our  forgotten  mercies.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Consider  the  past  :~-lieithei  earth 
nor  heaven,  time  nor  eternity,  yields  choicer  gems  of  thought  than  the  achievements 
of  our  Lord.  {Ibid. )  Fast  action  an  index  to  future  help  : — Since  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  what  He  did  at  one  time  ought  to  be 
well  considered,  because  it  is  the  index  of  what  He  is  prepared  to  do  again  should 
need  arise.  His  accomplished  wonders  have  not  spent  His  strength,  He  has  the  dew 
of  His  youth  still  upon  Him.  Our  Samson's  locks  are  not  shorn,  our  Solomon  has 
not  lost  His  wisdom,  our  Immanuel  has  not  ceased  to  be,  •'  God  with  us."  (Ibid.) 
The  inconsideration  of  the  disciples  : — '•  They  considered  not  the  miracle  of  the 
loaves." — At  first  sight  this  may  seem  almost  as  marvellous  as  the  miracle  itself. 
I.  It  is  by  no  means  difficult  to  discoveb  ▲  very  satisfactoby  beason  why  thb 

DISCIPLES  SEOULD   BE    MUCH  LESS  AFFECTED    BY  THE    FEEDING   OF  THE  FIVB  THOUSAND, 
THAN  BY  THE  WALKING  UPON    THE  WATEB   AND  THE    SUDDEN  STILLING   OF   THE  TEMPEST. 

1.  The  former  was  a  miracle  wrought  in  the  open  day,  when  there  was  nothing  to  dis- 
turb the  imagination,  or  to  awaken  fear.  It  was,  moreover,  not  a  sudden  effect,  but 
a  gradual  operation ;  not  a  shock  upon  the  senses,  but  a  gentle  and  continuous 
appeal  to  them  ;  and  would  thus  be  far  too  calm  and  quiet  in  its  general  character 
to  produce  anything  like  that  turbulence  of  emotion  which  the  latter  miracles  would 
excite,  aided  as  they  were  by  the  presence  of  danger,  the  confusion  of  the  storm,  the 
horror  of  darkness,  and  all  that  sublimity  of  circumstance  with  which  they  were 
accompanied.  This,  however,  though  it  may  afford  an  explanation  of  their  excessive 
amazement,  is  far  from  explaining  their  total  inadvertency  to  that  great  miracle  at 
which  they  had  so  recently  been  present ;  and  which,  had  it  occurred  to  their 
memory,  as  it  manifestly  ought,  would  speedily  have  recalled  them  from  their 
transport.  2.  The  evangelist  accounts  for  this,  by  saying  that  their  heart  was 
hardened.  They  had  become  so  accustomed  to  the  sight  of  their  Master's  mighty 
works  that  they  had  ceased  to  regard  them  with  any  peculiar  interest,  or  to  attach 
to  them  any  pecuhar  importance.  Every  one  is  aware  of  the  influence  of  familiarity 
with  the  great  and  astonishing,  in  abating  the  impressions  they  originally  produce. 
How  little,  for  instance,  are  any  of  us  affected  by  the  sublime  spectacle  of  the  uni- 
verse around  us  I  Even  the  conclusion  which,  beyond  all  others,  one  would  have 
thought  it  impossible  to  escape — the  conviction  of  His  omnipotence — they  seem  far 
from  having  practically  realized.  Some  exception  from  the  full  weight  of  this 
censure  may  perhaps  be  made  in  favour  of  Peter,  who,  on  various  occasions,  dis- 
covered  a  certain  boldness  and  force  of  apprehension,  which  we  look  in  vain  for  in 
his  fellow-disciples.  3.  Our  Lord  knew  all  this,  and  felt  the  necessity  of  reviving 
their  early  feeling  of  wonder,  in  order  to  rouse  them  from  that  mental  inactivity,  that 
slumberous  inconsideration,  into  which  they  had  fallen.  Hence  He  sent  them  away, 
Ac.  Astonishment  opens  the  eyes  of  their  understanding  to  at  least  some  temporary 
recognition  of  His  greatness,  for  now,  says  St.  Matthew,  they  *'  came  and  worshipped 
Him,  saying,  Of  a  truth,  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God  !  "  But  they  speedily  relapsed 
into  their  old  habit  of  inconsideration.  To  this,  accordingly.  He  frequently  ad- 
dressed Himself,  and  sometimes  in  a  tone  of  the  strongest  expostulation  and  reprool 


270  THE  BIBUCA  j  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  wu, 

(Mark  viii.  15-21).  II.  Thb  pbaotioa^  impobt  or  thk  subjbct  in  application  to 
ODBSELYBS.  1.  We  oaght  to  derive  a  strong  corroboration  of  our  faith  in  the  gospel. 
How  unfit  were  the  disciples  for  the  great  work  for  which,  neverthelesa,  they  were 
set  apart.  What  can  we  say  to  the  story  of  their  success,  &c,  but  "  This  is  the  hand 
of  God."  2.  Their  heedlessness  of  mind  ought  to  come  directly  home  to  our  own 
bosoms,  and  awaken  us  to  the  necessity  of  earnest  and  serious  reflection.  Familiarity 
has  produced  the  same  effects  upon  many  of  us.  So  with  respect  to  the  volume 
of  Scripture  generally.  3.  There  are  methods  in  the  order  of  Divine  grace  by  which 
we  are  at  times  roused  from  that  insensibility  and  heedlossuess  to  which  we  are 
prone,  and  the  remedy  which  the  Lord  adopted  in  the  case  of  the  disciples  is  strik- 
ingly symbolical  of  the  manner  in  which  He  still  coudesoends  at  times  to  deal  with 
us.  Affliction  and  fear,  under  the  gracious  direction  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  are  at 
times  the  most  efficient  of  all  interpf  eters  of  Scripture.  4.  The  gospel,  when  it  does 
not  soften  the  heart,  hardens  it,  <&o.    (t^.  U.  Smith.) 

Vers  5S-56.    They  laid  the  sick  in  the  streets. — The  multitude  in  affliction :— I. 

A  BKAUTIPUL  OOUNTBY,  INHABITATBD   BY    A   MULTITUDB  OT  SICK.      II.   A  PBOMPT  RBOOO- 

NiTioN  OF  A  POBMBB  BBNKFAC3T0B— "  They  kuew  Him  (Matt.  ix.  35,  xi.  20->24; 
Mark  iii.  7-11).  III.  Eitebobtio  exertion — ••  And  ran,  &o."  IV.  An  appkotino 
picTUBB  op  human  HELPLESSNESS — "Began  to  carry  about,"  Ac.     V.  An  admission 

THAT  HEALING  VIBTUB  DWELT  ALONB  IN  CflBIST.      YI.    ThB  INFALLIBLE  NATXTBE  OP   THB 

BEMEDT.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  Jesus  and  His  fulnesB  : — I.  The  landing.  Wherever  the 
Son  of  God  landed  there  was  blessing,  peace,  health,  liberty.  II.  The  bbooonizino — 
"  Straightway  they  knew  Him,"  •*  If  thou  knewest,"  &c.  III.  Thb  oathebino.  IV. 
The  touching.    V.  The  healing.   (H.  Bonar^  D.D.)      Touch  Jesus  and  be  healed: — 

I.  The  touch  was  needy.  2.  The  touch  was  wise,  8.  The  touch  was  prompt. 
4.  The  touch  was  believing.  5.  The  touch  was  pergonal.  6.  The  touch  was  un- 
restricted.  There  was  no  exception  to  the  healing.  7.  The  touch  was  efficacious. 
No  failure.  8.  The  lost  will  be  inexcusable.  (/.  Smith.)  A  crowd  of  eager 
applicants ; — It  was  after  a  walk  through  the  village  of  Ehden,  beneath  the  moun> 
tain  of  the  cedars,  our  last  Syri  n  expedition,  in  which  we  visited  several  of  the 
churches  and  cottages  of  the  pi  ce,  that  we  found  the  stairs  and  corridors  of  the 
castle  of  the  Maronite  chief,  Sheykh  Joseph,  lined  with  a  crowd  of  eager  applicants, 
♦'  sick  people  taken  with  divers  diseases,"  who,  hearing  that  there  was  a  medical 
man  in  the  party,  had  thronged  round  him,  "  beseeching  him  that  he  would  heal 
them."  I  mention  this  incident  because  it  illustrates  so  forcibly  these  scenes  in  the 
gospel  history,  from  which  I  have  almost  of  necessity  borrowed  the  language  best 
fitted  to  express  the  eagerness,  the  hope,  the  anxiety  of  the  multitude  who  had  been 
attracted  by  the  fame  of  this  beneficent  influence.  It  was  an  affecting  scene ;  oar 
kind  doctor  was  distressed  to  nd  how  many  cases  there  were  which  with  proper 
medical  appliances  might  have  been  cured ;  and  on  returning  to  the  ship,  by  the 
Prince  of  Wales'  desire,  a  store  of  medicines  was  sent  back,  with  Arabic  labels 
directing  how  and  for  what  puipose  they  should  be  used.  {Dean  Stanley.)  Spiri- 
tual healing: — I.  The  necessity  fob  such  an  application  to  Christ.  1.  Yoa 
have  a  disease  of  guilt  upon  you.    2.  Ton  have  a  disease  of  corruption  upon  yoa. 

II.  The  manneb  op  it.  1.  They  persuaded  themselves  that  Christ  was  able  to  do 
this  thing  for  them.  2.  They  put  themselves  in  His  way.  8.  Those  who  could  not 
come  of  themselves,  sought  the  help  of  their  stronger  neighbours ;  none  of  them 
were  so  unfeeling  as  to  refuse  the  needful  aid.  4.  They  earnestly  prayed  for  the 
blessing  which  they  desired.  5  They  complied  with  the  simple  method  which  was 
prescribed.  This  was  to  touo  Him.  IIL  Thb  obbtaxm  sucoBsa  of  ix-->**Mads 
whole."    {J.  JaweU,  M,A.) 


CHAPTER  Vn. 


Vbbb.  1-16.    Then  earns  together  onto  Him  tlis  Fbarisees,  tad  omtaln  of  th* 

Scribes. — Scribes  and  Pharisees  coming  to  Christ : — ^L  When  they  oamb.  When 
Gennesaret  turned  its  heart  towaid  Him.  When  diseased  bodies  had  felt  the  virtnt 
of  His  touch,  and  imprisoned  souls  had  been  set  free  by  His  word.  Then.  As  soon  as 
ever  the  Church's  Child  was  born,  the  devil  sought  to  drown  Him  (Rev.  xii).  II.  Who 
xasY  wBBB  that  CAME.     Pharisees  and  soribes.  The  learned  and  tne  religions.  Thess 


Tu.]  8T,  MARK,  271 

tvodasBeshave  always  been  the  greatest  opponents  of  Christ's  kingdom.  III.  Whencb 
THST  OAMB.  From  Jerusalem.  Macbiavel  observed  that  there  was  nowhere  leu  piety 
than  in  those  that  dwelt  nearest  to  Borne.  *•  The  nearer  the  Church,  the  iarther 
from  God."  **Iteannot  be  that  a  prophet  shall  perish  out  of  Jerusalem."  lY. 
Whbbb  thxt  cams.  To  Jesus.  As  the  moth  flies  at  the  lamp,  and  bats  fly  at  the 
sun«  What  a  contrast  between  such  a  coming  and  those  named  in  chap.  vi.  56. 
**  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  (L.  Palmer.)  The  tradition  of  men  :^It  is  the 
folly  of  men  that,  in  discharge  of  the  duties  of  religion,  they  are  satisfied  to  put 
ceremonies  and  confessions  that  cost  but  little,  in  the  place  of  righteousness  of  heart 
and  life  which  cost  a  great  deal.  I.  There  is  to-day  an  ecolesiastical  ritualism, 
which  is  disastrous  to  piety.  It  starts  with  the  assumption  that  its  methods  of 
worship  are  the  best  possible ;  and,  after  a  little,  declares  they  are  the  only  ones 
acceptable  to  God.  The  Church  usurps  the  place  of  Christ.  Of  any  church  that  esti- 
mates ritual  above  character,  that  endeavours  to  build  up  form  rather  than  shape 
life,  Christ  says,  "  Full  well  do  ye  reject  the  commandment  of  God  that  ye  may 
keep  your  tradition."  IL  There  is  to-day  a  social  ritualism,  which  is  disastrous 
to  true  piety.  Public  opinion  is  a  power;  it ^ai Tts  theof^  of  religion.  Certain 
things  done,  and  certain  others  left  undone,  are  the  credentials  of  piety.  Men's 
actions  are  tiie  only  things  taken  into  account,  not  the  men  themselves.  Society 
has  agreed  that  a  little  honesty,  a  little  charity,  and  church-going,  shall  be  accepted 
as  religion.  Such  reject  the  commandment  of  God  that  they  may  keep  their 
tradition,  in.  There  is  a  ritualism  of  pjissoisal  opinion,  which  is  disastrous  to 
true  piety.  Every  man  has  his  own  idea  of  the  conditions  on  which  he  personally 
may  be  right  with  (Jod.  They  forget  that  it  is  for  God  to  decide  what  is  satisfactory 
to  Him.  It  is  sometimes  argued  that,  since  there  are  so  many  opposite  theories 
and  conflicting  creeds,  our  acceptance  or  rejection  of  what  is  called  religion  cannot 
be  of  much  importance.  But  religion  is  a  simple  matter.  Piety  is  the  being  and 
doing  what  God  has  commanded ;  just  that ;  nothing  more  and  nothing  less. 
Those  commandments  are  few,  brief,  intelligible.  Whatever  vagueness  and  con- 
fnsion  there  may  be  in  our  ideas  of  religion,  it  is  of  our  own  making.  Let  God 
speak  for  HimseU,  and  listen  only  to  Him,  and  all  is  plain.  (Monday  Club  Sennom.) 
Tradition  aeeumulates  rubbish : — Accepting  the  traditions  of  men  as  our  rule,  we 
get  to  be  heirs  of  a  vast  deal  of  rubbish.  Just  as  around  the  anchored  rock  in  the 
ever-swinging  tide,  there  gathers  all  sorts  of  debris^  floating  fragments  of  wrecks, 
drifting  grass  and  weeds,  with  perhaps  now  and  then  some  bright  sea-blossom,  or 
shell  of  beauty  oast  up  by  the  heave  of  the  surge— so  a  church  that  takes  as  pattern 
of  its  oreed  and  ceremonial  the  belief  and  methods  of  men  of  other  times,  is  sure  to 
be  cambered  with  a  mass  of  outworn  mistakes,  the  refuse  and  driftwood  of  cen- 
toiies,  with  here  and  there  a  suggestion  of  world-long  value,  but  as  a  whole,  out  of 
date  and  useless.  (Ibid.)  Tradition  conceals  truth : — Each  generation  encum- 
bered the  divinely  ordained  ritual  with  its  own  comments ;  so  after  awhile  men's 
notions  overgrew  and  hid  from  sight  God's  thought,  as  some  wild  vine  in  the  forest 
wreathes  its  fetters  of  verdure  around  the  hearty  tree,  interlacing  and  interknotting 
its  sprays,  looping  mesh  on  mesh  of  pliant  growth,  till  the  tree  is  smothered  and 
hidden,  and  the  all-encompassiug  vine  alone  is  seen  and  seems  to  have  life.  (Ibid.) 
Perverted  tradition  the  bane  of  the  Church : — It  is  a  subtle  artifice  of  the  Great  Enemy 
of  mankind,  to  make  the  real  Word  of  God  of  none  effect  by  means  of  a  pretended 
Word.  When  he  cannot  prevail  with  men  to  go  contrary  to  what  they  know  to  be 
the  Wora  which  came  from  God,  then  he  deals  with  them  as  he  taught  his  lying 
prophet  to  deal  at  Bethel  with  the  prophet  of  God  who  came  from  Judah.  When 
Jeroboam  **  said  to  the  Man  of  God,  Come  home  with  me,  and  refresh  thyself,  and 
I  will  give  thee  a  reward,"  the  prophet  resolutely  repelled  the  invitation :  "  If  thou 
wilt  give  me  half  thy  house,  I  will  not  go  in  with  thee,  neither  will  I  eat  bread  nor 
drink  water  in  this  place ;  for  so  was  it  charged  me  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  saying, 
Eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water."  An  old  prophet,  however,  followed  the  man  of 
God,  and  gave  him  a  like  invitation,  and  received  a  hke  refusal.  But,  when  the 
great  deceiver  put  a  falsehood  into  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  old  man  :  *'  I  am  a 
prophet  also,  as  thou  art,  and  an  angel  spake  onto  me  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord, 
saving,  '  Bring  him  back  with  thee  into  thy  house,  that  he  may  eat  bread  and  drink 
water,'  but  he  Ued  unto  him  " — the  Ue  proved  fatal  I  '*  He  went  back  with  him, 
and  did  eat  bread  in  his  house,  and  drank  water  *'  (1  Kings  ziii.).  The  Man  of  God 
was  greatly  to  be  pitied,  yet  he  was  greatly  to  be  blamed.  He  had  received  it 
explicitly  from  God  that  he  should  neither  eat  nor  drink  in  idolatrous  Bethel ;  and 
it  was  his  plain  duty  to  adhere  to  that  command,  unless  God  repealed  it  in  the  same 


in  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [i 

way  in  which  he  gave  it,  or  with  equal  evidence  that  saoh  was  His  will ;  whereas 
he  believes  an  old  man  of  whom  he  knows  nothing,  on  his  own  word,  onder  sns- 
pioious  oircumstanoes,  and  in  opposition  to  what  had  been  the  Word  of  God  to 
himself.  While  a  direct  and  palpable  temptation  to  go  contrary  to  God*s  command 
was  offered,  he  resisted  and  repelled  the  temptation ;  bat  when  a  temptation  was 
offered,  which  came  as  a  repeal  of  the  command  and  in  relief  of  his  necessities, 

(though  on  no  sufficient  authority,  then  his  weakness  prevailed.  Why,  think  you, 
were  lying  prophets  permitted?  Why  are  lying  teachers  still  suffered f  Why, 
even  lying  wonders  ?  To  try  the  state  of  men's  hearts.  Is  your  heart,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  made  humble  and  teachable  ?  then  will  you  be  taught  of  the  Spirit 
"  to  discern  the  things  which  differ  " — to  detect  the  fallacies  and  delusions  practised 
upon  it — and  "to  approve  the  things  which  are  more  excellent."  Is  your  heart 
self-sufficient,  careless,  carnal  ?  then  wiU  it  bo  deceived  and  led  astray  by  plausible 
and  flattering  pretences.  In  contending  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  sole  rule  of 
faith,  we  give  them  exclusive  authority  over  the  judgment  and  the  conscience.  This 
authority  lies  in  the  real  sense,  and  the  just  application  of  that  sense,  not  in  any 
sense  or  application  contrary  to  that  which  is  just  and  true,  and  which  man  may 
seek  to  impose.  This  sense  is  to  be  ascertained,  and  the  right  application  of  it  is 
to  be  learnt  by  humble,  teachable,  diligent,  and  devout  study,  with  the  use  of  all 
needful  helps  thereto.  The  influence  of  the  Scriptures  on  the  heart  is  the  special 
work  of  Him  who  dictated  them.  The  blessing  of  God  is  needful  to  our  success  in 
endeavouring  to  ascertain  the  sense  and  right  application  of  them ;  but  so  great 
are  the  obstacles  to  our  "  receiving  with  meekness  tiie  engrafted  Word,"  that  *♦  God, 
who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  must  shine  into  our  hearts  "  by 
the  special  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  order  to  our  feeling  the  transforming  influence 
of  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  His  glory,  as  seen  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  No 
consent  of  man  in  any  interpretation  or  application  of  Scripture  is  of  binding 
authority  on  others.  Consent  is  often  contagious — ^not  enlightened.  The  influence 
of  leaders,  the  supposed  interests  of  party,  early  associations,  and  prejudices,  often 
bias  the  judgment.  £ut  the  unerring  standard  remains.  And  the  deviations  of 
churches,  and  councils,  and  nations,  from  this  standard,  and  the  continuance  of 
those  deviations  for  ages,  cannot  deflect  this  standard  one  jot  or  tittle  from  its 
rectitude.  But  while  no  consent  of  men  can  bind  of  authority  to  any  interpretation 
or  application  of  Scripture,  yet  those  views  of  truth  which  are  commended  to  us  by 
the  consent  in  them  of  varied  bodies  of  enlightened  and  devout  men,  come  to  as 
under  a  just  and  commanding  influence.  {J,  Pratt,  B.D.)  Ceremonialism  and 
spirituality  : — I.  Ceremonialism:  substitutes  washing  with  water  fob  pubity  of 

KBABT.  IL  CeBEMONIALISM  SUBSTITUTES  THE  TRADITIONS  OF  THE  ELDEBS  FOB  THB 
COMMANDS  OF  GoD.  III.  CEREMONIALISM  SUBSTITUTES  THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  LIPS  FOB 
THB  WOBSHIP  OF  THE  HEART.      IV.   CEREMONIALISM  SUBSTITUTES  A  SUBTLE  EVASION  FOB 

FiLiAii  DUTY.  V.  Ceremonialism  substitutes  avoidance  of  unclean  food  fob 
AVOIDANCE  OF  IMPURE  AND  MALICIOUS  THOUGHTS.  Application :  It  is  possible  to  be,  in 
a  sense,  religious,  and  yet,  in  a  deeper  sense,  sinful,  and  out  of  harmony  with  the 
mind  and  will  of  God.  None  is  wholly  free  from  the  temptation  to  substitute  the 
external,  formal,  apparent,  for  the  faith,  love,  and  loyalty  of  heart  required  by  God. 
Hence  the  need  of  a  good  heart,  which  must  be  a  new  heart — the  gift  and  creation 
of  God  by  His  Spirit.  (tT".  R.  Thomson,  M.A.)  The  tradition  of  m^n  versus  the 
commandments  of  God : — In  the  conflict  between  the  Church  and  the  sacred  relation- 
ships of  common  life,  to  the  latter  must  De  assigned  the  pre-eminence.  The 
necessities  of  the  temple,  of  its  services  or  its  servants,  must  not  be  met  at  the 
expense  of  filial  faithfulness.      The  sin  of  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  was — L  A 

GROSS  PERVERSION  OF  THE  RELATIVE  CLAIMS  OF  THE  PARENT  AND  THE  ChURCH.  II. 
A  WICKED  INTERFERENCE  WITH  THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  WITH  PROMISE.  III.  A  CRUEL 
UNDERMINING  OF  FILIAL  AFFECTION  AND  FIDELITY,  AND  AS  CRUEL  AN  EXPOSURE  OF  THE 
AGED  AND  ENFEEBLED  PARENTS  TO  A  FALSELY- JUSTIFIED  NEGLECT.  IV.  AN  UNWARRANTED 
USURPATION  OF  AUTHORITY  TO  WEAKEN   THE  OBLIGATION  OF  A  DiVINB  LAW.       {R.  Green.) 

The  religion  of  the  Jews  : — The  interference  of  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  served  to 
bring  out  their  religion.  Consider  some  of  its  features.  The  religion  here  depicted 
and  condemned — I.  Consisted  mainly  of  external  observances  (vers.  2-4).  1.  By 
this  feature  the  same  system  of  rehgion  may  be  detected  in  the  present  day.  2. 
Beligion  in  this  sense  is  upheld  by  many  strong  principles  in  the  nature  of  man — 
awakened  conscience,  self-righteousness,  vanity.  8.  This  system  is  exceedingly 
dangerous.  Misleads  the  awakened  sinner ;  produces  a  deep  and  fatal  slumber. 
n.  Bbbtb  on  HUMAN  authority  as  ITS  warrant  (vers.  8,  6,  7).     L  By  this  feature 


.  vn.]  8T.  MARK,  S78 

we  may  detect  it  in  the  present  day.  Among  those  who  take  away  the  right— duty 

*nd  exercise  of  private  judgment.  Among  those  who  derive  their  religious  belief 
from  man — in  whatever  way.  2.  This  form  of  false  religion  is  exceedingly  dan- 
gerous. It  dishonours  Christ  as  a  prophet,  &o.  It  gives  despotic  power  to  man, 
which  he  is  not  qualified  to  wield.  It  degrades  the  soul  to  be  a  servant  of  servants, 
<fec.    3.  Call  no  man  master.     HI,  Puts  dishokoub  upon  the  bacbed  Scbiptubes. 

1.  By  this  feature  we  detect  its  existence  now.  In  the  Church  of  Rome,  <feo.,  the 
Scriptures  are  wholly  concealed — made  to  speak  according  to  tradition  and  the  Church. 
Amongst  ourselves :  opinions  are  not  surrendered  to  them,  and  they  are  neglected'. 

2.  This  form  of  religion  stands  opposed  to  those  Scriptures  which  it  dishonours 
(John  V.  39,  and  others).  3.  Know  the  Scriptures  and  revere  them.  IV.  Made 
LIGHT  OF  THE  MORAL  LAW  (vers.  8-12).  1.  May  be  seen  in  our  own  day— in  the 
Chorch  of  Rome.  May  be  seen,  amongst  ourselves,  in  those  who  put  religious 
ceremonies  in  the  place  of  moral  duties.  2.  This  form  has  its  origin  in  the  love 
of  sin,  and  is  accommodated  to  an  unsanctified  heart.  3.  It  has  no  tendency  to 
purify,  but  the  reverse.  4.  Beware  of  Antinomianism.  V.  Consisted  in  hypocrisy, 
putting  on  appearances.  VI.  Was  vigilant  and  jealous  of  Christ,  and  censured 
His  disciples  (vers.  1,  2).  {Expository  Discourses.)  Unwashen  Mnds: — It  was 
laid  down  that  the  hands  were  first  to  be  washed  clean.  The  tips  of  the  ten  fingers 
were  then  joined  and  lifted  up,  so  that  the  water  ran  down  to  the  elbows,  then 
turned  down,  so  that  it  might  run  off  to  the  ground.  Fresh  water  was  poured  on 
them  ae  they  were  lifted  up,  and  twice  again  as  they  hung  down.  The  washing 
itself  was  to  be  done  by  rubbing  the  fist  of  one  hand  in  the  hollow  of  the  other. 
When  the  hands  were  washed  before  eating,  they  must  be  held  upwards,  when  after 
it  downwards,  but  so  that  the  water  should  not  nm  beyond  the  knuckles.  The 
vessel  used  must  be  held  first  in  the  right,  then  in  the  left  hand ;  the  water  was  to 
be  poured  first  on  the  right,  then  on  the  left  hand ;  and  at  every  third  time  the 
words  repeated,  ••  Blessed  art  thou  who  hast  given  us  the  command  to  wash  the 
hands.*'  It  was  keenly  disputed  whether  the  cup  of  blessing  or  the  handwashing 
shooli  come  first ;  whether  the  towel  used  should  be  laid  on  the  table  or  on 
the  coach ;  and  whether  the  table  was  to  be  cleared  before  the  final  washing  or 
after  it.  {Qeikie*9  Life  of  Christ.)  The  tradition  of  tlie  elders  :— The  excess  to 
which  these  regulations  were  carried  is  well  illustrated  by  what  is  told  of  one  Rabbi 
Akaba,  who,  in  his  dungeon,  being  driven  by  a  pittance  of  water  to  the  alternative 
of  neglecting  ablution  or  dying  with  thirst,  preferred  death  to  failing  in  ceremonious 
observance.  Moses  commanded  washing  very  freely : — But  it  was  always  in  con- 
nection with  some  very  definite  cause ;  being  required  either  (1)  because  of  physical 
pollution  which  had  been  gathered,  or  (2)  in  connection  with  moral  consecration 
which  was  purposed.  The  priests  at  consecration  were  washed.  So  was  the  leper 
after  his  recovery,  and  so  were  all  after  defilement  or  contact  with  those  defiled. 
But  the  tradition  of  the  elders  had  come  to  require  as  many  washings  in  a  day  as 
Moses  would  have  required  in  a  month.  The  secret  of  this  development  lay  in  the 
adoption  of  the  principle  of  ••  The  Hedge,"  i.e.,  something  which  guarded  the  Law 
by  prohibiting  not  only  actions  forbidden,  but  aU  actions  which  might  by  any  possi- 
bility lead  to  them.  Accordingly,  because  Moses  said  that  he  who  was  defiled  by 
contact  with  a  corpse  should  wash,  they  held  it  was  well  to  wash  always  after  being 
out  of  doors,  as  you  might  have  touched  some  one  who  might  have  touched  some 

one  or  something  dead Thus  life  became  a  very  slavery.     Of  course  "  the 

common  people,"  as  they  were  contemptuously  styled,  could  not  afford  either  time, 
or  thought,  or  money,  to  practise  such  scruples.  But  a  great  number  associated 
themselves  together,  calling  themselves '•  Haberim,"  or  "Comrades,"  to  observe 
these  scruples.  The  Pharisees  belonged  to  this  society,  of  course,  to  a  mAX), 
{R.  Glover.)  Pharisaic  prejudice  : — These  Pharisees  found  fault  because  Christ'a 
disciples  did  not  obey  man's  law,  the  quoted  "  tradition,"  the  authority  of  their 
Church.  It  was  not  until  the  great  (seventh)  Earl  of  Shaftesbury  was  twenty-five 
years  of  age  that  he  supposed  that  any  one  outside  the  Church  of  England  was 
worth  listening  to,  or  ever  wrote  anything  worth  reading.  •*  As  to  their  having  any 
views  of  their  own  worthy  of  consideration,"  he  says,  "  it  never  crossed  my  mind 
unto  one  dajr  I  got  hold  of  a  copy  of  some  Commentary,  and,  after  reading  for  awhile 
with  great  mterest,  it  suddenly  struck  me,  *  The  writer  must  have  been  a  rank 
Dissenter  1 '  and  I  instantly  shut  np  the  book,  recoiling  from  it  as  I  would  from 
poison.  One  of  the  first  things  that  opened  my  eyes  was  reading  of  Doddridge 
being  condemned  as  a  Dissenter,  and  I  remember  exclaiming,  •  Good  heavens !  how 
will  be  stand  in  the  day  of  judgment  at  the  bar  of  Qod,  as  compared  with  Pope 

18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tb. 

Alexander  VI.  ? '    It  was  not  till  I  was  twenty-five  years  old,  or  thereabouts,  that  I 
got  hold  of  Scott's  •  CJommentary  on  the  Bible,'  and,  struck  with  the  enormous 
difference  between  his  views  and  those  to  which  I  had  been  accustomed,  I  began  to 
think  for  myself."      A  hypocrite  : — A  hypocrite  has  been  likened  to  one  who  should 
go  into  a  shop  to  buy  a  pennyworth,  and  should  steal  a  pound's  worth ;  or  to  one 
who  is  punctual  in  paying  a  small  debt,  that  he  may  get  deeper  into  our  books  and 
cheat  us  of  a  greater  sum.      (T.  Manton.)        Hypocrites  perform  small  duties  and 
neglect  great  • — Hypocrites  make  much  ado  about  small  things  that  they  may  be 
more  easy  in  their  consciences  while  living  in  great  sins.     They  pay  the  tithe  of 
mint  to  a  fraction,  but  rob  (Jod  of  His  glory  by  their  self-righteousness.    They  give 
God  tiie  shells,  and  steal  the  kernels  for  their  own  pride  and  self-will.      (C.  H, 
Spurgeon.)        Heart  worship  required: — God  requires  soul  worship,  and  men  give 
Him  body  worship  ;  He  asks  for  the  heart,  and  they  present  Him  with  their  lips ; 
He  demands  their  tiioughts  and  their  minds,  and  they  give  him  banners,  and  vest- 
ments, and  candles.    {Ibid.)         Perverse  penances : — No  matter  how  painful  may 
be  the  mortification,  how  rigid  the  penance,  how  severe  the  abstinenoe ;  no  matter 
how  much  may  be  taken  from  his  purse,  or  from  the  wine  vat,  or  from  the  store, 
he  will  be  content  to  suffer  anything  sooner  than  bow  before  the  Most  High  with  a 
true  confession  of  sin,  and  trust  in  the  appointed  Saviour  with  sincere,  child-like 
faith.     (Ibid.)        Faith  and  works  reversed,  or  the  plant  upside  down : — Some  time 
ago  a  lady  showed  me  a  small  seedling  acacia,  remarking,  '*  I  cannot  make  this 
plant  out ;  it  doesn't  do  well  at  all ;  it  doesn't  grow  a  bit,  though  I  water  it  well, 
and  attend  to  it  carefully."     I  looked  at  the  plant,  and  soon  discovered  the  cause. 
The  little  plant  had  a  tap-root,  as  all  seedlings  have,  and  this  tap-root  should  have 
been  inserted  in  the  soil,  where  it  would  soon  have  struck  oat  its  lateral  rootlets ; 
but,  instead  of  this,  the  plant  was  upside  down,  the  leading  root  being  in  the  soil, 
and  the  tap-root  exposed  to  the  sun  and  air.  It  was  impossible  that  the  plant  could 
grow  or  even  live.     It  is  thus  with  some  people's  religion.     {Sword  and  Trowel.) 
In  what  sense  worship  is  voluntary  : — The  duties  of  worship  ought  to  be  voluntary, 
as  voluntary  is  opposed  to  constrained  ;  but  they  must  not  be  voluntary,  as  volun- 
tary is  opposed  to  instituted  or  appointed.     God  doth  no  more  approve  of  that 
worship  we  give  Him  according  to  our  will,  than  He  doth  approve  of  our  neglect  of 
~  that  which  is  according  to  His  own  will.     (Burkitt.)        Human  tradition  versus 
}i  Divine  command  : — The  experience  is  a  universal  one,  that  God's  conmiandments 
;  suffer  from  the  competition  of  human  rules.    The  great  precepts  of  God  have  only 
"  an  unseen  God  behind  them,  but  behind  the  human  rules  there  is  generally  a  class 
whose  pride  is  gratified  by  their  observance  and  incensed  by  their  neglect.    Accord- 
ingly, whenever  small  rules  of  outward  conduct  begin  to  flourish,  the  great  principles 
of  religion — faith,  love,  honour — fall  into  the  background.     It  is  so  to-djay.     The 
Thug  in  India  who  confessed  to  having  killed  320  people  had  no  pangs  of  con- 
science for  killing  them,  but  was  somewhat  distressed  on  account  of  having  killed 
a  few  of  them  after  a  hare  had  crossed  his  path  or  a  bird  whistled  in  a  certain  direc- 
tion.   Murder  was  no  crime  in  his  opinion,  but  the  neglect  of  an  omen  from  Bowany 
was  a  grave  one.     In  Hinduism,  which  is  ceremonial  throughout,  a  man  may  be  a 
Imost  religious  man,  and  yet  very  wicked.     Many  in  our  own  country  would  un- 
Uorupulously  commit  great  crimes,  and  yet  be  very  careful  to  avoid  eating  flesh  on 
^ood  Friday.    It  seems  as  if  we  only  had  a  certain  amount  of  power  of  attention  in 
us,  and,  if  it  goes  to  little  rules,  there  is  none  left  for  great  principles.     {R.  Glover.) 
Tradition  and  inspiration  : — As  with  the  man  who  attempts  to  serve  two  masters, 
so  with  him  who  thinks  to  walk  by  two  lights :  if  he  would  keep  in  the  straight 
path  he  must  put  out  one  of  the  two,  and  guide  himself  by  the  other.    {Dr.  Wylie.) 
Laying  aside  the  comma7idment  of  God : — ^A  philosopher  at  Florence  could  not  be 
persuaded  to  look  through  one  of  Galileo's  telescopes,  lest  he  should  see  something 
in  the  heavens  that  would  disturb  him  in  his  belief    f  Aristotle's  philosophy.   Thus 
it  is  with  many  who  are  afraid  of  examining  God  s  Word,  lest  they  should  find 
themselves  condemned.    {Buck.)       The  inejicacy  o_,  God's  Word — how  produced  ;— 
We  make  it  of  none  effect  when  we — I.  Fail  to  read  and  study  it  and  to  appropriate 
its  blessings.    II.  When  we  give  precedence  to  any  human  authority  or  law.    in. 
When  by  our  lives  wo  misrepresent  it  before  the  w  rid.     IV.  When  we  fail  to  urge 
its  truths  upon  the  anxious  inquirer  or  careless  sinner.     (J.  Gordon.)         Ear*  to 
hear : — This  rule  must  needs  be  of  very  great  importance  to  Christians.     For  our 
Great  Master  (1)  calls  all  the  people  unto  Him  o    purpose  to  tell  them  only  this. 
(3)  He  requires  of  them  a  particular  attention.       3)  He  requires  it  of  every  one  of 
without  exception.     (4)  H(»  exhorts  them  to  endeavour  thoroughly  to  under. 


.  Tn.}  ST.  MARK,  275 

•tand  it.  (5)  He  lets  them  know  that  in  order  to  do  it  they  have  need  of  a 
iingolar  grace  and  a  particular  gift  of  understanding.  It  was  for  want  of  under- 
standing  this  rule  tiiat  the  Jews  still  remained  Jews,  adhering  to  a  mere  external 
way  of  worship.  It  is  for  the  very  same  reason  that  numbers  of  Christians,  even  to 
this  day,  serve  God  more  like  Jews  than  Christians.    (Questiel.) 

Vers,  17-23.  Do  ye  not  perceive,  that  whatsoever  thing  from  without  entereth 
Into  the  man. — The  true  source  of  defilement : — Having  rebuked  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees,  our  Lord  addressed  the  people,  and  laid  down  a  great  general  principle 
(ver.  16),  which  His  disciples  asked  Him  to  explain  more  fully.  We  are  taught — 
L  That  mebb  extebnal  obsekvances  do  not  affect  or  chanqb  the  moraii 
STATE  AND  CHABACTEB  OF  MAN.  1.  The  Statement  that  nothing  from  without 
defileth  a  man,  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  what  goes  before,  and  then  it 
becomes  a  principle,  of  which  the  Jews  had  much  need  to  be  told.  All  require  to 
be  told.  2.  That  mere  outward  observances  cannot  affect  the  moral  nature,  seems 
a  very  simple  truth.  Reason  teaches  it.  The  body  may  be  affected  by  them,  but  not 
the  soul;  to  influence  the  heart,  means  of  a  right  class  must  be  selected.  Ex- 
perience teaches  it.  Observation  confirms  it.  3.  This  principle  reqmres  in  our 
day  to  be  loudly  proclaimed.  4.  The  more  nearly  the  soul  can  come  to  God, 
irrespective  of    outward  things,   the  better.      II.  That  the   moral  state  and 

CHARA.CTER   OF  A   MAN,   IS  AFFECTED   BY  THAT   WHICH   COMETH   OUT  OF  HIS  HEART.      1. 

The  fountain-head  of  all  that  enters  into  human  history  and  character,  is  the 
heart.  Hence,  the  character  of  the  moral  law,  the  order  of  the  Spirit's  work,  the 
importance  of  the  inspired  precept,  "  Keep  thine  heart,"  <fec.  2.  That  which 
naturally  proceeds  from  the  heart  proves  that  it  is  wholly  depraved.  3.  By  these 
things,  which  proceed  from  the  heart,  is  man  defiled.  Christ's  blood  and  spirit, 
alone  can  cleanse.  {Expository  Discourses.)  Spiritual  defilement: — I,  The 
0EBEM0NIAU8M  OF  THE  Phabisees  DENOUNCED.  1.  The  uudue  importance  they 
attached  to  outward  observances.  2.  The  additions  they  made  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  law  of  Moses.  8.  The  Saviour's  discourse  on  this  occasion  was 
evidently  intended  to  prepare  the  minds  of  the  people  for  the  total  aboUtinn  of 
all  ceremonial  rites.  II.  The  iqnobance  of  the  disciples  bbpboved.  **  Anu  Ha 
saith  unto  them.  Are  ye  so  without  understanding  also  ?  "  1.  To  us  their  dulnesa 
of  apprehension  appears  strange  and  unaccountable.  2.  In  their  ignorance  we  see 
the  effect,  not  merely  of  inattention,  but  of  prejudice  and  bigotry.  III.  The 
DEPRAVITY  OF  HUMAN  NATURE  EXHIBITED.  We  are  showD — 1.  The  souTco  of  evil. 
It  is  in  the  heart.  2.  The  diversified  streams  of  evil.  "  Adulteries,  fornications, 
thefts,  murders,  covetousness,"  &o.  8.  The  contaminating  influence  of  evil. 
These  are  the  things  by  which  men  are  defiled.  {Expository  Outlirus.)  Things 
from  within : — It  is  well  known  that  rotten  wood  and  glowworms  make  a  glorious 
show  in  the  night,  and  seem  to  be  some  excellent  things ;  but  when  the  day 
appears,  they  show  what  they  are  indeed — poor,  despicable,  and  base  creatures.  Such 
is  the  vanity  and  sinfulness  of  all  haughty,  proud,  high-minded  persons,  who,  though 
now  shining  in  the  darkness  of  this  world,  through  the  greatness  of  their  power,  place, 
and  height  of  their  honour,  when  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shall  appear  and  manifest 
the  secrets  of  all  hearts,  then  they  will  be  seen  in  their  own  proper  colours.  {Spencer.) 
Out  of  the  heBXt.-~The  heart  determines  the  life : — The  bowl  runs  ajs  the  bias 
inclines  it ;  the  ship  moves  as  the  rudder  steers  it ;  and  the  mind  thinks  according 
to  the  predominancy  of  vice  or  virtue  in  it.  The  heart  of  man  is  like  the  spring 
of  the  clock,  which  causes  the  wheels  to  move  right  or  wrong,  well  or  ill.  If  the 
heart  once  set  forward  for  God,  all  the  members  will  follow  after ;  all  the  parts, 
like  dutiful  handmaids,  in  theur  places,  will  wait  on  their  mistress.  The  heart 
is  the  great  workhouse  where  all  sin  is  wrought  before  it  is  exposed  to  open  view. 
It  is  the  mint  where  evil  thoughts  are  coined,  before  they  are  current  in  our 
words  or  actions.  It  is  the  forge  where  all  our  evil  works  as  well  as  words  are 
hammered  out.  There  is  no  sin  but  is  dressed  in  the  withdrawing  room  of  the 
heart,  before  it  appears  on  the  stage  of  life.  It  is  vain  to  go  about  an  holy  hfe 
till  the  heart  be  made  holy.  The  pulse  of  the  hand  beats  well  or  ill,  according  to 
the  state  of  the  heart.  If  the  chinks  of  the  ship  are  unstopped,  it  will  be  to  no 
purpose  to  labour  at  the  pump.  When  the  water  is  foul  at  the  bottom,  no 
wonder  that  scum  and  filth  appear  at  the  top.  There  is  no  way  to  stop  the  issue 
of  sin,  but  by  drying  up  the  matter  that  feeds  it.  {Swinnock.)  Natural  cor- 
ruption of  the  heart  .-—That  which  ^sop  said  to  his  master,  when  he  came  into 
hii  garden  and  saw  so  many  weeds  in  it,  is  appUcabl    to  the  heart.    His  master 


f76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chj*. 


asked  him  what  was  the  reason  that  the  weeds  grew  np  so  last  and  the  herbi 
thrived  not?  He  answered,  "The  ground  is  natural  mother  to  the  weeds,  but  a 
stepmother  to  the  herbs.'*  So  the  heart  o!  man  is  natural  mother  to  sin  and  cor- 
ruption, but  a  stepmother  to  grace  and  goodness ;  and  further  than  it  is  watered 
from  heaven,  and  followed  with  a  great  deal  of  care  and  pains,  it  grows  not. 
(Goodwin.)  The  heart  a  storehouse  of  evil ;— Here  is  a  piece  of  iron  laid  upon  the 
anvil.  The  hammers  are  plied  upon  it  lustily.  A  thousand  sparks  are  scattered 
on  every  side.  Suppose  it  possible  to  count  each  spark  as  it  falls  from  the  anvil ; 
yet,  who  could  guess  the  number  of  the  unborn  sparks  that  still  lie  latent  and 
hidden  in  the  mass  of  iron  ?  Now,  your  sinful  nature  may  be  compared  to  that 
heated  bar  of  iron.  Temptations  are  the  hammers  ;  your  sins  are  the  sparks.  If 
you  could  count  them  (which  you  cannot  do),  yet  who  could  tell  the  multitude  of 
unborn  iniquities — eggs  of  sin  that  lie  slumbering  in  your  soul  f  You  must  know 
this  before  you  can  know  the  sinfulness  of  your  nature.  Our  open  sins  are  like 
the  farmer's  little  sample  which  he  brings  to  market.  There  are  granaries  full  at 
home.  The  iniquities  that  we  see  are  like  the  weeds  upon  the  surface  soil,  but  I 
have  been  told,  and  indeed  have  seen  the  truth  of  it,  that  if  you  dig  six  feet  into 
the  earth  and  turn  np  fresh  soil,  there  will  be  found  in  that  soil  six  feet  deep  the 
seeds  of  the  weeds  indigenous  to  the  land.  And  so  we  are  not  to  think  merely  of 
the  sins  that  grow  on  the  surface,  but  if  we  could  turn  our  heart  up  to  its  core 
and  centre,  we  should  find  it  is  fully  permeated  with  sin  as  every  piece  of  putridity 
is  with  worms  and  rottenness.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.)  An  evil  heart ;— -A  certain 
little  boy  in  Kansas,  only  eleven  years  old,  strove  hard  to  be  a  Christian.  Once  he 
stood  watching  Maggie  paring  the  potatoes  for  dinner.  Soon  she  pared  an  extra  large 
one,  which  was  very  white  and  very  nice  on  the  outside,  but  when  cut  into  pieces 
it  showed  itself  to  be  hollow  and  black  inside  with  dry  rot.  Instantly  Willie 
exclaimed,  "  Why,  Maggie,  that  potatoe  isn't  a  Christian."  "  What  do  you  mean  ?  " 
asked  Maggie.  *•  Don't  you  see  it  has  a  bad  heart  ?  *'  was  the  child's  reply.  This 
little  Kansas  boy  had  learned  enough  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  to  know  that  how* 
ever  fair  the  outside  may  be,  the  natural  heart  is  corrupt.  (Baptist  Messenger.} 
Evil  passions  tchen  restrained  only  by  custonit  law,  or  public  opinion,  and  net  by 
the  grace  and  love  of  God,  still  merit  condemnation : — If  men  were  shut  up  in  cells, 
so  that  they  could  not  commit  that  which  their  nature  instigated  them  to  do,  yet, 
as  before  the  Lord,  seeing  they  would  have  been  such  sinners  outwardly  if  they 
could  have  been,  their  hearts  are  judged  to  be  no  better  than  the  hearts  of  those 
who  found  opportunity  to  sin  and  used  it.  A  vicious  horse  is  none  the  better 
tempered  because  the  kicking  straps  prevent  his  dashing  the  carriage  to  atoms ; 
and  so  a  man  is  none  the  better  really  because  the  restraints  of  custom  and 
Providence  may  prevent  his  carrying  out  that  which  he  would  prefer.  Poor  fallen 
human  nature  behind  the  bars  of  laws,  and  in  the  cage  of  fear  of  punishment,  is 
none  the  less  a  fearful  creature ;  should  its  master  unlock  the  door  we  should 
soon  see  what  it  would  be  and  do.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  No  heart  free  from  sin  :— 
Well-tempered  spades  turn  up  ill  savoury  soils  even  in  vineyards.  (Baily.) 
The  heart  its  own  laboratory  .-—We  hear  a  great  deal  said  in  our  day  about  the 
doctrine  of  environment.  "Circumstances,"  we  are  told,  "make  the  man;" 
"Life  is  a  modification  of  matter;"  "Thinking  is  matter  in  motion;"  "The 
brain  secretes  thought  as  the  liver  secretes  bile;"  "The  difference  between  a 
good  man  and  a  bad  man  is  mainly  a  difference  in  molecular  organization ; " 
"The  affections  are  of  an  eminently  glandular  nature;"  "Not  as  a  man 
thinketh  in  his  heart,  but  as  he  eateth,  so  is  he;"  "Character  is  the  aggre- 
gate of  surroundings,  the  sum-total  of  parents,  nurse,  place,  time,  air,  light,  food, 
&c."  Now  this  doctrine  of  environment  is  in  a  certain  sense  entirely  true.  The 
mind  does  not  more  certainly  act  on  the  body  than  the  body  on  the  mind.  But 
the  doctrine  of  environment  means,  or  at  least  tends  to  mean,  more  than  this.  It 
tends  to  teach  that  sin  is  not  so  much  a  crime  as  a  misfortune,  not  so  much  guilt 
as  disease.  Not  so  did  the  Galilean  Master  teach,  ••  Hearken  to  Me,  all  of  yon, 
and  understand:  Nothing  that  goeth  into  a  man  from  without  can  defile  him; 
but  the  things  that  come  out  of  him  are  what  defile  a  man."  Here  He  is  in  direct 
issue  with  the  materialism  of  the  day.  For  man  is  something  more  than  matter, 
or  an  organized  group  of  molecules.  Behind  the  visible  of  him  there  is  the 
invisible.  The  heart  is  its  own  laboratory.  Friend,  overtaken  in  a  sin,  do  not 
judge  yourself  too  eharitably.  Don't  ascribe  too  much  to  outward  circumstances. 
Becall  the  first  Adam :  he  was  in  a  garden,  where  every  outward  circumstance 
was  for  him ;  yet  he  fell.    Becall  the  second  Adam :  He  was  in  a  desert,  where 


cnuY.  Tix.]  ST,  MARK,  S77 

•very  outward  oiroamstanoe  was  against  Him  ;  yet  He  remained  ereot :  the  Devfl 
failed  to  eonqner  Him,  not  beoanse  He  was  Divine,  bat  beoaase  He  was  sinless. 
Don't  exonse  yourself  then  too  maoh  by  year  "  environment."  Man  is  not  alto- 
gether an  imbecile.  Tme,  "  circumstances  do  make  the  man."  Bat  they  make 
him  only  in  the  sense  and  degree  that  he  permits  them  to  make  him.  You  will 
find  the  most  niggardly  of  men  in  the  mansions  of  the  rich,  and  the  most  generous 
of  men  in  the  cabins  of  the  poor ;  the  humblest  of  Christians  in  the  palace,  and 
the  proudest  of  Pharisees  in  the  cottage ;  saints  in  the  dungeon,  and  villains  in 
the  Church.  It  is  not  so  much  the  outward  that  tinges  the  inward  as  the  inward 
that  tinges  the  outward.  It  is  for  the  man  himself  to  say  whether  his  own  heart 
shall  be  a  temple  or  a  kennel.  The  great  problem  then  is  this  :  How  shall  a  man 
use  his  "circumstances  "?  For  just  what  he  does  with  them — just  what  he  doea 
with  his  strength  and  time,  and  skill,  and  money,  and  imagination,  and  reason, 
and  afEections,  just  what  the  heart  does  with  its  opportunities — just  this  is  the  test 
of  him.  Do  these  opportunities,  after  passing  through  the  laboratory  of  his 
heart,  issue  as  blessings  on  the  world  ?  Then  his  heart  is  pure,  Do  they  issue 
in  moral  blights  ?  Then  his  heart  is  defiled.  Not  that  these  bad  issues  do  of 
themselves  defile  the  heart;  but  the  heart  being  itself  defiled,  and  sending  forth  issues 
of  evil  thoughts  and  deeds,  these  issues  take  on  the  impurities  of  the  source  from 
which  they  spring,  marking  its  defilement,  and  aggravating  its  pollution  by  the 
very  act  of  outflowing.  These  are  the  unclean  things,  which,  coming  out  from 
within,  defile  the  man.  Keep  thy  heart,  then,  with  all  dihgence,  for  out  of  it  are 
th«  issues  of  liie  and  of  death.  Friend,  are  you  disheartened  by  my  Master's 
doctrine  ?  Don't  seek  to  remedy  your  case  by  merely  altering  your  circumstances, 
or  reforming  your  habits.  You  can't  purify  a  fountain  by  purifying  its  streams.  Jesua 
Christ  is  the  most  radical  of  reformers.  He  does  not  say,  "Change  your  circum- 
stances, and  you  will  change  your  character ; "  but  He  does  say,  •'  Change  your  heart, 
snd  you  will  be  likely  to  change  your  circumstances."  {George  Dana  Boardman,  D.D.) 
Evil  Thoughts. — Source  of  evil  tJioughts : — ^Notice  how  evil  thoughts  are  by  the 
Saviour  said  to  be  the  first  of  the  evil  things  which  coming  out  of  the  heart  defile. 
We  should  not,  I  think,  have  put  evil  thoughts  amongst  the  things  which  come  out 
of  the  heart,  because  we  suppose  them  to  be  in  the  heart.  But  is  not  what  the 
Saviour  says  true  of  that  which  He  alone  knows — the  very  nature  and  substance  of 
the  soulr  In  its  very  centre,  or  close  to  its  centre,  the  evil  has  its  root  or  fountain. 
The  evil  suggestion  arises,  and  then  the  will  or  affection  takes  notice  of  it.  If  the 
will  is  right  with  God,  it  immediately  puts  out  the  evil  thing  as  if  it  were  a  loath- 
some reptile,  but  if  the  will  be  not  right  with  God,  it  harbours  the  first 
suggestion  of  evil,  it  cogitates  it,  thinks  it  over  and  over,  dwells  upon  it  in  imagina- 
tion, chews  the  food  of  the  evil  fancy,  desires  to  do  the  evil  deed,  resolves  to  do  it, 
and  so  has  already  done  it  in  the  heart.  So  that  out  of  the  heart,  out  of  the 
unseen  and  unthinkable  depths  within,  proceed  the  evil  thoughts  which  become 
evil  acts  within  before  they  are  incarnated,  as  it  were,  in  some  evil  deed  without. 
{M.  F.  Sadler t  M.A.)  Sinfulness  of  evil  tlwughts: — Some  please  themselves  in 
thoughts  of  sinfid  sports,  or  cheats,  or  unclean  acts,  and  sit  brooding  on  such 
cockatrice-eggs  with  great  delight.  It  is  their  meat  and  drink  to  roll  these  sugar- 
plums under  their  tongues.  Though  they  cannot  sin  outwardly,  for  want  of 
strength  of  body  or  a  fit  opportunity,  yet  they  act  sin  inwardly  with  great  love  and 
complacency.  As  players  in  a  comedy,  they  act  their  parts  in  private,  in  order  to  a 
more  exact  performance  of  them  in  public.     (Swinnock.)  Thoughts  utually 

indicate  character : — Our  thoughts  are  like  the  blossoms  on  a  tree  in  the  spring. 
Yon  may  see  a  tree  in  the  spring  all  covered  with  blossoms,  so  that  nothing  else  of 
it  appears.  Multitudes  of  them  fall  oft  and  come  to  nothing.  Of ttimes  where  there 
are  most  blossoms  there  is  least  fruit.  But  yet  there  is  no  fruit,  be  it  of  what  sort 
it  will,  good  or  bad,  but  it  comes  in  and  from  some  of  those  blossoms.  The  mind 
of  man  is  covered  vdth  thoughts  as  a  tree  with  blossoms.  Most  of  them  fall  off, 
▼anish,  and  come  to  nothing,  end  in  vanity  ;  and  sometimes  where  the  mind  does 
most  abound  with  them  there  is  the  least  fruit,  the  sap  of  the  mind  is  wasted  and 
consumed  in  them.  Howbeit  there  is  no  fruit  which  actually  we  bring  forth,  be  it 
good  or  bad,  but  it  proceeds  from  some  of  these  thoughts.  Wherefore,  ordinarily 
these  give  the  best  and  surest  measure  of  the  frame  of  men's  minds.  "As  a 
man  thinks  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  In  case  of  strong  and  violent  temptations,  the 
real  frame  of  a  man's  heart  is  not  to  be  judged  by  the  multiphcity  of  thoughts 
about  any  object,  for  whether  they  are  from  Satan's  suggestions,  or  from  inward 
darkness,  trouble,  and  horror,  they  will  impose  such  a  continual  sense  of  them- 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [obaf.  ?n. 

selves  on  the  mind  as  Bhall  engage  all  its  thoughts  abont  them ;  aa  when  a  man  li 
in  a  storm  at  sea,  the  current  of  his  thoughts  runs  quite  another  way  than  when 
he  is  in  safety  about  his  occasions.  But  ordinarily  voluntary  thoughts  are  the  best 
measure  and  indication  of  the  frame  of  our  minds.  As  the  nature  of  the  soil  is 
judged  by  the  grass  which  it  brings  forth,  so  may  the  disposition  of  the  heart  by 
the  predominancy  of  voluntary  thoughts ;  they  are  the  original  acting  of  the  soul, 
the  way  whereby  the  heart  puts  forth  and  empties  the  treasure  that  is  in  it,  the 
waters  that  first  rise  and  flow  from  that  fountain.  (J.  Owen,)  Petrifying 
influence  of  evil  thoughts  : — Any  one  who  has  visited  limestone  caves  has  noticed  the 
stalactite  pillars,  sometimes  large  and  massive,  by  which  they  were  adorned  and 
supported.  They  are  nature's  masonry  of  soUd  rock,  formed  by  her  own  slow, 
silent,  mysterious  process.  The  little  drop  of  water  percolates  through  the  roof  of 
the  cave,  and  deposits  its  sediment,  and  another  follows  it,  till  the  icicle  of  stone  is 
formed :  and  finally  reaching  to  the  rock  beneath,  it  becomes  a  sohd  pillar,  a 
marble  monument,  which  can  only  be  rent  down  by  the  most  powerful  forces.  But 
is  there  not  going  forward  oftentimes  in  the  caverns  of  the  human  heart  a  process 
as  eilent  and  effective,  yet  infinitely  more  momentous  ?  There  in  the  darkness 
that  shrouds  all  from  the  \dew  of  the  outward  observer,  each  thought  and  feeling, 
as  light  and  inconsiderate,  perhaps,  as  the  little  drop  of  water,  sinks  downward 
into  the  soul,  and  deposits — ^yet  in  a  form  almost  imperceptible — what  we  may  call 
its  sediment.  And  then  another  and  another  follows,  till  the  traces  of  all  com- 
bined become  more  manifest,  and  at  length,  if  these  thoughts  and  feelings  are 
charged  with  the  sediment  of  worldliness  and  worldly  passion,  they  have  reared 
within  the  spirit  permanent  and  perhaps  everlasting  monuments  of  their  effects. 
All  around  the  walls  of  this  spiritual  cave  stand  in  massive  proportions  the  pillars 
of  sinful  inclinations  and  the  props  of  iniquity,  and  only  a  convulsion  like  that 
which  rends  the  solid  globe  can  rend  them  from  their  place  and  shake  their  hold. 
Thus  stealthily  is  the  work  done ;  mere  fancies  and  desires  and  lusts  unsuspiciously 
entertained,  contribute  silently  but  surely  to  the  result.  The  heart  is  changed 
into  an  impregnable  fortress  of  sin.  The  roof  of  its  iniquity  is  sustained  by  marble 
pillars,  and  all  the  weight  of  reason  and  conscience  and  the  Divine  threatenings  are 
powerless  to  lay  it  low  in  the  dust  of  humility.  Such  is  the  power  of  those  light 
fancies  and  imaginations  and  desires  which  enter  the  soul  unobserved,  and  are 
slighted  for  their  insignificance.  They  attract  no  notice.  They  utter  no  note  of 
alarm.  We  might  suppose  that  if  left  to  themselves  they  would  be  absorbed  in 
obUvion,  and  leave  no  trace  behind.  But  they  form  the  pillars  of  character.  They 
sustain  the  soul  under  the  pressure  of  all  those  solemn  appeals  to  which  it  ought 
to  yield.  How  impressive,  then,  the  admonition,  '•  Keep  thy  heart  with  all 
diligence  '*  I  Things  which  seem  powerless  and  harmless  may  prove  noxious 
beyond  expression.  The  power  of  inveterate  sin  is  from  the  silent  flow  of  thought. 
Your  habitual  desires  or  fancies  are  shaping  yotir  eternal  destiny.  {American 
National  Preacher.)  Evil  thoughts  Twt  to  be  harboured : — ^The  best  Christian's 
heart  here  is  like  Solomon's  ships,  which  brought  home  not  only  gold  and  silver,  but 
also  apes  and  peacocks ;  it  has  not  only  spiritual  and  heavenly,  but  also  vain  and 
foolish  thoughts.  But  these  latter  are  there  as  a  disease  or  poison  in  the  body,  the 
object  of  his  grief  and  abhorrence,  not  of  his  love  and  complacency.  Though  we 
cannot  keep  vain  thoughts  from  knocking  at  the  door  of  our  hearts,  nor  from  enter- 
ing in  sometimes,  yet  we  may  forbear  bidding  them  welcome,  or  giving  them 
entertainment.  *'  How  long  shall  vain  thoughts  lodge  within  thee  t  '*  It  is  bad  to 
let  them  sit  down  with  us,  though  but  for  an  hour,  but  it  is  worse  to  let  them  lie  or 
lodge  with  us.  It  is  better  to  receive  the  greatest  thieves  into  our  houses  than  vain 
thoughts  into  our  hearts.  John  Huss,  seeking  to  reclaim  a  very  profane  wretch, 
was  told  by  him,  that  his  giving  way  to  wicked,  wanton  thoughts  was  the  original 
of  all  those  hideous  births  of  impiety  which  he  was  guilty  of  in  his  life.  Kusa 
answered  him,  that  although  he  could  not  keep  evil  thoughts  from  courting  him, 
yet  he  might  keep  them  from  marrying  him ;  ••  as,"  he  added,  "  though  I  cannot 
keep  the  birds  from  flying  over  my  head,  yet  I  can  keep  them  from  building  their 
nests  in  my  hair."  {Swinnock.)  Importance  of  keeping  the  mind  well  employed: — 
Man's  heart  is  like  a  millstone :  poor  in  com,  and  round  it  goes,  bruising  and 
grinding,  and  converting  it  into  flour ;  whereas  give  it  no  com,  and  then  indeed 
the  stone  goes  round,  but  only  grinds  itself  away,  and  becomes  ever  thinner  and 
■mailer  and  narrower.  Even  as  the  heart  of  man  requires  to  have  always  some- 
thing to  do;  and  happy  is  he  who  continually  occupies  it  with  good  and  holy 
thoughts,  otherwise  it  may  soon  consume  and  waste  itself  by  useless  anxieties  oi 


9KA9.  mj]  8T.  MARK.  279 

wieked  and  carnal  enggestions.  When  the  millstones  are  not  nicely  adjaeted,  grain 
may  indeed  be  poured  in,  bat  comes  away  only  half  ground  or  not  ground  at  alL 
The  same  often  happens  with  our  heart  when  our  devotion  is  not  sufficiently 
earnest.  On  such  occasions  we  read  the  finest  texts  without  knowing  what  we 
have  read,  and  pray  without  hearing  our  own  prayers.  The  eye  flits  over  the 
sacred  page,  the  mouth  pours  forth  the  words,  and  clappers  like  a  mill,  but  the 
heart  meanwhile  turns  from  one  strange  thought  to  another  ;  and  such  reading  and 
Buch  prayer  are  more  a  useless  form  than  a  devotion  acceptable  to  God.  {Scriver.)' 
Oood  thoughts  strangers: — The  thoughts  of  spiritual  things  are  with  many  as 
guests  that  come  into  an  inn,  and  not  like  children  that  dwell  in  the  house.  {Dr. 
John  Owen.)  Cure  for  evil  thoughts : — As  the  streams  of  a  mighty  river  running 
into  the  ocean,  so  are  the  thoughts  of  a  natural  man,  and  through  self  they  run 
into  hell.  It  is  a  fond  thing  to  set  a  dam  before  such  a  river  to  curb  its  streams. 
For  a  little  space  there  may  be  a  stop  made,  but  it  will  quickly  break  down  all 
obstacles,  or  overflow  all  its  bounds.  There  is  no  way  to  divert  its  course,  but  only 
by  providing  other  channels  for  its  waters,  and  turning  them  thereinto.  The 
mighty  stream  of  the  evil  thoughts  of  men  will  admit  of  no  bounds  or  dams  to  put 
a  stop  unto  them.  There  are  but  two  ways  of  rehef  from  them  ;  the  one  respect- 
ing their  moral  evil,  the  other  their  natural  abundance.  The  first  by  throwing  salt 
into  the  spring,  as  Elisba  cured  the  waters  of  Jericho ;  that  is,  to  get  the  heart  and 
mind  seasoned  with  grace ;  for  the  tree  must  be  made  good  before  the  fruit  will  ue 
so  ;  the  other  is,  to  turn  their  streams  into  new  channels,  putting  new  aims  and 
ends  upon  them,  fixing  them  on  new  objects ;  so  shall  we  abound  in  spiritual 
thoughts ;  for  abound  in  thought  we  shall,  whether  we  will  or  no.  (Ibid.)  Evil 
thoughts  not  trifles : — Notice  this  evil  catalogue,  this  horrible  list  of  words.  It 
begins  with  what  is  very  lightly  regarded  among  men— evil  thoughts.  Instead  of 
evil  thoughts  being  less  simple  than  evil  acts,  it  may  sometimes  happen  that  in  the 
thought  the  man  may  be  worse  than  in  the  act.  Thoughts  are  the  heads  of  words 
and  actions,  and  within  the  thoughts  lie  condensed  all  the  villany  and  iniquity  that 
can  be  seen  in  the  words  or  in  the  acts.  If  men  did  more  carefully  watch  their 
thoughts,  they  would  not  so  readily  fall  into  evil  ways.  Instead  of  fancying  that  evil 
thoughts  are  mere  trifles,  let  us  imitate  the  Saviour,  and  put  them  first  in  the 
catalogue  of  things  to  be  condemned.  Let  us  make  a  conscience  of  our  thoughts. 
In  the  words  of  the  text  the  first  point  mentioned  is  evil  thoughts,  but  the  last  is 
foolishness.  This  is  the  way  of  sin,  to  begin  with  ^  proud  conceit  of  our  own 
thoughts,  ending  with  folly  and  stupidity.  What  a  range  there  is  between  these 
two  points,  what  a  variety  of  sin  thus  enumerated !  Sin  is  a  contradictory  thing  ; 
it  takes  men  this  way  and  that,  but  never  in  the  right  way.  Virtue  is  one,  as  truth 
is  one ;  holiness  is  one,  but  sin  is  ten  thousand  things  conglomerated  into  a  dread 
confusion.  When  we  look  upon  any  man  and  only  regard  him  with  malignity,  we 
sin  in  all  that — it  is  the  sin  of  envy.  There  stands  pride.  One  would  have  thought 
that  a  man  who  commits  these  sins  would  not  have  been  proud.  When  a  man  is 
filled  with  a  proud  conceit  of  himself  he  is  justifying  his  own  iniquity.  (  C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Human  depravity  seen  in  the  thoughts  of  man  : — Consider  the  wild 

mixtures  of  thought  displayed  both  in  the  waking  life  and  the  dreams  of  mankind. 
How  grand !  how  mean !  how  sudden  the  leap  from  one  to  the  other  I  how 
inscrutable  the  succession  I  how  defiant  of  orderly  control '  It  is  as  if  the  soul 
were  a  thinking  ruin,  which  it  very  likely  is.  The  angel  and  the  demon 
life  appear  to  be  contending  in  it.  The  imagination  revels  in  beauty  exceeding 
all  the  beauty  of  things,  wails  in  images  dire  and  monstrous,  wallows  in  mur- 
derous and  base  suggestions  that  shame  our  inward  dignity.  (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.) 
Covetousness.  Govetousness — its  spirit : — The  spirit  of  covetousness  which  leads  to 
an  over-value  and  over-love  of  money,  is  independent  of  amount.  A  poor  man  may 
make  an  idol  of  his  little,  just  as  much  as  the  rich  man  makes  an  idol  of  his  much. 
We  know  ourLord  showed  how  the  poorest  person  may  exceed  in  charity  and  liberality 
the  richest — by  giving  more  than  the  wealthy  in  proportion  to  the  whole  amount 
of  his  possessions.  So  in  like  manner,  a  poor  man  may  be  more  covetous  than  a 
wealthy  man,  because  he  may  keep  back  from  the  treasury  of  God  more  in  propor- 
tion to  his  all  than  the  rich  man  keeps  back  from  his  all.  If  the  Christian 
character  is  debased,  and  heaven  is  lost  by  such  indulgence  of  covetousness  as  to 
make  a  man  an  idolater  of  mammon,  it  is  of  little  consequence  whether  the  heart 
be  set  on  an  idol  of  gold,  or  an  idol  of  clay.  {Dean  Ramsay.)  Covetousness 
exchanges  true  riches  for  the  false: — As  the  dug  in  ^sop's  fable  lost  the  real  flesh 
for  the  shadow  of  it,  no  the  covetous  man  casts  away  the  true  riches  for  the  love  ol 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m. 

the  ehadowy.  (T.  Adanui.)  Covetoxisne^s  pines  in  plenty  : — The  covetous  man 
pines  in  plenty,  like  Tantalns  up  to  the  chin  in  water,  and  yet  thirsty.  {Ibid.) 
Degradation  of  the  covetous : — A  young  man  once  picked  up  a  Bovereign  lying  in  the 
road.  Ever  afterwards,  in  walking  along,  he  kept  his  eye  fixed  steadily  upon  the 
ground  in  the  hope  of  finding  another.  And  in  the  course  of  a  long  life  he  did 
pick  up  a  good  many  gold  and  silver  coins  at  different  times.  But  all  these  years^ 
while  he  was  looking  for  them,  he  saw  not  that  the  heavens  were  bright  above  him, 
and  nature  beautiful  around.  He  never  once  allowed  his  eyes  to  look  up  from  the 
mud  and  filth  in  which  he  sought  his  treasure  ;  and  when  he  died — a  rich  old  man 
— he  only  knew  this  fair  earth  as  a  dirty  road  to  pick  up  money  as  you  walk  along. 
(Dr.  Jefers.)  Delusion  of  the  covetous : — Some  of  us  may  remember  a  fable  of  a 
covetous  man,  who  chanced  to  find  his  way  one  moonlight  night  into  a  fairy's 
palace.  There  he  saw  bars,  apparently  of  solid  gold,  strewed  on  every  side  ;  and 
he  was  permitted  to  take  away  as  many  as  he  could  carry.  In  the  morning,  when 
the  Bun  rose  on  his  imaginary  treasure,  borne  home  with  so  much  toil,  behold  I 
there  was  only  a  bundle  of  sticks,  and  invisible  beings  filled  the  air  around  >iiTn 
with  scornful  laughter.  Such  will  be  the  confusion  of  many  a  man  who  died  in 
this  world  with  his  thousands,  and  woke  up  in  the  next  world  not  only  miserable, 
and  poor,  and  naked,  but  in  presence  of  a  heap  of  fuel  stored  up  against  the  great 
Day  of  burning.  {Anan.)  Covetousness  mental  gluttony  : — Covetousness  is  a 
sort  of  mental  gluttony,  not  confined  to  money,  but  craving  honour  and  feeding  on 
selfishness.    {CJiamfort.)  Govetou£iuss  manifested  in  insufficient  expenditure  : — 

Whosoever,  when  a  just  occasion  calls,  either  spends  not  at  all,  or  not  in  some 
proportion  to  God's  blessing  upon  him,  is  covetous.  The  reason  of  the  ground  is 
manifest,  because  wealth  i<  given  to  that  end  to  supply  our  occasions.  Now,  if  I 
do  not  give  everything  its  end,  I  abuse  the  creature ;  I  am  false  to  my  reason,  which 
should  guide  me  ;  I  offend  the  Supreme  Judge,  in  perverting  that  order  which  He 
hath  set  both  to  those  things  and  to  reason.  The  application  of  the  ground  would 
be  infinite.  But,  in  brief,  a  poor  man  is  an  occasion  ;  my  friend  is  an  occasion ; 
my  country  ;  my  table  ;  my  apparel.  If  in  all  these,  and  those  more  which  concern 
me,  I  either  do  nothing,  or  pinch  and  scrape  and  squeeze  blood,  indecently  to  the 
station  wherein  God  hath  placed  me,  I  am  covetous.  More  particularly,  and  to 
give  one  instance  of  all :  if  God  have  given  me  servants,  and  I  either  provide  too 
little  for  them,  or  that  which  is  unwholesome,  and  so  not  competent  nourishment* 
I  am  covetous.  Men  usually  think  that  servants  for  their  money  are  as  other  things 
that  they  buy,  even  as  a  piece  of  wood,  which  they  may  cut,  or  hack,  or  throw  into  the 
fire  ;  and  so  that  they  pay  them  their  wages,  all  is  well.  Nay,  to  descend  yet  more 
particularly :  if  a  man  hath  wherewithal  to  buy  a  spade,  and  yet  he  chooseth 
rather  to  nse  his  neighbour's,  and  wear  out  that,  he  is  covetous.  Nevertheless, 
few  bring  covetousness  thus  low  or  consider  it  so  narrowly,  which  yet  ought  to  be 
done,  since  there  is  a  justice  in  the  least  things,  and  for  the  least  there  shall  be  % 
judgment.  {George  Herbert.)  Frlde. — Pride : — Diogenes  being  at  Olympia,  saw 
at  the  celebrated  festival  some  young  men  of  Ehodes,  arrayed  most  magnificently. 
Smiling  scornfully,  he  exclaimed,  "This is  pride."  Afterwards,  meeting  with  some 
Lacedsmonians  in  a  mean  and  sordid  dress,  he  said,  "This  is  also  pnde."  Pride 
is  found  at  the  same  opposite  extremes  of  dress  at  the  present  day.  The  folly  of 
pride : — Of  all  sins,  pride  is  such  a  one  as  we  may  well  wonder  how  it  should  grow, 
for  it  hath  no  other  root  to  sustain  it,  than  what  is  found  in  man's  dreaming  fancy. 
It  grows,  as  sometimes  we  see  a  mushroom,  or  moss  among  stones,  where  there  is 
httle  soil  or  none  for  its  root  to  take  hold  of.  {W.  Gumall.)  The  test  of  purity  : — 
A  gentleman  was  once  extolling  loudly  the  virtue  of  honesty,  saying  what  a  dignitj 
it  imparted  to  our  nature,  and  how  it  recommended  us  to  the  favour  of  God.  ••  Sir," 
rephed  his  friend,  "  however  excellent  the  virtue  of  honesty  may  be,  I  fear  there 
are  very  few  men  in  the  world  who  really  possess  it."  ♦♦  You  surprise  me,'*  said  m 
stranger.  "  Ignorant  as  I  am  of  your  character,"  was  the  reply,  "  I  fancy  it  would 
be  no  diflBcnlt  matter  to  prove  even  you  to  be  a  dishonest  man."  *•  I  defy  you." 
"Will  you  give  me  leave,  then,  to  ask  you  a  question  or  two,  and  promise  not  to  be 
offended T"  "Certainly."  "Have  you  never  met  with  an  opportunity  of  getting 
gain  by  unfair  means  f  I  don't  say,  have  you  taken  advantage  of  it ;  but,  have  you 
ever  met  with  such  an  opportunity  ?  I,  for  my  part,  have  ;  and  I  believe  eveiy- 
body  else  has."  ••  Very  probably  I  may."  "  How  did  you  feel  your  mind  affected 
on  such  an  occasion  ?  Had  you  no  secret  desire,  not  the  least  inclination,  to  seise 
the  adTantage  which  offered  t  Tell  me  without  any  evasion,  and  oonsistently  with 
the  eharaeier  you  admire."  **  I  must  acknowledge,  I  have  not  always  been  absolutely 


CKA».  Tn.]  ST.  MARK,  281 

free  from  every  irregular  inolmation ;  but ."     *•  Hold  I  sir,  none  of  your  salvos  ; 

you  have  confessed  enough.  If  you  had  the  desire,  though  you  never  proceeded  to 
the  act,  you  were  dishonest  in  heart.  This  is  what  the  Scriptures  call  concupiscence. 
It  defiles  the  soul ;  it  is  a  breach  of  that  law  which  requireth  truth  in  the  inward 
parts,  and,  unless  you  are  pardoned  through  the  Blood  of  Christ,  it  will  be  a  just 
ground  for  your  oondemnation,  when  Qod  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men. 

Ver.  24.  But  He  could  not  be  hid. — He  could  not  be  hid:— There  are  some 
persons  in  this  world  who  cannot  be  hid  :  by  birth,  inheritance,  or  talent,  they  come 
to  the  front.  But  this  was  not  the  case  here.  Christ  was  but  the  reputed  son  of  a 
village  carpenter,  a  poor  despised  Nazarene.  Yet  He  could  not  be  hid.  And  no 
wonder.  He  had  come  to  seek  and  save  that  which  was  lost,  to  fulfil  all  prophecy, 
to  preach  the  everlasting  gospel,  to  work  such  miracles  as  the  world  had  never 
seen  ;  therefore  the  fame  of  Him  spread  abroad.  1.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  not  hid. 
He  may  be  plainly  seen  by  those  who  will  use  their  eyes — in  the  works  of  creation, 
in  His  Word,  in  the  ejects  of  His  grace.  2.  He  ought  not  to  be  hid.  We  must 
renounce  self  to  announce  Christ.  He  is  the  only  remedy  for  the  yearning  cry  of 
humanity.  3.  He  cannot  be  hid.  The  Christian  sky  may  be  clouded  for  a  time, 
but  it  will  clear,  and  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  burst  forth  in  fresh  power  and  glory. 
All  things  are  preparing  for  His  coronation.  He  must  reign.  Over  all  man's  resis- 
tance, His  purpose  must  prevail.  4.  He  will  not  be  hid.  A  day  is  coming, 
when  every  eye  shall  see  Him,  and  self-deception  will  be  no  longer  possible.  (•/. 
Fleming,  B.D.)  Why  Christ  cannot  be  hid : — Because — 1.  Great  need  will  seek 
Him  out.  2.  True  love  will  surely  find  Him.  3.  Earnest  faith  will  ever  lead  to 
Him.    4.  His  own  heart  will  betray  Him.    5.  His  disciples  jwill  make  Him  known. 

iA.  Rowland^  B,A.)  He  could  not  be  hid: — Tacitus  saith  of  Brutus — ♦*  The  more 
16  sought  to  secrete  himself,  the  more  he  was  noticed."  The  open  secret  of 
character: — ^L  Chbist  desibed  to  be  hid.  He  entered  into  a  house,  and  would 
have  no  man  know  it.  We  are  sure  this  desire  was  not  prompted  by  fear  or  shame, 
that  it  did  not  spring  from  caprice  or  unworthy  policy.  One  reason  will  be  found — 
1.  In  the  modesty  of  high  goodness.  There  is  a  religiousness  which  clamours  for 
recognition.  Far  removed  from  this  stagey  pietism  is  the  goodness  which  does  not 
clamour  for  recognition.  With  all  her  magnificence,  how  modest  is  Nature.  Christ's 
character  and  life  is  the  grandeur  of  the  firmament — silent,  simple,  severe.  He 
enjoined  upon  His  disciples  constant  sequestration,  and  Himself  set  the  example. 
Let  us  remember  the  modesty  illustrated  by  the  Master,  enjoined  by  Him.  He  for 
ever  discarded  the  trumpet.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine."  Have  we  been  anxious 
for  distinction  or  applause  ?  Have  we  cared  for  the  foreground  ?  Let  us  rise  to  a 
more  perfect  life,  and  we  shall  think  less  of  society,  less  of  ourselves,  and  live  mora 
than  content  in  the  eye  of  God.  2.  The  sensitiveness  of  high  goodness  constrained 
Christ  to  privacy.  Wherever  you  find  rare  purity,  you  find  this  shrinking  from  the 
corruptions  of  the  times.  We  find  the  same  desire  to  escape  from  the  world's 
wickedness  in  the  Master  Himself,  and  it  is  so  shared  by  all  His  pure-hearted  fol- 
lowers. Monasticism  had  its  origin,  to  a  considerable  extent,  in  this  shrinking  of 
the  saints  from  the  corruptions  of  their  age.  H.  Christ  could  not  be  hid.  With 
all  His  miracle  working  power.  He  could  not  accomplish  this ;  and  all  who  are 
thoroughly  like  their  Master  share  this  inability.  High  goodness  desires  to  hide ; 
it  cannot  be  hid.  1.  Christ  could  not  be  hid  because  of  the  manifestiveness  of  such 
goodness.  Goodness  is  self-reveaUng.  This  is  true  in  large  measure  of  genius,  of 
culture,  and  this  is  pre-eminently  true  of  character.  It  "  cannot  be  hid."  That 
Christ  could  not  hide  Himself  is  manifest  from  other  passages  than  our  text,  e.g., 
when  the  disciples  walked  with  Him  to  Emmaus.  However  carefully  He  might 
shroud  Himself,  some  rift  in  the  cloud,  some  shifting  of  the  darkness,  would  betray 
the  hidden  glory.  And,  indeed,  the  course  adopted  of  making  Palestine  the  scene 
of  the  Incarnate  Life  is  itself  the  supreme  illustration  of  the  necessary  manifesta- 
tions of  glorious  character.  It  is  ever  thus  with  worthy  lives— -Aidd«n,  they  are 
revealed ;  all  the  more  impressively  revealed  for  the  attempt  at  retirement  and  sup- 
pression. Christ  could  not  be  hid,  because  of  humanity's  felt  need  of  what  great 
goodness  has  to  give.  Mark  the  event  which  drew  Christ  forth  from  His  sequestra- 
tion. How  she  knew  of  the  power  and  presence  of  Jesus  it  boots  little  to  con- 
iectore.  Misery  has  a  swift  instinct  for  a  helper,  and,  as  Lange  observes,  **  The 
tuen  sagacity  with  which  need  here  scents  out  and  finds  her  Saviour  is  of  infinite, 
quite  indeterminable,  magnitude.*'  All  ^s  is  true,  in  its  measure,  of  those  who  are 
Uke  Christ.    The  world  needs  them,  knows  them,  and  denies  them  retirement  and 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohA».  m 

leisnre.  8.  Christ  could  not  be  hid,  because  of  the  self-sacrificing  nature  of  His 
perfect  goodness.  When  the  afflicted  woman  made  herself  and  her  sorrow  known 
to  the  Master,  He  did  not  refuse  to  come  forth  from  His  hiding-plaoe.  Desiring  to 
be  hid,  we  are  half  like  Jesus  Christ ;  desiring  to  be  hid,  but  forced  by  charity  into 
the  light,  we  are  like  Christ  altogether.  Let  us,  in  these  days  of  manifold  loxai^ 
and  chronic  self-indulgence,  remember  the  adnionition  of  the  Prophet  (Amos  yi. 
4-6).  {W.  L.  Watkinson.^  Pharisaie  hypocrisy  inflictive  to  the  holy  nature  oj 
Christ : — Culture  of  any  kind  is  pained  by  contact  with  coarseness  and  imperfection. 
An  eye  schooled  to  beauty  is  pained  by  a  misshapen  thing,  an  ear  schooled  to  har- 
mony is  tortured  by  dissonance,  and  thus  a  high,  delicate,  moral  nature  is  wounded 
by  the  world's  sin  and  shame.  There  is  a  goodness,  maybe,  which  dwells  with  a 
wicked  generation  contentedly  enough,  simply  because  it  is  so  little  ahead  of  the 
generation  ;  but  a  deeply  true  and  spiritually  tender  nature  suffers  in  all  the  sin 
and  suffering  of  its  neighbourhood.  And  this  is  the  situation  of  Christ  in  the 
instance  before  ns.  He  had  seen  the  worst  features  of  the  age  in  the  pbarisaio 
party.  All  their  lies  and  impurities  were  open  to  His  eye,  unutterably  afflictive 
to  His  holy  nature,  and  He  retired  before  the  impure  atmosphere  as  before 
the  breath  of  pestilence.  They  were  defiled,  hardened,  blinded  by  sin,  and 
He  shrank  from  them  with  horror.  His  pure  soul  was  grieved  by  the  com- 
mon sinfulness,  hoUowness,  shamelessness ;  and  heart-sore,  heart-sick,  He  sought 
solitude  and  rest.  (Ibid.)  Hidden^  yet  revealed: — The  hidden  violets  pro* 
claim  their  presence  in  every  passing  breeze ;  the  lark,  hidden  in  the  light, 
fills  all  the  landscape  with  music;  and  the  vivid  freshness  of  grass  and  flower 
betrays  all  the  secret  windings  of  the  coy  meadow  stream.  Thus  superiority  of 
mind  and  life  all  unconsciously  reveals  itself,  makes  itself  everywhere  known  and 
felt  as  a  thing  of  beauty  and  blessing — all  the  more  penetrating  for  its  softness,  aU 
the  more  subduing  for  its  silence,  all  the  more  renowned  for  its  secrecy.  The  still, 
small  whisper  shakes  the  world ;  those  are  crowned  who  shun  greatness ;  the  valley 
of  humility  is  the  peak  of  fame.  The  man  of  royal  soul  cannot  hide  himself.  In 
his  modesty  he  may  draw  a  veil  over  his  face,  but  the  veil  itself  will  share  the* 
transfiguration.  Or,  if  constitutionally  timid  and  retiring,  the  superiority  of  his 
spirit  and  method  will  declare  itself,  and  the  *♦  unknown  '*  are  the  "  well-known.*' 
Or,  he  may  be  poor,  illiterate,  persecuted,  yet  will  the  innate  grandeur  shine  through 
all  poverty,  rudeness,  or  unpopularity,  winning  the  suffrages  of  all  beholders.  And 
as  he  cannot  hide  himself,  neither  can  the  world  hide  him.  Never  does  the  world 
appear  more  foolish  than  when  it  attempts  to  extinguish  a  burning  and  shining  Ught. 
In  the  Indian  legend,  a  mighty,  wicked  sorcerer  seeks,  with  very  poor  success,  to 
keep  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  in  three  separate  chests;  and  those  who  have  sought 
to  suppress  God's  servants  have  succeeded  no  better.  John  was  banished  to  Pat- 
mos ;  but  far  from  sinking  out  of  view  in  the  solitary  sea,  he  stands  before  the  world 
amid  sublimest  illuminations,  like  his  own  **  angel  standing  in  the  sun."  They 
drove  Luther  into  the  Wartburg;  but  there,  in  translating  the  Scriptures  into 
German,  he  became  the  cynosure  of  all  eyes.  Bunyan's  enemies  consigned  him  to 
Bedford  gaol,  and  lo,  he  became  known  to  the  race,  one  of  the  foremost  of  the  immor- 
tals of  Christendom.  Eminent  goodness  will  out — neither  men  nor  devils  can  keep 
it  under  a  bushel.  (Ibid.)  The  true  disciple  cannot  be  hid  anymore  than  his 
Master : — The  Chinese  have  a  wood  which,  buried  some  feet  underground,  fills  the 
air  with  fragrance ;  and  thus  grand  qualities,  powers,  graces,  assert  themselves 
through  all  obstructions,  filling  the  atmosphere  of  earth  with  the  fragrance  of 
heaven.  {Ibid.)  Attraction  at  a  distance : — Observers  have  stated  that  if  flowers  are 
placed  in  a  window,  the  window  closed  and  the  blinds  drawn,  the  bees  outside 
are  aware  of  the  presence  of  flowers,  and  beat  against  the  window-panes,  evidently 
anxious  to  reach  them.  This  "  action  at  a  distance "  is  sufficiently  wonderful ; 
yet  misery  has  a  sense  still  more  keen,  faith  a  penetration  yet  more  powerful. 
Christ  "entered  into  a  house,  and  would  have  no  man  know  it,"  and  no  doubt 
took  necessary  measures  to  secure  and  preserve  secrecy;  but  the  sorrowfol 
woman  discovered  His  locality,  apprehended  His  power  and  grace,  and  rested 
not  till  she  gained  that  Plant  of  Eenown  whose  leaves  are  "for  the  healing 
of  the  nations."  The  world  in  its  pbarisaical  mood  may  spurn  Christ  and 
drive  Him  away,  but  as  the  world  realizes  its  misery  it  feels  its  absolaie 
need  of  Him,  and  feels  after  Him,  if  haply  it  may  find  Him.  (Ibid.)  H* 
could  fwt  be  hid : — I.  The  purpos  of  God  forbids  that  Christ  should  be  hid.  11.  The 
innate  glory  of  the  Son  of  God  is  another  reason  why  He  could  not  be  hid. 
III.  The  desperate  need  of  sinners   rendered  it  impossible  that  He  should  bi 


©BAP.  TO.']  ST.  MARK.  288 

hid.  IV.  The  bonndless  compassion  of  the  Son  of  God  aooonnts  for  the  fact 
that  He  eonld  not  be  hid.  V.  The  deep  and  abiding  gratitude  of  His  followers 
forbids  that  Christ  should  be  hid.      IW.   O.  Letou^  If  a   Christian  abide 

hidden,  there  i$  little  to  hide : — ^What  does  this  prove  in  respeot  to  some  of  ns  ? 
We  enter  into  a  house  and  are  hid — we  are  not  inquired  for,  solicited,  dragged 
unwillingly  into  the  light.  We  wish  to  be  let  alone,  and  are  let  alone.  What 
does  all  this  reveal  but  the  poverty  of  our  nature  f  We  are  not  sought  out,  for  we 
are  not  worth  seeking.  A  needy  heart  is  an  infallible  divining-rod  to  discern  where  the 
gold  is  hidden  in  the  social  strata,  and  if  none  inquire  for  us,  if  none  disturb  our 
•olitude,  we  may  infer  with  certainty  that  there  is  little  preciousness  in  our  nature 
either  toward  God  or  man.  He  who  knows  the  deep  things  of  God  will  be  sought 
out  far  and  wide,  as  the  Queen  of  Sheba  came  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  to  hear 
the  wisdom  of  Solomon.  A  man  of  prayer  will  ever  be  importuned,  and  an  interest 
be  sought  in  his  sympathy  and  supplication.  The  good  Samaritan  is  ^own 
throughout  the  city,  and  his  aid  implored  day  and  night  If  a  Christian  abides 
hidden,  there  is  little  to  hide.  If  we  are  greatly  pure,  sympathetic,  wise,  prayerful, 
we  are  worth  discovering,  and  shall  soon  and  often  be  discovered.  If  there  is  in  us 
the  sweetness  of  the  Kose  of  Sharon,  we  shall  not  be  permitted  to  waste  our  '*  sweet, 
ness  on  the  desert  air  •' ;  if  there  is  in  us  the  preciousness  and  beauty  of  (Jod's 
jewels,  we  shall  be  fished  from  deepest  caves  to  enrich  the  world.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.) 
The  most  beautiful  characters  the  most  unobtrusive: — Travellers  tell  that  ^e 
forests  of  South  America  are  full  of  the  gem-like  hummiog-bird,  yet  vou  may 
sometimes  ride  for  hours  without  seeing  one.  They  are  most  difiSonlt  to  see 
when  perched  among  the  branches,  and  almost  indistinguishable  flying  among  the 
flowering  trees  ;  it  is  only  every  now  and  then  some  accidental  circumstance  reveals 
the  swarm  of  bejewelled  creatures,  and  they  flash  upon  the  vision  in  white,  red, 
green,  blue,  and  purple.  It  is  somewhat  thus  with  society — the  noblest,  the  most 
beautiful  characters,  are  not  the  obtrusive  ones.  Going  through  life  carelessly, 
one  might  think  all  the  people  common  enough ;  reading  the  newspapers,  one 
might  suppose  the  world  to  contain  only  bad  men ;  but  it  may  comfort  us  to  re- 
member the  truly  great  and  good  shun  observation  and  walk  humbly  with  God. 
The  poorest  and  worst  side  of  things  is  the  most  obvious.  "  It  is  the  glory  of 
God  to  conceal  a  thing ;  "  and  it  is  the  glory  of  God's  people  to  conceal  themselves. 
Nevertheless,  the  time  comes  for  their  revelation,  and  then  we  are  delighted  to  find 
how  much  silent,  hidden  goodness  the  world  contains.  The  spectacle  of  want  and  woe 
draws  forth  the  excellent  ones  of  the  earth ;  and  however  keen  the  trial  of  public  life, 
however  repugnant  contact  with  scenes  of  sin  and  shame  and  suffering,  all  is  bravely, 
cheerfully  borne  for  the  Saviour's  sake  and  the  world's  betterment.  When  a  true 
soul  hesitates  between  thecontemplative  and  active  life,  the  example  of  Christ  and  love 
of  Christ  determines  to  self -renouncing  service.  (Ibid.)  The  unhidden  Saviout : — 
I.  The  HUMANITY  of  Christ  as  revealing  itself  in  the  story.  His  fatigue  was  real : 
Nature  did  not  spare  Him.  When  the  soul  is  constantly  going  out  towards  the 
objects  of  one's  solicitude,  the  body  may  bear  up  bravely  for  a  time ;  but  Nature 
exacts  her  penalty.  U.  There  is  also  in  these  words  a  glimpse  into  something 
of  A  DiviKB  PUBPOSB.  It  was  part  of  the  Divine  plan  that  Christ's  immediate 
testimony  should  be  conveyed  to  the  Jews  only ;  this  involved  great  self-restraint. 
III.  This  desire  to  be  quiet  in  those  regions,  gives  a  prophetic  glimpse.  All  the 
tenderness  of  God's  heart  will  be  disclosed  when  we  are  prepared  for  it.    IV.  Tmc 

OVEBTURK  TO  A  MASTER'S  WORK  MAY  SEEM  SOMETIMES  LONG   AND  NEEDLESS.       1.    "  He 

could  not  be  hid."  No,  not  even  in  these  regions,  where  His  ministry  did  not 
especially  lie.  Marvellous  that  the  world  should  have  got  almost  to  disbelieve  in  the 
existence  of  a  warm,  generous  heart.  2.  How  could  Christ  be  hid  ?  If  He  were  • 
revelation,  then  He  must  be  declared.  There  are  great  spring  epochs  in  the  working 
out  of  Divine  thoughts  and  purposes ;  times  when  what  had  been  concealed  comes 
out  to  view.  Love  must  reveal  itself ;  so  must  life.  If  our  inner  life  is  to  retain  its 
force  and  beauty,  it  must  manifest  itself.  A  spiritual  recluse  is  a  mistftke.  {O.  J, 
Proctor.)  Life  must  reveal  itself: — Life  must  reveal  itself,  and  it  must  reveal  itself 
after  its  own  way.  There  is  no  need  of  parade  and  pomp  to  declare  it.  Christ-like 
piety,  which  is  so  delightful  in  all  its  phases,  is  specially  so  in  this ;  while  very 
courageous  it  is  very  modest ;  while  gloriously  strong  it  is  very  retiring.  Parade 
and  pomp  were  the  prominent  features  of  the  Pharisees'  religion.  Blow  the  trumpet! 
Sound  the  alarm  I  Make  way  for  virtue,  temperance,  zeal,  and  godliness !  Make 
way  indeed  t  But  where  is  love,  the  soul  of  all  life  ?  Love  is  modest.  Have  yon 
forgotten  her  f    Forgotten  her  ?    Then  never  mind  about  the  rest.     Your  virtue 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vn. 

it  merely  an  aeddent  of  eirenmstanee  or  oonetitntion ;  your  temperanee  only  desire 
worn  ont;  your  zeal  and  godliness  only  eelf-importanoe  dressed  in  sober  garb, 
undertaker's  costnme.  No  need  of  a  flonrish  of  trumpets  and  a  beating  of  gonga 
to  declare  the  tme  life.  It  most  manifest  itself,  bat  not  simply  on  state  oooa- 
sions.  It  will  oome  to  the  light,  but  it  would  rather  not  have  the  lime  light  of  a 
merely  popular  applause  thrown  upon  it.  It  cannot  be  hid,  but  it  will  not  speak 
of  its  own  beauties.  It  will  be  self-assertiye,  but  after  the  Ghristly  sort.  The  life 
mast  be  the  light  of  men.  A  revealer  of  Divine  mysteries  and  a  redeemer  of 
human  sins  and  griefs  could  be  no  sealed  fountain.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  25-30.    The  woman  was  a  Greek,  a  Syrophenlclan  by  nation :  and  ah 
iMsought  Him  that  He  would  oast  forth  the  devil  out  of  her  daughter.— TA 

Canaanitish  mother : — Through  her  natural  affections  she  had  mounted  up,  as  it 
would  seem,  to  higher  and  spiritual  things ;  for  to  a  wonderful  degree  did  she  enter 
into  the  secrets  of  His  mysterious  nature ;  "  she  worshipped  Him,  saying,  Lord, 
help  me !  "  She  pierced,  as  though  by  the  intuition  of  some  blessed  instinct, 
through  the  veil  in  which  He  was  shrouded.  Her  faith  laid  its  hold  at  once  upon 
His  very  Godhead,  and  on  His  true  humanity.  As  God,  she  fell  before  Him — she 
worshipped  Him ;  as  man,  she  appealed  to  His  feeling  for  the  sorrows  of  man's 
heart,  crying  to  Him,  "  Lord,  help  me  1 "  She  reached  on  to  that  entire  sympathy 
which  was  to  be  the  fruit  of  His  being  "  perfected  through  suffering,"  "  Tiiou 
that  art  the  Man  of  Sorrows ;  by  Thy  man's  heart,  and  by  the  covenant  of  Thy 
suffering,  help  me  in  my  woe."  Twice  more,  we  know,  she  seemed  to  be  refused  ; 
and  yet  she  persevered.  He  had  but  tried  her  faith,  and  perfected  her  patience. 
There  was  in  her  heart  a  hidden  treasure  which  was  thus  brought  forth ;  there  was 
in  it  the  fine  gold,  to  which  this  hour  of  agony  had  been  as  the  refiner's  fire.  Her 
importunity  had  won  its  answer ;  for  indeed  it  was  itself  His  gift.  The  fire  upon 
the  altar  of  her  heart  had  been  kindled  by  the  beams  of  His  own  countenance  ;  her 
cleaving  to  Him  was  His  gift ;  her  love  the  reflection  of  His  love  to  her ;  He  had 
put  the  words  into  her  mouth,  and  He  had  strengthened  her  to  speak  them.  And 
■o  the  end  was  sure:  she  had  knocked,  and  the  door  had  opened ;  she  had  asked,  and 
■he  received :  *'  O  woman,  great  is  thy  faith :  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt. 
And  her  daughter  was  made  whole  from  that  very  hour."  Such  is  the  narrative ; 
and  in  all  it^  parts  we  may  read  that  which  concerns  ouiselves  most  closely.  For 
what  else  are  our  lives,  with  all  their  varying  accidents  and  issues,  than,  as  it  were, 
the  shadows  cast  forward  into  all  time  by  these  dealings  of  the  Son  of  God  with 
man  ?  He  has  come  nigh  unto  us ;  yea.  He  stands  amongst  us — He,  the  Healer 
of  our  spirits ;  He,  our  heart's  true  centre — He  is  close  beside  us ;  and  we,  have  we 
not  each  one  our  own  deep  need  of  Him  ?  Have  we  not  each  one  our  own  burden  T 
— the  "young  daughter  who  liethat  home  grievously  afflicted,"  whom  He  only  can 
heal  ?  And  then,  further,  do  not  characters  now  divide  off  and  part  asunder  even 
as  they  did  then  ?  Are  there  not  those  who,  like  the  Jews,  kno^  not  the  office  of 
tills  Healer ;  who  hear  all  His  words,  and  see  all  His  signs,  and  languidly  let  Him 
pass,  or  angrily  murmur  at  Him,  or  blasphemously  drive  Him  from  them ;  from 
whom  He  passes,  even  to  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  to  pour  on  others  the  bless- 
ing they  refuse  ?  But  then  there  are  also  those  who  do  seek  Him  with  their  whole 
heart — unmarked,  it  may  be,  by  any  of  the  outward  appearances  which  catch  the 
eye  of  man.  I.  There  is  the  lesson  taught  us  by  the  Jews,  that  He  does  pass  away 
from  those  who  will  not  stay  Him  with  them  ;  that  He  goes  on  and  heals  others : 
and  that  they  die  unhealed,  because  they  knew  not  "  the  time  of  their  visitation." 
And  the  root  of  this  evil  is  here  pointed  out  to  us :  it  is  a  want  of  faith,  and,  from 
this,  a  lack  of  the  power  of  spiritual  discernment.  Such  men  are  purbhnd :  the 
full  light  of  heaven  shines  in  vain  for  them.  They  do  not  intend  to  reject  the 
Christ,  but  they  know  Him  not ;  their  gaze  is  too  idle,  too  impassive,  to  discover 
Him.  They  know  not  that  they  have  deep  needs  which  He  only  can  satisfy.  They 
yet  dream  of  slaking  their  thirst  at  other  streams.  II.  But  there  is  also  here  the 
lesson  of  the  woman  of  Canaan ;  and  this  has  many  aspects  ;  of  which  the  first, 
perhaps,  is  this,  that  by  every  mark  and  token  which  the  stricken  soul  can  read, 
He  to  whom  she  sought  is  the  only  Healer  of  humanity,  the  true  portion  and  rest 
of  every  heart ;  that  He  would  teach  us  this  by  all  the  discipline  of  outward  things ; 
that  the  ties  of  family  life  are  meant  thus  to  train  up  our  weak  affections  till  they 
are  fitted  to  lay  hold  on  HLm ;  that  the  eddies  and  sorrows  of  life  are  meant  to 
■weep  us  from  its  flowery  banks,  that  in  its  deep  strong  currents  we  may  cry  to  Him  ; 
that  for  this  end  He  opens  to  us,  by  little  and  little,  the  mystery  of  trouble  round 


OiAF.  Tn.}  ST.  MARK,  :i85 

as,  the  mystery  of  evil  within  as,  that  we  may  fly  from  others  and  onreelves  to 
Him.  III.  And,  once  more,  there  Ib  this  further  lesson,  that  He  will  most  surely 
be  found  by  those  who  do  seek  after  Him.  For  here  we  see  why  it  often  happens 
that  really  earnest  and  sincere  men  seem,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  pray  in  vain  ;  why 
their  *•  Lord,  help  me  1 "  is  not  answered  by  a  word.  It  is  not  that  Christ  is  not 
near  ns ;  it  is  not  that  His  ear  is  heavy ;  it  is  not  that  the  tenderness  of  His  sym- 
pathy is  blunted.  It  is  a  part  of  His  plan  of  faithfulness  and  wisdom.  He  has  a 
doable  purpose  herein.  He  would  bless  by  it  both  ns  and  all  ELis  Chorch.  How 
many  a  fainting  soal  has  gathered  strength  for  one  more  hour  of  patient  supplica- 
tion by  thinking  on  this  Ganaanitish  mother ;  on  her  seeming  rejection,  ovi  her 
blessed  saecess  at  last  1  And  for  ourselves,  too,  there  is  a  special  mercy  in  these 
long-delayed  blessings.  For  it  is  only  by  degrees  that  the  work  within  us  can  be 
perfected ;  it  is  only  by  steps,  small  and  almost  imperceptible  as  we  are  taking 
them,  yet  one  by  one  leading  us  to  unknown  heights,  that  we  can  mount  up  to  the 
golden  gate  before  as.  The  ripening  of  these  precious  fruits  must  not  be  forced. 
We  have  many  lessons  to  learn,  and  we  can  learn  them  but  one  by  one.  And  much 
«re  we  taught  by  these  delayed  answers  to  our  prayers.  By  them  the  treasure  of 
our  hearts  is  cleared  from  dross,  as  in  the  fnmace-heat.  He  would  but  teach  us  to 
oome  to  Him  at  once  for  all,  and  not  to  leave  Him  until  we  have  won  our  suit.  (Bishop 
Samuel  Wilberforee.)  Faith  triumphant  over  reftisal : — 1.  Here  is,  first,  the  Saviour 
leaving  the  usual  scenes  of  His  ministry,  and  passing  into  a  land  to  which  He  bad 
as  yet  no  message.  As  soon  as  He  reaches  it,  He  makes  it  plain  that  He  did  not  oome 
there  for  purposes  of  public  ministration.  He  came  there,  I  think  we  may  say,  for 
the  sake  of  one  soul.  He  would  leave  on  record  just  one  example  of  His  care  for 
those  who  were  not  yet  His  own.  Thus  would  He  warn  the  Jews  that  God's  bless- 
ing might  escape  them  altogether,  if  they  gave  not  the  more  earnest  heed.  When 
and  as  He  will,  such  is  the  law  of  His  working.  And  they  who  would  find  Him 
must  watch  for  Him.  Into  tbe  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  He  comes  but  now  and 
then,  or  He  comes  but  once.  2.  Again,  how  many  are  the  heart's  sorrows  I  How 
often  are  they  connected  with  family  life  ?  Happy  they  whose  timily  sorrows  bring 
them  to  the  same  place  for  healing — to  the  feet  of  Christ.  8.  But  at  all  events,  if 
the  home  be  ever  so  bright,  if  the  life  be  ever  so  oloadless,  there  is  a  want 
deep  down  within,  which  is  either  keenly  felt,  or,  if  not  felt,  tenfold  more 
urgent.  If  not  for  a  child  whom  Satan  hath  bound ;  yet  at  least  for  ourselves 
we  have  all  need  to  approach  Christ  with  the  prayer,  "Have  mercy  on  me, 
O  Lord,  Thou  Son  of  David."  In  some  of  us  ^ere  is  by  habit  a  possession 
of  the  evil  one :  in  all  of  ns  there  is  by  nature  a  taint  and  an  infection  of 
sin.  4.  Thus  then  we  have  all  of  as  occasion  to  approach  Him  who  has  turned 
aside  to  visit  our  coasts.  We  have  all  a  malady  which  needs  healing,  and  for 
which  He  alone,  alone  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  even  professes  to  have  a  remedy.  The 
less  we  feel,  the  more  we  need.  My  brethren,  we  do  not  believe  that  any  real 
prayer  was  ever  cast  out  for  the  onworthiness  of  the  asker.  6.  And  doubt  not,  but 
earnestly  believe,  that  as  this  miracle  describes  as  in  some  of  its  parts,  so  shall  it 
describe  as  also  in  all.  It  was  written  to  teach  men  this  lesson — that  refusals,  even 
if  they  were  uttered  in  words  from  the  heavenly  places,  are  at  the  very  worst  only 
trials  of  our  faith.  Will  we,  that  is  the  question,  pray  on  through  them  ?  6.  And 
assuredly,  this  morning,  we  may  take  the  history  before  us  as  a  strongly  encouraging 
call  to  Christ's  holy  Table.  (C  J,  VaugJian^  D.D,)  The  Syrophenician  woman : — 
I.  A  COMMENDATION  or  TBI  WOMAN'S  FAITH.  But  uow  what  is  it  that  Christ  commends 
and  admires  ?  It  is  the  greatness  of  the  woman's  faith.  Now  faith  may  be  said  to  be 
great  either  in  respect  had  to  the  understanding,  or  to  the  will.  For  the  act  of  faith 
proceeds  from  them  both  ;  and  it  may  be  said  to  increase  and  be  great,  either  as 
the  understanding  receives  more  light,  or  the  will  more  warmth :  as  the  one  doth 
more  firmly  assent,  and  the  other  more  readily  embrace.  In  the  understanding  it 
it  raised  by  certainty  and  assurance,  and  in  the  will  by  devotion  and  confidence. 
This  woman's  faith  was  great  in  both  respects.  She  most  firmly  believed  Christ  to 
be  the  Lord,  able  to  work  a  miracle  on  her  daughter :  and  her  devotion  and  confi- 
dence was  so  strongly  built,  that  neither  silence  or  denial  nor  a  reproach  could 
shake  it.  And  because  we  are  told  that  •'  the  greatness  of  virtue  is  best  seen  in  the 
effects;"  as  we  best  judge  of  a  tree  by  the  spreading  of  its  branches,  and  of  the 
whole  by  the  parts ;  we  will  therefore  contemplate  this  woman's  faith  in  those 
several  ^its  it  brought  forth, — in  her  patience,  in  her  humility,  in  her  persever- 
ance *,  which  are  those  lesser  stars  that  shine  in  the  firmament  of  our  souls,  and 
borrow  their  light  from  the  lustre  of  faith,  aa  from  their  sun.     1.  W«  mast  admire 


S86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ▼», 

her  patience.  She  endnred  maoh ;  misery,  reproach,  repulse,  silence,  and  the  name 
of  a  "dog."  Her  patience  proves  the  greatness  of  her  faith.  2.  Next  follows  her 
humility,  a  companion  of  patience.  "She  worshipped  Him."  Not  a  humility 
which  stays  at  home,  but  which  ♦*  comes  out  of  her  coasts  "  after  Christ.  She  cries 
after  Him;  He  answers  not.  She  falls  on  the  ground;  He  calls  her  "dog."  A 
humility  that  is  not  silent,  but  helps  Christ  to  accuse  her.  A  humility,  not  at  the 
lower  end,  but  under  the  table,  content  with  the  crumbs  which  fall  to  the  dogs. 
Thus  doth  the  soul  by  true  humility  go  out  from  God  to  meet  BUm,  and,  beholding 
His  immense  goodness,  looks  back  unto  herself,  and  dwells  in  the  contemplation  of 
her  own  poverty;  and,  being  conscious  of  her  own  emptiness  and  nihility,  she 
stands  at  gaze,  and  trembles  at  that  unmeasurable  goodness  which  filleth  all  things. 
It  is  a  good  flight  from  Him  which  hiimility  makes.  For  thus  to  go  away  from 
God  into  the  valley  of  our  own  imperfections,  is  to  meet  Him :  we  are  then  most 
near  Him  when  we  place  ourselves  at  such  a  distance ;  as  the  best  way  to  enjoy  the 
sun  is  not  to  live  in  his  sphere.  We  must  therefore  learn  by  this  woman  here  to 
take  heed  how  we  grace  ourselves.  For  nothing  can  make  the  heavens  as  brass  unto 
VLB,  to  deny  their  influence,  but  a  high  conceit  of  our  own  worth.  If  no  beam  of 
the  sun  touch  thee  in  the  midst  of  a  field  at  noonday,  thou  canst  not  but  think 
iome  thick  cloud  is  cast  between  thee  and  the  light ;  and  if,  amongst  that  myriad 
of  blessings  which  flow  from  the  Fountain  of  light,  none  reach  home  to  thee,  it  is 
because  thou  art  too  full  already,  and  hast  shut  out  God  by  the  conceit  of  thy  own 
bulk  and  greatness.  Certainly,  nothing  can  conquer  majesty  but  humility,  which 
layeth  her  foundation  low,  but  raiseth  her  building  to  heaven.  This  Canaanitess  is 
a  dog ;  Christ  calls  her  "  woman :  "  she  deserves  not  a  crumb  ;  He  grants  her  the 
whole  loaf,  and  seals  His  grant  with  a  Fiat  tibi.  It  shall  be  to  humiUty  "  even  as 
die  will."  3.  And  now,  in  the  third  place,  her  humility  ushers  in  her  heat  and 
perseverance  in  prayer.  Pride  is  as  glass :  "  It  makes  the  mind  brittle  and  frail. " 
Glitter  she  doth,  and  make  a  fair  show ;  but  upon  a  touch  or  fall  is  broken 
asunder.  Not  only  a  reproach,  which  is  "  a  hlow,"  but  silence,  which  can  be  but 
••  a  touch,"  dasheth  her  to  pieces.  Reproach  pride,  and  she  "  swells  into  anger  ;  " 
she  is  ready  to  return  the  "  dog  "  upon  Christ.  But  humility  is  "  a  wall  of  brass," 
and  endnreth  all  the  batteries  of  opposition.  Is  Christ  silent  ?  she  cries  still,  she 
follows  after,  she  falls  on  her  knees.  Calls  her  "dog?"  she  confesseth  it.  Our 
Saviour  Himself,  when  He  negotiated  our  reconciliation,  continued  in  supplications 
•*  with  strong  crying"  (Heb.  v.  7),  and  now,  beholding  as  it  were  Himself  in  the 
woman,  and  seeing,  though  not  the  same,  yet  the  like,  fervour  and  perseverance  in 
her,  He  approves  it  as  a  piece  of  His  own  coin,  and  sets  His  impress  upon  it.  And 
these  three,  patience,  humility,  perseverance,  and  an  undaimted  constancy  in  prayer, 
measure  out  her  faith.  For  faith  is  not  great  but  by  opposition.  4.  I  might  add  a 
fourth,  her  prudence,  but  that  I  scarce  know  how  to  distinguish  it  from  faith.  For 
faith  indeed  is  our  Christian  prudence,  which  doth  '•  innoculate  the  soul,"  give  her 
ft  clear  and  piercing  eye,  by  which  she  discerns  great  blessings  in  little  ones,  a  talent 
in  a  mite,  and  a  loaf  in  a  crumb ;  which  sets  up  "  a  golden  light,"  by  which  we  spy 
out  all  spiritual  advantages,  and  learn  to  thrive  in  the  merchandise  of  truth.  We 
may  see  a  beam  of  this  light  in  every  passage  of  this  woman ;  but  it  is  most  resplen- 
dent in  her  art  of  thrift,  by  which  she  can  multiply  a  crumb.  A  crumb  shall  turn 
this  dog  into  a  child  of  Abraham.  To  our  eye  a  star  appears  not  much  bigger  than 
a  candle ;  but  reason  corrects  our  sense,  and  makes  it  greater  than  the  globe 
of  the  earth :  so  opportunities  and  occasions  of  good,  and  those  many  helps 
to  increase  grace  in  us,  are  apprehended  as  atoms  by  a  sensual  eye  ;  but  our  Chris- 
tian prudence  beholds  them  in  their  just  magnitude,  and  makes  more  use  of  a  crumb 
tiiat  falls  from  the  table,  than  folly  doth  of  a  sumptuous  feast.  "  A  little, "  saith 
the  Psalmist,  "  which  the  righteous  hath  is  more  than  great  revenues  of  the  wicked  " 
(Psa.  xxxvii.  16).  A  little  wealth,  a  little  knowledge,  nay,  a  little  grace,  may 
be  so  husbanded  and  improved  that  the  increase  and  harvest  may  be  greatest 
where  there  is  least  seed.  It  is  strange,  but  yet  we  may  observe  it,  many 
men  walk  safer  by  starlight  than  others  by  day.  Many  times  it  falls  out  thai 
ignorance  is  more  holy  than  knowledge.  1.  Shall  we  now  take  pains  to  measure 
our  faith  by  this  woman's  ?  We  may  as  well  measure  an  inch  by  a  pole,  or  an  atom 
by  a  mountain.  We  are  impatient  of  afflictions  and  reproaches.  2.  But  next, 
for  humility:  who  vouchsafeth  once  to  put  on  her  mantle?  3.  Lastly:  For 
our  perseverance  and  fervour  in  devotion,  we  must  not  dare  once  to  compare 
them  with  this  woman's.  For,  Lord!  bow  loath  are  we  to  begin  our  prayers^ 
and  how  willing  to  make  an  end  !      Her  devotion  was  on  fire  ;  ours  is  congealed' 


OBiP.  yn.]  8T.  MARK,  987 

and  botmd  up  with  a  frost.  But  yet,  to  come  up  close  to  our  text,  our  Saviour 
mentions  not  these,  but  passeth  them  by  in  silence,  and  commends  her  faith. 
Not  but  that  her  patience  was  great ;  her  humility  great,  and  her  devotion 
great:  but  because  all  these  were  seasoned  with  faith,  and  sprung  from  faith, 
and  because  faith  -^hb  it  which  caused  the  miracle,  He  mentions  faith  alone,  that 
faith  may  have  indeed  the  pre-eminence  in  all  things.  1.  Faith  was  the  virtue 
which  Christ  came  to  plant  in  His  Church.  2.  Besides,  faith  was  the  fountain  from 
whence  these  rivulets  were  cut,  from  whence  those  virtues  did  flow.  For  had  she 
not  believed,  she  had  not  come,  she  had  not  cried,  she  had  not  been  patient,  she  had 
not  humbled  herself  to  obtain  her  desire,  she  had  not  persevered ;  but  having  a  firm 
persuasion  that  Christ  was  able  to  work  the  miracle,  no  silence,  no  denial,  no  le- 
proach,  no  wind  could  drive  her  away.  3.  Lastly ;  Faith  is  that  virtue  which  sea- 
sons all  the  rest,  maketh  them  useful  and  protitable,  which  commends  our  patience 
and  humility  and  perseverance,  and  without  which  our  patience  were  but  like  the 
heathen's,  imaginary,  and  paper-patience,  begotten  by  some  premeditation,  by  habit 
of  suflfering,  by  opinion  of  fatal  necessity,  or  by  a  stoical  abandoning  of  all  affec- 
tions. Without  faith  our  humility  were  pride,  and  our  prayers  babbling.  For 
whereas  in  natural  men  there  be  many  excellent  things,  yet  without  faith  they  are 
all  nothing  worth,  and  are  to  them  as  the  rainbow  was  before  the  flood,  the  same 
perhaps  in  show,  but  of  no  use.  It  is  strange  to  see  what  gifts  of  wisdom  and  tem- 
perance, of  moral  and  natural  conscience,  of  justice  and  uprightness,  did  remain, 
not  only  in  the  books,  but  in  the  lives,  of  many  heathen  men :  but  this  could  not 
further  them  one  foot  for  the  purchase  of  eternal  good,  because  they  wanted  the 
faith  which  they  derided,  which  gives  the  rest  to  (piKvpov,  "  a  loveliness  and  beauty," 
and  is  alone  of  force  to  attract  and  draw  the  love  and  favour  of  God  unto  us.  These 
graces  otherwise  are  but  as  the  matter  and  body  of  a  Christian  man,  a  thing  of  itself 
dead,  without  life  :  but  the  soul  which  seems  to  quicken  this  body,  is  faith.  They 
are  indeed  of  the  same  brotherhood  and  kindred,  and  God  is  the  common  Father 
unto  them  all :  but  without  faith  they  And  no  entertainment  at  His  hands.  As 
Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  "  You  shall  not  see  my  face  except  your  brother  be 
with  you  '*  (Gen.  xUii.  3) ;  so,  nor  shall  patience  and  humility  and  prayer  bring  us 
to  the  blessed  vision  of  God,  unless  they  take  faith  in  their  company.  You  see, 
our  Saviour  passeth  by  them  all :  but  at  the  sight  of  faith  He  cries  out  in  a  kind  of 
astonishment,  "  O  woman,  great  is  thy  faith  !  "  And  for  this  faith  he  grants  her 
her  request :  "  Be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt : "  which  is  my  next  part,  and 
which  I  will  touch  but  in  a  word.  U.  Fiat  tibi  is  a  grant  ;  and  it  follows  close  at 
the  heels  of  the  commendation,  and  even  commends  that  to.  (A.  Farindon,  D.D.) 
Suffering  tends  to  Christ : — No  wind  so  powerful  to  drive  us  from  Tyre  and  Sidon  to 
Christ,  from  the  coasts  of  sin  to  the  land  of  the  living,  as  calamity.  {Ibid.)  Light 
drawn  out  of  darkness : — Here  is  a  cloud  drawn  over  her ;  yet  her  faith  sees  a  star  in 
this  cloud ;  and  by  a  strange  kind  of  alchemy  she  draws  light  out  of  darkness,  and 
makes  that  sharp  denial  the  foundation  of  a  grant.  (Ibid.)  Prayer  richly 
answered : — ••  Then  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  her,  0  woman,  great  is  thy  faith : 
be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt."  Before,  silence ;  now,  admiration  :  before,  a  re- 
proof ;  now,  a  commendation :  before,  a  "  dog ;  **  now,  a  '*  woman ;  "  before,  not  a 
crumb  :  now,  more  bread  than  the  children.  She  cried  before,  and  Christ  answered 
not ;  but  now  Christ  answers,  and  not  only  gives  her  a  crumb,  but  the  whole  table  ; 
answers  her  with  "Be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt!  "  (Ibid.)  Si^.a  prayers 
take  long  to  answer: — If  God's  chastisements  make  you  better, thank  God  for  them. 
Those  unfeeling  words,  that  cold  look,  and  that  indifferent  way  of  Christ — what  a 
gush  of  feeling  they  brought  out  of  this  woman's  soul  I  That  pushing  away — ^how 
it  brought  the  pleading  hands  out,  as  it  were !  How  it  caused  every  tendril  and 
fibre  of  her  heart  to  clasp  and  cling  to  the  Saviour,  and  made  her  refuse  to  let  Him 
go  I  It  was  out  of  the  apparent  winter  of  His  face  that  her  summer  came.  It  was 
out  of  His  repulsion  that  her  blessing  came.  Any  defiling  that  makes  you  better 
inside  is  beneficial.  And  do  not  feel  when  God  is  dealing  with  you  severely  that  He 
has  forgotten  you.  It  takes  a  great  while  to  answer  some  prayers.  One  day  an  acorn 
looked  up  and  saw  an  oak  tree  over  it,  and  did  not  know  that  this  tree  was  its  father, 
and  pleaded  with  Nature,  saying,  **  Make  me  such  a  one  as  that."  So  the  6(iuirrel 
took  it,  and  raced  off  with  it  towards  its  nest ;  and  on  the  way  he  dropped  it  on  a 
ledge  where  there  was  a  httle  soil,  and  lost  it.  There  it  germinated,  and  its  roots 
Btruck  down.  And  after  a  year  the  little  whip  cried,  •'  I  did  not  pray  to  be  a  little 
whip ;  1  prayed  to  be  like  that  oak  tree."  But  God  did  not  hear.  The  next  year  it 
grew  and  branched  a  little  ;  but  it  was  not  satisfied  ;  and  in  its  discontent  it  said : 


MS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHir.  tb. 

**  0  Natare,  I  prayed  that  I  might  be  like  that  yolmninoiia  oak,  and  now  see  what 
a  contemptible  little  forked  stick  I  am."  Another  year  came,  and  the  winter  froze 
it,  and  the  summer  storms  beat  on  it,  and  it  tugged  away  for  its  life,  and  ita  roots 
ran  ont  and  twined  themselves  around  rocks  and  whatever  else  it  could  get  hold  oft 
and  fed  on  the  hillside.  So  it  grew  and  grew  till  a  hundred  yea*D  had  passed  over 
it.  Then  behold  how  on  the  hillside  it  stands  firm,  and  defies  the  winter  storms 
and  tempests.  Then  behold  how  it  spreads  itself  abroad,  and  stands  an  oak  indeed, 
tit  to  be  the  foundation  of  a  prince's  palace,  or  the  keel  of  a  ship  that  bears  a 
nation's  thunder  round  the  globe  I  You  cannot  be  transformed  in  an  instant.  You 
cannot  be  changed  between  twilight  and  sunrise.  When,  therefore,  you  pray  that 
God  will  regenerate  your  nature,  will  you  not  give  Him  time  to  do  such  a  work  7 
When  you  pray  for  the  reconstruction  of  your  character,  will  you  not  wait  till  God 
can  perform  such  an  act  of  mercy  ?  If,  looking  at  the  interior.  He  sees  that  the  work 
can  be  expedited,  He  will  expedite  it ;  but  you  must  be  patient.  (H.  W,  Beecher.) 
Great  faith  found  amongst  the  Gentiles  who  toere  to  gain  the  most  by  it: — If  it  be 
through  the  special  virtue  and  dignity  of  the  grace  of  faith  that  the  new  dispensa- 
tion  is  enabled  to  make  itself  commensurate  with  the  world,  it  seems  peculiarly 
appropriate,  that  the  chief  examples  of  that  grace,  which  was  thus  to  equalize  the 
claims  of  all  the  races  of  mankind,  should  have  been  selected  from  among  those  who 
were  to  gain  the  advantage  in  this  equalization.  {W.  A.  Butler,  M.A.)  A  gradual 
transition  from  Jew  to  Gentile : — Nor,  perhaps,  is  it  altogether  unworthy  of  notice 
in  this  point  of  view,  that  when  the  Church  was  indeed  to  be  declared  a  Church  of 
Gentile  no  less  than  Jew,  the  first  believer — the  common  ancestor  of  the  world  of 
evangelized  heathen — was  a  man  holding  the  same  o£fice,  and,  it  would  appear, 
similarly  connected  in  habits  and  disposition  with  the  Jews :  for  as  it  is  said  of 
the  Centurion  of  the  Acts,  that  he  was  "  one  that  feared  God,  and  gave  much  alms 
to  the  people,  and  prayed  to  God  alway  *' — so  it  is  likewise  said  of  the  Centurion  of 
the  Go?pel,  that  **he  loved  their  nation,  and  had  built  them  a  synagogue."  And  I 
may  add  that  this  respectful  attachment  to  the  ancient  people  of  Jehovah  is  very 
discernible  in  the  language  of  our  immediate  subject,  the  believing  Ganaanite ;  for 
she  not  only  addressed  her  Eedeemer  in  her  supplication  as  **  the  Son  of  David  "  (a 
title  which  could  appear  honourable  only  to  one  who  sympathized  with  the  feelings 
and  prepossessions  of  a  Jew),  but  even  acceded  to  the  justness  of  our  Lord's  strong 
expressions  when  He  classed  her  nation  as  "  dogs  "  in  comparison  with  the  long 
adopted  *•  children "  of  God.  However  this  may  be,  the  choice  of  the  previous 
friends  and  reverers  of  Israel,  as  the  special  instances  of  Gentile  faith  in  Christ, 
may  be  considered  in  a  view  beyond  this ;  not  merely  as  a  striking  exemplification 
of  that  law  of  gradual  transition  which  seems  to  pervade  all  the  works  of  God, 
spiritual  no  less  than  physical — the  heathen  being  partially  Judaized  before  he  be- 
comes wholly  enlightened,  but  also  as  manifestly  rendering  these  instances  more 
appropriate  types  of  the  entire  work  of  Gentile  conversion — externally,  of  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  heathen  in  all  ages,  which  in  all  ages  must  include 
so  large  a  Jewish  element,  must  build  itself  upon  Jewish  history,  authenticate 
itself  by  Jewish  prophecy,  and  proclaim,  its  great  Subject  the  fulfilment  of  Jewish 
types ;  internally  of  the  parallel  story  of  the  gospel  life  in  the  soul,  which,  perhaps, 
finds  every  man  more  or  less  a  Jew  in  heart,  in  pride,  self-reliance,  spiritual  ignor- 
ance, and  formality — before  it  conducts  him  into  the  humility,  the  faith,  the  illu- 
mination, and  the  liberty  of  the  gospel.  {Ibid.)  A  prayer  that  involved  an 
argument : — "  I  am  not  sent  but  to  Israel,"  said  Jesus.  ♦'  She  came,"  not  with 
an  argument,  but  a  prayer  that  involved  an  argument,  "  and  worshipped  Him,  say- 
ing, Lord,  help  me  I  "  She  no  longer  calls  Him  Son  of  David,  for  her  object  waste 
rise  from  the  Son  of  David  to  the  Son  of  God,  from  the  Messiah  of  the  Jew  to  tlr\ 
Messiah  of  the  world — to  "  the  Lord  "  in  the  simple  majesty  of  the  name,  yea,  ta 
"the  mighty  God,  the  Father  of  the  everlasting  age,  the  Prince  of  peace.'  She, 
therefore,  designates  Him  by  the  vaster  and  ampler  title,  and  adds  to  her  designa- 
tion "  worship."  She  insinuated  that "  the  Lord  "  had  power  above  His  commission ; 
that  this  plenipotentiary  of  heaven  could  at  will  transcend  the  terms  of  His 
instructions;  and  by  that  omnipotence  which  ruled  the  world  it  had  created,  she 
invoked  Him,  "  Lord,  help  me ! "  But  even  this  is  ineffective.  Faith  must  see 
more  than  power ;  and  the  Canaanite  must  pay  a  price  for  being  the  model  of  the 
Church  to  come.  Like  Him  she  implored,  she  must  be  "  made  perfect  through  suf- 
ferings." For,  alas,  omnipotence  acts  by  mysterious  and  often  exclusive  laws; 
though  the  agent  be  almighty,  the  object  may  be  unfit  for  its  operation ;  the  same 
power  that  bade  Garmel  blossom  left  Sinai  a  desert.    **  It  is  not  meet  to  take  th« 


«BAP.  VII.]  8T,  MARK, 


289 


J    il!"®??,^®.?^:"'**^  *'*^V*,^^*'^^»     "^^*  ^«  children  (St.  Mark  adds)  first 
be  fiUed  1       But  now  for  a  bolder  flight  of  the  eagle-wing,  and  a  keener  glance  of 
the  eagle  eye  of  faith.    She  springs  from  the  supreme  control  to  the  benevolent 
equity  of  providence.    She  rises  above  the  clouds  of  the  Divine  power,  often 
to  us  who  can  only  see  them   from  below,    dark,  disturbed,  and  stormy,  into 
the  holy  serenity  beyond  them.    She  sees  the  calm  Sovereign  of  the  universe,  par. 
tial,  yet  impartial  too ;  preferring  some,  yet  forgetting  none.    She  knows  that  "His 
care  18  over  all  His  works,"  and-deepest  wonder  of  her  heaven-sent  enlightenment 
--she  can  see  that  He  loves  her,  and  yet  accord  His  unquestionable  right  to  love,  if 
He  please  it,  others  more ;  allows  she  can  ask  but  Uttle,  yet  beUevingly  dares  to 
pronounce  that  httle  certain  1    She  will  permit  (would  to  God  we  coiUd  always 
follow  her  in  our  speculations  I)  no  mystery  of  dispensation  to  contradict  the  truth 
of  the  Divme  character     "Truth,  Lord,"  is  her  retort,  for  the  calmness  of  her 
settled  convictions  left  her  power  to  point  her  reply:  "  Truth,  Lord  1  yet  the  dogs 
eat  of  the  crumbs  which  fall  from  their  master's  table. "    Everything  is  here      ^ 
Christianity  IS  concentrated  in  one  happy  sentence.     She  believes  in  her  own  'lowU- 
ness :  she  beheves  m  God's  absolute  supremacy ;  she  beheves  in  the  secret  propriety  of 
the  apparent  mequalities  of  His  providence;  she  beheves  that  those  inequamies  can 
never  affect  the  true  universahty  of  His  love.     God  is  all,  yet  she  is  something  too  for 
she  18  God  8  creature.   Men  from  deep  places  can  see  the  stars  at  noon-day:  and  from 
the  utter  depths  of  her  self-abasement  she  catches  the  whole  blessed  mystery  of 
heaven :  like  St.  Paul's  Christian,  "in  having  nothing,  she  possesses  all  things."  (Ibid  ) 
The  power  of  faith  shown  in  the  woman  of  Canaan  :-^We  may  learn  from  this 
narrative— L  That  misfortunes  and  calamities,  however  severe  and  painful  they  may 
appear,  are  the  best,  and  often  the  only  means  of  leading  us  to  a  sense  of  religious 
duty.    II.  That  no  want  of  present  success  should  ever  lead  us  to  despair     IH 
That  the  lowest  station,  and  even  the  vilest  in  heart,  are  still  within  the  reach  of 
the  sanctifymg  mercies  of  their  Redeemer.  This  woman  belonged  to  an  outcast  race 
(ii.  Farkm8on,B,D,)        The  woman  of  Canaan ;— 1.  Her  faith  had  a  good  founda-* 
tion.     She  called  Jesus  "the  Son  of  David.'»    2.  Her  faith  made  her  very  dUigent 
to  seek  out  Chnst,  when  she  heard  that  He  was  m  the  country.   (E.  Bleneowe,  M.A  \ 
The  Syrophemcian  woman ;— "  Jesus  went  thence. "    The  persons  and  places  that 
have  been  favoured  with  Christ's  presence  and  instructions  may  not  be  always  so- 
havmg  dehvered  His  message,  and  done  His  work,  He  will  remove.    The  day  is 

Smg  away,  and  night  will  succeed.    Happy  they  who,  while  they  have  the  light. 
low  how  to  use  it ;  and,  having  Jesus  with  them,  make  sure  of  an  interest  in  Him 
before  He  go  from  them.    1.  The  euppUant.    2.  The  title  she  speaks  to  our  Lord 
by-"  O  Lord.  Thou  Son  of  David."  3.  The  request.  L  Tra  tbiaJ  and  difficulties 
OTM  suPMJANT'a  FAITH  MET  WITH.     1.  Though  she  cries,  Christ  is  whoUy  silent. 
How  great  a  tnal  is  this,  to  speak  to  the  only  Saviour,  and  have  no  return  ;  to  cry 
to  a  mereiftU  Saviour,  and  meet  no  regard.    Prayers  may  be  heard,  yet  kept  in 
suspense.    A  bitter  aggravation  of  affliction  (Lam.  iii.  8;  Cant.  v.  6 ;  Psa.  xxu  2 
tox.  3,  btxvu.  7,  8,  9).    This  a  trial,  considering  the  encouraging  character  under 
which  God  18  made  known  to  His  people  (Psa.  Ixv.  2,  1.  16 ;  Isa.  Ixv    24)      2 
Chnst  seems  to  intimate  that  He  had  nothing  to  do  with  her.    He  was  able  to  savel 
but  salvation  was  not  for  her.    3.  When  her  request  was  renewed,  Christ  seems  to 
answer  it  with  reproach.    H.  Having  spoken  of  the  trial  of  this  woman's  faith,  I 

COMB   TO  CONSIDER   HOW  IT  WAS  DISCOVERED,  AND  WOEKED   THROUGH  ALL.      1    ThoUgh 

Chnst  was  silent  she  did  not  drop,  but  continued  her  suit.  The  eternal  Word  woiSd 
not  speak  to  her,  the  wisdom  of  the  Father  would  not  answer  her,  the  compassionate 
Jesus  would  take  no  notice  of  her,  the  heavenly  Physician  would  not  yet  help  her- 
but  all  thiB  does  not  discourage  or  sink  her.  How  does  the  earnestness  of  this 
Heathen  in  crying  after  Christ  reproach  the  ignorance  and  ingratitude  of  the  Jews 
who  generally  made  hght  of  Him ;  and  invite  all  that  hear  it,  to  admire  her  faith 
thus  discovered,  and  the  grace  of  God  in  general  wherever  it  works.  Faith  enabled 
her  to  read  an  argument  in  Christ's  silence,  and  by  it  she  continued  her  suit.  The 
same  words  that  bid  us  pray,  bid  us  wait  too  (Psa.  xxvii.  14).  2.  When  Christ 
speaks,  and  seems  to  exclude  her  out  of  His  commission  to  give  help  and  reUef 
she  passeth  over  the  doubt  she  could  not  answer,  and,  instead  of  disputing,  adorea 
Him,  and  prays  to  Him  still  Two  or  three  things  are  here  implied,  as  what  she 
kept  her  eye  upon,  and  by  which  she  was  quickened  and  helped  on  in  praying  to 
Chnst  wmdst  so  many  discouragements,  which  otherwise  would  have  been  enough 
to  smk  her.  (1)  Upon  her  deep  necessity.  It  was  a  deplorable  case  her  child  was  m. 
being  gnevouBly  vexed  with  a  devil,  from  subjection  to  which  she  eamesUy  dedred 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  vn. 

to  Bed  her  set  free.  (2)  Upon  Christ's  power,  and  His  oompassioii  joined  with  it, 
that  He  and  He  only  could,  and,  as  she  hoped,  would  relieve  her.  Her  faith  as  to 
this  is  manifested  by  her  coming  to  Him,  and  by  the  title  she  gives  Him,  of 
Lord — "  Lord,  help  me."  (3)  Upon  Him,  as  the  Messiah  promised  of  God,  the 
great  Deliverer,  and  so  worshipped  Him,  and  cast  herself  upon  £Um,  with  this  strong 
cry,  uttered  by  a  stronger  faith,  "  Lord,  help  me."  This  was  the  discovery  of  this 
supplicant's  faith  under  trials.  Now  followeth — ^HI.  The  happt  issue  or  this,  in 
her  faith's  triumph.  "  Then  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  her,  0  woman,  great  is 
thy  faith  ;  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt."  To  how  blessed  an  issue  is  the  struggle 
brought  1  Christ's  answer  before  was  not  so  discooraging  as  this  was  comfortable. 
What  consolation  is  it  fitted  to  convey,  as  it  is  the  testimony  of  one  that  knew  the 
heart,  and  given  after  a  manner  most  fit  to  revive  it  ?  1.  Her  faith  was  owned, 
commended,  and  admired  by  the  Author  of  it,  whose  words  are  always  spoken 
according  to  truth,  most  clearly  and  certainly.  2.  The  reward  of  her  faith  was  ample, 
as  large  as  her  desires  were,  to  have  it  to  be,  "  Be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt." 
And  how  fast  and  far  will  a  sinner's  thoughts  and  desires  fiy  after  good  things  ?  What 
a  compass  will  they  take  ?  Looking  downward  he  will  say,  I  desire  to  be  delivered 
from  the  bottomless  pit,  that  my  soul  may  not  be  gathered  with  sinners,  nor  my 
portion  be  with  them  in  their  place  of  torment ;  and  Christ  will  say,  "  Be  it  unto 
thee  even  as  thou  wilt."  Looking  inward,  his  language  will  be,  O  tiiat  I  may  be 
delivered  from  this  body  of  death.  Looking  upward  to  the  mansions  of  glory,  the 
believer  cries,  0  that  heaven  may  be  mine.  (I).  Wilcox.)  Power  and  efficacy  oj 
prayer ;— I.  Pbateb  in  its  opportunities.  Some  are  more  highly  favoured  with 
opportunities  of  prayer  than  others.  Many  are  early  instructed  in  its  nature,  &c., 
others  are  destitute  of  such  instruction :  such  was  the  case  probably  with  the 
Cauaanitish  woman  who  so  urgently  presented  her  suit  to  our  Lord.  1.  Seasons  oi 
aiiliction  furnish  opportunities  for  prayer.  2.  The  special  presence  of  Christ,  either 
at  times  of  public  worship,  or  in  the  influence  of  His  Spirit  in  private,  furnish 
opportunity  for  prayer.  It  was  the  presence  of  the  Saviour  in  the  immediate 
ntdghbourhood  of  the  Cauaanitish  woman  that  induced  her  to  come  to  Him.  H. 
Prayer  in  its  objects.  1.  It  ought  to  be  personal.  ••  Lord,  help  me,"  is  the 
language  of  true  prayer.  2.  It  ought  to  be  intercessory.  HI.  Pbateb  in  its 
discouragements.  IV.  Pbayeb  in  its  success.  Prayer  to  be  successful — 1.  Must 
be  persevering.  2.  Must  be  offered  in  faith.  *'  O  woman,  great  is  thy  faith."  {Anon.) 
This  woman's  nationality  is  emphasized  by  the  Evangelists  with  a  variety  of  expres- 
sions. She  is  characterized  vaguely  as  **  a  Greek,"  not  in  the  limited  sense  with 
which  we  are  most  familiar,  but  as  a  genuine  term  for  non- Jewish  people,  very  much 
as  the  Turks  uxid  Asiatics  adopt  the  designation  of  ♦'  Frank  "  for  any  European.  Her 
personal  name  has  come  down  through  tradition  as  Justa,  and  that  of  her  daughter 
as  Bernice.  She  is  called  by  St.  Matthew  *•  a  woman  of  Canaan  " — an  inhabitant 
of  the  region  into  which  those  who  escaped  extermination  had  been  shut  up ;  and 
the  title  may  have  been  selected  to  enhance  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord,  not 
without  reference  to  her  inheritance  of  the  ancient  malediction,  "Cursed  be 
Canaan."  She  is  also  called  here  a  Syrophenician  by  descent,  probably  to  dis- 
tinguish her  from  those  Libyo-Phenicians  in  the  northern  coasts  of  Africa,  whom  the 
fame  of  Carthage  had  made  so  widely  known.  She  was,  no  doubt,  in  religion  a 
heathen,  but  was  possessed  by  principles  which,  when  called  into  active  exercise  by 
the  Great  Teacher,  served  her  in  better  stead  than  the  orthodox  creed  did  not  a  few 
of  its  professors.       {H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  She  was  a  heathen  in  religion,  an 

ahen  in  race,  a  dweller  in  a  city  hardly  surpassable  for  antiquity,  enterprise, 
wealth,  or  wickedness.  She  had  been  doubtless  a  worshipper  of  the  Syrian  goddess 
whose  worship  covered  the  Levant ;  the  deity  who  personified  the  fulness  of  Divine 
life  which  fills  the  world ;  who  was  loved  by  the  purest  because  they  deemed  her 
the  giver  of  their  children ;  and  yet  worshipped  with  loathsome  devotion  by  the 
vilest  because  she  was  supposed  to  sanction  all  action  of  human  lust.  A  Hindoo 
mother,  worshipping  Doorga,  in  her  brighter  aspect,  reproduces  exactly  the  sort  of 
feeling  and  devotion  in  which  this  woman  had  been  reared.  She  was  thus  ill-placed, 
for  the  favourite  deity  corrupted  the  morals  of  the  people  exactly  in  the  degree  they 
worshipped  her.  Yet  her  faith  receives  a  tribute  of  highest  praise  from  her  Saviour, 
and  she  is,  I  suppose,  the  first  heathen  converted  to  the  faith  and  the  salvation  of 
the  Son  of  God.  {R,  Glover.)  The  action  of  faith: — Faith  is  a  great  mystery. 
To  doubt,  nothing  is  needed  but  weakness ;  to  believe,  requires  great  energy  or  groat 
necessity.  Observe  the  creed  which  has  grown  in  this  woman  and  now  shows  itself. 
1.  She  believes  in  miracles.    The  lukewarm,  who  are  rich  and  increased  in  goods, 


«HAP.  vn.J  ST.  MARK.  231 

are  anbelieving ;  for,  needing  nothing,  they  cannot  believe  in  what  they  see  no 
need  for.  But  the  needy,  whose  case  is  desperate,  have  other  thoughts.  All  the 
afflicted  tend  to  settle  in  this  creed,  that  there  must  be  somewhere  a  cure  for  every 
trouble.  So  the  miracle  of  healing  a  demoniac  child  seems  quite  possible  to  her. 
2.  She  believes,  in  some  measure,  in  the  Divinity  of  Jesus — viz.,  that  he  can  do 
what  mere  man  cannot  do  ;  that  He  is  omnipotent  to  save.  3.  Sho  believes  in  the 
love  of  Christ.  Her  mother-love  has  given  her  a  new  idea  of  God's  love.  If  she 
were  God,  she  thinks,  she  would  succour  the  wretched  and  bind  up  the  broken  heart. 
And  she  feels  that  Christ's  heart  must  be  full  of  love — even  to  a  helpless  heathen. 
(Ibid.)  The  Syrophenician  woman : — This  story  places  before  us  a  pattern  of 
meekness  and  perseverance  rarely  equalled.  1.  How  many,  even  with  privileges  of 
teaching  and  education  to  which  she  was  a  stranger,  would  have  taken  offence  at 
the  apparent  insult  of  such  a  reception  as  she  met  with.  But  with  all  the  forbear- 
ance of  the  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  disarms  opposition,  she  discerned  a  smile 
beneath  His  frown,  and  won  her  petition.  2.  How  many,  if  not  offended  and  full 
of  resentment,  would  have  turned  away  discouraged.  To  have  hoped,  as  she  had 
done,  against  hope,  and  then  to  have  heard  that  there  was  One  who  could  give  her 
relief,  and  to  have  flung  herself  at  His  feet  in  the  agony  of  supplication,  and  to  be 
flo  received  I  Could  we  have  been  surprised  if  despair  had  taken  possession  of  her, 
and  she  had  hurried  from  His  presence  ?  3.  But  faith  triumphed  over  all  disap- 
pointment, and  her  desire  was  granted.  Whether  it  was  given  to  her  to  understand 
it  we  cannot  tell ;  but  the  seeming  harshness  of  her  Saviour's  conduct  was  bat  a 
new  revelation  of  his  unfailing  love.  The  same  love  which,  when  faith  was  weak, 
prompted  Him  to  go  forth  to  meet  it,  led  Him  to  hold  Himself  back  when  faith 
was  strong,  that  it  might  be  yet  further  purified  and  made  perfect  through  trial 
{H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  The  dogs : — She  had  often  heard  her  people  characterized 
as  "  dogs."  It  was  a  title  by  which  the  Jews,  whose  first  care  it  was  to  hate,  to 
mock,  and  to  curse  all  besides  themselves,  disgraced  the  Gentiles.  The  noble 
nature  of  the  dog  finds  no  recognition  in  the  history  of  the  Old  or  New  Testaments. 
Among  Jews  dogs  were  regarded  as  wild,  savage,  undomesticated  animals,  which 
prowled  about  cities  as  the  scavengers  of  the  streets,  with  no  masters  and  no  homes. 
But  Jesus,  by  the  use  of  a  diminutive  not  to  be  expressed  in  English,  softened  not 
a  little  the  harshness  of  the  comparison,  implying  that  the  dogs  to  which  He 
likened  this  woman  were  not  excluded  from  the  house.  And  the  woman  with  the 
instincts  of  a  Gentile,  with  whom  the  dog  was  not  only  a  favourite  but  an  almost 
necessary  companion,  having  its  place  at  the  domestic  hearth,  turned  it  at  once 
into  an  argument  in  her  favour,  and  replied,  "  Yes,  Lord,  I  accept  the  position ; 
for  the  dogs  under  the  table  eat  of  the  children's  crumbs."  What  she  meant  to 
convey  must  have  been  something  like  this :  '*  I  do  not  deny  that  the  Jews  are  the 
first  object  of  your  care  and  ministration.  They  are  the  true  children,  and  I  am 
far  from  asking  that  they  should  ever  be  superseded  in  their  rightful  prerogative ; 
but  the  very  fact  that  you  should  speak  of  their  being  first  fed  seems  to  imply  that 
our  turn  will  come  after  them,  and  your  mitigation  of  the  harsh  unfeeling  by-word 
which  the  Jews  adopt,  encourages  me  to  persevere  in  my  petition.  Let  the  full 
board,  then — the  plentiful  bread  of  grace — ^be  reserved  for  the  Jewish  children ;  but 
only  let  me  be  as  the  dog  under  the  table,  to  partake  of  the  crumbs  of  mercy  and 
comfort  that  fall  from  it."  (Ibid.)  Faith  improved  by  trial : — Compare  with  the 
testing  of  the  Syrophenician  woman's  faith,  God's  trial  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii. 
1-19),  and  note  the  rich  reward  which  triumphant  faith  won  in  both  instances. 
Pure  gold  loses  nothing  in  the  testing  for  alloys ;  the  diamond  shines  all  the  more 
clearly  for  being  rid  of  the  rough  surface  which  hid  its  hght.  Dogs  : — Duff,  the 
African  missionary,  was  about  to  begin  a  gospel  service  in  a  Boer  farmer's  house, 
when  he  noticed  that  none  of  the  Kaffir  servants  were  present.  To  his  request  that 
they  might  be  brought  in,  the  Boer  replied  roughly:  ''What  have  Kaffirs  to  do 
with  the  gospel  ?  Kaffirs,  sir,  are  dogs."  Duff  made  no  reply,  but  opened  his 
Bible,  and  read  his  text :  "  Yes,  Lord ;  yet  the  dogs  under  the  table  eat  of  the 
children's  crumbs."  **  Stop,"  cried  the  farmer,  **  you've  broken  my  head.  Let 
the  Kaffirs  come  in.** 

Vers.  81-87.  And  they  Xxring  unto  ^^^  one  that  was  deaf;  and  had  an  Impediment 
tnblB  speech.— T^  pattern  of  service:— The  "  missionary  spirit "  is  but  one  aspect 
of  the  Christian  life.  We  shall  only  strengthen  the  former  as  we  invigorate  the 
latter.  Harm  has  been  done,  both  to  ourselves  and  to  this  great  canse,  by  seeking 
to  stimolate  compassion  and  efforts  for  heathen  lands  by  tne  use  of  other  excite- 


298  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [coat,  m» 

mcnts,  which  have  tended  to  vitiate  even  the  emotions  they  have  aronsed,  and  are 
apt  to  fail  U8  when  we  need  them  most.  It  may  therefore  be  profitable  if  we  turn  to 
Christ's  own  manner  of  working,  and  His  own  emotions  in  His  merciful  deeds,  aa 
here  set  forth  for  our  example.     We  have  here  set  forth — I.    The  foundation  and 

CONDITION  op  all  TKDB  WORK  FOB  GoD,  IN  THE  LoRD'S  HKAVENWABD  LOOK.      That  wist- 

lul  gaze  to  heaven  means,  and  may  be  taken  to  symbolize,  our  Lord's  conscious 
direction  of  thought  and  spirit  to  God  as  He  wrought  His  work  of  mercy.  Such  in- 
tercourse  is  necessary  for  us  too.  It  is  the  condition  of  all  our  power,  and  the 
measure  of  all  our  success.  Without  it  we  may  seem  to  realize  the  externals  of 
prosperity,  but  it  will  be  an  illusion.  With  it  we  may  perchance  seem  to  spend  our 
strength  for  naught ;  but  heaven  has  its  surprises  ;  and  those  who  toiled,  nor  left 
their  hold  of  their  Lord  in  all  their  work,  wiU  have  to  say  at  last  with  wonder,  as 
they  see  the  results  of  their  poor  efforts,  "  Who  hath  begotten  me  these  ?  behold,  I 
was  left  alone  ;  these,  where  had  they  been  ?  "  The  heavenward  look  is — 1.  The 
renewal  of  our  own  vision  of  the  calm  verities  in  which  we  trust.  2.  It  will  guwrd 
us  from  the  temptations  which  surround  all  our  service,  and  the  distractions  which 
lay  waste  our  lives.  II.  Pity  for  thb  evils  we  would  remove,  by  the  Lord's  sigh. 
It  is  a  sharp  shock  to  turn  from  the  free  sweep  of  the  heavens ;  starry  and  radiant, 
to  the  sights  that  meet  us  on  earth.  Thus  habitual  communion  with  God  is  the 
root  of  the  truest  and  purest  compassion.  He  has  looked  into  the  heavens  to  little 
purpose  who  has  not  learned  how  bad  and  how  sad  the  world  now  is,  and  how  God 
bends  over  it  in  pitying  love.  And  pity  is  meant  to  impel  to  help.  Let  us  not  be 
content  with  painting  sad  and  true  pictures  of  men's  woes,  but  remember  that  every 
time  our  compassion  is  stirred  and  no  action  ensues,  our  hearts  are  in  some  measure 
indurated,  and  the  sincerity  of  our  religion  in  some  measure  impaired.  III.  Lovino 
contact  with  those  whom  we  would  help,  in  the  Lord's  touch.  The  would>be 
helper  must  come  down  to  the  level  of  those  whom  he  desires  to  aid.  We  must 
seek  to  make  ourselves  one  with  those  whom  we  would  gather  into  Christ,  by  actual 
familiarity  with  their  condition,  and  by  identification  of  ourselves  in  feeling  with 
them.  Such  contact  with  men  will  win  their  hearts,  as  well  as  soften  ours.  It  will 
lift  us  out  of  the  enchanted  circle  which  selfishness  draws  around  us.  It  will 
silently  proclaim  the  Lord  from  Whom  we  have  learnt  it.  The  clasp  of  the  hand 
will  be  precious,  even  apart  from  the  virtue  that  may  flow  from  it,  and  may  be  to 
many  a  soul  burdened  with  a  consciousness  of  corruption  the  dawning  of  belief  in  » 
love  that  does  not  shrink  even  from  its  foulness.  IV.  The  true  healino  power  and 
the  consciousness  of  wieldino  it,  in  the  Lord's  authoritative  Word,  That  word 
is  almighty,  whether  spoken  by  Him,  or  of  Him  (John  xiv.  12).  We  have  everything 
to  assure  us  that  we  cannot  fail.  The  work  is  done  before  we  begin  it.  The  word 
entrusted  to  us  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  we  know  that  it  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever. 
Nothing  can  prevail  against  it.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Ephphatha  :—l.  Tsachino 
FOR  THOSE  WHO  WOULD  FOLLOW  THE  LoBD  IN  DoiNO  GOOD.  1.  Be  Considerate.  Deal 
with  each  case  according  to  its  need.  2.  Look  up  to  heaven.  It  is  the  privilege  ol 
serving  God  to  create  correspondence  with  God.  He  who  does  good,  enters  into  alli- 
ance with  heaven.  3.  Sigh.  *♦  Shall  the  heirs  of  suaful  blood,  seek  joy  unmixed  in 
charity  ?  "  Doing  good  is  lessening  evils ;  contact  with  evils  makes  us  serious — sad. 
Therefore  many  avoid  it  aU  they  can — avert  eyes  from  realities  around  them,  attend 
only  to  what  will  please  and  amuse.  Selfish  creatures,  children  of  world,  who  haVe 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  Those  who  have  will,  in  this,  share  His  experience. 
Sadness  in  sympathy :  pain  in  disappointment.  II.  Admonition  to  all  to  whom 
THE  Word  of  God  comes.  Their  case  was  before  Christ's  mind.  The  deepest  cause 
of  His  sigh  and  sorrow  was  that  they  were  spiritually  deaf,  and  therefore  spiritually 
dead.  "  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."  (T.  D.  Bernard.)  Deaf  mutes  .-—I. 
Many  cannot  speak  because  they  are  deaf,  so  some  souls  are  silent  because  they  are 
dull  of  hearing.  IL  Christ  sighs  over  faculties  misused  or  destroyed.  HI.  We  need 
this  miracle  in  our  souls — the  opening  of  the  ear,  and  the  loosening  of  the  tongue. 
IV.  When  one  was  healed  many  sought  healing  (Matt.  xv.  80),  and  found  it,  till  the 
half-heathen  people  summed  up  their  experience  in  a  word  which  describes  all 
Christ's  action  in  miracles,  providence,  and  grace — *'  He  hath  done  all  things  well.** 
(R.  OUwer.)  He  took  him  aside  : — Thus  it  is  that  God's  greatest  works  are  per* 
formed.  Crowds  may  admire  the  full-blown  rose,  but  in  silence  and  secrecy  ita 
leaflets  have  been  folded  in  the  bud.  The  broad  river  bears  navies  on  its  bosom,  but 
amid  the  mosses  and  ferns  of  the  lonely  mountain  it  takes  its  rise.  In  this  instance, 
when  the  man  and  his  Saviour  were  alone  together,  there  was  asmncb  care  bestowed 
on  him  as  if  there  were  none  else  in  the  world.    I.  The  obbatness  of  Ood's  urn- 


L]  8T,  MARK.  393 

How  difflonlt  to  oonoeive  that  one  indiyidnal  can  be  of  importance  to  its 
Bnler.  Hore  we  see  each  soal  standing  in  His  sight  aside  from  all  the  rest ;  (1) 
Aside  for  responsibility ;  (2)  Aside  for  affection.  11.  Ik  ths  wobk  of  spibitual 
HXAUKO,  Ghbist  dsals  IN  THE  8AMB  WAY  STiLii.  1.  lu  childhood,  by  a  mother's 
▼oioe.  2.  In  after  years,  by  books,  sermons,  friends,  trials.  The  conscience  is 
touched ;  we  stand  face  to  face  with  God.  III.  The  healed  nc  body  uioht  oo  back 
TO  THB  MULTITUDE.  The  healed  in  soul  must  stay  aside.  In  the  world,  but  not  of 
it.  His  objects  of  life,  tastes,  aspirations,  are  different  from  those  of  the  multitude. 
He  must  be  much  alone  with  Cluist  in  prayer,  communion,  and  study.  Alone,  but 
not  lonely.  IV,  The  final  taking  aside.  Death.  Aside  from  the  earthly  multitude, 
its  toil,  bustle,  and  sorrow :  united  with  the  great  multitude  whom  no  man  can 
number.  (F.  R.  Wynne,  M.A.)  Healing  the  deaf  and  dumb  man  .-—Jesus  speaks 
to  him  in  signs.  (1)  Takes  him  aside  from  the  multitude — alone  with  Jesus ;  (2)  puts 
His  fingers  into  his  ears — these  are  to  be  opened ;  (3)  touches  his  tongue  with  His 
saliva—Christ's  tongue  is  to  heal  his ;  (4)  looks  up  to  heaven  and  sighs— God's  help 
in  man's  sorrow ;  (6)  speaks  the  word  "  Ephphatha  " — and  the  man  speaks  plain. 
(T.  M.  Lindsay^  D.D,)  He  took  him  aside : — Teaching  us  by  this  act — 1.  To 
avoid  vainglory  in  all  our  works  of  mercy  to  others.  2.  That  the  penitent  must 
separate  himself  from  the  crowd  of  worldly  cares,  tumultuous  thoughts,  and  inordi- 
nate affections,  if  he  would  find  rest  for  his  soul  in  God.  3.  That  he  must  tear 
himself  from  the  company  of  evil  and  frivolous  companions,  and  from  the  bustle  of 
incessant  occupation.  4.  That  Christ  alone  can  heal  the  soul.  He  took  from  the 
deaf  and  dumb  man  any  trust  that  he  might  have  had  in  those  who  stood  by.  5. 
He  leaves  also  this  lesson  to  His  ministers,  that  if  they  would  heal  the  sinner  by 
their  reproof ,  they  should  do  this  when  he  is  alone.  (W.  Denton^  M.A.)  The 
mccessive  steps  in  the  conversion  of  tlie  sinner : — I.  The  departure  from  the  multitude, 
i.e.,  from  evil  companions,  sinful  desires,  corrupt  practices.  2.  The  favour  which 
comes  from  Christ,  who  gives  us  both  the  sight  of  our  sins,  and  the  knowledge  of 
God's  will ;  and  then  strengthens  us  to  obey  His  commands.  3.  The  confession  of 
our  sins  which  is  given  us  when  Christ  touches  our  tongue  with  the  wisdom  which 
is  from  above,  and  gives  us  grace  to  acknowledge  God  by  word  and  deed.  {Jhid.) 
Meaning  of  Christ's  action : — The  whole  action  would  seem  to  have  been  symbolical, 
and  accurately  suited  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  Translate  the  action  into 
words,  and  what  have  we  but  sayings  such  as  these  ?  "  I  have  taken  thee  aside  from 
the  multitude,  that  thou  mightest  observe  and  remember  Who  it  is  to  Whom  thou 
hast  been  brought.  Thine  organs  are  imperfect :  here  are  members  of  thy  body, 
which  are  useless  to  the  ends  for  which  they  were  given,  and  I  am  about  to  aot  on 
them  with  a  power  which  shall  supply  all  defects.  Yet  I  would  have  thee 
know  that  this  power  is  but  a  credential  of  My  having  come  forth  from  God,  and 
should  produce  in  thee  belief  of  My  prophetical  character.  Behold,  therefore :  I 
lift  My  eyes  unto  heaven,  whilst  I  utter  the  word  which  shall  give  thee  hearing  and 
speech.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  abuses  and  uses  of  speech : — I.  Why  did  Christ 
SIGH  ?  For  us  Christians,  as  well  as  for  that  poor  Jew ;  because,  when  He  looked 
up  to  heaven,  He  looked  up  to  His  home  as  God,  and  as  God  He  had  before  His 
omniscience  all  the  sins  which,  through  ear  and  tongue,  had  brought,  were  bring- 
ing, and  would  bring,  misery  to  man.  II.  Is  there  not  still  a  cause  why 
Chbistians  should  sigh  with  Chbist  ?  1.  For  blasphemous  words.  2.  Unbeliev- 
ing, sneering  words,  and  flippant,  irreverent  words.  3.  False  words ;  the  hes  of 
society,  of  vanity,  of  business,  of  expediency,  of  ignorance.  4.  Obscene,  lascivious, 
wanton  words.  5.  Bitter,  slanderous,  and  railing  words.  Of  what  does  our  con- 
versation too  often  consist?  First,  there  are  self-evident  platitudes  about  the 
weather  (very  often  murmurings  of  discontent  with  that  which  comes  so  plainly 
ftnd  directly  from  God) ;  then,  the  old  Athenian  craving  either  to  tell  or  to  hear 
some  new  thing,  and  that  new  thing,  how  commonly  I  an  evil  report  about  our 
neighbour.  **  Thou  satest  at  thine  ease,"  deliberately,  in  your  home,  at  the  table 
of  your  friend,  in  the  railway  carriage,  in  the  news-room, in  the  office,  "thou  satest 
and  spakest  against  thy  brother."  Instead  of  •♦  every  man  shall  give  an  account 
of  himself,"  it  might  have  been  written,  "  every  man  shall  give  account  of  his 
neighbour  unto  God,"  so  eager  are  we  to  detect  and  remember  his  infirmities,  to  ignore 
and  forget  our  own.  It  never  seems  to  strike  as  that,  while  we  are  so  busy  in 
spying  and  pointing  out  to  others  the  thistles  in  our  neighbours*  fields,  the  tares 
are  choking  our  own  wheat.  Our  neighbours'  idleness,  lust,  drunkenness,  pro- 
fanity, debt, — these  are  our  theme ;  and  we  forget  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a 
judgment  to  eome  for  our  own  misdeeds.     IIL  The  cube  or  the  disease.    L  Not 


9M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  tii. 

mere  seeolar  "  edooation  ** :  that  is  only  the  pioneer,  who  saps  and  mines,  not  th« 
artillery  which  destroys  the  citadel.  If  the  fountain  is  poisonons,  the  filter  may 
remove  the  dirt  whioh  disoolonrs,  bat  it  will  not  make  the  water  wholesome.  No 
mental,  no  moral  education,  can  directly  act  upon  the  soul.  You  may  teach  men 
to  speak  more  correctly  and  politely,  to  think  more  cleverly,  and  to  reason  more 
closely  ;  but  this  will  not  pur^Ey  the  heart.  Lust  and  dishonesty  are  all  the  more 
dangerous,  when  they  quote  poetry,  and  converse  agreeably.  2.  Education  is  but 
a  means  to  an  end.  It  is  the  ambulance  on  which  we  may  convey  the  wounded 
man  to  the  surgeon — the  couch  on  which  we  bring  the  sick  man  to  Jesus. 
Eegarded  thus,  education  is  a  most  useful  handmaid  to  religion.  Christ  is  the  sole 
physician  ;  to  Him,  and  to  none  else,  the  sin-sick  soul  must  come.    IV.  Faith  in 

HlH,  STBENOTHKl^ED   BY   THE   HoLT  8pIBIT,  LEADS   UB  TO   C0N8BGBATB   OTTB  POWEB  OF 

SPEECH  TO  His  globy  and  the  good  of  His  cbeatubes.  Y.  The  final  issue. 
The  use  we  make  of  the  tongue  will  decide  our  future  (Matt.  xii.  37).  It  is  said 
that  one  who  had  not  long  been  converted  to  Christianity,  once  came  to  an  aged 
teacher  of  the  faith,  and  asked  instruction.  The  old  man  opened  his  Psalter,  and 
began  to  read  the  Psalm  which  first  met  his  eye,  the  thirty -ninth ;  but  when  he 
had  finished  the  first  verse,  "  I  said,  I  will  take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  offend  not 
in  my  tongue,"  his  hearer  stopped  him,  saying,  **  That  is  enough ;  let  me  go  home 
and  try  to  learn  that  lesson."  Some  time  after,  finding  that  he  came  no  more,  the 
elder  sent  to  enquire  the  reason,  and  the  answer  was,  **  I  have  not  yet  learned  the 
lesson  "  ;  and  even  when  many  years  had  passed,  and  the  pupil  became  a  teacher 
as  fuU  of  grace  as  .\ears,  he  confessed  that,  though  he  had  been  studying  it  all  his 
life,  he  had  not  mastered  it  yet.  (Canon  S.  B.  Hole.)  Christ's  sigh : — What  did 
that  sigh  mean?  1.  Sympathy  for  the  afflicted.  The  incarnation  brings  the 
heart  of  Jesus  close  to  our  own,  and  we  know  that  He  feels  for  our  sorrows. 
2.  Grief  at  the  effects  of  sin.  Man,  made  in  God's  image,  had  become  through 
sin  the  poor  dumb  creature  on  which  Christ  looked.  The  thought  of  Eden 
with  its  sinless  inhabitants,  and  the  sad  contrast  presented  by  the  sight  before 
Him,  made  Jesus  sigh.  3.  Apprehension  for  the  future.  What  use  would  the  man 
make  of  his  restored  faculties  ?  Hitherto  he  had  been  unable  to  let  any  corrupt 
communication  proceed  out  of  his  mouth,  and  his  ears  had  been  sealed  to  the 
cruel,  false,  impure  words  of  the  world.  What  evil  he  might  now  do  with  his 
tongue ;  what  poisonous  words  might  now  enter  into  his  ears.  (H.  J.  Wilniot 
Buxton,  M.A.)  Sighs : — It  is  by  prayer,  and  the  secret  sighs  of  the  heart,  that 
Christ  applies  His  merits,  and  that  the  Church  does  it  after  His  example.  If  the 
conversion  of  a  sinner  cost  Jesus  Christ  so  many  desires,  prayers,  and  sighs ;  is 
it  unreasonable  that  it  should  likewise  cost  the  sinner  himself  some  t  Is  it  not 
necessary  that  His  servants,  called  and  separated  to  this  work,  should  be  men  of 
desires,  prayers,  and  sighs  ?  That  which  Christ  does  here  is  the  pattern  which  a 
minister  of  the  Church  ought  to  follow,  who,  in  the  exercise  of  his  ministry,  ought 
to  lift  up  his  heart  toward  heaven,  to  groan  and  sigh  in  behalf  of  those  under  his 
hand,  and  to  expect  everything  from  Him  who  is  the  sovereign  Master  of  all  hearts. 
(QuesneL)  The  sigh  of  disappointed  desire  : — We  may  readily  understand  how, 
on  the  instant  of  working  a  miracle,  a  glance  towards  heaven  might  cause  Christ 
to  sigh.  Wherefore  had  He  descended  from  that  bright  abode  if  not  to  achieve 
its  being  opened  to  the  lost  race  of  man  f  And  wherefore  did  He  work  miracles, 
if  not  to  fix  attention  on  Himself  as  the  promised  seed  of  the  woman  who,  through 
obedience  and  death,  was  to  reinstate  our  lineage  in  the  paradise  from  which  they 
had  Jbeen  exiled  for  sin  ?  There  was  a  sufficiency  in  the  satisfaction  which  He 
was  about  to  make,  to  remove  the  curse  from  every  human  being,  and  to  place 
all  the  children  of  Adam  in  a  more  glorious  position  than  their  common  parent 
had  forfeited.  But  He  knew  too  well  that,  in  regard  of  multitudes,  His  endurances 
would  be  fruitless ;  fruitless,  at  least,  in  the  sense  of  obtaining  their  salvation, 
though  they  cannot  be  in  that  of  vindicating  the  attributes  of  God,  and  leaving 
the  impenitent  self-condemned  at  the  judgment.  Therefore,  it  may  be,  did  Christ 
sigh  ;  and  that,  too,  immediately  after  looking  up  to  heaven.  I  can  read  the  sigh; 
it  is  full  of  most  pathetic  speech.  "Yonder,"  the  Redeemer  seems  to  say,  "i* 
the  home  of  My  Father,  of  the  cherubim  and  seraphim,  I  would  fain  conduct  t»> 
that  home  the  race  which  I  have  made  one  with  Myself,  by  so  assuming  their  nature 
as  to  join  it  with  the  Divine.  I  am  about  to  work  another  miracle — ^to  make,  that 
is,  another  effort  to  induce  the  rebelUous  to  take  Me  as  their  leader  to  yon  glorious 
domain.  But  it  will  be  fruitless ;  I  foresee,  but  too  certainly,  that  I  shall  still  b# 
despised  and  rejected  of  men."    Then  who  can  wonder  that  a  sigh  was  interposed 


€HAP.  vn.]  ST.  MARK. 


between  the  looking  up  to  heaven  and  the  uttering  the  healing  word?  The  eye  of 
the  Redeemer  saw  further  than  our  own.  It  pierced  the  vault  which  bounds  our 
vision,  and  beheld  the  radiant  thrones  which  His  agony  would  purchase  for  the 
children  of  men.  And  that  men — men  whom  He  loved  with  a  love  of  which  that 
agony  alone  gives  the  measure— should  refuse  these  thrones,  and  thereby  not  only 
put  from  them  happiness,  but  incur  wretchedness  without  limit  or  end — must  not 
this  have  been  always  a  crushing  thing  to  the  Saviour  ?  and  more  especially 
when,  by  glancing  at  the  glories  which  might  have  been  theirs.  He  had  heightened 
His  thought  of  their  madness  and  misery  ?  I  am  sure  that  were  we  striving  to 
prevail  on  some  wretched  being  to  enter  an  asylum  where  he  would  not  only  be 
sheltered  from  imminent  danger,  but  surrounded  with  all  the  material  of  happiness, 
a  look  at  that  asylum,  with  its  securities  and  comforts,  would  cause  us  to  feel  sorer 
than  ever  at  heart,  as  we  turned  to  make  one  more  endeavour,  likely  to  be  useless 
as  every  preceding  one,  to  overcome  the  obduracy  which  must  end  in  destruction. 
Therefore  ought  we  readily  to  understand  why  the  Redeemer,  bent  only  on  raising 
to  glory  a  race,  of  which  He  foresaw  that  myriads  would  voluntarily  sink  down 
to  diame,  gave  token  of  a  distressed  and  disquieted  spirit,  between  looking  towards 
heaven  and  working  a  miracle — as  though  the  look  had  almost  made  Him  reluctant 
for  the  work.      (H.  Melvill^  B.D.)  Christ  the  opener  of  locked  doors: — The 

Ephphatha  of  Gnrist  was  not  spoken  in  Decapolis  alone.  It  is  heard  also  in 
history.  He  sighed  **  Ephphatha,"  and  the  conflict  of  His  Church  was  revealed  to 
His  evangelist.  He  sighed  "  Ephphatha,"  and  the  tongue  of  GalUeo  and  Kepler 
told  of  the  wondrous  order  of  the  heavens.  He  sighed  "Ephphatha,"  and  buried 
monuments  gave  up  their  records  of  the  past,  and  threw  side-lights  on  higher 
truths.  He  spoke  "  Ephphatha,"  and  Caxton  gave  new  powers  to  the  world. 
Knowledge  stepped  forth  from  her  dust-covered  shrine,  and  carried  her  rich 
bounties  into  every  city  and  house.  History  unlocked  her  long-hidden  lore. 
Science  painted  in  noble  colours  the  half- veiled  face  of  Nature.  The  tongue  of 
Europe  was  loosed.  But  well  might  a  sigh  have  been  heaved  as  the  Ephphatha 
was  spoken.  It  is  not  truth  alone,  or  holiness  alone,  which  has  been  unlocked. 
It  is  not  Chaucer's  "  well  of  English  undefiled,"  the  pure  song  of  Spenser,  the 
heart-rousing  vision  of  Dante,  the  chivalrous  epic  of  Tasso,  the  stately  and  mag- 
nanimous verse  of  Milton  alone  which  have  been  given  to  the  world.  A  fouler 
current  mingles  with  the  bright,  pure  stream,  and  darkens  the  flood  of  knowledge — 
the  unredeemed  filth  of  Boccaccio,  the  unbridled  licentiousness  of  Scarron,  the 
stupid  sensuality  of  Dancourt,  the  open  indecency  of  Wycherley,  the  more  fatal 
BU^gestiveness  of  Sterne.  The  press  became  indeed  the  voice  of  nations ;  but  when 
it  was  loosed  a  sigh  drawn  from  the  pure  heart  of  Christ,  wounded  by  the  misuse 
of  a  glorious  opportunity,  might  have  been  heard  by  the  Church  of  God.  Yet 
Christ  did  not  withhold  the  boon.  Freely,  ungrudgingly,  were  His  miracles  of  love 
performed.  To  deny  powers  or  privileges,  or  the  free  exercise  of  rights  and 
faculties,  on  the  ground  that  they  may  be  abused,  is  to  act  according  to  the  dictates 
of  expediency,  not  of  right.  But  there  is  a  remedy  for  the  evils  which  accompany 
this  freedom.  It  is  by  conferring  an  additional  and  guiding  gift.  There  is  another 
"Ephphatha."  He  speaks,  "Be  opened,"  and  the  tongue  is  loosed  ;  but  the  ear 
is  unstopped  also.  While  He  bestows  the  faculty  of  speech,  He  bestows  also  the 
opportunity  of  hearing  those  glad  and  soul-elevating  principles  of  righteousness, 
and  forgiveness,  and  love,  which  will  fill  the  loosened  tongue  with  joy,  and  put  a 
new  song  of  praise  in  that  long-silent  mouth.  {Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter.)  His 
ears  were  opened: — Christ  first  opened  the  man's  ears,  then  untied  his  tongue; 
because  we  must  hear  well,  before  we  can  speak  well.  (Pontanus.)  The  heavy  ear 
and  speech  of  faith : — There  are  diseases  of  the  soul  as  well  as  the  body,  and  a 
man's  spiritual  nature  often  needs,  in  order  to  its  perfection,  as  great  and  almost 
as  miraculous  a  change  as  the  gifts  of  speech  and  hearing  to  the  dumb  and  deaf. 
What  shall  we  say  of  those  who  have  no  ears  to  hear  what  our  Father  in  heaven 
is  always  revealing  to  the  hearts  of  those  who  love  Him  ?  There  are  sounds  in 
nature  which  often  arrest  our  attention  in  spite  of  ourselves  ;  there  are  messages 
of  grace  which  often  touch  the  conscience  in  the  midst  of  an  ungodly  course.  Can 
the  discontented  churl  walk  abroad,  on  a  fine  morning  in  the  early  summer,  and 
not  find  the  joyous  singing  of  the  birds  around  him  in  some  sort  a  condemnation 
and  a  solace  of  his  unthankful  spirit?  Can  the  moments  of  solema  thought 
(though  they  be  but  moments)  which  are  awakened  by  the  heavy  roll  of  thunder, 
pass  away  without  our  remembering  how  small  and  insignificant  we  ourselves  are 
in  the  hands  of  Him  who  made  all  created  nature  ?    Is  it  possible  that  the  old,  old 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [oaup.  tn, 

Btory  of  Jesus  GhriBt,  onr  Brother  and  our  God,  can  be  repeated  without  stirring  ap 
some  desire  to  be  with  Him  ?  Or  is  it  possible  for  us,  who  have  our  organs  &l 
speech  perfect,  to  use  that  speech  for  every  worldly  object  of  profit  or  interest,  and 
yet  to  have  no  voice,  because  we  have  no  heart,  to  join  in  earnest  prayer,  or  utter 
our  songs  of  praise  ?  Is  it  possible,  in  short,  for  a  professing  Christian  to  harden 
his  heart,  and  to  be  deaf  to  the  spiritual  invitations  which  he  listens  to  in  God's  Word, 
in  God's  providence,  and  in  God's  whispers  to  his  soul  ?  Alas,  we  know  such  things  are 
possible ;  but  we  know  also  that  He  who  imparted  the  gift  of  speech  and  bearing 
to  the  afflicted  one  near  the  lake  of  Galilee  is  waiting,  by  His  Spirit,  to  impskrt  a 
greater  gift  to  every  one  of  us,  however  careless  and  unfaithful  and  earthly  has 
been  our  life.  The  Lord  our  Master  is  ready  {to  bestow  the  hearing  ear  and  the 
speech  of  faith.  (Dean  Bramston.)  The  sigh  of  Jesus : — In  all  our  Saviour's 
sorrows — I  do  not  enter  now  into  the  mysteries  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary — ^but 
in  all  the  sorrows  of  our  Saviour's  life  among  men,  there  are  two  features 
characteristic,  beautiful,  and  instructive.  Our  Saviour's  recorded  sadnesses  were 
all  for  others.  They  were  either,  as  at  Bethany,  sympathy  with  others'  griefs ;  or 
as  when  He  wept  over  Jerusalem,  or  when  He  encountered  the  opposition  of  the 
Sadducees,  for  our  sins ;  the  selfirfi  element  was  unknown.  Again,  His  sorrow  was 
never  an  idle  sentiment  There  is  a  great  deal  of  useless,  impassioned  feeling  in 
the  world.  Thousands  are  pained  by  the  wickedness  and  misery  they  see  around ; 
they  descant  upon  it ;  they  can  even  weep  when  they  speak  of  it — but  it  leads  to 
no  action.  There  is  no  effort ;  there  is  no  eelf-sacrifice.  It  is  almost  poetry.  It 
is  but  little  more  than  the  luxury  of  a  tragedy.  How  different  Hisl  We  never 
read  of  a  sigh  or  tear  of  Jesus,  but  it  immediately  clothes  itself  into  a  benevolent 
word,  or  a  benevolent  work.  I  question  whether,  if  we  were  in  a  right  state,  there 
wo  aid  ever  be  a  sorrow  which  did  not  throw  itself  into  an  action.  Some  receive 
affliction  passively  and  meditatively.  They  go  into  seclusion.  But  others  at  once 
go  forth  the  more.  They  see  in  their  trial  a  call  to  energy.  The  sigh  of  Jesus,  as 
He  healed  the  deaf  and  dumb  man  in  Decapolis,  has  been  made  to  speak  many 
languages,  according  to  the  varied  habits  of  mind  of  those  who  have  interpreted  it. 
I  \nll  arrange  them  under  four  heads,  and  we  may  call  them: — the  Sigh  of 
Earnestness ;  the  Sigh  of  Beneficence ;  the  Sigh  of  Brotherhood ;  and  the  Sigh  of 
Hohness.  Let  us  note  each :  lest,  by  omitting  one,  we  should  miss  our  lesson. 
1.  Because  it  says  that  "  looking  up  to  heaven.  He  sighed,"  some  connect  the  two 
words,  and  account  that  the  sigh  is  a  part  of  the  prayer — an  expression  of  the 
intensity  of  the  workings  of  our  Lord's  heart  when  He  was  supplicating  to  the 
Father.  And  if,  brethren,  if  the  Son  of  God  sighed  when  He  prayed,  surely  they 
have  most  of  the  spirit  of  adoption — such  a  sense  of  what  communion  with  God  is — 
who,  in  theii-  Very  eagerness,  exhaust  themselves ;  till  every  tone  and  gesture  speak 
of  the  struggle  and  ardour  they  feel  withiiu  2.  But  it  has  been  said  again,  that 
He  who  never  gave  us  anything  but  what  was  bought  by  His  own  suffering — so 
that  every  pleasure  is  a  spoil  purchased  by  His  blood — did  now  by  the  sigh,  and 
under  the  feeling  that  He  sighed,  indicate  that  He  purchased  the  privilege  to  restore 
to  that  poor  man  the  senses  he  had  lost.  3.  But  furthermore,  as  I  conceive  of  this, 
that  sigh  was  the  Sigh  of  Fellowship— the  Sigh  of  Brotherhood.  4.  But  fourthly. 
All  this  still  lay  on  the  surface.  Do  you  suppose  that  our  Saviour's  mind  could 
think  of  all  the  physical  evil,  and  not  go  on  to  the  deeper  moral  causes  from  which 
it  sprang?  But,  after  all,  what  is  worth  sighing  for,  but  sin?  And  observe,  He 
only  sighed.  He  was  not  angry.  He  sighed.  That  is  the  way  in  which  perfect 
holiness  looked  on  the  sins  of  the  universe.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  sigh  of 
apprehension: — Who  among  us  has  not  sighed  to  look  on  his  speechless  child  in 
its  cradle,  thinking  what  words  those  iimocent  lips  might  one  day  form  f  Who 
Las  not  sighed  when  he  first  sent  his  boy  to  school,  remembering  what  other  lessons 
must  enter  into  his  ears  besides  those  of  the  class-room?  Jesus  looked  up  to 
heaven  as  He  performed  the  miracle  of  healing.  Surely  this  was  to  teach  the  dumb 
man  to  look  up  also,  and  to  learn  that  every  gift  comes  from  above.  {H.  J.  Wilmot 
Buxtouy  M.A.)  Why  Jesus  sighed  f — 1.  This  is  not  the  only  record  of  the  sighs, 
and  tears,  and  troubled  heart  of  Jesus  (Heb.  v.  7 ;  Mark  viii.  12 ;  John  xi.  33). 
Truly  He  was  ♦*  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief."  So,  to  some  extent, 
have  all  His  saints  and  children  been.  You  must  not  suppose  that  our  blessed 
Saviour  had  no  bright  and  joyous  hours  on  earth.  This  joy  of  Jesus — deep  joy, 
though  noble  and  subdued — is  not  our  subject  to-day,  but  I  touch  on  it  for  one 
moment  only,  lest  any  of  you  should  take  a  false  view  of  the  life  of  man,  or  fatally 
imagine  that  in  this  world  the  children  of  the  devU  have  a  monopoly  of  happiness. 


OBAP.  m.]  ST.  MARK.  297 

Happiness  ?— they  have  none.  Guilty  happiness  ?  there  is  no  such  thing !  Guilty 
pleasure  for  a  moment  there  is ; — the  sweetness  of  the  cup  whose  draught  is  poison, 
the  glitter  of  the  serpent  whose  bite  is  death.  Guilty  mirth  there  is — the  laughter 
of  Ibols,  which  is  as  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot.  But  guilty  happiness 
there  never  has  been  in  any  life,  nor  ever  can  there  be.  True  happiness,  happiness 
in  the  midst  of  even  scorn  and  persecution,  happiness  even  in  the  felon's  prison 
and  in  the  martyr's  flame,  is  the  high  prerogative  of  God's  saints  alone— of  God's 
saints,  and  therefore  assuredly,  even  in  His  earthly  life,  of  Him  the  King  of 
Saints ;  since  there  is  in  misery  but  one  intolerable  sting,  the  sting  of  iniquity, 
and  He  had  none.  2.  But  you  will  not  have  failed  to  notice  that  on  two  of  the 
occasions  on  which  we  are  told  that  Jesus  sighed  and  wept,  He  was  immediately 
about  to  dispel  the  cause  of  the  misery.  He  was  about  to  heal  the  deaf.  Why 
then  should  He  have  sighed  ?  He  was  about  to  raise  the  dead.  Why  then  did  the 
silent  tears  stream  down  His  face  ?  The  doing  of  good  is  not  a  work  of  unmixed 
happiness,  for  good  men  can  never  do  all  the  good  that  they  desire.  They  have 
wide  thoughts  and  much  feeling  for  the  rest  of  the  world  as  well  as  for  themselves ; 
and  this  sort  of  happiness  brings  much  pain.  3.  My  friends,  there  was  in  truth 
cause  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  why  the  Lord  should  sigh.  In  that  poor 
afflicted  man  He  saw  but  one  more  sign  of  that  vast  crack  and  flaw  which  sin 
causes  in  everything  which  God  has  made.  When  God  had  finished  His  work,  He 
saw  that  it  was  veiy  good  ;  but  since  then  tares  have  been  sown  amid  His  harvest ; 
an  alien  element  intruded  into  His  world;  a  jangling  discord  clashed  into  His 
music.  Earth  is  no  longer  Eden.  4.  And  alas,  it  is  not  only  the  unintelligent 
creation  which  groans  and  travails.  We  ourselves,  which  have  the  flrstfruits  of 
the  Spirit,  we  ourselves  also  groan  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to 
wit  the  redemption  of  the  body.  We  are  apt  to  be  very  proud  of  ourselves  and  of 
our  marvellous  discoveries  and  scientific  achievements;  but,  after  all,  what  a 
feeble  creature  is  man  I  what  a  little  breed  his  race !  what  shadows  we  are,  and 
what  shadows  we  pursue  1  We  fade  as  the  grass,  and  are  crushed  before  the  moth. 
If  we  knew  no  more  than  Nature  can  tell  us,  and  had  no  help  but  what  Science 
can  give  to  us,  what  sigh  would  be  too  deep  for  beings  born  to  sorrow  as  the  sparks 
fly  upward?  {Canon  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.)  L  The  nattjbe  of  the  miracle.  One 
of  the  most  wonderful  ever  wrought.  It  was  both  a  physical  and  mental  miracle, 
reaching  the  mind  as  well  as  the  organs  of  the  body.  It  not  only  conferred  the 
wanting  faculties  of  hearing  and  pronouncing  words,  but  also  supplied  an  acquain- 
tanoe  with  the  meaning  and  use  of  words.  Long  and  laborious  discipline  of  the 
tongue,  and  inward  effects  of  memory,  and  association  of  ideas  with  particular 
inflections  of  sound,  are  still  necessary  to  enable  us  to  employ  that  language  as  a 
medium  of  communication.  Here,  however,  was  the  impartation  at  once  of  both 
hearing,  and  understanding  of  what  was  heard.  It  has  been  compared  to  the  work 
of  creation  ;  it  had  in  it  all  the  elements  of  creativeness,  beneficence,  and  Divine 
power,  from  which  we  may  see  the  majesty  of  our  Saviour.  II.  The  attendant 
CIRCUMSTANCES  of  this  miracle.  UI.  The  spibitual  siqnifzcanoe  of  this  miracle. 
There  are  disabilities  upon  every  soul  by  nature  akin  to  the  deficiences  of  him 
whose  ears  were  deaf,  and  whose  tongue  was  tied.  The  Great  Healer  ii  now 
among  us.  He  can  help  anywhere,  on  the  highway.  This  Ephphatha  is  prophetic. 
It  tells  of  the  ultimate  consummation  of  Christ's  mediatorial  work.  (J.  A.  Seiss, 
D.D.)  Impediment  in  speech : — Notice,  too,  that  those  who  are  spiritually  deaf 
have  also  an  impediment  in  their  speech.  This  is  shown  in  many  different  ways. 
When  I  find  persons  who  will  not  speak  out  boldly  for  the  honour  of  Jesus  Christ, 
who  will  not  confess  Him  before  the  world,  I  know  they  have  an  impediment  in 
their  speech.  When  I  find  persons  in  church  silent  throughout  the  service,  making 
no  responses,  singing  no  psalm,  or  chant,  or  hymn,  I  know  they  have  an  impedi- 
ment in  their  speech :  they  will  not  put  their  tongue  to  its  right  use,  which  is  to 
praise  God  with  the  best  member  that  we  have.  If  I  find  a  man  saying  what  is 
false,  hesitating  to  give  a  plain,  straightforward  answer,  I  know  that  he  has  an 
impediment  in  his  speech,  his  stammeriug  '  )ugue  cannot  utter  the  truth.  If  I 
hear  a  man  wild  with  passion,  using  bad  language,  I  know  that  he  has  an  impedi- 
ment, he  cannot  shape  good  words  with  his  tongue.  And  so  with  those  who  tell 
impure  stories,  or  retail  cruel  gossip  about  their  neighbour's  character,  they  are  all 
alike  afflicted  people,  deaf  to  the  voice  of  God,  and  with  an  impediment  in  their 
speech.  And  now  let  us  look  at  the  means  of  cure.  (H.  J,  Wilmot  Btixton^  M.A.) 
Bringing  men  to  Jesus: — They  brought  the  afflicted  man  to  Jesus.  That  is  the 
first  step.     II  we  would  find  pardon  and  healing,  we  must  be  brought  to  Jesus. 


298  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  TB. 

The  Holy  Spirit  leads  the  sinner  hack  in  many  different  ways.  It  was  the  reading 
of  one  text  of  Scripture  which  turned  Augustine  from  his  evil  life.  It  was  the 
single  word  "  Eternity  *'  printed  in  the  tract  which  a  man  had  torn  scofl&ngly  in  two, 
and  which  lay  in  a  scrap  of  paper  on  his  arm,  that  led  him  to  repent.  Sometimes 
it  is  a  word  in  a  sermon,  or  a  verse  in  a  hymn  ;  sometimes  it  is  the  question  of  a 
little  child,  or  the  sight  of  a  dead  face  in  a  cofdn  ;  but  whatever  it  is  which  brings 
us  back  to  Jesus,  that  must  be  the  first  step  to  finding  pardon  and  healing.  (Ibid.) 
Love  and  Sorrow: — I.  That  sigh,  then,  was  a  pbayxb.  Probably  Jesus,  when 
on  earth,  never  did  any  great  work  without  prayer.  And  how  much  of  the 
real  force  of  prayer  was  concentrated  in  this  one  sigh?  Let  us  not  measure 
the  power  of  prayer  by  the  time  it  occupies,  or  by  the  noise  it  makes.  II.  But 
while  the  sigh  was  a  prayer,  thk  pbateb  was  a  sigh.  But  what  does  the  sigh 
suggest  to  us?  1.  Not  that  He  felt  Himself  incompetent  to  perform  the  task 
sought  at  His  hands.  2.  Not  that  He  felt  any  reluctance  to  bestow  the  requested 
boon.  Jesus  was  no  miser  in  mercy.  3.  Not  that  He  felt  that  the  performance  of 
this  miracle  would  be  in  any  respect  inconsistent  with  the  principles  and  purposes 
of  His  mission  to  our  world.  I.  It  EBVEAiiS  to  us  thk  reality  and  intenbitt 
or  the  Savioub's  love  to  iNi>rvn>UAi<  sufferers,  n.  It  shows  the  ebennbss 
WITH  which  the  Savioub  felt  the   evil   of    sin.    in.  Mat   not   that  sigh 

SUGGEST  THAT  THE  SaVIOUB  FELT  THAT  THE  BOON  Hj!  WAS  ABOUT  TO  BESTOW  WAS  A 

COMPARATIVELY  TBiviAL  ONE  ?  He  is  ouly  oue  of  miUious  of  men,  all  of  whom  are 
victims  of  some  misery,  and  all  of  whose  miseries  spring  from  the  one  cause— sin. 
What  have  I  done  towards  the  accomplishment  of  My  work  when  I  have  cured  this 
man?  IV.  That  sigh  reminds  us  of  the  essential  central  principle  of  th« 
PHILOSOPHY  OF  SALVATION.  Christ  nevcT  relieves  a  man  of  any  curse  the  misery  of 
which  He  does  not  appropriate  to  Himself.  In  all  our  afflictions  He  is  afflicted. 
This  sigh  was  the  price  He  paid  for  an  opened  ear  and  a  loosened  tongue.  What 
spiritual  blessing  have  you  and  I  which  He  has  not  paid  for  in  the  sorrow  of  His 
own  experience?  V.  That  bigh  may  well  suggest  to  us  the  holy  badness  of 
DOING  GOOD.  {J.  p.  Bamett,)  The  Saviour's  Sigh : — ••  He  sighed  "  when  about  to 
unstop  deaf  ears.  Sighed  when  on  the  verge  of  opening  the  door  by  which  the 
music  of  nature  and  the  welcome  sounds  of  the  human  voice  would  enter  the 
hitherto  silent  regions  within.  Sighed  when  He  was  prepared  to  give  power  to  the 
mute  organ  of  speech.  Why,  we  should  rather  have  expected  that  He  would  have 
smiled,  and,  **  looking  up  to  heaven,"  rejoiced.  We  do  not  sigh  when  engaged  in  a 
mission  of  mercy.  Far  from  it.  When  we  take  loaves  to  the  famishing,  or  money 
to  the  wretched  bankrupt,  we  feel  a  throb  of  sacred  delight.  As  we  mark  the  pallid 
invalid  get  stronger  and  better,  or  as  we  visit  asylums  for  the  deaf  and  dumb  in 
order  to  witness  the  compensations  offered  by  us  for  the  defects  of  nature,  we  are 
filled  with  grateful  happiness.    Why  did  the  Master  sigh  ?    I.  The  answer  bbinos 

BEFOBB     us     the     most     IMPBESBIVE     AND     TBAOICAL     FEATUBE      IN      THE     SaVI0UB*8 

experience.  His  whole  life  was  a  sigh.  So  utterly  was  this  the  case  that  we  find 
Him  mournful  even  when  about  to  perform  a  miracle  of  great  mercy  1  Just  as 
there  are  dark  spots  on  the  bright  sun,  so  even  when  suffused  with  celestial  glory 
on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  the  awful  cross  made  its  appearance,  for  "  they 
spake  of  His  decease."  Hardly  had  the  cheerful  hosannahs  of  the  multitude  died 
away  when  He  ♦•  beheld  the  city  and  wept  over  it."  To  quote  from  Jeremy  Taylor, 
'  *  This  Jesus  was  like  a  rainbow ;  half  made  of  the  glories  of  light,  and  half  of  the 
moisture  of  a  cloud."  We  speak  often  of  Christ's  sacrifice  in  a  one-sided  style. 
Too  often  we  mean  by  His  sufferings  the  death  He  endured.  We  think  of  Calvary. 
The  accursed  tree  rises  before  our  imaginations.  All  these  were  dreadful  indeed, 
albeit  they  were  not  the  sum  but  the  consummation  of  His  trials.  They  were  the 
closing  pages  of  a  volume  filled  with  like  details.  He  looked  *'  up  to  heaven,"  and 
what  saw  He  there  ?  Crowns  prepared  for  men  who  would  not  seek  them ;  thrones 
made  ready  for  such  as  cared  not  to  occupy  them.  U.  What  ought  we  to  leabn 
FROM  the  Saviour's  sigh?  1.  A  lesson  of  consolation.  Intense  trouble  seeks 
solitude.  In  great  affliction  men  often  wish  to  be  alone.  Even  in  inferior  creatures 
something  of  this  kind  appears.  The  wounded  deer  retreats  from  the  herd  into  the 
dark  recesses  of  the  forest.  The  whale,  smitten  by  the  harpoon,  dives  into  the 
lowest  depths  of  the  sea.  Human  beings  frequently  prefer  isolation  when  in  trial. 
Peter  •*  went  out,"  when  he  saw  the  truth  of  his  Master's  prediction,  and  ••  wept 
bitterly."  Of  Mary,  bereaved  so  heavily,  the  friends  near  her  said,  ♦'  She  went 
forth  unto  the  grave  to  weep  there."  Was  there  anything  akin  to  this  in  oni 
Lord  7    There  was.    Even  in  minor  matters  of  such  an  order  He  was  made  "  in  all 


¥u.]  8T,  MARK,  S99 

points  like  unto  His  bretbren."  Wbere  did  He  sigh  ?  In  company  f  In  a  crowd? 
No.  We  are  distinctly  informed  He  "  took  him  aside  from  tbe  mnltitade."  No 
one  heard  Him  sigh,  not  even  the  afflicted  man,  for  he  was  unable  to  do  so.  The 
sigh  was  between  the  Son  and  the  Father.  **  Looking  to  heaven,"  not  to  earth, 
*'  He  sighed."  Let  ns  be  comforted  in  sorrow.  These  incidents  clearly  show  how 
qualified  the  Great  High  Priest  is  to  sympathize  with  His  disciples.  He  was  once 
as  we  ar&  2.  Is  there  not  a  lesson  of  stimulus  f  Jesus  did  more  than  sigh.  He 
said,  ♦♦  Ephphatha,"  and  thus  restored  sound  and  speech  to  the  sufferer  before 
Him.  We  must  act  as  well  as  feel.  Sighing  will  never  reform  the  world,  re- 
generate humanity.  We  must  work.  Our  effort  should  be  to  bring  men  to  Him 
who  can  still  heal  and  restore.  3.  There  is  also  a  lesson  of  caution.  Possibly 
there  were  special  reasons  for  sorrow  on  the  part  of  Christ  in  reference  to  the  man 
whom  He  healed.  Perhaps  the  Eedeemer  foresaw  that  the  bodily  restoration 
would  not  lead  to  spiritual  restoration,  &o.  Do  we  never  sin  with  the  ear  ?  with 
the  tongue  ?  Alas,  none  is  innocent  herein.  The  golden  rule  has  not  yet  brought 
our  words  into  subjection  to  it.  "  Keep  the  door  of  my  Ups."  The  grand  thing  is 
to  have  oar  hearts  right,  then  all  will  be  well.  (T.  R.  Stevenson.)  The  iigh  of 
JesuM : — L  The  general  btudt  of  the  stoby  would  furnish  several  very  excellent 
and  edifying  lessons  suggested  by  our  Lord's  action  in  working  this  miracle  upon 
the  shore  of  Deoapolis.  1.  We  might  note,  earliest,  the  wide  reach  of  the  Master's 
zeal :  **  And  again,  departing  from  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  He  came  unto  the 
Sea  of  Galilee,  through  the  midst  of  the  coasts  of  Decapolis.'*  Jesus  had  just  come 
from  Tyre  and  Sidon,  clear  across  in  a  heathen  land ;  He  was  now  in  the  midst  of 
some  Greek  settlements  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Sea  of  Tiberias.  We  see  how 
He  appears  thns  going  upon  a  foreign  mission.  2.  Then,  next,  we  might  dwell 
upon  the  need  of  friendly  olBces  in  apparently  hopeless  cases.  '*And  they  bring 
unto  Him  one  that  was  deaf,  and  had  an  impediment  in  his  speech ;  and  they 
beseech  Him  to  put  His  hand  upon  him."  3.  We  might  also  mention,  just  here, 
the  manipulations  of  our  Saviour  as  illustrating  the  ingenuity  of  real  sympathy. 
'*  And  He  took  him  aside  from  the  multitude,  and  put  His  fingers  into  his  ears, 
and  He  spit,  and  touched  his  tongue."  4.  Even  better  still  is  our  next  lesson :  we 
observe  our  Lord's  respect  for  every  one's  private  reserves  of  experience.  •*  And  He 
took  him  aside  from  the  multitude  privately."  We  shall  surely  do  better  always, 
when  we  biing  souls  to  the  Saviour,  if  we  respect  the  delicacy  of  their  organization, 
and  take  them  aside.  5.  Now  we  notice  the  naturalness  of  all  great  services  of 
good.  **  And  looking  up  to  heaven.  He  sighed,  and  saith  unto  him,  Ephphatha, 
that  is,  Be  opened."  At  the  supremely  majestic  moments  of  His  life  our  Lord 
became  simpler  in  utterance  and  behaviour  than  at  any  other  time.  He  fell  back 
on  the  sweet  and  pathetic  speech  of  His  mother-tongue.  6.  Again :  we  learu  here 
the  risks  of  every  high  and  new  attainment,  "  And  his  ears  were  opened,  and  the 
bond  of  his  tongue  was  loosed,  and  he  spake  plain.  And  He  charged  them  that  they 
should  tell  no  man :  but  the  more  He  charged  them,  so  much  the  more  a  great  deal 
they  published  it.  And  they  were  beyond  measure  astonished,  saying.  He  hath  done 
aU  things  well ;  He  maketh  even  the  deaf  to  hear,  and  the  dumb  to  speak."  What 
will  the  restored  man  do  with  his  gifts?  II.  The  singular  pecdliabity  op  this 
sxoBT,  however,  is  what  might  be  made  the  subject  of  more  extended  remark  in  a 
homiletic  treatment.  Three  things  meet  us  in  their  turn.  1.  A  question  stands  at 
the  beginning :  Why  did  our  Lord  sigh  when  He  was  looking  up  to  heaven  ?  2. 
We  are  left  in  this  case  to  conjecture.  And,  in  a  general  way,  perhaps  it  would  be 
enough  to  say  that  there  was  something  like  an  ejaculatory  prayer  in  this  sigh  of 
Jesus'  soul;  but  more  likely  there  was  in  it  the  outbreaking  of  sad  and  weary 
sympathy  with  the  suffering  of  a  fallen  race  like  ours.  It  may  be  He  sighed 
because  there  was  so  much  trouble  in  the  world  everywhere.  It  may  be  He  sighed 
because  there  were  many  who  made  such  poor  work  in  dealing  with  their  trouble. 
It  may  be  He  sighed  because  He  could  not  altogether  alleviate  the  trouble  He 
found.  Some  worries  were  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  His  power.  He  did  not  come 
to  change  the  course  of  human  affairs.  Men  are  free  agents  ;  Jesus  could  not  keep 
drunkards  from  killing  themselves  with  strong  drink  if  they  would  do  it.  It  was 
not  His  errand  on  earth  to  crush  in  order  to  constrain.  It  may  be  He  sighed 
because  the  trouble  He  met  always  had  its  origin  and  its  aggravation  in  sin.  This 
was  the  one  thing  which  His  adorable  Father  hated,  and  against  which  He  was  a 
'*  consuming  fire."  It  may  be  He  sighed  because  so  few  persons  were  willing  to 
forsake  the  sins  which  made  the  trouble.  It  may  be  He  sighed  because  the 
spectacle  of  a  rained  and  rebellious  world  saddened  Him.    When  the  old  prophet 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  G<jha».  ti^ 

came  back  from  oaptivitj  and  fonnd  Jerasalem  in  fragments;  when  Marina 
returned  and  sat  down  among  the  broken  stones  of  Carthage,  we  are  not  surprised 
to  be  told  that  they  wept,  though  both  were  brave  men.  But  these  give  but  feeble 
illustration  of  the  passionate  mourning  of  soul  which  most  have  swept  over  the 
mind  and  heart  of  Jesus,  who  knew  what  this  earth  had  been  when  it  came  forth 
pux«  from  the  creating  hand  of  His  Father.  No  wonder  He  walked  heavily  de- 
pressed and  mournful  all  through  His  career.  8.  It  is  time  to  end  conjecture,  and 
come  at  once  now  to  the  admonition  we  find  here  in  the  story.  Christians  need 
more  "  sighs."  Christians  must  follow  sighs  with  more  '*  looking  np  to  heaven." 
Christians  may  cheer  themselves  with  the  prospect  of  a  new  Ufe  in  which 
sighing  shall  be  neither  needed  nor  known.  The  Saviour  shall  then  have  seen 
of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied.  ((7.  S.  Robinson,  D,D.)  Sorrow 
in  healing  : — He  sighed,  and  said.  Be  opened.  The  sigh  therefore  arose  from  no 
feeling  of  helplessness  to  remove  the  malady.  The  cure  followed,  as  ever,  that 
word  of  power.  And  yet  He  sighed  as  He  said,  Be  opened.  1.  He  sighed,  we 
cannot  doubt,  at  the  thought  of  that  destructive  agency  of  which  He  had  before 
Him  one  example.  Here  was  one  whom  Satan  had  bound.  Here  was  an  illustra- 
tion of  that  reign  of  sin  unto  death  to  wliich  the  whole  world  bears  witness.  This 
deaf  and  dumb  man  reminded  Christ  of  the  corruption  that  had  passed  over  God's 
pure  creation  :  and  therefore,  looking  up  to  heaven.  He  sighed.  And  it  will  be  no 
light  gain,  my  brethren,  if  this  thought  should  teach  yon  to  see  with  your  Saviour's 
eye  even  those  bodily  infirmities  which  yon  perhaps  are  tempted  to  regard  almost 
with  ridicule,  but  which  are  making  life  a  burden  and  a  weariness  to  so  many  of 
our  feUow  creatures.  Eemember  whence  these  things  come;  from  the  power  of 
him  who  has  entered  into  God's  creation  to  torture  and  to  ruin  God's  handiwork. 

2.  But  there  was  more  than  this,  as  we  all  feel  at  once,  in  that  sigh.  That  outward 
bondage  was  but  the  token  of  an  inward  thraldom.  Whether  healed  or  not  in  this 
life,  no  bodily  infirmity  can  have  more  than  a  temporary  duration.  Death  must 
end  it.  But  not  so  that  spiritual  corruption  of  which  the  other  was  but  a  sign. 
That  inward  ear  which  is  stopped  against  God's  sununons ;  that  voice  of  the  heart, 
which  refuses  to  utter  His  praise  ;  these  things  are  of  eternal  consequence.  And 
while  bodily  infirmities  and  disorders  are  occasional  and  partial  in  their  occur- 
rence, spiritual  disease  is  universal.  It  overspreads  every  heart.  And,  as  a  mere  matter 
uf  docUiue,  I  suppose  we  all  assent  to  this.  Without  God's  grace,  we  all  admit,  we 
can  know^  nothing  and  do  nothing.  But  oh,  how  different  our  view  of  aU  this  and 
Christ's  I  First  of  all,  we  shut  out  from  our  anxiety  every  case  but  our  own.  No 
one  by  nature  feels  the  value  of  his  brother's  soul :  it  is  well  if  he  bestows  a  thought 
upon  his  own.  But  how  differently  did  Christ  view  these  things,  when  He  sighed 
as  He  opened  the  deaf  man's  ears  1  Christ  sees  sin  as  it  is ;  sees  it  in  its  nature, 
as  a  defiance  of  God ;  sees  it  in  its  effects,  as  leaving  behind  it  in  each  heart  that 
it  enters  defilement,  and  weakness,  and  hardness,  and  misery ;  sees  it  in  its  conse- 
quences, as  bringing  forth  fruit  unto  death — a  death  not  of  annihilation,  not  of 
blank  unconsciousness,  but  a  death  of  unspeakable  and  interminable  wretchedness. 

3.  He  sighed  therefore,  we  may  say  further,  from  a  sense  of  the  disproportion  in 
actual  extent  between  the  ruin  and  the  redemption.  The  ruin  universal.  All  the 
world  guilty  before  God.  And  yet  the  great  multitude  refusing  to  be  redeemed. 
(C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  The  deaf  man  cured: — I.  Consider  first  thb  mak's  intbo- 
DucTioN  TO  Jesus.  Now,  in  contemplating  a  fellow-creature  in  sueh  sad  ease,  the 
thought  may  well  occur  how  Uttle  are  we  affected  by  our  common  mercies  1  How 
little  think  we  of  such  blessings  as  preserved  senses,  nnshattered  reason,  the  links 
unbroken  which  connect  us  with  the  outer  world,  and  all  the  faculties  unimpaired 
which  fit  us  for  the  activities  of  life.  And,  though  of  all  such  privations,  the  gift 
of  sight  is  perhaps  the  one  we  should  least  like  to  have  taken  away,  yet  blindnesi 
even  may  be  less  to  be  deplored  than  loss  of  hearing  and  speech.  For  this  calamity, 
unalleviated,  and  existing  from  birth,  shuts  up  the  soul  of  the  sufferer  in  a  per- 
petual prison-house.  He  has  no  outlet  for  communion  with  his  kind ;  he  has  no 
medium  for  the  interchange  of  sentiment  or  emotion,  until  wearied  with  treading  for 
ever  the  same  cycle  of  never-extending  and  never- wearied  thought,  he  sinks  into  • 
condition  of  utter  mindlessness— God's  image  on  a  dark  cloud,  s  sad  wreck  of 
humbled  and  defaced  humanity.  It  has  been  among  the  glorious  achievements  of  a 
soientifio  philanthropy  in  our  own  day  to  have  discovered  means  for  abating  somewhat 
Che  deep  misery  of  this  infliction;  but  any  such  alleviation  was  unknown  then.  So 
they  bring  him  to  Jesus.  Brethren,  is  there  not  some  light  thrown  by  this  fact 
oo  th»  put  whic^  our  friends  are  permitted  to  perform  for  us  in  reference  to 


«BAP.  Tn.]  ST.  MARK.  301 

the  more  helpless  and  hopeless  forms  of  spiritual  malady  f  What  does  this  prove 
bat  that  there  are  no  men  whose  case  is  so  bad  and  hopeless  as  that  we  must  not  tr^ 
to  convert  them,  but  rather  in  exact  proportion  to  the  hopelessness  of  a  man'i 
moral  condition,  is  the  obligation  to  do  all  we  can  for  him.  We  are  to  pray  for  none 
BO  earnestly  as  for  those  who  through  the  inveteracy  of  their  soul's  malady  cannot 
pray  for  themselves.    II.  But  I  pass  to  our  second  portion,  to  observe  some  pecd- 

LIABITIES  CONNECTED  WITH   THE    METHOD  OF  THIS  ATTLICTED  MAN'S  CURB.       "  And  He 

took  him  aside  from  the  multitude,  and  put  His  fingers  into  his  ears,  and  He  spit, 
and  touched  his  tongue ;  and  looking  up  to  heaven.  He  sighed,  and  saith  unto  him, 
Ephphatha,  that  is,  Be  opened."  Why  were  the  methods  used  by  our  Lord  in 
working  his  miracles  so  diverse  one  from  another?  The  only  account  to  be 
given  of  these  variations  is,  that  they  had  reference  either  to  something  in  the 
moral  circumstances  of  the  su£ferer,  or  to  some  effect  to  be  produced  in  the  mind 
of  the  bystanders,  or  it  might  be,  to  some  lesson  of  practical  instruction  which 
through  these  typical  healings  might  be  conveyed  to  believers  to  the  end  of  time. 
Especially  are  we  to  suppose  that  in  each  case  of  the  wrought  miracle  there  was  in 
the  method  chosen  some  express  adaptation  to  the  circumstances  of  the  person 
benefitted — the  state  of  his  affections  towards  God,  and  his  susceptibihty  to  become 
a  subject  of  the  spiritual  kingdom.  For  to  this  end  we  are  sure  our  Divine  Lord 
worked  always.  Indeed,  the  benefit  had  been  no  benefit  otherwise.  To  what  pur- 
pose had  been  the  recovery  of  sight  to  a  man  only  to  look  on  the  face  of  this  outer 
world,  while  his  soul  was  left  to  grope  its  way  through  mists  of  an  everlasting 
blindness  ?  The  instances  seem  to  suggest  that  there  are  some  persons,  who,  in 
order  to  their  learning  holy  lessons  must  be  withdrawn  from  the  world  for  a 
season.  They  cannot  have  their  ears  effectually  opened  in  a  crowd — not  even  in  a 
crowded  church.  They  must  be  forced  into  retirement.  Anything  Jesus  might 
say  to  them  while  the  bustle  and  stir  of  life  was  upon  them,  whilst  its  feverish 
excitements  were  drawing  them  hither  and  thither,  would  make  no  impression.  On 
coining  to  some  retired  place,  however,  our  Lord  proceeds  to  the  miracle,  but  still, 
observe,  by  a  gradual  process.  He  puts  His  fingers  into  the  man's  ears,  then  spits, 
and  with  tiie  moistened  finger  touches  his  tongue.  As  to  the  reasons  for  the  choice 
of  these  means,  in  preference  to  any  other,  it  does  not  seem  necessary  to  go  further 
than  the  circumstances  of  the  man  himself.  Questions  he  could  not  answer ;  verbal 
dueotions  he  could  not  understand ;  it  was  only  by  visible  and  sensible  applications 
to  the  organs  affected,  that  he  could  be  made  to  perceive  what  was  going  on,  or 
ooold  connect  Jesus  with  the  authorship  of  his  cure.  All  that  we  gather  is,  that 
the  case  was  one  in  which  it  would  not  be  well  that  the  blessing  to  be  bestowed 
should  be  instantaneous— that  it  was  needful  that  time  should  be  given  for  con- 
sideration of  what  all  those  processes  were  to  lead  to — that  faith  should  be  exer- 
cised, disciplined,  taught  to  look  up,  expecting  to  receive  something,  and  that  the 
soul  before  coming  into  that  which  would  be  to  it  as  a  new  world,  should  know 
who  that  Being  was  to  whom  it  must  dedicate  all  its  restored  faculties  and  powers. 
And  it  is  certain,  brethren,  that  the  Great  Healer  has  recourse  to  like  protracted 
methods  now.  The  ears  of  the  deaf  must  be  anstopped  before  the  tongue  of  the 
dumb  can  sing.  The  heart  must  believe  unto  righteousness,  before  with  the 
mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation.  But,  then,  how  shall  they  beheve  in 
Him  whom  they  have  not  heard,  and  how  shall  they  hear  who  are  born  deaf  ?  Deaf 
to  the  calls  of  mercy ;  deaf  to  the  alarms  of  danger ;  deaf  to  the  warning  of  con- 
science ;  deaf  to  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God.  Must  there  not,  I  say,  be  an  open- 
ing of  the  ears  first  7  Must  not  the  finger  of  Jesus  be  put  into  them,  making  a 
passage  through,  so  that  His  word  may  reach  the  heart.  Brethren,  let  us  all  pray 
lor  unstopped  ears.  It  is  for  oar  life  the  prophet  tells  us — "Hear,  and  yoiu  souls 
shall  live. "  Oh,  how  far  is  he  on  the  way  heavenward  who  has  an  ear  ever  opeti  to  the 
whisperings  of  the  Divine  Spirit  I  "  And  looking  up  to  heaven,  He  sighed,  and 
said,  Ephphatha,  that  is.  Be  opened."  He  looked  up  to  heaven  :  so  at  the  grave 
of  Lazarus  He  lifted  up  His  eyes.  On  the  deep  mystery  of  our  Lord's  prayers. 
They  were  as  much  prayers  as  yonrs  or  mine  are  prayers — and  in  connection  with 
His  miracles  were  petitions,  not  for  Himself,  that  He  might  be  able  to  work  them, 
bat  for  the  people  that  they  might  be  able  to  receive  them,  that  the  benefit  might 
not  be  lost  to  them  through  the  want  of  those  moral  dispositions,  faith  and  love, 
withoat  which  He  could  not,  according  to  the  sti  ulations  of  the  everlasting  cove- 
Ban^  have  performed  any  wonderful  work.  The  same  view  gives  a  reality  to  His 
eontinaed  interoession  for  ns  at  the  throne  of  God.  Christ  does  not  pray  for  any. 
thing  relating  to  Hii  own  work— for  His  bio  d  that  it  may  eleanae,  for  His 


80a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tix. 

righteousness  that  it  may  justify,  for  His  pardons  and  acquittals,  that  they  may  be 
endorsed  and  owned  of  God — these  are  among  heaven's  immutable  things.  What 
He  does  pray  for  is  the  removal  of  those  hindrances  in  our  hearts  which  prevent 
the  free  flowing  of  His  mercy  towards  us,  for  the  triumphs  of  His  grace  over  all 
our  unbelief  and  worldliness,  for  the  unclosed  ear  that  the  voice  of  the  charmer 
may  pierce  through,  for  the  loosened  tongue  that  it  may  magnify  the  grace  of  God. 
"And  He  sighed,"  Again  our  thoughts  revert  to  Bethany,  where,  just  before 
working  the  miracle  it  is  said,  He  "  groaned  in  spirit  and  was  troubled."  We  may 
see  many  reasons  for  the  distress  of  soul  on  the  part  of  the  Holy  Saviour.  He  sighed 
over  the  spectacle  before  Him  as  evidence  of  the  suffering  and  sorrow  of  our  race ; 
He  sighed  over  it  as  a  mournful  defacement  and  distortion  of  God's  moral  image ; 
but  He  sighed  most  of  all  over  the  stubborn  unbelief,  that  miserable  infidelity  of 
the  heart,  the  one  solitary  obstacle  in  the  whole  universe  of  God,  to  the  instan- 
taneous wiping  of  all  tears  from  off  all  faces,  and  the  saving  of  every  soul  of 
man.  Yes,  brethren,  this  last  it  was  that  wrung  theee  bitter  sorrows  from  the 
Saviour's  heart.  He  could  bear  the  scourge,  disregard  the  mockery,  endure  the 
cross,  despise  the  shame  ;  that  which  next  to  the  hidden  face  of  God,  rent  His  soul 
most  was,  to  be  obliged  to  say  continually,  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  Me,  that  ye 
might  have  life."  "Ephphatha,  Be  opened."  Here  the  Almighty  power  of  God 
speaks.  The  taking  him  aside,  the  touching  of  the  ear,  the  spitting  and  moisten- 
ing  of  the  tongue,  the  eye  raised  heavenwards,  and  the  deep  sigh,  were  all  the 
human  preparations;  the  man's  heart  was  getting  ready,  the  grace  of  Jesus  making 
way  for  the  demonstration  of  His  power,  the  Spirit  of  God  was  moving  upon  the 
face  of  a  dark  soul  before  the  irresistible  word  should  go  forth,  "  Let  there  be  light ; " 
and  as  irresistible  was  the  word  of  Jesus  to  this  poor  sufferer,  for  it  was  the  same 
word;  so  that  it  was  no  sooner  uttered  than  straightway  the  man's  ears  were 
opened,  and  the  string  of  his  tongue  was  loosed,  and  he  spake  plain.  Our 
profit  in  the  incidents  we  have  been  considering  will  be  found  in  seeing  how 
entirely  our  soul's  health  and  life  are  in  the  hands  of  Christ.  (D.  Moon,  M.A.) 
Alone  with  Je$us : — It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  alone  with  nature ;  to  be  alone  with  a 
man  of  a  noble  heart ;  a  greater  thing  by  far  to  be  alone  with  Jesus,  "  Aside  from 
the  multitude."  I.  That  Hb  might  quickbn  his  sense  op  individuality.  God  has 
made  us  persons ;  we  lose  ourselves  in  the  crowd ;  trials  depress,  we  lose  hope  and 
become  more  like  things.  But  Jesus  awakens  us.  II.  That  He  might  awaken  him 
TO  A  TEUEB  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  HIS  SPIRITUAL  NEEDS.  " Touched  him."  Where? 
Ears  and  tongue.  There  was  the  evil,  there  the  cure.  Some  are  touched  through 
their  fears,  others  through  their  hopes.  III.  That  he  might  concentbate  all  hm 
HOPES  on  Ghbist.  IV.  That  He  might  bind  him  fob  ever  to  Himself.  {W.  For- 
tyth,  M.A.)  GlimpseB  of  Jesus  .-—I.  The  upwabd  look.  1.  Devout  faith  in 
heaven.     2.  Conscious  harmony  with  heaven.    3.  Undoubting  confidence  in  heaven. 

II.  The  bigh.     1.    Holy  grief.    2.  Brotherly  sympathy.    8.  Anxious  solicitude. 

III.  The  wobd.  1.  A  word  of  love.  2.  A  word  of  power.  8.  A  word  of  prophetic 
meaning.  An  earnest  of  greater  victories.  Some  sigh,  but  nothing  mors.  Idle 
sentiment.  Others  sigh,  but  do  not  look  up.  No  faith  in  (Jod.  {Ibid.)  Words 
not  Tucessary  to  prayer: — It  is  impossible  fully  to  enter  into  the  profound  depths  of 
the  •'  sigh  "  which  Jesus  uttered  on  this  occasion.  We  may  learn  from  it,  at  least, 
two  things : — It  teaches  us  that  words  are  not  absolutely  indispensable  to  the  offering 
of  prayer.  This  sigh  doubtless  contained  a  prayer,  for  in  all  things  the  Bedeemer 
acknowledged  tiie  Father,  saying :  "  I  can  of  Mine  own  self  do  nothing."  The  sigh 
of  Jesus,  l2te  some  of  the  mightiest  forces  of  nature  that  are  silent,  was  charged 
with  the  power  of  God.  Some  of  the  sincerest,  deepest,  and  most  agonizing  suppli- 
cations that  have  ascended  to  the  ear  of  God,  have  gone  up  with  no  more  audible 
sound  than  that  of  a  "sigh."  {O.  Hunt  Jackson.)  The  touch  of  Christ:— Uo^ 
exquisitely  delicate  is  the  touch  of  those  highly-gifted  musicians  who  can  sweep 
the  keys  or  chords  of  their  instrument  and  make  it  speak  as  with  living  voice,  now 
melting  the  audience  to  tears,  now  stirring  their  souls  with  lofty  thoughts  or  mar- 
tial enthusiasm  1  With  equally  magic  power  does  the  master  painter  evoke  life 
from  the  canvas,  and  impart  to  his  creations  those  inimitable  touches  of  form  and 
colour  that  delight  the  eye  and  captivate  the  imagination.  The  tender  manipula- 
tion of  a  wise  and  skilful  surgeon  or  experienced  nurse  has  almost  a  healing  influence, 
as  it  soothes  the  overstrung  nerves  and  infuses  confidence  into  the  sufferer.  A 
friend's  gentle  pressure  of  the  hand  and  touch  of  sympathy  will  often  calm  sorrow* 
ful  hearts  more  than  the  most  kindly  and  fitly  chosen  words  of  condolence.  If  it 
be  thus  with  merely  human  beings,  we  might  reasonably  expect  to  find  far  more 


csur.  Tn.]  8T,  MARK,  808 

wonderful  effects  connected  with  the  touch  of  Him,  in  Whom,  while  a  partaker  of 
flesh  and  blood,  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  Such  we  know  from 
the  Gospels  to  have  been  actually  the  case :  His  touch  does  hold  an  important  place 
in  our  Lord's  miracles,  as  well  as  in  His  ordinary  ministry.  He  touched,  and  was 
touched,  and  through  this  medium  there  went  forth  blessings  of  various  kinds.  His 
touch  was  healing,  creative,  life-giving,  enlightening,  comforting.  The  fact  that  it 
was  so  during  His  life  on  earth  will  suggest  the  inquiry  how  far  it  may  be  so  stilL 
{The  Quiver.)  Leading  our  friends  to  Jesu^: — ^I.  In  view  of  the  gbeat  misebt 
IN  WHICH  MAN  FINDS  HIMSELF  WITHOUT  Christ  (versG  32).  Miserable  condition  of  the 
dumb  and  deaf  man.  H.  In  view  of  the  great  blessedness  into  which  he  enters 
THROUGH  the  Lobd.  Especially  since  we  thereby  enter  upon  the  greatest  happiness 
of  earth  (verse  33).  The  treatment  of  this  deaf  man  is  an  illustration  of  how  Jesus 
treats  those  who  are  led  to  Him  by  friend  or  acquaintance.  {Dr.  Amdt.)  Leading 
our  friends  to  Jesus: — ^During  the  exhibition  of  1867  in  Paris,  a  minister  met  with 
an  instance  of  direct  labour  for  souls  which  he  states  he  can  never  forget.  In  con- 
versation with  an  engineer  employed  on  one  of  the  pleasure-boats  which  ply  on  the 
Seine,  the  discovery  was  made  that  the  man  was  a  Christian,  and  on  the  inquiry 
being  put,  by  what  means  he  was  converted,  he  replied :  *•  My  mate  is  a  Christian, 
and  continually  he  told  me  of  the  great  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  His  readiness  to 
save,  and  he  never  rested  until  I  was  a  changed  man.  For  it  is  a  rule  in  our 
church  that  when  a  brother  is  converted,  he  must  go  and  bring  another  brother ; 
and  when  a  sister  is  converted,  she  must  go  and  bring  another  sister ;  and  so  more 
than  a  hundred  of  us  have  been  recovered  from  Popery  to  the  simplicity  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus.'*  This  is  the  way  in  which  the  gospel  is  to  spread  through  the  whole 
world.    (Anon,) 

Ver.  37.  He  hath  done  all  things  weXL— Excellency  of  Chris  fs  operations : — ^L 
The  excellency  of  Christ's  operations.  **  He  hath  done  all  things  well ; "  as  is 
apparent — 1.  In  the  magnificence  of  His  operations.  Instance  the  sublime  works 
of  His  creative  energy ;  His  infallible  administration  in  the  kingdom  of  providence ; 
His  stupendous  miracles  ;  His  mediatorial  achievements  (Psa.  Ixxxvi.  8-10,  ciii.  19 ; 
Col.  i.  16,  17»  ii.  15 ;  Matt.  xi.  4).  2.  In  the  completeness  of  His  operations 
(Deut.  xzzii.  4).  3.  In  the  harmony  of  His  operations  (Psa.  civ.  24 ;  cxlv.  10).  4. 
In  the  benevolent  design  of  His  operations  (Psa.  xxxiii.  19 ;  Dan.  vi.  27).  II.  Thx 
DEVOUT  sentiments  WITH  WHICH  THEY  SHOULD  BE  CONTEMPLATED.  1.  Devout  ad- 
miration (Psa.  Ixxvii.  13-16).  2.  Adoring  gratitude  (Psa.  cxlviii.  13).  3.  Zealous 
attachment  (Jer.  1. 1-5).  Has  Christ  done  oh  things  well  ?  Then — 1.  How  flagrant 
the  impiety  of  mankind  I  2.  How  justly  is  Christ  entitled  to  the  worship  of  the 
whole  universe  1  3.  Let  Him  be  the  subject  of  our  song,  and  the  object  of  our 
supreme  regard.  (J.  Burns^  LL.D.)  Christ's  excellent  doings : — The  text  explains 
itself — but  the  truth  of  it  is  of  vastly  wider  scope.  I.  It  has  a  grand  significancy 
in  the  creative  works  of  Christ.  II.  In  His  Divine  government  of  this  and  all  worlds. 
III.  Its  olimactaral  glory  belongs  to  redemption.  He  undertook  the  world's  redemp- 
tion, and  effected  it,  by — 1.  Obedience  to  the  law.  2.  Suffering  the  penalty  for  sin. 
3.  Conquering  the  powers  of  darkness.  4.  Bringing  life  and  immortality  to  light. 
6.  Obtaining  the  Holy  Spirit.  IV.  In  the  salvation  He  obtained  and  bestows.  An 
entire  salvation  of  the  whole  man — a  free  salvation  of  sovereign  grace — a  salvation 
for  the  whole  race — and  a  salvation  to  eternal  glory.  •♦  He  does  all  things  weU." 
V.  In  the  experience  of  His  people.  He  sought  and  found  them — He  forgave  and 
healed  them — He  renews  and  sanctifies  them — He  keeps  and  upholds  them,  and 
He  glorifies  them  for  ever.  {Ibid.)  He  hath  done  all  things  well : — I.  In  Creation. 
1.  Order  and  regularity.  2.  Adaptation.  3.  Provision.  4.  Happiness  of  creatures 
designed.  II.  In  Redemption.  1.  In  design — vicarious  suffering.  2.  Develop- 
ment—Incarnation. 3.  Application  to  individuals.  4.  To  Resurrection.  III.  In 
Providence.  1.  Afflictions.  2.  Persecution,  which  only  wafts  the  seed  of  truth  to 
distant  lands.  Conclusion :  1.  Submit  to  Him.  2.  Work  with  Him.  {E.  Har- 
greaves.)  The  dumb  to  speak : — Dr.  Carey  found  a  man  in  Calcutta  who  had  not 
spoken  a  loud  word  for  four  years,  having  been  under  a  vow  of  perpetual  silence. 
Nothing  could  open  his  mouth,  till  happening  to  meet  with  a  religious  tract,  he  read 
it,  and  his  tongue  was  loosed.  He  soon  threw  away  his  paras,  and  other  badges  of 
puperstition,  and  became,  as  was  believed,  a  partaker  of  the  grace  of  God.  Many  a 
nominal,  and  even  professing  Christian,  who  is  as  dumb  on  religious  subjects  as  if 
ouder  a  "  vow  of  silence,"  would  find  a  tongue  to  speak,  if  religion  were  really  to 
touch  and  warm  his  heart.    {AnoTi.)         On  Christ's  doing  all  things  w«ZZ;— L 


S04  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  lohap.  jui, 

CShrist's  actions  were  good  in  themselves.  In  His  general  conduct,  as  a  man,  He 
<tid  all  things  well.  U.  Christ's  actions  were  performed  with  good  designs.  III. 
Christ's  actions  were  performed  in  an  amiable  and  graceful  manner.  Learn — 1.  How 
anjust  was  the  treatment  our  Lord  met  with  in  the  world.  2.  How  worthy  is  Christ 
«A  our  admiration,  reverence,  and  love.  3.  How  fit  is  it  that  we  imitate  this  excel- 
lent and  lovely  pattern.  4.  Let  it  be  our  concern  to  do  all  things  well.  (J.  Orton,) 
All  things  well : — I.  The  fact.  Creation  announces  it.  Providence  announces  it. 
Bedemption  announces  it.  II.  The  testimony.  Saints  testify  to  it.  Admirers 
astonished  at  it.  Critics  confess  it.  HI.  Thb  conbequbnce.  Those  who  oppose 
Christ  are  sure  to  perish,  for  the  right  must  prevail.  They  will  stand  self-con- 
demned. The  universe  will  say  "  Amen  "  to  their  condemnation,  for  they  have  con- 
spired bgainst  it.     (L.  Palmer,) 


CHAPTEB  VIII. 


Yebs.  1-9.  In  those  days  the  muIUtude  being  very  great,  and  having  nothing  to 
eat. — Christ  knows  and  supplies  our  need : — A  little  lad,  during  the  American  war, 
was  his  widowed  mother's  comfort  and  joy.  One  day,  as  the  poor  woman  was  trying 
to  scrape  the  fiour  from  the  sides  and  bottom  of  the  barrel  to  help  oat  the  day's 
supply,  the  lad  cried,  "  Mother,  we  shall  have  some  more  very  soon,  I  know !  " 
Why  do  you  say  so,  my  boy  ?  "  asked  the  mother.  •*  Why,  because  you've  got  to 
scraping  the  barrel.  I  believe  God  always  hears  you  scraping  the  barrel,  and  that's 
a  sign  to  Him  you  want  another."  And  before  the  day  was  over  the  fresh 
supply  had  come.  Feeding  the  people : — I.  Now  we  read  that  some  of  our  fore- 
most scientists — ^men  of  learning  and  research,  and  I  am  not  here  to  say  one  word 
against  them  or  their  noble  labours — have,  as  it  were,  if  not  formally,  tacitly 
AGREED  to  BANISH  GoD  FROM  His  OWN  CREATION.  They  Continually  declare  we  have 
nothing  to  do  with  God.  He  is  the  Unknown,  and  must  remain  for  ever  Unknow- 
able ;  we  are  Agnostics,  we  know  nothing  of  Him.  We  summarise  in  a  few  words 
the  net  results  of  the  development  theory  as  applied  to  the  food  of  man.  Within 
the  last  ten  years  special  investigations  have  been  directed  to  the  origin  and  growth 
of  com.  I  cannot  now  indicate  the  course  and  scope  of  these  researches  more  than 
to  say  that  we  have  two  ways  of  prosecuting  the  inquiry — by  the  records  of  history, 
and  by  the  deposits  of  geology.  And  their  teachings  in  fine  amount  to  this.  Wheat 
has  never  been  found  in  a  wild  state  in  any  country  in  the  world,  nor  in  any  age. 
It  has  no  development,  no  descent.  It  has  always  been  found  imder  the  same  con- 
ditions as  it  is  now — always  under  the  care  and  cultivation  of  man — never  existed 
where  man  did  not  cultivate  it.  Moreover,  it  has  never  been  found  in  a  fossil  state. 
So,  if  we  hearken  to  the  teachings  of  geology,  man  existed  long  before  his  staff  of 
Ufe.  The  most  minute  investigations  into  the  origin  of  wheat  have  failed  to  find  it 
under  any  conditions  in  the  least  different  from  what  it  is  with  us  to-day.  The 
oldest  grain  of  wheat  in  the  world  is  in  the  British  Museum,  and  this  has  been 
microscopically  examined  and  subjected  to  the  most  searching  analysis,  but  it  is 
found  to  be  in  all  respects  exactly  the  same  as  the  wheat  you  secured  a  fortnight 
ago  in  this  parish  in  the  Vale  of  Clwyd.  So  there  has  been  no  development  within 
the  records  of  history,  and  it  has  no  existence  in  the  deposits  of  geology.  Again  : 
the  power  and  the  means  of  perpetuating  its  own  existence  have  been  given  to  every 
living  and  growing  thing,  animal  and  vegetable,  and  this  is  carried  on  from  age  to 
age,  without  any  interference  on  the  part  of  man.  The  only  great  exception  to 
this  grand  and  beneficent  law  is  the  com — the  food  of  man.  A  crop  of  wheat  left 
to  itself,  in  any  latitude  or  country,  would,  in  the  third  or  fourth  year  of  its  first 
planting,  entirely  disappear.  It  has  no  power  to  master  its  surrounding  difiiculties 
so  as  to  become  self-perpetuating.  Thus  it  does  not  come  under  the  law  of  the 
"survival  of  the  fittest."  And  what  is  still  more  singular — we  have  never  more 
than  a  sufficient  supply  for  some  fourteen  months  or  thereabouts,  even  after  the 
most  bountiful  harvest,  and  it  has  been  calculated  that  we  are  often  within  a  week 
of  universal  starvation  should  one  harvest  totally  fail.  And  how  near  this  awful 
catastrophe  we  may  have  been  this  year  even,  God  only  knows.  A  shade  too  much, 
or  a  shade  too  little ;  and  oh  how  little,  and  it  might  have  been  I  And  science 
informs  us  that  the  wheat  has  untold  millions  of  enemies  peculiar  to  itself.  And 
no  wonder  it  is  a  matter  of  universal  rejoicings  when  another  harvest  has  been 


«HAF.  Tm.]  ST.  MARK. 


605 


jeonred,  and  the  farmer's  anxions  labours  have  been  crowned  with  euocess     II 

AUN  MUST  woBK.    And  this  is  nowhere  more  evident  than  in  the  harvest     Man 

must  plough  and  harrow,  and  bow  and  reap,  and  bind  and  gather  into  bams,  and 

thresh  and  grind,  and  knead  and  bake,  and  the  hundred  and  one  other  little  things 

allotted  as  his  honourable  share  in  this  grand  concern  ;  otherwise  his  body,  with  its 

mysterious  relations  to  earth  and  sky,  to  time  and  eternity,  to  matter  and  spirit 

wul  not  receive  the  nourishment  intended  for  its  growth  and  work,  though  all  the 

cycles  of  immensity  were  kept  to  shed  their  benign  influences  on  field  and  meadow 

and  homestead.     And  on  the  other  hand,  man  may  do  all  his  part,  and  yet  not  one 

single  grain  could  he  gather  into  bam  or  rick  if  our  heavenly  Father  did  not  cause 

the  earth  to  revolve,  the  planets  to  move,  the  inconstant  moon  to  wend  its  way 

along  the  star-bespangled  firmament,  the  river  to  roll  on  its  pebbly  bed,  the  myriad- 

laughing  ocean  in  its  cradle  to  ebb  and  flow,  the  entrancing  landscapes  of  the  sun- 

tmted  clouds  to  sail  in  the  balmy  ah:,  and  the  barriers  of  the  dawn  to  be  loosened 

that  the  golden  rays  of  the  lord  of  day  may  dance  on  the  petals  of  the  flowering 

wheat,  and  kiss  the  dew  from  the  lips  of  the  lily.    Now  sublimate  this  thought  into 

the  domain  of  the  gospel,  and  you  will  have  our  part— our  bodily  and  mental 

part,  httle  though  it  be— in  the  spiritual  and  eternal  life.     For  instance,  you  have 

power  over  your  own  limbs  to  come  here  to  God's  house,  to  bow  the  knee,  to  blend 

your  voice  in  psalm  and  litany,  to  kneel  before  the  holy  table  and  receive  the 

visible  symbols  of  ffis  Divine  presence,  and  demean  yourselves  in  bodily  and  mental 

posture  as  men  who  feel  that  God  is  amongst  you ;  but  after  all  you  will  go  away 

empty  if  the  Holy  Spirit  be  not  here  to  carry  the  words  from  the  Ups  of  the 

preacher  to  the  heart  of  the  hearer,  and  your  Holy  Communion  will  be  an  ideal 

ceremony  if  God's  presence  be  not  here  to  bless  and  satisfy  the  faithful  worshipper 

In  one  and  the  truest  sense,  aU  is  of  God,  but  He  wiU  not  take  you  to  heaven  in 

spite  of  yourselves.     •*  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  for 

it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure." 

III.  Thesk  mieaoles  aeb  chabaoteristio  of  oub  Lobd  Himself,  His   life,  His 

WORK.    Contrast  this  miracle  of  feeding  the  multitudes  with  our  Lord's  refusal  at 

Satan's  bidding,  to  convert  the  stones  of  the  desert  into  bread  for  His  own  sake 

Our  Lord's  temptations  and  sufferings  and  death  were  all  for  the  sake  of  others-^ 

of  us— of  me  a  sinner— of  the  human  family.     (D.  Williams,)         God*i  food  the 

only  satUfaction  ."--y  And  they  were  fiUed."    No  true  wealth  except  the  harvest. 

All  the  gold  and  silver  are  simply  means  of  exchange :  they  have  a  purchasing 

power;    nothing  is  true  wealth  but  the  harvest     The  harvest  alone  enriches, 

the  harvest  alone  satisfies.    If  the  harvest  once  failed,  your  gold  and  precious 

stones  would   soon  become   only  so  much   dross   to    be  flung  away.     Riches 

pleasure,  fame,  empires  even,  do  not  satisfy;    these  things  only   increase  the 

hunger  of  the  soul,  created  to  have  its  enjoyment  and  satisfaction  in  God  alone. 

The  food  m  which  God  is  present  alone  satisfies.    If  God  be  here  you  will  not 

go  away  empty.     The  Divine  presence  gives  etemal  satisfaction.     "Labour  not 

for  the  meat  which  perisheth,  but  for  that  which  endureth   onto   everlasting 

life."     {Ibid.)         Fragment  gatherers :— The  apostles  —  the  agents  who  were 

chosen  to  distribute  amongst  the  multitudes  the  food  which  Jesus  blessed were 

privileged  to  gather  the  fragments.  Oh,  what  precious  fragments  all  who  help  to 
administer  bread  to  the  perishing  souls  receive  back  themselves  I  The  preacher, 
the  teacher,  the  district  visitor,  if  their  own  hearts  be  in  the  right  place,  what 
lessons  of  encouragement,  self-disoipline,  and  mutual  lovel  what  precious  frag, 
ments  in  the  respect,  gratitude,  and  affection  from  those  amongst  whom  they 
minister,  do  they  not  receive !  Virtue  is  its  own  reward.  Do  good,  and  the  basket 
of  fragments  is  yours.  The  less  the  material,  the  greater  the  number  fed,  the 
more  fragments.  Strange  arithmetic  I  But  it  is  the  rale  of  three  and  practice  of 
God,  This  is  trae  of  all  lives.  Those  who  have  large  means,  and  do  but  little,  have 
no  fragments  to  gather.  (Ibid.)  How  many  loaves  have  ye  /- The  miracle  was 
made  less  startling,  less  striking,  by  the  actual  manner  of  performing  it.  The 
moment  of  its  beginning  was  veiled.  The  first  recipients  took  common  bread. 
The  multiplication  was  imperceptible.  It  was  only  reflection  which  would  convince. 
The  transition  was  so  gradual  from  the  natural  to  the  supernatural,  from  the 
common  into  the  miraculous,  that  careless  or  superficial  observers  might  rise  from 
the  meal  half  unaware  that  a  Divine  hand  had  been  working.  In  all  this  we  see 
much  that  is  Christlike.  As  no  man  (Prophecy  said)  should  hear  His  voice  in  the 
streets,  so  no  man  should  be  forced  to  track  His  path  in  the  self-manifestation  of 
His  glory.    There  was  nothing  glaring  or  for  effect,  nothing  (as  we  should  now  say) 


806  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

sensational,  even  in  His  signs.     Christ  sought  rather  to  show  how  alike,  how  con- 
sistent, are  all  God's  acts  ;  those  which  He  does  every  day  in  Providence,  and  those 
which  He  keeps  commonly  out  of   sight  in  grace.     When  that  which  began  in 
eating  common  bread  changed  imperceptibly  into  eating  food  multiplied  by  miracle, 
that  was  a  type  of  God's  *'  two  worlds,"  the  one  seen,  the  other  unseen,  yet  each 
the  counterpart  and  complement  of  the  other,  and  separated  each  from  each  by  the 
thinnest  possible  veil  of  present  mystery.     Christ  might  have  wrought  this  miracle 
without  asking  for,  without  making  use  of,  the  seven  loaves.     But  He  did  not.     In 
like  manner,  Christ  might  now,  in  His  Church  and  in  His  world,  dispense  with 
everything  that  is  ours ;  might  begin  afresh.    Instead  He  asks  for  the  seven  loaves 
that  we  have.    The  applications  of  this  truth  are  many  and  various.    I.  Wb  bbx 
IT  IN  INSPIRATION.     When  it  pleased  God  to  give  us  a  book  of  light,  it  was  in  Hia 
power  to  have  made  it  all  His  own.     But  the  human  element  mixes  with  the 
Divine.    Bring  forth  all  your  gifts,  such  as  they  are,  of  understanding  and  culture 
and  knowledge  and  utterance ;  bring  them  forth,  all  ye  holy  and  humble  men  of 
heart,  Moses  and  Samuel,  David  and  Isaiah,  Ezra  and  Ezekiel,  Paul  and  John, 
Luke  and  Mark,  Matthew  and  Peter ;  and  then  Christ,  taking  them  at  your  hands, 
shall  give  them  back  to  you  blessed  and  blessing,  to  be  to  generations  yet  unborn 
the  light  of  their  life  and  the  consolation  of  their  sleep  and  of  their  awakening. 
n.  That  which  is  tbub  op  the  Book  is  true  also  op  the  lipe.    "  How  many 
loaves  have  ye  ?  "    Christ  puts  that  question  to  the  young  man,  whose  course  ia 
not  yet  shaped  definitely  towards  this  profession  or  that,  and  who  would  fain  so  pass 
through  things  temporal  that  he  finally  lose  not  the  things  eternal.     Christ  bida 
him  to  ponder  with  himself  each  particular  of  his  character  and  of  his  history ; 
gifts  of   nature  and  of  education,  gifts  of  mind  and  body,  gifts  of  habit  and 
inclination,  gifts   of  connection  and  acquaintanceship,  gifts  of  experience  and 
self-knowledge ;  and  to  bring  these,  like  a  man — not  standing  idle  because  he  has 
not  heard  or  felt  himself  hired:  not  excusing  himself  from  obeying  because  hia 
loaves  are  but  seven,  or  because  they  are  coarse  or  stale  or  mouldy^ — but  to  bring 
them  to  Him  who  made  and  will  bless.    How  many  loaves  have  ye  ?    Nothing  ? 
Not  a  soul  ?  not  a  body  ?  not  time  ?  not  one  friend,  not  one  neighbour,  not  one 
servant,  to  whom  a  kind  word  may  be  spoken,  or  a  kind  deed  done,  in  the  name, 
for  the  love,  of  Jesus?    Bring  that — do  that,  say  that — as  what  thou  hast;  very 
small,  very  trivial,  very  worthless,  if  thou  wilt :  yet  remember  the  saying,  "  She 
hath  done  what  she  could."    There  are  others  but  too  confident  in  their  gifts  and 
in  their  doings.    It  is  not  without  its  risk,  even  a  life  of  charity,  even  a  life  of 
ministry.    Are  you  quite  sure,  that,  bringing  out  your  seven  loaves,  you  brought 
them  to  Christ  for  that  blessing  which  alone  gives  increase  ?    Nothing  works  of 
itself — ^nothing  by  human  willing  or  human  running — but  only  by  the  grace  of  Him 
who  giveth  liberally,  and  who  showeth  mercy.     Most  of  all,  that  which  would 
help  Christ's  own  work — to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  is  lost.    "How  many 
loaves  have  ye?  '*    The  question  is  asked  of  the  man — it  is  asked  also  of  the  oom- 
monity.     (C.  J,  Vaughan,  D.D.)        Wherever  there  is  anything  new,  unusual,  or 
exciting  going  on,  there  the  crowd  is  sure  to  collect.    These  people  were  in  dis- 
tressing  bodUy  want.    It  seems  a  little  singular  that  this  multitude  should  have  so 
forgotten  themselves,  as  to  hurry  out  thus  unprovided  into  the  empty  wUdemesa. 
We  should  never  see  half  the  distress  we  do,  if  people  were  only  a  little  more  con- 
siderate and  thoughtful.    But  it  was  to  the  credit  of  these  people  that  the  distress 
they  suffered  was  incurred  by  what  was  commendable.    With  a  right  appreciation 
of  Christ,  it  would  be  no  unwisdom  to  perish  in  following  after  Him,  rather  than 
to  live  in  ease  by  forsaking  Him.     There  was  no  relief  for  the  multitude  in  the 
common  course  of  things.    But  man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity.    And  what 
a  picture  is  thus  given  na  of  the  tenderness  and  goodness  of  our  Lord  I    Jesus 
pities  people  in  want  of  bread  for  the  body,  as  well  as  those  in  want  of  food  for 
their  souls.    He  enters  into  our  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual  needs.     Nor  was  His 
compassion  a  mere  empty  sentiment.    It  stimulated  to  action.     It  exhibited  itseU 
in  deed.    It  set  to  relieve  the  distress  that  stirred  it.    It  would  not  be  right  to 
expect  such  interpositions  as  a  common  thing.    God  has  His  own  ways  for  dealing 
out  to  men  their  daily  bread,  which  must  be  regarded ;  but  hia  resources  are  not 
limited.     But  there  is  method  in  this  marvellous  relief.     **8o  they  did  eat." 
1.  There  were  directions  given  which  had  to  be  obeyed.    And  so  there  are  com< 
mands  to  be  observed  in  order  to  get  the  bread  of  life.    There  must  be  a  coming 
down,  a  sitting  in  the  dust  at  Jesus'  feet,  a  hu    illation  of  self  to  His  orders  and 
institiitat.    S.  He  took  what  the  people  had,  an   added  His  power  and  blessing  to 


CHAP,  vm.]  ST.  MARK.  SOT 

it,  and  thus  furnished  the  requisite  supplies.  They  had  seven  oakes  and  a  few 
small  fishes.  Grace  was  never  meant  to  supersede  nature,  but  to  work  upon  it,  to 
help  it,  bless  it,  and  alugment  it.  God  is  a  frugal  economist.  He  never  ^tastes  what 
already  exists.  He  is  never  prodigal  in  His  creations.  We  have  eyes,  and  ears,  and 
hearts,  and  understanding  wills,  which  can  be  of  good  service  in  our  salvation.  All 
that  they  need  is  to  be  brought  to  Christ,  submitted  to  His  handling,  bathed  in  His 
words  of  blessing,  and  filled  with  His  power,  to  serve  most  effectually.  3.  But  the 
food  He  furnished  was  given  to  these  hungry  ones  only  through  second  hands.  The 
bread  and  the  fishes  He  "  gave  to  His  disciples  to  set  before  them,  and  they  did  set 
them  before  the  people."  Christ  has  appointed  a  ministry — an  office  which  is  filled 
by  men,  who,  by  His  authority  and  command,  are  set  apart  and  ordained  to 
officiate  between  Christ  and  their  fellows.  And  where  there  has  been  no  ministry, 
there  has  been  no  salvation.  The  bread  of  life  no  man  can  have,  until  it  is  minis- 
terially  conveyed  to  him.  Be  it  through  the  living  voice,  or  the  written  page,  or 
the  solemn  sacrament,  that  voice  implies  a  speaker,  that  page  a  writer,  that  sacra- 
ment  an  administrator,  who  is  God's  appointed  agent  for  the  carrying  of  it  to  him 
who  gets  it.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  I)D.)  Faith  in  Christ  helpful  against  hunger : — There 
be  those  who  make  sport  of  the  thought  that  faith  in  Christ  can  help  against  the 
pangs  of  hunger,  or  the  pinchings  of  bodily  need.  That  a  religious  sentiment 
should  serve  to  put  bread  in  the  mouths  of  the  destitute,  is  to  them  ridiculous. 
And  even  unfledged  apostles  are  often  in  such  unfaith  as  to  be  in  pei^plexity  and 
doubt  if  He  who  saves  the  soul  can  also  feed  the  body.  The  world,  in  its  wisdom,  does 
not  know  Christ,  and  so  it  doubts  Him,  and  laughs  at  trust  in  Him.  Well-meaning 
peeple  get  wrong  in  their  Christology,  and  it  sets  them  wrong  at  every  other  point. 
Let  men  learn  that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  of  bodies,  as  well  as  of  souls ;  that  He  is  the 
Lord  of  harvests  and  of  bread,  as  well  as  of  moral  precepts  and  spiritual  counsels; 
that  He  lives  not  only  in  a  system  of  doctrines  and  rehgious  tenets,  but  also  in 
sovereign  potency  over  all  the  products  of  land  and  sea,  as  well  as  over  all  the  hidden 
principles  of  production ;  that  He  is  not  only  a  marvellous  prophet  of  truth  who  lived 
in  the  time  long  past,  but  also  an  enthroned  king  of  the  living  present,  swaying  His 
potent  sceptre  over  all  worlds,  all  nations,  and  all  affairs,  and  dispensing  His 
comforts,  blessings,  and  rebukes  untrammelled  by  laws  in  nature  or  the  economies  of 
earth  ;  and  doubt  will  cease  as  to  whether  faith  in  Him  may  not  bring  bread  to  the 
destitute,  as  well  as  pardon  to  the  guilty,  or  hope  of  heaven  to  the  dying.  (Ibid.) 
A  picture  of  man*s  life : — In  the  desert  of  this  world  he  is  in  continual  want,  hun- 
gering and  thirsting  in  the  midst  of  its  transitory  delights,  and  longing  to  be  filled 
with  food.  Sin  offers  itself,  and  the  world  tempts  him  with  its  barren  show,  but 
these  cannot  satisfy.  Only  when  he  follows  Christ,  knowing  that  he  is  sick,  and 
owning  that  he  is  blind  in  soul,  and  maimed  in  will,  and  attesting  by  his  stedfast- 
ness  in  continuing  with  his  Saviour  the  earnestness  of  his  desire  for  the  help  which 
comes  from  above,  will  Christ  give  him  that  water  which  whosoever  drinketh 
thereof  shall  never  thirst,  and  that  bread,  even  Himself,  which  came  down  from 
heaven.  In  this  miracle  we  are  taught — 1.  The  promptness  with  which  Christ 
succours  us.  We  see  this  in  His  providing  bread  before  the  multitude  hungered, 
and  in  His  care  lest  afterwards  they  should  faint  by  the  way.  2.  The  motive 
causes  for  all  God's  mercies  to  us,  viz.,  our  needs  and  our  dangers.  3.  The  true 
effects  of  God's  mercy — what  He  gives  us  is  that  true  food  which  really  satisfies, 
and  which  alone  can  satisfy,  the  whole  nature  of  man.  {W.  Denton,  M.A.)  The 
multitude  fed : — Christ  came  into  personal  contact  with  human  wants  and  woes. 

1.  Some  characteristics  of  this  miracle  as  contrasted  with  others.  1.  The 
desire  to  grant  this  blessing  originated  with  Christ  Himself.  How  comforting  to 
know  that  He  does  not  mete  out  His  mercies  in  the  scant  measure  of  our  prayers. 

2.  A  striking  instance  of  prevention,  rather  than  cure.  From  how  many  ills 
unthought  of,  dangers  unseen,  woes  unimagined,  are  we  daily  delivered  by  the 
preventing  grace  of  God.  3.  Human  intervention  employed.  Christ  the  source  of 
supply  ;  the  disciples  privileged  to  dispense  His  bounty.  4.  Unbelief  in  the  inner- 
most circle  of  disciples.  5.  A  vast  multitude  were  benefited.  II.  The  mtraclk 
itseu.  1.  Illustrates  Christ's  care  for  the  bodies  of  men.  2.  The  abundance  ol 
God's  bounty.  The  more  we  feed  upon  Christ,  the  Bread  of  Life,  the  more  there 
is  to  feed  upon.  3.  The  need  of  daily  feeding  on  Christ.  The  miracle  falls  short 
here.  To  feed  once  for  all  is  not  sufficient.  It  is  because  they  think  it  is  that  so 
many  are  spiritually  sickly  and  weak.  (JR  W.  Forrest,  M.A.)  On  the  encourage- 
ment which  the  gospel  affordt  to  active  duty: — I.  One  singular  feature  in  the 
character  of  our  Lord — His  supsbiobity  to  all  the  selfish  passions  of  oub  natubk. 


MS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  wtia. 

This  miracle  demonstrated  His  power  over  nature,  and  taught  those  who  witnessed 
it  that  if  His  kingdom  were  of  this  world  He  possessed  the  power  to  maintain  it. 
They  would  naturally  wish  to  assemble  under  such  a  Leader.  It  is  at  this  moment* 
when  all  the  vulgar  passions  of  hope  and  ambition  were  working  in  the  minds  of 
the  multitude,  **  that  He  sends  them  away ;  "  to  show  them  that  His  kingdom  was 
spiritual.     II.  The  chakacteb  of  His  religion.     The  systems  of  pretended  revela- 
tdon  which  prevail  in  the  world  encourage  either  superstition  or  enthusiasm,  and 
have  often  separated  piety  from  morality.     They  have  drawn  men  from  the  sphere 
of  social  duty  to  unmeaning  devotions.     Christ  assembles  the  multitude  that  He 
may  instruct  them.   III.  We  abe  the  multitdde  descbibed  in  this  passage  of  tbb 
Gospel.     We  have  heard  that  there  was  a  great  Prophet  come  into  the  world  for 
the  purpose  of  spiritual  improvement.     He  has  spread  before  us,  in  the  wildernest 
of  human  life,  that  greater  feast,  of  spirit  and  of  mind,  which  may  save  us  *•  from 
fainting  on  our  way."     The  services  we  are  called  to  perform  in  the  cause  of 
humanity.    "  That  they  who  had  eaten  were  about  four  thousand."    The  number 
who  have  this  day  approached  the  same  Lord,  and  heard  the  same  accents  of  sal- 
vation, are  countless  millions  of  the  family  of  God.     {A.  Alison,  LL.B,)        Satis- 
faction  for  the  food  in  the  wilderness : — I.  Satisfaction.    Is  not  the  Church  tired 
out,  fainting  ?    Is  not  the  world  a  wilderness  to  you  ?    Does  not  the  Spirit  of  God 
make  you  feel  the  nothingness  of  everything  upon  earth  f    Christ  the  only  satis- 
faction.   II.  The  thing  that  satisfies  a  man.    Bread.    III.  The  place  where  these 
individuals  were  to  have  that  satisfaction.     {J,  J,  West,  M.A.)        Second  miracle 
of  feeding  the  multitude : — It  could  hardly  have  been  without  some  special  reason 
that  the  same  miracle  should  have  been  worked  twice  by  Christ  with  scarcely  any 
variation  of  detail,  and  twice  recorded  with  so  very  great  attention  to  detail.    Id 
each  case,  too,  Christ  Himself  drew  from  the  miracle  teaching  of  the  highest 
importance.     Notice  these  points  of  similarity.    I.  In  bach  cask  Jesus,  beholding 
THE  multitude  OF  PEOPLE,  HAS  COMPASSION  ON  THEM.    That  is  the  Origin  and  source 
of  help  for  man.    Because  of  His  compassion — 1.  He  came  from  heaven  to  earth 
to  bring  to  famishing  men  the  Bread  of  Life.     2.  He  sends  to  us  His  Church,  by 
and  through  the  ministry  of  which  He  gives  us  all  the  means  of  grace.     He  takes 
just  what  we  have,  water,  bread,  wine — all  insufficient  of  themselves — and  by  His 
power  makes  them  more  than  sufficient  for  our  needs.  3.  He  looks  at  us  not  in  the 
mass,  but  one  by  one.    It  is  the  individual  soul  which  is  the  factor  in  the  mind  ol 
God.  II.  In  each  case,  befobe  wobeing  the  mibacle.  He  dbaws  fbom  the  disciples  a 
declabation  of  their  inability  to  supply  unassisted  that  which  was  needed.  ih. 
In  each  case  He  takes,  nevertheless,  that  which  they  have,  and  makes  it  suffi- 
cient. ••  How  many  loaves  have  ye  ?  "  "  Seven."   1.  The  gift  of  baptismal  grace — the 
germ  of  all  graces.   2.  The  sevenfold  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  bestowed  in  confirma- 
tion. 3.  The  Holy  Communion.  4.  All  the  means  of  grace.  The  Word  of  God.  Oppor- 
tunities  of  public  worship.     6.  The  power  of  repentance.     6.  The  gift  of  prayer. 
7.  The  ministry  of  the  Church.    So  that  we  have,  after  all,  a  great  deal ;  if  we  use 
these  gifts  faithfully,  by  God's  blessing  they  will  more  than  suffice  for  the  want» 
of  our  souls.    IV.  In  each  case  He  commanded  the  multitude  to  bit  down.    We 
must  come  to  receive  God's  blessing  obediently,  quietly,  calmly.    Need  of  this 
lesson  in  a  busy,  energetic  age,  so  restless  and  so  excited.    We  need  more  repose 
ef  mind  and  character.    It  is  good  to  be  "  up  and  doing,"  but  there  are  times  when 
it  is  well  for  us  to  sit  still.    The  life  most  free  from  feverish  excitement  is  the  life 
most  likely  to  profit  by  God's  gifts.    1.  "  Sit  down  '*  before  you  say  your  prayers, 
if  you  would  really  have  them  answered.    Becall  your  thoughts,  be  patient  and 
quiet  and  humble,  try  to  remember  to  Whom  you  are  about  to  speak,  and  what  it  i» 
you  are  going  to  ask,  what  you  really  need.    2.  "  Sit  down  "  before  your  acts  of 
public  worship.    Let  there  be  more  restfulness  about  your  worship,  more  repose 
©f  thought,  more  concentration  of  thought  on  what  you  are  about  to  do.     3.  "  Sit 
down  "  before  each  communion  you  make  (1  Cor.  xi.  28).     (1)  Let  me  calmly, 
honestly,  and  thoughtfully  look  into  my  past  life,  especially  examining  that  part 
•f  it  that  has  been  lived  since  my  last  communion.     (2)  Let  me  see  where  I  am, 
and  what  I  am.     |3)  Let  me  try  my  best  to  see  my  sins  as  they  really  are,  and  a» 
they  are  recorded  m  God's  book.     (4)  Let  me  truly  repent  of  past  sins,  and  make 
my  humble  confession  to  God,  honestly  purposing  amendment  of  life.    V.  In  bach 

CASE,  EITHEB  at  HiS  COMMAND  OB  WITH  HiS  APPROVAL,  THB  FRAGMENTS  ARE  OATHBRED 

BP.  God's  gifts,  whether  temporal  or  spiritual,  are  never  to  be  wasted.  He  givea 
with  a  splendid  liberality,  but  only  in  order  that  His  gifts  may  be  used.  Gathet 
W9 — 1.  Fragments  of  time.    2.  Fragments  of  opportunities.    3.  Fragments  of 


^■^♦▼ai.]    8T,  MARK,  SOf 

poral  goodg.  4.  Fragments  of  prayer,  repentance,  worghip,  grace.   (Canon Ingram.) 
Divine  law  o/ tncr«faj»«  .-—Usually  a  single  man  needed  three  of  these  loaves  for  a 
meal,  and  here  were  more  than  a  thousand  supplied  by  each  loaf.    Nobody  can 
tell  how  it  was  done,  any  more  than  we  can  understand  how  God  began  to  make 
the  world  when  there  was  nothing  anywhere.    It  may  be  objected  that  the  Lord 
does  not  feed  us  now  in  this  way ;  that,  if  we  want  bread,  we  must  work  for  it. 
But  thmk  about  it,  and  you  will  see  His  power  and  kindness  just  as  plainly  in 
gxvmg  us  food  in  reward  for  our  labour.     We  plant  single  kernels  of  grain,  and 
God  makes  each  one  grow  into  a  great  many.    What  is  this  but  another  way  of 
multiplying  the  loaves  T    How  hard  and  dead  the  seed  looks  when  we  put  it  into 
the  ground.    The  rain  and  the  sun  find  it  there,  and  the  yearly  wonder  begins. 
The  seed  swells  and  bursts ;  a  wee  pale  root  cornea  out  and  goes  down  into  the 
earth  ;  another  shoots  up  to  the  surface.    They  look  very  tiny  and  weak,  but  a 
microscope  shows  that  the  tender  cells  are  protected  by  tough  coverings,  sometunes 
even  by  particles  of  flint  along  the  edges,  so  that  they  can  push  their  way  through 
the  earth.     One  acre  of  soil,  three  inches  deep,  weighs  a  million  pounds,  and  all 
that  is  stirred  and  lifted  by  these  growing  fibres.    Up  come  the  stalks,  straight  and 
slender,  yet  so  tough  and  elastic  that  when  the  wind  blows  they  can  bend  clear  to 
the  ground,  and  then  spring  back  again,  as  the  strongest  tree  can  hardly  do.    Soon 
a  spike  of  tiny  flowers  appears  on  top,  then  a  cluster  of  kernels,  and  at  last  the 
whole  gets  yellow  and  ripe.    Is  not  this  work  of  God's  stranger  and  more  beautiful 
than  turning  one  piece  of  bread  into  a  thousand  just  like  it  T    (C.  M.  Southgate.) 
So  they  did  eat,  and  were  filled  .-—In  the  original  it  is,  "  They  were  fed  to  satisfac- 
tion.*'   That  such  a  result  followed,  was  the  consequence  of  their  being  fed  by  Him 
alone  who  satisfies  the  empty  soul,  and  fiUeth  the  hungry  soul  with  gladness. 
There  is  need  to  be  reminded  of  this  in  an  age  when  men  are  pointed  to  other 
sources  of  satisfaction— to  education,  to  culture,  and  to  refinement,  and  bidden  to 
find  their  highest  enjoyment  in  these  and  such-like  pursuits.    If  they  bear  no 
reference  to  Him  towards  whom  all  that  i«  noblest  and  best  in  nature  and  art  is 
designed  to  lead  us,  they  will  turn  out  to  be  but  broken  cisterns  that  hold  no  water. 
(£f.  Af.  Luekoek,  D.D.)        Help  in  extremity ;— May  we  not  learn  from  this  miracle 
how  Christ  will  exercise  acts  of  special  providence  to  help  and  succour  those  who 
are  following  Him  ?    Dean  Hook  mentions  a  striking  instance  of  this.    There  was 
an  individual  who  gave  up  a  profitable  employment,  acting  under  advice,  and  not 
from  the  mere  caprice  of  his  own  judgment,  because  he  thought,  taking  his  tempta- 
tions into  acoonnt,  he  could  not  follow  it  without  peril  to  his  soul.    And  after  many 
reverses  he  was  reduced  to  such  a  state  of  distress  that  the  last  morsel  in  the  house 
had  been  consumed,  and  he  had  not  bread  to  give  his  children.    His  faith  did  not, 
however,  forsake  him;  and  when  his  distress  was  at  its  height,  he  received  a  visit  from 
one  who  called  to  pay  him  a  debt  he  had  never  hoped  to  recover,  but  the  payment 
of  which  enabled  him  to  support  his  family  until  he  again  obtained  employment. 
Man's  food-supply ;— The  question  of  the  disciples  has  been  the  natural  question  of 
all  thinkers  at  all  times.     The  foremost  difficulty  to  be  encountered  everywhere 
is  the  difficulty  of  getting  daily  bread  for  self  or  others  in  this  wilderness,  this  land 
of  tiiorns  and  thistles.    We,  indeed,  raised  above  our  fellows  by  centuries  of 
civilization,  only  partially  feel  the  direct  pressure  of  bodily  hunger,  only  occa- 
sionally realize  the  paramount  necessity  which  governs  the  life  of  man — the 
necessity  of  procuring  food.    But,  in  fact,  a  vast  proportion  of  all  human  effort 
and  anxiety  is  directed  to  this  one  point ;  whatever  else  is  left  undone,  this  must  be 
done :  only  if  there  is  any  time  and  vigour  over  when  daily  bread  is  secured  can 
it  be  spent  on  other  things,  on  comforts  and  adornments  for  the  body,  on  learning 
and  improvement  for  the  mind.     There  is,  perhaps,  no  animal  that  has  to  spend 
BO  large  a  part  of  his  time  in  procuring  the  food  he  needs  as  man.     And  when  he 
has  got  it,  it  will  not  satisfy  him  as  their  daily  food  will  satisfy  the  other  creatures. 
No  sooner  is  he  filled  than  he  finds  out  that  man  cannot  live  by  bread  alone ;  that 
he  cannot  be  satisfied  from  any  earthly  stores ;  that  he  wants  something  more,  and 
has  another  kind  of  hanger.    This  is,  of  course,  because  God  has  made  him  with  a 
Bonl  as  well  as  a  body,  and  has  so  made  this  soul  and  body  that  each  requires  its 
own  proper  food.    Indeed,  we  must  acknowledge  that  we  are  the  most  dependent 
•f  all  creatures ;   we  cannot  go  a  few  hours  without  suffering  pangs  of  hanger, 
whieh  must  be  stilled  at  any  cost  or  risk,  or  else  we  die;  and  when  this  craving  is 
appeased,  then  the  hunger  of  the  soul  awakes,  and  it  demands  to  be  satisfied  with 
something-. it  knowi  not  what,  perhaps;  for  Qod  has  made  as  for  Himself,  made 
oi  to  b«  Mtiifled  with  nothing    m  than  Himself,  made  as  to  b«  entirely  disHtiiiol 


ait  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  wn. 

and  disoontented  without  Himself.  {^R.  Winterhotham,  M.A.)  This  world  a 
wilderness: — Men  often  talk  about  this  life  as  being  a  wilderness,  and  they  are 
right ;  but  do  you  know  why,  and  in  what  sense  ?  What  is  the  wilderness  to  which 
•ur  wrthlj  life  is  like,  the  wilderness  in  which  our  Lord  worked  this  and  other 
miracles  ?  Is  it  a  great  howling  expanse  of  sand  and  rock,  with  nought  but  blazing 
earth  below  and  blazing  sky  above  ?  Is  it  the  vast  and  terrible  desert,  where  fiery 
death  pursues  the  steps  of  the  unhappy  traveller,  where  doleful  creatures  cry,  and 
whitening  bones  lie  all  about  ?  If  this  were  the  wilderness,  then  would  our  life  be 
very  unlike  one.  .  .  ,  The  wildernesses  of  Palestine,  like  "  the  bush "  in 
Australia,  are  not  by  any  means  always  barren,  or  ugly,  or  desolate :  often  they 
are  very  beautiful,  and  very  productive  ;  only,  their  beauty  and  productiveness  are 
so  uncertain,  so  unreliable,  so  disappointing,  that  no  one  can  live  there  or  make 
his  home  there — unless,  indeed,  he  receives  his  supplies  from  somewhere  else. 
Now,  our  hfe  is  just  like  the  wilderness  in  this  sense :  very  often  it  is  full  of 
beauty,  of  grace,  of  life,  of  promise  ;  there  are  times  when  every  element  of  hope 
and  contentment  seems  present  in  abundance.  But  all  this  beauty  and  promise 
will  not  satisfy  the  soul  of  man,  however  much  it  may  please  his  fancy  and  his 
tastei  Suppose  you  found  yourself  in  the  wilderness  among  the  grasses  and 
flowers,  could  you  feed  on  them  ?  Could  you  sustain  life  on  them  ?  No ;  however 
lovely  and  luxuriant  they  might  be,  however  grateful  as  elements  in  a  landscape, 
they  would  not  appease  your  hunger  ;  your  limbs  would  grow  weak,  your  eyes 
would  fail,  your  head  would  swim,  and  you  would  fall  and  starve  and  die  amongst 
the  dewy  grasses  and  the  many-coloured  flowers.  Even  so  would  it  be  if  you  tried 
to  satisfy  your  immortal  souls  with  the  pleasures  and  beauties,  and  joys  and  riches, 
of  this  hfe.  We  should  be  other  than  human  if  we  did  not  like  them,  we  should 
be  very  ungrateful  if  we  did  not  give  thanks  for  them — but,  all  the  same,  we  cannot 
be  satisfied  with  them ;  the  old  craving  would  return — we  should  feel  ourselves 
discontented,  miserable,  perishing,  amidst  all  the  abundance  of  this  world.  (Ibid.) 
God  alone  can  satisfy : — It  is  easy  enough  to  please  people  in  the  wilderness  if 
you  go  at  the  right  time ;  the  beauly  of  the  landscape,  the  buoyancy  of  the  air,  the 
exhilarating  sense  of  freedom  and  expanse — all  these  are  delightful.  It  is  easy  to 
amuse  people  in  the  wilderness,  with  so  many  new  things  to  be  looked  at  and 
admired ;  it  is  easy  to  lead  them  on  further  and  further  from  home,  into  a  region 
where  there  are  no  barriers  and  few  landmarks.  But  to  satisfy  them — that  we 
cannot  do  ;  that  can  only  be  done,  in  the  wilderness,  by  the  Divine  power  of  Christ. 
He  only  can  feed  the  myriads  of  famishing  souls  which,  even  in  listening  to  Hia 
words,  have  only  felt  their  hunger  growing  keener.  He  can  and  will,  and  it  makes 
no  difference  to  Him  how  many  the  people,  how  few  the  loaves,  they  shall  all  be 
satisfied  and  go  home  in  the  strength  of  that  food;  He  can  and  will,  and  it  makes 
no  difference  to  Him  how  many  millions  of  souls  are  waiting  upon  Him  for 
spiritual  food — how  feeble,  apparently,  and  paltry  the  means  of  grace  by  which  He 
designs  to  feed  them.  (Ibid.)  Scattering  yet  increasing : — Good  husbandry 
does  not  grind  up  all  the  year's  wheat  for  loaves  for  one's  own  eating,  but  keeps 
some  of  it  for  seed,  to  be  scattered  in  the  furrows.  And  if  Christian  men  will  deal 
with  the  great  love  of  God,  the  great  work  of  Christ,  the  great  message  of  the 
gospel,  as  if  it  were  bestowed  on  them  for  their  own  sakes  only,  they  will 
have  only  themselves  to  blame  if  holy  desires  die  out  in  their  hearts,  and  the 
consciouBness  of  Christ's  love  becomes  faint,  and  all  the  blessed  words  of  truth 
come  to  sound  far  off  and  mythical  in  their  ears.  The  standing  water  gets  green 
scum  on  it.  The  close-shut  barn  breeds  weevils  and  smut.  Let  the  water  run. 
Fling  the  seed  broadcast.  Thou  shalt  find  it  after  many  days — bread  for  thy  own 
soul.  (A.  Maclareny  D.D.)  The  conditions  of  increase : — The  condition  of 
increase  is  diffusion.  To  impart  to  others  is  to  gain  for  oneself.  Every  honest 
effort  to  bring  some  other  human  heart  into  conscious  possession  of  Christ's  love 
deepens  my  own  sense  of  its  preciousness.  If  you  would  learn,  teach.  You  will 
catch  new  gleams  of  His  gracious  heart  in  the  very  act  of  commending  it  to 
others.  Work  for  God  if  you  would  live  with  God.  Give  the  bread  to  the  hungry, 
if  you  wotdd  have  it  for  the  food  of  your  own  souls.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  10-43.  SeeUiig:  of  Elm  a  sign  ttom  heaven,  tempting  Elm. — Seeking  a 
aign: — I.  The  unbeasonableness  op  this  bequest.  1.  Injother  matters  the^  wer« 
not  scrupulous  of  evidence — tradition.  2.  They  had  *the  signs  of  tfietimes— 
iBfiSTsting  m  a  combinatidft  (Jr~et6fit§"giving  fulfilment  to  their  own  Scripturts, 
J.  They  had  His  miracles — unquestioned.    4.  They  had  even  signs  from  heaven— 


CHAP,  vin.]  ST.  MARK.  Bll 

at  His  baptism.  5.  It  was  not  evidence  that  was  wanting.  6.  Neither  is  it  bo  yet. 
IL  The  denial  or  theib  bequest.  1.  Not  because  such  a  request  would,  in  other 
circumstances,  have  been  sinful.  Gideon.  Hezekiah.  2.  But  because  it  was 
unnecessary,  it  would  not  have  convinced  them,  it  was  asked  out  of  malice. 
3.  Our  request  must  be  for  necessary  things,  from  right  motives.    III.  Accobdino 

TO    THE   OTHEB    EVANGELISTS,    ChBIST   POINTED   THEM   TO    THE   SIGN   OF   THE   PBOPHET 

Jonas.  1.  There  are  several  points  of  resemblance  between  Christ  and  Jonas. 
2.  The  point  referred  to  by  Christ  was,  no  doubt.  His  resurrection.  {Expository 
Discourses.)  The  refusals  of  Christ : — We  often  speak  of  what  He  gave :  we 
might  also  speak  of  what  He  withheld.  The  words  of  the  Old  Testament  are 
applicable  to  Jesus  Christ :  *♦  No  good  thing  will  He  withhold,"  &c.  The  refusals 
of  Jesus  were  governed  by  three  considerations.  1.  Keligious  curiosity  is  not  to  be 
mistaken  for  religious  necessity.  2.  Beligious  confidence  is  not  to  be  won  by 
irreligious  ostentations.  3.  Beligious  appeals  are  not  to  be  addressed  to  the  eye, 
but  to  the  heart.  In  applying  these  points  show  what  Christ  gave  in  comparison 
with  what  He  refused.  He  gave  bread,  sight,  hearing,  speeph,  health ;  He  gave 
His  life,  yet  He  refused  a^t^T'^ndefsfand  that,' in  some  cases,  not  to  give  a  sign 
ia^'in'realily'ta  givtrflle  rnost  solemn  and  dreadful  of  all  signs.  {Dr.  J.  Parker.) 
Tempting  God : — It  is  a  wicked  and  sinful  practice  for  any  to  tempt  the  Lord, 
i.e.,  to  make  unlawful  and  needless  proof  of  His  Divine  attributes,  such  as  Power, 
Providence,  Justice,  Mercy,  &c.  This  sin  is  committed — 1.  By  limiting  and 
restraining  God's  actions  to  ordinary  means  and  secondary  causes  :  tying  Him  to 
these,  as  if  without  them  He  could  not  or  would  not  perform  those  things  which 
He  has  promised  to  the  godly  or  threatened  against  the  wicked.  2.  By  neglecting 
the  ordinary  means  appointed  by  God  for  the  good  and  preservation  of  our  souls 
and  bodies,  and  relying  upon  God's  extraordinary  power  and  providence  to  provide 
for  us.  Apply  this  to  such  cases  as — abandonment  of  earthly  calling ;  needlessly 
exposing  oneself  to  danger ;  rejecting  the  means  of  grace.  3.  By  Uving  and 
going  on  in  any  sin  contrary  to  the  Word  of  God,  thereby  making  proof  of  God's 
patience,  whether  He  will  punish  or  wink  at  disobedience.  {G.  Fetter.)  Modem 
doubt:  —  I.  First  of  all,  we  discover  the  same  sycophancy  of  spibit  among 
sceptics  now  as  was  noticeable  among  the  ancient  Jews.  The  significant  question 
those  people  asked  concerning  Christ  was,  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers  believed  on 
Him  ?  "  1.  One  of  the  maxims  of  the  Talmud  was  this  :  *•  My  son,  give  more  heed 
to  the  words  of  the  rabbis  than  to  the  words  of  the  law,"  Thus  they  pressed  human 
authority  above  inspiration,  and  exalted  traditions  above  the  revelation  from  God. 
2.  Our  times  are  not  much  better.  Little  men  appear  to  imagine  their  proportions 
are  vaster  when  they  stand  in  the  awe-inspiring  shadow  of  big  men.  Hence  we 
find  all  the  motley  company  of  sceptics  aping  masterly  leaders,  and  trying  to  make 
the  majesty  of  their  intellects  show  most  impressively.  3.  Babbis  (in  this  sense) 
ought  not  to  count  for  much  with  Christian  people :  "  One  is  our  Master,  even 
Christ"  What  God's  children  are  examining  is  truth,  and  not  men.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  there  never  was  a  system  of  even  confessed  error,  no  matter  how 
miserable  or  how  vile,  that  did  not  for  the  time  being  have  some  able  advocates. 
We  do  not  need  to  go  back  to  Marcion's  day,  nor  to  Basilides'  day,  to  illustrate 
this.  Gibbon  was  gifted,  and  Brigham  Young  was  a  man  of  power — and  Satan 
himself  was  one  of  the  brightest  of  God's  angels.  4.  Meantime,  the  cry  lifted  as 
to  the  supreme  abihty  of  not  a  few  of  these  leaders  of  modern  scepticism  might  as 
well  be  toned  down  to  moderation.  II.  Next  to  this  sycophancy  of  spirit,  we  dis- 
cover that  modern  doubt  has  for  its  characteristic  the  same  disposition  to  criticise 
God's  Wobd  which  prevailed  in  Herod's  time.  Our  Saviour's  charge  was,  *'  making 
the  Word  of  God  of  none  effect."  1.  Those  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  had  only  the 
Old  Testament,  but  they  kept  picking  at  it.  The  general  principle  of  interpretation 
was  very  frankly  avowed  in  those  days :  "  The  Bible  is  like  water,  the  traditions 
•re  like  wine ;  but  the  commentaries  are  like  wine  which  has  been  spiced."  2.  The 
modern  attack  is  just  like  this.  The  combat  with  opposers  is  not  now  that  of 
theological  philosophy,  but  of  biblical  criticism.  3.  It  is  impossible  to  stop  the 
mouths  of  carpers.  The  apostles  themselves  had  to  deal  with  strong  and  inveterate 
opposers.  There  w^ere  persistent  Pharisees  and  indefatigable  Sadducees.  Paul 
himself  even  could  not  put  down  these  disputants  at  will  so  completely  that  they 
should  not  harangue  the  populace.  He  could  refute  every  argument,  and  overturn 
every  position  ;  but  when  he  had  silenced  sense  they  kept  up  the  uproar.  Thus 
they  made  their  sorry  exhibition  at  Ephesus  (see  Acts  xix.  32-34).  III.  In  the 
Ihird  place,  modem  doubt  is  characterized,  like  the  ancient  scepticism  Jesus  re- 


tU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha?.  jul 

buked,  by  an  aimless  DBirxiMa  into  a  series  of  continual  disbeliefs.     This  was  thi 
ground  for  our  Lord's  most  terrible  denunciation :  *•  Woe  onto  you,  scribes  and 
Pharisees,  hypocrites  I  for  ye  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte ;  and 
when  he  is  made,  ye  make  him  twofold  more  the  child  of  hell  than  yourselves.** 
1.  Those  old  sects  seem  all  to  have  known  this  tendency  to  reckless  wandering  in 
speculation,  for  they  tried  to  force  a  system  of  checks  at  each  exposed  point 
against  free-thinking.    2.  This  generation  of  doubters  in  our  time  are  as  wandering 
in  their  purposes,  and  quite  as  devoutly  blind  in  their  career.      The  moment  one 
begins  to  question,  that  moment  he  begins  to  travel.     Yet  is  it  seriously  to  be 
doubted  whether  he  is  going  ever  to  reach  that  portal  of  God's  truth  he  talks  of  so 
glibly.      3.  There  is  no  settled  direction  which  modem  scepticism  chooses.     II 
there  were,  we  might  welcome  the  drift  as  perhaps  being  in  the  line  of  the  truth, 
and  indicating  progress.     But  it  makes  one  think  of  the  eddies  over  the  meadows 
tttter  a  freshet ;  it  is  unsafe  to  try  to  sail  because  nobody  knows  the  channel.     A 
thoughtful  man  would  like  to  know  beforehand  where  he  is  going.     4.  It  is  best, 
also,  to  settle  the  value  of  an  argument  drawn  from  an  example.    IV.  This  thought 
will  find  a  further  illustration,  when  we  go  on  to  consider  a  fourth  characteristic  of 
modem  doubt :  namely,  the  extreme  malionanoy  of  temper  with  which  those  who 
turn  from  the  Christian  faith  afterwards  attack  its  defenders.     1.  Renegades  are 
always  the  most  belligerent  allies  on  the  other  side.    2.  It  is  often  to  advantage  to 
read  up  the  antecedents  of  some  of  our  most  prominent  unbelievers.     ••  You  know 
who  the  critics  are  ?  "  asks  a  shrewd  character  in  Lord  Beaconsfield's  story ;  *•  they 
are  the  men  who  have  failed  in  literature  and  art."  Find  an  extremely  ill-tempered 
disputant  anywhere  nowadays,  who  begins  with  innuendo  and  continues  with 
abuse,  and  the  explanation  may  be  given  almost  instinctively :  this  man  did  not 
succeed  in  the  old  life,  and  is  angrily  trying  to  retrieve  his  fortunes  by  attracting 
attention  in  a  new.    3.  For  the  temper  of  unbelief  is  simple  selfishness.    4.  Hence, 
there  is  no  safety  in  yielding  even  just  a  Uttle.      "A  double-minded  man  is 
unstable  in  all  his  ways."     Behef  will  not  suffer  itself  to  be  divided.     ((7.  8. 
Robinson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  14.  Beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees.  The  leaven  of  the  Pharisees : — 
Our  Lord's  warning  against  false  doctrine.  I.  A  suggestive  figubb  of  speech.^ 
"Leaven."  (1)  A  suggestive  figure  of  the  power  of  influence,  good  or  bad. 
(a)  Aggressive,  (b)  Subtle  in  its  aggressiveness,  (c)  Unless  resisted,  all-conquering 
in  its  subtlety.  (2)  Our  Lord's  suggestive  use  of  this  figure,  (a)  To  represent  the 
powerful  influence  of  erroneous  doctiine.  (b)  To  represent  the  danger  to  which  His 
disciples  were  exposed  from  erroneous  doctrines,  notwithstanding  their  superior 
advantages,  arising  from  the  instructions  He  gave  them.  II.  A  suggestivb 
EXAMPLE  OF  THE  EXEKCI8E  OF  BAD  INFLUENCE.  (1)  Its  ageucy.  Phaiisees.  (a)  The 
secret  of  their  power,  i.  Their  ecclesiastical,  social,  and  political  position,  ii. 
Their  great  pretensions  to  piety — in  fasting  and  prayer.  (2)  Its  method.  Doctrine, 
(a)  Public  teaching  a  great  power  for  good  or  evil.  (6)  As  the  respect  felt  for  the 
Pharisees  enhanced  their  power,  so  our  respect  for  either  the  genius  or  supposed 
sincerity  of  a  public  teacher  enhances  his  power.  (3)  An  imperative  duty  in  view 
of  this  fact.  ♦•  Prove  all  things :  hold  fast  that  which  is  good."  (D.  C.  Hughes, 
M.A.)  The  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees  ;— This  caution  was  probably 
suggested  by  His  late  interview  with  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees.  I.  The 
DOCTRINE  OF  THE  PHARISEES  chicfly  hinged  upon  two  tenets.  1.  Acceptance  with 
God  on  the  ground  of  legal  performances.  2.  The  obhgation  of  the  tradition  of  the 
elders.  These  led  to  multipled  observances  of  a  legal  kind,  pride  and  boasting, 
hvpocrisy,  laxity  of  morals.  IL  The  doctrines  of  the  Sadducees,  here  called 
the  leaven  of  Herod,  were  opposed  to  these.  Notice  only  three,  as  having  a  prac- 
tical  influence.  They  denied — 1.  The  separate  existence  of  the  soul.  2.  The 
resurrection  of  the  dead.  8.  The  superintending  providence  of  God.  These  led  to 
the  removal  of  restraint  to  vicious  indulgences.  Sadduceeism  characterized  the 
generation  which  has  disappeared.  Phariseeism  the  present.  HI.  Their  doctrines 
ARE  compared  TO  LEAVEN.  1.  They  affect  the  whole  character.  2.  The  whole  mass 
of  society.  '*  Take  heed,"  &o.  The  one,  sanotimoniousness ;  the  other,  licention» 
uess.     {Expository  Discourses.) 

Vers.  16-21.  And  they  reasoned  among  themselTea.  Nine  sharp  and  pointed 
questionsy  turning  the  minds  of  the  disciples  hack  upon  their  ovm  experience  : — Their 
reasonings  vexy  plainly  and  painfully  proved  how  very  little  real  benefit  thej  had 


▼m.]  ST,  MARK,  313 

yet  derived  from  intercourse  with  Christ.  What  a  display  of  ignorance,  forgetfnl- 
oess,  and  anbelief  I  So  it  always  has  been  in  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with 
men.  And  so  it  is  now,  among  ourselves,  notwithstanding  all  the  superior  advan- 
tages we  enjoy.  How  often  do  all  of  us  misunderstand  *he  meaning  of  our  Master's 
words !  How  often  do  we  distrust  His  Providence  I  And  why  is  this  ?  The  main 
reason  is  that  we  are  forgetful  of  the  lessons  of  experience.  Like  the  first  disciples, 
we  do  not  thoughtfully  and  prayerfully  ponder  what  He  has  taught  us,  and  what  He 
has  done  for  us.  Consider  the  days  of  old.  Bemember  all  the  way  which  the  Lord 
thy  God  hath  led  thee.  Gather  up  into  the  basket  of  memory  all  the  fragments  of 
the  past,  carry  them  along  with  you,  and  make  use  of  them  day  by  day  as  occasion 
may  require.  {A.  Thomson.)  Seeing,  hearing,  and  understanding  : — ♦•  The  first  time 
I  went  to  a  Christian  missionary,"  said  a  Chinese  evangelist,  **Itook  my  eyes.  I  stared 
at  his  hat,  his  umbrella,  his  coat,  his  shoes,  the  shape  of  his  nose,  and  the  colour  of 
his  skin  and  hair  ;  but  I  heard  not  a  word.  The  next  time  I  took  my  ears  as  well 
as  my  eyes,  and  was  astonished  to  hear  the  foreigner  talk  Chinese.  The  third 
time,  with  eyes  and  ears  intent,  God  touched  my /i«art,  and  I  understood  the  gospel." 
How  Is  It  that  ye  do  not  understand? — Understanding  prevented: — With  the 
disciples,  as  with  the  rich  youth,  it  was  things  that  prevented  the  Lord  from  being 
understood.  Because  of  possession  the  young  man  had  not  a  suspicion 
of  the  grandeur  of  the  call  with  which  Jesus  honoured  him.  He  thought  he 
was  hardly  dealt  with  to  be  offered  a  patent  of  heaven's  nobility — he  was  so 
very  rich  1  Things  filled  his  heart;  things  blocked  up  his  windows;  things 
barricaded  his  door ;  so  that  the  very  God  could  not  enter.  His  soul  was  not 
empty,  swept,  and  garnished,  but  crowded  with  meanest  idols,  among  which  his 
spirit  crept  about  upon  its  knees,  wasting  on  them  the  gazes  that  belonged  to  his 
fellows  and  his  Master.  The  disciples  were  a  little  further  on  than  he ;  they  left  all 
and  followed  the  Lord ;  but  neither  had  they  yet  got  rid  of  things.  The  paltry  solitari- 
ness of  a  loaf  was  enough  to  hide  the  Lord  from  them,  to  make  them  unable  to  under- 
stand Him.  Why,  having  forgotten,  could  they  not  trust  ?  Surely  if  He  had  told 
them  that  for  His  sake  they  must  go  all  day  without  food,  they  would  not  have 
minded  1  but  they  lost  sight  of  God,  and  were  as  if  either  He  did  not  see,  or  did 
not  care  for  them.  In  the  former  case  it  was  the  possession  of  wealth.  In  the 
latter  the  not  having  more  than  a  loaf,  that  rendered  incapable  of  receiving  the 
Word  of  the  Lord :  the  evil  principle  was  precisely  the  same.  If  it  be  things  that 
slay  you,  what  matter  whether  things  you  have,  or  things  you  have  not?  The 
youth,  not  trusting  in  God,  the  source  of  his  riches,  cannot  brook  the  word  of  His 
Son,  offering  him  better  riches,  more  direct  from  the  heart  of  the  Father.  The 
disciples,  forgetting  who  is  Lord  of  the  harvests  of  the  earth,  cannot  understand  His 
Word,  because  filled  with  the  feaj*  of  a  day's  hunger.  He  did  not  trust  in  God  as 
having  given  ;  they  did  not  trust  in  God  as  ready  to  give.  We  are  like  them  when, 
in  any  trouble,  we  do  not  trust  Him.  It  is  hard  on  God,  when  His  children  will  not 
let  Him  give ;  when  they  carry  themselves  so  that  He  must  withhold  His  hand,  lest 
He  harm  them.  To  take  no  care  that  they  acknowledge  whence  their  help  comes, 
would  be  to  leave  them  worshippers  of  idols,  trusters  in  that  which  is  not.  {G. 
Macdonaldf  LL.D.)  The  lessons  of  trivial  loss : — Let  me  suggest  some  possible 
parellels  between  ourselves  and  the  disciples,  maundering  over  their  one  loaf — with 
the  Bread  of  Life  at  their  side  in  the  boat.  We,  too,  dull  our  understandings  with 
trifles,  fill  the  heavenly  spaces  with  phantoms,  waste  the  heavenly  time  with  hurry. 
To  those  who  possess  theii-  souls  in  patience  come  the  heavenly  visions.  When  I 
trouble  myself  over  a  trifle,  even  a  trifle  confessed — ^the  loss  of  some  little  article, 
say — spurring  my  memory,  and  hunting  the  house,  not  from  immediate  need,  but 
from  dislike  of  loss ;  when  a  book  has  been  borrowed  of  me  and  not  returned,  and 
I  have  forgotten  the  borrower,  and  fret  over  the  missing  volume,  while  there  are 
thousands  on  my  shelves,  from  which  the  moments  thus  lost  might  gather 
treasures,  holding  relation  with  neither  moth,  nor  rust,  nor  thief ;  am  I  not  like 
the  disciples  f  Am  I  not  a  Ibol  whenever  loss  troubles  me  more  than  recovery 
would  gladden  ?  God  would  have  me  wise,  and  smile  at  the  trifle.  Is  it  not  time  I 
lost  a  few  things  when  I  care  for  them  so  unreasonably  7  This  losing  of  things  is 
of  the  mercy  of  God  ;  it  comes  to  teach  us  to  let  them  go.  Or  have  I  forgotten  a 
thought  that  came  to  me,  which  seemed  of  the  truth,  and  a  revealment  to  my 
heart  t  I  wanted  to  keep  it,  to  have  it,  to  use  it  by  and  by,  and  it  is  gone  1  I  keep 
trying  and  trying  to  call  it  back,  feeling  a  poor  man  till  that  thought  be  recovered 
—to  be  far  more  lost,  perhaps  in  a  note-book,  into  which  I  shall  never  look  again 
te  find  it  1    I  forget  that  it  is  live  things  God  oaree  about — ^live  truths,  not  things 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  na 

set  down  in  a  book,  or  in  a  memoiy,  or  embalmed  in  the  joy  of  knowledge,  bnt 
things  lifting  up  the  heart,  things  active  in  an  active  wilL  True,  my  lost  thought 
might  have  so  worked ;  but  had  I  faith  in  God,  the  Maker  of  thought  and  memory, 
I  should  know  that,  if  the  thought  was  a  truth,  and  so  alone  worth  anything,  it 
must  come  again ;  for  it  is  in  God — so,  like  the  dead,  not  beyond  my  reach ;  kept 
for  me,  I  shall  have  it  again.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  22-26.  And  He  cometb  to  Bethsalda;  and  they  bring  a  blind  man  nnto 
TTim — Blindness  common  in  the  East : — Blindness  was  and  is  more  common  in  Egypt 
and  Syria  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  The  glare  of  light,  the  dust  which 
is  produced  by  a  dry  season,  extending  from  May  to  November,  in  which  rain  rarely 
falls,  and  the  fruit  of  the  newly-ripe  fig,  all  tend  to  produce  inflammation  of  the  eyes, 
and  this,  when  severe  or  repeated,  produces  blindness.  One-tenth  of  the  population 
of  Joppa  to-day  are  blind.  In  a  neighbouring  town,  Lydda,  a  traveller,  probably 
exaggerating,  said  every  other  person  was  blind  of  one  or  both  eyes.  In  Cairo,  a 
city  of  250,000  inhabitants,  there  are  4,000  blind.  Accordingly,  this  was  one  of  the 
commonest  ills  which  the  Saviour  had  to  treat.    {R.  Glover.)      Sight  for  the  blind: — 

I.    A  SYMBOL  OF  THE  SPIBITUAli  BLINDNESS  OF  HUMANITY.      II,    A  SYMBOL  OF  SALVATION 

BY  Divine  contact.     III.  A  symbol  of  the  pboqbessivb  ohabacteb  of  spisitual 

ENLIGHTENMENT.       IV.    A    SYMBOL    OF     THE    POWER    OF    ChRIST  TO   EFFECT    COMPLETH 

ILLUMINATION.  (J.  R.  Tkomsou,  M.A.)  Christ's  method  of  dealing  with  individttal 
souls  : — L  He  isolates  from  distubbino  xntlubnces.  First  with  Christ,  that  after- 
wards he  may  be  in  Him.  II.  He  encourages  and  confirms  faith.  Personal 
contact  and  operation,  and  kindly  words,  evoking  patient's  inner  freewill  and  power. 
III.  He  exacts  implicit  obedience.  The  first  use  of  the  restored  vision  is  to  avoid 
those  upon  whom  the  man  had  formerly  depended — a  hard  task  1  The  life  Christ's 
people  are  bidden  to  lead  may  not  commend  itself  to  their  judgment  or  desire,  but 
it  is  best  for  their  spiritual  interests  ;  and  if  Christ  is  to  be  a  complete  Saviour,  He 
must  be  an  absolute  and  unquestioned  Lord.  (A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.)  Curing  spiritual 
blindjiess : — I.  Deliverance  from  blind  guides.  II.  Transfer  of  confidence  to  the 
true  Guide.  HI.  Kevelation  of  the  invisible  power  of  God.  IV.  Exercising  the 
soul's  newly  acquired  pow*s  of  spiritual  vision.  V.  Giving  spiritual  direction  for 
the  future.  (Ibid.)  Earnestness  and  knowledge  the  parents  of  faith: — The 
only  progressed  cure  recorded  in  the  New  Testament.  Why  was  it  not  instan- 
taneous like  the  rest  ?  Nothing  our  Lord  did  or  left  undone  was  without  meaning ; 
BO  there  must  have  been  a  reason  for  this.  That  reason  cannot  have  been  in  Christ. 
He  was  no  respecter  of  persons ;  His  tender  sympathy  yearned  over  this  sufferer  as 
tenderly  as  over  the  rest.  It  must  be  traced,  then,  to  the  man  himself  and  his 
fellow-citizens.  If  the  tone  of  morality  had  been  higher  in  Bethsaida,  if  publio 
opinion  had  been  more  upright,  if  the  collective  example  of  the  citizens  had  been 
better,  the  probability  is  that  the  man  would  not  have  been  so  criminal.  Now,  what 
was  wrong?  I.  Want  of  faith.  Why  was  there  a  lack  of  faith?  1.  Because 
there  was  a  lack  of  earnestness.  Distinct  evidence  of  this.  His  friends  bring  him 
to  Chi  it^t,  and  from  the  fact  that  he  does  not  speak  except  to  answer  a  question,  we 
infer  that  he  was  not  particularly  anxious  to  be  brought.  No  such  eagerness  as  in 
the  case  of  Bartimasus.  2.  Because  there  was  a  want  of  knowledge.  This  man 
was  an  inhabitant  of  Bethsaida  Julius,  which  was  within  easy  walking  distance  of 
most  of  Christ's  great  works.  The  people  hving  there  had  heard  His  wonderful 
words  of  life ;  and  surely  if  those  who  could  see,  and  who  therefore,  were  without 
excuse,  had  realized  their  privileges  and  acted  up  to  them  they  might  have  taught 
this  man  ;  but  they  had  not  done  so.  They  had  not  rejoiced  iu  the  good  news  from 
God ;  they  had  not  reahzed  that  the  promised  Messiah  had  come ;  they  had  not 
hastened  to  be  His  witnesses  to  their  neighbours.  If  they  had  done  so,  they  would 
have  brought  home  to  the  mind  of  this  poor  blind  man  such  a  sense  of  the  powei 
find  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  would  not  have  hesitated  for  one  moment  to  believe 
that  Christ  was  well  able  to  restore  him  at  once  to  perfect  vision.  And  because  they 
were  so  unworthy  Christ  sends  the  man  to  his  house,  saying,  "  Neither  go  into  the 
town,"  &o.  His  fellow  citizens  were  not  worthy  to  hear  the  story  of  the  great  work 
which  God  had  wrought  in  him.  We  must  not  cast  our  pearls  before  swine,  or  give 
that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs.  This  man  himself  was  the  monument  of  their 
spiritual  shortcomings  ;  and  if  in  the  first  hour  of  his  faith  in  Christ  and  his  own 
personal  experience  of  the  power  of  Christ,  he  had  returned  to  his  cold-blooded, 
indifferent,  cynical  neighbours,  they  might  have  quenched  the  little  flame  of  grate- 
iol  love  which  was  springing  up  i    his  heart.     {Hugh  Price  Hughes.)        Significant 


au».  Tin.]  8T.  MARK.  S15 

metions : — The  profonnd  and  saintly  Bengel  calls  oar  attention  here  to  this  touching 
speotaole,  that  significant  fact — that  Christ  did  not  command  his  friends  to  lead 
him  out  of  the  town,  but  He  led  him  out  Himself.  Oh,  what  a  spectacle  for  men 
and  angels — the  Divine  Son  of  God  tenderly  taking  the  hand  of  this  poor  blind 
beggar,  and  leading  him  out  of  the  town  Himself  I  And  why  did  He  lead  him  out 
of  the  town,  away  from  the  noise  and  confusion  and  pre-occupation  of  town  life  ? 
Surely  it  was  because  solitude  and  silence  are  great  teachers  of  earnestness.  He 
needed  to  be  alone  with  himself  and  with  his  great  want.  It  has  been  well  said  by 
a  great  teacher  of  our  own  time,  that  solitude  in  the  sense  of  being  often  alone,  is 
essential  to  any  depth  of  meditation  and  character ;  and  at  present  there  is  very 
little  meditation  and  depth  of  character  in  this  man.  It  is  necessary  that  he  should 
be  alone  awhile,  that  he  might  realize  the  meaning  of  these  things — his  great  need 
and  the  love  of  God.  And  then  it  is  also  very  significant  that,  instead  of  speaking 
a  word  to  him  as  usual.  He  moistens  His  finger  and  places  it  upon  the  sightless 
eyeball  of  the  blind,  in  order  that  by  palpable  evidence  He  might  brin-  home  to  this 
man  that  He  is  about  to  bestow  upon  him  a  supreme  blessing.  But,  so  far,  the 
efforts  of  Christ  are  not  entirely  successful ;  for,  after  He  had  put  His  hands  upon 
him,  He  asked  him  if  he  could  see,  and  he  looked  np,  and  said,  "  I  see  men  as 
trees  " — I  can  see  better  than  I  ever  saw  before,  but  so  vaguely,  so  dimly,  the  out- 
line is  so  indistinct,  that  I  confess  I  cannot  distinguish  between  the  men  and  the 
trees  at  the  side  of  the  road,  except  by  the  fact  that  the  men  are  moving.  Now,  you 
will  observe  that  Christ  did  not  abandon  His  work  when  it  was  half  done.  Indeed, 
He  asked  the  man  whether  he  could  see,  in  order  to  bring  home  to  him  the  fact  that 
he  could  see  a  little,  and  that  so  far  hope  might  spring  up  within  him ;  but,  at  the 
same  time,  that  he  might  also  bring  home  to  him  the  fact  that  he  could  se«  only 
very  little.  And  then  Christ  put  His  hands  upon  his  eyes  a  second  time,  and  after 
that  second  touch  he  saw  clearly.  (Ibid.)  Healing  the  blind : — Men  arrive  at 
Christ  by  different  processes :  one  is  found  by  Christ  Himself,  another  comes  to 
Him,  another  is  borne  of  four,  and  this  blind  man  is  led.  This  matters  little,  so 
long  as  we  do  oome  to  Him.  The  act  of  bringing  men  to  Jesus  is  most  commend- 
able. 1.  It  proves  kindly  feeling.  2.  It  shows  practical  faith  in  the  power  ot 
Jesus.  8.  It  is  thus  an  act  of  true  wisdom.  4.  It  is  exceedingly  acceptable  to  the 
Lord ;  and  is  sure  to  prove  effectual  when  the  person  himself  willingly  comes.  In 
this  case  there  was  something  faulty  in  the  bringing,  since  there  was  a  measure  of 
dictation  as  to  the  method  in  which  the  Lord  should  operate.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  Lord  heals  in  His  own  way : — We  must  not  attempt  to  dictate  to  Him  how  He 
shall  operate.  While  He  honours  faith,  He  does  not  defer  to  its  weakness.  1.  He 
does  not  consent  to  work  in  the  prescribed  manner.  2.  He  touched,  but  no  healing 
came  ;  and  thus  He  proved  that  the  miracle  was  not  attached  to  that  special  form  of 
operation.  3.  He  did  nothing  to  the  bhnd  man  before  their  eyes ;  but  led  him  out 
of  the  town.  He  would  not  indulge  their  observation  or  curiosity.  4.  He  did  not 
heal  him  instantly,  as  they  expected.  5.  He  used  a  means  never  suggested  or 
thought  of  by  them — *•  spit  on  his  eyes,"  Ac.  6.  When  He  did  put  His  hands  on 
him.  He  did  it  twice,  so  that,  even  in  comphance  with  their  wish,  He  vindicated 
His  own  freedom,  (a)  Thus  He  refused  to  foster  the  superstition  which  limited  Hia 
power,  (b)  Thus  He  used  a  method  more  suited  to  the  case,  (c)  Thus  He  gave  to 
the  people  larger  instruction,  (d)  Thus  He  displayed  to  the  individual  a  more 
personal  care.  (Ibid.)  Man  cannot  chose  his  remedy : — Is  the  sick  man 
the  doctor,  that  he  should  ehoose  the  remedy?  {Madame  Swetchine.)  Symbolism 
of  touch : — In  the  touching  of  the  eyes  with  spittle,  and  laying  on  of  hands,  there  was 
no  inherent  efficacy.  They  were  means  and  channels  of  grace.  Christ  has  estab- 
lished a  Church  in  the  world,  and  an  ordained  ministry  therein,  and  holy  sacraments, 
which  only  through  Him  become  healing  powers  in  the  world.  He  could  have  spoken 
a  word  to  the  blind  man  at  Bethsaida  and  all  would  have  been  accomplished  that 
was  sought  for.  He  could  save  men's  souls  directly  by  fiats  of  omnipotent  grace,  but 
He  has  chosen  a  Church  to  embody  and  set  forth  the  fulness  of  His  love  toward  a  lost 
world.  He  has  used  means.  {E.  N.  Packard.)  Analogy  to  spiritual  cures  :— 
Doubtless  we  are  inclined  to  press  the  analogy  between  the  gradualness  of  this  man's 
onre  and  the  gradualness  of  certain  restorations  to  spiritual  life ;  but  this  seems  quite 
anauthorized.  The  cure  was  not  an  ideal  type  of  all  soul  cures,  but  an  instructive  illus- 
tration of  oooasional  Divine  methods.  The  instant  the  bhnd  eyes  began  to  see,  there 
was  a  miraele  practically  accomplished.  The  instant  we  turn  to  God  in  repentance 
and  faith  the  new  life  begins ;  and  regeneration,  whenever  it  occurs,  is  in8tantaneoa». 
Tei,  for  all  thnt,  our  capacity  to  receive  the  fulness  of  Christ  is  at  fint  but  amaU, 


816  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [^hjup.  nn. 


and  the  light  must  wax  stronger  and  stronger  as  we  walk  in  it  day  by  day.  (Ibid.) 
The  gradual  miracle :  —  Variety  is  one  mark  of  God's  working,  as  order  ia 
another.  There  was  a  fertility  of  resource,  and  a  diversity  of  administration, 
which  bespoke  the  agency  of  One  who  from  the  beginning  was  with  God  and  was 
God,  the  Doer  of  all  God's  acts  and  the  Partner  of  all  God's  counsels.  The 
spiritual  e>e  is  not  utterly  closed  nor  utterly  darkened ;  but  its  sight  is  confused,  its 
discernment  of  objects  both  misty  and  inaccurate.  1.  It  is  so  in  reference  to  the 
things  of  God.  We  can  speak  but  for  ourselves :  but  who  has  not  known  what  it 
is  to  say,  I  cannot  make  real  to  myself  one  single  fact  or  one  single  doctrine  of  the 
Bible  ?  I  can  say  indeed — and  I  bless  God  even  for  that — ^Lord,  to  whom  else  can 
I  go  ?  where,  save  in  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  there  either  the  hope 
or  the  peradventure  of  healing  for  a  case  like  mine?  And  therefore  I  can  cling  to 
the  Christian  revelation  with  the  tenacity  of  a  shipwrecked  sailor  whose  one 
*'  broken  piece  of  the  ship  "  is  his  only  possibility  of  escape :  I  can  just  float  upon 
that  fragment,  knowing  that,  torn  from  it  or  washed  off  from  it,  I  am  lost :  but  if 
the  question  is,  whether  I  reaUy  see  ought ;  whether  I  can  discern  with  the  mind's 
eye  the  sacred  and  blessed  forms  of  a  Father  and  a  Saviour  and  a  Comforter  who 
are  such  to  me ;  whether,  when  I  kneel  down  to  pray,  I  can  feel  myself  to  be  apart 
with  my  God ;  whether,  when  I  approach  Christ's  Table,  I  feel  myself  to  be  His 
guest ;  whether,  when  I  ask  to  be  kept  this  day  from  all  sin,  I  feel  myself  to  be  the 
temple  of  a  Holy  Spirit  whose  indwelling  is  my  safeguard  and  my  chief  joy ;  then 
I  must  answer  that  my  hold  upon  all  these  things  is  precarious  and  most  feeble ; 
that  seeing  I  see,  but  scarcely  perceive ;  that  my  God  is  too  often  to  me  like  the 
gods  of  the  heathen,  which  can  neither  see,  nor  hear,  nor  reward,  nor  punish ;  that  I 
too  often  conduct  myself  towards  Him  as  though  I  thought  wickedly  that  He  was 
even  such  an  one  as  myself,  equally  short-sighted,  equally  fallible,  equally  vacil- 
lating, equally  impotent.  More  especially  is  this  the  case  in  reference  to  ti^e  dis- 
tinctive doctrines  of  Divine  grace.  How  little  do  any  of  as  grasp  and  handle  and 
use  the  revelation  of  an  absolute  forgiveness  1  What  can  we  say  more,  in  regard  to 
all  these  things,  than  that  at  best  we  see  men  as  trees,  walking  f  that  we  have  a  dim, 
dull,  floating  impression  of  there  being  something  in  them,  rather  than  a  clear, 
bold,  strong  apprehension  of  what  and  whom  and  why  we  have  believed  f  2.  And 
if  tMs  be  so  in  the  things  of  God,  in  matters  of  direct  revelation  and  of  Christian 
faith ;  it  is  scarcely  les«s  true  in  reference  to  the  things  of  men  ;  to  our  views  of  life, 
the  present  life  and  the  future,  and  to  the  relations  in  which  we  stand  to  those 
fellow-beings  with  whom  the  Providence  of  God  brings  us  into  contact.  We  all 
profess  as  Christians  to  be  **  kv)king  for  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  the  life 
of  the  world  to  come."  And  yei,  when  w©  examine  our  own  hearts,  or  observe 
(however  remotely)  the  evident  principles  of  others,  we  find  that  in  reality  the 
world  that  is  holds  as  all  with  a  veiy  firm  gripe.  We  cannot  appreciate  the  oom- 
parative  dimensions  of  things  heavenly  and  things  earthly.  The  subject  appears 
to  suggest  two  words  of  application.  First,  to  those  who  are  truly  in  the  position 
which  I  have  sought  by  the  help  of  this  miracle  to  indicate.  To  those  who  are 
really  under  the  healing  hand  of  Christ,  but  upon  whom  as  yet  it  has  been  laid 
incompletely  if  not  indecisively.  Many  persons  think  themselves  quite  healed, 
when  they  are  at  best  but  half -healed.  Many,  having  experienced  a  first  awakening, 
and  sought  with  sincerity  the  gift  of  the  Divine  forgiveness,  rest  there,  and  coont 
themselves  to  have  apprehended.  The  importance  of  going  forward  in  the  process 
of  the  healing.  Secondly,  and  finally,  a  word  of  caution  mast  be  added  to  those 
who  are  too  easily  assuming  that  they  are  even  half-healed.  The  hand  is  not  laid 
without  our  knowing  it,  nay,  nor  without  our  seeking  it.  Even  the  first  act  of 
healing  is  a  gift  above  gold  and  precious  stone :  despise  it  not  1  Power  out  of  weak- 
ness, peace  out  of  warfare,  light  out  of  darkness,  sight  oat  of  dim,  groping ,  creeping 
blindness,  this  it  is  to  be  the  subject  of  the  first  healing.  (C.  J.  Vaughan^  D.D.) 
The  free  agency  of  Christ: — I,  It  is  a  common  weakkkss  op  faith  to  expect  the 
BLSssiNO  IN  A  CERTAIN  WAT.  They  bcsought  Him  to  touch  him.  II.  While  oub 
Loan  HONOUBS  vaith  He  does  not  DErsB  to  its  weakness.  He  used  a  means  never 
suggested  by  them — *♦  spit  on  his  eyes,"  Ac.  lU.  While  oub  Lobd  eebukbs  the 
WEAKNESS  or  VAiTH,  He  HONOUBS  FAITH  XTSELF.  Faith  ovcr  honouTS  the  Lord,  and 
therefore  the  Lord  honours. tt.  II  faith  were  not  thus  rewarded,  Jesus  Himself 
would  suffer  dishonour.  He  who  has  faith  shall  surely  see ;  he  who  demands  signs 
shall  not  be  satisfied.  Let  as  for  ever  have  done  with  prescribing  methods  to  our 
Lord.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  Seeing  or  not  ieeing,  or  men  tu  tree*  walking : — ^I.  Pio> 
TOU  THE  CABS.    A  pcTson  with  a  darkened  onderstanding,  not  a  man  who  might 


o«A».  Yin.]  ST,  MARK,  817 

be  pictured  by  a  person  possessed  with  &  devil.  II.  Notiob  the  ubans  or  curb. 
EUs  friends  brought  him  to  Jesus.  He  first  received  contact  with  Jesus.  A  solitary 
position  :  Jesus  led  the  man  out  of  the  town,  He  was  brought  under  ordained  but 
despicable  means.  Jesus  spit  on  his  eyes.  Jesus  put  His  hands  on  Viim  in  the  form 
of  heavenly  benediction.  III.  Consioeb  this  hopeful  btaob.  The  first  joyful 
word  is — "  I  see."  His  eight  was  very  indistinct.  His  sight  was  very  exaggerating. 
This  exaggeration  leads  to  alarm.  There  is  to  such  people  an  utter  loss  of  the 
enjoyment  which  oomes  from  seeing  beauty  and  loveliness.  IV.  Notiob  the  com- 
pletion or  THE  CUBE.  Jesus  touched  His  patient  again.  The  first  person  he  saw 
was  Jesus.  Jesus  bade  him  "  look  up."  At  last  he  could  see  every  man  clearly. 
W)id.)  Seeing  men  at  tree$  walking  : — I.  An  improvement  upon  the  past. 

He  was  no  longer  blind — thus  an  immense  change  liad  taken  place.  There  is  an 
infinite  distance  between  the  lowest  type  of  a  Christian  and  the  finest  specimen  of 
an  onconverted  soul.  The  most  subtle  animal  and  the  barbarous  savage  may  seem 
to  resemble  each  other ;  but  a  gulf  which  only  God  can  bridge  separates  them. 
Thus  the  most  imperfect  act  of  faith  in  Christ  lifts  a  person  out  of  the  natural  into 
the  spiritual  realm.  II.  A  state  that  is  still  unsatisfactory.  **  Men  as  trees 
walking."  Whilst  an  imperfect  faith  will  save  the  soul,  yet  it  will  not  prevent  in- 
correct views  of  truth :  exaggerated  views ;  and  many  heedless  fears.  Most  of  the 
theological  contentions  are  through  imperfect  conceptions  of  truth.  Two  men 
with  perfect  sight  would  see  an  object  alike — two  with  very  dim  sight  would 
each  see  it  to  be  different.  III.  A  ouabanteb  of  perfect  vision.  The  blade 
is  a  prophecy  of  the  ear :  the  morning  twilight  of  the  noon-day  splendonr : 
the  buds  of  spring  of  the  fruit  of  autumn.  He  which  hath  begun  a  good  work 
within,  will  perfect  it.  He  is  the  finisher  as  well  as  the  author  of  our  faith.  How 
strange  if  Christ  had  left  the  poor  man  thus.  **  Now  are  we  sons  of  Grod — there- 
fore it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  (L.  Palmer.)  Three  viewt 
of  Christ's  work : — I.  Christ's  work  as  a  salvation.  The  restoring  of  sight  was  a 
point  on  the  brilliant  line,  the  end  of  which  was  the  salvation  of  mankind ;  so  was 
every  miracle  of  healing.  II.  Christ's  work  as  a  process.  The  good  work  was  not 
acoomphshed  in  this  case,  as  in  others,  by  a  word ;  it  was  done  gradually.  It  is  so 
in  spiritual  enlightenment.  All  good  men  do  not  see  God  with  equal  quickness  or 
with  equal  clearness.  III.  Christ's  work  as  a  consummation.  "  He  was  restored, 
and  saw  every  man  clearly."  He  will  not  leave  His  work  antil  it  be  finished,  if  so 
be  men  beseech  Him  to  go  on  to  be  gracious.  {Dr,  Parker,)  The  cure  of  a  blind 
man: — I.  A  blind  man  bbouqht  to  Chbist.  Their  faith.  If  those  who  are  spiri- 
tually blind  will  not  pray, for  themselves,  let  others  pray  for  them.  II.  A  bund  man 
LED  BT  Christ.  He  did  not  bid  his  friends  lead  him.  Never  had  the  blind  man 
saoh  a  leader  before.  UI.  A  blind  man  marvellously  cubed.  1.  Christ  used  a 
sign.  2.  The  cure  was  wrought  gradually,  but — 3.  It  was  soon  completed.  He  took 
this  way  because — 1.  He  would  not  be  tied  to  any  one  method.  2.  It  should  be  to 
the  patient  according  to  his  faith,  which  at  first  was  very  weak.  8.  He  would  show 
how  spiritual  light  shines  "  more  and  more  to  the  perfect  day."  {M.  Henry.) 
Get  hold  of  sinners  by  the  hand  if  you  mean  to  get  hold  of  them  by  the  heart : — Gk>ugh, 
the  temperance  orator,  tells  of  the  thrill  of  Joe  Stratton's  hand  laid  lovingly  upon 
his  shoulder,  just  at  the  time  when  he  was  reeling  on  the  brink  of  hell ;  and  of 
another  gentleman  of  high  respectability,  who  came  to  his  shop  when  he  was 
desperately  strugghng  to  disengage  himself  from  the  coils  of  the  serpent,  and  almost 
ready  to  sink  down  in  despair ;  and  how  he  took  him  by  the  hand,  expressed  his 
faith  in  him,  and  bade  him  play  the  man.  Gough  said,  "  I  will :  "  and  he  did — as 
everybody  knows.  T}ie  gradual  healing  of  the  blind  man : — L  Herb  wb  have 
Chbist  ISOLATING  the  man  whom  He  wasxrd  to  hbal.  Christ  never  sought  to  dis- 
play His  miraculous  working ;  here  He  absolutely  tries  to  hide  it.  This  suggests 
the  true  point  of  view  from  which  to  look  at  the  subject  of  miracles.  Instead  of 
being  merely  cold,  logical  proofs  of  His  mission,  they  were  all  glowing  with  the 
•amestnesB  of  a  loviug  sympathy,  and  came  from  Him  at  sight  of  sorrow  as 
naturally  as  rays  from  tbe  sun.  A  lesson  about  Christ's  character;  His  benevo- 
lence was  without  ostentation.  But  Christ  did  not  invest  the  miracle  with  any  of 
its  peculiarities  for  His  own  sake  only.  All  that  is  singular  about  it  will,  I  think, 
find  its  best  explanation  in  the  condition  and  character  of  the  subject,  the  man  on 
whom  it  was  wrought.  What  sort  of  a  man  was  he  ?  Well,  the  narrative  does  not 
tell  as  much,  but  if  we  use  our  historical  imagination  and  our  eyes  we  may  learn 
something  about  him.  First,  he  was  a  GentUe ;  the  land  in  which  the  mirKcle  was 
wrought  was  the  half -heathen  country  on  the  east  side  of  the  Sea  ol  Chdilee.    In 


818  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0B.  [tauur.  no, 

the  second  place,  it  was  other  people  that  brought  him  ;  he  does  not  come  of  his 
own  accord.  Then  again,  it  is  their  prayer  that  is  mentioned,  not  his — he  asks  no- 
thing. And  suppose  he  is  a  man  of  that  sort,  with  no  expectation  of  anything  from 
this  Babbi,  how  is  Christ  to  get  at  him  f  His  eyes  are  shut,  bo  cannot  see  the  sym- 
pathy beaming  in  His  face.  There  is  one  thing  possible — to  lay  hold  of  him  by  the 
band  ;  and  the  touch,  gentle,  loving,  firm,  says  this,  at  least ;  "Here  is  a  man  that 
has  some  interest  in  me,  and  whether  He  can  do  anything  or  not  for  me,  He  is  going 
to  try  something."  Would  not  that  kindle  an  expectation  in  him  ?  And  is  it  not 
in  parable  just  exactly  what  Jesus  Christ  does  for  the  whole  world  ?  Is  not  the 
mystery  of  the  Incarnation  and  the  meaning  of  it  wrapped  up  as  in  a  germ  in  that 
little  simple  incident,  "  He  put  out  His  hand  and  touched  him  "  f  Is  there  not  in 
it  too  a  lesson  for  all  you  good-hearted  Christian  men  and  women,  in  all  your  work? 
We  must  be  content  to  take  the  hands  of  beggars  if  we  are  to  make  the  blind  to 
see.  How  he  would  feel  more  and  more  at  each  step, "  I  am  at  His  mercy  I  What 
is  He  going  to  do  with  me  ?  "  And  how  thus  there  would  be  kindled  in  his  heart 
some  beginnings  of  an  expectation,  as  well  as  some  surrendering  of  himself  to 
Christ's  guidance !  These  two  things,  the  expectation  and  the  surrender,  have  in 
them,  at  all  events,  some  faint  beginnings  and  rude  germs  of  the  highest  faith,  to 
lead  up  to  which  is  the  purpose  of  all  that  Christ  here  does.  And  is  not  that  what 
He  does  for  us  all  ?  Sometimes  by  sorrows,  sometimes  by  sick-beds,  sometimes  by 
shutting  us  out  from  chosen  spheres  of  activity.  Ah  1  brethren,  here  is  a  lesson 
from  all  this — if  you  want  Jesus  Christ  to  give  yon  His  highest  gifts  and  to  reveal 
to  you  His  fairest  beauty,  you  must  be  alone  with  Him.  He  loves  to  deal  with 
single  Bouls.  "  I  was  left  alone,  and  I  saw  this  great  vision,"  is  the  law  for 
all  true  beholding.  II.  We  have  Chbist  sxoopiMa  to  ▲  sensb-bounb  natitbb 
BY  THE  USE  OF  liATEBiAL  HELPS.  The  hand  laid  upon  the  eyes,  the  finger  possibly 
moisteued  with  saliva  touching  the  ball,  the  pausing  to  question,  the  repeated 
application.  They  make  a  ladder  by  which  his  hope  and  confidence  might  climb 
to  the  apprehension  of  the  blessing.  And  that  points  to  a  general  principle 
of  the  Divine  dealings.  God  stoops  to  a  feeble  faith,  and  gives  to  it  outward 
things  by  which  it  may  rise  to  an  apprehension  of  spiritual  realities.  Is  not  that 
the  meaning  of  the  whole  complicated  system  of  Old  Testament  revelation  ?  Is  not 
that  the  meaning  of  His  own  Incarnation  ?  And  still  further,  may  we  not  say 
that  this  is  the  inmost  meaning  and  purpose  of  the  whole  frame  of  the  material 
universe  ?  It  exists  in  order  that,  as  a  parable  and  a  symbol,  it  may  proclaim  the 
things  that  are  unseen  and  eternal.  So  in  regard  of  all  the  externals  of  Christianity, 
forms  of  worship,  ordinances,  and  so  on — all  these,  in  like  manner,  are  provided  in 
condescension  to  our  weakness,  in  order  that  by  them  we  may  be  lifted  above  them- 
selves ;  for  the  purpose  of  the  temple  is  to  prepare  for  the  time  and  place  where  the 
seer  '*saw  no  temple  therein.".  They  are  but  the  cups  that  carry  the  wine,  the 
flowers  whose  chalices  bear  the  honey,  the  ladder  by  which  the  soul  may  climb  to 
God  Himself,  the  rafts  upon  which  the  precious  treasure  may  be  floated  into  our 
hearts.  If  Christ's  touch  and  Christ's  saliva  healed,  it  was  not  because  of  anything 
in  them,  but  because  He  willed  it  go  ;  and  He  Himself  is  the  source  of  all  the  healing 
energy.  III.  Lastly,  we  have  Chbist  AccoMMODATma  the  face  or  His  poweb  to 
THE  SLOWNESS  OF  THE  man's  FAITH.  He  was  healed  slowly  because  he  believed 
slowly.  His  faith  was  a  condition  of  his  cure,  and  the  measure  of  it  determined 
the  measure  of  the  restoration ;  and  the  rate  of  the  growth  of  his  faith  settled  the 
rate  of  the  perfecting  of  Christ's  work  on  him.  As  a  rule,  faith  in  His  power  to  heal 
was  a  condition  of  Christ's  healing,  and  that  mainly  because  our  Lord  would  rather 
have  men  believing  than  sound  of  body.  "According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you.** 
And  here,  as  a  nurse  or  a  mother  might  do.  He  keeps  step  with  the  little  steps,  and 
goes  slowly  because  the  man  goes  slowly.  Now,  both  the  gradual  process  of  illu- 
mination and  the  rate  of  that  process  as  determined  by  faith,  are  true  for  us.  How 
dim  and  partial  a  glimmer  of  light  comes  to  many  a  soul  at  the  outset  of  the  Chris- 
tian life  I  How  little  a  new  convert  knows  about  God  and  self  and  the  starry  truth* 
of  His  great  revelation  !  Christian  progress  does  not  consist  in  seeing  new  things, 
but  in  seeing  the  old  things  more  clearly :  the  same  Christ,  the  same  Cross,  only 
more  distinctly  and  deeply  apprehended,  and  more  closely  incorporated  into  my 
very  being.  We  do  not  grow  away  from  Him,  but  we  grow  into  knowledge  of  Him. 
But  then  let  me  remind  you  that  just  in  the  measure  in  which  you  expect  blessing 
of  any  kind,  illumination  and  purif  ing  and  help  of  all  sorts  from  Jesua  Christ,  just 
in  that  measure  will  you  get  it.  To  can  limit  the  working  of  Almighty  power,  and 
can  determine  the  rate  at  which  it  shall  work  on  you.     God  fills  the  water-pots  to 


OHAF.  Tm.]  ST.  MARK.  819 

the  brim,  but  not  beyond  the  brim  ;  and  if,  like  the  woman  in  the  Old  Testament 
story,  we  stop  bringing  vessels,  the  oil  will  stop  flowing.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to 
know  that  we  have  the  power,  as  it  were,  to  turn  a  stopcock,  and  so  increase  or 
diminish,  or  cut  off  altogether  the  supply  of  God's  mercy  and  Christ's  healing  and 
cleansing  love  in  our  hearts.  You  will  get  as  much  of  God  as  you  want  and  no 
more.  The  measure  of  your  desire  is  the  measure  of  your  capacity,  and  the  mea- 
sure of  your  capacity  is  the  measure  of  God's  gift.  **  Open  thy  mouth  wide  and  I 
wiU  fiU  it"    {A,  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  27-30.  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  am  I^ThU  conversation  may  be  taken  in 

three  points  of  view : — I.  Jesus  Chbist  the  subject  of  universal  inquibt.  He 
appeals  to  all  men.  1.  By  the  variety  of  His  works.  2.  By  the  vitality  of  His 
teaching.  8.  As  the  "  Son  of  Man."  11.  Jesus  Chbist  DEUAMDiNa  special  testi- 
MONT.  His  followers  are  called — 1.  To  knowledge.  2.  To  profession.  3.  To 
individuality  of  testimony.  III.  Jesus  Christ  is  revealed  by  His  works  batheb 
THAN  BY  VERBAL  PBOFESsioN.  {Dv.  Parker.)  Personal  religion : — I.  Christ  put 
TO  the  disciples  themselves  THE  QUESTION,  *•  Whom  Say  ye  that  I  am?  "  1.  Christ 
would  turn  their  thoughts  from  others  to  themselves.  2.  He  does  not  take  for 
gianted  that  because  they  externally  follow  Him,  they  know  Him,  B.  He  examines 
them  on  the  most  important  of  all  points.  4.  He  examines  them  through  them- 
selves. 6.  He  leads  them  to  make  a  confession  of  their  faith.  6.  He  puts  them 
in  a  different  class  from  the  multitude.  II.  To  this  question,  Peteb  replied  for 
ALL  the  disciples.  Their  answer  was — 1.  Prompt  They  had  been  convinced  of  His 
Messiahship.  2.  Unanimous.  The  creed  was  very  short — of  one  article — all  held  it. 
8.  Correct.  4.  The  result  of  Divine  teaching.  6.  On  this  answer  the  Church  was 
to  be  built.  UI.  Christ  prohibits  them  from  publibhino  what  they  knew  of  Him, 
IN  present  circumstances.  1.  He  would  deal  with  them  Himself.  2.  The  proof  of 
His  Messiahship  was  not  complete.  3.  The  Jews  were  not  prepared.  4.  The  apostles 
were  not  qualified.  {Expository  Discourses.)  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  am  ? — 
I.  The  opinions  that  men  entertained  respectino  Christ  were  of  the  utmost 
importance.  1.  According  to  these,  they  would  act,  and  be  dealt  with,  in  this  the 
day  of  their  visitation.  2.  Without  a  knowledge  of  Christ  they  could  not  rely  on 
Him  for  their  own  personal  salvation.  3.  Their  opinions  respecting  Christ  indi- 
cated their  own  true  state  and  character.  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  U.  Christ 
WAS  concerned  fob  the  opinions  op  men  respecting  Himself.  1.  Having  sown,  He 
now  looks  for  the  fruit.  2.  If  He  has  not  been  a  *' savour  of  life  unto  life,"  He  has 
been  a  *•  savour  of  death  unto  death."  3.  He  has  shown  us  ih&i  we  should  not  be 
indifferent  as  to  human  opinion  respecting  ourselves.  III.  Christ  held  men 
responsible  fob  their  opinions  respecting  Him.  As  man's  judge.  He  deals  with 
their  belief.  IV.  Christ  applies  to  His  disciples  for  an  account  op  the  opinions 
which  men  had  of  Him.  1.  Not  because  He  was  ignorant,  &o,  2.  But  He  taught 
the  apostles  that  it  was  part  of  their  duty  to  mark  the  state  of  their  fellow-men. 
3.  We  ought  to  look  on  the  things  of  others,  and  especially  their  eternal  interests. 
{Expository  Discourses.)  The  knowledge  of  Christ  revealed  by  God : — The  claim 
of  Jesns  to  be  the  Messiah  should  be  examined.  I.  Such  knowledge  of  Christ  as  the 
true  Messiah  cannot  be  communicated  by  man  to  man.  We  may  have  an  acquaint- 
ance with  ancient  records  of  kingdoms  and  states  that  have  passed  away  ;  we  may 
acquire  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  warriors,  and  heroes,  and  statesmen,  and 
early  monarchs,  and  yet  be  utterly  uninfluenced  and  unaffected  by  what  we  learn  ; 
we  may  read  of  much  that  is  heroic,  and  noble,  and  heart-stirring,  in  the  achieve- 
ments of  many  master-minds  of  days  that  are  gone  by,  and  only  have  our  minds 
influenced,  as  by  a  bright  and  glowing  dream.  And  so  may  it  be  with  the  Scripture 
records.  We  may  be  delighted,  not  only  with  the  detail  of  ancient  history,  as  re- 
corded in  the  Bible,  but  we  may  be  touched  with  the  poetry  and  the  pathos  with 
which  the  Bible  abounds,  and  we  may  acquire  such  an  appetite  for  the  Bible,  in  that 
sense,  as  shall  induce  us  to  come  to  it,  as  affording  the  most  pleasant,  and  delight- 
ful, and  intellectual  study,  and  yet  be  unacquainted  with  Jesus,  the  Son  of  Man 
and  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  one  Mediator  between  our  sinful  souls  and  God ;  and 
instances  are  to  be  found,  and  ever  have  been,  in  which  the  mind  has  been  stored 
with  the  truth,  and  the  heart  untouched  by  it  It  is  because  we  have  reason  to  fear 
that  this  is  too  common,  that  we  press  upon  you  the  fact  that  a  merely  intellec- 
tual acquaintance  with  the  Bible  is  not  such  an  acquaintance  with  Christ  as 
will  meet  the  necessity  of  your  case.  A  speculative  knowledge  of  Christ  may  be 
acquired  by  the  exercise  of  the  natural  faculties  ;  systems  of  theology  may  be  con. 


890  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oba».  fm. 

oeived,  magnifioent  and  strikmg  views  may  be  obtained ;  and  yet  the  heart  of  a 
man,  as  a  sinner,  may  be  altogether  unmoved.  He  may  contemplate  the  wondrocu 
plan  of  redemption,  as  centred  in  Christ,  and  as  achieved  by  Christ,  **  in  the  fulness 
of  time  "  :  but  he  may  never  feel  the  want  of  redemption.  He  may  read,  and  be 
assured  of  the  fact,  that  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only-begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  hare  everlasting  life,** 
and  yet  never  be  in  fear  of  perishing  for  want  of  Christ.  He  may  read,  and  be  well 
assured  of  the  fact,  that  *'  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  that  this  life  is  in 
His  Son  '* ;  he  may  go  on,  and  read  the  next  verse,  in  which  it  is  affirmed,  *•  He 
that  hath  the  Son  hath  life,  but  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  hath  not  hfe,*'  and  yet 
remain  destitute  of  the  ••life,"  which  God  has  given  in  Christ,  because  he  as  yet 
knows  not  that  he  is  ••  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.'*  He  may  know,  and  be  ready 
to  declare,  without  fearing  contradiction,  that  Christ  hath  ••  abolished  death,  and 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the  gospel  '* ;  but  he  may  not  know  (or  if 
he  does,  he  is  not  influenced  by  the  knowledge)  that  he  is  still  subject  to  all  the 
consequences  of  sin  which  Jesus  came  to  remove.  He  may  read  in  another  place, 
that  ••  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life,"  and  yet  be  ignorant  that  all  his  life  he  has 
been  earning  ''the  wages  of  sin,"  which  ••is  death."  II.  That  revelation  then, 
must  be  first  general;  and  secondly,  particular.  "Blessed  art  thou,  Simon 
Barjona ;  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  My  Father,  which 
IS  IN  HEAVEN."  It  is  the  prerogative  of  the  Father  in  heaven  to  reveal  His  Son. 
Angels  cannot  tell  what  Jesus  is ;  the  highest  intellect  in  heaven  would  fail  to 
reveal  it.  But  the  Father  does  reveal  ii.  But  as  we  have  seen  that  multitudes 
remain  ignorant,  though  God  has  opened  the  page  of  revelation,  we  need  a  par- 
ticular revelation.  The  Bible  is  a  revelation  from  God  the  Father  to  us ;  but 
we  need  a  revelation  of  Christ  in  us.  During  all  lives,  God  has  revealed  Christ 
to  as;  but  has  He  revealed  Christ  in  us.  It  must  be  the  result  of  an  ex- 
press  revelation  from  God  the  Father,  through  His  own  blessed  Spirit,  to  our 
inward  souls ;  it  must  be  the  everlasting  Spirit  ••  taking  of  the  things  of  Christ, 
and  showing  them  to  as.'*  III.  That  blessed  abb  they  who  havb  such  a  know- 
LBnoE  OF  Christ,  as  a  bbvelation  from  God.  **  Blessed  art  thoa,  Simon,*'  &o. 
There  is  no  true  state  that  can  be  deemed  blessed,  but  that  which  results  from  * 
saving  knowledge  of  Christ.  He  who  has  this  revelation  is  blessed.  1.  In  the 
certainty  of  his  knowledge.  He  hath  the  witness  in  himself.  2.  In  the  reality  of 
the  effects  of  the  truth.  ••  The  truth  has  made  him  free.'*  He  is  ••an  heir  of  God, 
and  a  joint-heir  with  Christ."  8.  In  the  final  and  eternal  results  which  follow. 
"Bye  hath  not  seen,"  &o.      {G.  Fish,  LL.B.)        Who  am  i;— I.  The  populab 

IMPRESSION   OONOBRNIMO   JeSUS.      II.    ThB   APOSTOUO   CONFESSION   BBOABDINO  JeSUS. 

m.  Thb  acceptance  by  Jesus  of  this  confession.  1.  The  immense  importance  of 
the  answer  given  to  this  question.  2.  The  utter  inadequacy  of  any  answer  to  this 
question  save  one.  3.  The  complete  satisfaction  which  the  true  answer  affords. 
(J.  R,  Thomson,  M.A,)  *•  Whom  $ay  ye  that  lamf*' :— I.  It  is  evident,  from  the 
history,  that  oar  Lord  desired  to  awaken  some  sort  of  anxiety  in  the  minds  of  His 
followers,  and  to  excite  their  feelings  of  loyalty  to  truth  and  to  Himself,  so  that 
they  might  be  upon  their  guard  against  disaffection  under  any  popular  pressure, 
or  any  wild  popular  perversions  of  His  character  or  mission.  U.  This,  then, 
was  the  great  confession  of  faith,  which  has  come  down  to  us  through  the  ages. 
1.  First,  it  will  follow  from  a  story  like  this,  that  it  is  of  vast  consequence  what 
a  man  believes,  and  all  the  more  if  he  be  sincere  in  his  creed.  2.  We  learn  also 
that  it  is  not  enough  to  admit  the  bare  record,  and  so  simply  consent  to  an  historio 
Christ  3.  Again,  to  a  human  soul,  struggling  for  its  immortal  life,  Jesus  the 
Saviour  is  everything  at  once,  or  He  is  nothing  for  ever.    ((7.  S,  RobinMon^  DJ).) 

Ver.  31,  83.  That  the  Son  of  Man  must  enffer  many  things.— T^  rebuke  of 
love ;— Let  us  not  overlook  this  loving  rebuke ;  for  (1)  it  cures  Peter's  presumption ; 
(2)  sets  him  to  learn  a  new  lesson  on  the  heavenliness  of  sacrifice ;  (3)  prevents 
the  greatness  of  his  faith  being  spoiled  by  the  earthliness  of  his  hopes.  Faithful 
are  the  wounds  of  a  friend :  but  the  wounds  which  the  Saviour  inflicts  are  kindest 
of  all.  From  Peter's  weakness  let  us  learn  how  hard  it  is  to  see  all  truth  at  once. 
From  Christ's  rebnke  let  us  learn  that  the  ••  heavenly  thing  "  is  not  to  seek  for 
glory,  but  for  usefulness,  even  if  we  can  reach  it  only  through  a  cross.  {R.  Qlover.) 
Peter  rebuked  Chriit,  and  Ckriit  rebuked  Peter — an  altercation  of  more  than  mere 
wordt ;— It  is  charged  with  practical  truths.  1.  Man's  shortsightodness.  2.  Man's 
gentimemt  exaggerated.    8.  Man's  audacity  to  think  he  can  help  or  save  Christ.   On 


•HAP.  Tin.]  ST.  MARK,  821 

Christ's  fflde :  L  He  rebukes  the  oldest  2.  He  rebntes  the  wisest— it  was  Peter 
who  said,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ."  3.  He  shows  that  men  are  only  worthy  of  Him 
in  proportion  as  they  enter  into  His  spirit.  {Dr.  Parker.)  Christ's  intimation 
of  His  sufferings : — I.  What  there  is  to  mabk  the  time  wmch  our  blessed  Saviour 
thus  eeleoted,  for  giving  prominence  to  a  new  and  unwelcome  subject  of  discourse. 
In  the  third  year  of  His  public  ministry.  Up  to  this  time  our  Lord  left  the  great 
truth  of  His  Godhead  to  work  its  way  into  the  minds  of  His  apostles.  Now  they 
had  arrived  at  the  conviction  that  He  was  none  other  than  the  ever.living 
God.  What  inducement  led  to,  and  what  instruction  may  be  gathered  from,  the 
recorded  fact,  that  when  Jesus  had  drawn  from  His  disciples  the  acknow- 
ledgment of  His  Divinity,  then,  and  not  before,  "  He  began  to  teach  them  that 
the  Son  of  Man  must  suffer  many  thingfc,  and  be  rejected  of  the  elders,  and  of 
the  chief  priests,  and  scribes,  and  be  killed,  and  after  three  days  rise  again." 
Now  the  apostles  could  have  had  none  but  the  most  indistinct  apprehensions 
of  the  ofiBce  and  mission  of  our  Lord,  so  long  as  they  were  ignorant  of  the 
death  which  He  had  undertaken  to  die.  This  made  it  appear  remarkable,  that 
our  Lord  should  so  long  have  withheld  the  express  mention  of  His  sufferings. 
As  much  as  to  say,  "  It  will  be  of  no  avail  to  speak  to  them  of  My  death  till  they 
are  convinced  of  My  Deity.  So  long  as  they  oiUy  know  Me  as  the  Son  of  Man,  they 
will  not  be  prepared  to  hear  of  the  cross ;  when  they  shall  also  know  Me  as  the  Son 
of  the  living  God,  then  will  be  the  time  to  tell  of  ignominy  and  death."  "  Oh, 
how  strange,"  you  may  exclaim,  "  that  the  moment  of  discovering  a  Divine  person 
in  the  form  of  a  man  should  be  the  right  moment  for  the  being  informed  that  this 
person  should  be  crucified  I  To  discover  a  Divine  person  is  to  discover  what  death 
cannot  touch ;  and  yet  Christ  waited  till  this  discovery  in  regard  of  Himself,  that 
He  might  then  expressly  mention  His  approaching  dissolution."  But  do  yon  not 
observe,  my  brethren,  what  a  testimony  our  Lord  hereby  gives  to  the  fact,  that  the 
truth  of  His  Godhead  alone  explains — alone  gives  meaning  or  worth  to — His  having 
died  on  the  cross  ?  He  will  say  nothing  of  His  death  whilst  only  believed  to  be 
man  ;  He  speaks  continually  of  His  death,  when  once  acknowledged  as  God.  Are 
we  not  taught  by  this,  that  they  only  who  believe  Christ  Divine,  can  put  the  right 
construction  on  the  mystery  of  His  death,  or  so  survey  it  as  to  draw  from  it  what 
it  was  intended  to  teach  ?  Then  we  perceive,  that  He  must  have  died  as  a  sacrifice ; 
then  we  understand  that  He  must  have  died  as  an  atonement  to  be  the  propitiation 
for  our  sins,  to  reconcile  the  world  unto  God.  He  could  not  have  died  for  such 
ends  had  He  been  only  man ;  but  being  also  God,  such  ends  could  be  answered  and 
effected  by  His  death,  though  nothing  less,  so  far  as  we  can  tell,  could  have 
sufficed.  Therefore,  again  and  again,  we  say,  Christ's  Divinity  is  the  explanation 
of  Clu-iBt's  death.  We  seem  quite  justified  in  gathering  from  the  text,  that  hence- 
forward car  Lord  made  very  frequent  mention  of  His  cross.  If  you  examine,  you 
will  find  BO  many  as  nine  instances  spoken  of  by  the  evangelists ;  though  it  was  a 
topic  which  He  had  not  before  introduced.  And  what  is  very  observable  is,  that  it 
seems  to  have  been  upon  occasions  when  the  disciples  were  likely  to  have  been 
puffed  np  and  exalted,  that  ever  after  our  Lord  took  special  pains  to  impress  upon 
them  tlutt  He  must  be  rejected  and  killed.  Ah !  my  brethren,  ought  we  not  to 
learn  from  this  keeping  the  cross  out  of  sight  till  faith  had  grown  strong  and  high 
privilege  been  imparted,  that  it  is  the  advanced  Christian  who  has  need  of  per- 
secution ;  and  that  grace,  in  place  of  exempting  us  from,  is  to  fit  us  for  trial  ?  The 
disciples  must  have  well  known  that  if  suffering  were  to  be  their  Master's  lot,  it 
would  also  be  theirs.  If,  then  and  thence,  Jesus  spake  of  afflictions  which  should 
befall  Himself,  He  must  have  been  understood  as  likewise  speaking  of  afflictions 
which  would  befall  His  apostles  ;  and  He  abstained,  you  see,  from  dwelling  on  the 
tribulation  which  would  be  the  path  to  His  kingdom,  till  He  found  His  followers 
strong  in  belief  of  His  actual  Divinity.  And  then  take  one  more  lesson  from  the 
peculiarity  of  the  occasions  on  which,  as  we  have  shown  you,  Christ  made  a  special 
point  of  introducing  the  mention  of  His  sufferings ;  occasions  on  which  the  disciples 
were  in  danger  of  being  puffed  up  and  exalted.  Learn  to  expect,  and  be  thankfol 
for,  something  bitter  in  the  cup,  when  faith  has  won  the  victory,  and  yon  have 
tasted,  in  no  common  measore,  the  powers  of  the  invisible  world.  You  may  say, 
however,  that  it  militates  against  much  that  we  have  advanced,  that  in  point  of 
fact,  Christ's  mentioning  His  sufferings  at  the  time  when  He  did,  produced  not  on 
the  disciples  the  effect  which  our  statement  supposes.  We  have  but  too  good  proof, 
that  though  oar  Lord  deferred  so  long  as  He  did  speaking  of  His  rafferin^,  the 
apostles  were  itiU  onprepazed  for  the  saying,  and  could  neither  understand  it  nor 

21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIL  [cha».  thl 

receive  it.  Even  St.  Peter,  who  had  jnst  made  the  noble  eonfession  which  proved 
liim  ready  and  willing  to  hear  tidings  from  Christ,  no  sooner  hears  of  his  Saviour 
being  rejected  and  killed,  than  he  begins  presumptuously  to  rebuke  Him ;  saying, 
"  Be  it  far  from  Thee,  Lord ;  this  shall  not  be  unto  Thee."  Yet  let  it  not  be  thought 
that  Gbrist  chose  an  unseasonable  time,  or  tried  an  unsuitable  means.  The  medi- 
cine may  be  what  we  want ;  but  we,  alas !  may  reject  it,  as  not  being  what  we  like. 
The  case  may  be  precisely  such,  that  from  that  time  forth,  it  is  wholesome  that  we 
be  admonished  of  appointed  tribulation.  We  may  only  the  more  prove  how  the 
admonition  is  needed,  by  treating  it  with  dislike,  and  trying  to  disbelieve  it.  When 
we  find  that  there  was  such  repugnance  in  St.  Peter  and  his  brethren  to  the  cross, 
though  Christ  had  waited  so  patiently  for  the  fittest  time  to  introduce  it,  we  ought 
to  learn  the  difficulty  of  taking  part  with  the  suffering  Saviour,  and  submitting 
oarselves  meekly,  aud  thankfully,  to  the  scorn  and  the  trial  of  sharing  His  afflic- 
tions. And  this  lesson  from  man's  aversion  to,  and  how  much  more  the  bearing  of, 
tlie  cross,  should  bring  home  to  us  with  great  force,  our  need  of  being  continually 
disciplined  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  yet  it  is  not  to  pure  and  unmingled  sorrow, 
that  Christ  would  consign  the  more  faithful  in  His  Church.  As  St.  Paul  writes  to 
the  Corinthians,  "  as  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation  also 
aboundeth  by  Christ."  How  beautiful  is  it  in  our  text,  that  if  Jesus  then  began  to 
tell  His  disciples  how  He  should  die.  He  then  began  also  to  tell  them  how  He  should 
rise  again  from  the  dead.  It  is  our  unbelief,  or  our  impatience,  which  makes  us 
overlook  the  one  statement  in  our  eagerness  to  get  rid  of  the  other.  If  God  lead 
you  into  the  wilderness,  it  is,  as  He  saith  by  the  prophet  Hosea,  that  there  He  may 
"  speak  comfortably  to  you,  giving  you  vineyards  from  thence,  and  the  valley  of 
Achor  for  a  door  of  hope."     {H.  Melville  B.D.) 

Ver.  34.  Whosoever  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  MmaelL^FoUowing 

Christ : — Here  Christ  very  distinctly  sets  before  all  men  the  conditions  of  disciple- 
.hip  in  His  school,  and  of  citizenship  in  His  kingdom.  It  is  not  a  kingdom  of  earthly 
.  plendour.  If  any  would  come  after  Him,  they  must  expect  hardships,  self-denial, 
cross-bearing,  and  scorn.  Their  rest  and  reward  were  not  yet.  He  was,  indeed, 
the  Messiah ;  but  it  was  by  a  rough  pathway  that  He  would  bring  His  followers  to 
glory.  Nolice — I.  The  ukhesitatiko  wat  im  which  Jesus  assumes  to  be  our 
RiOHTFUii  Leadeb.  Elscwhere  He  is  man's  Teacher,  Master,  Friend,  Saviour.  Here 
He  invites  followers,  and  offers  and  claims  to  lead.  1.  Man  needs  a  Leader;  life's 
by-ways  are  many;  the  labyrinth  is  deep;  its  duration  is  short ;  the  stake  is  great. 
Man's  native  tendency  is  not  upward.  2.  Jesus  has  a  rightful  claim  to  be  our 
Leader.  He  proves  it  by  the  greatness,  and  wisdom,  and  perfection  of  His  person 
and  character.  11.  The  sobebino  way  in  which  Jesus  announces  the  cost  or 
FOLLOWING  Hm.  **  Whosoever  will " — this  points  to  obstacles  to  be  overcome,  and 
trials  to  be  borne.  To  be  a  true  follower  of  Christ  one  needs  the  courage  of  deep 
conviction  and  strong  desire.  This  may  seem  stem.  So  it  is.  But  it  is  not 
arbitrary  or  unfeeling.  There  are  two  reasons  for  denying  self.  1.  The  •'  self  "  in 
us  is  to  be  denied,  because  it  is  wrong.  Personal  salvation,  without  the  denial  of 
the  old  nature,  the  sinful  self  in  us,  would  be  a  contradiction.  2.  The  new  spirit 
that  is  in  us  requires  it.  The  follower  of  Christ  has  gone  over  to  His  side,  and 
become  His  servant  and  soldier.  But  his  new  work  is  not  easy.  It  was  not  easy 
to  the  Saviour,  for  it  cost  Him  humili8.tion,  and  privations,  and  obloquy,  and 
pains.  III.  The  cheebino  way  in  which  Jesus  sets  befobe  us  the  bewabds  of 
fatthfully  followino  Him.  While  Christ  was  the  greatest  of  all  preachers  of 
self-sacrifice,  He  uniformly  recommended  it  by  pledges  of  future  good.  The 
reward  He  promises  is  not  of  any  lower  or  sensual  kind.  It  is  that  of  activity, 
calling  into  right  and  glad  exercise  every  power  we  possess.  (H.  M.  Oroutf  D.D.) 
Following  Christ: — I.  Its  essential  coNnmoNs.  1.  It  must  be  absolutely  a 
voluntary  choice — •  *  Whosoever  will."  (a)  This  is  a  condition  universally  recognized 
in  the  New  Testament.  (6)  It  is  a  condition  that  underlies  the  whole  plan  of 
salvation,  (c)  It  is  a  condition  from  which  there  can  be  no  deviation.  2.  It  must 
be  absolutely  an  entire  surrender,  (a)  A  surrender  of  every  part  of  our  being  to 
Christ  as  Master.  (6)  A  surrender  of  every  object  which  He  requires  to  be  given 
up.  II.  Its  xbsential  pbinciples.  1.  Holiness,  suggested  by  the  necessity  of  the 
surrender  of  "  self."  2.  Implicit  obedience  is  suggested  by  the  necessity  of  taking 
up  the  cross.  8.  To  love  Christ,  suggested  by  the  necessity  of  being  ready  to  lose 
life  for  Christ's  sake.  4.  The  avowal  of  Christ,  suggested  by  the  words  of  Jesus  in 
^er.  88.     (D.  C.  Hughes,  MU,  The  Master's  summons  to  His  disciples ;— Like 


Tm.]  ST,  MARK.  121 

«  eommander  addresring  his  soldiers.  Fall  of  dear  vision  and  resolve.  I.  Thb 
Ant.  To  overcome  spiritual  error  and  Satanio  influence,  and  establish  God's 
kingdom.  II.  Thb  conditions  of  its  attainment.  These  are  open  to  all.  1. 
Self-denial.  2.  Cross-bearing.  3.  Obedience  and  imitation.  II.  Inoentivbs,  1. 
Christ's  example  and  inspiration.  He  says  not  "go"  but  **come."  He  goes 
before,  and  shows  the  way.  2.  The  endeavour  to  save  the  lower  "self"  will 
expose  to  certain  destruction  the  higher  •'  self  " ;  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  lower 
"  self  "  and  its  earthly  condition  of  satisfaction  will  be  the  salvation  of  the  higher 
**  self."  3.  The  value  of  this  higher  life  cannot  be  computed.  4.  Becognition  of 
Christ  on  earth  is  the  condition  of  His  recognition  of  us  hereafter.  {A,  F.  Muir^ 
M.A.)  Come  after  Me  .'—There  is  a  wonderful  spell  in  such  a  call.  All  history, 
profane  as  well  as  sacred,  has  shown  us  this.  The  great  Boman  general  realized 
its  force  when  he  called  to  his  soldiers,  who  shrank  from  the  hardships  of  the 
Libyan  desert,  and  promised  to  go  before  them,  and  to  command  them  nothing 
which  he  would  not  first  do  himself.  Even  so  Christ  designed  to  help  His  followers 
by  the  assurance  that  He  would  first  suffer  that  which  they  would  be  called  to  bear 
(H.  M.  Luekock,  D.D.)  Conditions  of  discipleship  .-—There  was  an  eagerness 
among  many  of  the  people  to  come  after  Him.  The  wistfulness  of  a  considerable 
proportion  of  the  northern  population  had  been  awakened.  They  were  ruminating 
anxiously  on  Old  Testament  predictions,  and  filled  with  vague  expectancy.  They 
saw  that  the  Babbi  of  Nazareth  was  no  common  Babbi.  He  was  a  wonderful  Being. 
It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that  they  pictured  out  to  themselves  all  sorts  of 
possibilities  in  connection  with  His  career.  To  what  was  He  advancing?  Whither 
was  He  bound  7  Was  He  on  His  way,  or  was  He  not,  to  the  throne  of  the 
kingdom?  The  Saviour  by  and  by  gives  suflBciently  explicit  indications  of  the 
ultimate  witherhood  of  His  career ;  but  meanwhile  He  brings  into  the  foreground 
the  moral  conditions  of  adherence  to  His  person  and  His  cause.  "  Whosoever  will 
come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself ,"— let  him  be  prepared  to  say  No  to  many  of 
the  strongest  cravings  of  his  nature,  in  the  direction  more  particularly  of  earthly 
ease,  comfort,  dignity,  and  glory.  (J.  Morison^  D.D.)  Following  Christ : — I. 
Th«  matter  whebkin  we  must  follow  Him.  1.  His  holy  doctrine.  3.  His  holy 
life.  Some  of  His  actions  were  not  imitable.  (1)  His  miraculous  works.  (2)  His 
mediatorial  acts.  The  things  wherein  we  must  follow  Christ.  1.  In  that  He  never 
sought  His  own  praise  and  glory,  but  the  praise  and  glory  of  God  that  sent  Him 
(John  vii.  18 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  31).  2.  In  that  He  contemned  His  own  will  for  His 
Father's  (Matt.  xxvi.  39).  3.  In  daily  and  frequent  prayer  to  His  Father  (Mark  i.  35). 
4.  In  fervent  zeal  to  His  Father's  house  (John  ii.  17).  5.  In  His  faith  and  confi- 
dence. 6.  His  charity  and  love  of  man,  shown  in  many  ways.  II.  The  manneb  wherein 
WE  must  follow  Chbist.  1.  We  must  follow  Him  in  faith.  2.  In  ardent  affection. 
3.  Sincerely.  4.  Wholly.  6.  Constantly.  HI.  The  beasons  ob  motives  thereunto. 
1.  The  equity  of  the  precept.  2.  Great  is  the  danger  of  not  following  Christ  onr 
Leader.  (1)  If  we  look  at  ourselves.  (2)  At  danger  of  false  guides.  (3)  At  the  world  as 
a  gnide.  3.  Argue  from  the  safety  of  following  Christ  our  Guide.  (T.  Taylor^  D.D.) 
Essence  of  self-denial : — In  the  parish  where  Mr.  Hervey  preached,  when  he  in- 
clined toloose  sentiments,  there  resided  a  ploughman  well-informed  in  religious 
matters.  Mr.  Hervey  being  advised  by  his  physician,  for  the  benefit  of  his  health, 
to  follow  the  plough  in  order  to  smell  the  fresh  earth,  frequently  accompanied  this 
ploughman  in  his  rural  employment.  Mr.  Hervey,  understanding  the  ploughman 
was  a  serions  person,  said  to  him  one  morning,  "  Wliat  do  you  think  is  the  hardest 
thing  in  religion  ?  "  To  which  he  replied,  '•  I  am  a  poor  illiterate  man,  and  you, 
sir,  are  a  minister.  I  beg  leave  to  return  the  question."  "  Then,"  said  Mr.  Hervey, 
*'  I  think  the  hardest  thing  is  to  deny  sinful  self ; "  and  applauded,  at  some  length, 
his  own  example  of  self-denial.  The  ploughman  replied,  *•  Mr.  Hervey,  you  have 
forgotten  the  greatest  act  of  the  grace  of  self-denial,  which  is,  to  deny  ourselves  of 
a  proud  confidence  in  our  own  obedience."  Mr.  Hervey  looked  at  the  man  in 
amazement,  thinking  him  an  old  fool ;  but  in  after  years,  when  relating  the  story, 
he  would  add,  "I  have  since  clearly  seen  who  was  the  fool:  not  the  wise  old 
Christian,  but  the  prond  James  Hervey."  Self-denial  vnay  he  manifested  (1)  in  the 
subjection  of  our  own  opinions  in  religious  matters  to  the  authoritative  announce- 
ments of  Scripture.  If  we  believe  God  only  where  we  can  see  the  truth  and  pro- 
priety of  what  He  states,  we  do  Him  no  honour.  (2)  In  the  renunciation  of  worldly 
and  social  advantages.  If  the  Spirit  dwelling  in  us  be  not  mightier  than  that 
which  is  in  the  world,  we  cannot  be  Christ's  disoipl  s.  If  we  have  the  true  prindpls 
of  Okristianity,  it  will  rise  within  us  in  proportion  to  the  demand  upon  it.    (3)  \m 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIt.  [OKAP. 

foregoing  the  love  of  eftse  and  qniet  and  wealth.  The  ignorant  mnst  be  tanghl; 
the  knowledge  of  Christian  principles  spread ;  the  wiles  of  the  devil  expos^  Li 
the  spiritual  army,  all  must  be  warriors,  if  they  would  be  victors.  (4)  In  tht 
abnegation  of  oar  own  honour.  The  end  of  all  our  actions  and  sufferings  is,  thai 
every  crown  earned  and  won  may  be  placed  on  the  head  of  Him  who  wore  for  as 
the  crown  of  thorns.  {J,  Leifehild.)  Incentives  to  self-denial:—!.  Necessity 
for  salvation.  Having  become  corrupt  through  apostasy,  we  must  be  wrought  on  • 
different  mould.  2.  Grateful  imitation  and  return.  Christ's  love  draws  out  oars. 
3.  Spiritual  and  eternal  recompense.  Even  this  world's  goods  will  be  restored,  if 
God  sees  we  would  benefit  by  possessing  them.  But  in  most  cases  the  reward  is 
wholly  spiritual — the  favour  of  heaven  instead  of  the  friendship  of  mortals — the 
blessed  experience  of  being  on  the  side  of  God  and  right.  (Ibid.)  Self- 
denial  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  "  himself."  1.  Things  outwajd  :  things  concerning 
the  outward  man,  yet  so  near  him,  as  they  are,  after  a  sort,  himself ;  not  only  his 
riches,  but  his  name,  his  liberty,  his  life ;  all  of  which  must  be  denied  rather  than 
Christ  and  His  truth.  2.  Things  inward,  which  can  hardly  be  distinguished  from 
himself.  (1)  He  must  deny  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh,  which  is  enmity  to  God. 
(2)  He  must  deny  his  own  corrupt  will,  which  is  contrary  to  God's  will  (3)  He 
must  deny  all  his  carnal  passions  and  affections,  as  carnal  love,  hatred,  fear. 
(4)  He  must  deny  all  his  own  wicked  inclinations.  (5)  He  must  deny  all  wicked 
habits  and  sins.  U.  The  difjicultt  of  this  pbecept.  1.  Consider  the  near- 
ness of  things  to  be  denied.  Were  it  only  in  things  without  us,  as  to  part  with 
riches,  it  were  difficult  enough ;  but  when  it  leads  us  out  of  our  own  wisdom  and 
judgment,  what  a  hard  province  proves  it.  2.  Natural  pride  and  self-love  is  such, 
that  it  is  with  as  as  with  Solomon  (Eccles.  ii.  10).  We  are  so  far  from  crossing 
ourselves,  that  we  endure  not  any  other  should  cross  as ;  Haman  is  sick  on  his  bed 
because  Mordicai  denies  him  obeisance ;  if  John  deny  Herod  his  Herodias,  he  will 
die  for  it ;  if  Jonas  his  gourd,  he  will  be  angry  to  the  death  ;  such  impatience  is  in 
our  nature,  if  we  be  crossed  in  our  wills.  3.  Distrust  in  God,  and  trust  in  the 
means,  makes  the  precept  yet  more  difficult :  we  see  not  easily  how  we  can  do  well 
without  friends,  wealth,  liberty,  favour,  preferments.  Wisdom  is  good  with  an 
inheritance  (Eccles.  vii.).  We  cannot  live  by  promises,  something  we  would  have  in 
hand.  HI.  Thb  necessity  of  self-denial.  1.  The  context  af&rms  a  twofold 
necessity :  in  the  words  going  before — without  it  a  man  cannot  be  a  disciple  of 
Christ :  and  in  the  words  following — no  man  can  take  up  his  cross  who  has  not 
denied  himselt  2.  The  true  wisdom  cannot  be  embraced  before  the  other  be  dis- 
placed, no  more  than  light  can  be  manifest  before   darkness  be  chased  away. 

3.  The  gospel  offers  Christ  as  a  Physician,  man  must  therefore  deny  the  means  he 
can  devise  to  help  himself,  before  he  come  to  see  what  need  he  hath  of  Christ. 

4.  No  obedience  can  be  acceptably  performed  to  God  without  self-denial,  for  many 
commandments  are  hard  and  difbcult.  5.  Whence  is  all  the  denial  of  Christ  at 
this  day,  but  want  of  self-denial.  IV.  The  aids  to  self-denial.  The  Lord  has 
not  left  us  destitute  of  means,  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  ourselves.  1.  Strength  to 
overcome  ourselves  is  not  from  ourselves,  therefore,  we  must  remember  that  the 
Spirit  is  given  to  those  who  ask.  2.  Consider  what  an  advantage  it  will  be  to  take 
ourselves  in  hand  before  our  lasts  be  grown  strong  in  as,  and  how  they  are  far  more 
easily  denied  in  the  first  rising  then  when  they  have  seated  themselves  with  delight 
in  the  affections  and  members,  and  are  grown  from  motions  to  acts,  from  acts  to 
customs,  from  customs  to  habits,  from  habits  to  another  nature.  3.  As  it  most 
be  the  first,  io  also  the  continued  acts  of  a  Christian  to  stand  in  the  denial  of 
himself,  seeing  the  enemy  continually  uses  our  own  natural  inclinations  against  as; 
he  ploughs  with  our  own  heifer.  4.  And  because  they  are  not  denied  till  the 
contrary  be  practised,  our  care  must  be  that  the  room  of  our  hearts  must  be  taken 
up  with  good  desires,  and  the  lustings  of  the  Spirit  which  will  keep  out  the  desires 
of  the  flesh.  5.  Whereas  distrustfulness  of  heart  rivetteth  us  with  the  world,  labour 
daily  for  the  strengthening  of  faith  in  the  providence  of  God,  and  bring  thy  heart 
to  lean  upon  that  and  not  upon  inferior  means.     6.  The  motives  to  self-denial. 

1.  Look  to  Christ,  He  denied  Himself  for  us,  we  cannot  deny  too  much  for  Him. 

2.  Look  to  the  world,  it  will  leave  and  deny  us.  3.  Look  to  the  examples  of  the 
saints  who  have  denied  themselves.  4.  Look  to  hypocrites  forsaking  much  for 
God's  favour ;  we  have  Baal's  priests  tormenting  themselves  to  uphold  their  idolatry. 

5.  Look  to  the  end  of  our  self-denial ;  there  meets  us  God's  promise  with  a  full 
hand ;  all  will  then  be  made  up  with  an  infinite  advantage.  YI.  The  mabkb  of 
SELF-DENIAL.     1.  One  in  regard  to  God ;  it  will  cast  a  man  wholly  out  of  himself 


fliAP.  tul]  8T,  mark.  326 

(Pn.  Ixxiii.  25).  9.  The  second  in  respeet  of  Christ,  for  Christ,  he  can  want  as 
well  as  abound  (Phil.  iiL  8).  3.  The  third,  in  respect  of  the  Word  of  God,  it  is 
ready  for  all  God's  will.  4.  The  fouriJi,  in  respect  to  himself,  he  that  hath  denied 
himself  will  desire  no  way  of  prosperity  but  God's  own,  and  will  ascribe  it  all  to 
God.  6.  The  fifth  mark  is,  in  respect  to  others ;  he  that  hath  denied  himself  lives 
not  to  himself,  but  procures  the  good  of  others,  and  advances  to  his  power  every 
man's  good.  He  looks  not  on  men  as  they  are  affected  to  himself,  but  as  he  ought 
to  be  affected  to  them.  6.  The  last  note  of  self-denial  is  the  life  of  faith,  beyond 
and  without  all  means  of  help.  As  nothing  gives  more  glory  to  God  than  faith,  so 
nothing  takes  so  much  from  man.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Self-denial : — Self-denial 
is  a  Christian  principle,  and  yet  no  new  thing,  since  in  some  form  it  must  form  a 
part  of  the  lives  of  most  men.  Thus,  when  Garibaldi  was  going  out  to  battle,  he 
told  his  troops  what  he  wanted  them  to  do,  and  they  said,  ••  Well,  general,  what  are 
you  going  to  give  ns  for  all  this  ? "  He  replied,  ••  I  don't  know  what  also  you  will 
gat,  but  you  will  get  hunger,  and  cold,  and  wounds,  perhaps  death."  They  stood 
awhile  in  silence,  and  then  threw  up  their  hands ;  "  We  are  the  men  I "  Faith  in 
Christ  puts  in  action,  and  strengthens  a  desire  to  conquer  self,  which  seems  inherent  in 
human  nature.  The  disciple^s  cross : — The  world  in  general  has  got  ready  a  cross  for 
each  of  Christ's  disciples.  So  determined  is  it  in  its  opposition,  and  so  remorseless  in 
its  hate.  It  has  resolved  that  every  Christian  shall  be  crucified,  in  one  way  or  another. 
If  the  body  cannot  be  got  hold  of  and  transfixed,  the  heart  may.  Every  true  Christian 
must  be  willing  to  accept  this  treatment  for  Christ's  sake.  He  must  take  up  his 
cross,  and  walk  with  it,  as  it  were,  to  the  place  of  execution,  ready  for  the  last  ex- 
tremity. It  is  the  dark  side  of  the  case ;  and  the  phase  of  representation  under 
which  it  is  exhibited  was  no  doubt  suggested  to  our  Lord  by  the  clear  view  He  had 
of  the  termination  of  His  own  terrestrial  career.  "A  Christian,"  says  Luther,  "is 
a  Crucian."  The  Saviour  pictures  to  His  hearers  a  procession.  He  Himself  takes 
the  lead  with  His  cross.  He  is  the  chief  Crucian.  All  His  disciples  follow.  Each 
has  his  own  particular  cross.  But  the  direction  of  the  procession,  wiien  one  looks 
far  enough,  is  toward  the  kingdom  of  heavenly  glory.  (•/.  Morison,  D.D.)  The 
cross  to  he  expected : — Be  prepared  for  afflictions.  To  this  end  would  Christ  have  us 
reckon  upon  the  cross,  that  we  may  be  forewarned.  He  that  builds  a  house  does 
not  take  care  that  the  rain  should  not  descend  upon  it,  or  the  storm  should  not  beat 
upon  it,  or  the  wind  blow  upon  it ;  there  is  no  fencing  agamst  these  things,  they 
cannot  be  prevented  by  any  care  of  ours ;  but  that  the  house  may  be  able  to  endure 
all  this  without  prejudice.  And  he  that  builds  a  ship,  does  not  make  this  his  work, 
that  it  should  never  meet  with  waves  and  billows ;  that  is  impossible ;  but  that  it 
may  be  light  and  staunch,  and  able  to  endure  all  weathers.  A  man  who  takes  care 
for  his  body  does  not  care  for  this,  that  he  meet  with  no  change  of  weather, 
hot  and  cold,  but  how  his  body  may  bear  all  this.  Thus  should  Christians  do ;  not 
BO  much  to  care  how  to  shift  and  avoid  afflictions,  but  how  to  bear  them  with 
an  even  quiet  mind.  As  we  cannot  hinder  the  rain  from  falling  upon  the  house,  nor 
the  waves  from  beating  upon  the  ship,  nor  change  of  weather  and  seasons  from 
affecting  the  body,  so  it  is  not  in  our  power  to  hinder  the  falling  out  of  afflictions 
and  tribulations :  all  that  lies  upon  us,  is  to  make  provision  for  such  an  hour,  that 
we  be  not  overwhelmed  by  it.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Necessity  of  discipline : — When 
God  built  this  world.  He  did  not  build  a  palace  complete  with  appointments.  This 
is  a  drill  world.  Men  were  not  dropped  down  upon  it  like  manna,  fit  to  be  gathered 
and  used  as  it  fell ;  but  like  seeds,  to  whom  the  plough  is  father,  the  furrow  mother, 
and  on  which  iron  and  stone,  sickle,  flail,  and  mill  must  act,  before  they  come  to  the 
loaf.  (fl.  W.  Beecher.)  Affiiction,  our  present  portion: — The  Christian  lives  in 
the  midst  of  crosses,  as  the  fish  lives  in  the  sea.  (Vianney.)  DifUcuUy  not  con- 
fined to  religion : — Is  religion  difficult  ?  and  what  is  not  so,  that  is  good  for  anything  f 
Is  not  the  law  a  difficult  and  crabbed  study  f  Does  it  not  require  great  labour  and 
perpetual  drudging  to  excel  in  any  kind  of  knowledge,  to  be  master  of  any  art  or 
profession?  In  a  word,  is  there  anything  in  the  world  worth  having,  that  is  to  be 
got  without  pains  ?  And  is  eternal  life  and  glory  the  only  slight  and  inconsiderable 
thing  that  is  not  worth  our  care  and  industry?  (Archbishop  Tillotson.)  The  cross 
it  a  reality : — The  crusaders  of  old,  it  is  said,  used  to  carry  painted  crosses  upon 
their  shoulders ;  it  is  to  be  feared  t  at  many  among  us  take  up  crosses  which  sit 
just  as  lightly ;  things  of  omamen  ,  passports  to  respectability,  a  cheap  exchange 
for  a  struggle  we  never  made,  and  crown  we  never  strove  for.  But  let  us  not 
deceive  ours^ves.  None  ever  yet  entered  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  without  tribu- 
lation; not,  perhaps,  the  tribnlation  of  fire,  or  rebuke,  or  blasphemy,  but  the 


816  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR*  [chat.  Tin. 

tribtilatioxi  of  •  bowed  spirit  and  a  humble  heart ;  of  the  flesh  enioified  to  the  spirit, 
and  oi  hard  oonfliet  with  the  powers  of  darkness ;  and,  therefore,  if  oar  religion  be 
of  such  a  pliable  and  elastic  form  as  to  have  cost  as  neither  pains  to  acqaire,  nor 
self-denial  to  preserve,  nor  effort  to  advance,  nor  struggle  to  maintain  hol^  and  on- 
defiled — we  may  be  assured  oar  place  among  the  ranks  of  the  risen  dead  will  be  with 
that  prodigious  multitude  who  were  pure  in  their  own  eyes,  and  yet  were  not  washed 
from  their  filthiness.  (D.  Moored  M.A.)  Meaning  of  the  cross  : — Carrying  a  cross 
after  Christ  means,  for  one  thing,  enduring  suffering  for  Christ.  "  Cross  "  was  the 
name  once  given  to  the  most  fei^ul  engine  of  agony  for  the  body ;  and  the  words 
"cross,"  "crucial,"  "excruciate,"  &c.,  have  come  into  our  language  from  that 
material  cross,  and  they  now  point,  in  a  general  way,  to  what  has  to  be  suffered,  not 
in  the  body,  but  in  the  soul.  To  carry  a  cross  for  Christ  means,  for  another  thing, 
having  a  great  weight  on  the  mind  for  Christ's  sake.  To  carry  a  cross  for  Christ 
means,  for  another  thing,  that  this  suffering  and  heavily- weighted  condition  should 
be  open,  not  secret ;  for  the  cross-bearer  is  seen.  It  means,  for  another  thing,  that 
the  man  who  is  wHling  to  carry  the  cross  for  Christ  is  willing  to  suffer  scorn  for 
Christ.  No  one  carried  a  cross  in  the  old  Roman  days  but  one  who  was  the  very 
refuse  of  society.  To  be  willing  to  canry  a  cross  for  Christ  means  willingness  to  suffer 
ignominy,  willingness  to  "  go  forth  without  the  camp,  bearing  His  reproach."  To 
carry  a  cross  for  Christ  has  another  meaning.  It  means  that  for  Christ's  sake  the 
person  who  does  so  takes  up  a  trial  that  comes  to  him  in  the  course  of  God's  provi- 
dence, and  not  through  his  own  choice,  or  fault,  or  folly.  A  man  does,  from  a 
sublime  motive,  some  evil  thing  that  good  may  come.  Then  he  suffers  the  penalty. 
When  he  does  so,  that  is  not  suffering  a  cross.  When  a  man  is  a  violator  of  the 
Petrine  law ;  when  he  is  a  busybody  and  a  meddler  in  other  men's  matters,  and 
suffers  the  proper  penalty ;  when  a  man  does  a  right  thing  at  a  wrong  time,  or  in  a 
wrong  place,  or  in  a  wrong  way,  and  suffers  the  penalty ;  when  a  man  tries  to  help 
out  the  cleansing  efi&cacy  of  Christ's  blood  by  some  nostrum  of  his  own,  as  if  the 
great  Lord  of  the  universe  had  mistaken  the  proportions  in  which  health  and  sick- 
ness,  light  and  darkness,  fire  and  frost,  ease  and  pain,  should  be  distributed,  and 
suffers  a  complicated  penalty  thereby  and  therefrom,  that  penalty  is  not  a  cross  in 
any  one  instance.  Penalty  is  penalty,  and  nothing  else.  Whatever  the  cause  may 
be  in  which  you  are  acting  or  suffering,  penalty  is  penalty,  not  a  cross  taken  up  for 
Christ.  But  when,  for  the  sake  of  principle,  for  the  sake  of  profession,  for  the  sake 
and  in  the  course  of  carrying  out  the  laws  of  a  Christian  calling,  any  man  has  to 
suffer  something  sharp,  or  to  bear  something  galling,  for  Christ's  sake,  that  is  a 
cross.  {Charles  Stanford,  D,D.)  Taking  up  the  cross: — I.  What  is  this  cross? 
By  the  cross  is  not  meant  any  affliction  wluch  belongs  to  the  common  calamities  of 
nature ;  but  that  suffering  which  is  inflicted  for  the  profession  of  Christ  and  His 
truth.  1.  From  Him :  His  fan  to  sift  and  purge  us.  2.  For  Him :  endured  for  His 
cause  and  glory.  3.  His  in  His  mystical  body ;  not  natural.  4.  Not  in  respect  of 
merit,  but  of  sympathy.  U.  Why  is  rr  called  thb  oboss  ?  1.  Because  of  the  union 
between  Christ  and  the  Christian,  so  it  is  a  part  of  Christ's  own  cross :  for  as  all  the 
members  suffered  with  Christ  on  the  cross,  as  their  Surety ;  so  He  suffers  with  them 
as  His  members.  2.  That  we  should  never  think  of  the  troubles  for  Christ,  but  cast 
our  eyes  also  upon  the  cross  of  Christ,  where  we  shall  see  Him  sanctifying,  sweeten- 
ing, and  conquering  all  our  sorrows.  8.  That  in  all  our  sufferings  for  Christ  we 
should  support  our  faith  and  patience  in  beholding  what  was  the  end  of  Christ's 
cross,  and  to  expect  the  same  happy  end  of  our  crosses  for  Christ — the  crown.  III. 
What  is  it  to  take  up  the  cross  ?  It  is  not  to  devise  voluntary  affliction  for  our- 
selves. Neither  is  it  to  pull  the  cross  upon  our  shoulders.  For — 1.  Christ  did  not 
carry  His  cross  till  it  was  laid  upon  Him.  2.  Our  rule  is  to  use  all  good  means  for 
the  preservation  of  our  bodies,  health,  wealth,  and  comfort.  3.  Every  bearing  of 
affliction  must  be  an  obedience  of  faith,  and  as  such  based  upon  a  commandment 
of  God.  No  soldier  must  of  his  own  head  raise  war  against  his  own  peace,  nor  set 
fire  upon  his  own  house ;  this  is  not  the  part  of  a  ood  soldier,  but  of  a  mutinous 
fellow.  So  no  soldier  of  Christ  must  be  superfluou  in  suffering.  4.  We  may  not 
tempt  God  by  running  before  Him,  but  follow  Him  going  before  us.  If  without  sin 
and  with  good  conscience  we  may  escape  danger,  a  d  do  not,  we  ran  upon  it,  and  it 
becomes  our  own  cross,  and  not  Christ's.  It  is  e  ough  to  suffer  wrong ;  we  must 
not  offer  wrong  to  our  ovm  persons.  We  are  not  ound  to  seek  the  cross,  nor  make 
it,  but  to  bear  and  take  it  up.  Nor  to  fill  the  oujp  for  ourselves,  but  to  drink  it  when 
God  reaches  it.  To  take  up  the  cross,  therefore, '  ,  when  a  cross  meet  us  in  our  way, 
which  we  cannot  without  sin  escape,  we  must  now  take  knowledge  of  God's  will,  God's 


fflUF.  rm.}  ST,  MARK.  827 

hand,  God's  time,  and  God's  roioe  calling  ns  to  snffer.  Now  God  laying  on  the  cross, 
we  mast  not  pull  away  the  shoulder,  nor  hide  ourselves  from  the  cross  under  the  covert 
of  sinful  shifts,  nor  avoid  it  by  any  unlawful  means,  but  take  it  up,  and  buckle  to 
the  burden.  IV.  Thb  necessity  op  the  cross.  1.  To  the  godly  afflictions  are  often 
as  necessary  as  meat  and  drink ;  for  prosperity  is  as  a  dead  sea  (Prov.  i.  32).  Stand- 
ing waters  contract  mud,  and  breed  vermin;  a  still  body  fills  with  bad  humours. 
Fallow  and  imstirred  grounds  are  fruitful  in  weeds ;  therefore  God  in  great  wisdom 
by  trials  shakes  them  out  of  security,  and  makes  them  more  watchful  of  themselves ; 
scouring  makes  metals  brighter  and  more  useful.  2.  Another  reason  why  the  Lord 
hath  yoked  the  Christian  to  the  cross  is,  because  He  will  thence  fetch  a  strong 
argument  to  confound  Satan  (Job  i.  9) ;  He  will  have  it  appear  that  His  servants 
love  Christ  and  religion  for  itself,  not  for  wealth  or  ease.  3.  Comfort  to  the  saints 
in  their  suffering.  (1)  In  that  they  have  such  a  partner.  (2)  In  that  we  have 
Christ  Himself  at  the  other  end  of  the  cross,  helping  and  supporting  us.  He  is  of 
power  to  carry  the  heavy  end,  and  bear  off  the  weight  from  us.  (3)  In  that  we  have 
all  the  saints  our  companions.  How  can  we  sink  having  so  many  shoulders  under 
our  burden.  V.  What  is  required  in  taking  up  the  cross  ?  1.  A  continual  ex- 
pectation and  a  standing  unfearfuUy  in  the  station  wherein  God  hath  set  us,  with  a 
strong  resolution  not  to  be  discouraged,  though  crosses  come  never  so  thick.  Ex- 
pected evils  smart  less.  2.  A  contentedness  to  abide  under  a  great  burden,  as  a  man 
stands  under  the  burden  he  hath  taken  up.  3.  Love  of  God,  notwithstanding  the 
cross.  4.  Humility  and  silence ;  not  disputing  the  matter  with  God.  5.  Joy  and 
rejoicing,  not  in  the  smart  of  the  cross,  but  in  waiting  the  sweet  fruit  of  it.  IT. 
Taylor,  D.D,) 

Yer.  35.  For  vhosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it.— Bearing  the  eroa : — A 
threefold  inducement  is  here  held  out.  I.  Each  man  has  two  lives — A  lower  and 
earthly,  and  a  higher  and  heavenly.  If  any  man  thinks  only  of  the  former,  and 
makes  everything  bend  to  that,  with  all  its  temporal  enjoyments  and  self-pleasing, 
he  will  forfeit  all  right  to  the  latter.  If,  however,  he  learns  to  sit  loosely  to  that, 
and  is  prepared  to  resign  it  whenever  a  strong  sense  of  duty  prompts  the  resignation, 
he  carries  in  his  hand  a  passport  into  a  higher  and  nobler  existence.  H.  There  is 
▲  VAST  disproportion  BETWEEN  THE  TWO  LIVES.  1.  Hc  pioturcs  to  His  hearcrs  a 
man  placed  upon  trial  for  his  conduct,  and  condemned  to  forfeit  all  claim  to  eternal 
life,  because  he  has  thought  only  of  the  present,  and  taken  his  fill  of  its  pleasures  ; 
and  then  He  weighs  in  the  balance  one  against  the  other,  what  he  has  gained  and 
what  he  has  lost,  and  the  former  flies  up  at  once  and  kicks  the  beam,  for  it  is 
altogether  lighter  than  vanity  itself.  2.  There  are  many  things  which  may  be  re- 
covered by  ransom  or  won  back  by  exchange ;  but  eternal  life,  once  forfeited,  is  past 
recovery ;  at  least  no  corruptible  things,  such  as  silver  and  gold,  neither  thousands 
of  rams  nor  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil,  can  effect  a  redemption  or  offer  the  least 
compensation.  HI.  He  appeals  to  the  requital  at  the  final  judgment.  {H.  M, 
Luckock,  D.D.)  Meaning  of  the  term  ♦♦  life  "  ; — The  first  thing  for  us  to  do  is  to 
settle  the  meaning  of  the  word  "life."  In  this  the  Lord  helps  us.  He  calls  it  in 
one  place  our  ••  life  in  this  world  "  (John  xii.  25).  The  term  is  the  very  same  which 
is  used  in  Genesis,  where  it  is  said  that  "  man  became  a  living  soul."  Again,  it  is 
a  word  which  the  Hebrews  used  as  a  synonym  for  happiness.  A  happy  life  in  this 
world  ;  perhaps  that  phrase  might  do  by  way  of  beginning  our  definition.  But  that 
definition  is  not  complete.  A  good  Christian  life  is  a  happy  life ;  nay,  it  is  the 
happiest  of  all ;  and  it  is  led  in  this  world  ;  so  that  one  might  lead  a  happy  Life  in 
this  world,  and  yet  lose  nothing  in  the  world  to  come.  Let  us  go  on  then  to  take 
in  other  elements.  "  Life  in  this  world  "  appears  to  mean  life  which  has  no  refer- 
ence to  any  other ;  a  worldly  life  only — no  more ;  a  life  which  is  regarded  as  a 
complete  and  finished  thing  in  itself ;  which  needs  no  rounding  and  filling  out  by 
aught  to  come  after  it ;  a  life  which  has  in  its  activities,  in  its  aims,  in  its  felt  neces- 
sities, no  relation  to  any  other :  that  seems  to  be  the  hfe  here  spoken  of  .  .  .  God 
Almighty,  when  He  made  man,  made  him  at  first  the  tenant  of  this  natural  world, 
which  was  to  him,  for  a  time,  a  home,  and,  during  that  time,  gave  him  all  that  the 
natural  man  requires :  nor  was  it  till  God  proposed  to  him  a  supernatural  end,  and 
an  eternal  life  of  glory  and  feUcity  like  that  of  God  Himself,  that  the  natural  earthly 
life  sank  away  out  of  sight,  and  man,  reaching  forth  towards  the  heavenly  prize,  lost 
his  relish  for  visible  and  temporal  joys.  This,  then,  is  what  we  understand  by  that 
••  life  "  which  we  are  bidden  not  to  love,  nor  save,  nor  find.  It  is  this  natural  exist- 
enee,  this  earthly  state,  this  present  life,  alone  and  by  itself,  with  nothing  in  it 


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  Tm. 

prophetic  of  the  world  to  come,  with  nothing  in  it  to  sanctify,  hallow,  bless ;  a  life, 
perhaps  of  toil,  perhaps  of  pleasure,  yet  marked  by  no  holy  signs,  secular,  social, 
and  domestic ;  wherein  all  is  for  time  and  man,  and  nothing  for  God.  That  is  our 
natural  state ;  we  began  that  way ;  and  there  should  we  have  remained,  but  for  some 
act  on  God's  part  calling  us  away ;  as  the  scripture  calls  it,  "  electing  "  as ;  giving 
us  a  new  birth  unto  another  and  wholly  different  condition ;  and  begetting  us  again 
unto  a  lively  hope  which  has  its  spring  and  centre  in  a  supernatural  region.  {Morgan 
I)ix,  D.B.)  Life  saved,  yet  lost: — Let  us  force  again  upon  our  thoughts  the  danger 
of  getting  back  into  the  bondage  from  which  the  Lord  has  made  us  free.  This  com- 
mon natural  life  of  ours  ;  the  life  of  those  who  are  "  conceived  and  born  in  sin ; "  the 
life  which  is  so  loaded  down  with  divers  kinds  of  trial  and  sorrow;  the  life  which  has, 
no  doubt,  much  that  is  bright  and  pleasant  in  it,  but  also  much  that  is  very  hard 
and  bitter ;  this  life  which  can  be  abstracted  from  any  practical  relation  to  aught 
that  is  to  come  hereafter,  and  made  to  look  as  if  it  came  out  of  nothing  and  went 
back  into  nothing  ;  why  should  we  love  it  so  dearly  as  to  care  for  nothing  else  ?  why 
should  we  be  so  wrapped  up  in  it  as  to  feel  almost  as  if  it  sufficed  to  our  necessity  ? 
Men  thus  love  it ;  and  a  cold  shudder  passes  through  the  soul  when  they  think, 
"After  a  little  while,  comes  an  end,  and  then  what  shall  become  of  me?"  And 
some  men  are  like  persons  seeking  to  find  what  is  lost.  You  lose  a  piece  of  silver, 
and  you  give  your  whole  thought  to  searching  for  it.  You  mislay  a  book,  or  an  im- 
portant paper,  and  you  give  yourself  no  rest  till  you  find  it  again.  A  name  is  gone 
from  your  memory,  or  the  details  of  an  incident  from  your  recollection,  and  you 
think,  and  think,  and  try  to  get  hold  of  the  lost  idea,  the  impression  which  you 
cannot  trace.  So  do  some  men  search  the  world  through,  fix  their  whole  thoughts  on 
their  life,  and  try  to  get  out  of  it  the  pleasure  they  miss,  and  of  it  to  fill  the  void  in 
their  hearts.  And  think  what  it  is  to  save :  the  double  sense  that  is  here.  You  save 
a  thing  from  destruction :  you  rescue  a  drowning  man,  you  run  in  haste  to  snatch 
something  from  the  flames.  Or  again,  you  save  things  by  putting  them  away  and 
making  no  use  of  them.  You  hide  things  in  dark  closets  or  on  top  shelves,  and 
there  they  remain,  unused,  till  the  dust  settles  on  them,  and  the  moth  or  the  worm 
consume  them.  Or  so  might  one  hide  grain  away,  instead  of  sowing  it  in  the  ground, 
and  what  might  have  produced  the  bright  green  leaf  and  the  rich  full  fruit  in  the 
ear,  lies  there  sterile  and  valueless.  Thus  do  some  men  save  their  lives ;  they  never 
will  take  any  risk ;  they  never  do  one  brave,  unselfish  thing ;  they  are  always  in 
alarm  for  consequences,  afraid  of  compromising  themselves  or  their  interest,  afraid 
of  losing  the  earthly  possession.  Or  they  bury  their  talents  and  skill,  their  ideals 
and  ambitions,  so  that  when  they  come  to  die  no  one  can  recollect  one  single  thing 
they  ever  did  in  all  their  lives,  that  others  might  be  thankful  for,  or  for  which 
society  was  the  better.  {Ibid.)  Insecurity  of  this  life: — Some  years  ago  a 
vessel  lay  becalmed  on  a  smooth  sea  in  the  vicinity  of  an  iceberg.  In  full  view  the 
mountain  mass  of  frozen  splendour  rose  before  the  passengers  of  the  vessel,  its 
towers  and  pinnacles  glittering  in  the  sunlight,  and  clothed  in  the  enchanting  and 
varied  colours  of  the  rainbow.  A  party  on  board  the  vessel  resolved  to  climb  the 
steep  sides  of  the  iceberg,  and  spend  the  day  in  a  picnic  on  the  summit.  The  novelty 
and  attraction  of  the  hazardous  enterprise  blinded  them  to  the  danger,  and  they  left 
the  vessel,  ascended  the  steep  mountain  of  ice,  spread  their  table  on  the  sununit, 
and  enjoyed  their  dance  of  pleasure  on  the  surface  of  the  frosty  marble.  Nothing 
disturbed  their  security,  or  marred  their  enjoyment.  Their  sport  was  finished  and 
they  made  their  way  down  to  the  water  level  and  embarked.  But  scarcely  had  they 
reached  a  safe  distance  before  the  loud  crash  of  the  crumbling  mass  was  heard. 
The  scene  of  their  gaiety  was  covered  with  the  huge  fragments  of  the  falling  pin- 
nacles, and  the  giant  iceberg  rolled  over  with  a  shock  that  sent  a  thrill  of  awe  and 
terror  to  the  breast  of  every  spectator.  Not  one  of  that  gay  party  could  ever  be 
induced  to  try  that  rash  experiment  again.  But  what  is  this  world  with  all  its 
brilliancy,  its  hopes,  and  its  alluring  pleasures,  but  a  glittering  iceberg,  melting 
slowly  away  P  Its  false  splendour,  enchanting  to  the  eye,  dissolves,  and  as  drop 
after  drop  trickles  down  its  sides,  or  steals  unseen  through  its  hidden  pores,  its  very 
foundations  are  undermined,  and  the  steady  decay  prepares  for  a  sudden  catastrophe. 
Such  is  the  world  to  many  who  dance  over  its  surface,  and  in  a  false  security  forget 
the  treacherous  footing  on  wh  h  they  stand.  But  can  any  one  who  knows  what  it 
is,  avoid  feeling  that  every  moment  is  pregnant  with  danger,  and  that  the  final  catas- 
trophe  is  hastening  on  ?  Is  it  in  a  merely  fanciful  alarm  that  we  warn  you  to  fle« 
from  the  wrath  to  come,  that  we  tell  you  that  every  moment  of  life  is  full  of  the 
deepest  solemnity,  and  that  we  ad    onish  yon  of  the  treacherous  character  of  hopef 


emr.  Tm.]  8T.  MARE,  139 

that  glitter  like  the  pinnacles  of  the  iceberg  in  the  sunlight,  which  a  moment  may 
crumble  to  ruined  fragments,  strewn  over  your  grave  ?  If  it  is  solemn  to  die,  is  it 
not  solemn  to  live,  when  any  moment  may  be  the  door  through  which  yoa  may  past 
into  eternity  ?  What  are  all  the  objects  upon  whioh  yon  rely — ^heidth,  strength, 
youthful  vigour — but  the  frozen  marble  beneath  your  feet,  that  may  yield  in  an  hour 
when  you  <^eam  not,  and  leave  you  to  sink  in  a  river  which  no  plummet  ean  fathom? 
Gonld  you  be  so  secure,  so  heedless  of  warning,  if  you  realized  your  true  condition  f 
{Homiletic  Encyclopaedia.)  The  shroud  of  Saladin : — Who  has  not  heard,  or 
rather  read,  of  that  famous  Asiatic  warrior,  Saladin  ?  After  subjugating  Egypt,  es- 
tablishing himself  as  Sultan  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  taking  towns  without  number,  and 
retaking  Jerusalem  itself  from  the  hands  of  the  crusaders,  this  Moslem  hero  of  the 
Third  Crusade,  and  beau  ideal  of  mediaeval  chivalry,  had  at  length  to  yield  to  a  still 
mightier  conqueror.  A  few  moments  before  he  breathed  his  last  he  ordered  a  herald 
to  suspend  on  the  point  of  a  lance  the  shroud  in  which  he  was  to  be  buried,  and  to 
cry  as  he  raised  it,  "  Look,  here  is  all  that  Saladin  the  Great,  the  conqueror,  the 
emperor,  bears  away  with  him  of  all  his  glory."  Thus  all  the  honours  and  riches 
of  this  world,  all  bodily  pleasures  and  gratifications,  aU  earthly  greatness,  are 
reduced  by  death  to  the  shroud  and  the  winding-sheet ;  but  the  soul,  immortal  in  iti 
nature,  and  secure  in  its  existence,  "  smiles  at  the  drawn  dagger  "  or  other  imple- 
ment of  death.  Who,  then,  can  estimate  the  untold  yalue  of  the  soul  ?  (J.  J, 
Given,  M.A.)  Men  imrnfor  goods,  who  will  not  for  Christ : — ^Richard  Denton,  ft 
blacksmith,  was  the  means  of  converting  the  martyr,  William  Woolsey.  When  told 
by  that  holy  man  that  he  wondered  he  had  not  followed  him  to  prison,  Denton 
rcpUed  that  he  could  not  bum  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  Not  long  c^er,  hia  house 
being  on  fire,  he  ran  in  to  save  some  of  his  goods,  and  was  burnt  to  death  1  And 
the  gospeVs: — These  words,  peculiar  to  St.  Mark,  are  written  for  those  who  in  this 
day  cannot  follow  Christ  personally,  as  the  apostles  did.  They  teach  us  that  those 
who  now  forsake  the  comforts  of  home  and  intellectual  society,  and  the  prospects  of 
preferment  in  a  wealthy  Church,  to  preach  the  gospel  amongst  uncivilized  or  savage 
tribes,  in  so  doing  lose  their  lives,  or  all  that  worldly  men  esteem  life  worth  liring 
for,  not  only  for  the  gospel,  or  for  the  Church's  sake,  but  for  Christ  Himself.  (M.  F, 
Sadler.)  Life  lost  and  saved : — It  is  a  riddle  to  flesh  t*,nd  blood,  that  the  same  life 
should  be  both  saved  and  lost :  For  the  resolving  whereof  we  must  know  that 
tViere  is  a  two-fold  tribunal,  the  court  of  the  world,  and  the  court  of  heaven} 
and  as  he  that  saves  himself  in  the  common  law,  may  be  east  in  the  Chancery ; 
so  he  that  saves  himself  here  in  the  consistories  of  men,  may  elsewhere  lose 
himself,  namely,  in  the  court  of  heaven.  (T.  Tavlor^  D.D,)  Loving  Chritt 
best: — I.  If  we  look  at  Christ,  He  is  to  be  loved  best  of  all,  and  all  thingg 
must  be  accounted  "dross  and  dung  in  comparison  of  Him**  (Phil.  iii.  7,  8). 
Again,  if  we  look  on  His  merit  and  desert,  he  loved  not  His  life  nnto  death  for  as, 
but  readily  offered  it  up  on  our  behalf  (Luke  xii.  60).  How  then  should  we  hold 
ourselves  bound  in  way  of  thankfulness,  if  we  had  a  thousand  lives,  to  give  them 
up  for  Him?  shall  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  and  not  the  unjust  for  &e  Just? 
II.  If  we  look  to  the  truth  and  gospel,  it  is  far  more  worthy  than  all  we  can 
give  in  exchange  for  it ;  it  cost  Christ  dear :  He  thought  it  worthy  of  His  life,  and 
bought  with  His  precious  blood,  which  was  the  blood  of  God  (Acts  xx.  28) ;  and 
should  we  think  much  to  buy  it  with  our  last  blood  ?  HI.  If  we  look  on  ourselves : 
1.  We  are  soldiers  under  Christ's  colours.  A  soldier  in  the  field  sells  his  life  for 
a  base  pay,  and  is  ready  for  his  king  and  country  to  endure  blows,  gashes,  and 
death  itself.  How  much  more  ought  the  Christian  soldier  for  the  love  of  his  Cap- 
tain, and  honour  of  his  profession,  contemn  fears  and  perils,  and  think  his  life 
\«  ell  sold  in  so  honourable  a  quarrel  and  cause  as  Christ's  is  ?  2.  This  is  indeed 
rightly  to  love  ourselves,  when  we  can  rightly  hate  ourselves.  We  must  learn  to 
love  ourselves  by  not  loving  ourselves.  (Ibid.)  Thought  no  test  of  love: — I 
grant  we  have  callings,  and  earthly  affairs,  which  tie  us  ordinarily  to  speak  and 
think  of  such  things ;  but  the  special  calling  of  a  Christian  must  be  ever  subor- 
dinate to  the  general,  and  in  all  earthly  business  a  man  must  carry  a  heavenly 
mind.  God  gives  no  leave  to  be  earthly-minded,  even  while  a  man  is  earthly  em- 
ployed. Again,  the  speaking  and  thinking  more  of  a  thing  upon  necessity  doth 
not  ever  argue  more  love  unto  it,  but  the  speaking  and  thinking  of  things  out  of 
the  valuation  of  judgment :  for  instance,  a  workman  thinks  more  of  his  tools,  and 
an  husbandman  speaks  more  of  his  husbandry,  than  of  his  wife  or  children,  because 
these  are  the  objects  of  his  labour ;  but  it  follows  not  he  loves  them  better,  because 
he  does  not  in  his  judgment  esteem  these  better.    Now  let  a  Christian  preserve  in 


.— -^ 


SaO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [osjup.  tin. 

his  jiidgment  a  better  estimate  of  Christ  and  heavenly  things,  and  his  speeches  in 
things  earthly  will  still  prefer  that,  and  run  apon  it.  {Ibid.)  Life  saved  by  loHng 
it : — And  this  is,  if  we  believe  onr  Lord,  to  save  and  preserve  oar  life  by  thns  oast* 
ing  It  away.  A  man  that  will  save  his  seed,  and  not  oast  it  away  into  the  ground, 
loseth  it  by  such  saving ;  but  if  he  sow  it,  he  reneweth  it,  and  mmtiplieth  it,  some^ 
times  an  hundredfold.  So  to  lose  thyself  for  Christ,  is  to  save  thyself,  and  to  reap 
an  hundredfold.  For  it  is  but  sown  to  spring  out  unto  the  eternal  harvest.  Ever 
remember  that  the  right  love  of  a  man's  self  is  in  and  for  Christ.  Objection. 
Tou  speak  of  nothing  but  hindrance  and  loss,  and  as  if  a  Christian  may  not 
have  riches,  friends,  life  and  comforts  of  it.'  Answer,  1.  Yes,  he  may  have  them, 
and  must  save  them ;  but  not  in  Christ's  cause  when  he  is  called  from  them.  2. 
Divorce  not  the  parts  of  the  text:  as  there  is  loss  in  the  text,  so  there  is  a 
greater  gain  by  it ;  as  the  harvest  makes  him  a  gainer,  who  in  seed-time  seemed  a 
loser.     (Ibid.) 

Ters.  86,  37.  For  what  shall  it  profit  a  manf^TAe  worth  and  exeeUeney  of  the 

soul : — The  soul  of  man  is  of  inestimable  value.  1.  In  respect  of  its  capacity  of 
understanding.  2.  In  respect  of  its  capacity  of  moral  perfection.  3.  In  respect 
of  its  capacity  of  pleasure  and  delight.  4.  The  high  price  which  God  the  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  have  set  upon  our  souls.  {Dr.  Scott.)  ^^he  gain  of  the 
world  compared  with  the  loss  of  the  soul  ;~L_^gfi.flAfl»  snPM8gn.,(^LJ  It  ifum  uncer- 
tain gain — "  If."  2^4^.  is  a  difficult  gain.  3.  It  is  a  trifling  gam.  (4p  It  is  an 
unsatisfactory  gain.  (6.  tt  is  a  temporary  gain.  n.TrairOss  sustained.  1.  The 
.loss  of  heaven.  2.  The  loss  of  happiness.  3.  The  loss  of  hope.  III.  Thb  xnquibt 
PBOPOSBD.  1.  Will  the  pleasures  of  sin  compensate  you  for  eternal  pain  ?  2.  Will 
any  worldly  gain  compensate  you  for  the  loss  of  the  soul  ?  2.  Christ  shunned  the 
offer,  you  accept  less.  4.  Or  will  you  ask,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved? "  {H.  F, 
Pickworth.)  I.  The  manner  ow  pbopoundino  this  truth.  The  manner  of  pro- 
pounding is  by  a  continued  interrogation,  which  not  only  carrieth  in  it  more  strength 
than  an  ordinary  negation,  but  stirreth  up  the  hearer  to  ponder  and  well  weigh  the 
matter,  as  if  he  were  to  give  his  judgment  and  answer ;  as  if  the  Lord  had  said  in 
larger  speech,  "  Tell  me  out  of  your  own  judgments  and  best  understanding,  let 
your  own  consciences  be  judges  whether  the  whole  world  were  a  reasonable  gain  for 
the  loss  of  the  soul,  or  whether  the  whole  world  could  recover  such  a  loss,  or  no." 

2.  In  the  manner  note  another  point  of  wisdom,  namely,  in  matters  of  much  im- 
portance, as  is  the  losing  of  the  soul ;  or  else  of  great  danger,  as  is  the  winning  of 
the  world,  to  use  more  than  ordinary  vehemence.  3.  Our  Saviour  in  the  manner 
teacheth  how  naturally  we  are  all  of  us  inclined  to  the  world,  to  seek  it  with  all 
greediness,  and  so  have  need  of  many  and  strong  back  biasses.  II.  The  matteb 
Ai-FORos  SUNDRY  INSTRUCTIONS : — 1.  The  moTO  a  man  is  addicted  to  gain  the  world, 
the  greater  is  the  danger  of  losing  his  soul.  They  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  many 
temptations  and  snares.  2.  Desire  to  be  rich  and  gain  the  world  stuffeth  the  soiu 
with  a  thousand  damnable  lusts,  every  one  able  to  sink  it  to  hell.  3.  Desire  of  gain 
threatens  danger  and  singular  detriment  to  the  soul ;  because  it  brings  it  almost  to 
an  impossibility  of  repentance  and  salvation;  Matt.  xix.  20:  "It  is  easier  for  a 
camel  to  pass  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  be  saved." 
4.  As  it  keeps  out  grace  in  all  the  means  of  it,  so  it  eats  out  and  casteth  it  out  of 
the  heart,  as  the  lean  kine  ate  up  the  fat,  and  were  lean  and  ill-favoured  still. 
(T.  Taylor  J  D,D.)  Gaining  the  world  : — What  a  man  loses  this  side  of  the  grave 
by  this  unholy  bargain.     1.  A  good  conscience.     2.  His  communion  with  God 

3.  His  hope  in  the  future.  Some  are  selling  their  souls — 1.  For  pleasure.  2.  For 
the  world.  8.  For  business.  4.  For  fear  of  ridicule.  (eT".  Vaughan,  M.A.)  A 
sum  in  gospeljorithmetic  : — I  |)ropose  to  estimate  and  compare  the  value  of  the  two 

rQpertieft.-^(l.  The  world  is  a  very  grand  property.  Its  flowers  are  God's 
oughts  in  bTdom.  Its  rocks  are  God's  thoughts  in  stone.  Its  dew-drops  are  God's 
thoughts  in  pearl.  How  beautiful  the  spring  with  bridal  blossoms  in  her  hair. 
*•  Oh,"  you  say,  ••  take  my  soul !  give  me  that  world."  But  look  more  minutely  into 
the  value  of  this  world.  You  will  not  buy  property  unless  you  can  get  a  good  titl*. 
You  cannot  get  a  good  title  to  the  world.  In  five  minutes  after  I  give  up  my  son] 
for  the  world,  I  may  have  to  part  with  it.  There  is  only  one  way  in  which  I  can 
hold  an  earthly  possession,  and  that  is  through  the  senses :  bH  beautiful  sights 
through  the  eye,  but  the  eye  may  be  blotted  out — all  captivating  sounds  through  the 
ear,  but  my  ear  may  be  deafened — all  lusciousness  of  fruits  and  viands  through  my 
taste,  but  my  taste  may  be  destroyed — all  appreciation  of  culture  and  of  art  throngb 


Tm.]  8T,  MARK,  S81 

my  mind,  but  I  may  lose  my  mind.  What  a  frail  hold,  then,  I  have  upon  any 
earthly  possession !  Now,  in  courts  of  law,  if  you  want  to  get  a  man  off  a  pro- 
perty, yon  must  serve  upon  him  a  writ  of  ejectment,  giving  him  a  certain  time  to 
vacate  the  premises ;  but  when  death  comes  to  us  and  serves  a  writ  of  ejectment, 
he  does  not  give  ns  one  second  of  forewarning.  He  says,  **  Off|  of  this  place ! 
You  have  no  right  any  longer  to  the  possession."  We  might  cry  out,  "  I  gave 
a  hundred  thousand  dollars  for  that  property  " — the  plea  would  be  of  no  avail. 
We  might  say,  **  We  have  a  warrantee  deed  for  that  property  " — the  plea  would  be 
of  no  avail.  We  might  say,  *'  We  have  a  lien  on  that  storehouse  " — the  plea  would 
be  of  no  avail.  Death  is  blind,  and  he  cannot  see  a  seal,  and  cannot  read  an 
indenture.  So  that  first  and  last,  I  want  to  tell  you  that  when  you  propose  that 
I  give  up  my  soul  for  the  world,  you  cannot  give  me  the  first  item  of  title.  Having 
examined  the  title  of  a  property,  your  next  question  is  about  insurance.  You  would 
not  be  silly  enough  to  buy  a  large  warehouse  that  could  not  possibly  be  insured. 
You  would  not  have  anything  to  do  with  such  a  property.  Now,  I  ask  you  what 
assurance  can  you  give  me  that  this  world  is  not  going  to  be  burned  up  ?  Absolutely 
none.  Geologists  tell  us  that  it  is  already  on  fire,  that  the  heart  of  the  world  is 
one  great  living  coal,  that  it  is  just  like  a  ship  on  fire  at  sea,  the  flames  not  bursting 
out  because  the  hatches  are  kept  down.  And  yet  you  propose  to  palm  off  on  me,  in 
return  for  my  soul,  a  world  for  which,  in  the  first  place,  you  give  no  title,  and  in  the 
second  place,  for  which  you  can  give  no  insurance.  **  Oh,"  you  say,  "  the  water  of 
the  oceans  will  wash  over  all  the  land  and  put  out  the  fire."  Oh  no,  there  are 
/  inflammable  elements  in  the  water— hydrogen  and  oxygen.  Call  off  the  hydrogen, 
/  and  then  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  oceans  would  blaze  like  heaps  of  shavings, 
y  "—You  want  me  to  take  this  world  for  which  you  can  give  no  possible  insurance. 
Astronomers  have  swept  their  telescopes  through  the  sky,  and  have  found  out  that 
there  have  been  thirteen  worlds,  in  the  last  two  centuries,  that  have  disappeared . 
At  first,  they  looked  just  like  other  worlds.  Then  they  got  deeply  red — they  were 
on  fire.  Then  they  got  ashen,  showing  they  were  burned  down.  Then  they  dis- 
appeared, showing  that  even  the  ashes  were  scattered.  And  if  the  geologist  be 
right  in  his  prophecy,  then  our  world  is  to  go  in  the  same  way.  And  yet  you  want 
me  to  exchange  my  soul  for  it.  Ah  no,  it  is  a  world  that  is  burning  now.  Sup- 
pose you  brought  an  insurance  agent  to  look  at  your  property  for  the  purpose  of 
I  giving  yon  a  policy  upon  it,  and  while  he  stood  in  front  of  the  house,  he  would  say. 
V  "  That  house  is  on  fire  now  in  the  basement " — yon  could  not  get  any  insurance 
upon  it.  Yet  you  talk  about  this  world  as  though  it  were  a  safe  investment,  as 
though  you  could  get  some  insurance  upon  it,  when  down  in  the  basement  it  is  on  fire. 
I  remark,  also,  that  this  world  is  a  property,  with  which  everybody  who  has  taken 
it  as  a  possession,  has  had  trouble.  Now,  between  my  house  and  this  church,  there 
is  a  reach  of  land  which  is  not  built  on.  I  ask  what  is  the  matter,  and  they  reply 
that  everybody  who  has  had  anything  to  do  with  that  property  got  into  trouble  about 
it.  It  is  just  so  with  this  world  ;  everybody  who  has  had  anything  to  do  with  it,  as 
a  possession,  has  been  in  perplexity.  How  was  it  with  Lord  Byron  ?  Did  he  not 
sell  his  immortal  soul  for  the  purpose  of  getting  the  world?  Was  he  satisfied  with 
the  possession?    Alas,  alas,  the  poet  graphically  describes  his  case  when  he  says : 

"  Drank  every  cup  of  joy,  heard  every  trump 
Of  fame  ;  drank  early,  deeply  drank ;  drank  draughts 
Which  common  millions  might  have  drank.     Then  died 
Of  thirst,  because  there  was  no  more  to  drink.*' 

/  Oh  yes,  he  had  trouble  with  it,  and  so  did  Napoleon.  After  conquering  nations  by 
the  force  of  the  sword,  he  lies  down  to  die,  his  entire  possession  the  military  boots 
^  that  he  insisted  on  having  upon  his  feet  while  he  was  dying.  So  it  has  been  with 
men  who  had  better  ambition.  Thackeray,  one  of  the  most  genial  and  lovable 
souls,  after  he  had  won  the  applause  of  all  intelligent  lands  through  his  wonderful 
genius,  sits  down  in  a  restaurant  in  Paris,  looks  to  the  other  end  of  the  room,  and 
wonders  whose  that  forlorn  and  wretched  face  is ;  rising  up,  after  awhile,  he  finds 
that  it  is  Thackeray  in  the  mirror.  Oh  yes,  this  world  is  a  cheat.  Talk  about  a 
man  gaining  the  world  I  Who^everj;ained  half  the  world  ?  II.  Now,  let  us  look 
AJ  TBX  OTHER  PEOPEBTT — TjELfi  swjlTv^  caimot  make  a  bargain  without  seeing  the 
comparative  value.  The  soul  1  How  shall  I  estimate  the  value  of  it  ?  Well,  by  its 
exquisite  organization.  It  is  the  most  wonderful  piece  of  mechanism  ever  pat 
;  together.    Machinery  is  of  val  e  in  proportion  as  it  is  mighty  and  silent  at  the 


839  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  LOHap.  vm. 

same  time.  Ton  look  at  the  engine  and  the  machinery  in  the  Philadelphia  Mint, 
and  as  you  see  it  performing  its  wonderful  work,  you  will  be  surprised  to  find  how 
silently  it  goes.  Machinery  that  roars  and  tears  soon  destroys  itself;  but  silent 
macHmery  is  often  most  effective.  Now,  so  it  is  with  the  soul  of  man,  with  all  its 
tremendous  faculties — it  moves  in  silence.  Judgment  without  any  racket,  lifting  its 
scales;  memory  without  any  noise,  bringing  down  all  its  treasures;  conscience 
taking  its  judgment-seat  without  any  excitement ;  the  understanding  and  the  will 
all  doing  their  work.  Velocity,  majesty,  might ;  but  silence — silence.  You  listen 
at  the  door  of  your  heart.  You  can  hear  no  sound.  The  soul  is  all  quiet.  It  is 
so  delicate  an  instrument,  that  no  human  hand  can  touch  it.  You  break  a  bone, 
and  with  splinters  and  bandages  the  surgeon  sets  it ;  the  eye  becomes  inflamed,  the 
apothecary's  wash  cools  it ;  but  the  soul  ofi  the  track,  unbalanced,  no  human  power 
can  re-adjust  it.  With  one  sweep  of  its  wing  it  circles  the  universe,  and  over- vaults 
the  throne  of  God.  Why,  in  the  hour  of  death  the  soul  is  so  mighty,  it  throws 
aside  the  body  as  though  it  were  a  toy.  It  drives  back  medical  skill  as  impotent.  It 
breaks  through  the  circle  of  loved  ones  who  stand  around  the  dying  couch.  With 
one  leap  it  springs  beyond  star,  and  moon,  and  sun,  and  chasms  of  immensity.  Oh, 
it  is  a  soul  superior  to  all  material  things.  I  calculate  further  the  value  of  the 
►  soul  by  the  price  that  has  been  paid  for  it.  ;ln  St.  Petersburg,  there  is  a  diamond 
"^  that  Government  paid  two  hundred  thousand  dollars  for.  *•  Well,**  you  say,  **  it 
must  have  been  very  valuable,  or  the  Government  would  not  have  paid  two  hundred 
thousand  dollars  for  it."  I  want  to  see  what  my  soul  is  worth,  and  what  your  soul 
is  worth,  by  seeing  what  has  been  paid  for  it.  For  that  immortal  soul,  the  richest 
blood  that  was  ever  shed,  the  deepest  groan  that  was  ever  uttered,  all  the  griefs  of 
earth  compressed  into  one  tear,  all  the  sufferings  of  earth  gathered  into  one  rapier 
of  pain  and  struck  through  His  holy  heart.  Does  it  not  imply  tremendous  value  ? 
I  argue  also  the  value  of  the  soul  from  the  home  that  has  been  fitted  up  for  it  in 
the  future.  One  would  have  thought  that  a  street  of  adamant  would  have  done. 
No,  it  is  a  street  of  gold.  One  would  have  thought  that  a  wall  of  granite  would 
have  done.  No,  it  is  the  flame  of  sardonyx  mingling  with  the  green  of  emerald. 
One  would  have  thought  that  an  occasional  doxology  would  have  done  ?  No,  it  is 
a  perpetual  song.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  ThfiMdef  thing  forgotten :— So  short-sighted 
and  foolish  is  man  1  I  once  read  of  a  woman  whose  house  was  on  fire.  She  was 
very  active  in  removingher  goods,  but  forgot  her  child,  who  was  asleep  in  the  cradle. 
At  last  she  thought  of  the  poor  babe,  and  ran,  with  earnest  desire,  to  save  it.  But 
it  was  now  too  late ;  the  flames  prevented  her  from  crossing  the  threshold.  Judge  of 
the  agony  of  mind  which  wrung  from  her  the  bitter  exclamation :  "  Oh,  my  child ! 
niy  child  1  I  have  saved  my  goods,  but  lost  my  child  I  *'  So  will  it  be  with  many  a 
poor  sinner,  who  spent  all  his  life  in  the  occupations  of  the  world,  while  the  "one 
thing  needful  '*  was  forgotten.  What  will  it  then  avail  for  a  man  to  say,  "  I  secured 
a  good  place,  or  a  good  trade,  or  profession,  but  I  lost  my  soul?  I  made  many 
friends,  but  God  is  my  enemy.  I  heaped  up  riches,  but  now  they  must  all  be  left." 
Profit  and  loss ;— What  is  the  good  of  life  to  us  if  we  do  not  live  f  what  is  the 
profit  of  being  a  man  in  form  and  not  a  man  in  fact?  what  is  the  worth  of  existence 
if  its  worth  is  all,  or,  for  the  most  part,  outside  of  us  and  not  in  us  ?  There  are 
two  remarks  which  might  be  made  in  illustration  of  this  question,  in  the  sense 
in  which  I  take  it.  I.  The  gain  here  spoken  of  is  nominal,  imaginary.  II. 
The  loss  is  real,  and  it  is  the  greatest  conceivable.  I.  I  shall  only  have  tirne 
here  to  say  a  few  words  with  regard  to  the  latter  point.  As  to  the  former  I  will 
only  say,  that  to  lose  the  soul,  not  to  live  man's  higher  life,  is  really  also  to  lose  the 
world,  whether  you  mean  by  it  the  material  world,  or  the  activities  and  pleasures  of 
human  life.  It  is  only  in  an  imaginary,  entirely  illusory  way  that  any  man  who 
loses  his  soul  gains  the  world.  We  gain  as  much  of  the  world  as  really  enriches 
us,  really  enters  in  the  shape  of  thought  and  feeling  into  the  ouiTent  of  our  existence, 
really  affords  ns  unmixed  and  enduring  satisfaction,  and  we  gain  no  more  of  the 
world  than  this.  We  have  of  the  world  not  what  we  call  our  own,  but  what  we  are 
able  to  enjoy  and  no  more.  It  is  not  to  gain  the  world,  to  gain  riches  which  can 
buy  anything  the  world  contains,  nnless  you  can  buy  along  with  it  the  power  to 
enjoy  it.  Thus  rich  men  gain  the  whole  world  and  do  not  gain  it  at  all.  They 
have  no  delight  in  books,  no  interest  in  public  affairs,  no  lest  for  amusements. 
They  have  gained  the  world,  and  do  not  possess  it.  Their  world  is  almost  the 
potest  conceivable.  It  does  not  enrich  them.  It  does  not  occupy  their  affeo- 
tiona,  or  fill  up  their  idle  hours ;  it  does  not  lend  stir  or  variety  or  charm  or 
to  their  existence.      Cultivate  and    expand   the  mind :   in   proportion  a« 


▼ni.]  ST.  MABK.  833 

you  do  80,  though  your  fortunes  remain  stationary,  you  gain  the  world.  On 
the  other  hand,  an  educated  man  may  be  poor — the  inhabitant  of  a  garret  or 
of  a  cottage  ;  but  the  world  which  exists  for  him,  in  which  he  lives,  is  rich  and 
spacious.  In  the  observation  of  nature,  in  the  study  of  books,  above  all  in 
the  study  of  man,  he  finds  deep,  unfailing  delights.  The  seas  which  break  on 
the  shores  of  other  lands,  the  storms  that  sweep  over  them,  the  streams  that 
flow  through  them,  the  people  who  inhabit  them,  are  all  full  of  interest  to  him, 
and  possess  him  and  are  possessed  by  him.  In  comparison  with  that  of  a 
man  devoid  of  intellectual  life,  his  world  is  one  full  of  a  thousand  various  pleasures, 
and  occupations,  and  possessions.  Without  something  higher  and  better  than  even 
intellect  and  mental  culture  and  activity,  you  cannot  gain  the  world,  except  in  a 
poor  and  illusory  manner.  Only  if  you  have  the  soul  to  scorn  delights  and  live 
laborious  days,  not  for  fame  but  for  the  good  of  others,  to  spend  riches  and  health 
and  intellect  and  life,  not  in  ministering  to  selfish  tastes,  be  they  either  fine  or 
coarse,  but  in  doing  good,  helping  others  to  be  better  and  happier,  in  being  to  them 
a  minister  of  the  things  which  God  has  given  you,  and  a  herald  to  them  of  the  glad 
tidings  of  God's  love,  and  man's  fellow-feeling  and  charity ; — only  if  you  have  such 
a  soul  can  you  truly  gain  the  world,  enjoy  its  best,  purest,  most  various,  and 
abundant  pleasures  and  satisfactions,  and  also  have  the  sting  taken  out  of  its  worst 
trials  and  afiQictions.  The  luxury  of  doing  good  in  the  love  of  goodness,  of  giving 
rather  than  receiving,  is  the  best  and  richest  which  the  world  affords.  It  was  a 
luxury  to  enjoy  which  the  Son  of  Man  advised  one  whom  He  loved  well,  one  who 
had  gained  the  world  and  had  large  possessions,  to  sell  all  that  he  had  and  give  it 
to  the  poor,  and  come  and  follow  Him.    The  gain  here  spoken  of,  then,  is  illusory. 

in.  The  loss  is  rg^V  §nd  Jjnmsaag,  1.  In  the  first  place,  the  soul  is  lost  by  not  being 
exercised.  Life  which  is  hot  effort,  growth,  increase,  is  not  life  at  all ;  it  is  life  lost. 
Souls  are  not  in  danger  of  being  lost  when  they  are  without  such  light  as  we  enjoy. 
They  are  lost.  There  is  no  contingency  in  the  matter.  Where  man's  higher  life 
has  not  been  called  forth,  the  loss  is  not  what  may  be,  but  what  is — it  is  con- 
demnation and  death.  Only  compare  a  savage  of  any  country  with  a  Christian 
of  your  own  land,  and  see  if  the  loss  is  nothing  or  little.  I  speak  of  the  heathen 
abroad,  because  what  is  to  be  said  of  them  has  its  application  at  home.  Use  the  body, 
exercise  your  limbs,  observe  the  laws  which  govern  the  use  of  your  physical  nature, 
and  you  will  thus  best  secure  its  health  and  soundness.  In  the  same  way  it  does 
not  save  the  soul  to  entertain,  as  many  do,  a  constant  and  worrying  anxiety  as  to 
the  soul.  Use  the  soul,  exercise  your  higher  life,  and  you  will  thus  save  the  soul, 
thus  promote  your  higher  life.  2. 1  remark,  in  the  second,  place^  thatlhe  soul  is  losl 
wJben_itjs_Eeivfijct£dj9ilid_flOirupted.  It  is  perverted  and  corrupted  in  the  sphere  of 
tl^  lower  life.  In  this  sphere  souls  are  doubly  lost,  as  a  citadel  for  which  con- 
tending armies  strive  for  weeks  and  months  is  doubly  lost  when  those  who  ought  to 
hold  it  are  driven  out  and  those  who  ought  not  to  hold  it  enter  in.  They  are  lost 
as  a  friend  is  lost  who  becomes  a  foe ;  they  are  lost  as  guns  are  lost  in  battle  when 
they  are  turned  upon  their  retreating  owners.  When,  instead  of  a  man  having 
passions  and  commanding  them,  passions  possess  the  man  and  and  command  him, 
all  human  life,  all  higher  life  is  lost ;  it  is  gradually  or  rapidly  narrowed,  curtailed, 
darkened,  debased,  emptied  of  its  worth  and  value.  The  Boui  is  perverted  in  the 
sphere  of  the  lower  life.  It  is  more  important,  perhaps,  to  remark  that  it  is  per- 
verted and  corrupted  in  its  own  sphere.  It  reminds  us  that  souls  are  perverted  in 
their  own  sphere — perverted  not  only  by  passion  but  by  religion.  If  the  light  that 
is  in  you  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness !  If  your  religion  is  false,  where 
can  you  be  in  contact  with  truth  ?  Souls  lost  through  passion  often  keep  a  mysterious 
reserve  of  goodness  in  which  there  is  hope.  It  is  not  so  where  religion  is  not  love, 
but  sect  and  party,  selfishness,  spiritual  pride,  bigotry ;  where  religion,  instead  of 
demolishing  every  wall  of  partition  between  man  and  man,  and  between  man  and 
God,  erects  new  barriers  and  new  divisions.  Man's  higher  life  of  faith  and  good- 
ness is  here  under  a  double  curse — ^it  is  cut  off  at  once  from  nature  and  from  grace, 
it  is  severed  at  once  from  the  world  and  God,  it  has  neither  pagan  health  nor 
Christian  beauty,  neither  natural  bloom  nor  spiritual  glory.  3.  It  is  easy,  I  remark  in 
conclusion,  to  exhaust  the  world  and  life  in  all  directions  bttf  one.  As  for  the  great 
mass  of  men,  they  are  by  their  very  condition  denied  all,  or  almost  aU,  that  makes 
life  attractive,  beautiful,  enjoyable.  Even  much  study  itself  is  a  weariness  of  the 
fleah.  As  we  think  of  all  this,  we  are  tempted  to  say— Surely  every  man  walketh  in 
"x  Vftin  dhow ;  they  are  disquieted  in  vain.  Other  life  is  vain — man's  true  life  is 
moi  vanity,  nor  T«xatioii  of  spirit.  For  all  men,  rich  and  poor,  learned  and  ignorant 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  Tin, 

for  the  dmdge  toiling  in  darkness  in  a  mine,  for  those  whose  labours  are  in  the 
lofty  fields  of  science,  there  is  a  life  possible,  not  remote,  far  off,  unnatural,  but  their 
own  life,  man's  true  life,  life  of  faith  and  goodness,  Christ's  life  in  the  unseen 
nnd  eternal,  from  which  vanity  is  remote,  to  which  vexation  cannot  come,  in  which 
the  rich  find  the  true  use  of  riches,  the  learned  and  gifted  of  their  gifts,  the  poor 
an  untold  wealth  in  poverty,  all  men  the  grandeur,  worth,  sacredness  of  this 
mortal  existence.  In  the  same  way,  I  will  add,  is  immortality  brought  to  hght  also. 
Flesh  and  blood  may  turn  again  to  clay,  all  human  glory  may  fade ;  but  truth  and 
righteousness  and  love  are  Divine  and  cannot  die.      A  life  which  is   filled  by 
these  is  a  part  of  the  life  of  God,  who  inhabiteth  eternity.     (J.  Service,  D.D.) 
Selling  otu's  tout : — I.  Let  us  examine,  in  the  first  place,  this  fine  human  posses- 
sToyTwhic^  ihe^devil  wishes  Joobtain,  called^.by  all  of  the  evangelists  who  report 
Jesus'  words,  a  man's  "  own"soul."  XTThink  of  this :  Each^f  u^  has?  a  whole  soul 
to  himself.    There  is  that  within  us  which  has  measureless  capacities.  '  Thesre  is 
within  us,  too,  that  which  has  marvellous  susceptibilities.  ^  A  human  heart  can 
weep  and  sing,  groan  and  laugh,  shudder  and  shiver.    There  is,  also,  that  within  us 
which  has  untold  possibilities.    Each  birth  begins  a  history,  the  pages  of  which  are 
not  written  out  at  once.    It  can  be  a  Nero  or  a  Paul,  a  Saul  or  a  David,  a  Bunyan 
or  a  Byron,  a  star  or  a  shadow.    2^J3;hiak.o^4hi6  Be&t~;^Thifl  son]  is  antirely^aach 
ni^'s  own.    We  might  have  expected  such  a  thing,  for  all  God's  gifts  and  creations 
are  perfect.     He  gave  each  human  creature  one  soul,  and  then  he  placed  the  indi- 
vidual owner  in  dominion  over  it.    Hence,  He  respects  the  property-title  in  all  His 
dealings  with  it.    •*  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock  "  (see^  Rev.  iii.  20). 
Even  the  devil  has  no  power  to  steal  away  a  man's  soul  unawares.  ("3.;  Then  think 
of  another  thing :  Gieat  estimates  have  been  set  upon  the  vBXne.fS.ti  human  soul. 
4.  Then,  again,  think  of'thTs  :'If  lost,  this  soul  of  ours  is  all  lost  at  once.    When  a 
soul  is  sold  to  the  devil,  it  resembles  real  estate,  in  that  it  carries  all  improvements 
with  it.    For  the  sale  of  soul  transfers  all  the  powers  of  it.    The  intellect  enters 
perdition  unchanged.    Moreover,  this  ruin  carries  with  it  aU  the  soul's  sensibilities. 
We  can  suffer  here ;  but  no  one  can  picture  with  language  how  the  finally  lost  at 
last  learn  to  suffer.     The  sale  of  the  soul,  furthermore,  carries  with  it  all  its 
biographies.    Our  souls  are  our  biographies  incorporated  in  existence.    Each  fibre 
of  being  is  a  thought,  a  word,  or  a  feeling.     He  who  sells  his  soul  to  the  devil  sella 
his  father's  tenderness  and  his  mother's  tears,  his  chances  of  good,  his  resolutions 
of  reform,  his  remembrance  of  Sabbaths,  his  own  fruitless  remorses  over  sin,  his 
educations,  his  embellishments— his  all.     H.  Now  let  us,  in  the  second  place,  turn 
«V  to  consider  the  devil's  price  for  a  soul,  called,  by  the  evangelists  all  alike,  "  the 
^  whole  world'.*'"  "l.'CTbserve  the  rather  fine  show  it  makes.    2.  But  now,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  just  fair  that  men  should  note  some  delusive  reserves  concealed  in 
^  this  luring  price.     For  example,  remember  that  the  devil  never  offered  the  entire 
/^^  world  to  anybody  except  Jesus  Christ  (see  Matt.  iv.  8,  9).    He  never  said  anything 
\  like  that  to  a  common  man.     Let  us  give  even  Satan  his  due.     One  lie  there  is  he 
has  not  yet  told  upon  this  earth.     He  has  offered  no  man  the  whole  world.    Nor 
'  has  any  one  person  ever  had  it.    Nor  does  anybody  keep  what  he  gets.    3.  StiU 
further  :  observe  as  you  contemplate  this  lure  of  the  devil,  which  he  calls  his  price, 
the  painful  drawbacks  one  meets  in  the  enjoyment  of  it  after  it  is  attained.     The 
world  we  get  attracts  jealousy  the  moment  we  have  it  in  possession.    Mere  posses- 
sion of  "  the  world  "  brings  satiety.     One  of  the  kings  in  Europe,  it  is  recorded, 
\  wearied  and  disgusted  with  luxurious  pleasures,  offered  a  vast  reward  just  for  the 
j  discovery  of  what  he  called  "  a.new_sensation."    The  princes  of  the  earth  are  not 
contented.    Rasselas  was  restless  even  in  the  Happy  Valley.     The  gain  of  this 
world  engenders  a  fresh  craving  for  more.    Poetic  justice  at  least  was  that  when 
the  Parthians  rewarded  Crassus  for  the  infamy  of  his  avarice  by  pouring  melted 
gold  down  his  throat  until  he  was  full  of  it ;  then  he  had  enough,  and  died.    Then 
love  is  lost  in  the  strife  of  desire.    III.  All  that  remains  now  to  be  considered,  is 
THB^-QBAND  OFFER  OF  CHBigT,  as  He,  attempts  to  arrest  the  ruinous  bargain  He  sees 
going  rapidly  on  toward  its  consummation.     I.  First,  What  does  the  Saviour  say? 
The  answer  is  found  in  the  context.     From  this  we  learn  that  Christ's  offer 
for  a  man's  soul,  is  the  soul  itself.     It  is  as  if  He  said,  "  Give  Moyour  soul,  and  I 
will  secure  the  everlasting  possession  of  it  to  yourself ;  if  you  will  lose  your  life— 
or  soul— to  Me,  I  will  see  that  you  shall  save  it."  He  will  take  nothing  away  in  this 
transfer  but  our  imperfections  an    our  sins.    9.  Then  what  will  the  Savionr  ask  J 
Only  this :  **  Come  to  Me ;  repent  of  sin  ;  trust  Me  for  an  atonement ;  enter  apoa 
My  senrioe ;  try  to  do  good ;  rest  n  My  love ;  perfect  yourself  for  heaven."   8.  (kn 


.  vm.]  8T.  MARK,  83b 

the  Saviour  be  actually  in  earnest  ?  The  Son  of  Ck)d  became  the  Son  of  man  in 
order  to  make  this  offer  for  human  souls.  (C  S.  Robinsorij  D.D.)  Logs  of 
the  soul — its  extent : — I.  It  is  an  entire  loss.  When  Francis  I.  lost  the  impor- 
tant battle  of  Pavia,  he  described  it  by  saying,  "  We  have  lost  all  but  honour."  But 
there  is  nothing  to  qualify  or  mitigate  the  loss  of  the  soul.  It  is  the  loss  of  losses, 
the  death  of  deaths — a  catastrophe  unequalled  in  extent,  and  unparalleled  in  its 
amount  through  all  the  universe  of  God.  II.  A  loss  without  compensation.  The 
great  fire  of  London  consumed  six  hundred  streets,  ttiirteenthousan3Twellings,  and 
ninety  churches,  and  destroyed  property  to  the  amount  of  seven  and  a  half  millions  of 
pounds  sterling.  Yet  that  calamity  was  in  some  sort  changed  into  a  blessing ;  for  the 
rebuilding  of  the  city,  in  a  superior  style  of  architecture,  and  with  more  regard  to 
sanitary  arrangements,  banished  for  ever  the  fearful  plague  which  had  previously 
made  such  havoc.  But  for  the  loss  of  the  soul  nothing  can  countervail  so  as  to 
make  amends  for  it.  Ill,  Ibreparable.  Other  losses  may  be  repaired.  Lost 
friendships  maybe  regained  or  replace! ;  lost  health  may  be  restored  ;  lost  property 
recovered ;  but  the  loss  of  the  soul  can  never  be  retrieved.  When  Sir  Isaac  New- 
ton had  lost  some  most  important  and  complicated  calculations,  the  result  of  years 
of  patient  thought  and  investigation,  by  the  burning  of  his  papers,  the  loss  to  him 
was  immense ;  and  yet,  with  patience  equal  to  his  genius,  he  could  say  to  the 
favourite  animal  that  caused  it,  "  Diamond,  Diamond,  thou  little  knowest  the  labour 
thou  hast  cost  me  1  "  But  what  is  the  loss  even  of  years  of  patient  philosophic  in- 
vestigation and  profound  mathematical  research,  compared  with  the  loss  of  a  human 
soul,  capable  of  conducting,  in  some  degree,  similar  investigations,  and  of  repeating 
and  repairing  them  if  lost  ?  IV.  Cast  away.  The  second  death.  {J.J.  Given,  M.A.) 
How  awful  the  charge  of  souls  : — Ministers  have  taken  even  the  care  of  immortal 
souls,  their  education  for  eternity,  their  discipline  for  heaven!  Have  we  ever 
essayed,  however  vain  the  effort,  to  take  the  dimensions  of  a  soul,  to  sound  its 
depths,  and  explore  its  vast  capacities  ?  Look  at  the  infant  child  that  appears  but 
little  raised  above  the  level  of  mere  vegetable  life.  Mark  the  gigantic  strides  by 
which  he  rises  in  a  few  short  years  to  such  wonders  of  intelligence,  that  he  dives 
into  the  hidden  mysteries  of  nature,  calculates  the  distance  of  the  stars,  and,  by  the 
magio  of  his  telescope,  sees  world  ascending  above  world,  and  system  towering 
above  system,  np  to  the  footstool  of  the  throne  of  God  I  Into  what,  then,  may  a  soul 
expand,  when,  free  from  the  prison-house  of  flesh,  it  is  let  out  to  expatiate  amidst 
its  native  heavens  1  Or,  what  may  such  a  nature  be  in  its  ruins,  in  a  fall  corres- 
ponding to  such  a  height !  These,  then,  are  the  mighty  concerns  with  which  we 
have  professedly  engaged  to  intermeddle.  For  the  perdition  or  salvation  of  beings 
on  so  immense  a  scale,  we  shall  have  to  render  an  account.  {H.  Woodward,  M.A. ) 
All  gain  i$  loss  when  a  man  does  not  save  his  soul : — He  who  possesses  all  things 
without  God,  has  nothing.  No  man  is  so  foolish  as  to  be  willing  to  purchase  an 
empire  at  the  price  of  his  life  ;  and  yet  the  world  is  fuU  of  those  pretenders  to  wis- 
dom,  who  give  up  salvation  and  immortal  life  for  a  vain  pleasure,  a  handful  of 
money,  or  an  inch  of  land.  How  much  are  the  greatest  conquerors  to  be  pitied,  if, 
whilst  intoxicated  with  their  victories  and  conquests,  they  ravage  and  lay  waste  the 
earth,  their  own  souls  are  laid  waste  by  sin  and  passion,  and  destroyed  to  all  eternity. 
(Quesnel.)  The  price  of  the  soul : — An  appeal  to  the  instincts  of  common  sense, 
which  comes  specially  home  to  a  commercial  nation  like  the  English.  The  selling 
price — the  market  value  of  everything  is  challenged.  All  schemes  and  proposals — 
whether  in  the  realm  of  politics  or  of  commerce — are  met  with  this  question.  The 
eager  desire  for  profit  carries  men  away  tiU  there  is  no  room  left  for  any  other  pur- 
pose in  life.  For  money  men  will  almost  dare  to  die.  There  are  men  who  for 
money's  worth  will  sell  others'  lives — shipowners  the  lives  of  their  sailors,  mothers 
the  happiness  of  their  daughters.  But  there  are  more  precious  treasures  at  stake 
sometimes  than  even  flesh  and  blood.  Some  will  tamper,  for  money's  worth,  with 
what  involves  the  loss  of  the  soul.  This  is  a  gain  which  it  is  dead  loss  to  win  ;  a 
price  which  it  is  suicidal  to  pay — selling  for  money  that  which  no  money  can  buy 
again ;  giving — like  the  foolish  Glaucus — golden  armour  for  brazen ;  trading  on 
capital;  embarking,  with  rotten  securities,  on  a  bubble  scheme.  No  amount  of 
earthly  gain  can  free  the  soul  from  death  and  judgment.  The  moral  life  once  gone— 
its  vitality  not  destroyed  but  ruined  and  turned  against  itself — how  shall  it  be  re- 
covered  ?  Even  now  there  is  a  foretaste  of  this  awful  state.  At  times  there  is  within 
the  heart  a  very  hell  of  sin ;  jealousy,  covetousness,  cruelty,  selfishness,  all  com- 
bining to  make  such  a  hell  within  the  breast  as  a  man  would  shrink  from  disclosing 
aven  to  his  most  lenient  friend.    Plain  sober  reason,  then,  obliges  ns  to  consider 


886  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [dKAP.  tm. 

Christ's  question.  {H.  B.  Ottley,  M.A.)  What  »hall  it  profit  .  .  .  ?— To  be  good, 
nay,  to  pursue  goodness  as  our  ruling  aim,  is  to  make,  or  gain  our  souls.  To  be  bad, 
or  not  to  follow  after  that  which  is  good,  is  to  unmake  or  lose  the  soul.  And  hence, 
whatever  other  aims  we  may  lawfully,  or  even  laudably,  place  before  us,  this  should 
stand  first  with  us  all.  For  what  are  we  profited  if  we  should  achieve  the  highest 
distinction — what  are  we  profited  should  we  become  great  poets  or  artists,  great 
scholars  or  statesmen,  if  we  did  not  use  our  powers  for  good  ends  ?  Or,  to  use  the 
Vsacred  familiar  words,  "  What  is  any  man  profited  if  he  should  gain  the  whole  woJcVd 
/only  by  the  loss  of  his  own  soul  ?  "  Nay,  more ;  what  is  the  world  profited  if  he 
^  should  lose  that  ?  I  often  think  of  Sir  Walter  Scott  kissing  Lockhart,  that  bitter 
man  of  the  world,  and  saying  to  him  with  his  dying  breath,  •*  Be  good,  my  dear,  be 
good."  For  Scott  had  gone  far  both  to  gain  the  world,  and  to  lose  it ;  only  to  discover 
at  last — as  sooner  or  later  you  will  discover — that  nothing  but  goodness  is  of  any  real 
worth.  To  be  good,  to  do  our  duty  in  a  dutiful  and  loving  spirit,  is  the  crown  and 
top  of  all  performance.  And  nothing  short  of  this,  nothing  apart  from  this,  will  be 
of  much  comfort  to  us  through  life  or  in  death.  For,  whatever  England  may  do,  it 
is  very  certain  that  God  "  expects  every  man  to  do  his  duty  " — his  duty  to  himself, 
to  God,  and  to  his  neighbour — lUot  only  on  this  exceptional  day  or  that,  but  every 
day.  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Losing  the  soul : — If  you  yield  to  temptation  and  fail  in 
the  hour  of  trial,  if  you  cease  from  the  work  and  retire  from  the  strife,  whatever 
else  you  may  gain,  you  will  be  losing  your  soul — losing  possession  of  it,  losing  com- 
mand  of  it,  losing  hope  for  it.  You  will  be  adjudging  yourself  unworthy  of  the  life 
eternal,  condemning  yourself  to  live  in  the  flesh  and  walk  after  the  flesh,  instead  of 
living  and  walking  in  the  spirit.  All  that  is  noblest,  purest,  best  in  you  will  die  for 
-Trant  of  sustenance  or  want  of  exercise.  All  that  is  loftiest  and  noblest  in  thought, 
m  morality,  in  religion,  in  life,  will  lose  its  power  over  you,  its  charm  for  you,  and 
will  fail  any  longer  to  quicken  responses  of  love  and  desire  within  you.  If  you 
would  know  to  what  depths  you  may  sink  should  you  relinquish  your  aim,  you  have 
only  to  recall  an  experience  which  can  hardly  be  strange  to  any  man  of  mature 
years  who  has  kept  his  soul  alive.  For  who  has  not  met  an  early  friend,  after  long 
years  of  separation,  only  to  find  that  by  addicting  himself  to  sensuous  or  selfish 
aims,  by  cherishing  a  vulgar  and  worldly  spirit — or,  in  a  word,  by  walking  after  the 
flesh — he  has  belied  all  the  fair  promise  of  his  youth,  and  grown  insensible  to  the 
charm  and  power  of  all  that  you  still  hold  to  be  fairest,  noblest,  best  ?  Speak  to 
hiT"  of  the  open  secrets  of  beauty,  of  purity,  of  truth,  of  love,  and  he  stares  at  you 
as  one  who  listens  to  a  forgotten  dream ;  or  perhaps — as  I  once  saw  a  poor  fellow 
do — bursts  into  tears,  and  exclaims,  "  No  one  has  spoken  to  me  like  that  for  an 
age  1 "  If  you  would  waken  any  real  interest  in  him,  elicit  any  frank  response,  your 
whole  talk  must  take  a  lower  range ;  you  must  come  down  to  the  level  on  which  he 
now  lives  and  moves.  What  has  the  man  been  doing  with  himself  all  these  years  ? 
He  has  been  losing  his  soul,  suffering  it  to  "  fust  in  him  unused."  He  has  ex- 
changed his  "  immortal  jewel,"  not  for  the  whole  world — though  even  that  were  a 
losing  bargain — but  for  a  little  of  that  which  even  the  world  confesses  to  be  vile  and 
«ordid  and  base.  To  that  base  level  even  you  may  sink,  if,  amid  all  trials  and  temp- 
tations and  defeats,  you  do  not  steadfastly  pursue  the  high  spiritual  aim  which 
Christ  invites  and  commands  you  to  cherish ;  if  you  do  not  seek  above  all  else  to  be 
good,  and  do  not  therefore  follow  after  whatsoever  things  are  just,  true,  pure,  fair.  Hold 
fast  to  that  aim,  then ;  that  by  your  constancy  you  may  gain  and  possess  your  soul. 
{Ibid.)  Loss  of  the  soul ;— And  what  is  it  to  lose  a  soul  ?  It  is  to  let  weeds  grow 
there  instead  of  flowers.  It  is  to  let  selfishness  grow,  suspicious,  curious  tempers 
grow,  wantonness  grow,  until  they  have  all  the  field  to  themselves.  Set  these  in 
full  force  within  a  being,  and  add,  if  you  will,  a  whole  universe  of  possession :  it  is 
hell.  You  may  think  that  these  are  only  strong  rhetorical  words.  It  is  just  aft 
simple  literal  fact  as  that  two  and  two  make  four.  I  do  not  think  that  you  will  need 
to  look  far  around  you  in  the  world  for  the  proof  of  it.  (J.  B.  Broton,  B.A.) 
Monuments  of  soul  ruin : — Often,  when  travelling  among  the  Alps,  one  sees  a  small 
black  cross  planted  upon  a  rock,  or  on  the  brink  of  a  torrent,  or  on  the  verge  of  a 
highway,  to  mark  the  spot  where  men  have  met  with  sudden  death  by  accident. 
Solemn  reminders  these  of  our  mortality  1  but  they  led  our  mind  still  further ;  for, 
we  said  within  ns,  if  the  places  where  men  seal  themselves  for  the  second  death 
could  be  thus  maidfestly  indicated,  what  a  scene  would  this  world  present  1  Here 
the  memorial  of  a  soul  undone  by  yielding  to  a  foul  temptation,  there  a  conscience 
Beared  by  the  rejection  of  a  final  warning,  and  yonder  a  heart  for  ever  turned  into 
•  stone,  bj  resisting  the  last  tender  appeal  of  love.    Our  plaees  of  worship  would 


OHi*.  Tin.]  ST,  MARK.  837 

•oaroe  hold  the  sorrowful  monmnents  which  might  be  erected  over  spots  where  spirits 
were  for  ever  lost — spirits  that  date  their  ruin  from  sinning  against  the  gospel  while 
under  the  sound  of  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Lost,  in  seeking  for  gain : — One  summer 
afternoon,  a  steamer  crowded  with  passengers,  many  of  them  miners  from  California, 
was  speeding  along  the  Mississippi.  Striking  suddenly  and  strongly  against  the 
wreck  of  another  vessel  which,  unknown  to  the  captain,  lay  near  the  surface  of  the 
water,  her  bow  was  stove  in,  and  she  began  to  fill  rapidly.  Her  deck  was  a  scene  of 
wild  confusion.  Her  boats  were  launched,  but  did  not  suflBce  to  carry  off  one-fourth 
of  the  terrified  passengers.  The  rest,  divesting  themselves  of  their  garments,  cast 
themselves  into  the  river,  ••  some  on  boards,  and  some  on  broken  pieces  of  the  ship ; 
and  BO  it  came  to  pass  that  they  escaped  all  safe  to  land."  Some  minutes  after  the 
last  of  them  had  quitted  the  vessel,  another  man  appeared  on  her  deck.  Seizing  a 
spar,  he  also  leaped  into  the  river,  but  instead  of  floating  as  the  others  had  done, 
he  sank  instantly  as  if  he  had  been  a  stone.  His  body  was  afterwards  recovered, 
and  it  was  found  that  he  had  employed  the  quarter  of  an  hour,  in  which  his  fellow- 
passengers  had  been  striving  to  save  their  lives,  in  rifling  the  trunks  of  the  miners. 
All  around  his  waist  their  bags  of  gold  were  fastened.  In  one  short  quarter  of  an 
hour  he  had  gained  more  gold  than  most  men  earn  in  their  lifetime ;  but  was  he 
advantaged  thereby,  seeing  that  he  lost  himself  ?  And  though  you  should  gain  power, 
or  rank,  or  fame,  or  learning,  or  great  wealth ;  though  your  life  should  be  one  pro- 
longed triumphal  procession,  all  men  applauding  you ;  though  all  your  days  you  should 
drink  unrestrained  of  the  cup  of  the  world's  pleasures,  and  never  reach  its  bitter 
dregs ;  yet  what  shall  you  be  advantaged  if,  nevertheless,  you  lose  yourself,  and,  at 
last,  instead  of  being  received  into  heaven,  are  cast  away?  {R.  A.  Bertram.) 
Great  loss  for  momentary  gratification : — When  Lysimachus  was  engaged  in  a  war 
with  the  Getae,  he  was  so  tormented  by  thirst,  that  he  offered  his  kingdom  to  his  ene- 
mies for  permission  to  quench  it.  His  exclamation,  when  he  had  drunk  the  water 
they  gave  him,  is  striking.  "Ah,  wretched  me,  who  for  such  a  momentary  gratifi- 
cation have  lost  so  great  a  kingdom  I  "  What  sJiall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his 
$oul  ? — Think  what  a  solemn  question  these  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  contain  I 
What  a  mighty  sum  they  propound  to  us  for  calculation !  I.  Eveby  one  of  us  has 
AN  UNDYING  BOUL.  This  is  Dot  the  only  life  we  have  to  do  with — we  have  every 
one  of  as  an  undying  soul.  .  .  .  There  is  a  conscience  in  all  mankind  that  is  worth 
a  thousand  metaphysical  arguments.  What  though  we  cannot  see  it  ?  Are  there 
not  millions  of  things  which  we  cannot  see,  and  of  the  existence  of  which  we  have 
nevertheless  no  doubt  ?  I  do  ask  you  to  realize  the  dignity  and  the  responsibility  of 
having  an  immortal  soul ;  to  realize  that  in  your  soul  you  have  the  greatest  t^ent 
that  God  has  committed  to  your  charge.  Know  that  in  your  soul  you  have  a  pearl 
above  all  price,  the  loss  of  which  nothing  can  ever  make  up.  H.  Ajjy  one  mat  losb  i 
HIS  OWN  SOUL.  Weak  as  we  are  in  all  things  that  are  good,  we  have  a  mighty  power 
to  do  ourselves  harm.  You  cannot  save  that  soul  of  yours,  remember  that.  We  are 
all  by  nature  in  great  peril  of  losing  our  souls.  But  some  one  may  ask.  How  may  a 
man  lose  hia  soul  f  The  answers  to  that  question  are  many.  Just  as  there  are  many 
diseases  which  assault  and  hurt  the  body,  so  there  are  many  evils  which  assault  and 
hurt  the  soul.  Numerous,  however,  as  are  the  ways  in  which  a  man  may  lose  his 
own  soul,  they  may  be  classed  under  these  three  heads.  1.  You  may  murder  your^ 
own  soul  by  open  sin,  or  serving  lusts  and  pleasures.  2.  You  may  poison  your  own 
BOol  by  taking  up  some  false  religion.  9.  You  may  starve  your  own  soul  to  death 
by  trifling  and  indecision.  But,  does  it  take  much  trouble  to  ruin  a  soul  ?  Oh,  no ! 
There's  nothing  you  need  do  t  You  have  only  to  sit  still,  <&o.  But  are  there  many, 
you  ask,  who  are  losing  their  souls  7  Yes,  indeed,  there  are  I  But,  who  is  respon- 
sible for  the  loss  of  your  soul  ?  No  one  but  yourself  1  But,  where  does  your  soul 
go  when  it  is  lost  ?  There  is  but  one  place  to  which  it  can  go.  IH.  The  lobs  of 
ANY  man's  souii  IS  THE  HEAVIEST  LOSS  HE  CAN  BUFFER.  No  man  living  cahsliiywihe 
full  extent  of  the  loss  of  the  soul,  nor  paint  it  in  its  true  coloars.  Nothing  can  ever 
make  up  for  the  loss  of  the  soul  in  the  life  that  now  is.  The  loss  of  property  and 
character  are  not  always  irreparable  ;  once  lost  the  soul  is  lost  for  evermore.  The 
loss  of  his  soul  is  irretrievable  1  Does  any  one  of  you  wish  to  have  some  clear  idea 
of  the  value  of  a  soul  ?  Then  go  and  see  what  men  think  about  the  value  of  a  soul 
when  they  are  dying.  Go  and  read  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  St.  Luke.  Measure  it 
by  the  price  that  was  paid  for  it  eighteen  hundred  yetirs  ago.  We  shall  all  under- 
stand the  value  of  a  soul  one  day.  Seek  to  know  its  value  now.  Do  not  be  like  the 
Egyptian  queen,  who,  in  foolish  ostentation,  took  a  pearl  of  great  value,  dissolved 
it  in  Bome  acid,  and  then  drank  it  off.    Do  not,  like  her,  cast  away  that  precioni 

22 


SM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  txb, 

jbal  of  yonrs,  that  pearl  above  all  price,  that  God  has  oommitted  to  yoor  charge. 
\riy .  Any  man's  sottl  may  be  saved.  I  dare  say  the  proclamation  is  startling  to  some ; 
it  was  once  startling  to  me.  •♦  How  can  these  things  be  ?  "  No  wonder  you  ask  that 
question.  This  is  the  great  knot  the  heathen  philosophers  could  never  untie — this 
is  the  problem  which  sages  of  Greece  and  Rome  could  not  solve — this  is  a  question 
which  nothing  can  answer  but  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Because 
Christ  has  died  upon  the  cross  to  bear  men's  sins.  2.  Because  Christ  still  lives. 
3.  Because  the  promises  of  Christ's  gospel  are  full,  free,  and  unconditional. 
Application  :  1.  T)o  not  neglect  your  own  soul.  2.  Come  to  Christ  without  delay. 
3.  To  all  who  have  sought  to  have  their  souls  saved,  and  have  ioond  Jesus  a 
Saviour,  ••  cleave  to  the  Lord  with  pmpose  of  heart,"  &c.  {Bishop  Jiyle.)  The 
soul : — The  soul  is  excellent  in  its  nature.  It  is  a  spiritual  being,  ♦•  it  is  a  kind 
of  angelical  thing."  The  mind  sparkles  with  knowledge,  the  will  is  crowned  with 
liberty,  and  all  the  affections  are  as  stars  shining  in  their  orbs.  How  quick  are  the 
motions  of  a  spark  1  How  swift  the  wings  of  cherubim !  So  quick  and  agile  are 
the  motions  of  the  soul.  What  is  quicker  than  thought  ?  How  many  miles  can  the 
soul  travel  in  an  instant  ?  The  soul  being  spiritual  moves  upward ;  it  has  also  a 
self-moving  power,  and  can  subsist  when  the  body  is  dead,  as  the  mariner  can 
subsist  when  the  ship  is  broken ;  it  is  also  immortal — a  bud  o£  eternity.  {T.  Wat- 
ton.)  Preciomness  of  the  soul : — It  is  a  misapplication  of  forces  for  the  nobler  to 
spend  itself  upon  the  meaner.  Men  do  not  usually  care  to  spend  a  pound  in  the 
hope  of  getting  back  a  groat  and  no  more,  and  yet,  when  the  soul  is  given  up  for 
the  sake  of  worldly  gain,  the  loss  is  greater  still,  and  not  even  the  groat  remains. 
C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  Soul  a  jewel : — The  soul  is  a  jewel,  a  diamond  set  in  a  ring  of 
clay  ;  the  soul  is  a  glass  in  which  some  rays  of  the  divine  glory  shine ;  it  is  a  celes- 
tial spark  lighted  by  the  breath  of  God.  (T.  Watson.)  Winning  the  world: — I 
do  verily  believe,  that  the  winning  of  the  whole  world  of  power,  is  in  itself  so 
f^light  a  gain,  that  it  were  fair  to  sti^e  the  balance,  and  say  there  is  little  left ;  for 
even  Alexander  himself  envied  the  peasant  in  his  cottage,  and  thought  there  was 
more  happiness  on  the  plains  among  the  shepherds  than  in  his  palace  amongst  his 
_pld  and  silver.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  witness  to  the  worth  of  the  world : — 
Alexander,  I  summon  theel  what  thinkest  thou:  is  it  worth  much  to  gain  the 
world  ?  Is  its  sceptre  the  wand  of  happiness  ?  Is  its  crown  the  security  of  joy  ? 
See  Alexander's  tears !  He  weeps  1  Yes,  he  weeps  for  another  world  to  conquer  I 
Ambition  is  insatiable!  The  gain  of  the  whole  world  is  not  enough.  (Ibid,) 
Profit  and  loss: — I.  What  is  a  man  pbofited  if  hb  should  gain  thb  wholb 
^voRLD  ?  Power  over  extensive  empires.  Power  over  great  riches.  Treasures  of 
knowledge  and  pleasures.  What  will  it  profit  him  when  he  comes  to  die  ?  In  the 
day  of  judgment  t  when  he  gets  to  hell  ?  II.  The  losing  the  soul.  Its  intrinsic 
value.  Its  capabihties.  Where  the  soul  must  go  to  that  is  lost.  lU.  The  pbao- 
TiCAL  LESSON.  {Ibid.)  Gaining  the  world  pretty  sport : — This  world  is  like  the 
boy's  butterfly — it  is  pretty  sport  to  chase  it;  but  bruise  its  wings  by  an  over- 
earnest  grasp,  and  it  is  nothing  but  a  disappointment.    {Ibid.) 

Yer.  87.  Or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  7 — The  folly  of  setting 
the  heart  on  things  below,  and  not  on  things  above  : — No  ransom  can  purchase  life. 
Yon  may  remember,  as  I  do,  the  dying  hours  of  a  monarch  who  emphatically  lived 
to  pamper  the  flesh,  to  serve  lusts  and  pleasures,  but  not  for  God  or  his  fellow-men. 
When  he  knew  the  fatal  hour  was  approaching,  he  said  to  the  medical  men  about 
him,  "  Oh,  I  would  give  any  sum  you  name,  if  you  would  but  give  me  another  year 
of  life."  But  it  was  of  no  use.  They  could  not ;  they  could  but  shake  their  heads 
and  tell  him  that  One  only  could  give  life,  and  when  He  saw  fit  He  would  take  it 
away — God,  even  God.  There  is  nothing  in  this  world  that  a  man  can  find,  which 
will  bribe  death  to  stop  away.  Kings  die,  and  their  sceptre  and  crown  roll  in  the 
dust.  Philosophers  succumb,  and  all  their  busy  chambers  of  the  brain,  which  have 
been  occupied  by  deep  researches,  become  occupied  by  the  worms  of  the  earth.  The 
young  man,  glorying  in  his  beauty  and  strength,  succumbs  to  death,  and  his  sun 
sets  at  noonday.  And  the  pretty  babe,  which  is  just  opening  hke  a  bud  in  all 
its  infantine  beauty — ah,  how  often  does  death  lay  its  cold  hand  on  that  I  There 
is  no  conceivable  thing  capable  of  saving  a  man,  woman,  or  child,  whom  God 
has  appointed  to  die.  By  the  question  in  the  text,  our  Lord  means  this ;  and 
He  means  more  than  this.  He  refers  also  to  the  life  of  the  world  to  come.  What 
ransom  shall  a  man  give  for  that  life?  There  is  such  a  ransom.  There  is 
One  who  has  found  a  ransom.     It  is  Jesus.    He  is  the  life  of  the  world.     He  that 


SHAT.  vm.]  8T.  MARK,  839 

hath  the  Son  hath  life.  Have  yon  found  this  ransom?  {R.  W.  Dibdin,  M.A.) 
The  iouVs  ramom : — What  is  the  world,  but  the  means  of  having  food  and  raiment 
and  ease,  in  greater  variety  and  abundance  than  others  have  them — a  distinction 
which,  if  viewed  narrowly,  is  not  worth  half  the  pains  and  labour  by  which  only  it  can 
be  obtained.  But  what  is  the  soul  ?  It  is  the  immortal  and  everlasting  principle  of 
all  thought  and  feeling  in  man's  nature — the  subject  in  which  abide  all  hope  and 
fear,  all  joy  and  sorrow,  all  happiness  and  all  misery.  It  is  that  part  of  our  intel- 
lectual frame  which  cannot  die,  forget,  cease  to  be  conscious,  or  fly  from  itself ; 
but  which  lives  for  ever,  either  beloved  and  cherished  by  its  Almighty  Creator,  or 
expelled  from  His  presence  in  horror  and  despair.  If  threescore  years  and  ten 
were  to  bring  it  to  an  end,  and  make  all  its  thoughts  perish ;  if,  after  death,  there 
were  no  judgment ;  if  the  worm  of  remorse  were  to  become  extinct  on  the  bed 
where  the  last  breath  goes  forth,  and  to  cease  its  gnawings  with  the  mortal  pains  of 
the  body, — then  might  we  hesitate  between  the  interests  of  the  present  and  the 
future,  and  adopt  the  maxim  of  the  atheist,  ♦'  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow 
we  die."  But,  as  these  things  cannot  be ;  as  the  soul,  which  sinneth  and  repenteth 
not,  has  to  die  a  death  which  will  never  be  completed,  a  death  of  horror  and  despair, 
of  which  the  sighs  and  agony  and  groaning  ascend  up  perpetually ;  the  question  which 
should  now  interest  us  the  most  is,  '•  What  shall  we  give  in  exchange  for  our  souls  ?  '• 
We  must,  in  the  first  place,  present  before  God,  on  the  altar  of  faith,  the  Atonement 
which  He  Himself  has  provided,  the  sole  procuring  cause  of  human  salvation ;  we 
must  offer  up  to  Him  a  broken  and  contrite  heart,  weaned  from  the  world,  and 
devoted  to  His  service ;  we  must  solicit  His  mercy  with  the  tears  of  penitence  and 
vows  of  reformation,  entreating  that  His  grace  may  be  sufficient  for  us,  and  His 
strength  made  perfect  in  oar  weakness ; — and  these  are  the  things  which  the  Lord 
will  accept  in  exchange  for  our  souls.  {Bp.  Russell.)  Incomputable  value  of  the 
$oul : — What  would  a  man  not  give  ?  If  he  had  the  whole  world,  would  he  not 
willingly  give  it,  provided  he  really  knew,  believed,  or  felt,  that  otherwise  he  would 
be  utterly  lost  ?  King  Eichard,  in  Shakespeare,  says,  "  My  kingdom  for  a  horse  1 " 
How  many  kingdoms  would  be  surrendered — if  man  were  not  utterly  infatuated — 
for  the  safety  of  the  soul  ?  The  Saviour  has  gone  forward  in  thought,  and  takes 
His  standpoint  in  eternity.  It  is  from  that  standpoint  that  He  pats  His 
question.  It  is  implied  that  the  time  will  oome,  in  ^e  experience  of  the  per- 
sistently infatuated,  when  kingdom  apon  kingdom — ^were  they  available — ^would 
be  an  insufficient  exchange  for  the  soul.  {J.  Morison^  D.D.)  Nothing  can 
compensate  for  loss  of  soul : — *•  I  was  called  upon,"  says  an  American  clergyman, 
•*  some  years  ago,  to  visit  an  individual,  a  part  of  whose  face  had  been  eaten  away 
fcy  a  most  loathsome  cancer.  Fixing  my  eyes  on  this  man  in  his  agony,  I  said, 
*  Supposing  that  Almighty  God  were  to  give  you  your  choice,  which  would  yoa 
prefer,  your  cancer,  your  pain,  and  your  sufferings,  with  a  certainty  of  death  before 
you,  but  of  immortality  hereafter ;  or  health,  prosperity,  long  life  in  this  world,  and 
the  risk  of  losing  your  immortal  soul  ? '  *  Ah,  sir  1 '  said  the  man,  •  give  me  the 
cancer  and  the  pain,  with  the  Bible  and  the  hope  of  heaven,  and  others  may  take 
the  world,  long  life,  and  prosperity.' "  Gain  cannot  satisfy  the  heart: — Mr.  Jeremiah 
Burroughs,  a  pious  minister,  mentions  the  case  of  a  rich  man  who,  when  he  lay  on 
his  death-bed,  called  for  his  bags  of  money ;  and,  having  laid  a  bag  of  gold  to  his 
heart,  after  a  little  he  bade  them  take  it  away,  saying,  "  It  will  not  do ;  it  will  not 
do."  Exchange  for  his  soul — Cost  of  an  estate  : — ♦•  What  is  the  value  of  this 
estate  ?  "  said  a  gentleman  to  another  with  whom  he  was  nding,  as  they  passed  a 
fine  mansion  surrounded  by  fair  and  fertile  fields.  "  I  don't  know  what  it  is  valued 
at ;  I  know  what  it  cost  its  late  possessor."  "  How  much  ?  "  "  His  soul.  Early  in 
life,  he  professed  faith  in  Christ,  and  obtained  a  subordinate  position  in  a  mercan- 
tile establishment.  He  continued  to  maintain  a  reputable  religious  profession,  till 
he  became  a  partner  in  the  firm.  Then  he  gave  less  attention  to  religion,  and  more 
and  more  to  business ;  and  the  care  of  this  world  choked  the  Word.  He  became 
exceedingly  rich  in  money,  but  so  poor  and  miserly  in  soul,  that  none  would  have 
suspected  he  had  ever  been  religious.  At  length  he  purchased  this  large  estate, 
built  a  costly  mansion,  and  then  sickened  and  died.  Just  before  he  died,  he 
remarked,  "  My  prosperity  has  been  my  ruin  I  "  No  satisfaction  from  the  world 
at  death  .-—The  dying  tell  us  that  earthly  possessions  cannot  satisfy  us  in  death, 
Philip  II.  of  Spain  cried,  ••  O  would  God  I  had  never  reigned  1  O  that  I  had  lived 
alone  with  God  I  What  doth  all  my  glory  profit,  but  that  I  have  so  much  the 
more  torment  in  death."  Albert  the  Good  said,  "  I  am  surrounded  with  wealth  and 
rank,  but  if  I  trusted  only  to  them,  I  should  be  a  miserable  man."     Salmasioi 


Ma  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chaf.  tnv 

«teclared,  "  I  hate  lost  a  world  of  time.  Oh,  sire !  mind  the  world  Ibu,  •»*  God 
more."  Bnnsen  exclaimed,  "  My  riches  and  experience  is  having  known  Jwoi 
Christ.    All  the  rest  is  nothing.** 

Vers.  38.  Whosoever  therefore  shaU  be  ashamed  of  He  and  of  Hy  words.— 

Ashamed  of  Jesus  :^l.  Inquibk  into  thk  natubb  of  thb  crimb  or  bbino  ashambd 
OP  Chbist,  and  oy  His  wobds.    The  duty  opposed  to  the  crime  is  expressed  by 
confessing  Christ  before  men ;  therefore  to  be  ashamed  of  Christ  and  of  His  word, 
is  to  deny  or  disown  Christ  and  His  doctrine  before  men.    There  have  not  wanted 
some  in  all  times  to  justify  the  prudence  of  concealing  our  religious  sentiments, 
and  to  encourage  men  to  live  well  with  the  world  in  an  outward  compliance  with  its 
customs,  provided  the  heart  be  right  with  God.    It  is  also  added  that  to  suppose 
it  necessary  for  men  to  own  their  religious  sentiments  at  the  peril  of  their  Hves,  is 
making  God  a  hard  master.    What  does  our  confession  avail  Him  who  can  see  the 
heart  ?    But  yet  these  are  but  excuses,  and  founded  in  ignorance  of  the  nature  of 
religion,  and  of  the  great  ends  to  be  served  by  it.    Were  we  to  estimate  our  religion 
by  the  service  or  benefit  done  to  God,  we  might  part  with  it  all  at  once.   He  gets  no 
more  by  the  sincerity  of  our  hearts  than  by  our  outward  prof essions ;  and  therefore 
upon  this  view  we  may  bid  adieu  to  both.    If  you  think,  however,  that  there  is 
something  in  inward  sincerity  that  is  agreeable  in  His  sight,  that  renders  men 
acceptable  to  Him,  I  wonder,  at  the  same  time,  you  should  not  think  hypocrisy  and 
dissimulation  with  the  world  odious  in  His  sight,  and  such  vices  as  will  render  us 
detestable  to  Him.    To  suppose  inward  sincerity  consistent  with  an  external  hypoo- 
risy  toward  the  world,  is  itself  a  very  great  absurdity.     For  what  is  hypocrisy? 
But  how  comes  it  to  be  necessary  for  a  man  to  say  anything  about  his  religion  ?  To 
a  clear  resolution  of  this  question  we  must  consider  the  nature  of  rehgion,  and  the 
ends  to  be  served  by  it.    The  duties  of  rehgion  respect  God  but  also  the  well-being 
of  the  world.    Religion  is  a  principle  of  obedience  to  God,  as  Governor  of  the  world. 
It  cannot  therefore  possibly  be  a  mere  secret  concern  between  God  and  every  man's 
conscience,  since  it  respects  Him  in  so  pubHo  a  character,  and  must  extend  to 
everything  in  which  God,  as  Governor  of  the  world,  is  supposed  to  be  concerned. 
For  surely  it  is  impossible  to  pay  the  proper  respect  and  obedience  which  is  due  to 
tJie  Governor  of  the  world,  whilst  we  deny  Him,  in  the  face  of  the  world,  to  be  tha 
Governor  of  it.    But  further :  if  any  religious  obedience  be  due  to  God  as  Governor 
of  the  world,  it  must  principally  consist  in  promoting  the  great  end  of  His  govern- 
ment.   Again :  if  it  be  really,  as  it  is,  impossible  for  us  to  do  God  any  private  ser- 
▼ice  by  which  He  may  be  the  better,  it  is  very  absurd  to  imagine  that  religion  can 
consist,  or  be  preserved  by  any  secret  beUef  or  opinion,  how  cordially  soever  em- 
braced.   What  thanks  can  be  due  to  you  for  silently  beUeving  God  to  be  the 
Governor  of  the  world,  whilst  you  openly  deny  it,  and  in  your  actions  disclaim  it  f 
Even  this  principle,  which  is  the  foimdation  of  all  religion,  has  nothing  of  religion 
in  it,  so  long  as  it  is  inactive,  and  consists  in  speculation,  without  bringing  forth 
fruits  agreeable  to  such  a  persuasion.    Lastly :  if  it  be  any  part  of  religion  to  pro- 
mote religion  and  the  knowledge  of  God's  truth  in  the  world,  it  cannot  be  consistent 
with  our  duty  to  dissemble,  or  to  deny  our  faith.    The  man  who  hides  hii  own 
religion  close  in  his  heart,  tempts  others,  who  suspect  not  his  hypocrisy,  to  throw 
theirs  quite  out ;  and  whilst  he  rejoices  in  this  sheet  anchor  of  a  pure  inward  faith, 
he  sees  others  who  steer  after  hun  make  shipwreck  of  their  faith  and  their  salva- 
tion.   Under  this  head  I  have  one  thing  more  to  observe  to  you,  that  there  are  in 
this  vice,  as  indeed  in  most  others,  very  different  degrees.    While  some  were  con- 
tented to  hide  themselves,  and  dissemble  their  acquaintance  with  Christ,  St.  Peter 
openly  denied  Him,  and  confirmed  it  with  an  oath,  that  he  knew  not  the  Man. 
Thus  some  for  fear  in  those  days  of  persecution,   denied  their  Lord ;  and  some 
im  these  days,  such  is  our  unhappy  case,  are  so  vain  and  conceited,  as  to  be  ashamed 
of  the  Lord  who  bought  them.    Among  these,  some  openly  blaspheme  Him ;  others 
are  content  to  make  a  sport  of  His  religion  ;  whilst  a  third  sort  profess  a  pleasure 
in  such  conversation,  though  their  hearts  ache  for  their  iniquity,  but  they  want  the 
courage  to  rebuke  even  by  their  silence  the  sin  of  the  scomer.    All  these  are  in  the 
number  of  those  who  are  ashamed  of  Christ.      Secondly :   to  imquibb  into  tub 

BBVBBAL  TEUPTATIONS  WHICH   LEAD  MEN  TO  THIS  CBIUB  OF  BEINa  ASHAMED  OF  ChBI«T 

AND  OP  His  wobds.  The  fountain  from  which  these  temptations  spring  is  plaiiUy 
enough  described  in  the  text,  "  This  adulterous  and  sinful  generation."  And  we 
know  full  well,  that  there  is  not  a  natural  fear  lurking  in  the  heart  of  man,  but  the 
werld  knows  how  to  reach  it ;  not  a  passion,  but  it  has  an  enchantment  ready  Urn 


IX.J  ST,  MARK.  S41 

it ;  no  weakness,  no  vanity,  but  it  knows  how  to  lay  hold  of  it :  so  that  all  oar 
natural  hopes  and  fears,  our  passions,  onr  infirmities,  are  liable  to  be  drawn  into 
the  conspiracy  against  Christ  and  His  word.  But  the  other  kind  of  temptations 
come  upon  our  invitation :  we  make  onr  faith  a  sacrifice  to  the  ^reat  idol,  the 
world,  when  we  part  with  it  for  honour,  wealth,  or  pleasure.  In  this  circumstance 
men  take  pains  to  show  how  little  they  value  their  religion,  and  seek  occasions  to 
display  their  hbertinism  and  infidelity,  in  order  to  make  their  way  to  the  favour 
of  a  corrupt  and  degenerate  age.  This  behaviour  admits  of  no  excuse.  But  when- 
ever infidelity  grows  into  credit  and  repute,  and  the  world  has  so  vitiated  a  taste,  as 
to  esteem  the  symptoms  of  irreligion  as  signs  of  a  good  understanding  and  sound 
judgment ;  that  a  man  cannot  appear  to  be  in  earnest  concerned  for  his  religion 
without  being  thought  a  fool,  or  suspected  to  be  a  knave ;  then  there  arises  another 
temptation  to  make  men  ashamed  of  Christ,  and  of  His  word.  No  man  likes  to 
be  despised  by  those  about  him.  There  is  a  contagion  in  ill  company,  and  he  who 
dwells  with  the  scomer  shall  not  be  guiltless.  Had  our  Lord  been  merely  a  teacher 
of  good  things,  without  any  special  commission  or  authority  from  the  great  Creator 
and  Governor  of  the  world,  it  would  have  been  highly  absurd  to  assume  to  Himself 
this  great  prerogative  of  being  owned  and  acknowledged  before  men.  When,  there- 
fore, we  read  that  our  Lord  requires  of  us  to  confess  Him  before  men,  the  true  way 
to  know  what  we  are  to  confess,  is  to  reflect  what  He  confessed  Himself ;  for  it 
cannot  be  supposed  that  He  thought  it  reasonable  for  Himself  to  make  one  confes- 
sion, and  for  His  disciples  and  servants  to  make  another.  Look,  then,  into  the 
gospel,  and  see  His  own  confession.  He  confessed  Himself  to  be  the  only  Son  of 
God,  to  come  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father  to  die  for  the  sins  of  the  world ;  to  have 
all  power  given  to  Him  in  heaven  and  earth  ;  to  be  the  Judge  of  the  world.  {TJie 
Practical  Pulpit. )  Our  great  work  for  Christ  is  to  confess  Him : — But  this  confession 
of  Christ — this  not  being  ashamed  of  Him  and  of  His  words — is  different  in  different 
generations  and  different  societies.  In  the  earliest  age  of  all,  the  offence  was  the 
offence  of  the  cross — that  men  should  not  he  ashamed  to  confess  that  they  believed 
that  He  who  was  crucified  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  they  hoped  to  be  saved  by 
His  very  cross.  Since  then,  this  offence  has  ceased  in  outward  form,  but  in  reality 
it  has  reappeared  under  different  forms  of  religious  cowardice.  In  licentious  ages 
and  societies  men  have  been  ashamed  of  the  self-denying  words  and  example  of  the 
Lord ;  in  superstitious  ages,  of  upholding  the  purity  of  His  religion ;  in  heretical 
ages,  of  manfully  contending  for  the  faith  of  His  true  godhead ;  in  later  periods  of 
our  history  men  seem  to  have  been  ashamed  of  confessing  that  we  are  saved  through 
Christ  alone  ;  and  in  this  age,  and  in  learned  and  scientific  societies,  are  not  men 
ashamed  of  confessing  those  words  of  Christ,  and  of  His  servants,  which  assert  the 
supernatural  in  our  holy  religion  ?  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  Ashamed  of  Jesus  : — I.  Th» 
PXBSONS  DEscBiBED.  Those  who,  from  shame—  (1)  Decline  to  assume  a  profession 
of  the  gospel ;  (2)  Do  not  maintain  a  consistent  profession  of  the  gospel ;  (3)  Aban- 
don the  profession  of  the  gospel.  11.  Thx  doom  THaBATSNxn.  It  is  certain,  awful, 
just.    {Plans  of  Sermons.) 


CHAPTER  DL 

YsBS.  1-10.  And  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  with  Htm  Peter.— Man't  transfor- 
wiation: — The  transfiguration  of  our  Lord  admonishes  us  of  a  change  which  we 
are  to  undergo  in  this  life.  We  must  be  conformed  in  our  souls  and  spirits,  and 
the  nse  of  our  bodies,  to  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God  (Bom.  viii.  29),  while  we  are 
here,  so  that  we  may  be  conformed  to  the  body  of  His  glory  hereafter  (Phil.  iii.  21). 
O,  then,  what  a  stake  have  we  in  our  treatment  of  this  body.  We  must  keep  it  in 
all  holiness,  even  on  its  own  account,  and  not  only  because  it  ministers  to  soul  and 
spirit.  In  this  same  body  we  are  to  meet  the  Lord,  and  upon  the  use  of  it  depends 
the  condition  in  which  we  shall  meet  Him,  in  glory  or  contempt.  We  must  serve 
Him,  and  do  His  work  in  it  now,  if  we  hope  to  serve  Him  in  it  in  His  heavenly  and 
everlasting  kingdom  hereafter.  But  how  can  we  serve  Him  in  it,  if  we  employ  it  in 
the  service  of  a  different  and  contrary  master?  And  how  can  we  keep  it  pure  and 
nndefiled  as  His  peculiar  vessel,  if  we  be  not  watchful  against  the  advances  of  that 
master,  who  has  so  many  natural  friends  in  its  house?  For  has  not  Satan  fast 
friends  in  its  corrupt  affections  and  sinful  passions  ?  Look  at  the  man  who  has 
clouded  his  reason,  palsied  his  limbs,  by  strong  drink.  See  the  disgusting,  degrading 


84t  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ix. 

spectacle  of  his  helplessness ;  hear  the  revilings,  the  folly,  the  blasphemlngs  of  his 
fanperfeot  speech.  Can  such  a  one  entertain  any  serious  thoughts  about  the  body  that 
shall  be  ?  Can  he  be  living  in  the  hope  of  being  glorified  together  with  Jesus  Christ  ? 
See  another  man.  His  body  is  seen  anywhere  else  but  in  this  place,  where  is  the 
assembling  of  the  body  of  Christ  in  one  body,  one  spirit,  to  give  glory  and  worship 
to  our  great  Head,  with  one  mind,  with  one  mouth ;  to  stand  before  that  throne 
where  sits  ^e  Son  of  Man  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  in  that  body  which  suffered 
and  rose  again.  What  can  he  care  about  the  most  precious  privilege  of  the  body 
that  shall  be ;  the  standing  face  to  face  before  his  Saviour  in  a  like  body,  amid  the 
company  of  His  saints  in  glorified  bodies  ?  In  the  same  manner  we  may  go  on  and 
deal  with  sins  less  open  and  gross  than  these,  and  show  how  inconsistent  they  all 
are  with  any  hope  of  a  joyful  resurrection  in  a  glorified  body ;  and  how  necessary 
is  the  bath  of  tears  of  repentance  to  all  who  commit  them,  that  so  their  sins  may 
be  washed  out  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  they  may  be  found  of  Him  in  peace, 
without  spot,  and  blameless.  Now,  therefore,  while  yet  it  is  the  season,  let  ub  do 
the  things  which  concern  the  body  that  shall  be.  Our  present  body  is  the  seed  of 
the  body  to  come.  It  may  be  as  unlike  it,  as  the  small  black  shapeless  seed  of  the 
tulip  is  to  that  beautiful  flower.  Still  it  is  the  seed,  and  according  as  we  sow  it,  we 
shall  reap.  If  it  go  into  the  ground  laden  with  sin,  ignorant  of  God's  service,  the 
mere  corrupt  remains  of  what  has  been  expended  in  folly,  in  idleness,  in  unprofit- 
ableness, in  rebellion  against  the  commandments  of  God,  in  neglect  of  duties,  in 
abuse  of  privileges,  then  it  will  come  out  of  it  a  vile  and  noxious  weed,  which  shaU 
be  cast  into  the  everlasting  fire.  But  if  the  sinner  shall  turn  away  from  his  sin, 
and  by  a  change  of  heart  and  life  conform  to  the  example  of  Christ ;  if  he  wiU  take 
his  body  out  of  the  service  of  sin,  and  conformity  to  the  world,  and  use  it  in  the 
service  of  righteousness ;  if  he  will  thus,  in  this  world,  be  transformed  into  the 
hkeness  of  the  body  of  Christ,  in  all  temperance,  in  all  purity,  in  aU  deeds  of  holy 
living,  then  he  will  have  "  sown  to  the  Spirit  "  ;  and  of  the  Spirit  he  shall,  through 
the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life,  reap  life  everlasting.  In  a  body,  no  longer  of  flesh  and 
blood  (which  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven),  in  a  spiritual  body,  compared 
with  the  glory  and  powers  of  which  the  most  beautiful  body  in  the  flesh  is  corrup- 
tion, the  strongest  and  most  healthy  is  the  impotence  of  death ;  he  shall  stand  on 
the  everlasting  mount  of  heaven,  transfigured  from  this  mortal  body  in  the  raiment 
of  a  body  shining  as  the  sun,  white  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  white,  and  gathered 
into  the.  company  of  the  sons  of  God,  such  as  Moses  and  Ellas,  and  beholding  the 
Son  of  God  in  eternal  glory  face  to  face,  shall  say  with  the  joyful  cry  of  the  song 
of  the  full  sense  of  thankful  blessedness,  "Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be 
here."    (R.   W.  Evans.)        On  the  Holy  Mount : — I.  That  beolusion  is  needed 

FOB  THE   HIGHEST  DEVOTION.      II.   ThAT    A    DEVOTIONAIi   SPIBIT    BEES     NEW  OLOBY  IN 

Cubist  and  in  His  Woed.  III.  That  devotion  is  not  the  whole  life.  IV. 
That  devotion  fubnishes  suppobt  fob  the  pebfobmancs  of  the  duties  and  thb 
endubance  of  the  tbials  of  life.  {W.  M.  Taylor^  DJ).)  Christ  the  light  of 
the  body : — There  were  other  wonders  in  that  glorious  vision  besides  the  coun- 
tenance of  our  Lord.  His  raiment,  too,  was  ddanged,  and  became  all  brilliant, 
white  as  the  light  itself.  Was  not  that  a  lesson  to  them  ?  Was  it  not  as  if  our 
Lord  had  said  to  them,  "  I  am  a  king,  and  have  put  on  glorious  apparel,  but  whence 
does  the  glory  of  My  raiment  come  ?  I  have  no  need  of  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and 
embroidery,  the  work  of  men's  hands ;  I  have  no  need  to  send  My  subjects  to  miret 
and  caves  to  dig  gold  and  jewels  to  adorn  My  crown :  the  earth  is  Mine,  and  the 
fulness  thereof.  All  this  glorious  earth,  with  its  trees  and  its  flowers,  its  sunbeams 
and  its  storms,  is  Mine.  I  made  it — ^I  can  do  what  I  will  with  it.  All  the  myste- 
rious laws  by  which  the  light  and  the  heat  flow  out  for  ever  from  God's  throne,  to 
lighten  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars  of  heaven — they  are  Mine.  I  am  the 
light  of  the  world — the  light  of  men's  bodies  as  well  as  of  their  souls ;  and  here  is 
My  proof  of  it.  Look  at  Me.  I  am  He  that '  decketh  Himself  with  light  as  it  were 
with  a  garment,  who  layeth  the  beams  of  His  chambers  in  the  waters,  and  walketh 
upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.' "  This  was  the  message  which  Christ's  glory  brought 
the  apostles — a  message  which  they  could  never  forget.  The  spiritual  glory  of  His 
countenance  had  shown  them  that  He  was  a  spiritual  king — that  His  strength  lay 
in  the  spirit  of  power,  and  wisdom,  and  beauty,  and  love,  which  God  had  given  Him 
without  measure;  and  it  showed  them,  too,  that  there  was  such  a  thing  as  a 
spiritual  body,  such  a  body  as  each  of  us  some  day  shall  have  if  we  be  found  in 
Christ  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just — a  body  which  shall  not  hide  a  man's  spirit 
when  it  becomes  subject  to  the  wear  and  tear  of  life,  and  disease,  and  decay ;  but  a 


8HAI.  n.]  8T.  MARK.  313 

spiritual  body— a  body  which  shall  be  filled  with  our  spirits,  which  shall  be  perfe^^tly 
obedient  to  our  spirits — a  body  through  which  the  glory  of  our  spirits  shall  shinti 
out,  as  the  glory  of  Christ's  Spirit  shone  out  through  His  body  at  the  transfigura- 
Hon.  ••  Brethren,  we  know  not  yet  what  we  shall  be,  but  this  we  do  know,  that 
when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is " 
(1  John  iii.  3).  {C.  KingsUy,  M.A.)  The  influence  of  heaven  here  below  : — The 
spirits,  good  and  bad,  are  all  about  us.  There  are  no  communications  from  the 
spirits,  but  they  are  here  and  interested  in  our  affairs.  The  angels  are  here.  "  Are 
they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs 
of  salvation  ?"  And  the  fallen  spirits  are  here  as  well.  Who  dare  say  that  there 
are  not  demoniac  possessions  to-day?  They  are  not  common  in  Christian  lands, 
but  I  cannot  regard  them  impossible.  Men  sometimes  become  satanically  ugly 
from  no  other  apparent  cause  than  that  they  give  loose  rein  to  their  passions, 
gratify  them  without  restraint,  and  so  lose,  in  time,  all  power  of  controlling  their 
passions  by  any  consideration  of  self-interest.  The  assassin  Guiteau  was  such  a 
man,  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  Guiteau  was  possessed  of  devils.  We  are  told 
that  our  ♦'  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he 
may  devour."  No  doubt  that  the  unseen  world  enwraps  us,  while  we  must  guard 
ourselves  most  sedulously  from  the  superstition  and  deception  too  often  connected 
with  the  truth.  (A.  P.  Foster.)  Ecstasy  cannot  be  continued: — Be  patient  in  the 
darkness ;  you  cannot  have  the  light  all  the  time.  Peter  would  have  three  taber- 
nacles. No,  no  1  it  was  not  best.  We  can  have  no  continuing  ecstasy.  It  would 
rack'  the  soul  to  pieces.  Many  have  glimpses,  but  no  eye  can  look  steadily  on  the 
sun.  We  must  console  ourselves  with  memories  and  anticipations.  These  supreme 
moments  which  come  to  us  occasionally  in  the  Christian  life  are  foretastes  of  the 
heavenly  bliss.  (Ibid.)  A  vision  of  home  .-—Years  ago,  after  a  weary  climb  up 
the  flank  of  a  high  mountain,  a  friend  led  me  by  a  path  through  the  woods  to  the 
head  of  a  gorge.  On  either  side,  to  right  and  left,  stood  the  huge  mountain,  while 
before  us,  at  the  end  of  a  mighty  gulf,  was  an  enchanting  vista.  Five  or  six  miles 
away  a  village  was  full  in  sight,  nestling  among  the  hills,  surrounded  with  lovely 
green,  and  encircled  with  glories  such  as  only  a  setting  sun  can  paint  on  the  western 
sky.  There  was  our  home.  Now,  beyond  doubt,  the  vision  on  Tabor  was  to  the 
wearied  disciples,  whose  feet  already  had  begun  to  tread  a  dark  and  dangerous 
road,  far  more  wonderful  and  delightful.  It  was  to  them  a  glimpse  of  home. 
Far  off,  indeed,  it  seemed,  and  yet  there  at  the  end  were  glories  ineffable.  The 
transfiguration  and  its  teachings: — God  leaves  not  His  people  in  the  midst  of 
many  and  sore  trials,  without  vouchsafing  to  them  occasional  periods  of  spiritual 
refreshment.  The  sight  then  given  to  them  of  the  King  in  His  beauty  left  a 
heavenly  savour  upon  the  souls  of  the  disciples,  which  abode  with  them  to  their 
dying  day.  I.  The  glimpses  of  Christ  obtained,  and  the  foretastes  of  olort 
EXPERIENCED,  IN  THE  SANCTUARY.  Between  that  holy  mountain  and  a  Christian 
sanctuary  many  points  of  resemblance  are  discoverable.  1.  The  mountain  summit 
is  a  secluded  spot,  removed  from  the  din  and  turmoil  of  the  earth ;  the  house  of 
God  is  a  spot  from  which  worldly  affairs  and  associations  are  excluded  ;  where  the 
things  of  time  and  sense  fall  into  the  background.  2.  The  holy  hill  was  made  by 
Jesus  a  place  of  prayer.  God's  house  is  a  house  of  prayer.  It  is  chiefly  in  the 
holy  converse  with  God  which  is  there  carried  on  that  the  furrows  of  care  and 
sorrow  are  obliterated  from  his  brow,  the  earthliness  of  his  spirit  is  worn  away,  and 
its  features  made  to  glow  with  a  tinge  of  heavenly  lustre.  3.  The  holy  hill  was  a 
mountain  of  testimony.  A  twofold  testimony  was  here  borne  to  Jesus,  Jesus  alone 
remained :  a  token  that  He  fulfilled  the  Law  and  Prophets.  Also,  "  This  is  My 
beloved  Son."  In  the  preached  word  in  the  sanctuary  man  bears  his  testimony  to 
Christ :  a  suffering  Kedeemer  should  be  presented  to  the  mind  of  the  people  in  God's 
house  of  prayer.  Also  the  Holy  Spirit  glorifies  Christ — "He  shall  testify  of  Me." 
4.  In  both  places  alike  slumberers  are  awakened — ' '  Peter  and  they  that  were  with 
BUm  were  heavy  with  sleep,  and  when  they  were  awake  they  saw  His  glory  "  :  a 
beautifrd  emblem  of  the  Word  of  God  reaching  down  to  the  sinner's  heart  through 
the  joints  of  a  harness  of  insensibility,  and  rousing  him  from  the  death-like  trance 
of  sin  to  an  apprehension  of  spiritual  truth.  When  such  an  one  is  awakened,  his 
attention  is  first  engaged  with  the  Saviour's  glory.  The  Light  of  the  World  is  the 
central  object  on  which  his  eye  fastens.  But  after  the  soul  has  once  apprehended 
the  beauty  and  excellency  of  Christ,  its  views  of  Him  in  all  His  offices  are  con- 
tinually enlarged.  Fresh  glimpses  of  the  King's  beauty  are  vouchsafed  to  it  from 
time  to  time  in  the  sanctuary.     II.    The  debion  with  which  such  oumpsks  of 


844  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaf.  Q, 

Chkist  and  fobetastes  op  glory  are  vouchsafed.  1.  One  main  design  of  th* 
transfiguration  in  reference  to  the  apostles  was  to  strengthen  their  faith  in  their 
Master's  Divinity.  2.  Another  design  was,  doubtless,  to  nerve  and  prepare  the 
apostles  for  endurance  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  III.  The  temporary  and  tran- 
sient CHARACTER   OF  THESE   GLIMPSES   OP    ChRIST  AND   FORETASTES  OF   GLORY  WHICH 

THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD  EXPERIENCE  HERE  BELOW.      1.  Much  as  we  could  wish  to  re- 
tain that  enjoyable  sense  of  God's  presence,  yet  it  is  God's  will  that  after  we  have 
refreshed  our  spirits  by  these  foretastes  of  glory,  we  should,  "  in  the  strength  of 
that  meat,"  descend  once  again  to  the  plain  and  encounter,  for  a  few  years  more, 
the  buffetings  of  the  world.     The  soul  cannot  always  be  in  its  pleasant  places,  not, 
while  this  life  lasts,  does  God  intend  that  it  should.    There  is  a  daily  round  of  duty 
which  it  is  the  Lord's  will  that  we  shall  execute  as  His  appointed  task.      Genuine 
apprehensions  of  Christ's  love  are  incentives  to  exertion,  not  to  sloth  and  self-indul- 
gence.    2.  The  questioning  which,  when  our  Lord  approached  the  multitude,  was 
being  carried  on  between  the  scribes  and  His  disciples.      The  first  sounds  which 
greeted  His  Divine  ear  on  reaching  the  plain  were  sounds  of  debate.    Nothing  grates 
^vith  more  harshness  on  the  ear  of  one  accustomed  to  hold  communion  with  God, 
and  to  live  much  in  a  spiritual  atmosphere,  than  religious  controversy.     Those  who 
are  called  to  controversy  should  be  much  in  the  sanctuary,  and  submit  a  willing 
ear  to   the    testimony  of    Jesus.      {Det^n   Goulburn.)        The    transfiguration  of 
Christ : — I.  What  the  disciples  saw — "  He  was  transfigured  before  them."    1. 
The  unveiled  glory  of  Christ.    2.    The  glorified  attendants  from  the  world  of 
spirits.    3.  The  bright  cloud  of  the  Divine  Presence.   Not  a  dark  cloud  as  under  the 
old  dispensation,  but  a   cloud  of  light.     II.  What  the  disciples  heard.     1.  An 
affecting  conversation.    2.  An  approving  testimony.    3.  An  authoritative  command. 
III.  What  the  disciples  felt.    1.  The  blessedness  of  heavenly  society.    2.  A 
solemn  awe — "sore  afraid."     3.  The  Saviour's  touch.     IV.    Practical  instbuo- 
TioNS.    1.  This  manifestation  was  given  to  disciples.     2.  This  communication  was 
given  whilst  they  were  praying.    3.  To  prepare  them  for  future  trials.     {W.  J. 
Brock^  B.A-)        Transfiguration  of  Christ: — 1.  One  design  of  the  transfiguration, 
undoubtedly,  was  to  give  the  disciples  some  idea  of  Christ's  future  appearance,  when 
He  should  come  in  His  kingdom.    2.  But,  again,  another  purpose  of  the  transfigu- 
ration was  probably  to  honour  Christ  and  His  gospel.    3.  But,  again,  we  have  in 
this  narrative,  in  strong  contrast  with  the  glories  of  the  transfiguration,  the  weak- 
ness of  poor  humanity.    4.  But  why,  let  us  again  ask,  has  our  Church  selected  such 
a  portion  of  Scripture  as  this  to  be  read  at  this  season  ?    It  seems,  at  first  view, 
very  inappropriate.    What  have  we  to  do  in  Lent  with  the  glories  of  the  transfigu- 
ration ?    Why,  when  we  are  called  to  humble  ourselves  in  prayer  and  confession  of 
sin,  are  we  directed  to  such  a  portion  of  God's  Word  as  this  ?    Because  the  most 
remarkable  feature  in  this  transaction  was,  that  amid  the  splendours  of  that  trans- 
figuration, the  death  of  Christ  has  the  most  prominent  place.     (W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.j 
The  use  of  religious  excitement : — ^Vivid  emotions  are,  by  the  law  of  their  being, 
transient.    They  cannot  last.    Possibly,  their  very  intensity  is,  roughly  speaking, 
the  measure  of  their  evanescence.    Souls  cannot  Hve  and  work  on  day  by  day  wi^ 
the  emotions  at  high  pressure.    Now,  what  is  to  be  said  of  these  occasional  times  of 
excited  feeling?     I.  That  no  man  must  take  belioious  feeling   fob  bblioiom. 
But  after  that,  what  ?     That  all  such  excited  feelings  are  false,  and  hollow,  and 
perilous,  and  must,  therefore,  be  at  once  suppressed  ?    That  plain,  simple  obedience 
to  God's  wiU  is  all  in  all,  and,  therefore,  all  deep  emotions  are  evil  and  to  be  avoided  f 
Surely,  no.    Surely,  the  true  thing  to  be  said  is  this,  that  God  gives  these  periods 
of  strong  feeling  as  mighty  helps  to  our  weak  and  wavering  courage  ;  that  they  are 
a  spur  to  the  halting  obedience,  and  a  goad  to  the  reluctant  will.    True,  these  feel- 
ings must  be  guided  and  regulated  and  led  into  practical  channels,  else,  of  course, 
they  will  run  to  waste,  and  leave  behind  them  X)nly  the  barrenness  of  a  field,  over 
which  the  flood  has  rushed  headlong  in  its  devastating  course.    I  am  not  speaking 
of  ungovemed  and  fanatical  excitement,  but  of  deep  and  powerful  religious  emotion, 
when  I  say  that  God  gives  it  to  carry  us  by  its  force  over  the  earlier  difficulties  of 
the  new  and  converted  life,  or  to  nerve  us  to  resolutions  and  set  us  upon  courses  of 
action,  which  would,  probably,  be  impossible  to  the  calculating  calmness  of  dispas- 
sionate reason.    But  I  think,  my  brethren,  these  times  of  unusual  religious  fervour 
have  another  use.    They  open  to  the  soul  visions  of  a  state  of  love,  and  joy,  and 
heavenly  mindedness,  which,  if  afterwards  thev  torn  into  nothing  bat  regret  anci 
longing,  nevertheless,  leave  behind  them  a  blessing.    It  is  good  for  Hae  weary 
toiler.  consoiooB  of  hiiB  cold,  shallow  heartedness,  the  poverty  of  his  faith,  and  love» 


n.]  8T.  MARK, 


345 


•nd  hope,  to  be  able  to  say,  though  sighing  as  he  Bays  it :— "I  have  known  the 
blessedness  of  a  bright,  triumphant  faith.  I  have  understood  what  it  is  to  pray  with 
holy  fervour."  Can  it  be  well  to  say,  •♦  I  have  known,"  when  it  were  so  much  better 
to  be  able  to  say,  "  I  know  "  ?  Yes,  I  think  it  is  well ;  for,  if  he  be  wise  who  says 
it,  he  will  know  that  these  higher,  deeper,  keener  feelings  cannot  be  always  with 
him.  He  will  gather  up  the  truths  and  the  duties  they  have  brought  to  him,  as  we 
gather  up  the  bright  shells  and  gem-like  pebbles  on  the  sea-shore  when  the  spring 
tide  has  ebbed.  Those  will  be  kept,  when  the  surging  waves  that  bore  them  to  our 
feet  have  retired.  He  will  regard  the  swelling  of  his  emotions,  when  the  sun  of 
Ood's  grace  has  melted  the  snow  of  his  chilled  heart  as  the  overflow  of  a  river ;  and 
he  will  no  more  expect  the  flow  of  his  religious  feeling  to  maintain  the  fulness  and 
force  to  which  it  has  at  times  risen,  than  he  would  expect  a  river  to  be  always  at  the 
flood.  Let  us  once  realize  that  these  more  vivid  religious  emotions  are  occasional 
helps  and  not  permanent  states,  that  they  reveal  to  us  what  might  be,  but  for  the 
weakness  and  earthliness  of  our  nature,  and  are  in  themselves  no  proofs  of  high 
attainments  of  grace,  and  then  we  may  thank  God  for  them,  and  not  be  afraid  or 
ashamed  to  say,  "  I  have  known,"  when  we  dare  not  say,  "  I  know."    H.  How 

FAB  IS  RELIGIOUS  EMOTION  TO  FORM  ANT  PART  OF  OUB  DAILT  RELIGIOUS  LITB  ;  OB,  IN 
OTHEB  WORDS,   HOW  FAB    ARE    THE    FEELINGS    TO    BE    BEGULABLY    EMPLOYED    IN    THE 

gBBvicE  OF  God  t  What  shall  we  say  as  to  ordinary  religious  emotion  ?  Is  it  a 
good  thing  or  a  bad  thing  ?  Assuredly,  as  I  repeat,  our  feelings  were  not  given  us 
for  the  purpose  of  being  crushed  out.  Our  religion  is  not  one  of  mere  dry  duty, 
f  he  very  fact  that  love  holds  so  prominent  a  place  in  it  is  a  proof  that,  at  least, 
lome  amount  of  religious  feeling  is  necessary  for  a  true  religious  life.  But  I  would 
ask  this  :  If  we  read  our  Bibles  candidly,  does  it  not  seem  that  a  greater  amount  of 
religious  emotion  is  expected  to  find  place  in  the  daily  life  of  Christian  men  than  is 
commonly  felt  or  commonly  supposed  ?  St.  Paul  was  a  most  thoroughly  practical 
man,  eminently  a  man  of  action,  always  up  and  domg.  He  surely  was  one  who 
would  scorn  to  let  feeling  take  the  place  of  obedience,  or  to  suffer  the  simple  daily 


however 
Joy»  peace — a  life  of  obedience,  in  other 
words,  without  emotion,  would  utterly  fail  to  satisfy  him.  Has,  in  a  word,  even 
excitement  no  work  to  do,  no  end  to  answer,  in  the  daily  Christian  life  ?  Take  any 
keen,  eager,  impulsive,  excitable  person,  may  I  not  believe  that  God  gave  such 
person  the  power  of  quick  impulse  and  eager  aspiration  for  some  worthy  end  ? 
What  is  that  end,  my  brethren  ?  Is  it  to  enjoy  a  ball,  or  a  novel,  or  a  sport  ?  One 
would  really  think  so  when  one  hears  of  so  many  people  who,  themselves  keenly 
enjoying  all  manner  of  worldly  amusements,  and  throwing  themselves  into  them 
heart  and  soul,  as  we  say,  when  they  see  others  as  keenly  and  engrossingly  giving 
themselves  to  religious  occupations,  settle  the  matter  with  a  self-satisfied  smile  by 
saying,  "  Oh,  it  is  all  excitement !  "  Might  it  not  be  a  better  way  of  looking  at  it 
if  they  should  think  and  say,  "  I  don't  know  how  such  an  one  can  enjoy  so  much 
religion.  I  only  know  I  don't  and  can't.  I  wish  I  could.  I  wish  I  could  take  delight 
in  high  and  holy  things.  {Bishop  Wahham  How.)  The  lessons  of  the  transfigura- 
tion : — The  practical  question  for  as  to  consider  is  this — How  does  the  transfigura- 
tion fit  into  our  lives?     What  should  be  its  effect  on  us?    I.  It  confibms  oub 

FAITH   IN   ChBIST  AS  THE   TBUE  BeDEEMBB  OF  MEN.      II.   It   SHOULD   ANIMATB   US  TO 

FOLLOW  Christ  in  the  way  of  the  cross.  Our  Lord,  after  announcing  that  He 
must  needs  die,  taught  His  disciples  that  they  must  die  with  Him  and  like  Him ; 
that  they,  too,  must  deny  themselves  and  take  up  the  cross  ;  that  they  must  lose 
their  life  in  order  to  save  it ;  that  to  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  their  own  souls 
would  be  but  a  sorry  exchange ;  and  that,  if  they  were  afraid  or  ashamed  thus  to 
follow  Him,  He  would  be  ashamed  of  them  when  He  came  in  the  glory  of  His 
Father  ani  of  the  holy  angels  (St.  Matt.  xvi.  21-28 ;  St.  Mark  viii.  31-88 ;  St. 
Luke  ix.  21-26).  Self-sacrifice  is  the  law  of  the  highest  life ;  we  can  only  rise  into 
the  life  of  love  as  we  deny  and  crucify  the  self  in  us  ;  we  must  die  to  the  flesh  if 
we  would  live  and  walk  in  the  spirit ;  the  body  must  die  before  we  can  rise  into  a 
sinless  and  perfect  life.  In  one  word,  religion  must  be  a  life-long  effort,  a  life-long 
sacrifice.  Not  in  mere  enjoyment,  even  though  it  be  an  enjoyment  of  worship,  of 
prowth  in  knowledge,  or  of  qniok  spiritual  response  to  fine  thoughts  and  pure 
mipulses,  but  by  toil,  by  self-denial,  by  really  spending  ourselves  in  the  service  of 
God  and  maB,  by  a  constant  reaching  forth  after  still  higher  and  nobler  aims,  do 
we  rise  into  the  life  and  follow  the  example  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.     Try  your- 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  n. 

selves  by  this  test,  then.  Ask  yoarselves  whether  your  religion  has  yet  become  a 
=acred  and  inspiring  reality  to  you,  making  toil,  pain,  sacrifice,  death  itself,  welcome  to 
you,  if  you  may  thus  win  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him.  {S.  Cox^  D.D.)  Elias 
with  Moaes  : — Eeasons  are  not  far  to  find  why  these  two  should  be  brought  back 
together  from  the  other  world  to  take  part  in  the  scene.  I.  They  wkbb  thb  be. 
PKESENTATrvES  OF  THE  QUICK  AND  DEAD.  Moscs  had  died ;  Elijah  had  ascended 
alive  into  heaven.  They  were  types  of  the  two  great  divisions  which  shall  appear 
before  the  same  Lord  when  He  comes  in  the  glory  of  which  that  was  a  glimpse  and 
foretaste,  the  dead  and  the  living  both  standing  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ. 
II.  Both  had  passed  from  earth  in  mysteby  :  the  first  buried  by  the  hand  of  God 
in  some  unfrequented  valley  apart  from  his  countrymen ;  the  other  not  dying,  but 
vanishing  instantaneously  in  the  midst  of  life.  Both  had  disappeared,  no  more  to 
be  seen  by  mortal  eye  till,  in  far-distant  times,  the  same  Hand  that  had  carried 
them  away  should  bring  them  back  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  It  suggests 
the  mighty  truth,  that,  however  we  are  taken,  whether  lost  to  men  in  the  depth  of 
the  sea,  or  consumed  by  the  devouring  fire,  it  matters  nothing  to  the  Great  Keeper 
of  His  people.  Who  will  bring  all  back  again  at  the  last  day.  III.  But  the  chief 
motive,  no  doubt,  was  to  unite  together  the  representatives  of  the  three  great 
dispensations  of  Divine  government — the  Law,  the  Prophets,  and  the  Gospel, 
(if.  M.  Lxickock,  D.D.)  The  transfiguration  gives  us  a  pledge  and  earnest  oj  oar 
personal  identity  in  the  risen  state : — And  doubtless  one  reason  for  the  preservation 
of  our  identity  is  for  mutual  recognition — that  we  may  know  hereafter  those  whom 
we  have  known  in  the  flesh.  It  puts  before  us  a  powerful  incentive  to  make  friends 
on  earth  with  whom  we  may  spend  not  only  the  life  here,  but  the  eternal  life  in 
heaven.  Again,  the  scene  opens  up  a  further  field  of  thought,  when  we  recall  the 
fact  that  St.  Peter  was  able  to  recognize  Moses  and  Elijah,  though  he  had  never 
seen  them  in  the  flesh.  Shall  we,  then,  recognize  the  great  saints  in  the  world  to 
come,  whom  we  have  learnt  by  the  study  of  their  lives  and  work  to  know  as  though 
we  had  seen  them  face  to  face  ?  There  was  clearly  something — ^it  may  have  been 
some  lingerings  of  the  splendour  which  illumined  his  face  after  communing  with 
God,  which  painters  have  tried  to  express  by  the  familiar  ••  horns  of  light " — we 
cannot  tell  what  it  was,  but  it  satisfied  the  apostle  that  the  form  was  none  other 
than  that  of  Moses.  Will  there  be  nothing  by  which,  in  like  manner,  we  shall  re- 
cognize  the  Baptist,  or  the  Beloved  Disciple,  or  the  Blessed  Virgin,  or  Mary 
of  Magdala  ?  Will  the  student  of  theology,  who  has  read  the  mind  of  St.  Augus- 
tine, or  pictured  the  fiery  Athanase,  with  his  feeble  frame  but  lion  heart,  confronting 
the  world  for  the  great  mystery  of  the  Blessed  Trinity,  find  no  means  of  identifying 
them  when  they  meet  hereafter  ?  Will  there  be  nothing  to  mark  painters  like  Fra 
Angelico  or  Raphael,  or  poets  such  as  Dante,  or  Tasso,  or  Milton  ?  It  must  surely 
be  that  marks  of  recognition,  in  all  who  have  witnessed  for  God  and  moulded  the 
minds  of  men  by  tbeir  words  or  works,  will  not  be  wanting.  (Ibid.)  It  is  good 
lor  us  to  be  here : — If  any  earthly  place  or  condition  might  have  given  warrant  to 
Peter's  motion,  this  was  it.  1.  Here  was  a  hill — the  emblem  of  heaven.  2.  Here 
were  two  saints — the  epitome  of  heaven.  3.  Here  was  Christ — the  Qt)d  of  heaven. 
{Bishop  Hall.)  Peter  and  his  fellows  were  so  taken  with  the  sight  of  the  felicity 
they  saw,  that  they  desired  to  abide  on  the  mount  with  Jesus  and  the  saints.  What 
moved  them  shows  what  will  delight  us  when  this  transient  world  is  over,  and  God 
will  gather  His  people  to  Himself.  1.  Here  was  but  Hermon  ;  and  there  will  be 
heaven.  2.  Here  were  but  two  saints ;  there,  the  mighty  multitude  no  man  can 
number.  3.  Here  was  but  Christ  transfigured ;  there.  He  will  sit  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,  enthroned  in  the  majesty  of  heaven.  4.  Here  was  a  representation  for  a 
brief  interval;  there,  a  gift  and  permanent  possession  of  blessedness.  {T.  M. 
Lindsay,  D.D.)  The  transfiguration  teaches  us  that  (1)  Special  manifestations 
of  favour  attend  entire  submission  to  the  Divine  will ;  (2)  outward  splendour  is  the 
proper  accompaniment  of  inward  excellence ;  (3)  Christ  is  attested  to  men  as  the  ob- 
ject of  Divine  approval  and  delight ;  (4)  therefore  they  should  love  and  trust,  honour 
and  obey  Him  ;  (5)  first  lessons  are  to  be  retained,  that  further  may  be  received  ; 
(6)  prophecy  teaches  that  suffering  belongs  to  the  present  service  of  God.  (J.  H.  God- 
win.) The  transfiguration : — The  Saviour  was  strengthened  for  conflict.  Moses  and 
Elias  talked  with  Him,  not  concerning  the  dark  aspects  of  His  death,  but  its  wonder- 
ful effects.  I.  The  transfiguration  was  a  preparation  for  the  disciples.  They 
saw  some  manifestation  of  their  Master's  glory.  How  greatly  this  would  strengthen 
them.  Was  a  source  of  comfort  in  after  times.  II.  The  transfiguration  has  its 
PBACTiCAii  liEssoNS  FOB  US.    1.  The  mountain  of  prayer  is  always  the  mountain  ol 


asAJt.  n.]  8T.  MARK,  847 

transfiguration.  If  we  would  hare  onr  trials  and  sorrows  transfigured,  we  must 
get  up  into  the  mount  of  converse  with  God.  Here  we  see  them  in  their  dark 
aspect,  only  there  can  we  learn  how  to  glory  in  tribulation.  2.  The  hour  of  prayer 
is  often  a  foretaste  of  future  joy.  3.  Let  us  always  remember  the  decease  which 
Jesus  accomplished  at  Jerusalem.  Christ's  death  is  our  one  all-powerful  argument 
with  God.  All  blessing  to  the  world,  and  to  us,  comes  through  that  precious  death. 
In  heaven  much  of  our  converse  will  be  of  "the  decease,"  &c.  (7.  W.  Boulding.) 
The  glorified  saint : — Every  faculty,  thought,  and  emotion  shall  reflect  His  holi- 
ness, truth,  and  love.  The  leafless  tree,  trembling  in  the  cold  blast  of  the  winter 
windK^  is  the  image  of  what  we  now  are ;  the  same  tree  covered  with  foliage, 
blossoms,  and  fruit,  is  the  symbol  of  what  the  sanctified  soul  shall  be.  The  dark 
sorrowful  cloud  hanging  heavily  in  the  atmosphere  represents  our  present  state ; 
that  cloud  penetrated  by  the  rays  of  the  morning  light,  fringed  with  gold,  made 
luminous  and  beautiful  by  the  splendour  of  the  rising  sun,  is  the  expression  of  the 
glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  the  spirits  of  redeemed  men.  The  mind  shaU  be 
illumined  with  the  pure  hght  of  knowledge  unmingled  with  error  ;  the  heart  shall 
be  filled  with  all  the  emotions  which  constitute  perfect  bliss  ;  the  imagination  shall 
soar  to  the  highest  regions  and  present  nothing  to  the  soul  but  visions  of  truth  and 
beauty.  The  whole  nature  shall  be  in  harmony  with  itself,  with  God,  with  the  holy 
intelligences  of  the  spirit-world,  and  with  all  the  circumstances  in  which  it  shall 
for  ever  exist.  {Thomas  Jones.)  Dust  of  gold  gathered  from  a  variety  of  autliors : — 
The  decease  was  the  keystone  of  the  arch  of  glory.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  In  the 
interior  of  Christ's  being  there  must  have  been  an  infinite  fulness  of  heavenliness, 
of  all  that  constitutes  the  essential  glory  of  heaven.  (Ibid.)  "  Hear  ye  Him," 
for  His  words  embody  the  very  thoughts,  desires,  and  determinations  of  the  Divine 
Mind.  (Ibid.)  The  name  of  the  mountain  is  not  mentioned,  and  thereby  super- 
stition is  prevented.  (Bengel.)  The  cloud  shows  that  human  nature  cannot  bear 
the  glory  of  God  without  admixture  or  interposition.  (Ibid.)  Ah  1  bright  mani- 
festations in  this  vale  of  tears  are  always  departing  manifestations.  {Dr.  Brown.) 
How  can  we  hope  ever  to  be  transfigured  from  a  lump  of  corrupt  fiesh  if  we  do  not 
ascend  and  pray?  {HaU.)  Exceptional  hours  in  life : — There  are  exceptional  hours 
in  human  history,  when  men  utter  words  which  attest  the  grandeur  of  the  human 
mind,  when  the  countenance  burns  with  the  fire  of  intelligent  enthusiasm,  and 
the  voice  reaches  a  tone  of  purer  music  than  is  bom  of  earth  ;  and  in  those  excep- 
tional hours  we  see  somewhat  of  the  dignity  of  human  nature.  Multiply  this  by 
infinitude,  and  we  shall  know  something  of  what  the  disciples  saw  when  Christ's 
*'  face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  and  His  raiment  was  white  as  the  light."  (eT*.  Parker^  D.D.) 
The  hiding  of  the  higher  life : — The  hiding  of  the  higher  life  will  oe  in  proportion 
to  its  compass  and  elevation.  The  young  Christian  talks  more  of  his  experience 
than  the  old  Christian,  just  as  a  rill  may  make  more  noise  than  a  river.  An 
ordinary  mother  talks  much  of  her  child ;  but  the  mother  of  Christ  "  kept  aU  these 
things,  and  pondered  them  in  her  heart."  {Ibid.)  Secrecy  enjoined  till  the  Son 
of  Man  be  risen  from  the  dead : — I.  Christ's  lifb  not  to  be  told  in  fragments. 
II.  Th«  parts  of  Christ's  lifk  are  mutually  explanatory.  HI.  The  resurrection 
of  Christ,  the  great  reconcilino  and  all-explaining  fact  in  His  ministry.  His 
profoundest  words  would  have  had  no  meaning  had  He  not  known  that  He  would 
rise  again  from  the  dead.  {Ibid.)  Moses  and  Eliat  talking  with  Jesm : — I.  De- 
parted MEN  ARE  still  LIVING.  II.  DSATH  DOES  NOT  DESTROY  THE  INDIVIDUALITY  OF 
MEN.       III.  The  GREATEST  OF  DEPARTED  MEN  ARE  INTERESTED  IN  THE  WORK  OF  ChRIST. 

IV.  Immediate  personal  communication  between  departed  spirits  and  men  yet  in 
the  FLESH  IS  POSSIBLE.  {Ibid.)  The  transfiguration  of  Christ: — To  what  may  we 
compare  this  wonderful  change  ?  Suppose  you  have  before  you  the  bulbous  root  of  the 
lily  plant.  You  look  at  it  carefully,  but  there  is  nothing  attractive  about  it.  How 
rough  and  unsightly  it  appears !  You  close  your  eyes  upon  it  for  a  brief  space.  You 
open  them  again.  But  what  a  change  has  taken  place  I  That  plain,  homely-looking 
bulb  has  disappeared,  and  in  its  place  there  stands  before  you  the  lily  plant.  It  has 
reached  its  mature  growth.  Its  flower  is  fully  developed,  and  blooming  in  all  its 
matchless  beantv !  What  a  marvellous  change  that  would  be !  And  yet  it  would 
be  but  a  feeble  illustration  of  the  more  wonderful  change  that  took  place  in  our 
Saviour  at  His  transfiguration.  Here  is  another  illustration.  Suppose  we  are  look- 
ing at  the  western  sky,  towards  the  close  of  day.  Great  masses  of  dark  clouds  are 
covering  all  that  part  of  the  hea  ens.  They  are  but  common  clouds.  There  is 
nothing  attractive  or  interesting  about  them.  We  do  not  care  to  take  a  second  look 
at  them.     We  turn  from  them  for  a  little  while,  and  then  look  at  them  again.     Is 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  nu 

the  meantime  the  setting  eon  has  thrown  his  glorious  beams  upon  them.  How 
changed  they  now  appear  I  All  that  was  commonplace  and  nnattractive  about  them 
is  gone.  How  they  glow  and  sparkle !  Gk)ld,  and  purple,  and  all  the  colours  of 
the  rainbow  are  blending,  how  beautifully,  there  1  Are  these  the  same  dull  clouds 
that  we  looked  upon  a  few  moments  before  ?  Yes ;  but  they  have  been  transfigured. 
A  wonderful  change  has  come  over  them.  And  here  we  have  an  illustration  of  our 
Lord's  Transfiguration.  The  first  wonder  about  this  incident  in  His  life  is  the 
wonderful  change  which  took  place  in  His  appearance  then.  {Dr.  Newton.)  How 
we  know  there  is  a  heaven  :~Il  Sunday-school  teacher  was  talking  to  one  of  her 
scholars  about  heaven,  and  the  glory  we  shall  have  when  we  reach  that  blessed 
place.  He  was  a  bright  boy,  about  nine  or  ten  years  old,  named  Charlie.  After 
listening  to  her  for  a  while,  he  said:  *'  But  you  have  never  been  there,  Miss  D.,  and 
how  do  you  know  there  really  is  any  such  place?  "  "  Charlie,"  said  the  teacher, 
"  you  have  never  been  to  London  ;  how  do  you  know  there  is  such  a  city  ?  "  "  O, 
I  know  that  very  well,"  said  CharHe,  "  because  my  father  is  there ;  and  he  has  sent 
me  a  letter,  teUing  me  all  about  it."  ♦♦  And  God,  my  Father,  is  in  the  heavenly  city," 
said  Miss  D,,  *♦  and  He  has  sent  me  a  letter,  telling  me  about  the  glory  of  heaven,  and 
about  the  way  to  get  there.  The  Bible  is  God's  letter."  "Yes,  I  see,"  said  Charlie, 
after  thinking  awhile,  "there  must  be  a  heaven,  if  you  have  got  such  a  nice  long 
letter  from  there."  The  lesson  of  hope  is  the  first  lesson  taught  us  by  the  transfigura- 
tion. (Ibid.)  The  decease  at  Jerusalem;  or,  the  power  of  the  cross  : — ^A  heathen 
ruler  had  heard  the  story  of  the  cross,  and  desired  to  know  its  power.  When  he 
was  sick,  and  near  his  end,  he  told  his  servants  to  make  him  a  large  wooden  cross, 
and  lay  it  down  in  his  chamber.  When  this  was  done,  he  said :  "  Take  me  now  and 
lay  me  on  the  cross,  and  let  me  die  there."  As  he  lay  there  dying,  he  looked  in  faith 
to  the  blood  of  Christ  that  was  shed  upon  the  cross,  and  said :  *•  It  lifts  me  up :  it 
lifts  me.  Jesus  saves  me !  "  and  thus  he  died.  It  was  not  that  wooden  cross  that 
saved  him ;  but  the  death  of  Christ,  on  the  cross  to  which  He  was  nailed — the 
death  of  which  Closes  and  Elias  talked  with  Him,  that  saved  this  heathen  man. 
They  knew  what  a  blessing  His  death  would  be  to  the  world,  and  this  was  why  they 
talked  about  this  death.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  This  Is  My  Beloved  Son:  hear  Bim.— Hearing  Christ:— I.  We  should 
hear  the  Lord  Jesus  with  resolution.  ♦*  I  will  go."  Nothing  shall  prevent  me ; 
no  employments,  no  pleasures  ;  no  solicitations,  no  difi&culties.  The  Son  of  God 
calls  me,  and  I  must  go.  Thus  we  ought  all  to  feel.  II.  We  must  hear  Him  with 
srnsMissiON.  Not  the  pride  of  the  world  only,  but  our  own  pride,  is  to  be  resisted. 
We  have  no  right  to  say  how  much  or  what  part  of  His  message  we  will  receive,  or 
when  or  where  we  will  follow  Him.  III.  We  must  hear  Him  with  attention,  with 
serious  and  concentrated  heed.  IV.  We  must  hear  Him  not  so  much  from  the 
principle  of  fear,  as  of  deep  and  eabnest  affection.  He  came  to  speak  to 
us  because  He  loved  us.  V.  We  must  hear  Him  with  sinolbnbss  of  mind,  placing 
no  other  instruction  on  a  footing  with  His,  far  less  yielding  them  the  precedence. 
{F.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)  The  ministry  of  Jesus  : — I.  Christ  is  God's  messengbb 
TO  MAN.  He  came  forth  and  proceeded  from  the  Father.  Grace  and  truth  came  by 
Jesus  Christ.  He  had  (1)  a  Divine  commission ;  (2)  a  Divine  message ;  (3)  Divine 
credentials,  divinely  authenticated.  He  spake  with  authority.  He  revealed 
mysteries.  H.  Man's  duty  to  God's  Messbngeb.  Hear  Him — 1.  Because  His 
ministry  is  the  super  cesser  of  the  ministries  of  Moses  and  Elias.  2.  Because  this 
ministry  contains  matters  of  universal  importance.  3.  Because  the  rejection  of  this 
ministry  leaves  no  moral  instructor  available,  Christ  is  the  truth  of  God,  through 
whom  the  Father's  latest  will  is  made  known  to  man.  Hear  Christ's  words,  catch 
Christ's  spirit,  obey  Christ's  law,  and  you  shall  inherit  Christ's  promises.  {J.  F. 
Porter.)       Hear  Him : — I.  Christ's  authobity  is  Divinb.    II.  Christ's  authobitt 

IS  UNDIVIDED.      III.   Men  abb   to  BB  heard  only  so  FAB  AB  THEY  BBPBAT  ChBIST'S 

WORDS.    {J.  Parker,  D,  D.) 

Yer.  8.  Save  Jesus  only. — Jenu  only : — ^I.  When  the  workman  is  tempted  to  waste 
his  employer's  substance,  or  the  time  which  is  his  property,  and  says  to  himself, 
"  There  is  nobody  to  see ;  nobody  will  know,"  he  would  be  checked  if  he  remem- 
bered and  realized  that  in  absolute  fact  he  owes  his  duty  to  no  man,  save  to  Jesus 
only,  Jesus  who  for  thirty  years  shared  the  workman's  lot,  and  put  dignity  for  ever 
upon  honest  handiwork.  II.  But  not  alone  for  this  world's  business  and  behavour, 
and  temperament,  is  this  tiiought  true :    in  the  matter  of  the  soul's  salvation 


.  nt.]  ST,  MARK,  34S 

blessed  are  they  who  see  no  man  save  Jesus  only.  1.  There  la  danger  for  the  young 
in  letting  their  religion  be  based  on  mere  love  or  regard  for  a  minister  or  a  religious 
friend.  2.  Others  there  are  who  allow  their  religion  to  be  unduly  influenced  by 
particular  places  and  circumstances.  3.  In  the  days  when  we  feel  burdened  with  a 
sense  of  our  sin,  may  we  then  look  to  no  man,  save  to  Jesus  only.  4.  In  the  hour 
of  death  you  will  have  the  one  Friend  to  go  with  you,  when  all  others  must  leave 
you.  (Canon  Erskine  Clarke.)  Jesug  only  in  death : — When  Bishop  Beveredge 
was  on  his  death-bed,  his  memory  so  failed  that  he  did  not  know  even  his  nearest 
relative.  His  chaplain  said,  "  Do  you  know  me  ?  "  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  was  the 
answer.  His  own  wife  asked  him,  "  Do  you  know  me  ? "  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  was 
the  only  answer.  On  being  told  that  it  was  his  wife  he  said  that  he  did  not  know 
her.  Then  one  standing  by  said,  " Do  you  know  Jesus  Christ? "  "  Jesus  Christ," 
he  replied,  reviving  as  if  the  name  acted  on  him  like  a  cordial,  "  yes,  I  have  known 
Him  these  forty  years :  He  is  my  only  hope."  Brethren,  when  our  time  cometh  to 
depart  to  the  place  of  peace,  may  we  in  like  manner  see  no  man,  save  Jesus  only. 
But  if  the  presence  of  Jesus  is  to  abide  with  us  when  flesh  and  heart  and  mind  are 
failing,  it  must  be  cherished  in  the  days  of  health  and  strength  and  vigour.  Nove 
misted  ifJesiu  be  present : — Love  brings  to  the  Saviour  a  flaming  heart ;  obedience 
comes  on  willing  feet ;  patience  bows  down  to  receive  its  load :  while  faith  stretches 
out  an  empty  hand,  to  be  filled  with  His  free  gifts.  A  faithful  Sunday-school 
teacher  lay  dying.  The  light  of  heaven  was  in  his  eye,  and  seraphic  smiles  played 
apon  his  thin  hps,  as  he  thought  of  his  mighty  Redeemer.  Just  before  he  sank 
away,  he  turned  to  his  daughter,  who  was  trying  to  anticipate  his  every  wish  by 
her  loving  care,  and  said,  "  Bring — "  More  he  could  not  say,  for  strength  was  too 
far  gone.  "  What  shall  I  bring,  dear  father  ?  "  asked  the  anxious  child.  ••  Bring — " 
**  Dear,  precious  father,  do  tell  me  what  to  bring  I  "  The  dying  man  rallied  for  a 
last  effort,  and  feebly  murmured — 

"  Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem, 
And  crown  Him  Lord  of  all !  ** 

If,  in  the  dosing  hour  of  life,  the  Saviour  is  as  near  to  ns,  we  cannot  eomplain  of 
the  lack  of  other  comforters.  We  shall  be  sure  to  awake  at  last  to  His  likeness,  and 
shall  shine  forth  as  the  son,  in  onr  Father's  kingdom.  (J.  H.  Norton.)  ManU 
abiding  Friend: — Whoever  and  whatever  vanishes,  Jesna  remains  with  £Qs 
disciples.  I.  Though  phtbxcal  health  depabts,  He  abzdbs.  When  heart  and 
flesh  faO,  He  is  present  to  succour  and  strengthen  the  soul,  and  to  bear  it  to  one  of 
the  many  mansions  He  has  prepared.  U.  Though  wobldlt  possessions  dzsappsab, 
He  beuaims.  Secular  wealu,  rightly  used,  is  an  incalculable  blessing ;  it  not  only 
serves  to  relieve  from  all  worldly  anxieties,  and  minister  to  bodily  comfort  and 
intellectual  enjoyment,  but  also  gives  ns  power  to  help  onr  fellowmen  both 
temporally  and  spiritually.  But  how  often  do  riches  take  wings  and  fly  away ! 
But  Christ  is  the  tme  riches :  He  is  of  more  value  than  untold  gold ;  and  nothing 
can  deprive  ns  of  Him.  UI.  Though  deabest  vbiends  dbpabt,  He  abides. 
Good  men  are  constantly  losing  from  their  social  sphere  those  who  have  charmed 
them  with  their  presence,  and  inspired  them  with  their  talk.  When  listening  to 
them  either  in  the  sanctuary,  the  club,  or  on  the  domestic  hearth,  they  have  felt 
it  good  to  be  there.  But  one  by  one  they  vanish ;  the  time  comes  when  the  best  is 
gone,  and  all  is  social  desolation ;  and  like  the  disciples,  they  look  around,  and  sec 
no  man  any  more,  save  Jesus  only,  with  themselves.  He  is  the  abiding  Friend. 
and  having  Him  we  have  all.  (D.  Thomas^  D.D.)  Jesus  only  with  themselves  : — 
L   It  was  a  symbolical  intimation  that  whsn  He  that  is  pebpeot  and  etebnal 

HAD  come,   all  that   WAS   IMPEBPECT  AMD   PBEPABATOBT   SHOULD  VANISH  AWAT.       And 

that  this  latter  was  the  character  botii  of  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  is  obvious. 
Moses  had  Christ  constantly  in  view,  and  the  entire  scheme  of  Levitical  worship 
which  he  was  inspired  to  draw  up,  looked  forward  to  Him.  So,  too,  the  prophets  in 
various  ways  predicted  an  age  of  surpassing  glory,  which  should  culminate  at  the 
Messiah's  coming.     II.  Not  only  was  all  prophecy  fulfilled  in  Christ,  but  the 

PBOPHSTIO    OHABAOTBB    ALSO    BKCBIVEO     ITS    PEBFKCT    DEVELOPMENT    IN     HlM.         He 

not  only  announced,  He  was,  the  Word  of  God.  The  lesson  of  this  mysterious 
scene  was  this :  that  Moses  and  Elias  and  Christ  were  three  no  longer,  no  more 
separated,  but  made  one  by  God.  Legislator  and  prophet  both  were  summoned  to 
the  scene  of  the  transfiguration,  and  both  symbolically  (by  vanishing  away, 
leaTing  Jesns  only  with  the  disciples)  consigned  their  finished  work  into  Christ's 


350  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  IX. 

hands,  knowing  that  henceforth  there  was  but  one  dispensation,  one  tabernacle, 
one  gospel.     (H.  M.  Ltickock,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  What  the  rising  from  the  dead  should  mean.— T^c  Resurrection:  it§ 

moral  meanings: — Men  heard  them  gladly,  because  they  preached  the  resurrection; 
and  because  the  truth  was  so  purely  human  as  well  as  purely  Divine,  it  overran 
and  mastered  the  world.  I.  It  seems  to  EXPiiAiN  man's  place  in  the  creation. 
Mp.n's  position  at  the  head  of  this  creation  places  him  on  the  threshold  of  a  higher 
creation,  in  which  the  true  sphere  of  his  royalty  lies.  Such  a  world  as  this  is  too 
small,  too  poor,  to  be  the  home  and  the  realm  of  his  manhood ;  its  true  function  is 
to  train  him  for  hi8  royalty  beyond.  The  risen  man,  by  rising,  enlarged  quite 
infinitely  the  field  of  man's  vision,  activity,  interest,  and  hope.  The  risen  man 
explained  every  propulsive  movement  and  yearning  in  man's  nature — all  his  kinglike 
form  and  instinct :  while  the  weakness,  the  poverty,  the  pain,  the  dread,  belonged  to 
his  mortal  and  transitory  sphere.  Men  heard  the  doctrine  gladly,  for  they  saw  the 
true  form  and  stature  of  the  human  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus ;  in  the  risen  Christ 
God's  idea  of  humanity  was  for  evermore  unveiled.     II.  It    seemed   to    unfold 

THE  MEANING  OF  THE  MYSTERY  OP  MATTER — THE  MORTAL  BODY  IN  WHICH  THE  SODIt 
FINDS   ITSET^F   ENSHRINED,    OR,    AS    IT    IS    CEASELESSLY     TEMPTED    TO     CRY,    ENTOMBED. 

The  mystery  of  embodiment  is  the  essential  mystery  which  perplexes  and  bewilders 
the  world.  Men  found  it  hard  to  see  how  there  could  be  fair  room  for  the 
flesh  in  any  scheme  of  the  world  which  should  include  the  rule  of  a  wise, 
righteous,  and  beneficent  Lord.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  and  the  resurrection 
flashes  at  once  a  flood  of  light  on  man  and  on  his  constitution.  There  is  One,  a  man, 
"  bone  of  our  bone,  flesh  of  our  flesh,"  who  has  borne  the  body  through  death, 
who  took  it  again  joyfully  when  death  had  slain  its  mortality,  and  bore  it  with  Him 
to  the  spiritual  and  eternal  world.  The  revelation  of  a  glorified  human  body  in 
the  world  behind  the  veil  was  the  sanctification,  not  of  the  body  only,  but  also  of 
all  material  things  on  this  side  the  veil ;  it  was  the  sign  from  heaven  that  they 
were  originally  and  essentially  not  of  the  devil,  but  of  God.  We  cannot  in  these 
days  measure  the  range  of  that  emancipation  —  man  freed  from  the  tormenting 
thought  that  he  bore  a  devilish  part  about  with  him,  a  body  which  could  never  be 
tamed  to  a  true  subjection,  never  trained  to  a  Divine  use.    III.  It  seemed  to  cast 

LIGHT  ON  THE  STILL  DEEPER  AND  DARKER  MYSTERY  OF  EVIL  *,  IT  EXPLAINED  THB 
MEANING    BY     UNVEIlInG     THE   END   OF     MAN'S   MORAL   DISCIPLINE.      It    proclaimed,  aS 

nothing  else  that  we  can  conceive  of  could  proclaim,  God's  mastery  over  all  that 
was  dark  and  malign  in  nature  and  in  life.  Thenceforth  man  could  fight  the 
battle  in  hope,  and  was  saved.  It  was  the  flashing  out  of  a  victorious  force  over 
sin  and  death,  which  lit  up  the  world  and  made  it  radiant  with  hope,  when  the 
apostles  preached  through  Jesus  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  {J.  B. 
Brown,  B.A.)  Questionings  concerning  the  resurrection  set  at  rest: — I  see  the 
force  of  all  this;  I  admit  that  the  death  and  burial  of  a  seed,  while  it 
suggests  the  bare  possibility  of  man  surviving  that  dissolution  which  we 
call  death,  by  no  means  raises  the  presumption  that  it  is  so  to  the  height 
of  a  proof.  All  we  can  say  is  that  there  are  certain  analogies  for  it  from 
plant  life,  and  other  analogies  against  it  from  animal  life;  and  who  can 
tell  which  way  it  will  ultimately  turn  ?  It  is  at  this  stage  of  the  argument  that 
tlie  resun-ection  of  Jesus  Christ  comes  in  to  decide  our  wavering  minds.  Until 
Easter-day  we  stand  with  the  disciples,  questioning  what  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead  should  mean  ;  but  now  we  question  no  longer.  In  this  respect  we  are  as  the 
contemporaries  of  Columbus  were  when  he  boldly  set  sail  from  Palos  in  August, 
1492,  and  in  less  than  three  months  set  at  rest  the  problem  of  ages.  His  return 
from  the  voyage  to  the  Bahamas  turned  presumption  into  proof.  It  was  no  longer 
a  question  on  which  sides  might  be  taken.  In  a  sense  it  was  now  set  at  rest.  It 
admitted  no  further  argument.  Those  who  continued  obstinate,  and  held  out  for 
the  old  opinion,  as  some  of  Columbus'  contemporaries  did,  in  spite  of  evidence  to 
ihe  contrary,  could  only  be  left  to  their  own  obstinacy.    (J,  B.  Heard,  M.A.) 

Vers.  14-29.  And  when  He  came  to  His  disciples,  He  saw  a  great  mnltltud* 
about  them. — The  evil  spirit  cast  out : — Learn  from  this  narrative — I.  The  omni- 
potence OF  TBUB  FAITH  IN  GoD.  It  is  uot  SO  much  the  amount  of  one's  faith  aa 
the  kind,  and  the  fact  that  one  really  has  it  (Matt.  zvii.  20).  II.  The  powbblbsb- 
NESS  of  Christians  without  tbde  faith.  III.  The  disorbditablsnebs  ov 
Christian  inefficienct,  leading  to  questionings  and  discussions  that  do  uotm 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  MARK.  85] 

BABM    THAN     GOOD.      IV.     ThB    INBrPICIENOY    OF    CHRISTIANS   THEIR  OWN   FAULT.      In 

Christ  they  may  be  complete  (Col.  ii.  10).  V.  The  duty  of  ever  livino  near  t<> 
Christ,  rblyino  on  Him  always  and  everywhere.  {Aiwn.)  The  secret  of  power  :— 
Christ's  reply  taught  the  disciples  that — 1.  Miracles  needed  force  to  work  them.  2. 
Soul  forces  are  the  highest  class  of  forces,  and  faith  force  is  the  highest  of  all  soul 
forces.  3.  Faith  force  needs  cherishing  (1)  by  consecration  watchfully  kept  up,  i.e., 
fasting ;  (2)  by  communion  vnth  God  carefully  maintained,  i.e. ,  prayer.  Indulgence 
of  the  body  enfeebles  the  soul ;  living  apart  from  God  is  living  apart  from  omni- 
potence. 4.  Earnest  love  is  the  secret  of  all  miracles.  Had  they  made  this 
sorrow  their  own — fasted  as  for  their  own  trouble,  prayed  as  for  their  own  mercy — 
their  love  would  have  ♦♦believed  all  things,"  and  been  triumphant  in  its  faith.  {E. 
Glover.)  The  afflicted  child : — This  miracle  stands  inseparably  connected  with  the 
transfiguration.  I.  The  Christian  is  the  repkesentativb  of  Christ.  The 
father  came  to  consult  Christ,  but  in  His  absence  appealed  to  His  disciples.  It 
should  have  been  a  safe  appeal.  So,  everywhere  and  always,  the  Christian 
represents  Christ.  He  holds  in  his  hands  the  great  trust  of  Christianity.  Coming 
to  him  should  be  equivalent  in  the  healing,  saving  result  to  coming  to  Christ.  II. 
The  failure  of  the  disciple  is  charged  as  the  failure  of  Christlinitt. 
"We  do  not  claim  the  continuance  of  the  power  of  miraculous  healing,  but  we  do 
claim  the  presence  of  Divine  power  in  the  Church.  The  Christian  is  entrusted 
with  it.  He  should  be  always  in  possession  of  it.  Let  oar  ideas  be  clear, 
our  claims  carefully  scriptural,  but  let  it  concern  us  when  Christianity  is 
without  manifested  power.  Men  wiU  be  turned  astray  and  led  to  question  and 
despise  religion.  lU.  Christ  always  manifests  Himself  to  protect  His  Church 
AND  to  assert  His  powbb.  It  may  be  after  delay.  But  He  comes.  He  cannot 
fail.  IV.  If  one  fails  with  a  disciple,  let  him  go  directly  to  Jesus.  The 
petitioner  who  fails  with  the  captain,  goes  to  the  colonel.  If  he  fails  again,  an 
earnest  petitioner  will  not  stop  until  he  has  appealed,  if  necessary,  at  headquarters, 
to  the  commander-in-chief.  V.  Parents  should  unow  the  condition  of  their 
children.  Make  the  moral  nature  of  your  child  as  careful  a  study  as  his  physical 
nature.  Do  not  assume  too  readily  that,  because  young,  he  is  innocent,  and  good, 
and  harmless.  VI.  The  difficulty  in  the  way  of  healing  is  not  want  of  power 
IN  God,  but  want  of  faith  in  man.  Faith  all  must  have  who  would  receive 
benefits  from  Christ.  The  blessing  given  is  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  faith. 
No  faith,  no  blessing ;  little  faith,  partial  blessing ;  great  faith,  great  blessing. 
(G.  R.  Ltavitt.)  The  disciples  nonplussed: — Like  some  mighty  general  who,  having 
been  absent  from  the  field  of  battle,  finds  that  his  lieutenants  have  rashly  engaged 
in  action  and  have  been  defeated,  the  left  wing  is  broken,  the  right  has  fled,  and  the 
centre  begins  to  fail ;  he  lifts  his  standard  in  the  midst  of  his  troops,  and  bids 
them  rally  around  him ;  they  gather  ;  they  dash  upon  the  ail-but  triumphant  foe- 
men,  and  soon  they  turn  the  balance  of  victory,  and  make  the  late  victors  turn 
their  ignominious  backs  to  the  flight.  Brethren,  here  is  a  lesson  for  us.  What 
we  want  for  conquest  is  the  shout  of  a  King  in  the  midst  of  us.  The  presence  of 
Christ  is  victory  to  His  Church  :  the  absence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  entails  disgraceful 
defeat.  O  armies  of  the  living  God,  count  not  on  your  numbers,  rely  not  on  your 
strength;  reckon  not  upon  the  ability  of  your  ministers;  vaunt  not  in  human 
might ;  nor  on  the  other  hand  be  discouraged  because  ye  are  feeble ;  if  He  be  with 
you,  more  are  they  that  are  for  you  than  all  they  that  are  against  you.  If  Christ 
be  in  your  midst,  there  are  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  you. 
{G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  afflicted  son : — I.  The  man's  affliction.  1.  It  was  not 
personal :  not  in  himself,  but  through  his  child.  2.  It  was  the  consequence  of 
affection.  Our  love  is  the  source  of  joy  ;  it  is  also  the  cause  of  pain.  Our  relation- 
ships are  a  blessing ;  they  often  become  a  curse.  3.  It  was  very  terrible.  A  son 
not  only  imbecile,  but  who  could  do  nothing  for  his  own  support.  II.  Thb  man's 
ADVANTAGE.  Affliction  is  not  an  unmixed  evil.  On  the  contrary,  God  often  makes 
it  a  means  of  the  greatest  blessings.  In  this  particular  case  it  led  to  two  great 
mercies.  (1)  It  led  to  the  lad  himself  being  brought  to  Christ,  and  (2)  it  led  to  the 
father  going  as  well.  How  often  are  parents  led  to  Christ  through  the  suflerings 
and  death  of  their  children.  III.  The  man's  mistake.  Instead  of  going  to  the 
Master  at  once,  he  went  to  the  servants.  They  tried  to  afford  relief,  but  they  tried 
in  vain.  This  course  is  very  natural  to  mankind.  1.  Our  pride  induces  it. 
Kaaman  was  too  proud  to  simply  obey  the  Divine  command ;  he  wanted  the 
prophet  to  come  and  touch  him  with  adulation  and  respect.  2.  Our  carnality 
causes  it.     We  are  of  the  earth  earthy.    We  do  not  appreb.end  spiritual  things,  and 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  a. 

will  have  nothing  of  them.  8.  Our  faithlessness  prodnoes  it.  We  don't  beUeve  in 
the  power  of  an  unseen  God,  It  is  a  painful  tendency  of  the  human  mind  to  make 
gods  of  men,  a  tendency  which  in  ancient  times  developed  into  idolatry.  lY.  His 
APPLICATION.  Finding  no  other  help,  the  man  was  obliged  to  go  at  last  to 
Christ.  We  may  see  here,  however — 1.  His  persistency.  Although  not  relieved 
by  the  disciples,  he  was  not  deterred  by  their  failure;  and  probably  the 
disciples,  when  they  failed,  did  as  they  ought  to  do — pointed  him  to  their 
Master.  2.  His  small  amount  of  faith.  Apparently  he  was  so  disheartened 
that  he  did  not  know  what  to  do.  Faith  differs  in  degree.  How  strong 
was  that  of  the  centurion — ••  Speak  but  the  word,  and  my  servant  shall  be 
healed."  3.  The  training  of  his  understanding.  Christ  first  tebuked  him — "  O 
faithless  generation,"  &c. — and  then  encouraged  him — "  All  things  are  possible  to 
him  that  believeth."  V.  His  developing  faith.  1.  He  acknowledges  his  convic- 
tion. He  began  to  realize  the  truth  of  what  the  Master  said.  The  germs  of  belief 
had  existed  before ;  otherwise  he  would  not  have  approached  at  all.  2.  He  con- 
fesses his  imperfection — "  Help  my  unbelief."  There  are  degrees  in  everything 
— in  growth,  health,  wealth.  6.  He  regrets  his  weakness — "He  said,  with  tears." 
4.  He  applied  for  succour.  We  may  bring  all  our  weakness  to  the  Saviour.  VL 
His  success.  Jesus  saved  the  son.  There  is  help  for  the  weakest.  (B.  L.) 
Sinful  men  may  be  looked  upon  as  possessed  of  the  devil: — In  a  hundred  ways  he 
tears  them,  and  throws  them  down;  he  stops  their  intelligent  speech,  and  sen  is 
them  wallowing  and  foaming  in  sin.  None  but  Jesus  can  do  helpless  sinners 
good.  Even  disciples  fail.  No  priest  can  ofifer  suflScient  sacrifice ;  no  man  can 
redeem  his  brother.  "  Bring  him  unto  Me  I "  Faith  is  in  every  case  of  instru- 
mental usefulness  positively  indispensable.  There  are  times  when  Christ  Himself 
will  do  no  mighty  works  because  of  unbelief.  **  0  faithless  generation  I  "  How 
quickly  this  explains  the  coldness  and  backwardness  of  the  churches.  When  faith 
is  feeble,  what  faith  there  is  may  well  be  employed  in  securing  more  faith.  "  Help 
mine  unbelief."  Pray  to  the  '♦  Lord,"  even  if  the  word  be  not  in  this  verse;  and 
pray  "  with  tears  "  too  1  (C7.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  dumb  ma.n  possessed  with  a 
devil : — I.  The  case  of  this  man.  1.  This  does  not  appear  to  be  an  ordinary  case 
of  dumbness.  2.  It  was  not  due  to  mental  ecstasy,  such  as  occasionally  produced 
a  temporary  suspension  of  speech.  The  father  of  Baptist.  3.  The  man  is 
described  in  simple  and  instructive  language  as  having  "a  dumb  spirit."  (1) 
There  is  the  dumbness  of  a  careless  heart.  (2)  The  dumbness  of  formalism. 
(3)  The  dumbness  of  shame  and  disappointment.  (4)  The  dumbness  of  despair. 
II.  The  intervention  of  the  man's  friends.  III.  Thb  poweb  or  Jbsos.  1. 
absolute  supremacy.  2.  The  manner  of  the  exercise.  3.  The  mystery  of  its 
power.  (L.  H.  Wiseman,  M.A.)  L  The  application  itself.  1.  It  was  made 
by  an  afflicted  parent.  The  child  mentally  afflicted  in  mind  and  hody — "  Oft- 
times  the  evil  spirit."  Every  sinner  is  so  far  under  the  power  of  the  devil.  2.  It 
was  made  by  a  party  that  deeply  felt  the  circumstances  in  which  he  himself  and 
his  suffering  chUd  were  placed  3.  That  the  person  who  made  it  stood  ready  to 
do  whatever  our  Lord  should  direct.  For  this  readiness  to  obey  a  truly  humble  heart 
prepares  us,  softened  by  grace.  4.  He  despaired  of  help  from  any  other  quarter. 
He  was  on  the  verge  of  despair  previous  to  our  Saviour's  administering  help.  Our 
minds  must  be  brought  off  from  every  other  dependence.  6.  The  party  before  us 
had  a  Httle  faith,  and  was  pleading  for  more.  II.  Thb  becbption  which  this 
APPLICATION  TO  OUR  Savioub  MET  WITH.  1.  Jcsus  administers  reproof  to  His 
disciples  and  to  all  around  Him.  Christ  often  has  to  reprove  us ;  we  deserve  it.  2. 
Jesus  directs  the  sufferer  to  be  brought  to  Him.  3.  Jesus  proceeds  to  correct  the 
views,  and  inform  the  mind  of  the  suppliant.  Light  is  given  with  grace.  4.  Jesus 
gives  the  party  before  us  the  warrant  or  authority  for  that  faith  which  He  called 
him  to  exercise.  5.  He  strengthens  the  confidence  of  the  party,  whom  He  thus 
authorizes  to  draw  near  to  Him  for  the  blessing  requested.  6.  The  earnestness 
with  which  we  should  draw  near  to  the  Great  Physician  for  spiritual  help.  7.  In 
some  cases  of  healing  special  means  «re  to  be  employed — **  Prayer  and  fasting." 
{Joseph  Taylor.) 

Ver.  19.  OtaltbleaBeen&ta.tlQn.— CkrisVs  lament  over faithlessneu:—!.  The  first 
thing  that  seems  to  be  in  these  words  is  not  anger,  indeed,  but  a  very  distinct  and  very 
pathetic  expression  of  Christ's  infinitb  pain,  becausb  of  man's  faithlbssnbss.  The 
element  of  personal  sorrow  is  most  obvious  here.  It  is  not  only  that  He  is  sad  for  their 
sakes,  that  they  are  so  onreoeptive,  bat  He  feels  for  Himself,  just  as  we  do  in  oat 


IS*]  ST.  MARK.  855 


hmnble  measure,  the  chUling  effect  of  an  atmosphere  where  there  is  no  sympathy. 
There  never  was  such  a  lonely  soul  on  this  earth  as  His,  just  because  there  never  was 
another  go  pure  and  loving.    The  plain  felt  soul-chilling  after  the  blessed  com- 
munion of  the  mountain.     For  once  the  pain  He  felt  broke  the  bounds  of  restraint, 
and  shaped  for  itself  this  pathetic  utterance,  "  How  long  shall  I  be  with  you  ?  "    I  do 
oot  know  that  there  is  one  in  which  the  title  of  "  The  man  of  sorrows  "  is  to  all 
deeper  thinking  more  pathetically  vindicated  than  in  this— the  solitude  of  the 
imcomprehended  and  the  unaccepted  Christ— His  pain  at  His  disciples'  faithlessness. 
And  then  do  not  let  us  forget  that  in  this  short  sharp  cry  of  anguish— for  it  is  that— 
there  may  be  detected  by  the  listening  ear  not  only  the  tone  of  personal  hurt,  but 
the  tone  of  disappointed  and  thwarted  love.    Because  of  their  unbelief  He  knew 
that  they  could  not  receive  what  He  desired  to  give  them.     We  find  Him  more  than 
once  in  His  life  hemmed  in,  hindered  of  His  purpose— simply  because  there  was 
nobody  with  a  heart  open  to  receive  the  rich  treasure  He  was  ready  to  pour  out. 
Here  I  would  remark,  too,  before  I  go  to  another  point,  that  these  two  elements-l 
that  of  personal  sorrow  and  that  of  disappointed  love  and  baulked  purposes— con- 
tinue still,  and  are  represented  as  in  some  measure  felt  by  Him  now.    It  was  to 
disciples  that  He  said,  •«  O  faithless  generation  1  "    He  did  not  mean  to  charge 
them  with  the  entire  absence  of  all  confidence,  but  He  did  mean  to  declare  that 
their  poor,  feeble  faith,  such  as  it  was,  was  not  worth  naming  in  comparison  with 
the  abounding  mass  of  their  unbelief.     There  was  one  light  spark  in  them,  and 
there  was  also  a  great  heap  of  green  wood  that  had  not  caught  the  flame,  and  only 
smoked  instead  of  blazing.    And  so  He  said  to  them,  *♦  O  faithless  generation  1 " 
Do  not  we  know  that  the  purer  our  love,  and  the  more  it  has  purified  us,  the  more 
sensitive  it  becomes,  even  while  the  less  suspicious  it  becomes?    Is  not  the  purest, 
most  unselfish,  highest  love,  that  in  which  the  least  failure  in  response  is  felt  most 
painfully  t    Though  there  be  no  anger,  and  no  change  in  the  love,  still  there  is  a 
pang  where  there  is  an  inadequate  perception,  or  an  unworthy  reception,  of  it. 
And  Scripture  seems  to  countenance  the  belief  that  Divine  Love,  too,  may  know 
something,  in  some  mysterious  fashion,  like  that  feeling,  when  it  warns  us,  ♦•  Grieve 
not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption." 
So  we  may  venture  to  say.  Grieve  not  the  Christ  of  God,  who  redeems  us ;  and 
remember  that  we  grieve  Him  most  when  we  will  not  let  Hun  pour  His  love  upon 
ns,  but  turn  a  sullen,  unresponsive  unbelief  towards  His  pleading  grace,  as  some 
glacier  shuts  out  the  sunshine  from  the  mountain-side  with  its  thick-ribbed  ice. 
n.  Another  thought,  which  seems  to  me  to  be  expressed  in  this  wonderful  exclama- 
tion of  our  Lord's,  is— that  theib  faithlessness  bound  Chbist  to  earth,  and  kept 
Him  here.    As  there  is  not  anger,  but  only  pain,  so  there  is  also,  I  think,  not 
exactly  impatience,  but  a  desire  to  depart,  coupled  with  the  feeling  that  He  cannot 
leave  them  till  they  have  grown  stronger  in  faith.    And  that  feeling  is  increased  by 
the  experience  of  their  utter  helplessness  and  shameful  discomfiture  during  His 
brief  absence.    That  had  shown  that  they  were  not  fit  to  be  trusted  alone.    He  had , 
been  away  for  a  day  up  in  the  mountain  there,  and  though  they  did  not  build  an 
altar  to  any  golden  calf,  like  their  ancestors,  when  their  leader  was  absent,  still 
when  He  comes  back  He  finds  things  all  gone  wrong  because  of  the  few  hours  of 
His  absence.     They  were  not  ready  for  Him  to  leave  them  ;  the  full-grown  tree  was 
not  strong  enough  for  the  props  to  be  removed.    Again,  here  we  get  a  glimpse  into 
the  depth  of  Christ's  patient  forbearance.    We  might  read  these  other  words  of 
our  text,  "  How  long  shall  I  suffer  you  ?  "  with  such  an  intonation  as  to  make  them 
almost  a  threat  that  the  limits  of  forbearance  would  soon  be  reached,  and  that  He 
was  not  going  to  suffer  them  much  longer.     But  I  fail  to  catch  the  tone  of  indigna- 
tion here.    It  sounds  rather  like  a  pledge  that  as  long  as  they  need  forbearance  they 
will  get  it ;  but  at  tne  same  time,  a  question  of  "  How  long  that  is  to  be  ?  "     It 
impUes  the  inexhaustible  riches  and  resources  of  His  patient  mercy.     There  is 
rebuke  in  His  question,  but  how  tender  a  rebuke  it  is  1    He  rebukes  without  anger. 
Plainly  He  names  the  fault.    He  shows  distinctly  His  sorrow,  and  does  not  hide 
the  strain  on  His  forbearance.    That  is  His  way  of  cure  for  His  servants'  faithless- 
ness.   It  was  His  way  on  earth.     It  is  His  way  in  heaven.     To  us,  too,  comes  the 
loving  rebuke  of  this  question,  •*  How  long  shall  I  suffer  you  7  '*    Thank  God  that 
car  answer  may  be  cast  into  the  words  of  His  own  promise  :  "  I  say  not  unto  thee, 
antil  seven  times ;  but  until  seventy  times  seven."    Bear  with  me  till  thou  hast 
perfected  me ;  and  then  bear  me  to  Thyself,  that  I  may  be  with  Thee  for  ever,  and 
grieve  Thy  love  no  more.    So  may  it  be,  for  with  Him  is  plenteous  redemption,  and 
His  forbearing  "  mercy  endureth  for  ever."    (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼in. 

Ver.  23.  If  thou  canst  believe,  all  tilings  are  possible  to  Mm  that  belleveth. — 

Omnipotence  of  faith : — I.  The  nature  of  faith.     "  Taking  God  at  His  Word,"  is 
perhaps  one  of  the  best  definitions  ever  given.     The  truths  connected  with  salva- 
tion, which  require  to  be  cordially  believed,  may  be  stated  in  the  following  manner. 
1.  That  all  have  sinned.     2.  I  am  a  guilty  sinner,  and  exposed  to  the  just  punish- 
ment of  sin.    3.  That  Jesus  having  died  for  all,  is  the  Saviour  of  all  that  truly 
believe  on  Him.    II.  The  provisions  for  faith.     You  are  authorized  to  believe. 
God  has  made  rich  provision  that  you  might  believe.    That  you  cannot  believe  in 
Christ  without  being  saved  is  evident — 1.  From  the  character  of  God.     2.  From 
the  Word  of  God.    3.  From  the  assurance  God  has  given  to  attest  His  word.    4. 
From  the  promises  of  God.     5.  From  the  covenant  of  God  (Heb.  vi.  13,  18).     6. 
From  the  experience  of  His  people  in  all  ages.      III.    The  exercise  of  faith. 
Includes — 1.  Attention  to  the  great  objects  of  faith.     2.  Knowledge  (Matt.  xiii.  16  ; 
Acts  xxvii.  27).     3.  Eeason.     4  Memory  (1  Cor.  xv.  1,  4).     5.  The  affections.     6. 
The  will — the  determined  exercise  of  the  affections,  aided  by  the  imderstanding. 
What  shall  hinder  the  exercise  of  faith?    Answer  objections.     IV.  The  mighty 
POWER  of  faith.     Examples — Abraham,  three  Hebrew  children,  Daniel,  the  man 
with  the  withered  hand,  the  dying  thief,  &c.     1.    Let  every  impenitent  sinner 
believe  that  he  is  on  the  very  brink  of  ruin,  &c.     2.  Let  every  penitent  believe  the 
record  God  has  given  of  His  Son,  and  apply  it  to  himself.    3.  Let  every  child  of  God 
in  distress,  &c.,  "  trust,  not  be  afraid."     4.  Let  the  Christian  who  is  seeking  full 
salvation,  believe,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  cleanseth  from  all  sin." 
Be  it  unto  thee  according  to  thy  faith.     Believe  now.     Continue  to  believe.     {A. 
Weston.)        I.  All  real  goodness  is  to  be  attained  by  the  exercise  op  faith  in 
Christ.    This  implies  the  absence  of  (1)  distrust ;  (2)  presumption ;  (3)  indiffer- 
ence.    II.  Faith  must  always  be  limited  by  the  promises  of  God.     IH.  Faith 
must  have  reference  to  the  particular  blessing  sought.     We  must  therefore  be 
well  versed  in  (1)  the  particular  promises  God  has  given,  and  in  (2)  the  method  in 
which  God  bestows  them.     {B.  Noel.)        All  things  possible  to  faith: — I.  You  will 
OBSERVE  THE  EXPRESSION,  "  If  thou  canst  bclievo  I  " — not,  if  thou  dost  believe; — "  If 
thou  canst  believe."     Cannot,  then,  everyone  believe?    Is  or  is  not  a  man  respon- 
sible for  the  character  of  his  faith,  and  its  degree?     I  want  to  examine  that  a  little 
carefully.     I  lay  down  two  broad  first  principles.     Every  man — at  least,  every 
man  who  has  not,  by  his  own  wilfulness,  destroyed  it — every  man  who  has  not 
made  himself  lower  than  a  man,  and  so  lost  the  position  of  our  common  humanity 
— every  man  has  some  faith.     And  secondly,  every  man  who  uses  the  faith  he  has, 
will  increase  its  power,  and  acquire  more.    If  you  deny  either  of  those  two  premises, 
I  do  not  see  how  a  man  can  be  brought  in  accountable  for  his  faith.    But  admit 
them,  and  observe  what  follows.     Can  every  one,  at  every  moment,  believe  every 
thing  which  he  ought  to  believe  ?    I  think  not ;  I  think  not  at  any  moment.    But 
then,  had  that  man  lived  altogether  as  he  ought  to  have  lived,  then  he  would,  at 
that  moment,  have  been  able  to  believe  a  great  deal  more  than  he  can  believe  now. 
The  faith  would  have  been  in  a  stronger  and  clearer  exercise.    Probably,  he  would 
have  been  able  to  believe  everything  which  at  that  particular  time  he  was  called 
upon  to  believe.    And  now,  if  that  man  will  be  true  to  his  convictions,  his  faith 
will  be  sure  to  rise  up  to  the  level  of  believing  what  at  that  time  he  is  unable  to 
believe.    For  faith  is  progressive :  faith  must  go  to  school,  as  patience  must,  or 
holiness  must.  Our  Lord's  words  imply  attainment — the  difficulty  of  the  attainment 
— and  they  sympathize  with  the  dilficulty  of  the  attainment.     But  the  power  of 
believing  is  a  moral  thing,  which  a  man  holds  in  his  own  hands.    We  all  know 
indeed,  that  there  cannot  be  a  believing  thought,  nor  one  true  conception,  or  any 
spiritual  thing,  without  the  inworking  of  the  Holy  Ghost.      But  then,  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  always  inworking.    All  that  is  contingent  is  our  reception  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.     II.  The  outside  boundary-link  of  the  province  of  faith,  pboperly  so 
CALLED,  IB  PROMISES.  Faith  is  laying  hold  :  I  do  not  say  of  what  God  is,  for  God  may 
be  and  is  much  which  we  cannot  understand  enough  even  to  believe — but  it  is 
laying  hold  of    what  God  has  covenanted  Himself  to  us — what  God  is  to  His 
people.    The  promises  are  what  God  is  to  His  Church — therefore  faith  confines 
itself  to  promises.     III.  I  must  not,  and  I  need  not,  stop  now,  to  show  that  within 

THAT  CIRCUMFEBENCS,  THE   RANGE  OF  God'S  UNDERTAKINGS  FOB  UB,  18   LEFT   ENOUGH, 

BECAUSE  IT  18  LKFT  STILL  iNFiNiTB.  But  how  to  get  this  faith  ?  What  is  the  road 
to  it  r  First,  be  sure  that  you  are  living  a  good,  moral  life.  Secondly,  do  God'a 
will,  whatever,  in  yoar  conscience,  you  feel  God's  will  is.  Thirdly,  cherish  oonvie- 
fcions,  and  obey  the  **  still  small  voices."    Fourth,  act  out  the  faith  yon  haye,  an4 


CHAP.  IX.]  ST.  MARK.  355 

let  it  be  a  constant  prayer,  "  More  faith,  Lord ;  more  faith."  Fifth,  go  np  and 
down  among  the  promises,  and  be  conversant  with  the  character  and  the  attributes 
of  God.  Sixth,  wrestle  with  some  one  promise  in  spirit  every  day,  till  you  get  it. 
Seventh,  take  large,  loving  views  of  Jesus,  make  experiments  of  His  love, — and 
always  sit  and  wait,  with  an  open  heart,  to  take  in  aU  that  He  most  assuredly  waits 
to  give.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Faith  omnipotent: — I.  Some  of  the  achievements  of 
VAiTH.  1.  We  will  consider  faith  in  its  relationship  to  guilt.  2.  Let  us  also 
observe  faith  in  the  midst  of  those  constant  attacks  of  which  the  heir  of  heaven 
is  the  subject.  3.  The  obtaining  of  eminence  in  grace.  4.  The  power  of  faith 
in  the-  service  of  God.  II.  Where  lies,  then,  the  secret  strength  of  faith  ? 
It  lies  in  the  food  it  feeds  on ;  for  faith  studies  what  the  promise  is — an  emanation 
of  Divine  grace,  an  overflowing  of  the  great  heart  of  God,  Faith  thinketh  who  gave 
this  promise.  She  remembereth  why  the  promise  was  given.  She  also  considers  the 
amazing  work  of  Christ.  She  then  looks  back  upon  the  past.  She  remembers  that 
God  never  has  failed  her.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon. )  The  power  of  faith : — Faith  is  not  only 
a  grace  of  itself,  but  is  steward  and  purveyor  of  all  other  graces,  and  its  office  is  to  make 
provision  for  them,  while  they  are  working ;  and  therefore  as  a  man's  faith  grows 
either  stronger  or  weaker,  so  his  work  goes  on  more  or  less  vigorously.  There  is  no 
grace,  nor  supply,  nor  mercy,  laid  up  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  it  is  all  in  the  hands 
of  a  believer's  faith ;  and  he  may  take  from  thence  whatsoever  he  needs,  to  supply 
the  present  wants  and  necessities  of  his  soul.  {Bishop  Hopkins.)  The  sphere  of 
/aith^s  power  : — The  expression  does  not  mean,  in  this  connection,  "  It  is  possible 
for  the  believer  to  do  all  things,"  but  "  It  is  possible  for  the  believer  to  get  all 
things."  Omnipotence  is,  in  a  sense,  at  his  disposal.  But  the  univereality  of 
things  contemplated  by  our  Lord  was  not,  as  the  nature  of  the  case  makes  evident, 
the  most  absolute  conceivable.  We  must  descend  in  thought  to  the  limited  univer- 
sality of  things  that  would  be  of  benefit  to  the  believer.  We  must,  indeed,  descend 
Btill  farther.  We  must  consider  the  benefit  of  the  believer  not  absolutely,  or 
unconditionally,  but  relatively  to  his  circumstances,  thus  relatively  to  the  circum- 
stances of  the  other  beings  with  whom  he  is  connected.  With  these  limitations — 
inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  case — "  all  things  "  are  possible  for  him  that 
believeth.  But  why  only  for  him  that  believeth?  Because  faith  in  the  fact  of 
Christ's  Divine  power  or  authority,  or,  at  all  events,  in  the  propitiousness  which  is 
involved  in  that  fact,  is,  in  the  nature  of  things,  absolutely  necessary  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  highest  spiritual  blessings.  By  making  it  a  pre-requisite  for  the 
obtaining  of  material  blessings,  Christ  made  His  visible  life  a  parable  of  high 
invisible  realities,  and  flashed  light  on  the  inner  by  the  reflective  power  of  the 
cater.    It  was  the  perfection  of  symbolism.     {J,  Morisan^  D.D,) 

Ver.  24.  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  Thou  my  xaiXteliet— Faith  unto  salvation : — This 
incident  will  show  as  what  believing  presupposes  and  consists  in.  I.  The  text 
shows  A  MAN  that  IS  IN  EARNEST.  He  cricd  out  with  tears.  They  were  tears  that 
told  how  his  heart  was  moved.  II.  We  look  at  this  man,  and  we  find  that  there 
is  more  than  a  general  earnestness  about  him.  We  see  the  tokens  of  a  special  and 
active  desire  to  have  the  blessings  which  faith  was  to  secure  for  him.  So  he  who 
is  awakened  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  1.  He  seeks  forgiveness.  Sin  is  not 
a  light  thing  in  his  eyes.  2.  He  longs  for  healing  of  the  disease  of  his  soul.  3.  To 
say  all  in  a  word,  his  desire  is  set  upon  salvation.  IIL  The  operation  of  this 
desire.  It  is  an  active  desire.  1.  It  makes  a  man  pray  and  cry  to  God.  It  is  a  time 
of  felt  need.  2.  It  may  cast  into  an  agony,  which  may  evince  itself  in  tears. 
There  is  a  melting  power  in  strong  desires  that  agitate  the  soul.  3.  The  desire  for 
salvation  will  cause  you  to  seek  for  faith.  We  are  justified  by  faith ;  no  holiness 
without  it.  4.  There  will  be  an  effort  to  believe.  It  is  not  God  that  believes ;  we 
have  to  believe.  He  would  not  command  you  to  believe,  if  it  were  idle  for  you  to 
try.  IV.  He  feels  his  need  of  grace  for  the  exercise  of  faith — '*  Help  mine 
unbelief."  My  own  resources  are  not  sufficient  for  it.  A  true  sense  of  the  need  of 
grace  to  believe  is  a  great  step  towards  the  act  of  believing.  V.  The  man  betakes 
himself  to  Christ.  I  need  grace  and  I  look  to  Thee  for  it.  So  is  it  with  all  those 
that  are  about  to  believe.  ••  Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself,  but  in  Me  is  thy  help." 
The  fulness  of  Christ  is  unlimited,  VL  The  man  has  a  distinct  conception  of 
THE  GRAND  OBSTACLE  WHICH  GRACE  MUST  REMOVE — "  Unbelief."  Why  is  it  that 
unbelief  has  so  great  an  ascendancy  f  Because  it  possesses  the  heart.  YII.  Ws 
FIND  THAT  THE  MAN  DOES  BELIEVE — '* Lord,  I  belie ve."  ** I  must  believe"  is  the 
first  step.     The  next,  '•  I  can  beHeve."     The  third,  "  I  will  believe."    The  last 


866  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha». 


Btep,  "I  do  believe."    {Andrew  Gray,)        Worki  of  faith  .'—V^e  have  often  heard 
of  George  Miiller,  of  BristoL    There  stands,  in  the  form  of  those  magnificent 
orphan  houses,  full  of  orphans,  supported  without  committees,  without  secretaries, 
supported  only  by  that  man's  prayer  and  faith,  there  stands  in  solid  brick  and 
mortar,  a  testimony  to  the  fact  that  God  hears  prayer.    But,  do  you  know  that  Mr. 
Miiller's  case  is  but  one  among  many.    Remember  the  work  of  Francke  at  Halle. 
Look  at  the  Rough  House  just  out  of  Hamburg,  where  Dr.  Wicbem,  commencing 
with  a  few  reprobate  boys  of  Hamburg,  only  waiting   upon    God's  help    and 
goodness,  has  now  a  whole  village  full  of  boys  and  girls,  reclaimed  and  saved,  and 
is  sending  out  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  brethren  to  occupy  posts  of  useful- 
ness in  every  land.     Remember  the  brother  Gossner,  of  Berlin,  and  how  mightily 
God  has  helped  him  to  send  out  not  less  than  two  hundred  missionaries  throughout 
the  length  and  the  breadth  of  the  earth,  preaching  Christ,  while  he  has  for  their 
support  nothing  but  the  bare  promise  of  God,  and  the  faith  which  has  learned  to 
reach  the  hand  of  God,  and  take  from  it  all  it  needs.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)    ^    Dealing 
directly  with  God : — Pastor  Harms,  in  Hermannsburg,  desired  to  send  missionaries 
to  the  Gallas  tribe  in  Africa,  and  in  his  life  he  is  reported  to  have  said :  Then  I 
knocked  diligently  on  the  dear  Lord  in  prayer ;  and  since  the  praying  man  dare 
not  sit  with  his  bands  in  his  lap,  I  sought  among  the  shipping  agents,  but  came  to 
no  speed ;  and  I  turned  to  Bishop  Gobat  in  Jerusalem,  but  had  no  answer ;  and  then 
I  wrote  to  the  Missionary  Krapf,  in  Mornbaz,  but  the  letter  was  lost.      Then  one 
of  the  sailors  who  remained  said,  "  Why  not  build  a  ship,  and  you  can  send  out  M 
many  and  as  often  as  you  will."     The  proposal  was  good ;  but,  the  money  1    That 
was  a  time  of  great  conflict,  and  I  wTestled  with  God.     For  no  one  encouraged  me, 
btit  the  reverse ;  and  even  the  truest  friends  and  brethren  hinted  that  I  was  not 
quite  in  my  senses.    When  Duke  George  of  Saxony  lay  on  his  death-bed,  and 
was  yet  in  doubt  to  whom  he  should  flee  with  his  soul,  whether  to  the  Lord  Christ 
and  His  dear  merits,  or  to  the  pope  and  his  good  works,  there  spoke  a  trusty 
courtier  to  him  :  "  Your  grace,  straight  forward  makes  the  best  runner."  That  word 
has  lain  fast  in  my  soul.     I  had  knocked  at  men's  doors  and  found  them  shut ; 
and  yet  the  plan  was  manifestly  good,  and  for  the  glory  of  God.    What  was  to  be 
done?        *»  Straight  forward  makes  the  best  nmner."    I  prayed  fervently  to  the 
Lord,  laid  the  matter  in  His  hand,  and  as  I  rose  up  at  mi^ight  from  my  knees,  I 
said,  with  a  voice  that  almost  startled  me  in  the  quiet  room,  **  forward  now  in  God's 
name  1 "    From  that  moment  there  never  came  a  thought  of  doubt  into  my  mind  I 
Weak  faith  clinging  to  a  mighty  object:— -There  was  once  a  good  woman  who  was 
well  known  among  her  circle  for  her  simple  faith,  and  her  great  calmness  in  the 
midst  of  many  trials.      Another  woman,  living  at  a  distance,  hearing  of  her, 
said,    "I  must  go  and  see  that    woman,  and  learn  the    secret   of    her   holy, 
happy  life."   She  went ;  and  accosting  the  woman,  said,  ••  Are  you  the  woman 
with  the  great  faith  ? "      •'  No,"  replied  she,   "  I  am  not  the  woman  with  the 
great  faith  ;  but  I  am  the  woman  with  a  little  faith  in  the  great  God."     (Milman,) 
Lord,  I  believe ;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief: — I.  Faith  may  be  weak  and  partial  in  a 
REAL  BELiBVER.    Howcvcr  much  some  persons  may  talk  of  our  religious  faith  being 
the  result  of  inquiry  and  evidence,  and  depending  solely  on  the  power  of  the  intellect, 
or  on  its  feebleness,  we  know  well  that  passion  and  prejudice,  not  only  in  religious 
matters,  but  in  all  other  matters  where  our  interests  or  our  passions  are  involved, 
have  a  powerful  influence  on  the  formation  of  our  opinions ;  and  wherever  prejudice 
or  excited  passion  exists,  a  much  stronger  degree  of  evidence  is  required  to  fix  our 
belief  of  a  thing,  than  were  our  minds  perfectly  calm.     So  in  religion.    II.  To 
BECOME  STEONO  IN  FAITH,  WE  MUST  PERSEVERE  IN  PRAYER.    Increase  of  faith  does  not 
come  by  argument  or  evidence,  but  by  direct  influence  on  the  heart,  sweeping 
away  prejudice  and  calming  the  impetuous  passions.    He  who  gave  can  alone 
increase  our  faith.    Let  us  ask  of  Him  who  is  so  willing  to  bestow.     (B.  Noel.) 
The  balance  and  the  preponderance : — L  It  was  so  with  the  suppliant  of  this  text. 
There  was  in  him  this  co-existence  op  faith  and  credulity.     It  was  not  so  much 
a  suspended  or  a  divided  feeling,  as  of  one  who  was  postponing  the  great  decision, 
or  in  whom  some  third  thing,  neither  belief  nor  disbehef ,  was  shaping  itself ;  as 
we  hear  now  of  persons  who  can  accept  this  and  that  in  Jesus  Christ,  but  who  also 
refuse  this  and  that,  so  that  they  come  to  have  a  religion  of  their  own,  of  which  Ht 
is  one  ingredient,  but  not  the  one  or  principal  one.     This  man's  state  was  not  one 
of  mixture  or  compromise ;  it  was  the  conflict  of  two  definite  antagonists — faith  and 
unbelief — competing  within.    He  was  not  a  half- believer.    He  was  a  believer  and 
an  unbeliever,  in  one  mind.    The  ••  father"  of  this  story  saw  before  him  a  Person 


ORAF.  n.]  ST.  MARK.  85) 

who  was  evidently  man,  and  yet  to  whom  he  was  applying  for  the  exercise  of  Deity. 
Brethren,  il  we  can  succeed  in  making  the  condition  clear,  there  is  a  great  lesson 
and  moral  in  it.  Many  men  in  this  age,  like  the  well-known  Indian  teacher, 
are  framing  for  themselves,  without  for  a  moment  intending  to  be  anything 
bnt  Christians  at  last,  a  Christianity  with  the  supernatural  left  out  of  it  — 
miracle,  prophecy,  incarnation,  resurrection,  the  God-man  Himself,  ehminated; 
and  it  is  much  to  be  feared  that  this  kind  of  compromise  is  likely  to  be  the  Chris- 
tianity of  the  educated  Englishman  in  so  much  of  the  twentieth  century  as  the 
world  may  be  spared  to  live  through.  It  will  be  a  Christianity  very  rational,  very 
intelligent,  certainly  very  intelligible.  But  it  will  have  parted  with  much  that  has 
made  our  Christianity  a  discipline;  it  will  have  got  rid  of  that  combination  of 
opposite  but  not  contrary  and  certainly  not  contradictory  elements,  which  has  been 
the  trial  yet  also  the  triumph  of  the  Divine  Revelation  which  has  transformed,  by 
training  and  schooling,  mind,  heart,  and  soul.  It  will  have  done  with  that  charac- 
teristic feature  of  the  old  gospel  which  made  men  suffer  in  living  it ;  which  made 
a  man  kneel  before  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Saviour  to  be  wondered  at  as  well  as  adored, 
with  the  prayer  on  his  hps,  "Lord,  I  believe — help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  II. 
There  is  a  second  thing  to  be  noticed  in  the  condition  of  this  suppUant.  He  was 
one  who  knew  and  felt  that,  in  all  matters,  whether  of  opinion  or  of  practice,  ths 
SOUND  MIND  ACTS  UPON  A  PRiNCiPLK  OF  PREPONDERANCE.  He  believed  and  he  dis- 
beheved.  He  did  not  conceal  from  himself  the  difficulties  of  beheving ;  the  many 
things  that  might  be  urged  against  it.  He  was  not  one  of  those  rash  and  fanatical 
people,  who,  having  jumped  or  rushed  to  a  certain  conclusion,  are  incapable  of 
estimating  or  even  recognizing  an  argument  against  it — who  bring  to  their  delibera- 
tions upon  matters  of  everlasting  importance  minds  thoroughly  made  up,  and  count 
all  men  first  fools,  and  then  knaves,  who  differ  from  them.  No ;  the  father  of  this 
demoniac  boy  saw  two  sides  of  this  anxious  question,  and  could  not  pretend  to  call 
its  decision  indisputable,  whichever  way  it  might  go.  He  himself  believed  and 
disbelieved.  But  he  was  aware  that,  as  nothing  in  the  realm  of  thought  and  action 
is  literally  self-evident— nothing  so  certain,  that  to  taka  into  account  its  alternative 
would  be  idiotcy  or  madness — a  man  who  must  have  an  opinion  one  way  or  the 
other,  a  man  who  must  act  one  way  or  the  other,  is  bound,  as  a  reasonable  being,  to 
think  and  to  act  on  the  preponderance,  *♦  if  the  scale  do  turn  but  in  the  estimation 
of  a  hair,"  of  one  alternative  over  the  other.  This  man  was  obliged  to  form  an 
opinion,  in  order  that  he  might  accordingly  shape  his  conduct,  on  the  mighty 
question.  What  was  he  to  think  of  Christ  ?  But  he  had  a  more  personal,  or  at 
least  a  more  urgent,  motive  still.  In  the  agony  of  a  tortured  and  possessed 
home,  he  could  lose  no  chance  presented  to  him  of  obtaining  help  and  deliver- 
ance. If  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  what  he  heard  of  Him  there  was  help,  there 
was  healing,  in  Him.  The  father's  heart  beat  warmly  in  his  bosom,  and  it 
would  have  been  unnatural,  it  would  have  been  imfeeling,  it  would  have  been 
impossible,  to  leave  such  a  chance  untried.  Action  was  required,  and  before 
action  opinion.  Therefore  he  only  asked  himself  one  question.  Which  way  for 
me,  which  way  at  this  moment,  does  the  balance  of  probability  incUne  ?  There 
is  on  the  one  side  the  known  virtue,  the  proved  wisdom,  the  experienced  benevo- 
lence, the  attested  power — so  much  on  the  side  of  faith.  There  is  on  the  other 
side  the  possibility  of  deception,  the  absence  of  a  parallel,  the  antecedent  impro- 
bability of  an  incarnation.  III.  There  is  yet  one  more  thought  in  the  text,  which 
must  be  just  recognized  before  we  conclude.  This  father  tested  truth  by  pravino. 
He  was  not  satisfied  with  saying,  "I  believe  and  I  disbelieve."  It  was  not  enough 
for  him  even  to  carry  his  divided  state  to  Christ,  and  say,  **Lord,  I  believe  and  I 
disbelieve."  No ;  he  turned  the  conflict  into  direct  prayer — "  Lord,  I  believe — help 
Thou  mine  unbelief  I "  Many  persons  imagine  that,  until  they  have  full  and 
uiidoubting  faith,  they  have  no  right  and  no  power  to  pray.  Yet  here  again  the 
principle  dwelt  upon  has  a  just  application.  If  faith  preponderates  in  you  but  by 
the  weight  of  one  grain  over  unbelief,  that  small  or  smallest  preponderance  binds 
you,  not  only  to  an  opinion  of  believing,  and  not  only  to  a  life  of  obeying,  but  also, 
and  quite  definitely,  to  a  habit  of  praying.  Faith  brings  unbelief  with  it  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  and  prays  for  help  against  it  to  Him  whom,  on  the  balance  and  on 
the  preponderance,  it  thinks  to  be  Divine.  "Lord,  I  believe — help  Thou  mine 
unbelief."  It  is  the  prayer  for  the  man  who  is  formulating  his  faith,  and  has  not 
yet  arranged  or  modelled  it  to  his  satisfaction.  It  is  the  prayer  for  the  man  who  is 
shaping  his  life,  and  has  not  yet  exactly  adjusted  the  principles  which  shall  guide 
it.    It  is  the  prayer  for  the  man  in  great  trouble— who  cannot  see  the  chastening 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ul 


for  the  afflicting— who  feels  the  blow  so  severe  that  he  cannot  yet  discern  the 
Father's  hand  dealing  it.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  only  help  for  unbelief:—!,  Th» 
NECESSITY  OF  A  FULL  BEUEr  IN  THE  Savioue.  1.  It  is  nscessary  as  the  foundation 
of  all  our  Christian  privileges  and  blessings.  Our  Lord  continually  laid  it  down  aa 
the  condition  of  bestowing  His  favour ;  His  apostles  insisted  upon  the  same  holy 
doctrine.  2.  It  is  clear  in  the  very  nature  of  things :  we  can  do  nothing  of  our- 
selves, by  any  independent  effort,  for  our  own  salvation ;  we  are  estranged  from 
God  without  the  means  of  reconciliation.     II.  Oub  natural  inability  to  attain 

THAT  BELIEF,  AND  THE  METHOD  BY  WHICH  IT  IS  CEBTAINLT  ATTAINABLE.      If  It  required 

nothing  more  than  the  assent  of  the  understanding,  it  would  be  clearly  within 
own  reach ;  it  implies  a  disposition  to  receive  all  the  doctrines  of  revealed  truth, 
a  submission  to  the  law  and  love  of  God.    It  is  idle  to  beseech  of  God  a  living 
faith,  when  we  have  no  intention  to  imbibe  those  principles,  to  form  that  character, 
which  a  true  faith  implies.    Look  at  the  case  of  this  man :  there  were  no  earthly 
prejudices  which  he  resolved  to  keep ;  no  earthly  hindrances  which  he  desired  to 
set  up;  all  he  wanted  was  further  light  in  his  understanding,  and  a  complete 
conviction  in  his  heart ;  hence  he  honestly  prayed  his  prayer  to  Him,  in  whose  hand 
was  the  bestowal  of  these  blessings.    III.  The  effect  and  triumph  of  it,  when 
ATTAINED.    It  is  the  only  means  by  which  the  enemies  of  our  peace  can  be 
vanquished,  and  we  prepared  for  our  crown  of  rejoicing  (1  John  v.  4).    (J,  Slade, 
M.A.)         The  spirit  of  faith  amid  uncertainties: — Let  us  take  comfort  in  thia 
wonderful  saying.    Never  fear;  whatever  thoughts  may  from  time  to  time  move 
through  the  listening  spirit.    Deal  firmly  and  bravely  with  your  intellectual  and 
spiritual  tempters ;  repel  them ;  cast  yourself  on  God.     Assert,  in  terms,  the 
principle  of  faith.    Say,  "  I  believe."    Thus,  at  length,  all  shall  be  well.    For  the 
hour  is  at  hand  when  doubt  shall  end  for  ever,  and  when  the  Eternal  Truth  shall 
stand  out  clear  before  our  eyes.     Doubt  and  uncertainty  belong  to  this  life ;  at  the 
end  of  the  world  they  will  sink  to  long  burial,  while  the  world  also  sinks  away,  and 
then  we  shall  see  all  things  plainly  in  the  "  deep  dawn  beyond  the  tomb."    In  this 
dim  life  we  see  spiritual  things  imperfectly,  yet  ever  draw  we  on  to  full,  clear 
knowledge.    Even  so,  a  man  might  be  led,  step  by  step,  through  darkness,  till  he 
came  out  and  stood  on  a  narrow  line  of  sandy  beach  hemming  the  border  of  the 
immeasurable  deep,  whose  depth  and  majesty  were  hidden  from  his  eyes  by  the 
cold  veil  of  fog.     But  once  let  the  winds  arise  and  blow,  and  the  dull,  grey 
curtain,  swaying  awhile,  shall  be  gathered  into  folds,  and  as  a  vesture  shall  it  be 
laid  aside ;  while,  where  it  hung,  now  rolls  the  sea,  clear,  smooth,  and  vast,  each 
wave  reflecting  the  sunbeam  in  many-twinkling  laughter ;  the  broad  surface  sweep- 
ing back,  to  where  the  far  horizon  hue  is  drawn  across,  firm  and  straight  from  one 
side  of  the  world  to  the  other.    Faith  sees  already  what  we  are  to  see  for  ourselves 
by-and-by,  when  God's  time  is  come.    And,  meanwhile,  though  we  be  here,  on  this 
narrow  border  of  the  world  beyond,  and  though  we  cannot  see  far,  and  though  the 
fog  do  sometimes  chill,  yet  let  us  be  men  and  shake  ourselves,  and  move  about ; 
yea,  let  us  build  a  fire  as  best  we  may  on  the  wild  shore,  to  keep  off  the  cold  and 
to  keep  us  all  in  heart ;  and  let  us  believe  and  trust,  where  we  can  neither  see  nor 
prove,  and  let  us  encourage  one  another  and  call  to  God.    (Morgan  Dix,  D.D.) 
The  struggle  and  victory  of  faith : — I.  Faith  and  unbeuef  are  often  found  in  the 
SAME  heart.    The  picture  which  Milton  gives  of  Eve  sleeping  in  the  garden  is  true 
•*  of  us  all.    There  is  the  toad-like  spirit  whispering  evil  dreams  into  the  heart,  and 
the  angel  is  standing  by  to  keep  watch  on  the  tempter.    So  the  two  worlds  of  faith 
and  unbelief  are  close  to  the  soul  of  man.    When  he  is  in  the  dark,  gleams  from 
the  light  will  shoot  in  as  if  to  allure  him ;  and  when  he  is  in  the  light,  vapours 
from  the  dark  will  roll  in  to  perplex  and  tempt  him.    H.  Whenever  faith  and 
unbelief  meet  in  an  earnest  heart  there  will  be  war.    The  question  raised  by 
faith  and  unbelief  presses  on  the  whole  nature,  and  will  not  be  silenced  until  settled 
one  way  or  the  other.    IH.  We  can  tell  how  the  war  will  go,  by  the  bide  a 
man's  heart  takes.    When  a  ship  is  making  for  the  harbour,  there  is  a  set  in  the 
tide  which  may  carry  it  straight  for  the  entrance,  or  to  the  treacherous  quicksands, 
or  to  the  boiling  surf.     Such  a  set  of  the  tide  there  is  in  a  man's  own  heart.    It 
is  acted  on  by  his  will,  therefore  he  is  responsible  for  it.    A  man  cannot  use_  his 
will  directly,  so  as  to  cause  himself  to  believe  or  not  to  believe,  but  he  can  use  it  in 
"  those  things  which  accompany  salvation."     We  cannot  reverse  the  tide,  but  we 
can  employ  the  sails  and  helm,  so  as  to  act  upon  it.    Let  us  seek  to  have  (1)  A 
sense  of  revereuce  proportioned  to  the  momentous  character  of  the  issue  at  stake. 
The  weight  of  thp  soul  must  be  felt  if  we  are  to  decide  rightly  on  its  intereatfc 


nt.]  ST.  MARK.  359 

(2)  A  sense  of  need :  a  care  for  the  sonl,  leading  ns  to  look  ont,  and  np,  and  cry  for 
help.  (3)  A  sense  of  sinfulness,  a  conviotion  of  the  gulf  between  what  we  should 
be  and  what  we  are.  The  way  to  God  begins  in  what  is  most  profound  in  our  own 
souls,  and  when  we  have  been  led  by  God's  own  hand  to  make  discoveries  of  our 
weakness  and  want  and  sin,  it  is  not  doubtful  how  the  war  will  go.  lY.  Thk  way 
TO  DB  soBE  OF  THE  VICTORY  OF  FAITH  IS  TO  cAiiL  IK  Chbist's  HELP.  Full  deliverance 
from  doubt  and  sin  is  only  to  be  procured  by  personal  contact  with  the  Saviour's 
person  and  life.  So  long  as  we  turn  our  back  on  Him,  we  are  toward  darkness ; 
as  soon  as  we  look  to  Him,  we  are  lightened.  If  there  are  any  who  have  lost  their 
faith,  or  fear  they  are  losing  it,  while  they  deplore  the  loss,  let  them  cry  toward 
that  quarter  of  the  heavens  where  they  once  felt  as  if  light  were  shining  for  them, 
and  an  answer  will  in  due  time  come.  Christ  is  there,  whether  they  see  Him  or 
not ;  and  He  will  hear  their  prayer,  though  it  has  a  sore  battle  with  doubt.  This 
short  prayer  of  a  doubting  heart  comes  far  down  like  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself, 
stretches  out  a  hand  of  help  to  the  feeblest,  and  secures  at  last  an  answer  to  all 
other  prayers.  If  men  will  use  it  truly,  it  will  give  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them 
that  have  no  might  it  will  increase  strength,  till  it  issues  in  the  full  confidence  of 
perfect  faith.  {John  Ker,  D.D.)  This  act  of  his,  in  putting  forth  his  faith  to 
believe  as  he  could,  was  the  way  to  believe  as  he  would.  {John  Trapp.)  Faith 
and  unbelief: — Take  these  words  as — I.  The  voice  of  one  seeking  salvation. 
Give  Christ  your  whole  confidence.  Don't  lose  time  in  excuses,  or  lamentations, 
or  in  seeking  fuller  conviction.  Cast  yourself  at  once  on  the  Bock  of  Ages — "  Lord, 
I  believe."  But  you  say,  "I  seem  to  slip  off  the  Rock  again."  Well,  that  is 
surely  a  sign  that  you  are  on,  if  you  are  afraid  of  slipping  otf.  Then  add,  "  Help 
Thou  mine  unbelief,"  i.e.,  "  Hold  me  on  the  Rock ;  do  Thou  keep  me  from  rolling 
off."  No  man  is  quite  a  stranger  to  the  Lord,  or  an  utter  unbeliever,  who  with 
tears  entreats  Christ  to  put  away  his  unbelief.  II.  The  voice  op  the  Chbistian  in 
SOAIB  anguish  of  SPIRIT.  In  adversity,  when  your  faith  is  slipping  away,  bow 
before  Jesus,  saying — "  Lord,  I  believe ;  I  cling  to  Thee  ;  I  hang  on  Thee.  Though 
He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him."  What  did  I  say  ?  Who  am  I,  to  utter  such 
mighty  words  of  confidence  ?  And  yet,  at  such  an  hour,  I  take  them  not  back ;  but 
with  tears  I  haste  to  add,  *•  Lord,  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  III.  The  words  of 
the  believer  in  view  of  duty,  or  of  some  holy  PRIVILEGE.  IV.  Thb  voice  of  the 
WHOLE  Church  on  earth,  anxious  for  the  salvation  of  her  children.  (D.  Fraser, 
D.D.)  Mine  unbelief: — Unbelief  is  an  alarming  and  criminal  thing;  for  it  ^ 
doubts — (1)  The  power  of  Omnipotence;   (2)  the  value  of  the  promise  of  God; 

(3)  the  efi&cacy  of  Christ's  biood;  (4)  the  prevalence  of  His  plea;  (5)  the 
almightiness  of  the  Spirit;  (6)  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  In  fact,  unbelief  robs 
God  of  His  glory  in  every  way ;  and  therefore  it  cannot  receive  a  blessing  from  the 
Lord  (Heb.  xi.  6).  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  strife  of  faith  and  doubt  in  the  soul : — 
This  was  the  cry  of  a  soul  in  distress;  it  was  a  frank,  honest  exclamation, 
showing  what  was  in  the  man ;  it  was  spoken  to  God.  It  was  a  cry  of  agony :  the 
agony  of  hope,  of  love,  of  fear,  all  pouring  out  and  upward,  trembling  and  expecting : 
the  cry  of  a  solitary  soul  indeed,  yet,  substantially,  a  cry  from  all  humanity 
summed  up  together.  Nor  did  it  meet  rebuke ;  no  fault  was  found  with  it ;  but  in 
the  granting  of  the  prayer,  assent  and  approval  were  implied  ;  assent  to  the  descrip- 
tion, acceptance  of  the  state  of  mind  it  disclosed.  L  Doubt  and  faith  can  co-bxist 
IN  THB  HEART,  AND  ACTUALLY  DO.  Natural  to  believB ;  we  cannot  but  cling  to  God ; 
cannot  live  without  Him.  Yet  natural  to  doubt ;  because  we  are  fallen ;  the  mind  ^ 
is  disordered,  Uke  the  body :  Divine  truth  is  not  yet  made  known  to  us  in  fulness.  • 
So  it  follows  that  the  mere  existence  of  doubts  in  intellect  or  heart  is  not  sinful, 
nor  need  it  disquiet  the  faithful.  The  sin  begins  where  the  responsibility  begins, 
via.,  in  the  exercise  of  the  will.  II.  The  will  has  power  to  choose  between  thb 
TWO.  This  is  the  sheet-anchor  of  moral  and  intellectual  Ufe.  No  man  need  be 
passive,  or  is  compelled  to  be  all  his  life  long  subject  to  bondage  under  the  spirit 
of  doubt.  The  will  can  control  and  shape  the  thoughts,  throwing  its  weight  en  one 
side  or  the  other  when  the  battle  rages  in  the  soul.  Because  it  can  do  this,  we 
are  responsible  for  the  strength  or  weakness  of  our  faith.  IH.  If  we  choose  to 
BELIEVB,  God  will  help.  Lift  thy  poor  hand  upward,  and  another  Hand  is  coming 
through  the  darkness  to  meet  it.  {Morgan  Dix,  D.D.)  Lord,  I  believe  ;  fielp  1  nou 
mine  unbelief: — If  a  man  can  say  this  sincerely,  he  need  never  be  discouraged  ;  let 
him  hope  in  the  Lord.  Little  grace  can  trust  in  Christ,  and  great  grace  can  do  no 
more.  God  brings  not  a  pair  of  scales  to  weigh  our  graces,  and  if  they  be  too  light 
refuseth  them  ;  but  he  brings  a  touchstone  to  try  them ;  and  if  they  be  pure  gold. 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaf.  » 

though  never  bo  little  of  it,  it  will  pass  corrent  with  Him  ;  though  it  be  bnt  smoke, 

not  flame — though  it  be  but  as  a  wick  in  the  socket — likelier  to  die  and  go  out 

than  continue,  which  we  use  to  throw  away ;  yet  He  will  not  quench  it,  but  accept 

it.     (Anon.)        We  give  a  beggar  an  alms  (says  Manton),  "  though  he  receives  it 

with  a  trembling  palsied  hand  ;  and  if  he  lets  it  fall,  we  let  him  stoop  for  it."     So 

doth  the  Lord  give  even  to  our  weak  faith,  and  in  His  great  tenderness  permits  as 

afterward  to  enjoy  what  at  first  we  could  not  grasp.     The  trembling  hand  is  part 

of  the  poor  beggar's  distress,  and  the  weakness  of  our  faith  is  a  part  of  our  spiritual 

poverty;  therefore  it  moves  the  Divine  compassion,  and  is  an  argument  with 

heavenly  pity.    As  a  sin,  unbelief  grieves  the  Spirit ;  but,  as  a  weakness,  mourned 

and  confessed,  it  secures  His  help.     "Lord,  I  believe,"  is  a  confession  of  faith 

which  loses  none  of  its  acceptablenesa  when  it  is  followed  by  the  prayer,  "  help 

Thou  mine  unbelief."     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         Weakness  of  faith  no  sin  : — A  friend 

complained  to  Gotthold  of  the  weakness  of  his  faith,  and  the  distress  this  gave  him. 

Gotthold  pointed  to  a  vine,  which  had  twined  itself  round  a  pole,  and  was  hanging 

loaded  with  beautiful  clusters,  and  said,  "  Frail  is  that  plant;  but  what  harm  is 

done  to  it  by  its  frailty,  especially  as  the  Creator  has  been  pleased  to  make  it  what 

it  is?    As  little  will  it  prejudice  your  faith  that  it  is  weak,  provided  only  it  be 

sincere  and  unfeigned.    Faith  is  the  work  of  God,  and  He  bestows  it  in  such 

measure  as  He  wills  and  judges  right.    Let  the  measure  of  it  which  He  has  given 

you  be  deemed  sufficient  by  you.    Take  for  pole  and  prop  the  cross  of  the  Savioor 

and  the  Word  of  God ;  twine  around  these  with  all  the  power  which  God  vouchsafes. 

A  heart  sensible  of  its  weakness,  and  prostrating  itself  continually  at  the  feet  of 

the  Divine  mercy,  is  more  acceptable  than  that  which  presumes  upon  the  strength 

of  its  faith,  and  falls  into  false  security  and  pride."    Weak  faith  may  he  effectual  ;— 

The  act  of  faith  is  to  apply  Christ  to  the  soul ;  and  this  the  weakest  faith  can  do 

as  well  as  the  strongest,  if  it  be  true.    A  child  can  hold  a  staff  as  well,  though  not 

so  strongly,  as  a  man.    The  prisoner  through  a  hole  sees  the  sun,  though  not  ai 

perfectly  as  they  in  the  open  air.    They  that  saw  the  brazen  serpent,  though  a 

great  way  off,  yet  were  healed.    The  poor  man's  "  I  believe,"  saved  him  ;  though 

he  was  fain  to  add,  •♦  Lord,  help  mine  unbelief."    So  that  we  may  say  of  faith,  as 

the  poet  did  of  death,  that  it  m:^es  lords  and  slaves,  apostles  and  common  persons, 

all  alike  acceptable  to  God,  if  they  have  it.     (r.  Adams.)        Prayer  is  the  cure  for 

unbelief: — One  said  to  me,  "  I  have  not  the  faculty  of  belief  or  faith  in  God,  or  in 

'  a  book-revelation."    Answer :   "  Have  you  prayed  with  your  whole  heart  and 

strength— as  for  dear  life— for  light  and  faith  ?  "    He  said,  "  I  cannot ;  for  a  man 

who  does  that  already  half  believes."    Answer:  " No ;  for  a  man  might  be  rescued 

from  a  shipwreck,  and  be  watching  the  attempt  to  save  that  which  was  dearest  to 

him — dearer  than  life— which  had  been  swept  from  his  side :  putting  aside  conscious 

prayer,  his  whole  being,  his  very  heart  and  soul  would  go  out  into  the  wish  and 

the  hope  that  his  treasure  might  be  saved :  yet  it  would  not  involve  any  belief  that 

the  rescue  would  be  accomplished.    Many  a  time  an  agony  like  that  has  been 

followed  by  the  bringing  in  of  the  lifeless  body.    But  after  a  true  heart-agony  of 

prayer  for  light,  no  lifeless  soul  has  ever  been  brought  in.    {Vita.)        Faith  without 

comfort : — The  soul's  grasp  of  Jesus  saves  even  when  it  does  not  comfort.    If  we 

touch  the  hem  of  His  garment  we  are  healed  of  our  deadly  disease,  though  our 

heart  may  still  be  full  of  trembling.    We  may  be  in  consternation,  but  we  cannot 

be  under  condemnation  if  we  have  believed  in  Jesus.    Safety  is  one  thing,  and 

assurance  of  it  is  another.    (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Faith  without  assurance : — As  a 

man  falling  into  a  river  espieth  a  bough  of  a  tree,  and  catches  at  it  with  all  his 

might,  and  as  soon  as  he  hath  fast  hold  of  it  he  is  safe,  though  troubles  and  fears 

do  not  presently  vanish  out  of  his  mind;  so  the  soul,  espying  Christ  as  the  only 

means  to  save  him,  and  reaching  out  the  hand  to  Him,  is  safe,  though  it  be  not 

presently  quieted  and  pacified.     (T.  Manton.)        Faith  only  in  Ood  : — He  did  not 

believe  in  the  disciples ;  he  had  once  trusted  in  them  and  failed.  He  did  not  believe 

in  himself ;  he  knew  his  own  impotence  to  drive  out  the  evil  spirit  from  his  child : 

He  believed  no  longer  in  any  medicines  or  men ;  but  he  believed  the  man  of  the 

shining  countenance  who  had  just  come  down  from  the  mountain.   {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Faith  under  difficulty : — Happy  is  the  man  who  can  not  only  believe  when  the 

waves  softly  ripple  to  the  music  of  peace,  but  continues  to  trust  in  Him  who  if 

almighty  to  save  when  the  hurricane  is  let  loose  in  its  fury,  and  the  Atlantie 

breakers  follow  each  other,  eager  to  swallow  up  the  barque  of  the  mariner.    Surely 

Christ  Jesus  is  fit  to  be  believed  at  all  times,  for  like  the  pole  star.  He  abides  in  Hit 

faithfulness,  let  storms  rage  as  they  may.    (Ibid.)        Faith's  dawn  and  its  clouds :— 


X.]  8T.  MARK,  361 

I.  Thxbb  is  tbub  vaith.  It  was  faith  in  the  Person  of  Christ.  It  was  faith 
about  the  matter  in  hand.  It  was  faith  which  triumphed  oyer  difficulties,  (a) 
Case  of  long  standing.  (6)  Considered  to  be  hopeless,  (c)  Disciples  had  failed. 
{d)  The  ohOd  was  at  that  moment  passing  through  a  horrible  stage  of  pain  and 
misery.  II.  Tkbbs  is  qbbvious  unbelief.  Many  true  believers  are  tried  with 
unbelief  because  they  have  a  sense  of  their  past  sins.  Some  stagger  through  a 
consciousness  of  their  present  feebleness.  Others  are  made  to  shiver  with  unbelief 
on  account  of  fears  for  the  future.  The  freeness  and  greatness  of  God's  mercy 
sometimes  excites  unbelief.  A  sacred  desire  to  be  right  produces  it  in  some.  It 
may  also  arise  through  a  most  proper  reverence  for  Christ,  and  a  high  esteem 
for  all  that  belongs  to  Him.  III.  The  conflict  between  the  two.  He  regards  it 
as  a  sin  and  confesses  it.  He  prays  against  it.  He  looks  to  the  right  Person  for 
deliverance.  {Ibid.)  Feeble  faith  appealing  to  a  strong  Saviour : — I.  The  sus- 
pected difficulty.  The  father  may  have  thought  it  lay  with  the  disciples.  He 
probably  thought  the  case  itself  was  well-nigh  hopeless.  He  half  hinted  that  the 
difficulty  might  lie  with  the  Master.  "If  Thou."  II.  The  tearful  discovery. 
Jesus  cast  the  "if"  back  upon  the  father — then — 1.  His  little  faith  discovered  his 
unbelief.  2.  This  unbelief  alarmed  him.  3.  It  was  now,  not  "help  my  child," 
but  "  help  my  unbelief."  III.  The  intelligent  appeal.  He  bases  the  appeal  upon 
faith — "I  believe."  He  mingles  with  it  confession — "help  my  unbelief."  He 
appeals  to  One  who  is  able  to  help — "  Lord."  To  One  who  is  Himself  the  remedy 
for  unbelief — ♦*  Thou."  (Ibid.)  Unbelief : — ^Nothing  is  so  provoking  to  God  as 
onbelief,  and  yet  there  is  nothing  to  which  we  are  more  prone.  He  has  spoken  to 
as  in  His  Word ;  He  has  spoken  plainly ;  He  has  repeated  His  promises  again 
And  again ;  He  has  confirmed  them  all  by  the  blood  of  His  own  dear  Son ;  and  yet 
we  do  not  believe  Him.  Is  not  this  provoking  ?  What  would  provoke  a  master 
like  a  servant  refusing  to  believe  him  ?  Or,  what  would  provoke  a  father  like  a 
child  refusing  to  believe  him  ?  The  man  of  honour  feels  himself  insulted  if  his 
professed  friend  refuses  to  believe  his  solemn  protestation ;  and  yet  this  is  the  way 
in  which  we  daily  treat  our  God.  He  says:  "Confess,  and  I  will  pardon  you." 
But  we  doubt  it.  He  says:  "Gall  upon  Me,  and  I  will  deliver  you."  But  we 
doubt  it.  He  says  :  "  I  will  supply  all  your  needs."  But  we  doubt  it.  He  says  : 
"  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  But  who  has  not  questioned  it?  Let 
OS  seriously  think  of  His  own  words :  "  He  that  believeth  not  God  hath  made  Him 
a  liar";  and  His  question,  "How  long  will  this  people  provoke  Me?"  Lord, 
forgive,  and  preserve  us  from  it  in  future.     {James  Smith,) 

Vers.  28,  29.  But  toyprayw  and  fasting'. — Fa«ttn^;— -**  Whyeoold  not  we  oast 
him  out?  " — "  because  of  your  unbeUef."  *'A11  things  are  possible  to  him  that 
beUeveth."  But  how  is  such  faith  to  be  attained  ?  It  is  God's  gift.  God  gives  by 
means — by  means  of  prayer.  Whatever  tends  to  increase  the  fervour  of  prayer 
tends  to  increase  the  energy  of  faith.  Fasting  also  has  this  effect.  In  the  Christian 
way  are  many  hindrances ;  arising  both  from  the  agency  of  fallen  spirits,  and  from 
the  inveteracy  of  besetting  sins.  It  appears  from  this  narrative,  that  some  spirits 
are  more  difficult  to  oast  out  of  men  than  others — "  this  kind ; "  and  it  is  certain, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  that  some  sins  are  more  tenacious,  more  stubborn ;  and  that 
(or  their  expulsion,  a  more  active  and  energetic  exercise  of  faith  is  required,  than 
for  the  subduing  of  other  sins.  "  This  kind  goeth  not  forth  but  by  prayer  and 
fasting. "  He  will  conclude,  therefore,  that  these  things  were  intended  to  strengthen 
faith — that  by  these  means  he  should  assail  his  unbelief,  in  order  that  by  changing 
his  unbelief  into  faith,  he  may  get  rid  of  this  cleaving  stain  that  distresses  his  soul. 
He  will  therefore  be  exceedingly  anxious  to  ascertain  what  "  fasting  "  means.  He 
ascertains  what  "prayer"  is — public,  private,  social;  he  will  be  as  anxious  to 
ascertain  with  the  same  distinctness  what  "  fasting  "  means ;  to  see  what  in  his 
particular  case  it  means.  I  suppose  the  case  of  a  man,  whose  tendency  before  he 
was  converted  was  to  luxurious  ^peding.  This  is  not  confined  to  the  rich,  as  is 
oommonly  supposed,  who  can  afford  to  multiply  varieties  and  pamper  their  appetites. 
It  is  found  in  all  classes,  though  variously  indulged.  There  is  a  sort  of  animal 
delight  which  men  take  in  their  food,  and  even  in  the  anticipation  of  their  food. 
There  are  men,  not  a  few,  who  dine  more  than  once  a  day,  by  indulging  an  eager, 
fleshly  avidity  in  anticipation ;  and  when  the  reality  comes,  they  yield  themselves 
to  reddess  animal  excitement,  even  without  any  check  of  reason ;  and  they  persevere 
nntil  animal  repletion  demands  a  pause.  It  is  descriptive  of  such,  and  it  is  not  too 
mooh  to  say,  that  instead  of  eating  to  live,  they  seem  to  hve  to  eat     Now  this  is  a 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

disease.  We  suppose  a  man  of  this  description  converted.  By  his  conversion  th» 
disease  is  not  then  and  there — at  one  stroke — eradicated ;  but  a  counteracting  power 
is  supplied  to  him.  This  counteracting  power  is  to  be  brought  to  bear  on  this 
disease ;  and  certainly  this  is  a  case  in  which  the  action  of  this  counteracting  power 
might  well  take  the  direction  of  abstinence  from  food.  Here  he  would  directly 
mortify  the  deed  of  the  old  body ;  for  that  was  its  tendency,  that  was  its  snare,  thai 
was  its  disease.  But  now  I  suppose  the  case  of  another  sort  of  man.  There  are 
such  people  in  this  world  as  misers.  I  do  not  refer  to  that  love  of  money,  which, 
in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  is  common  to  every  man — but  tJPS'drsease,  a  sort  of 
mania,  an  idolatry  for  the  hoarded  heap.  There  are  some  men  who  so  idolize  their 
savings,  that  they  absolutely  deny  themselves  the  common  necessaries  of  daily 
animal  support.  Now  suppose  such  a  man  converted ;  this  disease  is  not  entirely 
cured  by  his  conversion ;  but  a  counteracting  power  is  supplied  to  him.  And  how 
is  it  to  be  exercised?  How  is  that  man  to  fast?  To  abstain  from  food?  No  ;  he 
has  been  doing  that  already,  in  the  service  of  his  idol.  That  is  a  part  of  his  disease. 
What,  then,  in  this  ease,  would  occupy  the  scriptural  place  of  fasting  ?  Let  him 
take  from  the  store  ;  let  him  draw  out  the  pound,  or  the  hundred,  from  the  fostered 
heap ;  let  him  take  his  check  book,  and  order  something  to  clothe  the  naked  and 
feed  the  hungry.  That  would  be  fasting.  "  Is  not  this  the  fast  that  I  have  chosen  f 
saith  the  Lord ;  to  clothe  the  naked  and  to  feed  the  hungry  ?  "  Now,  suppose 
another  case,  of  a  man  or  a  woman  of  a  highly  imaginative  turn  of  mind,  and  of  ft 
romantic  tone  of  affection.  She  has  indulged  in  reading  works  of  fiction;  so  that 
all  her  imaginations  are  drawn  o£E  from  the  realities  of  life,  and  engaged  in  the 
luxuries  of  fictitious  scenes  of  pleasure  or  of  pain.  What  is  fasting,  in  her  casef 
Not  abstaining  from  food.  What  then?  Putting  away  her  novels,  burning  her 
romances,  and  turning  to  the  practical  walks  of  life  ;  ♦•  drawing  out  her  soul  to  the 
hungry ;  "  instead  of  weeping,  in  the  luxury  of  ease,  in  her  armchair,  over  a  fancied 
sick  person,  to  visit  a  real  sick  person,  and  carry  something  with  her ;  go  to  the 
stem  reality  of  cellars  and  garrets,  instead  of  luxuriating  over  the  pages  of  a  novel. 
This  is  a  fast,  in  her  case  ;  aud  by  this,  she  will  help  her  prayers,  and  increase  her 
faith,  and  so  advance  in  overcoming  the  besetting  sin.  These  illustrations  will,  I 
hope,  help  to  show  you  the  true  scriptural  nature  of  this  duty,  varying  with  various 
cases  because  of  the  object  in  view.  We  are  called  "by  the  spirit  to  mortify  the 
deeds  of  the  body,"  not  to  mortify  the  body.  This  is  the  mistake  that  has  been 
made.  We  are  nowhere  called  on  to  mortify  the  body  for  the  sake  of  the  mortifi- 
cation, but  to  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body  for  the  sake  of  the  sanctification.  And 
then,  what  is  the  object  of  our  Church  in  such  fasting?  That  you  will  learn  by  her 
collect  for  the  first  Sunday  in  Lent.  '♦  Give  us  grace  to  use  such  abstinence,  that 
our  flesh  being  subdued  to  the  spirit,  we  may  ever  obey  Thy  godly  motions,  in 
righteousness  and  true  holiness,  to  Thy  honour  and  glory,  who  livest  and  reignest 
with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  one  God,  world  without  end."  The  object  is 
sanctification.  (JET.  McNeile,  M.A.)  Prayer  and  fasting: — Staying  at  Hastings 
a  few  months  since  I  was  much  interested  in  watching  the  building  of  a  breakwater 
just  opposite  my  lodgings.  It  was  done  by  driving  massive  piles  of  wood  into  the 
shingle.  They  were  driven  by  a  huge  mass  of  metal  being  let  fall  upon  them  from 
a  great  height.  True,  the  blows  were  not  very  quick  one  upon  another,  for  it  took 
some  time  to  raise  the  weight  to  the  necessary  elevation ;  but  when  it  did  fall  it 
accomplished  something.  Now  suppose  an  on-looker  had  suggested  that  time  was 
being  wasted  in  hauhng  the  herculean  hammer  up,  and  had  offered  to  tap  the  iron- 
bound  pile  with  a  child's  spade,  saying  he  could  give  a  hundred  taps  to  the  one 
blow,  what  would  have  been  thought  of  his  suggestion  ?  It  would  have  been  laughed 
to  scorn,  and  he  would  have  been  told  that  one  of  their  blows  would  do  more  than 
a  whole  century  of  his  tapping ;  that  there  was  no  waste  of  time  in  raising  the  iron 
thunderbolt,  for  the  power  of  its  blow  was  in  proportion  to  the  height  from  whi<  h 
it  fell.  So,  believer,  your  power  and  mine  to  affect  men  is  in  exact  proportion  to 
the  elevation  of  our  soul-life,  and  this  elevation  can  only  be  obtained  by  secret 
communion  with  God,  and  abstinence  from  all  that  panders  to  the  flesh  and  hindei-s 
the  spirit's  fellowship.  Oh  for  a  higher  ambition  to  be  made  meet  for  the  Master's 
use ;  a  more  intense  longing  for  that  secret  power  with  God  in  private,  that  shall 
make  us  more  than  conquerors  over  hell  in  public.  {A.  Q,  Brown.)  Union  of 
faith  and  prayer  : — I  am  thankful  that  these  words  concerning  prayer  have  stood 
the  ordeal  of  the  late  Eevision.  One  seems  to  crave  a  reference  to  prayer  after  a 
lesson  on  the  importance  of  faith.  Prayer  seems  to  be  the  voice  by  which  faith 
must  express  itself ;  it  is  almost,  or  even  quite,  impossible  to  conceive  of  faitk 


CHAP.  IX.3  ST.  MARK. 


coming  into  action  except  in  connection  with  and  bj  means  of  the  utterance  of 
prayer.     {Bishop  Harvey  Goodwin.) 

Vera.  80-32.  And  they  departed  thence,  and  passed  through  Oalilee.—C^mf 
teaching  His  disciples : — I.  Hs  explained  to  them  His  Present  state.  He  was 
about  to  be  delivered  by  a  traitorous  disciple,  &c.  II.  He  told  them  the  parties 
INTO  WHOSE  POWER  Hb  HAD  BEEN  GIVEN.  1.  To  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  men, 
is  to  be  put  into  their  power — to  do  to  Him,  and  with  Him,  as  they  chose.  2.  They 
could  have  this  power  only  by  special  permission — from  the  Father,  and  Himself. 
3.  It  is  marvellous  that  He  should  have  been  so  delivered,  God  in  humanity  I  It 
brought  out  their  desperate  wickedness,  proved  the  voluntariness  of  His  obedience, 
showed  how  blind  sin  is  in  its  supposed  triumphs,  &c.  III.  He  told  them  what 
MUST  BEFALL  HiM  AT  THE  HANDS  OF  MEN.  1.  That  Christ  was  to  die,  was  not  now 
foretold  for  the  first  time,  predicted,  &c.     2.  This  death  of  Christ  was  necessary,  &c. 

IV.  He  FURTHER  REVEALED  TO  THEM  THE  FUTURE,  BY  TELLINQ  THEM  OF  HiS  RESUR- 
RECTION. The  result  of  an  agency,  neither  human  nor  satanic,  but  Divine ;  pro- 
phecy, &o.,  called  for  it.  Conclusion :  1.  Christ  had  His  sufferings  ever  in  view 
(Luke  xii.  50 ;  John  xii.  27).  2.  In  His  sufferings  and  resurrection  He  saw  His 
people.  8.  He  unveiled  the  future  to  His  disciples.  They  were  contending  for 
honour— on  the  brink  of  sufferings — understood  not  the  warning  of  Christ  {Ex- 
pository Discourses.)  The  complete  truth : — About  this  announcement  there  are 
two  things  remarkable — Christ's  care  in  preparing  His  disciples  for  the  cross,  and 
the  confidence  with  which  Christ  affirms  His  own  resurrection.  To  have  spoken  of 
the  betrayal  alone,  would  have  been  to  have  put  before  His  disciples  a  fragmentary 
truth ;  over  the  darkness  of  death  Christ  sheds  the  light  of  resurrection.  The 
revelation  of  Christ's  purposes  can  occasion  grief  only  when  it  is  incompletely 
apprehended ;  sorrow  attaches  to  some  of  the  intermediate  points,  but  never  to  the 
issue ;  "  the  Lamb  slain  "  is  a  part  of  the  process ;  the  Lamb  slain,  but  seated  in 
the  midst  of  the  throne,  is  the  sublime  consummation.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
utility  of  truth  not  understood : — It  is  not  to  no  purpose,  to  speak  things  that  are 
not  immediately  xmderstood.  Seed,  though  it  lies  in  the  ground  awhile  unseen,  is 
not  lost  or  thrown  away,  but  will  bring  forth  fruit.  If  you  confine  your  teacher, 
you  hinder  your  learning ;  if  you  limit  his  discourses  to  your  present  apprehensions, 
how  shall  he  raise  your  understandings  ?  If  he  accommodate  all  things  to  your 
present  weakness,  you  will  never  be  the  wiser,  than  you  are  now ;  you  wiU  be  always 
in  swaddling  clothes.  {Dr.  Whichcote.)  Understood  not : — When  I  was  a  little 
girl  I  had  a  sovereign  given  to  me.  If  it  had  been  a  shilling  I  might  have  put  it  in 
my  own  little  purse,  and  spent  it  at  once ;  but,  being  a  sovereign,  my  dear  father 
took  care  of  it  for  me,  and  I  expect  I  forgot  all  about  it.  But  one  day  when  I  was 
quite  grown  up,  he  called  me  into  his  study  and  gave  me  the  sovereign,  reminding 
me  how  it  had  been  given  me  when  I  was  about  as  high  as  the  back  of  a  chair. 
And  I  was  very  glad  to  have  it  then,  for  I  understood  how  much  it  was  worth,  and 
knew  very  well  what  to  do  with  it.  Now,  when  you  come  to  some  saying  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  that  you  do  not  understand  or  see  how  to  make  any  use  of  yourself,  do 
not  think  it  of  no  consequence  whether  you  read  it  or  not.  When  you  are  older  you 
will  find  that  it  is  just  like  my  sovereign,  coming  back  to  you  when  you  want  it  and 
are  able  to  make  use  of  it     {Frances  Ridley  Havergal.) 

Ver.  83-37.  What  was  It  that  ye  disputed  among  yourselves  by  the  way  T — The 
true  child  our  pattern : — What  is  the  true  child  like  ?  L  He  is  unconscious  o» 
HIMSELF ;  self -dissection  or  analysis  is  unknown  to  him.  II.  Ha  lives  in  thb 
PRESENT.  1.  He  never  worries  or  is  anxious  about  the  future ;  sufficient  to  the 
day,  for  him,  is  the  evil  thereof.  2.  So  also,  though  always  aspiring,  he  is  never 
discontented  in  the  ungrateful  or  peevish  sense  ;  sufficient  likewise  for  the  day  is 
the  good  thereof ;  he  would  not  have  it  otherwise.  III.  His  pleasures  are  simple, 
pure,  natural,  fresh  from  the  hand  of  God.  The  least  of  His  gifts,  even  a  cup  of 
cold  water,  has  value  in  his  eyes,  so  that  he  wastes  not  wilfully.    IV.  He  looks 

FORWARD    WITH    BOUNDLESS    HOPE   TO    A    GREATER,   MORE    COMPLETE    LIFE    {i.e.,   tO    be 

*•  grown  up").  V.  He  knows  not  how  to  sneer  or  be  cynical:  but  instinctively 
shrinks  from  a  sneer  as  from  a  blow  or  a  sting.  VI.  His  aversions  and  dreads  arb 
TRUE  AND  SYMBOLICAL  (uutil,  hko  his  tastcs  and  likings,  made  artificial  by  example 
and  training).  E.g. — (1)  Darkness  and  all  that  is  black ;  (2)  bitterness,  sourness, 
all  that  is  acrid  or  sickening  ;  (3)  all  that  wounds  and  kills.    VIL  His  obkdiencb 

IS   KOT   RELUCTAKT,   BUT  VAITHFUL.      VIU.      HiS   HEART  RESPONDS  TO    XHB   TOUCH   OV 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OTA*,  ix, 

TBUTH,  if  honestly  and  faithfully  appealed  to.  (Ft to.)  The  lesson  of  humility : — 
Children  are  patterns  of  humility  in  these  respects.  1.  They  are  not  bo  pn£Eed  np 
as  older  people  with  conceit  of  themselves,  or  of  their  own  good  parts  and  gifts ; 
they  do  not  think  the  better  of  themselves  because  they  possess  these  advantages, 
nor  do  they  boast  of  them.  2.  They  do  not  disdain  or  despise  others,  but  think 
as  well  of  them  as  of  themselves,  even  if  inferiors.  8.  They  are  not  ambitious  in 
seeking  after  vain -glory.  4.  They  are  not  given  to  strife  and  contention,  but  are 
of  a  quiet  and  peaceable  disposition.  6.  They  do  not  envy  the  good  fortune  of 
others,  but  rejoice  in  each  other's  prosperity.  6.  They  are  tractable  to  admonition 
and  reproof,  ready  to  submit  to  it,  and  easily  reclaimed  from  a  fault.  {O.  Fetter.) 
Lesson  against  pride: — I.  The  humility  and  trustfulness  of  children  should  be 
preserved  by  men.  II.  They  who  have  most  power  should  render  most  service. 
in.  They  who  descend  most  in  love  will  rise  most  in  honour.  IV.  God  is  served 
by  obedience  to  Christ,  and  Christ  by  kindness  to  the  least  and  lowest  who  belong 
to  Him.  {J.  H,  Godwin.)  Disciples  disputing: — I.  Those  whosb  conduct  is 
BEFOBE  us  ABB  THE  FOLLOWERS  OF  CHRIST.  Externally,  really  and  spiritually ;  hence, 
this  spectacle  is  one  within  the  bosom  of  the  Church.  II.  They  disputed  amono 
THEMSELVES  BY  THE  WAY.  How  fitly  did  the  College  of  Apostles  foreshadow  the 
state  of  the  Church  in  after  ages.  III.  The  cause  of  disagreement  amono  them — 
«•  Who  should  be  the  greatest."  Worldly  ambition  was  the  root  of  bitterness.  The 
secret  of   most  of   the  contentions  of  seeming  Christians.     lY.  Christ  did  not 

INTEBFBBB  TO  PREVENT  THESE  CONTENDINGS.      V.   ChRIST,  THOUGH  He  SUFFERED  THEM 

TO  END  THEIR  CONTEST,  CALLED  THEM  TO  ACCOUNT.  Divisious  are  most  offensive  to 
Him.  He  will  call  the  sowers  of  division  to  account.  VI.  To  the  inquiry  or 
Christ  as  to  the  grounds  of  their  disputb,  they  madb  at  first  no  answer. 
VIL  Christ  takes  advantage  of  what  had  occurred,  in  order  to  inculcate  trb 
DUTY  AND  RECOMMEND  THE  GRACE  OF  HUMILITY.  Bewarc  of  disputes,  Bud  therefore 
of  pride.  Cultivate  true  Christian  greatness— Christ's  example.  {Expository 
Discourse*,)  ^mftttron ;— I.  What  is  it  ?  II.  Proof  that  it  is  evil.  Ul.  Means 
OF  CUBE.  I.  Ambition  is  to  be  distinguishbd  fbom  thb  desire  of  excellence. 
II.  That  ambition  ib  evil  in  its  nature,  and  therefore  degrading  in  its 
influence,  is  evident.  1.  Because  it  is  inconsistent  with  our  relation  to  God 
as  creatures.  2.  It  is  inconsistent  with  our  relation  to  God  as  sinners.  3.  Because 
Christ  always  reproved  this  desire  of  pre-eminence.  4.  This  trait  of  character  did 
not  belong  to  Christ.  6,  We  always  approve  of  the  opposite  temper  whenever  we 
see  it  manifested.  6.  It  is  inconsistent  with  our  being  governed  by  right  motives  and 
affections.  III.  Means  of  cube.  1.  Cultivating  a  sense  of  our  insignificance  and 
unworthiness.  2.  Having  our  hearts  filled  with  Christ.  3.  By  constantly  refusing  to 
yield  to  this  evil  desire ;  refusing  to  cherish  it  or  to  obey  its  dictates.  By  uniformly 
avoiding  to  seek  the  honour  which  comes  from  men.  {Chas.  Hodge^  DJ).)  Who 
i»  the  greatest : — ^I.  The  wobld's  opinion.  The  world's  great  men  are  nsually  great 
conquerors,  or  great  philosophers,  poets,  Ac.  Many  of  them  small  men,  viewed  in 
their  moral  relations.  Alexander  wept  for  another  world  to  conquer.  "  Greater  is 
he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  See  the  world's  great  ones 
described  (Matt.  xx.  25,  26).  Haman  was  one  such,  yet  a  very  little  man.  It  is 
said  there  are  three  classes  of  great  men.  1.  Those  who  are  bom  great. 
2.  Those  who  have  greatness  thrust  upon  them.  8.  Those  who  achieve 
greatness.  The  world  sees  no  greatness  in  lowliness.  II.  The  disciples'  wish. 
Eveu  they  wished  to  be  great.  Not,  indeed,  after  the  world's  fashion,  but  each 
one  wanted  to  be  above  the  rest.  Each  one  might  think  he  deserved  to  be  first, 
or  had  qualities  that  fitted  him  for  pre-eminence.  III.  The  Master's  lesson.  Note- 
1.  The  kindness  of  His  manner.  "  Speak  the  truth  in  love."  2.  The  simplicity 
and  clearness  of  illustration.  Might  have  argued,  bat  took  a  little  child  in 
His  arms.  3.  The  nature  of  the  lesson.  Goodness  is  greatness.  Learn :  1.  Not 
to  be  deceived  by  the  world's  notionB  of  greatness.  2.  Not  to  give  place  to 
ambitious  desires.  8.  To  aim  after  goodness,  and  let  the  greatness  follow  if  it 
may.  (<7.  C  Qray.)  A  child  for  a  text: — I.  Let  as  begin  with  the  mistake 
sometimes  made,  which  will  certainly  need  correction.  Our  Lord  does  not 
teach  by  any  implication  that  children  are  sinless  little  creatures.  1.  For  the 
argument  and  illustration  of  the  discourse  He  gave  are  all  against  such  a  supposi- 
tion. According  to  the  authorized  version,  Christ  says  that  thejr  are  **  lost,"  that 
the  Son  of  Man  needed  to  come  to  **  save "  them,  and  without  the  will  of  the 
Father  they  would  "perish"  (Matt,  xviii.  11-14).  2.  The  story  oflerB  no  proof 
•f  any  innooenoe  even  in  the  child  He  chose.    Ecclesiastical  tradition,  not  rsliabiU*, 


ix.]  ST.  MARK.  365 

states  that  this  boy  became  afterwards  the  martyr  Ignatius,  and  was  in  the 
enbseqaent  persecntions  thrown  to  the  wild  beasts  at  Borne.  That  is  the  best 
which  could  be  said  of  him,  and  we  do  not  know  even  so  much  to  be  true.  Surely, 
he  was  never  offered  as  a  model  child,  and  we  do  not  suppose  he  was  born  unlike 
others.  II.  So  now  let  us  inquire  what  is  thb  true  spiritual  doctbinb  of  thb 
PASSAGE.  It  is  evident  that  our  Lord  was  rebuking  His  disciples  for  a  foolish 
dispute  they  had  had  "  by  the  way."  And  he  did  this  by  commending  to  them  a 
child-like  disposition.  1.  A  child  is  remarkable  for  his  considerateness  of  others. 
It  is  the  hardest  thing  we  ever  try  to  do  to  teach  our  children  to  be  aristocratic 
and  keep  up  *'  style."  They  are  instinctive  in  their  fondness  for  what  is  agreeably 
human.  It  was  asked  of  the  good  Cecil's  daughter  what  made  everybody  love  her  ? 
She  thought  a  moment  with  a  curious  sort  of  surprise,  then  answered  with  her  own 
kind  of  logic,  "Because  I  love  everybody."  2.  A  child  is  remarkable  for  his 
obedience  to  rightful  authority.  His  subjection  is  instinctive  as  his  charity  is.  He 
accepts  the  parental  will  as  law.  So  his  fidelity  is  spontaneous ;  he  does  not 
recognize  any  merit  in  it.  He  does  the  exact  thing  he  was  set  to  do.  When  the 
young  girl  in  the  class  heard  the  teacher  say,  "  How  is  the  will  of  God  done  in 
heaven  ? "  she  answered,  •*  It  is  done  without  anybody's  asking  any  questions." 
3.  A  child  is  remarkable  for  his  contentment  in  the  home  circle.  There  is  only 
one  mother  in  the  world,  and  where  that  mother  is,  there  is  home.  Disturb  him, 
wound  him,  frighten  him,  maltreat  him,  and  his  earliest  wish  is,  "  Please  let  me  go 
home."  4.  A  child  is  remarkable  for  his  persistency  of  trust.  Children  are  the 
most  logical  creatures  in  the  world.  A  lady  asked  the  small  daughter  of  the 
missionary  Judson,  "Were  you  not  afraid  to  journey  so  far  over  the  ocean?" 
And  the  reply  was,  •*  Why,  no,  madam:  father  prayed  for  us  when  we  started  I  " 
Do  a  boy  a  real  kindness,  and  nothing  on  earth  can  keep  him  from  insisting  to  all 
the  others  that  you  are  a  kind  man.  Help  him  once,  and  he  will  keep  coming  with 
a  pathetic  sort  of  confidence  that  you  like  to  help  him.  For  one,  having  stumbled 
around  a  good  deal  in  this  muddle  of  a  world,  in  which  nobody  seems  to  stick  to 
anything,  I  am  ready  to  say  I  know  nothing  more  beautiful  than  the  sweet  forgive- 
ness, and  renewal  of  confidence,  which  a  child  shows  when,  having  met  a  rebuff 
once  and  been  turned  away,  it  sits  wondering  and  waiting,  as  if  sure  you  would 
come  round  by  and  by  and  be  good  again.  UI.  Thus,  now,  having  studied  the  real 
meaning  of  this  incident,  let  us  try  to  find  out  rrs  practical  sEABiNa.  1.  In  the 
first  place,  consider  how  it  would  modify  our  estimates  of  human  greatness.  Here 
is  the  point  at  which  our  Lord  meant  His  instruction  should  be  felt  earliest.  These 
disciples  had  been  contending  about  pre-eminence.  Perhaps  Peter  began  the 
jealous  dispute,  reminding  them  that  he  kept  the  house  where  Jesus  was  enter- 
tained. Perhaps  John  asked  him  to  remember  the  place  Jesus  usually  gave  him  at 
the  table.  Perhaps  Andrew  suggested  that  Simon  might  as  well  bear  in  mind  that 
he  had  led  him  to  Jesus  down  in  Bethabara.  Perhaps  Matthew  hushed  them 
imperiously,  declaring  that  none  of  them  were  business  men  as  he  had  been.  And 
perhaps  James  insisted  that  age  and  experience  had  some  rights  in  the  reckoning 
of  precedence.  Thus  they  worked  themselves  up  into  a  passion.  All  this 
petulance  was  met  by  the  spectacle  of  a  tranquil  little  boy,  who  possibly  wondered 
how  he  came  to  be  put  into  show :  and  while  they  were  looking  curiously  at  him, 
Jesus  said,  calmly :  "  Whosoever  therefore  shall  humble  himseli  as  this  Httle  child, 
the  same  is  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  2.  Next,  let  as  consider  how  this 
teaching  would  modify  our  aims  for  attainment.  We  need  more  of  this  child-spirit 
in  our  hearts.  Does  any  one  ask  how  it  may  be  attained  ?  In  the  old  fable  which 
the  Hebrews  used  to  teach  their  children  about  the  fallen  angels,  they  said  that  the 
angels  of  knowledge,  proud  and  wilful,  were  cast  down  hopelessly  into  hell ;  but  the 
angels  of  love,  humble  and  tearful,  crept  back  once  more  into  the  blessed  light,  and 
were  welcomed  home.  8.  Again,  let  us  consider  how  these  words  of  Christ  would 
modify  our  intellectual  processes  of  study.  Yes :  but  the  Bible  says  do  this  thing 
like  a  child.  Study  with  your  faith  rather  than  your  intellect.  A  man  needs 
conversion,  not  conviction.  Our  Lord  here  reverses  human  terms  of  counsel.  We 
say  to  a  child,  "  Be  a  man,"  but  Jesus  says  to  a  man,  '♦  Be  a  child."  That  is  the 
way  to  enter  the  kingdom.  4.  Once  more  :  let  us  consider  how  this  doctrine  will 
modify  our  formulas  of  belief.  There  is  something  for  the  great  divines  to  learn 
also.  Do  we  never  force  our  theories  beyond  the  confines  of  the  gospel  t  A  child's 
theology  is  frequently  wiser  for  real  human  need  than  a  man's.  It  often  comes  to 
pass  that  when  a  mature  intellect  has  been  worrying  itself  into  most  discouraging 
confusion,  it  it  startled  by  the  keen  penetration  and  almost  oracular  deliverance  of 


566  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  vl 

an  infant  tmst.  Ask  one  of  our  young  girls,  "  What  is  God  ?  "  Perhaps  she  will 
give  answer,  ♦•  God  is  a  Spirit,  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  in  His  being, 
wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth."  And  perhaps  she  wiU 
reply,  "  God  is  my  father  in  heaven."  For  all  availableness  to  deep  experience  oi 
need,  some  of  us  think  that,  little  as  this  seems  to  say,  really  it  says  more  than 
the  other  does.  Faith  cannot  climb  up  on  the  north  side  of  a  doctrine  in  the 
shade.  She  took  her  notion  out  of  the  prayer,  and  not  out  of  the  catechism ;  that 
is  all.  These  great  formulas  ought  to  be  explained  in  the  very  warmth  and  light 
of  the  figures  and  relationships  of  the  gospel.  5.  Let  us  consider  likf^wise  how 
Christ's  teaching  would  modify  our  advice  to  inquirers.  Some  of  those  who  claim 
to  be  honest  seekers  after  truth  completely  invert  the  order  of  relation  between 
belief  and  duty.  Much  of  the  difficulty  they  profess  to  find  in  the  gospel  ia 
irrelevant  in  the  matter  of  obligation,  and  entirely  illogical  in  the  matter  of  faith. 
Any  sensible  child  is  aware  that  its  father's  relationship  by  marriage,  social  stand- 
ing in  the  community,  form  of  daily  occupation,  political  influence  in  the  party,  or 
citizenship  by  naturalization,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question  of  its  own 
obedience  to  his  just  commands.  To  reckon  how  much  money  he  owes  or  owns, 
does  not  come  before  minding  what  he  says.  But  inquirers  will  often  insist  on 
having  tie  Trinity  made  clear,  before  they  will  take  up  repentance.  They  say  they 
are  stumbled  about  praying,  because  they  cannot  understand  the  Incarnation.  Now 
the  child-spirit  knows  that  taking  the  yoke  comes  even  before  learning  of  Christ 
(see  Matt.  xi.  29).  Jesus  says.  Do  My  will  (John  vii.  17).  6.  Finally,  let  us 
consider  how  this  teaching  will  modify  our  tests  of  experience  in  grace.  It  is  only 
a  strange  perversity  which  makes  us  seem  to  prefer  the  more  subtle  evidences  of  a 
change  of  heart.  Here  a  plain  test  is  proposed.  The  last  result,  the  positively 
completed  picture,  of  regeneration,  is  found,  in  a  child's  temper  and  disposition. 
Any  one  ought  to  know  whether  he  possesses  that  or  not.  He  can  find  out.  His 
life  will  answer  his  questions,  when  possibly  he  cannot  exactly  find  out  about 
so  mysterious  a  thing  as  his  heart.  Nobody  is  going  to  be  excluded  from  heaven 
because  he  cannot  find  out  his  election  or  his  regeneration,  if  he  is  holy,  and  truly 
believes  in  Christ,  "as  this  little  child."  {C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  desire  to 
be  first : — If  any  man  desire  to  be  first,  the  same  shall  be  last  (v.  35).  There  is  no 
way  in  which  men  are  surer  to  outwit  themselves  than  in  looking  out  for  themselves 
over  everybody  else.  The  poorest  servant  in  the  world  is  the  one  who  always  puts 
himself  before  his  employer.  The  poorest  place  to  buy  anything  is  where  the 
dealer  never  regards  the  interest  of  his  customers.  He  is  less  than  nothing  as  a 
friend  who  gives  his  friend  the  second  place  in  his  plans  and  coarse.  No  politician 
can  be  a  leader  while  it  appears  that  he  cares  only  for  his  own  advancement,  and 
nothing  for  the  voters.  What  would  a  soldier  be  worth  whose  aim  was  to  look  out 
for  his  own  safety  and  comfort  in  times  of  service  and  battle  ?  And  if  this  principle 
be  applicable  in  other  fields,  how  much  more  does  it  apply  to  Christian  service ! 
He  who  is  intent  on  what  he  can  gain  out  of  his  religion,  will  be  behind  the  poorest 
servant  of  Christ  who  is  a  servant  in  truth  as  well  as  in  name.  Self-seeking  is  self- 
destroying  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  {H.  Clay  Trumbull.)  In  My  name : — This 
means,  for  My  sake,  and  it  includes  (1)  because  they  belong  to  Christian  parents ; 
(2)  because  they  partake  of  the  nature  which  Christ  took  upon  Him ;  (3)  because 
they  belong  to  the  race  which  Christ  redeemed  ;  (4)  because,  like  Christ,  they  are 
poor ;  (5)  because  Christ  may  be  honoured  in  their  after-life.  Such  children  are 
received  in  Christ's  Name,  not  only  in  orphanages  or  in  Sunday  schools,  but  by 
many  of  the  Christ-loving  poor,  who  have  children  of  their  own,  and  yet  taie  into 
their  homes  some  poor  waif  or  stray,  and  cherish  it  as  their  own  flesh  and  blood, 
for  no  reward  except  the  Lord's  approval.  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  Receiveth  Me : — The 
grace  of  this  promise  seems  almost  incredible.  What  an  honour  would  any 
Christian  have  esteemed  it,  if  he  had  been  permitted  to  receive  Christ  under  his 
roof  for  a  single  hour,  and  yet  that  receiving  might  have  been  external  and 
transitory ;  but  the  Lord  here  undoubtedly  promises  that  to  receive  a  little  one  in 
His  Name  is  to  receive  Him  effectually.    (Ibid,) 

Vers.  8S-40.     And  we  forbade  him. — Chrittian  toleration:—!.  That  powxb  to 

DO  OOOn  IB  NOT  MONOPOLIZED   BY  ONB   CLASS  OF  BELIEVXB8  Of  GhBIST.      We  Oan  OUfy 

conjecture,  bat  there  is  strong  reason  for  supposing,  as  many  have  done,  that  thu 
man  who  was  encountered  in  his  work  by  our  Lord's  disciples,  was  a  disciple  of 
John  Baptist.  It  is  not  unlikely  t  at  he  may  have  been  but  partially  enlightenad 
tm  to  the  mission  of  our  Lord ;  or  have  fully  believed  in  Him  as  the  Messiah,  Irat 


CHAP,  vni.]  ST,  MARK.  »67 

have  preferred  an  independent  conrse  of  action  for  himself.  We  have  seen,  and  wfe 
see  to-day,  similar  deeds  of  helpful  charity  being  performed  by  men  not  of  our  party, 
who  do  not  worship  at  the  church  or  chapel  which  we  are  accustomed  to  attend. 
The  essentials  of  a  good  deed  are  alike  in  both  oases.  These  neighbours  of  ours 
are  engaged  in  casting  out  the  demons  of  ignorance,  vicious  habits,  vile  passions, 
and  despairing  poverty.  Some  of  them  have  confronted  difficulties  which  we  have 
not  dared  to  face,  and  solved  problems  which  we  had  pronounced  impossible  of  solu- 
tion. All  Christian  parties  and  all  Christian  men  can  bear  testimony  to  the  uni- 
versal existence  of  this  fact.  II.  Wk  bbmabk  that  the  conduct  of  the  disciples 
18  not  sinoulab  fob  its  intolebangb.  The  clannish  feeling  was  very  strong  amongst 
these  men.  There  is  something  really  good  at  the  bottom  of  this  feeling.  It  implies 
and  involves  a  binding  principle  of  fealty,  which  is  one  of  the  truest  feelings  of 
noble  natures.  But  unless  it  is  checked  in  some  of  its  tendencies,  and  regulated  by 
judicious  reflections,  it  becomes  exclusive  and  illiberal.  We  can  hardly  imagine 
the  meek,  gentle,  and  tender-spirited  John  joining  in  the  exclusive  conduct  of  this 
severe  proceeding.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  the  censure  which  he  could  pass 
upon  a  man  who  was  doing  good.  But  the  meekest  men  become  severe  where  privi- 
leges of  a  certain  order  are  concerned.  III.  We  obsebve  the  tolebant  spibit  op 
Chbist.  "  Forbid  him  not !  **  Let  him  alone  ;  leave  him  to  his  work  I  "  Forbid 
him  not !  *'  for  two  reasons :  first,  because  "  there  is  no  man  which  shall  do  a 
miracle  in  My  name  that  can  lightly  (or  ♦  easily,*  •  quickly,'  readily ')  speak  evil  of 
Me."  Secondly,  "  He  that  is  not  against  ns  is  on  our  part."  He  that  cannot 
speak  against  me  may  be  regarded  as  my  friend.  In  a  matter  like  this  the  absence 
of  opposition  may  be  accepted  as  a  proof  of  support.  Tacit  approval  of  our  work 
mast  be  welcomed  as  next  in  importance,  if  no  more,  to  definite  co-operation.  Do 
we  not  wait  for  men  to  join  our  ranks  before  we  acknowledge  them  as  followers  of 
Christ  ?  We  have  devoted  too  much  of  the  energy  and  earnestness  of  our  life  to 
the  little  matters  that  absorb  as  as  denominations  rather  than  to  the  grander  and 
mightier  subjects  that  concern  ns  as  Christians.  Between  as  and  those  from  whom 
we  stand  aloof  there  may  exist  no  real  barrier  to  a  happy  and  hearty  recognition  of 
our  common  interest  in  the  same  dear  and  blessed  Lord.  Everything  which  tends 
to  rend  away  the  veil  that  separates  the  follower  of  Jesns  Christ  from  his  brother 
is  to  be  hailed  with  devout  and  fervent  gratitude,  and  every  spirit  should  yearn  to 
join  the  prayer  of  that  great  heart  while  yet  npon  the  earth,  **  Thai  they  all  may  be 
one."  IW.  Dorling.)  The  line  of  conduct  toe  should  adopt  Urwardg  those  who  follow 
not  with  us: — I  would  remark — I.  That  it  becomes  us  oabefullt  to  obsebve 

THEIB  8ENTIMXNT8,    PBOFESSIONS,    OHABACTEBS,    AND    OONDUOT.        **  They  follow    not 

with  OS  ; "  therefore,  says  one,  they  must  be  wrong.  Let  them  alone,  says  another. 
We  have  sufficient  to  do  to  mind  our  own  concerns,  repHes  a  third.  Am  I  my 
brother's  keeper  ?  observes  a  fourth.  Truth  and  charity  require  that  we  should 
ascertain  the  sentiments  and  practices  of  those  who  follow  not  with  us,  before  we 
forbid  them ;  and  that  we  should  ascertain  those  sentiments  from  authorized  and 
acknowledged  statements  and  records,  as  far  as  we  can  obtain  access  to  them.  II. 
Such  inqnires  naturally  lead  to  a  second  remark ;  namely,  that  where  we  have  not 
opportnnity  of  thus  precisely  ascertaining  the  sentiments  and  conduct  of  those  who 
follow  not  with  us ;  and  where  it  is  necessary,  notwithstanding,  to  give  some  advice 
with  respect  to  them,  that  advice  should  be  given  in  as  favoubable  a  vanneb  as 

the  OXBCUMSTANCES  with   which  we   ABE  ACQUAINTED  WILL  ALLOW.       They  folloW  UOt 

with  as ;  but  are  they  casting  oat  Satan  in  the  name  of  Christ  ? — They  follow  not 
with  as.  Now,  we  are  convinced  of  being  right,  and  this  affords  a  legitimate  pre- 
sumption that  those  who  differ  from  us  are  in  some  respects  wrong ;  bat,  at  the 
same  time,  it  is  not  a  necessary  conclusion.  The  presumption,  therefore,  of  crimi- 
nality being  disposed  of,  the  next  inquiry  is.  Do  they  cast  out  Satan  in  the  name  of 
Christ  ?  or,  in  plainer  terms,  Are  they,  on  Christian  principles,  endeavouring  to 
diminish  the  sum  of  crime  and  misery — to  promote  the  cause  of  peace  and  purity, 
to  lead  men  from  sin  to  holiness  ?  and  if  so,  the  answer  must  be—"  Forbid  them 
not."  Observe — It  must  be  in  the  name  of  Christ.  Men  come  continually  with 
this  and  that  ingenioas  device  and  philosophical  contrivance ;  the  cant  of  liberalism, 
the  yirtaes  of  universal  suffrage,  the  abolition  of  the  poor  laws — this  panacea  for  all 
that  is  wrong,  and  the  patent  for  the  production  of  all  that  is  right.  I  say  not,  there 
is  nothing  in  these  things ;  I  say  not  that  politicians  and  legislators  may  not  do  well 

to  oonsider  such  topics ;  but,  as  a  Christian  man  and  a  Christian  minister,  I  say All 

these  are  mere  trifles.  The  ph  osopher  may  say— With  this  machine,  and  this 
■tanding-pUoe,  I  will  move  the  world.    True,  says  his  opponent ;  in  Uie  longeet 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ix. 

Bpaoe  of  hnman  life  ^on  will  moye  the  world  Bome  thoasandth  part  of  an  inch — and 
what  then  ?  Saoh  is  the  whole  valne  of  the  labonrs  of  manj.  It  must  be  in  the 
name  of  Christ,  the  dignity  of  His  character,  the  power,  the  mercy,  the  atonement, 
the  intercession,  the  grace  of  Christ.  All  other  means,  brethren,  of  casting  out 
devils,  of  overcoming  sin,  of  producing  holiness,  are  utterly  in  vain ;  the  evil  spirit 
will  return.  He  will  say — Jesus  I  know,  and  Paul  I  know — but  who  are  ye  ?  Even 
moral  precepts,  moral  suasion,  the  terrors  of  the  law,  the  solemnities  of  death,  the 
eternal  consequences  of  judgment,  are  found  ineffectual  to  break  the  bondage  of 
iniquity.  (T.  Webster,  M.A.)  The  degrees  of  Christianity  : — I.  The  deorbb  ow 
SKRVICB.  "He  that  is  not  against  us  is  on  our  part."  That  man  of  whom  St. 
John  tells  us  in  our  text  that  he  had  oast  out  devils  in  Jesus's  name,  was  mightily 
stimulated  by  the  appearance  of  Jesus  and  His  wonderful  works.  He  was  no  dis- 
ciple, for  how  could  he  else  have  taken  his  own  way,  if  in  his  heart  he  truly  be- 
longed to  Jesus.  His  heart  was  far  from  Jesus,  but  his  understanding  perceived 
the  importance  of  Jesns,  and  he  believed  in  the  power  of  His  name  which  he  had 
often  experienced.  Thus  he  was  a  servant,  though  not  a  child,  of  God ;  in  Jesus's 
service,  but  not  in  His  commission.  The  name  of  Jesus  exercises  an  overwhelming 
authority  even  upon  those  who  in  heart  are  far  from  Him,  even  on  the  things  of 
natural  human  life,  law,  science,  art,  &c.  These  are  not  Christianized  in  the 
proper  sense  of  that  word,  and  yet  we  call  them  Christian ;  they  are  in  the  service 
of  the  cause  of  Jesus.  Christians  ought  not  to  disparage  outward  Christianity,  or 
call  it  hypocrisy ;  it  acknowledges  the  name  of  Christ  and  is  serving  His  cause. 
When  the  point  in  question  is  our  adoption  and  salvation,  then  we  must  be  for 
Him.  But  he  already  serves  Him  who  is  not  exactly  against  Bttm  and  His  cause. 
That  is  the  first  degree,  the  degree  of  serving  His  cause.  But  saving  His  believing 
people  has  a  higher  value.  *'  Whosoever  shall  give  you  a  cup  of  cold  water,"  &o. 
However,  nobody  has  au  eye  for  this  hidden  beauty,  but  he  who  in  the  spirit  per- 
ceives the  beauty  of  Jesus,  and  nobody  has  a  hearty  love  for  the  poor  saints  of  Jesus 
but  he  who  in  love  has  shut  up  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his  heart.  "  For  whosoever  shall  give 
you  a  cup  of  water  to  drink  in  My  name,  because  ye  belong  to  Christ,  verily  I  say 
unto  you,  he  shall  not  lose  his  reward."  The  Lord  does  not  speak  of  friendly  ser- 
vices such  as  man  renders  to  man  from  natural  sympathy,  but  of  the  service 
rendered  to  His  disciples,  and  rendered  to  them  because  they  are  His  disciples. 
'*  Whosoever  shall  give  you  a  cup  of  water  to  drink  in  My  name,  because  ye  belong 
to  Christ."  Such  a  serving  of  the  saints  is  not  without  communion  with  Jesus  in 
faith  and  love.  II.  That  is  the  other  degree.  The  deobee  of  communion,  of 
COMMUNION  of  heabt.  For  communion  of  the  heart  with  Jesus  is  that,  and  that 
only,  which  constitutes  the  disciple  of  Jesus  the  Christian.  My  beloved  brethren, 
there  are  many  things  which  we  find  and  win  in  Jesus — wisdom,  holiness,  glory — 
but  what  we  have  to  seek  in  Him,  in  the  first  place,  is  the  pardon  of  our  sins ;  what 
we  have  to  see  in  Him  is  the  Lamb  of  God  which  takes  away  our  sins.  Then  all 
other  things  will  be  added  to  us ;  that  is  the  communion  with  Jesus,  the  following 
of  Jesus,  as  St.  John  narrates  it  of  himself,  for  our  example  and  stimulation.  That 
is  his  meaning  when  he  tells  Jesus  of  one  "  who  folio weth  not  us."  But  that  is  not 
all.  That  man  of  whom  St.  John  speaks  exercised  an  activity  which  had  a  certain 
resemblance  to  the  working  of  the  apostles.  Thus  St.  John  did  not  only  recognize 
an  imitation  of  Jesus  Christ  in  faith  and  love,  but  also  in  good  works,  not  only  a 
communion  of  the  heart,  but  also  of  the  life.  He  thought  of  this  not  less  when  he 
spoke  that  word.  And  though  we  be  no  apostles,  and  though  we  are  not  all 
ministers  of  the  gospel,  we  yet  have  all  a  share  in  the  one  great  work  of  helping  to 
build  up  and  hasten  the  full  glory  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  But  our  entering  into 
that  communion  of  working  with  Jesus  is  only  effected  by  prayer,  by  His  prayer  &iji 
ours.  In  the  communion  of  the  love  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  the  Holy  Spirii 
begins  every  prayer,  and  we  carry  it  out  in  the  words  of  our  lips.  That  prayer 
sends  down  upon  us  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  while  our  prayer  plunges  us  into  the 
depth  of  the  Divine  spiritual  life,  that  we  may  emerge  from  it  filled  with  the  powers 
of  a  higher  world.  Therein  the  communion  with  Jesus  Christ  is  finished.  (C.  L, 
E,  Lutliardt.)  The  fellowship  of  tlie  apostles  : — It  is  argued  that  fu  the  apostles 
were  not  allowed  to  forbid  this  stranger,  neither  may  the  Church  forbid  strange 
preachers ;  that  all  have  a  right  to  preach,  whether  they  follow  the  Church  or  no, 
so  that  they  do  but  preach  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Such  is  the  objection,  and  I  pro- 
pose now  to  consider  it.  1.  First,  then,  this  man  was  not  preaching ;  he  was 
easting  out  devils.  This  is  a  great  diiference — he  was  doing  a  miracle.  *•  There  is 
which  shall  do  a  miracle  in  My  name,"  <&o.     Man  cannot  overcome  the 


GHAP.  n.]  ST.  MARE.  369 

devil,  Christ  only  overcomes  him.  U  »  mau  oh^ab  oat  a  devu,  ue  nas  power  from 
Christ ;  and  if  he  has  power  from  Christ,  he  must  have  a  commission  from  Christ ; 
and  who  shall  forbid  one,  to  whom  God  gives  commission  to  do  miracles,  from  doing 
them  f  That  would  be  fighting  against  God.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  many  a  man 
may  preach  without  being  sent  from  God  and  having  power  from  Him ;  for  Christ 
expressly  warns  us  against  false  prophets.  2.  But  it  may  be  said,  ♦•  The  effects  of 
preaching  are  a  miracle.  A  good  preacher  converts  persons ;  he  casts  out  devils 
from  the  hearts  of  those  whom  he  changes  from  sin  to  holiness.  This  he  could  not 
do  without  power  from  God.  But  what  seems  good,  is  often  not  good.  3. 
But,  again,  even  if  sinners  are  converted  upon  such  a  one's  preaching,  this  would 
not  show  that  he  did  the  work,  or,  at  least,  that  he  had  more  than  a  share  in  it. 
The  miracle  might  after  all  belong  to  the  Church,  not  to  him.  They  are  but  the 
occasion  of  the  miracle,  not  the  instrument  of  it.  Persons  who  take  up  with  strange 
preachers  often  grant  that  they  gained  their  first  impressions  in  the  Church.  To 
proceed,  (l)  It  should  be  observed,  then,  that  if  our  Saviour  says  on  this  occasion, 
"  He  that  is  not  against  us  is  on  our  part "  ;  yet  elsewhere  He  says,  "  He  that  is 
not  with  Me  is  against  Me."  The  truth  is,  while  a  system  is  making  way  against 
an  existing  state  of  things,  help  of  any  kind  advances  it ;  but  when  it  is  established, 
the  same  kind  of  professed  help  tells  against  it.  It  was  at  a  time  when  there  was 
no  church ;  we  have  no  warrant  for  saying  that  because  men  might  work  in  Christ's 
name,  without  following  the  apostles,  before  He  had  built  up  His  Church,  and  had 
made  them  the  foundations  of  it,  therefore  such  persons  may  do  go  lawfully  since. 
He  did  not  set  up  BLis  Church  till  after  the  resurrection.  Accordingly,  when  the 
Christians  at  Corinth  went  into  parties,  and  set  up  forms  of  doctrine  of  their  own, 
St.  Paul  forbade  them.  ••  What  I "  he  said,  "  came  the  Word  of  God  out  from 
yon  ?  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  86).  That  Church  made  you  what  you  are,  as  far  as  you  are 
Christian,  and  has  a  right  to  bid  you  follow  her.  And  for  what  we  know,  the  very 
man  in  the  text  was  one  of  St.  John's  disciples ;  who  might  lawfully  remain  as  he 
was  without  joining  the  apostles  till  the  apostles  received  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  then  he  was  bound  to  join  them.  (2)  And  here,  too,  we  have  light  thrown 
upon  an  expression  in  the  text,  "  In  My  name."  Merely  to  use  the  name  of  Jesus 
is  not  enough ;  we  must  look  for  that  name  where  He  has  lodged  it.  He  has  not 
lodged  it  in  the  world  at  large,  but  in  a  secure  dwelling-place,  and  we  have  that 
name  engraven  on  us  only  when  we  are  in  that  dwelling-place  (Exod.  xxiii.  20,  21). 
Thus  the  stranger  in  the  text  might  use  the  name  of  Jesus  without  following  the 
apostles,  because  they  had  not  yet  had  the  name  of  Christ  named  upon  them. 
Nothing  can  be  inferred  from  the  text  in  favour  of  those  who  set  up  against  the 
Church,  or  who  interfere  with  it.  On  the  whole,  then,  I  would  say  this ;  when 
strangers  to  the  Church  preach  great  Christian  truths,  and  do  not  oppose  the 
Church,  then,  though  we  may  not  follow  them,  though  we  may  not  join  them,  yet 
we  are  not  allowed  to  forbid  them ;  but  in  proportion  as  they  preach  what  is  in  itself 
untrue,  and  do  actively  oppose  God's  great  Ordinance,  so  far  they  are  not  like  the  man 
whom  our  Lord  told  His  apostles  not  to  forbid.  But  in  all  cases,  whether  they  preach 
true  doctrine  or  not,  or  whether  they  oppose  us  or  not,  so  much  we  learn,  viz.,  that  we 
must  overcome  them,  not  so  much  by  refuting  them,  as  by  preaching  the  truth. 
Let  us  be  far  more  set  upon  alluring  souls  into  the  right  way  than  on  forbidding 
them  the  wrong.  Let  us  be  like  racers  in  a  course,  who  do  not  impede,  but  try  to 
outstrip  each  other  by  love.  {J.  H.  Newman,  B.D.)  Party  spirit : — I.  Attestd 
TO  A  FEW  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  PASSAGE.  1.  On  the  introduction  of  a 
new  dispensation  the  power  of  working  miracles  was  necessary,  in  order  to  establish 
its  Divine  authority;  and  this  power  consequently  attended  the  first  ages  of  Chris- 
tianity. 2.  Some  who  profess  a  sacred  regard  for  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  the  doc- 
trines of  the  gospel,  may  nevertheless  not  follow  Him  in  all  things  as  we  do.  or  as 
they  themselves  ought  to  do.  This  may  arise  from  ignorance,  indolence,  and  inad- 
vertence. 3.  In  the  conduct  of  the  disiciples  we  may  see  our  own  aptness  to 
imagine  that  those  do  not  follow  Christ  at  all  who  do  not  follow  Him  with  us.    IL 

INQUIBE   into     the     causes     of    that    UNCHARITABIiE    JUDGMENT,    WHICH    PROFESSED 

Christians  abb  disposed  to  pass  upon  one  another.  1.  An  immoderate  degree 
of  self-love.  2.  Bigotry  and  party  spirit  are  another  source  of  uncharitable  judg- 
ment, 8.  An  idle  and  pragmatic  temper  is  another  of  these  causes.  4.  A  liberty 
taken  to  censuie  and  condemn  others,  is  often  vindicated  by  the  appearance  of  a 
similar  disposition  on  the  other  side.  Let  us  not  judge  of  men's  thoughts  and 
Intentions  when  there  is  nothing  reprehensible  in  their  conduct.  (B.  Beddonie,  M^.) 
The  tgirit  of  intolerance  and  sectarianism : — ^Note  the  "  us."    Although  no  exegetioal 

24 


870  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  k 

emphasis  is  lying  on  it,  jet  it  is  well  to  read  it  with  some  doctrinal  intonation.  It 
is  the  point  at  which  the  principle  of  ezclusiveness  crops  np — tbat  spirit  of  intoler. 
ance  which  so  easily  develops  itself  into  fagot  and  fire.  It  was  rife  in  the  Jewish 
nation.  It  had  been  rife  among  other  peoples.  And  although  it  was  nipped  in  the 
bud  by  the  Saviour  the  moment  it  sprang  up  among  His  disciples,  yet  by  and  by  it 
lose  again  within  the  circle  of  Christendom,  and  grew  into  a  upas  tree  that  spread 
its  branches,  and  distilled  its  blight,  almost  as  far  as  the  name  of  Christ  was  named. 
The  tree  still  stands,  alas — though  many  a  noble  hatchet  has  been  raised  to  cut  it 
down.  It  stands ;  but  the  hatchets  have  not  been  plied  in  vain.  It  is  moribund. 
And  here  and  there  some  of  its  larger  boughs  have  been  lopped  off,  so  that  the 
sweet  air  of  heaven  is  getting  in  upon  hundreds  of  thousands  of  the  more  favoured 
of  those  who  were  sitting  in  the  shadow  of  death.  (J.  Marison^  D.D.)  Working 
with  Christ  outside  the  apostolate : — The  complaint  brought  by  the  disciples  against 
the  man  was,  "  he  followeth  not  us," — us,  the  apostles ;  the  complaint  says  nothing 
about  following  Christ.  There  was  a  spirit  of  envy  and  selfishness  in  this  remark, 
which  would  have  restrained  Christ's  favours  to  the  persons  of  the  apostles  and  their 
immediate  adherents.  But  our  Lord  reminds  the  complainants  that  the  man 
wrought  miracles  in  their  Master's  name,  as  they  themselves  had  owned ;  <.«.,  he 
wrought  miracles  in  conformity  to  Christ's  will,  and  for  the  promotion  of  Christ's 
glory — i.e.,  in  union  with  Christ — and  not  for  any  private  end ;  therefore  the  man 
was  with  Christ,  though  he  did  not  personally  follow  in  the  company  of  the  apostles, 
just  as  John  Baptist  was  with  Christ,  though  not  in  person ;  and  as  all  the  apostles 
preaching  the  gospel  and  administering  the  sacraments  of  Christ  in  Christ's  name  in 
all  parts  of  the  world  were  with  one  another  and  with  Christ,  after  He  had  ascended 
into  heaven.  The  man  was  not  neuter  in  the  cause,  and  therefore  was  not 
against  them ;  and  their  Master  had  authorized  him  openly  by  enabling  him  to  work 
in  His  name ;  and  therefore  the  man  was  with  Him,  and  consequently  with  His 
apostles,  in  heart  and  spirit,  though  not  in  person  and  presence,  and  was  not  to  be 
forbidden  or  discouraged  by  them.  Thus  our  Lord  delivered  a  warning  against  that 
sectarian  spirit  which  is  eager  for  its  own  ends  rather  than  for  Christ's ;  and  would 
limit  Christ's  graces  to  personal  communion  with  itself,  instead  of  inquiring  whether 
those  whom  it  would  exclude  from  grace  are  not  working  in  Christ's  name — that  is, 
in  obedience  to  His  laws,  and  for  the  promotion  of  His  glory ;  and  in  the  unity  of 
His  Church,  and  in  the  full  and  free  administration  of  His  Word  and  Sacraments, 
and  so  in  communion  with  Him.  Besides — even  if  the  man  was  separated  from 
their  communion,  and  worked  miracles  in  separation  (which  does  not  appear  to 
have  been  the  case,  for  he  worked  in  the  name  of  Christ),  what  they  ought  to  have 
forbidden  was  the  being  in  separation,  and  not  the  working  miracles.  If  a  man, 
separated  from  Christ  and  His  Church,  preaches  Christ,  then  Christ  approves  Hia 
own  Word,  preached  by  one  in  separation  ;  but  He  does  not  approve  the  separation 
itself,  any  more  than  God  approved  the  sins  of  Balaam,  Saul,  and  Caiaphas,  and 
Judas,  when  He  prophesied  and  preached  by  their  mouths.  {Bishop  Christopher 
Wordsworth.)  Intolerance  rebuked: — There  lived  in  Berlin  a  shoemaker  who  had 
a  habit  of  speaking  harshly  and  uncharitably  of  all  his  neighbours  who  did  not 
think  quite  as  he  did  about  religion.  The  old  pastor  of  the  parish  in  which  the 
shoemaker  lived  heard  of  this,  and  felt  that  he  must  try  to  teach  him  a  lesson  of 
toleration.  He  did  it  in  this  way.  Sending  for  the  shoemaker  one  morning,  he 
said  to  him,  "John,  take  my  measure  for  a  pair  of  boots."  "  With  pleasure,  your 
reverence,"  replied  the  shoemaker,  "  please  take  off  your  boot."  The  clergyman 
did  BO,  and  the  shoemaker  measured  his  foot  from  toe  to  heei,  and  over  the  instep, 
noted  all  down  in  his  pocket-book ;  and  then  prepared  to  leave  the  room.  But,  as 
he  was  putting  up  the  measure,  the  pastor  said  to  him,  "  John,  my  son  also  requires 
a  pair  of  boots."  "  I  will  make  them  with  pleasure,  your  reverence.  Can  I  take  the 
young  gentleman's  measure  this  morning?  "  '*  Oh,  that  is  unnecessary,"  said  the 
pastor ;  "the  lad  is  fourteen,  but  you  can  make  my  boots  and  his  from  the  same  last." 
"  Your  reverence,  that  will  never  do,"  said  the  shoemaker,  with  a  smile  of  surprise. 
"  I  tell  you,  John,  to  make  my  boots  and  those  for  my  son,  on  the  same  last. " 
*•  No,  your  reverence,  I  cannot  do  it."  "  It  must  be  done — on  the  same  last,  re- 
member." "  But,  your  reverence,  it  is  not  possible,  if  the  boots  are  to  fit,"  said  the 
shoemaker,  thinking  to  himself  that  the  old  pastor's  wits  must  be  leaving  him. 
**  Ah,  then,  master  shoemaker,"  said  the  clergyman,  "  every  pair  of  boots  must  be 
made  on  their  own  last,  if  they  are  to  fit,  and  yet  you  think  that  God  is  to  form  all 
Christians  exactly  according  to  your  own  last,  of  the  same  measure  and  growth  in 
religion  as  yourself.  That  will  not  do,  either."    The  shoemaker  was  abashed.    Then 


*JHAP.  IX.]  ST.  MARK. 


S71 


he  said,  "  I  thank  your  reverence  for  this  sermon,  and  I  will  try  to  rememher  it,  and 
to  judge  my  neighboura  less  harshly  in  the  future.*' 

Ver.  41.    A  cup  of  water  to  drink  in  My  jmme.— The  smnllMt  gift  and  the  large*t 
reward  :—l.  IteE  description  which  is  here  given  of  the  disciples  of  Christ,  is  exceed- 
mgly  interesting  and  instructive.     They  «'  belong  "  to  Christ ;  they  are  peculiarly 
and  emphatically  His  ;  speaking  of  them,  he  calls  them  "  My  sheep,"  "  My  people," 
•'  My  disciples ;  "  and  addressing  His  heavenly  Father  respecting  them,  He  says, 
"  All  Mine  are  Thine,  and  Thine  are  Mine ;  and  I  am  glorified  in  them."    And  the 
Scnptures,  which  thus  represent  Christians  as  the  property  of  Christ,  teach  us  also 
the  way  in  which  they  become  so  entirely  His.     It  is  evident  from  Christ's  own  lan- 
guage, that  His  disciples  belong  to  Him  primarily  by  the  gift  of  His  Father    '•  Thine 
they  were,"  says  He,  ••  and  Thou  gavest  them  Me.     My  Father  which  gave  them  to 
Me,  18  greater  than  all.     All  that  the  Father  hath  given  to  Me  shall  come  to  Me." 
^d  if  they  thug  belong  to  Christ  by  His  reception  of  them  from  the  Father,  and  by 
His  redemption  of  them  by  His  blood,  they  are  also  His  by  their  own  voluntary 
dedication  of  themselves  to  Him,  as  the  result  of  His  electing  and  redeeming  mercy. 
II.  Thi  out  which  Jesus  Christ  asks  on  behalf  of  these  His  disciples,  is  a  cup  of 
water.    When  we  consider  believers  as  belonging  so  peculiarly  to  Christ,  we  might 
suppose  that  He  would  solicit  for  them  the  most  costly  and  munificent  donations 
that  the  most  wealthy  could  bestow ;  but  it  is  a  remarkable  and  an  interesting  fact, 
that  He  never  either  sought  great  things  for  Himself,  or  led  His  disciples  to  expect 
great  things  from  others.     An  impostor,  or  a  mere  enthusiast,  would  in  all  proba- 
bihty  have  acted  diflerently,  and  have  said  to  his  disciples,  "  Whosoever  shall  give 
vou  thousands  of  gold  and  silver ;  whosoever  shall  exalt  yon  to  worldly  dignity  and 
honour ;  and  whosoever  shall  clothe  you  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  cause  you  to 
fare  sumptuously  every  day ;  "—but  His  language  was,  "  Whosoever  shall  give  you  a 
cup  of  water  to  drink."    And  let  not  such  a  gift,  small  as  it  is,  be  despised.    In  our 
circumstances,  we  are  mercifully  unable  to  estimate  its  worth  ;  but  a  man  may  be 
brought  into  such  a  situation  that  even  a  cup  of  water  would  be  the  most  valuable 
and  acceptable  present  that  he  could  receive.     When  Samson  had  slain,  single- 
handed,  a  thousand  of  his  Philistine  foes,  he  cried  unto  the  Lord  and  said,  "  I  die 
for  thirst."    But  when  a  little  water  was  procured,  •'  his  spirit  came  again,  and  he 
revived."   The  smallness  of  the  gift  which  Christ  solicits  in  our  text,  may,  however 
suitably  admonish  His  disciples  to  be  satisfied  with  little.    III.  Thb  motfte  by  which 
you  should  be  influenced  in  the  bestowment  of  this  gift,  seems  to  include  both  love 
to  Christ  and  to  His  disciples ;  for,  says  He,  "  whosoever  shall  give  you  a  cup  of 
water  to  drink  in  My  name,  and  because  ye  belong  to  Christ."     Such  is  the  deceit- 
fulness  and  desperate  wickedness  of  the  human  heart,  that  an  action  productive  of 
good  to  others  may  be  done  merely  for  the  purpose  of  thereby  accomplishing  some 
selfish  and  unhallowed  object,  merely  because  they  are  following  with  you,  and  adher- 
ing to  the  sect  or  party  to  which  you  belong.   But,  to  return  to  the  consideration  of  the 
naotives  by  which  our  gifts  are  to  be  influenced— the  greatest  and  the  purest  is  love  to 
Christ.  To  Him  we  are  laid  under  unspeakable  obligations  for  the  love  with  which  Ke 
loved  us,  when  He  died  for  our  sins,  and  to  secure  the  complete  and  eternal  salvation 
of  our  Boulg.   Love  to  Christ  cannot  exist,  however,  without  love  to  Christians,  who 
belong  to  Christ,  and  who  bear  His  image ;  «•  for  every  one  that  loveth  Him  that 
begat,  loveth  them  also  that  are  begotten  of  Him."    IV.  The  reward  by  which  the 
bestower  of  this  gift  will  be  honoured  and  enriched  is  secured  to  him  by  the  Saviour's 
faithful  promise,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  shall  not  lose  his  reward."   1.  He  shall 
be  rewarded  by  the  pleasurable  feelings  which  the  exercise  of  benevolence  and  kind- 
ness to  others  never  fails  to  produce.    2.  He  shall  be  rewarded  with  the  prayers,  and 
blessings,  and  sympathy  of  the  disciple  on  whom  he  has  bestowed  the  gift.     3.  He 
ahaU  be  rewarded  with  the  approbation  and  blessing  of  Christ  Himself.  (J.  Alexander.) 
A  cup  of  water  .-—There  is  something  very  economical  about  the  generosity  of 
kindness ;  ft  little  goes  a  long  way.     (Faber.)        A  right  motive:— li  ia  6&id  th&i 
when  Andrew  Fuller  went  into  his  native  town  to  collect  for  the  cause  of  missions, 
one  of  his  old  acquaintances  said,  "  Well,  Andrew,  I'll  give  five  pounds,  seeing  it's 
you.*'  *•  No,"  said  Mr.  Fuller,  •'  I  can  take  nothing  for  this  cause,  seeing  it's  nu  "  :— 
and  handed  the  money  back.    The  man  felt  reproved,  but  in  a  moment  he  said, 
"Andrew,  you  are  right.    Here  are  ten  pounds,  seeing  it  is  for  the  Lord  Jesua 
Christ"        An  act,  a  motive,  and  a  reward: — Here  is  an  act,  a  motive,  and  a 
reward,  calling  for  thought.  As  to  the  act,  it  is  both  suggestive  and  comprehensive. 
A  mmn  may  live  without  food  for  many  days ;  but  h   cannot  exist  without  water  for 


ITS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caup.  n. 

the  body's  cooling  and  circulating  fluids.    So  there  is  a  moral  life  that  is  kept  up  by 
the  interchange  of  little  acts ;  the  kind  salutation,  the  smile,  the  "  kiss  of  charity,** 
the  word  "  fitly  spoken  and  in  season,"  which  cost  nothing  to  the  giver,  but  are 
invaluable  to  the  receiver.  So  the  little  acts  of  giving,  the  "  mites  **  of  poor  widows^ 
the  full  carrjing  out  of  Paul's  universal  appointment,  "  let  every  one  of  you  lay  by 
him  in  store  as  the  Lord  hath  prospered  him  " — it  is  these  gathered  drops  that 
fill  the  exhaustless  reservoirs  of  world-wide  Christian  charities.    The  motive,  too, 
like  that  which  sees  in  a  child  the  lineaments  of  an  esteemed  parent,  that  recog- 
nizes iu  the  livery  the  servant  of  a  liege-lord,  it  is  this  recognition  of  Christ  in  Hi» 
disciple  that  at  once  honours  the  Master,  and  which  permits  Him  to  honour  the 
service.    The  reward,  too,  is  in  keeping  with  the  act  and  its  motive.    The  little 
badge  a  prince  bestows  is  more  than  a  life-estate.    To  find  true  what  Jesus  declares 
shortly  after  (Matt,  xxv.),  that  the  rewards  of  the  final  judgment  turn  on  these 
little  acts  and  their  motive,  that  Jesus  will  say  of  forgotten  trifles,  "  Ye  did  it  to 
Me."  the  realization  of  this  fact,  so  as  to  make  it  the  rule  of  every-day  life— this  ia 
to  learn  the  lesson  of  giving  a  "  cup  of  cold  water "  in  the  name  of  Christ.    (G. 
W.  Samson,  D.D.)        Give  in  ChrisVs  "name — humanity  not  ChHstianity : — "  That 
man  has  given  more  to  the  poor  than  any  man  in  the  town ;  now  that's  what  I  call 
being  a  noble  Christian,"  is  the  remark  that  a  friend  made  a  few  days  ago.    This 
is  also  a  sample  of  the  opinion  of  quite  a  large  class  of  people ;  they  hold  that 
because  a  man  is  benevolent  he  must  naturally  be  a  Christian ;  but  this  does  not 
necessarily  follow.    A  man  may  love  the  poor,  sympathize  with  those  in  distress, 
and  in  the  fulness  of  his  heart  relieve  the  wants  of  the  pauper,  and  yet  not  be  a 
Christian.    He  gives  for  humanity's  sake,  while  the  Christian  gives  only  for  Christ's 
sake.    Humanity  must  not  be  mistaken  for  Christianity.     Many  noted  highway- 
men have  given  largely  to  the  poor  out  of  what  they  robbed  from  the  rich.    Thai 
tliey  possessed  humanity  no  one  will  doubt,  but  there  was  not  a  particle  of  Chris- 
tianity about  them.    The  virtue  in  humanity's  gift  lies  in  the  amount  given,  but 
the  test  in  Christianity's  gift  lies  in  the  amount  that's  left  behind ;  and  while 
humanity  rejoices  in  having  given  so  much,  Christianity  will  weep  because  she  has  no 
more  to  give.     The  gift  for  humanity's  sake  is  good,  but  to  give  for  Christ's  sake  ia 
better.      The  Pharisee  who  ostentatiously  cast  in  of  his  abundance  pales  into 
insignificance  before  the  poor  widow  who  cast  in  her  all.    Says  Christ :  "  For  the 
poor  always  ye  have  with  you ;  but  Me  ye  have  not  always."    Christ  first,  the 
poor  afterward.    Had  Mary  given  the  money  to  the  poor,  she  would  have  done  weU, 
but  in  that  she  gave  it  to  Christ  she  did  better.    Had  she  given  for  humanity's 
sake,  three  hundred  souls  would  each  have  the  temporal  satisfaction  of  a  penny- 
worth of  bread  ;  but  in  that  she  did  it  for  Christ's  sake  millions  have  been  cheered 
and  encouraged  while  reading  of  her  devotion  and  tenderness  of  Christ.    This  i» 
all  expressed  by  Paul  in  a  single  sentence :  "  Though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed 
the  poor  .  .  .  and  have  not  charity,  I  am  nothing."  To  feed  the  poor  is  humanity, 
but  charity  is  Christianity.    Humanity  is  transitory  and  passes  away.    Christianity 
ia  eternal,  and,  like  a  river,  is  continually  fed  by  countless  tiny  tributaries  that, 
however  small  and  powerless  in  themselves,  all  combine  to  form  one  golden  current 
that  flows  into  a  tar  more  exceeding  and  eternal  sea  of  glory.    {Frank  Hope.} 
Wliose  am  I.-— "Ye  belong  to   Christ."     These  thoughts  are  suggested  by  this 
phrase.    I.  Proprietorship.     There  is  a  sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  that  all 
men  belong  to  Christ.    1.  This  claim  to  us  is  based  primarily  on  His  Creatorship. 
2.  All  are  His  by  redemption.    3.  Baptism  is  a  confirmation  of  all  this.    4.  But 
believers  belong  to  Christ  in  a  more  peculiar  sense  by  an  act  of  personal  consecra- 
tion.   In  the  case  of  many  this  act  of  consecration  has  been  repeatedly  renewed. 
5.  Believers  are  Christ's  by  adoption.      The  soul  surrendered  aU  its  powers  to- 
Christ,  and  He  graciously  accepted  the  offering,  and  smiled  upon  the  oblation, 
n.   To  BELONG   TO   Christ  IMPLIES   PRiviLEOB.      1.    Special  care.     2.   Identity 
of    interests.      If    I  am   Christ's  my  joys  are   His  joys,  my  sorrows   are  His 
Borrowa,    (1)  Things  done  against  the  saints,  Christ  regards  as  done  against  Himselt 
(2)  Things  done  for  the  saints  Christ  regards  as  done  to  Himself.    The  act  of 
doing  pood  to  you  will  add  to  the  felicity  of  the  doer  for  ever.    3.  Dignity.     IIL 
Belongiug  to    Christ   involves   Responsibility.      1.  We  are  to  live  for  Christ. 
2.  We  are  to  live  like  Christ.    3.  We  are  to  confess  Christ.     (R.  Roberts.)        Be- 
longing to  Christ: — I.  The  connection  which  Christ  claims  with  His  pbopui. 
1.  They  belong  to  Him  by  separation  and  surrender.  2.  They  possess  some  spiritual 
worth.    There  are  in  Scripture  some  hints  respecting  the  Divine  estimate  of  men, 
8.  They  are  appointed  to  high  and  sacred  ministries.    4.  They  engage  the  interest 


sO  ST,  MARK.  87t 

of  Christ  in  their  improvement.  6.  They  enjoy  the  hononr  of  spiritnal  association. 
II.  Practical  bdooestions  from  thb  subject.  1.  The  difficulty  of  holding  this 
truth  firmly  is  seen.  2.  It  should  encourage  consistency  of  Christian  life.  8.  It 
invites  us  to  consider  the  personal  signs  of  connection  with  Christ.    {J.  S,  Bright.) 

Ver.  43.  And  if  thy  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  oS.-^Stamhling-hJockn  :~After 
stating  the  fearful  punishment  in  store  for  those  who  impede  the  spiritual  progress 
of  others,  our  Lord  proceeds  to  warn  men  not  to  place  stumbling-blocks  in  their 
own  way.  He  selects  the  chief  instruments  of  sin — the  hand,  the  foot,  the  eye^ 
and  counsels  their  immediate  destruction,  if  need  be,  rather  than  allow  them  to 
work  the  threatened  mischief.  It  is  the  hand  which  men  lift  up  to  do  violence,  as 
Cain  did  to  his  brother ;  or  to  appropriate  what  does  not  belong  to  them,  like 
A.chan.  It  is  the  feet  which  hurry  us  into  forbidden  paths,  as  they  hurried  Gehazi, 
or  the  old  man  of  God  whom  the  lion  slew  for  his  transgression.  It  is  the  eye 
which  excites  the  lust  to  desire,  in  the  spirit  of  Eve,  something  which  God  has 
seen  fit  to  withhold.  To  hurt,  to  trespass,  and  to  covet :  what  a  common  triple 
cord  of  sin  it  isl  (H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  The  price  of  salvation: — The  gentle- 
ness of  the  gospel  is  not  toward  sm,  but  only  to  win  from  it.  It  is  love  that  lays 
down  life  for  enemies,  which  makes  these  demands  on  friends.  Jesus  continually 
pui  before  those  who  heard  Him  the  price  of  salvation.  It  is  a  pearl,  bought  by 
selling  all  we  have ;  the  call  which  requires  us  to  leave — hate  in  comparison — 
houses,  lands,  and  dearest  friends.  It  brings  a  sword  to  divide,  a  cross  for  us  to 
bear.  To  lose  a  foot  will  make  you  walk  slow  and  painful,  to  lose  a  hand  will 
halve  your  power  for  gain  or  usefulness,  to  lose  an  eye  is  darkness  and  disfigure- 
ment. Precious  are  they,  part  of  ourselves ;  bloody  and  anguishing  the  cutting  off 
and  plucking  out.  But  it  must  be,  it  should  be.  Beckon  it  with  our  worldly 
arithmetic,  and  eternal  life  is  cheap  at  any  price.  A  career,  however  marred  and 
maimed,  which  ends  in  heaven,  is  better  than  a  painless  and  brilliant  passage  to  the 
tire  that  shall  never  be  quenched.  Are  things  most  sweet  and  necessary  occasions 
of  sin?  Be  rid  of  them  at  any  cost.  Spare  not  thyself,  and  God  shall  spare  thee. 
Cripple  thyself  for  holiness'  sake,  and  everlasting  life  shall  make  thee  whole.  Fling 
away  ecstatic  delights  to  embrace  purifying  pains,  for  God  has  infinite  stores  of 
blessings,  and  eternity  in  which  to  give  them.  It  is  a  wondrous  thing  to  know  that 
the  pains  and  chastisements  of  this  life  are  fitting  us  to  bear  the  awful  test  of  God's 
devouring  fire,  that  the  light  which  flashes  from  the  face  of  God  shall  strike  our 
souls,  and  the  flames  not  kindle  upon  us.  Compared  with  this,  there  are  no  joys, 
no  sorrows ;  all  other  experiences  get  character  from  their  power  to  affect  this 
consummation.  {G.  M,  Southgate. )  Excision  of  offending  members  : — The  hands, 
the  feet,  the  eyes,  are  set  forth  in  God's  Word  as  the  instruments  of  the  soul  in 
compassing  the  gratification  of  certain  distinct  evil  lusts  :  the  hand  is  the  instru- 
ment of  covetous  grasping  and  of  violence;  the  feet  are  the  means  of  evil 
companionship,  and  running  into  the  ways  of  temptation  and  sin ;  through  the 
eyes  the  soul  covets  what  is  not  her  own,  and  lusts  after  what  is  forbidden  and 
polluting ;  through  the  eyes  also  the  soul  envies  and  hates,  and  the  Lord  classes 
"  an  evil  eye  "  amongst  the  things  that  defile.  But  it  may  be  asked,  seeing  that 
the  members  are  but  the  instruments  of  the  evil  will,  why  does  not  the  Lord 
denounce  that,  and  that  only?  So  He  does  when  occasion  serves;  but  in  this 
instance  He  is  setting  forth  the  all-important  truth  that  the  evil  will  is  mortified 
and  slain,  not  by  arguing  with  it,  but  by  starving  it ;  i.e.,  by  forbidding  the  mem- 
bers to  yield  themselves  to  its  gratification.  When  the  Lord  bids  a  soul,  for  the 
sake  of  eternity,  mortify  its  members,  its  outward  members.  He  necessarily  speaks 
to  one  who  has  two  wills,  an  evil  will  belonging  to  the  old  man,  and  a  better  and 
holier  belonging  to  the  new.  The  evil  will  would  gratify  its  lusts  through  its 
members,  but  the  better  will  can  forbid  the  members  to  lend  themselves  to  the 
evil  within,  and  can  call  to  its  aid  the  Spirit  of  God  by  prayer,  and  can  mortify  the 
flesh,  and  use  in  faith  the  means  of  grace.  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  Personal  maiming : — 
There  are  many  persons  who  are  ready  to  cut  off  other  people's  offending  hands 
and  feet,  forgetting  that  the  command  is  to  cut  off  their  own.  At  all  costs  save  the 
life  I  Hands,  feet,  eyes  may  be  cast  away,  but  let  the  soul  be  held  in  godly  disci- 
pline. {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Mortification  of  sin  a  reasonable  duty: — ^I.  The  nun 
HEBE  ENJonnsn.  "  If  thy  hand  or  thy  foot  offend  thee,"  Ac.  To  offend,  in  the 
language  of  Scripture,  frequently  means  to  put  anything  in  the  way  of  a  person, 
which  may  cause  him  to  fall  or  stumble  (Rom.  zii.  21 ;  Matt.  xi.  6,  xvi.  23). 
Even  servicable  things  must  be  removed  if  an  occasion  of  evil.    II.  Thb  AROtnniiri 


S74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  z& 

BT  WHICH  He  ENF0BCE8  IT.  It  is  shortly  this :  that  it  is  better  for  ns  to  do  what  He 
enjoin!^.  Why  better  t  Becanse  not  to  do  it  will  certainly  bring  on  us  greater  evila 
hereafter.  It  is  better  to  suffer  a  present  evil,  however  great,  than  by  avoiding  it  to 
incur  a  gieater  evil  in  the  end.  Thus  men  reason  in  common  things.  They  endure 
present  loss  in  hope  of  future  gain ;  they  lose  a  limb  to  save  a  life.  To  feel  the  force 
of  this  argument  we  must  see  what  these  consequences  are.  1.  We  shall  be  shut  oat 
from  heaven.  "It  is  better  to  enter  into  life  maimed,"  Ac.  Without  mortifying 
sin  now  we  can  never  be  admitted  there  (Gal.  v.  21 ;  Kev.  xxi.  27 ;  Heb.  xii.  14).  2.  What 
it  is  to  be  cast  into  hell.  3.  I  remind  you  that  if  you  seriously  desire  to  set  about  the 
work,  there  is  a  powerful  Friend  who  is  ready  to  assist  you  with  all  needful  strength 
aud  health.  It  is  only  "through  the  Spirit  '*  that  you  can  mortify  the  deeds  of  the 
body.  (£.  Cooper.)  Mutilation  or  fire  : — The  mutilation  of  the  body  ordered  by 
Jesus  Christ.  As  Lord  of  the  body  He  has  the  right  to  issue  such  requirements ; 
common  sense  tells  us  that  they  cannot  be  meant  to  be  without  exception.  His 
"  if "  prefacing  each  instance  is  enough  to  prove  that  He  does  not  make  them 
binding  on  everybody  who  enters  His  army.  The  soldier  in  the  battle,  having  on 
the  whole  armour  of  God,  does  not  need  to  be  told  to  mutilate  himself.  He  is  not 
obi-tructed  by  wrongful  occupation  with  any  of  the  prominent  members  of  his  body. 
I.  A  due  consideration  of  the  threefold  repetition  will  show  that  all  or  vb  abb 
SOMEHOW  AFFECTED.  Jcsus  mcaus  to  siuglc  out  evcry  person  who  feels  reluctant  to 
give  his  all  up  to  Him  as  Lord  and  Saviour.  II.  That  these  orders  caknot 
REQUIRE  MUTILATION  OF  THE  BODILY  FRAME.  The  hand,  thc  foot,  End  the  eye  are 
nothing,  except  as  they  are  the  instruments  of  a  person.  What  benefit  could  there 
be  in  cutting  oli,  in  plucking  out,  merely  a  member  of  the  body  ?  He  would  be 
utterly  unfit  to  be  a  judge  who  sentenced  the  umbrella,  which  thrust  out  a  man's 
eye,  to  six  months'  imprisonment,  and  let  the  man  who  pushed  the  umbrella  go 
free  !  He  would  be  counted  more  idiotic  than  an  idiot  who  found  fault  with  the 
door  of  the  cellar  down  whose  steps  he  had  fallen,  and  not  with  the  careless  servant 
who  had  left  the  door  open.  When  you  had  cut  off  a  hand,  you  might  still  wish 
to  do  the  unworthy  action  which  your  hand  would  have  carried  out.  When  you  had 
plucked  out  an  eye,  your  imagination  might  still  revel  amid  the  unholy  things 
which  the  eye  would  have  gloated  on.  III.  The  Lord  backs  up  His  appeal  for  our 
energetic  action  with  an  exhibition  of  the  awful  law  under  which  oub  nature  is 
CONSTITUTED.  The  word,  which  is  translated  "  hell-fire  "  is  Gehenna.  It  was  the 
name  given  to  a  narrow  valley  close  to  Jerusalem.  Offal  and  filth  were  usually 
thrown  into  it,  and  fires  were  lighted  in  it  to  bum  all  the  sorts  of  refuse  which  were 
consumable.  So  the  sinner  is  separated  from  the  society  of  Jerusalem,  and  cast 
into  corruption ;  he  is  exposed  to  burning  now,  and  if  not  converted  from  the  error 
of  his  ways,  wiU  go  into  corruption  and  fijre  hereafter.  (D.  O.  Watt^  M.A.) 
Desire  sacrificed  to  duty : — Soldiers  have  dislodged  their  enemy  from  a  town.  They 
scatter  themselves  about  its  streets;  some  dashing  into  shops,  and  some  into 
houses,  seizing  any  valuable  thing  which  the  lust  of  their  eyes  prompts  them  to 
seize.  Suddenly  their  bugles  sound  an  alarm.  The  enemy  is  returning  in  force ; 
and,  whatever  else  the  sound  may  suggest,  it  suggests  this — that  they  must  throw 
everything  out  of  their  hands,  no  matter  how  valuable,  no  matter  how  eagerly  they 
long  to  retain  it.  Otherwise  it  would  be  an  obstruction  ;  they  would  not  be  free  to 
handle  their  rifles,  and  be  driven  out  instead  of  driving  their  foe  back  again.  With 
like  purpose  does  the  Lord  Jesus  give  forth  those  orders,  which  seem  to  many  of  us 
BO  unnecessarily  harsh  and  stringent.  {Ibid.)  Hell-fire  in  the  present  life : — At 
any  rate  multitudes  have  come  to  regard  hell  as  a  place  to  be  afraid  of,  not  because 
of  its  wickedness,  but  because  of  its  suffering.  Theirs  is  a  bitter  mistake.  It  is  a 
grotesque  and  misleading  interpretation  of  that  state  of  which  Jesus  tells  the 
nature.  His  words  assuredly  point  to  the  conclusion  that  a  man  may  be  in  hell 
here  as  well  as  yonder ;  may  be  gnawed  by  its  worm  and  burned  by  its  fire  now  ae 
well  as  hereafter.  You  do  not  lack  proofs  of  this  present  truth  in  human  life, 
perhaps  within  the  range  of  your  observation,  if  not  of  your  own  experience.  It 
may  be  that  no  more  striking  illustration  can  be  supplied  than  that  of  Lady 
Macbeth,  as  painted  by  our  great  dramatist.  After  the  murder  of  Banquo  she 
cannot  rest.  She  rises  from  her  bed  and  walks  about.  She  rubs,  and  rubs,  as  if 
washing  her  hands,  and  continues  it  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  She  fancies  she 
sees  a  spot  of  blood  on  them.  She  cannot  take  it  out ;  her  hands  will  not  be  clean, 
and  she  cries,  "  Here's  the  smell  of  the  blood  stiU ;  all  the  perfumes  of  Arabia  will 
not  sweeten  this  little  hand.  Oh  !  oh  !  oh  t  "  That  sigh  and  cry  show  how  "  surel; 
her  heart  is  charged."    Yet  there  is  no  repenta  ce  in  her  anguish.     She  argues  in 


CHAP,  ix.l  ST.  MARK.  375 

defence  of  the  evil  deed  still.  She  is  snffering  mentally ;  she  is  in  agony — not  for 
the  vileness  of  the  crime  she  has  urged  on,  but  for  its  interference  with  her  comfort 
and  peace.  Thus  her  case  affords  an  instance  of  how  a  soul  may  be  weeping,  and 
wailing,  and  gnashing  tbe  teeth  before  it  goes,  with  the  uncleansed  spots  of  sin, 
into  the  shadow  of  death.  {Ibid.)  The  members  of  the  body  reported  in  their 
deeds : — "  Do  you  know,"  said  a  young  lady  to  her  brother,  ••  there  is  a  reporter  to 
be  at  the  ball  to  which  we  are  going  to-morrow,  and  a  full  account  wiU  be  given  in 
the  newspapers  of  everybody  who  is  there  ?  "  Ah  !  yes,  there  was  a  Reporter  there 
whom  she  little  thought  of — a  Reporter  who  is  in  every  place  to  which  you  can  go, 
whether  it  be  to  the  house  of  feasting  or  the  house  of  mourning,  to  the  resort  which 
defiles  you  or  which  purifies  you,  to  the  place  of  cursing  or  the  place  of  prayer ;  and 
the  day  is  coming  when  that  Reporter  shall  publish,  before  the  myriads  amid  whom 
you  shall  stand  at  the  judgment  seat  of  God,  what  "  every  one  has  done  in  his  body, 
according  to  that  he  has  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad."  What  will  be  disclosed 
as  to  the  paths  on  which  your  feet  have  been  made  to  go  f  Will  you  expect  to  hear 
that  you  have  never  been,  in  thought  or  purpose,  in  any  place  but  where  Christ's 
footprints  were  known  to  be  before  you  ?  {Ibid.)  What  the  hands  can  do  : — Just 
glance  at  what  may  be  operated  by  the  hands.  Would  you  care  to  hold  out  your 
hands,  before  any  number  of  your  acquaintances,  and  say,  *♦  These  hands  have 
never  been  soiled  by  touching  an  unholy  thing.  They  have  not  once  written  a 
deceiving  figure  or  an  unbecoming  word.  They  have  never  held  any  instrument  in 
order  to  accomplish  a  selfish  and  impure  object."  No  neighbour  might  shrug  his 
shoulders  at  your  assertion ;  no  voice  might  call  ont,  "  I  saw  you  use  the  shaking 
glass  of  drunkenness,  the  cards  of  gambling,  the  jemmy  of  burglary  I "  But  would 
their  inabihty  to  accuse  you  be  a  satisfactory  acquittal  ?  Would  you  not,  as  brave 
and  honest  souls,  even  if  no  human  being  could  say  that  your  hands  were  offensive 
to  the  holy  God,  would  you  not  confess  they  are  or  were  ?  Your  tongue  would  not 
utter  boastful  things.  Why  ?  Because  you  are  well  aware  that,  though  you  have 
never  been  a  drunkard,  a  gambler,  or  a  burglar,  you  have  put  aside  a  service  of 
self-denial,  or  you  have  grasped  in  your  heart  at  an  evil  enjoyment.  Knowing,  as 
you  do,  that  wishing  and  planning  to  escape  from  any  Christ-like  duty  must  be  a 
grief  to  the  Saviour,  you  would  not  like  to  hear  His  voice  announce  His  sentence 
as  to  all  your  failures ;  you  would  not  like  to  receive  the  due  award  of  what  your 
hands  have  done  or  been  thought  capable  of  doing !     (Ibid.)      Stumbling -blocks  : — 

1.  The  STXJMBLINO-BLOCKS  HERB  MENTIONED.  II.  WhETHEB  A  CLASSIFICATION  OF 
STUMBLING-BLOCKS  BE   SUGGESTED  OB  NOT,  IMPOBTANT  LESSONS,  A8  TO  THE   CAUSES   Of 

FALLING,  ABE  HEBE  TAUGHT.    1.  May  be  part  of  ouTselvcs — personal  appearance,  &c. 

2.  May  be  in  our  occupation — sinful,  engrossing,  <feo.  8.  May  be  in  that  which 
delights  as — conversation,  music,  &c.  4.  May  be  in  persons  and  society  sought  after 
by  us.  6.  May  be  in  useful  and  lawful  things.  6.  Every  one  must  judge  for  him- 
self.  III.  The  command  of  Christ.  1.  Most  peremptory.  The  cause  must  be 
removed — however  valuable,  painful,  <fec.  2.  Most  pressing  and  weighty  reasons 
are  assigned.  Such  conduct  is  indispensable  to  life.  To  act  otherwise  is  to  perish. 
At  how  dear  a  price  sinners  purchase  their  pleasures !  {Expository  Discourses.) 
Maiming  and  life : — The  New  Testament  revisers  have  rightly  substituted  the  words 
**  cause  to  stumble,"  for  •'  offend ;  "  for  the  popular  conception  of  offend  is  mis- 
leading. It  means  that  which  is  annoying  or  distasteful  to  another,  but  not 
necessarily  hurtful.  But  the  word  in  the  New  Testament  habitually  means  some- 
thing dangerous.  That  which  offends  in  the  gospel  sense  may  be  neither  annoying 
nor  distasteful;  but  agreeable  and  seductive.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  "meat"  as  an 
offence  to  a  brother.  In  these  hard  words  about  cutting  off,  our  Lord  is  not  speaking 
of  things  that  are  simply  troublesome,  for  in  God's  moral  economy  a  good  many 
troublesome  things  are  retained  as  permanent  factors  of  life.  Self-sacrifice,  hard 
duty,  are  troublesome  things,  yet  they  enter  into  every  genuine  Christian  life;  while 
many  agreeable  things  are  of  the  character  of  stumbling-blocks.  The  truth  here 
stated  by  Christ  appears  a  cruel  one.  It  is  simply  that  maiming  enters  into 
the  development  of  hfe,  and  is  a  part  of  the  process  through  which  one  attains 
eternal  life.  We  shall  find  that  this  law  is  not  so  cruel  after  all.  There  is  an 
aspect  in  which  we  all  recognize  this  truth ;  namely,  on  the  side  where  it  is  related 
to  our  ordinary  life.  No  life  is  developed  into  perfection  without  cutting  off  some- 
thing. The  natural  tendencies  of  the  boy  are  to  play  and  eat  and  sleep.  Left  to 
themselves,  those  things  will  fill  np  the  space  allotted  to  thought  and  culture,  so 
that  they  must  be  controlled  and  restricted.  The  law  indeed  holds,  from  a  point 
below  hmnan  life,  that  every  higher  thing  costs ;  that  it  is  won  by  the  abridgment 


876  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha>.  nu 

or  suppresBion  of  something  lower.  The  com  of  wheat  must  die  in  order  to  bring 
forth  fruit.  The  seed-life  and  the  seed-form  must  go,  so  that  the  *'  full  com  in  the 
ear"  may  come.  This  fact  of  limitation  goes  along  with  the  entire  process  of 
human  education.  The  man  who  aims  at  eminence  in  any  one  department  of  life 
must  close  the  gates  which  open  into  other  departments.  In  order  to  be  a  success- 
ful merchant,  he  must  abridge  the  pleasures  of  literary  culture.  He  may  have 
equally  strong  affinities  for  medicine  and  for  law,  but  he  cannot  become  a  successful 
iawyer  without  cutting  off  the  studies  and  the  associations  which  go  to  make  a  suc- 
cessful doctor.  And  success  in  any  sphere  necessitates  his  cutting  off  a  large  section 
of  self-indulgence.  He  must  sacrifice  pleasant  leisure  and  pleasant  society,  and 
needful  rest  and  recreation.  Moreover,  it  is  true  that  men  love  life  so  much  that 
they  will  have  it  at  the  expense  of  maiming.  A  man  will  leap  from  a  third  story 
of  a  burning  house,  and  will  take  the  chance  of  going  through  life  with  a  crippled 
limb  or  a  distorted  face,  rather  than  stay  and  be  burned  or  suffocated.  "AH  that 
a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life."  Meecenas,  the  prime  minister  of  the  first 
Roman  emperor,  said  that  he  preferred  life  with  the  anguish  of  crucifixion  to  death. 
Where  is  the  man  who  will  not  lie  down  on  the  surgeon's  table,  and  have  his  right 
hand  cut  off  or  his  right  eye  plucked  out  rather  than  die?  The  most  helpless 
cripple,  the  blind  man,  the  mutilated  and  disfigured  man,  will  say,  *•  It  is  better  for 
us  to  live  maimed  than  to  die."  So  that,  on  one  side  at  least,  the  truth  is  not  bo 
unfamiliar  or  so  cruel,  after  all.  It  represents,  not  an  arbitrary  decree,  but  a  free 
choice.  Now,  our  Lord  leads  us  up  into  the  region  of  spiritual  and  eternal  life,  and 
confronts  us  with  the  same  alternative.  Cut  off  anything,  sacrifice  anything,  be 
maimed  and  crippled  so  far  as  this  life  is  concerned,  rather  than  forfeit  eternal  life. 
Life  in  God's  kingdom,  like  life  in  the  kingdom  of  nature  and  sense,  involves  a  pro- 
cess of  education  and  discipline.  A  part  of  this  disciphne  is  wrought  through  the 
agency  of  the  man  himself ;  that  is,  by  the  force  of  his  own  renewed  will.  A  part 
of  it  is  brought  to  bear  on  him  from  without,  through  no  agency  of  his  own«  And 
here,  as  elsewhere,  development  implies  limitation,  suppression,  cutting  off.  Have 
you  never  known  a  woman  on  whom  the  door  of  her  father's  house  was  closed  from 
the  moment  that  she  went  out  of  it  with  the  husband  of  her  choice,  and  who  gave 
herself  to  him,  knowing  that,  in  taking  his  part,  she  was  cutting  oft  and  casting 
from  her  parental  sympathy  and  aU  tbe  dear  associations  of  childhood  ?  In  our 
great  civil  war,  was  it  not  true  that  many  a  man,  by  taking  a  side,  became  an  out- 
cast to  those  whom  he  had  loved  best  ?  Has  it  not  been  so  in  all  the  great  issues  of 
history?  In  Christ's  own  day,  and  much  more  in  the  early  days  of  the  Church,  that 
happened  again  and  again  which  Christ's  words  had  foreshadowed.  He  who  went 
after  the  despised  Galilean  or  His  apostles,  must  forfeit  home  and  friends  and 
social  standing,  and  be  called  an  ingrate  and  a  traitor.  He  could  not  keep  father 
and  mother  and  old  associates  who  hated  his  Master.  They  would  be  only  stumbling- 
blocks  to  him  ;  and  he  must  therefore  cut  them  off,  and  go  after  Christ  maimed  on 
that  side  of  his  life.  This  text  tells  us  that  this  cutting  off  and  casting  away  must 
be  our  own  act.  "  If  thy  hand  cause  thee  to  stumble,  cut  it  off," — thou  thyself. 
We  are  not  to  presume  on  God's  taking  away  from  us  whatever  is  hurtful.  Our 
spiritual  discipline  does  not  consist  in  merely  lying  still  and  being  pruned.  That 
must  do  for  a  vine  or  a  tree,  but  not  for  a  living  will.  The  surrender  of  that  must 
be  a  self-surrender.  The  forced  surrender  of  a  will  is  no  surrender.  The  necessary 
abridgement  or  limitation  must  enhst  the  active  co-operation  of  the  man  who  is 
limited.  **  Te  are  God's  husbandry,"  says  Paul ;  but,  almost  in  the  same  breathy 
he  says,  •*  Ye  are  God's  fellow- workers."  There  are,  however,  two  aspects  in  which 
this  self-cutting  is  to  be  viewed.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is,  as  just  noted,  something 
which  the  man  is  to  do  by  his  own  will  and  act.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  cer- 
tain amount  of  limitation  apphed  directly  by  God,  without  the  man's  agency.  In 
this  latter  case,  the  man  makes  the  cutting  off  his  own  act  by  cheerful  acceptance 
of  his  limitations.  Let  us  look  at  each  of  these  two  aspects  in  turn.  In  Christian 
experience,  one  soon  discovers  certain  sides  on  which  it  is  necessary  to  limit  him- 
self ;  certain  things  which  he  must  renounce.  The  things  are  not  the  same  for  all 
men.  They  are  not  necessarily  evil  things  in  themselves,  but  a  sensitive  and  well- 
disciplined  conscience  soon  detects  certain  matters  which  it  is  best  to  lay  violent 
hands  upon.  Another  conscience  may  not  fix  upon  the  same  points ;  but  to  thit 
conscience  they  are  stumbling-blocks,  hindrances  to  spiritual  growth,  inconsistent 
inth  entire  devotion  to  Christ.  It  is  enough  that  they  are  so  in  this  particular  case. 
It  is  right  to  have  hands  and  feet  and  eyes,  and  to  nse  them.  But  in  certain  oasM 
there  if  an  antagonism  between  these  and  eternal  life.    The  whole  question  eentret 


flHAP.  IX.J  ST.  MARK,  377 

there.  Whatever  interferes  with  the  attainment  of  eternal  life  must  go.  Tliua 
much  for  the  self-applied  limitations,  for  oonscioas  hindrances  in  the  march  to 
eternal  life.  But  there  is  another  class  of  limitations,  the  need  of  which  we  do  not 
perceive.  They  belong  in  the  higher  and  deeper  regions  of  character,  and  are 
linked  with  facts  and  tendencies  which  our  self-knowledge  does  not  cover.  Such 
limitations  we  cannot  apply  to  ourselves  :  they  are  applied  to  us  by  God :  and  all 
that  our  will  has  to  do  is  to  concur  with  the  limitations  and  meekly  to  accept  them. 
In  this  region  the  discipline  is  more  painful.  God  outs  off  and  takes  away  where 
we  can  see  no  reason  for  it ;  but  on  the  contrary,  where  we  think  we  see  every  reason 
against  it.  There  are  multitudes  of  Christian  people  who  are  going  through  life 
maimed  on  one  side  or  another.  There  is  a  man  with  the  making  of  a  statesman, 
ruler,  painter,  or  poet.  He  is  maimed  by  no  opportunity  of  culture.  But  every 
true  disciple  of  Christ  enters  His  school  with  absolute  self-surrender,  and  will 
trust  that  God  will  cut  o£f  nothing  that  makes  for  eternal  life.  We  could  not  win 
eternal  life  as  well  with  these  gifts  as  without  them.  And  so  it  will  be  better  if  we 
can  but  enter  into  life.  Better,  far  better,  to  go  mumed  all  the  way  than  to  lose 
eternal  life.  It  matters  little  that  those  stately  masts  had  to  be  out  down  in  the 
raging  gale.  No  one  thinks  what  splendid  timbers  were  thrown  overboard,  on  that 
day  when  the  ship,  battered  and  mastless,  and  with  torn  sails  and  tangled  cordage, 
forges  into  the  land-locked  port  with  every  soul  on  board  safe.  Better  maimed  than 
lost.    (M.  B.  Vincent,  D.D.) 

Vers.  44,  46,  48.  Whero  their  worm  dieth  not. — The  punishment  of  the  wicked^ 
dreadful  and  interminable : — Some  will  say  that  this  doctrine  has  no  tendency  to 
do  good ;  it  is  idle  to  think  of  frightening  men  into  religion.  It  is  my  duty  not  to 
decide  what  doctrines  are  likely  to  do  good,  but  to  preach  such  as  I  find  in  the  Scrip- 
tures. I  dare  not  pretend  to  be  either  more  wise  or  more  compassionate  than  our 
Saviour ;  and  He  thought  it  consistent,  both  with  wisdom  and  compassion,  to  utter 
the  words  of  our  text.  These  expressions  allude  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Jews 
disposed  of  the  bodies  of  the  dead ;  placed  in  tombs  they  were  consumed  by  worms  ; 
or  on  a  funeral  pile  it  was  consumed  by  fire.  Ton  have  seen  this,  but  there  is 
another  death,  of  the  soul.  Those  who  die  this  death  shall  be  preyed  upon  by 
worms  which  will  never  die,  and  become  the  fuel  of  a  fire  that  will  never  be 
quenched.  The  language  is  indeed  figurative,  but  not  on  that  account  less  full  of 
meaning.    I.  In  dilating  upon  these  truths,  I  shall  bay  LrrTLE  or  thb  cobpobeal 

SUrFEBINOS      WHIOH      AWAIT     IMPENITEKT      SINNEBS       BEYOND      THE      GRAVE.         Such 

sufferings  will  certainly  compose  a  part  of  the  punishment ;  for  their  bodies  shall 
come  forth  to  the  resurrection  of  damnation ;  as  it  is  the  servant  of  the  soul,  its 
tempter  to  many  sins,  and  its  instrument  in  committing  them,  there  seems  to  be 
a  manifest  propriety  in  making  them  companions  in  punishment.  But  to  the 
Bufferings  of  the  soul,  the  Scriptures  chiefly  refer.  The  clause — "  where  their  worm 
dieth  not " — intimates  that  the  soul  will  suffer  miseries,  analagous  to  those  which 
would  be  inflicted  on  a  living  body,  by  a  multitude  of  reptiles  constantly  preying 
upon  it ;  that  as  a  dead  body  appears  to  produce  the  worms  which  consume  it,  so 
the  soul  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  really  produces  the  causes  of  its  own  misery. 
What  are  those  causes,  what  is  the  gnawing  worm?  1.  Its  own  passions  and 
desires.  That  these  are  capable  of  preying  upon  the  soul,  and  occasioning  acute 
suffering,  even  in  this  life,  need  not  be  proved.  Look  at  a  man  who  is  habitually 
peevish,  fretful,  and  disappointed.  Has  he  not  gnawing  worms  already  at  his  heart  ? 
Look  at  the  envious,  covetous,  ambitious,  proud ;  these  passions  make  men  miserable 
here ;  even  while  in  this  world  there  are  many  things  calculated  to  soothe  or  divert 
men's  passions.  Sometimes  they  meet  with  success,  and  this  produces  a  transient 
calm  ;  at  another  time,  the  objects  which  excite  their  passions  are  absent,  and  this 
al!ow8  quietness.  Men  have  not  always  the  leisure  to  indulge  their  passions ;  they 
are  under  the  operations  of  causes  which  tend  to  restrain  them,  such  as  sleep.  But 
suppose  all  these  removed,  deprived  of  sleep,  success,  and  the  objects  which  excite 
his  strongest  passions  constantly  before  him,  and  all  restraints  gone.  Would  not 
such  a  man  be  miserable?  Nothing  inflames  the  passions  of  men  more  than 
suffering.  9.  The  gnawing  worm  includes  the  consciences  of  sinners.  Conscience 
has  inflicted  terrible  agony,  as  in  the  case  of  Judas.  Here  she  speaks  only  at 
intervals;  there  without  intermission.  Here  she  may  be  stifled  by  scenes  of 
business  or  amusement,  sophistical  arguments ;  but  there  will  be  no  means  of 
eileneing  her ;  she  will  see  everything  in  the  clear  light  of  eternity.  What  a  God 
she  has  offended,  Savioor  neglected,  heaven  lost.    WeU  may  thia  be  eompared  to  a 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

gnawing  worm.  II.  Onr  Saviour  speaks  not  only  of  a  gnawing  worm,  but  of  am 
uNQUKNCHABiiK  FiBE.  So  far  as  the  soul  is  concerned,  this  refers  to  a  keen  and 
constant  sense  of  God's  presence  and  righteous  displeasure.  He  says  of  Himself,  "  I 
am  a  consuming  fire."  III.  We  learn  from  the  passage  before  us,  that  thobb 
SUFFERINGS  WILL  BE  ENDLESS.  Their  worm  dieth  not.  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched. 
The  passions  and  consciences  of  sinners  endure  as  long  as  the  soul  of  which  they  are 
a  part.  God  lives  for  ever,  He  must  for  ever  be  displeased  with  sinners.  "  It  is 
impossible  that  I  should  deserve  it."  You  know  nothing  of  your  sins,  or  of  what  sin 
deserves.  As  well  might  a  man,  who  should  put  vipers  into  his  bosom,  complain 
of  God  because  they  stung  him.  Christ  died  to  save  them  from  their  misery.  {E. 
Paysouy  D.D.)  Preserving  fire : — Preserving  fire,  or  salting  with  fire.  Decay  is  a 
species  of  burning  ;  and  only  those  things  that  have  been  burnt,  or  cannot  be  burnt, 
will  not  decay.  I.  Temptation  is  a  preserving  fire.  The  boy  who  has  been 
sheltered  at  home  is  honest ;  but  his  integrity  is  not  as  firm  as  that  of  the  honest 
merchant.  The  clay  (Isa.  Ixiv.  8)  is  soft  and  plastic ;  but  after  it  has  been  burnt 
in  the  furnace  it  will  break  before  it  vnll  bend.  All  must  pass  through  the  fire  of 
temptation.  If  you  are  to  be  a  vessel  of  honour  fit  for  the  heavenly  palace,  the  Lord 
must  be  your  potter.  IL  Affliction  is  a  preserving  fibe.  The  metal  comes 
forth  from  the  furnace  more  useful  (Mai.  iii.  3).  III.  The  day  ow  judgment  is  also 
COMPARED  TO  A  FIRE  (1  Cor.  iii.  13).  Fire  is  a  searching  test.  All  paint,  enamel, 
pretence  of  every  kind,  will  melt  before  it.  Its  results  are  enduring.  All  must  pass 
through  the  fiery  ordeal.  Only  such  works  can  stand  as  proceed  from  gospel  love. 
lY.  ibfOTHER  PRESERVING  FIRE  IS  THE  FiBB  OF  HELL.  The  misety  of  hell  is  two- 
fold :  sin  and  its  punishment.  {J.  B.  Converse),  Their  worm  dieth  not — Conscience 
in  hell : — It  has  been  discovered  that  there  are  worms  which  eat  and  live  upon 
stone.  Many  such  have  been  found  in  a  freestone  wall  in  Normandy.  So  there  is  a 
worm  in  hell — conscience — which  lives  upon  the  stony  heart  of  the  condemned 
sinner,  which  gnaws  with  remorse  all  whom  grace  has  not  softened. 

Ver.  49.  For  every  one  shall  be  salted  with  ILn.—The  salt  and  the  fire  :^The 
Lord's  people  are  represented  as  being  themselves  ofl!ered  up  to  Him,  as  His  spiritual 
sacrifices,  both  by  Isaiah  and  St.  Paul.  It  was  a  custom  ordained  of  God  in  the 
Levitical  code  (Lev.  u.l3)  that "  Every  oblation  of  thy  meat-offering  shalt  thou  season 
with  salt."  Collecting,  then,  the  points  to  which  we  have  adverted,  we  have  seen  that 
believers  are  represented  as  the  Lord's  sacrifices :  that  His  sacrifices  were  anciently 
purified  by  the  typical  salt ;  that  the  object  of  the  salt,  or  grace,  is  to  preserve  them 
from  the  corruption  of  the  worm  of  indwelling  sin  and  the  fire  of  ultimate  judgment ; 
and  that  in  the  whole  chamber  of  imagery  is  inculcated  the  duty  of  sacrificing  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh  in  order  to  our  being  edified  in  the  spirit,  and  promoting  the  edifi- 
cation of  others.  We  recognize  in  the  text  a  force  and  a  beauty  not  discernible  to 
the  superficial  student,  in  the  declaration  of  the  gracious  effect  of  those  sanctifying 
trials  and  mortifications  in  which  all  believers  have  their  share ;  "  for  every  one 
shall  be  salted  with  fire,  and  every  sacrifice  shall  be  salted  with  salt."  Let  os, 
therefore,  consider  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  in  this  text  to  imply,  first,  an  awful 
denunciation  on  the  man  of  unmortified  lusts — "  Every  "  such  "  one  shall  be  salted 
with  fire ;  "  secondly,  the  gracious  result  of  fleshly  mortification — "  every  sacrifice 
shall  be  waited  with  salt ;  "  that  is,  every  believer  who  •'  presents  his  body  a  living 
sacrifice,"  "  shall  be  salted  with  salt  '* — that  is,  not  with  fire  to  consume,  but  with 
salt  to  preserve.  This  is  the  contrast :  on  the  one  hand  penal  destruction ;  on  the 
other,  gracious  preservation.  I.  The  career  of  unmortified  lust  entails  a 
FEARFUL  penalty.  This  declaration  of  Scripture  is  continually  receiving  fearful 
illustrations  in  the  premonitory  dealings  of  Providence.  Days  of  indulgence  are 
succeeded  by  nights  of  pain ;  a  youth  of  profligacy,  if  not  prematurely  out  short, 
entails  a  feeble,  diseased,  and  miserable  old  age.  Sin  receives  judgment  by  instal- 
ments ;  the  salting  fire  of  the  Divine  displeasure  falls  upon  the  wretched  sinner,  in 
many  a  striking  instance,  even  in  this  life,  presenting,  like  the  shock  before  the 
earthquake,  prelusive  warning  of  the  catastrophe  about  to  follow.  It  is  admitted 
that  the  expression  in  the  text  is  figurative.  Bat  the  figures  of  Scripture  never 
exaggerate  the  facts  of  reality.  The  lost,  unransomed  soul,  exposed  to  the  searching 
and  protracted  agonies  of  a  fire  that  salts,  that  is,  perpetuates  the  anguish  of  ite 
miserable  victims,  exhibits  the  torments  of  the  unbelieving  in  a  broad  glare  of 
horror,  as  if  the  letters  were  illuminated  by  the  reflection  of  **  the  lake  that 
burneUi.*'  II.  Thx  obaoxous  bffscts  of  fleshly  mortifioatiom.  The  believef 
is  to  be  also  salted,  but  with  constraining  love,  with  preserving  grace,  with  saooti 


OBAP.  n.]  8T.  MARK.  379 

fying  trial.  The  grace  of  mortification  is  that  to  the  soul  which  salt  is  to  the  body  ; 
it  preserves  it  from  patrefaotion,  and  renders  it  savoury.  Inferences  :  1.  That  there 
is  in  every  believer  some  lust  to  be  subdued — for  "  every  sacrifice  shall  be  salted 
with  salt."  We  do  not  apply  salt  except  to  those  things  which  have  a  natural  ten- 
dency to  corruption.  If  behevers  must  have  *•  salt  in  themselves,"  it  follows  that 
there  is  in  them  the  principle  of  corruption.  One  man  is  attacked  through  the 
medium  of  his  ambition ;  the  lust  of  secular  distinction  desolates  his  heart  of  all 
piety.  Another  man  is  drawn  aside  by  his  avarice.  Another  man  is  seduced  by  his 
animal  lusts,  and  the  unchecked  vagrancy  of  the  eye.  Another  man  is  tempted 
through  the  medium  of  temper,  and  his  ebullitions  of  frightful  rage  shock  the  ears 
of  his  household.  Another  man  is  led  astray  by  his  pride.  Lastly,  the  figure  sug- 
gests the  doclrine,  that  the  spiritual  health  of  the  believer  is  to  be  promoted  and 
attained  by  fleshly  mortification.  It  is  by  this  means  that  the  soul  is  to  be  clarified 
from  sin  and  preserved  in  grace.  {J.  B.  Owelty  M.A.)  A  double  salting^  either 
with  fire  or  with  salt : — Every  man  that  lives  in  the  world  must  be  a  sacrifice  to  God. 
The  wicked  are  a  sacrifice  to  God's  justice ;  but  the  godly  are  a  sacrifice  dedicated 
and  offered  to  Him,  that  they  may  be  capable  of  His  mercy.  The  first  are  a  sacri- 
fice against  their  wills,  but  the  godly  are  a  free-will  offering,  a  sacrifice  not  taken 
but  offered.  The  grace  of  mortification  is  very  necessary  for  all  those  who  are 
devoted  to  God.  I.  That  thb  tbue  notion  of  a  Ghbistiam  is  that  he  is  a 
8ACBIFICE,  OB  A  THANK- oFTBBiNO  TO  GoD  (Rom.  xii.  1).  Under  the  law,  beasts  were 
offered  to  God,  but  in  the  gospel  men  are  offered  to  Him ;  not  as  beasts  were,  to  be 
destroyed,  slain,  and  burnt  in  the  fire,  but  to  be  preserved  for  God's  use  and  service. 
In  offering  anything  to  God,  two  things  were  of  consideration.  1.  There  is  a  separa- 
tion of  ourselves  from  a  common  use.  The  beast  was  separated  from  the  flock  «r 
herd  for  this  special  purpose  (2  Cor.  v.  15).  2.  There  is  a  dedicating  ourselves  to 
God,  to  serve,  please,  honour,  and  glorify  Him.  We  must  be  sincere  in  this — 1, 
Because  the  truth  of  our  dedication  will  be  known  by  our  use ;  many  give  up  them- 
selves to  God,  but  in  the  use  of  themselves  there  is  no  such  matter ;  they  carry  it 
as  though  their  tongues  were  their  own  (Psa.  xii.  4).  2.  Because  God  will  one  day 
call  us  to  account.  3.  Because  we  are  under  the  eye  and  inspection  of  God.  II. 
That  the  obacb  or  uobtificatiom  ib  the  tbue  salt  wherewith  this  offebino 
AND  8ACBIFICE  SHOULD  BE  SEASONED.  1.  Salt  prcscrves  flcsh  from  putrefaction  by 
consuming  that  superfluous  and  excrementitious  moisture,  which  otherwise  would 
soon  corrupt :  and  so  the  salt  of  the  covenant  doth  prevent  and  subdue  those  lusts 
which  would  cause  us  to  deal  nnfaithfuUy  with  God.  Alas  I  meat  is  not  so  apt  to 
be  tainted  as  we  are  to  be  corrupted  and  weakened  in  our  resolutions  to  God,  with- 
out the  mortifying  grace  of  the  Spirit.  2.  Salt  hath  an  acrimony,  and  doth 
macerate  things  and  pierce  into  them  ;  and  so  the  grace  of  mortification  is  painful 
and  troublesome  to  the  carnal  nature.  We  either  must  suffer  the  pains  of  hell  or 
the  pains  of  mortification  ;  we  must  be  salted  with  fire  or  salted  with  salt.  It  is 
better  to  pass  to  heaven  with  difficulty  and  austerity,  than  to  avoid  these  difficulties 
and  run  into  sin,  and  so  be  in  danger  of  eternal  fire.  The  strictness  of  Christianity 
is  nothing  so  grievous  as  the  punishment  of  sin.  8.  Salt  makes  things  savoury, 
so  grace  makes  us  savoury,  which  may  be  interpreted  with  respect  either  to  God  or 
man.  We  must  be  seasoned  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  so  become  acceptable  in  the 
sight  of  God ;  the  more  we  are  salted  and  mortified,  the  more  we  shall  do  good  to 
others.  IH.  Thebe  is  a  necessitt  of  this  salt  in  all  those  that  have  entered 
WTO  covenant  with  God,  and  have  dedicated  and  devoted  themselves  to  Him. 
1.  By  our  covenant  vow  we  are  bound  to  the  strictest  duties,  and  that  upon  the 
highest  penalties.  The  duty  to  which  we  are  bound  is  very  strict.  2.  The  abun- 
dance of  sin  that  yet  remains  in  us,  and  the  marvellous  activity  of  it  in  our  souls. 
We  cannot  get  rid  of  this  cursed  inmate  till  our  tabernacle  be  dissolved,  and  this 
house  of  clay  tumbled  into  the  dust.  Well,  then,  since  sin  is  not  nullified,  it  must 
be  mortified.  3.  Consider  the  sad  consequences  of  letting  sin  alone,  both  either  aa 
to  further  sin  or  punishment.  If  lust  be  not  mortified,  it  grows  outrageous.  Sins 
prove  mortal  if  they  be  not  mortified.  The  unmortified  person  spares  the  sin  and 
destroys  his  own  soul ;  the  sin  ves,  but  he  dies.  Now  to  make  application.  L  For 
the  reproof  of  those  that  canno  abide  to  hear  of  mortification.  The  unwillingness 
and  impatience  of  this  doctrine  may  arise  from  several  causes.  1.  From  sottish 
atheism  and  unbelief.  2.  It  m  y  come  from  libertinism.  And  these  harden  their 
hearts  in  sinning  by  a  mistaking  the  gospel.  (1)  Some  vainly  imagine  aa  if  God  by 
Jesus  Christ  were  made  more  reconcilable  to  sin,  that  it  needs  not  so  much  to  be 
rftood  upon,  nor  need  we  to  be  a    exact,  to  keep  such  ado  to  mortify  and  subdue 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  'ouAf.  a 

the  inclinaUons  that  lead  to  it  They  altogether  run  to  the  eomforts  of  the  gospel 
and  neglect  the  daties  thereof.  Christ  died  for  sinners,  therefore  we  need  not  to  bA 
troubled  aboat  it.  (2)  Another  sort  think  such  discourses  may  be  well  spared 
among  a  company  of  oelievers,  and  they  need  not  this  watchfulness  and  holy  oare, 
especially  against  grievoos  sins ;  that  they  have  such  good  command  of  themselves 
that  tbey  can  keep  within  compass  well  enough.  (3)  A  third  sort  are  such  as  think 
believers  are  not  to  be  scared  with  threatenings,  but  only  oUed  with  grace.  8.  It 
may  arise  from  another  cause,  the  passionateness  of  carnal  affections.  There  is 
no  hope ;  it  is  an  evil  and  I  must  bear  it.  Consider  the  doleful  condition  of  those 
that  indulge  their  carnal  affections ;  and  that  either  threatened  by  God,  or  executed 
upon  the  wicked.  (1)  Consider  it  as  it  is  threatened  by  God.  If  God  threaten  so 
great  a  misery,  it  is  for  our  profit,  that  we  may  take  heed  and  escape  it.  There  is 
mercy  in  the  severest  threatenings,  that  we  may  avoid  the  bait  when  we  see  the 
hook,  that  we  may  digest  the  strictness  of  a  holy  life,  rather  than  venture  upon 
such  dreadful  evils.  (2)  Consider  which  trouble  is  most  intolerable—to  be  salted 
with  salt,  or  to  be  salted  with  fire ;  with  unpleasing  mortification,  or  the  pains  of 
hell ;  the  trouble  of  physio,  or  the  danger  of  a  mortal  disease.  Surely  to  preserve 
the  life  of  the  body,  men  will  endure  the  bitterest  pill,  take  the  most  loathsome 
potion.  Better  be  macerated  by  repentance,  than  broken  in  hell  by  torments. 
Which  is  worse,  discipline  or  execution  ?  Here  the  question  is  put :  you  must  be 
troubled  first  or  last.  Would  you  have  a  sorrow  mixed  with  love  and  hope,  or  else 
mixed  with  desperation  ?  Would  you  have  a  drop  or  an  ocean  ?  Would  you  have 
your  souls  cured  or  tormented  f  Would  you  have  trouble  in  the  short  moment  of 
this  life,  or  have  it  eternal  in  the  world  to  come  ?  (J.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  church 
the  salt  of  the  earth: — The  first  expression  demanding  our  attention  is  "salt." 
Salt  is  an  object  of  external  nature,  endued  with  certain  properties.  It  possesses 
the  property  of  penetration  into  the  masses  of  animal  matter,  to  which  it  shall  be 
appUed  in  sufficient  abundance  and  with  sufficient  perseverance;  and  it  possesses 
the  property  of  extending  a  preserving  savour  as  it  pervades  the  mass.  Here  is  the 
basis  of  its  suitability  to  represent  Christ's  church  on  the  earth.  A  characteristic 
of  the  population  of  this  fallen  world  is,  moral  corruption.  The  men  of  this  world, 
even  those  who  are  most  advanced  in  morals  and  in  respectability  amongst  their 
fellows,  are  nevertheless  described  in  the  Word  of  God  as  being  corrupt  according  to 
their  deceitful  lusts  and  defilements.  Selfishness,  ostentation,  envy,  jealousy,  taint 
their  boasted  morals  ;  and  as  surely  as  a  mass  of  animal  matter  left  to  its  natural 
tendencies  in  our  atmosphere  would  proceed  from  one  degree  of  corruption  to 
another,  until  it  reached  the  putrefaction  of  dissolution,  so  surely  would  the  popu- 
lation of  this  world,  left  to  its  own  natural  tendency,  make  progress  from  one  degree 
of  m»ral  corruption  to  another,  until  they  all  reached  the  putrefaction  of  damnation. 
Christ's  church  is  the  salt  of  the  earth ;  it  is  the  Lord's  preserve  and  the  Lord's 
preservative.  This  brings  us  to  the  next  word  here,  which  is  **  fire."  Fire  is  another 
object  of  external  nature  possessing  certain  properties.  It  possesses  the  properties 
of  penetrating  and  melting,  and  separating  the  dross  from  the  pure  ore  ;  and  so  in 
this  respect  it  becomes  suitable  as  an  emblem  of  sanctified  affliction,  which  separates 
a  man  from  the  common  and  downward  course  of  a  heedless  and  worldly  popula- 
tion, and  causes  him  to  pause  and  meditate,  and  take  himself  to  task,  and  look  around 
and  look  before  him,  and  to  fall  upon  his  knees  and  cry  to  God  to  have  mercy  upon 
him.  I  have  said  sanctified  affiiction ;  because  affliction  itself,  considered  apart 
from  the  special  use  made  of  it  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  has  no  such  power  over  a  man's 
character.  '«  The  sorrow  of  this  world  worketh  death ;  "  mere  trouble  considered 
in  its  natural  operation  upon  man,  however  it  may  subdue  him  for  a  season,  however 
it  may  make  him  pause  in  his  course,  does  not  change  him.  But  this  is  not  all, 
the  Lord  says  in  our  text.  "  Every  one  " — not  every  Christian  only,  but — "  every 
one  shall  be  salted  with  fire."  This  leads  us  to  remark,  that  fire  possesses  other 
properties,  the  power  of  consuming  the  stubble  and  all  the  rubbish ;  and  it  is  thereby 
suitable  to  express  those  tremendous  judgments,  which  shall  overwhelm  the  adver- 
saries at  the  second  glorious  appearing  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  when,  as  the  apostle 
sublimely  tells  as,  **  The  Lord  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  in  flames  of  fire, 
taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  His  power."  Every  ungodly  man  shall, 
as  it  were,  be  salted  with  fire — shall  be  seasoned  with  fire — rendered  unconsumabla 
in  the  fire  that  bumeth — preserved  in  burning.  Salted  with  fire  1  This  is  a  tremen- 
dous saying,  a  dreadful  thought.     Immortalised  in  endurance  1  preserved  from 


OTAP.  IX.]  ST.  MARK,  881 

burning  out !  Salted  with  fire  I  Well,  well  might  He  call  upon  them  to  out  off  right 
hands,  pluck  out  right  eyes,  to  separate  themselves  from  the  dearest  lust,  from  the 
most  fostered  and  cherished  indulgence,  rather  than  be  cast  into  that  eternal  fire. 
But  how  shall  this  exhortation  be  obeyed  ?  There  is  no  native  power  in  man, 
whereby  be  can  rescue  himself  from  what  he  loves.  He  must  love  something;  and 
except  he  be  supplied  with  something  better  to  love,  he  must  go  on  to  follow  what 
he  now  loves.  It  is  only  the  power  of  something  he  loves  better,  that  can  separate 
him  from  what  he  loves  well.  What  can  induce  him  to  part  with  his  sin,  which  is 
as  precious  to  his  corrupt  heart  as  his  eyes  are  to  the  enjoyment  of  his  body  ?  What 
«an  induce  him  to  do  it  ?  Every  one  then,  both  he  that  believeth  and  he  that 
believeth  not,  shall  be  salted  with  fire.  He  that  believeth  shall  be  purified  by 
affliction,  and  he  that  believeth  not  sball  be  immortalized  in  the  endurance  of 
agony.  **  And  every  sacrifice  shall  be  salted  with  fire."  Here  is  another  figure, 
not  derived  from  external  nature,  but  derived  from  the  Mosaic  ritual — a  sacrifice. 
A  sacrifice  is  an  offering  devoted  to  God.  Hence  a  sacrifice  is  suitable  to  repre- 
sent a  member  of  Christ's  Church.  He  is  not  separated  from  the  common 
actions  and  lawful  actions  of  the  world,  for  that  would  be  to  take  him  out 
ol  the  world;  but  he  is  separated  from  the  common  state  of  mind  in  which 
those  actions  are  performed.  Instead  of  withdrawing  from  the  duties  of  life,  it 
engages  him  in  them  for  conscience'  sake,  as  well  as  for  convenience  or  reputation 
or  gain.  It  makes  every  action  of  his  life  religious ;  it  invests  the  very  drudgeries 
of  the  lowest  grade  of  life  with  a  sanctity,  as  being  done  in  the  service  of  God.  So 
then,  a  believer  becomes  a  sacrifice,  and  so  the  Apostle  Paul  having  enlarged  upon 
the  glorious  blessings  of  the  gospel,  whereby  men  are  so  separated,  improves  the 
statement  thus  :  "  I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye 
present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  which  is  your 
reasonable  service  ;  and  be  not  conformed  to  this  world,  but  be  ye  transformed  by 
the  renewing  of  your  mind,  that  ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good  and  acceptable  and 
perfect  will  of  God."  All  the  sacrifices  of  the  Jewish  ritual  were  seasoned  with 
salt.  In  the  second  chapter  of  the  book  of  Leviticus  and  at  the  thiri;eenth  verse 
you  will  find  the  commandment,  **  And  every  oblation  of  thy  meat-offering  shalt 
thou  season  with  salt ;  neither  shalt  thou  suffer  the  salt  of  the  covenant  of  tiiy  God 
to  be  lacking  from  thy  meat-offering :  with  all  thy  offerings  thou  shaJt  offer  salt." 
*'  Every  sacrifice,"  every  true  believer,  *•  shall  be  salted  with  salt."  Now  what  is 
the  force  of  this  expression, "  salted  with  salt "  ?  We  have  seen  that  to  be  salted 
with  fire  signifies  to  be  personally  purified ;  to  be  salted  with  salt  signifies  to  be 
made  relatively  a  blessing.  The  Christian  is  salted  with  fire  for  his  own  personal 
purification,  and  he  is  salted  with  salt  for  his  extended  usefulness  among  others. 
"  He  shall  be  blessed  and  he  shall  be  a  blessing,"  as  was  said  of  the  father  of  the 
faithful,  Abraham.  We  inherit  this  blessing  of  Abraham,  to  be  salted  with  fire  and  to 
he  salted  with  salt.  To  this  our  Lord  dearly  refers,  when  He  calls  His  church  **  the 
salt  of  the  earth. "  (H.  McNeile^  M.A.)  How  is  the  body^  it  may  be  said,  to  become 
a  sacrifice  f — Let  the  eye  look  upon  no  evil  thing,  and  it  has  become  a  sacrifice ; 
let  the  tongue  speak  nothing  filthy,  and  it  has  become  an  offering ;  let  thy  hand  do 
no  lawless  deed,  and  it  has  become  a  whole  burnt-offering.  Or,  rather,  this  is  not 
enough,  but  we  must  have  good  works  also.  Let  the  hand  do  alms,  the  mouth 
bless  them  that  curse  one ;  and  the  hearing  find  leisure  evermore  for  the  lections 
of  Scripture.  For  sacrifice  allows  of  no  unclean  thing.  Sacrifice  is  a  firstfruit  of 
the  other  actions.  Let  us  then  from  our  hands,  and  feet,  and  mouth,  and  all  other 
members,  yield  a  firstfruit  unto  God.  (Chnjsostom.)  Preservation  from  corrup- 
tion:— Christ  is  not,  in  either  of  these  terms  (salted,  fire),  referring  to  the  Uteral 
realities.  It  is  salting  and  fire,  metaphorically  viewed,  of  which  He  speaks. 
Among  the  various  uses  of  salt,  two  are  popularly  outstanding — seasoning  and 
preserving  from  corruption.  The  reference  here  is  to  the  latter.  In  hot  countries, 
in  particular,  killed  meat  hastens  to  a  tainted  condition,  and  could  not  be  preserved 
from  spoiling,  for  any  appreciable  length  of  time,  were  it  not  for  salting.  It  is  on 
this  antiseptic  propei-ty  of  salt  that  Christ's  representation  is  founded.  Every  one 
ol  His  disciples  shall  be  preserved  from  corruption  by  fire.  The  fire  referred  to, 
however,  is  not  penal,  like  the  inextinguishable  fire  of  Gehenna.  It  is  intentionally 
purificatory.  But,  though  not  penal,  it  is  painful.  It  scorches,  and  pierces  to  the 
■quick.  What,  then,  is  this  fire  f  It  is  the  unsparing  spirit  of  self-sacrifice — the 
spirit  that  parts,  for  righteousness'  sake,  with  a  hand,  a  foot,  an  eye.  Every  dis- 
ciple of  Christ  is  preserved  from  corruption,  and  consequent  everlasting  destruction, 
fcy  unsparing  self-sacrifice.     (-7.  Morison,  D.D.) 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  n. 

Ver.  50.  Salt  Is  good. — Have  salt  in  yourselves: — This  is  only  another  form  of 
exhorting  Christians  to  have  strength  of  character  as  Christians.  Bat  since  ft 
strong  character,  in  the  spiritual  as  in  the  natural  man,  is  apt  to  come  into  collision 
with  others  equally  strong,  our  Lord  cautions  His  disciples  against  any  breach  of 
the  law  of  love.  Staunch  they  must  be  in  their  adherence  to  principle  ;  but  they 
may  not  be  quarrelsome.  "  Have  peace  one  with  another."  1.  The  salt  of  self- 
denial.  2.  The  salt  of  energy.  3.  The  salt  of  truthfulness.  {Dean  Goulbum.) 
Salt : — I.  Look  at  what  is  heke  so  EXPRESsrvELY  symbolized.  Salt  is  necessary  to 
sacrifice.  1.  Christ  is  the  symbol  of  the  covenant  of  everlasting  mercy,  but  of  ever- 
lasting mercy  as  the  basis  of  a  sinner's  new  life.  2.  Salt  symbolizes  not  only  God's 
covenant  of  mercy  with  man,  but  man's  covenant  with  God.  The  liie  of  the  animal  was 
devoted  and  offered  with  salt  to  signify — not  only  the  Divine  fact  of  atonement,  but  the 
human  fact  of  self-surrendfr :  and  the  worshipper  said,  "  I  have  given  the  life  of  the 
animal  to  Thee  to  signify  that  henceforth  my  own  life  is  for  ever  Thine."  3.  Salt  is 
also  the  principle  of  counteractive  grace — "  Have  salt  in  yourselves."  4.  Salt  signifies 
the  preventive,  corrective,  life-nourishing  power  of  the  Christian  society  in  the 
world — "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth."  6.  Salt  is  also  the  principle  of  peace. 
It  destroys  the  unbenevolent  passions.  II.  The  Saviour's  lesson  concerning 
the  deterioration  of  the  salt.  1.  The  possibility  of  deterioration — "  If  the  salt  have 
lost  its  savour."  2.  Christ  marks  here  three  things  as  characteristic  of  men  in 
this  state.  (1)  They  are  useless.  (2)  They  are  contemptible.  (3)  They  are 
rejected   with  disdain.     {Preacher's  Monthly.)  True,  yet  tender — Tender,  yet 

true: — The  two  principal  terms  are  salt  and  peace.  I.  The  meaning  of  bach. 
Salt  as  a  metaphor  applied  to  human  character  in  the  New  Testament,  signifies  in 
general  the  grace  of  God  sanctifying  the  whole  nature,  and  in  particular  the  sterner 
virtues — faithfulness,  boldness,  righteousness,  truth,  purity.  The  term  indicates 
holiness  on  its  harder  side ;  and  holiness  has  a  hard  side,  for  it  must  needs  be 
strong.  In  this  use  of  the  analogy  the  preserving  power  of  salt  is  the  predomin- 
ating idea.  Salt  appears  here  as  the  stem,  sharp  antagonist  of  all  corruption. 
Christians  baptized  into  the  Spirit  of  Christ  act  as  salt  in  a  tainted  world.  In 
union  with  the  virtue  that  preserves,  there  is  a  pungency  that  pains.  You  may 
observe,  however,  that  salt  does  not  irritate  whole  skin.  Apply  it  to  an  open  sore, 
and  the  patient  winces  ;  but  a  healthy  member  of  a  living  body  does  not  shrink 
from  its  touch.  A  similar  distinction  obtains  in  the  moral  region.  Stringent 
faithfulness  in  the  conduct  of  his  neighbour  will  not  offend  a  just  man :  but  those 
who  do  not  give  justice  do  not  like  to  get  it.  Purity  in  contact  with  impurity  makes 
the  impure  miserable.  Peace.  Surely  it  is  not  necessary  to  explain  what  this  word 
means.  You  may  comprehend  it  without  the  aid  of  critical  analysis.  It  is  like  the 
shining  sun  or  the  sweet  breath  of  early  summer ;  it  is  its  own  expositor.  Wherever 
it  is,  it  makes  its  presence  and  its  nature  known.  As  the  traveller  who  has  missed 
his  way  thinks  more  of  the  light,  and  understands  it  better,  while  he  is  groping  in 
the  dark  than  he  did  in  the  blaze  of  noon ;  so  those  best  understand  and  value 
peace  who  suffer  the  horrors  of  war.  You  know  the  worth  of  it  when  you  know  the 
want  of  it.  The  greatest  peace  is,  peace  with  the  Greatest ;  the  greatest  peace  is, 
peace  with  God.  The  Mediator  who  makes  it  is  the  greatest  Peacemaker.  Peace 
— including  all  the  characteristics  of  a  Christian  which  make  for  peace — is  holiness 
on  its  softer  side ;  and  holiness  has  a  soft  side,  that  it  may  win  the  world.     II.  Thk 

RECIPROCAL  RELATION   BETWEEN   SALT  IN   OURSELVES    AND  PEACE   WITH    ONE    ANOTHER. 

To  a  certain  extent  these  two  are  opposites ;  peace  maintained  with  your  neighbour 
is  antagonist  to  the  vigour  of  salt  in  yourselves.  Accordingly  error  appears  in  two 
opposite  directions.  One  man  has  so  much  salt  in  himself  that  he  cannot  maintain 
peace  with  his  neighbours  ;  another  man  is  so  soft  and  peaceable  towards  all  that 
he  manifests  scarcely  any  of  the  faithfulness  which  is  indicated  by  salt.  It  is  in- 
structive to  examine  the  limits  and  extent  of  this  antagonism.  Faithfulness  does 
sometimes  disturb  peace ;  and  peace  is  sometimes  obtained  at  the  expense  of  faith- 
fulness. It  is  not  inherent  in  the  nature,  but  is  introduced  by  sin.  When  Christ 
has  made  an  end  of  sin  the  contradiction  will  disappear  from  the  new  world.  In 
heaven  all  are  peaceful  and  yet  pure :  pure  and  yet  peaceful.  There  the  salt  does 
not  disturb,  because  there  is  no  corruption ;  peace  does  not  degenerate  into  indiffer- 
ence, for  there  is  no  vile  appetite  to  be  indulged.  Meanwhile,  that  which  comes  as 
a  curse  is,  under  the  arrangements  of  Providence,  converted  into  a  blessing.  As 
toil  to  keep  down  thorns  and  thistles  is  a  useful  exercise  for  physical  health,  so 
effort  to  maintain  faithfulness  without  breaking  peace  keeps  the  spirit  healthfo} 
and  fits  for  heaven.    Every  effort  made  by  the  disciple  of  Christ  to  soften  his  ow» 


CHAP,  nc.]  ST.  MARK.  S83 


faithfulness  and  invigorate  his  own  tenderness  goes  to  increase  the  treasures  which 
he  shall  enjoy  at  God's  right  hand.    Watch  on  the  right  side,  and  on  the  left.     1. 
On  the  side  of  peace.    There  cannot  be  too  much  gentle  peace-making  in  the 
character  and  conduct  of  a  man.    But  if  the  folds  of  our  peace  are  so  large,  and 
thick,  and  warm,  as  to  overlay  and  smother  our  faithfulness,  the  peacemakers  are 
not  blest  by  God,  and  are  not  blessings  to  the  world.    2.  On  the  side  of  truth  and 
faithfulness.    There  cannot  be  too  much  of  faithfulness  in  the  character  of  a 
Christian ;  but  even  faithfulness  to  truth  may  become  hurtful,  if  it  is  dissociated 
from  the  gentleness  of  Christ.    Similar  antagonisms  in  the  system  of  nature  consti- 
tute  at  once  the  exercise  and  the  evidence  of  the  Creator's  skill.     Results  are 
frequently  obtained  through  the  union  of  antagonist  forces  neutralizing  each  other. 
A  familiar  example  is  supplied  by  the  centripetal  and  centrifugal  forces,  which 
insure  the  stability  of  the  solar  system.    Take  another  case,  equally  instructive, 
though  not  so  obvious.    In  the  structure  of  a  bird,  with  a  view  to  the  discharge  of 
its  fimctions,  two  qualites,  in  a  great  measure  reciprocally  antagonistic,  must  be 
united ;  these  are  strength  and  Ughtness.    As  a  general  rule,  strength  is  incom- 
patible with  lightness,  and  lightness  incompatible  with  strength.     You  cannot 
increase  the  one  without  proportionally  diminishing  the  other.    The  body  of  the 
bird  must  float  in  the  air,  therefore  it  must  be  proportionally  lighter  than  quad- 
rupeds or  fishes ;  but  the  creature  must  sustain  itself  for  long  periods  in  the  atmos- 
phere, and  perform  journeys  of  vast  length,  therefore  its  members  must  be  strong. 
The  structure  of  a  bird,  accordingly,  exhibits  a  marvellous  contrivance  for  the 
combination  of  the  utmost  possible  Ughtness.    Every  one  is  familiar  with  the 
structure  of  the  feathers  that  compose  the  wing.    The  quill  barrel  gives  you  an 
example  of  a  minimum  of  material  so  disposed  as  to  produce  a  maximum  of 
strength.    The  bones  of  birds  are  formed  on  the  same  plan.    They  are  greater  in 
circumference  than  the  corresponding  bones  of  other  animals,  but  they  are  hollower 
in  the  heart.^    In  iron  castings  we  repeat  the  process  which  we  have  learned  from 
nature.    This  union  of  antagonists  for  the  production  of  a  common  beneficent 
result  is  like  the  labour  of  a  Christian  life.    Let  the  timid  and  retiring  nature  stir 
np  his  soul  to  a  greater  measure  of  truthful  courage,  without  letting  any  of  his 
gentleness  go.    Let  the  vine  of  his  tenderness  cUng  to  an  oak  of  stern  faithfulness  ; 
it  will  thus  bear  more  fruit  than  if  it  were  allowed  to  trail  on  the  ground.  The  arms 
that  impart  strength  to  the  chair  only  hurt  the  occupant  if  they  lack  the  cushion 
that  ought  to  cover  them.    For  strength,  there  should  be  an  iron  hand  in  the  velvet 
glove ;  but  for  softness,  a  velvet  glove  should  be  on  the  iron  hand  when  it  grasps 
the  flesh  of  a  brother.    Self-love,  hke  a  huge  lump  of  iron  concealed  under  the 
deck  right  below  the  ship's  compass,  draws  the  magnet  aside  ;  thus  the  life  takes  a 
wrong  direction,  and  the  soul  is  shipwrecked.    Self-love  draws  the  life  now  to  the 
right  and  now  to  the  left ;  the  errors  lie  not  all  on  one  side.    One  man,  soft  from 
selfishness,  basely  sacrifices  truth  and  duty  for  ease ;  another,  hard  from  selfish- 
ness, bristles  all  over  with  sharp  points,  like  thorns  that  tear  the  flesh  of  the 
passenger,  and  when  he  has  kindled  discord  among  brethren,  calls  his  own  bad 
temper  faithfulness  to  truth.    There  is  no  limit  to  the  abberration  of  a  human 
judgment  under  the  bias  of  self-interest.    It  will  not  scruple  to  dispute  the  dis- 
tinction between  black  and  white,  if  it  can  thereby  hope  to  gain  its  selfish  end.   Oh, 
how  precious  are  these  words  of  our  Lord,  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into 
temptation."    It  is  easier  to  explore  the  sources  of  the  Nile,  than  to  discover  the 
true  motives  whence  our  own  actions  spring ;  and  easier  to  turn  the  Nile  from  his 
track,  than  to  turn  the  volume  of  thoughts  and  purposes  which  issue  from  a 
human  heart  and  constitute  the  body  of  a  human  life.    We  cheat  ourselves  and  oar 
neighbours  as  to  the  character  of  our  motives  and  the  meaning  of  our  acts.    Some 
people  mistake  acid  for  salt;  their  own  passions  for  godly  zeal.    Jehn  drives 
furiously  forward  to  purify  the  administration  of  the  kingdom  ;  but  it  is  a  cruel, 
selfish  ambition  that  spurs  him  on.     When  such  a  man  scatters  a  shower  of  acid 
from  his  tongue,  and  sees  that  his  neighbours  are  hurt  by  the  biting  drops,  he 
points  to  their  contortions,  and  exclaims.  See  how  pungent  my  salt  is  1    The  true 
savour  is  in  my  salt ;  for  see  how  these  people  smart  under  its  sting  1   Ah,  the  acid, 
in  common  with  salt,  makes  a  tender  place  smart  in  a  brother ;  but  it  possesses  not, 
in  common  with  salt,  the  faculty  of  warding  off  corruption.    Itself  corrupts  and 
undermines ;  it  corrodes  and  destroys  all  that  it  drops  upon.     "  Get  thee  behind 
me,  Satan:  for  thou  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of  God."      (W.  Amot.) 
8aUU$$  $alt : — In  the  Valley  of  Salt,  which  is  about  four  hours  from  Aleppo,  there 
ia  a  kind  of  drj  onut  of  salt,  which  sounds,  when  the  horses  go  apon  it,  like  frosea 


884  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ix. 

snow  when  it  is  walked  upon.  Along  on  one  side  of  the  valley,  via.,  that  towards 
Gibul,  there  is  a  small  precipice  about  two  men's  lengths,  occasioned  by  the  con' 
tinual  taking  away  the  salt ;  and  in  this  yoa  may  see  how  the  veins  of  it  lie.  I 
broke  a  piece  of  it,  of  which  the  part  that  was  exposed  to  the  rain,  snn,  and  air, 
though  it  had  the  sparks  and  particles  of  salt,  yet  it  had  perfectly  lost  its  savour. 
The  inner  part,  which  was  connected  with  the  rock,  retained  its  savour,  as  I  found 
by  proof.  (Maundrell.)  Seasoning  cJiaracters : — Whatever  may  be  the  case  with 
literal  salt,  Christ  is  referring  to  spiritual  salt,  which  undoubtedly,  in  so  far  as  it 
consiBts  of  a  phase  of  character,  may  be  metamorphosed  into  its  negative  or  contra- 
dictory. Such  metamorphic  changes  of  character  are  possible  in  two  directions. 
They  may  be  realized  upwardly,  in  bad  beings  becoming  good ;  or  downwardly,  in 
good  beings  becoming  bad.  Hatred  may  be  transformed  into  love,  or  love  into  hatred. 
In  either  case  there  is  "conversion"  from  contrary  to  contrary.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.) 
Salt  is  good : — Every  Christian  requires  as  a  sacrifice  the  salt  of  fire  ;  the  salt  of 
fiery  trial,  the  salt  of  searching,  fiery  self-restraint,  refusing  sin,  breaking  off  from 
evil,  cutting  off  the  right  hand,  plucking  out  the  right  eye,  preferring  the  fire  of 
self-denial  on  earth  to  the  terrible  fire  reserved  for  impenitent  sinners  in  hell.  Such 
salt,  such  searching,  pungent,  self -purifying  salt  is  good ;  but,  if  it  have  lost  its 
saltness,  wherewith  will  ye  season  it  ?  If  those  who  are  bound  in  covenant  with 
God  to  refrain  from  sin,  and  offer  themselves  holy  sacrifices  to  Him,  yield  instead 
of  resisting,  there  is  no  acceptableness  in  them,  God  will  not  receive  them ; 
shunning  the  earthly  fires  of  self-government  and  self-denial,  there  is  nothing  for 
them  to  look  forward  to  but  that  awful  hell  fire  which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
his  angels.  This  seems  to  be  the  true  and  just  method  of  paraphrasing  our  Lord's 
words  about  salt,  with  their  context,  as  they  occur  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  St. 
Mark.  IG.  Moberly,  D.C.L.)  The  victory  of  fiolinets : — Do  they  not  show  that 
to  be  a  Christian,  a  Christian  such  as  God  approves  and  will  accept,  there  needs 
heroism  ?  Yes,  not  less  than  a  true  heroism  of  spirit,  maintaining  a  visible  or 
secret  strife  against  evil,  and  conquering  it,  even  to  the  loss  of  hand,  foot,  or  eye, 
even  to  the  destruction  of  friendship,  if  so  be,  the  loss  of  love,  the  relinquishment 
even  of  life.  Does  it  not  show  that  this  heroism  of  spirit,  this  clear,  bright,  searching 
salt  of  hearts,  is  required  of  all  ?  (Ibid.)        A  bargain  of  salt : — ^I.  That  an  inward 

SEASONING  WITH   BELIOION  AND  OBACB    IS     SUCH    A  THING  AS  AUi    THB    DISCIPLES  OF 

Cbfjst  Jesus  must  endeavoub  for.  1.  Teaching  disciples,  ministers  must  be  well 
seasoned  within  with  the  power  of  godliness.  (1)  A  teacher  who  is  himself  well 
seasoned  is  the  most  fit  to  season  others.  There  is  ever  most  Ufe  in  that  man's 
teaching  who  teaches  from  experience.  (2)  An  unseasoned  minister  cannot  choose 
but  break  forth  into  some  outward  scandal.  His  inward  rottenness  cannot  possibly 
be  so  smothered  or  tempered,  but  it  will  make  his  course  to  be  unsavoury.  2.  The 
same  is  to  be  endeavoured  for  by  every  Christian,  that  is,  every  Christian  must 
labour  so  as  to  have  a  name  and  a  show  of  godliness  without,  so  that  he  feels  the 
power  of  godliness  within.  (1)  Until  this  holy  salt  has  fretted  out  the  evil  from  the 
heart  the  Lord  can  have  no  pleasure  therein ;  until  this  is  done  a  man  does  not 
know  what  true  religion  means ;  there  can  be  no  constancy  in  religion  where  this 
wants.  It  is  not  possible  for  a  man  to  hold  out  his  profession  unless  he  is  well 
seasoned.  (2)  These  duties,  required  of  each  Christian,  admonishing,  comfuting, 
<&c.,  can  never  be  practised  aright  but  by  a  man  who  is  able  and  willing  to  do  them 
out  of  personal  feeling.  That  which  is  in  itself  unsavoury  can  never  make  another 
thing  to  be  sweet.  {Samuel  Hieron.)  The  salting  process  in  the  soul : — For  thine 
own  particular,  learn  of  the  housewife ;  if  there  be  anything  in  the  house  needs 
seasoning,  she  falls  to  work  with  the  salt  forthwith.  Look  into  thyself,  see  what 
oorrupt  a^ections  there  be  in  t'nee,  what  careless  desires,  what  inordinate  motions, 
what  crookedness  of  will,  what  barrenness  of  spiritual  grace,  a  thousand  to  one  if 
the  salt  were  good  which  thou  broughtest  home,  it  will  do  thee  service  for  the 
bringing  of  those  oorrupt  humours  to  a  better  temper ;  cliiefly  take  note  of  this. 
I  am  nut  ashamed  to  use  this  household  kitchen  similitude  still.  She  that 
powdereth  meat  to  keep  it  sweet,  look  what  places  are  most  bloody  and  moisty ; 
there  she  ever  puts  in  most  salt,  such  parts  are  most  apt  to  putrify.  So  do  thou, 
consider  with  tibyself  what  is  thy  chiefest  sin,  thy  most  prevailing  fault,  thy  most 
strong  corruption,  that  which  thoumayest  call  by  David's  phrase,  "My  wickedness  "; 
thou  shalt  soon  know  it  by  the  strength  of  the  affection  to  it,  and  thy  imwillingness 
to  forego  it.  Oh,  clap  in,  put  on  store  of  salt  there;  rub  it  in  hard.  If  thou  hast 
heard  of  any  judgment,  or  reproof,  thrust  it  on  close,  it  may  be  it  may  smart  a 
little ;  it  is  no  matter,  better  so  than  ever  ache,  this  will  soak  out  the  rank  humours. 


CHAF.  EL]  8T.  MARK.  il86 

and  make  thee  become  a  sweet  Imnp  before  the  Lord.  It  is  ft  teolt  many  times, 
men  sprinkle  a  little  salt  of  doctrine  npon  themselves  here  and  there  snperficially, 
they  consider  not  what  be  their  master,  their  bloody,  their  reigning  sins,  they  search 
not  within  and  without  to  see  where  salt  needs  especially,  and  so  they  become 
loathsome  through  the  lack  of  an  effectual  powdering.  Neither  is  this  all  required 
in  the  use  of  this  salt  for  one's  own  particular,  but  there  is  also  a  more  general 
and  an  universal  use  to  be  made  thereof.  What  day  is  there  in  the  family,  wherein 
there  is  no  ose  of  common  salt?  Truth  is,  there  is  neither  day  in  the  life  of  a 
Christian,  nor  action  in  that  day,  wherein  this  spiritual  salt  can  justly  be  thought 
superfluous.  Every  sacrifice  must  be  salted  with  salt,  it  was  a  rule  of  the  ancient 
law.  (Ibid.)  Home  talting : — Good  it  were  if  masters  of  families  would  think 
themselves  bound  to  carry  home  some  of  this  salt,  and  bestow  it  on  those  that  are 
of  their  household  charge.  (Ibid.)  That  amongst  the  disciples  of  Christ  there  must 
be  mutual  peace : — Our  God  is  the  God  of  Peace.  Our  Saviour  is  the  Prince  of 
Peace.  The  gospel  which  is  preached  amongst  us,  is  the  gospel  of  peace.  The 
substance  of  it  is  glad  tidings  of  peace.  Our  calling  is  in  peace.  They  which  are 
the  Lord's  are  called  the  sons  of  peace ;  bo  we  ought  all  to  endeavour  to  keep  *•  the 
unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace  ";  and  to  live  in  peace.  Christians  must 
follow  peace  with  all  men ;  and  if  it  be  possible  have  peace  with  all  men ;  and 
therefore  among  themselves  they  must  seek  it,  and  ensue  it  much  more.  I  must 
open  this  as  the  former  doctrine  by  distinguishing  upon  Christ's  disciples.  Some 
are  preachers  of  peace,  some  are  professors  of  peace.  Let  me  show  you  how  this 
doctrine  reacheth  unto  both.  The  teachen  of  peace  must  have  peace  one  towards 
another : — Their  agreement,  their  peace,  their  consent,  is  a  great  motive  to  the 
people  to  entertain  their  doctrine.  Hereupon  was  that  use  of  Paul's,  to  prefix  the 
names  of  others  with  his  own, as  "Paul,  and  our  brother  Sostenes;"  "Paul,  and  our 
brother  Timotheus;"  "Paul,  and  all  the  brethren  that  are  with  me ;"  "  Paul,  and  Sil- 
▼anus  and  Timotheus."  The  case  stands  in  the  building  of  the  spiritual  body,  as  it 
did  in  the  typical  body,  in  fighting  the  Lord's  battle,  by  those  whose  ofl&ce  it  is  to 
fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  as  in  the  fighting  for  Israel  against  Ammon.  The  agree* 
ment  of  the  builders  will  advance  the  building  both  with  speed  and  beauty ;  the 
joint  proceeding  of  the  leaders  will  undoubtedly  prevail  against  the  common  enemy. 
Solomon's  temple  wasbuilded  without  noise ;  neither  hammer,  nor  axe,  nor  any  tool 
of  iron  was  heard  in  the  house  while  it  was  in  building;  a  type,  I  doubt  not,  of  the 
stillness  in  respect  of  freedom  from  mutual  contentions  which  ought  to  be  amongst 
pastors.  Again,  the  want  of  this  agreement  and  peace  will  be  a  great  prejudice  to 
the  growth  of  the  truth.  The  means  used  in  God'a  wisdom  to  hinder  Babel's 
bnilding  was  a  strife  of  tongues  among  the  builders ;  so  when  those  whidi  are  the 
builders  of  the  spiritual  House  of  God,  the  Church,  are  rent  asunder  in  affection, 
the  work  cannot  go  forward  as  it  should.  The  shepherds  being  divided,  the  sheep 
must  needs  be  scattered.  This  to  prove  that  the  teachers  of  peace  must  have  peace 
one  towards  another.  God  hath  sent  us  pradicare,  not  praliari,  to  work  and  not  to 
wrangle ;  while  we  strive  the  devil  works  for  himself :  atheism,  popery,  do  advan- 
tage themselves  by  our  dissentions.  There  must  be  mutual  peace  among  the  pro- 
fessors of  peace,  the  places  which  I  first  named  in  the  beginning  of  the  doctrine  do 
enjoin  it  This  is  the  mark  by  which  they  are  known.  "By  this  shall  all  men  know 
that  ye  be  my  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another."  To  love  one  another,  and  to 
have  peace  one  towards  another,  are  all  one.  Be  wise  and  learn  how  to  judge  and 
what  to  think  in  this  point  of  ministerial  consent  and  peace,  that  you  may  not 
easily  stumble  through  mistaking.  Here,  therefore,  in  order,  I  pray  heartily  observe 
these  particulars.  First,  that  consent  and  agreement  of  teachers  is  no  certain 
mark  of  truth  in  that  wherein  they  consent ;  Aaron  and  all  the  other  Levites  con- 
sented to  the  making  of  the  golden  calf,  four  hundred  prophets  joined  together  to 
persuade  good  success  to  Ahab,  yet  that  was  false  which  they  persuaded.  Our 
Saviour  was  condemned  by  a  common  consent  of  elders  and  priests.  Secondly, 
that  it  is  possible  for  some  dissention  to  fall  out  sometimes  even  amongst  the  best 
men,  A  controversy  betwixt  Peter  and  Paul,  betwixt  Peter  and  the  other  Apostles 
and  brethren  at  Jerusalem.  The  difference  between  Paul  and  Barnabas  was  very 
eaqer.  Dissentions  in  Corinth.  Great  and  vehement  quarrels  betwixt  Austen  and 
Elierome,  Cyril  and  Theodoret,  Chrysostome  and  Theophilact,  as  histories  acd  their 
own  writings  testify.  It  is  so ;  first,  by  the  cunning  of  the  devil,  who,  to  stop  the 
course  of  the  gospel,  laboureth  to  sow  the  seeds  of  dissention.  Secondly,  by  reason 
of  the  remainders  of  corruption  which  are  in  all ;  there  is  much  ignorance  and  self- 
love  even  in  the  best,  and  these  things  cause  differences,  while  men  either  see  act 

25 


886  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  x. 

the  truth.  That  among  professors  and  preachers  of  religion  there  is,  or  may  be,  a 
threefold  oonsent.  First,  in  one  faith  and  doctrine ;  namely,  a  consent  of  judgment 
Secondly,  in  affection.  Thirdly,  in  speech ;  namely,  when  their  teaching  and 
manner  of  holding  and  defending  of  points  of  doctrines  is  the  same.  {Ibid).  (hie 
^sseiUial : — "  Salt  is  good,  but  if  the  salt  have  lost  its  saltness  wherewith  will  ye 
(■eason  it  r  "  In  every  good  thing  there  is  one  supreme  essential,  besides  much  that 
is  of  minor  importance.  Let  that  one  element  be  lacking,  and  all  the  rest  is  a 
mockery.  If  sugar  be  not  sweet,  if  fruit  have  no  flavour,  if  meat  be  without  nutri- 
ment, what  folly  to  give  it  commendation  for  any  other  quality  1  If  a  man  lack 
manliness,  if  a  woman  lack  womanliness,  if  a  child  lack  childlikeness,  praise  for  any 
other  characteristic  is  little  else  than  censure  or  a  sneer.  What  is  home  without 
affection?  What  is  friendship  without  mutual  confidence?  What  is  character 
without  sincerity?  What  is  salt  without  saltness ?  If  you  are  a  disciple  of  Christ 
the  real  question  is.  How  much  of  Christian  discipleship  is  there  in  you  ?  Every- 
thing else — all  your  popularity,  all  your  supposed  usefulness,  all  your  zeal  in  good 
vv'orks— is  something  outside  of  the  only  that  is  really  worth  taking  into  aocount  in 
an  estimate  of  your  worth  as  a  disciple  of  Christ. 


CHAPTEB  Z. 

Yeb.  1.  He  taught  them  again. — He  taught  them  again: — How  thick  and  dose 
does  this  Heavenly  Sower  scatter  His  seed  I  Every  line  is  a  new  lesson,  and  every 
lesson  a  rule  of  perfection.  Oh,  the  magnificent  bounty  of  our  God  I  He  gives 
not  barely  the  measure  we  give  others ;  but  *'  pressed  down,  and  shaken  together, 
and  running  over  into  our  bosoms."  Why  are  we  then  so  slow  and  dull  to  learn 
these  Divine  instructions  ?  Why  so  remiss  to  practise  them  ?  Are  they  not  sweet 
and  excellent  in  themselves  ?  Are  they  not  infinitely  profitable  to  us  ?  Oh,  make 
us  greedy  to  learn  what  Thy  love  makes  Thee  so  eager  to  teach  !    (W.  Austin.) 

Vers.  2-12.  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  his  viMqI— The  family  relation:^ 
One  of  the  most  pathetic  incidents  found  in  the  narrative  of  one  of  the  arctic 
explorations,  is  that  of  the  attempt  made  to  induce  a  native  of  that  terribly  inhos- 
pitable region  to  journey  away  with  the  returning  navigators  to  a  more  sunny  clime. 
Won  by  the  enthusiastic  descriptions  of  a  land  of  orchards  and  meadows,  of  purling 
brooks  and  singing  birds,  he  did  indeed  surrender  himself  to  go.  But  hardly  were 
they  on  the  way  out  from  among  those  mountain  bergs  of  ice  and  dismal  fields  of 
snow,  directing  their  course  towards  the  latitudes  where  the  blue  tops  of  distant 
hills  told  of  freshening  verdure,  before  they  missed  their  simple-hearted  comrade. 
He  had  gone  back  clandestinely  to  the  cheerless  scenes  of  his  former  life.  Cold  and 
uninviting  to  a  stranger,  those  northern  soUtudes  were  welcome  to  him  because  they 
had  been  his  home  ever  since  he  was  bom.  We  smile  at  his  simplicity,  but  how 
quickly,  after  all,  do  we  give  him  our  sympathy  in  the  feeling  1  We  love  our  homes 
unaffectedly  and  almost  illogically  at  times;  not  because  they  in  every  case  are 
better  than  others,  but  because  they  are  ours.  I.  The  family  is  a  Divinb  institution. 
We  are  not  left  to  look  upon  it  as  a  chance  arrangement  of  individuals  of  the  human 
species ;  it  is  a  definitely  fixed  form  of  association.  1.  It  was  ordained  by  the 
Creator  himself  when  the  race  began  (see  Mark  x.  6 ;  Gen.  ii.  18-25).  This  order 
therefore  cannot  be  changed  irreverently,  nor  disturbed  without  peril.  2.  It  has 
been  recognized  all  along  the  ages  by  the  providence  of  God.  When  David  (Psa. 
Ixviii.  6)  says :  "  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  families,"  a  more  literal  and  more 
pertinent  translation  would  give  us  this :  "  God  maketh  the  lonely  to  dwell  in  a 
home."  The  all-wise  Creator  has  provided  in  the  wide  adaptations  of  nature  for  an 
abode  of  its  own  sort  for  every  creature  of  His  hand.  He  has  set  the  coney  in  the 
rock,  the  ant  in  the  sand,  the  fish  in  the  river,  and  the  whale  in  the  sea ;  but  to  no 
one  of  them  all  has  He  given  a  home  but  to  man.  8.  It  has  been  sanctioned  by 
God  in  His  Word  (see  Mark  x.  7-9).  4.  It  has  bee  symbolized  and  spiritualized  in 
the  Church  (see  Eph.  iii.  16).  And  the  relation  etween  Christ  and  His  people  is 
like  that  between  a  husband  and  wife  (see  Eph.  v.  22-32).  John  saw  the  Church, 
"the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,"  descending  out  of  heaven,  "having  the  glory  of  God" 
(Bev.  zxi.  9, 10).   U.  The  family  is  k  Bsuaions  institutiom.    That  is  to  say,  it  has 


z.]  iSrr.  MARK,  887 

ft  distinot  and  valaable  purpose  to  serve  in  aiding  men  to  glorify  Gh>d  and  enjoy  Him 
for  ever  as  their  chief  end,  1.  It  is  designed  to  perfeot  Christian  character.  The 
relations  of  a  believer  to  his  Saviour  are  essentially  filial.  The  saints  are  the 
«hildren  of  God.  The  Almighty  Father,  takiug  upon  Himself  the  three  obligations 
of  a  parent — government,  education,  and  support — calls  upon  each  Christian  for 
the  three  duties  of  a  son — subordination,  studiousness,  and  grateful  love.  Hence, 
aU  our  celestial  connections  with  God  are  most  perfectly  and  easily  taught  through 
cor  earthly  connections  with  each  other  in  a  well-ordered  home.  2.  Again  :  the 
family  relation  is  designed  to  concentrate  Christian  power.  For  it  is  the  earliest 
outflow  into  practical  use  of  the  principle  that  in  union  there  is  strength.  8.  In  the 
third  place,  the  family  relation  is  designed  to  cultivate  the  Christian  spirit.  There 
ought  to  be  in  all  organizations  which  are  worth  anything  what  the  French  people 
call  esprit  de  corps  ;  a  peculiar,  pervading  tone  of  pubUo  sentiment  and  opinion,  full 
of  a  generous  confidence  and  pride,  running  through  all  its  members.  Each  soldier 
feels  his  connection  with  the  company  to  which  he  owes  allegiance,  thence  with  the 
regiment,  and  so  with  the  entire  corps.  He  is  jealous  of  its  honour,  he  is  zealous 
for  its  name.  4.  Once  more :  the  family  relation  is  designed  to  increase  the 
Christian  census.  Children  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  God  (see  Mark  z.  14).  (C. 
8,  Bobinsouj  D.D.)  The  law  of  marriage : — I.  Thk  nature  of  this  contbact. 
It  is  for  life,  and  dissoluble  only  for  one  sin.  It  is  subject  to  Divine  laws.  It  is 
mutual.  It  must  be  based  upon  affection.  It  implies  the  surrender  of  various 
rights,  but  not  of  all,  i.e.  conscience.  In  case  of  difference  of  opinion,  and  within 
proper  limits,  the  authority  is  with  the  husband.  II.  Thb  duties  imposed  by  this 
BBLATiON.  Upon  both  is  imposed  chastity.  Likewise  mutual  affection.  Also  the 
duty  of  mutual  assistance.  The  husband  made  by  Scripture  and  by  law  the  head 
of  the  domestic  society;  hence  the  duty  of  submission.  Virtue  and  dignity  of 
submission.  {Dr.  Way  land.)  God's  law  greater  than  man's : — We  are  here  taught 
that  marriage,  being  an  institution  of  God,  is  subject  to  His  laws  alone,  and  not  to 
the  laws  of  man.  Hence  the  civil  law  is  binding  upon  the  conscience  only  in  so  far 
as  it  corresponds  to  the  law  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Influence  of  a  Christian  wife : — 
There  was  a  company  of  rough  men  together  at  one  o'clock  one  night,  and  a  man 
says :  '*  My  wife  is  a  Christian,  and  if  I  should  go  home  at  this  hour,  and  order  her 
to  get  as  an  entertainment,  she  would  get  it  with  good  cheer,  and  without  one  word 
of  censure."  They  laughed  at  him,  and  said  she  would  not.  They  laid  a  wager, 
and  started  for  his  home,  and  they  knocked  at  one  or  two  o'clock  in  the  morning. 
The  Christian  wife  came  to  the  door,  and  her  husband  said :  "  Get  us  something  to 
eat  1  get  it  right  away  1 "  She  said :  "  What  shall  I  get  ? "  And  he^  ordered  the 
bill  of  fare,  and  it  was  provided  without  one  word  of  censure.  After  his  roystering 
companions  had  gone  out  of  the  house,  he  knelt  down  and  said :  **  Oh  1  forgive  me  I 
I  am  wicked  1  I  am  most  wicked !  Get  down  and  pray  for  me ! "  and  before  the 
morning  dawned  on  the  earth,  the  pardon  of  Christ  had  dawned  on  that  man. 
Why  ?  His  wife  was  a  thorough  Christian.  He  could  not  resist  the  power  of  her 
Christian  influence.  {Br.  Talmage.)  Marriage: — The  special  duties  belonging 
to  marriage  are  love  and  affection.  Love  is  the  marriage  of  the  affections.  ^  There 
is,  as  it  were,  but  one  heart  in  two  bodies.  Love  lines  the  yoke  and  makes  it  easy ; 
it  perfumes  the  marriage  relation.  Like  two  poisons  in  one  stomach,  one  is  ever 
Bi(^  of  the  other.  In  marriage  there  is  mutual  promise  of  living  together  faithfully 
according  to  God's  holy  ordinance.  Among  the  Romans,  on  the  day  of  marriage, 
the  woman  presented  to  her  husband  fire  and  water :  signifying,  that  as  fire  refines. 
and  water  cleanses,  she  would  Uve  with  her  husband  in  chastity  and  sincerity. 
{Thomas  Watson.)  A  cure  for  divorces: — A  gentlemen  who  did  not  Live  very 
happily  with  his  wife  decided  to  procure  a  divorce,  and  took  advice  on  the  subject 
from  an  intimate  friend — a  man  of  high  social  standing.  ♦ '  Go  home  and  court  your 
wife  for  a  year,"  said  this  wise  adviser,  "  and  then  tell  me  the  result."  They  bowed 
in  prayer,  and  separated.  When  a  year  passed  away,  the  once-complaining  husband 
called  again  to  see  his  friend,  and  said :  "  I  have  called  to  thank  you  for  the  good 
advice  you  gave  me,  and  to  tell  you  that  my  wife  and  I  are  as  happy  as  when  first 
we  were  married.  I  cannot  be  grateful  enough  for  your  good  counsel."  *'  I  am  glad 
to  hear  it,  dear  sir,"  said  the  other,  "and  I  hope  you  will  continue  to  court  your  wife 
as  long  as  you  live."  The  marriage  tie  and  the  married  life : — The  sacred  institu- 
tion of  marriage  has  been  fiercely  assailed.  The  attempt  is  to  shake  off  the  authority 
of  the  great  God  who  made  and  rules  all  things.  Thus  with  regard  to  marriage,  men 
tell  us  it  is  simply  an  agreement  between  two  persons,  which  the  State  takes  notice  of 
only  for  the  sake  of  public  convenience,  like  it  does  of  the  lease  of  %  house.    This 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chaf.  x. 

leaves  ont  of  view  the  most  powerful  part  of  matrimony — ^the  religions.  Tme»  ii 
is  a  legal  engagement ;  but  it  is  also  a  solemn  engagement  before  Ood.  **  Whom 
God  hath  joined  together,"  Ac  See,  the  golden  links  of  matrimony  are  of  heavenly 
temper.  What  hand  can  be  so  impious  as  to  try  to  burst  them  asunder  t  The  law 
of  God  has  been  transgressed  of  late  years  by  the  doctrine  of  polygamy  so  boldly 
proclaimed  by  the  Mormon  blasphemy.  Everywhere  Christ  and  His  apostles  speiJb 
of  one  wife ;  as  the  great  God  only  created  one  man  and  one  woman.  It  is  a  solemn 
moment  when  two  immortal  beings  venture  out  on  life's  stormy  sea  in  the  bark  of 
matrimony,  with  no  aid  but  their  own  to  help  them.  A  mistake  iu  matrimony  is  a 
nnstake  for  life.  Do  not  Christians  find  it  important  to  avoid  the  friendship  of  the 
irreligious;  what  then  is  likely  to  be  the  effect  of  marriage  with  the  ungodly f 
Married  life  is  a  detector  of  the  real  character.  After  marriage,  faults  are  dis- 
covered, perhaps,  to  be  greater  than  was  expected,  and  excellences  less.  Disap- 
pointment springs  up ;  contempt  follows.  Do  you  find  much  yon  did  not  expect  f 
Kemember  you  also  are  showing  much  that  was  not  expected,  and  as  you  do  not  like 
in  consequence  of  your  faults  to  cease  to  be  loved,  so  also  do  not  let  the  faults  yoo 
see  kill  your  own  love.  Do  not  gloomily  meditate  on  each  other's  failings,  for  that 
will  make  them  seem  greater  than  they  are.  If  you  would  see  your  life  partner's 
faults  amended,  you  should  set  the  example  by  amending  your  own.  Gentleness, 
firmness,  forbearance,  cheerfulness,  openness,  must  be  the  chains  with  which  husband 
and  wife  try  to  keep  marriage  love  from  escaping.  1.  The  want  of  experience  is 
often  a  great  hindrance  to  the  happiness  of  married  life ;  hence  it  frequently  happens 
that  the  first  years  of  married  life  are  not  the  happiest.  2.  The  married  life  is 
often  disturbed  by  the  extravagance  and  folly  of  the  husband  or  wife ;  for  difificulties 
arise  therefrom,  and  much  bitterness  is  likely  to  spring  up.  Love  is  the  universal 
law  of  marriage.  Love  will  not  easily  find  fault  or  rashly  give  offence.  Poverty 
cannot  quench  it.  The  Christian  rule  for  all  applies  doubly  to  man  and  wife — "weep 
with  them  that  weep,  and  rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice."  Different  dispositions 
and  tastes  may  sometimes  make  mutual  sympathy  difficult.  The  sympathy  of  love 
and  the  sympathy  of  taste  are  distinct  things.  A  source  of  unhappiness  in  married 
life  is  the  habit  of  dwelling  on  individual  right  instead  of  remembering  that  love 
should  not  measure  the  service  it  bestows,  nor  that  it  receives.  If  difference  of 
opinion  does  arise,  the  Christian  duty  is  for  the  wife  to  yield.  The  marriage  life 
was  intended  to  promote  human  happiness ;  but  it  brings  with  it  peculiar  duties, 
and  the  happiness  marriage  was  intended  to  impart  will  be  wanting,  if  the  duties  of 
the  married  life  are  neglected.    {A.  Bibhy^  M.A.) 

Vers.  13-16.  And  they  brought  young:  children  to  Bim.—Bringing  children  to 
Jesus  .'-feWe  know  what  it  was  to  bring  a  little  child  to  Jesus  when  He  wfts  on 
earth;  we  may  ask  what  it  is  now,  and  wherein  the  difference  consists.  Qf^^lN 
REOABD  TO  THE  CHILDBEN  THEMSELVES.  It  is  a  commou  expression  on  the  hps  of 
good  people  to  bid  children  to  ••  come  to  Jesus."  This  cannot  mean  exactly  the 
same  as  when  Jesus  was  sitting  in  the  house.  The  child  saw  Jesus  with  his  bodily 
eye,  might  mark  the  kindly  light  in  it,  and  be  encouraged  by  the  kindly  smile  that 
played  around  His  Hps.  There  could  not  be  in  the  children  on  that  day  anything 
hke  what  we  now  call  a  spiritual  feeling,  any  doubts  or  difficulties  as  to  what  was 
raeaht  by  coming  to  Jesus.  In  more  advanced  years  the  notion  of  what  is  spiritual 
may  be  gradually  developed  in  the  mind,  but  in  the  tender  time  of  childhood, 
religious  ideas  shonld  be  presented  to  children  in  forms  that  are  true  and  natural 
to  them.  Let  them  feel  that  they  are  the  children  of  the  great  unseen  Father ; 
that  they  have  a  Saviour  and  Friend;  but  beware  how  you  mix  up  with  that 
religious  teaching  a  philosophy  of  human  invention.^  Children  are  patterns  of 
simplicity ;   do  not  reverse  this  picture.     II.  What  is  the  diffebrncb  between 

BRINGING  A  CHILD  IN   ChBIST'b  DAY  TO  JeSUS  AND  BBINGINO  HIM  NOW  7      What  is  the 

difference  to  the  child  himself,  and  what  to  the  parents  ?  ^  At  that  time  the  parents 
saw  whether  the  child  was  accepted ;  saw  Christ  bless  the  child ;  it  was  a  matter 
ef  sight,  not  of  faith.  Now  it  is  matter  of  faith.j^  One  would  like  to  know  the 
ground  of  the  rebuke  administered  by  the  disciples.  Perhaps  the  parents  were 
interrupting  the  teaching  of  Christ,  or  the  disciples  thought  that  the  placing  of 
Christ's  hands  on  the  children  could  do  them  no  good.  The  objections  of  modem 
disciples  are  of  the  same  nature.  The  action  of  Christ,  as  well  as  His  words,  is 
a  rebuke  to  such.  He  does  not  say,  "  Take  these  children  hence,  they  can  get  no 
good  from  Me.  Bring  them  to  Me  when  they  can  express  assent  to  My  teaching.** 
His  words  tell  as  that  before  the  age  of  understanding  God  can  do  the  child  good. 


1.]  ST.  MARK. 


What  is  meant  by  "  receiving  the  kingdom  of  Ctod  as  a  little  child  "  ?  There  are 
elements  of  a  child's  life  which  cannot  be  continued  in  the  life  of  manhood ;  but 
there  are  outstanding  characteristics  of  childhood  which  must  be  seen  in  those  who 
receive  the  kingdom  of  God.  1.  He  refers  to  naturalness,  truthfulness,  or  single^ 
mindedness,  as  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  artifice  or  duplicity.  The  child's  nature 
comes  out,  unmindful  of  pain  or  pleasure  to  others,  he  speaks  what  is  in  him. 
His  mind  is  a  perfect  mirror,  throwing  back  all  that  falls  on  it,  and  he  is  utterly 
unconscious  of  any  wish  to  give  an  undue  colouring  to  his  feelings  or  desires.  He 
does  not  pretend  to  like  what  he  hates ;  to  beUeve  what  he  does  not  believe ;  he  is 
true  to  himself.  Whosoever  would  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child 
must  be  true  to  nature,  the  new  nature,  and  be  simple  and  sincere.  How  much 
more  straightforward  would  the  path  be  to  the  kingdom,  and  in  the  kingdom,  if 
men  would  only  renounce  the  crooked  policy  which  they  learn  in  the  world.  2.  The 
element  of  trust.  {A.  Watson,  D.D.)  Children  welcomed  to  Christ : — 1.  The 
danger  of  sin  standing  in  the  way  of  children  coming  to  Christ.  Few  persons  are 
aware  of  the  extent  to  which  children,  even  very  young  children's  minds,  are 
capable  of  being  affected,  prejudiced,  distorted,  by  the  conversation  which  they 
hear.  Children  cannot  balance  and  dismiss  a  subject  as  you  do.  It  has  fallen  with 
fearful  impression.  But  some  cast  obstacles  less  offensively,  but  perhaps  more 
dangerously.  They  render  religion  repulsive  to  children.  Where  is  that  cheerful- 
ness which  a  child  loves,  and  in  which  real  religion  always  consists  ?  What  ought 
to  come  as  a  pleasure  you  force  as  a  duty ;  you  are  seveia  when  you  ought  to  be 
encouraging ;  abstract  when  you  should  be  practical.  ^Xl)  Thb  dutt  of  bbinoino 
CHILDREN  TO  Ghbist.  Impressions  made  in  childhood  are  sure  to  creep  out  in  after 
life.  Let  them  feel  that  at  any  point  of  life  they  have  to  do  with  Jesus.  Your 
clijld  has  told  a  lie.  Tell  him,  '*  Jesus  is  Truth."  This  is  leading  him  to  Christ. 
(XII^ '  Wk  oubselves  must  bk  like  little  ohildbbn.  Be  quite  a  child,  and  you  will 
soon  be  quite  a  saint.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  Saviour's  invitation  to  little 
children :—Yfhy  does  the  Saviour  show  such  tender  affection  for  children? 
1.  Because  they  have  a  confiding  trust  in  God.  2.  Because  they  have  a  holy  fear 
of  God.  3.  Because  they  have  no  false  shame.  4.  Because  they  have  the  spirit 
of  humihty.  6.  Because  they  have  the  spirit  of  love.  {J.  H.  Norton,  D.D.) 
The  child's  gospel : — **  O  mother,"  said  a  little  girl,  on  returning  from  church,  and 
running  into  her  mother's  sick  room,  **  I  have  heard  the  child's  gospel  to-day  1 " 
It  was  the  very  part  which  I  am  now  preaching  about.  Another,  about  seven  years 
old,  heard  the  same  passage  read  when  she  was  near  death,  and,  as  her  sister 
closed  the  book,  the  little  sick  one  said,  *'  How  kind  1  I  shall  soon  go  to  Jesus.  He 
will  take  me  up  in  His  arms,  and  bless  me,  too  I  "  The  sister  tenderly  kissed  her, 
and  asked,  *' Do  you  love  me,  dearest?"  **Yes,"  she  answered,  "but,  don't  be 
angry,  I  love  Jesus  more."  {Ibid.)  Parental  love: — The  poet  Lamartine,  in 
alluding  to  his  father  and  mother,  says,  "  I  remember  once  to  have  seen  the 
branch  of  a  willow,  which  had  been  torn  by  the  tempest's  hands  from  the  parent 
trunk,  floating  in  the  morning  light  upon  the  angry  surges  of  the  overflowing 
Saone.  On  it  a  female  nightingale  covered  her  nest,  as  it  drifted  down  the  foaming 
stream ;  and  the  male  on  the  wing  followed  the  wreck  which  was  bearing  away  the 
object  of  his  love."  Beautiful  illustration,  indeed,  of  the  tender  affection  of 
parents  for  their  children.  ^Much,  however,  as  father  and  mother  love  their 
offspring,  there  is  One  whose  feelings  towards  them  are  inflnitely  stronger  and 
more  enduring.  ^  I  hardly  need  explain  that  I  refer  to  our  adorable  Saviour.  (Ibid.) 
The  sin  of  keeping  back  children  from  Christ : — I:  It  should  be  noted  carefully  that 
the  parties  who  objected  to  the  bringing  Uttle  children  to  Christ  were  not  Scribes 
and  Pharisees,  the  unbelieving  Jews  who  recognized  nothing  Divine  in  the  mission 
of  our  Lord,  but  actually  His  disctples.  They  perhaps  considered  it  entailing 
unnecessary  fatigue  on  their  Master,  that  He  should  have  to  receive  the  young  as 
well  as  the  old ;  or  that  no  suf&cient  end  was  to  be  answered  by  bringing  little 
children  to  Christ.  They  would  have  understood  the  use  of  bringing  a  lame  child 
to  Him,  though  too  young  to  exercise  faith ;  but  they  had  no  idea  of  a  child  in 
bodily  health  deriving  any  advantage  from  contact  with  Christ.  The  parents 
judged  better  than  the  disciples,  knowing  that  by  God's  express  command  th* 
rite  of  circumcision  was  administered  to  infants,  they  concluded,  as  we  may 
snppose,  that  infancy  of  itself  was  no  disqualiflcation  for  a  religious  privilege,  and 
that  if  there  was  anything  spiritual  in  the  mission  of  Christ,  it  might  be  com- 
municated to  the  young  as  well  as  the  old.  If  we  delay  religious  instruction,  under 
the  idea  that  it  ia  too  dif&colt  or  too  abBtmse  for  a  very  young  mind,  are  we  not 


890  THR  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

acting  in  mnoh  the  same  way  as  the  disciples  r  In  after  life  there  is  no  greater 
impediment  to  religion  than  the  want  of  proper  habits  of  self-discipline  and 
control.  It  may  therefore  be  justly  considered,  that  whatever  tends  to  the  forming 
such  habits  facilitates  the  coming  to  our  Lord  for  His  blessing.  Then,  what  want 
of  faith  is  there  in  the  education  of  children.  Parents  are  actually  suspicions  of 
the  Bible,  even  when  desirous  of  instilling  its  truths  into  their  children.  ^  They  run 
to  good  books  to  make  the  Bible  easy  and  amusing,  whose  business  it  is  to  dilute 
and  simplify  the  Word,  ridding  it  of  mysteries,  and  adapting  it  to  juvenile  under- 
standings. But  this  is  virtually  withholding  the  children  from  Christ.  Eemember 
that  for  the  most  part  what  is  mystery  to  a  child  is  to  a  man.  If  I  strive  to  make 
intelligible  what  ought  to  be  left  mysterious,  I  do  but  nourish  in  the  child  the 
notion  of  his  being  competent  to  understand  all  truth,  and  prepare  him  for  being 
disgusted  if  he  finds  himself  in  riper  years  called  upon  to  submit  reason  to  faith. 
Do  not  let  it  seem  to  you  a  harsh  accusation— consider  it  well,  and  you  will  have  to 
confess  it  grounded  upon  truth — that  whensoever  there  is  dilatoriness  in  com- 
mencing  the  correction  of  tempers,  which  too  plainly  prove  the  corruption  of 
nature,  or  the  substitution  of  other  modes  of  instruction  for  the  Bible  itself,  or  any 
indication,  more  or  less  direct,  of  a  feeling  that  there  must  be  something 
intermediate,  that  children  are  not  yet  ready  for  the  being  brought  actually  to  the 
Saviour,  we  identify  your  case  with  that  of  our  Lord's  disciples,  who,  when  some 
sought  for  infants  the  benediction  of  Christ,  rashly  and  wrongfully  "  rebuked  those 
that  brought  them."  U.  But  now  let  us  mark  more  particularly  oitb  blesbeo 
Lord's  conduct,  in  begabd  to  the  childeen  and  those  who  would  have  kept  them 
from  Him.  When  he  observed  the  endeavour  of  the  disciples  to  prevent  the 
children  being  brought,  you  read  that  "He  was  much  displeased."  The  origin^ 
word  marks  great  indignation.  It  is  used  on  one  or  two  other  occasions  in  the 
New  Testament,  when  very  strong  feelings  were  excited.  For  example,  "  When  the 
chief  priests  and  scribes  saw  the  wonderful  things  that  He  did,  and  the  children 
crying  in  tiie  temple,  and  saying,  Hosanna,  to  the  Son  of  David,  they  were  tore 
di$pUased : "  it  is  the  same  Greek  word.  Again :  on  the  occasion  of  the  woman's 
pouring  on  Christ's  head  an  alabaster  box  of  very  precious  ointment,  **  when  His 
disciples  saw  it,  they  had  indignation " — the  same  word — "  saying.  To  what 
purpose  is  tiiis  waste  ?  "  These  instances  show  you  that  the  word  denotes  a  very 
high  degree  of  dissatisfaction,  anger  being  more  excited  than  sorrow,  as  though  the 
thing  done  were  specially  offensive  and  criminal.  It  is  never  again  used  in  connec- 
tion with  Christ ;  Christ  is  never  again  said  to  have  been  •'  much "  or  "  sorely 
displeased."  On  the  occasion  of  having  little  children  kept  from  Him,  but  on  no 
other  occasion,  did  Christ  show  Himself  *'  sorely  displeased."  What  an  indication 
of  His  wiUingness  to  receive  little  children  I  Wbat  a  declaration  as  to  the  duty  of 
bringing  to  Him  little  children ;  and  the  sinfulness,  in  any  measure  or  on  any 
account,  of  withholding  them  from  Him  I  And,  perhaps,  many  children  would  go 
to  Christ,  il  they  were  but  suffered  to  go.  Christ  draws  their  young  hearts ;  but 
how  often  are  serious  thoughts  discouraged  in  children !  How  little  advantage  is 
taken  of  indications  of  youthful  piety  1  Then,  again,  what  inconsistencies  they 
perceive  in  those  around  theml  and  who  quicker  than  children  in  detecting 
inconsistencies  ?  They  are  as  sharp-sighted  in  their  discernment  of  the  faults  of 
their  superiors,  as  if  they  had  been  bom  critics,  or  bred  up  for  censors.  But 
inconsistencies  will  stop  them,  just  when  they  might  be  determining  on  taking  the 
first  step  towards  Christ ;  and  we  do  not  **  suffer  "  them  to  go,  if  by  anything  in 
our  example  we  interfere  with  their  going,  putting  some  sort  of  hindrance — and  it 
need  not  be  a  high  one  for  young  feet  to  stumble  at.  Yea,  and  we  may  actually 
**  forbid  them."  This  is  our  Lord's  next  expression ;  and  it  indicates  more  active 
opposition  than  when  He  only  requires  us  to  suffer.  Evidently  the  worldly-minded 
parent  or  instructor  forbids  the  children  from  coming  to  Christ,  when  he  discoun- 
tenances any  religious  tendency ;  when  he  manifests  his  fear  of  a  young  person 
becoming  too  serious,  too  fond  of  reading  the  Bible,  too  disposed  to  avoid  gay 
amusements,  and  cultivate  the  society  of  such  as  care  for  the  soul.  This  is  the 
more  open  sort  of  forbidding.  Not  but  what  there  is  a  yet  more  open:  when 
children  or  young  persons  are  actually  prevented  from  what  they  are  inclined  to  do 
in  the  matter  of  religion,  and  forced  into  scenes  and  associations  which  they  feel 
to  be  wrong.  It  is  not  thus,  however,  that  "  disciples" — any  who  may  be  parallel 
with  those  to  whom  our  Lord  addressed  His  remonstrance — are  likely  to  prevent 
little  children.  But  are  there  no  other  ways  of  forbidding  t  Indeed,  a  young  mind 
is  very  easily  discouraged ;  more  espeoiaJly  in  snoh  a  thing  as  xehgion,  toiwdf 


.  z.]  8T,  MARK,  391 

which  it  needs  every  possible  help,  and  from  which  it  may  be  said  to  have  a  natural 
swerving.  A  look  will  be  enough  ;  the  slightest  hint ;  nay,  even  silence  will  have 
the  force  of  a  prohibition.  There  may  be  needed  a  stem  command  to  withhold 
from  an  indulgence,  but  a  mere  glance  of  the  eye  may  withhold  from  a  duty.  Not 
to  encourage,  may  be  virtually^  to  forbid.  The  child  soon  catches  this ;  he  soon 
detects  the  superior  anxiety  which  the  parent  exhibits  for  his  progress  in  what  is 
called  learning,  the  comparative  coldness  as  to  his  progress  in  piety.  He  quickly 
becomes  aware  of  the  eye  being  lit  up  with  greater  pleasure  at  an  indication  of 
talent,  than  at  a  sign  of  devotion.  And  thus  the  child  is  practically  **  forbidden  '* 
to  come  to  Christ.  He  is  practically  told  that  there  is  something  preferable  to  his 
coming  to  Christ.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Ofsttch  U  the  kingdom  of  God  : — Perhaps 
God  does  with  His  heavenly  garden  as  we  do  with  our  own.  He  may  chiefly  stock 
it  from  nurseries,  and  select  for  transplanting  what  is  yet  in  its  young  and  tender 
age — flowers  before  they  have  bloomed,  the  trees  ere  they  begin  to  bear.  (T.  Guthrie^ 
D.D.)  The  conversion  of  little  children: — 1.  Because  they  are  not  too  young 
to  do  wrong.  2.  Because  the  regeneration  of  children  or  adults  is  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  3.  Because  piety  is  a  matter  of  the  heart,  rather  than  of  the 
intellect.  4.  Special  examples  found  in  God's  Word.  5.  It  is  a  pleasing  confirma- 
tion of  our  faith  in  very  early  piety  to  observe  the  many  instances  within  our  own 
observation  of  the  conversion  of  young  children,  and  of  their  teachable  spirit  with 
reference  to  religion.  IS.  S.  Portwin.)  The  love  of  Christ  to  children: — I.  It  is 
very  old.  II.  It  is  all-embracing.  IH.  It  is  all-sufficing.  {Anon.)  Teachers 
warned  against  impeding  children's  salvation: — The  impediments  which  teachers 
throw  in  the  way  of  children  coming  to  Jesus.  I.  Inadequate  feett.  U.  Incom- 
petent ENOWLEDOE  of  the  gospcl.  1.  YouT  knowledge  must  spring  from  faith. 
2.  It  must  be  derived  from  scripture.     III.  Injudicious  modes  of  instbuction. 

1.  Loading  the  memory  with  scripture  without  explanation.  2.  Lengthened 
addresses  in  which  children  take  no  part.     IV.  An  impbopeb  spibit.     1.  Impatience. 

2.  Pride.  3.  Selfishness.  V.  Inconsistent  conduct.  1.  Want  of  punctuality. 
2.  Gossiping.  {J.  Sherman.)  Jesus  and  children: — 1.  The  text  teaches  that 
Jesus  is  attractive  to  children.  2.  That  Christ  takes  a  deep  interest  in  children. 
8.  Jesus  prays  for  children.  4.  Jesus  wishes  children  to  be  happy,  and  they  could 
not  be  that  without  pardon.  5.  There  are  a  great  many  children  in  heaven. 
{Dr.  McAuslane.)  ( Jesus  and  children: — There  was  one  thing  about  Jesus  which 
no  one  could  fail  to  notice — His  great  popularity  with  children.  A  certain  fulness 
of  humanity  always  seems  to  attract  children.  In  Jesus  this  constituted  an 
irresistible  attraction.  They  ran  after  Him — they  clung  to  Him — they  shouted  for 
Him.  His  must  have  been  a  joyous  presence.  Different  from  your  sour-faced 
Puritan  (who  has  his  merits  notwithstanding) :  your  dried-up  theologian  (who  is 
needful,  too,  in  season) :  your  emaciated  ascetic  (whose  protest  against  sensuality 
is  sometimes  necessary  and  even  noble).  I  thmk  this  power  of  attracting  and 
interesting  the  little  ones  is  one  of  the  haU-marks  of  good  men.  The  children's 
unspoiled  natures  seem  to  cling  to  unspoiled  souls — as  like  cleaves  to  like.l  "  They 
brought  young  children  to  Christ."  Ah  1  there  was  no  need  of  that,  for  they  cam^ 
to  Him  of  their  own  accord — nor  did  He  ever  repulse  them.  How  shall  we  bring 
the  children  to  Christ — how  shall  we  win  them  to  love  and  follow  Him  t  The  best 
way  of  bringing  our  children  to  Christ  is  by  being  Christ-Hke  ourselves.  Let  them 
see  in  us  nothing  but  His  kindness,  wisdom,  strength,  tenderness,  and  sympathy, 
and  they  will  learn  to  love  their  religion,  and  grow  close  to  Jesus,  as  in  the  days 
when  "  He  took  them  up  in  His  arms,  laid  His  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed 
them."  {H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  Christ's  sympathy  for  childhood :  —Jesus  was  the 
first  great  teacher  of  men  who  showed  a  genuine  sympathy  for  childhood — perhaps 
the  only  teacher  of  antiquity  who  cared  for  childhood  as  such.  Plato  treats  of 
children  and  their  games,  but  he  treats  them  from  the  standpoint  of  apubUcist. 
They  are  elements  not  to  be  left  out  in  constructing  society.  Children,  in  Plato's 
eyes,  are  not  to  be  neglected,  because  children  wUl  inevitably  come  to  be  men  and 
women.  But  Jesus  was  the  first  who  loved  childhood  for  its  own  sake.  In  the 
earlier  stages  of  civilization  it  is  the  main  endeavour  of  men  to  get  away  from 
childhood.  It  represents  immaturity  of  body  and  mind,  ignorance  and  folly.  The 
ancients  esteemed  it  their  first  duty  to  put  away  childish  things.  It  was  Jesus 
who,  seeking  to  bring  about  a  new  and  higher  development  of  character,  perceived 
that  there  were  elements  in  childhood  to  be  preserved  in  the  highest  manhood ; 
that  a  man  must,  indeed,  set  back  again  towards  the  innocence  and  simplicity  of 
childhood  if  he  would  be  truly  a  man.    Until  Jesus  Christ,  the  world  had  no  place 


8M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB,  [chap.  X. 

for  childhood  in  its  thoughts.  When  He  said,  "  Of  snoh  is  the  kingdom  of  God,* 
it  was  a  revelation.  (Eggleston.)  (  Bring  the  children  to  the  Saviour: — In  • 
Chinese  Christian  family  at  Amoy,  a  little  boy,  the  youngest  of  the  three  children, 
on  asking  his  father  to  aUow  him  to  be  baptized,  was  told  that  he  was  too  yonng; 
that  he  might  return  to  heathenism,  if  he  made  a  profession  of  religion  when  he 
was  only  a  little  boy.  To  this  he  made  the  following  touching  reply : — "  Jesus  has 
promised  to  carry  the  lambs  in  His  arms.  I  am  only  a  little  boy ;  it  will  be  easier 
for  Jesus  to  carry  me."  This  was  too  much  for  the  father ;  he  took  him  with  him, 
and  the  dear  child  was  ere  long  baptized.)  The  whole  family,  of  which  this  child  is 
the  youngest  member,  belong  now  to  the  mission  church  at  Amoy.  The 
Saviour's  love  for  children  reciprocated: — A  little  girl,  between  six  and  seven  years 
of  age,  when  on  her  death-bed,  seeing  her  eldest  sister  with  a  Bible  in  her  hand, 
asked  her  to  read  this  passage  respecting  Christ's  blessing  little  children.  The 
passage  having  been  read,  and  the  book  closed,  the  child  said,  "  How  kind  1  I 
shall  soon  go  to  Jesus ;  He  will  soon  take  me  up  in  His  arms,  bless  me,  too ;  no 
disciple  shall  keep  me  away."  Her  sister  kissed  her,  and  said,  "  Do  you  love  me?  *' 
•*  Yes,  dear,"  she  replied,  "  but  you  mustn't  mind  that  I  love  Jesus  better."  (Care 
in  training  children: — What  if  God  should  place  in  your  hand  a  diamond,  and  tell 
you  to  inscribe  on  it  a  sentence  which  should  be  read  at  the  last  day,  and  shown 
there  as  an  index  of  your  thoughts  and  feelings !  What  care,  what  caution,  would 
yon  exercise  in  the  selection  1  Now  this  is  what  God  has  done.  He  has  placed 
before  you  immoiial  minds,  more  imperishable  than  the  diamond,  on  which  yon 
are  about  to  inscribe  every  day  and  every  hour,  by  your  instructions,  by  your  spirit, 
or  by  your  example,  something  which  wUl  remain  and  be  exhibited  for  or  against 
.vou  at  the  judgment  day/  (Dr.  Payaon.)  Children  need  to  be  brought  to 
Christ : — The  apostles'  rebuke  of  the  children  arose  in  a  measure  from  ignorance 
of  the  children's  need.  If  any  mother  in  that  throng  had  said,  "  I  must  bring  my 
child  to  the  Master,  for  he  is  sore  afflicted  with  a  devil,"  neither  Peter,  nor  James, 
nor  John  would  have  demurred  for  a  moment,  but  would  have  assisted  in  bringing 
the  possessed  child  to  the  Saviour.  Or  suppose  another  mother  had  said,  "My 
child  has  a  pining  sickness  upon  it,  it  is  wasted  to  skin  and  bone ;  permit  me  to 
bring  my  darling,  that  Jesus  rnay  lay  His  hands  upon  her,"  the  disciples  would  aU 
have  said,  ••  Make  way  for  this  woman  and  her  sorrowful  burden."  But  these  little 
ones  with  bright  eyes,  and  prattling  tongues,  and  leaping  limbs,  why  should  they 
come  to  Jesus  ?  Ah,  friends  1  they  forgot  that  in  those  children,  with  all  their  joy, 
their  health,  and  their  apparent  innocence,  there  was  a  great  and  grievous  need 
for  the  blessing  of  a  Saviour's  grace.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  sin  of  keeping 
children  from  coming  to  Christ : — It  must  be  a  very  great  sin  indeed  to  hinder  any- 
body from  coming  to  Christ.  He  is  the  only  way  of  salvation  from  the  wrath  of 
God,  salvation  from  the  terrible  judgment  that  is  due  to  sin— who  would  dare  to 
keep  the  perishing  from  that  way  ?  To  alter  the  sign-posts  on  the  way  to  the  city 
of  refuge,  or  to  dig  a  trench  across  the  road,  would  have  been  an  inhuman  act, 
deserving  the  sternest  condemnation.  He  who  holds  back  a  soul  from  Jesus  is  the 
servant  of  Satan,  and  is  doing  the  most  diabolical  of  all  the  devil's  work.  We  are 
all  agreed  about  this.  I  wonder  whether  any  of  us  are  quite  innocent  in  this 
respect.  May  we  not  have  hindered  others  from  repentance  and  faith  7  It  is  a  sad 
suspicion ;  but  I  am  afraid  that  many  of  us  have  done  so.  Certainly  you  who  have 
never  believed  in  Jesus  yourselves  have  done  sadly  much  to  prevent  others  believing. 
The  force  of  example,  whether  for  good  or  bad,  is  very  powerful,  and  especially  is 
it  so  with  parents  upon  their  children,  superiors  upon  their  imderlings,  and 
teachers  upon  their  pupils,  {Ibid.)  Children  the  pastor's  chief  care: — Dr. 
Tyng,  senior,  of  New  York,  said  that  in  aU  his  ministry  he  had  never  hesitated, 
when  the  choice  must  be  made  between  one  child  and  two  adults,  to  take  the  child. 
••It  seems  to  me,"  he  says,  "that  the  devil  would  never  ask  anything  more  of  a 
minister  than  to  have  him  look  upon  his  mission  as  chiefly  to  the  grown-np 
members  of  his  congregation,  while  somebody  else  was  to  look  after  the  children. 
I  can  see  the  devil  standing  at  the  door,  and  saying  to  the  minister,  *  Now  you  just 
Are  away  at  the  old  folks ;  and  I'll  stand  here,  and  steal  away  the  little  ones  as  the 
Indians  catch  ducks,  swimming  under  them,  catching  them  by  the  legs,  and  pulling 
them  under.' "  Children  to  be  brought  into  the  Church  at  earliest  age: — ^Now  let  ni 
Bee  how  this  theory  works.  I  nnot  show  its  evil  e£Fects  better  than  by  taking  tat 
illustration  from  the  first  book  I  ever  read— *•  ^sop's  Fables."  It  is  long  since  I 
saw  the  book,  but  its  pages  are  vividly  impressed  on  my  memory,  especially  the 
pictures,  and  here  ia  one  of  them.    A  fisherman  is  sitting  on  the  btuik  of  a  stream. 


X.]  ST.  MARK. 


He  has  thrown  in  his  bait,  and  brought  out  a  very  little  fish.  He  has  the  fish  in 
his  hand,  and  is  just  about  to  put  it  into  his  basket,  when  the  fish  begins  to  talk. 
He  is  sitting  up  in  the  man's  hand,  and  addressing  himself  to  the  fisherman, 
speaks  on  this  wise  :  "  You  see  I  am  a  very  little  fish.  It  is  not  worth  your  while 
to  put  me  into  the  basket.  Throw  me  back  into  the  stream,  and  I  shall  become  a 
bigger  fish,  and  much  better  worth  catching."  But  the  fisherman  says :  *•  No  ;  if 
I  throw  you  into  the  stream,  it  is  most  likely  that  I  shall  never  see  you  again.  I 
wUl  keep  you  whilst  I  have  got  you."  And  so  he  puts  the  fish  into  the  basket. 
The  wrong  theory  is  the  theory  of  the  fish,  the  right  one  that  of  the  fisherman. 
Now  I  ask  you  to  consider  this.  In  the  present  day  we  have  vast  multitudes  of 
children  under  Christian  teaching  and  influence.  A  careful  estimate  gives  the 
present  number  of  scholars  in  the  Sunday  schools  of  England  and  Wales  as  over 
4,000,000 ;  and  there  are  very  many  children  well  taught  in  Christian  homes  who 
are  not  in  the  Sunday  schools.  There  is  also  provision  made  in  our  elementary 
day  schools  for  over  4,000,000  scholars.  Now  these  children  are,  so  to  speak,  yet  in 
the  basket  of  the  Church,  and  we  should  use  our  utmost  efforts  to  prevent  them 
from  ever  getting  out  of  it.  According  to  the  great  Teacher  the  little  ones  belong  to 
the  kingdom  of  God  in  their  earliest  days.  Why  should  they  ever  leave  it  ?  But, 
alas  t  instead  of  acting  in  accordance  with  the  true  theory,  we  too  often  act  as  if 
the  wrong  theory  were  true.  We  are  not  so  anxious  as  we  ought  to  be  to 
bring  our  children  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  into  the  enjoyment  of  peace 
with  God  through  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  are  not  so  careful  as  we 
ought  to  be  to  provide  that  before  a  child  leaves  school  and  his  parents'  home  he 
shall  be  fortified  against  the  temptations  of  life  by  established  faith  in  Christ. 
On  the  salvation  of  all  dying  before  the  age  of  accountability  : — I.  The  conduct  of 
THB  PARENTS  WAS  VEBY  NATURAL  AND  COMMENDABLE.  "  They  brought  youug  chUdren 
to  Jesus,"  &0.  Just  as  Joseph  brought  his  sons  to  Jacob,  that  he  might  lay  his 
hands  upon  them  and  bless  them.  His  blessing  would  be  sure  to  make  rich 
in  one  way  or  another.  These  parents  did  not  send  their  children  to  Jesus,  but 
brought  them  ;  example  better  than  precept.  Let  us  not  stop  short  of  the  Saviour. 
Morality  good  :  but  they  must  be  born  again.  II.  The  spirit  and  demeanour  of 
THB  disciples  WERE  VERY  REPULSIVE — "  They  rcbukod  those  that  brought  them. " 
What  if  the  parents  had  judged  of  the  Master  by  the  spirit  of  His  servants  ?  There 
is  love  in  His  heart  infinitely  transcending  all  that  exists  in  the  hearts  of  His  most 
devoted  people.  HI.  The  conduct  op  Jesus  Christ  was  a  perpect  contrast  to  that 
OP  His  disciples.  "  He  was  much  displeased."  Christ  may  be  angry  with  His  own 
people,  even  when  they  think  they  are  doing  Him  service.  It  is  not  enough  to  mean 
well.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  Christ  should  feel  an  interest  in  little  children  when  He 
voluntarily  became  a  little  child  Himself  ?  "  Of  such  " — in  years — "  is  the  kingdom 
of  heaven."  All  infants  go  to  heaven.  The  lost  will  go  away  into  *'  everlasting 
punishment,"  but  an  infant  cannot  be  punished,  for  that  would  imply  personal 
criminahty  and  conscious  guilt :  but  an  infant  can  neither  do  good  nor  evil.  But 
may  they  not  be  annihilated  ?  This  passage  kindles  light  in  their  little  sepulchre 
and  says,  *•  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  They  Uve  unto  God.  The  only 
difference  between  the  salvation  of  an  infant  and  others,  is  this — the  infant  is 
saved  without  faith,  by  the  direct  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  consequence  of  the 
finished  work  of  Christ ;  others  are  saved  by  believing  the  gospel,  and  being  sancti- 
fied through  the  truth.  See  the  condescension  of  Christ.  We  cannot  bless  them  as 
He  did  ;  we  can  plead  for  the  Divine  blessing  upon  them.  {R,  Bayne.)  The 
talvation  of  infants  : — Infants  are  all  saved.  1.  Our  remarks  apply  exclusively  to 
ehildren  who  are  not  yet  arrived  at  years  of  accountability  ;  that  is,  who  are  not  yet 
capable  of  employing  the  appointed  means  of  salvation.  2.  It  is  not  said  that  the 
children  of  believers  and  of  unbelievers  are  in  all  respects  in  the  same  case  ;  on  the 
contrary  the  relative  holiness  of  the  children  of  believers  is  an  important  blessing  ; 
their  circumstances  are  more  favourable  to  the  formation  of  a  religious  character  ; 
their  means  of  salvation  are  more  direct.  But  the  child  of  a  believer  has  no  other 
claim  on  the  mercy  of  God  than  that  may  be  put  in  by  any  infant.  I.  Statb  the 
ABeuMSNT  IN  FAVOUR  OP  INPANT  SALVATION.  Considerations  which  may  suggest  this 
hope.  1.  They  are  not  accountable.  They  are  incapable  of  moral  obligation, 
hence  are  not  condemned  :  free  from  personal  guilt.  Does  it  comport  with  the 
Divine  Justice  or  mercy,  to  suppose  that  such  are  not  saved  whose  only  guilt  is  their 
unavoidable  connection  with  a  broken  covenant  ?  The  benevolence  of  the  Divine 
character  suggests  the  hope  of  their  salvation ;  and  embraces  infants  in  the  redeem- 
ing purpose.    The  rectitude  of  the  Divine  (government  suggests  their  salvation  ; 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

they  cannot  be  healed  according  to  their  deeds  who  have  neither  done  good  nor  eviL 
There  are  many  general  expressions  of  Divine  favour  towards  infants  ;  God  contem* 
plates  their  advantage  in  the  blessings  He  confers  on  mankind  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  6,  6  ; 
Deut.  xii.  28  ;  Jer.  xix.  3,  9).  He  spared  Nineveh  for  their  sake  (Jonah  iv.  11). 
2.  There  are  gracious  declarations  of  the  Word  of  God  which  imply  this  trutli 
(Matt,  xviii.  1,  14).  That  infants  are  capable  of  receiving  the  principle  of  faith  is 
plain  ;  Jeremiah  and  John  Baptist  have  been  sanctified  from  the  womb.  The 
Jewish  children  were  accounted  worshippers  of  the  true  God,  even  from  their 
infancy  (Deut.  xxix.  10, 13  ;  v.  3  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  18  ;  Joel  ii.  15,  16).  And  so  under 
the  Christian  dispensation  children  are  viewed  as  believers,  because  visibly  connected 
with  the  dispensation,  and  continue  to  be  so  accounted  till  they  renounce  it  as  their 
religion.  Christ  would  not  recognize  as  subjects  of  His  kingdom  here,  those  whom 
He  did  not  regard  as  heirs  of  His  kingdom  hereafter.  *•  Of  such  i$  the  kingdom  of 
God."  Romans  v.  12,  19  appears  to  involve  this  truth.  It  places  in  contrast  the 
dispensations  under  which  God  has  governed  man  ;  one  at  creation,  the  other  at 
redemption.  The  curse  of  the  broken  covenant  included  the  children  ;  the  saving 
benefit  provided  by  Christ  extends  to  them.  **  As  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ 
shall  all  be  made  alive  again."  3.  There  are  some  recorded  instances  of  faith  in  thii 
truth,  which  support  the  conclusion  (2  Sam.  xii.  22,  23  ;  2  Kings  iv).    II.  Examine 

SOME  OF  THB  DimCULTIES  WHICH  APPEAB  TO  LIB  IN  THE  WAY  OF  ADOPTING  THIS  CON- 
CLUSION. 1.  The  imputation  of  Adam's  sin.  The  doctrine  of  infant  salvation  doea 
not  deny  this,  but  declares  that  the  grace  of  God  frees  from  the  curse,  and  bestows 
the  capacity  for  celestial  happiness,  through  the  mediation  of  Christ.  2.  The 
temporal  si^erings  and  death  of  infants.  Because  they  suffer  some  of  the  effects  ol 
the  curse  it  by  no  means  follows  that  they  suffer  all.  Actual  believers  suffer  in  this 
world.  8.  The  destruction  of  the  children  of  the  ungodly  along  with  their  parents. 
The  case  of  Eorah.  4.  The  declared  necessity  of  faith  in  order  to  salvation.  A  new 
heart  is  the  qualification  for  heaven,  and  may  as  easily  be  given  to  an  infant  as  to 
an  adult.  5.  The  early  indications  of  sinfulness  in  infants.  It  is  not  easy^  to 
determine  bow  far  these  are  the  result  of  animal  propensities  or  deliberate  choice. 
It  is  not  said  that  infants  are  free  from  tendency  to  evil,  or  even  apparent  acts  ol 
sin  ;  but  are  saved  through  Christ  whose  sacrifice  puts  away  sin.  6.  The  silence  of 
scripture.  III.  The  practical  intluencb  of  this  tbuth.  1.  Let  it  be  viewed 
generally  in  its  aspect  on  the  moral  government  of  God.  (1)  It  relieves  the  diffi- 
culty connected  with  the  permission  of  sin.  (2)  It  reflects  the  glory  of  Divine  graoe. 
(3)  It  illustrates  the  declared  importance  of  the  mediation  of  Christ.  2.  Let  this 
truth  be  viewed  in  its  aspect  on  tiie  religious  education  of  children.  No  excuse  for 
the  neglect  of  it.  3.  Let  this  doctrine  be  viewed  in  its  aspect  on  the  seriousness  of 
bereaved  parents.  {J.  Jefferson.)  The  death  of  babes  : — The  whole  case  of  the 
death  of  babes  seems  at  the  first  thought  to  be  indeed  a  marvel ;  yet  what  is  there 
in  life  which  is  not  a  marvel  ?  How  few  things  there  are  which  we  can  regard  in 
any  other  light  than  that  of  unintelligent,  though  not  unreasonable,  wonder.  StUl, 
few  things  seem  more  marvellous  in  the  rough  aspect  than  that  a  little  child  should 
be  allowed  to  suffer  pain  and  die.  Here  is  a  little  bud,  a  tender  nursling  of  the 
spring,  in  the  fairest  way  for  flower,  fragrance,  and  fruit,  nipped  by  that  bitter 
envious  frost  before  a  single  leaf  unfolds  itself.  Here  is  a  little  barque,  freighted 
with  costly  wares  for  the  markets  of  earth  and  heaven,  bound  for  eternity,  launched 
into  life  and  wrecked  at  the  very  harbour-mouth.  A  work  nobly  simple,  yet  beauti- 
fully complex,  with  God's  fresh  breath  of  life  inspiring  its  every  look,  and  the  power 
of  the  sweetest  nature  swaying  its  every  movement ;  lo  1  it  drops  from  His  hand,  as 
it  might  seem,  in  the  very  act  of  His  holding  it  np  to  show  its  beauty  to  the  world. 
It  falls  to  pieces  in  an  hour.  The  high  art  of  its  creation  is  negatived  in  a  moment ; 
its  lovely  mechanism  siles  off  into  dust ;  aU  its  myriad  contrivances  for  life — no  one 
of  which  any  man  since  the  world  began  can  imitate  with  the  slightest  effect,  no, 
nor  even  rightly  understand — in  a  few  days  are  crumbled  into  mould,  and  as  11 
they  never  had  been  at  all.  In  fine,  a  work  designed  for  duties  of  seventy  or  eighty, 
or  perhaps  a  hundred  vears,  capable  of  beautiful  deeds,  and  of  fiUing  happy  places 
in  the  house,  the  neighbourhood,  the  State,  and  all  along  in  the  family  of  the 
Church,  is  destroyed,  as  it  might  seem,  by  some  slight  accident,  before  any  one 
of  those  duties  has  been  met ;  and,  to  outward  view,  annihilated  as  though  it 
had  never  been  meant  for  anything  whatsoever  in  the  world.    (FT.  B.  Philpott  M,A») 

Ver.  16.   Am  a  Uttto  tibn&,^InteUeetual   submistUm  :— "  Chrysostom,'*    nji 
Manton,  '*  has  the  following  comparison  :  *  A  smith  that  takes  up  his  red-hot  iros 


X.]  ST.  MARK, 


with  his  hands,  and  not  with  his  tongs,  what  can  he  expect  but  to  bum  his  fingers  ?* 
So  we  destroy  our  souls,  when  we  judge  of  the  mysteries  of  faith  by  the  laws  of  com- 
mon reason."  Common  enough  is  this  error.  Men  must  needs  comprehend 
when  their  main  business  is  to  apprehend.  That  which  God  reveals  to  us  is,  to  a 
large  extent,  beyond  the  reach  of  understanding  ;  and  therefore,  in  refusing  to 
believe  until  we  can  understand,  we  are  doing  ourselves  and  the  truth  a  grievous 
wrong.  Our  wisdom  lies  as  much  in  taking  heed  how  we  receive,  as  in  being  care- 
ful wJuit  we  receive.  Spiritual  truth  must  be  received  by  a  spiritual  faculty,  viz., 
by  faith.  As  well  hope  to  grasp  a  star  by  the  hand  as  Divine  truth  by  reason. 
Faith  is  well  likened  to  the  golden  tongs,  with  which  we  may  carry  live  coals  ;  and 
carnal  reason  is  the  burned  hand,  which  lets  fall  the  glowing  mass,  which  it  is 
not  capable  of  carrying.  Let  it  not,  however,  be  thought  that  faith  is  contrary  to 
reason.  No  :  it  is  not  unreasonable  for  a  little  child  to  believe  its  father's  state- 
ments, though  it  is  quite  incapable  of  perceiving  all  their  bearings.  It  is  quite 
reasonable  that  a  pupil  should  accept  his  master's  principles  at  the  beginning  of 
his  studies  ;  he  will  get  but  little  from  his  discipleship  if  he  begins  by  disputing 
with  his  teacher.  How  are  we  to  learn  anything  if  we  will  not  believe  ?  In  the 
gloriously  sublime  truths  of  Godhead,  incarnation,  atonement,  regeneration,  and  so 
forth,  we  must  believe,  or  be  for  ever  ignorant :  these  masses  of  the  molten  metal 
of  eternal  truth  must  be  handled  by  faith,  or  let  alone.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Necessity  of  humility  : — A  high-caste  Brahmin  came  to  receive  Holy  Baptism.  He 
approached  the  font  wearing  the  sacred  thread  which,  amongst  his  Hindoo  co- 
religionists, was  the  badge  of  his  being  amongst  the  •*  twice-born,"  entitling  him  to 
little  short  of  religious  worship  from  those  of  a  lower  caste.  But  at  the  moment 
when  he  answered,  "  I  renounce  them  all,"  he  stripped  off  the  sign  of  idolatrous  pre- 
eminence and  trampled  it  under  his  feet.  Childlike  trust  in  prayer: — People  say, 
"  What  a  wonderful  thing  it  is  that  God  hears  George  Miiller's  prayers  1 "  But  is 
it  not  a  sad  thing  that  we  should  think  it  wonderful  for  God  to  hear  prayer  ?  We 
are  come  to  a  pretty  pass  certainly  when  we  think  it  wonderful  that  God  is  true  ! 
^Much  better  faith  was  that  of  a  little  boy  in  one  of  the  schools  at  Edinburgh,  who 
had  attended  the  prayer  meetings,  and  at  last  said  to  his  teacher  who  conducted  the 
meeting,  "  Teacher,  I  wish  my  sister  could  be  got  to  read  the  Bible  ;  she  never 
reads  it."  "  Why,  Johnny,  should  your  sister  read  the  Bible  ?  "  "  Because  if  she 
should  once  read  it,  I  am  sure  it  would  do  her  good,  and  she  would  be  converted  and 
be  saved."  ** Do  you  think  so,  Johnny? "  "  Yes,  I  do,  sir  ;  and  I  wish  the  next 
time  there's  a  prayer  meeting,  you  would  ask  the  people  to  pray  for  my  sister,  that 
she  may  begin  to  read  the  Bible."  "  Well,  well,  it  shall  be  done,  John."  So  the 
teacher  gave  out  that  a  little  boy  was  very  anxious  that  prayers  should  be  offered 
that  his  sister  should  begin  to  read  the  Bible.  John  was  observed  to  get  up  and  go 
out.  The  teacher  thought  it  very  unkind  of  the  boy  to  disturb  the  people  in  a 
crowded  room  and  go  out  like  that,  and  so  the  next  day  when  the  lad  came,  he 
said,  "  John,  I  thought  that  was  very  rude  of  you  to  get  up  in  the  prayer  meeting, 
and  go  out.  You  ought  not  to  have  done  it."  "  Oh,  sir,"  said  the  boy,  "  I  did  not 
mean  to  be  rude,  but  I  thought  I  should  just  like  to  go  home  and  see  my  sister 
reading  her  Bible  for  the  first  time."  That  is  how  we  ought  to  believe,  and  wait 
with  expectation  to  see  the  answer  to  prayer.  The  girl  was  Heading  the  Bible  when 
the  boy  went  home.  God  had  been  pleased  to  hear  the  prayer  ;  and  if  we  could 
but  trust  God  after  that  fashion  we  should  often  see  simUar  things  accomplished.) 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.^  A  dying  blessing  ; — A  few  days  previous  to  his  death,  Dr. 
Belfrage,  of  Falkirk,  hearing  his  infant  son's  voice  in  an  adjoining  room,  desired 
that  he  should  be  brought  to  him.  When  the  child  was  lifted  into  the  bed  the  dying 
father  placed  his  hands  upon  his  head,  and  said,  in  the  language  of  Jacob,  "  The 
God  before  whom  my  fathers  did  walk,  the  God  who  fed  me  all  my  life  long  to  this 
day,  the  Angel  who  redeemed  me  from  all  evil,  bless  the  lad.*'  When  the  boy  was 
removed  he  added  :  "  Remember  and  tell  John  Henry  of  this  ;  tell  him  of  these 
prayers,  and  how  earnest  I  w  s  that  he  might  become  early  acquainted  with  his 
father's  Qod."    Happy  are  th     who  have  their  parents'  prayers. 

Vers.  17-22.— <}ood  Master,  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  Inherit  eternal  lift  f 
The  great  refusal: — I.  We  have  here  an  inquirkb.  There  are  many  things  about 
him  which  awaken  interest.  H  was  young,  thoughtful,  an  inquirer  after  the  most 
momentoos  matter  that  can  engage  the  attention  of  a  man ;  not  after  methods  of 
worldly  sucoess,  speculative  or  ntiquarian  subjects.  II.  How  Jesus  dealt  witb 
TBI  TOUMo  MAH.    Christ  "knew  what  was  in  man."  He  yaried  His  treatment  of 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  > 

inquirers  so  as  to  meet  the  character,  history,  and  disposition  of  each.  He  touched 
the  conscience  always  in  the  quick.  To  Nicodemus :  woman  at  the  well.  This  young 
man  had  a  narrow  view  of  the  commandments;  he  did  not  love  God  with  all  his  heart. 
Christ  put  before  him  the  same  alternative  which,  in  many  different  forms,  He  puts 
before  some  of  His  people  yet  in  the  dispensation  of  His  providence.  The  one  thing 
needful  is  always  entire  self-surrender  to  God.  IH.  The  conversational  comment 
OF  THE  Saviour  on  the  youno  man's  decision.  "How  hardly  shall  they  that 
have  riches,"  <fec.  He  does  not  mean  to  say  that  wealth  is  a  bad  thing.  Intrin- 
sically riches  have  no  moral  character ;  all  depends  upon  the  use.  Our  Lord  does 
not  mean  to  say  that  it  is  an  absolutely  easy  thing  for  a  man  that  has  no  riches  to 
enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  Poverty  has  spirittial  perils.  It  is  not  the  amount  of  a 
man's  possessions,  but  the  view  which  he  entertains  regarding  them,  that  deter- 
mines whether  he  will,  or  not,  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  Salvation  is  a  super- 
natural work.  "With  God  all  things  are  possible."  1.  That  the  whole  battle  of 
conversion  has  to  be  fought  over  that  which  is  dearest  to  the  heart.  2.  We  may 
see  here  how  an  experience  like  this  youth's  takes  the  attraction  even  out  of  that 
which  the  heart  prefers  to  Christ.  "  He  went  away  grieved."  He  had  discovered 
his  slavery,  and  such  gladness  as  he  had  formerly  known  even  in  his  possessions 
dropped  in  a  large  measure  out  of  his  heart.  In  that  one  interview  with  Christ  he 
had  seen,  as  never  before,  the  world's  power  over  him ;  and  even  while  he  yielded  to 
it,  he  loathed  it  His  property  had  a  fascination  for  him,  yet  it  seemed,  even  aa 
he  clung  to  it,  the  very  price  for  which  he  had  sold  eternal  life ;  and  he  could 
neither  give  it  up,  nor  regard  it  with  as  much  complacency  as  before.  Just  as  the 
drunkard  in  his  inmost  soul  loathes  his  slavery,  even  while  he  is  draining  the  bottle 
to  its  dregs,  and  has  no  more  such  enjoyment  in  its  stimulus  as  he  had  at  first, 
because  that  which  was  then  a  delight  has  now  become  a  bondage ;  so  this  youth, 
now  that  he  saw  that  his  property  owned  him,  rather  than  he  his  property,  had  no 
longer  the  same  delight  in  it  as  of  yore.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Character  tests: — 
The  chemical  analyst  has  different  tests  for  different  poisons.  If  he  suspect  the 
presence  of  arsenic,  he  will  use  one  thing  to  detect  that ;  if  he  is  looking  for  anti- 
mony, he  will  take  another  to  discover  that ;  if  he  is  trying  for  strychnine,  he  will 
employ  quite  another  to  bring  that  to  light.  The  test  that  will  reveal  one  poison 
may  altogether  fail  to  make  manifest  another.  Now  it  is  quite  similar  with  the 
moral  poisons  which  destroy  the  soul.  Each  has  its  own  appropriate  test,  and  that 
which  would  reveal  the  presence  of  one  would  be  impotent  to  detect  another. 
Hence,  like  a  skilful  analyst  as  He  was,  the  Lord  in  dealing  with  this  young  man 
used  those  means  which  He  knew  would  be  most  effectual  in  revealing  him  to  him- 
sell  He  did  not  need  to  use  any  measures  for  the  purpose  of  satisfying  Himself. 
He  wanted  rather  to  do  for  the  youth  what  the  woman  at  the  well  said  He  had  done 
for  her  when  she  affirmed  «•  He  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  did."  (Ibid.)  Life 
eternal : — What  was  the  idea  of  eternal  life  which  this  young  man  had  ?  Some 
understand  heaven ;  to  others  it  means  a  particular  kind  of  life,  which  even  now 
tills  the  soul.  In  order  to  know  what  a  man  means  by  the  words  yon  require  to 
know  more  about  him  and  his  modes  of  thinking.  Which  of  these  was  the  yoong 
man  thinking  of  ?  What  was  the  view  of  eternal  life  which  Jesus  Christ  had  in 
mind  ?  The  eternal  life  was  the  life  that  was  in  Him.  You  gather  an  idea  of  the 
life  which  is  spoken  of,  in  any  case,  from  the  specimen  of  it  which  is  adduced.  Tou 
speak  of  the  life  of  poetry  as  seen  in  one  man,  of  the  life  of  science  as  seen  in 
another,  of  the  practical  life  of  industry  or  benevolence  as  seen  in  a  third ;  and 
when  you  read  of  the  eternal  life  in  Christ,  you  must  consider  His  history  and  see 
what  His  life  was.  It  was  not  a  life  of  ease  or  quiet,  or  one  free  from  trouble  and 
suffering  and  care.  But  it  was  a  life  always  manifested ;  a  life  visible  in  defeat  as 
well  as  in  power,  in  weakness  as  really  as  in  honour ;  a  life  of  absolute  submission 
to  the  will  of  His  Father ;  and  a  life  which  was  full  of  wisdom,  purity,  gentleness, 
truth.  Whatever  was  in  the  mind  of  Christ,  the  thoughts  of  the  young  ruler  had 
not  been  quite  so  high  as  this.  Possibly  he  could  not  have  explained  the  thought 
to  himself.  Christ  shows  him  his  deficiency  like  a  skilful  physician.  He  has  come 
op  to  the  yeiy  gate  of  heaven,  but  cannot  take  the  last  step.  There  was  a  Uke  crisis 
in  the  life  of  St.  Paul.  He  was  in  search  of  etema  life,  questioning  what  good 
thing  he  should  do.  He  learned  that  it  could  not  be  won  by  good  works.  "  Sell 
that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor."  Must  not  explain  these  words  away;  nor 
most  we  apply  to  every  case  alike,  or  make  the  gosp  1,  what  it  if  not,  a  system  of 
eofwinnnism,  or  of  pnrohase  wit^  certain  outlays.  To  lose  eyerything  is  a  calamity 
whieh  thousands  have  borne  with  courage.    "  The  L  rd  gave,  and  Uie  Lord  hath 


x.]  ST.  MARK,  897 

taken  away."  They  have  entered  the  kingdom  through  losses  and  stifFerings,  not  ot 
property  only,  but  of  possession  more  precious.  What  is  that  state  of  mind  which 
riches  may  injure.  A  comparatively  poor  man  may  be  hurt  by  his  wealth  because 
of  the  place  it  has  in  his  mind.  We  dare  not  direct  men  to  outward  acts  in  order 
to  obtain  eternal  life,  or  to  give  up  their  property  to  religious  uses.  You  may  gain 
In  material  results,  but  lose  in  spiritual.  Fellowship  and  sympathy  with  God, 
ihe  mind  that  was  in  Christ — this  is  the  highest  possession.  And  if  there  is  a 
hindrance  to  this— avarice  or  anything  else — let  us  part  with  it  at  once,  rather  than 
obstruct  the  growth  of  our  souls.  {A.  Watson,  D.D.)  The  disease  pointed  out : — 
"  What  lack  I  yet?  "  he  said,  sincerely  wishing  to  know  wherein  he  might  approach 
nearer  to  the  standard  of  perfection,  and  thus  attain  the  eternal  life  of  which  he 
was  in  search.  And  the  answer  of  Christ  shows  that  He  discerns  at  once  where 
the  fault  lies.  It  reminds  one  of  a  skilful  physician  who  listens  to  the  complaint 
of  a  patient  telling  him  of  some  weakness  and  want  of  proper  energy,  but  not  know- 
ing from  what  it  springs ;  and  at  once  the  physician  touches  some  muscle,  puts 
his  finger  on  a  tender  spot  which  had  been  unsuspected,  presses  it,  and  says, 
"Tour  disease  is  there."  The  patient  starts :  he  had  never  felt  pain  there — never 
antil  it  was  touched  by  that  hand ;  but  at  once  he  knows  that  the  physician  is 
right,  that  he  has  all  along  been  living  in  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  his  malady, 
and  perhaps  by  his  habits  he  has  been  feeding  it.  So  this  young  ruler  feels  at 
once  that  Christ  is  right,  but  he  cannot  all  at  once  make  up  his  mind  to  the  conse- 
quences. He  has  power  to  do  much — power  to  part  with  much,  power  to  restrain 
his  hand  and  his  heart  from  much ;  but  here  is  a  tenderness  he  had  never  dreamt 
of,  a  diseased  organ  which  hinders  the  current  of  his  life,  and  he  cannot  suffer  it  to 
be  removed.  He  has  come  up  to  the  very  gate  of  the  kingdom,  but  he  cannot  take 
the  last  step  and  enter  in.  {Ihid.)  Eternal  life  a  gift : — There  was  a  strange 
inconsistency  in  this  young  man's  question,  •♦  What  shall  I  do  to  inherit  eternal 
life  ? "  Inheritances  are  not  earned  by  services.  They  are  gifts,  not  wages.  I 
have  read  somewhere  the  story  of  a  poor  woman  who  looked  longingly  at  the 
flowers  which  grew  in  the  king's  garden,  wishing  to  buy  some  for  her  sick  daughter. 
The  king's  gardener  angrily  repelled  her.  "  The  king's  flowers  are  not  for  sale," 
he  said,  rudely.  But  the  king,  chancing  to  come  by,  plucked  a  bouquet  and  gave  it 
to  the  wistful  woman,  remarking  at  the  same  time,  "  It  is  true  the  king  does  not 
sell  his  flowers,  but  he  gives  them  away."  So,  too,  the  Great  King  does  not  sell 
eternal  life.  He  gives  it.  {Lyman  Abbot,  D.D.)  The  splendid  young  man : — 
♦*  One  thing  thou  lackest."  1.  The  element  of  happiness.  Happiness  does  not 
depend  upon  physical  conditions.  Some  of  the  happiest  people  I  have  known  have 
been  those  who  have  been  wrapped  in  consumption.  There  is  no  happiness  outside 
Christ ;  there  is  joy  in  His  service.  You  lack — 2.  The  element  of  usefulness.  You  have 
not  yet  commenced  the  real  service  of  life.  You  lack — 3.  The  element  of  personal 
safety.  There  is  only  safety  in  religion.   {Dr.  Talmage.)      A  defective  character : — I. 

In  AIiL  Gbn's   DEAIiINO  with   MBN,  there  is  one   element  of  BELIOIOnS   CHABACTER 

FOB  WHICH  He  invariably  looks.  Men  are  influenced  by  a  showy  exterior; 
God  sees  the  heart  (see  1  Sam.  xvi.  6,  7).  1.  What  is  this  element  ?  A  comparison 
of  the  different  parts  of  this  story  will  answer  the  question.  *'  A  little  child  "  has 
a  single  peculiarity  as  its  controlling  characteristic :  it  loves,  trusts,  and  obeys  its 
parent.  Its  motive  of  life  is  sincere  affection  for  him,  above  anything  else.  This 
is  what  God  demands  of  His  children :  a  fuU,  filial  regard  for  Has  honour.  His 
commandments,  and  His  affectionate  approval  (Mai.  i.  6).  2.  How  do  we  know 
the  young  ruler  did  not  possess  this  ?  He  certainly  seems  like  a  thoughtful,  amiable, 
virtuous  person.  But  he  owned  that  he  still  lacked  something  (see  Matt.  xix.  20). 
n.  Let  us  take  np  a  second  lesson  :  no  other  qualitt  of  MiNn  and  heart,  no  other 
charaotbristio,  no  other  oroupino  of  klements  of  character,  can  atone  fob  the 
LACK  OF  JUST  THIS  ONE.  1.  Piety  is  the  significant  disposition  which  registers  the 
value  of  everything  else.  Take  any  amount  of  ciphers,  and  arrange  them  carefully 
in  a  line ;  they  will  represent  nothing,  till  you  place  a  numeral  figure  at  their  head. 
We  call  that  a  '•  significant"  figure ;  it  gives  reckoning  of  value  to  all  the  others. 
Now,  with  it  at  the  head,  each  one  of  the  ciphers  increases  it  tenfold,  while  without 
it  ten  times  as  many  ciphers  would  go  for  naught.  The  wiser  a  man  is,  the  more 
distinguished  a  man  is,  the  more  wealthy  a  man  is,  the  more  lovely  a  man  is — pro- 
Tided  the  consecration  of  his  entire  heart  is  rendered — the  more  helpful  and  useful 
he  18  as  a  Christian.  But,  the  moment  this  consecration  disappears,  all  these  ad- 
vantages are  turned  suddenly  into  dangers,  for  they  work  on  the  adverse  side. 
Satan's  gifts  helped  him  to  be  a  worse  devil.    2.  We  recognize  the  same  principle 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  i, 

in  ordinary  life.  Suppose  a  joameyman,  wilful  and  self-satisfied,  comes  to  one  of 
us,  and  asks  for  employment.  We  go  to  a  master-mechanic  seeking  work  for  him 
in  his  poverty.  Each  one  in  turn  says  he  is  well  acquainted  with  the  man,  but  will 
have  nothing  to  do  with  him.  Now  we  begin  to  expostulate :  "  Is  he  not  skilful  f 
is  he  not  industrious ;  is  he  not  honest  f  is  he  no  ia  kind  neighbour  ?  is  he  not 
sober?**  All  this  is  true,  comes  the  reply:  "but  the  man  will  not  obey  orders.** 
The  prime  quality  of  a  workman  is  gone ;  that  lack  vitiates  all  the  rest ;  he  breeds 
insubordination  wherever  he  goes.    His  excellences  simply  render  him  dangerous. 

3.  The  worst  is,  that  God  Himself  gives  all  these  characteristics  on  which  moral 
men  pride  themselves,  and  they  wickedly  turn  them  against  Him.  It  has  hap- 
pened that  one  man  has  interfered  sometimes  to  reconcile  another  man  with  his 
disinherited  son.  For  many  years  under  the  home  roof  he  was  unfilial,  abusive, 
alienated  from  all  who  loved  him  there.  The  father  admits  that  he  has  rejected 
him  at  last.  The  neighbour  inquires,  "Is  he  not  educated,  so  as  to  be  an  honour 
to  you  ?  is  he  not  a  most  agreeable  companion  ?  are  not  his  manners  gentlemanly  ? 
is  he  not  the  very  likeness  of  yourself  in  form  and  mien  ?  how  can  you  keep  hun 
away  from  your  heart? '*  And  the  father  answers  in  sad  sincerity  of  pity  and  love : 
All  that  you  say  is  true ;  and  it  was  myself  who  gave  him  these  accomplishments : 
I  educated  my  boys  all  alike,  but  this  one  turned  against  me ;  I  love  him,  but  he 
hates  me ;  no  matter  how  courteous  he  is  to  strangers,  he  vilifies  me  here  before 
the  others :  till  he  changes  from  a  prodigal  to  a  son,  he  is  only  a  peril  and  a  dis- 
turbance in  the  house :  he  is  all  the  worse,  in  that  he  knows  so  well  how  to  be  better.'* 
III.  So  we  reach,  as  our  third  lesson  this :  such  a  dkfbctive  ohabacteb  as  is  hebb 

PICTUBED   HAS  TO  BE    BECKONED  ACCOBDINO   TO  ITS  DEFECT,  TO  THE   EXCLUSION   OF  ITS 

EXCELLENCES.  1.  There  may  be  a  very  showy  morality  without  any  true  religion. 
Here  was  a  man  of  great  prominence  and  promise.  He  said  he  had  kept  the  law 
(Mark  z.  18-20).  2.  There  may  be  a  very  splendid  manhood  without  any  tme 
religion.    8.  There  may  be  an  unquestionable  orthodoxy  without  any  tme  religion. 

4.  There  may  be  deep  conviction  of  need  in  the  soul  without  any  true  religion. 
Never  forget  the  errand  of  this  young  man,  nor  the  manner  in  which  he  discharged 
it  (Mark  x.  17).  See  his  zeal :  he  came  to  Jesus.  See  his  haste :  he  came  nmning, 
See  his  courage :  he  was  out  in  the  highway  conspicuous  to  all.  See  his  humility : 
he  kneeled  at  Jesus*  feet.  See  his  anxiety :  he  waited  for  no  circumlocution,  bat 
pushed  his  qoestion  straight  towards  the  "eternal  life'*  he  longed  for.  (C.  S. 
Robinsorif  D.D.)  The  rich  young  man's  question  and  carriage : — I.  The  opinion 
OF  qainino  btebnal  life  by  the  outwabd  obsebvance  of  the  law,  will  appbab  vbbt 
unsatisfactobt  to  an  inquisitive  consoibnck.  This  young  man  had  not  any  full 
satisfaction  in  his  own  conscience,  &o.  He  comes  to  Christ  to  receive  instructions 
for  the  piecing  up  whatever  was  defective.  Whosoever  will  consider  the  nature 
of  God,  and  the  relation  of  a  creature  cannot  with  reason  think  that  eternal 
life  was  of  itself  due  from  God  as  a  recompense  to  Adam,  had  he  continued  in  a 
state  of  innocence.  Who  can  think  so  great  a  reward  due  for  having  performed 
that  which  a  creature  in  that  relation  was  obliged  to  do  ?  And  if  it  were  not  to  be 
expected  in  the  integrity  of  nature,  but  only  from  the  goodness  of  God,  how  can  it 
be  expected  since  the  revolt  of  man,  and  the  universal  deluge  of  natural  corruption  ? 
God  owes  nothing  to  the  holiest  creature ;  what  He  gives  is  a  present  from  His 
bounty,  not  the  reward  of  the  creature's  merit  (Bom.  xi.  35).    II.  It  is  the  disease 

OF   HUMAN  NATUBE,   SINCE  ITS  COBBUPTION,  TO  HOPE   FOB  ETEBNAL  LIFE  BY  THE  TENOB 

OF  THE  COVENANT  OF  woBKS  (vcr.  17).  Cain  thought  to  be  accepted  for  the  sake  of 
his  sacrifice.  All  men  set  too  high  a  value  upon  their  own  services  (Luke  xix.  12  ; 
Phil.  iii.  7).  The  whole  nation  of  the  Jews  aiffected  it,  compassing  sea  and  land  to 
make  out  a  righteousness  of  their  own,  as  the  Pharisees  did  to  make  proselytes. 
Man  foolishly  thinks  he  hath  enough  to  set  np  himself  after  he  hath  proved  bank- 
rupt, and  lost  all  his  estate.    lU.  How  insufficient  abe  some  assents  to  Divine 

TRUTH,  AND   SOME   EXPBE8SI0NS  OF  AFFECTION  TO  ChRIST,   WITHOUT  THE   PBAOTICB   OF 

Christian  precepts.  IV.  Wb  should  neveb  admit  anything  to  be  ascbibed  to 
US,  WHICH  IS  PROPBB  TO  GoD.  If  yoQ  do  Dot  acknowledge  Me  God,  ascribe 
not  to  Me  the  title  of  good,  &o.  God  is  jealous  of  His  own  honour;  He  will 
not  have  the  creature  share  with  Him  in  His  royal  titles.  (<Sf.  Chamocke^  B.D.) 
Gain  though  loi$ : — A  great  gain  was  offered  him,  but  a  great  loss  was  its  condition, 
(r.  T.  Lynch.  Qlad  though  grieved  : — ^As  thou  once  camest  glad  and  wentest  away 
grieved,  didst  thou  ever  come  grieved  and  go  away  glad  ?  {Ibid.)  Privilege  a 
trial : — Have  compassion  on  the  privileged ;  for  their  advantage  is  their  trial,  and 
may  be  their  ruin.     (Ibid.)        No  heaven  without  merit : — ^And  if  we  cannot  merit 


(SAP.  X.]  ST,  MARK.  899 

heaven,  we  cannot  have  heaven  without  merit.  (IMi.)  Ebh  and  ^/lood;— The 
ebb  of  this  man's  wealth  would  have  been  the  flood  of  his  prosperity.  (Ibid.) 
The  beauty  of  an  amiable  character: — ^Why  did  He  love  him  ?  Because  He  saw  him 
as  he  was — pure,  enthusiastic,  unspoiled  though  unproved.  It  is  a  false  and 
forlorn  view  to  take  of  man,  that  there  is  nothing  beautiful  in  him  before  he 
becomes  saintly.  The  very  attractiveness  of  an  unredeemed  soul  makes  us  the 
more  keenly  desirous  to  redeem  it.  But  often,  as  a  cultured  tree  knows  nothing  of 
the  husbandries  which  beautified  the  stock  from  which  it  sprang,  and  thus  caused 
its  beauty,  so  youths  know  nothing  of  the  spiritual  husbandries  of  past  days,  to 
which  they  are  indebted  for  the  moral  attractiveness  they  have  to  others,  and  the 
moral  strength  which  they  themselves  deem  sufficient.  The  children  of  Christians, 
not  yet  Christian  themselves,  have  by  nature  an  advantage.  Often  they  are  more 
loveable  than  others.  But  they  must  not  trust  a  "nature**  in  themselves  that 
would  never  have  been  so  lovely  but  for  the  *•  grace**  that  was  in  their  parents. 
There  is  much  in  common,  and  even  in  perverted,  men  that  has  a  rude  native  grace. 
There  is  yet  more  in  the  sons  and  daughters  of  the  sincerely  pious  that  has  a 
natural  hopeful  bloom  about  it.  God  loves  this,  and  so  may  we.  But  God  may 
love  a  man  whom  He  cannot  yet  trust ;  He  may  love  a  man  who  does  not  yet  truly 
know,  and  cannot  yet  deeply  love.  Himself.  ^Ibid.)  Virtue  dependent  upon 
wealth: — He  hardly  knew  how  much  of  his  happiness  as  a  virtuous  man  depended 
upon  his  being  a  rich  one.  People  are  often  happy  in  their  religion  because  they 
are  happy  in  their  circumstances.  They  do  well  because  they  are  well  to  do. 
These  are  good  people,  but  they  are  not  the  best  sort  of  good  people.  They  do 
honour  to  religion  as  their  very  good  master,  and  to  themselves  as  his  very  good 
scholars ;  but  they  are  but  dry  pools  when  the  rain  ceases,  for  no  inner  fountain 
feeds  them.  They  know  not  how  much  Christ  can  do  for  them  without  the  world, 
but  how  much  he  can  do  with  the  world,  to  help  Him.  All  such  goodness  is  only 
hopefully  good  as  it  learns  that,  without  trial,  it  cannot  know  that  it  is  lastingly 
good.  (Ibid.)  Commandment  keeping : — ^Life  is  enjoyed  in  keeping  the  command- 
ments, in  doing  as  God  would  have  us  His  creatures  do.  But  they  can  only  be  kept 
as  we  attain  the  living  ability  to  keep  them.  Thus,  an  adult  man's  privileges  are 
enjoyed  by  doing  as  an  adult  man  does :  but  a  child  cannot  enjoy  these  privileges 
because  his  abUity  is  not  mature ;  nor  an  invalided  adult  because,  though  fully 
grown,  he  has  not  the  powers  of  maturity.  So  an  uneducated,  uncivilized  man 
cannot  have  the  life  of  culture,  because  the  "  commandments,"  the  ordinances  of 
that  life,  though  suitable  to  him  as  a  man,  are  beyond  his  ability  as  such  a  man. 
The  way  to  keep  God's  commandments  in  future  is,  first  of  all,  to  learn  that  you 
have  never  folly  kept  them  yet.  This  young  man  really  had  kept  God's  law  accor- 
ding to  his  understanding  of  it ;  and  he  could  only  be  blessed  as  his  comprehension 
of  tiie  law  and  his  disposition  to  fulfil  it  were  advanced.  But  in  him  there  was  no 
capacity  to  become  a  chief  example  of  obedience  to  the  chief  laws,  as  there  was  in 
Christ.  (Ibid.)      On  characters  of  imperfect  goodness : — I.  Pebsons  of  this  descbiptign 

▲BX  NOT  QUALIFIEn  FOB  DISCHABOIMa  ABIOHT  MANY  DUTIBS  TO  WHICH  THEIB  SITUATION 

IN  LiFB  HAT  CALL  THEM.  MUdness  and  gentleness  alone  are  not  sufficient.  This  is  but 
plastic  clay  to  be  shaped  either  for  good  or  bad.  U.  These  pebsons  abb  also  ill-fitted 
FOB  BEsisTiNO  THE  COMMON  TEMPTATIONS  TO  VICE.  A  oonstaut  dcsire  to  pIcBsc  is  a 
poor  bulwark  against  the  persuasions  of  wicked  men.     HI.  Thet  abb  also  unpbe- 

PABED  FOB  SUSTAINING  THE  mSTBESSES  TO  WHICH  OUB  STATE  18  LIABLE.       Lcam  :    1. 

That  fair  appearances  alone  are  not  to  be  trusted.  2.  Piety  is  the  only  safe  foun- 
dation of  character.  3.  Discipline  must  also  be  practised.  4.  Watchfulness  is  also 
needed.  (Hugh  Blair,  D.D.)  "All  these  have  I  observed  from  my  youth"  : — L 
Consider  his  profession.  He  had  not  only  made  the  law  of  God  his  study,  but 
practice.  1.  His  obedience  was  early—"  From  my  youth  up.**  2.  His  obedience 
was  universal — "  All  these.'*  3.  It  was  constant  and  persevering.  Here  we  remark — 
1.  How  much  the  conduct  of  this  young  man  condemns  that  of  the  generality  of 
mankind,  who,  so  far  from  having  anything  of  trne  religion,  have  not  even  the 
shadow  of  it  S.  Those  who  have  been  preserved  from  such  evils,  and  have 
attained  a  high  degree  of  moral  excellence,  are  apt  to  think  better  of  their  case  than 
it  really  deserves.  H.  His  inquiby — "  What  lack  I  yet?'*  1.  He  lacked  the  true 
grace  of  God,  or  an  inward  principle  of  faith  and  holiness.  He  was  like  a  spread- 
ing tree  without  a  root.  2.  He  was  deficient  in  the  knowledge  of  himself  and  of 
that  misery  in  which  sin  had  involved  him.  3.  He  lacked  a  justifying  righteousness 
in  which  to  appear  before  God.  4.  With  all  his  professions  he  was  not  weaned 
from  earthly  objects.    Conclude  :  L  We  see  that  though  grace  puts  sinners  on  the 


400  THB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB,  (ohat.  t. 

inqmry  abont  salvatioii,  yet  all  inqnirers  are  not  truly  gnoionB;  many  ask  the  way 
to  Zion  whose  faces  are  not  thitherward.  2.  Mistakes  with  respect  to  the  spiritual 
state  of  men  are  more  common  than  most  people  imagine.  8.  We  here  see  what 
is  tiie  right  use  of  the  Divine  law :  by  it  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  {B,  Beddome^ 
M.A,)  The  goodness  of  God : — The  words  are  part  of  a  reply  of  our  Saviour  to 
the  young  man's  petition  to  Him.  1.  God  only  is  originally  good,  good  of  Himself. 
All  created  goodness  is  an  outlet  from  this  fountain,  but  Divine  goodness  hath  no 
spring ;  Ood  depends  upon  no  other  for  His  goodness :  He  hath  it  in,  and  of,  Him. 
self.  2.  God  only  is  infinitely  good — a  boundless  goodness  that  knows  no  limits.  8. 
God  only  is  perfectly  good  because  only  infinitely  good.  He  is  good  without  indigence, 
because  He  hath  the  whole  nature  of  goodness,  not  only  some  beams  that  may 
admit  of  increase  of  degree.  4.  God  only  is  immutably  good.  There  is  not  such  a 
perpetual  light  in  the  sun  as  there  is  a  fulness  of  goodness  in  God  (Jas.  i.  17).  5. 
All  nations  have  acknowledged  God  good.  6.  The  notion  of  goodness  is  inseparable 
from  the  notion  of  a  God  (Rom.  i.  20 ;  Psa.  oxlv.  6, 7).  I.  What  this  goodness  is. 
1.  We  mean  not  the  goodness  of  His  essence,  or  the  perfection  of  His  nature.  God 
is  thus  good  because  His  nature  is  infinitely  perfect.  2.  Nor  is  it  the  same  with  the 
blessedness  of  God,  but  something  flowing  from  His  blessedness.  3.  Nor  is  it  the 
same  with  the  holiness  of  God.  4.  Or  with  the  mercy  of  God.  6.  By  goodness  is 
meant  the  bounty  of  God — His  inclination  to  deal  well  and  bountifully  with  His 
creatures.  This  is  the  most  pleasant  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature.  6.  Compre- 
hends  all  His  attributes.  All  the  acts  of  God  are  nothing  else  but  the  effluxes  of 
His  goodness,  distinguished  by  several  names,  according  to  the  object  it  is  exercised 
about.  As  the  sea,  though  it  be  one  mass  of  water,  yet  we  distinguish  it  by  several 
names,  according  to  the  shores  it  washeth  and  beats  upon  (Exod.  xxxiii.  19,  xxxiv.  6 ; 
Psa.  cxlv.  7,  8).  n.  Some  propositions  to  explain  the  natdbe  of  this  goodness.  1. 
He  is  good  by  His  own  essence — not  by  participation  from  another.  Not  a  quality  in 
Him,  but  a  nature ;  not  a  habit  added  to  His  essence,  but  His  essence  itself.  2.  God  is 
the  prime  and  chief  goodness  to  whom  all  goodness  whatsoever  must  be  referred,  as 
the  final  cause  of  all  good.  3.  His  goodness  is  communicative,  diffusive,  without 
which  He  would  cease  to  be  good  (Psa.  cxix.  68.)  God  is  more  prone  to  communi- 
cate Himself  tiian  the  sun  to  spread  its  beams,  or  the  earth  to  mount  up  its  fruits, 
or  the  water  to  multiply  living  creatures.  4.  God  is  necessarily  good — inseparable 
from  His  nature  as  holiness.  5.  God  is  freely  good.  The  necessity  of  the  goodness 
of  His  nature  hinders  not  the  liberty  of  His  actions :  the  matter  of  His  acting  is  not 
at  all  necessary,  but  the  manner  of  His  acting  in  a  good  and  bountiful  way  is  neces- 
sary as  well  as  free.  6.  Communicative  with  the  greatest  pleasure.  What  God 
gives  out  of  goodness  He  gives  with  joy  and  gladness.  He  is  as  much  deUghted 
with  petitions  for  His  liberality  in  bestowing  His  best  goodness  as  princes  are  weary 
of  the  craving  of  their  subjects.  7.  Its  display  was  the  motive  and  end  of  all  His 
works  of  creation  and  providence.  III.  God  is  good.  1.  The  more  excellent  anything 
is  in  nature  the  more  of  goodness  and  kindness  it  hath.  2.  He  is  the  cause  of  all 
created  goodness.  (1)  Is  not  impaired  by  suffering  sin  to  enter  into  the  world,  and 
man  to  fall  thereby.  It  is  rather  a  testimony  of  God's  goodness,  that  He  gave  man 
an  ability  to  be  happy,  than  any  charge  against  His  goodness,  that  He  settled  man 
in  a  capacity  to  be  evil.  God  was  first  a  benefactor  to  man  before  man  could  be  a 
rebel  against  God.  (2)  Is  not  prejudiced  by  not  making  all  things  the  equal 
subjects  of  it.  Is  any  creature  destitute  of  the  open  marks  of  His  goodness,  though 
all  are  not  enriched  with  those  signal  characters  which  He  vouchsaies  to 
others  (Gen.  i.  4,  10,  12,  18,  21,  26,  31)?  (3)  Is  not  violated  by  the  severe 
punishment  of  offenders,  and  the  inflictions  He  inflicts  upon  His  servants,  (a)  God's 
justice  is  part  of  the  goodness  of  His  nature.  Is  it  not  a  part  of  the  goodness 
of  God  to  make  laws  and  annex  threatenings  ?  and  shall  it  be  an  impeachment  of  His 
goodness  to  support  them?  Not  to  punish  evil  would  be  a  want  of  goodness. 
{b)  Sometimes  God  afflicts  men  for  the  temporal  and  eternal  good  (1  Cor. 
xi.  32;  Psa.  Ixxxix.  33;  Heb.  xii.  10).  IV.  The  manifestation  of  His  good- 
ness. 1.  In  creation  of  man  —  his  being  and  nature  ;  the  conveniences  He 
provided  for,  and  gave  to  man  ;  the  world  was  made  and  furnished  for  man  ; 
the  laws  He  hath  given  to  man  —  fitted  to  his  nature  and  happiness.  2.  In 
redemption.  (1)  Goodness  was  its  spring.  He  was  under  no  obligation  to  pity  our 
misery,  Ac.  (2)  Exceeds  His  goodness  in  creation :  in  regard  to  the  difficulty  of 
effecting  it ;  its  cost ;  man's  desert  of  the  contrary.  Greater  goodness  than  was 
expressed  towards  the  angels — standing  or  fallen.  Greater  than  was  for  a  time 
aanifested  to  Christ  Himselt     He  $o  loved  the  world  that  He  seemed  for  a  time 


«B^-  xj  8T,  MARK.  401 


not  to  love  His  Son  in  comparison  of  it,  or  equal  with  it  (Jno.  iii.  16).    The  first 
resolution  to  redeem,  and  the  means  appointed  for  redemption,  could  have  no  other 
inducement  but  Divine  goodness.    In  God's  giving  Christ  to  be  our  Redeemer,  He 
gave  the  highest  gift  that  it  was  possible  for  Divine  goodness  to  bestow— greater  than 
worlds  or  all  things  purchased  by  Him  :  greater  because  it  was  His  Own  Son,  not  an 
angel ;  and  this  Son  given  to  rescue  us  by  His  death.     (3)  This  goodness  is  enhanced 
by  considering  the  state  of  man  in  the  first  transgression,  and  since :  nothing  in  fallen 
man  to  allure  God  to  the  expression  of  His  goodness ;  man  was  reduced  to  the  lowest 
condition ;  every  age  multiplied  provocations  ;  man  was  utterly  impotent ;  the  high 
advancement  of  our  nature,  after  it  had  so  highly  offended ;  the  covenant  of  grace 
made  with  us,  whereby  we  are  freed  from  the  rigour  of  that  of  works — its  nature 
and  tenor,  its  confirmation  (Heb.  vi.  17,  18),  its  easy,  reasonable,  and  necessary 
condition  ;    His    affectionate    method    cf  treating  with  man   to    embrace    this 
covenant  ;    the    sacraments  He  hath    affixed    to    this    covenant,    especially  in 
the  Lord's  Supper.    (4)   By  this  redemption  God  restores  us  to  a  more  excel- 
lent condition  than  Adam  had  in  innocence  (Jno.  x.  10).      3.   In  His  govern- 
ment— in  preserving  all  things ;  in  the  preservation  of  human  society ;  prescribing 
rules  for  it,  restraining  the  passions  of  men,  &c. ;  in  providing  Scripture  as  a  rule 
to  guide  US,  and  continuing  it  in  the  world ;  in  the  conversion  of  men ;  in  answer- 
ing prayers  ;  in  bearing  with  the  infirmities  of  His  people ;  in  afflictions  and  perse- 
cutions (Psa.  cxix.  71);  in   temptations.     V.   Use.    1.  Of  instruction.     If   God 
be  so  good— (1)  How  unworthy  is  the  contempt  or  abuse  of  His  goodness.    (2)  It 
is  a  certain  argument  that  man  is  fallen  from  his  original  state.     (3)  There  can  be 
no  just  complaint  against  God,  if  men  be  punished  for  abusing  His  goodnesss.     (4) 
Here  is  a  certain  argument,  both  for  God's  fitness  to  govern  the  world,  and  His 
actual  government  of  it.     (5)  The  ground  of  all  religion  is  this  perfection  of  good- 
ness.     (6)  Renders  God  amiable— to  Himself,  to  us.    (7)  Renders  Him  a  fit  object 
of  trust  and  confidence.     (8)  Renders  God  worthy  to  be  obeyed  and  honoured.    2. 
Of   comfort.     (1)  In  our  addresses  to  Him.      (2)  In  afflictions.     (3)  Ground  of 
assurance  of  happiness.     (4)  Of  comfort  in  the  midst  of  public  dangers.     3.  Of 
exhortation.  (1)  How  should  we  endeavour  after  the  enjoyment  of  a  God  so  good  I  (2) 
Often  meditate  on  the  goodness  of  God.   (3)  Be  thankful  for.  (4)  Imitate— in  relieving 
and  assisting  others  in  distress,  &o.    {Stephen  Charnocke,  B.D.)      I  shall  show  what 
was  commendable  in  this  young  man.    First — The  question  asked — ^What  shall  I  do 
to  inherit  eternal  life  ?    I.  It  is  not  a  question  about  another  man,  but  himself. 
Many  do  not  look  inward,  and  are  busy  about  the  concernments  of  others ;  but  here 
it  is  not,  What  shall  they  do,  or  what  shall  others  do  ?  but.  Good  Master,  what  is  my 
duty  ?    What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?    II.  It  is  not  a  curious  question,  or  the  pro- 
posal of  some  intricate  doubt  and    nice  debate    (Titus  iii.  9— "Avoid  foolish 
questions  ").    HI.  It  is  not  about  the  body,  but  the  soul.  IV.  About  his  soul.    And 
certainly  such  a  question  as  this  discovers  a  good  spirit.      1,  That  he  was  no 
Sadducee,  for  he  inquires  after  eternal  life,  which  they  denied.    2.  It  discovers 
some  thoughtf  ulness  about  it ;  his  thoughts  were  more  upon  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
than  upon  a  temporal  reign.     3.  It  discovered  that  he  was  very  sensible  of  the 
connection  that  is  between  the  end  and  the  means,  that  something  must  be  done 
in  order  to  eternal  life.     There  are  some  men  who  would  have  heaven  and 
happiness,  but  are  loathe  to  be  at  the  cost.     4.  This  question  so  put  discovers  that 
he  was  sensible  that  a  slight  thing  would  not  serve  the  turn,  not  a  little  saying  and 
outward  profession.      6.  This  was  the  errand  and  great  thing  that  brought  him  to 
Christ  to  find  the  way  to  heaven  and  true  happiness.      V.  This  question  was 
seriously  put :  he  did  not  ask  it  in  jest,  but  in  the  greatest  earnest.     Secondly. 
Let  Qs  consider  the  person  by  whom  it  was  put.    I.  We  find  him  to  be  a  young 
man.    God  demands  His  right  of  the  young  man,  that  his  heart  be  seasoned  betimes 
with  grace.     1.  Consider  how  convenient  and  reasonable  it  is  that  God  should  have 
our  first  and  best.    The  flower  and  best  of  our  days  is  due  to  God,  who  is  the  best 
of  beings.     Under  the  law  the  first  fruits  were  God's ;  the  sacrifices  were  all  offered 
young,  and  in  their  strength  (Lev.  ii.  14).     When  wit  is  dulled,  ears  heavy,  body 
weak,  affections  spent,  is  this  a  fit  sacrifice  for  God  ?    If  a  man  has  a  great  way  to 
go,  it  is  good  rising  early  in  the  morning  ;  many  set  out  too  late,  never  any  too 
soon.    And  for  the  convenience  of  it,  young  men  are  most  capable  of  doing  God 
service ;  the  faculties  of  their  souls  are  most  vigorous,  and  ^e  members  of  their 
bodies  most  active.    It  is  not  fit  to  lay  the  greatest  load  on  the  weakest  horse ;  the 
weak  shoulders  of  old  men  are  not  fit  for  the  burden  of  religion.    2.  Consider  how 
necessary  it  is,  because  the  lusts  of  youth  being  boiling  hot  need  the  oorreotion  of  a 


401  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  x. 

more  severe  discipline.    As  the  boiling  pot  sendeth  up  most  steam,  so  in  the 
fervours  of  youth  there  are  the  strongest  inclinations  to  intemperance  and  unclean- 
ness.    3.  Consider  the  profit  of  it.     (1)  The  work  is  more  easy  the  sooner  it  is 
taken  in  hand :  whereas  the  longer  it  is  delayed,  the  more  difficult.    A  twig  is  easily 
bowed,  but  when  it  is  grown  into  a  tree  it  is  not  moved.    When  the  disease  groweth 
inveterate,  medicines  do  little  good.     (2)  You  hereby  provide  for  the  comfort  of  old 
age.    K  you  serve  God  in  your  good  days,  He  will  help  you  the  better  over  those 
evil  days  wherein  there  is  no  pleasure.     It  will  then  be  no  grief  of  heart  to  you 
when  old  that  you  were  acquainted  with  God  young :  whereas,  on  the  other  side,  the 
vanities  of  youth  will  be  the  burden  of  age.     (3)  Our  great  work,  that  must  be  once 
done,  is  put  out  of  hazard  when  we  think  of  heaven  seriously  while  we  are  young. 
Life  is  most  uncertain,  and  such  a  weighty  business  as  this  should  not  be  left  at 
peradventures.    II.  This  man  was  a  rich  man,  one  who  had  great  possessions. 
This  man,  though  he  had  enough  to  live  happily  in  the  present  world,  yet  he  thinks 
of  the  world  to  come.    This  is  a  question  rarely  moved  by  men  of  that  sort.    They 
think  heaven  is  a  fit  notion  to  entertain  the  fancies  of  the  poor  and  afflicted  withal, 
a  pleasant  thought  wherewith  to  comfort  and  relieve  their  sorrows ;  but  this  rich 
man,  though  he  had  great  possessions,  yet  he  hath  his  trouble  upon  him  about  his 
salvation.      III.  He  was  a  ruler,  not  a  vulgar  and  obscure  plebeian,  but  a  man  of 
eminence  and  authority,  a  nobleman  (to  speak  in  the  English  language),  or  the 
chief  of  his  family.    Thirdly.    Here  is  the  manner  of  his  address,  and  thenop  you 
may  observe — 1.  The  voluntariness  of  it.    2.  The  earnestness  and  fervour  of  his 
coming — "  He  came  running."     3.  Consider  his  humility  and  reverence  to  Christ : 
he  kneeled  to  him,  in  token  of  civil  honour  and  reverence  to  Him,  as  an  eminent 
teacher  and  prophet.    I.  But  where  was  his  defect  ?    1.  His  fault  was  that  he  asked 
in  the  Pharisee's  sense,  what  good  thing  he  should  do.     Now  the  Pharisee's  error 
was  double  ;  he  thought  that  men  should  be  saved  by  their  own  works,  and  that 
those  works  were  in  their  own  power.    They  were  confident  of  their  own  merit  and 
strength.     II.  His  next  fault  was  his  love  of  riches  and  worldly  things,  which  is  a 
dangerous  obstruction  and  a  let  to  salvation.    First :  This  may  serve  to  humble  us. 
It  were  a  blessed  thing  for  the  world  if  all  men  went  so  far  as  this  young  man,  so 
as — 1.  To  have  their  thoughts  taken  up  about  eternal  life.     The  most  part  of  the 
world  never  consider  whence  they  are  nor  whither  they  go,  nor  what  shall  become 
of  them  to  all  eternity.     Should  a  man's  thoughts  be  taken  up  about  furnishing  his 
inn  where  he  tarries  but  a  night  and  neglect  his  home  ?    2.  To  be  sensible,  it  is 
no  slight  matter  to  have  an  interest  in  the  world  to  come.    Most  men  think  they 
shall  do  well  enough  for  heaven  ;  a  small  matter  will  serve  the  turn  for  that.     3. 
To  have  such  a  sense  as  to  choose  fit  means.    Many  keep  up  teachers  to  please  their 
own  lusts.    4.  To  be  so  concerned  as  to  be  in  earnest  in  the  means.    "  Be  swift  to 
hear "  (St.  James  i.  19).    But  we  are  cold,  slack,  and  negligent.    Secondly :  To 
caution  us :  do  not  rest  in  a  common  work.     1.  In  a  desire  of  heaven  is  your  only 
happiness.    2.  Do  not  rest  barely  in  a  desire  that  moveth  us  \o  the  use  of  some 
means,  unless  it  bring  us  to  a  perfect  resignation  to  God.      This  man  had  a  good 
mind  to  heaven ;  he  cheapens  it,  but  is  not  willing  to  go  through  with  the  price.    3. 
If  we  would  not  rest  in  a  common  work,  there  are  two  things  we  must  take  care  of, 
which  are  opposite  to  the  double  defect  of  this  young  man — brokenness  of  heart, 
and  unbounded  resignation  of  ourselves  to  the  will  of  God ;  bring  yourselves  to  that, 
and  the  thing  is  done.     (1)  Brokenness  of  heart.     (2)  Resignation  of  yourselves  to 
God's  wiU.     He  that  starves  as  well  as  he  that  surfeits  hath  his  difficulties  in  the 
way  to  heaven.    Every  man  hath  a  tender  part  of  soul,  some  carnal  afifection  that 
he  doth  allow,  reserve,  and  is  loath  should  be  touched ;  therefore,  till  there  be  an 
unbounded  resignation,  and  we  fully  throw  ourselves  at  Christ's  feet,  it  is  impossible 
ever  we  should  come  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.    No ;  we  should  be  ^lad  to  accept 
of  mercy  on  any  terms,  and  take  heaven  at  God's  price.    1.  This  unbounded  reso- 
lution must  be  seriously  made   (St.  Luke  xiv.   26).      2.  It  must  be  faithfully 
performed.    There  are  four  points  of  great  weight  and  moment,  which  should  ever 
be  remembered  by  them  that  would  make  out  their  gospel  qualifications  or  new 
covenant  plea  of  sincerity.     (1)  That  any  allowed  evil  habit  of  soul  or  reigning  sin 
is  inconsistent  with  that  faith  that  worketh  by  love,  and  only  maketh  us  capable  of 
the  great  privileges  of  the  gospel.     (2)  That  the  usual  bait  of  reigning  sin  is  the 
world.  The  great  difficulty  of  salvation  lies  in  a  man's  addictedness  to  worldly  things 
of  temporal  satisfaction.     (3)  That  our  inclinations  to  worldly  things  is  various, 
according  to  our  temper  and  constitution  of  men — '*  As  the  channel  is  oat  so  the 
rivor  roiu  *'  (Isa.  liii.  6).    (4)  That  many  times,  when  pretences  are  fair,  there  is  a 


X.]  ST.  MARK.  403 

secret  reserve  in  onr  hearts.  The  devil  seeketh  to  deceive  men  with  a  sriperficial 
change  and  half  reformation,  and  moveth  them  to  take  on  the  profession  of  religion, 
and  yet  secure  their  fleshly  and  worldly  interest.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  We  have 
seen  tihe  young  man's  question :  here  is  Christ's  answer ;  in  wliich  observe  two 
things.  1.  Hi^  expostulation  with  him — "  Why  callest  thou  Me  good  ? "  2.  His 
instruction  of  him—"  There  is  none  good  but  One,  that  is  God."  First :  For  the 
expostulation.  He  doth  not  simply  blame  him  for  giving  Him  this  title,  but 
argueth  with  him  about  it.  1.  To  show  He  loves  no  compliment  or  fair  words 
which  proceed  not  from  sound  faith  and  love  to  Him.  As  elsewhere  (St.  Luke  vi. 
46) — "  Why  call  me  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  things  which  I  say  ?  "  It  is  a 
mockery  to  give  titles  to  any  one  when  we  do  not  answer  it  with  suitable  endeavours. 
2.  He  takes  occasion  to  draw  him  from  his  error  of  conceiving  Him  as  a  mere  man. 
The  attribute  of  good  belongeth  truly  and  properly  to  none  but  God.  3.  Our  Lord 
would  teach  us  by  His  own  example  to  cast  all  the  honour  we  receive  upon  God. 
This  is  a  common  sin,  that  when  God  doth  any  good  by  His  creatures  the  minds  of 
men  stick  in  the  creatures,  and  never  look  up  to  God ;  and  from  thence  comes 
idolatry.  4.  I  suppose  the  chief  reason  was  to  beat  down  this  pharisaical  conceit. 
Secondly :  I  come  to  Christ's  instruction  of  him.  There  is  none  good  but  God.  And 
there  you  have  two  propositions.  1.  That  in  some  sense  there  is  no  man  good.  2. 
That  God  only  is  good.  Doctrine  1 :  There  is  no  mere  man  that  is  absolutely  and 
perfectly  good.  I  shall  explain  this  negatively  and  affirmatively.  First :  For  the 
negative  part.  1.  It  is  not  to  be  so  understood  as  if  in  no  sense  man  were  good,  for 
it  is  said  in  St.  Luke  vi.  45,  ♦•  A  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart "  ; 
and  it  is  said  of  St.  Barnabas  (Acts  xi.  24)  and  of  Joseph  of  Aramathea  (St.  Luke 
xxiii.  50).  2.  This  is  not  so  to  be  understood  as  if  there  were  no  distinction 
between  men,  but  they  were  all  equal  in  sin.  3.  It  is  not  so  to  be  understood  as  if 
it  were  unlawful  wholly  to  acknowledge  that  goodness  that  is  in  others.  Secondly : 
Positively.  How  is  it  then  true  that  no  man  is  good?  1.  No  man  is  of  himself 
good,  but  only  by  participation  of  God's  goodness.  As  all  the  stars  derive  their 
ught  from  the  sun,  so  do  we  derive  our  poor  weak  ray  wherewith  we  shine  from  the 
Father  of  lights  (St.  James  i.  17).  All  the  tribute  we  pay  Him  we  have  oat  of  His 
own  exchequer.  2.  No  man  is  good,  that  is,  absolutely  and  perfectly  good.  3.  No 
man  is  good  in  comparison  with  God.  The  consideration  of  God's  holiness  and 
dignity  obscureth  all  the  glory  and  praise  of  the  creature.  As  when  the  sun  is  up 
the  lustre  of  the  stars  is  no  more  to  be  seen  than  if  they  were  not,  so  when  God 
is  thought  on,  and  we  are  compared  with  Him,  there  are  none  good,  no,  not  one. 
1.  This  should  ever  keep  us  humble,  for  all  the  good  that  is  in  us,  natural  and 
spiritual,  is  not  of  ourselves  but  God  (1  Cor.  iv.  7).  2.  This  should  keep  us  in  a 
self-loathing  frame  and  posture  of  heart,  because  the  good  that  is  in  us  is  so  imper- 
fect and  mingled  with  so  much  evil  of  sin.  3.  This  instructeth  us,  since  none  is 
good,  where  our  happiness  lieth,  not  in  the  plea  of  innocenoy,  but  in  the  pardon  of 
sin  (Psa.  xxxii.  1, 2).  Doctrine  2  :  That  God  only  is  good.  First,  the  absolute  per- 
fection of  His  nature  and  being,  which  is  such  as  nothing  is  wanting  to  it  or 
defective  in  it,  and  nothing  can  be  added  to  it  to  make  it  better.  In  short,  God  is 
good,  and  only  good  four  ways— originally,  essentially,  infinitely,  and  immutably. 
1.  Originally.  He  is  avrayaQog,  good  of  Himself.  2.  He  is  essentially  good. 
The  goodness  of  God  and  the  goodness  of  a  creature  differs,  as  a  thing  whose  sub- 
stance is  gold  differs  from  ^at  which  is  gilded  and  overlaid  with  gold.  A 
vessel  of  pure  gold,  the  matter  itself,  gives  lustre  to  it ;  but  in  a  gilded 
vessel,  the  outward  lustre  is  one  thing,  and  the  substance  is  another.  The 
essence  and  being  of  an  angel  is  one  thing,  and  its  holiness  another.  The  holiness 
may  be  separated  from  the  essence,  for  the  essence  and  being  of  the  angels  was 
continued  when  their  perfection  aud  goodness  was  lost;  so  man's  substance  is  one 
thing,  his  holiness  another,  but  in  God  His  holiness  is  His  being.  3.  God  is 
infinitely  good.  God  is  an  ocean  without  banks  or  bottom;  the  goodness  of  a 
creature  is  but  a  drop  from  the  ocean,  or  as  a  nutshell  filled  with  the  water  of  the 
sea.  4.  God  is  immutably  good:  it  cannot  be  diminished  or  augmented,  for  in 
infiniteness  there  are  no  degrees — it  can  never  be  more  than  it  is  or  less  than  it  is  ; 
(or  God  hath  actually  all  possible  perfection.  Use  1.  To  humble  us  in  our  con- 
verse with  God.  Use  2.  To  make  us  thankful.  Use  3.  If  we  would  have  good 
wrought  in  us,  let  us  look  up  to  God.  Use  4.  Let  us  love  God,  and  love  Him  above 
all  things,  for  He  only  is  good.  He  is  the  chiefest  good.  Other  things  are  good  in 
subordination  to  Him.  All  the  goodness  that  is  in  the  creature  is  but  a  spark  of 
that  good  which  is  in  God.    If  we  find  any  good  there,  it  is  not  to  detain  our  affeo- 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap. 


tions,  but  to  lead  us  to  a  greater  good ;  not  to  hold  ub  from  Him,  but  to  lead  ob  ta 
Him,  as  the  streams  lead  ua  to  the  fountain,  and  the  steps  of  a  ladder  are  not  to 
stand  still  upon,  but  to  lead  us  higher.  If  the  prince  should  woo  us  by  messengers, 
and  we  should  leave  him  and  cleave  to  the  messengers,  this  were  extreme  folly,  and 
a  great  abuse  and  wrong  to  the  prince.  By  the  goodness  of  the  creatures  God's  end 
is  to  draw  us  to  Himself  as  the  chief  est  good.  Here  is  goodness  in  the  creature,  but  it 
is  mixed  with  imperfection ;  the  goodness  is  to  draw  us  to  God,  the  imperfection  to 
drive  us  from  the  creatures.  Many  a  fair  stream  is  drawn  dry  or  runneth  low  by  being 
dispersed  into  several  channels,  but  that  which  is  infinite  cannot  be  lessened.  {Ibid.) 
Question  1.  Why  Christ  refers  the  young  man  to  the  commandments  7  To  convince 
him  of  his  impotency,  to  humble  him  in  the  sense  of  his  guilt,  to  drive  him  out  of 
himself,  and  to  draw  him  to  seek  salvation  by  a  better  covenant,  or  if  not,  to  leave 
him  without  excuse.  1.  Christ  used  the  same  method  that  God  did  in  giving  the 
law  upon  Mount  Sinai.  Why  did  God  give  it  then  but  to  break  a  stiff-necked  people, 
trusting  to  their  own  strength,  by  this  exact  yoke  of  duty,  which  neither  they  nor 
their  fathers  were  able  to  bear?  (Rom.  v.  20,  21 ;  Gal.  iii.  19.)  2.  Practical  con- 
viction is  best,  and  men  never  see  their  unworthiness  so  much  as  when  they  are 
held  to  their  own  covenant,  and  we  are  so  far  to  condescend  to  the  humours  of  men 
as  to  convince  them  and  condemn  them  in  their  own  way.  As  a  presumptuous  sick 
man,  that  is  strongly  conceited  he  is  able  to  leave  his  bed  and  walk  up  and  down, 
the  best  way  to  confute  him  is  by  trial.  3.  It  was  a  truth  Christ  spake.  If  thou 
wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments ;  but  we  must  consider  his  intention. 
Though  men's  trusting  in  their  own  works  is  displeasing  to  God,  yet  good  works  are 
not  displeasing  to  Him.  Question  2.  Why  the  conunandments  of  the  second  table 
are  only  mentioned  ?  1.  In  these  the  Pharisees  conceived  themselves  to  be  most 
perfect,  and  yet  these  were  a  sufficient  touchstone  whereby  to  try  and  discover  their 
unfruitfulness  and  their  imperfection.  Certainly  if  they  be  defective  here,  there  is 
no  standing  by  the  law.  If  a  man  cannot  go,  surely  he  cannot  run ;  if  he  cannot 
spell,  surely  he  cannot  read ;  if  men  be  defective  in  the  duties  of  the  second  table, 
certainly  they  are  not  able  to  keep  the  law.  2.  These  are  most  plain  and  easy  to 
be  understood,  and  the  sins  committed  against  them  are  most  evident  and  apparent. 
3.  In  the  externals  of  the  first  table  the  Jews  seemed  very  zealous,  but  negligent 
they  were  of  the  second  ;  and  herein  they  commonly  fail  who  hypocritically  make 
fair  shows  of  devotion  and  outward  respect  to  God  in  worship  (Isa.  i.  11).  Doct. : 
The  true  way  to  prepare  men  for  Christ  is  to  cause  them  to  see  their  misery  and 
impotency  by  the  law.  Because  every  man  is  apt  to  flatter  himself  with  a  spurious 
covenant  of  works  of  his  own  making,  which  is  the  main  let  and  hindrance  to  keep 
him  from  Christ  and  salvation.  It  must  be  a  powerful  instrument  to  prepare  men 
for  Christ,  because  this  covenant  shuts  up  a  siimer  without  any  hope  of  reUef,  unless 
Christ  and  grace  open  the  door  to  him.  Let  us  then  see  how  this  law  shuts  men 
up.  1.  The  duty  is  impossible  (Rom.  viii.  3).  2.  The  penalty  is  intolerable  (Gal. 
iii.  10).  There  is  none  passeth  into  the  new  covenant  till  he  be  driven  by  the  old; 
and  therefore  certainly  this  is  the  way  to  prepare  a  man  for  Christ,  to  have  some 
eense  and  feehng  of  it  in  our  heart,  and  we  see  we  are  cursed  and  undone  creatures, 
and  so  lie  at  God's  feet  with  brokenness  of  heart  (Rom.  viii.  15).  To  instruct  us, 
if  we  would  be  prepared  for  Christ,  what  we  must  do.  1.  We  must  be  able  to  under- 
stand the  law.  2.  Meditate  often  thereupon  (Psa.  i.  6).  3.  Judge  yourselves  by  it- 
look  into  thy  bill,  what  owest  thou  ?  4.  Beg  the  light  of  the  Spirit  to  show  thee  thy  sin 
and  misery  (Rom.  vii.  9) .  Without  the  Spirit  we  guess  confusedly  concerning  things, 
as  the  man  that  saw  men  like  trees  walking,  and  have  but  general,  cursory,  confused 
thoughts.  {Ibid.)  A  good  answer,  if  true:— The  young  man's  answer  was  good 
if  it  were  true.  First.  It  is  good  in  the  first  respect,  as  an  universality  of  obedience 
is  pretended;  and  I  drop  this  note — Doct.  :  They  that  would  keep  the  commandments 
must  observe  not  only  one  but  all.  It  is  true  of  the  law  of  God,  as  it  belongeth  to 
the  covenant  of  works,  or  to  the  covenant  of  grace.  1.  As  it  belongeth  to  the 
covenant  of  works  (Gal.  iii.  10;  James  ii.  10].  As  one  condition  not  observed 
forfeits  the  whole  lease,  therefore  it  concerns  this  legalist  to  make  good  his  plea  and 
conceit  of  perfection  by  the  law,  to  say,  "  all  these  things  have  I  done."  2.  But  is 
not  the  covenant  of  grace  more  favourable  ?  No ;  it  gives  not  allowance  to  the 
least  failings,  but  binds  us  to  make  conscience  of  all  as  well  as  of  some.  (1)  Because 
the  authority  is  the  same  (Exod.  xx.  1).  "  God  spake,"  not  one  ortwo,  but "  all  these 
words."  (2)  The  heart  can  never  be  sincere  when  we  can  dispense  with  anything 
which  God  hath  commanded;  and  you  cannot  have  the  testimony  of  a  good 
conscience  approving  your  sincerity  when  you  allow  yourselves  in  the  least  failing 


.  X.]  8T,  MARK,  4Q6 

(Pea.  oxiz.  6 ;  Luke  i.  6 ;  Psa.  Ixvi.  18).  (8)  God  giveth  grace  to  all.  Wherever 
ae  renews  and  sanctifies  is  thronghont.  He  fills  the  soul  with  the  seeds  of  all  grace, 
80  as  to  dispose  and  incline  us  to  every  duty,  whether  to  God  or  man,  the  world  or 
cur  fellow-creatures  (2  Peter  i.  7).  Use.  To  reprove  those  that  would  keep  some 
commandments,  but  not  alL  There  is  such  an  union  betwixt  all  the  parts  of  the 
law  of  God,  that  one  cannot  be  violated  without  a  breach  of  all  the  rest ;  therefore 
take  heed  of  obeying  God  by  halves.  Secondly :  There  is  another  thing  that  is  good 
in  the  reply  the  young  man  maketh,  that  is  his  early  beginning — "  I  have  kept  all 
from  my  youth."  1.  Because  it  will  be  a  help  to  us  all  our  lives  afterwards,  before 
affections  are  forestalled  and  pre-engaged,  to  begin  with  God,  and  to  have  the 
inclinations  of  youth  set  right  by  a  good  education,  to  be  restrained  from  our  own 
will,  and  to  be  trained  up  in  a  way  of  abstinence  from  bodily  pleasures.  When  men 
are  well  principled  and  seasoned  in  youth,  it  sticketh  by  them ;  the  vessel  is  seasoned 
already.  2.  While  parents  and  governors  are  careful  to  season  those  tender  vessels, 
the  Lord  is  pleased  many  times  to  replenish  them  with  grace  from  above,  and  to 
give  us  His  blessing  upon  their  education,  and  many  have  been  converted  that  way. 
You  will  bewail  any  natural  defect  of  your  children,  and  seek  to  cure  it  while  they 
are  young,  if  they  have  a  stammering  tongue,  a  deai  ear,  or  a  lame  leg  ;  certainly 
you  ought  much  more  bewail  the  want  of  grace.  Dye  the  cloth  in  the  wool,  and  not 
in  the  web,  and  the  colour  is  more  durable.  God  works  strangely  in  children,  and 
many  notable  things  have  been  found  in  them  beyond  expectation.  3.  It  prevents 
many  sins  which  afterwards  would  be  a  trouble  to  us  when  we  are  old.  The  sins 
of  youth  trouble  many  a  conscience  in  age ;  witness  David  (Psa.  xxv.  7  ;  Job  xiii.  26). 
New  afflictions  may  awaken  the  sense  of  old  sins,  as  old  bruises  may  trouble  us  long 
after,  upon  every  change  of  weather.  Alas  1  we  cannot  say  "  all  these  have  we  kept 
from  our  youth,"  but  when  we  come  to  look  to  the  commands  of  God,  we  may  say 
"  all  these  have  we  broken  from  our  youth."  But  was  it  true  ?  1.  It  was  true  in 
regard  of  outward  conformity.  If  there  be  light  in  the  lantern,  it  will  shine  forth. 
If  there  be  grace  in  the  heart,  it  will  appear.  2.  It  was  not  true  in  regard  of  that 
perfect  obedience  which  the  law  requireth,  and  so  he  ignorantly  and  falsely  supposed 
that  he  had  kept  the  law  well  enough,  and  done  those  things  from  his  youth.  The 
falsity  and  presumption  of  this  answer  will  appear  by  considering — (1)  What  the 
Scripture  saith  of  the  state  of  man  by  nature  (Gen.  viii.  21).  (2)  The  falsity  of  it 
appears  by  the  sense  of  the  commandment  produced.  (3)  The  falsity  of  it  will 
appear  by  comparing  "^jm  with  other  holy  men  of  God ;  now  differently  do  they 
express  themselves  from  this  man  that  was  so  fuU  of  confidence.  Compare  him 
first  with  Josiah,  who,  when  he  heard  the  law  read,  rent  his  clothes  (2  Kings  xxii. 
11).  A  tender  conscience  is  all  in  an  agony  when  it  hears  the  law,  and  will  smite 
for  the  least  failing,  as  David's  heart  smote  him  for  cutting  off  the  lap  of  Saul's 
garment.  But  what  is  the  cause  that  men  are  so  apt  to  overrate  their  own 
righteousness  and  goodness  before  God?  First.  Ignorance.  1.  Ignorant  of  the 
spiritual  meaning  of  the  law.  A  man  that  keeps  the  law  only  outwardly  can  no 
more  be  said  to  keep  the  law  than  he  that  hath  undertaken  to  carry  a  tree,  and  only 
taken  up  a  little  piece  of  the  bark.  2.  They  are  ignorant  of  gospel  righteousness, 
which  consists  in  the  remission  of  sins,  and  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness 
applied  by  true  faith.  Ignorance,  then,  is  one  great  cause  of  this  disposition  in  men 
to  justify  themselves,  ignorance  of  the  legal  and  gospel  covenant ;  they  are  ignorant 
of  the  nature,  merit,  and  influence  of  sin,  and  of  the  severity  of  God's  justice. 
Secondly.  Another  cause  is  error.  1.  That  they  live  in  good  order  and  are  of  a 
civil,  harmless  life,  and  are  better  than  others,  or  better  than  themselves  have  been 
heretofore,  and  therefore  are  in  good  condition  before  God,  and  yet  a  man  may  be 
carnal  for  all  this.  A  man  may  not  be  as  bad  as  others,  and  yet  not  as  good  as  God 
requireth  (Gal.  vi.  4).  What  is  short  of  regeneration  is  short  of  salvation.  2.  Here 
is  another  of  their  errors :  they  are  bom  and  bred  up  in  the  bosom  of  the  Church, 
and  true  religion  ;  and  because  they  are  baptized,  and  profess  the  faith  of  Christ, 
therefore  they  think  they  ever  had  faith  and  a  good  heart  towards  God,  and  do  not 
see  why  or  from  what  they  should  be  converted.  8.  They  know  no  difference 
between  a  state  of  nature  and  a  state  of  grace ;  they  know  no  such  thing  as 
passing  from  death  to  life,  and  therefore  are  never  troubled  about  it.  As  if  all 
were  of  one  lump,  and  all  should  fare  alike,  and  therefore  think  themselves  aa 
good  as  the  best.  4.  That  those  that  are  blameless  before  men,  and  well  spoken  of 
in  the  world,  need  not  doubt  of  their  acceptance  with  God.  5.  Another  sottish 
maxim  is,  that  petty  sins  are  not  to  bo  stood  upon.  Thirdly :  Self-love  is  the  reason 
of  it  (Prov.  xvi.  2).    A  man  is  very  blind  and  partial  in  his  own  cause,  and  wiU 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

not  own  any  opinion  and  conceit  against  himself.  Fonrthly.  Negligence  and  want 
of  searching,  and  taking  the  course  whereby  we  may  be  undeceived.  Fifthly. 
Security.  As  they  will  not  search,  so  they  will  not  know  themselves  when  they  are 
searched,  and  cannot  endure  thoroughly  to  be  discovered  to  themselves.  1.  They 
cannot  endure  to  be  searched  by  the  Word  (St.  John  iii.  20).  2.  When  God 
searcheth  them  by  affliction  j  when  they  do  not  judge  themselves,  they  are  judged 
by  the  Lord.  And  that  yen  may  not  be  besotted  with  a  dream  of  your  own 
righteousness,  consider — 1.  How  light  every  one  of  us  shall  be  found  when  we  are 
put  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary  (Prov.  xvi.  2).  2.  CJonsider  how  different  the 
judgment  of  God  and  men  will  be  (St.  Luke  xvi.  15).  3.  Consider  that  self  is  an 
incompetent  judge  in  its  own  case ;  and  therefore  you,  that  are  to  endure  God's 
judgment,  should  not  stand  merely  to  the  judgment  of  self.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  21.  Then  Jesus  beholding  him,  loved  him. — The  young  rulers  whom 
Jesus  loved : — I.  Let  us  inquire  into  the  natubk  of  oub  Lord's  beqabb  fob  the 
YOUNG  BULEB.  "Then  Jesus,  beholding  him,  loved  him."  There  are  those 
who  think  that  ardent  love  for  an  unconverted  friend  is  a  misplaced  affection ; 
that  we  should  only  love  what  God  loves.  But  the  love  of  God  must  be  different 
from  the  love  of  the  creature.  When  God  loves  He  loves  the  whole  man,  not 
for  his  moral  qualities,  but  in  spite  of  them.  The  love  of  man  is  partial  in 
its  object,  for  we  can  admire  one  part  of  a  man's  character  whilst  we  dislike 
another.  Our  attachments  also  in  their  present  form  must  be  of  limited  duration. 
What  is  implied  in  this  love .'  1.  There  is  a  sincere  desire  for  such  a  person's 
welfare  and  an  anxious  wish  to  do  him  good.  2.  There  is  a  feeling  of  mournful 
pity,  that  one  endowed  with  such  high  and  hopeful  qualities  should  fall  short 
of  heaven  at  last.  II.  What  webe  the  qualities  which  kindled  oub  Lobd's 
REGARD  FOB  THE  YOUNG  BULEB  f  1.  A  real  concom  OH  the  part  of  the  young  man 
for  the  safety  of  his  soul.  2.  Our  Lord  would  be  pleased  with  the  young  man's 
desire  for  rehgious  knowledge.  3.  The  excellence  of  his  moral  character.  HI. 
Having  seen  the  nature  of  our  Lord's  regard,  and  the  qualities  of  the  young  man 
which  seem  most  likely  to  have  kindled  it,  let  us  conclude  with  a  few  practical  reflec- 
tions on  THE  SAD  COMPATABILITY  OF  BOTH  WITH  THE  FINAL  LOSS  OF  HEAVEN.      1.   HoW 

many  amiable  qualities  are  here  spoiled  at  once  by  the  love  of  this  world.  2.  What 
is  the  precise  value  of  any  combination  of  amiable  quaUties  towards  the  securing 
of  this  rich  inheritance  ?  However  the  world  may  applaud  noble  qualities,  they 
will  not  save  in  the  day  of  judgment.  There  must  be  repentance  and  faith. 
(D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Amiable  qualities  in  the  unregenerate : — Doctrine  I. — There 
may  be  some  amiable  and  good  qualities  in  unregenerate  men.  1.  AH  are  created 
with  some  inclination  to  good,  though  not  to  good  spiritual,  yet  to  good,  natural 
and  moral.  In  our  decayed  condition  there  are  some  remainders  of  right  reason, 
some  impressions  of  equity,  some  principles  of  common  honesty,  still  left  and  pre- 
served in  us,  though  as  to  spiritual  endowments,  "we  are  altogether  become 
filthy  and  abominable "  (Psa.  xiv.  2).  As  in  a  rifled  palace,  though  the  rich 
furniture  be  gone,  the  plate  and  the  jewels,  and  though  the  fashion  of  it  be  much 
spoiled,  yet  some  of  the  fabric  is  left  still  standing  to  show  what  a  magnificent 
Btructuie  it  once  was.  2.  For  the  good  of  mankind.  God  is  the  patron  of  human 
society,  and  delights  in  the  welfare  and  preservation  of  it.  Now  there  would  be 
no  such  thing  as  human  society,  if  there  were  not  sweetness  of  nature  and  moral 
dispositions  yet  left  in  us.  3.  There  are  other  things  besides  renewing  grace  that 
might  cause  these  amiable  qualities.  (1)  Bodily  temper  may  incline  men  to  some 
good.  (2)  The  increase  of  one  sin  may  cause  others  to  decrease,  as  a  wen  that 
grows  big  and  monstrous  defrauds  other  parts  of  their  nourishment.  Though  all 
sin  be  kindly  to  a  natural  heart,  yet  some  sins  are  more  apt  to  take  the  throne,  and 
other  lusts  are  starved  to  feed  that.  ...  A  prodigal  man  is  not  covetous,  and  so 
more  prone  to  be  liberal  and  free-hearted.  .  .  .  Thus  as  weeds  destroy  one  another, 
so  do  many  vices  ;  so  many  vices  occasion  something  that  is  amiable.  Ambition 
makes  men  diligent,  sober,  and  vigilant  to  improve  their  opportunities.  (3)  It  may 
be  occasioned  partly  by  discipline  and  strict  education,  or  else  the  miseries  and 
calamities  of  the  present  life ;  for  these  things,  hough  they  do  not  mortify  sin, 
yet  they  may  much  weaken  and  hinder  the  discovery  of  it.  (4)  By  politic  govern- 
ment and  laws,  which  keep  men  within  the  bound  of  their  duty,  so  that  they  are 
orderly  by  constraint,  and  for  fear  of  penalty,  w  ich,  if  they  should  follow  their 
pleasure  in  sinning,  liiey  would  be  exposed  to.  Austin  compares  laws  to  brooms, 
which,  though  they  cannot  make  corn  of  weeds  or  of  chaff,  yet  they  serve  to  sweep 


CHAP.  X.)  ST.  MARK.  407 

in  the  com  and  keep  it  within  the  floor.  Laws  may  make  men  good  subjects, 
though  not  good  men.  (5)  Unregenerate  men  may  be  translated  from  the  grammar 
school  of  nature  to  the  university  of  grace ;  and  though  they  never  commence 
there,  and  took  the  degree  of  true  sanctification,  yet  they  may  come  very  near  to  it 
by  common  grace,  and  may  not  be  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  Use  I.  It 
shows  as  how  inexcusable  they  are  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  how  just  their 
condemnation  will  be,  that  have  nothing  lovely  in  them.  Use  2.  If  there  may  be 
amiable  qualities  in  unregenerate  men,  then  do  not  rest  in  these  things 
(St.  Matt.  v.  46).  A  good  nature  without  grace  makes  a  fair  show  with  the 
world,  but  it  is  of  little  respect  with  God  as  to  your  salvation.  All  this  may  be 
from  temper  and  awe  of  men.  How  may  a  man  mistake  a  still  nature  for  meek- 
ness, firmness  and  height  of  spirits  for  zeal,  want  of  affection  to  holy  things  for 
discretion,  stupidity  for  patience,  obstinacy  for  constancy  I  But  God  knows  how 
to  distinguish.  Will  complexion  and  temper  ever  pass  for  grace  in  God's  account  ? 
And  usually  if  a  natural  man  hath  one  good  quality,  he  hath  another  bad  one 
to  match  it.  Nay,  a  good  nature  once  corrupted  doth  prove  the  worst  of  all  others, 
as  the  sweetest  wine  makes  the  tartest  vinegar — all  their  parts  and  excellences  are 
but  like  a  sword  in  a  cutler's  shop,  as  ready  for  the  thief  as  the  true  man  to  purchase. 
Doctrine  2.  That  in  some  respect  Christ  loves  tbose  that  are  orderly  and  civil,  and 
do  but  outwardly  carry  themselves  according  to  God's  commands.  1.  The  thing  ia 
good  in  itself,  though  the  resting  in  it  makes  it  useless  as  to  the  salvation  of  the 
person  that  goes  no  further  (Micah  vi.  8).  2.  Because  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
willing  and  ready  to  own  the  least  good  in  us,  that  He  might  draw  us  on  to  more 
(St.  Matt.  xii.  20).  3.  Because  these  things  tend  to  the  profit  of  mankind,  and 
Jesus  Christ's  heart  is  much  set  upon  the  good  of  mankind.  Use.  Now  let  us  see 
what  use  we  may  make  of  this.  I.  Negatively.  1.  We  cannot  make  this  use  of  it 
as  if  Christ  did  love  moral  virtues  as  meritorious  of  grace ;  they  are  not  such  things 
upon  which  God  hath  bound  Himself  to  give  the  grace  of  conversion.  2.  We  must 
not  so  take  this  as  that  He  doth  love  good  qualities  so  as  to  make  them  equal  with 
Christian  virtues  or  the  graces  of  the  Spirit.  Morality  is  good,  but  we  must  not 
lift  it  up  beyond  its  place.  There  is  something  better,  and  that  is  grace  (Heb.  vi.  9). 
Loose  professors  dishonour  their  religion,  but  the  sound  grapes  in  the  cluster  must 
not  be  judged  of  by  the  rotten  ones,  nor  is  the  beauty  of  a  street  to  be  measured  by 
the  filthiness  of  the  sink  and  kennel.  Those  that  are  the  sink  and  disgrace  of 
Christianity  are  unfit  to  show  forth  the  virtue  of  it.  So  that  if  you  compare  these 
things,  their  morality  is  but  like  a  field  flower  to  a  garden  flower,  or  wild  fruits  to 
orchard  fruits ;  it  is  a  wild  thing  in  comparison  of  grace,  and  not  in  any  way  comes 
up  to  the  height  of  it.  3.  We  must  not  from  hence  make  this  use,  that  we  should 
think  ourselves  to  be  in  a  good  condition  because  of  moral  qualifications.  Men 
may  be  viceless,  but  yet  if  they  be  Christlesa  and  graceless,  and  never  brought  to 
brokenness  of  heart  (for  certainly  that  is  necessary  to  prepare  men  for  faith,  and 
for  pardon  of  sins)  they  may  perish  for  evermore.  II.  Positively.  What  use  may 
we  make  of  this,  that  Jesus  loved  this  young  man  ?  1.  If  Christ  did  love  civility, 
much  more  will  He  love  true  grace  in  any  of  His,  though  mingled  with  much  weak- 
ness. Certainly  He  that  delights  in  the  obscure  shadow  of  His  image  will  much 
more  delight  in  the  lively  picture  and  impression  of  it  upon  the  souls  of  His  people, 
though  we  have  our  weaknesses.  2.  We  learn  by  Christ's  example  to  honour 
others  for  their  common  gifts.  3.  Thus  we  may  learn  children,  young  men,  and 
others,  all  may  know  how  to  get  Christ's  love  if  they  be  tractable.  By  the  rule  of 
contraries,  if  He  loves  conformity  to  the  law  of  God  in  externals,  He  hates  those 
that  walk  contrary  to  His  laws.  4.  It  condemns  those  that  will  pretend  to  the 
peculiar  love  of  Christ,  when  they  are  not  moral,  but  forward,  undutiful  in  their 
relations,  unconscionable  in  their  dealing,  and  have  not  learned  to  be  sober,  to 
possess  their  vessels  in  sanctification  and  honour.  What  I  do  you  talk  of  being 
Christians,  when  you  are  not  as  good  as  heathens  ?  Object :  What  love  doth  Christ 
show  now  upon  earth  to  those  that  are  moral?  1.  Moral  virtues  will  at  least  pro- 
cure a  temporal  reward.  2.  There  will  be  some  serenity  of  mind  resulting  from  the 
rectitude  of  your  actions.  3.  It  is  some  advantage  to  grace  ;  it  is  like  the  priming  the 
post,  that  mVketh  it  receptive  of  better  colours.  4.  As  to  their  eternal  state,  it  will 
be  more  tolerable  for  such  than  for  others.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  On  discerning  good 
in  others ;— It  is  only  St.  Mark  who  informs  us  that  our  Lord,  beholding  him,  loved 
him.  There  were  many  imperfections  in  this  young  man,  who  was  far  too  well  satisfied 
with  himself  ;  yet  our  Lord  loved  him.  Thus  when  we  see  much  in  people  to  lament 
and  condemn,  we  should  try  to  discern  something  in  them  to  love      We  are  often 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  X 

tempted  to  dweH  on  the  worst  side  of  our  neighbour's  charactei      We  shall  neyet 
help  him  much  unless  we  love  him.    Let  us  go  on  looking  till  the  ungraceful  quali- 
ties disappear  from  view,  and  we  discover  his  better  self.     There  is  some  such  view 
taken  of  the  departed.     Sometimes  while  a  man  is  alive  we  are  keenly  alive  to  hia 
bad  points  ;  when  the  man  dies  we  find  there  is  another  side  to  his  character  which 
we  never  suspected.     We  often  do  not  know  the  value  of  persons  till  we  have  lost 
them.    We  should  not  wait  for  death  to  remove  men  before  we  appreciate  them. 
Try  to  think  not  so  much  of  what  the  man  is  as  what  he  was  meant  to  be.     Recon- 
struct in  imagination  the  pattern  after  which  he  was  created.    He  was  meant  to  be 
something  better  than  he  has  yet  become.   God  meant  him  simply  to  be  courageous. 
He  is  now  rash.     He  is  now  lavish — he  was  intended  to  be  generous.    His  very 
faults  are  perhaps  perversions  of  good  qualities.       What  you  think  insincerity 
arises  from  a  desire  not  to  wound  feelings.     What  you  thijik  abruptness  is  a  dis- 
torted form  of  straightforwardness.    Not  that  we  should  confound  moral  distinc- 
tions.   The  man  is  a  drunkard — we  need  not  justify  intemperance,  but  we  may  yet 
think  God  meant  him  for  something  better.      God  drew  the  plan  for  each.      I  will 
consider  what  by  grace  they  may  yet  become.  The  Saviour  loves  you  still,  beholding 
you  with  all  your  blemishes.      {H.  W,  Burrows.)         One  thing  thou  lackest. — 
The  defective  amiabilities  of  the  young  : — There  may  be  much  exceedingly  fair  and 
interesting  in  youth,  and  yet  one  thing  of  essential  importance  lacking.    1.  Cor- 
poreal beauty — comeliness  of  feature,  freshness  of  complexion,  symmetry  of  form, 
gracefulness  of  movement ;  but  how  terrible  if  united  with  depraved  and  deformed 
Boul,  if  no  Divine  light  within,  no  love  of  God  reigning  in  the  heart     2.  Tender 
sensibilities,  ever  apt  to  awake  at  sight  of  distress.    And  yet  in  same  heart  there 
may  be  no  sense  of  sin,  no  repentance  toward  God,  no  regard  for  Christ,  no  graces 
of  the  Spirit.     3.  Mental  ability — strong  memory,  ready  judgment,  shrewd  observa- 
tion, Hvely  fancy ;   and  yet  an  understanding  blind  in  reference  to  the  things  of 
God,  e.g.y  Balaam,  Ahitophel.    4.  Docihty — readiness  to  devote  energies  to  this  or 
that  pursuit,  but  neglecting  the  greatest  study  of  all.    He  who  has  been  learning  aU 
other  sciences,  but  will  not  learn  of  Jesus,  has  left  out  of  his  study  that  very  science 
which  alone  can  "  enlighten  him  with  the  light  of  the  living."     6.   Religious  as- 
siduity— attention  to  outward  rites.     It  is  possible  to  know  the  truth  and  not  love 
it ;  to  hear  the  gospel  and  not  believe  it.    6.  Active  benevolence.    Eondness  may 
be  done  from  motives  of  self-interest.     They  may  also  proceed  merely  from  natural 
instinct,  and  not  from  love  to  God.     7.  Ardent  friendship,  without  any  concern 
about  the  Friend  who  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother.     {John  MitcTuU,  D.D.)        A 
special  precept,  given  as  a  test: — In  the  ruler's  mind  there  was  an  ideal  goodness  ; 
would  he  act  up  to  its  requirements  ?    Riches  and  poverty  in  themselves  are  of 
little  moment ;  our  views  of  them  constitute  their  most  important  feature.     The 
point  is.  Are  we  trusting  in  them  ?     If  so,  they  must  be  given  up,  for  they  are  a 
Bnare  to  us.    1.  This  test  is  much  needed ;  for,  although  so  dangerous,  riches  are 
not  avoided  like  a  haunted  house.    Very  few  fancy  that  they  are  rich,  therefore  the 
warning  passes  by  them  unheeded.    But,  whether  we  possess  much  or  little,  we 
may  be  clinging  to  what  we  have,  and  that  is  the  danger.     2.  If  there  remains  one 
thing  wanting,  we  cannot  know  satisfaction.     No  matter  what  our  earthly  posses- 
sions may  be,  still  we  shall  be  disappointed.     The  desires  of  an  immortal  spirit  can 
be  satisfied  with  nothing  less  than  immortality.     3.  Christ  alone  can  satisfy  all  our 
wants.     If  we  take  up  our  cross  and  follow  Him,  we  shall  discover  treasure  laid 
up  for  us  in  heaven.     With  Christ  as  our  guide  and  our  hope,  we  shall  be  able 
to  despise  the  riches  of  this  world  as  so  much  glittering  dross.    Our  course  will  be 
forward,  our  hope  consistent,  and  heaven's  pure  treasures  our  everlasting  portion. 
(G.  C.  Tomlinson.)      One  thing  thou  lackest : — ^A  barren  and  a  fruitful  vine  are  grow- 
ing side  by  side  in  the  garden ;  and  the  barren  vine  says  to  the  fruitful  one,  "  Is  not 
my  root  as  good  as  yours  ?  "    "  Yes,"  replies  the  vine ;  "  it  is  just  as  good  as  mine.** 
"  And  are  not  my  lower  leaves  as  broad  and  spreading  ?  And  is  not  my  stem  M 
large  and  my  bark  as  shaggy  ?  "    "  Yes,"  says  the  vine.    "  And  are  not  my  leaves 
as  green,  and  have  I  not  as  many  bugs  creeping  up  and  down  ?  And  am  I  not  taller 
than  you?"     "Yes;   it  is  quite  true,"  replies  the  vine;   "but  I  have  blossoms.** 
"  Oh,  blossoms  are  of  no  use."      "But  I  bear  fruit."      "What I    those  clusters? 
Those  are  onlv  a  trouble  to  a  vine."    Such  is  the  opinion  of  the  fruitless  vine ;  but 
what  thinks  the  vintner  ?    He  passes  by  the  barren  vine ;  but  the  other,  filling  the 
air  with  its  odour  in  spring,  and  drooping  with  purple  clusters  in  autimm,  is 
his  pride  and  joy ;  and  he  lingers  near  it,  and  prunes  it,  that  it  may  become  yet 
more  luxuriant  and  fruitful.     &o  the  moralist  and  the  Christian.    {U.  W.  Betchtr^ 


CHAP.  X.)  ST,  MARK.  40\t 

Whole-hearted  allegiance  necessary :  —  What,  then,  did  this  young  man  lack  ? 
Not  right  desires :  he  wished  to  inherit  eternal  life.  Not  a  good  moral  character : 
aU  the  moral  law  he  had  kept  from  his  youth  up ;  he  had  been  an  honouring  sou. 
an  honoured  citizen,  a  pure  man.  Not  earnestness :  he  came  running  to  Christ 
Not  reverence  :  he  kneeled  before  Him.  Not  humility :  he  made  willing  and  public 
confession  of  his  desire  and  his  faith  before  the  multitude  in  the  open  roadway. 
Not  an  orthodox  belief :  if  words  are  creeds,  no  creed  could  be  more  orthodox  than 
that  which  he  compacted  into  the  two  words,  "  Good  Master."  Not  a  humane  and 
tender  spirit :  for  Christ  looking  on  him  loved  him.  But  he  lacked  absolute  and 
nnquestioning  allegiance ;  entire  and  implicit  consecration ;  the  spirit  of  the  soldier 
who  only  asks  what  the  marching  orders  are ;  the  spirit  of  the  Master  Himself, 
whose  prayer  was  ever,  •*  Thy  will,  not  Mine,  be  done."  And,  lacking  this,  he 
lacked  everything,  and  went  away  sorrowful.  {Lyman  Abbot,  D.D.)  Importance 
of  the  one  thing  lacking : — The  lack  of  one  thing  may  make  void  the  presence  of  all 
things  else.  Lacking  its  mainspring — which  is  but  one  thing — a  watch  with  jewels, 
wheels,  pinions,  and  beautiful  mechanism,  the  finest  watch  indeed  that  ever  was 
made,  is  of  no  more  use  than  a  stone.  A  sun-dial  without  its  gnomon,  as  it  is 
called.  Time's  iron  finger  that  throws  its  shadow  on  the  circling  hours — but  one 
thing  also — is  as  useless  in  broad  day  as  in  the  blackest  night.  A  ship  may  be 
built  of  the  strongest  oak,  with  masts  of  the  stoutest  pine,  and  manned  by  the  best 
officers  and  crew ;  but  I  sail  not  in  her  if  she  lacks  one  thing — that  trembling 
needle  which  a  child  running  about  the  deck  might  fancy  a  toy  ;  on  that  plaything, 
as  it  looks,  the  safety  of  all  on  board  depends — lacking  that,  but  one  thing,  the 
ship  shaU  be  their  coffin,  and  the  deep  sea  their  grave.  It  is  thus  with  true  piety, 
with  hving  faith.  That  one  thing  wanting,  the  greatest  works,  the  costliest  sacri- 
fices, and  the  purest  life,  are  of  no  value  in  the  sight  of  God.  Still  further,  to  im- 
press you  with  the  valuelessness  of  everything  without  true  piety,  and  to  show  how 
its  presence  imparts  such  worth  to  a  believer's  life  and  labours  as  to  make  his  mites 
weigh  more  than  other  men's  millions,  and  his  cup  of  cold  water  more  precious 
than  their  cups  of  gold — let  me  borrow  an  illustration  from  arithmetic.  Write 
down  a  line  of  ciphers.  You  may  add  thousands,  multiplying  them  till  the  sheets 
they  fill  cover  the  face  of  earth  and  heaven ;  yet  they  express  nothing,  and  are 
worth  nothing.  Now  take  the  smallest  number  of  the  ten,  the  smallest  digit,  and 
place  that  at  their  head  —  magic  never  wrought  such  a  change  I  What  before 
amounted  to  nothing  rises  instantly  by  the  addition  of  one  figure,  one  stroke  of  the 
pen,  into  thousands,  or  millions,  as  the  case  may  be ;  and  whether  they  represent 
pounds  or  pearls,  how  great  is  the  sum  of  them  !  Such  power  resides  in  true  faith 
— in  genuine  piety.  It  may  be  the  lowest  piety,  but  one  degree  above  zero ;  it  may 
be  the  love  of  smoking  flax,  the  hope  of  a  bruised  reed,  the  faith  of  a  mustard  seed, 
the  hesitating,  fluttering  confidence  of  him  who  cried,  **  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  Thou 
mine  unbelief."  Still,  so  soon  as  it  is  inwrought  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  changes 
the  whole  aspect  of  a  man's  Ufe,  and  the  whole  prospect  of  his  eternity.  It  is  that 
one  thing  wanting  which,  however  amiable,  moral,  and  even  apparently  religious 
we  may  be,  our  Lord  addresses  us,  as  He  did  the  young  ruler,  saying,  ♦*  One  thing 
thou  lackest."  (T.  Guthrie,  D,D.)  One  habitual  fault  may  vitiate  the  whole  life : — 
When  a  clock  is  out  of  order,  we  take  it  to  pieces,  and  search  where  the  fault  lies, 
knowing  that  one  wheel  amiss  may  hinder  the  going  of  the  whole  clock.  Our 
hearts  are  every  day  out  of  order ;  our  work  must  be  to  take  them  to  pieces  by 
examination,  and  to  see  where  the  great  fault  is.  (G.  Stoinnoek.)  One  thing 
thou  lackest : — The  celebrated  preacher,  George  Whitfield,  made  it  a  custom  where- 
ever  he  went  to  speak  to  the  people  in  whose  houses  he  stayed  concerning  their  souls. 
He  used  to  travel  throughout  the  country  preaching  the  gospel,  and  was  brought 
into  communication  with  vast  numbers.     At  one  time  he  was  staying  in  the  house 

of  a  kind  and  amiable  man,  General  E ,  who  was  a  great  admirer  of  his  preaching. 

The  family  was  so  extremely  hospitable  and  kind  that,  though  he  saw  no  evidence 
of  vital  godliness  among  them,  Whitfield's  lips  seemed  sealed  to  all  but  the  genial 
courtesies  of  society,  and  he  omitted  his  ordinary  custom  on  such  occasions.  But 
when  he  went  up-stairs  to  bed  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  said  to  him,  "  O,  man  of  God, 
how  shalt  thou  be  clear  of  their  blood  if  thou  dost  not  warn  them  ?  "  His  own 
feelings  would  have  led  him  to  be  dlent ;  and  the  tempter  suggested,  **  They  are  so 
amiable  and  good ;  how  can  yon  speak  to  them  aboat  sin  ?  Besides,  you  have 
preached  the  gospel  to-day  in  their  hearing ;  surely  that  is  enough."  There  was  a 
struggle  in  his  mind,  which  he  would  fain  have  decided  by  continuing  silent, 
especially  as  so  much  kindness  had  been  received.    Bat  God  would  not  let  him 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  x, 

sleep  that  night.  The  voice  of  conscience  said,  "  This  very  kindness  should  appeal 
to  your  gratitude  not  to  be  silent.  It  is  your  duty  to  speak — to  warn  them.*'  Early 
in  the  morning,  before  going  away,  Whitfield  took  his  diamond  ring  from  his  finger, 
and  wrote  on  the  pane  in  the  window  these  words :  *•  One  thing  thou  lackest."  He 
was  no  sooner  gone  than  the  master  of  the  house  said,  "  I  will  go  up  and  look  into 
the  room  where  this  holy  man  slept,"  for  he  had  an  almost  superstitious  reverence 
for  him.  The  first  thing  that  caught  his  attention  when  entering  the  room  was  the 
writing  on  the  glass.  Its  meaning  flashed  across  his  mind.  He  stood  and  wept. 
He  then  went  to  the  door  and  caUed  his  wife.  On  looking  at  the  writing  she  burst 
into  tears,  and  said :  ♦'  I  thought  he  was  unhappy.  There  seemed  to  be  something 
■  in  his  mind.  I  knew  he  was  in  trouble  about  us,  that  we  were  not  converted.  I 
had  been  hoping  he  would  speak  to  us."  The  husband  said,  "  By  God's  grace,  then, 
^xe  will  seek  that  '  one  thing '  we  lack."  He  called  his  famUy  together,  three 
aanghters  and  a  grown-up  son.  The  text  was  pointed  out.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
blessed  it  to  their  souls.  The  whole  family  knelt  in  prayer,  confessed  their  sins, 
and  found  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  The  narrator  of  this  incident  says:  ''I 
luiow  the  story  to  be  a  fact,  a  friend  of  mine  in  New  York  having  in  his  congrega- 
lion  a  young  woman,  the  daughter  of  one  of  the  three  daughters  who  knelt  with  her 
family  in  Whitfield's  room,  and  she  treasures  up  the  pane  of  glass  as  a  precious 
relic."      {Christian  Globe.)  A  good  natural  cJiaracter  without  religion :— The 

dahlia  would  surely  be  a  very  empress  among  flowers  if  it  had  but  perfume  equal 
to  its  beauty,  even  the  rose  might  need  to  look  to  her  sovereignty.  Florists  have 
tried  all  their  arts  to  scent  this  lovely  child  of  autumn,  but  in  vain,  no  fragance  can 
be  developed  or  produced ;  God  has  denied  the  boon,  and  human  skill  cannot  devise 
it.  The  reflecting  mind  will  be  reminded  of  those  admirable  characters  which  are 
occasionally  met  with,  in  which  everything  of  good  repute  and  comely  aspect  may 
be  seen,  but  true  religion,  that  sweet  ethereal  perfume  of  grace,  is  wanting ;  if  they 
had  but  love  to  God,  what  lovely  beings  they  would  be,  the  best  of  the  saints  would 
not  excel  them,  and  yet  that  fragrant  grace  they  do  not  seek,  and  after  every  effort 
we  make  for  their  conversion,  they  remain  content  without  the  one  thing  which  is 
needful  for  their  perfection.  Oh,  that  the  Lord  would  impart  to  them  the  mystic 
sweetness  of  His  grace  by  the  Holy  Spirit  I  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  One  thing  lacking  ;— 
I.  That  no  outward  respect,  however  exact,  or  however  long,  to  God's  law,  can  give 
us  a  title  to  eternal  life.  1.  It  is  not  enough  that  there  should  be  wishes  after 
heaven :  and  even  a  willingness  to  do  many  things,  so  that  we  may  obtain  the 
crown  and  the  glory  which  are  there  laid  up.  2.  It  is  not  enough  either  that  our 
hearts  should  be  tender,  and  our  temper  amiable.  For  after  all,  delightful  as  is  this 
frame  of  mind  to  those  among  whom  we  live,  and  on  whom  it  sends  forth  a  per- 
petual  sunshine,  it  is  the  gift  of  God  to  us.  It  is  not  our  own,  but  His,  and,  in 
many  cases,  we  can  no  more  help  this  sweetness  of  disposition,  than  the  flowers  of 
the  field  can  help  being  fragrant  and  beautiful.  It  is  their  nature  to  be  sweet,  and 
ours,  perhaps,  to  be  amiable.  But  is  it  any  excuse  for  not  loving  God,  that  we  love 
everything  and  everybody  else  ?  3.  It  is  a  mere  wilful  murdering  of  our  own  souls, 
to  whisper  to  ourselves  that  the  greatness  of  a  sacrifice  will  plead  before  God  in 
excuse  for  our  not  making  it.  Had  the  young  man  in  the  text  prayed  to  God  to 
help  him  in  his  strait,  to  conquer  his  carnal  weakness,  to  support  his  fainting 
courage,  and  to  gird  up  his  soul  with  a  triumphant  faith,  he  would  have  prevailed ; 
and  so  shall  we.  Faith,  faith,  faith— here  is  the  want  I  {J.  Garbett.)  Sermon 
to  the  young : — 1.  What  is  thebb  in  the  scAiiB  that  is  rAVOUBABLs  to  you  7  1. 
There  are  many  of  the  qualities  of  youth  which  are  favourable  to  religion,  and  as 
such  Christ  regards  them.  Courage,  warm  affections,  retentive  memory.  These 
favourable  to  piety.  2.  There  are  words  in  Scripture  that  are  peculiarly  favourable 
to  you,  and  should  inspire  your  hope.  "  They  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me." 
3.  So  the  works  of  God— His  works  of  grace— confirm  those  things  that  are  said, 
so  earnestly,  to  encourage  you.  Perhaps  not  one  in  forty  is  convinced  after  the  age 
of  forty.  II.  What  is  there  in  the  scale  that  is  against  you  ?  "  One  thing  thou 
lackest,"  &c.  1.  All  that  is  merely  amiable  and  hopeful  in  nature  is  not  grace,  nor  is 
it  at  all  really  valuable  in  God's  sight.  It  is  not  holiness.  2.  All  those  things  that 
may  appear  amiable  and  lovely,  if  they  are  not  sanctified  by  religion,  wiU  become 
hostile.  The  readiness  of  mind  that  receives  a  report  may  render  your  mind  the  store- 
house of  all  impurity.  3.  That  if  the  grace  of  God  prevent  not,  all  the  promises  of 
youth  may  perish  in  everlasting  despair.  Now  let  me  entreat  you  to  take  the  fol- 
lowing counsels.  1.  Never  think  you  are  too  young  to  be  converted,  and  forgiven, 
and  saved.      2,  Never  take  up  with  anything  shoit  of  true  religion.      3.  Never  be 


CHAF.  X.1  ST,  MARK,  411 

satisfied  with  having  religion — seek  to  abound  in  it.  4.  Let  me  remind  you  that 
for  this  purpose  you  should  study  your  own  easily  besetting  sin,  especially  the  sins 
of  your  youth.  6.  For  this  purpose  form  a  rule,  lay  down  a  plan  for  life,  laying  out 
every  day  as  it  ought  to  be  spent,  and  as  you  will  wish  you  had  spent  it  when  you  come 
to  die  ;  for  this  purpose  read  daily  the  Holy  Scriptures — consult  aged  and  experienced 
Christians,  and  ask  them  how  they  would  advise  you  to  conduct  yourself  before  God. 
6.  Lastly,  seek  to  live  not  for  yourselves,  but  to  live  usefully  as  well  as  safely.  {J. 
Bennettf  D.D.)  ChrisVi  answer : — Now  we  come  to  Christ's  answer,  and  there  take 
notice.  First :  Of  the  admonition  of  his  defect :  "  Jesus  said  unto  him,  One  thing 
thou  lackest."  1.  Because  it  would  have  been  tedious  to  convince  him  of  all  his 
defects,  Christ  would  take  the  more  compendious  way,  and  insist  but  upon  onetbing, 
which  was  enough  to  show  that  he  was  not  perfect,  as  he  vainly  dreamed.  If  a  man 
brag  that  he  is  able  to  pay  one  hundred  pounds,  you  convince  him  of  his  penury 
when  you  press  him  to  pay  one  penny,  and  he  cannot.  2.  This  one  thing  was  sure, 
and  would  strike  home ;  for  our  Lord  knew  his  heart,  and  therefore  was  resolved  to 
touch  his  privy  sore,  and  doth  propose  such  a  precept  as  would  cross  his  darling 
sin ;  and  therefore  he  would  only  come  with  one  thing,  which  would  try  him  to  th^? 
purpose.  8.  That  one  thing  which  he  lacked  was  the  main  thing,  the  principal 
thing  of  the  law,  which  was  loving  God  above  all  things ;  the  sum  of  the  law  is 
to  love  God  above  all,  and  our  neighbours  as  ourselves.  4.  JBecause  the  young  man 
erred  out  of  ignorance,  Christ  would  not  deal  roughly  with  him,  or  by  way  of 
sharp  reproof;  He  doth  not  rate  him.  (1)  We  learn — That  proud  shiners 
must  not  be  soothed  up  in  their  self-conceit,  but  convinced  of  their  defects.  (2) 
That  the  way  to  convince  them  is  by  representing  their  principal  and  chief  faults, 
some  one  sin ;  as  Christ  dealt  with  this  young  man :  and  so  He  deals  with  the 
woman  of  Samaria,  convincing  her  of  her  sin.  (3)  The  more  our  failings  strike 
deep  upon  the  main  articles  of  our  obedience  to  God,  the  greater  our  conviction, 
and  the  more  sense  we  should  have  of  our  condition  before  God.  Secondly : 
We  come  to  Christ's  precept,  command,  and  injunction.  First:  "Go  thy  way, 
sell  whatsoever  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor,  and  thou  shalt  have  treasure 
in  heaven."  Not  applicable  to  all,  in  all  circumstances.  But  yet  still  in  some 
cases  we  are  to  forsake  all.  1.  When  God  by  His  providence  reduceth  us  to  a 
poor  condition.  2.  When  we  cannot  obey  any  particular  precept  of  God  without 
danger  of  being  undone  by  it.  The  reasons  why  we  must  do  so.  (1)  God  hath  an 
absolute  right  to  all  that  we  have  by  His  own  eminency  and  prerogative.  (2)  Be- 
cause it  is  impossible  we  should  be  Christians,  if  we  come  not  to  Christ  with  this 
mind  and  resolution  to  forsake  all  for  our  duty  to  Him  (Luke  xiv.  33).  (T.  Manton, 
D.D.)  One  defect  fatal: — But  is  it  right  to  make  such  destinies  turn  upon  a 
single  point  ?  That  depends  on  the  point.  In  other  relations  one  thing  may  bring 
ruin.  At  a  crisis  in  worldly  interests,  one  wrong  step  may  lead  to  remediless 
disaster.  One  error  in  trade  may  make  you  bankrupt ;  one  medicine  in  sickness 
may  give  the  turn  to  your  life ;  for  the  lack  of  one  anchor  a  vessel  is  lost.  In 
religion,  how  may  *♦  one  thing "  keep  a  soul  from  heaven  ?  If  there  is  a  deter- 
mined, persistent  unwillingness  to  be  saved,  that  would  seem  suflficient,  would  it 
not  ?  Well,  that  is  the  "  one  thing  "  referred  to  by  Christ.  And,  furthermore,  it 
is  some  "one  thing  **  which  makes  the  unwillingness.  The  ruler  loved  his  great 
possessions  more  than  he  loved  his  soul.  But  the  "one  thing"  may  take  many 
forms.  It  may  be  one  appetite,  one  ambition,  one  companionship,  one  pleasure. 
Every  one  is  called  to  choose  between  one  set  of  influences  that  helps  religion, 
and  some  other  set  which  hinders.  {T,  J,  Holmes.)  Sell  whatsoever  thou 
hast.  A  severe  test: — It  is  not  raw  recruits  and  beardless  boys  that  hold 
the  front  of  battle.  These  are  not  the  stormers  they  throw  into  the  fiery 
breach.  Where  the  bullets  fly  the  thickest,  and  the  carnage  is  the  fiercest,  the 
ground  is  held  by  veterans,  men  inured  to  war,  the  flash  of  steel  and  the  roar  of 
cannon ;  on  whose  grim  faces  calm  determination  sits,  with  scars  and  medals  on 
their  breasts.  The  post  of  danger  is  assigned  to  veterans.  Heavy  burdens  are 
laid  on  the  backs,  not  of  boys,  but  of  grown  men.  It  were  little  else  than  murder 
to  bid  a  youth,  who  had  just  left  his  mother's  side,  nor  ever  had  his  foot  before  on 
a  deck,  climb  the  shrouds  and  reef  the  topsails  in  a  storm,  when  the  mast  bends  to 
the  breaking,  and  the  ship  reels  in  the  trough  of  the  sea.  That  were  not  common- 
sense  ;  and  what  man,  who  loved  his  son,  and  had  either  sense  or  consideration, 
would  put  a  tender  youth  to  bo  terrible  a  trial  ?  It  is  said  here,  "  Jesus,  beholding 
him,  loved  him  "  ;  and  if  He  loved  this  young  ruler,  why  did  Ho  put  him  to  a  trial 
that,  I  venture  to  say,  would  test  the  faith,  not  of  a  young  Christian,  but  of  the 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

oldest  and  most  mature  Christian  here  ?  Why  did  He,  so  to  speak,  send  this  boy 
to  the  Tery  front  of  the  battle,  the  thickest  of  the  fight  ?  Doing  so,  I  confess  that, 
for  myself,  I  am  not  much  astonished  at  the  result.  At  first  sight,  at  least,  I 
wonder  less  at  this  youth  shrinking  back,  than  I  wonder  at  our  Lord  bidding  him 
go  forward.  Let  the  best  Christian  here  put  himself  for  a  moment  in  this  youth's 
circumstances.  Think  how  you  would  feel  now,  were  you  called  upon  to-day  to 
give  np  all  the  earnings  of  a  lifetime,  to  part  with  some  ancestral  property — the 
dear  old  house,  and  the  old  trees,  and  the  scenes  of  your  boyhood,  your  possession, 
fortune,  estate,  rank — to  leave  all,  to  become  a  beggar,  and  follow  the  fortunes 
of  a  man  so  poor  Himself  that  He  often  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head.  I  doubt 
that  would  be  a  burden  under  which  the  oldest  Christian  would  stagger.  I  suspect 
that  would  try  the  faith  of  the  best  man  here.  And  if  any  of  yon  are  disposed  to 
look  with  scorn  rather  than  sympathy  on  this  poor  young  man,  I  am  not  of 
your  number ;  and  I  would  ask  you  to  think  how  you  would  have  done,  and  how 
erect  yon  would  have  stood,  under  the  same  trial.  The  question  occurs,  then. 
Why  did  our  Lord  put  this  youth  to  such  a  trial  ?  Was  it  done  to  repel  him  ?  No ; 
it  was  done  to  draw  him.  It  was  not  done  to  quench  the  smoking  flax;  but  to  blow 
it,  as  it  were,  by  what  seemed  an  adverse  wind,  into  a  burning  flame.  It  was  done 
Idndly,  discreetly,  mercifully.  By  this  step  Christ  intended  to  make  that  man 
know  what  he  was  ;  to  make  him  see  that  he  was  not  what  he  seemed  to  others 
and  to  himself.  This  test  was  apphed  to  convince  him  practically  of  what  it  was 
not  possible,  perhaps,  to  convince  him  theoretically — that  there  was  one  thing 
he  lacked,  and  that  (so  to  say)  the  one  thing  needful.  {T.  Guthriey  D.D.) 
I.  Christ-following  involves  self-abnegation.  Ton  cannot  have  a  little  of  Christ, 
and  a  little  of  self.  All  or  none.  II.  Christ-following  must  be  the  expression  of 
the  soul's  supreme  love.  You  must  not  make  Christ  a  mere  convenience.  IH. 
Christ-following  means  self-giving.  Christ  was  the  Giver,  and  men  are  like  Him 
in  proportion  as  they  give.  Giving  is  not  yet  understood  as  a  test  of  discipleship. 
Giving  is  understood  as  a  patronage,  but  not  as  a  self-sacrifice.  Giving  means 
different  things  to  different  people.  There  are  men  who  give  a  thousand  guineas  at 
once,  yet  is  their  gift  without  value.  If  certain  rich  merchants,  whose  purses  are 
always  accessible,  would  but  utter  two  sentences  distinctly  in  favour  of  Christ  as 
their  personal  Saviour,  that  would  be  worth  more  to  the  Christian  cause  than  all 
the  gold  they  lavish  on  it.  {J»  Parker^  D.D.)  Consecration  of  all  to  Christ : — 
Commentators  stumble  over  the  difi&culty  of  this  command.  But  it  came  to  others, 
and  they  stood  the  test.  It  came  to  Peter,  and  James,  and  John,  and  Andrew, 
when  Christ  bade  them  leave  all  to  follow  Him,  to  become  fishers  of  men.  It 
came  to  Paul  when  Christ  bade  him  crucify  his  pride,  and  go  into  Damascus,  and 
take  his  instructions  from  one  of  the  despised  and  persecuted  Christians,  who  would 
tell  him  what  he  should  do.  It  came  to  Luther  when  Christ  bade  him  forsake  the 
church  of  his  fathers  and  of  his  childhood;  to  Coligny,  when  Christ  bade  him 
abandon  wife,  and  home,  and  peace ;  to  William  of  Orange ;  to  the  Puritans ;  to 
John  Howard ;  to  David  Livingstone.  In  one  form  or  another  it  comes  to  every 
Christian;  for  to  every  would-be  Christian  the  Master  says,  "Give  up  your  property, 
your  home,  your  life  itself,  and  take  them  back  as  Mine,  and  use  them  for  Me  in 
nsing  them  for  your  fellowmen."  He  who  cannot—does  not — do  this,  is  no 
Christian.  He  can  do  nought  but  go  away  sorrowful :  in  this  hfe,  if  he  is  keen  of 
conscience ;  in  the  life  to  come,  if  a  false  education  has  lulled  his  conscience  into 
nneasy  slumber,  but  slumber  so  deep  that  only  the  judgment  day  can  awaken  it. 
{Lyman  Abbots  D.D.)  How  to  treat  wealth: — When  King  Henry  asked  the  Duke 
of  Alva  if  he  had  observed  the  eclipses  happening  that  year,  he  replied,  "  I  have  so 
much  business  upon  earth,  that  I  have  no  leisure  to  look  up  to  heaven."  So  it  is 
with  those  who  entangle  themselves  with  the  riches  and  pleasures  of  this  world. 
There  is  only  one  way  in  which  we  can  make  them  helps  instead  of  hindrances. 
As  an  old  writer  remarks,  "  If  we  place  a  chest  of  gold  or  treasures  upon  our  backs, 
it  weighs  us  down  to  the  earth  ;  but  if  we  stand  upon  it,  we  are  raised  higher.  So 
if  our  possessions  are  placed  above  us,  they  will  surely  keep  our  souls  grovelling 
earthward ;  but  if  we  place  them  under  our  feet,  they  will  hft  us  nearer  to  God 
and  heaven."  {Anon.)  Apostolic  poverty : — ♦•  Once  I  was  staying  as  a  boy  in  a 
bishop's  house,  and  there  was  dug  up  the  brass  plate  from  the  tomb  of  one  of  hia 
predecessors,  and  I  have  never  forgotten  the  inscription  that  was  on  it.  It  was 
this :  ♦  Stay,  passer  by  1  See  and  smile  at  the  palace  of  a  bishop.  The  grave  is 
the  palace  they  must  aU  dwell  in  soon.'  Some  of  the  best  bishops  who  ever  lived 
have  been  housed  in  log  huts,  and  lived  in  apostolic  poverty,  and  on  hard  fare.    S« 


X.]  ST,  MARK,  413 

did  St.  Augostihe,  the  sainted  Bishop  of  Hippo.  *  Do  not  give  me  rich  robes,'  he 
said  to  his  people ;  '  they  do  not  become  &  humble  bishop.  When  a  rich  robe  is 
given  to  me  I  feel  myself  obliged  to  sell  it  to  help  the  poor.'  In  former  centuries 
the  first  thing  a  bishop  did,  as  a  rule,  was  to  part  with  all  his  earthly  possessions ; 
And,  while  the  heathen  historian  of  the  fourth  century  praises  them,  he  speaks 
with  angry  scorn  of  the  pompous  and  worldly  prelates  of  other  sees."  {Archdeacon 
Farrar.)  Giving  to  the  poor: — The  Dry  Goods  Chronicle  says  that  the  late  Mr. 
Nathaniel  Fwipley  Cobb,  of  Boston,  was  generous-liearted  and  conscientious  in  the 
highest  degree.  In  November,  1821,  he  drew  up  the  following  document : — "  By 
the  grace  of  God,  I  will  never  be  worth  more  than  50,000  dollars.  By  the  grace  of 
God,  I  will  give  one-fourth  of  the  net  profits  of  my  business  to  charitable  and 
religious  uses.  If  I  am  ever  worth  20,000  dollars,  I  will  give  one-half  my  net  profits, 
and  if  I  am  ever  worth  30,000  dollars,  I  will  give  three-fourths,  and  the  whole  after 
my  fiftieth  thousand.  So  help  me  God,  or  give  to  a  more  faithful  steward  and  set 
me  aside.  November,  1821."  He  adhered  to  this  covenant,  it  is  stated,  with  the 
strictest  fidelity.  Give  God  thy  Jieart,  and  He  will  reward  thee  with  heaven: — 
From  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  then,  to  which  the  text  particularly  refers,  ii 
is  evident  this  precept  implies  that  religion  requires  the  renunciation  of  every 
object  that  engrosses  the  mind  to  the  exclusion  of  God  and  duty.  Nothing  short 
of  a  complete  sacrifice  can  fulfil  the  design  of  the  gospel.  This  is  a  sublime  view 
of  the  spirit  and  design  of  religion.  It  is  not  enough  to  submit  to  some  privations, 
and  endure  some  trials  in  performing  its  duties ;  religion  is  so  authoritative  and 
dogmatic,  that  it  must  govern  the  will.  The  precept  of  the  text  requires  the 
avaricious  to  sacrifice  their  wealth  ;  but  their  wealth  is  to  be  applied  to  useful  and 
charitable  purposes.  The  sacrifice  is  enjoined  as  an  indispensable  proof  of  sincerity. 
Keligion  casts  contempt  on  all  sublunary  things ;  still  it  commands  its  disciples  to 
make  the  world's  goods  subservient  to  generous  uses ;  it  does  not  mortify  one  vice 
to  afford  scope  for  another.  The  wealth  which  the  rich  man  in  the  text  possessed, 
was  to  be  distributed  among  the  poor ;  and  nothing  can  illustrate  more  strikingly 
the  kind  and  charitable  spirit  of  the  gospel  than  the  importance  which  is  thus 
given  to  the  claims  of  the  destitute.  In  thus  illustrating  the  benevolent  spirit  of 
the  gospel,  it  is  necessary  to  remark,  that  the  text  furnishes  no  argument  for  profuse 
and  in^scriminate  charity.  There  is  a  danger  that  our  charity  should  not  only 
be  indiscriminate,  but  profuse.  In  enjoining  these  arduous  and  important  duties, 
religion  proposes  a  rich  and  splendid  reward.  The  figurative  language  of  the  text 
was  evidently  suggested  by  the  nature  of  the  precept  it  contains.  The  individual 
to  whom  the  text  was  addressed  was  commanded  to  renounce  his  wealth ;  and  the 
reward  promised  to  his  obedience  was  a  treasure  hereafter,  infinitely  more  valuable 
than  all  the  treastu'es  of  the  earth.  We  are  accustomed  to  say  of  any  object  on 
which  we  set  a  high  value,  that  it  is  a  treasure.  We  say  of  knowledge,  that  it  is  a 
treasure ;  we  say  of  fame,  that  it  is  a  treasure ;  we  say  of  affection,  that  it  is  a 
treasure — a  rich,  inestimable  treasure  ;  and  in  all  these  cases,  the  phrase  expresses 
the  importance  we  attach  to  the  object  to  which  it  is  applied.  In  its  application 
to  the  reward  which  religion  reveals,  it  is  comparatively  weak.  Nothing  that  men 
value  on  earth  can  convey  any  adequate  idea  of  the  splendour  and  value  of  that 
reward ;  for  it  includes  in  it  all  of  dignity,  enjoyment,  and  purity,  of  which  our 
nature  is  capable — the  greatest  honour,  the  most  exquisite  happiness,  and  the  most 
exalted  virtue.  It  is  a  treasure  of  knowledge ;  for  there  all  Divine  truth  will  be 
revealed  to  the  soul;  doubts,  errors,  and  prejudices,  will  be  dispelled.  It  is  a 
treasure  of  affection;  for  there  all  distrust,  jealousy,  and  fear,  will  be  removed; 
God's  generous,  unchanging  love,  will  enrich  and  soothe  the  glorified  spirit ;  a  pure 
and  glowing  sympathy  will  unite  soul  to  soul ;  the  sweetest  thoughts,  and  the  most 
confiding  tenderness,  will  be  cherished  and  enjoyed ;  no  suspicions  will  ever  darken 
or  chill  file  current  of  love,  as  it  flows  deep  and  warm  from  the  rich  fountains  of 
the  soul ;  and  in  communion  with  God,  in  the  society  of  angels,  and  amidst  the 
bright  company  of  the  redeemed,  all  the  delights  of  lofty  devoted  affection  will 
yield  perpetual  ravishment.  It  is  a  treasure  of  joy;  for  there  every  hope  will  be 
realized,  and  every  promise  fulfilled ;  care,  trouble,  and  grief,  will  be  for  ever  gone; 
all  the  meanness,  sufferings,  and  bereavements  of  hfe,  will  have  passed  away;  bright 
scenes  will  call  up  the  fairest  images,  and  awaken  into  life  the  most  animating 
thoughts ;  and  exercises  of  lofty  meditation,  and  the  purest  devotion,  will  fill  the 
soul  with  transporting  ecstasy.  It  is  a  treasure  of  glory ;  for  there  the  soul  will  be 
raised  to  its  native  rank,  adorned  with  unfading  righteousness,  invested  with  the 
honour  of  a  mighty  triumph,  associated  with  angels,  and  welcomed  by  Christ ;  then 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha». 

the  white  robes  will  be  pnt  on,  the  crown  and  victory's  palm  ;  then  the  song  of 
praise  will  smile  from  the  innumerable  host ;  all  the  glory  of  God,  all  the  glory  of 
angels,  and  all  the  glory  of  the  redeemed,  will  meet  in  one  resplendent  blaze,  and 
fill  the  vast  heaven  with  its  inconceivable  brightness.  Oh,  what  a  treasure!  valuable 
as  the  soul,  lasting  as  eternity  I  Riches  will  decay  and  perish ;  tbe  proud  palace  will 
crumble  into  ruins,  and  its  stately  chambers  be  lonely  and  silent ;  the  charms  of  beauty 
will  fade,  the  trophies  of  ambition  moulder  into  dust;  and  all  the  gaiety,  pomp,  and 
Rjilendour  of  life,  will  vanish  like  a  dream,  and  leave  not  a  wrack  behind.  (A.  Bennie.) 
Take  up  the  cross. — TJie  Christian  taking  up  his  cross : — I.  The  Christian's  cross 
— What  is  it?  It  is  something  painful  and  humiliating.  No  death  inflicted  by  the 
Eomans  was  so  agonizing  as  crucifixion ;  no  death  so  ignominious.  The  Christian's 
cross  is  that  portion  of  pain  and  humiliation  and  suffering  which  the  wisdom  of 
God  may  allot  to  him  in  the  way  to  heaven.  It  comes  on  us  in  different  forms ; 
the  world's  hatred  ;  domestic  sickness ;  in  himself.  One  man's  cross  is  visible — all 
can  see  it ;  another  man's  may  be  secret.  Our  crosses  may  be  changed ;  my 
neighbour's  to-day  may  be  mine  to-morrow.  II.  But  we  ark  to  take  up  oub 
CROSS.  What  is  meant  by  this  ?  1.  There  are  some  things  it  seems  to  forbid.  We 
are  not  to  make  crosses  for  ourselves ;  this  is  to  invade  God's  province.  He  will 
order  our  auctions  for  us.  We  are  to  take  those  He  lays  down,  not  to  aggravate 
or  increase  them.  Not  to  wish  to  choose  what  crosses  the  Lord  shall  make  for  us. 
We  often  want  other  men's  crosses  just  as  we  want  their  comforts.  We  must  let 
the  Physician  prescribe  for  our  disease.  The  cross  sent  is  that  from  which  we 
would  most  like  to  be  exempt ;  the  man  of  strong  affections  is  wounded  in  his 
affections.  The  text  forbids  stepping  out  of  the  way  to  avoid  our  cross ;  this  is 
choosing  sin  rather  than  affliction.  God  can  meet  us  with  crosses  in  sinful  ways  as  well 
as  in  righteous,  heavier  than  those  turned  from.  2.  We  have  seen  what  this  taking 
up  of  the  cross  forbids :  let  us  now  see  what  it  enjoins.  To  take  our  cross  as  Christ 
did  His.  We  are  to  carry  it  patiently — voluntarily — cheerfully.  III.  Look  now  at 
THE  COMMAND  OUR  LoRD  GIVES  US  TO  DO  THIS.  "  Comc,  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow 
Me."  Be  careful  not  to  mistake.  Suffering  cannot  expiate  sin.  Christ  has  done  this 
completely.  What  will  you  say  when  you  lay  your  cross  down  at  the  gate  of  heaven  T 
(C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Following  Christ : — There  are  many  special  reasons  why  Christ 
should  be  propounded  to  us  as  our  pattern  and  example  whom  we  should  f  oUow  and  imi~ 
tate.  1.  Because  He  is  a  pattern  of  holiness  set  up  in  our  nature.  2.  Because  there  are 
many  advantages  by  this  pattern  in  our  nature ;  as  (1)  our  pattern  is  more  complete 
than  if  God  had  been  our  pattern.  There  are  some  graces  wherein  we  cannot  be 
said  to  resemble  God,  and  therefore  we  must  look  for  a  pattern  elsewhere,  as 
humility,  faith,  fear,  hope,  reverence,  obedience ;  none  of  these  things  are  in  God, 
for  He  hath  no  superior,  and  these  things  imply  inferiority  and  subjection.  (2)  It 
is  an  engaging  pattern.  We  are  engaged  by  the  rule  of  our  obedience,  but  much  more 
by  Christ's  example.  (3)  It  is  an  encouraging  pattern,  partly  as  there  is  an  efficacy 
in  this  pattern ;  as  with  the  gospel  or  law  of  Christ,  there  goeth  along  the  minis- 
tration of  the  Spirit,  so  also  with  the  consideration  of  His  example.  Use.  To 
persuade  us  to  follow  Christ.  1.  Our  general  profession  of  being  Christians  doth 
oblige  us  to  be  hke  Him ;  head  and  members  should  be  all  of  one  piece — oh  1  what 
an  affront  is  it  to  Christ  to  put  His  name  to  the  picture  and  image  of  the  devil.  2. 
We  shall  never  be  like  Him  in  glory  unless  we  be  hke  Him  in  grace  also  (Eomans 
viii.  29).  But  wherein  should  we  follow  Christ?  1.  In  His  self-denial  (2  Cor.  viii.  9). 
2.  In  Hig  humility  (St.  Matt.  xx.  28).  3,  In  His  love  to  the  saints  (St.  Johnxiii.  34). 
4.  In  His  usefulness  and  profi  ableness,  and  of  this  the  whole  Gospel  is  a  narrative 
and  history.  6.  In  His  piety  towards  God.  6.  In  His  spirituality  and  heavenly- 
mindedness.  7.  In  His  obedience  to  His  mean  earthly  parents.  8.  In  the  sweet- 
ness and  beauty  of  His  conversation,  and  yet  in  a  strict  and  winning  way.  9.  In 
the  holiness  and  purity  of  His  life.  10.  In  His  wonderful  patience  and  meekness. 
11.  In  love  to  His  enemies  (Rom.  v.  10).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  And  went  away 
grieved. — Christ  left  sorrowfully : — I.  Hb  went  awat  from  Christ,  though  good. 
Alas  that  the  moral  should  eve  be  separate  from  the  holy.  II.  Hb  thought  so 
HIGHLY  OP  Christ,  and  yet  wb  t  away  from  Him.  III.  He  had  pure  and  lofty 
aspirations,  and  yet  he  went  away.  Contentment  in  good  is  a  sign  of  a  poor  aim, 
rather  than  a  great  achievement.  His  aspiration  was  weak,  though  pure.  He  was 
only  partially  prepared  to  do  *'  t  e  good  thing."  He  had  imagined  performance 
rather  than  sacrifice.  He  looked  to  receive  a  lesson,  not  to  enter  a  school.  Like 
one  who  would  gladly  gain  healt  and  soundness  at  any  cost,  and  then  shrinks 
from  the  medicine  and  the  knife-  like  one  who  feels  quite  strong  and  vigorous  ob 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  MARK.  415 

the  couch,  and  falls  when  he  attempts  to  walk.  Men  may  be  dissatisfied  with  their 
Bpiritual  condition.  This  comes  to  naught.  They  want  instruction  to  go  on ;  they 
receive  instructions  to  begin  anew.  Instead  of  being  improved,  they  have  to  he 
detected.  IV.  He  went  away,  though  Jesus  loved  him.  Jesus  always  is  pleased 
with  justice,  goodness,  truth  ;  as  far  as  they  go,  they  are  like  Himself,  and  give  Him 
joy.  Jesus  loved  him  :  but  He  loved  something  more.  Jesus  may  love  you,  and 
yet  you  may  not  attain  to  His  righteousness  and  blessing.  There  is  a  point  beyond 
which  He  cannot  go  with  sinners,  beyond  which  it  would  not  be  saving  men,  but 
forcing  machines.  V.  He  went  away,  AiiTHOUOH  he  did  it  bobbowfully.  The 
sadness  of  loss — of  disappointment — of  self-conviction.  "  Ah  I  He  is  right."  The 
Badness  of  shame.  *•  He  has  seen  through  me — I  have  left  Him.**  But  the  sorrow  did 
not  prevent  his  going.  Jesus  may  but  baptize  you  for  the  dead.  You  may  die  and 
yet  mourn  the  loss  of  heaven.  There  are  special  times  when  we  may  be  said  to 
leave  Christ.  Such  a  time  is  that  of  deep  religious  conviction;  when  we  are 
obliged  by  outward  circumstances  to  take  a  stand.  In  leaving  Christ  we  leave  aU. 
Let  those  who  are  following  Him  "  cleave  to  Him  vrith  full  purpose  of  heart."  {A,  J, 
Morris.)  Man  good  in  the  lower  relationships  of  life^  lacking  in  the  higher  relation- 
ships : — So  is  it  often  still.  Man  is  in  ruins ;  but,  as  you  often  see  in  old  religioua 
houses,  the  part  devoted  to  godly  deeds  has  gone  to  utter  decay,  while  that  em. 
ployed  in  providing  for  the  lower  needs  of  man  is  yet  in  good  repair — though  the 
spirit  is  wholly  lost  to  God,  the  meaner  but  worthy  offices  of  life  are  well  discharged  ; 
and  while  the  saint  cannot  be  found,  the  man  of  the  family,  the  place  of  business, 
and  the  social  circle,  are  all  that  could  be  wished.  Christ  approved  this  ruler  in  the 
lower  relations  of  social  morality,  while  He  pronounced  him  essentially  defective  in 
the  higher ;  and  ♦•  he  went  away  "  from  Him  in  whom  all  morality  might  find  ita 
supplement  and  stimulus,  its  truest  end  and  source.    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  23-27.  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
Qod! — Wealth  a  fearful  snare  to  the  soul: — The  Scriptures  represent  wealth,  when 
used  aright,  as  a  distinguished  blessing.  It  may,  and  ought  to,  lead  men  nearer 
to  God,  instead  of  driving  them  far  from  Him.  I.  The  pride  of  life.  The 
Scriptures  speak  of  this  as  one  of  the  most  operative  causes  of  human  destruction. 
An  inordinate  and  unreasonable  self-esteem  excludes  God  from  the  heart.  II.  A 
STBONO  iMPBEssioN  OF  THEiB  PEBSONAL  INDEPENDENCE.  Though  men  are  abso- 
lutely dependent  on  God,  and  to  a  great  extent  on  one  another,  there  is  in  all  ft 
natural  feeling  of  independence.  Nor  will  it  be  denied  that  wealth  is  very  apt  to 
foster  this  unseemly  self-rehance,  and  this  haughty  contempt  of  God.  III.  Thsib 
ATTACHMENT  TO  THIS  WORLD.  There  is  DO  Toom  in  the  heart  for  God  where  it  is 
pre-occupied  by  the  world.  IV.  Theib  cases  and  peeplexities.  Wherever  you 
find  the  greatest  amount  of  secular  care  and  solicitude,  there,  rest  assured,  is  the 
greatest  danger  of  losing  the  soul.  V.  The  best  means  of  oeace  abe  babblt 
used  with  the  bich  and  affluent.  God  has  formed  no  purpose  to  save  any 
man  irrespective  of  the  appointed  means.  From  these  views  several  reflections 
may  naturally  arise.  1.  What  melancholy  evidence  does  this  subject  furnish  of 
the  strange  depravity  of  the  human  heart.  2.  Do  not  envy  the  rich.  3.  Our 
subject  then  admonishes  us  to  take  care  how  we  heap  up  riches.  4.  Our  subject 
affectionately  addresses  itself  to  the  rich.  Of  all  those  who  have  hope  towards 
God,  the  rich  are  most  in  danger  of  losing  the  savour  and  usefulness  of  piety,  and 
of  being  *♦  scarcely  saved."  And  that  your  riches  may  prove  a  blessing,  and  not 
a  curse,  "  set  not  your  hearts  upon  them,"  "  be  not  conformed  to  this  world," 
'•use  this  world  as  not  abusing  it,  for  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away." 
You  are  God's  stewards,  and  must  give  an  account  of  your  stewardship.  And  to 
the  rich  who  are  not  pious,  let  me  say,  is  there  not  fearful  reason  to  apprehend 
that  you  will  never  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  Everything  is  leagued  against 
you. '  5.  Let  me  say  to  all,  while  you  envy  not  the  affluent  study  to  do  them  good. 
{Gardiner  Spring,  D.D.)  Use  and  abuse  of  riches  ;— Kiches  neither  further  nor 
hinder  salvation  in  themselves,  but  as  they  are  used :  as  a  cipher  by  itself  is 
nothing,  but  a  figure  being  set  before  it,  it  inoreaseth  the  sum.  Wealth,  if  well 
used,  is  an  ornament,  an  encouragement  to  duty,  and  an  instrument  of  much  good. 
All  the  danger  lies  in  loving  these  things.  Have  them  we  may,  and  use  them  too, 
as  a  traveller  doth  his  staff,  to  help  him  the  sooner  to  his  journey's  end ;  but 
when  we  pass  away  our  hearts  to  them,  they  become  a  mischief.  .  .  .  Let  not, 
therefore,  the  bramble  be  king  :  let  not  earthly  things  bear  rule  over  thy  affections ; 
••  fire  will  arise  out  of  them,  that  will  consume  thy  cedars,"  and  emasculate  all  the 


il«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

powers  of  thy  soul,  as  they  did  Solomon's,  whose  wealth  did  him  more  hurt  than 
his  wisdom  good.  How  many  have  we  nowadays  who,  when  poor,  could  read, 
pray,  &c.,  but  who,  now  they  have  grown  rich,  resemble  the  moon,  which,  grown 
full,  gets  farthest  off  from  the  sun,  never  suffers  eclipse  but  then,  and  that  by 
earth's  interposition  1  Let  rich  men  therefore  take  heed  how  they  handle  their 
thorns:  let  them  gird  up  the  loins  of  their  minds,  lest  their  long  garments 
hinder  them  in  the  way  to  heaven ;  let  them  see  to  it,  that  they  be  not  tied  to  their 
abundance,  as  little  Lentulus  was  said  to  have  been  to  his  long  sword ;  that  they 
be  not  held  prisoners  in  those  golden  fetters,  as  the  king  of  Armenia  was  by 
Anthony,  and  so  sent  by  him  as  a  present  to  Cleopatra ;  lest  at  length  they  send 
their  mammon  of  unrighteousness,  as  Croesus  did  his  fetters,  for  a  present  to  the 
devil,  who  had  deluded  him  with  false  hopes  of  victoi^.  {John  Trapp.)  Wealth 
not  always  desirable  : — How  many  can  form  any  estimate  as  to  whether  it  is  best 
for  them  to  be  prosperous  or  not?  If  I  should  consult  the  wheat  growing  in 
spring  in  the  field  as  to  what  was  best  for  it,  the  wheat  would  say,  •*  Let  me  alone. 
Let  the  rain  feed  me.  Let  the  winds  gently  strengthen  me.  Let  me  grow  to  my 
full  height  and  size."  But  ah  1  the  land  on  which  that  wheat  is  sown  is  over-rich ; 
and  if  the  wheat  grows  to  its  full  height  and  size,  it  will  be  so  fat  and  heavy  that  it 
will  break,  and  fall  down,  and  be  lost.  So  the  farmer  turns  in  his  cattle,  and 
they  browse  the  wheat.  They  eat  it  down  to  the  ground.  And  by  and  by,  later, 
when  it  is  allowed  to  grow,  it  has  been  so  weakened  by  this  cruel  pasturage  that  it 
will  not  become  so  rank  as  to  break  down,  but  will  stand  erect,  and  carry  its  head 
up,  and  ripen  its  grain.  Many  men  will  bear  browsing.  They  get  too  fat,  and 
cannot  carry  themselves  upright  and  firm,  and  they  break  and  fall  down ;  and  the 
best  of  them  lies  in  the  ^rt ;  and  all  that  stands  up  is  straw  and  stubble.  .  .  . 
Who  knows  what  is  best  for  him  ?  Some  men  can  endure  prosperity,  and  some 
cannot ;  but  who  can  discriminate  between  them  ?  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  ^  Wealth 
genden  pride : — Who  almost  is  there  whose  heart  does  not  swell  with  his  bags  ? 
and  whose  thoughts  do  not  follow  the  proportions  of  his  condition?  What 
difference  has  been  seen  in  the  same  man  poor  and  preferred  ?  his  mind,  like  a 
mushroom,  has  shot  up  in  a  night ;  his  business  is  first  to  forget  himself,  and  then 
his  friends.  When  the  smi  shines,  then  the  peacock  displays  his  train.  (R. 
Souths  D.D.)  The  rich  should  grow  more  humble: — When  flowers  are  full  of 
heaven-descended  dews,  they  always  hang  their  heads ;  but  men  hold  theirs  the 
Iiigher,  the  more  they  receive— getting  proud  as  they  get  full,  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Riches  often  debase  the  character  .-—See  yonder  lake  I  The  bigger  the  stream  that 
runs  into  it — lying  so  beautiful  and  peaceful  in  the  bosom  of  the  shaggy  mountain 
—the  bigger  the  stream  it  discharges  to  water  the  plains,  and,  like  the  path  of  a 
Christian,  wend  its  bright  and  blissful  way  on  to  its  parent  sea.  But,  in  sad  con- 
trast with  that,  the  more  money  some  men  gain,  the  less  they  give ;  in  proportion 
aa  their  wealth  increases,  their  charities  diminish.  Have  we  not  met  it,  monmed 
over  it,  and  seen  how  a  man,  setting  his  heart  on  gold,  and  hasting  to  be  hob, 
came  to  resemble  a  vessel  with  a  narrow,  contracted  neck,  out  of  which  water 
iiows  less  freely  when  it  is  full  than  when  it  is  nearly  empty?  As  there  is 
is  a  law  in  physics  to  explain  that  fact,  there  is  a  law  in  morals  to  explain 
this.  So  long  as  a  man  has  no  hope  of  becoming  rich ;  so  long  as  he  has  enough  of 
bread  to  eat,  of  raiment  to  put  on,  of  health  and  strength  to  do  his  work  and  fight 
his  honest  way  on  in  the  world,  he  has  all  man  really  needs — having  that,  he  doeg 
not  set  his  heart  on  riches ;  he  is  a  noble,  unselfish,  generous,  large-hearted,  and, 
for  his  circumstances,  an  open-handed  man.  But  by  success  in  business  or  other- 
wise, let  a  fortune  come  within  his  reach,  and  he  clutches  at  it — grasps  it.  Then 
what  a  change  1  His  eye,  and  ear,  and  hand  close  ;  his  sympathies  grow  dull  and 
blunt ;  his  heart  contracts  and  petrifies.  Strange  to  say,  plenty  in  such  cases  feeds 
not  poverty  but  penuriousness ;  and  the  ambition  of  riches  opens  a  door  to  the 
meanest  avarice  (T.  Quthrie,  D.D.)  Uncertainty  of  riches ;— How  often  have 
I  thought  of  riches,  when,  intruding  on  their  lone  domain,  I  have  seen  a  covey  of 
wild  fowl,  from  the  reeds  of  the  lake  or  the  heather  of  the  hill-side,  rise  clamorons 
on  the  wing,  and  fly  away  I  Has  not  many  a  man  who  hasted  to  be  rich,  and 
made  gold  his  god,  hved  to  become  a  bankrupt,  and  die  a  beggar  1 — buried  among 
the  ruins  of  his  ambitious  schemes.  {Ibid.)  Wealth  involves  danger : — It  was 
as  much  as  we  could  do  to  keep  our  feet  upon  the  splendid  mosaic  floor  of  the 
Palace  Giovanelli,  at  Venice ;  we  found  no  such  difficulty  in  the  cottage  of  the 
poor  glass-blower  in  the  rear.  Is  it  one  of  the  advantages  of  wealth  to  have  one's 
abode  polished  till  all  comfort  vani^es,  and  the  very  floor  is  as  smooth  and 


.  Z.J  8T,  MARK.  417 

dangerous  as  a  sheet  of  ice,  or  is  this  merely  an  accidental  oiromnstanoe  typical 
of  the  dangers  of  abundance  ?  Observation  shows  us  that  there  is  a  fascination 
in  wealth  which  renders  it  extremely  di£&cult  for  the  possessors  of  it  to  maintain 
their  eqnihbrium ;  and  this  is  more  especially  the  case  where  money  is  suddenly 
acquired ;  then,  unless  grace  prevents,  pride,  affectation,  and  other  mean  vices 
stupify  the  brain  with  their  sickening  fumes,  and  he  who  was  respectable  in  poverty, 
becomes  despicable  in  prosperity.  Pride  may  lurk  under  a  tlureadbare  cloak,  but 
it  prefers  the  comely  broadcloth  of  the  merchant's  coat :  moths  will  eat  any  of  our 
garments,  but  they  seem  to  fly  first  to  the  costly  furs.  It  is  so  much  the  easier  for 
m&n  to  fall  when  walking  on  wealth's  sea  of  glass,  because  all  men  aid  them  to  do 
so.  Flatterers  haunt  not  cottages :  the  poor  may  hear  an  honest  word  from  his 
neighbour,  but  etiquette  forbids  that  the  rich  man  should  enjoy  the  like  privilege  ; 
for  is  it  not  a  maxim  in  Babylon,  that  rich  men  have  no  faults,  or  only  such  as  their 
money,  like  charity,  covereth  with  a  mantle  ?  What  man  can  help  slipping  when 
everybody  is  intent  upon  greasing  his  ways,  so  that  the  smallest  chance  of  standing 
may  be  denied  him  ?  The  world's  proverb  is,  *♦  God  help  the  poor,  for  the  rich  can 
help  themselves  " ;  but  to  our  mind,  it  is  just  the  rich  who  have  most  need  of 
heaven's  help.  Dives  in  scarlet  is  worse  oU  than  Lazarus  in  rags,  unless  Divine 
love  shall  uphold  him.  (C,  H.  Spurgeon.)  Riches  are  perilous  to  the  soul : — 
Christ  does  not  speak  of  an  impossibility,  but  of  the  difficulty  of  it  and  the  rare- 
ness of  it.  Job  unfolded  the  riddle,  and  got  through  the  needle's  eye  with  three 
thousand  camels.  But  it  is  hard  to  be  wealthy,  and  not  wanton :  too  often  are 
riches,  like  bird-lime,  hindering  the  soul  in  its  flight  towards  heaven.  {G.Swinnock.) 
The  snares  of  afflttence : — I.  The  snabss  of  affluencb.  1.  It  begets  on  inordinate 
love  of  pleasure.  2.  It  banishes  from  the  memory  all  considerations  of  God  and 
religion.    8.  It  produces  an  insensibility  to  the  attractions  of  the  gospel    II.  The 

PBACTXCAXi    BSFLECTIONS    THAT    ABB     SUGGESTBD     BT    THE    SNABES  OF  AFFLUBMCE.      1. 

Affluence  is  not  a  proof  of  a  state  of  grace.  2.  The  loss  of  wealth  may  be  a 
spiritual  gain.  8.  Both  religion  and  happiness  abound  most  in  the  middle  region, 
between  extreme  wealth  and  extreme  poverty.  4.  The  hope  of  heaven  should 
reconcile  us  to  present  hardship.  {Plans  of  Sermom.)  Ruined  by  riches: — Do 
not  be  over-anxious  about  riches.  Get  as  much  of  true  wisdom  and  goodness  as 
yon  can,  but  be  satisfied  with  a  very  moderate  portion  of  this  world's  good.  Biches 
may  prove  a  curse  as  well  as  a  blessing.  I  was  walking  through  an  orchard, 
looking  about  me,  when  I  saw  a  low  tree  laden  more  heavily  with  fruit  thtkn 
the  rest.  On  a  nearer  examination,  it  appeared  that  the  tree  had  been  dragged  to 
the  very  earth,  and  broken  by  the  weight  of  its  treasures.  ♦•  Oh  1 "  said  I,  gazing 
on  the  tree,  "  here  lies  one  who  has  been  ruined  by  his  riches."  In  another  part  of 
my  walk  I  came  up  with  a  shepherd,  who  was  lamenting  the  loss  of  a  sheep  that 
lay  mangled  and  dead  at  his  feet.  On  inquiry  about  the  matter,  he  told  me  that 
a  strange  dog  had  attacked  the  flock ;  that  the  rest  of  tiie  sheep  had  got  away 
through  a  hole  in  the  hedge,  but  that  the  ram  now  dead  had  more  wool  on  his 
back  than  the  rest,  and  the  thorns  of  the  hedge  held  him  fast  till  the  dog  had 
worried  him.  "  Here  is  another,"  said  I,  '♦  ruined  by  his  riches."  At  the  close  ol 
my  ramble  I  met  a  man  hobbling  along  on  two  wooden  legs,  leaning  on  two  sticks. 
" Tell  me,"  said  I,  *•  my  poor  fellow,  how  you  came  to  lose  your  legs?  "  •*  Why, 
sir,"  said  he,  '*  in  my  younger  days  I  was  a  soldier.  With  a  few  comrades  I  at- 
tached a  party  of  the  enemy,  and  overcame  them,  and  we  began  to  load  ourselves 
with  spoil.  My  comrades  were  satisfied  with  little,  but  I  burdened  myself  with  as 
much  as  I  could  carry.  We  were  pursued ;  my  companions  escaped,  but  I  was 
overtaken  and  so  cruelly  wounded  that  I  only  sived  my  life  afterwards  by  losing  my 
legs.  It  was  a  bad  affair,  sir;  but  it  is  too  late  to  repent  it  now."  "Ah,  friend," 
thought  I,  "  like  the  fruit  tree  and  the  mangled  sheep,  you  may  date  your  down- 
.fall  to  your  possessions.  It  was  your  riches  that  ruined  yoo."  When  I  see  so 
many  rich  people,  as  I  do,  oaring  so  much  for  their  bodies  and  so  little  for  their 
souls,  I  pity  them  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  and  sometimes  think  there  are  as 
many  ruined  by  riches  as  by  poverty.  "  They  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation 
and  a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  which  drown  men  in  destruc- 
tion and  perdition  "  (1  Timothy  vi.  9).  The  prayer  will  suit  you,  perhaps,  as  well 
as  it  does  me,  "  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches ;  feed  me  with  food  convenient 
for  me :  lest  I  be  full,  and  deny  Thee,  and  say,  Who  is  the  Lord  ?  or  lest  I  be  poor, 
and  steal,  and  take  the  name  of  my  God  in  vain  "  (Prov.  xxx.  8, 9).  (Old  Humphrey.) 
A  man  of  the  world : — The  Interpreter  takes  them  apart  again,  and  nas  them  first  in 
a  room  where  was  a  man  that  could  look  no  way  but  downwards,  with  a  muok^raka 

27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x, 

in  his  hand.  There  stood  also  One  over  his  head,  with  a  celestial  crown  in  Hia 
hand,  and  proffered  to  give  him  that  crown  for  his  muck-rake ;  but  the  man  did 
neither  look  up  nor  regard,  but  raked  to  himself  the  straws,  the  small  sticks,  and 
the  dust  of  the  floor.  Then  said  Christiana,  '♦  I  persuade  myself  that  I  know  some- 
what the  meaning  of  this  ;  for  this  is  a  figure  of  a  man  of  this  world ;  is  it  not, 
good  sir?"  "Thou  hast  said  the  right,"  said  the  Interpreter;  ''and  his  muck- 
rake doth  show  his  carnal  mind.  And  whereas  thou  seest  him  rather  give  heed  to 
rake  up  straws  and  sticks,  and  the  dust  of  the  floor,  than  to  what  He  says  that 
calls  to  him  from  above,  with  the  celestial  crown  in  His  hand,  it  is  to  show  that 
heaven  is  but  as  a  fable  to  some,  and  that  things  here  are  counted  the  only  things 
substantial.  Now,  whereas  it  was  also  showed  thee  that  the  man  could  look  no 
way  but  downwards,  it  is  to  let  thee  know  that  earthly  things,  when  they  are  with 
power  upon  men's  mind,  quite  carry  their  hearts  away  from  God."  Then  said 
Christiana,  '*  Oh,  deliver  me  from  this  muck-rake  I  *'  "That  prayer,"  said  the 
Interpreter,  "  has  lain  by  till  it  is  almost  rusty.  ♦  Give  me  not  riches  *  (Pro v.  xxx. 
8)  is  scarce  the  prayer  of  one  of  ten  thousand.  Straws  and  sticks  and  dust,  with 
most,  are  the  great  things  now  looked  after."  {John  Bunyan.)  A  man  in  danger 
through  riches : — As  a  Christian  man  was  passing  out  of  church  he  met  an  old 
acquaintance  whom  he  had  not  seen  for  several  years.  In  the  brief  interview  he 
seriously  said  to  him,  "  I  understand  that  you  are  in  great  danger."  The  remark 
was  heard  with  surprise.  The  friend  addressed  was  not  aware  of  any  danger,  and 
eagerly  inquired  what  was  meant.  The  answer  was,  "  I  have  been  informed  that 
you  are  getting  rich. "  Men  of  this  class  are  not  accustomed  to  suspect  danger 
from  such  a  cause.  They  see  none,  and  they  see  no  reason  why  others  shoidd. 
And  yet  they  are  in  peril ;  they  are  in  great  peril.  They  are  in  danger  of  making 
a  god  of  mammon  instead  of  the  living  God.  They  are  in  danger  of  seeking  to  lay 
up  their  treasures  on  the  earth  instead  of  in  heaven,  as  the  Saviour  exhorts  them 
to  do.  To  His  disciples  He  said,  "  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  that  a  rich  man  shall 
hardly  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  Paul  thus  wrote:  "  They  that  will 
be  rich  fall  into  temptation  and  a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts, 
which  drown  men  in  destruction  and  perdition."  Engrossed  in  worldly  cares : — 
We  keep  ourselves  in  such  a  continual  hurry  and  crowd  of  cares,  thoughts,  and 
employments  about  the  things  of  the  body,  that  we  can  find  little  time  to  be  alone, 
communing  with  our  own  hearts  about  our  great  concernments  in  eternity.  It  is 
with  many  of  us  as  it  was  with  Archimedes,  who  was  so  intent  upon  drawing  his 
mathematical  schemes,  that  though  all  the  city  was  in  alarm,  the  enemy  had 
taken  it  by  storm,  the  streets  filled  with  dead  bodies,  the  soldiers  come  into  his 
particular  house,  nay,  entered  his  very  study,  and  plucked  him  by  the  sleeve, 
before  he  took  any  notice  of  it.  Even  so,  many  men's  hearts  are  so  profoundly 
immersed  and  drowned  in  earthly  cares,  thoughts,  projects,  or  pleasures,  that  death 
must  come  to  their  very  houses,  yea,  and  pull  them  by  the  sleeve,  and  tell  them 
its  errand,  before  they  will  begin  to  awake,  and  come  to  a  serious  consideration  of 
things  more  important.  (Flavel.)  Sanctified  wealth  is  a  blessing,  not  a  hindrance, 
to  its  possessor : — Two  men  have  recently  passed  away,  whose  history,  as  one  turns 
from  their  graves  to  sum  it  up,  is  at  once  a  poem  and  a  benediction.  They  were 
both  men  of  large  wealth  and  of  inherited  culture.  They  were  both  men  with  an 
intense  love  of  life,  and  most  human  enjoyment  of  its  pleasures.  There  have  not 
lived  in  our  generation  two  men  who  were  more  thoroughly  alive,  to  their  very 
finger  ends,  or  who  were  more  conspicuously  exposed  to  the  manifold  dangers  of 
thepossession  of  great  wealth.  And  yet  who,  in  thinking  of  them,  ever  thought  of 
their  money  ?  And  when  they  died  the  other  day,  bereaving  the  two  chief  cities  of 
our  land  with  a  sense  of  personal  loss,  who  asked  concerning  either  of  them  so 
beggarly  a  question  as,  **  What  did  he  leave  ?  "  What  did  they  leave  P  They  left 
«aoh  of  them  the  fragrance  of  a  good  name,  which  is  as  ointment  poured  out. 
They  left  their  image  stamped  in  the  hearts  of  thousands  of  men,  women,  and 
children,  whose  lives  they  had  brightened  and  ennobled  and  blessed.  Above  all, 
they  left  a  lesson  to  you  and  me  of  what  men  can  be  and  do  who  say  to  wealth 
and  the  world,  "  Ton  are  my  servant,  not  my  master !  1  will  not  be  slothful  in 
business ;  I  wUl  be  fervent  in  spirit,  but  it  shall  be  always  •  serving  the  Lord.'  " 
They  have  taught  two  great  communities  that  it  is  possible  to  be  rich  and  not 
•elfish,  to  have  wealth  and  not  be  enslaved  by  it,  to  use  the  world  as  not  abusing 
it.  And  to-day,  William  Welsh,  in  the  Indian  wigwam  in  Niobrara,  among  the 
boys  of  Girard  College  with  whom  he  spent  a  part  of  every  Sunday  of  his  life,  in 
the  homes  of  the  working  men  of  Frankf ord  whom  he  taught  to  love  him  as  a 


.  X.]  ST.  MARK.  419 

brother-man; — and  Theodore  Roosevelt  in  the  newsboy's  lodging-honse,  in  the 
cripple's  hospital,  in  the  heart  of  the  little  ItaUan  flower-girl  who  brought  hex 
offering  of  grateful  love  to  his  door  the  day  he  died,  have  left  behind  them  monu- 
ments the  like  of  which  mere  wealth  could  never  rear,  and  the  proudest  achieve- 
ments of  human  genius  never  hope  to  win.  They  will  be  remembered  when  the 
men  of  great  fortune  who  have  filled  the  brief  hour  with  the  fame  of  their  millions 
shall  have  vanished  into  merited  oblivion.  They  may  have  been  poorer  than  these, 
but  the  world  is  richer  because  they  were  in  it,  and  the  influence  of  their  large- 
hearted  and  unselfish  lives  will  be  owned  and  honoured  when  the  mere  hoarders 
of  the  day  have  ceased  to  have  any  slightest  interest  or  influence  among  men,  save 
as  subjects  of  the  somewhat  curious  and  somewhat  contemptuous  study  of  the  moral 
anatomist  {Bishop  H.  C,  Potter.)  Eight  use  of  wealth  .-—Wealth  is  dangerous; 
and  the  worshipper  of  mammon,  whether  he  dwell  in  a  palace  or  a  hovel,  will  find 
it  equally  hard  to  secure  an  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  wealth,  like 
other  dangerous  powers,  may  be  subjected  to  a  wise  discipline  and  a  resolute 
control.  Lightning  is  dangerous,  but  men  have  mastered  it  and  made  it  do  their 
bidding.  Master  your  meaner  lust  for  gain,  and  then  make  it  do  your  bidding  in  the 
service  of  your  heavenly  Master.  It  is  not  how  many  bonds  you  have  in  a  bank  vault, 
or  how  much  plate  on  your  side-board,  that  God  looks  to  see,  but  how  miiny  lives 
have  been  brightened  and  how  many  sorrows  have  been  healed  by  the  gifts  of  your 
love.  The  cause  of  Christ,  the  cause  of  truth,  the  cause  of  humanity,  need  your 
gifts.  But  none  of  them  need  them  half  as  much  as  you  yourself  need  the  blessed  and 
ennobling  education  of  being  permitted  to  give  them.  {Ibid.)  Christians  ladened 
with  toealth: — Crossing  the  Col  D'Obbia,  the  mule  laden  with  our  luggage  sank  in 
the  snow,  nor  could  it  be  recovered,  until  its  load  was  removed ;  then,  but  not  till 
then,  it  scrambled  out  of  tlie  hole  it  had  made,  and  pursued  its  journey.  It 
reminded  us  of  mariners  casting  out  the  lading  into  the  sea  to  save  the  vessel,  and 
we  were  led  to  meditate  on  the  dangers  of  Christians  heavily  laden  with  earthly 
possessions,  and  the  wise  way  in  which  the  gracious  Father  unloads  them  by  their 
losses,  that  they  may  be  enabled  to  pursue  their  journey  to  heaven,  and  no 
longer  sink  in  the  snow  of  camal-mindedness.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  In  an 
interesting  article  in  the  Expositor  (1st  series,  iii.  375),  Canon  Farrar  mentions 
that  some  modem  travellers  in  the  East  state  that  houses  are  sometimes  pro- 
vided with  smaller  gates  in  or  by  the  side  of  larger  ones,  and  tiiat  the  former  are 
ealled  Es  tumm  el  kayHt,  the  hole,  or  eye,  of  the  needle.  He  also  gives  the  following 
extract  from  the  letter  of  a  correspondent  :—**  In  the  summer  of  1835,  when 
travelling  in  the  western  part  of  Africa  ^orocco),  I  took  up  my  abode  for  a  time 
in  the  house  of  a  Jew  named  Bendelak.  The  house  was  built  quadrangular,  having 
an  open  court,  in  which  beautiful  plants  were  flourishing,  and  where  the  family  eat 
in  the  heat  of  the  day  beneath  a  large  awning.  High  double  gates  faced  the 
streets,  not  unlike  our  coach-house  doors,  in  one  of  which  was  a  smaller  door 
which  served  as  an  entrance  to  the  court.  Being  seated  one  day  in  a  balcony  of 
the  upper  chamber,  I  suddenly  heard  the  exclamation,  *  Shut  the  needle's  eye ;  shut 
the  eye.'  Looking  down,  I  saw  a  stray  camel  trying  to  push  through  the  little 
open  doorway.  Shortly  afterwards  I  questioned  the  master  of  tiie  house  (a  man 
whom  I  can  never  recall  to  mind  without  feelings  of  the  utmost  respect),  and 
learnt  from  him  that  the  double  doors  were  always  called  *  the  needle,'  and  the 
little  door  *  the  needle's  eye,'  which  explanation,  of  course,  reminded  me  forcibly 
of  the  well-known  passage  in  St.  Matthew.  Bendelak  assured  me  that  no  camel 
would  push  through  *the  eye'  unless  driven  by  stick  or  hunger,  and  always 
without  any  back-load.  If  the  allusion  of  Christ  be  to  this,  it  forcibly  teaches 
the  lesson  that  a  rich  man  must  strive  and  humble  himself,  must  be  willing  to 
leave  behind  the  load  of  his  riches,  must  hunger  for  the  bread  of  heaven,  or 
he  can  never  pass  through  the  narrow  way  that  leadeth  unto  Ufe  eternal." 
TJie  danger  of  riches: — 1.  In  the  first  place  comes,  very  naturally,  the  idea  of  the 
young,  that  riches,  in  and  of  themselves,  create  happiness.  A  man's  happlDcss 
depends  upon  what  he  is.  If  his  feelings  are  right,  and  he  is  capable  of  beiug 
h&PP7i  riches  will  make  him  happy ;  but  if  these  conditions  do  not  exist,  then 
riches  will  not  make  him  happy.  2.  Then  comes  the  idea  that  riches  are  a 
•abstitute  for  character  in  the  eyes  of  men.  There  is  an  impression,  if  a  man 
is  only  rich,  he  can  do  what  he  has  a  mind  to,  and  that  the  world  will  accept  his 
riches  in  lien  of  excellence.  8.  Passing  to  another  great  peril,  riches  and  the 
it  of  them  are  apt  to  absorb  the  life  and  time  f  men  to  a  degr  e  that  shall 
them  to  mere  external  things,  so  that  they  have  yexy  little  leisure  and  less 


pnrraiti 
nani68s 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [obay.  X. 

disposition  for  Belf-cnltore.    4.  Biches  are  apt  to  lift  a  mac  away  from  sympathy 
with  common  humanity ;  and  that  is  always  a  sign  of,  and  a  step  toward,  deteriora- 
tion.   6.  Then  there  is  a  great  tendency  in  riches  to  pamper  a  man's  pride.   (H.  W, 
Beecher.)        Riches  do  not  of  themselves  create  happiness : — ^Now,  it  is  very  tme 
that  riches  are  a  power  which,  if  rightly  appUed  or  used,  may  create  happiness ; 
bnt  it  is  not  true  that  riches,  in  and  of  themselves,  ever  do  make  men  happy ;  and 
this  indiscriminate  notion,  as  an  ideal  on  which  they  base  their  life,  will  be  fatal  to 
iheir  happiness.    If  a  man  is  prepared  for  happiness  riches  can  make  him  happy. 
A  man  is  an  organ.    I  do  not  care  if  Beethoven  is  put  before  an  organ  that  has 
not  a  pipe,  and  whose  bellows  is  split,  I  do  not  care  who  plays  on  such  an  instru- 
ment as  that,  you  will  not  get  any  music.   And  if  the  organ  were  perfect,  and  there 
was  nobody  that  knew  how  to  play,  you  would  not  get  any  music  either.    Where 
you  get  music  you  must  have  two  things  :  a  good  instrument  and  a  good  performer 
on  it.    Now  happiness,  conducted  on  a  great  scale  in  life,  requires  that  there  should 
be  a  performer — and  riches  are  the  performer ;  but  what  does  it  play  on  T  An  empty 
case,  a  wind-bag,  a  leathern  pocket,  an  old  iron  chest,  a  rusty  old  miser.    Do  riches 
bring  out  anything  in  the  way  of  happiness  ?    Of   themselves,  no,  they  do  not. 
The  rich  are  not  the  happy  folks  in  the  world,  as  a  rule.    A  great  many  of  them 
are  the  most  happy  people  on  the  globe;  a  man  who  has  riches,  and  is  otherwise 
rightly  attuned,  certainly  can  command  as  much  happiness  as  any  other  man  on 
the  face  of  the  earth ;  nobody  can  be  any  happier  than  he  has  the  capacity  of  being. 
A  man  is  happy  according  as  he  can  generate  sensibility  of  brain  and  nerve.     Some 
men  generate  only  five  pounds,  some  generate  fifteen  pounds,  and  some  generate 
twenty-five  pounds.    So  some  men  can  be  happy  a  little  bit,  while  others  can  be 
happy  a  great  deal.   Some  men  are  not  bigger  than  a  daisy,  and  they  can  have  only  so 
much  sunlight  as  can  get  into  their  disc.    A  man  cannot  be  happy  in  one  spot  and 
miserable  everywhere    else,  any  more   than    he   can   have  the  toothache  and 
feel  well  everywhere  else  but  in  his  tooth.      Happiness  must  have  harmony 
in  it.    Where  there  is  not  harmony  there  is  no  happiness.    If  two-thirds  of 
a  man's  nature  is  morbid  and  wrong,   the    other    third  is   not  going   to  rule 
them   down,   and   compel    happiness.      I   think   that    when    a  man    has  good 
manners,  and  is  a  gentleman,  good  clothes  are  very  becoming  and  comfortable  to 
him,  and  pleasant  to  everybody  else ;  but  good  clothes  do  not  make  a  gentleman, 
any  more  than  riches  make  a  man  happy.     (Ibid.)        Man  more  than  money: — I 
do  not  object  to  a  man's  having  a  good  deal  of  property ;  I  do  not  object  to  his 
having  beautiful  grounds,  and  making  them  shine  Uke  a  garden  of  Eden,  if  he 
can ;  I  do  not  object  to  his  building  himself  a  magnificent  mansion,  and  storing  it 
with  whatever  art  can  give ;  I  admire  the  grounds,  I  admire  the  house,  I  admire 
tlie  furniture,  and  I  justify  them.     But  now  let  me  see  the  man.     When  a  man  has 
risen  in  wealth  so  that  he  can  have  fine  grounds,  a  fine  house  and  fine  furniture,  he 
ought  to  have  something  even  grander  in  himself ;  and  yet  how  many  men  are 
there  that  are  like  a  monkey  in  an  oriental  palace,  men  that  are  ignorant,  empty, 
narrow,  conceited,  poverty-stricken  inside,  but  that  outside  glow  like  a  rainbow! 
How  m  any  men  there  are  that  make  the  power  of  money  in  their  hands  simply 
picturesque,  grotesque  !     (Ibid).        Who  then  can  be  saved  7 — The  disciples  wonder- 
ing at  the  difficulties  of  salvation  : — Salvation  1  What  so  desirable  and  necessary? 
Why  so  difficult  to  obtain.    I.  You  know  what  salvation  is.    Deliverence  from 
condemnation,  and  placing  us,  pure  and  happy,  in  God's  kingdom.    We  must  take 
care  that  we  do  not  mistake  as  to  where  the  difficulty  lies.    It  is  not  in  God,  not  in 
Ch:ist;  willing  and  able  "to  save  to  the  uttermost."     1.  There  is  the  difficulty 
arising  out  of  the  pride  of  our  hearts — the  difficulty  of  falling  in  with  God's  way 
of  saving  us.    Salvation  of  grace  troubles  us.    2.  There  is  the  difficulty  of  com- 
plying with  God's  terms  of  salvation.    We  trace  this  to  unbelief.     The  tidings  of 
the  gospel  seem  too  good  to  be  credited.    3.  The  difficulty  of  our  seeking,  or  even 
accepting,  such  a  salvation  as  God  offers.     It  is  a  deliverance  from  the  love  and 
power  of  sin.    We  are  by  nature  unholy,  salvation  crucifies  all  that  nature  dehghts 
in ;  hence  difficulty.    II.  What   the   disciples   felt   at  the  prospect  of  thbsb 
niFFicDLTiBS,     1.  Wouder.    "  They  were  astonished  out  of  measure."    There  was 
a  time  when  we  considered  salvation  easy ;   God  was  regarded  as  merciful.      No 
sooner  did  the  Holy  Spirit  make  us  alive  to  our  spiritual  welfare,  than  wonder 
came  as  described  in  the  text.    They  wondered  at  the  patience  of  God,  at  His 
amazing  grace,  and  the  mountain  of  difficulties  which  lies  between  them  and 
heaven.    2.  The  other  feeling  we  discover  in  these  men  is  despair — •*  Who  then  can 
be  saved  ? "    We  must  learn  to  look  beyond  our  spiritual  difficulties,  if  ever  wt 


OBA».  X.]  8T.  MARK,  4S1 

would  be  oarried  over  them.  HI.  Oub  Lobd's  jxtdoment  ooNOBBNiNa  thm  mattbb. 
**  You  are  right,"  He  says,  "  up  to  a  certain  ^oint ;  beyond  that  you  are  altogether 
wrong."  1.  They  were  partially  right.  It  is  difficult  for  a  man  to  overcome  the 
difficulties  between  him  and  heaven.  He  is  weak  as  well  as  sinful ;  must  despair  of  his 
own  power  to  attain  salvation.  Self-sufficiency,  like  self -righteousness,  insurmount. 
able  obstacle  in  our  journey  heavenwards.  2.  But  these  disciples  were  also  wrong. 
He  tells  them  that  salvation  was  never  intended  to  be  man's  work ;  but  God's. 
What  omnipotence  undertakes  can  be  carried  through.  3.  How  compassionately 
He  says  this — ♦*  You  have  felt  My  power,  difficulties  have  vanished."  Apply  :  1. 
Some  of  you  know  nothing  at  all  of  the  difficulties  of  salvation.  3.  Others  of 
you,  like  those  disciples,  have  just  begun  to  see  the  difficulties  that  lie  before  you. 
3.  A  few  of  you  have  been  long  accustomed  to  spiritual  difficulties.  (C.  Bradley.) 
The  difficuUie»  of  salvation: — I.  Let  us  notice  more  particularly  some  or  thb 
DnncDLTiBs  IN  thb  way  of  salvation.  1.  The  truths  to  be  believed  are  some  of 
them  very  mysterious.  2.  The  sacrifices  to  be  made  are  also  in  some  degree  pain- 
ful. 3.  The  dispositions  to  be  exercised  are  such  as  are  contrary  to  the  natural 
bias  of  our  depraved  hearts.  4.  The  duties  to  be  performed.  5.  The  trouble  and 
danger  to  which  religion  exposes  its  professors.  U.  Attempt  to  answeb  the 
inquiby — "  Who  then  can  be  saved?  "  Certainly  not  those  who  neglect  the  means 
of  salvation  ;  nor  those  who  prefer  other  things  before  it ;  nor  those  who  think  to 
attain  it  in  any  other  way  than  God  has  appointed.  1.  Such  shall  be  saved  as  are 
appointed  to  it.  2.  Those  shall  be  saved  who  are  truly  desirous  of  it.  3.  Those 
who  come  to  Christ  for  salvation  shall  be  sure  to  obtain  it.  4.  Such  as  endure  to 
the  end  shall  be  saved.    (B.  Beddome^  M.A,) 

Vers.  28-31.  Lo,  we  have  left  all,  and  followed  Thee. — Sacrifice  and  reward : — 
Clirist  had  pity  for  this  young  man.  He  saw  his  soul  visited  by  the  dream  of  a  more 
perfect  life ;  then  the  dissolving  of  the  dream  and  the  return  to  commonplace.  It 
were  impossible  not  to  pity  his  after  life,  for  he  could  never  be  the  same  again. 
*'  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  God."  The  disci- 
ples felt  the  difficulty.  Then  Peter  said,  "  We  have  left  all,"  &c.  "  It  was  very  ill  done 
of  them,"  we  say,  "  very  selfishly  thought,  and  no  good  could  come  of  it."  That  is 
the  hard  way  in  which  we  speak,  but  we  forget,  when  we  ask  this  fine  spirituality  from 
men  who  are  beginning  the  higher  life,  that  we  are  asking  more  than  human  nature 
can  bear.  We  are  asking  of  the  student  the  self-denial  of  the  scholar.  Christ  did  not 
ask  this ;  He  was  tender  to  spiritual  childhood.  He  was  satisfied  with  the  seeds  of 
affection.  He  knew  that  if  love  was  there  it  would  grow,  and  that  as  their  mind 
advanced  and  their  love  changed  to  higher  love,  the  reward  desired  would  also 
change.      I.  The  sacbifice  aseed  fob  hebe  was  to  give  up  the  whole  wobld 

AND    its    goods  ;   TO  GIVE    THEM    TO   THE    POOB  AND    TO  FOLLOW   ChEIST.      Is  HO  OHO  a 

Christian  who  does  not  utterly  make  it  ?  Christ  always  asked  for  sacrifice  of  life,  of 
self,  for  God.  That  is  the  principle.  In  this  case  a  special  form  of  the  life  was 
asked  for,  and  for  a  special  reason.  The  sacrifice  of  wealth  was  the  special  form. 
The  special  reason  was  this.  Christ  was  the  founder  of  a  new  method  of  religion ; 
He  wanted  missionaries  to  propagate  it.  No  one  could  think  of  Paul  or  Xavier  or 
Henry  Martyn  with  great  possessions,  without  a  smile  at  the  incongruity.  Apostolio 
work  could  not  be  done  by  a  man  with  ten  thousand  a  year.  The  special  form  of 
the  demand  was  motived  by  special  circumstances.  Such  a  demand  was  not  made 
of  all  rich  men ;  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  universal  character  of  His  religion, 
which  was  to  enter  into  the  life  of  all  classes,  rich  and  poor,  as  a  spirit.  It 
would  shut  out  all  rich  men  from  Christianity;  it  would  upturn  society  for  no 
good.  In  fifty  years  all  the  industrious  and  intelligent  would  be  rich  again.  It  would 
be  wrong ;  for  wealth  has  its  duties,  its  own  ideal  of  life.  The  wealthy  are  bound 
to  keep  their  wealth,  and  to  use  it,  but  in  obedience  to  the  spirit  of  sacrifice.  IL 
All  this  kind  of  tale  comes  fbom  persons  being  foolish  enough  to  bind  a  spiri- 
tual IDEA  INTO  ONE  SPECIAL  FORM.  The  Spirit  of  Sacrifice  may  express  itself  in  a 
thousand  -different  ways,  even  in  opposite  ways  in  different  men,  It  may  be  the 
giving  up  of  wealth  in  one  man,  the  taking  up  its  duties  in  another.  One  man  may 
sacrifice  by  leaving  those  whom  he  loves,  another  by  remaining  at  home.  Take  the 
principle ;  do  not  limit  it  to  one  meaning.  That  is  one  characteristic  of  the  idea  of 
sacrifice.  It  cannot  be  specialized.  In  one  point  the  special  demand  made  on  the 
rich  man  is  in  accord  with  the  whole  idea  of  sacrifice ;  it  is  in  its  absoluteness.  It 
asks  us  to  give  up  all  our  selfish  life.  "  It  is  an  impossible  demand,"  say  these 
persons.    It  was  original,  and  Christ  knew  it.  It  did  not  say,  like  the  moral  law — this 


4M  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

4o  and  yon  shall  live,  and  yon  can  do  it.  It  did  say  **  This  ideal  life  I  set  before  yon 
is  far  beyond  mere  oonformity  with  law.  It  is  perfection.  You  shall  not  live  by 
doing  it  completely,  but  by  loving  it  and  labouring  towards  it.  It  will  transcend 
eternal  endeavour,  and  thus  secure  eternal  progress.  The  morality  of  the  law  is 
measurable,  it  stops  at  a  certain  point.  The  righteousness  I  put  before  you  is 
immeasurable,  infinite  as  God."  It  was  a  higher  method  than  that  of  the  moralist. 
It  is  orUy  by  loving  and  following  illimitable  ideas  that  man  grows  great.  Their 
impossibility  is  Uieir  highest  virtue,  and  awakens  the  highest  virtue ;  they  kindle 
unfading  aspiration.  It  is  better  for  man  to  live  by  than  the  standard  of  im- 
morality. I  now  turn  to  the  question  of  reward  as  illustrated  by  the  answer  of 
Christ.  It  is  the  custom  now  to  say  that  we  are  to  live  the  high  life  without  a 
•ingle  hope  of  future  reward ;  to  hope  for  it  is  to  set  religion  on  a  selfish  basis. 
But  there  is  no  selfishness  in  the  doctrine  of  rewards  offered  by  Christ.  His 
rewards  are  naturally  connected  with  the  acts,  following  from  them  and  contained 
in  them,  as  a  flower  follows  from,  and  is  contained  in,  the  seed.  The  word  fruits  is 
better  than  the  word  rewards.  The  fruits  are  multiplied  results.  To  live, 
hoping  for  the  reward  of  a  more  unselfish  life,  and  becoming  more  unselfish 
M  one  hopes  and  acts  for  such  a  life — is  it  not  too  ludicrous  to  call  that  a  selfish 
motive  ?  The  man  who  gave  up  lands,  houses,  (&c.,  received  them  tenfold ;  but  not  in 
ja  way  which  could  serve  his  selfishness ;  on  the  contrary,  in  a  way  which  increased 
f%e  spirit  of  a  larger  love.  It  lifted  above  the  narrow  circle  of  an  isolated  family 
into  union  with  mankind.  Eternal  life  is  another  reward  promised  by  Christ.  "  He 
that  beheveth  on  Me  hath  everlasting  life."  It  may  co-exist  with  what  the  world 
eaUs  misery — "  with  persecutions."  It  cannot  be  material  ease.  So  far,  the  element 
of  ease  or  happitfess  is  excluded.  Love  doubles  itself  by  loving.  Truth  in  us  in- 
creases by  being  true.  Mercy,  purity,  faith,  hope,  bring  forth  themselves  in  multi- 
plied abxmdance.  The  sum  of  them  all  is  a  life  with  God  and  in  God,  and  that  is 
eternal  life,  a  state  of  the  soul.  It  cannot  be  selfish,  it  puts  before  man  as  his  highest 
aim,  onion  with  God.  {S.  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  Love  consistent  with  reward : — And 
the  heart,  do  you  believe  that  it  can  reconcile  itself  to  your  cold  doctrine,  and  always 
love  without  hoping  for  return  ?  It  does  not  calculate,  doubtless,  but  it  believes 
that  its  flights  do  not  disappear  in  a  void.  What  is  more  disinterested  than  the 
love  of  a  mo^er  ?  Does  she  love  her  infant  in  order  to  be  recompensed  ?  Ah  ! 
though  one  should  come  and  tell  her  that  she  must  die  before  that  infant  can 
respond  to  her  affection  and  reward  her  by  a  word,  will  she  love  it  less,  will  she  use 
the  less  on  its  behalf  all  that  remains  to  her  of  energy  and  of  life  ?  Are  there  not 
•very  day  and  in  aU  classes  those  martyrs  of  maternal  love  7  And  yet  will  you 
accuse  a  mother  of  loving  less  because,  looking  towards  the  future,  she  dreams  with 
tremors  of  joy  of  the  day  when  her  infant's  look  will  respond  to  her  look,  when  its 
heart  will  understand  her,  and  when  she  will  find  in  it  her  strength  and  her 
recompense?  Her  recompense,  I  have  said.  .  .  .  Well,  be  consistent.  Call  her 
mercenary,  accuse  her  of  devoting  herself  to  her  task  through  self-interest,  drag 
her  to  the  tribunal  of  the  human  conscience,  and,  if  she  comes  away  from  it  con- 
demned, you  shall  drag  there  the  Christian  who  seeks  his  joy  and  his  wages  in  the 
love  of  God,  who  finds  his  true  Hfe  there,  and  who  thirsts  for  immortality,  because 
he  thirsts  for  an  eternal  love.  {E.  Bersier^  D,D.)  Following  Christ : — I.  What 
ZB  INVOLVED  IN  BBiMO  A  TRUE  FOLLOWEB  OF  Ghbist  ?  1.  Partaking  of  His  spiritual 
nature — being  bom  again.  2.  Besting  upon  the  infinite  merit  of  His  atonement  as 
the  only  ground  of  acceptance  with  God.  8.  Sitting  at  His  feet  as  a  humble  learner. 
n.  What  abb  the  distinguishino  chabacteeistics  of  the  followeb  of  Chbist  ?  1. 
Willingne.'s.  2.  Humility.  3.  Constancy,  4.  Intimacy.  Not  as  Peter,  who 
followed  afar  off.  6.  Eiclusiveness— Jesus  only.  III.  What  abe  the  bewabds  of 
THE  FOiiLowEB  OF  Ghbist  7  1.  Souship.  2.  Constant  access  to  God.  3.  The 
presence  of  Christ.  4.  Protection  in  danger.  6.  Light  in  darkness.  6.  Salvation 
here  and  glory  hereafter.  {Anon.)  Go<Vs  mode  of  recompensing  telf-sacrifice : — 
The  man  who  renounces  temporal  advantages  for  Christ's  sake,  is  rewarded  in  kind 
as  follows.  1.  He  has  communion  with  God  and  His  consolations,  which  are  better 
than  all  he  has  given  up ;  as  Caleacius,  that  Italian  marquis  who  left  all  for  Christ, 
avowed  them ;  and  as  Paulinus  Nolanus,  when  his  city  was  taken  by  the  barbariaus, 
prayed  thus  to  God,  *'  Lord,  let  me  not  be  troubled  at  the  loss  of  my  gold  and  silver, 
for  Thou  art  all  in  all  to  me."  Communion  wit  Jesus  Christ  is  heaven  before- 
hand,  the  anticipation  of  glory,  2.  God  often  gives  His  suffering  servants  here  such 
supplies  of  their  outward  losses,  in  raising  them  u  other  friends  and  means,  as  do 
abundantly  outweigh  what  they  have  parted  with.    David  was  driven  from  his  wife  \ 


.  z.]  ST.  MARK.  439 

but  gained,  in  Jonathan,  a  friend  whose  love  was  beyond  that  of  women.  So 
thoagh  Naomi  lost  her  hnsband  and  children,  Boaz,  Buth,  and  Obed  became  to  her 
instead  of  all.  The  apostles  left  their  houses  and  household  stuff  to  follow  Christ, 
but  then  they  had  the  houses  of  all  godly  people  open  to  them,  and  free  for  them, 
and  happy  was  that  Ljdia  who  could  entertain  them ;  so  that,  haying  nothing,  they 
yet  possessed  all  things.  They  left  a  few  friends,  but  they  found  far  more  where- 
ever  they  came.  3.  God  commonly  exalts  His  people  to  the  contrary  good  to  that 
evil  they  suffer  for  Him ;  as  Joseph,  from  being  a  slave  became  a  ruler ;  as  Christ, 
who  was  judged  by  men,  is  Judge  of  all.  The  first  thing  that  Caius  did,  after  he 
came  to  the  empire,  was  to  prefer  Agrippa,  who  had  been  imprisoned  for  wishing 
him  emperor.  The  king  of  Poland  sent  Zelislaus,  his  general,  who  had  lost  hia 
hand  in  war,  a  golden  hand  instead  of  it.  God  is  far  more  liberal  to  those  who 
serve  and  suffer  for  Him.  Can  any  son  of  Jesse  do  for  us  as  He  can  P  {John  Trapp.) 
The  Lord's  reply  to  Peter  shows: — 1.  That  he  does  not  need  man's  work  in  the 
sense  that  He  must  pay  wages  for  it.  There  is  no  comparison  between  what  is 
given ;  an  hundredfold  will  be  returned.  2.  That  Christian  work  must  be  done  in 
the  spirit  of  devotion,  not  of  calculation.  Many  of  the  first  may  work  in  a  wrong 
spirit,  and  become  last.  3.  The  reward  may  not  come  in  this  life ;  the  work  is 
spiritual,  as  are  the  wages.  (T.  M.  Lindsay,  D.D.)  Reward  of  self-sacrifice  : — 
Jesus,  knowing  out  of  the  depth  of  His  own  experience  how  great  is  the  joy  of  self- 
sacrifice,  how  transcendently  superior  to  anything  else,  assures  them  that  they  will 
have  their  reward  both  here  and  hereafter.  Here,  in  a  vastly  intensified  apprecia- 
tion of  earthly  enjoyments,  finding  new  homes  and  new  friends  wherever  they  go, 
and  seeing  new  beauty  in  the  commonest  things — in  earth  and  air,  and  sky  and  sea. 
It  was  true  they  would  meet  with  persecutions,  but  these  would  not  mar  their 
happiness,  for  by  a  mysterious  law,  understood  by  those  alone  who  experi- 
enced them,  they  were  accompanied  by  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 
And  hereafter  they  would  receive  the  fullest  compensation,  an  eternal  weight  of 
glory  in  the  life  everlasting.  {H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  **My  Father's  wiW: — 
A  pious  old  man  was  one  day  walking  to  the  sanctuary  with  a  New  Testament  in 
his  hand,  when  a  friend  who  met  him  said,  "  Good-morning,  neighbour."  •♦  Ah ! 
Good-morning,"  repUed  he ;  "  I  am  reading  my  Father's  will  as  I  walk  along. " 
••  Well,  what  has  He  left  you ? "  said  his  friend.  "Why,  He  has  bequeathed  me  a 
hundredfold  more  in  this  life,  and,  in  the  world  to  come,  life  everlasting."  It  was 
a  word  in  season ;  his  Christian  friend  was  in  circumstances  of  affliction,  but  he 
went  home  comforted.  Things  to  come  are  yours : — Had  Queen  EUzabeth  fore- 
known, whilst  she  was  in  prison,  what  a  glorious  reign  she  would  have  for  forty-four 
years,  she  would  never  have  wished  herself  a  milk-maid.  So,  did  but  the  saints 
understand  what  great  things  abide  them  botii  here  and  hereafter,  they  would  bear 
anything  cheerfully.      {John  Trapp,) 

Ver.  32-34.  And  they  were  In  the  way  going  up  to  Jemsalem. — Christ  on  the 
road  to  the  cross : — Full  of  calm  resolve  Christ  comes  forth  to  die.  Behold  the 
little  company  on  the  steep  rocky  mountain  road  that  leads  up  from  Jericho  to 
Jerusalem ;  our  Lord  far  in  advance  of  His  followers,  with  a  fixed  purpose  stamped 
upon  His  face,  and  something  of  haste  in  His  stride,  and  that  in  EUs  whole 
demeanour  which  shed  a  strange  astonishment  and  awe  over  the  group  of  silent 
and  uncomprehending  disciples.  I.  Wb  have  herb  what,  roB  want  of  a  betteb 
NAME,  I  WOULD  CALL  THE  HEBoio  Chbist.  The  Ideal  Man  unites  in  Himself  what 
men  are  in  the  habit,  somewhat  superciliously,  of  calling  the  masculine  virtues,  as 
well  as  those  which  they  somewhat  contemptuously  designate  the  feminine.  He 
reads  to  us  the  lesson,  that  we  must  resist  and  persist,  whatever  stands  between  us 
and  our  goal.  The  most  tenacious  steel  is  the  most  flexible,  and  he  who  has  the 
most  fixed  and  definite  resolve  may  be  the  one  whose  heart  is  most  open  to  aU 
human  sympathies,  and  is  strong  with  the  almightincss  of  gentleness.  U.  The 
BEL»-8ACRiriciNG  Chbist.  Hastening  to  His  cross ;  surrendering  Himself  to  death. 
His  self-sacrifice  was  not  the  flinging  away  of  the  life  which  He  ought  to  have 
preserved,  nor  carelessness,  nor  the  fanaticism  of  a  martyr,  nor  the  enthusiasm  of 
a  hero  and  champion ;  but  the  voluntary  death  of  Him  who  of  His  own  will  became 
in  His  death  the  oblation  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  III.  The 
BHBiNEiNO  Christ.  May  not  part  of  the  reason  for  His  haste  have  been  that 
instinct  which  we  all  have,  when  some  inevitable  grief  or  pain  lies  before  us,  to  get 
it  over  soon,  and  to  abbreviate  the  moments  that  He  between  us  and  it  ?  (See  Luke 
xii.  50 ;  John  xiii.  27.)    In  Christ  this  natural  instinct  never  became  a  desire  ox 


iU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [cha».  I. 

pnrpoBe.    It  had  bo  mnch  power  over  Him  as  to  make  Him  march  a  little  faster  ta 
the  cross,  bnt  it  never  made  Him  turn  from  it.    IV.  Thk  lonely  Ghbist.  X7n- 
appreciated  aims ;  unshared  purposes ;  misunderstood  sorrow ;  solitude  of  death — 
all  this  He  bore,  that  no  human  soul,  living  or  dying,  might  ever  be  lonely  any 
more.     (-4.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  Saviour**  alacrity  to  reach  the  end  of  Hi* 
course : — A  lowly  band  of  travellers  journeying  towards  Jerusalem.     Already  they 
are  within  sight  of  the  hills  that  encompass  the  capital.     One  of  the  company  oat- 
strips  the  rest.     His  countenance  is  lit  up  with  joyous  expression,  like  that  which 
glows  on  the  face  of  one  who,  after  long  absence,  is  again  drawing  near  to  hi» 
father's  house.     It  is  Christ ;  and  He  is  going  up  to  Jerusalem  to  expiate  a  world's 
guilt  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.    Sorrows  such  as  have  never  yet  filled  the  breast 
of  man  await  Him  there ;  and  least  of  all  is  it  ignorance  of  what  is  before  Him, 
which  makes  Him  in  haste  to  press  forward.    What  was  it  that  prompted  Him  to 
such  eagerness?    He  designed  to  teach  by  action  (1)  a  doctrine  for  His  disciples  to 
learn,  viz.,  the  necessity  of  His  suffering,  and  suffering  alone.    In  the  work  on 
which  He  was  now  entering,  no  man  could  be  associated  with  Him.    He  must  go 
before.     (2)  An  example  for  them  to  follow.    If  He  goes  first,  they  come  next.    By 
His  alacrity  He  would  teach  them  how  noble  a  thing  it  is  to  suffer  in  a  good  cause. 
They  would  think  of  this  afterwards,  and  take  courage.    They  would  recollect  the 
insignificance  of  all  their  sufferings  as  contrasted  with  His ;  and  as  they  remem- 
bered this,  the  thought  how  bravely  the  Saviour  went  forward  in  the  path  of  triba> 
lation  would  nerve  them  to  endurance,  and  make  them  almost  impervious  to  fear.  Arm 
yourselves  with  the  like  mind,  and  blush  at  the  very  thought  of  cowardice  or  retreat 
when  summoned  to  suffer  for  the  Bedeemer's  sake,  remembering  how  eagerly  He 
*•  went  before."    (JR.  Bichersteth)        Christ**  life  founded  on  a  plan: — There  was 
no  uncertainty  or  experiment  about  that  life ;  every  detail  was  foreseen  from  the 
beginning.    Every  man's  life  may  be  planned  by  Divine  wisdom,  but  the  man  him- 
seU  is  ignorant  of  his  own  course,  unable  to  foresee  the  next  hour.    2.  That  Jesus 
Christ  knew  all  the  developments  of  His  plan  of  Bfe.     The  sorrow  of  the  first  day, 
the  sleep  of  the  second,  the  triumph  of  the  third,  were  all  before  Him,  as  conditions 
of  His  daily  labour.    3.  That  though  He  knew  the  result.  He  patiently  fulfilled  the 
whole  process.    There  was  no  precipitancy ;  there  was  no  f  retf  ulness ;  every  case  of 
need  was  attended  to  as  though  it  were  the  only  case  in  the  world.     The  Christian 
knows  that  heaven  will  be  his  portion  at  last ;  let  him  be  stimulated  to  constant 
activity,  as  though  human  want  demanded  his  whole  attention.    4.  That  Jews  and 
Gentiles  were  alike  engaged  in  carrying  on  a  work  which  was  for  the  highest  benefit 
of  the  whole  world.     How  unconsciously  we  work  1    We  may  be  pulling  down  in 
the  very  act  of  setting  up.    6.  That  the  assured  triumph  of  the  right  is  a  source 
of  strength  to  the  good  man.    Jesus  Christ  spoke  not  of  the  crucifixion,  but  ol 
"  the  third  day."     The  picture  was  not   all  gloomy.    Light  broke  through  the 
very  centre  of  the  darkness.    How  hopeless,  but  for  "the  third  day,"  is  the  lot  of 
suffering  men.    The  third  day  may  suggest  (a)  the  brevity  of  bad  influence ;  (6) 
the  impossibility  of  destroying  that  which  is  good,  and  (c)  the  transference  of  power 
from  a  temporary  despotism  to  an  eternal  and  beneficent  sovereignty.    Brief  and 
frail  is  the  tenure  of  all  malign  powers.    (F.  Wagstaff.)         The  cross,  the  object  of 
desire.    I.  That  the  cboss  should  havb  been  an  object  of  desibb  and  or  intbnbb 

LONGING   TO  ODB   SaVIOUB'S   HEABl    IS  A   STATEMENT   TOO  BEMABKABLB  TO    BE   BABELT 

ASSERTED.  Such  a  death  was  abhorred  by  all  mankind.  It  was  a  death  of 
ignominy,  agony,  and  shame.  Yet,  contrary  to  the  universal  sentiment,  Christ 
desired  it.  That  the  cross  was  a  token  of  desire  rather  than  fear  will  be  seen  by 
the  way  oui  Lord  checked  every  hindrance  or  suggestion  raised  against  it,  and  by 
His  words  and  deportment  as  He  approached  it  (Matt.  xvi.  23).  He  desired  the 
cross,  and  wanted  to  communicate  that  desire  to  others.  On  one  occasion  He 
reveals  His  desire  in  most  remarkable  language  (Luke  xii.  60).  When  He  entered 
the  Samaritan  village,  we  are  told  *'  His  face  was  as  though  He  would  go  to 
Jerusalem  "  (Luke  ix.  53).  The  text  discloses  the  same  zeal — •'  Behold  we  go  up  to 
Jerusalem  " ;  a  sentence  which  sounds  the  key-note  of  triumph.  His  eager  gait 
betokened  the  onward  desire  of  His  soul.  II.  We  would  consideb  the  beasons 
FOB  THIS  DEsiBE.  The  cross  could  not  be  in  itself  an  object  of  desire.  It  was  not 
hke  the  joy  set  before  Him  at  the  Father's  right  hand ;  if  desired  at  all,  it  mast  be 
because  of  its  results.  These  were  in  two  directions— one  in  relation  to  God,  the 
other  to  man.  The  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  man  were  the  ruling  motives 
of  Christ's  conduct.  We  can  all  str've  to  be  like  Him  in  His  inward  life,  though  only 
martyrs  are  completely  like  Him  i    His  outward  hfe.    His  great  motive  was  the 


.  X.]  8T,  MARK.  42S 

glorifying  of  the  Father  (John  v.  30).  God  was  glorified  on  Calvary  (John  xvii.  1). 
The  oroBB  was  the  Divine  way  of  repairing  the  honour  of  God,  which  had  been 
outraged  by  sin.  The  heart  of  Jesus  was  consumed  with  this  desire  of  a  reparatior 
which  was  in  His  power.  We  know  what  it  is  to  bum  with  indignation,  when  one 
who  is  loved,  is  offended  and  unjustly  injured;  how  then  must  the  true  perception 
of  sin  have  kindled  the  flame  of  desire  for  the  cross  in  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  Also 
the  cross  was  to  be  the  means  of  glorifying  God  by  manifesting  the  Divine  character 
— harmonizing  mercy  and  justice ;  it  was  to  be  the  witness  of  love — removing  such 
misconceptions  of  the  Deity,  as  may  have  arisen  from  the  misery  of  sin.  Thus 
viewed  in  relation  to  God,  the  cross  was  to  Christ  an  object  of  desire.  His  love  for 
us  made  it  an  object  of  desire  on  the  human  side.  The  cross  was  necessary  ac- 
cording to  the  predestination  of  God  as  a  means  for  imparting  life  to  others 
(John  xii.  24).  Thus  an  object  of  desire ;  for  to  restore  the  creature  must  redound 
to  the  glory  of  the  Creator.  HI.  The  qbbatnkss  of  that  desirb.  Its  greatness 
lies  in  its  intensity  and  purity — ''Jesus  went  before  them."  It  was  not  a  mere  im- 
pulse which  prompted  this  onward  movement,  as  the  hero  is  carried  forward  in  the 
excitement  of  battle.    All  impulse  in  Jesus  was  regulated  by  His  calm  mind  and 

Sirfect  will,  therefore  vehemency  of  action  betokened  the  ardour  of  His  sov" 
oreover,  our  desires  are  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  our  inward  facultiw:. 
Their  intensity  will  depend  upon  the  vigour  of  our  wills  and  the  reach  of  our  minds. 
The  mind  must  present  the  object  sought.  The  perfection  of  Christ's  mind  will 
show  the  strength  of  His  desires.  He  saw  the  cross  with  all  its  detail  of  suffering. 
He  saw  all  the  effects  of  the  cross.  He  looked  beyond  it  and  traced  all  its  powers; 
all  the  powers  of  grace  and  supernatural  beauty  which  would  result  from  the  merit 
of  His  passion ;  He  saw  the  saints  enjoying  countless  ages  of  happiness  in  heaven. 
Hence  the  intensity  of  His  desire  for  the  cross.  2.  This  desire  may  be  measured 
by  the  natural  fear  which  it  overpowered.  As  man,  Christ  feared  death  and  suffer- 
ing. Pure  human  nature  shrinks  from  torture.  S.  The  greatness  of  this  desire  of 
Christ  for  the  cross,  consists  in  its  purity  as  well  as  intensity.  With  all  the 
vehemency  of  our  Saviour's  zeal,  there  was  calmness  of  spirit  and  an  obedient  will. 
The  purity  of  desire  lies  also  in  the  nature  of  the  cross  Ho  had  to  bear,  of  shame 
and  desolation.  The  hiding  of  the  Father's  face  separates  His  cross  from  that  of 
the  martyr.  It  was  comfortless  suffering.  The  cross,  too,  was  a  punishment  viewed 
with  contempt.  Some  desire  to  suffer  great  things,  because  their  greatness  brings 
renown.  Pride  will  support  much  bodily  mortification ;  the  cross  had  at  that  time 
only  tiie  aspect  of  humiliation.  Christ  took  His  disciples  aside  that  He  might 
impart  to  them  His  desire.  He  wanted  to  cast  out  of  that  fountain  of  fire  which 
glowed  within  His  own  soul  some  sparks  which  might  inflame  them  also — "  Behold 
we  go  up."  He  suffers  not  only  instead  of  us,  but  also  to  purchase  for  us  power 
and  grace  to  suffer  with  Him  and  for  Him.  He  has  not  removed  the  necessity  of 
suffering  by  His  suffering,  any  more  than  He  has  removed  the  necessity  of  temp- 
tation by  His  being  tempted.  The  same  cross  whereby  we  are  redeemed  promul- 
gates, as  the  condition  of  emancipation,  the  law  of  mortification.  The  desire  of  the 
cross  Christ  communicates  to  His  members.  St.  Paul  prays  "that  I  may  know  Him, 
and  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings."  It  must  begin  with  the  mortification  of  our 
lower  nature  (Gal.  y.  24).  It  is  a  high  pitch  of  nature  to  desire  to  suffer  as  a  means 
of  closer  union  with  our  Lord ;  we  must  first  learn  to  bear  crosses  without  murmur- 
ing ;  then  to  accept  them  with  resignation ;  and,  lastly,  to  meet  them  with  desire 
and  joy.  {W.  H.  HutcUngs,  M.A.)  As  they  followed  they  were  afraid. 
Following  Jenu  fearingly  : — See  the  union  of  two  apparently  contradictory  things. 
The  fear  was  not  enough  to  stop  the  following,  nor  the  following  sufficient  to  arrest 
the  fear.  That  walk  up  to  Jerusalem  illustrative  of  the  pa^  to  heaven.  You 
follow  Christ,  you  love  Him  too  much  not  to  follow  Him.  But  your  religion  is  an 
amazement ;  it  creates  fear.  Certainly,  if  you  were  not  a  follower,  you  would  not 
be  a  fearer.  I  never  knew  any  one  begin  to  fear  till  God  had  begun  to  love  him, 
and  he  had  begun  to  love  God.  The  fear  is  an  index  that  you  ore  on  the  road. 
Fear  1  ought  we  not  to  be  beyond  it ;  ought  not  to  be  the  motive.  How  is  it  that 
a  real  follower  may  be  a  real  fearer  ?  I.  Thet  had  not  adequate  idkas  or  Htm 
WBOM  THEY  FOLLOWED.  They  did  not  know  what  exceeding  care  He  takes  of  His 
own.  If  you  knew  the  character  and  work  of  Christ  you  would  get  rid  of  fear. 
II.  Thouoh  the  disciples  loved  Christ,  they  did  not  love  Hiu  as  Hk  dbskbved. 
If  they  had,  the  love  would  have  absorbed  the  fear ;  they  would  have  rejoiced  to 
die  with  Him.  lU.  They  had  not,  what  the  Master  had,  one  great,  fixkd,  sus- 
tAXHixa  AIM.    This  will  lift  above  the  petty  shafts  of  little  disturbanoea ;  obovt 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  X. 

yonrself.  lY.  Thk  disoiples  had  thbib  veabs  undefimbd.  It  was  the  indefinite 
which  terrified  them.  Take  these  four  rales.  1.  Yon  that  follow  and  are  afraid, 
fortify  yourself  in  the  thought  of  what  Christ  is — His  Person,  work,  covenant ;  and 
what  He  is  to  you.  2.  Love  Him  very  much,  and  realize  your  union  with  Him. 
3.  Set  a  high  mark,  and  carry  your  life  in  your  hand,  so  you  may  reach  that  mark, 
and  do  something  for  God.  4.  Often  stop  and  say  deliberately  to  yourself,  **  Why 
art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul."  Many  increase  their  fears  by  thinking  so  much 
about  them.  The  onward  going  will  gradually  overcome  the  inward  fear.  (<7^. 
Vaughan,  3I.A.)  Following  and  fearing  : — Experience  ought  to  teach  us  that 
our  fears  are  seldom  fulfilled.  I.  "  As  they  followed  " ;  then  even  the  olobioub  abmi 
OF  MARTYRS  WERE  AFRAID.  For  "they"  iucludes  Si  Peter.  Fears  disheartened 
them.  Never  let  us  think  that  the  greatest  souls  are  heroic  right  through,  ever  and 
always.  The  battle  with  the  fiesh  was  keen  in  them.  Besides,  some  fears  have 
their  moral  uses.  It  is  well  to  be  afraid  of  ourselves,  if  our  dependence  on  Christ 
is  strengthened.  Then,  what  courage  may  not  fear  afterwards  merge  intol  U. 
"  As  they  followed  " :  them  fear  did  mot  himdeb  their  progress.  If  there  was 
fear  in  their  hearts,  there  was  fidelity  in  their  steps.  HI.  "  As  they  followed" ;  them 
we  need  not  doubt  our  discipleship  because  wb  are  afbaid.  It  is  indifference 
that  is  to  be  dreaded,  and  presumptuous  self-confidence.  Forgiveness  is  needed 
for  others,  not  for  them.  IV.  ♦'  As  they  followed  "  :  then  the  departure  of  soioi 
FEARS  DOES  NOT  DO  AWAY  WITH  THEM  ALL.  They  did  not  fear  poverty,  they  had  left 
all  to  follow  Christ ;  they  did  not  fear  change  in  Jesus,  they  found  His  word  of  promise 
sure.  We  shall  never  lose  all  fears  here ;  this  discipline  is  wise  for  us.  V.  "  As  they 
followed  " ;  then  let  none  turn  back.  Even  when  the  intellectual  beliefs  are 
burdened  with  difficulty,  never  be  afraid.  Follow  on.  Be  faithful  unto  death. 
{W.  M.  Statham.)  As  they  followed,  they  were  afraid  : — The  disciples*  conduct. 
Up  to  the  very  period  of  Christ's  death  and  resurrection,  the  disciples  looked  for- 
ward to  His  manifestation  as  a  prince  who  should  release  their  nation  from  bondage, 
and  advance  it  to  an  hitherto  unattained  height  of  glory  and  dominion.  All  along 
they  had  been  staggered  at  the  meanness  of  their  Master's  outward  appearance ; 
and  now  they  were  amazed  to  find  that  the  expected  Deliverer  of  mankind  was 
on  His  way  to  suffering.  They  could  not  understand  it.  They  were  amazed,  too, 
at  His  readiness  to  suffer.  He  was  advancing  to  the  cross,  like  a  victor  to  his 
crown.  We  must  note  here  that  (1)  they  followed.  This  is  to  their  praise.  They 
knew  He  was  going  on  to  death,  yet  they  did  not  desert  Him.  They  had  true  faith. 
But  it  was  also  weak  faith,  for  (2)  they  were  afraid.  Strange,  that  while  with  Him 
they  should  fear.  They  thus  missed  much  of  the  comfort  they  might  have  derived 
from  His  companionship.  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of  Arimathea  are  instances  of  the 
same — a  true  but  weak  faith — a  faith  which  does  not  fill  its  possessor  with  peace. 
Let  us  not  rest  in  a  timorous  faith.  Let  us  be  vaUant  for  the  truth.  We  have  not 
the  same  excuse  for  fear  that  they  had.  They  had  not  then  experienced  the 
Eesurrection,  the  Ascension,  the  gift  of  the  Comforter.  When  once  the  Spirit  was 
given,  they  no  longer  knew  fear.  Shame  on  us,  if  with  all  our  superior  knowledge 
and  privilege,  we  cast  not  aside  the  fear  of  man,  and  follow  Jesus,  with  diligence 
to  do,  and  with  readiness  to  suffer,  whatever  He  is  pleased  to  prescribe  or  appoint. 
(E.  Biekersteth.) 

Vers.  35-45.  Master,  we  would  that  Thou  shouldest  do  for  ns  what80«yer  m 
shall  desire. — Christ's  last  journey  to  Jerusalem: — I.  Self-seekino.  It  is  a 
plausible  maxim  of  this  world  which  says :  *'  Every  man  for  himself."  Prominent 
places  are  secured  by  those  who  seek  them  diligently,  with  shrewd  management  and 
artful  manoeuvring.  Why  should  not  this  principle  be  extended  into  the  next  world, 
and  our  prudence  take  merely  a  little  longer  range  in  looking  out  for  the  main  chance? 
Many  people  seem  to  have  convinced  themselves  that  in  striving  to  outdo  one 
another  they  are  simply  obeying  a  necessary  law — the  law  of  emulation ;  and  have 
much  to  say  about  the  wholesomeness  of  competition.  In  this  narrative  we  see 
what  effect  self-seeking  had  on  the  disciples.  1.  It  blinded  their  eyes  to  the  glory  of 
the  Son  of  God.  Men  seeking  conspicuous  places  cannot  understand  the  mind  which 
was  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  and  humbled  Himself  to 
the  cross.  What  oould  they  know  of  His  going  up  to  Jerusalem  ?  They  saw  only 
thrones  and  kingdoms.  A  self-seeking  spirit  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 
2.  It  plunged  the  disciples  into  a  quarrel  on  the  eve  of  a  great  occasion.  It  con- 
Terts  the  world  into  a  place  of  violence.  3.  It  put  the  disciples  into  a  false  attitud* 
of  presumption,  undertaking  more  than  they  were  able  to.  "  Ihey  say  unto  Him,  Wf 


OHAP.  X.]  ST.  MARK,  437 

are  able."    In  a  strength  greater  than  their  own  they  were  indeed  to  drink  of  Wm 
cup ;  but  only  after  learning  their  own  weakness.    4.  The  spirit  of  self-aeekina 
confused  their  notions  of  dominion.      They  had  adopted  the  maxima  of  tS 
Gentiles,  and  were  in  danger  of  beheving  that  a  man  was  great  simply  because  he 
exercised  authority.      Position  does  not  make  the  man.    II.    Sblf-saobificb— 
"  Whosoever  wiU  be  great  among  you,"  &o.    1.  The  courage  of  self-saorifice— ••  We 
go  up  to  Jerusalem."    It  shrinks  from  no  danger.    2.  The  universality  of  self- 
sacrifice.    Each  man  is  to  become  like  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.    3.  The  reward  of 
self-sacrifice.      4.   The  kingdom    of    self-saorifice.      Power  to  bless  and    rule 
(E.  B.  Mason.)        The  greatness  of  service  .—It  is  clear  that  the  whole  passage 
we  are  to  study  to-day  arranges  itself  easily  around  these  three  particulars: 
the  fact   of  which  they  were  aware,  the   counsel  which  He  wished  to  add   to 
It,  and  the  argument  from  the  one  with  which  He  proposed  to  enforce  the  other 
(see  also  Matt.  xx.  25-28).    I.  What  they  knew  was  this :  in  all  the  forms  of 
government  around   them,  ecclesiastical    or   political,    with    which    they    were 
acquamted,  the  principle  of  «♦  lordship "  held  sway.    1.  In  those  times  the  pro- 
minent matter  of  notice  was  a  tremendous  hierarchy  in  the  Jewish  Church,  and  a 
domineering  aristocracy  in  the  Eoman  government.  The  ancient  people  of  God  had 
travestied  His  word,  and  perverted  His  ordinances,  and  forfeited  His  favour.    The 
♦•  rulers"  usurped  authority  everywhere  in  matters  of  faith  and  conscience.    They 
destroyed  the  revelation  from  heaven  by  overlaying  of  human  traditions.    And  as 
they  continued  to  grow  unrighteous,  they  began  to  grow  oppressive.     And  surely, 
those  Jewish  disciples  needed  only  to  be  reminded  of  the  hateful  superciliousness 
of  the  Boman  empire  that  was  holding  their  nation  in  captivity.    They  did  indeed 
know  that  their  "great  ones  exercised  authority  upon  them."    2.  In  our  times 
the  picture  is  quite  like  the  old  one  in  every  point.    Leave  men  to  themselves,  and 
the  systems  they  are  sure  to  construct  will  be  centralized  and  monarchical.    The 
common  people  will  be  dominated  by  lords,  and  the  lords  will  have  dukes,  and  the 
dukes  will  be  put  under  »  king.       The  one  principle  of  organization  is,  that 
each  one  will  try  to  monopolize  position  and  power,  and,  by  crowding  down 
aJl  he  can  beneath  him,  will  seek  to  elevate  himself  mto  rule  over  the  masses. 
Louis  of  France  only  uttered  the  universal  sentiment  when  he  gave  his  word  to 
history  :  he  was  reminded  that  there  was  a  State  which  ought  to  be  considered  : 
"  L'6tat !  o'est  moi  I "  was  his  answer :  ♦«  The  State  1 1  am  the  State  I '»  Look  at  the 
Papal  Church,  or  the  Greek  Church.    There  are  the  poor  worshippers  that  pray 
and  pay  and  obey  their  leaders.    Over  these  are  the  priests,  then  the  prelates,  then 
the  archbishops,  and  ecclesiastics  without  number,  narrowing  in  and  rising  up  till 
they  reach  the  patriarch  or  the  pope.    And  even  the  tiara  has  its  triple  crown, 
running  straight  up  to  one  point.     3.  In  all  tunes  this  is  almost  inevitably  the 
same.    For  unregenerate  human  nature  is  selfish  and  domineering.    This  is  what 
"ye  know."      The  best  figure  of  this  is  a  pyramid.     Builders  construct  these 
masses  of  solid  stone  out  of  blocks.    They  place  the  lowest  layer  on  abnost  a  half- 
acre  of  land.     After  a  base  is  made,  they  draw  in  a  step  on  every  side,  then  rise 
for  a  new  layer ;  then  narrow  in,  and  rise  again.     So  the  structure  lifts  itself  aloft 
till  the  apex  crowns  it  with  a  single  stone.    The  people  are  at  the  bottom ;  the 
artisans,  the  paupers,  the  slaves,  the  great  wrestling  toilers,  whom  everybody  pro- 
poses to  live  upon  and  domineer  over,  if  he  can.     Then  there  come  landholders 
and  monopolists  and  capitalists.    After  this,  we  expect  to  find  some  aristocrats, 
with  titles,  and  entails  of  primogeniture.    So  we  reach  what  are  called  nobles ;  and 
6o  on  indefinitely,  all  working  towards  a  pinnacle  at  the  top.    II.    This,  Christ 
says,  "  ye  know ; "  and  now  He  adds  to  it  a  counsel  of  His  own :  "  so  it  shall  not 
be  among  you"   (v.  43).      1.   He  surprised  His  followers  by  relinquishing  the 
••  lordship  "  and  disclaiming  the  "authority."     We  must  be  careful  to  notice  that 
He  did  not  forbid  ambition  as  a  motive ;  He  sought  only  to  direct  it  into  a  new 
exercise  (v.  44).  He  did  not  say  it  was  wrong  to  wish  to  be  "  chiefest,"  but  told  them 
that  a  Christian  should  desire  to  be  chief  servant  to  all.     2.  He  suggested  that  the 
humblest  service  constituted  the  highest  dignity  (v.  44).     8.  Thus  He  completely 
reverses  the  whole  notion  of  those  who  looked  for  lordship.    Let  us  come  back  to 
the  figure  which  we  just  left.     The  "  chief "  should  be  at  the  base,  thw  "  servant " 
of  all  those  above.  III.  Now  we  are  ready  to  notice  the  argument  with  which  Jesus 
enforces  His  extraordinary  counsel :  He  offers  Himself  as  an  example  for  absolute 
imitation  (v.  45).    Consider  the  plain  fact  in  this  case.   Let  us  turn  to  a  passage  in 
one  of  Paul's  Epistles  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).    [G.  S.  Eobinson,  D.D.)        A  religion  which 
develops  the  fit  and  the  twe/wi  .•— This  was  Christ's  eternal  principle,  "the  truest 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  :^ 

supremacy  is  the  most  faithful  semoe  to  men."  The  view  of  Christianity 
which  looks  upon  religion  as  an  excellent  way  of  "getting  something,"  is,  wa 
trust,  fast  dying  out.  Christ  removed  the  question  of  getting  to  the  level  of 
enduring  and  doing.  The  most  irresistible  power  in  the  world  is  the  power  of  on- 
selfishness.  Is  self-sacrifice  possible,  when  self-sacrifice  is,  in  reality,  self-gain  f 
These  two  disciples  proved  to  be,  although  they  little  expected  it,  perfect  types  of 
that  of  which  our  Lord  was  speaking.  James  was  the  first  apostle  to  receive  the 
crown  of  martyrdom.  John's  mart3'rdom  was  that  of  living ;  he  was  the  last  of  the 
apostles  to  die.  Learn  the  divineness  of  a  life  of  service.  ''  Whosoever  of  you  will 
be  the  chief  est  shall  be  servant  of  all."  The  natural  idea  of  the  untutored  mind  is 
that  a  man  in  supreme  power  would  rule  and  please  himself.  Qualifications  for 
serving  are  becoming  to  be  the  badge  of  governing.  What  a  world  of  thought 
we  suddenly  reach,  when  we  strike  the  flint  of  one  text  with  the  steel  of  another 
text,  and  a  Divine  spark  is  emitted,  which  lights  up  our  system  with  the  Christ-like 
principle  of  the  divinity  of  eternal  usefulness  1  Is  it  not  a  part  of  that  stupendous 
truth,  that  nothing  can  live  eternally  except  that  which  is  useful  and  good  7  All 
nature  is  teaching  us  this  lesson ;  plants,  and  animals,  and  men,  and  nations, 
are  disappearing  and  dying  out  unless  they  can  give  a  favourable  answer  to 
the  searching  question,  "Art  thou  useful?  Art  thou  of  any  service  to  God 
or  to  man  t "  What  a  magnificent  view  this  gives  of  man's  magnificent  share 
in  the  universe!  The  worlds  are  hastening  along  in  their  prescribed  courses 
— suns  are  forming — spheres  are  whirling  in  ordered  procession  through  space : 
in  what  we  call  the  chaos  of  nature  there  is  no  ohaos:  seas,  and  continents, 
and  air,  and  clouds,  are  daily  growing  up  and  evolving;  every  star,  every 
leaf,  every  creature  that  lives  is  busy,  and  is  helping  to  roU  the  Great  Universe 
along — and  nature,  if  asked,  "Art  thou  useful?"  must  reply,  "Yea,  every  grain 
and  every  molecule,  every  breath  and  every  atom,  all  are  contributing  to  the 
order  and  the  usefulness  of  God's  system  1 "  What  is  nature  7  Nature  is  an 
aggregation  and  a  development  of  the  eternally  fit  and  useful.  So  also  man's  test 
must  be  this  test  of  fitness  too,  and  we  may  even  go  farther,  and  declare  our  belief 
that  prospective  material  rewards  are  sometimes  misleading  in  the  way  they  are 
usuaUy  interpreted.  Man's  highest  reward  must  be  perfect  oo-operation  with,  union 
with,  and  knowledge  of  the  eternal  God.  When  God's  purposes  become  man's  pur- 
poses, God's  aims  man's  aims,  God's  spirit  and  essence  man's  spirit  and  essence ; 
then  we  shall  not  find  men  clamouring  for  seats  upon  golden  thrones,  but  we  shall 
bear  them  ask,  "  How  can  I  combine  with  God  to  further  the  purposes  of  man  and 
of  God  ?  "  for  both  these  are  identical.  Or,  to  use  our  Saviour's  phrase,  we  shall 
hear  men  ask,  "How  can  I  drink  of  the  oup  which  Christ  drank  of?'*  The 
eternally  useful  need  not,  of  course,  be  the  eternally  assertive  or  prominent.  Many 
careers  of  usefulness  there  are,  which  are  perhaps  more  of  enduring  than  of  acting. 
To  endure,  in  many  circumstances,  is,  in  a  sense,  to  act.  {A.  H,  Powell^  M.A.) 
Christ  a  Servant :— I.  "  Thk  Son  oi*  Man  cams  not  to  be  ministbrbd  unto."  This 
should  teach  us — 1.  The  emptiness  of  earthly  greatness.  2.  Contentment  in  our 
situation.  II.  The  Son  of  Man  came  "  to  mimisteb."  From  this  we  learn — 1.  To 
be  diligent  in  doing  good.  2.  To  condescend  to  the  meanest  acts  of  kindness. 
III.  The  Son  of  Man  came  '*to  oivb  His  lcte  a  banbou  roa  uant."  It  teaches — 
1.  The  deplorable  condition  of  sinners.  2.  The  amazing  compassion  of  the 
Saviour.  3.  The  subject  encourages  our  application  to  Him,  and  dependence  on 
Him  as  the  Saviour.  4.  The  subject  stimulates  us  to  seek  diligently  the  salvation 
of  others.  {T.  Kidd.)  Servant  of  all: — A  minister  having  accepted  a  cordial 
invitation  to  the  pastorate  of  a  Church,  was  visited  by  a  lady,  who  said,  "  Sir,  this 
Church,  of  which  you  are  now  unhappily  the  minister,  is  composed  of  such  materials 
that  you  must  either  be  its  tyrant  or  its  slave ;  which  office  will  you  select  ?  "  He 
answered,  "  Its  servant,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake."  Not  rendering  service  to  please 
this  one  or  the  other,  not  giving  forth  dull  tones  to  soothe  the  slumbering  souls  of 
those  that  love  to  sleep,  not  selecting  dainty  sentences  of  polite  speech  (polished 
swords  that  will  not  out),  hoping  to  win  the  admiration  and  commendation  of 
those  that  sit  in  the  well-cushioned  pews ;  but  a  servant,  and  the  servant  of  the 
Choroh  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.  Our  highest  relationship  to  God  is  a  relationship 
of  service ;  it  ranks  above  sonship,  because  it  is  the  fruit  of  adoption ;  love  in 
action.  The  servant  of  all : — Men  of  the  world  would  prefer  to  say.  "  I  am  among 
yon,  not  as  one  who  serves,  but  as  one  who  rules.  I  live  quite  independent  of  the 
authority  of  any  superior."  There  is  a  natural  revolt  against  dependence  on 
emother  as  something  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  manhood.    This  revolt  against 


1.]  ST.  MARK, 


mle,  this  ohafing  against  the  idea  of  interdependence,  is  founded  on  an  ntter  mis- 
apprehension. If  God  is  Creator,  and  we  creatures,  we  are  forced  to  concede  the 
whole  question  at  issue.  There  can  be  but  one  independent  existence ;  man's 
ignorance  renders  inter-dependence  impossible.  Again,  he  is  a  servant,  and  not  a 
roler,  because  of  the  physical  laws  which  environ  him.  Man  is  equally  impotent 
to  resist  the  operation  of  moral  law.  The  servant  of  these  laws  secures  his  highest 
"  '    '         ""  ...  .  ^^^  world. 

"  Whom 
the  truth  of  the 

text :  "  He  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto."  There  was  but  one  way  in  which  He 
ooold  derive  new  glory,  and  that  was  by  service  and  sacrifice.  All  crowns  were 
already  His,  save  one,  and  that  one  was  the  crown  of  thorns.  After  this  who  will 
venture  to  call  service  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  manhood,  when  even  the  glory 
of  Godhead  derives  new  lustre  from  this  matchless  display  of  condescending  grace  ? 
The  spectacle  of  the  great  Lord  of  All  shrinking  from  no  ofl&ce,  however  menial, 
whereby  humanity  might  be  cleansed  and  elevated  and  ennobled,  has  given  a  new 
ideal  to  the  world.  A  new  form  of  beauty  rises  on  the  vision  of  mankind.  A  new 
standard  of  greatness  is  established  by  the  authority  of  the  Highest.  "  He  that 
would  be  chief  among  you,  let  him  be  the  servant  of  all."  These  are  creative  words. 
Out  of  them  have  come  the  philanthropies,  the  benevolent  enterprises  which  the 
pious  ingenuity  of  the  Church  has  devised  for  the  relief  of  suffering  humanity,  the 
sweet  charities  which  minister  to  the  physical  and  spiritual  wants  of  the  world. 
They  are  revolutionary  words.  They  have  reversed  the  judgments  of  men,  and  re- 
constructed public  opinion  as  to  what  constitutes  true  greatness.  {M.  Z>.  Hoge,  D.D.) 
Greatness  realized  in  humble  service : — Dr.  Chalmers  was  great  when  he  presided 
over  the  General  Assembly  of  his  church,  and  when  he  lectured  in  the  Divinity 
Hall  from  his  professor's  chair,  and  when  he  electrified  vast  audiences  by  his  power 
in  the  pulpit  all  over  Scotland,  but  never  did  he  attract  more  reverential  admira- 
tion or  loving  regard  than  when  he  was  seen  walking  through  the  dark  "closes  " 
and  filthy  lanes  of  Edinburgh,  with  ragged  children  clinging  to  his  fingers  and  to 
his  skirts,  as  he  led  them  oat  and  gathered  them  into  the  schools  he  had  organized 
for  their  benefit.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  88.  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask.— Pray«r»  qfered  in  ignoranee  answered  in 
love :— 1.  They  did  ask.  Whatever  be  thy  desire,  go  to  Him.  2.  These  brothers 
had  a  definite  purpose  in  coming  to  Him.  Our  prayers  are  often  vague  and  in- 
definite. 3.  These  brothers  were  honest  and  sincere  in  their  request.  What,  then, 
was  there  to  be  blamed  in  the  matter?  They  had  a  f^se  conception  of  Christ's 
glory;  also  as  to  the  things  which  were  involved  in  the  granting  their  request. 
Holiness  is  a  character  which  is  formed  within  a  man ;  it  is  not  a  gift  conferred 
from  without.  He  is  the  highest  in  the  peerage  who  has  served  his  Master  best. 
By  the  cross  Christ  was  elevated  to  the  throne.  The  text  means,  ••  Ye  do  not  know 
what  is  implied  in  the  terms  you  employ  in  making  your  request,  or  what  is  involved 
in  granting  it  to  yon.**  We  may  have  a  definite  object  in  view,  we  may  think  it 
good  and  desirable  ;  but  we  cannot  trace  it  through  all  its  bearings ;  we  cannot  see 
how  it  would  affect  us  if  bestowed  ;  nor  can  we  tell  what  may  be  required  from  us 
before  it  can  be  granted.  The  omniscient  One  alone  can  discern  what  is  involved 
in  our  petitions.  He  will  answer  our  prayers,  if  not  in  the  letter,  yet  in  the  spirit. 
You  ask  for  success  in  life,  having  in  mind  external  prosperity.  But  God's  view  of 
success  is  a  very  different  affair;  in  His  estimation,  success  consists  in  what  a  man 
is,  not  in  what  he  has  ;  and  He  gives  you  that  success  by  denying  you  the  other. 
You  ask  for  forgiveness,  and  expect  it  in  joy.  God  answers  by  showing  you  more 
thoroughly  your  sins.  We  pray  for  holiness ;  it  comes  through  sore  trial.  Thus 
God  answers  the  prayer  for  purity.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D. )  Ignorance  in  prayers : — 
A  beautiful  instance  of  this  in  the  life  of  the  great  Church  father,  Augustine,  has 
often  given  both  consolation  and  light.  He  wished  to  leave  Carthage,  where  he  had 
become  deeply  entangled  in  the  snares  of  sin,  and  o  visit  Rome,  then  the  metropolis 
of  the  world ;  but  his  pious  mother,  Monica,  restrained  him  with  her  tears,  and 
would  not  let  him  go,  being  afraid  that  he  would  encounter  still  more  dangerous 
snares  in  the  great  city.  He  promised  to  her  to  remain ;  but,  forgetful  of  his  duty, 
he  embarked  in  a  vessel  under  the  cloud  of  night,  nd  in  that  very  Italy  to  which  her 
affection  was  afraid  to  let  him  go,  he  found  salvat  on  and  was  converted.  Pondering 
in  his  mind  how  the  Eternal  Love  had  conduct  d  him  to  where  he  himself  had 
thought  of  going  only  in  the  forwardness  of  his  heart,  he  says,  in  his  *'  Confessions,'* 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  x. 

"But  thou,  my  God,  listening  in  Thy  high  and  heavenly  counsels  to  what  was  the 
scope  of  my  mother's  wishes,  refused  her  what  she  prayed  for,  at  that  time,  that 
Thou  mightest  grant  her  what  was  at  all  times  the  subject  of  her  prayers."  (Ibid,) 
Mistaken  prayer : — A.  tradition  current  in  Wales  is  a  striking  illustration  of  these 
words.  It  is  said  that  an  old  woman,  who  was  very  ungodly,  was  once  travelling 
from  CardifiE  to  a  neighbouring  town,  some  twelve  miles  distant,  for  the  purpose  of 
selling  her  vegetables.  It  was  a  winter's  day,  the  east  wind  was  blowing,  and  drove 
the  hail  and  ^eet  right  in  her  face,  causing  her  to  give  vent  to  sundry  curses  and 
evil  exclamations.  When  she  was  nearing  the  end  of  her  journey,  she  began  in  a 
most  irreverent  manner  to  pray  that  the  wind  might  turn  to  her  back.  Extra- 
ordinary to  relate,  the  wind  did  turn,  and  for  about  five  minutes  she  had  the 
comfort  of  a  tolerably  easy  journey.  But,  alas,  poor  short-sighted  creature  I  she 
fini/hed  the  sale  of  her  goods,  and  at  almost  dark  started  to  return  home  ;  but  the 
wind,  which  she  had  been  so  anxious  should  change,  had  done  so,  and  was  there- 
fore again  in  her  face.  She  had  forgotten,  when  she  prayed  in  the  morning  that 
it  might  turn,  that  to  go  home  she  would  have  to  turn  too,  and  then  be  exposed  to 
its  violence  during  the  cold  and  dark  night.  The  storm,  too,  had  increased  in  fury, 
and  it  was  not  till  the  next  morning  that  the  old  woman  reached  her  native  town. 
ChristU  Clip  of  suffering : — We  cannot  drink  Christ's  cup  of  suffering  so — I.  Wil- 
lingly. II.  Intelligently.  III.  With  such  bitter  ingredients.  IV.  So  capacions. 
V.  Deadly.  (Plans  of  Sermons.)  Can  ye  drink  of  tJie  cup  that  I  drink  of  f — L 
Consider  the  cup  pbesented  to  oub  Saviocb,  and  the  makneb  in  which  He  dbauk 
IT.  David  speaks  of  a  cup  of  joy  (Psa.  zxiii.  6  ;  cxvi.  18) ;  but  there  is  a  cnp  of 
affliction  (Isa.  li.  17 ;  Jer.  xzv.  15).  1.  It  was  a  bitter  cup,  consisting  of  the  bitter 
ingredients  of  sin  and  wrath.  2.  It  was  deep  and  large,  and  contained  much  like 
that  which  was  presented  to  Jndah  in  her  captivity  (Ezek.  xziii.  32).  8.  It  was  a 
cup  without  mixture,  it  had  torment  without  ease.  In  what  manner  did  our 
Saviour  drink  this  bitter  cup?  (1)  He  did  it  not  ignorantly,  but  knowingly.  (2) 
He  did  it  not  reluctantly,  but  freely.  (8)  He  drank  it  not  partially,  but  entirely. 
II.  The  shabb  which  believebs  take  in  tee  suffebinqs  or  Chbist.  **  Can  ye 
drink,"  &o,  1.  As  no  one  can  do  what  Christ  did,  so  no  one  can  suffer  what  He 
suffered.  2.  Though  no  one  can  suffer  what  Christ  suffered,  yet  His  people  must 
have  some  fellowship  with  Him  in  His  sufferings,  and  be  conformable  to  His  death. 
8.  The  people  of  God  must  expect  trials.     (B,  Beddome^  M.A.) 

Yer.  46-62.     Blind  yBartlmeos. — Observation*  on  the  narrative  of  blind  Bar- 
timeus  : — I.  Observe  how  singulably  is  the  pbovidentiai.  goodness  ov  God  dis- 

PliAVED  in  the  DIBECTION  OF  THE  EVENTS  LEADING  TO  THIS  INTEBVIEW.    The  blind  man 

takes  his  place  by  the  road-side,  not  to  meet  with  Jesus  or  any  one  else  who  might 
restore  his  sight,  but  merely  to  procure  from  the  uncertain  compassion  of  travellers  a 
small  pittance  that  should  serve  to  prolong  his  weary  existence.  Just  at  this  juncture 
Jesus,  having  left  Jericho  on  His  way  to  Jemsalem,  passes  that  way.  Many  travel- 
lers came  and  returned,  but  he  knew  them  not.  In  this  instance  the  rush  of  a 
multitude  attracts  his  notice.  That  God  who  has  denied  him  the  use  of  sight  can 
convey  His  blessings  through  another  organ.  It  is  affecting  to  think  on  what  a 
trifle  appear  to  hinge  the  most  important  relations  and  destinies  of  our  existence. 
II.  The  NOTICE  Babtimeus  takes  of  the  infobmation  conveyed  to  him.  It  is 
with  him  no  idle  aipeculation.  He  did  not  fix  on  mere  circumstantials,  or  on  a  topic 
of  interest  to  others ;  he  contemplated  the  matter  in  direct  and  prompt  reference  to 
his  own  case.  Go  at  once  to  Christ,  and  cry  so  as  to  be  heard  through  the  crowd. 
The  petition  of  Bartimeus  deserves  notice  not  less  for  the  terms  in  which  it  is 
expressed  than  for  the  urgency  with  which  it  is  preferred — "  Jesus,  Thou  Son  of 
David,  have  mercy  on  me."  It  contains  a  full  and  prompt  confession  of  Christ 
in  that  character,  in  which  of  all  others  He  demanded  the  recognition  of  mankind, 
and  of  that  age  and  nation  in  particular,  and  in  which  He  was  most  obnoxious  to 
the  malice  of  His  enemies.  Kor  is  this  testimony  to  Christ  as  the  Son  of  David  less 
valuable  as  an  indication  of  gr  at  faith  in  the  covenant  mercies  of  God  as  set  forth 
in  prophecy  (Isa.  Iv.  8 ;  Psa  Ixxii.  12).  lU.  The  oolo  and  chilling  bxpulsx 
which  hb  met  with,  not  from  Jesus  but  from  the  bystanders,  perhaps  even  the 
disciples,  for  they  had  not  yet  learnt  much  of  the  spirit  of  the  Master.  Some 
nndervidae  accessions  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ  from  the  ranks  of  the  poor.  Indif- 
ference and  snspicion  often  hinder  rehgious  inquiry.  IV.  The  gonduot  OF  Bam- 
tiubus.  When  tihwarted  in  your  approach  to  the  Saviour  how  has  it  operated?  ^  It 
has  grieved  yon ;  but  has  it  driven  you  back  r    Like  the  tide  pent  op, 


z.]  8T.  MARK.  431 

barsting  every  barrier,  mshea  with  aoonmolated  force,  Bariimeas  is  prompted  by 
this  ungracious  repulse  to  cry  so  much  the  more.  Go  thou  and  do  Ukewise.  V. 
Jesus  stood  still,  and  commanded  him  to  bs  bbouoht.  Of  what  importance  is 
it,  in  the  career  of  the  great  mass  of  individuals,  when  they  move  along  or 
when  they  stop?  There  are  men  whose  movements  are  eyed  with  anxious 
care.  The  steps  of  a  Grasar,  an  Alexander,  or  a  Napoleon,  have  borne  hope 
or  dread  with  them ;  the  incidental  halting  of  each  characters  has  been  identified 
with  the  fate  of  a  city  or  a  province.  It  is  only  of  such  as  preach  the  gospel  of 
peace  that  we  can  say,  •♦  How  beautiful  are  their  feet  upon  the  mountains."  The 
cry  of  one  poor  man  was  of  sufficient  importance  to  arrest  Christ  in  His  progress. 
YI.  Thk  commands  abb  obbtxd  with  alaohitt.    YII.  Thb  samb  pbomptitudb  and 

DETEBMINATION  WHICH  BaRTIMBUS  BEFORE  MANIFESTED  GUIDES  HIM  IN  THIS  NBW  ASPECT 

OF  AFFAIRS.  His  tattered  cloak  is  cast  away  as  a  hindrance.  He  has  an  all- 
absorbing  object  before  him.  The  sinner  rejects  as  idle  encumbrances  his  self- 
righteousness  and  self-indulgence,  which  have  clung  to  him  as  his  second  self,  and 
rushes  alone  into  the  arms  of  a  compassionate  Saviour.  VIII.  The  scene  now 
increases  in  interest.  Thb  man  is  healed  in  the  way  of  inquibt,  **  What  wilt  thou 
that  I  shall  do  unto  thee?  "  This  is  the  way  disconsolate  sinners  are  encouraged 
to  tell  their  own  tale.  IX.  What  beplt  is  madb  to  this  inquiby  t  "  Lord,  that 
I  might  receive  my  sight."  He  came  by  the  shortest  step  to  the  matter  in  hand ; 
in  prayer  we  should  have  a  specific  object  in  view.  X.  How  it  succeeded  in  thb 
CASE  BEFOBB  US?  " Go  thy  way."  {A.  O.  Fuller.)  Sightless  sinners: — ^L  We 
look  closely  at  Bartimeus  on  this  occasion.  It  is  true  that  Jesus  is  the  centre  of  the 
picture,  as  He  always  is.  But  this  miracle  is  peculiar  in  that  the  details  of  it  are 
more  than  usually  brilliant  as  an  illustration  of  simple  human  nature  in  the 
one  who  receives  the  advantage  of  it.  1.  The  state  of  this  poor  creature  is 
given  at  a  stroke  of  the  pen.  It  would  be  difficult  to  crowd  more  biography 
into  one  verse  than  we  find  in  here.  He  was  sightless.  He  had  come  to 
be  called  by  that  name,  "Blind  Bartimeus.'*  He  was  a  pauper.  **Beggiiig'* 
was  his  business.  He  was  a  professional  mendicant.  We  do  not  look  upon 
him  as  one  who  had  got  behind-hand  for  a  little,  and  so  was  out  on  the  street 
for  a  day  or  two,  until  he  could  get  into  employment.  He  "  sat  by  the  highway 
side  begging.*'  He  was  helpless.  There  is  no  evidence  that  he  had  any  trienda 
who  cared  for  him  ;  they  would  have  made  themselves  conspicuous  after  his  core, 
if  there  had  been  many  of  them.  He  was  hopeless.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to 
do  anything ;  he  could  not  see  to  learn  a  trade.  He  was  onpopular.  Anybody  had 
a  right  to  snub  him,  the  moment  he  said  a  word  (see  Luke  xviii.  39).  He  was 
uneaiey,  and  fiercely  on  the  alert  to  better  his  condition.  2.  Now  notice  his  action. 
Here  we  need  the  verse  which  has  just  been  quoted  from  Luke's  Gospel,  for  a  link 
between  the  two  apparently  disjointed  verses  of  Mark's  (see  Mark  x.  47).  The  way 
in  which  this  man  "  heard  that  it  was  Jesns  of  Nazareth "  is  shown  there ;  the 
multitude  told  him.  Bartimeus  sought  information.  He  was  not  too  proud  to 
acknowledge  he  did  not  know.  Does  any  one  suppose  this  poor  beggar  got  offended 
because  some  one  insisted  that  he  was  sightless?  If  a  neighbour  had  showed  him- 
self a  httle  friendly,  and  proposed  to  lead  him  up  for  a  core,  would  Bartimeus 
simply  spite  him  for  being  impertinent  about  other  people's  concerns?  Then,  next, 
this  blind  man  began  to  ask  for  help  (see  Luke  xviii.  38,  39).  His  request  was 
singularly  comprehensive  and  intelligent.  His  ciy  was  personal  and  direct :  **  have 
mercy  on  me."  He  wastes  no  time  in  graceful  opening  or  becoming  close ;  what 
he  wanted  he  tells.  His  prayer  was  courageous  and  importunate  (see  Mark  x.  48). 
Bartimeus  then  "  rose,  and  came  to  Jesus."  It  would  have  been  the  height  of  toUj 
for  him  to  say  to  himself,  "  If  it  is  the  will  of  this  rabbi  to  open  my  eyes,  he  can 
do  it  from  a  distance  just  as  well  as  if  I  were  there."  Then,  also,  this  blind  man 
put  away  the  hindrance  which  it  was  likely  would  delay  him  in  going  for  his  cure 
(Mark  x.  50).  A  simple  garment,  no  doubt,  but  almost  indispensable  to  him.  Still, 
if  it  interfered  with  the  restoration  of  his  eyesight,  it  could  well  be  spared.  8. 
Notice,  in  the  next  place,  Bartimeus' s  full  surrender  (see  v.  51).  Two  things  are  to 
be  noted  in  this  remarkable  speech.  We  shall  not  understand  either  of  them 
unless  we  keep  in  mind  the  most  singular  question  which  Jesus  puts  to  the  man,  tht 
moment  he  comes  within  hearing.  It  was  not  because  He  did  not  know  this  beg- 
gar's condition,  that  our  Lord  asked  him  so  abruptly  what  he  would  have  Him  to 
do.  It  must  have  been  because  He  desired  to  fasten  his  faith  upon  one  chief 
object  of  supreme  desire.  There  was  no  end  to  the  needs  of  Bartimeus :  he  wanted 
food,  friends,  clothing,  home,  everything  that  anybody  demands  in  order  to  maka  ■ 


iza  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTHATOB.  (oHtf.  t, 

mendicant  a  man.  Bnt,  more  than  all  besides,  he  wanted  eyesight ;  and  he  found 
that  out  when  he  went  in  upon  his  own  sonl  to  make  inquiry.  This  explains  hia 
reply.  He  speaks  with  a  declaration,  "  Lord."  This  address,  most  inadequately 
rendered  here  in  Mark's  Gospel,  means  far  more  than  mere  respect.  The  word  in 
Luke  is  different  from  this ;  here  it  is  actually  the  same  as  that  Mary  Magdalene 
uses  when  she  discovers  that  one  she  thought  was  the  gardener  is  Jesus :  **  Bab- 
boni  I "  There  is  concentrated  in  just  a  single  word,  a  whole  burst  of  generous  and 
affectionate  feehng  :  "My  Master  I"  Faith,  reverence,  love  unspeakable,  adoring 
wonder,  were  in  that  word.  He  speaks  with  an  ellipsis.  As,  before,  we  found  more 
in  his  utterance  than  we  expected,  so  now  we  find  less.  Bartimeus  does  not  reply 
directly  to  our  Lord's  question.  He  cannot :  how  could  he  know  what  a  miracle- 
worker  should  do  ?  All  he  knew  was  what  he  himself  wanted  to  be  done.  So  his 
answer  would  read  in  full :  "  I  do  not  understand  what  Thou  wilt  do,  nor  even  what 
I  would  have  thee  to  do — oh,  do  anything,  any  thing — that  I  might  receive  my  sight  I " 

4.  Once  more,  notice  Bartimeus's  cure  (v.  52).  It  was  instantaneous — "imme- 
diately." It  was  perfect — "whole."  It  was  sovereign — "go  thy  way."  It  was 
complete,  including  salvation — "  thy  faith  hath  saved  thee  "  (see  Luke  xviii.  42). 

5.  Lastly,  notice  the  man's  experience  (Luke  xviii.  43).  He  was  full  of  joy  ;  a  new 
world  had  been  suddenly  opened  upon  him.  He  was  obedient :  he  followed  Jesus 
as  a  disciple.  He  was  grateful :  he  glorified  God.  He  was  zealous.  We  may  be 
sure  he  left  not  so  much  as  one  blind  man  in  all  Jerioho  without  the  knowledge  of 
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  "  Oh  that  all  the  blind  but  knew  Him,  and  would  be  advised 
by  me  I  Surely  would  they  hasten  to  Him,  He  would  cause  them  all  to  see."  II. 
So  much  then,  concerning  this  miracle  as  a  wonder  ;  let  us  now  study  its  lessons 
as  a  parable.  It  very  beautifully  pictures  the  steps  of  a  sinner  coming  for  spiritual 
relief  to  Jesus;  the  state,  the  action,  the  surrender,  the  cure,  the  experience. 
Indeed,  this  was  a  real  part  of  the  story  that  day.  1.  Sightlessness  is  the  symbol  of 
sin.  Not  darkness  now,  for  Christ  has  come  (see  John  viii.  12).  The  trouble  is  in 
the  heart  (see  Eph.  iii.  18).  Who  did  this  ?  (see  3  Cor.  iv.  4).  How  deep  is  it  f 
(see  Rev.  iii.  18).  2.  Sin  destroys  the  whole  nature.  We  do  not  say  Bartimeus 
was  injured  in  any  of  his  senses  except  his  eyes.  But  his  blindness  made  him  a 
beggar.  His  touch,  hearing,  and  taste  may  have  been  perfect:  indeed,  they 
may  have  been  rendered  sensitive,  sharp,  and  alert  more  than  usual.  But 
he  walked  as  a  blind  man,  he  reasoned  as  a  blind  man,  he  thought  as  a  blind 
man,  and  he  went  to  his  regular  stand  as  a  blind  man,  and  then  begged.  3. 
Awakening  of  sinners  is  often  due  to  Christian  fidelity.  4.  In  the  salvation  of 
his  soul  the  sinner  has  a  work  to  do.  It  is  of  no  use  to  fall  back  on  one's 
blindness;  the  first  step  is  to  confess  blindness,  and  go  to  Christ  for  help. 

6.  Frayer  is  indispensable  in  every  case.  No  one  can  be  saved  who  will  not  ask  for 
salvation.  The  petition  might  well  become  a  "  cry."  And  whatever  hinders,  let 
the  man  continue  to  pray,  and  pray  "  the  more  a  great  deal."  6.  All  hindrances 
must  be  put  away  if  one  is  in  earnest  to  be  saved.  Many  a  man  has  seemed  to 
start  well,  but  has  been  tangled  in  the  running  by  his  garments  of  respectability, 
fame,  fortune,  social  standing,  literary  eminence,  or  pleasant  companionship.  One 
may  obtain  the  •*  whole  world,"  and  lose  "  his  own  soul."  7.  Jesus  is  always  ready 
to  save  any  one  who  cries  to  Him.  Oh,  most  impressive  moment  is  that  when  the 
Lord  of  Glory  pauses  in  the  way,  and  commands  a  soul  ''to  be  called  "I  8.  Un- 
qualified  acceptance  of  Christ  in  all  His  offices  is  the  essential  condition  of  accep- 
tance by  Him.  The  sinner  must  say  "  Lord,"  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,"  •*  Son  of  David," 
and  "  Rabboni."  9.  Experience  of  salvation  is  the  instrument  to  use  in  our  efforts 
to  save  others.  (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  How  to  procure  blessing  from  God  : — I. 
Cry  aloud.  "  What  is  the  noise  ?  "  asks  this  blind  man.  "  Who  is  it  ?  "  "  Jesus," 
they  say.  And  at  once  he  cries,  "  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me."  **  Hush,"  say 
some  ;  "  hush," — not  liking  the  loudness  of  the  cry,  nor  the  shrill,  sad  tone  of  it. 
But  Bartimeus  only  cries  the  louder.  Misery  often  makes  a  great  noise  in  the  world, 
a  great  and  displeasing  noise,  if  it  can  but  get  opportunity  to  make  its  want  and  its 
woe  known.  Surely,  happy  people  should  be  ready  to  bear  with  the  disturbance 
a  little  time ;  for  misery  has  perhaps  had  to  bear  its  sorrow  for  a  long  time. 
n.  Be  in  babnest.  It  has  always  needed  an  effort  to  come  at  Jesus.  You  must  not 
be  discouraged  by  hindrances.  III.  Cast  git  xnoumbrances.  The  blind  man  throws 
aside  his  garment,  lest  it  should  hamper  him,  in  his  eagerness  to  get  at  Christ. 
Give  him  his  sight,  and  he  will  not  care  even  to  look  for  this  soiled  and  tattered 
garment  any  more,  but  will  find  a  better.  People  that  have  their  eyes  opened  wiU 
at  the  very  least  get  their  clothes  washed.    A  neat,  decent  dress  is  often  an  early 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  MARK,  433 

Bign  that  a  man  is  becoming  careful  who  has  hitherto  been  reckless.  And  new  talk, 
new  tempers,  new  estimates  of  things,  are  garments  of  the  spuritual  man,  that  show 
he  has  become  a  new  man.  {T.  T.  Lynch.)  Tlu  blind  beggar  of  Jericho:— Th^s 
man  is  a  picture  of  what  we  would  fain  have  every  seeker  of  Christ  to  become.  In 
his  lonely  darkness,  and  deep  poverty,  he  thought  and  became  persuaded  that  Jesus 
was  the  Son  of  David.  Though  he  had  no  sight,  he  made  good  use  of  his  hearmg. 
If  we  have  not  all  gifts,  let  us  use  those  we  have.  I.  He  sought  the  Lobd  undbb 
DI8C0UBAGEMENT8.    1.  No  One  prompted  his  seekmg.    2.  Many  opposed  his  attempts. 

3.  For  awhile  he  was  unheeded  by  Christ  Himself.  4.  He  was  but  a  blmd  beggar, 
and  this  alone  might  have  checked  some  pleaders.  II.  He  bbceivbd  bncoubaob- 
UEMT.  This  came  from  Christ's  commanding  him  to  be  called.  There  are  several 
kindaof  calls  which  come  to  men  at  the  bidding  of  Christ.  1.  Universal  call  (John 
iii  14  15).  2.  Character  call  (Matt.  xi.  28  ;  Acts  ii.  38.  39).  3.  Ministerial  call 
(Acts  xiii.  26, 38, 39  ;  xvi.  31).  4.  Effectual  call  (Rom.  viii.  30).  III.  But  encouraoe- 
MENT  DID  NOT  CONTENT  HIM :  he  Still  sought  Jcsus.  To  stop  short  of  Jesus  and 
heaUng  would  have  been  folly  indeed.  1.  He  arose.  Hopefully,  resolutely,  he 
quitted  his  begging  posture.  In  order  to  salvation  we  must  be  on  the  alert,  and  m 
earnest.    2.  He  cast  away  his  garment,  and  every  hindrance.     3.  He  came  to  Jesus. 

4.  He  stated  his  case.    5.  He  received  salvation.    Jesus  said  unto  him,  "  Thy  faitii 
hath  made  thee  whole."    He  obtained  perfect  eyesight:  complete  health.    IV. 
Havino  rouND  Jesus  he  kept  to  Him.     1.  He  used  his  sight  to  see  the  Lord.    2.  He 
became  His  avowed  disciple.    3.  He  went  with  Jesus  on  His  way  to  the  cross,  and 
to  the  crown.    4.  He  remained  a  well-known  disciple,  whose  father  s  name  is  given. 
IC.  H.  Spurgeon.)        This  man  came  out  of  cursed  Jericha :— Are  there  not  some  to 
come  from  our  slums  and  degraded  districts  ?    This  man  at  least  was  a  beggar,  but 
the  Lord  Jesus  did  not  disdam  his  company.    He  was  a  standing  glory  to  the  Lord, 
for  every  one  would  know  him  as  the  blind  man  whose  eyes  had  been  opened.    Let 
seeking  souls  persevere  under  all  drawbacks.    Do  not  mind  those  who  would  keep 
you  back.    Let  none  hinder  you  from  finding  Christ  and  salvation.    Though  blmd, 
and  poor,  and  miserable,  you  shall  yet  see,  and  smile,  and  sing,  and  follow  Jesus. 
(Ibid  )        Blind  Bartimeus ;— I.  We  take  those  points  which  speak  to  us  of  odb 
Lord.    We  are  struck  by  the  obvious  fact  that  though  attended  by  a  wondermg 
joyful  crowd.  He  has  an  ear,  grace,  gifts,  for  the  one  ;  so  to  the  one  miserable  man. 
We  are  apt  to  think  the  Lord  of  all  has  so  many  dependent  upon  Him,  our  distress 
may  be  overlooked  by  Him ;  and  this  fear  is  strongest  when  we  are  weakest.     "Lord, 
that  I  may  receive  my  sight."  "  Eeceive  thy  sight "  responds  Christ.    Chnst  gives 
us  iust  as  much  as  we  can  take— as  much  as  we  really  ask  for.    IL  Let  us  now 
OLANCB  AT  BABTIMBU8  AND  HIS  FAITH.    It  is  to  his  faith  that  out  Lord  attributes  his 
healing ;  therefore  our  attention  is  specially  called  to  it.    It  was  surpnsmgly  great. 
There  was  pertinacity  in  his  faith.    Those  who  stand  near  Chnst  may  rebuke  the 
cry  for  mercy.    The  doctrinal  rebuke.    The  philosophical  rebuke.    (S.  Cox,  D.D.) 
The  gate  of  the  city  .-—The  gate  of  the  city  was,  in  the  East,  the  favourite  resort  of 
the  mendicant  class ;  for  there,  not  only  must  all  travellers,  and  caravans,  and 
peasants  bringing  their  wares  to  market,  pass  them  by,  but  the  broad  side-arches  of 
the  gate,  with  their  cool  recesses  and  divans,  were  the  justice-halls  m  which  smts 
and  quarrels  were  adjusted,  and  the  lounging-place  in  which.when  the  labours  of 
the  day  were  over,  the  citizens  gathered  to  discuss  their  local  pohtics  or  to  en]oy 
then:  neighbourly  gossip.    The  very  reason,  therefore,  which  draws  the  beggars  of 
Italy  to  the  fountains  or  the  steps  of  churches,  and  the  beggars  of  Ireland  to  the 
doors  of  hotels,  or  to  the  spots  haunted  by  tourists,  and  the  beggars  of  England  to 
the  crowded  thoroughfares  and  market-places,  drew  the  beggars  of  the  East,  and 
still  draws  them,  to  the  gates  of  the  cities.    There  men  most  congregate,  ana  there 
they  are  most  Ukely  to  meet  some  response  to  their  appeals  for  pity  and  help.  (Ibid.) 
Prayer  of  a  solitary  individual  heard ;— You  have  seen  a  mother  laughing  and 
making  merry  with  happy  friends.  Suddenly  she  pauses,  listens,  and  leaves  the  noisy 
room.     She  has  heard  a  tiny  wail  of  distress  which  you  could  not  hear,  and  she 
cannot  be  content  till  the  cry  of  her  babe  be  hushed,  its  wants  satisfied.     And  shall 
God,  who  made  the  mother's  heart,  be  less  tender,  less  pitiful,  than  the  creature 
He  has  made  ?  I  tell  you.  Nay  ;  but  "  as  one  whom  his  mother  comforteth,    so  will 
God  comfort  all  the  distressed  who  cry  to  Him.     (Ibid.)         The  blind  beggar  ;— 

I.  The  ORIGIN  OF  this  poor  blind  man's  FAITH.  II.  Its  quickness  IN  OBASPINO  T^ 
OBACIOUS  OPPOBTUNITY.  HI.  LiSTEN  TO  THIS  FAITH  WHILST  IT  CBIES  AND  BEGS.  IV. 
ObSEBVI  how  BAOEBLY  it    OBEYED  THE  CALL.      V.   LlSTBN    TO   THIS  FAITH  DE8CBIBINO 

ms  OABB.    Hb  TOLD  IT  AX  ONCB.     (C.   H.  Spurgeov.)        The  blind  man  s  earnest 

28 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

erie»: — "Wherever  Jesus  Christ  is  found,  His  presence  is  marvellously  mighty. 
Providence  at  all  times  co-works  with  grace  in  the  salvation  of  the  chosen  people. 
I.  The  blind  man's  eabnestness  as  a  contrast  to  thb  behavioub  of  many  hsasbbi 
or  THB  WoBD.  By  a  very  short  sermon  he  was  led  to  prayer.  Instead  of  praying 
over  sermons,  a  great  many  disport  themselves  with  them.  Some  are  anxious  for 
others,  whilst  this  man  cried  for  himself.  IL  Notice  this  man's  intense  desibb  as 
AN  absorbing  passion.  Some  plead  the  excuse  of  poverty,  and  demands  of  business ; 
and  these  are  the  two  obstacles  that  Bartimeus  overcame.  Passover :  and  the  passover 
time  when  roads  crowded  with  pilgrims,  was  his  harvest.  III.  His  vehemence  was  a 
most  reasonable  zeal.  He  knew  the  misery  of  blindness.  He  was  a  beggar,  and 
had  learned  the  weakness  of  man.  He  knew  that  Jesus  Christ  was  near.  He  felt 
it  was  now  or  never.  IV.  He  experienced  checks  in  his  pbateb.  V.  BEis  impob- 
tunity  at  last  became  so  mighty,  that  rebuffs  became  arguments  with  him,  (Ibid.) 
A  great  number  of  people. — Christ  and  His  many  followers: — I.  That  the  fol- 
lowers OF  Christ  are  not  necessarily  His  friends  or  true  disciples.  "  He 
went  out  of  Jericho  with  His  disciples,  and  a  great  number  of  people."  1.  In  the 
multitudes  who  accompanied  Jesus  out  of  Jericho,  some,  doubtless,  followed  Him 
out  of  mere  curiosity.  2.  Some  followed  because  it  was  just  then  fashionable  to  do 
so.  3.  Some  followed  with  a  view  to  future  worldly  advantage.  4.  Such  following 
is  generally  useless,  deceptive,  and  mischievous,  being  of  no  real  or  permanent  ad- 
vantage to  any  one.  (1)  It  confers  no  substantial  benefit  on  any  Christian  country. 
(2)  It  is  of  no  real  advantage  to  those  followers  themselves.     II.  The  text  suggests 

to  us  THAT  AMONG   A  MULTITUDE   OF  ChRIST's  FOLLOWERS  YOU  MAY  GENERALLY   EXPECT 

TO  FIND  SOME  FRIENDS.  "With'His  disciples."  Out  of  those  who  follow  from 
curiosity  Christ  is  drawing  many  real  followers.  1.  This  should  encourage  us  to 
persevere  in  our  own  following.  2.  This  should  encourage  us  in  relation  to  other 
followers.  (J.  Morgan.)  Christ  and  the  true  friends  : — I.  That  the  trxtb  friends 
OF  Christ  should  follow  Him  constantly,  closely,  and  collectively.  But  why 
should  we  be  anxious  to  follow  Christ  thus  ?  1.  Because  it  would  gratify  and  glorify 
Christ.  2.  Because  it  would  bring  great  blessings  to  our  own  souls.  3.  Because 
such  following  would  exert  a  blessed  influence  over  our  fellow  creatures.  H.  But 
while  the  friends  of  Christ  should  thus  follow  Him  constantly,  closely,  and  ooUeo- 

tively,   THEY  SHOULD  ALSO   PREACH  HiM  SIMPLY,   DIRECTLY,   AND  LOVINOLT.         "  JeSUB 

of  Nazareth  passeth  by."  1.  The  sermon  was  a  very  simple  one.  2.  It  was  a  very 
evangelical  one.  3.  It  was  a  very  sympathetic  or  loving  one.  (Ibid.)  A  great 
number  of  people: — There  he  sits  hoping  for  mere  worldly  gain.  He  has  not  come 
to  meet  Christ.  It  was  not  in  all  his  thoughts  to  get  his  eyes  opened.  How  many 
like  him  are  before  me — dying  sinners  on  whom  God's  curse  is  resting,  who  yet  did 
not  come  to  secure  the  great  salvation.  God  grant  a  further  parallel ;  that  you  may 
get  what  yon  did  not  come  for,  even  a  solemn  meeting  and  saving  closing  of  your 
souls  with  Jesus  Christ.  A  multitude  with  Jesus  I  a  multitude  of  followers  I  How 
can  He  then  complain,  I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I  have  spent  My  strength  for  nought  f 
Simply  because  He  had  many  followers,  but  few  friends.  A  multitude  with  Jesus  I 
But  it  is  not  all  following  that  blesses.  A  multitude  with  Jesus !  Tea,  when  ELis 
march  is  at  all  triumphal — when  as  He  goes  He  invests  His  progress  with  the  splen- 
dour of  miracles,  there  will  be  no  want  of  a  crowd  to  gape  after  Him.  A  multitude 
with  Jesus!  Take  care,  then,  ye  members  of  the  Church.  Examine  yourselves 
closely.  Profession  of  religion  is  easy  now.  Numbers  give  power,  respectability, 
fashion,  even  enthusiasm.  A  multitude  with  Jesus  I  Blessed  be  God,  in  that 
multitude  some  true  disciples  may  be  found ;  some  who,  though  weak  and  sinning, 
forward,  like  Peter,  when  they  should  be  backward,  and  then  backward,  of  course, 
when  they  should  be  forward ;  ambitious,  hke  Zebedee's  children,  or  doubting,  like 
Thomas,  are  still  true  friends  of  Jesus,  living  for  Him,  suffering  for  Him,  growing 
like  Him  day  by  day,  and  dying  for  Him  without  a  murmur,  if  He  so  appoint 
Among  the  professed  people  of  God  there  have  always  been  real  people  of  God. 
**  And  hearing  the  multitude."  Oh,  what  a  blessing  is  that  I  His  ears  are  open 
though  his  eyes  are  shut.  Thus  God  remembers  to  be  gracious.  Where  He  takes 
one  mercy  He  leaves  another.  My  text  shall  be  my  guide.  The  roadside  was  the 
church,  the  multitude  preached,  and  Bartimeus  was  the  hearer.  And  now  for  the 
sermon — "  And  they  told  him,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  passeth  by  1'*  "Jesus  of  Naza- 
reth passeth  by !  "  So  you  see  it  was  a  powerful  sermon.  It  went  to  the  heart  and 
took  complete  possession  of  it.  It  was  a  very  simple  sermon.  Who  cannot  preach 
it?  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth  passeth  by."  There  is  no  follower  of  Jesus  who  cannot 
tell  poor  blind  souls  this.    A  good  preacher  tries  to  make  all  truth  simple.    He  is  a 


X.]  8T,  MARK.  435 

bad  shepherd,  eay  the  old  writers,  who  holds  the  hay  too  high  for  the  sheep.  Accord- 
ing to  Lord  Baoon,  little  minds  love  to  inflate  plain  things  into  marvels,  while 
great  minds  love  to  reduce  marvels  to  plain  things.  "  The  very  essence  of  truth,'* 
Bays  Milton,  **  is  plainness  and  brightness ;  the  darkness  and  crookedness  are  our 
own."  *•  Better  the  grammarian  should  reprehend,"  says  Jenkyn,  "  than  the  people 
not  understand.  Pithy  plainness  is  the  beauty  of  preaching.  What  good  doth  a 
golden  key  that  openB  not  f  *'  An  old  lady  once  walked  a  great  way  to  hear  the 
celebrated  Adam  Clarke  preach.  She  had  heard  he  was  "  such  a  scholar,"  as  indeed 
he  was.  But  she  was  bitterly  disappointed,  "because,"  said  she,  *'!  understood 
everything  he  said."  And  I  knew  a  man  who  left  the  church  one  morning  quite 
indignant,  because  the  preacher  had  one  thing  in  his  sermon  he  knew  before  1  It 
was  a  little  explanation  meant  for  the  children  ;  dear  little  things — they  are  always 
coming  on,  and  I  love  to  see  their  bright  little  faces  among  the  older  people.  We 
used  to  need  and  prize  these  simple  explanations,  and  why  shouldn't  they  have  them 
in  their  turn?  But,  best  of  all,  this  sermon  was  about  Christ.  He  is  mentioned 
alone.  "  The  excellency  of  a  sermon,"  says  Flavel,  "  lies  in  the  plainest  discoveries 
and  liveliest  applications  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  passeth  by  1  Now  is  your  time ;  make 
haste  to  secure  your  salvation.  How  near  He  is  I  He  passeth  by  in  the  light  of  every 
Sabbath  sun,  in  every  church  built  to  His  name,  in  every  reading  of  His  Word,  in  every 
gospel  sermon,  in  sacraments  and  prayers  and  psalms,  but  most  of  all  in  every  move- 
ment of  His  Spirit  on  the  heart.  But  He  "  passeth  by  I  "  He  will  not  always  tarry.  The 
day  of  grace  is  not  for  ever.  Its  sun  wiU  go  down,  and  the  night  that  follows  is  eternal 
despair.  Christ  never  passed  that  way  again ;  He  may  never  pass  your  way  again.  That 
was  His  last  visit  to  Jericho ;  this  call  may  be  His  last  visit  to  you.  This  was  Barti- 
meus*  only  opportunity  ;  to-day  maybe  your  only  opportunity.  {Prof.  W.  J,  Hoge.) 
Blind  Baxtimeus. — Three  kinds  of  blindness: — The  eye  of  the  body  may  be  out,  and 
we  have  no  name  for  the  result  but  blindness.  The  eye  of  the  intellect  may  be  out, 
and  we  name  the  result  idiocy.  We  say  the  man  is  a  fooL  The  eye  of  the  soul 
may  be  out,  and  God  names  the  result  wickedness.  He  calls  the  man  a  sinner. 
Thmk  of  Bartimeus.  He  rose  this  morning,  and  his  wife  blessed  him,  his  children 
climbed  his  knees  and  kissed  him.  They  ministered  to  his  wants.  They  led  him  a 
little  way  by  the  hand.  But  he  did  not  see  them.  He  knew  of  them,  but  he  could 
not  behold  them.  Their  smiles  or  beauty  were  nothing  to  him — ^he  was  blind. 
Think  of  yourself,  0  sinner  1  You  rose  this  morning,  and  the  eye  of  your  heavenly 
Father  looked  upon  you.  His  hand  led  you,  His  power  guarded  you,  His  goodness 
blessed  you.  But  your  soul  did  not  see  Him.  A  vague  idea  that  God  had  done  it 
all  may  have  occurred  to  you,  but  it  had  no  vividness.  He  was  no  blessed  reality  to 
you.  You  saw  not  the  lineaments  of  a  father — the  loving  eye,  the  benignant  smile. 
You  saw  nothing — your  soul  was  blind.  Think  again  of  Bartimeus.  He  went 
abroad,  and  the  rich  valley  of  the  Jordan  spread  out  before  him.  The  stately  palms 
rose  toward  heaven,  and  waved  their  feathery  tops  in  the  early  breeze.  The  gardens 
of  balsam  were  clothed  in  their  deUcate  spring  verdure,  and  Jericho  sat  in  the  midst 
of  these  vernal  glories,  deserving  its  name— Jericho,  the  place  of  fragrance,  deserving 
its  frequent  description  among  the  ancient  writers — the  City  of  Palms.  And  high 
above  all  was  the  blue  sky,  bending  over  as  if  to  embrace  and  bless  so  much  loveliness 
of  earth ;  and  the  great  sun,  filling  earth  and  sky  and  balmy  air  with  glory.  But 
what  was  all  this  to  Bartimeus  ?  It  might  have  been  narrow  and  black  for  aught  he 
could  tell.  It  was  an  utter  blank,  a  dreadful  gloom  to  him.  All  was  night,  black, 
black  night,  with  no  star.  Why  was  it  so  to  him,  when  to  others  it  was  splendour 
and  joy  ?  Ah  1  he  was  blind.  Unregenerate  man,  think  again  of  yourself.  You 
went  abroad  this  morning,  on  an  earth  once  cursed,  as  of  old  Jericho  had  been,  but 
spared  and  blessed  by  redeeming  mercy,  even  as  Jericho  was  that  day  blessed  by  the 
presence  and  healing  grace  of  Jesus.  Around  you,  too,  was  spread  a  world  of 
spiritual  beauty.  The  walls  and  bulwarks  and  stately  palaces  of  the  city  of  our  God 
were  before  you.  The  rose  of  Sharon,  the  lily  of  the  valley,  the  vine,  the  palm,  the 
olive,  and  the  fig-tree  all  stood  about  you  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  Through  them 
flowed  the  river  of  life,  reflecting  skies  more  high  and  clear  than  the  azure  of  sum- 
mer mornings  ever  imagined,  and  lit  to  its  measureless  depth  by  a  sun  moreglorioua 
than  ever  poured  splendour  even  upon  Eden,  in  our  poor  world's  ancient  prime. 
You  walked  forth  amid  all  this  beauty,  and  many  saw  it — none  perfectly,  yet  some 
very  blessedly — but  you  saw  nothingi  You  see  othing  now.  Nay,  you  cannot  see 
it.  Strain  your  blind  soul  as  you  will,  you  can  t  see  it.  I  see  a  beautiful  mother 
gaze  anxiously  on  her  babe.  She  is  trying  a  fearful  experiment.  She  stretches  out 
her  arms  to  it,  beseeches  it  with  lofing  looks,    olds  out  sparkling  jewel?  to  it,  and 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  x. 

flashes  them  before  its  eyes  in  the  very  sunshine  at  the  open  window.  Bat  the  littW 
eyes  move  not,  or  move  aimlessly,  and  turn  vacantly  away.  And  she  cries  out  in 
anguish,  ••  Oh,  my  poor  child  is  blind  1 "  And  now  I  understand  why  even  tender 
children  turn  away  from  Christ,  seeing  no  beauty  in  Him  that  they  should  desire 
Hirn,  and  caring  nothing  for  all  His  smiles  or  tears,  or  offers  of  the  rich  jewehry  of 
heaven.  They  see  nothing  of  it  all.  They  are  blind,  born  blind.  (Ibid.)  ^  The 
danger  of  the  blind : — I  once  saw  a  man  walk  along  the  edge  of  a  precipice  as  if 
it  were  a  plain.  For  anything  he  knew,  it  was  a  plain,  and  safe.  He  was  calm  and 
fearless,  not  because  there  was  no  danger,  but  because  he  was  blind.  And  who  can- 
not now  understand  how  men  so  wise,  so  cautious  in  most  things,  can  go  so  securely, 
so  carelessly,  even  so  gaily  on,  as  if  eveiything  were  safe  for  eternity,  while  snares 
and  pitfalls  are  all  about  them,  and  death  may  be  just  at  hand,  and  the  next  step 
may  send  them  down  the  infinite  abyss  !  Oh,  we  see  it,  we  see  it — they  are  blind  ! 
A  blind  man  is  more  taken  up  with  what  he  holds  in  his  hand,  than  with  mountains^ 
ocean,  sun,  or  stars.  He  feels  this  ;  but  those  he  can  neither  touch  nor  see.  And 
now  it  is  plain  why  unconverted  .men  undervalue  doctrine,  saying,  that  "  it  is  no 
matter  what  a  man  believes,  so  his  heart  is  right ; "  that  "  one  doctrine  is  at 
good  as  another,  and  for  that  matter,  no  doctrines  are  good  for  much ;  "  and  that 
"  they  don't  believe  in  doctrinal  preaching  at  any  rate."  They,  forsooth,  they  I 
blind  worms,  pronouncing  contemptuously  of  the  stupendous  heights  and  glories  of 
God's  revelation,  where  alone  we  learn  what  we  are  to  beheve  concerning  Him,  and 
what  duty  He  requires  of  us.  It  is  plain,  too,  why  they  see  no  preciousness  in  the 
promises,  no  glory  in  Christ,  no  beauty  in  holiness,  no  grandeur  in  the  work  of  re- 
demption ;  why  they  make  a  mock  at  sin,  despise  God's  threatenings,  brave  His 
wrath,  make  light  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  jest  at  death,  and  rush  headlong  on  certain 
perdition.  They  are  blind.  {Ibid.)  Light  no  remedy  for  blindness : — "  But  we 
want  to  see  them.  If  they  are  real,  they  are  our  concern  as  well  as  youra  Oh,  that 
some  preacher  would  come,  who  had  power  to  make  us  see  them  I "  Poor  souls, 
there  is  no  such  preacher,  and  you  need  not  wait  for  him.  Let  him  gather  God's 
Ught  as  he  will,  he  can  but  pour  it  on  blind  eyes.  A  burning-glass  will  condense 
sunbeams  into  a  focus  of  brightness ;  and  if  a  blind  eye  be  put  there,  not  a  whit  will 
it  see,  though  it  be  consumed.  Light  is  the  remedy  for  darkness,  not  blindness. 
(Ibid.)  Blindness  disqualifies  the  critic : — ^Let  the  people  of  God  no  more  wonder 
then  at  the  clamours  of  infidels  against  the  Scriptures.  Would  you  heed  a  blind 
man  criticising  pictures,  or  raving  against  your  summer  skies  ?  If  he  denies  that 
the  sun  has  brightness,  or  the  mountains  grandeur,  will  you  believe  him  ?  And  if  a 
hundred  blind  men  should  all  declare  that  they  cannot  see  the  stars,  and  argue 
learnedly  that  there  can  be  no  stars,  and  then  grow  witty  and  laugh  at  you  as  star- 
gazers,  would  the  midnight  heavens  be  less  glorious  to  you  ?  When  these  men  had 
thus  satisfactorily  demonstrated  their  blindness,  would  not  the  mighty  works  ol 
God  still  prove  their  bright  reality  to  your  rejoicing  vision  ?  Would  they  not  still 
declare  His  glory  and  show  His  handiwork  7  And  shall  the  spiritually  blind  be 
more  trusted  ?  (Ibid.)  The  blind  man  happy : — In  a  journal  of  a  tour  through 
Scotland,  by  the  Eev.  C.  Simeon,  of  Cambridge,  we  have  the  following  passage : — 
"  Went  to  see  Lady  Boss's  grounds.  Here  also  I  saw  blind  men  weaving.  May  I 
never  forget  the  following  fact.  One  of  the  blind  men,  on  being  interrogated  with 
respect  to  his  knowledge  of  spiritual  things,  answered,  'I  never  saw  till  I  was  blind: 
nor  did  I  ever  know  contentment  when  I  had  my  eyesight,  as  I  do  now  that  I  have 
lost  it :  I  can  truly  affirm,  though  few  know  how  to  credit  me,  that  I  would  on  no 
account  change  my  present  situation  and  circumstances  with  any  that  I  ever  enjoyed 
before  I  was  blind.*  He  had  enjoyed  eyesight  tiU  twenty-five,  and  had  been  blind 
now  about  three  years.  My  soul,"  Mr.  Simeon  adds,  "was  much  affected 
and  comforted  with  his  declaration.  Surely  there  is  reality  in  religion." 
Begging. — When  may  a  man  be  called  poor: — Is  wealth  for  the  body  alone  r  Has 
the  heart  no  riches?  May  not  a  mind  be  impoverished,  a  soul  be  bankrupt? 
Ah  !  yes,  there  are  riches  besides  money,  wealth  to  which  gold  and  rubies  are 
as  nothing.  A  man  is  poor  when  his  need  is  not  supplied.  The  higher  the 
wants,  the  deeper  the  kind  of  poverty,  the  more  the  want,  the  deeper  its  degree. 
A  man  with  neither  food  nor  shelter  is  poorer  than  he  who  lacks  shelter  only. 
And  is  not  the  man  without  love  or  hope  poorer  than  he  who  has  merely  no  fire 
nor  bread  ?  Who  shall  deny  the  name  of  poor  to  him  whose  soul  is  unfurnished  f 
What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat,  the  body  to  the  soul  f  Are  not  the  soul's  desires 
larger  and  more  insatiable  than  those  of  the  flesh  ?  Does  not  the  heart  hunger  ?  Is 
there  no  such  thing  as  "  a  famine  of  truth  and  love  "  t    Do  desolate  spirits  never 


s.]  8T.  MARK.  i87 

oower  and  shiver  and  freeze,  like  houseless  wretches  in  stormy  winter  nights  ?  Night 
and  winter  and  storm — are  they  not  also  for  the  soul  f  And  when  it  has  no  home 
in  its  desolations,  no  refuge  from  its  foes,  no  shelter  from  the  blast,  no  food  for  its 
hnnger,  no  consolation  in  its  sorrows,  is  it  not  poor  ?  poor  in  the  deepest  poverty, 
which  almost  alone  deserves  the  name  of  poverty  7  How  much  of  such  poverty  is 
there,  dwelling  in  princely  halls,  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  faring  sump- 
tuously eveiy  day  I  How  often  does  it  walk  in  royal  processions,  and  flash  with 
jewels,  and  handle  uncounted  gold,  {Ibid.)  Every  tinner  is  a  beggar: — How  can 
it  be  otherwise?  Can  such  poverty  be  independent?  In  outward  poverty,  a  well- 
furnished  mind,  a  wealthy  soul  may  be  an  inward  solace.  But  when  it  is  the  soul 
that  is  bankrupt,  there  is  no  region  still  within,  where  it  may  retire  and  comfort 
itself.  It  will  seek  for  happiness,  and  it  must  look  without— it  is  forced  to  beg. 
And  thus  I  see  poor,  guilty,  blinded  souls  begging — begging  of  earth  and  sky,  and 
air  and  sea,  of  every  passing  event,  of  one  another,  of  all  but  the  great  and  merciful 
God,  who  would  supply  all  their  need  through  Jesus  Christ.  They  must  beg.  The 
vast  desires  of  the  soul,  which  God  gave  that  they  might  be  filled  from  Himself,  and 
which  nothing  but  His  own  fulness  can  satisfy  ;  the  noble  powers  degraded  to  work 
with  trifles  ;  the  aspirations  which  thrill  only  as  they  mount  heavenward,  but  now 
struggle  and  pant  like  an  eagle  with  broken  wing,  and  his  breast  in  the  dust ;  the 
deathless  conscience,  filled  with  guilt  and  touched  with  unappeasable  wrath,  drugged 
indeed,  and  often  sleeping  heavily,  but  waking  surely,  and  then  lashing  the  soul 
inexorably — all  these  compel  it  to  be  a  beggar.  (Ibid.)  Begging  begins  in  child- 
hood:— ^We  beg  then  with  eager  hope.  We  are  sure  we  shall  not  be  disappointed. 
Games,  holidays,  sight-seeing,  all  promise  much,  and  childhood  begs  them  to  make 
it  blessed.  Vexed,  wearied,  sent  empty  away  again  and  again,  the  boy  sees,  further 
on,  tile  youth,  pursuing  his  great  hopes,  and  hastens  to  join  him,  confident  that  in 
higher  excitements  and  larger  hberty,  in  new  aspirations  and  tenderer  love,  his  soul's 
thirst  shall  be  slaked.  Deluded  once  more,  he  grows  sober  and  wise  and  firm.  He 
is  older.  He  is  a  man.  He  lays  deep  plans  now,  puts  on  a  bolder  face,  and  begs 
with  sterner  importunity.  He  can  take  no  denial.  He  must  have  happiness  ;  he 
vnil  be  blessed.  Fame,  wealth,  power — these  have  the  hidden  treasure  he  has  sought 
so  long.  He  knows  now  where  it  is,  and  they  must  give  it  up.  Years  are  passing, 
his  time  will  soon  be  gone,  and  now  he  begs  indeed  1  How  these  idols  lead  his  soul 
captive !  How  he  toils,  cringes,  grovels,  sacrifices  for  their  favour !  Fame,  wealth, 
power— deceitful  gods  I — still  promise  that  to-morrow  the  long-sought  good  shall  be 
given.  But  how  many  to-morrows  come  and  go,  and  leave  him  still  trusting  to  the 
next !  Now  he  forsakes  the  pleasures  he  might  have,  dries  up  the  fountains  of  his 
early  love,  sweeps  all  sentiment  from  his  heart,  crushes  his  dearest  affections,  tasks 
every  power  to  the  utmost,  wrings  out  his  heart's  blood,  and  lays  all  his  soul  before 
his  idol's  feet — and  is  disappointed !  Disappointed  alike  in  failure  and  success  I 
If  he  wins  the  prize,  this  is  not  what  he  coveted,  and  worshipped,  and  bargained 
away  bis  soul  for,  and  he  curses  it  for  a  cheat.  If  he  fails,  he  still  believes  that  the 
true  good  was  there,  and  he  was  near  it ;  and  he  curses  the  chance,  or  envy,  or 
hate  which  snatched  it  from  his  grasp.  But  who  shall  describe  the  base  arts  of  this 
beggary  7  The  disguises,  the  pretences,  the  fawnings — all  the  low  tricks  of  street- 
beggars — are  adopted  and  eclipsed  by  those  who  will  be  rich,  will  be  great,  will  have 
fame.  And  what  are  the  profits  of  thus  begging  the  world  for  what  God  alone  can 
give  ?  Observe  a  street-beggar  for  a  while.  How  many  go  by  and  give  nothing, 
where  one  drops  even  a  penny  in  the  hat !  So  many  of  the  passing  things  of  time 
refuse  altogether  to  give  the  soul  the  good  it  asks.  See  again.  Do  you  mark  the 
impudent  leer  of  that  mean  boy  ?  He  knows  the  beggar  is  blind,  and  so  he  comes 
up  pretending  sympathy,  and  puts  a  pebble,  a  chip  in  that  trembling  hand.  So  a 
thousand  times  have  you  seen  the  world  do  for  a  begging  soul.  But  there  comes  a 
still  meaner  boy ;  he  puts  that  which,  when  the  grateful  old  man's  hand  closes  on 
it  pierces  or  stings  it,  and,  laughing  loudly  in  the  blind,  bevnldered  face,  he  runa 
away.  And  thus  have  I  seen  the  gay,  pohshed  world  put  a  sparkling  crap  to  the 
young  man's  lips ;  but  when  at  last  it  bit  him  like  a  serpent  and  stung  him  like  an 
adder,  the  pohshed  world  jeered  his  imprudence,  and  turned  him  from  its  door. 
His  excesses  and  agony  and  death  must  not  be  seen  there  I  And  when  the  beggar's 
gains  for  the  day  are  fairly  counted,  what  are  they  ?  A  few  oopper  coins,  foul  with 
gangrene,  and  Uttle  bits  of  silver,  rarely, — enough  to  buy  a  scanty  meal  and  a 
poor  lodging,  and  to-morrow  all  is  to  begin  again.  And  thus  the  world  gives — few 
pleasures,  low  pleasures,  brief  pleasures.  They  stay  the  soul's  hunger  for  a  while, 
bat  never  satisfy  it,  so  that  straightway  we  must  go  out  and  beg  again.    The  world 


438  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Ioha».  «. 

never  raised  a  man's  soul  above  beggaiy.  It  is  both  too  selfish  and  too  poor.  It 
gives  but  little  of  what  it  has,  and  if  it  gave  all,  gave  itself,  that  woold  not  fill  and 
bless  an  immortal  soul.  These  things  make  me  think  how  sadly  all  this  begging 
from  the  world  ends.  The  hour  comes  when  the  world  can  do  no  more.  It  is  a 
bitter  hoar — an  hoar  of  pain  and  angoish,  of  weakness  and  despair — the  hoar  of 
death.  The  world  is  roaring  away  as  ever,  in  basiness  and  mirth,  all  onoonsciooa 
that  the  poor  man  who  loved  and  worshipped  it  so,  is  dying.  Bat  oh,  the  begging 
of  God  which  now  begins  1  Bitter  crying  to  Him  whose  gracious  heart  has  been 
waiting  to  bless  these  many  years,  waiting  in  vain  for  one  sigh  of  contrition,  one 
prayer  of  faith  to  His  infinite  grace  1  Bat  it  is  too  late.  His  patient,  insalted 
Spirit  has  been  grieved  at  length.  He  has  departed.  (Ibid.)  And  when  he  heard. — 
And  when  he  heard : — Eternal  salvation  depends  on  right  hearing.  There  are  just 
two  kinds  of  hearing,  not  three.  There  is  a  hearing  anto  Hfe,  and  another  hearing 
unto  death ;  but  there  is  no  hearing  between — none  to  indifference.  You  may  try 
to  hear  merely  that  you  may  hear,  and  let  that  be  the  end  of  it — ^bat  that  will  not 
be  the  end  of  it.  The  end  of  it  will  be  life  or  death  1  Yoa  may  resolve  that  the 
preaching  shall  make  no  difference  in  you ;  but  it  will  make  a  difference  in  you,  and 
the  difference  will  be  salvation  or  perdition  1  The  gospel  leaves  no  man  where  it 
lound  him.  If  it  be  not  wings  to  bear  him  to  heaven,  it  will  be  a  mill-stone  to  sink 
him  to  hell.  Some  of  you  think  it  the  lightest  of  pastimes  to  come  to  choroh  and 
bear  a  sermon.  I.  His  hearing  led  him  to  action.  His  very  soul  seemed  to  be 
roused,  and  be  began  to  do  something.  Oh,  for  a  pulse  of  hfe  in  those  frozen  hearts  1 
A  flush  of  blood,  even  though  it  were  angry  blood,  in  those  pale  cheeks  I  •'  I  came 
to  break  your  head,"  said  a  man  once  to  Whitefield,  ''but  by  the  grace  of  God 
you  have  broken  my  heart."  That  was  a  vile  purpose  to  go  to  church  with,  but  if 
he  had  gone  in  a  complacent  frame,  and  quietly  slept  or  coolly  criticised  the  preacher, 
it  would  have  been  far  worse.  He  would  not  have  carried  away  that  priceless 
treasure — a  broken  heart.  If  what  we  say  is  true,  why  do  you  not  act  upon  it  ?  II 
false,  how  can  you  bear  to  be  charged  with  it  f  If  our  charges  are  false,  they  are 
also  insulting  and  outrageous.  If  you  believe  them  to  be  false,  your  conduct,  in 
hearing  them  so  calmly,  and  coming  back  to  hear  them  again,  and  even  sometimes 
applauding  us  for  the  vehement  way  in  which  we  assail  and  denoonce  you,  is  per- 
fectly astonishing.  Or  if  you  say  you  beUeve  these  things  to  be  trne,  your  conduct 
is  still  more  amazing.  If  true,  they  should  concern  you  infinitely :  yet  you  are  not 
concerned  at  all.  You  will  call  Bartimeus  a  fool  if  he  does  not  try  to  get  his  eyes 
opened  this  very  day.  But  what  name  will  you  reserve  for  yourselves,  if,  while 
I  this  day,  as  one  of  these  ambassadors  of  God,  offer  you  pardon  and  healing 
and  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ,  who  now  passes  by  to  bestow  them, 
you  once  more  refuse  the  Saviour,  and  go  on  as  before  toward  perdition? 
II.  This  reveals  to  us  the  second  mark  of  right  hearing — It  fills  ▲  mam  with 
EABNESTNEss.  If  he  has  heard  such  truth  as  he  ought,  he  not  only  acts,  but  acta 
with  energy.  Thus  Bartimeus  acted.  ^'When  he  heard  he  cried  out."  So  it 
must  be  with  you,  0  sinners.  If  you  would  enter  heaven  you  must  be  in  earnest 
about  it.  Let  UB  now  see  how  this  earnestness  found  expression.  So  shall  we  have 
another  mark  of  true  hearing.  III.  When  the  gospel  is  heard  aright,  it  leads  to 
PRATKB.  This  was  the  first  thing  Bartimeus  did,  when  he  was  told  that  Jesus  was 
passing  by — he  prayed.  And  this  is  always  the  first  thing  for  a  lost  sinner  who 
hears  of  Christ — let  him  pray.  A  soul  truly  in  earnest  after  salvation  will  cry  for 
belp.  Self-preservation  is  the  first  law  of  nature,  and  when  our  strength  fails, 
prayer  is  nature's  messenger  for  helpers.  And  when  did  nature  fail  to  pray  in  her 
need  ?  Hunger  wUl  beg  and  pain  cry  out.  Though  the  fever  have  caused  madness, 
the  sufferer  will  still  ciy  for  water.  None  need  teach  the  babe  to  clamour  for  its 
nurture.  Birds  can  plead  for  tiieir  young,  and  the  dog  entreat  you,  with  all  the 
power  of  speech,  to  follow  him  to  the  forest,  where  his  master  lies  robbed  and 
bleeding.  And  has  the  soul  no  voice  in  its  sickness  unto  death  ?  Is  the  instinct 
of  the  brute  a  sure  guide,  and  do  the  reason  and  conscience  of  men  slumber  or  lie  f 
Or  are  they  quicksighted  and  honest  about  bodily  wants  and  earthly  things,  only  to 
show  themselves  utterly  besotted,  when  glory,  honour,  and  immortality  are  at  stake  ? 
When  your  souls  are  in  jeopardy,  must  you  be  phed  with  such  urgency  before  you 
will  cry  for  help?  If  the  voice  of  grace,  sometimes  warning,  sometimes  inviting,  cannot 
wake  you  and  bring  you  to  your  knees,  God  will  try  the  voice  of  unmixed  vengeance. 
IV.  And  do  it  at  once.  Pbohptness  is  another  mark  of  a  good  hearer  of  the  gospeL 
It  is  found  in  Bartimeus.  ♦♦  And  when  he  heard,"  that  is,  as  soon  as  he  beard,  ♦*  ha 
began  to  cry  out."    But  what  need  of  such  haste?    "Jesus  is  going  slowly,"  h« 


CHAP.  X.J  ST.  MARK,  439 

might  say,  "and  some  little  while  must  pass  before  He  is  gone.    Be  sure  I  will  be 
in  time  "    •*  Or  if  He  does  get  a  little  out  of  sight,"  Bartimeus  might  say,  "  while  I 
am  attending  to  some  little  matters,  I  will  run  after  Him  and  call  Him."     *♦  But  I 
only  want  a  little  time,  and  that  for  most  important  business,"  Bartimeus  might 
plead.    But  if  Bartimeus  choose  to  attend  to  his  alms  instead  of  his  eyes,  see  if  he 
has  not  a  still  stronger  reason.     Begging  is  not  only  his  business,  but  this  happens 
to  be  a  very  "  busy  season,"  as  we  say  in  the  city,  or  ♦'  harvest-time,"  as  they  say  in 
the  country.    A  multitude  was  passing  I    He  might  go  home  almost  rich — might 
almost  retire  from  business  1    And  after  all  has  not  Providence  given  him  this  op- 
portunity, and  would  it  be  exactly  right  to  throw  it  away  ?    So  have  I  heard  pro- 
fessors of  religion  and  non-professors  reason.    So  do  they  put  earth's  business 
above  all  the  calls  of  God.     V.  and  VI.  Two  other  marks  of  a  good  hearer  of  the 
gospel  are  found  in  Bartimeus.     He  heard  with  faith  and  humility.    He  trusted 
in  Jesus  and  was  lowly  in  heart.    His  faith  even  outran  the  word  of  the  multitude. 
They  spoke  of  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth," — Nazareth  of  Galilee — a  despised  town  of  a 
despised  province :  but  he  could  call  Him  "  Son  of  David,"  and  "  Lord."    And  how 
deep  was  his  humility  !     He  hid  nothing,  pretended  nothing.    He  came  as  he  was. 
Blind,  he  came  as  blind.    Poor,  he  came  as  poor.    A  beggar,  he  came  as  a  beggar. 
And  so  it  is  always.    Faith  and  humility  meet  in  the  sinner's  experience,  not  as 
occasional  companions  only ;  they  ever  walk  lovingly  together  as  sisters.    They 
cannot  separate.    Like  the  Siamese  twins  they  hve  in  each  other's  presence 
alone;  should  they  part,  they  would  die.    A  sinner  cannot  believe  in  Jesus  and 
not  be  humble;  he  cannot  be  truly  humble  without  believing  in  Jesus.     (Ibid.) 
That  he  should  hold  his  peace.     That  he  should  hold  hia  peace : — There  is  never  a 
knock  at  heaven's  gate  but  it  sounds  through  hell,  and  devils  come  out  to  silence 
it.     The  ungodly  world  bids  anxious  souls  to  hold  their  peace.    It  cannot  bear  the 
sinner's  distress.     If  his  conscience  is  disturbed  its  own  is  not  quite  easy.    There- 
fore the  world  sets  itself  to  make  an  end  of  these  convictions.     For  this  it  has 
innumerable  devices.     It  will  flatter  or  curse.    For  some  it  has  persecutions,  for 
others  promotions.    But  I  pause  not  on  any  of  these.    I  wish  now  to  address  the 
professed  people  of  God.    I  say,  then,  plainly :  you  are  in  great  danger  every  day 
of  rebuking  anxious  souls,  and  charging  them  to  hold  their  peace.     I.  By  injudi- 
cious CBiTicisM  OF  SERMONS  you  may  stifle  convictions  and  drive  sinners  away  from 
Christ.    I  cannot  better  illustrate  this  caution  than  by  a  true  narrative  from  ♦*  The 
Central  Presbyterian."    "  A  pious  lady  once  left  a  church  in  this  city  (Kichmond), 
in  company  with  her  husband,  who  was  not  a  professor  of  religion.     She  was  a 
woman  of  unusual  vivacity,  with  a  keen  perception  of  the  ludicrous,  and  often 
playfully  sarcastic.    As  they  walked  along  toward  home,  she  began  to  make  some 
amusing  and  spicy  comments  on  the  sermon,  which  a  stranger,  a  man  of  very 
ordinary  talents  and  awkward  manner,  had  preached  that  morning  in  the  absence 
of  the  pastor.    After  running  on  in  this  vein  of  sportive  criticism  for  some  time, 
surprised  at  the  profound  silence  of  her  husband,  she  turned  and  looked  np  in  his 
face.*    He  was  in  tears.     That  sermon  had  sent  an  arrow  of  conviction  to  his 
heart  1     What  must  have  been  the  anguish  of  the  conscience-stricken  wife,  thus 
arrested  in  the  act  of  ridiculing  a  discourse  which  had  been  the  means  of  awakening 
the  anxiety  of  her  unconverted  husband  1"     II.  Beware  also  of  unseasonablb 
LEVITY  AFTBB  SOLEMN  APPEALS.    III.  This  briugs  to  mind  another  way  by  which 
you  may  bid  sinners  hold  their  peace — by  blindness  to  any  beginning  conceen. 
Would  you  see  how  you  should  watch  ?    Come  with  me  to  the  chamber  where  a 
babe  lies  dying.    A  breathless  messenger  has  gone  for  the  physician,  but  still  he 
comes  not.    How  the  worn  mother  gazes  on  her  little  sufferer  in  an  agony  of  fond- 
ness and  fear ;  how  she  sinks  in  anguish  before  the  mercy-seat,  and  pleads  like  the 
Syrophenician  woman  at  the  feet  of  Jesus ;  how  she  rises  wildly,  and  watches  at 
the  window  for  the  physician ;  how  at  every  sound  of  wheels  she  flushes  with 
eagerness,  and  then  grows  sick  at  heart  as  they  turn  the  comer,  and  the  sound 
dies  away  ;  how  she  springs  to  the  door  as  his  well-known  etep  is  heard  on  the 
stair ;  and  then,  as  he  searches  every  symptom,  how  she  waits  on  his  every  look, 
living  on  a  gleam  of  hope,  ready  to  die  if  his  face  is  darkened  by  a  cloud  I    IV. 
Nor  is  this  the  worst.     Professing  parents  often  lay  plans  fob  theib  chudben 
dzbectly  opposed  to  the  Spirit's  wore.  {Ibid.)    Pertinacity  successful  in  the  end  : — 
Success  in  this  world  comes  only  to  those  who  exhibit  determination.    Can  we 
hope  for  salvation  unless  our  mind  is  truly  set  upon  it  ?    Grace  makes  a  man  to 
be  as  resolved  to  be  saved  as  this  beggar  was  to  get  to  Jesus,  and  gain  his  sight. 
**  I  must  see  him,"  said  an  applicant  at  the  door  of  a  public  person.    *'  Yon  caimol 


;40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  & 

ee  him,"  said  the  servant ;  but  the  man  waited  at  the  door.  A  friend  went  out  to 
'lira,  and  said,  *' You  cannot  see  the  master,  but  I  can  give  you  an  answer."  "No," 
ae  replied;  ••  I  will  stay  all  night  on  the  doorstep,  but  I  will  see  the  man  himselL 
de  alone  will  serve  my  turn."  You  do  not  wonder  that,  after  many  rebuffs,  he 
altimately  gained  his  point ;  it  would  be  infinitely  greater  wonder  if  an  importunate 
jinner  did  not  obtain  an  audience  from  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  you  must  have  grace,  you 
jhall  have  it.  If  you  will  not  be  put  off,  you  shall  not  be  put  off.  Whether  thing» 
ook  favourable  or  unfavourable,  press  you  on  till  you  find  Jesus,  and  you  shall  find 
Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  And  Jesus  stood  still.  Arresting  Christ : — When  Jesus 
thus  ♦'  stood  still,"  He  was  on  His  way  for  the  last  time  to  Jerusalem.  His  "  hour" 
^as  drawing  nigh,  and  He  was  hastening  to  meet  it.  Can  He  be  arrested  in 
ihis  journey?  Where  is  the  event  mighty  enough  to  stay  His  course?  What 
iestiny  of  man  or  empire  is  worthy  even  of  a  thought  from  Him  now? 
'  He  stood  still."  Let  us  also  stand  and  admire.  Here  let  us  learn  the  grace 
»f  our  Redeemer,  and  lay  up  in  our  hearts  the  blessed  teaching.  Then 
nay  we  learn  how  unreasonable  and  how  unnatural  is  a  favourite  clamour  of 
nfidels  against  the  gospel.  They  say  they  carmot  believe  that  the  Son  of  God 
came  to  this  world  and  died  for  its  redemption.  This  world  is  too  small  and  mean 
•n  the  great  scale'of  the  universe,  to  allow  them  to  think  that  the  Creator  of  countless 
oaillions  of  glorious  suns  and  systems,  could  have  stooped  to  love  and  care  and 
iuffer  and  die  for  the  poor  creatures  of  a  day,  who  live  on  this  insignificant  planet. 
To  a  narrow  vision  a  structure  may  seem  unsightly  from  its  vastness,  while  in 
miniature  the  same  eye  might  find  the  proportions  exquisite.  And  have  we  not,  in 
this  standing  still  of  Jesus,  amidst  tna  urgencies  of  such  a  journey,  at  the  call  of  a 
beggar,  a  miniature  of  the  very  things  by  which  some  are  confounded  or  repelled, 
in  the  immense  transactions  of  the  Atonement  ?  It  was  worthy  of  the  illustrious 
Stranger — nay,  it  was  beautiful,  it  was  sublime — to  stay  for  the  relief  of  the  un- 
happy beggar,  though  His  own  mind  was  burdened  with  the  weight  of  the  infinite 
sacrifice  He  was  about  to  offer.  Then  who  shall  so  vilify  the  redemption  of  men 
by  the  Gross,  as  to  pronounce  it  unworthy  of  the  Sovereign  of  a  universe  to  which 
our  earth  is  but  an  atom  ?  Shall  an  astronomer  be  so  lost  in  God's  glory  declared 
by  the  heavens,  in  their  measureless  and  bright  immensity,  as  to  scorn  the  thought 
of  His  upholding  and  blessing  each  sun  and  star  ?  Then,  if  these  philosophers 
gaze  on  the  luminous,  illimitable  fields  of  creation,  until  their  dazzled  minds  turn 
back  with  contempt  to  the  world  on  which  they  dwell,  and  find  no  worth  nor 
grandeur  in  the  Cross  which  redeems  it,  though  it  saves  numbers  without  number 
from  perdition,  and  glorifies  them  in  the  light  of  God,  and  displays  His  Attributes 
before  an  admiring  universe,  let  us  hold  up  the  confessed  truthfulness  and  beauty 
of  this  simple  incident,  till,  "  like  a  mirror  of  diamond,  it  pierce  .their  misty  eye* 
ball "  and  lead  them  on  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  truth.  "  Jesus  stood  still," 
and  when  did  He  ever  refuse  to  stay  at  the  call  of  the  distressed  sinner  ?  Nay,  if 
He  stayed  then,  when  can  He  refuse  ?  Is  He  not  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and 
for  ever  ?  The  fires  of  eternal  vengeance  stood  still  over  Sodom  till  Lot  was  gone 
out.  The  waves  stood  still,  and  the  depths  were  congealed  in  the  heart  of  the  sea 
till  the  children  of  Israel  passed  over.  The  down-rushing  waters  of  swollen  Jordan 
stood  still,  as  the  feet  of  the  priests  touched  their  brim,  and  rose  up  as  a  wall  till 
the  chosen  tribes  had  gained  their  inheritance.  At  the  cry  of  Joshua,  the  sun 
stood  still  in  the  midst  of  the  heavens,  and  the  moon  in  the  valley  of  Ajalon,  until 
the  Lord's  hosts  had  avenged  themselves  upon  their  enemies.  So  we  may  look 
upon  His  call,  and  the  gracious  call  of  every  sinner  who  becomes  a  saint,  in  its 
Divine  origin,  its  gentle  instruments,  and  its  effectual  aids.  I.  "  He  called." 
Our  vocation  is  of  God.  He  hath  called  us  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous 
light.  "  He  called."  This  word  of  Matthew  contains,  as  in  the  seed,  the  ex- 
pressions of  Mark  and  Luke.  All  the  agencies,  by  which  the  soul  is  persuaded  and 
enabled  to  embrace  Jesus  Christ  freely  offered  to  us  in  the  gospel,  are  hidden  in 
this.  His  loving  call,  as  the  leaves  and  flowers  and  golden  fruit  are  all  folded  in  the 
germ.  Many  providences,  many  scriptures,  many  ordinances,  many  movements  of 
the  Spirit  may  lay  hold  on  a  soul  to  draw  it  to  Christ  ;  but  they  are  all  so  many 
threads  which  Christ  holds  in  His  own  hand.  They  have  all  their  power  from 
His  drawing.  Then  let  us  use  this  truth  for  holy  fear.  If  you  resist  the  appeals 
of  God's  ministers,  you  resist  God.  "  He  called."  In  Jesus  Christ  we  behold  the 
best  of  preachers — the  Divine  Exemplar  after  whom  all  should  copy.  II.  "He 
commanded  him  to  be  called."  Th  Lord  gave  the  word  ;  great  was  the  company 
of  them  that  published  it.    Let  him  that  heareth,  say,  Come  1    Then  all  the  called 


enAF.  X.]  8T,  MARK,  441 

may  themselves  become  callers.  III.  And  now  what  a  word  of  good  oheer  the 
third  evangelist  speaks — **  He  oommanded  him  to  be  brought  unto  Him  !  '*  Admire 
the  Lord's  grace  to  the  blind  man.  He  will  not  leave  him  to  grope  his  dark  way 
alone.  Some  shall  lead  him  by  tha  hand.  In  whatever  way,  he  shall  have  all  thd 
aid  he  needs  to  come  into  the  Saviour's  very  presence.  Blessed  thought  1  that  we 
j^ho  are  but  men  may  have  some  share  in  this  dear  work  of  guiding  blind  souls  to 
Jesus.  But  here  I  rather  choose  to  think  of  the  higher  than  human  aid,  which  Christ 
sends  with  His  word  to  the  souls  of  His  chosen.  The  energy  of  Almighty  power  accom- 
panies the  preaching  of  the  truth,  i  The  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say,  Come  I  {Prof.  W. 
J.  Hoge.)  A  gospel  sermon  to  outsiders  : — I.  Many  persons  who  are  really  seeking  the 
Saviour  greatly  want  comforting.  There  is  a  sort  of  undefined  fear  that  these  good 
things  are  not  for  them.  They  are  cast  down  because  they  think  they  have  been 
seeking  in  vain.  They  are  sad  because  many  round  about  them  discourage  them. 
Their  sadness  also  rise  from  their  spiritual  ignorance.  They  regard  conversion  as 
something  very  terrible.  II.  This  comfort  is  to  be  found  in  the  text.  The  general 
gospel  call  ought  to  yield  great  comfort  to  any  seeking  soul.  But  there  is  also  an 
effectual  call.  III.  This  comfort  should  lead  to  immediate  action.  The  exhorta- 
tion to  rise  means  instant  decision.  It  means  also  resolution.  You  are  also  to 
cast  away  everything  that  would  hinder  you  from  finding  salvation.  {C,  H.  Spurgeon.) 
He  calleth  thee.  The  analogy  would  be  perfect,  if  those  who  were  sent  to  Barti- 
meus  had  themselves  been  blind,  until  their  eyes  had  been  opened  by  Christ.  And 
who  can  say  that  it  was  not  so  with  some  of  them  ?  Then  with  what  generous 
indignation  must  they  have  heard  the  cruel  rebukes  of  the  multitude  1  Then,  too, 
with  what  alarmed  sympathy  would  these  men,  once  blind,  now  seeing,  have 
regarded  Bartimeus,  if  he  had  wavered  in  his  earnestness  after  Christ  I  And  with 
what  alacrity  would  these  messengers  of  Christ  have  hastened  to  bear  His  words  of 
welcome  to  the  blind  man  I  Joy  beyond  expression  would  have  inspired  them.  I 
have  heard  of  a  caravan  which  had  lost  its  way  in  the  desert.  For  days  they  could 
find  no  water.  The  suffering  was  sore,  and  many  were  perishing.  Men  were  out 
in  all  directions  searching  for  the  water  that  was  to  be  indeed  water  of  life.  At 
last,  faint  and  ready  to  die,  one  man  lighted  on  a  spring.  Cool  and  clear  the 
stream  gushed  from  the  rock.  Almost  frantic  with  thirst,  he  rushed  forward  and 
drank,  drank.  Oh,  how  deep  was  the  bliss  of  that  draught  I  Is  it  strange  that  for 
one  moment  he  thought  only  of  himself  ?  But  suddenly  the  perishing  multitude 
came  before  his  mind,  and  he  leaped  up,  and  ran  shouting,  •♦  Water  1  water  I 
Enough  for  all !  Come  and  drink ! "  And  so  from  rank  to  rank  of  that  scattered 
host  he  sped,  until  he  had  told  them  all,  and  was  himself  thirsty  again.  But  when 
he  saw  the  eager  crowds  rushing  to  the  fountain,  when  he  beheld  the  refreshment 
and  gladness  of  all  hearts  and  faces,  and  then  stooped  once  more  himself  to  drink 
the  hberal  stream,  was  not  his  second  draught  full  of  deeper  bliss  than  even  the 
first?  Had  he  ever  tasted  such  water  as  that?  O  blessed  souls  who  have  drank 
of  the  river  of  life,  lift  up  your  voice  upon  the  mountains,  and  let  your  feet  be 
swift  upon  the  plains,  publishing  the  good  tidings  of  salvation.  This  brings  to 
view  the  joyfulness  of  the  gospel.  It  is  not  a  message  of  gloom,  a  thing  to  be 
whispered  in  darkness  as  a  dreadful  secret.  We  dishonour  the  gospel  when  we 
would  recommend  it  by  a  melancholy  visage.  Such  is  the  spirit  of  the  tidings 
these  messengers  bring  to  Bartimeus,  in  this,  his  second  gospel  sermon.  The  first 
told  him  simply  that  Jesus  was  passing  by.  Now  he  hears  these  heart-reviving 
words,  ••  Be  of  good  comfort ;  rise ;  He  calleth  thee."  '*  Be  of  good  comfort."  On 
thy  long  night,  without  moon  or  star,  or  even  a  dim  candle  in  thy  dwelling,  the 
Day-star  is  dawning.  Thine  eyes  have  never  been  used  but  for  weeping ;  they 
seemed  only  made  for  tears.  But  now  they  shall  serve  thee  for  seeing.  Sinners, 
poor,  wretched,  and  blind,  but  crying  for  the  Saviour,  be  not  disconsolate.  "  Be  of 
good  comfort."  After  your  night  of  weeping,  your  morning  of  joy  has  come. 
"  Bise  1 "  say  the  preachers  to  Bartimeus,  and  so  we  cry.  There  is  salvation  for  the 
sinner,  none  for  the  sluggard.  Bise,  then,  ye  unpardoned.  Away  with  your  fears 
and  doubts.  They  are  unreasonable  and  wicked.  Break  off  your  indifference.  It 
is  a  noiseless  chain,  indeed,  but  be  not  deceived ;  the  chain  that  does  not  clank  is 
the  tightest.  Let  me  take  the  trumpet  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  may  He  fill  it  wiUi 
a  sound  that  shall  pierce  your  heart ; — Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from 
the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light !  "  He  alleth  thee."  What  more  canst 
thou  want,  Bartimeus  ?  If  He  calls  thee.  He  will  cure  thee.  If  He  calls,  who  can 
forbid  ?  Thy  call  is  thy  warrant.  The  call  of  Christ  is  warrant  enough  for  any 
sinner.    He  may  use  it  against  the  Law  and  Satan  and  his  own  evil  oonscieuce* 


H2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [0HA».  & 

For  example,  Satan  comes  to  him  and  says — "  What,  wretch  I  art  thon  going  to 
Christ  f"  "Ay,  that  I  am,  with  all  my  heart."  "Bat  will  He  receive  thee?" 
"  Ay,  that  He  will,  with  all  His  heart."  "  Truly,  thou  art  a  brave  talker  I  Who 
taught  thee  this  lofty  speech  ?  "  •*  Nay,  my  speech  is  lowly,  and  I  learned  it  of  my 
Lord."  But  where  is  thy  warrant  ?  None  can  go  to  Christ  without  a  warrant." 
"He  calleth  me — be  that  my  warrant!"  ''But  where  is  thy  fitness?"  sayi 
Satan,  shifting  his  ground.  "  Be  my  warrant  my  fitness — ^He  calleth  me,"  answen 
the  sinner,  keeping  his  ground,  his  only  ground.  "  But  listen,  soul  1  Thou  art 
going  before  a  King.  He  cannot  look  upon  iniquity  "  (for  you  see  Satan  can 
quote  Scripture),  "  and  thou  art  but  a  mass  of  iniquity  "  (here  the  devil  affects  a 
great  horror  of  it,  to  fill  the  sinner  with  fear^.  "  The  heavens  are  not  clean  in  Hia 
sight ;  how  then  shall  thy  filthiness  appear  oefore  Him  f  Look  at  thy  rags,  if  thy 
blind  eyes  will  let  thee,  and  say,  what  a  dress  is  this  to  take  into  His  presence  I  " 
"  It  is  all  true,"  says  the  contrite  sinner,  "  still  I  will  go,  for  He  calleth  me.  I  will 
bind  this  call  about  me  and  it  shall  be  my  dress,  till  He  give  me  another.  I  will 
hold  up  this  call,  written  with  His  own  hand,  and  signed  with  His  own  name, 
and  sealed  with  His  own  blood,  and  it  shall  be  my  defence  and  plea.  Miserable 
and  unworthy  as  I  am,  and  deserving,  I  know,  to  die,  with  this  I  have  boldness  and 
access  with  confidence,  saying  only,  like  httle  Samuel,  Here  am  I,  for  Thou  didsl 
call  me  1 "  Bartimeus  needed  no  more.  "  Casting  away  his  garment,  he  rose  and 
came  to  Jesus."  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  True  earnestness  does  not  wait. 
Conscious  wretchedness  in  the  presence  of  a  trusted  Saviour  cannot  delay.  Only 
half-convictions  can  procrastinate.  The  ancient  heathen  had  this  saying :  "  Tht 
feet  of  the  avenging  deities  are  shod  with  wool."  Shod  with  wool  1  Yes,  they 
crept  with  noiseless  steps,  that  the  touch  that  aroused  might  be  the  blow  that  de> 
etroyed.  It  is  not  so  with  our  merciful  God.  He  sounds  an  alarm  that  we  may 
seek  a  refuge.  His  thunder  rolls  along  the  distant  horizon,  that  we  may  take  in 
sail  and  be  ready  for  the  storm,  the  storm  which  would  have  burst  upon  ns  no  lesi 
surely  without  this  gracious  warning.  As  Bartimeus  rose  to  hasten  to  Jesus, 
he  "  cast  away  his  garment,"  his  loose  upper  robe.  He  would  sufifer  no  hin. 
drance.  He  may  have  thrown  it  aside  unconsciously,  but  it  was  the  action  of 
nature— nature  in  earnest  for  some  great  end.  Let  us  take  the  lesson.  If  we 
would  win  Christ,  we  must  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which  so  easily 
besets  ns — ^the  sin  we  have  daily  wrapped  about  us  like  our  garment.  (Prof. 
W.  J,  Hoge,)  What  wUt  thon?  OurufaTOs  imut  be  expressed :—U  we  would 
conmiune  with  Christ,  we  must  draw  near  to  Him.  If  we  would  hear  Hia 
voice,  we  must  fall  down  before  Him.  It  is  only  there  that  heaven  and 
earth  may  meet  in  peace.  "What  wilt  thon  that  I  should  do  unto  thee?  " 
A  goodly  word,  indeed  I  What  would  not  a  soul,  struggling  in  the  depths  and 
entanglements  of  sin,  give  once  to  hear  it  from  his  Lord?  Let  us  admire 
— L  The  FXJLKXss  of  thb  gbacb.  The  tender  love  of  Christ  to  lost  souls  is  a 
great  deep,  without  bottom  and  without  shore.  The  wing  of  no  angel  can  bear 
him  BO  high  that  he  can  look  over  all  its  extent.  The  guilt  of  no  sinner  has 
been  able  to  sound  all  its  depth.  King  Ahasuerus  said  unto  Queen  Esther  at 
the  banquet  of  wine,  What  is  thy  petition  ?  and  it  shall  be  granted  thee :  and 
what  is  thy  request?  even  to  the  half  of  my  kingdom  shall  it  be  performed. 
And  so  the  monarchs  of  the  East  delighted  to  speak.  But  their  utmost  promisa 
was  half  the  kingdom,  and  their  kingdoms  were  earthly,  bounded  and  unsubstantial, 
and  their  pompous  generosity  often  but  the  flourishing  rhetoric  of  lust,  pride,  an4 
wine.  But  Jesus  puts  no  limit  to  His  offers.  Ask,  it  shall  be  given  you.  Ask, 
and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full.  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  Mv 
name,  that  will  I  do.  In  Him  are  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  AU 
power  is  given  unto  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  IL  Let  us  also  admire  ths 
FBEENEss  07  Chbist's  OFFERS  TO  LOST  siNNEBS.  The  freonass  of  the  offer  springa 
from  the  fulness  of  the  grace.  "  What  wilt  thou  ?  "  Choose  for  thyself,  Bartimeus. 
If  thou  dost  not  carry  away  a  noble  gift,  it  is  thine  own  fault.  I  do  not  set  bounds 
to  thy  desires.  The  treasure  is  infinite,  and  thou  hast  it  all  to  choose  from.  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  not  straitened,  and  if  we  are,  it  is  in  ourselves.  (Jod's  graoa 
is  always  larger  than  man's  desire,  and  freer  than  his  faith.  If  we  take  httle 
pitchers  to  the  well,  we  shall  carry  little  water  away.  Though  the  golden  bowl  ba 
full  of  golden  oil,  the  lamp  will  bum  dim,  if  the  golden  pipe  be  narrow  or  ohokad. 
The  ocean  itself  can  pour  but  a  scanty  stream  through  a  slender  channel.  UI.  Sn 
HOW  Chbibx'b  obacb  ookdescends  to  bvebt  soul's  pkculiab  need.  He  will  suit 
His  grantilg  to  our  asking.     To  e  ery  soul  He  says,  "  What  wilt  thou  ?  "  IV.  Tbia 


z.]  ST.  MARK, 


question  teaches  that,  thongh  Ghbxbt  shows  w:iat  we  want  and  what  Hb  will 
DO,  Hs  WILL  BATS  US  EXPRESS  ouB  WANTS.  Through  all  the  oold,  dark  night  the 
petals  of  the  flower  were  shut.  So  the  sun  found  it  and  poured  his  rays  upon  it,  till  its 
heart  felt  the  warmth.  Then  it  yearned  to  be  filled  with  these  pleasant  beams,  and 
opened  its  bosom  to  drink  them  in.  And  so  it  is  with  man's  prayer  and  God's 
grace.  How  pointless  are  the  prayers  we  often  hear.  They  scatter  weakly  over 
the  whole  ground.  They  have  no  aim  and  do  no  execution.  If  we  would  pray 
well,  we  must  have  something  to  pray  for,  something  we  really  crave,  we  must 
know  our  wants,  feel  our  wants,  express  our  wants.  We  must  have  "  an  errand 
at  the  Throne."  I  learned  that  expression  from  a  pious  old  slave.  He  was 
asked  the  secret  of  the  fervour  and  spirit  with  which  he  always  prayed.  **  Oh," 
said  he,  "I  have  always  an  errand  at  the  Throne,  and  then  I  just  tell  the  Lord 
what  I  come  for,  and  wait  for  an  answer."  Thus,  too,  shall  we  wait  for  an 
answer.  Even  the  sportsman,  who  cares  not  for  his  game,  follows  the  arrow 
with  his  eye,  till  he  sees  it  strike.  But  how  many  never  oast  a  second  glance 
after  a  prayer  which  has  left  their  lips  I  (I&td.)  What  wilt  thou  t : — Did  the 
omniscient  Redeemer  not  know  what  was  the  calamity  under  which  this  man 
groaned  ?  He  did.  It  was  evident  to  all  the  world.  Was  He  not  aware  of  the 
desire  of  Bartimens'  heart  7  and  that  what  he  sought  was  not  an  ordinary  alms? 
Undoubtedly,  and  He  had  already  resolved  to  restore  his  sight.  Why  then  did  He 
put  this  question  ?  It  was  that  He  might  more  fully  manifest  His  Father's  glory  ; 
that  He  might  awaken  the  man  to  a  deeper  consciousness  of  his  misery;  call 
forth  his  faith  into  liveliest  exercise ;  and,  especially,  teach  him  and  all  of  us  the 
nature  and  necessity  of  fervent  prayer.  1.  God  has  appointed  a  definite  way  in 
which  we  are  to  obtain  His  aid  and  deHveranoe.  If  we  would  have  we  must  ask. 
Prayer  is  the  means  He  has  prescribed.  Why  ?  We  could  not  enjoy  the  blessing  of 
God  without  it.  It  is  indispensable  as  a  preparation  of  our  hearts.  2.  Our  prayers 
must  be  definite  and  precise.  Beware  of  vague,  general,  pointless  prayers.  State  at 
once  the  evil  you  would  have  removed,  the  want  you  would  have  supplied,  the  pro- 
mise you  would  have  fulfilled.  3.  He  who  asks  the  question  in  the  text,  can  answer  it. 
Jesus  has  all  things  at  His  disposal.  There  is  no  limit  either  to  His  resources  or  His 
readiness  to  help.  Be  not  afraid  to  ask  much,  to  expect  much,  and  much  you  shall 
obtain.  He  imposes  no  conditions,  no  price,  no  merit.  {A.  Thomson.)  Immediately 
he  received  his  sight.  Blindnets  removed: — ^I.  What,  then,  does  this  healing  stand 
for  in  the  higher  spiritual  world  f  Surely,  nothing  less  than  regeneration — the  new 
birth  of  the  soul.  Of  the  many  images  employed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  set  forth 
our  natural  state,  perhaps  none  is  more  frequent  than  blindness.  Darkness  is  ever 
the  chosen  symbol  of  the  kingdom  of  Satan,  and  light  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  1. 
That  the  new  birth  is  from  God.  If  the  harp  be  broken,  the  hand  of  the  maker 
may  repair  it,  and  wake  the  chords  again  to  their  old  power  and  sweetness.  There 
is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  down,  that  it  will  sprout  again,  and  that  the  tender 
branch  thereof  will  not  cease.  Though  the  root  thereof  wax  old  in  the  earth,  and 
the  stock  thereof  die  in  the  ground,  yet  through  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud  and 
bring  forth  boughs  like  a  plant.  But  who  can  restore  the  shattered  crystal,  so  that 
the  sunbeams  shall  stream  through  it  without  finding  a  flaw,  and  flash,  once  more, 
as  of  old,  in  the  ever-changing  play  of  their  splendour  ?  And  who  can  open  the 
eyes  of  the  blind  ?  Who  can  restore  to  that  most  lustrous  and  precious  of  gems, 
its  expression  and  power,  when  distorted  and  blotted  by  disease  or  violence  ?  Who 
shall  open  again  those  delicate  pathways  for  the  light  of  two  worlds — the  outer 
world  shining  in  and  filling  the  soul  with  images  of  beauty,  and  that  inner  world 
shining  out  in  joy,  love,  and  thankfulness?  Surely  none  bat  the  Maker  of  this 
curious  frame,  who,  when  sin  had  so  cruelly  marred  it,  came  in  compassion  as 
infinite  as  His  might,  to  be  Bedeemer  and  Restorer  where  He  had  already  been 
Creator.  Only  He  can  open  the  eyes  of  the  bUnd.  The  power  of  God  is  in  that 
work.  But  if  a  man  die  shall  he  live  again  f  Oh,  if  the  soul  be  dead,  dead  in  guilt 
and  corruption  and  the  ourse  of  Almighty  God,  can  it  revive  ?  Yes,  thanks  be  to 
God  !  by  reason  of  the  working  of  His  mighty  power,  which  He  wrought  in  Christ, 
when  He  raised  Him  from  the  dead  (after  He  had  been  delivered  for  our  offences), 
we  also  may  be  quickened,  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  children  of 
wrath,  we  may  be  quickened  together  with  Christ ;  for  we  are  His  workmanship, 
created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works.  2.  In  the  light  of  this  miracle  we  also 
learn  that,  whatever  activities  the  sinner  may  put  forth  before  and  after  his 
regeneration,  in  the  great  change  he  is  passive.  ^1  the  agonies  of  the  blind  man, 
all  his  tears  and  cries,  all  his  rolling  and  straining  his  sightless  balls,  had  jost 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  x. 

nothing  at  all  to  do  with  the  act  of  restoration.  That  was  Christ's  alone.  And  so 
in  the  new  birth — **  bom  of  God,"  tells  it  all.  It  is  the  **  unparticipated  work  "  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  In  this,  regeneration  is  distinguished  from  conversion.  God  torna 
the  man,  but  the  man,  so  moved,  turns  with  his  whole  heart.  It  is  the  day  of  God's 
great  "power,"  but  also  of  the  sinner's  great  *' willingness."  The  fire  which  the 
sun  has  kindled  mounts  toward  it  at  once.  The  kindling  of  the  heavenly  flame  is 
regeneration ;  its  upward  motion,  conversion.  Begeneration  is  the  Divine  cause ; 
conversion,  the  sure  effect.  Where  there  is  the  grace  of  life,  there  will  be  a  life  of 
grace.  3.  Light  did  not  open  Bartimeus'  eyes,  nor  does  truth  alone  regenerate  the 
sinner.  Pouring  light  on  blind  eyes  will  not  heal  them.  Flashing  truth,  even 
God's  glorious  truth,  on  the  sinner's  mind  will  not  regenerate  him.  Bartimeus  was 
as  blind  at  noon  as  at  midnight.  The  sinner  is  as  blind  under  the  blaze  of  the 
gospel  as  amid  the  glooms  of  heathenism.  II.  Let  me  now  speak  of  the  greatness 
and  glory  of  this  change.  III.  As  "  Bartimeus  immediately  received  his  sight," 
so,  in  regeneration,  the  great  change  is  instantaneous.  There  is  some  one  moment 
when  the  vision  of  the  blind  man,  and  the  new  life  of  the  sinner  begins.  It  may 
be  feeble,  but  it  has  begun,  and  for  the  faintest  beginning  the  creative  act  is  needed. 
The  main  thing  for  every  sinner  is,  to  be  able  on  good  ground  to  say.  Whereas  I 
was  bliud,  now  I  see.  If  he  can  say  this,  and  have  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  to  its 
truth,  it  matters  httle  whether  he  is  able  to  add.  On  such  a  day,  in  such  a  place,  by 
such  and  such  means,  my  eyes  were  opened.  A  good  ship  has  been  broken  by  the 
tempest.  Mast  and  rudder  and  compass,  all  are  gone.  The  storm  is  over,  but  the 
wreck  is  drifting  away  blindly  through  night  and  fog.  At  length  all  is  still,  and  the 
wondering  sailors  wait  for  the  day.  Tardily  and  uncertainly  it  dawns,  and  as  the 
heavy  mists  slowly  dissolve,  all  eyes  are  busy  trying  to  discover  where  they  are. 
At  length  one  descries  a  cliff  which  seems  familiar,  another  a  pier  in  which  he  can 
hardly  be  mistaken,  a  third  the  old  church  spire,  under  whose  shadow  his  mother 
is  Bleeping,  and  now,  as  the  sun  breaks  forth,  they  all  cry  out  in  joyful  assurance, 
that  they  are  in  the  desired  haven !  Mysteriously  and  without  their  aid,  the  Buler 
of  wind  and  wave  has  brought  them  there,  and  all  are  exulting  in  the  great 
deliverance.  Nay,  shall  we  say  not  all  ?  Can  you  imagine  one  poor  melancholy 
man  refusing  to  rejoice,  and  even  doubting  these  evidences,  because  he  cannot  teU 
the  hour  and  angle  of  his  arrival,  nor  whether  he  was  borne  chiefly  by  currents  of 
air  or  ocean  ?  IV.  On  the  blessedness  of  this  change  in  Bartimeus — image  of  the 
spiritual  blessedness  of  him  who  is  first  tasting  that  the  Lord  is  gracious — I 
can  hardly  bring  myself  to  comment.  When  after  long  imprisonment  in  the 
chamber  of  suffering,  we  go  forth  again,  leaning,  perhaps,  on  the  arm  of  a  con- 
genial friend,  to  breathe  once  more  the  fresh  air,  and  rejoice  in  the  measureless 
freedom  of  nature,  she  seems  to  have  clothed  her  green  fields  and  forests,  her  blue 
skies  and  waters,  in  a  brighter  pomp  of  "  summer  bravery  "  than  ever  before,  and 
the  strange  beauty  fills  and  almost  oppresses  the  soul.  In  what  affecting  terms 
does  Dr.  Kane  describe  the  almost  adoring  rapture  with  which  the  return  of  the 
first  sunshine  was  hailed,  after  the  long  horror  of  an  Arctic  night — the  froaen  black- 
ness of  months'  duration,  when  he  eagerly  climbed  the  icy  hills  "to  get  the  luxury 
of  basking  in  its  brightness,"  and  made  the  grateful  record,  "  To-day,  blessed  be  the 
Great  Author  of  light  1  I  have  once  more  looked  upon  the  sun ; "  while  his  poor 
men,  sick,  mutilated,  broken- hearted,  and  ready  to  die,  crawled  painfully  from  their 
dark  berths  to  look  upon  his  healing  beams ;  when  "  everything  seemed  superlative 
lustre  and  unsurpassable  glory,"  when  they  could  not  refrain ;  they  "  oversaw  the 
light."  But  what  was  this,  what  were  all  these,  to  the  wonder  and  joy  of  Barti- 
meus* first  vision  of  the  mighty  works  of  God?  They  already  had  the  sense  of 
sight,  and  had  enjoyed  many  pleasurable  exercises  of  it.  To  him  the  very  sense  is 
new,  nnimagined  before.  And  now,  at  the  word  of  Christ,  the  glorious  element 
comes  streaming,  suddenly  and  for  the  first  time,  and  in  its  fulness,  with  thrills  of 
inconceivable  bliss,  upon  the  sense  and  soul  buried  from  birth  in  utter  darkness. 
And  what  did  he  see  first  ?  Jesus,  his  best  friend,  his  Saviour  1  Jesus,  chief  est  of 
ten  thousand  and  altogether  lovely  ;  O  enviable  lot !  The  first  image  which  the 
light  of  heaven  formed  in  his  soul  was  the  image  of  that  dear  face  ;  0  rich  recom- 
pense for  the  long  psuns  of  blindness !  The  first  employment  of  his  eyes  was  in 
beholding  Him  that  opened  them ;  O  blessed  consecration  of  his  new  powers  and 
pleasures !  Gaze  on,  old  man  I  Thou  canst  not  look  too  ardently  or  too  long.  But 
IS  the  joy  which  attends  spiritual  illumination  answerable  to  this  f  Not  always  (we 
have  seen)  as  the  immediate  result.  But  it  is  attainable,  and  very  soon  the  behever 
ought  to  have  it,  and,  unless  through  ignorance,  error,  or  guilt,  will  have  it,  and 


.  X.]  8T.  MARK.  445 

that  abundantly.  Moreover,  the  Bible  is  the  Bole  Bevealer  of  a  conception  of  joy, 
in  comparison  with  which  every  other  idea  of  it,  wherever  found,  is  poor,  earthly. 
and  already  darkened  with  the  taint  of  death.  It  is  a  conception  in  which  ever^ 
best  element  of  every  earthly  delight,  by  whatever  name  known — all  the  serenity  of 
peace,  all  the  exhilaration  of  hope,  all  the  satisfaction  of  fruition,  all  the  liveliness 
and  sparkle  of  joy,  all  the  mellower  radiance  of  gladness,  all  the  flush  and  bound 
of  exaltation,  all  the  thrill  and  movement  of  rapture,  are  wrought  into  one  sur- 
passing combination,  which,  chastened  by  holiness,  softened  by  charity,  dignified 
by  immortality  and  transfused  by  the  beams  of  the  all-encircling  glory  of  the  God- 
head, ia  Blessedness.  It  elevates  the  soul  to  know  of  such  a  state  as  possible  for 
itself ;  it  purifies  it  to  hope  for  it ;  strengthens  it  to  strive  after  it.  What,  then, 
must  it  be  to  taste  it,  as  we  may  on  earth,  and  drink  it  to  the  full,  as  we  shall  for  ever 
in  heaven!  The  Lord's  answer: — An  echo  from   within  the  Veil  I     "Lord, 

that  I  might  receive  my  sight  I  "  cried  the  suppliant  without.  "  Receive  thy 
sight  I "  answers  the  Sovereign  within.  And  so,  if  Christ  suits  BUs  granting  to 
oar  asking,  it  is  because  the  Spirit  has  first  shaped  our  asking  to  His  granting.  The 
porpose  of  grace  is  the  foundation  of  the  prayer  of  faith.  Eternal  grace  is  the 
mould  into  which  faith  is  cast.  Therefore  there  is  harmony  between  faith  and 
grace.  "  Grace  crowns  what  grace  begins."  And  so  *•  faith  saves  "  and  grace  saves ; 
faith  as  the  instrument,  and  grace  as  the  Divine  efficiency ;  faith  the  channel,  and 
grace  the  heavenly  stream ;  faith  the  finger  that  touches  the  garment's  fringe,  and 
grace  the  virtue  that  pours  from  the  Saviour's  heart.  Faith  cannot  scale  the  dreadful 
precipice  from  which  nature  has  fallen,  but  it  can  lay  hold  on  the  rope  which  grace 
haa  let  down  even  into  its  hands  from  the  top,  and  which  it  will  draw  ap  again  with 
all  the  burden  faith  can  bind  to  it.  And  this  is  all  the  mystery  of  faith's  saving. 
Christ  reaches  down  from  heaven,  and  faith  reaches  ap  from  earth,  and  each  hand 
grasps  the  other ;  one  in  weakness,  the  other  in  power.  Yea,  the  hand  of  faith  is 
often  but  a  poor,  benumbed  hand,  stretched  out  in  anguish  from  the  dark  flood  where 
the  soul  is  sinking.  Followed  Jesus  in  the  wslj.— Attachment  to  ChrUt  .'—Who- 
ever has  looked  unto  Jesus  as  the  Author  of  his  faith,  will  look  unto  Him  as  the 
Finisher.  If  the  eyes  be  opened  truly  to  see  Him,  the  heart  will  be  opened  truly  to 
love  Him ;  and  when  the  heart  is  thus  enlarged,  like  David,  we  will  run  in  the  way 
of  His  commandments.  This  is  the  test  of  discipleship :  *'  If  any  man  serve  Me, 
let  him  follow  Me."  0  friends,  let  tu  follow  Him  whithersoever  He  goeth.  Let  us 
follow  Him  "in  the  way" — the  way  laid  down  in  Bib  Word,  the  way  opened 
by  His  Providence,  the  way  of  which  the  Spirit  whispers,  "  This  is  the  way, 
walk  ye  in  it."  Sometimes  His  way  is  in  the  sea,  and  His  path  in  the  great 
waters,  and  His  footsteps  are  not  known.  The  path  of  many  of  us  may  lie 
much  in  the  Valley  of  Humiliation — a  life  of  obscurity,  poverty,  and  lowly  toil. 
We  may  be  Christ's  hidden  ones  all  our  days.  So  thy  way,  believer,  must 
lie  by  the  cross  and  the  grave.  But  beyond  the  grave  is  the  resurrection,  and 
then  the  crown  of  hfe  for  ever.  Christ  revealed  to  the  needy : — The  loss  of  sight 
is  spiritually  the  most  significant  of  all  privations.  The  loss  of  Eden  was  perhaps 
truly  a  loss  of  sight — a  great  shadow,  as  of  an  eclipse,  fell  over  all  the  beauty  and 
splendour  of  the  world,  as  the  sinner's  eye  grew  dun.  Sin  is  privative.  It  works 
on  us  by  limiting  and  finally  destroying  our  powers.  But  this  blind  beggar  had 
learned  in,  perhaps  through,  his  bHnduess,  more  than  Scribes  and  Pharisees  knew. 
None  of  them  have  an  eye  for  the  Son  of  David,  whom  he  saw  in  his  blindness. 
Christ  is  revealed  to  those  who  need  Him  most.  The  man's  importunity.  He  cast 
aside  his  garment  and  came  to  Jesus.  It  means  impetuosity,  and  carelessness  about 
external  things.  He  came  in  the  naked  simplicity  of  his  need.  I.  To  see  spiritually 
is  to  see  Christ,  the  Light  of  the  world,  and  to  be  penetrated  with  the  sense  of  the 
beauty  and  fulness  which  are  in  Him.  II.  A  soul  fully  enlightened  sees  that  in 
Jesus  is  all  its  salvation  and  all  its  hope.  (J.  B.  Browne  B.A.)  ChrisVs  recognition 
of  faith : — I.  The  application.  1.  He  applies  in  h»  right  quarter.  2.  In  the  right 
spirit.  3.  At  the  right  time.  U.  The  bbcept  n.  1.  Most  gracious.  2.  Most 
satisfactory.  UI.  The  effect  of  thb  cube.  He  followed  Jesus  in  the  way  up  to 
Jerusalem.  The  love  of  Christ  constrained  him  Thus  gifts  from  the  hands  of 
Jesus  attach  us  to  His  Person.  They  form  a  link  between  us  and  Him.  They  are 
as  a  magnet  to  draw  us.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Christ  and  the  blind: — I.  Christ 
eame  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  and  to  be  the  Light  of  the  world.  U.  He  did  not 
disregard  the  meanest,  and  was  ever  ready  to  d  good.  III.  Some  wait  long  in 
darkness  before  obtaining  the  help  desired.  IV.  Faith  perseveres,  reeeives  en- 
eoungement,  and  attains  its  end.     (J.  ff.  Godwin,) 


4M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap. 


CHAPTEB  XL 

Vebs.  1-11.— And  when  they  came  nigh  to  Jernsalem,  nnto  Bethpha«:e  and 

Bethany,  at  the  Mount  of  Olives. — The  triumphal  entry : — I.  The  occasion  or  this 
HOMAGE.  II.  The  scene  of  this  homage.  Scene  of — 1.  His  ministry.  2.  His 
martyrdom.  IIL  The  offerers  of  this  homaqe.  IV.  By  what  actions  this  homage 
WAS  expressed,  v.  The  language  in  which  this  homage  was  uttered.  (J.  R, 
Thomson.)  Christ  entering  Jerusalem: — The  story  presents  to  view  Christ's  sovb- 
REiGNTT  OVER  ALL  MEN.  II.  This  story  also  Bxhibits  Christ's  foreknowledge  of  all 
ORDINARY  EVENTS.  He  tells  the  disciples,  as  they  set  forth  to  do  this  errand,  just  what 
will  happen.  III.  Then  again,  this  story  discloses  Christ's  power  over  all  the  brute 
CREATION  (Luke  xix.  35).  No  other  instance  of  Jesus'  riding  upon  an  animal  of  any 
sort  has  been  recorded  in  His  history ;  and  of  all,  this  must  have  been  a  beast  most 
difficult  to  employ  in  a  confused  pageant.  IV.  Once  more :  this  story  illustrates 
Christ's  majesty  as  the  Messiah  of  God.  Two  of  the  evangelists  quote  at  this  point 
the  Old  Testament  prophecy  concerning  this  triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem  (Zech.  ix. 
8,  9).  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D,)  Christ  entering  Jerusalem : — ^What  is  the  meaning  ol 
the  day?  What  was  the  purpose  of  the  demonstration  ?  The  suggestions  that  Jesus  lost 
control  of  either  Himself  or  of  the  people,  so  as  to  be  carried  away  by  their  enthusiasm, 
are  unworthy  of  His  former  history  and  of  His  subsequent  teachings.    I.  The  day 

IS  MEMORABLE  FOR  ITS  SURPRISES  AND  REVERSALS  OF  JUDGMENT.     JeSUS  Only  judged 

rightly ;  next  to  Him  the  children  in  the  temple.  The  hopes  and  visions  of  the 
people  and  disciples  were  wide  of  the  mark  and  doomed  to  disappointment.  This 
day  to  them  promised  a  throne,  but  hastened  the  cross  and  a  tomb.  The  fears  and 
hates  of  the  Pharisees  and  rulers  were  surprised  and  reversed.  Jesus  made  no 
attempt  at  temporal  power  and  offered  no  resistance.     II.  This  day  emphasizes 

SPIRITUALITY  AS  THE  ONLY  KEY  TO  A    BIGHT  UNDERSTANDING  OF  PERSONS  AND   PROVI- 

denceb.  Christ  was  revealed  as  a  king,  but  not  of  this  world.  After  the  gift  of  the 
Spirit  the  apostles  clearly  perceived  the  prediction  of  prophecy,  the  prediction  ol 
providence,  in  the  songs  of  praise.  HI.  What  the  day  teaches  of  the  child- 
like SPIRIT  should  not  ESCAPE.     IV.  We  SHALL  NOT  BE  TOO  BOLD  IN  PBONOUNOING 

this  day  MEMORABLE  AS  A  PROPHECY.  The  meaning  of  it  was  projected  into  the 
future.  It  is  prophetic  of  the  entrance  into  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  when,  indeed, 
souls  shall  give  Him  homage.  That  triumphal  entry  into  the  city  of  David  was 
followed  by  crucifixion.  This  triumphal  entry  into  the  city  of  God  shall  be  con- 
summated in  coronation.  (J.  R.  Danford.)  "  Who  is  this  f  " — I.  Let  us  investi- 
gate THE  DIFFERENT  FEELINGS  WHICH  GAVE  BIRTH  TO  THIS  INQUIRY.     1.  With  many 

it  was  a  feeling  of  thoughtless  wonder.  2.  Angry  jealousy  prompted  the  question 
in  some.  3.  There  was  yet  another  class  of  questioners,  whose  state  of  mind  may 
properly  be  described  as  that  of  irresolute  doubt.  IL  The  true  answer  to  the 
QUESTION.  1.  Go  to  the  multitude  by  whom  Jesus  is  surrounded,  and  ask,  "  Who  is 
this  ?  "  2.  Go  to  the  ancient  prophets  and  ask,  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  (Zecji.  ix-  9).  3. 
Go  to  the  apostles  after  they  were  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  Go  to  the 
experienced  believer.     (J.  Jowett,  M.A.)         Honouring  Christ: — I.  Consideb  the 

MEANING  OF  THE   INCIDENT   ITSELF,   THE   SPIRIT  AND  TRUTH  WHICH  IT  EXPRESSES.     It 

was,  in  fact,  an  expressive  illustration  of  His  claims  as  the  Messiah.  It  was  a 
spontaneous  heart-offering.  It  indicates  Christ's  influence  on  His  own  age.  The 
truth  does  get  honoured  at  times,  even  in  its  own  time.  The  prophet  is  not 
without  his  reward.    A  noble  life  will  touch  the  hearts  of  the  people.    II.  Consideb 

SOME   OF  THE   LESSONS   WHICH   ARE  TO  BE  DRAWN  FBOM  THE   CONDUCT  OF  THE  MULTI- 

TUDE.  The  reputation  of  Christ  was  great.  The  multitude  was  lashed  into  enthu- 
siasm. But  then  came  disappointment.  He  assumed  no  royal  dignity.  "Crucify 
Him  I  "  It  was  the  fickle  element  that  helps  to  constitute  public  opinion.  We 
should,  therefore,  consider  the  grounds  and  motives  from  which  we  honour  Christ. 
He  demands  more  than  our  fickle,  transient  homage.  He  is  not  truly  honoured  by 
mere  emotions.  Men  get  glimpses  of  Christ's  beauty  and  power.  EQs  sacrifice  in 
its  incidents  moves  to  tears  ;  but  the  real  spirit  and  significance  of  it  all  are  missed. 
Christ  needs  more  than  good  resolutions  under  the  influence  of  emotional  excite- 
ment. We  have  to  honour  Him  by  our  perfect  self-surrender  and  trust ;  and  by 
our  actions  amid  the  mire,  and  toil,  and  dust  of  daily  traffic.  Beal  honour  must  be 
faithfiU  and  persistent,  like  that  of  the  loving  women  who,  when  Peter  meanly 
shrank,  stood  at  the  last  hour  by  His  cross,  and  were,  on  the  first  dawn  ol 
Easter  Day,  at  His  sepulchre.    There  will  necessarily  be  variationa  in  religions 


CHAP,  n.]  ST,  MARK,  *47 

moods.  But  uplifting  moments  should  leave  us  higher  when  they  pass.  Christ 
asks  more  than  public  honours.  Professional  respectabilities  not  enough.  He 
wants  individual  honour  and  homage.  The  true  heart's  sacrifice  more  than  the 
hosannas  of  the  thoughtless  hollow  crowd.  III.  Considkb  the  significance  op 
THIS  TRANSACTION  IN  ITS  BELATioNS  TO  Chbist  Himself.  It  reveals  His  true  glory. 
He  despised  the  earthly  crown.  Outward  glory  was  not  His  object.  He  manifested 
the  internal,  spiritual,  eternal.  The  kind  of  triumph  here  symbolized.  ^  That  was 
one  to  be  reached  through  sorrow,  agony,  death ;  a  triumph  of  self-sacrificing  love. 
It  was  not  the  coronation  of  sorrow,  but  victory  through  death.  There  is  no  real 
victory  which  does  not  partake  of  the  qualities  of  the  Lord's.  Obedient,  submissive, 
self-sacrificing  love  is  in  our  appointed  path  to  the  upward  heights  of  glory.  You 
may  share  Christ's  victory.  Then  honour  Him  in  a  kindred  spirit  of  sympathy  and 
self-renunciation.  My  Lord  and  my  God  I  Let  every  heart  honour  Him  !  (E,  H. 
Chapin,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8—6.  Say  ye  that  the  Lord  hath  Med  of  him.—"  TJie  Lord  hath  need  of 
you  "  ; — I.  He  wants  you  fob  Himself.  Jesus  loves  you ;  you  are  to  be  the  com- 
pensation to  Him  for  all  He  suffered.  Christ  feels  incomplete  without  you.  II.  He 
WANTS  YOU  FOR  His  Chubch.  The  Church  is  a  building ;  you  can  never  tell  what 
stone  the  Great  Master  Builder  may  require  next.  It  is  a  family — ^you  complete 
the  circle.  III.  He  wants  you  fob  His  work.  IV.  Hb  wants  you  for  His  glory. 
When  the  Lord  wants  anything  you  will  let  Him  have  it.  1.  Your  money.  If  He 
takes  it  you  will  know  that  He  had  need  of  it.  2.  Death.  He  has  need  of  those 
dear  to  us.  There  is  great  comfort  in  the  fact  that  when  Christ  sent  to  appropriate 
what  was  indeed  His  own,  He  sent  also  the  constraining  power  of  His  own  grace 
to  overrule  that  it  might  consent  to  the  surrender.  (J,  Vanghant  M.d.).  On  obeying 
Christ :— The  two  disciples,  without  any  questioning,  proceeded  upon  their  Master's 
mission.  L  The  pbinciple  we  have  stated  applies  to  all  new  undertakings  in 
which  wb  engage  as  servants  of  oub  Saviour,  acting  under  His  mRECTioN. 
It  was  a  new  thing  He  asked  them  to  do  when  He  sent  them  to  bring  to  Him  the 
colt.  Our  Lord  often  asks  us  to  do  unlikely  and  unexpected  things.  God  told 
Moses  to  go  to  Egypt.  God  asked  Jonah  to  do  a  new  thing.  If  God  asks  us  to 
take  a  new  departure.  His  hand  will  guide  us.    II.  The  principle  illustbated 

HEBE      applies     TO      UNDEBTAKING8     WHICH     ABB      DIFFICULT      AND     MYSTEBIOUS,     TO 

WHICH  OUB  LoBD  CALLS  U8.  What  right  had  they  to  the  colt  ?  There  was  a  touch 
of  mystery — ^why  such  a  beast  of  burden  ?  God  often  calls  His  people  to  diflBcult 
and  mysterious  duties.    Try  to  do  it  and  all  is  well  ordered.    III.  The  pbinoiple 

HEBE    ILLUSTBATED     APPLIES  TO  ALL    UNDEBTAKINGS    IN    WHICH    ChBIST'S    BBBVAMTS 

XNaAOS  DiBECTLY  FOB  Hi8  BASE.    **The  Lord  hath  need  ol  him."    (A,  Scott.) 

Vers.  8-10.  And  they  spread  their  garments  in  the  way.— E«K^i<n«  excitement  :— 
How  are  we  to  deal  with  religious  emotions  when  they  are  awakened  in  a  more 
than  ordinary  degree  ?  1.  We  should  make  them  subservient  to  the  promotion  of  the 
rectitude  of  our  nature  and  of  our  life.  With  the  kindhng  of  our  religious  emotions 
there  comes  strength  for  action,  and  our  care  should  be  to  use  that  strength  for 
right  action.  2.  It  is  not  always  safe  to  act  under  the  impulse  of  strong  feelings  ; 
therefore  we  need,  at  such  seasons,  to  be  more  than  ordinarily  prayerful ;  and  at 
such  times  conscience  ought  to  be  more  than  ever  consulted.  3.  If  a  man,  under 
the  influence  of  religious  excitement,  does  not  do  what  conscience  and  God's  law 
clearly  require  of  him,  there  is  little  reason  to  expect  that  he  will  do  so  when  the  excite- 
ment shall  have  passed  away.  There  are  certain  lessons  taught  us  by  this  subject. 
(1)  That  religious  excitement  has  its  sphere  of  usefulness  in  the  development  of 
religious  life ;  (2)  but  it  is  a  grievous  mistake  to  regard  emotional  excitement  as 
the  very  essence  and  substance  of  religion.     {F.  Wagstaff.) 

Vers.  13-14.  And  seeing  a  fig-tree  afar  off  having  leaves.- Nothing  hut  leaves  :— 
1.  There  webb  biany  trees  with  leaves  only  upon  them,  and  yet  none  of 
THESE  WEBB  CURSED  BY  THE  Savioub,  SAVE  ONLY  THIS  FiG-TBEB.  Here  are  some 
of  the  characters  who  have  leaves  but  no  fruit.  1.  Those  who  follow  the  sign  and 
know  nothing  of  the  substance.  2.  Those  who  have  opinion  but  not  faith,  creed 
but  not  credence.  3.  Those  who  have  talk  without  feeling.  4.  Those  who  have 
regrets  without  repentance.     6.  Those  who  have  resolves  without  action.     II. 

ThXBE  WEBB  OTHEB  TBEES   WITH   NEITHER  LEAVES    NOR  FRUIT,  AND   NONB   OF    THESB 

wbbb  ctbssd.    There  are  many  characters  who  are  destitute  of  both  religion  and 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ghap.  n. 

profession.  IH.  Wb  havb  bbfobb  its  ▲  special  oabs.  To  begin  with  the  ezpltto*- 
tion  of  this  special  case.  1.  In  a  fig-tree  fruit  comes  before  leaves.  2.  Where  we 
see  the  leaves  we  have  a  right  to  expect  the  fmit.  8.  Our  Lord  hungers  for  fmit. 
4.  There  are  some  who  make  unusual  profession  and  yet  disappoint  the  Saviour 
in  His  just  expectations.  IV.  Such  a  tbbe  iiiaHT  well  bb  withebed.  Decep- 
tion is  abhorred  of  God.  It  is  deceptive  to  man.  It  committed  sacrilege  upon 
Christ.  It  condemned  itself.  (0.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Je»u$  a  Judge: — As  if  to  show 
that  Jesus  the  Saviour  is  also  Jesus  the  Judge,  one  gleam  of  justice  must  dart 
forth.  Where  shall  mercy  direct  its  fall  ?  The  curse,  if  we  may  call  it  a  curse  at 
all,  did  not  fall  on  man  or  beast,  or  even  the  smallest  insect ;  its  bolt  faUs  harm- 
lessly upon  a  fig-tree  by  the  way-side.  It  bore  upon  itself  the  signs  of  barrenness, 
and  perhaps  was  no  one's  property ;  little,  therefore,  was  the  loss  which  any  man 
sustained  by  the  withering  of  ihfti  rerdant  mockery,  while  instruction  more 
precious  than  a  thousand  acres  of  fig-trees  has  been  left  for  the  benefit  of  all 
ages.  {Ibid.)  Doctrine  without  practice: — I  am  sick  of  those  cries  of  "the 
truth,"  •♦  the  truth,"  *'  the  truth,"  from  men  of  rotten  lives  and  unholy  tempers. 
There  is  an  orthodox  as  well  as  a  heterodox  road  to  hell,  and  the  devil  knows  how  to 
handle  Galvlnists  quite  as  well  as  Armenians.  No  pale  of  any  Church  can  insure 
salvation,  no  form  of  doctrine  can  guarantee  to  us  eternal  life.  "Ye  must  be 
born  again."  "  Ye  must  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance."  (Ibid.)  Leaves 
without  fruit: — When  Christ  came  it  was  not  the  time  of  figs.  The  time  for 
great  holiness  was  after  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit. 
All  the  other  nations  were  without  leaves.  Greece,  Bome,  all  these  showed  no 
signs  of  progress ;  but  there  was  the  Jewish  nation  covered  with  leaves.  You 
know  the  curse  that  fell  on  Israel.  {Ibid),  Profession  without  possession: — Like 
Jezebel  with  her  paint,  which  made  her  all  the  uglier,  they  would  seem  to  be  what 
they  are  not.  As  old  Adam  says,  "  They  are  candles  with  big  wicks  but  no  tallow, 
and  when  they  go  out  they  make  a  foul  and  nauseous  smell,"  "and  they  have 
summer  sweating  on  their  brow,  and  winter  freezing  in  their  hearts."  You  would 
think  them  the  land  of  Goshen,  but  prove  them  the  wilderness  of  sin.  (Ibid.) 
Nothing  but  leaves  : — Most  readers  of  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  will  remember  that 
the  Interpreter  took  Christiana  and  her  family  into  his  "significant  rooms,"  and 
showed  them  the  wonders  he  had  formerly  exhibited  to  Christian ;  and  then  the 
story  runs  on  thus :  "  When  he  had  done,  he  takes  them  out  into  his  garden  again 
and  had  them  to  a  tree  whose  inside  was  all  rotten  and  gone,  and  yet  it  grew  and  had 
leaves.  Then  said  Mercy,  "What  means  this?"  **This  tree,"  said  he,  " whose 
outside  is  fair,  and  whose  inside  is  all  rotten,  is  that  to  which  many  may  be  compared 
that  are  in  the  garden  of  God ;  who  with  their  mouths  speak  high  in  behalf  of 
God,  but  indeed  will  do  nothing  for  Him  ;  whose  leaves  are  fair,  but  their  heart  good 
for  nothing  but  to  be  tinder  for  the  devil's  tinder-box."  This  was  John  Bunya.n'8 
way  of  putting  into  an  allegory  what  he  had  preached  in  his  famous  sermon  on  the 
*'  Barren  Fig-tree."  It  shows  the  force  with  which  the  narrative  now  coming  under 
our  study  fastens  itself  in  the  popular  imagination.  L  Let  us  begin  with  the 
observation  that  God  cherishes  a  beasonable  expectation  op  fbuitfui^ness  pbom 
ALii  His  cbeatubes  .  Christ  once  told  His  disciples  that  He  had  chosen  them  and 
ordained  them  that  they  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  their  fruit  should 
remain  (John  xv.  16).  1.  This  story  teaches  that  what  the  Almighty  expects  is 
only  what  is  befitting  nd  appropriate  to  the  nature  of  the  being  He  has  made  and 
endowed  with  a  soul.  2.  Then,  next  to  this,  the  story  suggests  that  .  hat  God 
expects  is  that  every  individual  shall  bring  forth  his  own  fruit.  It  is  not  v.  eyards 
that  bear  clusters,  but  vines.  It  is  not  orchards  that  produce  figs,  but  trees.  The 
all-wise  One  does  not  anticipate  that  one  man  or  one  woman,  or  that  a  few  women 
and  a  few  men,  shall  do  the  whole  work  in  each  community  or  in  each  parish.  For 
there  is  nothing  clearer  in  the  Scripture  than  the  declaration  that  every  Christian 
is  held  accountable  pe  sonally,  and  cannot  be  lost  in  a  crowd.  3.  The  story  also 
teaches  tbat  God  expects  a  proportionate  quantity  oi  fruit  from  each  person.  And 
this  would  have  to  be  eckoned  according  to  circumstances.  Suppose  one  fig-tree 
is  standing  a  little  better  in  the  sunshine  than  another;  suppose  one  receives 
somewhat  more  of  refreshing  moisture  than  another ;  suppose  one  has  deeper  soil 
for  its  roots  than  another  ;  the  rule  will  be, — the  higher  the  favour,  the  riche^  must 
be  the  fruit.  The  principle  of  the  gospel  is  all  in  a  single  formula :  "  Unto  whom- 
soever much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  required."  Superior  advantages 
extend  the  measure  of  our  responsibility  for  usefulness.  4.  Once  more  :  the  story 
teaches  that  the  Master  looks  for  fruit  in  the  proper  time  for  fruit.    In  the  case  tt 


tmAT.  n.]  BT.  MARK.  449 

this  tree,  "  the  time  was  not  yet."  Figs  come  before  leaves  on  that  kind  of  tree. 
So  the  appearance  of  leaves  assumed  the  presence  of  fruit  underneath  them ;  but  none 
was  there.  For  some  phenomenal  reason  this  fig-tree  was  a  hypocrite.  Hence, 
Jesus  caught  it  for  a  parable  with  which  to  teach  His  disciples,  and  warn  them  off 
from  mere  profession  without  performance.  God  does  not  in  any  case  come  pre- 
cipitously demanding  fruit,  as  soon  as  trees  are  planted ;  He  seems  to  respect  the 
laws  of  growth  and  ripening.  He  never  hurries  any  creature  of  His  hand.  But 
He  gives  help  to  the  end  He  proposes.  He  certainly  puts  realities  before  shows  ; 
figs  previous  to  leaves.  And  He  has  no  patience  or  complacency  for  those  who  are 
always  making  ready,  and  preparing,  and  getting  started,  and  setting  about  things, 
without  ai  y  accomplishments  or  successes.  H.  This  leads  to  a  second  observation 
suggested  by  an  analysis  of  the  narrative:  God   ib  sometimes   mockbd   by  thb 

PROFFER  OF   MERE   PROFESSIONS  INSTEAD  OF  FRUITFULNSSS.      Ho  COmeS   for  figS,   but 

He  finds  "  leaves  only  "  (Matt.  xxi.  19).  1.  II  is  possible  to  pat  all  one's  religious 
experience  into  mere  show.  That  is  to  saj,  it  is  possible  to  feign,  or  to  imitate,  or  to 
counterfeit,  all  the  common  tokens  of  a  genuine  Christian  life,  and  yet  possess  no  reali- 
ties imderneath  the  pretence.  Men  may  be  traitors,  heady,  high-minded,  lovers  of 
pleasures  more  than  lovers  of  God ;  having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the 
power  thereof.  All  this  is  predicted  of  these  latter  times  (2  Tim.  iii.  1-7).  Pro- 
fessors of  religion  may  appear  to  love  the  Church  of  the  Redeemer,  and  be  nothing 
but  sectarians.  They  may  pray  lengthily  for  a  pretence,  and  devour  widows* 
houses  meanwhile.  They  may  ♦•  repent "  like  King  Saul,  and  "  believe "  like 
Simon  Magus.  They  may  speak  "  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  angels,"  and  be  no 
better  in  charity  than  a  cymbal  that  tinkles.  They  may  cry  "  Lord,  Lord,"  and 
yet  not  do  a  single  thing  which  the  Lord  has  commanded.  And  with  all  this 
•mount  of  loathsome  hypocrisy  in  the  world,  the  patient  God  forbears.  3.  The 
sin  of  fruitlessness  is  always  aggravated  by  the  bold  imposture  of  hypocritical 
cant.  The  Scriptures  startle  a  timid  student  sometimes  with  their  daring  demand 
for  clear  issues,  no  matter  where  they  will  lead.  Christ  Himself  is  represented  as 
saying,  "I  woula  thou  wert  cold  or  hot"  (Rev.  iii.  15-16).  Elijah  cries  out,  **If 
Baal  be  God,  follow  him  "  (1  Kings  xviii.  21).  It  is  the  temporizing,  compro- 
mising spirit  of  Naaman  which  destroys  the  historic  picture  of  him  (2  Kings  ▼. 
17-18).  And  the  higher  up  into  conspicuous  assumption  of  sainthood  one  rises, 
when  his  heart  is  bad,  the  more  offensive  are  his  character  and  publio  professions 
in  the  sight  of  a  trath-loving  God. 

**Por  sweetest  things  torn  sourest  by  their  deed; 
Lilies  that  fester  smell  far  worse  than  weeds.'* 

m.  Thvs  we  reach  our  third  observation :  God  will  in  thb  Bin>  assxbt  Hihsilf, 

AND    TXSZT    on    ALL  FALSB  PROFESSORS  A  FITTINa  RETRIBUTION    (Mark    zl.    211.        At 

last  the  retribution  is  sure  to  come.  The  settled,  calm,  solemn  decision  is  pro- 
nounced, from  which  there  is  no  appeal.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Thefruitlets  life : — 
The  verdict  against  the  tren  is,  **  nothing  but  leaves."  1.  It  is  a  remarkable  descrip- 
tion.  It  is  the  least  offensive  way  of  describing  barrenness.  Nothing  but  words, 
forms,  profession.  3.  It  is  an  expression  of  disappointment.  Leaves  are  promises. 
Christian  profession  is  a  promise  to  God  and  man.  3.  It  is  a  declaration  of 
nselessness.  There  is  (1)  nothing  to  do  eredit  to  any  one — to  the  garden,  owner, 
soil,  root ;  (2)  nothing  to  be  of  nse  to  any  one.  4.  It  is  a  sentence  of  doom. 
**  Nothing  but  leaves."  1.  Then  our  creed  is  vain.  2.  Our  religion  is  vain.  8. 
Oar  Bible-reading  is  vain.  4.  Our  churchmanship  is  vain.  5.  Our  faith  and  hop« 
are  vain.  6.  Our  life  is  vain.  {H.  Bonar^  D.D.)  The  barren  Jig-tree : — The 
incident  is  full  of  instruction.  I.  As  to  oub  Lord's  Bbino.  It  reminds  as  of 
the  inseparable  union  between  His  humanity  and  His  Divinitjr.  1.  He  was 
hungry,  and  came  looking  for  something  which  did  not  exist ;  it  bespeaks  His 
liability  to  that  which  was  common  to  man.  3.  He  cursed  the  tree  by  the  fiat  of 
an  irresistible  will,  and  nature  was  arrested,  and  the  fountain  of  Ufe  dried  ap. 
It  marks  the  possession  of  a  power  which  is  shared  by  no  mortal  creature,  but 
is  the  sole  prerogative  of  Almighty  God.  II.  As  to  thb  Jbwish  nation.  Jesos 
had  often  taught  by  word.  Here  He  arrests  attention  by  a  parable  in  action.  It 
was  the  sequel  of  the  parable  of  the  barren  fig-tree  (St.  Luke  xiii.  6);  a  rehearsal, 
as  it  were,  of  the  execution  of  the  judgment  then  denoanced  upon  the  Jewish 
nation  if  they  continued  to  bear  no  fruit.  This  tree  had  been  refreshed  by  the 
daws  of  heaven;  the  sunshine  had  warmed  it  with  genial  rays;  the  shelterinfl 

29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [<wi».  n. 

hill,  perhaps,  had  warded  off  the  chilling  blasts,  and  all  the  seasonable  inflaeneea 
of  Providence  had  ministered  to  its  growth,  but  only  to  bring  forth  an  ostentationa 
show  of  unproductive  leaves.  And,  as  with  that  hapless  tree,  so  with  the  nation. 
All  the  care  and  culture  of  the  Great  Vine-dresser  had  been  bestowed  in  vain;  there 
was  nothing  but  a  deceptive  and  pretentious  display ;  they  were  for  ever  giving 
promise  of  fruit,  but  yielding  none ;  there  was  no  return  for  unremitting  attention ; 
they  cambered  the  soil,  their  end  was  to  be  burned,  they  were  nigh  to  cursing. 
(H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  The  penalty  of  barren  professions  .-—Yesterday  Christ 
wept  over  the  fate  of  Israel,  to-day  He  will  warn  them  of  it.  And  at  once  accord- 
ingly He  utters  His  warning  on  barrenness.  It  takes  the  form  of  a  parabolic 
action.  Deeds  speak  louder  than  words,  and,  therefore,  for  the  sake  of  a  greater 
impression,  Christ  places  before  every  one's  eyes  the  penalty  of  barrenness, 
especially  of  barrenness  concealed  by  hypocritical  profession.  He  pronounces  a 
curse  on  the  tree,  which  at  once,  in  all  its  greenness  and  glory,  begins  to  wither 
away.  1.  Barrenness  is  a  very  common  and  grievous  sin.  ^  It  is  very  common, 
because  we  think  there  is  no  particular  harm  in  it.  If  we  avoid  committing  actual 
wrong,  we  think  it  no  great  matter  if  we  neglect  the  discharge  of  duty.  Accord- 
ingly, many  who  would  be  shocked  at  being  "  sinful "  are  quite  unconcerned  at  being 
useless.  There  may,  however,  be  the  greatest  guilt  in  uselessness.  "  Ye  gave  Me 
no  meat,"  **  ye  gave  Me  no  drink,"  "  ye  took  Me  not  in,"  are  words  which  accuse  of 
nothing  but  neglect,  yet  are  followed  by  the  doom,  '•  Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed." 
Sins  of  commission  slay  their  thousands,  but  sins  of  omission  their  tens  of 
thousands.  2.  The  sin  of  barrenness  is  often  accompanied  and  orbatlt 
AGGRAVATED  BY  GREAT  PROFESSIONS.  Performance  and  profession  are  apt  to  be  in 
the  inverse  ratio  of  each  other,  for  performance  comes  from  a  high  standard,  and  a 
high  standard  never  permits  complacency  or  boasting ;  while  a  low  standard  permits 
poor  performance,  and  sanctions  complacency  along  with  it.  In  human  trees  the 
combination  is  very  frequent  of  pretentious  foliage  and  poor  fruitage.  3.  Ali> 
BARRENNESS  LEADS  TO  DESTRUCTION.  Nothing  is  permitted  to  exist  except  on  condi* 
tion  that  it  employs  its  powers.  Unused  faculties  decay ;  and  unemployed  oppor. 
timities  are  withdrawn.  4.  The  penalty  of  wilful  barrenness  is  judicial 
BARRENNESS.  The  punishment  of  uselessness  which  is  voluntary,  is  such  with 
drawal  of  grace  as  makes  it  fixed  and  absolute.  Wrong  is  wrong's  penalty.  Going 
further  astray  is  the  penal  result  of  going  astray.  {R.  Glover.)  The  fruitiest 
fig-tree : — I.  Its  bymbolio  significancb.  1.  Keasons  for  regarding  it  in  a  symbolic 
sense.  (1)  Neither  its  fruitlessness  nor  its  leafiness  was  a  thing  of  its  own  volition, 
therefore  the  tree  was  not  blameworthy.  (2)  But  as  a  symbol  it  was  full  of  instruc- 
tion, (a)  As  a  correct  representation  of  the  heirarchical  party  in  Jerusalem, 
adorned  with  the  leaves  of  a  pretentious  piety,  but  utterly  barren  of  the  real  fruit 
of  a  holy  life,  or  reverence  for  God's  Son.  (6)  As  a  correct  representation  of  all 
pretension  to  piety.  U.  Beasons  fob  begabdino  its  doom  symbolic.  1.  There 
was  neither  conscience  nor  heart  in  the  tree  to  be  hurt  by  its  withering.  2.  FnU  of 
significance,  however,  as  the  type  of  the  doom  that  awaits  all  those  whom  its  fruit* 
lessness  represented.  lU.  Beasons  for  regarding  its  symbolic  doom  just.  1. 
As  a  fig-tree  in  good  situation  and  covered  with  leaves,  fruit  was  reasonably  expected. 

(1)  So  with  the  Jewish  people,  as  taught  in  the  parable  of  the  wicked  husbandmen. 

(2)  The  fruitlessness  of  those  whom  the  tree  represented  was  blameworthy,  and 
their  guilt  enhanced  by  their  pretension.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  He  found 
nothing  but  leaves:  a  fruitless  life:  —  Christ's  miracles  were  unspoken  sermons. 
Here  He  sees  a  fig-tree  growing  by  the  wayside,  and  full  of  leaves ;  He  draws  near 
looking  for  fruit,  but  finds  none — only  leaves.  It  was  not  indeed  the  time  for  figs, 
but  neither  was  it  the  time  for  leaves.  The  tree  was  making  a  false  pretence.  Jesus 
cursed  the  fruitless  tree,  and  it  withered  away.  It  was  a  symbolic  act.  I.  A  lesson 
FOB  the  Jews.  They  were  full  of  the  leaves  of  profession :  proud  of  their  religious 
ordinances,  frequent  fasts,  long  prayers,  sacrifices ;  but  they  bore  no  fruit  of  holi- 
ness, meekness,  gentleness,  love.  Nothing  but  leaves.  II.  A  lesson  fob  all, 
WARNING  UB  OF  THE  DOOM  OF  A  FRUITLESS  LiFB.  Our  blcssings — what  havc  we 
done  to  deserve  them  ?  We  aU  remember  what  we  have  done  for  ourselves,  how  we 
have  made  our  way  in  the  world ;  but  what  have  we  done  for  God  ?  Our  religious 
professions — are  they  sincere,  or  are  they  kept  for  Sunday  use  only  ?  Our  talents — 
how  are  we  employing  them  ?  Our  time,  intell  ct,  bodily  strength,  wealth,  infln- 
«noe?  (H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton,  M.A.)  The  time  of  figs  was  not  y<f;— Trees  havf 
their  seasons  at  certain  times  of  the  year,  when  they  bring  forth  fruit ;  but  a  Chris- 
tuax  is  for  all  seasons — like  the  tree  of  life,  which  bringeth  forth  fruit  every  monUi 


OBAP.  X1.J  ST.  MARK.  451 

Christ  looked  for  fruit  on  the  fig-tree  when  the  time  of  fruit  was  not  jet.  Whv  ? 
Did  He  not  know  the  season  for  fruit?  or,  did  He  it  "  altogether  for  our  sakes ?  " 
For  our  sakes,  no  doubt,  He  did  it,  to  teach  us  that  Christians  must  always  be 
fruitful ;  the  whole  time  of  our  life  is  the  season  for  fruitfulness.  {Bp.  Brownrig.) 
Warnings  of  Scripture : — Cowper,  speaking  of  his  distressing  convictions,  says, 
"  One  moment  I  thought  myself  shut  out  from  mercy  by  one  chapter,  and  the  next 
by  another.  The  sword  of  the  Spirit  seemed  to  guard  the  tree  of  life  ^om  my  touch, 
and  to  flame  against  me  in  every  avenue  by  which  I  attempted  to  approach  it.  I 
particularly  remember  that  the  parable  of  the  barren  fig-tree  was  to  me  an  incon- 
ceivable source  of  angmsh ;  and  I  applied  it  to  myself,  with  a  strong  persuasion  in 
my  mind,  that  when  our  Saviour  pronounced  a  curse  upon  it,  He  had  me  in  His  eye, 
and  pointed  that  curse  directly  at  me." 

Vers.  15-18.  And  Jesus  went  Into  the  Temple,  and  began  to  cast  ont  them  that 
told.  —  TJie  Temple  cleansed :  or^  Christ  the  punjier  of  religion : — When  we  are 
told  that  this  took  place  "  in  the  temple  "  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  Holiest  of 
all  is  meant,  but  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles.  It  was  this  portion  of  the  sacred 
enclosure  that  was  converted  into  a  market.  It  was  doubtless  a  convenient  arrange- 
ment, and  a  profitable  one ;  but  it  was  a  bold  offence,  and  drew  down  the  severe 
condemnation  of  Christ.  Men  may  buy  and  sell  in  the  temple,  so  to  speak,  without  the 
presence  of  the  articles  and  actual  proceedings  of  commerce.  How  many  of  you  are 
busy,  in  God's  house,  with  the  secularities  of  every-day  life  1  Many  do  in  spirit 
what  these  men  did  in  fact.  There  is  no  need  to  call  in  the  aid  of  miracle  to 
account  for  the  consequences  of  Christ's  interference.  Holy  will  is  strong,  espe- 
cially when  dealing  with  sinful  consciences  which  are  weak.  Wrong  felt  the 
presence  of  Divine  right,  and  departed.  Strange  to  say,  this  action  of  Christ  has 
been  objected  to.  There  are  periods  when  logical  arguments  and  gentle  persuasions 
are  out  of  place,  and  reason  and  righteousness  assume  their  right  of  direct  appeal, 
in  word  and  act,  to  the  inmost  sense  and  conscience  of  men.  Christ  was  thus  severe 
only  with  corruption :  He  had  nothing  but  tenderness  for  simply  evil ;  He  poured 
His  hot  displeasure  only  on  the  hardened  wretches  that  covered  their  real  sin  with 
seeming  sanctity.  We  see  an  under  meaning  in  this  incident :  Christ  standing  in  the 
temple  of  oniversal  humanity,  and  by  His  word  of  power  redeeming  it  from  the 
desecrations  of  sinful  corruption  and  abuse,  rescuing  it  to  the  honour  of  its  slighted 
Lord.  I.  The  tsmple  of  God  is  desecxuted  and  defiled.  1.  Look  at  the  heathen 
world ;  behold  there  the  strength  of  the  corruption.  The  religious  sentiment  strong 
amongst  them  is  abused;  at  least  it  operates  through  fear,  distrust,  and  hate,  instead 
of  love,  hope,  and  faith  ;  at  worst  it  is  the  tool  of  craft  and  lust.  Thus  the  highest 
endowments  bring  about  the  lowest  degradation.  2.  Thus  has  it  been  with  every 
mode  of  revealed  religion.  Thus  it  was  with  Judaism.  The  life-giving  spirit  had 
perished ;  its  very  form  had  become  corrupt  Does  Christianity  present  an  excep- 
tion to  this  desecration  ?  What  is  the  religion  of  many  of  you  but  a  buying  and 
selling  in  the  temple  1  Self-interest  has  its  office  in  religion,  but  it  is  not  an 
element  of  religion  itself.  Indeed,  there  is  no  juster  distinction  between  true  and 
false  religion  than  this :  In  true  religion,  self-interest  is  made  the  means  of  what 
is  spiritual ;  in  false  religion,  what  is  spiritual  is  made  the  means  of  self-interest. 
When  religion  appears  as  a  ladder  set  up  between  heaven  and  earth  for  all  God's 
angels  to  descend  and  minister  to  man,  but  not  for  aspirations  and  holy  com- 
munions to  ascend  from  man  to  God ;  when  Christianity  is  contemplated  as  a 
scheme  of  political  economy,  and  the  Lord  of  all  is  regarded  chiefly  as  the  most 
nseful  being  in  existence,  we  make  our  hearts  the  scenes  of  degrading  traffic.  11. 
This  desecbation  and  defilement  of  the  temple  of  God  should  create  holy  and 
VEHEMENT  INDIGNATION.  What  is  there  in  the  scene  we  have  surveyed  to  call  for 
holy  wrath?  1.  It  involves  the  abuse  of  what  is  best  and  highest — '•  My  house,"  <fco. 
His  Father's  house  was  polluted.  The  highest  view  to  take  of  sin  is  always  that  it 
dishonours  God ;  the  man  who  dishonours  God  also  dishonours  himself.  When  is  God 
more  dishonoured  than  when  tiie  many  gifts  by  which  He  may  be  felt,  known, 
served,  frustrate  His  purposes  and  misrepresent  His  being  ?  As  when  faculties, 
whose  sphere  is  spirit,  feed  and  flatter  tiie  flesh.  2.  It  involves  the  promotion 
of  the  worst  and  lowest  things — "  A  den  of  thieves."  They  who  rob  God  can 
scarcely  be  expected  to  be  very  scrupulous  in  their  dealings  with  men.  The  best 
things  when  abused  become  the  worse ;  there  is  no  devil  like  a  fallen  angeL  The 
reasons  are  not  far  to  seek.  The  best  things  are  the  strongest.  The  best  thingt 
when  abased  have  a  natural  tendency  to  exceed  in  eviL    SUll  farther,  good  when 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBAFOR.  [chip.  xi. 

it  is  abnged  hardens  the  moral  feeling.  III.  Jesus  Chbist  afpea.bs  Bsroue  ns  am 
XHE  CLEAMBBB  OT  THB  TEMPLE  OF  GoD.  How  does  He  effect  it  ?  1.  He  oomes  inta 
the  temple  of  Ck)d  as  ttie  living  representative  of  Divine  things.  He  appears  as  the 
Son  of  God  in  His  "Father's  house."  2.  He  makes  an  effective  appeal  to  men  on 
the  true  character  and  design  of  Divine  things — "  Is  it  not  written,  My  house  shall 
be  called,"  &o.  He  draws  attention  to  the  nature  and  object  of  the  sacred  place. 
He  forbids  what  is  auxiliary  to  the  condemned  abuse.  He  "  would  not  suffer  that 
any  man  should  carry  any  ressel  through  the  temple."  The  purification  of  humanity 
is  slow,  but  sure.  [A.  J.  Morris,)  Pickpockets  in  the  synagogue  : — Our  Paris 
correspondent  telegraphs  : — Complaints  having  been  made  to  the  police  that  the 
synagogue  of  the  Eue  de  la  Yictoire  had  become  a  house  of  call  for  pickpockets, 
several  detectives  were  set  there  on  watch,  who  last  Saturday  caught  a  man  in  the 
act  of  stealing  a  purse  from  one  of  the  congregation.  Henceforth  a  couple  of 
inspectors  will  be  on  duty  during  the  service,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  will  render 
personal  property  secure  in  the  synagogue.  The  name  of  the  man  arrested  is  Jule» 
Henrilien.  He  refuses  to  name  his  accomplices.  {Daily  News.)  The  expulsion 
of  the  money  changers  from  the  temple  : — It  would  appear  from  a  comparison  of  the 
different  evangelists,  that  there  were  two  occasions  upon  which  Christ  displayed 
His  indignation  at  the  traffic  by  which  His  Father's  house  was  defiled.  Those  who 
yielded  to  the  supernatural  power  with  which  our  Lord  acted,  returned  to  their 
unlawful  practices  when  that  power  was  withdrawn.  It  was  one  thing  to  drive  the 
wicked  from  the  temple,  but  quite  another  to  drive  wickedness  from  their  heart. 
This  was  a  miracle  upon  mind.  I.  The  place  whbbb  the  market  was  held.  It 
was  not  the  temple  properly  so  called ;  the  Jews  were  scrupulous  about  their  temple. 
"Where,  then,  was  the  market  ?  We  will  endeavour  to  explain  this  to  you.  In  the 
time  of  our  Saviour,  the  temple,  properly  so  called,  had  three  courts,  each  sur- 
rounding one  another.  These  courts,  with  the  building  they  encompassed,  made  up 
what  was  known  under  the  general  name  of  the  temple.  In  the  first  of  these  cource 
stood  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  and  to  this  came  none  but  the  priests  and  Levites. 
The  second,  surrounding  that  of  the  priests,  was  the  great  hall  which,  though 
the  Jews  assembled  to  worship,  was  also  open  to  those  proselytes  who  had  been 
circumcised,  and  had  thus  taken  upon  themselves  the  whole  ritual  of  Moses.  But  the 
outer  court  of  the  three  was  called  the  court  of  the  Gentiles,  and  was  appropriated 
to  such  proselytes  as  had  renounced  idolatry,  but  who,  not  having  been  circumcised, 
were  still  accounted  unclean  by  the  Jews.  The  two  first  of  these  courts  were 
accounted  holy,  but  no  sanctity  appears  to  have  been  attached  to  the  third ;  it  was 
considered  a  part  of  the  temple,  but  had  no  share  in  that  sacredness  which  belonged 
to  all  the  rest.  And  in  this  outer  court — the  court  of  the  Gentiles— it  was,  that  the 
sheep,  and  oxen,  and  doves  were  sold,  and  the  money  changers  had  their  tables. 
As  the  Jews  did  not  regard  this  court  as  possessing  any  legal  sanctity,  they  per- 
mitted  to  be  used  as  a  market  the  temple  of  those  who  came  thither  to  worship.  11 
you  have  followed  me  in  this  there  is  good  reason  for  supposing  that  it  was  on 
purpose  to  show  their  contempt  for  the  Gentiles,  that  the  Jews  allowed  the  traffic 
which  Christ  interrupted.  When  Christ  entered  the  court  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
found  in  place  of  the  solemnity  which  should  have  pervaded  a  scene  dedicated  to 
worship,  all  the  noise  and  tumult  of  a  market.  He  had  before  Him  the  most  striking 
exhibition  of  that  fatal  resolve  on  the  part  of  His  countrymen,  and  which  His 
apostles  strove  in  vain  to  counteract — the  resolve  of  considering  themselves  as 
God's  peculiar  people,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  besides  ;  and  the  refusing  to  unite 
themselves  with  converts  from  heathenism  in  the  formation  of  one  visible  Church. 
Was  not  this,  then,  an  occasion  upon  which  to  exercise  the  prophetic  ofiiice  ?  Was 
there  not  here  an  opportunity  of  inculcating  a  truth  which,  however  unpalatable  to 
the  Jews,  required,  of  all  others,  to  be  set  forth  with  clearness,  and  maintained 
with  constancy — the  truth,  that  though  God  for  a  time  had  seemed  neglectful  of  the 
great  body  of  men,  and  bestowed  all  His  carefulness  upon  a  solitary  tribe ;  yet  were 
the  Gentiles  watched  over  by  Him  in  their  long  aUenation,  and  about  to  be  gathered 
within  the  borders  of  His  Church.  And  this  truth  we  suppose  it  to  have  been  which 
Christ  set  Himself  to  teach  by  the  significant  act  of  driving  from  the  court  of  tht 
Gentiles  the  merchants  with  their  merchandise.  He  declared,  as  emphatically  aa 
He  could  have  done  in  words,  that  the  place  where  the  strangers  worshipped  was  to 
be  accounted  as  sacred  as  that  in  which  the  Israelites  assembled,  and  that  what 
would  have  been  held  as  a  profanation  of  the  one,  was  to  be  held  a  profanation  <A 
the  other.  By  thus  vindicating  the  sanctity  of  the  spot  appropriated  to  the  Gtontilee, 
M  worthy  of   m   much  veneration  as  that   appropriated  to  the  Jews,  whea 


OHAP.  n.]  ST.  MARK,  458 

He  expelled  the  merohants  and  money  changers,  He  went  far  towards  pnt- 
ting  Jew  and  Oentile  on  the  same  level,  and  announcing  the  abolition  of  cere- 
monial distinctions.  The  Jews  had  allowed  the  desecration  of  the  court  of  the 
Gentiles,  because  they  regarded  the  Gentiles  as  immeasurably  inferior  to  themseWes, 
and  defiled  through  the  want  of  circumcision  ;  and,  therefore,  unable  to  offer  to 
God  any  acceptable  worship.  What,  then,  was  meant  by  the  resistance,  on  Christ's 
part,  to  this  desecration  of  the  court  of  the  Gentiles,  except  that  the  Jews  had  fallen 
into  the  grossest  of  errors,  in  so  supposing  that  the  Gentile  had  been  overlooked 
by  God,  or  excluded  from  His  mercies  ?  The  ground  on  which  he  stood  to  pray  was 
as  hallowed  as  that  on  which  the  sanctuary  rose,  and,  therefore,  he  might  himself 
be  as  much  approved  and  accepted  as  any  one  of  that  family  which  seemed  for 
centuries  to  engross  the  notice  of  heaven.  And  when  this  has  been  determined,  it 
is  scarcely  possible  but  to  feel  that  the  prophecy  may  glance  on  to  future  occur- 
rences. We  need  not  point  out  to  you  how  little  progress  has  yet  been  made, 
notwithstanding  the  struggles  and  the  advancings  of  Christianity,  towards  the 
announced  consummation  that  God's  "  house  shall  be  a  house  of  prayer  for  all 
people."  "  All  people  "  have  not  yet  flocked  to  its  courts ;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
the  great  mass  of  the  human  population  bow  down  in  the  temple  of  idols.  True, 
indeed,  that  the  doors  of  the  sanctuary  have  been  thrown  open,  and  the  men  of 
every  land  been  invited  to  enter ;  but  the  prophecies  in  question  speak  of  more  than 
a  universal  offer  of  admission ;  they  speak  of  what  shall  yet  take  place — the  general 
acceptance  of  the  offer ;  the  pressing  of  all  nations  into  the  Church  of  the  Kedeemer. 
Consider,  then,  whether  the  expulsion  of  the  buyers  and  sellers,  as  figuring  the 
first  accomplishment  of  the  prophecy,  when  the  Gentiles  were  admitted  into  the 
visible  Church,  may  not  also  be  significative  of  what  shall  occur  at  the  close  of  the 
dispensation  when  Christianity  shall  be  diffused  throughout  the  earth.  We  have 
succeeded  to  the  place  of  the  Jews ;  for  Christians  are  now  the  peculiar  people  of 
God,  and  what  the  (Gentiles  were  to  the  Jews,  that  are  the  heathen  to  us — a  race 
divided  from  us  by  external  privileges,  and  not  admitted  into  the  same  covenant 
with  the  Almighty.  And  what  is  it  that  Christian  nations  have  done  and  are 
doing  for  the  heathen  ?  In  our  intercourse  with  lands  where  idolatry  and  super- 
stition still  hold  the  ascendency,  has  it  been  our  main  endeavour  to  introduce  the 
pure  gospel  of  Christ  ?  or  have  we  striven,  where  there  was  no  room  for  direct 
assault  upon  the  fabric  of  error,  to  exhibit  Christianity  in  its  purity, 
and  beauty,  and  majesty  ?  Alas,  might  it  not  be  said,  we  have  planted 
our  markets  rather  than  our  churches  in  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  ; 
that  we  have  crowded  that  court  with  our  merchandise,  but  taken  little 
pains  to  gain  room  within  its  area  for  the  solemnities  of  truth  ;  that  even 
when  the  voice  of  the  preacher  has  been  heard,  it  has  been  overborne  by  the  din 
of  conunerce,  or  contradicted  by  the  lives  of  those  professing  Christianity? 
Indeed,  we  much  think  that  putting,  as  we  are  bound  to  do,  the  Christian  into  the 
place  of  the  Jew,  there  is  little  or  no  difference  between  the  present  aspect  of  the 
court  of  the  Gentiles,  and  that  which  it  wore  when  Christ  was  on  earth — the  same, 
at  least,  in  a  great  degree ;  for  what  portion  do  our  efforts  bear  either  to  our  ability 
or  the  urgency  of  the  case  ?  The  same  inattention  to  those  not  bom  to  our  privi- 
leges ;  the  same  persecution ;  the  same  neglect  or  disregard  of  the  interests  of 
religion ;  the  same  superciUous  notion  of  superiority  in  the  midst  of  the  non- 
improvement  of  our  many  advantages ;  and  if  Christ  were  now  to  return  to  the 
earth,  as  we  believe  He  shall  at  the  close  of  the  dispensation,  what  measure  conld 
Christendom  expect  at  His  hands  but  that  awarded  to  the  Jews  f  It  is  in  exact 
accordance  with  those  delineations  of  Scripture  which  relate  to  the  second  coming 
of  Christ,  that  we  should  consider  the  expulsion  of  the  trafl&ckers  from  the  temple 
figurative  of  what  will  be  done  with  the  great  mass  of  nominal  Christians.  We 
could  almost  think  that  in  this,  and  other  respects,  the  transaction  represented  how 
Christ  would  proceed  in  cleansing  the  temple  of  the  heart.  He  comes  into  the 
courts  of  this  temple — the  heart  of  any  amongst  ourselves  whom  He  desires  to  con- 
secrate to  Himself ;  and  He  finds  it  occupied  by  worldly  things — carnal  passions, 
ambitious  projects,  the  affections  all  fastening  on  the  creature,  to  the  exdusion  d 
the  Creator.  And  there  must  be  an  expulsion  from  the  temple  of  whatsoever 
defiles  it,  that  it  may  indeed  become  a  sanctuary  fit  for  the  indwelling  of  the  Lord 
of  the  whole  earth.  But  the  purifying  process  is  gradual.  Nothing  unclean  can  be 
suffered  to  remain ;  but  it  is  not  all  at  once  that  what  pollutes  is  removed.  The 
first  assault,  as  it  were,  is  on  the  oxen,  and  the  sheep,  and  the  tables  of  the  money 
changsn,  as  the  more  prominent  of  the  occasions  and  causes  of  profanation. 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xx. 

And  with  these  He  is  vehement  »nd  forcible.  Sensuality,  covetousness,  pride— 
these  are  for  the  scourge  and  the  indignant  expostulation ;  and  no  qaarter  can  be 
allowed,  no,  not  for  an  instant.  But  it  is  not  only  the  oxen,  and  the  sheep,  and  the 
tables  of  the  money  changers,  which  desecrate  the  temple  of  the  heart.  There  are 
the  doves — the  gentler  and  Idndlier  affectionB  of  onr  nature ;  and  these — even  these — 
contaminate  when  God  is  not  their  first  object,  but  their  fervonr  and  their  freshness 
given  to  the  creatare.  Bat  it  is  in  gentleness,  rather  than  in  harshness,  that  the  Lord  of 
the  temple  proceeds  with  us  in  effecting  this  part  of  the  purification.  It  is  not  with 
the  doves,  as  with  the  sheep,  and  the  oxen,  and  the  tables  of  the  money-ehangen — 
the  scourging  and  the  overthrowing,  but  rather  by  the  mild  expostulation — ♦•Take 
these  things  hence,"  that  He  attempts  the  removal  of  what  He  cannot  suffer  to 
remain.  Harshness  might  injure  or  destroy  the  affections  themselves,  just  as  the 
driving  out  the  doves  would  have  caused  their  being  lost ;  but  by  continually  setting 
before  us  the  goodness  of  God,  whether  as  manifested  in  creation  or  redemption, 
by  teaching  us  how  much  more  precious  becomes  every  object  of  love  when  we  love 
it  not  so  much  for  its  own  sake  as  for  the  sake  of  the  Giver — this  cleanses  the 
heart,  and  gradually  inclines  us  to  the  substituting  for  affections  chained  to  the 
finite,  affections  centeriBg  on  the  infinite ;  and  thus  persuades  us  to  take  away  the 
dove  on  whose  plumage  is  the  dust  of  the  earth,  but  only  that  its  place  may  be 
occupied  by  one  such  as  the  Psalmist  describes — "  whose  wings  are  covered  with 
silver,  and  her  feathers  with  yellow  gold."  The  cleansing  of  the  heart  is  not 
complete  till  God  is  supreme  in  its  affections,  It  is  not  enough  to  mortify  corrupt 
passions,  and  resist  imperious  lusts :  this  is  but  expelling  the  sheep  and  the  oxen. 
We  must  give  God  the  heart,  delighting  in  Him  as  the  "  chief  good ; "  ay,  my 
brethren,  we  must  act  on  the  consciousness,  and  God  grant  that  we  all  may  I — we  must 
act  on  the  consciousness  that  the  gentle  dove  may  profane  God's  house,  as  well 
as  the  flocks  whose  pastures  are  of  the  earth ;  and  that  if  the  one — the  sheep  and 
the  oxen — must  be  altogether  ejected,  the  other — the  dove — must  be  trained  to 
the  soaring  upwards,  and  bathing  in  the  free  li^^ht  of  heaven.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Profanation  of  holy  places  : — Who  wiU  venture  to  deny  the  exceeding  enormity  of 
that  offence  which  a  prince  deems  it  right  to  punish  with  his  own  hand  ?  God 
drove  our  guilty  first  parents  from  the  garden ;  but  it  was  done  by  the  intervention 
of  an  angel.  He  chased  the  Canaanites  from  their  land ;  but  He  did  it  by  an 
army  of  hornets.  By  the  hand  of  an  angel  He  struck  down  the  army  of  the 
Assyrians,  and  brought  low  the  pride  of  Herod  when  he  assumed  Divine  honour 
to  himself.  Only  in  the  case  of  those  who  profane  sacred  places  do  I  see  Christ — 
Him,  that  is,  who  on  all  other  occasions  was  so  mild  and  gentle— coming  forth  and 
taking  the  rod  in  His  own  hand.  What  a  monstrous,  what  an  intolerable  crime  must 
this  be— the  profanation  of  holy  places  1  (Segneri.)  Desecration  of  t?ie  temple  :^ 
The  circumstances  which  led  to  the  profanation  were  these.  The  Jews  who  came  up  to 
the  Feasts  from  a  distance  would  obviously  find  it  more  convenient  to  purchase  their 
sacrificial  victims  on  the  spot,  and  cattle-markets  were  held  in  the  city ;  but  in  lapse 
of  time,  when  the  authorities  of  the  temple  began  to  grow  mercenary, they  determined 
to  have  such  a  large  source  of  profit  in  their  own  hands.  The  Court  of  the  Gentiles 
was  always  held  in  Uttle  respect  by  the  Jews,  and  it  seemed  to  them  quite  justifiable 
to  utilize  it  for  their  purpose.  For  about  twenty  days  before  the  Feast  the  corridors 
and  arcades  and  outer  waUs  of  the  sacred  enclosure  were  commonly  occupied  by 
eattle-pens ;  and  the  solemn  stillness  of  the  precincts  was  broken  by  the  unseemly 
confusion  of  the  lowing  of  herds,  and  the  wrangling  of  drovers  and  pilgrims  bar. 
gaining  for  their  price.  Besides  these  there  were  the  money-changers.  After  the 
captivity  the  Jews  of  the  dispersion,  when  they  came  up  to  the  Feasts,  in  common 
with  those  who  dwelt  in  Palestine,  made  each  their  offering  for  the  temple  service. 
There  was  only  one  coin  in  which  this  offering  might  be  paid  into  the  treasury — 
the  half-shekel  piece.  It  was  intended  as  a  safeguard  to  prevent  the  Korban  being 
desecrated  by  the  introduction  of  pieces  of  money  upon  which  heathen  emblems 
were  stamped.  Those  pilgrims,  therefore,  who  came  from  countries  where  non. 
Jewish  money  was  current,  as  Babylon,  Alexandria,  Greece,  or  Bome,  were  com- 
pelled to  procure  the  half-shekel  by  exchange.  It  was  not  only  a  fruitful  source  of 
gain  to  the  bankers,  who  demanded  an  exorbitant  discount ;  their  extortion  kindled 
tiie  indignation  of  our  Lord,  and  His  ears  were  pained  by  the  clinking  of  money 
and  weights  and  balances,  and  the  strife  of  words  and  angry  recriminations, 
mingling  with  the  prayers  and  praises  of  the  sanctuary.  But  this  was  not  alL 
Btcu  the  offerings  of  poor  women,  and  others,  whose  very  poverty  might  have 
•Kcmpted  them  from  fraudulent  imposition,  were  included  in  the  market.    The 


aoAt.   zx.]  ST,  MARK.  455 

whole  scene  was  suoh  as  would  raise  the  righteous  anger  of  any  one  who  was 
jealous  for  the  honour  of  God's  house.  It  was  almost  a  worse  profanation  than 
that  which  made  our  cathedrals  and  churches  scenes  of  riot  and  desecration  in  the 
times  of  Edward  VI.,  when  St.  Paul's  was  turned  into  a  stock  exchange  for  mer- 
chants, and  its  aisles  were  used  as  common  thoroughfares  for  both  man  and  beast. 
(H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  Gleaming  of  the  Temple  ;— I.  God  has  many  temples  ; 
(1)  Temple  of  Israel;  (2)  Temple  of  nature;  (3)  Christian  church;  (4)  Saved 
souls.  II.  Wk  ABE  TOO  BEADY  TO  DEFILE  THEM.  We  mix  self-interest  with  religion, 
or  trade  with  religion,  for  our  own  profit.  1.  Preaching  in  order  to  get  money. 
2.  Sale  of  livings.  3.  Going  to  certain  churches  because  it  may  be  good  for 
business.  III.  However  the  Saviour  may  seem  to  ignore  such  pollution,  a  time  will 
come  when  He  will  besent  and  purge  it  away.  {R.  Glover.)  Thieves  in  the 
Temple  : — Eeligion  must  not  be  exploited  for  money.  The  church  is  not  a  shop. 
The  kind  of  spiritual  outrage  attacked  by  Christ  is  one  that  repeats  itself.  There 
was  nothing  wrong  in  selling  outside  the  temple,  or  any  other  church,  things  which 
were  necessary  for  the  temple  service.  We  sell  hymn-books  in  our  vestries  ;  abroad 
they  sell  candles  and  breviaries  and  crosses  at  the  doors  of  the  cathedrals.  It  is  a 
question  of  degree  and  intention.  But  I  have  seen,  at  the  time  of  a  church  cele- 
bration abroad,  the  whole  street  blocked  with  booths.  Noisy  sellers  of  sweetmeats, 
toys,  and  provisions,  pushing  their  bargains,  and  touting  even  in  the  church  porch, 
and  on  the  threshold  of  the  sanctuary.  There  was  the  den  of  thieves.  Your 
miracle-mongers,  who  set  up  their  winking  statues  and  healing-saints'  bones  with 
the  one  view  of  fleecing  the  people — are  thieves.  Your  idle  clergy,  especially 
certain  Roman  cathedral  clergy,  who  fatten  on  the  sins  of  the  faithful,  never  preach, 
seldom  hear  confessions,  never  visit  the  sick;  simply  do  nothing  but  mumble 
mass  on  samts'  days — they  are  thieves.  Your  Enghsh  clergy,  who  are  hale  and 
hearty  non-residents  on  £500  a  year,  and  put  in  a  man  at  £80  to  look  after  their 
parishes — are  thieves.  Wherever  or  whenever  God's  church  and  service  is  made 
the  pretext;  first  and  foremost  for  getting  money,  then  and  there  the  spiritual  out- 
rage chastised  by  Christ  with  whip  and  expulsion  is  committed  afresh :  the  house  of 
prayer  has  been  made  a  den  of  thieves ;  and  at  such  an  hour  as  they  wot  not  of, 
the  Lord  will  suddenly  come  to  His  temple  and  purify  it.  (H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.) 
Right  looking  upon  wrong : — As  it  is  said  that  ferocious  animals  are  disarmed  by 
the  eye  of  man  if  he  but  steadily  look  at  them,  so  it  is  when  right  looks  upon  wrong. 
Besist  the  devil  and  he  will  flee  from  you ;  ofter  him  a  bold  front  and  he  nma 
away.     (Dr.  BushnelL), 

Ver.  22.  Have  faith  in  God. — Have  faith  in  Ood: — I.  What  paith  is.  1.  Taking 
God  at  His  word,  about  things  unknown  (Heb.  xi.  7),  unlikely  (Heb.  xi.  17-19), 
untried  (Heb.  xi.  28).  2.  Trusting  Jesus  at  His  invitation.  Trust  your  soul 
to  His  care ;  your  sins  to  His  cleansing ;  your  life  to  His  keeping.  H.  Whbncb 
FAITH  COMES.  1.  From  God's  grace  (Eph.  ii.  8 ;  Bom.  xii.  3).  2.  From  God's 
Word  (Bom.  x.  17 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  15).  3.  From  God's  working  (1  John  v.  1 ;  Col.  it  12). 
4.  Out  of  the  heart  (Rom.  x.  10).  III.  How  faith  wobks.  1.  It  overcomes  the 
world  (1  John  v.  4).  2.  It  purifies  tha  heart  (Acts  xv.  8,  9).  3.  It  works  by  love 
(Gal.  V.  6).  (J.  Richardson,  M.A.)  Have  faith  in  God— Ood  will  not  desert  those 
who  trust  in  Him : — Many  years  ago,  when  in  my  country  charge,  I  returned  one 
afternoon  from  a  funeral,  fatigued  with  the  day's  work.  After  a  long  ride,  I  had 
accompanied  the  mourners  to  the  churchyard.  As  I  neared  my  stable-door,  I  felt  a 
strange  prompting  to  visit  a  poor  widow  who,  with  her  invalid  daughter,  lived  in  a 
lonely  cottage  in  an  outlying  part  of  the  parish.  My  natural  reluctance  to  make 
another  visit  was  overcome  by  a  feeling  which  I  could  not  resist,  and  I  tamed  my 
horse's  head  towards  the  cottage.  I  was  thinking  only  of  the  widow's  spiritual 
needs ;  but,  when  I  reached  her  little  house,  I  was  struck  with  its  look  of  unwonted 
bareness  and  poverty.  After  putting  a  little  money  into  her  hand,  I  began  to 
inquire  into  their  circumstances,  and  found  that  their  supplies  had  been  utterly 
exhausted  since  the  night  before.  I  asked  them  what  they  had  done.  "  I  just 
spread  it  out  before  the  Lord  I  "  «•  Did  you  tell  your  case  to  any  friend  ?  "  ••  Oh 
no,  sir ;  nobody  knows  but  Himself  and  me.  I  knew  He  wouldn't  forget,  though  I 
didn't  know  how  He  would  help  me,  till  I  saw  you  coming  riding  over  the  hill,  and 
then  I  said,  "  There's  the  Lord's  answer."  Many  a  time  has  the  recollection  of 
this  incident  encouraged  me  to  trust  in  the  loving  care  of  my  heavenly  Father. 
{G,  Macdonald,  D.D.)  One  winter  morning,  a  poor  little  orphan  boy  of  six  or 
eight  years  begged  a  lady  to  allow  him  to  clean  away  the  snow  from  her  door.  **  Do 


456  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TEAT0B,  [obat.  zl 

yon  get  much  to  do,  xuy  little  boy  ?  "  said  the  lady.  "  Sometimes  I  do,**  he  repliedt 
"  but  often  I  get  very  little. "  "  And  are  you  never  afraid  that  you  will  not  get  enough 
to  live  on?  "  The  child  looked  perplexed  a  moment,  and  then  answered,  "Don't 
you  think  God  will  take  care  of  a  boy  if  he  puts  his  trust  in  Him,  and  does  the  best 
he  can  t  "  Have  faith  in  God: — Gotthold  saw  several  sailors  step  into  a  boat  to 
cross  a  river.  Two  took  the  oars,  and,  as  usual,  turned  their  backs  upon  the  shore 
to  which  they  intended  to  sail.  A  third  stood  and  kept  his  face  unaverted  on  the 
place  where  they  wished  to  land,  and  which  they  very  speedily  reached.  *•  See 
here,"  he  said,  to  those  about  him,  **  what  may  well  remind  us  of  our  condition. 
Life  is  a  mighty  river,  rapidly  flowing  into  the  ocean  of  eternity,  and  returning  no 
more.  On  this  river  we  are  all  afloat  in  the  bark  of  our  vocation,  which  we  must 
urge  forward  with  the  oars  of  industry  and  toil.  Like  these  sailors,  therefore,  we 
ought  to  turn  our  back  upon  the  future,  put  our  confidence  in  God,  who  stands  at 
the  helm,  and  by  His  mighty  power  steers  the  vessel  to  where  happiness  and  salva- 
tion await  us,  and  diligently  labour,  unconcerned  about  anything  else.  "We  would 
smile,  were  these  men  to  turn  round  and  pretend  that  they  could  not  row  blindfold, 
but  must  needs  see  the  place  to  which  their  course  was  directed ;  and  it  is  no  less 
foolish  in  us  to  insist  on  apprehending,  with  our  anxieties  and  thoughts,  all  things, 
whether  future  or  at  hand.  Let  it  be  our  part  to  ply  the  oar  and  toil  and  pray ; 
but  let  us  leave  it  to  God  to  steer  and  bless  and  govern.  0  my  God,  be  with  me 
in  my  little  bark,  and  bless  it  according  to  Thy  good  pleasure  1  I  will  turn  my  face 
to  Thee,  and,  as  Thou  sbalt  enable  me,  I  will  diligently  and  faithfully  labour ;  for 
all  else  Thou  wilt  provide."  The  orphan's  prayer : — A  little  child,  whose  father 
and  mother  had  died,  was  taken  into  another  family.  The  flrst  night  she  asked  if 
she  might  pray,  as  she  used  to  do.  They  said,  "Oh,  yes."  So  she  knelt  down, 
and  prayed  as  her  mother  had  taught  her ;  and  when  that  was  ended,  she  added  a 
little  prayer  of  her  own  :  ♦'  0  God,  make  these  people  as  kind  to  me  as  father  and 
mother  were."  Then  she  paused,  and  looked  up,  as  if  expecting  an  answer,  and 
then  added,  "  Of  course  you  will."  How  sweetly  simple  was  that  little  one's  faith; 
she  expected  God  to  "  do  " ;  and,  of  course,  she  got  her  request.  Have  faith  in 
Qod — Never  give  up  in  despair: — An  industrious  tradesman  had  fallen  on  bad  times; 
his  business  would  not  prosper,  and  he  lost  heart.  His  wife,  however,  kept  cheerful; 
she  went  on  praying,  and  tried  to  hearten  up  her  husband.  But  it  was  no  use ;  he 
kept  on  saying  there  was  no  hope  for  him,  and  he  might  as  well  go  out  of  life,  for 
there  was  notlung  good  to  be  looked  for.  One  morning  the  cheery  wife  came  down 
with  a  face  as  sad  as  her  Lusband's.  "  What's  the  matter  ?  "  said  he.  **  Oh,"  she 
replied,  with  a  shudder,  "I've  had  such  a  dreadful  dream.  I  dreamt  God  was 
dead,  and  all  the  angels  were  going  to  His  funeral  I  "  "  What  nonsense  1 "  said  her 
husband.  "  How  can  you  be  so  silly  ?  Don't  you  know  God  can't  die  ?  "  She 
thought  a  moment,  and  then  brightened  up.  '*  That's  true,"  she  answered.  "  But, 
oh,  husband  I  if  He  can't  die,  He  can't  change,  either.  He  has  taken  care  of  as  aU 
our  lives :  why  should  we  begin  to  think  He  has  forgotten  us  now  f  It'll  only  be  a 
passing  cloud,  may  be,  that's  hiding  the  sun,  just  to  try  us.  Let  us  trust  Him 
through  it  all."  "  You're  right,  wife,"  said  the  man.  "  Seems  to  me  I've  believed 
in  God  without  trusting  Him.  Let  us  ask  Him  to  forgive  me  this  sin  of  mistrust. 
May  be  my  ill-luck  has  been  a  punishment  for  that  same,  sent  to  open  my  eyes,** 
However  that  may  have  been,  the  tide  did  turn,  and  neither  man  nor  wife  ever 
mistrusted  God  again.  Have  faith  in  Qod — Wonder -working  faith  : — It  is  not 
only  to  faith,  as  a  general  spiritual  force  of  boundless  potency  and  value,  that  onx 
Lord  here  directs  our  thoughts ;  but  also,  and  more  particularly,  to  the  faith  which 
sees  what  things  are  useless  and  ready  to  die,  and  puts  them  out  of  the  way ;  the 
faith  which  confronts  obstacles  as  big  as  solid  mountains,  and  yet  is  sure  that  it 
cau  remove  or  surmount  them ;  the  faith  which  faints  at  no  difficulty,  no  apparent 
impossibility  even,  but  attacks  even  the  greatest  of  them  with  courage  and  good 
hope.  This  is  the  faith  to  which  Christ  here  invites  us — the  faith  which  He  Him- 
self exercised,  not  only  when  He  banned  the  fig-tree,  but  also  when  He  set  Himself 
to  save  and  raise  the  world  against  its  will,  and  had  therefore  to  face  a  world  in 
arms.  It  is  the  faith  which  believes  truth  to  be  stronger  than  error,  righteousness 
than  unrighteousness,  good  than  evil,  even  though  all  the  world  should  have  espoused 
the  losing  cause.  It  is  the  faith  which  believes  not  only  that  spiritual  energies 
are  stronger  than  material  fo  ces,  but  also  that  the  good  spiritual  foroes  of  the 
universe  are  stronger  than  its  evil  forces,  and  are  sure  to  overcome  them  in  the 
end  Nothing  seems  more  doubtful  to  us  at  times  than  the  victory  of  faith  over 
the  world ;  yet  nothing  is  more  certain.    The  whole  history  of  the  world  is  on« 


<imAP.  n.]  ST.  MARK.  457 

long  continnous  teitimony  to  the  fact,  that  it  is  by  faith  in  great  prinoiples  that 
men  are  really  swayed.  What  is  the  history  of  every  great  movement  by  which 
the  world,  or  any  portion  of  it,  has  been  raised,  purified,  reformed,  and  renewed, 
but  just  this  :  Faith  in  some  great  truth  or  principle — faith  in  justice,  faith  in 
freedom,  faith  in  wise  laws  and  deep  convictions — has  grown  to  enthusiasm  in  a 
few  hearts ;  and  in  the  power  of  this  faith  they  have  spoken  and  toiled,  facing  and 
gradually  beating  down  all  ojDposition,  detecting  signs  of  decay  in  the  most  vene- 
rable and  solidly  established  institutions,  customs,  statutes,  and  dooming  them  to 
perish ;  encountering  whole  mountains  of  obstacle  and  difficulty,  yet  taking  them 
up  and  at  last  casting  them  into  the  sea.  {S.  Cox^  D.D.)  Faith  in  God : — 
1.  There  is  Christ's  command  itself.  2.  God's  own  character  demands  this  faith. 
3.  God's  gifts  claim  and  warrant  faith.  4.  The  way  in  which  we  specially  honour 
Him  is  by  having  faith  in  Him.  6.  Unbelief  profits  nothing.  6.  Faith  has  dono 
wonders  in  time  past,  and  it  can  do  wonders  still.    {H.  Bonar^  D.D.) 

Ver.  23.  That  whosoever  shall  say  unto  this  mountalii.  Be  thou  removed— 
This  mountain : — ♦ '  This  mountain,"  which  Christ  promised  His  disciples  power  to 
remove,  and  which  in  after  years  they  did  most  effectually  remove,  was  the  holy 
mount  on  which  the  Hebrew  temple  once  stood,  but  which  is  now  crowned  with 
churches  and  a  mosque.  He  saw  that  even  the  Jewish  religion  was  waxing  old  and 
ready  to  vanish  away.  And  yet  how  impossible  it  seemed  that  they,  a  few  simple 
and  unlettered  men,  with  no  force  but  their  faith  in  Him,  should  achieve  this 
mighty  task.  The  whole  world,  heathen  and  Hebrew,  was  against  them  :  the  un- 
broken power  of  Kome,  the  unsurpassed  wisdom  of  the  Greeks,  the  ancient 
philosophies  and  hereditary  customs  of  the  unchanging  East,  the  fierce  barbarism 
of  the  North,  the  jealous  and  tenacious  bigotry  of  the  Jews ;  the  lusts  of  the  flesh 
and  of  the  mind,  the  pride  and  splendour  of  life  ;  all  to  which  men  leaned  with  all 
the  weight  of  habit,  tradition,  and  inclination.  And  yet,  in  a  few  years,  all  these 
mighty  forces  went  down  before  the  power  of  faith ;  and,  where  they  still  survive, 
their  doom  is  written  on  them  in  characters  which  it  takes  no  prophet  to  read.  All 
this  the  disciples  had  to  believe  before,  as  yet,  any  jot  of  it  had  come  to  pass. 
Their  faith  in  God,  and  in  the  redeeming  purpose  of  His  love,  was  to  be  their  sole 
warrant  and  evidence  that  the  temple,  with  all  which  it  symboUzed,  was  to  pass 
away;  that  "this  mountain,"  with  all  its  pile  of  sacred  fabrics,  all  its  weight  of 
sacred  memories,  was  to  be  cast  into  the  sea ;  and  that  the  world,  banded  in  an 
apparently  impregnable  unity  against  them,  was  nevertheless  to  be  overcome.  And 
in  this  faith  they  both  destroyed  the  temple  and  conquered  the  world.  (5.  Cox, 
D.D.)  This  mountain — Difficulties  in  the  Christianas  path : — Our  Lord  here  pre- 
supposes  that  believers  will  be  called  by  God  to  the  undertaking  and  doing  of  great 
and  difficult  works,  such  as  are  above  and  beyond  the  power  of  nature,  and  as  hard 
and  difficult  to  flesh  and  blood  as  the  removing  of  a  mountain.  Such  great  and 
difficult  works  may  a  Christian  be  called  by  God  to  perform  :  yea,  every  Christian 
is  actually  called  by  God  to  the  performance  of  such  hard  and  difficult  works,  so 
soon  as  he  is  called  to  believe  and  to  be  a  Christian— «.^.,  a  Christian  is  called  to 
deny  himself,  and  to  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Christ :  which  are  most  difficult 
works,  impossible  to  nature  and  contrary  to  it.  A  Christian  is  also  called  to  the 
practice  of  repentance,  i.e.,  to  die  unto  sin,  to  mortify  his  sinful  lusts,  &c.,  a  most 
hard,  difficult,  and  painful  work.  Again,  we  are  called  to  obey  (Jod  in  all  things 
which  He  requires :  in  all  parts  of  His  will,  though  never  so  hard  and  contrary  to 
our  nature.  We  are  called  to  despise  the  world,  and  to  use  it  as  if  we  used  it  not ; 
yea,  to  be  crucified  and  dead  to  it ;  and  to  forsake  all  we  have  for  Christ  and  the 
gospel.  All  these  are  most  hard  and  difficult  duties,  which  every  Christian  and 
true  believer  is  called  to  undertake  and  perform ;  and  he  must  indeed  perform 
ihem,  in  some  measure  at  least ;  otherwise,  he  cannot  be  a  good  Christian.  If  we 
wish  to  be  good  Christians  indeed,  we  must  not  promise  ourselves  a  life  of  ease ; 
we  must  think  seriously  and  often  what  we  are  called  to  ;  and  we  must  daily  pray 
and  labour  for  supernatural  strength  and  grace.  Not  of  ourselves  can  we  accom- 
plish this  arduous  task ;  but  God,  who  calls  us  to  it,  will  enable  us  to  perform  it, 
if  we  seek  from  Him  that  which  we  have  not  in  ourselves.  (O.  Petter.)  Mountain 
removed  .-—When  William  Carey  went  to  India,  many  a  wise  man  would  have  said 
to  him,  ♦'  You  may  just  as  well  walk  up  to  the  Himalaya  mountains,  and  order 
them  to  be  removed  and  cast  into  the  sea."  I  would  have  said,  '*  That  is  perfectly 
trcM ;  this  Hinduism  is  as  vast  and  as  soUd  as  those  mountains ;  but  we  have  faith 
—not  much,  yet  we  have  faith  aa  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  " ;  and  William  Care/ 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap. 


said,  "  I  will  go  np  to  the  mountain."  Lonely  and  weak  he  walked  up  towardB  the 
mountain,  which  in  the  eye  of  man  seemed  verily  one  of  the  summits  of  human 
1  hings,  far  above  all  power  to  touch  or  shake  it ;  and  with  his  own  feeble  voice  he 
began  saying,  "Be  thou  removed  !  be  thou  removed!  "  And  the  world  looked  on 
and  laughed.  A  celebrated  clergyman,  looking  down  from  his  high  place  in  the 
Edinburgh  Review,  was  much  amused  with  the  spectacle  of  that  poor  man  down 
in  Bengal,  thinking  in  his  simple  heart  that  he  was  going  to  disturb  Hinduism ; 
and  from  his  high  place  he  cast  down  a  scalding  word,  which  he  meant  to  fall  just 
as  of  old  boiling  lead  used  to  fall  upon  a  poor  man  from  the  height  of  a  tower.  He 
called  him  a  "  consecrated  cobbler.'*  All  the  wise  world  laughed,  and  said  he  was 
treated  as  he  ought  to  be  treated.  However,  he  went  on  saying  to  the  mountain, 
"  Be  thou  removed  1  be  thou  removed  !  "  And  one  joined  him,  and  another  janed 
]nm;  the  voice  grew  stronger;  it  was  repeated  in  more  languages  than  one.  *'  Be 
thou  removed,  and  be  thou  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea  !  "  and  now  there  is  a  large 
oompany  who  are  uttering  that  one  word,  "  Be  thou  removed  I  "  I  ask  the  living 
ropresentativesof  the  very  men  who  first  smiled  at  this  folly,  "What  say  ye  now?  " 
"Well,"  they  answer,  "  you  have  not  got  into  the  sea  yet."  That  is  true ;  but  do 
you  pay  that  the  mountain  during  the  last  forty  years  has  not  moved  ?  No  man  can 
say  that  it  is  in  the  same  position  as  it  was  when  William  Carey  first  went  up  to  it. 
It  is  moving  fast ;  and  I  call  upon  you  to  swell  that  voice,  the  voice  of  God's 
Church,  which  seems  to  say,  "  Be  thou  removed,  be  thou  removed,  and  be  thou  cast 
into  the  depths  of  the  sea  1 "  Cast  into  those  depths  it  will  be  ;  and  a  day  will  come 
when  the  nations  of  a  regenerated  East  will  write  in  letters  of  gold  upon  the  first 
pages  of  their  Christian  history  the  name  of  the  *'  consecrated  cobbler."  {William 
Arthur.) 

Ver.  24.  What  things  soever  ye  desire  when  ye  v^j.— Combined  action  of 
prayer  and  faith  : — The  apostles,  when  the  Lord  was  taken  away  from  them,  would 
have  to  commend  His  doctrine  to  the  world  by  miracles.  To  this  end  it  was  need- 
ful that  their  faith  in  God,  as  the  Bestower  of  all  power  to  do  such  things,  should 
be  raised.  For  the  real  doer  of  every  miracle  or  sign  was  God,  and  God  only. 
When  the  apostles  healed  suddenly  any  sick  person,  or  cast  out  any  evil  spirit,  it 
was  by  the  combined  exercise  of  prayer  and  faith.  They  secretly  or  openly  called 
upon  God,  and  they  implicitly  believed  that  He  would  accompany  their  word  with 
His  power.  Now,  being  men  totally  ignorant  of  science,  and  so  unable  to  form  a 
conception  of  the  kind  or  amount  of  power  put  forth  in  the  performance  of  any 
miracle,  they  would  naturally  look  upon  it  as  a  matter  of  size,  or  weight,  or  exten- 
sion.  They  would,  as  a  matter  of  course,  look  upon  the  removal  of  the  Mount  of 
Olives  as  a  far  greater  thing,  demanding  far  greater  power,  than  the  sudden  drying- 
up  of  the  life-juices  of  a  single  fig-tree  ;  but  it  may  not  really  be  greater  by  any 
means.  On  the  contrary,  the  sudden  touching  and  arresting  the  springs  of  life  in 
the  living  thing  may  require  far  more  knowledge  of  the  greatest  secret  of  all — the 
secret  of  life,  and  far  more  real  power  in  applying  that  knowledge,  than  the  removal 
of  the  most  stupendous  mass  of  dead  matter.  Now  the  apostles,  though  they 
could  not  understand  this,  must  yet  act  as  if  it  were  so.  They  must  not  judge  by 
the  sight  of  their  eyes  of  the  diflSculty  or  easiness  of  anything  which  they  felt 
moved  by  the  Spirit  to  perform.  They  must  think  of  nothing  but  the  almighty 
power  of  God,  and  His  pledge  to  accompany  their  prayers  or  words  with  that 
power.  {M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  The  miracle  of  faith  .-—True  prayer  is  sure  power. 
L  Look  at  the  text  to  see  the  essential  qualities  necessaby  to  any  orsat 
SUCCESS  IN  PBAYEB.  There  must  be— 1.  Definite  things  prayed  for.  No  rambling, 
or  drawing  the  bow  at  a  venture.  Use  no  mock-modesty  with  God.  Be  simple  and 
direct  in  your  pleadings.  Speak  plainly,  and  make  a  straight  aim  at  the  object  ol 
your  supplications.  2.  Earnest  desure.  Plead  as  for  your  life.  There  was  a  beau- 
tiful  illustration  of  true  prayer  addressed  to  man  in  the  conduct  of  two  noble  ladies, 
whose  husbands  were  condemned  to  die  and  were  about  to  be  executed,  when  they 
came  before  George  I.  and  supplicated  for  their  pardon.  The  king  rudely  and 
cruelly  repulsed  them.  But  they  pleaded  again  and  again ;  and  could  not  be  got  to 
rise  from  their  knees ;  and  they  had  actually  to  be  dragged  out  of  court,  for  they 
refused  to  leave  till  their  petition  was  granted.  That  is  the  way  we  must  pray  to 
God.  We  must  have  such  a  desire  for  the  thing  we  want  that  we  will  not  rise  until 
we  have  it, — but  in  submission  to  His  Divine  will,  nevertheless.  3.  F*^*^  J," 
questioning  whether  God  can  or  will  grant  the  prayer.  The  prayers  of  God  t 
people  are  but  God's  promises  breathed  out  of  living  hearts ;  and  those  promisei 


SHIP,  n.]  8T.  MARK.  45f 

are  the  decrees  only  pat  into  another  fonn  and  fashion.  When  you  can  plead  His 
promise,  then  your  will  is  His  will.  4.  A  realizing  expectation.  We  should  be  able 
to  count  over  the  mercies  before  we  have  got  them,  believing  that  they  are  on  the 
road.  II.  Look  about  tou,  and  judge  by  thb  tenor  of  the  text.  1.  Public 
meetings  for  prayer.  How  often,  at  these  meetings,  does  this  advice  of  an  old 
preacher  need  to  be  remembered :  «•  The  Lord  will  not  hear  thee  because  of  the 
arithmetic  of  thy  prayers ;  He  does  not  count  their  numbers  :  nor  because  of  their 
rhetoric ;  He  does  not  aare  for  the  eloquent  language  in  which  they  are  couched : 
nor  for  their  geometry ;  He  does  not  compute  them  by  their  length  or  their 
breadth :  nor  yet  will  He  regard  thee  because  of  the  music  of  thy  prayers ;  He 
cares  not  for  sweet  voices  and  harmonious  periods.  Neither  will  He  look  at  thee 
because  of  the  logic  of  thy  prayers— because  they  are  well  arranged  and  excellently 
comparted.  But  He  will  hear  thee,  and  He  will  measure  the  amount  of  the  blessing 
He  will  give  thee,  according  to  the  divinity  of  thy  prayers.  If  thou  canst  plead  the 
person  of  Christ,  and  if  the  Holy  Ghost  inspire  thee  with  zeal  and  earnestness,  the 
blessings  thou  askest  will  surely  come  to  thee."  2.  Your  private  intercessions. 
There  is  no  place  that  some  of  us  need  to  be  so  ashamed  to  look  at  as  our  closet 
door.  Shame  on  our  hurried  devotions,  our  lip  services,  our  distrust.  See  to  it  that 
an  amendment  be  made,  and  God  make  you  more  mighty  and  more  successful  in 
your  prayers  than  heretofore.  IH.  Look  above,  and  you  will  see  enough  to 
MAKE  TOU— 1.  Weep.  God  has  given  us  a  mighty  weapon,  and  we  have  let  it  rust. 
If  the  universe  were  as  still  as  we  are  where  should  we  be?  God  gives  light  to  the 
sun,  and  he  shines  with  it.  To  the  winds  He  gives  force,  and  they  blow.  To  the 
air  He  gives  life,  and  it  moves,  and  men  breathe  thereof.  But  to  His  people  He  has 
given  a  gift  that  is  better  far  than  force,  or  life,  or  light,  and  yet  they  neglect  and 
despise  it  1  Constantino,  when  he  saw  that  on  the  coins  of  the  other  emperors  their 
images  were  in  an  erect  position,  triumphing,  ordered  that  his  image  should  be 
struck  kneeling,  for,  said  he,  "  This  is  the  way  in  which  I  have  triumphed."  The 
reason  why  we  have  been  so  often  defeated,  and  why  our  banners  trail  in  the  dust, 
is  because  we  have  not  prayed.  2.  Rejoice.  For,  though  you  have  sinned  against 
God,  He  loves  you  still.  You  may  not  as  yet  have  gone  to  the  fountain,  but  it 
still  flows  as  freely  as  ever.  3.  Amend  your  prayers  from  this  time  forth.  Look  on 
prayer  no  longer  as  a  romantic  fiction  or  an  arduous  duty,  but  as  a  true  power  and 
a  real  pleasure.  When  philosophers  discover  some  latent  power  they  delight  to  put 
it  in  action.  Test  the  bounty  of  the  Eternal.  Take  to  Him  all  your  petitions  and 
wants,  and  see  if  He  does  not  honour  yoo.  Try  whether,  if  you  believe  Him,  He 
will  not  fulfil  His  promise,  and  richly  bless  you  with  the  anointing  oil  of  Hia 
Spirit,  by  which  you  will  be  strong  in  prayer.  (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Lessons  on 
prayer :— L  God  hears  prayers  of  any  magnitude ;  much  wrong  might  have  been 
prevented  or  cured,  much  good  done,  if  only  we  had  prayed.  II.  Success  for  prayer 
depends  on  goodness ;  without  the  soul-health  of  trust  and  love  we  cannot  pray. 
in.  Let  our  unanswered  prayers  be  a  mirror  in  which  we  see  our  faults.  {R.  Olover.) 
If  our  doubts  do  not  prevail  so  far  as  to  make  ns  leave  off  praying,  our  prayers  wiil 
prevail  so  far  as  to  make  us  leave  off  doubting.  {H.  Hiekman.)  Prayer  a 
key  .-—Prayer  is  a  key  which,  being  turned  by  the  hand  of  faith,  unlocks  God'a 
treasures.  {Anon.)  The  sum  and  substance  of  every  prayer  should  be  the  unll  of 
Ood  .-—The  exercise  of  prayer  can  only  be  a  blessing  to  our  souls  when  our  own 
will  is  entirely  merged  in  the  will  of  our  heavenly  Father.  If  we  only  knew  the 
truth,  we  should  find  that  prayer  is  more  connected  with  the  discipline  of  the  will 
than  we  generally  imagine.  Our  will  is  not  naturally  in  harmony  with  God's.  The 
carrying  out  of  our  own  will,  when  bent  on  some  desired  object,  is  what  invariably 
eharacterises  us.  It  becomes  habitual  to  us.  We  carry  it,  more  or  less,  as  a  habit 
into  the  presence  of  God.  It  must  not  be,  however.  Wilfulness  is  not  a  oharao- 
teristio  of  one  of  God's  children.  He  is  but  a  child,  and  he  must  know  it.  The 
Father's  will  is  best;  the  child  must  know  no  will  but  His.  It  must  be  crossed, 
however  painful  it  may  be.  To  subdue  that  will,  to  blend  it  with  His,  and  to  mak« 
ns  perfectly  happy  under  the  conviction  that  our  own  is  not  to  be  carried  out,  is  th« 
only  tme  explanation  of  many  an  unanswered  prayer,  many  a  bitter  cup  still  un- 
removed,  and  many  a  thorn  still  left  rankling  in  the  flesh.  But  when  the  heart 
has  been  brought  into  that  state  when  it  can,  with  happy,  confiding  trast,  look  up 
and  say,  "  Father,  not  my  will,  but  Thine,  be  done  I  "  then  will  relief  come.  The 
thorn,  indeed,  may  not  be  extracted,  the  cup  may  not  be  removed,  but  there  will 
appear  the  itrengtiiemng  angel  from  heaven  enabling  ns  to  bear  it.  (F.  Whitfield,) 
Scope  and  liwUt  of  prayer :— In  other  places  the  promise  is  considerably  qualified. 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xx. 

We  shall  receive,  not  whatever  we  ask,  but  the  Holy  Spirit,  «.«.,  we  are  to  spread 
out  our  case,  our  needs,  our  desires,  before  God,  for  that  is  the  way  to  come  into 
close  relations  with  Him  ;  He  will  do  the  rest.  The  answer  shall  be  the  ^ft  we  ask 
for,  and  our  demand  sball  be  the  needful  link  in  the  chain  of  causes  which  brings 
us  and  our  heart's  desire  together  ;  in  other  words,  the  answer  shall  be  the  "  Holy 
Spirit,"  who  shall  mould  our  wills  into  accord  and  illuminated  acquiescence  with 
His  good  wiU.  In  any  case,  prayer  is  seen  to  be  the  ways  and  means  of  bringing 
us  into  communication  with  One  who  is  above  all,  and  over  all,  and  through  all. 
Direct  demands  are  the  most  obvious,  simple,  childlike  forms  of  prayer ;  but  the 
spiritual  value  of  prayer  is,  after  all,  not  this — to  get  exactly  what  we  want,  when 
we  want  it,  like  the  magic  ring  in  the  fairy  tale ;  but  this — to  bring  the  human 
into  close  relation  with  the  Divine.  {H.  R.  Haweis^  M.A.)  ^  The  foundation  of 
faithful  prayer : — I  remember  asking  an  old  friend  of  mine,  who  is  now  between 
seventy  and  eighty  years  of  age,  and  who,  I  think,  as  far  as  I  have  been  permitted 
to  know  Christian  men,  is  mightier  with  God  than  almost  any  man  I  have  met, 
♦*  Do  tell  me  the  secret  of  your  success  in  prayer."  He  said,  "  I  will  tell  you  what 
it  is.  I  say  to  myself,  Is  that  wbich  I  am  asking  for  promised?  Is  it  according 
to  the  mind  of  God  ?  If  it  is,  I  plant  my  foot  upon  it  as  upon  a  firm  rock,  and  I 
never  allow  myself  to  doubt  that  my  Father  will  give  me  according  to  my  petition." 
{Bp.  Bickersteth,)  The  links  that  unite  earth  and  heaven: — Give  me  these  links — 
(1)  sense  of  need ;  (2)  desire  to  get ;  (3)  belief  that,  though  He  withhold  for  a  while, 
He  loves  to  be  asked ;  (4)  belief  that  asking  will  obtain — give  me  these  links,  and 
the  chain  will  reach  from  earth  to  heaven,  bringing  all  heaven  down  to  me,  or 
bearing  me  up  into  heaven.  {T.  Guthrie y  D.D.)  Faith  and  Tprayer  : — ^Faith  is  to 
prayer  as  the  feather  is  to  the  arrow ;  faith  feathers  the  arrow  of  prayer,  and  makes 
it  fly  swifter  and  pierce  the  throne  of  grace.  Prayer  that  is  faithless  is  fruitless. 
(T.  Watson.)  Earnestness  in  prayer: — The  arrow  that  is  shot  from  a  loose  cord 
drops  powerless  to  the  ground,  but  from  the  tightly-drawn  bowstring  it  springs  for- 
ward, soars  upward,  and  reaches  the  object  to  which  it  is  directed.  So  it  is  not  the 
loose  utterance  of  attempted  prayer  that  is  effectual,  but  the  strong  earnestness  of 
the  heart  sending  its  pointed  petition  to  heaven,  that  reaches  the  Divine  ear  and 
obtains  the  desired  blessing.  {Bowden.)  Perseverance  in  prayer: — I  saw  the 
other  day  a  man  attempting  to  split  a  rock  with  a  sledge-hammer.  Down  oama 
the  sledge  upon  the  stone  as  if  it  would  crush  it,  but  it  merely  rebounded,  leaving 
the  rock  as  sound  as  before.  Again  the  ponderous  hammer  was  swung,  and  again 
it  came  down,  but  with  the  same  result.  Nothing  was  acoompUshed.  The  rock 
was  still  without  a  crack.  I  might  have  asked  (as  so  many  are  disposed  to  ask 
concerning  prayer)  what  good  could  result  from  suoh  a  waste  of  time  and  strength. 
But  that  man  had  faith.  He  believed  in  the  power  of  that  sledge.  He  believed 
that  repeated  blows  had  a  tendency  to  split  that  rock.  And  so  he  kept  at  it.  Blow 
after  blow  came  down ;  all  apparently  in  vain.  But  still  he  kept  on  without  a 
thought  of  discouragement.  He  believed  that  a  vigorously. swung  sledge  "  has  great 
power."  And  at  last  came  one  more  blow  and  the  work  was  done.  That  is  the  way 
in  which  we  ought  to  use  prayer.  God  has  told  us  that  "  the  earnest  prayer  of 
the  righteous  man  has  great  power."  We  ought  to  believe  it,  just  as  that  man 
believed  that  his  sledge  had  power.  And  believing  it,  we  ought  to  use  prayer  for 
the  attainment  of  spiritual  results  with  just  such  confidence  of  success  as  that  man 
used  Ills  sledge.  We  may  not  secure  our  answer  at  once.  That  rock  was  not  spUt 
at  the  first  blow,  or  the  second.  But  that  man  believed  that  if  he  continued  hia 
blows,  he  was  more  likely  to  succeed  every  blow  he  struck.  So  we  are  to  beheyo 
that  there  is  a  spiritual  power  in  prayer,  just  as  there  was  a  physical  power  in 
that  sledge ;  and  that,  the  more  perseveringly  and  earnestly  we  use  it,  the  more 
certain  are  we  to  accomplish  something  by  it.  Ye  shall  have  them :  Divine  answers 
to  prayer: — Is  the  direct  Divine  answer  to  praver  a  reality?  Gall  the  witnesses 
and  let  them  testify.  Let  the  martyrs  of  the  early  church  answer,  from  their  exile, 
from  the  prisons  where  they  were  chained,  from  the  amphitheatre  whose  sanda 
were  crimsoned  with  their  blood,  from  the  chariots  of  flame  in  which  they  swept 
up  to  glory.  Let  the  Covenauters,  kneeling  on  the  heather,  or  hiding  in  the  grey 
fastnesses  of  the  crags ;  let  the  Pilgrims,  with  their  faces  wet  with  the  cold,  salt 
spray,  and  the  gloom  of  the  wilderness  overshadowing  them ;  let  Christian  heroes 
everywhere — missionaries  passing  through  belts  of  pestilence,  women  in  army 
hospitals,  philanthropists  in  jails  and  lazar-houses — ^let  all  these  testify  whether 
prayer  has  anything  more  than  a  **  reflex  influence."  Let  thousands  of  death-beds 
answer.    Let  the  myriad  homes  of  sorrow,  wrapped  in  darkness  that  may  be  felt. 


XI.)  ST.  MARK.  461 


answer.  Let  every  man  or  woman  who  has  ever  really  prayed,  answer.  From  each 
and  all  comes  one  and  the  same  testimony :  "  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  all  that  call 
upon  Him,  nnto  all  that  call  upon  Him  in  truth,"  {Ed.  S.  Attwood.)  Expecting 
answer  to  prayer: — A  few  years  ago  there  was  a  time  of  much  dr^ess  in  a  certain 
part  of  England.  No  rain  had  fallen  for  several  weeks,  and  it  seemed  as  if  the 
crops  would  all  perish  for  want  of  moisture.  A  few  pious  farmers  who  beUeved  in 
the  power  of  prayer  asked  their  minister  to  make  a  special  supplication  on  a  par- 
ticular Sunday  for  the  needed  blessing  of  rain.  The  day  came,  and  was  as  bright 
and  cloudless  as  those  which  had  preceded  it.  Among  the  congregation  the  minister 
noticed  a  little  Sunday-scholar,  who  carried  a  large  old-fashioned  umbrella.  "  Why, 
Mary,"  he  exclaimed,  •*  what  could  have  induced  you  to  bring  an  umbrella  on  such 
a  lovely  morning  as  this ? '*  "I  thought,  sir,"  answered  Mary,  "  that  as  we  were 
going  to  pray  for  rain  I  should  be  sure  to  want  the  umbrella."  The  minister  patted 
her  cheek  good-naturedly  and  the  iervice  began.  Presently  the  wind  rose,  the 
clouds  gathered,  and  at  length  the  long-desired  rain  feU  in  torrents.  Mary  and  the 
minister  went  home  together  under  the  umbrella,  while  the  rest  of  the  congrega- 
tion reached  their  dwellings  well  drenched.  Let  us  follow  Mary's  example,  and 
always  pray,  not  only  hoping  that  God  may  hear,  but  believing  that  He  does  hear, 

and  will  send  us  what  we  ask  if  it  is  good  for  ns.        The  most  mighty  force : 

Thou  hast  power  in  prayer,  and  thou  standest  to-day  amongst  the  most  potent 
ministers  in  the  universe  that  God  has  made.  Thou  hast  power  over  angels,  they 
will  fly  at  thy  will.  Thou  hast  power  over  fire  and  water,  and  the  elements  of 
earth.  Thou  hast  power  to  make  thy  voice  heard  beyond  the  stars ;  where  the 
thunders  die  out  in  silence  thy  voice  shall  make  the  echoes  of  eternity.  {C.H.Spur- 
geon.)  Power  of  prayer :— Oh,  God,  thou  hast  given  us  a  mighty  weapon,  and 
we  have  permitted  it  to  rust.  Would  it  not  be  a  vile  crime  if  a  man  had  an  eye 
given  him  which  he  would  not  open,  or  a  hand  that  he  would  not  lift  up,  or  a  foot 

that  grew  stiff  because  he  would  not  use  it.     (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)      Pleading  prayer : 

It  was  said  of  John  Bradford  that  he  had  a  peculiar  art  in  prayer,  and  when 
asked  for  his  secret  he  said  :  "  When  I  know  what  I  want  I  always  stop  on  that 
prayer  until  I  feel  that  I  have  pleaded  it  with  God,  and  until  God  and  I  have  had 
dealings  with  each  other  upon  it.  (Ibid.)  The  limit  of  prayer : — I.  Pbayeb's 
MMiT.  "  All  things  soever  ye  desire,  believe  and  ye  shall  have  them."  The  boundary 
line  of  desire  and  of  faith.  1.  The  boundary  line  of  faith.  Faith  is  vast,  recog- 
nizes the  covenant  of  the  promises,  and  whatever  comes  outside  the  promises  for 
which  she  can  find  anywhere  a  direct  engagement  of  Almighty  God  to  do.  Faith 
is  the  taming  of  an  infinite  future,  into  a  present  real  receiving ;  it  can  go  confi- 
dently when  it  treads  on  Scripture  ground.  So  the  Bible  becomes,  in  a  measure, 
prayer ;  you  must  try  to  bring  prayer  up  to  the  mind  of  God  in  it.  2.  Desire  has 
a  gracious  limit.  A  man  well  acquainted  with  God's  Word  lives  under  the  teaching 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  his  mind  is  conformed  to  the  mind  of  Gk)d,  and  his  desires 
gradually  blend  with  the  wishes  of  the  Almighty.  II.  Pbatbb's  beach.  III. 
Pbaybb'b  wabbant.  The  blood  of  Christ  and  the  worth  of  this  warrant.  1.  It 
is  personal.    2.  It  is  present.    8.  It  is  absolute.    {J,  Vaughan,  MJL.) 

Vers.  25,  26.  Bat  If  ye  do  not  forgive.— P/ayw  and  forgiveness ;— 1  The  first 
lesson  here  taught  is  that  of  a  forgiving  disposition.  God's  ftill  and  free  forgiveness 
is  to  be  the  rule  of  ours  with  men.  2.  There  is  a  second  and  more  general  lesson. 
Our  daily  life  in  the  world  is  made  the  test  of  oar  intercourse  with  God  in  prayer. 
Life  does  not  consist  of  so  many  loose  pieces,  of  which  now  the  one,  then  the  other, 
can  be  taken  up.  My  drawing  nigh  to  God  is  of  one  piece  with  my  intercourse 
with  men.  Failure  here  will  cause  failure  there.  8.  We  may  gather  these  thoughts 
into  a  third  lesson.  In  oar  life  with  men  the  one  thing  on  which  everything  depends 
is  love.  The  spirit  of  forgiveness  is  the  spirit  of  love.  The  right  relations  to  the 
living  God  above  me,  and  the  living  men  around  me,  are  the  conditions  of  effectual 
prayer.    (A,  Murray.)        Forgiving  foe* : — L    Wb  should  fobqivb  oub  shxhiss 

AHD  ALL  WHO  HATH  DUUBBB  US,  BXOAUSX  OV  THX  DiVINE  BXAKPLE.      Let  US  Icam  tO 

act  like  oar  Father  in  heaven,  who  forgives  as  without  any  merit  on  our  part.  IL 
W»  SHOULD  VOMITB  BxoAusx  IT  18  NBSDruL  FOB  OUB  OWN  PBAOK.  Bevenge  cherished 
is  like  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,    in.  Foboivxnxss  is  onb  of  thk  most  mpobtant  bzoks 

AVn  ■SSHMTXALS    OF   8PXBITDAL  OBOWTH.      IV.    Wb   SHOULD  FOBOIVZ   ONB  ANOTHBB  BB- 

OAUSB  IT  IS  THH  OONDITIOR  OF  OUB  OWN  FOBaivxNBSS.  (Anon.)  Forgive  : — ^He  that 
eannot  forgive  others  breaks  down  the  bridge  over  which  he  most  pass  himself ;  for 
•vofj  one  has  need  to  be  forgiven.    As  when  the  seaworm  makes  a  hole  in  the  shell 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR,  [ohap.  Xk 

of  the  massel,  the  hole  is  filled  np  with  a  pearl ;  so,  when  the  heart  is  pierced  by  aa 
injury,  forgiveness  is  like  a  pearl,  healing  and  filling  ap  the  wound.  (Anon,) 
Generous  and  magnanimous  minds  are  readiest  to  forgive ;  and  it  is  a  weakness  and 
impotency  of  mind  to  be  unable  to  forgive.  {Bacon.)  Forgive  and  forget : — 
Whilst  wrongs  are  remembered,  they  are  not  remitted.  He  forgives  not,  that  forgets 
not.  When  an  inconsiderate  fellow  had  struck  Cato  in  the  bath,  and  afterwards 
besought  his  pardon,  he  replied,  '*  I  remember  not  that  thou  didst  strike  me."  Our 
Henry  VI.  is  said  to  have  been  of  that  happy  memory,  that  he  never  forgot  anything 
but  injuries.  (J.  Trapp.)  Forgive: — ^A  wealthy  planter  in  Virginia,  who  had  a 
great  number  of  slaves,  found  one  of  them  reading  the  Bible,  and  reproved  him  for 
neglect  of  his  work,  saying,  there  was  time  enough  on  Sundays  for  reading  the  Bible, 
and  that  on  other  days  he  ought  to  be  in  the  tobacco-house.  On  the  offence  being 
repeated,  he  ordered  the  slave  to  be  whipped.  Going  near  the  place  of  punishment 
soon  after  its  infliction,  curiosity  led  him  to  listen  to  a  voice  engaged  in  prayer ;  and 
he  heard  the  poor  black  implore  the  Almighty  to  forgive  the  injustice  of  his  master, 
to  touch  his  heart  with  a  sense  of  his  sin,  and  to  make  him  a  good  Christian. 
Struck  with  remorse,  he  made  an  immediate  change  in  his  life,  which  had  been 
careless  and  dissipated,  and  appears  now  only  to  study  how  he  can  render  his  wealth 
and  talents  useful  to  others.  Forgiveness  by  those  forgiven : — A  great  boy  in  a 
school  was  so  abusive  to  the  younger  ones,  that  the  teacher  took  the  vote  of  the 
school  whether  he  should  be  expelled.  All  the  small  boys  voted  to  expel  him, 
except  one,  who  was  scarcely  five  years  old.  Tet  he  knew  very  well  that  the  bad 
boy  would  probably  continue  to  abuse  him.  '♦  Why,  then,  did  you  vote  for  him  to 
stay  ?  "  said  the  teacher.  **  Because  if  he  is  expelled,  perhaps  he  will  not  learn  any 
more  about  God,  and  so  he  will  be  more  wicked  still."  •'  Do  you  forgive  him  then?" 
inquired  the  teacher.  •*  Yes,"  said  the  little  fellow ;  "  papa  and  mamma,  and  you, 
all  forgive  me  when  I  do  wrong ;  God  forgives  me  too,  and  I  must  do  the  same.** 
Why  prayers  sometimes  fail : — I.  Let  us,  in  the  first  place,  entbb  upon  am  intellx* 
OBNT  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  VERSES  JUST  ks  THBT  STAND.  It  will  be  quitc  as  nccossary 
for  us  to  be  sure  what  they  do  not  mean,  as  what  they  do  mean ;  for  the  declaration 
has  been  somewhat  abused.  1.  It  is  easy  to  show  what  our  Lord  does  not  teach  in 
His  repeated  counsels  on  this  point.  The  new  revision  gives  a  very  interesting  turn 
to  the  form  of  expression  by  throwing  the  verb  into  the  past  tense :  "  forgive  as  our 
debts,  as  we  also  have  forgiven  our  debtors."  This  intensifies  the  admonition,  and 
enforces  the  condition  that  ensures  success  in  our  praying ;  for  it  demands  that  our 
pardon  of  injuries  shall  have  taken  place  previous  even  to  our  coming  to  the  mercy- 
seat  for  ourselves.  It  cannot  be  that  the  passage  we  are  studying  means  that  our 
forgiveness  of  others  is  in  any  sense  the  ground  for  our  remission  of  sins  from  God. 
It  cannot  be  that  the  passage  means  that  our  forgiveness  of  others  is  to  furnish  the 
measure  of  our  own  pardon  from  God.  2.  What  then  does  our  Lord  mean  when 
He  gives  this  warning  ?  How  is  a  forgiving  spirit  connected  with  our  prayers  ?  If 
our  having  pardoned  those  who  have  injured  us  be  not  a  ground  for  our  own  pardon 
nor  a  measure  of  Divine  grace,  what  is  it  T  For  one  thing,  it  may  be  used  as  a  token. 
It  can  be  looked  upon  as  a  hopeful  sign  that  our  transgressions  have  been  removed, 
and  that  we  are  now  heirs  of  the  kingdom.  "  For,  if  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses 
your  heavenly  Father  will  also  forgive  you.'*  Such  a  token  can  be  employed  very 
easily.  If  used  faithfully,  it  would  set  at  rest  many  a  doubt  concerning  religion  in 
one's  heart.  For  another  thing,  this  passage  may  serve  as  an  admonition.  And  it 
is  likely  that  it  will  have  in  this  its  widest  use.  The  petition  of  the  great  universal 
prayer  cannot  be  pressed  without  its  comment.  In  this  demand  for  a  forgiving 
spirit,  there  is  nothing  less  than  a  permanent  reminder  that  when  we  come  asking 
for  pardon,  we  must  be  prepared  to  exercise  it  likewise ;  if  not,  we  are  to  turn  on  oar 
track  and  seek  preparation.  II.  This  being  the  exposition  of  the  verses,  and  the 
conclusion  having  been  inevitably  reached  that  we  cannot  even  pray  without  the 
spirit  of  forgiveness,  rr  is  evident  that  wb  must  move  fobwabd  to  a  hioheb  planb 
OF  ohbistian  expebiengb  in  this  one  PABTIOUX.AB.  So  WO  iuquire,  in  the  seoond 
place,  concerning  the  reach  and  the  limit  of  the  doctrine  of  forgiveness.  1.  The 
reach  of  it  is  indicated  in  an  incident  of  Simon  Peter's  life  (Matt,  xviii.  21, 22).  2. 
But  now,  with  a  sober  sense  of  inquiry,  and  a  sincere  wish  to  be  reasonable,  some 
of  us  are  ready  to  ask  after  the  limit  as  well  as  the  reach  of  this  counsel.  (Luke  xvii. 
8,  4.)  Before  this  question  can  be  plainly  answered,  we  must  be  careful  to  see  that 
forgiveness  does  not  imply  that  we  approve,  condone,  or  underrate  the  injorioui 
acts  committed  ;  we  forgive  the  sin  er,  not  the  sin — the  sin  we  are  to  forget.  Nor 
does  forgiveness  imply  that  we  a  e  to  stifle  all  honest  indignation  against  the 


CHAP,  n.l  8T.  MABK.  463 

wickedness  of  the  injury.  Nor  is  it  settled  that  we  are  to  take  the  injurious  man 
into  constant  companionship  if  we  forgive  him ;  Jacoh  and  Esau  will  do  better  aparu 
What,  then,  are  we  to  do  ?  We  are,  in  our  very  heart  of  hearts,  to  cease  for  evei 
from  the  sore  sense  of  a  hurt ;  we  are  to  shut  our  souls  against  all  suggestions  of 
requital  or  future  revenge ;  we  are  to  use  all  means  for  furthering  the  interests  ol 
those  who  have  done  us  harm ;  we  are  to  illustrate  the  greatness  of  God*s  pardoning 
love  by  the  quickness  of  our  own.  All  this  before  our  wrongs  have  been  atoned  for ; 
before  our  honest  acts  and  decent  deeds  have  been  shown  1  It  does  seem  a  little 
difficult ;  but  think  over  Augustine's  searching  question :  **  Do  you  who  are  a  Christian 
desire  to  be  revenged  and  vindicated,  and  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  has  not  yet  been 
revenged,  nor  his  innocence  vindicated  t "  It  is  related  of  the  chivalric  leader,  the 
great  Sir  Tristam,  that  his  stepmother  tried  twice  to  poison  him.  He  hurried  to  the 
king,  who  honoured  him  as  he  honoured  none  other,  and  craved  a  boon:  "I 
beseech  you  of  your  mercy  that  you  will  forgive  it  her !  Gk>d  forgive  it  her,  and  I 
do  1  For  God's  love,  I  require  you  to  grant  me  my  boon  1  '*  ((7.  S,  Robinson,  B.D.) 
Forgiveness  of  injurieg : — A  young  Greenlander  said  to  a  missionary,  *•  I  do  love  Jesus 
— I  would  do  anything  for  Him ;  how  good  of  Him  to  die  for  me  1 "  The  missionary 
said  to  him,  "  Are  you  sure  you  would  do  anything  for  our  dear  Lord?  **  "  Yes,  I 
would  do  anything  for  Him.  What  can  I  do  ?  **  The  missionary,  showing  him  the 
Bible,  said,  '•  This  Book  says,  *Thou  shalt  do  no  murder.'"  "  Oh,  but  that  man 
killed  my  father."  "Our  dear  Lord  Himself  says,  •  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  com. 
mandments,'  and  this  is  one  of  them."  "Oh,"  exclaimed  the  Greenlander,  "  I  do 
love  Jesus  1  but  I — I  must — "  "Wait  a  little,  calm  yourself ;  think  it  well  over,  and 
then  come  and  let  me  know."  He  went  out,  but  presently  came  back,  saying,  "  I 
cannot  decide ;  one  moment  I  will,  the  next  I  will  not.  Help  me  to  decide."  The 
missionary  answered;  "  When  you  say,  *I  will  kill  him,'  it  is  the  evil  spirit  trying  to 
gain  the  victory ;  when  you  say,  *%  will  not,'  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  striving  withm 
you."  And  so  speaking,  he  induced  him  at  length  to  give  up  his  murderous  design. 
Accordingly  the  Greenlander  sent  a  message  to  the  murderer  of  his  father,  telling 
him  to  come  and  meet  him  as  a  friend.  He  came,  with  kindness  on  his  lips,  but 
treachery  in  hia  heart.  For,  after  he  had  stayed  with  him  a  while,  he  asked  the 
yotmg  man  to  come  and  visit  him  on  this  side  of  the  river.  To  this  he  readily  as- 
sented, but,  on  returning  to  his  boat,  found  that  a  hole  had  been  pierced  in  the  boat, 
and  cleverly  concealed  by  his  enemy,  who  hoped  thereby  to  destroy  him.  He  stopped 
the  hole,  and  put  off  in  his  boat,  which  to  tiie  surprise  and  wrath  and  indignation 
of  the  other,  who  had  climbed  a  high  rock  on  purpose  to  see  him  drown,  did  not 
sink,  but  merrily  breasted  the  waves.  Then  cried  the  young  man  to  his  enemy,  "  I 
freely  forgive  you,  for  our  dear  Lord  has  forgiven  me." 

Vers.  28-88.  By  what  authority  doest  Thou  fheee  thlngit— CArut't  authority 
and  the  vay  to  discern  it: — I.  From  thb  sxdb  or  thx  qubstiombbs  and  theib 
QuxsTiON.  "By  what  authority  doest  Then  these  things,"  &o.  Christ's  power 
was  a  new  power  in  the  world  at  that  time.  It  was  different  from  the  authority 
of  the  scribes,  priests,  elders,  and  sanhedrim.  They  had  a  right  to  put  this 
question,  but  were  chargeable  with  negligence  in  not  having  settled  it  long 
before.  They  were  Israel's  shepherds,  and  had  a  responsibility  for  the  people 
over  whom  they  were  set.  Year  by  year,  and  we  may  almost  say  day  by  day, 
there  is  some  power  or  another  growing  np  in  society  which  in  process  of  time 
will  make  itself  felt,  and  which  will  gradually  weaken  and  uproot  all  authority 
which  is  held  in  a  wrong  spirit,  and  which  is  exercised  in  a  wrong  way.  And  it 
has  often  made  great  way  before  its  progress  is  observed.  Christianity  began  by 
appealing  to  the  hearts  of  men,  to  what  men  felt  to  be  true.  It  began  in  Christ's 
life  and  teaching.  It  pandered  to  no  prejudice.  It  rested  not  till  it  brought  every 
man,  with  his  faults,  into  the  presence  of  God.  To  these  facts  the  priests  and 
scribes  were  blind.  There  are  men  who  will  do  nothing  but  by  tradition  and  rule ; 
they  set  form  above  substance.  They  slumbered  whilst  new  forces  were  rising  sJl 
around  them.  So  like  Christ  there  are  men  who  strive  to  do  good,  striking  out  a 
course  for  themselves,  who  look  at  what  has  to  be  done,  if  not  in  the  old  way,  in  one 
which  will  accomplish  the  object.  These  leave  it  to  critics  and  cavillers  to  settle  as 
best  they  can  by  what  authority  this  work  is  done.  II.  Loos  ax  thb  passaox 
raoM  THB  BiDB  ov  Chbist.  It  was  not  His  custom  to  be  silent  when  men  wished  to 
learn.  He  received  Nicodemus  by  night;  reasoned  with  the  Samaritan  woman; 
ZaccheuB.  Christ  says,  "  Neither  will  I  tell  you."  These  words  are  not  mere 
resolotioii  on  His  part  to  withhold  information ;  but  in  their  being  unable  to  receive 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  n. 

what  He  might  tell  them.  On  another  oocasion  the  Jews  came  to  Christ  and  said, 
*' If  Thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly."  Christ's  answer  was,  "I  have  told  you 
before,  and  ye  did  not  believe."  In  like  manner  the  rulers  had  been  virtually  told 
before  by  what  authority  Christ  had  done  these  things.  His  words  and  works  were 
His  authority.  This  want  of  power  to  set  the  truth  and  to  know  it  is  the  natural 
result  of  a  spirit  of  unfaithfulness  to  former  light  and  present  convictions.  Many 
people  overlook  this  law  of  their  spiritual  being ;  they  think  that  by  neglect  or 
carelessness  they  are  at  the  most  missing  some  advantage  for  a  short  season,  and  that 
when  they  please  they  can  regain  what  has  been  lost.  They  forget  that  the  loss  is 
within,  in  the  soul,  character,  and  life,  and  that  it  is  irreparable.  When  they  wrong 
their  inward  convictions,  they  not  merely  defile  their  honour,  but  destroy  the  very 
powers  of  discerning  right  and  wrong,  truth  and  error.  Each  time  that  a  man  is 
unfaithful  to  the  light  within  him  he  is  laying  a  thicker  fihn  upon  the  spiritual  eye. 
It  is  marvellous  how  men  with  an  honest  love  of  the  truth  are  guided  into  it,  and 
are  led  out  of  the  labyrinth  of  darkness  and  perplexities  which  surround  them. 
{A.  Watson,  D.D.)  Christ's  works  His  authority : — His  works  were  His  authority, 
His  teaching  was  His  authority.  Just  as  the  discovery  of  a  principle  in  science  is 
the  authority  for  accepting  it,  as  the  discovery  of  a  law  of  nature  is  the  authority 
for  following  it,  as  the  invention  of  a  piece  of  mechanism  is  the  authority  for  using 
it,  as  the  healing  power  of  a  new  medicine  is  the  authority  for  applying  it — so,  one 
would  think,  there  was  no  need  to  ask  for  the  authority  by  which  the  sorrowful 
were  comforted,  or  the  ignorant  taught,  or  the  wicked  reformed,  or  the  worldly 
made  spiritual.  These  works  themselves  showed  whose  authority  they  had.  It 
you  cannot  see  authority  in  an  act  of  mercy  or  kindness,  how  can  any  words  show 
it  ?  If  you  cannot  see  the  authority  of  a  wise  act,  or  of  a  true  word,  or  of  a  good  - 
life,  how  can  any  assertions  prove  it  ?  If  a  man  is  righteous,  yon  do  not  ask  him 
his  authority  for  being  just ;  or  benevolent,  you  do  not  question  his  authority  for 
kindness  of  heart :  and  if  a  man,  by  reading  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  men, 
succeeds  in  producing  in  them  a  purer  and  better  life,  in  calming  the  passionate,  in 
changing  the  idle  into  the  industrious,  the  intemperate  into  the  sober,  the  imholy 
into  the  chaste  and  virtuous— these  changes  themselves  are  for  you  the  assurance 
of  an  authority  which  no  man  may  deny.  {Ibid.)  The  question  of  authority : — 
There  is  something  just  in  the  words  of  Christ's  enemies.  The  idea  of  Divine  reve- 
lation is  inseparable  from  the  idea  of  authority.  If  God  speaks  He  will  speak  with 
authority.  That  authority  will  have  nothing  violent  or  arbitrary  in  it ;  it  will  be 
persuasive,  it  will  set  free  instead  of  enthralling.  Individual  illumination  becomes 
a  dream  if  it  claims  to  raise  itself  above  God's  revelation.  God,  who  has  given 
revealed  truth  to  men,  has  given  them  at  the  same  time  the  institutions  which 
preserve  it.  But  we  must  make  a  fundamental  distinction  between  the  Divine 
truth  and  the  institutions  destined  to  preserve  it.  The  authority  of  the  first  is 
direct ;  the  authority  of  the  second  only  derived.  What  is  the  aim  of  religious 
institutions  ?  To  preserve  life.  If  the  authority  of  the  institution  is  put  above  that 
of  the  truth  itself,  if  the  form  is  put  above  the  foundation,  it  is  a  perversion  of  the 
Divine  order.  Jesus  to  the  Scribes  is  a  person  without  authority.  For  them 
authority  is  wholly  in  the  priestly  institution.  These  men  would  have  said  to  the 
sun,  *'  By  what  right  dost  thou  shine  at  an  hour  we  have  not  chosen  f  Prove  to  us 
that  thou  hast  permission  to  give  us  light."  Therefore  they  shut  their  eyes  to  the 
light.  Let  us  never  put  questions  of  hierarchy  and  of  the  church  above  the  truth. 
I  am  not  indifferent  to  these  things,  the  form  here  touches  very  closely  the  reality 
I  distrust  a  soldier  that  turns  up  his  nose  at  his  flag.  We  must  love  and  defend 
the  church  to  which  we  belong.  But  we  must  know  how  to  recognize  everything 
outside  of  it  that  God  makes  beautiful,  and  by  means  which  are  not  at  its  direction. 
We  must  choose  between  the  pharisaioal  spirit  that  says  to  Christ,  "By  what 
Authority  doest  thou  these  things?  "  and  the  spirit  of  truth  which,  when  it  sees  the 
light,  comes  to  the  light,  and  says,  "  God  is  here."  {E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  The  official 
religionist  challenges  the  Prophet  on  apointof  order : — The  method  is  always  popular 
— ^plausible ;  it  appeals  to  every  commonplace  instinct,  and  is  flattering  even  to  the 
lowest  intelligence.  "By  what  authority?"  Who  shall  fathom  the  depth  of 
Divine  scorn  in  the  Saviour's  glance  ere  He  replied  t  In  truth,  by  what  authority 
did  Nathan  stand  in  the  presence  of  David,  and,  after  arraigning  before  him  in  his 
tale  a  black  criminal,  cry,  **  Thou  art  the  man  "  ?  By  what  authority  did  Elijah 
confront  Ahab  and  denounce  him  as  the  ••  troubler  of  Israel "  ?  By  what  authority 
did  Paul,  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  stand  before  Fehx,  and  reason  with  him  **  con> 
•eming  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgme  t  to  oome  "  ? ,  By  what  authority 


CHAP,  xxt]  ST.  MARK,  465 

in  all  ages  and  everywhere  does  the  spiritual  man  judge  the  carnal  man;  the 
heavenly  assert  supremacy  over  the  earthly,  sensual,  and  devilish  ?  Before  we 
listen  to  the  question  which  Jesus  in  His  turn  puts  to  His  questioner  by  way  oi 
answer,  read  the  situation  between  the  lines  ;  let  us  pause  to  take  in  the  full  mean- 
ing of  His  searching,  indignant  gaze.  "  You"  it  seems  to  say,  ♦•  you  who  question 
My  authority,  then,  are  the  religious  teachers.  It  is  your  business  to  know  about 
spiritual  things ;  to  judge  between  the  things  of  God  and  the  things  of  man ;  to 
judge  spiritual  and  carnal  conduct ;  to  protect  religion ;  to  guard  the  temple ;  to  be 
the  ministers  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries.  Is  that  so  ?  Well,  let  Me  see  it  you 
are  fit  for  such  duties — if  you  in  the  least  understand  them.  If  you  do,  you  will 
have  a  right  to  question  My  action,  not  otherwise.  Prove  to  Me  your  authority,  I 
will  prove  to  you  Mine.  The  baptism  of  John,  was  it  from  heaven  or  of  men  ?  " 
A  silence — dead  silence.  The  eyes  of  the  crowd  are  on  the  Pharisees  ;  they  notice 
them  whispering  together.  They  are  overheard  muttering,  "  If  we  say,  •  of  heaven,' 
He  will  say,  '  Why,  then,  did  you  not  believe  Him  ?  '  if ,  ♦  of  men,'  all  the  people  will 
stone  us,  for  they  be  persuaded  that  John  was  a  prophet.' '  Then  at  last  these 
teachers,  these  judges  of  spiritual  action,  reply  out  loud,  ♦'  We  cannot  tell."  Cannot 
tell — great  doctors  of  the  law — whether  John  was  a  charlatan  or  not ;  cannot  teU 
the  difference  between  true  and  false  teaching — real  and  sham  religion !  Well,  if 
they  cannot  tell  about  John,  what  is  the  value  of  their  opinion  about  Christ  ?  They 
are  not  ashamed  to  dub  themselves  imbeciles — incapables.  Had  they  expressed  an 
adverse  opinion,  it  would  have  still  been  respectable ;  had  they  proclaimed  John 
and  Christ,  fanatics,  enthusiasts,  or  impostors,  they  would  have  found  supporters,  as 
every  one  does  who  has  the  courage  of  his  opinions.  But  no — "  We  cannot  tell." 
It  was  enough ;  they  were  answered  out  of  their  own  mouths.  There  are  some 
things  it  is  quite  useless  to  tell  people  who  *•  cannot  tell " ;  there  are  some  things 
which,  if  not  felt,  can  never  be  explained.  (H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  Authority 
and  presumption: — I.  Where  the  action  is  unquestionably  right,  some  will  censure 
the  agent.  II.  They  who  require  reasons  should  be  ready  to  give  reasons.  IH. 
Truth  should  be  the  first  question  with  men,  not  consequences.  IV.  Incompetency 
may  be  exposed,  and  assumption  resisted,  for  the  sake  of  truth.    {J.  H,  Qodwin.) 


CHAPTER  Xn 

Vbbi.  1-12.   A  certain  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and  set  an  hedgre  abont  it.— 

The  vineyard,  or  the  visible  Church  transferred  to  the  Oentilet : — I.  The  chdbch  la 
God's  peculiab  tseasure.  U.  The  Jewish  people  webb  appoimtei)  its  ouabdiamb. 
ni.  The  Jewish  nation  was  unfaithful  to  its  tbust.  1.  They  rejected  the  moral 
government  of  Jehovah.  2.  They  rejected  His  political  control  as  the  head  of  their 
theocracy.  IV.  The  sacbed  tbust  was  transfbbbed  to  otheb  peoples  and  nations. 
V.  They  webb  feabtully  punished  as  a  nation.  1.  We  are  now  led  to  admire  the 
sublime  features  of  the  scheme  of  Providence.  2.  That  there  is  a  great  responsi- 
bility on  the  nations,  communities,  and  individuals,  to  which  God  commits  His 
Church.    3.  We  are  the  husbandmen.     {E.  N.  Kirk,  D.D.J  Ood  the  Proprietor 

of  all : — ^The  manufacturer  in  his  ofiSce  knows  that  througn  building  after  building 
filled  with  machinery,  running  out  to  the  very  first  and  rudest  processes,  every  single 
act  of  every  single  operative,  down  to  the  last  and  lowest  boy,  has  its  direct  com- 
mercial connection  with  him  and  his  interest.  There  is  not  one  of  the  wheels  that 
revolve  of  the  ten  thousand  ;  there  is  not  a  thread  spun  or  woven ;  there  is  not  a 
colour  mixed  nor  employed ;  there  is  not  a  thing  done  by  any  of  the  hands  working 
in  his  vast  establishment  of  whom  there  may  be  hundreds  or  even  thousands,  that 
is  not  related  directly  to  his  interest.  The  whole  economy  of  the  globe  is,  as  it 
were,  but  a  small  manufactory  under  the  direction  of  God ;  and  there  is  not  a 
single  act  performed  in  it  which  has  nai  some  relation  to  the  thought,  the  feelings, 
the  purpose  of  God.  And  He  declares  Himself  to  be  in  a  wonderful  sense  identi- 
fied with  everything  that  is  going  on  in  life,  in  one  way  or  another.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Obligation  to  God  .-—Horace  Bushnell  tells  us  that  a  few  years  before  his 
death,  Daniel  Webster,  having  a  large  party  of  friends  dining  with  him  at  Marsh- 
field,  was  called  on  by  one  of  the  party  as  they  became  seated  at  the  table  to  specify 
what  one  thing  he  had  met  with  m  his  life  which  had  done  most  for  him,  or  had 
contributed  most  to  the  success  of  his  personal  history.     After  a  moment  ha 

80 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  xn. 

replied :  "  The  most  fraitful  and  elevating  influence  I  have  ever  seemed  to  meet 
with  has  been  my  impression  of  obligation  to  God."  Th^  world's  ingratitude  : — 

Soentes,  one  of  the  wisest  and  noblest  men  of  his  time,  after  a  long  career  of  service 
m  denouncing  the  wrongs  of  his  age,  and  trying  to  improve  the  morals  of  the  people, 
was  condemned  to  death  and  obliged  to  drink  poison.  Dante,  when  Italy  was  torn 
by  poHtical  factions,  each  ambitious  of  power,  and  all  entirely  unscrupulous  as  to 
the  means  employed  to  attain  it,  laboured  with  untiring  zeal  to  bring  about  Italian 
unity,  and  yet  his  patriotism  met  no  other  reward  than  exile.  *•  Florence  for  Italy, 
and  Italy  for  the  world,"  were  his  words  when  he  heard  his  sentence  of  banishment. 
Columbus  was  sent  home  in  irons  from  the  country  he  had  discovered.  The  last 
two  years  of  his  Ufa  present  a  picture  of  black  ingratitude  on  the  part  of  the  Crown 
to  this  distinguished  benefactor  of  the  kingdom,  which  it  is  truly  painful  to  contem- 
plate. He  died,  perhaps,  the  poorest  man  in  the  whole  kingdom  he  had  spent  his 
lifetime  to  enrich.  Bruno,  of  Nola,  for  his  advocacy  of  the  Copernican  system,  was 
seized  by  the  Inquisition  and  burned  alive  at  Rome  in  1600,  in  the  presence  of  an 
immense  concourse.  Scioppus,  the  Latinist,  who  was  present  at  the  execution,  with 
a  sarcastic  allusion  to  one  of  Bruno's  heresies,  the  infinity  of  worlds,  wrote,  '•  The 
-^  flames  carried  him  to  those  worlds."  {M.  Denton.)  God's  forbearance  : — The 
Macedonian  king,  Alexander  the  Great,  who,  as  in  one  triumphal  march,  conquered 
the  world,  observed  a  very  singular  custom  in  his  method  of  carrying  on  war. 
^Vhenever  he  encamped  with  his  army  before  a  fortified  city  and  laid  siege  to  it,  he 
caused  to  be  set  up  a  great  lantern,  which  was  kept  lighted  by  day  and  night. 
This  was  a  signal  to  the  besieged,  and  what  it  meant  was  that  as  long  as  the  lamp 
burned  they  had  time  to  save  themselves  by  surrender,  but  that  when  once  the  light 
should  be  extinguished,  the  city,  and  all  that  were  in  it,  would  be  irrevocably  given 
over  to  destruction.  And  the  conqueror  kept  his  word  with  terrible  consistency. 
When  the  light  was  put  out,  and  the  city  was  not  given  up,  all  hope  of  mercy  was 
oyer.  The  Macedonians  stormed  the  place,  and  if  it  was  taken  all  were  out  to 
pieces  who  were  capable  of  bearing  arms,  and  there  was  no  quarter  or  forgiveness 
possible.  Now,  it  is  the  good  pleasure  of  our  God  to  have  compassion  and  to  show 
mercy.  But  a  city  or  a  people  can  arrive  at  such  a  pitch  of  moral  corruption  that 
the  moral  order  of  the  world  can  only  be  saved  by  its  destruction.  It  was  so  with 
the  whole  race  of  men  at  the  time  of  the  flood,  with  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  at  a 
later  period,  and  with  the  Jewish  people  in  our  Saviour's  time.  But  before  the 
impending  stroke  of  judgment  fell,  God  alvsrays,  so  to  speak,  set  up  the  lamp  of 
grace,  which  was  not  only  a  signal  of  mercy,  but  also  a  light  to  show  men  that  they 
were  in  the  way  of  death,  and  a  power  to  turn  them  from  it.  (Otto  Funeke.) 
Pursutd  by  God's  mercy  ;— "  Saved  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  1 "  So  said  one  of  our 
Sydney  divers  to  a  city  missionary.  In  his  house,  in  one  of  our  suburbs,  might  be 
seen  lately  what  would  probably  strike  the  visitor  as  a  very  strange  chimney  orna- 
ment ;  the  shells  of  an  oyster  holding  fast  a  piece  of  printed  paper.  But  devoutly 
do  I  wish  that  every  chimney  ornament  could  tell  such  a  tale  of  usefulness.  The 
possessor  of  this  ornament  might  well  value  it.  He  was  diving  amongst  wreck  on 
our  coast,  when  he  observed  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  this  oyster  on  a  rock,  with  this 
piece  of  paper  in  his  mouth,  which  he  detached,  and  commenced  to  read  through 
the  goggles  of  his  head-dress.  It  was  a  tract,  and,  coming  to  him  thus  strangely 
and  unexpectedly,  so  impressed  his  unconverted  heart,  that  he  said,  "  I  can  hoU 
out  against  God's  mercy  in  Christ  no  longer,  since  it  pursues  me  thus."  He  tells 
us  that  he  became,  whilst  in  the  ocean's  depth,  a  repentant,  converted,  and  (as  he 
was  assured)  sin-forgiven  man— "saved  at  the  bottom  of  the  seal"  (Mother's 
Treasury.)  God's  longsuffering : — The  axe  carried  before  the  Roman  consuls  was 
always  bound  up  in  a  bundle  of  rods.  An  old  author  tells  us  that  "  the  rods  were 
tied  up  with  knotted  cords,  and  that  when  an  offender  was  condemned  to  be 
punished  the  executioner  would  untie  the  knots,  one  by  one,  and  meanwhile  the 
magistrate  would  look  the  culprit  in  the  face,  to  observe  any  signs  of  repentance 
and  watch  his  words,  to  see  if  he  could  find  a  motive  for  mercy ;  and  thas  justice 
went  to  its  work  deliberately  and  without  passion."  The  axe  was  enclosed  in  rods 
to  show  that  the  extreme  penalty  was  never  inflicted  till  milder  means  had  failed  ; 
first  the  rod,  and  the  axe  only  as  a  terrible  necessity.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's 
love  in  sending  Hi*  Son : — What  would  tempt  you  to  give  the  baby  out  of  your 
cradle  ?  Is  there  any  one  you  love  on  earth,  mother,  that  would  tempt  yon  to  give 
your  baby  for  that  t  But  what  ii  the  child  had  grown  up  and  had  come  to  man's 
estate  ?  Say  it  had  bloomed  into  fruition  and  all  your  hope  was  on  it.  What  do 
yoa  lore  in  this  world  that  would  tempt  yoa  to  give  this  child  up  a  sacoifioe  f   Yoa 


<JHAF.  xn.]  8T.  MARK,  467 

might  for  the  country  in  hours  of  heroism.  Many  and  many  a  mother  has  done 
a  work  that  was  divine  when  she  consecrated  her  only  son  and  sent  him  forth  into 
the  war,  believing  that  she  should  never  see  him  again.  How  many  hearts  are 
touched  with  the  thought  of  this  remembrance.  But,  oh,  is  there  language  that 
can  expound  such  heroism,  such  zeal,  such  enthusiasm,  as  must  inhere  in  the 
hearts  of  every  one  that  can  do  such  work  as  that  ?  And  yet  our  hearts  are  small 
comparatively,  and  pulseless  and  shallow,  and  our  human  senses,  as  compared  with 
God,  are  like  a  drop  of  water  in  comparison  with  the  ocean.  And  what  is  the  love 
of  God,  the  Infinite,  whose  flowings  are  like  the  Gulf  Stream?  What  are  the 
depths,  and  the  breadths,  and  the  lengths  of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  when, 
looking  upon  a  world  that  was  so  degraded  and  animal-like,  He  gave  His  only, 
begotton  Son  to  die  for  it  that  there  might  be  an  interpretation  of  the  love  of  God 
to  the  world.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christ  ungratefully  treated : — Surely  a  servant 
of  the  government  may  risk  himself  in  the  very  heart  of  a  convict  prison  ^lone,  if 
he  is  the  bearer  of  a  royal  pardon  for  all  the  inmates.  In  such  a  case  it  would  not 
be  necessary  to  look  out  for  a  man  of  rare  courage  who  might  dare  to  carry  the 
proclamation  to  the  convicts.  Give  him  but  the  message  of  free  pardon,  and  he 
may  go  in  unarmed,  with  all  safety,  like  Daniel  in  the  den  of  lions.  When  Christ 
Himself  came  to  the  world — the  great  convict-prison  of  the  universe — came  the 
Ambassador  from  God,  bringing  peace — they  said :  "  This  is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us 
kill  Him  !  "  He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not ;  and  the  ser- 
vant is  not  greater  than  his  Lord.  (4.)  Cruelty  to  Christ : — Some  time  ago  a 
father  had  a  son  who  had  broken  his  mother's  heart.  After  her  death  he  went  on 
from  bad  to  worse.  One  night  he  was  going  out  to  spend  it  in  vice,  and  the  old 
man  went  to  the  door  as  the  young  one  was  going  out,  and  said,  "  My  son,  I  want 
to  ask  a  favour  of  you  to-night.  You  have  not  spent  one  night  with  me  since  your 
mother  was  buried,  and  I  have  been  so  lonesome  without  her  and  without  you,  and 
now  I  want  to  have  you  spend  to-night  with  me ;  I  want  to  have  a  talk  with  you 
about  the  future."  The  young  man  said,  '» No,  father,  I  do  not  want  to  stay ;  it  is 
gloomy  here  at  home.'*  He  said,  "Won't  you  stay  for  my  sake?"  and  the  son 
said  he  would  not.  At  last,  the  old  man  said,  **  If  I  cannot  persuade  you  to  stay, 
if  you  are  determined  to  go  down  to  ruin,  and  to  break  my  heart,  as  you  have  your 
mother's — for  these  grey  hairs  cannot  stand  it  much  longer — ^you  shall  not  go 
without  my  making  one  more  effort  to  save  you ;  "  and  the  old  man  threw  open  the 
door,  and  laid  himself  upon  the  threshold,  and  said,  "  If  you  go  out  to-night  you 
must  go  over  this  old  body  of  mine ; "  and  what  did  he  do  ?  Why,  that  young  man 
leaped  over  the  father,  and  on  to  ruin  he  went.  Did  you  ever  think  that  God  has 
given  His  Son  ?  Yes,  He  has  laid  Him,  as  it  were,  right  across  your  path  that 
you  might  not  go  down  to  hell ;  and  if  there  is  a  soul  in  this  assembly  that 
goes  to  hell,  you  must  go  over  the  murdered  body  of  God's  Son.  {D.  L.  Moody.) 
The  Mtream  of  mercy  directed  into  another  course : — In  the  channel  through  which 
a  running  stream  is  directed  upon  a  mill-whed,  the  same  turning  of  a  valve 
that  shuts  the  water  out  of  one  course  throws  it  into  another.  Thus  the  Jews,  by 
rejecting  the  counsel  of  God,  shut  themselves  out,  and  at  the  same  moment  opened 
a  way  whereby  mercy  might  flow  to  us  who  were  afar  off.  {William  Arnot.) 
The  parable  of  the  vineyard  :^One  who  was  wont  to  illustrate  His  teaching  by 
imagery  drawn  from  the  objects  which  surrounded  Him,  could  hardly  fail  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  to  speak  of  vineyards.  The  hills  and  table-lands  of 
Judah  were  the  home  of  the  vine.  Five  times  our  Lord  availed  Himself  of  this 
figure  for  His  parables  (St.  Matt.  xx.  1;  xxi.  28,33;  St.  Luke  xiii.  6;  St  John  xv.  1); 
and  though  it  is  doubtful  in  what  locality  He  spoke  that  of  the  labourers  in  the 
vineyard,  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  remaining  four  are  intimately  associated 
with  Jerusalem.  In  many  places  in  Southern  Palestine  the  features  of  this  parable 
may  still  be  traced.  The  loose  stone  fences,  like  the  walls  so  familiar  to  the  eye  in 
Wales  or  Derbyshire ;  the  remains  of  the  old  watch-towers,  generally  in  one  corner 
of  the  enclosure ;  and  the  cisterns  hewn  in  the  solid  rock  in  which  the  grapes  were 
pressed — all  remain  to  the  present  day.  It  was  the  custom  in  our  Lord's  time  for 
the  owner  in  leasing  a  vineyard  to  tenants,  to  arrange  for  the  rent  to  be  paid,  not 
in  money  but  in  kind — a  certain  portion  of  the  produce  being  set  apart  as  *•  a  first 
charge  "  for  the  landlord.  The  system  prevails  in  modem  times  in  some  parts  of 
France,  and  more  widely  under  the  name  of  "ryot-rent"  in  India.  {H.  If. 
Luekock,  D.D.)  God's  dealings  with  the  Jews  are  signified  in  this  parable:^ 
I.  He  did  by  His  special  providence  protect  and  defend  the  Jewish  Church,  against 
all  enemies  and  dangers  both  bodily  and  spiritual,  which  might  annoy  them  and  so 


TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha». 


hinder  their  fmitfulneBS.    11.  He  afforded  them  all  necessary  helps  and  mean» 
to  further  them  in  grace,  and  to  make  them  spiritually  fruitful.    1.  The  Ministry 
of  the  Word  and  Sacraments,  together  with  the  whole  true  worship  of  God  prescribed 
in  the  moral  and  ceremonial  Law.    2.  Godly  discipline.    3.  Afflictions  and  chostiBO- 
ments.    4.  Mercies  and  deliverances.    6.  Miracles.     (G.  Fetter.)        God'g  care  oj 
Hi*  church  .-—Where  God  plants  a  true  church,  He  does  not  so  leave  it,  but  u 
further  careful  to  furnish  it  with  all  things  needful  for  a  church  ;  and  not  only  for 
the  being,  but  also  for  the  well-being  of  it ;  that  it  may  not  only  be  a  church,  but 
a  happy  and  prosperous  church,  growing  and  flourishiug  in  grace,  and  bringing 
forth  plentiful  fruits  of  grace,  such  as  God  requires  and  are  acceptable  to  Him  by 
Jesus  Christ.     As  a  careful  and  wise  householder,  having  planted  a  vineyard  for  hi& 
use,  doth  not  so  leave  it,  and  do  no  more  to  it ;  but  is  at  further  care  and  cost  to 
furnish  it  with  such  things  as  are  necessary  and  commodious,  to  the  end  ii  may 
grow  flourish,  and  prosper,  and  that  it  may  bring  forth  much  fruit  and  profit  to  the 
owner  of  it.     So  here,  the  Lord  having  planted  a  church  in  any  place  or  amongst 
any  people,  doth  not  so  leave  it,  but  is  caief ul  to  use  all  further  means  for  the  good 
of  His  church  ;  especially  for  the  spiritual  good  and  prosperity  of  it,  that  it  may 
grow,  and  increase,  and  prosper  spiritually,  and  bring  forth  much  spiritual  fruit 
to  God  who  planted  it.     Thus  He  did  to  the  church  of  the  Jews :  He  did  not  only 
plant  His  vineyard  amongst  them,  by  adopting  and  calling  them  to  be  His  people, 
but  withal  He  hedged  about  that  vineyard,  and  set  up  a  winepress,  and  buUt  a 
watch-tower  in  it,  i.e..  He  furnished  the  Jews  with  all  things  needful  to  make  them 
happy  and  prosperous,  truly  growing,  thriving,  and  prospering  in  grace,  and 
brmging  forth  plentiful  fruits  thereof,  to  the  glory  of  God,  the  good  of  others,  and 
the  furtherance  of  their  own  salvation.    To  this  end.  He  compassed  them  about 
with  His  special  providence,  as  with  a  strong  and  sure  hedge,  to  defend  and  keep 
them  safe  from  all  enemies  and  dangers  bodily  and  spiritual  which  might  annoy 
them  ;  He  gave  and  continued  to  them  all  spiritual  helps  and  means  of  grace,  and  a 
government  of  His  own  appointing ;  He  corrected  them  with  afflictions,  bestowed  on 
them  great  mercies  and  deliverances,  and  wrought  miracles  for  their  benefit,  to  further 
their  spiritual  good  and  prosperity.    And  this  is  but  a  sample  of  how  He  treats 
every  iJue  church  that  He  plants.     {Ibid.)        The  church  divinely  protected:— 
Whether  in  the  parable  the  hedge  and  winefat  and  tower  had  each  a  special  applica- 
tion in  the  system  of  God's  providential  care  for  His  ancient  people,  we  cannot 
say  •  but  at  least  in  one  particular  we  may  trace  a  peculiar  fitness  in  the  figure  of 
"  the  hedge."    What  was  it  that  protected  the  land  of  Israel  year  by  year  during 
the  three  Great  Festivals,  when  by  the  Divine  Law  the  country  was  denuded  of  its 
male  population ;  when  every  man  from  north,  south,  east,  and  west,  from  the  most 
unguarded  districts,  leaving  their  flocks  and  herds,  their  wives  and  little  ones, 
totally  unprotected  from  their  bitterest  enemies,  went  up  to  Jerusalem,  the  centre 
of  religious  worship  ?    What  was  it  that  held  in  check  the  Moabite  and  Ammonite, 
and  the  robber  tribes  of  Arabia  ?    It  was  the  fence  of  Divine  protection,  which, 
like  a  wall  of  fire,  God  in  His  providence  had  built  up,  so  that  no  one  dared  to  pass 
it.     (H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)        The  pleading  of  the  last  Messenger :— The  coming  of 
the  Son  of  God  in  human  form,  as  Emmanuel,  is  love's  great  plea  for  reconciliation. 
Who  can  resist  so  powerful  an  argument  ?    I.  The  amazing  mission.     1.  He  comes 
after  many  rejections  of  Divine  love.     None  have  been  left  without  admomtions 
and  expostulations  from  God.    From  childhood  upwards  He  has  called  us  by  most 
earnest  entreaties  of  faithful  men  and  affectionate  women ;  and,  in  spite  of  our 
obstinate  resistance.  He  still  sends  to  us  His  Son  to  plead  with  us  and  urge  us  to 
go  to  our  Father.    2.  He  comes  for  no  personal  ends.    It  is  for  our  own  sake  that 
He  strives  with  us.    Nothing  but  tender  regard  for  our  well-being  makes  Him  warn 
us.     3.    See  who  this  Messenger  is.    (1)  He  is  One  greatly  beloved  of  His  Father. 
(2)  In  Himself  He  is  of  surpassmg  excellence.    (3)  His  graciousness  is  as  con- 
spicuous  as  His  glory.    (4)  His  manner  is  most  wmning.    (6)  He  is  God's  uUi- 
matum.    Nothing  remains  when  Christ  is  refused.    Heaven  contams  no  further 
Messenger.    Rejecting  Christ  you  reject  all,  and  shut  against  yourself  the  only 
possible  door  of  hope.     II.  The  astounding  crimb.     There  are  many  ways  of 
killing  the  Son  of   Gcd.     1.  Denying  His  deity.     2.  Denying  His  atonement. 
8.  Remaining  indifferent  to  His  claims.    4.  Refusing  to  obey  His  gospel.     Thus 
you  may  virtually  put  Him  away,  and  so  be  guilty  of  His  blood,  and  crucify  Him 
afresh.    HI.  Thb  appbopbiatb  punishment.    Our  Lord  leaves  our  own  consciences 
t«  depict  the  overwhelming  misery  of  those  who  carry  their  rebellion  to  its  full 
kngtb.    He  leayei  oar  imagination  to  prescribe  a  doom  sufficient  for  a  crime  so 


31.J  ST,  MARK.  469 

base,  so  daring,  bo  oraeL  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  ion  rejected  : — ^I.  Th»  ownxb's 
ciiAiM.  His  right  and  aatbority  are  complete.  God  presses  His  right  to  oar  love 
and  servioe.  Blessings  are  privileges,  and  privileges  are  obligations.  We  owe  Him 
more  than  Israel  owed.  The  human  will  has  a  natural  repngnanoe  to  submission 
to  absolute  authority.  But  God  never  presents  His  claim  as  grounded  on  thia 
alone.  He  tells  of  His  love  before  He  declares  His  laws.  Only  a  bad  heart  can 
resent  the  authority  or  refuse  the  service.  H.  The  owner's  lovino  patience. 
There  never  was  an  earthly  employer  who  showed  such  persistent  kindness  towards 
such  persistent  rebellion.  This  is  a  faint  picture  of  God's  forbearance  towards 
Israel.  Mercies,  deliverances,  revelations,  gather  around  their  history.  III.  Thb 
BBJECTION.  Bejection  of  the  prophets  leads  up  to  the  rejection  of  Christ.  Privilege 
ftnd  place  do  not  lessen  the  danger.  IV.  The  judgment.  It  was  just,  necessary, 
complete,  remediless.  Y.  The  final  exaltation  of  the  son.  The  kingdom  is 
not  to  perish,  only  the  rebellious.  {C.  M,  Southgate.)  The  Head  of  the  Comer : — 
I.  The  picture  suggested  by  the  scene  which  Christ  calls  up  into  imagination 
would  be  likely  to  cause  surprise,  or  be  termed  an  exaggeration,  if  it  were  laid  any- 
where outside  of  Palestine.  Down  even  to  the  present  time  customs  remain  very 
much  the  same  as  in  Christ's  day  in  that  oppressed  country.  1.  The  insecurity  ot 
property  and  person  is  proverbial.  The  Scripture  record  might  be  incorporated 
into  the  ordinary  guide-books.  2.  There  has  been  in  all  ages  a  special  confusion  of 
iniquitous  dealing  iu  respect  to  real  estate.  Thievery  and  violence  seem  to  be  the 
rule  in  the  east,  peace  and  possession  the  exception.  Something  is  to  be  charged 
to  the  government ;  the  laws  are  indefinite,  and  bribery  is  rife ;  indeed,  the  govern- 
ment sets  the  example  of  systematized  crime.  In  all  history  of  the  Holy  Land, 
from  Christ's  time  to  ours,  the  rulers  have  been  organized  for  official  robbery 
and  outrage.  No  titles  are  secure,  even  when  one  has  paid  for  his  vineyard 
or  his  bmlding-plot.  3.  Then,  too,  the  custom  of  committing  all  oversight 
and  control  of  farms  and  orchards  to  underhngs  makes  the  matter  a  great  deal 
worse.  Absenteeism  is  a  fruitful  reason  for  crime  (Mark  xii.  1).  Those  men 
left  in  charge  of  the  vineyard,  to  whom  messenger  after  messenger  had  been^  sent, 
and  who  now  were  peremptorily  addressed  by  the  owner  with  a  GnaX  demand  in  the 
august  person  of  his  son,  are  represented  as  communing  with  each  other,  and  saying, 
as  they  laid  the  wiles  of  their  conspiracy,  what  might  be  construed  into  an  ntterance 
of  their  belief  that,  if  this  one  inheritor  were  only  dead,  all  heirship  would  be 
extinguished  (Mark  xii.  7).  4.  Still,  so  far  as  we  can  learn,  there  was  no  ground 
for  hope  of  success  in  this  plot.  No  enactment  has  come  down  to  us  which  would 
sustain  such  an  entailment  or  division  or  heirship  as  those  infamous  creatures 
assumed.  Luke's  language  (xx.  14)  agrees  with  Mark's ;  but  Matthew  (xxi.  38)  says, 
**  Let  as  seize  on  his  inheritance."  This  suggests  the  true  interpretation.  The 
husbandmen  had  no  countenance  in  the  common  law ;  they  intended  to  say  that 
they  would  make  the  vineyard  theirs  by  violence,  and  hold  it  by  any  extremities  of 
force.  It  was  a  singularly  stupid  plan ;  it  could  not  have  even  a  plausible  look 
anywhere  but  in  that  wretched  region.  It  assumed  an  absence  of  justice,  an 
insecurity  of  possession,  an  immunity  from  the  worst  crime,  positively  oriental  in 
its  toleration  of  rapine  and  murder.  5.  Add  to  this  the  fact  that  in  those  early 
days,  when  invention  had  not  yet  brought  firearms  into  use,  the  measures  taken  for 
homicide  were  brutal  and  hard  beyond  description.  Not  even  spears  or  daggers  or 
knives  are  used  there  for  assassination  now  any  more  than  they  used  to  be.  The 
coarse,  rude  weapon  for  murder  is  a  club  or  bludgeon  of  the  roughest  sort ;  the 
Bed&win  will  have  a  gun  on  their  shoulders,  but  will  knock  their  victim  on  the 
head  with  a  knotted  stick  all  the  same.  The  description,  left  on  record  by  the 
Psalmist,  is  true  to  this  day :  **  He  sitteth  in  the  larking  places  of  the  villages :  in 
the  secret  places  doth  he  murder  tiie  innocent :  his  eyes  are  privily  set  against  th« 
poor.  He  lieth  in  wait  secretly  as  a  lion  in  his  den :  he  lieth  in  wait  to  catch  tha 
poor :  he  doth  catch  the  poor,  when  he  draweth  him  into  his  net.  He  cronoheth, 
and  humbleth  himself,  that  the  poor  may  fall  by  his  strong  ones.  He  hath  said  in 
his  heart,  God  hath  forgotten:  He  hideth  His  face;  He  will  never  see  it."^  6.  Hence, 
this  frightful  picture  was  a  tremendous  invective  as  well  as  a  vivid  illustration 
when  employed  by  our  Lord.  He  used  it  for  a  similitude  in  one  of  His  most  direct 
and  forcible  arraignments  of  the  Jewish  nation  for  their  blind,  dull,  coarse,  criminal 
rejection  of  God's  only-begotten  Son,  despatched  then  from  high  heaven  to  secure 
His  Father's  rights  from  those  who  had  grasped  after  heirship  by  murder.  IL  We 
turn  now  to  the  second  branch  of  the  story.  Oar  Lord  suddenly  drops  His  figure, 
and  leaves  the  parable  altogether,  finiahing  His  application  with  a  quotation  from 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

one  of  the  most  familiar  of  the  psahns  (cxviii.  22).  1.  Thns  He  illnstrates  Hii 
position.  He  claims  a  Messianic  psahn  for  Himself.  Matthew  (xzi.  43)  tells  ns  He 
said  to  those  hearers  of  His  in  plain  words  that  He  was  speaking  this  parable  con- 
cerning them.  And  He  chooses  to  show  them  that,  for  Himself,  there  was  no  fear 
of  the  future.  The  *'  son  "  of  the  story,  who  got  murder  instead  of  *•  reverence," 
is  heard  of  no  more.  But  the  Son  of  God,  though  "rejected"  now,  should  one 
day  come  to  His  place  of  honour.  They  understood  Him  very  well,  for  in  an 
alarmed  sort  of  murmur  they  said,  "  God  forbid  I  "  (Luke  xx.  16).  2.  Thus  He 
predicts  His  eventual  triumph.  There  is  a  tradition  of  the  Jewish  Rabbis  which 
relates  the  history  of  a  wonderful  stone,  prepared,  as  they  say,  for  nee  in  the  building 
of  Solomon's  temple.  Each  block  for  that  matchless  edifice  was  shaped  and  fitted 
for  its  particular  place,  and  came  away  from  the  distant  quarry  marked  for  the 
masons.  But  this  one  was  so  different  from  any  other  that  no  one  knew  what  to  do 
with  it.  Beautiful  indeed  it  was ;  carved  with  figures  of  exquisite  loveliness  and 
grace ;  but  it  had  no  fellow ;  it  fitted  nowhere  ;  and  at  last  the  impatient  and  per- 
plexed workmen  flung  it  aside  as  only  a  splendid  piece  of  folly.  Years  passed,  while 
the  proud  structure  was  going  up  without  the  sound  of  axe  or  hammer.  During  all 
the  time  this  despised  fragment  of  rock  was  lying  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat 
covered  with  dirt  and  moss.  Then  came  the  day  of  dedication ;  the  vast  throng 
arrived  to  see  what  the  Israelites  were  wont  to  call  "  the  noblest  fabric  under  the 
sun."  There  it  stood  crowning  the  mountain's  ridge,  and  shining  with  whiteness 
of  silver  and  yellowness  of  gold.  The  wondering  multitudes  gazed  admiringly  upon 
its  magnificent  proportions,  grand  in  their  splendour  of  marble.  But  when  one  said 
that  the  east  tower  was  unfinished,  or  at  least  looked  bo,  the  chief  architect  grew 
impatient  again,  and  replied  that  Solomon  was  wise,  but  a  builder  must  admit  there 
was  a  gap  in  his  plans.  By  and  by  the  king  drew  near  in  person ;  with  his  retinue 
he  rode  toectly  to  the  incomplete  spot,  as  if  he  there  expected  most  to  be  pleased. 
"  Why  is  this  neglect?  *'  he  asked  in  tones  of  indignant  surprise :  *•  where  is  the 
piece  I  sent  for  the  head  of  this  comer?"  Then  suddenly  the  frightened  workmen 
bethought  themselves  of  that  rejected  stone  which  they  had  been  spurning  as  worth- 
less. They  sought  it  again,  cleared  it  from  its  defilement,  swung  it  fairly  np  into 
its  place,  and  found  it  was  indeed  the  top-stone  fitted  so  as  to  give  the  last  grace  to 
the  whole.  8.  Thus  Jesus  also  clinches  His  argument.  He  made  His  audience  see 
that  He  was  fulfilling  every  necessity  of  the  Messiah's  office,  and  answering  to  every 
prediction  made  of  Him,  even  down  to  the  receiving  of  the  "  rejection  "  at  their 
hands  as  they  were  now  giving  it  to  Him.  They  were  educated  in  the  ancient  oracles 
of  God,  and  were  wont  to  admit  the  bearing  of  every  sentence  and  verse  of  prophecy. 
And  when  this  strange,  intrepid  Galilean  asked  them,  **  Did  ye  never  read  in  the 
Scripture?"  they  saw  that  He  knew  His  vantage  wiUi  the  people,  and  would  be 
strong  enough  to  hold  it  against  their  violence  or  treachery.  ^  There  was  force  in 
argument  when  one  brought  up  a  text  inspired.  4.  Thus,  likewise,  our  Lord  en- 
lightened their  consciences.  There  is  something  more  than  logical  defeat  in  their 
manner  after  this  conversation :  there  is  spiritual  dismay  and  consternation.  "  They 
knew  that  He  had  spoken  the  parable  against  them."  It  was  necessary  to  silence 
this  terrible  voice  of  denunciation.  (C,  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  They  toill  reverence 
My  S(m : — ^A  father  may  be  sure  that  his  son  will  be  counted  as  standing  for  himself 
in  a  peculiar  sense ;  and  that  all  there  is  of  gratitude  or  affection  or  reverence  toward 
himself  will  indicate  itself  in  the  reception  and  treatment  of  that  son,  wherever  the 
son  goes  as  the  father's  representative.  When  the  Grand  Duke  Alexis  visited 
America  after  our  civil  war,  he  was  greeted  with  the  liveliest  expressions  of  interest 
by  young  and  old  throughout  the  North,  because  of  his  father's  sympathy  with  our 
government  in  the  hour  of  its  need.  The  Prince  of  Wales,  on  his  visit  to  this 
country,  was  honoured  as  the  representative  of  his  royal  mother;  and  the  admira- 
tion for  her  character  as  a  woman  was  commingled  with  the  respect  for  her  as  a 
sovereign,  in  all  the  honours  that  were  tendered  to  him  wherever  he  moved.  Any 
father  or  any  mother  may  always  be  sure  that  a  real  friend  will  be  true  to  the 
interests  of  a  child  of  that  parent,  keenly  alive  to  that  child's  welfare,  and  tenderly 
sensitive  to  its  comfort  and  good  name,  because  it  is  that  parent's  child.  God  recog- 
nized this  truth  when  He  sent  His  only  Son  into  this  world  as  His  representative. 
Whatever  of  real  love  for  the  Father  there  was  among  the  sons  of  men,  would  be 
sure  to  show  itself  wherever  the  Son  was  recognized.  {H.  Clay  Trumbull.)  Re- 
jection of  Christ  a  common,  but  most  unreasonable  iniquity  : — There  is  no  sin 
more  common  or  more  pernicious  in  the  Christian  world  than  an  unsuitable  recep- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  gospel.     A  soul  that  has  the  offer  of  Christ  and  thi 


«HAP.  xn.]  8T.  MARK.  471 

gospel,  and  yet  neglects  Him,  13  certainly  in  a  perishing  condition,  whatever  good 
works,  whatever  amiable  qualities  or  appearances  of  virtue  it  may  be  adorned  with. 
This  was  the  sin  of  the  Jews  in  Christ's  time,  and  this  brought  temporal  and 
eternal  ruin  upon  them.  To  represent  this  sin  in  a  convictive  light  is  the  primary 
design  of  this  parable.  But  it  will  admit  of  a  more  extensive  application.  It  reaches 
as  in  these  ends  of  the  earth.  However  likely  it  be  from  appearances  that  the  Son 
of  God  will  universally  meet  with  an  affectionate  reception  from  creatures  that 
stand  in  such  absolute  need  of  Him,  yet  it  is  a  melancholy,  notorious  fact  that 
Jesus  Christ  has  but  little  of  the  reverence  and  love  of  mankind.  The  prophetical 
character  given  of  Him  long  ago  by  Isaiah  still  holds  true.  This  is  a  most  melan- 
choly and  astonishing  thing ;  it  may  spread  amazement  and  horror  through  the 
whole  universe,  but,  alas  1  it  is  a  plain  fact.     I.  To  show  you  what  kind  of  becep- 

TION  WB  MAY  REASONABLY  BE  EXPECTED  TO  GIVE  TO  THE  SON  OP  GoD.    1.    We  should  give 

Him  a  reception  agreeable  to  the  character  which  He  sustains.  (1)  A  Saviour  in  a 
desperate  case,  a  relief  for  the  remediless,  a  helper  for  the  helpless.  (2)  A  great  high 
priest  making  atonement  for  sin.  (3)  A  mediatorial  king,  invested  with  all  the  power 
in  heaven  and  earth,  and  demanding  universal  homage.  (4)  The  publisher  and  the 
brightest  demonstration  of  the  Father's  love.  And  has  He  not  discovered  His  own 
love  by  the  many  labours  of  His  life,  and  by  the  agonies  and  tortures  of  His  cross? 
^5)  As  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  unto  God  through  Him,  and  as 
willing  as  able,  as  gracious  as  powerful.  (6)  A  great  prophet  sent  to  publish  His 
Father's  will,  to  reveal  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  to  show  the  way  in  which  guilty 
sinners  may  be  reconciled  to  God,  A  way  which  all  the  philosophers  and  sages  of 
antiquity,  after  all  their  perplexing  searches,  could  never  discover.  (7)  The  august 
character  of  supreme  Judge  of  the  quick  and  dead.  Do  not  imagine  that  none  are 
<5oncemed  to  give  Him  a  proper  reception  but  those  with  whom  He  conversed  in  the 
days  of  His  flesh.  He  is  an  ever-present  Saviour,  and  He  left  His  gospel  on  earth  in 
His  stead,  when  He  went  to  heaven.  It  is  with  the  motion  of  the  mind  and  not  of 
the  body  that  sinners  must  come  to  Him  ;  and  in  this  sense  we  may  come  to  Him 
«s  properly  as  those  that  conversed  with  Him.    U,  The  reasonableness  or  the 

EXPECTATION   THAT  WE  SHOULD  GIVB  THE    SoN   OP  GoD  A  WELCOME   RECEPTION.      Here 

full  evidence  must  strike  the  mind  at  first  sight.  Is  there  not  infinite  reason  that 
infinite  beauty  and  excellence  should  be  esteemed  and  loved  ?  that  supreme 
authority  should  be  obeyed,  and  the  highest  character  revered?  Is  it  not  reasonable 
that  the  most  amazing  display  of  love  and  mercy  should  meet  with  the  most 
affectionate  returns  of  gratitude  from  the  party  obliged,  &o?  In  short,  no  man  can 
deny  the  reasonableness  of  this  expectation  without  denying  himself  to  be  a 
creature.    III.  To  show  how  dippbbent  a  reception  the  Son  of  God  oenbbally 

MEETS  WITH  IN  OUB  WOULD,  FBOM  WHAT  MIGHT  REASONABLY  BE  EXPECTED.      1.   Let  me 

put  you  all  upon  a  serious  search,  what  kind  of  reception  you  have  given  to  Jesus 
Christ.  It  is  high  time  for  you  to  inquire  into  your  behaviour.  2.  Is  it  not  evident 
that  JesQS  Christ  has  had  but  little  share  in  your  thoughts  and  affections  ?  3.  Is 
Jesus  Christ  the  favourite  subject  of  your  conversation  t  4.  Are  not  your  hearts 
destitute  of  His  love  ?  If  you  deny  the  charge  and  profess  that  you  love  Him,  where 
ore  the  inseparable  fruits  and  effects  of  His  love  ?  5.  Have  you  learned  to  entrust 
your  souls  in  His  hands,  to  be  saved  by  Him  entirely  in  His  own  way  ?  Or,  do  you 
not  depend,  in  part  at  least,  upon  your  own  imaginary  goodness  ?  &o.  Conclusion : 
— 1.  Do  you  not  think  that  by  thus  neglecting  the  Lord  Jesus,  you  contract  the 
most  aggravated  guilt?  2.  Must  not  your  punishment  be  peculiarly  aggravated, 
since  it  will  be  proportioned  to  your  guilt  ?  3.  How  do  you  expect  to  escape  this 
«ignal  vengeance,  if  you  still  continue  to  neglect  the  Lord  Jesus  (Heb.  ii.  3)  ?  4. 
If  your  guilt  and  danger  be  so  great,  and  if  in  your  present  condition  you  are  ready 
every  moment  to  be  engulfed  in  everlasting  destruction,  does  it  become  you  to  be  so 
easy  and  careless,  so  merry  and  gay  ?  (President  Davieg.)  Reverence  claimed  for 
Christ : — The  Saviour  here  applies  an  ancient  prediction  to  Himself  (ver.  10), 
**  And  have  ye  not  read,"  &c.  Our  present  design  is  the  consideration  of  the  words 
of  our  text  as  they  will  properly  apply  to  us.  I.  The  dignified  chabacteb  of 
Christ.  '•  God's  well-beloved  Son."  This  representation  presents  Jesus  to  us.  1. 
In  His  divine  nature.  2.  As  the  object  of  the  Father's  delight  (Isa.  xiii.  1  ;  Jno. 
xvii.  24).  II.  The  mission  op  Christ.  "He  sent  Him  also."  God  had  sent  His 
prophets  and  ministering  servants  to  teach,  to  warn,  and  reveal  His  will  to  His 
people  ;  but,  last  of  all.  He  sent  His  Son.  1.  From  whence  ?  From  His  own 
bosom  (Jno.  i.  18).  2.  To  whom  was  He  sent  ?  To  a  world  of  sinners.  3.  For 
what  was  He  sent  ?    To  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world  ;  to  restore  men  to  the  favoui^ 


4T«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xn 

image,  and  enjoyment  of  God.  (1)  He  came  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil  and 
set  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth.  (2)  He  was  sent  to  illumine  a  dark  world 
by  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  (3)  To  recover  an  alienated  world  by  His  powex 
and  grace.  (4)  To  redeem  an  accursed  world  by  His  death  upon  the  cross.  (5)  To 
purify  a  polluted  world  by  His  spirit  and  blood.  III.  The  reverence  God  demands 
ON  behalf  op  His  Son.  Let  us  ascertain — 1.  The  manner  in  which  this  reverence 
should  be  evinced.  (1)  By  adoring  love  of  His  person.  (2)  By  cheerful  obedience 
to  His  authority.  (3)  By  studious  imitation  of  His  example.  (4)  By  ardent  zeal 
for  His  glory  ;  making  Christ's  interest  our  own  ;  living  to  spread  His  name.  2. 
The  grounds  of  this  reverence.  (1)  Think  of  the  glory  of  His  person.  (2)  The 
'jurity  of  His  character.  (3)  The  riches  of  His  grace.  (4)  The  preciousness  of  His 
benefits.  (5)  The  terribleneBS  of  His  wrath.  Application  :  1.  Address  sinners. 
Kejection  of  Christ  will  involve  you  in  endless  wrath  and  ruin.  2.  Saints.  Aver 
your  reverence  for  Christ.  Not  only  cherish  it,  but  exhibit  it.  FearlesKly  profess 
Him  before  men,  and  ever  live  to  the  glory  of  His  name.  (J.  Bums^  D.D.)  The 
reverence  due  to  the  Son  of  God  : — I.  It  is  reasonable  He  SHOuiiD  be  reverenced 
on  account  of — 1.  The  dignity  and  authority  of  His  Father.  2.  Hxa  inherent 
excellencies.  3.  His  actual  achievements.  U.  The  reception  which  He  met  with. 
III.  The  doom  of  those  who  disregard  the  Son.  The  ancient  Jews  who  persisted 
in  their  rebellion  did  not  escape  punishment.  So  all  those  who  now  reject  the 
offers  of  mercy  and  disregard  the  Son  of  God,  will  not  escape  punishment.  IV. 
Christ  shall  be  reverenced.  (G.  Phillips.)  The  builders  overruled  by  the 
great  Architect: — This  is  a  striking  though  homely  image  applied  to  the  most 
wonderful  of  events.  I.  The  blindness  of  the  builders.  The  position  which 
the  Jewish  leaders  occupied  was  a  very  honourable  one.  They  were  appointed 
to  build — to  build  up  the  Church.  They  have  to  deliberate  and  devise  regard- 
ing all  that  greatly  pertained  to  the  ecclesiastical  life  of  the  nation.  But  there 
also  lay  their  great  responsibility.  They  might  do  a  great  service,  putting  Christ 
into  the  place  intended  for  Him;  or  they  might  do  a  great  disservice,  setting 
Him  aside,  and  putting  Him  in  a  false  light  before  the  nation.  It  unhappily  turned 
out  in  the  latter  way.  And  their  crime  is  represented  as  a  refusing  of  Him  whom 
God  meant  to  be  a  chief  comer-stone.  And  what  made  their  conduct  so  crimina} 
was  that  they  acted  against  the  light.  H.  The  builders  as  overruled  by  the 
GREAT  Architect.  It  has  always  been  matter  for  surprise  how  bad  men  get  into 
power.  Never  was  human  liberty  brought  into  such  antagonism  to  the  Divine 
sovereignty.  It  would  have  been  a  sad  thing  if  their  conduct  had  prevented  the 
building  up  of  a  Church.  That,  we  know,  could  never  be.  This  may  be  put  on 
the  ground  of  the  Divine  purpose.  Christ  was  the  living  stone,  chosen  of  Grod. 
But  deeper  than  the  purpose  itself  is  the  ground  of  the  purpose  in  the  character  of 
God,  and  the  fitness  of  the  stone  for  the  place.  He  was  a  stone  refused,  disallowed. 
But  God  was  independent  of  them,  and  got  others  more  humble  than  they,  but  more 
in  sympathy  with  the  purpose.  Ay,  even  they  were  taken  up  into  the  purpose  as 
unconscious,  involuntary  instruments.  For  it  was  in  the  very  refusing  of  Him  in 
Hid  death  that  Ho  became  chief  comer-stone.  They  were  thus  doing  what  they 
did  not  intend  to  do.  And  He  rose  triumphant  out  of  their  hands  when  they  thonght 
they  had  effectually  secured  Him  in  the  tomb.  HE.  Let  us  draw  somb  lessons 
FROM  the  theme.  1.  Let  us  beware  of  self-deception,  of  blinding  ourselves.  These 
rulers  thought  they  were  doing  God  service  in  what  they  did  to  Christ.  If  they 
could  so  far  deceive  themselves  who  occupied  so  prominent  a  position  in  the  Chorch^ 
have  we  not  reason  to  be  on  our  guard  f  2.  Let  us  beware  of  leaving  out  Christ. 
8.  Let  us  admire  the  placing  of  Christ  as  chief  oomer-stone.  4.  Let  us  remember 
the  way  and  glory  of  becoming  living  stones  in  the  spiritual  temple.  5.  Let  ns 
consider  the  loss  of  not  being  living  stones  in  this  building.  Our  Lord  has  a  com- 
ment on  these  words,  than  which  there  is  nothing  more  fearful :  '*  Whosover  shall 
fall,"  <fec.  (R.  Finlayson,  B.A.)  Rtjeeted  and  chosen: — I.  The  principle  herb 
ASSERTED.  The  quotatioH  is  from  Fs.  oxviii.  22,  23.  1.  The  intrinsic  excellence  of 
a  thing  is  not  at  all  affected  by  its  non-recognition.  2.  The  instrinsic  excellence  of 
true  principles  enables  them  to  b  come,  in  spite  of  human  contempt,  true  rulers  of 
the  world  and  of  life.  3.  In  their  opposition  to  the  true  and  the  good,  men  know 
not  what  they  do.  4.  We  see  now  how  God  must  make  use  of  what  seem  the 
nnlikeliest  instruments  for  the  realization  of  His  gracious  purposes.  5.  The  pro- 
cesses of  spiritual  regeneration  and  new  life  are  carried  on  by  means  of  rejected 
powers.  II.  The  reaction  of  this  principle  upon  the  men  of  Christ's  time. 
*'  They  knew  that  H*  had  spoken  the  parable  against  them."     They  lost  the  Christ 


n.]  8T,  MARK.  473 

ihey  rejected.  **  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,**  &o.  III.  Thxrb  lbm  speciai. 
XiKssoNS  HBBB  FOB  THB  MBN  OF  THE  PBESENT  AQB.  1.  The  poBsession  of  great  privi- 
leges and  advantages  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  exclnding  moral  abases  and  dangers. 
2.  Faithfulness  to  spiritual  truth  is  the  true  life-giving  and  conservative  force  in 
individual  and  national  life.  What  is  morally  wrong  can  never  be  safe.  3.  Personal 
relations  'to  the  Christ  determine  destiny.  **  Whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone 
shall  be  broken;  but  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall  it  will  grind  him  to  powder."  (TJie 
Preacher's  Monthly.)  The  rejected  ttone : — God's  truth  overcoming  human  oppo- 
sition : — There  is  a  legend  whi^  I  have  seen  somewhere,  which  describes  the  origin 
of  the  figure  in  this  way :  That  at  the  building  of  the  temple  a  stone  was  cut  and 
shaped  in  the  quarries,  of  which  the  builders  oould  make  no  use.  It  lay  about 
during  the  period  of  the  building,  held  by  all  to  be  a  hindrance  (a  stone  of  stumbling), 
but  at  the  very  last  its  place  was  found  to  be  at  the  head  of  the  corner,  binding  the 
two  sides  together.  And  so  the  Father  explains  Christ  the  corner-stone,  as  binding 
Jew  and  Gentile  in  one  Church  of  God.  It  is  very  remarkable  how  often  this  has 
been  repeated  in  the  history  of  the  Church — how  great  religious  movements  have 
been  frowned  down,  if  not  actively  opposed,  by  those  in  high  places,  which  have 
afterwards  subdued  all  opposition.  In  our  own  times,  in  this  very  century,  this  has 
occurred  twice.  First,  the  great  evangelical  movement  in  our  Church  was  set  at 
naught  by  the  builders,  though  it  was  the  assertion  of  the  primaiy  truth  of  personal 
religion — that  each  soul  must  have  a  personal  apprehension  of  Christ,  and  look  to 
Him  with  the  eye  of  a  Hving  faith ;  and  then  the  great  Church  movement  was  almost 
unanimously  rejected  by  the  bishops  between  1840  and  1850,  though  it  was  the 
assertion  of  the  truths  patent  through  all  the  New  Testament,  that  the  Church, 
though  a  visible  organization,  is  the  mystical  body  of  Christ — that  it  is  a  super- 
natural system  of  grace,  and  that  its  sacraments  are  the  signs  of  grace  actually 
given  in  and  with  the  outward  sign.  In  neither  of  these  cases  did  ••  the  builders  '* 
discern  the  strength  of  the  principles  asserted,  and  foresee  that  they  must  win  their 
way ;  though  the  formularies  of  the  Church,  of  which  these  builders  were  the  ex- 
ponents and  guardians,  assert  very  unmistakably  both  these  truths  in  conjunction, 
viz.,  spiritual  apprehension  of  Christ,  and  sacramental  union  in  His  body.  (M.  F. 
Sadler,  M.A.)  The  head  stone  of  the  corner : — The  Lord  Jesus  is — L  A  stonb  : 
No  firmness  but  in  Him.  II.  A  fundamental  stone :  No  building  but  on  Him.  III. 
A  cornbb  stone  :  No  piecing,  or  reconciliation,  but  in  Him.  {Anon.)  They  knew 
that  He  had  spoken. — A  guilty  conscience : — During  the  Protectorate,  a  certain  knight 
in  the  county  of  Surrey  had  a  lawsuit  with  the  minister  of  his  parish ;  and,  whilst 
the  dispute  was  pending,  Sir  John  imagined  that  the  sermons  which  were  delivered 
in  church  were  preached  at  him.  He,  therefore,  complained  against  the  minister 
to  Oliver  Cromwell,  who  inquired  of  the  preacher  concerning  it ;  and,  having  found 
that  he  merely  reproved  common  sins,  he  dismissed  the  complaining  knight,  saying, 
"  Go  home.  Sir  John,  and  hereafter  live  in  good  friendship  with  your  minister ;  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  is  a  searching  word,  and  it  seems  as  if  it  had  foond  you  oat  1 " 

Yen.  13,  14.  Catch  Hlxn  in  His  woTiM.Sasttm  spies:— The  ooursa  pursued 
by  the  enemies  of  our  Lord  does  not  seem  strange  to  any  one  who  knows  any- 
thing of  the  surveillance  which  a  Hindoo  uris  establishes  over  any  one  whose 
sayings  or  doings  it  may  be  of  importance  for  him  to  know.      For  instance, 

Major  T ,  the  agent  for  the  Viceroy  at  the  coort  of  the  Nawab  Moorshedabad, 

complains  that  his  house  is  as  full  of  spies  as  it  is  of  servants,  nearly  all  of  whom, 
he  suspects,  are  in  the  pay  of  the  Nawab.  One  servant,  who  pretended  not  to  know 
a  word  of  English,  was  discovered  at  length  to  know  it  well,  and  great  was  the 
major's  disgust  at  the  discovery ;  for  this  man  was  in  attendance  at  the  table,  where 
of  course  he  would  have  ample  opportunities  of  hearing  his  master's  opinions  ex- 
pressed in  all  the  confidence  of  social  intercourse.  One  of  the  punkah-bearers,  too, 
was  found  to  be  a  quite  well-to-do  man.  His  position  was  a  most  menial  one,  yet 
its  duties  took  him  within  sight  and  hearing  of  his  master  many  times  in  the  day. 
It  was  suspected  tbat  the  Nawab  was  making  it  worth  his  while  to  submit  to  the 
drudgery  of  so  mean  a  post.  {A  Missionary's  Notes.)  We  know  that  Thou  art 
trae.— Concerned  only  to  do  right:—**  What  I  must  do,"  says  Emerson,  *•  is  all  that 
concerns  me,  and  not  what  people  think.  This  rule,  equally  arduous  in  actual  and 
In  intellectual  life,  may  serve  for  the  whole  distinction  between  greatness  and  mean- 
ness. It  is  the  harder  because  yon  will  always  find  those  who  think  they  know  what 
is  your  duty  better  than  you  know  it.  It  is  easy  in  the  world  to  live  after  the  world'a 
opmion ;  it  is  easy  in  solitude  to  look  after  your  own ;  but  the  great  man  is  he  who 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ot 

in  the  midst  of  the  crowd  keeps  with  perfect  sweetness  the  independence  of  solitnde." 
Moral  fearlessness : — In  Scotland,  Knox  arose,  of  whom  the  Regent  Morton  said, 
"  Here  lies  one  who  never  feared  the  face  of  man ;  '•  who  said  himself  that  *•  he  had 
looked  in  the  faces  of  many  angry  men."  When  he  was  working  in  chains  on  the 
galleys  in  France,  they  brought  him  an  image  of  the  Virgin,  and  bade  him  worship 
the  mother  of  God.  *♦  Mother  of  God,"  he  exclaimed,  "  it  is  a  pented  bredd  "  (or 
board),  and  he  flung  it  into  the  river  to  sink  or  swim.  ♦ '  Who  are  you  f  •'  said  Mary 
Queen  of  Scots  to  him,  "  that  presume  to  school  the  nobles  and  sovereign  of  this 
realm  ?  "  "  Madam,"  he  answers,  •*  a  subject  bom  within  the  same."  "  Have  you 
hope  ?  "  they  ask  him  on  his  death-bed,  when  he  can  no  longer  speak ;  and  lifting 
his  hand  he  pointed  upwards  with  his  finger,  and  so,  pointing  to  heaven,  he  died. 

Ver.  16.  But  He  knowing  their  hypocrisy. — Jffypocn«y;— Sir  John  Trevor,  who 
had  for  some  misdemeanours  been  expelled  from  Parliament,  one  day  meeting  Arch- 
oishop  Tillotson,  cried  out,  "  I  hate  to  see  an  Atheist  in  the  shape  of  a  Churchman." 
"  And  I,"  replied  the  good  Bishop,  "  hate  to  see  a  knave  in  any  shape."  {Clerical 
Anecdotes.)  Always  a  hypocrite  : — The  sincerity  of  his  (the  Emperor  Alexius) 
moral  and  religious  virtues  was  suspected  by  the  persons  who  had  passed  their  lives 
in  his  familiar  confidence.  In  the  last  hours,  when  he  was  pressed  by  his  wife 
Irene  to  alter  the  succession,  he  raised  his  head  and  breathed  a  pious  ejaculation 
on  the  vanity  of  this  world.  The  indignant  reply  of  the  Empress  may  be  inscribed 
as  an  epitaph  on  his  tomb :  "You  die  as  you  have  lived — a  hypocrite,"  (Gibbon.) 
Bring  Me  a  penny. — Lessons  in  the  smallest  things  : — We  may  learn  and  be  put  in 
mind  of  good  and  Christian  duties  by  the  smallest  things  that  are  in  common  use 
amongst  us ;  «.flr.,  the  very  stamp  of  the  coin  or  money  which  is  in  common  circu- 
lation  may  put  us  in  mind  of  our  duty  of  subjection  and  obedience  to  the  prince  and 
to  all  lawful  magistrates.  So  also  the  matter  of  the  coin,  whereof  it  is  made,  being 
silver  or  gold,  may  remind  us  of  God's  goodness  and  bounty  towards  us,  in  affording 
us  such  precious  metals  for  our  use  and  trading  one  with  another.  The  meanest  gar- 
ment we  wear  may  cause  ns  to  think  of  our  sins  and  be  humbled  for  them,  sin  being 
the  first  cause  of  nakedness  appearing  shameful.  Every  bit  of  meat  or  bread  which 
we  eat  may  teach  as  the  frailty  of  our  bodies,  which  cannot  be  sustained  without 
such  food.  Every  blade  of  grass  in  the  field,  and  every  flower  in  our  garden  may 
put  as  in  mind  of  oar  mortality,  and  stir  us  np  to  prepare  for  death  and  judgment. 
Hence,  also,  it  is  that  the  Scriptures  send  ns  sometimes  to  brute  beasts  to  learn  our 
dnties,  as  to  the  ox  and  the  ass,  and  to  the  birds  of  the  air,  yea  to  such  tiny  creatures 
as  the  ant.  This  leaves  us  without  excuse  if,  having  so  many  masters  at  hand  and 
near  about  ns  continually  to  teach  us  and  stir  ns  up  to  our  duties,  we  yet  io  not 
learn,  or  make  conscience  of  what  is  required  of  ns.  {G.  Fetter.)  The  Roman 
penny  : — The  silver  penny  was  a  coin  a  little  larger  tnan  a  sixpence,  bat  probably 
equal  to  48.  or  5s.  in  purchasing  power.  In  this  coin  the  poll-tax — so  much  for 
each  man — was  paid.  Until  very  lately  the  Jews  had  had  a  Hebrew  coinage,  on 
which  no  head  was  permitted  (in  deference  to  the  second  commandment),  but  which 
carried  the  names  of  their  ruler  and  their  high  priest.  Even  now  the  Herods  issued 
money  of  their  own  coinage.  But  since  Judaea  had  been  reduced  to  a  province,  the 
Boman  penny  had  been  introduced,  and  was  the  coin  legally  demanded  for  payment 
of  taxes.  Its  use  proclaimed  who  was  master,  as  the  head  of  Victoria  on  an  Indian 
rupee  proclaims  her  ruler  of  India.  Indeed,  already  it  had  become  a  maxim  that 
he  is  ruler  whose  coin  is  current  in  a  land.  It  was  not,  therefore,  an  unsettled 
question  whether  they  would  have  the  Romans  for  their  rulers  or  not ;  but  they  being 
rulers — and  any  government  being  better  than  anarchy — were  they  at  liberty  to 
withhold  the  amount  needed  for  its  fair  support?  {R.  Glover.)  Christ's  victory 
over  cunning : — I.  They  take  counsel.  He  is  thoroughly  armed.  U.  They  would 
entangle  Him.  He  seeks  to  deliver  them  out  of  their  own  snare.  III.  They  praise 
Him  in  order  to  His  destruction.  He  rebukes  them,  for  their  awakening  and  salva- 
tion. {J.  P.  Lange^  D.D,)  A  penny : — A  penny  has  two  sides.  As  I  hold  it  up 
I  see  one  and  you  the  other.  If  I  were  to  ask  you  what  is  represented  on  the  coin,  yoa 
would  say,  A  portrait  of  the  Queen  and  some  Latin.  If  I  say  what  I  see  it  is  some- 
thiog  very  different,  it  is  a  representation  of  Britannia  and  some  English.  Yon  say 
one  thing  and  I  say  another.  Now,  suppose  we  were  to  wrangle  abont  it,  and  I 
were  to  contradict  yoa,  and  say,  **  It  is  a  falsehood ;  I  can  see  no  likeness  of  the 
Queen ; "  and  yon  were  to  say,  "  You  must  be  out  of  your  senses ;  I  am  sure  then 
is  one ; "  that  would  be  very  foolish.  Yet  that  is  about  the  way  with  one  half  of 
the  disputes  amongst  people.     It  is  so  with  many  religious  controversies.     And 


n.]  8T,  MARK,  47fi 

with  party  feeling  in  politics.  And  with  those  qnarrels  that  take  place  in  the  family 
or  amongst  friends.  People  cannot  see  both  sides  of  the  penny  at  once.  Two  per- 
sons may  have  very  different  opinions  on  the  same  subject,  and  yet  both  be  right. 
Try  and  remember  that  when  you  look  on  a  penny.  Look  at  these  two  sides.  On 
the  one  is  a  portrait  of  the  Queen.  It  has  two  inscriptions.  Victoria  D.  G. :  that 
means  by  Divine  grace.  It  is  well  to  acknowledge  that  every  blessing  we  have  is 
through  the  grace  of  God.  Then  we  read,  Britt.  Keg.  F.  D. :  that  means  Queen  of 
the  Britains,  or  the  British  Islands,  and  Defender  of  the  Faith.  The  double  T 
shows  the  plural/which  in  Latin  is  by  doubling  the  last  letter  rather  than  adding  S, 
as  in  English.  There  is  a  beautiful  story  told  of  our  Queen.  When  she  was  a  little 
girl,  about  twelve  years  of  age,  her  tutors  thought  the  time  had  come  when  she  ought 
to  know  that  she  might  some  day  become  Queen  of  this  great  and  glorious  nation 
Into  one  of  her  lesson-books  was  put  a  paper  which  showed  to  her  that  it  might  be 
so.  On  looking  at  it,  she  said,  "  I  see  I  am  nearer  the  throne  than  I  thought." 
'•  So  it  is,  madam,'*  said  her  governess.  After  some  moments'  thought  the  Prin- 
cess said,  "  Now,  many  a  child  would  boast,  but  they  don't  know  the  difficulty. 
There  is  much  splendour,  but  there  is  more  responsibility."  Then  she  gave  the 
lady  her  hand,  and  said,  •♦  I  will  be  good."  That  was  a  noble  resolve.  None  of 
you  can  hope  to  gain  an  earthly  crown,  but  you  may  each  resolve,  and  solemnly 
say,  *•  I  will  be  good."  Better  be  good  than  great,  better  be  good  than  rich,  better 
be  good  than  powerful,  better  be  good  than  to  sit  on  a  throne.  Best  of  all  to  have 
the  true  goodness— that  which  comes  from  the  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  On 
the  penny  the  crown  is  a  crown  of  leaves.  It  is  a  fading  crown.  Jesus  Christ  has 
promised  to  all  who  trust  Him  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away.  You  cannot 
be  kings  and  queens  here,  but  if  you  are  amongst  the  followers  of  Christ  you  will 
be  grander  in  heaven  than  kings  and  queens.  Of  all  things  it  is  best  to  be  a  Christian. 
The  Lord  said,  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life." 
Try  and  remember  that  when  you  look  upon  a  penny.  Look  to  the  other  side,  and 
consider  the  representation  of  Britannia.  It  is  full  of  beautiful  suggestfons  of  what 
our  nation  should  be.  Let  us  consider  the  emblem,  and  we  shall  find  it  quite  a 
treasury  of  good  ideas.  Our  country  would  be  indeed  great  and  glorious  if  every 
British  young  person  acted  up  to  them.  1.  She  appears  very  calm,  holding  firm  the 
shield  of  faith  in  her  right  hand.  On  the  shield  are  three  crosses — the  cross  of  St. 
George  of  England,  the  cross  of  St.  Andrew  of  Scotland,  and  the  cross  of  St.  Patrick 
of  Ireland.  The  true  Christian,  however,  only  lays  hold  of  the  one  true  cross— that 
of  Jesus  Christ — and  finds,  resting  upon  that,  a  peace  that  passeth  all  understand- 
ing.  2.  She  is  clad  from  head  to  foot  with  a  robe.  This  reminds  us  that  by  faith 
in  the  Lord  Christ  the  Christian  has  the  robe  of  righteousness,  which  oovers 
every  defect.  It  is  pure  and  white,  and  the  wedding  garment  of  the  marriage  supper 
of  the  Lamb.  The  saints  in  glory  are  represented  as  having  washed  their  robes  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  8.  She  holds  her  head  erect,  having 
on  the  helmet.  The  Apostle  speaks  of  the  helmet  of  hope.  Nothing  can  mora 
enable  us  to  lift  up  our  heads  and  look  out  brightly  than  the  hope  of  heaven.  4. 
She  is  prepared  for  attack.  She  holds  the  very  ancient  weapon  called  the  trident. 
The  Christian  is  surrounded  by  daoger,  and  always  liable  to  the  attacks  of  sin  and 
Satan,  and  should  ever  be  on  the  guard,  and  the  old  weapon  of  the  Word  of  God  is 
the  best  after  all.  Whilst  resting  on  faith,  wearing  the  robe  of  righteousness,  and 
lifting  up  the  head  with  hope,  there  must  be  the  preparation  for  conflict :  Jesus  Christ 
bid  all  His  followers  «*  Watch."  There  are  two  other  beautiful  emblems  of  the 
Christian  hero.  One  is  a  lighthouse.  This  is  a  tall  column  placed  in  a  dangerous 
part  of  the  ocean,  in  which  there  is  a  powerful  light.  That  shines  out  into  the 
darkness,  and  so  guides  vessels  safely  into  the  harbour.  Thus  the  Christian  is  to 
show  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  help  souls  to  avoid  dangerous 
rocks  and  to  find  the  way  to  heaven.  On  another  part  of  the  coin  is  a  ship  in  full 
sail.  That,  too,  is  an  emblem  of  the  Christian.  He  leaves  the  port  of  this  world ; 
he  takes  Christ  for  his  captain  ;  he  sails  through  perils  and  dangers,  through  sun- 
shine and  storm,  but  reaches  at  last  the  desired  haven.  Try  and  remember  these 
truths  when  you  look  upon  a  penny.  Thus  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  you  some  of 
the  important  lessons  which  Jesus  taught,  and  to  illustrate  them  by  a  penny,  so 
that  when  yon  look  at  a  penny  you  may  remember  some  of  these  truths  you  ought 
ever  to  have  in  mind.  There  are  many  others  which  might  be  considered  if  time 
permitted,  and  which  you  may  well  discover  for  yourselves.  I  conclude  by  giving 
70a  *  very  beantifnl  old  Babbinical  legend  taken  from  the  Talmud :~ 


4Y«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [osat.  xo. 

**  From  the  mint  two  bright,  new  pennies  oftmt, 
The  value  and  beauty  of  both  the  same ; 
One  slipt  from  the  hand,  and  fell  to  the  groand» 
Then  rolled  out  of  sight  and  could  not  be  foimd* 
The  other  was  passed  by  many  a  hand, 
Through  many  a  change  in  many  a  land ; 
For  temple  dues  paid,  now  used  in  the  mart* 
Now  bestowed  on  the  poor  by  a  pitying  heart. 
At  length  it  so  happened,  as  years  went  roi 
That  the  long-lost,  unused  coin  was  found. 
Filthy  and  black,  its  inscription  destroyed 
Through  rusting  peacefully  unemployed ; 
Whilst  the  well-worked  coin  was  bright  and  i 
Through  active  service  year  after  year ; 
For  the  brightest  are  those  who  live  for  dnty —    . 
Bast  more  than  rubbing  will  tarnish  beauty."    (/.  H,  Oooht^ 

Yer.  17.  Render  to  Caesar  the  things  that  are  Cesar's,  and  to  Gtod  the  things  that 

are  (Sod's. — Our  obligations  to  God  and  man: — The  spirit  of  the  passage  requires 
us  to  regard  the  rights  of  all  beings  as  sacred,  and  to  give  to  them  all  that  is 
theirs.  I.  What  is  due  to  God  ?  Or  what  are  the  things,  the  property  of  God, 
which  our  Saviour  here  requires  us  to  render  to  Him  ?  "The  earth  is  the  Lord's,**  Ac. 
Of  course  we,  and  all  that  we  possess,  are  God's  property.    More  particularly — 

1.  Our  souls  with  all  their  faculties.  2.  Our  bodies.  3.  Our  time.  4.  All  our 
knowledge  and  literary  acquisitions.  5.  Our  temporal  possessions.  6.  Our  in- 
fluence. He,  then,  who  withholds  from  God  any  of  these  things,  or  any  part  of 
them,  does  not  comply  with  the  precept  in  the  text.  II.  What  things  abb  dub 
FBOM  UB  TO  MEN  ?  1.  All  men  have  a  right  to  our  love.  2.  To  all  whom  Chod  has 
made  our  superiors  we  owe  obedience,  submission  and  respect.  3.  To  our  inferiors 
we  owe  kindness,  gentleness  and  condescension.  4.  Those  of  us  who  are  members 
of  Christ's  visible  church,  owe  to  each  other  the  performance  of  all  the  duties 
which  result  from  our  connection.  6.  There  are  some  things  which  we  owe  our 
families  and  connexions.  As  husbands  and  vidves.  Improvement :  1.  How  great, 
how  inconceivable  is  the  debt  which  we  have  contracted  both  to  God  and  to  men  I 

2.  Our  need  of  an  interest  in  the  Saviour,  and  the  impossibility  of  being  saved 
without  Him  We  evidently  cannot  discharge  our  past  debts.  In  Christ  is  there 
help.  He  becomes  surety  for  aU  who  believe  in  Him.  And  do  not  reason,  conscience, 
and  a  regard  to  our  own  happiness,  combine  with  Scripture  in  urging  us  to  accept  the 
offers  of  this  Divine  benefactor,  and,  constrained  by  His  love,  to  live  henceforth  to 
Him,  and  not  to  ourselves?  (Br.  Pay  son).  God  before  Casar: — Frederio,  the 
Elector  of  Saxony,  who,  being  prisoner  to  Charles  V.,  was  promised  enlargement 
and  restitution  of  dignity,  if  he  would  come  to  mass.  "  Summum  in  ttrris  dominum 
agnosco  Casarem,  in  codis  Deum." — "In  all  civil  accommodations  I  am  ready  to 
yield  onto  Ceesar,  but  for  heavenly  things  I  have  but  one  Master,  and  therefore  I 
dare  not  serve  two :  Christ  is  more  welcome  to  me  in  bonds,  than  the  honours  of 
CsBsar  without  Christ.  {Dictionary  of  Illustrations.)  An  offence  against  Casar: — 
A  boy  about  nine  years  of  age,  who  attended  a  Sabbath-school  at  Sunderland, 
requested  his  mother  not  to  allow  his  brother  to  bring  home  anything  that  wa» 
smuggled  when  he  went  to  sea.  "Why  do  you  wish  that,  my  child?"  said  the 
mother.  He  answered,  "Because  my  catechism  says  it  is  wrong."  The  mother 
replied,  *'But  that  is  only  the  word  of  a  man.*'  He  said,  "Mother,  is  it  the 
word  of  a  man  which  said,  'Bender  onto  Ctesar  the  things  that  are  Caasar's?'' 
This  repl;^  entirely  silenced  the  mother ;  bat  his  father,  stiU  attempting  to  defend 
the  practice  of  smuggling,  the  boy  said  to  him,  '*  Father,  whether  is  it  worse  to 
rob  one  or  to  rob  many  ?  **  By  these  qaestions  and  answers,  the  boy  silenced  both 
his  parents  on  the  subject  of  smuggling*    (Biblical  Museum.) 

Vera.  18,  27.  In  the  resorrection. — More  in  Scripture  than  at  ftrst  appears : — 
These  words  of  Christ  show  us  how  much  more  there  is  in  Scripture  than  at  first 
sight  appears.  God  spoke  to  Moses  in  the  bush,  and  c^ed  EUmself  the  God  of 
Abraham ;  and  Christ  tells  us,  that  in  this  simple  announcement  was  contained  the 
promise,  Uiat  Abraham  should  rise  again  from  the  dead.  In  truth,  if  we  may  say 
it  with  reverence,  the  All-wise  All-knowing  God  cannot  speak,  withoat  meaning 
many  things  at  once.    He  sees  the  end  from  the  b^;inning ;  He  understands  the 


OHAT.  raj  ST.  MARK.  477 

aamberless  connections  and  relations  of  all  things  one  with  another.  Every  word 
of  His  is  full  of  instruction  looking  many  ways ;  and,  though  it  is  not  often  given 
to  as  to  know  these  various  senses,  and  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  attempt  lightly  to 
imagine  them,  yet,  as  far  as  they  are  told  us,  and  as  far  as  we  may  reasonably 
infer  them,  we  must  thankfully  accept  them.  (J.  H.  Newman.)  Christ's  proof 
of  immortality  : — Christ  raises  the  question :  Gould  God  call  Himself  Abraham's 
Ood  if  He  had  permitted  his  hopes  to  be  disappointed,  and  his  whole  life  to  be  dis- 
sipated by  the  touch  of  death  ?  Whatever  we  love  we  seek  to  keep  alive,  and,  if 
Ood  loved  Abraham,  would  He  let  him  die  ?  If  the  Sadducee  was  right,  Abraham 
was  at  the  time  a  handful  of  desert  dust  in  which  certainly  God  could  take  no 
peculiar  interest.  The  fact  that  man  can  engage  the  interest  of  God,  speak  to 
Him,  enter  into  covenant  with  Him ;  be  beloved,  embraced,  protected  by  God,  is 
the  proof  of  immortality.  Because  God  lives,  he  will  live  also  whom  God  loves. 
There  are  many  arguments  that  go  to  prove  immortality,  but  this  is  chief,  that  God 
loves  man,  delights  in  him,  and  would  be  Himself  bereaved,  and  spend  a  desolate 
€temity,  if  death  robbed  Him  of  the  spirits  that  trust  Him.     {R.  Glover).  The 

error  of  the  Sadducees : — 1.  Knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  may  be  very  superficial. 
■2.  Christ  shows  us  how  to  conduct  controversy.  3.  Jesus  enlarges  our  thoughts 
of  what  life  is.  4.  We  are  not  to  measure  the  unseen  by  the  seen.  6.  We  cannot 
ignore  one  truth  without  danger  of  losing  our  hold  on  othets.  6.  The  future  life 
differs  from  the  present  (1)  In  its  constitution  ;  (2)  in  its  blessedness.  7.  A  higher 
existence  hereafter  suggests  the  folly  of  expecting  perfection  here.  8.  Oar  friends, 
who  "  sleep  in  Jesus "  are  not  dead.  {F.  Wagstaff.)  Materialism  and  the 
Resurrection : — I.  The  abodment.  It  may  be  presented  in  three  aspects.  1.  After 
the  three  patriarchs  were  dead,  and  had  been  in  the  grave  for  centuries,  God  spoke 
of  Himself  as  their  Gk)d.  If  the  words  assume  their  then  conscious  existence  as 
spirits,  then  it  followed  (1)  that  the  negative  portion  of  the  system  of  the  Sadducees 
was  destroyed.  There  are  spiritual  existences.  2.  Supposing  they  do  not  exist  in 
a  state  of  consciousness,  still  God  considers  Himself  as  sustaining  relations  to 
them ;  He  is  their  God.  This,  again,  disposes  of  materialistic  Sadduceeism.  For 
Ood  cannot  sustain  that  relationship  to  what  has  been  annihilated — to  what  has 
ceased  to  be — to  nothing.  3.  The  emphasis  may  be  put  on  the  term  "  God."  *'  I 
«m  the  God,"  <&o.  What  is  it  to  be  God  to  a  being  who  has  a  religions  nature,  is 
capable  of  worship  and  happiness  through  Divine  relations  ?  How  had  He  shown 
them  He  was  their  God  ?  He  called,  led,  educated,  tried  them,  and  taught  them 
to  rest  implicitly  on  His  word.  He  promised  them  a  wonderful  possession.  What 
eeemed  to  be  conveyed  by  the  words  was  never  aotoaUy  enjoyed.  Yet  they  lived  in 
<aith,  and  died  in  the  exercise  of  this  faith — that  in  bestowing  this  possession  He 
would  prove  Himself  to  be  their  God.  If  the  Saddnoees  were  right,  there  was  an 
end  of  them  and  of  the  Divine  faithfulness.  It  was  a  oommencement  without 
a  conclusion,  a  porch  without  a  temple,  a  beginning  of  promise  without  the 
termination.  U.  Now,  this  bubjbot  will  oast  xjoht  upon  two  othebs. 
1.  The  manner  in  which  Christ  threw  light  upon  the  future  condition  of 
man.  He  did  not  bring  life  and  immortality  to  light  as  a  new  thing.  There 
were  indications  of  it  in  the  ancient  Choroh.  He  brought  out  in  distinct- 
fiess,  and  clearness,  and  fulness  what  was  involved  in  mist  and  fog.  Speaking 
with  Divine  authority,  (1)  He  took  the  affirmatiTe  side— always  took  it; 
resisted  the  objectors,  threw  against  them  arguments  from  the  power  of  God, 
and  the  Scriptures  of  God.  (2)  He  raised  men  from  the  dead.  (3)  He  threw 
light  upon  the  resurrection — the  life  of  men  in  glory — long  after  their  bodies  had 
passed  away.  (4)  Then  He  illustrated  and  embodied  in  His  own  Person  everything 
He  taught.  He  died,  was  buried,  was  raised,  was  changed,  was  glorified.  (5)  Bat 
greatest  of  all,  by  His  redemptive  work  He  shows  how  all  could  be  done  according 
to,  and  in  harmony  with,  the  principles  of  the  Divine  government,  and  the  per- 
fection of  God's  nature.  2.  Light  is  cast  upon  the  state  of  the  pious  and  holy 
dead.  They  live.  Martyred  saints  committed  their  spirits  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  L 
If  men  choose  to  live  "  without  God  "  here,  they  will  find  hereafter  that  there  is  a 
sense  in  which  the  actual  relation  between  Him  and  them  has  not  been  destroyed. 
%  The  dignity  and  glory  of  a  religions  life.  They  are  to  be  clorious  immortals 
who  love  God,  cherish  religious  faith,  cultivate  acquaintance  with  the  Infinite,  and 
walk  in  holy  obedience.  The  character  of  faithful  worshippers  is  to  be  i>erpetuated 
and  beoome  eternal.  8.  It  is  of  infinite  importance  that  all  possess  this  Divine  faith, 
and  liTO  the  real  life  based  upon  the  truth  of  God  and  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  {Thomat 
Bifnaejf.)       ImmortaUtif  and  lave : — I  nerer  saw  a  man  that  did  not  believe  in  the 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ofa».  xu. 

immortality  of  love  when  following  the  body  of  a  loved  one  to  the  grave.  I  have 
Been  men  under  other  circumstances  that  did  not  believe  in  it ;  but  I  never  saw  a 
man  that,  when  he  stood  looking  upon  the  form  of  one  that  he  really  loved  stretched 
out  for  burial,  did  not  revolt  from  saying,  "  It  has  all  come  to  that :  the  hours  of 
sweet  companionship ;  the  wondrous  interlacings  of  tropical  souls,  the  joys,  the 
hopes,  the  trusts,  the  unutterable  yearnings — there  they  all  lie."  No  man  can 
stand  and  look  in  a  cofiQn  upon  the  body  of  a  fellow-creature,  and  remember  the 
flaming  intelligence,  the  blossoming  love,  the  whole  range  of  Divine  faculties  which 
so  lately  animated  that  cold  clay,  and  say,  "  These  have  all  collapsed  and  gone." 
No  person  can  witness  the  last  sad  ceremonials  which  are  performed  over  the 
remains  of  a  human  being — the  sealing  down  of  the  unopenable  lid,  the  following 
of  the  rumbling  procession  to  the  place  of  burial,  the  letting  of  the  dust  down  into 
dust,  the  falling  of  the  earth  upon  the  hoUow  coHn,  with  those  sounds  that  are 
worse  than  thunder,  and  the  placing  of  the  green  sod  over  the  grave — no  person, 
unless  he  be  a  beast,  can  witness  these  things,  and  then  turn  away  and  say,  "  I 
have  buried  my  wife  ;  I  have  buried  my  child ;  I  have  buried  my  sister,  my  brother, 
my  love."  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  A  type  of  the  Resurrection: — One  bright  summer 
day  I  stood  beside  a  large  water-butt,  watching  the  insect  life  which  skimmed  its 
surface  and  the  lower  forms  of  life  which  revelled  and  rejoiced  in  its  depths. 
Whilst  thus  engaged,  I  saw  a  little  creature,  in  the  shape  of  a  worm,  come  up  with 
zig-zag  course  apparently  from  the  bottom  of  the  butt  to  its  surface.  There  was  a 
little  agitation — the  shell  broke,  and  a  bright  and  beautiful  insect  flew  away  towards 
heaven.  To  my  apprehension  that  was  the  most  beautiful  type  of  the  resurrection 
I  ever  beheld,  and  thus  has  our  gracious  God  filled  all  nature  with  appropriate  and 
instructive  emblems  of  the  glorious  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  {S.  Cocki.) 
The  Resurrection: — In  Dr.  Brown's  work  on  the  resurrection,  their  is  a  beautiful 
parable  from  Halley.  The  story  is  of  a  servant,  who,  receiving  a  silver  cup  from  his 
master,  suffers  it  to  fall  into  a  vessel  of  aquafortis,  and,  seeing  it  disappear,  con- 
tends in  argument  with  a  fellow-servant  that  its  recovery  is  impossible,  until  the 
master  comes  on  the  scene,  and  infuses  salt  water,  which  precipitates  the  silver 
from  the  solution  ;  and  then,  by  melting  and  hammering  the  metal,  he  restores  it 
to  its  original  shape.  With  this  incident  a  sceptic — one  of  whose  great  stumbling- 
blocks  was  the  resurrection — was  so  struck,  that  he  ultimately  renounced  his  oppo- 
sition to  the  gospel,  and  became  a  partaker  of  the  Christian  hope  of  immortality. 
(S.  S.  Teacher.)  Heaven  will  reveal  itself: — John  Bunyan  was  once  asked  a  ques- 
tion about  heaven  which  he  could  not  answer,  because  the  matter  was  not  revealed  in 
the  Scriptures ;  and  he  thereupon  advised  the  inquirier  to  live  a  holy  life  and  go  and 
see.  {Christian  Age).  Progressive  knowledge  of  the  Bible  : — It  is  curious  to  compare 
old  and  new  maps,  and  to  mark  the  progress  of  discovery.  The  black  space  oJ 
ocean  is  followed  by  a  faint  outline  of  a  few  miles  of  coast,  marking  the  termination 
of  an  intrepid  voyage.  Then  further  portions  of  the  same  coast  are  laid  down  at 
intervals  as  supposed  islands.  Then  by  and  by  these  portions  are  connected,  and 
the  outline  of  a  great  continent  begins  to  be  developed.  The  "undiscovered" 
passes  into  the  region  of  the  known  and  familiar.  Thus  it  is  with  the  Bible. 
What  progress  is  being  made  in  the  discovery  of  its  meaning  !  How  much  better 
acquainted  is  the  Church  of  Christ  now  with  its  spirit,  its  allusions,  its  inner  and 
outer  history,  than  the  same  church  during  a  former  period !  What  a  far  more  true 
and  just  idea  of  the  mind  of  Christ,  as  manifested  in  and  by  the  Apostolic  Church, 
have  we  now  than  the  Church  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  possessed  1  Distance 
has  increased  the  magnitude,  the  extent,  the  totality,  the  grandeur  in  the  heaven- 
kissing  mountain  range.  Individually  I  find  in  daily  study  of  the  Bible  a  daily 
discovery.  What  was  formerly  unknown  becomes  known,  and  what  seemed  a  soli- 
tary coait  becomes  a  part  of  a  great  whole,  and  what  seemed  wild  and  strange  and 
lonely  becomes  to  me  green  pasture  and  refreshing  water — the  abode  of  my  fireside 
affections.  And  surely  I  shall  read  the  Bible  as  an  alphabet  in  heaven.  It  was  my 
first  school-book  here,  and  I  hope  it  will  be  my  first  there.  What !  shall  I  never 
know  the  Spirit  which  moves  the  wheels,  whose  rims  are  so  high  that  they  are 
dreadful  ?  The  only  true  theory  of  development  is  the  development  of  the  spiritual 
eye  for  the  reception  of  that  light  which  ever  shineth.  {Norman  Maeleod,  D.D.)  Our 
knowledge  of  the  future  state  imperfect : — Whatever  correct  ideas  we  have  about  the 
heavenly  state,  are  of  course  derived  from  the  revelation  God  has  made.  And  yet 
from  the  very  nature  of  the  subj  ct  our  ideas  must  necessarily  be  vagne,  and  per- 
haps even  incorrect.  The  infon  ation  may  be,  and  doubtless  is,  the  very  best  God 
•oold  give  na ;  bat  the  nnsatisf  ctoriness  of  it  clearly  remains,  just  because  tb* 


xn.J  ST,  MARK.  479 

Bubject  is  BO  far  beyond  oar  present  attainments  and  conceptions.  It  is  like  talking 
of  the  higher  mathematics  to  a  child  who  has  only  begun  to  comprehend  the  simplest 
relations  of  nmnbers,  and  to  whom  the  multiplication  table  is  an  **  Ultima  Thule." 
{Christian  World  Pulpit.)  Like  the  angels  ;— The  children  of  God,  in  the 
resurrection,  our  Saviour  says,  shall  be  equal  to  the  angels ;  or,  perhaps,  more 
properly,  they  shall  be  Uke  the  angels  in  attributes,  station,  and  employments. 
Like  the  angels,  they  will  possess  endless  youth,  activity,  power,  knowledge,  and 
holiness;  enjoy  the  same  immortal  happiness,  dignity,  and  Divine  favour;  be  lovely, 
beautiful,  and  glorious  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  "  shine  forth  as  the  son  in  the 
kingdom:  of  their  Father."  Like  the  angels,  shall  they  be  sons,  and  kings,  and 
priests  to  God,  and  live  and  reign  with  Him  for  ever  and  ever.  {Pres.  Dwight.) 
Individual  relation  to  God : — In  our  mysterious  being  we  have  a  double  existence ; 
we  are  part  of  a  body,  and  God  deals  with  men  collectively  as  communities :  yet 
also  we  are  as  much  single  spirits  as  if  we  were  alone  in  the  world,  each  running 
separately  and  apart  its  individual  course.  To  teach  men  from  the  first  the  awful, 
the  difficult  truth,  that  they  have  each  of  them  a  soul — this  was  the  meaning  of 
that  discipline  of  Abraham  and  the  Patriarchs ;  and  the  whole  history  has  shown 
how  necessary  it  was.  The  visible  world  is  all  about  us,  early  and  late,  wrapping 
US  around,  occupying  eye  and  thought  and  desire ;  we  seem  to  belong  to  it,  and  to 
it  alone ;  it  seems  as  if  we  must  take  our  chance  with  it.  And,  on  the  other  hand, 
we  know  how  easily  men  come  to  think  that  being  one  of  a  body — even  though  it 
were  the  *'  seed  of  Abraham,"  or  "the  Church  of  Christ" — made  it  less  necessary  to 
remember  their  personal  singleness,  their  personal  responsibility.  To  belong  to  a 
**  good  set,"  to  a  religious  family,  seems  to  give  us  a  security  for  ourselves ;  in- 
sensibly, perhaps,  we  take  to  ourselves  credit  for  the  goodness  of  our  friends,  we 
look  at  ourselves  as  if  we  must  be  what  they  are.  The  soul  has  indeed  to  think  and 
to  work  with  others  and  for  others,  and  for  great  aims  and  purposes,  out  of  and  be- 
yond itself.  For  others,  and  with  others,  the  best  parts  of  its  earthly  work  is  done. 
But  first,  the  soul  has  to  know  that  sublime  truth  about  itself:  that  it  stands  before 
the  Everlasting  by  itself,  and  for  what  it  is.  Abraham  learned  it,  like  Moses,  like 
Elijah,  like  Isaiah,  like  St.  Paul :  in  Job  and  the  Psalter  we  see  the  early  fruits  of 
that  discipline.  The  soul  knew  itself  alone  with  God ;  no  words  could  tell  the  in- 
communicable secret  of  the  presence  of  God ;  and  in  that  secret  was  wrapped  up 
the  seed  of  its  conviction  of  its  mysterious  immortality — "  God  is  not  the  God  of 
the  dead,  but  of  the  living."  This  is  the  first  lesson  of  the  masters  of  the 
spiritual  life.  This  is  the  first  opening  of  the  eyes  to  the  reaUty  of  religion, 
when  it  comes  upon  us  in  our  heart  of  hearts,  in  the  deep  certainties  of  conscience, 
that  in  spite  of  all  that  fills  the  eye  and  is  not  ourselves,  there  is  ourself  and  there 
is  God;  and  we  begin  by  degrees,  as  it  has  been  said,  to  perceive  that  there 
are  but  two  beings  in  the  whole  universe — two  only  supreme  and  luminously  self- 
evident  beings — our  own  soul,  and  the  God  who  made  it.  {Dean  Church.)  As 
the  angels. — Employment  in  heaven: — What  shall  we  do  in  heaven?  Well, 
our  employments  will  accord  with  our  state  and  disposition.  Some  one  of  you  may 
perhaps  be  an  artist.  Now  to  paint  a  fine  picture  to  hang  npon  somebody's  wall 
on  earth  is  accounted  a  great  thing.  Pooh !  In  heaven,  your  canvas  shall  be  a 
soul,  and  your  picture  a  loving  spirit  which  tinder  your  guidance  shall  become 
a  being  of  grace  and  beauty  for  evermore.  On  earth,  an  artist  genersdly  paints  to 
make  himself  a  name  and  earn  both  money  and  glory,  bat  in  heaven  the  object 
and  aim  of  an  artist  shall  be,  "  Oh,  that  I  might  train  this  soul  to  be  Uke  Christ  I 
Oh,  that  my  work  might  glorify  God  I  "  Some  one  else  here  may,  I  think,  be  an 
architect  in  heaven,  not  with  bricks,  stone,  mortar,  ladders,  and  rubbish.  No ; 
you  build  houses  here ;  there  you  shall  build  human  souls  into  angels.  If  life  in 
heaven  is  to  be  as  the  angels,  we  have  the  joy  of  knowing  that  useful  and  congenial 
occupation  will  be  our  lot.  (TT.  Birch.)  Congenial  occupation  in  heaven : — A  lad, 
who  served  as  a  milk-vendor,  stood  one  day  in  Antwerp  cathedral  before  the  glorious 
picture  by  Rubens  of  the  bringing  down  of  Christ  from  the  cross.  The  boy  drank 
in  all  the  beauty  of  the  painting  as  if  it  were  a  thing  of  life;  and  it  seemed  as  if 
the  hunger  in  his  soul  were  satisfied  while  he  gazed  upon  the  marvellous  glory  of 
that  scene.  At  length,  he  turned  away  with  a  sigh  in  his  heart,  but  a  light  in  his 
eye,  saying,  •*  I,  also,  have  in  me  the  soul  ol  a  painter  I  "  But  he  was  only  a  poor 
boy,  who  went  with  a  dog  and  a  little  cart  carrying  milk-cans  from  the  country  to  the 
people  of  Antwerp.  In  his  soul  he  said,  "  I  in  soul  am  an  artist !  "  But  he  had 
to  go  back  to  his  dog  and  cart  and  milk  cans,  and  that  sort  of  humdrum  work  con- 
tinoed  to  be  his  d!aily  employment,  antil  having  lost  his  living  through  a  false 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ma, 

accnsation,  and  he  and  his  dog  being  refused  bread,  they  wandered  up  and  down  in 
the  cold  of  the  winter  until  one  day  they  found  themselves  weary  and  starving  al 
the  door  of  the  cathedral.  The  poor  boy,  with  the  soul  of  an  artist,  followed  by  his 
dog,  more  faithful  to  him  than  men  and  women,  walked  up  titie  grand  aisle  of  the 
cathedral,  and  stood  before  the  glorious  picture  of  Christ.  Being  weary,  he  lay 
down,  when  the  poor  dog  crouched  close  to  his  starving  master  to  warm  him,  and 
the  boy  kissed  the  head  of  the  faithful  beast  and  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  sacred  canvas. 
In  the  morning,  the  people  found  a  boy  and  dog  both  dead,  and  clasped  together. 
He  had  the  soul  of  a  painter,  but  he  was  poor  and  cold  and  hungry,  yet  he  died 
feeling  the  love  of  his  dog  and  beholding  the  picture  whose  glory  had  inspired  his 
soul.  And  the  people  wept,  and  mourned  over  the  poor  boy  whose  circumstances 
had  prevented  the  realization  of  his  heart's  desire.  In  the  other  world  there  will 
be  no  obstruction  to  lawful  desires,  and  the  possibilities  of  the  human  heart  shall 
be  granted.  Every  one  of  us  shall  have  our  opportunity  of  congenial  employment. 
That  which  is  within  the  soul  and  forms  our  real  nature  shall  come  out  and  have 
an  opportunity  of  being  employed  in  the  service  of  God  and  mankind.  A  man 
with  a  musical  soul  one  day  went  into  a  shop  where  he  saw  a  beautiful  violin  for 
sale,  and  with  all  the  money  he  had,  he  bought  it.  He  came  exultingly  out  of  the 
shop  the  possessor  of  the  glorious  instrument.  Then  somebody  said  to  him,  ••  My 
friend,  where  is  the  bow?"  He  had  the  fiddle,  but  he  had  no  bow.  In  a  cor- 
responding way,  many  of  you  have  the  violin  in  your  nature,  the  capacity  for  har- 
mony, but  circumstances  are  against  you ;  you  cannot  realize  your  earnest  resolves 
because  there  is  something  wanting.  You  were  meant  to  be  a  poet,  and  yet  are, 
perhaps,  a  bricksetter;  or  you  were  made  to  be  an  artist,  and  may  be  only  a 
ohinmey-sweep ;  or  you  may  have  the  instincts  of  an  engineer,  and  yet  are  pro- 
bably chained  to  a  desk  in  some  dingy  office,  or  may  be  a  shoemaker  sitting  at  a 
stall  all  day  mending  boots.  These  are  some  of  the  disciplinary  contradictions  of 
this  life,  where  round  people  are  continually  found  in  square  holes,  and  square 
people  in  round  holes.  But  in  the  better  land  all  these  "  odds  "  shall  be  made 
•♦  even,"  and  an  opportunity  given  to  every  one  to  bring  out  that  which  God  has 
put  within  us,  and  we  shall  be  and  do  that  which  harmonizes  with  our  angelio 
nature  and  inclination.  (Ibid.)  Leisure  in  heaven : — Most  earnest  men  are  too 
busy  in  this  world  to  find  time  to  really  live  and  know  themselves.  They  are  too 
much  engrossed  in  the  "  maddening  maze  "  of  things  to  "  watch  and  pray  "  and 
practise  self-examination.  They  are  like  a  steamer  which  is  of  excellent  build  and 
power  of  speed,  and  which  is  so  profitable  to  its  owners  that  they  send  it  about  from 
port  to  port  and  never  put  it  into  harbour  to  survey  and  restore  it ;  and  at  length 
when  stress  of  weather  comes,  the  beautiful,  powerful  steamer  gives  way  and  sinks. 
Thousands  of  business  men  are  like  that  steamer ;  they  perish  for  want  of  over- 
hauling and  renovation.  They  are  too  busy  to  think  of  God,  and  death,  and 
judgment.  They  are  too  busy  to  do  a  good  deed  in  any  way  except  putting  their 
hand  into  their  pocket  to  give  something  to  a  charitable  institution,  or  throwing  a 
copper  to  some  unfortunate  beggar.  In  the  other  world  these  over-busy  men  will 
have  time  to  think  of  God  and  of  themselves.  The  life  of  the  other  world  will 
without  doubt  be  progressive.  Progress  or  development  is  the  law  of  creation. 
There  is  progress  on  earth,  and  there  will  be  progress  in  heaven.  Your  life  is  to 
be  as  a  pure  river  which  cannot  be  defiled  or  overshadowed  by  evil.  We  shall  have 
to  learn  to  forgive,  learn  to  be  pure,  learn  to  be  loving,  learn  to  be  kind.  Have  yon 
learned  these  things  on  earth?  Not  fully;  but  you  are  trying  to  learn  them ;  if  so, 
you  shall  be  as  the  angels  and  finish  your  education  in  heaven.  There  has  been 
only  One  who  went  perfect  into  heaven.  That  perfect  being  was  Jesas,  and  He  has 
promised  that  His  Spirit  shall  be  with  every  one  who  desires  to  follow  Him. 
(Ibid.) 

Ver.  SO.  And  tbon  shalt  Ioto  the  Lord  thy  God  with  an  thy  heart.— Lov«  to  Ood 

Becures  all  blessings : — "  Love  not  pleasure,"  says  Garlyle ;  "  love  God.  This  the 
Everlasting  Yea  wherein  all  contradiction  is  solved ;  wherein  he  who  so  walks  and 
works,  it  is  well  with  him."  Love  to  Ood  contrasted  loith  not  loving  Him : — Man 
not  loving  God,  not  looking  upward  and  outward,  becomes  sensual.  He  spends 
his  time  in  feeding  his  body,  in  satisfying  his  appetites,  in  grovelling  in  the  dust, 
m  joining  himself  to  earth,  that  God  made  simply  for  his  footstool  and  his  path- 
way, and  he  forgets  the  realm  of  empire  over  nature,  and  over  ideas,  and  over 
thoughts,  that  God  opens  out  before  him ;  and  hence,  without  love  of  Ood,  man  is 
the  animal ;  with  love  to  God,  he  is  the  seraph ;  without  love  to  God,  he  lives  for 


mur.  m.]  ST.  MARK,  481 

his  appetites  and  is  debased ;  with  love  to  God,  he  lives  in  His  afteotions  and  rises 
toward  glory ;  without  love  to  God,  he  crawls  like  the  worm ;  with  love  to  God.  be 
soars  like  the  seraph,  flames  like  the  cherubs ;  without  love  to  God,  he  goes  down 
ward  until  he  is  ready  to  make  his  bed  with  demons ;  with  love  to  God,  he  rises 
above  angels  and  archangels,  and  is  preparing  for  the  throne  of  God.  {Buhop 
Simpson.)  Love  to  God  the  tupreme  feeling : — A  man  may  be  weary  of  life,  but 
never  of  Divine  love.  EUstories  tell  us  of  many  that  have  been  weary  of  their  lives, 
but  no  histories  can  furnish  us  with  an  instance  of  any  one  that  was  ever  weary  of 
Divine  love.  As  the  people  prized  David  above  themselves,  saying,  "  Thou  art 
worth  ten  thousand  of  us ;  "  so  they  that  indeed  have  God  for  their  portion,  oh, 
how  do  they  prize  God  above  themselves,  and  above  eveiything  below  themselves  I 
and,  doubtless,  they  that  do  not  lift  up  God  above  all,  they  have  no  interest  in  God 
at  all.  (Thomas  Brooks.)  The  great  commandment: — ^Whan  Tom  Paine,  the 
man  who  did  so  much  mischief  years  ago  in  spreading  infldel  opinions,  and  making 
our  Bible  a  laughing-stock,  resided  in  New  Jersey,  he  was  one  day  passing  the 
house  of  Dr.  Staughton,  when  the  Doctor  was  sitting  at  the  door.  Paine  stopped, 
and  after  some  remarks  of  a  general  character  observed,  **  Mr.  Staaghton,  what  a 
pity  it  is  that  a  man  has  not  some  comprehensive  and  perfect  rule  for  the  govern- 
ment of  hii  life."  The  Doctor  replied,  ••  Mr.  Paine,  there  is  such  a  rule."  "  What 
is  that  ?  "  Paine  inquired.  Dr.  Staughton  repeated  the  passage,  "  Thou  shalt  love 
the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Abashed  and 
confounded,  Paine  replied,  "  Oh,  that's  in  your  Bible,"  and  immediately  walked 
away.  The  great  commandment  from  which  the  infidel  turned  away,  is  the  rule 
which  Christians  accept,  love,  and  try  to  obey.  The  nature  of  our  love  to  Christ  :— 
I.  It  must  be  sincere,  with  all  the  heart.  U.  Intelligent,  with  all  the  mind.  m. 
Emotional,  with  all  the  soul.  IV.  Intense  and  energetic,  with  all  the  strength. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  two  great  commandments :  all  true  love  is  one : — The  first 
commandment  is  very  great,  but  the  second  is  not  little.  They  are  upper  and 
nether  pools,  and  the  same  fountain  fills  them.  He  who  is  richest  in  the  love  of 
God  has  the  greatest  advantage  for  loving  his  neighbour— for  loving  his  family,  his 
household,  his  country,  and  the  world.  And  that  is  the  best  and  happiest  state  of 
things,  the  primal  and  truly  natural,  where,  springing  from  under  the  throne  of 
God,  with  a  bright  and  heaven-reflecting  piety,  love  fills  the  upper  pool,  and  then, 
through  the  open  flower-frin^ed  channel  of  filial  affection  and  the  domestic  chari- 
ties, flows  softly  till  it  agam  expands  in  neighbourly  kindness  and  unreserved 
philanthropy.  The  channel  may  be  choked.  The  devotee  may  close  it  up  in  the 
nope  of  raising  the  level  in  the  first  and  great  reservoir,  and  by  arresting  the 
eorrent  he  causes  an  overflow  and  converts  into  swamp  the  surrounding  garden. 
In  the  same  way  the  materialist  or  worldling,  content  with  the  lower  pool,  may  fill 
op  the  condoit,  and  declare  that  he  is  no  longer  dependent  on  the  upper  magazine; 
but  from  the  isolated  cistern  quickly  evaporates  the  scanty  supply,  and  thick  with 
elime,  weltering  with  worms,  the  stagnant  residue  mocks  the  thixsty  owner,  or,  as 
over  the  babbling  malaria  he  persists  to  linger,  it  fills  his  frame  with  the  mortal 
poison.  Cut  ofl  from  living  water,  receiving  from  on  high  no  consecrating  element, 
hnnuui  ft£fection  is  too  sure  to  end  in  the  disgust  of  a  disappointed  idolatry  or  the 
mad  despair  of  a  total  bereavement ;  whilst  the  mystic  theopathy,  which  in  order 
to  give  the  whole  heart  to  God  gives  none  to  its  fellows,  will  soon  have  no  heart  at 
all.  Love  is  of  God,  and  all  true  love  is  one.  The  piety  which  is  not  humane  will 
Boon  grow  superstitious  and  gloomy ;  in  cases  like  Donunic  and  Philip  H.  we  see 
that  it  may  soon  grow  bloodthirsty  and  cruel;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  will  brotherly 
love  long  continue  if  the  love  of  God  is  not  shed  abroad  abundantly.  (Hamilton.) 
Supreme  love  to  Qod  impossible  without  a  Saviour : — The  Bev.  M.  Jeanmarie,  a 
widely  known  French  Protestant  pastor,  has  recently  passed  away.  The  story  of 
his  oonversion  appears  in  the  continental  journals,  and  is  a  fine  example  of  the 
power  of  the  Word  of  God.  He  was  at  the  time  a  preceptor  in  a  family  of  the 
Eonee  of  Hohenlohe  and  »  rationalist.  A  neighbouring  preacher  asked  him  to 
supply  for  hiuL  He  declined  on  the  plea  of  "  How  could  he  preach  what  he  did 
not  believe  ?  "  "  What  I  not  believe  m  God  ?  "  "  Yes,  I  do  that"  "  And  surely 
you  believe  that  man  should  love  Him  ?  "  **  Doubtless."  *'  Well,  then,  preach  on 
the  words  of  Jesus,  *  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and 
mind,  and  strength.* "  **  I  will  try,  just  to  oblige  you."  He  thought  over  the 
words,  and  took  note : — "  1.  We  must  love  God,  and  the  reasons  thereof.  2.  We 
must  love  Him  with  all  our  powers  in  very  deed;  nothing  short  of  this  could  satisfy 
Ood.    8.  But  do  we  thus  love  Godf . . ."    "  No !  **  and  then  said  he,  **  Withoot  any 

81 


483  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  zn. 

previonsly  formed  plan  I  was  brought  to  add,  *  We  need  a  Saviour.*  At  that  moment 
a  new  light  broke  upon  my  soul ;  1  understood  that  I  had  not  loved  God,  that  I  needed 
a  Saviour,  that  Jesus  was  that  Saviour :  and  I  loved  Him  and  clung  to  Him  at  once. 
On  the  morrow  I  preached  the  sermon,  and  the  third  head  was  the  chief — via., 
the  need  of  Jesus,  and  the  necessity  of  trusting  to  such  a  Saviour."  {Chrittian  Age,) 
The  properties  of  love : — Because  many  deceive  themselves  in  thinking  that  they 
love  God,  when  they  do  not,  it  is  needful  to  set  down  the  marks  of  the  true  love  of 
God,  by  which  we  may  ascertain  whether  it  be  in  us  or  not.  The  principal  are 
these:  1.  A  deliberate  preferring  and  esteeming  of  God  above  all  things  in  the 
world,  though  never  so  excellent  or  dear  to  us.  2.  A  desire  to  be  united  and  joined 
to  God  in  most  near  communion  with  Him,  both  in  this  life  and  the  next.  3.  A 
high  estimation  of  the  special  tokens  and  pledges  of  God's  love  to  us— the  JBible, 
Sacraments,  &c.  4.  A  conscientious  care  to  obey  God's  will,  and  to  serve  and 
honour  Him  in  our  calling.  5.  Joy  and  delight  in  the  duties  of  God's  service  and 
worship.  6.  Zeal  for  God's  glory,  causing  in  us  a  holy  grief  and  indignation  when 
we  see  or  hear  that  God  is  dishonoured  by  sin.  7.  Love  is  bountiful,  making  us 
willing  and  ready  to  give  and  bestow  much  upon  the  person  we  love.  8.  True  love 
to  the  saints  and  children  of  God.  (G.  Fetter.)  Love  to  God  and  men  :—M&n'a 
life,  rightly  ordered,  revolves,  like  the  earth  upon  which  he  dwells,  upon  an  axis 
with  two  fixed  poles.  That  axis  is  love,  and  the  poles  are  God  and  man.  The  love 
thus  defined  and  exercised  fulfils  the  whole  law.  It  embraces  in  its  scope  all  of 
man's  duties,  religious  and  moral.  Consider — I.  The  nature  of  this  love.  1.  An 
affection  of  the  soul.  2.  An  all-inclusive  affection,  embracing  not  only  every  other 
affection  proper  to  its  object,  but  all  that  is  proper  to  be  done  to  its  object.^  3.  The 
most  personal  of  all  affections.  One  may  fear  an  event,  hope  for  and  rejoice  in  it ; 
but  one  can  love  only  a  person.  4.  The  tenderest,  most  unselfish,  most  divine  of 
all  affections.  Such  is  that  axial  principle,  on  which  man's  Ufe,  when  obedient  to 
God,  revolves.  It  reminds  us  of  that  great  discovery  of  the  age,  which  has  traced 
the  various  powers  of  nature— light,  heat,  electricity,  Ac. — back  to  one  great  original 
force,  frorii  which  they  all  spring  and  into  which  they  are  convertible.  Like  the 
mythic  Proteus,  that  force  changes  its  form  according  to  the  exigency  of  the  time, 
now  appearing  as  heat,  then  as  light,  then  as  magnetism,  then  as  motion — so  this 
love,  which  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  law,  is  at  the  basis  of  all  acts  of  piety  and  of 
all  forms  of  virtue  (1  Cor.  xiii.).  II.  The  object  of  this  love.  1.  God  is  the 
first  and  supreme  object.  2.  True  love  of  God  begets  love  to  man.  The  lattcor, 
resulting  from  the  former,  must  needs  occupy  a  subordinate  position.  The  foontain 
is  higher  than  the  stream,  and  includes  it.  IIL  The  deoreb  in  whioh  this  lov* 
TO  God  should  be  exercised.  It  should  not  be  a  languid  affection,  but  one  in 
whioh  all  the  powers  of  man's  nature  are  engaged.  The  various  parts  of  our  com- 
plex being  are  summoned  to  contribute  their  utmost  force  to  the  formation  of  it. 
1.  With  the  heart :  perfectly  hearty  and  sincere.  2.  With  the  soul :  ardent — full 
of  warmth  and  feeling.  3.  With  the  mind :  intelligent.  God  does  not  want  fanatical 
devotion.  4.  With  the  strength :  energetic  and  intense.  In  a  word,  our  love  to 
God  is  to  be  of  tiie  most  earnest,  real,  and  vital  sort ;  one  into  which  we  are  to  put 
the  whole  of  our  being,  as  a  plant  puts  into  its  flower  the  united  forces  of  root  and 
leaf  and  stem.  IV.  This  love  is  possible  only  through  Christ.  He  reveals  to 
us  the  almighty,  incomprehensible  Creator,  who  would  otherwise  be  to  us  a  mere 
abstraction.  V.  False  and  true  manifestations  of  this  love.  1.  Take  care  not  to 
let  it  become  a  matter  more  of  outward  form  than  of  inward  reality.  2.  The  real 
proof  of  love  is  its  willingness  to  make  sacrifices  for  the  sake  of  its  object.  {A.  H. 
Currier.)  The  mind's  love  .-—The  love  of  God  fills  the  mind,  when  knowledge 
gatheretn  all  things  with  reference  to  God ;  when  speculation  ever  weigheth  the 
things  of  God  with  the  things  of  men;  when  imagination  compareth  all  things  with 
the  things  of  God ;  when  memory  storeth  in  her  treasure  things  of  God,  new  and 
old;  when  the  thoughts  ever  turn  to  God,  as  their  end;  when  all  studies  are  in  God, 
and  there  is  no  study  whioh  hath  not  God  for  its  end.  We  are  always  thinking  of 
something,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places ;  we  can  behold  no  object  in  the  earth 
or  sky,  but  thought  is  busy  with  the  same.  The  thoughts  are  according  to  the 
heart.  If  one  might  say  it  with  reverence,  as  angelic  ministrations  execute  God's 
will,  BO  are  the  thoughts  to  the  heart  and  soul  of  man  ever  busy  traversing  and 
retnming,  through  earth  and  heaven,  as  the  heart  wills.  And  these,  in  the  good 
yn^w^  are  ever  full  of  God.  {Isaac  Williams^  M.  .\  Love  .-—Observe  that  love 
is  not  merely  one  way  of  fulfilling  the  Law.  Iti  the  best  way.  Far  better  to  love 
A  man  to  mnoh  that  to  steal  from  him  would  be  impossible,  than  merely  to  refrain 


n.]  8T.  MARK,  48a 

from  stealing  in  obedience  to  the  Eighth  Commandment.  Nay,  more,  it  is  the  only 
way.  One  who  would  steal,  but  for  his  sense  of  its  being  forbidden,  and  therefore 
wrong,  already  sins  against  his  neighbour  by  breaking  the  Tenth  Commandment. 
1.  Love  brings  all  the  powers  of  man's  soul  into  interior  harmony.  2.  It  begets 
obedience,  both  inward  and  outward.  8.  It  begets  a  strong  desire  after  God.  4.  It 
finds  God  in  everything.  6.  It  is  the  mainspring  of  the  soul,  controlling  hands, 
feet,  eyes,  lips,  brain,  life.  {Anon.)  Love  i$  the  most  important  thing: — 
"  Father,"  asked  the  son  of  Bishop  Berkeley,  "  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  words 
*  cherubim '  and  •  seraphim,'  which  we  meet  with  in  the  Bible  ?  "  '•  Cherubim,"  re- 
plied his  father,  "is  a  Hebrew  word  signifying  knowledge;  seraphim  is  another 
word  of  the  same  language,  signifying  flame.  Whence  it  is  supposed  that  the 
cherubim  are  angels  who  excel  in  knowledge ;  and  that  the  seraphim  are  angels  like- 
wise who  excel  in  loving  God."  "I  hope,  then,"  said  the  little  boy,  "when 
I  die  I  shall  be  a  seraph,  for  I  would  rather  love  God  than  know  all  things." 
The  fint  and  great  commandment: — I.  Whether  wb  are  possessed  of  this  supreme 
I.OVB  TO  God  T  A  sincere  love  manifests  itself  by  approbation,  preference,  delight, 
familiarity.  Do  these  terms  express  the  state  of  our  affections  towards  our 
heavenly  Father  f  1.  Do  we  cordially  approve  all  that  the  Scriptures  reveal  con- 
cerning His  character  and  His  dealings  with  men  ?  2.  Approbation,  however,  is  the 
very  lowest  token  of  this  Divine  affection.  What  we  really  love  we  distinguish  by  a 
decided  preference :  we  have  compared  it  with  other  things,  and  have  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  it  is  more  excellent  than  all  of  them.  3.  Further,  the  love  of  God 
will  lead  us  to  delight  in  Him.  4.  I  wiU  mention  but  one  more  sign  of  love 
unfeigned ;  which  is  seen  when  a  person  courts  the  society  and  familiar  intimacy 
of  the  object  of  his  affections.     U.  By  what  means  a  spirit  op  lovb  to  God  may  be 

AOQUntED,  IP  WE  HAVE  IT  NOT,  OB  INCREASED,  IP  WB  HAVE.      1.    The  first  Stcp  is  tO  fccl 

our  utter  deficiency  in  this  duty.  2.  Take  up  your  Bible,  and  learn  the  character 
of  Him  whom  you  have  so  neglected.  3.  These  views  of  the  love  of  God,  however, 
will,  in  great  measure,  be  ineffectual,  till  you  have  actually  cast  yourself  at  the  foot 
of  the  cross,  and  believed  in  Jesus  Christ  for  the  justification  of  your  own  souL  4. 
My  next  direction  for  cherishing  this  spirit  of  love  to  God  is,  that  you  should  care- 
fully guard  against  everything  in  your  temper  and  conduct  which  might  grieve  the 
Spirit  of  God.  6.  I  would  press  upon  you  the  necessity  of  frequent  communion 
with  your  reconciled  God  in  prayer  and  thanksgiving.  (Joseph  Jotcett^  M.A.) 
Love  to  God : — I.  A  true  love  to  God  has  three  principal  coNSTrniENT  parts.  1. 
The  love  of  desire,  which  takes  its  origin  from  the  wants  of  man,  and  the  fitness 
and  willingness  of  God  to  supply  them.  2.  The  love  of  gratitude,  arising  from 
the  sense  of  the  Divine  gootkiess  to  us.  8.  A  disinterested  love,  having  as  its 
foundation  the  excellence  and  perfection  of  God  considered  in  themselves,  and 
without  any  reference  to  the  advantages  we  derive  from  them.  II.  The  measure 
OF  DiYiNB  LOVB.  1.  That  WO  must  love  God  supremely  above  any  other  object.  2. 
With  all  the  ardour  and  intensity  of  our  soul.  {H.  Kollock,  D.D.)  The  life  of 
Christian  consecration : — I.  The  character  op  this  lovb.  The  whole  man  must  be 
enlisted  in  our  love  of  God ;  all  the  force  o"!  our  life  must  go  to  express  and  to  fulfil 
it.  1.  God  claims  from  us  a  warm  personal  affection.  2.  God  must  be  loved  for 
His  moral  excellence.  Not  only  must  our  conscience  approve  our  affection ;  it  will 
be  ever  supplying  us  with  new  material  for  exalted  worship  of  Him.  The  sense  of 
righteousness  will  kindle  gratitude  into  adoration.  8.  God  claims  from  us  an 
intelligent  affection.  Our  intelligence  must  have  full  scope,  if  our  love  of  God 
is  to  be  full.  4.  God  claims  from  as  that  we  love  with  all  our  strength.  The 
whole  force  of  our  character  is  to  be  in  our  affection  for  Him.  Men  devote  their 
energies  to  worldly  pursuits.  II.  Thb  unity  op  spiritual  lipb  in  this  love.  The 
command  of  our  text  is  introduced  by  a  solemn  proclamation,  "  Hear,  O  Israel,  the 
Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord."  The  object  of  Moses  in  declaring  the  unity  of  God 
was  to  guard  the  Jews  against  idolatry ;  my  object  in  dwelling  on  it  is  to  claim 
from  you  the  consecration  of  all  your  powers.  A  simple  illustration  will  make  both 
these  points  dear.  Polygamy  is  contrary  to  the  true  idea  of  marriage ;  he  who  has 
many  wives  cannot  love  one  of  them  as  a  wife  should  be  loved.  Equally  is  the 
ideal  of  marriage  violated  if  a  man  cannot  or  will  not  render  to  his  wife  the  homage 
of  his  whole  nature.  His  affection  itself  will  be  partial  instead  of  full,  and  his 
heart  will  be  distracted,  if,  whatever  her  amiability  may  be,  her  conduct  offends 
his  moral  sensibilities ;  if  he  cannot  trust  her  judgment  and  accept  her  counsel ;  if 
■he  is  a  hindranoe  to  him  and  not  a  help  in  the  practical  business  of  life.  Many  a 
nan's  spiritual  life  is  distracted  and  made  inefficient,  simply  because  his  whola 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zn. 

being  is  not  engrossed  in  his  religion ;  one-sidedness  in  devotion  is  sure  to  weft1cen» 
and  tends  ultimately  to  destroy  it.  Consider  the  infinite  worthiness  of  God.  He  is 
the  source  and  object  of  all  our  powers.  There  is  not  a  faculty  which  has  not  oome 
from  Him ;  which  is  not  purified  and  exalted  by  consecration  to  Him.  And  as  all 
our  powers  make  up  one  man — reason  and  emotion,  conscience  and  will  imiting  in 
a  complete  human  life — so,  for  spiritual  harmony  and  religious  satisfaction,  there 
must  be  the  full  consecration  and  discipline  of  all  our  powers.  Again  and  again  is 
this  truth  set  before  us  in  the  Biole.  The  blind  and  the  lame  were  forbidden  for 
sacrifice ;  the  maimed  and  imperfect  were  banished  from  the  congregation  of  the 
Lord.  The  whole  man  is  redeemed  by  Christ — body,  soul,  and  spirit,  aU  are  to  be 
presented  a  living  sacrifice.  The  gospel  is  intended,  not  to  repress  our  powers,  nor 
to  set  a  man  at  strife  with  himself,  but  to  develop  and  enlarge  the  whole  sphere  of 
life  ;  and  he  wrongs  the  Author  of  the  gospel,  and  mars  his  own  spiritual  perfection, 
who  allows  any  faculty  to  lie  by  disused  in  God's  service.  Look  at  the  same  truth 
in  another  aspect ;  consider  how  our  powers  aid  one  another  in  gaining  a  true  appre- 
hension of  God.  The  sensibilities  of  love  give  us  insight  into  His  character,  and 
furnish  us  with  motives  for  active  service  of  Him.  On  the  other  hand,  intelligent 
esteem  of  God  expands  affection  for  Him,  and  preserves  it  strong  when  mere  emotion 
will  have  died  away.  Obedience  is  at  once  the  organ  of  spiritual  knowledge,  and  the 
minister  of  an  increasing  faith.  "  They  that  know  Thy  name,"  says  the  Psalmist, 
"  will  put  their  trust  in  Thee."  HI.  The  gkounds  and  impulses  of  this  love.  In 
reality  it  has  but  one  reason — God  is  worthy  of  it ;  and  the  impulse  to  render  it 
comes  directly  from  our  perception  of  His  worthiness  and  the  knowledge  that  He 
desires  it  from  us.  The  claim  for  love,  like  all  the  Divine  claims,  is  grounded  in 
the  character  of  God  Himself ;  and  it  takes  the  form  of  commandment  here  because 
the  Jews  were  "  under  the  law."  There  are,  however,  two  thoughts  suggested  by 
the  two  titles  given  by  Moses  to  God,  which  will  help  us  in  further  illustration  oi 
our  subject.  (1)  Moses  speaks  of  God  as  Jehovah,  the  self-existent,  self-sufl&cing 
One.  God  is  the  source  and  author  of  all,  wherever  found,  that  awakens  love  in 
man.  When  once  the  idea  of  God  has  taken  full  possession  of  the  soul,  there  ib 
not  a  perfection  which  we  do  not  attribute  in  infinite  measure  to  Him.  (2)  Moses 
calls  Jehovah  "  the  Lord  our  God,"  reminding  His  people  that  God  had  singled 
them  out  from  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  that  they  were  "  precious  in  His  sight 
and  honourable ; "  and  that  all  they  knew  of  His  excellence  and  goodness  had  come 
to  them  through  their  perception  of  what  He  had  done  for  them.  ♦'  We  love  Him, 
because  He  first  loved  us ;  "  this  is  the  Christian  reading  of  the  thought  of  Moses. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Of  loving  God: — I.  The  duty  enjoined  is,  "  Thou  shalt  love 
the  Lord  thy  God."  A  true  love  of  God  must  be  founded  upon  a  right  sense  of 
His  perfections  being  really  amiable  in  themselves,  and  beneficial  to  us :  and  such 
a  love  of  God  will  of  necessity  show  forth  itself  in  our  endeavouring  to  practise  the 
same  virtues  ourselves,  and  exercise  them  towards  others.  All  perfection  is  in  itself 
lovely  and  amiable  in  the  very  nature  of  the  thing ;  the  virtues  and  excellencies  of 
men  remote  in  history,  from  whom  we  can  receive  no  personal  advantage,  excite  in 
us  an  esteem  whether  we  will  or  no :  arid  every  good  mind,  when  it  reads  or  thinks 
upon  the  character  of  an  angel,  loves  the  idea,  though  it  has  no  present  communi- 
cation with  the  subject  to  whom  so  lovely  a  character  belongs :  much  more  the 
inexhaustible  Fountain  of  all  perfections ;  of  perfections  without  number  and  with- 
out hmit ;  the  Centre,  in  which  all  excellencies  unite,  in  which  all  glory  resides,  and 
from  which  every  good  thing  proceeds,  cannot  but  be  the  supreme  object  of  love  to 
a  reasonable  and  intelligent  mind.  Even  supposing  we  ourselves  received  no  benefit 
therefrom,  yet  infinite  power,  knowledge,  and  wisdom  in  conjunction,  are  lovely  in 
the  very  idea,  and  amiable  even  in  the  abstract  imagination.  But  that  which 
makes  these  perfections  most  truly  and  substantially,  most  really  and  permanently, 
the  object  of  our  love,  is  the  application  of  them  to  ourselves,  and  our  own  more 
immediate  concerns,  by  the  consideration  of  their  being  joined  also  with  those 
relative  and  moral  excellencies,  which  make  them  at  the  same  time  no  less  beneficial 
to  us  than  they  are  excellent  absolutely  in  their  own  nature.  I  say,  then  is  it  that 
God  truly  appears  the  complete  object  of  love,  for  so  our  Saviour  Himself  teaches 
us  to  argue  (Luke  vii.  47) — To  whom  much  is  forgiven,  he  will  love  the  more ;  and 
the  apostle  St.  John  (1  John  iv.  19) — "  We,"  says  he,  ♦♦  love  Him,  because  He  first 
loved  us."  This,  therefore,  is  t  e  true  ground  and  foundation  of  our  love  towards 
God.  But  wherein  this  love  towards  God  consists,  and  by  what  acts  it  is  most 
properly  exercised,  has  sometim  s  been  very  much  misunderstood.  It  always  signi- 
fies a  moral  virtae,  not  a  passio    or  affection ;  and  is  therefore  in  Soriptxire  always 


mu9.  Jtt.}  8T,  MARK. | *85 

with  great  care  explained  and  declared  to  mean  the  obedience  of  a  virtuous  life,  in 
opposition  to  the  enthusiasm  of  a  vain  imagination.  In  the  Old  Testament,  Moses 
in  his  last  exhortation  to  the  Israelites,  thus  expresses  it  (Deut.  x.  12) :  "And  now, 
Israel  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee,  but  to  fear  the  Lord  thy  God, 
and  to  love  Him f  "  And  what  is  loving  Him?  Why,  He  tells  them  m  the  very 
next  words,  'tis,  "  To  walk  in  all  His  ways,  and  to  serve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  to  keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,  and  His 
statutes,  which  I  command  thee  this  day  for  thy  good."  And  again  (2  John  6), 
"This,"  says  he,  "is  love,  that  we  walk  after  His  commandments."  For  what  is 
rational  love  but  a  desire  to  please  the  person  beloved,  and  a  complacency  or  satis- 
fa<>tion  in  pleasing  him?  To  love  God,  therefore,  is  to  have  a  smcere  desire  of 
obeying  His  laws,  and  a  delight  or  pleasure  in  the  conscience  of  that  obedience. 
Even  to  an  earthly  superior,  to  a  parent,  or  a  prince,  love  can  no  otherwise  be 
shown  from  a  child  or  a  servant  than  by  cheerfully  observing  the  laws,  and  promo- 
ting the  true  mterest  of  the  government  he  is  under.  Now  from  this  account  which 
has  been  given  of  the  true  nature  of  love  towards  God,  it  will  be  easy  for  us  to 
correct  the  errors  which  men  have  sometimes  fallen  into  in  both  extremes.  Some 
have  been  very  confident  of  their  love  towards  God  from  a  mere  warmth  of  super- 
stitious zeal  and  enthusiastic  affection,  without  any  great  care  to  bring  forth  in 
their  lives  the  fruits  of  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  On  the  contrary,  others 
there  are,  who  though  they  really  love  and  fear  and  serve  God  m  the  course  of  a 
virtuous  and  religious  life,  yet,  because  they  feel  not  in  themselves  that  warmth  of 
affection  which  many  enthusiasts  pretend  to,  therefore  they  are  afraid  and  suspect 
that  they  do  not  love  God  sincerely  as  they  ought.  II.  Ha^ng  thus  at  large 
explained  the  duty  enjoined  in  the  text,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  1 
proceed  now  in  the  second  place  to  consider  briefly  thb  ciboxtmbtances  requisite 

TO  MAKE   THB  PERFOBMANCB   OP  THIS   DUTY  ACCEPTABLE   AND  COMPLETE:    "ThOU  Sftalt 

love  Him  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mmd.  In  St. 
Luke  it  is  somewhat  more  distinctly:  "  With  all  thy  heart,  with  all  thy  soul,  with 
aU  thy  strength,  and  with  all  thy  mind."  1.  It  must  be  smcere :  we  must  love  or 
obey  Him  with  all  our  heart.  'Tis  not  the  external  act  only,  but  the  mward 
affection  of  the  mind  principally  that  God  regards,  an  affection  of  mind  which 
influences  all  a  man's  actions  in  secret  as  well  as  in  public,  which  determines  tne 
person's  true  character  or  denomination,  and  distinguishes  him  who  reaUy  is  a 
servant  of  God  from  him  who  only  seems  or  appears  to  be  so.  2.  Our  obedience 
must  be  universal :  we  must  love  God  with  all  our  soul,  or  with  our  whole  soul. 
He  does  not  love  God  in  the  Scripture  sense  who  obeys  Him  m  some  i^t^ljcea  wily 
and  not  in  all.  The  Psahnist  places  his  confidence  m  this  only,  that  he  Had 
respect  unto  all  God's  commandments  "  (Psa.  cxix.  6).  Generally  speafang,  most 
men's  temptation  Ues  principally  in  some  one  particular  mstance,  and  this  is  tne 
proper  trial  of  the  person's  obedience,  or  of  his  love  towards  God.  3.  Our  obedience 
must  be  constant  and  persevering  in  time  as  weU  as  universal  m  its  extent;  we 
must  love  God  with  all  our  strength,  persevering  in  our  duty  without  famtmg. 
"  He  that  endureth  to  the  end,"  saith  our  Saviour,  "  the  same  shall  be  saved ; 
and  "  he  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things ; "  and  "  we  are  made  partakers  of 
Christ,  if  we  hold  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  steadfast  unto  the  end.  ine 
Scripture  notion  of  obedience  is,  walking  "in  holiness  and  nghteonsness  before 
Him  all  the  days  of  our  life"  (Luke  i.  76).  4.  Our  obedience  to  God  ought  to  be 
wiUing  and  cheerful :  we  must  love  Him  with  all  our  mind.  "  They  that  love  Thy 
name  will  be  joyful  in  Thee"  (Psa.  v.  12) :  and  St.  Paul,  among  tne  frmts  of  the 
Spirit,  reckoni  up  peace  and  joy  "  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  But  virtue  becomes  more 
perfect  when  'tis  made  eaey  by  love,  and  by  faa^if^^l  P^,^^?«  "'^'''^1?;^  in  thl 
were  into  a  man's  very  nature  and  temper.    IH.  The  last  thing  observable  in  ^ 

text    is    THE    WEIGHT    AND    IMPORTANCE    OF    THE  DUTY:     it    18    *^%     S     *    TI'*?^^ 

commandment."  The  reason  is,  because  'tis  the  foundation  of  aU ;  ^^  without 
regard  to  God  .there  can  be  no  rehgion.    {Samiul  CUirke,  D.P.)  On  the  love 

of  Qod  :^lt  is  the  improved  abihty  of  the  head  that  fonns  the  philosopher,  birt 
'Us  the  right  disposition  of  the  heart  that  chiefly  makes  Uie  Chnstian.  IJi 
our  love  directed  to  that  Being,  who  is  most  worthy  of  it.  as  the  Centrsui 
wSoh  all  exceUencies  unite,  and  the  Source  from  ^l^^<^li.'^  "^f^J^f  .J'^ff^ 
"Love  la  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  'Tis  not  the  mere  action  that  is  valuable  m 
itselt  Til  the  love  from  which  it  proceeds  that  stamps  a  value  upon  it,  and  givee 
an  endearing  charm  and  beauty  to  it.  When  a  servile  fear  engrosses  the  whoh 
Si^  S  lo^  np  all  the  active  powers  of  the  soul,  it  cramps  the  abihties,  and  i* 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip.  xn. 
t 

rather  a  preservative  against  sin  than  an  incentive  to  virtne.  Bat  love  qniokena 
oar  endeavours,  and  emboldens  onr  resolutions  to  please  the  object  beloved ;  and 
the  more  amiable  ideas  we  entertain  of  our  Master,  the  more  cheerful,  Uberal,  and 
animated  the  service  that  we  render  Him  will  consequently  be.  Upon  love,  there- 
fore, the  Scriptures  have  justly  laid  the  greatest  stress,  that  love  which  will  give  life 
and  spirit  to  our  performances.  L  I  shall  inquibb  into  the  natubk  ahd  vouk- 
DATioN  OF  CUB  LOVE  TO  THE  Detty.  The  love  of  Grod  may  be  defined  s  fixed* 
habitual,  and  grateful  regard  to  the  Deity,  founded  upon  a  sense  of  His  goodness, 
and  expressing  itself  in  a  sincere  desire  to  do  whatever  is  agreeable,  and  avoid 
whatever  is  offensive  to  Him.  The  process  of  the  mind  I  take  to  be  this.  The 
mind  considers  that  goodness  is  everywhere  stamped  upon  the  creation,  and  appears 
in  the  work  of  redemption  in  distinct  and  bright  characters.  It  considers,  in  the 
next  place,  that  goodness,  a  lovely  form,  is  the  proper  object  of  love  and  esteem, 
and  goodness  to  us  the  proper  object  of  gratitude.  But  as  goodness  exists  nowhere 
but  in  the  imagination  without  some  good  Being  who  is  the  subject  of  it,  it  goes  on 
to  consider  that  love,  esteem,  and  gratitude  is  a  tribute  due  to  that  Being,  in  whom 
an  infinite  fulness  of  goodness  ever  dwells,  and  from  whom  incessant  emanations 
of  goodness  are  ever  flowing.  Nor  does  the  mind  rest  here;  it  takes  one  step 
farther  to  reflect  that  a  cold  speculative  esteem  and  a  barren,  unactive  gratitude  is 
really  no  sincere  esteem  or  gratitude  at  all,  which  will  ever  vent  itself  in  strong 
endeavours  to  imitate  a  delight  to  please  and  a  desire  to  be  made  happy  by  the 
Being  beloved.  If  it  be  objected  that  we  cannot  love  a  Being  that  is  invisible,  I 
answer  that  what  we  chiefly  love  in  visible  beings  of  our  own  kind  is  always  some- 
thing invisible.  Whence  arises  that  relish  of  beauty  in  our  own  species  f  Do  wa 
love  it  merely  as  it  is  a  certain  mixture  of  proportion  and  colours?  No;  for, 
though  these  are  to  be  taken  into  the  account  as  two  material  ingredients,  yet  some- 
thing else  is  wanting  to  beget  our  love ;  something  that  animates  the  features  and 
bespeaks  a  mind  within.  Otherwise  we  might  fall  in  love  with  a  mere  picture  or 
any  lifeless  mass  of  matter  that  was  entertaining  to  the  eye.  We  might  be  as  soon 
smitten  with  a  dead,  uninformed,  unmeaning  countenance,  where  there  was  an 
exact  symmetry  and  regularity  of  features,  as  with  those  faces  which  are  enlivened  by  a 
certain  cheerfiilness,  ennobled  by  a  certain  majesty,  or  endeared  by  a  certain  com- 
placency diffused  over  their  whole  mien.  Is  not  this  therefore  the  chief  foundation 
of  our  taste  for  beauty,  that  it  giveth  us,  as  we  think,  some  outward  notices  of 
noble,  benevolent,  and  valuable  qualities  in  the  mind  ?  Thus  a  sweetness  of  mien 
and  aspect  charms  the  more  because  we  look  upon  it  as  an  indication  of  a  much 
sweeter  temper  within.  In  a  word,  though  the  Deity  cannot  be  seen,  nnmerona 
instances  of  His  goodness  are  visible  throughout  the  frame  of  nature.  And  where- 
•ver  they  are  seen,  they  naturally  command  our  love.  But  we  cannot  love  goodness 
abstractedly  from  some  Being  in  which  it  is  supposed  to  inhere.  For  that  would 
be  to  love  an  abstract  idea.  Hitherto,  indeed,  it  is  only  the  love  of  esteem.  The 
transition,  however,  from  that  to  a  love  of  enjoyment,  or  a  desire  of  being  made 
happy  by  Him,  is  quick  and  easy :  for,  the  more  lovely  ideas  we  entertain  of  any 
being,  the  more  desirous  we  shall  be  to  do  his  pleasure  and  procure  his  favour. 
Having  thus  shown  the  foundation  of  our  love  to  God,  I  proceed— H.  To  btatb 

TEE  DEOBEE  AND  POINT  OUT  THE  MXASUBES  07  OUB  LOVB  TO  HiM.   The  meaning 

of  these  words^  «♦  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with 
all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength,"  is,  that  we  are  to 
serve  God  with  all  those  faculties  which  He  has  given  us :  not  that  the  love  of  God 
is  to  be  exclusive  of  all  other  loves,  but  of  all  other  rival  affections  ;  that,  when- 
ever the  love  of  God  and  that  of  the  world  come  in  competition,  tJhe  former 
undoubtedly  ought  to  take  place  of  the  latter.  To  love  God,  therefore,  with  all  our 
heart  is  so  far  from  excluding  all  inferior  complacencies  that  it  necessarily  compre- 
hends them.  Our  love  must  begin  with  the  creature,  and  end  in  Him  as  the 
highest  link  in  the  chain.  We  must  love,  as  well  as  argue,  upwards  from  the  effect 
to  the  cause ;  and  because  there  are  several  things  desirable  even  here  under  proper 
regulations,  conclude  that  He,  the  Maker  of  them,  ought  to  be  the  supreme,  not 
the  only,  object  of  our  desires.  We  cannot  love  God  in  Himself  without  loving 
Him  in  and  for  His  works.  We  are  not  to  parcel  out  our  affections  between  piety 
and  sm.  Then  is  our  affection  Uke  a  large  diamond,  most  valuable,  when  it 
remains  entire  and  unbroken,  without  being  cut  out  into  a  multitude  of  independent 
and  disjointed  parts.  To  love  the  Lord  with  all  our  strength  is  to  put  forth  the  active 
powers  of  the  soul  in  loving  and  serving  Him.  It  is  to  quicken  the  wheels  and  springs 
•f  actions  that  moved  on  heavily  before.     It  is  to  do  well  without  being  wearj  of 


«toAP.  m.]  ST.  MARK,  487 

well-doing.  The  love  of  God  is  »  settled,  well-grounded,  rational  delight  in  Him, 
founded  upon  conviction  and  knowledge.  It  is  seated  in  the  understanding,  and 
therefore  not  necessarily  accompanied  with  any  brisker  agitations  of  spirits, 
thongh,  indeed,  the  body  may  keep  pace  with  the  soul,  and  the  spirits  flow  in  a 
more  sprightly  torrent  to  the  heart,  when  we  are  afifected  by  any  advantageous 
representation  of  God,  or  by  a  reflection  on  His  blessings.  This  I  thought  neces- 
sary to  observe,  because  some  weak  men  of  a  sanguine  complexion  are  apt  to  be 
elated  upon  the  account  of  those  short-lived  raptures  and  transient  gleams  of  joy 
which  they  feel  within  themselves  ;  and  others  of  a  phlegmatic  constitution  to 
despond,  because  they  cannot  work  themselves  up  to  such  a  degree  of  fervour. 
Whereas  nothing  is  more  precarious  and  uncertain  than  that  affection  which 
depends  upon  the  ferment  of  the  blood.  It  naturally  ceases  as  soon  as  the  spirits 
flag  and  are  exhausted.  Men  of  this  make  sometimes  draw  near  to  God  with  great 
fervency,  and  at  other  times  are  quite  estranged  from  Him,  like  those  great  bodies 
which  make  very  near  approaches  to  the  sun,  and  then  all  at  once  fly  off  to  an 
immeasurable  distance  from  the  source  of  light.  You  meet  a  person  at  some  happy 
time,  when  his  heart  overflows  with  joy  and  complacency:  he  makes  you  warm 
advances  of  friendship,  he  gives  you  admittance  to  the  inmost  secrets  of  his  soul, 
and  prevents  all  solicitation  by  offering,  unasked,  those  services  which  you,  in  this 
soft  and  gentle  season  of  address,  might  have  been  encouraged  to  ask.  Wait  but 
till  this  flush  of  good  humour  and  flow  of  spirits  is  over,  and  you  will  find  all  this 
overwarmth  of  friendship  settle  into  coldness  and  indifference ;  and  himself  as 
much  differing  from  himself  as  any  one  person  can  from  another;  whereas  a 
person  of  a  serious  frame  and  composure  of  mind,  consistent  with  hirnself ,  and 
therefore  constant  to  you,  goes  on,  without  any  alternate  heats  and  colds  in  friend- 
ship, in  an  uninterrupted  tenour  of  serving  and  obliging  his  friend.  Which  of 
these  two  is  more  valuable  in  himself  and  acceptable  to  you  ?  The  answer  is  v«ry 
obvious.  Just  so  a  vein  of  steady,  regular,  consistent  piety  is  more  acceptable  to  that 
Being  with  whom  there  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  change,  than  all 
passionate  sallies  and  short  intermitting  fits  of  an  unequal  devotion.  Truly  to  love 
God  is  not  then  to  have  a  few  warm  notions  about  the  Deity  fiuttering  for  a  while 
in  the  breast,  and  afterwards  leaving  it  void  and  empty  of  goodness.  But  it  is  to 
have  the  love  of  God  dwelling  in  us.  It  is  not  a  religious  mood  or  humour,  but  a 
religious  temper.  It  is  not  to  be  now  and  then  pleased  with  our  Maker  in  the 
gaiety  of  the  heart,  when,  more  properly  speaking,  we  are  pleased  with  ourselves. 
It  is  not  to  have  a  few  occasional  transient  acts  of  complacency  and  delight  in  the 
Lord  rising  in  our  minds  when  we  are  in  a  vein  of  good  humour,  as  the  seed  in  the 
parable  soon  sprung  up  and  soon  withered  away,  because  it  had  no  root  and  deep- 
ness  of  earth,  but  it  is  to  have  a  lasting,  habitual,  and  determiuate  resolution  to 
please  the  Deity  rooted  and  grounded  in  cor  hearts,  and  influencing  our  actions 
throughout.  IH.  I  pbooeed  to  examine  how  fab  the  feab  of  the  Deitt  is 
CONSISTENT  WITH  THE  LOVE  OF  HiM.  *•  There  is  mercy  with  Thee,  therefore  shalt 
Thou  be  feared,"  is  a  passage  in  the  Psalms  very  beautiful,  as  well  as  very  apposite, 
to  our  present  purpose.  The  thought  is  surprising,  because  it  was  obvious  to  think 
the  sentence  ehould  have  concluded  thus:  There  is  mercy  with  Thee,  therefore 
shalt  Thou  be  loved.  And  yet  it  is  natural,  too,  since  we  shall  be  afraid  to  draw 
upon  ourselves  His  displeasure,  whom  we  sincerely  love.  The  more  we  have  an 
affection  for  Him,  the  more  we  shall  dread  a  separation  from  Him.  Love,  though 
it  casteth  out  all  servile  fear,  yet  does  not  exclude  such  a  fear  as  a  dutiful  son 
shows  to  a  very  affectionate  but  a  very  wise  and  prudent  father.  And  we^  may 
rejoice  in  God  ynth  reverence,  as  well  as  serve  Him  with  gladness.  For  love,  if  not 
aUayed  and  tempered  with  fear  and  the  apprehensions  of  Divine  justice,  would 
betray  the  soul  into  a  sanguine  confidence  and  an  ill-grounded  security.  Fear,  on  the 
other  hand,  if  not  sweetened  and  animated  by  love,  would  sink  the  mind  into  a 
fatal  despondency.  Fear,  therefore,  is  placed  in  the  soul  as  a  counterpoise  to  the 
more  enlarged,  kindly,  and  generous  affections.  It  is  in  the  human  constitution 
what  weights  are  to  some  machines,  very  necessary  to  adjust,  regulate,  and  balance 
the  motion  of  the  fine,  curious,  and  active  springs.  Happy  the  man  who  can  com- 
mand such  a  just  and  even  poise  of  these  two  affections,  that  the  one  shaU  do 
nothing  but  deter  him  from  offending,  while  the  other  inspirits  him  with  a  hearty 
desire  of  pleasmg  the  Deity.  {J,  Seed,  D.D.)  Love  of  Qod  peculiar  to  Chris- 
tianity : — Do  vou  know  that  ours  is  almost,  if  not  quite,  the  omv  religion  which 
teaches  ns  to  love  God  ?  The  heathen  do  not  love  their  gods.  They  are  afraid  of 
them ;  they  are  inch  horrid,  ugly  things ;  they  are  so  fierce ;  they  fear  them.     It 


488  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m. 

was  thought  that  the  Esquimaux  had  no  word  for  "  love  "  in  their  language.  At 
last  they  found  one  nearly  two  lines  long.  It  makes  two  lines  in  a  book — ^you  oonld 
hardly  say  it.  But  ours  is  very  short.  If  I  were  an  Esquimaux,  and  I  had  to  say 
"  love,"  I  should  have  to  write  a  word  of  two  lines,  made  up  of  all  sorts  of  words. 
It  is  ft  great  privilege  that  we  can  love  God.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Love 
buried  : — I  have  heard  it  said  of  a  man,  "  That  man  is  a  grave  1  '*  because  some- 
thing in  him  lay  dead  and  buried.  What  do  you  think  it  was  ?  Love.  Love  was 
dead  and  buried  in  him,  so  the  man  was  a  grave  1  I  hope  I  have  no  graves  here. 
I  hope  there  is  nobody  here  that  is  a  grave  ;  a  person  in  whom  love  lies  dead  and 
buried.  {Ibid.)  Thy  God  .•— "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God."  You  won't 
love  Him,  you  will  never  love  the  Lord,  till  you  can  call  Him  yours.  *•  Thy  Gk)d." 
••  My  God."  ••  He  is  my  God."  If  a  little  girl  likes  her  doll,  she  says,  "  My  doll." 
If  a  boy  likes  his  hoop  or  bat,  he  says,  "  My  hoop ;  my  bat."  We  say,  "  My 
father ;  my  mother ;  my  bjother ;  my  sister ;  my  little  wife ;  my  husband."  **  My  " 
is  such  a  nice  word.  Till  you  can  say  "thy"  or  "my"  you  will  not  love  God. 
But  when  you  can  say,  "  My  God  1  "  then  you  will  begin  to  love  Him.  "  The  Lord 
thy  God."  When  one  of  the  Koman  emperors — after  a  great  triumph,  a  mihtary 
victory — ^was  coming  back  to  Kome,  he  went  up  the  Appian  hiU  in  great  state,  with 
his  foes  dragged  at  his  chariot  wheels.  Many  soldiers  surrounded  him,  adding  to 
his  triximphant  entry.  On  going  up  the  hill,  a  little  child  broke  through  the  crowd. 
"You  must  not  go  there,"  said  the  soldiers,  "that  is  the  emperor."  The  little 
child  repHed,  "True,  he  is  your  emperor,  but  he  is  my  father!  "  It  was  the  em- 
peror's own  little  boy.  He  said,  "  He  is  your  emperor,  but  he  is  my  father."  I 
hope  we  shall  be  able  to  say  that  of  God.  He  is  the  God  of  everybody ;  but  he  it 
my  Qod  specially.  He  is  not  only  the  Creator  of  the  world, — but  He  is  my  God  I 
{Ibid.)  Eov  it  is  that  we  love  God: — What  is  the  way  to  do  it?  I  will  tell  you. 
When  I  look  at  some  of  you  boys  and  girls  down  there,  I  cannot  see  much  of  your 
right  cheek,  but  I  can  see  your  left  cheek  very  clearly,  because  the  light  comes  that 
way,  shines  directly  down  upon  you.  That  is  the  way  I  see  them.  How  do  I  love 
God  ?  Love  comes  from  God  on  me ;  then  it  shines  back  again  on  Him.  I  mast 
put  myself  where  God  can  shine  upon  me ;  then  His  love  shining  upon  me  will 
make  a  reflection  go  back  again  to  Him.  There  is  no  love  to  God  without  that.  It 
is  all  God's  love  reflected  back  to  Him.  Have  not  you  sometimes  seen  the  sun 
setting  in  the  evenmg,  and  it  has  been  shining  so  brightly  on  a  house  that  you  have 
thought,  "  Really  that  house  is  on  flre  "  f  It  was  only  the  light  of  the  sun  shining 
back  again,  the  reflection.  So  if  the  love  of  God  shines  on  your  heart,  then  it  will 
shine  back  in  love  to  Him.  Did  you  ever  go  near  a  great  high  rock  where  there 
was  an  echo  ?  You  said  a  word,  back  it  comes  to  you ;  you  said,  "  Come  I  come  1 " 
It  said, "  Come !  come !  "  It  was  an  echo.  It  was  your  voice  coming  back  to  you. 
It  is  God's  love  that  comes  back  to  you  when  you  love  Him.  It  is  not  your  love. 
You  have  no  right  to  it.  It  is  God's  love  shining  upon  you  makes  your  love  go  back 
to  Him.  God's  love  touching  you  goes  back  to  Hun.  That  is  the  way.  I  hope 
you  will  so  love  God.  llbid.)  Love  for  God  at  the  bottom  of  everything : — In 
one  of  the  wars  in  which  the  Emperor  Napoleon  was  engaged,  we  read  that  one  of 
his  old  soldiers,  a  veteran,  sustained  a  very  bad  wound ;  and  the  surgeon  came  to 
dress  it  and  probe  it.  He  was  feeling  it  with  his  probe,  when  the  man  said  to  the 
surgeon,  "  Sir,  go  deep  enough ;  if  you  go  quite  deep,  you  will  find  at  the  bottom 
of  my  wound  '  emperor  1  * "  It  was  all  for  the  love  of  the  emperor.  "  Yon 
will  find  the  word  'emperor'  at  the  bottom  of  my  wound."  I  wish  I  could 
think  in  all  our  wounds,  on  everything  we  do,  we  could  find  quite  at  the  bottom  of 
it,  •'  I  have  got  this  wound  for  love  of  the  Emperor.  The  love  of  my  Emperor  has 
given  me  this  wound."  0  that  we  might  find  at  the  bottom  of  everything, "  God  I " 
God  1 "  (Ibid.)  Love  for  God  supreme : — I  will  teU  you  another  thing.  Many 
years  ago,  there  lived  a  schoolmaster  in  the  Netherlands.  It  was  at  the  time  that 
a  very  wicked  persecution  was  going  on  against  the  Protestants,  when  they  had 
"  The  Inquisition. "  It  was  a  very  cruel  thing.  The  inquisitors,  as  they  were 
called,  put  this  poor  man  to  the  torture  of  the  rack.  They  pulled  his  limbs  almost 
asunder.  This  rack  was  a  horrible  instrument  1  have  you  ever  seen  one  f  You 
may  see  them  in  some  museums.  These  inquisitors  put  men  on  the  rack,  and  then 
pulled  their  joints  out,  thus  putting  them  to  horrible  pain !  When  on  the  raok,  the 
inquisitor  said  to  this  poor  schoolmaster,  "  Do  you  love  your  wife  and  children  7 
Won't  you,  for  the  sake  of  your  wife  and  children,  give  up  this  religion  of  yourt  T 
Won't  you  give  it  up  ?  "  The  poor  old  schoolmaster  said,  "  If  this  earth  were  all 
gold»  if  all  the  stars  were  pearls,  and  if  that  golden  globe  and  those  pearly  stars 


nur.  zn.]  ST,  MARK,  489 

were  all  mine,  I  would  give  them  all  np  to  have  my  wife  and  children  with  me.  I 
woold  rather  stay  in  this  prison,  and  live  on  bread  and  water  with  my  wife  and 
ctiildren,  than  live  like  a  king  without  them.  But  I  will  not  for  the  sake  of  pearls, 
or  gold,  or  wife,  or  children,  give  up  my  religion,  for  I  love  my  God  more  than  wife, 
or  child,  or  gold,  or  pearls."  But  the  inquisitors'  hearts  did  not  soften  a  bit ;  they 
went  on  inflicting  more  tortures,  till  the  man  died  on  the  rack.  He  loved  God  with 
*•  all  his  mind,  and  soul,  and  heart,  and  strength."  Do  you  think  we  could  go  to 
the  death  for  Him  ?  If  we  love  Him,  we  shall  every  day  do  something  for  Him. 
What  have  you  done  this  day  to  snow  your  love  to  God?  {Ibid.)  I  should  just 
like  to  point  you  to  a  few  ways  by  which  we  may  show  our  love  to  God  : — Supposing 
you  liad  got  a  very  dear  friend — some  one  whom  you  loved  very  much — should  you 
tike  to  be  quite  alone  with  that  friend,  and  tell  him  your  secrets,  and  for  him  to 
tell  you  his  secrets  f  Did  you  ever  do  that  ?  If  you  have  a  friend,  I  am  sure  you 
would  like  to  be  quite  alone  with  him,  and  talk  secrets.  This  is  just  what  you  will 
do  with  God  if  you  love  Him— you  will  like  to  be  quite  alone  with  Him ;  you  will 
tell  Him  your  secrets,  and  God  will  tell  you  His  secrets.  He  has  promised  this, 
**  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him."  He  will  tell  you  things  He 
does  not  tell  to  everybody.  He  will  tell  you  things  you  h'ave  not  heard  before.  I 
will  tell  you  another  thing.  Do  you  know  anybody  you  love  very  much  ?  If  they 
go  away  from  you,  don't  you  like  to  have  a  letter  from  them  ?  and  when  a  letter 
does  come,  don't  you  read  it  from  beginning  to  end  without  one  wandering  thought  ? 
I  don't  think  you  can  say  your  lessons  without  a  wandering  thought ;  but  if  you 
had  a  letter  from  a  dear  friend,  I  think  you  would  give  it  all  your  best  attention — 
from  the  first  word  to  the  last.  Well,  is  there  a  letter  from  God?  Yes.  Here  it  is 
—the  Bible  I  It  is  a  letter  from  God  Himself.  If  you  love  God,  you  will  love  His 
letter,  and  you  will  read  it  very  lovingly,  and  attentively,  and  give  your  whole  mind 
to  it.  (Ibid.)  Loving  those  like  God  :—li  you  have  got  a  friend  you  love  very 
much,  you  will  like  anybody  who  is  like  your  friend.  You  will  say  sometimes,  **  I 
quite  like  that  person,  she  is  so  like  my  mother ;  he  is  bo  like  my  friend."  You 
will  love  other  Christian  people,  because  you  can  say  of  them,  "They  are  so  like  my 
Jesus,  BO  like  my  God.  I  will  love  them  therefore."  So  you  will  like  poor  people. 
I  will  tell  you  why.  I  will  tell  you  a  little  story,  I  do  not  know  whether  you  ever 
heard  of  it.  There  was  a  gentleman  who  always  used  to  say  grace  before  dinner. 
and  he  used  to  M7, 

**  Be  present  at  oar  table,  Lord, 
Be  here  and  everywhere  adored : " 

and  his  little  child,  his  little  boy,  said,  "  Papa,  yon  always  ask  Jesns  Christ  to 
come  and  be  present  at  our  table,  but  He  never  comes.  Yon  ask  Him  every  day, 
but  He  never  does  come."  His  father  said,  "Well,  wait  and  see."  While  at 
dinner  that  very  day,  there  was  a  little  knock  at  the  door,  given  by  a  very  poor 
man  indeed,  and  he  said,  **  I  am  starving ;  I  am  very  poor  and  miserable.  I  think 
God  loves  me,  and  I  love  God,  but  I  am  very  miserable ;  I  am  hungry,  wretched, 
and  cold."  The  gentleman  said,  "  Come  in  ;  come  and  sit  down,  and  have  a  bit  of 
our  dinner."  The  little  boy  said,  ••  You  may  have  all  my  helping."  So  he  gave 
faim  all  his  helping ;  and  a  very  nice  dinner  the  poor  man  had.  The  father — after 
dinner — said,  •*  Didn't  Jesus  come  ?  You  said  He  never  came.  There  was  that 
poor  man,  and  Christ  said,  *  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of 
these.  My  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  Me  I  *  Christ  sends  His  representatives  I 
What  yon  have  done  to  that  poor  man,  it  is  the  same  as  if  yon  had  done  it  onto 
God."  Then  I  am  sore  if  you  love  people  very  much,  yoa  will  love  to  work  for 
tbem,  and  you  will  not  mind  how  hard,  because  yon  love  them.  If  you 
love  God,  yoa  will  love  to  do  something  for  God.  Like  Jacob  felt  about 
Bachel  :  **  He  served  seven  years  for  Bachel,  and  they  seemed  onto  him  bat  a 
«ew  days,  for  the  love  he  had  to  her."  I  will  tell  you  one  more  thing.  If  you  love 
a  person  very  much,  and  he  has  gone  away  from  you,  yoa  will  love  to  think  he  is 
eoming  back  again,  fjbid.)  Do  you  love  Jesus  f — A  long  time  ago,  a  gentleman, 
a  young  man,  was  travelling  in  a  coach,  and  opposite  to  him  there  sat  a  lady,  and 
the  lady  had  a  very  little  girl  on  her  lap,  a  very  sweet  pretty  little  girl.  This  young 
man  was  very  much  pleased  with  the  little  girl:  he  played  with  her,  took  great  notice 
of  her,  he  lent  her  his  penknife  to  play  with  ;  and  he  sang  to  her,  and  he  told  her 
little  stories ;  he  liked  her  so  exceedingly.  When  the  coach  arrived  at  the  hotel 
where  they  were  to  stop,  this  little  girl  put  her  face  close  to  the  young  man's,  and 
said,  ••  Does  '00  love  Jesus  ?  "    The  young  man  could  not  catch  it,  and  so  he  asked. 


490  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [< 

"What  do  you  say,  my  dear?"  She  said  again,  "Does  'oo  love  Jesus?"  H« 
blushed,  and  went  out  of  the  coach,  but  he  could  not  forget  the  question.  There 
was  a  large  party  to  dinner,  but  he  could  hear  nothing  but,  "  Does  'oo  love  Jesus  ?  ** 
After  dinner,  he  went  to  play  billiards,  and  while  playing  he  could  not  forget  it— 
"  Does  'oo  love  Jesus  ?  "  He  went  to  bed,  uncomfortable  in  his  mind.  "V^^en  on 
his  bed  at  night,  in  his  wakeful  moments  and  in  his  dreams,  he  could  only  hear  the 
same  question,  '♦  Does  'oo  love  Jesus  ?  "  The  next  day  he  had  to  meet  a  lady  by 
appointment,  he  was  still  thinking  about  it,  he  could  not  forget  it,  but  spoke  a  little 
out  loud,  and  when  the  young  lady  came  in,  he  said,  "  Does  'oo  love  Jesus  ?  "  She 
said,  "  What  are  you  talking  about?"  He  said,  "  I  forgot  you  were  present.  I 
was  saying  what  a  very  little  girl  said  to  me  yesterday,  ♦  Does  'oo  love  Jesus?'" 
She  said,  '•  What  did  you  say  to  her  ?  "  He  replied,  "  I  said  nothing.  I  did  not 
know  what  to  say."  So  it  went  on.  Five  years  afterwards,  that  gentleman  was 
walking,  I  think  it  was  through  the  city  of  Bath.  As  he  was  going  along  the 
streets,  he  saw  at  the  window  the  very  lady  who  had  had  the  little  girl  on  her  lap. 
Seeing  her,  he  could  not  help  ringing  the  bell,  and  asked  if  he  might  speak  to  her. 
He  introduced  himself  tp  her  thus :  "  I  am  the  gentleman  you  will  remember, 
perhaps,  who  travelled  with  you  in  a  coach  some  years  since."  She  said,  •♦  I  re- 
member it  quite  well."  He  said,  "  Do  you  remember  your  little  girl  asking  me  a 
question  ?  "  She  said,  "  I  do,  and  I  remember  how  confused  you  were  about  it." 
He  said,  "May  I  see  that  little  girl?"  The  lady  looked  out  of  the  window,  she 
was  crying.  He  said,  "  What  1  what  I  is  she  dead  ?  "  ••  Yes,  yes,"  was  the  reply. 
"  She  is  in  heaven.  But  come  with  me,  and  I  will  show  you  her  room.  I  will  show 
you  all  her  treasures."  And  the  gentleman  went  into  the  room,  and  there  he  saw 
her  Bible,  and  a  great  many  prize  books,  very  prettily  bound  ;  and  he  saw  all  her 
childish  playthings,  and  the  lady  said,  '*  That  is  all  that  is  now  left  of  my  sweet 
Lettie."  And  the  gentleman  replied,  "  No,  madam,  that  is  not  all  that  is  left  of 
her.  I  am  left.  I  am  left.  I  owe  my  soul  to  her.  I  was  a  wicked  man  when  I 
first  saw  her,  and  I  was  living  among  other  wicked  people,  and  living  a  very  bad 
life.  But  she  said  those  words  to  me,  and  I  never  forgot  them.  And  since  that 
time  I  am  quite  changed.  I  am  not  the  man  I  was.  I  am  now  God's.  I  can 
answer  that  question  now.  Don't  say  that  all  of  little  Lettie  is  gone."  And  now  I 
?ay  to  you,  and  to  everybody  in  this  church,  "Does  'oo  love  Jesus?"  (Ibid.) 
The  nature  of  love  to  God : — I.  That  the  love  which  we  ought  to  cultivate  and 

C  HERISH,  IN   reference   TO   GoD,  IS  SUPREME  IN  ITS   DEGREE.      "  ThoU  shalt  love  the 

Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind ;  " 
thus  reminding  us  that,  in  every  respect,  God  is  to  have  the  pre-eminence,  because 
He  possesses  a  right  of  absolute  and  entire  proprietorship  in  us,  as  the  author  and 
the  end  of  our  existence — because  He  only  is  adapted,  in  Himself  and  in  the  benefits 
which  He  has  to  bestow,  to  constitute  the  happiness  of  man,  as  an  intelligent  and 
immortal  being.  And,  indeed,  it  cannot  be  otherwise :  it  is  utterly  impossible  that 
the  love  of  God  should  be  a  subordinate  principle.  Wherever  it  exists  it  must  be 
the  ascendant ;  from  its  own  nature  it  cannot  mix  with  anything  that  is  unlike  itself, 
and,  in  reference  to  its  object,  it  cannot  by  possibility  admit  of  a  rival.  For  what  if 
there  in  us  to  which  it  can  be  subordinated  ?  Can  the  love  of  God  in  us  be  subor< 
dinated  to  the  love  of  any  sin?  Certainly  not ;  for  ••  if  any  man  love  Me,"  said  the 
Saviour,  ♦♦  he  will  keep  My  commandments."  Can  the  love  of  God  in  us  be  subor- 
dinated to  the  love  of  fame?  Certainly  not— " How  can  ye  believe,"  said  Christ, 
"  while  ye  seek  honour  one  of  another,  and  seek  not  the  honour  that  cometh  from 
God  ?  "  Can  the  love  of  God  be  subordinated  in  us  to  the  love  of  the  world  ?  Most 
certainly  it  cannot.  This  is  as  inimical  to  it,  and  as  unlikely  to  mix  with  it,  as  any 
other  principle  or  feeling  that  can  be  specified :  ••  Love  not  the  world,"  says  the 
Apostle,  "neither  the  things  of  the  world;  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the 
Father  is  not  in  him," — and  "  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil."  Can  the 
love  of  God  be  subordinated  in  us  to  the  love  of  creatures  ?  Can  it  be  subordinated 
to  the  love  of  the  various  comforts  and  enjoyments  of  this  life  ?  Most  certainly  it 
cannot — for  what  says  our  Lord  ?  Why,  He  asserts  thus  much  on  this  subject :  that 
if  any  man  love  houses  or  lands — that  if  any  man  love  father  or  mother — that  if  any 
man  love  wife  or  children — that  if  any  man  love  sister  or  brother,  more  than  Him, 
he  is  not  worthy  of  Him.  Nay,  indeed.  He  goes  beyond  this,  and  gives  as  to  imder. 
stand,  that  where  the  continuance  or  preservation  of  our  own  life  is  inimical  to,  or  in- 
compatible  with,  the  performance  of  oar  duty  to  Christ,  even  to  this  our  love  to  Qcd 
is  not  to  be  sobordinated ;  for,  says  He,  **  If  any  man  love  his  own  life  more  than 
Me,  he  ii  not  worthy  of  Me."     This  is  the  view  we  are  to  take  of  that  graeiooi 


OH&r.  zn.]  ST.  MARK,  491 

empire  eBtablished  over  man  by  Jesns  Christ :  it  is  not  the  reign  ot  coercion  or  of 
fear,  but  of  freedom  and  of  love.  It  supposes  the  entire  surrender  of  our  hearts  to 
Christ,  so  that  Christ  is  enthroned  in  our  affeotions,  and  exercises  entire  dominion  over 
OS,  bringing  every  imagination  and  thought  of  the  heart  into  entire  subjection.  It 
wculd  be  just  as  fooHsh  to  say,  that  a  kingdom  was  given  up  to  a  conqueror  while  at 
the  same  time  its  strongholds  were  in  possession  of  his  adversary,  as  for  an 
individual  to  say  that  he  had  surrendered  his  heart  and  affections  to  Christ,  while, 
at  the  same  time,  these  affections  are  placed  on  anything  opposed  to  the  will  and 
inimical  to  the  interests  of  Christ.  II.  That  the  love  of  God,  as  inculcated 
UPON  us  BT  Himself,  is  to  be  beoabded  as  a  bational  exebcisb  of  oub  affec- 
tions, IMPLYING  THB  HIGHEST  POSSIBLE  ESTEEM  OF  GoD.  Man  is  not  Only  the  sub- 
ject of  passion,  but  also  of  reason.  It  is  originated  in  us  by  the  knowledge  of  God ; 
it  arises  from  the  admission  of  the  soul  into  an  acquaintance  with  God.  But  this 
is  not  all :  there  are  vast  multitudes  that  have  this  knowledge  of  God ;  at  the  same 
time,  they  love  not  God.  And  hence  we  would  distinctly  and  seriously  impress  it 
upon  your  minds  that  that  knowledge  of  God  which  is  to  originate  in  us  supreme 
affection  for  Kim,  implies  the  peculiar  and  personal  application  to  us  of  the 
benefits  of  His  grace — it  supposes  our  reconciliation  to  God  by  the  forgiveness  of 
our  sins,  through  faith  in  the  redemption  that  has  been  wrought  out  by  Jesus 
Christ.  When  this  becomes  the  case,  "  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our 
hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  given  unto  us ; "  then  our  love  assumes  the  character  of 
filial  love,  the  love  which  a  child  feels  to  its  parent.     III.  That  the  lovk  of  God, 

INCULCATED  UPON  US  BY  THB  PBECEPTS  OF  HiS  HOLT  GoSPEL,  SUPPOSES  8UPBEME  DE- 
LIGHT OB  coMPLACENCT  IN  GoD.  Now,  the  cxcrcise  of  our  affections  forms  a  very 
prominent  part  of  that  capacity  of  happiness  by  which  we  are  distinguished ;  for 
our  own  experience  has  taught  us  that  the  presence  of  that  object  on  which  our 
affections  are  placed  is  essential  to  our  happiness ;  and  that  its  absence  at  any  time 
occasions  an  indescribable  feeling  of  pain,  which  cannot  be  alleviated  by  the  pre- 
sence of  other  objects,  however  excellent  in  themselves — for  this  very  reason,  that  they 
do  not  occupy  the  same  place  in  our  affections.  Look,  for  instance,  at  the  miser : 
let  him  only  accumulate  wealth  and  add  house  to  house  and  land  to  land,  and  to  the 
presence  and  claims  of  every  other  object  he  seems  completely  insensible:  his 
attention  is  completely  engrossed  with  the  one  object  of  his  pursuit ;  and,  dead  to 
everything  else,  he  cares  not  to  what  sufferings  or  privations  he  submits,  if  he  can 
only  succeed  in  gratifying  his  penurious  avidity.  Now,  look  at  the  same  principle 
in  reference  to  the  love  of  God.  Wherever  it  exists,  it  lifts  the  soul  to  God,  as  the 
source  and  fountain  of  its  happiness — it  brings  the  mind  to  exercise  the  utmost 
possible  complacency  in  God — it  leads  the  mind  to  seek  its  felicity  from  God — it 
brings  it  to  Him  as  to  its  common  and  only  centre.  God  is  the  centre  to  which  the 
Bonl  can  always  tend — the  sun  in  whose  beam  she  can  bask  with  nnutterable  pleasure 
and  delight ;  she  finds  in  Him  not  merely  a  stream  but  a  sea — a  fountain  of  blessed- 
ness, pure  and  perennial,  of  which  no  accident  of  time  can  ever  deprive  her.  lY. 
That  thb  lots  or  God,  as  inculcated  upon  us  in  His  wobd,  implies  the  entibe 

AND  PBAOTIOAL  DEVOTBDNESS   OF  OUBSELVES  TO  HiS  SEBVICE  AND  OLOBT.      Ordinarily, 

^oa  know,  nothing  is  more  delightful  than  to  promote,  in  any  possible  way,  the 
iiitsrests  of  those  whom  we  love :  and  whatever  is  the  sacrifice  which  we  make, 
however  arduous  the>duty  we  perform,  in  order  to  accomplish  this  object,  if  suc- 
cessful, we  feel  ourselves  more  than  adequately  rewarded.  {John  James.)  The 
great  commandment: — I.  How  can  this  lovb  bb  discbiminated ?  It  is  directed 
towards  "the  Lord  thy  God"  (Psa,  xvi.  8).  1.  It  may  be  known  by  its 
sensibility.  It  is  the  love  of  a  bride  on  the  day  of  her  first  espousals  (Jer.  li.  2). 
A  new  convert  wants  to  be  demonstrative.  At  the  ancient  Boman  games,  so  we 
are  told,  the  emperors,  on  rare  occasions,  in  order  ip  gratify  the  citizens,  used  to 
cause  sweet  perfumes  to  be  rained  down  through  the  vast  awnings  which  covered 
the  theatres ;  and  when  the  air  grew  suddenly  fragrant,  the  whole  audiences  would 
instinctively  arise  and  fill  the  space  with  shouts  of  acclamation  for  the  costly  and 
delicate  refreshment  (Cant.  vi.  12).  2.  This  love  will  be  characterized  by  humility. 
Call  to  mind  David's  exclamation,  for  a  notable  illustration  of  such  a  spirit  (2  Sam. 
vii.  18,  19).  A  sense  of  unworthiness  really  renders  a  lovely  person  more  welcome 
and  attractive.  8.  This  love  will  be  recognized  by  its  gratitude.  Christians  love 
their  Saviour  because  He  first  loved  them.  He  began  the  acquaintance.  A  true 
penitent  will  remember  how  muo  she  owes  for  her  forgiveness,  and  will  break  an 
alabaster-box,  costly  and  fragrant,  over  the  Bedeemer's  head  (Mark  ziv.  3).  Once 
Dr.  Doddridge  secured  for  »  sorrowful  woman  the  pardon  of  her  husband  who  had 


492  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  m. 

been  condemned  for  crime ;  she  fell  at  the  minister's  feet  in  tears  of  overcharged 
feelings  and  exclaimed,  *•  Oh,  my  dear  sir,  every  drop  of  blood  in  my  body  thanks 
you  for  your  kindness  to  me  1 "  4.  So  this  love  will  be  manifested  in  consecration. 
What  belongs  to  God  shall  be  defiled  by  nothing  earthly  (1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17).  Once 
among  the  Scottish  highlands,  the  queen  of  Great  Britain,  storm  stayed,  took 
refuge  in  a  cottage.  Not  till  after  she  had  gone  did  the  simple-hearted  house- 
keeper learn  who  it  was  she  had  been  sheltering  under  her  roof.  Then  she  gently 
took  the  chair  which  her  sovereign  had  occupied,  and  set  it  reverently  aside,  saying, 
**  None  shall  ever  sit  in  that  seat  less  than  the  heir  of  s  crown  t  "  6.  Then  this 
love  will  be  distinguished  by  its  solicitude.  It  would  seem  as  if  every  true  convert 
might  hear  Jesus  saying  to  him,  as  He  said  to  the  impotent  cripple  at  Bethesda  on 
receiving  his  cure :  "  Behold,  thou  art  made  whole  :  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing 
come  unto  thee  I "  II.  So  we  reach  a  second  question :  How  mat  this  love  bb 
INJUBED  ?  It  may  be  wilfully  "  left,"  and  so  lost  (Rev.  ii.  4) .  1.  It  may  lose  the  "  heart  '* 
ont  of  it.  It  was  fabled  that  Mahomet's  coffin  was  suspended  in  the  air  half-way 
between  heaven  and  earth ;  that  is  no  place  for  a  Christian  surely  while  he  is  alive. 
Christ  said,  **  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  Look  at  the  account  given  of  the 
nulitary  people  who  wanted  to  make  David  king  (1  Chron.  xii.  33-38).  No  man 
can  love  God  with  a  heart  for  Him  and  another  heart  for  somebody  or  something 
else  (Psa.  xii.  2,  margin).  2.  This  love  may  lose  the  "  soul"  out  of  it.  See  how 
£ne  seems  the  zeal  of  Naaman  when  he  scoops  up  some  loads  of  earth  from  tiie 
soil  of  Israel,  that  he  may  bear  it  over  into  Syria  for  an  altar  to  Jehovah ;  and  now 
see  how  he  takes  the  whole  worth  out  of  it  by  the  absurd  proposition  that,  when 
his  royal  master  walks  in  procession  to  the  temple  of  Rimmon,  he  may  be  permitted 
to  go  as  he  always  went,  kneeling  down  to  the  idol  with  the  rest  of  the  heathen 
worshippers  (2  Kings  v.  17,  18).  When  the  heart  is  gone,  and  so  there  is  no  interest 
in  loving,  and  the  soul  is  gone,  and  there  is  no  purpose  in  loving,  where  is  love  ? 
3.  Then  this  love  may  be  injured  by  losing  the  "  mind"  out  of  it.  All  true  affec- 
tion is  intelligent.  Defections  from  the  true  doctrines  of  the  Scriptures  are  inevit- 
ably followed  by  a  low  state  of  piety.  4.  This  love  may  lose  all  the  •* strength" 
out  of  it  When  the  worldly  Lord  Peterborough  stayed  for  a  time  with  F6n61on,  he 
was  so  delighted  with  his  amiable  piety  that  he  exclaimed  at  parting,  **  If  I  remain 
here  any  longer,  I  shall  become  a  Christian  in  despite  of  myself."  Love  is  a  power ; 
but  it  is  possible  that  the  force  of  it  shall  be  mysteriously  spirited  away  while  the 
form  of  it  might  appear  unchanged.  One  secret  sin,  or  one  indulged  Inst,  will  turn 
the  whole  man  from  its  influence.  We  saw  the  story  of  a  ship  lost  not  a  great  while 
ago ;  it  went  on  the  rocks  miles  away  from  the  harbour  which  the  pilot  said  he  was 
entering.  The  blame  was  passed  as  usual  from  hand  to  hand ;  but  neither  steers- 
man's skill,  nor  captain's  fidelity,  nor  sailor's  zeal,  could  be  charged  with  the  loss. 
Then  it  came  to  light  at  last  that  a  passenger  was  trying  to  smuggle  into  port  a 
basket  of  steel  cutlery  hid  in  his  berth  underneath  the  compass ;  that  swerved  the 
needle  from  the  north  star.  A  single  bit  of  earthliness  took  all  the  strength  out  of 
the  magnetism.  That  is  to  be  the  fate  of  those  who  try  to  smuggle  little  sins  into 
heaven.  III.  Now  comes  our  third  question :  How  should  this  love  be  exbbciskd  t 
This  brings  us  straight  to  the  eleventh  commandment,  which  our  Lord  declares  is 
new  in  some  respects,  but  in  its  spirit  is  like  the  rest  of  the  Decalogue  (John  xiii.  34). 
We  are  bidden  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves.  1.  Who  is  our  neighbour? 
The  answer  to  this  is  found  in  the  parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan  (Lnke  x.  29). 
2.  What  are  we  to  do  for  our  neighbour  ?  The  answer  to  all  such  questions  is 
found  in  the  Golden  Rule  (Matt.  vii.  12).  We  are  to  comfort  his  body,  aid  his 
estate,  enlighten  his  mind,  advance  his  interests,  and  save  his  soul.  There  is  a 
story  that  a  priest  stood  upon  the  scaffold  with  Joan  of  Arc  till  his  very  garments 
took  fire  with  the  flames  which  were  consuming  her,  so  zealous  was  he  for  her 
conversion.  **  None  know  how  to  prize  the  Saviour,"  wrote  the  good  Lady  Hont- 
ingdon,  **  but  such  as  are  zealous  in  pious  works  for  others."  (C.  S.  Robinson^  D.D,) 
Supreme  love  to  Qod,  the  chief  duty  of  man : — I.  The  plages  or  scbiptube  whebb 

THIS  OEBAT  DUTY  IB  ENJOINED,   EITHEB  EZPBE88LY  OB  IHPUOITLT,  are  the  following  : 

Dent.  vi.  4,  **  Hear,  O  Israel,  the  Lord  cor  God  is  one  God."  Dent.  x.  12  ;  Josh. 
zziL  4,  S ;  2  These,  iii.  5.  II.  Let  as  look  a  little  into  thb  ratubs  op  this  com- 
PB»HEMS1VK  DUTT.  And  without  oontrorersy  it  is  the  most  excellent  qualification 
of  the  hnman  nature.  This  love  supposes  some  acquaintance  with  God :  not  only 
a  knowledge  that  there  is  such  a  Being,  but  a  jnst  notion  of  His  nature  and  per- 
fections. And  further,  this  love  of  God  is  justifiable  in  the  highest  degrees 
possible ;  nay,  it  is  more  laudable  in  proportion  to  its  ardency,  and  the  influence 


n.1  ST.  MARK.  493 

it  has  on  our  thongbte  and  on  the  actions  of  life :  whereas  love  to  our  fellow, 
mortals  may  rise  into  unlawful  extremes,  and  produce  ill  effects.  Even  natural 
affection,  such,  for  instance,  as  that  of  parents  to  their  children,  may  exceed  due 
bonndis  and  prove  a  snare  to  as,  and  be  the  occasion  of  many  sins  :  but  the  love  of 
Ood  can  never  have  too  much  room  in  the  heart,  nor  too  powerful  an  influence  on 
our  conduct ;  but  ought  to  rule  most  extensively,  and  to  govern  and  direct  in  all 
oar  purposes  and  practices.  III.  Let  us  now,  in  some  particulars,  consider  thb 
■ICKLLBNOT  OF  THIS  DUTY.  1.  The  objcct  of  it  is  the  infinitely  perfect  God ;  the 
contemplation  of  whose  glories  gives  the  angels  inexpressible  and  everlasting 
•delight;  nay,  furnishes  the  eternal  mind  with  perfect  unchangeable  happiness. 
2.  Love  to  God  is  a  celestial  attainment :  it  flames  in  the  upper  world ;  heaven  is 
full  of  this  love.  God  necessarily  loves  Himself ;  takes  delight  in  His  own  glory ; 
reflects  upon  His  own  perfections  with  eternal  complacency :  the  Son  loves  the 
Father ;  the  angels  and  the  spirits  of  the  just  behold  the  face  of  God  with  entire 
satisfaction.  3.  The  love  of  God  is  the  noblest  endovmient  of  the  mind  of  man. 
It  more  extdts  the  soul,  and  gives  it  a  greater  lustre  than  any  other  virtue.  Nay, 
this  is  the  most  excellent  part  of  godliness,  internal  godliness.  4.  The  excellency 
of  this  gracious  principle,  love  to  God,  will  appear,  if  we  consider  it  as  productive 
of  the  most  excellent  fruits.  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  It  prepares  us  for 
communion  with  God,  for  gracious  communications  from  Him,  for  delight  in  Him, 
for  a  participation  of  the  comforts  of  the  Spirit,  for  the  light  of  God's  countenance, 
a  sense  of  His  love  to  us,  and  a  lively  hope  of  glory.  6.  Without  love  we  cannot 
be  approved  and  accepted  of  God,  either  in  religious  worship,  or  in  the  common 
actions  of  life.  What  the  apostle  says  of  faith,  ♦♦  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God,"  we  may  likewise  say  of  love.  6.  Love  to  God  entitles  as  to  many 
special  privileges  and  blessings.  7.  Besides  the  promises  of  the  life  that  now 
is,  they  have  a  claim  to  such  as  relate  to  another  life.  It  is  not  in  this  life  only 
they  have  hope,  there  is  an  eternity  of  glory  provided  for  them ;  they  shall  have 
the  pleasure  of  an  everlasting  view  of  the  infinite  beauties  of  the  Deity,  and  for 
ever  feel  the  ravishment  of  that  incomprehensible  glory.  8.  It  likewise  prepares 
the  soul  for  heaven,  adapts  the  mind  to  celestial  entertainments.  It  meetens  us 
for  the  presence  of  God,  as  it  is  an  ardour  like  that  which  is  raised  by  the  heavenly 
vision,  though  so  much  below  it  in  degree.  IV.  The  reasons  fob  thb  lovb  of 
God.  1.  The  infinite  perfections  of  God  call  for  our  highest  esteem  and  love.  2. 
Creating  goodness  teaches  as  to  adore  and  love  our  Maker.  3.  The  consideration 
of  God's  preserving  care  directs  us  to  love  Him.  4.  The  liberality  and  bounty  of 
God  in  making  provision  for  mankind  is  what  should  by  no  means  be  overlooked, 
bat  considered  and  acknowledged  to  the  praise  of  His  goodness,  and  should  incline 
our  hearts  to  the  great  Benefactor.  6.  The  patience  of  God  is  engaging,  and 
should  attract  the  soul  to  Him,  and  dispose  us  cheerfully  to  return  to  obedience 
with  grateful  resentment  of  His  unmerited  and  forfeited  goodness.  6.  The  titles 
which  God  is  pleased  to  take  on  Himself  with  regard  to  His  people  should  be 
thought  an  inducement  to  love  Him,  at  least  by  those  who  hope  they  have  an 
interest  in  His  special  favour.  7.  The  promises  of  God  are  of  an  attractive 
engaging  nature,  and  are  made  to  gain  our  hearts,  and  to  render  the  paths  of  duty 
pleasant.  8.  Redeeming  grace  directs  our  hearts  into  the  love  of  God.  9.  Another 
argument  directing  and  pressing  us  to  the  love  of  God  is  the  distinguishing  good- 
ness of  God  to  as  in  giving  us  the  gospel  revelation.  10.  With  respect  to  those  I 
have  mentioned,  and  all  other  instances  of  the  love  of  (}od,  the  disinterestedness 
of  it  exalts  and  magnifies  it,  and  shows  Him  to  be  infinitely  worthy  of  our  esteem 
and  love.  We  are  bound  to  love  the  Lord  our  God  for  the  hope  He  has  given  as 
«8  to  another  life  ;  hope  of  a  fulness  of  joys  and  pleasures  for  evermore,  blessedness 
more  suitable  to  the  highest  powers  of  the  soul  than  any  that  we  enjoy  here,  and 
lasting  as  eternity  itself.    Y.  I  must  now  lay  before  you,  in  some  particulars,  thb 

FBUrrS   OF  THIS   BXCELLEKT  PRINCIPLE   ZN  THB   SOUL  OF  MAS.      1.  Love  tO    God   will 

produce  obedience,  voluntary,  cheerful  obedience.  2.  Love  to  God  will  beget  in  us 
a  sincere  affection  for  the  people  of  God,  such  as  in  the  gracious  condescending 
style  of  the  Scripture  are  called  His  children.  8.  Love  to  God  will  moderate  your 
affections  towards  worldly  enjoyments,  which  are  apt  to  take  up  too  much  room  in 
our  hearts,  and  to  engross  oxilawful  degrees  of  o  r  love.  4.  It  will  qualify  you  for 
dutilol  sabmission  to  God  onder  temporal  eWls,  nd  bodily  afiiictions,  and  prevent 
complaints  against  God.  6.  Love  to  God  will  prepare  voa  for  communion  with 
God,  manifestations  of  Himself  to  yoo.  6.  It  fit  the  soul  for  delightful  meditation 
upon  God.    7.  If  yoa  traly  love  God,  yon  will  deUght  in  His  worship,  yoa  will 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  zn. 

love  the  honse  of  God.  8.  Love  to  God  will  furnish  you  with  a  lively  hope  of 
glory.  What  remains  further  to  be  done  on  this  subject  is  to  add  some  inferences 
and  exhortations.  The  inferences  are  the  following  :  1.  If  the  love  of  God  be  ft 
great  and  indispensable  duty,  then  the  whole  of  religion  does  not  lie  in  love  to  onr 
neighbour  ;  much  less  does  it  in  being  just  and  honest  in  our  dealings,  giving  to 
all  their  due,  and  doing  no  one  any  barm.  2.  If  the  love  of  God  be  so  great  a 
duty,  and  there  are  so  many  clear  unanswerable  arguments  to  prove  it  to  be  bo» 
what  a  horrid  accursed  wickedness  is  it  to  hate  God  I  3.  What  a  vast  advantage 
is  it  to  enjoy  the  gospel  revelation,  where  we  have  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  God  shining  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  I  4.  If  to  love  the  Lord  our  God 
with  all  our  heart  be  the  first  and  great  commandment,  then  we  are  greatly  con- 
cerned to  inquire,  whether  we  have  this  Divine  principle  in  the  soul.  I  have  a  few 
particulars  of  exhortation  to  add,  and  with  these  I  shall  finish  this  subject.  1. 
Believe  in  God,  His  existence.  His  glorious  perfections,  His  infinite,  eternal,  un. 
changeable  rectitude.  His  providence.  His  care  of  His  creatures,  His  mercy  and 
love,  His  general  goodness  to  all.  2.  Use  yourselves  to  meditation  on  those 
attributes  of  God  which  have  a  more  direct  tendency  to  attract  esteem  and  love, 
the  attributes  which  are  as  it  were  the  spring  from  whence  blessings  flow  to  His 
creatures,  such  as  His  compassion,  mercy,  and  goodness.  3.  Believe  the  gospel. 
God's  purposes  of  love  to  fallen  man  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  the 
incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  sufferings  and  death  of  the  Mediator,  remission 
of  sin  purchased  by  His  blood.  4.  Be  conversant  with  the  Scriptures,  which 
were  written  to  bring  us  to  God  as  the  fountain  of  good  and  the  author  of  happiness, 
to  raise  and  improve  in  the  mind  all  gracious  affections  towards  Him,  and,  among 
the  rest,  our  love  to  Him.  5.  Labour  to  get  the  heart  more  purified  from  natur^ 
corruption.  6.  Take  care  to  keep  your  affections  towards  other  things  within  due 
bounds,  that  they  may  not  lessen  your  esteem  of  God.  *  (Thomas  Whitty,) 

Ver.  81.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself: — The  second  great  command- 
menty  love  to  our  neighbour : — I  shall  make  a  few  obsebvations  coNCEBNiNa  thb 
NATUBE  OF  THIS  DUTY.  This  phraseology  has  been  very  differently  understood  by 
different  persons.  Some  have  supposed  it  to  contain  a  direction  that  we  should 
love  our  neighbour  with  the  same  kind  of  love,  which  is  exercised  towards  our- 
selves. This  plainly  cannot  be  its  meaning.  The  love  which  we  usually  and 
naturally  exercise  towards  ourselves  is  selfish  and  sinful.  Others  have  insisted, 
that  we  are  required  to  love  them  in  the  same  manner  as  ourselves.  This  cannot 
be  the  meaning.  For  we  love  ourselves  inordinately,  unreasonably,  without 
candour,  or  equity;  even  when  the  kind  of  love  is  really  evangelical.  Others, 
still,  have  supposed,  that  the  command  obliges  us  to  love  our  neighbour^  in  exactly 
the  same  degree  in  which  we  ought  to  love  ourselves.  This  interpretation,  though 
nearer  the  truth  than  the  others,  is  not,  I  apprehend,  altogether  agreeable  to  the 
genuine  meaning  of  the  text.  It  has,  it  I  mistake  not,  been  heretofore  shown 
satisfactorily,  that  we  are  in  our  very  nature  capable  of  understanding,  realizing, 
and  feeling  whatever  pertains  to  ourselves  more  entirely  than  the  same  things 
when  pertaining  to  others ;  that  our  own  concerns  are  committed  to  us  by  God 
in  a  peculiar  manner ;  that  God  has  made  it  in  a  peculiar  manner  our  duty  to 
"  provide  for  our  own,  especially  for  those  of  our  own  households  " ;  and  that  thus 
a  regard  to  ourselves,  and  those  who  are  ours,  is  our  duty  in  a  peculiar  degree.  To 
these  things  it  may  be  justly  added  that  we  are  not  bound  to  love  all  those 
included  under  the  word  neighbour,  in  the  same  degree.  Some  of  these  persons 
are  plainly  of  much  greater  importance  to  mankind  than  others ;  are  possessed  of 
greater  talents,  of  higher  excellence,  and  of  more  usefulness.  Whether  we  make 
their  happiness  or  their  excellence  the  object  of  our  love ;  in  other  words,  whether 
we  regard  them  with  benevolence,  or  complacency,  we  ought  plainly  to  make  a 
difference,  and  often  a  wide  one,  between  them;  because  they  obviously  and 
exceedingly  differ  in  their  characters  and  circumstances.  A  great,  excellent,  and 
useful  man,  such  as  St.  Paul  was,  certainly  claims  a  higher  degree  of  love  from  us 
than  a  person  totally  inferior  to  him  in  these  characteristics.  For  these,  and 
various  other  reasons,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  precept  in  the  text  requires  ni 
to  love  oar  neighbour  generally  and  indefinitely  as  ourselves.  The  love  whieh  we 
exercise  towards  him  is  ever  to  be  the  same  in  kind,  which  we  ought  to  exeroiM 
towards  ourselves ;  regarding  both  ourselves  and  him  as  members  of  the  intelligeat 
kingdom ;  as  interested  substantially  in  the  same  manner  in  the  Divine  favoor: 
as  in  the  same  manner  capable  o    happiness,  moral  excellence,  and  osefulneM ;  m 


xn.]  ST.  MARK,  495 

beinp;  instraments  of  glory  to  God,  and  of  good  to  onr  fellow-creatures ;  m  being 
originally  interested  alike  in  the  death  of  Christ ;  and,  with  the  same  general  pro- 
bability, heirs  of  eternal  life.  This  explanation  seems  to  be  exactly  accordant  with  % 
the  language  of  the  text.  '*  As  '*  does  not  always  denote  exact  equality.  In  many 
eases,  for  example,  in  most  oases  of  commutative  justice,  and  in  many  of  dis- 
tributive justice,  it  is  in  onr  power  to  render  to  others  exactly  that  which  we  render 
to  ourselves.  Here,  I  apprehend,  exactness  becomes  the  measure  of  our  duty. 
The  love  which  I  have  here  described  is  evidently  disinterested ;  and  would  in  our 
own  case  supply  motives  to  onr  conduct  so  numerous  and  so  powerful  as  to  render 
selfish  affections  useless  to  as.  Bslfishness  therefore  is  a  principle  of  action  totally 
nnnecessary  to  intelligent  beings  as  such,  even  for  their  own  benefit.    II.  The 

LOVE  HEBE  BEQUIBED  EXTENDS  TO  THE  WHOLE  XNTELLIQENT  CBEATION.  ThlS  posi- 
tion I  shall  illustrate  by  the  following  observations : — 1.  That  it  extends  to  our 
families,  friends,  and  countrymen,  will  not  be  questioned.  2.  That  it  extends  to 
our  enemies,  and  by  consequence  to  aU  mankind,  is  decisively  taught  by  our 
Saviour  in  a  variety  of  Scriptural  passages.  It  is  well  known  that  the  Pharisees 
held  the  doctrine,  that,  while  we  were  bound  to  love  our  neighbour,  that  is,  our 
friends,  it  was  lawful  to  hate  our  enemies.  On  this  subject  I  observe  (1)  That 
the  command,  to  love  onr  enemies,  is  enforced  by  the  example  of  God.  (2)  If  we 
are  bound  to  love  those  only  who  are  friends  to  us,  we  are  under  no  obligation  to 
love  God  any  longer  than  while  He  is  our  friend.  (3)  According  to  this  doctrine, 
good  men  are  not  bound  in  ordinary  cases  to  love  sinners.  (4)  According  to  this 
doctrine,  sinners  are  not  ordinarily  bound  to  love  each  other.  From  these  con- 
siderations it  is  onanswerably  evident  that  all  mankind  are  included  under  the 
word  neighbour.  8.  This  term,  of  course,  extends  to  all  other  intelligent  beings, 
to  far  as  they  are  capable  of  being  objects  of  love ;  or  in  other  words,  so  far  as 
they  are  capable  of  being  happy.  4.  The  love  required  in  this  precept  extends  in 
its  operations  to  all  the  good  offices  which  we  are  capable  of  rendering  to  others. 
(1)  The  love  required  in  this  precept  will  prevent  us  from  voluntarily  injuring 
others.  (2)  Among  the  positive  acts  of  beneficence  dictated  by  the  love  of  the 
gospel,  the  contribution  of  onr  property  forms  an  interesting  part.  (3)  Love  to 
our  neighbonr  dictates  also  every  other  office  of  kindness  which  may  promote  his 
present  welfare.  (4)  Love  to  onr  neighbour  is  especially  directed  to  the  good  of 
Iiis  soul.  Remarks :  1.  From  these  observations  it  is  evident,  that  the  second  great 
command  of  the  moral  law  is,  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  text,  "  like  the  first."  It  is 
not  only  prescribed  by  the  same  authority,  and  possessed  of  the  same  obligation, 
unalterable  and  eternal ;  but  it  enjoins  exactly  the  exercise  of  the  same  disposition. 
2.  Piety  and  morality  are  here  shown  to  be  inseparable.  8.  We  here  see  that  the 
religion  of  the  Scriptures  is  the  true  and  only  source  of  all  the  duties  of  life.  (T. 
Dwightf  D,D.)  Tfie  $eeond  commandment : — I.  Explain  the  second  oomcAND. 
1.  Who  is  my  neighbonr  f  (1)  Some  regulate  their  charities  by  local  habi- 
tation: for  a  stranger,  or  one  afar  off  they  have  no  compassion.  (2)  Some 
have  a  law  of  relationship.  **WhatI  assist  the  heathen  while  I  have  poor 
relations?"  (3)  Others  confine  charity  to  their  own  nation.  (4)  Others  to  the 
same  religious  profession.  (5)  Many  think  themselves  justified  in  exdnding 
enemies.  The  Jews  understood  the  word  neighbour  to  signify  "thy  friend." 
(6)  The  last  rule  of  exclusion  is  that  which  relates  to  character.  Even  if 
notoriously  vile,  there  is  no  plea  for  neglect :  benevolence,  under  these  circum- 
stances, may  often  gain  their  souls  I  Is  the  inquiry  still  urged,  "Who  is  my 
neighbour  ?  "  Every  human  being,  without  exception.  **  As  ye  have  opportunity, 
do  good  nnto  all  men."  If  redeeming  love  made  the  exclusions  we  make,  where 
should  we  be  ?  In  hell ;  or,  if  in  the  world,  without  Gk>d  and  without  hope.  '*  Be 
ye  therefore  perfect,  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  jperfect."  Christianity  makes  dis- 
tinctions, but  no  exclusions.  With  these  distinctions,  every  man  is  your  neighbour, 
and  you  are  bound  to  fulfil  towards  him  the  duties  of  love.  2.  What  is  my  duty 
to  my  neighbonr?  It  includes  :(1)  The  dispositions  we  are  to  cultivate  and  the 
conduct  we  are  to  observe  towards  him  in  all  the  intercourse  and  transactions  of 
ordinary  life.  It  includes  (2),  as  already  remarked,  the  benevolence  we  are  to 
exercise  towards  our  neighbour  in  distress ;  because  then  he  is  more  particularly 
the  object  of  regard  and  affection.  If  the  text  were  more  obeyed  there  would  be 
far  less  evil  in  ue  world.  (8)  The  endeavours  we  ought  to  mi^e  for  the  s<dvation 
of  the  soul.  8.  What  is  the  measure  of  duty  to  your  neighbour?  **  To  love  him 
as  yonrsell.**  Self-love  is  thus  lawful  and  excellent,  and  even  necessary.  It  is  not 
the  dispodtiop  which  leads  nnregenerate  man  to  gratify  Tioioos  appetites  moi 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohav.  zn. 

passions.  This  is  rather  self -hatred.  Nor  that  which  leads  as  to  grasp  at  all  advan- 
tages, regardless  of  the  consequences  to  others.  This  is  selfishness.  Bat  thai 
principle  which  is  inseparable  from  our  being ;  by  which  we  are  led  to  promote  our 
own  happiness,  by  avoiding  evil  and  acquiring  the  greatest  possible  amount  of 
good.  This  is  the  measure  for  our  neighbour.  While  avoiding  everything  that  would 
injtire  him  in  body,  family,  property,  reputation,  seek  to  do  him  all  the  good  you 
can,  and  do  it  in  the  way  in  which  you  would  promote  your  own  welfare.  Now, 
how  does  a  man  love  himself?  1.  Tenderly  and  afifectionately.  Then  so  love 
your  neighbour.  While  helping  him,  never  show  sourness  of  countenance  or  use 
asperity  of  language.  2.  Sincerely  and  ardently.  This  will  make  him  prompt  and 
diligent,  in  everything  he  thinks,  for  his  good.  "  Say  not  unto  him,  go  and  come 
again,  and  to-morrow  1  will  give,  when  thou  hast  it  by  thee."  Our  opportunities 
for  floing,  as  for  getting,  good  are  precarious.  Now  is  the  accepted  time.  3.  Patiently 
and  perseveringly.  So  if  we  do  not  succeed  by  one  means  we  try  another,  keeping  on 
to  life's  end.  Consider  how  varied  the  means  which  God  employed  with  you. 
Having  thus  explained  the  text,  let  us,  II.  Enforce  it.  In  doing  this,  we  make 
our  appeal.  1.  To  authority.  His,  who  is  Lord  of  aU.  2.  To  example. 
Example  is  of  two  kinds.  First,  those  we  are  bound  to  imitate:  these  are 
strictly  patterns  for  us.  Secondly,  those  which,  though  we  are  not  obliged  to 
follow,  yet,  for  their  excellence,  are  worthy  of  imitation.  3.  To  the  connection  and 
dependence  which  subsist  between  us  and  our  neighbour.  We  are  parts  of  one  and 
the  same  body,  and  each  is  expected  to  contribute  to  the  general  good.  4.  How 
much  present  pleasure  arises  from  the  exercise  of  this  duty.  This  is  present 
pleasure;  and  have  we  not  present  advantages  too?  Is  not  charity  a  gain ?  6. 
Advert  to  the  future  recompense  of  benevolence.  (1)  The  love  of  our  neighbour 
originates  in,  and  is  always  connected  with,  the  love  of  God.  (2)  That  benevo- 
lence must  not  infringe  upon  justice.  No  man  should  give  in  alms  what  belongs 
to  creditors.  (3)  The  most  proper  objects  are  often  those  who  are  least  willing  to 
make  known  their  distress.  {John  Summerjield,  M.A.)  The  duty  of  loving  our 
lu'ighhour  ae  ourselves  exphiived: — It  is  not  said,  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour 
with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength.  No,  that 
would  have  been  carrying  the  point  too  high,  and  scarce  have  left  any  sufficient 
note  of  distinction  between  what  we  owe  to  man,  and  what  we  owe  to  God  only. 
I.  To  SHOW  WHAT  NEIGHBOUR,  IN  THE  TEXT,  MEANS.  The  word  neighbour  primarily 
and  properly  signifies  one  that  is  situated  near  unto  us,  or  one  that  dwelleth  nigh 
us.  But  by  use  and  custom  of  language,  the  same  word  neighbour  has  been  made 
to  signify  one  that  we  are  any  way  allied  to,  however  distant  in  place,  or  how- 
ever removed  from  the  sphere  of  our  conversation  or  acquaintance.  From  all 
which  it  is  plain,  that  in  construction  of  gospel-law,  every  man  whom  we  can  any 
way  serve,  is  our  neighbour.  And  as  God  is  a  lover  of  mankind  at  large,  so  ought 
every  good  man  to  consider  himself  as  a  citizen  of  the  world,  and  a  friend  to  the 
whole  race  ;  in  real  effect  to  many,  but  in  good  inclination  and  disposition,  and  in 
kind  wishes  and  prayers,  to  all.  So  much  for  the  extent  of  the  name,  or  notion  of 
neighbour.  II.  Next,  I  am  to  explain,  what  it  is  to  lovk  oub  nkighboub,  ob  all 
MEN,  AS  WB  LOVE  OUR  OWN  SELVES.  There  is  the  more  need  of  frequent  exercise 
this  way,  because  indeed  selfishness  i^  iriginaUy  sown  in  our  very  nature,  and  may 
perhaps  be  justly  called  our  original  depravity.  It  shows  itself  in  the  first  dawn  of 
our  reason,  and  is  never  well  cured,  but  by  a  deep  sense  of  religion,  or  much  self- 
reflection.  From  hence  may  appear  our  Lord's  profound  wisdom  and  deep  penetra- 
tion into  the  darkest  recesses  of  man's  heart ;  while  to  the  precept  of  loving  one's 
neighbour.  He  superadds  this  home-consideration.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself.  Not  so  highly,  or  so  dearly,  as  you  love  yourself  (for  that  is  not 
expected)  but  as  highly  and  truly  as  you  could  reasonably  desire  of  him,  if  his 
«ase  and  circumstances  were  yours  and  yours  were  his.  Judge  from  yourself,  and 
your  own  just  expectations  from  others,  how  you  ought  to  behave  towards  them,  in 
like  cases  and  circumstances.  III.  Having  tnus  competently  explained  the  precept 
'Of  the  text,  it  remains  now  only,  that  in  the  third  and  last  place,  I  lay  down  bomb 
considbbations  pbopeb  TO  ENroBOB  IT.  1.  First,  Let  it  be  considered,  that  this 
second  commandment,  relating  to  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  is  so  like  the  first, 
relating  to  the  love  of  God,  and  so  near  akin  to  it,  and  so  wrapp'd  np  in  it,  that  they 
are  both,  in  a  manner,  but  one  commandment.  He  that  truly,  sincerely,  consistently 
loves  God,  must  of  course,  love  his  neighbour  also  :  or  if  he  does  not  really  love  his 
neighbour,  he  cannot,  with  any  consistency  or  truth,  be  said  to  love  God. 2.  It  may  fur- 
ther be  eonsidered  (which  indeed  is  but  the  consequence  of  the  former)  that  by  this  vei7 


xu.]  8T,  MARS,  481 

rule  will  the  righteous  Judge  of  all  men  proceed  at  the  last  day;  as  our  Lord  Himself 
has  sufficiently  intimated  in  the  twenty-fifth  of  St.  Matthew.  (D.  Waterland,  D.D.) 
The  proof  of  brotherly  love  : — It  is  said  that  when  the  story  of  West  India  slavery 
was  told  to  the  Moravians,  and  it  was  told  that  it  was  impossible  to  reach  the 
slave  population  because  they  were  bo  separated  from  the  ruling  classes,  two 
Moravian  missionaries  offered  themselves,  and  said :  «  We  will  go  and  be  slaves 
on  the  plantations,  and  work  and  toil,  if  need  be,  under  the  lash,  to  get  right  beside 
the  poor  slaves  and  instruct  them."  And  they  left  their  homes,  went  to  the  West 
Indies,  went  to  work  on  the  plantations  as  slaves,  and  by  the  side  of  slaves,  to  get 
close  to  the  hearts  of  slaves ;  and  the  slaves  heard  them,  and  their  hearts  were 
touched,  because  they  had  humbled  themselves  to  their  condition.  [BUhop 
Simpson.)  Love  to  each  other  should  be  constant : — "  On  the  top  of  the  Mourne 
Mountains  in  the  North  of  Ireland  there  is  a  clear,  cool  pool  of  water.  The  hiU 
on  which  it  is  situated  is  very  high  and  steep,  and  when  you  have  laboured  to  the 
top  you  feel  very  tired,  hot,  and  thirsty,  especially  if  it  be  a  warm  day.  How 
gratefully  you  drink  of  the  clear,  cool  water,  and  you  think  that  if  you  had  met 
with  it  hali  way  up  the  hill  the  ascent  would  have  been  much  easier  completed. 
The  peculiar  thing  about  this  well  is  that  on  the  warmest  day  in  summer  the  water 
is  always  cold,  almost  ice  cold ;  and  on  the  coldest  day  in  winter  the  water  will  not 
freeze,  but  is  exactly  the  same  all  the  year  round.  The  well  is  a  spring,  or  rather 
a  nmning  stream  which  suddenly  emerges  from  the  earth,  showing  itself  at  this 
place,  and  immediately  disappearing.  When  I  looked  at  that  I  thought,  should 
this  not  teach  Christians  a  lesson  ?  Should  not  brotherly  love  springing  from  Christ, 
and  making  its  appearance  as  an  unexpected  refreshing  stream  in  us,  flow  con> 
Btantly,  swiftly,  and  strongly,  refreshing,  and  strengthening,  and  preparing  for  new 
efforts,  all  with  whom  we  come  in  contact,  and  such,  that  no  matter  what  trouble 
or  annoyance  may  come  in  the  way,  the  love  of  Christ  flowing  through  us  may  be 
strong  enough  to  sweep  them  all  away  and  leave  us  as  clear  and  calm  as  ever — 
loving  and  kindly  affectionate  one  towards  another  as  ever."  {Forbes.)  The 
nature  of  true  laudable  self-love : — I.  Endeavoub  to  explain  to  you  thb  hatube 

or  TRUE    LAUDABLE    SELF-LOVE,   AND  SHOW    YOU     WHAT    IS    NOT     MEANT  BY  IT.      The 

mistakes  to  which  we  are  generally  liable  as  to  this  matter ;  and  then  what  we 
are  to  understand  by  self-love,  in  what  respects  it  is  our  duty.  1.  That  it  is  not 
self-conceit,  an  extravagant  opinion  of  our  own  qualifications,  and  an  unreasonable 
esteem  and  value  for  ourselves.  2.  By  self-love  I  do  not  mean  self-indulgence, 
allowing  ourselves  in  the  gratification  of  sensual  appetites  without  restraint  or 
control,  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind,  and  giving  liberty  to 
oar  own  inclinations  and  passions  however  irregular  and  unbounded.  3.  Neither  does 
this  duty  consist  in  taking  care  only  for  the  body,  in  employing  all  our  thought 
and  care,  spending  all  our  pains,  and  all  our  time  in  making  provision  for  our 
subsistence  in  the  world.  4.  By  loving  ourselves,  I  do  not  mean  what  we  may  call 
selfishness,  a  confining  our  regard  and  concern  wholly  to  ourselves,  minding  our 
own  pleasures,  or  oar  own  interest,  not  caring  what  becomes  of  others,  what 
difficulties  they  go  through,  what  miseries  they  suffer.  For  a  farther  explication 
of  this  duty  of  love  to  ourselves,  take  the  following  particulars.  (1)  It  must  be 
xegalated  by  love  to  God,  and  our  relations  and  obligations  to  Him.  (2)  The 
measure  of  our  love  to  ourselves  must  likewise  be  adjusted  by  the  love  and  duty  we 
owe  to  others ;  just  as  the  love  of  others  to  themselves  should  be  such  as  is  con- 
^stent  with  their  love  and  duty  to  us.       II.  Oub    love   hust  extend  to  oub 

fHOLB  SELVES,   BODY  AND  SOUL.     UI.    TbUS  LOVB  TO  OUBSELVES  MUST  HAVE  BESPECT 

TO  ETBBNiTY  AS  WELL  AS  TIME.  The  argomeuts  for  rational  religious  self'love  are 
such  as  the  following.  1.  The  excellent  nature  of  the  soul  requires  a  regard  for 
ourselves,  and  a  concern  for  our  own  welfare,  and  particularly  for  the  true  happiness 
of  the  soul.  2.  To  love  ourselves,  and  to  show  a  concern  for  our  own  welfare  is  a 
natural  duty.  3.  Your  eternal  salvation  depends  upon  your  serious  oonoem  for 
yourselves,  i.  Consider  the  love  of  Qod  to  souls,  manifested  in  his  declarations 
of  goodness  and  mercy.  5.  How  great  is  the  loss  of  the  soul  I  It  is  shameful 
folly  and  ignorance  to  think  that  any  pleasure  you  can  find  in  the  way  of  sin  wiB 
in  any  measure  compensate  it :  What  is  a  man  profited.     {Thomas  Whitty,) 

Yer.  82.  Well,  Master,  Tbou  bast  said  the  trnth. — The  Divine  echo  in  the  human 
heart :— Man  needs  a  Saviour.  The  heart  of  man  answers,  "  Well,  Master,  Thoa 
hast  said  the  trnth."  What  are  the  practical  consequences  of  our  having 
this  respoQsiye  faculty  ?    L  Mah  zb  made  a  oo-wobksb  with  Ood  ;  not  a  machine, 

S2 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cHA».  xit 

bat  a  co-operating  agent.  II.  Man  enjoys  the  restraints  of  conscience.  The 
Bible  appeals  to  and  has  the  consent  of  conscience.  III.  God  bases  His  judgment 
UPON  THIS  responsivb  FACULTY.  "  To  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,"  &o.  The 
judgment  day  will  be  short,  because  every  man  will  be  his  own  witness.  (The 
Pulpit  Analyst.) 

Ver.  34.  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God. — Need  of  self-examination  : — 

There  is  great  cause  for  every  one  of  us  diligently  to  try  and  examine  ourTtnowledge 

and  faith  in  Christ,  whether  it  be  true,  sound,  and  sincere ;  or  whether  it  be  an 

hypocritical  and  counterfeit  faith,  seeing  one  may  be  ♦'  not  far  from  the  kingdom," 

and  yet  not  in  it.    The  rather,  because  so  many  deceive  themselves  with  a  vain 

persuasion  and  opinion  of  faith,  thinking  they  have  true  faith  in  Christ,  when  it  is 

not  BO.    We  are  to  try  our  faith  by  those  marks  of  it,  which  are  taught  in  the 

Word  of  God.    1.  By  the  object  of  it.     True  faith  believes  and  applies  not  only 

the  promises  of  the  gospel  touching  forgiveness  of  sins  and  salvation  in  Christ,  but 

also  all  other  parts  of  God's  Word,   as  the  precepts  and  commandments  of  it 

forbidding  sin  and  commanding  holy  duties,  also  the  reproofs  and  threatenings 

denounced  against  sin  and  sinners.     2.  By  the  means  by  which  we  attained  to  it, 

and  by  which  it  is  daily  nourished  in  us.     3.  By  the  contrary  sin  of   unbelief. 

Look  whether  thou  feel  and  complain  of  thy  unbelief,  and  doubtings  of  God's 

mercy  and  forgiveness  of  thy  sins  in  Christ,  and  whether  thou  daily  pray  and 

strive  against  such  doubtings.     4.  By  the  fruits  and  effects  of  it,  especially  by 

our  hatred  of  sin,  and  care  to  avoid  it,  and  to  live  holily.     (G.  Fetter).       Danger 

of  this  state : — Among  those  who  have  turned  out  to  be  the  most  determmed 

enernies  of"  the  gospel  are  many  who  once  were  so  near  conversion  that  it  was 

a  wonder  they  avoided  it.     Such  persons  seem  ever  after  to  take  vengeance  upon 

the  holy  influence  which  had  almost  prove!  too  much  for  them.     Hence  our  fear 

for  persons  under  gracious  impressions ;  for,  if  they  do  not  now  decide  for  God, 

they  will  become  the  ^nore  desperate  in  sin.     That  which  is  set  in  the  sun,  if  it  be 

not  softened,  will  be  hardened.    I  remember  well  a  man  who,  under  the  influence 

of  an  earnest  revivalist,  was  brought  to  his  knees,  to  cry  for  mercy,  in  the  presence 

of  his  wife  and  others ;  but  never  afterwards  would  he  enter  a  place  of  worship,  or 

pay  attention  to  religious  conversation.      He  declared  that  his  escape    was  so 

narrow,  that  he  would  never  run  the  lisk  again.    Alas,  that  one  should  graze  the 

gate  of  heaven,  and  yet  drive  on  to  hell  I   {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)    Nearly  a  Christian : — 

After  being  twelve  days  on  shipboard,  I  awakened  in  the  morning  and  saw  the 

American  coast.     The  headlands  seemed  beautiful;    even  Sandy  Hook  seemed 

attractive.     I  was  impatient  to  get  on  shore.    It  seemed  as  if  we  never  would  get 

free  from  quarantine,  or  get  up  the  Narrows,  or  come  to  our  friends  who  stood  on 

the  wharf  waiting  for  us.     I  think  that  the  most  tedious  part  of  a  voyage  is  the 

last  two  or  three  hours.    Well,  there  are  many  before  me  who  are  in  the  position 

I  have  described  myself  as  once  having  been  in.     You  have  been  voyaging  on 

towards  Christian  life;  you  have  found  it  a  rough  passage;    a  hurricane  from 

Mount  Sinai  has  smitten  you,  but  now  you  see  lighthouses,  and  you  see  buoys, 

and  the  great  headlands  of  God's  mercy  stretching  out  into  the  ocean  of  your 

transgression.    You  are  almost  ashore.    I  have  come  here  to-night  to  see  you  land. 

You  are  very  near  being  a  Christian — *•  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of 

God."     0  that  this  might  be  the  hour  for  your  emancipation.      (T.  de  Witt 

Talmage,  D.D.)       Lost  within  sight  of  home : — A  Christian  minister  says :  "  When 

after  safely  circumnavigating  the  "g^Obe,  the  Royal  Charter  went  to  pieces  in 

Moelfra  Bay,  on  the  coast  of  Wales,  it  was  my  melancholy  duty  to  visit  and  seek 

to  comfort  the  wife  of  the  first  officer,  made  by  that  calamity  a  widow.    The  ship 

had  been  telegraphed  from  Queenstown,  and  the  lady  was  sitting  in  the  parlour 

expecting  her  husband,   with  the  table  spread  for  his  evening  meal,  when  the 

messenger  came  to  tell  her  he  was  drowned.     Never  can  I  forget  the  grief,  so 

stricken  and  tearless,  with  which  she  wrung  my  hand,  as  she  said, '  So  near  home, 

and  ^et  lost  1  *     That  seemed  to  me  the  most  terrible  of  sorrow.    Btrt,  ah  t  thttt  Is 

nothing  fo  the  anguish  which  must  wring  the  soul  which  is  compelled  to  say  at 

last,  '  Once  I  was  at  the  very  gate  of  heaven,  and  had  almost  entered  in,  but  now 

I  am  in  hell ! '  "        Not  quite  saved  is  lost : — Suppose  yon  stop  where  yon  are,  and 

go  no  further  ?    Suppose  yon  perish  at  the  gate  ?    Suppose  I  teU  yon  that  multi- 

tades  have  come  jnst  where  yoa  are,  and  got  no  further  ?    Do  yon  know  that  to  be 

almost  saved  is  not  to  be  saved  at  all  ?    Suppose  a  man  is  ^oinff  iip  a JLadder  and 

he  slip,  from  what  roond  had  ha  better  slip?    If  he  slip  from  'i^  bottom-rung  it 


>.  xii.]  ST.  MARK,  499 

IB  not  half  80  perilous  as  if  from  the  top.  Suppose  you  are  making  an  effort  for 
eternal  life,  and  you  have  oome"Srm88r  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  you  fall — 
not  quite  saved,  almost  saved,  very  near  the  kingdom  of  God,  not  quite— but  lost ! 
A  vessel  came  near  the  Long  Island  coast,  and  was  split  amid  the  breakers  in  a 
violent  storm.  They  were  within  a  stone's  throw  of  being  saved,  when  a  violent 
wave  took  the  boat  and  capsized  it,  and  they  perished — almost  ashore,  but  not 
quite.  And  there  are  men  who  are  pulUng  away  towards  the  shore  of  safety. 
Nearer  and  nearer  they  are  coming.  I  can  say  to  them  to-night :  Thou  art  not  far 
trom  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  you  have  not  quite  reached  it.  Alas  1  if  you  stop 
where  you  are,  or  if  a  wave  of  worldiiness  capsizes  your  soul,  and  you  perish 
almost  within  arm's  reach  of  the  kingdom  I  0  do  not  stop  where  you  are.  Having 
come  so  near  the  kingdom  of  God,  push  on  !  push  up  !  Will  you  tantalize  your 
soul  by  stopping  so  near  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  Will  you  come  to  look  over  the 
fence  into  the  heavenly  orchard,  when  you  might  go  in  and  pluck  the  fruit  ?  Will 
you  sit  down  in  front  of  the  well-curb,  when  a  few  more  turns  of  the  windlass  might 
bring  up  the  brimming  buckets  of  everlasting  life?  (T.  de  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 
Not  far  of: — The  man  to  whom  these  words  were  addressed  was  a  candid  inquirer. 
I.  Thb  characteristicb  of  those  who  are  not  tab  from  the  einqoom.  1.  They 
may  possess  considerable  knowledge  of  Scripture.  2.  They  may  make  a  candid  con- 
fession of  their  belief.  3.  They  may  have  strong  convictions  of  sin.  4.  They  may 
have  a  desire  to  amend  their  lives.  5.  They  may  have  partially  reformed.  They 
only  need  repentance  and  faith.  II.  The  reasons  why  they  do  not  enter  the 
KINGDOM.  1.  Difficulties  in  the  way.  2.  Advantages  in  a  middle  course.  3. 
BeHef  that  they  are  Christians  already.  4.  Reluctance  to  observe  the  needful 
conditions.  III.  The  inducements  to  enter.  1.  The  blessedness  of  those  whb 
do.    2.  The  misery  of  those  who  do  not.    {Seeds  and  Saplings.)        "  So  near :  "— 

T  I.  What  are  its  marks?  1,  Truthfulness  of  spirit.  2.  Spiritual  perception. 
8.  Acquaintance  with  the  law.  4.  Teachableness.  6.  A  sense  of  need  of  Christ. 
A  horror  of  wrongdoing.  7.  A  high  regard  for  holy  things.  8.  Diligent  attention 
to  the  means  of  grace.  11.  What  abb  its  dangers  ?  There  is  danger — 1.  Lest 
you  slip  back  from  this  hopefulness.  2.  Lest  you  rest  content  to  stop  where  you 
are.  3.  Lest  you  grow  proud  and  self-righteous.  4.  Lest  instead  of  candid  you 
become  indifferent.    6.  Lest  you  die  ere  the  decisive  step  is  taken.    III.  What 

!  ABB  ITS  DUTIES?    1.  Thank  God  for  dealing  so  mercifully  with  you.    2.  Admit 

I,  with  deep  sincerity  tiiat  you  need  supernatural  help  for  entrance  into  the  kingdom. 

j  8.  Tremble  lest  the  decisive  step  be  never  taken.  4.  Decide  at  once,  through 
Divine  grace.  (C.H.  Spur g eon.)  For  the  candid  and  thoughtful: — I.  The 
COMMENDATION  WHICH  IS  HEBB  EZPBESSED.  1.  He  posscsscd  candouT.  2.  He 
possessed  spiritual  knowledge.  3.  He  knew  the  superiority  of  an  inward  religion 
over  that  which  is  extemaL  4.  He  saw  the  supremacy  of  God  over  the  whole  of 
our  manhood.  5.  Yet  he  did  not  despise  outward  religion  so  far  as  it  was  com- 
manded of  God.  II.  Thb  question  which  is  hbbb  suoGBsnED.  This  man 
came  so  near  to  the  kingdom ;  did  he  ever  enter  it  ?  1.  There  is  no  reason  why 
he  should  not  have  done  so.  (1)  His  knowledge  of  the  law  might  have  taught 
him  his  inability  to  obey  it.  (2)  The  presence  of  Christ  might  have  drawn  forth 
his  love.  (3)  His  knowledge  of  sacrifices  might  have  taught  him  their  spiritual 
import.  (4)  The  Holy  Spirit  may  have  changed  his  heart.  2.  But  perhaps  he 
never  did  enter  the  kingdom.  If  he  did  not  enter,  one  of  the  reasons,  no  doub^, 
would  be — that  he  was  afraid  of  his  fellow-men.  {Ibid.)  Not  far  from  God's  king^ 
^m : — I,  We  find  many  excellent  people  whose  goodness  is  '6»  A  negative  kind.  By 
'Judidious  management  and  advice  of  parents  and  teachers,  they  have  grown  up 
free  from  the  grosser  sins.  11.  Another  class  of  persons  are  fitted  by  the  cha- 
racter of  their  minds,  and  the  nature  of  their  studies,  to  take  ah  intbbest   in 

OHBISTIANITT  AND    THB    CHUBCH    FBOM  AN     INTELLEOTUAIj   POINT  OP  VIEW.    ^   But    let 

such  remember  that  religion  is  something  more  than  correctness  of  intellect ; 
it  is  a  life-giving  principle,  regulating  the  will,  as  well  as  directing  the  creed. 
III.  A  third  class  who,  in  disposition  and  habits  are  not  far  from  the  kingdom 
of  God,  may  be  described  as  thb  amiable.  IV.  One  other  class  which  I  shall 
speak  of,  as  embracing  many  "  not  tit  from  the  kingdom  of  God,"  is  that 
of  THB  GENEROUS  AND  IJBERAL-SPIRITBD.  {J.  N.  Nortou^  D.D.)  Not  quite  in 
time: — To  iee  a  friend  riding  briskly  away,  by  the  time  we  have  reached  the 
door  to  deliver  a  parting  message ;  to  have  the  boat  pushed  off  from  the  dock, 
while  we  are  hurrying  down  to  get  on  board.  These  small  disappointments  will 
M  illustrations  in  greater  things.    {Ibid.)        Indecision  dangerout : — I.  Art 


600  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xh. 

there  not  manj  bearing  the  Christian  name  who,  though  not  far  from  the  kingdom 

of  God,  HAVE  NEVER  YET  PASSED  THE  BOUNDARY  WHICH  SEPARATES  THEM  FROM  THE  WORLD  f 

1.  In  this  state  there  are  those  who  have  correct  views  of  doctrinal  truth  without 
a  spirit  of  devotion.  2.  They  are  not  far  from  the  kingdom,  but  do  not  belong  to 
that  kingdom,  who  are  the  subjects  of  frequent  and  powerful  convictions,  yet  have 
never  been  converted  to  God.  3.  They  are  not  far  from  the  kingdom,  but  do  not 
belong  to  it,  who  cultivate  amiable  tempers  and  agreeable  manners,  and  yet  are^ 
strangers  to  the  influence  and  grace  of  the  Divine  Spirit.    II.  Are  there  not  sous 

REASONS  to  be  ABSIONED  AB  CAUSES  WHY  MANY  OF  YOU  CONTINUE  80  LONG  TO  HOVK& 
ROUND   THE  BORDERS  OP  THE   KINGDOM   OP  GOD,  YET  NEVER  ENTER  IT  f      YOUI  COnduot 

carries  in  it  a  multitude  of  strange  inconsistencies.  1.  Your  hovering  still  round 
the  outer  borders  of  the  kingdom  of  God  must  be  ascribed  to  a  want  of  firm  deci- 
sion of  mind.  2.  It  must  be  ascribed  to  a  want  of  warm  and  loyal  attachment  to 
the  blessed  Immanuel,  the  Prince  of  life.  3.  It  must  be  ascribed  to  a  want  of  true 
faith  and  humility.  III.  While  you  continue  without  the  boundary  of  the  kingdom 
of  God,  at  whatever  point  of  nearness,  is  not  your  state  a  state  op  awful  danger? 
You  are  more  liable  to  self-deception  than  vile  profligates ;  you  are  commanded ; 
you  are  in  danger  of  attaching  too  much  consequence  to  the  soundness  of  your 
creed  and  strictness  of  your  morals.  Do  not  expect  to  glide  into  the  kingdom 
without  effort  or  hindrance.  1.  You  must  press  into  the  kingdom  by  casting  oflf 
every  incumbrance,  and  by  forsaking  every  prejudice  and  passion  which  has  a 
tendency  to  entangle  and  obstruct  your  progress.  2.  You  must  press  into  the 
kingdom  through  all  possible  resistance.    {J.  Thornton.)  ♦•  Not  far  from  the 

kingdom  " ; — True  praise  never  does  harm ;  it  softens  and  humbles.  Yet  this  man 
belonged  to  a  class  which  had  no  right  to  expect  any  indulgence  at  Christ's  hand. 
Christ  sees  the  good  points  of  the  scribe.  There  is  a  "  kingdom  of  God  "  in  this 
world,  and  it  has  distinct  boundary  lines.  What  was  there  in  the  man  which 
made  Christ  speak  of  him  as  "near  to  the  kingdom"?  I.  That  the  scribe  spoke 
practically  and  sensibly,  and  without  prejudice — as  Christ  expresses  it,  "  dis- 
creetly." Such  a  mind  will  always  be  approximating  to  the  kingdom  of  truth.  II. 
There  were  further  indications,  in  the  particular  thoughts  which  were  in  the 
scribe's  mind,  that  he  was  nearing  the  shores  of  truth.  It  is  plain  that  he  saw 
before  his  eyes  the  true,  relative  value  of  the  types  and  ceremonies  of  the  Jewish 
church.  He  recognized  them  as  inferior  to  the  great  principles  of  truth  and  love. 
His  mind  had  travelled  so  far  as  to  see  that  the  sum  of  all  true  religion  is  love  to 
God  and  man.  How  is  that  love  of  God  implanted  in  a  man's  breast  ?  Will  the 
beauties  of  nature  do  it?  Will  the  kindnesses  of  Providence  do  it?  Will  the 
natural  instincts  of  gratitude  do  it  ?  I  think  not.  There  must  be  the  sense  of  f or> 
giveness.  Within  this  he  distinguished  and  magnified  the  unity  of  God.  *♦  For 
there  is  one  God,"  <fec.  The  unity  of  God  the  argument  for  a  unity  of  service.  III. 
And  perhaps,  still  more  than  all,  that  enlightened  Jew  had  been  drawn  near  to  the 
Person  of  Christ.  Consequently  he  consulted  Him  as  a  Teacher.  Do  we  not  know 
that  Christ  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  that  we  are  all  in  or  out  of  that  kingdom 
just  according  to  what  Christ  is  to  us  ?  To  be  indifferent  to  Him  is  to  be  very  "  far 
off;"  to  feel  the  need  of  Him  is  to  be  "near."  IV.  The  most  affecting  of  i^ 
possible  conditions  is  a  nearness  which  never  enters.  If  I  had  to  select  the  most 
awful  passage  in  history,  I  should  select  the  Israelites  on  the  Canaanitish  boundary 
— they  saw,  they  heard,  they  tasted,  they  were  on  the  eve  to  pass ; — they  disbelieved, 
they  did  not  go  in,  they  were  sent  back,  and  they  never  came  near  again ;  but  their 
carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness.  It  will  be  an  unutterably  solemn  thing  if  Christ 
shall,  at  the  last,  say  to  any  of  as,  "  Thou  wast  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of 
\  God."  {J.  VaugJian,  M.A.)  Critical  hours : — The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  certaim 
^condition  of  the  human  soul.  CIEnsl  st&fids  contrasted  with  the  condition  of  self- 
ishness, vulgarity,  animalism.  See  how  it  comes  directly  out  of  the  controversy 
here :  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God."  The  superior  love  of  God  is  what  we 
mean  by  spirituality — the  fulness  of  thought,  imagination,  and  feeling  in  the  direo- 
tion  of  the  Infinite.  We  know  how  men  divide  themselves  up,  and  live  under  the 
dominant  influence  of  certain  parts  or  faculties  of  their  nature.  One  man  lives 
under  the  dominion  of  his  passions ;  another  class  of  men  build  themselves  into  a 
power  in  which  property  and  collateral  influences  shall  be  central.  These  dominant 
states  in  which  men  dwell  will  give  us  an  idea  of  what  it  is  to  be  in  that  oonditioD 
in  which  Christ  says  men  are  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  When  a  mai^ 
has  attained  the  higher  spiritual  state,  then  he  is  in  the  kingdom  of  Qod.  Then 
has  mind  becomes  laminoos.      ^he  man  comes  into  union  with  God,  and  disoema 


CHIP.  XXL]  ST.  MARK.  501 

truths  which  in  his  lower  state  he  never  conld  discern.  When,  therefore,  a  man 
ia  said  to  be  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God,  he  is  where  he  can  easily  enter  into 
these  higher  perceptions  and  conditions.  There  are  a  great  many  persons  who  are 
bordering  on  the  kingdom  of  heaven  even  in  this  life.  There  are  luminous  hours 
given  to  most  men,  and  especially  to  men  of  large  brain  and  intelligence.  Persons 
in  vulgar  conditions  of  life  have  certain  hours  given  to  them  which  they  do  not 
understand,  but  which  render  them  susceptible  of  being  drawn  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  1.  There  are  hours  of  vision  in  which  men  are  under  the  direct  stimulus 
of  the  preached  truth.  STSomeliimes  the  same  result  is  produced  because  they  have 
seen  the  truth  embodied  somewhere.  A  man  goes  to  a  funeral,  and  comes  home 
and  says,  "  That  was  a  great  man  ;  I  wish  I  were  like  him.  I  wish  I  were  living  on 
a  higher  plane."  3.  There  are  times  of  awakening  that  are  the  result  of  great 
sorrows  and  affliction  in  some  natures.  When  men  see  how  uncertain  is  everything 
that  pertains  to  life,  they  say,  •♦  I  ought  to  have  an  anchor  within  the  veil."  4. 
When  men  are  in  great  distress  in  their  social  relations  there  is  oftentimes  a 
luminous  hour.  I  do  not  say  that  if  men  neglect  the  first  impulse  to  change  their 
course  they  will  never  have  another ;  the  mercy  of  God  calls  a  great  many  times  ; 
but  very  likely  they  will  not  have  another  that  is  so  influential.  If,  however,  in 
such  hours  of  disclosure,  hours  of  influence,  hours  in  which  everything  urges  him 
toward  a  nobler  and  a  better  life,  a  man  would  ratify  his  impulse  to  go  forward, 
even  though  at  first  he  stagger  on  the  journey,  he  would  not  be  far  from  the  king- 
dom of  God ;  but  if  he  waits,  you  may  be  sure  that  these  hours  will  pass  away  and 
be  submerged.  That  is  where  the  real  force  comes  in.  All  the  civilized  world 
sent  out  men  to  take  an  observation  of  the  transit  of  Venus ;  and  when  the  con- 
junction came  it  was  indispensably  necessary  to  the  success  of  the  undertaking  that 
the  very  first  contact  should  be  observed.  An  astronomer  who  had  devoted  six 
months  to  preparation,  and  has  gone  out  to  take  this  observation,  eats  a  heavy 
dinner  and  takes  copious  draughts  of  liquid  to  wash  it  down,  and  lies  down,  saying, 
♦•  Call  me  at  the  proper  time,"  and  goes  to  sleep ;  and  by  and  by  he  is  waked  up 
and  is  told,  "  The  planet  approaches,"  and,  half  conscious,  he  turns  over  and  says, 
'*  Yes,  yes,  yes,  I  will  attend  to  it ;  but  I  must  finish  my  nap  first ; "  and  before 
he  is  aware  of  it  the  thing  is  all  over,  and  he  has  thrown  away  the  pains  he  has 
taken  to  prepare  himself.  It  was  important  that  he  should  be  on  hand  to  take  the 
observation  on  the  second ;  and  the  whole  failed,  so  far  as  he  was  concerned,  for 
want  of  precise  accuracy.  A  Httle  girl  sickened  and  died.  She  might  have  recovered ; 
for  the  nature  of  the  disease  was  such  that  if  it  had  been  watched,  and  if  stimulants 
had  been  applied  at  the  critical  moment,  they  would  have  been  like  oil  in  a  half  or 
wholly  exhausted  lamp.  But  this  was  not  known,  and  the  child  slept,  and  the 
caretaker  thought  the  sleep  was  all  right,  and  it  slept  itself  out  of  life.  The  child 
might  have  been  alive,  walking  and  talking  with  us  to-day,  if  it  had  not  been  for 
that.  There  are  such  critical  moments  as  those,  and  they  are  occurring  in  human 
experience  everywhere — in  health,  in  sickness,  in  business,  in  pleasure,  in  love,  in 
poUtical  affairs,  in  all  the  congeries  of  circumstances  in  which  men  live  and  move. 
{H.  W,  Bucher.)        Pharisaical  righteousness  to  be  exceeded: — L  What  is  hebb 

MSANT  BT  THB  EINODOK  OW  GOD?       U.   WhaT    IS    MSAIIT  BY    BBINQ  FAB  VROM  THIS 

siNODOU  ?  1.  In  regard  of  the  means  (1)  absolute :  Such  as  are  wholly  and  uni- 
versally deprived  of  all  the  ordinances  of  religion,  as  are  the  heathen  (Ephes.  ii.  13). 
(8)  Comparative  remoteness,  which  we  may  notice  of  such  as  live  within  the  bounds 
of  the  church  and  compass  of  the  Christian  commonwealth,  and  yet  have  little  of 
the  gospel  sounding  in  their  ears  ;  they  live  in  some  dark  comer  of  the  land.  (3) 
Besides  all  this  there  is  a  remoteness  voluntary  and  contracted  in  those  which  tac 
near  the  means,  and  yet  never  the  nearer,  who  put  the  Word  of  God  from  them.  2. 
In  regard  of  the  terms :  Namely,  the  state  in  which  they  are  at  present,  compared 
with  the  state  which  they  stand  in  opposition  unto.  They  are  far  from  the 
kingdom  of  God  as  being  destitute  of  tiiose  personal  qualifications  in  order  to  it 
Their  principles  and  Ufe  are  remote.  The  notoriously  wicked  (Ephes.  v.  5 ;  Bom. 
zzi.  8 ;  Bev.  zxii.  15).  Hypocrites  or  secret  enemies.  All  such  as  are  formal  but 
not  ^ioas.  8.  In  regard  of  the  event.  In  regard  of  God's  purpose  and  degree  con> 
oemmg  them.  This  was  the  case  of  Paul.  He  was  far  from  God's  kingdom  ia 
regard  of  the  terms  and  his  personal  qualification  ;  yet,  in  regard  of  the  event,  was 
rerj  near.  Sometimes  the  most  notorious  offenders  are  nearer  conversion  thaa 
dvil  persons.  Let  as  look  more  minutely  at  the  text.  III.  It  is  a  wobd  or  ooii- 
MXVDATioM :  an  acknowledgment  of  ^at  reality  of  goodness  which  was  in  the  Scribs^ 
and  so  enoonraging  him  in  it  If  we  see  beginnings  of  good  in  any,  to  ohnrish  Hmm, 


S02  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

We  should  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  Ac,  nor  nip  the  sproutings  of  grace.  1.  This 
does  honour  God  Himself  in  the  bestowing  of  His  graces.    He  that  takes  notice  of 
the  streams  acknowledges  the  fountain  whence  they  proceed.     2.  We  draw  men  on 
further  and  make  them  more  willing  to  improve ;  it  is  the  whetstone  of  virtue. 
3.  By  this  course  we  occasionally  work  upon  others  who  are  much  moved  by  such 
examples.    IV.  It  is  also  a  wobd  of  diminution.    Thou  art  not  quite  at  home ; 
you  must  go  farther ;  an  excitement.     We  must  not  flatter  so  as  to  make  beginners 
satisfied  with  less  grace,  but  urge  them  forward.     The  speech  of  our  Lord  was 
efifectuai  to  him  hereunto  in  sundry  respects.     1.  It  showed  him  his  defects  and 
imperfections,  for  which  he  had  need  to  go  further.    There  is  no  greater  hindrance 
to  improvement  than  a  conceit  of  perfection :  when  men  think  they  are  at  their 
journey's  end,  they  will  not  step  any  further ;  but  when  they  are  persuaded  that  they 
are  not  at  home,  they  will  set  them  upon  going  (Phil.  iii.  12, 13).   2.  It  showed  him 
also  his  hopes  and  possibilities  :  that  is  another  excitement  to  endeavour.   There  is 
hope  of  coming  hither,  for  you  are   almost  there.     3.  It  showed  him  also  his 
engagements,  from  what  he  had  done  already,  to  proceed.    You  have  already  made 
some  endeavour,  do  not  decline  and  grow  worse.    We  should  imitate  Christ  in 
helping  others  forward  in  religion,  as  Aquila  and  Priscilla  did  Apollos.    Consider 
these  words  as  reflectively,  as  coming  from  Christ  the  speaker  of  them.   We  should 
discern  and  distinguish  persons.    He  discerned  the  teaching  of  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  in  the  foregoing  part  of  the  chapter ;  now  He  discerns  the  sincerity  of  the 
Scribe.  V.  Thb  occasion  whereupon  His  censure  was  passed.  "  When  Jesus  saw 
that  he  answered  discreetly."    This  includes  those  things.    1.  Distinctly  as  to  the 
matter  of  his  answer.     He  was  right  in  the  notion  and  in  the  thing  itself.    He 
who  knows  anything  of  religion  knows  that  it  does  not  lie  in  outside  duties,  but  in 
a  gracious  soul ;  yet  he  does  not  take  away  the  forms.     Those  which  are  above 
ordinances  are  below  heaven  ;  and  they  which  hate  instruction  shall  never  partake 
of  salvation.    2.  He  answered  intelligently  as  to  the  principle  from  whence  he 
answered.    He  did  not  speak  by  rote,  but  he  was  able  to  give  a  rational  account  of 
his  religion.    We  must  believe  more  than  we  can  understand,  and  yet  we  must 
also  understand  why  we  believe.    3.  He  was  hearty  and  serious  in  it.    He  spoke 
as  a  man  that  had  some  savour  of  that  which  he  spoke.  A  man  maybe  an  orthodox 
divine,  and  yet  but  a  sorry  Christian.    4.  He  answered  discreetly ;  IJbat  is  prudently* 
as  to  the  manner  of  it.    It  was  with  humility,  teachableness,  and  submission  to 
Christ.     {T.  Horton,  D.D.)        Near  hut  not  secure : — He  perishes  for  want  of  that 
remedy  which  otherwise  might  be  supplied  withal.     As  it  is  sometimes  in  the 
body;  those  which  have  great  sicknesses,  they  many  times  get  up  and  recover, 
whilst  those  which  have  some  smaller  distemper,  do  perhaps  die  under  it.    What's 
the  reason  of  it,  and  how  comes  it  about  ?  Why,  the  one,  thinking  himself  to  be  in 
danger,  goes  to  the  physician ;  the  other,  being  more  secure,  neglects  him,  and  looks 
not  after  lum.    Thus  it  is  with  men  also  in  religion ;  civUity  trusted  in  is  further 
off  from  conversion  than  profaneness  in  the  effects  and  consequents  of  it.    This 
was  the  case  of  the  Jews  in  comparison  of  the  Gentiles.    {Ibid.)         Mere  morality 
alone  i$  remote  from  the  kingdom  of  God : — Civility  left  alone  to  itself  would  never 
be  grace,  nor  attain  to  the  consequents  of  it.  These  two  are  at  a  very  wide  distance 
one  from  tiie  other,  and  left  alone,  would  never  meet  together.    Though  mere 
civility  be  not  so  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God  as  absolute  profaneness,  yet  it  will 
never  come  thither,  no  more  than  profaneness  itself.    A  mere  civil  man  is  as  truly 
excluded  from  heaven  as  a  profane  man.    I  say  as  truly,  though  not  in  so  great  a 
degree.    To  explain  it  to  you  by  an  easy  and  familiar  resemblance :  Dover  (for 
example)  is  not  so  far  from  Calais  as  London,  yet  he  that  goes  no  further  than 
Dover  shall  never  come  to  Calais,  no  more  than  he  that  stays  at  London.  So  here,  a 
mere  moral  or  civil  person  is  not  so  remote  from  salvation  as  a  debauched ;  but  yet  if  he 
goes  no  further  than  morality,  he  will  come  short  of  it  as  well  as  the  other.    (Ibid.) 
Nearness  not  possetsion : — A  man  may  be  almost  in  possession  of  a  fortune ;  but 
thtttlidds  not  to  ImiDredit  at  the  bank.    A  man  may  be  almost  honest,  or  almost 
sober ;  but  that  will  be  no  recommendation  to  a  position  of  trust  and  responsibility. 
And  as  with  these,  so  with  the  kingdoms  of  mental  force,  health,  and  social  in- 
fluence ;  nearness  is  not  sufficient.    How  near  it  is  possible  to  be  to  the  kingdom 
of  God  without  being  in,  we  know  not.    Nor  do  we  know  how  it  is  possible  to 
remain  near  without  entering ;  unless  it  be  that  those  who  are  near  mistake  near> 
ness  for  possession.    Notice :  (1)  A  man  is  not  necessarily  in  the  kingdom  of  God 
because  an  intelligent,  mc^uirer.    Distinguish  between  questioning  with  a  view  to 
information,  and  questioning  with  a  view  to  disputation.      (2)    A  man  is  not 


CHAP.  XII.]  ST.  MARK.  608 

necessarily  in  the  kingdom  of  God  because  he  knows  truth  wheii. he  hears  it.  We 
uaay  assent  to  all  Christ's  utterances,  and  yet  have  no  affection  for  Him  as  Saviour. 
It  is  possible  to  make  a  false  god  of  orthodoxy.  A  man  may  be  a  capital  judge  of 
the  soundness  of  a  sermon,  an  adept  as  regards  scripture  knowledge,  and  yet  only 
"  not  far  from  the  kingdom."  (3)  A  man  is  not  necessarily  in  the  kingdom 
because  he  can  answer  questions  on  Christianity.  You  may  know  the  creed  without 
knowing  the  ChJISt.  'TSfere  knowledge  is  not  enough.  You  must  repent,  confess, 
believe,  serve.  (J.  S.  Swan.)  Not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  Ood : — There  are, 
then,  different  degrees  of  approximation  to  the  light.    Let  us  consider — I.  Somb  or 

THOSE  THINGS  WHICH  BRING  A  MAN  NEAR  THE  KINODOM  OF  GOD.      (1)   A  life   associated 

with  some  of  its  members  and  privileges.  We  have  all  known  many  whose  lives 
proved  that  they  were  true  disciples  of  Christ ;  we  have  observed  the  deepening 
earnestness  of  their  character,  and  seen  it  growing  up  into  a  purpose  and  con- 
sistency unknown  before.  How  have  we  been  affected  by  this  connection  ?  (2)  A 
spirit  of  reverence  and  candour  towards  Christ.  Few  things  short  of  positive 
immorality  so  deaden  the  spiritual  perception  as  does  habitual  flippancy.  It  is, 
therefore,  a  hopeful  sign  in  a  man,  if  he  is  not  ashamed  to  own  that  he  considers 
some  things  too  sacred  to  be  sported  with.  (3)  Kindliness  and  amiability  of 
nature.  Christ  never  cast  a  chilling  look  on  anything  that  is  beautiful  in  human 
nature.  He  acknowledged  it  to  be  good  as  far  as  it  went,  and  sought  to  gain  it  for 
the  Divine  and  eternal.  All  kindly  and  generous  impulses  are  wild-flowers  of 
nature,  which,  with  the  enclosure  of  Christ's  garden  and  the  hand  of  Divine 
culture,  would  put  on  a  rare  beauty.  (4)  A  desire  to  conform  to  God's  law  as  far 
as  he  knows  it.  If  conscience  be  at  work  in  any  man,  if  it  is  keeping  him  from 
doing  what  he  believes  to  be  sin,  and  leading  him  to  aim  at  the  true  and  right,  he 
is  to  be  commended.  And  if  there  be  any  measure  of  humility  and  charity  with 
it,  that  man  is  certainly  nearer  the  kingdom  than  he  who  is  going  on  in  known 
sin,  searing  his  conscience,  hardening  his  heart,  and  building  up  obstacles  against 
his  return  to  God.  (5)  An  interest  in  the  spiritual  side  of  things.  We  meet  with 
so  much  indifference  and  materiahsm  among  the  unconverted,  that  it  is  refreshing 
to  light  upon  one  who  rises  above  such  a  chilling  element,  and  who  gives  evidence 
that  he  beheves  there  is  a  God,  and  a  soul,  and  a  spiritual  law  laid  down  for  man's 
guidance — to  see  him  not  only  listening,  but  putting  intelligent  questions,  and 
avowing,  with  honest  conviction,  how  far  he  goes,  though  it  may  not  be  so  far  as 
we  desire.  If  we  meet  such  a  man  in  a  kindly,  candid  spirit,  we  may  win  him  to 
the  kingdom  of  Him  whose  heart  yearns  over  the  most  distant  wanderers,  but 
who  cherishes  a  peculiar  interest  in  those  whose  souls  are  feeling  their  way,  how- 
ever faintly,  to  the  eternally  true  and  good.  II.  What  is  needed  to  make  a  man 
DECIDEDLY  BBLONO  TO  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GoD  ?  Our  Lord's  words  imply  that,  with 
all  that  is  favourable  in  this  man,  there  is  still  something  wanting.  He  perceived 
the  claim  of  God's  law,  and  admitted  it  to  be  spiritual ;  but,  so  far  as  we  can  see, 
he  had  no  conviction  of  that  hopeless  violation  of  it  which  only  a  Divine  deliverer 
like  Christ  could  meet.  Then,  too,  while  admiring  Christ's  teaching,  he  gave  no 
sign  of  his  soul  bowing  before  Him  as  a  teacher  sent  from  God,  still  less  of  his 
being  ready  to  follow  Him  as  his  spiritual  leader,  to  cast  in  his  lot  with  Him,  to 
walk  in  His  steps  and  do  His  will.  He  lacked  (1)  the  new  birth.  (2)  The  new 
Ule.  {John  Ker,  D.D.)  On  the  verge  of  the  kingdom : — I.  The  qualities  which 
CONSIST  with  the  STATE  HERE  DESCRIBED.  1.  Beligious  knowledge.  You  may  have 
an  accurate  creed,  an  extensive  acquaintance  with  the  Bible,  a  power  to  discuss 
with  clearness  and  precision  controverted  points,  without  the  will  being  influenced, 
the  affections  purifled,  the  life  and  conversation  regulated.  2.  A  life  of  blameless 
nprightnees  and  integrity.  Many  things  may  tend  to  preserve  you  from  the  com- 
mission of  great  sins,  besides  real  love  for  God,  e.g.,  a  prudent  regard  to  your  own 
well-being  and  well-doing  in  the  world.  3.  Strong  convictions  of  sin,  and  even 
consequent  amendment.  You  may,  like  Herod,  do  "  many  things,"  and  yet  neglect 
"the  one  thing  needful."  Outward  reformation  is  not  necessarily  the  result  of  an 
inward  moral  change.  4.  Carefully  maintained  habits  of  public  and  private 
devotion.  The  fonn  may  be  kept  up  long  after  the  spirit  has  vanished.  II.  The 
REASONS  why  peopIjB  REMAIN  IN  THIS  DANOEROU8  STATE.  1.  A  Want  of  real  and 
heartfelt  love  to  God.  We  must  give  God  and  the  things  of  God  not  only  a  place, 
but  the  first  place  in  our  heart.  The  service  He  requires  is  that  which  springs 
from  a  real  preferHiice  of  Himself.  2.  If  God  is  not  loved,  something  else  must  be 
receiving  an  undue  share  of  the  affections;  for  man  must  bestow  them  somewhere, 
whether  in  the  attractions  of  his  calling  and  profession,  or  in  the  cultivation  of 


504  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xa 

refined  and  intellectual  tastes,  or  in  an  idolatrous  fondness  for  the  comforte  oi 
social  and  domestic  life.  The  more  naturally  amiable  a  man  is,  the  more  beloved, 
the  more  honoured,  the  more  respected  for  his  social  and  moral  worth,  for  the 
largeness  of  his  charities,  for  the  constancy  of  his  friendships,  for  the  kindness  of 
his  heart,  and  for  the  blameless  purity  of  his  life,  the  greater  danger  there  is  lest 
that  man  should  be  ensnared  by  mere  human  approbation,  and  close  his  eyes  to  the 
danger  he  is  in  of  falling  short  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  III.  Now,  what  is  thb 
MORAL  VALUE  OF  THE  STATE  HEBE  DESCRIBED  ?  If  a  loHg  joumey  Were  sct  before  me, 
it  would  be  some  comfort  to  have  one  to  say,  "  Thou  art  not  far  from  thy  journey's 
end."  If  all  through  life  I  had  been  proposing  to  myself  the  accomplishment  of 
some  great  object,  it  would  be  some  comfort  to  know  I  was  not  far  from  attaining 
the  object  of  my  ambition.  This  is  on  the  supposition  of  continual  progress,  con- 
stant  advancement  towards  that  object.  But  the  spiritual  condition  we  have  been 
copsidering  is  that  of  a  person  who  is  standing  still — continuing  year  after  year  in 
the  same  state  of  dead,  motionless,  nnadvancing  formalism,  ever  seeking,  bat 
never  striving  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate,  ever  learning  but  never  coming  to  the 
knowledge  of  tiie  truth.  What,  then,  is  the  moral  value  of  being,  and  continuing^ 
not  far  from  the  kingdom  ?  There  is  a  door.  We  must  be  on  one  side  of  it,  or 
the  other.  There  is  no  paradise  of  mediocrity.  How  sad  to  be  overtaken  by  the 
avenger,  when  close  by  the  city  of  refuge— to  have  made  shipwreck  of  our  souls, 
when  just  within  sight  of  the  harbour!  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Reasons  why  a  man 
who  i$  near  the  kingdom  should  strive  to  enter  it : — If  there  are  some  so  far  away 
that  they  at  times  fall  into  a  despair  of  ever  reaching  it,  there  are  a  greater 
number  so  near  that  they  sink  into  an  apathetic  contentment  with  being  almost 
Christians.  Those  who  are  far  off  may  come  to  be  nigh,  when  the  children  of  the 
kingdom  are  cast  out.  1.  Though  the  distance  may  not  seem  jgreat,  there  is 
momentous  importance  in  it.  A  great  deal  depends  on  being  a  Christian,  and  to  be 
a'Christian  needs  soihelhmg  more  than  a  decent  arrangement  of  the  natural  life. 
The  end  of  man's  soul  can  only  be  found  in  looking  to  God,  and  learning  to  stand 
right  with  Him.  Otherwise,  it  is  to  let  a  plant  cling  to  the  earth  that  was  made  to 
climb,  and  that  can  bring  forth  its  best  flowers  and  fruits  only  when  it  ascends ;  as 
if  a  palace  were  tenanted  in  its  dungeons  and  lower  rooms,  while  the  higher  apart- 
ments, commanding  infinitely  the  best  view,  were  left  desolate ;  or  as  if  a  city  had 
its  streets  crowded  with  traffic,  and  filled  with  the  labour  and  din  of  busy  life, 
while  the  temples,  which  tell  of  man's  dignity  by  pointing  him  to  God,  remained 
in  untrodden  silence,  and  became  the  homes  only  of  the  dead.  Can  a  man,  who 
has  a  soul,  feel  that  it  is  well  with  him  in  such  a  state  ?  And  yet  thus  he  stands 
while  he  refuses  to  admit  God  to  His  rightful  place.  2.  TheJharmful  effect  of  this 
position  upon  others.  When  Hheie  is  a  nature  which  has  so  much  of  tfie  beau^fiiil 
w3  attractive  outside  the  proper  Christian  sphere,  it  is  apt  to  give  shallow-minded' 
persons  the  idea  that  the  gospel  is  not  so  necessary  as  the  Bible  declares.  3.  The 
only  security  for  permanence  in  what  is  naturally  attractive  in  man,  consists  in 
connecting  it  with  God.  The  brightest  and  most  beautiful  things  of  the  heart  lie 
all  unshielded  if  God's  shadow  be  not  over  them.  The  conflicts  of  life,  the 
assaults  of  passion,  the  irritations  of  care  and  ill- success,  and  the  resentments 
against  man's  injustice,  will  corrode  and  canker  the  finest  heart  if  it  be  not  con- 
stantly  drawing  the  corrective  from  a  Divine  source.  Even  without  these  trials, 
whatever  has  not  God  in  it  is  smitten  with  the  inevitable  law  of  decay.  (JoJm 
Ker,  D.D.)  Crossing  the  line : — It  is  as  if  a  man  were  standing  on  tiie  snore, 
close  to  where  a  ship  is  moored.  There  is  but  a  line  between,  and  a  step  may 
cross  it.  But  the  one  is  fixed,  the  other  moves,  and  all  the  future  of  existence 
depends  upon  that  step, — new  lands,  a  new  life,  and  God's  great  wide  world.  In 
the  spiritual  sphere  to  stand  still  is  to  fall  away,  to  be  left  on  that  shore,  doomed 
to  decav  and  death.  To  pass  into  God's  kingdom  is  to  move  with  it,  not  only 
up  to  the  grandeur  of  His  universe,  but  into  the  heritage  of  Himself.  {Ibid.\ 
Some  are  in  the  niburbs  of  the  city  of  refuge : — I  warn  you  against  staying  there. 
Oh,  what  pity  is  it  that  any  should  perish  at  the  gates  of  salvation  for  want  of 
another  step  t 

Ver.  87.  And  the  eommon  people  heard  Him  gleMj.—The  gospel  and  the  numet  .- 
—This  passage  refers  to  the  reception  given  to  the  teachings  of  our  Lord  by  the 
masses  of  the  people.  I.  The  eeabbbs  or  Chbist  referred  to  in  the  text  are 
designated  "the  conunon  people."  As  the  words  in  the  original  Greek  mean, 
litendlj,  **the  great  multitude,"  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  better  rendering  of 


xzi.]  ST,  MARK  50S 

4h6  passage  would  be  *'  the  great  maltitade  heard  Him  gladly.**  The  revisers  of 
the  New  Testament,  however,  have  adhered  to  the  rendering  of  the  Aathorized 
Version,  and  in  the  text  of  the  Revised  New  Testament  we  have  the  long-familiar 
words,  "  the  common  people  heard  Him  gladly,"  while  the  alternative  rendering, 
**  the  great  multitude,"  is  relegated  to  the  margin.  A  critio  has  remarked  that  in 
the  words  "  the  great  mnltitude  "  there  is  no  intended  antithesis  or  opposition  to 
the  upper  classes.  This,  to  say  the  least,  is  questionable  ;  but  of  this  we  are  cer- 
tein,  that,  whether  any  distinction  of  classes  was  intended  or  not,  "  the  great 
multitude  "  necessarily  includes  the  common  people,  By  ♦•  the  common  people  "  is 
meant,  in  every  country,  the  people  without  wealth,  or  power,  or  exalted  rank,  or 
intellectual  culture,  or  refinement  of  manners.  They  are  the  vulgar,  the 
aneducated,  the  lowly,  the  poor,  the  masses.  The  phrase  *•  the  common  people" 
is  suggestive  of  human  inequality,  and  implies  that  the  gradations  of  rank  and 
class  obtain  amongst  men.  But  why,  and  how,  it  may  be  asked,  should  there  be 
these  distinctions?  Are  not  all  men  equal?  To  this  I  reply  that. in  certain  im- 
portant senses  all  men  are  equal.  All  men  are  equal  by  natural  descent,  as  the 
offspring  of  the  same  first  parents.  Then  there  is  the  base  equality  of  natural 
depravity  and  guilt.  Over  the  entire  race  is  written  the  inspired  description : 
"  There  is  none  righteous ;  no,  not  one."  And,  thank  God,  there  is  the  blessed 
equality  of  a  common  redemption,  an  equal  connection  with  the  second  Adam  as 
with  the  first.  Notwithstanding  the  universal  equality  of  man  in  the  essential 
aspects  to  which  I  have  referred,  there  are  other  important  respects,  some  of  them 
natural,  and  some  of  them  artificial,  in  which  men  are  not  equal.  There  are 
differences  in  physique,  in  stature,  and  strength,  which  are  obvions  to  all.  There 
are  still  greater  differences  to  be  found  amongst  the  minds  of  men.  And  whilst 
the  native  and  constitutional  varieties  of  human  intellect  are  numerous  and  great, 
these  differences  are  further  increased  in  number  and  variety  by  education  and 
culture.  The  social  inequalities  which  exist  in  society,  and  which  are  not 
removed,  bet  are  aggravated,  by  civilization,  comprise,  with  other  classes,  the 
common  people.  However  class  distinctions  may  be  disliked,  they  appear  to  be 
inevitable,  at  least  to  some  extent,  and  in  some  variety.  In  recognizing  the  dis- 
tinctions of  ranks,  classes,  and  conditions  of  men,  we,  as  Christian  preachers, 
recognize  existing  facts — facts  which  exist  now,  and  which  have  always  eidsted. 
The  mission  of  the  gospel,  however,  is  to  all  men  without  distinction ;  and  if  the 
most  numerous  class,  the  great  multitude,  give  it  a  favourable  reception,  it  is  a  matter 
of  thankfulness  now,  as  it  doubtless  was  when  the  Author  of  the  gospel  was  a  preacher 
of  the  gospel,  causing  the  evangelist  to  make,  in  the  midst  of  Christ's  sayings,  the 
abrupt  record,  "  and  the  common  people  heard  Him  gladly."    U.  The  becbption 

QIYER  TO  THE  MINIBTBY  OF  JeSUS  BY  THE  MASSES  IS  WOBTHT  OV  THOUGHT  AND  XNVE8TI- 

OATioN.  The  question.  Why  did  the  common  people  hear  Him  gladly  ?  is  a  very 
natural  question,  and  is  worthy  of  the  best  answer  that  can  be  given  to  it.  The 
reasons  for  their  gladness  are  not  assigned,  and  must  be  gathered  mainly  from 
inference  and  from  the  hints  of  Scripture.  No  doubt  ihe  principal  causes  were 
connected  with  the  character  of  the  Great  Teacher  Himself ;  with  the  nature  of 
the  truths  which  He  taught ;  with  the  style  and  methods  of  His  teaching ;  and 
with  the  receptability  of  the  hearers.  1.  Jesus  was  no  ordinary  teacher,  but  in  the 
singularity  of  His  greatness  stood  out  in  marked  contrast  to  the  scribes  and  rabbis 
of  His  day,  and  even  rose  vastly  superior  to  the  ancient  prophets  of  Israel,  although 
grand  to  sublimity  were  the  characters  of  these  holy  men  of  old.  There  is  an  im- 
pressiveness  amounting  to  awe  in  the  quiet  self-assertion  of  EUs  Messianic  profes- 
sions and  Divine  claims.  2.  The  favourable  reception  given  by  the  masses  to  the 
ministry  of  Jesus  may  be  further  accounted  for  by  the  nature  of  the  doctrines  and 
precepts  which  He  taught,  and  especially  by  the  methods,  style,  spirit,  and 
sympathetic  feeling  of  His  teachings.  Not  less  striking  was  the  system  of  morals 
which  He  set  up  and  enforced.  The  common  people  heard  Him  gladly  because  of 
the  tone  of  certainty  with  which  He  taught.  This  teaching,  as  bMUtiful  aa  it  was 
true,  is  inteUigible  to  the  humblest  intellect.  No  wonder  that  at  Jerusalem,  when 
He  taught  in  the  temple,  "  the  conmion  people  heard  Him  gladly.*'    lU.  Thx  tkxt 

KB  BUOOKSTIVS  OT  THE  BELATIONS  OV  THK  GOSPEL  TO   THK  UASSBB  OV  MBN   NOW,  iSD  TO 

THEiB  ATTiTUDB  TowABDB  IT.  The  gospcl  is  for  the  masscs,  because  the  gospel  is 
for  all.  It  comes  with  good  news  to  every  man,  without  distinction  of  rank  or 
condition.  The  gospel,  like  the  Sabbath,  was  made  for  man — for  universal  man. 
The  impartial  manner  in  which  the  Bible  treats  of  the  different  elasses  of  society 
it  to  me  an  additional  proof  of  its  Divine  origin.    Nor  does  it,  on  the  other  hand. 


506  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR,  [cha».  xxl 

denounce  the  less  favoured  classes,  and  call  them  "the  swinish  multitude,"  "thf 
great  unwashed,"  "the  many-headed  beast,"  "the  canatlte,"  "the  dregs,"  ''the 
scum."  Such  offensive  language  is  never  employed  in  that  Holy  Book,  which 
teaches  us  to  honour  all  men  ;  which  declares  God  to  be  the  common  Parent ;  "  the 
Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  " ;  which  says,  "  The  rich  and  the  poor  meet 
together ;  the  Lord  is  the  maker  of  them  all."  And  then,  in  consequence  of  the 
saving  grace  of  God,  it  places  all  upon  the  one  platform  of  common  privilege  and 
blessing.  It  levels  up  by  dignifying  the  lowly  ;  it  levels  down  by  clothing  the  lofty 
with  humility ;  and  it  says  to  both,  "  Let  the  brother  of  low  degree  rejoice,  in  that 
he  is  exalted ;  but  the  rich  in  that  he  is  made  low."  The  masses  should  listen  to 
the  goppel  now  with  delight,  just  as  the  common  people  in  the  days  of  our  Lord 
heard  with  gladness  the  Author  of  the  gospel  Himself.  To  hear  at  all  is  a  point 
gained,  and  is  matter  of  thankfulness.  The  most  deplorable  characteristic  of  the 
masses  of  the  wage- earning  classes  is  their  habitual  absence  from  the  house  of 
God.  They  do  not  hear  the  gospel  gladly,  because  they  do  not  hear  it  at  all.  How 
to  get  the  masses  to  hear  the  gospel  is  one  of  the  great  religious  problems  of  the 
day.  In  order  to  success,  the  Christian  ministry  must  enlarge  upon  the  right 
theme.  That  theme  is  gospel  truth,  of  which  the  atonement  is  the  principal 
article,  around  which  others  are  grouped.  Hearing  the  gospel  gladly  is  the  duty 
and  privilege  of  all  alike — the  rich  man  with  his  gold  ring  and  goodly  apparel  and 
the  poor  man  in  vile  raiment.  {T.  M'Cullagh.)  The  gospel  arid  the  common 
people: — The  state  of  society  in  Palestine  when  Jesus  appeared  in  one  respect 
resembled  that  of  our  ovm  age  and  country — ^the  habit  of  going  to  the  synagogue 
was  for  the  most  part  restricted  to  the  upper  and  middle  classes,  led  by  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees.  The  mass  of  the  working  people  were  "  scattered  abroad  as  sheep 
having  no  shepherd."  They  had  sunk  into  a  state  of  general  neglect  of  religion. 
To  these  conmion  people  Jesus  Christ  specially  addressed  Himself ;  for,  while  the 
learned  men  rejected  Him,  and  sought  only  to  entangle  Him  in  His  talk,  these 
heard  Him  gladly,  welcomed  His  discourses,  recognized  His  Divine  mission,  and 
many  of  them  repented  at  His  reproof.  We  have  an  indication  of  this  willingness 
on  the  part  of  the  common  people  to  hear  Him,  in  the  words  of  this  text. 
I.  Leaving  the  context,  however,  we  shall  first  make  some  remarks  on  the  ex- 
pression "The  common  people" — an  English  phrase,  which,  without  being  an 
exact  translation  of  the  original,  sufficiently  well  conveys  its  meaning.  The 
common  people :  This  is  a  description  of  the  multitude  of  the  population — com- 
prising the  whole  of  the  working  orders.  The  phrase  implies  that  there  are  other 
sorts  of  people  who  are  not  so  common,  but  fewer  and  scarcer,  and  distinguishable 
by  certain  eminent  qualifications  from  the  crowd  around  them.  Well,  there  are 
everywhere  such  common  people,  and  people  less  common.  What  makes  the 
difference  ?  Society  is  built  up  of  three  classes  of  men — those  who  have  remark- 
able mind,  those  who  have  money  and  rank,  and  those  who  labour  with  their  hands. 
The  latter  class  are  by  far  the  most  numerous.  They  are  nearly  a  hundred  to  one 
of  the  others.  These  are  the  common  people.  The  others  are  distinguished  from 
the  crowd  by  some  personal  quaUfication.  Illustration : — There  always  will  be  e 
real  difference  between  educated  and  uneducated  men.  A  man  may  grow  rich,  and 
push  his  way  up  into  the  middle  or  higher  classes ;  but,  if  his  education  has  been 
neglected  and  his  taste  uncultivated,  neither  he  nor  his  family  will  be  able  to 
establish  themselves  as  the  equals  of  their  neighbours  in  a  similar  position 
of  wealth.  It  is  not  an  artificial — it  is  a  real  difference  that  separates  ^e  two. 
A  cultivated  rose  really  is  a  different  flower  from  a  dog-rose  that  grows  in  a  hedge ; 
and  not  all  the  airs  of  the  hedge- flower  will  give  it  a  place  of  equal  rank  with  its 
betters.  There  is,  and  there  ought  to  be,  a  difference  in  rank  between  educated 
and  uneducated  persons ;  and,  so  far  as  the  differences  in  English  society  represent 
differences,  not  merely  of  wealth,  but  of  mind  and  culture,  you  will  never  be  able 
to  break  them  down,  except  by  converting  the  common  people  into  uncommon. 
How  very  common  many  of  the  common  people  are— common  in  the  sense  of  low 
and  degraded  in  thought,  in  feeling,  in  habit,  in  speech,  in  character  I  It  is  sad  to 
think  how  the  wretched  lives  of  the  labouring  multitude  might  be  varied,  and 
rendered  infinitely  more  comfortable  and  respectable,  if  they  would.  The  single 
particular  of  more  cleanliness  would  itself  double  the  comfort  of  life.  The  most 
sunken  type  of  human  life  may  be  raised  into  a  fellowship  with  saints  and  angels. 
The  ladder  Jacob  saw  was  a  glorious  scale  on  which  the  lowest  grade  of  humanity 
may  rise  to  heaven  and  to  God.  This  **  oonunon  people  "  may  sU  be  dothed  in 
glory,  honour,  and  immortality,  and  pat  on  for  ever  the  splendours  of  eternity. 


in.1  8T,  MARK,  507 

When,  therefore,  we  look  upon  onr  own  multitudes  of  oommon  people,  alienated 
from  the  redeeming  influence,  despising  the  ministers  of  Christianity,  and 
abhorring  the  churches,  we  ask,  Why  is  it  that  we  have  so  sadly  failed  ?  When 
Jesus  preached,  the  common  people  heard  Him  gladly ;  and,  believing  in  Him,  they 
were  changed  into  the  same  image,  and  became  the  sons  of  (rod.  What  was  it  in 
His  preaching  that  made  them  hear  Him  so  gladly — that  won  their  hearts,  and 
drew  them  to  Him  and  to  God  ?  Let  us  first  mention  two  or  tiiree  things  that 
cannot  be  alleged  as  Christ's  means  of  influencing  the  multitude.  1.  It  was  not  a 
comical,  a  jocose  mode  of  address.  2.  Neither  did  He  seek  to  propitiate  the 
eomnon  people  by  flattering  them  with  the  promise  of  great  temporal  and  social 
rewards  for  adhering  to  His  cause.  1.  Then,  the  common  people  heard  Him 
gladly,  because  of  the  great  and  obvious  sincerity  and  disinterestedness  of 
His  character.  All  the  suspicions  which  attended  the  ministrations  of  the 
Pharisees  were  absent  from  Him.  2.  They  heard  Him  willingly  because  of  the 
spiritual  depth  of  His  doctrine,  and  the  suitableness  of  His  teaching  to  the  mind 
of  the  populace.  He  did  not  approach  them  with  a  long  array  of  puzzling  articles 
and  creeds,  which  a  man  must  believe,  or  pretend  to  believe,  or  *•  without  doubt 
perish  everlasting."  But  He  showed  both  His  wisdom  and  His  patience  by  teach- 
ing even  His  own  apostles  only  "  as  they  were  able  to  bear  it."  Love  is  still  more 
powerful  than  argument ;  or,  rather,  it  is  the  most  powerful  of  arguments.  8.  I 
think  we  should  mention  that  one  of  the  most  characteristic  traits  of  our  Lord's 
teaching  was  its  perfect  manliness  and  freedom  from  affectation.  4.  Once  more ; 
Jesus  commanded  the  attention  of  the  common  people  because  He  spoke  to  them 
with  a  compassion  which  reached  their  hearts  and  won  their  affections.  [E.  White.) 
On  preaching  to  the  common  people : — I.  First,  then,  we  have  no  quarrel  with  you 
because  you  are  of  the  number  of  those  who  hear  gladly.  This  is  so  far  well.  It  is 
one  of  the  deadliest  symptoms  of  those  who  perish,  that  to  them  the  preaching  of 
the  cross  is  foolishness.  A  very  promising  symptom  most  assuredly  ;  and  it  may 
evidence  the  beginning  of  a  good  work  which  God  may  carry  forward  and  bring  to 
perfection.  II.  But,  secondly,  though  your  hearing  gladly  be  a  promising  symp- 
tom,  it  is  not  an  infallible  one.  The  common  people  of  Jerusalem  heard  gladly ; 
and  we  need  not  repeat  the  awful  disaster  and  ruin  which,  in  the  course  of  a  few 
years,  overtook  the  families  of  that  oommon  people.  III.  But  though  to  bear 
gladly  be  not  an  infallible  symptom,  yet  to  hear  the  whole  truth  gladly  is  a  much 
more  promising  symptom  than  only  to  hq^r  part  of  the  truth  gladly.  We  fear 
that  it  is  this  partial  liking  for  the  Word  which  forms  the  whole  amount  of  their 
affection  for  it,  with  the  great  majority  of  professing  Christians.  They  like  one 
part ;  but  they  do  not  like  another.  Some  like  to  hear  of  the  privileges  of  the  gospel ; 
but  they  do  not  like  to  hear  of  the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  and  that  the  soul  in  whom 
Christ  is  formed  the  hope  of  glory,  will  purify  itself  even  as  Christ  is  pure.  IV. 
But  lastly,  if  it  do  not  follow  that  because  a  man  is  a  delighted  hearer  of  the  word, 
he  is  therefore  an  obedient  doer  of  it,  how  is  he  to  become  one  ?  What  is  there 
which  can  bring  relief  to  this  melancholy  helplessness  ?  We  assert  that  the  glow 
of  a  warm  and  affecting  impression  is  one  thing,  and  the  sturdiness  of  an  enduring 
principle  is  another.  We  again,  then,  recur  to  the  question,  how  shall  we  give  the 
property  of  endurance  to  that  which  in  time  past  has  been  so  perishable  and  so 
momentary  f  The  strength  of  your  own  natural  purposes,  it  would  appear,  cannot 
do  it.  The  power  of  argtunent  cannot  do  it.  The  tongue  of  the  minister,  though 
he  spake  with  the  eloquence  of  an  angel,  cannot  do  it.  {Dr.  Ghalmer$. )  Common 
people  heard  him  gladly  .'—Luther  when  preaching  to  a  mixed  assembly,  said :  ••  I 
perceive  in  the  church  Dr.  Justus  Jonas  and  Melancthon,  and  other  learned  doctors. 
Now,  if  I  preach  to  their  edification,  what  is  to  become  of  the  rest  ?  Therefore,  by 
their  leave,  I  shall  forget  that  Dr.  Jonas  is  here  at  all,  and  preach  to  the  multi- 
tude." So  must  I  do  at  this  good  hour,  asking  those  of  you  who  are  advanced  in 
the  Divine  life  to  unite  your  prayers  with  mine,  that  the  word  of  the  gospel  maybe 
blessed  to  the  unconverted.  ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Jesut  and  the  common  people  :— 
We  are  all  common  people  as  to  the  ground  covered  by  His  teachings.  The  duties 
inouxnbent  on  us  to  God  and  man  have  in  their  principles,  their  motives,  their  spirit, 
no  diversity  corresponding  to  the  differences  of  condition  and  culture.  You  cannot 
specify  a  primal  obligation  that  admits  of  any  exceptions.  Yon  can  name  none  that 
belong  to  the  highly  endowed  and  privileged,  but  not  to  the  simple  and  unlettered 
--none  that  appertain  to  the  lowly,  and  not  to  those  who  hold  a  superior  poiition 
to  Ihe  ■oeial  seale.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  may  be  aU  lived  out  by  the  labourer. 
tlM  po(»  widow,  the  person  whose  intelligence  and  sphere  of  action  are  of  the  very 


S08  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [crip.  la 

narrowest ;  and  tA  the  same  time  there  is  no  life  so  large,  so  high,  so  extended  in 
its  relations  and  responsibilities,  that  it  may  not  find  here  all  that  it  is  bound  to  be 
and  to  do.  Still  more,  we  can  conceive  of  no  broader,  fuller,  loftier  law  of  duty  for 
the  redeemed  in  heaven,  or  for  any  created  being  in  the  universe.  As  regards  our 
trials  and  our  griefs,  too,  we  are  all  common  people.  There  is  no  resource  for  high 
or  low,  when  the  heart  is  overwhelmed,  but  trust  in  Almighty  love — no  prayer  that 
can  bring  an  answer  of  peace,  but  ♦•  Father,  Thy  will,  not  mine,  be  done."  In  the 
presence  of  the  mighty  leveller  Death  we  are  all  common  people.  {A,  Peabody, 
LL.D.)        The  Model  Preacher: — Why  did  the  common  people  hear  Him  gladly? 

1.  BECA.nsB  Christ  oavb  a  new  and  bboadeb  meakimo  to  belioiom.  He  proclaimed 
God's  love  to  all,  Jew  and  Gentile.  Christianity  touches  the  great  heart  of  humanity. 
Those  who  live  at  the  bottom  of  society  are,  by  nature,  most  open  to  conviction. 
They  are  governed  largely  by  their  feelings :  but  religion  is  a  matter  of  feeling ;  it 
is  love.  II.  The  atfections  of  life  have  thbib  labqest  scope  and  efteot  among 
THE  LOWEST.  He  Said,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  weary,"  <feo.  Look  at  the  manner 
of  our  Lord's  preaching.     1.  He  spoke  as  one  having  authority ;  He  revealed  truth. 

2.  Much  of  our  Lord's  preaching  was  outside  of  synagogues,  and  in  conversation  with 
the  people.  3.  His  ministry  was  in  the  "  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  with 
power."  {W.  E.  Griffith.)  Other  gospels  hidden  from  the  common  people : — In 
Greece  and  Italy,  while  a  few  superior  minds  acknowledged  a  spiritual  worship,  the 
common  people  were  kept  in  brutish  ignorance  by  the  celebrated  philosophers  of 
Greece  and  Rome.  In  Hindostan,  though  the  doctrines  of  their  complicated  faith 
are  freely  revealed  to  the  Brahmins  and  their  pupils,  it  is  a  law  never  to  be  violated 
that  the  sacred  books  shall  be  locked  up  from  the  bulk  of  the  people,  and  the  Paria, 
or  lowest  caste,  is  not  only  excluded  from  the  common  assemblies  of  the  people,  but 
forbidden  even  to  enter  the  temples  to  pray  or  to  sacrifice.  Nay,  the  Gentoo  code 
even  enacts  that,  should  a  priest  read  the  sacred  books  to  the  inferior  orders,  heated 
oil,  wax,  and  melted  tin  shall  be  poured  into  his  ears ;  and  that,  should  any  mem- 
ber of  these  classes  get  passages  by  heart,  he  shall  instantly  be  put  to  death. 
{Eastern  Manners  and  Custotns.)  Preaching  so  as  to  be  understood  by  the  common 
people: — Archbishop  Tillotson,  who  has  left  imperishable  memorials  of  his  excel- 
lence in  his  sermons,  as  well  as  in  the  traditional  reports  of  his  voice  and  delivery, 
regarded  it  as  the  highest  compliment  ever  paid  him,  when,  on  descending  from 
the  pulpit,  he  overheard  a  countryman  who  came  to  London  to  hear  him,  ask  his 
friend  with  evident  surprise,  "  Is  that  your  great  Archbishop  ?  Why,  he  talks  just 
like  one  of  ourselves."  And  the  greatest  of  all  preachers,  who  "  spake  as  never  man 
spake,"  must  have  been  characterized  by  the  same  sublime  simplicity ;  for  it  ia 
written  of  Him,  "  The  common  people  heard  Him  gladly."  Study  the  people : — 
Mr.  Hill  always  wished  to  be  considered  the  apostle  of  the  common  people,  in  re- 
semblance of  Him  whom  the  common  people  heard  gladly,  and  in  whose  teaching 
"  the  poor  had  the  Gospel  preached  unto  them. "  But  he  who  undertakes  this  work 
of  faith  and  labour  of  love  will  find  that  he  has  not  to  address  angels,  and  some- 
times hardly  men.  He  will  need  to  learn  the  advice  which  the  philosopher  was  wont 
to  give  his  pupils,  '•  Study  the  people ; "  or  that  which  Cromwdl  gave  to  his  soldiers, 
**Fire  low."  Had  bis  men  fired  high  they  would  have  done  no  more  execution  than 
some  of  our  preachers,  who  shoot  over  their  hearers'  heads.  (Rowland  HiU.)  The 
intuitions  of  the  multitude : — "  When  an  uninstructed  multitude,"  says  Nathaniel 
Hawthorne,  "  attempts  to  see  with  its  eyes,  it  is  exceedingly  apt  to  be  deceived. 
When,  however,  it  forms  its  judgment,  as  it  usually  does,  on  the  intuitions  of  its 
great  and  warm  heart,  the  conclusions  thus  attained  are  often  bo  unerring  M  to 
possess  the  character  of  truths  supematurally  revealed." 

Vers.  38-40.  Beware  of  the  Scrihes  which  love  to  go  In  lonff  Nothing.— 

Recklessness  of  awiftifion  .-—There  is  the  Synagogue  of  Ambition,  whose  bond 
of  union  is  me  lust  of  place  and  of  power.  Let  Diotrephes  be  its  repre- 
sentative, who,  "loved  to  have  the  pre-eminence,"  and  whom  St.  John  censured 
for  this  ambitious  temper,  which  tempted  him,  though  nominally  a  member — 
perhaps  a  minister— of  the  early  church,  violently  to  reject  the  best  Christians. 
What  are  not  men  ready  to  do  to  grati^  an  inordinate  and  insatiate  ambition ! 
You  know  how  the  old  Bomans  built  their  miUtary  roads.  They  projected 
them  in  a  mathematical  line,  straight  to  the  point  of  termination,  and  every- 
thing had  to  give  way,  there  could  be  no  deviation.  And  bo  on  went  the 
road,  bridging  rivers,  filling  up  ravines,  hewing  down  hilla,  levelling  forests, 
cutting  its  way  through  every  obstacle  1    Just  a     men  set  their  lust  upon  aelf* 


CBAT.  xn.]  ST.  MARK.  60S 

emolament,  some  height  of  ambition,  the  attainment  of  place,  rank,  power,  and 
he"w  their  way  toward  it,  not  minding  what  gives  way.  No  obstacle  is  insurmount- 
able, health,  happiness,  home-comfort,  honesty,  integrity,  conscience,  the  law  of 
God,  everything  is  sacrificed  to  the  god  of  ambition.  {Christian  Age.)  Yielding 
the  pre-eminence : — Old  Dr.  Alexander  used  to  say  to  ua  students,  •'  Young  brethren, 
«nvy  is  a  besetting  sin  with  the  ministry :  you  must  keep  that  abominable  spirit 
cinder."  When  a  servant  of  Christ  is  willing  to  take  a  back  seat,  or  to  yield  the 
pre-eminence  to  others,  he  is  making  a  surrender  which  is  well  pleasing  to  his  meek 
and  lowly  Master.  One  of  the  hardest  things  to  many  a  Christian  is  to  serve  his 
Saviour  as  a  ••  private,"  when  his  pride  tells  him  that  he  ought  to  wear  a  *•  shouider- 
strap"  in  Christ's  army.  {Ibid.)  Long  prayers. — Prayers  judged  by  wrigJU,  not 
length  : — God  takes  not  men's  prayers  by  tale,  but  by  weight.  He  respecteth  not 
the  arithmetic  of  our  prayers,  how  many  there  are ;  nor  the  rhetoric  of  cur  prayers, 
how  eloquent  they  are ;  nor  the  geometry  of  our  prayers,  how  long  they  are ;  nor 
the  music  of  our  prayers,  the  sweetness  of  our  voice  ;  nor  the  logic  of  our  prayers, 
nor  the  method  of  them ;  but  the  divinity  of  our  prayers  is  that  whieiiHe  so  much 
esteemeth.  He  looketh  not  for  any  James  with  homy  knees  tbfough  assiduity  in 
prayer ;  nor  for  any  Bartholomew  with  a  century  of  prayers  for  the  morning,  and 
as  many  for  the  evening ;  but  St.  Paul,  his  frequency  of  praying  with  fervency  of 
spirit,  without  all  tedious  prolixites  and  vain  babblings,  this  it  is  that  God  makes 
most  account  of.  It  is  not  a  servant's  going  to  and  fro,  but  the  despatch  of  his 
business,  that  pleases  his  master.  It  is  not  tibie  loudness  of  a  preacher's  voice,  but 
the  holiness  of  the  matter  and  the  spirit  of  the  preacher,  that  moves  a  wise  and  in 
telligent  hearer.  So  here,  not  gifts,  but  graces  in  prayer  move  the  Lord.  But  these 
long  prayers  of  the  Pharisees  were  so  much  the  worse,  because  thereby  they  sought 
to  entitle  God  to  their  Bin,  yea,  they  merely  mocked  Him,  fleering  in  His  face. 
{John  Trapp.) 

Vers.  41-44.  And  Jesru  sat  oyer  against  the  treasury. — T?te  treasury  teat: — The 
lesson  taught  by  this  narrative  is — man's  treatment  of  God's  treasury  the  true 
touchstone  of  piety.  L  God  has  ▲  tbbasury  in  His  ohubcb.  God  has  conferred 
on  man  various  kinds  of  material  possessions  and  property  for  use  and  enjoyment. 
Among  these,  money  has  become  the  portable  representative  and  circulating 
medium  of  all.  Far  above  these  possessions  is  the  privilege  of  sacred  worship. 
This  woold  be  an  argent  necessity  and  a  lofty  privilege  even  if  man  were  holy.  How 
much  more  now  that  he  is  a  sinner  I  As  all  material  arrangements  are  costful,  so 
also  is  worship.  If  man  could  not  meet  this  cost,  God  would.  As  man  can.  Why 
ehould  he  not  ?  Is  he  not  honoured  in  being  allowed  to  do  it  ?  Does  not  this  test 
his  character?  II.  Men  comtbibdtb  to  God's  tbxasuby  ni  vabious  mkasubes 
AND  VBOM  VABions  Moxmss.  The  Divine  rule  has  ever  been  acoording  to  one's 
power.  This  principle  is  definitely  stated  in  an  instance  for  universal  guidance 
(Lev.  V.  7, 11.) :  *'  As  God  hath  prospered. "  *'  Acoording  to  that  a  man  hath."  In 
the  temple  scene  before  us,  we  behold  the  devotion  of  every  coin,  from  the  golden 
mineh,  of  three  guineas  value,  to  the  mite  of  brass,  three-quarters  of  a  farth- 
ing. Motives  also  differ,  often  as  much  as  coins.  Some  give  from  neeessity. 
Some  give  from  a  sense  of  honesty ;  if  they  did  not  give,  debt  and  dishonour  must 
ensue.  Some  give  with  pride  and  self-righteousness  even  before  God.  Some  give 
from  habit  acquired  from  youth.  Some  give  with  holy  love  and  joy,  as  a  blessed 
privilege  and  rich  delight :  thus  did  the  widow ;  so  also  have  many  done  till  now. 

m.    ThS  SaVIOUB  OBSEBVXS  how  UXS  rSSAT  His  TBBASUBT,  AND   BT  THIS  Hs   TBSTS 

THXiB  LOVB  TO  HiMSELT.  As  worship  is  man's  highest  act,  its  gifts  should  be  rich 
and  substantial.  Jesus  beheld  men  at  the  treasury.  He  still  directs  His  eye 
thither;  not  that  He  needs  man's  gifts;  but  deeds  and  gifts  test  man's  love; 
also  they  elevate  and  refresh  man's  heart.  Men  test  others'  love  by  deeds  and 
gifts.  Jesus  challenges  us  to  test  the  love  of  God  thus.  IV.  Jesus  estimates  airrs 
OBivwvr  BT  WHAT  IS  BBTAiNKD.  This  principle  alone  accounts  for  the  higher  worth 
of  the  widow's  gift.  1.  This  estimate  of  gifts  acoording  to  what  is  retained  agrees 
with  reason.  Man's  gauge  of  the  moral  value  of  a  deed  is  the  power  of  the  doer. 
The  child  is  not  expected  to  put  forth  the  strength  of  a  man.  Less  force  is  looked 
for  from  the  feeble  than  the  strong  man.  A  s  all  gift  from  a  narrow  income  is 
esteemed  as  much  as  a  large  gift  from  a  vast  income.  2.  This  treasury  test  accords 
wiUi  general  life.  This  principle  is  acknowledge  in  all  departments  of  life.  Men 
leadily  meet  the  eost  of  their  chosen  pursuits  and  pleasures,  in  the  measure  of  their 
True  patriots  willingly  pay  national  o  larges,  aeeording  to  their  ability, 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  Coha*.  in. 

Faitbful  hnsbands  provide  for  their  wives,  in  the  measure  of  their  power.  Loving 
parents  nourish  their  children,  as  their  resooroes  allow.  Should  not  Christians  thns 
provide  for  the  Bervice  and  glory  of  Christ?  Notice  God's  rebuke  of  Israel'a 
neglect  of  this  principle  (Isa.  xliii.  22-24;  Jer.  vii.  18).  3.  This  treasury  test 
accords  with  universal  Scripture  demands.  God  tested  man's  confidence  and 
honesty  by  the  forbidden  fruit.  We  know  the  sad  issues.  Jesus  tests  our  obedi- 
ence, love,  and  devotion  by  a  treasury.  Besides  the  large  dedication  of  their  pro- 
perty to  the  national  religious  service,  Israel  were  commanded  to  open  a  treasury  to 
the  Lord,  to  build  a  tabernacle  (Exod.  xzxv. ,  xxxvi.) ;  David  to  build  a  temple 
(1  Chron.  xxix.) ;  Joash  to  meet  the  expenses  of  worship  (2  Kings  xii.  1,  9).  Thia 
woman  would  give  her  all  to  His  worship.  Who  doubts  her  love  T  But  did  she  aot 
prudently  ?  She  acted  according  to  the  rule.  She  acted  for  the  hour  and  the  occasion. 
She  would  not  make  herself  an  exception  to  the  rule.  She  gave  her  all  to  God. 
She  left  the  future  to  Him.  Does  any  one  think  she  starved  by  this  t  Behold 
what  a  grand-eur  the  smallest  service  acquires,  when  it  is  done  for  God  I  Observe 
what  magnificent  interest  and  enduring  renown  accrue  from  the  devotion  of  a 
creature's  all  to  God.  Jesus  did  not  disparage  the  other  gifts ;  He  simply  indicated 
their  true  relative  value,  and  attached  to  the  widow's  His  highest  commendation. 
Application : — 1.  God  has  a  treasury  for  human  hearts.  His  own  heart.  He  would 
have  your  heart  centre  in  love,  safety,  and  joy  in  His  own  heart.  He  wants  you 
there,  as  a  creature  who  can  love,  serve,  and  delight  in  Him.  He  claims  and 
demands  yon  for  His.  Christ  has  died  to  redeem  and  win  you  back  to  Him.  Will 
you  give  yourself  to  Him  now  just  as  you  are,  that  He  may  make  you  all  that  He 
can  delight  in,  that  you  may  find  Him  all  that  your  soul  can  desire  7  2.  Christ 
gathers  the  funds  of  His  kingdom  in  His  Church.  3.  All  worshippers  are  required 
to  give  as  a  duty.     4.  To  give  cheerfully  is  to  elevate  a  duty  into  a  privilege. 

5.  Jesus  thus  tests  His   friends  and  foes,   the  obedient  and    the  disobedient. 

6.  Jesus  waits  at  the  treasury  for  your  gift,  to  receive  it  at  your  hands,  to  bless  it, 
and  to  teach  you  how  to  use  it.  If  Christ  is  Lord  of  your  mind,  and  heart,  and 
life,  let  Him  be  also  of  your  silver  and  gold.  (John  Ross.)  Helper$  of  sacred 
institutions: — Surely  this  must  tell  us  what  it  did  to  those  that  stood  by  the 
Messiah.  The  principle  now  is  exactly  the  same  as  it  was  then,  as  certainly  as  any 
principle  governing  mattex  in  natural  laws.  The  young  man  may  say,  *'  I  am 
willing  to  do  my  share  for  sacred  causes  and  institutions ;  "  but  if  he  means  by 
that,  he  will  aid  them  after  he  gets  all  his  parties,  and  operas,  and  sleigh-rides,  and 
everything  besides  that  his  heart  can  wish — the  gift  for  which  he  will  not  deny 
himself  the  least  of  these  things,  must  be  before  heaven  less  than  the  least.  And 
the  man  of  business  may  say,  "  I  will  help ;  the  Lord  has  been  good  to  me,  I  will 
be  grateful ; "  if  gratitude  takes  the  form  of  that  he  can  well  spare,  and  yet  spare 
nothing  out  of  his  life.  But  after  he  has  purchased  with  the  talents  God  gave  him 
as  a  steward  everything  for  himself  that  he  can  possibly  need,  then  he  really 
spares  nothing,  makes  no  sacrifices,  gives  only  out  of  his  abundance,  and  is  stiU 
open  to  that  touch  of  fear,  that  he  may  not  even  be  dealing  fairly  with  the  Prin* 
oipal  who  has  committed  the  talents  to  his  trust ;  the  fear  which  good  old  brother 
Cecil  used  to  say,  always  gathers  about  stewards  and  agents  that  grow  uncommonly 
rich.  So  may  we  all  give,  no  matter  what  we  are,  a  poor  selvage  out  of  the  web  in 
our  ample  and  voluminous  robes ;  give  the  crusts  after  we  have  eaten  the  dinner ; 
spare  in  the  Lent  what  we  could  not  spend  in  the  Carnival — and  it  will  be  the 
same  to  every  one  of  us.  The  wise  all-seeing  eyes  will  see  us,  and  what  we  are 
doing,  and  the  angel  will  write  in  his  book  of  life,  "  He  gave  to  God  and  good  uses 
what  he  did  not  need  himself  for  any  uses.'*  Or  we  may  give  out  of  the  real  sub- 
stance ;  but  if  we  do  not  give  with  a  real  sacrifice,  I  have  no  authority  from  the 
Lord  to  say  that  the  poorant  Irish  washerwoman  in  this  town  who  gives  to  the 
Lord,  according  to  her  light,  her  two  mites,  which  make  one  farthing,  gives  it  out 
of  her  life  to  say  a  mass,  even  for  the  soul  of  her  wretched  sot  of  a  husband  who 
was  found  dead  in  the  Bridewe  — does  not  take  infinite  precedence  of  the  best  and 
most  generous  who  have  all  they  want,  and  then  do  ever  so  nobly  out  of  the  rest 
{R.  Colly er.)  The  widow's  mitet: — I.  Som  or  the  thinob  which  ths  imoioxnt 
BBVEALB  ooNCEBNiMa  Ghbist  Hiusklv.  1.  It  presents  Him  as  the  omniscient 
Teacher  of  hearts.  2.  By  what  a  different  standard  Christ  judges  men's  actions 
from  that  they  themselves  judge  by.  3.  His  eyes  are  upon  the  treasury  and  those 
who  contribute  to  it.  IL  Somb  ow  thb  things  which  this  ikoident  bxvrals  bb< 
■PEOTiNo  ouBSELVES.  1.  It  shows  that  offerings  to  the  Lord's  treasury  mns^  bear 
some  decent  proportion  to  what  He  has  bestowed  upon  us.    2.  Our  offerings  to  be 


.  xn.]  ST,  MARK.  511 

acceptable  mnst  be  felt  to  inToIve  some  sacrifice.  8.  Liberality  is  a  means  of  grace. 
III.  Thebb  abb  hkbb  lessons  yoB  THK  WHOLE  CHURCH.  1.  What  value  God  sets 
on  tittles.  2.  Christ  will  strictly  reckon  with  the  Church  for  all  the  wealth  bestowed 
npon  her.  (James  Moir,  M.A.)  Giving  ourselves  in  the  sacrifice: — ^schines, 
when  he  saw  nis  fellow-scholars  give  great  gifts  to  his  master,  Socrates,  he  being  poor 
and  having  nothing  else  to  bestow,  did  give  himself  to  Socrates,  as  confessing  to  be 
his  in  heart  and  goodwill,  and  wholly  at  his  devotion.  And  the  philosopher  took 
this  most  kindly,  esteeming  it  above  all  other  presents,  and  returned  him  love 
accordingly.  The  widow's  two  mites  were  welcome  into  His  treasury,  because  her 
heart  was  full,  though  her  purse  was  empty.  (Dr.  Donne.)  The  power  of  mites 
when  eombined: — There  is  now — a.d.  1887 — in  the  French  savings'  banks  the  sum 
of  £100,000,000  sterling.  These  savings'  banks  are  patronized  only  by  workmen, 
servants,  and  small  shopkeepers.  What  missions  might  be  founded  and  Christian 
work  accomplished,  if  professors  would  but  cast  their  mites  into  the  treasury. 
(Somerset  Express.)  Over  against  the  treasury  : — One  form  of  gift  which  is  found 
with  increasing  frequency  is  the  in  mem^riam  gift.  This  touching  form  of  offering 
in  rememberance  of  some  loved  one  is  a  beautiful  new  departure  from  the  old  mode, 
which  too  often  expressed  its  loss  only  by  the  stately  monument  in  the  quiet 
churchyard.  The  Christian  inventiveness  revealed  in  many  of  the  contributions  is 
significant.  A  young  lady  gathers  snowdrops  in  the  fields  around  Carnarvon,  and 
realizes  £2,  which  she  sends  to  Dr.  Bamardo.  A  friend  of  missions  puts  on  one 
side  all  the  threepenny  pieces  he  receives.  Talents,  such  as  painting  and  drawing, 
are  made  to  contribute  towards  sending  the  Gospel  across  the  seas.  In  many 
quaint  ways  Christian  inventiveness  helps  on  the  work  of  God  in  the  world. 
Another  class  of  contributions  are  the  thank-offerings.  One  sends  a  shilling — "  a 
thank-offering  for  God's  kindness  to  me  on  the  evening  of  March  1,  when  I  was  out 
in  that  severe  snowstorm."  An  old  lady  of  eighty  sends  a  thank-offering  because 
she  has  had  no  doctors'  bills  for  two  years  !  The  thank-offerings  of  parents  for  the 
recovery  of  children  from  sickness  are  also  frequent.  Then  there  is  the  sacrifice 
pure  and  simple.  The  ring,  the  pencil-case,  the  brooch,  the  treasured  coins,  given 
by  devoted  hearts  who  feel  that  "  if  missionaries  are  willing  to  give  up  the  comforts 
of  home  and  kindred,  and  to  sacrifice  their  Uves  even  for  the  love  they  have  for  the 
Master,  Christians  in  England  should  be  joyfully  ready  to  support  them  at  fdl  cost." 
A  form  of  contributions  peculiar  to  these  days  springs  from  the  growing  practice  of 
abstainers  to  devote  the  money  saved  by  giving  up  stimulants  to  missionary  and 
charitable  societies,  who  thus  save  their  money  from  doing  harm,  and  spend  it  in 
doing  good.  The  last,  but  not  the  least,  kind  of  offering  is  that  which  comes  firom 
the  stricken  themselves.  The  life-long  invalid,  the  afflicted,  the  maimed,  with  a 
sympathy  bom  of  pain,  and  a  Chnst-like  desire  to  relieve  and  help  other  lives,  are 
among  the  most  frequent  contributors  to  our  societies.  The  concealment  by  many 
of  the  donors  of  their  identity  is  another  feature  of  present-day  charity.  In  this 
present  time  this  anonymity  brings  its  reward,  for  it  saves  them  h-om  the  reiterated 
requests  of  the  importunate  letter- writers.  "  If  thou  hast  abundance  give  alms 
accordingly;  if  thon  hast  but  a  little,  be  not  afraid  to  give  according  to  that 
little.  (Edward  Dakiiu)  Small  gifts : — Jesns  commends  the  worshipper  who  put 
in  the  smallest  gift.  This  was  strange.  Why  did  He  do  it  ?  Two  reasons.  1.  Be- 
cause she  gave  her  heart  with  it :  and  God  wants  hearts,  not  coins,  and  coins  only 
when  they  carry  with  them  hearts.  2.  Because  hers  was  really  a  great  gift  in  pro- 
portion to  her  means.  Sixpence  from  one  may  be  really  more  than  a  sovereign 
from  another.  The  sixpence  may  come  from  one  who  has  but  few  shillings  a 
week ;  the  sovereign  from  one  who  has  thousands  a  year.  This  woman  gave  alL 
Hers  was  a  great  sacrifice.  The  duty  of  giving  in  proportion  to  our  means : — Dean 
Ramsay  relates  of  a  certain  penurious  laird  in  Fife,  whose  weekly  oontributbns  to 
the  church  collection,  notwithstanding  his  largely  increasing  wealth,  never  exceeded 
the  sum  of  one  penny,  that  he,  one  day,  by  mistake,  dropped  into  the  plate  at  the 
door  a  five-shilling  piece,  but,  discovering  his  error  before  he  was  seated  in  his  pew, 
hurried  back,  and  was  about  to  replace  the  silver  coin  by  his  customary  penny, 
when  the  elder  in  attendance  cried  out,  "  Stop,  laird,  ye  may  put  what  ye  like  in, 
but  ye  maun  tak'  naething  out.**  The  laird,  finding  his  explanations  went  for 
nothing,  at  last  said,  "  Aweel,  I  suppose  I'll  get  credit  for  it  in  heaven."  *<  Na,  na, 
laird,"  said  the  elder,  "yell  only  get  credit  for  the  penny."  It  is  not  the  amount 
of  our  gift,  but  the  proportion  of  it,  and  the  spirit  of  it  which  are  noticed,  and  com- 
mended by  Ghrist.  The  widowU  gift  of  her  sons : — The  eldest  son  of  a  widowed 
mother  went  oat  to  missionary  work  in  Western  Africa.    In  a  short  time  he  fUIed 


51t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  xu. 

a  missionary's  grave.  There  was  another  son  left  at  home,  and  he  eame  to  hit 
mother  and  said,  *•  Mother,  let  me  go,  and  I  will  take  my  stand  by  my  brother's 
grave.  I  will  preach  to  my  brother's  people.  I  will  tell  them  of  my  brother's  God." 
He  went,  and  it  was  not  long  before  there  were  two  graves  in  that  heathen  land, 
and  the  brothers  were  sleeping  side  by  side ;  at  least  their  ashes  were ;  their  spirits, 
no  doubt,  were  safe  in  the  heavenly  land.  The  news  came  to  the  mother,  and  the 
story  said  she  wept  sore.  Her  mourning  friends  tried  to  comfort  her.  •*  Oh,"  she 
said,  "  you  do  not  understand  my  grief.  I  am  not  mourning  because  two  of  my 
lads  have  filled  a  missionary's  grave  in  Africa.  I  grieve  because  I  have  not  a  third 
son  to  die  in  the  same  cause."  {Handbook  to  Scripture  Doctrines.)  Motive 
the  meoiure  of  the  acceptability  of  giftt: — Xenophon  tells  us  of  Socrates,  that  when 
he  sacrificed  he  feared  not  his  offering  would  faU  of  acceptance  in  that  he  was  poor ; 
but,  giving  according  to  his  ability,  he  doubted  not  but,  in  the  sight  of  the  gods,  he 
equalled  those  men  whose  gifts  and  sacrifices  overspread  the  whole  altar;  for 
Socrates  ever  deemed  it  a  most  indubitable  truth,  that  the  service  paid  to  the  Deity 
by  the  pure  and  pious  soul  was  the  most  grateful  service.  As  with  what  Plutarch 
relates  of  Artaxerxes,  out  on  a  royal  progress,  during  which  people  presented  him 
with  a  variety  of  gifts ;  but  "  a  labouring  man,  having  nothing  else  to  give  him,  ran 
to  the  river,  and  brought  him  some  water  in  his  hands.  Artaxerxes  was  so  much 
pleased  that  he  sent  the  man  a  gold  cup  and  a  thousand  darios."  (Francit  Jacox.) 
Give  till  you  feel  it: — A  religion  which  costs  nothing  is  good  for  nothing.  Like  a 
certain  kind  of  faith  which  we  read  of,  "it  is  dead,  being  alone."  How  much 
meaning  was  conveyed  in  the  reply  which  one  man  made  to  another  who  offered  to 
contribute  a  small  amount  to  some  benevolent  object,  and  said,  '*  I  can  give  this 
and  not  feel  it  1 "  •*  Would  it  not  be  better  for  you,  my  friend,  to  increase  it  to 
such  an  amount  that  you  will  feel  it  ?  "  So  in  every  case.  A  person  should  feel 
what  he  does,  and  should  do  what  he  will  be  likely  to  feel,  or  morally  there  will  be 
but  very  little  good  resulting  from  it.  {Quarterly  Journal.)  Giving  her  all  to 
God : — In  the  beautiful  Island  of  Ceylon,  a  few  years  ago,  the  native  Christians 
decided  that  they  must  have  a  church  built  for  themselves.  To  the  amazement  of 
all,  Maria  Peabody,  a  lone  orphan  girl  who  had  been  in  the  schools  at  Oodooville, 
came  forward  and  offered  to  give  the  land  upon  which  to  build — the  best  site  in  her 
native  village.  Not  only  was  it  all  she  owned  in  this  world,  but  it  was  her 
marriage  portion,  and  in  making  the  gift  she  renounced  all  hopes  of  being  mar- 
ried. As  this,  in  the  East,  is  regarded  as  an  awful  step,  many  thought  her 
beside  herself,  and  tried  to  dissuade  her  from  her  purpose.  **  No,"  said  Maria, 
"  I  have  given  it  to  Jesus,  and  as  He  has  accepted,  you  must."  Maria  Peabody's 
schooling  had  been  paid  for  years  by  a  coloured  servant  in  Salem,  Massachusetts, 
whose  wages  were  rather  more  than  a  dollar  (48.)  a  week.  {Light  and  Life.) 
Tlie  widov'i  donation: — Eeligion  is  the  road  to  honour.  Little  did  this  woman 
imagine  she  was  doing  an  act  that  would  be  handed  down,  for  the  admiration  of 
mankind,  to  the  end  of  time.  This  is  the  only  instance  recorded  in  history,  of  an 
individual  going  the  whole  of  his  or  her  possessions.  Observe  from  this  incident : 
— 1.  That  God  employs  man's  instrumentality,  for  carrying  on  His  work.  Not  of 
necessity,  but  to  exhibit  His  grace  and  power.  2.  That  we  should  combine  in  oar 
rdigion,  piety,  zeal,  and  humanity.  We  must  come  to  Christ  ourselves,  before  trying 
to  benefit  others.  We  must  make  it  a  matter  of  conscience  to  influence  others  for 
good.  While  caring  for  men's  souls,  we  must  also  have  regard  to  the  comfort  of 
5ieir  bodies.  3.  That  the  Saviour  is  ever  watching  His  treasury,  and  those  who 
come  up  to  it,  or  pass  it  by.  He  notes  all  our  opportunities  for  doing  good,  and 
whether  we  embrace  or  reject  them.  How  this  should  impel  us  to  look  to  oar 
motives,  spirit  actions ;  and  stimulate  us  to  do  our  utmost.  4.  That  there  is  great 
propriety  in  contributing  to  collective  funds  for  public  objects.  The  relief  of  men's 
bodily  miseries  cannot  be  met  without  hospitals,  dispensaries,  &o.;  so  it  is  our  dal^ 
to  support  them.  Especially  should  we  take  care  that  everything  connected  with 
public  worship  is  well  sustained.  It  was  a  gift  for  the  service  of  the  temple  that 
won  this  high  commendation  from  the  Saviour.  {J.  A.  Jame$.)  The  mdow*$ 
farthing : — In  that  court  of  the  temple  called  the  court  of  the  women,  there  stood 
thirteen  vessels,  shaped  liked  trumpets,  to  receive  offerings.  Shaped  like  trumpets  I 
surely  a  sarcasm  is  lurking  here.  As  tlie  rich  man  drops  in  much,  the  clash  of  it 
sets  the  trumpet  blowing,  and  all  the  temple  knows  what  a  liberal  man  is  passing 
by.  But  two  mites  would  cause  the  trumpet  to  sound  very  faintly,  if  at  all.^  Yet 
Love  can  see  love,  and  will  honour  it.  Christ  views  it  not  relatively  to  what  it  will 
boy,  bat  to  the  love  that  gave  it.    Bat  there  is  no  ascetic  or  envious  disparagement 


caiAp.  zn.j  ST.  MARK.  513 

of  riches  in  Christ's  praise  of  this  tiny  ofifering.  Great  gifts  are  jast  as  capable  of 
illustrating  pore  motives  as  small  ones.  1.  If,  then,  Christ  thought  much  less  of 
the  rich  men's  gifts  than  they  did  themselves,  it  was  because  they  gave  (1)  for 
ostentation,  loving  (so  to  say)  the  trumpet  much  more  than  the  temple,  (2)  without 
a  grateful  sense  of  personal  obligation,  and  (3)  with  little  spiritual  appreciation  of 
the  true  glory  of  Jehovah's  service,  or  (4)  because  usage  so  required,  and  policy  urged 
their  observance  of  the  usage,  though  their  heart  inwardly  grudged  the  offering.  2. 
And  if  Christ  thought  much  more  of  the  widow's  gift  than  any  of  these  men  would 
have  done,  or  even  His  own  disciples,  it  was  because  of  (1)  the  grateful  love  she 
manifested,  (2)  the  deep  sense  of  religious  blessings  she  evinced,  (3)  the  self-respect 
that  valued  a  share  in  spiritual  obligations,  and  would  not  allow  penury  to  be  an 
excuse  for  withholding  an  offering,  (4)  that  confiding  trust  shown  towards  God, 
which  would  not  divide  the  last  farthing  with  Him,  giving  Him  one  mite  and  keeping 
the  other,  but  which  gave  him  both.  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  Offerings  for  God's  treasury  : 
— Observe  these  four  points.  I.  Thk  contrast.  It  is  not  the  poor,  or  widows, 
that  Christ  contrasts  with  rich  men,  but  a  widow.  She  was,  perhaps,  in  almost 
as  great  contrast  to  many  of  her  own  class  as  to  these ;  for  many  of  the  poor 
forget  God,  and  offer  Him  nothing,  because  they  have  but  little ;  and  many  widows 
make  widowhood  worse  by  murmuring.  But  circumstances  may  be  imagined  in 
which  it  would  not  have  been  right  for  the  widow  to  give  away  her  last  farthing. 
But  why  suppose  she  was  in  such  circumstances  ?  A  heart  that  so  loved  God, 
as  hers  did,  would  understand  Him  too  well  to  divert  the  last  farthing  from  the 
service  of  her  sick  child,  if  she  had  one.  Then,  perhaps,  God  would  have  received 
only  a  mite.  She  threw  herself  utterly  on  God's  Providence,  and  would  not  with- 
hold from  Him  even  the  half  of  her  last  farthing.  U.  The  lesson.  Christ  might 
have  said,  "  See  how  these  rich  men  can  offer  openly  in  the  temple ;  how  much  better 
would  it  be  to  give  private  aid  to  this  poor  widow.  That  would  be  real  love ;  this 
is  but  paraded  zeal."  He  might  have  said  this,  but  He  did  not.  Instead  of 
directing  attention  to  what  the  poor  want  done  for  them,  He  pointed  to  what  they 
(in  spite  of  their  poverty)  do ;  instead  of  teaching  His  disciples  liberality  towards 
them.  He  here  bids  all  men  learn  from  their  liberality.  UI.  The  Masteb's 
ATTITUDE.  Christ  "sat  over  against  the  treasury,"  as  if  placing  Himself  there  on 
purpose  to  observe.  Our  gifts  are  offered  under  the  Divine  eye.  We  know  the 
difference  between  a  bad  half-crown  and  a  good  one ;  but  we  think  a  half-crown 
from  a  bad  man  and  from  a  good  one  of  the  same  value.  Christ,  doubtless,  thinks 
otherwise.  He  tries  the  heart  as  well  as  the  money ;  notices  what  our  spiritual  temper 
is,  and  what  proportion  our  gifts  bear  to  our  possessions.  IV.  The  motive.  Though 
money  came  plentifully  to  the  treasury,  and  the  splendid  temple  was  sustained  by 
splendid  offerings,  yet  this  vigour  of  the  "voluntary  principle"  did  not  prevent 
Christ  from  being  crucified,  nor  avail  to  keep  the  temple  standing.  It  was  not  the 
purified  will  of  believing  hearts  that  brought  the  plentiful  money.  There  may  be 
strong  motives  for  supporting  "religion,"  when  there  is  in  the  heart  bitter  enmity 
against  the  very  religion  sustained.  (Ibid.)  The  woman  who  gave  her  all : — L  God 
still  has  a  treasury  open.  II.  The  poorest  may  make  some  offering.  III.  Christ 
still  watches  over  against  the  treasury.  lY.  God's  estimate  of  gifts  differs  from 
ours.  V.  Gk)d  looks  at  motives  as  well  as  gifts.  YL  An  individual  unconscious  of 
God's  high  estimate.  [T.  Sherlock,  B.A.)  The  widow's  acceptable  offering  : — I. 
Great  hearts  are  often  found  where  great  sorrows  have  been  before  them.  H.  Little 
services  and  little  gifts  are  needed  by  man  and  noted  by  God.  If  we  can  only  give 
even  two  mites,  God  will  not  despise  the  offering.  HI.  Had  this  woman  listened 
to  excuses,  she  would  have  lost  her  great  honour  and  reward.  IV.  More  justice 
should  be  done  to  the  giving  of  the  poor,  for  their  generosity  still  supasses  that  of 
any  other  class.  God  notes  their  gifts  of  money,  whose  necessary  smallness  permits 
them  to  be  overlooked  by  men.  0  what  a  gospel  for  the  poor  is  here !  (R.  GUwer.) 
The  widow's  offering  : — I.  The  occasion  dbsceibed.  GiU  says  there  were  thirteen 
chests  placed,  six  of  which  were  to  receive  the  freewill  offerings  of  the  people.  Mao- 
knight  says  they  stood  in  the  second  court,  and  each  had  an  inscription,  signifying 
for  what  use  the  offerings  were  destined.  The  chief  objects  were  to  repair  and 
beautify  the  temple.  The  whole,  however,  was  voluntary.  IL  Thb  lesson  taught. 
That  the  value  of  the  offering  depends  chiefly  on  the  state  of  the  heart  1.  Some 
that  were  rich  gave  liberally.  (1)  No  doubt,  some  gave  ostentatiously.  (2) 
Perhaps  some  gave  in  a  self-righteous  spirit.  (3)  Probably  some  gave  only  because 
it  was  customary.  (4)  Possibly  some  gave  dishonestly,  who  should  have  paid  their 
debts ;  and  thus  gave  '*  robbery  for  burnt-offering,"  which  God  declares  thai  He 

83 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chaf.  m. 


abhors.  (6)  Others,  no  doubt,  gave  grudgingly.  1.  Of  the  poor  widow  it  u  said 
that  she  gave  but  two  mites,  which  make  a  farthing.  What  were  the  motives  which 
rendered  her  offering  so  precious  in  the  Saviour's  sight?  (1)  Her  love  to  God.  (2) 
Her  trust  in  His  providing  care.    IIL  But  what  would  Chbibt  have  said  to  thosb 

WHO  OAVE  NOTHING,  W  THXBS  WBBK  ANT  SUCH  WHO  PASSED  IN   BEVIBW  BBFOBB  HiM  ? 

(Evangelical  Preacher.)        Two  mite$ ;— A  woman  who  was  known  to  be  very  poor, 
came  to  a  missionary  meeting  in  Wakefield,  and  offered  to  subscribe  a  penny  a  week  to 
the  mission  fund.  ♦•  Surely,"  said  one,"  you  are  too  poor  to  afford  this  ?  "  She  replied, 
"  I  spin  so  many  hanks  of  yam  a  week  for  my  living,  and  I'll  spin  one  hank  more, 
and  that  will  be  a  penny  a  week  for  the  society."        Loving  and  giving  .'—Ytom 
this  passage  we  may  learn :  L  That  God  is  pleased  with  offerings  made  to  Him  and 
His  cause.    II.  That  it  is  our  duty  to  devote  our  property  to  God.    We  received  it 
from  Him ;  we  are  stewards,  <fec.     III.  That  the  highest  evidence  of  love  to  the  caase 
of  religion  is  not  the  amount  given,  but  the  amount  compared  with  our  means. 
rV.  That  it  may  be  proper  to  give  all  our  property  to  God,  and  to  depend  on  His 
providence  for  the  supply  of  our  wants.    V.  That  God  does  not  despise  the  humblest 
offering,  if  made  in  sincerity.    He  loves  a  cheerful  giver.    VI.  That  there  are  none 
who  may  not  in  this  way  show  their  love  to  the  cause  of  religion.    The  time  to  begin 
to  be  benevolent  is  in  early  life.    VII.  That  it  is  every  man's  duty  to  make  inquiry, 
not  how  much  he  gives,  but  how  much  compared  with  what  he  has ;  how  much  self- 
denial  he  practises,  and  what  is  the  motive  with  which  it  is  done.    VIII.  Few 
practise  self-denial  for  the  purpose  of  charity.     Most  give  of  their  abundance— what 
they  can  spare  without  feeling  it,  and  many  feel  that  this  is  the  same  as  throwing 
it  away.    Among  all  the  thousands  who  give,  how  few  deny  themselves  of  one 
comfort,  even  the  least,  that  they  may  advance  the  kingdom  of  Christ.     {A.  Barnes^ 
D.D.)        The  widow's  mites : — I.  Christ's  notice  of  apparently  trivial  things. 
This  is  not  incompatible  with  true  greatness.    Things  are  not  always  as  trivial  as 
they  appear.    The  fact  affords  encouragement  to  those  whose  means  are  small  and 
whose  opportunities  are  few.     IL  The  nature  or  true  benevolence.    1.  It  is 
unobtrusive.    The  widow  did  not  want  to  be  observed.    *•  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not 
your  alms  before  men,"  Ac.    The  gifts  most  acceptable  to  God  do  not  always  appear 
in  the  subscription  hst.    2.  It  is  spontaneous.    "  The  Lord  loveth  a  cheerful  giver." 
Love  must  rule  us  in  giving,  as  in  other  matters.     The  word  charity  stands  for 
love.     3.  It  is  self-denying.     God  is  best  pleased  when  our  gifts  cost  us  something. 
He  judges  less  by  what  is  given  than  by  what  is  left  behind.     4.  It  involves  trust 
in  God.     She  cast  in  all  that  she  had.    Faith  asks  no  questions.     It  concerns  itself 
with  present  duty,  and  leaves  the  future  with  God.     Have  you  of  your  abundance 
or  of  your  penury  cast  into  the  treasury?    If  Christ  gave  Himself  for  you,  is  it 
unreasonable  that  He  should  ask  you  for  your  money?    (Seeds  and  Saplings.) 
The  due  proportion  of  Christian  benevolence : — I.  As  rr  bkgards  thb  individuaii 
contributing.    1.  There  should  always  be  a  due  proportion  observed  between  an 
individual's  contributions  and  his  means.    Appearances  are  often  considered.   Pre- 
cedent and  example  have  a  painful  influence.     Strongly  execited  feelmg  is  not 
unfrequently  a  cause  of  error  and  of  sin  in  our  benevolent  contributions,  nor  must 
it  be  concealed  that  men  are  often  lured,  in  the  present  day,  by  the  fame  and 
splendour  of  an  institution,  rather  than  by  its  intrinsic  merits,  to  contribute  to  its 
funds.    There  should  be  a  due  proportion  observed  between  an  individual's  con- 
:tribution8  and  his  means ;  a  man's  means  are  to  be  determined  by  what  he  has — 
what  he  owes— what  he  can  obtain  by  exertion— and  what  he  can  save  by  economy. 
2.  There  should  be  a  proportion  observed  between  an  individual's  contributions  and 
aiis  station.     8.  There  should  also  be  a  proportion  between  our  benevolent  con- 
tributions and  our  opportunities  of  doing  good.    II.  To  the  objects  of  benevolbnt 
contribution.    The  souls  of  men  are  to  be  preferred  before  their  bodies ;  we  must 
do  good  to  them  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith.    Remarks :  1.  See  that  what 
you  give  in  the  cause  of  Christian  benevolence  is  from  love  to  Christ,  and  to  the 
souls  of  men.    2.  Give  as  much  as  possible  in  secret,  and  this  will  at  once  relieve 
you  from  the  suspicion  that  you  give  to  be  seen  of  men.    8.  Never  pride  yourself 
on  what  you  give.    4.  Consider  what  Christ  gave  for  you,  and  be  ashamed  that  you 
should  give  Him  bo  little  in  return.     (T.  Baffles,  LL.D.)        The  widow's  gift  .— 
I.  The  orvEB :  a  widow,  and  a  poor  widow.     The  widow  alone  understands  widow. 
hood ;  it  must  be  felt  to  be  known.    God  knows  its  grief.    Sorrow  often  makea 
people  selfish,  but  this  benevolent  donor  was  a  widow,  and  she  was  poor.    Perhaps 
a  young  widow  whose  husband  had  been  cut  off  before  he  could  provide  for  his  own 
Jioose.  Poverty,  like  rain,  comes  tcom  several  quarters,  and  is  not  easy  to  be  borne. 


«HAP.  xn.]  ST.  MABK.  615 

whether  the  wind  that  brings  it  blow  from  east  or  west,  from  south  or  north. 
With  poverty  we  generally  associate  getting,  not  giving.  This  poor  widow  was 
pious  and  generous ;  the  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit.  II.  The  oift.  Money  was 
her  gift ;  hard  to  get,  hard  to  hold,  hard  to  part  with ;  the  severest  test  of  religious 
integrity.  The  commercial  value  is  small,  but  the  value  to  her  is  great.  Wealth 
called  it  small,  commerce  called  it  small,  religious  custom  reckoned  it  small ;  but 
in  relation  to  the  means  and  heart  of  the  donor,  and  in  the  judgment  of  God,  the 
gift  was  exceeding  great.  III.  The  place,  oe  scene  of  the  gift.  It  was  bestowed 
in  the  temple  of  God,  deposited  in  one  of  the  thirteen  boxes  in  the  women's  court. 
It  is  meet  and  right  that  we  give  where  we  receive.  IV.  And  what,  fourthly,  was 
THE  OBJECT  OF  THIS  GIFT  ?  These  two  mites  were  given  as  a  freewill  offering  to 
the  support  of  the  temple,  its  institutions  and  its  services,  and  the  offering  them 
with  this  intent  constituted  this  "  certain  poor  widow  "  a  contributor  to  aU  that 
he  temple  yielded — to  all  it  offered  to  heaven,  and  to  all  it  gave  to  the  children 
of  men.  The  incense  and  the  light  and  the  fire  and  the  shewbread  and  the  daily 
sacrifices  were,  in  part,  this  woman's  oblation.  She  helped  to  clothe  the  priests  in 
their  holy  garments,  to  supply  the  altars  with  oblations,  and  to  preserve  the  order, 
decency,  and  beauty  of  the  house  of  God«  Say  not,  she  gave  only  two  mites.  This 
voluntary  offering,  although  commercially  so  small,  as  really  contributed  to  sup- 
port the  temple,  as  the  immense  revenue  derived  from  tithes  and  other  appointed 
contributions.  Jehovah  received  these  two  mites,  and  the  world  was  by  this  offer- 
ing  made  a  debtor.  V.  The  spirit  of  the  offering.  Was  it  gratitude  for  benefits 
received  ?  She  may  have  valued  more  highly  the  benefit  of  God's  sanctuary,  since 
she  became  a  mourning  widow,  than  while  she  was  a  rejoicing  wife.  She  had  there 
heard  words  of  consolation  which  had  healed  her  wounded  heart  (Psa.  Ixviii.  6 ; 
cxlvi.  9).  What  impulse  opened  her  hand  ?  Was  it  the  force  of  haUowed  and 
pleasant  association  ?  Her  fathers  worshipped  there.  She  could  say,  "  Lord,  I 
have  loved  the  habitation  of  Thy  house  "  (Psa.  xxvi.  8).  The  spirit  of  the  offering 
was  the  spirit  of  true  piety  and  of  real  godliness.  VI.  The  Divine  recognition 
OF  THE  gift.  Jesus  Christ  saw  the  gift,  estimated,  approved,  and  commended  the 
giver.  He  did  not  speak  to  her,  but  of  her,  in  an  undertone  to  the  disciples.  "  No 
person  takes  any  account  of  what  I  do,"  some  disciples  are  heard  to  complain. 
Thy  fellow-servants  may  fail  to  recognize,  but  the  Master  never  fails.  Jesus  is  in 
a  position  to  see,  and  He  is  disposed  to  observe.  Everything  that  is  human  ie 
interesting  to  Him,  and  all  that  is  right  is  attractive.  Some  people  only  see  faults. 
Jesus  approves  all  that  He  can  approve.  He  gives  the  testimony  of  a  good  con- 
science. Vn.  Look  at  the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  calls  attention  to  this 
giFT.  1.  That  the  greatness  of  a  gift  depends  upon  the  possessions  of  the  in- 
dividual after  the  gift  has  been  made.  2.  That  grief  need  not  hinder  giving.  The 
child  of  sorrow  doubly  needs  the  returns  which  acts  of  piety  and  charity  invariably 
bring.  3.  And  shall  we  not  be  taught  by  this  incident  to  learn  well-doing  from 
each  other?  The  Head  Teacher  bids  His  disciples  learn  from  this  certain  poor  woman. 
He  makes  her  a  kind  of  object  lesson.  4.  Let  us  learn  to  act  as  under  our 
Great  Master's  eye.  He  sees  us.  He  speaks  of  you,  it  may  be  to  His  angels  and 
glorified  saints.  And  what  can  He  say  of  you?  (S.  Martin.)  Giving  in  the 
sanctuary : — It  is  meet  and  right  that  we  give  where  we  receive.  The  tree  yields 
its  fruit  on  the  very  spot  where  it  has  been  nourished  by  the  earth ;  there,  where  it 
has  received  the  light  and  air  and  heat  of  heaven,  does  it  hold  up  as  into  the 
face  of  heaven  its  increase.  The  child  gives  joy  to  the  parent  in  the  home  whose 
very  walls  remind  the  mother  of  her  anguish.  The  place  of  an  unsealed  spring  is 
the  seat  of  a  flowing  fountain.  And  it  seems  but  meet  that,  in  the  place  where 
we  receive,  we  give.  And  what  a  place  of  blessing  is  a  true  house  of  the  Lord  ;  it 
is  Bethel  and  holy  ground,  it  is  beautiful  Zion  and  Bethesda,  a  house  of  light,  and 
life,  and  love,  of  healing,  and  salvation,  and  redemption.  (Ibid.)  Christ  mindful 
of  our  love  service : — He  who  knows  how  much  I  am  loved,  knows  how  I  love ;  He 
who  knows  all  that  I  receive,  and  how  I  receive,  knows  what  I  give,  and  in  what 
spirit.  It  is  possible  that  my  very  gifts  to  His  Church  may  grieve  Him.  Not  that 
He  is  hard  to  please;  He  waits,  looks,  longs  to  delight  in  the  doings  of  His 
disciples.  Their  good  works  may  be  concealed  like  violets  in  the  tall  grass  of  the 
forests,  but  He  will  scent  their  fragrance;  they  may  be  feeble  as  the  new-bom 
infant,  but  He  will  rejoice  over  them  as  over  the  bright  beginning  of  blessed 
life  ;  they  may  be  imperfect  as  some  flower  or  fruit  in  a  formative  state,  but  He  wilj 
see  the  end  from  the  beginning;  they  may  wear  an  appearance  of  evil,  but  He  will 
look  deeper  than  the  surface ;  they  may  be  condemned  by  His  disoiples,  bat  they 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (( 


shall  be  approved  by  Himself,  and  He  will  show  to  the  universe  that  He  is  not  on- 
righteous,  to  forget  any  work  of  faith  or  service  of  love.    (Ibid.)        The  twt 

mite$ : I.  That  thbeb  may  bb  more  splendour  in  bomb  obscure  thino  we  never 

stop  to  notice,  and  would  not  care  for  if  we  did,  than  there  is  in  the  things  thai 
DAZZLX  CUB  8I0HT  iND  CAPTIVATE  OUR  HEARTS.  1.  We  have  all  tried  to  notice  this 
among  children.  One  little  child  runs  all  the  errands,  makes  all  the  sacrifices, 
but  beyond  that  is  a  little  nobody  ;  plain,  small ;  not  brilliant.  This  is  the  two- 
mite  child  of  the  family ;  the  small  piece  of  home  heroism,  of  a  worth  surpassing 
all  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  household  besides ;  the  little  one  Chiist  would  see  if 
He  came  and  sat  down  in  the  house.  2.  We  notice  this  again  in  the  Church. 
Some  naturally  attract  applause  by  their  gifts ;  others  no  more  attention  than  this 
widow  with  her  two  mites.  They  say  their  poor  word.  It  is  their  sorrow  that  they 
cannot  do  more;  but  the  joy  of  heaven  that  they  do  so  much.  3.  This  is  true  of 
the  whole  life  we  are  living.  There  are  many  never  seen  or  known  who  cast  in 
more  than  the  brilliant  characters  who  cast  in  of  their  abundance.  11.  It  was 
an  illustration  of  this  law  of  our  life,  that  the  most  God-like  deed  is  that  wmcB 
BELONGS  to  THE  SACRIFICES  WE  MAKE,  giving  for  sacred  things  and  causes  that 
which  costs  us  most,  and  is  most  indispensable,  and  yet  is  given  back  to  God. 
Nothing  was  worth  a  thought  in  this  poor  widow's  gift,  but  the  sacrifice  it  cost  her 
to  give.  The  whole  worth  of  it  lay  in  that  piece  of  her  very  life  which  went  with 
it,  but  that  made  the  two  mites  outweigh  the  whole  sum  of  silver  and  gold  cast  in 
by  the  wealthy,  which  cost  nothing,  beyond  the  effort  to  give  what  a  very  natural 
instinct  would  prompt  them  to  keep.  They  gave  of  their  fulness,  she  of  her 
emptiness;  they  of  the  ever-springing  fountain,  she,  the  last  drop  in  her  cup.  It 
was  not  the  sum,  but  the  sacrifice  that  made  the  deed  sublime.  III.  We  learn,  in 
this  simple  and  most  obvious  way,  of  that  whole  world  of  grace  and  truth  that 
culminated  on  Calvary.  {R.  Colly er.)  The  icem  .---Here  comes  a  merchant ;  the 
times  are  hard,  he  tells  you ;  nothing  doing,  taxes  heavy,  losses  large,  and  things 
so  bad  generally,  that  you  have  to  say,  "  What  a  misfortune  it  must  be  to  be  a 
merchant."  But  you  have  to  notice  that  his  chariot  is  of  the  latest  style,  and  by 
the  best  maker ;  his  robes  of  the  finest  texture  and  colour ;  his  diamonds  of  the 
purest  water ;  and,  altogether,  for  a  man  in  such  hard  trial,  he  looks  very  well. 
Yesterday  he  looked  over  his  accounts ;  he  will  not  tell  you  wha»t  he  saw  there,  but, 
certainly,  he  did  not  seem  any  worse  for  the  sight.  This  morning,  before  he  goes 
to  his  store,  he  will  go  to  the  temple ;  he  will  be  thankful,  to  the  extent  of  offering 
a  lamb ;  and  then  there  is  a  little  balance,  when  all  is  done,  that  he  would  like  to 
drop  into  the  treasury.     A  little  balance !  but  it  would  buy  all  that  widow  has  in 

this  world, the  hut  she  lives  in,  all  the  furniture,  and  all  the  garments  she  has  to 

keep  her  from  the  cold.  Very  low  the  priest,  who  stands  by  the  chest  that  day, 
bows  to  the  generous  gift ;  the  holy  man  would  be  horrified  if  you  told  him  he  was 
worshipping  a  golden  idol,  but  it  is  true  for  all  that.  Then  the  great  merchant 
passes  on,  and  you  see  him  no  more ;  he  has  given  out  of  his  abundance ;  he  will 
not  need  to  deny  himself  one  good  thing  for  what  he  has  given.  If  a  new  picture 
strikes  his  fancy,  he  will  ask  the  price,  and  then  say,  "Send  that  round  to  my 
house  ; "  he  will  have  his  venison,  all  the  same,  whether  it  is  a  sixpence  a  pound 
or  a  dollar ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  he  will  have  his  balance  undamaged,  in 
spite  of  the  hard  times.  He  has  given  out  of  his  abundance ;  but,  considering  the 
abundance,  he  has  not  given  as  the  widow  did.  Then  there  comes  a  lady.  Yon 
can  see  that  she  is  not  looking  well,  and  the  world  goes  hard.  This  has  been 
a  hard  year  for  her.  Sbe  has  had  to  give  parties,  and  attend  parties ;  to  dress, 
and  dance,  and  smile  when  she  wanted  to  weep ;  and  lose  her  rest,  and  bo  a 
slave  that  the  slaves  themselves,  if  they  had  any  sense  of  what  she  is,  and  has  to 
do,  might  pity.  The  season  is  over,  and  now  she  must  think  of  her  soul — ^her 
poor  soul.  She  must  repent  in  dust  and  ashes ;  go  to  the  temple ;  give  to  the  poor, 
and  to  the  support  of  the  true  faith ;  and  altogether  lead  a  new  life.  It  is  the 
most  exquisite  "  make  up  "  of  dust  and  ashes  on  the  avenue  that  morning.  She 
sweeps  on  in  her  humility,  gathering  her  garments  of  penitence  about  her,  lest 
even  a  fringe  should  touch  the  beggar  at  the  gate.  She  stops  a  moment  to  give  her 
gift ;  low  bows  the  priest  again  as  she  passes,  and  she  takes  her  place  among  the 
women,  and  says  her  prayers,  and  her  soul  is  shriven.  May  we  venture  to  watch 
her  back  to  her  home,  and  see  the  luxury  that  waits  her  ?  Is  there  one  jewel,  or 
one  robe  Uie  less  for  what  she  has  given,  or  one  whim  the  less  gratified,  when  the 
time  for  penitence  is  over,  and  the  season  opens  ?  I  see  no  sign  of  that.  I  nevei 
hear  her  say,  "  This  and  that  I  will  forego,  that  I  may  give.    She  has  given  of  hai 


OBAV.  XXL]  8T,  MARK,  611 

abnndanoe;  the  simply  porohased  a  new  laxnry,  and  got  it  obeap,  and  she  fades 
out  of  sight  and  ont  of  life.  Yon  see  others  oome  with  better  gifts,  not  so  much,  it 
may  be,  in  mere  money  value,  but  more  in  those  pore  eyes  that  are  watching  that 
day,  not  for  the  amount  of  the  gifts,  bat  for  their  meaning.  A  decent  farmer 
follows  the  fine  lady,  forehanded,  and  fuU  of  industry.  His  crops  have  done  well ; 
his  bams  are  full ;  his  heart  is  open.  He  has  come  to  the  city  to  sell  his  produce ; 
has  sold  it  well,  and  is  thankful,  and  he  will  make  his  offering  of  two  doves  in  the 
temple,  and  give  something  for  the  saored  cause,  and  to  the  poor  besides,  because 
his  heart  is  warm  and  grateful,  and,  as  he  says,  he  will  never  feel  what  he  gives  to 
God  and  the  poor ;  there  will  be  plenty  left  at  the  farm  when  this  is  given ;  and 
then  who  knows  but  that  the  Lord  will  give  a  greater  blessing  next  year,  for  does 
not  the  wise  book  say,  "  He  that  giveth  to  the  poor  lendeth  to  the  Lord,  and  that 
which  he  giveth  shall  be  rendered  to  him  again  ?  **  So  it  is  at  once  a  free  gift,  and 
in  some  way,  a  safe  investment.  He  is  glad  to  give  the  money,  and  yet  to  feel  that 
this  is  not  the  last  of  it.  Very  pleasantly  the  holy  man  smiles  on  him  too,  as  he 
drops  his  shekels  and  passes  on ;  he  has  been  there  before  ;  he  will  come  again. 
He  is  one  of  those  fast  friends  who  can  always  be  counted  on  to  give  while  the 
fruitful  fields  answer  to  the  diligent  hand.  He  is  a  sort  of  country  connection  to 
these  commissioners  of  the  Most  High,  and  will  always  be  received,  as  he  is  to-day, 
with  grace  and  favour.  And  very  low  indeed  the  good  man  bows  to  that  stately 
centarion  who  comes  now.  He  is  not  a  member  of  this  church ;  indeed,  he  is  not 
a  member  of  any  church ;  for,  hke  all  his  nation  of  that  rank,  he  thinks  that  all 
churches  are  very  much  alike,  and  none  of  them  of  much  account,  except  as 
managers  of  the  common  people.  But  it  is  a  good  thing  to  keep  in  with  them ; 
there  is  no  knowing  what  you  may  want ;  and  so  he  comes  now  and  then,  and 
looks  on  at  the  service,  tosses  his  Boman  gold  into  the  chest,  nods  and  smiles  to 
the  cringing  priest,  and  feels  that  he  has  done  well.  Then  with  all  these  come  the 
good  and  sincere  men  and  women,  with  not  much  to  spare,  but  who  make  a 
conscience  of  giving,  and  manage  to  get  an  education  for  their  children,  and  every- 
thing decent ;  who  never  want  any  simple  and  wholesome  thing  they  need,  and  are 
able  to  lay  up  a  little  beside  for  a  rainy  day ;  as  various  as  they  are  now,  they  were 
then,  who  would  do  something  for  these  things  which  to  them  were  so  sacred ;  and 
it  was  when  givers  like  these  came,  that  the  widow  came  with  her  two  mites — the 
smallest  matter,  possibly,  that  anybody  ever  thought  of  giving.  I  think  if  she  was 
Hke  most  women,  the  utter  littleness  of  what  she  had  to  spare,  would  be  a  shame 
to  her ;  she  would  be  tempted,  on  the  mere  ground  of  her  womanly  pride,  to  say, 
'•  Since  I  cannot  give  more,  I  will  not  give  anything :  to  put  in  these  two  mites 
when  others  are  pouring  in  their  gold  and  silver,  will  only  show  how  poor  I  am." 
So  it  was  like  giving  her  life  to  give  so  little  ;  and  yet  these  two  mites  that  meant 
so  Httle  to  the  treasury,  meant  a  great  deal  to  her.  They  meant  darkness,  instead 
of  a  candle  on  a  winter's  evening ;  a  pint  of  milk,  or  a  fagot  of  sticks,  or  a  morsel 
of  honey,  or  a  bit  of  butter,  or  a  bunch  of  grapes,  or  a  pound  of  bread.  They 
meant  something  to  be  spared  out  of  the  substance  and  essence  of  her  simple  and 
spare  living.  And  this  these  wise  and  loving  eyes  saw  at  a  glance.  Jesus  knew  that 
the  two  mites  were  all  she  had ;  and  so  as  they  made  their  timid  tinkle  in  the  coffer, 
they  outweighed  all  the  gold.  He  saw  what  they  came  to,  because  He  saw  what 
they  cost,  and  so  His  heart  went  with  the  two  mites;  and  while  the  holy  man,  who  had 
made  such  deep  obeisance  for  the  larger  gifts,  let  this  trifle  pass  unnoticed ,  Christ  caught 
up  the  deed  and  the  doer,  and  clad  them  both  in  the  shining  robes  of  immortal  glory. 
The  poor  widow^s  two  mites: — 1.  Ses  God's  obdinancb  that  His  cause  should  be 

BUPPOBTBD  BY  OUB  GIFTS.  U.  ThAT  THB  LoBD  NOTICES  THE  GIFTS  WE  CAST  INTO  HiS 
TBEASDBT.      HI.  ThAT  THE  LORD  PASSES  JUDGMENT  ON   THOSE  WHO  OAST   THEIB   GIFTS 

INTO  HiB  TBEA8UBT.  He  declared  she  had  given  more  than  all  the  rest.  1.  She  had 
given  more,  because  she  had  given  with  a  larger  heart,  with  more  real  love.  2.  She 
had  given  more  in  proportion  to  her  possessions.  8.  She  had  given  more  in  the 
force  of  her  example.  4.  She  had  given  more  in  its  beneficial  influence  on  the  cha- 
racter of  the  giver.  5.  She  had  given  more  in  the  relation  of  the  gift  to  its  future 
reward.  Learn :  1.  The  right  use  of  money.  2.  The  value  of  the  offerings  of  the 
poor.  8.  That  the  Lord  sits  over  against  the  treasury.  {W.Walters.)  The  power 
of  pence  : — Those  whose  means  are  small  may  take  encouragement  to  give  what  thej 
ean.  There  is  a  mighty  power  in  the  combination  of  littles.  We  see  this  in  nature, 
and  in  the  institutions  of  society.  One  star  would  afford  small  hght  to  the  mid- 
night sky,  but  oountless  myriads  shining  together  brighten  it  with  their  glory.  One 
drop  of  rain  eonld  have  no  moistening  effect  on  the  earth's  dry  and  thirsty  soil,  but 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xn. 

millions  of  such  drops  make  the  barren  land  fmitftil.  There  are  two  bodies  of 
religionists  who  show  us  in  a  striking  manner  what  may  be  done  by  the  combination 
of  a  large  number  of  small  contributions,  by  regular,  systematic  giving  on  the  part 
of  all  their  members,  even  the  poorest.  I  refer  to  the  Boman  Catholics  and  the 
Wesleyan  Methodists.  Both  sects  number  the  poor  largely  among  their  members, 
and  derive  no  inconsiderable  support  from  their  o£ferings.  The  Boms  they  annually 
raise  furnish  in  a  most  striking  manner  an  illustration  of  the  power  of  pence. 
{Ibid.)  The  power  of  humble  fidelity : — There  were  many  gifts,  many  of  them  of 
vanity,  many  of  them  of  pride,  many  of  them  of  superstition,  many  of  them  of  mere 
custom  and  necessity ;  but  hers  was  a  voluntary  gift  of  love.  And  that  fact  conse- 
crated  it.  Love  imparts  a  value  to  a  gift  which  nothing  but  love  can  stamp  upon 
it.  I.  This  is  a  striking  illustbation  of  oub  Lord's  sympathy  tob  thb  hbabt  o» 
HUMAN  LIFE,  INSTEAD  OF  FOB  ITS  BXTBBiOB.  Hc  was  sitting  in  the  vcry  culmination 
of  the  pride  and  beauty  of  the  Jewish  ceremonial.  He  was  not  attracted  by  sump- 
tuous trains  of  these  gorgeous  gift-bringers.  He  saw  that  which  interpreted  the 
innermost  and  the  best  nature,  the  gentle,  generous,  and  piteous.  When  human 
strength  disdains  to  notice,  there  is  the  very  point  at  which  Divine  strength  notices 
most.  Where  men  see  least  to  be  admired,  under  uncouth  forms  of  helplessness, 
there  Christ  looks  with  sympathy  and  compassion.  This  imparts  to  the  Divine 
government  an  aspect  of  comfort  and  encouragement.  If  human  life  takes  care  of 
the  successful,  the  Divine  government  takes  care  of  the  weak  and  obscure.  The 
great  Eye  is  not  looking  out  for  the  great  deeds  alone,  but  for  those  whose  deeds  are 
in  secret.     II.  Many  of  the  secbbt  fidelities  of  lotb  have  poweb  to  outlive,  in 

USEFULNESS,  THB  PRODUCTS  OF  AMBITIOUS  DESIBES  AND  DEEDS.      All  the  rich   glftS   of 

the  temple  are  now  forgotten.  We  do  not  know  what  Eabbi  was  syllabled  with 
admiration  among  his  fellows  on  that  day.  The  only  person  who  has  come  down 
to  us  was  the  least  conspicuous.  The  gentle  light  of  that  example  shines  still.  AU 
the  ages  have  not  buried  her.  How  little  she  thought  she  was  enriching  the  world. 
Christ  is  still  the  same.  We  think  those  gifts  most  influential  which  have  most  of 
record ;  but  it  is  not  so.  While  many  a  proud  philanthropist  will  scarcely  be  seen, 
many  strange  philanthropists  will  emerge  from  among  the  poor,  and  take  their 
places  as  princes  in  God's  glory.  So  God  works  Himself,  in  secret  might.  So  gives  He 
a  pattern  for  us  to  work  after.  It  is  not  the  thunder  which  makes  the  most  racket, 
that  does  the  most  work.  The  things  in  this  world  that  are  accomplishing  great 
deeds  are  silent  things,  and  hidden  things.  And  we  are  told,  in  a  kind  of  strange 
paradox,  that  the  things  which  are  not,  are  ordained  to  bring  to  nought  the  things 
that  are.  The  most  inconspicuous  things  often  belong  to  God's  most  potential 
working.  The  root  neither  strives  nor  cries,  and  yet,  all  the  engines  of  all  the 
ships  and  shops  on  earth,  that  puff  and  creak  with  ponderous  working,  are  not 
to  be  compared  for  actual  power  with  the  roots  of  one  single  acre  of  ground  in 
the  meadow.  All  the  vast  pumps  of  Harlem  Lake,  and  all  that  serve  our  needs, 
adjoining,  are  not  to  be  compared  for  force  with  that  might  which  inheres  in  one 
single  tree.  It  is  a  fact  revealed  only  to  those  who  study  natural  history,  that 
leaves,  that  vegetation,  that  dews,  and  rains,  and  heat,  that  the  natural  attractions 
which  prevail  in  the  world,  without  any  echo  or  outward  report,  have  an  enormoas 
power  in  them,  and  that  they  are  the  means  by  which  God  works.  He  works  in 
silence,  and  inconspicuously,  and  almost  hiddenly.  And  so  they  work  importantly 
wno  work  by  thought,  by  love,  by  zeal,  by  faith  nnrevealed ;  who  work  in  places  not 
seen  by  the  public  eye,  in  season  and  out  of  season,  from  the  mere  desire  to  do 
good,  and  not  from  the  mere  love  of  being  found  out  in  doing  it.  Look  upon  your 
scarfs,  so  brilUant.  The  colour  shines  afar  off.  Comely  it  is  on  the  shoulder  of 
beauty.  How  exquisite  is  the  dye  that  comes  from  the  cochineal  insect.  And  yet 
how  small  is  that  insect — scarcely,  I  may  say,  so  big  as  the  point  of  a  pin — ^which 
feeds  so  inconspicuously  on  the  under  side  of  the  leaf  of  the  cactus,  nourishing  his 
growth  quite  unconscious  that  as  one  of  aU  the  myriads  of  all  these  little  shining 
points  he  will  by  and  by  help  to  produce  those  glowing  colours  which  civilization 
and  rfyfinement  will  make  so  meet  and  comely  in  distant  lands  1  So  it  is  with  good 
deeds.  The  great  things  in  this  world  are  the  sum  of  infinitesimal  little  things. 
And  those  who  are  in  sympathy  with  God  and  nature,  are  not  to  reject  in  men  the 
ripening,  the  development  of  tiiemselves  or  their  true  spiritual  life,  because  the 
effect  is  but  little.  That  effect  will  be  joined  to  other  things  which  are  like  itself 
obscure,  and  others  and  others  will  make  their  contributions ;  and  little  by  little  the 
sum  of  these  specks  of  gold  will  make  masses  of  gold ;  little  by  little  these  small 
insects  will  make  great  quantities  of  colouring  matter;  little  by  little  small  thingf 


n.]  8T.  MARK.  619 

will  become  laiige  in  magnitnde.  Do  not  be  ashamed,  then,  to  live  in  hnmility,  if 
you  fill  it  up  with  fidelity.  Never  measure  the  things  that  you  do,  or  do  not,  by 
the  report  which  they  can  make.  III.  Thsbe  abb  two  spheres  in  which  uen  mttst 
woBK.  The  first  is  that  which  judges  of  causes  by  their  apparent  relations  to  the 
end  sought.  That  is  important ;  but  it  is  not  the  only  sphere.  It  is  the  visible, 
material  sphere— the  one  which  belongs  to  the  region  of  physical  cause  and  effect. 
We  are  obliged  to  work  in  that  sphere  according  to  its  own  laws.  But  in  the  moral 
sphere  men  must  judge  of  acts  by  their  relations  to  the  motives  and  dispositions 
which  inspire  them ;  and  they  are  great  or  little,  not  according  to  what  they  do, 
but  according  to  the  sources  from  which  their  actions  spring.  In  engineering  that 
only  is  great  which  does.  It  matters  not  what  the  intention  is ;  he  who  in  the  day 
of  battle  is  not  victorious,  is  not  saved  by  his  intention.  No  matter  how  wisely  you 
mean,  ii  your  timber  is  not  squared  and  fitted  right,  the  result  is  not  right.  In  the 
outward  sphere  effect  measures  the  worth  of  the  plan.  In  that  sphere  effect  must 
always  be  measured  by  tlie  cause ;  and  the  worth  of  the  cause  must  be  proved  by  the 
effect.  And  that  is  the  lower  sphere.  In  the  moral  sphere  it  is  the  other  way. 
There,  no  matter  what  the  effect  is,  you  do  not  measure  in  that  direction.  Pray. 
Your  prayer  accomplishes  nothing?  The  measure  is  not  "What  did  it  do?" 
Speak.  Your  words  fall  apparently  uncaught  and  unprofitable?  You  do  not 
measure  in  that  direction.  Yon  measure  the  other  way.  What  was  it  in  your 
heart  to  do  ?  What  was  your  purpose  ?  In  the  moral  sphere  we  look  at  the  bow — 
not  at  the  target.  From  what  motive  did  the  soul  project  its  purpose  ?  What  gave 
that  sigh?  What  issued  that  speech?  What  created  that  silence?  What  pro- 
duced &at  moral  condition  ?  In  that  sphere  the  heart  measures,  estimates,  regis- 
ters. This  gives  rise  to  thoughts  which,  perhaps,  may  have  »lation  to  ourselves. 
There  are  many  who  will  work  if  you  will  show  them  that  thdr  working  will  insure 
immediate  good  results.  They  will  work  in  the  moral  sphere  if  they  oan  work 
according  to  the  genius  of  the  visible  or  the  physical  sphere.  They  will  work  if 
they  can  do  what  others  do.  They  do  not  work  because  they  love  to  work.  They 
do  not  work  because  they  feel  that  it  is  their  duty  to  work,  simply,  without  regard 
to  consequences.  They  are  willing  to  work  under  the  stimulus  of  a  vain  ambition. 
They  will  work  if  they  may  be  praised.  They  will  work  if  they  are  to  receive  an 
equivalent  for  their  working  in  some  appreciable  form.  The  equivalent,  often- 
times, for  exertion,  is  praise  or  popularity.  Do,  then,  whatever  there  is  to  be  done 
without  questioning  and  without  calculation.  Make  progress  in  things  moral.  If 
need  be,  utter  stammering  words.  Would  you  console  the  troubled  if  you  only  had 
a  ready  tongue  ?  Take  the  tongue  that  you  have.  Bing  the  bell  that  hangs  in  your 
ateeple,  if  you  can  do  no  better.  Do  as  well  as  you  can.  That  is  all  that  God 
requires  of  you.  Would  you  pray  with  the  needy  and  tempted  if  you  had  eminent 
gifts  of  prayer  ?  Use  the  gifts  that  you  have.  Do  not  measure  yourself  according 
to  the  pattern  of  somebody  else.  Do  not  say  to  yourself,  *'  If  I  had  his  skill,"  or, 
"  If  I  had  his  experience."  Take  your  own  skill  and  your  own  experience,  and 
make  the  most  of  them.  Do  yon  stand  over  against  trouble  and  suffering,  and 
marvel  that  men  whom  God  hath  blessed  with  such  means  do  so  little  ?  Do  you 
Bay  to  yourself,  ♦♦  If  I  had  money,  I  know  what  I  would  do  with  it "?  No,  you  do 
not.  God  does ;  and  so  He  does  not  trust  you  with  it.  "  If  I  had  something  dif- 
ferent from  what  I  have,  I  would  work,"  says  many  a  man.  No ;  if  you  would  work 
in  other  circumstances,  you  would  work  just  where  you  are.  A  man  that  will  not 
work  just  where  he  is,  with  just  what  he  has,  and  for  the  love  of  God,  and  for  the 
knre  of  man,  will  not  work  anywhere,  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  his  work  valuable. 
It  will  be  adulterated  work.  What  if  you  have  not  money  ?  If  you  have  a  heart  to 
work,  it  is  better  than  if  you  had  great  riches.  And  if  you  find  that  you  are  hesi- 
tant, reluctant,  and  are  acting  accordingly,  be  sure  that  you  do  not  belong  to  the 
widow's  school.  Did  she  say  to  herself,  as  she  handled  her  fractions  of  a  penny, 
"  What  is  the  use  of  my  throwing  these  in  ?  They  will  scarcely  be  taken  out.  They 
are  all  that  I  have,  with  which  to  buy  my  day's  food.  There  it  will  do  very  little 
good ;  here  it  will  do  a  great  deal  of  good "  ?  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Conucrated 
womanhood: — What  is  it  to  be  a  consecrated  woman?  I.  Such  consecration 
involves  heart-dedication  to  Christ  and  His  service.  II.  Such  eonsecration 
embraces  the  sacred  devotion  of  time  to  the  work  God  carries  on  through 
female  agents.  She  saves  her  odd  minutes  as  the  jeweller  saves  the  cuttings 
of  gems  and  gold.  m.  Such  a  consecration  implies  the  devotion  of  culture 
to  ^e  Divine  glory  and  uplifting  of  humanity.  IV.  Such  consecration  em- 
if>odies  the  ability  to  do  varied  work  of  a  beneficent  nature,  whereby  God  is  glorified. 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xa 


V.  Such  consecration  involves  the  Banctification  of  the  pence  to  the  Divine  glory, 
(S.  V.  Leech^  D.D.)  The  Lord's  searching  eye : — The  Saviour  noticed  not  merely 
the  fact  or  acts  of  contribution,  but  also  the  wonderfully  diversified  modes  in 
which  the  acts  exhibited  themselves.  Mode  is  inseparable  from  act,  and,  when 
outward,  reveals  the  inward  essence  of  the  act.  We  may  suppose  that  our  Saviour 
looked  in,  through  the  diversified  modes  that  struck  His  outward  eye,  to  the  diver- 
sified characters  of  the  contributors,  as  they  passed  in  succession  before  Him.  II 
BO,  it  would  be  with  far  more  interest  and  innerliness  than  was  ever  manifestated 
by  Lavater,  and  with  an  intuition  that  was  unerring.  "  On  Sundays,  after  the 
sermon,"  says  the  poet  Goethe,  "it  was  Lavater's  duty,  as  an  ecclesiastic,  to 
hold  the  short-handled,  velvet  alms-bag  before  each  one  who  went  out,  and  to 
bleps  as  he  received  the  pious  gift.  Now,  on  a  certain  Sunday  he  proposed  to  him- 
self, without  looking  at  the  several  persons  as  they  dropped  in  their  offerings,  to  observe 
only  their  hands,  and  by  them  silently  to  judge  of  the  forms  of  their  donors. 
Not  only  the  shape  of  the  finger,  but  its  peculiar  action  in  dropping  the  gift, 
was  attentively  noted  by  him,  and  he  had  much  to  communicate  to  me  on  the 
conclusions  he  had  formed."  As  the  idiosyncrasy  and  form  of  the  whole  body 
was  revealed  to  Lavater's  eye  by  the  form  and  action  of  the  fingers,  bo  the 
idiosyncrasy  and  moral  condition  of  every  soul  were  unveiled  to  our  Saviour's 
gaze,  as  He  noticed  "how"  the  offerings  were  cast  in.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.) 
Liberality  of  the  poor: — Peggy  bad  been  consigned  by  her  dying  motber  in 
Ireland  to  the  care  of  a  lady,  who  brought  her  up  as  a  servant,  giving  her 
only  clothes  and  food  as  her  wages.  Her  residence  with  this  lady  led  to 
Peggy's  attendance  on  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  which  met,  in  her  case,  with  a 
heart  prepared  by  Divine  grace  to  receive  it.  She  imbibed  it  as  the  thirsty  earth 
the  shower;  her  appearance  became  altered,  and  her  whole  demeanour  greatly 
improved.  Her  mistress,  finding  her  services  increasingly  valuable,  and  fearing  that 
the  temptation  of  higher  wages  might  cause  her  to  seek  another  place,  offered,  of  her 
own  account,  to  give  her  a  small  sum  of  money  annually.  For  this  she  was  truly 
thankful;  and  some  months  having  elapsed,  she  came  to  me  (says  a  Christian 
minister  in  London)  one  evening  after  service,  apparently  with  great  joy,  and  slipped 
a  piece  of  paper  into  my  hand.  On  examination  I  found  it  to  be  a  one-pound  note. 
♦•Peggy,"  said  I,  "what  is  this?"  "Your  reverence,"  said  she,  "it  is  the  first 
pound  I  could  ever  call  my  own  since  I  was  born ;  and  what  will  I  do  with  it  ?  Ah  I 
will  I  forget  my  country  ?  No  ;  it  is  for  poor  Ireland ;  it  is  for  my  countrymen  to 
have  the  blessed  gospel  preached  to  them."  I  admired  her  disinterestedness, 
but  thought  the  sacrifice  too  great,  as  I  knew  she  must  want  such  a  sum 
for  very  important  purposes.  "  Peggy,"  I  said,  "  it  is  too  much  for  you  to 
give ;  I  cannot  take  it."  •*  Oh,  your  reverence,"  she  replied,  with  her  character- 
istic energy,  "  if  you  refuse  it,  I  shall  not  be  able  to  sleep  for  a  fortnight  1  "  And 
she  went  away,  leaving  the  money  in  my  hand,  and  exclaiming,  •*  God  bless  my 
poor  country  with  the  ministry  of  the  gospel."  Costly  gifts  : — A  missionary,  in  a 
report  of  his  field  of  labour  says  :  "  I  can  imagine  some  one  saying,  as  he  reads 
this  report,  ♦  Well,  I  will  give  £5  to  the  cause ;  I  can  give  that,  and  not  feel  it.' 
But  suppose,  my  Christian  brother,  you  were  to  give  £20,  and  feel  it  ?  "  There  is 
vast  meaning  in  the  advice,  **Give  till  you  feel  it."  It  is  by  this  principle  that 
churches  are  founded,  and  gospel  institutions  sustained.  If  this  rule  were 
to  be  put  in  operation  everywhere,  there  would  hardly  be  a  feeble  church 
in  our  land,  or  a  church  in  debt,  or  a  sanctuary  out  of  repair,  or  a  minister  half- 
Bustained,  or  a  true  cause  of  charity  without  adequate  support.  (Anon.)  Reli- 
gion the  first  thought : — A  poor  negro  woman,  after  the  death  of  her  husband,  had 
no  means  of  support  for  herself  and  two  little  children,  except  the  labour  of  her 
own  hands,  yet  she  found  means,  out  of  her  deep  poverty,  to  give  something  for 
the  promotion  of  the  cause  of  her  Redeemer ;  and  would  never  fail  to  pay,  on  the 
very  day  it  became  due,  her  regular  subscription  to  the  church  of  which  she  was  a 
member.  In  a  hard  winter  she  found  it  very  difficult  to  supply  the  pressing  needs 
of  her  little  family,  yet  the  few  pence  for  rehgious  purposes  had  been  regularly  put 
by.  As  one  season  for  the  contribution  came  round,  she  had  only  a  little  com,  a 
single  Bait  herring,  and  a  five-cent  piece  remaining  of  her  httle  store.  Yet  she  did  not 
waver.  She  ground  the  com,  prepared  her  children's  supper,  and  then  with  a 
light  heart  and  cheerful  countenance  set  out  to  service,  where  she  gave  joyfully  the 
five  cents,  the  last  she  had  in  the  world.  Betuming  from  the  church  she  passed 
the  house  of  a  lady,  to  whom  a  long  time  before  she  had  sold  a  piece  of  pork — so 
long,  indeed,  that  she  had  quite  forgotten  all  the  particulars  of  the  transaction ;  but 


31.J  ST,  MARK,  631 

seeing  her  this  evening,  the  lady  called  her  in,  apologizing  for  having  been  bo  tardj^ 
in  the  settlement,  and  then  inquired  how  much  it  was,  The  poor  woman  conld 
only  reply  she  did  not  know ;  bat  the  lady,  determined  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  gave 
her  two  dollars,  besides  directing  her  housekeeper  to  pnt  up  a  basket  of  flour, 
sugar,  coffee,  and  other  good  things  for  her  use.  She  returned  home  with  a  joyful 
heart,  saying,  as  she  displayed  her  treasures,  ♦•  See,  my  children,  the  Lord  is  a  good 
paymaster,  giving  us  a  hundredfold  even  in  this  present  life,  and  in  the  world  to 
come  life  everlasting."  The  gift  of  love : — Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a 
king,  and  he  was  very  powerful  and  great.  He  was  also  very  good,  and  so  kind 
to  his  people  that  they  idl  loved  him  very  much.  To  show  their  gratitude  to  him 
for  all  his  kindness  and  the  many  favours  he  was  constantly  bestowing  upon  them, 
and  also  to  show  the  very  great  love  which  they  had  in  their  hearts  for  him,  the 
people  resolved  to  make  him  a  present.  Now  there  was  a  poor  woman  who  loved 
the  king  very,  very  much,  and  she  wished  to  contribute  something  to  the  present  for 
her  dear  sovereign ;  but  she  was  so  very  poor  that  she  had  nothing  at  all  in  the  world 
to  give  but  only  one  little  brown  farthing.  And  a  rich  neighbour  came  to  her,  and  said, 
*♦  You  can  never  put  that  dirty  brown  farthing  among  the  bright  gold  pieces  offered  to 
the  great  king.  Here  are  some  new  silver  shillings,  they  will  not  look  so  bad  ;  you  can 
put  them  in,  and  it  is  all  the  same,  for  I  was  going  to  give  them  at  any  rate."  But 
this  poor  woman  replied,  "  Oh  no ;  when  I  bring  a  gift  to  the  good  king,  it  must  be 
my  very  own.  I  am  very  sorry  I  have  nothing  better  to  give ;  but  I  will  just  slip 
it  in  quietly,  so  that  the  Mng  won't  take  any  notice  of  it ;  and  if  he  throws  it  away 
afterwards,  I  don't  mind.  It  is  all  I  have,  and  I  will  have  the  pleasure  of  giving  it 
to  him  whom  I  love  so  very,  very  much."  So  this  poor  woman  went  forward  with 
the  rest;  but  she  walked  very  slowly,  and  hung  down  head,  being  sorry  her  gift  was  so 
small ;  and  when  she  passed  the  king  she  never  once  looked  up,  but  just  slipped 
her  little  brown  farthing  into  the  plate  among  the  rest  of  the  gifts.  When  she  was 
tumicg  away  she  felt  some  one  give  her  a  tap  on  the  shoulder,  and  when  she  looked 
round  the  king  was  looking  down  at  her,  and  smiling  very  graciously.  **  My  good 
woman,"  he  said,  "  was  it  you  who  put  in  this  costly  gift?  *'  And  as  she  looked  in 
fais  hand  she  saw  something  very  like  her  old  brown  farthing ;  but  just  as  she  was 
wondering  if  that  could  be  what  the  king  meant,  the  farthing  began  to  grow 
brighter  and  brighter,  till  the  poor  woman  could  scarcely  look  at  it,  for  it  had 
changed  into  a  beautiful  locket,  all  shining  with  gold  and  diamonds  and  other  pre- 
cious stones.  The  poor  woman  gave  a  httle  sigh  of  disappointment  in  her  heart, 
but  she  looked  up  straight  into  the  king's  face,  and  said,  **  Oh  no,  I  only  gave  one 
little  brown  farthing."  **  Take  it  into  your  hand  and  see,"  said  the  king,  still 
fimiling.  So  she  took  it  as  he  bade  her,  and  then  she  saw  that  it  was  her  farthing 
after  all.  '*Te8,"  she  said,  feeling  greatly  surprised,  **  that  is  the  very  farthing  I 
put  in,  for  I  tried  hard  to  clean  it  up,  and  could  only  get  it  to  look  a  Uttle  bright  at 
the  edge."  So  she  laid  it  back  again  in  the  king's  hand,  and  as  soon  as  he  touched 
it,  there  it  was  shining  and  sparkling  as  before.  Then  the  king  said,  "  I  thank  you 
very  much  for  this  beautiful  gift;  it  is  very  precious  to  me."  And  he  took  it,  and 
hung  it  upon  the  chain  that  was  round  his  neck,  and  the  poor  woman  went  home 
quite  happy,  because  the  king  had  been  pleased  to  accept  her  gift,  and  loving  him  a 
thousand  times  more  than  before,  il  that  were  possible.  Now  it  is  more  than 
eighteen  hundred  years  since  that  day,  and  the  great  and  good  king  has  been  wear. 
ing  that  poor  woman's  brown  farthing  at  his  chain  all  the  time.  And  whenever 
any  poor  woman  wishes  to  offer  him  a  gift  from  the  great  love  that  is  in  her  heart, 
and  is  afraid  to  bring  it  because  it  seems  so  small,  he  points  to  the  shining  locket, 
and  says,  **  Why,  this  was  once  only  a  little  brown  farthing,  and  it  pleased  me  as  much 
as  the  rich  man's  gold ;  for  with  me  '  a  man  is  accepted  according  to  what  he  hath, 
and  not  according  to  what  he  hath  not  ? '  "  (C  P.  Craig.)  Covetou»nes$  cor- 
nered : — A  gentleman  called  upon  a  rich  friend  for  a  contribution  to  some  charitable 
object.  *•  Yes,  I  most  give  you  my  mite,"  said  the  rich  man.  *•  Do  you  mean  the 
widow's  mite?"  asked  his  friend.  "Certainly,"  was  the  reply.  "I  shall  be 
satisfied  with  half  as  much  as  she  gave.  How  much  are  you  wor^  ?  "  **  Seventy 
thousand  dollars."  "  Oive  me,  then,  your  cheque  for  thirty-five  thousand ;  that 
will  be  half  as  much  as  the  widow  gave,  for  she,  you  know,  gave  *  all  that  she  had, 
cren  all  her  living. '  "  The  rich  man  was  cornered.  Covetous  people  often  try  to 
■belter  themselves  behind  the  widow's  mite ;  but  it  is  a  dangerous  refuge.  Alnu- 
f  tvt'ny,  false  and  true : — Almsgiving  is  degraded  in  two  ways — when  it  is  done  to  be 
Men  of  men,  and  when  it  is  done  to  save  your  soul.  You  caxmot  tender  to  God 
la.  6d.  or  £1  for  a  sin  committed.    You  cannot  wipe  oat  goilt  with  hali-a-crown. 


523  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zm. 

The  Jews  thought  you  could.  The  Roman  Catholic  Church,  in  its  worst  days  at 
least,  openly  taught  that  you  could.  The  priests  invited  the  dying  to  insaitt 
against  hell  or  purgatory  by  leaving  their  property  to  the  church  or  the  poor.  The 
fallacy  is  not  yet  quite  extinct.  The  other  day  a  witty  ecclesiastic  was  listening  to 
a  rich  merchant  who,  after  dinner,  boasted  that,  although  no  better  than  he  should 
be,  he  gave  £2,000  away  to  the  poor  every  year.  He  did  not  know,  nor  apparently 
care,  who  got  it,  but  it  went.  ••  Well,"  said  his  clerical  listener,  ••  that  is  the 
largest  insurance  against  fire  I  ever  heard  of ! "  Now,  mark  this,  if  in  almsgiving 
the  donor  is  thinking  more  of  himself  than  of  the  recipient  of  his  gift,  his  act  is 
not  Christian  charity,  but  selfishness.  If  he  gives,  in  order  to  be  praised,  or  to  save 
liis  soul,  or  movely  to  relieve  his  own  feelings,  without  regard  to  the  effect  of  his 
gift,  that  is  not  Christian  charity.  The  impulse  is  good,  but  not  alone.  It  does 
more  harm  than  good,  without  reflection,  common-sense,  and  even  wisdom.  Every 
penny  given  to  a  knave  robs  a  deserving  person.  There  are  plenty  such :  find  them 
out,  and  when  you  find  them,  do  not  pauperize  them.  Help  them  to  help  them- 
selves. Every  Christmas  we  are  deluged  with  circulars;  choose  the  right  institu- 
tions and  pleas  to  support ;  avoid  the  professional  beggars  of  this  world,  in  print  or 
out  of  print,  who  prey  on  the  credulous  and  impulsive,  and  can  give  no  satisfactory 
account  of  their  stewardship.  I  am  not  against  extras  at  Christmas.  If  we 
brighten  our  homes  for  our  friends,  God  forbid  that  we  should  forget  the  poor ; 
but  again  I  say,  be  careful.  Let  us  comfort  the  sick,  seek  out  the  deserving  poor, 
think  of  poor  dependents,  old  servants,  the  people  in  our  own  neighbourhood  ;  let 
us  do  all  we  can  to  lighten  the  burden  of  unobtrusive  sufferers,  helping  the  thrifty 
poor,  the  sick,  the  aged;  but  let  us  avoid  bolstering  up  the  blatant  impostor  I 
(H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  All  her  living. — Mr.  Skelton'$  devotion  to  the  poor  : — The 
salary  of  the  Rev.  Philip  Skelton,  an  Irish  clergyman,  arising  from  the  discharge 
of  his  ministerial  duties  and  from  tuition,  was  very  small ;  yet  he  gave  the  larger 
part  of  it  away,  scarcely  allowing  himself  to  appear  in  decent  clothing.  Returning 
one  Lord's  day  from  public  worship,  he  came  to  a  cabin  where  an  awful  fire 
had  occurred.  Two  children  had  been  burnt  to  death,  and  a  third  showed  but  faint 
signs  of  life.  Seeing  the  poor  people  had  no  linen  with  which  to  dress  the  child's 
sores,  he  tore  his  shirt  from  his  back  piece  by  piece  for  their  use,  and  cheerfully 
submitted  to  the  inconvenience  to  which  it  exposed  him.  Some  time  after  this, 
when  a  scarcity  of  food  was  felt  around  him,  he  sold  his  library,  though  his  books 
were  the  only  companions  of  his  solitude,  and  spent  the  money  in  the  purchase  ol 
provisions  for  the  poor.  Some  ladies  hearing  of  this,  sent  him  £50  to  replace  some 
of  his  most  valuable  books  with  ;  but,  while  gratefully  acknowledging  their  kind- 
ness, he  said  he  had  dedicated  the  books  to  God,  and  tiien  Applied  the  £50  Also  to 
the  relief  of  the  poor. 


CHAPTER  XUL 


Yebs.  1,  t.  Ilaster,  bm  wtiat  manner  of  stones  and  wtuX  bnlldlngi  are  hem— 

Men  admiring  doomed  things: — "What  manner  of  stones,  and  what  buildings  are 
here  1 "  An  outburst  of  admiration  this.  The  stones  were  indeed  beautiful.  That 
sacred  building  was  constructed  of  prodigious  blocks  of  white  marble,  some  of 
which  seem  to  have  been  upwards  of  thirty  feet  long,  eighteen  broad,  and  sixteen 
thick.  They  did  not  view  the  temple  in  the  light  in  which  Christ  viewed  it.  It  is 
worthy  of  note  that  Christ,  in  His  discourse,  speaks  in  a  very  different  spirit  of 
doomed  things  to  what  He  does  of  doomed  people.  Mind  was  infinitely  more 
interesting  to  Him  than  masonry.  When  He  refers  to  the  temple  He  says,  "  As 
for  these  things  "  with  an  air  of  comparative  indifference ;  but  when  He  refers  to 
doomed  people  He  weeps,  and  says,  "  0  Jerusalem,"  &o.  The  language  of  Christ 
and  His  disciples  here  will  apply — I.  To  beculab  interests,  which  abm  doomxo 
THiNos.     Markets,  governments,  navies,  and  armies  are  doomed.     IL  To  abtistio 

PRODUCTIONS,  which  ABK  DOOMED  THINOS.  III.  To  SOCIAL  DI8TIN0TIONS,  WHICH  ABI 
DOOMED   THINGS.      lY.   To  BEIilOIOUS   SYSTEMS,    WHICH  ABB    DOOMSD  THINOS.      V.   To 

THE  woBiiD  iTSELV,  WHICH  IS  A  DOOMED  THiNo.  Why  sct  yoor  hcarts  on  doomed 
things  ?  (D.  Thonuu,  D.D.)  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  .-—It  is  interesting  to 
mark  the  site  and  trace  the  history  of  edifices  built  for  Ck)d,  some  of  which  have 
been  signaUy  honoured  by  Him.  The  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  one  of  these.  It 
flood  eontemporary  with  great  events,  and  was  the  scene,  for  iom  hundred  years. 


OBAP.  xm.]  8T.  MARK,  198 

of  the  perpetual  sacrifices,  those  augnst  national  solemnities,  the  divinely 
appointed  services  that  distingnished  the  worship  of  the  God  of  Israel.  ^  Bat  that 
which  piety  erects,  sin  often  lays  in  ruins.  This  temple  accomplished  its  service 
and  shared  in  the  national  fall,  when  the  people  by  whom  it  had  been  profaned 
were  carried  to  their  seventy  years'  captivity.  The  second  temple  was  designated  to 
etill  higher  distinction,  inasmuch  as  it  was  that  which  Messiah's  feet  trod,  and 
within  whose  walls  He  joined  as  a  worshipper.  What  have  been  the  bearings  of 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  upon  Christianity  on  the  one  hand,  and  Judaism  on 
the  other  f  L  This  event  fubnished  a  most  stbikino  pboof  of  the  tbuth  of  odb 
Lobd's  pbedictions,  and  consequently  of  His  Divinb  mission  and  authobity. 

II.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  served  a  most  important  purpose  in  reference  to 
Christianity,  by  liberamsino  the  minds  op  the  beuevbbs,  and  pabticularly  by 
emancipating  the  Jewish  convebts  fbom  thb  authority  of  the  Mosaic  bitual. 

III.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  by  weaning  the  believing  Hebrews  from  their 
national  attachments,  and  scattebinq  them  abboad  in  thb  babth,  contributed 

ESSENTIAIiLY  TO  THB   DIFFUSION   OF   THB   KNOWLBDOB  AND   INFLUENCE   OF  THE  GOSPEL. 

But  what  are  its  bearings  upon  Judaism  ?  1.  Whether  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
and  the  dispersion  of  the  Jews  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  an  act  of  righteous  judg- 
ment upon  the  nation,  incurred  by  the  dreadful  crime  of  rejecting  the  promised 
Messiah  f  2.  I  ask  whether  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  temple  was 
not  a  clear  intimation  of  the  final  abolition  of  the  Mosaic  economy  ?  Here  only 
could  the  sacrifices  be  offered,  so  that  when  it  was  destroyed,  the  institution  itself 
was  abolished.  {H.  Gray,  D.D.)  The  dueipUne  of  d««fruction;--"For  as  a 
physician,  by  breaking  the  cup,  prevents  his  patient  from  indulging  his  appetite  in 
a  hurtful  draught,  so  God  withheld  them  from  their  sacrifices  by  destroying  the 
city  itself,  and  making  the  place  inaccessible  to  all  of  them."  {Warburton's 
Julian.)  The  ruins  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem  .-—In  the  very  ruins  of  the  earthly 
Jerusalem  you  will  find  a  salutary  memorial,  not  onlv  of  the  transitory  character 
of  all  this  world's  glory,  but  of  the  exchange  of  the  shadow  for  the  substance  ;  of 
the  introduction  of  that  kingdom  which  is  not  of  this  world,  and  of  that  temple, 
built  upon  everlasting  foundations,  in  which  all  believers  are  living  stones, 
fashioned  after  the  model  of  "the  chief  comer  stone,"  even  Jesus  Chriit. 
{H.  Gray.)  The  religious  use  of  arehasology ;— What  is  the  true  religious  aspect  of 
archsBolo^  ?  We  must  all  profit  by  that  warning  voice  which  did  for  a  moment 
check  the  enthusiasm  of  the  antiquarian  disciple.  The  admiration  for  stones  and 
buildings,  however  innocent  and  nsefol,  is  yet  not  religion.  The  regard  for 
antiquity  and  the  love  of  the  past,  if  pushed  to  excess,  have  often  been  the  ruin  of 
religion.  Christianity  is  not  antiquarianism,  and  antiquarianism  is  not  Christianity. 
There  must  be  times  and  places  when  antiquity  must  give  way  to  truth,  and  the 
beauty  of  form  to  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  the  charm  of  poetic  and  historic 
recollections  to  the  stem  necessities  of  fact  and  duty.  It  is  well  to  remember  that 
there  is  something  more  enduring  than  the  stones  of  the  temple.  If  archaBology 
is  not  everything,  it  is  at  least  something.    I.  It  awakbns  that  lovb  of  thb  past 

WHICH  IB  BO  NECESSARY  A  COUNTEBPOISB  TO  THB  BXCITEMBNT  OF  THB  PBESENT  AND  THE 

FUTUBB.  "  I  have  considered,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  the  days  of  old,  the  years  of 
the  ancient  time."  They  were  to  him  as  a  cool  shade,  a  cahn  haven.  The  study 
of  them  carries  as  back  from  the  days  of  the  man  to  the  days  of  the  child ;  it 
opens  to  us  a  fresh  world ;  it  makes  us  feel  that  we  do  not  stand  alone  in  our 
generation  on  the  earth,  but  that  under  God,  we  are  what  we  are  because  of  the 
deeds  and  thoughts  of  those  who  have  lived  before  ns,  and  to  whom  we  thus  owe  a 
debt  which  we  have  constantly  to  repay  to  our  posterity.  How  this  insight  into 
the  past  has  been  increased  in  our  own  age.  Not  only  Greeks  and  Bomans,  but 
Egyptians  and  Assyrians,  are  familiar  to  as  in  this  century,    n.  Thb  impobtancb  of 

THESE  studies  IN  DEVELOPING  THOSE  BABEBT  OF  God's  GIFTS  TO  MAN,  A  LOVE  OF  lEUTH, 

AND  A  LOVB  OF  JUSTICE — the  will  and  the  power  to  see  things  as  they  reaUy  are,  and 
in  their  just  proportions  to  one  another.  HI.  The  more  thoroughly  we  can  under- 
stand these  ancient  forms,  the  more  eagerly  we  can  restore  and  beautify  ancient 
buildings,  so  much  the  betteb  is  the  fbambwobk  pbepabbd  fob  the  bsception  of 
NEW  THOUGHTS  AND  NEW  IDEAS.  It  has  been  sometimes  said  that  the  great  periods 
of  building  and  of  admiration  for  the  past  have  been  the  precursors  of  the  fall  of 
the  religion  of  the  nations  which  they  represented.  It  has  been  said,  for  example, 
that  the  burst  of  splendid  archite  ture  under  the  Herods,  immediately  preceded  the 
fall  of  Judaism ;  that  the  like  display  under  the  Antonii  preceded  the  fall  of  Paganism; 
that  the  like  display  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century  preceded  the  fall  of 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oh4».  xm. 

the  Ghnrch  of  the  middle  ages.  There  is  no  doabt  a  truth  in  this.  There  is  a 
tendency  in  an  expiring  system  to  develop  itself  in  outward  form,  when  its  inward 
spirit  has  died  away.  But  this  is  not  at  all  the  whole  truth,  and  the  higher  truth 
is  something  quite  different,  namely,  that  these  magnificent  displays  of  art,  these 
profound  investigations  into  the  past,  in  those  eras  of  which  I  have  spoken,  were 
part  of  the  same  throes,  of  the  same  mind  and  spirit,  which  accompanied  the  birth 
of  tiie  new  and  higher  religion,  which  in  each  case  succeeded.  Those  Augustan 
buildings  suggested  to  the  apostles'  hearts  the  imagery  by  which  they  expressed  the 
most  sublime  of  spiritual  truths.  "  The  chief  corner-stone ; "  the  stones  joined 
and  compacted  together ;  the  pillars  which  were  never  to  be  moved ;  the  whole  idea 
of  what  the  apostles  called  •*  edification," — that  most  expressive  word  when  we  under- 
stand it  rightly — the  architecture,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Christian  soul — all  these 
images  were  drawn  from  the  superb  edifices  which  everywhere  rose  before  the 
apostles*  eyes.  And  so  in  the  last  great  efflorescence  of  medisBval  architecture, 
religion,  instead  of  dying  out  with  that  effort,  took  a  third  start  throughout  Europe. 
Oh  I  may  God  grant  that  the  glorv  of  the  third  temple,  the  glory  of  the  living 
temple,  may  as  much  exceed  the  glory  of  the  second,  as  the  glory  of  the  second 
exceeded  the  glory  of  the  first  1  Cast  not  away  the  old,  but  see  what  it  means,  see 
what  it  embraces,  see  what  it  indicates,  *•  See  what  manner  of  stones  and  what 
buildings  are  here,"  and  then,  as  in  the  case  of  sacred  and  of  ancient  words,  so 
also  in  the  case  of  sacred  and  ancient  edifices,  they  will  become  as  Luther  said  of 
words,  not  dead  stones  but  living  creatures  with  hands  and  feet;  living  stones 
which  will  cry  out  with  a  thousand  voices  ;  stones  which  will  be  full  of  "  sermons;" 
dry  boires  which  when  we  prophesy  over  them,  will  stand  on  their  feet  an  exceeding 
great  army ;  ancient,  everlasting  gates,  which  shall  turn  upon  their  rusty  hinges 
and  lift  up  their  hoary  doors  that  the  Lord  of  Hosts  may  come  in ;  a  heavenly  city 
within  the  earthly  city,  a  city  which  hath  foundations  deeper  than  any  earthly 
foundations,  a  city  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God  I  {Dean  Stanley.)  Ruin  ever 
near: — Jesus  and  the  disciples  of  Jesus  differ  in  just  this  way  about  the  strength 
and  durability  of  a  great  many  things  in  this  world.  The  disciples  point  to  the 
wealth  of  the  millionaire,  to  the  reputation  of  a  man  of  world-wide  fame,  to  the 
influence  of  a  popular  leader,  to  the  power  of  a  national  government,  to  the 
strength  of  some  system  of  wrong ;  and  they  say,  **  Behold  what  manner  of  stones 
and  what  manner  of  buildings  I  "  Jesus  says,  *'  There  shall  not  be  left  here  one 
stone  upon  another."  And  the  word  of  Jesus  never  fails.  Wealth  is  no  sure 
support  even  for  the  life  that  now  is.  The  splendid  fabric  of  a  fortune,  which  a 
man  has  toiled  a  life  through  to  give  as  an  inheritance  to  his  family,  crumbles  in  a 
night,  and  the  millionaire's  children  are  beggars,  or  worse.  The  man  whom  all  the 
world  honoured  has  become  a  by>word  of  tiie  scoffer  and  jester.  He  who  swayed 
multitudes  at  bis  will,  and  who  defied  the  voice  of  an  outraged  public  sentiment,  is 
a  wi-etched  outcast  denied  help  or  pity  from  the  very  creatures  of  his  influence.  A 
system  of  iniquity  edged  in  by  law,  and  venerable  for  ages,  is  overthrown  and 
Nwept  away  as  by  the  breath  of  Omnipotence.  No  nation  on  earth,  to-day,  is 
beyond  the  possibility  of  ruin  to-morrow.  A  few  pounds  of  dynamite  may  scatter 
the  last  vestiges  of  the  strongest  dynasty.  The  traditions  of  the  ages,  the 
superstitions  of  entire  races,  ignorance,  vice,  evil  in  high  places,  Satan  himself, 
and  all  his  hosts  combined,  cannot  keep  one  stone  on  another,  when  the  word  of 
God  is  spoken  for  the  fabric's  fall.  If  we  only  really  believed  this  truth,  which  is 
as  true  as  any  other  truth  of  God,  and  which  has  been  verified  anew  before  our 
own  eyes  again  and  again  in  the  present  generation,  how  much  more  restful  we 
should  be,  and  how  much  more  courage  we  should  have.  {Sunday  School  Times.) 
GotVs  grtat  judgment  on  Israel: — ^Privilege  and  responsibility  go  hand  in  hand,  and 
the  higher  the  opportunity,  tiae  greater  the  penalty  for  neglecting  to  improve  it.  The 
occasion  of  the  uttering  of  this  prediction  is  suggestive.  The  Saviour  had  marvelled 
at  the  widow's  mite ;  the  dibciples  marvel  at  the  temple's  magnificence.  Forty  and 
six  years  had  the  temple  been  in  building,  and  had  not  long  been  completed. 
Occupying  a  site  which  seemed  impregnable,  its  massive  structure  seemed  to  defy 
the  destructive  arts  of  war,  while  the  exquisite  beauty  of  its  golden  roof,  of  its 
courts,  of  its  cloisters,  of  its  pillars,  of  its  gates,  made  it  one  of  the  wonders  of 
the  world.  As  to-day,  a  visitor  to  the  cathedral  of  St.  Isaao's,  at  St  Petersburg, 
would  mark  ontside  the  great  pillars,  made  of  single  stones  of  granite,  and  within 
the  marvellous  pillars  of  Malachite  and  Lapis  Lazuli,  so  the  twelve  point  to  stones 
of  vast  dimensions  and  beautiful  in  their  vuins  and  workmanship,  and  ask  Hii 
tdmiration  at  once  for  these  individual  stones,  and  for  the  whole  temple,  which. 


.  xiu.]  ST.  MARK.  525 

like  a  jewel,  crowned  that  hill  of  Zion,  which  the  Psalmist  had  thonght  so 
oeantifid  for  situation.  It  was  a  time  of  peace,  for  the  horrors  of  war  were  being 
forgotten  as  a  troubled  dream.  The  absorption  of  Judsea  in  the  Boman  Empire 
seemed  to  promise  a  degree  of  security,  which  would  be  not  an  altogether  un- 
satisfactory compensation  for  the  loss  of  dignity  of  freedom.  Just  as  our  rule  in 
India  prevents  wars  amongst  the  various  nations  peopling  that  continent,  so  **  The 
Boman  peace,"  as  it  has  been  termed,  prevailed  between  and  blessed  the  various 
peoples  blended  together  in  the  great  Boman  Empire.  The  scene  was  made  more 
impressive  by  the  multitudes  from  every  land  who  had  gathered  to  the  feast, 
wearing  various  costumes,  speaking  various  languages.  The  candid  observer 
would  regret  the  absence  of  many  of  the  signs  of  devotion  he  had  hoped  to  find  ; 
but  would  at  the  same  time  indulge  the  feeling  that  there  must  be  some  vitality  in 
the  religion  which  felt  such  a  mighty  attraction  to  the  House  of  God.  A  nation 
BO  united  in  what  was  deepest  and  hoUest  could  not,  he  would  think,  fail  to  have 
some  future  still  awaiting  it.  And  whether  the  cloudless  sun  gilded  the  scene  of 
cheerful  activity,  or  the  silver  light  of  the  passover  full-moon  rested  like  a 
benediction  on  the  whole,  hope  rather  than  solicitude  would  fill  his  heart ;  and  the 
holiest  spot  on  earth  would  seem  destined  to  wear  an  eternal  bloom  of  glory. 
Unexpected  by  His  hearers,  Christ's  words  thrill  them  with  horror.  We  stiU  feel 
Christ's  sayings  hard.  We  still  find,  on  earnest  study,  that  some  hard  sayings  are 
yet  helpful.  1.  Taste  is  not  everything  in  religion.  The  temple  of  Jerusalem  was 
perhaps  the  most  beautiful  religious  buUding  ever  raised  by  men ;  yet  it  was  built 
by  Herod  the  Great,  a  man  as  wicked  in  his  life  as  he  was  exquisite  in  bis  taste. 
And  all  this  beauty  is  so  valueless  in  God's  sight  that,  costly  and  marvellous  as  it 
was,  it  had  no  endurance,  but  like  the  grass  of  the  housetop,  which  withereth  afore 
it  groweth  up,  the  world  had  hardly  time  to  marvel  at  its  aspect  before  they 
lamented  its  end.  The  true  beauty  of  a  church  is  that  of  hearts:  the  kindly 
thought,  the  gracious  prayer,  the  consecrated  life.  2.  There  is  only  one  thing  that 
can  give  endurance — righteousness.  Where  it  is  absent,  nothing  can  secure  man, 
city,  or  institution  from  a  grave  fate.  So  the  Saviour  begins  His  teaching  on  the 
judgment  of  Jerusalem.  Was  it  any  wonder  that,  sickened  with  the  thought  of 
such  calamity,  Christ  could  not  enjoy  the  outward  beauty  of  the  temple  as  others 
did?  (iJ.  Glover).  ChrisVs  double  propJiecy : — The  difficulty  in  explaining 
this  discourse  of  oar  Lord  lies  in  the  appropriateness  of  its  terms  to  two  distinct 
and  distant  events, — the  end  of  the  world  and  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  But 
whether  we  assume,  with  some  interpreters,  that  the  one  catastrophe  was  meant  to 
typify  the  other ;  or,  with  another  class,  that  the  discourse  may  be  mechanically 
divided  by  assuming  a  transition,  at  a  certain  point,  from  one  of  these  great 
subjects  to  the  other ;  or,  with  a  third,  that  it  describes  a  sequence  of  events  to  be 
repeated  more  than  once,  a  prediction  to  be  verified,  not  once  for  all,  nor  yet  by  a 
continuous  progressive  series  of  events,  but  in  stages  and  at  intervals,  like  repeated 
flashes  of  lightning,  or  the  periodical  germination  of  Uie  fig  tree,  or  the  re- 
assembling of  the  birds  of  prey  whenever  and  wherever  a  new  carcase  tempts 
them ;  upon  any  of  these  various  suppositions  it  is  still  true  that  the  primary 
fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  was  in  the  downfall  of  tiie  Jewish  state,  with  the 
previous  or  accompanying  change  of  dispensations  ;  and  yet  that  it  was  so  framed 
as  to  leave  it  doubtful  until  the  event,  whether  a  still  more  terrible  catastrophe  was 
not  intended.  However  clear  the  contrary  may  now  seem  to  us,  there  was  nothing 
absurd  in  the  opinion  which  so  many  entertained  that  the  end  of  the  world  and  of 
the  old  economy  might  be  coincident.  This  ambiguity  is  not  accidental,  but  designed, 
as  in  many  otiaer  prophecies  of  Scripture.  {J.  A.  Alexander^  D.D.)  Beauty 
of  Jerusalem ;— When  I  stood  that  morning  on  the  brow  of  Olivet,  and  looked 
down  on  the  city  crowning  those  battlemented  heights,  encircled  by  those  deep  and 
dark  ravines,  I  involuntarily  exclaimed,  "  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the 
whole  earth  is  Mount  Zion."  And  as  I  gazed,  the  red  rays  of  the  rising  sun  shed  a 
halo  round  the  top  of  the  castle  of  David ;  then  they  tipped  with  gold  each 
tapering  minaret,  and  gilded  each  dome  of  mosque  and  church,  and  at  length 
bathed  in  one  flood  of  ruddy  light  the  terraced  roofs  of  the  city,  and  the  grass  and 
foliage,  the  cupolas,  pavements,  and  colossal  walls  of  the  Haram.  No  human 
being  could  be  disappointed  who  first  saw  Jerusalem  from  Olivet.  {Dr,  Porter.) 
Trouble  just  ahead: — The  chapter  now  coming  under  our  perusal  for  two  Sundays 
in  Buocession,  is  not  easy  of  interpretation  in  a  good  manv  of  its  particulars, 
because  the  suggeetions  of  doctrine  glide  so  imperceptibly  and  fitfully  between  the 
predictions  of  Jerusalem's  downfall  and  the  prophecies  of  the  world's  end  that  we 


MS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xhl 

cannot  always  fix  their  exact  application.  ^  It  appears  as  if  it  might  be  as  well  on 
the  present  occasion  to  occupy  ourselves  with  what  is  plain  and  practical,  and  not 
lose  our  time  in  speculation  upon  what  is  not  certainly  revealed.  I.  We  learn,  in 
the  beginning,  that  Jerusalem  was  openly  announced  as  doomed  to  fall,  bkfobb 
IT  fell.  Some  specific  incidents  were  related  beforehand  which  would  test  the 
prophetic  power  of  Jesus  Christ  there  at  once,  and  put  within  reach  of  His 
disciples  a  confutation  or  a  confirmation  of  His  claims.  It  hardly  needs  to  be 
stated,  for  the  whole  matter  is  so  famiUar,  that  the  predictions  of  this  city's  over- 
throw  showed  that  our  Lord  spoke  with  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  events  He 
mentioned  as  coming  on  the  earth.  The  site  of  that  old  town  is  a  well-known 
fact ;  no  one  thinks  of  disputing  the  locality.  The  historic  books  of  the  Jews  tell 
how  Jerusalem  was  overthrown  by  the  Romans.  Any  one  can  ask  and  answer 
whether  the  stones  are  large,  whether  they  are  in  position  or  not.  The  city  Hea 
"  on  heaps."  Mount  Zion  is  "  ploughed."  The  temple  is  gone.  Those  vast  walls 
are  scattered.  Some  few  stones  of  prodigious  size  yet  remain  in  what  were  the 
foundations  of  the  edifices,  and  in  the  cavernous  substructions  underground.  No 
one  can  pass  out  of  the  modem  Jaffa  gate,  and  push  on  around  along  the  decUvity 
of  Zion  till  he  enters  again  the  gate  of  Stephen,  without  unconsciously  saying  to 
himself,  •*  See  what  manner  of  stones  1 "  II.  We  learn,  next,  as  we  continue  to 
read  the  verses  (vers.  3,  4),  that  it  is  lawful  to  inquire  fob  the  time  of  fulfil- 
ment OF  scriptural  pbopheoy.  It  is  not  right  to  attempt  to  set  it,  but  if  it  can  be 
ascertained,  so  much  the  better  for  our  understanding,  and  in  that  direction  our 
duty  lies.  Christ  makes  no  rebuke  for  what  some  consider  their  curiosity.  On  the 
contrary,  He  tells  them  most  important  facts  concerning  the  great  times  coming. 
UL  We  learn  also,  just  here,  that  there  will  be  one  special  token  of  the 
world's  end  which  will  not  fail  :  "  the  gospel  must  first  be  published  among  aD 
nations"  (ver.  10).  Very  carefully  chosen  is  this  phraseology.  We  are  not  told  that 
all  the  nations  are  to  be  converted  by  the  gospel  before  the  true  Christ  shall  come 
again,  but  that  they  are  all  to  hear  it.  It  would  seem  as  if  it  could  not  be  a 
difficult  thing  to  decide  so  evident  a  fact  as  this  assumes,  whenever  it  should  occur. 
Most  of  us  would,  no  doubt,  be  surprised  to  learn  how  many  of  the  nations  on  the 
face  of  the  earth  have,  really,  already  heard  the  tidings  of  salvation ;  and  it  is  not 
impossible  that  the  joyous  moment  is  very  nigh.  It  is  time,  certainly,  to  be 
thoughtful.  It  is  witiun  the  memory  of  almost  all  of  as  that  ihe  fixed,  and  with 
some  good  old  men  the  stereotyped,  prayer  for  monthly  concert,  for  many  a  year, 
was  that  God  would  open  China  to  the  gospel,  and  break  down  the  barriers  in 
Japan.  Now  there  is  in  all  the  world  nothing  in  the  way  except  the  hardness  of 
men's  hearts.  Growth  has  been  made  in  evangelizing  eiSort  that  startles  as  when 
we  think  of  it.  Lately,  the  sudden  conversion  of  nations  in  a  day,  as  once  seemed 
to  be  the  case  in  Madagascar,  has  come  to  appear  less  and  less  strange.  Spiritual 
uprisings  of  whole  peoples  at  a  time  have  been  recorded  in  our  generation, 
rv.  We  learn,  also,  that  when  ttie  end  of  the  world  draws  nigh,  it  will  bb 
hebaldeo  akd  accompanied  with  most  dibk  convulsions  and  troubles  (vers.  19, 20). 
YI.  So  we  are  ready  for  our  final  lesson  from  the  passage :  Men  need  to  pbbpabb 

FOB  such  a  DAT  AS  THIS  BEFORE  IT  SHALL  PROVE  TO  BE  TOO  LATE.      It  is   CBSy  fOT  US   tO 

see  now  the  relevancy  of  what  has  been  given  us  as  the  golden  text  (Prov.  xxii.  3), 
*' A  prudent  man  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself."  There  is  but  one  refuge 
for  any  human  soul :  Christ  is  our  **  hiding-place ;"  He  will  "  preserve  us  from 
trouble  "  (Psa.  xxxii.  7).  If  we  believe  in  Him,  we  are  safe.  It  is  revealed  in  the 
Scriptures  that  the  coming  of  oiu:  Lord  to  judge  the  world  will  find  men  in  a  con- 
dition of  apathy  and  Hstlessness.  They  will  be  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and 
giving  in  marriage,  as  they  were  in  Noah's  time  (Matt.  xxiv.  37-39).  They  will  be 
buying  and  selling,  planting  and  building,  as  they  were  in  Lot's  time  (Lake  xvii. 
23-30).  Better  for  as  who  are  studying  to  know  God's  will  this  ImpressiTe  hoar  to 
call  on  the  Lord  at  once,  and  be  secure.    (C.  S,  Robituon,  D.D.) 

Yer.  4.  Tell  ns,  when  ahaU  these  things  be  J— Date  fixing  .-—That's  it  I  Fix  the 
date  of  the  ooming  failure,  or  the  coming  triumph.  All  of  as  are  ready  to  join  io 
that  request.  How  we  long  to  have  the  veil  of  the  future  lifted ;  and  how  well  it  is 
that  the  Lord  does  not  gratify  our  longing  in  this.  There  is  no  greater  blessing  to  as 
than  Qod'B  oonoealment  of  our  future.  There  could  be  no  surer  corse  from  God 
than  his  opening  before  oar  eyes  the  pathway  of  our  lives,  so  that  we  could  see  it 
to  its  mr  end.  What  heart-breaking  that  would  bring  into  a  myriad  homes  I 
What  a  eneoking  too,  on  every  side,  of  hope  and  aspiration  and  noble  endeavour  I 


OHAT.  xm.]  ST.  MARK.  bVJ 


How  it  would  paralyze  loving  effort,  and  check  or  destroy  needed  tenderness  oi 
love  and  deed  in  kindly  ministry  1  We  know  not  what  we  ask,  when  we  crave  au 
mf  igbt  into  the  future.  God  knows  what  He  does,  and  why,  when  He  refuses  every 
request  of  this  kind  from  His  loved  and  loving  ones.  {Sunday  School  Times  ) 
Leading  astray ;— It  is  quite  as  important  not  to  be  led  astray  by  false  religious 
teachers  as  by  any  other  class  of  deceivers  or  deceived ;  and  there  is  quite  as  much 
danger  in  this  Ime  as  in  any  other.  Sincerity  on  our  part  is  no  guard  against  decep- 
tion or  wandering ;  nor  is  sincerity  a  safeguard  to  a  religious  teacher.  Those  who 
are  themselves  both  honest  and  sincere  would  lead  us  astray  if  we  followed  them  in 
their  wrong  path.  There  is  danger  of  our  being  led  astray  by  the  sermons  we  hear, 
the  papers  or  the  books  we  read,  the  counsel  or  example  of  those  whom  we  1  ive  sup- 
posed  to  be  godly,  or  by  the  impulses  or  convictions  of  our  own  minds  and  hearts. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  conscientious  error- teaching  and  devil-serving.  The  warn- 
ing of  Jesus  is,  that  ye  take  heed  that  no  man  lead  you  astray  in  doctrine  or  morals, 
through  holding  up  a  false  standard  of  conduct,  or  a  false  interpretation  of  God's 
Word.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  And  when  ye  shaU  hear  of  wars.— Trottftlota  times  .—I,  Wis  ibb  hebe 
roBBWABNBD  TO  EXPBOT  TBOUBLE,  '*  Yc  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wars  **  •  and 
it  follows,  "  such  things  must  needs  be  "  ;  look  for  no  other.  Is  not  our  life  a  war- 
fare T  1.  This  points  immediately  at  those  wars  which  brought  on  the  final  ruin 
and  overthrow  of  the  Jewish  church  and  nation.  2.  It  looks  further,  and  is  intended 
as  an  intimation  to  us  all,  and  to  all  Christians,  to  count  upon  trouble  in  this  world. 
When  ye  hear  wars  (so  the  word  is),  when  ye  hear  war  at  home,  the  noise  of  it,  for 
war  in  a  country  makes  a  noise  ;  never  more  than  since  the  invention  of  guns,  the 
most  noisy  way  of  fighting;  yet  of  old  they  complained  of  the  noise  of  war  (Nahum 
lii.  2 ;  Exod.  xxxii.  17, 18).  When  we  hear  the  rumours  of  wars,  the  reports  or  tidings 
of  wars.  We  commonly  call  uncertain  reports  rumours,  and  in  time  of  war  we 
often  hear  such,  but  the  original  word  signifies  intelligences,  to  at  of  which  we  hear. 
Doctrine  :  That  though  it  be  very  sad,  jet  it  is  not  at  all  strange  in  this  world,  to 
hear  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wars.  There  are  three  sorts  of  wars :  1.  Law- wars 
among  neighbours  and  relations,  bad  enough,  and  very  common,  through  too  much 
love  of  the  world,  and  too  little  of  our  brother.  There  are  few  of  the  spirit  of 
Abram  (Gen.  xiii.  8).  2.  Book-wars  among  scholars  and  Christians.  Different 
sentiments  maintamed  by  each  side  with  great  heat,  too  often  greater  than  the 
occasion  demands.  3.  Sword- wars  among  nations  and  public  interests :  of  these 
tiie  text  speaks.  Whence  is  it  that  so  much  mischief  should  be  done  in  the  world 
by  wars?  considering  (1)  What  principles  there  are  in  the  nature  of  man.  Is 
there  not  such  a  thing  as  humanity?  Man  is  not  bom  for  war,  but  naked  and 
miaimed ;  not  fierce,  as  birds  and  beasts  of  prey.  (2)  What  promises  there  are  in 
the  Word  of  God.  It  seems  hard  to  reconcile  this  text  with  Isa.  ii.  4  and  with 
Isa.  xi.  6,  &c.  The  Jews  object  it,  Christ  Himself  has  said  otherwise  (Luke  xii.  51, 
and  m  the  text).  How  shall  we  reconcile  these  two?  I  reply.  Those  promises  are 
m  part  fulfilled  already.  Christ  was  bom  at  a  tune  of  general  peace.  The  gospel 
has  prevailed  much  to  the  civilizing  of  the  nations,  and  as  far  as  it  is  received,  it 
disposes  naen  to  peace.  The  primitive  Christians  were  of  a  peaceable  disposition. 
They  will  have  a  more  full  accomplishment  in  the  latter  days.  Though  contrary 
events  come  between,  that  word  shall  not  fall  to  the  ground.  Yet  the  commonness 
of  war  in  every  age  takes  off  the  strangeness  of  it.  What  do  we  hear  of  at  this 
day  so  much  as  of  wars?  Now  this  we  are  not  to  think  strange.  Because  men 
are  so  provoking  to  God,  and  He  does  thus  in  a  way  of  righteous  judgment  punish 
them  for  their  sins  (Isa.  xxxiv.  5).  War  is  one  of  God's  sore  judgments,  with 
which  He  corrects  the  people  of  His  wrath  (Ezek.  xiv.  17, 21).  Sometimes  God  thus 
makes  wicked  men  a  scourge  one  to  another,  as  Nebuchadnezzar  was  to  the 
nations.  Sometimes  a  scourge  to  His  own  people  (Isa.  x.  6).  Because  men  are  so 
provomg  one  to  another,  and  they  do  thus  give  way  to  their  own  lusts  (James  iv. 
1,  2).  No  war  carried  on  but  there  is  certainly  a  great  deal  of  sin  on  both  sides  as 
2  Chron.  nvm.  9.  But  as  to  the  cause  of  war.  1.  Sometimes  men's  lusts  on 
both  sides  begin  the  war,  and  where  there  may  be  a  right  and  colour  of  reason  on 
both  sides,  yet  not  such  as  on  either  to  justify  the  taking  up  of  arms,  and  while 
there  are  such  follies  set  in  great  dignity  (Eccl.  x.  6),  no  marvel  if  we  hear  much  of 
wars ;  punctihos  of  honour,  inconsiderable  branches  of  right,  to  which  lives  and 
countnes  are  sacnficed  by  jealous  princes ;  the  mouth  justly  opened  to  denounce 
war,  but  the  ear  unjustly  deaf  to  the  proposals  of  peace.    2.  Where  the  war  on  the 


5M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xin, 

one  side  is  jnst  and  necessary,  it  is  men's  lusts  on  the  other  side  that  make  it  so. 
And  if  we  see  it,  we  need  not  marvel  at  the  matter.  Here  is  the  original  of  war 
and  bloodshed.  (1)  Men's  pride  and  ambition  sometimes  make  a  war  just  and 
necessary.  (2)  Men's  covetousness  and  injustice  sometimes  make  a  war  just  and 
necessary.  (3)  Men's  treachery  sometimes  makes  war.  No  marvel  we  hear  of 
wars,  when  all  men  are  liars,  and  no  confidence  is  to  be  put  in  them.  (4)  Oppres- 
sion and  persecution  sometimes  make  war  just.  II.  Wk  abb  hebb  pobeabmed 
AGAINST  THE  TROUBLE  WE  ABE  BID  TO  EXPECT.  When  you  are  yourselves  disturbed 
with  the  alarms  of  war,  be  not  troubled,  i.<„  be  not  inordinately  dejected  and  cast 
down,  be  not  terrified,  whatever  happens ;  keep  trouble  from  your  heart  (John  xiv.  1) 
if  war  come  to  your  door.  It  is  both  for  caution  and  comfort.  You  need  not  be 
troubled,  therefore  give  not  way  to  it.  Doctrine :  That  the  faithful  disciples  of 
Jesus  Christ  ought  not  to  be  inordinately  troubled,  when  there  are  wars  and 
rumours  of  wars.  1.  As  for  others,  they  have  reason  to  be  troubled.  Those  that 
are  not  the  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  are  not  interested  in  His  merit  and  grace, 
iiave  cause  for  trouble  when  God's  judgments  are  abroad  (see  Isa.  xxxiii.  14). 
Terrors  belong  to  them,  and  as  for  comforts,  they  have  no  part  nor  lot  in  the 
matter  (see  Luke  xxi.  25,  26).  Those  that  have  the  most  cause  to  be  troubled 
commonly  put  trouble  furthest  from  them.  2.  There  is  cause  for  the  disciples  of 
Christ  themselves,  upon  some  accounts,  and  in  some  degree,  to  be  troubled. 
Christ  would  not  have  His  followers  to  be  without  feeling.  God  calls  to  mourning 
at  such  a  time.  This  is  a  doctrine  that  needs  explication  and  limitation.  When 
you  hear  of  wars  be  ye  troubled  after  a  godly  sort.  There  is  a  threefold  trouble 
commendable:  (1)  Sympathy  with  the  sufferers.  (2j  Sorrow  for  sin.  It  is  sin. 
that  makes  all  the  mischief.  Mourn  for  the  sin  that  is  the  cause  of  the  war,  and 
the  sin  that  is  the  effect  of  it.  (3)  SoUcitude  for  the  ark  of  God.  For  this  our 
iiearts  should  tremble,  lest  religion  in  its  various  interests  suffer  damage.  The 
desolations  of  the  sanctuary  should  trouble  us  more  than  the  desolations  of  the 
earth :  this  is  a  holy  fear,  3.  Christians  ought  not  to  be  inordinately  troubled. 
WTien  ye  hear  this,  be  not  troubled,  i.e.,  (1)  Be  not  disquieted,  but  make  the  best 
of  it.  It  is  not  our  wisdom  to  aggravate  to  ourselves  the  causes  of  trouble,  nor  to 
make  them  worse  than  they  are.  (2)  Be  not  affrighted,  but  hope  the  best  from  it. 
When  we  hear  the  rumours  of  war,  we  must  not  be  of  doubtful  mind ;  not  as  Ahaz 
(Isa.  vii.  2 ;  viii.  11,  12).  We  must  not  give  up  all  for  lost  upon  every  disaster  and 
disappointment.  Courage  is  an  excellent  virtue  in  time  of  war,  and  needful  at 
iiome  as  well  as  abroad.  (3)  Be  not  amazed,  but  prepare  for  worse  after  it.  There 
seems  to  be  this  also  mtended  in  the  caution ;  compare  v.  8,  "  These  are  the  beginnings 
of  sorrows."  Weep  not  for  this,  but  get  ready  for  the  next  (Luke  xxiii.  28,  29.) 
Faint  not  in  these  lesser  conflicts,  for  then  what  will  you  do  when  greater  come 
(see  Jer.  xii.  5).  Several  considerations  will  be  of  use  to  keep  trouble  from  the  heart 
of  good  Christians,  when  we  hear  of  wars,  (a)  The  righteous  God  sits  in  the 
throne  judging  right,  therefore  be  not  troubled.  God  is  King  of  nations,  and 
presides  in  the  affuirs  of  nations.  Men  talk  of  the  fortune  of  war,  but  it  is  not  a 
blind  fortune ;  the  issue  is  determined  by  a  wise  God.  (6)  The  church  is  built  upon 
a  rock,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it,  therefore  be  not  troubled, 
(c)  Christ  is  His  people's  peace,  therefore  be  not  troubled.  The  remnant  of  those 
that  fear  God,  find  rest  in  Christ,  even  in  troublous  times  (see  Micah  v.  6 ;  John 
xvi.  33).  (d)  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower,  therefore  be  not  troubled. 
Into  this  citadel  the  vanquished  may  retire  and  find  shelter,  and  a  refuge  that  they 
cannot  be  beaten  out  of  (Prov.  xviii.  10).  This  is  a  stronghold,  inaccessible,  insuper- 
able, and  which  cannot  be  taken.  The  power  and  providence  of  God  are  fortifica- 
tions which  cannot  be  scaled,  nor  battered,  nor  undermined.  What  need  good  people 
fear?  (Psa.  xlvi.  1,  2)  They  have  always  a  God  to  whom  they  may  go.  (e)  Men  are 
God's  hand,  therefore  be  not  troubled.  God  is  doing  their  own  work  by  them  all 
this  while,  and  they  are  accomplishing  His  purpose,  though  they  mean  not  so  (Isa. 
X.  6,  7,  15  ;  Psa.  xvii.  13,  14).  (/)  There  will  come  a  reckoning  day,  when  all  these 
things  shall  be  reviewed ;  therefore  be  not  troubled.  Behold,  the  Judge  standeth 
before  the  door  and  the  mighty  men  shall  shortly  stand  at  His  bar  (Isa.  xxvi.  21 ; 
Bev.  vi.  10).  (g)  The  wars  of  the  nations  perhaps  may  end  in  the  peace  of  the 
church.  God  can  bring  light  out  of  darkness,  and  meat  out  of  the  eater,  {h) 
However,  we  are  sure  in  heaven  there  are  no  wars  nor  rumours  of  wars,  therefore  be 
not  troubled.  All  will  be  well  there.  To  conclude :  1.  Let  us  thankfully  own  God's 
great  goodness  to  us  in  this  nation— that  we  have  peace  at  home,  a  happy  govem- 
snent,  peaceable  habitations,  a  defence  on  our  glory  (Isa.  xxxiii.  20).   2.  Let  ua 


xra,]  ST.  MARK.  629 

not  complain  of  the  inconveniences  that  attend  our  being  interested  in  the  present 
war;  the  expense  of  it,  or  the  abridging  and  exposing  of  our  trade  and  property.  3. 
Let  rumours  of  wars  drive  us  to  our  knees.  Pray,  pray,  and  do  not  prophesy. 
Spread  the  matter  before  God,  and  you  may  greatly  help  the  cause  by  your 
supplications.  4.  Patiently  wait  the  issue  with  a  humble  submission  to  the  will  of 
Qod.  Do  not  limit  Him,  nor  prescribe  to  Him.  Let  Him  do  His  own  work  in  His 
own  way  and  time.  {Matthew  Henry.)  Tlie  sorrow  of  war : — The  conqueror  of 
Bonaparte  at  Waterloo  wrote,  on  the  day  after  the  19th  of  June,  to  the  Duke  of 
Beaufort : — "  The  losses  we  have  sustained  have  quite  broken  me  down,  and  I  have 
no  feeling  for  the  advantages  we  have  acquired."  On  the  same  day,  too,  he  wrote 
to  Lord  Aberdeen : — "  I  cannot  express  to  you  the  regret  and  sorrow  with  which  I 
look  round  me  and  contemplate  the  loss  which  I  have  sustained,  particularly  in 
your  brother.  The  glory  resulting  from  such  actions,  so  dearly  bought,  is  no  con- 
solation to  me,  and  I  cannot  suggest  it  as  any  to  you  and  his  friends ;  but  I  hope 
that  it  may  be  expected  that  this  last  one  has  been  so  decisive  as  that  no  doubt 
remains  that  our  exertions  and  our  individual  losses  will  be  rewarded  by  the  early 
attainment  of  our  just  object.  It  is  then  that  the  glory  of  the  actions  in  which 
our  friends  and  relations  have  fallen  will  be  some  consolation  for  their  loss."  He 
who  could  write  thus  had  already  attained  a  greater  victory  than  that  of  Waterloo  ; 
and  the  less  naturally  follows  the  greater.    (Julius  C.  Hare.) 

Ver.  8.  These  are  the  besrinnlngrs  of  sorrows. — The  beginnings  of  sorrowi : — I. 
Tea  VALus  of  thesb  facts  im  belation  to  the  ufb  and  ohabacteb  of  the  Loan. 
He  is  the  prophet  of  the  church.  He  was  a  revealer  of  secrets.  His  word  was 
verified  to  the  letter.  The  church  lives  in  evil  times  on  the  word  of  her  unseen 
Lord.  II.  Thebe  is  also  a  suaassTioN  of  the  connection  of  sobbows  and  sims. 
Jerusalem's  fate  is  a  series  of  such  sorrows.  They  arise  out  of  religious  unfaithful- 
ness and  moral  deterioration.  Nations  are  doomed  by  their  own  acts.  III.  If  we  do 
not  and  will  not  learn  the  Divine  uses  of  adversity,  then  the  things  we  regret,  and 
which  are  most  painful  to  us,  will  only  pbove  to  be  the  beoinnings  of  sobbows. 
If  ]esser  Divine  chastisements  do  not  raise  us  to  higher  moods  of  being,  there  must 
be  held  in  reserve  some  hotter  fire  of  discipline.  We  should  immediately  yield  to 
the  disciplines  of  God.  {The  Preacher^s  Monthly.)  The  Christian's  support  in 
troublous  times  : — ^Whatever  happens,  we  must  calm  ourselves  by  remembering  that 
the  great  Christ  is  still  in  heaven,  ruling  by  the  changeless  laws  of  righteousness. 
In  presence  of  extraordinary  events,  the  ordinary  methods  of  God's  grace  and  provi- 
dence will  seem  too  slow,  and  the  common  gospel  too  calm;  but  it  is  exactly  at  such 
times  that  we  most  need  to  maintain  our  faith  in  them.  IR.  Glover.)  Horrors 
of  famine  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem : — During  this  dreadful  time,  the  extremity  of 
the  famine  was  such,  that  a  Jewess  of  noble  family,  urged  by  the  cravings  of  hunger, 
slew  her  infant  child,  and  prepared  it  for  a  meal.  She  had  actually  eaten  one-half 
of  it,  when  the  soldiers,  attracted  by  the  smell  of  food,  threatened  her  with  instant 
death  if  she  refused  to  show  them  where  she  had  hidden  it.  Intimidated  by  this 
menace,  she  immediately  produced  the  remains  of  her  son ;  but,  instead  of  sitting 
down  to  eat,  they  were  utterly  horror-struck ;  and  the  whole  city  stood  aghast,  when 
they  heard  the  horrible  tale,  congratulating  those  whom  death  had  hurried  away 
from  such  heartrending  scenes.  Indeed,  humanity  at  once  shudders  and  sickens  at 
tiie  narration;  nor  can  any  one  of  the  least  sensibility  reflect  upon  the  pitiable  con- 
dition to  which  the  female  part  of  the  inhabitants  must  at  this  time  have  been 
reduced,  without  experiencing  the  tenderest  emotion  of  sympathy,  or  refraining 
from  tears,  when  he  reads  our  Saviour's  pathetic  address  to  the  women  who 
bewailed  Him  as  He  was  led  to  Calvary ;  for  in  that  address  He  evidently  refers  to 
these  very  horrors  and  calamities. 

Ver.  10.  And  the  gospel  most  first  be  pabllshed  among  all  nations. — Extent  of 
apostolic  missionary  labours : — Doubtless  this  prediction  will  only  receive  its  com- 
plete accomplishment  in  the  secondary  application  of  the  prophecy,  but  we  hardly 
reaUze  how  near  it  was  to  fulfilment  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  "  The 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  "  fill  us  with  amazement  at  the  rapid  progress  of  Christianity 
in  Europe  and  Asia,  nnder  the  teaching  of  two  of  them.  What  should  we  not 
learn  if  the  whole  Twelve  had  found  chroniclers  to  record  their  labours  ?  Scattered 
traditions,  with  more  or  less  of  certainty,  show  at  least  this,  that  missionary  work 
was  carried  on  throughout  the  then  known  world.  There  is  Uttle  doubt  that  St. 
Thomas  established  the  church  in  Parthia  and  on  the  shores  of  India ;  that  St. 


690  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xnu 

Andrew  penetrated  far  into  Bnssia;  that  Bartholomew  preaohed  in  Arabia  and 
among  the  fire-worshippers  of  Persia;  and  it  haa  been  said  that  even  Central  Africa, 
which  tiie  present  generation  bnms  to  win  back  to  Christ,  was  the  scene  of  St. 
Matthew's  labours  eighteen  centuries  ago.  St.  Paul's  appeal  to  "the  hope  of  the 
gospel  which  was  preached  to  every  creature  which  is  under  heaven  "  (Col.  L  23), 
though  doubtless  written  with  Oriental  exaggeration,  testifies  to  a  widespread 
diffusion  of  the  truth.  (H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  Progreu  of  the  gospel:—! 
remember  hearing  a  story  in  connection  with  our  battle-fields.  One  weaiy,  dreary 
night,  while  our  army  was  on  the  eve  of  a  great  and  important  battle,  a  soldier 
paced  np  and  down  before  the  tent  of  his  general.  Wearied  with  his  work,  he 
began  to  sing  half  to  himself,  *'When  I  can  read  my  title  clear."  After  a  little 
his  voice  grew  louder,  and  he  sang  the  hymn  as  though  it  were  a  song  of  victory. 
His  tones  rang  out  on  the  still  night  air.  After  a  little  another  soldier,  off  yonder, 
hearing  the  music,  and  fascinated  by  it,  joined  in.  There  was  a  duet.^  A  little 
longer,  and  another  voice,  farther  off,  joined,  and  there  was  a  chorus,  and  it  was  not 
long  before  the  whole  army,  as  far  as  the  mind  could  reach  on  either  dde,  were 
joining  in  that  wondrous  chorus,  and  singing  in  the  presence  ol  the  enemy, 

**  When  I  can  read  my  title  clear, 
To  mansions  in  the  sky." 

Well,  brethren,  when  I  heard  the  story,  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  eonld  see  in  the  far-off 
distance  that  wondrous  carpenter's  Son  of  Nazareth,  standing  alone  and  singing, 
"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace  and  goodwill  to  men."  After  a 
little  twelve  disciples  took  up  the  refrain,  and  joined  in  the  chorus.  After  a  little 
longer,  in  the  next  century,  a  still  larger  company  gathered  and  sang  it  with  all 
their  hearts.  In  the  next  century  a  still  larger  number  added  their  voices,  and  now, 
after  eighteen  hundred  years  have  gone  by,  tiie  music  of  that  wondrous  song,  which 
began  with  Him  who  stood  in  His  father's  workshop,  is  sung,  and  echoed,  and  re- 
echoed the  whole  wide  world  over.  It  is  our  revelation  from  God,  and  it  is  the 
impulse  that  lifts  as  all  up  to  God.    {GhrUtian  Mirror.) 

Ver.  11.  But  when  they  shall  lead  yon,  and  deliver  you  vp,—Tfie  dUeiplee  led, 
delivered,  and  taught : — Our  Lord  is  here  foretelling  the  persecutions  which  the 
disciples  would  be  called  upon  to  suffer  for  the  gospel's  sake,  and  is  arming  them 
against  the  errors,  the  deceits,  and  the  cruelties  of  those  times.  He  is  also  enjoining 
upon  them  how  they  are  to  conduct  themselves  under  the  subtlety  and  fury  of  the 
oppressor,  and  is  giving  them  directions  which,  if  they  rightly  follow,  will  not  only 
determine  the  excellence  of  their  discipleship,  but  the  certain^  of  their  triumph 
over  the  jeopardy  and  envy  of  circumstances  and  foes.  (See  verses  9  to  13.)  Deal- 
ing directly  with  the  eleventh  verse,  we  see — I.  That  when  suffering  persecution  the 
disciples  were  to  be  led,  and  not  driven.  "But  when  they  shall  lead  yon."  It  is 
always  better  to  be  led  than  forced;  more  is  to  be  gained  from  obedience  than 
coercion.  We  are  led,  or  we  lose  that  obedience  which  constitutes  the  soul  of  god- 
liness. We  follow,  or  we  are  not  led  as  Christ  was  and  would  have  us  to  be.  He 
was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  &o.  Stephen,  the  martyr,  was  led ;  so  Paul  the 
apostle.  So  also  was  Ridley  and  Latimer,  each  ending  their  earthly  lives  in  the 
very  track  and  spirit  of  their  Lord  and  Master.  But  observe  again— 11.  The 
disciples  were  to  be  delivered  in  opposition  to  becoming  resistful  and  violently  taken 
sacrifices.  "  But  when  they  shall  lead  you,  and  deliver  you  up."  Both  led  and  de- 
livered. Not  to  be  led,  and  then  to  take  a  final  stand  of  opposition.  The  deliver- 
ance must  not  be  less  loyal  and  true  than  the  leading  has  been.  The  sacrifice  must 
be  complete.  Begun  in  being  led,  in  true  following,  it  must  not  end  in  rebellious 
resistance  and  forsaking.  No;  we  are  to  be  delivered  up,  not  thmst  up — self- 
offered  and  complying  rather  than  confiicting  with  our  foes.  (See  Isa.  1.  6 ;  1  Peter 
ii.  21-23).  Then  further,  Uie  text  teaches— HI.  That  in  times  of  persecution  the 
disciples  were  not  to  prepare  and  to  rely  upon  mechanical  defences.  "  Take  no 
thought  beforehand  what  ye  shall  spei^,  neither  do  ye  premeditate ;  but  whatso- 
ever," &o.  The  reasons  for  this  are  evident.  Self-thought,  self-prepared  plans  of 
defence,  would — 1.  Disturb  and  disorder  their  minds.  Scheming  for  words  of  reply 
and  methods  of  escape  would  result  in  mental  distraction.  They  would  be  con- 
fused. And,  moreover,  trusting  to  means  of  self-defence  would — 2.  Deny  and 
neutralize  the  proper  ofl&ce  and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  *'  Whatsoever  shall  be 
given  yon  in  that  hour,  that  speak  ye ;  for  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Holy 


m.]  8T.  MARK.  531 

Ghost**  Thus,  then,  acting  as  true  believers  should— serving  Christ  fearlessly,  all 
our  self -reserve  given  up  to  His  guidance  and  power— we  shall  find  the  Holy  Spirit 

(in  all  those  cases  morally  correspondent  to  the  circumstances  of  our  text)  to (a) 

Sufficiently  enlighten  our  minds,  {b)  To  be  timely  and  powerful  in  the  exercise  of 
His  help.  Either  the  help  of  deliverance,  or  that  of  loyal  resignation ;  complete 
escape,  or  patient  endurance.  In  illustration  and  proof  of  these,  see  Exodus  iv. 
10-12 ;  Jer.  i.  7-9  ;  Luke  xxi.  14,  15 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  13.  In  this  aspect  of  heaven's 
cause  the  answer  and  the  help  must  be  from  heaven,  and  not  from  the  earth,  "  A 
man  can  receive  nothing  except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven"  (John  iii.  27).  Here 
alone  is  the  true  light  and  the  power  that  prevails.  It  is  therefore  plain — IV,  That 
where  the  Holy  Spirit  thus  operates  all  human  self-assertion  is  suppressed.  ♦*  For 
it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  this  takes  place— 1.  For  our  sake 
as  Christ's  true  disciples.  This  is  the  victory  He  gives,  and  without  which  we 
could  not  overcome  the  world.  2.  To  prevent  self-glorying.  In  these  crises  the 
tongue  of  the  learned  and  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer  come  from  God.  Human 
sagacity  can  claim  no  credit.  This  wisdom  is  not  of  man,  lest  he  should  boast. 
And — 3.  To  secure  the  Divine  victory  and  praise.  To  Him  who  directs  and  speaks 
belongs  the  glory.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  Thine,  therefore  is  the  victory,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory  for  ever. 
Amen.     (Thomas  Colclough). 

Ver,  12.  Now  the  brother  shall  betray  the  brother  to  iiesXh..— Christianity  earning 
division : — As  Christianity  gives  birth  to  and  cherishes  the  most  perfect  love,  so  it 
calls  forth  the  most  bitter  hatred.  It  calls  forth  a  love  which  is  above  nature, 
because  it  makes  men  love  their  enemies.  Contrariwise  it  calls  forth  a  hatred  which 
is  unnatural,  for  it  made,  and  yet  makes,  men  hate  and  betray,  and,  if  they  can, 
destroy  their  own  flesh  and  blood.  Thus  we  read  that  the  Emperor  Domitian,  in 
his  hatred  of  the  Christian  name,  slew  Flavius  Clemens  and  his  niece,  or  neat 
relation  Flavia  Domitilla;  the  Emperor  Maximin  martyred  Artemia,  his  own  sister; 
and  Diocletian  slew  his  own  wife,  and  other  relatives.  St.  Barbara  also  was  killed 
by  her  own  father ;  and  if  we  had  a  full  martyrology  of  obscure  Christians,  we 
should  find  multitudes  of  others  similarly  betrayed  by  their  own  flesh  and  blood. 
We  are  told  by  Indian  missionaries,  that  as  soon  as  converts  are  baptized,  they  be- 
come objects  of  hatred  to  their  nearest  relatives ;  even  their  wives  often  desert 
them.  Now,  if  this  be  so  in  a  country  where  Christianity  is  the  religion  of  the  rulers, 
what  would  it  be  if  heathenism  were  michecked  in  its  power  of  persecution? 
(M.  F,  Sadler,  M.A.). 

Ver.  13.  But  he  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end,  the  same  ehaU  be  saved.- 

Of  letting  go  and  giving  up : — The  tower  of  a  lofty  Christian  character  and  life  is 
not  going  to  push  itself  up  in  a  night  like  Jonah's  gourd.  You  cannot  wake  up  some 
fine  morning,  in  glad  surprise,  to  find  it  finished  to  the  turret  stone.  To  build  that 
tower  costs.  It  costs  sacrifice.  It  costs  skill.  It  costs  patience.  It  costs  resolution. 
As  gravitation  pulls  stones  downward  and  glues  them  to  the  earth,  and  as,  if  they 
go  into  the  tower  at  all,  they  must  be  lifted  there  with  wrench  and  strain,  so  this 
tower  of  a  noble  Christian  hfe  must  be  builded  in  the  face  of  opposition,  and  at  the 
cost  of  fight  with  it.  But  history  has  borne  out  the  words  of  Christ.  In  other 
times  it  has  come  to  that.  The  Inquisition  made  it  come  to  that.  The  massacre 
of  St.  Bartholemew,  for  which  Rome  sang  Te  Deumst  made  it  come  to  that.  Phihp 
the  Second  of  Spain  made  it  come  to  that.  The  Duke  of  Alva,  during  his  govern- 
ment of  the  Netherlands,  made  it  come  to  that.  Thank  God,  Torquemada  cannot 
torture  now!  Thank  God,  there  is  no  fuel  for  Smithfield  fires  now  I  But 
still  now,  in  our  time,  in  this  worldly  world,  no  man  can  give  himself  in  utter 
consecration  to  the  unworldly  Christ,  and  put  his  feet  squarely  in  His  exemplifying 
footprints,  and  go  on  in  resolute  practice  after  Him,  and  not  meet  various  oppo- 
sition. It  is  well  worth  noting  how  constant  is  the  insistence  of  the  Scripture  on, 
not  simply  foundation  laying,  but  also  on  turret  stone  lifting,  on  finishing.  **  I 
have  inclined  mine  heart  to  perform  Thy  statutes  always,  even  unto  the  end,"  sings 
David.  ••  Wherefore  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober  and  hope  unto  the 
end,"  urges  the  Apostle  Peter.  "  For  we  are  made  partakers  of  Christ,  if  we  hold 
the  beginning  of  our  confidence  steadfast  unto  the  end,"  declares  the  author  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  And  the  Epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches  in  the  Revelation 
are  full  of  this  doctrine  of  the  importance  of  the  end.  *'  Be  thou  faithful  unto 
death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."    This,  I  am  certain,  is  one  of  the 


Sn  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  jjik 

commonest  assanlts  of  evil ;  this  toward  discouragement,  toward  despondency  ia 
the  practice  of  the  true  life ;  this  towaid  letting  go  and  giving  up.  "  Well,  you 
have  laid  the  foundation,"  Satan  says:  "you  have  accepted  Christ  and  been  bap- 
tized and  joined  the  church,  and  professed  yourself  a  Christian.  You  have  started, 
but  think  how  long  it  is  before  you  can  come  to  that  turret  stone.  You  are  a  fool  to 
try.  Give  up.  Have  done  with  it.  Anyway,  you  are  a  fool  to  try  in  your  circum- 
stances ;  or  certainly  you  are  a  fool  to  try  with  your  disposition.  What  may  under 
lucre  favourable  circumstances,  or  with  another  sort  of  inherited  disposition,  be 
possible  for  others,  is  surely  impossible  for  you.  Why  strain  and  struggle  and 
wrench  at  the  impossible  ?  Don't  I  Quit  t "  Who  has  not  felt  the  subtle  acid  .i 
this  temptation  eating  out  the  substance  of  his  high  endeavour  ?  Some  time  since, 
I  was  talking  with  a  young  Christian  business  man  in  another  city.  He  was 
troubled  with  the  very  problem  which  tormented  the  Psalmist  long  ago :  "For  I 
was  envious  at  the  foolish,  when  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked."  That  is  pre- 
cisely what  he  was  saying :  "  Here  am  I.  1  have  determined  to  be  straight  and 
true,  and  Christian  in  my  business ;  and  I  have  been.  But  look  at  that  man ;  he 
isn't,  but  see  how  he  gets  on.  What's  tlie  use  of  my  toiling  at  this  tower  of  a 
Christian  business  integrity,  when  it  is  work  so  hard  and  slow  ?  Why  wouldn't  it 
be  better  for  me  to  stop  toiling  at  this  Christian  tower,  and  go  on  with  one  which 
men  would  call— well,  at  least  measurably  decent,  like  that  man's,  but  which 
mounts  into  the  sky  of  success  in  such  swift  and  easy  fashion  ?  "  It  was  only  a 
luomentary  temptation.  But  I  am  sure  he  is  not  the  only  Christian  business  man, 
be  he  young  or  old,  who  has  felt  the  force  of  it  Or,  here  again,  is  a  young  Chris- 
tian. He  has  laid  the  foundation  of  this  Christian  tower  well  and  thoroughly  in 
prayer  and  penitence  and  faith  in  Christ.  He  is  full  of  the  beautiful  enthusiasm 
of  the  new  life.  He  has  confessed  his  Lord  and  is  going  on  in  the  rejoicing  pur- 
pose  of  building  a  life  his  Lord  can  smile  on.  And  then,  as  sometimes  in  the  early 
summer  the  flowers  come  upon  a  frost  that  bites  and  draggles  them,  the  chill  of  the 
inconsistencies  of  some  older  Christians  smites  all  his  beautiful  enthusiasm  down. 
Why  am  I  under  obligations  to  be  any  better  than  they,  the  older,  more  experienced, 
more  prominent  Christians  ?  Why  cannot  I  at  least  loosen  the  tug  of  my  endeavour, 
if  I  do  not  altogether  give  up  and  let  go  ? "  Or,  here  is  a  Christian  wife  and 
mother.  To  be  the  sole  source  and  centre  of  religious  influence  in  the  home  is 
very  hard ;  to  seek  to  breathe  about  the  home  a  Christian  atmosphere,  when  the 
husband,  if  he  do  no  more,  does  meet  and  chill  it  by  the  icy  air  of  his  indifference ; 
to  have  to  train  the  children  away  from,  instead  of  towards,  the  example  of  the 
father  in  the  topmost  and  most  important  thing,  the  matter  of  religion ;  to  have  to 
meet  this  objection,  falling  from  the  lips  of  her  own  child:  "Father  never  prays; 
why  should  I  ?  Father  never  cares  much  for  Sunday ;  why  should  I  ?  Father 
never  says  he  loves  the  Saviour;  why  should  I  try  to?  " — well,  I  do  not  wonder  that 
she  feels  sometimes  like  letting  go  and  giving  up.  I  do  not  wonder  that  sometimes 
her  cross  seems  too  rugged  and  too  heavy.  And  now  that  we  may  arm  ourselves 
against  this  so  common  temptation  of  letting  go  and  giving  up,  let  us  attend  to- 
gether to  certain  principles  opposed  to  it.    I.  Let  us  get  cheek  fob  oubselves  by 

BEaiEMBEBINO  THAT  THE  WOBLD'S  BEST  WOBE  HAS  BEEN  DONE  AND  THE  NOBLEST  LIVU 
HAVE  BEEN  LIVED  BY  MEN  AND  WOMEN  WHO,  LIKE  OTJBSELVES,  HAVE  SOMETIMES  FELT  LIKX 

LETTING  GO  AND  GIVING  UP.  There  is  a  verse  of  Scripture  which  many  a  time  has 
been  to  me  both  a  comfort  and  a  girding.  It  is  written  in  the  First  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  in  the  tenth  chapter  and  at  the  thirteenth  verse:  "There  hath  no 
temptation  taken  you  but  such  as  is  common  to  man ;  but  God  is  faithful,  who  will 
not  suffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  able,  but  will  with  the  temptation 
also  make  a  way  to  escape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it."  "  So  I  am  not,"  I  have 
said  to  myself,  in  darker  and  more  despairing  moments,  "  one  singled  out  for  un- 
usual and  separate  trial ;  others  have  been  wrapped  in  clouds  similar,  others  have 
stood  in  ways  as  thorny."  That  is  a  twisted  and  bubble-blown  and  distorting  glass, 
which  trial  so  often  bids  us  look  through,  out  upon  the  landscape  of  our  lives— 
that  nobody  else  has  ever  had  to  meet  such  chastening  discipline  as  our  own.  Why, 
there  was  Moses ;  he  had  just  this  very  feeling  toward  letting  go  and  giving  up.  It  was 
immensely  hard  to  satisfy  those  Israelites.  There  was  David,  hunted  and  hounded; 
turned  against  and  betrayed  by  his  trusted  counsellor,  Ahithophel.  "  Fearfulness 
and  trembling  have  come  upon  me,  and  horror  hath  overwhelmed  me.  And  I  said. 
Oh !  that  I  lutd  wings  like  a  dove,  for  then  would  I  fly  away  and  be  at  rest.  I 
would  hasten  my  escape  from  tiie  windy  storm  and  tempest."  There  was  Elijah 
tmder  the  juniper  tree,  "  It  is  enough ;  now,  O  Lord,  take  away  my  life."    Wha» 


oiut.  nn.]  ST.  MARK.  63d 

failing  feeling  toward  letting  go  and  giving  np  in  himl    And  if  von  leave  the 

Scripture  and  turn  to  the  record  of  great  lives  anywhere,  you  shall  find  that  in  them, 
too,  feeling  faltered,  and  suggestion  came  to  cease  from  their  great  tower  building 
this  side  the  turret  stone.  I  suppose  a  sermon  scarcely  ever  did  more,  both  for 
the  man  himself  and  the  great  cause  it  advocated,  than  Dr.  Wayland's  sermon  on 
the  Moral  Dignity^  of  the  Missionary  Enterprise.  But  the  evening  of  its  preaching 
was  chill  and  rainy,  and  possibly  fifty  persons  made  up  the  audience,  and  the 
church  was  so  cold  tiiat  the  preacher  had  to  wear  his  great  coat  throughout  the 
service,  and  nobody  seemed  to  listen,  nor  anybody  to  care ;  and  the  next  day  the 
discouraged  preacher,  throwing  himself  on  the  lounge  in  the  house  of  one 
of  his  parishioners,  in  one  of  his  most  despairing  moods,  exclaimed :  ♦•  It  was  a 
complete  failure ;  it  fell  perfectly  dead  I "  I  am  sure  he  felt  hke  letting  go  and 
giving  up,  when  he  remembered  that  he  had  rewritten  that  sermon  eleven  times  that 
he  might  make  it  more  worthy,  and  that  such  was  the  outcome  of  it.  But  that 
sermon,  published,  made  him,  and,  more  than  any  other  influence  in  those  begin- 
ning days  of  the  Foreign  Missionary  enterprise,  made  the  cause.  The  Duke  of 
Wellington,  when  a  subaltern,  was  anxious  to  retire  from  the  army,  where  he 
despaired  of  advancement,  and  actually  applied  to  the  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland 
for  the  poor  post  of  a  commissioner  of  customs.  And  his  great  antagonist,  the 
great  Napoleon,  was  in  early  life  tempted  to  commit  suicide  because  he  could  do 
nothing  and  could  get  no  chance,  and  was  only  saved  from  it  by  a  cheerful  word 
from  somebody.  Oh  1  friend  of  mine,  you  are  not  the  only  person  in  the  world  who 
has  been  assaulted  by  this  suggestion  of  letting  go  and  giving  up.  There  has 
never  been  a  noble  or  achieving  life  anywhere  that  has  not  had  to  push  its  tower  up 
in  spite  of  it.  II.  Let  us  remember  that  this  failing  to  endure  to  the  end,  this  giving 
up  and  letting  go,  must  necessarily  cabby  with  itbeut  a  complete  forfeitubb  of 
THE  PAST.  If  our  Past  has  been  true  and  noble,  we  may  be  helped  by  it  in  the 
Present.  But  we  cannot  live  upon  the  Past.  The  tower  is  unfinished  if  we  stop 
this  side  of  the  turret  stone.  It  is  but  an  untuming  and  useless  wheel  if  we  do  not 
take  advantage  of  the  present  water.  All  its  previous  turning  helps  it  not.  There 
at  Muckross  Abbey  I  saw  a  yew  tree  hundreds  of  years  old,  as  old  as  the  crumbling 
abbey  rising  round  it,  yet  still  growing  bravely  on.  It  was  growing,  because, 
standing  on  the  Past  of  gnarled  trunk  and  spreading  branches,  it  was  using  the 
Present,  forming  its  leaf  buds  every  season,  and  drinking  in  the  dew  and  light.  But 
the  abbey  in  whose  court  it  stood  was  only  a  disintegrating  pile  of  crumbling  stone, 
because  it  had  ceased  relation  with  the  Present.  It  had  no  use  for  the  Present,  nor 
the  Present  for  it ;  no  longer  were  busy  hands  of  inmates  putting  it  to  function, 
keeping  it  in  repair.  It  was  a  Past  thing,  so  the  severe  Present  was  treading  it 
under  foot.  To  give  up  and  let  go  is  to  forfeit  what  we  have  done  and  have  been. 
The  Past  is  useful  only  as  a  preparation  for  the  Present ;  and  if  in  the  Present  we 
will  not  steadily  push  on  toward  the  finishing,  we  lose  the  value  and  meaning  of  the 
Past.  Besist,  therefore,  the  temptation  of  letting  go  and  giving  up.  III.  Let  us 
resist  the  temptation  of  letting  go  and  giving  up,  by  holdino  oubselvbs  to  thb 
SHORT  VIEW  OF  LIFE,  BY  DOING  THE  NEXT  THiNO.  Eaoh  day's  stone  laid  in  each  day's 
time;  the  short  view  method,  the  next  thing  method,  that  is  the  only  method  of 
strong  endurance  and  shining  achievement.  Wise  words  those  which  George 
Macdonald  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Hugh  Sutherland  in  his  story  of  David  Elgin- 
brod ;  they  are  words  worthy  the  careful  heeding  of  every  one  of  us :  "  Now,  what 
am  I  to  do  next?  "  asks  Hugh,  and  he  goes  on  thinking  with  himself :  "  It  is  a 
happy  thing  for  us  that  this  is  really  all  we  have  to  concern  ourselves  about,  what 
to  do  next.  No  man  can  do  the  second  thing.  He  can  do  the  first.  If  he  omits  it, 
the  wheels  of  the  social  Juggernaut  roll  over  him,  and  leave  him  more  or  less 
crushed  behind.  If  he  does  it,  he  keeps  in  front  and  finds  room  to  do  the  next 
again ;  and  so  he  is  sure  to  arrive  at  something,  for  the  onward  march  will  carry 
him  with  it.  There  is  no  saying  to  what  perfection  of  success  a  man  may  come 
who  begins  with  what  he  can  do,  and  uses  the  means  at  hand  ;  he  makes  a  vortex 
of  action,  however  slight,  toward  which  all  the  means  instantly  begin  to  gravitate." 
True  words,  the  veir  gospel  of  achievement,  these.  So  against  this  temptation 
toward  letting  go  and  giving  up,  let  me  take  the  short  view,  let  me  seise  the  next 
thing,  and  not  trouble  myself  about  the  fortieth  thing,  sure^  that  God's  grace  will 
give  the  strength  for  the  coming  day  to  which  the  fortieth  thing  belongs ;  but  that, 
if  I  want  God's  strengthening  grace  for  that,  I  must  use  God's  strengthening  grace 
which  offers  itself  to-day,  and  for  this  next  thing,  which  belongs  to  no  other  day  ia 
all  time'ti  awful  calendar  but  this.    lY.  Let  us  bemembkb  thai  bbfusxbo  to  yixlb 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  siii. 

TO  THE  TEMPTATION  OP  LETTING  00  AND  OIVINO  UP  IS  THE  CONSTANT  PCONO  OUBBKLVES 
BUT  THE  MOBB  PIEMLT  IN  THE  HABIT  OP   OOINO  ON  IN  BIGHTE0USNE8S.      Dark  laW  that, 

which  through  and  because  of  momentary  decisions  against  righteousness,  ends  in 
the  awful  doom,  "  Let  him  that  is  filthy  be  filthy  still."  But  that  same  law  has  a 
sunward  side  bright  as  the  light  that  flashes  from  God's  throne,  viz.,  that  momen- 
tary and  constant  decisions  towards  righteousness  end  at  last  in  that  celestial  turret 
stone,  piercing  the  far  radiances  of  Heaven — "  Let  him  that  is  righteous  be  righteous 
still."  V.  Let  us  remember  that  for  us,  keeping  hold  and  refusing  to  let  go,  thebb 
IS  THE  CONSTANT  HELP  OP  Christ  TOWARD  TRIUMPHING.  That  is  a  swcct  legend 
hanging  about  an  old  church  in  England,  and  it  tells  the  great  truth  well;  how 
centuries  ago,  when  the  monks  were  rearing  it,  a  new  temple  for  the  worship  of 
their  God,  there  came  among  the  workers  a  strange  monk,  unasked,  who  always  took 
on  himself  the  heaviest  tasks ;  and  how  at  last,  when  a  particularly  gigantic  beam 
was  needed  for  a  position  as  important  as  that  of  the  keystone  of  an  arch,  and  how 
when,  with  sweating  strain  and  united  effort,  it  was  lifted  to  its  place,  it  was 
strangely  found  to  be  some  feet  too  short.  No  device  of  the  builders  could  remedy 
it ;  they  had  tried  their  best  with  it,  they  had  used  the  most  careful  measurement 
they  knew,  but  how  sadly  they  had  failed !  There  it  was,  too  short,  and  their  ut- 
most skill  could  not  find  remedy.  The  night  shut  down  upon  the  tired  workers,  and 
they  went  to  their  rest  with  sore  hearts,  leaving  only  this  unknown  monk,  who 
would  go  working  on.  But  when  the  morning  came,  and  the  workers  came  forth 
again,  they  saw  the  sunlight  falling  on  the  beam  exactly  in  its  place,  lengthened  to 
the  precise  dimensions  needed,  and  resting  accurately  on  its  supports.  But  the  un- 
known monk  had  disappeared.  Yet  the  workers  knew  Him  now,  and  were  certain 
they  could  carry  the  temple  onward  to  its  topmost  turret.  For  He  who  had 
been  working  with  them  and  supplying  their  lack  of  perfect  work,  they  came  now  to 
know,  was  none  other  than  the  Lord  Himself.  They  were  not  unhelped  toilers. 
Nor  are  we.  ♦*  Lo  !  I  am  with  you  always,"  declares  our  Lord  I  It  is  our  privilege 
to  answer  with  the  apostle,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ,  who  strengtheneth 
me."  VI.  And  now  for  the  last  word.  Let  us  determine  that  as  we  hope  to  carry 
the  tower  of  a  Christian  life  and  service  onward  to  its  finishing  ourselves,  wk  will 

BE  VERY  CABEFDL  NOT  TO  DISCOUBAOE  ANY  ONE  BESIDE  US,  TOILING  LIKE  OUBSELVES  AT 

THE  SAME  ACHIEVEMENT.  Onco  a  buildiug  was  wrapped  in  flame ;  at  a  high  window, 
a  little  child  was  seen  vainly  endeavouring  to  escape ;  a  brave  fireman  started  up  a 
ladder  to  try  to  rescue  it.  He  went  up,  and  still  further  up :  he  had  almost  gained 
the  window,  but  the  flames  darted  at  him  and  the  flames  smote  him,  and  he  began 
to  falter ;  he  hesitated,  looked  upward  at  the  raging  fire ;  he  shook  his  head ;  he 
was  just  about  to  turn  back.  Just  then  some  one  in  the  throng  below  cried : 
•'  Cheer  him  1  Cheer  him  I"  From  a  thousand  throats  a  loud  heart-helping  cheer 
went  up.  He  did  not  turn  back.  He  went  on  toward  the  finishing,  and  in  a 
minute  he  was  seen  through  the  thick  drifts  of  smoke,  with  the  little  child  safe 
in  his  arms.  So  let  us,  every  one,  see  to  it  that  we  cheer  on  aU  we  can  who, 
Uke  ourselves,  are  struggling  upward  toward  any  nobleness.  (W.  EoyU  J>.I>') 
Unflinching  endurance  : — I  have  read  of  that  noble  servant  of  God,  Marcus  Arethu- 
sius,  minister  of  a  church  in  the  time  of  Constantino,  who  in  Constantino's  time 
had  been  the  cause  of  overthrowing  an  idol's  temple ;  afterwards,  when  Julian  came 
to  be  emperor,  he  would  force  the  people  of  that  place  to  build  it  up  again.  They 
were  ready  to  do  it,  but  he  refused ;  whereupon  those  that  were  his  own  people,  to 
whom  he  preached,  took  him,  and  stripped  him  of  all  his  clothes,  and  abused  his 
naked  body,  and  gave  it  up  to  the  children,  to  lance  it  with  their  pen-knives,  and 
then  caused  him  to  be  put  in  a  basket,  and  anoint  his  naked  body  with  honey,  and 
set  him  in  the  sun,  to  be  stung  with  wasps.  And  all  this  cruelty  they  showed  be- 
cause he  would  not  do  anything  towards  the  building  up  of  this  idol  temple ;  nay, 
they  came  to  this,  that  if  he  would  do  but  the  least  towards  it,  if  he  would  give  but 
a  half-penny  to  it,  they  would  save  him.  But  he  refused  all,  though  the  giving  of 
a  half-penny  might  have  saved  his  life :  and  in  doing  this,  he  did  but  live  up  to  that 
principle  that  most  Christians  talk  of,  and  all  profess,  but  few  come  up  to,  viz.,  that 
we  must  choose  rather  to  suffer  the  worst  of  torments  that  men  and  devils  can 
invent  and  inflict,  than  to  commit  the  least  sin,  whereby  God  should  be  dishonoured, 
our  consciences  wounded,  religion  reproached,  and  our  own  souls  endangered. 
{Brooks.)  Enduring  to  the  end: — Under  this  revival  of  the  persecuting  spirit,  in 
a  few  days  nineteen  Christians,  conspicuous  for  their  character  and  zeal,  were 
apprehended,  and  it  was  resolved  to  make  a  severe  example.  All  were  condemned 
to  die ;  the  four  nobles  (one  of  them  a  lady)  were  ordered  to  be  burned  alive ;  fifteen 


A».  xm.]  8T.  MARK.  635 

others  were  to  be  thrown  over  a  precipice.  At  one  o'clock  the  night  before  their 
execution,  a  large  gathering  of  their  companions  secretly  took  place,  not  to  break 
prison  or  attempt  a  rescue,  but  to  commend  the  sufferers  specially  to  God  in  prayer. 
"  At  one  at  night,  we  met  together  and  prayed."  With  the  early  dawn  the  whole 
city  was  astir :  it  had  been  whispered  that  the  Christians  were  to  die,  and  an  im- 
mense multitude  gathered  to  witness  the  sight.  On  the  west  side  of  Antananarivo, 
is  a  steep  precipice  of  granite,  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  high ;  the  terrace  above 
which  has  long  been  used  as  a  place  of  execution.  Above  the  terrace  the  ground 
rises  rapidly  to  the  crest  of  the  ridge,  on  which  the  city  is  built,  and  on  which  the 
palace  enclosure,  with  its  lofty  dwellings,  stands  conspicuous.  Beneath  the  preci- 
pice the  ground  is  a  mass  of  jagged  rocks  and  boulders,  upon  which  the  unhappy 
oriminal  would  fall  headlong,  when  rolled  or  thrown  over  the  ledge.  The  refined 
cruelty  which  invented  this  terrible  punishment  has,  in  the  modem  world,  been 
repeated  in  but  one  country  and  among  one  people,  the  half- savage  population  of 
Mexico.  Through  the  thousands  that  had  crowded  every  point  of  the  sloping  hill 
the  condemned  brethren  were  carried,  wrapped  in  mats  and  slung  on  poles.  But 
they  prayed  and  sang  as  they  passed  along  the  roadway;  "and  some  who  beheld 
them,  said  that  their  faces  were  like  the  faces  of  angels."  One  by  one  they  were  thrown 
over  the  precipice,  the  rest  looking  on.  "  Will  you  cease  to  pray  ?  "  was  the  only 
question.  "No,"  was  the  firm  answer  in  every  case.  And  in  a  moment  the  faithful 
martyr  lay  bleeding,  and  mangled,  and  dead,  among  the  rocks  below. — {Trophies 
of  Grace  in  Madagascar.)  The  finally  saved ;— I.  It  is  a  faib  subject  of  inquiry  : 
Whebb  and  from  whence  do  we  expect  these  tbials?  1.  From  our  own 
heart.  2.  The  wiles  and  the  machinations  of  Satan.  3.  The  world  will 
assault  you.  4.  Sin  in  all  its  phases,  its  fascinating  aspects,  will  seek  to 
seduce  you.     6.    Error  will  assail  you.      II.    Thosb  fobms  of  bbuoion,  those 

SHADES  AND  SYSTEMS  OF  BELIEF,  WHICH  WILL  NOT  ENDUBE,  BUT  MUST  COL- 
LAPSE IN  THE  OBDEALS  TO  WHICH  THEY  WILL  BE  SUBJECTED  IN  A  WOBLD  WHICH  TESTS 
THE  BEAL  EVEBY  DAY,  AND   BEJECIS  ALL  THAT   IS  PBETENTI0U8.      Nothing  will  CUdure 

but  vital,  scriptural  Christianity.  1.  The  religion  of  mere  impulse.  Excitement  is 
not  conviction.  2.  The  religion  of  sentiment,  not  the  religion  of  conviction  nor  of 
the  adoption  of  the  heart,  but  purely  of  the  imagination.  3.  The  reUgion  of  intel- 
lect. A  very  striking  and,  so  far,  commendable  form.  The  understanding  is  con- 
vinced that  Christianity  is  true.  It  is  orthodoxy,  not  regeneration ;  it  is  light  in 
the  head  without  love  in  the  heart.  4.  The  religion  of  the  conscience.  5.  The 
religion  of  the  natural  affections,  than  which  nothing  is  more  amiable,  beautiful,  or 
lovely ;  and  yet  it  is  a  religion  that  will  not  endure.  6.  The  religion  of  tradition. 
7.  The  religion  of  form.  There  is  no  endurance  in  it ;  it  collapses  the  moment  it 
ts  exposed  to  trouble.  {J.  Gumming,  D.D.)  Perseverance  .--—The  leopard  doth 
not  run  after  his  prey  like  other  beasts,  but  pursues  it  by  leaping ;  and  if  at  three 
or  four  jumps  he  cannot  seize  it,  for  very  indignation  he  gives  over  the  chase. 
There  be  soma  who,  if  they  cannot  leap  into  heaven  by  a  few  good  works,  will  even 
let  it  alone ;  as  if  it  were  to  be  ascended  by  leaping,  not  by  climbing.  But  they  are 
more  unwise  who,  having  got  up  many  rounds  of  Jacob's  ladder,  and  finding  diffi- 
culties in  some  of  the  uppermost — whether  wrestling  with  assaults  and  troubles,  or 
looking  down  upon  their  old  allurements — even  fairly  descend  with  Demas  and 
allow  others  to  take  heaven.      (T.   Adams.)  Constancy: — Some  dyes  cannot 

bear  the  weather,  but  alter  colour  presently;  but  there  are  others  that,  having 
something  that  gives  a  deeper  tincture,  will  hold.  The  graces  of  a  true  Christian 
hold  out  in  all  sorts  of  weather,  in  winter  and  summer,  prosperi^  and  adversity, 
when  superficial  counterfeit  holiness  will  give  out.  {R.  Sibbes.)  ^  Incentives  to 
perseverance : — Here  are  some  grounds  or  motives  to  the  patient  suffering  of  persecu- 
tion and  troubles  for  the  profession  of  Christ  and  of  the  gospel.  1.  Of  all  afflic- 
tions and  troubles,  those  are  the  most  comfortable  to  suffer  and  endure,  which  are 
suffered  for  Christ.  2.  By  these  kinds  of  sufferings  we  glorify  God,  and  bring 
honour  to  the  name  of  Christ,  and  credit  to  the  gospel,  more  than  by  any  other  suf- 
ferings. 3.  It  is  a  most  honourable  thing  unto  us,  yea,  the  greatest  glory  that  may 
be  in  this  world,  to  suffer  anything  for  Christ.  4.  Consider  how  much  Christ  has 
suffered  for  us,  and  for  our  salvation ;  how  great  reproach  and  shame ;  what  bitter  pain 
and  torment  of  soul  and  body ;  and  let  this  move  us,  patiently  and  willingly  to  suffer 
any  persecution  and  trouble  for  His  sake.  5.  Consider  how  much  wicked  men 
suffer  in  the  practice  of  sin,  and  to  satisfy  their  wicked  lusts,  and  let  this  move  oa 
to  suffer  any  persecution  for  Christ.  6.  Consider  the  great  and  excellent  reward 
Dromised  to  those  who  endure  for  Christ's  sake.     (George  Fetter.)        Endurance: — 


53i  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  inu 

This  is  another  word  for  constancy  or  perseverance.  Suppose,  now,  the  case  oi 
individuals  desirous  of  realizing,  as  a  matter  of  experience,  the  great  vital  truths  of 
the  gospel  in  the  heart.  They  have  great  doubts  about  the  correctness  and  safety 
of  thek  former  mode  of  life,  and  consequently  feel  in  some  measure  attracted  to- 
wards the  hopes,  and  aspirations,  and  privileges  of  the  Christian.  But  they  have 
to  stand  up  against  many  oppositions;  they  have  to  withdraw  from  the  society  of 
the  giddy  and  thoughtless,  and  from  habits  of  dissipation  and  worldliness.  They 
have  to  contend  with  disincliuations  for  public  and  private  religious  duties,  for 
prayer  and  Scripture  reading.  They  begin  to  find  that  it  is  no  easy  thing  to  act  the 
part  of  self-denial — to  wrestle  against  the  warm  passions  and  earnest  longings  ol 
a  corrupt  nature.  They  feel,  too,  the  trial  of  a  wayward  and  treacherous  heart, 
ever  tending  downwards,  cleaving  to  the  dust.  Such  persons  as  these  are  like  the 
Israelites  upon  the  shores  of  the  Bed  Sea,  with  its  surging  breakers  and  rolling 
waves  before  them,  and  the  Egyptians  behind  them.  And  yet  God  said  unto  Moses, 
"  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  that  they  go  forward."  They  must  not  turn 
hack  to  Egypt  again,  but  must  step  onward  to  brave  the  sea.  And  so  with  those  i» 
the  state  described.  Do  not  turn  back.  Do  you  not  yield  to  tempting  solicitations 
to  return  to  foimer  haunts.  Be  faithful  to  your  convictions.  By  perseverance  in 
treading  the  path  of  duty  the  victory  shall  be  yours — the  path  shall  be  ever  brighter 
and  broader  as  you  near  your  everlasting  home.  The  young  eaglet  looking  up  from 
its  nest  upon  the  high  floating  clouds  and  the  broad  expanse  of  the  clear  blue  sky,  may, 
perhaps,  in  its  first  efforts  to  mount  through  and  above  them,  sink  with  discourage- 
ment ;  but  the  parent  bird  is  close  at  hand  to  give  help  ;  and  so  by  perseverance, 
at  last  the  eaglet  soars  in  the  path  of  its  mother,  and  rivals  her  in  distance  as 
well  as  in  rapidity.  Even  so  the  weak  in  faith  shall  be  made  strong.  {W.  D. 
Horwood.)  Enduring  to  tlie  end: — Among  the  different  games  and  races  at 
Athens,  there  was  one  in  which  they  carried  a  burning  torch  in  their  hand.  If  they 
reached  the  goal  without  its  being  extinguished,  they  obtained  the  prize.  Thus, 
they  only  shall  be  saved,  says  the  Saviour,  who  endure  to  the  end.  It  is  not  the 
man  who  makes  a  splendid  profession  for  a  season— it  is  not  the  man  who  appears 
to  carry  the  torch  of  truth  only  a  part  of  the  way — that  shall  be  crowned ;  but  he 
who  perseveres,  and  whose  lamp  is  trimmed,  and  who  holds  fast  his  confidence, 
and  the  rejoicing  of  his  hope,  unto  the  end.  Yet,  alas  1  how  many  seem  to  bid  fair 
for  a  season,  but  in  time  of  temptation  fall  away.  Epictetus  tells  us  of  a  gentleman 
returning  from  banishment,  who,  on  his  journey  homewards,  called  at  his  house, 
told  a  sad  story  of  an  imprudent  life ;  the  greater  part  of  which  being  now  spent, 
he  was  resolved  for  the  future  to  live  philosophically  ;  to  engage  in  no  business,  to 
be  candidate  for  no  employment,  not  to  go  to  court,  nor  to  salute  Caesar  with  am- 
bitious attendances ;  but  to  study,  and  worship  the  gods,  and  die  willingly  when 
nature  or  necessity  called  him.  Just,  however,  as  he  was  entering  his  door,  letters 
from  Csesar,  inviting  him  to  court,  were  delivered  to  him ;  and,  then,  alas ;  he  forgot 
all  his  promises,  and  grew  pompous,  secular,  and  ambitious.  Thus  many  form 
resolutions  in  their  own  strength,  and  make  for  a  season  some  pretentions  to 
seriousness  ;  but  prove  like  the  children  of  Ephraim,  who,  though  armed  and  carry- 
ing bows,  yet  turned  back  in  the  day  of  battle.  Enduring  to  the  end: — To 
endure,  that  is  the  great  point.  It  does  not  simply  signify  that  a  man  should 
hold  on,  but  that  a  man  should  hold  on  in  spite  of,  and  in  the  face  of  dis- 
couragements, aud  difficulties,  and  disappointments.  It  is  more  than  "dure," 
it  is  "  endure."  It  is  a  very  great  mistake  for  Christian  people  to  imagine  that  iXk 
will  be  light  and  liberty,  and  peace  and  joy.  There  are  representations  in  the  Word 
of  God  of  the  Christian  course  that  seem  to  be  contrary,  but  they  are  only  different 
aspects  of  the  whole  subject.  For  instance :  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness, 
and  all  her  paths  are  peace."  "Your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you."  "  Rejoice  in 
the  Lord  al«ay."  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  as  we  had  it  this  morning,  "  If  any  man 
will  come  after  Me,  let  him  take  up  his  cross  daily."  Again,  we  are  told,  we  must 
"  mortify  "  our  evil  and  corrupt  affections ;  that  we  must  "  crucify  the  flesh  with 
the  affections  and  lusts;"  that  "the  right  hand"  must  be  "cut  off,"  and  th« 
"  right  eye  plucked  out,"  in  order  that  we  may  follow  and  obey  our  Lord  and  Master 
Now  all  these  things  are  not  contrary,  but  they  are  reconciled.  There  is  joy,  but  it 
is  joy  in  the  midst  of  trouble  ;  there  is  peace,  but  it  is  peace  maintained  by  constant 
warfare ;  and  there  is  blessed  rest,  but  it  is  rest  in  labour  and  toil.  II  we  have  a 
battle  to  fight,  if  we  have  a  race  to  run,  if  we  have  a  building  to  erect,  it  must  be 
with  toil,  and  trouble,  and  effort.  We  shall  have  to  "  endure  to  the  end."  It  will 
not  avail  to  be  constant  and  enduring  in  the  outset,  but  we  must  endure  to  the  end. 


.  xm.]  ST.  MARK.  537 

Many  will  try  to  prevent  oar  following  the  Lord  fally,  they  will  tz^  to  disooorage  as. 
And  then,  too,  do  we  not  find  very  many,  from  following  into  different  companies, 
and  amongst  gay,  thoughtless,  and  worldly  oompanionships,  get  absorbed  in  the 
vortex  of  hfe,  tiieir  holiness  is  gone,  they  tumble  down  in  the  mire,  their  hope  is 
withered,  and  passes  away  as  a  dream.  Then,  again,  are  there  not  very  many  who 
get  into  some  peculiar  state  of  trial  from  perseoation,  or  reproach,  or  something  they 
did  not  count  upon  ;  they  are  ashamed  of  Jesus,  they  are  ashamed  of  the  cross,  and 
BO  they  betray  the  M£«ter  with  a  kiss.  Then,  again,  how  many  are  disheartened 
and  discoaragsd  with  the  struggle  in  their  own  hearts.  They  set  out  with  much 
emotion,  but  feeling  too  httle  faith.  How  many  things  lead  a  man  to  come  short 
oi  eternal  life !  It  is,  perhaps,  more  beautiful  to  see  a  man  in  little  comfort  and  in 
darkness,  holding  on,  than  one  who  walks  in  the  full  sunshine.  Job  was  able  to 
say,  "  Though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him."  Was  not  that  a  beautiful  in- 
stance of  enduring  to  the  end  ?  When  he  was  stripped  of  everything, — without  were 
fightings,  and  within  were  fears ;  clouds,  and  tribulations,  and  adversity  were  about 
him  ;  yet  he  says,  *♦  though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him."  We  have  not  full 
salvation  now  ;  it  is  in  progress,  it  is  not  complete  ;  it  is  the  man  that  endures  to 
the  end  that  attains  the  full  recompense,  and  enters  into  the  joy  of  the  Lord.  This 
is  the  great  purpose  and  end.  We  do  not  set  out  on  a  voyage  just  for  the  purpose 
of  setting  out ;  we  have  to  seek  to  reach  the  haven.  We  do  not  cover  ourselves  in 
armour  simply  for  the  sake  of  being  ready  for  the  battle,  but  that  we  may  fight  and 
win  the  victory,  and  gain  the  crown ;  therefore,  after  all,  this  is  the  grand  test  of 
onr  having  true  faith  in  Christ,  that  we  continue  in  Christ,  that  we  abide  as 
branches  in  the  vine,  and  bear  fruit.  How  much  blossom  of  promise  there  is  that 
has  no  measure  of  fruit?  Let  us  never  forget  that  there  maybe  a  good  deal  of 
seeming  fruit ;  but  if  it  does  not  last,  if  it  drops  off  it  is  beoanse  it  is  worthless, 
rotten  at  the  core.  You  sometimes  see  under  a  fruit  tree  the  ground  strewn  with 
fallen  fruit.  Somebody  may  say,  perhaps,  some  great  storm  has  passed  over,  or 
some  sudden  frost,  when  probably  the  truth  has  been  that  the  fruit  itself  was  an- 
flound  at  the  core,  and  that,  therefore,  it  rotted  and  fell  off.  Brethren,  it  is  so  with 
the  fruits  that  grow  in  the  orchard  of  God ;  many  are  fair  and  seeming  good  to  the 
sight,  but  they  are  not  sound  at  the  core.  The  proof  that  they  are  sound  is,  that 
they  still  cling  to  the  tree  and  ripen,  until,  as  it  is  beautifully  said,  •'  the  righteous 
shall  hold  on  his  way,  and  he  that  hath  clean  hands  shall  be  stronger  and  stronger." 
(Hugh  mowell,  M.A,) 

Ver.  14.  Let  him  that  readeth  imderBtaad. — Need  of  an  attentive  mind : — Let 
him  strive  to  understand  (this  meansj  by  reading  with  utmost  attention,  diligence, 
and  devotion,  weeping  as  John  did,  till  the  sealed  book  was  opened ;  digging  deep 
in  the  mine  of  the  Scriptures  for  the  mind  of  God,  and  holding  it  fast  when  he  hath 
it,  lest  at  any  time  he  should  let  it  slip.  Admirable  is  that,  and  applicable  to  this 
pturpose,  which  Philostratus  relates  of  the  precions  stone  Pantarbe,  of  so  orient, 
bright,  and  sweet  a  colour,  that  it  both  dazzles  and  refreshes  the  eyes  at  once,  draw- 
ing together  heaps  of  other  stones  by  its  secret  force  (though  far  distant),  as  hives 
of  bees,  &c.  But  lest  so  costly  a  gift  should  grow  cheap,  nature  has  not  only  hid  it 
in  the  innermost  bowels  of  the  earth,  but  also  has  put  a  faculty  into  it,  of  slipping 
out  of  the  hands  of  those  who  hold  it,  unless  they  be  very  careful  to  prevent  it. 
CJohn  Trapp. )  Reading  the  Scriptures : — Motives  to  the  dihgent  reading  of  the 
Scriptures  in  private.  1.  Consider  the  excellency  of  the  Scriptures  above  all  other 
books  and  writings  of  men.  They  are  the  books  of  God  Himself ;  the  letter  of  the 
Creator  to  the  creature.  2.  Consider  how  much  spiritual  fruit  and  profit  is  to  be 
reaped  by  the  diligent  reading  of  the  Scripture :  this  being  an  excellent  means  not 
only  to  build  as  up  in  the  knowledge  of  those  things  which  concern  God's  glory, 
and  onr  own  salvation ;  but  also  to  confirm  and  strengthen  our  faith,  and  to  quicken 
and  stir  us  up  to  all  oonscionable  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  as  well  in  doing,  as 
in  suffering  what  He  requires  of  us.  3.  Consider  the  examples  of  such  as  have 
been  most  diligent,  and  taken  great  pains  in  reading  the  Scriptures.  Cromwell 
conld  say  the  New  Testament  withoat  book.  Bishop  Bidley  learned  all  St  Paul's 
Epistles  by  heart.    (Qeorge  Fetter,) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Not  go  down  Into  the  lumso. — Opportunity  to  he  ieUed : — Oppor- 
tanity  is  like  a  string  of  stepping-stones  across  a  ford.  The  traveller,  coming  ap  to 
them,  may  find  the  river  so  swollen  witii  the  rains  that  the  stones  are  all  but 
•overed.    If  he  delay,  though  his  home  be  on  the  opposite  bank,  and  fall  in  sight. 


638  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xm. 

it  may  be  too  late  to  cross,  and  he  may  have  a  journey  of  several  miles  to  reach  hii 
home.  {Union  Magazine.)  Danger  of  delay  : — Opportunity  is  like  a  narrow 
passage  in  the  Arctic  Seas.  Sometimes,  in  these  northern  regions,  ships  get  enclosed 
in  a  narrow  space  between  ice-islands.  The  floating  rocks  glide  nearer  the  ship  on 
every  side,  and  the  dismayed  seamen  behold  their  only  chance  of  escape  from  the 
fatal  crash  lies  in  a  narrow  channel,  that  every  moment  grows  still  narrower.  How 
hurriedly  they  press  their  vessel  through  that  strip  to  reach  the  safety  of  the  open 
ocean  I  Even  so  must  we  press  along  the  narrow  way  that  leads  to  eternal  life ; 
for  who  knows  how  soon  that  narrow  way  may  be  closed  against  him.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  18.  That  your  flight  be  not  In  the  winter. — The  difficulty  ofeonvenion  <n  old 
age : — There  is  a  winter  in  human  life,  as  there  is  a  winter  in  the  seasons  of  the 
year.  Infancy  is  our  spring  ;  and  the  bud  of  existence  which  is  then  nourished  and 
cherished,  opens  its  flowers  during  the  summer  of  youth.  In  riper  years,  and  in 
the  vigour  of  manhood,  the  fruit  is  put  forth :  -and  this  period  we  call  the  autumn  of 
our  days.  But  if  death  spare  us  a  little  longer,  there  will  come  ice  in  the  blood, 
and  snow  on  the  brow ;  and  all  the  emblems  of  a  moral  winter  are  thickly  strewed 
over  the  man.  And  if  there  has  been  no  fleeing  to  the  mercy  of  the  Lord,  whilst 
the  advance  of  summer  and  autumn  has  warned  us  that  our  year  would  soon  draw 
to  a  close,  it  will  be  a  hard  thing,  and  a  scarcely  possible  thing,  when  the  limb  has 
grown  rigid,  when  the  blood  is  congealed,  and  when  the  branches  hang  withered 
from  the  stem,  to  drag  ourselves  along ;  and  the  man,  in  the  winter  of  his  days, 
when  his  foot  is  halting,  and  his  eye  is  darkening,  and  his  blood  is  freezing,  is  so 
onfltted  to  brave  the  difficulties  of  the  rugged  path  of  winter,  that  no  consideration 
should  have  more  weight  with  the  young  and  with  the  impenitent  than  the  recom- 
mendation  of  our  text.  It  will  not  be  supposed,  then,  that,  by  any  of  my  statements, 
I  do  at  all  hmit  the  operations  of  grace,  or  insinuate  that  there  can  be  no  flight 
during  the  winter  because  there  has  been  none  before  the  winter.  On  the  contrary, 
the  mere  fact  of  its  being  subject  of  prayer  that  our  flight  may  not  be  in  the  winter, 
implies  that  flight  is  at  the  least  practicable,  though  not  then  easy.  First,  the 
difficulty  of  flight  in  the  winter. — Secondly,  the  danger  that  flight,  if  deferred  to  the 
winter,  will  not  then  be  practicable.  I.  The  difficulty  or  flight  in  the  wiktbb; 
or,  to  drop  th'i  metaphor,  the  difficulty  of  conversion  in  old  age.  The  Spirit 
doth  strive  with  every  one ;  and  by  secret  admonitions  and  suggestions,  by  working 
npon  hope  and  exciting  fear,  it  does  summon  all  men  to  consider  their  ways,  and 
aUows  not  that  any  sinner  should  go  on  in  transgression,  and  not  have  its  ruinous 
result  set  before  him.  Well,  then,  if  this  statement  be  accurate — if  it  be  true  that 
all  men  are  plied  with  inducements  and  threatenings,  and  that  the  Divine  machinery 
is  brought  to  bear  on  their  consciences;  it  follows  that  the  aged  sinner  must  have 
resisted  many  godly  motions :  and  now  he  stands,  in  the  winter  of  his  days,  the 
hero  of  a  succession  of  victories.  But  then,  they  have  been  victories  won  by  the 
lust  of  the  flesh,  by  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  by  the  pride  of  life— over  the  benevolent 
t  trivings  of  holy  angels,  and  the  merciful  interpositions  of  Deity  Himself.  And  I 
ask  whether  it  will  not  be  necessarily  true,  that  the  man  who  has  resisted  saoh 
impressions  will  be  found  correspondently  hardened  against  threatenings.  The 
aged  sinner  must  have  been  successful  in  stifling  anxiety,  and  in  drowning  con- 
science :  and  thus  he  hath  closed  up,  so  to  speak,  the  common  avenues  throogh 
which  the  gospel  message  finds  entrance.  Hence,  there  is  less  hope  of  the  aged 
sinner.  But  not  only  has  the  aged  sinner  resisted  much ;  but  it  will  generally 
happen  that  he  has  invented  much.  He  will  haye  his  own  scheme  of  salvation :  he 
will  have  devised  some  method  of  quieting  alarm:  he  will  have  arranged  some 
system  of  religion  for  himself.  I  cannot  but  suppose  that  this  is  ordinarily  the 
case.  I  cannot  suppose  that  there  are  many  aged  men,  who  give  themselves  no 
concern  touching  the  things  of  eternity.  Sometimes  indeed  we  are  presented  with 
that  sad  spectacle— an  old  man  hunting  after  money  which  his  trembling  hands 
cannot  grasp ;  or  an  old  woman  tottering  into  the  grave  with  a  heap  of  new  fashions 
hung  on  her  shrivelled  body.  But  I  am  ready  to  believe,  that  very  commonly  old 
people  have  some  thought  about  the  future ;  and,  to  use  the  common-place  phrase, 
cast  up  their  account  with  God,  and  contrive  by  the  most  ingenious  arithmetic  to 
strike  a  balance  in  their  own  favour.  They  have  sinned  in  their  youth ;  but,  thank 
God,  He  has  given  them  time  for  repentance ;  and  the  seriousness  of  later  years  has 
made  amends  for  the  frivohties  of  the  earlier.  They  may  have  offended  s  great 
deal,  but  then  they  have  suffered  a  great  deal ;  and  Uie  afflictions  will  be  taken  ai 
an  Atonement  for  the  transgression.    Their  lives  have  been  excellent  lives;  no 


.  xm.]  8T,  MARK.  533 

Bum  was  ever  wronged  by  them:  they  were  m  trade  for  half  a  century,  and 
kept  nnsuUied  the  oharacter  of  honourable  dealers.  They  were  engaged  in  the 
management  of  varioas  societies,  and  received  pieces  of  plate  as  compUments  to 
their  integrity.  One  old  man  is  comforted  because  he  has  been  a  very  moral 
man ;  and  another,  because  he  has  been  a  very  charitable  man ;  and  a  third,  because 
Gk>d  is  a  God  of  wonderiul  mercy ;  and  a  fourth,  because  it  is  too  late  to  alter, 
and  things  wUl  probably  not  turn  out  so  bad  as  they  have  been  represented.  I 
believe  the  observations  I  have  thus  advanced  are  grounds  for  deciding  that  con- 
version in  the  winter  of  life  must  be  a  work  of  great  difficulty.  It  must  be  further 
obvious  to  you,  that,  as  it  would  be  in  natural,  so  in  spiritual  things,  the  infirmities 
of  the  old  man  incapacitate  him  for  flight.  I  ask  you  whether  the  old  man,  the  withered 
man,  the  wasted  man,  is  adapted  for  grappling  with  so  stem  a  communication  ?  Is  his 
mind  calculated  to  take  in  what  is  thus  overpowering  ?  Are  his  apprehensions  likely 
to  grasp  the  tidings  in  their  length  and  breadth?  Is  one  so  timid,  the  being  who 
is  expected  to  arm  for  the  battle,  or  to  gird  himself  for  the  fight  ?  If  it  be  a  time  of 
hazard  to  set  out  upon  a  voyage  when  the  vessel  has  just  sprung  a  leak — and  if  it 
be  an  hour  of  peril  to  conmience  a  journey  in  a  foreign  land  when  the  son  has 
faded  from  the  heavens — and  it  be  a  moment  of  danger  to  sit  at  the  base  of  the 
mountain  when  the  avalanche  is  just  loosening  from  the  heights — and  it  be  an 
instant  of  imminent  risk  when  the  draw-bridge  is  trembling  between  us  and  the 
citadel — then  is  old  age  and  winter  a  dangerous  season  for  man  to  dee  from  his 
present  condition.  II.  We  have  thus  shown  you  that  great  difficulties  are  atten- 
dant on  flight  in  the  winter.    We  are  next  to  consider  the  dakoer  that  riiioHT,  if 

DEFEBBEn   TO   THE    WINTEB,   WIUj  NOT    THEN   BE    PBACTICABLE ;    in    Othcr    WOrds,   the 

grounds  for  believing,  that,  if  men  repent  not  before  old  age,  they  will  never  repent  at 
all.  One  reason  for  praying  against  postponement  is,  the  possibility  that  flight,  if 
delayed,  may  never  take  place.  It  is  a  trite  saying,  that  "  to-morrow  never  comes  ;  " 
and  I  may  add,  that  few  men  practically  think  themselves  a  year  nearer  the  grave, 
because  they  are  a  year  older.  Once  more.  It  is  the  testimony  of  experience  that 
men  are  seldom  converted  in  old  age.  Who,  then,  would  defer  flight,  when  the 
Almighty  is  inviting  him  to  join  the  ranks  of  the  redeemed  ?  Let  us  address  our- 
selves to  the  journey.  The  days  are  short,  and  the  sunbeams  are  watery ;  the  time 
for  repentance  may  soon  be  at  an  end.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Winter  useful 
and  beautiful: — However  disagreeable  a  very  severe  winter  may  be,  in  some  respects, 
it  yet  serves  most  important  purposes.  The  sap  retires  from  the  extremities  of  shrubs 
and  trees,  and  takes  refuge  in  the  roots,  thus  giving  them  a  time  to  rest  and  recupe- 
rate. The  covering  of  snow  which  is  spread  over  the  earth  protects  the  grass  and 
the  grain,  and  keeps  all  things  which  grow  out  of  the  ground  snug  and  warm. 
Moreover,  the  nipping  frost  kills  off  the  myriad  hordes  of  insects;  dries  up 
the  seeds  of  infectious  and  deadly  diseases ;  improves  the  blood,  on  which 
our  very  existence  depends ;  and  gives  new  vigour  to  the  worn-out  and  wasted 
system.  Consumptive  patients  are  no  longer  sent  to  gasp  and  faint  beneath  the 
orange-groves  of  a  debilitating  southern  clime,  but  uniform  and  invigorating  cold 
weather  is  found  much  better  for  them.  Winter,  besides  being  an  useful  season,  is 
certainly  a  very  beautiful  one.  The  earth  spread  smoothly  over  with  its  white 
coverlid ;  the  icy  tracery  of  the  trees ;  and  the  fantastic  pictures  which  the  frost 
draws  on  the  window-panes — what  could  be  more  beautiful  than  these  ?  The  good- 
ness of  our  heavenly  Father  is  plainly  discovered  in  the  provision  which  He  makes 
for  the  lower  orders  of  creation,  to  protect  them  from  the  rigours  of  winter.  The 
more  deHcate  birds  are  instructed  by  their  instincts  to  fly  off  to  warmer  latitudes. 
The  creatures  which  are  to  remain  behind,  need  not  go  to  clothing  stores  for  thick 
coats  1  The  fur,  and  hair,  and  feathers  on  their  bodies,  are  made  abundantly  warm 
to  protect  them  ;  and  the  colder  the  winter  which  is  approaching,  the  better  does 
their  gracious  Creator  provide  for  them.  {J.  N,  Norton, D.D.)  Flight  in  winter  :— 
Many  of  you  will  remember  an  instance  of  such  a  flight,  which  was  disastrous  in 
the  extreme.  In  the  autumn  of  1812,  Napoleon  entered  Moscow  with  120,000 
soldiers,  intending  to  pass  the  winter  there  in  comfort.  On  the  13th  of  October 
(three  weeks  earher  than  it  had  ever  been  known  before),  snow  began  to  fall.  The 
proud  Emperor  looked  out  of  his  window  in  dismay,  and  decided  to  hasten  back  at 
once,  and  establish  his  winter  quarters  in  the  friendly  cities  of  Poland.  It  was  a 
march  through  a  dreary  and  desolate  region,  of  more  than  a  thousand  miles  ;  bu^ 
he  put  on  a  bold  front,  and  the  troops  began  to  retire  in  good  order.  A  week  later, 
and  the  grand  army  was  in  full  retreat.  Bleak,  chilly  winds  howled  through  the 
trees ;  the  weary  soldiers  were  blinded  by  the  flakes  of  snow  and  sle«t ;  their 


540  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  zni. 

embittered  enemies  attacked  them  in  every  unguarded  point ;  order  and  disciplin« 
were  forgotten ;  ilm  ranks  were  broken,  and  each  man  struggled  on  as  best  he  could  ; 
the  dead  and  the  dying  were  trodden  down ;  hundreds  of  horses  were  slain  for  food  ; 
all  ideas  of  conquest  were  banished ;  Napoleon  himself  left  the  army  to  its  fate  ; 
and  each  day's  weary  march  was  marked  by  heaps  of  broken  waggons,  and  aban- 
doned cannon,  and  white  hillocks  of  snow,  beneam  which  the  frozen  bodies  of  man 
and  beast  were  buried.  With  such  a  dreadful  picture  of  misery  before  you,  it  will 
be  easy  to  understand  the  tender  compassion  which  prompted  the  Savionr  to  say : 
"  Pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter."  Especially  ought  we  to  remember 
those  who  are  suffering  the  sad  privations  of  poverty,  and  be  glad  to  relieve  their 
wants  when  we  are  able.  No  one  can  claim  to  have  the  love  of  God  abiding  in  his 
heart,  who  is  willing  to  see  a  fellow  mortal  destitute  of  food  and  clothing,  and 
make  no  effort  to  help.  The  more  merciful  we  are,  the  better  shall  we  deserve  to 
be  called  God's  children.  (Ibid.)  A  blasphetner^t  death  in  the  snow : — It  was 
near  the  close  of  one  of  those  storms  that  deposit  a  great  volume  of  snow  upon  the 
earth  that  a  middle-aged  man,  in  one  of  the  southern  counties  of  Vermont,  seated 
himself  at  a  large  Are  in  a  log-house.  He  was  crossing  the  Green  Mountains  from 
the  western  to  tihe  eastern  side  ;  he  had  stopped  at  the  only  dwelling  of  man  in  a 
distance  of  more  than  twenty  miles,  being  the  width  of  the  parallel  ranges  of 
gloomy  mountains ;  he  was  determined  to  reach  his  dwelling  on  the  eastern  side 
that  day.  In  reply  to  a  kind  invitation  to  tarry  in  the  house  and  not  dare  the 
horrors  of  the  increasing  storm,  he  declared  that  he  would  go,  and  that  the  Almighty 
was  not  able  to  prevent  him.  His  words  were  heard  above  the  howling  of  the 
tempest.  He  travelled  from  the  mountain  valley  where  he  had  rested  over  one 
ridge,  and  one  more  intervened  between  him  and  his  family.  The  labour  of  walking 
in  that  deep  snow  must  have  been  great,  as  its  depth  became  near  the  stature  of  a 
man ;  yet  he  kept  on,  and  arrived  within  a  few  yards  of  the  last  summit,  from 
whence  he  could  have  looked  down  upon  his  dwelling.  He  was  near  a  large  tree,  partly 
supported  by  its  trunk ;  his  body  bent  forward,  and  his  ghastly  intent  features  told 
the  stubbornness  of  his  purpose  to  overpass  that  little  eminence.  But  the  Almighty 
had  prevented  him ;  the  currents  of  his  blood  were  frozen.  For  more  than  thirty 
years  that  tree  stood  by  the  solitary  road,  scarred  to  the  branches  with  names, 
letters,  and  hieroglyphics  of  death,  to  warn  the  traveller  that  he  trod  over  a  spot  of 
fearful  interest.    {Baxendale's  Dictionary  of  Anecdote,) 

Ver.  19.  For  in  those  days  shall  be  aflUctlon. —42^tction«  OoSPt  hired  labowren : — 
Aflflictions  are  God's  hired  labourers,  to  break  the  clods  and  plough  the  land. 
(Anon.)  Trouble  a  lever : — Trouble  is  often  the  lever  in  God's  hand  to  raise  us 
up  to  heaven.  {Anon.)  Sorrow  an  instructor : — Has  it  never  occurred  to  us  when 
surrounded  by  sorrows,  that  they  may  be  sent  to  us  only  for  our  instruction,  as  we 
darken  the  eyes  of  birds  when  we  wish  to  teach  them  to  sing?  (Jean  Paul.) 
Troubled  waters : — The  angel  troubled  the  waters,  which  then  cured  those  who 
stepped  in ;  it  is  also  Christ's  manner  to  trouble  our  souls  first,  and  then  to  come 
with  healing  in  His  wings.  (R.  Sibbes.)  Tears : — Tears  often  prove  the  telescope 
by  which  men  see  far  into  heaven.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Tuned  by  trouble: — Men 
think  God  is  destroying  them  because  He  is  tuning  them.  The  violinist  screws  up 
the  key  till  the  tense  cord  sounds  the  concert-pitch ;  but  it  is  not  to  break  it,  but  to 
use  it  tunefully,  that  he  stretches  the  string  upon  the  musical  rack.  [Ibid.)  Trouble 
a  tett: — Men  pray  to  be  made  "  men  in  Christ  Jesus,"  and  think  in  some  miraculous 
way  it  will  be  given  to  them  ;  but  God  says,  "  I  will  try  My  child,  and  see  if  he  is 
sincere ;  "  and  so  He  lays  a  burden  upon  him,  and  says,  "  Now  stand  up  under  it ;  ** 
and  asks,  "  Where  are  now  thy  resources  f  "  If  the  ambitious  ore  dreads  the  fur- 
nace, the  forge,  the  anvil,  the  rasp,  and  the  file,  it  should  never  desire  to  be  made  a 
sword.  Man  is  the  iron,  and  God  is  the  smith ;  and  we  are  always  either  in  the 
forge  or  on  the  anvil.  God  is  shaping  as  for  higher  things.  {Ibid.)  Extraordinary 
afflictions  are  not  always  the  punishment  of  extraordinary  sms,  but  sometimes  the 
trial  of  extraordinary  graces.  Sanctified  aflflictions  are  spiritual  promotions. 
(Matthew  Henry.)  The  fall  of  Jerusalem  a  unique  calamity : — One  might  explain 
this  language  on  the  principle  of  that  graphic  hyperbolism  that  pervaded,  to  so  large 
an  extent,  the  speech  of  all  peoples.  It  is  quite  common,  in  many  languages  at  least, 
if  not  in  all,  to  say  of  any  very  extraordinary  affliction,  it  is  the  greatest  possible. 
Superlatives  are  often  employed,  when  there  is  really  no  definite  intention  of  assert- 
ing a  perfectly  absolute  prominence.  It  is  at  the  same  time,  however,  worthy  of 
eonsideration,  whether  there  was  not,  in  this  catastrophe  of  the  Jews,  a  minglement 


WAP.  ZIII.J  ST.  MARK.  541 

ot  elements,  physical,  intellectual,  moral,  and  spiritual,  which  was  so  unique  as  to 
cender  the  anguish,  consequent  on  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  unprecedented,  and 
incapable  of  repetition.  Many  peoples  have  been  vanquished.  Often  have  surviving 
populations  been  "  peeled,"  and  scattered  or  led  captive.  Often  have  capital  cities 
been  stormed  and  sacked.  But  the  case  of  the  Jews  was  peculiar.  They  were  con- 
vinced that  they  were  the  favourites  of  heaven.  They  regarded  their  capital  as  the 
"  City  of  the  Great  King,"  and  the  predestined  Mistress  of  the  world.  Their  Temple 
was  to  them  the  one  House  of  God.  It  could  noj  ue  dispensed  with  in  the  world. 
Hence  they  expected,  up  to  the  last  moment,  that  the  Lord's  arm  must  needs  con- 
spicuously interpose  in  the  extremity  of  their  necessity,  to  smite  the  beleaguering 
hosts  and  and  rescue  the  beloved  place  and  people.  When  one  mingles  the  elements 
of  such  thoughts  and  feelings,  and  their  effects,  with  the  effects  of  the  utter  social 
disorganization  that  prevailed,  and  consequently  with  the  unutterable  physical  woes 
that  preceded  and  succeeded  the  capture  of  the  Temple,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the 
tribulation  endured  may  have  had  an  edge  of  agony  which  never  was  before  in  the 
history  of  any  people,  and  which  will  never  be  again.  {J.  Morison^  D.D.)  Afflic- 
tion iiuih  as  never  was  andnever  shall  be : — At  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  Milman  says, 
"  Every  kind  feeling,  love,  respect,  natural  affection,  were  extinct  through  the  all- 
absorbing  want.  Wives  would  snatch  the  last  morsel  from  husbands,  children  from 
parents,  mothers  from  children.  ...  If  a  house  was  closed,  they  supposed  that  eat- 
mg  was  going  on,  and  they  burst  in  and  squeezed  the  crumbs  from  the  mouths  and 
throats  of  those  who  were  swallowing  them.  Old  men  were  scourged  till  they  sur- 
rendered the  food  to  which  their  hands  clung  desperately.  .  .  .  Children  were  seized 
as  they  hung  upon  the  miserable  morsels  they  had  got,  whirled  round  and  dashed 
apon  the  pavement.  .  .  .  The  most  loathsome  and  disgusting  food  was  sold  at  an 
enormous  price.  They  gnawed  their  belts  and  shoes.  Chopped  hay  and  shoots  of 
trees  sold  at  high  prices."  Destruction  of  Jerusalem : — It  is  worth  any  man's 
while  to  read  the  story  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  as  it  is  told  by  Josephus :  it 
ie  the  most  harrowing  of  all  records  written  by  human  pen ;  it  remains  the  tragedy 
of  tragedies  ;  there  never  was  and  there  never  will  be  anything  comparable  to  it ; 
the  people  died  of  famine  and  of  pestilence,  and  fell  by  thousands  beneath  the 
flwords  of  their  own  countrymen.  Women  devoured  the  flesh  of  their  own  children, 
and  men  raged  against  each  other  with  the  fury  of  beasts.  All  ills  seemed  to  meet 
in  that  doomed  city,  it  was  filled  within  with  horrors  and  surrounded  without  by 
terrors.  Portents  amazed  the  sky  both  day  and  night.  There  was  no  escape, 
neither  would  the  frenzied  people  accept  of  mercy.  The  city  itself  was  the  banquet- 
ing hall  of  death.  Josephus  says :  **  All  hope  of  escaping  was  now  cut  off  from  the 
Jews,  together  with  their  liberty  of  going  out  of  the  city.  Then  did  the  famine 
widen  its  progress,  and  devour  the  people  by  whole  houses  and  families :  the  upper 
rooms  were  full  of  women  and  infants  that  were  dying  by  famine,  and  the  lanes  of 
the  city  were  full  of  the  dead  bodies  of  the  aged  ;  the  children,  also,  and  the  young 
men  wandered  about  the  market  places  like  shadows,  all  swelled  with  the  famine, 
and  fell  down  dead  wheresoever  their  misery  seized  them.  For  a  time  the  dead  were 
buried ;  but  afterwards,  when  they  could  not  do  that,  they  had  them  cast  down  from 
the  wall  into  the  valleys  beneath.  When  Titus,  on  going  his  rounds  along  these 
valleys,  saw  them  full  of  dead  bodies,  and  the  thick  pu&efaction  running  about  them, 
he  gave  a  groan,  and  spreading  out  his  hands  to  heaven,  called  God  to  witness  tiiis 
was  not  his  doing."     ((7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  20.  Shortened  those  days. — Ood  ihortened  the  tiege : — Many  oiroumstances 
oombined  to  secure  the  primary  fulfilment  of  these  words.  The  incomplete  state  of 
the  fortifications,  the  paucity  of  food,  the  factions  fights  within  the  city,  &c., 
shortened  the  siege ;  and  Titus  himseU  exclaimed,  "  God  has  fought  for  as :  what 
ooold  human  hand  or  engines  do  against  these  towers  ?  "    (Stock,) 

Ver.  22.  For  fUse  CtaiatB.—Fal$e  C/imf# ;— David  George,  e.g.^  who  ultimately 
settled  at  Basle,  where  he  died  in  1556.  He  claimed,  according  to  the  account  of 
Dr.  Henry  More,  to  be  the  true  Christ,  the  dear  Son  of  God,  bom  not  of  the  flesh, 
but  of  the  Spirit.  He  was  to  restore  the  house  of  Israel,  and  re-erect  the  taber- 
nacle of  God,  not  by  afflictions  and  death,  as  the  other  Messiah,  but  by  that  sweet- 
ness, love,  and  grace,  which  were  given  him  of  the  Father.  He  had  the  power  of 
the  remission  of  sins ;  and  had  come  to  administer  the  last  judgment.  He  averred 
that  "  the  Holy  Scriptures,  the  sayings  and  testimonies  of  the  prophets,  of  Christ, 
and  of  His  apostles,  do  all  point,  if  rightly  understood,  in  their  true  mystery,  to  the 


64a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  na 

glorious  coming  of  David  George,  who  is  greater  than  the  former  Christ,  as  being 
bom  of  the  Spirit,  and  not  of  the  flesh."  This  David  George,  says  Dr.  More,  was  a 
man  "  of  notable  natural  parts,  of  comely  person,  and  a  graceful  presence."  And  he 
had  many  adherents,  who  believed  in  him.  In  our  own  day  there  are  persons — 
out  of  asylums — who  put  forth  corresponding  claims.  There  is  lying  before  the 
writer  a "  Tract  on  the  Second  Advent  fulfilled,"  in  which  it  is  said  that "  the  enrolling 
of  the  saints  commenced  on  the  anniversary  of  the  last  day  of  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
i^a  les  of  the  year  1868,  i.e.,  on  the  9th  of  October,  1868.  The  following,"  it  is  added, 
'<  is  the  declaration  to  be  made  and  signed: — I  believe  Jesus  of  Nazareth  to  be  the 
Messiah  at  His  first  coming,  and  the  antitypical  Paschal  Lamb  Who  died  for  sin  in 
allegory,  and  I  believe  John  Cochran  of  Glasgow  to  be  that  Messiah  at  His  second  com- 
ing, and  the  antit}T)ical  High  Priest  who  has  taken  away  sin  in  reality."  False  pro- 
phets ;— Lodowick  Mug|zleton,«.p.,  who  on  the  title-page  of  his  "True  Interpretation  of 
the  whole  Book  of  the  Revelation  of  St.  John,"  describes  himself  as  "  one  of  the  two 
last  commissioned  witnesses  and  prophets  of  the  only  high,  immortal,  glorious  God, 
Christ  Jesus."  Madame  Antoinette  Bourignon,  before  him,  was  a  far  nobler  being, 
yet  she  declared  to  Christian  de  Cort,  "  I  am  sent  from  God  to  bring  light  to  the 
world,  and  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth.  He  has  sent  me  to  tell  that  the  last  times 
are  come;  that  the  world  is  judged,  and  the  sentence  is  irrevocable;  that  the 
plagues  are  begun,  and  will  not  cease  till  all  evil  be  rooted  out ;  and  that  Jesus 
Christ  will  come  shortly  to  the  earth  to  finish  this,  and  then  He  will  continue  to  reign 
with  '  men  of  goodwill,'  who  shall  enjoy  eternal  peace.  I  am  sent  with  a  com- 
mission to  declare  all  these  things  to  men,  to  the  end  that  peradventure  some  of 
them  may  be  converted  and  repent,  that  they  may  reign  with  Jesus  Christ  in  His 
glory."  And  again,  she  says,  *♦  I  am  certainly  sent  from  God  to  declare  the  truth 
of  everything."  False  prophets  in  Spain: — There  was  great  excitement  in  Madrid 
owing  to  the  aimouncement  that  the  world  would  come  to  an  end  on  the  24th  of  June, 
1886,  that  day  being  the  conjunction  of  the  festivals  of  St.  John  and  of  the  Corpus 
Christi.  The  belief  had  taken  such  hold  among  the  lower  and  superstitious  classes 
of  Madrid,  that  the  fright  was  general,  the  prophecy  having  been  printed  and  circu- 
lated in  thousands.  During  the  past  two  or  three  weeks  many  people  have  spent 
their  days  in  fasting,  prayer,  and  weeping,  and  yesterday  the  churches  and  con- 
fessionals were  crowded  with  women.  {Freeman.)  Danger  from  those  coming  in 
the  name  of  Christ  .—In  the  frescoes  of  Signorelli  we  have  "  The  Teaching  of  Anti- 
christ " — no  repulsive  figure,  but  a  grand  personage  in  flowing  robes,  and  with  a 
noble  countenance,  which  at  a  distance  might  easily  be  taken  for  the  Saviour.  To 
him  the  crowd  are  eagerly  gathering  and  listening,  and  it  is  only  when  you  draw 
close  that  you  can  discover  in  his  harder  and  cynical  expression,  and  from  the  evil 
spirit  whispering  in  his  ear,  that  it  is  not  Christ.  (Augustus  J.  C.  Hare.)  Signs 
AKD  Wonders. — Wonder-working  impostors  : — '*  Lying  wonders  "  (2  Thess.  ii.  9)  no 
doubt— wonders  that  serve  a  purpose  of  imposition,  partly,  it  may  be,  on  the  wonder- 
workers themselves,  and  partly  on  those  whom  they  wish  to  attach  to  themselves. 
There  are  wonderful  idiosyncrasies  among  men,  that  give  scope  for  the  performance 
of  such  wonders.  In  some  natures — as  in  Valentine  Greatrakes  and  Gassner  (see 
Ho\vitt's  "History  of  the  Supernatural "),  singular  therapeutic  energies  instinctively 
well  up  and  flow  over.  In  others  there  is  a  singular  power  of  something  like 
"second-sight,"  or  "clairvoyance,"  turning  fitfully  its  penetrative  eye,  now  upon 
objects  distant  in  space,  and  now  upon  objects  distant  in  time — though  in  a  way  far 
removed  from  infallibihty.  This  clairvoyant  eye  often  takes  cognizance  of  only 
frivolous  realities,  and  seems  blind  to  things  of  moment.  Still  its  peculiarity  is 
fitted— when  once  a  wiUing  and  shallow  fanaticism  tries  its  hand  at  understanding 
it — to  be  a  "lying  wonder."  There  are  other  remarkable  endowments  and  instincts, 
which  crop  up  at  times  in  exceptional  idiosyncrasies,  and  may  give  occasion  either 
to  self -delusion,  or  to  deliberate  artifice,  or  to  a  minglement  of  the  two  peryeraities. 
(J.  Morisout  D.D.) 

Ver.  26.  The  Son  of  Man  coming  In  the  dondi. — Christ's  second  tidvent : — It  has 
been  as  much  a  hope  as  a  fear  in  all  religions  of  men  that  there  would  be  a  verdict 
which  would  on  the  one  hand  bring  forth  men's  righteousness  as  the  light,  and  on 
the  other  change  their  pride  in  sin  to  shame.  For  a  new  start  the  great  thing  to 
be  longed  for  is  that  all  men  and  things  might  find  their  proper  level ;  the  evil,  its 
rebuke  and  penalty ;  the  good,  its  crown  and  its  reward.  Therefore  there  will  be 
a  judgment,  and  Christ  will  be  the  Judge.  Through  Him  the  worlds  were  made ; 
through  TTirn  salvation  wrought;  and  through  Him  judgment  will  be  execated, 


<»AP.  xni.l  ST.  MARK,  543 

We  think  too  little  of  that  day  whose  glory  pales  the  sun,  and  of  the  fact  that  manv 
things,  now  seeming  great,  will  then  seem  trifling  and  contemptible,  and  much 
obscure  faithfulness  will  be  lifted  into  light  and  glory.  The  uses  we  should  make 
of  this  truth  are  various.  1.  It  should  quicken  our  sense  of  responsibility.  The 
thought  that  God  ignores  our  deeds  permits  good  to  languish  and  evil  to  thrive. 
The  belief  that  God  will  bring  all  into  judgment,  stimulates  good,  represses  evil. 
2.  It  should  give  us  a  more  vivid  sense  of  God's  providential  presence.  On  this 
world  He  walked ;  on  it  He  again  will  stand.  He  is  the  living  God,  and  is  guiding 
the  course  of  all  events  by  His  loving  hand.  3.  It  should  comfort  us.  Man's  judg- 
ment ol  OS  is  harsh ;  our  judgment  of  ourselves  unwise.  But  what  could  we  ask 
for  more  than  to  be  judged  by  Christ?  {R.  Glover.)  The  second  coming  oj 
Chritt : — ^Brethren  1  the  earnest  belief  in  and  the  longing  for  the  coming  of  Jesus 
ChriBt  has  been  too  much  surrendered  to  one  school  of  interpreters  in  unfulfilled 
prophecy,  who  have  no  greater  claim  to  possess  it  than  the  rest  of  us.  It  belongs, 
or  ought  to  belong,  to  us  all.  And  I  bring  it  to  you,  dear  friends,  as  a  sharp  test — 
what  do  you  feel  about  that  coming  ?  Can  you  say,  "  More  than  they  that  wait  for 
the  morning,  my  soul  waiteth  for  Thee  "  ?  Does  your  heart  leap  when  you  think 
that  Christ,  who  is  ever  present,  is  drawing  near  to  us  7  All  the  signs  of  the  times, 
intellectual  and  social,  the  rottenness  of  much  of  our  life,  the  abounding  luxury,  the 
hideous  vice  that  flaunts  unblamed  and  unabashed  before  us  all ;  the  unsettlement 
of  opinion  in  which  it  is  unbelief  that  seems  to  be  "  removing  the  mountains  "  that 
all  men  thought  stood  fast  and  firm  for  ever ;  all  these  things  cry  out  to  Him  whose 
ear  is  not  deaf— even  if  our  voice  does  not  join  in  the  cry — and  beseech  Him  to  oome. 
And  I  believe  that  a  "  Day  of  the  Lord,"  dreadful  and  radiant  with  the  brightnes^s 
of  destructive  power,  which  is  also  constructive  and  merciful  love,  is  hanging  over 
much  of  the  world,  and  not  a  little  of  the  Church,  at  this  moment.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Sight  of  Christ  as  Judge : — Mr.  G was  mayor  of  the  town  of  Maidenhead  not 

many  years  after  the  late  Rev.  J.  Cooke  settled  in  it.  One  Sabbath  evening  he 
attended  the  meeting-house,  and  heard  Mr.  Cooke  preach.  The  test  was,  "  Behold, 
He  cometh  with  clouds,  and  every  eye  shall  see  Him  "  (Rev.  i.  7).  His  attention 
was  powerfully  arrested:  an  arrow  of  conviction  entered  his  heart;  he  became 
speedily  a  changed  man,  and  regularly  attended  the  means  of  grace.  He  had  been 
a  jovial  companion,  a  good  singer,  and  a  most  gay  and  cheerful  member  of  the  cor- 
poration. The  change  was  soon  perceived.  His  brethren,  at  one  of  their  social 
parties,  rallied  him  upon  Methodism.  But  he  stood  firm  by  his  principles,  and 
said,  "  Gentlemen,  if  you  will  listen  patiently,  I  will  tell  you  why  I  go  to  meeting, 
and  do  not  attend  your  card-table.  I  went  one  Sunday  evening  to  hear  Mr.  Cooke. 
He  took  for  his  text,  •  Behold,  He  cometh  with  clouds,  and  every  eye  shall  see 
Him.'  Your  eye  shall  see  Him  I "  In  short,  he  gave  them  so  faithful  and  powerful 
an  epitome  of  the  sermon,  and  applied  it  so  closely  to  them  individually,  marking 
the  words,  •♦  every  eye  shall  see  Him,"  with  such  emphasis,  and  pointing  to  them, 
said,  •*  Your  eye,"  and  "  your  eye,"  that  they  were  satisfied  with  his  reasons  for 
going,  and  never  again  durst  speak  to  him  on  the  subject.  {Biblical  Museum.) 
Science  points  to  the  end  of  the  world: — Is  it  not  probable,  it  may  be  asked,  that  the 
time  will  come  when  the  globe  itself  will  come  to  an  end  ?  And  if  it  be  so,  can 
science  detect  the  provision  that  is  possibly  made  for  this  consummation  of  all 
things  ?  We  have  seen  that  the  atmosphere  has  for  long  been  undergoing  a  change ; 
that  at  a  very  early  period  it  was  charged  with  carbonic  acid,  the  carbon  of  which 
now  forms  part  of  animal  and  vegetable  structures.  We  saw,  also,  that  at  first  it 
contained  no  ammonia ;  but  since  vegetation  and  decomposition  began,  the  nitrogen 
that  existed  in  the  nitrates  of  the  earth,  and  some  of  the  nitrogen  of  the  atmosphere, 
have  been  gradually  entering  into  new  combinations,  and  forming  ammonia ;  and 
the  quantity  of  ammonia,  a  substance  at  first  non-existent,  has  gradually  increased, 
and  as  it  is  volatile,  the  atmosphere  now  always  contains  some  of  it.  The  quantity 
has  now  become  so  great  in  it  that  it  can  always  be  detected  by  chemical  analysis. 
There  is  an  evident  tendency  of  it  to  increase  in  the  atmosphere.  Now  supposing 
it  to  go  on  increasing  up  to  a  certain  point,  it  forms  with  air  a  mixture  that,  upon 
the  application  of  fire,  is  violently  explosive.  An  atmosphere  charged  with  ammonia 
is  liable  to  explode  whenever  a  flash  of  lightning  passes  through  it.  And  such  an 
explosion  would  doubtless  destroy,  perhaps  without  leaving  traces  of,  the  present 
order  of  things.    {Dr,  Kemp.) 

Ver.  28.  That  munmwr  Is  near. — A  »ign  of  the  eternal  tummer  approaching:^ 
When  Dr.  Bees  preaohed  last  in  North  Wales  a  friend  said  to  him— one  of  those 


544  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xin. 

who  are  alwaya  reminding  people  that  they  are  getting  old — "  You  are  whitening 
fast,  Dr.  Rees."  The  old  gentleman  did  not  say  anything  then ;  but  when  he  got 
to  the  pulpit  he  referred  to  it,  and  said,  "  There  is  a  wee  white  flower  that  comes 
up  through  the  earth  at  this  season  of  the  year — sometimes  it  comes  up  through 
the  snow  and  frost ;  but  we  are  all  glad  to  see  the  snowdrop,  because  it  proclaims 
that  the  winter  is  over  and  that  the  summer  is  at  hand.  A  friend  reminded  me  last 
night  that  I  was  whitening  fast.  But  heed  not  that,  brother ;  it  is  to  me  a  proof 
that  my  winter  will  soon  be  over,  that  I  shall  have  done  presently  with  the  cold 
east  winds  and  the  frosts  of  earth,  and  that  my  summer — my  eternal  summer — is 
at  hand."    {Heber  Evans,) 

Ver.  81.  But  My  words  shall  not  pass  away. — The  perpetuity  of  ChrisV*  words : — 
Contrast  the  apparent  transitoriness  of  "words"  with  the  solid  earth  and  tbe 
"  eternal  heavens."  Yet  when  these  shall  have  faded  away  the  words  of  Christ  will 
still  endure.  I.  In  a  literal  sense  tbe  text  reminds  us  that  the  words  which  Jesus 
spake  while  on  earth  are  permanently  associated  with  our  whole  life.  II.  At.t.  our 
litbrature  is  enriched  by  these  words.    III.  That  which  is  spiritual  must 

ALWAYS  BE   MORB  PERUANENT  THAN  THB   MATERIAL.      IV.   YeT  THE  MATERIAL  PREPARES 

THB  WAY  roB  THB  SPmiTUAL  APPLICATION.  1.  A  lessoD  of  wamiug,  since  we  are  in 
danger  of  attaching  too  much  importance  to  the  form,  and  too  little  to  the  truth, 
which  the  form  embodies.  2.  A  lesson  of  encouragement ;  opinions  may  change 
and  interpretations  differ ;  but  the  truth  remains  always  the  same.    (F.  Wagstaff^ 

Ver.  88,  S3.  But  of  tbat  day  and  tliat  hour  knoweth  no  man. — The  day  and  the 
hour: — I.  The  practxoal  importance  or  congbalino  thb  day  and  houb  when 
THB  SoH  07  Man  shall  comb  from  thb  knowlbdgb  of  THB  Church  and  of  all 
MAinoND.  1.  Were  the  day  and  the  hour  of  the  Saviour's  advent  specifically  and 
unmistakably  stated,  it  would  contradict  constantly  those  passages  scattered 
throughout  the  whole  Word  of  God  which  say  He  shall  come  as  a  thief  in  the 
night,  <&o.  After  the  day  of  Pentecost  the  apostles  received  information  upon  this 
subject  which  they  did  not  previously  possess.  2.  It  would  be  altogether  morally 
without  practical  good  results,  and  incompatible  with  other  portions  of  Scripture, 
if  God  were  to  tell  us  the  precise  day  and  the  hour.  What  would  be  the  practical 
use  of  telling  us  either?  3.  Were  that  day  made  known  to  us,  it  would  be 
gratifying  a  very  worthless  curiosity.  But  if  there  be  one  feature  in  this  book 
more  striking  than  another  it  is  its  utter  refusal  to  gratify  the  curiosity  of  man. 
4.  Suppose  tiiat  this  day  and  hour  had  been  made  known,  there  is  no  proof  that  it 
would  be  beUeved  by  the  unconverted  masses  of  mankind.  If  the  unconverted  and 
unsanctified  multitude  believed  it,  it  would  do  incalculable  mischief.    II.  On  thb 

OTHEB  hand,  it  IS  MOST  PBOFITABLB  AND  MOST  IMPROVINO  THAT  WE  SHOULD  STUDY 

THB  PBBDXCTED  SIGNS ;  usy,  our  Lord  condemned  the  men  of  His  day,  because, 
while  they  could  predict  wet  or  fine  weather,  from  the  sky  at  evening  and  at  mom, 
they  were  not  acquainted  with  the  moral  signs  of  the  age  in  which  they  lived.  The 
Scripture  in  every  page  is  most  explicit  in  giving  us  tokens  and  signs  by  which  we 
are  to  infer  either  that  tiie  tmie  is  near,  or  that  it  is  remote.  This  leads  me  to  the 
great  sign  given  here,  instead  of  the  day  and  the  hour — the  sigpi  9t  Noah.  1. 
Notice  that  there  is  here  a  distinct  recognition  of  Noah  as  a  historic  person,  of  the 
flood  as  a  literal  fact.  2.  Notice  here  also  that  human  nature  is  substantially  the  same 
in  the  days  of  Napoleon  and  of  Queen  Victoria,  that  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah  and  the 
patriarchs  before  the  flood.  The  antediluvians,  or  those  that  were  in  the  days  of 
Noah,  when  the  flood  came,  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in 
marriage.  This  is  not  stated  as  a  sin.  In  the  gospel,  where  our  Lord  represents 
the  blessings  that  He  purchased  under  a  feast,  those  that  were  invited  refused ; 
but  the  ground  they  assigned  was  not  any  one  sinful  act.  Where  then  was  the 
sin  of  the  antediluvians  T  "  So  shall  it  be  when  the  Son  of  Man  cometh."  This 
is  not  a  mere  history ;  but  also  a  solemn  prophecy.  Just  as  the  ark  was  the  only 
safety  in  the  days  of  Noi^,  so  the  only  safety  for  us  this  very  day  is  Christ,  the 
living,  the  glorious,  the  indestructible  ark.  Are  you  trusting  to  Uiis  ark  ?  Are 
you  cleaving  to  this  Saviour?  Now  there  is  salvation  for  the  worst  and  the 
guiltiest ;  but  at  that  day,  when  grace  shall  depart  like  a  vision,  when  the  last  fire 
shall  cover  the  round  globe  with  its  piercing  and  its  searching  flames,  not  one  cry 
will  be  heard,  not  one  appeal  for  mercy  wul  be  regarded,  not  one  sin  will  be  for- 
giyen.  The  very  glory  of  the  gospel  is  its  simplicity :  "  Look  and  live ; "  **  BeUeve 
tad  tikoa  ihalt  be  saved. "   (/.  Gumming,  DJ>.)        Uncertainty  a$tothe  time  demand* 


CHAP.  XII1.J  ST.  MARK,  046 

eomtant  watehfulnett : — ^The  fact  that  we  cannot  know  beforehand  the  time  of  Christ's 
coming,  does  not  relieve  us  of  the  duty  of  being  on  the  watch  for  it.  It  is  because 
we  do  not  know  the  time,  that  we  must  watch  for  the  time.  If  a  man  wants  to 
Bee  the  meteors  which  flash  across  the  sky  in  the  nights  of  August  and  November, 
he  must  be  all  the  more  watchful  because  he  cannot  know  beforehand  when  they 
are  coming.  The  lookout  on  the  ocean  steamer's  mast-head  must  be  none  the  less 
watchful  against  icebergs,  or  headlands,  or  passing  vessels,  because  be  cannot 
know  when  they  are  to  show  themselves  ;  and  the  denser  the  fog,  the  keener  his  watch 
must  be.  The  time  of  Christ's  second  coming  is  concealed  from  us.  The  fact  of 
that  coming  is  foretold  to  us.  The  duty  of  hving  not  only  in  expectancy  of  this 
event,  but  in  prayerful  watchfulnesi  for  it,  is  as  plainly  and  as  positively  enjoined 
npon  us,  as  is  the  requirement  of  any  one  of  the  ten  commandments.  The  solemn 
day  approaching  : — When  it  comes  we  know  not.  We  know  simply  this — it  is  a 
fact^in  God's  government.  Slowly  and  steadily  it  is  approaching.  It  encamps 
every  night  neares  to  the  race — to  us — to  me.  We  have  no  human  almanacs  thai 
can  foretell  its  coming.  That  it  will  come  seems  one  of  the  fundamental  thoughts 
of  our  mind,  admitted  everywhere  and  always.  The  Egyptians  bore  decided 
witness,  in  their  books  of  the  dead,  to  the  coming  of  that  day.  Let  not  that  day 
come  upon  you  sleeping,  said  Jesus.  Duty  is  ours — that  day  is  God's.  {H.  W. 
Beeeher.)  The  uncertainty  of  the  Day  of  Judgment  considered  and  improved : — 
First,  our  Saviour  here  declares  the  uncertainty  of  the  time  as  to  us  and  all  creatures, 
when  the  general  judgment  shall  be.  And  to  express  this  the  more  emphatically.  He 
tells  us  — 1.  That  God  only  knows  it.  He  excludes  from  the  knowledge  of  it,  those 
who  were  most  likely  to  know  it,  if  God  had  not  absolutely  reserved  it  to  Himself. 
2.  That  ihe  consideration  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  time  should  make  us 
very  careful  to  be  always  prepared  for  it.  First,  a  general  caution,  **  Take  ye 
heed."  From  whence  I  shall  observe,  by  the  way,  the  great  goodness  of  God  to  us. 
and  His  singular  care  of  us.  God  hath  acquainted  us  with  whatever  is  necessary 
to  direct  and  excite  us  to  our  duty ;  but  He  hath  purposely  concealed  from  us  those 
things  which  might  tend  to  make  us  slothful  and  careless,  negligent  and  remiss  in 
it.  Besides  this,  it  is  always  useful  to  the  world  to  be  kept  in  awe  by  the  continual 
danger  and  terror  of  an  approaching  judgment.  And  it  was  no  inconvenience  at 
all  that  the  apostles  and  first  Christians  had  this  apprehension  of  the  nearness  of 
that  time  ;  for  no  consideration  could  be  more  forcible  to  keep  them  steadfast  in 
their  profession,  and  to  fortify  them  against  sufferings.  1.  We  should  resolve 
without  delay,  to  put  ourselves  into  that  state  and  condition,  in  which  we  may  not 
be  afraid  judgment  should  find  us.  In  the  secure  and  negligent  posture  that  most 
men  live,  even  the  better  sort  of  men,  if  judgment  should  overtake  them,  how  few 
could  be  saved  1  So  that  our  first  care  must  be  to  get  out  of  this  dangerous  state 
of  sin  and  insecurity,  "  to  break  off  pur  sins  by  repentance,"  that  we  may  be 
capable  of  the  mercy  of  God,  and  at  peace  with  Him,  before  He  comes  to  execute 
judgment  upon  the  world.  2.  After  this  great  work  of  repentance  is  over,  we 
should  be  very  careful  how  we  contract  any  new  guilt,  by  returning  to  our  former 
sins,  or  by  the  gross  neglect  of  any  part  of  our  duty.  3.  Let  us  neglect  no 
opportoni^  of  doing  good,  but  always  be  employing  ourselves,  either  in  acts  of 
religion  and  piety  towards  God,  or  of  righteousness  and  charity  towards  men,  or 
in  such  acts  as  are  subordinate  to  religion.  4.  We  should  often  review  our  lives 
and  call  ourselves  to  a  strict  account  of  our  actions,  that,  judging  ourselves,  we 
may  not  be  judged  and  condemned  by  the  Lord.  5.  Another  part  of  our  prepara- 
tion for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  is  a  humble  trust  and  confidence  in  the  virtue  of 
His  death  and  passion,  as  the  only  meritorious  cause  of  the  remission  of  our  sins, 
and  the  reward  of  eternal  life.  6.  And  lastly,  to  awaken  and  maintain  this 
vigilancy  and  care,  we  should  often  represent  to  our  minds  the  judgment  of  the 
Great  Day,  which  will  certainly  come  though  we  know  not  the  time  of  it.  This 
is  the  first  direction  our  Saviour  gives  us ;  continual  vigilancy  and  watchfulness 
over  ourselves  in  general.  The  second  direction  is  more  particular,  and  that  is, 
prayer — "  Take  ye  heed,  watch  and  pray."  And  the  practice  of  this  duty  of  prayer 
will  be  of  great  advantage  to  us  upon  these  two  accounts.  It  is  very  apt  to  awaken 
and  excite  our  care  and  diligence  in  the  business  of  religion.  Piayer,  indeed, 
Bupposeth  that  we  stand  in  need  of  the  Divine  help ;  but  it  implies,  likewise,  a 
resolution  on  our  part  to  do  what  we  can  for  ourselves ;  otherwise  we  ask  in  vain. 
2.  If  we  use  our  sincere  endeavours  for  the  effecting  of  what  we  pray  for,  prayer 
is  the  most  effectual  means  to  engage  the  Divine  blessing,  and  assistance  to  second 
oar  endeavours,  and  to  secure  them  from  miscarriage.  I  proceed  to  Ihe  third  and  last 

85 


546  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  m 

pari  of  the  text,  which  is  the  reason  which  our  Saviour  here  adds  to  enforce  om 
care  and  diligence  in  a  matter  of  so  great  concernment,  viz.,  the  uncertainty,  as 
to  us,  of  the  particular  time  when  this  Day  of  Judgment  will  be :  "Ye  know  not 
when  the  time  is."    (J.  Tillotson,  D,D.)        Ye  know  not  when  the  time  u ;— I.  Th» 

CONSIBEBATION   OF    THS    UNOEBTAINTT    OW    LIFB,     VBOM     WHICH    THB    XXHOBTATIOM  18 

BNFOBCBB — "  Te  know  not  when  the  time  is."  II.  Thb  exhobtatxom  to  oxboum- 
BPBCTioN,  vioiLANOB,  AND  PBAYBB — "  Take  yc  heed,  watch  and  pray."  But  we 
proceed  to  consider  what  this  watchfulness  impli&s.  1.  It  implies  spiritual  life. 
2.  It  implies  a  sense  of  danger.  (JF.  BuUevant.)  Life's  uncertainty  improved : — 
I.  The  fact  of  life's  dncbbtainty.  But  before  I  attempt  to  fix  your  thoughts  on 
life's  uncertainty,  there  are  two  other  kindred  facts  which  merit  attention — the 
certainty  of  death,  and  the  nearness  of  it.  We  know  not  when  the  time  is. 
Death  is  an  ambush.  Hence  the  force  of  "  Take  ye  heed,  watch  and  pray."  1. 
Men  full  of  laudable,  anxious,  active  strife  of  business,  have  in  one  moment  been 
called  to  their  higher  account,  prepared  or  unprepared.  2.  More  fearful  still  is 
the  subject,  when  we  consider  that  not  only  are  men  called  away  from  the  midst 
of  worldly  business,  but  are  taken  in  the  very  act  of  sin  and  rebellion  against  God. 
"  The  third  day  Noah  entered  into  the  ark,  the  flood  came  and  took  them  all  away." 
8.  Let  it,  however,  be  clearly  understood,  that  no  degree  of  morality,  faith,  or 
holiness,  can  wholly  shield  as  from  the  stroke  of  sudden  death.  II.  The  plain 
practical  duty  abisino  out  of  it — ♦'  Take  ye  heed,"  &c.  A  word  in  season. 
Many  are  heedless  and  unprepared  to  die.  *'  Take  ye  heed,"  or  you  must  needs 
miss  heaven.  Would  we  prepare  to  die — I.  Habitually  believe  in  Christ.  2. 
Habitually  commune  with  God.  8.  Habitually  aim  at  Christian  consistency. 
Conclusion :  1.  Address  those  who  are  obviously  neither  watching  nor  praying. 
Are  there  in  the  church  lukewarm  professors  ?  3.  You  who  are  in  the  way  to  a 
bUssful  immortality.  {B.  Carvosso."^  Preparation  for  death  : — The  true  significance 
of  death  lies  not  in  its  physical  pam,  in  its  breaking  in  upon  the  plans  of  life,  but 
in  the  fact  that  it  brings  men  into  final  moral  relations  with  God.  Now  let  us 
consider,  as  calm  and  prudent  men,  the  full  effect  and  the  true  character  of 
deferring  the  preparation  for  death  until  the  dying  hour.  1.  To  thus  defer  this 
preparation  is  to  deprive  life  itself  of  one  of  its  chief  steadying  elements.  2. 
Living  without  conscious  preparation  for  death  is  a  risk  which  neither  prudence 
nor  self-respect  should  allow.  A  man  guards  himself  with  a  wise  providence  of  the 
future.  No  man  puts  his  affections  as  they  are  involved  in  the  family  to  such 
peril.  He  is  perpetually  forethinking ;  working  to  provide  against  evils  ;  making 
preparation  to-day  and  this  year  for  to-morrow  and  next  year.  3.  There  is  a  view 
which  will  have  weight  with  men  who  are  just,  and  who  are  honestly  seeking  to 
guide  themselves  by  principles  of  honour.  It  is  the  ignoring,  the  dishonouring  of 
God's  love,  His  will  and  EUs  commands,  all  one's  life,  and  then  at  death,  for  fear, 
or  for  the  sake  of  interest,  rushing  into  a  settlement.  A  child  is  reprobate,  and 
breaks  away  from  home,  and  squanders  all  he  can  get,  and  becomes  a  wreck  and  a 
wretch,  and  apparently  is  to  be  disowned.  He  hears,  at  last,  after  years  and  yean 
of  dissipation,  that  his  father  is  weakening  and  drawing  near  to  death ;  and  ha 
scents  the  opportunity,  and  rushes  home,  and  professes  repentance  and  reformation, 
in  order  that  his  fattier  may  reconstruct  his  will,  and  leave  him  a  part  of  his 
estate.  What  would  you  think  of  a  child  that  should  do  that  f  What  would 
you  think  of  a  child  that  should  deliberately  calculate  upon  it,  and  say  in  himself, 
"  The  old  man  has  oftentimes,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  warned  me  against  my  gambling 
companions ;  but  there  is  time  enough  yet.  He  is  rich,  and  I  want  a  part  of  his 
money,  and  I  know  his  heart,  and  I  mean  to  come  in  for  a  share  by  and  by.  I  am 
going  to  have  my  pleasure  ;  I  am  going  to  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry ;  I  am  going  to 
have  my  royal  debauch  with  my  companions ;  and  when  I  see  the  old  man  is  about 
pegging  out  I  will  go  home  and  reform ;  because  I  do  not  mean  to  lose  that 
proper^ ;  I  am  going  to  enjoy  myself  as  I  please,  and  have  that  too "  ?  What 
would  you  think  of  a  child  that  should  say  that,  and  then  keep  his  eye  on  his 
father,  and  calculate  his  chances  and  run  scuttling  home  just  in  time  to  get  his 
name  put  in  the  will  right,  in  order  that  he  might  have  the  property  7  What 
name  is  there  in  any  language  that  is  adequate  to  express  your  feelings,  toward 
such  baseness  as  that  f  And  yet,  are  there  not  in  my  hearing  men  that  are  living 
precisely  so  with  respect  to  their  Father  who  is  in  heaven  f  4.  There  are 
pnidential  considerations  of  a  very  solemn  nature  which  one  should  employ. 
Those  who  think  that  they  shall  prepare  for  death  in  the  last  hour  of  life,  ought 
Id  ooniiilw  loine  of  tiaeir  ehanoes.    As  a  matter  of  fact,  more  than  half  that  die  in 


€HAP.  xiu.]  ST,  MARK,  64T 

this  world  die  witboat  consciousness.  Not  alone  of  those  that  die  by  accident,  by 
sadden  stroke,  but  of  those  that  die  by  disease,  more  than  one  half  die  under  a 
cloud,  so  that  they  have  no  use  of  their  reason.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Autumnal 
life : — It  is  always  a  sad  day  in  autumn  to  me,  when  I  see  the  change  that  comes 
over  nature.  Along  in  August,  the  birds  are  all  still,  and  you  would  think  that 
there  were  not  any  left ;  but  if  you  go  out  into  the  fields  you  find  them  feeding  in  the 
trees,  and  hedges,  and  everywhere.  By  and  by  September  comes,  and  they  begin  to 
gather  together  in  groups ;  and  anybody  that  knows  what  it  means  knows  that  they  are 
getting  ready  to  go.  And  then  comes  the  later  days  of  October — the  sad,  the 
sweet,  the  melancholy,  the  deep  days  of  October.  And  the  birds  are  less  and  less. 
And  in  November,  high  up,  you  see  the  sky  streaked  with  waterfowl  going 
southward ;  and  strange  noises  in  the  night,  of  these  pilgrims  of  the  sky,  they 
shall  hear  whose  ears  are  attuned  to  natural  history.  Birds  in  flocks,  one  after 
another,  wing  their  way  to  the  south.  Summer  is  gone ;  and  I  am  left  behind ; 
but  they  are  happy.  And  I  think  I  can  hear  them  singing  in  all  those  States  clear 
down  to  the  Gulf.  They  have  found  where  the  sun  is  never  cold.  With  us  are 
frosts,  but  not  with  the  bird  that  has  migrated.  Oh,  mother  1  my  heart  breaks  with 
your  heart  when  your  cradle  is  empty ;  but  shall  I  call  back  the  child  ?  Nay ;  sooner 
pluck  a  star  out  of  heaven  than  call  back  that  child  to  this  wintry  blast.  Shall  I  call 
back  your  young  and  dear  and  blooming  friend?  Nay.  You  are  left  in  some  bitter- 
ness for  a  time ;  but  make  not  a  man  out  of  angel  again.  Let  him  rejoice.  {Ihid.) 
Watch  and  pray : — Two  duties. — I.  The  activity  of  the  eye  earthward.  II.  The 
EMOTION  of  the  hbabt  Godward.  Watchfulness  is  like  the  hands  of  the  clock  that 
point ;  prayer  is  the  weight  that  keeps  the  machinery  in  motion.  {T.  J.  Judkin.) 
A  believer's  watchfulness  like  tliat  of  a  soldier : — A  sentinel  posted  on  the  walls, 
when  he  discerns  a  hostile  party  advancing,  does  not  attempt  to  make  head 
against  them  himself,  but  informs  his  commanding  officer  of  the  enemy's  approach, 
and  leaves  him  to  take  the  proper  measures  against  the  foe.  So  the  Christian  does 
not  attempt  to  fight  temptation  in  his  own  strength;  his  watchfulness  lies  in 
observing  its  approach,  and  in  telling  God  of  it  by  prayer.  {W.  Mason,)  Watch- 
ing and  praying : — He  that  prays  and  watcheth  not,  is  like  him  that  sows  a  field 
with  precious  seed,  but  leaves  the  gate  open  for  hogs  to  come  and  root  it  up ;  or  him 
that  takes  great  pains  to  get  money,  but  no  care  to  lay  it  up  safely  when  he  hath  it. 
{W.  Gumall.)  Watch: — "Wickedness,"  says  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  "is  like  a 
bottomless  pit,  into  which  it  is  easier  for  a  man  to  prevent  himself  falling  than, 
having  fallen,  to  preserve  himself  from  falling  infinitely."  The  watchfulness  of 
^ayer : — "  I  often  recall,"  says  an  old  sailor,  "  my  first  night  at  sea.  A  storm  had 
come  up,  and  we  had  put  back  under  a  point  of  land  which  broke  the  wind  a  little, 
but  still  the  sea  had  a  rake  on  us,  and  we  were  in  danger  of  drifting.  I  was  on  the 
anchor  watch,  and  it  was  my  duty  to  give  warning  in  case  the  ship  should  drag  her 
anchor.  It  was  a  long  night  to  me.  I  was  very  anxious  whether  I  should  know  if 
the  ship  really  did  drift.  How  could  I  tell  ?  I  found  that,  going  forward  and 
placing  my  hand  on  the  chain,  I  could  teU  by  the  feeling  of  it  whether  the  anchor 
was  dragging  or  not ;  and  how  often  that  night  I  went  forward  and  placed  my  hand 
on  that  chain !  And  very  often  since  then  I  have  wondered  whether  I  am  drifting 
away  from  God,  and  then  I  go  away  and  pray.  Sometimes  during  that  long  stormy 
night  I  would  be  startled  by  a  rumbling  sound,  and  I  would  put  my  hand  on  the 
chain,  and  find  it  was  not  the  anchor  dragging,  but  only  the  chain  grating  against 
the  rocks  on  the  bottom.  The  anchor  was  still  firm.  And  sometimes  now,  in 
temptation  and  trial,  I  become  afraid,  and  upon  praying  I  find  that  away  down  deep 
in  my  heart  I  do  love  God,  and  my  hope  is  in  His  salvation.  And  I  want  just  to 
say  a  word  to  my  fellow- Christians  :  Keep  an  anchor  watch,  lest  before  you  are 
aware  you  may  be  upon  the  rocks."    (Anon.) 

Vers.  34-36.  And  to  every  man  his  work,  and  commanded  the  porter  to  watch.— 

Christian  watchfulness : — I.  A  certain  event  referred  to.  That  He  should  go 
away  was  necessary.  1.  It  was  impossible  that  His  state  of  humiliation  should  be 
continued.  2.  The  work  He  had  to  do  in  heaven  required  His  presence  there. 
3.  His  removal  was  necessary  in  order  that  the  Holy  Spirit  might  be  bestowed. 
n.  A  BE8POMSIBLE  TRUST  couinTTED.  1.  What  He  left  in  charge  of  His  servants 
was  His  house.  The  church  is  frequently  set  forth  under  this  designation. 
2.  Those  whom  He  left  behind  were  invested  with  the  powers  necessary  for  the 
transaction  of  affairs  during  His  absence.  3.  While  peculiar  authority  was  grante«l 
to  some,  none  of  the  servants  were  permitted  to  remain  idle.    HI.  An  imfobtan* 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  xm. 

Dursr  XNJoiNED.  1.  To  no  subject  is  our  attention  more  frequently  directed 
than  that  of  watchfuhiess.  2.  The  consideration  by  which  it  is  enforced.  It  is  the 
uncertainty  as  to  when  the  master  of  the  house  might  return  ;  whether  at  even,  or 
at  midnight,  or  at  the  cock-crowing,  or  in  the  morning.  3.  Whatever  limits  may 
belong  to  other  obligations,  this  is  universal  in  its  claims.  "  And  what  I  say  unto 
you,  I  say  unto  all,  watch."  {Expository  Outlines.)  Christ's  second  coming: — 
I.  The  Chuech' 8  authority.  *•  He  gave  authority  to  His  servants."  The  more  we 
serve  the  more  authority  is  given.  For,  what  is  authority  ?  Not  position,  not 
office  ;  but  a  certain  moral  power  :  the  power  of  truth,  the  power  of  affections,  the 
power  of  virtue  over  vice,  the  power  of  faith  over  sight.  There  are  degrees  of 
authority  in  the  Church.  There  is  authority  which  belongs  to  the  Church  collectively, 
essential  for  her  wholesome  discipline.  But  we  have  to  do  only  with  what  is 
personal  to  ourselves.  It  is  your  authority  to  go  to  every  single  man  under  heaven 
and  tell  the  glorious  things  of  the  gospel.  It  is  your  authority  to  go  to  the  throne 
of  God  Himself.  II.  The  work.  Authority  is  never  given  in  the  Church  of  Christ 
for  any  other  end  but  work.  The  work  is  specific,  **  to  every  man  his  work."  Each 
Christian  should  pray  till  he  finds  out  the  work  God  has  assigned  him  in  this 
present  life.  There  is  work  active  and  passive  in  the  Master's  house  ;  the  childlike 
reception  of  the  grace  of  God,  to  evangelise  mankind.  III.  Watching.  There  are 
two  ways  of  watching.  There  is  a  watching  against  a  thing  we  fear ;  and  or  a  thing 
we  love.  Watch  for  the  second  advent,  and  you  will  be  vigilant  against  sloth  and 
sin.  Will  you  not  keep  every  trespasser  out  of  the  Master's  house,  when  yon 
feel  that  that  Master  Himself  stands  almost  at  the  door  ?  He  is  worth  watching  for. 
(J.  Vaughan^  M.A. )  Watching  for  the  Master : — In  all,  therefore,  you  do,  brethren, 
and  in  all  you  suffer,  you  are  to  be  in  the  spirit  of  a  man  who,  expecting  a  dear  friend, 
has  taken  his  stand  at  the  gate,  to  meet  him  when  he  arrives, — a  porter.  Oh,  it  is  sucb 
a  pleasant  thing  to  watch, — pleasant  to  go  up  on  the  high  door  of  prophecy,  and  turn 
the  telescope  of  inspiration  down  the  road  where  He  will  come :  pleasant,  in  every 
trouble  to  feel, — in  a  moment  He  may  come,  and  cut  this  trouble  very  short: 
pleasant,  in  every  fear,  however  deep,  to  think  Christ's  coming  may  be  nearer  than 
we  might  fear  :  pleasant,  to  feel,— when  the  world  knocks  at  your  door,  to  say,  "  I 
am  keeping  place  for  Jesus,  and  I  cannot  let  you  in  : "  pleasant,  in  some  work  to 
have  conscience  say,  "  I  think  my  dear  Master  would  like  to  find  me  here :  " 
pleasant  when  all  is  happy,  to  double  the  happiness  with  the  thought,  ♦*  And  He, 
too,  will  soon  be  here :  "  and  pleasant  to  wake  up  every  morning  and  think, 
"What  can  I  do  to-day  to  prepare  the  way  for  my  Saviour."  {Ibid.)  The 
Master  Cometh:— 1.  The  house.  II.  The  householder.  III.  The  journey.  IV. 
The  servants.  V.  The  charge.  VI.  The  individual  work.  VII.  The  command 
TO  THE  porter.  1.  Watch  against  thieves  and  robbers.  2.  Watch  for  the  Master. 
{H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Our  absent  Lord : — The  parable  in  Mark  xiii.  34-36  cannot 
be  discharged  of  its  meaning  by  a  reference  to  the  ordinary  risks  of  human 
mortality.    Its  theme  is  not  man's  dying,  but  Christ's  coming.     I.  The  Son  of 

MAN  is  represented   AS   A  HOUSEHOLDER  AWAY  ON  A  JOURNEY  fver.  34).      1.   It   is  not 

fair  to  look  upon  Jesus  as  a  mer^  absentee  lord  of  the  soil.  For  He  made  this 
world;  He  has  suffered  wonderfully  to  save  souls;  and  He  owns  what  He  has 
purchased.  2.  It  must  be  remembered  that  He  went  away  for  a  most  graciciw 
purpose.  He  would  send  the  Comforter  (John  xvi.  7).  He  has  gone  to  prepare 
a  "place"  for  those  whom  He  died  to  redeem  (John  xiv.  2,  3).  3.  It  is  better 
to  urge  His  coming  back  with  eargerness  of  prayer.  There  is  fitness  in  (HI 
passionate  words  of  Richard  Baxter :  "  Haste,  0  my  Saviour,  the  time  of  Thy 
return :  send  forth  Thy  angels,  let  the  last  trumpet  sound  1  Delay  not,  lest  the 
living  give  up  hope.  Oh,  hasten  that  great  resurrection  day  when  the  seed  Thou 
sowedst  corruptible  shall  come  forth  incorruptible,  and  the  graves  that  retain  bat 
dust  shall  return  their  glorious  ones,  Thy  destined  bride !  "  II.  To  every  onb 
"OUR  ABSENT  LoRD *'  HAS  GIVEN  HIS  OWN  WORK  TO  DO  (vcr.  35.)  1.  There  is  a 
work  to  be  wrought  on  ourselves.  Our  bodies  are  to  be  exercised  and  skilled  for 
service  (Rom.  xii.  1).  Our  minds  are  to  be  developed  and  embellished  for  God's 
praise.  One  of  our  Lord's  parables  spoken  on  this  very  occasion  has  actually 
added  to  our  language  the  new  word  "  talents,"  as  signifying  intellectual  gifts 
(Matt.  XXV.  16).  Our  souls  are  to  be  sanctified  wholly  (1  Thess.  v.  23).  2.  There 
is  also  a  work  to  be  wrought  upon  others  and  for  others.  The  poor  are  to  be 
succoured,  the  weak  to  be  strengthened,  the  ignorant  to  be  taught,  the  sorrowfnl 
to  be  comforted.  3.  There  is  another  work  to  be  wrought  for  God's  gloiy.  "  Man'i 
ehief  end  is  to  glorify  God  and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever."    Our  whole  life  is  to  bt 


xm.]  ST.  MARK.  641 

oonBeorated  to  this,  even  down  to  the  particulars  of  eating  and  drinking 
(1  Cor.  X.  31).  III.  *•  Our  absent  Lord  "  is  surely  oomino  back  again  to  thw 
woBLD  (ver.  26).  1.  He  predicted  His  Beoond  advent  (John  xiv.  28).  The  language 
Jesus  used  in  this  remembered  declaration  is  not  at  all  figurative;  it  all  goes 
together  as  a  statement  of  fact.  He  said,  literally,  He  would  sand  the  Comforter,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit  came  in  person  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  And  just  as  literally  did  He 
say  He  would  Himself  return  at  the  appointed  time.  2.  He  asseverated  the  certainty 
and  solemnity  of  His  own  promise,  as  if  He  foresaw  some  would  deny  or  doul  t  it  (ver. 
31).  This  was  endorsing  the  covenant  engagement  by  a  new  oath ;  "  because  He  could 
swear  by  no  greater,  He  sware  by  Himself."  3.  He  left  behind  Him  vivid  descrip 
tions  of  the  momentous  day  on  which  He  should  arrive  (vers.  24-26).  In  these, 
however,  He  does  little  more  than  repeat  the  vigorous  language  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment prophet  (Dan.  vii.  9-14).  4.  He  even  sent  back  word  from  heaven  by  an 
angel  (Acts  i.  11).  It  should  be  "  this  same  Jesus  "  who  should  come  back,  and 
He  should  come  "  in  like   manner "   as  they    had   seen  Him  depart.    IV.  Thk 

XZAOT  HOUR  IN   WHICH   "  OUR  ABSENT  LORD "   WILL  ARRFTB   IS    NOT   ANNOUNCED   (Matt. 

xxiv.  42).  1.  Jesus  asserted  that  He  did  not  know  it  Himself  (ver.  32).  The 
disciples  once  asked  Him  about  this  (Matt.  xxiv.  3).  He  told  them  that  God  the 
Father  had  kept  this  one  secret  in  His  own  solemn  reserve  (Acts  i.  6,  7).  2.  But 
our  Saviom:  declares  that  His  coming  might  be  expected  at  any  moment,  morning  or 
midnight,  evening  or  cock-crowing  (ver.  35).  It  would  assuredly  be  sudden.  The 
figure  is  employed  more  than  once  in  the  Scriptures  of  ♦•  a  thief  in  the  night  '* 
(2  Pet.  iiL  10).  Peter  in  his  Epistle  only  quotes  our  Lord's  own  language  (Luke  xii. 
39,  40).  3.  Moreover,  Christ  told  His  disciples  that  there  would  be  tokens  of  the 
nearness  of  this  great  day,  by  which  it  might  be  recognized  when  it  should  be  close 
at  hand  (vers.  28,  29).  These  signs  would  be  as  clearly  discerned  as  shoots  on  fig- 
trees  in  the  opening  summer.  He  mentioned  some  of  them  explicitly  (Luke  xxi. 
25-28).  We  may  admit  that  "  wars  and  rumours  of  wars,"  earthquakes,  famines, 
falling  stars,  and  pestilences  (Matt.  xxiv.  6-8J,  together  with  "  great  signs  in  heaven 
and  earth,"  are  alarming  disclosures ;  but  will  any  one  doubt  that  such  phenomena 
are  conspicuous  at  least  ?  (Luke  xvii.  24).  4.  So  Jesus  insisted  that  men  were 
bound  to  be  wise  in  noting  these  signs,  and  be  ready  (Luke  xii,  64-56).      V.  Th« 

GREATEST  PERIL  IS  THAT,   WHEN  "  OUR  ABSENT  LoRD "    COMBS,     MEN    WILL    BB    TASXM 

UNAWARES  (ver.  36).  1.  The  instinctive  tendency  of  the  human  heart  is  to  procras- 
tinate in  the  performance  of  religious  work.  2.  Time  glides  mysteriously  on  with 
no  reference  to  daring  delay.  The  grave,  like  the  horseleach's  daughter,  cries  ••  Give  " 
(Prov.  XXX.  15,  16),  and  damnation  slumbereth  not  (2  Peter  ii.  3),  but  men  sleep 
clear  up  to  the  edge  of  divine  judgment.  They  did  in  Noah's  time,  and  in  Lot's, 
when  a  less  catastrophe  was  at  hand ;  and  so  it  will  be  when  the  Son  of  Man  is 
revealed  (Luke  xviii.  26-30).  3.  Christians  ought  to  hold  in  memory  the  repeated 
admonitions  they  have  received.  Walter  Scott  wrote  on  his  dial-plate  the  two  Greek 
words  which  mean  •'  the  night  cometh,"  so  that  he  might  keep  eternity  in  mind 
whenever  he  saw  the  hours  of  time  flitting  by.  Evidently  the  Apostle  Paul  feels 
that  he  has  the  right  to  press  peculiarly  pertinent  and  solemn  appeals  upon  those 
who  had  enjoyed  Sie  advantage  of  such  long  instruction  (1  Thess.  v.  1-7).  4.  There 
is  no  second  chance  offered  after  the  first  is  lost.  When  Christ  comes,  foolish 
virgins  will  have  no  time  to  run  for  oQ  to  pour  into  their  lightless  lamps.  A 
forfeited  life  cannot  be  allowed  any  opportunity  for  retrieval.  Where  the  tree  falls. 
north  or  south,  there  it  must  lie,  whether  the  full  fruit  has  been  ripened  upon  its 
branches  or  not  (Ecol.  xi.  3).  VI.  The  final  counsel  left  behind  Him  by  "  our 
ABSENT  Lord  "  is  for  all  to  watch  (ver.  37).  1.  Christ's  coming  would  seem  to 
be  the  highest  anticipation  for  true  believers.  When  He  appears,  saints  will  appear 
with  Him  in  glory  (Col.  iii.  4).  This  is  the  "  blessed  hope  "  of  the  Church  along  the 
ages  (Titus  ii.  13).  2.  It  might  clear  an  inquirer's  experience  to  think  of  this 
coming  of  Jesus.  Does  one  love  to  "  watch  "  for  Him  f  In  the  autobiography  of 
Frances  Ridley  Havergal  we  are  told  of  the  years  during  which  she  sought  sadly  for 
peace  at  the  cross.  At  last  one  of  her  teachers  put  this  question  to  her :  •*  Why 
cannot  you  trust  yourself  to  your  Saviour  at  once  f  Supposing  that  now,  at  this 
moment,  Christ  were  to  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  take  up  His  redeemed, 
could  you  not  trust  Him  r  Would  not  His  call.  His  promise,  be  enough  for  you  ? 
Could  you  not  commit  your  soul  to  Him»  to  your  Saviour,  Jesus  f  "  This  lifted  the 
cloud ;  she  tells  the  story  herself:  *>  Then  came  a  flash  of  hope  across  me,  which 
made  me  feel  literally  breathless.  I  remember  how  my  heart  beat.  '  I  could 
sorely,'  was  my  response ;  and  I  left  her  suddenly  and  ran  away  upstairs  to  think  it 


iM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

•at.  I  flnng  myself  on  my  knees  in  my  room,  and  strove  to  realize  the  sadden 
hope.  I  was  very  happy  at  last.  I  coidd  commit  my  soul  to  Jesus.  I  did  not,  and 
need  not,  fear  His  coming.  I  could  trust  Him  with  my  all  for  eternity.  It  was  so 
atterly  new  to  have  any  bright  thoughts  about  religion  that  I  could  hardly  believe 
it  could  be  so,  that  I  had  really  gained  such  a  step.  Then  and  there,  I  committed 
my  soul  to  the  Saviour,  I  do  not  mean  to  say  without  any  trembling  or  fear,  but  I 
did — and  earth  and  heaven  seemed  bright  from  that  moment — I  did  trust  the  Lord 
Jesus."  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Work  for  God:— The  sentence  which  mast 
have  seemed  to  Adam  a  curse,  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  shalt  thou  eat  bread," 
has  been  turned  by  God  into  a  blessing.  The  elements  of  Adam's  doom  are  the 
materials  of  himian  happiness.  Heaven  is  made  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  fall. 
What  a  world  this  would  be  without  work  1  What  a  weariness  1  What  a  hot-bed  of 
every  bad  passion  1  What  a  torment  1  I.  Evbb-x  LrviNG  creature  has  its  own  pbopbb 
woBK.  It  matches  with  each  man's  natural  endowment  and  his  spiritual  attain- 
ment. It  is  what  suits  him  :  neitiier  too  little  nor  too  much.  Enough  to  engage, 
and  occupy,  and  draw  out  aU  his  powers ;  and  yet  not  so  much  as  to  injure  or 
distress  them.  Take  pains  to  ascertain  whether  the  work  you  are  engaged  in  is 
really  yours — the  work  God  would  have  you  to  do.  To  settle  that  satisfactorily,  the 
following  conditions  must  be  fulfilled:  1.  There  must  be  the  vocation  of  the  heart 
— conscience  and  spiritual  conviction  telling  you,  after  prayer  and  thought,  that  yon 
are  called  to  it.  2.  The  vocation  of  circumstances — ^your  position  and  means  being 
suited,  and  your  education  and  habit  of  mind  accommodated  to  it.  3.  The  voca- 
tion of  the  Church — the  advice  and  judgment  of  pious  friends  who  are  in  a  position 
to  ofier  an  unprejudiced  opinion  on  the  subject.  If  these  three  things  unite,  you 
may  be  sure  that,  though  you  are  directed  to  it  by  human  agencies,  the  work  is 
really  allotted  to  you  by  God.  II.  You  abe  besponsible  only  fob  doing  the  wobe, 
NOT  FOB  the  BE8ULT8.  The  work  is  yours,  but  the  issue  is  God's.  Leave  that  to 
Him.  Do  you  work  with  faith — for  faith  is  confidence,  and  confidence  is  calmness, 
and  calmness  is  power,  and  power  is  success,  and  success  is  God's  glory.  (J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  Wakeful  work  : — Unless  we  work,  we  shall  not  keep  spiritually 
awake  and  lively :  unless  we  are  awake,  we  shall  not  work.  The  last  thing  that 
would  please  a  master  would  be  the  idle  curiosity  which  would  make  the  servants 
neglect  their  work  to  stand  outside  the  door  gazing  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  his  return. 
What  the  Master  desires  is  wakeful  work.  He  desires — I.  Wobk.  1.  Work  of 
mercy.  2.  Work  of  uprightness.  3.  Work  of  struggling  against  evil  within  us. 
4.  Work  of  witnessing  for  Christ.  6.  Work  of  helping  others  in  various  ways. 
6.  Work  of  comforting  the  sad,  of  supporting  the  weak.  7.  Work  of  reclaiming  the 
erring.  8.  Work  of  saving  the  lost.  U.  He  wants  this  to  be  done  wakefullt  ; 
in  that  fresh  and  earnest  way  which  men  take  (1)  when  their  faculties  are  on  the 
alert ;  (2)  when  they  are  on  tiie  watch  for  opportunities  of  doing  good,  and  against 
seductions  to  neglect  it ;  (3)  when  they  are  wakeful  enough  to  see  a  living  Saviour, 
and  feel  His  inspiration ;  (4)  when  they  watch  lest  they  lose  the  things  they  have 
wrought ;  (5)  when  they  are  awake  to  the  immense  needs  and  the  awful  dangers  of 
their  fellow  men ;  (6)  when  they  are  awake  to  the  littleness  of  time  and  the  great- 
ness of  eternity — the  nearness  and  sufficiency  of  the  Spirit's  help,  and  the  certainty 
and  value  of  the  Saviour's  reward.  When  there  is  this  working  and  this  watching 
mutually  aiding  each  other,  then  the  desire  of  the  Master  is  fulfilled,  and  whenever 
He  appears  we  are  ready  to  receive  Him  with  exceeding  joy.  {R.  Glover.)  Work 
and  tcatching: — I.  The  wobk  of  the  servants.  1.  Work  is  the  common  duty  of  all 
in  Christ's  house.  The  calm  stars  are  in  ceaseless  motion,  and  every  leaf  is  a  world, 
with  its  busy  inhabitants  and  the  sap  coursing  through  its  veins  as  the  life-blood 
through  our  own.  It  would  be  strange  then  if  the  Christian  Church,  which  was  in- 
tended to  be  the  beating  heart  to  all  this  world's  activity,  were  exempted  from  a  law 
BO  universal.  Such  a  thing  would  be  against  our  highest  nature.  Work  is  not  only 
a  duty,  but  a  blessing.  Every  right  deed  is  a  step  upward.  Instead  of  praying  that 
God  would  grant  us  less  work,  our  request  should  be  that  he  would  give  us  a  greater 
heart  and  growing  strength  to  meet  all  its  claims.  2.  This  work  is  varied  to  different 
individuals.  In  one  respect  there  is  something  common  in  the  work  of  all,  as  there 
is  a  conunon  salvation — to  believe  in  Christ  and  to  grow  in  grace ;  but  even  here 
there  may  be  a  variety  in  the  form.  There  is  a  different  colour  of  beauty  in  different 
stones  that  are  all  of  them  precious.  One  man  may  be  burnishing  to  the  sparkle  of 
tiiie  diamond,  while  another  is  deepening  to  the  glow  of  the  ruby;  and  each  is 
equally  useful  and  necessary.  The  corner-stone  and  the  cope-stone  have  both  their 
due  place  in  the  palace-house  of  Christ.  To  see  how  this  may  be,  is  to  perceive  that  an 


m.]  Sr.  MARK,  661 

end  ean  be  pat  to  all  jealonsies  and  heart-bomings,  and  may  help  us  even  now  to 
take  oar  position  calmly  and  onenviously,  working  in  onr  departaient,  assured  that 
oar  labour  will  be  found  to  contribute  to  tiie  full  proportion  of  the  whole.  3.  Each 
individual  has  means  for  ascertaining  his  own  work.  Not  a  special  revelation,  or 
an  irresistible  impression.  Still  Christ  does  guide  men  into  their  sphere  of  work  by 
the  finger  of  His  providence  and  by  the  enlightenment  of  His  Word  in  the  hand  of 
His  Spirit.  If  it  be  thought  it  would  be  simpler  and  more  satisfactory  to  have  our 
place  directly  pointed  out  to  us,  let  us  remember  the  trouble  and  care  necessary  to 
ascertain  it  are  part  of  our  training.  There  are  these  rules  to  guide  us.  1.  Our 
aptitudes.  2.  Our  opportunities.  3.  The  opinion  of  our  fellow-men  when  fairly 
expressed.  II.  The  watch  of  the  porter.  The  porter  is  that  one  of  the  servants 
whose  station  is  at  the  door  to  look  out  for  those  who  approach,  and  open  to  them 
if  they  have  right  to  enter.  It  would  be  wrong,  however,  to  suppose  that  the  body 
of  the  servants  are  exempted  from  watching,  while  one  takes  the  duty  for  them 
(ver.  37).  In  saying  the  workmen  are  many  and  the  watchman  one,  our  Lord  indi- 
cated that,  while  the  mode  of  labour  in  the  house  may  vary,  the  duty  of  watchfulness 
is  common  to  all  who  are  in  it.  The  porter  must  stand  at  the  door  of  every  heart, 
while  that  heart  pursues  its  work.  What,  then,  is  this  watching  f  It  is  to  do  all 
our  work  with  the  tkought  of  Christ's  eye  measuring  it,  as  of  a  friend  who  is  ever 
present  to  our  soul,  gone  from  us  in  outward  form,  sure  to  return,  and  meanwhile 
near  in  spirit;  to  subject  our  plans  and  acts  to  His  approval,  asking  ourselves  at 
every  step  how  this  would  please  Him,  shrinking  from  what  would  cloud  His  face, 
rejoicing  with  great  joy  in  all  that  would  meet  His  smile.  This  is  a  more  difficult 
task  than  to  have  our  hands  busy  with  the  work  of  the  house.  But,  if  attended  to, 
it  will  bring  its  proportionate  benefit.  1.  It  will  keep  as  wakeful.  2.  It  will 
preserve  purity.  3.  It  will  maintain  the  soul  in  calmness.  4.  It  will  rise  increas- 
ingly to  the  fervour  of  prayer — that  prayer  which  is  the  strength  of  the  soul  and  the 
life  of  all  work.     III.  The  bearing  of  these    two    duties    upon    each   other. 

1.  Work  cannot  be  rightly  performed  without  watching ;  for  then  it  would  be  (1) 
blind  and  without  a  purpose ;  (2)  discouraging  and  tedious ;  (3)  formal  and  dead. 

2.  Watching  will  not  suffice  without  work ;  or  it  would  be  (1)  solitary ;  (2)  subject  to 
many  temptations,  such  as  empty  speculations,  vanity,  pride ;  (3)  unready  for  Christ. 
The  solitary  watcher  can  have  no  works  of  faith  nor  labours  of  love  to  present,  no 
saved  souls  to  offer  for  the  Redeemer's  crown,  and  no  crown  of  righteousness  to 
receive  from  Him.  He  is  saved,  but  alone,  as  on  a  board  or  a  broken  piece  of  the 
shh) ;  not  as  they  who  have  many  voices  of  blessing  around,  and  many  welcomes 
berore,  and  to  whom  an  entrance  is  ministered  abundantly  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  Happy  is  the  man  who  can  combine  these  two  duties  in  perfect  harmony-  - 
who  has  Stephen's  life  of  labour  and  Stephen's  vision  in  the  end.  In  every  soul  there 
should  be  the  sisters  of  Bethany,  active  effort  and  quiet  thought,  and  both,  agreeing 
in  mutuahlove  and  help.  {John  Ker^  D.D.)  The  discipline  of  work : — Consider 
what  an  amount  of  drudgery  must  be  performed — how  much  humdrum  and  prosaic 
labour  goes  to  any  work  of  the  least  value.  There  are  so  many  layers  of  mere  white 
lime  in  every  shell  to  that  inner  one  so  beautifully  tinted.  Let  not  the  shell-fish 
think  to  build  his  house  of  that  alone ;  and  pray  what  are  its  tints  to  him  ?  Is  it 
not  his  smooth  close-fitting  shirt  merely,  whose  tints  are  not  to  him,  being  in  the 
dark,  but  only  when  he  is  gone  or  dead,  and  his  shell  is  heaved  up  to  light,  a  wreck 
apon  the  beach,  do  they  appear.  With  him,  too,  it  is  a  song  of  the  shirt — "  Work 
— work — work  !  "  And  the  work  is  not  merely  a  policy  in  the  gross  sense,  but,  in 
the  higher  sense,  a  discipline.  If  it  is  surely  the  means  to  the  highest  end  we 
know,  can  any  work  be  humble  or  disgusting  ?  Will  it  not  rather  be  elevating,  as  » 
ladder,  the  means  by  which  we  are  translated  ?  ^horeau.)  ChrisVs  service  delight- 
ful : — A  beautiful  incident  in  reference  to  Mr.  Townsend  is  mentioned  in  the  life  of 
John  Campbell.  *'  Finding  him  on  Tuesday  morning,  shortly  before  his  last  illness, 
leaning  on  the  balustrade  of  the  staircase  that  led  to  the  committee-room  of  the  Tract 
Society,  and  scarcely  able  to  breathe,  I  remarked,  *  Mr.  Townsend,  is  this  you?  Why 
should  you  come  in  this  state  of  body  to  our  meetings  ?  You  have  now  attended  them 
for  a  long  time,  and  you  should  leave  the  work  to  younger  men.'  The  reply  of  Mr. 
Townsend  was  worthy  of  his  character.  Looking  at  his  friend  with  a  countenance 
brightened  and  elevated  by  the  thoughts  that  were  struggling  for  utterance,  his 
words  were :  *  Oh  I  Johnny,  Johnny,  man,  it  is  hard  to  give  ap  working  in  tht 
service  of  such  a  Master  1 '  "    {Biblical  Treasury.) 

Vers.  86,  86.  Watch  ye,  therefore. — Watchfulness,  a  preparation  for  the  coming  »; 


MS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

Christ.  L  What  wb  abe  to  understand  by  the  cobono  of  the  mastbb  of  ihb 
HOUSE.  By  **  the  master  of  the  house  "  here  is  meant  Christ,  as  it  is  also  in  Luke 
xiii.  26.  The  world  in  general,  and  the  visible  Church  in  particular,  and  especially 
the  spiritual  part  of  it,  are  His  house  (Eph.  i.  20-23  ;  Heb.  iii.  3-6).  His  coming 
is  represented  in  Scripture  in  different  lights  and  for  different  purposes.  In  this 
chapter  of  Mark,  and  in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter  of  Matthew,  and  the  twenty- 
first  of  Luke,  He  is  represented  as  coming  to  judge  and  punish  the  Jewish  nation. 
His  visible  Church  of  old,  or  His  house,  for  rejecting  Him  (Deut.  xviii.  19  ;  comp. 
with  Acts  iii.  23  ;  Heb.  xii.  16).  In  other  places  He  is  represented  as  coming  to 
judge  all  mankind  at  tiie  last  day  (vers.  24-26  ;  2  Peter  iii.  3-12).  He  is  said  to 
come  when  He  visits  in  a  peculiar  way,  whether  in  judgment  or  mercy,  any  nation, 
or  Church,  or  any  particular  member  of  it  (Eev.  ii.  5-16  ;  iii.  3).  He  comes  to  each 
of  us  at  death  (Rev.  i.  18  ;  ii.  25  ;  iii.  11).  It  is  this  last  coming  of  Christ  to  which 
I  would  especially  call  your  attention.  For  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  ns» 
since— 1.  It  will  separate  us  from  all  below,  from  our  occupations,  enjoyments, 
possessions,  families,  relations,  and  friends,  and  even  from  our  own  bodies.  2.  It 
will  finish  our  state  of  trial,  and  determine  our  condition  for  ever.  3.  It  will  bring  us 
into  the  unseen  and  eternal  world — a  new,  imtried,  unknown  state.  4.  It  will  place 
us  in  the  presence  of  God,  that  we  may  receive  His  smile  or  frown,  may  enjoy  the 
effects  of  His  favour  and  friendship,  and  conmiunications  of  bUss  from  Him ;  or 
feel  the  effects  of  His  wrath,  and  find  Him  to  be  a  consimiing  fire.  6.  It  will  make 
a  most  astonishing  change  in  our  circumstances.  6.  It  often  comes  suddenly,  and 
gives  no  warning.  H.  What  is  that  watchfulness  which  is  recommended  as  a 
PREPARATION  FOR  His  COMING  ?  1.  It  impHcs  Spiritual  life,  in  opposition  to  that 
sleep  of  death  which  is  mentioned  (Eph.  v.  14 ;  ii.  1).  2.  It  implies  a  Hvely  sense 
of  the  reality  and  importance  of  spiritual  and  eternal  things,  such  as  persons 
awake  have  of  temporal  things,  the  seeing,  feeling,  tasting  them,  so  to  speak,  in 
opposition  to  that  insensibihty  about  them  which  is  implied  in  spiritual  sleep. 
3.  It  implies  a  thoughtfulness,  care,  and  concern  about  them,  in  opposition  to  that 
thoughtlessness  and  unconcern  about  them,  which  is  natural  to  us.  4.  It  implies  a 
sense  of  our  danger  from  our  enemies,  visible  and  invisible — from  the  devil,  the 
world,  persons,  and  things,  the  flesh,  our  own  hearts ;  and  the  standing  on  our 
guard,  in  opposition  to  security  of  mind  and  foolish  peace.  6.  It  implies  activity, 
and  tiie  vigorous  exercise  of  every  grace  and  virtue,  as  repentance^  faith,  hope, 
love,  patience,  (&c.,  in  opposition  to  indolence  and  sloth.  III.  The  vast  import- 
ance OF  THIS  watchfulness  AS  A  PREPARATION  FOB  EVEBT  DISPENSATION  OF  DlVUn 

Providence,  and  especially  for  death.     IV.  How  wb  may  be  enabled  to  take 

THIS  ADVICE,   AND   TO   "  WATCH,"   AND    WHAT  ARE   THE   MEANS  LEADING   TO    THAT    END. 

1.  We  must  not  presume  on  a  long  life,  which  is  a  most  dangerous  temptation,  and 
an  abundant  source  of  unwatchfulness ;  but  we  must  set  before  us,  and  have  always 
in  view,  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  the  present  Ufe,  and  the  certainty  and 
nearness  of  death.  2.  We  must  remember  that  unless  we  were  lords  of  our  own 
lives,  and  could  appoint  the  time  of  our  death,  we  can  never  be  exempt  from  the 
duty  of  a  wakeful  and  active  attention  to  our  spiritual  and  eternal  interests. 
3.  Those  whose  constitutions  are  peculiarly  feeble,  or  whose  circumstances  or  em- 
ployments expose  them  to  peculiar  danger,  or  who  are  arrived  at  old  age,  should 
consider  themselves  as  being  under  special  obligation  to  be  watchful.  4.  We  must 
be  particularly  on  our  guard  against  our  own  nature,  and  every  person  and  thing 
around  us,  which  tends  to  lull  us  asleep,  and  against  sensuahty  and  worldly  cares 
(Luke  xxi.  34).  6.  We  must  remember  that  ^onsands  are  found  sleeping,  even 
thousands  of  professors,  at  the  coming  of  their  Lord.  We  must  prav  much — a 
duty  frequently  inculcated  in  connection  with  watchfulness  (yer.  83 ;  Luke  xxi.  36 ; 
Eph.  vi.  18).    {J.  Beruon.) 

Ver.  37.  And  what  I  say  unto  yon,  I  say  onto  all,  WaX^x.—WatchfulneM  ;— 
I.  In  WHAT  DOES  THIS  WATCHFULNESS  CONSIST  ?  Gousider  it  in  reference  to 
the  coming  of  Christ,  and  our  solemn  appearance  before  Him.  In  this  respeot  it 
implies — 1.  Thoughtfulness.  Sinners  are  so  intent  upon  buying  and  selling  that 
they  have  neither  time  nor  inclination  to  think  of  anything  else.  It  would  be  an 
interruption  and  disturbance  to  them  to  be  told  of  Christ's  coming.  Every  incident 
of  life  should  bring  it  to  remembrance.  When  we  rise  in  the  morning,  it  is  natural 
for  us  to  think,  *•  Perhaps  before  night  I  may  be  at  the  end  of  my  journey."  2.  But 
watchfulness  also  implies  preparation.  II.  On  what  account  this  watohfulness 
IS  NS0S88ABY.  1.  Bccausc  many  are    ailed,  and  few  are  chosen.    In  every  field  there 


m.]  8T,  MARK,  553 

are  taxes  as  well  as  wheat ;  in  every  church  sinners  and  saints  are  blended  together. 
Watch,  therefore,  commiine  with  your  own  heart,  and  let  your  spirit  make  diligent 
search.  2.  Because  so  many  about  you  are  slothful.  3.  Because  you  know  not 
the  day,  nor  the  hour,  when  the  Son  of  Man  cometh.  Watch,  therefore,  while  ye 
have  the  light,  lest  darkness  come  upon  you.  4.  Because  blessed  are  the  dead 
which  die  in  the  Lord.  (S.  Lavington.)  Watchfulne$$  a  safeguard : — A  prompt 
resistance  of  temptation,  or  a  prompt  repentance  of  sin  as  soon  as  committed,  will 
commonly  extinguish  the  flames.  A  few  buckets  of  water  dashed  on  the  fire  as 
soon  as  it  kindled  in  De  Eoven  Street  would  have  saved  Chicago  from  ruin  in  1871. 
Had  David  exercised,  at  the  right  moment,  one  half  of  the  grace  which  afterwards 
permed  the  fifty-first  Psalm,  he  would  have  saved  his  own  character  and  Uriah's 
life.  The  same  rule  of  safety  applies  alike  to  sin  and  to  fire ;  the  first  spark  must 
be  extinguished.  When  a  man's  whole  soul  is  on  fire,  and  the  fabric  of  his  cha- 
racter has  been  consumed,  it  is  too  late  for  prevention  to  use  its  apparatus.  The 
ruined  structure  may  be  rebuilt  by  penitence  and  prayerful  living,  but  many  precious 
things  have  perished,  never  to  be  restored.  A  dear  friend  in  St.  John  writes  me 
that  he  shall  rebuild  his  house,  but  the  superb  library,  the  pictures,  and  the  keep- 
sakes are  gone  for  ever.  The  reformed  inebriate  may  save  the  remnant  of  his  life  ; 
but  the  best  days  of  it  are  in  ashes.  Wherefore  the  Omniscient  Master  has  uttered 
the  solemn  admonition,"!  say  unto  you  all,  watch  I"  {Dr.  Cuyler.)  Always 
ready  : — And  the  words  which  the  German  Commentator  wrote  over  his  study  door 
in  Hanover,  **  Always  to  be  ready,"  become  the  motto  of  Christian  lives.  And 
this,  because  the  unusual  is  for  ever  happening.  The  providences  of  storm,  acci- 
dent, and  disease ;  of  prosperity  and  loss,  life  and  death — all  or  any  one  of  them 
may  come  in  a  day.  The  contingencies  of  life  therefore  must  needs  be  reckoned  on  in 
all  our  estimates.  The  route  of  our  journeying  was  mapped  out,  the  trunks  were 
packed  and  the  day  of  our  departure  fixed ;  but  a  child  fell  sick,  or  the  mail  that 
morning  brought  a  message  of  death,  and  our  plans  were  changed.  Or,  weary  with 
long  labour,  and  with  wealth  enough  and  well  invested,  we  plan  to  spend  the  afternoon 
of  Ufe  in  ease  and  culture;  but  a  panic  comes,  the  bank  fails,  and  debtors  de- 
fault, and  unexpectedly  we  are  pushed  back  again  into  the  tread-mill  of  anxious  toil. 
Or,  we  counted  on  the  schedule  time  and  a  close  connection,  but  the  train  was 
a  half -hour  late,  and  so  we  missed  the  boat  and  lost  the  hohday.  {W.  H.  Davis.) 
Watching  in  work : — For  the  smith's  apron,  the  baker's  cap,  ^e  labourer's  blue 
jeans,  and  the  housewife's  gown  are  all  suitable  material  for  ascension  robes. 
And  he  watches  best  for  his  Lord's  coming  who  does  the  duty  and  the  service 
which  lie  next  to  him,  with  fidelity  to  men  and  love  to  God.  Be  that  duty  with 
ploughs  or  day-books,  in  the  office  with  its  briefs,  or  in  the  school-room  with  its 
classes,  or  busy  with  railroads  and  mines,  with  homes  or  farms,  qo  matter,  if 
the  currents  of  purpose  sweep  heavenward  and  the  graces  of  faiui  and  hope 
and  love  are  in  the  heart.  As  Israel  Putnam  left  the  plough  in  the  furrow 
and  mounted  a  field-horse  when  the  bugle  sounded  for  the  rallying  at  Cambridge ; 
as  the  minute-men  of  Middlesex  left  workshop  and  farm  at  Paul  Bevere's  call 
to  Lexington,  so  the  Master  would  have  men  work  and  watch.  {Ibid.)  Watch- 
fulness:— I.  What  re  meant  bt  spibittjal  watchtulnebs  7  1.  The  mind  must 
be  awake,  the  understanding,  the  rational  powers.  In  order  to  this  it  is  essential 
that  the  powers  should  be  exercised ;  in  other  words,  that  the  man  should  think. 
To  be  mentally  awake  there  must  be  life,  spontaneous  action,  and  coherence  in  the 
thoughts.  But  this  is  not  enough.  The  mind  may  be  awake  in  one  sense  and  yet 
dreaming  in  another.  Some  men's  minds  operate  too  fast,  and  some  too  slow.  Some 
attempt  to  discover  what  has  not  been  revealed  of  the  future ;  some  think  too  late. 
The  mind  must  think  seasonably.  It  must  also  act  upon  the  proper  objects,  or  it 
might  just  as  well  not  act  at  all.  The  powers  of  many  are  in  active  exercise,  but 
they  are  spent  on  trifles,  on  puzzles  in  theology.  It  thinks  to  no  practical  purpose. 
2.  The  conscience  as  well  as  the  intellect  must  be  awake — the  moral  as  well  as  the 
pnrely  intellectual  faculties.  There  must  be  perception  not  only  of  what  is  true, 
out  of  what  is  right.  There  must  be  liveliness  of  affection  no  less  than  of  intellect. 
We  must  not  only  feel  bound,  but  feel  disposed  to  do  the  will  of  God.  When  the 
man  thinks  in  earnest,  seasonably  of  right  objects  and  to  practical  purpose— when 
he  feels  his  obligations  and  his  failures  to  discharge  them-— when  he  earnestly 
desirss,  and  sincerely  loves,  what  he  admits  to  be  true  and  binding — ^then  he  may  ha 
said,  in  the  highest  spiritual  sense,  to  be  awake.  H.  Be  on  youb  ouABn.  The  im- 
portance of  the  charge  committed  to  our  care.  Although  essential,  it  is  not  enough 
to  be  awake.    The  sentry  is  awake ;  but  he  is  more,  he  is  upon  his  guard — his  mind 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB,  [chap,  xm, 

is  full  of  his  important  trust.  The  sentry  may  look  for  danger  only  in  one  quarter, 
and  be  overtaken  by  it  from  another  direction.  The  danger  is  a  complex  one.  He 
may  even  find  the  enemy  within  the  city  while  he  looks  without.  The  soul  may 
expose  itself  to  ruin,  not  only  by  actually  falling  asleep,  but  by  want  of  proper 
caution  when  awake — by  forgetting  the  danger  or  by  underrating  it— by  admitting 
its  reality,  but  losing  sight  of  its  proximity,  by  looking  for  it  from  one  quarter,  but 
forgetting  that  it  may  proceed  from  ethers,  by  looking  at  a  distance  when  the  enemy 
is  near  at  hand.  If  asked,  "  Who  is  the  enemy  against  which  spiritual  vigilance  is 
called  for,"  I  reply,  "  His  name  is  Legion."  IH.  How  shall  wb  obey  this  duty  f 
It  is  natural  to  ask.  Is  tJiere  not  some  safeguard,  some  tried  means  of  spiritual 
safety,  that  will  at  once  secure  our  vigilance  and  make  it  efficacious  f  Yes,  there  ia 
such  a  talisman,  and  its  name  is  prayer,  that  settled  bent  of  the  affections  which 
makes  actual  devotion  not  a  rare  experience,  but  the  normal  condition  of  the  soul. 
(J.  A.  Alexander,  DJ).)  The  nature  and  obligation  of  watchfulness ;— I.  Wb  must 
WATCH  THAT  WE  MAY  PREVENT  EVIL.  1.  We  must  watch  agaiust  sin.  2.  We  must 
guard  against  the  world.  3.  We  must  watch  against  the  temptations  of  the  devil. 
II.  We  must  WATCH  TO  DO  GOOD.  1.  We  have  to  discharge  all  the  duties  we  owe 
to  God,  and  our  fellow  Christians  and  neighbours ;  to  improve  all  our  talents  wisely 
and  faithfully.  2,  We  must  watch  to  do  all  the  good  that  God  has  commanded  us. 
3.  We  must  watch  to  do  good  in  its  proper  season.  4.  We  must  watch  to  do  good 
in  the  appointed  manner.  Application  :  1.  How  naturally  prone  we  are  to  become 
eeoure  and  careless.  2.  That  without  watchfulness  we  shall  become  an  easy  prey  to 
our  "Worst  enemy.  3.  Without  this  we  can  perform  no  duty  that  will  be  acceptable 
to  God.  4.  Let  us  join  prayer  to  watchfulness.  (Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermam,\ 
Helping  others  to  watch : — I  suppose  you  never  heard  of  a  man  of  the  name  oi 
Thomas  Bilby.    He  was  the  man  who  wrote  that  beautiful  hymO'— 

**  Here  we  suffer  grief  and  paiii, 

Here  we  meet  to  part  again ; 

In  heaven  we  part  no  more. 
Oh  1  that  will  be  joyful, 
When  we  meet  to  part  no  moie  t  ** 

He  wrote  It  for  me.  He  wrote  it  for  the  first  "  children's  service  "  I  erer  held.  That 
was  forty-five  years  ago,  since  I  held  my  first  "  children's  service."  I  was  at  Chelsea. 
I  may  be  wrong,  but  I  believe  that  was  the  first  "  children's  service  "  ever  held  in 
the  Church  of  England.  I  had  heard  of  "  catechising  "  before,  but  I  had  not  heard 
of  "  children's  services."  Mr.  Bilby  wrote  that  hymn  for  me,  for  my  first  "  children's 
service."  He  was  my  infant- schoolmaster.  Before  then  he  had  been  a  private  in 
the  Coldstream  Guards,  but  he  became  a  religious  man,  was  converted  while  in  the 
army.  There  were  several  religious  men  in  the  same  regiment,  and  they  were  very 
much  observed  by  all  the  other  soldiers,  who  watched  them  to  see  if  they  acted  in 
any  wrong  way,  because  they  called  themselves  Christians.  So  they  watched  that 
litUe  society,  these  few  religious  men  in  the  army,  and  if  ever  any  one  of  the  little 
band  should  see  another  going  to  do  anything  wrong,  get  into  a  bad  temper,  use  a 
bad  word,  or  going  to  fight  with  another  soldier,  he  would  go  and  whisper  to  that 
man,  "  Watch  I  "  No  one  else  could  hear  it.  Mr.  BUby  told  me  that  that  was  the 
rule  among  the  Christians  in  the  Coldstream  Guards.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Found 
at  our  post ;— Oh  I  there  are  so  manjr  places  where  we  must  watch.  There  was  a 
city  in  Italy,  I  daresay  you  know  of  it,  where,  more  than  a  thousand  years  ago,  tiie 
lava  from  Mount  Vesuvius  came  all  over  the  city,  and  covered  it  completely  with 
thick  lava.  I  have  been  there,  and  seen  it.  A  thousand  years  after  that  happened, 
it  was  discovered,  the  city  was  excavated,  and  they  dug  out  many  of  the  things  that 
were  therein.  Amongst  other  things  that  were  discovered,  there  was  a  man,  a 
soldier,  a  sentinel  at  his  post.  A  thousand  years  before,  that  man  had  been  killed 
at  his  post  by  the  lava,  and  there  he  was  found,  a  sentinel  still  at  his  post  1  A  lesson 
to  us.  A  great  deal  more  than  a  thousand  years  after,  he  was  found  still  at  his 
post.  Let  us  be  found  at  our  post,  wherever  God  has  placed  us,  when  He  comes ; 
when  this  world  is  covered,  as  it  will  be,  with  fire,  may  we  be  found  faithful  at  our 
posts  !  (Ibid.)  Danger  varied  and  where  least  expected : — Oh  1  the  danger  may 
come  in  a  very  different  way  from  the  way  you  expect.  Did  you  ever  read  iBsop'i 
Fables  ?  I  will  tell  you  one  of  a  doe  that  was  blind  of  one  eye  (have  you  read  the 
story  ?) ;  this  doe  was  very  cunning  and  clever,  for  she  knew  which  eye  was  blind, 
and  down  the  path  which  the  doe  used  to  go  she  always  kept  her  blind  eye  to  the 


zm.]  ST.  MARK.  561 

Bea  and  her  good  eye  to  the  land,  because  it  was  from  the  land  the  doe  thought  the 
danger  would  come.  So  the  doe  always  kept  tJie  blind  eye  to  the  sea  and  the  good 
eye  to  the  land.  One  day  a  poacher,  who  knew  all  about  that,  got  a  boat  and  went 
out  in  the  boat  on  the  sea,  and  from  the  boat  he  shot  the  poor  doe ;  and  as  the  poor 
doe  was  dying,  she  said,  so  the  fable  goes,  ••  Unhappy  watcher  1  poor  me  1  My 
danger  came  from  where  I  never  expected  it,  and  there  was  no  danger  where  I  did 
expect  it  I  "  You  may  be  like  that  poor  blind  doe  :  the  danger  comes  where  you 
don't  expect  it  1  Do  you  know  where  to  expect  the  danger  ?  "  Watch  1 "  I  believe 
a  hare  when  it  lies  in  the  grass  always  tries  to  see  out  of  its  eyes  backwards  ;  he 
thinks  the  danger  will  come  from  behind,  therefore  he  so  fixes  his  eyes  and  puts  his 
ears  back  that  he  cannot  see  what  is  before ;  he  is  always  looking  back.  Tour 
danger  comes  every  way.  Another  thing  I  want  you  to  watch  against  is  wandering 
thoughts.  (Ibid.)  Be  watchful : — L  Our  conduct.  IL  Oub  temper.  III.  Our 
WORDS.  IV.  Our  hkabt.  (T.  Heath.)  No  disappointment  to  watcJiers  for  Chritt  :  — 
Most  persons  know  what  watching  is.  There  are  few  who  have  not  learned  it  by 
experience.  In  nights  of  sickness  or  sleeplessness  you  have  watched  for  the  morning. 
You  have  watched  for  the  coming  of  expected  friends.  If  they  have  been  long 
separated  from  you,  if  they  have  gone  to  a  far  country,  how  anxiously  you  await  the 
day  of  their  return  1  It  is  a  work  of  love  to  make  your  home  bright  and  cheerful  for 
them,  and  sometimes  you  gather  flowers  that  they  may  add  their  greeting  to  yours. 
But,  alas  t  how  much  of  this  earthly  watching  ends  in  disappointment  1  The  ship 
that  is  bringing  the  absent  one  home  goes  down,  and  the  longed-for  sound  of  the 
familiar  step  and  voice  is  waited  for  in  vain.  Ambitious  souls  lay  plans  and  watch 
for  success.  Oftener  than  otherwise  those  plans  fail  and  come  to  nothing.  There 
has  been  more  than  one  mother  of  a  Sisera,  whose  son  has  gone  out  into  the  world 
flushed  with  the  expectation  of  victory  in  some  field  of  noble  strife.  She  has  looked 
through  the  lattice  of  her  hmnble  retirement  for  the  return  of  his  chariot,  and  for  a 
division  of  the  honour  gained,  and  kept  on  gazing  and  expecting,  not  knowing  that 
he  has  fallen  a  captive  to  temptation,  and  that  his  soul  was  pierced  through,  nailed 
to  the  earth,  and  dead.  .  .  .  Most  of  our  earthly  watching  is,  after  all,  sad  and 
fruitless.  It  always  is,  provided  we  look  only  for  what  this  world  can  bring  and 
preserve  in  our  keeping.  But  blessed  is  he  that  watches  for  Jesus,  and  for  His 
coming.  That  coming  will  be  indeed  a  blessed  morning,  the  bringing  in  of  an 
eternal  day,  one  through  all  of  whose  simny  hours  no  more  sickness  or  pain  will  be 
felt.  It  will  restore  our  absent  ones  to  us,  in  a  home  better  than  any  here,  a  man- 
sion bright  and  fragrant  with  flowers  fairer  than  any  of  earth.  It  will  mark  the 
victorious  return  of  every  true  soldier  of  the  Gross,  and  his  joyous  coronation.  It 
will  reveal  the  multiplied  richness  and  value  of  every  treasure  given  into  the  Lord's 
hand.  {E.  E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  The  interval  between  Christ's  going  and  coming  : — 
The  first  advent  is  the  pivot  on  which  all  turns  for  the  life  below ;  the  second 
advent  will  be  the  point  round  which  all  will  be  grouped  for  the  life  above.  Faith 
looks  back  at  the  Cross,  and  finds  peace.  Hope  looks  forward  to  the  coronation, 
and  gathers  strength.  Meanwhile  the  Master's  eye  and  heart  are  towards  His 
people,  and  He  gives  this  motto.  I.  There  are  things  which  suooest  watchful- 
ness. 1.  The  tendency  of  the  body  to  induce  sleep.  2.  The  influence  of  the  world 
to  beget  sloth.  8.  The  design  of  the  enemy  to  rob  us  while  we  slumber.  II.  Things 
WHICH  PROMOTE  WATCHFULNESS.  1.  Waiting.  2.  Working.  3.  Worshipping.  III. 
Things  which  repay  watchfulness.  1.  Many  a  glorious  sight  is  missed  by  those 
who  will  not  watch.  2.  The  night  watches  give  an  insight  into  depths  of  space.  3. 
The  morning  watches  tell  cA  unthought  glories  in  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  4.  The 
men  who  watch  look  out  of  self.  IV.  Things  which  encourage  watchfulness.  1. 
Time  is  too  precious  to  waste  in  sleep.  2.  A  restless  conscience.  3.  A  longing 
desire.  4.  A  burning  hope.  {J.  Richardson.)  Watch — I.  Against  sin.  Put  on  the 
Christian  soldier's  armour  to  preserve  you  from  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked.  Be  in 
earnest.  You  may  be  armed  from  head  to  foot,  and  yet  false  in  your  Christianity. 
Some  time  since  I  remember  walking  across  the  tesselated  pavement  of  a  grand  hall 
in  the  mansion  of  one  of  England's  noblest  bom.  In  a  niche  I  saw,  by  the  light 
which  streamed  through  the  painted  glass  of  an  oriel  window,  a  statue.  I  thought 
at  first  it  was  a  man.  I  walk  d  across  the  pavement,  and  drew  near  to  examine  the 
figure.  He  had  upon  his  head  a  helmet  of  iron ;  the  vizor  was  drawn  down  over  his 
face,  concealing  the  features ;  he  held  on  his  arm  a  long  shield  that  reached  to  the 
very  ground  ;  in  his  hand  was  grasped  an  iron  sword,  double  edged  ;  he  wore  on  his 
boeom  a  strong  breast-plate ;  his  limbs  were  covered  with  greaves  and  rings ;  hii 
feet  were  also  shod  with  iron.    I  drew  near,  and  began  to  examine  this  well-pro- 


5M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  n?, 

teoted  figure.  Presently,  to  my  surprise,  I  saw  something  protruding ;  it  was  a 
piece  of  straw.  On  walking  round,  I  saw  some  more  straw  sticking  out  through  the 
greaves  of  the  armour.  I  soon  found  this  was  a  man  in  armour — if  you  will, — but 
stuffed  with  straw.  And  so,  there  may  be  many  armed  with  the  spiritual  panoply — 
ready  to  quote  texts,  apt  with  religious  arguments,  apparently  respectable  and  sin- 
cere,— whose  religion  is  false,  hollow,  and  worthless.  Unless  you  are  watching 
against  all  inroads  of  the  enemy,  and  pressing  onward  in  the  battle,  you  are  none 
of  Christ's.  II.  Against  temptation.  Satan  comes  in  many  guises.  Be  on  the  look* 
out.  Don't  let  him  deceive  you  with  specious  arguments  and  seductions.  III.  Fob 
souu.  Seek  to  turn  others  into  the  right  way.  Draw  them  by  love  and  with  care. 
Do  not  let  an  opportunity  slip,  or  you  will  regret  it  for  ever.  There  was  one  whose 
hand  I  held  in  mine  ;  with  whom  I  trod — the  narrow  way  that  leadeth  unto  life  t 
No — the  bread  road  that  leadeth  unto  hell ;  and  he  has  departed,  he  has  been 
removed  beyond  the  reach  of  my  voice.  I  will  tell  yon  how  it  was.  Bred  early  to 
a  knowledge  of  God,  I  became  a  backslider,  and  I  wandered  with  him  for  years  in 
the  road  that  leads  to  hell.  I  left  this  country,  and  wandered  over  the  shores  of 
Mexico,  Texas,  the  West  Indies,  and  through  the  Caribbean  Seas ;  and  then  returned 
home,  after  having  been  a  long  while  away.  I  went  to  where  my  friend  lived,  and 
asked,  "  Where  is  so  and  so  ?  "  The  person  hesitated.  "  Where  is  he  ?  Is  he  here, 
or  in  another  part  of  the  country  f  "  The  person  turned  pale.  I  said,  **  Tell  me — 
I  must  have  it — where  is  he  ?  "  "  Well,"  was  the  reply,  "  he  is  dead."  "  Dead  I  " 
I  felt  petrified.  Then  I  demanded,  "  Where  did  he  die  ?  "  The  person  said,  "  He 
went  up  to  London ;  there  he  ran  a  course  of  dissipation,  and  then  he  was  suddenly 
cut  off  by  the  hand  of  God."  Now,  do  you  know,  I  have  never  lost  the  remembrance 
of  that.  Sometimes  I  close  my  door  and  go  on  my  knees  in  prayer,  and  beseech 
God  to  blot  out  the  black  mark.  And  sometimes,  when  I  lie  down  to  sleep,  I  see 
staring  at  me  through  the  gloom  a  pale  face  that  I  know — it  is  the  face  of  that 
damned  man.  Aye,  methinks,  if  he  might  speak,  he  would  ourse  me ;  he  would 
say,  "  God  curse  you  1 "  "Why?"  "Because  you  might  have  preached  to  me 
Christ  Jesus ;  and  now  I  am  lost."  Let  not  this  reproach  be  cast  upon  you.  IV.  Fob 
Christ.  With  affection.  With  patience.  With  perseverance.  {H.  O.  Guinness.) 
Watch  for  death ; — There  is  nothing  more  certain  than  death  ;  nothing  more  uncer- 
tain than  the  time  of  dying.  I  will  therefore  be  prepared  for  that  at  all  times  which 
may  come  at  any  time,  and  must  come  at  one  time  or  another.  I  shall  not  hasten 
iny  death  by  being  still  ready,  but  sweeten  it.  It  makes  me  not  die  the  sooner,  but 
the  better.  {A.  Warwick.)  Watch : — Men  hear  these  warnings  as  general  dis- 
courses, and  let  them  pass  so ;  they  apply  them  not ;  or,  if  they  do,  it  is  readily  to 
3ome  other  person.  But  they  are  addressed  to  all,  that  each  one  may  regulate  him- 
self by  them  :  and  so  these  Divine  truths  are  like  a  well-drawn  picture,  which  looki 
particularly  upon  every  one,  amongst  the  great  multitude,  that  looks  ftt  it.  {Areh- 
(mhop  Leiyhton,) 


CHAPTEB  XIV. 


Vkbs.  1-9.  And  ^)6ing  In  Bethany  In  the  honse  of  Simon  the  Iwper,— Working 
for  Christ : — The  home  of  Mary  and  Martha  and  Lazarus  at  Bethany,  about  two 
miles  from  Jerusalem  across  the  Mount  of  Olives,  had  been  the  scene  of  some  of 
the  calmest  and  happiest  moments  of  our  Lord's  life.  We  know  something  of  the 
sweetness  of  a  quiet  home  after  work  and  anxiety  and  worry— the  labourer  knows 
it,  the  man  of  business  knows  it.  We  can  therefore  understand  how  restful  to  the 
Lord  Jesus,  after  those  angry  scenes  that  had  been  gathering  around  Him  all  day  in 
the  temple,  were  the  peaceful  evenings  of  this  week  in  the  home  at  Bethany.  There 
are  two  things  which  we  should  notice  about  that  home  as  we  follow  Jesus  thither. 
I.  It  was  a  homk  of  true  family  love,  or  Jesus  would  not  have  sought  its  shelter  so 
often  as  He  did.  What  tender  memories  cluster  round  the  childhood  that  has  been 
spent  in  such  a  home !  What  a  foretaste  of  the  home  beyond  the  grave,  the  haven 
where  we  would  be !  II.  It  was  a  houx  where  Jesus  always  was  a  welcoub  ouest, 
whither  He  was  summoned  in  every  trouble,  where  He  was  the  Companion,  the 
Guide,  and  the  familiar  Friend.  Are  our  homes  like  that  ?  Is  He  felt  and  acknow- 
ledged to  be  the  Master  of  the  house?  the  unseen  Guest  at  every  meal?  the  unseen 
Hearer  of  every  conversation  ?  Is  His  blessing  asked  on  every  meal,  on  every  under- 
taking, on  every  event  ?    But  now,  as  we  stand  with  Jesus  at  Bethany,  look  what 


ST.  MARK.  657 


one  of  the  sisters  is  doing  to  Him  as  He  sits  at  meat,  either  in  her  own  house,  or  in 
one  of  a  similar  type  where  she  is  hardly  less  at  home.  "  Then  took  Mary  a  pound 
of  ointment  of  spikenard,  very  costly,  and  anointed  the  feet  of  Jesus."  Beloved, 
Is  there  not  something  like  tiiat  that  we  can  do  for  Jesus  in  this  Holy  Week  ?  Is 
ihere  not  something  that  we  can  bring  and  lay  at  His  feet  while  we  are  watching  with 
him  through  the  hours  of  His  Passion  ?  Something  that  will  be  an  earnest  of  our 
love — some  secret  sin  which  it  would  really  cost  us  something  to  give  up  ?  And 
cannot  we  find  something,  too,  in  our  family  life,  or  in  the  part  we  have  to  play  in 
it  ?  Is  there  not  some  new  departure  we  might  make  for  Jesus'  sake,  to  make  our 
homes  a  little  less  unworthy  to  be  His  dwelling-place?  (Henry  S.  Miles,  M.A.) 
Mary  anointing  Christ ;— What  she  is  said  to  have  done.  This  standard  for  our 
service  is,  you  perceive,  at  once  stimulating  and  encouraging.  It  is  stimulating,  for 
we  are  never  to  think  tiiat  we  have  done  enough  while  there  is  anything  more  we 
can  do ;  and  it  is  encouraging,  for  it  tells  us  that  though  we  can  do  but  little,  that 
little  will  be  accepted,  nay,  considered  by  our  gracious  Master  as  enough.  We  are 
not  to  condemn  ourselves,  or  to  repine,  because  we  can  do  no  more.  But  something 
olse  must  be  noticed  here.  I.  Mabt  did  more  than  shb  was  awabe  op  doino.  It  is 
an  affecting  circumstance,  brethren,  that  wherever  our  Lord  was,  and  however  en- 
gaged, His  death  seems  to  have  been  always  in  His  mind.  It  was  in  His  mind  here 
at  a  social  meal,  and  what  we  should  have  called  a  happy  one,  with  those  He  loved 
the  very  best  on  earth  around  Him,  and  with  the  love  of  some  of  them  towards  Him 
in  the  liveliest  exercise.  It  is  a  cheering  truth,  brethren,  that  we  can  never  measure 
the  use  to  which  a  gracious  Saviour  may  turn  our  poor  doings.  As  His  designs  in 
our  afflictions  often  lie  deeper  than  we  can  penetrate,  so  do  His  designs  in  the  ser- 
vices to  which  He  prompts  us.  We  do  this,  and  we  do  that,  and  we  mourn  that  it 
is  so  little,  and  that  so  little  good  to  our  fellow,  men  and  so  little  honour  to  our  God 
will  come  from  it ;  but  we  know  not  what  will  come  from  it.  That  little  thing  is  in 
the  hand  of  a  great,  omnipotent  God,  and  His  mighty  arm  can  bend  and  turn  it  we 
know  not  how  or  whither.  U.  We  must  now  ask  what  Maby's  motives  probably 
WEBB  in  this  extraordinary  act.  1.  The  strongest  of  them  perhaps  was  a  feeling  of 
grateful  love  for  her  blessed  Lord.  He  had  just  raised  her  brother  from  the  dead  ; 
had  just  shown  a  sympathy  and  affection  for  herself  and  Martha,  which  might  well 
astonish  her ;  had  put  an  honour  on  her  family  she  must  have  felt  to  be  surpass- 
ingly great.  "  Thank  Him,"  she  perhaps  said  within  herself,  "  I  could  not  when  Laza- 
rus came  forth.  I  cannot  now.  My  tongue  will  not  move,  and  if  it  would,  words  are 
too  poor  to  thank  Him.  But  what  can  I  do  ?  Kings  and  great  men  are  sometimes 
anointed  at  their  splendid  banquets.  My  Lord  is  to  be  at  Simon's  feast.  I  will  go 
and  buy  the  most  precious  ointment  Jerusalem  affords,  and  at  that  feast  I  will 
anoint  Him.  It  will  be  nothing  to  Him,  but  if  He  wiU  suffer  it,  it  will  be  much  to 
me."  Do  something  to  show  that  you  are  thankful  for  blessings,  though  that  some- 
thing be  but  little.  2.  Mary  was  probably  influenced  also  by  another  motive— a  desire 
to  put  honour  on  Christ.  "  Let  others  hate  Him,  and  spurn  Him,"  she  must  have 
said,  "  Oh  for  some  opportunity  of  showing  how  I  honour  Him."  It  is  an  easy  thing, 
brethren,  to  honour  Christ  when  others  are  honouring  Him,  but  real  love  delights  to 
honour  Him  when  none  others  will.  IIL  Let  us  kow  come  to  the  judgment  men 
PASSED  ON  Mary's  conduct.    They  censured  it,  and  strongly.     Men  are  generally 

made  angry  by  any  act  of  love  for  Christ  which  rises  above  their  own  standard 

above  their  own  ideas  of  the  love  which  is  due  to  Him.  They  can  generally,  too,  find 
something  in  the  warm-hearted  Christian's  conduct  to  give  a  colour  to  their  dis- 
pleasure. "Why  was  this  waste  of  the  ointment  made?"  It  was  a  plausible 
question  ,  it  seemed  a  reasonable  one.  And  observe,  too,  men  can  generally  assign 
some  good  motive  in  themselves  for  the  censure  they  pass  on  others.  And  mark, 
also,  Christ's  real  disciples  will  sometimes  join  with  others  in  censuring  the  zealous 
Christian.  "  There  were  some  that  had  indignation."  But  yet  again,  the  censures 
passed  on  the  servant  of  Christ  often  have  their  origin  in  some  one  hypocritical,  bad 
man.  Who  began  this  cavilling,  this  murmuring  against  Mary  ?  We  turn  to  St. 
John's  Gospel,  and  he  tells  us  it  was  Judas — Judas  Iscariot,  the  betrayer.  Trace  to 
their  source  the  bitter  censures  with  which  many  a  faithful  Christian  is  for  a  time 
assailed,^  you  will  often  find  it  in  the  secret,  unthought  of  baseness  of  some  low, 
hypocritical  man.  IV.  The  history  now  brings  before  us  the  notice  oub  Lord  took 
ow  THIS  wohan's  conduct.  Hc,  first,  vindicated  it.  And  observe  how  He  vindicates 
Biary — with  a  wonderful  gentleness  towards  those  who  had  blamed  her.  The  prac- 
tical lesson  is,  brethren,  to  adore  the  blessed  Jesus  for  taking  us  and  our  conduct 
under  His  protection,  and  while  acting  through  His  grace  as  He  would  have  as,  to 


568  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nv. 

feel  ourselves  safe,  and  more  than  safe,  in  His  hands.  "  He  that  toucheth  you,** 
He  says,  "  toucheth  the  apple  of  My  eye."  But  this  is  not  all — our  Saviour  recom- 
penses tiiis  grateful  woman  as  well  as  vindicates  her.  **  Wheresoever,"  He  says, 
"  this  gospel  shall  be  preached,  throughout  the  whole  world,  this  also  that  she  hath 
done  shall  be  spoken  of  for  a  memorial  of  her."  Our  Lord  had  said  long  before, 
"  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you,  and  shall  say  aU 
manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  My  sake.  Kejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad, 
for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven."  But  here  He  anticipates  this  ;  there  is  a  re- 
ward for  this  woman  on  the  earth,  and  a  wide  and  large  one.  And  now,  turning  from 
Mary  and  her  conduct,  let  us  think  of  ourselves  and  our  conduct.  What  have  we 
done  for  Christ  ?  "  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us  " — there  is  the  secret  of 
Christian  obedience.  Christian  self-denial.  Christian  devotedness.  (C.  Bradley, 
M.A.)  The  box  of  ointment : — I.  The  natubb  or  the  act.  It  was  done  to  Christ. 
It  was  inspired  by  a  right  sentiment.  If  we  give  all  that  we  possess  to  Christ  still  it 
is  less  than  He  deserves.  Her  regret  is  not  that  she  gave  so  much,  but  so  httle. 
n.  The  lessons.  An  action  is  precisely  of  the  value  of  the  motive  by  which  it  has 
been  actuated.  We  must,  moreover,  take  into  account  the  difference  of  positions 
and  mental  tendencies.  Good  intention,  which  is  no  other  thing  than  love,  may 
deceive  itself,  without  doubt,  but  it  does  not  always  deceive  itself.  In  the  Divine 
flame  which  the  Spirit  kindles  the  light  is  inseparable  from  the  heat.  He  who  seeks 
to  do  the  will  of  God  will  know  the  mind  of  God.  Even  in  giving  to  the  poor  it  iff 
possible  to  make  serious  mistakes.  True  charity  does  not  open  the  heart  without 
expanding  the  mind.  (Alexander  Vinet,  D.D.)  A  woman's  memorial: — It  weD 
exhibits,  in  a  single  illustration,  the  appropriateness,  the  motive,  the  measure,  and 
the  reward  of  Christian  zeal  (Mark  xiv.  3-9).    I.  Wb  stabt  out  with  a  becooni- 

TION,    ON    ODB   PART,    OF    A    SETTLED    BULB   OF   ACTIVITT.      All    of    Christ' 8  frieuds  are 

expected  to  do  something  for  Him.  1.  Work  and  sacrifice  are  not  inconsistent  with 
even  the  highest  spirituality.  For  this  is  the  same  Mary  whose  other  story  is 
BO  familiar  to  us  all.  She  was  the  one  who  used  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet  (Luke  x.  39)  in 
all  the  serene  quiet  of  communion  with  her  Lord ;  yet  now  who  would  say  that  Mary 
at  the  Master's  head  might  not  be  as  fine  a  theme  for  the  artist's  pencil  ?  Piety  is 
practical,  and  practical  piety  is  not  the  less  picturesque  and  attractive  because  it  has 
in  such  an  instance  become  demonstrative.  2.  Our  Lord  always  needed  help  while 
He  was  on  the  earth.  There  were  rich  women  among  those  whom  He  had  helped,  at 
whose  generous  hands  He  received  money  (Luke  viii.  2,  3).  And  His  cause  needs 
help  now.  3.  It  is  a  mere  temptation  of  the  devil  to  assert  that  one's  work  for 
Jesus  Christ  is  vitiated  by  the  full  gladness  a  loving  soul  feels  in  it.  Some  timid 
and  self-distrustful  believers  are  stumbled  by  the  fear  that  their  sacrifices  for  our 
blessed  Master  are  meritless  because  they  enjoy  making  them.  There  used  to  be 
rehearsed  an  old  legend  of  an  aged  prophetess  passing  through  a  crowd  with  a  censer 
of  fire  in  one  hand  and  a  pitcher  of  water  in  the  other.  Being  asked  why  she  carried 
80  singular  a  burden,  she  rephed,  *•  This  fire  is  to  bum  heaven  with,  and  this  water 
is  to  quench  hell  with :  so  that  men  may  hereafter  serve  God  without  desire  for 
reward  or  fear  of  retribution."  Such  a  speech  may  appear  becoming  for  a  mere 
devotee's  utterance;  but  there  is  no  warrant  for  anything  like  it  in  the  Bible. 
Heaven  is  offered  for  our  encouragement  in  zeal  (Bom.  ii.  7).  Hell  is  often  exhibited 
that  it  might  be  feared  (Matt.  x.  28).    U.  Next  to  this,  the  story  of  this  alabaster 

box  suggests  A  LESSON  CONCEBNINO  THE  MOTIVE  WHICH  UNDEBLIES  ALL  TBUB  GhBISTIAN 

ACTIVITY.  1.  In  the  case  of  this  woman,  we  are  told  that  her  action  grew  out  of  her 
grateful  affection  for  her  Lord.  Every  gesture  shows  her  tenderness ;  she  wiped 
His  very  feet  with  her  own  hair  (John  xii.  3).  This  was  what  gave  her  offering  its 
supreme  value.  2.  Herein  hes  the  principle  which  has  for  all  ages  the  widest  appli- 
cation. It  is  not  so  much  what  we  do  for  our  Saviour,  nor  the  way  in  which  we  do 
it,  as  it  is  the  feeling  which  prompts  us  in  the  doing  of  anything  that  receives  His 
welcome.  It  is  the  affection  pervading  the  seal  which  renders  the  zeal  precious. 
3.  It  may  as  well  be  expected  that  the  ^dness  which  proceeds  from  pure  love  wiU 
sometimes  meet  with  misconstruction.  Those  who  look  upon  zeal  far  beyond  their 
own  in  disinterested  affection,  will  frequently  be  overheard  to  pass  uncharitable 
mis  judgments  upon  it.  We  find  (John  xii.  4-6]  that  it  was  only  Judas  Isoariot 
after  all,  on  this  occasion,  who  took  the  lead  m  assigning  wrong  motives  to  the 
woman,  and  he  did  not  so  much  care  for  the  poor  as  he  did  for  his  own  bag  of  trea- 
sure. No  matter  how  much  our  humble  endeavours  to  honour  our  Lord  Jesus  may 
be  derided,  it  will  be  helpful  to  remember  they  are  fuUy  appreciated  by  Him.  4.  This 
18  the  principle  which  uplifts  and  enobles  even  commonplace  zeal     When  trot 


CHAT.  30?.]  8T.  MARK,  659 

honest  loYO  it  fhe  motiye,  do  we  not  all  agree  that  it  is  slight  ministrations  more 
than  great  oonspicnous  efforts  which  touoh  the  heart  of  one  who  receives  them  '^ 
The  more  onnoticed  to  every  eye  except  onrs,  the  more  dear  are  the  glances  of  ten- 
derness we  receive.  It  is  the  delicacy,  not  the  bulk,  of  the  kindness  which  constitutes 
its  charm.  lY.  The  final  lesson  of  this  story  la  concebnino  thk  bbwabd  or  Cbbis- 
TiAN  ZBAL.  Higher  encomium  was  never  pronounced  than  that  which  this  woman 
received  from  ^e  Master.  1.  It  was  Jesus  that  gave  the  approval.  Set  that  over 
against  the  fault-filnding  of  Jadas  1  If  we  do  our  duty,  we  have  a  right  to  appeal 
away  from  anybody  who  carps.  When  Christ  justifies,  who  is  he  that  condemns  'I 
Some  of  OS  have  read  of  the  ancient  classic  orator,  who,  having  no  favour  in  the 
tiieatre,  went  into  the  temple  and  gestured  before  the  statues  of  the  gods  ;  he  said 
they  better  understood  him.  Thus  may  maligned  believers  retire  from  the  world 
that  misjudges  them,  and  comfort  themselves  with  Jesus'  recognition.  2.  Jesus 
said  this  woman  should  be  remembered  very  widely — wherever  the  gospel  should  go. 
Men  know  what  is  good  and  fine  when  they  see  it.  And  they  stand  ready  to  com 
mend  it.    Even  Lord  Byron  had  wit  enough  to  see  that — 

**  The  drying  up  a  single  tear  has  more 
Of  honest  fame,  than  shedding  seas  of  gore.'* 

8c«M  ol  the  grandest  lives  in  histoiy  have  had  only  little  show  to  make.  Gare- 
burdened  women,  invalids  on  couches,  ill-clad  and  ill-fed  sons  of  toil,  maid-servants, 
man-servants,  apprentices  and  hirelings  with  few  unoccupied  hours,  timid  hearts, 
imeduoated  minds,  sailors  kept  on  ships,  soldiers  held  in  garrisons — these,  with  only 
ft  poor  chance,  have  done  such  service  that  the  world  remembers  them  with  its 
widest  renown  (Faa.  oxiL  5,  6).  8.  It  was  just  this  parable  of  Jesus  which  b^same 
Mary's  memoriaL  A  word  sometimes  lasts  longer  than  a  marble  slab.  We  must 
learn  to  be  content  with  the  approval  of  God  and  our  own  consciences.  Nothing 
will  ever  be  forgotten  that  is  worUi  a  record  in  God's  book.  Those  who  die  in  the 
Lord  wUl  find  tiheir  works  follow  them,  and  the  worthy  fame  remains  behind :  "The 
memory  of  the  jost  is  blessed ;  bat  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot"  Only  we 
are  to  recollect  that  love  alone  gives  character  and  value  to  all  zeal.  That 
was  a  most  suggestive  remark  of  old  Thomas  4  Eempis:  *'He  doeth  much, 
who  loveth  much ;  and  he  also  doeth  much,  who  doeth  well."  (C.  S,  Robin- 
mm^  D.D.)  The  iocrifiee  of  love: — ^I.  Tna  baobhtoe  or  love.  Observe — 1. 
What  Maiy  gave.  The  alabastron  of  precious  and  perfumed  ointment  Bare 
ftnd  costly.  Love  does  not  measure  its  offering  by  a  bare  utility;  nor  by 
A  legal  okum.  3.  What  Mary  did.  Anointed  with  this  precious  ointment.  Things 
wortiiy  of  our  highest  uses  are  honoured  when  used  in  the  lowliest  uses  of  reli- 
gion. What  is  worthy  of  our  head,  honoured  by  being  laid  at  the  Master's  feet. 
XL  Tb>  bbbttks  or  covbtousness.  Judas's  criticism.  1.  Waste  I  because  his  plan 
was  not  adopted.  He  thought  not  of  the  good  that  was  done,  bat  of  what  nught 
have  been  done.  2.  He  had  an  excuse.  The  poor  I  He  was  one  of  those  who  are 
always  **  looking  at  home ; "  who  do  so  with  shut  eyes ;  who  see  little,  and  do  less. 
ni.  Thi  aboument  or  wisdom.  1. 1  shall  not  be  here  long.  Jesus  is  not  long — in 
this  liffr— with  stay  of  as.  Let  as  make  much  of  this  guest.  Do  what  we  can  now. 
S.  You  will  always  have  the  poor.  These  Jesus  loved  and  cared  for.  This  legacy 
was  not  forgotten  (Acts  iv.  31-87).  Nor  are  the  spiritually  poor  forgotten.  Learn— 
1.  To  love  Jesus  and  show  it.  2.  That  no  gift  consecrated  to  Jesus  is  wasted.  3. 
The  best  gift  is  a  broken  heart,  the  perfume  of  whose  penitence  and  faith  is  plea- 
sant to  the  Lord.  {J,  C,  Gray.)  Profiuion  not  watte : — L  A  motive.  Mary  no 
doubt  intended  weU.  Her  ri^t  intention  would  hardly  have  been  questioned  by 
the  murmuring  disciples  themselves.  Whatever  may  be  said  of  her  work,  nothing 
can  be  said  of  her  motive  but  that  it  was  purely  and  altogether  good.  Now  motive 
is  of  first  importance  in  the  estimate  we  form  of  any  act  whatever,  small  or  great. 
Motive  of  some  kind  there  mast  be,  or  the  act  cannot  be  moral ;  it  becomes  merely 
mechanicaL  The  motive  too  must  be  good,  or  the  act  oaunot  be  otherwise  than  bad. 
It  need  not,  however,  appear  so,  and  frequently  does  not.  Words  are  not  neces- 
sarily the  garb  of  troth,  nor  appearances  the  signs  and  pledges  of  corresponding 
realities.  However  good  the  motive  may  be  it  does  not  follow  that  the  act  as  such 
will  be  equally  good.  That  is,  there  may  be  something  more  and  higher  in  the 
motive  wan  appears  in  the  act.  This  may  arise  from  ignorance,  from  our  not 
knowing  how  to  make  the  act  better ;  or  it  may  result  from  the  nature  of  the  act 
Itself,  AS  being  aaaentiaUy  humble  and  commonplace.    Bat  a  deeper  oaiMe  is  found 


560  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oHii.  rrr. 

in  oar  inability  to  do  what  we  wotild.  We  seem  to  do  our  very  beat,  we  put  forth 
a  ad  strain  our  resources  to  the  utmost,  and  yet,  after  all,  come  short,  and  some- 
times sadly  short,  of  our  preconceived  desires  and  hopes.  There  is,  however, 
another  an^  brighter  side  to  this.  Our  work  is  not  considered  absolutely  by  itself, 
rhe  motive  that  inspires  it  counts  for  something,  it  may  be  for  much.  U.  From 
the  motive  to  this  act  let  us  pass  to  the  act  itself,  with  especiaIi  befeben0e  to 
TEE  IMPBES8I0N  PRODUCED  BY  IT  ON  THOSE  WHO  WITNESSED  IT.  Mary  intended  well, 
I  have  said  :  she  also  as  certainly  did  well.  This  appears  in  part  from  what  has 
been  already  said,  but  the  fact  deserves  and  will  repay  still  further  exposition.  "  She 
hath  done  what  she  could,"  is  the  testimony  borne  to  her  conduct  by  the  Saviour 
Himself,  which  alone  were  commendation  sufficient,  as  it  implies  that  she  had  acted 
up  to  the  full  measure  of  her  ability.  But  to  this  He  adds :  "  She  hath  wrought  a 
good  work  on  Me,"  thus  greatly  enlarging  and  heightening  the  commendation, 
especially  as  the  term  rendered  "  good  "  means  what  is  noble  and  beautiful.  Her 
work  was  thus  good  because  it  was  the  spontaneous  overflow  of  a  profoundly  grateful 
affection  for  the  restoration  of  her  brother  Lazarus  to  life.  It  was  thus  good  be- 
cause it  was  in  effect  an  act  of  complete  abandonment  and  loving  devotion  of  her 
whole  self  to  Christ  as  her  one  and  only  Saviour.  No  doubt  there  was  something 
extraordinary  in  the  form  which  this  declaration  took  ;  but  then  there  was  some- 
thing extraordinary  in  the  sensibility  of  Mary's  nature.  But  if  Judas  was  first 
and  chief  he  was  quickly  followed  by  others ;  for  evil  is  ahke  contagious  and 
confederate.  Complaining  is  easy,  and  also  infectious,  and  is  often  practised  by 
some  as  though  it  were  a  virtue.  Mark,  then,  our  Lord's  reply  to  their  common 
protest,  "  Let  her  alone ;  why  trouble  ye  her  ? "  &o.  A  restrictive  economy, 
He  virtually  tells  us,  a  bare  and  rigid  utility  is  not  at  any  time  the  distinguishing 
characteristic  of  what  is  purest  and  noblest  in  human  conduct.  Utility  has  its  own 
sphere.  Economy  is  a  duty  even  where  it  is  not  a  necessity.  But  there  are  whole 
legions  of  thought  and  action  into  which  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  can  enter, 
or,  entering,  can  reign  alone.  There  must  be  beauty  as  well  as  utility,  there  must 
be  generosity  as  well  as  economy,  there  must  be  splendour,  magnificence,  profusion, 
seeming  waste  even,  or  human  Hfe  will  lose  much  of  its  charm.  The  Uke  pro- 
fusion is  seen  in  the  Word  of  God  as  in  His  works.  Shall  men,  then,  in  the  service 
of  faith  and  piety,  be  so  unlike  God  as  to  confine  themselves  within  the  narrow 
range  of  a  definite  economy,  or  bind  themselves  to  the  strict  and  positive  demands 
of  a  rigorous  utility  ?  Is  this  what  they  do  in  regard  to  any  other  kind  of  service, 
and  with  reference  to  interests  that  are  purely  secular  and  material  ?  Shall  it  be 
called  waste  for  a  vehement  and  self-forgetting  love  to  pour  costly  perfumes  on  the 
head  and  feet  of  an  adored.  Eedeemer,  and  yet  not  waste  to  consume  them  daily  in 
the  gratification  of  a  bodily  sense  ?  No  one  inspired  only  with  what  is  called  the 
"  enthusiasm  of  humanity  *  vnll  say  so.  Still  less  will  any  one  who  can  profess  in 
the  words  of  the  apostle,  as  giving  the  animating  and  impellent  principle  of  his 
whole  life,  "The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  me."  But,  in  truth,  utility  has  a  much 
larger  sphere  than  is  usually  assigned  to  it.  That  is  not  the  only  useful  thing  which 
simply  helps  a  man  to  exist;  nor  is  it,  when  viewed  comparatively  with  other  things, 
even  the  most  useful.  The  same  principle  applies  to  faith  and  love,  especially  to 
the  latter;  while  of  this  latter  it  may  further  be  said,  that  its  utility  is  greatest 
when  utility  is  least  the  motive  to  its  exercise.  That  is  not  love  which  looks  directly 
to  personal  advantage,  and  knows  how  to  regulate  its  fervour  by  prudential  consi- 
derations of  profit  and  loss.  HI.  Maby's  becompense.  1.  Christ  vindicated  her 
conduct  against  the  angry  complaints  of  His  disciples.  2.  He  did  more :  He 
accepted  and  commended  her  work  as  "  good  " — as  truly  and  nobly  beautiful.  This 
itself  would  be  recompense  enough  for  her.  She  could,  and  would,  desire  nothing 
more,  and  nothing  better.  What  more  and  better,  indeed,  could  any  one  desire,  for 
«,ny  work  whatever,  than  the  applauding  "  well  done  "  of  Jesus?  3.  Yet  more  there 
was  in  her  case.  She  received  assurance  of  everlasting  reputation  and  honour. 
Here  was  marvellous  and  unparalleled  distinction,  no  deed  of  merely  human  creature 
•was  ever  promised  a  renown  so  great.  And  though  this  renown  could  of  itself  add 
but  little  to  her  future  felicity,  yet  the  promise  of  it,  as  indicating  what  the  SaAriour 
thought  of  her  deed,  must  have  been  to  her  a  deep  and  unfailing  source  of  most  holy 
satisfaction  and  delight.  Nothing  of  this  kind  is,  of  course,  possible  to  us ;  nor  need 
we  desire  it.  We  may,  however,  learn  from  it,  or  rather  from  both  forms  of  Mary'i 
recompense  combined,  that  whatever  is  done  for  Christ  shall  not,  even  to  ourselves, 
be  in  vain.  4.  With  gracious  recompense,  there  was  also  natural  result.  "  The 
house,"  says  od«  evangelist,  "  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment"    Maiy 


IT.) 8T.  MARK,  Ml 

accomplished  more  than  she  intended,  anointing  not  only  Jesns,  but  all  who  were 
with  Him,  and  even  the  house  itself.  The  fact  is  very  suggestive,  giving  us  at  the 
same  time  a  lesson  both  of  admonition  and  of  encouragement.  Continuity  and 
diffusion  mark  all  we  do.  The  thought  is  stupendously  solemn,  and  ought  to  be 
solemnly  laid  to  heart.  It  is  one  to  inspire  us  with  gladdening  hope,  or 
else  to  fill  us  with  terrible  dismay.  (Prof.  J,  Stacey,  D.D.)  The  broken 
vase: — ^The  affectionate  Mary,  in  the  devout  prodigality  of  her  love,  gave — not 
a  part — but  the  whole  of  the  precious  contents,  and  did  not  spare  the  vase  itsell, 
in  which  they  were  held,  and  which  was  broken  in  the  service  of  Christ.  She 
gave  the  whole  to  Christ,  and  to  Him  alone.  Thus  also  she  took  care,  in  her 
reverence  for  Christ,  that  the  spikenard  and  the  vessel  (things  of  precious  value, 
and  of  frequent  use  in  banquets  and  festive  pleasures  of  tiiis  world  for  man's 
gratification  and  luxury)  having  now  been  used  for  this  sacred  service  of  anointing 
the  body  of  Christ,  should  never  be  applied  to  any  other  less  holy  purpose.  This 
act  of  Mary,  providing  that  what  had  been  thus  consecrated  to  the  anointing  of 
Christ's  body,  should  never  be  afterwards  employed  in  secular  uses,  is  exemplary  to 
us ;  and  the  same  spirit  of  reverence  appears  to  have  guided  the  Church  in  setting 
apart  from  aU  profane  and  common  uses,  by  consecration,  places  and  things  for  the 
service  of  Christ's  mystical  body,  and  for  the  entertainment  of  His  presence ;  and 
this  same  reverential  spirit  seems  also  to  animate  her  in  consuming  at  the  Lord's 
Table  what  remains  of  the  consecrated  elements  in  the  Conmiunion  of  His  Body  and 
Blood.  (Bishop  Ghristoplier  Wordsworth.)  Costly  offerings  acceptable  to  God : — 
There  is  just  one  principle  that  runs  through  all  the  teaching  of  the  two  Testaments 
concerning  what  men  do  for  their  Maker,  and  that  is  that  God  does  not  want,  and 
cannot  otherwise  than  lightly  esteem  that  which  costs  as  nothing,  and  that  the 
value  of  any  service  or  sacrifice  which  we  render  for  His  sake,  is,  that  whatever 
may  be  its  intrinsic  meanness  or  meagreness,  it  is,  as  from  us,  our  very  best,  not 
given  lightly  or  cheaply  or  unthinkingly,  but  with  care  and  cost  and  crucifixion  of 
our  self-indulgence ;  and  then  again,  that  it  is  such  gifts,  whether  they  are  the 
adornment  of  the  temple,  or  the  box  of  alabaster— that  these  are  gifts  which  God 
equally  and  always  delights  in.  (Bishop  H,  G.  Potter.)  Broken  tMngs  useful  to 
God :— It  is  on  crushed  grain  that  man  is  fed ;  it  is  by  bruised  plants  that  he  is 
restored  to  health.  It  was  by  broken  pitchers  that  Gideon  triumphed ;  it  was  from 
a  wasted  barrel  and  empty  cruse  that  the  prophet  was  sustained ;  it  was  on  boards 
and  broken  pieces  of  the  ship  that  Paul  and  his  companions  were  saved.  It  was 
amid  the  fragments  of  broken  humanity  that  the  promise  of  the  higher  life  was 
given  ;  though  not  a  bone  of  Him  was  broken,  yet  it  is  by  the  broken  life  of  Christ 
that  His  people  shall  live  eternally ;  it  was  by  the  scattering  of  the  Jews  that  the 
Gentiles  were  brought  in ;  it  was  by  the  bruised  and  torn  bodies  of  the  saints  that 
the  truth  was  so  made  to  triumph  that  it  became  a  saying,  that  "  the  blood  of  the 
,  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  It  is  by  this  broken  box,  that  throughout  the 
Iwide  world  it  is  proclaimed  how  blessed  and  glorious  a  thing  it  is  to  do  a  whole 
r  thing  for  Christ.  When  the  true  story  of  all  things  shall  be  known,  then  will  it 
appear  how  precious  in  God's  sight,  how  powerful  in  His  hands,  were  many  broken 
thiQgs.  Broken  earthly  hopes  will  be  found  to  have  been  necessary  to  the  bringing 
in  of  the  better  hope  which  endures  for  ever.  Broken  bodily  constitutions  will  be 
found  to  have  been  needful  in  some  cases  to  the  attainment  of  that  land  where  the 
body  shall  be  weary  and  sore  no  more  ;  broken  earthly  fortunes,  to  the  winning  of 
the  wealth  beyond  the  reach  of  rust  and  maEE"l®a' thief  {broken  earthly  honour,  to 
the  being  crowned  with  the  diadem  which  fadeth  not  away.  Tetf  1  even  for  what  we 
have  to  accomplish  here,  it  often  needs  that  we  should  be  broken  up  into  personal 
helplessness  ere  we  can  accomplish  anything ;  that  the  excelTenoy  oi  the  power  may 
benot  of  man  but  of  God.  It  is  along  a  channel  marred,  and,  as  we  should  say,  of 
no  worth,  that  the  precious  ointment  flows.  Therefore,  when  any  of  God's  people 
are  broken  and  marred,  let  them  bethink  themselves  of  this  shattered  box,  and  how 
from  it  there  flowed  forth  that  ointment  which  anointed  Jesus  for  His  burial,  and 
how  it  gave  materials  for  that  story  which  every  gospel  should  tell.  (P.  B,  Power.) 
She  brake  the  box : — If  relics  were  needed  for  the  instruction  of  the  Church  of  God, 
we  can  well  understand  how  among  the  choicest  of  them  would  be  found  the 
remnants  of  this  alabaster  box.  This  broken  vessel  would  not  onlv  be  a  monument 
of  love,  but  a  preacher  with  varied  eloquence ;  at  once  pathetic  and  practical,  tender 
and  even  stem ;  appealing  to  sentiment,  and  yet  thundering  against  mere  senti- 
mentality ;  its  jagged  edges  preaching  "  fact "  in  this  world  which  men  are  alwayi 
telling  as  is  a  world  of  fact ;  and  saying,  '*  Beligion  is  fact — fact  from  God  to  man, 

66 


Sn  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OKAP.  Jtf. 

ftnd  back  from  man  to  God  again."    It  may  be  that,  as  we  studied  these  poor  frag- 
ments of  the  pAst,  our  minds  might  pass  from  the  stem  teachings  of  those  jagged 
edges  to  the  sweet  scent  which  diffused  itself  therefrom ;  and  so,  impalpable  and 
invisible  as  that  scent,  sweet-savoured  thoughts  might  steal  into  the  secret  recessea 
of  our  being,  and  we  might  be  won  to  more  decided  action  for  our  Lord.    We  can 
understand  the  broken  vessel  being  carried  into  the  exchange,  the  counting-house, 
and  the  shop,  and  one  man  shrinking  from  it  as  he  heard  its  story,  and  another 
pouring  out  his  gold  as  its  depth  and  power  struck  deep  into  his  soul.^   We  can 
picture  it  to  ourselves  on  tiie  table  of  the  philosopher,  as  with  his  midnight  lamp 
beside  it,  he  sits  contemplating  it  with  his  hands  spread  over  his  temples,  and  rises 
from  his  cold,  unsanctified  study,  unable  to  understand  why  the  woman  did  this 
deed,  and  why  any  one  should  now  be  called  to  do  the  like ;  and  we  can  imagine  it 
now  arresting  with  its  broken  form,  now  beguiling  with  even  the  remembrance  of  its 
perfume,  some  strong  intellect,  which  longs  to  know  the  reality  of  things,  and  bows 
before  the  majesty  and  substsmce  of  true  love  as  offered  and  accepted  here.    We  can 
understand  how  it  would  make  a  missionary  of  this  one,  whose  deeds  would  be 
known  to  all,  and  of  another  for  Christ's  sake  a  lone  midnight  watcher  of  the  sick, 
whose  deeds  would  be  known  to  none — from  the  light  of  love  shining  from  this 
broken  vessel,  as  the  lamps  shone  from  the  broken  pitchers  of  Gideon,  we  can  see 
thousands  fleeing,  as  the  bats  and  owls  before  the  morning  sun  ;  and  others,  open- 
ing and  expanding  as  the  flowers  into  bloom  and  scent.    Were  relics  needed  for  the 
conversion  of  man  from  his  selfishness,  his  half-heartedness,  his  ignorance  of  the 
power  of  love,  first  above  aU  things  we  would  carry  through  the  world  the  cross  of 
Calvary  and  its  thorny  crown,  and  next  to   them   this   alabaster  box.    (Ibid.) 
Anointing : — Anointing  was  employed  in  the  East  for  several  purposes :  first,  for 
pl^^iu^,  it  being  a  great  luxury  in  that  climate ;  and  the  ointments  were  prepared 
from  oils  with  great  difficulty.    They  represented  the  very  best  fragrance  that  could 
be  compounded.    They  were  used  by  a  person  upon  himself ;  and  it  was  a  signifi- 
cant act  of  esteem  when  ointment  was  presented  by  friend  to  friend.    Ointments 
were  also  used  in  the  coronation  and  ordination  of  kings  and  priests ;  and  so  they 
came  to  signify  sacredSess  IHirough'^reverence.    Ointments  were  further  used  in  the 
burial  of  the  dead,  and  so  came  to  signify  the  sorrow  of  love.    But  in  every  case, 
wHetEer~76f~gift8,  or  for  pleasure,  or  for  sacred  uses  of  consecration  or  burial, 
it  was  not  the  intrinsic  value  of   the   ointment,  but  the  thought  which  went 
with  it,  that  gave   it  significance.     It  represented  deep  heart  feeling,  loyalty; 
deep   religious   consecration ;  sorrow  and  hope.     These  various   feelings,  which 
have   but  very  little  expression  awarded  to  them,  choose  symbols ;  and   these 
symbols    almost  lose  their  original  meaning,   and    take  this  second  attributive 
meaning.      (H.   W.  Beecher.)         An  alabaster  box  of  ointment — Mary'i  gift: — 
In  climates  where  the  skin  gets  feverish  with  dust,  the  use  of  oil  in  ^  anointing 
the  person  is  still  a  common  practice.    It  is  so  in  India;  it  was  so  in  ancient 
Greece  and  Home.    It  keeps  the  skin  cool  and  soothes  it,  and  is  held  to  be 
healthful.    In  warmer  climes  the  senses  are  more  delicate,  and  the  smells  often 
more  strong  and  disagreeable,  and  sweet  odours  are  therefore  greatly  in  demand. 
In  Egypt  to-day,  the  guests  would  be  perfumed  by  being  fumigated  with  a  fragrant 
incense ;  and  as  spices  are  still  used  to  give  to  the  breath,  the  skin,  the  garments, 
an  agreeable  odour,  so  was  it  then.    In  any  house  the  Saviour  would  have  had  His 
head  anointed  with  oil.    It  was  like  the  washing  of  the  feet,  a  refreshment.    In 
India  these  anointings  with  fragrant  oils  and  perfumes  are  largely  practised  after 
bathing,  and  especially  at  feasts  and  marriages,  so  that  the  act  of  Mary  was  not 
something  embarrassing  and  peculiar,  but  only  the  very  highest  form  of  a  service 
which  was  expected  and  welcome.    But,  instead  of  the  anointing  with  oil,  which 
would  have  cost  less  probably  than  the  widow's  mite,  she  has  provided  a  rich 
anointing  oil.    Judas  estimated  its  value  at  three  hundred  pence ;  Pliny  says  it  sold 
generally  for  three  hundred  pence  a  pound  of  twelve  ounces.    It  was  something  of  the 
same  kind  as  attar  of  roses ;  made  chiefly  by  gathering  the  essential  oil  from  the 
leaves  of  an  InTKan  plant,  the  spikenard,  described  by  Dioscorides,  1,800  years  ago, 
as  growing  in  the  Himalayas,  afid  still  found  there,  and  used  to-day  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  costly  perfumes.    Except  in  drops,  it  was,  of  course,  only  used  by  kings  and 
by  the  richest  classes;  was  costly  enough  to  be  made  a  royal  present.    Three 
hondred  pence  would  be  worth  aa  much  in  those  days  as  £60  would  be  in  England 
to-day.    Mary  must  have  been  a  woman  of  property  to  be  able  to  bring  such  a  holy 
anointing  oil;  unless,  as  is  equ^y  probable,  this  amount  was  the  total  of  her  lowly 
aavinga,  and  the  with  her  royal  gift,  like  the  widow  with  her  lowly  offering,  gives  aU 


ziT.]  8T,  MARK.  (69 

Bhe  had.  If  there  be  none  other  to  anoint  Him,  she  will  not  let  His  sacred  heal 
lack  what  honour  she  can  bring.  And  if  some  reject  Him,  she  will  make  it  clear 
that  to  do  Him  the  least  and  most  transient  honour  is  worth,  in  her  view,  the 
sacrifice  of  all  she  has.  And  so,  with  wondrous  lavishness  of  generous  love,  she 
buys  and  brings  to  the  feast  the  costly  unguent.  It  is  enclosed  in  an  alabaster  vase 
or  phial,  such  as  some  which  may  be  seen  in  the  British  Museum  to-day,  thousands 
of  years  old,  and  not  unlike  the  alabaster  vases  that  are  still  made  in  vast  numbers 
and  sold  in  toy-shops  and  fairs  for  a  few  pence  ;  the  softness  of  the  stone  permitting 
it  to  be  then,  as  now,  easily  turned  in  a  lathe.  {R.  Olover.)  There  is  no  word 
for  ••  box  "  in  the  original ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  vessel,  in 
which  the  perfume  was  contained,  would  be  of  the  nature  or  shape  of  a  box. 
Doubtless  alabaster  boxes  would  be  in  use  among  ladies  to  hold  their  jewels, 
cosmetics,  perfumes,  &c. ;  but  it  would,  most  probably,  be  in  some  kind  of  minute 
bottles  that  the  volatile  scfeuts  themselves  would  be  kept.  The  expression  in  the 
original  is  simply,  "having  an  alabaster  of  ointment."  Pliny  expressly  says  that 
perfumes  are  best  preserved  in  alabasters.  The  vessel,  because  made  of  alabaster, 
was  Cjp^ed  an  alabaster,  just  as,  with  ourselves,  a  particular  garment,  because  made 
of  wato-proof-stuS,  is  called  a  waterproof.  And  a  small  glass- vessel  for  drinking 
out  of  is  called,  generically,  a  glass.  Herodotus  uses  the  identical  expression 
employed  by  the  Evangelist.  He  says  that  the  Icthyophagi  were  sent  by  Cambyses 
to  the  Ethiopians,  "  bearing,  as  gifts,  a  purple  cloak,  a  golden  necklace,  an  alabaster 
of  perfume,  and  a  cask  of  palm-wine."  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Wasted  aroma: — 
Just  as  soon  as  these  people  saw  the  ointment  spilling  on  the  head  of  Christ,  they 
said :  "  Why  this  waste  ?  Why,  that  ointment  might  have  been  sold  and  given  to 
the  poor  1 "  Ye  hypocrites !  What  did  they  care  about  the  poor  ?  I  do  not 
believe  that  one  of  them  that  made  the  complaint  ever  gave  a  farthing  to  the  poor. 
I  think  Judas  was  most  indignant,  and  he  sold  his  Master  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver. 
There  is  nothing  that  makes  a  stingy  man  so  cross  as  to  see  generosity  in  others. 
If  this  woman  of  the  text  had  brought  in  an  old  worn-out  box,  with  some  stale 
perfume,  and  given  that  to  Christ,  they  could  have  endured  it ;  but  to  have  her 
bring  in  a  vessel  on  which  had  been  expended  the  adroitness  of  skilled  artizans,  and 
containing  perfume  that  had  usually  been  reserved  for  palatial  and  queenly  use, 
theyoonld  not  stand  it.  And  so  it  is  often  the  case  in  communities  and  in  churches 
that  those  are  the  most  unpopular  men  who  give  the  most.  Judas  cannot  bear  to 
see  the  alabaster  box  broken  at  the  feet  of  Christ.  There  is  a  man  who  gives  a 
thousand  dollars  to  the  missionary  cause.  Men  cry  out :  **  What  a  waste  1  What's 
the  use  of  sending  out  New  Testaments  and  missionaries,  and  spending  your  money 
in  that  way  7  Why  don't  you  send  ploughs,  and  com  threshers,  and  locomotives, 
and  telegraphs  ?  "  But  is  it  a  waste  ?  Ask  tiie  nations  that  have  been  saved ;  have 
not  religious  blessings  always  preceded  financial  blessings  ?  Show  me  a  community 
where  the  gospel  of  Christ  triumphs,  and  I  will  show  you  a  community  prospered  in 
a  worldly  sense.  Is  it  a  waste  to  comfort  the  distressed,  to  instruct  the  ignorant,  to 
baulk  immorality,  to  capture  for  God  the  innumerable  hosts  of  men  who  with  quick 
feet  were  tramping  the  way  to  hell !  If  a  man  buys  railroad  stock,  it  may  decline. 
If  a  man  invests  in  a  bank,  the  cashier  may  abscond.  If  a  man  goes  into  partner- 
ship,  his  associate  may  sink  the  store.  Alas,  for  the  man  who  has  nothing  better 
than  "greenbacks  "  and  government  securities  1  God  ever  and  anon  blows  up  the 
money  safe,  and  with  a  hurricane  of  marine  disaster  dismasts  the  merchantmen, 
and  from  the  blackened  heavens  He  hurls  into  the  Exchange  the  hissing  thunder- 
bolts of  His  wrath.  People  cry  up  this  investment  and  cry  down  the  other;  but  I 
tell  you  there  is  no  safe  investment  save  that  which  is  made  in  the  bank  of  which 
God  holds  the  keys.  The  interest  in  that  is  always  being  paid,  and  there  are 
eternal  dividends.  God  will  change  that  gold  into  crowns  that  shall  never  lose  their 
lustre,  and  into  sceptres  that  shall  for  ever  wave  over  a  land  where  the  poorest 
inhabitant  is  richer  than  all  the  wealth  of  earth  tossed  up  into  one  glittering  coin  I 
So,  if  I  stand  this  morning  before  men  who  are  now  of  small  means,  but  who  once 
were  greatly  prospered,  and  who  in  the  days  of  their  prosperity  were  benevolent,  let 
me  ask  you  to  sit  down  and  count  up  your  investments.  All  the  loaves  of  bread  you 
ever  gave  to  the  hungry,  they  are  yours  yet ;  all  the  shoes  you  ever  gave  to  the 
barefooted,  they  are  yours  yet;  all  the  dollars  you  ever  gave  to  churches  and 
schools  and  colleges,  they  are  yours  yet.  Bank  clerks  sometimes  make  mistakes 
about  deposits;  but  God  keeps  an  unfailing  record  of  all  Christian  deposits;  and, 
though  on  the  great  judgment,  there  may  be  a  "  run  "  upon  that  bai:^,  ten  thou- 
land  times  ten  thousand  men  will  get  back  all  they  ever  gave  to  Christ ;  get  all 


S64  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xw. 

back,  heaped  ap,  pressed  down,  shaken  together,  and  ronning  over.     A  yonng 

Christian  woman  starts  to  instruct  the  freedmen  of  the  South,  with  a  spelling-book 
in  one  hand  and  a  Bible  in  the  other.  She  goes  aboard  a  steamer  for  Savannah. 
Through  days,  and  months,  and  years  she  toils  among  the  freedmen  of  the  South  ; 
and  one  day  there  comes  up  a  poisonous  breath  from  the  swamp,  and  a  fever  smites 
her  brow,  and  far  away  from  home,  watched  tearfully  by  those  whom  she  has  come 
to  save,  she  drops  into  an  early  grave.  •'  Oh,  what  a  waste  I — waste  of  beauty, 
waste  of  talent,  waste  of  affection,  waste  of  everything,"  cries  the  world.  "Why, 
she  might  have  been  the  joy  of  her  father's  house ;  she  might  have  been  the  pride 
of  the  drawing-room."  But,  in  the  day  when  rewards  are  given  foi  earnest 
Christian  work,  her  inheritance  will  make  insignificant  all  the  treasure  of  Croesus. 
Not  wasted,  her  gentle  words ;  not  wasted,  her  home  sickness ;  not  wasted,  her 
heart-aches ;  not  wasted,  her  tears  of  loneliness ;  not  wasted,  the  pangs  of  her  last 
hour ;  not  wasted,  the  sweat  on  her  dying  pillow.  The  freedman  thought  it  was  the 
breath  of  the  magnolia  in  the  thicket ;  the  planter  thought  it  was  the  sweetness  of 
the  acacia  coming  up  from  the  hedge.  No  I  no  1  it  was  the  fragance  of  an  alabaster 
box  poured  on  the  head  of  Christ.  One  day  our  world  will  burn  up.  So  great  have 
been  its  abominations  and  disorders  that  one  would  think  that  when  5ie  flames 
touched  it  a  horrible  stench  would  roll  into  the  skies ;  the  coal  mines  consuming, 
the  impurities  of  great  cities  burning,  you  might  think  that  a  lost  spirit  from  the 
pit  would  stagger  back  at  the  sickening  odour.  But  no.  I  suppose  on  that  day 
a  cloud  of  incense  will  roll  into  the  skies,  all  the  wilderness  of  tropical  flowers  on 
fire,  the  mountains  of  frankincense,  the  white  sheet  of  the  water-lilies,  the  million 
tufts  of  heliotrope,  the  treUises  of  honeysuckle,  the  walls  of  "  morning  glory."  The 
earth  shall  be  a  burning  censer,  held  up  before  the  throne  of  God  with  all  the 
odours  of  the  hemispheres.  But  on  that  day  a  sweeter  gale  shall  waft  into  the  skies. 
It  will  come  up  from  ages  past,  from  altars  of  devotion,  and  hovels  of  poverty,  and 
beds  of  pain,  and  stakes  of  mart3n:dom,  and  from  all  the  places  where  good  men 
and  women  have  suffered  for  God  and  died  for  the  truth.  It  will  be  the  fragrance 
of  ten  thousand  boxes  of  alabaster,  which,  through  the  long  reach  of  the  ages,  were 
poured  on  the  head  of  Christ.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  Blinding  influence  of  prejudice : — 
A  man  said  to  Mr.  Dawson,  "Ilike  your  sermons  very  much,  but  the  after-meetings 
I  despise.  When  the  prayer-meeting  begins  I  always  go  up  into  the  gallery  and 
look  down,  and  I  am  disgusted."  "  Well,"  replied  Mr.  Dawson,  "  the  reason  is, 
you  go  on  the  top  of  your  neighbour's  house,  and  look  down  his  chimney  to  examine 
his  fire,  and  of  course  you  get  only  smoke  in  your  eyes  1  "  The  anointing  at 
Bethany : — ^I.  This  pbophecv  by  Christ  has  been  fulfilled.  1.  Unlikely  as  it 
must  have  seemed  that  the  simple  act  of  devotion  here  named  should  be  known  in 
all  the  world,  it  has  literally  come  to  pass.  It  is  told  in  all  the  languages  of  men, 
till  there  is  scarcely  a  patch  of  coral  in  the  wide  sea  large  enough  for  a  man  to 
stand  upon  where  this  incident  is  not  known.  It  should  increase  our  confident 
in  all  our  Lord's  promises.  It  is  a  witness  that  the  rest  will  be  found  true  as  their 
time  comes.  2.  Wherever  this  story  has  been  told,  it  has  received  the  commenda- 
tion of  those  who  have  heard  it.  The  Lord's  judgment  has  been  confirmed :  not 
that  of  those  who  ••  had  indignation  within  themselves,"  and  considered  the  oint- 
ment wasted.  II.  Why  was  this  womah  abls  to  do  so  praiseworthy  an  act? 
How  did  she  know  so  much  better  than  the  others  that  Christ  was  to  die,  and  that 
this  was  an  appropriate  act  in  view  of  His  death  ?  1.  She  had  paid  attention  to 
His  words.  She  was  a  good  hearer.  Her  ear  was  single,  and  her  whole  mind  waft 
full  of  truth.  2.  Her  act  was  the  result  of  her  character  and  feeling,  not  of  her 
reasoning.  She  gave  to  Him,  because  she  was  Mary  and  He  was  Christ.  It  was 
the  impulse  of  love.  {AUx.  McKenzie,  D.D.)  The  offering  of  devotion :— The 
time  will  come  when  to  do  a  thing  for  Christ  and  to  have  it  accepted  by  Him  wiU 
be  work  and  accomplishment  enough.  If  He  is  pleased,  we  shall  not  care  to  look 
beyond  for  recompense.  If  the  spikenard  is  pleasant  to  Him,  we  shall  not  ask  that 
the  house  be  filled  with  its  fragrance.  But  the  fragrance  will  fill  the  house.  The^ 
poor  are  best  cared  for  where  Christ  is  the  best  served.  Virtue  is  strongest  where 
piety  is  purest.  Let  Him  be  satisfied  and  the  world  is  blessed.  Let  us  break  at 
His  feet  the  alabaster  which  holds  our  life,  that  the  spikenard  may  anoint  Him. 
Go  out  and  stand  before  men  and  open  the  box  of  stone.  Then  men  will  be  drawn 
to^  yon  and  to  your  devotion.  Soon  kings  will  swing  the  golden  censer,  and  nations 
will  oast  incense  on  the  glowing  coals,  and  the  perfume  will  make  the  air  sweet ; 
while  many  voices  from  earth  and  from  heaven  blend  in  the  song  of  adoration  unto 
Him  that  loTod  na.    (Ibid.)        The  anointing  at  Bethany  .'—In  this  narrative  o^ 


ST.  MARK, 


Mary's  good  work  and  the  indignation  of  the  apostles,  we  have  an  eiample  of  all 
those  views  and  all  those  judgments  which  have  their  foundation  in  the  favourite 
principle  of  utilitarianism,  and  which  is  so  often  falsely  applied  to  the  wounding  of 
pious  hearts,  and  to  the  hindrance  of  that  justifiable  worship  in  the  Church  ol 
Christ,  which  seeks  to  express  worthily  the  sentiment  of  reverence  and  of  love,  and 
which  is  in  itself  productive  of  the  highest  blessing.  I.  (1^  In  Mary  we  have  set 
before  us  an  image  of  ardent  love ;  (2)  in  Judas  an  example  of  great  hypocrisy ; 
(8)  in  the  rest  of  the  apostles  an  instance  of  the  ease  with  which  even  good  men  are 
often  scandalized  when  God's  purpose  happens  to  differ  from  their  own  preconcep- 
tions.  n.  (1)  In  the  acceptance  of  Mary's  offering  of  the  ointment,  we  have  the 
mercy  of  God  displayed  in  receiving  and  hallowing  man's  gift  when  bestowed  on 
Hirn  ;  (2)  in  the  rejection  of  Judas,  who  impenitently  hardened  himself  at  the  sight 
of  Marys  devotion,  an  instance  is  given  us  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  the 
Almighty  against  the  sinner.  {W.  Denton^  M.A.)  The  true  principle  of  Christian 
expenditure : — ^It  is  commonly  argued  that  whatever  may  have  been  the  appropriate- 
ness of  that  earlier  devotion  which  built  and  beautified  the  temple,  it  is  super- 
annuated, inappropriate,  and  even  (as  some  tell  us)  unwarranted  now.  Those  costly 
and  almost  barbaric  splendours,  it  is  said,  were  appropriate  to  a  race  in  its  infancy, 
and  to  a  religion  in  the  germ.  But  the  temple  and  the  ritual  of  Judaism  have 
flowered  into  the  sanctuary  and  the  service  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  Not  to  Mount 
Gerizim  nor  Jerusalem  do  men  need  to  journey  to  worship  the  Father,  says  the 
Founder  of  that  Church  Himself.  **  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  Him 
must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  If  one  would  show  his  devotion  to  Him, 
says  this  same  Teacher,  "  sell  all  that  thou  hast  and  give  to  the  poor."  It  is  not  to 
adorn  temples  and  garnish  holy  places  that  Christianity  is  called  nowadays,  but  to 
rear  hospitals,  and  shelter  orphans,  and  feed  the  hungry.  It  is  a  diviner  thing  to 
send  bread  to  some  starving  household,  or  to  minister  in  some  plague-smitten 
Memphis  or  New  Orleans,  to  some  fevered  sufferer,  than  to  build  all  the  altars  and 
adorn  all  the  sanctuaries  that  ever  were  reared.  Not  it  is  not — not  one  whit 
diviner — ^noble  and  Christ-like  as  such  service  surely  is.  Let  us  come  to  a  distinct 
understanding  here  as  to  an  issue  concerning  which,  in  the  popular  mind,  there  la 
much  confusion  and  much  more  misapprehension.  If  it  be  asked.  Is  there  not  an 
order  and  sequence  in  which  things  equally  excellent  may  wisely  and  rightly  be 
done,  the  answer  is  plain  enough.  If  anybody  is  starving  or  houseless  or  orphaned, 
the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  feed  and  shelter  and  succour  them.  And  so  long  as  such 
work  is  undone,  we  may  wisely  postpone  other  work,  equally  meritorious  and 
honourable.  But  it  should  be  clearly  understood  that  if  in  some  ages  a  dispro- 
portionate amount  of  time  and  money  and  attention  have  been  given  to  the 
aesthetics  of  religion,  in  others  the  same  disproportion  has  characterized  that  which 
has  been  given  to  what  may  justly  be  called  the  sentimentalism  of  religion.  An 
enormous  amount  of  indiscriminate  almsgiving  both  in  our  own  and  other  genera- 
tions has  bred  only  shiftlessness,  indolence,  unthrift,  and  even  downright  vica 
God  forbid  that  we  should  hastily  close  our  hand  or  our  heart  against  any  needier 
brother  I  But  God  most  of  all  forbid  that  we  thrust  him  down  into  a  condition  of 
chronic  pauperism  by  the  wanton  and  selfish  facility  with  which  we  buy  our 
privilege  of  being  comfortably  let  alone  by  him  with  an  alms  or  a  dole.  Better  a 
thousand  times  that  our  gifts  should  enrich  a  cathedral  already  thrice  adorned,  and 
olothe  its  walls  already  hung  with  groaning  profusion  of  enrichment,  for  then,  at 
least,  some  one  coming  after  us  may  be  prompted  to  see  and  own  that,  whatever 
fault  of  taste  or  oongruity  may  offend  him,  there  has  not  been  building  and  beauti- 
fying without  cost  and  sacrifice.  .  .  .  Those  wonderful  men  of  an  earlier  generation 
toiled  singly  and  supremely  to  give  to  God  their  best,  and  to  spend  their  art  and 
toil  where,  often  if  not  ordinarily,  it  could  be  seen  and  owned  and  adequately 
appreciated  by  no  other  eye  than  His.  This,  I  maintain,  is  alone  the  one  sufficient 
motive  for  cost,  and  beauty,  and  even  lavish  outlay,  in  the  building  and  adornment 
of  the  House  of  God.  We  may  well  rejoice  and  be  thankful  when  any  Christian 
disciple  strives  anywhere  to  do  anything  that  tells  out  to  God  and  men,  whether 
in  wood,  or  stone,  or  gold,  or  precious  stones,  that  such  an  one  would  fain  con- 
eecrate  to  Him  the  best  and  costliest  that  human  hands  can  bring.  When  any 
poor  penuriousness  cries  out  upon  such  an  outlay,  "  To  what  purpose  is  thii 
waste  f  "  the  pitiful  objection  is  silenced  by  that  answer  of  the  Master's  to  her 
who  broke  over  His  feet  the  alabaster  box  of  ointment  very  precious,  "  Verily, 
I  say  unto  you,"  &o.  And  why  was  it  to  be  told  ?  for  the  spreading  of  hex 
iT     No,  bat  for  the  inculcation  of  her  example.     {Bi*hop  H.  C.  Potter.) 


666  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nv. 

Contrast  hetween  Mary  and  Judas : — *'  Tlie  Messiah,  although  going  to  death,  let 
me  lavish  my  sUl  on  Him,"  was  Mary's  thought ;  "  Going  to  death,  and  therefore 
not  the  Messiah,  let  me  make  what  I  can  out  of  Him,"  was  the  thought  of  Judas, 
(r.  M.  Lindsay,  D.D.)  Costly  gifts  acceptable  to  Christ :— There  is  a  great 

principle  involved  in  this  woman's  offering,  or  rather  in  our  Lord's  acceptance  of 
it,  which  is  this,  that  we  may  give  that  which  is  costly  to  adorn  and  beautify  the 
sanctuary  of  God  and  His  worship.  God  Himself  enjoined  on  the  Jews  that  they 
should  make  a  tabernacle  of  worship  of  such  materials  as  gold,  and  purple,  and 
fine  linen,  and  precious  stones  ;  and  the  man  after  God's  own  heart  collected  a  vast 
treasure  of  gold  and  costly  materials  to  build  and  beautify  a  temple  which  was  to 
be  exceeding  magnifical.  But  since  then  a  new  dispensation  has  been  given,  which 
had  its  foundations  in  the  deepest  humiliation — in  the  manger  of  Bethlehem — in 
the  journey ings  of  a  poor,  homeless  man,  with  the  simple  peasants  His  companions 
— ending  in  the  cross  and  in  the  sepulchre.  Is  there  place  in  such  a  kingdom  for 
generous  men  and  women  to  lavish  precious  things  on  His  sanctuaries  and  the 
accompaniments  of  His  worship  ?  Now  this  incident  at  the  end  of  the  Lord's  life, 
taken  together  with  that  at  its  beginning,  when  God-directed  men  offered  to  Him 
gifts  of  gold,  frankincense,  and  myrrh,  teaches  us  that  there  is.  Just  as  this 
woman  was  led  by  a  Divine  instinct  to  lavish  upon  His  Person  what  was  costly  and 
fragrant,  so  the  Church  has,  by  the  same  Divine  instinct,  been  led  to  pour  at  His 
feet  the  richest  treasures  of  the  nations  she  has  subdued  to  His  faith.  The  Church 
has  done  what  she  could.  At  least  her  faithful  sons  and  daughters  have.  At  first, 
in  her  days  of  persecution,  she  could  worship  only  in  catacombs,  and  in  her 
day*  of  poverty  she  could  only  offer  what  was  rude ;  but  when  she  subdued  her  per- 
secutors and  emerged  from  her  poverty,  then  also  she  did  what  she  could.  The 
grandest  efforts  of  architectural  skill  have  been  raised  to  the  honour  of  Christ,  the 
greater  part  built  in  the  form  of  the  cross  on  which  He  hung  to  redeem  us.  The 
noblest  paintings  are  of  His  acts  and  sufferings ;  and  the  most  elevating  strains  of 
music  are  accompaniments  of  His  worship.  It  is  too  true  that  many  have  taken 
part  in  these  offices  who  have  not,  like  Mary,  sat  at  His  feet,  and  chosen  the 
good  part ;  but  what  we  are  now  concerned  with  is,  whether  this  incident  warrants 
those  who  have  first  given  themselves  to  Him  to  offer  in  and  for  His  worship  what 
has  cost  labour  and  treasure  and  skill.    {M,  F,  Sadler,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  The  poor  with  you  always. — TJie  condition  of  the  poor  may  he  bettered : — 
Covetous  men  have  put  our  Lord's  words,  "  Ye  have  the  poor  with  yon  always,'* 
beside  the  Old  Testament  sentence,  "  The  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land," 
in  order  to  quiet  the  trouble  of  their  own  consciences  when  forced  to  think  of  the 
little  they  are  daily  doing  for  the  poor ;  and  then  tell  themselves,  and  too  often  tell 
others,  that  aspiration,  self-denial,  and  liberality  are,  after  all,  mere  spasmodic, 
ineffectual  palliatives  of  a  disease  which  is  inveterate  and  hopeless,  and  that,  the 
existence  of  poverty  being  an  unalterable  decree,  there  can  be  no  true  neglect  in 
doing  nothing  in  their  power,  if  there  can  be  no  full  success  in  doing  all.  To  some 
other  people  this  combination  of  texts  supphes  a  convenient  discouragement  to 
throw  on  all  suggestions  for  elevating  the  condition  of  the  poor,  and  alleviating  the 
pressure  of  their  poverty ;  for  it  enables  them  practically  to  conclude  thus :  "  To 
do  this  thing  would  be,  more  or  less,  to  fly  in  the  face  of  the  Almighty :  To  alter 
the  conditions  He  has  so  clearly  laid  down  would  be,  in  fact,  to  contradict  His 
will."  Of  course  this  error  also  admits  of  an  easy  reply,  too  logical  by  far,  how- 
ever, for  men  who  would  offer  the  argument.  It  is  this.  God  may  have  willed, 
and  has  willed,  that  absolute  equality  of  goods  shall  be,  in  this  world,  an  impossi- 
bility ;  that  the  terms  rich  and  poor,  being  relative  terms,  shall  always  have  persona 
to  whom  they  may  be  applied,  though  a  man  who  is  rich  as  compared  with  a  peasant 
may  be  poor  as  compared  with  a  prince.  But  God  has  never  revealed  as  His  will 
that  those  conditions  shall  never  be  interchangeable ;  on  the  contrary.  His  word 
tells  us  that  such  interchange  must  be  sought  (James  i.  9),  and  the  history  of  the  world, 
from  day  to  day,  shows  us,  as  part  of  its  natural  course,  a  continual  rising  of  some, 
and  sinking  of  others,  in  the  social  scale.  Then  there  is  another  class  of  objections 
to  deal  with.  It  is  urged  by  those  who  really  sympathize  in  good  will  for  the 
physical  and  moral  raising  of  the  poor,  and  feel  that  the  bettering  of  poor  men's 
condition  would  be  an  admirable  thing  if  only  it  were  possible,  but  that  its  antece- 
dent impossibility  frustrates  all  efforts  towards  so  desirable  an  end.  There  art 
very  many  such—people  who  feel  Christian  love  to  fellow-men  fill  them  with  long- 
ing to  promote  their  temporal,  and  through  it  their  eternal  good ;  people  who« 


or.]  ST.  MARK.  iC? 

themselves  blessed  with  ease  and  afiQaence  in  worldly  things,  feel  themselves  in 
some  sort  trusted  by  God  to  benefit  their  poorer  fellows ;  who  know  the  pity  and 
the  wrong  of  merely  flinging  money,  in  whatever  sums,  into  the  grasping  hand  of 
the  loudest  olamourer ;  who  strive  with  all  their  might  in  seeking,  and  fail  so  often 
bitterly  in  finding,  the  true  deserving  poor ;  who  go  themselves  amidst  the  haunts 
of  squalor,  the  homes  of  misery,  the  very  centres  of  disease,  trying  to  make  true 
Christian  mercy  the  dispenser  of  their  money,  and  to  consecrate  even  filthy  lucre 
to  the  holy  ministry  of  Christian  love.  How  many  these  are,  of  Christian  men 
and  Christian  women,  God  only  knows  who  only  can  reward ;  but  yet  how  dis- 
appointing is  their  work !  They  see  from  day  to  day  so  little  fruit ;  they 
meet  from  day  to  day  so  much  resistance ;  what  wonder  if,  while  conscience 
urges  them  to  persist  in  their  work,  despondency  should  often  overwhelm 
them,  and  make  the  toil,  which  only  hope  can  lighten,  a  crushing  burden  when 
hope  is  fled?  Is  it  not  too  sadly  true  that  when  the  self-indulgent  love  to 
cry,  "the  raising  of  the  poot  is  resistance  to  God,"  the  self-sacrificing  often 
have  to  answer,  "  the  raising  of  the  poor  is  hopeless  for  man  1  "  The  one  class 
lets  them  lie,  and  cries,  "  their  poverty  is  destiny ;  "  the  other  class  labours  even 
while  it  cries,  "  our  labour  is  in  vain  1  "  And  both  have  only  quoted  half  the  texts 
— the  one  side  to  excuse  neglect,  the  other  to  explain  despondency  ;  while  the  whole 
text  can  force  duty  on  the  slothful  and  give  courage  to  the  zealous.  For  our  Lord, 
indeed,  spoke  the  truth  of  His  day,  of  our  day,  and  of  all  days,  when  He  said, 
"Ye  have  the  poor  with  you  always ; "  but  He  said  something  more  which  we  should 
lay  to  heart,  "  When  ye  will,  ye  can  do  them  good."  These  glorious  words  settle 
all  questions  at  once  as  to  the  title  of  man  to  interfere  with  the  condition  of  the  poor, 
and  as  to  the  alleged  hopelessness  of  such  interference.  The  thing  may  be  done, 
and  the  thing  may  be  done  with  success.  To  alter  the  condition  of  the  poor  is 
allowable ;  to  alter  it  for  the  better  is  possible.  "  Ye  can  do  them  good  !  "  {W.  L. 
Blackley,  M.A.)  Christians  caring  for  the  poor: — ^When  the  deacon,  St.  Law- 
rence, was  asked,  in  the  Decian  persecution,  to  show  the  prefect  the  most  precious 
treasures  of  the  Church  at  Rome,  he  showed  him  the  sick,  the  lame,  the  blind. 
"  It  is  incredible,"  said  Lucian,  the  pagan  jeerer  and  sceptic,  "  to  see  the  ardour 
with  which  those  Christians  help  each  other  in  their  wants.  They  spare  nothing. 
Their  first  legislator  has  put  it  into  their  heads  that  they  are  all  brothers."  "  These 
Galileans,"  said  Julian  the  apostate,  "  nourish  not  only  their  own  poor,  but  ours  as 
well."  In  the  year  252  a  plague  raged  in  Carthage.  The  heathen  threw  out  their 
dead  and  sick  upon  the  streets,  and  ran  away  from  them  for  fear  of  contagion,  and 
cursed  the  Christians.  St.  Cyprian,  on  the  contrary,  assembled  his  congregation, 
told  them  to  love  those  who  cursed  them ;  and  the  rich  working  with  their  money, 
the  poor  with  their  hands,  never  rested  till  the  dead  were  buried,  the  sick  cared 
for,  and  the  city  saved  from  destruction.  {Archdeacon  F.  W.  Farrar.)  Care  of 
the  poor : — Thomas  Willet,  one  of  the  old  Puritan  divines,  was  a  man  of  remark- 
able benevolence.  He  spent  the  income  of  his  two  benefices  in  comforting  and 
entertaining  the  parish  poor,  often  inviting  them  to  the  hospitalities  of  his  house. 
When  asked  why  he  did  so,  his  reply  was,  "  Lest  Joseph  and  Mary  should  want 
room  in  the  inn,  or  Jesus  Himself  should  sav  at  last, '  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took 
Me  not  in.'" 

Ver.  8.  Bhe  hath  done  what  she  could. — Do  what  you  can: — ^I.  That  the  Lord 
Jesns  likes  His  people  to  be  doxno  chbistiaks.  She  "  did  something."  She  did 
"  what  she  could."  Hence  the  praises  bestowed  upon  her.  The  great  Head  of  the 
Church  likes  "  doing"  Christians.  Christians  who  show  their  Christianity  in  their 
lives.  True  religion  is  not  made  up  of  general  notions  and  abstract  opinions — of 
certain  views,  and  doctrines,  feelings,  and  sentiments.  Useful  as  these  things  are, 
they  are  not  everything.  The  wheels  of  the  machine  must  move.  The  clock  mu-t 
go  as  well  as  have  a  handsome  case  and  face.  It  matters  httle  what  a  man  thinks, 
feels,  and  wishes  in  religion,  if  he  never  gets  further  than  that.  What  does  he  do  * 
How  does  he  hve  ?  1.  "  Doing  "  is  the  only  satisfactory  proof  that  a  man  is  a 
living  member  of  the  Lord.  2.  "  Doing  "  is  the  only  satisfactory  proof  that  yc  nr 
Christianity  is  a  real  work  of  the  spirit.  Talking  and  profession  are  cheap  and 
easy  things.  But  "  doing  "  requires  trouble  and  self-denial.  3.  "  Doing  "  is  the 
only  evidence  that  will  avail  a  man  in  the  day  of  judgment.  (Matt.  xxv.  81,  &o.)  IL 
That  ALL  TBUX  Chbistuns  can  do  something,  and  that  all  should  do  what  they  can. 
Now  I  know  well  the  devil  labours  to  make  true  Christians  do  nothing.  Doing 
Christians  are  the  devil's  greatest  enemies.    I.  Satan  will  tell  some  that  they  art 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [( 

too  yonng  to  do  anything.  Believe  him  not :  that  is  a  lie.  Yet  a  little  while  and 
the  enemy  will  say,  "  you  are  too  old,  and  it  is  too  late."  2.  Satan  will  tell  othert 
that  they  stand  alone  too  much  to  do  any  good.  Martin  Luther,  Mahomet,  Napo- 
leon— all  are  cases  in  point.  They  all  rose  from  the  ranks.  Ti^ey  stood  alone  at  first. 
They  owed  nothing  to  position  or  patronage.  3.  Satau  will  tell  others  that  they 
have  no  power  to  do  anything.  He  will  say,  "  you  have  no  gifts,  no  talents,  no 
influence.  4.  But  Satan  will  tell  some  that  they  have  no  opportunities  for  doing 
anything — ^no  door  open  on  any  side.  5.  Do  you  ask  me  what  you  can  do  ?  I 
reply,  there  is  something  for  every  true  Christian  in  England  to  do.  Have  you  not 
the  power  of  doing  good  by  your  life  ?  you  may  work  wonders  by  steady  consistency 
and  patient  continuance  in  well-doing.  (Bishop  J.  C,  Ryle.)  Work  and  joy  : — ^A 
young  girl,  in  one  of  her  pensive  moods,  wrote  thus  in  her  journal :  **  If  I  dared  I 
would  ask  God  why  am  I  placed  in  this  world  ?  and  what  have  I  to  do  ?  My  day* 
are  idly  spent,  and  I  do  not  even  regret  their  swift  passing  away.  If  I  might  but 
do  some  good  to  myself  or  another,  if  only  for  the  short  space  of  a  moment  each 
day  1 "  A  few  days  later  her  views  were  wider  and  brighter,  and  she  wrote  again  : 
"  Why,  nothing  is  easier  1  I  have  but  to  give  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  one  of  Christ's 
little  ones."  Paths  of  service  are  sure  to  open  before  willing  feet.  When  the  Spirit 
of  God  puts  a  benevolent  impulse  in  the  soul  the  providence  of  God  will  open  a 
channel  for  its  outflowing.  Thousands  of  God's  afflicted  children  would  be  inex- 
pressibly touched  if  Christian  young  women  would  sing  to  them  of  His  love  and  the 
"  home  beyond  the  tide,"  (Ibid.)  Good  works  the  fruit  of  faith  and  love: — I. 
The  incident  hebb  recorded  comprised  the  conduct  op  a  certain  woman  on  > 

PARTICUIiAB  occasion,  TOGETHER  WITH  THE  TREATMENT  WHICH  SHE  RECEIVED  ;  first,  from 

some  of  the  persons  present,  and  secondly,  from  Jesus  Himself.  Those  present, 
not  having  the  same  affection  and  veneration  for  Jesus  which  the  woman  had, 
found  fault  with  her  conduct.  But  what  treatment  did  she  receive  from  Jesus  ? 
"  And  Jesus  said,"  &g.  Here  we  see  in  the  first  place,  how  our  Saviour  defended 
the  woman,  and  reproved  and  exposed  those  who  had  blamed  her.  Let  us  notice 
also  in  the  second  place,  that  Jesus  not  only  defended  the  woman,  but  even  praised 
and  commended  her.  11.  To  draw  from  this  incident  some  instructive  infer* 
ENCES.  1.  We  may  hence  infer  that  those  works  which  Jesus  Christ  accounts  to 
be  ♦'  good  '*  are  such  as  spring  from  faith  in,  and  love  to  Him.  2.  Such  good 
works,  such  acts  of  love  and  faith,  will  not  always,  nor  even  in  general,  obtain  the 
favour  and  applause  of  the  world.  To  the  world  the  good  works  of  the  Christian 
are  seldom  either  intelligible  or  gratifying.  Propose,  for  instance,  to  worldly  persons 
to  join  with  you  in  supporting  some  charity  at  a  distance ;  they  will  tell  you  how  it 
is  abused  and  perverted,  and  that  there  are  poor  at  home  to  whom  we  are  required 
to  attend.  Thus  selfishness  and  avarice  plead  their  cause,  and  lead  men  to  evade 
their  plainest  duties.  3.  We  may  infer  from  the  passage  before  us  that  those 
"good  works,"  those  fruits  of  faith  and  love,  which  the  world  misunderstands,  mis 
represents,  and  censures,  are  yet  graciously  noticed,  and  favourably  accepted  by 
Jesus  Christ.  My  brethren,  what  encouraging  and  consolatory  reflections  are  these 
to  all  such  as  are  endeavouring  to  serve  the  Lord  Christ,  and  to  be  fruitful  in  good 
works !  Begard  not  the  sneers  and  reproaches  of  ungodly  persons.  Behave  to  them 
with  meekness  and  kindness.  Overcome  their  evil  with  good.  {Edward  Cooper.) 
Tlie  motive  and  measure  of  Christian  duty  : — I.  The  motive  of  Christian  duty. 
Love  is  that  motive — the  very  principle  which  fills  the  mind  of  Deity.  It  was  love 
which  brought  the  Saviour  down,  and  led  Him  through  all  the  scenes  of  His  earthly 
sufferings  and  the  cross.  Christ  has  loved  you ;  therefore  do  what  you  mty,  for 
His  sake.  No  higher  motive  than  this  can  be  urged.  II.  The  amount  cv  sebvxob 
required.  The  amount  of  ability  is  tiie  measure  of  duty.  What  we  oan  do,  wt 
ought  to  do — cheerfully  and  honestly.  Use  the  balance  of  the  sanotu&iy  t-j  make 
sure  that  thou  art  not  defrauding  thy  God.  (S.  Robins.)  Christ  accepts  tut 
humblest  gifts  : — Christ  asks  no  impossibilities.  That  woman  brought  sjn  alabaster 
box.  What  was  it  to  Jesus  ?  Why,  He  owns  all  the  fragrance  of  earth  and  heaven : 
but  He  took  it.  He  was  satisfied  with  it.  If  it  had  been  a  wooden  box  He  wooid 
have  been  just  as  well  satisfied  had  it  been  the  best  one  she  could  bring.  I  hea> 
some  one  say  :  ••  If  I  only  had  this,  that,  or  the  other  thing,  I  would  do  ao  mcuL 
for  God."  In  the  last  day,  it  may  be  found  that  a  cup  of  cold  water  given  in  the 
name  of  a  disciple  gets  as  rich  a  reward  as  the  founding  of  a  kingdom ;  and  thai  ijic 
sewing  girl's  needle  ma^  be  as  honourable  in  God's  sight  as  a  king's  sceptre ;  j»nd 
that  the  grandest  euloginm  that  was  ever  uttered  about  any  one  was  :  "  She  itatb 
done  whM  she  coold."    There  she  sits  at  the  head  of  the  Sabbath-school  class,  and 


XT.]  ST.  MARK.  66'J 

«he  eays :  "  I  wish  I  understood  the  Soriptures  in  Greek  and  Hebrew.  I  wish  I  had 
more  faoility  for  instraotion.  I  wish  I  could  get  the  attention  of  mj  class.  I  wish 
I  could  bring  them  all  to  Christ.  Do  not  worry.  Christ  does  not  want  yon  to  know 
the  Scripture  in  Greek  and  Hebrew.  Do  as  well  as  you  can,  and  from  the  throno 
the  proclamation  will  flame  forth :  *'  Crown  that  princess.  She  hath  done  what  she 
oould."  There  is  a  man  toiling  for  Christ.  He  does  not  get  on  much.  He  is  dis- 
couraged when  he  hears  Paul  thunder  and  Edward  Payson  pray.  He  says:  "I 
wonder  if  I  will  ever  join  the  song  of  heaven."  He  wonders  if  it  would  not  look 
odd  for  him  to  stand  amid  the  apostles  who  preached  and  the  martyrs  who  fiamed. 
Greater  will  be  his  wonder  on  the  day  when  he  shall  find  out  that  many  who  were 
first  in  the  Church  on  earth  are  last  in  the  Church  of  heaven ;  and  when  he  sees  the 
procession  winding  up  among  the  thrones  of  the  sorrowing  ones  who  never  again 
shall  weep,  and  the  weary  ones  who  never  again  shall  get  tired,  and  the  poor  who 
never  again  shall  beg,  and  Christ,  regardless  of  all  antecedents,  will  upon  the  heads 
of  His  dJsciples  place  a  crown  made  from  the  gold  of  the  eternal  hills,  set  in  with 
pearl  from  the  celestial  sea,  inscribed  with  the  words :  *'  He  hath  done  what  he 
could."  {Dr.  Talmage.)  Doing  something  for  Christ : — A  man  in  America,  who 
depended  for  support  entirely  on  his  own  exertions,  subscribed  five  dollars  annually 
in  support  of  the  Bombay  schools.  His  friends  inquired,  **  why  he  gave  so  much, 
and  how  he  could  afford  it  ?  "  He  replied :  "  I  have  been  for  some  time  wishing  to 
do  something  for  Christ's  cause,  but  I  cannot  preach,  neither  can  I  pray  in  pubUc,  to 
any  one's  edification,  nor  can  I  talk  to  people ;  but  I  have  hands,  and  I  can  work." 
She  hath  done  what  she  could. — Acceptance  of  the  heart : — In  many  aspects  this  is 
one  of  the  most  encouraging  expressions  of  our  Lord.  It  was  uttered  in  defence  of 
a  woman  who  ventured  to  approach  Him  under  the  unceremonious  impulse  of  affec- 
tion, destitute,  so  far  as  we  know,  of  any  recommendation  from  family  circumstance 
or  social  distinction,  but  urged  solely  by  an  irresistible  longing  to  do  something, 
however  humble  or  irregular,  in  behalf  of  this  Divine  friend,  who  has  gained  the 
anntterable,  enthnsiastic  devotion  of  her  soul.     I.  This  answeb  of  oub  Lobd's 

PLAINLY  AND  POWEBFULLY  ASSERTS  THE  SUFEBIOB  WOBTH  OF  THE  HEABT'B  FEELINO  OVSB 

ANY  ouTWABD  ACTS.  The  Very  form  of  the  expression  implies  that,  in  one  sense,  she 
had  done  but  Uttle.  Yet  that  little  was  enough.  It  was  a  test  of  her  sincerity.  It 
said  distinctly  that  she  was  in  earnest.  It  demonstrated  the  deep  and  tender  attach- 
ment of  her  soul.  One  penny's  worth,  if  it  is  only  the  utmost  that  self-denial  can 
do,  is  as  good  for  that  as  ten  thousand  shekels.  The  whole  spiritual  meaning  of 
gifts  consists  in  the  disposition  of  the  giver.    II.  These  wobds  bestow  a  blessing 

ON  THE  FEELING   OF  PERSONAL  AFFECTION  TOWABDS   ChBI3T.      HbVC  yOU  CVCr  had  that 

mingled  sense  of  gratitude  and  love  towards  a  person  which  made  you  long,  above 
all  things,  to  find  out  some  way  of  serving  him,  and  made  it  a  positive  pain  to  be 
denied  that  privilege  ?  Did  Christianity  not  provide  an  outlet  for  this  feeling,  it 
would  fail  to  secure  a  practical  hold  on  human  sympathies.     UI.  Thess  wobds 

AFFIBM,  FOB  TBUB  GOODNESS,  A  COHPLETB  INDEPENDENCE  OF  PLACE.      AoceptanOO  with 

God  is  as  possible  in  small  fortunes,  or  limited  reputations,  as  in  influential  and 
poweriul  circles.  No  one,  therefore,  is  excused  from  doing  "  what  he  can,"  nor  is 
there  one  to  whom  the  whole  infinite  wealth  of  Christ's  favour  is  not  offered.  IV. 
Ability  is  the  measubb  of  besponsibility.  No  soul  is  tasked  beyond  its  power. 
God's  commandment  never  passes  the  line  of  a  possible  obedience,  and  so  never 
goes  over  from  justice  to  tyranny.  What  we  fail  to  render  in  actual  work  ^through 
our  hmnan  frailty).  He  mercifully  permits  ns  through  Christ  to  make  up  m  those 
penitent  and  self-renouncing  affections  which  gain  forgiveness  and  open  the  way  of 
reconciliation.  Still,  let  ns  solemnly  ask  ourselves,  even  after  making  allowance 
for  this.  Have  I  done  what  I  could  ?  Has  my  service  to  the  Master  reached  the  full 
measure  of  the  powers  and  gifts,  the  capacities  of  affection  and  the  opportunities  of 
well-doing,  with  which  my  Master  has  entrusted  mef     V.  Take  these  thkek 

THOUGHTS  AS  THE   PBAd'IOAL  SUBSTANCE  OF  THE  SUBJECT.      1.   This  SBjing  of  JeSUS   is 

dangerously  perverted  and  shamefully  abused,  if  we  take  it  as  excusing  us  from  the 
utmost  effort  in  well-doing,  and  a  laborious  progreiis  in  Christ's  service.  We  must 
rammon  into  the  Master's  service  every  power,  tvery  energy,  every  affection,  every 
liour  of  life.  No  laxities,  and  no  apologies.  Nothing  less  than  entire  consecration 
is  demanded  of  us.  3.  In  order  to  serve  Christ  acceptably,  we  have  not  to  revolu- 
tionize  our  lot,  nor  to  seek  other  conditions  Hidu.  Uiose  Providence  supplies.  The 
place  is  nothing ;  the  heart  is  all.  3.  There  ib  no  service  thoroughly  right  which 
uoeb  not  directly  doknowledge  and  honour  the  Saviour.  The  heart's  offering  to  Him 
iS  the  beginning  oi  all  righteousness.     (Bishop  F.  D.  Huntington.)        VarUnu  wayi 


wi%  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cm*.  !!▼. 

of  serving  Christ: — The  Father  has  appointed  many  ways  in  which  we  may  walk 
toward  Hie  face,  and  run  on  His  errands.  Work  is  the  way  for  strength ;  lying  still 
is  the  way  for  infirmity, — il  only  there  are  trust  and  prayer  in  both.  Thezt 
is  some  instruction  in  a  picture  \  have  read  of,  which  represents  the  lives  ol 
iwin-brothers  diverging  from  the  cradle.  One,  by  study,  becomes  a  learned 
aud  skilful  physician,  reaching  great  riches  and  honours  by  ministering  to  the 
sick.  The  other  has  no  talent  for  books,  and  no  memory,  and  so  no  science; 
he  becomes  a  poor,  strolling  musician,  but  spends  his  davs  in  consoling,  by 
)}is  lute,  sufferings  that  are  beyond  all  medicine.  The  brothers  are  shown 
meeting  at  the  close  of  their  career.  The  vagrant  is  sick  and  worn  ont,  and 
the  brother  prescribes  for  him  out  of  his  learning,  and  gathers  ingenious  com> 
pounds  for  his  relief ;  but,  meantime,  he  to  whom  God  gave  another  gift,  touches 
his  ineitrument  for  the  solace  of  the  great  man's  shattered  nerves,  and  heals  his 
benefactor's  disordered  spirit.  (Ibid.)  Characteristics  of  fervent  love  to  Christ: — 
1.  Willing  service.  2.  Costly  sacrifices.  (Wm.  Marsh.)  What  a  woman  may  do : — 
An  American  paper  tells  the  story  of  a  woman  who,  because  tired  of  a  life  mainly 
spent  in  eating  and  dressing,  resolved  to  devote  herself  and  her  money  to  a  nobler 
purpose.  At  the  close  of  the  war,  she  went  to  a  sandy  island  o3  the  Atlantic  coast, 
where  about  two  hundred  persons  were  living  in  poverty  and  ignorance,  and  there 
she  established  her  home,  with  the  intention  of  benefiting  the  inhabitants.  She 
began  by  teaching,  by  example,  how  to  cultivate  the  land  lucratively.  Then  she 
established  a  school  for  the  children,  and  afterwards  a  church.  Now  the  island  is  a 
thriving  region,  with  an  industrious  and  moral  population,  the  change  being  the 
work  of  one  woman.  All  may  be  useful: — Many  true  saints  are  unable  to  render 
much  service  to  the  cause  of  God.  See,  then,  the  gardeners  going  down  to  the  pond, 
and  dipping  in  their  watering-pots  to  carry  the  refreshing  liquid  to  the  flowers.  A 
child  comes  into  the  garden  and  wishes  to  help,  and  yonder  is  a  little  watering-pot 
for  him.  Note  well  the  little  waler-pot,  though  it  does  not  hold  so  much,  yet  carries 
the  same  water  to  the  plants ;  and  it  does  not  make  any  difference  to  the  flowers 
which  receive  that  water,  whether  it  came  out  of  the  big  pot  or  the  httle  pot,  so  long 
as  it  is  the  same  water,  and  they  get  it.  You  who  are  as  little  children  in  God's 
Church,  you  who  do  not  know  much,  but  try  to  tell  to  others  what  Uttle  you  do 
know  ;  if  it  be  the  same  gospel  truth,  and  be  blessed  by  the  same  Spirit,  it  will  not 
matter  to  the  souk  who  are  blessed  by  you,  whether  they  were  converted  oi  com* 
forted  by  a  man  of  one  or  ten  talents.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Usefulness  of  common 
actions  : — It  is  the  bubbling  stream  that  flows  gently,  the  little  rivulet  which  flows 
along  day  and  night  by  the  farmhouse,  that  is  useful,  rather  than  the  swollen  flood 
or  warring  cataiact.  Niagara  excites  our  wonder ;  and  we  stand  amazed  at  the 
powerful  greatness  of  God  there,  as  He  pours  in  from  the  hollow  of  His  hand.  But 
one  Niagara  is  enough  for  the  continent  of  the  world,  while  the  same  world  requires 
thousand  and  tens  ot  thousands  of  silver  fountains  and  gently  flowing  rivulets,  that 
water  every  farm  and  meadow,  and  every  garden,  and  shall  flow  on  every  day  and 
night  with  their  gentle  quiet  beauty.  So  with  the  acts  of  our  lives.  It  is  not  by 
great  deeds,  like  those  of  the  martyrs,  that  good  is  to  be  done,  but  by  the  daily  and 
quiet  virtues  of  life.  {A.  Barnes.)  She  hath  done  what  slie  could. — All  may  unn 
this  encomium : — This  encomium  is  just  as  sufficient  and  adequate  for  the  ablest  as 
the  most  infirm ;  it  is  enough  for  such  as  Elizabeth  Fry,  Hannah  More,  and  Madame 
Adorna,  and  no  more  than  enough  for  the  unlettered  woman  carried  out  from  an 
obscure  lane  last  week,  having  died  in  the  joy  of  her  Lord,  and  her  name  never  seen 
in  printed  letters,  perhaps,  till  it  was  enrolled  in  the  record  of  the  dead.  When  I 
read  a  description  of  Kaiserswerth,  near  Diisseldorf,  on  the  Bhine — of  that  vast 
establishment  of  Christian  mercy,  with  its  hospital,  insane  asylimi,  Magdalen  re- 
treat, charity  schools,  and  institutions  for  training  the  most  scientific  nurses  and 
accomplihhed  teachers,  graduating  superintendents  for  the  humane  houses  of  both 
Europe  and  America,  and  a  few  miles  away  another  building  for  the  rest  and  refresh- 
ment  of  those  that  have  been  worn  down  by  the  fatigues  of  these  voluntary  labours 
of  love, — when  I  see  how,  throughout,  charity  has  been  systematized  by  skill,  and 
benevolence  perfected  by  perseverance,  and  then  behold  the  benefits  flowing  forth 
to  be  extended  and  multiplied,  in  ever  enlarging  proportions,  over  the  whole  sick 
and  suf  ering  and  groaning  earth, — I  am  as  much  ashamed  and  humbled  before  this 
devoted  Pastor  Fleidner,  whose  active  spirit  and  benevolent  genius  have  called  up 
all  this  busy  and  organized  kingdom  of  Good-Samaritanism  about  him  to  glorify 
the  age,  as  I  suppose  my  sisters  are  before  the  beautiful  and  accomplished  baroness 
who  has  laid  down  you^,  rank,  and  wealth  as  an  offering  to  sorrow  and  disease  ;  or 


If.]  ST.  MARK,  671 

before  the  high-bom,  gifted,  and  admired  English  girl  (Florence  Nightingale)  wb'* 
came  to  Kalserswerth  as  a  pupil,  and  then  reproduced  the  same  wonders  of  consolih- 
tion  and  healing  for  sick  and  destitute  governesses, — not  amidst  the  rural  quiet  and 
Bweet  verdure  of  her  own  paternal  home  in  Hampshire,  but  in  a  dismal  street  in 
London.  Yet  we  ought  aU  to  remember  that  these,  too,  only  did  what  they  could ; 
that,  if  we  do  that,  God's  honours  are  impartial ;  that  if  we  do  not  that,  then  ours 
is  indeed  the  shame  of  the  shortcoming.  (Bishop  F.  D.  Huntington.)  }Miat  we  can 
do  we  are  hound  to  do  : — This  language  of  the  Saviour  most  naturally  associate  s 
itself  with  the  closing  up  of  life's  great  account.  Of  how  many  among  us,  when  that 
trial-hour  comes,  with  all  its  retrospections  and  searching  examinations,  can  those 
glorious  words  be  spoken?  We  cannot  recall  nor  judge  the  dead.  They  are  in  the 
hands  of  the  All-Just.  But  we  can  speak  to  one  another  as  yet  living.  How  many 
of  us  are  so  striving  righteously,  and  watching  soberly,  and  praying  earnestly,  that 
this  shall  be  the  just  and  consoling  eulogy — They  have  done  what  they  could  ?  The 
busy  man  of  affairs,  the  auccessful  one,  the  disappointed  and  losing  one,  the  young 
adventurer,  the  older  and  long- trusted,  and  finally  unfortunate  one, — those  that 
have  prospered  by  others*  industry,  and  those  that  have  been  ruined  by  others' 
crimes, — has  each  one  of  them  done  what  he  could  ?  The  wife  or  mother,  whose 
very  name  is  sacred,  because  the  sacred  office  of  forming  character  is  her  perpetual 
duty,  the  lonely  woman  that  has  only  her  own  heart  to  discipline,  the  young  girl 
that  has  so  few  cares  for  herself  that  God  requires  many  of  her  for  the  less-favoured, 
— has  each  done  what  she  could  ?  The  bereaved  parent,  the  desolate  widow  suddenly 
summoned  to  take  up  the  dreary  and  dreadful  burden  of  solitary  suffering,— has 
each  done  what  she  could  ?  is  each  one  doing  what  she  can  ?  Christ  draws  near  to 
ns  and  repeats  the  question.  He  tarns  and  puts  it,  with  twofold  solemnity  and 
sadness,  to  those  that  leave  Him  and  pass  away.  To  all  that  sit  at  His  feet  and 
follow  in  His  steps  in  the  spirit  of  her  who  poured  the  fragrant  offering  on  His  head, 
He  is  ready  to  speak  the  same  benediction  with  His  infinite  love, — hiding  in  it  the 
sure  promise  of  life  everlasting.  I  said  we  cannot  adjudge  the  deservings  of  the 
departed.  But  we  can  guard  ourselves  against  those  hallucinations  of  mortal  glory, 
and  all  those  artificial  illusions,  which  are  so  apt  to  cheat  our  souls,  and  obscure  the 
plain  truth.  There  goes  to  his  august  repose,  enveloped  in  imperial  pomps,  the 
ruler  of  the  world's  mightiest,  vastest  empire.  Fifty-seven  millions  of  human  souls, 
embracing  nine  different  races  of  men,  with  a  milHon  soldiers,  drew  their  daily 
breath  subject  to  his  direct  and  despotic  will ;  but  not  all  of  so  many  millions  could 
add  one  single  breath  to  his  prostrate  lungs.  Eight  millions  of  square  miles  of 
territory  were  yesterday  ruled  by  his  word ;  now  he  needs  not  eight  feet,  out  of  it 
all.  The  guns  of  massive  fortresses  on  the  huge  ramparts  that  guard  widely  divided 
waters  made  a  continent  tremble  in  their  volleying  answers  to  his  edicts,  and  the 
haughtiest  noblemen  of  the  world  bent  at  his  smile  or  frown.  Common  cabinets  and 
kings  were  perplexed  and  afraid  at  the  cunning  of  his  brain,  as  boys  are  of  their 
master,  and  the  armies  of  the  strongest  governments,  after  his  own,  felt  the  globe  to 
be  a  more  conquerable  and  practicable  domain  the  moment  they  knew  he  was  dead. 
But  he  is  dead.  And  neither  the  millions  of  acres  nor  men,  the  fortresses  nor  tbe 
fears,  the  armies  nor  the  brain,  shall  make  it  a  whit  easier,  but  harder  rather,  for 
his  single  soul — when  it  goes  alone,  disrobed  of  crown  and  purple,  into  the  presence 
of  the  King  of  kings,  whose  right  it  is  to  reign — to  answer  that  simple  question, 
Hast  thou  done  for  Me — ah  1  for  Me — what  thou  couldst  ?  Canst  thou  stand  with 
the  lowly  and  powerless  woman  who  crept  with  the  box  of  ointment  to  her  Re- 
deemer's feet,  and  who  shall  have  the  story  of  that  act  of  love  told  for  a  memorial 
of  her  wherever  the  everlasting  gospel  is  preached,  when  the  history  of  Cossack  and 
Czar  shall  be  dim  as  that  of  princes  before  the  flood,  and  on  to  the  end  of  time  ? 
But  here,  close  by  us,  falls  asleep  a  meek,  patient  girl, — a  faithful  sister,  an  obedient 
daughter,  a  mild  and  friendly  counsellor  of  a  few  children  that  she  knew,  ruler  of 
none  on  earth  but  her  own  patient  spirit,  and  thereby  made  greater  than  he  that 
taketh  a  city,  or  prevents  its  being  taken.  She,  too,  dies,  and  no  anxious  hemispheres 
dispute  about  the  report,  nor  do  kingdoms  mourn,  nor  cowardly  assemblies  clap 
their  hands,  when  the  report  is  confirmed.  And  in  the  day  when  the  secrets  of  all 
hearts  shall  be  revealed,  our  only  question  is,  which  of  these  two  shall  be  found 
nearest  to  Him  who  sitteth  on  the  one  throne,  and  shall  wear  the  crown  which  is  a 
crown  of  life.  (Ibid.)  She  hath  done  what  she  could. — A  whole  city  visited  by  one 
woman : — An  intelligent,  industrious,  and  kind-hearted  woman  in  Russia  became  a 
Christian.  Her  labours  were  t  ansformed  into  Christian  labours,  and  were  followed 
op  with  an  ardour  and  perseverance  seldom  exceeded.   In  her  visits  to  the  poor,  the 


57S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [ohap.  xik. 

carried  books  and  tracts  as  well  as  food  and  raiment ;  and  when  she  foond  perBoni 
tillable  to  read,  which  was  frequently  the  case,  she  made  it  a  point  to  read  to  them, 
and  to  explain  what  thej  could  not  understand.  Her  prompt  assistance  was,  in  a 
great  measure,  instrumental  in  a  lealoos  agent  becoming  exteusively  engaged  in  the 
circulation  of  the  Scriptures.  She  gave  him  two  of  the  first  Firmish  Bibles  that  ever 
passed  through  his  hands ;  and  when  there  was  a  great  demand  for  the  sacred 
volume  in  that  language,  she  actually  sold  her  watch,  in  order  to  furnish  one  hundred 
Bibles  to  the  poor  at  reduced  prices.  She  took,  as  her  sphere  for  visiting,  the  whole 
city  of  St.  Petersburg,  perambulating  it  alone,  and  suooeeeded  beyond  all  ezpeota> 
tions.  In  the  course  of  a  few  months  she  sold  more  than  1,500  Bibles  and  Testa- 
ments ;  and  in  this  blessed  work  she  persevered,  while  hundreds  derived  advantage 
from  her  visits.  A  little  boy's  effort : — "  Children,  I  want  each  of  you  to  bring  a 
new  scholar  to  the  school  with  yon  next  Sunday,"  said  the  superintendent  of  a 
Sunday  school  to  his  scholars  one  day.  "I  can't  get  any  new  scholars,"  said  several 
of  the  children  to  themselves.  "  I'll  try  what  I  can  do,"  was  the  whispered  response 
of  a  few  others.  One  of  the  latter  class  went  home  to  his  father,  and  said,  "  Father, 
will  you  go  to  the  Sunday-school  with  me ? "  "I  can't  read,  my  son,"  replied  the 
father,  with  a  look  of  shame.  "  Our  teachers  wUl  teach  you,  dear  father,"  answered 
the  boy,  with  respect  and  feeling  in  his  tones.  **  Well,  I'll  go,"  said  the  father.  He 
went,  learned  to  read,  sought  and  found  the  Saviour,  and  at  length  became  a 
colporteur.  Years  passed  on,  and  that  man  had  established  four  hundred  Sunday- 
schools,  into  which  thirty-five  thousand  children  were  gathered  1  Thus  you  see 
what  trying  did.  That  boy's  efforts  were  like  a  tiny  rill,  which  soon  swells  into  a 
brook,  and  at  length  becomes  a  river.  His  efforts,  by  God's  grace,  saved  his  father; 
and  1^8  father,  being  saved,  led  thirty-five  thousand  children  to  the  Sunday-school. 

Ver.  9.  For  a  memorial  of  her. — Works  done  for  ChrUt  remembered  and  reeom- 
pemed  : — The  doing  of  works  has  been  over- valued  in  one  part  of  the  Church's 
history,  t.«.,  works  as  separate  from  the  motives  which  led  to  them ;  and,  as  you 
know,  for  a  long  season  language  was  held  as  if  there  was  a  merit  in  works,  and  as 
if  they  could  make  an  atonement  for  sin,  and  wipe  out  a  man's  past  misdeeds,  and 
as  if,  if  upon  a  death-bed  he  made  great  sacrifices  to  Christ's  church,  that  wiped  out 
years  of  lust,  covetousness,  and  cruelty.  And  so,  by  a  revulsion  of  feeling,  which 
always  must  beset  the  Church,  it  has  come  to  pass,  that  amongst  us  men  have  been 
afnud  of  speaking  of  the  great  privilege,  and  of  the  great  duty,  of  doing  works  of 
love  for  Christ's  body,  the  Church ;  and  there  has  come  amongst  us  a  mawkish, 
miserable  sort  of  notion,  that  we  are  to  cultivate  inward  feelings,  affections,  and  the 
like,  and  that  this  is  all  of  rehgion,  and  the  whole  of  the  reality  of  it,  at  which  we 
are  to  aim.  But  this  is  not  the  whole  of  the  truth  of  the  thing ;  this  is  a  very  poor 
and  miserable  counterfeit  of  Christianity.  Wherever  Christianity  truly  takes  hold 
of  the  deep  of  any  man's  heart,  it  will  show  itself,  not  only  in  guiding  his  feeling, 
but  in  guiding  his  actions,  in  leading  him  to  a  generous,  devoted,  and  loyal-hearted 
service  ;  it  will  make  him  bring  his  *'  alabaster  box,"  and  break  it,  and  never  count 
its  price,  and  never  reckon  nicely  whether  he  could  lay  out  his  money  to  better  profit 
elsewhere ;  it  will  stop  all  such  objections  as — "Had  it  not  better  been  sold  and  given 
to  the  poor  7  "  for  there  is  a  munificence  about  love,  and  there  is  a  grandeur  in  the 
giving  of  a  loyal  heart,  which  Christ  loves  to  see,  and  which  He  will  surely  reward. 
In  two  ways  this  is  set  before  us  in  the  text.  1.  In  the  readiness  of  our  blessed 
Master  to  receive  the  offering ;  the  way  in  which  He  at  once  stepped  in  between  the 
woman  and  her  reproof,  the  way  in  which  He  put  down  the  objection,  whether  it 
was  urged  in  hypocrisy,  or  whether  in  the  darkness  of  a  half-faith,  that  she  had 
better  have  sold  it  and  given  it  to  the  poor ;  the  ready  way  in  which  He  stepped  in 
and  at  once  acknowledged  "  She  hath  done  what  she  could,"  "  she  hath  done  it 
against  My  burial."  The  woman,  perhaps,  knew  not  that  Christ  was  near  His  end. 
But  so  it  is,  that  love  comes  at  the  hidden  truth  of  things,  before  the  things  them- 
selves have  been  revealed.  The  man  who  is  acting  from  love  to  Christ  is  a  sort  of 
prophet ;  he  foreacts  upon  that  which  is  yet  hidden  in  the  counsels  of  God.  2.  By 
the  remarkable  promise  added.  See  what  enduring  honour  was  this  which  Christ 
put  upon  this  deed ;  see  how  far  it  goes  beyond  any  worldly  honour  which  we  reckon 
the  highest  in  order.  Those  who  labour  for  God  will  reap  an  abiding  honour,  which 
is  to  be  got  in  no  path  of  earthly  service.  This  little  thing  which  seemed  to  err  in 
the  doing,  this  thing  which  seemed  to  be  done  so  easily,  so  naturally,  which  cost 
this  woman  no  thought  beforehand,  but  which  was  just  the  impulse  of  a  loving  heart 
—this  has  lived  on  and  been  spoken  of,  though  all  the  Boman  empire  has  passed 


.  xrw,-}  ST.  MABK.  673 

away.  The  great  gulf  of  forgetfulness  has  swallowed  it  np,  but  the  Lord  our  God 
«nduretb  for  ever ;  and  even  the  miserable  works  of  man,  when  done  for  God,  are 
gifted  with  endurance  too.  It  is  wove,  as  it  were,  into  the  web  of  God's  greatness  ; 
and  80  it  lasts  on,  and  the  blessing  and  the  memory  of  it  lives  on  in  this  world  of 
change,  long  after  the  great  world  of  things  which  surround  it  has  sunk  down  beneath 
the  distant  horizon,  and  this  comes  up  like  some  mighty  mountain  which  was  swal- 
lowed up  by  those  that  stood  near  it  and  seemed  greater  than  it,  but  now  in  the  far 
distance  it  stands  out  alone  in  the  light  of  heaven  and  tells  us  that  it  is  unlike  all  the 
rest.  And  so  it  has  been  often  with  things  done  for  God,  and  for  Christ,  and  for  His 
Church.  I.  Encouraoembnt.  The  remembrance  of  this  woman  is  a  pledge  that 
God  will  never  forget  His  people.  Worthless  though  their  work  is ;  mixed  as  it  is 
in  the  motives  from  which  it  springs,  even  in  the  very  best  men ;  stained,  therefore, 
as  it  is  with  sin  ;  yet,  for  Christ's  sake,  it  is  accepted,  and,  being  accepted,  it  shall 
be  rewarded.  Here,  then,  is  a  great  motive  to  exertion  in  God's  service.  Sow 
largely  this  passing  opportunity  of  time  with  the  seeds  of  eternity.  Put  out  your 
lives,  and  all  you  have,  at  interest,  where  God  will  pay  again  that  which  you  lend 
Him.  Make  ventures  for  Him.  Cast  into  the  dark  deep  of  His  providence  that 
which  He  will  give  you  again  with  interest.  II.  Duty.  The  power  of  doing  this 
comes  from  your  being  a  Christian ;  therefore  the  necessity  of  your  doing  it  is  bound 
up  in  the  fact  of  your  being  a  Christian.  You  are  not  living  as  a  Christian  if  you 
are  not  doing  it.  The  power  of  working  for  God  is  the  fruit  of  your  redemption.  It 
is  because  Christ  has  redeemed  as  that  we  can  serve  God  with  an  acceptable  sacri. 
fice ;  that  creation  has  received  us  back  again  into  the  place  which  sin  had  lost  for 
as ;  that  all  things  can  be  full  of  God  to  as  ;  that  we  can  in  fact  serve  the  Lord, 
knowing  whom  we  serve,  and  sure  of  being  accepted ;  that  everything  we  have  has 
become  a  talent— our  station  in  life,  our  daily  walk,  oar  conduct  in  our  family  and 
in  the  world  around  us,  that  these  are  tasks  set  us  by  God,  just  as  much  allotted  to 
us  because  we  are  Christians  as  the  tasks  of  angels  are  allotted  to  them ;  so  that  it 
does  not  matter  where  or  what  I  am  in  life ;  whether  my  life  is  mean  as  men  judge, 
or  great  as  men  judge,  it  matters  nothing ;  it  is  the  aim  of  my  life  which  makes  the 
whole  difference.  {Bishop  S.  Wilberf&rce.)  Work  not  for  success,  but  for  Ood: — 
You  are  not  to  labour  for  visible  success.  This  is  one  of  the  great  reasons  why  those 
who  had  begun  to  work  for  God  are  seen  to  faint.  They  think  to  gather,  when  they 
should  sow.  They  mean  to  do  some  great  good,  and  they  set  about  it  heartily ;  it 
all  turns  to  disappointment ;  and,  as  they  were  working  for  success,  they  sit  down 
and  work  no  longer.  Eemember,  brethren,  you  are  working  not  for  success,  but  for 
God.  You  are  to  work  in  the  dark.  It  is  the  very  condition  of  life.  In  heaven  we 
shall  work  in  the  light — shall  see  the  work  of  God ;  but  not  here.  In  this  life  we 
must  work  in  the  dark ;  we  must  give  to  the  unthankful ;  we  must  give,  because 
Christ  is  represented  in  the  poor  and  miserable  around  us,  and  because  this  is  the 
only  way  we  have  of  breaking  our  "  box  of  spikenard  "  upon  His  body.  And^  if  we 
labour  in  love,  there  is  a  secret  law  of  love  bringing  as  to  the  result.  The  saints  of 
God  have  found  this.  They  have  done  something  in  love,  because  **  the  love  of 
Christ  constrained  them  "to  do  it ;  and,  it  may  be  in  the  next  generation,  or  even 
in  the  generation  after,  it  has  begun  to  work  mightily.  They  have  founded  some 
little  institution  with  a  liberal  hand,  and  that  little  institution  has  swelled  and 
grown  into  a  mighty  fortress,  in  which  the  truth  of  Christ  has  been  stored  for  a 
whole  generation ;  they  have  opened  a  door  in  the  desert,  and  they  knew  not  that 
multitudes,  who  should  travel  that  way,  would  thank  God  for  the  refreshment  thus 
afforded  to  them.  {Ibid.)  A  very  pleasant  way  of  getting  ourselves  remembered  :— 
Human  aggrandisement  gives  no  permanent  satisfaction.  I  had  an  aged  friend  who 
went  into  the  White  House  when  General  Jackson  was  President  of  the  United 
States,  four  days  before  President  Jackson  left  the  White  House,  and  the  President 
said  to  him,  *•  I  am  bothered  almost  to  death.  People  strive  for  this  White  House 
as  though  it  were  some  grand  thing  to  get,  but  I  tell  you  it  is  a  perfect  hell !  " 
There  was  nothing  in  the  elevation  the  world  had  given  him  that  rendered  him 
satisfaction,  or  could  keep  off  the  annoyances  and  vexations  of  life.  A  man  writes 
a  book.  He  thinks  it  will  circulate  for  a  long  while.  Before  long  it  goes  into  the 
Archives  of  the  city  library,  to  be  disturbed  once  a  year,  and  that  when  the  janitor 
cleans  the  house.  A  man  builds  a  splendid  house,  and  thinks  he  will  get  fame  from 
it*  A  few  years  pass  along,  and  it  goes  down  under  the  auctioneer's  hammer  at  the 
executors'  sale,  and  a  stranger  buys  it.  The  pyramids  were  constructed  for  the 
honour  of  the  men  who  ordered  them  built.  Who  built  them  ?  Don't  fcnow  1  For 
whom  were  they  built  f    Don't  knov  1    Their  whole  history  is  an  obscuration  and  a 


S74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  zr». 

mystery.  There  were  men  in  Thebes,  and  Tyre,  and  Babylon  who  strove  for  great 
eminence,  but  they  were  forgotten;  while  the  woman  of  the  text,  who  lovingly 
accosted  Jesus,  has  her  memorial  in  all  the  ages.  Ah  1  men  and  women  of  God,  I 
have  found  out  the  secret ;  that  which  we  do  for  ourselves  is  forgotten — that  which 
we  do  for  Christ  is  immortal.  They  who  are  kind  to  the  sick,  they  who  instruct  the 
ignorant,  they  who  comfort  the  troubled,  shall  not  be  forgotten.  There  have  been 
more  brilliant  women  than  Florence  Nightingale,  but  all  the  world  sings  her  praise. 
There  have  been  men  of  more  brain  than  missionary  Carey — their  names  are  for- 
gotten, while  his  is  famous  on  the  records  of  the  Christian  Church.  There  may 
have  been  women  with  vases  more  costly  than  that  which  is  brought  into  the  house 
of  Simon  the  leper,  but  their  names  have  been  forgotten,  while  I  stand  before  you 
to-night,  reading  the  beautiful  story  of  this  Bethany  worshipper.  In  the  gallery  of 
heaven  are  the  portraits  of  Christ's  faithful  servants,  and  the  monuments  may 
crumble,  and  earth  may  bum,  and  the  stars  may  fall,  and  time  may  perish ;  but 
God's  faithful  ones  shall  be  talked  of  among  the  thrones,  and  from  the  earthly  seed 
they  sowed  there  shall  be  reaped  a  harvest  of  everlasting  joy.  {Dr.  Talmage.) 
Christ  deserves  the  best  of  everything : — That  woman  could  have  got  a  vase  that 
would  not  have  cost  half  so  much  as  those  made  of  alabaster.  She  might  have 
brought  perfume  that  would  have  cost  only  fifty  pence ;  this  cost  three  hundred.  As 
far  as  I  can  understand,  her  whole  fortune  was  in  it.  She  might  have  been  more 
economical ;  but  no,  she  gets  the  very  best  box  and  puts  in  it  the  very  bestperfume, 
and  pours  it  all  out  on  the  head  of  her  Kedeemer.  My  brothers  and  sisters  in  Christ, 
the  trouble  is  that  we  bring  to  Christ  too  cheap  a  box.  If  we  have  one  of  alabaster 
and  one  of  earthenware,  we  keep  the  first  for  ourselves  and  give  the  other  to  Christ. 
We  owe  to  Jesus  the  best  of  our  time,  the  best  of  our  talents,  the  best  of  everything. 
If  there  is  anybody  on  earth  you  love  better  than  Jesus,  you  wrong  Him.  Who  has 
ever  been  so  loving  and  pure  and  generous  t  Which  one  of  your  friends  offered  to  pay 
all  your  debts,  and  carry  all  your  burdens,  and  suffer  all  your  pains  f  Which  one 
of  them  offered  to  go  into  the  grave  to  make  you  victor  ?  Tell  me  who  he  is  and 
where  he  lives,  that  I  may  go  and  worship  him  also.  No,  no ;  you  know  there  has 
never  been  but  one  Jesus,  and  that  if  He  got  His  dues,  we  would  bring  to  Him  all 
the  gems  of  the  mountains,  and  all  the  pearls  of  the  sea,  and  all  the  flowers  of  the 
field,  and  all  the  fruits  of  the  tropics,  and  all  the  crowns  of  dominions,  and  all  the 
boxes  of  alabaster.  If  you  have  any  brilliancy  of  wit,  bring  it ;  any  clearness  of 
judgment,  any  largeness  of  heart,  any  attractiveness  of  position,  bring  them.  Away 
with  the  cheap  bottles  of  stale  perfume  when  you  may  fill  the  banqueting-hall  of 
Christ  with  exquisite  aroma.  Paul  had  made  great  speeches  before,  but  he  made 
his  best  speech  for  Christ.  John  had  warmth  of  affection  in  other  directions,  but  he 
had  his  greatest  warmth  of  affection  for  Christ.  Jesus  deserves  the  best  word  we 
ever  uttered,  the  gladdest  song  we  ever  sang,  the  most  loving  letter  we  ever  wrote, 
the  healthiest  day  we  ever  hved,  the  strongest  heart-throb  we  ever  felt.  {Ibid.\ 
Give  the  children  to  Jesus : — Is  there  a  child  in  your  household  especially  bright  and 
beautiful  ?  Take  it  right  up  to  Jesus.  Hold  it  in  baptism  before  Him ;  kneel 
beside  it  in  prayer ;  take  it  right  up  to  where  Jesus  is.  Oh,  do  you  not  know,  father 
and  mother,  that  the  best  thing  that  could  happen  to  that  child  would  be  to  have 
Jesus  put  His  bands  on  it  ?  If  some  day  Jesus  should  oome  to  the  household,  and 
take  one  away  to  com 3  back  never,  never,  do  not  resist  Him.  His  heart  is  warmer, 
His  arm  stronger  than  yours.  The  cradle  for  a  child  is  not  so  safe  a  place  as  the 
Kfms  of  Jesus.  If  Christ  should  come  into  your  household  where  you  have  your 
very  best  treasures,  and  should  select  from  all  the  caskets  an  alabaster  box,  do  not 
repulse  Him.  It  has  seemed  as  if  Jesus  Christ  took  the  best ;  from  many  of  your 
households  the  best  one  is  gone.  You  knew  that  she  was  too  good  for  this  world ; 
she  was  the  gentlest  in  her  ways,  the  deepest  in  her  affections ;  and,  when  at  last 
the  sickness  came,  you  had  no  faith  in  medicines.  You  knew  that  Jesus  was  coming 
over  the  door-sill.  You  knew  that  the  hour  of  partmg  had  oome,  and  when,  through 
the  rich  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  surrendered  that  treasure,  you  said : 
"Lord  Jesus,  take  it— it  is  the  best  we  have — take  it.  Thou  art  worthy."  The 
others  in  the  household  may  have  been  of  grosser  mould.  She  was  of  alabaster. 
The  other  day  a  man  was  taking  me  from  the  depot  to  a  village.  He  was  very 
rough  and  coarse,  and  very  blasphemous ;  but  after  awhile  he  mellowed  down  as  he 
began  to  talk  of  his  little  son  whom  he  had  lost.  ''Oh,  sir,"  he  said,  "that  boy 
was  different  from  the  rest  of  ns.  He  never  used  any  bad  language ;  no,  sir.  I 
never  heard  bim  use  a  bad  word  in  my  life.  He  used  to  say  his  prayers,  and  wt 
laughed  at  him ;  but  he  would  keep  on  saying  his  prayers,  and  I  often  thought,  •  1 


«BAy.  sy.l  8T,  MARK,  CTA 

oan'fe  keep  that  child ; '  and  I  said  to  my  wife :  '  Mother,  we  oan't  keep  that  child.* 
But,  sir,  the  day  he  was  drowned,  and  they  brought  him  in  and  laid  him  down  on 
the  carpet,  so  white  and  so  beautiful,  my  heart  broke,  sir.  I  knew  we  couldn't  keep 
him."  Yes,  yes,  that  is  Christ's  way ;  He  takes  this  alabaster  box.  {Ibid.)  A 
thank-offering  for  Jetus : — Now,  my  friends,  this  woman  made  her  offering  to  Christ ; 
what  offering  have  you  to  make  to  Jesus  ?  She  brought  an  alabaster  box,  and  she 
brought  ointment.  Some  of  you  have  been  sick.  In  the  hours  of  loneliness  and 
suffering  you  said :  "  Lord  Jesus,  let  me  get  well  this  time,  and  I  will  be  consecrated 
to  Thee."  The  medicines  did  their  work ;  the  doctor  was  successful ;  you  are  well ; 
you  are  here  to-night.  What  offering  have  you  to  make  to  the  Lord  JesoB  who 
cured  you  ?  Some  of  you  have  been  out  to  Greenwood,  not  as  those  who  go  to  look 
at  the  monuments  and  criticise  the  epitaphs,  but  in  the  procession  that  came  out  of 
the  gate  with  one  less  than  when  you  went  in.  And  yet  you  have  been  comforted. 
The  gravedigger's  spade  seemed  to  turn  up  the  flowers  of  that  good  land  where  God 
shall  wipe  away  the  tears  from  your  eyes.  For  that  Jesus  who  so  comforted  yon, 
and  so  pitied  you,  what  offering  have  you  to  make  ?  Some  of  you  have  passed  with- 
out any  special  trouble.  To-day,  at  noon,  when  you  gathered  around  the  table,  if 
you  had  called  the  familiar  names,  they  would  have  all  answered.  Plenty  at  the 
table,  plenty  in  the  wardrobe.  To  that  Jesus  who  has  clothed  and  fed  you  all  your 
life  long,  to  that  Jesus  who  covered  Himself  with  the  glooms  of  death  that  He  might 
purchase  your  emancipation,  what  offering  of  the  soul  have  you  to  make  f  The 
woman  of  the  text  brought  the  perfumes  of  nard.  You  say :  "  The  flowers  of  the 
field  are  all  dead  now,  and  we  ean't  bring  them."  I  know  it.  The  flowers  on  the 
platform  are  only  those  that  are  plucked  from  the  grim  hand  of  death ;  they  are  the 
children  of  the  hothouse.  The  flowers  of  the  field  are  all  dead.  We  saw  them 
blooming  in  the  valleys  and  mountains ;  they  ran  up  to  the  very  lips  of  the  eave  ; 
they  garlanded  the  neck  of  the  hills  like  a  May  queen.  They  set  their  banquet  of 
golden  cups  for  the  bee,  and  dripped  in  drops  of  honeysuckle  for  the  humming-bird. 
They  dashed  their  anthers  against  the  white  hand  of  the  siok  child,  and  came  to 
the  nostrils  of  the  dying  like  spice  gales  from  heaven.  They  shook  in  the  agitation 
of  the  bride,  and  at  the  burial  hour  sang  the  silver  chime  of  a  resurrection.  Beau- 
tiful flowers  1  Bright  flowers  1  Sweet  flowers  1  But  they  are  all  dead  now.  I  saw 
their  scattered  petals  on  the  foam  of  the  wild  brook,  and  I  pulled  aside  the  hedge, 
and  saw  the  place  where  their  corpses  lay.  We  cannot  bring  the  flowers.  What 
shall  we  bring  ?  Oh,  from  our  heart's  affections,  to-night  let  us  bring  the  sweet- 
smelling  savour  of  a  Christian  sacrifice.  Let  us  bring  it  to  Christ,  and  as  we  have 
no  other  vase  in  which  to  carry  it,  let  this  glorious  Sabbath  hour  be  the  alabaster 
box.  Rawlins  White,  an  old  martyr,  was  very  decrepid ;  and  for  years  he  had  been 
bowed  almost  double,  and  could  hardly  walk ;  but  he  was  condemned  to  death,  and, 
on  his  way  to  the  stake,  we  are  told,  the  bonds  of  his  body  seemed  to  break,  and  he 
roused  himself  up  as  straight  and  exuberant  as  an  athlete,  and  walked  into  the  fire 
singing  victory  over  the  flames.  Ah,  it  was  the  joy  of  dying  for  Jesus  that  straightened 
his  body,  and  roused  his  soul  I  If  we  suffer  with  Him  on  earth  we  shall  be  glorified 
with  Him  in  heaven.  Choose  His  service ;  it  is  a  blessed  service.  Let  no  man  or 
woman  go  out  of  this  house  to-night  unblest.  Jesus  spreads  out  both  arms  of  His 
mercy.  He  does  not  ask  where  you  came  from,  or  what  have  been  your  sins,  or 
what  have  been  your  wanderings :  but  He  says,  with  a  pathos  and  tenderness  that 
ought  to  break  you  down :  "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  who  are  weary  and  heavy  laden, 
And  I  will  give  you  rest."    Who  will  accept  tiie  o£ter  of  His  mercy  ?    {Ibid,) 

Vers.  9-11.  And  Jndaa  Iscariot. — Mary  and  Judas : — ^As  these  verses,  and  espe- 
cially the  narrative  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  place  in  juxtaposition  tiie  grandest  act  of 
Mary  and  the  vilest  deed  of  the  son  of  Iscariot,  let  us  take  this  opportunity  of 
contrasting  th«  one  with  the  other,  that  the  brightness  of  the  one  character  may 
allure  us  into  the  path  which  she  trod,  and  that  the  baseness  of  the  other  may 
determine  us  with  all  speed  to  shun  all  sin,  that  we  may  not  be  destroyed  by  its 
plagues.  I.  We  here  have  Mary's  love  for  her  Lord  arriving  at  its  loftier  elevation, 
pouring  its  costly  treasure  on  those  feet  at  which  she  was  wont  to  ait  with  ao  much 
reverence,  and  learn  lessons  whose  value  is  beyond  rubies.  It  was  not  at  first  that 
she  wrought  this  deed  of  munificence,  the  fame  of  which  shall  be  coeval  with  the 
duration  of  the  world  which  now  is,  but  after  continuing  to  receive  and  to  profit  by 
the  instructions  and  works  of  her  Lord  for  some  time  ;  the  gracious  impression  on 
her  mind  and  heart  toward  her  Lord,  once  in  its  infancy,  is  full-fledged  and  full- 
grown;  now  the  little  leaven  has  leavened  the  whole  lump.    II.   Now  let  Hi 


51«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OBAr.  zrr. 

glance  at  bim  who  was  called  to  be  on  earth  one  of  the  twelve,  and  cailed  in 
heaven  to  sit  on  an  apostolic  throne;  bat  who  became  oovetoas,  and,  in  conse- 
quence, stole  from  the  poor,  and  sold  the  Lord  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  He  was 
not  all  this  at  once,  even  as  Mary  did  not  break  her  alabaster  box  the  first  time  she 
saw  Jesus,  but  the  last,  immediately  before  His  death  and  burial.  Judas  Iscariot 
erred  by  blowing  a  creaturely  thing,  even  mammon,  to  have  an  undue  place  first 
in  his  thoughts  and  then  in  his  heart.  Jesus  was  the  object  of  Mary's  regard,  her 
thoughts  were  ever  running  after  Him,  until  her  heart  was  filled  and  ruled  by  His 
love,  so  that  she  would  consider  it  a  little  thing  to  be  allowed  to  poar  a  fortune 
down  at  His  feet.  She  was  spiritually-minded,  and  in  that  she  found  rest  to  her 
soul;  Judas  was  carnally-minded,  and  he  fearfully  proved  that  to  be  so  is  death. 
III.  These  opposites  serve  to  show  that  a  continued  course  of  virtue  or  sin  will  lead 
to  extraordinary  acts  of  goodness  or  crime  when  opportunity  or  temptation  arises. 
While  the  love  of  Christ  leads  to  constant  acts  of  beneficence  for  Christ,  and  extra- 
ordinary acts  on  great  occasions,  as  with  Mary,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  disciple 
who  allows  himself  to  indulge  at  first  in  lesser  acts  of  delinquency,  waxes  gradually 
worse  and  worse,  becomes  so  habituated  to  wander  from  the  straight  line,  that  he 
is  prepared  to  commit  under  strong  temptation  the  greatest  enormity,  to  do  that  of 
winch  at  one  time  he  would  have  cried  with  horror,  "  Is  thy  servant  a  dog,  that  he 
should  do  this  thing  ?  "  Nip  sin  in  the  bud ;  cease  from  it  at  once,  for  you  little 
know  to  what  height  of  crime  and  depth  of  shame  it  may  conduct ;  seek,  by  God's 
help,  to  eject  from  the  heart  the  little  leaven  of  perverseness  ere  the  whole  heart 
and  life  be  corrupted  and  misguided  thereby ;  the  beginning  of  sin  is  as  the  letting 
out  of  water,  there  is  the  trickling  stream  at  first,  the  overwhelming  flood  after- 
wards. IV.  We  have  the  Lord's  commendation  of  the  one  and  condemnation  of 
the  other.  How  contrary  his  fate  on  earth  to  that  of  the  woman  of  Bethany ! 
Thus,  the  one  who  forgot  self  and  thought  only  of  her  Lord,  and  gloried  that  she 
might  become  poor  if  He  might  but  be  honoured,  the  fragrance  of  her  name  fills 
the  whole  world  with  a  sweet  perfume,  even  as  the  ointment  filled  the  house 
with  a  grateful  odour ;  while  the  other,  who,  yielding  to  temptation,  did  not  care 
that  His  Lord  should  be  destroyed  if  he  might  be  enriched  and  aggrandized,  his 
fate  is  to  stand  forth  among  men  as  most  destitute  and  desolate,  cursed  of  God  and 
man.  And  where  are  they  now — the  Christ-loving  one  and  the  money-loving  one — 
brought  into  contact  for  a  moment  under  this  roof  ?  The  distance  between  them, 
the  moral  distance,  has  been  widening  ever  since,  and  will  evermore  and  evermore ; 
the  one  has  been  soaring  always  nearer  to  the  throne  of  infinite  love  and  truth, 
following  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth,  increasing  in  likeness  and  devotednesa 
to  her  Lord ;  the  other,  cut  ofi'  from  all  sources  of  restoring  life,  and  only  exposed  to 
what  is  evil,  is  always  plunging  into  a  lower  depth  of  corruption,  wandering  ever  to 
greater  distances  from  his  Father's  house,  his  Shepherd's  fold ;  it  had  been  good  for 
that  man  if  he  had  never  been  bom.  A  few  lessons  suggested  by  this  subject :  1.  We 
have  a  terrible  lesson  read  to  us  here  against  the  sin  of  covetousness.  It  is  not  neces- 
sary to  have  large  sums  of  money  entrusted  to  us  to  be  covetous.  No  one  can  sin 
exactly  as  he  did  by  selling  again  his  Saviour  for  money,  but  professors,  if  not 
watchful,  may  allow  their  supreme  love  to  wander  from  Christ,  and  to  concentrate 
itself  on  earthly  treasure,  be  it  equal  in  value  to  five  pounds  or  fifty  thousand ;  the 
sin  is  not  in  the  quantity  of  wealth  which  is  preferred  to  the  Saviour,  but  in  giving 
to  weidth  or  anything  else  our  highest  love  instead  of  to  Jesus.  Those  who  do  this 
are  as  guilty  of  soul-destroying  idolatry  as  ever  Judas  was.  Take  heed  and  beware 
of  eovetousness ;  all  the  more  need  to  beware  thereof  because  it  comes  to  us  in 
such  specious  forms,  and  assumes  such  deceptive  titles,  as  economy,  carefulness, 
prudence,  honesty,  provision  for  the  future,  provision  against  old  age ;  it  is  a  sin 
which  among  men  is  treated  with  respect,  and  not  held  in  abhorrence,  as  are  sins 
of  murder,  adultery,  and  theft ;  and  yet  it  has  been  the  millstone  which  has  sunk 
many  besides  Judas  among  the  abysses  of  the  bottomless  pit ;  it  is  idolatry,  says 
the  Word  of  God ;  and  we  know  that  no  idolater  hath  place  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  2.  The  only  safeguard  against  this  and  every  other  evil  besetment  is  to 
imbibe  the  spirit  and  track  the  steps  of  Mary.  Her  heart  was  full  of  Christ.  Let 
Him  have  your  heart,  that  He  may  wash  it  from  all  sin  in  His  blood,  and  fill  it 
^ith  His  perfect  love.  Begard  Him  as  your  one  thing  needful,  the  only  one  abso 
lutely  essential  to  your  well-being.  Having  given  Him  your  heart,  and  fastened  ita 
strongest  love  on  Him,  all  boxes  and  bags  containing  treasure  will  be  forthcoming 
at  His  demand ;  and  in  life,  in  death,  in  eternity,  like  Mary,  you  will  be  infinitely 
removed  from  Judas  and  all  who  are  like-minded.    Well,  my  fellow-sinners,  do  yoa 


xrrj  fir.  MARK,  57T 

choose  with  Judas  or  with  Mary?  Not  with  Jndas,  you  say.  You  would  not,  if  you 
could,  betray  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just.  But  his  original  offence,  the  root  of  the 
great  betrayal  sin,  consisted  in  allowing  something  in  preference  to  Christ  to  engage 
his  thoughts  and  affections,  even  money,  until  he  became  wholly  absorbed  thereby  ; 
^here  was  the  seat  of  the  mischief.  ^  As  long,  then,  as  anything  has  your  heart,  be 
it  money,  be  it  a  fellow-creature,  be  it  a  sensual  indulgence,  a  carnal  gratification, 
be  it  anything  else,  you  do  choose  with  Judas  and  not  with  Mary.  You  give  your 
heart,  like  the  apostate,  to  some  creaturely  thing  or  other,  and  as  long  as  you  do 
your  soul  is  in  danger  of  eternal  ruin ;  that  one  sin  of  yours,  unless  it  be  abandoned, 
will  destroy  you.  Oh,  choose  with  the  sister  of  Martha  and  Lazarus,  and  give  the 
whole  heart  to  Jesus.  (T.  Nightingale.)  Remembering  the  poor  but  not  Christ : — 
On  a  cold  winter  evening,  I  made  my  first  call  on  a  rich  merchant  in  New  York. 
As  I  left  his  door,  and  the  piercing  gale  swept  in,  I  said,  "  What  an  awful  night  for 
the  poor !  "  He  went  back,  and  bringing  to  me  a  roll  of  bank-bills,  he  said,  "  Please 
hand  these,  for  me,  to  the  poorest  people  you  know."  After  a  few  days,  I  wrote  to 
him  thft  grateful  thanks  of  the  poor  whom  his  bounty  had  relieved,  and  added  : 
"  How  is  it  that  a  man  so  kind  to  his  fellow  creatures  has  always  been  so  unkind 
to  his  Saviour  as  to  refuse  Him  his  heart  ?  "  That  sentence  touched  him  to  the 
core.  He  sent  for  me  to  come  and  talk  with  him,  and  speedily  gave  himself  to 
Christ.  He  has  been  a  most  useful  Christian  ever  since.  {Dr.  Cuyler.)  Helping  the 
poor : — On  one  occasion  only  did  I  hear  Jenny  Lind  express  her  joy  in  her  talent  and 
self-consciousness.  It  was  during  her  last  residence  in  Copenhagen.  Almost  every 
evening  she  appeared  either  in  the  opera  or  at  concerts  ;  every  hour  was  in  requi- 
sition. She  heard  of  a  society,  the  object  of  which  was  to  assist  unfortunate 
children,  and  to  take  them  out  of  the  hands  of  their  parents,  by  whom  they  were 
misused  and  compelled  either  to  beg  or  steal.  "  Let  me,"  said  she,  "  give  a  night's 
performance  for  the  benefit  of  these  poor  children  ;  but  we  will  have  double  prioes.^^ 
Such  a  performance  was  given,  and  returned  large  proceeds.  When  she  waf  in- 
formed of  this,  and  that  by  this  means  a  number  of  poor  children  would  be  bene- 
fitted for  several  years,  her  countenance  beamed,  and  the  tears  filled  her  eyes.  **  la 
it  not  beautiful,"  said  she,  *'  that  I  can  sing  so  ?  "  Through  her  I  first  became 
sensible  of  the  holiness  there  is  in  art ;  through  her  I  learned  that  one  must  forget 
one's  self  in  the  service  of  the  Supreme."  (Hant  Christian  Andersen.)  The 
treachery  of  Judas : — Judas  and  Mary  are  at  the  two  poles  of  human  possibility. 
Perhaps  in  their  earlier  years  both  seemed  equally  promising.  But  now  how  vast 
the  interval  1  Little  by  little  Mary  has  risen  by  following  God's  light,  and  little  by 
little  Judas  has  fallen  by  following  Satan's  temptation.  1.  Many  begin  well  who 
perish  awfully.  2.  Self  is  the  destruction  of  safety  and  sanctity  alike.  8.  Greed 
leads  to  much  inward  backsliding,  and  to  much  open  apostasy.  4.  There  is  mean- 
ness and  cowardice  in  all  evil.  Evil  lays  plots  and  practises  deceit,  ashamed  and 
afraid  to  act  in  the  open.  5.  The  goodness  of  good  men  makes  bad  men  worse 
when  it  fails  to  wake  repentance  in  them.  6.  The  world  thinks  as  Judas  thought, 
that  Uie  lack  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil ;  but  God  says  what  Judas  forgot, 
that  the  love  of  money  is  so.  7.  To  get  one-third  of  the  sum  Mary  had  spent  on 
ointment,  Judas  sides  with  the  foes  of  Jesus,  and  becomes  a  traitor  to  his  Saviour. 
8.  They  who  plot  against  the  Saviour  plot  against  themselves.  It  was  Judas,  not 
Christ,  who  was  destroyed.  9.  Beware  of  half-conversion  and  the  blending  of 
worldliness  and  discipleship,  for  such  mixtures  end  badly.  The  thorns  springing 
up,  ohoke  fatally  the  grace  that  seemed  strong  and  healthy.  {R.  Qlover.) 
Policyof  Judas  : — I  do  not  think  that  Judas  meant  to  betray  Jesus  to  death.  He 
sold  TTJTn  for  aboQt  £3  16s.  He  meant,  no  doubt,  to  force  His  hand — ^to  compel 
Him  to  declare  Himself  and  bring  on  His  kingdom  at  once.  Things,  he  thought, 
ought  now  to  come  to  a  crisis;  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  the  great  Miracle - 
Worker  would  win  if  He  could  only  be  pushed  into  action,  and  if  just  a  little  money 
could  also  be  made  it  would  be  smart,  especially  as  it  would  come  out  of  the 
enemy's  pocket.  That  was  Judas  all  over.  His  character  is  very  interesting,  and 
I  think  much  misunderstood.  The  direct  lesson  to  be  learnt  is  generally  the  danger 
of  living  on  a  low  moral  plane.  It  is  like  a  low  state  of  the  body — it  is  not  exactly 
disease,  but  it  is  the  condition  favourable  to  all  kinds  of  disease.  Dulness  to  fine 
feeling,  religion,  truth,  leads  to  self-deception — which  leads  to  blindness  of  the 
worst  kind,  and  then  on  to  crime.  Nothing  is  safe  but  a  high  Ideal,  and  it 
cannot  be  too  high.  Aim  at  the  best  always,  and  keep  honour  bright.  Don't 
tamper  with  truth  —  don't  trifle  with  affection  —  and,  above  all,  don't  be  con- 
tinuuly  set  on  getting  money  at  all  ris]^-  '  d  at  any  saoifioe.    We  maj  all  look  ai 

87 


579  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  nr, 

Jadas  and  learn  that.  {H.  R.  Haioeis,  M.A.)  The  sin  of  eovetotunest ; — Learn 
from  this  the  greatness  and  danger  of  the  sin  of  covetousness,  the  cause  and  root  from 
which  spring  many  other  sins  (1  Tim.  vi.  10.).  A  mother  sin,  having  many  cursed 
daughters  like  itself.  A  stock  upon  which  one  may  graft  any  sin  almost.  Hence 
come  fraud,  injustice,  and  all  kinds  of  oppression  both  open  and  secret;  cruelty  and 
unmerciful  dealing  ;  lying,  swearing,  murder,  <feo.  1.  It  withdraws  the  heart  from 
God  and  religion,  hindering  our  love  to  God,  and  delight  in  His  service  ;  quenching 
our  zeal  for  His  glory ;  causing  men  to  set  their  hearts  upon  worldly  wealth  and 
gain,  which  so  takes  them  up  that  they  cannot  be  free  to  love  God,  and  to  delight 
in  His  service  as  they  ought  to  do  (Matt.  vi.  24  ;  Luke  xiv,).  2.  It  chokes  the  seed 
of  God's  Word  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  hear  it,  so  that  it  cannot  bring  forth  fruit 
in  them  (Matt.  xiii.  22;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31).  3.  Grievous  judgments  are  threatened 
in  Scripture  against  this  sin  (Isa.  v.  8 ;  Hab.  ii.  9 ;  James  v.  1 ;  Luke  vi.  li). 
4.  It  is  a  sin  very  hard  to  be  repented  of.  When  other  sins  leave  a  man,  e.g.,  in  old 
age,  this  only  clings  faster  to  him.  He  that  will  follow  Christ,  and  be  a  true 
Christian,  must  forsake  all  things  in  this  world  (at  least  in  heart)  to  follow  Him. 
But  how  difficult  is  this  for  the  covetous  man  to  do.  Besides,  such  have  many  pre- 
tences and  excuses  for  their  sin :  as,  that  hard  times  may  come ;  and,  "  He  that 
provides  not  for  his  own,"  &c.,  which  is  one  main  cause  why  it  is  so  hard  for  such 
to  repent.      {George  Fetter.)  Covetousness  not  confined  to  the  rich; — The  poor 

may  think  they  are  free  from  this  sin,  and  in  no  danger  of  falling  into  it.     But 

(1)  look,  does  not  the  love  of  money  or  riches  possess  thy  soul  ?  If  so,  then,  though 
thou  be  poor,  yet  thou  may  est  be  in  danger  of  this  sin ;  yea,  thou  mayest  be  deeply 
tainted  with  it — if  thy  heart  be  in  love  with  worldly  wealth  ;  if  thou  eagerly  desire 
to  be  rich,  and  esteem  wealth  too  highly,  thinking  only  those  who  have  it  happy. 

(2)  If  discontented  with  thy  present  estate,  it  is  a  sign  thou  art  covetous. 
(Ibid.)  Remedies  against  covetousness: — 1.  Eemember,  that  we  are  in  Scrip 
ture  plainly  forbidden  to  desire  and  seek  after  worldly  wealth  (Prov.  xxiii.  4 ; 
Matt.  VI.).  2.  Consider  the  nature  of  all  worldly  wealth  and  riches.  It  is  but 
this  world's  goods  (as  the  Apostle  calls  it),  which  serves  only  for  maintenance  of 
this  present  momentary  life,  and  is  in  itself  most  vain  and  transitory ;  being  all  but 
perishing  substance.  Gold  itself  is  but  "  gold  that  perisheth  "  (1  Pet.  i.  7  ;  1  Tim. 
vi.  17  ;  Prov.  xxiii.  5 ;  Luke  xii.  20).  3.  Consider  how  vain  and  unprofitable  to  us 
all  worldly  wealth  is,  even  while  we  enjoy  it :  not  being  able  of  itself  to  help  or  do 
us  good  (Luke  xii.  15).  The  richest  men  do  not  live  longest.  All  the  wealth  in  the 
world  cannot  prolong  a  man's  life  one  hour.  It  cannot  give  us  ease  in  pain ;  health 
in  sickness  ;  but  most  unable  it  is  to  help  or  deliver  us  in  the  day  of  God's  wrath. 
Think  of  these  things,  to  restrain  and  keep  us  from  the  love  and  inordinate  desire 
of  this  world's  goods.  One  main  cause  of  covetousness  is  a  false  persuasion  in 
men's  hearts  touching  some  great  excellency  in  riches,  that  they  will  make  one 
happy ;  but  it  is  not  so  ;  rather  the  contrary.  4.  Consider  the  account  to  be  given 
hereafter  to  God,  of  all  wealth  here  enjoyed;  how  we  have  used  it,  well  or  ill :  for 
wfi  are  not  absolute  owners  of  that  we  have,  but  stewards  only,  entrusted  by  God 
with  earthly  substance  to  use  it  to  His  glory  and  the  good  of  others.  Think  of  this 
well,  and  it  will  be  a  means  to  curb  the  inordinate  love  and  desire  of  worldly  wealth. 
5.  Labour  for  faith  in  God's  providence ;  to  depend  on  His  Fatherly  care  for  things 
of  this  Ufa  This  will  cut  off  covetous  desires,  which  are  fruits  of  infidelity  and 
distrust  of  God's  Providence  (Matt.  vi.  30,  32 ;  Bom.  viii.  32 ;  Psa.  Iv.  22).  6. 
Labour  for  oontentedness  with  present  condition.  This  is  true  riches  (Heb.  xiii.  5 ; 
Phil.  iv.  11 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  8).  7.  Labour  to  make  God  our  portion  and  treasure.  Let 
thy  heart  go  chiefly  to  Him,  and  be  chiefly  set  on  Him :  thy  love,  joy,  delight. 
Then  thou  art  rich  enough.  In  Him  thou  hast  all  things.  (Ibid.)  The  Church 
injured : — I.  That  a  too  intimate  connection  between  a  pbofessino  Christian  and 

THE    WOBLD   18    INJDBIOUS    TO    THE    ChUBCH.      II.   ThAT   THE   HYPOCBITE  IS   MOBE    IN- 

jUBions  TO  THE  Chubch  THAN  A  NON-PBOFESSOB.  1.  The  world  depends  upon  him 
for  an  opportunity.  To  the  chief  priests  all  plans  and  proposals  failed,  until 
Judas's  came.  2.  Hypocrites  are  the  leaders  of  the  enemies  after  abandoning 
Christ.  Examples :  Judas,  Alexander  the  coppersmith,  <fec.  3.  They  have  a  know, 
ledge  of  the  failures  of  Christian  brethren.  A  fortress  attacked — an  enemy  dis- 
guised enters — has  intelligence  of  the  weakness  of  the  fortification — ^joins  the  army 
outside — leads  the  assault  to  the  weakest  place.  Zion  trusts  in  the  "Lord.  4.  ThejT 
are  too  near  to  be  seen.  Gold  and  copper  cannot  be  distinguished  when  held  so 
olosely  as  to  touch  the  eye.    HI.  That  a  feeble  mobal  ohabacteb  is  injubioub  t*' 

THX  &UBCH.      rV.   That  the  WOBLD'S  joy  ^ND   the   ChUBOH's  OBIEF  mat  often   Bis 


W.J  ST.  MARK.  579 

ATTBisnTBD  10  TH»  SAME  CAUSK.  "  And  when  they  heard  it  they  were  glad  ;  '*  and 
"they  were  exceeding  sorrowful."  The  same  cause  —  how  different  the  effects! 
Dismembering,  abandonment  of  God,  &c.,  produce  similar  effects.  "Be  ye  there- 
fore perfect,  even  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect."  {William 
Nicholson,)  Modern  apostasies : — The  Rev.  W.  Archer  Butler  remarks :  "  The 
apostasies  of  the  table,  the  fireside,  and  the  market  may  be  as  bad  as  those  of 
Judas,  Julian,  or  Demas."  And  is  it  not  so  ?  If,  for  some  petty  advantage — some 
poor  worldly  enjoyment— our  religious  duties  are  neglected,  do  we  not  thereby 
appear  to  acknowledge  that  Christ  is  of  less  esteem  to  us?  If,  for  example,  we 
forsake  our  public  or  private  devotions  to  attend  social  parties  and  engagements, 
fearing  lest  we  may  be  otherwise  censured  for  not  uniting  in  them,  is  not  this  one 
mode  of  slighting  Christ  for  the  world?  Or,  if  we  allow  the  pursuits  of  money- 
getting  or  private  pleasure  to  absorb  our  lives,  or  leave  us  but  the  narrowest  margin 
for  the  service  of  Jesus  and  the  promotion  of  His  kingdom,  is  not  this  also,  in  no 
imaginary  sense,  •*  selling  Him  for  silver  ?  "  Then  what  will  the  end  be  if  tiiis  sin 
shall  remain  unrepented  of  and  persisted  in.  Traitors  despised  by  their  em- 
ployers:— When  Graveston,  who  betrayed  the  Spaniards  at  Bergen-op-Zoom  to 
Queen  Elizabeth,  came  to  England  to  give  her  Majesty  an  account  of  his  success, 
and  to  claim  the  reward,  the  queen  gave  him  a  thousand  crowns,  but  said  to  him 
at  the  same  time,  "  Get  you  home,  ^at  I  may  know  where  to  send  when  I  want 
a  thorough-faced  villain."  Money  that  profits  not : — Three  men  who  were  travelling 
together  found  a  treasure  and  divided  it.  Then  they  continued  on  their  journey 
discussing  of  the  use  that  they  would  make  of  their  riches.  Having  eaten  all  the 
food  which  they  had  taken  with  them,  they  concluded  to  go  away  into  the  city  to 
purchase  some,  and  charged  the  youngest  with  this  errand,  so  he  set  out  on  his 
journey.  While  on  the  way  he  said  to  himself :  *'  How  rich  I  am  1  but  I  should  be 
richer,  did  I  only  have  all  of  the  treasure.  Those  two  men  have  robbed  me  of  my 
riches.  Shall  I  not  be  able  to  revenge  them?  That  could  be  easily  done,  for 
I  Bhonld  have  only  to  poison  the  food  which  I  am  oonmiissioned  to  purchase.  On 
my  return  I  will  tell  them  that  I  have  dined  in  town.  My  companions  will  partake 
of  the  food  without  suspicion,  and  die,  then  I  shall  have  all  the  riches,  while  I  have 
now  only  a  third."  During  this  time  his  two  companions  said  to  each  other :  "  We 
have  no  need  that  this  young  man  associate  with  us ;  we  have  been  obliged  to 
divide  our  riches  with  him ;  his  portion  would  increase  ours,  and  we  should  be 
truly  rich.  He  is  coming  back,  we  have  good  daggers,  let  us  use  them."  The  youth 
returned  with  the  poisoned  food ;  his  fellow  travellers  assassinated  him,  then  par- 
took of  the  food  direct,  and  the  treasure  belonged  to  no  one. 

Ver.  12.  When  they  killed  the  Passover. — The  Passover^  a  typical  observance : — 
No  other  festival  was  so  full  of  typical  meaning,  or  pointed  so  clearly  to  **  good 
things  to  come  "  (Heb.  x.  1).  I.  It  was  a  Feast  of  Redemption,  foreshadowing  a 
future  and  greater  redemption  (Gal.  iv.  4,  6).  H.  The  victim,  a  laub  without 
BLEMISH  and  without  spot,  was  a  striking  type  of  *'  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world  "  (John  i.  29  ;  1  Cor.  v.  7  ;  1  Peter  i.  19).  IH.  Slain, 
not  by  the  priest,  but  by  the  head  of  the  Paschal  company,  the  blood  shed  and 
sprinkled  on  the  aliar,  roasted  whole  without  the  breaking  of  a  bone,  it  symbolized 
Him  who  was  put  to  death  by  the  people  (Acts  ii.  23),  whose  blood  during  a  Paschal 
festival  was  shed  on  the  altar  of  His  cross,  whose  side  the  soldier  pierced,  but  break 
not  His  legs  (John  xix.  32-36).  lY.  Eaten  at  the  sacrificial  meal  (peculiar  to 
the  peace-offering)  with  bitter  herbs  and  unleavened  bread  (the  symbol  of  purity),  it 
pointed  to  that  one  oblation  of  Himself  once  offered,  whereby  Christ  has  made  us  at 
peace  with  God  (Eph.  ii.  14, 15),  in  which  whosoever  truly  believes  must  walk  in 
repentance  and  sincerity  and  truth  (1  Cor.  v.  7,  8).  V.  It  was  at  a  Paschal 
SuppEB  that  its  ANTITYPE,  THE  Ohbistian  Eqohabist,  was  instituted  by  our  Lord 
(Matt,  xxvi  17).  (G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D.)  The  Passover: — The  Passover,  com- 
memorating the  exodus  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  was  the  annual  birth- 
day of  the  Hebrew  nation.  Its  celebration  was  marked  with  a  popular  joy  and 
impressiveness  suited  to  its  character.  The  time  of  its  observance  was  the 
fourteenth  of  the  month  Abib,  called  Nisan  after  the  Babylonish  captivity.  It 
corresponded  to  that  part  of  our  year  included  between  the  middle  of  March  and  the 
middle  of  April.  It  is  the  fairest  part  of  the  year  in  Palestine.  Fresh  verdure 
covers  the  fields,  and  innumerable  flowers  of  brightest  tint  and  sweet  periume 
bedeck  the  ground.  The  fields  of  barley  are  beginning  to  ripen,  and  are  almost 
ready  for  the  sickle.    To  crown  all,  the  moon,  the  Pasohal  moon,  is  then  at  the 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  XIT« 

fnll,  and  nightly  floods  with  splendonr  the  landscape.  As  early  as  the  first  of  the 
month,  Jerusalem  showed  signs  of  the  approaching  feast.  Worshippers  from  all 
parts  of  Palestine  and  other  countries  began  to  arrive,  in  increasing  numbers,  down 
to  the  very  day  of  the  Passover.  They  came  in  companies  of  various  sizes,  in 
family  groups,  in  neighbourhood  groups,  in  bands  of  tens,  twenties,  and  hundreds. 
The  city  was  filled  to  overflowing,  and  thousands  encamped  in  tents  in  the  environs. 
Josephus  says  that  more  than  two-and-a-half  millions  of  people  gathered  al 
Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Nero  to  attend  the  Passover.  Universal  hospitality  was 
shown.  Wherever  a  guest.chamber  could  be  found,  it  was  thrown  open.  The  only 
recompense  allowed  or  taken  was  that  the  occupant  of  the  apartment  might  leave 
behind  for  their  host  the  skin  of  the  Paschal  lamb  and  the  earthen  vessel  used  at 
the  meal.     (A.  H.  Currier.)        Significance  of  the  Passover : — I.  Considering  th» 

EVENTS  AND  CIKCUM8TANCE8  ATTENDINO  ITS  ORIOINAI,  INSTtTDTION  (Ex.  xii.),  WC  may 

say,  in  general,  that  it  signified  deliverance  through  the  lamb.  The  angel  of  death 
entered  not  where  its  blood  was  sprinkled.  It  declared  that  the  corruption  incurred 
in  Egypt  was  expiated.  II.  But  the  meaning  of  the  Passover  was  not  exhausted  in 
the  idea  of  atonement.  For  it  consisted  not  only  in  the  slaying  of  the  lamb  and 
the  offering  of  his  blood,  but  in  the  joyful  eatino  or  it.  The  wine  at  the  feast 
was  a  symbol  of  its  blood.  The  quaffing  of  this  as  a  cup  of  refreshment,  and  the 
feeding  upon  the  savoury  flesh,  expressively  indicated  that  it  was  the  privilege  of 
God's  reconciled  people  not  only  to  be  saved  from  death  by  the  lamb,  but  to 
receive  from  it  conscious  satisfaction,  joy,  and  strength.  They  felt  the  benefit  of 
His  surrendered  life  in  all  their  renewed  and  quickened  powers.  III.  Leaven,  as 
PBODUciNQ  FEBMBNTATioN,  WAS  A  SYMBOL  TO  THB  Jews  ow  cobbxtption.  It  represented 
the  influence  of  idolatrous  Egypt,  which  they  were  utterly  to  put  away.  Unleavened 
bread,  therefore,  was  an  emblem  of  purity.  It  signified  that  they  who  ate  it  had 
put  away  sin.     lY.   The  bittbb  hebbs  abe  emblematical  of  the  tbials  and 

DISCIPLINE  WmOH  FOBM  AN  ESSENTIAL  AND  WHOLESOME  PABT  OF  THE  ChBISTIAN   LIFE. 

Such  trials  are  shadows  made  by  the  light.  They  are  inseparable  accompaniments 
of  the  gospel  in  its  work  of  subduing  the  world  to  submission  to  Christ.    {Ibid^ 

Vers.  13, 16.  Go  ye  Into  the  dtj.^TJie  finding  the  guest-chamber  :—Vfe  might 
expect  that  Christ,  Ixiowing  to  how  great  effort  the  faith  of  His  followers  was  about  to 
be  called,  would,  in  His  compassionate  earnestness  for  their  welfare,  keep  their 
faith  in  exercise  up  to  the  moment  of  the  dreaded  separation.  He  would  find  or 
make  occasions  for  trying  and  testing  the  principles  which  were  soon  to  be  brought 
to  so  stem  a  proof.  Did  He  do  this  ?  And  how  did  He  do  it  ?  We  regard  the 
circumstances  which  are  now  under  review,  those  connected  with  the  finding  the 
guest-chamber  in  which  the  last  supper  might  be  eaten,  as  an  evidence  and  illus- 
tration of  Christ's  exercising  the  faith  of  His  disciples.  Was  it  not  exercising  the 
faith  of  Peter  and  John — for  these,  the  more  distinguished  of  the  disciples,  were 
employed  on  the  errand — to  send  them  into  the  city  with  such  strange  and  desultory 
directions  ?  There  were  so  many  chances,  if  the  word  may  be  used,  against  the 
guest-chamber  being  found  through  the  circuitous  method  prescribed  by  our  Lord, 
that  we  could  not  have  wondered  had  Peter  and  John  showed  reluctance  to  obey  His 
command.  And  we  do  not  doubt  that  what  are  called  the  chances  were  purposely 
multiplied  by  Christ  to  make  the  finding  the  room  seem  more  improbable,  and 
therefore  to  give  faith  the  greater  exercise.  Again,  there  would  have  been  risk 
enough  of  mistake  or  repulse  in  accosting  the  man  with  the  pitcher :  but  this  man 
was  only  to  be  followed ;  and  he  might  stop  at  many  houses  before  he  reached  the 
right.  But  Christ  would  not  be  more  explicit,  because,  in  proportion  as  He  had 
been  more  explicit,  there  would  have  been  less  exercise  for  faith.  And  if  yon 
imagine  that,  after  all,  it  was  no  great  demand  on  the  faith  of  Peter  and  John  that 
they  should  go  on  so  vague  an  errand— for  that  much  did  not  hinge  on  their  finding 
the  right  place,  and  they  had  but  to  return  if  anything  went  wrong — we  are 
altogether  at  issue  with  you.  There  was  something  that  looked  degrading  and 
ignoble  in  the  errand,  which  required  more  courage  and  fortitude  than  to  under* 
take  some  signal  enterprise.  And  the  apparent  meanness  of  an  employment  wiU 
often  try  faith  more  than  its  apparent  difficulty;  the  exposure  to  ridicule  and 
contempt  will  require  greater  moral  nerve  than  the  exposure  to  danger  and  death. 
We  believe  that  it  is  very  frequently  ordered  that  faith  should  be  disciplined  and 
nurtured  for  its  hardest  endurances,  and  its  highest  achievements,  through  exposure 
to  petty  inconveniences,  collisions  with  mere  rudeness,  the  obloqny  of  the  proud, 
the  sneer  of  the  supercilious,  and  the  incivility  of  the  ignorant.    Nowhere  is  faith 


XIV.]  8T.  MARK,  581 

■o  well  disciplined  as  in  hnmble  occnpations ;  it  grows  great  throngh  little  tasks, 
and  may  be  more  exercised  by  being  left  to  the  menial  business  of  a  servant  than 
oy  being  sommoned  to  the  lofty  standing  of  a  leader.  And  we  do  earnestly  desire 
of  yon  to  bear  this  in  mind ;  for  men,  who  are  not  appointed  to  great  achievements 
and  endurances,  are  very  apt  to  feel  as  though  there  were  not  enough  in  the  trials 
and  duties  of  a  lowly  station  for  the  nurture  and  exercise  of  high  Christian  graces. 
Whereas,  if  it  were  by  merely  following  a  man  bearing  a  pitcher  of  water  that 
apostles  were  trained  for  the  worst  onsets  of  evil,  there  may  be  no  such  school  for 
the  producing  strong  faith  as  that  in  which  the  lessons  are  of  the  most  everyday 
kind..  But  there  is  more  than  this  to  be  said  in  regard  of  the  complicated  way  in 
which  Christ  directed  His  disciples  to  the  guest-chamber  where  He  had  determined 
to  eat  the  last  supper.  He  was  not  only  exercising  the  faith  of  the  disciples  by 
sending  them  on  an  errand  which  seemed  unnecessarily  intricate,  and  to  involve 
great  exposure  to  insult  and  repulse — He  was  giving  strong  evidence  of  His 
thorough  acquaintance  with  efBrything  that  was  to  happen,  and  of  His  power  over 
the  minds  whether  of  strangers  or  of  friends.  You  must  consider  it  as  a  prophecy 
on  the  part  of  Christ  that  the  man  would  be  met  bearing  a  pitcher  of  water.  It  was 
a  prophecy  which  seemed  to  take  delight  in  putting  difficulties  in  the  way  of  its 
own  precise  accomplishment.  It  would  not  have  been  accomplished  by  the  mere 
finding  the  house— it  would  have  been  defeated  had  the  house  been  found  through 
any  other  means  than  the  meeting  the  man,  or  had  the  man  been  discovered  through 
any  other  sign  than  the  pitcher  of  water;  yea,  and  it  would  have  been  defeated, 
defeated  in  the  details,  which  were  given,  as  it  might  have  seemed,  with  such  un- 
necessary and  perilous  minuteness,  if  the  master  of  the  house  had  made  the 
least  objection,  or  if  it  had  not  been  an  upper  room  which  he  showed  the  disciples ; 
or  if  that  room  had  not  been  large ;  or  if  it  had  not  been  furnished  and  prepared. 
And  whatever  tended  to  prove  to  the  disciples  their  Master's  thorough  acquaintance 
with  every  future  contingency,  ought  to  have  tended  to  the  preparing  them  for  the 
approaching  days  of  disaster  and  separation.  Besides,  it  was  beautifully  adapted 
to  the  circumstances  of  the  disciples  that  Christ  showed  that  His  foreknowledge 
extended  to  trifles.  These  disciples  were  likely  to  imagine  that,  being  poor  and 
mean  persons,  they  should  be  overlooked  by  Christ  when  separated  from 
them,  and,  perhaps,  exalted  to  glory.  But  that  His  eye  was  threading 
the  crowded  thoroughfares  of  the  city,  that  it  was  noting  a  servant  with 
a  pitcher  of  water,  observing  accurately  when  this  servant  left  his  master's 
house,  when  he  reached  the  well,  and  when  he  would  be  at  a  particular  spot  on  his 
way  back — this  was  not  merely  foreknowledge ;  this  was  foreknowledge  applying 
itself  to  the  insignificant  and  unknown.  Then,  again,  observe  that  whatever 
power  was  here  put  forth  by  Christ  was  put  forth  without  His  being  in  contact 
with  the  party  on  whom  it  was  exerted.  Christ  acted,  that  is,  upon  parties  who 
were  at  a  distance  from  Him,  thus  giving  incontrovertible  proof  that  His  visible 
presence  was  not  necessary  in  order  to  the  exercise  of  His  power.  What  a  comfort 
should  this  have  been  to  the  disciples.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  how,  when  His  death 
was  near  at  hand,  Christ  might  have  wrought  miracles  and  uttered  prophecies  more 
august  in  their  character.  He  might  have  darkened  the  air  with  portents  and 
prodigies,  but  there  would  not  have  been  in  these  gorgeous  or  appalling  dislpays  the 
sort  of  evidence  which  was  needed  by  disquieted  and  dispirited  men.  But  to  our- 
selves, who  are  looking  for  the  guest-chamber,  not  as  the  place  where  the  Paschal 
lamb  may  be  eaten,  but  as  that  where  Christ  is  to  give  of  His  own  body  and  blood, 
the  pitcher  of  water  may  well  serve  as  a  memento  that  it  is  baptism  which  admits 
us  into  Christian  privileges ;  that  they  who  find  a  place  at  the  supper  of  the  Lord 
must  have  met  the  man  with  the  water,  and  have  followed  that  man — must  have 
been  presented  to  the  minister  of  the  Church,  and  have  received  from  Him  the 
initiatory  sacrament,  and  then  have  submitted  meekly  to  the  guidance  of  the 
Church,  till  introduced  to  those  deeper  recesses  of  the  sanctuary  where  Christ 
spreads  His  rich  banquet  for  such  as  call  upon  His  name.  Thus  may  there  have 
been,  in  the  directions  for  finding  the  guest-chamber,  a  standing  intimation  of  the 
process  through  which  should  be  sought  an  entrance  to  that  upper  room,  where 
Christ  and  His  members  shall  finally  sit  down,  that  they  may  eat  together  at  the 
marriage-supper.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Providential  meetings  .'—There  are  no 
chance  meetings  in  this  world.  They  all  are  providential.  They  are  in  God's 
plan.  On  many  of  them  great  possibilities  hinge.  You  enter  a  railroad  car,  and 
take  your  seat  among  strangers.  A  proffered  courtesy  brings  yon  into  conversation 
with  a  tellow-trayeller.    An  acquaintance  is  the  result.    Years  of  helpful  Christian 


§81  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit 

co-work  follow  in  the  train  of  that  first  meeting.  You  visit  a  place  of  winter  resort 
for  health-seekers.  At  the  dinner-table  you  meet  a  man  unknown  to  you  until 
then.  An  entire  change  in  the  aim  and  conduct  of  his  life  is  one  consequence  of 
that  meeting ;  and  his  labours  for  good  may  be  far  more  effective  than  yours  in 
your  whole  life-time.  You  look  in  upon  a  celebrated  preparatory  school,  where  two 
hundred  young  men  are  at  their  studies.  One  face  impresses  you.  Your  meeting 
with  him  affects  your  course  and  his  for  all  time,  and  involves  the  interests  of  a 
multitude.  Your  meeting  of  another  young  man  in  a  Sunday-school  where  you  are 
present  only  for  that  one  session  has  more  influence  over  his  life  than  aU  other 
agencies  combined — and  scarcely  less  over  yours.  You  may  even  meet  on  the 
street  one  whom  you  wished  not  to  see,  one  whom  at  that  moment  you  were  seek- 
ing to  avoid ;  and  as  a  result  more  lives  than  one  are  affected  in  all  their  human 
course,  and  in  their  highest  spiritual  interests.  All  these  illustrations  are  real 
incidents  ;  and  there  are  thousands  like  them.  It  behooves  us  to  consider  well  our 
duty  in  every  meeting  with  another.  We  can  fail  to  improve  our  opportunity  and 
lose  a  blessing.  We  can  fill  our  place  just  then,  and  have  reason  to  rejoice  eternally 
that  we  did  so.  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do — when  next  I  meet  one  whom 
thou  hast  planned  for  me  to  see  ?  {Sunday -School  Times).  The  Master's  question : — 
«•  The  Master  saith  I "  Has  the  charm  of  the  Master's  name  vanished  in  these  latter 
days  ?  Are  we,  men  and  women  of  the  nineteenth  century,  children  of  a  modern 
life  and  civilization  which  is  ever  extending  itself  with  feverish  restlessness  and 
painiul  throes  of  new  birth,  are  we  grown  fanuliar  with  strange  voices,  with  forces  un- 
kno^^  n  in  that  ancient  world,  and  those  ancient  days  spent  under  the  blue  Syrian  sky ; 
are  we  become  superior  to  the  claims,  the  force,  the  beauty,  and  the  authority  of  a 
great  personal  life  ?  Have  we  relegated  Jesus  of  Nazareth  merely  to  a  place,  how- 
ever great,  in  the  development  of  history  ?  Is  He  merely  the  product  of  social 
forces  and  political  and  historic£j  traditions  ?  ♦•  The  Master  saith  I  "  Being  dead, 
doth  He  yet  speak  ;  yet  so  as  through  the  faint  vibrations  of  memory — of  memory 
which  grows  weaker  as  the  ages  roll  behind  us  into  the  eternity  of  the  past ;  or  ia 
it  a  living  voice  still  which  I  hear — a  voice  which  no  results  of  time  can  shake  with 
the  tremulousness  of  age  ?  Do  not  our  own  hearts — we  who  have  become  disciples, 
we  who,  constrained  by  a  force  which  we  could  not  resist,  have  exclaimed,  *'  Master, 
Thou  art  the  Christ  who  hast  conquered  me.  Thou  art  the  Christ  who  hast  died  for 
me »» — do  not  our  own  hearts  passionately  exclaim,  "  He  liveth  still  to  make  iilter- 
cession  for  us,  and  to  rule  us  with  tiie  supremacy  of  perfect  love "  ?  Will  ye  also 
admit  the  Master  within  ?  Will  ye  hear  Him  ?  Will  ye  let  Him  talk  with  you  ? 
This  night,  as  a  disciple  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  bring  the  word  to  you  also  : 
"  The  Master  saith  I "  The  voices  of  all  His  disciples  are  but  weak  echoes  of  the 
mightier  and  abiding  voice  which  is  His.  "  The  Master  saith  1 "  But  where  ?  Hath 
His  voice  a  local  habitation  and  a  name  f  Doth  He  reach  me  through  the  channel 
of  my  senses,  or  how  doth  He  touch  my  living  spirit  ?  It  is  here  that  "  the  Master 
saith  1 " — even  now.  These  poor  temples  of  ours,  they  are  for  the  most  part 
but  shapeless  structures  of  stone  and  lime,  yet  they  are  clothed  with  the  spiritual 
and  unfading  beauty  of  a  Divine  guest-chamber ;  a  voice  which  is  not  my  voice 
overpowers  my  struggling  will,  subdues  by  gentle  and  beautiful  processes  my  efforts 
to  make  my  own  will  my  law  and  arbiter  of  duty,  and  speaks  through  me.  And 
most  of  all  is  it  of  infinite  moment  to  know  that  there  is  one  called  "  Master," 
and  who  does  speak.  This  is  what  I  need  to  know  and  feel.  In  Jesus  of  Nazereth 
life  and  duty  are  reconciled.  In  Him  I  recognize  the  Master  whom  I  need.  To 
Him,  in  whom  gentleness  was  so  perfectly  blended  with  strength,  I  come,  craving 
to  touch  but  the  hem  of  His  garment,  contented  in  that  I  have  seen  my  Lord. 
♦'  The  Master  saith  ! "  If  His  voice  is  the  voice  of  an  authority,  sublimely  enforced 
through  self-denial,  patience,  gentleness,  suffering,  and  death,  why  should  I  crave 
more  ?  Shall  I  not  say.  It  is  enough ;  He  calleth  me,  and  I  must  answer  ?  He  bids 
me  arise,  and  I  must  arise.  For  me  the  highest  virtue  is  obedience,  for  it  is  the 
Master  who  saith.     (J.  Vickery.) 

Vers.  18-21.  And  as  they  sat  and  did  eat. — T?ie  company  makei  the  feast : — ^The 
mgredients  of  this  meal  were  few  and  simple,  but  the  presence  of  Christ  made  it 
more  than  roysi.  It  is  not  what  men  have  to  eat,  but  the  company  that  makes  a 
meal  delightful.  Agassiz,  when  a  young  man  travelling  in  Germany,  visited  Oken, 
the  eminent  zoologist.  "After  I  had  delivered  to  him  my  letter  of  introduction," 
he  says,  "  Oken  asked  me  to  dine  with  him.  The  dinner  consisted  only  of  potatoei 
boiled  and  roasted,  but  it  was  the  best  dinner  I  ever  ate,  for  there  was  Oken.     The 


ZXT.]  8T,  MARS.  533 

mind  of  the  man  seemed  to  enter  into  what  we  ate  socially  together,  and  I  devonred 
his  intellect  while  eating  his  potatoes."  So  the  presence  of  Christ  as  the  realized 
embodiment  of  the  Passover,  and  His  Diviue  discourse,  made  that  Paschal  meal 
the  most  memorable  ever  eaten.  It  is  a  feast,  moreover,  whose  solemn  delight  is  a 
perpetual  heritage  of  the  Christian  Church.  Christ  made  it  so  by  erecting  upon  it 
the  sacrament  of  His  supper,  the  equivalent  in  the  new  kingdom  of  God  to  the 
Passover  in  the  old,  and  making  its  recurring  celebration,  there  enjoined,  the  means 
of  preserving  the  memory  of  all  that  then  transpired.  {A.  H.  Currier.)  The  bad 
among  the  good : — 1.  In  the  holiest  society  on  earth,  the  unholy  may  have  a  place. 
2.  The  highest  goodness  may  fail  to  win  to  the  obedience  of  faith.  3.  There  may 
be  moral  wrong  without  present  consciousness.  4.  The  knowledge  and  appointment 
of  God  do  not  hinder  the  freedom  and  responsibility  of  man.  {J.  H.  Godwin.) 
The  treachery  of  Judas  foretold : — I.  A  fearful  announcement.  Christ  had  already 
more  than  once  predicted  that  He  would  be  betrayed ;  but  now  He  adds  to  the 
intimation  the  terrible  news  that  it  would  be  by  one  of  themselves.  A  little  of  the 
horror  of  thick  darkness  which  His  words  spread  over  them  still  pervades  our  hearts. 
The  fact  is  more  than  anything  else,  suggestive  of  all  that  is  dark  and  pitiful  in 
human  nature.  It  shows — 1.  How  measureless  may  be  the  evil  a  man  may  reach 
by  simply  giving  way  to  wrong.  2.  No  privileges,  no  light,  no  opportunity,  can 
bless  a  man  without  his  own  co-operation.  3.  Privileges,  if  unimproved,  injure  the 
soul.  4.  Without  self-surrender  to  God,  every  other  religious  quality  and  tendency 
is  insufficient  to  save  the  soul.  Judas  only  lacked  this  one  thing.  6.  As  the 
existence  of  a  pure  soul  is  itself  a  proof  and  a  prediction  of  heaven,  so  such  a  soul 
seems  to  prove  and  predict  a  hell.  II.  Christ's  reasons  fob  making  this  fearfitl 
ANNOUNCEMENT.  1.  Perhaps  to  cure  the  pride  of  the  disciples.  The  announcement 
that  one  of  them  will  betray  will  help  to  abate  their  vehemence  in  seeking  to  know 
♦•  who  shall  be  greatest."  2.  To  give  Judas  a  glimpse  of  the  perdition  before  him, 
and  thus  awake  repentance.  3.  To  intimate  to  him  that,  though  the  Saviour  might 
die  by  his  craft,  it  was  with  His  own  knowledge  and  consent.    {R.  Glover.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  Shall  betray  Me. — The  betrayal : — ^What  think  you,  my  brethren.if  a 
similar  declaration  were  made  in  regard  to  ourselves  ?  Should  we  sorrowfully  ask, 
*•  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  Should  we  not  be  more  likely  to  ask, "  Lord,  is  it  this  man  ?  "  Lord, 
is  it  that  man?"  Would  not  Peter  be  more  ready  to  say,  "Is  it  John?"  and 
John,  "  Is  it  Peter  ?  "  than  either,  "  Is  it  I  ?  "  It  is  a  good  sign  when  we  are  less 
suspicious  of  others  than  of  ourselves,  more  mistrustful  of  ourselves  than  of  others 
in  regard  of  the  commission  of  sin  ;  as  indeed  we  ought  always  to  be,  for  we  have 
better  opportunities  of  knowing  our  own  proneness  to  evil,  our  own  weakness,  our  own 
deceitfulness,  than  we  can  have  of  that  of  others ;  and  therefore  we  have  far  more 
cause  to  ask,  ♦'  Is  it  I?" — the  question  showing  that  we  dare  not  answer  for  our- 
selves,— than,  "  Lord,  is  it  my  neighbour  ?  " — the  question  indicating  that  we  think 
others  capable  of  worse  things  than  ourselves.  Peter  was  safe  when  asking, 
"  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  but  in  sore  danger  when  he  exclaimed,  "  Although  all  shall  be 
offended  because  of  Thee,  yet  will  not  I."  I.  Suppose  Judas  to  have  been  aware,  as 
he  might  have  been,  both  from  ancient  prophecy,  and  from  the  express  declarations 
of  onr  Lord  Himself,  that  Jesus,  if  He  were  indeed  the  Christ,  must  be  delivered  to 
His  enemies,  and  ignominiously  put  to  death — might  he  not,  then,  very  probably 
say  to  himself,  "  After  all,  I  shall  only  be  helping  to  accomplish  what  has  been 
determined  by  God,  and  what  is  indispensable  to  the  work  which  Messiah  has 
undertaken?  "  I  do  not  know  any  train  of  thought  which  is  more  likely  to  have 
presented  itself  to  the  mind  of  Judas  than  this.  *'  The  Son  of  man  goeth  as  it  is 
written  of  Him."  Bat  this  determination,  this  certainty,  left  undiminished  the 
guiltiness  of  the  parties  who  put  Christ  to  death.  They  obeyed  nothing  but  the 
suggestions  of  their  own  wilful  hearts ;  they  were  actuated  by  nothing  but  their 
desperate  malice  and  hatred  of  Jesus,  when  they  accomplished  prophecies  and  ful- 
filled Divine  decrees.  Therefore  was  it  no  excuse  for  them  that  they  were  only 
bringing  to  pass  what  had  long  before  been  ordained.  The  whole  burden  of  the 
crime  rested  upon  the  crucifiers,  however  true  it  was  that  Christ  must  be  crucified. 
It  did  not  make  Judas  turn  traitor  that  God  foreknew  his  treason,  and  determined 
to  render  it  subservient  to  His  own  almighty  ends.  God,  indeed,  knew  that  Judas 
would  betray  his  Master,  but  God's  knowing  it  did  not  conduce  to  his  doing  it  It 
was  certain,  but  the  foreknown  wickedness  of  the  man  causes  the  certainty,  and  not 
the  fore-ordained  performance  of  the  deed.  Oh  I  the  utter  vanity  of  the  thoughti 
that  God  ever  places  us  onder  a  necessity  of  sinning,  or  that  beoaase  our  sins  may 


^  ^    i  tt§i^i.,i,^^  $X 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chip.  jxw. 

turn  to  His  glory  they  will  not  issue  in  our  shame.  IL  And  now  let  us  glance  at 
another  delusion  to  which  it  is  likely  that  Judas  gave  indulgence.  This  is  the 
delusion  as  to  the  consequences,  the  punishment  of  sin,  being  exaggerated  or 
over-stated.  It  may  be  that  Judas  could  hardly  persuade  himseU  that  a  being  so 
beneficent  as  Christ  would  ever  wholly  lay  aside  the  graciousness  of  His  nature, 
-and  avenge  a  wrong  done  by  surrendering  thn  doer  to  intense  and  interminable 
anguish.  But,  in  all  the  range  of  Scripture,  there  is  not,  perhaps,  a  passage  which 
seie  itself  so  decisively  against  this  delusion  as  the  latter  clause  of  our  Saviour's 
iddress  in  the  text — "It  had  been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been  bom." 
There  is  nothing  in  the  Bible  which  gives  me  so  strong  an  idea  of  the  utter  moral 
I'.ariiness  in  which  a  man  is  left  who  is  forsaken  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  the  fact 
that  Judas's  question,  "Lord,  is  it  I?"  followed  immediately  on  Christ's  saying, 
"  Woe  unto  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  ;  '*  and  that  his  going 
forth  to  fill  his  accursed  compact  with  the  priests  was  on  the  instant  of  his  having 
been  told  that  Christ  knew  him  for  the  traitor.  I  pause  on  the  word  "  then,"  and 
I  am  tempted  to  ask,  could  it,  oh  !  could  it  have  been  "then?"  Yes,  "then"  it 
was  that,  with  the  words, "  It  had  been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been  bom," 
— ^words  vocal  of  an  eternity  of  unimagined  woe — then  it  was  that,  with  these 
words  rung  out  to  him  as  the  knell  of  his  own  doomed  spirit,  Judas  proceeded  to 
address  Christ  with  a  taunting  and  insolent  inquiry,  and  then  went  out  to  accom- 
plish the  traitorous  purpose  which  had  called  forth  the  tremendous  denunciation. 
With  what  earnestness  should  we  join  in  that  prayer  in  the  Liturgy,  ♦'  Take  not 
Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  us ! ''  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Judaa  arid  the  disciplei : — There 
will  be  many  that  were  gallant  professors  in  this  world  wanting  among  the  saved 
in  the  day  of  Christ's  coming  ;  yea,  many  whose  damnation  was  never  dreamed  of. 
Which  of  the  twelve  ever  thought  that  Judas  would  have  proved  a  devil  ?  Nay,  when 
Christ  suggested  that  one  among  them  was  naught,  they  each  were  more  afiiaid  of 
themselves  than  of  him.  {Bunyan.)  Jvdas  as  he  appeared  to  the  other  apottUi : — 
You  will  observe  that  the  character  of  Judas  was  openly  an  admirable  one.  I  find 
not  that  he  committed  himself  in  any  way.  Not  the  slightest  speck  defiled  his 
moral  character  so  far  as  others  oould  perceive.  He  was  no  boaster,  like  Peter ;  he 
was  free  enough  from  the  rashness  which  cries,  "  Though  all  men  should  forsake 
Thee,  yet  will  not  I."  He  asks  no  place  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne,  his  am- 
bition is  of  another  sort.  He  does  not  ask  idle  questions.  The  Judas  who  asks 
questions  is  "  not  Iscariot."  Thomas  and  Philip  are  often  prying  into  deep  matters, 
but  not  Judas.  He  receives  truth  as  it  is  taught  him,  and  when  others  are  offended 
and  walk  no  more  with  Jesus,  he  faithfully  adheres  to  Him,  having  golden  reasons 
for  so  doing.  He  does  not  indulge  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  or  in  the  pride  of  life. 
None  of  the  disciples  suspected  him  of  hypocrisy;  they  said  at  the  table,  "  Lord,  is 
it  I  ?  "  They  never  said .  "  Lord,  is  it  Judas  ?  "  It  was  true  he  had  been  filching  for 
months,  but  then  he  did  it  by  littles,  and  covered  his  defalcations  so  well  by 
financial  manipulations  that  he  ran  no  risk  of  detection  from  the  honest  unsuspect- 
ing fishermen  with  whom  he  associated.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Judas  unsuspected 
to  the  last : — A  secret  sin  works  insidiouflly,  but  with  wondrous  quiet  power.  Its 
hidden  ravages  are  awful,  and  the  outward  revelation  of  their  rest^t  and  existence 
may  be  contemporaneous.  Until  that  revelation  was  made,  probably  no  one  erw 
suspected  the  presence  in  the  man  of  anything  but  a  few  venial  faults  which  were 
OS  mere  excrescences  on  a  robust  character,  though  these  growths  were  something 
rude.  Oftentimes  a  large  fungus  will  start  from  a  tree,  and  in  some  mysterious 
manner  will  sap  the  life-power  on  the  spot  on  which  it  grows.  They  were  like  that 
fungus.  When  the  fungus  falls  in  the  autumn,  it  leaves  scarcely  a  trace  of  its 
presence,  the  tree  being  apparently  as  healthy  as  before  the  advent  of  the  parasite. 
But  the  whole  character  of  the  wood  has  been  changed  by  the  strange  power  of  the 
fungus,  being  soft  and  cork-Uke  to  the  touch.  Perhaps  the  parasite  may  fall  in  the 
autumn,  and  the  tree  may  show  no  symptoms  of  decay  ;  but  at  the  first  tempest  it 
may  have  to  encounter,  the  trunk  snaps  off  at  the  spot  where  the  fungus  has  been, 
and  the  extent  of  the  injury  is  at  once  disclosed.  As  long  as  any  portion  of  that 
tree  retains  life,  it  will  continue  to  throw  out  these  destructive  fungi ;  and  even 
when  a  mere  stump  is  left  in  the  ground,  the  fungi  will  push  themBelvea  ont  in 
profusion.  {Scientific  Illustrations  and  Symbols.)  The  treason  of  Judas  fore- 
shoum  by  Christ : — I.  The  first  is,  the  fact  spxcinxD.  *'  The  Son  of  man  iff  betrayed 
to  be  crucified."  Do  any  ask,  as  those  of  old  did,  "Who  is  this  Son  of  manf " 
This  Son  of  man  is  none  other  than  the  very  person,  of  whom  the  apostle  spake  M 
possessing  in  Himself  "  the  great  mystery  of  godliness ;  "  He  is  "  C^  manifest  iv 


IT.J  8T.  MARK,  §85 

the  flesh."  There  is,  first,  the  heinous  character  of  the  traitor  that  betrayed  Him ; 
secondly,  the  importance  of  hunting  out  and  exposing  the  imitators  of  his  black 
deed  in  the  present  day — and,  God  helping  me,  I  mean  to  be  faithful  here ;  and 
then,  in  the  third  place,  the  sufferings  of  Him  who  was  betrayed  and  crucified.  Let 
me  invite  you  to  pray  over  tbese  three  things.  1.  The  heinousness  of  the  traitor. 
He  had  made  a  glaring  profession.  He  had  attached  himself  to  the  disciples  of 
Christ ;  he  had  become  a  member  of  the  purest  Church  that  ever  was  formed  upon 
earth — the  immediate  twelve  around  our  Lord.  He  was  looked  up  to,  a  leading  man. 
I  beseech  you,  weigh  this  solemn  fact — for  a  solemn  one  it  is— that  neither  pro- 
fession, nor  diligent  exertion,  nor  high  standing  among  professors,  so  as  to  be 
beyond  even  suspicion,  will  stand  in  the  stead  of  vital  godliness.  And  there  may 
be  Juda^es  even  now,  and  I  believe  there  are  not  a  few,  that  are  as  much  un- 
suspected as  Judas  Iscariot  was.  So  artful  was  his  deception,  that  none  of  the 
disciples  suspected  him.  Nay  more ;  the  first  feature  of  his  character  that  is 
developed,  the  first  view  we  have  of  him  in  his  real  character,  is,  that  he  was  the 
last  to  suspect  himself.  All  the  others  had  said,  "Lord,  is  it  I?  " — and  last  of  all, 
Judas  drawls  it  out,  "  Master,  is  it  I?  "  Yet  after  all  the  standing  he  gained,  after 
all  the  miracles  he  -^ibserved,  aftei  cill  the  attacbment  he  professed,  this  wretch,  for 
thirty  pieces  of  silver,  is  content  to  betray  his  Lord.  Ah  1  only  put  a  money  bait  in 
the  way  of  the  Judases,  and  you  soon  find  them  out ;  that  will  find  them  out,  if 
nothing  else  will.  Of  course.  His  enemies  are  glad  to  have  Him  seized  ;  but  who 
would  believe  it  possible,  especially  among  those  who  have  such  a  high  opinion  of 
the  dignity  of  human  nature,  that  this  wretch,  after  eating  and  drinking  with  Christ, 
after  following  Him  all  His  ministry  through,  can  go  and  betray  Him  with  a  kisa  ? 
can  say,  in  the  very  act  of  betraying  Him,  "  Hail,  Master  ? " — carrying  on  his  devilism 
to  the  last.  2.  But  I  want  a  word  of  interrogation  with  regard  to  imitators  or 
Judas  in  the  present  day.  Have  you  thrown  "the  bag"  away?  Have  you  done 
with  carnal  objects  and  pursuits?  Do  you  scorn  the  idea  of  marketing  about 
Christ,  and  selling  Him — bartering  Him  ?  Are  you  really  and  honestly  concerned 
about  the  truth  of  Christ,  the  interests  of  His  cause,  the  purity  of  His  gospel,  the 
•acredness  of  His  ordinances  ?  Oh  1  try,  try  these  matters.  I  would  not  for  the 
world  have  a  single  masked  character  about  me,  of  the  Judas-like  breed.  3.  Let 
me  now  invite  your  attention  for  a  moment  to  the  other  point — the  sufferings  of 
this  betrayed  and  murdered  Lord.  *•  The  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified." 
Ib  not  this  enough  to  make  a  man  hate  sin  ?  If  you  do  not  hate  sin  in  its  very 
nature,  yon  have  never  been  to  Calvary,  and  you  have  never  had  fellowship 
with  a  precious  Christ.  Wherever  the  blood  of  atonement  is  applied,  it  produces 
hatred  of  sin:  oh  that  you  and  I  may  live  upon  Calvary,  until  every  sin 
shall  be  mortified,  subdued,  and  kept  under,  and  Christ  reign  supreme! 
II.  I  pass  on  to  the  second  feature  in  our  subject:  the  ofticial  announce- 
ment OK  THIS  FACT  BY  THK  SuFFEBEB  HiMSELF.  III.  I  pass  on  to  the  third 
particular  of  our  subject — the  result.  "The  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  bo 
crucified ;  "  but  the  matter  did  not  end  there.  "  The  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be 
crucified  ;  "  and  then  the  powers  of  darkness  have  done  their  worst.  "  The  Son  of 
man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified ;  "  and  even  death  shall  lose  its  sting,  hell  shali 
lOM  its  terrors  for  all  Mine  elect,  Jehovah  shall  get  the  glory  of  His  own  name,  and 
I  ihall  go  throogh  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  to  My  exaltation.  To  be  brief, 
I  will  just  name  three  things  as  the  result  anticipated ;  for  you  know  it  is  said, 
that  "  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him,  He  endured  the  cross."  And  what  was  it  ? 
The  redeemed  to  be  emancipated ;  Christ  to  be  exalted;  and  heaven  to  be  opened  and 
peopled.  These  are  the  results ;  and  I  said,  when  I  gave  yon  l^e  plan  of  my  sermon, 
that  He  should  not  be  disappointed  in  any  of  them;  nor  shall  He.  {J.  Irons,  D.D.) 
Treachery  to  Christ : — Wrongs  and  indignities  may  be  offered  to  Christ  still,  in 
sundry  ways.  1.  In  His  person.  By  vilifying  Him,  as  do  Turks,  Jews,  and 
heathen.  Also,  when  any  deny  or  oppose  His  Nature — either  the  Godhead  or  the 
Manhood,  as  do  heretics.  Also,  when  any  profane  the  blood  of  Christ,  by  re- 
maining unrepentant,  or  turning  apostate.  2.  In  His  office,  as  Mediator ;  putting 
any  person  or  thing  in  His  place.  8.  In  His  names  or  titles ;  using  them  profanely. 
4.  In  His  saints  and  faithful  members ;  wronging  or  abusing  them.  5.  In  His 
messengers  and  ministers  (Luke  x.  16).  6.  In  His  holy  ordinances ;  the  Word, 
sacraments,  <fto.  (1  Cor.  xi.  27).  By  this  we  may  examine  whether  the  love  to 
Christ  which  we  profess  is  true  and  sincere.  Does  this  child  love  his  father,  or 
that  servant  his  master,  who  can  hear  him  abused  and  reproached?  {Oewg^ 
Petter.)        Latent  possibilities  of  evil: — There  is  latent  evil  lurking  in  all  our 


•86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxt. 

hearts,  of  which  we  are  not  aware  ourselves.  We  do  not  know  how  many  devils  of 
selfishness,  sense,  and  falsehood  are  hiding  themselves  in  the  mysterious  depths  of 
our  souls.  If  we  do  not  learn  this  through  that  noble  Christian  humility  which 
*'  still  suspects  and  still  reveres  itself,"  we  must  learn  it  through  the  bitter  experience 
of  failure  and  open  sin.  How  many  examples  there  are  to  prove  the  existence  oi 
this  latent  evil  1  We  have  seen  a  young  man  go  from  the  pure  home  of  his  child- 
hood, from  the  holy  influences  of  a  Christian  community.  As  an  infant  his  brow 
had  been  touched  with  the  water  of  baptism  amid  the  prayers  of  the  Church  ;  as  a 
child  his  feet  had  been  taught  the  way  to  the  house  of  God;  in  his  home  his 
parents  had  prayed  for  him  that  he  might  be  an  honest  and  useful  man,  whether 
he  was  to  be  poor  or  rich,  learned  or  ignorant.  He  leaves  his  home  and  comes  to 
the  city  to  engage  in  business.  He  trusts  in  his  own  heart,  in  his  own  upright 
purpose,  in  his  own  virtuous  habits.  But  there  is  latent  evil  in  his  heart,  there  ifl 
a  secret  selfishness,  which  is  ready  to  break  out  under  the  influences  which  will 
now  surround  him.  He  becomes  a  lover  of  pleasure;  he  attends  balls  and 
theatres ;  he  rides  out  with  gay  companions  :  he  acquires  a  taste  for  play,  wine,  and 
excitement.  He  determines  to  make  money  that  he  may  indulge  these  new  tastes^ 
and  he  devotes  all  his  energies  to  this  pursuit.  In  a  year  or  two,  how  far  has  he 
gone  from  the  innocent  hopes  and  tastes  of  his  childhood?  His  serene  brow  is 
furrowed  with  worldly  lines ;  his  pure  eye  clouded  with  licentious  indulgence.  The 
latent  evil  that  was  in  him  has  come  out  under  the  test  of  these  new  circumstances. 
.  .  .  The  moral  of  it  all  is,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it  are  the 
issues  of  life."  But  how  can  we  keep  our  heart  ?  We  can  keep  our  hands,  by  an 
effort,  from  wrong  actions,  and  force  them  to  do  right  ones.  We  can  keep  our  lips 
from  saying  unkind  or  hasty  words,  though  that  is  sometimes  hard  enough.  But 
how  keep  our  heart  ?  How  make  ourselves  a  right  spirit,  a  good  temper  ?  That 
seems  simply  impossible.  How  direct  those  tendencies  which  are  hidden  even  from 
ourselves  ?  Here,  it  seems  to  me,  is  the  place  and  need  of  religion.  If  it  be  true 
that  our  soul  lies  open  inwardly  to  God,  and  that  we  rest  on  Him,  then  is  it  not 
possible,  is  it  not  probable,  that  if  we  put  our  heart  into  His  hands  He  will  guide 
it  ?  And  the  experience  of  universal  man,  in  all  ages,  all  countries,  all  religions, 
teaches  this  value  of  prayer.  It  is  taught  by  Socrates  and  Seneca,  no  less  tl^n  by 
Jesus  Christ.  Here  is  the  place  of  religion  :  this  is  its  need.  We  do  not  need  to 
pray  to  God  for  what  we  can  do  ourselves.  But  what  we  cannot  do  for  ourselves  is 
to  guide  and  keep  and  direct  this  hidden  man  of  the  heart.  We  have  a  right  to 
come  boldly  to  God  for  this ;  asking  His  spirit,  and  expecting  to  receive  it.  This 
is  a  promise  we  can  trust  in,  that  God  will  give  His  Holy  Spirit  to  those  who  ask 
Him.  {J.  Freeman  Clarke.)  The  question  that  went  round  the  table  .-—I.  Look 
AT  TH»  QUESTION,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  II.  Look  at  this  question  in  connection  with 
THE  BEMABK  THAT  CALLED  IT  FOBTH.  What  did  Judas  Sell  Chrfst  for  ?  The  old 
German  story  reports  that  the  astrologer  Faustus  sold  his  soul  to  the  evil  one  for 
twenty-four  years  of  earthly  happiness.  What  was  the  bargain  in  this  case  ?  The 
auctioneer  had  tempting  lists  to  show ;  what  was  it  that  tempted  Judas  f  He  sold 
his  Lord  for  thirty  somethings.  What  things  ?  Thirty  years  of  right  over  all  the 
earth,  with  all  the  trees  of  the  forests,  all  the  fowls  of  the  mountains,  and  the  cattle 
upon  a  thousand  hills  ?  For  thirty  armies  ?  Or  thirty  fleets  ?  Thirty  stars  ? 
Thirty  centuries  of  power,  to  reign  majestically  on  hell's  burning  throne?  No,  for 
thirty  shillings  1    III.  Look  at  the  question  in  connection  with  the  simple 

UNSUSPECTING  BROTHEBUNESS  IT  BEVEALED  IN  THOSE  TO  WHOM  IT  WAS  SPOKEN.       When 

Christ's  declaration  was  made,  "  One  of  you  shall  betray  Me,"  it  would  not  have 
been  wonderful,  judging  by  a  common  standard,  if  such  words  as  these  had  passed 
through  various  minds— ''It  is  Judas ;  I  always  thought  him  the  black  sheep  of 
the  fold ;  I  never  liked  his  grasp  of  that  bag ;  I  never  liked  the  mystery  of  that 
missing  cash ;  I  never  liked  the  look  of  him;  I  never  liked  his  fussy  whisper."  No 
such  thoughts  were  in  open  or  secret  circulation.  The  disciples  already  ex- 
emplified  the  principle,  and  carried  in  their  hearts  the  Divine  music  of  the 
language,  "Love  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind  ...  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketb 
no  evil ;  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the  truth ;  beareth  all  things, 
belie veth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things."  With  lips  that  were 
tremulous,  and  cheeks  that  were  blanched,  each  one  said,  not,  "  Lord,  is  it  he  f  " 
but,  "Lord,  is  it  I?"  IV.  Look  at  this  question  in  connection  with  thk  feab 
FOB  HiMSELP,  shown  BY  EVERY  ONE  WHO  ASKED  IT.  A  pieaohcr  in  a  certain  viUage 
church  once  gave  easy  lessons  in  Christian  ethics  through  a  scheme  of  illustration 
taken  from  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.    Rebuking  his  hearers  for  their  readiness  t« 


OBAP.  XIV.]  ST.  MARK.  687 

epeak  evil  of  their  neigbbonrs,  he  said  that,  regarding  each  letter  of  the  alphabet 
as  the  initial  letter  of  a  name,  they  had  something  to  say  against  all  the  letters, 
with  one  exception.  His  homily  was  to  this  effect.  **  You  say,  A  lies,  B  steals, 
C  swears,  D  drinks,  F  brags,  G  goes  into  a  passion,  H  gets  into  debt.  The  letter  I 
is  the  only  one  of  which  you  have  nothing  to  say."  No  rustics  can  require  such 
elementary  education  more  tlian  do  some  keen  leaders  of  society.  Pitiless  detectors 
of  sin  in  others,  begin  at  home.  Think  first  of  that  which  is  represented  by  the 
letter  I.  It  is  a  necessary  word,  for  you  can  never  get  beyond  it,  never  do  without 
it,  while  you  live,  or  when  you  die.  It  is  a  deep  word,  for  who  can  sound  the  sea 
of  its  deep  significance  f  It  is  an  important  word,  for  of  all  words  which  can 
lighten  as  with  their  flash,  or  startle  us  with  their  blow,  there  is  no  more  important 
word  to  us  than  this.  Who  is  there?  "I."  Who  are  you?  Conjure  up  this 
mystery — this  "you,"  symbolized  by  the  letter  *•  I."  Face  it,  speak  to  it,  challenge 
it,  and  know  if  all  is  right  with  it.  If  indeed  you  can  say,  ♦•  I  am  a  Christian  "  ; 
«*  I  believe,  help,  Lord,  mine  unbelief ; "  "I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me ; " 
still  you  feel  that  two  natures  for  the  present  war  within  you,  and  have  need  to 
offer  Augustine's  prayer,  "  Lord,  deliver  me  from  the  wicked  man,  myself."  When 
the  wind  is  rising,  and  the  waves  are  treacherous,  it  is  good  for  each  man  to  look  to 
his  own  ship,  to  his  own  ropes,  to  his  own  sails ;  not  first  to  stand  and  speculate  on 
the  seaworthiness  of  other  ships.     V.  Look  at  this  question  in  connection  with 

THE  LOVE   that  WORKED  IN  THE   HEART  OF  THE   QUESTIONER.      Not  OnC  of  them  CVCr 

knew  before  how  much  he  loved  his  Lord,  but  this  shock  brought  the  love  out. 
VI.  Look  at  this  question  in  connection  with  the  answer  to  it.  "  Thou  hast 
said."  You  can  read  what  is  on  the  open  page,  Jesus  can  look  through  the  lids  of 
the  book,  and  read  off  the  sheet — in  print.  You  can  see  the  whited  sepulchre;  He 
can  see  the  skeleton  within.  You  can  see  the  fair  appearance,  He  can  see  the  wolf 
under  the  borrowed  fleece.  You  can  see  the  body.  He  can  see  the  soul.  Now  the 
secret  had  come  to  light,  as  one  day  all  secrets  will.  YII.  Look  at  this  question 
in  other  possible  applications.  "One  of  you  will  go  out  of  this  place  a  lost 
spirit."  "  Lord,  is  it  I  f  "  "One  of  you,  having  refused  the  Divine  love  before, 
will  refuse  it  again  1  '*  "  Lord,  is  it  I  f  "  "  One  of  you  will  go  out  with  a  harder 
heart  than  when  he  oame  in."  "Lord,  is  it  IT"  "  One  of  you,  a  waverer  now, 
will  be  a  waverer  still."  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  **  One  of  you,  now  almost  persuaded  to 
be  a  Christian,  will  still  remain  only  almost  persuaded."  *♦  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  "  One 
of  you,  already  a  true  disciple,  will  refuse,  as  you  have  refused  before,  to  confess 
your  faith  1 "  "  Lord,  is  it  I P  "  Let  us  think,  on  the  other  hand,  of  certain  happy 
possibilities  in  the  fair  use  of  these  words.  There  will  come  a  time,  beyond  what 
we  now  call  time,  when,  in  the  rapture  of  immortality,  and  in  the  language  of 
heaven,  you  will  say,  "  Have  I  in  reality  come  through  death  ?  Am  I  on  the  other 
side  ?  Can  it  be  that  I  am  glorified  at  last  f  This,  so  wonderful  beyond  language 
to  express,  so  bright  beyond  the  most  enchanted  fancy  to  picture,  what  is  it  ?  Is  it 
solid  ?  Or  is  it  a  glory  of  dreamland  ?  I  used  to  sin,  I  used  to  be  slow,  I  used  to  be 
weary,  I  used  to  have  dim  eyes,  and  dull  ears  1  Now  I  see  1  Now  I  love  I  Now  I  can 
fly  like  the  light  1  Lord,  is  it  I?"  {Charles  Stanford, D.D.)  The  history  of  Jtidas :— 
Of  Judas  this  fearful  sentence  is  uttered  by  the  Lord.  I.  But  before  entering  into 
the  particulars  of  his  history,  a  few  general  remarks  are  pertinent.  1.  There 
ia  no  evidence  that  Judas  Iscariot  was  a  man  of  bad  countenance.  Most  men  are 
much  influenced  by  looks,  and  many  think  they  can  tell  a  man's  character  by  the 
physiognomy.  This  may  often  be  true,  but  there  are  many  exceptions.  2;  There 
is  no  evidence  that,  up  to  his  betrayal  of  his  Lord,  his  conduct  was  the  subject  of 
censure,  complaint,  jealousy,  or  of  the  slightest  suspicion.  His  sins  were  all  con< 
cealed  from  the  eyes  of  mortals.  He  was  a  thief,  but  that  was  known  only  to 
Omniscience.  3*  There  is  no  evidence  that,  during  his  continuance  with  Christ,  he 
regarded  himself  as  a  hypocrite.  Doubtless  he  thought  himself  honest.  4.  Let  it 
not  be  supposed  that  Judas  ought  not  to  have  known  his  character.  He  shut  his 
eyes  to  the  truth  respecting  himself.  The  aggravations  of  the  sin  of  betraying 
Christ  were  many  and  great.  The  traitor  was  eminent  in  place,  in  gifts,  in  office, 
in  profession ;  a  guide  to  others,  and  one  whose  example  was  likely  to  influence 
many.  H.  The  lessons  taught  us  by  the  life  and  end  of  Judas  are  such  as 
these — 1.  Though  wicked  men  do  not  so  intend,  yet  in  all  cases  they  shall  certainly 
glorify  God  by  all  their  misdeeds  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  10).  The  wickedness  of  Judas  wab 
by  God  over-ruled  to  bring  about  the  most  important  event  in  man's  salvation. 
The  wicked  now  hate  God,  but  they  cannot  defeat  Him.  2.  Nor  shall  God'i 
nnfftiling  purpose  to  bring  good  out  of  evil  abate  aught  of  the  gmlt  of  those  wh« 


588  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnr« 


work  iniquity  (Acts  ii.  28 ;  iv.  27,  28).  8.  From  the  history  of  Jndas  we  also  learn 
that  when  a  man  is  once  fairly  started  in  a  career  of  wickedness,  it  is  impossible  to 
tell  where  he  may  stop.  In  the  next  world  surprise  awaits  aU  the  impenitent. 
4.  All  men  should  especially  beware  of  covetousness  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).  6.  Did  men 
but  know  how  bitter  would  be  the  end  of  transgression,  they  would  at  least  pause 
before  they  plunge  into  all  evil.  Oh  1  that  men  would  hear  the  warning  words  of 
Richard  Baxter,  "  Use  sin  as  it  will  use  you :  spare  it  not,  for  it  will  not  spare  you ; 
it  is  your  murderer  and  the  murderer  of  the  world.  Use  it,  therefore,  as  a 
murderer  should  be  used."  6.  How  small  a  temptation  to  sin  will  at  last  prevail 
over  a  vicious  mind.  For  less  than  twenty  dollars  Judas  sold  his  Lord  and 
Master.  Those  temptations  commonly  esteemed  great  are  not  the  most  sure  to 
prevail.  7.  Nothing  prepares  a  man  for  destruction  faster  than  hypocrisy  or 
formality  in  actions  of  a  religious  nature.  The  three  years  which  Judas  spent  in 
the  family  of  our  Lord  probably  exceeded  all  the  rest  of  his  life  in  ripening  him 
for  destruction.  We  should  never  forget  that  official  character  is  one  thing,  and 
moral  character  another  thing.  All  official  characters  may  be  sustained  without 
any  real  grace  in  the  heart.  8.  The  history  of  Judas  shows  us  how  man  will  cling 
to  false  hopes.  There  is  no  evidence  that  during  years  of  hypocrisy  he  ever 
seriously  doubted  his  own  piety.  9.  If  men  thus  self-confident  forsake  their  pro- 
fession, and  openly  apostatize,  we  need  not  be  surprised.  10.  Thus,  too,  we  have 
a  full  refutation  of  the  objection  made  to  a  connection  with  the  visible  church 
because  there  are  wicked  men  in  her  communion.  The  apostles  certainly  knew 
that  among  them  was  one  bad  man ;  but  they  did  not  therefore  renounce  their 
portion  among  Christ's  professed  friends.  11.  How  difficult  it  is  to  bring  home 
truth  to  the  deceitful  heart  of  man.  Hypocrites  are  slow  to  improve  close,  dis- 
criminating preaching.  They  desire  not  to  look  into  their  real  characters.  12.  The 
case  of  Judas  discloses  the  uselessness  of  that  sorrow  of  the  world  which  worketh 
death,  hath  no  hope  in  it,  and  drives  the  soul  to  madness.  It  is  not  desperation, 
but  penitence,  that  God  requires.  Regrets  without  hatred  of  sin  are  useless,  both 
on  earth  and  in  hell.  {W.  S.  Plumer,  D.D.)  Terrible  result  of  the  secret  working 
of  sin  .-—There  once  sailed  from  the  city  of  New  Orleans  a  large  and  noble 
steamer,  laden  with  cotton,  and  having  a  great  number  of  passengers  on  board. 
While  they  were  taking  in  the  cargo,  a  portion  of  it  became  slightly  moistened  by  a 
shower  of  rain  that  fell.  This  circumstance,  however,  was  not  noticed ;  the  cotton 
was  stowed  away  in  the  hold,  and  the  hatches  fastened  down.  During  the  first  part 
of  the  voyage  all  went  well ;  but,  far  out  towards  the  middle  of  the  Atlantic  ocean, 
all  on  board  were  one  day  alwrmed  by  the  fearful  cry  of  "  Fire  1 "  and  in  a  few 
moments  the  noble  ship  was  completely  enveloped  in  flames.  The  damp  and 
closely-packed  cotton  had  become  heated ;  it  smouldered  away,  and  got  into  a  more 
dangerous  state  every  day,  until  at  last  it  burst  out  into  a  broad  sheet  of  flame,  and 
nothing  could  be  done  to  stop  it.  The  passengers  and  crew  were  compelled  to  take 
to  the  boats  ;  but  some  were  suffocated  and  consumed  in  the  fire,  and  many  more 
were  drowned  in  the  sea.  Now,  the  heated  cotton,  smouldering  in  the  hull  of  that 
vessel,  is  like  sin  in  the  heart  of  a  man.  All  the  while  it  is  working  away 
according  to  its  own  nature,  but  no  one  perceives  it  or  knows  anything  about  it. 
The  man  himself  may  wear  a  smiling  face ;  he  may  in  appearance  be  making  the 
voyage  of  life  smoothly ;  he  may  seem  to  be  happy.  His  family  and  friends  may 
see  nothing  wrong  about  him;  he  may  see  nothing  wrong  about  himself.  But  the 
evil  spirit  within  may  be  growing  stronger  and  stronger,  and  spreading  wider  and 
wider,  until,  in  an  unexpected  moment,  it  breaks  out  into  some  awful  deed  of 
wickedness,  which  in  former  days  would  have  made  him  start  back  with  horror. 
Beware,  then,  of  this  fatal  cheat.  '*  Take  heed,"  as  the  apostle  says  in  another 
place,  "  lest  any  of  you  be  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin."  It  may  smile 
bewitohingly  before  your  eyes ;  it  may  promise  the  most  grateful  sweetness  to  your 
taste.  But,  oh !  put  no  trust  in  it ;  at  the  last  it  will  bite  like  a  serpent  and  sting 
like  an  adder.    (Edgar  Woods,) 

Vers.  22-24.  Jesus  took  bread.— TA«  symbols  of  ChrisVs  body :— L  Lit  vb  olanob 

kt  TBS  OOSPKL  FSAST,  A8  BXHIBITXI)  TO  OUB  VIEW  IN  OCB  PBBIOniOAIi  APPBOAOH  TO 

THB  TABLE  ov  THB  LoBD.  What  IS  it  that  we  are  to  feast  upon  f  What  is  it  of 
which  Jehovah  Jesus  says — •♦  This  is  My  Body,  and  this  is  My  Blood "  f  It  is 
His  own  Person — ^the  glorious,  perfect,  complete  God-Man.  It  is  His  redemption 
work,  accomplished  and  perfected  by  Himself,  which  constitutes  the  gospel-feast. 
1.  The  redemption  which  constitutes  good  for  our  souls  is  perfect.    Christ  has  not 


nr.)  ST.  HARK,  689 

done  His  work  by  halves.  He  has  not  left  His  work  in  an  nnfinished  state.  2. 
Moreover,  the  redemption  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ  is  personal ;  and  if  it  be  not  so, 
there  is  no  eating  of  it.  If  you  come  to  a  meal,  to  make  it  personal,  you  must 
participate;  you  must  receive  for  yourself.  3.  Moreover,  it  is  a  permanent 
jredemption.  II.  Let  mb  pass  on  to  notick  the  ordained  guests.  He  took  and 
brake  it,  and  gave  to  them — His  disciples.  I  do  not  believe  that  Judas  was  there  at 
that  moment,  though  some  people  do.  I  shall  not  stop  to  argue  that  point,  however. 
There  are  two  things,  and  only  two  things,  essential  to  a  welcome  guest.  The  first 
is,  vital  godliness,  as  an  essential  qualification ;  and  the  second  is,  the  imputed 
righteousness  of  Christ  as  the  essential  robe.     III.  Let  me  now  pbess  on  to 

8PEAK  or  THE    OBTHODOX    VIANDS   THAT    WE     EXPECT    TO    FEAST   UPON,    OF  WHICH   MY 

PBECI0U8  Lord  says — "  Take,  eat,  this  is  My  Body,  and  this  is  My  Blood."  The 
sacrificed  Lamb  is  the  great  feast  itself.  This  was  ordered  under  the  Levitical 
dispensation  every  morning  and  evening — a  lamb  to  be  sacrificed  and  presented  to 
the  Lord — the  lamb  of  the  Passover ;  and  the  same  sacred  emblem,  pointing  to  the 
precious  Christ  of  God,  is  declared  to  be  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of 
tiie  world ;  and  just  such  persons  as  I  have  been  describing  were  welcome  to 
partake  of  it.  This  feasting  on  the  Lamb,  the  atoning  Blood,  the  perfect  satisfac- 
tion, and  the  sacred  acceptance  thereof,  is  announced  by  God  Himself  as  a  thing 
with  which  He  is  well  pleased ;  and  the  soul  that  is  under  the  teaching  and  the 
operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  can  find  nothing  to  feast  upon  short  of  It.  If 
I  go  to  some  places  I  have  nothing  but  a  dinner  of  poisonous  herbs :  I  mean 
the  beauties  of  rhetoric,  the  eloquence  of  the  creature,  heathenish  morality,  and 
nothing  to  profit  the  precious  soul  that  is  bom  from  above.  The  believer  is  able 
to  do  what  the  Israelites  were  commanded  to  do :  he  is  able  to  eat  a  whole  lamb ; 
he  is  able  to  partake  of  a  whole  Christ.  So  we  may  well  say  again,  *' having 
Christ,  I  possess  all  things.'*  Do  not  talk  to  me  of  feeding  upon  frames  and 
feelings,  and  groping  amongst  "ifs"  and  "huts,"  and  •*  per  ad  ventures,"  and 
probabilities,  and  contingencies,  and  conditions  and  uncertainties — they  are 
enough  to  make  all  the  people  of  God  like  Pharaoh's  lean  kine,  if  they  do  not 
Absolutely  starve  them  to  death.  IV.  Let  mb  mow  lead  on  youb  attention  to  the 
Masteb'b  wobds — "This  is  My  body,"  and  "This  is  My  Blood  of  the  New 
Testament,  which  is  shed  for  many."  Mark,  I  beseech  you,  that  this  saored 
gospel  feast  is  intended  to  nourish  not  the  fleshly,  but  the  spiritual  existence. 
{Joseph  Irons,  M.A.)  The  emnmunion  service ;— It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark, 
that  almost  every  transaction  of  human  life  has  its  appropriate  ceremony,  its 
established  order  and  process.  In  our  most  familiar  intercourse  we  have  onr 
known  forms  of  salutation.  The  system  is  natural  in  its  origin,  and  beneficial  in 
its  effects.  In  religion  above  all  other  subjects,  established  forms  are  valuable. 
They  fix  attention  on  the  duties  which  we  assemble  to  perform.  They  give  its  due 
solemnity  to  the  most  interesting  of  all  human  concerns.  They  impress  more 
deeply  the  sentiments  of  piety  on  the  heart.  They  support  uniformity  and 
sympathy  in  the  public  worship  of  God.  Would  it  not  then  be  unwise  and 
ungrateful  if  we  did  not  commemorate  by  some  appropriate  ceremony  the  most 
important  transaction  of  the  gospel,  the  sacrifice  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  Such 
has  been  prescribed  by  Him  who  had  the  undoubted  right  to  prescribe  it,  the 
Author  of  that  religion,  which  it  is  intended  to  support.  The  fitness  and  propriety 
of  a  commemoration  appointed  by  such  authority  will  not  be  called  in  question. 

L  ThX  MEMOBY  of  THB  most  INTEBEBTINO  events  is  APT  TO  FADE  FBOM  THE 
MIND,  UNLESS  OCCASIONALLY  REVIYBD  BY  BEFLECTIOM  ON  THEIB  BESPECTIVB  CIB- 
CUMSTANCES,     OB     BY    SOME     SUITABLE     AND     BEOULAB     COMMEMORATION.        EvOU    the 

sentiments  of  friendship  require  to  be  kept  alive  by  tokens  of  regard.  The 
disciples  had  seen  the  miracles  of  Christ.  From  the  minds  of  those  who  had  not 
seen  them,  at  the  distance  of  almost  two  thousand  years,  the  genuine  religion  of 
the  gospel  might  have  been  lost,  had  it  not  been  cherished  by  the  ordinances  of 
the  Church.     U.  Befobb  thb  pitblioation  of  the  gospel  to  the  wobld,  thb 

HATXTEB  OF  XVEBY    HSATHBH    RATION     HAD    THEIB    BESPECTIVa    OFFERINGS    TO  THEIB 

eoDS.  They  knew  not  from  what  authority  their  sacrifices  were  derived.  They 
did  but  imperfectly  understand  the  meaning  of  the  ceremonies  of  their  own 
worship.  Their  expectations  were  limited  almost  to  temporal  advantage.  When 
we  partake  the  sacrament  we  unite  in  an  act  of  worship,  of  which  we  know  the 
aathority,  intention,  and  benefit.    HI.  Thb   saobifioxs    of  thv  heathens,  and 

tHB  FXBTIVAUI  that  FOLLOWED  THEM,  WEBB  USUALLY  ATTENDED  WITH  OBUELTT  TO 
IHOFfBNBITI     ANIMAU,     DISaBAOSO     BY     DOfOBAL     PBAOTIGBB,     AND     PBBFOBMXD     AS 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n?. 

BXTiKous  EXPENSE.  The  sacrifioes  of  the  Jews  were  designed  to  typify  one  efficaciona 
sacrifice  of  the  Bedeemer  of  the  world.  Our  sacrament  is  not  the  sacrifice  itsell 
It  is  only  the  festival  after  it ;  commemorating  the  sacrifice,  and  urging  our  claims 
to  the  benefits,  which  it  was  intended  to  convey.  By  the  prudent  regulations  of 
our  Church  no  indecent  excess  can  disgrace  this  act  of  our  worship.  The  exhorta- 
tions to  repentance,  faith,  and  charity  are  Scriptural.  lY.  The  last  recommendation 
of  our  ceremonies  at  the  sacrament  is  the  fitness  and  propriety  of  the  bub- 
stances  EMPLOYED  ON  THAT  SOLEMN  OCCASION.  From  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of 
Him  who  prescribed  them  this  was  to  be  expected.  Instead  of  the  slaughter  of 
animals,  select  and  perfect,  but  within  the  reach  of  the  poor ; — instead  of  incense 
and  spices  which  are  only  found  in  a  few  favoured  regions  of  the  earth,  and  which 
when  found  are  more  costly  than  appropriate,  our  Saviour  has  directed  us  to  employ 
the  simple  elements  of  bread  and  wine ;  produced  in  every  country ;  which  may  be 
obtamed  without  delay  or  difficulty.  These  elements  are  fit  emblems  of  the 
benefits  to  be  derived  from  the  solemnity ;  nay,  "  the  strengthening  and  refreshing 
of  our  souls  by  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ."  {W.  Barrow,  LL.D.)  The  Lord's 
supper: — ^I.  The  Bbbai>.  This  signifies  our  need  of  spiritual  food  from  Christ. 
We  have  a  spiritual  life  within,  as  real  as  the  physical  life,  and  needing  just  as 
much  a  constant  supply  of  nourishment.  When  General  Grant  took  the  Federal 
army  at  Chattanooga  it  was  feeble  and  dispirited  because  it  was  almost  destitute. 
The  food  of  the  army  was  hauled  with  difficulty  over  mountain  roads  and  the 
supply  was  totally  insufficient.  His  first  movement,  on  assuming  command — and 
it  was  that  which  eventually  led  to  victory, — was  to  repair  the  railroads  and  open 
up  conununication,  so  that  the  army  soon  had  everything  it  needed.  There  is  a 
like  necessity  in  the  spiritual  life  of  Christ's  army.  We  are  worth  very  little  in 
the  service  of  Christ,  except  as  we  are  spiritually  nourished.  The  soul  is  easily 
starved  by  lack  of  appropriate  food.  And  our  spiritual  nourishment  must  come 
from  Christ.  II.  The  bread  was  blessed  by  Christ.  The  significance  of  this 
act  was  that  God  the  Father  was  recognized  as  having  a  part  in  the  work  of  the 
Son.  III.  The  bread  is  bboken  by  Christ.  Why  is  this  ?  Here  is  a  reminder 
of  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  "  This,"  said  Christ,  "  is  My  Body  which  is  broken  for 
you."  The  broken  bread  is  designed  to  bring  to  our  minds  His  sacrificial  work. 
And  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  our  Lord  broke  the  bread  Himself.  He  did  not 
delegate  this  to  another.  So  did  Christ  voluntarily  surrender  Himself  to  death. 
"  Therefore,"  He  affirms  in  one  place,  "doth  the  Father  love  Me,  because  I  lay 
down  My  life,  that  I  might  take  it  again.  No  one  taketh  it  away  from  Me,  but  I 
lay  it  down  of  Myself.  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take  ii 
again."  There  is  a  peculiar  value  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  in  the  fact  that  He 
was  not  forced  to  it.  All  He  did  and  suffered  was  voluntary.  It  was  because  He 
loved  OS.  It  was  in  the  infinite  tenderness  of  His  heart  that  He  became  our 
Saviour.  IV.  The  bread  was  distributed  to  the  disciples  by  Christ.  Here 
is  suggested  our  complete  dependence  on  Christ  for  salvation.  V.  The  second 
part  of  this  symbol.  The  use  of  the  cup,  as  well  as  the  bread,  gives  the  idea  of 
completeness.  The  two  necessities  for  life  are  food  and  drink.  When  both  are 
given  there  is  fulness  in  the  provision.  The  spiritual  food  symbolized  in  the 
supper  covers  all  the  needs  of  the  soul.  He  who  has  Christ  has  what  causes  want 
to  cease.  2.  The  doubling  of  the  symbol  also  serves  for  emphasis.  Thus  Elisha, 
Hannah,  and  Job  received  double  portions,  that  is,  an  unusual  amount.  3. 
There  is  also  climax.  The  giving  of  the  cup  presents  not  only  the  old  thought 
suggested  in  the  giving  of  the  bread,  but  something  more,  which  is  even  more 
important.  VI.  The  cup.  The  cup  is  symbolic  of  the  Blood  of  Christ ;  and  the 
blood  of  life.  The  juice  of  the  grape,  as  it  is  violently  pressed  from  the  grape  and 
procured  by  the  grape's  destruction,  fittingly  represents  the  Blood  of  Christ  poured 
out  for  us.  VII.  Eating  the  bread  and  drinking  the  cup.  Our  Saviour's  directions 
to  His  disciples  regarding  the  Supper  were  very  simple.  They  were,  "  Take,  eat." 
"  Drink  ye  all  of  it."  And  the  one  hint  our  Saviour  gave  as  to  the  meaning  of 
this  reception  of  the  Supper  was  in  His  words :  **  This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me." 
To  this  the  apostle  added  the  inspired  comment :  "  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this 
bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  proclaim  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come."  From  this 
language  several  things  are  plain.  We  are  taught  that  our  eating  the  bread  and 
driiddng  the  cap  is  a  confession  of  Christy  a  pledge  to  serve  our  Lord,  and  an  act 
of  fellowship  as  Christians.  But  it  is,  above  all,  a  reception  of  Christ  by  faith. 
Oar  yery  act  of  taking  the  bread  3nnbolizes  the  way  in  whidi  we  are  to  be  benefited  l^ 
Christ.    We  ean  not  have  Christ  except  as  we  open  our  hearts  to  Him.    We  are  to 


[IV.]  8T.  MARK.  691 

give  Him  lovisg  welcome.  We  are  to  rejoice  in  Him  and  accept  Him,  just  as  we 
do  the  food  for  the  body,  in  the  assurance  that  He  will  build  us  up  in  life  and 
health.  We  must  cherish  the  thought  of  Christ  with  the  same  loyalty  with  which 
we  cherish  earthly  friendships.  We  remember  earthly  friends  when  they  are  out 
of  our  sight,  recognizing  their  interests  and  rights,  keeping  ourselves  in  proper 
attitude  towards  them,  and  allowing  no  one  else  and  nothing  else  to  come  between 
them  and  us  in  such  way  as  to  make  us  forgetful  of  them  or  indifferent  towards 
them.  The  mother  of  Professor  Louis  Agassiz  lived  in  Switzerland.  In  her 
beautiful  old  age  Professor  Silliman  and  wife  called  upon  her  and  were  charmed 
with  her  character.  The  morning  they  were  leaving  Switzerland  she  met  them, 
and  giving  them  a  bunch  of  pansies  said,  with  a  beautiful  play  upon  words, 
speaking  of  course  in  the  French  language :  "  Tell  my  son  that  my  thoughts  {mes 
pensies)  are  all  for  him,  they  are  all  for  him."  Now  this  is  the  way  we  should 
feel  towards  Christ.  If  we  give  Him  all  our  heart,  all  our  thoughts,  we  are 
communing  with  Him,  we  are  receiving  Him  to  ourselves,  as  He  desires.  As  the 
elements  of  the  Supper  are  taken  into  our  system,  so  do  we  receive  Christ  into 
our  souls.  {Addison  P.  Foster.)  Sacrament  of  the  Lord^s  Supper : — Because  the 
sacraments  of  the  gospel  are  only  two  in  number,  it  has  sometimes  been  thought  that 
they  must  be  ordinances  of  minor  importance.  No  mistake  can  be  greater,  or  more 
calculated  to  depreciate  the  value  of  these  divinely-appointed  ordinances,  which,  from 
their  very  fewness,  as  well  as  from  having  received  Christ's  explicit  command,  should 
receive  the  Christdan's  stricterest  gard.  The  passage  before  us  leads  to  inquiries  re- 
specting the  meaning  and  design  of  this  great  sacrament.  I.  The  belatioxs  in  which 
Chbist  herb  pbesbnts  Himself  to  His  disciples.  1.  Propitiation.  The  object  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  not  to  commemorate  Jesus  as  a  Teacher,  though  in  this  He  was 
unlike  any  other ;  nor  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  His  example,  although  His  was 
the  only  perfect  one  ever  afforded.  It  is,  to  keep  constantly  in  mind  that  He  who 
was  the  one  illustrious  Teacher,  and  the  only  perfect  Exemplar,  employing  these 
together  with  His  incarnate  Deity,  to  add  efficacy  to  the  offering,  yielded  up  His 
life  a  sacrifice  for  sinners.  2.  The  whole  benefit  of  His  death  is  available  to  those 
for  whom  He  died.  All  He  did  is  placed  to  our  credit.  II.  The  belations  which 
Ghbistians  by  recbiviko  this  SA.CBAMENT  ASSUME  TowABDS  Chbist.  1.  They  coufcss 
their  need  6i  Christ.  At  the  Holy  Table  supply  and  demand  meet.  Christ  proffering 
and  the  disciple  needing  forgiveness,  and  all  the  attendant  blessings  purchased  by 
His  blood.  2.  They  confess  their  personal  faith  in  Christ.  At  the  Lord's  Table 
disciples  individually  appropriate  Christ's  work  to  themselves.  By  receiving  Christ 
they  gain  inward  strengthening.  3.  They  consecrate  themselves  to  Christ.  Eating 
at  His  Table,  they  proclaim  themselves  His  friends,  and  consent  to  His  claims  as 
their  Saviour  and  Lord.  Christ  there  enters  into  covenant  with  them,  and  they 
with  Him.  HI.  The  belations  nrro  which  by  this  sacbament  Christians  abk 
bbought  towabd  each  othbb.  1.  Brotherhood.  The  bond  which  unites  disciples 
to  the  Master  links  them  to  each  other.  2.  Love.  lU-will  is  banished  by  the  very 
desire  to  sit  with  Christ  at  this  feast,  and  in  its  warm  and  sacred  atmosphere 
animosities  can  no  more  exist  than  an  iceberg  in  the  gulf  stream.  (P.  B.  Davis.) 
Holy  Communion : — Picture  the  scene :  our  Lord's  last  night  on  earth — He  fully 
aware  of  it — the  Paschal  supper,  conmiemorative  (through  fifteen  centuries)  of  the 
deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egypt — our  Lord  surrounded  by  twelve  persons,  one  of 
whom  He  knew  to  be  His  betrayer,  and  who  went  out  from  this  meal  to  execute 
his  purpose— our  Lord  full  of  thoughts,  not  for  Himself,  but  for  them,  and  in  this 
instance  leaving  them  something  to  do  for  Him  when  He  was  gone.  Holy  Com- 
munion is — I.  The  commemobation  of  the  death  or  Chbist,  and  of  all  contaikxd 
AKD  IMPLIED  IN  THAT  DEATH  (1  CoT.  xi.  26).  In  that  act  of  worship  we  express 
our  faith  in  (1)  the  fact,  (2)  the  intention,  (3)  the  efficacy  of  the  death  (as  the  com- 
pletion of  the  earthly  life,  and  as  the  prelude  to  the  resurrection  life)  of  Christ, 
very  God  and  very  man.  H.  A  token  of  the  man  neb  in  which  alonx  oub 
sPXBirnAL  LIFE  IS  maintained.  The  bread  and  wine  are  not  merely  gazed  upon, 
but  eaten  and  drunk ;  and  that  in  church,  as  a  religious  act.  This  would  be,  not 
merely  unprofitable,  but  irreverent  also,  if  there  were  not  a  deep  meaning  in  it. 
The  key  is  John  vi.,  which  expresses  in  words  the  same  truth  the  sacrament  ex- 
presses in  act.  If  we  are  to  have  life  through  Christ,  it  must  be,  not  merely  by 
hearing  of  Him,  or  contemplating  Him  as  an  external  object,  but  by  receiving  Hitp 
into  heart  and  soul  as  by  a  process  of  spiritual  digestion.  IH.  The  chief  oppob- 
tunity  of  so  eiebcisino  and  maintaining  the  spibitual  lite  (1  Cor.  x.  16 ;  Matt 
xxvi.  26-28).    Application  :  1.  Form  a  high  estimate  of  this  ordinance.    It  is  what 


599  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cBMr.  uw, 

we  make  it ;  great  or  small,  according  aa  we  seek  and  expect  mnch  or  little  from 
it.     2.  But  let  yoor  high  estimate  be  a  spiritual  estimate.    Beverenoe,  not  super- 
stition.    "Feed  on  Him,  in  thy  heart,  by  faith."    3.  Realize  Christ's  presence. 
4.  Make  due  preparation.     5.  Beware  of  delay  in  becoming  a  communicant.    6. 
Beware  of  coming  once  or  twice  and  then  ceasing.    7.  Beware  of  becoming  familiar 
with  the  sign  and  not  with  the  thing  signified.    {Dean  Vaughan.)        Importance  of 
the  Holy  Communion  : — When  we  consider  the  acts  of  Christ  on  this  eventful  night, 
we  are  led  to  see  how  vast  is  the  importance  given  to  the  Holy  Communion.     He 
puts  it  in  juxtaposition  with  the  Paschal  supper.    As  an  Israelite  ceased  to  be  of 
Israel — became  an  alien  and  outcast  from  the  House  of  God,  forfeited  the  grace  of 
God  and  his  inheritance  in  God — if  he  did  not  keep  the  Passover  and  partake  of 
the  Lamb  ;  so  He  would  have  us  learn  that,  in  like  manner,  unless  Christians  par- 
take of  the  Lamb  of  God  in  His  New  Institution,  they  are  not  members  of  Him, 
they  cut  themselves  off  as  dead  branches  from  a  vine,  they  lose  His  grace,  they  are 
no  more  members  of  His  Kingdom.     (S.  Baring  Gould,  M.A.)        The  Holy  Com- 
munion a  support  to  the  weak  : — It  is  just  because  you  are  a  sinner  that  you  need  the 
help  which  God  gives  through  the  Eucharist.  You  know  your  own  weakness ;  you  tell 
me  you  are  afraid  of  the  sin  of  yielding  to  temptation  after  having  communicated. 
Yes ;  but  is  it  not  almost  certain  that  if  you  do  not  communicate  you  will  yield  ? 
while,  if  you  will  only  come  in  simple  faith  and  trust,  looking  for  God's  blessing, 
it  is  through  the  Holy  Sacrament  that  God  will  give  the  grace  and  strength  which 
will  enable  you  to  resist  the  temptation  and  come  off  victor  in  the  fight.    There 
was  a  labouring  man  some  time  since  in  one  of  our  northern  towns,  who,  owing  to 
some  mistake,  had  been  misinformed  as  to  the  hour  of  service.    He  came  when  the 
Celebration  of  the  Holy  Communion  was  just  over,  and  when  they  came  out  of 
Church  they  found  him  waiting  sadly  outside.     The  clergyman  explained  how  the 
mistake  had  arisen,  and  expressed  his  sorrow  for  it.     ♦♦  Never  mind,  master,"  said 
the  man  ;  but  the  poor  fellow  could  not  help  adding,  "  only  I  did  so  build  upon  it." 
He  knew  his  own  weakness,  and  his  need  of  Divine  grace  and  supernatural  assist- 
ance ;  and  so  he  was  coming,  not  as  if  there  was  any  virtue  in  the  bare  act  of 
coming,  not  as  if  the  Sacrament  itself  could  save  him,  but  because  he  had  grasped 
the  great  truth  that  it  is  through  the  Sacrament  that  God  imparts  grace,  and 
strength^  and  life  to  us  His  children,  unworthy  as  we  are  of  the  least  of  His  benefits. 
{Prebendary  Gibson,  M.A.)      Value  of  the  Holy  Communion : — In  times  of  persecu- 
tion men  would  risk  their  lives  to  get  their  Communions.    A  hundred  years  ago, 
during  the  French  Revolution,  when  religion  was  abolished  by  the  French  Parlia- 
ment, when  Sunday  was  done  away  with,  the  clergy  were  hunted  into  the  thickets 
like  beasts  of  prey,  and  none  might  conduct  or  attend  a  service  on  pain  of  death, 
did  people  go  without  this  means  of  grace  ?    No  1    From  time  to  time  a  messengei 
hurried  with  a  mysterious  watchword  from  house  to  house ;  "  the  black  swamp,' 
he  would  mutter,  and  pass  on  without  greeting  or  farewell.     But  the  personb 
addressed  understood  him.    Shortly  after  midnight,  men  and  women,  dressed  in 
dark  clothes,  would  meet  silently  by  the  black  swamp  below  the  village,  and  there, 
by  the  light  of  a  carefully-guarded  lantern,  one  of  the  homeless  priests  would  give 
the  Body  and  Blood  of  the  Lord  to  the  faithful  of  the  neighbourhood.    They  all 
knew  that  at  any  moment,  before  the  alarm  could  be  given,  the  soldiers  might  be 
upon  them,  and  a  volley  of  grape-shot  might  stretch  them  bleeding  and  dying  on 
the  ground.     What  matter  ?   man  might  kill  their  body,  but  Jesus  had  said  that 
He  would  raise  them  up  at  the  last  day.     {M.  A.  Lewis.)        The  new  testament. — 
Testament  or  Covenant : — The  word  is  thirteen  times  translated  "testament"  in  the 
A.  v.,  and  twenty  times  "  covenant."    Its  Hebrew  equivalent  properly  means  "  cove- 
nant." But  its  classical  import  is  "latter  will"  or  "testament."  Neither  of  the  trans- 
lations does  full  justice  to  the  unique  transaction  referred  to.   Indeed  no  human  word 
could.     And  to  have  used  a  Divine  word  would  simply  have  been  to  speak  an  unin- 
telligibility.  The  reference  is  to  that  arrangement  or  disposition  of  things,  in  virtue 
of  which  mercy,  and  the  possibility  of  true  and  everlasting  bliss,  are  extended  to 
the  sinful  human  race.     It  wfts  a  glorious  device,  culminating  in  the  atoning  sacri- 
fice of  the  Lamb  of  God.    »T  It  was  a  covenant,  inasmuch  as  there  is,  inherent  in 
it,  an  element  of  reciprocity!^    God,  on  His  part,  does  something.    He  does  much. 
But  the  blessing  involved  in  what  He  does  is  suspended,  so  far  as  men's  enjoy- 
ment of  it  is  concerned,  on  acquiescence  on  their  part,  or  cordial  acceptance,  or 
faith.    2.  It  is  also  of  the  nature  of  a  testamentary  deed.    For  there  is  involved 
in  it  a  disposition  or  disposal  of  the  effects  or  goods  which  constitute  the  property 
of  God;  in  virtue  of  which  disposition  it  is  that  men,  who  acquiesce  or  believe, 


OUP.  IIT.]  ST.  MARK,  593 


become  His  "  heirs."  The  deed  is  a  real  testament,  for  it  is  duly  and  solemnly 
attested  and  testified.  3.  And  it  is  also  really  a  last  will,  for  it  is  a  final  expression 
of  the  will  and  wish  of  God.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  The  sacraments  as  symbols  : — 
The  Magna  Charta  of  British  history  is  not  a  more  forcible  witness  to  our  national 
love  of  liberty,  and  our  need  of  it  as  a  condition  of  progress,  than  are  these  institu- 
tions to  the  universal  needs  of  redeemed  men.  Ordinances  that  have  persisted 
through  innumerable  and  violent  changes,  and  re-asserted  themselves  in  the  face  of 
gigantic  efforts  to  suppress  them,  offer  the  strongest  presumption  that  they  are 
founded  on  true  reason  and  spiritual  necessity :  and  though  they  may  have  only  a 
secondary  and  never  a  primary  place,  yet  they  are  likely  to  be  requisite  still  for  the 
expression  and  nourishment  of  this  life  of  the  soul.  Man  is  not  all  reason  and 
will.  He  is  still  ensphered  with  sense,  and  dowered  with  imagination,  and  the 
whole  of  him  cannot  be  fed,  developed,  and  perfected  without  the  beneficent 
ministry  of  symbol.  Carlyle,  no  fanatic  ritualist,  says,  with  as  much  truth  as 
beauty,  "  Would'st  thou  plant  for  eternity,  then  plant  into  the  deep,  infinite  facul- 
ties of  man,  his  fantasy  and  heart ;  would'st  thou  plant  for  year  and  day,  then 
plant  into  his  shallow,  superficial  faculties,  his  self-love  and  arithmetical  under- 
standing ;  "  and  again,  speaking  in  •'  Sartor  Kesartus  "  of  "  Symbols,"  he  writes  : 
"  Of  kin  to  the  so  incalculable  influences  of  concealment,  and  connected  with  still 
greater  things,  is  the  wondrous  agency  of  symbols.  In  a  symbol  there  is  conceal- 
ment and  yet  revelation  ;  here,  therefore,  by  silence  and  by  speech  acting  together, 
comes  a  double  significance.  And  if  both  the  speech  be  itself  high,  and  the  silence 
fit  and  noble,  how  expressive  wiU  their  union  be  !  Thus  in  many  a  painted  device, 
or  simple  seal-emblem,  the  commonest  truth  stands  out  to  us  proclaimed  with  quite 
new  emphasis."  {Dr,  John  Clifford.)  The  communion  service  saved : — "  A  poor 
widow  sent  me  a  dollar  and  thirty-three  cents,  in  silver  change,  saying  that  it  was 
all  she  found  in  her  dead  husband's  pocket-book,  and  she  wanted  to  give  it  to  God. 
I  told  this  to  the  children  and  their  parents  in  the  Church  of  the  Ascension,  in 
Chicago,  and  they  soon  found  a  way  to  use  this  widow's  mite  '  for  God.'  They 
said  :  •  We  will  make  a  communion  service  of  it.'  So  they  added  to  it  their  gold 
rings  and  pieces  of  jewelry,  and  pocket-pieces  of  silver,  and  a  lady  gave  her  dead 
boy's  silver  cup,  and  so  they  kept  on  adding  pieces  of  silver  and  gold  till  we  had 
enough ;  and  then  the  artist  made  us  a  very  beautiful  chalice  and  paten  all  of  silver 
and  gold.  Now  I  must  tell  you  what  came  of  it,  and  that  shall  be  my  second  story. 
When  that  dreadful  fire  which  destroyed  our  churches  and  homes  in  Chicago  was 
seen  approaching  our  little  church,  a  little  girl,  seven  years  old,  came  with  her 
father  to  see  what  they  could  save.  It  was  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  there 
was  no  light  except  what  came  from  the  fire.  But  little  Louisa  Enderli  found  the 
Communion  Service  and  saved  it.  She  was  soon  lost  from  her  father,  and  for  four 
weary  miles  she  made  her  way  among  the  crowd  of  people  who  were  hurrying  away 
from  the  burning  district.  The  wind  blew  the  burning  sand  and  cinders  in  her 
eyes,  and  almost  blinded  them ;  but  she  defended  them  as  best  she  could  with  one 
hand,  and  clung  to  her  precious  treasure  with  the  other,  refusing  to  give  it  up  till 
she  had  it  in  a  place  of  safety.  For  three  days  she  was  lost  from  her  father,  she 
having  been  sheltered  and  cared  for  by  a  kind  German  family.  When  her  father 
at  last  found  her,  she  threw  her  arms  about  his  neck,  saying,  •  0,  papa,  I  saved 
the  Communion  1  I  saved  the  Communion  1 '  But  even  then  she  could  not  give  it 
up  till  she  had  placed  it  safely  in  the  rector's  hand.  I  think  that  was  an  act  of 
Christian  heroism  worthy  of  the  martyrs  who  died  for  their  Lord's  sake  in  the  older 
days."  {Rev,  Charles  P.  Dorset,  rector  of  the  Church  oj  the  Ascension,  Chicago, 
Illinois.)  The  blood  of  Christ : — "  The  only  thing  I  want,"  said  a  dying  bishop 
of  our  church,  Bishop  Hamilton,  •*  is  to  place  my  whole  confidence  more  and  more 
perfectly  in  the  precious  blood  1 "  {The  Fireside  Parish  Almanack.)  Bloodshedding 
as  an  expression  of  love : — A  certain  Asiatic  queen,  departing  this  life,  left  behind 
her  three  accomplished  sons,  all  arrived  to  years  of  maturity.  The  young  princes 
were  at  strife  as  to  who  should  pay  the  highest  respect  to  their  royal  mother's 
memory.  To  give  scope  for  their  generous  contentions  they  agreed  to  meet  at  the 
place  of  interment,  and  there  present  the  most  honourable  gift  they  knew  how  to 
devise,  or  were  able  to  procure.  The  eldest  came,  and  exhibited  a  sumptuous 
monument,  consisting  of  the  richest  materials,  and  ornamented  with  the  most 
exquisite  workmanship.  The  second  ransacked  all  the  beauties  of  the  blooming 
creation,  and  offered  a  garland  of  such  admirable  colours  and  delightful  odours  as 
had  never  been  seen  before.  The  youngest  appeared,  without  any  pompous  prepara- 
tions, having  only  a  ciystal  basin  in  one  hand,  and  a  silver  bodkin  in  the  other.  Aa 

88 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nv. 

■oon  as  he  approached  he  threw  open  his  breast,  pierced  a  vein  which  lay  opposite 
to  his  heart,  received  the  blood  in  the  transparent  vase,  and,  with  an  air  of  affec- 
tionate reverence,  placed  it  on  the  tomb.  The  spectators,  struck  with  tne  sight, 
gave  a  shout  of  general  applause,  and  immediately  gave  preference  to  this  oblation. 
II  it  was  reckoned  such  a  singular  expression  of  love  to  expend  a  few  of  those 
precious  drops  for  the  honour  of  a  parent,  O  how  matchless  I  how  ineffable  was  the 
love  of  Jesus  in  pouring  out  all  his  vital  blood  for  the  salvation  of  his  enemies  I 
{Student's  Handbook  of  Scripture  Doctrines.)        The  heavenly  Passover: — ^I.  Thk 

RBAIilTY  AND    CHABAOTEB    OP   THK   LIPB   BEYOND    DEATH.      Chrfst    Spcaks  of  it  aS  "  the 

kingdom  of  God."  This  is  not  the  idea  of  mere  existence,  but  of  being  in  the 
highest  form  of  organization.  The  Father-King  will  pervade  all  life  with  His  own 
spirit.    The  law  will  be  the  Father's  rule,  which  is  love.    II.  The  special  form  op 

lilFB  IN  THE  FaTHSB'S  KINGDOM  HEBE  ANTICIPATED.      "  I  will  drink  it  with  yOU  UeW." 

This  implies — 1,  Close  and  intimate  association  between  the  Eedeemer  and  the  re- 
deemed. 2.  The  mutual  presence  and  intercourse  of  the  redeemed.  3.  Their  sacred 
employment.  The  Saviour  says  He  will  drink,  and  they  shall  drink,  the  wine  of 
the  Pascal  feast  new  in  tiie  Father's  kingdom.  He  had  just  said :  "  This  cup  is  the 
new  covenant  in  My  blood."  The  heavenly  festival  is  a  memorial  celebration  of 
redeeming  love.  To  the  redeemed  it  will  be  a  cup  of  grateful  love,  and  of  grateful 
retrospection.     {The  Preacher's  Monthly.) 

Ver.  26.  And  when  they  had  wxmg  an  hyxnzL — T?ie  best  harmony : — Jesus  sung  an 
hymn,  and  when  before  was  heard  music  so  pleasing  to  God,  so  grand  and  beautiful 
to  listening  angels  ?  We  know  not  what  harmonies  from  the  power  of  sound  the 
Creator  produces  for  the  ceaseless  joy  of  His  intelligent  creatures  who  fill  the  vast 
amplitudes  of  the  sky.  We  know  not  whal;  sublime,  and  to  us,  inconceivable 
realities  are  expressed  by  those  descriptions  given  by  that  apostle  who  leant  on 
Jesus's  bosom,  and  heard  with  prophetic  ear  the  voice  as  of  many  waters,  as  of  a 
great  thunder,  and  the  voices  of  harpers  harping  with  their  harps ;  but  sure  am  I 
that  there  was  a  harmony  and  a  glory  in  this  hymn  they  never  heard  before.  For 
the  beauty  of  its  harmony  was  moral ;  it  was  harmony  from  the  inner  spirit  of 
man ;  it  was  harmony  between  man  and  Christ ;  it  was  the  melody  of  meekness,  of 
obedience,  of  peace  and  joy ;  it  was  like  the  music  of  law  and  order  from  those 
glittering  stars  of  night  beneaih  which  they  sung — such  a  harmony  as  the  character 
of  Christ  for  ever  sounds  in  the  ears  of  God.  {N.  Macleod,  D.D.)  Value  of 
forms  of  prayer  and  praise : — One  of  the  commonest  objections  to  the  constant  use 
of  stated  forms  of  common  prayer  is,  that  at  times  they  must  inevitably  jar  upon 
our  feelings,  compelling  us,  for  example,  to  take  words  of  joy  and  praise  on  our 
lips  when  our  hearts  are  fidl  of  grief,  or  to  utter  penitent  confessions  of  sin  and 
imploring  cries  for  mercy  when  our  hearts  are  dancing  with  mirth  and  joy. 
But  if  we  mark  the  conduct  of  our  Lord  and  His  disciples,  we  cannot  say  that 
even  this  objection  is  final  or  fatal.  He  and  they  were  about  to  part.  He  was 
on  His  way  to  the  agony  of  Gethsemane  and  the  shame  of  the  cross.  Their 
hearts,  despite  His  comforting  words,  were  heavy  with  foreboding  and  grief. 
Yet  they  sang  the  Hallel,  used  the  common  form  of  praise,  before  they  went 
out, — He  to  die  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  and  they  to  lose  all  hope  in  Him  as 
the  Saviour  of  Israel.  No  Divine  command,  nothing  but  the  custom  of  the 
Feast,  enjoined  this  form  upon  them;  yet  they  do  not  caet  it  aside.  And  this 
"  hymn "  was  ng^dirge,  no  slow  and  measured  cadence,  no  plaintive  lament, 
hxA  a  joyous  song  of  exultation.  .  .  ,  Must  not  these  tones  of  irrepressible  hope, 
ctf  joyous  and  exultant  trust,  have  jarred  on  the  hearts  of  men  who  were  passing 
into  a  great  darkness  in  which  all  the  lights  of  life  and  hope  and  joy  were  to 
be  eclipsed?  If  our  Lord  could  look  through  the  darkness  and  see  the  joy  set 
before  Him,  the  disciples  could  not.  Yet  they  too  joined  in  this  joyous  hymn 
before  they  went  out  into  the  darkest  night  the  world  has  ever  known.  With 
their  example  before  us,  we  cannot  fairly  argue  that  settled  forms  of  worship  are 
to  be  condemned  simply  because  they  jar  on  the  reigning  emotion  of  the  moment. 
We  must  rather  infer  that,  in  His  wisdom,  God  will  not  leave  us  to  be  the  prey  of  any 
unbalanced  emotion;  that,  when  our  hearts  are  most  fearful,  He  calls  on  us  to  put  our 
trust  in  Him ;  that  when  they  are  saddest  He  reminds  us  that,  if  we  have  made  Him 
our  chief  good,  our  chief  good  is  stiU  with  us,  whatever  we  may  have  lost,  and  that 
we  may  still  rejoice  in  Hun,  tiiough  all  other  joy  has  departed  from  us.  And  when 
He  bids  us  trust  in  Him  in  every  night  of  loss  and  fear,  and  even  to  be  glad  in  Him 
however  sorrowlal  oiur  sools  may  be, — 0  how  comforting  and  welcome  the  eommand 


nv.]  ST.  MARK.  595 

Bhonld  be !  for  it  is  nothing  less  than  an  assurance  that  He  sees  the  gain  which  is 
to  spring  from  our  loss ;  it  is  nothing  short  of  a  pledge  that  He  will  turn  our  sorrow 
into  joy.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Place  of  forms  in  religion : — Keligion  is  a  thing  of 
principles,  not  of  forms  ;  spirit,  not  letter.  It  is  a  life,  a  life  which  reveals  itself  in 
various  ways  under  all  the  changes  of  time,  a  life  which  consecrates  every  faculty 
we  possess  to  the  service  of  God  and  man.  It  uses  forms,  but  is  not  dependent  on 
them.  It  may  modify  them  in  a  thousand  different  ways,  to  suit  them  to  the 
wants,  emotions,  aspirations  of  the  soul.  Tbeie  was  a  most  true  and  sincere 
religious  life,  for  example,  among  the  Hebrews,  and  under  the  laws  of  Moses. 
Worship  then  took  the  form  of  offerings  and  sacrifices,  fasts  and  feasts.  All  these, 
in  so  far  as  they  were  Hebrew,  and  were  specially  adapted  to  Hebrew  life,  have 
passed  away ;  but  the  religious  life  has  not  passed  with  them.  It  has  clothed  itself 
in  simpler  and  more  universal  forms.  Our  worship  expresses  itself  in  prayers, 
hymns,  sacraments,  and  above  all  in  the  purity  and  charity  which  bids  us  visit  the 
poor  and  needy  in  their  affliction,  and  keep  ourselves  unspotted  from  the  world. 
In  due  time,  these  forms  may  be  modified  or  pass  away.  But  the  life  which 
works  and  speaks  through  them  will  not  pass  away.  It  will  simply  rise  into 
higher  and  nobler  forms  of  expression.  No  man,  therefore,  can  live  and  grow 
simply  by  adhering  to  forms  of  worship  and  service,  let  him  be  as  faithful  and 
devoted  to  them  as  he  will.  They  may  feed  and  nourish  life,  but  they  cannot 
impart  it.  They  will  change  and  pass,  but  the  life  of  the  soul  need  not  therefore 
suffer  loss.  If  that  life  has  once  been  quickened  in  us  through  faith  and  love,  it 
will  and  must  live  on,  for  it  is  an  eternal  life,  and  continue  to  manifest  itself  in 
modes  that  will  change  and  rise  to  meet  its  new  necessities  and  conditions. 
Religion  accepts  us  as  we  are,  that  it  may  raise  us  above  what  we  are ;  it  employs 
and  consecrates  all  our  faculties,  that  our  faculties  may  be  refined,  invigorated, 
enlarged  in  scope.  If  we  can  speak,  it  bids  us  speak.  If  we  can  sing,  it  bids  us 
sing.  If  we  can  labour  and  endure,  it  bids  us  labour  and  endure.  If  we  can  only 
stand  and  wait,  it  teaches  us  that  they  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait.  What- 
ever we  can  do,  it  bids  us  do  heartily,  as  unto  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men,  and  yet 
do  for  men,  that  it  may  be  unto  the  Lord.  If  we  really  have  this  life,  it  will  reveal 
itself  in  us  as  it  did  in  Him  who  is  our  life — ^in  a  love  too  profound  and  sincere  to 
be  repelled  by  any  diversities  of  outward  form ;  in  a  spirit  of  praise  too  pure  and 
joyous  to  be  quenched  by  any  of  the  changes  and  sorrows  of  time  ;  and  in  an  earnest 
consecration  of  our  every  capacity  and  power  to  the  service  of  Him  who  loved  us, 
and  gave  Himself  for  us,  and  for  all.  (S.  GoXy  D.D.)  Singing  in  heaven : — ^For 
one  I  would  not  rid  myself  of  the  hope  that  we  shall  sometimes — perhaps  on  great 
anniversaries  commemorative  of  earthly  histories — literally  sing,  in  heaven,  the 
very  psalms  and  hymns  which  are  so  often  the  "  gate  of  heaven  "  to  us  here.  It 
would  be  sadder  parting  with  this  world  than  we  hope  it  will  be  when  our  time 
oomes,  if  we  must  forget  these  ancient  lyrics,  or  find  our  tongues  dumb  when  we 
would  utter  them.  How  can  we  live  without  them  ?  Are  they  not  a  part  of  our 
very  being  ?  Take  them  away,  with  all  the  experiences  of  which  they  are  the 
symbol,  and  what  would  there  be  left  of  us  to  carry  into  heaven  ?  (Prof.  Austin 
Phelps.)  The_Jetcijh  Psalms  : — The  Jewish  Psalms,  in  which  is  expres  ed  the 
very  spirit  onfie  national  life,  have  furnished  the  bridal  hymns,  the  battle  songs, 
the  pilgrim  marches,  the  penitential  prayers,  and  the  public  praises  of  every  nation 
in  Christendom,  since  Christendom  was  bom.  It  is  a  sentence  from  the  Jewish 
Psalm-book,  which  we  have  written  over  the  portico  of  the  chief  temple  of  the 
world's  industry  and  commerce,  the  London  Exchange.  These  psalms  have  rolled 
through  the  din  of  every  great  European  battle-lield,  they  have  pealed  through  the 
scream  of  the  storm  in  every  ocean  highway  of  the  earth.  Drake's  sailors  sang 
them  when  they  clove  the  virgin  waves  of  the  Pacific;  Frobisher's,  when  they 
dashed  against  the  barriers  of  the  Arctic  ice  and  night.  They  floated  over  the 
waters  on  that  day  of  days,  when  England  held  her  Protestant  freedom  against 
Pope  and  Spaniard,  and  won  the  naval  supremacy  of  the  world.  They  crossed  the 
ocean  with  the  Mayflower  pilgrims  ;  they  were  sung  around  Cromwell's  camp  fires, 
and  his  Ironsides  charged  to  their  music;  while  they  have  filled  the  peaceful  homes 
of  England  and  of  Christendom  with  the  voice  of  supplication  and  the  breath  of 
praise.  In  palace  halls,  by  happy  hearths,  in  squalid  rooms,  in  pauper  wards, 
in  prison  cells,  in  crowded  sanctuaries,  in  lovely  wildernesses,  everywhere  these 
Jews  have  uttered  our  moan  of  contrition  and  our  song  of  triumph,  our  tearful 
complaints  and  our  wrestling,  conquering  prayer.  {J.  Baldwin  Brovm,  B.A.)  Tht 
love  of  singing  sanctioned  by  Jesus: — At  a  gathering  of  children  one  Christmas  Day 


596  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTKATOB.  [chap,  nv: 

a  gentleman  present  related  the  following  very  interesting  incident :  A  little  girl» 
only  three  years  of  age,  was  very  curious  to  know  why  Christmas  evergreens  were 
so  much  used,  and  what  they  were  intended  to  signify.  So  Mr.  It—  told  her  the 
story  of  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem,  the  child  whose  name  was  Jesus.  The  little 
qaestioner  was  just  beginning  to  give  voice  to  the  music  that  was  in  her  heart;  and 
after  Mr.  L —  concluded  the  narrative,  she  looked  up  in  his  face  and  asked,  "  Did 
Jesus  sing  ?  "  "Who  had  ever  thought  of  that  ?  The  text  is  almost  conclusive 
proof  that  our  Lord  did  sing;  it  is,  at  any  rate,  quite  conclusive  proof  that  He 
sanctioned  the  use  of  song  on  the  part  of  His  disciples.  Singing  in  prospect  of 
death: — Jerome,  of  Prague,  bound  naked  to  the  stake,  continued  to  sing  hymns 
with  a  deep  untrembling  voice.  (A.  W,  Atwood.)  Soothing  influence  of  hymn- 
Hinging : — I  remember  a  remarkable  instance  which  occurred  in  my  father's  lecture- 
room  during  one  of  those  sweet  scenes  which  preceded  the  separation  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church  into  the  old  and  new  schools.  At  that  time  controversy  ran 
high,  and  there  were  fire  and  zeal  and  wrath  mingled  with  discussion ;  and  who- 
ever sat  in  the  chair,  the  devil  presided.  On  the  occasion  to  which  I  refer  an  old 
Scotchman,  six  feet  high,  much  bent  with  age,  with  blue  eyes,  large  features,  very 
pale  and  white  all  over  his  face,  and  bald-headed,  walked  up  and  down  the  back 
part  of  tbe  room,  and  as  the  dispute  grew  furious  he  (and  only  he  could  have  done 
it)  would  stop  and  call  out,  *•  Mr.  Moderator,  let  us  sing  '  Salvation ' ; "  and  some 
one  would  strike  up  and  sing  the  tune,  and  the  men  who  were  in  angry  debate  were 
cut  short ;  but  one  by  one  they  joined  in,  and  before  they  had  sung  the  hymn 
through  they  were  all  calm  and  quiet.  When  they  resumed  the  controversy,  it  was 
in  a  much  lower  key.  So  this  good  old  man  walked  up  and  down,  and  threw  a 
hymn  into  the  quarrel  every  few  minutes,  and  kept  the  religious  antagonists  from 
absolute  explosion  and  fighting.  It  is  the  nature  of  hymns  to  quell  irascible 
feeling.  I  do  not  think  that  a  man  who  was  mad  could  sing  six  verses  through 
without  regaining  his  temper  before  he  got  to  the  end.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The 
power  of  a  hymn: — On  one  of  the  days  that  President  Garfield  lay  dying  at  the  sea- 
side, he  was  a  little  better,  and  was  permitted  to  sit  by  the  window,  while  Mrs» 
Garfield  was  in  the  adjoining  room.  Love,  hope,  and  gratitude  filled  her  heart, 
and  she  sang  the  beautiful  hymn,  commencing,  "Guide  me,  O  Thou  great 
Jehovah !  '*  As  the  soft  and  plaintive  notes  floated  into  the  sick-chamber,  the 
President  turned  his  eyes  up  to  Dr.  Bliss  and  asked,  ••  Is  that  Crete  ?  "  "  Yes,** 
replied  the  Doctor ;  "  it  is  Mrs.  Garfield."  *'  Quick,  open  the  door  a  little,"  anliously 
responded  the  sick  man.  Dr.  Bliss  opened  the  door,  and  after  listening  a  few 
moments,  Mr.  Garfield  exclaimed,  as  the  large  tears  coursed  down  his  sunken 
cheeks,  *♦  Glorious,  Bliss,  isn't  it  ?  "  The  power  of  a  hymn : — ^A  little  boy  came  to 
one  of  our  city  missionaries,  and  holding  out  a  dirty  and  well-worn  bit  of  printed 
paper,  said,  "  Please,  sir,  father  sent  me  to  get  a  clean  paper  like  this."  Taking  it 
from  his  hand,  the  missionary  unfolded  it,  and  found  it  was  a  paper  containing  the 
beautiful  hymn  beginning,  "  Just  as  I  am."  The  missionary  looked  down  with 
interest  into  the  face  earnestly  upturned  to  him,  and  asked  the  little  boy  where  he 
got  it,  and  why  he  wanted  a  clean  one.  "  We  found  it,  sir,"  said  he,  *•  in  sister's 
pocket  after  she  died  ;  she  used  to  sing  it  all  the  time  when  she  was  sick,  and  loved 
it  so  much  that  father  wanted  to  get  a  clean  one  to  pat  in  »  frame  to  hang  it  np. 
Won't  you  give  us  a  clean  one,  sir  ?  " 

Yer.  27.  I  wUl  smite  the  8hepherd.~Tr%y  Chriit  i$  eaUed  a  8hspherd:^l.  Aft 

descending  from  ancient  patriarchs  who  were  shepherds.  They  were  types  of 
Him.  2.  He  knows  His  sheep,  and  marks  them  for  His  own  (John  x.  3,  14J[.  God 
sets  His  seal  on  them  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  3.  He  feeds  their  souls  and  bodies  m  green 
pastures  (Psa.  xxiii.)  and  drives  them  to  the  sweet  streams  and  waters  of  comfort,  by 
the  paths  of  grace  and  righteousness.  4.  He  defends  them  from  the  wolf  and 
enemies;  they  being  timorous,  simple,  weak,  shiftless  creatures,  unable  to  fly, 
resist,  or  save  themselves.  5.  He  nourishes  the  young  and  tender  lambs.  6.  He 
seeks  them  when  they  go  astray,  and  rejoices  to  find  them.  7.  He  brings  them  to 
the  fold.  (1)  The  fold  of  grace.  (2)  The  fold  of  glory.  (Dr.  Thomas  Taylor.) 
Comfort  in  Christ,  our  Shepherd : — In  that  Christ  is  our  Shepherd,  we  may  comfort 
ourselves  in — 1.  His  love.  More  love  is  included  in  the  title  "  Shepherd,"  than  if 
He  should  call  Himself  our  father,  brother,  kinsman.  The  good  Shepherd  gives 
His  life  for  the  sheep,  which  every  father  or  brother  will  not  do.  2.  His  care.  The 
sheep  need  care  for  nothing  but  the  Shepherd's  presence  (Psa.  xxiii.  1).  (Ibid.) 
ChrUt  smitten,  an  example  to  u$: — In  that  Christ  was  smitten  with  the  sword,  let 


BV.]  8T.  MARK.  S97 

OB  learn  patience  in  affliction  of  every  kind.  1.  He  snffered  for  no  necessity  or 
desert,  but  by  voluntary  humility,  whereas  we  deserve  fiery  trials.  2.  He  suffered 
not  for  His  own  cause,  but  ours  ;  and  shall  not  we  for  His  ?  3.  He  despised  the 
shame ;  and  why  should  not  we  ?  4.  The  end  of  His  cross  was  the  exaltation  at 
God's  right  hand ;  and  we  expect  the  same.  (Ibid.)  Comfort  because  God  U  the 
tmiter: — Though  Christ  was  smitten,  it  was  not  by  chance,  fortune,  or  altogether 
by  malice  of  wicked  men ;  but  all  by  the  counsel  and  decree  of  God.  If  thou  art 
smitten,  comfort  thyself.  1.  It  is  God's  hand.  2.  God  intends  by  this  means  to 
bring  about  some  good  purpose  in  thee.  3.  God  not  only  sends  thy  trouble,  but 
also  regulates  and  checks  it.  (Ibid.)  The  tcattering: — Why  were  the  disciples 
thus  scattered  ?  1.  Their  own  weakness  and  carnal  fear  made  them  fly  to  save 
themselves.  They  had  not  counted  the  cost  of  their  profession.  Nor  had  they  yet 
received  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  afterwards  kept  them  strong  and  stedfast.  2.  God 
in  His  wisdom  would  have  Christ  deserted,  because  He  was  to  be  known  to  tread 
••  the  winepress  of  God's  wrath  alone."  3.  Thus  it  behoved  the  Scripture  to  be 
fulfilled,  in  regard  of  Christ  Himself,  who  voluntarily  undertaking  the  grievous 
burden  of  our  sin,  must  be  forsaken  by  all  for  the  time.  4.  To  teach  us,  that  all 
our  safety  depends  on  our  relation  to  the  chief  Shepherd.  Without  Christ  we  lie 
dispersed*  ongathered,  and  forlorn.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  28.  I  will  go  before  you  Into  Galilee. — Voice*  from  Galilee  ;— It  is  quite 
certain  that,  in  the  manhood  of  Christ,  there  was,  in  a  very  large  degree,  the  truest 
poetry  of  the  heart.  Hia  sympathies  with  nature — His  love  of  the  beautiful 
everywhere— His  tenderness  to  childhood  and  to  weakness — the  deUcacy  of  His 
action — ^the  play  of  His  fancy — all  show  that  vivid  imagination,  and  fervent  glow, 
and  quiet  sensibility,  and  creative  habit,  and  deep  perception  which,  I  speak  it 
humanly,  always  make  life  a  poem.  Can  we  wonder  that  to  such  a  mind  as  His, 
that  country,  so  endetured,  so  sanctified, — lovely  in  nature,  but  lovelier  still  in  all  its 
sacred  recoUections — should  have  such  an  attraction  that  He  could  scarcely  consent 
even  to  go  to  heaven  without  another  look  at  its  beauty,  and  a  last  taste  of  its 
sweetness  I  And  did  my  Saviour — did  He— even  thus  ?  Then  for  ever  He  has  con- 
secrated the  pious  memories  of  early  years,  and  the  yearnings  of  our  manhood 
after  the  sacredness  of  the  past  I  H.  But,  as  far  as  we  may  presume  to  judge,  this 
was  not  the  only  feeling  which  led  the  risen  Jesus  back  to  Galilee.  We  know, 
indeed,  from  St.  Peter's  words  to  Cornelius,  that  when  ♦•  God  raised  up  Jesus,  the 
third  day,  He  showed  Him  openly  indeed,  but  not  to  all  the  people,  only  to  chosen 
witnesses,  chosen  before  of  God,  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  Him  after  He  rose 
from  the  dead."  Indeed  we  know  that  "He  appeared  to  above  five  hundred 
brethren  at  once,"  and  this  manifestation  was  most  probably  on  that  mountain  in 
Galilee,  where  He  had  made  such  a  special  appointment  for  the  re-union.  We  may 
well  belieTe — and  it  is  in  complete  accordance  with  the  whole  mind  of  Christ — that 
He  went  down  to  Galilee  for  this  very  object — to  gather,  and  assure,  and  comfort, 
and  strengthen  those  to  whom  His  miracles  and  teaching  had  been  already  blessed 
in  that  part  of  Palestine.  And  it  was  only  like  our  dear  Master,  and  consistent 
with  all  EEis  faithful  love,  that  He  should  thus  pause,  before  He  went  on  further — to 
reassure  and  bless  His  own  in  distant  places.  HI.  And  of  this,  more  and  more, 
be  quite  sure,  that  Christ  will  always  come  back  to  His  own  work  in  the  soul  which 
He  has  once  made  His  own.  And  this  blcised  lesson  again  I  read  in  that  loving 
journey  to  Galilee.  Whom  Christ  calls,  to  them  He  returns.  No  time  dims,  no 
changes  reach,  no  distance  appals,  that  love  I  17.  I  see,  too,  in  the  visit  to  Galilee, 
a  probation  and  discipline  to  His  own  more  immediate  followers.  They  were  to 
have  the  joy  of  His  presence,  but  they  must  make  an  effort.  They  must  show 
their  constancy  and  their  faith  by  an  act  of  toil  and  trust.  They  must  go — at  His 
word — all  the  way  to  meet  Him  in  Galilee.  ••  He  went  before  them."  He  always 
goes  before  His  people.  And  sometimes  precedence  looks  like  desertion.  Obey  and 
believe,  and  the  recompense  will  be  a  full  and  mantling  cup.  •*  Go  where  I  send 
you;  " — ^this  is  His  constant  language — "  Go  where  I  send  you;  I  shall  be  there." 
V.  One,  and  perhaps  the  greatest,  cause  why  He  passed  those  *•  forty  days  "  on 
earth — after  He  had  finished  His  great  work — was  to  show  and  prove  His  identity  ; 
to  demonstrate  that  the  Bisen  was  the  Crucified;  that  nothing  was  changed 
•f  His  love  and  being.  He  was  the  same  I  the  same  Man  I  the  same  Brother ! 
the  same  Saviour  I  the  same  God !  And  there  were  the  very  wotmds  to  bear  their 
evidence  I  This  visit  to  GaUlee  was  singularly  fitted  to  evidence  the  onenese.  He 
goes  the  very  same  journey  which  He  had  taken  often  before,  to  the  Mune  pUeaa, 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xjt. 

where  He  had  spent  the  greater  part  of  His  life,  and  where  the  witnesses  to  the 
identity  would  be  the  greatest  in  number,  and  the  most  competent  to  attest.  He 
seeks  the  same  lake,  which  He  had  made  the  centre  of  His  previous  ministry.  He 
stands  with  His  disciples — on  the  very  shore  where  He  had  spoken  to  them  and 
called  them.  The  voice,  the  accent,  the  manner,  the  spirit  are  the  same.  They 
recognize  it  in  a  moment.  He  eats  food,  where  He  had  so  often  eaten  it  before. 
And  how  much  we  owe  to  that  identity,  I  need  not  say.  The  Man  of  Weakness  is 
the  God  of  Power.  The  Crucified  is  the  Intercessor.  Sure  proof  that  the  ransom 
is  accepted,  and  the  whole  debt  is  paid  by  Christ  1  Positive  evidence  that  we  have 
now  a  God  in  sympathy.  And  one  more  voice  I  hear  from  Galilee.  The  risen 
Christ  walked  the  whole  land — from  Dan  to  Beersheba:  He  revealed  His 
authority  :  He  showed  His  power :  He  made  all  His  own  I  An  earnest  of  that  day 
when  He  shall  come  and  "reign  in  Mount  Sion  and  in  Jerusalem,  and  before  Hia 
ancients  gloriously  ;  "  and  ••  His  feet  shall  stand  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives ;  "  and 
then  "  there  shall  be  one  Lord,  and  His  name  One,"  and  "  all  Israel  shall  be 
saved."  {James  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Consoling  promises : — Such  a  promise  as  was 
never  heard  of  before — that  a  dead  man  shall  rise  within  a  few  days,  and  promise 
to  do  so.  Note  the  consolations  with  which  our  Lord  sustains  His  disciples.  1. 
That  there  shall  be  a  certain  end  of  this  evil  ready  to  swallow  them  up.  2.  That 
there  shall  be  a  short  end  after  a  few  days  ;  three  or  four.  3.  That  there  shall  be 
a  happy  end.  For  (1)  Christ  should  rise  again  from  the  dead  with  power  and  glory. 
(2)  Whereas  they  have  run  away  from  Him,  He  will  come  to  them  again.  (3) 
Though  they  have  left  their  Shepherd,  yet  He  will  become  their  Shepherd  again, 
and  guide  them  as  a  shepherd  goes  before  his  sheep.  {Dr.  Thomas  Taylor.)  The 
promised  meeting  in  Galilee: — Why  in  Galilee?  1.  That  our  Lord  and  His 
disciples  may  more  surely  enjoy  one  another  without  fear  of  the  Jews ;  and  that 
He  may  instinct  them  in  the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2. 
Because  Christ  had  more  disciples  and  favourites  in  Galilee  to  whom  He  would 
familiarly  offer  Himself,  and  manifest  His  resurrection,  than  in  Jndea.  3.  Hia 
disciples  belonged  to  Galilee,  and  He  would  bring  them  to  the  place  where  He 
found  them.  4.  They  must  foUow  their  calling  tiU  Christ  came,  and  for  the  time 
before  they  can  get  into  Galilee,  He  will  be  there  before  them,  waiting  for  them 
{Ibid.) 

Ver.  29.  Altboagh  all  shall  he  offended,  yet  will  not  t-— Peter's  aim  was  a  three- 

fold  one  ;  it  consisted  in — 1.  His  vehement  contradiction  of  the  words  of  Christ. 
'2.  His  preferring  himself  to  and  putting  himself  above  the  rest  of  the  apostles. 
:'j.  His  self-confidence  and  boastfulness  of  his  own  strength.  The  remedy  against 
temptation  is  such  a  knowledge  of  our  own  natural  weakness,  as  may  lead  us  to 
distrust  ourselves,  to  rely  on  God,  and  to  seek  His  protection  in  all  things. 
()r.  Denton,  M.A.)  Peter's  rash  zeal : — Peter's  action  in  this  instance  was  at  the 
t^ame  time  commendable  for  some  things  and  faulty  for  others.  I.  Commendablb 
IN  THE  following  pabticdlabs.  1.  His  purpose  and  resolution  of  mind,  not  to 
take  offence  at  Christ,  which  purpose  and  resolution  he  professes  sincerely  and  from 
his  heart,  speaking  as  he  really  thought.  2.  It  is  also  commendable  in  him,  that 
he  was  so  zealous  and  forward  above  the  other  disciples  to  show  his  love  to  Christ 
II.  Yet  be  was  at  fault  in  being  so  confident.  1.  In  that  he  directly  con> 
tradicts  the  express  words  of  Christ,  whereby  He  had  plainly  told  him  and  the 
rest,  that  they  should  all  be  offended  at  Him.  2.  In  presuming  rashly  and  con- 
fidently upon  his  own  strength  or  ability  to  hold  out  constantly,  and  to  stick  close 
to  the  Saviour  in  the  time  of  trouble  and  danger  now  at  hand.  3.  In  arrogantly 
preferring  himself  to  his  fellow-disciples,  affirming  that  though  all  should  be 
offended,  yet  he  would  not.  {George  Petter.)  Enthusiasm : — Enthusiasm  is  the 
glow  of  the  soul ;  it  is  the  lever  by  which  men  are  raised  above  their  average 
level  and  enterprise,  and  become  capable  of  a  goodness  and  benevolence  which,  but 
for  it,  would  be  quite  impossible.  There  is  not  too  much  enthusiasm  of  any  sort 
or  for  any  object,  in  a  world  like  ours,  and  Christians  had  better  not  join  in  sneering 
at  a  force,  which,  in  its  purest  form,  founded  and  reared  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ.  True,  enthusiasm  often  loses  its  way,  spends  itself  on  mistaken  causes,  on 
imperfect  systems,  on  worthless  ideals,  but  that  is  no  reason  for  saying  that  all 
enthusiasm  is  bad.  Mistaken  enthusiasm,  like  Peter's,  will  in  time  be  rudely  tested 
by  experience;  and  meanwhile  those  who  have  any  reason  to  hope  that  their 
enthusiasm  is  not  mistaken,  can  afford  to  be  generous  and  hopeful  about  others. 
He  that  is  not  against  us  is,  unconsciously  perhaps,  on  our  side.     {Canon  Liddon.) 


CHAP.  »▼.]  ST,  MARK,  599 

Peter's  rashness : — ^Hera  we  have  an  instance  (as  many  elsewhere)  of  Peter's 
temerity  and  rashness,  not  well  considering  his  weakness,  and  what  spirit  he  was 
of.  He  betrays  great  infirmity,  arrogating  much  more  than  was  in  him.  1.  He 
directly  contradicts  his  Lord,  who  said,  '•  All  ye ;  "  Peter  says,  *•  No,  not  all " — ^he 
will  not ;  not  this  night — no,  never.  2.  He  believes  not  the  oracle  of  the  prophet 
Zechariah  (xiii.  7),  but  would  shift  it  off  with  pomp  of  words,  as  not  concerning 
him  ;  he  was  not  one  of  the  sheep  that  should  be  scattered,  though  the  Pastor  was 
smitten.  8.  He  presumes  too  much  upon  his  own  strength,  and  of  that  which  is 
out  of  his  own  power,  never  mentioning  or  including  the  help  and  strength  of  God, 
by  whom  alone  he  could  stand.  He  neither  considers  his  own  frailty,  which  will  over- 
throw him,  nor  yet  the  power  of  God,  which  can  sustain  and  uphold  him.  4.  He 
sets  himself  too  much  above  other  men ;  as  if  all  men  were  weak  in  comparison 
with  Peter,  and  Peter  the  champion.  6.  He  is  bold,  hardy,  and  vainly  confident  in 
a  thing  yet  to  come,  in  which  he  has  never  tried  his  strength.  Knowing  his 
present  affection,  he  will  take  no  notice  of  his  future  peril ;  nay,  he  disclaims  and 
almost  scorns  the  danger,  little  thinking  how  close  it  is  to  him.  (Dr.  'Thomas 
Taylor.)  Self-deception  : — Louis  XV.,  in  his  disgusting  depravity,  exposed  him- 
self to  the  smallpox,  tben  the  dread  of  all  society.  Though  flattered  for  a  time 
into  the  belief  that  there  was  no  danger,  he  was  at  length  undeceived ;  but,  owing 
to  the  prevalence  of  court  intrigue,  the  information  was  only  conveyed  to  him  at 
the  latest  possible  moment.  He  caused  his  guilty  companions  to  be  sent  away, 
telling  them  that  he  would  recall  them  should  he  recover  from  his  disorder.  Just 
before  dismissing  one  of  the  most  degraded  among  them,  he  said :  "  I  would  fain 
die  as  a  believer,  and  not  as  an  infideL  I  have  been  a  great  sinner,  doubtless ;  but 
I  have  ever  observed  Lent  with  a  most  scrupulous  exactitude ;  I  have  caused  more 
than  a  htmdred  thousand  masses  to  be  said  for  the  repose  of  unhappy  souls ;  I 
have  respected  the  clergy,  and  punished  the  authors  of  all  impious  works  ;  so  that 
I  flatter  myself  I  have  not  been  a  very  bad  Christian."  Extreme  self-dependence : — 
There  is  a  famous  speech  recorded  of  an  old  Norseman  thoroughly  characteristic 
of  the  Teuton.  '*  I  believe  neither  in  idols  nor  demons,"  said  he ;  **  I  put  my 
sole  trust  in  my  own  strength  of  body  and  soul."  {S.  Smiles.)  Danger  of  pre- 
sumption : — A  scientific  gentleman,  deputed  by  the  Government,  was,  not  many 
years  ago,  examining  the  scene  of  a  fatal  explosion.  He  was  accompanied  by  the 
anderviewer  of  the  colliery,  and  as  they  were  inspecting  the  edges  of  a  goaf  (a 
region  of  foul  air),  it  was  observed  that  the  "Davy  "  lamps  which  they  carried 
were  afire.  "  I  suppose,"  said  the  inspector,  that  there  is  a  good  deal  of  fire-damp 
hereabouts.  **  Thousands  and  thousands  of  cubic  feet  all  through  the  goaf,"  coolly 
replied  his  companion.  "  Why,"  exclaimed  the  official,  •*  do  you  mean  to  say  that 
there  is  nothing  but  that  shred  of  wire-gauze  between  us  and  eternity  T " 
*•  Nothing  at  all,"  replied  the  underviewer,  very  composedly.  "  There's  nothing 
here  where  we  stand  but  that  gauze  wire  to  keep  the  whole  mine  from  being  blown 
into  the  air."  The  precipitate  retreat  of  the  Government  official  was  instantaneous. 
And  thus  it  should  be  with  the  sinner :  his  retreat  from  the  ways  of  sin — those 
♦'  goafs  "  of  poisonous  air — should  be  instantaneous.  Sir  Humphrey  Davy's  lamp 
was  never  designed  as  a  substitute  for  caution  if  accidentally  or  unknowingly 
carried  into  foul  air,  whereas  many  do  so  knowingly  and  habitually. 

Ver.  30.  Thou  shalt  deny  Me  thrice. — Danger  of  self-ignorance : — "  The  Dougal, 
an  old  line  of  battle  ship,  which  has  been  lying  in  Portsmouth  Harbour  since  her 
return  from  a  cruise  on  the  China  station,  in  1871,  has  been  recently  docked  for  the 
purpose  of  alterations,  so  as  to  fit  her  for  taking  the  place  of  the  Vernon,  torpedo 
and  dep6t  ship.  During  an  examination  of  her  interior,  one  of  the  workmen  came 
across  a  live  shell  in  a  disused  comer  of  the  ship.  The  projectile  must  have  lain 
where  it  was  found  for  over  fourteen  years."  This  was  a  startling  discovery ;  but 
had  no  examination  of  the  interior  been  required,  the  missile  would  not  even  now 
have  been  found.  How  forcibly  the  story  illustrates  the  need  we  have  for  careful 
and  frequent  search  into  our  own  hearts  I  Possibly  the  projectile  had  been  placed 
in  the  ••  disused  comer  of  the  ship  "  by  an  enemy ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may 
have  been  concealed  ready  to  hurl  at  the  foe.  Anyhow,  it  was  a  dangerous  thing 
to  have  stowed  away,  for  at  any  moment  it  might  have  exploded,  and  destroyed  the 
vesseL  Self-examination  is  ever  beneficial,  and  often  leads  to  the  startling  dis- 
covery of  some  most  dangerous  evil  that  lay  long  concealed  in  the  disused  comers 
of  the  heart.  That  we  may  be  fitted  to  take  our  right  place  in  God's  service,  and 
go  forth  to  our  work  with  His  approval,  let  a  thorough  examination  be  made,  and 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xw. 

let  all  evil  be  removed.     (Robert  Spurgeon.)  Good  resolutions  soon  forgotten : — 

Note  how  suddenly  even  a  good  man  is  turned  from  good  resolutions,  if  but  a  little 
left  to  himself,  or  if  he  remit  but  a  little  of  his  own  watchfulness.  In  a  few  hoan 
this  confident  disciple,  who  scorned  to  think  of  denying  his  Master,  denies  and 
forswears  Him  too.  1.  We  stand  by  grace,  which,  if  not  every  moment  renewed, 
we  must  needs  fall ;  as  in  the  case  of  a  man  supported  by  a  crutch — remove  the 
crutch,  and  he  falls  down ;  or  set  a  staff  upright,  withdraw  the  hand,  and  you  need 
not  push  it  down,  it  goes  of  itself.  2.  The  suddenness  of  the  temptation,  which 
comes  like  lightning,  and  our  proneness  to  be  kindled  with  it.  3.  The  freedom  of 
the  Spirit,  who  comes  and  goes  at  His  own  pleasure.  (1)  This  should  keep  us 
humble,  no  matter  how  holy  a  state  we  get  into.  The  sun  may  at  any  time  sud- 
denly disappear  under  a  cloud.  (2)  Let  us  watch  our  graces  well,  and  forecast 
temptation.  (3)  Let  us  depend  on  the  Spirit  of  God  to  perfect  and  accomplish 
His  own  good  motions,  and  leave  us  not  to  ourselves,  who  can  quickly  quench  them. 
4.  No  wonder  if  the  righteousness  of  hypocrites  be  as  the  morning  dew  (Hosea  vL  4). 
(Dr.  Thomas  Taylor.) 

Ver.  31.  I  will  not  deny  Thee  In  any  wise.— Peecr**  deniiU  of  Christ: — ^I.  We  may 
learn  from  this  transaction  not  to  be  too  fobwabd  in  oub  fbofessioms,  or  too 
confident  in  our  own  strength,  lest  confidence  should  at  last  increase  the  guilt  and 
shame  of  failure ;  and  in  the  event  of  non-performance,  our  professions  be  turned 
to  our  reproach.  The  chief  of  the  apostles  mistook  the  firmness  of  his  own  spirit. 
In  the  day  of  peace  it  is  easy  to  form  good  resolutions,  and  to  be  confident  that 
we  shall  perform  them.  To  resolve  in  private  and  act  in  public  are  very  different 
things,  requiring  very  different  degrees  of  firmness,  both  in  exerting  the  powers  of 
the  understanding  and  in  regulating  the  affections  of  the  heart.  Bash  resolutions 
are  foolish,  and  rash  vows  cannot  be  innocent.  Yet  our  weakness  is  itself  the 
decisive  proof  that  vows  and  resolutions  ought  to  be  made.  But  let  them  be  made 
as  reason  and  duty  require— deliberately  not  ostentatiously;  not  so  much  to  be 
heard  as  to  be  kept ;  not  so  much  to  man  as  to  God.     II.  To  hope  the  best,  anp 

TO  DEPEND  the  MOST  UPON  THOSE  WHOSE  TEMPERS  ABE  NOT  80  WARM  AND  FOBWABD,  BUT 

MILD,  AND  COOL,  AND  FiEM.  In  St.  Johu  we  find  no  forward  professions,  no  hasty 
declarations  of  invincible  spirit.  He  was  firm  and  faithful,  but  meek  and  unoffend- 
ing. His  zeal  united  gentleness.  Zeal  should  be  with  moderation.  The  passions 
must  not  rule  the  conduct.  The  feelings  of  a  good  man  are  ruled  by  his  rehgion. 
"  Every  thought  should  be  brought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ." 
Without  such  guidance  feeling  is  bold,  forward,  and  capricious,  liable  to  error,  and 
wiU  involve  us  in  sin ;  but  conviction  and  principle  are  steady  and  permanent ;  trnth 
and  right  are  for  ever  the  same.    III.  That  if  we  be  subprised  into  any  failubh 

IN   OUB  DUTY  WE    MAY   BE  FORGIVEN    UPON   REPENTANCE   AND  BEITOBMATION.      But   this 

great  privilege  must  not  be  allowed  to  relax  our  care,  or  encourage  our  presumption. 
St.  Peter  delayed  his  repentance  only  till  he  knew  his  fault.  Hand-in-hand  with 
conviction  came  contrition.  {W.  Barrow^  LL.D.)  Peter  and  the  rest : — The  text 
shows  St.  Peter  exercising  the  supreme  influence.  I.  Hebe  is  Peter's  undoubted 
SUPREMACY.  History  circles  around  great  names.  Men  are  not  all  original.  The 
apostles  could  not  do  without  Peter.      II.    This  supbemacy  was  intellectual, 

MORAL,    SPIBIXUAL;   NOT    ECONOMICAL,    LEOAL,   OB  MEBELY   OFFICIAL.      His    SUpremaOy 

rose  out  of  qualification.  There  are  no  spiritual  leaderships  which  can  be 
irrespective  of  character.    A  true  man  must  always  influence  others  powerfully. 

III.  The  value  of  such  chabactebb  as  that  or  Peteb  in  the  Chubch.  Each  age 
needs  men  who  can  call  onward  and  upward  because  they  are  beyond  and  above. 

IV.  Hebe  is  noble  pubpose  and  noble  feeling  coming  bhobt  in  action.  The  sequel 
is,  **  they  all  forsook  Him  and  fled."  Not  even  the  grandest  human  inspirations 
have  staying  virtues  in  them.  These  must  be  sought  from  the  Holy  Spirit.  (TJie 
Preacher's  Monthly.)  Presumption: — I  stand  on  a  mountain  in  Colorado  six 
thousand  feet  high.  There  is  a  man  standing  beneath  me  who  says:  "I  see  a 
peculiar  shelving  to  this  rock,"  and  he  bends  towards  it.  I  say :  "  Stop,  you  wiU 
fall."  He  says  :  **No  danger;  I  have  a  steady  head  and  foot,  and  see  a  peculiar 
piece  of  moss."  I  say  :  "  Stand  back  " ;  but  he  says :  '*  I  am  not  afraid  " ;  and  he 
bends  farther  and  farther,  and  after  a  while  his  head  whirls  and  his  feet  slip — and 
the  eagles  know  not  that  it  is  the  macerated  flesh  of  a  man  they  are  picking  at,  bat 
it  is.  So  I  have  seen  men  come  to  the  very  verge  of  New  York  life,  and  they  look 
away  down  in  it.  They  say :  "  Don't  be  cowardly.  Let  us  go  down."  They  look 
farther  and  farther.     I  warn  them  to  stand  back ;  but  Satan  comes  behind  theoit 


OBAV.  ziT.]  ST.  MARK.  601 

And  while  they  are  swinging  over  the  verge,  pushes  them  off.  People  say  they  were 
naturally  bad.  They  were  not!  They  were  only  engaged  in  exploration.  {Dr. 
Talmage,)  Fatal  presumption  ;— The  present  Eddystone  Lighthouse  stands  very 
firmly,  but  that  was  not  the  character  of  the  first  structure  that  stood  on  that 
dangerous  point.  There  was  an  eccentric  man  by  the  name  of  Henry  Winstanly, 
who  built  a  very  fantastic  lighthouse  at  that  point  in  1696,  and  when  it  was 
nearly  done  he  felt  so  confident  that  it  was  strong,  that  he  expressed  the  wish  that 
he  might  be  in  it  in  the  roughest  hurricane  that  ever  blew  in  the  face  of  heaven. 
And  he  got  his  wish.  One  November  night,  in  1703,  he  and  his  worfanen  were  in 
that  light-house  when  there  came  down  the  most  raging  tempest  that  has  ever 
been  known  in  that  region.  On  the  following  morning  the  people  came  down  to  see 
about  the  lighthouse.  Not  a  vestige  of  the  wall,  not  a  vestige  of  the  men.  Only 
two  twisted  iron  bolts,  showing  where  the  lighthouse  had  stood.  So  there  are 
men  building  up  their  fantastic  hopes,  and  plans,  and  enterprises,  and  expecta- 
tions, thinking  they  will  stand  for  ever,  saying :  "  We  don't  want  any  of  the  defences 
of  the  gospel.  We  can  stand  for  ourselves.  We  are  not  afraid.  We  take  all  the 
risks  and  we  defy  everything; "  and  suddenly  the  Lord  blows  upon  them  and  they 
are  gone.  Only  two  things  left — a  grave  and  a  lost  soul.  {Dr.  Talrmge.) 
Accumulated  sin : — Peter,  instead  of  being  humbled  and  made  self-distrustful  by 
our  Lord's  warning,  as  he  ought  to  have  been,  only  heaps  up  more  sin  against  him- 
self by  persisting  in  contradicting  the  Lord.  Let  us  take  note  from  this  that  the 
child  of  God,  through  strength  of  his  corruption,  may  fall  often  into  the  same  sin, 
notwithstanding  good  means  against  it.  1.  It  is  a  very  hard  thing  to  lead  people 
out  of  themselves.  Almost  nothing  but  experience  of  former  falls  brings  them  to 
see  their  folly.  2.  Till  their  mind  is  changed  their  action  will  be  the  same.  3. 
Weakness  of  grace  causes  even  the  best  to  fall  over  and  over  again  into  the  same 
sins.  4.  The  same  reason  remains  still  which  may  move  the  Lord  to  leave  His 
children  to  themselves;  to  try,  excite,  humble  them,  work  more  serious  sorrow, 
make  them  more  watchful,  &c.  {Dr.  Thomas  Taylor.)  Repetition  strengthens : — 
Every  repetition  of  sin  makes  sm  the  stronger ;  for  as  the  body,  the  more  it  ia 
nourished  and  fed,  the  stronger  it  grows,  so  with  sin  in  the  soul ;  every  new  act  is 
an  addition  of  strength  till  it  comes  to  a  habit.  Pluck  up  a  twig,  then,  before  it 
grows  up  into  a  plant.    Dash  out  the  brains  of  every  sin  in  infancy.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  32-36.  Which  was  named  Gethsemane. — The  conflict  in  Gethsemane : — ^I.  The 

PLACE  OF  THE  CONFLICT  CALLS  EOR  A  BRIEF  NOTICE.      U.   ThE  STOBY   OF  THE  CONFLICT. 

Its  intensity  is  the  first  fact  in  the  story  that  strikes  us.  "  His  sweat  was  as  it  were 
great  drops  of  blood  falling  to  the  ground."  This  conflict  wrung  from  the  Saviour  a 
great  cry.  What  was  it  ?  "0  My  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me; 
nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt."  We  have  a  glimpse  of  the  conflict 
carried  on  by  Christ  for  us,  single-handed.  III.  The  sleep  of  the  nisciPLEa 
WHILST  THIS  CONFLICT  WAS  GOING  ON.  {GharUs  Stanford,  D.D.)  Gethsemane: — 
I.  Gethsemane  suggests  to  reverent  faith  our  blessed  Eedeemer's  longing  for  human 
sympathy.  11.  It  reminds  us  of  the  sacredness  of  human  sorrow  and  Divine 
eommonion.  lU.  It  reveals  the  overwhelming  fulness  of  the  Eedeemer's 
sorrow.  IV.  It  reminds  us  of  the  will  of  Christ  yielded  to  the  will  of  the 
Father.  V.  It  has  lessons  and  influences  for  oar  own  hearts.  (The  Preacher's 
Monthly.)  Jesu*  in  Gethsemane : — I.  Woe's  bittebest  cup  should  be  taken  when 
IT  IS  the  means  of  HIGHEST  USEFULNESS.  Wasted  suffering  is  the  climax  of 
suffering.  Affliction's  furnace-heat  loses  its  keenest  pangs  for  those  who  can  see 
the  form  of  One  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man  walking  with  them  by  example,  and 
know  that  they  are  ministering  to  the  world's  true  joy  and  life,  in  some  degree, 
as  He  did.    U.  Fbom  oub  Loan's  example  we  leabn  the  helpfulness  in  sorbow 

OF   RELIANCE   UPON   HUMAN  AND  DlVINE   COMPANIONSHIP  COMBINED.      But    tO    do    both 

in  proper  proportion  is  not  easy.  Some  hide  from  both  earth  and  heaven  as  much 
as  possible.  Others  lean  wholly  upon  human  supports ;  others,  yet,  turn  to  God 
in  a  seclusion  to  which  the  tenderest  offices  of  friends  are  unwelcome.  Our  Lord's 
divinity  often  appears  plainest  in  his  symmetrical  union  of  traits,  mainly  remark- 
able because  of  their  eombination.  JSe  was  at  once  the  humblest  and  boldest  of 
men ;  the  farthest  from  sin  and  the  most  compassionate  towards  the  returning 

{)rodigal ;  the  meekest  and  the  most  commanding.  So,  in  the  garden  agony,  he 
eaned  upon  human  and  Divine  supports ;  the  one  as  indispensable  as  the  other. 
Whatever  the  situation,  we  are  not  to  act  the  recluse.  Life's  circles  need  as  and 
we  need  them.    Neither  are  we  to  forget  the  Father  in  heaven.    Storms  and  tria^ 


602  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [Oha*.  nv. 

only  increase  His  ready  sympathy  and  snccour.  III.  Oub  Lord's  cbuotal  obsdienck 

IN  THE  OABDEN  AGONY  REFLECTS  THE  MAJESTY  OF  THE  HUMAN  WILL  AMD  ITS  POSSIBLE 
MASTERY   OF   EVERY   TRIAL   IN   PERFECT   OBEDIENCE   TO    THE    DiVINB    WILL.        HoweVer 

superhuman  Jesus'  suffering,  He  was  thoroughly  human  in  it.  He  had  all  our 
faculties,  and  used  them  as  we  may  use  ours.  It  is  no  small  encouragement 
that  the  typical  Man  gives  us  an  example  of  perfect  obedience,  at  a  cost  unknown 
before  or  since.  In  the  mutual  relations  of  the  human  and  Divine  wills  all  merit 
is  achieved  and  all  character  constructed.  Learned  authors  dwell  with  deserved 
interest  upon  the  world's  "decisive  battles,"  the  pivots  of  destiny.  The  soul's 
future  for  time  and  eternity  turns  upon  contests  in  which  the  will  is  in  chief  com- 
mand. Intellect  and  sensibilities  participate,  but  they  are  always  subordinate.  It 
were  helpful  to  bear  this  in  mind  under  every  exposure.  Let  the  inquiry  be  quick 
and  constant,  What  saith  the  will  ?     Is  that  steady  and  unflinching  ?    IV.  Jesus' 

BOCL    COULD   HAVE    BEEN    "SORROWFUL   EVEN   UNTO   DEATH'*    ONLY   AS   HiS    SUFFERINGS 

WERE  VICARIOUS.  He  was  always  sublimely  heroic.  Why  such  agony  now  ?  It  was 
something  far  deadlier  than  death.  It  was  the  burden  and  mystery  of  the  world's  sin. 
The  Lamb  of  God  was  slain  for  us  in  soul  agony  rather  than  by  physical  pain.  His 
soul  formed  the  soul  of  His  sufferings.  V.  Gethsemane's  darkness  paints  sin's 
GUILT  AND  BuiN  IN  FAITHFUL  AND  ENDURING  coLouB.  It  is  easy  to  think  lightly  of  sin. 
Having  never  known  guilt,  Christ  met  the  same  hidings  of  the  Divine  countenance 
as  do  the  guilty.  This  was  man's  disobedience  in  its  relation  with  God's  law  and 
judgment.  VI.  Gethsejiane  throws  portentous  light  upon  the  woe  of  lost  souls. 
He  suffered  exceptionally,  but  He  was  also  a  typical  sufferer ;  every  soul  has  possi- 
bilities beyond  our  imagination  ;  and  terrible  the  doom  when  these  possibilities  are 
fulfilled  in  the  direction  to  which  Gethsemane  points.     VIL  Oub  lesson  oiyes 

TKRRIBLE  EMPHASIS  TO  THE  FACT  AND  SERIOUSNESS  OF  IMPOSSIBILITIES  WITH  GOD.       Out 

time  tends  strongly  towards  lax  notions  of  the  Divine  character  and  law  and  of  the 
conditions  of  salvation.  The  will  and  fancy  erect  their  own  standards.  Religion 
and  obedience  are  to  be  settled  according  to  individual  notions,  a  subjective  affair. 
Our  Lord's  agonized  words,  "  If  it  be  possible,"  cBtablish  the  rigidity  and  absolute- 
ness of  governmental  and  spiritual  conditions.  God's  will  and  plans  are  objective 
realities ;  they  have  definite  and  all-important  direction  and  demands.  Man  should 
not  think  of  being  a  law  unto  himself  either  in  conduct  or  belief;  least  of  all  should 
he  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  revealed  Word,  fancying  that  any  amount  or  kind  of 
inner  light  is  a  true  and  sufficient  test  of  its  legitimacy  and  authority.  But,  how 
futile  all  attempts  at  fathoming  Gethsemane's  lessons.  (H.  L.  B,  Speare.)  Christ 
in  Gethsemane: — I.  Gethsemamb  saw  Ghbist's  agony  on  accounz  of  sin.  U. 
Gethsemane  was  a  witness  of  Ghbist's  deyotiom  m  thb  houb  of  distbess. 
ni.  Gethsemane  was  ▲  witness  of  Ghbist's  besionatiom  to  the  will  of  Gtod. 
rV.  Gethsemane  was  ▲  witness  of  Christ's  sympathy  with,  and  affection  fob. 
His  tbied  followebs.  {J.  H.  Hitchens.)  The  prayer  in  Gethsemane: — 
L  Let  us  notice,  in  the  outset,  the  sudden  expebiencb  which  led  to 
this  act  of  supplication.  He  began  to  be  "sore  amazed  and  to  be  very 
heavy."  Evidently  something  new  had  come  to  Him;  either  a  disclosure 
of  fresh  trial,  or  a  violence  of  unusual  pain  under  it.  Here  it  is  affecting 
to  find  in  our  Divine  Lord  so  much  of  recognized  and  simple  human  nature. 
He  desired  to  be  alone,  but  He  planned  to  have  somebody  He  loved  and  trusted 
within  call.  His  grief  was  too  burdensome  for  utter  abandonment.  Hence  came 
the  demand  for  sympathy  He  made,  and  the  persistence  in  reserve  he  retained,  both 
of  which  are  so  welcome  and  instructive.  For  here  emphatically,  as  perhaps 
nowhere  else,  we  are  "  with  Him  in  the  garden."  Oh,  how  passionately  craving  of 
help,  andyethowmajesterially  rejectful  of  impertinent  condolence,  are  some  of  these 
moments  we  have  in  our  mourning,  when  our  souls  retire  upon  their  reserves,  and 
will  open  their  deepest  recesses  only  to  God  I  Our  secret  is  unshared,  our  struggle 
is  unrevealed  to  men.  Yet  we  love  those  who  love  us  just  as  much  as  ever.  It  ia 
helpful  to  find  that  even  our  Lord  Jesus  had  some  feelings  of  which  He  could  not 
tell  John.  He  "went  away"  (Matt.  xxvi.  44).  II.  Let  us,  in  the  second  place, 
inquire  concerning  the  exact  meaning  of  this  singulab  supplication.  In  those 
three  intense  prayers  was  the  Saviour  simply  afraid  of  death  f  Was  that  what  cor 
version  makes  the  Apostle  Paul  say  He  "  feared "  f  Was  He  just  pleading  there 
under  the  olives  for  permission  to  put  off  the  human  form  now,  renounce  the  "  like* 
ness  of  men  "  (Phih  li.  7,  8),  which  He  had  taken  upon  Him,  slip  back  into  heaven 
inconspicuously  by  some  sort  of  translation  which  would  remove  Him  from  the 
power  of  Pilate,  so  that  when  Judas  had  done  his  errand  "quickly/'  and  had 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  MARK.  603 

arrived  with  the  soldiers,  Jesus  would  be  mysteriously  missing,  and  the  the  traitor 
would  find  nothing  but  three  harmless  comrades  there  asleep  on  the  grass  ?  That 
is  to  say,  are  we  ready  to  admit  that  our  Lord  and  Master  seriously  proposed  to  go 
back  to"  His  Divine  Father's  bosom  at  this  juncture,  leaving  the  prophecies  unful. 
tilled,  the  redemption  unfinished,  the  very  honour  of  Jehovah  sullied  with  a  failure? 
Does  it  offer  any  help  in  dealing  with  such  a  conjecture  to  insist  that  this  was 
only  a  moment  of  weakness  in  His  "  human  nature  ?  "  Would  this  make  any 
difference  as  a  matter  of  fact  for  Satan  to  discover  that  he  bad  only  been 
contending  with  another  Adam,  after  all?  Would  the  lost  angels  any  the  less 
exult  over  the  happy  news  of  a  celestial  defeat  because  they  learned  that  the 
"  seed  of  the  woman  "  had  not  succeeded  in  bruising  the  serpent's  head  by  reason 
of  His  own  alarm  at  the  last?  Oh,  no:  surely  no  I  Jesus  had  said,  when  in  the 
lar-back  counsels  of  eternity  the  covenant  of  redemption  was  made,  '•  Lo,  I  come: 
I  dehght  to  do  Thy  will,  O  my  God  "  (Psa.  xl.  7,  8).  He  could  have  had  no  purpose 
now,  we  may  be  evermore  certain,  of  withdrawing  the  proffer  of  Himself  to  suffer 
for  men.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  "  cup"  which  our  Lord  desired  might 
"  pass  from  "  His  lips,  and  yet  was  willing  to  drink  if  there  could  be  no  release 
from  it,  was  the  judicial  wrath  of  God  discharged  upon  Him  as  a  culprit  vicariously 
before  the  law,  receiving  the  awful  curse  due  to  human  sin.  We  reject  all  notion 
of  mere  physical  illness  or  exhaustion  as  well  as  all  conjecture  of  mere  sentimental 
loneliness  under  the  abandonment  of  friends.  In  that  supreme  moment  when  He 
found  that  He,  sinless  in  every  particular  and  degree,  must  be  considered  guilty,  and 
so  that  His  heavenly  Father's  face  and  favour  must  at  least  for  a  while  be  with- 
drawn from  Him,  He  was,  in  despite  of  all  His  courageous  preparation,  surprised  and 
almost  frightened  to  discover  how  much  His  own  soul  was  beginning  to  shudder 
and  recoil  from  coming  into  contact  with  sin  of  any  sort,  even  though  it  was  only 
imputed.  Evidently  it  seemed  to  His  infinitely  pure  nature  horrible  to  be  pat  in  a 
position,  however  false,  such  as  that  His  adorable  Father  would  be  compelled  to 
draw  the  mantle  over  His  face.  This  shocked  Him  unutterably.  He  shrank  back 
in  consternation  when  He  saw  He  must  become  loathsome  in  tiie  sight  of  heaven 
because  of  tho  *'  abominable  thing  "  God  hated  (Jer.  xliv.  4).  Hence,  we  oonceiv* 
the  prayer  covered  only  that.  That  which  appears  at  first  a  startling  surrender  of 
redemption  as  a  whole,  is  nothing  more  than  a  petition  to  be  reUeved  from  what  He 
hoped  might  be  deemed  no  necessary  part  of  the  curse  He  was  bearing  for  others. 
He  longed,  as  He  entered  unusual  darkness,  just  to  receive  the  usual  light.  It  was 
as  if  He  had  said  to  His  heavenly  Father :  "  The  pain  I  understood,  the  curse  I  came 
for.  Shame,  obloquy,  death,  I  care  nothing  for  them.  I  only  recoil  from  being 
loaded  so  with  foreign  sin  that  I  cannot  be  looked  upon  with  any  allowance.  I  am 
in  alarm  when  I  think  of  the  prince  of  this  world  coming  and  finding  something  in 
me,  when  hitherto  he  had  nothing.  I  am  poured  out  like  water,  and  all  my  bones 
are  out  of  joint,  my  heart  is  like  wax,  when  I  think  of  the  taunt  that  the  Lord  I 
trusted  no  longer  delights  in  Me  ;  this  is  like  laughing  God  to  scorn.  Is  there  no 
permitted  discrimination  between  a  real  sinner,  and  a  substitute  only  counted  such 
before  the  law  in  this  one  particular  ?  All  things  are  possible  with  Thee  ;  make  it 
possible  now  for  Thee  to  see  Thy  Son,  and  yet  not  seem  to  see  the  imputed  guilt 
He  bears  1  Yet  even  this  will  I  endure,  if  so  it  must  be  in  order  that  I  may  fulfil 
all  righteousness;  Thy  will,  not  Mine,  be  done  I  "  III.  Again,  let  us  observe  care- 
fully   THE    EXTRAORDINARY   RANGE   WHICH   THIS   PRAYER    XN   THE   GARDEN   TOOK.        It  is 

not  worth  while  even  to  appear  to  be  playing  upon  an  accidental  collocation  of 
words  in  the  sacred  narrative ;  but  why  should  it  be  asserted  that  any  inspired 
words  are  accidental  ?  The  whole  history  of  Imunanuel's  sufferings  that  awful 
night  contains  no  incident  more  strikingly  suggestive  than  the  record  of  the  distance 
He  kept  between  Himself  and  His  disciples.  It  is  the  act  as  well  as  the  language 
which  is  significant.  Mark  says,  •*  He  went  forward  a  little."  Luke  says,  "  He  was 
withdrawn  from  them  about  a  stone's  oast."  Matthew  says,  ••  He  went  a  little 
farther."  So  now  we  know  that  this  one  petition  of  our  Lord  was  the  final,  secret, 
supreme  whisper  of  His  innermost  heart.  The  range  of  such  a  prayer  was  over  His 
whole  nature.  It  exhausted  His  entire  being.  It  covered  the  humanity  it  repre- 
sented. In  it  for  Himself  and  for  us  "  He  went  a  little  farther  "  than  ever  He  had 
in  His  supplication  gone  before.  One  august  monarch  rules  over  this  fallen  world, 
and  holds  all  human  hearts  under  His  sway.  His  name  is  Pain.  His  image  and 
superscription  is  upon  every  coin  that  passes  current  in  this  mortal  life.  He  claims 
fealty  from  the  entire  race  of  man.  And,  sooner  or  later,  once,  twice,  or  a  hundred 
times,  as  the  king  chooses,  and  not  as  the  subject  wills,  each  soul  ha?  ^o  put  on  its 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

black  garment,  go  sedately  and  snfferingly  on  its  sad  journey  to  pay  its  loyal  tribute, 
precisely  as  Joseph  and  Mary  were  compelled  to  go  up  to  Bethlehem^  to  be  taxed. 
When  this  tyrant  Pain  summons  us  to  come  and  discharge  his  dues,  it  is  the  quickest 
of  human  instincts  which  prompts  us  to  seek  solitude.  That  seems  to  be  the 
universal  rule  (Zech.  xii.  12-14).  But  now  we  discover  from  this  symbolic  picture 
that,  whenever  any  Christian  goes  away  from  other  disciples  deeper  into  the  soli- 
tudes of  his  own  Gethsemane,  he  almost  at  once  draws  nearer  to  the  Saviour  he 
needs.  For  our  Lord  just  now  "  went  forward  a  little."  There  He  is,  on  ahead  of 
us  all  in  experience  1  It  is  simply  and  wonderfully  true  of  Jesus  always,  no  matter 
how  severe  is  the  suffering  into  which  for  their  discipline  He  leads  His  chosen. 
He  Himself  has  taken  His  position  in  advance  of  them.  No  human  lot  was  ever  so 
forlorn,  so  grief-burdened,  so  desolate,  as  was  that  of  the  Great  Life  given  to  redeem 
it.  No  path  ever  reached  so  distantly  into  the  region  of  heart-trying  agony  as  that 
it  might  not  still  see  that  peerless  Christ  of  God  •*  about  a  stone's  cast  "  beyond  it, 
kneeling  in  some  deeper  shadows  of  His  own.  No  believer  ever  went  so  far  into 
hia  lonely  Qethsemane  but  that  he  found  his  Master  had  gone  "  a  little  farther.'* 

•  Christ  did  not  send,  but  came  Himself,  to  save; 
The  ransom  price  He  did  not  lend,  but  gave ; 
Christ  died,  the  Shepherd  for  the  sheep, — 
We  only  fall  asleep." 

IV.  Finally,  let  ns  inquire  after  thb  sxtpbeub  besttlts  of  this  bttpplxoaroh  ov 
ouB  LoBD.  1.  Consider  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession  (Heb.  xii.  2-4).  What 
good  would  it  do  to  pray,  if  Christ's  prayer  was  unsuccessful?  2.  But  was  it 
answered  ?  Certainly  (Heb.  v.  7-9).  The  cup  remained  (John  xviii  11),  but  he  got 
acquiescence  (Matt.  xxvi.  42),  and  strength  (Luke  xxii.  43).  3.  Have  we  been  •*  with 
Him  in  the  garden"?  Then  we  have  found  a  similar  "cup"  (Mark  x.  38,  39). 
(C.  S,  Robinson,  D.D.)  Companionship  in  sorrow  : — It  is  a  delightful  thing  to  be 
with  Jesus  on  the  mountain  of  transfiguration,  where  heavenly  visitants  are  seen, 
and  a  heavenly  voice  is  heard.  It  would  seem  good  to  be  always  there.  But  they 
who  would  follow  Jesus  through  this  earthly  life,  must  be  with  Him  also  out  on  the 
stormy  sea  in  the  gloomy  night ;  and  again  they  must  come  with  Him  into  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  There  are  bright,  glad  days  to  the  Christian 
believer,  when  faith  and  hope  and  love  are  strong.  But  there  are  days  also  of  trial 
and  sorrow,  when  it  seems  as  if  faith  must  fail,  and  hope  must  die,  and  love  itself 
must  cease.  It  is  one  thing  for  a  young  couple  to  stand  together  in  light  and  joy, 
surrounded  by  friends,  at  their  marriage  reception,  or  to  share  each  other's  pleasure 
on  their  wedding-tour.  It  is  quite  another  thing  for  a  married  pair  to  watch  together 
through  the  weary  night  over  a  sick  and  suffering  child,  and  to  close  the  eyes  of  their 
darling  in  its  death  sleep,  in  the  gray  of  the  gloomy  morning.  Yet  the  clouds  are 
as  sure  as  the  sunlight  on  the  path  of  every  chosen  disciple  of  Jesus  who  follows  his 
Master  unswervingly ;  and  he  who  never  comes  with  Jesus  to  a  place  named  Geth- 
semane has  chosen  for  himself  another  path  than  that  wherein  the  Saviour  leads 
the  way.    {H.  Clay  Trumbull).        Christ,  our  sin-bearer: — I.  With  reoabi)  to  the 

POSITION  OUB  LOBD  WAS  IN,   £[e   STOOD  THEBE   AS  THE    GBEAT     SiN-BeABSB.       Here, 

beloved,  we  see  what  the  burden  was  which  our  Lord  bore :  it  was  our  sins.  II. 
But  now  obsxbve,  secondly,  the  gbeat  weight  op  this  bubden.  Who  can 
declare  it?  (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  sufferings  of  the  good: — My  life  has  been 
to  me  a  mystery  of  love.  I  know  that  God's  education  of  each  man  is  in  perfect 
righteousness.  I  know  that  the  best  on  earth  have  been  the  greatest  sufferers, 
because  they  were  the  best,  and  like  gold  could  stand  the  fire  and  be  purified  by  it. 
I  know  this,  and  a  great  deal  more,  and  yet  the  mercy  of  God  to  me  is  such  a 
mystery  that  I  have  been  tempted  to  think  I  was  utterly  unworthy  of  suffering.  God 
have  mercy  on  my  thoughts  I  I  may  be  unable  to  stand  suffering.  I  do  not  know. 
But  I  lay  myself  at  Thy  feet,  and  say, '  Not  that  I  am  prepared,  but  that  Thou  art 
good  and  wise,  and  wilt  prepare  me.'"  {Norman  Macleod.)  Resignation: — Of 
all  the  smaller  English  missions,  the  Livingstone-Congo  stands  conspicuous  for  its 
overflowing  of  zeal  and  life  and  promise ;  and  of  all  its  agents,  young  M'Call  was 
the  brightest ;  but  he  was  struck  down  in  mid-work.  His  last  words  were  recorded 
by  a  stranger  who  visited  him.  Let  each  one  of  us  lay  them  to  our  hearts.  **  Lord, 
I  gave  myself,  body,  mind,  and  soul,  to  Thee.  I  consecrated  my  whole  life  and 
being  to  Thy  service ;  and  now,  if  it  please  Thee  to  take  myself,  instead  of  the  work 
which  I  would  do  for  Thee,  what  is  that  to  me  ?    Thy  will  be  done."    (JR.  N,  Cust,) 


OHAP.  XIV.]  ST,  MARK,  60S 

Christ's  sorrotc  and  desertion : — It  is  beyond  our  power  to  ascertain  the  precise 
amount  of  suffering  sustained  by  our  Lord ;  for  a  mystery  necessarily  encircles  the 
person  of  Jesus,  in  which  two  natures  are  combined.  This  mystery  may  ever 
prevent  our  knovnng  how  His  humanity  was  sustained  by  His  divinity.  Still, 
undoubtedly,  the  general  representation  of  Scripture  would  lead  to  the  conclusion, 
that  though  He  was  absolute  God,  with  every  power  and  prerogative  of  Deity,  yet 
was  Christ,  as  man,  left  to  the  same  conflicts,  and  dependent  on  the  same  assistances 
as  any  of  His  followers.  He  differed,  indeed,  immeasurably,  in  that  He  was  con- 
ceived without  the  taint  of  original  sin,  and  therefore  was  free  from  our  evil  pro- 
pensities :  He  lived  the  life  of  faith  which  He  worked  out  for  Himself,  and  He  lived 
it  to  gain  for  us  a  place  in  His  Father's  kingdom.  Although  He  was  actually  to 
meet  affliction  like  a  man,  He  was  left  without  any  external  support  from  above. 
This  is  very  remarkably  shown  by  His  agony  in  the  garden,  when  an  angel  was  sent 
to  strengthen  Him.  Wonderful  that  a  Divine  person  should  have  craved  assistance, 
and  that  He  did  not  draw  on  His  own  inexhaustible  resources  1  But,  it  was  as  a  man 
that  He  grappled  with  the  powers  of  darkness — as  a  man  who  could  receive  no 
eelestial  aid.  And,  if  this  be  a  true  interpretation  of  the  mode  in  which  our  Lord 
met  persecution  and  death,  we  must  be  right,  in  contrasting  Him  with  martyrs, 
when  we  assert  an  immeasurable  difference  between  His  sufferings,  and  those  of 
men  who  have  died  nobly  for  the  truth :  from  Him  the  light  of  the  Father*! 
4;ountenance  was  vtdthdrawn,  whilst  onto  them  it  was  conspicuously  displayed. 
This  may  explain  why  Christ  was  confounded  and  overwhelmed,  where  others  had 
been  serene  and  undaunted.  Still,  the  question  arises, — Why  was  Christ  thus 
deserted  of  the  Father?  Why  were  those  comforts  and  supports  withheld  from 
Him  which  have  been  frequently  vouchsafed  to  His  followers  ?  No  doubt  it  is  a 
surprising  as  well  as  a  piteous  spectacle  that  of  our  Lord  shrinking  from  the 
«nguish  of  what  should  befal  Him,  whilst  others  have  faced  death,  in  its  most 
frightful  forms,  with  unruffled  composure.  You  never  oan  account  for  this,  except 
by  acknowledging  that  our  Lord  was  no  ordinary  man,  meeting  death  as  a  mere 
witness  for  truth,  but  that  he  was  actually  a  sin-offering,  bearing  the  weight  of  the 
world's  iniquities.  His  agony— His  doleful  cries — His  sweating,  as  it  were,  great 
drops  of  blood ;  these  are  not  to  be  explained  on  the  supposition  of  His  being 
merely  an  innocent  man,  hunted  down  by  fierce  and  unrelenting  enemies.  Had  He 
been  only  this,  why  should  He  be  apparently  so  excelled  in  confidence  and  eom- 
posure  by  a  long  line  of  martyrs  and  confessors  f  Christ  was  more  than  this. 
Though  He  had  done  no  sin,  yet  was  He  in  the  plaoe  of  the  sinful,  bearing  the 
ireight  of  Divine  indignation,  and  made  to  feel  the  terrors  of  Divine  wrath.  Iimo- 
«ent,  He  was  treated  as  guilty !  He  had  made  Himself  the  substitute  of  the  guilty 
— hence  His  anguish  and  terror.  Bear  in  mind,  that  the  sufferer  who  exhibits,  as 
you  might  think,  so  much  less  of  composure  and  firmness  than  has  been  evinced  by 
many  when  called  on  to  die  for  truth — bear  in  mind,  that  this  sufferer  has  had  a 
world's  iniquity  laid  on  His  shoulders ;  that  God  is  now  dealing  with  Him  as  the 
representative  of  apostate  man,  and  exacting  from  Him  the  penalties  due  to  unnum- 
bered transgressions ;  and  you  will  cease  to  wonder  though  you  may  still  almost 
shudder  at  words,  so  expressive  of  agony — "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even 
unto  death."  {U.  Melvill,  B,D.)  ChrisVs  agony  of  $oul : — It  is  on  the  sufferings 
of  the  soul  that  we  would  fix  your  attention ;  for  these,  we  doubt  not,  were  the 
mighty  endurances  of  the  Bedeemer — these  pursued  Him  to  His  very  last  moments, 
ontil  He  paid  the  last  fragment  of  our  debts.  You  will  perceive  that  it  was  in  the 
soul  rather  than  in  the  body  that  our  blessed  Saviour  made  atonement  for  trans- 
gression. He  had  put  Himself  in  the  place  of  the  criminal,  so  far  as  it  was  possible 
for  an  innocent  man  to  assume  the  position  of  the  guilty;  and  standing  in  the  plaoe 
of  the  criminal,  with  guilt  imputed  to  Him,  He  had  to  bear  the  punishment  that 
misdeeds  had  incurred.  You  must  be  aware  that  anguish  of  the  soul  rather  than 
of  the  body  is  the  everlasting  portion  of  sinners ;  and  though,  of  course,  we  cannot 
think  that  our  Lord  endured  precisely  what  sinners  had  deserved,  for  he  could  have 
inown  nothing  of  the  stings  and  bodes  of  conscience  beneath  which  they  must 
eternally  writhe, yet  forasuiuch  aa  He  was  exhausting  their  curse— a  curse  which  was 
to  drive  ruin  into  their  soul  as  well  as  rack  the  body  with  unspeakable  pain — we 
might  well  expect  that  the  soul's  anguish  of  a  surety  or  substitute  would  be  felt 
«!ven  more  than  the  bodily :  and  that  external  affliction,  however  vast  and  accumu- 
lated, would  be  comparatively  less  in  its  rigour  or  accompaniments,  than  His 
internal  anguish,  which  is  not  to  be  measured  or  imagined.  This  expectation  ia 
certainly  quite  borne  out  by  the  statements  of  Scripture,  if  carefully  considered. 


606  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

Indeed  it  is  very  observable  that  when  onr  Lord  is  set  before  us  as  exhibiting  signs 
of  anguish  and  distress  there  was  no  bodily  sufifering  whatever — none  but  what  was 
caused  mentally.  I  refer,  as  yon  must  be  aware,  to  the  scene  in  the  garden,  as 
immediately  connected  with  our  text,  when  the  Bedeemer  manifested  the  most 
inten(!e  grief  and  horror,  His  sweat  being  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood — a  scene 
which  the  most  callous  can  scarcely  encounter :  in  this  case  there  was  no  nail,  no 
spear.  Ay,  though  there  was  the  prospect  of  the  cross,  there  was  hardly  fear.  It 
was  the  thought  of  dying  as  a  malefactor,  which  so  overcame  the  Redeemer,  that 
He  needed  strength  by  an  angel  from  heaven.  That  it  was  that  wrung  out  the 
thrilling  exclamation  :  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful."  It  is  far  beyond  us  to 
tel]  you  what  were  the  spiritual  endurances  which  so  distressed  and  bore  down  the 
lledeemer.  There  is  a  veil  over  the  anguish  of  the  incarnate  God  which  no  mortal 
hand  may  attempt  to  remove.  I  can  only  suppose  that  holy  as  He  was — incapable 
of  sinning  in  thought  or  deed — He  had  a  piercing  and  overwhelming  setfce  of  the 
criminality  of  sin — of  the  dishonour  which  it  attached  to  the  world — of  the  ruin 
which  it  was  bringing  on  man :  He  must  have  felt  as  no  other  being  could,  the 
mighty  fearfulness  of  sin — linked  alike  with  God  and  with  man — the  brethren  of 
sinners,  and  the  being  sinned  against.  Who  can  doubt  that,  as  He  bore  onr  trans- 
gressions in  our  nature,  He  must  have  been  wounded  as  with  a  two-edged  sword — 
the  one  edge  lacerating  Him  as  He  was  jealous  of  divine  glory,  and  the  other  as  He 
longed  for  human  happiness  ?  Though  we  cannot  explain  what  passed  in  the  soul 
of  the  Redeemer,  we  would  impress  on  you  the  truth,  that  it  was  in  the  soul  rather 
than  in  the  body  that  those  dire  pangs  were  endured  which  exhausted  the  curse 
denounced  against  sin.  Let  not  any  think  that  mere  bodily  anguish  went  as  an 
equivalent  for  the  miseries  and  the  tortures  which  must  have  been  eternally  exacted 
from  every  human  being.  It  would  take  away  much  of  the  terribleness  of  the  future 
doom  of  the  impenitent,  to  represent  those  sufferings  as  only,  or  chiefly,  bodily. 
Men  will  argue  the  nature  of  the  doom,  not  the  nature  of  the  suffering  capacity  in 
its  stead.  And,  certainly,  a  hell  without  mental  agony,  would  be  a  paradise  in 
comparison  with  what  we  believe  to  be  the  pandemonium,  where  the  sonl  is  the  rack, 
and  conscience  the  executioner.  Go  not  away  from  Calvary,  with  thoughts  of 
nothing  but  suffering  a  death  by  being  nailed  to  a  cross  and  left  to  expire  after  long 
torture !  Go  away,  rather  thinking  of  the  horror  which  had  taken  hold  of  the  soul 
of  the  forsaken  sufferer  ;  and  as  you  carry  with  yon  a  remembrance  of  the  doleful 
spectacle,  and  smite  your  breasts  at  the  thought  of  His  piteous  cry — a  cry  more 
startling  than  the  crash  of  the  earthquake  that  announced  His  death — lay  ye  to 
heart  His  unimaginable  endurances  which  extort  the  cry :  "  My  soul  is  exceeding 
sorrowful,  even  unto  death."  {Ibid.)  Blessings  through  ChrisVt  soul-agony  : — 
It  is  this  death — this  travail  of  the  soul,  which  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  a 
Christian  liffl  is  effecting  or  producing  that  holier  creature  which  is  finally  to  be 
presented  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light. 
It  is  in  the  pangs  of  the  soul,  that  he  feels  the  renewing  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
realized  in  the  birth  of  the  Christian  character,  who  in  any  age  of  the  world  recovers 
the  defaced  image  of  his  God.  I  think  it  gives  a  preciousness  to  every  means  of 
grace,  thus  to  consider  them  as  brought  into  being  by  the  agonies  of  the  Redeemer. 
It  would  go  far,  were  this  borne  in  mind,  to  defend  it  against  the  resistance  or 
neglect,  if  it  were  impressed  on  you  that  there  is  not  a  single  blessing  of  which  you 
are  conscious,  that  did  not  spring  from  this  sorrow — this  sorrow  unto  death  of  the 
Redeemer's  soul.  Could  you  possibly  make  light,  as  perhaps  you  now  do,  of  those 
warnings  and  secret  admonitions  which  come  you  know  not  whence,  prompting  yoa 
to  forsake  certain  sins  and  give  heed  to  certain  duties,  if  yon  were  impressed  that 
it  was  through  the  very  soul  of  the  Redeemer  being  "exceeding  sorrowful,  even 
unto  death,"  that  there  was  obtained  for  you  the  privilege  of  access  to  God  by 
prayer,  or  the  having  offers  made  to  you  of  pardon  and  reconciliation  ?  Do  you 
think  you  could  kneel  down  irreverently  or  formally,  or  that  you  could  treat  the 
ordinance  of  preaching  as  a  mere  hiunan  institution,  in  regard  to  which,  it  mattered 
little  whether  you  were  in  earnest  or  not  f  The  memory  that  Christ's  soul  travailed 
in  agony  to  procure  for  you  those  blessings — which,  because  they  are  abundant,  you 
may  be  tempted  to  underrate — would  necessarily  impart  a  preciousness  to  the  whole. 
You  could  not  be  indifferent  to  the  bitter  cry  ;  you  could  not  look  languidly  on  the 
scene  as  you  saw  the  cross.  This  is  a  fact ;  it  was  only  by  sorrow — sorrow  unto 
death  of  the  Redeemer's  soul — that  any  of  the  ordinary  means  of  grace— those 
means  that  you  are  daily  enjoying,  have  been  procured.  Will  you  think  little  of 
thoee  means  7    WiU  you  neglect  them  ?    Will  you  trifle  with  them  ?    Will  you  not 


CHAP.  XIV.]  8T,  MARK, 


rather  feel  that  what  cost  so  mnoh  to  bny,  it  must  be  fatal  to  despise  ?  Neither,  as 
we  said,  is  it  the  worth  only  of  the  means  of  grace  that  you  may  learn  from  the 
mighty  sorrow  by  which  they  were  purchased ;  it  is  also  your  own  worth,  the  worth 
of  your  own  soul.  When  we  would  speak  of  the  soul  and  endeavour  to  impress  men 
witii  a  sense  of  its  value,  we  may  strive  to  set  forth  the  nature  of  its  properties,  its 
powers,  its  capacities,  its  destinies,  but  we  can  make  very  little  way ;  we  show  little 
more  than  our  ignorance,  for  search  how  we  will  the  soul  is  a  mystery ;  it  is  like 
Deity,  of  which  it  is  the  spark ;  it  hides  itself  by  its  own  light ;  and  eludes  by 
dazzling  the  inquirer.  You  will  remember,  that  our  Lord  emphatically  asked: 
"  What  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?  "  It  is  implied  in  the  question, 
that  if  the  whole  world  were  offered  in  barter — the  world,  with  all  its  honours  and 
its  riches — he  would  be  the  veriest  of  fools  who  would  consent  to  the  exchange,  and 
would  be  a  loser  to  an  extent  beyond  thought,  in  taking  creation  and  surrendering 
his  BouL  Then  I  hear  you  say,  "  This  is  all  a  theory  I  "  It  may  be  so.  "  The 
world  in  one  scale,  is  but  a  particle  of  dust  to  the  soul  in  the  other !  We  should 
like  to  see  an  actual  exchange :  this  might  assure  us  of  the  untold  worth  that  you 
wish  to  demonstrate."  And,  my  brethren,  you  shall  see  a  human  soul  put  on  one 
Bide  and  the  equivalent  on  the  other.  You  shall  see  an  exchange  1  Not  the  exchange 
— the  foul  exchange  which  is  daily,  ay,  hourly  1  made — the  exchange  of  the  soul  for 
a  bauble,  for  a  shadow ;  an  exchange,  which  even  those  who  make  it  would  shrink 
from  if  tliey  thought  on  what  they  were  doing — would  shrink  from  with  horror,  if 
they  would  know  how  far  they  are  losers  and  not  gainers  by  the  bargain.  The 
exchange  we  have  to  exhibit  is  a  fair  exchange.  What  is  given  for  the  soul  is  what 
the  soul  is  worth.  Come  with  us,  and  strive  to  gaze  on  the  glories  of  the  invisible 
God — He  who  has  grieved  in  the  soul,  "  for  He  emptied  Himself,  and  made  Himself 
of  no  reputation,"  that  the  soul  might  be  saved  1  Come  with  us  to  the  stable  of 
Bethlehem  !  Come  with  ns  to  Calvary !  The  amazing  accumulation  of  which  yon 
are  spectator — the  fearful  sorrow,  on  which  you  hardly  dare  to  look — the  agony  of 
Him  who  had  done  no  sin — the  agony  of  Him  who  was  the  Lord  of  glory — the 
death  of  Him  who  was  the  Prince  of  Light — this  was  given  for  the  soul ;  by  this 
accumulation  was  redemption  effected.  Is  there  not  here  an  exchange — an  exchange 
actually  made,  with  which  we  might  prove  it  impossible  to  overrate  the  value  of 
the  soul  f  If  you  read  the  form  of  the  question — '*  What  shall  a  man  give  in 
exchange  for  his  soul  ?  "  you  will  see  it  implies  that  it  is  not  within  the  empire  of 
wealth  to  purchase  the  soul.  But  cannot  this  assume  the  form  of  another  question 
— What  would  God  give  in  exchange  for  the  soul  ?  Here  we  have  an  answer,  not 
of  supposition,  but  of  fact :  we  tell  you  what  God  has  given— He  has  given  Himself. 
(Ibid,)  Complete  resignation : — ^A  minister,  being  asked  by  a  friend,  during  his  last 
illness,  whether  he  thought  himself  dying,  answered :  •*  Eeally,  friend,  I  care  not 
whether  I  am  or  not.  If  I  die,  I  shall  be  with  God ;  and,  if  I  live,  God  will  be  with  me." 
Instance  of  resignation : — During  the  siege  of  Barcelona,  in  1705,  Captain  Carleton 
witnessed  the  following  affecting  incident,  which  he  relates  in  his  memoirs :  "  I 
saw  an  old  officer,  having  his  only  son  with  him,  a  fine  young  man  about  twenty 
years  of  age,  going  into  their  tent  to  dine.  Whilst  they  were  at  dinner  a  shot 
took  off  the  head  of  the  son.  The  father  immediately  rose,  and  first  looking  down 
upon  his  headless  child,  and  then  lifting  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  whilst  the  tears  ran 
down  his  cheeks,  only  said,  *  Thy  will  be  done  I " 

Ver.  88.  The  spirit  truly  la  ready,  but  the  flesh  is  wealL — 1.  I  think,  will 
Bome  say,  that  my  sin  is  a  sin  of  infirmity  because  it  is  but  small.  But  if 
yon  look  into  1  Sam.  xv.  you  may  read  that  Saul's  sin,  for  which  the  Lord 
rejected  him,  was  of  no  great  outward  bulk ;  for  he  spared  the  fatlings  that  he 
might  sacrifice  thereby.  A  great  many  small  sins  may  make  as  great  a  bulk  as 
one  gross  sin  ;  yea,  possibly  there  may  be  much  sinfulness  and  evil  in  committing 
of  a  small  sin ;  for  as  amongst  men,  it  is  the  greatest  incivility  to  break  with 
another  for  a  small  matter ;  so  with  God,  to  break  with  God  for  a  small  thing ;  and 
much  skill  may  be  seen  in  a  small  work ;  a  little  watch,  &o.  So  your  skill  in 
sinning  may  be  Been  in  a  small  sin;  his  sin  is  never  small  that  thinks  it  small. 
2.  But  I  think  my  sin  is  a  sin  of  infirmity  because  I  am  tempted  to  it,  and  because 
I  am  drawn  on  by  others.  But,  I  pray,  was  not  Adam  tempted  unto  the  eating  of 
the  forbidden  fruit  by  Eve?  And  was  not  Eve  tempted  by  Satan  ?  And  will  you 
call  that  a  sin  of  infirmity  that  condemned  all  the  world  as  Adam's  sin  did  ?  3.  But 
I  think  my  sin  is  a  sin  of  infirmity  because  I  do  strive  against  it.  And,  I  pray,  did 
not  Pilate  strive  against  the  crucifying  of  Christ  ?    Possibly  therefore  a  man  ma; 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  xir. 

strive  i^ainst  hii  iin,  and  yet  the  sin  be  no  gin  of  infirmity.  4.  But  my  sin  is  a 
sin  of  infirmity  because  I  am  troubled  after  it.  And  was  not  Esau  troubled  after 
he  had  sold  his  birth-right  for  a  mess  of  pottage ;  did  he  not  seek  it  with  tears  ?  I 
do  strive  against  it,  and  though  I  am  troubled  after  it,  yet  it  may  be  no  sin  of 
infirmity.  But  as  some  are  mistaken  on  the  left  hand,  thinking  that  their  sins  are 
sins  of  infirmity,  when  indeed  they  are  not :  so  others  on  the  right  hand  are 
mistaken,  and  think  that  their  sins  are  not  sins  of  infirmity,  but  of  a  worse  nature, 
when  indeed  they  are :  and  that  upon  these  accounts :  1,  6b,  paith  one,  I  fear  my 
sin  is  no  sin  of  infirmity,  for  I  sin  knowingly,  and  with  deliberation  ;  I  sin  against 
my  knowledge,  and  against  my  conscience,  and  therefore  my  sin  can  be  no  sin  of 
infirmity.  But  for  answer  hereunto,  you  must  know,  it  is  one  thing  for  a 
man  to  sin  knowingly,  and  another  thing  for  a  man  to  sin  out  of  knowledge, 
or  against  his  knowledge.  A  man  sins  ignorantly  when  ignorance  is  the  com- 
panion of  his  sin  only :  a  man  sins  out  of  ignorance,  when  ignorance  is  the  only 
cause  of  his  sin,  and  not  the  companion  only.  2.  Oh,  but  I  fear  that  my  sin  is 
no  sin  of  infirmity,  because  I  fall  into  it  again  and  again,  and  do  lie  in  it.  But  do 
ye  know  what  it  is  to  lie  in  sin  ?  There  is  much  mistake  about  lying  in  sin.  Now 
if  you  do  thus  keep  and  lie  in  your  sin,  why  do  you  so  complain  ?  this  your  com- 
plaining argues  that  there  is  some  purging  out,  and  therefore  you  do  not  lie  in  sin. 
3.  Oh,  but  I  fear  my  sin  cannot  be  a  sin  of  infirmity,  because  I  fall  into  it  after  I 
have  been  admonished  of  the  evil  of  it.  To  that  I  say  no  more,  but  desire  you  to 
consider  the  instance  that  is  here  before  you.  The  disciples  slept,  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Christ  comes  and  wakens  them;  yea,  and  He  chides  them  too:  "What 
(saith  He)  cannot  ye  watch  with  Me  one  hour  I  watch  and  pray ; "  and  yet  they 
slept  again  :  and  He  comes  and  wakens  them  again,  and  admonisheth  them  again, 
and  yet  they  slept  again.  Possibly,  therefore,  a  man  may  fall  into  the  same  sin  again 
and  again,  yea,  even  after  admonition,  and  yet  it  may  be  a  sin  of  infirmity.  Yet 
how  many  poor  souls  are  there,  that  are  mistaken  here  on  the  right  hand,  and  do 
think  that  their  sins  are  no  sins  of  infirmity,  when  indeed  they  are.  But  if  there 
be  such  mistakes,  how  shall  we  then  know  whether  our  sins  be  sins  of  infirmity  ? 

1.  Negatively,  That  is  no  sin  of  infirmity,  which  is  a  gross,  foul,  scandalous  sin, 
committed  with  deliberation  and  consultation.  2.  If  the  sin  be  a  ringleader  unto 
other  foul  sins,  it  is  no  sin  of  infirmity.  The  ringleading  sin  is  the  most  heinous 
sin.  And  you  see  how  it  is  amongst  men  ;  if  there  be  a  rebelUon  or  insurrection, 
they  take  the  ringleader  and  hang  up  him,  for  say  they,  This  is  the  great  trans- 
gressor, for  he  is  the  ringleader.  So  amongst  sins,  the  great  sin  is  the  ringleader ; 
and  therefore  if  your  sin  be  a  ringleader  unto  other  foul  eins,  it  is  not  a  sin  ol 
infirmity.  3.  A  sin  of  presumption  is  not  a  sin  of  infirmity.  Sins  of  presumption 
and  sins  of  infirmity  are  set  in  opposition  one  to  the  other  in  Numb.  xv.  and 
Psalm  xiz.  And  when  a  man  doth  therefore  sin  the  rather  because  God  is  merciful, 
or  because  the  sin  is  but  a  sin  of  infirmity,  or  because  he  hopes  to  repent  afterward, 
or  because  his  sin  may  and  can  stand  with  grace ;  this  is  a  sin  of  presumption,  and  is 
no  sin  of  infirmity :  sins  ol  presumption  are  no  sins  of  infirmity.  4.  Again,  If  the 
sin  be  a  reigning  sin,  then  it  is  no  sin  of  infirmity,  for  when  sin  reigns,  grace  doth 
not ;  therefore  saith  the  apostle  (Bom.  vi,),  "  Let  not  sin  have  dominion  over  you, 
for  ye  are  not  under  the  law  but  under  grace ; "  and  when  sin  reigns  it  is  in  its  full 
strength.  But  how  shall  we  know,  then,  affirmatively,  whether  our  sin  be  a  sin  of 
infinnity?  1.  Thus:  If  it  do  merely  proceed  from  want  of  age  in  Christianity, 
then  it  is,  without  doubt,  a  sin  of  infirmity.   Babes  are  weak  and  full  of  weaknesses. 

2.  If  it  be  no  other  sin  than  what  is  incident  unto  all  the  saints,  then  it  is  a  sin 
of  infirmity ;  for  that  sin  which  is  committed  by  all  the  saints,  is  no  reigning  sin, 
but  ft  sin  mortified.  3.  If  it  be  such  a  sin  as  you  cannot  avoid,  which  breaks 
in  upon  you  before  you  are  aware,  even  before  you  can  call  in  for  help  from  your 
reason  and  consideration,  and  which  the  general  bent  and  frame  of  your  heart  and 
soul  is  against,  then  it  is  a  sin  of  infirmity,  for  then  it  doth  arise  from  want  of  strength 
to  resist,  and  not  from  will  to  commit.  This  was  the  case  of  Paul  (Bom.  vii.)  when 
evil  was  present  with  him,  being  against  the  general  bent  and  frame  of  his  soul ; 
for  saith  he,  "  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man,  and  yet  the  thing 
that  I  would  not  do,  that  do  I."  4.  An  infirmity  will  hardly  acknowledge  itself 
to  be  a  sin  of  infirmity ;  but  the  person  in  whom  it  is,  fears  lest  it  should  be  worse. 
If  yoor  sin  do  arise  chiefly  from  some  outward  cause,  it  is  a  sin  of  infirmity ;  for 
then  it  is  not  so  mneh  from  will  to  commit,  as  from  want  of  strength  to  resist.  The 
sin  which  the  apostle  speaks  of  (Gal.  vi.  1)  is  a  sin  of  infijrmity,  and  the  man  that 
commits  it  is  said  to  be  overtaken.  Now  when  a  man  is  upon  his  journey  travelling 


OHAT.  hy.]  ST.  MABK,  eO& 

and  is  oyertaken  by  another  person,  his  inward  inclination  and  disposition  was  not 
to  meet  the  other :  bo  when  a  man  is  overtaken  by  sin,  it  argnes  that  his  sin  doth 
proceed  from  some  outward  cause ;  and  when  it  doth  proceed  from  some  outward 
cause,  then  he  is  truly  said  to  be  overtaken  with  it.  6.  Infirmity  loves  admonition : 
I  mean,  the  person  that  sins  out  of  infirmity,  loves  to  be  admonished,  takes 
admonition  kindly,  and  doth  bless  God  for  it.  6.  An  infirmity  discovers  good, 
though  it  be  in  itself  evil ;  it  is  an  ill  sin,  but  a  good  sign.  The  thistle  is  an  ill 
weed,  yet  it  discovers  a  fat  and  a  good  soil ;  smoke  is  ill,  but  it  discovers  fire.  7. 
Sins  of  infirmities  are  servants  and  drawers  of  water  onto  your  graces ;  though  in 
themselves  evil,  yet  through  the  overruling  hand  of  God's  grace,  they  will  make 
yon  more  gracious  another  way.  Te  know  how  it  is  with  a  young  tradesman,  who 
hath  but  a  small  stock  ;  he  keeps  his  shop  diligently,  and  will  not  spend  as  others 
do.  If  you  ask  him  the  reason,  saying.  Such  and  such  men  are  of  your  trade,  and 
they  will  spend  their  shilling  with  us,  and  their  time  with  us ;  why  will  you  not  do 
as  they  ?  He  answers  presently.  True,  they  do  so,  and  they  may  do  so,  their  estate 
will  bear  it ;  but  as  for  me,  my  stock  is  small,  very  little,  therefore  I  may  not  do  as 
they  do,  bat  I  must  be  diligent,  and  a  good  husband ;  I  am  but  a  young  beginner, 
and  have  little  skill  in  the  trade,  therefore  it  behoves  me  to  be  diligent.  His  very 
weakness  is  the  cause  of  his  diligence.  So  here,  the  more  infirmities  that  a 
gracious  soul  labours  under,  the  more  diligent  he  will  be ;  and  if  you  ask  him,  Why 
do  you  take  so  much  pains  in  following  the  means,  and  the  like  ?  he  answers,  Alas, 
I  am  a  poor  weak  creature  :  such  and  such  an  one  there  is  that  hath  an  excellent 
memory,  all  that  ever  he  reads  or  hears  is  his  own ;  but  my  memory  is  naught,  my 
head  and  heart  is  naught,  and  therefore  by  the  grace  of  God  I  will  take  the  more 
pains  in  following  after  Christ.  Thus  his  very  infirmity  is  a  provocation  unto  all 
his  diligence.  8.  Infirmity  doth  constantly  keep  a  man's  heart  low,  down,  and 
humble.  If  one  have  an  infirmity  in  his  speech,  he  will  not  be  so  forward  to  speak 
as  others  are ;  but  being  conscious  of  his  own  infirmity,  he  is  always  low,  and 
afraid  to  speak.  So  spiritually.  But  suppose  that  my  sin  be  no  other  than  a  sin 
of  infirmity,  what  then  r  The  third  particular  answers  you.  Then,  your  sin  being 
but  an  infirmity,  Christ  will  never  leave  you  for  it,  nor  cast  you  off  for  it ;  but^  il 
you  sleep.  He  will  waken  you ;  and  if  you  sleep  again.  He  will  waken  you  again. 
Oh,  what  sweet  grace  is  this.  Is  there  no  evil  then  in  this  sin  of  infirmity?  Tes, 
mnch,  very  much :  for  though  it  be  a  drawer  of  water  to  your  grace,  yet  it  is  a 
Gibeonite,  a  native,  a  Canaanite,  that  will  npon  all  occasions  be  ready  to  betray 
you,  and  to  open  the  door  unto  greater  thieves,  and  will  always  be  a  thorn  and 
goad  in  your  sides ;  and  though  it  do  not  put  out  your  light,  yet  it  is  a  thief  in 
your  cancUe,  which  may  smear  out  mnch  of  your  comfort,  and  blemish  your  duty. 
Ye  know  how  it  is  with  a  good  writing  pen ;  H  there  be  a  small  hair  in  it,  though 
the  hair  be  never  so  little  a  thing,  yet  if  it  be  not  pulled  out,  it  will  blot  and  blemish 
the  whole  writing  sometimes.  So  may  the  sin  of  infirmity  do ;  your  whole  duty 
may  be  blotted  and  blemished  by  this  small  hair,  and  although  God  can  and  doth 
make  use  of  your  infirmities  for  to  keep  your  graces,  yet  they  are  but  your  lees  and 
dregs,  whereas  your  graces  should  be  {dl  refined.  Oh,  what  an  evil  thing  therefore 
is  it,  for  a  man  to  be  unrefined.  And  although  Christ  will  not  cast  you  off  for  a 
sin  of  infirmity,  yet  you  may  provoke  Him  thereby  to  chide  you,  and  to  be  angry 
with  you.  The  unbelief  of  the  disciples  was  but  their  infirmity,  yet  Christ  did 
upbraid  them  because  of  their  unbelief.  Thirdly,  Though  there  be  much  evil  in 
this  sin,  Christ  will  not  cast  you  off  for  it.  For  it  is  an  honour  to  a  man  to  pass  by 
infirmities,  saith  Solomon  ;  much  more  is  it  for  the  honour  of  Christ  to  pass  by  the 
infirmities  of  His  people.  The  saints  and  people  of  God  are  in  covenant  with  God 
by  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  covenant  is  a  conjugal  covenant  (Hosea  ii).  Bnt  what 
husband  will  put  away  his  wife  for  her  infirmities  ?  That  covenant  is  a  paternal 
covenant,  and  what  father  will  thrust  his  child  out  of  doors  for  his  infirmities  ?  A 
child,  though  deformed,  is  more  pleasing  to  the  father,  because  the  child  is  his  own, 
than  another  b^utiful  child  that  is  not  his  own.  If  a  master  should  tnm  away 
his  servant  for  everj^  failing  and  weakiess,  who  would  serve  him  ?  Now,  saith 
Luther,  what  man  will  out  off  his  nose  because  there  is  filth  in  it  ?  yea,  though  the 
nose  be  the  sink  of  the  brain,  yet  because  it  is  a  member  a  man  wUl  not  oat  it  off. 
And  will  Christ  out  off  one  of  His  members,  because  there  is  filth  in  him,  or  some 
weakness  and  infirmity  in  him  ?  "What  father  will  knock  his  child  on  the  head, 
because  a  wart  grows  on  his  forehead  r  These  infirmities  in  the  saints  and  people 
of  God,  are  their  warts,  which  grow  in  the  face  of  their  conversation :  the  blessed 
martyrs  themselvw  had  these  warts :  Hierom  of  Prague  had  a  great  wart  upon  him, 

89 


•10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  nw. 

Cranmer  another,  Jewel  another ;  yea,  if  we  look  into  that  little  book  of  Chronicles, 
I  mean  Heb.  zi.,  what  saint  is  there  mentioned  upon  record,  but  had  one  wart  or 
another?    Had  not  Abraham  his  wart,  in  saying,  that  Sarah  was  his  sister?    Had 
not  Sarah  hers  in  laughing  ?     Had  not  Jacob,  Isaac,  and  Joseph  theirs  t    Moses, 
Eahab,  Samson,  Jephthah,  and  David  theirs?    Luther  had  his,  and  our  reformers 
theirs  ;  yet  God  owued,  used,  and  honoured  them.     Surely  therefore,  though  there 
be  much  evil  in  a  sin  of  infirmity,  especially  if  a  man  faU  into  it  again  and  again  ; 
yet  Christ  will  not  leave  a  man,  or  cast  him  off  for  it.     If  these  things  be  true,  then 
what  necessity  is  upon  us,  and  what  great  cause  have  we  to  examine  ourselves,  and 
to  consider  seriously,  what  sort  of  sins  those  sins  are,  which  we  labour  under.     But 
it  seems  that  all  the  sins  of  the  godly  are  not  sins  of  infirmity,  and  God  will  not  cast 
off  a  godly  man  for  any  sin  :  what  advantage,  therefore,  hath  this  sin  of  infirmity 
above  other  sins;  or  what  disadvantage  do  the  other  sins  of  the  godly  labour  under, 
which  this  sin  of  infirmity  doth  not  ?    1.  Much,  very  much :  for  though  my  sin  be 
great ;  yet  if  it  be  a  sin  of  infirmity,  it  shall  not  hinder  the  present  acceptance  of 
my  duty.     2.  Although  my  sin  be  great,  yet  if  it  be  but  an  infirmity,  it  shall  not 
hinder  the  sense  of  my  justification.     3.  Though  my  sin  be  great,  yet  if  it  be  but  an 
•ufirmity,  there  is  a  pardon  that  lies  in  course  for  it ;  and  though  it  be  good  to 
repent  of  every  sin,  with  a  distinct,  and  particular  repentance,  yet  it  is  not 
necessary  that  there  should  be  a  particular  repentance  for  every  sin  of  infirmity. 
4.  Though  a  man's  sin  be  great,  yet  if  it  be  but  an  infirmity,  it  shall  never  bring  a 
scourge  upon  his  family.    And  though  my  sin  be  great,  yet  if  it  be  but  a  sin  of 
infirmity,  it  shall  never  spoil  my  gifts,  nor  make  them  unprofitable :  if  a  man  have 
great  gifts,  praying,  exercising  gifts,  and  his  life  be  scandalous,  what  saith  the 
world  ?    But  suppose  that  upon  due  search  and  examination,  I  find  that  my  sin  is 
no  other  than  a  sin  of  infirmity,  which  will  not  cast  me  off,  although  through  my 
weakness,  I  do  fall  into  it  again  and  again,  what  then  ?  Then  several  duties  follow, 
and  accordingly  you  are  to  take  up  these,  and  the  like  gracious  resolutions.     1.  If 
ray  sin  be  a  sin  of  infirmity,  and  no  other,  then  through  grace  will  I  observe  what 
God's  design  is,  in  suffering  and  leaving  such  infirmities  in  me,  and  will  labour 
what  I  can  and  may,  to  promote  and  advance  that  design.    2.  If  my  sin  be  but  a 
sin  of  infirmity,  and  God  will  not  cast  me  off  for  it,  then  through  the  grace  of  God, 
will  I  never  believe  these  false  reports  of  Christ,  and  those  misrepresentations  of 
Him  which  Satan  would  put  upon  Him,  whereby  he  would  persuade  me  and  others, 
that  our  Lord  Christ  is  a  hard  master.  3.  If  the  Lord  Christ  will  not  cast  me  off  for 
my  sins  of  infirmity,  then,  through  the  grace  of  God,  I  will  not  question  my  spiritual 
estate  and  condition  for  every  sin ;  I  will  grieve  for  every  sin  of  infirmity  because 
it  is  a  sin,  but  I  will  not  question  my  condition,  because  it  is  but  a  sin  of  infirmity. 
4.  Then  will  not  I  cast  off  myself  and  others  for  the  sins  of  infirmities.     Shall 
Christ's  eye  be  good  and  shall  my  eye  be  bad?      5.  Then  will  not  I  cast  off 
the  things  of  Christ  because  of  any  infirmity  that  may  adhere  to  them,  or  the 
dispensation  of  them.    When  Christ  took  our  nature  on  Him,  His  deity  was  veiled 
under  our  humanity,  His  excellency  under  our  infirmity.     So  now,  His  grace  and 
His  dispensations  are  veiled  under  the  infirmity  of  our  administrations :  as  for 
-jxample :  preaching  is  an  ordinance  of  Christ,  yet  the  sermon  may  be  so  delivered, 
;7ith  so  much  weakness  of  the  speaker,  that  the  ordinance  of  Christ  may  be  veiled 
under  much  infirmity.    6.  And  if  the  Lord  will  not  cast  me  off  for  my  infirmities, 
'iien,  through  grace,  I  will  never  be  discouraged  from  the  performance  of  any  duty. 
I  will  pray  as  I  can  and  hear  as  I  can,  and  though  I  be  not  able  to  pray  as  I  would, 
I  will  pray  as  I  am  able ;  and  though  I  am  not  able  to  examine  mino  own  heart  as  I 
would,  yet  I  will  do  what  I  am  able,  for  the  Lord  will  not  cast  me  off  for  infirmities, 
and  therefore  I  will  not  oast  off  my  duties  because  of  them.    7,  And,  lastly,  if  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  not  oast  me  off  for  mine  infirmities,  then  will  I  never  sin  be- 
cause the  sin  is  but  a  sin  of  infirmity.    (W.  Bridge,  M.A.)        Watch  and  Pray : — 
Two  points  sx>ecially  claim  our  attention  here.    I.  Ths  command  oivbn — **  Watch 
and  pray."    1.  Watch.    The  word  is  very  simple.    A  physician  watches  a  sick 
man.    A  porter  watches  a  building.    A  sentinel  watches  on  a  city's  wall.     (1)  To 
watch  implies  not  to  be  taken  up  with  other  things.    (2)  To  watch  implies  to  expect 
the  enemy's  approach.    (3)  Watching  also  includes  an  examination  of  the  points 
of  attack.    The  physician  will  observe  what  course  the  disease  is  taking,  what 
organs  it  is  likely  to  tonch.    Thus  he  watches.     2.  Pray.    (1)  This  seems  to  refer 
to  a  habit  of  prayer.    Not  a  wild  ory  in  danger  or  sorrow.     (2)  Special  prayer 
with  reference  to  temptation  is  also  implied.    Prayer  to  be  delivered  from  the  pre- 
4MMe  of  temptation,  prayer  for  victory  in  temptation.    U.  Thb  surrABnirrr  or  ths 


xxT.]  8T.  MARK.  611 

wOMMAND  TO  THosB  KZPOSBO  TO  TBMPTATiGN.  1.  The  two  paits  together  form  the 
safegaard.  Watohing  supplies  materials  for  prayer.  Prayer  makes  watching  eSeo- 
toal.  To  pray  only  is  presumption.  To  watch  only  is  to  depend  on  self.  2.  The 
command  also  suits  us  because  of  the  enemy's  subtlety.  We  need  to  discover  his 
wiles  by  watching.  We  pray  for  wisdom  to  discern  his  specious  assaults.  3.  And 
because  of  our  own  weakness.  (Compare  vers.  29,  31,  with  67,  68.)  4.  It  is 
also  suitable  in  consequence  of  our  Lord's  appointment.  The  battle  is  His.  He 
appoints  its  laws.  And  He  has  said,  **  Watch  and  pray."  The  command  speaks 
thus  to  true  disciples.  What  does  it  say  to  those  who  are  careless  and  unbelieving  ? 
(W.  8.  Brucgf  M.A.)  Prayer  all  comprehensive  : — Prayer  is  not  only  request  made 
to  God,  but  converse  had  with  Him.  It  is  the  expression  of  desire  to  Him  so  as  to 
supply  it — of  purpose  so  as  to  steady  it — of  hope  so  as  to  brighten  it.  It  is  the 
bringing  of  one's  heart  into  the  sunshine,  so  that  like  a  plant,  its  inward  life  may 
thrive  for  an  outward  development.  It  is  the  plea  of  one's  better  self  against  one'a 
weaker  self.  It  ntters  despondency  so  that  it  may  attain  confidence.  It  is  the  ex- 
pression smd  the  exercise  of  love  for  all  that  is  good  and  true.  It  is  a  wrestle  with 
evil  in  the  presence  of  Supreme  Goodness.  It  is  the  ascent  of  the  soul  above  time 
into  the  freedom  of  eternity.  (Christian  World  Pulpit.)  The  need  for  watchful- 
ness : — It  seems  as  though  there  were  no  word  so  far  reaching  as  the  word  "watch." 
Vigilance  is  the  price  of  everything  good  and  great  in  earth  or  heaven.  It  was  for 
his  faithful  vigilance  that  the  memory  of  the  Pompeian  sentinel  is  embalmed  in 
poetry  and  recorded  in  history.  Nothing  but  xmceasing  watchfulness  can  keep  the 
heart  in  harmony  with  God's  heart.  It  was  a  stormy,  boisterous  night.  The  dark 
clouds  hung  over  us,  and  the  wind  came  with  tenfold  fury.  The  sea  rolled  in  moun- 
tains, and  the  proud  ship  seemed  but  a  toy  amid  those  tremendous  billows.  Far  up 
on  the  mast,  on  the  look  out,  the  sailor  was  heard  to  cry,  "  An  iceberg  on  the 
starboard-bow."  "  An  iceberg  on  the  larboard-bow  I "  The  deck-officer  called  to 
the  helmsman,  "  Port  the  helm  steadily  1 "  and  the  sailors  at  the  wheel  heard  and 
obeyed.  The  officers  were  aroused,  for  there  was  danger  on  board  to  three  hundred 
precious  souls.  The  captain  spent  a  sleepless  night,  pacing  the  deck  or  cabin. 
Gigantic  icebergs  were  coming  against  the  vessel,  and  eternal  vigilance  was  the  price 
of  our  safety  in  that  northern  sea.  And  so  it  is  all  through  human  life.  (Anon.) 
Watchfulness: — Watching  is  never  pleasant  work ;  no  soldier  really  likes  it.  Men  pre- 
fer even  the  excitement  and  danger  of  the  battle-field  to  the  long  weeks  of  patient 
vigilance,  which  nevertheless  may  do  quite  as  much  as  a  victorious  battle  to  decide 
the  issues  of  a  campaign.  Now  it  is  just  so  in  the  spiritual  war.  The  forces  of 
civiliaation  rendered  our  soldiers  more  than  a  match  for  all  the  barbarous  courage  of 
their  swarthy  foes,  provided  only  by  constant  vigilance  they  were  in  a  position  to 
use  those  forces  ;  and  even  so  the  omnipotence  of  God  renders  the  true  Christian 
more  than  a  match  for  all  the  forces  of  hell,  provided  only  he  too  is  sufficiently 
vigilant  to  detect  the  approach  of  the  foe,  and  sufficiently  wise  to  confront  him 
with  the  courage  of  faith  when  his  approach  is  detected ;  but  if  he  walks  carelessly, 
or  fails  to  exercise  proper  vigilance,  the  battle  wiU  be  lost  almost  before  the  danger 
is  realized,  and  Faith  will  forfeit  her  victory  just  because  she  was  not  ready  to  put 
forth  all  the  supernatural  powers  that  she  may  command.  It  is,  alas  !  not  an  un- 
eonmion  thing  to  meet  with  Christian  souls  that  seem  to  know  something  of  the  life 
of  faith,  and  yet,  to  their  great  surprise,  find  themselves  overcome  when  they  least 
expect  it.  We  observe  sometimes  a  certain  tone  of  petulance  in  these  admissions  of 
failure,  as  if  in  their  heart  of  hearts  some  sort  of  implication  were  oast  upon  the 
faithfulness  of  God,  although  they  would  shrink  from  expressing  this  in  so  many 
words.  Now,  dearly  the  cause  of  aU  such  failures  must  lie  with  us,  and  it  will  be  our 
wisdom  to  endeavour  to  discover  it ;  while  it  is  the  worst  of  folly  to  charge  God 
with  unfaithfulness.  What  are  we  placed  in  this  world  for  P  Obviously  that  we 
may  be  trained  and  developed  for  our  future  position  by  exposure  to  the  forces  of 
evit  Were  we  so  sheltered  from  evil  as  that  there  should  be  no  need  for  constant 
watchfulness,  we  should  lose  the  moral  benefit  which  a  habit  of  constant  watchful- 
ness induces.  We  know  that  it  is  a  law  of  nature,  that  faculties  which  are  never 
employed  perish  from  disuse ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  faculties  which  are  fully  and 
frequently  employed  acquire  a  wonderful  capacity.  Is  not  this  equally  true  in  the 
spiritual  world  ?  We  are  being  trained  probably  for  high  and  holy  service  by-and-by, 
in  which  we  shall  need  all  those  faculties  that  are  now  being  qmckened  and  trained 
by  our  contact  with  danger,  and  our  exposure  to  apparently  hostile  conditions  of 
existence.  We  are  to  be  trained,  by  learning  quickness  of  perception  of  danger  here, 
to  exercise  qoiokness  of  perception  in  ministry  and  willing  service  yonder.    Besides, 


61S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nv. 

Watchfulness  oontinnally  provides  opportunities  for  faith,  and  tends  to  draw  n» 
the  closer,  and  keep  us  the  closer,  to  Him  by  whom  alone  wo  stand.  Were  we  to 
be  80  saved  from  evil  by  a  single  act,  as  that  we  should  have  no  further  need  ol 
Watchfulness,  should  we  not  lose  much  that  now  makes  as  feel  our  dependenoe  on 
Him  who  is  our  constant  safety?  Have  we  not  to  thank  God  for  the  very  dangert 
that  constrain  us  to  keep  so  near  Him  if  we  are  to  be  safe  at  all  r  Let  us  point  ont 
what  Watchfulness  is  not  before  we  go  on  to  consider  what  it  is.  And  I.  Watch- 
fulness IS  SOMBTHINO  QUITB  DISTINCT  FBOM  NERVOUS    TIMIDITT  AND  MOBBID  APPBE* 

HBNSIVBNE8S — the  Condition  of  a  man  who  sees  an  enemy  in  every  bush,  and  i» 
tortured  by  a  thousand  alarms  and  all  the  misgivings  of  unbelief.  David  did  not 
show  himself  watchful,  but  faithless,  when  he  exclaimed,  "  I  shall  now  one  day 
peribh  by  the  hands  of  Saul  ;  '*  and  we  do  not  show  ourselves  watchful  when  we 
go  on  our  way  trembling,  depressed  with  all  sorts  of  forebodings  of  disaster.  Let  me 
offer  a  homely  illustration  of  what  I  mean.  I  was  amused  the  other  day  at  hearing 
a  soldier's  account  of  a  terrible  fright  that  he  had  during  the  time  of  the  Fenian 
scare  a  few  years  ago.  It  fell  to  his  lot  one  dark  night  to  act  as  sentinel  in  the  pre- 
cincts of  an  important  arsenal,  which  it  was  commonly  supposed  might  be  the  scene 
of  a  great  explosion  any  night.  The  fortress  was  surrounded  by  a  common,  and 
was  tiierefore  easy  to  be  approached  by  evil-disposed  persons.  The  night,  as  I  have 
said,  was  as  dark  as  a  night  could  be,  and  he  was  all  alone,  and  full  of  apprehen- 
sions of  danger.  He  stood  still  for  a  moment  fancying  he  heard  something  moving 
near  him,  and  then  stepped  backwards  for  a  few  paces,  when  ho  suddenly  felt  him- 
self come  into  violent  contact  with  something,  which  he  incontinently  concluded 
must  be  a  crouching  Fenian.  "  I  was  never  so  frightened,"  he  said,  "  before  o» 
since  in  my  life,  and  to  tell  yon  the  truth,  I  fell  sprawling  on  my  back.  Imagine 
my  feelings  when  I  found  that  the  thing  that  had  teiTified  me  beyond  all  descrip- 
tion was  only  a  harmless  sheep  that  had  fallen  asleep  a  little  too  near  my  beat.** 
Now,  dear  friends,  I  think  that  this  soldier's  ridiculous,  but  very  excusably 
panic  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  experience  of  many  timid,  apprehensive  Chris- 
tians. They  live  in  a  state  of  chronic  panic,  always  expecting  to  be  assailed  by  some 
hostile  influence,  which  they  shall  prove  wholly  incompetent  to  resist.  If  they  foresee 
the  approach  of  any  circumstances  that  are  likely  to  put  their  religion  to  a  test,  they 
at  once  make  up  their  mind  that  fiasco  and  overthrow  are  inevitable  ;  and  when  they 
are  suddenly  confronted  by  what  seems  an  adverse  influence,  or  promises  to  be  a 
severe  temptation,  they  are  ready  to  give  all  up  in  despair.  They  forget  that  our 
Lord  has  taught  us  to  take  no  anxious  thought  for  the  morrow,  and  has  assured  us 
tbat  sufficient  for  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof.  II.  Nob  aoaim  does  WAXCHFULNssa 
CONSIST  in  morbid  intbospectivenbss,  OB  in  a  disposition  to  charqe  ourselves 
WITH  all  sorts  of  IMAGINED  FORMS  OF  EVIL.  To  their  morbid  sensibility  everything 
has  depravity  in  it ;  good  and  generous  actions  only  spring  from  self-seeking ;  every 
natural  affection  is  inordinate ;  every  commonplace  gratification  a  loving  of  pleasure 
rather  than  God.  It  is  surely  possible,  believe  me,  dear  Christian  friends,  to  emu- 
late the  exploits  of  a  Don  Quixote  in  our  religious  life,  and  to  run  a  tilt  at  any 
number  of  spiritual  windmills,  but  this  is  not  watchfulness.  A  clerical  brother  of 
mine,  alarmed  from  his  slumbers  by  a  policeman  who  reported  his  church  open, 
imagined  tbat  he  had  captured  a  burglar  by  the  hair  of  his  head  in  the  tower  of  his 
church,  when  he  had  only  laid  violent  hands  in  the  darkness  upon  the  church  mop  1 
It  is  quite  possible  to  convert  a  mop  into  a  burglar  in  our  own  spiritual  experiences. 
Just  once  more  let  me  ask  you  to  bear  in  mind  that  Watchfulness  does  not  consist  in, 
and  is  not  identical  with,  a  severe  affectation  of  solemnity,  and  a  pious  aversion  to  any- 
thing like  natural  mirth  or  cheerful  hilarity.  I  have  before  my  eyes  at  this  moment 
the  recollection  of  a  dear  and  honoured  brother,  who,  when  something  amusing  had 
been  related  at  his  table,  suddenly  drew  himself  up  when  he  was  just  beginning  to 
join  in  the  hearty  laugh,  and  observed  to  me  with  much  seriousness,  "  I  am  always 
afraid  of  losing  communion  by  giving  way  to  levity.**  I  confess  f  admired  the  good 
mail's  conscientiousness,  which  I  am  sure  was  perfectly  sincere,  but  I  could  not  help 
thinking  that  he  was  confusing  between  sombreuess  and  sobriety.  III.  But  hav- 
iug  pointed  out  certain  forms  or  habits  of  conduct  which  are  not  be  mistaken 
for  Watchfulness,  though  they  often  are,  liBT  us  proceed  to  inquire  what  Watch- 
fulness is  ;  we  have  seen  what  it  is  not.  And  here  it  may  be  well  to  notice  that 
two  distinct  words,  or  perhaps  I  should  say  sets  of  words,  in  the  Greek,  are  trans- 
lated in  our  version  by  the  one  word — watch.  The  one  set  of  terms  indicates  th« 
necessity  of  guarding  against  sleep,  and  the  other  the  necessity  of  guarding  against 
any  form  of  moral  intoxication  and  insobriety.    Both  these  ideas  are  presented  ta 


xiT.]  ST.  MARK.  ail 

OS  together  in  a  single  passage  in  the  first  Epistle  to  the  TheasalonianB :  "  Let  ns  not 
sleep  as  do  others ;  bat  let  as  watch  and  be  sober.  For  they  who  sleep  sleep  in  the 
night :  and  they  that  be  dninken  are  dranken  in  the  night."  Here  the  two  dangers 
arising — the  one  from  sleep,  and  the  other  from  drunkenness — are  brought  before  us  at 
once  ;  and  the  two  words,  which  are  each  of  them  usually  translated  by  the  English 
word — watch,  are  employed  to  guard  us  against  these  dangers.  "  Let  us  watch  and 
be  sober."  These  dangers  seem  to  be  in  some  respects  the  opposites  of  each  other 
— the  one  springs  from  heaviness  and  dullness  of  disposition,  and  the  other  from 
undue  excitability.  The  one  is  the  special  danger  incidental  to  monotonous  routine 
and  a  dead  level  of  quiet  regularity,  the  other  is  the  danger  incidental  to  a  life 
full  of  stir  and  bustle — a  life  where  cares  and  pleasures,  successes  and  failures,  im- 
portant enterprises  and  stunning  disappointments,  bringing  with  them  alternating 
experiences  of  elation  or  depression,  are  only  too  apt  to  prove  all-engrossing,  and  to 
exclude  the  vivid  sense  of  eternal  realities.  The  one  danger  will  naturally  specially 
threaten  the  man  of  phlegmatic  temperament  and  equable  disposition,  the  other 
will  more  readily  assault  the  man  whose  nervous  system  is  highly  strung,  whether 
he  be  of  sanguine  or  melancholic  habit.  In  the  present  passage  the  call  to  watch 
is  coupled  with  the  exhortation  to  pray,  and  similarly  St.  Peter  warns  us  "  to  be 
sober  and  watch  unto  prayer."  This  suggests  to  us  that  Watchfulness  needs 
first  of  aU  to  be  exercised  in  the  maintenance  of  our  proper  relations  with  God.  If 
only  these  be  preserved  inviolate,  everything  else  is  sure  to  go  well  with  us ;  but 
where  anything  like  coldness  settles  down  upon  our  relations  with  God,  backsliding 
has  already  commenced,  and  unless  it  be  checked  we  lie  at  the  mercy  of  our  foe. 
Oh,  Christian  soul,  guard  with  jealous  care  against  the  first  beginnings  of  listless- 
ness  and  coldness  and  unreality  in  thine  intercourse  with  Godl  Not  less,  perhaps 
even  more,  do  we  need  to  watch  in  the  other  sense  which,  as  I  have  pointed  out, 
the  word  bears  in  New  Testament  Scripture.  Let  us  not  only  keep  awake,  but  let 
us  be  sober.  We  need  to  remember  that  we  are  in  an  enemy's  land,  and  that  un- 
less we  are  constantly  breathing  the  atmosphere  of  heaven,  the  atmosphere  of  earth, 
which  is  all  that  we  have  left,  soon  becomes  poisonous,  and  must  produce  a  sort  of 
moral  intoxication.  How  often  have  I  seen  a  Christian  man  completely  forget  him- 
self under  the  influence  of  social  excitement  1  But  I  hasten  to  say,  Do  not  let  us  fall 
into  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  it  is  only  the  light-hearted  and  the  pleasure- 
loving  that  need  to  be  warned  against  the  danger  of  becoming  intoxicated  by  worldly 
influences.  The  cares  and  even  the  occupations  of  hfe  may  have  just  as  deleterious 
an  effect  upon  us  in  this  respect  as  the  pleasures.  Many  a  man  of  business  is  just 
as  much  intoxicated  with  the  daily  excitements  arising  from  the  fluctuations  of  the 
market  or  of  the  Stock  Exchange,  and  just  as  much  blinded  to  higher  things  by  the 
absorbing  interests  connected  with  money-making  or  money-losing  as  the  votary  of 
pleasure  can  be  at  the  racecourse  or  in  the  ball-room.  Yet  again.  Watchfulness  is 
to  be  shown  not  only  in  maintaining  our  relations  with  God,  in  resisting  any  dis- 
position to  be  drowsy,  and  in  guarding  against  the  intoxicating  influence  of  worldly 
excitement ;  it  is  also  to  be  shown  in  detecting  the  first  approach  of  temptation,  or 
the  first  uprisings  of  an  unholy  desire.  The  careful  general  feels  his  enemy  by  his 
scouts,  and  thus  is  prepared  to  deal  with  him  when  the  attack  takes  place.  Even 
so  temptation  may  often  be  resisted  with  ease  when  its  first  approach  is  discerned ; 
but  it  acquires  sometimes  an  almost  irresistible  power,  if  it  be  allowed  to  draw  too 
near.  But  I  spoke  a  few  moments  ago  of  the  importance  of  watching,  not  only 
against  the  beginning  of  temptation  without,  but  also  against  any  disposition  to 
make  terms  with  temptation  within.  Here,  I  am  persuaded,  lies,  in  most  instances, 
the  secret  cause  of  failure.  Balaam  was  inwardly  hankering  after  the  house  full  of 
silver  and  gold  at  the  very  moment  when  he  affected  to  despise  it.  But  there  is  a 
danger  on  the  other  side,  against  which  we  have  to  guard  with  equal  watchfulness. 
And  it  is  the  danger  of  incipient  self-complacency.  {W,  H.  Aitken.)  Advantage 
of  knowing  one's  weak  point : — It  is  the  interest  of  every  man  not  to  hide  from 
himself  his  ailment.  What  would  you  think  of  a  man  who  was  sick,  aud  attempted 
to  make  himself  believe  that  it  was  his  foot  that  was  ailing,  when  it  was  his  heart  ? 
Suppose  a  man  should  come  to  his  physician  and  have  him  examine  the  wrong  eye, 
and  pay  for  the  physician's  prescription,  founded  on  the  belief  that  his  eye  was 
shghtly  bat  not  much  damaged,  and  should  go  away,  saying,  "  I  am  a  great  deal 
happier  than  I  was,"  although  the  doctor  had  not  looked  at  the  diseased  eye  at  all  T 
li  a  man  should  have  a  cancer,  or  a  deadly  sore,  on  one  arm,  and  should  refuse 
to  let  the  physician  see  that,  but  should  show  him  the  well  arm,  he  would  imitate 
what  men  do  who  use  all  deceits  and  delusions  to  hide  their  moral  sores  and  weak- 


•14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xxf, 

messes  and  fanlts,  as  far  as  possible,  from  themselyeB,  from  all  persons,  and  then 
congratulate  themselves  that  they  are  not  in  danger.  Watchfulness  requires  that 
a  man  should  be  honest,  and  should  know  where  he  is,  and  where  his  danger  is. 
Let  others  set  their  watch  where  they  need  it,  and  you  set  yours  where  you  need  it. 
Each  man's  watchfulness  should  be  according  to  his  temperament  and  constitution. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Watching — a  military  figure  : — Undoubtedly  this  is  a  military 
ngure ;  although  watching  may  be  a  domestic  figure,  ordinarily  it  is  military.  A 
tower,  a  castle,  a  fort,  is  not  content  with  simply  the  strength  of  its  walls,  and  its 
various  defences.  Sentinels  are  placed  all  round  about  it,  and  they  walk  both  night 
and  day,  and  look  out  on  every  side  to  descry  any  approaching  danger,  that  the 
soldiers  within  may  put  themselves  at  once  in  a  condition  to  receive  attack.  Still 
more  are  a  moving  army  watchful,  whether  upon  the  march  or  in  the  camp.  They 
throw  out  advanced  guards.  The  picket  line  is  established  by  night  and  by  day. 
Men  are  set  apart  to  watch  on  purpose  that  no  enemy  may  take  them  unawares ; 
that  they  may  constantly  be  prepared  for  whatever  incursion  the  chances  of  war 
may  bring  upon  them.  It  is  here  taken  for  granted  that  we  are  making  a  campaign 
through  life.  The  assumption  all  the  way  through  is,  that  we  are  upon  an  enemy's 
ground,  and  that  we  are  surrounded,  or  liable  to  be  surrounded,  with  adversaries 
who  will  rush  in  upon  us,  and  take  us  captive  at  unawares.  We  are  commanded, 
therefore,  to  do  as  soldiers  do,  whether  in  fort  or  in  camp — to  be  always  vigilant, 
always  prepared.  (Ibid).  Each  to  guard  against  hit  own  temptations: — Your 
excess  of  disposition,  your  strength  of  passion,  and  your  temptableness  are  not  the 
same  as  your  neighbour's.  Therefore  it  is  quite  foolish  for  you  to  watch  as  your 
neighbour  watches.  Every  man  must  set  his  watch  according  to  his  own  disposition, 
and  know  his  own  disposition  better  than  anybody  else  knows  it.  If  a  fort  is  situ- 
ated BO  that  the  weakest  side  is  on  the  east,  the  commander,  if  he  is  wise,  will  set 
his  watch  there.  He  says,  *'  I  believe  that  if  I  defend  this  point,  nothing  can  do 
me  any  harm,"  and  sets  his  watch  there.  But  suppose  the  commander  of  a  fort, 
whose  weak  place  was  on  the  west  side,  should  put  his  force  all  on  the  other  side  1 
If  he  would  defend  his  fort  successfully,  he  should  put  his  soldiers  where  it  is  weak. 
Here  is  a  man  who  watches  against  pride ;  but  your  temptation  is  on  the  side  of 
vanity.  It  will  not  do  for  you  to  watch  against  pride,  because  pride  is  not  your 
besetting  sin.  There  is  many  a  man  who  flatters  himself,  that  because  his  neigh- 
bour has  corrected  his  faults  by  gaining  a  victory  over  pride,  all  he  himself  needs 
to  do  is  to  gain  a  victory  over  pride.  He  has  no  diflBculty  in  that,  because  he  is 
not  tempted  in  his  pride.  It  is  very  easy  to  watch  against  an  enemy  that  does  not 
«xist.  It  is  very  easy  to  gain  a  victory  where  there  is  no  adversary.  {^Ibid.) 
Watch  against  times  of  temptation : — Every  man  should  know  what  are  the  circum- 
stances, the  times,  and  the  seasons  in  which  he  is  liable  to  sin.  To  make  this 
matter  entirely  practical,  there  are  a  great  many  who  neglect  to  watch  until  the  pro- 
per time  and  seasons  for  watching  have  passed  away.  Suppose  your  fault  is  of  the 
tongue  ?  Suppose  your  temper  takes  that  as  a  means  of  giving  itself  air  and  ex- 
plosion ?  Witii  one  man  it  is  when  he  rises  in  the  morning,  and  before  breakfast 
he  is  peculiarly  nervous  and  susceptible.  It  is  then  that  he  is  irritable.  It  is  then 
that  things  do  not  look  right.  Ajid  it  is  then  that  his  tongue,  as  it  were,  snaps, 
and  throws  off  sparks  of  fire.  With  another  man  it  is  at  evening,  when  he  is 
jaded,  and  wearied  with  the  oare  and  labour  of  the  day.  He  has  emptied  himself 
of  nervous  excitement,  and  left  only  excitability.  And  then  is  the  time  when  he  is 
liable  to  break  down  in  various  ways.  Men  must  set  their  watch  at  the  time  when 
the  enemy  is  accustomed  to  come.  Indians  usually  make  their  attack  at  three  or 
four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  men  sleep  soundest ;  and  that  is  the  time  to 
watch  against  Indians.  There  is  no  use  of  doing  it  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning. 
The^  do  not  come  then.  If  it  be  when  yon  are  sick  that  you  are  most  subject  to 
malign  passions,  then  that  is  the  time  when  you  must  set  your  watch.  Or,  if  it  be 
when  you  are  well  that  the  tide  of  blood  swells  too  feverishly  in  yon,  then  that  is 
the  time  when  you  must  set  your  watch.  If,  at  one  time  of  the  day  more  than 
another,  experience  has  shown  that  you  are  liable  to  be  tempted,  then  in  that  part 
of  the  day  you  must  be  on  your  guard.  Everybody  has  his  hours,  his  times  and 
seasons,  and  his  circumstances ;  and  every  man  should  learn  them  for  himself ;  and 
every  man  should  set  his  watch  then  and  there.  And  frequently,  by  watching  at 
the  right  time,  you  can  easily  carry  yourself  over  all  the  rest  of  the  day.  (Ibid.) 
The  danger  of  dallying  with  temptation : — There  is  such  a  thing  as  dallying  with 
temptation.  Many  a  maiden  will  insensibly,  and  step  by  step,  ^low  herself  to  b% 
led  to  things  that,  if  not  wrong,  are  yet  so  near  it  that  th^  he  in  tti  y9Sj  twilight  i 


IT.J  ST.  MARK.  61S 

and  she  is  all  the  time  excusing  to  herself  snoh  pennissionB  and  snch  dalliance, 
saying,  "  I  do  not  intend  to  do  wrong ;  I  shall  in  due  time  recover  myself."  There 
is  many  a  man  who  takes  the  serpent  into  his  hand,  because  it  is  lithe,  and  graceful, 
and  burnished,  and  beautiful,  and  plays  with  that  which  in  some  unguarded 
moment  will  strike  him  with  its  poison  fangs ;  and  it  is  poor  excuse,  when  this 
dalliance  has  led  him  to  the  very  edge  of  temptation,  and  has  struck  the  fatal  poison 
into  him,  for  him  to  say,  **  I  did  not  mean  to."  The  mischief  is  done.  The  damnation  is 
to  come.  And  it  is  poor  comfort  to  say,  *•  I  did  not  mean  to."  Pass  by  it ;  come  not 
near  it ;  keep  far  from  it,  and  then  you  will  be  safe.  But  it  is  not  safe  for  innocent, 
or  inexperienced,  or  unconscious,  or  inconsiderate  virtue,  to  go,  by  dalliance,  near  to 
things  that  carry  in  them  the  very  venom  of  Satan.  What  should  you  think  of  a 
man  who,  coming  down  to  New  York,  should  say,  '•  I  have  had  quite  an  experience 
this  morning.  I  have  been  up  to  one  of  the  shambles  where  they  were  butchering ; 
and  I  saw  them  knock  down  oxen,  and  saw  them  cut  their  throats,  and  saw  the 
blood  flow  in  streams  from  the  great  gashes.  I  spent  a  whole  half-day  there, 
looking  at  men  killing,  and  killing,  and  killing."  What  would  you  say  of  a  man 
who  said,  "  I  have  been  crawling  through  the  sewers  under  the  street ;  for  I  want 
io  know  what  is  at  the  bottom  of  things  in  this  city  ?  "  What  kind  of  curiosity 
would  that  be  ?  What  would  you  think  of  a  man  who  went  where  he  could  see  the 
offal  of  hospitals  and  dissecting  rooms,  and  went  wallowing  in  rottenness  and 
disease,  because  he  wanted  to  increase  his  knowledge  of  things  n  g  neral  ?  And 
yet,  here  are  men  who  take  things  more  feculent,  more  fetid,  luoie  foul,  more 
damnable  and  dangerous — the  diseases,  the  ulcers,  the  sores,  and  the  filth  of  the 
appetites  and  the  passions  ;  and  they  will  go  wading  and  looking  at  things  that  a 
man  should  shut  his  eyes  on  if  they  were  providentially  thrown  before  him.  Why, 
there  are  some  things  that  it  is  a  sin  to  look  at  twice.  And  yet  there  are  men  who 
hunt  them  up  1  Then  again,  there  are  men  who  live  so  near  to  cheating  that, 
though  they  do  not  mean  to  cheat,  circumstances  cannot  bend  them  without  push- 
ing them  over.  There  are  many  men  who  are  like  an  apple-tree  in  my  garden, 
whose  trunk  and  roots,  and  two-thirds  of  the  branches,  are  in  the  garden,  and  one- 
third  of  whose  branches  are  outside  of  the  garden  wall.  And  there  are  many  men 
whose  trunk  and  roots  are  on  the  side  of  honesty  and  uprightness,  but  who  are 
living  so  near  the  garden  wall  that  they  throw  their  boughs  clear  over  into  the 
highway  where  iniquities  tramp,  and  are  free.  It  is  never  safe  for  a  man  to  run 
BO  near  to  the  line  of  right  and  wrong,  that  if  he  should  lose  a  wheel  he  would  go 
over.  It  is  like  traveUing  on  a  mountain  road  near  a  precipice.  You  should  keep 
Bo  far  from  the  precipice,  that  if  your  waggon  breaks  down  there  is  room  enough 
between  you  and  the  precipice.    Otherwise,  you  cannot  be  safe.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  39.  And  prayed,  and  spake  the  same  -woTds.— Perseverance  in  prayer ;— We 
may  learn  from  this  what  we  are  to  do  in  time  of  distress  and  affliction ;  we  are 
not  only  to  go  to  God  by  prayer  for  help,  comfort,  and  deliverance;  but  we  are  to  goto 
TTim  again  and  again :  yea,  often  to  call  upon  Him,  and  seek  to  Him  in  our  distress, 
to  be  instant  and  importunate  with  Pun;  and  bo  to  continue  as  long  as  the 
affliction  presses  us.     I.  Pbaybb  is  a  duty  and  bebvice  which  we  owe  to  God,  and 

WHICH  WE  OUGHT  CONSTANTLY  TO  PEBFOBM  IN  OBEDIENCE  TO  HiB  WILL  COMMANDING  IT, 

though  otherwise  we  should  reap  no  benefit  by  it  to  ourselves,  nor  even  obtain  the 
things  we  ask.  And  here  the  very  doing  of  our  duty  in  uprightness  of  heart  must 
comfort  us  (2  Cor.  L  12).     IL  Although  God  does  not  at  once  grant  our  petitions, 

YET  He  takes  notice  of  cub  PBAYERS,  and  IB  WELL  PLEASED  WITH  THEM.  III.  ThEBB 
ABE  JUST  CAUSES  WHY  GOD  DOES  NOT  ALWAYS  HEAB  OUB  PBAYEBS  AT  FIBST  OB  BPEEDELY  ; 

but  delays,  sometimes  for  long.  1.  To  exercise  and  try  our  faith,  hope,  patience, 
and  obedience  in  waiting  upon  Him.  2.  To  make  us  more  fervent  in  prayer.  ^  3. 
That  the  things  we  have  asked,  being  for  a  time  delayed,  may  be  the  more  prized 
by  us  when  we  get  them.  IV.  The  beason  why  God  does  not  heab  ub  at  fibst,  or 
BO  Boon  as  we  ded'-e,  may  be  and  often  is  in  ourselves,  viz.,  in  the  faultiness  or 
OUB  PRAYERS.  Either  we  ask  such  things  as  God  does  not  see  fit  for  us  to  obtain, 
and  then  it  is  a  mercy  in  Him  to  deny  them  to  us ;  or  else  we  ask  not  in  due 
manner,  we  pray  not  in  faith,  or  not  witii  such  feeling  and  fervour  as  we  ought ;  or 
else  we  are  Uving  in  some  sin  unrepented  of,  which  hinders  the  fruit  of  our  prayer 
(James  iv.  2,  3 ;  v.  16;  Psalm  Ixvi.  18).  V.  Though  God  has  promised  to  hear  our 
prayers,  and  to  grant  our  petitions,  so  far  as  is  good  for  us,  and  is  according  to  Hia 
will ;  YET  He  will  not  have  us  limit  Him  a  time  in  which  to  do  bo  :  nor  is  it  fit 
fox  OB  BO  to  do,  bat  we  are  to  wait  His  leisure,  convinced  that  by  bo  doing  we  shali 


61«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  xnt. 

lose  nothing  (Isaiah  xzviii.  16 ;  Psakn  zl.  i.  YI.  God  hejlbs  ovb,  pbatzbs  in  diysbi 
WAYS.  1.  By  giving  as  the  things  we  ask.  Hannah,  a  child;  Solomon,  wisdom; 
<&c.  2.  By  giving  us  something  as  good,  or  better  for  us  than  that  we  ask ;  e.g. 
patience  in  time  of  trouble,  and  strength  to  bear  it  (2  Cor.  zii.  7-10).  8.  By  giving 
us  inward  comfort,  by  and  in  our  prayers,  and  after  them  (Psalm  xxzv.  18.  4.  By 
accepting  our  prayers  as  a  service  pleasing  to  Him.  Now  although  God  often  delays 
to  hear  us  the  first  way,  yet  He  always  hears  us  one  of  these  ways,  and  that  as 
soon  as  we  pray  to  Him,  if  we  pray  in  due  manner,  and  as  we  ought ;  which  being 
so,  most  encourage  us  to  persevere,  and  hold  out  in  prayer,  when  we  do  not  im- 
mediately obtain  those  petitions  which  we  ask  of  God.  (George  Fetter.)  Law- 
fulness of  iet  forms  of  prayer : — Hence  we  may  gather,  that  it  is  lawful  for  us  to  use 
a  set  form  of  prayer :  not  only  to  ask  the  same  petitions  of  God  in  effect  and  sub- 
stance of  matter  at  sundry  times,  but  also  in  the  same  form  of  words,  or  well  near 
the  same :  yea,  that  this  may  be  done  even  in  private  prayer  alone  by  ourselves,  for 
such  was  this  prayer  now  made  by  our  Saviour.  And  if  in  private  prayer  alone 
by  ourselves  (where  usually  more  liberty  may  be  taken  to  vary  the  form  of  words  in 
our  prayers),  then  much  more  when  we  pray  with  others,  especially  in  public,  it 
must  needs  be  lawful  to  use  a  set  form  of  words,  and  to  ask  the  same  petitions  in 
the  same  words.  Our  Saviour  taught  His  disciples  a  set  form  of  prayer,  which  is 
that  we  call  the  Lord's  Prayer,  appointing  both  them  and  us  to  use  it  in  the  very 
same  form  of  words  in  which  it  is  framed  (Luke  xi.  2).  .  .  .  And  what  are  sundry 
of  David's  Psalms,  but  set  forms  of  prayer,  used  by  the  Church  in  those  times?  .  .  . 
The  Church  of  God  has  always  used  set  forms  of  prayer  in  public  and  solemn 
meetings,  nor  was  the  lawfulness  of  this  practice  ever  questioned  till  of  late  times 
by  Anabaptists,  Brownists,  and  such  like.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  40.  He  found  them  asleep. — Power  of  $leep : — The  most  violent  passion  and 
excitement  cannot  keep  even  powerful  minds  from  sleep ;  Alexander  the  Great  slept 
on  the  field  of  Arbela,  and  Napoleon  upon  that  of  Austerlitz.  Even  stripes  and 
torture  cannot  keep  off  sleep,  as  criminals  have  been  known  to  give  way  to  it  on  the 
rack.  Noises,  which  at  first  serve  to  drive  it  away,  soon  become  indispensable  to 
its  existence ;  thus  a  stage-coach,  stopping  to  change  horses,  wakes  all  the  pas- 
sengers. The  proprietor  of  an  iron  forge,  who  slept  close  to  the  din  of  hammers, 
forges,  and  blast  furnaces,  would  wake  if  tiiere  was  any  interruption  to  them  during 
the  night,  and  a  sick  miller,  who  had  his  mill  stopped  on  that  account,  passed 
sleepless  nights  until  the  mill  resumed  its  usual  noise.  Homer,  in  his  Iliad, 
elegantly  represents  sleep  as  overcoming  all  men,  and  even  the  gods,  exoept  Jupiter 
alone.    (Christian  Journal.) 

Ver.  41.  Sleep  on  now  and  take  yonr  ZMt — The  night  icene  in  Oethtemane : — 

1.  The  first  thought  suggested  by  this  text  is  that  the  Son  of  Man  may  even  now 
be  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners.  Men  are  apt  to  imagine  that  had  they  lived 
in  the  time  of  Christ  they  would  not  thus  and  thus  have  treated  Him.  But  they 
who  despise  Him  unseen  would  have  spumed  Him  to  His  face.  The  enemies  of 
Christ's  Church  are  the  enemies  of  Christ.  Even  in  our  own  day  Christ  may  be 
betrayed.  He  may  be  betrayed  by  His  own  disciples.  The  disposition  to  surrender 
Him  to  enemies  may  still  exist ;  a  disposition  to  secure  the  favour  of  the  world  at 
His  expense.  In  this  sense,  for  example,  it  may  well  be  said  that  the  Son  of  Man 
is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners  when  the  truth  respecting  Him  is  given  up  to 
errorists,  or  cavillers,  or  infidels ;  when  His  divinity  is  called  in  question ;  when 
His  eternal  Sonship  is  degraded  or  denied;  when  the  sinless  perfection  of  His 
human  nature  is  tainted  by  the  breath  of  dubious  speculation ;  when  His  atonement 
is  disfigured  or  perverted ;  when  the  vadue  of  His  cross  and  bloody  passion  is  de- 
preciated ;  when  His  place  in  the  system  of  free  grace  is  taken  from  Him  and 
bestowed  on  something  else.  To  mention  one  other  example ;  Christ  is  betrayed 
into  the  hands  of  sinners  when  His  gospel  is  perverted  ;  His  example  dishonoured ; 
and  Himself  represented  as  the  Minister  of  sin.  O  Christian !  have  you  evev 
tibought  that  every  inconsistent  and  unworthy  act  of  yours  is  one  step  towards  be. 
tTraying  Him  whom  you  profess  to  love  ?  2.  Another  thought  which  I  suggest  is, 
that  when  the  cause  of  Christ  is  about  to  be  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners. 
His  disciples  are  to  watch  unto  prayer,  lest  they  enter  into  temptation.  8.  Anothei 
thought,  and  that  a  melancholy  one,  is,  that  when  Christ's  disciples  are  thus  left  U 
watch,  whilst  He  is  interceding  with  the  Father,  they  too  often  fall  asleep.  Som^ 
in  the  touchiog  language  of  tibte  gospel,  may  be  "  sleeping  for  sorrow."    Bat  oh  t 


«XAV.  znr.]  8T.  MARE,  617 

iiow  many  others  sleep  for  sloth  arxd  spiritual  iuclifference.  It  is  no  time  to  sleep. 
The  Church,  Christ's  weeping  bride,  and  the  d>ing  souls  of  men  are  at  your  pillow, 
«hrieking  in  your  ears,  like  the  shipmaster  in  the  ears  of  Jonah,  '•  What  meanest 
thoa,  0  sleeper  ?  Arise  ;  call  upon  thy  God,  if  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us, 
that  we  perish  not."  4.  But,  alas !  this  warning  voice  is  often  heard  in  vain. 
Amidst  a  world  lying  in  wickedness,  amidst  the  untold  miseries  produced  by  sin, 
amidst  the  fierce  attacks  of  open  enemies  on  the  Son  of  Man,  His  friends,  His 
chosen  friends,  sleep  on.  And  that  sleep  would  prove  to  be  the  sleep  of  death,  if 
we  had  not  an  High  Priest  who  can  be  touched  with  the  sense  of  our  infirmities, 
and  when  He  sees  us  thus  asleep,  comes  near  and  arouses  us.  There  may  be  some 
before  me  now,  who,  though  sincere  believers,  have  been  overcome  by  sleep.  Your 
senses  and  your  intellects  may  be  awake,  your  conscience  has  its  fitful  starts  and 
Intervals  of  wakefulness  when  scared  out  of  its  slumbers  by  terrific  dreams.  But 
yom:  affections  are  asleep.  You  hear  the  gospel,  but  it  is  like  the  drowsy  lull  of 
distant  waters,  making  sleep  more  sound ;  you  see  its  light,  but  with  your  eyelids 
closed,  and  so  subdued  is  its  splendour  that  it  only  soothes  the  sense  and  deepens 
Its  repose.  If  this  is  your  experience,  I  appeal  to  you,  and  ask  you  whether,  even 
in  this  dreamy  state,  you  have  not  felt  the  gentle  hand  of  Christ  at  times  upon  you. 
Has  not  your  house  been  visited  by  sickness  ?  But  it  is  not  only  in  personal  afflic- 
tions that  the  Saviour  rouses  you.  Have  you  not  felt  His  hand  in  public  trials  ? 
Have  you  not  felt  it  in  the  trials  of  the  Church  ?  Have  you  had  no  signal  mercies 
flinoe  you  fell  asleep  ?  Besides  the  voice  of  personal  afflictions,  and  of  public  trials, 
and  of  private  mercies,  there  is  a  voice  in  public  mercies  too.  But  when  our  Lord 
had  for  the  third  time  fallen  prostrate  and  arisen,  when  He  came  a  third  time  to 
BUs  friends,  and  found  them  sleeping,  He  no  longer  expostulated ;  He  no  longer 
asked  whether  they  could  not  watch  with  Him  one  hour.  There  is  something  far 
more  awful  in  this  mild  but  significant  permission  to  sleep  on,  than  in  all  the  in- 
fectives or  reproofs  He  could  have  uttered.  '♦  Sleep  on  henceforth,  and  take  your 
rest."  That  this  may  not  prove  to  be  indeed  the  case,  we  must  arise  and  call  upon 
oar  God ;  we  must  come  up  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty.  But,  oh  t 
remember,  that  the  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal.  When  the  pre- 
fltimptuous  Simon  was  at  last  aroused,  and  saw  his  Master's  danger,  he  thought  to 
atone  by  violence  for  past  neglect.  And  many  a  modem  Simon  does  the  same. 
When  once  aroused  they  draw  the  sword  of  fiery  fanaticism.  But  is  there  no  danger 
from  an  opposite  direction  ?  Is  it  any  consolation  that  the  sword  is  in  its  scabbard, 
if  the  bearers  of  the  sword  are  fast  asleep  instead  of  watching  ?  (J.  A,  Alexander,  DJ).) 

Vers.  42,  48,  45,  46.  He  that  betrayeth  Me  U  at  hand.—The  betrayer:— I.  Wb 

•XX   IN   HIM  WHAT  BELIOIOITS   PBIVILEOX8  AHD    ADTANTAOES  IT  IS   POSSIBLB   TO  ENJOY, 

AND  YXT  BE  DESTiTTJTX  OF  VITAL  PIETY.  How  imprcssively  docs  the  fatal  example 
of  Judas  admonish  the  hearers  of  the  gospel,  the  members  of  Christian  churches, 
and  especially  the  junior  members  of  Christian  families.  Value  your  privileges,  but 
do  not  rest  in  them.  Improve  them,  profit  by  them ;  bnt  do  not  confide  in  them. 
Say  not,  "  We  have  Abraham  to  our  father ;  *'  "the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we." 
XI.  Wx  SEX  IN  Judas  what  melancholy  consequxncks  the  induloencb  of  one 
BiNTUL  PB0PEN8ITY  MAY  INVOLVE.  Most  men  have  some  easily  besetting  sin ;  some 
propensity  which  is  more  powerful,  some  passion  which  more  readily  than  others 
overcomes  them.  Let  the  young,  especially,  endeavour  to  ascertain  what  that  is, 
each  in  his  own  case.  The  besetting  sin  of  Judas  was  avarice.  Notwithstanding  his 
association  with  that  purest,  loveUest  one,  whose  peerless  elevation  of  character  and 
disinterested  benevolence  appeared  in  all  He  said  and  did,  Judas  caught  no  portion 
of  his  magnanimity ;  there  was  in  him  none  of  the  nobleness  of  mind  which  dis- 
tinguished His  master.  His  was  always  a  mean,  sordid,  grovelling  spirit.  He  was 
one  of  those  grubs  with  whom  you  sometimes  meet  in  society,  who  will  do  anything, 
bear  anything,  sacrifice  anything  for  money ;  who  have  no  idea  of  worth  but 
wealth  ;  who  reverence  none  but  those  who  bear  the  bag ;  whose  reverence  increases 
as  the  purse  distends ;  if,  indeed,  they  do  not  envy  still  more  than  they  reverence 
even  these.  Ton  may  know  them  by  their  gait.  There  is  always  something  low, 
shuffling,  tortuous,  sinister  in  their  looks,  and  in  their  movements.  They  have 
^nerally  one  hand  in  the  pocket,  fingering  about  their  silver  or  their  copper  gods. 
Their  eyes  are  almost  always  cast  on  the  ground,  as  Milton  saw  that  Mammon,  the 
meanest  of  all  the  devils,  had  his  eye  fixed  on  the  golden  pavement  of  the  nether 
world.  Bat  though  his  besetting  sin  was  avarice,  Judas  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
•ware  of  it,  or  he  did  not  watch  against  it ;  and,  as  it  often  happens,  he  was  placed 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohat.  nv. 

in  a  eitnation  which  tended  to  draw  it  ont,  and  to  strengthen  it.  He  was  tht 
treasurer  of  the  little  society  with  which  he  was  connected.  He  kept  the  bag,  and 
had  the  management  of  their  pecuniary  matters.  His  hand  was  often  in  that  money 
bag ;  his  eye  was  almost  constantly  upon  it ;  and  his  heart  was  always  with  it.  The 
melancholy  effect  of  this  was,  that  avarice  soon  grew  into  thievishness ;  the  tempta* 
tions  presented  by  his  office,  though  in  themselves  exceedingly  trifling,  were  too  power* 
f  ul  for  his  avaricious  propensities  to  resist.  What  an  idea  of  the  character  of  Judas, 
this  transaction  gives  us ! — Of  his  meanness,  his  low,  sordid  avarice  I  This  is 
seen  in  the  paltry  sum  which  he  agreed  to  take  as  a  sufficient  recompense  for  so 
foul  a  deed.  For  a  few  pieces  of  sUver  he  would  deliberately  clothe  himself  with 
everlasting  shame. — Of  his  hardness  of  heart.  This  is  seen  in  the  time  during 
which  he  maintained  his  resolution.  This  fearful  deed  was  not  done  in  the  hurry  of 
a  moment ;  it  was  a  deliberate  act,  it  was  Wednesday  when  he  made  the  agreement 
with  the  chief  priests  ;  it  was  Friday  morning  before  it  was  carried  into  execution. 
During  that  time  he  repeatedly  saw  his  Lord.  How  oonld  he  meet  His  eye  ?  He 
was  present  at  the  last  supper ;  and  when  Jesus  said,  **  One  of  yon  shaU  betray 
Me,"  he  inquired,  as  well  as  the  rest,  **  Is  it  If  "  His  callousness  appears  also  in 
the  manner  in  which  he  betrayed  the  Redeemer — with  the  very  token  of  affection ; 
and  he  did  it  in  the  presence  of  his  brethren.  Lord,  what  is  man  ?  Such  were 
some  of  the  melancholy  consequences  of  indulging,  instead  of  watching  against 
and  subduing,  his  easily  besetting  sin.  To  derive  from  his  example  the  instruction 
it  is  calculated  to  yield,  we  must  endeavour  to  enter  into  his  views  and  feelings  ; 
to  understand  how  he  felt  and  how  he  reasoned.  A  remark  or  two  may  assist  ns 
here.  It  is  evident  we  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  he  had  not  the  slightest 
apprehension  of  the  Eerious  consequences  of  his  treachery.  It  was  not  his  wish 
to  inflict  any  pain  on  the  Bedeemer,  or  to  do  Him  any  injury;  and  nothing  was 
farther  from  his  thoughts  than  that  he  was  delivering  Him  up  to  death.  He  was 
not  a  cruel  monster  who  thirsted  for  human  blood,  and  laughed  at  human  woe.  He 
belonged  not  to  the  savages  of  the  French  revolution,  nor  to  the  ferocious  men  of 
our  own  country,  whose  deliberate  murders  attained  for  them  considerable  notoriety 
some  few  years  since.  He  was  a  poor  despicability,  who  loved  money  above  aU 
things,  and  cared  not  to  what  meanness  he  submitted  in  order  to  secure  it ;  but 
he  had  no  sympathy  with  deeds  of  cruelty  and  blood.  It  would  appear  that  he 
was  as  fully  persuaded  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  as  any  of  the  apostles ;  but 
in  exact  proportion  to  the  strength  of  this  conviction  would  be  his  confidence 
that  Jesus  could  not  suffer ;  as  in  common  with  the  rest  of  his  nation,  he  believed 
that  the  Christ  would  continue  for  ever.  It  is  also  possible  that,  in  making  the 
offer  to  deliver  his  Master  into  the  hands  of  the  chief  priests  and  rulers,  he  may 
have  been  influenced  in  some  measure  by  resentment.  While  at  sapper  in  the 
house  of  Simon  the  leper,  a  pious  woman  anointed  our  Lord  with  very  precious 
ointment.  This  conduct  was  censured  by  Judas  and  his  brethren  as  an  act  of 
useless  prodigality,  but  was  vindicated  and  commended  by  our  Lord  as  an  act  of 

5iety  which  should  receive  honourable  mention  wherever  the  gospel  was  known. 
'his  incident  may  have  greatly  displeased  Judas;  for  he  appears  to  have  gone 
directly  from  the  house  of  Simon  to  the  palace  of  the  high  priest ;  and  it  is  not  im- 
possible that,  in  taking  this  step,  avarice  was  quickened  by  resentment.  But,  as 
we  have  repeatedly  intimated,  the  prevailing  motive  was  love  of  money.  By  the 
habitual  indulgence  of  his  avariciousness,  he  had  become  the  blind  slave  of  that 
sordid  passion.  All  generosity  of  sentiment,  all  nobility  of  mind,  all  sense  of 
integrity  and  honour,  had  become  extinct.  In  our  own  day  persons  have  been 
known  to  perpetrate,  with  their  own  hands,  the  most  atrocious  murders  under  the 
sole  influence  of  cupidity.  It  was  not  that  their  victims  had  done  anything  to 
offend  them ;  it  was  not  that  they  regarded  them  with  any  feelings  of  hostility ;  and 
yet  they  watched  them  carefully  for  successive  days,  drew  them  into  their  meshes, 
and  then  deliberately,  and  without  the  sUghtest  compunction,  murdered  them. 
Like  Judas,  they  did  it  for  what  they  could  get  by  it ;  and,  in  some  instances,  the 
wages  of  their  iniquity  were  not  greater  than  his.  It  is,  we  believe,  an  undeniable 
fact,  that  certain  persons,  well  known  to  those  who  require  their  services,  and  to 
others  connected  with  them,  may  be  hired  at  any  time,  in  the  metropolis  of  England, 
for  half-a-crown,  deliberately  to  perjure  themselves.  It  is  not  that  they  have  any 
interest  in  the  case,  or  that  they  have  any  wish  to  injure  one  party,  or  to  benefit 
another ;  like  Judas,  they  do  it  simply  for  what  they  can  get  by  it  These  illustra- 
tions, it  most  be  confessed,  are  taken  from  the  very  dregs  of  society — ^the  lowest 
deptba  of  social  d^;radation«     But  if  we  look  to  higher  regions,  we  shall  find 


IT.]  8T,  MARK,  «18 

illustrations  in  ftbondanee,  and  of  a  character  seareely  less  affecting.  It  is,  we 
believe,  a  fact,  that  there  are  persons  employed  in  Christian  England  in  casting  idols 
for  the  Indian  market.  Christian  people  make  these  gods  and  ship  them  out  tc 
India  for  sale.  There  they  work  amongst  the  teeming  millions  of  that  vast 
continent,  deceiving,  degrading,  destroying  the  souls  of  men.  It  is  not  that  these 
idol-makers  have  any  faith  in  the  gods  which  they  make ;  it  is  not  that  they  have 
any  interest  in  the  prevalence  of  idolatry,  or  any  wish  that  it  should  continue  to 
curse  the  world ;  as  in  the  case  of  Judas,  their  only  object  is  what  they  can  get  by 
it.  Take,  for  instance,  the  case  when  a  question  of  vital  interest  is  agitated,  the  con- 
stituency of  the  country  is  appealed  to,  the  happiness  of  millions  is  involved  in  the 
issue,  and  how  do  many  of  our  electors  act  ?  Some  do  not  concern  themselves  in  the 
least  abont  the  merits  of  the  question  ;  but  make  it  known  that  their  suffrages  are  iv 
the  market,  and  that  the  highest  bidder  may  secure  them.  Others  have  their  opinions, 
but  lures  are  presented,  promises  are  made  if  they  will  vote  in  opposition  to  their  con- 
victions ;  and  they  do  it.  They  thus  sacrifice  what  they  beheve  to  be  the  truth,  and 
the  best  interests  of  their  country,  at  the  shrine  of  mammon.  It  is  not  that  they 
hate  their  fellow  men :  it  is  not  that  they  wish  to  injure  their  country  ;  but  they  act 
as  Judas  did ;  he  sold  his  Master  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  they  sell  their  country 
for  what  they  can  get  for  it  Very  much  of  this  spirit  is  found  amongst  professedly 
religious  people.  Many  are  influenced  in  their  selection  of  the  place  of  worship 
they  attend,  or  the  church  they  join,  chiefly  by  the  prospect  of  gain  which  it  holds 
out  to  them.  If  there  be  in  a  congregation  one  or  two  wealthy  and  benevolent 
families,  yon  are  almost  sure  to  find  many  there ;  some  because  it  is  respectable,  and 
others  because  there  is  something  to  be  got  by  it.  We  once  heard  a  Christian  pastor 

relate  the  following  : — N.  S-  and  his  wife  were  members  of  the  church  at ;  they 

avowed  great  attachment  to  the  church,  and  great  affection  for  the  pastor,  from 
whose  ministry  they  professed  to  derive  much  good.  They  removed  on  account  of 
business  to  some  distance,  where  they  had  the  advantage  of  attending  a  very  faith- 
ful ministry,  and  of  associating  with  a  united  flock.  Bat  that  church  was  not  like 
their  own ;  it  was  not  home  to  them,  and  the  preaching  was  not  Uke  that  of  their 
minister.  Often  did  they  come  a  considerable  distance,  and  at  no  small  in- 
convenience, to  enjoy  the  privilege  of  a  Sabbath-day  amongst  their  own  friends. 
After  some  time  they  were  brought  back  again  to  their  old  neighbourhood ;  and 
now  everything  was  so  delightful— Sabbaths,  week-day  services,  intercourse  with 
friends — it  was  all  so  good.  A  few  months  passed  away,  and  it  was  observed  that 
N.  S.  and  his  wife  had  lost  much  of  the  ardour  of  their  zeal,  and  had  grown  slack 
in  their  attendance.  Their  pastor  called  on  them  one  day  to  inquire  of  their  wel- 
fare. N.  S.  seemed  low,  and  had  very  little  to  say ;  he  did  remark,  however,  that 
he  had  received  very  Uttle  encouragement  from  his  own  friends  and  fellow  members 
in  the  way  of  business,  but  that  Mr,  L.  T.  (a  leading  man  in  another  conununity) 
had  been  very  kind  to  him,  that  his  bill  for  the  last  quarter  amounted  to  the  sum 
of  £ — .  A  word  to  the  wise  is  enough.  The  minister  remarked  when  he  left  the 
house,  **  The  bait  has  taken ;  N.  S.  will  soon  find  some  pretext  for  leaving  us,  and 

will  go  over  to  the ."  And  so  it  was.    Oh,  Judas,  thou  art  not  dead ;  thy  spirit 

lives,  and  works  amongst  as  in  ten  thousand  ways.  **  Every  man  looketh  for  his 
gain  from  his  quarter."    III.  Thk  ohabaoteb  of  Judas  is  still  fubtheb  instbuo- 

TIVB    TO    us,   AS    IT    SHOWS     HOW    DEBPLT    HBN    MAT    BOBBOW    FOB    SIN,   AND    TET   BB 

DESTiTUTX  OF  OEKTTiirB  coNTBiTioM.  We  remark  further  that  the  repentance  of 
Judas  led  him  to  make  every  reparation  in  his  power.  His  sorrow  was  sincere, 
inward,  deep ;  and  he  did  not  keep  it  to  himself.  Judas  not  only  confessed  his  sin, 
but  he  also  honoured,  publicly  honoured  Him  who  suffered  through  his  treachery  ; 
"  I  have  sinned  in  that  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood."  And  this  is  not  all ; 
Judas  not  only  honoured  the  Redeemer  who  suffered  through  his  treachery,  but  he 
also  threw  back  the  wages  of  iniquity :  "  He  oast  down  the  pieces  of  silver  in  the 
temple,  and  departed."  The  price  of  innocent  blood  he  eould  hold  no  longer.  This 
indicates  a  great  change  in  his  views  and  feelings.  His  repentance,  therefore, 
seems  not  only  to  come  exceedingly  near  to  that  which  is  spiritual  and  saving,  but 
absolutely  to  include  its  great  elements.  (/.  J.  Davie$.)  The  possibilitiet  of  a 
human  life  illtutrated  by  the  downfall  of  the  traitor  .-—The  career  of  Judas  is  simply 
— L  Am  sxaxplx  of  the  mbanimo  of  tbuptatioii.  Man  is  under  no  iron  law  which 
compels  him  to  sin.  He  does  as  he  does,  not  because  he  ha»  to,  but  because 
he  wiUt  to.  The  stress  of  habit  may  become  desperate,  but  it  is  the  sinner's 
own  aei  that  has  brought  him  into  such  a  state.  So  it  was  with  Judas  Intelli- 
gMtUy,  deliberately  had  he  leaned  the  whole  weight  of  his  obdurate  heart  against 


S90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xir. 

that  door  of  mercy  which  the  Saviour  would  have  opened  to  him.  In  the  very 
face  of  his  destiny,  with  its  notes  of  doom  sounding  louder  and  louder,  like  the 
peals  of  distant  bells  as  one  approaches  the  town,  he  went  straight  on  to  hia 
deed.  In  selfishness  and  avarice  he  has  cherished  base  suggestions,  till  they 
fastened  their  ruinous  hold  upon  him.  A  pilferer,  grown  to  be  a  thief,  soon  be- 
came a  monster,  balancing  an  innocent  life  against  thirty  denarii.  II.  Thb  socibtt 
OF  THE  worthy  DOES  NOT  INSURE  LIKENESS  TO  THEM.  The  Uou  will  crave  blood 
wherever  he  is,  and  the  buzzard  be  scenting  carrion  in  every  breeze.  There  is  no 
salvation  in  friendships.  There  may  be  restraints,  there  is  no  certainty.  Illl 
Treachery  always  fails  to  make  good  its  pledges.  Falseness  never  pays. 
Judas  was  promptly  given  his  price ;  but  with  it  a  burden,  whose  nature  he  little 
divined  at  the  first.  So  long  as  he  must  carry  this,  his  treasure  was  cankered.  He 
thought  by  giving  it  back  to  find  relief ;  but  none  was  there.  He  could  not  imagine 
he  should  soon  be  seeking  to  hang  himself,  rather  than  prolong  the  moments  that 
he  might  enjoy  abundance.  Whatever  our  infidelity,  whether  financial  or  social  or 
religious,  we  must  reap  as  we  have  sown.  Condemnation  is  certain.  There  is  only 
One  whose  voice  can  silence  it.  Confession  of  Him  means  everything.  Betrayal 
of  Him  involves  the  loss  of  all  hope  and  well-being.  Repentance  may  not  be  pos- 
sible for  sucb.  Eepentance  would  have  sent  the  guilty  out  by  himself  to  weep 
bitterly ;  but  remorse  could  find  no  stopping-place  short  of  the  halter.  {De  Witt 
S.  Clark.)  The  traitor : — 1.  Observe  here  Christ's  meekness.  He  requires  us  to 
submit  to  the  blows  of  our  enemies.  He  submitted  even  to  their  kiss.  How 
gracious  the  self-control  that  could  allow  such  a  liberty  I  2.  Apostasy  should  be 
very  earnestly  guarded  against.  When  we  fall,  we  fall  not  merely  to  the  level  we 
left,  but  to  one  much  lower.  3.  The  very  manner  in  which  Christ  was  betrayed 
commends  Him  and  condemns  Judas.  For  is  not  the  kiss  itself  an  acknowledgment 
that  love  and  homage  were  the  things  to  which  the  Saviour  was  entitled  ?  And  if 
his  act  admits  Christ's  worth,  how  self-condemned  he  stands  for  practising  treason 
against  One  whose  right  is  love.  4.  The  cause  of  Christ  is  frequently  betrayed  still, 
with  a  kiss.  Deadly  attacks  on  it  often  contain  complimentary  acknowledgments  of 
its  worth.  Sometimes  the  wicked  life  can  adopt  a  bearing  of  punctilious  respect- 
fulness to  everything  religious.  (R.  Glover.)  Foes  within  the  fold  the  most 
tiangerous : — ^Natural,  domestic,  and  home-bred  enemies,  are  of  all  other  the  most 
hurtful  and  dangerous  enemies  of  Christ  and  of  His  Church.  I  say,  of  Christ  and  of 
His  Church,  because  there  is  the  same  reason  of  both ;  for  such  as  are  enemies  of 
Christ,  are  also  enemies  of  His  Church,  and  so  on  the  contrary.  Judas  was  the 
worst  and  most  dangerous  enemy  of  all  those  that  came  to  apprehend  our  Saviour ; 
be  did  more  than  all  the  rest  toward  the  effecting  of  this  wicked  plot  against  Christ ; 
he  was  a  guide  to  them  all,  and  the  very  ringleader  in  this  enterprize.  He  had 
opportunity  and  means  to  do  that  against  our  Saviour,  which  all  the  rest  without 
hiiu  could  not  have  done ;  that  is,  to  entrap  and  betray  Him.  He  knew  the  place 
where  our  Saviour  used  to  resort,  and  at  what  time  usually ;  he  knew  where  and 
when  to  find  Jesus,  viz.,  in  the  garden  at  Gethsemane  (John  xviii.  2).  Besides,  he 
being  so  well  acquainted  with  Him,  was  better  able  than  all  the  rest  of  the  com- 
pany to  discern  our  Saviour,  and  to  descry  Him  from  all  others  in  the  dark.  And, 
lastly,  he  by  reason  of  his  familiarity  with  Christ,  might  have  access  to  Him  to 
salute  Him  with  a  kiss  (as  the  manner  of  those  times  was),  and  to  betray  Him.  So 
that  by  all  this  it  appears  that  Judas,  being  one  of  our  Saviour's  own  disciples,  was 
in  that  respect  the  most  dangerous  enemy  to  our  Saviour  of  all  those  who  came  to 
take  Him.  And  as  it  was  with  Christ  the  Head  of  the  Church,  so  is  it  with  the 
Church  itself,  and  all  true  members  of  it.  Their  worst  and  most  dangerous  enemies 
are  commonly  intestine  and  home-bred  enemies,  which  lie  hid  amongst  them,  and 
are  near  them  in  outward  society,  and  join  in  outward  profession  with  them.  These 
are  usually  worse  than  open  and  professed  enemies,  who  are  out  of  the  Church.  In 
the  times  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  false  prophets  and  counterfeit  priests,  and  other 
close  hypocrites  which  arose  and  sprang  up  in  the  Church  itself,  did  more  harm  in 
it  than  the  open  and  professed  enemies  of  God's  people.  So  in  the  time  of  the  New 
Testament,  the  false  apostles,  heretical  teachers,  and  false  brethren,  did  more  hurt 
the  Church  than  cruel  tyrants  and  open  persecutors  of  the  Church.  As  Luther  used 
to  say,  ♦'  Tyrants  are  bad,  heretics  worse,  but  false  brethren  worst  of  aU."  As  they 
are  commonly  most  malicious,  so  they  have  most  opportunity  to  do  hurt.  And  as  it 
is  in  the  Church  of  Christ  in  general,  so  also  in  Christian  families  (which  are,  or 
ought  to  be,  as  little  churches),  commonly  a  man's  worst  and  most  dangerous  enemies 
are  those  of  his  own  house,  if  it  so  fall  out  that  these  turn  against  him.      (Qeorgi 


SAP.  ziv.]  ST.  MARK.  621 

Petter.)  The  Jttda$-»pirit  still  rife  : — ^We  may  see  in  Judas  a  true  pattern  and 
lively  image  of  hypocriiioal,  false,  and  coonterfeit  Christians,  who  make  a  show  of 
love  to  Christ,  and  of  honouring  Him,  when  in  reality  they  are  enemies  and 
despisers  of  Him.  These  salute  Christ  by  calling  Him,  "  Master,  Master,"  and  by 
kissing  Hun ;  and  yet  betray  Him,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  as  Judas  did.  Many 
such  Assembling  and  hypocritical  Christians  there  are,  and  always  have  been,  in 
the  Church.  1.  Such  as  make  outward  show  of  holiness  and  religion  in  their  con- 
duct before  men,  and  yet  live  in  secret  sins  unrepented  of.  These  by  their  outward 
show  of  holiness  seem  to  kiss  and  embrace  Christ,  but  by  their  unreformed  lives 
betray  Him  (Matt,  zxiii.  28 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  5).  2.  Such  as  profess  Christ  and  the 
gospel  of  Christ,  and  yet  live  profanely,  wickedly,  loosely,  or  scandalously,  to  the 
dishonour  of  Christ's  name,  and  the  disgrace  of  the  gospel  which  they  profess, 
causing  it  to  be  evil  spoken  of  (Luke  vi.  46;  Eom.  ii.  24).  3.  Such  as  pretend  love 
to  religion,  and  yet  are  secret  enemies  to  it  at  heart,  seeking  to  undermine  it.  4. 
Such  as  make  show  of  love  to  good  Christians,  but  oppose  them  underhand  and 
seek  to  bring  them  into  trouble  and  disgrace  (Gal.  ii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  26).  Let  us 
take  heed  we  be  not  in  the  number  of  these  false-hearted  Christians ;  and  to  this 
end  we  have  need  diligently  to  examine  ourselves,  touching  the  truth  and  sincerity 
of  our  love  to  Christ  and  His  members,  and  whether  our  hearts  be  sincere  and  up- 
right in  the  profession  of  Christ's  name  and  truth.  Also,  whether  our  life  and 
practice  be  answerable  to  the  profession  we  make ;  for,  otherwise,  we  are  no  better 
than  Judas,  kissing  Christ  and  yet  betraying  Him.  We  speak  much  against  Judas, 
and  many  cry  out  against  him  for  his  treachery  in  betraying  Christ  with  a  kiss  ; 
but  take  heed  we  be  not  like  unto  him,  and  as  bad  as  he,  or  worse  in  some  respect. 
{Ibid.)  The  betrayal: — I.  Thb  person.  Judas:  praise.  One  of  the  chosen 
twelve.  Our  Lord  must  have  foreseen  this  when  He  called  him.  The  call  of  Judas 
facilitated  fulfilment  of  Scripture.  Called  "the  traitor"  (Luke  vi  16);  "son  of 
perdition  (John  xvii.  12).  Avaricious ;  dishonest  in  choice  of  means  for  securing 
what  he  may  have  deemed  a  lawful  end.  H.  The  motive.  Various  motives  have 
been  imputed.  1.  Sense  of  duty  in  bringing  Jesus  to  justice.  But  consider  Acts 
iv.  15,  23 ;  v.  27-40 ;  where  the  high  priests,  &c.,  are  silent  when  they  might  have 
repeated  the  charges  of  Judas.  Especially  note  Matt,  xxvii.  4.  2.  Resentment 
(oomp.  Matt.  xxvi.  8-17;  John  xii.  4,  6).  But  two  days  elapsed  before  the  deed 
was  executed.  Resentment  would  have  subsided.  3.  Avarice  (Matt.  xxvi.  15).  But 
had  this  been  the  chief  motive,  he  would  surely  have  bargained  for  a  larger  sum, 
and  not  have  sold  his  Master  for  less  than  £4,  as  he  did,  nor  would  he  afterwards 
have  returned  it.  4.  Ambition  (consider  John  vii.  31;  Matt.  xvi.  16,  xix.  28),  by 
some  thought  to  be  the  true  motive.  To  him  Jesus  was  King.  He  would  force 
Jesus  to  declare  Himself.  If  Jesus  were  made  a  king,  what  might  not  he  (Judas) 
become  ?  He  knew  the  power  of  Jesus,  and  thought  that,  at  the  worst,  Jesus  would 
escape  from  danger  (Luke  vi.  30;  John  viii.  59,  x.  39),  hence  Matt.  xxvi.  48  was 
ironical.  He  believed  the  Messiah  would  never  die  (John  xii.  34).  Contrast  the 
ambition  of  Judas  with  the  lesson  of  humility  he  had  heard.  5.  Demoniacal  pos- 
session (John  xiii.  27).  HI.  The  time.  Significant — the  Feast  of  Passover.  Type 
and  anti-type.  Multitudes  at  Jerusalem.  Witnesses  of  these  things  (Acts  ii.  5-36). 
Many  had  beheld  His  miracles  and  heard  of  His  fame  in  other  parts.  Night — a  fit 
time  for  a  dark  deed  (John  iii.  19).  IV.  The  manner — a  kiss.  Perhaps  Judas  was 
sincere,  after  all,  and  meant  this  as  a  friendly  act  to  force  Jesus  into  an  avowal  of 
His  kingship.  If  so,  then  one  may  be  wrong  though  sincere,  and  mere  sincerity 
will  not  save  (Prov.  xvi.  25).  V.  The  effect.  1.  To  Judas.  2.  To  Jesus.  3. 
To  ourselves.  Learn — 1.  God  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him.  2. 
Ofl&cial  standing,  a  power  for  evil  in  the  hands  of  the  unprincipled  and  ignorant. 
8.  Shows  of  friendship  may  be  tricks  of  treason  (Prov.  xxvii.  6).  4.  Seek  to  be  not 
only  sincere,  but  right.  6.  The  fulfilment  of  Scripture,  a  proof  of  the  Messiahship 
of  Christ.  6.  If  He  be  the  only  and  true  Saviour,  have  we  accepted  Him  ?  {J.  Comper 
Gray.)  Our  Lord's  apprehension: — L  The  time  of  Christ's  apprehension. 

'•  While  He  yet  spake."  The  Saviour  was  preparing  Himself  by  fasting  and  prayer. 
He  was  exhorting  and  strengthening  His  disciples  against  the  scandal  of  the  cross. 
Now  He  was  determined  to  be  taken.  Note  here  the  incomprehensible  providence 
of  God,  in  that  all  the  powers  of  the  world  could  not  apprehend  Him  till  thi>)  time. 
IL  The  person  apprehending.  1.  His  name.  A  Rood  name ;  signifying  blessing 
or  praise.  Yet  what  a  wretch  was  he  I  what  a  discredit  to  his  name !  3.  His 
office.  One  of  twelve.  A  disciple  turned  traitor.  (1)  Christ  had  admitted  him  not 
to  Hii  presence  only,  bat  to  His  near  fellow^p  and  society.    (2)  Not  to  that  only. 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [oha».  nf. 

bat  to  apostleship.  (3)  He  had  made  him  steward  of  His  hoase  and  treasurer  of 
ffis  family ;  for  He  entrusted  him  with  the  bag.  (4)  He  had  conferred  on  him  high 
gifts  of  knowledge  and  power  to  work  miracles.  What  ingratitude,  then,  was  his ! 
8.  His  attendants.  (1)  A  great  company  of  soldiers.  ^2)  To  these  were  joined 
captains  of  the  temple,  and  some  of  the  chief  priests  ana  elders.  (3)  There  were 
gathered  to  him  also  a  great  many  of  the  priests'  and  elders'  servants.  4.  The 
originators  of  the  attack.  The  scribes  and  Pharisees.  III.  The  manner  or  ths 
APPREHENSION.  A  kiss.  1.  Pre-arranged.  2.  Executed.  What  treachery  1  The 
salutation  of  friendship  debased  to  such  a  purpose !  {Dr.  Thomas  Taylor.)  TJu 
mystery  of  the  call  of  Judas  to  the  apostleship ; — With  reference  to  the  call  of  Judas  to 
the  apostleship,  we  look  upon  it  as  only  one  of  the  innumerable  mysteries  in  God's 
moral  government,  which  no  system  of  philosophy  can  solve  at  all,  and  which  even 
Christianity  solves  but  in  part,  reserving  the  final  answer  for  a  higher  expansion  ol 
our  faculties  in  another  world.  It  involves  the  whole  problem  of  the  relation  of  God  to 
the  origin  of  sin,  and  the  relation  of  His  foreknowledge  and  fore-ordination  to  the  free 
agency  of  man.  The  question  why  Christ  called  and  received  Judas  into  the  circle 
of  His  chosen  twelve,  has  received  three  answers,  none  of  which,  however,  can  be 
called  satisfactory.  1.  The  view  held  by  Augastine  and  others,  namely,  that  Christ 
elected  him  an  apostle  not,  indeed,  for  the  very  purpose  that  he  might  become  a 
traitor,  bat  that,  through  his  treason,  as  an  incidental  condition  or  necessary 
means,  the  Scriptures  might  be  fulfilled,  and  the  redemption  of  the  world  be  accom- 
plished. This  view,  as  Dr.  Schaff  observes,  although  it  contains  an  element  of 
truth,  seems,  after  all,  to  involve  our  Lord  in  some  kind  of  responsibility  for  the 
darkest  crime  ever  committed.  2.  The  Bationalistic  view,  which  is  incompatible 
with  our  Lord's  Divine  foresight,  that  Jesus  foresaw  the  financial  and  administra- 
tive abilities  of  Jada»,  which  might  have  become  of  great  nse  to  the  Apostolic 
Church,  bat  not  his  thievish  and  treacherous  tendencies,  which  developed  them- 
selves afterwards,  and  He  elected  him  solely  for  the  former.  We  cannot  see  how 
this  view  can  be  held  by  any  one  who  believes'in  our  Lord's  divinity.  3.  The  view 
held  by  Meyer  and  many  others,  namely,  that  Jesus  knew  the  whole  original  cha- 
racter of  Judas  from  the  beginniuR,  before  it  was  properly  developed,  and  elected 
him  in  the  hope  that  the  good  qualities  and  tendencies  would,  under  the  influence 
of  His  teaching,  ultimately  acquire  the  mastery  over  the  bad.  But  this  implies 
that  oar  Lord  was  mistaken  in  His  expectation,  and  is  therefore  inconsistent  with 
His  perfect  knowledge  of  the  human  heart.  Alford  despairs  of  solving  the  difficulty. 
Two  things  are  clear  from  this  sad  subject :  1.  The  absolute  necessity  of  a  change 
of  heart ;  without  this,  privileges,  however  great,  may  be  abused  to  one's  destruc- 
tion: and  2.  The  danger  of  covetousness,  or  love  of  the  world.  This  seems  to 
have  been  the  cause  of  Judas's  ruin.  For  the  rest,  we  must  leave  it  to  the  light  of 
a  higher  state  of  existence.  (Christian  Age.)  Incidenti  of  the  arrest : — I.  Tmi 
ABBiVAii  ON  THE  SCENE  OF  JuDAS  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS.  While  Judas  bcHeved  that 
Jesus  was  shortly  to  appear  in  great  glory  as  the  predicted  King  of  the  Jews,  he 
followed  Him  loyally.  "  Hephestion,"  said  a  certain  great  personage  of  history, 
"  loves  me  as  Alexander,  but  Craterns  loves  me  as  king."  So  we  may  ventore  to 
say  Judas  did  once  upon  a  time  love  Jesus,  not,  indeed,  as  Jesus,  but  as  king.  **  He 
was  the  father  of  all  the  Judases,"  remarks  a  Puritan,  "  who  follow  Him,  not  for 
love,  but  for  loaves ;  not  for  inward  excellencies,  but  for  outward  advantages ;  not 
to  be  made  good,  but  to  be  made  great."  II.  The  panic.  How  are  we  to  explain 
it  ?  Was  it  the  power  of  the  human  eye,  like  that  by  which  the  lion-tamer  quells 
the  lion  ?  This  has  been  suggested  by  a  modem  critic.  Was  it  magic  ?  This  was 
said  by  an  ancient  reviler.  Was  it  all  in  the  mere  fancy  of  the  simple  folk  who  told 
the  tale  ?  This  notion  has  found  much  popular  favour.  For  my  own  part,  be- 
lieving, as  I  do,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  this  phenomenon  does  not 
strike  me  as  unlikely  or  unexpected.  Put  out  your  hand,  man,  and  arrest  the  loco- 
motive when  it  comes  thundering  into  the  station,  making  the  ground  tremble ; 
arrest  the  shot  as  it  bursts  blazing  from  the  lip  of  the  cannon ;  arrest  the  lightning 
as  it  stabs  the  cloud  before  it  strikes  the  tree ;  arrest  a  ray  of  light,  catch  it  and  turn 
it  out  of  its  course ;  arrest  the  tidal  wave,  as  King  Canute  essayed  to  do ;  arrest  the 
force  now  traveUing  under  ground,  and  which,  as  the  scientific  prophet  tells  us,  is  next 
year  to  burst  out  in  many  earthquakes  1  If  you  really  could  succeed  in  these  arrests, 
and  turn  back  these  natural  powers,  could  you  arrest  their  Lord  Himself  t  UL 
The  oaptdbb.  IV.  A  blow  struck  pob  Jesus — "  And  behold  one  of  them  which 
were  with  Jesus  stretched  out  his  hand,  and  drew  his  sword,  and  struck  a  servant 
of  the  high-priest's  and  smote  off  his  ear."    Y.  The  appxakanob  ow  ▲  Touiro  kab 


0SAP.  ziv.]  8T.  MARK.  631 

IN  k  lilRXH  CLOTH  HB«  CLAIMS  OONSIDBBATIOll.      VI.   Th«   GREAT  FOBSASINd — "  Then 

all  the  disciples  forsook  Him  and  fled."  Ton  pardon  a  politician  when  he  forsakes 
a  cause  that  he  once  thought  perfect,  because  he  has  now  found  out  its  glaring  im- 
perfections :  you  pardon  a  theorist  when  he  forsakes  a  theory  that  he  once  thought 
perfect,  because  he  has  now  found  out  its  fallacies ;  you  pardon  a  merchant  when 
he  forsakes  a  concern  that  he  once  thought  perfect,  because  he  has  now  found  out 
that  it  is  hollow :  yon  pardon  one  man  when  he  forsakes  another  as  his  own  con- 
fidential friend,  though  once,  thinking  him  perfect,  he  had  been  ready  to  do  any- 
thing or  bear  anything  for  him,  with  no  incentive  but  a  wish,  and  no  reward  but  a 
smile ;  if  now  he  has  found  him  oat  to  be  a  person  not  safe,  not  true,  not  to  be 
trusted.  Bat  he  who  forsakes  Christ  forsakes  perfection.  We  can  challenge  any 
man  to  say  that  he  thought  Him  perfect  once,  but  that  he  has  now  found  stains  on 
that  snow,  spots  in  that  sun.    {Charles  Stanford^  D,D,) 

Yer.  50.  And  they  all  forsook  Elm  and  fled.  —  The  deierters  :~-We  may  take 
three  views  of  the  desertion  of  oar  Lord  on  this  occasion ;  that  event  may  be  con- 
■idered  with  reference  to  the  deserters,  to  the  deserted,  and  to  ourselves.  I.  The 
desertion  of  oar  Lord  may  be  considered  with  reference  to  thb  apostles.  In  this 
▼lew  it  affords  an  affecting  instance  of  the  inconstancy  of  man.  The  desertion  of 
oar  Lord  by  the  apostles  affords  also  a  proof  of  the  melancholy  consequences  of  the 
adoption  of  false  notions.  Men  are  sometimes  found,  it  is  true,  both  better  and 
worse  than  toeir  respective  creeds ;  but  it  is  undeniable  that,  whatever  sentiment 
we  really  embrace,  whatever  we  truly  believe,  is  sure  to  influence  our  spirit  and 
conduct.  The  apostles,  in  common  with  the  Jews  generally,  had  fully  adopted  the 
notion  of  a  personal  reign  of  the  Messiah,  of  a  temporal  and  worldly  kingdom. 
Hence,  ambition,  of  a  kind  (in  their  circumstances)  the  most  absurd  and  unnatural, 
took  full  possession  of  their  minds.  They  expected  to  be  the  chief  ministers  and 
counsellors  of  state  of  the  largest,  and,  in  every  respect,  the  greatest  empire  in  the 
world,  an  empire  which  was  destined  to  absorb  all  others,  and  to  become  universal. 
Think  of  such  a  notion  as  this,  for  a  few  illiterate  fishermen  of  one  of  the  obscurest 
provinces  of  the  civilized  world !  I  do  not  say  that  it  would  have  been  otherwise — 
that  they  would  steadfastly  have  adhered  to  their  Lord,  and  have  gone  with  Him  to 
prison  and  to  death,  if  they  had  been  entirely  quit  of  their  false  notions,  and  had 
had  right  views  of  the  spiritual  nature  of  His  kingdom ;  for  temptation,  danger, 
fear,  may  overcome  the  strongest  convictions ;  but  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that  their 
false  notions  contributed  to  render  them  an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy,  while  more 
correct  views  would  have  tended  to  prepare  their  minds  for  iti&  trial,  and  to  fortify 
them  against  it.  We  may  learn  from  this  how  important  it  is  that  we  should  take 
heed  what  we  believe.  Let  as  prove  all  things,  and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good. 
n.  The  desertion  of  Christ  by  the  apostles  may  be  considered  with  reference  to  our 
LoBD  Himself ;  and  here  it  may  be  viewed  in  two  aspects  :  as  an  aggravation  of  His 
saflerings,  and  as  a  proof  of  His  love.  1.  As  an  aggravation  of  His  sufferings.  It 
shoold  not  be  forgotten  that  our  Lord  was  made  in  all  points  like  nnto  His  brethren. 
He  had  all  the  affections,  passions,  feelings,  of  human  nature  just  as  we  have ;  the 
great  difference  being  that,  in  as  they  are  constantly  liable  to  perversion  and  abuse, 
while  in  Him  their  exercise  was  always  healthful  and  legitimate.  In  the  language 
of  prophecy,  also,  He  complains  of  the  desertion  of  His  friends :  *'  I  looked  for  some 
to  take  pity,  but  there  was  none,  and  for  comforters,  but  I  found  none."  *'  Of  the 
people  there  was  none  with  Me."  As  **  bone  of  our  bone,"  as  subject  to  all  the 
■ympathies  of  oar  common  humanity.  He  felt  it  deeply,  and  on  many  accounts, 
when  Jadas  came,  heading  a  band  of  ruffians,  and  betrayed  Him  with  the  very  token 
of  affection.  He  felt  it  deeply  when  Peter  denied  Him  in  His  very  presence  with 
oaths  and  curses.  He  felt  it  deeply  when  *'  they  all  forsook  Him  and  fled."  2.  This 
melancholy  event  may  be  considered  further  as  a  proof  of  the  greatness  of  the 
Saviour's  love.  He  met  with  everything  calculated  not  only  to  test  His  love,  to 
prove  it!  sincerity  and  its  strength ;  but  also  to  chill,  and  to  extinguish  it.  But  as 
it  was  self-moved,  it  was  self- sustained.  Many  waters  could  not  quench  it.  All  the 
ingratitude  of  man  could  not  destroy  it ;  all  the  powers  of  darkness  could  not  damp 
its  ardour.  *'  Having  loved  His  own  who  were  in  the  world.  He  loved  them  to  the 
end."  Perhaiw  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  apostles  was  permitted,  that  Jesus  might 
taste  of  every  ingredient  of  bitterness  which  is  mingled  in  man's  cup  of  woe ;  that, 
being  tempted  in  all  points  like  unto  His  brethren,  He  might  be  able  to  (qrmpathize 
with,  and  to  saooonr  them  in  their  temptations.  It  may  have  been  permitted, 
also,  in  order  to  show  that  there  was  nothing  tu  deserve  His  favour  in  the  objects  of 


«M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  xrr. 

His  love.  Say  not  that  your  sins  are  too  great  to  be  forgiven,  or  your  heart  too 
depraved  to  be  renewed.  Only  trust  Him  :  His  grace  is  sufficient  for  you.  And 
let  this  encourage  the  unhappy  backslider,  notwithstanding  his  frequent  desertion 
of  his  Lord,  to  return  to  Him.  Jesus  did  not  disown  the  apostles,  though  they 
deserted  Him  in  His  distress  ;  but  after  His  resurrection  He  sent  to  them,  by  the 
faithful  women,  messages  of  tenderness  and  love :  "  Go,"  said  He  to  Mary  Magda- 
lene, *'  go  to  My  brethren,  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  unto  My  Father  and  your 
Father;  to  My  God,  and  your  God."  And  to  the  other  women,  "Go,  tell  My 
brethren  that  I  go  into  Galilee,  and  there  shall  they  see  Me."  IH.  We  proceed  to 
consider  this  melancholy  event  with  reference  to  oubselves.  We  may  learn  not  a 
little  from  it.  We  may  use  it  as  a  mirror  in  which  to  see  ourselves.  Some  may 
see  in  it,  perhaps,  the  likeness  of  their  own  conduct  to  their  fellow-men.  When 
you  thought  they  did  well  for  themselves,  then  you  blessed  them.  When  you  knew 
they  did  not  need  you,  you  followed  them,  and  were  at  their  service.  When  all 
praised  tLem,  yon  also  joined  in  the  laudation.  But  circumstances  changed  with 
them  ;  and  you  changed  too.  The  time  came  when  you  might  really  have  served 
them,  but  then  you  withdrew  yourself.  Others  may  see  in  the  desertion  of  the 
apostles,  the  likeness  of  their  own  conduct  to  the  Saviour.  Oh  I  how  many  desert 
Him  in  His  poor,  calumniated,  persecuted  brethren  ?  How  many  desert  Him  in  His 
injured,  oppressed  interest !  Many  will  befriend  and  applaud  a  mission,  a  religious 
institution,  a  Christian  church,  a  ministry,  while  it  receives  general  commendation 
and  support ;  but  let  the  great  frown  upon  it,  let  the  foul  breath  of  calumny  pass 
over  it  and  dim  its  lustre,  let  the  bleak  winds  of  adversity  blow  upon  it,  and  blast 
it ;  and  where  are  they  then  ?  They  are  scattered,  and  gone  every  one  to  his  own. 
We  may  learn  from  this  event  to  solace  ourselves  under  some  of  the  severest  trials 
which  can  befall  us  in  the  present  world.  Surely  there  are  few  things  more  bitter 
than  this — to  be  deserted,  when  we  most  need  their  assistance,  by  those  on  whose 
friendly  offices  we  are  entitled  to  rely.  But  we  may  learn  from  this  event  not  to 
wonder  at  it ;  it  is  no  strange  thing.  We  must  not  wonder,  then,  if  when  we  are 
most  deeply  interested  in  any  great  undertaking,  if  when  our  labours  and  sacrifices 
for  the  good  of  our  fellow-oreatures  are  most  abundant,  or  when  our  afflictions  and 
sufferings  are  most  severe,  that  is  to  say,  if  when  we  most  need  the  sympathy  and 
support  of  our  friends,  we  should  be  left  most  entirely  to  ourselves.  Let  us  solace 
ourselves  in  God.  "  Yet  I  am  not  alone,  for  the  Father  is  with  me."  Let  us  live 
more  in  communion  with  Him.  Let  us  look  less  to  creatures,  and  more  to  the 
Creator.  Let  us  depend  less  on  outward  things,  and  more  on  God.  Finally,  let  us 
learn  to  anticipate  the  hour  in  which  our  most  ifaithful  friends  must  leave  us.  Oh  I 
to  have  the  great  and  good  Shepherd  with  us  then !  "  Though  I  walk  through  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil ;  Thou  art  with  me ;  Thy  rod  and 
Thy  staff  they  comfort  me."    (/.  J.  Davies.) 

Vers.  61, 52.  And  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  from  them  nalced.— Ha«f«  in  reli- 
gion:— It  strikes  me  that  this  "  certain  young  man  "  was  none  other  than  Mark  himself. 
He  was  probably  asleep ;  and,  aroused  by  a  great  clamour,  he  asked  what  it  was  about. 
The  information  was  speedily  given — "  The  guards  have  come  to  arrest  Jesus  of 
Nazareth."  Moved  by  sudden  impulse,  not  thinking  of  what  he  was  doing,  he 
rises  from  his  bed,  rushes  down,  pursues  the  troopers,  dashes  into  the  midst  of  their 
ranks,  as  though  he  alone  would  attempt  the  rescue,  when  all  the  disciples  had  fled. 
The  moment  they  lay  hold  upon  him  his  heroic  spasm  is  over ;  his  enthusiasm 
evaporates ;  he  runs  away,  leaves  the  cloth  that  was  loosely  wrapped  about  his  body 
behind,  and  makes  his  escape.  There  have  been  many  who  acted  like  Mark  since 
then.  First,  however,  you  will  say,  "Why  suppose  it  to  be  Mark? "^  I  grant  you 
it  is  merely  a  supposition,  but  yet  it  is  supported  by  the  strongest  chain  of  probabi- 
lities. It  was  common  among  the  evangelists  to  relate  transactions  in  which  they 
themselves  took  part  without  mentioning  their  own  names.  Whoever  it  was,  the 
only  person  likely  to  know  it  was  the  man  himself.  I  cannot  think  that  any  one 
else  would  have  been  likely  to  tell  it  to  Mark.  Again,  we  know  that  such  a  transaction 
as  this  was  quite  in  keeping  with  Mark's  common  character  :  the  evangel  of  Mark 
is  the  most  impulsive  of  all  the  evangels.  He  is  a  man  who  does  everything  straight- 
way ;  fnU  of  impulse,  dash,  fire,  flash ;  the  thing  must  be  done,  and  done  forthwith. 
Onoe  more  :  the  known  life  of  John  Mark  tends  make  it  very  probable  that  he 
would  do  such  a  thing  as  is  referred  to  in  the  text.  As  icon  as  ever  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas set  out  on  their  missionary  enterprise  they  were  attended  by  Mark.  As  long 
as  they  were  sailing  across  the  blue  waters,  and  as  long  as  thqr  were  in  the  island 


.  xiT.]  ST.  MARK.  625 

of  Cyprus,  Mark  stuck  to  them.      Nay,  while  they  travelled  along  the  coast  of  Asia 
Minor,  we  find  they  had  John  Mark  to  be  their  minister ;  but  the  moment  they 
went  up  into  the  inland  countries,  among  the  robbers  and  the  mountain  streams — 
as  soon  as  ever  the  road  began  to  be  a  little  too  rough,  John  Mark  left  them.    His 
missionary  zeal  had  oozed  out.    For  these  reasons,  the  supposition  that  it  was 
John  Mark  appears  to  me  not  to  be  utterly  baseless.     I.  Hebs  ib  hastt  followiko. 
John  Mark  does  not  wait  to  robe  himself,  but  just  as  he  is,  he  dashes  out  for  the 
defence  of  his  Lord.    Without  a  moment's  thought,  taking  no  sort  of  considera- 
tion, down  he  goes  into  the  cold  niglit  air  to  try  and  deliver  his  Master.    Fervent 
zeal  waited  not  for  chary  prudence.     There  was  something  good  and  something  bad 
in  this,  something  to  admire  as  well  as  something  to  censure.    Beloved,  it  is  a  good 
and  right  thing  for  us  to  follow  Christ,  and  to  follow  Him  at  once ;  and  it  is  a  brave 
thing  to  follow  Him  when  His  other  disciples  forsake  Him  and  flee.     Would  that 
all  professors  of  religion  had  the  intrepidity  of  Mark  I     The  most  of  men  are  too 
slow ;  fast  enough  in  the  world,  but,  ah  1  how  slow  in  the  things  of  God  1     Of  all 
people  that  dilly-dally  in  this  world,  I  think  professed  servants  of  God  are  the  most 
drowsy  and  faddling.    How  slothful  are  the  ungodly,  too,  in  Divine  things ;  tell 
them  they  are  sick,  they  hasten  to  a  surgeon ;  tell  them  that  their  title-deeds  are  about 
to  be  attacked,  and  they  will  defend  them  with  legal  power ;  but  tell  them,  in  God's 
name,  that  their  soul  is  in  danger,  and  they  think  it  matters  so  little,  and  is  of  so 
small  import,  that  they  will  wait  on,  and  wait  on,  and  wait  on,  and  doubtless  con- 
tinue to  wait  on  till  they  find  themselves  lost  for  ever.     The  warnings  of  the  gospel 
all  bid  you  shun  procrastination.    I  do  beseech  you  fly  to  Jesus,  and  fly  to  Jeaua 
now,  though  even  it  should  be  in  the  hurry  of  John  Mark.    I  change  my  note. 
There  is  a  haste  that  we  most  reprove.    The  precipitate  running  of  Mark  suggests 
an  admonition  that  should  put  you  on  your  guard.    I  am  afraid  some  people  make 
a  hasty  profession  through  the  persuasion  of  friends.     Nor  are  there  a  mere  few 
who  get  their  religion  through  excitement.  This  furnishes  another  example  of  inju- 
dicious haste.    Many  profess  Christ  and  think  to  follow  Him  without  counting  the 
cost.  They  had  never  sought  God's  strength ;  they  had  never  been  emptied  of  their 
own  works  and  their  own  conceits ;  consequently,  in  their  best  estate  they  were 
vanity ;  they  were  like  the  snail  that  melts  as  it  crawls,  and  not  like  the  snowflake 
upon  the  Alps,  which  gathers  strength  in  its  descent,  till  it  becomes  a  ponderons 
avalanche.    God  make  you  not  meteors  or  shooting  stars,  but  stars  fixed  in  their 
places.    I  want  you  to  resemble,  not  the  ignis  faiuus  of  the  morass,  but  the  steady 
beacon  of  the  rock.    There  is  a  phosphorescence  that  creeps  over  the  summer  sea, 
but  who  is  ever  lighted  by  it  to  the  port  of  peace  ?   And  there  is  a  phosphorescence 
which  comes  over  some  men's  minds.    Very  bright  it  seems,  but  it  is  of  no  value ; 
it  brings  no  man  to  heaven.    II.  It  remains  for  me  to  notice  ths  hastt  BUNNma 
AWAT.    Some  who  run  well  at  first  have  hardly  breath  enough  to  keep  the  pace  up, 
and  so  turn  aside  for  a  little  comfortable  ease,  and  do  not  get  into  the  road  again. 
There  are  two  kinds  of  desertion  which  we  denounce  as  hasty  running  away ;  the 
one  temporary,  the  other  final.    Think  what  a  fool  Mark  made  of  himsell    Here 
he  comes ;  here  is  your  hero.    What  wonders  he  is  going  to  do  1    Here  is  a  Samson 
for  you.    Perhaps  he  will  slay  his  thousand  men.    But,  no ;  he  runs  away  before 
he  strikes  a  single  blow.    He  has  not  even  courage  enough  to  be  taken  prisoner. 
How  everybody  in  the  crowd  must  have  laughed  at  the  venturesome  coward — at  the 
dastardly  bravo  1    Therefore  abstain  from  these  inconsistencies  for  your  own  cha- 
racter's sake.    Besides,  how  much  damage  yon  do  the  Church  1    And  think  what 
must  be  the  dying  bed  of  an  apostate.  Did  you  ever  read  of  "  the  groans  of  Spira  '*? 
That  was  a  book  circulated  about  the  time  of  the  Beformation — a  book  so  terrible 
that  even  a  man  of  iron  could  scarcely  read  it.     Spira  knew  the  gospel,  but  yet 
went  back  to  the  Church  of  Bome.     His  conscience  woke  on  his  dying  bed,  and  his 
cries  and  shrieks  were  too  terrible  to  be  endured  by  his  nurses;  and  as  to  his 
language,  it  was  despair  written  out  at  full  length  in  capital  letters.     My  eminent 
predecessor,  Mr.  Benjamin  Keach,  published  a  like  narrative  of  the  death  of  John 
Child,  who  became  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  but  afterwards  went  back  to  the  Ohurob 
from  which  he  seceded,  and  died  in  the  most  frightful  despair.    May  God  deliver 
yoa  from  the  death-bed  of  any  man  who  has  lived  a  professed  Christian,  and  dies 
an  apostate  from  the  faith  I    Bat  what  must  be  the  apostate's  doom  when  hie 
naked  seal  goes  before  God  ?    ((7.  H,  Spurgeon,) 

Yet.  63.  And  they  led  Jesns  away  to  the  High  Priest— CAtitt  before  thepriette  .•— 
L  Gits  aiis^ixxon  to  zhx  xwo  Hioq  Fbissts  with  WHoac  thx  teial  or  Jbsos  bxoab 

40 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  or. 

n.  Thb  mtdnioht  oouMcn.  of  tbiers.  For  blind  men  to  be  fair  critics  of  Turner,  for 
bats  to  be  fair  critics  of  sunshine,  for  worms  to  be  fair  critics  of  the  open  air,  would 
be  more  conceivable  than  the  possibility  of  men  like  these  being  fair  judges  of 
Jesus  1  How  could  such  sinners  understand  the  Holy  One  of  God  ?  Besides  their 
unfairness  from  natural  unfitness,  there  was  unfairness  from  the  fact  that  they  were 
desperate  conspirators,  plotting  against  His  life.  lU.  How  He  was  tried.  (Charle* 
Stanford^  D,D.). 

Ver.  54.  And  Peter  followed  Him  afex  ofS.— Following  afar  of ;— A  young  mac, 
it  is  told,  was  for  several  months  in  a  backsliding  state,  which  manifested  itself  in 
the  usual  way, — of  conformity  to  a  fashionable  and  unholy  course  of  life,  and  a 
neglect  of  the  ordinances  and  institutions  of  the  house  of  God.  During  this  time  he 
called  on  a  deacon  of  the  church,  who  was  a  watchmaker,  and  asked  him  to  repair 
his  watch.  **  What  is  the  difficulty  with  your  watch  ?  "  said  he.  "  It  has  lost 
time  lately,'*  said  the  young  man.  The  deacon  looked  at  him  with  a  steady  and 
significant  eye,  and  said,  ♦♦  Haven't  you  lost  time  lately  ?  "  These  few  words  brought 
the  backslider  to  repentance,  to  the  church,  and  to  duty.  Peter's  fall :  iu  lessons : — 
I.  Who  FOLLOWED  Him  afab  off?  *' Peter."  1.  Then  seniority  and  leadership  in 
the  church  are  no  guarantee  against  falling  into  sin.  In  the  order  of  choice,  Peter 
was  the  oldest  of  the  apostles.  He  was  also  their  recognized  leader.  Peter  is  the 
last  man  that  should  have  **  followed  afar  oS,"  both  because  of  seniority  and 
leadership,  and  the  blighting  influence  that  would  naturally  and  inevitably  result 
from  his  conduct.  The  power  of  leadership  involves  tremendous  responsibility.  2. 
Then  a  man  may  backsHde  while  blessed  with  the  most  faithful  and  efficient  gospel 
teaching.  Peter's  experience  shows  that  a  man  may  sin  shamefully  while  blessed 
with  the  most  perfect  gospel  teaching.  3.  Then  a  man  may  backslide  while  blessed 
with  the  most  affectionate  pastoral  care.  Jesus  foresaw  his  dangers;  told  him  of  the 
enemy's  purpose  ;  warned  him  of  this  very  fall,  and  in  the  true  pastoral  spirit  bore 
him  to  God  in  prayer  :  •♦  I  have  prayed  for  thee."  Surely  no  man  was  ever  blessed 
with  such  pastoral  solicitude  and  fidelity,  and  yet,  in  spite  of  it  all,  Peter  fell.  4. 
Then  high  professions  of  loyalty  and  love  are  not  always  to  be  relied  upon.  Peter's 
assurances  partook  somewhat  of  the  nature  of  boasting.  Great  natures  never 
burden  you  with  vows  and  assurances.  They  are  the  product  and  sign  of  a  weak, 
unreliable  character.  Peter  soon  found  out,  however,  that  it  is  one  thing  to  make 
vows  in  the  heavenly  atmosphere  of  the  upper  room,  but  quite  another  thing  to 
pay  those  vows  amid  the  provocation  of  Gethsemane,  and  the  excitement  of  the 
judgment  hall.  I  have  heard  of  a  little  boat  that  carried  such  an  immense  whistle 
that  it  took  all  the  steam  to  blow  it ;  so,  whenever  it  whistled  it  stopped  nmning. 
Too  many  in  our  churches  are  like  that  little  boat ;  the  whistle  of  their  profession 
is  too  big  for  their  supply  of  steam.  It  takes  all  their  energy  to  blow  it,  to  tell  of 
their  attainments,  and  what  wonders  they  are  goiug  to  do.  (T.  Kelly),  Following 
Christ  afar  off : — I.  Let  us  inquibe,  in  the  outset,  concerning  the  siOMiFioANca 
or  THIS  ACTION  OF  SiuoN.  1.  The  facts  are  very  simple.  When  Christ  retrieved 
the  folly  which  this  impetuous  disciple  had  committed,  and  healed  the  ear  of 
Malohus,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  magnaminity  of  the  Master  had  any  effect  in 
mitigating  the  malignity  of  the  mob.  Simon's  stroke  with  his  unusual  weapon, 
instead  of  checking  those  belligerent  people  bearing  swords  and  staves,  came  very 
near  exasperating  them.  He  simply  put  himself  and  his  friends  to  flight,  and  then 
Uie  crowd  had  it  all  their  ovra  way.  It  is  a  mournful  record  to  read  :  "  They  all 
forsook  Him  and  fled."  But  now,  after  this  sudden  and  useless  panic,  it  appears 
that  at  least  two  of  our  Lord's  followers  rallied  their  courage  a  little.  They  turned 
upon  their  flying  footsteps,  and  started  after  the  melancholy  train.  These  were 
Peter  and  John.  And  the  whole  force  of  the  dramatic  incident  we  are  studying  ia 
disclosed  in  the  contrast  of  their  behaviour.  John  ran  with  a  will.  As  in  the  race 
afterwards  for  Christ's  sepulchre  he  easily  distanced  Peter  (John  xx.  4),  so  now  he 
arrived  first  in  the  palace.  Moreover,  he  soon  showed  how  brave  he  was,  and  how 
much  in  earnest  to  retrieve  his  temporary  defection  he  was,  by  urging  his  way 
directly  through  all  obstacles  into  the  very  apartment  where  Jesus  had  been  taken 
for  trial ;  he  **  went  in  with  Jesus,  bat  Peter  stood  at  the  door  without "  (John  xviii. 
16,  16).  2.  The  meaning  of  all  this  is  what  makes  it  so  important  One  has  no  need 
of  being  deceived  ever  as  to  the  exact  commencement  of  any  defection  from  Christ. 
Baokaliding  is  earliest  in  the  **  heart,"  then  it  shows  itself  in  one's  **  ways  "  (Prov. 
xiT.  14).  Absalom  was  a  rebel  while  as  yet  he  made  no  overt  attack  on  his  father's 
The  younger  son  was  a  prodigal  before  he  started  for  the  far  oonntiy. 


0B4P.  zrr.]  8T.  MARK,  627 

Peter  was  a  renegade  aod  a  poltrooD  from  the  earliest  instant  in  which,  listless  and 
halting,  he  had  begun  to  follow  Jesus  only  "  afar  off."  For  an  analysis  of  his  ex- 
perience would  nave  disclosed  three  bad  elements.  1.  There  was  petulance  in  it. 
Simon's  self-love  was  wounded  when  Jesus  administered  the  somewhat  extensive 
rebuke  he  had  received  (Matt.  xxvi.  52-54).  He  felt  himself  aggrieved.  His  defec- 
tion began  with  sullenness.  We  cannot  doubt  that  his  countenance  fell ;  he  wore 
an  injured  expression.  2.  There  was  distrust  in  his  experience.  We  have  seen  that 
there  was  some  reason  for  all  the  disciples  to  apprehend  violence,  instantaneous  and 
passionate.  Peter  was  fully  responsible  for  that.  The  immediate  result  of  his  rash- 
ness was  danger  rather  than  deliverance.  But  could  not  Jesus  be  relied  upon  for 
rescue  f  Was  not  John  fully  protected  afterwards  ?  3.  There  was  unbelief  in  his 
experience.  This  disciple  evidently  had  become  ashamed  of  his  adhesion  to  Jesus 
as  the  Messiah.  An  omnipotent  Son  of  God  was  in  his  estimation  for  the  moment 
letting  things  go  too  far,  when  He  suffered  Himself  to  be  apprehended  by  a  rabble 
and  maltreated  in  this  way  without  a  word.  Perhaps  Simon  lost  confidence  in  His 
cause.  If  the  words  of  Matthew  are  to  be  taken  literally  (xxvi.  68),  this  disciple  did 
not  follow  Jesus,  even  afar  off,  so  much  from  affection  as  from  curiosity  ;  he  went 
into  the  palace  not  to  see  Jesus,  but  to  "  see  the  end."    U.  Let  us  go  a  step  farther 

now,  AND  INQUIRE  CONCERNING  THE  RESULTS  OF  THIS  BEHAVIOUR  OF  PeTER.       1.   It  tOOk 

him  away  from  Christ's  personal  presence.  There  was  always  to  this  disciple  a 
peculiar  exhilaration  and  help  in  the  companionship  of  his  Divine  Lord.  Under  the 
shining  of  His  countenance  he  constantly  grows  humble,  gentle,  and  affectionate. 
Just  as  Mercury,  that  feeblest  of  all  the  planets  in  our  solar  system,  seems  most 
brilliant  when  likeliest  to  disappear,  because  nearest  the  sun,  so  Simon  actually 
appears  at  his  best  when  he  is  the  most  outshone ;  and  the  moment  he  wanders,  he 
wanes.  Duty  is  to  most  of  us  what  this  personal  leadership  was  to  the  disciples. 
If  we  follow  our  religious  duties  close  up,  they  will  bring  us  near  Jesus.  2.  Again, 
this  behaviour  separated  Peter  from  the  sympathy  of  Jesus'  adherents.  In  union 
there  is  strength.  Those  disciples  ought  not  to  have  allowed  themselves  to  be 
scattered  during  the  trials  of  that  passover  night.  For  together  they  would  have 
helped  each  other  very  much.  Now  we  do  not  know  what  became  of  any  of  them 
except  John.  If  Peter  had  been  sitting  by  John's  side  he  certainly  would  have  been 
safer.  He  was  easily  inffuenced,  and  the  beloved  disciple  soon  recovered  his  courage 
and  loyalty.  Whenever  professed  Christians  are  seen  to  be  falling  away  from  each 
other  by  following  the  Master  afar  off,  there  is  reason  for  alarm  in  reference  to  their 
spiritual  interests.  Only  sin  is  solitary,  and  only  guilt  loves  to  live  alone.  Hence 
there  is  vast  wisdom  in  the  ancient  counsel  that  believers  should  not  forsake  the 
assembling  of  themselves  together,  as  the  manner  of  some  is  (Heb.  x.  25).  3.  More- 
over, this  behaviour  threw  Peter  hopelessly  into  the  companionship  of  his  enemies. 
Peter  fell  into  bad  company  the  instant  he  fell  out  of  good.  in.  It  is  time  fob 
us  to  inquire  concerning  the  real  cause  of  Simon  Peter's  defection  that  night. 
1.  It  would  not  be  enough  to  ascribe  it  just  to  a  sudden  fright  of  alarm.  2.  It  was 
because  his  piety,  at  that  period  of  his  history,  was  fashioned  more  by  feeling  than 
by  principle.  Peter's  spirituality  blew  in  a  gusty  sort  of  way  because  his  theological 
groundwork  was  faulty.  We  remember  more  than  one  occasion  when  he  deliberately 
interfered  with  our  Lord's  communication  of  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement.  As  a 
master,  a  teacher,  a  leader,  he  loved  Jesus  personally;  there  he  rested.  Jesus  away, 
he  failed.  Soft  gales  do  not  always  waft  to  the  heaven  ;  they  the  rather  often  aid 
in  an  nnperceived  drift  towards  the  open  sea.  Simon  loved  to  have  all  things 
beautiful  and  serene.  He  was  the  man  who  grew  ecstatic  on  the  mount  of  trans- 
figuration, and  proposed  that  Jesus  should  stay  there.  His  sensibilities  were 
so  shocked  at  the  thought  of  the  Saviour's  maltreatment,  that  he  protested 
against  the  official  act  of  sealing  the  covenant  of  redemption  with  blood.  The 
words  were  characteristic :  **  This  shall  not  be  unto  Thee "  (Matt.  xvi.  22). 
Now  let  it  be  remembered  that  for  nobody  is  there  any  hope  of  standing  firm 
under  stress  of  opposition,  if  his  piety  has  been  nurtured  only  in  tender  hours 
of  emotional  enjoyment.  Spiritual  impulses  will  be  dangerously  irregular  and 
intermittent  unless  they  have  the  help  of  steady  purpose  underneath.  Carpenters 
never  cut  ships'  knees  from  tropical  palms.  The  grand  doctrines  of  the  cross 
must  be  wrought  into  the  very  fibre  of  one's  soul,  as  the  granite  soil  and  the 
winter  tempests  of  the  mountains  are  wrought  into  the  gnarls  of  the  oak  which  the 
shipwright  loves.  That  is  to  say.  Christian  character  is  reared  out  of  a  determinate 
wrestle  with  sin.  IV.  Finally,  i.bt  us  inquire  concerning  the  admonition  which 
m  guoaE8TKi>  BY  THIS  BEHAViouB  OF  Peteb.    1.  How  cau  this  sin  be  repeated  in  ooz 


•28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  nf. 

time  ?  We  follow  Jesus  afar  off  when  we  refuse  to  defend  the  doctrines  of  redemp- 
tion before  unbelievers  who  scoff  at  a  blood  atonement — when  we  allow  the  rules  and 
institutions  of  the  Christian  Church  to  be  derided  or  belittled  in  our  hearing— whe» 
we  neglect  the  ordinances  of  God's  house  and  refuse  the  fixed  practice  of  family 
devotion — when  we  strain  Christian  liberty  to  see  how  much  of  indulgence  in  world- 
liness  an  unattacked  church-membership  will  bear.  There  is  no  difficulty  whatever 
in  modern  experience  in  the  way  of  repeating  Peter's  wrong.  2.  It  is  a  bette* 
question  to  ask,  How  can  this  sin  of  following  Christ  afar  off  be  avoided  in  our 
time  ?  John,  and  not  Peter,  is  our  pattern.  The  way  to  escape  the  taunts  of  maid- 
servants in  the  hall  is  to  go  right  up  the  steps  into  the  presence  of  Jesus.  It  touches 
us  to  the  heart  to  read  the  words  which  show  how  well  Simon  understood  all  his 
cowardice  and  folly  long  years  afterwards  (1  Pet.  v.  6-10).    (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  55.  All  the  eotmcil  sought  for  witness  agralnst  Jesus. — Tfie  Council:-' 
Jesus  before  the  Jewish  Council: — The  world,  in  its  best  moods,  exalts  justice; 
and,  in  its  worst  moods,  defeats  it.  Everything  depends  on  the  mood  for  the  time 
being.  Multitudes  on  the  first  day  of  Holy  Week  strewed  the  way  with  their 
clothes  for  their  king  to  ride  over ;  it  was  their  mood.  Only  five  days  later  a  mob, 
bearing  lanterns  and  torches,  sought  Him  as  if  He  were  a  thief,  and  led  Him  a 
prisoner  over  that  same  highway.  The  mood  had  changed.  Mob  law  prevailed., 
L  The  tribunal.  No  gathering  of  star-chamber  was  ever  more  lawless.  1.  The  law 
decreed  that  no  court  should  sit  before  sunrise ;  this  trial  followed  immediately 
upon  the  midnight  arrest — while  Jerusalem  was  asleep.  2.  The  law  required  that 
any  one  accused  should  have  an  advocate ;  here  the  Nazarene  stood  alone,  with 
none  to  question  in  His  behalf.  3.  The  law  demanded  that  witnesses  should  be 
summoned  for  every  prisoner ;  here  no  one  was  called  to  testify.  4.  The  judge 
of  that  court  was  Caiaphas,  who  had  already  declared  the  necessity  of  the  death 
of  Jesus,  in  order  that  the  factions  of  the  people  might  be  harmonized.  5.  Like 
a  travesty  reads  the  record :  "  The  chief  priests  and  all  the  council  sought  for 
witness  against  Jesus  to  put  Him  to  death. "  Their  aim  was  to  establish  guilt,  not 
to  find  justice.  6.  It  was  the  law  that  no  sentences  of  death  should  be  passed 
upon  the  same  day  as  the  trial ;  yet,  in  spite  of  their  subterfuge,  declaring  the 
sentence  of  death  just  after  sunrise,  it  was  on  the  same  day,  since  the  Jewish  day 
began  at  evening.  II.  The  indictment.  Full  of  flaws.  Hopelessly  confused. 
Even  the  testimony  of  bribed  witnesses  was  too  inconsistent  to  be  of  any  use. 
The  only  seeming  ground  for  a  charge  was  a  distortion  of  a  saying  in  His  earlier 
ministry  concerning  the  destruction  of  the  temple  which  He  called  His  body,  but 
which  they  declared  was  the  pride  of  Jerusalem  ;  but  even  this  was  no  crime,  as 
oven  His  judges  knew.  Their  case  had  failed.  Their  miserable  charges  were  not 
sustained.  UI.  The  prisoner.  The  one  sinless  Person  among  men.  No  enemy 
has  ever  found  a  flaw  in  His  pure  character.  No  charge,  even  of  haste  or 
imprudence,  has  ever  been  preferred.  By  His  greatness  and  goodness,  He  throws 
all  other  human  attainments  into  obscurity.  1.  The  best  character  is  no  protection 
against  human  hatred.  The  higher  the  character  the  more  isolated  it  stands. 
The  treatment  accorded  the  Master  will  be  meted  out  to  His  disciples.  Persecu- 
tion for  righteousness'  sake  is  a  natural  outcome  of  being  righteous.  2.  The  best 
character  does  not  always  command  friendship  in  the  time  of  trial.  It  is  not  an 
infallible  mark  of  piety  to  be  always  surrounded  with  friends.  IV.  The  sentence. 
Death,  that  cry  of  assassins ;  death,  cold,  and  cruel,  blanching  in  a  moment  the 
ruddiest  face ;  death,  the  breaking  down  of  human  life ;  death,  the  guardian  of 
the  cross ;  this  was  the  word  they  hissed  out — "  He  is  guilty  of  death."  To  beckon 
such  a  death  the  laws  of  Moses  and  of  the  Bomans  were  torn  to  shreds ;  mockery 
clothed  itself  in  ermine ;  Pilate  washed  his  guilty  hands ;  and  priests  and  rabble 
shouted  themselves  hoarse.  {David  O.  Hears.)  The  Sanhedrin : — The  Council 
of  the  Jews,  commonly  called  the  Sanhedrin,  was  composed  of  seventy-one 
persons.  It  consisted  of  three  Courts  or  Houses, — ^the  Sopherim,  or  Teachers  of 
the  Law,  the  College  of  the  High  Priest,  and  the  house  of  the  Elders.  The 
president,  or  head  of  the  Council,  bore  the  title  of  Nasi,  and  was  not  necessarily 
the  High  Priest.  In  Numbers  xL  16,  we  read  that  God  commanded  Moses  to  call 
together  seventy  of  the  Elders  of  Israel,  and  to  put  his  spirit  upon  them.  The 
Council  was  composed  in  like  manner  of  seventy,  to  represent  these  Elders,  chosen 
and  ordained  by  Moses,  and  the  seventy-first,  the  president,  represented  Moses ; 
bvt  as  the  Council  was  summoned  by  Moses,  and  not  by  Aaron,  the  High  Priest 
was  not  necessarily  the  head  of  it.    This  president,  or  Nasi,  was  Also  called  th« 


out,  SIT.]  8T,  MARK  $3$ 

Prinoe  of  Israel,  and  mast  be  of  the  house  of  David,  and  the  office  beeame  for 
many  generations  an  inheritance  of  the  family  of  Hillel,  which  descended  from 
David.  The  First,  or  Upper  House,  was  the  House  of  the  Lawyers,  and  it  had  ori- 
ginally  supreme  control  of  life  and  death.  But  when  the  Romans  conquered  Palestine, 
and  converted  Judea  into  a  Roman  Province,  then  this  power  was  taken  from  them, 
and  all  those  cases  which  had  been  tried  by  the  Court  of  the  Lawyers  were  heard 
by  the  Eoman  Preetor.  This  House  accordingly  was  practically  dissolved ;  it  had 
nothing  to  do,  the  sceptre  was  taken  from  it,  and  its  lawgiver  was  divested  of  all 
power.  The  Second  House  was  that  of  the  Chief  Priests  ;  at  the  head  of  it  sat  the 
High  Priest,  and  it  was  made  up  of  the  heads  of  the  twenty-four  priestly  families 
and  of  the  heads  of  the  departments  connected  with  the  ministry  in  the  Temple. 
The  members  all  bore  the  title  of"  Chief  Priests"  (apxwpcTc)-  They  decided  in  all 
spiritual  matters,  as  to  faith  and  heresy.  This  House  remained  in  full  activity 
after  the  practical  abrogation  of  the  First,  and  thus  the  High  Priest  became  the 
virtual  head  of  the  Jewish  Council.  The  Third  House  was  that  of  the  Elders,  and 
was  made  up  of  representatives  of  the  great  Jewish  families  and  of  Babbis  of 
note.  They  went  by  the  name  of  the  "  Elders,*'  and  continued  to  sit  along  with 
the  Second  House.    {S.  Baring  Gould,  M.A.) 

Ver.  61,  62.  But  He  held  HIb  peace. — Eloquent  silence: — ^There  is  »  silence  which 
is  often  more  eloquent  than  speech,  means  more  than  any  words,  and  speaks  tea 
times  more  powerfully  to  the  heart.  Such,  for  example,  is  the  silence  when  the 
heart  is  too  full  for  utterance,  and  the  organs  of  speech  are  choked  by  the  whelming 
tide  of  emotion.  The  sight  of  a  great  man  so  shaken,  and  quivering  with  feeling, 
that  the  tongue  can  give  no  voice  to  what  the  heart  feels,  is  of  all  human  rhetoric 
the  most  potent.  Such,  also,  is  the  silence  of  a  wise  man  challenged  to  speak  by 
those  whom  he  feels  unworthy  of  his  words.  The  man  who  can  stand  and  listen 
to  the  language  of  stolid  ignorance,  venomous  bigotry,  and  personal  insult, 
addressed  to  hixn  in  an  offensive  spirit,  and  offers  no  reply,  exerts  a  far  greater 
power  upon  the  minds  of  his  assailants,  than  he  could  by  words  however  forceful. 
His  silence  reflects  a  moral  majesty,  before  which  the  heart  of  his  assailants  will 
scarcely  fail  to  cower.  Such  was  tiie  silence  which  Christ  now  maintained  in  this 
hall.    {HomilisU) 

Ters.  62-65.  And  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man. — The  value  of  Chri$t*§  oath 
before  Pilate : — I  propose  to  inquire  what  the  value  of  this  oath  is ;  what  value  we 
ought  to  attach  to  it  as  evidence  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah ;  and  I  suppose  that 
this  is  to  be  determined  on  the  same  basis  and  grounds  on  which  we  determine 
the  value  of  evidence  in  other  cases.  How  is  that?  1.  By  those  extraneous 
circumstances  which  are  corroborative  or  otherwise,  of  that  which  is  testified  to. 
(1)  Jesus  was  the  only  being  who  ever  appeared  on  this  earth  corresponding  to  the 
types  of  the  ritualistic  part  of  the  Old  Testament.  (2)  He  was  the  only  being  who 
ever  appeared,  in  whom  the  prophecies  would  be  fulfilled  in  their  double  aspect. 
A  King,  a  Conqueror,  a  Deliverer,  a  Great  One ;  and  yet  suffering,  despised,  and 
rejected  of  men,  &c.  The  Jews  looked  only  at  one  aspect  of  these  prophecies ; 
and  the  hiJf-truUi  misled  them.  (3)  Our  Lord's  teaching  was  infinitely  loftier  than 
can  be  accounted  for  on  any  other  supposition.  (4)  His  miracles  all  pointed  to  Him 
as  a  Saviour ;  all  of  them  beneficent,  and  all  of  them  such,  in  their  various 
characteristics,  as  to  indicate  His  power  over  the  forces  of  nature,  over  the  spiritual 
world,  and  over  the  dead.  All  these  things  conspire  to  sustain  the  testimony 
which  Jesus  bore  to  Himself  as  the  Christ,  before  the  High  Priest  under  oath.  2. 
The  value  of  an  oath  may  be  affected  by  the  circumstances  in  which  it  is  given. 
(1)  There  was  nothing,  absolutely  nothing,  external  to  Himself,  that  could  have 
originated  in  Christ  the  idea  that  He  was  the  Messiah,  i.  His  home,  an  obscure 
and  distant  place,  ii.  His  want  of  education,  iii.  His  poverty,  iv.  His  want  of 
authority.  How  came  He,  then,  with  the  idea  that  He  was  greater  than  Solomon, 
that  He  was  Lord  of  the  Sabbath ;  that  He  was  the  Light  of  the  world ;  that  He 
was  the  Deliverer  that  was  to  come — how  came  He  by  it?  That  a  single 
individual,  in  these  circumstances,  should  have  had  that  idea,  seems  to  me  to 
indicate  that  He  had  a  right  to  it.  (2)  Moreover,  you  will  observe,  when  He  took 
this  oath,  He  stood  wholly  alone.  What  courage,  then,  must  have  been  needed 
to  maintain,  in  the  face  of  death,  that  He  was  the  Messiah.  S.  The  value  of  ao 
oath,  or  of  testimony  given  in  such  circumstances,  is  determined  by  the  com- 
petenqy   of  the  witness.     Was  the  witness  of    sound  mind,  and  had  he  the 


530  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  nr. 

means  of  knowing  that  to  which  He  testified  ?  Need  I  ask  this  question 
regarding  Jesus?  Was  He  beside  Himself?  Was  He  carried  away  by  fanati- 
cism ?  Was  there  anything  to  awaken  snch  fanaticism  in  that  solitary  man 
standing  thus  wholly  alone,  forsaken  by  His  friends,  with  absolutely  nothing 
to  sustain  Him  in  the  very  face  of  death  but  His  own  consciousness  of  the 
great  fact  that  He  was  the  Messiah  ?  Nothing  I  4.  The  moral  character  of  the 
witness.  And  here  again,  need  I  say  anything  in  regard  to  the  moral  character  of 
Jesus  ?  No  sin  was  ever  imputed  to  Him  ;  He  claimed  to  be  without  sin ;  in  the 
Lord's  Prayer  He  taught  others  to  confess  sin,  but  He  never  confessed  sin  Himself. 
The  Bible  claims  this  for  Him  :  "  Who  was,"  says  Peter,  "  without  sin  " — absolutely. 
And  was  such  a  person  as  that,  with  such  a  character  as  that,  one  who  would  stand 
before  the  highest  tribunal  of  His  nation  and,  when  adjured  by  the  living  God,  perjure 
Himself  ?  Taking  these  things  together,  it  seems  to  me  that  no  oath  was  ever 
uttered  under  circumstances  to  give  it  greater  validity  and  greater  significance,  and 
that  no  oath  can  be  thus  uttered — never !  (Mark  Hopkins^  D.D.)  Rejectionof  evidence 
concerning  Christ : — How  was  our  Lord's  testimony  received  ?  You  will  notice,  here, 
the  position  which  the  High  Priest  assumed,  and  it  is  a  position  which  very  many 
men  assume  in  regard  to  the  evidence  of  Christianity.  He  asked  the  question,  "Art 
thou  the  Christ  ?  "  Was  he  prepared  to  accept  evidence  ?  Let  us  see.  Suppose 
our  Lord  had  said  "No"?  Then  He  would  have  been  an  impostor,  and  would 
have  been  led  off  self -condemned.  But  now,  when  He  said  "  I  am,"  was  there  the  least 
tendency  in  the  mind  of  the  High  Priest  to  accept  the  testimony  f  No ;  but  instead  of 
that,  he  condemned  Him  for  blasphemy  I  It  was  as  Christ  had  said  in  regard  to 
that  generation :  "  We  have  piped, "  &e.  Whatever  He  might  do,  and  whatever 
He  might  say,  there  was  that  determined  position  of  opposition  against  Him, 
which  precluded  any  evidence  from  having  an  effect.  And  that  is  the  case  with 
many  men  to-day  :  there  is  this  position  of  opposition  which  precludes  any  fair 
consideration  of  evidence;  and  the  oath  of  Christ  to  His  Messiahship,  which 
stands  to-day  such  an  oath  as  would  convince  any  man  of  anything  except  that, 
does  not  weigh  with  them.  (Ibid.)  Danger  of  being  attracted  by  the  world's 
ways: — He  who  becomes  a  friend  to  the  world's  ways  becomes  an  enemy  to 
Christ's.  When  you  begin  to  love  them,  you  begin  to  dislike  religion.  When 
you  begin  to  worship  money  you  cease  to  worship  God.  When  you  begin  to 
love  the  house  of  pleasure  you  begin  to  dislike  the  house  of  prater.  When  you 
begin  to  love  bad  books  you  begin  to  lose  your  relish  for  the  Bible.  When  you 
seek  irreligious  associates  you  draw  off  steadily  from  intercourse  with  the  people 
of  God.  When  the  greedy  lust  of  the  world  has  eaten  out  a  Christian  conscience 
— when  it  has  deadened  the  spiritual  sense— when  it  has  dry-rotted  the  whole 
heart — when  it  has  banished  Christ  and  possessed  the  soul's  affection — then  the 
man  is  ready  to  desert  I  Nay,  he  has  deserted  1  What  is  any  man  worth  to  the 
Church,  or  to  God,  when  his  heart  is  the  property  of  Satan?  He  may  linger 
within  the  camp  and  even  wear  the  uniform  of  a  church  member.  But  when 
the  bugle  calls  to  action  he  is  not  in  the  ranks !  When  a  march  of  reform  is 
ordered  or  a  strife  for  God's  law  is  waged,  he  is  *'  missing."    (Cuyler,) 

Ver.  66.  And  as  Peter  was  teneath  In  the  palace.— Tfc*  Eigh  Priesfi  palace  :^ 
The  palace  of  the  High  Priest  was  in  all  probability  built  much  in  the  Eoman  style. 
There  was  what  was  called  the  vestibuluniy  an  entrance  adorned  with  pillars ;  in 
this  was  the  ostium,  or  entrance  hall,  closed  with  doors.  On  one  side  lived  the 
porter.  This  hall  gave  admission  to  the  atrium,  called  in  a  Greek  house  the  aule^ 
a  square  or  oblong  apartment,  open  in  the  middle  to  the  sky,  with,  in  Boman 
houses,  a  small  water-tank  in  the  middle,  and  beside  it  the  image  of  the  tutelary 
god  and  a  small  altar  on  which  incense  was  burnt.  At  the  further  end  of  this 
great  hall  was  a  large  and  handsome  room,  opening  to  it  by  steps,  called  the 
tablinum.  It  was  the  grand  reception-room,  and  was  richly  adorned.  In  the 
tablinum,  which  was  sometimes  square,  sometimes  semi-circular,  the  court  was 
held  in  the  house  of  Caiaphas.  Without,  below  the  marble  steps  in  the  atrium, 
were  the  servants  of  the  house.  There  was  no  image  of  a  god  there,  but  there  was 
a  brazier  in  the  place  of  the  altar  of  incense.  That  there  was  an  impluvium  or 
tank  is  likely  enough  ;  as  so  much  importance  was  ascribed  to  washings,  and  water 
had  been  conveyed  throughout  Jerusalem  by  means  of  subterranean  canals  and 
aqueducts.  Out  of  the  tablinum  sometimes  a  door  opened  into  a  small  bedroom, 
which  was  without  a  window.  It  was  in  this  little  room  that  the  false  witnesses 
were  kept  concealed  till  summoned  to  appear.    They  were  perfectly  in  the  dark. 


OHAP.  xnr.]  8T.  MARK,  $31 

and  could  not  be  seen,  whereas  Christ  was  visible  distinctly  becanse  of  the  torcbei 
held,  as  Jewish  law  required,  before  Him  to  make  His  face  clearly  distinguishable. 
In  the  tablinum  were  also  seats  or  benches,  of  marble,  of  alabaster,  or  costly  woods. 
On  these  benches  sat  the  council.  WhDst  the  trial  was  going  on  in  the  tablinum^ 
another  trial  was  going  on  in  the  atrium,  a  step  or  two  below  the  tablinum.  The 
Master  was  tried  in  the  upper  court,  and  found  guilty,  though  innocent.  The 
disciple  was  tried  in  the  lower  court,  and  found  guilty  by  his  own  conscience,  or 
rather,  let  me  say,  by  that  Master  who  was  receiving  sentence  a  few  steps  above 
him.  Both  were  irradiated  by  the  red  Ught  of  fire  in  the  midst  of  the  prevailing 
darkness.  Probably  the  only  lights  then  burning  were  the  fire  of  charcoal  in  the 
brazier  on  the  edge  of  the  water-tank,  and  the  torches  held  aloft  by  the  Serjeants 
of  the  guard  before  Jesus.  Very  generally,  the  tablinum  opened  into  a  garden  be- 
hind, so  that  those  in  the  atrium  or  hall  looked  through  it  into  the  garden,  which 
was  surrounded  by  a  colonnade.  When  this  was  the  case,  the  seats  were  between 
the  steps  from  the  atrium  and  the  garden  door,  and  the  little  bedroom  door  was 
opposite  the  seats.  Now,  perhaps,  you  can  picture  the  scene.  In  the  foreground 
are  the  servants  and  soldiers  moving  about  the  hall,  women  bringing  bundles  of 
thorn,  or  shovels  of  charcoal  to  the  fire  in  the  brazier.  Beyond,  raised  like  a  low 
stage  of  a  theatre,  is  the  tablinum,  with  the  judges  seated  on  the  right.  On  the 
left,  peering  out  of  the  dark  door,  are  the  evil  faces  of  the  hired  spies  and  witnesses. 
A  little  forward,  on  a  small  raised  platform,  is  Christ,  with  bound  hands,  and  on 
either  side  stands  an  officer  holding  a  flaring  torch.  Behind,  like  the  scene  in  a 
theatre,  is  the  garden,  with  the  setting  moon  casting  long  shadows  from  the  black 
cypresses  over  the  gravel,  and  high  aloft  in  the  sky  twinkles  one  star.  (S.  Baring 
Gould,  M.A.) 

Ver.  67.  Peter  warming  himself. — Peter  at  the  fire: — 1.  Peter  had  one  reason  for 
being  there — to  see  what  would  be  the  issue  of  Christ's  apprehension,  and  to  while 
away  the  time  :  but  God  had  another  end  in  view.  Had  Peter  favoured  the  re- 
vealed will  of  God,  he  had  not  been  there  with  no  business  but  to  sit  down  and 
warm  himself.  But  by  the  secret  will  and  providence  of  God,  Peter  must  be  here, 
not  only  to  accomplish  the  word  of  Christ,  but  for  another  special  purpose.  For 
the  good  of  the  Church,  he  is  made  an  eye-witness  of  all  Christ's  sufferings  in  the 
house  of  the  High  Priest.  Never  did  any  evil  befall  any  of  God's  servants,  but  by 
God's  overruling  power  was  turned  to  some  good  to  themselves  and  others.  2. 
Peter  was  cold,  and  it  was  not  unlawful  to  warm  himself ;  but  better  he  had  been 
cold  and  comfortless  alone  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  than  to  have  sat  within 
warming  himself  in  such  company.  Peter  was  now  colder  by  the  warm  fire,  than 
he  was  without  in  the  cold  air ;  his  heart  grew  cold,  and  his  faith  and  zeal.  1.  Let 
OS  resolve  that  that  is  a  cold  and  comfortless  place  (though  the  fire  be  never  so 
great)  where  Christ  is  bound,  where  Christ  cannot  be  professed,  where  Christ  is 
scorned,  and  the  disciples  of  Christ  are  set  upon  as  Peter  was  here.  2.  Let  us 
labour,  how  cold  soever  the  weather  be  without,  to  keep  the  heart  warm  in  grace ; 
it  had  been  better  for  Peter  to  have  sat  cold  without  and  warm  within,  than  for 
outward  warmth  to  freeze  and  starve  inwardly.  The  season  is  generally  cold — 
heat  of  zeal  counted  madness,  godliness  disguised,  <fec. ;  let  us  labour  in  this  general 
coldness  to  keep  our  heat.  3.  When  thou  sittest  at  a  warm  fire,  beware  of 
temptation.  Peter,  when  he  followed  Christ,  suffering  cold  and  want,  was  strong 
and  zealous ;  but  now  he  comes  to  the  warm  fire,  he  is  quite  overthrown.  The 
warm  fire  of  prosperity  and  outward  peace  has  overthrown  many,  who  in  their 
wants  and  trouble  stood  fast  in  grace.  If  thou  hast  not  prosperity  and  wealth,  con- 
sole thyself  with  the  thought  that  thou  art  free  from  the  snare  which  has  caused 
others  to  fall.  And  if  thou  art  in  affliction,  be  not  too  much  cast  down ;  for  in 
this  estate  thou  art  more  secure  than  in  its  opposite.  Prosperity  is  not  always  a 
sign  of  God's  favour,  but  only  when  it  provokes  to  humility  and  duty.  Too  much 
rankness  hurts  the  com,  and  too  much  fruit  breaks  the  trees.  {Dr.  Thomas 
Taylor),  Weak  tempters  can  foil  stout  men : — Peter's  tempter  is  a  woman,  a  silly 
maid,  ft  very  weak  party.  1.  To  show  him  his  frailty.  Peter  thought  no  man 
could  cast  him  down,  when  lo  1  a  woman  does.  2.  To  humble  his  pride.  How 
easily  God  overthrows  the  pride  of  man  I  He  need  not  come  in  His  own  person ; 
He  need  not  bring  a  champion  or  man  of  war  against  him ;  a  mere  woman  shall  be 
tempter  too  strong  for  as  presumptuous  a  professor  as  Peter.  The  Lord,  who 
resists  all  sinners,  is  said  often  to  "  resist  the  proud,"  t.«.,  after  a  special  and 
severe  manner,  because  they  seek  to  draw  God's  glory  upon  themselves.    Pharaoh. 


689  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  bt. 

Jezebel.  Herod.  Historians  write  of  a  city  in  France  that  \va8  depopulated  and 
wasted,  and  the  inhabitants  driven  away,  by  frogs.  It  is  reported  also,  that  »town 
in  Thessalonica  was  rooted  up  and  overthrown  by  moles.  And  we  read  of  Pope 
Adrian  being  choked  with  a  fly.  Thus  the  Lord  plays,  as  it  were,  with  Hia 
enemies,  scorning  to  come  Himself  into  the  field  against  them,  but  sending  the 
meanest  of  His  creatures  to  cast  them  down.  Let  this  humble  us  under  the  mighty 
hand  of  God;  presume  of  nothing  in  ourselves,  be  proud  of  nothing,  lest  we  know 
by  woeful  experience  that  a  thing  of  nothing  is  strong  enough  to  overthrow  us.  If 
our  pride  shall  resist  God,  God's  weakness  shall  resist  us,  and  we  shall  know  to 
our  cost  that  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  man.  Never  was  pride  ol 
heart  unrevenged  with  falls,  sin,  and  shame.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  68,72.  But  lie  AenieA.-— The  foulness  of  Peter's  sin:—l.  He  denies  flatly  and 
peremptorily.  2.  He  gives  a  double  denial ;  implying  more  resolution.  And  both 
his  denials  are  distinct  and  manifest  lies.  3.  He  denies  Christ  before  a  multitude. 
(1)  Bad  enough  to  have  denied  Christ  before  one  witness.  How  much  worse  before 
so  many  ?  (2)  He  who  denies  Christ  before  any  man,  shall  be  denied  by  Him  before 
the  Father.  What  a  great  sin  to  deny  Him  before  all  men !  (3)  In  so  great  a 
company  were  a  number  of  wicked  men,  and  now  Peter  exposes  the  name  ol 
Christ  to  all  their  scorn  and  opprobrium.  He  animates  and  hardens  them,  and 
takes  part  with  them  in  the  rejection  of  Christ.  (4)  There  were  also  some  weak  ones 
and  well-wishes  to  Christ.  Peter's  action  weakens  and  scandalizes  these,  and  per- 
haps prevents  some  of  them  coming  forward  in  defence  of  the  Lord.  [Dr.  Thomas 
Taylor.)  It  is  hard  to  confess  Christ  in  danger : — 1.  Because  of  Satan's  malice. 
He  will  do  all  in  his  power  to  keep  men  from  confessing  Christ  openly,  and  to 
make  them  deny  Him.  2.  The  strength  of  our  natural  corruption  makes  it  difficult 
to  resist  Satan's  attacks.  3.  Weakness  of  faith  and  graces.  (1)  Think  it  not  an 
easy  thing  to  confess  Christ  in  trial,  nor  a  thing  to  be  performed  by  our  own  power ; 
but  pray  for  the  "Spirit  of  strength."  (2)  Pray  for  wisdom  when  and  how  to 
confess.  (3)  Pray  for  faith.  {Ibid.)  The  porch  of  sin : — Many  step  out  of  the 
midst  of  sin,  but  hang  about  the  porch.  They  would  not  be  outrageous  sinners, 
but  retain  a  snatch  or  taste ;  not  open  adulterers,  but  adulterous  eyes,  thoughts, 
and  speeches ;  not  noted  drunkards,  but  company-keepers  and  bibbers ;  not  blas- 
phemous swearers  by  wounds  and  bloods,  but  by  faith,  troth,  God,  &c.  All  this  is 
to  remain  in  the  porch  of  sin.  (Ibid.)  Difficult  to  quit  bad  company : — In  that 
Peter  sticks  in  the  porch,  and  comes  back  among  those  whom  he  had  forsaken, 
learn  how  difficult  it  is  for  a  man  who  has  been  long  used  to  bad  company  and 
courses,  to  be  brought  to  leave  it  altogether.  He  will  either  look  back,  or  else  tarry 
in  the  porch.  Sin  and  sinners  are  like  bird-lime.  The  more  Peter  strives  to  get 
out,  the  more  he  finds  himself  limed  and  entangled.  (Ibid.)  Why  God  did  not 
prevent  Peter's  fall : — 1.  He  would  give  us  and  the  whole  Church  an  example  of  in- 
firmity and  weakness,  by  the  fall  of  such  a  man.  2.  The  strongest  must  learn  fear 
and  watchfulness,  and  whUe  they  stand  take  heed  lest  they  fall,  lest  the  enemy 
suddenly  overcome  them  as  he  did  Peter.  3.  To  crush  men's  presumption,  and 
teach  them  to  attribute  more  to  the  word  of  Christ  than  their  own  strength.  Had 
Peter  done  this,  he  had  not  so  shamefully  fallen.  4.  To  take  away  all  excuse  for 
men  in  after  ages  setting  np  Peter  as  an  idol.  (Ibid.)  To  avoid  sin,  avoid 
occasions : — He  that  would  avoid  sin  must  carefully  avoid  occasions,  which  are  the 
stronger  because  of  our  own  natural  inclination  to  evil.  He  that  would  not  be 
burnt  must  not  touch  fire,  or  go  upon  the  coals.  Beware  of  evil  company.  Con- 
sider thine  own  weakness,  and  the  power  of  evil  to  seduce.  (Ibid.)  To  avoid 
siUf  keep  close  to  Qod's  Word : — He  that  would  avoid  occasion  of  sin,  must  hold  Mm- 
self  to  God's  commandment,  and  within  the  limits  of  his  own  calling.  If  Peter  had 
done  this,  he  had  not  fallen  so  foully.  Christ  having  expressed  His  will  and 
pleasure,  he  should  not  have  so  much  as  deliberated  upon  it,  much  less  resolved 
against  it.  But  he  forgets  the  word  and  commandment  of  Christ,  and  so  falls  into 
sin.  (Ibid.)  How  we  are  to  show  love  to  a  friend : — Here  is  a  notable  rule  to  be 
observed  in  friendships.  Examine  the  love  thou  showest  to  thy  friend,  by  the  love 
of  God.  1.  Take  heed  thy  love  be  subordinate  to  the  love  of  God ;  so  that,  if 
thou  canst  not  please  both,  thou  please  not  thy  friend  at  the  cost  of  God's  dis- 
pleasure (Matt.  X.  87).  Peter  should  first  have  loved  Christ  as  his  Lord,  and  then 
as  his  friend.  Had  he  so  done,  he  would  have  kept  His  word.  2.  Love  the  Word 
better  than  ihj  friend.  Peter  should  have  stuck  to  Christ's  road,  instead  of  His 
person.    8.  See  thy  love  to  thy  friend  be  not  preposterous,  that  thy  affection  de* 


flBAP.  ST.]  8T.  MARK,  633 

fltroy  liim  not.  The  subtlety  of  Satan  creeps  into  our  friendships  and  fellowships, 
BO  that  by  onr  improvidence,  instead  of  helping,  we  hurt  them  more  than  their 
enemies  could  do.  We  must  pray  for  wisdom  and  judgment,  that  neither  willingly 
nor  unawares  we  either  council  or  lead  them  into  any  sin,  or  uphold  any  sin  in  them, 
or  hinder  in  them  any  good.  (Ibid.)  The  corrupting  influence  of  had  company  : — 
See  how  soon  even  God's  children  are  corrupted  with  wicked  company.  Even  Peter,  a 
great  and  forward  disciple  of  Christ,  full  of  zeal  and  courage,  who  will  pray,  profess, 
and  immediately  before  draw  the  sword  in  Christ's  quarrel,  now  can  deny  Him  among 
persecutors.    Great  is  the  force  of  wicked  company  to  pervert  even  a  godly  mind. 

1.  There  is  a  proueness  in  godly  men  to  be  withdrawn  by  evil  company.  As  the 
body  is  infected  by  pestilential  air,  so  the  mind  by  the  contagion  of  bad  company. 

2.  There  is  a  bewitching  force  in  evil  company  to  draw  even  a  good  mind  beyond 
his  own  purpose  and  resolution.  (Ibid.)  Reasons  for  avoiding  evil  company  : — 
1.  There  cannot  be  true  fellowship  with  God  and  His  enemies  too.  2.  Every  man's 
company  tells  what  he  is.  Eavens  flock  together  by  companies ;  and  so  do  doves. 
A  good  man  will  not  willingly  stand  in  the  way  of  sinners.  3.  The  practice 
of  wicked  men  should  make  good  men  shun  their  company;  for  wherein 
are  their  sports  and  delights,  but  in  things  which  displease  God  and  grieve  His 
Spirit,  and  the  spirits  of  all  who  love  God  and  His  glory?  What  can  a  good 
man  see  in  such  company,  but  must  either  infect  him,  or  at  least  offend  him 
in  almost  everything  ?  [Ibid.)  Godly  company  the  best : — It  seems  very  sweet 
to  sit  warm  among  wicked  men,  to  eat  and  drink  and  be  jovial  with  them ;  but 
there  is  a  bitter  sauce  for  such  meats.  On  the  contrary,  in  company  of  godly 
men  thou  art  under  the  shadow  of  God's  mercy  for  their  sakes.  God  loves 
His  children  and  their  friends.  For  Lot's  sake  His  family  was  saved.  (Ibid.) 
The  fall  of  Peter ;— A  great  study  in  human  nature  is  here  presented.  I.  The 
ORIGIN  OF  Peter's  fall.  Do  not  overlook — 1.  The  quarrel  in  Peter's  heart  with 
Christ's  methods.  Christ's  plan  was  to  conquer  by  suffering  ;  Peter's  to  conquer  by 
resisting.  This  inward  divergence  produced  the  outward  separation.  Beware  of 
quarrelhng  with  God's  dealings,  or  methods,  or  demands ;  the  most  common  of  all 
sources  of  backsliding.  2.  Peter's  pride  helped  his  fall.  II.  The  process  of 
Peter's  fall.  1.  Following  Christ  "afar  off"  (Luke  xxii.  54)— half-heartedly, 
not  close,  not  to  testify  to  the  Sanhedrin  for  Him,  but  simply  to  •'  see  the  end  '" 
(Matt.  xxvi.  68).  Close  to  Christ  in  the  path  of  duty  you  are  kept  wann ;  sluggish. 
and  distant,  the  heart  chills  and  grows  feeble.      2.  He  entered  into  temptation. 

3.  A  subtle  snare  is  laid  for  him.  If  the  three  challenges  had  taken  place  in  a 
reversed  order,  probably  Peter  would  not  have  fallen  by  them.  Had  the  men 
come  first,  his  manhood  might  have  risen  to  meet  the  challenge.  But  a  housemaid 
does  not  put  him  on  his  mettle.  Thrown  off  his  guard,  he  tells  his  first  lie,  and  it 
has  afterwards  to  be  backed  up  by  more  falsehoods  and  deadlier  denials,  putting  a 
gulf  between  himself  and  Christ  which,  but  for  Christ's  grace,  would  have  been 
eternal.  III.  The  commonness  of  similar  transgression.  Not  a  question  of  who 
is  guilty,  but  who  is  guiltless  of  this  fault.  All  hiding  of  the  face  from  Christ,  all 
secrecy  of  fear,  which  leads  people  to  assume  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  Christ,  all 
leaving  Him  unowned  and  undefended,  is  a  sin  identical  in  nature  with  Peter's. 
Each  should  ask,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  {R.  Glover.)  St.  Peter's  fall  .-—Let  us  take 
warning  from  this — 1.  Not  to  rely  on  our  own  strength  for  steadfastness  in  the 
moment  of  trial,  but  to  trust  only  in  Divine  grace.  2.  Not  to  suppose  our  own 
power  of  resistance  to  temptation  is  greater  than  that  of  others.  Rather,  when  we 
see  another  sin,  let  us  in  him  see  our  own  selves,  and  pray  God  for  him  as  we 
would  for  ourselves.  When  we  see  another  steadfast  in  the  faith,  let  us  pray  that 
he  may  preserve  that  gift  which  he  has  unto  the  end.  8.  To  heed  every  warning 
that  is  mercifully  given  us.  When  the  cock  crew  for  the  first  time,  it  seems 
wonderful  that  St.  Peter  was  not  reminded  of  Christ's  prediction,  nor  restrained 
from  subsequent  denials.  But  sin  deafens  the  heart  to  every  voice,  and  blinds  the 
eye  to  all  signs.  {W.  Denton,  M. A.)  Fall  and  restoration  :^Theve  Ate  MSS., 
you  know,  called  palimpsests,  i.e.,  written  upon  twice.  The  original  inscriptio:i 
upon  them,  which  was  fair,  and  full  of  Divine  wisdom,  has  been  defaced,  and  in 
its  place  may  now  be  seen  letters  and  words  and  sentences  in  contrast  to  what  wiis 
described  before.  So  with  the  characters  of  men — even  good  men.  Over  their 
better  nature  you  may  see  scratched  in  ugly  scrawls  very  obvious  imperfections  an- 5 
frailties.  But,  thank  God,  often  do  we  witness,  after  the  process  of  defacement,  a 
process  of  restoration.  Divine  grace,  through  discipline  of  various  descriptions, 
rubs  out  the  evil  and  brings  back  the  good,  and  causes  the  soul  at  last  to  reveal 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOH.  [chap.  xn. 

again  most  distinctly  what  had  only  been  dimmed  and  not  destroyed;  even  as  thert 
has  been  discovered  a  method  by  which  Buch  ancient  writings  can  be  made  to 
exhibit  once  more  what  seemed — but  only  seemed — for  ever  spoiled.  {Dr.  Stotighton.) 
Danger  of  one  false  step : — We  see  in  Peter's  fall  the  danger  of  a  first  false  step.  As 
he  entered  the  house  he  denied  his  discipleship  to  the  portress ;  he  did  wtong  that 
good  might  come.  He  loved  his  Master ;  he  sought  to  be  with  or  near  Him. ;  he 
desired  to  see  the  end.  What  was  the  harm  of  merely  a  white  lie  to  gain  this  great 
advantage  ?  But  the  white  lie  led  to  black  denial,  and  to  a  false  oath.  When  he 
had  assured  Jesus  that,  though  all  might  deny  Him,  yet  would  not  he,  Peter  had 
supposed  the  case  of  his  being  brought  up  for  trial  before  the  Sanhedrin.  And  it 
is  possible  that  he  would  have  stood  firm  under  such  a  trial,  but  this  temptation 
came  on  him  from  an  unexpected  quarter,  and  when  he  was  unprepared  to  meet  it; 
that  is  why  he  fell.  He  would  have  confessed  his  discipleship  before  the  High 
Priest,  but  he  denied  it  to  the  young  woman  who  kept  the  gate.  From  this  we 
learn  tbat  we  must  be  always  prepared  to  meet  temptation,  and  that  the  most 
treacherous  and  dangerous  of  temptations  come  upon  us  suddenly,  without  giving 
us  time  to  prepare,  and  in  a  way  unexpected.  Peter's  heart  was  sound  from  first 
to  last ;  he  never  wavered  in  his  love.  His  spirit  was  willing,  but  the  flesh  was 
very  weak.  This  makes  the  difference  between  venial  and  wilful  sin.  Wilful  sin  is 
committed  by  deliberate  consent  of  the  will  to  what  is  evil.  The  fall  of  Peter  was 
not  wilful.  Venial  sin  is  the  fault  of  infirmity,  the  fall  through  weakness  against 
the  purpose  of  the  heart.  Such  was  the  fall  of  Peter.  We  see  in  his  repentance 
the  harmfulness  of  venial  sin.  We  are  apt  to  make  light  of  sin  if  it  be  not  wilfuL 
This  sin  of  Peter's  was  not  wilful,  yet  his  heart  was  broken  and  contrite  for  it. 
{S.  Baring  Gould,  M.A.)  Discrepancies  in  the  narrative*  of  the  Evangelist*  may 
he  harmonized : — It  is  well  known  that  there  are  varieties  of  detail  in  the  four 
records  of  St.  Peter's  threefold  denial.  The  discrepancies  have  been  spoken  of  ai 
irreconcilable,  and  attempts  to  shake  the  credibility  and  trustworthiness  of  Holy 
Scripture  have  been  based  upon  this  supposition.  Careful  examination  will  show 
that  "  the  incidents  given  by  the  different  Evangelists  are  completely  in  harmony 
with  the  belief  tbat  there  were  three  denials,  i.e.,  three  acts  of  denial,  of  which  the 
several  writers  have  taken  such  features  as  seemed  to  be  most  significant  for  their 
purpose."  The  multiplicity  of  charges  may  well  be  illustrated  out  of  our  own 
experience.  We  have  witnessed,  no  doubt,  a  scene  in  which  a  crowd  of  people  in  a 
state  of  excitement  are  setting  upon  an  individual  whom  they  believe  to  have  done 
something  of  which  they  disapprove.  No  sooner  has  one  begun  to  accuse  him  of 
it  than  another  comes  up  and  adds  to  the  charge,  another  insists  upon  it  with 
gestures  of  violence,  another  can  prove  it  if  they  will  only  let  him  speak,  and  then 
perhaps  several  cry  out  at  once.  The  bewildered  man  tries  to  exculpate  himself 
from  ^e  Babel  of  charges.  He  says  anything  and  everything  in  the  excitement  of 
the  moment,  and  at  last,  when  matters  become  desperate,  loses  all  control  over  his 
words.  This  is  almost  exactly  what  happened  in  the  last  "  act  of  denial "  in  the 
courtyard  of  the  High  Priest's  palace.  St.  Peter  was  driven  to  bay  by  a  multitude 
of  excited  assailants,  and  perhaps  hardly  knowing,  certainly  not  realizing,  what  he 
said,  he  appealed  to  heaven,  and  called  down  Divine  vengeance  upon  his  head  if 
his  denial  were  untrue,  (if.  M.  Luckocky  D.D.)  Peter  denies  his  Lord: — I. 
The  circumstances  under  which  this  great  guilty  act  was  performed  abx  ExcEEDiKaLT 
DBAMATic.  The  story  shifts  its  phases  like  pictures  in  a  play.  I.  The  scene  is  laid 
in  the  quadrangle  of  the  High  Priest's  house  in  Jerusalem,  whither  the  miscel- 
laneous mob  of  people  had  hurried  Jesus  after  His  apprehension  in  the  garden  of 
Getbsemane.  It  will  be  necessary  for  those  who  desire  to  understand  this 
narrative  to  form  for  themselves  a  conception  of  Peter's  precise  whereabouts  during 
such  a  grand  crisis  of  his  history.  Eastern  dwellings  of  the  better  sort  appear  to 
have  been  buOt  around  a  four-sided  court — an  interior  space  like  a  private  yard 
enclosed — frequently  paved  with  flat  flagging-stone,  and  open  to  the  sky  overhead. 
Into  this  area  a  passage  from  the  street  led  by  an  arched  opening  through  one  side 
of  the  house.  Heavy  folding.doors  guarded  the  entrance,  leaving  a  smaller  wicket- 
gate  near  by  for  the  convenience  of  visitors  who  came  familiarly  or  one  at  a  time. 
Usually  this  was  kept  by  a  porter.  Such,  in  all  likelihood,  was  the  general  fashion 
of  Caiaphas'  palace.  Simon  Peter  was  inside  of  the  wicket  standing  there  in  the 
court-yard.  2.  The  company  into  the  midst  of  which  before  this  Jolm,  the  beloved 
disciple,  had  found  his  way,  and  which  he  does  not  appear  to  have  paused  even  to 
notice  as  he  hurried  through,  was  made  up  of  servants  and  soldiers.  Belated  and 
bewildered  by  their  unwonted  excitements  on  the  night  ^  our  Saviour's  trial,  the; 


(SAP.  zxT.]  8T.  MARK,  63ft 

had  kindled  •  ••  fire  of  coals  "  out  in  the  area.  The  honr  of  this  arraignment  waa 
unusual,  the  air  was  chilly,  and  the  confusion  was  full  of  discomfort.  The  entire 
group  appears  irritable  and  maliciously  disposed.  The  girls  are  coarse,  the  military 
men  hoisterous  and  brutal,  the  Levites  insolently  triumphant,  as  they  see  their 
victim  now  in  what  they  deem  the  right  hands,  and  the  waiters  abusive  and  impu- 
dent. Everything  shows  picturesquely  there  among  the  flitting  dresses  and 
uniforms.  The  flame  makes  all  the  quadrangle  dance  with  uncouth  shadows,  and 
the  faces  of  the  men  and  maidens  are  ruddy  under  the  red  glow  of  the  coals.  Ill- 
tempered  and  testy  with  the  raw  air  of  the  midnight,  they  jostle  each  other  and 
join  roughly  in  gibea  about  the  discomfiture  and  capture  of  this  Nazarene  prophet 
at  last  3.  Enter  Simon  Peter  now,  the  chief  actor  in  this  awful  tragedy  of 
the  denial.  Into  the  midst  of  the  throng  comes  a  burly  figure,  a  quick- stepping 
individual,  evidently  trying  t6  do  that  peculiar  thing  which  almost  everybody,  one 
time  or  another  in  his  Ufe,  has  tried  to  do,  and  nobody  at  any  time  has  ever  suc- 
ceeded in  accomplishing,  namely,  to  look  unconscious  and  unconcerned  when 
absorbently  anxious,  and  to  seem  unnoticed  and  unembarrassed  when  he  knows  the 
rest  are  all  staring  at  him.  That  new-comer  is  our  well-known  friend  Simon,  the 
son  of  Jonas ;  and  he  is  now  endeavouring  to  act  at  perfect  ease,  although  he  is 
certain  that  he  is  and  ought  to  be  an  object  of  suspicion  from  the  beginning.  "  He 
sat  with  the  servants  (Mark  xiv.  54),  and  warmed  himself  at  the  fire."  Picture 
him  now,  away  from  all  his  friends,  among  the  sullen  enemies  of  his  Lord.  There 
is  some  evidence  that  this  disciple  imagined  he  might  pass  himself  off  for  one  of 
the  crowd  who  went  out  to  apprehend  Jesus,  if  only  he  mingled  unabashed  with 
the  chilly  company  around  the  coals.  So  he  pressed  nearer,  and  this  was  exactly 
what  hastened  his  exposure.  4.  Now  commences  the  dialogue  of  the  drama.  A 
girl  kept  the  outer  door ;  this  rsminds  ns  of  the  o£Bce  of  the  damsel  named  Rhoda 
(Acts  xii.  13),  whom  we  meet  in  another  part  of  Peter's  history  farther  on.  II.  We 
must  arrest  our  study  of  the  melancholy  story  here,  for  it  is  high  time  that  we 
should  seek  for  the  practicaii  lessons  taught  in  this  transgression  of  Peter. 
1.  We  see,  for  one  thing,  how  commonplace  is  even  the  most  notable  of  human 
sins.  This  denial  of  his  Lord  will  always  be  quoted  as  the  characteristic  wicked- 
ness of  Simon  Peter.  It  stands  out  in  history  as  one  of  the  vast  crimes  of  the 
world  and  the  race.  To  deny  Christ  is  so  simple  a  thing  that  we  can  fall  into  it, 
and  hardly  know  it  at  the  time.  This  sin  is  not  singular  nor  unusual.  Christ's 
cause  is  on  trial  now  as  really  as  was  Christ  Himself  in  the  High  Priest's  palace. 
We  stand  in  jeopardy  every  hour.  Satan's  ingenious  policy  is  to  come  suddenly 
upon  us  with  the  surprise  of  a  question  with  ridicule  in  it.  So  small  a  matter  as 
omitting  family  prayer  because  a  stranger  is  in  onr  dwelling,  as  putting  on  a  ribald 
air  when  one  twits  us  with  being  serious,  may  have  in  it  all  the  meaning  and  the 
meanness  of  Peter's  sin.  "  Wherefore  let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed 
lest  he  fall."  2.  Again :  we  see  the  immeasurable  peril  of  just  one  act  of  wrong, 
doing.  Indeed,  one  act  never  seems  to  remain  alone.  This  first  denial  led  to  two 
more  of  the  same  sort ;  then  to  lying,  then  to  profanity.  It  is  as  supreme  a  folly 
to  talk  of  a  little  sin  as  it  would  be  to  talk  of  a  small  decalogue  that  forbids  it,  or 
a  diminutive  God  that  hates  it,  or  a  shallow  hell  that  wiU  punish  it.  Sin  is 
registered  according  to  heavenly  measurements  of  holiness  and  majesty.  3.  We 
see,  hkewise,  a  ready  explanation  of  the  mysterious  falls  into  sin  sometimes 
noticed  in  the  lives  of  really  good  men.  No  one  doubts  that  Simon  Peter  was  a 
regenerate  Christian  man :  how  happens  it  that  he  crashes  down  into  wickedness 
so  suddenly?  The  answer  to  this  question  must  be  found  in  the  disclosures  of  this 
disciple's  previous  history.  He  had  for  a  long  time  been  preparing  for  this  disaster. 
One  of  the  brightest  of  onr  modem  writers  has  given  us  a  simile  somewhat  like 
this.  If  a  careless  reader  lets  fall  a  drop  of  ink  in  among  the  leaves  of  a  book  he 
is  just  closing,  it  will  strike  through  the  paper  both  ways.  When  he  opens  the 
volume  again,  he  can  begin  with  the  earliest  faint  appearance  of  the  stain,  and 
measure  by  its  increase  his  progress  towards  the  great  black  point  of  defacement. 
Open  it  now  anywhere,  and  he  will  detect  some  traces  of  the  coming  spot.  He  can 
turn  back  to  it ;  he  can  turn  forward  from  it.  So  of  this  great  base  act  of  the 
Apostle  Peter,  which  we  call  emphatically  the  denial.  It  is  a  stain  in  the  middle  of 
his  life.  Most  of  ns  have  a  profound  admiration  and  a  tender  love  for  this  old 
Bethsaida  fisherman,  even  if  we  do  deny  he  was  ever  set  up  for  the  first  pope. 
But  hitherto,  as  we  have  been  studying  his  biography,  we  might  often  have  seemed 
to  see  the  denial  coming.  Along  the  way  hints  of  it  appear.  One  who  reads  the 
Gospels  for  the  first  time  would  be  likely  to  remark,  "  Here  is  a  man  who  will  be  ia 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xrr. 

awful  shame  and  trouble  some  day,  for  he  thinks  he  stands  safely  ;  he  is  going  td 
tall."  This  might  be  true  of  most  self-confident  Christians  who  lapse  into  sin ; 
the  wickedness  has  been  growing  upon  them  longer  than  they  thought.  "  Men 
fall,"  so  once  said  Goizot,  "  on  the  side  towards  which  they  lean."  {G.  S.  Robin- 
son, D.D.)  Petefs  denial  of  Jesus : — ^We  speak  of  a  sudden  death  ;  when  the 
doctor  had  long  been  warning  the  man  who  has  just  died  that  he  might  die  at  any 
laoment.  We  speak  of  a  sudden  bankruptcy;  which,  however,  the  commercial 
prophets  had  long  secretly  foretold.  We  speak  of  the  sudden  fall  of  a  tree  in  a 
tempest ;  when,  under  a  fair  bark  and  a  leafy  shade,  it  had  long  been  only  a  thing 
of  powder.  We  speak  of  the  sudden  fall  of  a  soul ;  when  in  that  soul  the  causation 
of  that  fall  had  long  been  working  out  of  sight.  I.  Thine  of  this  deed  in  oonnec- 
TioN  WITH  A  CERTAIN  WEAKNESS  IN  WHICH  IT  BEOAN.  That  sin  began,  not  in  a  sin, 
but  in  a  weakness.  The  strength  of  a  rope  is  to  be  measured,  not  according  to 
what  it  is  in  its  strongest,  but  in  its  weakest  point.  The  strength  of  a  ship  is  to  be 
estimated,  not  according  to  her  strongest,  but  her  weakest  part;  let  but  the  strain 
come  on  that,  let  that  be  broken,  no  matter  how  strong  in  any  other  part  she  may 
be,  the  mighty  ship,  being  conquered  there,  will  go  down.  So  it  is  with  the 
strength  of  a  soul.  Peter  had  many  strong  points,  but  one  weak  one ;  and  that 
one,  undetected  by  himself,  was  at  the  beginning  of  this  disaster.  It  was  the  weak- 
]iess  of  excessive  constitutional  impulsiveness.  Impulse  is  beautiful  and  good ;  but 
impulse  is  only  like  steam  in  the  works  of  a  factory,  or  wind  in  the  sails  of  a 
yacht.  Impulse  is  a  good  servant  of  the  soul,  but  a  bad  master.  Impulse  may 
act  with  as  much  emotional  force  in  a  wrong  direction  as  in  a  right.  Even  when 
its  direction  is  right,  if  left  to  itself,  it  is  not  safe.  But  for  this  weakness,  a  soul 
might  often  be  saved  just  in  time  from  the  special  kind  of  danger  to  which  other 
weaknesses  specially  lead.  There  is  a  man  who  feels  it  a  pain  to  contradict,  and  a 
pleasure  to  acquiesce  ;  and  when  in  the  company  of  errorists,  this  weakness  is  his 
danger.  There  is  a  man  whose  weakness  is  an  agonizing  consciousness  of  ridicule. 
There  is  a  man.  a  favourite  with  us  all,  whose  simplicity  we  love,  at  whose  heroics 
we  smile,  but  whose  weakness  is  that  he  is  apt  to  think  too  highly  of  himself.  Did 
any  man  with  all  these  foibles  but  take  the  steadfast  poise  of  principles,  did  he  but 
take  time,  he  might  be  saved  from  the  action  of  them  all.  II.  Think  of  this  act 
OF  Peter  in  connection  with  his  entrance  into  the  temptation  to  commit  such  an 
ACT.  "  Enter  not  into  temptation,"  said  the  Master ;  and  within  a  few  minutes 
from  the  time  of  that  order  the  servant  entered  into  it.  He  loved  Christ  far  too  deeply 
to  deny  Him ;  he  had  never  denied  Him  yet,  and  was  not  likely  to  do  so  now. 
Ah  1  he  had  never  yet  been  tried.  You,  perhaps,  are  a  man  of  splendid  morality, 
but  you  hardly  know  how  much  your  integrity  depends  upon  circumstances;  you  have 
never  yet  had  it  tried.  There  may  be  no  accident  before  a  train  starts  from  the  station ; 
but  let  there  be  an  undetected  flaw  only  in  one  axle,  and,  when  the  locomotive  is 
spinning  along  the  line  at  the  rate  of  forty  miles  an  hour,  there  may  be  a  great 
crash  of  property  and  life.  Peter  thought  himself  an  iron  man ;  but  there  was  a 
flaw  in  his  iron,  though  he  knew  it  not  until  he  had  entered  into  a  trial  for  which  he 
was  not  fitted ;  then  the  iron  broke  1    III.  Think  of  Peter's  deniaii  of  Christ  in 

CONNECTION   WITH  THE  ACCOUNT  OF  ITS  THREE  OCCASIONS.       God   pity   that  yOUth   who 

has  just  uttered  his  first  lie  1  If  eventually  saved  from  the  evil  it  has  already  set 
working,  God  alone  can  save  him.  No  liar  can  alter  the  law  of  the  lie,  and  that 
law  is,  that  the  first  lie  has  a  generative  power,  that  one  lie  compels  another,  that 
one  lie  requires  another  to  back  it,  that  one  lie  spreads  and  ramifies  into  endless 
evolutions.  IV.  Think  of  Peter's  denial  in  connection  with  the  treat- 
ment THAT  Christ  wab  receiving  at  the  time.  A  seer  tells  us  that  he  once 
saw  heaven,  and  had  a  glimpse  of  the  treatment  Jesus  receives  there.  This  is  his 
report :  "  I  saw  also  the  Lord,  sitting  upon  a  throne,  high  and  lifted  up,  and  His 
train  filled  the  temple."  Now  turn  to  this  place  on  earth,  and  see  how  the  Holy 
One  is  treated  there.  Do  you  not  now  see  how  the  pictured  memory  of  this  episode 
came  into  the  phrase  of  John  the  Divine,  "  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus 
Christ "  ?  V.  Think  of  Peter's  denial  of  Christ  in  connection  with  Crrist'b  act 
OF  restoring  love.  Simultaneously,  the  startled  man  turned  to  look  at  his 
Master,  and  his  Master  turned  to  look  at  him.  We  are  awed  before  the  calm 
sovereignty  of  that  look,  no  less  than  by  its  lovingkindness.  "  He  spoke  with  His 
eye,"  says  Erasmus.  We  may  not  imagine  what  the  look  was  Uke,  but  we  know 
what  effect  it  had  upon  the  disciple.  The  outgoing  power  of  the  Lord  that  went 
with  it  struck  his  heart,  as  once  the  prophet's  rod  struck  the  rock,  and  made  the 
waters  flow.    It  touched,  and  set  flowing,  frozen  memories.    With  only  self  to 


8T.  MARK,  637 


Sean  apon,  lower  and  lower  would  have  been  the  inevitable  fall ;  but  just  in  time 
the  Lord  lifted  him  by  a  look  I  Some  structures  can  only  be  saved  by  being  ruined. 
They  have  in  them  such  slack  work  and  such  bad  materials,  that  it  is  of  no  use  to 
patdi  them,  or  to  shore  them  up  ;  the  only  thing  to  be  done  is  to  pull  them  down 
altogether  and  build  them  again.  Some  lives  can  only  be  saved  by  a  desperate 
operation.  Some  souls  can  be  saved  only  through  being  fur  an  instant  hung,  as 
by  a  hair,  over  the  pit  of  the  lost.  A  certain  man  was  seen  for  many  years  ricii. 
prosperous,  influential  in  the  State ;  that  very  man  was  afterwards  seen,  down  on 
his  hands  and  knees,  in  the  livery  of  degradation,  scrubbing  the  floor  of  a  con- 
vict prison.  In  his  days  of  worldly  honour  he  bad  made  profession  of  the 
Christian  faith,  and  not  without  sincerity ;  but  egotism  was  suffered  to  master  him. 
He  fell.  In  the  shock  of  that  fall,  in  the  recoil  that  comes  of  despair,  he  was 
"  saved  as  by  fire."  {Charles  Stanford,  D.D.)  Peter's  denial: — I.  Peter  nevek 
MjEAWC  TO  DENY  HIS  LoBD.  He  believed  now,  as  clearly  as  he  did  that  day  at 
€fflsarea  Philippi,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,"  &c.  He  was  honest  in  saying,  "  Though 
I  should  die  with  Thee,  yet  will  I  not  deny  Thee."  He  proved  that  soon  after  by 
drawing  his  sword  in  defence  of  Christ.  Any  believer  may  have  a  like  assurance. 
There  is  the  peril.  If  there  should  come  to  a  Sabbath  congregation  a  voice  from 
heaven,  declaring  that  some  one  there  would  one  day  turn  out  a  thief,  how 
impossible  it  would  seem  I  Every  one  would  think  there  must  be  a  mistake;  the 
message  has  come  to  the  wrong  church,  or,  at  least,  it  does  not  mean  me.  Of 
course  not.  Satan  says  to  us  all,  "  Think  of  your  faith,  your  virtue,  your  blood, 
your  position."  And  when  he  has  beguiled  us  into  such  self-complacency,  he 
begins  his  manosavres,  not  asking  ns  at  first  to  do  anything  dishonest,  but  com- 
mencing on  the  border-line  between  his  kingdom  and  the  Lord's,  knowing  if  we 
yield  to  him  in  things  that  are  doubtful,  we  will  soon  yield  to  him  in  things  that 
are  sure.  A  leading  member  of  a  city  church,  caught  in  a  shameful  crime,  wrote 
his  friends:  **I  am  astonished  at  the  bUndness  and  wickedness  of  my  course." 
II.  Fetbb  went  voluntabilt  into  thb  way  of  temptation.  Peter  thought  very 
Likely  that  he  was  safe  in  such  company,  because  nobody  would  know  him.  A 
Christian  had  better  not  stay  at  the  fire  with  the  ungodly.  Satan  did  not  come  to 
him  as  a  *'  roaring  lion,"  but  in  a  mere  whisper.  Who  could  draw  a  sword  at  a 
young  girl  ?  If  he  had  contemplated  her  question,  he  might  have  had  ready  an 
answer  that  would  have  been  truthful  vrithout  giving  offence.  Often  the  science  of 
^truth-telling  is  to  look  out  for  emergencies ;  to  have  ready  an  answer  that  shall  be 
polite  and  true.  But  that  is  essentially  the  science  of  all  virtue.  It  is  the  trials 
which  take  us  by  surprise  that  measure  our  strength ;  it  is  at  these  crises  that 
destiny  is  made.  And  such  unlooked-for  assaults  are  sure  to  come  to  a  Christian 
who  goes  voluntarily  into  the  way  of  temptation.  One  who  does  not  watch  has  no 
fight  to  pray.  A  man,  exhorted  to  abandon  a  habit  of  drinking  that  was  fast 
dragging  him  to  ruin,  replied :  "  I  magnify  more  than  you  do  the  grace  of  God. 
Without  drinking  any  one  could  save  himself.  I  believe  in  grace  that  can  save  a 
man  when  he  does  drink."  He  held  that  delusion  till  he  died  a  sot.  That  is  a 
Divine  law  with  reference  to  all  sin.  If  you  throw  yourself  from  the  top  of  the 
temple,  God  has  power  to  keep  your  bones  from  breaking ;  but  yon  had  better  not 
do  so,  for  it  is  written :  "  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God."  The  precept, 
"  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall,"  means,  if  you  are 
walking  in  slippery  places,  watch  every  little  danger,  every  least  step.  One  may 
slip  as  badly  on  a  foot  of  ice  as  on  an  acre.  Peter  would  not  have  fallen  if  he  had 
remembered  Christ's  caution  spoken  to  him :  *'  Watch  and  pray  that  ye  enter 
not  into  temptation."  UI.  Peteb  bepented.  There  is  no  other  way  back  to 
Ohrist  for  one  who  has  fallen.  IV.  Peter  wowhd  mebcy.  {T.  J.  Holmes.) 
The  denier: — Let  us  endeavour  to  understand  this  melancholy  event,  Peter's  denial 
of  his  Lord.  In  order  to  this,  let  ns  advert  to  the  circumstances  which  attended 
it,  and  the  causes  which  led  to  it ;  and  then  consider  seriously  the  improvement 
which  we  should  make  of  it.  I.  The  circumstances  under  which  an  offence  is 
committed  often  greatly  affect  its  character ;  they  sometimes  even  change  its  com- 
plexion altogether.  The  first  circumstance  of  aggravation  is  found  in  the 
repeated  warnings  which  he  received.  Forewarned  is  forearmed ;  when,  therefore, 
Peter  had  been  warned  by  our  Lord  of  his  danger,  we  might  have  expected  on  his 
part  the  utmost  vigilance  and  prayeriulness.  The  second  circumstance  of  aggrava- 
tion is  found  in  the  solemn  protestations  and  vows  which  he  made.  After  each 
warning  he  solemnly  avowed  his  willingness  to  go  with  his  Lord  to  prison  and  to 
death.    Homihty,  self-abasement,  orayers,  tears,  had  been  far  more  suitable  in  hid 


ess  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrr. 

case  than  those  solemn  protestations.  And  ever  does  it  become  ns  to  say,  **  Hold 
Thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe."  The  third  circumstance  of  aggravation  is  found 
in  the  recency  of  the  warnings  and  vows  to  which  we  have  adverted.  If  the 
warnings  had  been  given,  and  the  vows  made,  some  years  before,  they  might  have 
been  forgotten ;  but  they  were  all  given  and  made  the  same  night  in  which  the 
offence  was  committed.  A  very  few  hours  only  could  have  elapsed  between  the  last 
warning  especially,  and  the  first  denial.  A  fourth  circumstance  of  aggravation  is 
found  in  the  repetition  of  the  offence.  It  was  not  once  that  he  denied  his  Lord, 
but  a  second,  and  again  a  third  time.  And  this  leads  to  another  circumstance  of 
aggravation,  that  is  to  say,  the  profaneness  and  the  perjury  with  which  his  denial 
was  attended.  We  have  just  seen  that  the  second  time  he  did  not  simply  deny  his 
Lord,  but  he  did  it  with  an  oath.  He  appealed  to  high  heaven  as  his  witness  and 
his  judge — when  he  swore  falsely.  The  last  circumstance  of  aggravation  which  we 
shall  notice  is,  that  all  this  was  done  in  the  very  presence  of  the  Redeemer.  It 
was  not  done  in  a  corner  :  it  was  not  a  secret  offence,  which  might  for  ever  remain 
unknown  ;  but  it  was  done  publicly,  before  many  witnesses.  John  was  there.  It 
was  in  the  presence  of  this  faithful  friend  that  Peter  denied  his  Lord — ^with  oaths 
and  curses.  Above  all,  Jesus  was  there.  II.  Such  are  the  circumstances  of 
aggravation  which  marked  the  offence  of  Peter ;  we  shall  now  advert  with  great 
brevity  to  the  causes  of  this  strange  conduct.  How  can  we  account  for  it  ?  1.  One 
cause  is  found  in  the  known  character  of  Peter.  He  was  a  man  of  ardour, 
impetuosity,  zeal;  but,  like  many  others  of  a  similar  temperament,  he  was 
destitute  of  moral  courage.  There  is  no  necessary  connection  between  physical 
and  moral  courage,  some  of  the  finest  specimens  of  the  former  having  proved 
themselves  utterly  destitute  of  the  latter.  How  many  there  are  who  suffer  from 
the  same  moral  infirmity  1  Let  our  young  friends  especially  guard  against  it,  and 
labour  to  correct  it.  In  order  to  this  I  would  earnestly  recommend  two  things. 
(1)  An  intimate  acquaintance  with  some  of  the  noble  characters  presented  to  us 
in  history,  as  well  as  with  some  of  the  writings  of  choice  spirits  which  have  the 
most  direct  tendency  to  strengthen  the  mind.  Let  them  steep  their  minds  in 
the  noble  sentiments  which  are  there  so  appropriately  expressed.  (2)  An 
habitual  realization  of  the  Divine  presence.  Let  them  feel  that  God's  eye  is  ever 
upon  them  ;  and  let  it  be  their  study  to  approve  themselves  to  Him.  2.  We  have 
another  cause  in  the  state  of  mind  which  he  had  recently  indulged.  I  refer 
particularly  to  his  overweening  confidence  and  pride.  The  solemn  warnings  of  his 
Lord  ought  to  have  humbled  him ;  but  his  confidence  was  in  himself,  not  in 
his  God.  '•  God  will  humble  the  proud,  but  will  give  grace  to  the  lowly."  3. 
A  third  cause  is  found  in  the  danger,  real  or  imaginary,  in  which  he  was  placed. 
It  would  not  appear  that  there  was  any  danger  involved  in  the  fact  of  his 
discipleship.  John  was  a  disciple ;  known  as  such  to  the  High  Priest,  and  yet  he 
was  in  the  palace,  and  appears  to  have  apprehended  no  danger.  But  Peter  had 
been  active,  in  one  sense  mischievously  active,  in  the  garden.  He  had  cut  off  the 
ear  of  the  servant  of  the  High  Priest,  and  this  might  be  construed  into  a  crime ;  an 
attempt  to  rescue  or  prevent  the  capture  of  a  criminal.  Hence  Peter's  fears  ;  his 
wish  to  be  unknown ;  his  denial.  How  closely  rashness  and  cowardice  are  allied  I 
HI.  Let  us  now  see  what  instruction  we  may  derive  from  this  mournful  spectacle. 
We  regard  it  as  an  affecting  illustration  of  the  frailty  of  our  nature;  as  • 
melancholy  proof  of  what  man  can  do  under  the  influence  of  temptation,  con- 
sidered simply  as  a  morally  imperfect  being.  It  thus  presents  one  phasis  at  least 
of  human  character  in  an  instructive  light.  Let  us  illustrate  this.  We  may 
divide  the  human  family  into  three  classes.  First,  there  are,  in  the  worst  sense  at 
the  term,  wicked  beings — beings  whose  moral  nature  is  entirely  perverted,  whose 
good  is  evil ;  malevolent  beings  who  can  do  evil  for  evil's  sake,  and  have  real 
delight  in  mischief.  There  are  others  who  have  by  no  means  attained  to  this  com- 
pleteness in  evil,  who  are,  nevertheless,  the  slaves  of  some  one  dominant  passion. 
And  from  his  affecting  case  we  see  what  evil  a  man  may  commit,  how  low  he  may 
sink  in  moral  degradation  from  mere  frailty,  from  inherent  defectiveness  of 
character,  when  sore  pressed  by  a  temptation  adapted  to  his  weakness.  It  may  be 
proper  to  remark  here,  that  one  act,  whether  good  or  bad,  does  not  constitute  a 
character.  We  should  guard  against  the  severity,  the  injustice  of  representing 
men  as  guilty  of  hypocrisy,  of  insincerity,  because  they  have  once,  or  even  twice, 
under  the  influence  of  temptation,  acted  in  opposition  to  their  professions.  The 
fall  of  Peter  is  further  instructive  to  us,  as  it  affords  a  striking  illustration  of  man's 
ignorance  of  himself.    How  little  man  knows— can  know  of  what  is  in  him  1    The 


CHAP.  xiT.]  8T»  MARK.  639 

fall  of  Peter  calls  upon  us  to  review  our  past  history,  and  to  look  carefully  into  our 
own  hearts.  We  may  learn  from  the  case  of  Peter  the  nature  of  true  repentance. 
"Peter  went  out  and  wept  bitterly."  If  we  compare  the  case  of  Peter  with  that  oi 
Judas,  we  shall  learn  the  nature  of  true  repentance,  we  shall  perceive  the 
characteristic  difference  between  that  which  is  true  and  that  which  is  false,  that 
which  is  saving  and  that  which  is  destructive.  Wherein  does  the  difference 
consist?  1.  Judas  saw  clearly  the  enormity  of  his  conduct,  but  it  was  only  in 
and  through  its  consequences ;  he  had  no  perception  of  the  evil  of  his  conduct  in 
itself.  2.  The  second  point  of  difference  between  the  repentance  of  Judas  and 
of  Peter  is  in  the  subject.  (J.  J.  Davies.)  Peter's  secmd  denial  of  Christ  :— 
He  who  once  cracks  his  conscience  will  not  much  strain  at  it  the  second  time. 
1.  Sin  is  very  bold  when  once  it  is  bid  welcome.  If  it  once  enter,  it  knows  the 
way  again,  and  once  admitted  will  plead,  not  possession,  but  prescription.  An 
army  is  easier  kept  out  than  beaten  out.  2.  The  sinner  is  less  able  to  resist  the 
second  time  than  he  was  the  first.  Grace  is  weakened  and  decayed  by  yielding  to 
the  first  temptation,  and  the  strength  of  Grod,  which  only  makes  the  way  of  grace 
easy,  is  plucked  away  by  grieving  His  Holy  Spirit.  8.  The  way  of  sin  once  set 
open,  is  as  the  gates  of  a  city  thrown  open  for  an  enemy,  by  which  Satan  bringing 
in  his  forces,  strongly  plants  them,  and  quickly  so  fortifies  them,  that  it  will 
require  great  strength  to  remove  them.  4.  Every  sin  admitted,  not  only  weakens, 
but  corrupts  the  faculties  of  the  soul  by  which  it  is  upheld.  It  darkens  the  under- 
standing, corrupts  the  will,  disturbs  the  affections,  and  raises  a  cloud  of  passions 
to  dazzle  reason.  {Dr.  Thomas  Taylor.)  Peter's  degeneration : — A  dicer,  they 
say,  will  grow  to  oe  a  beggar  in  a  night ;  and  in  a  night  Peter  will  grow  from  a 
dissembler  to  be  a  swearer  and  forswearer.  (Ibid.)  Why  Christians  are  allowed 
to  fall : — Why  (it  may  be  asked)  does  the  Lord  leave  His  saints  and  children  to 
themselves,  by  withdrawing  His  grace  from  them,  and  so  suffer  them  to  fall  into 
sin  ?  1.  To  correct  their  carelessness  and  carnal  security.  2.  To  stir  them  up  to 
more  watchfulness  over  themselves  for  time  to  come,  when  tbey  know  their  own 
weakness.  3.  To  pull  down  their  pride,  and  humble  them  more  thoroughly  before 
God  (2  Cor.  xii.  7).  4.  To  drive  out  of  them  aU  confidence  in  themselves,  and 
presumption  of  their  own  strength.  6.  To  make  them  more  compassionate  toward 
others  (Luke  xxii.  82).  6.  That  by  this  means  He  may  make  them  examples,  and 
grounds  of  comfort  to  other  poor  sinners.  {George  Petter.)  The  heinousness  of 
Peter's  third  denial : — Peter  was  now  in  great  danger.  He  hears  of  the  garden, 
and  is  likely  to  be  revenged  for  his  tumult,  his  quarrel,  and  wronging  Malchus. 
He  is  pressed  by  evident  signs  that  he  was  with  Christ,  and  now  if  he  bestir  him 
not,  he  shall  not  avoid  present  danger;  or  if  he  do,  he  shall  be  branded  for  a 
common  liar  and  perjured  person  for  ever;  and  therefore  out  of  great  fear  he  more 
stoutly  denies  his  Master  than  before,  and  because  neither  his  simple  denial  will 
serve  him  as  in  the  first  instance,  nor  his  binding  it  with  oaths  and  swearing  as  in 
the  second,  as  if  he  had  not  done  enough,  he  curses  and  imprecates  himself, 
wishing  not  only  mischief  to  himself,  but  calling  on  God,  a  just  Judge,  to  avenge 
that  falsehood,  and  infiict  the  deserved  punishment  if  he  knew  Him  of  Whom  they 
spake.  Oh,  fearful  sin  1  1.  To  deny  his  Lord  and  dear  Master.  2.  After  so  many 
warnings  on  Christ's  part.  3.  After  so  many  confessions  and  professions  of  his 
own.  4.  After  so  often,  three  several  times,  so  much  time  of  deliberation  coming 
between.  One  might  seem  infirmity,  but  thrice  argues  resolution.  5.  With  lying 
and  perjury.  6.  With  cursing  and  imprecation.  Thus  Peter  is  among  the 
forwardest  of  those  who  make  falsehood  their  refuge,  and  who  trust  in  lies. 
{Dr.  Thomas  Taylor.)  Lying  a  slough  of  despond : — Benvenuto  CeUini  records 
in  his  autobiography  the  bitter  experiences  he  endured  in  being  tempted  to  lie  to 
the  Duke,  his  patron,  lest  he  should  forfeit  the  favours  of  the  Duchess — he,  who 
"was  always  a  lover  of  truth  and  an  enemy  to  falsehood,  being  then  under  a 
necessity  of  telling  lies."  "As  I  had  begun  to  tell  lies,  I  plunged  deeper  and  deeper 
into  the  mire,"  till  a  very  slough  of  despond  it  became  to  him.    {Francis  Jaeox.) 

Ver.  72.  And  Petar  called  to  mind  the  vror^— Peter's  repentance  .-—That  the 
cock  crew  again  was  an  ordinary  and  natural  thing,  but  at  this  time  ordained  for  a 
special  end.  1.  To  put  Peter  in  mind  of  his  promise.  2.  To  bear  witness  to  the 
words  of  Christ,  which  Peter  will  not,  till  now,  believe  to  be  true.  3.  To  reprove 
Peter  of  His  sin.  4.  To  accuse  Peter  to  his  own  conscience.  He  needs  the  voice  of 
a  cock  to  help  him  out  of  his  sin  1  He  is  admonished  by  this  voice,  that  the  silly 
cock  kept  his  watch,  according  to  the  word  of  his  Creator ;  but  Peter  has  not  kept 


54t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

his  watch  with  his  Lord,  but  fearfully  fallen  in  his  station.    I.  The  timb  of  Pktkb'b 
BBPBNTANCB.    "  Then."    The  fittest  time  for  repentance  is  immediately  after  the     | 
sin,  without  delay.    1.  Consider  the  exhortation  in  Heb.  iii.  7.    Hast  thou  a  lease    :| 
jf  thy  life  till  to-morrow,  that  thou  refusest  to  repent  to-day  f    2.  Sin  gets  strength    ,j 
by  continuance.    8.  Nature  teaches  in  other  things  to  take  the  fittest  season ;  to     j 
sow  in  seed-time,  to  make  hay  while  the  sun  shines,  to  take  wind  and  tide  which 
wait  for  no  man.    Let  grace  teach  thee  to  know  thy  season,  thy  day  of  visitation. 
4   Late  repentance  is  seldom  true  repentance.     IL   Thk  means  of  Peter's  bb- 
PBNTANCB.     1.  External.     (1)  The  crowing  of  the  cock.    (2)  The  looking  back  of 
Christ.    2.  IntemaL    (1)  Remembermg  the  Lord's  words.    (2)  Weighmg  the  Lord's 
words.      (Dr.  Thomas  Taylor.)         Peter  goes  out  .—Peter  went  out— 1.  In  respect 
of  the  place.    The  hall  and  the  porch  were  no  places  of  safety  or  tranquility,  but 
full  of  danger  and  fear  and  tumult,  and  no  fit  place  for  meditation.    2.  In  respect 
of  the  company.    He  sees  that  the  longer  he  stays  among  wicked  men,  the  more 
sins  he  heaps  up  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  own  conscience,  and  therefore 
he  sees  it  high  time  to  be  gone.    3.  In  respect  of  the  business  in  hand.    He  is  to 
bewail  his  sin,  to  weep  bitterly,  to  get  out  of  himself ;  and  to  do  this,  he  must  be 
alone  with  God.     (Ibid,)         Reasons  for  avoiding  evil  company  .-—I.  He  that  will 
cleave  to  God,  must  sever  from  God's  enemies.    The  same  grace  that  binds  us  to 
God,  looses  us  from  the  wicked.      Solitariness  is  better  than  bad  company.      2. 
What  comfort  can  a  sheep  have  among  a  herd  of  swine,  which  wallow  and  tumble 
in  foul  lusts?  or  a  silly  dove  among  a  company  of  ravens?    How  can  a  good  heart 
but  grieve  in  their  society  whose  sports  and  pleasures  are  in  such  things  as  only 
grieve  the  Spirit  of  God?    How  can  a  Christian  solace  himself  among  such  as  care 
for  none  but  brutish  delights,  in  eating,  drinking,  sporting,  gaming,  attended  with 
swearing,  railing,  drunkenness,  and  idleness?    3.  What  safety  among  evil  men, 
whether  we  respect  themselves  or  their  practices?    For  themselves,  they  are  so 
poisonful,  so  infectious,  that  we  can  hardly  participate  with  them  in  good  things 
and  not  be  defiled.    For  their  practices,  how  just  is  it  if  we  join  ourselves  in  their 
sins,  that  we  should  not  be  disjoined  in  their  judgments  1      4.  This  has  been  the 
practice  of  the  godly  (Psa.  xxvi.  4).    {Ibid.)        How  to  act  in  bad  company ;— If  we 
fall  among,  or  be  cast  into  bad  company — 1.  Let  us  not  fashion  ourselves  to  them. 
2.  Consider  who  thou  art— a  disciple,  separated  by  grace— a  son  of  God.    8.  Look 
upon  ungodly  examples  to  detest  them,  to  grieve  at  the  dishonour  of  God,  to  grieve 
at  the  wickedness  of  man  made  in  God's  image.     4.  See  them,  to  stop  them  if  pos- 
sible.   If  there  be  hope  of  doing  good,  admonish  them.    Warn  them  of  the  wrath 
of  God,  coming  on  those  who  do  such  things.    Win  them,  and  pray  for  them  and 
their  amendment.    6.  If  their  be  no  hope  of  winning  them,  yet  by  thy  godly  car- 
riage  convince  them,  check  them,  confute,  shut  their  mouths.    Let  thy  light  shine 
in  spite  of  their  darkness,  to  glorify  thy  Father ;  and  at  least  let  them  see  thy  watch 
and  godly  care  to  preserve  thyself  from  their  contagion.    (Ibid.)      Times  for  calling 
sins  to  mind : — We  ought  to  take  all  occasions  offered  to  think  of  our  sins,  and  to 
be  stirred  up  to  humiliation  and  repentance  for  them.    Especially,  for  example— 1. 
When  in  the  public  ministry  of  the  Word  we  hear  such  sins  reproved  M  we  are 
guilty  oL     2.  When  we  come  to  Holy  Communion.     8.  When  we  read  the  Scrip- 
tures,  or  hear  them  read.    4.  When  we  are  privately  admonished  of  our  sins,  either 
by  the  ministers  of  God,  or  by  any  other  that  have  a  calling  to  do  it.  6.  When  God 
Uys  upon  us  any  grievous  affliction  or  chastisement;  such  as  sickness,  loss  of  goods, 
loss  of  near  friends  by  death,  <feo.    When  we  either  see  or  hear  of  the  judgments  of 
God  inflicted  upon  others  for  sin.   (George  Fetter.)      Fountains  of  repentant  tears  ;— 
Repentance  is  wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  God.    But  He  works  it  in  us  by  leading  us 
to  think  upon  the  evil  of  sin.    Peter  could  not  help  weeping  when  he  remembered 
his  grievous  fault.    Let  us  at  this  time— I.  Sxudy  Peter's  oau,  and  dsb  it  fob 
OUB  OWN  INSTRUCTION.    1.  He  Considered  that  he  had  denied  his  Lord.    Have  we 
never  done  the  like  ?    It  may  be  done  in  various  ways.    2.  He  reflected  upon  the 
excellence  of  the  Lord  whom  he  had  denied.    3.  He  remembered  the  position  in 
which  his  Lord  had  placed  him — making  him  an  apostle,  and  one  of  the  first  of 
them.    Have  we  not  been  placed  in  positions  of  trust  ?    4.  He  bethought  him  of 
the  special  intercourse  which  he  had  enjoyed.    Have  not  we  known  joyous  fellow- 
ship with  our  Lord  ?    6.  He  recollected  that  he  had  been  solemnly  forewarned  by 
his  Lord.    Have  not  we  sinned  against  light  and  knowledge  ?    6.  He  recalled  hia 
own  vows,  pledges,  and  boasts.    Have  we  not  broken  very  earnest  declarations  ?    7. 
He  thought  upon  the  special  circumstances  of  his  Lord  when  he  had  so  wickedly 
denied  Him.    Are  there  no  aggravations  in  our  case  ?    8.  He  revolved  in  hia  mind 


nv.]  ST,  MARK,  Ui 

his  repetitions  of  the  offence,  and  those  repetitions  with  added  aggravations :  lie, 
oath,  &o.  We  ought  to  dwell  on  each  item  of  oar  transgressions,  that  we  may  be 
brought  to  a  more  thorough  repentance  of  them.  II.  Study  oub  own  lives,  ani* 
U8B  THB  STUDY  FOB  OUB  FUBTHEB  HUMILIATION.  1.  Think  upon  OUT  transgressions 
while  unrepentant.  2.  Think  upon  our  resistance  of  light,  and  conscience,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit,  before  we  were  overcome  by  Divine  grace.  3.  Think  upon  our 
small  progress  in  the  Divine  life.  4.  Think  upon  our  backslidings  and  heart- 
wanderings.  6.  Think  upon  our  neglect  of  the  souls  of  others.  6.  Think  upon  oar 
little  communion  with  our  Lord.  7.  Think  upon  the  little  glory  we  are  bringing  to 
Bis  great  name.  8.  Think  upon  our  matchless  obligations  to  His  infinite  love. 
Each  of  Uiese  meditations  is  calculated  to  make  as  weep.  III.  Study  the  eitect 
or  THESE  THOUGHTS  UPON  OUB  OWN  MINDS.  1.  Can  we  think  of  these  things  with- 
out  emotion  ?  This  is  possible ;  for  many  exoase  their  sin  on  the  ground  of  their 
circumstances,  constitution,  company,  trade,  fate:  they  even  lay  the  blamo  on 
Satan,  or  some  other  tempter.  Certain  hard  hearts  treat  the  matter  with  supreme 
indifference.  This  is  perilous.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  such  a  man  is  not  Peter,  bat 
Judas  ;  not  a  fallen  saint,  but  a  son  of  perdition.  3.  Are  we  moved  by  thoughts 
of  these  things?  There  are  other  reflections  which  may  move  us  far  more.  Our 
Lord  forgives  us,  and  numbers  us  with  His  bretLren.  He  asks  us  if  we  love  Him, 
and  He  bids  us  feed  His  sheep.  Surely,  when  we  dwell  on  these  themes,  it  must  be 
true  of  each  of  us — "  When  he  thought  thereon,  he  wept."  (C  H,  Spurgeon.) 
Becolleetion : — Peter's  recollection  of  what  he  had  formerly  heard  was  another  oc- 
casion of  his  repentance.  We  do  not  sufficiently  consider  how  much  more  we  need 
recollection  than  information.  We  know  a  thousand  things,  but  it  is  necessary 
that  they  should  be  kept  aJive  in  our  hearts  by  constant  and  vivid  recollection.  It 
is,  therefore,  extremely  absurd  and  childish  for  people  to  say,  "  You  tell  me  nothing 
but  what  I  know."  I  answer,  You  forget  many  things,  and,  therefore,  it  is  neces- 
sary that  line  should  be  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept.  Peter  himself  after- 
wards said  in  his  Epistle, "  I  will  not  be  neghgent  to  put  you  always  in  remembrance 
of  these  things,  though  ye  know  them."  We  are  prone  to  forget  what  we  do  know ; 
whereas  we  should  consider  that,  whatever  good  thing  we  know  is  only  so  far  good 
to  as  as  it  is  remembered  to  purpose.  {R.  Cecil.)  Peter's  life-long  repentance : — 
Peter  falls  dreadfully,  but  by  repentance  rises  sweetly;  a  look  of  love  from  Christ 
melts  him  into  tears.  He  knew  that  repentance  was  the  key  to  the  kingdom  of 
grace.  At  once  his  faith  was  so  great  that  he  leaped,  as  it  were,  into  a  sea  of  waters 
to  come  to  Christ ;  so  now  his  repentance  was  so  great  that  he  leaped,  as  it  were, 
into  a  sea  of  tears,  for  that  he  had  gone  from  Christ.  Some  say  that,  after  his  sad 
fall,  he  was  ever  and  anon  weeping,  and  that  his  face  was  even  farrowed  with  con- 
tinoal  tears.  He  had  no  sooner  taken  its  poison  but  he  vomited  it  up  again,  ere  it 
got  to  the  vitals ;  he  had  no  sooner  handled  this  serpent  but  he  tamed  it  into  a  rod, 
to  scourge  his  soul  with  remorse  for  sinning  against  such  dear  light,  and  strong  love, 
and  sweet  discoveries  of  the  heart  of  Christ  to  him.  Clement  notes  that  Peter  so 
repented  that,  all  his  life  after,  every  night  when  he  heard  the  oock  crow,  he  would 
fall  npon  his  knees,  and,  weeping  bitterly,  would  beg  pardon  for  his  sin.  Ah ! 
souls,  yoo  can  easily  sin  as  the  saints,  but  can  yon  repent  with  the  saints  ?  Many 
can  sin  with  David  and  Petor,  who  cannot  repent  with  David  and  Peter,  and  so 
must  perish  for  ever.  {Thomas  Brooks.)  Washing  with  tears : — ^Nothing  will  make 
the  laces  of  God's  children  more  fair  than  for  them  to  wash  themselves  every  morn- 
ing in  their  tears.  {S,  Clark.)  Tears  of  repentance : — A  saint's  tears  are  better  than 
a  sinner's  triumphs.  Bernard  saith,  •*  The  tears  of  penitents  are  the  wine  of 
angels."  {Archbishop  Seeker.)  The  faU  of  St.  P«t«r;—"  And  Peter  called  to 
mind  the  word  that  Jesus  said  unto  him.  Before  the  cock  crow  twice,  thou  shalt 
deny  Me  thrice.  And  when  he  thought  thereon,  he  wept."  I.  The  vibst  ebbob 
OF  the  apostle  was  confidenos  in  the  stbenoth  ov  his  own  vibtuk,  roLLOWED  by  its 
NATURAL  BssuLT — THE  WANT  ow  WATCHFULNESS.  This  wss  the  Commencement  of  his 
aberration,  and  the  origin  of  all  his  subsequent  sorrow.  Our  only  strength  is  in 
humble  and  earnest  rehance  upon  the  grace  of  Christ.  It  is  rare  that  an  humble  and 
watchful  soul  is  overcome  by  temptation.  Temptations  are  seldom  nearer  than  when 
we  suppose  them  most  distant.  If  we  commit  our  way  unto  the  Lord,  He  will  direct 
our  steps.  II.  The  fibbt  sinful  act  of  Peteb  abose  fbom  vainoloby.  He  wished  to 
make  a  display  of  his  courage.  One  extreme  is  always  liable  to  be  succeeded  by 
its  opposite.  Rashness  is  natmally  followed  by  cowardice.  He  who  smote  oS  the 
servant's  ear  was  seen,  in  a  few  minutes,  hiding  himself  in  the  darkness  among  th« 
trees  of  the  garden.    IIL  The  VAOiLiiATioN  of  Peteb  pboduoeo  its  natural  bssulx^ 

41 


«4S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  zxt. 

iMsniTXoneKT  akd  unbxoioed  bbpentakos.  He  ooold  not  forsake  his  Master  entirely. 
He  dared  not  openly  confess  his  fault,  and  meet  the  conseqaenoes  of  doing  right. 
He  followed  Christ  afar  off.  Thus  diffioolt  is  it  to  do  right,  after  we  have  once 
commenced  the  doing  of  wrong.  A  coarse  only  half-way  right  is  as  perilous  a  one 
as  can  be  chosen.  Nothing  could  have  restored  to  Peter  the  moral  courage  of 
innocence,  but  going  at  once  to  Christ,  confessing  his  sin,  and  avowing  his  attach- 
ment, no  matter  what  the  avowal  might  have  cost  him.  We  may  be  surprised  into 
sin.  Our  only  safety  consists  in  forsaking  it  immediately.  If  we  hesitate,  our 
conscience  will  become  defiled,  and  our  resolution  weakened.  It  is  also  of  the 
utmost  importance  that  our  reformation  be  bold,  manly,  and  entire.    IV.  Petbb 

HEABO  JeSDS  TALSELY  ACCUSED,  AND  HE   UTTEBED  NOT  A  WOBD  IM  Hl8  DEFENCE.      He 

was  the  friend  and  the  witness  of  Christ.  It  was  his  duty  to  act,  and  to  act  promptly. 
By  quietly  looking  on,  when  he  ought  to  have  acted,  Peter  prepared  himself  for 
all  the  guilt  and  misery  that  ensued.  Hence  let  us  learn  the  danger  of  being  found 
in  any  company  in  which  the  cause  of  Christ  is  liable  to  be  treated  with  indignity. 
If  we  enter  such  company  from  choice  we  are  accessory  to  the  breaking  of  Christ's 
commandments.  If  our  lawful  duties  call  us  into  society,  where  the  name  of  Christ 
is  not  revered,  we  can  never  remain  in  it  innocently  for  a  moment,  unless  we 
promptly  act  as  disciples  of  Christ.     V.  Peteb  attempted  to  escape  tboh  the 

EMBARRASSMENTS  OF  HIS  SITUATION  BY  EQUIVOOATION.      "  I  kuOW  UOt,"   Said  he,    "  nor 

understand  what  thou  sayest."  This  only  in  the  end  rendered  his  embarrassment 
the  more  inextricable.  Let  this  part  of  the  history  teach  us  the  importance  of 
cultivating,  on  all  occasions,  the  habit  of  bold  and  transparent  veracity.  Equivo- 
cation is  always  a  sort  of  moral  absurdity.  It  is  an  attempt  to  make  a  lie  answer 
the  purpose  of  the  truth.  He  who  does  this  when  his  attachment  to  Christ  is 
called  in  question  has  already  fallen.  He  denies  his  Lord  in  the  sight  of  his 
all-seeing  Judge,  though  his  cowardice  will  not  permit  him  to  do  it  openly.  The 
man  who  has  gone  thus  far  will  soon  be  brought  into  circumstances  which  will 
openly  reveal  his  guilt.     VI.  Peteb  was  rapidly  led  on  to  the  oommissioh  of 

CRIMKS  IN  themselves  MOST  ABHORRENT  TO  HIS  NATURE,  AND  OBIMBB  OF  WHICH,  AT 
THE  COMMENCEMENT  OF  HIS  WBONG-DOINO,  NEITHEB  HE  NOB  ANY  ONE  ELSE  WOULD  HAVB 

BEUEVED  HIM  CAPABLE.  He  began  by  nothing  more  guilty  than  self-confidence  and 
the  want  of  watchfulness.  He  ended  with  shameless  and  repeated  lying — the 
pubhc  denial  of  his  Master,  accompanied  by  the  exhibition  of  frantic  rage,  and  the 
uttering  of  oaths  and  blasphemy  in  the  hearing  of  all  Jerusalem.  Thus,  step  after 
step,  he  plunged  headlong  into  more  and  more  atrocious  guilt,  until,  without  the 
power  of  resistance,  he  surrendered  himself  up  to  do  the  whole  wiU  of  the  adversary 
of  souls.  (Francis  Way  land.)  True  contrition:— When  King  Henry  H.,  in  the 
ages  gone  by,  was  provoked  to  take  up  arms  against  his  ungrateful  and  rebellious 
son,  ho  besieged  him  in  one  of  the  French  towns,  and  the  son  being  near  to  death, 
desired  to  see  his  father,  and  confess  his  wrong-doing;  but  the  stem  old  sire 
refused  to  look  the  rebel  in  the  face.  The  young  man,  being  sorely  troubled  in  his 
conscience,  said  to  those  about  him,  "  I  am  dying ;  take  me  from  my  bed,  and  let 
me  lie  in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  in  token  of  my  sorrow  for  my  ingratitude  to  my 
father."  Thus  he  died;  and  when  the  tidings  came  to  the  old  man,  outside  the 
walls,  that  his  boy  had  died  in  ashes,  repentant  for  his  rebellion,  he  threw  himself 
upon  the  earth,  like  another  David,  and  said,  "  Would  God  I  had  died  for  him." 
The  thought  of  his  boy's  broken  heart  touched  the  heart  of  the  father.  {Spurgeon.) 
Peter's  recovery : — I.  Let  no  Chbistian  bely  on  his  disposition  or  feeunq  fob 
SAFETY  FROM  FALLING.  Yirtucs  lean  towards  their  vices :  liberty  to  license ;  liberality 
to  waste.  And  when  we  see  only  oar  virtaes,  others  see  only  our  vices.  II.  Let  no 
Christian  rely  upon  his  past  conduct  as  a  safeguard.  Peter  had  been  nearest  of 
all  the  disciples  to  Christ  for  three  years.  He  had  deep  and  pure  affection.  IIL 
Let  no  Christian  presume  to  trust  in  conboiencb  to  seep  him  right  in  the  houb 
OF  DANOEB.  There  are  many  moral  forces  which  hinder  conscience.  The  danger 
of  Peter  had  been  distinctly  pointed  out.  IV.  Fbom  this  example  learn  to  realize 
THE  bitter  memory  OF  GOOD  woBDS  WHICH  COME  TOO  LATE.  The  great  regrets  of  life 
consist  in  the  memory  of  graces  which  might  have  made  us  good,  bat  which  we 
have  neglected.  And  oh  how  awful  is  this  bitterness  1  {F.  Skerry.)  True  peni- 
tence: — The  naturally  warm  and  impetuous  temperament  is  liable  to  extremes 
under  the  pressure  of  circumstances.  This  tendency  to  vacillation  can  only  be 
corrected  by  a  severe  trial.  There  is  one  sentence  in  the  history  which  shows  that 
Peter  began  the  downward  course  when  he  followed  afar  off.  Had  he  been  close  to 
tho  Masttt's  side  all  through  the  trial  his  courage  would  have  stood  the  strain. 


XT.]  8T.  MARK.  643 

The  florist  who  forgot  to  olose  the  skylights  of  his  eonservatory,  saw  his  rare  plants 
withered  by  the  frost  of  the  night.  So  the  warm  heart  of  the  Christian  can  only 
live  in  the  warmth  of  Divine  love.  I.  Eveby  sin  is  ik  thb  facb  of  wabnikg. 
Where  there  is  no  law  there  is  no  sin,  and  where  there  is  no  warning  the  transgres- 
sion is  more  ezonsable.  II.  Eyeby  sin  in  thb  faos  of  wabnino  awaksns  a 
PAINFUL  BEFLECTiON.  It  is  not  enough  that  sin  is  denounced  by  jnstioe,  and 
that  warning  is  added  to  the  denunciation;  we  must  be  brought  into  a  state 
of  observation  and  reflection  in  which  to  have  a  deep  insight  into  the  nature 
and  consequences  of  sin.  The  very  painful  part  of  this  state  is  the  reap- 
pearance of  the  discarded  warning.  The  mercy  of  God  came  to  the  apostle 
through  a  veiy  humble  channel ;  and  how  often  we  are  awakened  to  reflection  by 
onimportant  incidents  1  God  has  blessed  the  tick  of  the  clock,  and  the  falling  of  a 
leaf,  to  rouse  in  man's  breast  a  sense  of  responsibility.  A  thousand  voices  in  nature 
eall  us  to  reflection,  but  sometimes  a  simple  incident  in  daily  life  has  done  so  more 
effectually.  The  hard-hearted  father  who  had  listened  to  remonstrance  and  warning 
for  many  a  year,  was  at  last  touched.  He  had  heard  most  of  the  temperance  orators 
of  the  day,  but  he  continued  the  drink.  One  Sunday  afternoon  he  took  his  little 
girl  to  the  Sunday-school,  intending  himself  to  go  after  more  drink.  At  the  door 
of  the  school-house  he  put  the  child  down  from  his  arms,  but  observed  that  tears 
started  into  her  eyes.  "  Why  do  you  cry  ?  "  he  asked.  The  little  one  sobbed  out 
her  answer,  *•  Because  you  go  to  public-house,  and  frighten  us  when  you  come 
home."  It  was  enough.  He  never  entered  a  public-house  again.  God  can  bless 
simple  means  to  reach  great  ends.  The  narrative  states,  **  The  Lord  turned  and 
looked  upon  Peter."  Nothing  can  hide  us  from  the  Saviour's  view.  It  was  a  living 
and  a  life-giving  look.  It  brought  back  moral  sensibility.  The  living  heart  of 
Jesus  travelled  through  that  look  to  the  cold  heart  of  Peter.  He  was  moved  by  it 
to  reflection.  The  look  spurned  the  offence  but  recalled  the  offender.  It  was  a 
magnet,  with  both  a  negative  and  a  positive  pole.  It  repelled  sin,  but  attracted  the 
sinner.  There  is  mercy  in  God's  rebuke,  and  an  invitation  in  His  warning.  The 
road  back  to  rectitude,  to  truth,  to  honesty,  to  moral  courage,  and  to  discipleship 
was  a  thorny  one.  III.  Eveby  sin  which  awakens  a  painful  beflection  leads 
ro  TBUB  penitence.  "  And  when  he  thought  thereon,  he  wept."  1.  His  repentance 
was  genuine.  St.  Matthew  says,  "He  went  out  and  wept  bitterly."  His  spirit  was 
broken  and  his  heart  contrite.  2.  His  penitence  was  effective.  He  was  led  to  see 
the  error,  and  to  feel  the  power  of  forgiveness.  Here  is  an  illustration  of  the  power 
of  thought — dive  to  the  depths  of  sin  and  rise  to  the  lights  of  peace.  {The  Weekly 
Pulpit.)  "Blotting  out**: — The  old  Greeks  thought  that  memory  must  be  a 
source  of  torture  in  the  next  world,  so  they  interposed  between  the  two  worlds 
the  waters  of  Lethe,  the  river  of  forgetfulness ;  but  believers  in  Christ  want  no 
river  of  oblivion  on  the  borders  of  Elysium.  Calvary  is  on  this  side,  and  that  is 
•nongh.    {Dr,  Alexander  Maclaren.) 


CHAPTEB  XV. 

▼n.  1.  And  bound  Jwnm.-'The  Lamb  of  Ood ;— It  Is  Interesting  to  observe  the 
remarkable  resemblance  which  is  found  to  exist  in  several  particuUirs  between  the 
ceremonial  of  the  daily  sacrifice  of  the  lamb  on  the  altar  in  the  Temple  and  the  sac- 
riflce  of  the  true,  spotless  Lamb  of  God.  After  the  lamb  had  been  kept  under  watch 
for  four  days,  and  had  been  examined  by  an  inquisition  of  the  priests  on  the  evening 
before,  to  make  sure  that  it  was  without  spot  or  blemish,  it  was  brought  forth  early 
in  the  morning  as  soon  as  it  was  light.  At  the  cockcrow  the  altar  had  been  swept 
clear  of  ashes  to  prepare  it  for  the  victim.  Then  *'  the  president  said  to  the  other 
priests,  *  Go  out  and  see  if  it  be  time  to  slay  the  lamb.'  If  it  was,  the  observer 
said,  *  There  are  bright  streaks  of  light  in  the  east.'  The  president  asked,  *  Do  they 
stretch  as  far  as  to  Hebron  ? '  If  he  answered  that  it  was  so,  then  he  said,  *  Go  ye 
and  bring  the  lamb  from  the  prison  of  the  lamb.' "  Now,  in  like  manner,  on  the 
fourth  day  after  Jesus  had  come  to  Jerusalem  to  be  offered  up  as  "  the  Lamb  of  God 
that  takeUi  away  the  sin  of  the  world,"  when  the  morning  was  come  after  the  night- 
inquisition  into  the  spotlessness  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  He  is  brought  forth  from  His 
pison  to  be  re-examined  and  ordered  to  be  slain.  The  lamb  of  the  daily  sacrifice, 
Mfore  being  laid  on  the  altar,  was  bound.    "  Those  priests,"  we  read,  **  whose  lot  it 


•44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  Xf 

is  to  attend  to  the  pieces  (with  the  view  of  laying  them  apon  the  ftltftr)  took  hold  ol 
the  lamb  and  bound  it."  So  in  the  Antitype,  **  they  bonnd  Jesns,  and  carried  Him 
away."  Christ  is  bound  when  He  is  in  the  hands,  the  power,  of  men.  So  is  it 
always  with  the  world.  It  desires  to  have  net  a  free,  but  a  bound  Jesua.  As  the 
servants  covered  His  face,  so  does  the  world  desire  to  have  a  not  all-seeing  God. 
The  world  strives  to  emancipate  itself  from  the  bonds  of  obedience  to  the  will  of 
Qod.  Let  us  break,  they  say,  the  bonds  which  the  Lord  God  and  His  Christ  lay  od 
us ;  and  even  the  very  cords  of  love  whereby  they  would  draw  us,  let  us  cast  away. 
There  is  a  cry  for  freedom.  Freedom  is  the  most  perfect  blessing  man  can  have. 
Freedom  from  what  ?  Freedom  to  do  what  7  Among  the  many,  the  desire  is  to 
be  freed  from  responsibilities  caused  by  duty,  and  to  do  their  own  will  unrestrained 
by  any  obligations.  That  is,  indeed,  the  great  cry  of  the  day.  All  duties  are 
irksome,  all  obligations  intolerable.  No  man  can  develop  his  individuality  except 
in  absolute  freedom.  But  at  the  same  time  that  the  world  seeks  freedom  from  the 
bonds  of  Christ,  it  tries  to  impose  bonds  on  Christ.  Providence  is  to  be  bonnd  witb 
laws.  Science  imposes  rules  on  the  Most  High,  and  lays  down  principles  by  which 
God  must  act — if  there  be  a  God— or  science  will  do  without  Him.  Prayer  is 
declared  to  be  worthless,  because  man  cannot  alter  the  course  of  Nature.  God  is 
fettered  by  self-imposed  laws.  He  is  not  a  free  agent.  Not  only  so,  but  God's 
Church  must  not  be  free.  It  also  must  be  hampered  and  restricted  in  every  way — 
prevented  from  doing  all  it  may  for  the  cause  of  Christ.     {S,  Baring  Gouldt  M^.) 

Yer.  3.  Bat  He  answered  nothlngr. — The  silence  of  our  Lord : — From  our  Lord's 
sublime  silence  we  may  learn — 1.  That  the  manifestation  of  anger  and  temper  is 
inconsistent  with  a  Christian  spirit.  Again,  anger  is  said  to  rest  "  in  the  bosom  oi 
fools,"  a  mortifying  fact,  which  should  be  a  corrective  to  this  tendency.  Socrates, 
when  kicked  by  a  profligate  person,  said  to  those  who  would  have  him  re- 
taliate, "  Had  an  ass  kicked  me,  would  you  have  me  kick  back  in  return  T  "  It 
requires  no  intellect  to  be  angry.  It  is  rather  a  sign  of  mulishness.  Tou  give  an 
advantage  to  your  adversary.  Men  get  the  fruit  of  the  cocoa-nut  tree  by  exas- 
perating the  monkeys  that  live  among  the  branches,  so  that  the  animals  hurl  down 
the  fruit.  The  assailants  keep  up  the  altercation  nntil  their  end  is  gained  and 
their  baskets  are  full.  But  to  be  patient  is  to  be  godlike.  Here,  iiien,  are  two 
mirrors.  In  which  is  your  face  reflected  f  Are  you  easily  irritated,  or  are  you  able 
to  patiently  stand,  like  your  Lord,  answering  not  a  word  r  2.  No  one  grace  more 
glorifies  God  than  the  spirit  shown  in  the  silence  of  Christ.  The  following  incident 
is  related  of  that  eminent  minister,  Dr.  Hopkins:  A  brother-in-law  who  was  a 
sceptic,  said  that  his  pious  kinsman  would  bear  exasperating  circumstances  no 
better  than  any  one  else,  and,  to  try  him,  stated  to  him  some  facts  peculiarly 
aggravating.  Dr.  H,  went  away  very  angry,  and  the  remark  was  made,  ••  I  told 
you  80."  The  night,  however,  was  spent  in  prayer,  and  with  the  morning  Dr.  H. 
came  and  confessed  his  sin  of  unholy  passion,  whereupon  his  brother  was  deeply 
affected,  and  admitted  that  this  was  a  spirit  which  he  did  not  possess.  The  infidel 
was  led  to  re-examine  the  grounds  on  which  he  stood.  He  became  a  humble  fol- 
lower of  Christ  and  a  minister  of  the  gospel.  But  the  objector  says,  I  cannot 
control  myself:  what  is  the  remedy?  In  general,  we  may  answer,  Watch  and 
pray.  God  will  do  His  part,  we  must  do  ours.  More  specifically :  Keep  yourself 
from  temptations.  Again,  your  physical  condition  is  to  be  cared  for.  Late  hours, 
bad  ventilation,  and  improper  diet  afleot  the  temper.  If  yon  eat  mince  pie,  fruit 
cake,  and  lobster  salad  at  night,  you  will  have  dyspepsia.  If  you  have  dyspepsia, 
you  will  be  cross.  Think,  again,  how  belittling  to  you  are  these  spurts  of  ill-temper, 
and  let  it  shame  you.  Think,  too,  how  trivial  are  these  annoyances,  and  how  tran- 
sitory life  is.  Look  at  Christ,  whose  whole  nature  was  sweet  to  the  depths  of  His 
being,  and  so  was  not  obliged  continually  to  curb  the  risings  of  unholy  emotion. 
Commit  your  cause  nnto  Him  who  jadgeth  righteously,  and  answer  not  a  word. 
{Ameriean  Homiletie  Review,) 

Ter.  6.  B»  rtleased  onto  them  one  prisoner  whomsoeyar  they  doilred.— Barabbu 
or  Christ ;— It  afifords  the  most  vivid  illustration  in  the  New  Testament  of  just  two 
great  moral  lessons :  Pilate's  behaviour  shows  the  wicked  wrong  of  indecision,  and 
the  chief  priests'  choice  of  Barabbas's  release  shows  the  utter  ruin  of  a  wrong 
decision.  These  will  become  apparent,  each  in  its  turn,  as  we  study  the  story. 
I.  Eablikbt  or  all,  lbt  us  oboup  toobthbb  thb  incidknts  or  thb  histobt,  so  thai 
YHXiB  OBDJBit  MAT  BB  SBBN.    1.  Obscrvo  the  rapid  action  of  the  priests  (Mark  xy.  1), 


ST.]  BT,  MARK,  642 

It  mast  liATe  been  yery  late  on  Thursday  night  when  the  great  conncfl  finished  the 
condemnation  of  Jesus.  But  the  moment  that  was  over,  the  priests  hurried  Him  at 
dawn  into  the  presence  of  the  Eoman  governor.  Their  feet  ran  to  evil,  and  they 
made  haste  to  shed  innocent  blood  (Isa.  lix.  7).  2.  Now  comes  the  providential 
moment  for  Pilate.  For  the  wisdom  of  God  so  orders  it  that  this  man  shall  be  able 
to  meet  his  tremendous  responsibility  unembarrassed  by  a  mob  for  his  audience. 
These  zealots,  like  all  creatures  who  have  the  form  of  godliness  but  deny  the  power 
thereof,  are  so  emphatically  pious  that  even  in  the  midst  of  murder  they  pause  on 
a  punctilio ;  they  will  not  enter  the  judgment  hall  lest  they  should  be  so  defiled 
that  they  could  not  eat  the  passover  (John  xviii.  28).  This  left  Pilate  the  chance 
calmly  to  converse  with  Jesus  alone.  3.  Then  succeeds  the  pitiable  period  of  sub- 
terfuge which  always  follows  a  shirked  duty.  Convinced  of  our  Lord's  innocence, 
Pilate  proposed  that  his  official  authority  should  just  be  counted  out  in  this  matter. 
He  bade  the  chief  priests  take  their  prisoner  themselves,  and  deal  with  Him  as  they 
pleased.  To  this  he  received  a  reply  which  showed  their  savage  animosity,  and  at 
the  same  instant  disclosed  the  use  they  meant  to  make  of  his  power.  They  cried 
out  that  the  only  reason  why  they  had  consulted  him  at  all  was  found  in  the  unlaw- 
fulness of  killing  a  man  without  due  form  of  procedure  (John  xviii.  30, 31).  4.  Next 
to  this  is  recorded  the  attempt  of  the  governor  to  shift  his  responsibility.  Pilate 
learned  from  the  mere  chance  use  of  a  word  that  Jesus  was  from  Galilee ;  and  as 
this  province  was  in  the  jurisdiction  of  Herod,  the  titular  monarch  of  the  Jews,  he 
sent  his  prisoner  onder  a  guard  over  to  the  other  palace  (Luke  xxiii.  7).  The  king 
was  quite  glad  to  see  this  Nazarene  prophet,  and  tried  to  get  Him  to  work  a  miracle, 
but  did  not  succeed  in  evoking  so  much  as  a  word  from  His  lips  (Isa.  liii.  7).  But 
before  the  return,  he  put  a  slight  on  Jesus'  kingly  claims,  so  that  Pilate  might  know 
how  much  in  derision  he  held  them.  The  soldiers  mocked  Him,  arraying  Him  in  a 
gorgeous  robe,  and  then  led  Him  back  into  the  presence  of  the  governor  again. 
6.  At  his  wits'  end,  Pilate  at  last  proposes  a  compromise.  He  remembered  that 
there  was  a  custom,  lately  brought  over  from  Italy  into  Palestine,  of  freeing  some  one 
of  the  State's  prisoners  every  year  at  Passover  as  a  matter  of  proconsular  clemency 
(Mark  xv.  6).  He  offered  to  let  Jesus  go  under  this  rule.  Such  a  procedure  would 
be  equivalent  to  pronouncing  him  technically  a  criminal,  but  thus  His  life  would  be 
spared.    But  the  subtle  priests  put  the  people  up  to  refuse  this  favour  flatly. 

6.  The  governor's  wife  now  meets  him  with  a  warning  from  «  dream.  He  had 
returned  to  the  judgment  seat,  and  was  just  about  to  pronounce  the  decision.  His 
wife  interrupted:  "  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that  just  man  "  (Matt,  xxvii,  19). 
This  threw  Pilate  into  a  frantic  irresolution  once  more.  A  second  time  he  left  the 
room,  and  went  forth  to  reason  and  expostulate  with  the  infuriated  crowd  at  the 
door.  With  renewed  urgency  he  pressed  upon  their  consideration  the  half-threat 
that  he  would  let  loose  on  them  this  wretch  Barabbas,  if  they  persisted  in 
demanding  Jesus*  death  (Luke  xxiii.  18).    This  only  exasperated  them  the  more. 

7.  Finally,  this  bewildered  judge  gave  his  reluctant  consent  to  their  clamours.  But 
in  the  act  of  condemnation  he  did  the  foolishest  thing  of  all  he  did  that  awful  day. 
He  took  water  and  washed  his  hands  before  the  mob,  declaring  thus  that  he  was 
iimocent  of  the  blood  of  the  just  person  he  was  delivering  up  to  their  spite 
(Matt,  xxvii.  24).  II.  So  we  beach  the  crisis  or  events  in  the  sfibitual  careeb 
or  that  buleb  and  or  that  nation.  1.  Observe  the  singular  picture.  It  is  all  in 
one  verse  of  the  Scripture  (Mark  xv.  15).  Two  men,  now  in  the  same  moment, 
appear  in  pnblic  on  the  steps  of  the  PrsBtorium :  Jesus  and  Barabbas.  One  of  them 
was  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  of  men.  ♦•  Then  came  Jesus  forth,  wearing  the 
crown  of  thorns,  and  the  purple  robe.  And  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  Behold  the 
man  ! "  (John  xix.  5).  Art  has  tried  to  reproduce  this  scene.  Dor6  has  painted 
the  whole  of  it ;  Guido  Beni  has  painted  the  head  with  thorns  around  the  forehead. 
Others  have  made  similar  attempts  according  to  their  fancy  or  their  ability.  It  is 
a  spectacle  which  attracts  and  discourages.  Beyond  them  all,  however,  lies  th« 
fact  which  each  Christian  will  be  likely  to  fashion  before  his  own  imagination. 
Jesus  comes  forth  with  His  reed  and  His  robe :  Eeee  Homo  I  Barabbas  alongside  1 
This  creature  has  never  been  a  favourite  with  artists.  He  was  a  paltry  wretch  any 
way,  thrust  ap  into  a  fictitious  importance  by  the  sapreme  occasion.  We  suppose 
bim  to  hay*  been  quite  a  commonplace  impostor.  Bar  means  son ;  Ahha^  which 
■ome  interpret  as  father.  Very  likely  he  chose  his  own  name  as  %  false  Messiah, 
**  Son  of  the  Father ; "  indeed,  some  of  the  ancient  manoseripts  call  him  "  Jesui 
Barabbas.*'  He  does  not  poise  picturesquely ;  look  at  him  1  2.  The  inoral  of  this 
scene  turns  upon  the  wilful  choice  made  between  these  two  leaders,  the  real  and  the 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xt 

pretended  Christ.  Now  let  it  be  said  here  that  the  whole  history  is  often  repeated 
even  in  these  modem  times.  It  is  onwise  to  lose  the  lesson  taught  as  by  rushing 
off  into  pious  execration  of  those  bigoted  Jews.  Men  had  better  look  into  their 
own  hearts.  In  his  introduotion  to  the  study  of  metaphysics,  Malebranohe  remarks 
very  quietly,  "  It  is  not  into  a  strange  ooimtry  that  such  guides  as  these  volumes 
of  mine  will  conduct  you ;  but  it  is  into  your  own,  in  which,  not  unlikely,  yon  are 
a  stranger."  It  will  be  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  decision  is  offered  and  made 
between  Jesus  and  Barftbbas  whenever  the  Lord  of  glory  is  represented  in  a  prin- 
ciple,  in  an  institution,  in  a  truth,  in  a  person.  8.  So  let  as  pause  right  here  to 
inquire  what  this  decision  involves  for  those  who  make  it.  The  illustration  is 
helpful,  and  we  can  still  employ  it.  Dwell  a  moment  upon  the  deliberateness  of 
the  choice  which  the  multitude  made  that  day.  The  exhibition  was  perfectly 
intelligible :  it  always  is.  There  is  Barabbas  I  there  is  Christ  1  When  a  sharp 
moral  crisis  is  reached,  men  generally  know  the  side  they  ought  to  choose.  Bight 
and  wrong,  truth  and  error,  sin  and  holiness,  the  world  or  God — this  is  just  the  old 
Jerusalem  scene  back  again.  Such  a  choice  fixes  character.  **  As  a  man  thinketh 
in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  When  one  wills  strongly,  he  moulds  himself  in  the  likeness 
of  the  thing  he  chooses.  The  old  Gastilian  proverb  says,  **  Every  man  is  the  son 
of  his  own  work."  Then  observe  the  responsibility  of  the  choice  between  Barabbas 
and  Christ.  The  chief  priests  declared  they  would  take  it  (Matt,  xxvii.  25).  Pilate 
could  ruin  no  soul  but  his  own.  In  the  end  Jesus'  blood  rested  upon  the  nation 
that  slew  Him.  Oh,  what  a  history  I  a  land  without  a  nation — a  nation  without  a 
land  1  All  the  vast  future  swung  on  the  hinge  of  that  choice.  Note,  therefore,  the 
reach  of  this  decision.  It  exhausted  all  the  chances.  Once — on  that  Friday 
morning  early — those  two  men  stood  side  by  side,  and  Pilate  asked  the  question, 
"  Whether  of  the  twain  P  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  21).  It  was  never  possible  after  that  to 
traverse  the  same  spiritual  ground  of  alternative  again.  Whoever  chooses  the 
wrong  must  go  and  fare  for  good  or  ill  with  the  thing  he  has  chosen.  The  thief 
becomes  master,  the  murderer  lord.     III.  Wb  abb  bbady  now  to  rkceivb  thb  fdlij 

TEACHINa  OF  THB   8T0BT  :   OUB  TWO  LESSONS  APPEAB  PLAINLY.       1.  We  SCO  the  wickod 

wrong  of  indecision.  We  are  agreed  that  Pilate  wished  to  let  Jesus  go.  But  when 
he  gave  Him  up  to  the  spite  of  His  murderers,  he  himself  "  consented  "  and  so 
shared  the  crime  (Psa.  1.  18).  Thus  he  destroyed  his  character.  Trinuning, 
injustice,  cruelty :  step  by  step  he  went  down,  till  he  added  a  scourging  which 
nobody  demanded.  *•  The  facility  with  which  we  commit  certain  sins,"  says 
Augustine,  "  is  a  punishment  for  sins  already  committed."  Thus  he  also  destroyed 
his  reputation.  One  man  there  has  been  whose  name  was  put  in  an  epistle  just 
for  a  black  background  on  which  to  write  a  name  that  was  white  (1  Tim.  vi.  13). 
The  same  was  put  in  the  Apostles'  Creed  that  all  Christendom  might  hold  it  in 
"  everlasting  fame  "  of  infamy :  "  crucified  under  Pontius  Pilate."  2.  We  see  also 
the  utter  ruin  of  a  wrong  decision.  Do  not  waste  any  more  thought  on  Pilate  or 
the  Jews.  Think  of  yourself.  See  life  and  death,  blessing  and  cursing ;  choose 
life  (Deut.  xxx.  15,  19).  Do  not  forfeit  what  may  be  your  soul's  last  chance.  (C. 
S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Not  Barabbas  but  Jesus: — TremelUus  was  a  Jew,  from  whose 
heart  the  veil  had  been  taken  away,  and  who  had  been  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
acknowledge  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  and  the  Son  of  God.  The  Jews  who  had  con- 
demned our  Saviour  had  said,  "Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas;"  Tremellius, 
when  near  his  end,  glorying  in  Christ  alone,  and  renouncing  whatever  came  in 
competition  with  Him,  used  very  different  words,  "Not  Barabbas,  bat  Jesus." 
{BaxendaWs    Dictionary    of    Anecdote.)  Barabbas  jpreferred    to    Christ : — 

I.  This  implies  a  histoby.  n.  It  bbcobds  a  ohoiob.  The  choice  involves  two 
things— first,  what  was  repudiated ;  next,  what  was  approved.  Here  was  the 
repudiation  of  One  who  was  absolutely  faultless.  Here  was  the  repudiation  by  the 
world  of  One  who  had  wrought  for  the  world  the  greatest  wonders  of  material  kind- 
ness. Here  was  the  repudiation  of  One  who  loved  them,  knowing  their  lack  of  love 
to  Himself.  Here  was  the  repudiation  of  One  who  had  at  His  command  power  to 
destroy  as  well  as  to  save.  From  what  was  repudiated,  turn  to  what  was  approved. 
"  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas."  HI.  It  suggests  a  paballel.  If  you  prefer  any 
passion  or  habit,  any  thing  or  man,  any  person  or  personification,  to  Christ,  that  is 
your  Barabbas.  If  you  prefer  any  treasure  to  Him  who  is  "  value,"  that  is  your 
Barabbas.  If  you  prefer  any  company  to  His  company,  any  love  to  His  love,  that 
object  of  preference  is  your  Barabbas.  If  you  prefer  any  given  sin  to  the  grace  that 
w  ould  conquer  it,  that  sin  is  your  Barabbas.  If,  though  you  ought  to  know  that 
this  sin  is  destructive,  that  the  blood  of  souls  is  on  it,  that  it  is  a  robber,  and  that 


XT.]  ST,  MARK,  647 

it  stiU  lurks  in  darkneis  to  rob  you  of  your  nobility,  of  your  peace,  of  your  spiritna] 
•ensitiveness,  of  your  liberty  to  have  fellowship  with  the  Infinite  One,  and  still 
refuse  to  give  the  vile  thing  up  to  be  crucified,  bat  will  rather  give  up  Christ,  that 
vile  thing  is  your  Barabbas.  If,  refusing  Christ,  you  trust  something  else  to  be  the 
**  Jesus  "  of  your  souls,  that  false  righteousness,  false  foundation,  false  comfort, 
false  hope,  is  your  "  Jesus  Barabbas."  Of  all  the  faculties  with  which  God  has 
enriched  man,  there  is  not  one  so  mysterious  in  its  nature  *nd  awful  in  its  working 
as  the  choosing  faculty.    {Charles  Stanford,  DJ),) 

Yer.  10.  Had  delivered  Him  for  en^y. — Envy  and  malevolence  : — Mutius,  a  citizen 
of  Bome,  was  noted  to  be  of  such  an  envious  and  malevolent  disposition,  that 
Publius,  one  day,  observing  him  to  be  very  sad,  said,  "  Either  some  great  evil  is 
happened  to  Mutius,  or  some  great  good  to  another."  Envy  and  malevolence : — 
Dionysius  the  tyrant,  out  of  envy,  punished  Philoxenius  the  musician  because  he 
eould  sing,  and  Plato  the  philosopher  because  he  could  dispute,  better  than  himself. 
Envy  in  a  Christian : — **  Who  is  this  elder  son  ?  "  was  once  asked  in  an  assembly 
of  ministers  at  Elberfeldt.  Daniel  Erummacher  made  answer :  **  I  know  him  very 
well ;  I  met  him  yesterday."  **  Who  is  he?  "  they  asked  eagerly;  and  he  replied 
solemnly,  "  MyseU."  He  then  explained  that  on  the  previous  day,  hearing  that  a 
very  iU-conditioned  person  had  received  a  very  gracious  visitation  of  God's  good- 
ness, he  had  felt  not  a  little  envy  and  irritation.  Envy  punishes  itself: — A 
Burmese  potter,  says  the  legend,  became  envious  of  the  prosperity  of  a  washerman, 
and,  in  order  to  ruin  him,  induced  the  king  to  order  him  to  wash  one  of  his  black 
elephants  white,  that  he  might  be  lord  of  the  white  elephant.  The  washerman 
replied  that,  by  the  rules  of  his  art,  he  must  have  a  vessel  large  enough  to  wash" 
him  in.  The  king  ordered  the  potter  to  make  him  such  a  vessel.  When  made, 
it  was  crushed  by  the  first  step  of  the  elephant  in  it.  Many  trials  failed,  and  the 
potter  was  ruined  by  the  very  scheme  he  had  devised  to  crush  his  enemy.  TJie  per- 
ucutort — the  causes  of  their  hostility : — We  now  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  the 
**  causes  '*  of  this  strange  conduct ;  in  other  words,  we  shall  inquire,  Why  the  chief 
priests  and  rulers  of  the  Jews  acted  thus  towards  our  Lord?  We  remark,  in 
general,  that  the  cause  was  this — that  the  whole  of  our  Lord's  conduct  and  ministry 
was  in  direct  opposition  to  their  views,  prejudices,  and  interests.  1.  It  is  obvious 
to  remark,  that  there  was  much  in  what  may  be  called  their  national  feelings  and 
prejudices,  against  which  our  Lord  greatly  and  constantly  offended.  The  chief 
priests  and  rulers  would,  of  course,  share  with  the  people  generally,  in  the  expecta- 
tion of  a  temporal  prince  in  the  person  of  Messiah,  and  of  national  distinctions  and 
honours  under  his  reign.  But  there  was  nothing  in  our  Lord's  conduct  or  ministry 
to  favour  these  views.  2.  But  this  is  not  all.  There  was  much  in  their  ofi&cial 
position  and  interests  which  rendered  our  Lord  an  object  of  Constant  suspicion,  and 
of  bitter  hatred.  The  whole  of  their  power  and  influence  depended  on  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  ecclesiastical  system  which  then  existed.  Their  power  and  influence 
in  their  own  nation  were  very  great ;  and  few  who  have  once  possessed  power  are 
willing  to  relinquish  it.  But  our  Lord's  conduct  and  ministry  appeared  not  only 
unfavourable  to  their  expectations  of  national  aggrandizement,  but  they  seemed 
to  threaten  even  the  existence  of  the  system  of  ecclesiastical  poUty  which  then 
obtained  amongst  them.  3.  But  the  grounds  of  hostility  to  our  Lord  were  carried 
further  stiU.  He  had  rendered  himself  personally  offensive  to  the  chief  priests  and 
rulers  of  the  Jews.  ''Beautiful,"  said  men,  *' these  prayers  and  fastings,  these 
alms  and  phylacteries,  this  scrupulous  attention  to  the  smallest  points  of  the  law  I " 
•'  Beautiful,"  replied  our  Lord,  •'  as  whited  sepulchres,  which  are  fuU  of  corruption 
and  dead  men's  bones ;  the  very  abodes  of  putridity,  loathsomeness,  and  death." 
It  was  a  very  common  thing  with  Him,  not  only  in  His  private  intercourse  with 
His  disciples,  but  also  in  His  public  ministry,  to  caution  men  against  the  designs 
and  the  practices  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  of  whom  these  chief  priests  and 
rulers,  for  the  most  part,  consisted.  ♦'  Beware  of  them,"  He  often  cried.  ♦•  Do  not 
as  the  Pharisees  do ;  "  "  they  give  alms,  and  say  long  prayers,  to  be  seen  of  men." 
It  may  not  be  improper  to  confirm  the  view  we  have  taken  of  their  conduct  by  a 
more  direct  reference  to  the  evangelical  history.  I  remark,  then,  that  the  truth  of 
it  appears  in  the  origin  of  their  opposition.  It  is  evident  that  their  hostility  ori- 
ginated in  the  success  of  our  Lord's  ministry ;  and  it  increased  with  the  increasa 
of  His  influence.  To  point  out  every  illustration  of  this  which  the  sacred  narratives 
afford,  would  be  to  go  through  a  great  part  of  our  Lord's  history.  But  we  may 
notice  the  extraordinaiy  event  which  specially  stimulated  their  malignity,  and  led 


$48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  iv. 

to  their  determination  to  destroy  Him ;  that  is  to  say,  the  resnrreotion  of  Lasama. 
It  was  not  many  months  before  His  crucifixion  that  this,  in  some  respects  Hif 
greatest  miracle,  was  performed.  "  Then  from  that  day  forth  they  took  counsel 
togetiier  for  to  pat  Him  to  death."  They  tried  to  put  the  people  down,  but  in  vain; 
they  appealed  to  onr  Lord,  **  Master,  rebuke  Thy  disciples ;  but  Jesus  said.  If  these 
Bliould  hold  their  peace,  the  stones  would  immediately  cry  out."  Then  *'  they  said 
among  themselves.  Perceive  ye  how  that  ye  prevail  nothing ;  behold  the  world  is 
gone  after  Him.'*  Thus  we  find  that  their  hostility  increased  just  as  His  influence 
increased.  Bat,  in  addition  to  His  influence  with  the  people,  our  Lord,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  rendered  Himself  personally  offensive  to  the  chief  priests  and  rulers 
by  His  xmsparing  exposure  of  their  hypocrisy.  Before  we  leave  this  part  of  our 
subject,  let  us  pause  for  a  moment  to  inquire  whether  the  same  spirit  has  ever  been 
displayed  since  the  persecutors  of  Jesus  went  to  give  in  their  account  ?  1.  There 
are  very  few  men  who  will  not  decidedly  oppose  every  effort  to  overturn  a  system, 
on  the  continuance  of  which  their  worldly  interests  depend.  Very  few  who  are  fed, 
enriched,  ennobled  by  any  social  arrangement,  will  ever  care  to  inquire  whether  it 
be  in  itself  good,  whether  it  be  generally  beneficial,  or  whether  it  be  not  for  the 
public  weal  that  it  give  place  to  another  ?  For  them  and  theirs  it  is  good  ;  and 
they  ate  all  the  world  to  themselves.  They  can  see  nothing  but  disaster  in  its 
overthrow,  and  nothing  but  wickedness  in  those  who  wish  to  effect  it.  And  this 
suggests  a  passing  remark,  that  the  best  institution  may  become  antiquated.  All 
the  unprejudiced  perceive  that  it  is  fast  becoming  a  nuisance,  and  that  the  sooner 
it  is  allowed  to  be  decently  interred,  the  better  for  all  interests.  But  the  fact  that 
it  was  once  a  benefit,  helps  to  blind  the  eyes  of  those  who  are  still  interested  in  ite 
continuance  to  another  fact — that  it  has  ceased  to  be  so.  2.  It  is  also  worthy  of 
remark,  that  generally  speaking,  their  hostility  is  bitter  in  proportion  to  their 
apprehensions  of  the  unsoundness  of  the  system  with  which  they  are  connected. 
3.  No  men  are  more  frequently  placed  in  this  position,  or  have  more  frequently  dis> 
played  this  spirit,  than  ecclesiastics.  Their  power  is  of  a  peculiar  kind,  and  always 
rests,  more  or  less,  on  public  opinion.  4.  It  is  still  worse  when  they  have  become 
completely  corrupt,  and  their  corruption  and  hypocrisy  are  exposed  to  the  world. 
Hence  the  persecutions  which  faithful  men  have  endured  in  every  age,  and  almost 
LQvariably  through  the  instigation  of  ecclesiastics.  Hence  the  suferings  of  the 
Lollards,  the  Puritans,  the  Nonconformists,  in  our  own  country ;  of  the  Waldenses, 
the  Albigenses,  the  Huguenots,  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  Hence,  we  say,  and 
hence  alone.  Why  was  Wycliffe  so  hateful  to  the  ecclesiastical  rulers  of  his  day? 
Simply  because  of  the  light  which,  from  time  to  time,  he  threw  on  the  system  of 
corruption  with  which  they  were  identified,  and  by  which  they  were  enriched  and 
ennobled  ;  because,  by  the  calm  and  earnest  exhibition  of  the  truth,  he  was  under- 
mining their  influence,  and  exposing  them  to  contempt.  Were  Gardiner  and 
Bonner,  men  of  some  note  in  their  day,  better  than  Annas  and  Caiaphasf 
Wherein,  beloved  reader,  and  how  much,  were  they  better  f  They  acted  on  pre- 
cisely the  same  principles,  and  in  precisely  the  same  spirit ;  and  if  they  were  not 
better  than  the  persecutors  of  Jesus,  were  they  worse  than  some  of  their  successors, 
the  EUzabethan  bishops?  Were  they  worse  than  Parker  and  Whitgift;  than 
Aylmer,  and  many  others?    {J,  J.  Davies.) 

Ver.  12.  The  King  of  the  JewB.--PtIate**  question ;— I.  Thh  title—"  King  of  the 
Jews."  U.  The  embabbabsmbnt  that  pbomptbd  the  utterance  or  this  question. 
UI.  BEOABn  THIS  AS  A  PBESBNT  QUESTION.  What  shall  you  do  with  reference  to  Him 
who  is  "  King  of  the  Jews  *' ?  Will  you  reject  Him  ?  Will  you  be  neutral  ?  Will 
you  be  like  the  Jews — for  Him  to-day,  against  Him  to-morrow?  Will  yoar  con« 
science  be  content  if  yea  simply  call  Him  by  His  name  ?    {Charle$  Star^fard,  D.D,) 

Ver.  13.  Cradfy  Bim.— The  worWt  treatment  of  Chrut :— John  Wesley,  at  • 
considerable  party,  had  been  maintaining  with  great  earnestness  the  doctrine  of 
Voz  popuU,  vox  Deif  against  his  sister,  a  lady  whose  talents  were  not  onworthy  tht 
family  to  which  she  belonged.  At  last  the  preacher,  to  pat  an  end  to  the  con- 
troversy, pat  his  argument  in  the  i^ape  of  a  dictum,  and  said,  "I  teU  you,  sister, 
the  voice  of  the  people  U  the  voice  of  God."  **  Yes,"  she  replied,  mildly,  ** it  cried, 
•Crucii^  Him,  crucify  Him.*"  A  more  admirable  answer  was,  perhaps,  never 
given.  The  world's  treatment  of  Christ : — Dr.  Blair,  at  the  conclusion  of  a 
sermon  in  which  he  had  descanted  with  his  usual  eloquence  on  the  loveliness  of 
virtue,  gave  utterance  to  the  following  apostrophe:  "0  virtue,  if  thou  warl 


.  XT.J  ST.  MARK,  G49 

«xnbodied,  how  would  all  men  love  and  imitate  thee."  His  oolleagne,  the  Bev.  B. 
Walker,  preached  that  afternoon,  and  took  occasion  to  say,  **  My  reverend  friend 
observed  in  the  morning  that,  if  virtue  were  embodied,  sJl  men  would  love  and 
imitate  her.  Well,  virtue  has  been  embodied ;  but  how  was  she  treated  7  Did  all 
men  love  her  7  Did  they  copy  her  ?  No  I  She  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men, 
who,  after  defaming,  insulting,  and  scourging  her,  led  her  to  Calvary,  where  they 
erucified  her  between  two  thieves."  Fickleneas  of  the  populace : — When  Napoleon 
was  returning  from  his  successful  wars  in  Austria  and  Italy,  amid  the  huzzas  of 
the  people,  Bourrienne  remarked  to  him  that  *'  it  must  be  delightful  to  be  greeted 
with  such  demonstrations  of  enthusiaBtio  admiration."  **  Bah  1 "  replied  Napoleon, 
"  this  same  unthinking  crowd,  under  a  slight  change  of  circumstances,  would  fol- 
low me  just  as  eagerly  to  the  scaffold."  {Dictionary  of  Anecdote.)  An  indict- 
ment against  man: — L  Here  we  have  thb  basis  ov  a.  TREsiENDona  indictment 
against  human  nature.  1.  Human  nature  does  not  know  good.  It  if  had,  it  would 
not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.  2.  Human  nature  hated  goodness  in  its 
most  attractive  form.  3.  Humanity  is  guilty  of  the  utmost  possible  folly,  because 
in  crucifyiDg  Jesus  it  crucified  its  best  friend.  4.  Human  nature  destroyed  its  best 
instructor.  6.  Human  nature  submitted  to  the  insolent  tyranny  of  the  priests. 
6.  Human  nature  was  guilty  of  craven  cowardice  in  striking  One  who  would  not 
defend  Himself.  U.  Let  me  shut  the  door  against  some  self-righteous  disclaimebs. 
1.  "  I  should  not  have  done  so."  Of  whom  wast  thou  born,  but  of  a  woman,  aa 
they  were  ?  2.  "  I  would  have  spoken  for  Him."  Yes ;  and  dost  thou  speak  for 
Him  now?  What  have  you  done  already?  Have  you  sneered  at  the  gospel? 
Have  you  rejected  it?  Are  you  ignorant  of  it?  Have  you  ever  doubted  His  power 
and  His  willingness  to  save  ?  For  behevers — oh  what  a  sorrow  to  think  we  stabbed 
our  Friend  to  the  heart.  If  we  have  crucified  Him — let  us  resolve  to  oxown  Him. 
{C.  H,  Spurgeon,) 

Ver.  15.  And  fo  FUate,  wUUng  to  content  the  people.— Ptlate  and  Jeius  :—l. 
What  sobt  o»  man  was  PiiiATS?  Probably  not  worse  than  many  Boman 
governors;  not  very  unlike  Festus,  Felix,  Gallio,  and  the  rest.  1.  Gruel.  2. 
Determined.  8.  Worldly.  II.  What  wab  hb  to  do  with  Jxsub?  This  was  his 
difficulty  ;  this  was  the  rook  on  which  he  was  stranded.  The  voice  of  the  nation 
demanded  Christ's  death.  Insurrection,  possibly  even  war,  impended,  if  the 
demand  was  refused.    What  was  to  be  done?    III.  Pilatb  tbies  to  evade  the 

BE8P0N8IBILITT  OF  DBCIDINO.      lY.   WhT  DID  NOT  PiLATE   DABE  TO  BEFUSE  THE  JeWS' 

DEMAND  ?  1.  He  had  an  evil  conscience.  3.  By  defending  Jesus,  he  would  run  the 
risk  of  earthly  loss.      8.  He  had  no  fixed  belief  to  support  him.     Y.  Obsebvx  the 

■TFEOT  OF  LimrO  HABITTALLT  FOB  THE  PBE8ENT  WOBLD.      A  man   of   the  WOrld,  who 

lives  only  for  the  things  of  time  and  sense,  content  if  he  can  satisfy  QaBsar  and  the 
people,  has  antliority  given  him  to  deal  with  the  cause  of  Christ.  He  cannot 
make  up  his  mind  to  take  up  the  cross  and  follow  Him ;  for  he  has  lived  for  self 
alone,  and  walked  only  by  sight.  What  will  such  a  man  do  in  time  of  sudden  trial 
but  follow  Pontius  Pilate.  If  I  must,  I  must.  I  see  it  is  wrong.  I  would  give 
much  to  escape,  but  there  is  no  other  way  open.  I  must  be  content  to  satisfy  th6 
people.  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  EUs  Church,  His  kingdom,  His  interest.  His  people,  I 
surrender  them  to  your  will.  (C  H,  Waller,  MJL.)  Pilate* $  toeakneu  and  the 
chief  priests*  gjuilt : — I.  Pbincxplb  will,  but  poliot  will  hot,  pbesebve  you  fbom 
ax.  If  you  will  not  make  the  sacrifice  which  goodness  requires,  give  up  all  hope 
of  keeping  your  goodness.  Courage  is  absolutely  necessary  for  goodness.  II.  A 
man's  sins  weigh  him  hsatilt.  If  PUate  had  had  a  guiltless  oonscience,  he  would 
have  defied  the  clamour  of  the  rulers.  He  walks  along  the  downward  path  to  hell 
with  his  eyes  open.  UI.  Bewabb  of  compbomisb.  Come  to  no  terms  with  evU, 
but  resist  it.  lY.  If  w>  can  pbkvent  wbono  being  done,  we  cannot  bt  vebbal 
FBOTESTi  bsgapb  THE  BE8PONSIBILITT  FOB  IT.  Pilatc's  handwashing  has  many 
imitators,  men  substituting  a  feeble  protest  for  vigorous  and  dutiful  action.  But 
in  vain  does  Pilate  think  to  wash  his  hands  of  guilt.    Y.  The  hollowness  of 

■ABTHLT   PBIDB   AND  POMP  GOMES  OUT   HEBE.      Yl.      ThEBE  IS  AN  EXHIBITION  HEBE  OF 

THB  SINFUL  SIDE  OF  HUMAN  NATUBX.  Sclf-will  scems  ft  bright,  brave  thing,  very 
excusable.  Behold  its  guiltiness  here.  Weakness  seems  a  harmless,  good-tempered 
thing ;  it  may  easily  commit  the  greatest  crime.  VII.  The  hardships  of  tbans- 
OBESSOBS  WATS  IS  ILLUSTBATED  HEBE.  Pilate  woi  d  havo  fouud  it  ten  times  easier 
to  do  right.  Think  of  his  shame,  self-contempt ;  of  the  horror  he  would  feel  when 
Christ  rose  from  the  dead ;  of  the  pensdties  which  followed.    It  was  not  more  than 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIL  [okaf.  «r. 

seven  or  eight  years  before  Gaiaphas  and  Pilate  were  both  degraded  from  theii 
posts ;  and  shortly  after,  Pilate,  weary  with  misfortunes,  killed  himself.  Nor, 
when  we  hear  the  men  of  Jerusalem  ask  the  Roman  governor  for  a  cross,  can  wt 
help  remembering  that  they  got  their  fill  of  crosses  from  the  Komans ;  when,  Titoi 
crucifying  sometimes  500  a  day  of  those  seeking  to  escape  from  the  doomed  city, 
at  length,  in  the  circuit  of  Jerusalem,  room  was  wanting  for  the  crosses,  and 
crosses  wanting  for  the  bodies.  YIU.  Oub  wsaknbss  incbeases  thb  Savioub'i 
TBOUBLES.  IX.  Chbist  nbveb  GOES  WITHOUT  ▲  WITNESS.  Pilate,  Horod,  Pilate*! 
wife,  and  even  the  hypocrisy  of  the  crowd,  all  proclaim,  **  There  is  no  fault  in 
Him.'*  X.  The  Savioub's  suffebinos  claim  oub  oBATirunE,  but  they  also  call  oa 
us  TO  take  up  oub  cross  and  oo  afteb  Him.  Let  us  copy  the  Divine  meekness, 
majesty,  and  love  which  met  in  the  cross  of  Christ.  {R.  Glover.)  Pilate : — Th« 
miserable  governor  is  an  example  to  us  of  a  man  of  infirm  principle  who  seeks  to 
tide  over  a  difficulty  by  temporising.  He  proposed  to  inflict  ignominious  sufferings 
on  Christ,  grievous  in  themselves,  but  yet  short  of  death;  hoping  in  this  way 
to  appease  the  multitude,  and  by  moving  their  fickle  humour  by  the  sight  of  blooi 
to  induce  them  to  remit  the  punishment  they  had  just  cried  out  to  have  executed  on 
Christ.  Pilate  had  no  strength  of  character,  no  moral  rectitude  and  fortitude.  He 
could  not  do  a  right  thing  unless  he  were  backed  up  by  the  people.  He  must  have 
the  popular  voice  with  hun  to  do  justice  or  to  commit  an  injustice.  A  terrible 
instance  is  Pilate  to  as  of  what  comes  of  seeking  a  principle  of  action,  direction, 
outside  of  our  own  selves,  of  beiujg  swayed  by  popular  opinion.  Pilate  knew  too 
well  what  were  the  Jewish  expectations  of  a  Messiah  to  suppose  for  an  instant  that 
the  High  Priests  had  delivered  Jesus  over  because  He  sought  to  rescue  His  nation 
from  a  foreign  domination.  He  appears  never  to  have  been  deceived  for  a  moment 
as  to  the  malignant  motives  of  those  who  sought  the  death  of  Christ ;  but  he  had 
not  the  moral  courage  to  stand  out  against  the  popular  voice.  {S.  Baring  Goulds 
M.A,)  Triumph  of  evil  only  apparent : — Jesus  is  given  over  to  death.  Wicked* 
ness  nas  had  its  way ;  righteousness  and  pity  have  been  trodden  down.  Yet  no 
Divine  defeat  here.  Though  seemingly  a  victory  for  hell,  it  was  really  a  triumph 
for  heaven.  I.  As  A  vindication  of  character.  In  no  other  way  could  such 
irresistible  proof  have  been  given  of  Christ's  sinlessness.  Deadly  foes,  with  every- 
thing their  own  way,  cannot  find  against  Him  a  single  cause  of  just  accusation. 
Six  times  He  is  declared  by  two  Boman  officials  to  be  without  fault.  Throughout 
the  scene  it  is  continually  forced  on  us  that  Jew  and  Eoman  are  on  trial,  and  Jesua 
is  the  judge.  Not  by  His  charges,  but  by  His  silence,  they  are  made  to  convict 
themselves  of  prejudice,  envy,  hypocrisy,  falsehood,  outrage  of  justice,  cruelty,  and 
murder.  II.  As  A  vulfilment  of  the  Divine  plan.  The  hope  of  the  world  was  ful- 
filled at  this  hour.  Eden's  distant  anticipation  of  bruising  the  heel  of  Him  who 
should  bruise  the  serpent's  head ;  Abraham,  across  the  altar  of  his  son,  beholding 
this  day  afar  off ;  Moses,  lifting  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness  ;  the  Psalmist's 
picture  of  rejection,  trial,  and  death ;  that  chapter  in  Isaiah  where  we  are  made  to 
stand  beside  the  cross ;  all  these,  and  many  another  prophetic  assurance,  waited 
for  this  tragic  hour  of  salvation.  Not  alone  through  the  love  of  friends,  but  even 
more  through  the  wrath  of  man,  the  purpose  of  God  marched  on  through  tears  and 
crime  to  redemption.    III.  Thb  final  outcoms  of  Chbist's  condemnation  displayed 

WITH  STABTLINa  POWEB  WHEBE   DEFEAT  AND  TBIUMPH  BESTED.        Pilate  gBVC  Up  JeSOS 

to  death  to  save  his  place ;  soon  he  was  accused  to  his  master,  and  driven  forth,  a 
broken-hearted  exile.  The  priests  persuaded  the  people  to  give  Jesus  to  death  to 
save  their  place  and  nation ;  that  generation  had  not  passed  away  before  their  own 
madness  brought  down  on  them,  ten  thousand  times  repeated,  all  the  cruelty  and 
outrage  to  which  they  had  surrendered  Him.  But  the  crucified  One — on  the  third 
day  rises,  and  on  the  fortieth  ascends  to  the  throne  of  God.  To-day,  while  the 
Koman  Empire  is  only  a  name,  and  the  Jew  is  a  restless  and  affiicted  wanderer, 
Jesus  triumphs.  (C  M.  Southgate.)  Chritt  willing  to  be  crucified : — Among  the 
Bomans  the  despotic  power  was  so  terrible,  that  if  a  slave  had  attempted  the  life  of 
his  master,  all  the  rest  had  been  crucified  with  the  guilty  person.  Bat  oar 
gracious  Master  died  for  His  slaves  who  had  conspired  against  Hun.  He  shed  His 
blood  for  those  who  spilt  it.  He  was  willing  to  be  crucified,  that  we  might  be 
glorified.  Our  redemption  was  sweeter  to  Him  than  death  was  bitter,  by  which  it 
was  to  be  obtained.  It  was  excellently  said  by  Pherecides  that  God  transformed 
Himself  into  love  when  He  made  the  world.  Bat  with  greater  reason  it  ia  said  by 
the  apostle,  God  is  love,  when  He  redeemed  it.  {Handbook  to  Scripture  Doctritiei^ 
The  scourging : — *'  I  will  chastibe  Him,"  said  Pilate.      The  word  used  {irat£ty€iti 


XT.]  8T,  MARK,  661 

is  rantemptnoai ;  it  means  to  oorreot  as  a  naughty  child,  or,  u  a  slave,  to  scare 
him  against  again  oommitting  the  same  offence.  By  Boman  usage,  when  a  slave 
was  about  to  be  set  free,  his  master  led  him  before  the  Praetor,  and  the  latter  then 
slightly  beat  the  slave  on  the  back  with  a  rod  {virgulta),  as  a  reminder  to  him  of 
the  slavery  in  which  he  had  been,  and  from  which  he  was  about  to  be  set  free. 
And  now,  see,  the  Jewish  people  lead  Jeans,  bound  as  a  slave,  before  the  Roman 
governor,  and  Pilate  igporantly  deals  with  Him  according  to  the  law  for  the 
manumission  of  slaves.  He  beats  Him — but  Jesus  does  not  pass  at  once  from  His 
court  to  freedom.  He  must  first  traverse  the  dark  valley  of  death,  and  go  to  His 
death  through  the  way  of  sorrows.  There  were  various  kinds  of  scourges  employed 
among  the  Romans.  There  was  the  stick  (ftutU),  the  rod  {virga),  the  whip  {lorumj, 
which  was  of  leather-platted  thongs,  and  into  the  plats  were  woven  iron  spikes 
(scorpio)  or  knuokle-bones  of  animals.  When  Behoboam  said  to  the  deputatiou, 
*'  My  father  chastised  you  with  whips,  but  I  will  chastise  you  with  scorpions,"  he 
contrasted  the  simple  scourge  of  leather  thongs  with  that  which  was  made  more 
terrible  with  the  nails  and  spikes,  and  which  was  called  the  scorpion,  and  was  in 
use  among  the  Jews  as  well  as  among  the  Romans.  The  lictors  who  stood  about 
the  Praetor  bore  axes  tied  in  bundles  of  rods.  The  rods  were  for  beating,  the  axes 
for  decapitating ;  but  they  only  used  the  rods  for  persons  of  distinction  and  quality. 
A  Praetor  such  as  PUate  had  six  of  such  officers  by  him.  We  may  be  quite  sure 
that  they  did  not  proceed  to  unbind  their  bundles  of  rods  to  scourge  Jesus 
with  them — that  would  be  rendering  Him  too  much  respect.  He  would  not  be 
beaten  with  the  lictors'  rods,  but  be  scourged  with  the  tiionged  whip,  armed 
either  with  scorpions  or  knuckle-bones,  the  instrument  of  chastisement  for 
slaves  and  common  criminals.  Before  Christ  was  scourged  He  was  stripped  of 
His  raiment  before  the  people.  His  hands  being  bound  and  attached  to  a  pillar. 
We  have  descriptions  from  old  heathen  writers  of  the  manner  in  which  such  a 
scourging  was  performed.  '*  In  Rome,"  says  Aulus  Gellius,  **  in  the  Forum  was  a 
post  by  itself,  and  to  this  the  most  illustrous  man  was  brought,  his  clothes  stripped 
off,  and  he  was  beaten  with  rods."  There  is  a  profane  Life  of  Christ,  of  uncertain 
date,  written  in  Hebrew,  circulating  anciently  among  the  Jews,  that  embodies  their 
traditions  about  Christ,  and  in  it  it  is  said  that  **  The  elders  of  Jerusalem  took 
Jesus  and  bound  Him  to  a  marble  pillar  in  the  city,  and  scourged  £Qm  there  with 
whips,  crying  out,  •  Where  now  are  the  wondrous  works  that  Thou  hast  done ?'" 
In  the  Jewish  laws  it  is  ordered  that  behind  the  man  to  be  scourged  shall  stand  a 
stone,  upon  which  the  executioner  shall  take  his  place,  so  as  to  be  well  raised,  that 
thereby  the  blows  he  deals  may  fall  with  greater  effect.  It  is  probable  that  before 
Herod's  palace,  where  Pilate  held  his  court,  was  a  low  pillar,  and  the  prescribed 
square  block  on  which  the  executioner  was  to  stand,  whilst  the  person  to  be 
scourged  was  fastened  to  the  low  pillar  in  a  bowed  position,  the  ropes  knotted  about 
his  wrists  being  passed  through  a  ring  strongly  soldered  into  the  stone  pillar.  Thus 
the  scourger  stood  above  the  man  he  beat,  and  struck  downwards  at  his  bent  back. 
The  tradition  that  the  scourging  of  Jesus  took  place  somehow  thus,  that  He  was 
attached  to  a  pillar  when  beaten,  is  very  old.  {S.  Baring  Gould,  M.  A.)  Contrast 
between  a  scourged  Christ  and  a  pampered  Christian: — Christ  shows  us  how  the 
flesh  ig  to  be  mastered  by  the  spirit,  how  we  are  to  strive  to  obtain  such  a 
dominion  over  cor  bodies  that  we  can  bear  pain  without  outcry  and  anger.  Ood 
Himself  sends  us  pain  sometimes,  and  we  are  disposed  to  be  restive  under  it,  to 
murmur,  and  to  reproach  Him.  Let  us  look  to  Jesus,  scourged  at  the  pillar,  and 
see  how  He  endured  patiently.  Let  us  learn  to  keep  the  body  under,  and  bring  it 
into  subjection ;  ease,  luxury,  sell-indulgence  have  a  deadening  effect  on  the  soul, 
and  this  is  an  age  of  self-indulgence.  We  are  always  intent  on  heaping  to  ourselves 
comforts ;  we  have  no  idea  of  '*  enduring  hardships."  We  must  have  softer,  deeper 
carpets  for  our  feet;  garments  that  fit  us  most  perfectly  and  becomingly,  easy 
chairs,  soft  springy  beds,  more  warmth,  better  food,  purple,  fine  linen,  sumptuous 
fare  every  day.  Our  rooms  must  be  artistic,  the  decorations  and  colours  aesthetic ; 
the  eye,  the  ear,  the  nose,  the  touch  must  all  be  gratified,  and  we  seek  to  live  for 
the  pleasures  of  the  sense,  and  think  it  a  sort  of  duty  to  have  the  senses  tickled  or 
soothed.  How  strangely  does  the  figure  of  Jesus,  bowed  at  the  pillar,  with  His 
back  exposed,  and  the  soldiers  lashing  at  Him  with  their  whips  loaded  with 
knuokle-bones,  contrast  with  this  modern  foppishness  and  effeminacy !  What  a 
lesson  he  teaches  of  the  control  of  the  senses,  of  the  conquest  of  the  fiesh  1  I  would 
not  Mj  that  it  is  wrong  to  cultivate  art  and  to  love  that  which  is  beautiful ;  but  it 
is  wrong  to  be  so  giren  up  to  it  as  to  allow  the  lovb  of  the  ease  and  beauty  and 


56«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xt, 

graoefalness  in  modem  life  to  take  the  fibre  out  of  our  sonls,  and  reduce  as  to  moral 
limpnesB.  We  must  endure  hardship  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ ;  we  must 
strive  to  be  above  the  comforts  and  adornments  of  modem  life,  and  make  of 
them  the  accident  and  not  the  substance  of  our  existence.  (Ibid,)  Duty 
and  interest : — In  Pilate's  case,  the  particular  influence  that  prevented  was 
the  fear  of  man.  **  What  will  the  Jews  say,  v/hat  will  the  Jews  do,  if  I  discharge 
this  Prisoner  whom  they  wish  me  to  condemn  ?  "  When  once  men  are  governed 
in  their  conduct,  not  by  the  sense  of  right,  but  by  the  desire  to  obtain  the  world's 
approval,  or  the  fear  of  incurring  the  world's  hatred,  they  are  at  the  mercy  of  the 
winds  and  waves,  without  chart  or  rudder.  They  are  not  rocks  against  which  the 
waters  break,  but  which  stand  unmoved  because  they  are  rooted  into  the  solid  earth, 
but  they  are  things  that  drift  upon  the  surface,  borne  hither  and  thither  as  the 
current  sets  or  the  breezes  drive  ihem.  The  man  who  owns  Christ  only  when  the 
world  tolerates  it,  or  as  far  as  the  world  bears  it,  will  deny  Christ  when  the  world 
frowns.  It  is  impossible  to  be  a  lover  of  Christ  and  a  lover  of  the  world ;  it  ia 
impossible  to  fear  God  and  man  too ;  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  please  men  and 
be  the  servant  of  Christ.    (Oxford  Lent  Semums.) 

Vers.  17-19.  And  they  clothed  Him  with  purple,  and  platted  a  crown  of  tbonu.— 
Mock  dignity : — Among  the  Babylonians  and  Persians  it  was  customary  on  a  certain 
feast  to  bring  forth  a  malefactor  from  the  prison,  to  place  him  on  a  throne,  adorned 
with  the  royal  insignia,  to  treat  him  with  homage  and  honour,  gi^e  him  a  splendid 
banqnet,  and  then  tear  o&  his  crown  and  royal  apparel,  scourge  him,  and  put  him 
to  death  by  burning  him  alive.  In  Aricia,  the  priest,  king  for  the  year,  was 
anciently  sacrificed  annually,  but  afterwards  a  slave  was  taken  and  adorned  with 
royal  and  priestly  ornaments  for  a  few  days,  and  treated  with  all  reverence,  and 
then  was  stripped  and  put  to  death.  Throughout  the  heathen  world,  at  midwinter, 
it  was  customary  to  thus  give  a  short-lived  dignity  to  some  person,  who  was  after- 
wards despoiled  of  his  splendour  and  put  to  death,  and  this  custom  lingered  on  in 
a  modified  form  in  Europe,  and  at  Twelfth  Night  Epiphany  kings  and  queens  were 
installed.  Even  in  Mexico,  when  discovered  and  invaded  by  the  Spaniards,  a  some- 
what similar  usage  was  found.  A  young  man  for  a  whole  year  was  treated  with 
homage,  and  given  everything  he  desired,  and  then  was  suddenly  despoiled  and  pnt 
to  death.  Haman,  when  he  desired  the  royal  apparel  for  himself,  and  the  royal 
steed,  had  little  idea  that  he  was  seeking  a  brief  glory  which  woold  end  in  the 
gallows,  just  like  the  annual  exaltation  and  execution  of  the  Sagan,  as  he  was  called. 
The  Bomans  kept  their  Saturnalia  when  the  slaves  took  their  masters'  places,  and 
were  dressed  in  the  best  robes,  and  banqueted  at  their  tables,  whilst  their  lords 
served  them.  And  then,  in  a  night,  all  was  changed,  and  the  slave  was  subjected 
to  the  rod  and  bondage.  The  soldiers  were  wont  to  keep  their  Saturnalia,  and  knew 
all  about  the  custom  of  dressing  up  a  victim  as  a  king,  then  disrobing  him  and  pat- 
ting him  to  death,  and  now  they  practised  this  on  Jesus.  Their  act  was  not  one 
prompted  by  a  sudden  fancy.  It  was  a  thing  to  which  they  were  either  themselves 
accustomed,  or  knew  of  it  as  a  rite  still  in  nse.  They  regarded  Jesus  as  a  victim, 
and  as  a  victim  they  treated  Him  to  this  short  honour ;  but  they  did  it,  for  all  that, 
in  mockery.  (S.  Baring  Gould,  M.A.)  A  crown  of  thorns  .-—We  usually  think  ot 
it  as  with  an  Eastern  diadem ;  but  it  was  far  more  probably  in  imitation  of  the  victor's 
wreath,  which  the  emperor  of  the  time  was  so  fond  of  wearing,  as  the  statues  of 
Liberins  abundantly  testify.  One  of  the  soldiers  must  have  ran  into  the  garden  of 
the  palace,  or  down  the  rocky  valley  hard  by,  and  gathered  a  handful  of  thorny 
bramble  :  of  what  kind  it  was,  has  been  often  disputed.  Those  who  thought  most 
of  the  infliction  of  pain  fixed  on  an  Acanthus,  with  long  spikes  that  sting  as  well 
as  prick ;  others,  who  saw  in  the  crowning  more  of  mockery  than  cruelty,  chose  the 
Nebk — the  Spina  Cbristi — which,  with  its  pliant  twigs  and  bright  ivy-like  leaves, 
best  recalls  the  Imperial  wreath.  Whichever  it  was,  it  is  enough  for  as  to  feel,  as 
an  evidence  of  the  restitution  wrought  by  the  Incarnation,  that  what  sprang  from 
the  ground  as  a  curse  on  Adam's  transgression,  was  woven  into  a  crown,  and  worn 
by  Christ.  (H.  M.  Lttckockt  D.D.)  The  curse  and  crown  of  thoms : — And  thos, 
as  the  eorse  began  in  thorns  (Gen.  iii.  18),  it  ended  in  thoms.  (Hiller,)  Spm- 
bolitm  of  the  erown  of  thoms : — Thorns  and  briars  were  the  curse  of  the  earth,  sent 
because  of  man's  disobedience,  and  after  his  expulsion  from  Paradise.  There  is, 
therefore,  a  symbolical  propriety  in  Christ  assuming  a  crown  of  thoms.  He  who 
had  come  to  undo  the  fault  of  Adam,  to  take  away  its  consequences,  takes  to  His 
head  the  symbol  of  the  evil  brought  on  the  earth,  and  bears  it  on  His  temples.  .  . 


.  xf.]  ST.  MARK,  65a 

Ood  of  old  likened  the  law  which  He  gave  to  Israel  to  a  thorn  hedge  enclosing  His 
people.  Christ  has  oome  to  take  away  the  law  of  ordinances  which  tore  and  tor- 
tared  the  Jewish  people,  and  He  takes  its  symbol,  the  thorny  circle,  and  is  crowned 
with  it.  .  .  .  The  thorn  has  also  the  symbolic  meaning  of  sin,  and  a  dry  thorn 
was  regarded  as  the  symbol  of  a  sinner  (Ezek.  ii.  3,  6).  ...  A  thorn  is  symboUcal, 
not  of  sin  only,  bat  of  mockery.  As  the  thorn  eaters  into  the  flesh  and  works 
itself  deeper  in,  and  rankles  there,  causing  intolerable  pain,  and  can  only  with  the 
greatest  diffioiUty  be  extracted,  so  is  it  with  the  stabbing  word  of  sarcMm — it 
pierces  deep  into  the  heart,  and  festers  there.  (<Sf.  Baring  Oould,  M.A,)  The 
etmmatum  of  Christ : — The  thorn  chaplet  was  a  triumphal  crown.  Christ  had  fought 
with  sin  from  the  day  when  he  first  stood  foot  to  foot  with  it  in  the  wilderness,  up 
to  the  time  when  He  entered  Pilate's  hall,  and  He  had  conquered  it.  As  a  witness 
that  He  had  gained  the  victory,  behold,  sin's  crown  seized  as  a  trophy  I  What  was 
the  crown  of  sin  ?  Thorns.  But  now  Christ  has  spoiled  sin  of  its  richest  regalia, 
and  He  wears  it  Himself.  Glorious  Champion,  all  hail  I  (C.  JET.  Spurgeon.)  Tlie 
thorn  crown  a  ttimulus: — In  the  thorn  crown  I  see  a  mighty  stimulus.  1.  To  fervent 
love.  Can  you  see  Christ  crowned  with  thorns,  and  not  be  drawn  to  Him  ?  2.  To 
repentance.  Can  you  see  your  best-beloved  put  to  such  shame,  and  yet  hold  truce 
or  parley  with  the  sins  which  pierced  Him.  It  cannot  be.  (ibid.)  The  thorn 
crown  a  shelter : — Of ttimes  I  have  seen  the  blackthorn  growing  in  the  hedge  all 
bristling  with  a  thousand  prickles,  but  right  in  the  centre  of  the  bush  have  I  seen 
the  pretty  nest  of  a  httle  bird.  Why  did  the  creature  plaoe  its  habitation  there  ? 
Beoaase  the  thorns  become  a  protection  to  it,  and  shelter  it  from  harm.  And  to 
yon  I  would  say — Build  your  nests  within  the  thorns  of  Christ.  It  is  a  safe  plaoe 
for  sinners.  Neither  Satan,  sin,  nor  death  can  reach  you  there.  And  when  you 
have  done  that,  then  come  and  crown  His  sacred  head  with  other  crowns.  What 
glory  does  He  deserve?  What  is  good  enough  for  Him?  If  we  could  take  all  the 
precious  things  from  all  the  treasuries  of  monarchs,  they  would  not  be  worthy  to  be 
pebbles  beneath  His  feet.  If  we  could  bring  Him  all  the  sceptres,  mitres,  tiaras, 
diadems,  and  all  other  pomp  of  earth,  they  would  be  altogelJier  unworthy  to  be 
thrown  in  the  dust  before  Him.  Wherewith  shall  we  crown  Him  ?  Come,  let  us 
weave  our  praises  together,  and  set  our  tears  for  pearls,  our  love  for  gold.  They  will 
sparkle  like  so  many  diamonds  in  His  esteem,  for  He  loves  repentance,  and  He  loves 
faith.  Let  us  make  a  chaplet  with  our  praises,  and  crown  Him  as  the  laureate  of 
graoe.  Oh,  for  grace  to  do  it  in  the  heart,  and  then  in  the  life,  and  then  with  the 
tongue,  that  we  may  praise  Him  for  ever  who  bowed  His  head  to  shame  for  us. 
(Ibid.)  A  crown  of  thorns : — When  John  Huss,  the  Bohemian  martyr,  was  brought 
out  to  be  burnt,  they  put  on  his  head  a  triple  crown  of  paper,  with  painted  denls  ou 
it.  On  seeing  it  he  said,  "  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  my  sake  wore  a  crown  of 
thorns.  Why  should  not  I  then  for  His  sake  wear  this  light  crown,  be  it  ever  so 
ignominious  ?  Truly  I  will  do  it  and  that  willingly."  When  it  was  set  upon  his 
head,  the  bishop  said, "  Now  we  commend  thy  soul  to  the  deviL  "  **  But  I,"  said  Huss, 
lifting  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  "  do  commit  my  spirit  into  Thy  hands.  O  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  to  Thee  I  commend  my  spirit,  which  Thou  hast  redeemed  1 "  When  the 
fagots  were  piled  up  to  his  very  neck,  the  Duke  of  Bavaria  was  officious  enough  to 
desire  him  to  abjure.  "  No,"  said  Huss,  "  I  never  preached  any  doctrine  of  any 
evil  tendency,  and  what  I  have  taught  with  my  lips  I  now  seal  with  my  blood." 
{Mother*  s  Treasury.)  The  erue  I  coronation : — First,  the  cruel  coronation  is  set  before 
us ;  secondly,  the  abjects  exulting  over  their  supposed  victim,  mocking  Him  and 
hailing  Him  with  the  supposition  that  He  only  pretended  to  be  a  king ;  but  we  can- 
not stop  there — ^we  must  go  on  to  notice  His  exaltation  in  consequence,  and  look 
to  Him  where  He  is.  I.  I  was  led  to  the  first  statement  from  the  circumstance  of 
the  rejoicings  in  the  week  that  is  past,  on  account  of  its  being  coronation  week,  or 
coronation  day.  "  Well,"  I  said  in  my  own  soul,  as  I  turned  over  the  leaves  of  my 
Bible, "  every  day  of  my  life,  God  helping  me,  shall  be  a  coronation  day.  He  must 
be  crowned  Lord  of  all.  But  mark,  in  His  official  character  He  must  be  crowned 
oroelly  with  thorns  first.  Thorns  were  the  symbol  of  the  curse.  When  Grod 
pronounced  a  corse  upon  creation,  in  consequence  of  man's  fall,  it  was  said, 
"  Thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  unto  thee."  Not  a  few,  yea,  prob- 
ably, all  of  God's  saints  have  had  to  experience  that  there  are  thorns  in  their  path, 
that  there  are  thorns  around  them,  that  there  are  thorns  in  their  choicest  gardens, 
perhaps,  in  their  families,  in  their  children ;  that  there  are  thorns  in  their  most 
pleasant  dronmstanoee,  that  there  are  thorns  in  their  most  prosperous  businesses, 
that  there  are  thorns  in  their  fondest  hopes ;  but  none  among  them,  that  I  have  ever 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0R.  [ora».  xfi 

heard  of,  have  been  crowned  with  thorns.  I  sometimes  flinch  if  a  thorn  only  tonchef 
my  finger — I  eometimes  flinch  if  a  thorn  seems  threatening  the  destmotion  of  my 
fond  expectation.  What  should  I  do  if  I  were  brought  to  be  crowned  with  them  ? 
That  was  only  the  honour  belonging  to  the  King  of  kings,  who,  though  King  of 
kings,  was  the  Prince  of  sufferers ;  and  this  Prince  of  suflerers  was  crowned  with 
that  curse  which  belonged  to  poor,  fallen,  ruined  sinners,  and  which  must  have 
crushed  you  and  me  into  eternal  destruction,  if  He  had  not  been  crowned  with  it. 
Have  we  never  read,  that  He  was  "made  a  corse  for  us,"  because  ♦•  it  is  written, 
Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  When  this  crown  of  thorns  was  placed 
upon  the  head  of  our  blessed  Lord,  it  was  that  as  a  crowned  head  He  should  pro- 
claim the  liberation  of  His  people  from  the  curse.  As  though  He  bad  said,  "  Plat 
it  closely,  take  them  all  in,  do  not  leave  a  single  thorn  for  My  bride,  do  not  leave 
a  single  point  that  shall  be  experienced,  in  a  judicial  sense,  for  any  that  the  Father 
gave  Me  ;  plat  it  thicker,  plat  it  higher,  lay  it  heavier,  that  I  may  endure  all."  And 
why?  Because  He  loved  His  Church,  and  would  put  away  the  curse,  and  secure 
the  blessing  of  His  Father  upon  them,  and  at  least  welcome  them  home  with  the 
very  appellation  of  blessing,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father."   II.  Let  vs  advanob 

TO  TAKE  A  VIEW  OF  THESE    ABJECTS,  THAT   WEBB   EXULTING   IK  HiS  SCFFEBINOB.       Are 

there  not  many  such  mockers  now  P  But  just  look  for  a  moment  at  the  characters 
set  forth  here,  as  the  abjects  that  mocked  Him.  •*  What  1 "  say  you,  "  are  we  to 
count  chief  priests  and  scribes  among  the  abjects  f  *'  I  do  so  always,  and  among  the 
very  worst  of  abjects.  What  was  Pilate?  an  abject.  What  were  the  priests,  that 
prompted  and  goaded  the  people  to  cry,  "  Away  with  Him,  away  with  Him."  They 
were  all  abjects,  decided  mockers  of  Christ.  And  yet  these  abjects  did  not  like  to 
go  forward  in  a  party  by  themselves,  but  must  summon  the  other  abjects  to  do  so  for 
them.  Now  look  for  a  moment  how  Christ  is  mocked,  in  the  present  day,  with  all 
the  gaudy  show,  with  all  the  mimicry  of  expressions  in  honour  of  Him,  in  wjbiob 
the  heart  does  not  go,  with  all  the  superstitious  ceremonies  and  abominable  idola- 
tries  that  are  palmed  upon  men  under  the  name  of  Christianity !  But  yon  will 
observe,  that  amidst  all  this  insult  and  mockery,  which  was  heaped  upon  Jesus  when 
He  was  upon  earth,  by  these  abjects,  yet  they  were  obliged  to  honour  Him  as  King, 
and  they  cried  out,  though  they  only  meant  it  in  mockery,  ••  Hail,  King  of  the 
Jews."  Now  panse  here  for  a  moment,  just  to  ask  the  quession, "  How  do  I  honour 
Him  ?  "  Are  we  really  honouring  Him  as  our  King  ?  or  are  we  fleeing  from  Him, 
as  His  disciples  did  amidst  His  sufferings.  UI.  This  will  lead  he  to  sat  a  ntw 
WORDS  ABOUT  His  PBEBENT  EXALTATION.  Now  this  proscnt  exaltatiou,  I  am  told,  if 
*'  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,"  where  He  is  enthroned  in  gloiy.  (/. 
Irons,  M,A,) 

Ver.  20.  And  led  Him  out  to  crucify  mm.^Preparatiom  for  erueiJlxUm ;— Tht 

case  was  shut  and  the  last  chance  was  gone,  and  Pilate  uttered  the  terrible  formnUk, 
**  Go,  soldier ;  get  the  cross  ready !  "  The  cross,  perhaps,  was  found  on  a  pile  of 
grim  lumber  in  some  prison-yard  not  far  off.  Perhaps  it  was  a  bole  of  some 
common  tree,  with  the  boughs  lopped  off  and  the  bark  left  on.  This  log  and  iti 
transverse  beam  had  to  be  roughly  knocked  together  at  the  place  of  crucifixion — 
not  before.  Some  officer  would  say  to  the  man  and  his  mates  who  went  for  it : 
"  You  may  as  well  bring  two  other  crosses,  for  there  are  two  other  men  to  be  cruoi* 
fied,  and  we  may  as  well  put  them  all  three  to  death  together,  and  so  save  trouble." 
Meanwhile,  there  stands  Jesus  meekly  waiting,  still  thorn-crowned — for,  when  the 
soldiers  took  away  the  fantastic  robe  they  did  not  take  away  (according  to  any  evi- 
dence  that  we  have)  the  crown  of  thorns.  Then  the  two  convicts  are  fetched  out, 
and  yonder  they  slouch.  Ah  1  I  can  almost  see  the  two  horrors — two  hard,  white- 
grey  cruel  faces,  two  pairs  of  eyes  that  shift  and  shine  under  two  shocks  of  rough  wild 
hair.  Now  all  is  ready.  The  three  are  formed  into  a  line,  each  one  carrying  a  part  of 
his  cross,  and  each  one  has  slung  before  him,  from  his  neck,  a  board  whitened  with 
gypsum,  on  which  yon  see  his  name  and  crime  scored  in  great  red  letters.  A  cen- 
turion, on  horseback,  goes  first ;  and  then  comes  the  Holy  One,  sinking  under  the 
shaft  of  His  cross.  The  oner  walks  by  His  side,  shouting,  *'  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
the  King  of  the  Jews !  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews  I "  The  second  man 
comes  eiter  Him,  and  the  third  man  after  him,  attended  in  like  manner.  Ab  they 
stagger  slowly  along,  all  the  reeking,  ragged  lazzaroni  swarm  out  in  larger  numbers 
from  the  slums  of  outcast  Jerusalem,  leaping,  laughing,  swearing,  and  playing  off 
piMtical  jokes  upon  one  another.  {Charles  Stanford,  D.D.)  The  way  to  the 
«roft.*— The  procession  formed,  and  started  on  its  way.    First  went  a  trumpeter  to 


iBir.  XT.]  8T.  MARK.  65£ 

call  attention  and  elear  the  road.    This  was  nsnal  hoth  among  the  Eomans  and 
the  Jews.    Among  the  latter  a  herald  led  the  way,  crying  out,  •'  So  and  so,  the  son 
of  BO  and  so,  is  being  led  forth  to  execution.   The  witnesses  against  Him  are  so  and 
80.    If  any  one  knows  any  reason  why  the  sentence  be  remitted  or  deferred,  let 
him  now  declare  it.*'     Also,  when  a  criminal  had  been  sentenced,  two  members  of 
the  council  accompanied  him  to  execution.    We  may  be  sure  it  was  so  on  this  occa- 
Bion.    Jesus  had  been  condemned  to  death  by  the  Sanhedrim,  and  members  of  it 
would  be  likely  to  attend  and  see  that  Christ  was  really  slain ;  we  find  also  that  when 
He  hung  upon  the  cross  some  of  these  were  present,  who  mocked,  and  these  were 
probably  the  two  members  delegated  to  assist  at  the  execution,  according  to  law.    A 
centurion  also  attended  the  procession,  mounted  on  horseback.     He  represented 
the  governor,  and  his  function  was  to  see  that  the  execution  was  properly  and  fully 
carried  out,  and  that  the  person  executed  died  on  his  cross.   We  see  in  the  presence 
of  the  centurion  under  the  cross,  when  Christ  died,  as  well  as  in  that  of  the  chief 
priests  deriding  Jesus  as  He  hung,  one  of  those  many  little  touches  of  truth,  those 
undesigned  coincidences,  which  serve  to  show  the  fidelity  of  the  record  to  the  facts 
of  the  case.    A  considerable  detachment  of  soldiers  was  also  in  attendance,  and 
accompanied  the  Lord  on  His  way  to  death.  There  were  fears  of  a  riot,  and  possibly 
of  an  attempt  to  release  the  two  thieves.     If  these  were,  as  we  may  suppose,  of  the 
band  of  Barabbas,  they  were  not  only  found  guilty  because  theywere  robbers,  but 
also  because  they  were  political  offenders.     The  mob  had  demanded  and  obtained 
the  release  of  Barabbas  ;  it  was  not  unUkely  they  might  make  an  attempt  to  free 
the  two  other  conspirators.    Now  try  to  picture  the  train  as  it  moved.     The  streets 
of  Jerusalem  were  narrow,  and  though  the  road  chosen  was  one  of  the  principal 
streets,  yet  that  street  was  by  no  means  broad.     It  was  part  of  the  custom  to  con- 
vey criminals  to  death  through  the  most  frequented  portions  of  the  city.     Quinc- 
tilian  says,  **  As  often  as  we  crucify  criminals,  the  most  populous  streets  are 
traversed,  so  that  the  crowd  may  see  and  be  filled  with  fear."    Another  ancient 
writer  gives  a  description  of  the  cross-bearing  of  a  slave,  which  is  interesting,  as  it 
shows  what  the  usage  then  was,  and  helps  us  to  realize  the  scene  when  Christ  went 
through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  to  His  passion.    He  says  that  a  noble  Boman  had 
delivered  over  one  of  his  slaves  to  death,  and  he  bade  the  fellow-slaves  convey  this 
man  about  Bome,  and  make  his  death  as  conspicuous  and  notorious  as  possible. 
He  had  been  first  scourged  in  the  Forum,  and  then  dragged  about  to  all  the  most 
frequented  parts  of  the  city.   He  was  made  to  carry  his  cross,  his  hands  were  bound 
to  the  arms  of  the  cross,  and  the  f  uU  weight  of  the  rough  cross  was  laid  on  his  back 
and  shoulders,  bleeding  and  raw  from  the  scourging  he  had  received.  .  .  .  The 
Btreets  were  not  only  narrow,  but  they  were  winding.    The  way  led  to  the  gate 
Oennath,  or  the  Garden  Gate,  which  was  in  the  comer  between  the  old  wall  of  Zion 
and  the  wall  of  the  lower  town,  and  belonged  to  the  latter.     It  was  so  called,  be- 
cause, outside  the  city,  to  the  north  of  the  Pool  of  Hezekiah,  lay  gardens  belonging 
to  oitizens,  one  of  which,  as  we  learn  later,  belonged  to  Joseph  of  Arimathea. 
The  procession  moves  on,  in  the  full  glare  of  day,  with  the  hot  Syrian  sun  stream- 
ing down  on  the  train.    Above,  the  sky  is  blue,  Uie  street,  though  narrow,  is  full  of 
light,  for  the  walls  reflect  the  glare  of  the  sun.      (8.  Baring  Oould,  M.A,)         Tlie 
tcene  at  Calvary : — I.  What  was  crucifixion  f    To  the  devout  Christian  every  item 
of  information  he  can  gain  concerning  that  dread  scene  at  Calvary  is  of  the  utmost 
▼alne.    1.  It  was  foreign  in  every  sense  in  its  infliction  upon  our  Lord.    This  kind 
of  capital  punishment  was  Boman,  and  not  Jewish.    2.  It  was  excessively  cruel  in 
its  detailB.     The  word  which  it  has  given  to  our  English  language  indicates  its 
severity.    To  be  ••  excruciated  '*  simply  means  to  be  in  suffering  like  that  of  cruci- 
fixion ;  it  signifies  the  extreme  anguish  to  which  human  sensibility  can  go.    8.  It 
was  long  and  lingering  in  its  operation.    Severe  as  these  wounds  were,  they  could 
never  be  very  dangerous.    Hardly  more  than  a  few  drops  of  blood  fell  from  th^. 
It  would  have  been  too  much  of  a  merciful  indulgence  for  this  mode  of  execution 
to  make  any  of  its  agonising  strokes  immediately  fatal.  Death  did  not  ensue  some- 
times until  after  several  days  of  torture.     Even  then  it  was  brought  on  by  weakness 
and  starvation,  coupled  with  the  low  fever  which  the  inflammation  from  the  wounds 
sooner  or  later  produced.    The  great  suffering  was  caused  by  the  constrained  pos- 
ture on  the  cross,  the  soreness  of  the  members  from  the  nails,  and  of  the  back  from 
the  welts  raised  by  the  whips  in  the  scourging.     Every  motion  brought  with  it  only 
anguish  without  relief.    Thus  the  poor  body  was  permitted  to  hang  with  no  respite 
and  no  hope,  through  the  night  and  through  the  day,  in  the  dullness  of  the  evening, 
in  the  heat  of  the  noon,  until  death  put  an  end  to  consciousness  and  to  life.    4 


6d<  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  st. 

Sach  »  panisbment  powerfnlly  arrested  the  popular  imagination  as  a  speotaole. 
Sometimes  the  military  men  put  on  guard  were  compelled  to  aooelerate  the  final 
agony  by  brutally  beating  the  legs  of  the  viotims  with  bludgeons  till  the  bones 
were  crushed  and  the  sudden  shocks  produced  collapse.  No  wonder  people  called 
this  "the  most  cruel,  the  worst  possible  fate."  It  is  on  record  that  a  soldier  once 
said  that,  of  aJl  the  awful  sounds  human  ears  could  be  forced  to  listen  to,  the 
most  terrible  out  of  hell  were  those  pitiable  cries,  in  the  solemn  silence  of  the  mid- 
night, from  the  lonely  hill  where  crucified  men  were  hanging  in  agonies  out  of 
which  they  could  not  even  die  while  a  breath  to  suffer  with  remained.  6.  So  we  see 
whence  came  the  suggestion  of  a  crucifix  as  a  symbol  of  faith  and  penitence.  It  is 
not  likely  that  the  physical  pains  of  our  Lord  were  the  severest  He  had  to  bear  ;  but 
they  certainly  have  availed  from  the  earliest  time  to  move  the  hearts  of  the  simple- 
minded  common  people.  Nor  is  this  all :  there  are  moments  of  deep  spiritual  feeling 
when  even  the  most  cultivated  penitent  will  find  an  argument  in  the  ••  agony  and 
bloody  sweat "  as  well  as  in  the  "  cross  and  passion  "  of  the  Divine  Redeemer. 
The  popular  mind  is  moved  by  such  a  picture ;  but  the  mistake  might  easily  be 
made  of  trusting  a  crucifix  in  an  impulse  of  superstition,  instead  of  Christ  on  a 
principle  of  faith.  II.  So  much,  then,  as  to  the  manner  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion ; 
now  comes  up  for  our  study  a  far  more  interesting  question  concerning  its  meaning. 
1.  Considered  merely  as  a  matter  of  historic  incident,  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
of  little,  if  any,  spiritual  value.  Doubtless  there  were  other  executions  at  Golgotha 
before  and  after  this  one,  equally  painful  and  equally  iniquitous — for  the  Boman 
government  in  Palestine  was  never  free  from  charges  of  injustice.  We  do  not  care, 
however,  to  remember  the  sufferers'  names.  And  Christ's  crucifixion  is  but  one 
more  wail  of  abused  humanity,  if  we  contemplate  it  alone.  2.  We  must  consider 
this  event  as  a  matter  of  theological  doctrine.  When  history  is  so  momentous  and  so 
mysterious  as  this,  we  are  compelled  to  read  below  the  surface  and  between  the  lines. 
He  was  "  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God  *'  in  order 
that  He  should  suffer  precisely  as  He  did  (Acts  ii.  23).  Men  wreaked  their  violent 
passions  upon  Him,  and  it  was  by  wicked  and  responsible  hands  He  was  crucified 
and  slain.  Messiah  was  "  cut  off,  but  not  for  Himself  "  (Dan.  ix.  26).  The  wisdom 
of  God  overruled  the  wrath  of  His  murderers  to  the  Divme  glory  and  the  salvation 
of  men.  One  of  the  ancient  commentators  springs  up  almost  out  of  sober  exposi- 
tion into  the  realm  of  song,  as  he  exclaims ;  *'  In  their  frantic  anger  they  pluck  to 
pieces  the  Rose  of  Sharon ;  but  by  so  doing  they  only  display  the  brilliance  of  every 
petiJ.  In  their  fury  they  break  a  diamond  into  fragments ;  by  which  they  only 
cause  it  to  ehovr  its  genuineness  by  its  sparkling  splinters.  They  are  anxious  to  tear 
from  Immanuel's  head  the  last  remnant  of  a  crown  ;  but  they  only  lift  the  veil  from 
the  forehead  of  His  majesty  I "  3.  More  than  anything  else  we  must  also  consider 
the  crucifixion  of  Jesus  as  a  matter  of  vicarious  atonement.  There  is  something 
very  fine  in  the  quiet  simplicity  with  which  one  of  the  apostles  explains  this  entire 
scene  at  Calvary :  "  All  have  sinned.*'  Christ  died  to  be  **  a  propitiation  through 
faith  in  His  blood  "  (Rom.  iii.  23-26).  Pilate  wrote  an  inscription  to  be  put  over 
the  head  of  the  Saviour ;  according  to  a  Roman  custom,  this  was  designed  to  ex- 
plain the  transaction  to  all  who  stood  by.  The  true  inscription  on  the  cross  would 
be  "  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  These  are  the  words  which 
would  give  to  the  scene  at  Calvary  its  eternal  interpretation  before  the  Church  and 
the  ages.  The  very  voice  of  Immanuel  Himself  as  He  seems  to  speak  out  of  the 
midst  of  His  suffering,  is :  "  See  1  I  have  taken  away  the  handwriting  that  was 
against  you,  and  have  nailed  it  to  My  cross  *'  (Col.  ii.  13, 14).  The  one  word  which 
describes  the  whole  gospel  plan  of  salvation  is  substitution,  Christ  was  sinless,  yet 
He  suffered  :  we  are  sinful,  yet  we  go  free  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  4.  This  will  lead  at  last 
to  our  consideration  of  the  crucifixion  as  a  matter  of  personal  experience.  Believers 
all  glory  in  the  cross.  Many  a  death-bed  has  been  iUumined  by  its  light.  Many  a 
sorrowful  and  lonely  heart  has  been  encouraged  by  the  remembrance  of  it.  There 
have  been  old  men,  just  trembling  on  the  verge  of  the  tomb,  whose  eyes  filled  with 
the  tears  of  grateful  gladness  as  they  died  thinking  of  it.  There  have  arisen  voices 
from  around  the  stake  in  the  midst  of  the  martyr's  flames,  singing  praise  to  Him 
who  hung  upon  it.  Many  a  bowed  sinner  has  come  forth  into  freedom  as  he  laid 
his  burden  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  This  personal  experience  begins  with  self-re- 
nunciation. Every  other  reliance  must  absolutely  be  surrendered,  and  each  soul 
must  become  content  to  owe  its  salvation  to  Jesus  Christ's  merits,  not  to  its  own.  So 
this  personal  experience  continues  to  the  end  with  a  deep  soHcitude  against  lapsing 
into  sin  again.    {C.  S.  Bobituon,  D.DJ* 


OBAT.  z?.]  8T.  MARK.  657 

Ver.  21.  And  tbey  compel  one  Simon  a  Cyrenlan. — Bearing  the  cross : — ^I.  In 
going  through  the  history  of  the  fact,  our  thoughts  must  glance  along  the  lines 

or  THS   CONNBCTIOM     BETWEXN    THB  IiAST  APPBAL  OV  PlLATB,    "  Behold,    the    Man," 
AND    THB  SUBJECT   WHICH    CltAIMS     OUB    ATTENTION    NOW.        11.   Wb    PASS     FBOM    THE 

HisTOBio  TACT  TO  THX  CHALLENQE  FOUNDED  UPON  IT.  In  viow  of  what  is  HOW  meant 
by  cross-bearing,  we  ask,  "  Who  among  you  is  willing  to  become  a  cross-bearer  for 
Christ  ?  "  The  only  cross  in  prospect  now  is  a  cross  for  the  soul.  Carrying  a  cross 
after  Christ  means,  for  one  thing,  some  kind  of  suffering  for  Christ.  View  the 
cross-bearing  as  something  practical,  in  distinction  from  something  only  emotional, 
and  answer  the  question,  "who  is  now  willing  to  be  a  cross-bearer  for  Christ?" 
♦*  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  Me,  but  weep  for  yourselves,  and  your 
children  1  "  On  the  roadside  near  an  old  Hungarian  town,  grey  with  the  stains  of 
time  and  weather,  there  is  a  stone  image  of  the  great  Cross-bearer,  and  under  it  is 
sculptured  this  inscription  in  Latin  ;  "  Is  it  nothing  to  ^ou,  all  ye  that  pass  by  f 
Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  lilfeelinEo'My  sdirowl"  ''The  thorough  w-oe- 
begonfehess  of  that  image,"  remaf^i'fih  old  SCholftT,'**^^^  haunt  me  long:  that 
old  bit  of  granite — the  beau-ideal  of  human  sorrow,  weakness,  and  woe-begoneness. 
To  this  day  it  will  come  back  upon  me."  Natural  sensibility  is  not  irreligious; 
but,  considered  in  itself  alone,  it  is  not  religion.  With  all  the  pain  of  bursting 
heart,  and  all  the  leverage  of  straining  strength,  Simon,  bearing  the  cross  for  Christ, 
is  the  perpetual  type  of  one  who  not  only  feels  for  Christ,  but  who  tries  to  do  some- 
thing. I  charge  you  by  the  crown  of  thorns,  that  you  shrink  from  no  ridicule  that 
comes  upon  you  simply  for  Christ's  sake.  On  July  Ist,  1415,  when  John  Huss  had 
to  die  for  Christ's  sake,  and  when,  on  the  way  to  the  dread  spot,  tte^n&Sta  put 
npon  his  head  a  large  paper  cap,  painted  with  grotesque  figures  of  devils,  and 
inscribed  with  the  word,  ***H®tesiarcha  1  "  he  said,  •*Our  Lord  wore  a  crown  of 
thorns  for  me ;  why  should  not  I  wear  this  for  Him  ?  "  I  charge  you  by  the  truth 
ihatCbrrst  was  not  ashamed  of  you,  that  you  be  not  ashamed  of  Christ.  In  view 
of  the  strength  assured  to  each  cross-bearer,  who  is  willing  ?  {Charlei  Stanford, 
D.D.)  Carrying  the  cross  for  Christ : — Christ  comes  forth  from  Pilate's  hall  with 
the  oumbroQB  wood  npon  His  shoulder,  but  through  weariness  He  travels  slowly, 
and  His  enemies  urgent  for  His  death,  and  half  afraid,  from  His  emaciated  appear- 
ance, that  He  may  die  before  He  readies  the  place  of  execution,  allow  another  to 
carry  His  burden.  The  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel,  they  cannot  spare 
Him  the  agonies  of  dying  on  the  cross,  they  will  therefore  remit  the  labour  of 
carrying  it.  They  place  the  cross  upon  Simon,  a  Cyrenian,  coming  out  of  the 
country.  We  do  not  know  what  may  have  been  the  colour  of  Simon's  face,  but  it 
was  most  likely  black.  Simon  was  an  African ;  he  came  from  Cyrene.  Alas  poor 
African,  thou  hast  been  compelled  il!t*mffythe  cross  even  until  now.  Hail,  ye 
despised  children  of  the  sun,  ye  foUow  first  after  the  King  in  the  march  of  woe. 
We  are  not  sure  that  Simon  was  a  disciple  of  Christ ;  he  may  have  been  a  friendly 
spectator ;  yet  one  would  think  the  Jews  would  naturally  select  a  disciple  if  they 
could.  Coming  fresh  from  the  country,  not  knowing  what  was  going  on,  he  joined 
with  the  mob,  and  they  made  him  carry  the  cross.  Whether  a  disciple  then  or  not, 
we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  he  became  so  afterwards  ;  he  was  the  father, 
we  read,  of  Alexander  and  Bufli^St  two  persons  who  appear  to  have  been  well-known 
in  the  early  Church  ;  let  us  hope  that  salvation  came  to  his  house  when  he  was 
compelled  to  bear  the  Saviour's  cross.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Simon  helping  Jesus  : — 
Little  did  these  people  know  that  they  were  making  this  man  immortal  I  Notice 
in  this  connection :  L  The  Gbeatness  of  tbifles.  Had  Simon  started  from  the 
little  village  where  he  lived  five  minutes  earher  or  later,  had  he  walked  a  little 
faster  or  slower,  had  he  happened  to  be  lodging  on  the  other  side  of  Jerusalem, 
had  he  gone  in  at  another  gate,  had  the  centurion  not  fixed  on  him  to  carry  the 
cross,  all  his  life  would  have  been  different.  And  so  it  is  always.  Our  lives  are 
Uke  the  Cornish  rocking-stones,  pivoted  on  little  points.  1.  Let  us  bring  the 
highest  and  largest  principles  to  bear  on  the  smallest  events  and  circumstances. 
2.  Let  US  repose  in  quiet  confidence  on  Him  in  whose  hands  the  whole  puzsling 
overwhelming  mystery  lies.  To  Him  "  great  "  and  "  small "  are  tenns  that  have 
no  meaning.  He  looks  upon  men's  lives,  not  according  to  the  apparent  magnitude 
of  the  deeds  with  which  they  are  filled,  but  simply  according  to  the  motives  from 
which,  and  the  purpose  towards  which,  they  were  done.  II.  The  blessedness  and 
HOMOUB  or  hblpino  Jesus  Christ.  Though  He  bore  Simon's  sins  in  His  Own 
^dy  on  the^  tree,  He  needed  Simon  to  help  Him  fo" Bear  the  cross;  and^ He  needs 
"^       help  Him  io  spread  throughout  the  world  the  blessed  consequences  of  that 

42 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0B,  [ohat.  zn 

oro00.    For  ns  all  there  is  granted  the  honour,  and  from  na  all  there  is  required  tht 
Baorifice  and  the  service  of  helping  the  suffering  Saviour  of  men.     m.  Thb  fxr- 

PBTUAL  BBCOHPEMSB  AND  BECOBD  OF  HUMBLEST  GhBISTIAN  WOBK.      HoW  little  SimOO 

thought,  when  he  went  back  to  his  rural  lodging  that  night,  that  he  had  written 
his  name  high  up  on  the  tablet  of  the  world's  memory,  to  be  legible  for  ever.  God 
never  forgets,  or  allows  to  be  forgotten,  anything  done  for  Him.  We  may  not  leave 
our  works  on  any  record  that  men  can  read.  What  of  that,  if  they  are  written  in 
letters  of  light  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life,  to  be  read  out  by  Him,  before  His 
Father  and  the  holy  angels,  in  the  last  great  day.  We  may  not  leave  any  separate 
traces  of  our  service,  any  more  than  the  little  brook  that  comes  down  some  gulley 
on  the  hillside  flows  separate  from  its  sisters,  with  whom  it  has  coalesced  in  the 
bed  of  the  great  river,  or  in  the  rolling,  boundless  ocean.  What  of  that,  so  long 
as  the  work,  in  its  consequences,  shall  last  ?  lY.  Thb  blessed  results  of  oontact 
WITH  THE  suFFEBiKo  Ghbist.  Only  by  standing  near  the  cross,  and  gazing  on  the 
Crucified  Jesus,  will  any  of  us  ever  learn  the  true  mystery  and  miracle  of  Christ's 
great  and  loving  Being  and  work.  Take  your  place  there  behind  Him,  near 
His  cross ;  gazing  upon  Him  till  your  heart  melts,  and  you,  too,  learn  that  He  is 
your  Lord,  and  Saviour,  and  God.  Look  to  Him  who  bears  what  none  can  help 
TTim  to  carry — the  burden  of  the  world's  sin ;  let  Him  bear  yours  ;  yield  to  Hirn 
your  gratefiil  obedience ;  and  then  take  up  your  cross  daily,  and  bear  the  Ught 
burden  of  self-denying  service  to  Him  who  has  borne  the  heavy  load  of  sin  for  you 
and  all  mankind.  {A.  Maelaren,  D.D.)  The  compulsion  of  Simon: — The  Persian 
monarchs  had  a  service  of  carriers  or  post,  and  these  were  called  ^£|(in ;  they 
were  allowed  to  seize  on  any  horses  and  equipages  they  needed,  to  d^mas^  enter- 
tainment wherever  they  came,  free  of  expense,  and  this  proved  a  great  grievance. 
The  word  passed  into  use  among  the  Greeks  {ayyapEveiv),  and  the  Bomans  exercised 
pretty  freely  the  same  rights  of  requisitioning.  When  the  Baptist  said  to  the 
soldiers,  "  Do  violence  to  no  man,"  he  doubtless  referred  to  this'lB^Btem  of  extorting 
the  use  of  iheir  horses,  thexr  beasts,  even  their  own  work,  out  of  subject  people, 
without  payment.  {S.  Baring  Goulds  M.A.)  Simon  helping  Jems: — We  are 
not  told  as  much,  but  we  may  conclude  that  Jesus  had  fallen  under  the  weight.  He 
seemed  unable  to  bear  the  cross  any  further.  Perhaps  He  had  fainted  from  the 
loss  of  blood  and  from  the  long  fasting.  He  sank  on  the  pavement,  and  could  bear 
the  wood  no  longer.  Something  of  the  sort  must  have  occurred,  or  the  centurion 
would  not  have  halted  the  convoy,  and  ordered  that  the  cross  should  be  transferred 
to  another.  This  was  not  done  out  of  compassion,  but  out  of  necessity.  Jesua 
could  not  bear  it  any  further ;  therefore,  in  order  that  the  place  of  execution  might 
be  quickly  reached,  some  one  else  must  be  got  to  carry  it.  No  Boman  would  carry 
the  cross.  To  do  so  would  dishonour  him.  The  soldiers  looked  out  for  some  one, 
and  seized  on  Simon.  They  were  wont  thus  to  requisition  men  and  animals  for 
the  service  of  the  State.  Simon  was  a  foreigner,  a  native  of  Lybia  in  Africa,  a  dark 
man,  possibly  not  exactly  a  negro,  but  so  dark-complexioned  that  he  went  by  the 
name  of  Niger,  or  the  BlacF'M&n;-  He  was  coming  into  the  town,  probably  laden 
with  the  wood  for  the  fire  on  which  the  Easter  lamb  was  to  be  burnt,  for  on  thia 
day  of  the  preparation  the  Jews  were  wont  to  go  out  of  the  city  and  collect  the 
necessary  wood,  lay  it  on  their  shoulders  and  bring  it  home.  So  now,  on  the  day 
of  the  preparation,  the  Lord  carries  on  His  shoulders  the  wood  for  the  new 
sacrifice,  on  which  He,  the  Lamb  of  God,  was  to  have  His  life  consumed. 
As  He  goes.  He  meets  Simon  carrying  the  wood  into  Jerusalem  for  the  typical 
lamb.  The  soldiers  at  once  seize  Simon,  make  him  cast  down  his  load,  and  take 
on  his  shoulders  the  burden  of  Christ's  cross.  He  was  the  first ;  he,  this  African, 
to  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  Christ ;  he,  the  representative  of  the  race  of  Ham, 
the  most  despised  of  all  the  descendants  of  Noah,  that  on  which  the  yoke  of  bond- 
i^age  seems  ever  to  have  pressed.  And  now,  how  wonderful,  if  this  our  conjecture  be 
i'time.  The  Bomans  and  Greek,  representatives  of  Japhet ;  the  Jews,  representatives 
I  of  Shem  ;  and  Simon,  the  representative  of  Ham,  are  all  united  in  one  stream, 
I  setli&|^4orward  to  Calvary.  Each,  this  day,*gives  a  pledge  of  conversion ;  the 
centurion,  the  son  of  Japhet ;  the  thief,  the  son  of  Israel,  of  Shem ;  and,  first 
of  all,  the  Cyrenian,  the  descendant  of  Ham.  .  .  .  Simon  was  compelled.  He  was 
not,  at  first,  willing  to  take  it ;  if,  as  we  suppose,  he  was  carrying  hia  bundle  of  wood. 
he  was  constrained  to  lay  that  down.  So  must  we  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the 
13n  that  doth  so  easily  besot  us,  that  we  may  follow  after  Jesus,  bearing  Hii 
reproach.  Simon  shrank  both  from  thS  burden  and  from  the  shame,  and  the  natural 
man  shrinks  from  the  cross  of  Christ,  shrinks  from  the  cross  that  God  lays  on  us. 


.  XT.]  ST,  MARK,  669 

He  compels  ns  to  bear  the  cross ;  and  though  we  may  wish  to  escape  it  at  first, 
yet,  if  like  Simoa  we  submit,  and  bear  it  in  a  right  spirit,  it^wiU  bring  us,  as  it  did 
Smaon,  to  meeknesB  and  patience,  and  a  more  perfect  knowTecTgOf'Cirfist.  {Ihid:) 
STidpe'^'the  cross':— i'iie'^h'S^  of  the  cross  on  which  our  Lord  suliered  has  been 
much  debated.  Some  ancient  Fathers,  fancying  they  found  a  typical  reference  in 
the  crossing  of  the  hands  over  the  head  of  the  scape-goat,  and  in  the  peculiar  mode 
in  which  Jacob  blessed  his  grandsons,  often  assumed  that  it  was  in  the  form  of 
what  is  commonly  called  a  St.  Andrew's  Cross  ;  others  again,  seeing  in  the  mystical 
mark  or  Tau  set  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  righteous  in  Ezekiel's  vision  a  fore- 
thadowing  of  the  cross,  concluded  that  it  was  like  that  which  bears  the  name  of 
St.  Anthony,  in  form  like  a  capital  T"*  I*  is  far  more  probable  that  it  was  what  is 
known  familiarly  as  the  Latin  Gross.  It  was  prefigured  by  the  transverse  spits 
which  the  priest  placed  in  the  Pascal  lamb.  Its  four  arms,  pointing  to  the  four 
quarters  of  the  globe,  symbolized  "the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height  " 
of  Christ's  universal  Church.  It  is  a  strong  argument  in  favour  of  this  form  that 
••  the  inscription  "  was  set  above  the  head  of  the  Crucified,  which  would  be  im- 
possible in  either  of  the  other  forms.  (H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  Sharing  the  crosa 
toith  Jesus : — Jesus  was  pleased  to  take  man  unto  His  aid,  not  only  to  represent  His 
Own  need,  and  the  dolorousness  of  His  Passion,  but  to  consign  the  duty  unto  man, 
that  we  must  enter  into  a  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings,  taking  up  a  cross  of 
martyrdom  when  God  requires  us,  enduring  affronts,  being  patient  under  affliction, 
loving  them  that  hate  us,  and  being  benefactors  to  our  enemies,  abstaining  from 
sensual  and  intemperate  dehght,  forbidding  ourselves  lawful  recreations  when  we 
have  an  end  of  the  spirit  to  serve  upon  the  ruins  of  the  body's  strength,  mortifying 
our  desires,  breaking  our  own  will,  not  seeking  ourselves,  being  entirely  resigned 
to  God.  These  are  the  cross  and  the  naUs,  and  the  spear  and  the  whip,  and  all  the 
instruments  of  a  Christian's  passion.  {Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor.)  Simon  bearing 
the  cross : — A  scene  for  all  the  ages  of  time  and  all  the  cycles  of  eternity ;  a  cross 
with  Jesus  at  the  one  end  of  it,  and  Simon  at  the  otjie?,  suggesting  the"?dearto 
eVBfftrmiMeJ' sou!,  that  no  one  tieed  ever  carry  a  whole  cross.  You  have  only  half 
a  cross  to  carry.  li  you  are  in  poverty,  Jesus  was  poor,  and  HeT'SdttffeS  aild  takel" 
ttl&  other  end  of  the  cross.  If  ytJttlBte  in  persecution,  Jesus  was  persecuted  too. 
If  you  are  in  any  kind  of  trouble,  you  have  aTspipiStMzing  Redeemer.  Let  this  be 
a  lesson  to  each  of  us.  1?  ^on  find  a  man  in  persecution,  or  in  sickness,  or  in 
trouble  of  any  kind,  go  up  to  him  and  say,  "  My  brother,  I  have  come  to  help  you. 
Ton  take  hold  of  one  end  of  this  cross,  and  I  will  take  hold  of  the  other  end,  and 
Jesus  Christ  will  come  in  and  take  hold  of  the;middle  of  the  cross ;  after  a  while 
there  will  be  no  cross  at  all."  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  A  strange  episode  :— 
Simon  was  probably  a  pilgrim  to  the  feast ;  possibly  had  not  known  of  the  existence 
of  Jesus  Christ  before ;  is  not  now  seeking  Him.  But  Christ  crosses  his  path ;  and 
forced  to  yield  a  detested  service,  Simon  learns  in  the  brief  companionship  of  a 
few  hours  enough  to  lead  him  to  yield  to  Christ  the  service  of  a  life.  There  is 
;  something  very  characteristic  about  this  story.  The  Saviour  is  perpetually  crossing 
'  ftfCin^i  patbrln'Kf6 ;  dtJing  so  siometimes  painfully  with  some  awful  thought,  painful 
HSfflfcCthwaTting  some  plan,  spoiling  some  hoUday  pleasure,  or  some  effort  to  get 
i  gain.  And  constantly  we  see  the  pain  of  first  acquaintance,  the  early  resentment 
I  against  the  gospel  for  spoiling  plans  and  pleasures,  giving  way,  and  changing  into 
\  lifelong  fidelity.  {B,  Qlover,)  So  he  got  linked  for  ever  to  the  Lordl  (J, 
\  Morison,  DJ),) 

Ver.  22.  The  place  Ctolffotluu — Golgotha. — The  place  of  execution: — CJalvary,  or 
Golgotha,  is  not  now  distinguishable  as  a  hill,  partly  because  of  the  accumulation 
of  rubbish  from  the  ruin  of  the  city,  in  the  hollows  and  valleys,  and  partly  because 
it  is  doubtful  whether  it  ever  was,  properly,  a  hill.  It  stood  below  Zion,  and  was 
looked  down  on  from  Herod's  new  palace,  but  it  was  slightly  above  the  elevation 
of  the  lower  town.  Its  name,  Golgotha,  more  correctly,  Golgoltha,  comes  from  the 
same  root  as  Gilgal,  that  signifies  a  hill,  and  the  term  golgoi  was  used  for  sacred 
stones,  employed  in  the  heathen  rites  of  the  Ganaanites  and  Phoenicians,  in  their 
worship  of  Venus  (Baaltis).  As  in  Wales  and  Cornwall,  and  in  Scotland,  Pen 
means  "  head  "  and  •'mountain,**  so  this  word  golgoi  came  to  have  a  double  mean- 
ing. Among  the  earlv  Christians  a  legend  existed,  that  Calvary  took  its  name  from 
Adam's  skull  having  been  buried  there,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  Jewish  rabbis  had 
■ucn  a  story ;  but  the  name  Calvary,  or  Golgotha,  properly  means  only  i\iB  rounded 
stone t  and  by  a  corruption  of  the  original  signification  was  taken  to  signify  "  the 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaf.  st» 

place  of  m  skull.**  Jast  in  the  same  way,  the  Oapitoline  hill,  in  Borne,  wm  m 
called,  becanse  it  was  a  rounded  elevation,  but  afterwards  a  fable  grew  up  that  i% 
took  it3  designation  from  the  head  of  a  certain  Tolus  having  been  dug  up  there. 
The  spot,  Calvary,  would  seem  to  have  been  the  place  of  execution  from  an  ancient 
date.  It  is  probably  mentioned  by  Jeremiah  (xxzi.  38,  39),  m  a  propUecy  concerning 
the  rebuilding  and  enlargement  of  Jerusalem,  in  which  he  foretells  that  the  wall 
would  be  built  in  an  extended  arc  from  the  hill  of  Gareb  in  the  East,  sweeping 
round,  along  the  North,  to  the  hill  of  Goath  in  the  West — and  Goath,  here,  answers 
to  Calvary,  and  means  the  place  of  execution  His  prophecy  was  fulfilled  about 
seven  years  after  the  death  of  Christ,  by  Agrippa,  when  Golgotha  was  actually 
enclosed  within  the  new  walls;  and  at  the  present  day  it  lies  within  the  city.  {S, 
Baring  Gouldf  M.A.) 

Ver.  24.  But  He  received  it  not.— -TTtne  mingled  with  myrrK^TTie  ttupefying^ 
potion  .-—Solomon's  words  in  Prov.  xxxi.  6,  7,  were  taken  by  the  Jews  to  apply  to 
such  as  were  condemned  to  death,  and  it  was  usual  for  the  most  illustrious  and 
honourable  women  of  Jerusalem  to  attend  criminals  to  their  execution,  and  to  give 
them  to  drink,  before  they  were  put  to  death,  wine  and  myrrh,  with  gall,  which  was 
regarded  as  numbing  the  nerves,  and  superinducing  sleep.  The  Talmud  says  that 
they  were  wont  to  put  a  grain  of  incense  in  the  draught,  as  that  deadened  the  sense 
of  pain.  It  says  further,  "  The  women  of  highest  rank  in  Jerusalem,  out  of  free 
impulse,  and  at  their  own  cost,  gave  the  condenmed  man  this  draught.  But  if  it 
should  so  happen  that  the  noble  ladies  failed  to  do  so,  then  the  cost  of  providing 
this  drink  fell  on  the  community,  and  was  paid  for  out  of  the  public  fund."  This 
was  sometimes  the  case  among  the  heathen.  We  are  told  that  at  the  annual  feast 
of  Chronos,  when  a  man  was  put  to  death  to  expiate  the  sins  of  the  people,  he  wa» 
first  made  drunk  with  wine,  and  then  executed  whilst  in  a  state  of  intoxication. 
Among  the  ancients,  myrrh  was  regarded  as  having  great  efiectas  a  pain-killer,  and, 
indeed,  it  will  be  found  to  be  one  of  the  principal  ingredients  in  modem  compounds, 
sold  for  the  purpose  of  deadening  the  nerves  to  sii&ering.  Accordingly,  the  pious 
women  who  followed  Jesus  were  only  acting  according  to  immemorial  custom,  when 
they  followed  Him  weeping,  bearing  the  cup  of  wine,  mingled  with  myrrh  and  gall, 
and  of  ered  it  to  Him  before  He  was  stretched  on  the  cross,  and  His  hands  and  feet 
nailed  to  the  wood.  He,  however,  turned  away  His  head.  He  would  not  drink  of 
the  offered  cup ;  not  because  He  disapproved  of  the  piety  and  pity  of  the  women 
who  offered  it,  but  because  He  would  not  seem  in  any  way  to  evade  the  sufferings 
He    had    come    to    endure.      (Ibid.)  Christ    refuting    any    alleviation    oj 

His  suffering:— J,  The  boubce  of  thb  hobal  majesty  or  the  Son  of  Mah. 
That  was  Clmst's  power,  the  yielding  to  the  loving  wiU  of  Heaven,  even  though  it 
led  Him  into  darkness  so  deep  and  vice  so  unutterable,  that  His  fainting  humanity 
sank  beneath  the  awful  burden  of  the  spirit's  agony;  not  choosing  suffering  in  order 
that  He  might  grandly  bear  it,  but,  because  it  came  from  Heaven,  refusing  to  accept 
any  deliverance  from  man.  IL  What  was  the  MEANiNa  or  the  consubiuation  or 
Chuist's  suftebings?  That  man  might  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  two  things  were 
requisite.  1.  Man  must  learn  the  majesty  of  God's  law.  2.  He  must  be  drawn  by 
love  to  the  Divine  One.  Both  these  receive  glorious  illustrations  from  these  words. 
III.  The  oleabkess  or  Chbist*8  vision  or  death.  He  resolved  to  die  with  His 
mental  vision  clear  and  calm.  IV.  The  duty  or  Ghbist's  disciples.  Not  to  seek 
suffering,  but  when  it  comes  in  the  path  of  duty  to  meet  it  calmly,  resolutely,  and 
fearlessly.  V.  The  poweb  or  Ghbist's  claims  on  all  hen.  (E.  L.  HulU  B,A,} 
Christ  refusing  the  stupefying  draught  .'—The  intention  of  the  soldiers  was  humane. 
Crucifixion  was  so  lingering  and  painful  that  it  was  customary  thus  to  deaden  the 
consciousness  of  the  criminal.  L  What  was  the  Savioub's  condition  at  tha» 
MOMENT?  Intense  anguish  of  soul  combined  with  physical  suffering.  Christ's 
nature  was  pecuharly  sensitive.  The  sorrow  at  Gethsemane  had  already  weakened 
Him.  Now  His  sorrow  had  reached  its  height.  U.  Why  did  He  befuse  tbm 
PROFTEBED  BELIEF?  Not  to  awakcu  mcu's  admiration.  Not  to  awaken  men's 
sympathy.  1.  Because  His  sufferings  were  by  Divine  appointment;  not  simply 
accidental.  He  would  not  escape  the  full  force  of  the  penalty  which  He  had  under- 
taken to  endure.  2.  Because  He  was  imwilling  to  die  without  a  full  consciousness 
of  the  conquest  which  He  was  achieving  over  sin  and  death.  III.  What  enable) 
Him  to  dispense  with  this  STUPErviNO  dbauoht  ?  It  was  the  direct  result  of  Hiv 
self -surrender  to  the  Father.  He  who  gives  up  will,  purpose,  life,  into  the  hands  of 
Ood,  may  expect  that  Grod  will  be  all  in  all  to  him.    IV.  What  lesson  dobs  Hb^ 


zv.]  ST.  MARK.  661 

RBTUOAL  TKAOH  uf  ?  1.  HIb  time  nobility.  2.  Our  own  duty  under  triaL  **  The  cup 
which  My  Father  hath  given  Me,  ehall  I  not  drink  it.*"  It  is  our  privilege  to  accept 
the  Saviour's  love.  He  suffered,  died,  arose,  ascended  to  Heav«n,  and  pleads  now 
for  us.    {Seeds  and  Saplingt.) 

Yer.  24.  Tbf7  parted  His  garmente. — The  soldien  :— The  soldiers  who  crucified 
our  Lord  were  not  Jews,  but  Bomans ;  they  had  not,  therefore,  the  same  grounds  of 
opposition  to  Him  which  the  Jews  had :  they  had  not  the  same  expectations  of  the 
Messiali,  nor  the  same  prejudices  as  to  the  perpetuity  of  the  Mosaic  ritual ;  and  yet 
they  participated  largely  in  the  great  crime  of  His  crucifixion.  All  classes  were,  in 
an  extraordinary  manner,  brought  in  contact  with  the  Kedeemer  during  His  last 
sufferings,  that  all  might  have  an  opportunity  of  displaying  the  state  of  their  minds 
towards  Him,  of  showing  how  they  were  affected  towards  the  Saviour  of  men.  It 
is  remarkable  what  a  share  all  ranks  had  in  His  death, — priests,  rulers,  the  common 
people,  kings,  governors,  soldiers ;  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  high  and  the  low,  the 
religious  and  the  profligate,  the  learned  and  the  rude ;  from  the  representative  of 
Caesar  on  the  Roman  tribunal,  to  the  wretched  malefactor  on  the  cross ;  from  the 
sanctimonious  Pharisee,  with  his  phylacteries  and  his  prayers,  to  the  profane  and 
profligate  wretch  who  lived  without  a  thought  of  God  ;  from  the  learned  Eabbi, 
with  his  books  and  his  speculations,  to  the  illiterate  peasant  who  knew  not  the  use 
of  letters ;  from  the  king,  with  his  insignia  of  royalty,  down  to  the  poor  drudge 
who  scarcely  dared  to  call  himself  a  man ;  from  the  high  priest,  with  his  sacerdotal 
vestments  and  functions,  down  to  the  Gentile  soldier, — all  were  brought  near  Him 
during  His  last  sufferings  ;  all  had  a  voice  or  a  hand  in  them ;  and  all  showed  that 
their  hearts  were  not  with  Him.  We  have  now  brought  before  us  the  actual  perpe- 
trators of  the  murder  of  Jesus  Christ.  Indeed,  we  have  here  a  striking  illustration 
of  the  difference  between  the  act  and  the  guilt.  The  actual  murderers  of  Jesus 
were  not  the  most  criminal ;  perhaps  they  were  the  least  so  of  all  the  parties  con- 
cerned in  the  transaction.  The  soldiers  who  executed  the  sentence  of  death  upon 
Jesus  were  not  so  guilty  as  Pilate  who  pronounced  it;  Pilate  who  pronounced  it  was 
not  so  guilty  as  the  people  who  demanded  it;  and  the  people  who  demanded  it  were 
not  so  guilty  as  the  priests  and  rulers  who  designed  it,  and  who  instigated  the  whole 
proceeding.  Guilt  pertains  not  so  much  to  the  hand  as  to  the  head,  and  still  more 
to  the  heart ;  it  lies  not  so  much  in  the  deed,  as  in  the  design  and  purpose  of  the 
inner  man.  The  priests  and  rulers  who  did  not  touch  Him  were  far  more  guilty  of 
His  murder  than  the  soldiers  who  actually  nailed  Him  to  the  cross.  The  remarks 
we  have  to  offer  on  the  conduct  of  the  soldiers  will  relate  to  the  brutality  which 
marked  their  treatment  of  the  Bedeemer,  and  then  to  their  unconscious  connection 
with  the  greatest  event  which  the  history  of  the  world  records.  I.  Our  first  remarks 
will  relate  to  ths  bbutauty  and  cbcelty  ov  the  soldiers  towabds  Jesus.  It  is 
to  be  observed  that  there  was  not,  on  the  part  of  the  soldiers,  any  personal  enmity 
to  Jesus.  But  still  there  were  evident  marks  of  brutality  and  cruelty;  such  were 
their  stripping  Him  of  His  raiment,  arraying  Him  in  the  old  scarlet  robe,  putting 
the  reed  in  His  hand  as  a  mock  sceptre,  crowning  Him  with  thorns,  bowing  the  knee 
to  Him,  and  crying,  **  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  1 "  How  are  we  to  account  for  this 
barbarity  of  the  Boman  soldiers  towards  one  who  was  guilty  of  no  crime.  1.  Their 
occupation  tended  to  blunt  their  sensibilities,  and  to  harden  their  hearts.  They 
were  familiar  with  deeds  of  horror  and  of  blood,  not  only  on  the  field  of  battle,  but 
in  the  prison-house,  and  the  place  of  public  execution ;  they  were  familiar  with 
fetters  and  stripes ;  they  sported  vrith  lacerations  and  death.  Strange  things  the 
human  heart  can  be  brought  to.  2.  But  another  reason  may  be  assigned  for  it ;  it 
is  found  in  our  Lord's  chum  to  royalty.  He  was  accused  of  attempts  against  the 
Boman  government,  and  of  declaring  Himself  the  King  of  the  Jews.  They  may 
have  heard  of  the  expectations  which  prevailed  amongst  the  Jews  respecting  the 
Messiah.  But  the  claims  of  Jesus,  who  seemed  only  a  poor  oppressed  peasant,  te 
royalty,  would  appear  to  them  ineffably  absurd — a  fit  subject  for  derision  and  scorn. 
Hence  their  indignities  and  insults  were  founded  chiefly  on  this.  Thus  it  often  is : 
men  pronounce  tiiat  ridiculous  which  they  do  not  understand ;  they  declare  there  is 
nothing  visible,  because  they  are  too  blind  to  see.  Hence,  we  perceive,  how  almost 
aU  sin  is  based  on  ignorance.  Had  the  soldiers  known  Jesus  they  could  not  have 
mocked  Him.  8.  But  we  have  one  remark  more  to  offer  on  this  part  of  our  subject. 
The  eharacter  which  the  soldier  has  ever  been  taught  and  accustomed  to  admire  is 
the  opposite  of  that  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  eharacter  which  he  admires  is  the  bold, 
high-gpirited— keen  to  perceive  insult,  and  quick  to  resent  an  injuxy;  the  meekness. 


662  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xt. 

gentleness,  forbearance  of  Jesus  Christ  were  beyond  his  comprehension.  It  is  ft 
true  remark,  that  mankind  have  almost  always  admired  and  landed  the  destroyer! 
of  their  race  more  than  their  greatest  benefactors.  Indeed,  the  world's  admiration 
of  conquerors  is  wonderful.  Military  greatness,  as  the  eloquent  Channing  has  justly 
remarked,  is  by  no  means  the  highest  order  of  greatness.  With  him  we  claim  the 
first  rank  for  the  moral ;  real  magnanimity,  which,  perceiving  the  true,  the  right, 
the  good,  the  pure,  and  loving  it,  cleaves  to  it  at  all  hazards,  and  will  die  for  it 
rather  than  deny  it.  The  second  rank  we  assign  to  the  intellectual ;  the  power  of 
thought  which  perceives  the  harmonies  of  the  universe,  which  discloses  the  secrets 
of  nature,  and,  revealing  to  men  some  of  the  laws  by  which  God  governs  the 
material  or  the  spiritual  word,  augments  the  po>verof  man,  and  increases  his  means 
of  enjoyment.  We  cannot  assign  a  higher  than  the  third  rank  to  the  active ;  the 
energy  and  force  of  will  which  surmounts  practical  difficulties.  And  it  is  to  this 
class  the  soldier  belongs :  it  is  with  the  physical,  not  with  the  spiritual,  that  he  has 
to  do.  Hence  Napoleon  was  not  so  great  a  man  as  Bacon  and  Newton,  as  Milton 
and  Shakespeare  ;  nor  so  great  a  benefactor  to  his  race.  Still  less  is  he  to  be  eom- 
pared  with  Howard,  with  Carey,  with  Williams.  Napoleon  felt  this;  henoe  he 
wished  to  rest  his  fame  far  more  on  the  noble  code  of  laws  which  he  was  the  means 
of  giving  to  his  vast  empire,  than  on  all  his  splendid  victories.  We  trust  the  days 
are  coming  in  which  correct  views  of  this  subject  will  be  generally  formed ;  and 
that  the  discoveries  of  science,  and  the  various  inventions  of  man,  will  contribute, 
in  conjunction  with  the  diffusion  of  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  to  banish  wars  from 
the  earth.  Meantime,  as  to  the  military  profession,  one  wonders  at  the  estimate  in 
which  it  is  held.  I  speak  not  of  individuals,  but  of  the  system.  To  think  of  men 
letting  themselves  out  for  a  shilling  a  day  to  shoot  their  fellow-oreatures,  and  to  be 
shot  at  1  What  a  high  estimate  they  must  form  of  themselves  I  II.  It  is  time  that 
we  adverted  to  the  second  train  of  remark  in  which  we  propose  to  indulge.  They 
knew  they  had  many  hours  to  wait,  and,  having  completed  their  task,  they  composed 
themselves  as  well  as  they  could ;  they  put  themselves,  mentally  and  physically,  in 
an  attitude  of  patience,  till  death  slowly,  but  surely,  accomplished  his  work.  "  They 
sat  down  and  watched  him  there."  There  is  something  very  affecting  in  the  position 
of  him  who  sits  down  and  watches  a  fellow-creature  as  life  slowly  ebbs.  The  tender 
mother,  as  she  watches  her  beloved  child,  or  the  affectionate  daughter,  as  she 
watches  her  aged  parent,  thus  sinking  in  the  arms  of  death,  feels  her  position  to  be 
at  once  a  painful  and  a  solemn  one.  Oh  !  yes,  in  the  chamber  of  the  dying  saint, 
what  solemn  and  impressive  thoughts  may  we  not  indulge!  But  the  men  who  were 
appointed  to  see  the  last  of  Jesus,  watched  Him  without  the  slightest  emotion;  they 
were  not  impressed  with  the  solemn  character  of  their  position ;  death  was  there  at 
work,  but  they  had  been  accustomed  to  his  neighbourhood,  and  were  unmoved  by 
his  presence.  Oh  I  how  closely,  and  yet  how  unconsciously,  may  men  be  allied  to 
the  most  interesting  and  the  most  important  events.  How  nnconscious  were  they 
of  the  character  of  Him  who  was  suffering  there.  They  were  utterly  nnconscious 
of  His  dignity  or  His  worth ;  they  did  not  know  that  when  they  saw  Him,  they  saw 
the  fullest  and  clearest  revelation  of  God  that  the  world  ever  beheld— that  the  ful- 
ness of  the  Godhead  dwelt  in  Him  bodily.  When  God  appeared  on  Mount  Sinai, 
the  Jews  trembled ;  when  the  cloud  filled  the  tabernacle  and  the  temple,  the  priests 
could  not  abide  there,  they  were  awe-struck ;  but  in  Jesus,  they  had  not  simply  a 
symbol  of  the  Divine  presence — the  Divinity  itself  dwelt  in  Him,  so  that  His  disciple 
said,  **  We  beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of 
grace  and  truth;"  and  He  said,  **He  that  hath  seen  Me,  hath  seen  the  Father." 
And  little  did  they  think,  when  they  roughly  bound  Him,  fiercely  scourged  Him, 
and  rudely  nailed  Him  to  the  tree,  that  they  had  in  their  hands  the  Lord's  anointed ; 
that  they  were  thus  treating  the  only  begotten  and  well-beloved  Son  of  God ;  that 
they  were  thus  touching  the  apple  of  His  eye.  Had  they  known  Him,  they  would 
not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory ;  had  they  known  Him  they  would  not  readily 
have  touched  Him,  they  would  rather  have  trembled  in  His  presence ;  they  would 
have  fallen  down  at  His  feet  and  worshipped  Him.  But  not  knowing  Him,  they 
imbrued  their  hands  in  His  blood ;  unconsciously  they  crucified  the  Son  of  God. 
Ignorance  is  a  fearful  thing ;  say  we  not  truly,  sometimes,  that  all  sin  is  a  mistake, 
— a  grand,  a  fatal  mistake  ?  How  much  evil  may  we  do  ignorantly  ?  Take  heed  of 
your  sins  of  ignorance.  The  apostle  says,  "  Unawares  some  have  entertained 
angels,"  and  some  have  entertained  them  strangely.  Prophets,  God-sent  men,  have 
been  among  them,  and  they  have  not  regarded  them,  but  have  treated  them  most 
•ontamelioasly*    Th»  soldiers  were  equally  unconscious  of  the  nature  and  grandeoi 


.  XT.]  ST.  MARK,  663 

of  the  transaction  in  which  they  were  concerned ;  they  saw  in  it  merely  a  very 
common  oeoarrence»  an  event  of  no  importance,  and  of  very  partial  and  transient 
interest.  They  were  wholly  imoonscions  of  the  real  nature  of  the  transaction,  oi 
the  infinite  and  enduring  interest  of  the  event.  Little  did  they  think,  while  they 
sat  down  watching  Him  there,  of  the  relation  of  what  was  passing  before  them  to 
all  worlds  and  to  all  beings — to  heaven,  earth,  hell— to  God,  to  man,  to  angels,  and 
apostate  spirits.  Little  did  they  think  that  they  were  witnessing  the  greatest  act  of 
obedience  to  the  Divine  commands  which  God  had  ever  received ;  that  the  Divine 
law  was  never  so  magnified.  They  were  equally  ignorant  of  the  consequences  which 
would  result  from  it.  Ah  I  no ;  while  men  Uve  in  opposition  to  God,  they  are 
ignorant  of  the  real  nature  of  their  conduct,  and  are  altogether  unprepared  for  the 
consequences  which  must  ensue.  The  responsibility  increases,  however,  with  the 
means  of  information  within  onr  reach.  Ignorance,  so  far  from  excusing  the 
transgressions  which  grow  out  of  it,  may  itself  be  exceedingly  sinfuL  All  that  they 
did  had  been  foreseen  and  foretold  by  some  of  the  ancient  seers ;  the  whole  of  their 
conduct  had  been  described  by  inspired  men,  who  had  looked  at  it  through  the  vista 
of  ages;  and  every  action  of  theirs,  in  connection  with  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus, 
was  the  fulfilment  of  some  prediction ;  but  they  knew  it  not.  In  this  sense,  too, 
"  they  knew  not  what  they  did."  This  part  of  our  subject  suggests  an  important 
reflection :  it  relates  to  the  consistency  between  the  free  agency  of  man,  and  the 
foreknowledge  of  God.  (tT".  J.  Davies.)  Stripped  of  HU  raiment : — Tom  Baird, 
the  carter,  the  beadle  of  my  working-man's  church,  was  as  noble  a  fellow  as  ever 
lived — God-fearing,  true,  xmselfish.  I  shall  never  forget  what  he  said  when  I  asked 
him  to  stand  at  l^e  door  of  the  working-man's  congregation,  and  when  I  thought 
he  was  unwilling  to  do  so  in  his  working  clothes.    "  If,"  said  I,  *♦  you  don't  Hke  to 

do  it,  Tom ;  if  you  are  ashamed "    "  Ashamed  1 "  he  exclaimed,  as  he  turned 

round  upon  me ;  "I'm  mair  ashamed  o'  yersel',  sir.  Div  ye  think  that  I  believe,  as 
ye  ken  I  do,  that  Jesus  Christ,  who  died  for  me,  was  stripped  o'  His  raiment  on  the 

cross,  and  tiiat  I Na,  na,  I'm  prood  to  stand  at  the  door."    Dear,  good  fellow  I 

There  he  stood  for  seven  winters,  without  a  sixpence  of  pay ;  all  from  love,  though 
at  my  request  the  working  congregation  gave  him  a  silver  watch.  When  he  was 
dying  from  small  pox,  the  same  unselfish  nature  appeared.  When  asked  if  they 
would  let  me  know,  he  replied:  "There's  nae  man  leevin'  I  like  as  I  do  him.  I 
know  he  would  come.  But  he  shouldna'  come  on  account  of  his  wife  and  bairns, 
and  so  ye  maxmna'  tell  him  1 "  I  never  saw  him  in  his  illness,  never  hearing  of  his 
danger  till  it  was  too  late.  {Norman  Macleod.)  The  hardened  gamester : — There 
was  a  profligate  gamester,  whose  conversion  was  attempted  by  some  honest  monks, 
and  they  in  order  to  break  his  heart  for  sin,  put  into  his  hands  a  fine  picture  of  the 
crucifixion  of  Christ ;  but  when  they  inquired  what  he  was  studying  so  intently  in 
the  picture,  hoping  his  conversion  was  going  forward,  he  replied,  *'  I  was  examining 
whether  the  dice,  with  which  the  soldiers  are  casting  lots  for  the  garment,  be  like 
ours."  This  man  too  well  resembles  bad  men  in  the  ceremonies  of  religion,  and 
their  hearts  guide  their  eyes  to  what  nourish  their  vioes,  not  to  what  would  destroy 
them.     (Robert  Robimon.) 

Yer.  25.  AaA  they  crvLdAeA  Eim.— The  mytteru  of  eternity  :—l%  waa  %  death  of 
horror ;  yet  inflicted  on  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  whose  crime  was  mercy,  whose 
mission  here  was  one  of  redeeming  love.  I.  All  the  mvstebiss  or  human  natubb 
ABB  HKBs.  1.  Sin.  2.  Freewill.  3.  Judgment.  After  these  things  must  there 
not  be  some  reckoning?  II.  The  mtstbbiks  or  Dr?Dni  bbvxlatxon.  1.  God's 
love.  2.  God's  meekness.  3.  God's  method  of  curing  sin.  By  enduring  its  strokes 
He  shames  and  vanquishes  transgression.  III.  Thb  mybtebikb  of  salvation. 
1.  Atonement.  2.  Reconciliation.  In  the  cross  our  love  meets  God's  love,  and  we 
are  reconciled.  3.  A  great  inspiration.  Ever  since,  the  cross  has  been  the  pattern 
on  the  mount  which  holy  lives  have  copied,  and  it  has  inspired  love  and  bacrifice 
into  countless  hearts.  IV.  All  mysteries  op  consolation.  Had  Chriit  evaded 
death,  who  would  have  dared  to  face  it?  He  has  changed  Jordan's  streams  into 
still  waters,  and  its  banks  to  green  pastures.  Death  fixed  its  sting  in  Christ,  and 
left  and  lost  it  there.  Thus  Christ's  cross  is  our  Alpha  and  Omega,  glowing  with 
law  and  gospel,  comfort  and  restraint,  power  and  peace ;  it  is  the  new  Tree  of  life 
in  the  midst  of  life's  wilderness.  {R.  Glover.)  Crucifixion  of  Christ:— L  The 
DBATH  or  CBuciTixioN.  1.  Degrading.  2.  Involving  self-abasement  on  Christ's 
part.  3.  Conformity  in  will  on  ours.  II.  The  place  op  obdcipixion.  L  Common 
•xeoation-groand  for  felons  and  outlaws.    A  place  of  desolation  and  horror.    2. 


864  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  st» 

We  have  to  bear  His  reproach.  III.  The  blindness  of  eatb.  They  did  all  in  their 
power  against  Him.  Bat  with  what  result  ?  1.  That  was  the  salvation  hour  for 
the  whole  world.  2.  Jesus  went  into  the  realm  of  the  dead,  and  revolutionized  it, 
opening  the  door  of  Satan's  stronghold  and  setting  the  captives  free.  8.  He  ha» 
changed  ihe  aspect  of  death  for  ever — rolled  away  its  sting.  {F.  B.  Proctor^  M.A.} 
Our  part  in  ChrisV*  crucifixion : — A  traveller  ascends  a  hiU :  having  reached  the 
summit  and  seen  the  view,  he  descends.  As  he  descends  he  sees  at  the  foot  of  the 
hill  a  little  cottage  from  which  cries  of  lamentation  proceed.  He  enters.  He  see* 
the  mangled  form  of  a  strong  man  surrounded  by  a  weeping  wife  and  children. 
He  sympathizes.  He  pities.  But  when,  on  inquiry,  he  learns  that  a  stone  rolling 
down  the  hill  put  an  end  to  that  man's  life,  how  different  are  his  feelings — ^not 
sympathy,  but  shame ;  not  pity,  but  anguish :  for  he  remembers  that  he  wilfully 
(for  there  was  a  notice  up,  warning  him)  hurled  a  boulder  down  the  hill-side  for  his 
own  gratification.  (O.  Calthrop,  D.D.)  Whitfield  and  the  execution: — ^During 
one  of  the  visits  which  the  Kev.  George  Whitfield  paid  to  Edinburgh,  an  unhappy 
man,  who  had  forfeited  his  life  to  the  offended  laws  of  his  country,  was  executed 
in  that  neighbourhood.  Whitfield  mingled  with  che  crowd  that  was  collected  on 
the  occasion,  and  was  struck  with  the  solemnity  and  decorum  which  were  observ- 
able at  so  awful  a  scene.  His  appearance,  however,  drew  the  eyes  of  all  upon  him, 
and  raised  a  variety  of  speculations  as  to  the  motives  which  had  induced  him  to 
join  the  crowd.  The  next  day  being  Sunday,  he  preached  to  a  very  large  con- 
gregation in  a  field  near  the  city ;  and  in  the  course  of  his  sermon  he  adverted  to 
the  event  of  the  previous  day.  *•  I  know,  said  he,  "  that  many  of  you  will  find  it 
difficult  to  reconcile  my  appearance  yesterday  with  my  character.  Many  of  you,  I 
know,  will  say  that  my  moments  would  have  been  better  employed  in  praying  for 
the  unhappy  man,  than  in  attending  him  to  the  fatal  tree ;  and  that,  perhaps, 
curiosity  was  the  only  cause  that  converted  me  into  a  spectator  on  that  occasion ; 
but  those  who  ascribe  that  uncharitable  motive  to  me  are  mistaiken.  I  went  as 
an  observer  of  human  nature,  and  to  see  the  effect  that  such  an  example  would 
have  on  those  who  witnessed  it.  I  watched  the  conduct  of  those  who  were  present 
on  that  awful  occasion,  and  I  was  highly  pleased  with  their  demeanour,  which  has 
given  me  a  very  favourable  opinion  of  the  Scottish  nation.  Your  sympathy  was 
visible  on  your  countenances,  particularly  when  the  moment  arrived  that  your  un- 
happy fellow-creature  was  to  close  his  eyes  on  this  world  for  ever ;  and  then  yon 
all,  as  if  moved  by  one  impulse,  turned  your  heads  aside  and  wept.  Those  teari 
were  precious,  and  will  be  held  in  remembrance.  How  different  it  was  when  th« 
Saviour  of  mankind  was  extended  on  the  cross  I  The  Jews,  instead  of  sympa- 
thizing with  the  Divine  Sufferer,  gloried  in  His  agony.  They  reviled  Him  with 
bitter  words, — ay,  with  words  more  bitter  than  the  gall  and  vinegar  which  they 
handed  Him  to  drink.  Not  one,  of  all  that  witnessed  His  pains,  turned  his  head 
aside,  even  in  the  last  pang.  Yes,  my  friends,  there  was  one  ;  that  glorious 
luminary,"  pointing  to  the  sun,  **  veiled  his  brightness,  and  travelled  on  his  course 
in  tenfold  night."  Jesus  crucified : — I.  Why  Christ  was  cbucified.  The  suffer- 
ings of  our  Lord  were  not  less  because  He  was  the  Son  of  God.  His  was  a  Divine 
sorrow.  Natures  most  sensitive  to  all  that  is  holy  and  true,  most  keenly  aware  of 
all  that  is  false,  suffer  sharpest  torture  when  rudely  invaded.  These  sufferings 
came  upon  Him  from  the  first.  To  John  the  Baptist  He  appeared  as  the  Lamb  of 
God.  Christ's  sufferings  were  public  and  ignominious.  It  was  in  the  broad,  open 
day,  and  in  the  most  public  place,  that  He  was  crucified.  His  most  sacred  suffer- 
ings were  made  a  public  spectacle.  It  was  a  part  of  His  degradation  that  He  did 
not  suffer  alone.  Two  wretched  criminals  from  the  city  were  crucified  with  Him. 
For  one  moment  He  lost  sight  of  His  Father's  face.  In  that  hoar  He  was  linked  to 
all  that  is  worst  and  vilest  in  our  common  humanity.  H.  How  Christ  suffered. 
Through  it  all  He  showed  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God—"  My  God."  He  suffered 
as  a  kmg  might  suffer.  HI.  Why  Christ  suffered.  He  suffered  in  order  that  He 
might  obey  the  Father.  ••  He  humbled  Himself  and  became  obedient  unto  death." 
He  suffered  to  make  known  the  Father.  **  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the 
Father."  He  suffered  that  men  might  be  redeemed.  {E.  B.  Maton.)  The  suffer- 
iiigi<  of  Christ: — Our  Lord's  sufferings  were  inexpressibly  great  and  exquisitely 
painful.  They  may  be  said  to  have  commenced  at  the  very  first,  moment  He  came 
in  contact  with  our  nature.  He  suffered  in  every  possible  way,  and  in  every 
possible  degree.  He  suffered  in  His  body  and  in  His  soul ;  He  suffered  person- 
ally, and  He  sulEered  relatively.  If  we  had  been  told  that  the  Son  of  God  was  to 
into  oar  world,  and  to  save  as  by  His  sufferings,  we  naturally  would  have 


.  ST.]  ST,  MARK.  665 

snpposed  that  He  was  to  die,  and  if  to  die,  that  He  would  die  in  a  state  of  glory — 
If  He  were  to  fall,  that  He  would  fall  in  the  field  of  war :  and  that,  when  He  died, 
BQs  praises  would  be  shouted  by  the  whole  world.  But  how  differerit  a  lot  was 
assigned  to  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  Moreover,  He  suffered  under  the  seal  of  the 
eurse.  Crucifixion  was,  among  the  Romans,  the  death  awarded  only  to  slaves,  and 
by  the  Jews  it  was  held  in  execration.  Bemember,  too,  that  the  influence  of  many, 
•nd  of  various  characters,  contributed  to  our  Lord's  last  sufferings.  Here,  above 
«11  the  rest,  was  to  be  seen  the  supreme  hand  of  God  allotting  to  Him  the  various 
parts  of  His  suffering,  and  overruling  those  who  had  an  instrumental  hand  in 
bringing  it  about.  Then  again,  there  are  wonderful  things  to  be  seen  in  the 
manner  and  circumstances  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion.  We  see  here  God  with- 
drawing, and  yet  God  supporting ;  the  Redeemer  sinking  under  His  sufferings,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  rising  triumphantly  above  them  all.  And,  once  more,  we  observe 
in  the  last  sufferings  of  Christ  a  remarkable  accomplishment  of  the  Word  of  God. 
In  Him  all  the  ancient  predictions  of  the  Jewish  prophets  were  fulfilled.  So  much 
in  relation  to  the  history  of  the  death  and  last  sufferings  of  our  Saviour.  Let  these 
things  be  deeply  impressed  upon  your  minds.  But  beware  of  regarding  them  in 
the  mere  light  of  history.  You  may  be  acquainted  with  all  the  historical  facts  re- 
lating to  our  Lord's  sufferings  and  death,  and  yet  you  may  obtain  no  interest  what- 
ever in  their  benefits.  They  may  float  in  your  understanding  without  ever  sinking 
into  your  heart,  or  influencing  your  conduct.  Yet  the  bare  history,  the  minute 
facts  of  the  Saviour's  hfe  are  of  such  importance  that  they  ought  to  be  known. 
Traced  in  their  connection  one  with  another,  they  throw  a  flood  of  light  over  the 
Bible.  (Thos,  McCrie^  D.D.)  Lessons  at  the  cross : — I.  We  may  learn  something 
from  the  fact  that  our  Lord  was  actually  put  to  death  like  an  ordinary  criminal. 
All  of  the  evangelists  call  attention  to  the  circumstance  of  Christ's  having  been 
associated  with  two  malefactors  crucified  at  the  same  moment.  Thus  Pilate  makes 
the  two  robbers  intensify  Jesus'  shame  in  the  eyes  of  the  multitude.  Each  one 
of  the  common  people  who  saw  the  sad  spectacle,  would  inevitably  draw  the  con- 
clusion that  Christ  was  the  chief  malefactor  of  them  all.  The  terrible  humiliation 
of  the  death  which  our  Saviour  suffered  is  thus  made  apparent.  But  the  power  of 
this  scene  is,  singularly  enough,  deepened  by  this  very  particular.  We  call  to 
mind  as  an  illustration  of  such  a  statement  the  tale  of  Colonel  Gardiner's  con- 
version,— a  tale  so  remarkable  that  it  has  remained  historic  for  more  than  a 
hundred  and  fifty  years.  He  was  a  gay  miUtary  man,  without  any  virtues  to  com- 
mend him,  licentious,  profane,  and  intemperate.  One  Sabbath  evening  he  had  been 
earousing  in  company  with  some  roystering  comrades;  late  at  night  he  retired 
to  his  chamber.  There  his  eye  accidentally  lighted  upon  a  book  entitled  "The 
Christian  Soldier ;  or,  Heaven  taken  by  storm."  He  took  it  up  to  ridicule  it,  but 
fell  asleep  while  it  lay  in  his  hand.  He  dreamed :  he  thought  he  saw  a  prodigious 
blaze  of  light  shining  upon  the  volume;  raising  his  eyes  to  know  what  was  so 
suddenly  bright  overhead,  he  saw  suspended  in  the  air  a  vivid  representation 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  upon  the  cross ;  distinctly  then  he  heard  some  one 
saying,  "  This  I  did  for  thee  ;  what  hast  thoa  done  for  Met **  Struck  to  the  very 
depth  of  his  conscience,  he  was  wakened  instantly;  at  onoe,  filled  with  con- 
trition, as  a  sinner  he  sought  peace  and  found  pardon  for  his  soul.  II.  We 
may  learn,  also,  something  from  the  record  that  this  form  of  death  was  a  ful- 
filment of  prophecy.  Mark  says  that  when  Jesus  was  «*  numbered  with  trans- 
gressors,'* the  scripture  "  was  fulfilled."  HI.  We  may  learn,  onoe  more,  something 
from  the  account  given  of  the  taunts  which  oor  Lord  received.  It  would  appear 
that  all  sorts  of  people  joined  in  this  sarcasm.  The  passers-by  "  railed,"  the  rulers 
•♦  derided,"  the  soldiers  **  mocked ;  "  even  the  thieves  "  reviled  "  Him.  The  utmost 
ingenuity  m  invention  of  jibes  and  epithets  seemed  to  grow  in  demand  that 
awful  morning.  The  lesson  here  is  plain ;  the  patience  of  our  Lord  is  simply 
wonderful.  How  He  could  bear  all  this  contumely  and  reproach  passes  under- 
standing. rV.  In  like  manner,  we  may  learn  something  from  the  sudden  dark- 
ness which  Jesus  endured  on  that  day.  This  darkness  is  to  be  understood  as 
symbolical  of  Gk>d'8  horror  of  sin  even  when  borne  vicariously  by  an  innocent 
Christ.  How  an  impenitent  man  ean  hope  to  have  audience  with  his  Maker,  so 
as  to  implore  and  obtain  pardon,  when  even  Christ  was  left  in  the  darkness  nn- 
pitied,  passes  all  comprehension.  V.  We  may  likewise  learn  something  from  the 
grief  of  our  blessed  Lord  when  He  found  Himself  deserted.  VI.  We  may  learn 
something,  also,  from  our  Lord's  rejection  of  the  draught  proffered  for  His  relief. 
What  an  example  of  self-sacrificing  fidelity  there  is  here  for  as  1  How  little  oourags 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  »▼. 

we  have  when  our  day  of  trial  comes  on  1  Jesus  had  always  been  the  embodiment 
and  pattern  of  dutifiilness  and  affection  in  His  Father's  sight ;  He  was  not  going 
to  shirk  and  shrink  and  fail  now.  He  told  His  disciples  once  in  simple  sincerity 
just  what  was  His  purpose :  **  I  can  of  mine  own  self  do  nothing :  as  I  hear,  I 
judge ;  and  My  judgment  is  just ;  because  I  seek  not  Mine  own  will,  but  the  will 
of  the  Father  which  hath  sent  Me."  VII.  Finally,  we  may  learn  something  from 
the  cry  which  our  Lord  uttered  as  His  "  great  voice  "  at  the  last.  It  was  really  a 
shout — a  shout  of  triumph.  There  is  great  significance  in  the  fact  that  not  one  of 
the  inspired  biographers  says  Jesus  died ;  they  all  agree  in  an  unusual  form  of 
speech  which  preserves  the  notion  of  His  entire  voluntariness  in  the  surrender  He 
made  to  death's  power.  He  "  yielded  "  His  soul,  He  "  gave  up"  His  breath— such 
are  the  expressions  ;  but  the  adversary  did  not  gain  the  victory  :  it  was  Death  that 
died  in  the  conflict.  What  this  cry  was  is  told  us  in  the  Gospel  of  John — *•  It  is 
finished  1"  His  entire  work  was  done.  The  Lord  standeth  sure  now  for  the 
believer.  It  is  recorded  of  a  dying  minister,  one  of  the  faithfullest  of  modem 
times,  that  in  his  last  hour  his  son  asked  him,  "  Father,  are  you  comfortable  now?" 
And  he  answered,  **  Certainly  :  why  not?  for  I  lie  most  comfortably  resting  upon 
the  finished  work  of  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ."     {G.  S.  Robinson.) 

Ver.  26.  ni«  King  of  the  Jews. — Jesus  mocked  and  crueified : — Jesus  suffered 
and  died  under  the  forms  of  law.  His  execution  was  the  result  of  a  six-fold  trial — 
three  trials  at  the  hands  of  the  Jews,  and  three  at  the  hands  of  the  Romans.  When 
Jesus  was  led  to  Golgotha  bearing  His  cross,  He  had  stood  at  the  focal  point  of  the 
world's  best  light  and  been  pronounced  guilty  of  death.  For  what  offence  ?  Pilate, 
as  the  custom  was,  with  his  own  hand  wrote  the  charge.  "  And  the  superscription 
of  His  accusation  was  written  over,  •  The  King  of  the  Jews.* "  L  The  words  or 
THE  SUPERSCRIPTION  coBRECTLT  EXPRESS  WHAT  Jesus  cLAisiEB.  He  was  Condemned, 
not  so  much  upon  the  testimony  of  the  non-agreeing  witnesses,  as  upon  His  own 
admission  of  this.  He  maintained  it  to  the  last.  No  terror  from  the  sight  of  the 
cross  could  make  Him  withdraw  the  claim.  He  died  resolutely  claiming  that  He 
was  King.  II.  The  words  of  the  supebscription  indicate  the  claim  Christ  maxm 
TO-DAY.  Eighteen  centuries  have  not  dimmed  the  title  Pilate  wrote.  As  decisively 
now  as  then  He  stands  at  every  court,  at  every  public  and  private  tribunal,  at  Uie 
door  of  every  man's  heart,  at  every  turn  in  our  journey,  before  every  thought  of  our 
mind,  every  choice  of  our  will,  every  act  of  our  life,  and  says,  ♦*  I  am  King."  If  He 
be  indeed  King,  His  offices  and  attributes  are  kingly,  and  He  has  the  right  to 
demand  that  no  one  dim  the  lustre  of  His  crown,  or  weaken  the  sway  of  His  sceptre. 
It  is  sometimes  said  that  it  matters  little  what  place  we  assign  to  Christ,  or  with 
what  attributes  we  clothe  Him,  so  that  life  is  only  upright,  and  our  conduct  such  as 
He  would  not  condemn.  At  His  trial  before  the  Jewish  and  Boman  Courts  il 
mattered  much  what  place  was  allotted  Him  and  what  title  He  should  be  allowed  to 
bear.  He  died  rather  than  disown  His  royal  title.  Is  He  less  mindful  of  it  now  in  His 
exalted  glory,  and  less  regardful  of  those  attributes  which  rightfully  constitute  His 
regal  claim  ?  If  He  be  a  King,  His  is  the  right  to  hold  the  name  and  place  thereof. 
Who  shall  dare  to  put  forth  the  hand  and  pluck  one  jewel  from  His  diadem  of 
omnipotence,  or  efface  one  ray  from  His  halo  of  infinite  wisdom  ?    HI.  The  words 

OF  THE   SUPERSCRIPTION   INDICATE    WHT   80   MANY   NOW   REJECT    ChRIST.       BeoaUSO   He 

asserts  kingly  authority— the  right  to  rule,  and  to  control  men's  hearts  and  lives. 
Men  exalt  the  compassion  of  Jesus  ;  they  praise  His  teachings  ;  they  laud  the  good 
deeds  with  which  His  life  was  full ;  they  extol  the  lustre  of  His  example ;  but  when 
asked  if  they  have  placed  within  their  heart  a  throne  on  which  He  may  sit  and 
reign,  they  falter.  The  title  they  apply  to  Him  is  burden-bearer  rather  than  law- 
maker, benefactor  rather  than  king,  counsellor  rather  than  judge,  one  to  admire 
and  extol  rather  than  obey.  IV.  The  words  of  the  superscription  indicate  in  what 
WAY  Christ  is  now  to  be  received.  As  the  world's  Redeemer  Christ  fulfils  the  three- 
fold office  of  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  To  accept  EQm  as  the  first  is  to  beUeve  and 
adopt  His  teachings  ;  as  the  second,  to  rely  for  pardon  and  approach  to  God  upon 
His  atonement  and  intercession  ;  as  the  third,  to  add  to  the  others  a  surrender  of 
the  will  to  Him  in  loyalty  and  love,  to  instal  Him  as  ruler  of  our  hearts  and  lives. 
We  thus  receive  Him* as  our  Saviour  and  Lord  ;  we  at  once  believe  in  Him  and  snb- 
mit  to  Him  ;  we  ask  Him  to  both  pardon  us  and  control  us  ;  and  while  He  justifies 
He  takes  ns,  with  our  cordial  consent,  into  His  own  care  for  the  direction  and 
government  of  oar  life  both  here  and  hereafter.  Henceforth  the  thought  thftt 
Christ  is  King  is  welcome.    A   place  is  gladly  made  in  the  heart  for  His  throne  to 


SHAP.  X?.]  8T.  MARK,  667 

stand  immatably.  He  it  snpreme.  His  will  is  law.  (P.  B,  DavU.\  ChrUt  the 
King  of  kings  .-—Wben  Mr.  Dawson  was  preaching  in  South  Lambetn  on  the  offices 
of  Christ,  he  presented  Him  as  Prophet  and  Priest,  and  then  as  the  Eong  of  saints. 
He  marshalled  patriarchs,  kings,  prophets  and  apostles,  martyrs  and  confessors  of 
every  age  and  clime,  to  place  the  insignia  of  royalty  upon  the  head  of  the  King  of 
kings.  The  audience  was  wrought  up  to  the  highest  pitch  of  excitement,  and,  as  if 
waiting  to  hear  the  anthem  peal  out  the  coronation  hymn,  the  preacher  commenced 
iinging  "  All  hail  the  power  of  Jesus'  Name."  The  audience,  rising  as  one  man, 
Bang  the  hymn  as  perhaps  it  was  never  sung  before.    {Fo»ter'»  Cyclopcedia.) 

Ver.  S7.  And  with  him  they  erncUy  two  thieves.— TA«  malefacton  : — We  pro- 
pose to  advert  to  thb  fact  that  Jesus  endured  His  last  agonies  between  two 
liALEVACTOBS  *,  and  then  to  notice  the  bespectivb  chabactebs  of  His  companions  in 
■UFFBEXNO.  I.  Let  US  behold  this  strange  sight :  Jesus  suffsbinq,  dying  between 
TWO  UALEFAOTOBB  1  What  an  amazing  spectacle  I  And  it  may  have  been  without 
any  specific  design  on  the  part  of  his  oppressors  that  He  was  crucified  in  the  midst, 
raUier  than  on  either  side  of  His  companions  in  suffering.  But  whether  it  was 
designed  by  His  enemies  or  not,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  circumstance  consti* 
tnted  a  part  of  our  Lord's  humiliation.  A  pre-eminence  was  thus  assigned  Him  in 
ignominy  and  shame.  This  circumstance  affords  a  striking  fulfilment  of  prophecy ; 
ti^en  was  aooomphshed  the  declaration  of  the  prophet,  "  He  was  numbered  with  the 
transgressors  :"  and  not  only  so,  but  it  is  also  illustrative  of  the  prophetic  Scrip- 
tures, as  it  shows  how,  without  any  design  whatever,  and  sometimes  with  the  very 
opposite  design,  men  may  be  fulfilling  God's  purposes,  and  accomplishing  the  pre- 
dictions of  His  Word.  That  strange  spectacle  suggests  the  remark,  how  closely  men 
may  be  allied  by  oiroumstanoes — how  completely  identified  as  to  tiieir  lot  on  earth 
— between  whom  there  is  no  resemblance  in  real  character.  Here  are  three  persons 
suffering  at  the  same  time,  and  in  the  same  place,  the  same  omel  and  ignominious 
death,  and  yet  how  perfectly  dissimilar  in  point  of  character  I  Ontwar(Uy  their  lot 
is  the  same  ;  but  inwardly  there  is  not  the  slightest  resemblance  between  them. 
Heaven,  eartii,  and  hell,  are  brought  into  closest  contact  in  the  persons  of  those 
three  sufferers.  In  the  elevated  character  of  Jesns  we  have  all  that  is  highest, 
purest,  best  in  heaven  ;  in  the  obduracy,  the  prof aneness,  and  the  impiety  of  one  of 
the  malefactors,  we  have  the  most  striking  characteristic  of  the  lost,  who  are 
hardened  in  sin  beyond  the  possibility  of  repentance  ;  while  in  the  contrition  and 
prayerfulness  of  the  other,  we  have  what  is  peculiar  to  the  good  on  earth.  Often 
may  the  best  and  the  worst  be  found  in  close  connection  here,  sitting  at  tiie  same 
able,  or  suffering  on  the  same  scaffold.  How  clearly  does  this  indicate  another 
state  of  being  I  Under  the  government  of  one  infinitely  wise  and  just,  as  well  as 
almighty,  such  disorders  cannot  be  final ;  there  surely  must  come  a  time  of  separa- 
tion, of  adjustment !  H.  We  now  proceed  to  consider  thx  chabaoteb  of  the 
MALEFACTOBS  WHO  8UFFSBED  WITH  ouB  LoBD.  Wc  havc  already  intimated,  that  they 
differed  essentially  from  each  other ;  we  must,  therefore,  consider  them  separately. 
And,  first,  of  the  impenitent  ualefactob.  The  treatment  which  our  Lord  received 
at  his  hands  is  remarkable,  and  deserves  our  attention.  He  reviled  the  Redeemer, 
even  on  the  cross.  The  conduct  of  this  wretched  man,  in  reviling  the  Bedeemer  on 
the  cross,  not  only  illustrates  the  power  of  example,  but  it  is  further  instructive,  as 
showing  how  near  death  a  man  may  be,  and  yet  how  far  from  thinking  seriously  of 
any  of  the  consequences  of  dying ;  how  far  from  any  reflections  suited  to  his  solemn 
position  and  prospects  !  How  strikingly  does  this  illustrate  the  folly  of  deferring 
to  a  dying  hour,  Uie  all-important  work  of  preparation  for  an  eternal  world  I  Men 
often  speak  of  the  penitent  thief,  and  expect,  like  him,  in  their  last  moments,  to 
find  repentance  unto  life  ;  but  they  rarely  think  of  his  companion  who  died  un- 
changed ;  and  yet  it  is  to  be  feared  he  is  the  representative  of  a  far  larger  class  than 
the  other.  Let  us  turn  to  a  more  pleasing  theme — the  spibtt  and  conduct  of  the 
PENITENT  thief  ;  In  which  there  is  much  that  is  extraordinary,  and  deserving  of 
our  best  attention.  We  may  notice  his  deep  sense  of  the  solemnity  of  his  situation. 
"  He  feared  God,"  into  whose  immediate  presence  he  was  so  soon  to  enter.  Nothing 
can  operate  so  nowerf uUy,  so  constantly,  in  deterring  from  evil,  and  in  imparting  to 
the  eharaoter  the  highest  elevation  and  purity  ;  and  those  who  do  not  realize  this 
are  exposed  to  every  breath  of  temptation,  and  are  guilty  of  neglecting  their  noblest 
and  b^t  interests.  We  notice,  also,  the  free  and  spontaneous  acknowledgment  of 
his  goilt.  He  felt  And  confessed  that  he  and  his  companion  deserved  to  die,  and 
that  tb^  were  Joftly  exposed  to  the  displeasure  of  God—**  We,  indaad,  joitly ;  for 


566  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  xt. 

we  receive  the  due  reward  of  oar  deeds.**  How  deep  seemed  to  be  his  conviction  ol 
sin  and  demerit ;  and  how  free  and  fall  his  acknowledgment  of  it !  What  a  toaoh- 
ing  illastration  we  have  here  of  the  distingaishing  grace  of  God  I  The  two  male- 
factors who  soflered  with  cor  Lord  were  probably  condemned  for  the  same  o£Fence. 
They  had  been  associates  in  sin,  and  now  they  were  companions  in  shame,  and 
suffering,  and  death  ;  and  yet,  how  the  one  is  made  to  differ  from  the  other  !  And 
this  leads  me  to  notice  his  knowledge  of  the  character  of  Christ.  '*  This  man  has 
done  nothing  amiss."  Whence  he  derived  his  knowledge  of  the  character  of  the 
Redeemer,  it  were  in  vain  to  inquire.  It  is  not  impossible  that,  in  former  days,  he 
may  have  heard  Jesus  preach,  and  may  have  witnessed  some  of  His  stupendoas 
miracles  ol  power  and  of  mercy.  It  is  not  improbable  that,  while  on  his  way  to  the 
cross,  and  while  hanging  on  it,  he  heard  much  of  Jesus  ;  for  while  the  multitude 
reviled  and  reproached  Him,  there  were  some  amongst  them  who  ber-ailed  and 
lamented  "Frim  ;  and  these,  doubtless,  spoke  of  His  worth  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  he 
that  day  saw  much  of  the  spirit  and  conduct  of  the  Bedeemer,  as  well  as  of  Hia 
enemies  ;  and  no  man^could  observe  the  oondnct  of  Jesus  with  an  impartial  mind, 
without  being  convinced  that  He  was  a  righteous  person.  Still  more  remarkable  il 
the  persuasion  which  he  entertained  and  expressed  of  the  dominion  and  spiritual 
power  of  the  Redeemer  :  *•  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thoa  comest  into  Thy  king- 
dom." Strange  that  he  could  recognize  a  king  in  one  whose  environment  was  so 
humiliating.  I  cannot  but  remark,  finally,  his  deep  humility,  which  appears  in  his 
throwing  himself  so  unreservedly  on  the  compassion  and  grace  of  the  Saviour. 
"  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thoa  comest  into  Thy  kingdom."  There  is  no  pre- 
sumption, no  dictation,  here.  There  is  nothing  of  the  Spirit  of  the  two  disciples 
who  prayed  that  they  might  sit,  the  one  on  His  right  hand  and  the  other  on  His 
left,  in  His  kingdom  ;  but  there  is  the  deep  humility  which  is  always  oharacteristi« 
of  genoine  repentance.    (J.  /.  Davies.) 

Vers.  31,  32.    Ltt  Christ,  the  King  of  Israel,  now  descend  from  tho  erosa. — 

A  glorious  reproach : — In  the  Divinest  sense  He  could  not  save  Himself.  Physically, 
of  course.  He  could  have  delivered  Himself ,  **come  down  from  the  cross,"  and  over- 
whelmed His  enemies  with  destruction.  But  morally  He  could  not,  and  His  moral 
weakness  here  is  His  glory.  He  could  not  because  He  had  promised  to  die,  and 
He  could  not  break  His  word.  He  could  not,  because  the  salvation  of  the  world 
depended  upon  His  death.  The  greatest  man  on  earth  is  the  man  who 
cannot  be  unkind,  who  cannot  tell  a  falsehood,  who  cannot  do  a  dishonourable  act 
or  be  guilty  of  a  mean,  selfish  deed.  The  glory  of  the  omnipotent  God  is,  that 
'<He  cannot  lie."  These  men,  therefore,  should  have  honoured  the  wea^ess 
that  they  acknowledged;  adored  it.  Their  very  confession  condemns  their 
conduct.  {Eomilist.)  The  heroism  of  the  crucified  .-—The  testimony  of  an  enemy 
is  always  valuable.  What  is  it  that  they  testify?  First,  that  "He  saved 
others : "  and  second,  that  in  order  to  save  others — nay,  they  testify  not  that,  yet  it 
is  implied  in  the  assertion  they  make — ^in  order  to  save  others  He  was  content  not 
to  save  Himself.  Perhaps  there  never  was  a  sentence,  that  was  in  one  sense  so 
radically  false,  and  in  another  sense  so  sublimely  true,  as  this  particular  sentence. 
Take  it  in  the  abstract,  and  it  contains  a  most  outrageous  and  glaring  falsehood. 
There  was  not  a  moment  from  beginning  to  end  of  His  human  career  in  which  our 
blessed  Lord  might  not  have  turned  back  from  shame  and  suffering.  Yet  while 
these  words  are  false  absolutely,  they  are  none  the  less  true  relatively.  Relatively 
to  the  work  which  our  blessed  Lord  had  undertaken,  it  was  necessary  that  He  Him- 
self shotdd  not  be  saved.  Because  He  was  the  Son,  there  was  a  certain  blessed, 
constraining  influence  which  rendered  it,  in  one  sense,  necessary  that  He  should  go 
forward :  but  the  necessity  was  not  imposed  upon  Him  from  without,  but  accepted 
from  within.  It  was  the  necessity  of  love ;  love,  first  and  foremost  to  His  Father, 
and  then  love  to  thee  and  to  me.  When  you  look  over  His  history,  how  much  there 
was  to  lead  Him  to  exercise  this  power  which  all  along  He  possessed.  How  natural 
it  would  have  been  if  He  had  done  so.  He  has  scarcely  come  into  the  world  before 
He  begins  to  meet  with  the  world's  bad  treatment.  When  He  was  bom,  they  had 
no  room  for  TTiwi  in  the  inn.  Would  it  not  have  been  most  natural  if  our  blessed 
Lord  had  even  then  thought  better  of  it.  *' These  rebel  sinners,  these  thoughtless 
beings,  I  have  come  into  the  world  to  save — they  have  not  even  a  place  whereon  to 
lay  My  infant  form."  As  He  grew  up  to  be  a  young  man,  **  He  eame  onto  His  own :  ** 
His  very  brethren  did  not  believe  in  Him.  When  He  found  that  there  was  oold 
incredulity,  an  absence  of  sympathy  in  His  own  family  circle,  ought  He  not  i 


^aur.  !▼.}  ST,  MARK,  869 

mbly  have  been  expected  to  ^sy,  '*  Ah,  well  1  this  ia  not  what  I  expected :  I  thonght 
I  shoald  have  been  received  with  open  arms ;  that  every  heart  would  have  been  full 
of  Bympathizing  tenderness  towards  Me :  but  they  have  nothing  but  hard  thoughts 
to  think,  and  hard  sayings  to  say  of  Me.  Let  them  alone :  from  this  time  I  give  up 
the  task:  it  is  a  hopeless  one."  We  read  "that  He  was  in  the  world,  and  the 
world  was  made  by  Kim,  and  the  world  knew  Him  not."  How  wonderful  a  thing 
it  was  that  Jesus  Christ  should  have  stood  all  this,  and  yet  continued  true  to  His 
purpose  still.  They  laid  the  cross  upon  Him,  and  He  faints  on  the  way  to  Calvary. 
O,  Son  of  God  1  Thy  body  has  fainted  1  Weakness  has  done  its  work  1  Surely  Thou 
wouldest  be  justified  in  giving  in  now  1  He  might  reasonably  have  said,  **  Flesh 
And  blood  will  bear  no  more ;  My  physical  strength  has  absolutely  yielded  under  the 
terrible  shock ;  I  can  carry  it  no  further."  But  no,  no.  He  may  faint ;  but  He 
will  not  yield.  Is  it  not  wonderful?  What  made  Him  stand  to  His  purpose  7  What 
gave  Him  that  strange  stability?  Well,  I  can  only  say,  " He  loved  us."  Why  He 
loved  us,  I  do  not  know ;  but  He  loved  us,  and  He  loves  us  still ;  and  it  is  because 
He  loved  us  that  "He  saved  others;  Himself  He  could  not  save."  But  we  are 
only  sUmming  the  surface.  We  must  endeavour,  if  we  can,  to  go  deeper  than  this. 
There  is  a  mystery  of  sorrow  here.  If  we  are  to  understand  what  is  transpiring  on 
yonder  cross,  we  must  endeavour  to  look  within  the  veil ;  we  must  try  to  see  things 
«s  God  saw  them.  Yet  it  is  an  awful  thing  to  think  of  that  world  descending  in  that 
gradually  lowering  scale  into  the  very  jaws  of  darkness  and  death.  Where  are  we 
to  find  the  hero  of  humanity  ?  Who  shall  fight  our  battle  for  us  ?  Who  shall  avail 
to  lift  that  sinking  world  from  the  very  depth  of  doom  into  which  it  is  disappear- 
ing ?  No  angel  in  heaven  can  do  it.  There  is  only  One  who  can  do  it,  and  there 
is  only  one  way  in  which  He  can  do  it.  By  a  sovereign  effort  of  His  own  will,  Christ 
might  have  called  a  new  world  into  existence;  He  might  have  blasted  this  world 
with  judgment,  and  caused  it  to  disappear  altogether ;  but  in  doing  so  He  would 
have  been  stultifying — shall  I  say  ? — His  own  designs  ;  He  would  have  been  with- 
drawing from  His  own  eternal  purposes  of  mercy  and  love.  Nay,  nay ;  the  ruinous 
world  must  be  saved — How  is  it  to  be  done  ?  The  Son  of  the  Father's  bosom  steps 
Into  that  ascending  scale.  Now  look  1  He  does  it  voluntarily.  "  I  lay  down  My 
life,"  He  says ;  "  no  man  taketh  it  from  Me ;  I  give  it ;  for  it  was  His  own  free  gift 
for  man,  for  you,  for  me.  What  means  this  strange  sense  of  desolation  !  Through 
«11  His  human  life,  there  was  one  thing  that  had  sustained  Him,  one  joy  that  had 
«ver  been  present  to  Him.  It  was  the  joy  of  His  Father's  presence.  He  had  lived 
in  the  light  of  His  countenance.  He  bad  refreshed  Himself  with  His  fellowship. 
**He  had  drank  of  the  brook  by  the  way,  and  therefore  He  lifted  up  His  head."  But 
lo  I  the  brook  by  the  way  seems  to  be  dried  np.  It  was  no  mere  natural  thirst  that 
parched  Emmanuel.  That  outward  thirst  was  but  the  indication,  the  type,  the 
symbol,  of  the  inward  thirst  which  burned  within  His  soul.  What  means  this 
strange  sense  of  desolation  r  What  is  it  f  Is  it  the  loss  of  human  friends  ?  No  ; 
something  more  than  that.  That  is  bad  enough  to  bear ;  but  it  is  something  more 
than  that.  What  is  it  7  For  the  first  time  in  His  human  hfe  He  finds  Himself 
«lone.  The  light  is  eclipsed ;  the  sun  has  disappeared  from  His  heaven,  and  the 
joj  of  existence  is  gone.  He  gazes  round  and  round— east,  and  west,  and  north, 
«nd  south.  What  is  it  ?  It  is  but  a  little  matter  that  the  outward  sun  was  eclipsed ; 
bat  there  was  a  dread  eolipse  had  taken  place  within  the  soul  of  Emmanuel,  of 
which  that  outward  darkness  was  but  the  type.  What  was  it  ?  Wherever  sin  goes 
it  brings  its  own  deadly  shame  of  everlasting  night  along  with  it.  And  because  He 
had  taken  the  burden  of  the  world's  sin  upon  Him,  therefore  the  shadows  of  night 
were  resting  npon  Him  now.  One  shrinks  from  following  out  these  words,  yet  one 
ean  fancy — and  it  is  no  mere  fancy — what  must  have  passed  through  His  heart. 
**  I  oould  have  borne  that  My  own  people  should  treat  Me  thus  :  I  could  have  borne 
that  My  own  disciple  should  betray  Me  for  thirty  pence :  I  might  have  borne  that 
Simon  Peter  should  deny  me  with  oaths  and  curses:  I  might  have  borne  the  out- 
ward pain,  the  bodily  anguish :  but  O,  My  God,  My  God,  Thy  smile  has  been  my 
tight :  Thy  presence  has  been  My  joy.  What  have  I  done  r  How  comes  it  to  pass 
that  instead  of  fellowship  I  have  desolation  ;  instead  of  Thy  joyful  company.  Thy 
blessed  society,  I  have  this  awful  sense  of  loneliness  ?  What  is  it  ?  What  means 
it  ?  "  "My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  What  did  it  all  mean  ?  It  meant 
that  "  He  saved  others : "  and  because  "  He  saved  others.  Himself  He  could  not 
save:"  and  so  the  scale  that  bore  the  Christ  descended  into  the  deepest  darkness, 
and  the  scale  that  bore  a  ruined  world  began  to  rise,  and  to  rise.  Lo  1  the  gloom  is 
Mttled  on  that,  and  the  sunlight  on  this :  that,  is  sinking  down  into  the  darkness  ol 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «?. 

3eath ;  this,  ii  rising  into  the  glories  of  life.  The  angels  are  veiling  their  faces  in 
horror  as  they  behold  the  Son  of  God  disappear  beneath  the  oload :  l^e  sons  of 
God  are  shouting  in  triumph  as  they  behold  a  ransomed  world  rising  into  the  very 
sunlight  of  the  Divme  smile,  the  curse  revoked,  the  doom  recalled,  the  gates  of 
everlasting  life  opened  to  a  ruined  world.  So  He  carried  it  through, — that  won- 
derf  ul  enterprise — through  to  the  bitter  end :  and  so  He  drank  the  cup  to  the  last 
drop,  and  He  paid  the  ransom  to  the  last  penny,  sinner,  for  thee,  and  for  me. 
I  Wi<.nt  to  ask  you,  Have  you  accepted  that  which  He  has  purchased  at  such  a  price  f 
What  is  it  that  renders  sin  inexcusable  ?  Just  this  glorious  fact  we  are  gazing  at. 
Your  condemnation,  my  friend,  lies  in  this :  that  at  the  cost  of  such  indescribable 
Hgony  as  we  shall  never  know,  until  we  get  to  the  other  side :  and  not  even  then, — 
Christ  has  bought  everlasting  life  for  you,  and  you  have  refused  to  accept  it.  To- 
night, that  pierced  hand  seems  to  hold  it  out  for  you.  It  seems  as  though  He 
pleaded  with  vou ;  as  if  He  were  saying,  "  Now,  my  dear  brother,  I  have  saved,  not 
Myself,  that  I  might  save  thee:  I  turned  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting,  that 
thy  face  might  be  irradiated  with  Divine  glory  :  I  wore  that  crown  of  thorns  that 
thou  mightest  wear  the  crown  of  glory  :  I  carried  that  cross  that  thou  mightest  sway 
the  sceptre:  I  hung  in  agony  that  thou  mightest  sit  in  triumph:  I  fathomed  the 
depth  that  thou  mightest  rise  to  the  height.  Men !  do  yon  think  there  is  anything 
manly  in  trampling  such  love  as  that  under  your  feet  ?  Women  1  do  you  think 
there  is  anything  womanhke  in  turning  your  back  npon  such  love  as  that? 
Ob,  let  us  be  ashamed  of  ourselves  to-night,  that  we  have  sinned  against  that  love 
so  long !  {W,  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  demand  of  $inner$  unreasonable  : — These 
words  are  a  demand  that  He  would  prove  His  claims  to  the  Messiahship  by  coming 
down  from  the  cross,  and  a  promise  that,  if  He  would  do  this,  they  would  receive 
Him  as  the  Messiah.  It  strikes  us  at  once  that  this  demand  is  tmreasonable,  even 
to  effrontery.    I,  You  make  demands  which  are  unbeasonable,  because  coMPiiiANCB 

WITH  THEM  WOULD  DEFEAT  THE  DiVINE  PLAN  OF  REDEMPTION.  This  WaS  One  charac- 
teristic of  the  unreasonable  demand  of  the  Pharisees.  If  Christ  had  come  down 
from  the  cross,  the  work  of  redemption  would  never  have  been  finished.  Similar 
demands  are  often  made  by  ungodly  men— demands  that  Christ  would  come  down 
from  the  cross — ^that  He  would  save  them  in  some  other  way  than  by  His  atoning 
sacrifice,  and  His  blood.       II.    Youb  demands  abb  unbeasonable,  because  yov 

CBEATE  T0UE8ELVBS  THE  VEBY  DIFFICULTIES  WHICH  YOU  CLAIM  TO  HAVE  REMOVED.   JcSUS 

was  moving  among  the  Jews,  working  the  most  convincing  miracles.  They  seized 
Him,  and  nailed  Him  to  the  cross :  then  they  demanded  that  He  should  undo  what 
their  own  maUce  had  done — "  Come  down  from  the  cross,  and  we  will  believe."  A 
similar  unreasonableness  belongs  to  many  of  your  demands.  Is  it  not  your  own 
hand  that  has  plunged  your  soul  into  this  flood  of  worldliness,  Ac.  7  With  what 
reason  can  you  urge,  as  your  apology  for  inaction,  the  chains  which  your  own  hands 
have  fastened  on  your  souls?     III.  Demands  abe  unbeasonable  which  bequibb 

additional  evidence  of  the   IMPOBTANCB  of  BELiaiON,   WHEN   SUFFICIENT   HAS    BEEN 

ALREADY  GIVEN.  Unrcasonableness  of  this  kind  characterized  the  demand  of  the 
Pharisees.  They  had  seen  the  Saviour's  miracles,  &o.  It  was  unreasonable  in  them 
to  propose  that,  if  a  single  miracle  should  be  added  to  the  multitude  already  given, 
they  would  be  ready  to  receive  Jesus  as  the  Christ.  Precisely  similar  is  the  unrea- 
sonableness of  many  of  your  demands.  You  say,  "  If  I  had  lived  in  Christ's  day, 
and  had  seen  His  miracles,  I  should  have  been  ^s  disciple.  Other  demands  exhibit 
the  same  unreasonableness.  The  reason  most  commonly  given  for  indifference  to 
religion,  is  the  inconsistency  of  professors.  I  presume  everyone  of  you  knows  some 
whom  he  acknowledges  as  real  Christians.  You  are  no  stranger  to  these  triumphs 
of  the  cross,  to  these  demonstrations  of  its  Divine  power.  And  yet  you  plead  that, 
because  A,  B,  and  C  do  not  live  consistently  with  their  profession,  you  will  neglect 
religion,  and  treat  it  as  if  it  were  a  worthless  imposture.  Similar  are  all  the  reasons 
for  neglecting  religion,  founded  on  its  mysteries.  If  men  never  engaged  in  worldly 
business  till  all  who  engage  in  it  manage  it  wisely,  honestly,  and  successfully ;  if 
they  never  acted  except  on  certainty — never  acted  till  everything  dark  was  cleared 
up,  and  every  objection  removed,  they  would  never  act  at  all.     IV.  Ix  X8  unbeasoh- 

ABLE  TO  DEMAND  MOBE,  WHEN  GOD  HAS  ALBEADY  DONE  SO  MUCH  IN  TOUB  BEHALF,  ES- 
PECIALLY WHEN  TOU    HAVB    NOT    MADE    IMPBOVEMENT    OF    WHAT  Hb  HAS  DONE.       Th« 

Jews  might  have  known,  from  the  ancient  prophecies,  that  Christ  was  to  suffer  an 
ignominious  death.    It  was  unreasonable.      V,  Youb  demands  are  unreasonable, 

BECAUSE    God  has    PBOTED  it  by  TESTING  THEM.      YoU  HAVE  MADE  SIMILAB  DEMANDS 

BRFOBx;  God  bab  condzsobndbd   to  ooxflt  with  thbh,  and  txt  yov  did  sot, 


BBAP.  IT.] 


ST.  MARK,  •'^l 


STBK  THEN,  KEEP  THE  PBOWiEB  YOU  HAD  MADE.  Time  and  again  had  the  Pharisees 
S™d  Jesui  to  give  them  a  sign  that  they  might  see  and  beheve.  Signs  He  had 
riven  them,  t^e  most  stupendous  and  convincing;  yet  they  were  not  more  ready  to 
Sleive  Hiii  than  before.    And  even  when  He  rose  from  the  dead,  they  stiU  rejected 

Him  VI.  YOUB  DBMANDB  ABB  UNBEASONABLE,  BECAUSE,  IN  THE  VEBY  ACT  OF  MAX^G 
THEM     TOU   ADMIT  WHAT   JUSTITIES  YOUB  CONDEMNATION.      .  Th^   PhMlSeeS  Said,        He 

B^ed  Others  "  They  admitted  that  He  had  wrought  miracles.  Thus,  by  the  very 
justification  which  they  attempted,  they  condemned  themselves  ?/>  ^V«  ^*?,  JJ"' 
Whatever  reason  yoa  may  give  for  neglecting  rehgion,  you  admit  its  Divine  auttio- 
ritv  its  reality,  and  importance.  "  Out  of  thine  own  mouth  wiU  I  judge  thee,  thou 
wicked  servant"    VII.  Youb  demands  and  apologies  abe  unbeasonabuc,  because 

THEY    LAY  THB    BLAME     OF    YOUB    CONTINUED    IMPENITENCE    ON    GOD.         (S.   HarrX$.) 

The  sight  of  the  Saviour's  suffering  .—Do  you  not  know  that  this  simple  story  of  a 
Savioi^'s  kindness  is  to  redeem  aU  nations?  The  hard  heart  of  this  world  s  obduracy 
is  to  be  broken  before  that  story.  There  is  in  Antwerp  Belgium,  one  of  the  mos 
remarkable  pictures  I  ever  saw.  It  is  "  The  Descent  of  Christ  from  the  Cross."  It 
IbZ  of  Rubens'  pictures.  No  man  canBtand  and  look  at  tj^at,' Descent  from  ^e 
OroBfl."  as  Rubens  pictured  it,  without  having  his  eyes  flooded  wi  h  tears  if  he  have 
any  sinsibility  at  all.  It  is  an  overmastering  picture-one  that  ^^^^  y°^' ^^^  stag- 
ge^  Tou,  and  haunts  your  dreams.  One  afternoon  a  man  stood  in  that  cathe^al 
Kg  it  Reubens'  "Descent  from  the  Cross."  ,  He  was  all  absorbed  m  that  scene 
of  a  Saviour's  sufferings  when  the  janitor  came  in  and  said :  « It  is  time  to  close  up 
Se  <»?hXal  for  the  night.  I  wish  yon  would  depart.''  The  pilgrim  lo^^g  at 
that  "Descent  from  the  Cross."  turned  around  to  the  jamtor  and  «a»d:  "No,  no 
not  yet.  Wait  until  they  get  Him  down."  O,  it  is  the  story  of  a  Saviour'8  suftermg 
kindfift*"*  that  is  to  capture  the  world;    {Dr,  TaJmage.) 

Ver.  88.  There  was  dartaiess  over  the  whole  land.-.r^  three  hours'  ^w  w~ 
What  a  call  must  that  mid-day  midnight  have  been  to  the  careless  I  They  knew 
not  that  the  Son  of  God  was  among  them ;  nor  that  He  was  working  ont  human 
rSemption.  The  grandest  hour  in  all  history  seemed  hkely  to  pass  by  Reeded 
Xn  suddenly  night  hastened  from  her  chambers  and  usurped  the  day.  Every  one 
TeSS  Idfl  fellow,  "What  means  this  darkness  f  "  Business  stood  still :  the  plough 
Bta^d  i^rdd  fJrrow,  and  the  axe  paused  uplifted.  There  was  a  halt  m  the  caravan 
ofUfe.  Men  were  stirtled,  and  hushed  into  silence.  I.  Let  us  view  this  dabkness 
AS  A  MiBACLE  WHICH  AMAZES  US.  Abundant  reason  for  a  miracle  at  tins  time  The 
nnnsnal  in  lower  nature  is  made  to  consort  with  the  unusual  in  the  deahngs  o 
nature's  Lord,  The  sun  darkened  at  noon  is  a  fit  accompaniment  of  the  death  of 
JesuB.  XL  Let  us  beoabd  this  dabkness  as  a  veil  which  conceals.  1.  A  conce^- 
m^nt  for  guilty  enemiea.  9.  A  sacred  concealment  for  the  blessed  Person  of  our 
Divine  Lord.  The  angels  found  for  their  King  a  pavilion  of  thick  clouds,  in  the 
wWohffiB  Majesty  might  be  sheltered  in  its  hour  of  misery.  3.  The  Passion  is  a 
Treat  myBtery;  into  which  we  cannot  pry.  4.  The  powers  of  darkness  will  always 
ffivour  t^ionceal  the  cross  of  Christ.  III.  Let  us  co««°>?V°f.hfrmP  time' 
SYMBOL  WHICH  INSTRUCTS.  The  veU  fslls  dowH  sud  couceals  J  l^?V*V^f.rf«  ron 
as  an  emblem  it  reveals.  1.  It  is  the  symbol  of  the  wrath  of  God  which  fell  on 
JhoBe  who  Blew  His  only.begotten  son.  2.  It  tells  us  what  our  Lord  Jesus  Chnst 
Buffered.  8.  It  shows  us  what  it  was  that  Jesus  was  battling  with-darkness.  IV. 
A  PB^icTiCAL  DISPLAY  OF  SYMPATHY.  1.  All  lights  are  dim  when  Christ  shines  not^ 
2.  See  the  dependence  of  all  creation  on  Chnst.    «•  Hi^Jit' Sl^^^ll^^n^^m^ 


Z.  tiee  tne  aepenaenoe  oi  an  oronwuu  uu  v/**-..--.    -.*.---— , 

from  the  thought  that  Jesus  also  was  once  there.  Feel  after  Him.  Lean  on  Him^ 
He  will  hold  you  up.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  Total  eclipse  of  the  sun :— A  pious 
astronomer,  in  deBonbing  an  eoUpse  which  he  witnessed  in  Norway,  says:  I 
itched  th;  instantaneous  extinction  of  light,  and  saw  the  glorious  scene  on  which 
I  had  been  gazing  turned  into  darkness.     All  the  horizon  seemed  to  speak  of  tenrw. 


I  had  been  gazmg  turnea  mw  aarKnesB.  ^i  fcuo  iiuw*.wi^  u^^^^^  ir^u-rv,  -  .to^-o 
death,  and  judgment;  and  overhead  Bat,  not  the  clear  flood  of  ight  which  a  starry 
night  sends  do^.  but  there  hung  over  me  dark  and  leaden  blackness^hich  seemed 
as  if  it  would  crush  me  into  the  earth.  And  as  I  beheld  it  I  thought,  How  miserable 
is  the  soul  to  whom  Christ  is  eclipsed  I  The  thought  was  answered  by  a  voice ;  for 
a  fierce  and  powerful  sea-bird  which  had  been  swooping  around  us,  apparently 
infuriated  at  our  intrusion  on  its  domain,  poured  out  a  scream  of  despwnng  agony 
when  it  was  surprised  in  the  darkness."  What,  then,  will  be  the  fearful  surprise 
when  the  lost  soul  finds  itself  in  that  worid"  where  hope,  withermg,  flees,  and 
mercy  sighs,  Farewell  I "     {Chrutian  Age.) 


C7S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAF.  lib 

Ver.  84.    My  Ood,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  I^Forsaken  of  Ood  ;-- 
One  thing  we  know,  He  was  alone ;  He  had  reached  the  climax  of  that  loneliness  in 
which  His  whole  earthly  work  had  been  carried  on.    It  is  hardly  possible  for  us  to 
understand  the  nature  of  the  solitude  of  the  life  of  Christ.    "  It  was  not  the  solitude 
of  the  hermit  or  monk ;  He  ever  lived  among  his  fellow-men ;  not  the  solitude  of 
pride,  sullenly  refusing  all  sympathy  and  aid;  not  the  solitude  of  selfishaess, 
creating  around  its  icy  centre  a  cold,  bleak,  barren  wilderness ;  not  the  solitude  of 
sickly  sentimentality,  for  ever  crying  out  that  it  can  find  no  one  to  understand  or 
appreciate ;  but  the  solitude  of  a  pure,  holy,  heavenly  spirit,  into  all  whose  deeper 
thoughts  there  was  not  a  single  human  being  near  Him,  or  around  Him,  who  could 
enter ;  with  all  whose  deeper  feelings  there  was  not  one  who  could  sympathize ; 
whose  truest,  deepest  motives,  ends,  and  objects,  in  living  and  dying  as  He  did,  not 
one  could  comprehend.    Spiritually,  and  all  throughout,  the  loneliest  man  that  ever 
lived  was  Jesus  Christ."    (Hanna.)    Yet  there  were  times  when  this  loneliness 
deepened  on  His  soul.     Again  and  again,  when  in  this  place  or  that,  •*  He  came 
unto  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not."    But  one  other  stage  was  reached 
of  yet  more  utter  solitude  when,  in  the  darkness  of  that  most  mysterious  noonday 
that  veiled  the  scene  of  Calvary,  and  in  the  grosser  darkness  of  unfathomable 
anguish  that  enveloped  the  human  soul  of  Jesus,  He  trod  the  winepress  of  the 
wrath  and  justice  of  God  alone,  and  entered  that  last  stage  of  solitude  in  which  He 
could  no  longer  say,  "  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  Me,"  but  uttered 
that  bitter  cry — a  cry  from  the  darkest,  deepest,  dreariest  loneliness  into  which  a 
pure  and  holy  spirit  ever  passed—"  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken 
Me?  "    We  may  in  reverence  consider  three  causes  which  seem  to  have  produced 
this  element  of  the  Sacred  Passion.     The  first  cause  of  this  awful  desolation  was 
the  fact  of  the  accumulated  sin  of  the  whole  world,  from  the  disobedience  of  Eden 
down  to  the  last  intention  of  sin  that  shall  be  disturbed  by  the  archangel's  trumpet, 
resting  upon  one  Human  Soul,  to  whom  the  faintest  shadow  of  sin  was  intolerable. 
The  second  cause  was  the  gathering  of  the  hosts  of  darkness,  vanquished  in  the 
wilderness,  and  in  the  garden,  and  in  many  of  the  souls  they  had  possessed,  but 
now,  rallied  and  marshalled,  and  massed  for  one  last  supreme  effort,  hurling  them- 
selves with  the  fury  of  despair  and  hate  upon  their  Vanquisher.    The  third  cause 
was  the  hiding  of  the  Father's  face.    He  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold 
iniquity  could  not  look  even  upon  His  beloved  Son,  when  deluged  thus  in  our  sin. 
Beloved,  out  of  the  depths  of  this  most  bitter  woe  of  the  passion  of  Jesus  there 
comes  some  solid  comfort  for  us.     He  endured  that  utter  loneliness  that  we  might 
never  be  alone.     {Henry  S.  Miles,  M.A.)        Eclipse  of  the  face  of  God;  — The 
black  miphitic  cloud  of  a  world's   sin  came  between  God  and  Christ.    Neces- 
sarily there  was  an  eclipse  of  the  face  of  God.    An  eclipse  of  the  sun  is  caused, 
as  you  are  all  aware,  by  that  opaque  body  the  moon  coming  between  the  earth 
and  it.     That  preternatural  darkness  of  which  we  read  in  the  preceding  verse, 
was  caused  by  some  thick  veil  of  sulphureous  clouds  being  drawn  across  the  face  of 
the  sun — the  sun  veiling  his  face,  that  he  might  not  witness  the  perpetration  of  the 
blackest  crime  ever  perpetrated  on  even  our  sin-cursed  earth — a  crime  that  made 
even  incarnate  nature  shudder  to  its  innermost  core.     So  when  this  opaque  body 
of  our  sins  came  between  Christ  and  God,  when  that  dark  sulphureous  cloud  of  a 
world's  sins  enwrapped  the  being  of  Christ  like  some  great  funereal  pall,  necessarily 
there  was  an  eclipse  of  the  loving  face  of  God,  who  is  light.  Necessarily  there  was,  on 
the  part  of  Christ,  spiritual  darkness,  and  desertion,  and  loneliness — a  darkness, 
and  desertion,  and  loneliness  which  found  expression  in  the  wailing  cry,  *•  My  God, 
My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "    [J.  Black.)        The  preienee  of  God  the 
Bupport  of  the  martyr* ;— What  was  it  that  enabled  Ignatius,  waiting  to  be  thrown 
to  the  lions, to  say— "Let  me  be  food  for  the  wild  beasts, if  only  God  be  glorified ; ** 
that  enabled  the  aged  Polycarp,  the  flames  lapping  his  body,  to  cry — "  I  thank  Thee, 
O  Father,  that  Thou  hast  numbered  me  among  the  martyrs;"  that  enabled 
Latimer,  under  the  same  circumstances,   to  say — "Be  of  good  cheer,  Brother 
Bidley  " — What  but  the  feeling  of  His  nearness  to  them ;  the  thought  of  His 
approving  smile ;  and  that  though  they  were  hated  and  persecuted  by  men,  they 
were  not  forsaken  of  God.     But  Christ,  in  His  hour  of  deepest  need— He  is  robbed 
of  that  all  and  alone  sufficient  help.    When  He  most  needs  the  presence  of  God, 
just  then  God  forsakes  Him.    Friends  !  we  are  here  brought  face  to  face  with  a 
great  mystery.    Christ  Himself  feels  that.     His  words,  if  they  mean  anything, 
mean  that.     "  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?  "     {Ibid,)        Tht 
cry  of  the  forsaken  one  :—l.  And  first,  let  us  not  forget  that  xius  cax  waii  a  VaM 


CHAP.    X?0  ^^'   ^^^^  ^'^ 

PUT  INTO  OLD  TESTAMENT  W0BD8.     To  be  perfectly  fair  in  maj  consideration  of 
the  phase  of  anguish  expressed  by  them,  we  must  look  to  the  twenty-second  Psalm, 
where  the  words  first  of  all  occur.    Let  us  read  a  verse  or  two  of  the  Psalm.    Take 
vers.  7,  8,  **  All  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to  scorn :  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they 
shake  the  head,  saying,  He  trusted  on  the  Lord  that  He  would  deliver  him :  let  Him 
deliver  him,  seeing  he  delighted  in  Him; "  almost  the  very  cry  of  the  railing  passers  by 
Terse  sixteen  is  yet  more  remarkable  in  its  application :  *•  They  pierced  my  hands 
and  my  feet."  Equally  so  is  the  eighteenth  verse :  **  They  part  my  garments  among 
them,  and  cast  lots  upon  my  vesture."    If  the  Psalm  had  been  written  after  the 
occun-ences  of  that  day,  it  might  almost  have  been  given  as  an  historical  record  of 
them  in  these  particulars.  But  I  want  you  to  think  of  the  possibility— nay,  extreme 
probability — that  while  our  Lord's  mind  in  that  dark  hour  rested  upon  these  por- 
tions of  the  Psalm,  it  would  also  recall  other  portions  of  it.    For  mark  how  from 
the  cry  of  the  twenty-first  verse  there  arises  a  strong  hope :  ••  Save  me  from  the 
lion's  mouth :  for  thou  hast  heard  me  from  the  horns  of  the  unicorns.    I  will 
declare  Thy  name  unto  my  brethren  :  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation  will  I  praise 
Thee."    From  these  words  forth  there  is  no  longer  any  sense  of  desolation.     "  For 
He  bath  not  despised  nor  abhorred  the  aflliction  of  the  afidicted  ;  neither  hath  He 
hid  His  face  from  him ;  but  when  he  cried  unto  Him,  He  heard."    Now,  I  say,  we 
ought  to  remember  this  in  our  endeavour  to  interpret  the  cry.    Heavy  enough 
indeed,  with  all  the  suffering  it  involved,  was  the  hand  of  God  that  day  as  it  rested 
upon  liie  patient  Sufferer;  and  life  was  ebbing  out  even  while  the  cry  came  forth. 
And  yet  surely  the  blessed  Saviour  was  not  long  bereft  of  consolation.    Did  He 
cling  only  to  the  first  cry  of  the  Psalm  ?    Was  this  all  ?    Was  there  no  mounting 
aloft  into  the  blessed  heights  of  faith  and  of  hope  and  of  praise  ?    I  would  believe 
there  was ;  and  this,  though  it  may  not  deprive  the  scene  of  all  its  mysteriousness, 
helps  me  somewhat  to  apprehend  its  significance,  which,  as  I  have  already  inti- 
mated, is  about  all  I  thought  we  could  attempt  to  do— all  we  purposed  to  attempt. 
n.  Next,  we  will  view  the  words  as  the  bbvelation  op  a  obbat  anguish.    And  yet, 
when  we  began  to  think  a  little  more  about  this,  Christ's  sense  of  utter  desertion 
and  loneliness,  in  the  light  especially  of  His  relation  to  our  race  as  its  true  head 
and  High  Priest ;  we  should  find  ourselves  ready  to  admit  some  sort  of  a  congruous- 
ness  in  the  fact.     For  we  know  that  this  experience,  a  sense  of  God-desertion,  is 
one  of  the  most  real  of  men's  troubles.    And  there  seems  a  fitness  in  the  ordina- 
tion of  the  Redemptive  scheme  which  allows  a  place  for  this  sense  of  God-desertion 
in  those  sufferings  by  which  that  Redemption  was  secured  and  ratified.    So  far  as 
we  have  any  knowledge  of  Christ's  inner  experience  during  the  years  before,  we 
fail  to  discern  any  trace  of  this  God- desertion.    On  the  contrary,  it  was  the  one 
sweetness  and  light  of  His  life,  even  when  He  thought  and  told  of  the  coming 
desertion  of  His  chosen  ones,  that  still  amid  all  circumstances  the  Father  was  with 
Him.    It  was  not  always  so  in  the  case  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  and  worthies. 
They  had,  as  we  have,  intervals,  when  the  clear  shining  of  the  Divine  face  is  inter- 
fered with,  and  the  summer  of  the  soul  ceases  awhile.    When  God  is  nigh,  when 
we  feel  able  to  say,  "  The  Lord  is  at  my  right  hand,'*  we  can  add,  "  I  shall  not  be 
greatly  moved."    But  up  comes  the  mist  from  the  rolling  sea  of  passion  and  self- 
will  and  pride  and  human  weaknesses,  and  we  find  that  the  light  of  our  life  is 
awhile  quenched.    Many  days  we  may  have  lost  sight  of  land  and  sun  and  star, 
and  God  appears  to  hide  Himself,  until  the  soul  cries  out  passionately,  "Where  is 
thy  God— where  ?  "    And  the  tempter  echoes  and  re-echoes  the  dreary  desolate 
cry,  "Where,  ah,  where  indeed?  "    And  any  one  who  has  ever  found  himself  in 
such  darkness  knows  that  it  is  most  profound ;  he  who  has  felt  such  a  distance 
between  God  and  him  knows  it  is  most  terrible  and  dreary.    He  who  perfectly 
fulfilled  the  Eternal  Will,  and  who  was  at  that  very  moment  fulfilling  its  more  mys- 
terious  ordinations,  cannot  wholly  escape  this  bitterness.    And  yet,  I  say,  never 
was  Christ  more  truly  fulfilling  the  Divine  Will  than  now.    Never  was  the  Father 
more  delighted  in  the  blessed  Son  than  now.    Why,  it  was  the  suffering  of  a  perfect 
sacrifice.     It  wm  a  true  self -offering.     If  Christ  had  been  dragged  to  this  tree 
against  His  will,  if  Christ  had  tried  to  escape  from  the  hands  of  his  tormentors,  it 
would  have  been  different.     O,  my  brethren,  instead  of  trying  to  build  upon  this 
cry  of  the  Saviour's  any  strange  theory,  let  us  rather  think  how  much  of  real  and 
abiding  comfort  we  may  draw  from  it.    You  and  I  may  often  have  had  to  pass 
through  the  gloomy  way  unrelieved  by  any  of  heaven's  sunshine.    It  may  seem  to 
us  that  everything  has  conspired  against  us,  and  that  the  very  heavens  are  sealed 
against  our  cry.    Our  prayers  may  seem  to  return  to  ns  unanswered.    All  may 

43 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHikP.  rr« 

appear  to  be  lost,  even  God.  Let  ns  but  at  snch  moments  look  at  the  blessed 
Christ.  Let  us  think  how  God  put  His  best  beloved  One  through  the  hottest  firea 
and  the  most  searching  tests.  He  knew  once  what  it  was  to  have  the  heavens 
above  Him  darkened.  And  yet  the  Eternal  Father  loved  Him.  May  He  not  love 
you  too  ?  III.  And  now  we  come  to  these  words  from  another  point  of  view.  We 
have  seen  in  them  the  utterance  of  a  great  anguish ;  let  us  look  at  them  as  the 
expression  of  a  clinging  faith  and  love.  You  will  perceive  why  we  called  atten- 
tion to  the  twenty-second  Psalm.  That  Psalm  shows  us  one  who  felt  himself  for- 
saken, and  who  was  by  no  means  actually  forsaken ;  and  the  words  used  by  Christ 
may  serve  also  to  show  us  how  very  close  Christ  was  to  the  Eternal  heart  when  He 
uttered  them.  "My  God" — 0,  if  we  can  only  say  this,  "My  God."  It  matters 
little  what  we  may  say  afterward.  If  we  can  only  say  "  My  God,"  the  darkness 
will  not  long  brood  upon  our  souls.  They  are  words  of  faith  and  love,  which,  when 
truly  spoken,  must  bring  in  the  daylight.  In  the  battle  of  the  Christian  faith  and 
life,  the  victory  is  more  than  half  won  when  we  can  say,  ♦'  My  God."  No  soul  that 
is  lost  can  say,  "  My  God."  I  turn  again  to  the  real  comfort  wrapped  up  within 
the  very  words  which  expressed  the  Saviour's  agony.  How  often  is  this  the  case. 
The  very  words  by  which  we  express  our  sorrow,  our  trouble,  are  themselves 
often  charged  with  deep  and  true  solace  and  refreshment.  We  know  not  how  long 
this  cloud  rested  over  tiie  Saviour.  I  do  not  think  it  could  be  for  long.  Presently, 
we  know,  the  Father  was  looking  upon  Him  with  shining,  unveiled  face ;  for  calmly 
and  restfuUy  He  breathed  forth  the  dying  sigh  of  thousands  since,  ♦•  Father,  into 
Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit."  {G.  J.  Proctor,  B.A.)  Jesus,  throwing  Him- 
self into  the  bosom  of  His  Father,  implores  consolation: — This  Scripture  leads  our 
thoughts  to  the  desolation  of  our  Jesus ;  to  inquiry  after  the  cause ;  and  to  the 
exclamation  that  passed  from  His  lips,  through  the  intense  suffering  of  His  heart. 
I.  First,  the  desolation  of  Jesus.  It  was  not  unforeseen.  With  regard  to  the 
desolation  of  Him,  whose  love  undertook  our  cause ;  that  we  may  understand  the 
meaning  of  the  term  He  used,  it  becomes  us  to  enter  on  a  clear,  a  Scriptural  view 
of  His  person,  and  of  the  intimate  relation  which  subsisted  between  the  Father  and 
Himself.  He  was  emphatically  *'  the  Word,"  that  was  "  in  the  beginning,"  eternal, 
before  all  time,  before  the  glowing  sun  came  forth  from  his  chamber,  as  a  bride- 
groom, and  rejoiced  as  a  giant  to  run  his  course.  He  "was  with  God" — distinct 
in  His  Person  ;  and  He  '•  was  God  " — self-existent  in  nature  or  essence.  ♦♦  All 
things  were  made  by  Him; "  then  He  is  the  mighty  Creator  of  the  universe,  of 
which  we  form  an  insignificant  part ;  and  "  without  Him  was  not  anything  made 
that  was  made."  As  to  the  nature,  then,  of  this  forsaking,  of  which  the  lips  of 
Jesus  utter  lamentation,  it  is  clear,  to  him  who  receives  the  word  of  Scripture  in 
simplicity,  that  there  was  no  desertion  of  His  humanity  by  the  Word.  This  Eternal 
Word  took  His  human  fiesh  and  reasonable  soul  into  union  with  itself ;  and  that 
union  was  never  dissolved.  By  this  oneness,  the  body  never  saw  corruption, 
although,  after  death,  it  was  laid  in  Joseph's  tomb :  nor  was  it  separated  from  the 
reasonable  soul  in  Paradise.  By  this  Godhead  body  and  soul  were  re-united  on  the 
morning  of  the  Resurrection ;  that  union  is  preserved  to  the  present,  and  wiU  be 
after  that  wondrous  prediction  shall  be  accomplished,  that  all  things  having  been 
subdued  unto  Him,  the  Son,  the  Mediator,  the  ancient  Daysman,  shall  Himself  be 
subject  unto  Him  that  put  all  things  under  Him;  that  God  may  be  all  in  all.  We 
are  instructed  likewise  by  Holy  Scripture,  as  to  the  nature  of  that  intimate  and 
mysterious  relationship  that  subsisted  between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  co-equal, 
co-eternal.  What  testimony  can  be  plainer  than  the  words  of  Christ  Jesus,  written 
in  St.  John  x.  37,  38?  "  If  I  do  not,"  says  He,  "  the  works  of  My  Father,  believe 
Me  not.  But  if  I  do,  though  ye  believe  not  Me,  believe  the  works :  that  ye  may 
know,  and  believe,  that  the  Father  is  in  Me,  and  I  in  Him."  He  entreats,  with  an 
earnestness  His  own,  that  all  the  children  of  faith  may  be  one :  as  "  Thou,  Father, 
art  in  Me,  and  I  in  Thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  Us."  If  the  Word  forsook 
not  the  humanity,  it  follows  that  the  Father  essentially  deserted  not  the  same, 
because  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  One  in  nature,  eternally,  inseparably.  Hence, 
then,  the  question.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  the  complaint  of  being  forsaken  ? 
That  He  was  bereft  of  the  countenance,  the  comforts,  the  consolations  of  the 
Father,  in  which  He  had  rejoiced.    II.  Wb  have  viewed  the  pibst  pabt  of  oub 

SUBJECT,  NAMELY,  ChBIST   FOBSAXXN  ;  AND    COUE   TO  THE  CAUSE,  WHICH  WAS  ASKED  BY 

His  LIPS.  The  Father  gives  the  answer  to  this  interrogation — "Why?"  Because 
yon  have  become  the  Bondsman  of  sinners,  have  consented  to  stand  in  their  stead  ; 
thet«fbxe,  as  at  your  hands,  I  look  for  a  continual  and  perfect  obedience  to  the  law 


:▼.]  8T,  MARK.  673 

in  its  exceeding  breadth,  so,  in  your  person,  I  exact  the  penalty  to  its  ntmost  tittle.'* 
Here  Isaiah,  who  seems  to  look  upon  the  scene  before  us :  "  the  Lord  hath  lain  on 
Him  the  iniquity  of  us  alL  Be  attentive  to  Paul :  "  He  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us,'* 
therefore  to  bleed  and  die,  **  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.'* 
Little  did  the  Jews  imagine,  when  they  exulted  in  the  ignominy  of  Jesus,  who  was 
without  sin,  and  lived  without  guile,  that  in  gratifying  their  malice,  they  were  but 
dealing  the  second  blow ;  that  the  first  was  dealt  by  a  secret,  powerful,  invisible 
hand ;  yet  such  was  the  fact,  according  to  the  testimony  of  prophets  and  apostles. 
St.  Peter,  addressing  the  men  of  Israel  at  Jerusalem  concerning  Israel,  says,  **  Him, 
being  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God" — ^there  is 
the  secret  purpose — "ye  have  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands  crucified  and  slain;  " 
there  is  the  resulting  blow.  In  a  Psalm  of  the  passion  (Ixix.  26)  we  read,  *•  They 
persecute  Him  "  (the  second  blow),  whom  Thou  hast  smitten  "  (the  first  stroke), "  and 
they  talk  to  the  grief  of  those  whom  Thou  hast  wounded."  That  secret  blow  was 
the  fruit  of  sin,  which  covered  perfect  innocence  with  confusion.  Thus  Jesus 
speaks,  in  the  seventh  verse,  **  Shame  hath  covered  My  face."  *♦  "Why  ?  "  As  there 
was  no  impatience  under  the  blow,  there  was  no  ignorance  of  the  cause.  Jesus 
asks,  not  for  knowledge,  but  to  call  our  notice  to  the  fearful  cause.  Himself  gives 
the  answer,  as  w*  have  it  in  the  Vulgate.  "Far  from  My  deliverance  is  the 
matter  of  My  sins."  III.  Thirdly,  wb  look  at  the  exclamation  that  passed 
THBOUGH  His  lips,  arising  from  the  intense  sufferino  of  the  heart.  Jesus  at 
this  time  does  not  simply  speak ;  and  who  can  imagine  the  bitterness  of  that 
cry  —  it  pierced  the  heavens  —  He  cried  —  "He  cried  with  a  loud  voice."  It 
before  was  the  sweet  word  "Father,"  but  not  so  now.  Is  He  forsaken?  why 
should  we  wonder  at  the  hiding  of  Heaven's  countenance  ?  Jesus  in  His  agony, 
inquires,  "  Why  ?  "  Is  it  not  our  wisdom  to  say,  "  Is  there  not  a  cause  ?  "—to  search 
it  out  and  expose  our  sore  to  the  pitying  eye  of  a  Father  ?  Jesus  was  made  desolate 
by  that  Father,  that  we  might  be  supported,  comforted,  delivered.  Jesus  instructs 
as  for  a  dying  hour :  He  turns  from  creatures,  and  occupies  Himself  with  God. 
Be  this  our  happiness,  as  it  is  our  privilege ;  and  when  heart  and  flesh  both  fail, 
the  Lord  will  be  the  strength  of  our  heart,  and  our  portion  for  ever.  {Thomas 
Ward,  MU.) 

Yet,  36.  A  sponge  ftill  of  rbiegai.—The  acids  o/K/«:— They  go  to  a  cup  of 
vinegar,  and  soak  a  sponge  in  it,  and  put  it  on  a  stick  of  hyssop,  and  then  press  it 
against  the  hot  lips  of  Christ.  You  say  the  wine  was  an  anaesthetic,  and  intended 
to  relieve  or  deaden  the  pain.  But  the  vinegar  was  an  insult.  I  am  disposed  to  adopt 
the  theory  of  the  old  English  commentators,  who  believed  that  instead  of  its  being 
an  opiate  to  soothe,  it  was  vinegar  to  insult.  Malaga  and  Burgundy  for  grand  dukes 
ftnd  duchesses,  and  costly  wines  from  royal  vats  for  bloated  imperials — but  stinging 
acids  for  a  dying  Christ.  He  took  the  vinegar  1  In  some  lives  the  saccharine  seems 
to  predominate.  Life  is  sunshine  on  a  bank  of  flowers.  A  thousand  hands  to  clap 
approval.  In  December  or  in  January,  looking  across  their  table,  they  see  all  their 
family  present.  Health  rubicund.  Skies  flamboyant.  Days  resilient.  But  in  a 
great  many  cases  there  are  not  so  many  sugars  as  acids.  The  annoyances,  and  the 
vexations,  and  the  disappointments  of  life  overpower  the  successes.  There  is  a 
gravel  in  almost  every  shoe.  An  Arabian  legend  says  that  there  was  a  worm  in 
Solomon's  staff,  gnawing  its  strength  away ;  and  there  is  a  weak  spot  in  every 
earthly  support  that  a  man  leans  on.  King  George  of  England  forgot  all  the  gran- 
deurs of  his  throne  because,  one  day  in  an  interview.  Beau  Brummell  called  him  by 
his  first  name,  and  addressed  him  as  a  servant,  crying  :  ''George,  ring  the  belli  " 
Miss  Langdon,  honoured  all  the  world  over  for  her  poetic  genius,  is  so  worried 
with  the  evil  reports  set  afloat  regarding  her  that  she  is  found  dead  with  an  empty 
bottle  of  prussio  acid  in  her  hand.  Goldsmith  said  that  his  life  was  a  wretched 
being,  and  that  all  that  want  and  discontent  could  bring  to  it  had  been  brought 
and  cries  out:  "What,  then,  is  there  formidable  in  a  gaol?"  Corregio's  fine 
painting  is  hung  up  for  a  tavern  sign.  Hogarth  cannot  sell  his  best  paintings, 
except  ttirough  a  raffle.  Andrew  Delsart  makes  the  great  fresco  in  the  Church  of 
the  Annunciata  at  Florence,  and  gets  for  pay  a  sack  of  com ;  and  there  are 
annoyances  and  vexations  in  high  places  as  well  as  in  low  places,  showing  that  in 
a  great  many  lives  the  sours  are  greater  than  the  sweets.  "  When  Jesus,  therefore, 
had  received  the  vinegar."  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  a  man  who  has  always 
been  well  can  sympathize  with  those  who  are  sick,  or  that  one  who  has  always 
been  honoured  can  appreciate  the  sorrow  of  those  who  are  despised,  or  that  one  who 


676  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [obap.  1?. 

has  been  bom  to  a  great  fortune  can  understand  the  distress  and  the  straits  of 
those  who  are  destitute.  The  fact  that  Christ  Himself  took  the  vinegar  makes  TTiti> 
able  to  sympathize  to-day  and  for  ever  with  all  those  whose  oup  is  fiUed  with  sharp 
acids  of  this  life.    {Dr.  Talmage.) 

Yer.  37.  And  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  Tolce. — CIvrUt  died  a$  a  nihstituite : — la 
one  sense,  Jesus  died  as  our  substitute.  Now,  what  is  a  substitute.  A  substitute 
is  one  who  suffers  for  or  instead  of  another.  A  schoolboy  feeble  of  body  was  brought 
up  to  the  master's  desk  for  breaking  one  of  the  laws  of  the  school.  In  those  days,  the 
punishment  at  school  was  something  like  that  which  is  given  to  garrotters  in  our 
prisons.  The  poor  boy  took  off  his  clothes,  and  stood  there  with  his  thin  body  and  his 
bones  almost  pushing  through  his  skin.  It  was  a  pitiable  slight,  so  poor  and  thin  and 
wretched  was  that  body  I  There  was  a  great  hush  in  the  school  I  Then  one  of  the 
leading  boys  sprang  up  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  in  a  moment  almost  tore  hi» 
clothes  from  Lis  back,  and,  while  every  boy  wept,  he  stood  before  the  master,  saying, 
"  Please,  sir,  he  cannot  bear  it;  I  will  take  his  punishment."  {W.  Birch.)  The 
death  of  death : — Last  winter,  Jacob,  a  native  assistant  of  mine,  was  summoned  to 
his  rest.  On  the  day  before  his  death,  having  been  asked  how  he  felt,  he  replied, 
"  I  shall  not  rise  from  this  bed  again.  I  am  called  hence  to  the  Lord."  He  then 
raised  his  arm,  stretched  it  out,  and  said,  •'  Look  1  my  arm  is  nothing  but  bnnet 
and  skin ;  it  is  the  same  with  my  earthly  body.  The  flesh  is  dead  within  me ;  my 
desire  is  fixed  on  my  heavenly  country — that  country  where  I  shall  behold  Him  who 
loves  me,  and  whom  I  love.  Yes,  I  shall  see  Him  shortly."  When  asked  whethei 
he  feared  death,  "  Oh,  no,"  he  answered,  "how  can  I  love  Christ  and  fear  death? 
How  can  death  affect  me  ?  The  death  of  Christ  was  the  death  of  Death  I  "  (J. 
Kogel,  Greenland.)  Vicarious  dying : — In  the  recent  floods  in  France,  at  Castle- 
sarazin,  while  the  house  was  being  swept  away,  the  mother,  in  agony  to  save  her 
two  children,  put  them  in  a  bread  tray  and  floated  the  bread  tray  off  upon  the 
waves ;  but  the  tray  with  the  two  children  had  gone  but  a  short  distance  when  it 
struck  a  tree  and  capsized.  The  mother  started  out  for  the  place.  She  got  there. 
She  took  the  two  children.  She  somehow  clambered  up  into  the  tree  with  them, 
and  held  on  to  a  branch.  But  while  hanging  there  the  branch  began  to  crack,  and 
she  knew  it  could  not  long  hold  the  three,  and  so  she  wrapped  up  her  little  ones  as 
well  as  she  could,  and  she  tied  them  fast  to  the  branch,  and  then  she  kissed  the 
darlings  good-bye,  and  fell  backward  into  the  wave  and  died,  while  they  lived  and 
were  recovered.  What  do  you  think  of  that  ?  0 1  you  say :  "  Bravo  1  bravo  1  That 
was  just  like  a  mother  to  do  that ;  "  but  what  do  you  say  when  I  tell  you  that  these 
tides  of  sin  and  death  are  bearing  away  the  race,  and  that  Jesus  Christ  swims 
through  the  flood,  and  He  comes  to  us  to-night  to  lift  us  out  and  to  fasten  us  to 
the  tree  of  life,  and  then  having  given  ns  the  kiss  of  pardon  and  peace,  falls  back 
Himself  in  the  billows  of  death,  dying  Himself  that  we  might  live.  0 1  the  sacri- 
fice of  the  Son  of  God  1    Bleeding  Jesus,  let  me  embrace  Thee  now  1  {Dr.  Talmage.) 

Ver.  38.  And  the  veil  of  the  tempte  was  rent— Tft«  rent  veil:—li  yon  look  into 
the  account  of  the  arrangements  and  furniture  of  the  Jewish  temple,  you  will  find 
that  there  were  two  veils — the  one  at  the  entrance  into  the  holy  place ;  the  other 
between  the  holy  place,  or  the  sanctuary,  and  the  most  holy,  or  the  holy  of  holies. 
This  latter  is  called  by  St.  Paul,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  "  the  second  veil ;  " 
and  its  position  is  thus  described  by  him — "  After  the  second  veil,  the  tabernacle 
which  is  called  the  holiest  of  all ; "  for  therein,  as  the  apostle  goes  on  to  enumerate, 
were  deposited  the  most  sacred  of  those  mystic  articles.which  were  appropriated  to  the 
rites  of  the  Jewish  religion.  The  second  veil  is  always  considered  to  have  been  that 
which  was  rent  in  twain  at  the  death  of  our  Lord ;  so  that  the  thing  done  through 
the  rending,  was  the  throwing  open  that  heretofore  invisible  and  inaccessible  place, 
the  holy  of  holies.  Invisible  and  inaccessible,  forasmuch  as  no  one  but  the  High 
Priest  was  ever  permitted  to  pass  the  veil,  and  he  but  once  in  the  year,  on  the  great 
day  of  atonement.  On  that  day — all  whose  ceremonies  and  sacrifices  were  so  won- 
drously  significative,  representing  as  with  the  accuracy  of  history  rather  than  ol 
prophecy,  the  expiatory  work  of  the  Lord  our  Kedeemer — it  was  ordered  that  the 
High  Priest  having  slain  certain  victims,  should  carry  the  blood  within  the  veil, 
that  he  might  therewith  sprinkle  the  mercy  seat.  There  is  no  debate  that  in  per- 
forming  this,  the  High  Priest  was  a  type  of  Christ  in  His  office  of  intercessor;  foi 
Christ  after  suffering  without  the  camp,  offering  Himself  up  as  a  sin-offering  to  th» 
Almighty,  was  to  pass  within  the  veil— to  enter,  that  is,  into  the  immediate  presenot 


OBAP.  IV.]  ST.  MARK,  677 

of  Ood  in  heaven — oarzying  with  Him  His  own  blood,  that  He  might  plead  its  virtue 
on  behalf  of  His  ohorch.  Here  is  the  office  which  Christ  still  discharges  as 
Mediator — He  died  bat  once,  for  one  offering  sufficed  to  make  expiation  for  the  sins 
of  the  whole  world,  but  He  ever  liveth  to  present  the  merits  of  His  oblation,  and 
through  it  to  act  in  heaven  as  the  advocate  of  those  for  whom  He  submitted  to  the 
death  of  the  cross.  But  we  can  perhaps  scarcely  say,  that  the  rending  of  the  veil 
had  reference  to  Christ's  entrance  on  His  office  of  intercessor,  except  that  He  may 
thus  have  shown  that  He  had  opened  the  way  into  the  holy  of  holies,  and  had 
obtained  a  right  to  enter  as  our  advocate.  Until  He  had  completed  on  the  cross 
the  redemption  of  the  world,  He  could  not  become  an  intercessor  with  the  Father  ; 
He  must  have  blood  wherewith  to  sprinkle  the  mercy-seat ;  and  therefore  as  the 
rent  rocks  and  opened  graves  proclaimed  Him  victorious  in  death,  so  may  the  riven 
veil  have  declared  that  He  had  won  for  Himself  an  access  into  heavenly  places, 
there  to  perpetuate  the  work  which  had  been  wrought  out  on  Calvary.  Ajid  there 
are  other  intimations  which  may,  perhaps,  have  been  conveyed  by  the  occurrence  in 
question.  It  is  probable,  for  example,  that  the  abolition  of  the  Mosaic  economy 
was  hereby  figuratively  taught.  "What  could  be  more  significative  of  a  change  of 
dispensation,  than  that,  at  the  moment  of  Christ's  death,  there  should  have  been 
miraculously  destroyed  the  covering  which  had  heretofore  shrouded  the  golden 
censer,  and  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  the  cherubim  of  glory  shadowing  the 
mercy-seat ;  those  majestic  and  mysterious  things  which  looked  upon  by  any  but 
the  High  Priest,  demanded  the  death  of  the  presumptuous  beholder  f  The  priests 
may  have  been  in  the  holy  place,  when  suddenly  an  invisible  hand  tore  in  twain  the 
veil,  within  which  they  had  never  dared  to  gaze,  and  revealed  those  symbols  of 
divinity  which  gave  an  awful  sacredness  to  the  unapproached  shrine.  What  thought 
they  ?  How  felt  they  ?  If  the  flashing  light  from  characters  traced  by  an  unseen 
hand,  spread  consternation  through  the  halls  of  the  Assyrian,  and  caused  the 
monarch  to  tremble,  though  girt  round  with  guards,  what  effect  should  have  been 
wrougbt  on  tiie  ministering  priests  by  the  sudden  shining  of  all  that  bright  gold 
which  had  long  been  hidden  from  the  human  eye,  and  in  whose  deep  rich  lustres  Deity 
might  be  said  to  have  imaged  His  presence  ?  Did  they  turn  and  flee,  as  if  fearing 
that  Jehovah  was  about  to  come  forth  from  the  tremendous  solitude,  and  purify 
His  temple ;  or  did  they  dare  to  stand  and  look  at  the  uncovered  shrine,  amazed 
that  they  might  behold,  and  not  be  instantly  struck  dead  ?  Nay,  I  know  not  what  may 
have  been  the  feelings  of  the  officiating  priests  at  this  strange,  this  fearful  visitation  of 
the  holy  of  holies ;  but  they  knew  what  was  then  transacting  on  Calvary.  Their  voices 
had  been  loud  in  demanding  the  death  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth ;  and  had  they  not  been 
given  up  to  a  judicial  blindness — a  blindness  justly  awarded  them  for  their  long 
rejection  of  light— they  could  scarcely  have  resisted  the  surpassing  evidence,  that  the 
Mosaic  economy  was  now  to  pass  by.  Had,  indeed,  the  expiring  groan  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  rent  asunder  the  veil  of  the  temple,  and  thus  made  common  things 
of  those  which  for  ages  had  been  fearfully  sacred  ?  O,  then,  ye  priests,  ye  ought  to 
learn  that  your  office  is  at  an  end;  O  quench  the  flres  on  your  altars ;  O  drive  the 
sacrificial  victims  from  your  courts ;  and  whilst  the  earth  yet  trembles,  and  appalling 
and  portentous  things  tell  out  ^e  majesty  of  your  crucified  King,  fall  down  before 
Him  whom  ye  have  crucified  and  slain,  and  learn,  as  ye  may  learn,  the  most  amazing 
thing  of  all,  that  He  is  compassionate  enough  to  love  His  enemies,  and  powerful 
enough  to  save  His  murderers.  Yes,  learn  that  He  has  indeed  come  to  destroy  the 
law,  but  only  that  He  might  substitute  for  it  a  better  covenant ;  for  all  that  is 
taught  you  by  the  fact,  that  immediately  on  His  giving  up  the  ghost,  "  the  veil  of 
the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom."  But  we  do  not  thus 
exactly  bring  home  to  ourselves  the  type  of  the  rent  veil,  or  give  it  part  in  that  con- 
tinuous instruction  which  we  look  for  in  the  prodigies  which  attended  Christ's 
death.  Yon  will  remember  that  not  only  was  there  a  very  quick  rending  of  the 
veil,  but  that  the  graves  were  opened,  and  many  bodies  of  saints  which  slept 
arose  and  came  out  of  their  graves  after  His  resurrection  and  appeared  nnto  many. 
The  quaking  of  the  earth  was  as  much  as  to  tell  ns  that  Satan's  dominion  was 
overthrown — that  dominion  of  which  the  earth  was  the  seat.  The  solid  globe 
shook  to  its  centre,  indicating  the  falling  to  ruin  of  that  empire  of  evil  which  had 
been  erected  upon  it.  And  the  rocks  were  rent ;  mountains  had  been  piled  up 
between  God  and  man ;  the  barrier  was  as  that  of  the  everlasting  hills ;  but  the 
Redeemer  in  dying  broke  into  shivers  the  vast  impediment,  and  reconciled  the 
world  to  its  Creator.  But  the  parable  was  yet  more  explicit — the  graves  were 
opened.    It  had  been  through  apostasy  that  death  had  entered  the  world ;  it  was 


678  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zv. 

one  of  the  most  fearful  and  eomprehensive  of  the  eonseqnenoes  of  sin ;  and,  there- 
fore was  its  abolition  to  be  looked  for,  as  one  of  the  chief  results  of  the  interference 
of  a  sarety.  Hence  the  opening  of  the  graves.  In  dying,  Christ  destroyed  death ; 
and  therefore  did  the  sepolohres  at  once  throw  open  their  gloomy  doors,  as  though 
in  confession  that  they  had  no  longer  right  to  hold  fast  their  prey.  And  if  the  bars 
are  loosened,  and  the  prison  gates  opened,  may  not  the  captives  march  instantly 
forth  ?  What  can  longer  hinder  the  emancipation  of  the  dead  f  Yet  here  there 
is  a  pause;  a  delay  intervenes ;  and  the  evangelist  specially  notes  that  it  was  after 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  that  many  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept  arose  and 
came  out  of  the  graves.  Does  not  this  figuratively  teach  that  Christ  was  to  be  raised 
again  for  our  justification :  that  although  the  sacrifice  of  the  cross  had  perfected 
our  redemption,  in  respect  of  God  shaking  the  earth,  rending  the  rocks,  opening  the 
graves,  there  yet  remained  a  further  act  to  complete  it  towards  ns  ?  Besnrrection 
must  follow  on  death,  otherwise  would  the  prison  be  opened,  and  yet  the  prisoner 
not  discharged.  As  we  gaze  on  the  dying  Eedeemer,  and  listen  to  the  piteous 
exclamation  which  marks  how  He  is  deserted  of  the  Father,  we  are  tempted  to 
doubt  whether  it  be  indeed  as  a  conqueror  that  He  departs  from  this  earth,  whether 
He  has  indeed  vanquished  our  enemies  and  those  of  God,  as  He  bows  His  head  and 
gives  up  the  ghost.  But  soon  is  heard  a  sound  as  of  victory.  Proof  after  proof 
crowds  in  upon  us,  that  whatsoever  was  undertaken  has  been  accomplished,  what- 
soever we  needed  been  obtained.  First,  there  are  general  symbols — a  trembling 
earth  and  riven  rocks.  Creation  has  recognized  her  Maker  in  the  expiring  man, 
and  confesses  by  the  dissolving  of  her  most  solid  parts,  that  He  has  now  effected  a 
wondrous  transformation,  extracting  good  out  of  evil,  converting  the  fall  of  man  into 
an  occasion  of  discomfiture  to  Satan  and  of  glory  to  God,  and  thus  virtually  turning 
the  rock  into  a  standing  water,  the  fiint  into  a  fountain  of  waters.  But  I  seem  to 
crave  yet  more  specific  testimony.  I  know  that  creation  has  before  now  been  dis- 
quieted, when  it  was  no  message  of  comfort  to  man  which  was  written  in  its  struggles 
and  uttered  through  its  groans  ;  and  I  have  the  more  specific  testimony.  What 
shaU  I  say  to  opened  graves  and  quickened  bodies  ?  I  remember  the  Saviour  to 
have  said,  ♦♦  The  hour  is  coming  and  now  is,  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of 
the  Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live."  And  now  the  voice  which  they 
have  heard,  and  on  which  they  stirred  in  their  narrow  beds,  is  the  voice  which 
had  exclaimed,  "It  is  finished."  O  beautiful  token  that  in  dying  Christ  hath 
indeed  mastered  death,  and  that  what  He  finished  on  the  cross  is  my  rescue  from 
the  powers  of  darkness.  But  still  I  crave  further  testimony;  I  need  a  higher 
blessing ;  it  is  not  enough  for  me  to  be  emancipated  from  corruption ;  I  long  for 
admission  into  the  world  which  is  radiant  with  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God 
Almighty  ;  I  long  for  companionship  with  angels  ;  I  would  walk  where  they  walk ; 
I  would  wait  with  cherubim  and  seraphim  in  the  court  of  the  celestial  King,  gazing 
on  His  glories,  and  delighting  to  execute  His  will.  Is  this  possible  ?  A  creature  of 
dust — where  are  the  wings  with  which  I  may  soar,  where  the  path  which  I  may 
tread,  and  find  that  it  conducts  me  within  the  veil  ?  Within  the  veil  1  Why,  whilst 
I  look  on  the  graves  which  Christ  hath  opened  by  the  greatness  of  His  might,  and 
feel  that  though  they  tell  me  of  a  resurrection,  they  do  not  tell  me  of  entrance  into 
the  celestial  courts,  there  come  tidings  which  announce  that  the  veil  of  the  temple 
has  been  rent  in  twain — that  very  veil  which  I  have  always  regarded  as  being  before 
the  holy  of  holies,  to  show  me  that  there  is  no  admission  for  such  as  myself  into 
the  place  where  Deity  is  specially  manifested.  The  veil  is  rent.  Then  with  it 
should  be  rent  away  all  doubt  and  all  unbeliet  The  door  of  heaven,  as  well  as  the 
door  of  the  grave,  is  thrown  open  through  the  work  of  mediation.  I  may  not  only 
rise  from  the  dust ;  I  may  tread  the  firmament ;  I  may  enter  by  the  gate  of  pearl, 
and  I  may  walk  the  street  of  gold.  There  is  a  remarkable  prophecy  in  the  writings 
of  Micah,  which  seems  closely  to  bear  upon  the  subject  of  our  present  discourse : 
it  is  this — "  The  breaker  is  come  up  before  them :  they  have  broken  up,  and  have 
passed  through  the  gate,  and  are  gone  out  of  it ;  and  their  King  shall  pass  before  them, 
and  the  Lord  at  the  head  of  them."  Now,  here  is  presented  to  as  a  magnificent  pro- 
cession, led  by  a  chief  under  the  expressive  title  of  the  breaker ;  He  heads  a  vast 
company.  He  directs  them  through  some  gate,  which  He  presses  open  by  His  own 
energy  or  labour  ;  and  they  follow  in  triumph,  and  pass  on  like  marclung  conquerors. 
Who  is  this  but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who,  having  vanquished  death,  and  opened  the 
closed  gate  of  everlasting  life,  has  gone  before  that  He  may  prepare  a  place  for  His 
followers,  who  through  faith  and  patience,  shall  inherit  His  promise.  And  do  yoa 
•bserve  how  the  title  of  the  breaker,  as  applied  to  oar  Bedeemer,  ig  Terified  or 


OHAP.  XV.]  ST.  MARK.  67f 

vindicated  by  the  prodigies  which  throng  the  crucifixion  1  The  broken  earth,  the 
broken  rocks,  the  broken  graves,  the  broken  veil  of  the  temple— >how  do  all  these 
seem  to  correspond  with  the  name  of  the  breaker  1  Oh !  that  in  cor  own  ease  we 
might  be  able  to  add  broken  hearts  to  the  list,  and  thus  prove  that  Christ  ie  etill 
a  breaker ;  but  a  breaker  who  breaks  only  with  the  graoioos  purpose  of  »«^Mti« 
whole.    (H.  MeMU,  B.D,)  * 

Ver.  39.  Truly  this  Uan  was  the  Son  of  (SML—The  eenturion'i  confession ;— Never 
did  reason  obtain  a  more  complete  victory  over  prejudice.  Death  is  the  touchstone 
of  the  soul.  Even  in  the  most  favourable  circumstances  it  tries  a  man  severely. 
But  in  this  instance  there  were  many  aggravating  circumstances  to  weigh  down 
and  overwhelm  the  soul.  1.  The  treason  of  Judas.  Jesus  had  been  delivered  np 
to  His  enemies  by  one  who  had  been  admitted  to  His  friendship  and  close  inter- 
course  with  Him.  2.  Christ's  utter  abandonment  by  His  disciples.  Not  a  voice 
had  been  uttered  in  His  defence,  or  to  comfort  TTirn  ;  not  one  was  found  to  come 
forward  courageously  and  acknowledge  Him.  3.  The  injustice  of  His  sentence. 
Even  His  judge  was  convinced  of  His  innocence ;  yet  He  was  condemned  to  the 
most  cruel  death  ever  devised.  4.  The  ignominy  accompanying  His  punishment. 
The  death  of  Jesus,  '*  expiring  in  the  midst  of  tortures,  abused,  insulted,  cursed  by 
a  whole  nation,  is  the  most  horrible  that  could  be  feared."  5.  His  knowledge  of 
all  that  was  to  come  upon  Him.  His  passion  and  death  commenced  in  Gethsemane. 
There  He  resigned  Himself  unreservedly  to  all  the  anguish  He  afterwards  under- 
went. Nor  did  He  for  one  moment  draw  back  from  the  awful  sufferings  that  fol- 
lowed. Was  not  the  centurion  justified  in  the  conclusion  forced  upon  him  by  such 
a  spectacle  as  this — that  He  who  could  thus  die  must  be  of  a  trutii  not  Man  only, 
but  the  very  Son  of  God  ?  (L.  H.  Hornet  B.D.)  The  believing  centurion  ;— 
What  was  Jesus  Christ  to  this  heavy-bearded,  battle-scarred  soldier?  He  had 
heard  of  Him,  doubtless,  for  the  hot  talk  and  the  excited  crowds  in  the  streets  of 
Jerusalem  could  not  have  escaped  the  notice  of  one  of  the  officers  appointed  to 
preserve  order  in  the  city.  But  in  his  opinion  Christ  was  nothing  but  a  Jewish 
fanatic,  in  regard  to  whom  he  was  profoundly  indifferent.  He  had  received  the 
order  to  superintend  the  execution  of  this  disturber  of  the  peace  without  any 
emotion.  After  an  impassive  fashion  he  had  directed  the  details  of  the  execution, 
supposing  that  it  would  be  only  the  repetition  of  a  scene  familiar  to  him.  The 
fact  was  far  otherwise.  As  has  been  said,  he  "halted  as  he  passed  the  cross 
when  Jesus  uttered  His  loud  death-cry.  He  was  within  a  few  feet  of  Him,  and 
must  have  involuntarily  fixed  his  gaze  on  Him  at  such  a  sound.  He  saw  the 
change  pass  over  His  features ;  the  light  of  life  leaving  them,  and  the  head 
suddenly  sink.  As  it  did  so,  the  earthquake  shook  the  ground,  and  made  the  three 
crosses  tremble.  But  the  tremor  of  the  earth  affected  the  Roman  less  than  the 
piercing  cry  and  sudden  death.  He  had  likely  attended  many  crucifixions,  but  had 
never  seen  or  heard  of  a  man  dying  within  a  few  hours  on  a  cross.  He  had  nev^ 
heard  a  crucified  man,  strong  to  the  last,  utter  a  shriek  that  showed,  as  that  of 
Jesus  did,  the  full  vigour  of  the  vital  organs  to  the  last.  He  felt  that  there  was 
something  mysterious  in  it,  and  joining  with  it  all  he  had  seen  and  heard  of  the 
sufferer,  he  broke  involuntarily  into  this  confession."  The  triumphs  of  the  kingdom 
of  the  cross  were  beginning.  The  Jewish  thief  had  already  asked  and  received 
Messiah's  salvation,  and  now  the  Gentile  centurion  bowed  in  loyalty  to  the  Divine 
Sufferer.  The  confession  of  the  centurion  was  a  sort  of  first-fruits  of  the  cruci- 
fixion. Tradition  has  it  that  years  afterwards,  unable  to  shake  off  the  influence,  he 
became  a  preacher  of  the  gospel ;  and  certainly  that  cross  testified,  as  nothing  else 
could,  to  the  divinity  of  Him  who  endured  its  pains.  {E.  S.  Atwood.)  Convert- 
ing power  in  the  sight  of  Christ : — The  Koman  centurion  is  not  one  you  would  have 
expected  to  be  impressed.  He  was  there  but  casually ;  had  probably  only  been  in 
Jerusalem  a  few  days,  Cassarea  being  his  station.  His  deities  were  those  whose 
chief  characteristic  was  power.  Meekness  and  lowliness  were,  by  his  people,  con- 
sidered failings,  not  virtues.  He  had  probably  everything  abont  religion  to  learn ; 
and  yet  he  follows  the  dying  thief  in  the  path  of  faith  and  of  salvation.  He  would 
not  mean,  perhaps,  by  his  exclamation,  all  that  St.  Paul  would  have  meant ;  bat 
he  meant  that  Christ  was  more  than  mere  man ;  that  God  was  in  Him  ;  that  what- 
ever claims  He  made  we  should  reverently  admit  them.  Such  a  converting  power 
is  there  in  the  mere  sight  of  Christ.  We  have  but  to  fix  our  honest  gaze  on  Him  ,and 
we  begin  to  beHeve  upon  Him  and  to  become  hke  Him.  {R.  Glover.)  Th  erisen 
Lord  Divine: — If  in  dying  the  Boman  officer  became  convinced  that  Jesos  was 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xv. 

Divine,  liow  much  more  should  we  be  oonvinoed  of  the  Divinity  of  a  risen  and 
exalted  Christ.  (D.  C.  Hughes^  M.A.)  Irwoluntary  tettimony  to  the  Divinity  of 
Jesus: — A  well-known  learned  man  of  Saxony,  after  having  all  his  life  long 
attacked  Jesus  and  His  gospel  with  all  the  weapons  of  sophistry  he  could  com- 
mand, was  in  his  old  age  partially  deprived  of  his  reason,  chiefly  through  the  fear 
uf  death,  and  frequently  fell  into  religious  paroxysms  of  a  peculiar  nature.  He 
was  almost  daily  observed  conversing  wiUi  himself,  while  pacing  to  and  fro 
in  his  chamber,  on  one  of  the  walls  of  which,  between  other  pictures, 
hung  one  of  the  Saviour.  Bepeatedly  he  halted  before  the  latter,  and  said,  in  a 
horrifying  tone  of  voice,  ♦♦  After  all,  Thou  wast  only  a  Man."  Then,  after  a  short 
pause,  he  would  continue,  "What  wast  Thou  more  than  a  Man?  Ought  I  to 
worship  Thee?  No,  I  will  not  worship  Thee,  for  Thou  art  only  Kabbi  Jesus, 
Joseph^s  son,  of  Nazareth."  Uttering  these  words,  he  would  return  with  a  deeply- 
afifected  countenance,  and  exclaim,  "What  dost  Thou  say?  That  Thou  camest 
from  above !  How  terribly  Thou  eyest  me  1  Oh,  Thou  art  dreadful  1  But  Thou 
art  only  a  Man,  after  all  I  "  Then  he  would  again  rush  away,  but  soon  return  with 
faltering  step,  crying  out,  "What  1  Art  Thou  in  reality  the  Son  of  Godt "  The 
same  scenes  were  daily  renewed,  till  the  unhappy  man,  struck  by  paralysis,  dropped 
down  dead ;  and  then  really  stood  before  his  Judge,  who,  even  in  His  picture,  had  so 
strikingly  and  overpoweringly  judged  him.  The  evidence  which  arise*  from  the 
nature  and  character  of  the  gospel : — I.  That  the  rehgion  of  the  gospel  is  the  only 
one  which  has  ever  yet  appeared  among  mankind  which  is  adequate  to  all  the 
instinctive  desires  and  expectations  of  the  human  mind.  II.  There  is  a  second 
view  of  it  which  arises  from  its  relation  to  the  welfare  of  society,  or  the  prosperity 
of  the  world.  III.  That  the  religion  of  the  gospel  is  the  only  one  which  has  ever 
appeared  among  mankind  which  is  commensurate  to  the  future  hopes  or  expecta- 
tions of  the  human  soul.  {A.  Alison^  LL.B.)  The  centurion : — ^He  had  been 
condemned  as  a  blasphemer  by  the  ecclesiastical  authorities,  because  He  had  said 
that  He  was  the  Son  of  God.  It  was  proper,  it  was  needful,  that  His  claims  should 
be  vindicated.  This  was  done,  indeed,  eftectuaUy  by  His  resurrection  from  the 
dead :  He  was  then  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power — with  the  most 
powerful  weight  of  evidence.  But  it  was  not  necessary  to  wait  till  the  third  day ; 
it  was  fitting  rather  that  something  should  be  done  to  vindicate  His  claims  while 
He  yet  suffered,  so  that  His  enemies  should  not  completely  triumph.  The  prodigies 
which  attended  the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord  seemed  necessary  also,  in  order  to  bring 
His  death  into  harmony  with  His  life.  As  in  the  person  so  also  in  the  history  of 
Jesus,  there  was  a  strange  combination  of  humihation  and  dignity,  of  power  and 
weakness.  The  centurion  was  convinced  by  the  scenes  which  he  witnessed  of  the 
innocence  of  Jesus.  ^  "  When  the  centurion  saw  what  was  done,  he  glorified  God, 
saying,  Certainly  this  was  a  righteous  man."  His  enemies  had  said  all  manner  of 
evil  of  Him.  They  had  said  that  He  was  a  sinner,  a  Sabbath-breaker,  a  profane 
person,  a  leader  of  sedition,  a  Samaritan  who  had  a  devil  and  was  mad.  But  to 
the  centurion  all  nature  became  animated,  vocal,  and  refuted  these  foul  calumnies. 
The  centurion  was  convinced  by  the  scenes  which  he  witnessed,  not  only  of  the 
innocence  of  our  Lord,  but  also  of  His  Messiahship  ;  he  not  only  exclaimed,  ••  Cer- 
tainly this  was  a  righteous  man,"  but  he  said  again,  "  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of 
God."  Some  have  supposed  that  we  should  interpret  this  as  the  language  of  a 
heathen ;  and  that  it  means  simply  this  was  "  a  son  of  a  god ; "  He  was  a  hero ; 
thece  was  something  Divine  in  Him.  But  in  reading  the  new  Testament  we  are 
struck  with  the  fact  that  many  of  the  Eoman  soldiers,  those  especially  of  any 
rank,  who  were  stationed  in  Jndea,  appear  to  have  derived  much  rehgious  know- 
ledge from  their  intercourse  with  the  Jews.  It  is  necessary  only  to  refer  to  the 
centurion  at  Capernaum.  This  centurion  appears  to  have  known  that  Jesus 
claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  the  promised  deUverer  of  mankind,  but  that  the 
Jews  denied  the  claims  of  Jesus,  that  they  rejected  Him,  that  they  pronounced 
Him  guilty  of  blasphemy,  and  worthy  of  death ;  and  now  the  centurion  felt  that 
God  had  decided  the  controversy — that  He  had  decided  it  against  the  Jews  and  in 
favour  of  Jesus.  He  and  those  with  him  felt  that  those  prodigies  were  expressions 
of  the  Divine  displeasure ;  they  said  therefore,  "  What  have  we  done  r  We  have 
been  partakers  with  the  Jews  in  this  great  sin ;  we  have  contributed  to  the  murder  of 
this  righteous  man ;  we  have  crucified  the  Son  of  Gtod.  And  what  will  God  dof 
He  will  sorely  be  avenged  on  such  a  people ;  He  will  punish  such  a  deed  as  this  1 " 
Hera  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  ^ey  were  soldiers,  Roman  soldiers  who  wer« 
thus  impressed  bj  the  prodigies  which  attended  the  death  of  our  Lord ;  they  werf 


<aHip.  xw.]  8T,  MARK,  681 

Oentile  soldiers  who  were  convinced  by  those  signs  and  wonders  of  the  innocence 
of  Jesus,  and  of  the  jastice  of  His  claims ;  the  Jews  were  not  impressed,  were  not 
convinced  by  them ;  nothing  could  convince  them ;  nothing  could  remove  their 
prejudices  and  unbelief ;  especially  of  the  chief  priests  and  rulers.  So  it  often  is  ; 
we  frequently  find  most  where  we  expect  least;  we  often  find  publicans  and 
sinners,  soldiers  and  Gentiles,  more  open  to  conviction,  and  more  susceptible  of 
impression,  than  religious  professors  and  self-righteous  Pharisees.  Of  all  men 
these  indeed  are  generally  the  most  hardened  and  the  most  hopeless.  We  shoul-l 
remark  further:  the  centurion  and  those  that  were  with  him  watching  Jesus,  thii 
is  to  say,  those  who  were  the  least  guilty  of  all  the  parties  concerned  in  the  melan 
eholy  transactions  of  that  day,  feared  greatly  when  they  saw  in  the  wonders  whicli 
attended  the  death  of  our  Lord  the  proofs  of  His  Messiahship,  and  of  the  Divine 
displeasure  against  His  enemies ;  but  those  who  were  most  guilty  had  no  fear. 
Luke  tells  us  indeed  that  all  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  sight,  beholding 
the  things  that  were  done,  smote  their  breasts  and  returned.  But  Annas  and 
Caiaphas,  the  chief  priests  and  rulers,  were  not  amongst  them.  Their  consciences 
were  seared,  their  minds  were  reprobate;  they  were  given  ap  to  judicial  blindness 
And  obduracy.     {J.  J.  Davies.) 

Vers.  42-47.  Joseph  of  Arlmathaea,  an  honourable  connsellor. — The  crisis  in 
Joseph's  life  : — The  record  of  spiritual  progress  through  many  years  is  given  here. 
Long  looking  for  the  promised  Saviour,  almost  convinced  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
yet  for  a  while  doubting  so  great  a  consolation,  we  find  him  at  last  settling  in  the 
great  belief  that  He  was  the  promised  Saviour.  With  the  timidity  natural  to  a  rich 
man  and  a  ruler,  he  waits  to  be  still  more  fully  assured  before  openly  committing 
himself  to  a  discipleship  which  will  involve  him  in  persecution  of  the  sternest  kind. 
He,  therefore,  opposes  in  the  Sanhedrin  the  persecution  of  Christ,  but  does  nothing 
more.  But  the  constraining  power  of  the  cross  makes  him  abandon  his  policy  of 
secrecy.  It  is  not  a  time  to  shrink  from  shame  or  danger  when  Jesus  hangs  upon 
the  cross.  1.  Give  men  time  to  grow.  "  First  the  blade,"  Ac.  2.  Secrecy  inva- 
riably kills  discipleship,  or  discipleship  secrecy.  Here  the  latter  happier  result  is 
seen ;  but  beware  of  concealing  God's  righteousness  in  your  heart.  3.  The  rulers 
had  thought  to  rob  Christ  of  His  followers  among  the  people ;  but  all  they  really 
do  is  to  give  Him  additional  followers  (Nicodemus,  as  well  as  Joseph)  among  them- 
selves. 4.  There  is  always  *•  a  remnant "  that  remains  faithful  to  God.  Even  in 
the  Sanhedrin  there  are  some  that  believe.  5.  Li  no  circumstances  is  goodness  an 
impossibility.  {R.  Glover.)  Joseph  of  Arimathaa : — ^This  man  becomes  prominent 
on  the  momentous  day  of  Calvary,  but  till  then  unknown.  He  belongs  to  a  class 
who  appear  for  a  moment  on  the  stage  of  the  history,  to  teach  some  great  lesson  or 
to  perform  some  special  service,  and  then  disappear.  All  we  know  of  him  is  that 
he  was  of  Arimathsea  (the  site  of  which  is  not  certainly  known),  a  man  of  wealth,  a 
member  of  the  Jewish  Council,  a  good  man  and  a  just,  who  waited  for  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  but  secretly,  through  fear  of  the  Jews ;  that  his  fear  gave 
place  to  courage  in  that  day  of  Christ's  greatest  humiliation,  when  he  avowed  him- 
self His  disciple,  and  boldly  craved  the  body  of  the  crucified  Jesus ;  and  that  he  had 
the  high  honour  of  laying  it  in  his  own  new  tomb,  hewn  in  a  rock,  near  the  city. 
In  his  story  we  see  how — I.  Faith  is  sometimes  found  in  unexpected  quarters.  II. 
Faith,  hitherto  weak,  by  God's  grace  may  spring  into  strength  to  meet  and  surmount 
greatest  difficulties.  III.  Instruments  are  forthcoming  at  the  right  moment  to  fulfil 
God's  purposes,  when  to  man  it  would  seem  impossible,  (r.  M.  Macdonald,  M.A.) 
Secret  discipleship  : — Secret  discipleship  like  that  of  Joseph  is  truly  excellent,  inas- 
much as  times  and  opportunities  will  occur  for  it  to  render  essential  service  to  truth 
and  virtue ;  but  open  discipleship  is  infinitely  preferable,  inasmuch  as  in  season  and 
out  of  season  its  example  and  action  are  continuously  and  powerfully  infl  aencing 
for  good,  more  or  less,  all  who  come  into  contact  with  it.  (Dr.  Davies.)  Legend 
respecting  Joseph : — A  special  interest  attaches  to  his  name  for  Englishmen  from 
his  supposed  connection  with  this  country.  He  is  one  of  the  few  Scriptural  names 
that  are  associated  with  the  early  legends  of  British  history.  He  shares  the  dis- 
tinction with  Pudens,  Claudia,  and  St.  Paul.  Tradition  says  that  he  was  sent  by 
St.  Philip  as  a  missionary  to  this  island,  and  that,  settling  at  Glastonbury,  he 
erected  the  first  Christian  Church  in  Britain,  made  of  wicker  twigs,  on  the  site 
where  the  noblest  abbey  was  subsequently  buUt.  His  pilgrim's  staff,  which  hp 
drove  into  the  ground,  is  said  to  have  taken  root  and  grown  into  an  umbragoouK 
thorn  to  protect  him  from  the  heat.     We  smile,  perhaps,  at  the  legend,  but  it  wa-: 


68a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB,  [chap.  if. 

only  the  romantic  dress  in  which  an  imaginative  age  clothed  an  important  truth. 
It  tells  how,  from  a  small  and  unpretending  enterprise,  the  founder,  whoever  he 
may  have  been,  was  able  to  raise  up  a  vast  monastery,  within  the  walla  of  which  he 
took  refuge  himself,  and  offered  means  of  shelter  to  others  from  the  bustle  and  tur- 
moil of  the  world.  {H.  M.  Luckock,  D.D.)  Joseph's  position  and  character : — 
The  Sanhedrin  of  Jerusalem  consisted  of  seventy  members,  of  whom  twenty-four 
were  the  heads  of  the  priesthood,  twenty-four  were  heads  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and 
twenty-two  were  scribes  learned  in  the  law.  Joseph  was,  no  doubt,  one  of  the  noble 
representatives  of  the  people,  and,  as  such,  shared  in  the  functions  of  government, 
and  was  conversant  with  those  sacred  Scriptures  which  formed  the  basis  of  the 
Jewish  Commonwealth.  ArimathsBa  is  thought  to  have  been  situated  on  the  fertile 
plain  of  Sharon,  where,  probably,  Joseph's  property  lay.  He  also  possessed  an 
estate  in  Jerusalem — possibly  a  house  in  the  city — certainly  a  garden  in  the  out- 
skirts. Josephus  tells  us  that  the  Holy  City  was  in  those  times  thickly  surrounded 
by  groves  and  gardens ;  shady  retreats  in  the  heat  from  the  crowded  streets  of  the 
metropolis.  Captain  Conder,  and  some  of  the  leading  topographical  experts,  are  of 
opinion  that  recent  research  has  fixed  on  the  probable  site  of  Calvary,  and  of 
Joseph's  garden  near  at  hand,  some  short  distance  outside  the  city,  where  an  eleva- 
tion of  the  ground,  in  the  form  of  a  skull,  abuts  upon  an  old  Eoman  road ;  and  near 
at  hand,  till  lately  buried  under  the  accumulated  soil,  a  sepulchre  in  the  adjacent 
rock  has  been  discovered,  which,  it  is  thought,  may  have  been  the  very  tomb  happily 
concealed  for  so  many  ages  from  the  corrupt  worshippers  and  crusaders,  who  have 
lavished  their  regard  upon  a  mistaken  site  inside  the  walls.  Be  this  as  it  may,  we 
know  that  Jesus  died  "outside  the  camp,"  and  from  St.  John  that  "in  the  place 
where  Jesus  was  crucified  was  a  garden,"  and  that  "  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at 
hand  "  to  Calvary.  A  place  of  public  execution,  and  a  garden  nigh  at  hand,  were 
both  more  probably  situated  outside  the  city  wall,  and  abutting  on  some  roadway, 
rather  than  within  the  immediate  precincts  of  Zion.  Here,  then,  under  the  shade 
and  concealment  of  trees  and  umbrageous  shrubs,  we  may  think  of  this  honourable 
counsellor  as  refreshing  his  spirit  in  peaceful  meditations,  by  day  and  night,  when 
his  public  duties  permitted  of  repose.  One's  thoughts  picture  this  good  man  sitting 
under  the  shadow  of  some  terebinth  or  sycamore,  in  full  view  of  the  holy  temple 
rising  in  the  distance,  and  reading  the  prophet  Isaiah,  very  likely  reading  sometimes 
the  fifty-third  chapter,  and  asking  himself — "Of  whom  speaketh  the  prophet,  of 
himself,  or  of  some  other  man?  "  How  little  he  imagined,  as  he  sat  there,  poring 
over  the  sacred  scroll,  that  he  himself  was  denoted  on  that  wondrous  page  as  the 
"  rich  man  "  who  should  furnish  a  "  sepulchre  "  to  the  crucified  Messiah ;  much  less 
did  he  imagine,  as  he  paced  along  his  favourite  shady  pathway,  in  the  morning  or 
the  evening  light,  and  stood  before  the  door  of  his  tomb,  that  that  garden  of  his 
was  destined  to  be  most  holy  ground,  the  scene  of  an  event  on  which  the  justifica- 
tion, redemption,  and  immortal  life  of  mankind  depended.  {Ed.  White.)  Burial 
of  Christ : — I  have  been  told  that  the  bells  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  London,  never 
toll  save  when  the  king  or  some  member  of  the  royal  family  dies.  The  thunders  in 
the  dome  of  heaven  never  toUed  so  dolefully  as  when  they  rang  out  to  the  world  the 
news,  "  King  Jesus  is  dead  I "  When  a  king  dies,  the  whole  land  is  put  in  black : 
they  shroud  the  pillars  ;  they  put  the  people  in  procession ;  they  march  to  a  doleful 
drum-beat.  What  shall  we  do  now  that  our  King  is  dead  T  Put  blackness  on  the 
gates  of  the  morning.  Let  the  cathedral  organs  wail.  Let  the  winds  sob.  Let  all 
the  generations  of  men  fall  in  Une,  and  beat  a  funeral-march  of  woe  !  woe  1  woe!  as 
we  go  to  the  grave  of  our  dead  King.  In  Philadelphia  they  have  a  habit,  after  the 
coffin  is  deposited  in  the  grave,  of  the  friends  going  formally  up  and  standing  at  the 
brink  of  the  grave  and  looking  in.  So,  I  take  you  all  to-night  to  look  into  the  grave 
of  our  dead  King.  The  lines  of  care  are  gone  out  of  his  face.  The  wounds  have 
stopped  bleeding.  Just  lift  up  that  lacerated  hand.  Lift  it  np,  and  then  Iaj  it 
down  t^oftly  over  that  awful  gash  in  the  left  side.  He  is  dead  1  He  is  dead  f  {Dr, 
Talmage.)  An  honourable  man : — The  power  of  religious  character  in  men  of  high 
station. — The  humblest  Christian  life  has  an  irresistible  influence  for  good  in  some 
measure  and  in  certain  directions.  A  man  need  not  be  nobly  bom,  or  distinguished 
for  talent  and  wealth,  in  order  to  do  brave  work  for  God.  And  yet  it  remains  true 
that  those  who  are  held  in  high  esteem  among  men  have  an  exceptional  influence, 
and  so  are  weighted  with  an  exceptional  responsibility.  It  is  probable  that  no  other 
of  the  disciples  could  have  accomphshed  what  Joseph  effected.  Mary  Magdalene 
would  have  been  turned  away  from  the  door  of  Pilate's  palace ;  Peter  and  Joha 
would  have  been  answered  with  a  curt  rebuff,  even  if  they  had  gained  a  scant  hear- 


OBAT.  XT.]  ST,  MARK,  683 

ing  from  the  Roman  governor.  But  Joseph's  social  standing  was  Buoh  that  he  coald 
not  be  dismissed  with  a  sneer  and  a  frown.    He  matched  his  station  against  that  of 
Pilate,  and  so  received  courteous  treatment,  and  had  his  request  granted.     Consti- 
tuted as  human  society  is,  how  often  this  incident  has  been  repeated  in  history. 
Constantino  embraced  Christianity,  and  all  the  idolatry  of  the  empire  shrank  in 
sudden  collapse.     President  Garfield  confessed  Christ  in  creed  and  life,  and  the 
nation  kindled  with  a  new  reverence  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel.    His  dying  bed  was 
a  pulpit  that  preached  more  emphatically  than  all  the  other  pulpits  of  the  land. 
Men  in  authority,  civic  or  social,  by  reason  of  their  opportunities,  owe  more  to  God 
than  the  great  multitude.    Their  service  need  not  be  ostentatious.    Rulers  and 
statesmen  and  scholfirs  need  not  flaunt  their  piety  in  the  eyes  of  men,  but  if  it  is 
genuine  and  earnest  it  can  make  channels  of  influence  for  itself,  as  the  streams  from 
the  mountain-tops  cleave  their  way  to  the  sea  by  simple  momentum,  through  inter- 
vening ridges  and  barriers  of  rock,  beautifying  all  the  leagues  through  which  they 
flow.     Great  opportunities  bring  gieat  responsibilities.     It  is  well  for  men  in  high 
places  when  they  recognize  tiie  fact  and  accept  the  burden.  {E.  S.  Atwood.)      Went 
in  boldly.— Moral  courage ;— A  great  deal  of  talent  is  lost  in  the  world  for  the  want 
of  a  little  courage.    Every  day  sends  to  their  graves  a  number  of  obscure  men,  who 
have  only  remamed  in  obscurity  because  their  timidity  has  prevented  them  from 
making  a  first  effort ;  and  who,  if  they  could  have  been  induced  to  begin,  would  in 
all  probability  have  gone  great  lengths  in  the  career  of  fame.    The  fact  is,  that  to 
do  anything  in  this  world  worth  doing,  we  must  not  stand  back  shivering  and  think- 
ing of  the  cold  and  danger,  but  jump  in  and  scramble  through  as  well  as  we  can. 
It  will  not  do  to  be  perpetually  calculating  risks  and  adjusting  nice  chances;  it  did 
very  well  before  the  flood,  when  a  man  could  consult  his  friends  upon  an  intended 
publication  for  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  and  then  live  to  see  its  success  afterwards ; 
but  at  present  a  man  waits  and  doubts,  and  consults  his  brother  and  his  par- 
ticular friends,  till  one  fine  day  he  finds  that  he  is  sixty  years  of  age;   that 
he  has  lost  so  much  time  in  consulting  his  first  cousins  and  particular  friends 
that  he  has  no  more  time  to  follow  their  advice.   {Sydney  Smith.)       Great  occasiom 
discover  great  qualities : — Some  natures  need  powerful  incentives  to  draw  out  their 
better  traits  and  nobler  qualities.     Close  to  Bracelet  Bay,  Mumbles,  is  a  bell-buoy 
marking  a  concealed  rock.   This  bell  rings  only  in  the  storm.  It  is  only  when  the  wind 
is  high  and  the  billows  roll  and  beat  against  it  that  it  gives  forth  the  music  that  is  in  it. 
On  the  crucifixion,  death,  and  burial,  of  Christ ;— You  are  invited— 1.  To  witness 
the  crucifixion  of  Christ.     2.  To  attend  the  burial  of  Christ ;  and— 3.  To  watch  at 
His  grave.    I.  You  are   invited  to  witness   the  ceucifixion  of  Christ.     "It 
was  the  third  hour  of  the  day,  and  they  crucified  Him."    Here  you  will  naturally 

mark 1.  The  instrument  of  His  torture.    It  was  a  cross — a  cross  composed  of  two 

pieces  of  timber ;  one  a  transverse  beam,  and  the  other  a  perpendicular  one,  the 
foot  of  which  was  inserted  into  the  ground  ;  and  then  the  sufferer  was  nailed  to  that 
cross,  and  suspended  in  bleeding  anguish,  tiU  life  became  extinct.  It  was  not  only 
a  most  ignominious,  but  it  was  a  most  agonizing  death ;  and  not  only  was  it 
agonizing,  but  it  was  lingering.  You  will  naturally  think  of  the  place  of  His 
crucifixion,  "They  led  Him  to  a  place  called  Golgotha,"  which  signifies,  the 
place  of  skulls.  There  it  was  that  malefactors  were  executed.  In  that  gloomy, 
melancholy,  horrifying  spot,  did  the  Saviour  pay  the  forfeiture  of  our  guilt.  You  will 
naturally  revert,  not  only  to  the  instrument  of  His  torture,  and  the  place  of  His 
suffering,  but  to  the  time  of  His  crucifixion.  It  was  a  very  remarkable  season ;  at  the 
particular  moment  when  the  Jewish  Passover  was  held,  and  when,  consequently, 
there  was  a  vast  concourse  of  persons  gathered,  both  Jews  and  proselytes  from 
among  the  Gentiles,  in  order  to  keep  this  annual  feast.  This  was  remarkable, 
both  with  respect  to  the  typical  relation  of  Christ's  death,  and  with  respect  to  the 
open  publicity  or  popularity  of  His  death.  You  will  not  only  think  of  the  instru 
ment,  and  the  time,  and  the  place,  of  His  crucifixion,  but  you  will  think  of  the 
aggravations  of  it.  In  His  agonies  He  met  with  mockery,  insult,  and  derision. 
He  was  exposed  to  the  rude  treatment  of  the  soldiers,  and  had  the  mortification  of 
beholding  their  avaricious  contention  among  themselves,  when  they  "  parted  His 
raiment,  and  for  His  vesture  they  did  cast  lots."  There  are  those  who  care  little 
for  Christ,  beyond  His  robes  and  His  vesture.  II  they  can  enrich  themselves  with 
the  smallest  perquisite  from  His  wardrobe,  this  is  all  that  concerns  them,  and  all 
that  they  are  disposed  to  contend  about.  But  that  which  seems  to  have  con- 
■tituted  the  greatest  aggravation  of  His  crucifixion,  was  this — the  withdrawment 
ol  the  light,  and  sensible  consolation,  derived  from  the  presence  of  His  Divine 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohaf.  Xf 

Father.  Ton  will  cot  only  notice  the  instrament,  and  the  place,  and  the  time,  and 
the  aggravations,  of  His  crucifixion,  but  you  will  advert  to  those  supematural 
portents  which  accompanied  this  transaction,  and  which  proved  it  to  be  decidedly 
extraordinary,  and  of  what  we  may  call  a  miraculous  character:  for  you  will 
remember  that  while  He  was  suspended  on  the  cross,  darkness  extended  itself  over 
the  whole  land.  He  was  crucified.  II.  We  abk  fubtheb  invited,  this  mobnino, 
TO  ATTEND  His  BDBiAL.  This  demonstrates,  in  the  first  place,  the  truth  and 
indubitable  certainty  of  His  death.  All  this  was  not  an  imaginary  scene ;  it  was 
DO  fantastic  illusion.  He  really  suffered,  and  He  really  died.  The  character  of 
His  death  deserves  our  particular  notice.  He  died  not  an  ordinary  or  common 
death,  but  He  died  as  a  public  person ;  and  His  death  was  of  a  threefold  character. 

1.  It  may  be  considered  as  a  satisfaction  for  sin.  2.  As  a  glorious  triumph.  3. 
As  an  edifying  example  III.  And  now,  uy  deab  heabbbs,  fob  a  bhobt  season, 
YOU  ABB  INVITED  TO  WATCH  AT  His  ORAVB.  "  Comc,  Ece  the  place  where  the  Lord 
lay."  1.  It  was  a  new  tomb — it  had  never  been  previously  occupied.  By  which,  I 
think  God  intended,  in  His  Providence,  to  put  especial  honour  upon  the  mangled 
remains  of  His  Son ;  "  that  in  all  things,  He  might  have  the  pre-eminence  " — that 
precedence  might  be  given  to  Him,  even  in  the  lowest  depths  of  His  humiliation. 

2.  It  was  the  tomb  which  Joseph  of  Arimathiea  had  prepared  as  his  own  resting 
place.  How  willingly  should  men  sacrifice  everything  for  Christ ;  the  honour  of 
an  honourable  interment,  not  excepted.  Then,  it  was  well  for  Joseph  of 
Arimatheea,  that  Christ,  by  condescending  to  occupy  his  grave,  seasoned  it  and 
perfumed  it,  and  left  there  a  lasting  fragrance.  3.  It  was  a  tomb  singularly 
guarded  and  fortified.  I  have  only  to  add,  once  more,  that  it  was  in  a  garden.  It 
was  in  a  garden  that  man  lost  his  innocency ;  in  a  garden  that  Adam  sinned ;  and 
therefore  in  a  garden  Christ  was  buried,  that  He  might  expiate  the  guilt  of  sin, 
and  take  away  the  sting  of  death.  Now,  brethren,  in  retiring  from  the  crucifixion, 
from  the  burial,  and  from  the  grave,  of  Jesus,  we  must  first  observe  the  vehement 
displeasure  and  indignation  of  Ood  against  sin.  Secondly,  in  departing,  let  us 
bitterly  bewail  those  sorrows  which  we  have  been  instrumental  in  inflicting  upon 
the  immaculate  Eedeemer.  Thirdly,  let  us  accept  the  oblation  and  sacrifice  of  the 
Son  of  God.  In  the  fourth  place,  how  little  reason  have  we  to  fear  death.  If  we 
are  united  to  Christ,  "  death  is  ours  " — "  to  die,  is  gain."  Lastly,  how  reasonable 
it  is  that  we  should  give  our  lives  to  Him,  who  has  encountered  death  in  all  its 
bitterness  for  us.  {G,  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  burial  of  Jems  : — No  mention  is  on 
record  concerning  the  final  disposal  of  Jesus'  crucified  body,  except  the  somewhat 
bare  statement  that  a  stranger  asked  the  privilege  of  laying  it  in  his  family  tomb. 
I.  The  friend  in  need.  It  was  a  settled  principle  of  the  Mosaic  law,  that,  if  a 
man  had  been  executed  for  a  capital  crime,  his  body  should  not  be  suffered  to 
remain  unburied  even  over  a  night ;  for  he  that  was  hanged  was  accursed  of  God 
{Deut.  xxi.  22,  23).  This  seems  to  have  been  borne  in  mind  by  the  chief  priests 
when  they  suggested  that  Jesus'  legs  should  be  broken  in  order  that  he  might  not 
be  dilatory  in  dying  (John  xix.  31).  And  after  He  was  dead  the  same  recollection  led 
H  new  man—a  stranger  from  one  of  the  towns  in  Ephraim,  but  having  a  residence 
in  Jerusalem — to  the  carrying  out  of  a  much  more  generous  purpose.  On  Friday 
eveuing  he  went  to  the  governor,  and  gained  permission  for  the  interment  of  the. 
body.  1.  Who  was  Joseph  of  Arimatheea  ?  Mark  tells  us  he  was  a  councillor  who 
like  old  Simeon  had  "  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (zv.  43).  John  says  he  was 
a  true  disciple  of  Jesus,  only  he  had  hitherto  been  afraid  to  confess  Him  openly 
(xix.  38).  Matthew  adds  that  he  was  a  "rich  man"  (xzvii.  67).  And  Luke 
informs  as  that  in  character  he  was  **  a  good  man  and  a  just,"  and  that 
although  he  was  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrin,  he  had  refused  to  vote  for 
Christ's  condemnation  (xxiii.  50,  51).  2.  What  was  his  special  usefulness?  (1) 
He  furnished  generous  help.  Just  then  there  was  a  supreme  need  in  the  circle 
of  Jesus'  friends.  Crisis  periods  in  the  providence  of  God,  occurring  now  and 
then,  cause  even  commonplace  services  to  become  intensely  important.  Who  else 
would  have  buried  Jesus,  when  all  the  disciples  had  forsaken  him  and  fled  f  (2) 
He  fulfilled  an  embarrassing  prophecy.  It  had  been  declared  many  hundred  years 
before  that  the  Messiah  should  make  His  grave  with  the  rich  in  His  death  (Isa. 
liii.  9).  There  surely  was  no  wealth  within  reach  for  those  faithful  women  who 
were  exhausting  their  resources  on  the  costly  spices  they  purchased  for  the 
embalming.  Joseph  was  raised  up  for  this  grand  office.  Noble  opportunity 
always  discloses  the  needed  man.  (3)  He  obtained  a  valuable  argument.  In  the 
endless  debate  about  Christ's  resurrection  from  the  dead,  it  has  pleased  some  reck- 


XT.]  8T,  MARK,  685 

leas  disputants  to  assert  that  the  reason  why  Jesus  was  found  alive  on  Sunday 
morning,  was  because  he  had  never  been  actually  dead  after  all.    Joseph's  request 
tor  the  body  surprised  Pilate,  for  he  did  not  suppose  that  the  man  he  had  crucified 
would  have  died  so  soon ;  hence  he  instantly  took  measures  to  ascertain  from  the 
military  officer  who  had  conducted  the  execution  the  facts  in  the  case.    Satisfied 
on  this  point,  he  gave  his  consent  at  once  (Mark  xv.  44,  45).     Thus  Joseph's  con- 
■ideration  and  courage  added  another  unanswerable  testimony  to  the  truth  for  the 
Church's  use.    II.  The  nkw  skpulchbb.     Our  next  question  arises  most  naturally 
concerning  the  exact  place  where  our  Lord  Jesus  was  laid.     Joseph  did  not  find  it 
necessary  to  consult  any  one  as  to  the  disposal  of  the  body  his  bold  petition  had 
gained.    He  seems  to  have  had  his  own  way  about  everything.     1.  What  tradition 
has  to  say  concerning  the  locality  is  easily  stated ;  but  it  will  bring  no  satisfaction. 
There  stands  in  Jerusalem  to  this  day  what  is  called  the  "  Church  of  the  Holy 
Sepulchre ;  "  a  dirty,  rambling,  old  structure,  which  the  resident  priests  of  many 
faiths  assert  was  raised  upon  the  precise  field  of  the  crucifixion,  and  now  covers  the 
whole  area  of    Golgotha.     The  tomb  of   Jesus  is  represented  by  an  imposing 
mausoleum  in  the  midst  of  it ;  and  beside  it,  and  around  it,  is  almost  everything 
else  under  that  extensive  roof  which  the  imagination  could  wish  or  the  purse  could 
pay  for.     Calvary  is  a  domed  room  upstairs  and  in  the  air.     A  knob  in  the  floor 
marks  the  exact  "centre  of  the  earth."    Underneath  this  is  Adam's  grave,  and  the 
iomb  of   Melchizedek  is  close  by.     One  can  have  almost  any  historic  site  within 
this  absurd  enclosure,  at  a  proper  price  and  with  fit  notice.    It  is  evident  at  once, 
when  a  man  in  simplest  of  candour  sets  his  eyes  upon  this  place  with  its  surround- 
ings, that  such  an  edifice,  with  its  populous  shrines,  could  never  by  any  possibility 
have  been  situated  beyond  the  city  wall,  ♦*  without  the  gate,"  and  yet  have  left 
room  for  Jerusalem  to  exist  on  its  sacred  hills.     2.  The  Scriptures  do  not  pretend 
to  give  any  aid  in  locating  the  tomb  of  Jesus.    Matthew  says  Joseph  laid  the  body 
in  a  sepulchre  which  was  "  his  own,"  and  which  was  "  new  "  (xxvii.  60).     Mark 
relates  that  this  burial-ground  was  hewn  out  of  the  rock  (xv.  46).  Luke  adds  that  it 
had  never  been  used  for  an  interment  before  (xxiii.  63).    John  furnishes  all  the 
hints  of  help  we  have,  when  he  states  that  it  was  in  a  "  garden,"  and  the  garden 
was  "  in  the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified "  (xix.  41,  42).    Some  of  the  best 
scholars  on  both  sides  of  the  ocean  are  coming  to  believe  that  the  spot  which  best 
answers  all  the  requisitions  of  the  inspired  narrative,  is  to  be  found  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  northern  wall  of  Jerusalem,  close  by  what  is  called  the  Damascus 
Gate ;  and  that  to  the  rounded  knoll,  of  slight  elevation,  but  resembling  a  skull  in 
general  shape  so  striMngly  as  to  arrest  the  attention  of  every^  beholder, —  the 
knoll,  which  arches  over  what  is  known  as  the  "  Cave  of  Jeremiah," — was  once 
given  tJbie  name  of  Calvary.    3.  The  decision,  even  if  it  could  be  made,  however, 
might  prove  far  from  valuable  now.    When  we  remember  the  foUies  of  devoteeism, 
and  the  offensive  wrestle  of  the  Eastern  national  churches  over  so-called  holy 
shrines  for  many  a  century,  we  may  perhaps  be  willing  to  think  it  is  better  that 
the  exact  locality  of  Jesus'  burial  should  never  be  known,  and  Golgotha  remain 
unmarked  on  the  map.     III.  The   few  moubnebb.     To  most  of  us  it  appears 
passing  strange  that  not  one  of  the  disciples  is  recorded  as  having  been  present 
at  the  burial  of  Jesus.    John  tells  us  that  Nicodemus,  that  other  wealthy  ruler  of 
the  Jews  who  once  came  for  an  interview  with  Our  Lord  in  the  night,  was  associated 
with  Joseph  in  these  kind  offices  of  affection  (xix.  39).    Mark  mentions  the  Virgin 
Mary  and  Mary  Magdalene  by  name  (xv.  47).     This  is  confirmed  by  Matthew 
(xxvii.  61).    Luke,  by  a  singular  form  of  expression,  seems  to  refer  us  to  another 
verse  in  his  own  gospel  (xxiii.  65).    These  "  women  also  which  came  with  him 
from  Galilee"  are  named  once  before  (Luke  viii.  2,  3).    And  Mark  likewise 
identifies  them  for  us  by  the  same  expression ;  those  who  *♦  ministered  unto  Him 
when  He  was  in  Galilee"  were  "looking  on  afar  off"  during  the  crucifixion 
(xv.  40,  41).    Thus,  as  we  compare  the  narratives  of  the  different  Evangelists,  do 
what  we  ^<dll,  we  cannot  find  that  more  than  these  seven  or  eight  persons — two 
men  and  five  or  six  women — assisted  in  this  last  service.    1.  As  to  the  men — 
Joseph  and  Nicodemus — it  is  suggestive  to  remark  that  they  resembled  each  other 
in  public  position ;  they  were  ^th  senators  in  the  grand  council  of  the  nation. 
Moreover,  they  had  both  been  timid  and  backward  all  along,  till  this  great  crisis  in 
•ffairs  brought  them  out.    They  perilled  fame  and  fortune  now  in  uniting  them- 
selves to  the  cause  of  Christ,  when  the  look  of  it  on  the  human  side  was  most 
melancholy  and  desperate.      2.  As  to  the  women — Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus- 
Mary  Magdalene ;  Joanna ;  Susanna :  Mary  the  mother  of  James  ;  and  Salome.— 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  IV. 

some  few  partioolars  may  profitably  be  noted.  ^1)  How  tender  was  their  spirit  I 
For  of  course  we  reckon  them  in  that  pathetic  group  of  the  "  daughters  of 
Jerusalem,"  to  whom,  as  they  wept,  Jesus  had  spoken  on  His  way  to  the  cross 
(Luke  xxiii.  27,  28).  Some  of  them  had  stood  patiently  at  His  feet  all  through 
the  dark  time  when  He  was  dying  (John  xis.  25).  (2)  How  grateful  were  their 
memories  I  It  was  impossible  for  Mary  of  Magdala  to  forget  the  favour  she  had 
received.  Each  of  them  all  must  have  recalled  some  good  deed  Jesus  had  done,  or 
some  kind  word  He  had  spoken.  (3)  How  lavish  were  their  offerings !  They  had 
been  in  the  habit  of  ministering  to  Him  "  with  their  substance  "  while  in  Galilee ; 
and  even  now,  on  that  melancholy  Friday  evening,  they  were  at  much  expense 
preparing  unguents  and  "  sweet  spices "  with  which  to  anoint  His  body 
(Luke  xxiii.  66).  So  we  conclude  as  before,  that  these  devout  and  honourable 
women  have  a  right  to  have  the  grand  memorial  that  remains  of  them.  Wherever 
the  Bible  goes,  will  go  the  story  of  that  gentle  group  of  Christian  friends  around 
Jesus'  grave  in  the  garden.  IV.  The  silent  tomb.  Our  study  closes  to-day  with 
the  vision  of  that  impressive  scene  still  resting  upon  our  imagination.  A  few 
reflections  arise  as  we  remain  sitting  among  the  shadows  by  the  sepulchre.  1. 
Things  are  not  what  they  seem.  What  contrasts  are  bere  of  the  mean  with  the 
majestic  I  A  poor  crucified  body  lies  in  a  borrowed  tomb.  A  slender  company  of 
friends  are  in  waiting.  A  band  of  drowsy  soldiers  are  stationed  before  the  sealed 
door  (Matt,  xxvii.  66).  But  within  the  enclosure,  unseen  as  yet,  there  are  already 
two  angels  from  heaven,  one  at  the  feet,  one  at  the  head,  reverently  keeping  watch 
(John  XX.  12).  And  the  supreme  God  is  looking  down  providently ;  for  He  is  not 
going  to  suffer  His  Holy  One  to  see  corruption  (Acts  ii.  31).  2.  Redemption  is  not 
yet  fully  completed.  We  ask  curiously.  Where  was  our  Saviour's  soul  during  those 
three  days  ?  The  Apostles'  Creed  assumes  to  answer  *•  He  descended  into  hell ; " 
thus  it  follows  David's  Psalm  (xvi.  10).  But  it  cannot  mean  what  it  appears  to 
say.  Simon  Peter  (1  Peter  iii.  19)  speaks  about  His  preaching  to  •*  spirits  in 
prison ;  "  but  commentators  differ  sharply  concerning  the  interpretation  his  words 
will  bear.  We  do  not  know :  this  mystery  lies  concealed  in  the  infinite  reserve  of 
God.  3.  Our  only  glory  is  in  the  cross  (Gal.  vi.  14).  We  have  nothing  to  glory  over  in 
the  burial.  It  seems  sad  and  lonely:  but  the  resurrection  was  coming,  (C7.  S.  Robingon^ 
D.D,)  The  buriert : — Some  topics  of  interest  present  themselves  for  our  consideration, 
on  a  view  of  the  conduct  of  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  ;  such  as  the  fact  of  their  disciple- 
ship  ;  the  secrecy  of  it ;  the  noble  avowal  of  it  on  occasion  of  our  Lord's  deepest 
humiliation ;  and  the  bearing  of  this  on  the  evidence  of  His  Divine  mission,  and  of 
His  resurrection  from  the  dead.  In  the  fact  that  our  Lord  was  buried  by  Joseph 
and  Nicodemus,  and  in  the  grave  of  the  former,  we  have  the  accomplishment  of  an 
important  prediction  respecting  the  Messiah,  while,  at  the  same  time,  it  served  to 
render  the  fact  of  His  resurrection  undeniable.  I.  We  notice  the  fact  that  Joseph 
AND  NmoDBHUS  WEBB  THE  DISCIPLES  OF  Jesus  *,  and  the  first  thing  which  strikes  us 
in  connection  with  the  fact  of  their  discipleship,  is  their  position  in  society.  They 
were  distinguished  at  once  by  their  wealth,  and  by  their  rank  and  influence.  "  Not 
many  wise  men,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  called ;  "  and,  while  our 
Lord  was  yet  on  earth.  His  enemies  asked,  with  an  air  of  triumph,  "  Have  any  ol 
the  rulers,  or  of  the  Pharisees,  believed  on  EEim  ?  "  And  it  is  certain  that  He  had 
but  few  disciples  amongst  the  respectabilities  of  His  day.  But  yet  He  had  some, 
and  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  were  of  them.  This  fact  also  suggests  a  very  cheering 
reflection,  that  true  piety  may  sometimes  be  found  where  we  least  expect  to  meet 
with  it.  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  were  the  disciples  of  Jesus.  This  expression  can- 
not  signify  less,  in  my  opinion,  than  this,  that  they  believed  His  Messiahship ; 
they  believed,  not  only  that  He  was  a  just  man  and  a  prophet,  but  that  He  was  tiie 
Christ — the  long-promised  and  earnestly-expected  deliverer  of  Israel.  The  professed 
disciples  of  Jesus  avowed  this  as  their  belief,  and  were  understood  to  avow  it.  But 
as  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  were  disciples  secretly,  they  did  not  avow  it,  but  they 
inwardly  cherished  it ;  in  their  hearts  they  believed  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ 
They,  too,  had  found  the  Messiah,  but  in  how  strange  an  environment  1  How  different 
the  reality  from  all  the  expectations  which  they  had  formed  of  Him  1  **  Blessed 
are  our  eyes,  for  they  have  seen  the  Lord's  Anointed ;  blessed  are  our  ears,  for  they 
have  heard  Messiah's  voice."  They  were  the  disciples  of  Jesus.  This  suggests 
another  reflection :  how  great  e  diversity  of  opinion  which  obtained  amongst  the 
Jews  respecting  the  character  an  claims  of  the  Redeemer !  We  find  amongst  them 
all  shades  of  opinion  respecting  Him,  from  the  most  exalted  conceptions  of  His 
dignity,  and  the  most  profound  veneration  for  His  worth,  down  to  the  most  profaiM 


▼.]  ST.  MARK.  687 

and  impions  ideas  of  His  oharseter.  And  yet,  believe  me,  the  trath  yon  will  never 
receive  unless  yon  are  yourself  true.  They  were  the  disciples  of  Jesus.  How  or 
when  Joseph  was  convinced  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  we  are  not  informed ;  but  an 
interesting  narrative,  in  the  early  part  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  acquaints  us  with  the  in- 
troduction of  Nioodemns  to  our  Lord,  and  informs  us  of  the  subject  of  their  conversa- 
tion. It  appears  that,  from  that  time,  Nicodemus  was  inwardly  persuaded  that  Jesus 
was  the  Christ.  And  as  the  miracles  of  Jesus  convinced  him  that  He  was  a  prophet, 
BO  His  wisdom  and  knowledge  convinced  him  that  He  was  the  Messiah.  From  that 
night  he  appears  to  have  been  the  sincere,  though  secret  disciple  of  Jesus.  U.  And 
this  leads  us  to  our  next  topic,  the  secbeoy  of  theib  dmcifleship.  They  were  the 
disciples  of  Jesus  sincerely,  but  secretly ;  they  were  inwardly  persuaded  of  His  Divine 
mission,  and  of  His  Messiahship,  but  they  kept  their  convictions  and  feelings  to  them- 
selves. How  far  did  they  proceed  in  the  concealment  of  their  attachment  to  Jesus  ? 
We  are  mistaken  if  we  imagine  that  they  were  guilty  of  positive  duplicity,  or  that 
they  used  any  art  to  conceal  their  real  sentiments.  But  why  did  they  hesitate  to 
avow  their  conviction  ?  They  were  evidently  amiable,  and  perhaps,  also,  they  were 
timid  men.  The  amiable  are  often  timid,  though  not  always,  or  necessarily  so,  by 
any  means.  The  amiable,  but,  at  the  same  time,  thoroughly  principled  and  devout 
man,  is  not  unlike  the  verdant  slopes  in  the  midst  of  rugged  rocks,  which  you  some- 
times see  beside  our  broad  rivers,  where  all  seems  so  soft,  so  gentle,  and  so  green, 
and  presents  an  air  of  so  much  tranquility  and  repose,  that  the  eye  delights  to  rest 
upon  it,  and  the  mind  is  soothed  and  refreshed  by  its  sweet  influence ;  but  around 
and  underneath  that  softness  and  gentleness,  there  is  a  solid  rock,  on  which  the 
fiercest  storms  may  beat  in  vain.  The  Jews  had  resolved  that  whosoever  confessed 
that  Jesus  was  the  Christ  should  be  **  cast  out  of  the  synagogue  " — should  be  ex- 
communicated. This  was  a  terrible  evil,  amounting,  in  its  severest  form,  to  nothhig 
less  than  civil  death  ;  and  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  had  much  to  lose.  We  are  mis- 
taken if  we  suppose  that  the  rich  and  powerful  can  more  easily  avow  their  convic- 
tions, especially  in  times  of  danger,  than  the  poor  and  destitute.  The  more  men 
have  to  lose,  the  greater  in  general  is  their  reluctance  to  part  with  it.  Under  these 
circumstances,  Joseph  and  Nicodemus,  while  in  reality  yielding  to  the  fear  of  man, 
perhaps  thought,  that  in  not  avowing  their  belief  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus,  they 
were  but  acting  with  justifiable  prudence  and  caution.  This  is  one  way  in  which  we 
often  deceive  ourselves.  We  would  fain  be  persuaded  that  we  are  exercising  a  moral 
virtue,  that  we  are  even  wiser  than  other  men,  when,  in  truth,  we  are  yielding  to 
temptation,  and  falling  into  a  snare.  The  language  of  Scripture  would  lead  us  to 
r^iard  the  situation  of  these  men  as  one  of  great  peril.  It  is  the  duty  of  all  who 
receive  the  righteousness  of  God  to  make  it  known.  In  making  man  the  depository 
of  His  richest  treasure.  Divine  truth,  it  is  God's  gracious  design,  not  that  it  should 
be  concealed,  but  communicated.  To  hide  the  truth  that  is  in  as,  is,  therefore,  un- 
faithfolness  to  God  and  man ;  and  this,  surely,  is  a  state  of  guilt  and  of  danger. 
III.  We  proceed  to  notice  the  noble  avowal  of  their  real  sentiments  and  feelings, 
which  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  made  on  the  occasion  of  our  Lord's  death.  How 
strange  that  these  men  who  begged  the  body  of  Jesus,  and  who  united  in  showing 
the  utmost  respect  to  His  lifeless  remains,  did  not  rise  up,  some  hours  before,  to 
demand,  or,  at  least,  to  solicit.  His  acquittal  I  While  the  trial  proceeds,  no  voice  is 
heard  on  His  behalf ;  He  must  be  condemned— He  must  die.  But  no  sooner  is  He 
condenmed  than  tones  of  the  bitterest  woe  are  heard  in  the  temple :  it  is  Judas, 
exclaiming,  **  I  have  sinned  in  that  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood  I  "  As  He 
is  led  away  to  be  crucified  amidst  the  tramp  and  confused  noise  of  myriads  moving 
in  one  mass  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  you  distinctly  hear  the  sighs  and  cries 
of  those  who  bewailed  and  lamented  Him.  While  He  is  hanging  on  the  cross,  the 
penitent  malefactor  testifies  to  His  innocence.  His  power,  and  His  grace.  When  He 
IS  dying,  all  nature  sympathizes  with  Him ;  (Gentile  soldiers  smite  on  their  breasts, 
and  exclaim,  **  This  was  the  Son  of  God."  And  no  sooner  has  He  expired,  than  the 
flame  of  love,  which  had  been  long  pent  up,  blazes  in  the  hearts  of  these  noble 
counsellors,  and  a  spirit  of  holy  courage  animates  them,  and  they  beg  the  body  of 
Jesus ;  and  they  bury  Him  with  the  profoundest  respect,  with  their  own  hands  per- 
forming the  funeral  rites.  The  conduct  of  these  noblemen  appears  remarkable  when 
contrasted  with  that  of  the  apostles.  They  all  forsook  Hun  when  He  was  appre- 
hended ;  and  afterwards,  they  seemed,  for  the  most  part,  ashamed  to  show  themselves 
openly.  Their  conduct  is  still  the  more  remarkable  when  taken  in  connection  with 
their  own  previous  history.  When  Jesus  was  alive  and  at  liberty,  when  all  con- 
fessed His  power,  and  tiie  world  went  after  Him,  their  attachment  to  Him  was  • 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chat,  xrt 

secret ;  but  now  that  He  is  publicly  condemned  and  crucified,  and  His  chosen  dis- 
ciples have  deserted  Him,  they  come  forward  and  beg  His  body,  and  honour  Hia 
sacred  remains.  How  strangely  men  change  I  Often  do  they  change  with  circum- 
stances ;  sometimes  they  change  even  against  them.  With  what  feelings  did  they 
bury  Him  ?  With  what  faith  ?  Did  they  still  believe  that  He  was  the  Messiah  ? 
IV.  We  must  just  advert  to  the  beabimq  of  this  fact  on  the  bvidbncb  o»  oub 
Lobd's  Divine  mission,  and  ov  thb  tbuth  or  His  besubbeoxion.  The  fact  that 
our  Lord  was  buried  by  these  noblemen  in  the  grave  of  Joseph  of  Arimathsea,  affords 
one  more  evidence  of  His  Divine  mission :  it  was  necessary  to  complete  the  proof 
of  His  Messiahship ;  for  thus  was  fulfilled  a  very  remarkable  prophecy  concerning 
Him :  •'  His  grave  was  appointed  with  the  wicked ;  but  with  the  rich  man  was  His 
tomb  "  (Ita.  liii.  9.  [Lowth's  translation]).  But  this  fact  has  also  an  important 
bearing  on  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  :  it  has  served  to  render  it  undeniable.  If 
Jesus  had  been  buried  with  the  malefactors  with  whom  He  suffered,  in  some  common 
grave,  His  resurrection  might  have  been  very  doubtful ;  an  air  of  Uncertainty  might 
always  have  attached  to  it.  But  the  circumstances  of  His  burial  were  so  ordered 
that  there  could  be  no  possibility  of  a  mistake  touching  His  resurrection ;  that  if  He 
were  not  risen  there  could  be  no  doubt  about  it,  and  that,  if  He  were  risen,  the  fact 
must  be  unquestionable.  (J.  J.  Davies.)  The  character  of  an  Jionourable  coun- 
sellor:— ^A  counsellor  is  a  man  who  studies  the  law,  to  qualify  himself  for  defending 
the  life,  property,  or  reputation  of  his  client.  To  become  an  honourable  counsellor, 
a  man  must  be — 1.  Perfectly  satisfied  that  the  basis  of  the  law  is  jubtice ;  and— 2.  He 
must  be  irrevocably  determined  neither  to  engage  in  an  imjust  action,  nor  to  con- 
tinue  the  defence  of  one  from  the  time  he  discovers  it  to  be  so.  (1)  Because  he  will 
thereby  take  part  with  the  oppressor,  and  become  an  accomplice  in  depriving  the 
injured  parties  of  their  rights.  (2)  Because,  in  such  an  action  he  must  speak 
against  his  conscience,  and  advance  untruths  to  support  his  cause,  and  must  descend 
to  despicably  mean  arts  to  confoimd  the  evidence,  and  to  influence  the  jury  to  decide 
in  opposition  to  justice.  (3)  Because  nothing  less  than  total  depravity  could,  for  the 
love  of  money,  induce  a  man  to  appear  in  defence  of  injustice,  at  the  hazard  of  his 
conscience,  his  integrity,  his  veracity,  the  salvation  of  his  soul,  and  the  esteem  of 
man.  (4)  Because  retrospection  must  be  painful.  (6)  Because  to  obviate  the  conse- 
quences of  such  proceedings,  it  will  be  absolutely  requisite  that  restitution  should 
be  made  to  every  one  whose  injury  he  has  been  the  means  ol  ocoasioning.  {The 
PulpU,) 


CHAPTEB  XVL 


Vebb.  1-8.  And  wlien  the  Sabbath  w&s  past.— TA«  Sahhath  before  th6  remrreetion 
of  ChrUt  .'—There  never  was  such  a  Sabbath  on  earth  as  that  described  here. 
1.  To  Jesus,  our  Divine  Master,  it  was  a  Sabbath  of  silence.  His  ministry  had 
closed.  His  public  career  had  ended.  Love  and  hate,  and  want  and  weakness,  were 
all  outside,  and  Jesus  was  in  the  sepolchre.  2.  To  the  disciples  it  was  a  sabbath 
of  grief.  The  heart  had  been  torn  out  of  their  lives.  This  was  the  darkest  sabbath 
they  had  ever  known.  3.  To  the  churchmen  in  their  temple-worship  it  was  a 
sabbath  of  guilt  and  fear.  Sing  they  might ;  but  there  lay  that  dead  Saint  in  the 
garden,  and  they  seemed  to  hear  His  deep  pantings  as  He  travelled  under  the  cross 
towards  Golgotha.  Pray  they  might ;  but  they  would  seem  to  hear  Jehovah  telling 
them  to  wash  their  hands  in  innocency,  and  so  surround  His  altarl  Then  there 
was  something  about  that  garden-sepulchre  that  was  frightful  to  them.  They  had 
rolled  up  a  huge  stone  and  sealed  it,  set  a  guard,  and  yet  that  Teacher  seemed  to  be 
abroad  and  walking  through  the  temple,  and  ever  and  anon  His  great  eyes  would 
throw  out  flashes  from  their  awful  depths,  which  made  their  souls  quail  in  them. 
And  ever  and  anon  their  hearts  beat  as  tiiey  seemed  to  hear  the  accents  of  His 
marvellous  voice,  as  if  its  echoes  still  hung  on  cloister-beams,  and  would  occasion- 
ally descend  with  its  palpitating  utterances  on  their  horror-stricken  ears.  No  living 
man  could  scare  them  as  that  dead  Man  did.  (Dr.  Deems.)  Jestu  risen: — 
L  What  was  the  object  of  these  women  in  qoino  to  thb  sepulchbe?  That 
they  might  anoint  the  body  of  the  dead  Christ.  This  was  their  only  thought. 
They  had  loved  Him.  They  loved  Him  still :  and  with  a  woman's  fidelity  loved 
Him  though  He  were  not  merely  onfortunate,  but  false  to  His  word.    It  was  de> 


XVI.]  ST.  MARK.  689 

Bpairing,  yet  unbelieving  love.    The  Easter  morning's  sun  has  risen  in  the  Church 
these  eighteen  hundred  years,  and  there  are  those  who  still  go  to  the  tomb  looking 
for  their  Christ.     The  Church  for  such  is  but  a  sepulchre.     Their  Christ  is  a  dead 
Christ.     Their  Christian  love  is  tearful.   The  world,  the  Church,  needs  enthusiastic 
believers;  and  they  can  never  be  had  except  as  each  can  say,   "I  know  that 
my    Eedeemer  liveth."    Despairing,   unbelieving  love  is  always  timid  and  dis- 
trustful.   It  always  sees  obstacles  ahead.    It  cannot  go  easily  in  an  open  path. 
Faith  removes  mountains.     Faith  in  a  living  Christ  makes  the  way  to  heaven  easy 
to  tread,  open  to  view.    II.  The  obamokd  xrrand  of  these  visitobs  to  the  tomb 
or  Jesus.    They  had  come  to  embalm  Him.     Their  spirit,  purpose,  all  are  changed. 
It  is  not  now  in  sadness  to  anoint  a  dead  Christ,  but  in  gladness  to  announce  a 
risen  Christ.    And  the  new  work  of  hope  is  much  easier  than  the  old  errand  of 
despair.     Is  there  not  just  this  difference  between  the  spirit  and  work  of  those  who 
hefl^rtily  believe  and  trust  a  living  Christ  and  those  whose  faith  all  centres  about  a 
dead  Christ  ?    Let  as  not  underrate  the  value  of  the  death  of  Christ,  it  is  the 
foundation  of  our  peace  with  God.    But  the  foundation  is  not  the  whole  of  the 
temple  of  our  faith.     The  cross  is  no  more  the  sign  of  suffering,  but  the  symbol  of 
victory  and  power.     It  is  the  royal  sceptre  in  His  hands  who  rules  in  the  kingdom 
which  is  righteousness  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.    In  this  spirit  of  courageous 
hope  we  are  to  go  and  teU  the  story  of  the  risen  Jesus.    {G.  M.  Boynton.)        The 
misnon  of  the  holy  women : — Our  Lord  was  already  in  His  grave,  but  He  was  not 
covered  with  earth ;  He  was  not  enclosed  in  a  coffin,  but  merely  lay  in  a  recess 
hollowed  out  of  the  rock,  where  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  had  placed  Him  on  the 
evening  of  Good  Friday.  Joseph  had  probably  been  forced  to  do  His  work  hurriedly, 
in  order  to  get  it  done  before  the  Sabbath  came  on.    He  had  been  contented  with 
wrapping  the  body  in  fair  linen,  and  hastily  covering  it  with  some  preparation  that 
might  preserve  the  bruised  and  mangled  flesh  from  the  rapid  corruption  that  might 
naturally  be  looked  for.     Mary  Magdalene  and  her  companions  came  to  complete 
what  Joseph  had  begun — to  re-arrange  with  more  care  and  attention  to  detail  the 
position  of  the  body  in  its  last  resting-place,  and  while  doing  this  to  cover  it  with 
such  preservatives  against  decomposition  as  to  ensure  its  integrity  for  many  years 
to  come.     Now,  Mary  Magdalene  and  her  companions  would  have  expected  to 
encounter  at  least  one  difficulty,  for  they  had  watched  the  burial  on  the  evening  of 
Good  Friday ;  they  had  even  noted  how  the  Lord's  body  was  laid ;  they  would 
have  observed  how,  under  the  direction  of  Joseph  of  Arimathasa,  the  doorway  which 
formed  the  entrance  to  the  tomb  had  been  closed  up  by  a  large  stone,  which, 
spanning  an  opening  of  some  four  feet  in  height  by  three  in  breadth,  could  not 
have  been  moved  by  fewer  than  two  or  three  men.    They  could  not  hope  to  roU  away 
such  a  stone  by  themselves,  and  how  were  they,  at  that  early  hour,  to  procure  the 
necessary  assistance?     Their  anxiety  did  not  last  long.     "When  they  looked,"  says 
St.  Mark,  "they  saw  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away."    It  seems  to  have  been 
rolled  into  the  first  or  outer  chamber  of  the  tomb,  where  the  angel  was  sitting  upon 
it  when  he  addressed  the  holy  women.    {Canon  Liddon.)       The  Holy  Sepulchre — its 
interest  to  Christian*  : — No  other  spot  on  the  surface  of  this  earth  can  equally  rouse 
Christian  interest.    Rome  and  Athens  have  glories  all  their  own :  they  say  much  to 
the  historical  imagination ;  but  they  say  little  by  comparison  to  all  that  is  deepest 
in  OTir  nature-^little  to  the  conscience,  little  to  the  heart.      Sinai  and  Horeb, 
Lebanon  and  Hermon,  Hebron  and  Bethel,  Shechem  and  the  Valley  of  the  Jordan 
and  the  Valley  of  the  Kishon,  have  high  claims  on  Jews  and  Christians  from  their 
place  in  the  history  and  books  of  the  chosen  people;  but  dearer  still  to  us  Christiana 
are  Bethlehem  and  Nazareth,  and  Jericho  and  Bethany,  and  Tabor  and  the  Hill  of  the 
Beatitudes,  and  Bethsaida  and  Capernaum,  and  Gethsemane  and  Calvary  ;  and  yet 
the  interest  even  of  these  must  pale  before  that  which  attracts  us  to  the  Tomb  oi 
Jesus.    When  in  the  Middle  Ages  the  flower  of  European  chivalry,  and  amongst 
them  our  own  King  Richard,  set  forth  on  that  succession  of  enterprises  which  we 
know  as  the  Crusades,  the  special  object  which  roused  Europe  to  this  great  and 
prolonged  effort  was  the  deliverance  not  so  much  of  the  Holy  Land,  but  the  Holy 
Sepulchre  from  the  rule  of  the  infidel ;  and  when  a  Christian  in  our  day  finds  him- 
self in  the  Holy  City,  what  is  it  to  which  his  eager  steps  first  and  naturally  turn  ? 
There  is  much,  indeed,  on  every  side  to  detain  him  ;  but  one  spot  there  is  which 
give!^  to  the  rest  the  importance  which  in  his  eyes  they  possess,  and  one  spot  com- 
pared with  which  the  site  of  the  Temple  itself  is  insignificant ;  he  must  take  the 
advice  of  the  Angel  of  the  Sepulchre  (Matt,  xxviii.  6),— he  must  "  come  and  see  the 
plaoe  where  the  Lord  lay."     (Ibid.)        Tike  Holy  Sepulchre— 4U  appearance  now  :— 

U 


69t  THE  BIBLICAL  1LLV8TRAT0R.  [obav.  Zfl. 

Under  the  larger  of  the  two  oapolas  of  the  Choreh  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  in  Jera> 
salem,  there  stands  what  is  to  all  appearance  a  chapel,  twenty-six  feet  in  length  by 
eighteen  in  breadth.  It  is  eased  in  stone ;  around  it  is  a  row  of  slender  pilasters  and 
half  oolnmns ;  and  at  the  summit  is  a  crown>like  tomb.  At  the  east  end  of  this 
chapel  a  low  door  opens  into  a  email  square  room,  called  the  Chapel  of  the  Angel, 
because  here  the  angel  sat  on  the  stone  that  had  been  rolled  inside  from  the  door  of 
the  sepulchre.  At  the  western  end  of  this  ante-chamber  is  another  much  lower 
door  leading  into  the  sepulchre.  The  sepulchre  itself  is  a  vaulted  chamber  about 
six  feet  by  seven  feet,  and  the  resting-plaoe  of  the  holy  Body  of  our  Lord  is  at  the 
right  side  as  you  enter,  and  is  now  covered  with  a  marble  slab  which  serves  as  an 
altar;  indeed,  the  sides  and  the  floor  of  this  sepulchral  chamber  are  cased  in 
marble,  which  hides  the  rock  beneath.  Immediately  over  the  slab  there  is  a  bas- 
relief  of  the  resurrection,  while  forty-three  lamps  of  gold  and  silver  hang  from  the 
roof,  and  shed  a  brilliant  light  in  what  would  be  otherwise  a  perfectly  dark  vault. 
No  doubt  it  all  wears  a  different  aspect  from  that  which  met  the  eyes  of  Mwry 
Magdalene.  Then  there  was  only  a  low,  rocky  ridge,  the  boundary  of  •  small 
suburban  garden,  in  the  face  of  which  rock  the  tomb  was  excavated.  Since  then 
all  the  ridge  except  that  which  contains  the  tomb  itself  has  been  cut  away  in  order 
to  form  a  level  floor  for  the  great  Church.  Mary  saw  no  incrustation  of  architectural 
ornament,  no  marble,  no  lamps ;  only  a  tomb  of  two  chambers,  one  inside — ^the 
other  cut  out  of  the  face  of  the  rock.  Thus  it  is  that,  as  the  ages  pass,  human 
hands,  like  human  minds,  are  wont  to  surround  whatever  is  most  dear  and  precious 
with  creations  of  their  own ;  but,  like  the  native  rock  inside  the  marble,  the  reality 
remains  beneath.  If  the  surroundings  are  thus  utterly  changed,  the  original  fipot 
— the  original  tomb — still  remains ;  and  if  Christian  pilgrims  from  well-nigh  all 
the  nations  of  the  world  still  seek  it  year  by  year,  and  if  prayer  and  praise  is  almost 
incessantly  offered  around  it  in  rites  and  tongues  the  most  various  and  dissimilar, 
it  is  because  its  interest  to  the  Christian  heart  is  beyond  that  of  any  other  spot  on 
the  surface  of  this  globe— it  is  "the  place  where  the  Lord  lay."  {Vnd.)  The 
Holy  Sepulchre — authenticity  of  the  site : — Can  we  believe,  some  one  asks,  that  this 
is  really  the  place  where  the  Body  of  the  Lord  was  laid  after  His  death  ?  Why  not? 
Christendom,  east  and  west,  has  believed  it,  at  least  since  a.d.  336.  In  that  year 
the  first  Christian  Emperor  Constantine  completed  the  church  which  the  historian 
EusebiuB  tells  us  he  made  up  his  mind  to  build  on  this  spot  immediately  after  the 
Nicene  Council.  At  its  consecration  a  great  many  bishops  came  to  Jerusalem,  and 
Eusebius  himself  among  the  rest ;  and  no  doubt  was  entertained  by  them  that  this 
was  the  genuine  tomb  of  our  Lord.  But  then  the  question  arose.  How  did  Con- 
stantine and  his  bishops  know  that  the  sepulchre  over  which  he  built  his  church 
was  really  the  sepulchre  of  our  Lord,  and  not  of  some  one  else?  And  one  answer 
which  is  sometimes  given  to  this  question,  as  by  Bobinson,  is,  that  the  place  was 
revealed  to  Constantine  by  a  miracle,  and  that  as  the  miracle  may  at  least  con- 
ceivably have  been  a  pious  fraud  of  some  kind,  there  is  no  certainty  that  the 
presumed  site  was  the  true  one.  Bobinson  quotes  a  letter  of  Constantine  to  the 
then  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  in  which  the  Emperor  speaks  of  the  gladdening  discovery 
of  the  Sign  of  the  sacred  Passion  of  the  Bedeemer  as  miraculous.  But  ti^e  allusion 
in  this  expression  is  to  the  real  or  supposed  finding  of  the  wood  of  the  Cross. 
Constantine  says  nothing  about  the  finding  of  the  Sepulchre,  nor  is  there  any  real 
ground  for  thinking  that  it  was  ever  discovered  at  all,  for  the  simple  reason  that  its 
position  had  never  been  at  all  lost  sight  of.  The  wood  of  the  Cross  might  well  have 
been  buried  and  forgotten ;  and  it  it  was  ever  to  be  certainly  identified,  som« 
extraordinary  occurrence  might  be  necessaiy  to  identify  it ;  but  the  burial-plaee  of 
Jesus  was  not  likely  to  have  been  lost  sight  of.  Constantine  was  not  farther 
removed  in  point  of  time  from  the  date  of  the  earthly  life  of  our  Lord,  than  we  are 
from  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  we  know  pretty  well  where  most  people  who 
attracted  any  public  attention  during  her  reign  were  buried.  The  Jews,  like  the 
Egyptians,  took  especial  care  to  preserve  memorials  of  the  dead.  St.  Peter,  in  his 
first  sermon,  alludes  to  David's  sepulchre  as  being  "  with  us  even  to  this  day." 
Would  St.  Peter,  think  you,  or  those  whom  he  taught,  have  ever  lost  sight  of  the 
sepultnre  of  "David's  greater  Son?"  Would  not  each  generation  of  Christians 
have  learned,  and  handed  on  to  their  successors,  all  that  was  known  about  itt 
Above  all,  would  not  the  great  Alexandrian  school,  who  diffused  so  much  light  and 
knowledge  in  the  first  ages  of  the  Church,  have  kept  its  eyes  steadily  on  a  matter 
of  some  real  importance  like  this?  Even  in  those  days  a  visit  from  Alexandria  to 
Jerusalem  and  back  might  hAve  been  easily  taken,  the  weather  being  favourable,  ia 


.  zvx.]  8T.  MARK.  691 

ihiee  weeks;  and  men  like  Clement  end  Origan  would  have  learnt,  either  from 
personal  obserration  or  through  others,  all  that  oonld  be  learnt  respecting  the 
«zaot  scene  of  the  momentous  event  which  was  the  key-stone  of  the  religion  which 
they  taught.  Indeed,  it  was  notorious  amongst  the  Christians,  that  in  the  days  of 
the  Emperor  Hadrian  (a.d.  132)  a  temple  of  Venus  had  been  built  on  this  very 
spot,  and  this  building,  in  something  less  than  two  centuries  was  finally  removed  by 
Gonstantine,  who  uncovered  the  tomb  in  the  rock  beneath.  Notwithstanding  the 
rain  which  fell  upon  Constantine's  Church  at  the  time  of  the  Persian  invasion,  and 
apon  its  snccessor  nnder  the  mad  Caliph  El  Hakim,  there  is  no  reason  to  think 
that  the  site  and  identity  of  the  tomb  were  ever  lost  sight  of.  There  are,  of  course, 
other  opinions  on  the  subject.  The  late  Mr.  Ferguson  maintained  with  great 
ftbiUty  what  scholars  have  come  to  consider  a  paradox,  viz.,  that  the  site 
of  the  Sepulchre  was  that  of  the  so-called  Mosque  of  Omar  in  the  Temple  area.  A 
more  plausible  opinion,  warmly  upheld  by  the  late  General  Gordon,  is,  that  it  is  in 
a  garden  at  the  foot  of  the  striking  hill  which  is  just  outside  the  Gate  of  Damascus. 
This  site  is  so  much  more  picturesque  and  imposing  than  the  traditional  one  that, 
had  there  been  any  evidence  in  its  favour  in  Constantine's  day,  it  would  certainly 
have  been  adopted.  The  old  belief  is  likely  to  hold  its  ground  unless  one  thing 
should  happen.  We  know  that  our  Lord  was  crucified  and  buried  outside  the  Gate 
of  Jerusalem.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  points  out  the  typical  importance  of 
His  suffering  **  without  the  gate.'*  If  excavations  ever  should  show  that  the  second 
(i.e.,  in  our  Lord's  day,  the  outer)  wall  of  the  city  embraced  the  site  of  the 
Sepulchre  within  its  circuit,  then  it  would  be  certain  that  the  traditional  site  is  not 
ihe  true  one.  At  present  t^ere  is  not  much  chance  of  these  necessarily  difficult 
excavations  being  made ;  and  while  no  one  can  speak  positively,  high  authorities 
believe  that  the  real  direction  of  the  second  wall  is  that  which  Constantine  and  his 
advisers  took  for  granted.  We  may  therefore  continue  to  hold  with  our  forefathers 
that  the  chapel  under  the  larger  cupola  of  the  Church  of  the  Sepulchre  does  really 
contain  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay.  (Ibid.)  The  joy  of  Easter  ;--The  humilia- 
tion  of  Jesus  reached  its  lowest  depths  when  He  "  gave  up  the  ghost."  Everything 
after  that  moment  gave  symptoms  of  change  in  the  current  of  affairs.  The  very 
enmity  which  crucified  Him  started  us  heroes  in  His  favour — Nicodemus :  Joseph. 
Even  His  descent  into  hell  was  more  a  thing  of  victory  than  of  abasement  Spirits 
in  prison  are  made  sensible  of  a  new  achievement  in  the  universe,  of  which  He  is 
the  hero.  Angels  in  glory  are  despatched  on  new  embassies,  and  mysteriously 
move  about  the  place  where  His  Body  lay.  A  new  era  breaks  upon  the  course  of 
time.  **  He  is  risen."  Blessed  news  1  Joyous  tidings  1  Solemn  wonder  I  Glorious 
triumph  1  Well  may  we  gather  flowers  for  the  altar,  and  tune  our  voices  to  exultant 
songs,  and  call  every  instrument  of  music  to  our  aid,  to  give  utterance  to  the  holy 
cheer  which  such  an  occasion  carries  with  it.  /JLJ^^*™®  ^  ^^^  bollino  away  of 
soBROW  FROM  DISTRESSED  AND  LoviNO  HEARTS.  A  death  day  to  the  tormenting  dis- 
tresses of  human  care  and  heart-oppressions.  Believest  thou  the  tidings?  then 
why  afiaict  thyself  any  longer  with  thy  bereavements  and  weaknesses?  Lift 
ap  your  downcast  eyes  and  look,  and  you  will  see  that  the  stone  is  rolled 
away,  and  greater  comfort  at  hand  than  we  ever  imagined.  Easter  brings 
comfort  and  joy  to  (1)  the  poor,  (2)  the  suffering,  (3)  the^bgieayed,  (4)  the 
fearful.  Ouilt  is  cancelled,  condemnation  is  past,  peace  with  God  is  made. 
Open  thy  heart  to  these  Easter  tidings,  and  as  thou  hungerest  and  thirsteth 
after   righteousness,    thou    shalt   be   satisfied.      The    stone    is    rolled    away. 

n«^EASTEB  IB  THE  SETTINQ  UP  OF  k  OLOBIOUS  BEFUOB  FOB  ASSAULTED  AND  ENDANOEBED 

'tajth.  If  we  have  any  doubts  about  the  Divine  Sonship  of  Jesus,  or  any  questions 
about  the  truthfulness  of  Christianity,  or  any  disheartening  scepticism  about 
the  reahty  of  gospel  blessings,  it  is  because  we  have  not  done  justice  to  the 
facts  of  the  Christian  Easter.  It  is  the  impregnable  fortress  of  our  faith.  There 
is  ndiEihg  m  Chnstiahity  which  does  not  there  find  shelter,  entrenchment,  vindi- 
cation. The  resurrection  of  Jesus  demonstrates :  1.  That  Jesus  was  the  Christ. 
2.  That  there  is  another  life  after  this.  8.  That  it  is  safe  to  trust  in  a  complete 
forgiveness  in  the  merits  and  righteousness  of  Christ  alone.  He  died  as  thy 
substitute ;  therefore  the  account  must  be  settled,  or  he  never  could  have  thus 
triumphantly  been  made  aHve  again.  4.  That  He  is  now  ever  with  and  in  Hia 
Church  and  Sacraments,  there  to  dispense  the  blessings  of  His  efficacious  presence, 
to  breathe  His  Spirit  on  men's  souls,  and  to  make  them  participants  in  His  new 

life.      ni.   EaSTEB  is  the  STATIONINa  OF  LOVING  ANOBLS  BOUND  THE   OBAVE,  CONDUCT* 

DM  to  ooiiTBBSB  WITH  Tsx  OLOBiFiBDw    Bj  nato  e  we  have  no  fellowship  with 


692  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  C<nur.  Xfu 

heaven,  and  no  communion  with  the  dwellers  there.  Oar  sins  have  sundered  as  from 
that  hright  and  happy  world.  But  Jesus  has  brought  as  and  angels  together  again. 
Easter  has  put  an  angel  of  God  in  every  sepulchre.  A  higher  and  a  better  world 
there  joins  upon  this  life  of  sorrow  and  tears.  As  the  friends  of  Jesus  come  thither 
with  spices  of  love  in  their  hands,  they  come  into  the  communion  of  the  glorified, 
and  begin  to  have  converse  with  angelic  excellence.  Heaven  borders  on  the  tomb. 
Another  step,  and  the  "loud  uplifted  angel  trumpets"  bid  us  welcome  to  the 
mansions  of  the  everlasting  home.  {J,  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  Love*»  tribute : — I.  A 
81'BiEiNa  EXAMPLE  OF  CONSTANT  LOVE.  It  is  usual  to  regard  man  as  typifying 
strength  and  courage,  and  woman  as  typifying  love  and  tenderness.  But  often 
those  who  typify  love  and  tenderness  prove  stronger  and  more  courageous  in  the 
sense  of  clinging  constancy  than  those  who  claim  to  have  a  monopoly  of  the 
robuEter  qualities.  It  was  certainly  so  here.  II.  Love  acts  pbomptly.  Here  love  had 
imposed  a  task  upon  itself,  and,  true  to  its  nature,  sought  the  earUest  opportunity 
for  discharging  it.  These  women  could  not  have  entered  earher  upon  this  busi- 
ness. 1.  Promptness  to  perform  an  act  of  kindness.  2.  Loving  service  rendered 
in  relation  to  one  from  whom  there  was  no  prospect  of  a  return.  ILL  Lovb  is 
OBLivions  TO  OBSTACLES.  It  forms  its  plans,  marks  its  course,  regards  ardently  its 
object,  but  takes  no  account  of  the  stones,  great  or  small,  that  may  be  in  its  way. 
Well  for  the  world  that  love  is  thus  characteristically  blind  to  hindrances ;  ninety- 
nine  out  of  every  himdred  efforts  made  for  its  welfare  have  been  the  achievements 
of  men  who  have  been  gloriously  oblivious  of  the  stones.  Carey:  Livingstone. 
IV.  Love  neveb  retreats.  Ever  accompanied  by  faith  and  hope,  it  dares  to 
pursue  its  course  whatever  the  difficulties  may  appear.    Y.  God  has  angels  oveb 

AGAINST  THE    STONES   THAT    MAY  BE  IN  THE    PATHWAY  OV   LOVB.        Men    are  UOVer  Sa 

angel-like  as  when  engaged  in  removing  hindrances  oat  of  the  way  of  those  who 
seek  to  serve  God.  (A.  J,  Parry.)  Songs  in  the  night: — The  nightingale  is 
celebrated  for  its  singing  in  the  night.  We  have,  however,  seen  it  maintained  that 
it  is  all  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  she  sings  only  in  the  night.  She  sings  in  the 
day  as  well ;  only,  as  other  songsters  are  then  in  full  chorus,  her  sweeter  strains 
are  not  particularly  distinguishable  from  the  rest.  Bat  at  night,  when  all  others 
are  ha^ed,  her  song  is  heard,  and  is  more  sweet  by  reason  of  the  contrast  with 
the  surroimding  stillness.  So  it  was  with  these  women.  They  served  in  the  day 
of  bright  sunshine,  but  their  service  was  then  overshadowed,  so  to  speak,  by  the 
demonstrative  crowd  that  thronged  around  the  Saviour.  Amidst  all  the  marks  of 
attention  paid  Him,  theirs  did  not  appear  particularly  distinguishable.  But  when 
the  voice  of  the  noisy,  eHusive  crowd  was  hushed  daring  the  dark  night  of  trial  and 
suffering  which  followed  the  brief  day  of  popularity,  they  continued  to  give  forth 
the  music  of  love  and  sympathy  through  the  dark  loneliness  of  the  night.  This 
is  love  indeed,  and  the  world  needs  more  of  it — love  that  will  give  forth  the  masie 
of  service  in  the  night,  and  even  at  the  grave  of  its  hope.  (Ibid.)  Love*» 
tenacity : — The  little  English  drummer  boy's  apt  reply  to  Napoleon  indicates  the 
spirit  of  love  in  this  respect.  The  story  relates,  that  when  the  little  drummer  was 
brought  prisoner  before  the  Emperor,  he  was  told  to  sound  the  retreat.  **  I  never 
learnt  it,"  was  the  prompt  answer.  Love  has  never  learnt  to  sound  the  retreat,  or 
practise  it.  Love  is  ever  accompanied  by  faith  and  hope,  and  in  their  company 
it  always  dares  to  pursue  its  course,  however  great  may  appear  the  odds 
against  it.  (Ibid.)  Moral  strength  in  women :  —  It  is  a  carious  psychological 
fact  that  women,  though  usually  much  weaker  than  men,  develop,  in  Uie  hoar  ol 
affliction,  a  wonderful  degree  of  moral  strength.  They  bear  op  under  a  weight 
of  adversity  which  would  completely  crush  a  man ;  bat  as  soon  as  the  painful  ordeal 
is  over,  then  nature  seems  to  resume  its  sway,  and  the  stoic  of  a  few  momenta 
before  melts  into  a  flood  of  tears,  and  gives  herself  up  to  a  season  of  uncontrollable 
weeping.  Just  as  the  stately  oak  affords  an  impervious  shelter  from  the  pouring 
tempest ;  but  so  soon  as  the  fury  of  the  storm  is  past,  and  the  sun  shines  out  again 
from  behind  the  clouds,  then  the  slightest  touch  brings  the  great  raindrops  rattling 
to  the  ground.  Hence  we  are  not  surprised  that  these  three  women  came  witS 
tearless  eyes  to  anoint  our  Saviour's  body.  Their  hearts  were  sore  with  grief,  but 
theirs  was  a  depth  of  woe  that  fonnd  no  relief  in  weeping.  {J,  E.  Johnson.) 
The  ttone  of  death  rolled  away : — "  They  saw  that  the  stone  had  beeen  rolled 
away."  How  I  love  to  dwell  upon  these  words ;  they  are  so  full  of  comfort  to 
every  stricken  soaL  There  is  not  only  a  great  beauty,  but  there  is  a  profound 
significance  in  them.  The  mass  of  men  at  that  time  beHeved  that,  when  a 
died,  that  was  the  end  of  him  ;  he  was  indeed  dead — ^he  was  annihilated.    It 


zn.]  8T,  MARK,  MS 

ft  eommon  enstom  among  the  Romans  to  heap  great  piles  of  rough  rocks  upon  the 
grayes  of  the  dead,  as  though  they  would  bind  them  down  to  the  only  scene  of 
their  existence.  Men  everywhere  shrank  with  terror  from  the  grave,  and  the 
thought  of  death  filled  them  with  horror.  On  Easter  eve,  nearly  nineteen  cen- 
turies ago,  the  fear  of  death  rested  like  an  immense  rock  upon  the  great  heart  of 
humanity,  but  on  Easter  mom  that  weight  of  fear  and  dread  was  rolled  away,  and 
a  risen  Saviour  proclaimed  to  the  world  the  glorious  fact  of  an  immortal  existence. 
(Ibid.)  The  import  of  death  : — The  complexion  of  our  rehgious  thought  depends 
upon  the  view  we  take  of  death.  This  life  is  but  the  foreground  of  that  which  ia 
to  oome,  and  death  is  the  narrow  bridge  upon  which  we  pass  from  one  state  of 
existence  to  another ;  or,  rather,  it  is  our  initiation  into  the  hidden  mysteries  of 
the  future.  The  initiatory  ceremony  is  attended  with  some  pain,  it  is  true ;  but,  as 
in  ancient  times,  when  a  king  wished  to  raise  a  brave  man  to  knighthood,  he  struck 
him  lightly  with  a  sword,  and  then  pronounced  him  noble :  even  so,  death  is  but 
the  soft  sword-touch  by  which  the  Eternal  King  elevates  His  faithful  servant  to  the 
knight-errantry  of  heaven.  There  is,  in  the  German,  a  beautiful  fable  whieh  repre- 
sencB  the  angel  of  slumber  wandering  over  the  earth  in  company  with  the  angel  of 
death.  As  the  evening  draws  near  they  approach  a  village  and  encamp  upon  one 
of  its  hills,  Ustening  to  the  curfew  as  it  tolls  the  knell  of  parting  day.  At  last  the 
sounds  cease,  profound  silence  reigns  round  about,  and  the  dark  mantle  of  night 
covers  the  earth.  Now  the  angel  of  sleep  rises  from  her  bed  of  moss,  and,  stepping 
forward  to  the  brink  of  the  height,  silently  scatters  the  unseen  seeds  of  slumber. 
The  evening  wind  noiselessly  wafts  them  out  over  the  habitations  of  weary  men. 
Sweet  sleep  settles  down  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  village,  and  overcomes 
them  all,  from  the  old  man  who  nods  in  his  chair  to  the  infant  resting  in  its  cradle. 
The  sick  forget  their  pain ;  the  afidicted  their  anguish :  even  pover^  is  oblivious 
of  its  wants.  All  eyes  are  closed.  After  her  task  has  been  performed,  the  angel  of 
slumber  turns  to  her  sister  and  says  :  "  When  the  morning  sun  appears,  all  these 
people  will  praise  me  as  their  benefactor  and  friend.  How  delightful  it  is  to  go 
about  doing  good  so  silently  and  all  unseen  1  What  a  beautiful  calling  we  have  t " 
Thus  spoke  the  angel  of  sleep ;  but  the  angel  of  death  gazed  upon  her  in  silent 
sorrow,  and  a  tear,  such  as  the  undying  shed,  stood  in  her  eye.  *'  Alas  1 "  said  she, 
**  I  cannot  rejoice  like  you  in  the  gratitude  of  men.  The  earth  calls  me  its  enemy, 
and  the  destroyer  of  its  peace."  "  O  my  sister,"  replied  the  angel  of  slumber, 
**  at  the  great  awakening  of  the  resurrection  morning  the  souls  of  the  blessed  will 
recognize  you  as  their  friend  and  benefactor.  Are  we  not  sisters,  and  the  mes- 
sengers of  our  common  Father?  "  They  ceased  to  speak,  but  the  eyes  of  the  death- 
angel  glistened  with  tears  as  they  bo^  fled  out  into  the  darkness  of  the  night. 
(Ibid.)  Hope  in  death: — Visitors  to  the  catacombs  at  Borne  never  fail  to  observe 
the  inscriptions  over  the  graves  of  those  early  Christians  who,  escaping  from  per- 
secution, took  refuge  in  these  subterranean  abodes.  Their  friends  inscribed  over 
their  resting-plaoe  these  blessed  words,  **  Requiescat  in  pace  " — "Best  in  peace." 
Sometimes  they  added  an  anchor,  which  was  a  favourite  emblem  with  them — ^the 
symbol  at  once  of  their  tempestuous  lot,  and  of  the  calm  trust  with  which  it  was 
borne.  {Ibid.)  Reunion  after  the  resurrection: — It  you  have  taken  a  sail,  on  a 
pleasant  day,  down  the  harbour  of  some  great  city  by  the  sea,  you  have  seen  there, 
perhaps,  a  noble  ship  sailing  up  the  bay.  All  her  canvas  is  set,  and  shines  brightly 
in  the  sun.  Her  crew  crowd  the  rail,  and  earnestly  gaze  at  the  familiar  landscape. 
Here  they  are  at  last.  They  have  been  round  the  world,  or  in  search  of  whale  in 
the  Arctic  Ocean.  At  times,  during  their  absence,  it  seemed  as  though  this  hour 
would  never  come.  In  the  night  when  the  waves  tossed  their  ship,  when  the  wind 
whistled  through  the  rigging,  and  the  blocks  and  cords  were  covered  with  ice,  they 
thought  of  home  and  loved  ones,  but  long  years  must  elapse  before  they  could 
return,  and  hope  sunk  utterly  in  their  bosom.  Now,  however,  it  is  all  over ;  the 
pain  is  passed ;  their  eyes  are  rejoiced  once  more  with  the  sight  of  their  native  land, 
and,  as  the  ship  draws  near  the  shore,  they  eagerly  scan  the  faces  on  the  pier — 
fathers,  mothers,  sisters,  brothers,  little  ones,  and  friends  have  oome  down  to 
welcome  them.  The  vessel  is  made  fast,  a  plank  is  thrown  to  the  land,  they  step 
upon  it,  pass  over,  and  all  hearts  rejoice  in  the  present  gladness.  No  one  thinks  of 
the  past ;  the  anguish  of  parting  is  forgotten ;  the  long  separation  fades  into  a  brief 
moment ;  all  is  bliss.  My  friends,  this  is  but  a  figure.  We  are  the  crew  of  that 
▼essel,  Jeans  is  the  Captain,  life  is  the  long  voyage  upon  which  we  are  all  embarked, 
~  the  landing  is  that  glorious  moment  when  we  shall  all  be  united  beyond  the 
ditfk  ooean  of  eternity.    And  may  we  not  see  in  those  who  stand  upon  the 


694  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  (eair.  zn. 

pier,  and  scan,  with  eager,  earnest  gaze,  the  faces  on  the  ship,  that  throng  ol 
friends  who  await  U£  on  the  other  side  f  (Ibid.)  Angelt  in  graves ;— It  is  very 
pleasant  to  note  how  the  ministering  angels  gather  round  death  and  the  grave. 
There  is  the  supporting  angel,  in  what  we  may  truly  call  the  dying  agony  of 
Gethsemane.  There  are  the  angels  who  waited  to  waft  the  soul  set  free  to  that 
inner  heaven,  familiar,  in  Hebrew  imagery,  as  Abraham's  bosom.  There  is  the 
angel  of  the  resurrection,  who  takes  away  the  bar,  and  lets  out  the  prisoners  of 
hope.  And  still,  even  in  the  empty  grave,  tarrying  there  as  if  he  loved  it,  there  i« 
an  angel— strong,  beautiful,  and  fresh  as  a  young  man — ^pure,  and  bridal,  and 
modest  in  his  long  white  robe.  And  why  should  I  put  such  a  difference  between 
the  Head  and  the  members  as  to  think  that  Jesus'  tomb  was  so  tenanted,  and  that 
mine  is  empty?  Why  should  that  have  such  sweet  company,  and  a  Christian's 
grave  be  solitary  f  Or  why  should  that  be  shrouded,  in  our  imagination,  in  dark- 
ness and  gloom,  which  is  so  beautiful  and  so  attractive  to  those  heavenly  visitors  ? 
{Jamet  Vaughan^  M.A,) 

Ver.  3.  They  came  unto  the  sepulchre  at  the  rising  of  the  srm.— T^  sedulity 
of  the  devout  women : — Consider  their  sedulity — sedulity  that  admits  no  intermis- 
sion, no  interruption,  no  discontinuance,  no  indifference  in  religious  offices.  Con- 
sider we  therefore  their  seduUty,  if  we  can.  I  say,  if  we  can  ;  because  if  a  man 
should  sit  down  at  a  beehive  or  an  ant-bill,  and  determine  to  watch  such  an  ant  or 
such  a  bee  in  its  work,  he  would  find  that  bee  or  that  ant  so  sedulous,  so  serious, 
BO  various,  so  concurrent  with  others,  so  contributary  to  others,  as  that  he  would 
quickly  lose  his  marks  and  his  sight  of  that  ant  or  that  bee.  ^  So,  if  we  fix  our 
consideration  upon  these  devout  women,  and  the  sedulity  of  their  devotion,  as  the 
several  evangelists  present  it  to  us,  we  may  easily  lose  our  sight,  and  hardly  know 
which  was  which,  or  at  what  time  she  or  she  came  to  the  sepulchre.  "  They  came, 
in  the  end  of  the  Sabbath,  as  it  began  to  dawn  toward  the  first  day  of  the  week," 
says  St.  Matthew ;  ♦*  they  came  very  early  in  the  morning,  the  first  day  of  the  week, 
at  the  rising  of  the  sun,"  says  St.  Mark ;  "  they  prepared  their  spices,  and  rested 
the  Sabbath,  and  came  early  the  next  day,"  says  St.  Luke  ;  ♦♦  they  came  the  first 
day  when  it  was  yet  dark,"  says  St  John.  From  Friday  evening  till  Sunday  morn- 
ing they  were  sedulous,  busy  upon  this  service;  so  sedulous,  that  Athanasius 
thinks  these  women  came  four  several  times  to  the  sepulchre,  and  that  the  four 
evangelists  have  relation  to  their  four  comings,  and  Jerome  argues  that  this  variety 
is  no  sign  of  untruthfulness  in  the  evangelists,  but  testifies  the  sedulity  of  the 
women  they  speak  of,  going  and  coming,  and  unwilling  to  be  far  distant  or  long 
absent  from  their  devout  exercise.  Beloved,  true  devotion  is  a  serious,  a  sedulous, 
an  impatient  thing.  He  who  said,  *•  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,"  was  but  a  Pharisee ; 
he  who  can  reckon  his  devout  actions  is  no  better ;  he  who  can  tell  how  often  be 
has  thought  upon  God  to-day,  has  not  thought  upon  Him  often  enough.  It  is 
St.  Augustine's  holy  circle,  "  to  pray  that  we  may  hear  sermons  profitably,  and  to 
hear  sermons  that  we  may  learn  to  pray  acceptably."  Devotion  is  no  marginal  note, 
no  interlineary  gloss,  no  parenthesis  that  may  be  left  out ;  it  is  no  occasional 
thing,  no  conditional  thing :  ••  I  will  go  if  I  like  the  preacher,  the  place,  the  com- 
pany,  the  weather ;  "  but  it  is  of  the  body  of  the  text,  and  lays  upon  ni  an  oblige* 
tion  of  fervour  and  continuance.    {John  Donne,  D,D,) 

Vers.  3, 4.    Who  shaU  roll  us  away  the  stone  1—The  death  unto  $in  : — So  said  the 

women  who  came  to  see  Christ,  who  had  died  upon  the  cross.  Are  they  the 
last  who  have  had  the  like  fears  on  a  like  occasion  ?  Has  not  every  Christian  who 
has  set  himself  in  earnest  to  the  work  of  foUowing  Christ  in  His  death  been  alarmed 
at  an  equal  difficulty  ?  Are  not  many  frightened  at  the  very  outset  of  their  course  f 
I.  The  stone  at  the  doob.  Surely  no  one  who  understands  anything  of  the  nature 
of  his  Christian  profession  expects  to  maintain  it  without  trial  of  his  strength  ;  he 
that  seeks  Christ  crucified  and  dead  for  sin,  sees  that  he  has  first  of  all  to  roll  away 
the  stone  from  the  sepulchre.  This  exclamation  of  the  women  is  continually  the 
cry  of  our  weak  nature,  of  the  old  man  within  us  who  is  of  littie  faith,  and  sees  not 
that  the  finger  of  God  is  stronger  than  the  arm  of  man.  And  to  our  natural  weak- 
ness the  devil  adds  his  wiles  to  add  to  our  perplexities.  1.  To  seek  Christ  as  dead 
for  our  sins  is  to  resolve  to  forsake  tiiem,  and  to  follow  Him  to  His  sepulchre  with 
the  earnest  desire  and  full  determination  of  crucifying  some  sinful  affection  and 
resisting  some  evil  inclination  or  purpose.  2.  When  a  man  begins  to  attempt  tiiif 
a  ftroggle  ensues,  and  he  discovers  his  own  weakness.    Every  sin,  every  infirmity. 


n.]  8T,  MARK,  695 

pleads  to  be  heard  before  it  be  omed  off  from  his  service.  Who  demands  from  you 
snob  a  sonrender  of  your  former  habits  ?  Are  yon  to  live  a  life  of  continnal  struggle  ? 
Is  watching  onto  righteoosness  as  pleasant  as  sleeping  in  sin  ?  Is  swimming  against 
the  flood  of  ungodliness  as  easy  as  swimming  with  it  f  Is  a  distant  prize,  which 
you  may  miss,  to  be  preferred  to  one  at  hand  wliich  is  certain?  So  says  the  law  of 
sin,  and  thus,  with  all  his  desire  to  follow  Christ  unto  His  death  and  burial,  he  is  at 
the  same  time  tempted  with  a  number  of  hindrances  which  seem  effectually  to  block 
up  the  way,  and  if  he  feels  the  spirit  to  be  willing,  he  also  feels  the  flesh  to  be  weak. 
He  begins  to  despair  of  strength  to  remove  them,  and  asks  in  his  despondency, 
•♦  Who  shall  roll  me  away  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre,  that  I  may  see 
and  find  Christ  crucified  for  me  ?  "  H.  The  stone  bollbd  away.  1.  As  the  women 
who  uttered  these  words  had  no  sooner  spoken  them  than  they  saw  that  the  stone 
was  already  rolled  away,  so  it  befalls  every  one  who  through  the  sincere  purpose  of 
the  death  unto  sin,  seeks  Christ  crucified.  Those  hindrances,  which  his  weak  un- 
assisted nature  never  could  so  much  as  hope  to  remove,  are  rolled  away  by  the  arm 
of  the  power  of  God.  If  he  feels  the  power  of  the  death  of  his  Saviour,  he  feels  also 
the  glorious  power  of  His  resurrection;  he  is  enabled  by  the  grace  of  God  to  over- 
come all  the  hindrances  and  stones  of  offence  which  before  seemed  so  great  and 
dificult  of  removal.  2.  Many  there  are  who  would  rather  forsake  a  course  of  care- 
lessness and  forgetfulness  of  God ;  they  see  its  foUy  and  unreasonableness ;  they 
perceive  in  what  it  must  end ;  but  they  have  not  the  resolution  to  free  themselves. 
They  no  sooner  see  the  sepulchre  of  Christ,  and  the  spot  where  they  must  become 
partakers  in  His  death  by  dying  to  their  besetting  sin,  than  they  give  up  the  trial, 
crying  out  that  the  thing  is  impossible.  But  this  would  not  be  so  if  they  accom- 
panied hearty  prayer  to  the  Lord  with  hearty  endeavours  at  removing  the  hindrances 
from  the  way.  Let  them  begin  to  practise  with  the  lighter  ones,  with  overcoming, 
e.p.,  the  habit  of  frivolous  excuses,  which  is  so  general  an  obstacle  to  a  consistent 
course.  When  a  man  has  once  overcome  one  ever  so  frivolous,  he  is  prepared  for  over- 
coming one  more  serious.  And  when  he  has  overcome  it,  he  is  quite  astonished  and 
ashamed  that  he  should  ever  for  a  moment  have  yielded  to  it.  He  is  thenceforward 
convinced  that  all  the  rest  are  not  at  all  more  serious  and  substantial,  and  goes  to 
work  with  them,  with  the  strong  hand  of  a  just  indignation  at  having  been  so  be- 
fooled and  perilled  by  them ;  and  thus,  under  the  grace  of  God,  his  faith  becomes 
strong  enough  to  remove  mountains.  {R.  W.  Evans^  M.A.)  Fear  exaggerating 
danger : — When  the  first  ironclad  vessel  was  used  in  naval  warfare,  the  news  of  its 
victory  sent  a  panic  through  the  Federal  rulers.  At  a  cabinet  meeting  called  on 
receipt  of  the  news,  Mr.  Stanton,  the  Secretary  of  State,  said :  **  This  will  change 
the  whole  character  of  the  war ;  she  will  destroy  seriatim  every  naval  vessel ;  she 
will  lay  all  the  cities  on  the  seaboard  under  contribution.  Port  Boyid  must  be 
abandoned ;  the  governors  and  authorities  must  take  instant  measures  to  protect 
their  harbours."  Looking  out  of  the  window,  which  commanded  a  view  of  the 
Potomac  for  many  miles,  he  said,  *'  Not  unlikely,  we  shall  have  a  shell  or  cannon- 
ball  from  one  of  her  guns  in  the  White  House  before  we  leave  this  room."  Mr. 
Seward,  usually  buoyant  and  self-reliant,  was  overwhelmed  with  the  intelligence, 
and  listened  in  responsive  sympathy  to  Stanton ;  he  was  greatly  depressed,  as, 
indeed,  were  all  the  members.  Needless  fears : — The  trouble  we  expect  scarcely 
ever  comes.  How  much  pain  the  evils  cost  us  that  have  never  happened  I  {George 
Moore.)  Difficulties  are  phantoms  : — There  is  a  beautiful  tradition  among  the 
American  Indians  that  Manaton  was  travelling  in  the  invisible  world,  and  that  he 
came  upon  a  hedge  of  thorns,  and  after  a  while  he  saw  wild  beasts  glare  upon  him 
from  the  thicket,  and  after  a  while  he  saw  an  impassable  river ;  but,  as  he  determined 
to  proceed,  and  did  go  on,  the  thorns  turned  to  phantoms ;  the  wild  beasts  a  power- 
less ghost ;  the  river,  only  the  phantom  of  a  river.  And  it  is  the  simple  fact  of  our 
lives  that  the  vast  majority  of  the  obstacles  in  our  way  disappear  when  we  march 
upon  them.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  How  to  deal  with  difficulties : — ^Dr.  Raleigh  used  tt) 
tell  of  an  old  Scotch  minister  who,  when  he  came  to  a  peculiarly  difficult  passage  of 
Scripture,  woidd  say  to  his  people,  •♦  No  doubt,  my  brethren,  there  is  great  difficult  v 
here;  all  the  commentators  are  agreed  upon  that;  so  let  us  look  the  difficulty 
boldly  in  the  face,  and — pass  on  1 "  Help  from  above  : — It  much  perplexed  these 
women  how  they  should  roll  away  the  tombstone,  and  so  purchase  the  sight  of  their 
beloved  Master ;  but  He  that  has  given  His  angels  charge  over  His  children,  that 
they  hurt  not  their  foot  against  a  stone,  sent  a  messenger  from  heaven  to  roll  back 
that  huge  stone  for  them.  Even  as  a  loving  father,  when  ho  carries  his  little  child 
10  Uie  town,  wUl  let  him  alone  to  walk  in  the  ilain  and  fair  way ;  but,  when  ht 


59e  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Xfl. 

eomeB  to  slippery  paths,  he  takes  him  by  the  hand,  and  in  dirty  passages  bears  him 
in  his  arms,  and,  when  he  comes  to  a  stile,  gently  lifts  him  over;  so  God,  out 
heavenly  Father,  uses  His  dear  children.  If  they  endeavour  to  go  as  far  as  they 
may  in  the  ways  of  His  commandments,  so  fast  as  they  can  in  the  way  to  the  celes- 
tial Jerusalem,  He  will  assist  them  in  danger,  and  help  them  over  stiles  of  dis* 
couragement ;  take  away  all  rubs  of  offence,  remove  all  blocks  and  hiudrances  in 
their  passage ;  and  the  very  great  stone  parting  Christ  and  them,  even  while  they 
least  think  of  it,  shall  be  rolled  away.  {Dean  Boys,)  The  opened  sepulchre : — 
Beneath  Westminster  Abbey  is  an  old  cloister  which  for  centuries  was  used  as  the 
burial-place  of  the  early  kings.  There,  in  their  stone  sarcophagi,  are  the  remains 
of  the  Saxon  sovereigns,  some  of  them  over  twelve  hundred  years  entombed.  It  ia 
related  that  one  day,  a  few  years  since,  a  visitor,  who  had  wandered  into  this  vault, 
was  locked  in.  He  did  not  notice  as  the  door  swung  together.  The  janitors  were 
busy.  The  usual  throng  of  visitors  was  in  the  spacious  building.  No  one  heard 
the  muffled  voice  which  began  to  cry  from  the  cloister,  or  the  muffled  blows  which 
began  to  beat  upon  its  oaken  door.  The  afternoon  passed  away.  What  that  im- 
prisoned man  suffered,  as  it  gradually  grew  upon  him  that  he  was  buried  alive,  who 
can  know  ?  At  the  usual  hour  the  janitor  made  his  evening  rounds,  before  closing 
the  building  for  the  night.  The  entombed  man  heard  him  as  his  footsteps  came 
near,  then  retreated,  came  near  again,  then,  finally  receding,  grew  fainter  and 
fainter,  and  died  away  at  length  in  the  distance.  What  imagination  can  conceive 
his  agony  1  He  redoubled  his  cries.  He  shrieked.  He  dashed  himself  wildly 
against  the  solid  door.  In  vain.  Now  he  thought  he  heard  the  distant  entrance- 
doors  creak  on  their  hinges,  and  the  key  pushed  into  the  great  iron  lock.  In  • 
moment  more  the  vast  tomb  would  be  closed  for  the  night.  Fortunately,  before 
turning  the  key,  the  janitor  paused  a  moment  and  listened.  He  thought  he  heard 
dull  blows,  faint  and  far  away,  a  sound  as  of  stifled,  agonizing  cries.  He  listened 
more  intently.  A  horrible  thought  suggested  itself  to  his  mind :  "  Some  one  ia 
locked  into  the  cloister."  He  hastened  to  the  place,  threw  open  the  heavy  oaken 
door,  and  held  his  lantern  up  to  see.  The  buried  man  had  fallen  senseless  upon 
the  stone  floor.  He  was  rescued  just  in  time  to  save  his  reason.  Were  it  not  for 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  men  had  been  like  that  poor  wretch,  helplessly 
and  hopelessly  beating  against  the  bolted  door  of  a  living  tomb.  Some  tell  as  that 
Christ  came  to  influence  men,  to  draw  us  to  God,  to  make  an  effectual  appeal  to 
men  by  His  life  and  His  death  to  repent  and  imitate  Him.  Is  this  all  ?  we  ask. 
We  lay  away  our  friends,  and  over  the  coffin  and  the  tomb  we  say :  ••  Jesus  is  the 
Resurrection  and  the  Life."  If  He  is  not ;  if  He  is  dead ;  then  we  ask  in  awe-struck 
dread:  "Who  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone?"  Christ  came  to  bring  life  and 
immortality  to  light.  What  hope  could  we  have  if  He  still  lay  in  His  grave  T  What 
would  this  earth  then  be  but  the  eternal  grave  and  ohamel-honse  of  the  human 
race  ?  (G.  R.  Leavitt.)  The  stone  was  rolled  away. — The  door  unlocked : — Some 
time  since  we  wished  to  enter  a  strange  church  with  a  minister,  a  little  before  the 
time  for  service.  We  procured  a  key,  but  tried  in  vain  to  unlock  the  outside  door 
with  it.  We  concluded  we  had  brought  the  wrong  key,  so  sent  to  the  janitor  for  the 
right  one.  But  he  came  and  told  us  that  the  door  was  already  unlocked.  All  we  had 
to  do  was  to  push,  and  the  door  would  open.  We  thought  ourselves  locked  out» 
when  there  was  nothing  but  that  mistaken  thought  to  hinder  us  from  entering.  In 
the  same  way  we  fail  to  enter  into  love  and  fellowship  with  God.  The  door,  wo 
think,  is  locked  against  us.  We  try  to  fit  some  key  of  extraordinary  faith  to  open 
it.  We  try  to  get  our  minds  wrought  up  to  some  high  pitch  of  feeling.  We  say, "  I 
have  the  wrong  key;  I  must  feel  more  sorry ;  I  must  weep  more."  Aiid  all  the  time 
the  door  is  ready  to  open.  If  we  but  come  boldly,  with  humble  earnestness,  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  we  may  enter  at  once,  without  having  to  unlock  the  door.  Christ 
is  the  door,  and  His  heart  is  not  shut  against  us.  We  must  enter  without  stopping 
to  fit  our  key  of  studied  faith,  for  His  mercy  is  not  locked  up.  We  must  enter 
boldly,  trustingly,  not  doubting  His  readiness  to  receive  us  just  as  we  are.  He  is 
willing  already,  and  we  must  not  stop  to  make  Him  willing  by  our  prayers  or  our 
tears.  (Anon,)  Sunshine  in  a  shady  place: — The  place  where  Jesus  lay  was 
a  dark  spot  to  His  disciples.  Little  did  they  know  that  speedily  He  was  to  leave 
that  grave,  victor  over  death,  and  that  heaven's  rare  sonshine  should  come 
to  that  shady  place.  Yet  so  it  was.  Other  captains  may  gather  laurels  from 
a  hundred  fields,  their  very  names  may  be  proverbs  of  conquest ;  but  when  they 
lie  in  the  narrow  house  appointed  for  iJl  living,  they  cease  from  fight,  and 
no  mora  oonquests  are  in  store  for  then.    Not  so  was  it  with  the  Captain  6i  our 


>.  zn.]  8T.  MARK.  697 

salvation.  His  greatest  viotory  was  gained  in  the  grave  and  over  it.  Every  hour  of 
His  life  yielded  ^e  palm  to  that  in  which  He  rose  from  death.  I.  Christ's  bisino 
WAS  TO  HiB  DISCIPLES  THB  BKSUBBECTioN  OF  HOPB.  1.  It  proved  to  them  the  accep- 
tance of  His  atonement.  2.  It  was  to  them  a  verification  of  aU  His  claims.  11. 
Christ's  bisno  was  to  His  disciplbs  thb  besubrection  or  coubaob.  What  changed 
men  they  were  after  Easter  Day !  The  craven  deserters  were  thereafter  bold  as 
lions.  III.  Christ's  Bisroo  was  to  His  disciples  the  resubrectiom  of  RELioions 
AOTmTY.  Till  He  rose,  their  activities  were  paralyzed.  When  He  rose,  how  they 
began  to  preach  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God ;  and,  more  than  all  besides,  they 
preached  not  Jesus  and  the  cross,  but  "  Jesus  and  the  resurrection  " — the  empty 
sepulchre,  rather  than  the  uplifted  cross.  {George  T.  Coster.)  Empty  sepulchres : — 
1.  There  are  some  sepulchres  from  which  we  would  not  desire  to  roll  the  stone 
•way.  The  past  has  many  suoh  sepulchres.  In  that  past  there  is  a  sepulchre  in 
which  corpses  lie — corpses  of  sinful  facts ;  corpses  of  broken  vows  ;  corpses  of  old 
hates ;  corpses  of  old  loves.  Oh  1  that  we  could  never  see  them  more.  Oh  1  that 
we  could  forget  their  very  names.  2.  But  there  is  another  sepulchre  of  the  past 
where  there  do  lie  some  things  very  sweet,  holy,  and  precious.  We  long  to  live 
these  memories  over  again.  We  long  to  walk  again,  hand  in  hand,  with  childlike 
trust,  beside  the  Oahlean  lake,  or  climb  the  Judean  mount  with  one  who  lies  asleep 
and  has  gone  into  the  memory-sepulchre.  Let  us  keep  our  spices  ready.  When 
the  bitter  Sabbath  which  has  followed  the  sorrowful  interment  shall  have  passed, 
there  will  be  an  Easter  morn,  and  as  we  run  sobbing  to  the  sepulchre  we  shall  see 
the  splendours  of  the  face  and  hear  the  music  of  the  voice  of  our  risen  and  immortal 
Lord.  {Dr.  Deems.)  Love  takes  us  to  Jesus : — It  is  not  my  work  to  roll  away  the 
•tone,  but  it  is  my  duty  to  go  to  the  grave.  Nay,  we  will  not  talk  of  duty.  Love 
sends  me  to  Jesus,  living  or  dead.  My  love  does  that.  His  love  will  see  that  the 
stone  is  rolled  away,  llbid.)  Love  works  for  faith : — It  is  said  that  love  is  blind. 
I  do  not  beheve  it.  Love  is  full  of  eyes.  The  sharp-eyed  intellect — that  Poly- 
phemus of  the  brain  which  has  only  one  eye — may  miss  many  a  thing.  Even 
cunning,  that  carries  a  calcium  lamp,  may  fail  to  see  many  a  thing.  But  love  will 
;ee  all.  Love  is  the  highest  philosophy.  Love  is  the  eyes  of  faith.  Love  is  the 
hand  of  faith.  Be  not  faithless,  and  then  you  will  not  be  loveless  nor  blind.  {Ibid.) 
The  power  of  the  resurrection : — The  facts  of  our  religion  are,  when  rightly  appre- 
ciated, so  many  moral  forces  for  the  soul,  incorporating  ideas  which  give  courage 
and  gladness,  and  containing  principles  which  are  at  the  root  of  conduct  and  life. 
Pre-eminent  among  them  all  is  the  resurrection.  Faith  in  this  is  the  one  and  only 
force  that  adequately  enables  us  to  roll  away  the  stones  that  encounter  us  in  the 
struggles  of  life.  What  St.  Paul  calls  the  "power"  of  the  resurrection  is  for  all  of 
as  the  mighty  secret  of  a  steady  triumph  over  temptation,  difficulty,  and  sorrow. 
I.  Thx  besubrection  is  A  POWER  TO  HEAL  coNscncNCB.  Looking  back  upon  the  cross 
and  forward  to  the  ascension,  it  tells  us  both  of  pardon  and  righteousness.  U.  The 
BESUBRECTION  IS  A  PowzB  TO  ENNOBLs  DUTY.  In  its  light  life  is  secu  to  be  worth 
living,  for  the  stone  of  a  purposeless  and  brief  existence  is  rolled  away,  and  with  its 
new  aims,  responsibilities,  functions,  and  motives,  this  life  on  earth  has  a  new 
meaning  and  force.  There  is  its  stupendous  responsibility,  for  some  day  we  shall  rise 
to  receive  the  things  done  in  our  body,  t.e.,  their  results,  whether  they  be  good  or  bad. 
There  is  its  universal  jurisdiction.  For  the  resurrection  of  the  race,  like  its  ineyi' 
table  mortality,  is  generically  bound  np  with  the  resurrection  of  its  Head  (1  Cor. 
XV.  22).  There  is  its  potential  grace  (Col.  iii.  1).  There  is  its  majestic  consecration 
(Bom.  xii.  1).  III.  Thb  besubrection  is  a  poweb  to  explain  death.  It  shows  as 
that  death  is  not  the  end  of  our  journey,  only  a  stage  in  it.  Because  Christ  lives, 
we  shall  live  also.  We  have  each  of  as  to  go  down  alone  to  the  brink  of  the  river, 
and  to  leave  behind  as  all  we  have  ever  known  and  possessed  and  loved,  and  to  pass 
into  another  condition  of  which  we  have  no  kind  of  experience,  and  most  probably 
to  abandon  schemes  but  half  completed,  and  lessons  but  scantily  learned.  Yet  in 
the  world  to  which  we  go,  there  will  be  leisure  enough  in  the  great  spaces  of  eternity 
to  mellow  and  develop  in  that  land  which  needeth  not  sun  or  moon  to  lighten  it, 
the  gems  of  thought  and  action  which  we  sowed  here.  IV.  Thb  besubbection  is  a 
rowEB  TO  console  sorrow.  {Bishop  Th/)rold,)  Courage  rewarded  : — Scipio 
▲fricanns  besieged  a  city  in  Spain  weM  fortified  every  way,  and  wanting  nothing, 
and  no  hope  did  appear  to  take  it.  In  the  meantime  Scipio  heard  many  causes 
pleaded  before  him,  and  put  off  one  before  it  was  ended,  to  be  heard  three  days 
after ;  and,  being  asked  by  his  officers  where  he  would  keep  his  next  court,  be 
pointed  to  the  chief  citadel  of  the  besieged  city,  and  told  them  he  woald  hear  th« 


C98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB,  [CBir.  xn. 

canse  there.  In  that  space  he  became  master  of  the  town,  and  did  as  be  had 
appointed.  He  was  not  more  confident  to  enter  into  a  city  fortified  against  him,  by 
his  valour,  than  these  women  were  to  enter  by  faith  into  a  sepulchre  sealed  and  shut 
up,  but  the  Lord  is  present  with  courageous  attempts,  and  He  sent  His  angel  to 
assist  them.  (Bishop  Racket.)  The  rolled  stone : — The  angel  was  present  on  thif 
occasion  for — 1.  A  witness.  The  empty  sepulchre  confirmed  his  words.  2.  A  pre- 
paration. They  were  soon  to  see  the  Lord  in  His  glorious  resurrection-body.  8.  A 
pledge.  Peace  established  between  heaven  and  earth.  A  new  and  sweet  commnnion 
opened.  4.  A  help.  They  could  not  have  moved  the  stone  without  assistance.  God 
always  aids  those  who  seek  to  go  onwards  in  the  path  of  duty.  An  angel  is  ever  by 
holy  places — thoughts — words — works,  leading  us  upwards  to  higher  gifts.  (Af.  Fdber.) 
The  question  of  the  bereaved  heart  answered  : — I.  Why  wastherb  kveb  ▲  sbpulohbb 
ON  EABTH  ?  A  Bepulchre  tells  of  sorrow,  sickness,  bereavement,  death.  "  By  one 
man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin."  II.  Why  was  thbrb  a  sepuiiOhbb 
FOB  Jesus?  To  remove  all  doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  His  death.  IIL  Why  was 
THAT  STONB  PUT  THERE  ?  St.  Matthew  gives  the  reason.  The  very  means  by  which 
they  hoped  to  prevent  the  resurrection,  were  made  the  occasion  of  more  glorious 
triumph.  Thus  did  God  cause  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him,  and  the  plottings 
of  enemies  to  give  the  strongest  proofs  of  His  resurrection.  IV.  Who  bollbd  that 
STONE  AWAY,  AND  FOB  WHAT  PURPOSE  ?  Had  the  Lord  rolled  it  away  it  would  have  been 
said  that  He  was  not  dead,  but  only  in  a  state  of  trance.  We  must  not  weep  as  if 
we  had  no  one  to  roll  away  the  stone  from  the  sepulchre.  The  grave  will  hold  our 
bodies  but  a  little  while.  {Bishop  Stevens.)  Imaginary  difficulties: — We  may 
note  some  important  lessons  which  this  incident  teaches.  1.  That  gloomy  forebod- 
ings should  never  prevent  us  from  doing  our  duty.  2.  That  those  who  talk  of  diffi- 
culties, have  frequently  but  little  knowledge  of  the  actual  state  of  affairs.  8.  That 
difficulties,  as  difficulties,  are  sometimes  more  imaginary  than  real.  I.  Thb  isabs 
OF  AN  AWAKENED  8INNEB.  Thcse  Bxc  represented  in  the  earnest  inquiry  of  the  woman. 
Whence  these  fears  ?  1.  They  may  be  due  to  want  of  thorough  knowledge  of  God's 
character.  2.  That  men  who  are  exceedingly  anxious  in  reference  to  any  matter  ait 
prone  to  dwell  upon  the  dark  side.  Let  as  look  at  the  different  forms  which  these 
fears  assume.  1.  The  awaked  sinner  sometimes  doubts  the  readiness  of  God  to 
receive  him,  2.  Fears  that  he  can  never  lead  a  godly  life.  3.  Fears  that  he  wiU 
never  be  ready  for  heaven.  II.  That  thxsb  feabs  abb  oboundless.  This  is  repre- 
sented in  the  fact  recorded  here.  Note — 1.  That  difficulties  are  oftentimes  advan- 
tages. 2.  t)ifficulties  generally  dwindle  away  as  we  grapple  with  them.  8.  God  has 
abundantly  provided  against  every  difficulty.  (D.  Rowlands,  B,A.)  Difficulties 
removed : — Prospective  difficulties  in  the  path  of  duty,  persons  often  find  removed 
when  they  come  to  the  place  of  meeting  them.  Tlus  may  be  inferred — L  Fbom 
the  expebience  of  God's  people.  Instance  Abraham,  Moses,  the  Israelites  in  the 
time  of  Joshua  and  Esther,  the  three  Hebrews,  Daniel,  (&c.,  the  apostles  and  primi- 
tive Christians,  Ac.  U.  From  the  promises  of  God.  1.  The  promises  of  God 
should  not  inspire  as  with  a  false  confidence,  blind  us  to  the  consequences  of  our 
conduct,  or  render  us  remiss  in  endeavours  to  know  the  will  of  God.  We  may  be  pre- 
sumptuous in  our  reliance  on  the  government  and  promises  of  God.  2.  God  has,  in  the 
Scriptures,  given  assurance  of  a  special  providence  over  those  who  obey  His  commands. 
3.  Professors  of  religion  have  suffered  much  in  peaoe  of  mind,  and  in  efficiency  of 
Christian  character,  because,  by  apparent  difficulties  in  prospect,  they  have  been 
deterred  from  going  forward  in  duty,  when,  had  they  trusted  in  God  and  gone  for- 
ward, they  would  not  have  experienced  the  difficulties  anticipated.  4.  Where  God 
directs,  there  go.  What  God  commands,  that  do.  (G.  A,  Calhoun,)  Hindrances 
removed : — I.  Look  hobs  OABEFUiiLY  and  minutely  at  thx  nabbatitb.  Costly  were  the 
spices  brought  by  Nicodemus,  costlier  than  they  could  buy ;  but  the  first  anointing 
was  hurried,  the  time  before  Jewish  Sabbath  so  brief.  With  women's  eyes  they  saw 
defects,  deplored  hasce.  They  would  anoint  carefully.  Love  prompted  resolution ; 
love  is  often  oblivious  of  hindrances.  They  had  not  thought  of  the  stone  which  the 
combined  strength  of  many  had  rolled  into  its  place.  II.  Thb  nabbativb  spkaks  to 
U8  OM  THIS  Easter  Day  of— 1.  A  work  of  love.  (1)  Love  prompted  the  purchase  of 
spices;  the  preparation,  the  early  journey  to  tomb.'  Jjove  compelled  them  with  sweet 
compulsion.  (2)  Love  to  Christ  has  led  to  greatci:  sacrifices,  more  toilsome  work ; 
e.g.,  love  led  St.  Paul  to  give  up  all  things  ;  St.  Peter  to  go  to  prison  and  onto  death. 
Motive  power  of  all  trae  work  for  Christ,  love.  2.  The  cause  of  that  love.  (1)  Maiy 
Magdalene  loved  Christ  as  her  Deliverer,  Emancipator.  Mary  the  mother  of  James, 
and  Salome  the  mother  of  James  and  John,  loved  Him  becaose  of  what  He  had  beec 


osAT.  m.]  ST.  MARK, 


to  their  sons  m  well  as  to  themselves.  (2)  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  ns. 
S.  The  hindrances  which  seem  to  be  in  the  way  of  performing  the  work  of  love. 
Many  great  stones  in  oar  way.  [1)  Our  ignorance,  incompetency,  insufficiency.  (2) 
The  world's  sin,  indifference,  distrust,  sorrow.  (3)  The  formality  of  the  Church, 
lack  of  unity  and  love.  (4)  Other  hindrances  of  which  we  may  be  as  ignorant  as 
women  were  of  seal  and  guard.  *♦  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  "  Who  shall 
roll  these  stones  away  ?  4.  These  hindrances  are  more  than  removed  if  we  go  on 
in  spite  of  them.  The  stone  was  rolled  away,  and  the  Lord  was  risen.  A  living 
present  Saviour  our  strength  and  joy.  {J.  M.  Blackie,  LL.B,)  Symbol  of  the 
returrection : — A  monument  erected  to  the  memory  of  a  Spanish  lady  was  of  pecu- 
liar and  happy  design.  It  represented  a  full-sized  marble  coffin,  with  the  lid  burst 
open,  revesting  the  pltuse  where  the  body  had  lain.  A  Bible  and  a  cross  lay  in  the 
vacant  place  upon  the  grave-clothes,  and  on  the  inside  of  the  half -raised  lid  these 
words  were  graven :  **  Non  est  hie,  ted  resurrexit,**    {Burritt,) 

Yer.  6.  They  saw  a  joxaig  man  sitting  on  the  right  side. — Perpetual  youth : — 
Very  remarkable  that  this  super-human  being  should  be  described  as  a  "  young 
man."  Immortal  youth,  with  buoyant  energy  and  fresh  power,  belongs  to  angeUc 
beings,  and  to  the  children  of  the  resurrection,  who  are  to  be  "  equal  unto  the 
angels.*'  No  waste  decays  their  strength,  no  change  robs  them  of  forces  which  have 
ceased  to  increase.  Age  cannot  wither  them.  L  The  lipb  of  the  faitefcl  dead 
IS  BTKBMAL  PBOOBBSs  TowABDS  iKFiNiTE  PEBrECTioN.  Their  being  uevcr  reaches  its 
climax ;  it  is  ever  but  entering  on  its  glory.  Their  goal  is  the  likeness  of  God  in 
Christ— all  His  wisdom.  His  love.  His  holiness.  He  is  all  theirs,  and  all  that  He  is 
is  to  be  transfused  into  their  growing  greatness.  They  rise  like  the  song-bird,  aspiring 
to  the  heavens,  circling  round,  and  ever  higher,  up  and  up  through  the  steadfast 
blue  to  the  sun  1  They  shall  lose  the  marks  of  age  as  they  grow  in  eternity,  and  they 
who  have  stood  before  the  throne  the  longest  shall  be  likest  him  who  sat  in  the 
sepulchre  young  with  immortal  strength,  radiant  with  unwithering  beauty.   II.  Thx 

liZVB  OW   THE    FAITHrXTL   DEAD  BBCOVEBS  AND   BXTAINS    THE    BEST   CHABACTEBI8TIC8    OF 

YOUTH.  1.  Hope.  No  more  disappointments ;  a  boundless  future  of  blessedness. 
2.  Keenness  of  relish.  The  pleasures  of  heaven  always  satisfy,  but  never  cloy. 
8.  Fervour  of  love.  Zeal  such  as  that  of  the  seraphs,  that  have  burned  before 
the  throne  nnconsumed  and  undecaying  for  unknown  ages.  4.  Buoyant  energy. 
All  that  maturity  and  old  age  took  away,  is  given  back  in  nobler  form.  All 
the  limitation  and  weakness  which  they  brought,  the  coldness,  monotony,  torpor, 
weariness,  will  drop  away;  but  we  shall  keep  all  the  precious  gifts  they  brought — calm 
wisdom,  ripened  Imowledge,  full-summed  experience,  powers  of  service  acquired  in 
life's  long  apprenticeship.  The  perfect  man  in  the  heavens  will  include  the  graces 
of  childhood,  the  energies  of  youth,  the  steadfastness  of  manhood,  the  calmness  of 
old  age ;  as  on  some  tropical  trees  you  may  see  at  once  bud,  blossom,  fruit — the  ex- 
pectanoy  of  spring,  the  maturing  promise  of  summer,  and  the  fulMed  fruition  of 
autumn — hanging  together  on  the  unexhausted  bough.  lU.  The  fatthtul  dead 
SHALL  LIVE  IN  A  BODY  THAT  CANNOT  OBow  OLD.  No  wcarincss.  Needing  no  repose. 
No  death  (1  Cor.  xv.  42-44 ;  2  Cor.  v.  1-4;  Rev.  vii.  13-17).  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Youth  in  heaven : — If  all  this  be  true,  that  glorious  and  undecaying  body  shall  then 
be  the  equal  and  fit  instrument  of  the  perfected  spirit,  not,  as  it  is  now,  the  adequate 
instrument  only  of  the  natural  life.  The  deepest  emotions  then  will  be  capable  of 
expression — nor,  as  now,  like  some  rushing  tide,  choke  the  floodgates  through  whose 
narrow  aperture  they  try  to  press,  and  be  all  tossed  into  foam  in  the  attempt.  All 
outward  things  shall  then  be  fully  and  clearly  communicated  to  the  spirit ;  that 
glorious  body  will  be  a  perfect  instrument  of  knowledge.  All  that  we  desire  to  do  we 
shall  then  do,  nor  be  longer  tortured  with  tremulous  hands  that  can  never  draw  the 
perfect  circle  we  plan,  and  stammering  lips  that  will  not  obey  the  heart,  and  throb- 
mg  brain  that  will  ache  when  we  would  have  it  dear.  The  young  spirit  shall  have 
for  true  yokefellow  a  body  that  cannot  tire,  nor  grow  old,  nor  die.  The  aged  saints 
of  God  shall  rise  then, in  youthful  beauty.  More  than  the  long- vanished  comeliness 
shall  then  rest  on  faces  that  were  here  haggard  with  anxiety,  and  pinched  with 
penury  and  years.  No  more  palsied  hands,  no  more  scattered  grey  hairs,  no  more 
dim  and  homy  eyes,  no  more  stiffened  muscles  and  slow-throbbing  hearts.  **  It  is 
sown  in  weakness ;  it  is  raised  in  power."  It  is  sown  in  decaying  old  age ;  it  is 
raised  in  immortal  youth.  His  servants  shall  stand  in  that  day  among  *'  the  young- 
eyed  cherubim,"  and  be  like  them  for  ever.  {Ibid.)  The  presence  of  the  angel : — 
Here  is  one  keeper  more  than  the  Jews  looked  for  about  our  Saviour's  sepulchre,  one 


rOO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xn. 

more  than  Pilate  appointed.  One  mighty  prince  of  that  anpemal  host,  whose  coun- 
tenance was  able  to  daunt  a  legion  of  the  best  Roman  soldiers ;  perhaps  there  was 
a  multitude  with  him  to  celebrate  the  resurrection,  as  there  was  a  multitude  that 
appeared  in  the  fields  of  Bethlehem  to  rejoice  at  Christ's  Nativity.  But  this  angel, 
I  may  say  determinately,  was  one  of  the  most  royal  spirits  that  stand  before  the 
face  of  God  for  ever.  How  sweetly  the  eternal  wisdom  did  dispose  to  let  an  angel  show 
himself  openly  at  this  place  of  the  grave,  and  upon  the  celebration  of  this  great  day  t 
1.  Those  ministering  spirits  had  been  attendants  upon  all  the  parts  of  our  Saviour's 
humility  ■  good  reason  they  should  be  occupied  upon  all  occasions  of  His  exaltation 
and  glory  2.  The  women  came  out  with  confidence  to  embalm  Christ's  body,  without 
considering  how  many  difficulties  were  in  their  way ;  such  difficulties  as  could  never 
have  been  mastered  if  the  angel  had  not  been  sent  to  facilitate  all  things  for  them. 
3.  The  presence  of  the  angel  showed  that  He  who  had  been  buried  there  was  God 
as  well  as  man  ;  for  angels  were  as  officious  at  the  sepulchre  as  they  use  to  be  in 
heaven,  which  is  the  throne  of  God.  4.  If  not  an  angel,  who  else  would  be  believed 
in  so  great  a  matter  as  this  ?  Tell  me,  who  could  give  testimony  beside  that  would 
be  credited  ?  The  disciples  were  never  so  tardy  to  conceive,  never  so  unapprehen- 
sive  in  anything  else  as  in  this  1  They  knew  not  as  yet  what  the  rising  from  the 
dead  did  mean.  5.  It  is  in  effect  a  promise  that  we  shall  be  exalted  after  death  to 
the  society  of  angels.  6.  Angels  desire  to  be  present  at  everything  wherein  man- 
kind is  benefited,  that  they  may  rejoice  with  us.  No  envy,  no  malignity  in  them, 
that  we  shall  be  made  perfect  in  both  parts  of  nature,  both  in  body  and  soul,  and 
80  in  that  respect  exceed  them  who  are  only  spiritual  substances.    {Bishop  Hacket.) 

Yen.  6,  7.  He  Is  risen;  He  Is  not  here. — The  words  of  an  angel : — Here  we  have 

the  first  gospel  sermon  preached  after  the  gospel  had  been  finished  on  the  cross, 
and  sealed  by  the  fact  of  the  resurrection.  Not  a  sentence  that  dropped  from  the 
speaker's  Hps  by  accident;  nor  are  its  words  mere  words  that  came  uppermost,  as 
though  some  other  words  might  have  done  as  well.  They  hold  the  germ  of  which 
the  preaching  of  all  true  evangelists  is  but  the  expansion.     I.  The  fibst  title 

UMDEB     WHICH     ChBIST   WAS  PBOCLAIMED   BT  A  BIESSENOEB  PBOM  HEAVEN     AFTEB    HIS 

cBuciFixioN.  1.  Jesus.  The  name  given  at  the  annunciation.  Now  it  is  fulfilled. 
He  has  saved  His  people  from  their  sins.  Henceforth  this  name  shall  be  above 
every  name.  All  through  our  life  in  time  let  us  sing  with  Bernard,  "  This  name  is 
sweetness  in  the  mouth,  music  in  the  ear,  joy  in  the  heart;"  and  all  through  our 
life  in  eternity  let  as  expect  to  penetrate  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  soul  of  its 
beauty,  and  glory,  and  meaning.  2.  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  A  lowly  title,  despised  by 
men.  3.  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  whieh  was  crucified.  Words  used  among  men  to 
express  contempt,  an  angel  is  proud  to  use ;  and  the  last  phrase  of  degradation 
which  His  enemies  fiung  at  Him  on  earth  was  the  first  title  under  which  He  is  pro- 
claimed by  a  flaming  prophet  from  heaven.  IL  The  »ibst  notice  or  Chbist's 
BEsuBBECTioN.  Christ's  rcsurrection  is — 1.  A  mystery.  2.  A  miracle.  8.  A  victory 
over  death.  4.  A  fulfilment  of  His  promise.  (C  Stanford^  D.D.)  The  angeVt 
1  words : — I.  This  message  brings  to  as  the  glad  tidings  that  He  who  onoe  died  fob 
^\Aja  NOW  LIVES  FOB  US.  For  the  sake  of  convenience  in  the  presentation  of  thought, 
we  may  be  permitted  to  speak  of  Christ's  death  as  having  two  aspects  in  its  saving 
efficacy — a  heavenward  and  an  earthward  aspect, — and  we  assert  that  its  power  in 
both  directions  depends  upon  the  truth  that  He  is  risen.  1.  The  heavenward 
aspect.  Our  benefit,  in  this  direction,  from  the  death  of  Christ,  depends  on  cor 
trust  in  Him,  and  not  on  oar  ability  to  explain  precisely  what  His  death  has  done. 
We  know,  at  any  rate,  that  it  has  done  all  that  was  necessary,  and  that  not  only 
has  He  died,  but  also  risen  again.  His  resurrection,  sanctioned  by  the  seal  of  law 
and  all  the  pomp  of  heaven,  gave  to  His  redeeming  Etct  the  most  pubhc  and  solemn 
satisfaction.  2.  The  earthward  aspect.  He  who  is  our  Saviour  must  be  our 
Saviour  every  day,  and  our  Saviour  in  every  place ;  our  Saviour  from  Satan,  from 
the  world,  and  from  ourselves.  Not  only  must  we,  by  the  heavenward  efficacy  of 
His  death,  have  the  forgiveness  of  sins;  but,  by  its  earthward  efficacy  have  Him 
with  as  as  a  living  presence,  ever  at  work  by  "the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Some  time  ago  the  agents  of  Anti-Christianity  placed  posters  about  London,  on 
doors,  on  walls,  and  on  wooden  fences,  advertising  the  question,  "  Will  faith  in  a 
dead  man  save  you  ?  "  If ,  as  thus  insinuated,  the  Christian  faith  is  hke  this,  then 
Christianity  is  a  shock  to  common  sense.  Dead  Hampden  will  not  take  a  hand 
against  tyranny;  dead  Milton  will  not  sing;  dead  WelUngton  will  not  fight;  dead 
Wilberf oroe  will  not  work  for  the  emancipation  of  slaves  in  the  Soadan ;  a  dead 


cmuf,  XTi.]  ST.  MARK.  701 

lawyer  will  not  save  yon  from  legal  complications;  a  dead  doctor  will  not  save  yon 
{rem  the  grasp  of  fever;  and  just  as  fantastic,  and  jast  as  insane,  is  the  conception 
of  salvation  by  faith  in  a  dead  Saviour — a  Saviour  who  is  behind  eighteen  centuries, 
ft  Saviour  who  was  crucified  but  of  whom  we  have  been  told  nothing  more.  With- 
out the  resurrection  all  the  gospel  would  collapse,  as  an  arch  would  collapse  without 
ihe  key-atone.      11.  The  obavb  is  the  only  place  where  the  tbus  beeeebs  of 

l/  Jbsus  mat  mot  ron)  Hiu.  1.  "He  is  not  here " :  this  will  not  apply  to  heaven. 
2.  •*  He  is  not  here  '* :  this  will  not  apply  to  any  earthly  solitude.  3.  •*  He  is  not 
here*' :  this  will  not  apply  to  the  walks  of  human  life.  A  Christian  may  say  of  his 
place  of  business,  "  Here  I  pass  most  of  my  life ;  this  is  my  soul's  battlefield ;  and 
will  Christ  leave  me  to  fight  my  battles  alone  ? "  Never  1  "  Here,  in  my  commercial 
life,"  one  may  say,  •'  Chnst  is  with  me,  quickening  my  conscience,  and  holding  my 
soul  in  life,  while  I  seem  to  be  only  deaUng  with  questions  of  material,  colour,  and 
shape;  or  with  distinctions  of  weight  and  currency;  or  with  tables  of  value,  or 
calculations  of  outlay,  or  rates  of  exchange."  It  is  an  axiom  of  sanctified  reason 
and  a  sovereign  article  of  faith,  that  Christ  most  is — where  Christ  is  most  wanted ; 
and  that  wherever  I  am,  if  I  want  Him,  and  seek  Him,  He  is  near  to  my  heart  as 
the  Sim  is  to  that  which  it  shines  upon.    4.  "He  is  not  here  ** :  tJtiis  will  not  apply 

>^  to  the  worshipping  assembly.  5.  "He  is  not  here":  this  will  not  apply  to  the 
place  where  the  prodigal  stands  in  his  rags  and  tries  to  pray,  but  is  speechless  ;  i^ 
will  not  apply  to  the  place  where  the  backslider  bemoans  himself ;  it  will  not  apply 
to  the  spot  where  some  interceding  soul,  whose  oonoem  for  some  other  soul  has 
risen  to  the  point  of  intolerable,  bursts  into  the  prayer,  "  Lord  help  me !  "  6.  "  He 
is  not  here  "  :  Christ  is  not  in  the  grave.  To  think  of  Christ  as  among  the  dead 
would  be  to  give  up  faith  in  Christ.  Christ  is  the  life ;  He  cannot,  therefore,  be 
among  the  dead ;  He  must,  therefore,  be  everywhere  except  in  the  grave.    HI.  Tub 

/    «EEEBBS  or  Jesus  have  koihiko  to  feab,  even  from  that  which  may  look  mosi 

^  alarming.  When  we  are  overpowered  with  a  sense  of  the  awful  other  world,  let  us 
remember  that  angels  and  ministers  of  grace  are  all  our  friends.  We  and  they  are 
fMider  the  same  Lord,  at  home  in  the  same  heaven,  choristers  in  the  same  service. 

^€V.  AliL  WHO  KNOW  THE    OLAO    TIDIMOS     ABB    BOUND    TO    TELL    THEU    TO    OTHERS. 

{Ibid.)  The    women   at    the   sepulchre: — Very    signal    and    very    beautiful 

was  the  devotedness  of  these  women.  They  put  to  shame  the  stronger  sex. 
1.  Their  faith,  it  is  true,  was  weak.  They  cherished  no  hope  of  finding  Christ 
alive.  They  had  forgotten  His  own  express  prediction.  2.  Yet,  if  there  be  no  faith 
to  admire,  there  is  great  love  to  commend.  3.  And  then,  what  zeal  was  in  their 
love.  They  well  knew  how  carefully  the  grave  had  been  dosed ;  but  they  did  not 
tarn  back  at  the  prospect  of  a  difficulty  which  they  might  justly  have  reasoned  was 
too  much  for  their  strength.  Theirs  was  the  love  which  seems  to  itself  able  to 
break  through  rooks,  though  hope  might  have  been  perplexed  had  it  been  called 
upon  for  a  reason.  4.  And  love  had  its  reward.  They  came  with  the  pious  intent 
of  anointing  the  dead,  and  themselves  were  anointed  with  the  most  fragrant  tidings 
that  ever  fell  on  mortal  ear.  I.  Thb  znvobmation  given  to  thb  womsn.  1.  Their 
fears  are  quieted.  *'  Be  not  afirighted."  They  had  no  need  to  be  terrified  at  the  « 
glories  of  an  angel,  who  had  not  been  alarmed  at  the  indignities  heaped  upon  their  ^ 
Lord.  They  who  could  come  seeking  the  crucified  Nazarene  in  the  grave  were  not 
unworthy  to  hold  converse  with  celestial  beings  themselves.  2.  But  the  women 
needed  more  than  the  quieting  of  those  fears  which  the  apparition  of  the  angel  bad 
naturally  excited.  They  wanted  information  as  to  the  disappearance  of  Christ's 
body,  and  this  was  quickly  furnished.  There  is  something  remarkable  in  the 
feasoning  of  the  angel.  He  calls  upon  the  women  to  behold  the  place  where  their 
Lord's  body  had  lain,  as  though  its  mere  desertion  were  evidence  enough  of  the 
fact  of  a  resurrection.  And  so,  in  real  truth,  it  was ;  to  all,  at  least,  who  like  the 
women,  knew  and  considered  the  characters  and  circumstances  of  the  disciples  of 
Christ.  The  body  was  gone.  Either,  therefore,  it  had  been  raised  from  the  dead, 
or  it  had  been  removed  for  the  purpose  of  deception.  If  removed,  it  could  only  be 
by  some  of  his  immediate  followers  and  adherents.  But  could  they  have  stolen  the 
bodv?  The  supposition  is  absurd.  In  believing  that  Christ  was  raised  from  the 
dead,  I  believe  a  miracle  for  which  there  was  adequate  power ;  but  in  believing  that 
Ohrist's  disciples  stole  away  His  body,  I  believe  a  miracle  for  which  there  was  no 

Kwer  at  all.  Hence  the  simple  fact,  ascertainable  by  the  senses,  that  Christ's  body 
d  disappeared,  was,  and  should  be  still,  sufficient  evidence  of  the  resurrection. 
8.  It  may  not,  however,  have  been  only  as  proving  the  fact  of  a  resurrection,  that 
4ha  angel  directed  attention  to  the  deserted  grave;  but  yet  further,  because  ther« 


70i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

wonld  be  high  topics  of  meditation  and  comfort  raggested  by  the  fact  that  it  had 
been  hallowed  by  the  body  of  the  Lord.  Pause  awhile,  that  yon  may  gaze  on  the 
consecrated  spot,  and  gather  in  the  wonders  with  which  it  is  haunted.  So  inter* 
woven  is  the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  with  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption — so 
dependent  is  the  entire  gospel,  whether  for  its  truth  or  its  worth,  upon  its  not  being 
possible  He  should  be  holden  of  death, — that  if  we  could  but  fix  attention  on  that 
empty  grave,  we  should  give  hope  to  the  desponding,  constancy  to  the  wavering, 
warning  to  the  careless,  comfort  to  the  sorrowing,  courage  to  the  dying.  Oh,  hnger 
awhile  at  the  tomb  in  holy  meditation.  Solemn  thoughts  may  steal  over  you,  and 
brilliant  visions  may  pass  before  you.  That  empty  vault  is  full  of  sublime,  and 
stirring,  and  glorious  things — things  which  escape  the  mere  passer-by,  but  present 
themselves  to  the  patient  inspector.  IL  Thb  commission  with  which  thb  women 
WERE  ENTRUSTED.  1.  The  glad  tidings  were  not  for  them  alone;  and  the  angel 
directs  them  to  hasten  at  once  to  give  intelligence  of  the  glorious  fact.  Were  not 
these  women  highly  honoured  f  Were  they  not  well  recompensed  for  their  zeal  and 
love  ?  They  became  apostles  to  the  apostles  themselves ;  they  first  preadied  the 
resurrection  to  those  who  were  to  preach  it  to  the  farthest  ends  of  the  earth.  As  the 
first  news  of  death  came  by  woman,  by  woman  came  the  first  news  of  resurrection. 
2.  What  a  breaking-forth  of  long-suffering  and  forgiving  love  is  there  in  the  fact, 
that  the  tidings  were  first  sent  to  the  disciples  of  the  Lord.  It  seems  to  have  been 
the  first  object  of  the  risen  Kedeemer  to  quiet  the  apprehensions  of  His  followers ; 
to  assure  them  that  so  far  from  feeling  sternly  towards  them  on  account  of  their 
desertion,  He  had  returned  to  life  for  their  comfort  and  welfare.  Christ  did  not 
think  little  of  having  been  deserted  ;  but  He  knew  how  His  disciples  sorrowed  for 
their  fault ;  that  they  loved  Him  sincerely,  notwithstanding  their  having  been  over- 
come by  fear ;  and  He  gave  a  proof  of  His  readiness  to  forgive  and  welcome  the 
backslider,  whensoever  there  is  compunction  of  heart,  in  sending  the  first  tidings 
of  His  resurrection  to  the  men  who  had  all  forsaken  Him  and  fied.  3.  And  this 
were  but  little.  The  disciples  as  a  body  had  indeed  played  the  coward ;  yet  they 
had  rather  avoided  standing  forth  in  His  defence,  than  shrunk  from  Him  in  open 
apostacy.  One  only  had  done  that — denied  his  Lord— denied  Him  thrice,  with  aU 
that  was  vehement  and  blasphemous  in  expression.  Alas  for  Peter  1  But  oh  I  the 
gracious  consideration  of  Christ  1  for  indeed  it  is  His  voice  which  must  be 
recognized  in  the  voice  of  the  angel :  *•  Go  your  way ;  tell  His  disciples  and  Peter." 
Those  two  words — *•  and  Peter  *' — thrown  into  the  commission  are,  I  might  almost 
say,  a  gospel  in  themselves.  To  all  repentant  backsliders,  Easter  brings  glad 
tidings  of  great  joy.  HI.  The  promise.  1.  There  was  an  appropriateness  in  the 
selection  of  Galilee  for  this  meeting  of  our  Lord  with  His  apostles,  forasmuch  as 
He  was  likely  to  be  known  to  numbers  there.  He  having  been  brought  up  in 
Nazareth,  a  city  of  Galilee,  having  wrought  His  first  miracle  in  Cana  of  Galilee, 
and  having  laboured  most  abundantly  in  Capernaum  and  the  neighbouring  coast. 
2.  Moreover,  as  Galilee  was  called  ••  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles,"  from  its  proximity  to 
the  territories  of  the  heathen,  this  fixing  the  place  of  meeting  on  the  confines  of 
Judea  might  be  intended  to  mark  that  all  men  had  an  interest  in  the  fact  of  the 
resurrection,  or  that  the  blessings  of  the  new  dispensation  were  not  to  be  restricted 
as  had  been  those  of  the  old.  8.  And  if  it  were  only  to  the  then  living  disciples 
that  the  promise  pertained,  of  meeting  their  risen  Lord  in  Galilee,  assuredly  some 
place  there  is  of  which  it  may  be  said  to  the  Church  in  every  age — "  There  shall  yt 
see  Him."  "  He  goeth  before  you  '*  is,  and  always  will  be,  the  message  to  the 
Church.  {H.  Melvill^  BJ).)  The  holy  womevCi  Easter  and  ours: — Ahl  my 
brethren,  let  us  see  whether,  in  our  annual  pilgrimage  to  the  grave  of  our  Lord,  w« 
have  anything  of  the  love  which  shows  so  conspicuously  in  these  zealous  women. 
It  is  so  easy  for  us  to  keep  Easter  with  high  pomp  and  gratulation,  coming  to  ft 
tomb  which  we  know  to  be  empty,  because  death  has  been  vanquished  in  his  own 
domain,  that  we  may  readily  overlook  the  strength  of  that  affection  which  glowed 
fervently  towards  Christ  whilst  supposed  to  be  dead — dead,  too,  with  every  circum> 
stance  of  indignity  and  shame.  When  now  the  Church  marshals  her  children  in 
solemn  precession,  and  leads  them  up  to  the  place  where  the  Lord  was  laid,  there 
is  a  thorougli  consciousness  that  mourning  is  about  to  be  turned  into  joy,  and  all 
remembrance  of  Christ's  having  died  as  a  malefactor,  is  perhaps  lost  in  the  feeling 
of  His  having  come  forth  ai  the  resurrection  and  the  life.  What  would  it  be,  if  aa 
yet  we  only  knew  Him  as  **  Jesus  of  Nazareth  which  was  crucified,"  and  not  as  tht 
Son  of  God  who  stripped  the  grave  of  all  victory  T  Is  it  not  too  much  the  fact  thai 
(if  such  expressions  may  be  used)  we  tolerate  the  humiliation  of  Christ,  in  eonaider* 


XTX,]  ST.  MARK. 


tion  of  His  snbMqnent  triumph,  just  as  we  can  overlook  the  oircamstanoe  of  a 
man's  having  been  bom  a  beggar,  when  we  know  him  to  have  become  a  prince  ? 
We  put  up  with,  though  we  dislike,  the  cross,  because  we  know  that  it  conducted  to 
a  throne.  And  yet  what  ought  so  to  endear  to  us  the  Bedeemer,  as  the  shame  and 
the  sorrow  which  He  endured  on  our  behalf  ?  When  ought  He  to  seem  so  precious 
in  our  eyes  as  when,  "  a  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,"  He  "  gives  His 
back  to  the  smiters,  and  His  cheeks  to  them  that  pluck  off  the  hair  ?  "  Oh !  that 
heart  has  scarcely  jet  been  touched  with  celestial  fire,  which  is  forced  to  tarn  from 
Christ  in  His  hamiiity  to  Christ  in  His  glory,  ere  it  can  be  kindled  into  admiration 
and  devotednesB.  (Jbid.)  The  place  where  they  laid  the  Lord: — I.  Considbb  the 
MANNEB  iM  WHICH  He  WAS  COMMITTED  THEBB.  1.  Ho  was  Committed  there  by 
persons  of  remarkably  interesting  character.  Joseph  of  Arimathea :  Nicodemus. 
2.  He  was  committed  there  with  many  tokens  of  regard  and  affection.  3.  He  was 
committed  there  with  unostentatious  quietness  and  privacy.  U.  Consideb  the  ends 
WHICH,  BY  His  committal  to  it,  WEBB  accomplished  thebe.  1.  EQs  committal 
to  that  place  confirmed  the  reality  of  His  death.  2.  His  committal  to  that  place 
folfilled  the  declarationB  of  ancient  prophecies  and  types.  8.  His  committal  there 
completed  the  abasement  of  His  humiliation.  4.  His  committal  has  delightfully 
softened  and  mitigated  the  terrors  of  the  grave  for  His  people.  6.  By  His  com- 
mittal there  He  immediately  and  necessarily  introduced  His  own  mediatorial 
exaltation  and  empire.  This  was  the  last  step  towards  His  exaltation ;  it  provided 
for  and  secured  it.  IH.  Leabn  the  lessons  which  are  inculcated  thebe.  1.  The 
tenderness  and  devotedness  of  His  love.  2.  The  duty  of  unreserved  devotedness  to 
His  will.  3.  The  abounding  consolations  we  possess,  in  reflecting  on  the  departure 
of  our  Christian  friends,  and  in  anticipating  our  own.  {James  Parsons.)  Tlie 
risen  Christ: — Eight  hundred  years  after  Edward  I.  was  buried,  they  brought  up 
his  body  and  they  found  that  he  still  lay  with  a  crown  on  his  head.  More  than 
eighteen  hundred  years  have  passed,  and  I  look  into  the  grave  of  my  dead  King,  and 
I  see  not  only  a  crown,  but  **  on  his  head  are  many  crowns."  And  what  is  more, 
He  is  rising.  Yea,  He  has  risen !  Ye  who  came  to  the  grave  weeping,  go  away 
rejoicing.  Let  your  dirges  now  change  to  anthems.  He  lives  1  Take  off  the  black- 
ness from  the  gates  of  the  morning.  He  lives  I  Let  earth  and  heaven  keep  jubilee. 
He  lives  I  I  know  that  my  Bedeemer  lives.  For  whom  that  battle  and  that 
victory?  For  whom?  For  you.  {Dr,  Talmage.)  The  lessons  of  the  empty 
grave: — 1.  It  is  full  of  consolations.  1.  It  proclaims  that  life  reigneth.  The 
sorrow  of  earth  is  the  seeming  supremacy  of  death.  The  world's  creed  is  a  belief 
in  death  as  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  the  terror  and  destroyer  of  all  things.  But 
the  empty  grave  of  Christ  teaches  us  that  not  death,  but  life,  reigns.  2.  It  shows 
that  love  reigns.  Death  seems  to  suggest  indifference  on  God's  part  to  human  woe. 
The  resurrection  tells  a  very  different  tale.  3.  It  restores  hope  to  man.  What 
Christ  wins  for  Himself  He  wins  for  all.  4.  It  tells  of  redemption  being  perfected. 
It  is  accepted  by  God ;  or  the  great  *•  Prisoner  of  Hope  "  would  not  have  been 
discharged.  And,  accepted,  Christ  rises  to  reign,  from  a  higher  vantage-ground 
and  with  new  sovereignty.  We  have  a  Saviour  now  on  the  throne  of  all  things. 
II.  Lessons  on  Lirs  and  dutt.  1.  Self-sacrifice  is  the  secret  of  goodness,  success, 
and  joy.  The  way  of  the  cross  always  leads  to  some  heaven.  No  love  is  ever  lost, 
nor  any  sacrifice  ever  fruitless.  2.  Nothing  can  by  any  means  harm  the  good.  By 
doing  wrong  we  inflict  the  only  thing  worth  calling  injury  upon  ourselves.  {R. 
Olover.)  The  empty  tomb : — He  lies  there  no  longer.  He  was  not  lying  there 
when  tne  angel  addressed  Mary  Magdalene.  With  most  tombs  the  interest  consists 
in  the  fact  that  all  that  is  mortal  of  the  saint,  or  hero,  or  near  relative,  rests 
beneath  the  stone  or  the  sod  on  which  we  gaze.  Of  our  Lord's  sepulchre  the  ruling 
interest  is  that  He  no  longer  tenants  it.  It  is  not  as  the  place  in  which  He  lies,  it 
is  not  even  chiefly  as  the  place  wherein  He  lay,  it  is  as  the  place  from  which  He 
rose — that  the  tomb  of  Jesus  speaks  to  faith.  {Canon  Liddon.)  Importance  of 
the  resurrection  to  the  Christian :-^Ijet  us  suppose — it  is  a  terrible  thing  for  a 
Christian  even  to  suppose — but  let  us  suppose  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  been 
betrayed,  tried,  condemned  to  death,  and  crucified ;  that  He  had  died  on  the  cross, 
and  had  been  buried ;  and  that,  instead  of  rising  the  third  day,  He  had  lain  on  in 
His  grave  day  after  day,  week  after  week,  year  after  year,  until  corruption  and  the 
worm  had  done  their  work,  and  nothing  was  left  of  His  bodily  frame  save  perhaps 
a  skull  and  a  few  bones  and  a  little  dust.  Let  us  suppose  that  that  was  proved  to 
have  happened  to  Him  which  will  happen  to  you  and  me,  which  does  happen  as  a 
matter  of  ooorse  to  the  sons  of  men,  to  the  wealthy  and  to  the  poor,  to  the  wise  and 


704  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  in. 

the  thoughtless,  to  the  yonng  and  the  old, — that  which  certainly  happened  to  all 
the  other  founders  of  religion  and  martyrs,  to  Socrates  and  Confacius  and  Moham> 
med  and  Marcus  Aurelius ;  what  would  be  the  result  on  the  claims  and  works  of  the 
Christian  religion  ?  If  anything  is  certain  about  the  teaching  of  our  Lord,  it  it 
certain  that  He  foretold  His  resurrection,  and  that  He  pointed  to  it  as  being  a 
coming  proof  of  His  being  what  He  claimed  to  be.    Ir  He  had  not  risen,  His 

AUTHORITY   WOULD   HAVE   BEEN   FATALLY   DISCREDITED  ;    He  WOuld  haVe  StOOd  forth    in 

human  history — may  He  forgive  me  for  saying  it— as  a  bombastic  pretender  to 
anpernataral  sanctions  which  He  could  not  command.  If  He  had  not  risen, 
WHAT  would  havk  BEEN  THE  MEANING  OF  His  DEATH  ?  Even  if  It  Still  retained 
the  character  of  a  martyrdom,  it  would  have  been  only  a  martyrdom.  It  could  not 
have  been  supposed  to  have  any  effect  in  the  invisible  world :  to  be  in  any  sense  a 
propitiation  for  human  sin.  The  atoning  virtue  which,  as  we  Christians  believe, 
attaches  to  it,  depends  on  the  fact  that  He  who  died  was  more  than  man,  and  that 
He  was  more  than  man  was  made  clear  to  the  world  by  His  resurrection.  As 
St.  Paul  tells  the  Romans,  He  was  powerfully  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  in 
respect  of  His  holy  and  Divine  nature  by  His  resurrection  from  the  dead.    If  He 

HAD  BOTTKD  IN   HiS  OBAVE,  WHAT  MUST  WE   HAVE   THOUOHT  OF  HiS  CHABACTSB  AB  A 

BELiaious  TEACHER?  He  Said  a  great  deal  about  Himself  which  is  inconsistent  with 
truthfulness  and  modesty  in  a  mere  man.  He  told  ns  men  to  love  Him,  to  trust  Him, 
to  believe  in  Him,  to  believe  that  He  was  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,  to  believe 
that  He  was  in  God  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  Him,  to  believe  that  one  day  He 
would  be  seen  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven. 
What  should  we  think  of  language  of  this  kind  in  the  mouth  of  the  veiy  best  man 
whom  we  have  ever  known  ?  What  should  we  think  of  it  in  our  Lord  Himself,  if 
He  was,  after  all,  not  merely,  as  He  was,  one  of  ourselves,  but  also,  nothing  more  ? 
He  proved  that  He  had  a  right  to  use  this  language  when,  after  dying  on  the 
cross,  at  His  own  appointed  time  He  rose  from  the  dead.  Bat  it  is  His  resor* 
rection  which  enables  as  to  think  that  He  could  speak  thus  without  being 
intolerably  conceited  or  profane.  Faith  in  the  resurrection  is  the  very  key-stone 
of  the  arch  of  Christian  faith,  and,  when  it  is  removed,  all  must  inevitably  crumble 
into  ruin.  The  idea  that  the  spiritual  teaching,  that  the  lofty  moral  character  of 
our  Lord,  will  survive  faith  in  His  resurrection,  is  one  of  those  phantoms  to  which 
men  cling  when  they  are  themselves,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  losing  faith,  and 
have  not  yet  thought  out  the  consequences  of  the  loss.  St.  Paul  knew  what  he  was 
doing,  when  he  made  Christianity  answer  with  its  life  for  the  truth  of  the  resurrec- 
tion (1  Cor.  XV.  14).  {Ibid.)  Christ*s  resurrection  the  ChristiatCt  hope: — Christ  is 
risen.  O  how  do  those  words  change  tne  wnoie  aspeci  ui  liuiimil  liie  I  The  sun- 
light that  gleams  forth  after  the  world  has  been  drenched,  and  dashed,  and  terrified 
with  the  black  thunder-drops,  reawakening  the  song  of  birds  and  reilluminating  the 
bloom  of  the  folded  flowers,  does  not  more  gloriously  transfigure  the  landscape 
than  these  words  transfigure  the  life  of  man.  Nothing  short  of  this  could  be  our 
pledge  and  proof  that  we  also  shall  arise.  We  are  not  left  to  dim  intimations  of  it 
from  the  reminiscences  of  childhood;  vague  hopes  of  it  in  exalted  moments; 
splendid  guesses  of  it  in  ancient  pages  ;  faint  analogies  of  it  from  the  dawn  of  day, 
and  the  renovation  of  spring,  and  the  quickened  grain,  and  the  butterfly  shaking 
itself  free  of  the  enclosing  chrysalis  to  wave  its  wings  in  the  glories  of  summer 
light :  all  this  might  create  a  longing,  the  sense  of  some  far-off  possibility  in  a  few 
chosen  souls,  but  not  for  all  the  weary  and  suffering  sons  of  humanity  a  permanent 
and  ennobling  conviction,  a  sure  and  certain  hope.  But  Christ  is  risen,  and  we 
have  it  now ;  a  thought  to  comfort  us  in  the  gloom  of  adversity,  a  belief  to 
raise  us  into  the  high  privilege  of  sons  of  Ood.  They  that  are  fallen  asleep  in 
Christ  are  not  perished.  Look  into  the  Saviour's  empty  and  angel-haunted  tomb ; 
He  hath  burst  for  us  the  bonds  of  the  prison-house ;  He  hath  shattered  at  a  touch 
the  iron  bars  and  brazen  gates ;  He  hath  rifled  the  house  of  the  spoiler,  and  torn 
away  the  serpent's  sting  ;  "  He  is  risen ;  He  is  not  here."  They  that  sleep  in  all 
those  narrow  graves  shall  wake  again,  shall  rise  again.  In  innumerable  myriads 
from  the  earth,  and  from  the  river,  and  from  the  rolling  waves  of  the  mighty  sea,  shall 
they  start  up  at  the  sounding  of  that  angel-trumpet ;  from  peaceful  ohurch-yards, 
from  bloody  battle-fields,  from  the  catacomb  and  from  the  pyramid,  from  the 
marble  monument  and  the  mountain-cave,  great  and  small,  saint  and  prophet  and 
apostle,  and  thronging  multitudes  of  unknown  martyrs  and  onre^nurded  heroes,  ia 
every  age  and  every  dimate,  on  whose  forehead  was  the  Lamb's  seal — they  shall 
oome  loflh  from  thiB  power  of  death  and  helL    This  ia  the  Clhrislian*s  hope,  and 


:vi.]  BT.  MARK.  705 

thus  m  not  only  triumph  over  the  enemy,  but  profit  by  him,  wringing  out  of  his 
curse  a  blessing,  out  of  his  prison  a  ooronation  and  a  home.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.) 
ChruVs  resurrection: — Christ  is  the  resurrection ;  therefore  its  source  and  spring, 
its  author  and  finisher,  in  a  sense  in  which  no  other  can  be.  When  He  emerged 
from  the  tomb  on  the  morning  of  the  world's  great  Sabbath,  He  brought  life  and 
immortality  with  Him,  by  which  the  pearls  of  the  deep  sea,  before  awaiting  the 
plunge  of  the  diver,  the  treasures,  before  lying  in  the  dark  mine,  were  by  Him  seized 
and  brought  up  to  the  light  of  day.  Life  and  immortality  were  brought  to  light  by 
the  gospel,  and  with  this  knowledge  in  our  minds,  we  seem  to  stand  by  the  Saviour's 
broken  sepulchre,  just  as  a  man  stands  upon  the  shelving  brink  of  the  precipice 
from  which  some  friendly  hand  has  snatched  him,  shuddering  as  he  thinks  of  the 
awful  death  that  he  has  only  just  escaped.  Look,  and  see  the  place  where  the 
Lord  lay,  and  tremble — but  rejoice  with  trembling.  Is  the  stone  there  yet  ?  If  it 
is,  if  the  stone  is  not  yet  rolled  away,  if  the  grave  clothes  and  spices  yet  shroud  and 
embalm  the  corpse,  then  let  the  darkness  come  and  blot  out^  the  sun,  and  bid  a 
long,  long  good-night  to  all  the  world's  hopes  of  life,  for  existence  is  a  feverish 
dream,  and  death  shall  be  its  ghastly  but  its  welcome  end.  "  But  now  u  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept."  (W.  M, 
Pumhon,D.D.)  The  triumph  of  good: — As  a  noble  sonata,  whose  melodies  are 
broken  with  pathetic  IfllliUffl'  UiTd  Cl&figmg  discords,  ends  in  a  burst  of  triumphant 
harmony,  so  the  story  of  the  life  of  Jesus,  beset  with  sins  and  piteous  with  sorrows, 
is  crowned  at  last  with  the  glory  of  His  exaltation.  (G.  M.  Southgate.)  TJie 
absent  corpse: — When  we  wander  through  a  graveyard  and  look  at  the  tombstones, 
or  go  into  the  church  and  examine  the  old  monuments,  we  see  one  heading  to  them 
all :  "  Hie  jacet,"  or  "  Here  lies."  Then  follows  the  name,  with  date  of  death,  and 
perhaps  some  praise  of  the  good  qualities  of  the  departed.  But  how  totally  different 
18  the  epitaph  on  the  tomb  of  Jesus  1  It  is  not  written  in  gold,  nor  cut  in  stone  ;  it 
is  spoken  by  the  month  of  an  angel,  and  it  is  the  exact  reverse  of  what  is  put  on  all 
other  tombs:  "He  is  not  here  I  "  (S.  Baring  Gould,  M.A.)  The  resurrection 
guarantees  success  to  Christianity: — During  the  years  that  followed  the  outbreak  of 
the  French  revolution,  and  the  revolt  against  Christianity  which  accompanied  it, 
there  was  an  extraordinary  activity  in  some  sections  of  French  society  directed  to 
projecting  a  religion  that  might,  it  was  hoped,  take  the  place  of  Christianity.  New 
philanthropic  enthusiasms,  new  speculative  enthusiasms,  were  quite  the  order  of  the 
day.  On  one  occasion  a  projector  of  one  of  these  schemes  came  to  Talleyrand, 
who,  yon  will  remember,  was  a  bishop  who  had  turned  sceptic,  and  so  had  devoted 
himself  to  politics ;  but  whatever  is  to  be  said  of  him,  he  was  possessed  in  a  very 
remarkable  degree  of  a  keen  perception  of  the  proportion  of  things,  and  of  what  is 
and  is  not  possible  in  this  human  world.  Well,  his  visitor  observed,  by  way  of 
complaint  to  Talleyrand,  how  hard  it  was  to  start  a  new  religion,  even  though  its 
tenets  and  its  efforts  were  obviously  directed  to  promoting  the  social  and  personal 
improvement  of  mankind.  "  Surely,"  said  Talleyrand,  with  a  fine  smile,  ••  surely 
it  cannot  be  so  difficult  as  yon  think."  **  How  so  ?  "  said  his  friend.  **  Why,"  he 
replied,  **  the  matter  is  simple ;  yon  have  only  to  get  yourself  crucified,  or  anvhow 
pat  to  death,  and  then,  at  your  own  time  to  rise  from  the  dead,  and  yoo  will  have 
no  difficulty.*'    (Canon  Liddon.) 

Ver.  7.  Tell  His  disdifles  and  Peter.    Love*s  triumph  over  sin : — Matthew,  who 
also  reports  the  angel's  words,  has  only  '*  teU  His  disciples."    Bfark  ^the  "  inter- 

Sreter"  of  Peter)  adds  words  which  mast  have  come  like  wine  ana  ofl  to  the 
raised  heart  of  the  denier,  "  and  Peter."  To  the  others,  it  was  of  less  importance 
that  his  name  should  have  been  named  then ;  to  him  it  was  life  from  the  dead  that 
he  should  have  been  singled  out  to  receive  a  word  of  forgiveness  and  a  summons  to 
meet  his  Lord;  as  if  He  had  said  through  His  angel  messenger,  "I  would  see 
them  aU,  bat  whoever  may  stay  behind,  let  not  him  be  wanting  to  our  glad  meeting 
again."  I.  Notice  the  loving  message  with  which  He  beckons  the  wahdsbeb 
BACK.  1.  A  revelation  of  love  stronger  than  death.  2^  A  revelation  of  a  love  that 
is  not  tamed  away  by  oar  sinful  changes.  Whilst  we  forget  Him,  He  remembers 
ns.  We  cannot  get  away  from  the  sweep  of  His  love,  wander  we  ever  so  far.  3. 
A  love  which  sends  a  special  message  because  of  special  sin.  The  depth  of  oni 
need  determines  Uie  strength  of  the  restorative  power  put  forth.  The  more  we 
have  sinned,  the  less  can  we  believe  in  Christ's  love ;  and  so,  the  more  we  have 
sinned,  the  more  marvellous  and  convincing  does  He  make  the  testimony  and 
operations  of  His  love  to  as.    4.  A  love  which  singles  oat  a  sinf al  man  by  nam* 

45 


fM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohav.  sn, 

Christ  deals  with  us  not  in  the  mass  but  soul  by  sool.  He  has  »  dear  individnali8> 
ing  knowledge  ol  each.  He  loves  every  single  sool  with  a  distinct  love.  He  calls 
to  thee  by  thy  name— as  truly  as  He  singled  out  Peter  here,  as  truly  as  when 
His  voice  from  heaven  said,  "  Saul,  SauL"  To  thee  forgiveness,  help,  purity,  life 
eternal  are  offered.  II.  The  sxobbt  MEBTn?o  between  Ghbist  and  Peteb 
(Luke  xxiv.  34  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  5).  This  is  the  second  stage  in  the  victorious  conflict  of 
Divine  love  with  human  sin.  What  tender  consideration  there  is  in  meeting  Peter 
alone,  before  seeing  him  in  the  company  of  others  I  How  painful  would  have  been 
the  rush  of  the  first  emotions  of  shame  awakened  by  Christ's  presence,  if  their 
course  had  been  checked  by  any  eye  but  His  own  beholding  them  1  The  act  of  faith 
is  the  meeting  of  the  soul  with  Christ  alone.  Do  you  know  anything  of  that 
personal  communion  7  Have  you,  your  own  very  self,  by  your  own  penitence  for 
your  own  sin,  and  your  own  thankful  faith  in  the  love  which  thereby  becomes  truly 
yours,  isolated  yourself  from  all  companionship,  and  joined  yourself  to  Christ  ? 
Then,  through  that  narrow  passage  where  we  can  only  walk  singly,  you  will  come 
into  a  large  place.  The  act  of  faith  which  separates  us  from  all  men,  unites  us 
for  the  first  time  in  real  brotherhood,  Heb.  xii.  22-24.  HI.  The  gradual  cube  o» 
THE  PABDONBD  APOSTLE  (Johu  xxi.  15-19).  **  Lovest  thou  Me  ?  '*  includes  every- 
thing. Hast  thou  learned  the  lesson  of  My  mercy  f  Hast  thou  responded  to  My 
love  ?  Then  thou  art  fit  for  My  work,  and  beginning  to  be  perfected.  So  the 
third  stage  in  the  triumph  of  Christ's  love  over  man's  sin  is  when  we,  beholding 
that  love  flowing  towards  us,  and  accepting  it  by  faith,  respond  to  it  with  our  own, 
and  are  able  to  say,  **  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee."  And  when  we  love,  we  can 
follow.  With  love  to  Christ  for  motive,  and  Christ  Himself  for  pattern,  and 
following  him  for  our  one  duty,  all  things  are  possible,  and  the  utter  defeat  of  sin 
in  us  is  but  a  question  of  time.  The  love  of  Christ,  received  into  the  heart, 
triumphs  gradually  but  surely  over  all  sin,  transforms  character,  turning  even  its 
weakness  into  strength,  and  so,  from  the  depths  of  transgression  and  very  gates  of 
hell,  raises  men  to  God.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  And  Peter  .-—I.  Tell  Peter, 
although  he  has  sinned  so  grievously.  It  was  heartless,  repeated,  public,  wilfuL 
II.  Tell  Peter,  for  he  has  wept.  God's  anger  against  His  children  ceases  with  the 
commencement  of  their  penitence.  HI.  Tell  Peter,  for  he  has  suffered.  His 
thoughts  were  God's  chastening  rod.  IV.  Tell  Peter  he  is  dear  to  Christ.  Sin  can 
grieve  Christ,  cause  Him  to  withdraw,  wound  and  disfigure  us ;  but  it  cannot  alter 
His  love.  V.  Tell  Peter,  for  he  is  your  brother.  They  had  sinned.  Have  not  we 
denied  our  Lord  ?  {Stems  and  Ttoigs.)  The  news  of  Christ* s  resurrection  sent  to 
Peter : — ^No  action  of  Christ's  life  is  without  importance  and  significance.  I.  To 
WHOM  WAS  THIS  MESSAGE  PABTicuiiABLT  SENT  ?  To  Peter,  who  was  then  distinguished 
from  the  other  disciples,  not  in  merit,  but  in  guilt.  He  was  not  thus  honoured, 
however,  because  of  his  guilt,  but  because  he  was  now  penitent  and  sorrowful.  It 
was  not  his  cursing  and  oaths  which  brought  this  mercy  to  him,  but  his  penitence 
and  tears.  There  is  no  comfort  here  for  the  hardened  or  careless  sinner,  or  for  the 
self-righteous,  or  for  the  man  who,  in  the  midst  of  his  iniquity,  feels  no  self- 
abhorrence,  no  deep  contrition,  for  his  guilt.  But  for  the  broken-hearted  sinner, 
there  is  the  sweetest  comfort.  II.  The  gbacious  Being  who  sent  this  message. 
1.  Christ  had  just  the  same  compassionate  heart  after  His  resurrection  that  he  had 
before  it.  Death  changed  the  nature  of  His  body,  but  not  the  nature  of  His  heart 
or  the  disposition  of  His  soul.  He  still  looks  on  those  who  seek  Him,  with  the 
same  tenderness,  sympathy,  and  love.  2.  The  risen  Jesus  looks  more  on  the 
graces  than  on  the  sins  of  the  penitent  Christian.  He  seems  to  have  thought 
more  of  Peter's  sorrow  than  of  his  curses,  more  of  his  tears  than  of  his  oaths. 
He  sees  so  much  of  the  desparate  wickedness  of  our  hearts,  as  to  make  Him  con- 
template with  pleasure  the  least  good  His  grace  enables  us  to  bring  forth.  Who 
would  not  value  a  flower  which  he  should  find  blooming  on  a  rock,  or  throwing  iti 
fragrance  over  the  sands  of  a  desert  ?  Not  that  in  giving  His  grace  and  pardon. 
He  overlooks  the  sin ;  to  Peter's  everlasting  shame  the  treachery  which  he  com- 
mitted is  recorded  against  him  in  God's  Holy  Word.  The  sin  is  forgiven,  but  the 
remembrance  and  shame  of  it  still  remain.  3.  Christ  sometimes  vouchsafes  to  the 
believer,  when  bowed  down  with  extraordinary  sorrow,  more  than  ordinary  comfort. 
It  is  not  a  light  thing  that  will  quiet  the  conscience  of  the  Christian,  after  he  has 
been  overcome  by  temptation.  The  storm  which  sin  occasions  in  hiis  soul,  cannot 
easily  be  soothed  into  a  calm.  The  mourning  Christian  needs  Bome  special  in^< 
position  of  grace  and  mercy,  before  he  can  again  cherish  in  his  heart  a  hope  of 
pardon  and  acoeptauce.    In  the  mysterious  riches  of  His  goodness,  the  Lord  some- 


CHAP.  XVl^l 


ST.  MARK.  707 


times  vouchsafes  to  His  Saints,  in  these  seasons,  peculiar  consolations.  He  recalls 
their  soul  "  tossed  with  tempest  and  not  comforted,"  from  the  contemplation  of 
its  own  depravity,  and  tells  it  to  look  again  with  the  eye  of  faith  on  the  cross  of 
His  Son,  4  The  contrite  sinner  may  draw  much  comfort  and  hope  from  Chnst  • 
resurrection*  What  a  ground  for  rejoicing  have  we  in  the  fact  that  "  Christ  is 
risen  1*'  Let  ns  seek  to  know  the  power  of  His  resurrection.  IH.  Thb  mbssekobm 
EMPLOYED.  1.  An  angel.  Why?  (1)  To  do  honour  to  Christ.  (2)  To  teach  us, 
that  the  breach  between  ns  and  the  angels  is  healed.  They  agam  regard  us  ai 
friends  and  love  us  as  brethren.  They  are  made  our  ministering  servants,  and  do 
not  disdain  the  office.  (3)  The  contrite  sinner  is  peculiarly  an  object  of  love  to 
the  heavenly  hosts.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  has  compassion  on  the  weepmg  Peter, 
and  rejoices  to  take  to  him  a  cup  of  consolation.  What  a  lesson  for  mimstere, 
what  a  lesson  for  every  Christian,  is  here  1  It  is  a  heavenly  work  to  eomf ort  tiie 
sorrowful.  2.  Three  poor  women  receive  the  message  from  thelips  of  thii 
heavenly  herald,  and  carry  it  to  the  mourning  penitent.  Why?  They  had  been 
first  in  love,  affection,  service ;  it  was  but  right  that  they  should  be  first  in  honour 
and  reward.  And  note  the  manner  in  which  these  women  were  sent  ^ "Go 
quickly"  (Matt,  xxviii.  7).  Why  such  haste?  There  was  nothmg  sinful  in  the 
feelings  which  a  view  of  their  Lord's  tomb  was  likely  to  excite ;  but  they  were  not 
suffered  to  stay  there  to  indulge  them,  that  we  might  be  taught  that  pious  feeling 
must  lead  to  pious  actions.  It  is  good  and  sweet  to  think  of  Chnst ;  but  it  ii 
better  to  act  for  Christ.  He  is  the  best  servant,  not  who  dehghts  to  stand  m  his 
master's  presence,  but  who  carefully  minds  and  diUgently  goes  about  his  nciaster  s 
business.  (Charles  Bradley,  M.A.)  Women  as  amh(Uisador$:--The  faculties  and 
abiUties  of  the  soul  appear  both  in  affairs  of  state  and  in  ecclesiastical  affairs ;  m 
matters  of  government  and  in  matters  of  religion ;  and  in  neither  of  these  are  we 
without  examples  of  able  women.  For,  for  state  affairs,  and  matters  of  govern- 
ment,  our  age  hath  given  us  such  a  queen,  as  scarce  any  former  king  hathequaUed. 
And  in  the  Venetian  story,  I  remember,  that  certain  matrons  of  that  city  were  sent 
by  commission,  in  quahty  of  ambassadors,  to  an  empress  with  whom  that  state 
had  occasion  to  treat.  And  in  the  stories  of  the  eastern  parts  of  the  world,  it  is 
said  to  be  in  ordinary  practice  to  send  women  for  ambassadors.  And  then  m 
matters  of  reUgion,  women  have  always  had  a  great  hand,  though  sometimes  on  the 
left  as  well  as  on  the  right  hand.    {John  Donne,  D.D.)        Reasons  for  the  meeting 


to  go  there?  At  Jerusalem  He  was  crucified,  at  Jerusalem  He  rose,  at  Jerusalem 
He  ascended;  Jerusalem  was  the  place  of  all  honour;  why  then  should  He  be  so 
careful  to  go  down  to  that  northern  province  ?  Many  reasons  doubtless  there  were 
of  which  I  know  nothing ;  but  I  think  we  may  be  permitted  to  see  some  of  them- 
1  One  might  He  in  that  very  fact  of  the  distance  and  the  difficulty.  For  it  is  a 
uiiiversal  law  that  God  always  requires  efforts,  and  always  blesses  the  efforts  He 
requires.  You  wiU  not  find  your  best  privileges  close  to  your  hand.  You  must 
be  content  to  go  far  for  them.  You  must  exercise  self-denial  and  labour 
to  get  at  them.  2.  There  is  no  doubt  also  that  Jesus  did  it  partly  because 
Galilee  was  despised.  He  had  lived  in  Galilee  as  a  chJd  and  youth;  He 
had  taken  most  of  His  apostles  from  thence;  and  now  that  He  was  nsen  and 
almost  glorified,  He  was  not  going  to  pass  by  the  plaxje  He  loved  m  li;^°ij;l^^^^ 
That  would  not  be  the  Jesus  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  3.  Underlymg  this  feehng 
there  can  be  little  question  that  there  was  a  great  principle  upon  which  Chnst 
acted,— of  extending  the  proofs  of  His  resurrection  as  widely  as  possible.  ^  There- 
fore  He  manifested  His  risen  body  in  the  two  extremes  of  the  land  to  which  that 
dispensation  was  confined.  4.  Christ  was  trae  to  aU  the  finer  sympathies  of  our 
nature,  and  amongst  those  sympathies  is  the  love  of  old,  and  especiaUy  early, 
asiciations.    {JaLi  Vaughai  MA.)        Mary  of  Magdala  .—She  was-L  A  obeat 


SUTFEBEB  HEALED  BY  ChRIST.      II.   A  OBATETOL  MINISTBAKT   TO  ChBIST    (LukO   Till. 

2,  8;  Mark  xv.  41).  HI.  A  faithful  adherent  to  Chmst.  IV.  A  binceb. 
MODBNEB  FOB  Chbist  (Comp.  Matt,  xxvii.  61 ;  Mark  xv.  47  ;  John  xx.  1,  2,  11-18). 
V.  An  honoubbd  mesbbnobb  of  Chbist  (John  xx.  17,  18;  ob.  xtu  lOJ.  (£.  a 
Dickson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  9.  Now  when  Jeros  was  rism.—Evidemse  of  the  fact  of  Christ'i  resurrection  .— 
The  empty  tomb  of  Jesus  recalls  an  event  which  is  as  weU  attested  as  any  ib 


708  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ifB. 

history.  It  is  so  attested  as  to  put  the  idea  of  what  is  called  "  illusion  "  ont  of  th» 
question.  The  main  purpose,  the  first  duty,  of  the  apostolic  ministry  was  to 
witness  to  the  fact  that  Christ  had  risen.  The  apostles  did  not  teach  the  resorreO' 
tion  as  a  revealed  truth,  as  they  taught,  e.g.t  the  doctrine  of  justification ;  they 
taught  the  resurrection  as  a  fact  of  experience— a  fact  of  which  they  themselves 
had  had  experience.  And  this  is  why  the  different  evangelists  do  not  report  the 
same  appearances  of  our  risen  Lord.  Each  one  reports  that  which  he  himself 
witnessed,  or  that  which  was  witnessed  oy  the  eye-witness  on  wnose  authority  he 
writes.  Put  the  various  attestations  together,  and  the  evidence  is  irresistible. 
That  which  these  witnesses  attest  must  be  true,  unless  they  have  conspired  to 
deceive  us,  or  are  themselves  deceived.  The  idea  that  they  are  deceived,  however, 
cannot  be  entertained  by  any  man  who  understands  human  character;  the  idea 
that  they  were  themselves  deceived  is  inconsistent  with  the  character  of  the  witness 
which  they  give.  No  doubt  there  are  states  of  hallucination,  states  of  mental 
tension,  in  which  a  man  may  fancy  that  he  sees  something  which  does  not  in  fact 
present  itself  to  his  senses.  The  imagination  for  the  moment  is  so  energetic  as  to 
impose  upon  the  senses  an  impression  which  corresponds  to  that,  whatever  it  be, 
which  creates  an  emotion  within  the  soul.  Nay  more,  the  New  Testament  itself 
speaks  of  inward  revelations,  sometimes  during  sleep,  sometimes  during  the 
waking  hours,  as  was  that  rapture  of  which  St.  Paul  wrote,  into  *♦  the  third 
heaven,  whether  in  the  body  I  cannot  tell,  or  whether  out  of  the  body  I  cannot  tell 
— God  knoweth."  But  the  accounts  of  the  appearances  of  our  risen  Lord  do  not 
at  all  admit  of  either  of  these  explanations.  If  He  had  been  seen  only  for  a 
passing  moment,  only  by  one  or  two  individuals  separately,  only  in  one  set  of 
circumstances,  under  one  set  of  conditions  again  and  again  repeated,  then  there 
would  have  been  room  for  the  suspicion  of  a  morbid  hallucination,  or  at  least  of  an 
inward  vision.  But  what  is  the  real  state  of  the  case  ?  The  risen  One  was  seen 
five  times  on  the  day  that  He  was  raised  from  the  dead ;  He  was  seen  a  week  after ; 
He  was  seen  more  than  a  month  after  that ;  and  frequently,  on  many  occasions, 
during  the  interval ;  He  was  seen  by  women  alone,  by  men  alone,  by  parties  of  two 
and  three,  by  disciples  assembled  in  conclave,  by  multitudes  of  men,  five  hundred 
at  a  time ;  He  was  seen  in  a  garden,  in  a  public  roadway,  in  an  upper  chamber,  on 
a  mountain  in  Galilee,  on  the  shore  by  the  lake,  in  the  village  where  His  friends 
dwelt.  He  taught  as  before  His  death,  He  instructed.  He  encouraged.  He  reproved. 
He  blessed,  He  uttered  prolonged  discourses  which  were  remembered,  which  were 
recorded ;  He  explained  passages  of  Scripture,  He  revealed  great  doctrines.  He  gave 
emphatic  commands.  He  made  large  and  new  promises.  He  communicated 
ministerial  powers  ;  and  they  who  pressed  around  Him  knew  that  His  risen  body 
was  no  phantom  form,  for  He  ate  and  drank  before  them  just  as  in  the  days  of 
yore,  and  they  could,  if  they  would,  have  pressed  their  very  fingers  into  the  fresh 
wounds  in  His  hands  and  feet  and  side.  In  short,  He  left  on  a  group  of  minds, 
most  unlike  each  other,  one  profound  ineffaceable  impression,  that  they  had  seen 
and  lived  with  One  who  had  died  indeed  and  had  risen  again,  and  that  this  fact 
was  in  itself  and  in  its  import  so  precious,  so  pregnant  with  meaning  and  with 
blessing  to  the  human  race,  that  it  threw  in  their  minds  all  other  facts  int9 
relative  insignificance  ;  it  was  worth  living  for,  it  was  worth  dying  for.  {Carunt 
Liddon.)  He  appeared  first  to  Mary  Magdalene  : — The  Saviour's  first  appearance 
after  resurrection  was  to  a  woman.  For  all  He  had  died.  But  not  to  an  assembled 
world  does  He  manifest  Himself  now  that  He  has  risen  victorious  o'er  the  grave ; 
not  to  angels,  or  apostles;  not  to  the  faithful  Joseph,  or  the  true-hearted 
Nicodemus ;  but  to  a  woman  1  I.  The  chabacteb  of  the  person  to  whom  Chbubx 
APPEABED.  A  woman,  and  an  inhabitant  of  a  distant  and  unimportant  town 
bordering  towards  the  Gentile  frontier,  who  had  been  possessed  of  demons,  until 
Christ  reached  forth  to  her  the  hand  of  pity.  II.  The  circumstancbs  undeb  WHJ£ii 
He  APPEABED  TO  HEB.  He  Called  her  by  her  name.  III.  The  obakd  truth  hxbk 
ILLUSTRATED.  1.  It  was  uot  a  mere  chance  encounter.  Christ  having  already  left 
the  tomb,  must  have  purposely  concealed  Himself  from  all  His  disciples  save  lh«« 
one  whom  He  wanted  to  see  and  comfort.  3.  Jesus  revealed  Himself  to  her, 
unaccompanied  by  any.  No  angel  hosts :  Christ  was  *'  all  in  all."  8.  Th« 
manifestation  was  afforded  in  a  garden  to  a  woman.  Eden  :  Eve.  {George  Venablet ) 
The  power  of  the  gospel  to  restore  the  fallen: — The  free  grace  of  the  gospel,  and  the 
holiness  it  produces,  distinguish  it  from  every  other  system.  It  both  justifies  and 
sanctifies.  In  its  method  of  justifying,  it  gives  glory  to  God,  and  brings  peaee  to 
In  its  method  of  sanctifying,  it  displays  the  fulness  of  grace,  and  deliyen 


xfi.]  8T,  MARK,  909 

from  the  power  of  Satan.    L  Thosi  who  am  most  ursbb  Satakio  ufTLUENCE,  abe 
TBT  wiTHXM  THH  BEACH  OF  THE  008PKL.     1.  The  power  of   evil  Spirits  would  be 
exerted  over  both  body  and  soul,  if  they  were  not  restrained  by  a  greater  power. 
As  it  is,  Satan  blinds  the  mind ;  works  powerfully  in  the  hearts  of  the  children  of 
disobedience ;  puts  it  into  men's  hearts  to  betray  the  best  of  Masters,  apd  to  lie 
against  the  best  Friend.    All  sins,  whether  against  God  or  against  men,  are  com- 
mitted in  consequence  of  his  temptation.    2.  No  power  can  counteract  this  evil 
influence  but  that  which  is  Divine.     In  heathen  countries  Satan  reigns  uncon- 
trolled ;  in  Christian  countries  his  devices  are  revealed,  all  his  malice  is  baffled,  his 
kingdom  is  overthrown.    8.  The  gospel  not  merely  delivers  men  from  Satanic 
influence,  but  exalts  men  into  the  most  holy  characters.     IL  Th«  gospel  can 
EFFECT  THE  REFORMATION  OF  THE  MOST  ABANDONED.     No  soonor  was  Mary  Magdalene 
dispossessed,  than  she  devotes  herself  to  the  service  of  her  Lord.     So  with  all  who 
heartily  embrace  Christ's  religion.     The  power  of   sin  in  them  is  destroyed,  the 
influence  of  Satan  is  dissolved,  and  they  become  willing  captives  of  Christ's  love. 
Justin  Martyr,  in  one  of  his  apologies,  says,  "  O  Emperor ;  we,  who  were  formerly 
adulterers,  are  now  chaste;  we,  who  used  magic  charms,  now  depend  on  the 
immortal  God ;  we,  who  loved  money,  now  cheerfully  contribute  to  the  wants  of 
all ;  we,  who  would  not  sit  down  with  those  who  were  not  of  the  same  tribe  with 
OS,  now  cheerfully  sit  among  and  pray  for  the  conversion  of  them  that  hate  us,  and 
persuade  them  to  live  according  to  the  excellent  precepts  of  Christ."     1.  Let 
us  learn  how  admirably  the  gospel  is  adapted  to  the  present  state  of  human 
natura     It  finds  us  gmlty,  and  reveals  to  us  the  sovereign  mercy  of   God  in 
Christ.    It  subdues  the  corrupt  heart;   turns  men  from  darkness  to  light,  Ac. 
2.  See  what  ground  this  affords  for  exertion,  even  in  the  most  desperate  cases. 
(W.  Marshy  M.A.)        Jesu$  appearing  to  Mary  Magdalene: — I.  Who  she  was*. 
Christ  revealed  Himself   first  to  a  woman.    A  woman  out  of  whom  He  had 
cast  seven  devils.     She  had  been  a  special  trophy  of  Christ's  delivering  power. 
In  her  mighty  grace  had  proved  its  power.    She  had  become  a  constant  attendant 
on  the  Saviour.     She  spent  her    substance  in  relieving  His  wants.     II.  How 
SHS    SOUGHT.    Very    early  in  the  morning.    With    very   great    boldness.    Very 
faithfully :  stood  at  sepulchre.    Very  earnestly — weeping.     Perseveringly.    Sought 
Christ  only.    There  was    much  ignorance,  very   little   faith,  but   much    love. 
lU.  How  SHE  FOUND  HiM.    Jesus  Christ  was  discovered  to  her  by  a  word.    Her 
heart  owned  allegiance  by  another  word.    Her  next  impulse  was  to  seek  close 
fellowship.     She    then    entered    on    His    service.     (C.    H,    Spurgean.)        Mary 
Magdalene : — I.  A  melancholy  instance  of  Satanic  power.     H.  A  glorious  trophy 
of  Divine  grace.    The  cure  was  unsought  by  her.     Mary  resisted  the  healing  hand. 
She  wud  nealed  by  a  word.     She  was  healed  instantaneously.    lU.  An  ardent 
follower  of  Christ.    IV.  A  faithful  adherent  to  her  Master  under  all  trial.     V.  One 
of  the  most  favoured  beholders  of  Christ.    VI.  An  honoured  messenger  of  Christ 
to  the  apostles.    {Ibid.^        Woman  first : — Was  it  not  most  meet  that  a  woman 
should  first  see  the  risen  Saviour.      She  was    first  in   the   transgression,  let 
her  be  first  in  tne  justification.      In  yon  garden  she  was  first  to  work  our  woe  ; 
let  her  in  that  other  garden  be  the  first  to  see  Him  who  works  our  weal.     She 
takes  the  apple  of  that  bitter  tree  which  brings  us  ail  our  sorrow;  let  her  be 
the  first  to  see  the  Mighty  Gardener,  who  has  planted  a  tree  which  brings 
forth    fruit    onto    everlasting    life.      (Ibid.)         Magdalene: — Mary    Magdalene 
represents  those  who  have  come  under  the  tormenting  and  distracting  power 
of    Satan,  and  whose  lamp  of  joy  is  quenched  in  tenfold    night.     They  are 
imprisoned  not  so  much  in  the  dens  of  sin  as  in  the  dungeons  of  sorrow ;  not 
so  criminal    as    they  are    wretched ;    not    so    depraved    as    thoy  are    desolate. 
(Ibid.)         Demented: — Persons    possessed    with    devils    were    unhappy;     they 
found  the  gloom  of    the  sepulchre  to  be  their  most  congenial  resort.      They 
were  unsocial  and   solitary.      If  they  were  permitted,   they  broke    away  from 
all  those  dear  associations  of  the  family  circle  which  gave  half    the  charms 
to  life ;  they  delighted  to  wander  in  dry  places,  seeking  rest  and  finding  none ; 
they  were  pictures  of  misery,  images  of  woe.     Such  was  the  seven-times  unhappy 
Magdalene,  for  into  her  there  had  entered  a  complete  band  of  devils.     She  was 
overwhelmed  with  seven  seas  of  agony,  loaded  with  seven  manacles  of  despair, 
encircled  with  seven  walls  of   fire.     Neither  day  nor   night  afforded   her  rest, 
her  brain  was  on  fire,  and  her  soul  foamed  like  a  boiling  cauldron.     (Ibid.) 
Demented : — To  sum  up  much  in  few  words,  there  is  no  doubt  that  Mary  Magdalene 
would  have  been  consivioiva  by       lo  be  ueiuenweu ,  ^no  vtaj,  practically,  a  maniac 


7l#  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha». 


Bauon  was  onshippeoU  and  Satan  stood  at  the  helm  instead  of  reason,  and  the 
poor  barqae  was  harried  hither  and  thither  under  the  gaidanoe  of  demons.  {Ibid,) 
A  modern  iUtutration: — I  remember  a  man  of  excellent  character,  well-beloved  by 
hii  family  and  esteemed  by  his  neighboors,  who  was  for  twenty  years  enveloped  in 
unutterable  gloom.  He  ceased  to  attend  the  house  of  Qod,  because  he  said  it  was 
no  use ;  and  although  always  ready  to  help  in  every  good  work,  yet  he  had  an 
abiding  conviction  upon  him  that,  personally,  he  had  no  part  nor  lot  in  this 
matter,  and  never  could  have.  The  more  you  talked  to  him  the  worse  he  became ; 
even  prayer  seemed  but  to  excite  him  to  more  fearful  despondency.  In  the 
providence  of  God,  I  was  called  to  preach  the  Word  in  his  neighbourhood ;  he  was 
induced  to  attend,  and,  by  God's  gracious  power,  under  the  sermon  he  obtained  a 
joyful  liberty.  After  twenty  years  of  anguish  and  unrest,  he  ended  his  weary 
roamings  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  to  the  amazement  of  his  neighbours,  the 
joy  of  his  friends,  and  to  the  glory  of  God.  {Ibid.)  Hope  for  the  worst:-' 
Until  the  gate  of  hell  is  shut  upon  a  man,  we  must  not  cease  to  pray  for  him ; 
and  If  we  see  him  hugging  the  very  door-posts  of  damnation,  we  must  go  to  the 
mercy-seat  and  beseech  the  arm  of  grace  to  pluck  him  from  his  dangerous  position. 
The  case  of  Mary  Magdalene  is  a  looking-glass  in  which  many  souls,  wrung  with 
anguish,  may  see  themselves.    {Ibid,) 

Vers.  10, 11.  And  she  went  and  told  the/m.—A  sadinterior  and  a  cheery  messenger  .'-^ 
Mark  is  graphic :  be  paints  an  interior  like  a  Dutch  artist.  We  see  a  choice  company 
•♦  Them  that  had  been  with  Him."  We  know  many  of  the  individuals,  and  are  in- 
terested to  note  what  they  are  doing,  and  how  they  bear  their  bereavement.  We  see 
—  I.  A  soBBOWiNo  ASSEMBLY.  "  As  they  mourned  and  wept."  What  a  scene  1  We  be- 
hold a  common  mourning,  abundantly  expressed  by  tears  and  lamentations.  They 
mourned— 1.  Because  they  had  believed  in  Jesus,  and  loved  Him  ;  and  therefore 
they  were  concerned  at  what  had  happened.  2.  Because  they  felt  their  great  loss 
in  losing  Him.  8.  Because  they  had  seen  His  sufferings  and  death.  4.  Because 
they  remembered  their  ill-conduct  towards  Him.  6.  Because  their  hopes  concern- 
ing Him  were  disappointed.  6.  Because  they  were  utterly  bewildered  as  to  what 
was  now  to  be  done,  seeing  their  Leader  was  gone.  U.  A  consoling  msssbnosb.  1. 
Mary  Magdalene  was  one  of  themselves.  2.  She  came  with  the  best  of  news.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  (o)  removes  the  cause  of  sorrow  ;  (6)  assures  of  the  help  of  a 
living  Redeemer  ;  (c)  secures  personal  resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.  23) ;  (d)  brings  per- 
sonal justification  {Rom.  iv.  25).  3.  She  was  not  believed,  (o)  Unbelief  is  apt  to 
become  chronic  :  they  had  not  believed  the  Lord  when  He  foretold  His  own  resur- 
rection, and  so  tiiey  do  not  believe  an  eye-witness  who  reported  it.  {b)  Unbelief  is 
cruelly  unjust :  they  made  Mary  Magdalene  a  liar,  and  yet  all  of  them  esteemed 
her.  HI.  A  BEASsuBma  beflection.  1.  We  are  not  the  only  persons  who  have 
mourned  an  absent  Lord.  2.  We  are  not  the  only  messengers  who  have  been 
rejected.  3.  We  are  sure  beyond  all  doubt  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  (a)  The 
evidence  is  more  abundant  than  that  which  testifies  to  any  other  great  historical 
event,  {b)  The  apostles  so  believed  it  as  to  die  as  witnesses  of  it.  (e)  They  were 
very  slow  to  be  convinced,  and  therefore  that  which  forced  them  to  believe  should 
have  the  same  effect  on  us.  4.  Great  reason,  then,  for  us  to  rejoice.  {C.  H, 
Spurgeon.)  Unnecessary  grief: — A  sorrow  is  none  the  less  sharp  because  it  is 
founded  upon  a  mistake.  Jacob  mourned  very  bitterly  for  Joseph,  though  his 
darhng  was  not  torn  in  pieces,  but  on  the  way  to  be  lord  over  all  Egypt.  Yet  while 
there  is  of  necessity  so  much  well-founded  sorrow  in  the  world,  it  is  a  pity  that  one 
unnecessary  pang  should  be  endured,  and  endured  by  those  who  have  the  best 
possible  grounds  for  joy.  The  case  in  the  text  before  us  is  a  typical  one.  Thousands 
are  at  this  day  mourning  and  weeping  who  ought  to  be  rejoicing.  Oh,  the  mass  of 
needless  grief  I  Unbelief  works  for  the  father  of  lies  in  this  matter,  and  works 
misery  out  of  falsehood  among  those  who  are  not  in  truth  children  of  sadness  but 
heirs  of  light  and  joy.  Rise,  faith,  and  with  thy  light  chase  away  this  darkness  I 
And  if  ever  thou  must  have  thy  lamp  trimmed  by  a  humble  Mary,  do  not  despise 
her  kindly  aid.  Transient  unbelief : — **  Is  it  always  foggy  here  ?  "  inquired  a 
lady  passenger  of  a  Cunard  steamer's  captain,  when  they  were  groping  their  way 
across  the  Banks  of  Newfoundland.  "How  should  I  know?  "  replied  the  captain, 
gruffly  ;  "  I  do  not  live  here."  But  there  are  some  of  Christ's  professed  followers 
who  do  manage  to  live  in  the  chilling  regions  of  spiriftoal  fog  lor  »  gfMl  part  ol 
their  unhappy  Uvea.    (Cuyler.) 


xn.]  8T,  MARK.  711 

Ver.  12.  liter  that  Ha  appeared  In  another  form.— T^  changing  form  of  the 
unchanging  Saviour  : — I.  Ghbist  has  a  roBM.  Eliphaz  said  (Job  iv.  15, 16).  Not 
thus  is  the  Lord  Jesus  presented  to  us  in  the  New  Testament.  Throaghoat  Hia 
earthly  life  He  appears,  not  in  uncertain  and  wavering  lines,  bnt  in  all  the  distinct- 
ness and  power  of  a  human  personality.  And  during  the  forty  days  it  is  the  same. 
The  corporeity  of  the  Eedeemer  is  glorified,  but  it  is  still  the  **  man  Christ  Jesus  " 
with  all  His  individual  characteristics.  In  car  day  strong  endeavours  are  being 
made  to  get  rid  of  the  **  form  '*  of  Christ ;  to  substitute  what  is  vague  and  visionary 
for  the  definite  and  palpable  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  The  prophet  says,  "  The  heart 
is  deoeitfol."  Half  this,  it  seems,  is  true;  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things, 
and  desperately  good,  for  modern  introspection  has  found  in  it  a  Messiah,  a  Church, 
and  a  Bible.  Let  us  enter  our  protest  against  these  endeavours  to  reject  a  sub< 
stantive  religion.  1.  We  have  those  who  reject  the  historical  Christ  on  behalf  of  a 
mystical  Christ.  Spiritual  men,  we  are  told,  attain  positions  which  render  historical 
saviours  redundancies.  They  find  a  diviner  Christ  in  their  heart.  But,  my 
brethren,  can  we  forego  the  Christ  who  is  painted  with  such  severe  realism  in  the 
New  Testament  for  that  idealistic  Christ  whom  men  assume  to  find  in  their  own 
heart  ?  Must  we  vaporize  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels  into  that  formless,  bloodless 
Christ  known  in  certain  quarters  as  the  inward,  the  spiritual,  the  eternal  Christ  ? 
Surely  not.  If  we  reject  the  historic  Christ  we  shall  soon  have  no  Christ  at  all,  for 
the  Christ  we  find  in  our  heart  is  simply  the  reflection  of  the  historic  Christ.  What 
Christ  did  Morison  find  in  the  heart  of  the  Chinese  ?  or  Carey  in  the  heart  of  the 
Hindoo?  or  John  Hunt  in  the  heart  of  the  Fijian?  A  very  equivocal  Christ,  surely  1 
2.  We  have  those  who  reject  the  visible  Church  for  the  invisible  Church.  The 
Church  of  God  does  not  exist,  we  are  told,  as  a  visible  institution.  The  external 
Church — sacraments,  ritual,  ministers,  and  impertinences.  "  God  is  a  spirit,  and 
they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  Spirit  and  in  truth."  Once  more 
Christ  is  to  become  disembodied  and  formless  ;  His  Church  is  to  be  sublimated  into 
that  featureless  shade  known  as  Flymouthism.  Against  this  etherealization  we 
must  protest  also.  The  true  Church,  which  is  Christ's  "body,"  will  resemble  Christ's 
resurrection  body  ;  being  at  once  spiritual  and  corporeal ;  heavenly  and  earthly  ; 
invisible,  as  its  deepest  life  is  hid  in  God,  and  yet  revealing  in  its  organisation  and 
government  and  ordinances  the  power  and  grace  of  its  immortal  Head ;  with  human 
features  and  human  raiment,  and  yet  standing  before  the  world,  as  the  Master  stood 
on  the  Mount,  transfigured  in  a  glory  altogether  unearthly  and  Divine.  3.  We  have 
those  who  reject  dogmatic  theology  for  subjective  truth.  Some  of  these  reject  the 
Scriptures  altogether — looking  into  the  heart  they  find  a  surer  Bible.  They  spurn 
a  **  book  revelation ; "  the  eternal  truth  is  wronged  by  any  attempt  to  give  it 
**  form."  Or,  if  revelation  is  accepted,  no  '*  form  of  sound  words  "  must  be  allowed ; 
the  teachings  of  revelation  must  not  be  expressed  in  any  distinct  and  definite 
doctrine.  They  must  have  the  milky  way  where  all  is  nebulous  and  undistinguished 
light ;  they  cannot  tolerate  the  astronomy  which  for  practical  purposes  makes  a  map 
of  the  stars  ;  they  must  have  the  light — the  pure,  white,  or  bless  light — and  look 
wi^  contempt  on  Sir  Isaac  Newton  who  with  the  prism  breaks  up  the  light  for 
human  uses.  The  mysticism  which  rejects  the  orb,  which  rejects  the  prism,  forgets 
the  limitations  of  man,  and  the  practical  needs  of  human  life.  The  Word  of  God 
and  the  creed  of  His  Church  are  sun  and  rainbow,  one  shedding  the  light,  the 
other  analyzing  it,  and  both  essential  for  the  illumination  and  pacification  of  the 
world,  n.  The  FOBM  or  Christ  is  susceptiblb  or  ohanqb.  *'In  another  form." 
The  form  of  Christ  still  changes,  as  perhaps  all  forms  change.  There  are  constant 
and  legitimate  changes  in  the  presentment  of  Christ  ;  in  the  expression  of 
evangelical  doctrine  ;  in  the  ritual  and  government  of  Christ's  Church.  Christ 
changes  the  form  of  His  manifestation  for  great  ends.  1.  That  the  form  shall 
not  stand  between  us  and  the  Saviour  Himself.  We  can  only  know  Christ  through 
the  form,  and  up  to  a  certain  point  any  particular  form  may  help  us,  bat  at  length 
the  form  instead  of  being  a  medium  of  revelation  may  become  a  screen.  Spiritual 
meaning  evaporates  from  the  best  definitions  ;  ceremonies  are  emptied  of  their 
meaning  ;  and  the  Church  order  which  once  aided  the  gospel  may  become  inopera- 
tive and  obstructive.  The  form  may  become  a  darkened  glass  to  hide  Christ,  and 
lest  this  should  be  the  case  the  form  is  ever  being  changed  so  that  we  may  **all  with 
open  face  behold  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  2.  That  He  may  make  Him- 
•elf  known  to  men  of  the  most  diverse  character  and  circumstance.  It  seems  very 
probable  that  the  appearance  of  Christ  was  altered  from  time  to  time  daring  the 
forty  days  to  meet  tiie  several  cases  of  the  disciples.  Our  religion,  thank  God>  ia  fox 


71«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  m. 

the  world,  and  it  has  all  the  richness  and  versatility  of  a  nniversal  faith.  What  a 
scene  of  infinite  variety  is  this  world  of  oars  1  How  it  teems  with  individuality, 
originality,  eccentricity,  divergence,  contrast  1  So  the  Christian  Church  does  not 
come  with  stereotyped  language,  a  rigid  ritual,  an  unalterable  rubric,  but  it  meets 
the  infinite  richness  of  human  nature  with  infinite  flexibility  and  inezhaostible  re- 
source. Christ  comes  in  many  forms  that  He  may  meet  the  multitudiousness  and 
manifoldness  of  the  race.  3.  That  He  may  become  the  Saviour  of  all  generations. 
With  the  perpetual  and  inevitable  changes  of  time  Christ  constantly  reappears  in 
new  forms.  The  world  does  not  outgrow  Christ,  but  Christ  confronts  successive 
generations  in  new  forms,  appropriate  forms,  richer  forms.  Christianity  never  be- 
comes obsolete ;  in  the  midst  of  a  new  world  it  stands  forth  in  a  new  form,  but  with 
all  its  ancient  power  and  grace.  The  old  truth  speaks  in  new  language;  t^e  old  spirit 
passes  into  new  vessels  ;  the  old  life  pulsates  in  new  organizations ;  the  old  purpose 
is  accelerated  by  a  new  programme.  The  Church  of  Christ  does  not  present  the 
spectacle  of  an  antique  corporation,  but  it  is  strong,  fresh,  aggressive,  and  hopeful 
as  ever  to-day  (Psalms  ex,  2,  3).  The  "new  religion,"  what  is  that.  Positivism?  No, 
Positivism  is  the  new  superstition ;  Christianity  is  the  new  religion — the  old  religion 
and  the  new.  This  earth  is  old,  very  old,  and  yet  to-day  when  ^ou  look  at  the  prim- 
rose, the  anemone,  and  all  the  fresh  yoimg  beauty  of  the  spring,  you  feel  it  is  the 
new  earth  also.  So  is  it  with  Christianity.  Older  than  the  hills,  it  is  vital,  and 
fresh  and  fruitful  as  ever.  The  Christianity  of  St.  Paul,  of  Chrysostom,  of  Bernard, 
of  John  Howe,  of  John  Wesley,  produces  at  this  very  moment  the  brightest,  grand- 
est, happiest  thoughts  and  things  of  the  modem  world.  *'  The  word  of  the  Lord 
endureth  for  ever,  and  this  is  the  word  which  by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  jon.** 
Observe — HI.  That  under  thk  CHANOiNa  fobh  abb  ABiniNa  chabactbbistics.  For 
a  time  the  eyes  of  the  disciples  were  holden,  and  they  knew  not  with  whom  they 
talked,  but  in  the  end  they  recognized  their  Master.  How  shall  we  recognise  the 
Master  7  Under  changing  forms  how  shall  we  be  sure  of  His  presence  ?  There  are 
many  anti-Christs  in  the  world  ;  many  creeds  and  doctrines  set  forth  as  Christ's 
which  are  not  Christ's.  The  old  Scandinavian  heroes  after  eating  an  oz  are  fabled 
as  making  another  to  grow  in  its  hide  the  next  day.  Many  in  modem  times  have 
caught  the  trick  of  denying  the  vital  facts  and  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and  then 
substituting  vain  dreams  of  their  own  under  the  language,  institutions,  and  symbols 
of  Christianity.  But  yet  we  need  hardly  be  deceived.  1.  There  is  the  sign  of 
reality.  John  writes  |2  John  vii.).  Let  us  turn  from  all  those  who  would  turn 
Christ  into  an  abstraction  or  personification.  2.  There  is  the  sign  of  glory.  In  the 
beginning  of  their  intercourse  with  the  stranger  Cleophas  and  his  companion  had 
no  exalted  idea  of  the  stranger,  but  as  they  conversed  with  Him  their  sense  of  His 
greatness  grew  until  they  knew  Him  to  be  their  risen  Lord.  They  recognized  the 
sign  of  His  divinity.  Where  the  glory  of  the  Divine,  the  Risen,  the  Reigning  Lord 
does  not  shine  fortii,  "this  is  a  deceiver  and  anti-Christ."  8.  There  is  ttie  sign  of 
sacrifice.  It  has  been  conjectured  that  in  the  breaking  of  the  bread  the  disciples 
saw  the  mark  of  the  nails  in  the  Saviour's  hands.  However  this  may  be,  their 
mind  was  full  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  they  recognized  in  Him  the  Viotim  ol 
Calvary.  Let  us,  like  the  monk  in  the  old  legend,  ask  for  the  print  of  the  nails. 
The  true  gospel  is  the  gospel  of  the  cross  ;  the  true  ministry  confesses,  *'  I  am 
determined  to  know  nothing  among  men,  but  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified;  "  the 
true  worship  ascribes  salvation  ••  to  Him  who  has  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His 
own  blood."  The  ••  form  "  may  change,  but  by  "  the  tokens  of  His  Passion,  by  the 
marks  received  for  me,"  all  His  people  discern  Him  with  exultation  and  assoranee. 
{W.  L,  Watkituon.) 

Vers.  14-20.  And  upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief.— T^  departing  Saviour. ^-^ 
It  cannot  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  pious  to  know  in  what  manner  the 
blessed  Saviour  took  final  leave  of  His  earthly  Church.  If  we  really  love  Him  it 
cannot  but  interest  us  to  understand  how  He  conducted  Himself,  how  He  looked, 
and  what  were  the  last  things  He  said  and  did.  Upon  these  points  the  Scriptures 
are  not  silent ;  and  the  whole  account  is  quite  in  keeping  with  what  we  would 
naturally  expect.  I.  Oub  depabttno  Savioub'b  chidimos.  Lgiffi.  itself  gave  birth 
to  these  upbraidings.  There  is  nothing  so  subtle  or  so  damaging  to  the  peace  of 
souls  as  the  workings  of  unbelief.  Faith  is  the  great  saving,  grace ,  where  it  is 
wanting  there  is  misery,  darkness,  deaths  Therefore,  because  He  loved  them,  and 
wished  to  have  them  take  in  and  possess  the  true  joys  of  faith,  Christ  npbraided 
His  disciples  with  their  nnbeUef .    They  deserved  and  required  ciiiding,  for  thtiu 


XVI.]  8T,  MARK.  713 


anbelief  waa  due  to  their  own  hardness  of  heart,  not  to  the  want  of  evidence. 
The  Lord's  valedictory  admonition  is  repeated  to  us  again  to-day.    We  may  not 
have  doubted  that  He  rose  from  the  dead,  but  have  we  so  believed  as  to  take  all 
the  momentous  implications  of  Christ's  resufreclioiT  borne  to  our  souls,  and  to  have 
them  Uving  in  our  lives?   (Rom.   vi.  4-6;  Col.   iii.  1,   2.)      II.  Odb  departino 
Savioub's  commakdb.    Another  manifestation  of  His  love.    He  would  that  all  should 
be  saved.     1.  The  gospel  must  be  preached.    This  is  a  Divin6  wort,  and  a  binding 
obligation.    No  Christian  is  exempt  from  the  duty,  and  none  excluded  from  the 
privilege  and  honour  of  taking  part  in  it,  according  to  his  sphere  and  measure.   ^ 
2.  The  gospel  must  be  heard.    3.  The  sacrament  of  baptism  must  be  administered 
Faith  without  obedience  is  nothing,  and  salvation  is  promised  only  to  him  "  who 
believeth  and  is  baptized."    It  may  seem  to  be  a  very  small  thing— a  mere  insig- 
nificant ceremony ;  but  in  whatever  way  men  look  upon  it  Jesus  appointed  it,  and 
has  connected  with  it  all  the  sublime  benefits  of  His  mediation.  lU.  Oub  depabtino 
Satioub'b  pbomibes  (Heb.  ii.  4 ;  Acts  xvi.  16-24 ;  xix.  11, 12).    Many  demons,  also, 
of  pride,  covetousness,  uncleanness,  drunkenness,  gluttony,  ambition,  lust,  hatred, 
moroseness,  and  spirits  of  wickedness  innumerable,  did  the  apostles  expel  by  their 
preaching,  turning  men  from  their  idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God  (Acts 
u.  6-11 ;  X.  46;  xxviii.  1-6;  iii.  1-9;   ix.  33-35;  xiv.  8-11).    Time  would  fail  to 
tell  the  works  of  healing  wonder  which  the  disciples  wrought  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
by  prayer  and  the  laving  on  of  hands,  in  which  the  Master  fulfilled  His  promise. 
Nor  was  the  promise  or  the  fulfilment  of  it  confined  to  them  alone.    It  is  still 
outstanding,  firm,  and  good ;  and  always  must  hold  good,  as  long  as  the  gospel  is 
preached,  and  men  are  found  to  believe  it.     IV.  Thk   dkpaeturb  itself.     No 
thunder,  as  at  Sinai ;  no  darkness,  as  at  the  crucifixion  ;  no  overpowering  radiance, 
as  at  the  transfiguration.    Only  the  gentle  lifting  up  of  the  hands  to  bless.    (J.  A. 
8eu$,  D,D.)        Upbraided  them :— 1.  That  He  might  keep  them  humble  through 
the  memory  of  their  past  weakness,  and  their  readiness  at  all  times  to  fall  away 
from  Him.    2.  He  reminds  them  of  their  incredulity  and  blindness  of  heart,  so 
that  they  might  be  gentler  in  dealing  with  those  who  sinned,  and  who  were  unable 
to  perceive  and  hold  the  truth.    8.  He  did  so  also  for  our  sakes  in  order  that 
we  may  not  doubt,  seeing  that  they  so  greatly  doubted,  and  yet  had  all  their  doubts 
removed  by  the  dear  evidence  of  their  own  senses.     Their  faithlessness  is  the  j^ 
stimulus  to  our  faith,  and  their  doubt  removes  all  ground  of  doubt  from  us.    And 
in  thus  showing  the  httleness  of  their  faith  and  their  natural  unaptness  to  be  His 
messengers,  Christ  indicates  the  greatness  of  that  gift  which  was  able  to  overcome 
all  natural  disqualifications,  and  to  make  these  doubting  disciples  the  faithful 
ministers  and  stewards  of  His  gospel.    Those  who  had  fled  when  no  real  danger 
existed  He  sends  into  the  midst  of  a  people  thirsting  for  their  blood ;  those  who 
had  not  comprehended  Him  He  chooses  for  the  work  of  making  others  comprehend 
Him ;  those  who  had  not  believed  in  the  very  witnesses  of  His  resurrection  He 
sends  forth  as  the  witnesses  themselves  of  this  same  truth,  that  so  we  might  know 
that  the  promulgation  of  Christianity  is  the  direct  work,  not  of  men,  but  of  God. 
{W.  Denton,  M.A.)        EffecU  of  uncertainty  ;— If  one  should  go  into  the  Louvre  at 
Paris,  and  see  the  Venus  de  Milo,  and  begin  to  have  admiration  for  that  highest 
eonception  of  a  noble  woman  held  by  the  Greek  mind,  and  his  guide  should 
whisper  to  him,  "It  is  very  uncertain  whether  this  is  the  original  statue ;  in  the 
time  of  Napoleon  it  was  stolen,  and  it  is  said  that  it  was  sent  back ;  but  many 
think  that  another  was  made  in  imitation  of  it,  and  put  in  its  place,  and  that  this 
is  the  imitation,"  it  would  kill  that  man's  enthusiasm  in  a  second ;  and  he  is  not 
going  to  say,  *'  I  admire  that  countenance,"  because  it  may  not  be  that  counte- 
nance.   And  the  moment  you  introduce  the  element  of  uncertainty  in  regard  to 
any  substantial  religious  conviction,  your  doubt  has  taken  away  that  enthusiasm 
which  only  goes  oot  toward  certainty.    {Beecher,) 

▼er.  15.  Oo  ye  Into  idl  the  world  and  preach  the  gospeL  Ckrist*$  eommusion 
CO  EU  apostles  /—I.  Thk  wobk.  Preaching  the  gospel.  1.  Speaking.  Much  of  the 
real  and  useful  work  of  life  is  wrought  by  words.  They  are  the  tools  of  almost 
•very  worker  in  some  department  of  his  toiU  In  preaching  the  gospel  they  are 
the  chief  agency.  2.  The  gospel.  Gospel,  in  the  lips  of  Jesus,  represented  facts 
in  the  eternal  past  and  in  the  eternal  future— promises,  predictions.  His  own  history, 
dispensations  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  certain  aspects  of  the  government  of  God ; 
and  gospel,  to  the  ears  of  the  eleven,  represented  the  same  central  truths,  with 
Uto  outlying  truths  unrevealed,  so  that  they  could  not  mistake  what  Jesus  meant 


714  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha».  xn. 

wHen  He  said,  "  Preach  the  gospel.**  8.  A  new  work  this.  Not  preaching  merely 
— that  was  old  enough  ;  but  preaching  the  gospel.  4.  A  Divine  work.  Conuuenoed 
by  God  Himself.  A  work  which  claims  high  esteem  for  all  engaged  in  it ;  ft  work 
in  which  the  loftiest  ambition  may  be  satiated ;  a  work  whose  results  surpass  in 
blessedness  the  creation  of  earth  and  heaven.  II.  Thb  workmen.  1.  Men  of 
little  refinement  or  education.  This  gave  them  sympathy  with  the  common  people, 
if  not  influence  over  them.  2.  Men  of  ordinary  secular  occupations.  8.  Great 
varieties  of  natural  character  among  them.  No  two  were  alike.  Yet  these  very 
different  men  were  called  to  do  the  same  work.  The  same  gospel  may  be  preached 
in  very  different  st^es  with  equal  success.  4.  They  had  received  special  training 
for  their  special  work.  As  more  was  expected  from  them  than  from  others,  more 
had  been  done  for  them.  5.  Yet  they  were  far  from  being  perfect  men.  Just 
before  this  commission  was  addressed  to  them  they  were  upbraided  by  Christ  with 
their  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart.  A  perfect  man  or  a  perfect  preacher  is  not 
necessary  for  the  preaching  of  a  perfect  gospel.  6.  Although  not  perfect  men,  they 
were  men  to  whom  special  promises  were  made — promises  of  the  presence  of  Christ 
and  of  the  Holy  GhosT^-^prdrnises  of  power.  7.  They  were^r.epresentative  men, 
foundation  men,  men  who  had  to  begin  what  others  should  carry  on.  Iir."^  Th» 
SPHERE  OF  WOBK.  The  wholo  world.  No  limitations  of  country  or  climate ;  no  dis« 
tinctions  of  barbarism  and  civilization,  bondage  and  freedom,  preparedness  or 
otherwise  of  particular  peoples.  Wherever  there  were  men  these  workmen  were 
to  go.  *♦  Every  creature  '* — for  every  creature  hath  sinned,  and  every  creature  is 
guilty  before  God,  and  every  creature  is  going  astray,  and  every  creature  is  liable 
to  punishment.  For  every  creature  there  is  gospel  enough  and  to  spare.  What  a 
glorious  sphere  for  working — the  world,  man,  men,  all  men,  every  creature  I  And 
what  work  I  These  workmen  are  builders  of  a  temple  that  shaU  fill  the  world, 
and  stewards  of  wealth  which  shall  enrich  the  world,  and  ambassadors  upon  an 
errand  of  supreme  importance  to  the  world,  and  sowers  in  the  field  of  the  world,  by 
whose  agency  the  wilderness  shall  become  a  fruitful  field,  men  shall  be  reconciled 
to  God,  the  poor  shall  become  heirs  of  God,  and  "the  tabernacle  of  God,"  Ac. 
(Rev.  xxi.  3,  4).  IV,  Thb  Masteb  of  the  workmeh.  He  who  saith  *♦  Go,"  came 
into  the  world.  He  who  saith  "  Go  ye,"  Himself  came :  came  not  by  deputy  or 
proxy,  but  Himself  came.  He  who  saith  "  Go  ye  and  preach,"  Himself  preached. 
He  who  saith  •♦  Go  ye  and  preach  the  gospel,"  is  the  gospel.  He  who  saith  "  Go 
into  the  world  to  every  creature,"  is  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  world. 
With  such  a  Master  the  lack  of  willing  workmen  is  truly  wonderful.  Shall  we 
neglect  to  obey?  Shall  we  undervalue  obedience  as  a  means  of  redemption  to 
others?  All  cannot  preach,  but  all  can  repeat  the  faithful  saying,  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  and  all  can  unite  in  sending  forth  men 
qualified  to  preach,  and  in  sustaining  such  men  by  contributions  of  property,  by 
manifestations  of  sympathy,  and  by  prayer,  (S,  Martin,  D.D.)  Missionary 
zeal : — A  ragged-school  teacher  went  out  into  tne  lanes  of  our  city  to  bring  in 
neglected  children.  He  found  a  child,  the  very  incarnation  of  wickedness  and 
wretchedness,  and  led  her  to  the  school.  There  she  heard  expounded  and  applied 
the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son.  Shortly  after  the  child  was  seized  by  fever,  and 
the  teacher  visited  her.  In  one  of  his  visits  he  read  this  parable,  and  when  he  came 
to  the  words,  *'  When  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off  his  father  saw  him,  and  had  com- 
passion, and  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him,"  the  child  exclaimed,  "  Ah, 
that  was  just  hke  me  I  That's  good ;  say  it  again — '  a  great  way  off ! '  What,  ever 
so  far,  away,  away,  like  me  with  the  devil  ?  That  must  be  far  from  God  and  the 
Lamb.  Yes  1  I  was  a  great  way  off.  How  good  1  how  kind  I  But  I'm  afraid  I 
have  been  worse  than  that  bad  son.  Still,  I  have  said  •  Dear  Jesus,  I  want  to  love 
you,  I  want  to  get  away  from  the  devil ;  please  help  me.'  And  I  think  He  heard 
me,  for  I  have  felt  somehow  different  ever  since.  I  am  not  afraid  now ;  no,  not 
one  bit."  When  death  was  so  near  that  it  was  supposed  that  all  power  of  utterance 
was  gone,  she  aroused  herself,  and  said,  in  a  clear  and  distinct  voice,  evidently 
referring  to  destitute  children  allowed  still  to  wander  through  the  streets  and  lanes 
of  the  city :  **  Fetch  them  in ;  oh,  be  sure  and  fetch  them  in !  Fetch  them  in  and  tdl 
them  of  Jesus,  tell  them  of  Jesus;  oh,  be  sure  and  fetch  them  in."  {Ibid.)  The 
apostolic  eommiition : — L  This  commission  is  most  important  in  its  natcbb.  Con- 
sider— 1.  Its  Divine  origin.  2.  Its  adaptation  to  the  circumstances  of  mankind.  8. 
Its  efficiency.  4.  Its  individuality.  One  and  the  same  salyation  for  all  and  efteh. 
One  common  remedy  for  the  universal  disease.  If  there  were  some  given  pIao« 
where  all  must  needs  be,  and  many  roads  led  to  it,  it  woold  not  be  essentially  ini' 


.  XTL]  ST,  MARK,  711 

portant  which  we  took ;  bat  if  there  were  bat  one  road  which  woold  condact  the 
traveller  to  the  place  where  all  should  be,  how  carefully  should  that  road  be  sought ! 
And  is  not  Christ  the  only  way  to  heaven  ?  U.  This  commission  is  liSairiMATE  ux 
ITS  AnTHOBiTT.  It  is  the  command  of  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  And 
His  authority  is  twofold.  1.  It  is  official — by  delegation  from  His  Father.  2.  It 
is  essentiaL  Authority  without  control,  in.  This  commission  is  official  m  its 
EXEcuTioH.  It  is  to  bc  douc  by  preaching.  There  is  a  special  commission  for 
those  sent  oat  to  preach.  1.  The  preacher  must  have  a  personal  realization  of 
the  benefits  of  the  gospel  in  his  own  heart.  How  can  an  unbeliever  inculcate 
faith  ?  How  can  an  impenitent  man  call  sinners  to  repentance  ?  2.  The  preacher 
must  have  an  ardent  love  to  the  fallen  souls  of  men.  3.  He  must  have  a  solemn, 
heartfelt  impression,  that  the  Author  of  the  gospel  requires  this  at  his  hands.  4. 
He  must  have  suitable  qualifications.  5.  He  must  have  the  sanction  of  his  brethren 
in  the  ministry.  IV.  This  commission  is  univkbsaIj  in  its  extent.  1.  Universal 
in  point  of  place.  2.  Universal  in  point  of  persons.  Conclusion  :  1.  This  subject 
enables  us  to  meet  the  infidel  objection  which  is  urged  against  the  gospel  on  the 
ground  of  its  partial  diltusion.  This  is  not  God's  fault.  He  commands  that  His 
salvation  be  proclaimed  to  the  ends  of  the  world.  2.  How  loud  is  the  call  on  our 
gratitude  that  the  gospel  has  been  proclaimed  to  as.  3.  How  imperative  is  the 
obligation  that  we  hand  it  on  to  others.  {R.  Newton.)  Reasons  for  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel : — I.  The  wobld  knows  not  God.  By  its  own  wisdom  it  cannot  find 
Him  oat.  Instruction  needed  which  God  alone  can  impart.  God  has  imparted 
the  knowledge  of  Divine  things  to  some,  and  ordered  them  to  convey  that  know- 
ledge to  the  rest  of  the  world.  II.  The  temporal  miseries  or  the  heathen  are 
vsBT  GREAT.  To  what  torturc  do  they  submit  in  their  blind  devotion  to  false  gods  ! 
Hasten  to  lead  them  oat  of  their  ignorance  and  superstition  into  the  light  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  only  true  God.  III.  The  woe  that  awaits  them  betond  the 
ORAVB.  What  an  education  for  eternity  is  theirs !  IV.  The  gospel  is  the  power 
ow  God  to  ktbry  one  who  becsiteb  it.  {H.  Townley. )  The  duty  of  Ghristiam 
with  retpeet  to  mi$non$  :^1.  The  natubb  of  this  command.  U.  The  extent  of 
this  oommamd.  IIL  The  period  when  this  command  was  giysh.  {J,  Langley, 
M.A.)  Oood  news  for  you : — L  The  gospel  is  a  revelation  of  love.  Is  tiiere 
not  sunshine  enough  in  the  sky  for  your  daily  paths,  and  is  there  not  enough  water 
in  the  ocean  to  bear  your  small  craft  ?  The  love  of  God  is  like  the  sunshine,  and 
His  goodness  is  like  the  ocean ;  there  is  enough  for  you ;  and  if  you  will  but  take 
the  gospel  as  meant  for  you,  His  great  love  shall  be  shed  abroad  in  your  heart  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  U.  The  gospel  also  is  a  provision  of  peace.  It 
takes  tiie  sting  from  trouble ;  it  takes  the  pain  from  sickness ;  it  breathes  to  all, 
hope,  paradise,  joy.  And  it  imparts  peace  at  all  times.  Wherever  you  are,  what- 
soever you  may  be,  and  through  whatever  yoa  may  pass,  the  gospel  gives  you  a 
peace  that  sustains  you  safely.  Like  yonder  impregnable  British  fortress  at  Gib- 
raltar, so  God's  peace  shall  keep  you.  The  waves  may  dash  against  that  ancient 
fortress,  and  guns  may  burst  their  fire-balls  upon  it,  but  that  rock  is  impregnable  ; 
held  by  British  hearts  it  shall  stand  against  all  the  foes  of  the  world.  So  God's 
peace  shall  enter  your  soul,  and  keep  yoa  in  all  the  trials  and  storms  of  Ufe.  UI. 
The  gospel  is  a  call  to  libertt.  What  is  it  that  causes  men  to  feel  the  pstin  of 
guilt  f  It  is  that  they  are  afraid  of  being  discovered ;  they  are  afraid  of  men 
pointing  the  finger  of  scorn  at  them.  But  how  blessed  to  know  that  when  we  stand 
before  the  bar  of  God  all  our  sins  shall  be  blotted  out.  IV.  The  gospel  is  an 
INSPIRATION  OF  POWER.  It  tells  US  that  the  Lord  shall  stand  up  in  your  heart  and 
raise  a  standard,  which  shall  hurl  back  the  flood  of  sin.  However  great  the  torrent 
may  be  the  Lord  shall  breathe  power  to  check  it.  V.  The  gospel  is  the  inspira- 
tion or  POWER  TO  BE  HOLT.  We  caimot  in  our  own  strength  run  the  heavenly 
race ;  but  Jesus  enters  into  us,  abides  in  our  hearts,  and  gives  us  His  own  almighty 
strength.  VI.  The  gospel  also  offers  a  present  jot.  Blessings,  mercies,  pardon, 
peace — all  to  be  had  now.  VH.  The  gospel  constrains  us  to  love  God,  and  to 
LIVE  HOLT  UfK8,  BT  THE  MOST  POWERFUL  MOTTVs.  What  Can  Constrain  U3  like  the 
love  of  Jesosr  {W.  Bireh.)  Life  in  the  gospel:— I.  The  gospel  is  brought  to 
UB  BT  Jesus,  ovb  kxnbicav.  U.  In  the  gospel  Jesus  reveaia  to  us  the  charactbb 
or  GK)D.  When  yon  hold  a  magnet  to  a  little  bit  of  steel  the  two  are  drawn 
together,  on  aoooant  of  some  mysterious  affinity  between  them.  So,  when  a 
■incere  mind  examines  the  way  to  Qod  pointed  out  by  Jesus  in  the  Gospel,  and  we 
are  true  as  steel  to  the  Saviour-magnet,  we  are  drawn  to  the  breast  of  oar  God. 
nL  The  OHOcr  obm  or  the  ooepsL  is,  that  evert  human  being  is  roRorvEN.    We 


716  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xn. 

forgive  men  after  they  have  begged  us  to  do  so,  but  Gk)d  forgives  men  before  they 

ask.      IV.   EVEBT  HAN    WHO    BINCEBELY  BSLIBVE8   THB  GOSPEL  SHALL  BS  SAVXO  FBOM 

iHE  powEB  OF  HIS  SIM.  Salvation  is  not  a  varnish  to  hide  our  blemishes  ;  it  is  a 
new  spirit  which  roots  out  every  sin.  V.  The  gospel  is  fob  evxbt  hah.  (Ibid.) 
Preach,  preach,  preach  everywhere  : — I.  What  it  is  that  wb  have  to  cabby  to  evbbI 
CREATURE.  The  great  truth  that  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto 
Himself."  What  is  meant  by  the  word  preach  ?  Its  meaning  is  extensive.  It  in- 
cludes all  church  work  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  II.  What  u  the  extent  of 
this  cohmission  ?  No  limit  as  to  where  this  gospel  is  to  be  preached.  No  limit 
as  to  the  persons  to  whom  it  is  to  be  preached.  III.  The  inducement  to  enlist  in 
this  service,  and  obey  this  command.  God  has  said  it.  It  it  a  dehght  to  God. 
By  it  the  elect  are  to  be  gathered  out.  We  should  do  it  for  our  own  sakes.  Be- 
cause Jesus  wills  it.  IV.  What  powers  have  wb  to  wobb  with,  and  how  oah  wb 
DO  it  f  If  all  cannot  preach,  yet  they  may  either  teach  the  young  or  influence 
their  own  households.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  *•  Up,  guards,  and  at  them  "; — Search 
ye  out,  and  look  what  you  can  4ft.  and  whatsoever  your  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  with 
all  your  might,  for  the  grave  will  soon  open  for  you,  and  there  is  no  work  nor 
device  in  the  grave  whither  you  are  hastening.  "  Up,  guards,  and  at  them,"  was 
said  in  the  day  of  battle,  and  I  may  say  it  to  every  Christian.  We  shall  not  bless 
the  world  by  big  schemes,  mighty  theories,  gigantic  plans.  Little  by  little  grows 
the  coral  reef  on  which  afterwards  gardens  are  to  be  planted.^  Little  by  httle  must 
the  kingdom  come,  each  man  bringing  his  mite  and  laying  it  down  at  Jesus'  feet. 
So  breaks  the  hght.  Beam  by  beam  it  comes.  One  by  one  come  the  arrows  from 
the  bow  of  the  sun,  and  at  last  darkness  flies.  So,  so  must  break  the  ever- 
lasting mom.  (Ibid.)  *' Compel  them  to  come  in": — He  would  be  a  poor 
sportsman  who  would  sit  in  his  house  and  expect  the  game  to  come  to  him.  He 
that  would  have  it  must  go  abroad  for  it,  and  he  that  would  serve  his  Master 
mast  go  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  and  compel  them  to  oome  in.  (Ibid.) 
A  great  work ;— Oh,  church  of  God  1  thy  Lord  has  given  thee  a  work  almost  as 
immense  as  the  creation  of  a  world ;  nay,  it  is  a  greater  work  than  that ;  it  is  to 
recreate  a  world.  What  canst  thou  do  in  this  1  Thou  canst  do  nothing  effectively 
unless  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  bless  what  thou  attemptest  to  do.  But  that  He 
will  do,  and  if  thou  dost  gird  up  thy  loins,  and  thy  heart  be  warm  in  this  en- 
deavour, thou  shalt  yet  be  able  to  preach  Jesus  Christ  to  every  creature  under 
heaven.  {Ibid.)  The  great  commission: — I.  It  is  implied  that  thxbx  is  ax 
last  a  gospel  in  the  world;  not  a  history  merely,  not  a  philosophy,  but  a 
gospel — a  way  of  salvation  for  dying  men ;  a  finished  thing,  to  which  nothing  iB  to 
be  added,  and  from  which  nothing  is  to  be  taken.  U.  This  commission  to  preach 
the  gospel  to  all  the  world  also  implies  thb  continuity  of  the  Chxtbch  as  a 
PREACHING,  teaching  BODY.  III.  The  extcusion  and  establishment  of  the  gospel 
through  the  world,  till  it  evebtwhebe  cohes  to  be  a  dohinant  poweb  u 
SOCIETY,  h  an  obligation  on  our  part  in  whatever  light  we  examine  it.  ^  1.  Consider 
the  gcjspel  as  related  to  whatever  is  best  in  human  civiliEation.  Civilization  is  but 
a  secular  came  for  Christianity  itselt  Popular  education  comes  from  the  gospel. 
As  tbe  dignity  of  man  is  reahzed  there  comes  a  liberalizing  of  government,  and 
tyrannic  dynasties  are  overthrown.  Domestic  felicity,  hterature  and  art,  are  aided 
by  the  gospel.  2.  But  beyond  all  this  look  at  the  spuritual  wants  of  man  to  which 
the  gospel  ministers.  It  transfigures  man's  whole  life.  3.  Becall  tbe  new  impres- 
sions which  we  ourselves  have  received  of  the  greatness  and  value  of  the  gospeL 
We  have  felt  its  inspiring  energy  in  our  own  hearts.  4.  Thus  we  enter  the  fellow- 
ship  of  the  noblest  souls  of  earth — a  society  grander  than  that  of  a  mere  intellectual 
companionship — even  with  the  ancient  martyrs.  But  best  of  all,  the  execution  of 
this  great  commission  brings  us  into  fellowship  with  Jesus  Christ,  in  His  unique 
and  royal  work.  {R,  S.  Storrs,  D.D.)  Every  Christian  a  preacJier ;— It  is  often 
said  that  there  are  not  preachers  enough  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  land  and  of 
tbe  world.  That  may  be  true.  But  every  living  Christian  is  a  preacher.  Every 
prayerful,  earnest,  godly  hfe  is  a  sermon.  There  are  a  hundred  ways  of  preaching 
Jesus  without  choosing  a  Bible  text  or  standuig  in  a  pulpit.  A  Wilberforce  could 
proclaim  the  gospel  of  love  on  the  floor  of  the  British  Parliament,  even  though  he 
wore  no  surplice  and  never  had  a  bishop's  hand  laid  upon  his  honoured  head. 
George  H.  Stuart  was  an  apostle  of  the  cross  when  he  organized  the  Christian 
commission  for  soldiers'  tents ;  and  John  Macgregor  was  another  when  he  organized 
the  *' Shoe-black  Brigades"  in  the  streets  of  London.  Hannah  More  preached 
Chziit  in  the  drawing-room,  and  Elizabeth  Fry  in  prison-cells,  and  Florenoe 


CHIP.  xviO  ST,  MARK,  717 

Nightingale  in  the  hospitals,  and  Sarah  F.  Smiley  among  the  negro  freedmen  of 
the  South.  Our  Master  scatters  Bis  commissions  very  widely.  Harlan  Page 
dropping  the  tract  and  the  kind  word  through  the  city  workshops ;  John  Wana- 
maker,  the  Christian  merchant,  mustering  poor  children  into  his  *'  Bethany  ** 
mission-house ;  James  Lennox,  giving  his  gold  to  huild  churches  and  hospitals ; 
the  Dairyman's  Daughter,  murmuring  the  riaroe  of  'Jesus  with  her  faint,  dying 
▼oice ;  George  Miiller,  housing  and  feeding  God's  orphans — all  these  were  effective 
and  powerful  preachers  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  Son  of  God.  There  is  a  poor 
needlewoman  in  my  congregation  whose  unselfish,  cheerful,  holy  life  impresses  me 
as  much  as  any  pulpit  message  of  mine  can  possibly  impress  her.  A  true  and  noble 
life  is  the  mightiest  of  discourses.  It  is  the  sermons  in  shoes  that  must  convert 
the  world  to  Jesus,  if  it  is  ever  to  be  converted.  {Dr.  Guyler.)  To  every  creature  : — 
Christ's  own  word  for  it,  come  with  me  to  that  scene  in  Jerusalem  where  the  dis- 
ciples are  bidding  Him  farewell.  Calvary,  with  all  its  horrors,  is  behind  Him ; 
Gethsemane  is  over,  and  Pilate's  judgment  hall.  He  has  passed  the  grave,  and  is 
about  to  take  His  place  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father.  Around  Him  stands  His 
little  band  of  disciples,  the  little  church  He  was  to  leave  to  be  His  witnesses. 
The  hour  of  parting  has  come,  and  He  has  some  "  last  words  "  for  them.  Is  He 
thinking  about  Himself  in  these  closing  moments?  Is  He  thinking  about  the  throne 
that  is  waiting  Him,  and  the  Father's  smile  that  will  welcome  Him  to  heaven  ?  Is 
He  going  over  in  memory  the  scenes  of  the  past ;  or  is  He  thinking  of  the  friends 
who  have  followed  Him  so  far,  who  will  miss  Him  so  much  when  He  is  gone  ?  No, 
He  is  thinking  about  you.  You  imagined  He  would  think  of  those  who  loved  Him  ? 
No,  sinner,  He  thought  of  you  then.  He  thought  of  His  enemies,  those  who  shunned 
Him,  those  who  despised  Him,  those  who  killed  Him — He  thought  what  more  He 
could  do  for  them.  He  thought  of  those  who  would  hate  Him,  of  those  who  would 
have  none  of  His  gospel,  of  those  who  would  say  it  was  too  good  to  be  true,  of  those 
who  would  make  excuse  that  He  never  died  for  them.  And  then  turning  to  His 
disciples,  His  heart  just  bursting  with  compassion.  He  gives  them  His  farewell 
charge:  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature." 
They  are  almost  His  last  words,  *•  to  every  creature."  {D.  L.  Moody.)  Preach 
the  gospel: — When  we  ask  in  these  days  what  does  this  injunction  mean,  the 
answers  which  come  to  us,  from  within  and  from  without  the  Church,  are  many 
and  discordant.  As  in  the  earliest  times  of  Christianity  there  were  pseudo-gospels, 
counterfeits,  and  forgeries,  so  it  is  now.  I.  Amono  these  pseudo-gospels  outside 
THE  PALE  OF  THE  Chubch  WE  HAVE — I.  The  gospol  of  rcasou ;  the  idea  that  man, 
by  his  own  mental  power,  is  rapidly  acquiring  a  newer  and  truer  wisdom,  which  is 
to  make  the  world  happier  and  better  than  it  has  ever  been.  It  is  a  religion  of  the 
head,  not  the  heart ;  it  cannot  therefore  apprehend  spiritual  verities.  2.  The  easy, 
plausible  gospel  of  universal  toleration  and  philanthropy,  which  assumes  and 
abuses  the  sacred  name  of  love.  Indifferent  altogether  for  truth,  caring  only  for 
expediency.  Anything  for  peace.  3.  The  gospel  of  sentiment — the  religion  which 
very  much  resembles  those  pictures  in  which  the  cross  is  almost  hidden  by  gay- 
coloured  flowers — satisfying  itself  with  music,  sensational  preaching,  controversial 
reading,  and  much  speaking,  but  shirking  the  plain  uninteresting  duties  of  daily 
life,  and  doing  no  real  work  for  others,  for  the  soul,  and  for  God.  4.  The  gospel 
of  wealth,  pleasure,  honour,  authority,  believing  (so  falsely)  that  a  man's  life  con- 
fists  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  he  possesses.  XL  And  then,  within  the 
Chubch,  how  many  gospels  ?  Alas,  what  sore  surprise  and  sorrow  would  vex  the 
righteous  soul  of  one  of  those  who  lived  in  the  earlier,  happier  days  of  our  faith 
oould  he  re- visit  this  world  and  witness  our  unhappy  divisions  1  "  What  has 
become,"  he  would  say,  "of  the  apostles*  doctrine  and  fellowship?  How  the 
seamless  robe  of  our  crucified  Lord  is  rent  and  torn ;  and  that,  not  by  declared 
enemies,  but  by  professed  friends  1 "  HI.  What,  then,  are  we  to  preach  ?  We 
must  appeal  to  two  friends,  whom  we  shall  find  in  every  heart ;  two  allies  who  will 
help  OS  ;  two  witnesses  who  will  come  into  court.  (1)  Love  and  (2)  fear.  Let  all 
seek  Christ  as  their  Saviour,  lest  they  tremble  when  He  comes  to  be  their  Judge. 
(S.  R.  HoUt  M.A.)  Missionary  work  for  all  ChrUtiam  : — After  these  words  were 
spoken,  the  missionary  duty  of  the  Church,  in  its  nearest  and  remotest  extent, 
was  as  little  a  matter  of  doubt  as  the  resurrection.  A  thousand  other  things  it 
may  do  or  neglect ;  may  have  elaborate  organization  or  none ;  may  build  cathedrals, 
or  pitch  tents ;  may  master  all  learning  and  art,  or  know  nothing  save  Christ  and 
Him  crucified ;  but  go  it  must,  and  preach  it  must,  or  it  is  not  Christ's  Church. 
Toa  little  children  who  love  Jesoi  must  tell  others  of  His  love.    Yoa  rich  meo 


718  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLV SIR ATOR,  [chap,  xn, 

most  work  through  your  money ;  you  wise  men  by  your  wisdom ;  you  poor  uncul- 
tured souls  through  your  prayers.  Unless  you  do  your  utmost  to  spread  the 
kingdom,  you  disobey  the  first  law  of  the  kingdom ;  unless  your  love  reaches  out  to 
all  men,  you  have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,  who  died  for  all.  A  positive  belief  and 
a  missionary  spirit  have  lon^  ago  been  proved  the  indispensable  characteristics  of 
a  living  Church.  The  Lord  speaks  in  tender  tones  to  rouse  our  sympathy  for  those 
who  are  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge.  He  unfolds  the  magnificent  conception 
of  the  empire  of  holy  love,  exalting  the  continents  and  blessing  the  isles.  He 
stands  in  the  midst  of  these  unredeemed  millions  and  says :  "  Come.  Lo  1  I  am 
waiting  for  you  here."  But  behind  all  invitations  stands  the  command,  **  Go, 
preach ; "  and  above  them  all  rises  the  judgment,  for  us  and  for  them,  with  lis 
eternal  blessedness  and  eternal  woe.  (C.  M,  Soutkgate.)  Go : — ♦'  I  hope," 
says  Mr.  Enibb,  of  St.  Petersburg,  in  a  letter,  **  the  subject  of  devoting  ourselves 
and  our  children  to  God  and  to  His  service  will  be  more  thought  of,  and  more  acted 
upon,  than  it  has  been  hitherto.  I  am  more  and  more  convinced  that,  if  St.  Paul 
had  ever  preached  from  this  particular  text,  he  would  have  laid  great  stress  on  the 
word  *  go.'  On  your  peril  do  not  substitute  another  word  for  go.  Preach  is  a  good 
word ;  direct  is  a  good  word ;  collect  is  a  good  word ;  give  is  a  good  word.  They 
are  all  important  in  their  places,  and  cannot  be  dispensed  with.  The  Lord  bless 
and  prosper  tiiose  who  are  so  engaged,  but  still  lay  the  stress  on  the  word  go ;  for 
•  how  can  they  hear  without  a  preacher,  and  how  can  they  preach  except  they  be 
sent  ?  *  Six  hundred  millions  of  the  human  race  are  perishing,  and  there  are  per- 
haps thirty  among  all  the  Christians  in  Britain  who  are  at  this  moment  preparing 
to  *  go  M  "  TI^  commission : — Words  of  strong  authority  from  the  captain  to 
the  soldier ;  from  master  to  servant ;  from  Redeemer  to  redeemed  ;  from  king  to 
subject  No  doubt  as  to  possibility,  no  discussing  of  dangers,  no  calculating  of 
results — "  Go  I "  Great  oceans,  high  mountains,  wide  deserts  are  in  the  way ; 
shipwreck,  fever,  starvation,  death — ♦•  Go  1 "  The  people  are  brutish  and  hard  of 
heart ;  they  have  slain  the  Lord;  they  will  not  hear  the  disciple — "Go  I  "  I  am 
but  a  child,  a  man  of  unclean  lips ;  I  forsook  the  Lord  and  fied ;  I  denied  Him — 
*'  Go  1  •'  (CM.  Southgate. )  Go  ye  into  all  the  icorld. — Peculiarity  of  Christianity : — 
There  is  one  feature  of  Christianity  which  must  strike  the  mind  of  every  observer, 
viz.,  that  no  other  system  of  religion  in  the  world  is  missionary.  They  all  limit 
themselves  to  the  people,  country,  and  clime  where  they  have  grown.  Where  are 
the  missionaries  of  the  religions  of  China,  India,  Africa,  Persia,  or  Japan  ?  But 
no  sooner  was  Christianity  introduced  into  the  world  than  it  sent  forth  its  agencies 
beyond  the  place  oi  its  introduction.  "  Jerusalem,  Judea,  Samaria,  and  the  utmost 
parts  of  the  earth  "  are  the  scope  of  its  operations.  "  Go  ye  into  ail  the  world, 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,"  is  the  command  of  the  Spirit  to  < all  its 
agents.  And  hence  Christianity  has  its  agents,  institutions,  literature,  and  means 
in  every  quarter  of  the  globe.  What  does  this  prove  for  Christianity  ?  That,  as 
a  system  of  rehgion,  it  is  nobler,  grander,  more  benevolent  and  diffusive  than  any 
other;  and  the  success  which  has  crowned  Christianity  wherever  it  has  gone 
demonstrates  that  it  is  Divine  in  its  origin;  adapted  to  all  minds,  hearts,  lives,  and 
countries ;  civilizing,  meliorating,  saving,  and  beautifying  in  its  effects ;  and  the 
only  religion  which  can  restore  a  fallen  world  to  its  glorious  Creator  and  God 
{John  Bate,)  A  strange  messenger: — A  professional  diver  said  he  had  in  hi, 
house  what  would  probably  strike  a  visitor  as  a  very  strange  chimney  ornament — 
the  shells  of  an  oyster  holding  fast  a  piece  of  printed  paper.  The  possessor  of  this 
ornament  was  diving  on  the  coast,  when  he  observed  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  this 
oyster  on  a  rook,  with  a  piece  of  paper  in  its  mouth,  which  he  detached,  and  com- 
menced to  read  through  the  goggles  of  his  head-dress.  It  was  a  gospel  tract,  and, 
coming  to  him  thus  strangely  and  unexpectedly,  so  impressed  his  unconverted 
heart,  that  he  said,  *•  I  can  hold  out  against  God's  mercy  in  Christ  no  longer,  since 
it  pursues  me  thus."  He  became,  whilst  in  the  ocean's  depth,  a  repentant,  con- 
verted, and  (as  he  was  assured)  sin-forgiven  man.  Saved  at  the  bottom  of  the 
sea.  Universality  of  the  message : — The  apostles  understood  their  commission  to 
be  general  and  indiscriminate  for  every  creature ;  so  they  received  it  from  Him  who 
laid  the  foundation  of  such  an  extensive  ministration  by  tasting  death  for  every 
man.  Accordingly,  they  went  forth  on  their  commission,  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
all  the  world.  They  did  not  square  their  message  by  any  human  system  of 
theology,  nor  measure  their  language  to  the  lines  of  Procrustean  creeds.  They 
employed  a  dialect  that  traverse  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  world.  They  did 
not  tremble  for  such  an  unreserv  d  exhibition  of  the  ark  and  the  mercy-seat.    They 


wn,}  ST,  MARK,  n9 

eoold  not  bring  themselyeB  to  stint  the  remedy  which  was  prepared  and  intended  to 
restore  a  dying  world,  nor  would  they  cramp  the  bow  which  God  had  lighted  up  in 
the  storm  which  threatened  all  mankind.  {Dr.  T,  W.  Jenkyn.)  The  Chureh*t 
orderi : — During  the  American  war,  a  regiment  received  orders  to  plant  some  heavy 
guns  on  the  top  of  a  very  steep  hill.  The  soldiers  dragged  them  to  the  base  of  the 
hill,  but  were  unable  to  get  them  any  farther.  An  officer,  learning  the  state  of 
affairs,  said,  **  Men,  it  must  be  done  1  I  have  the  orders  in  my  pocket."  So  the 
Church  has  orders  to  discipline  the  world.  Progresi  of  mistiona  .'—We  sometimes 
complain  of  the  slow  progress  of  missions,  as  though  nothing  had  been  done.  Is 
it  nothing  that  the  Church  has  been  aroused  to  her  duty  7  that  every  large  branch 
of  Zion  has  her  missionary  organization?  that  these  amount  to  eighty?  that  four 
thousand  missionaries  are  in  the  field?  that  t^e  Word  of  Qod  is  preached  in 
fifteen  thousand  localities  of  the  heathen  world  7  ten  million  dollars  are 
collected  annually  to  sustain  these  missions?  that  six  hundred  and  eighty-seTen 
thousand  converts  are  enrolled  in  Africa,  and  seven  hundred  and  thirteen  thousand 
in  Asia  ?  and  that,  if  we  add  to  these  die  fruits  of  the  Bomish  missions,  we  shall 
number  Christians  by  the  million  in  the  heathen  world  ?  {Bp,  H.  M.  Thompton.) 
The  universal  gospel : — The  late  Duke  of  Wellington  once  met  a  young  clergyman, 
who,  being  aware  of  his  Grace's  former  residence  in  the  East,  and  of  his  familiarity 
with  the  ignorance  and  obstinacy  of  the  Hindoos  in  support  of  their  false  religion, 
gravely  proposed  the  following  question :  ••  Does  not  your  Grace  think  it  almost 
useless  and  absurd  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  Hindoos  ?  "  The  Duke  immediately 
rejoined:  **Look,  sir,  to  your  marching  orders,  *  Preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature.***  Stteee$s  of  mi$$ion$: — Carey  and  his  compeers,  the  first  English 
Baptist  missionaries,  laboured  seven  years  before  the  first  Hindoo  convert  was 
baptised.  Judson  toiled  on  for  years  without  any  fruit  of  his  labour,  until  the  few 
churches  in  this  land  which  sustained  him  began  to  be  disheartened.  He  wrote, 
*'  Beg  the  churches  to  have  patience.  If  a  ship  were  here  to  carry  me  to  any  part 
of  the  world,  I  would  not  leave  my  field.  Tell  the  brethren  success  is  as  certain  as 
the  promise  of  a  faithful  God  can  make  it."  The  mission  was  commenced  in  1814. 
In  1870  there  were  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  converts.  Vivifying  effecU  of 
mistion* : — As  Peter  walked  at  eventide,  his  lengthened  shadow,  as  it  fell  on  the 
gathered  sick  in  the  streets  of  Jemsalem,  healed  as  it  swept  over  them ;  even  so  is 
Christianity  going  through  the  earth  like  a  spirit  of  health,  and  the  nations, 
miserable  and  fallen,  start  up  and  live  as  she  passes.  {F.  F.  Trench.)  The  duty 
and  results  of  preaching  the  gospel: — I.  The  extent  ov  oub  ooMMissioif.  1.  **  All 
the  world  '* — ^because  all  the  world  is  involved  in  transgression.  (1)  We  learn  this 
from  Scripture  (Bom.  iii.  19,  23 ;  v.  12).  (2)  Experience  confirms  this.  All  the 
foundations  of  the  world  are  out  of  course.  2.  '*A11  the  world** — because  man's 
wants  are  everywhere  the  same.  All  need  pardon ;  all  need  enlightenment ;  all 
need  peace.  8.  "All  the  world  "—because  God  has  designed  to  collect  a  people 
for  Himself  from  all  the  tribM  and  families  of  men.  II.  Ths  object  ov  oub 
BMBA88T.  To  preach  the  gospel — the  glad  tidings  of  mercy  and  grace.  1.  The 
gospel  most  be  preached  faithfully.  Nothing  of  our  own  put  in ;  nothing  of  God's 
left  out.  2.  The  gospel  must  be  preached  affectionately.  Not  to  drive  men  away, 
but  to  gather  them  in ;  not  to  terrify,  but  to  console.  8.  The  gospel  must  be 
preached  in  complete  and  entire  dependence  upon  the  grace  of  Christ.    IIL  Thb 

VaSUIOB  THAT  WILL  ATTEND  THE  AOOEPTAMOE  OB  BEJECTIOM  OV  OUB  MBSSAOB.      NOUC 

can  perish  but  by  their  own  fault.  {Oeorge  Weight.)  The  obligations  and 
requirements  of  the  gospel : — I.  The  natubb  ow  thb  Chbxbtxah  ukisteb's  oomas- 
sioN.  To  preach  the  gospel,  explain  its  doctrines,  to  enforce  its  precepts,  to  pro- 
claim its  promises,  and  to  denounce  its  threatenings.  H.  Thb  end  ob  nssiaM  ov 
THB  Cheistian  hikistbb'b  COMMISSION.  To  prcBch  the  gospel  in  all  the  world  and 
to  every  creature.  1.  This  implies  that  aU  mankind  stand  in  need  of  the  goepeL 
2.  It  implies  universality  of  design  on  the  part  of  God  to  bestow  the  benefits  of  the 
gospel  on  those  who  receive  it.  8.  It  implies  universal  grace  and  efficiency  as 
accompanying  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  to  render  it  effectual  for  the  salvation  of 
all.  4.  It  implies  an  obligation  on  the  part  of  the  Church  to  send  its  ministers 
literally  into  all  the  world  and  to  every  creature.  HI.  Thb  bequibbmbnts  of  thb 
GOSPEL  VBOM  THOSE  TO  WHOM  IT  IS  PBEAOHBD.  1.  Thc  gospel  rcquires  faith  from 
those  to  whom  it  is  preached.  Saving  faith  consists  of  two  parts.  (1)  The  faith 
bj  which  the  sinner  is  justified.  And  in  this  there  are  three  distinct  acts,  (i) 
The  assent  of  the  understanding,  (ii)  The  consent  of  the  wflL  (iii)  The  soul's 
ii|ose  and  reliance  upon  Christ  for  pardon.     (2)  The  faith  bj  whicn  the  Christiaa 


720  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xn 

daily  lives.  Trust.  Confidence  in  God,  leading  to  prompt  and  willing  obedience. 
2.  Baptism.  The  duties  imposed  upon  all  baptized  are — (1)  To  maintain  an  open 
oonnection  with  the  Church.  (2)  To  defend  the  cause  of  Christ  against  all 
adversaries.  (3)  To  live  a  holy  life.  IV.  The  results  of  the  reception  ob 
REJECTION  OP  THE  GOSPEL.  {E.  GHndrod.)  The  duty  of  $preading  the  gospel : — 
Hnber,  the  great  naturalist,  tells  us  that  if  a  single  wasp  discovers  a  deposit  ol 
honey  or  other  food,  he  will  return  and  impart  the  good  news  to  his  companions, 
who  will  then  sally  forth  in  great  numbers  to  partake  of  the  fare  wliich  has  been 
discovered  for  them.  Shall  we  who  have  found  honey  in  the  rock  Christ  Jesus  be 
less  considerate  of  our  fellow-men  than  wasps  are  of  their  fellow-insects  ?  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  gospel  for  every  creature : — I  heard  of  a  woman  once  who 
thought  that  there  was  no  promise  in  the  Bible  for  her ;  they  were  all  for  other 
people.  One  day  she  got  a  letter,  and,  when  she  opened  it,  found  it  was  not  for 
her  at  all,  but  for  some  other  woman  of  the  same  name.  It  led  her  to  ask  herself, 
"  If  I  should  find  some  promise  in  the  Bible  directed  to  me,  how  should  I  know 
that  it  meant  me,  and  not  some  other  woman  ?  "  And  she  found  out  that  she  must 
just  take  God  at  His  word,  and  include  herself  among  the  "  whosoevers  "  and  the 
"  every  creatures  "  to  whom  the  gospel  is  freely  preached.  (D.  L.Moody.)  The 
great  commission : — Christianity  and  missions  are  inseparable.  A  Christian  is  one  who 
professes  to  obey  Jesus.  Jesus  has  distinctly  told  us  to  go  and  preach  the  gospel  through- 
out  the  world  ;  therefore,  whatever  objections  may  be  brought  against  Christian  mis- 
sions, are  really  brought  against  the  authority  of  Christ  and  against  Christianity  itself. 
The  Christian  who  opposes  Christian  missions  is  an  anomaly.  Some  philosophers 
may  say  that  Christianity  is  unsuited  to  the  circumstances  of  every  nation.  Some 
philanthropists  may  say  there  is  a  better  method  of  doing  good  to  the  world ;  some 
patriots  may  say  that  all  we  can  do  should  be  done  in  our  own  country ;  some 
politicians  may  say  that  it  is  unwise  to  interfere  with  the  established  institutions  of 
other  countries ;  some  practical  men  may  say  the  results  accomplished  are  not 
worth  the  pains  taken.  Now,  if  we  have  no  distinct  reply  to  any  of  these  objec- 
tions, it  is  sufficient  that  we  are  ander  the  orders  of  Christ,  and  those  orders  we 
must  comply  with.  Suppose  that  when  the  commander-in-chief  of  an  army  calls 
his  ofl&cers  to  him  and  says :  "  You  are  to  storm  every  battery,  to  attack  every 
position,  of  the  enemy,"  then  the  subordinate  officers  were  to  say ;  ♦*  I  can't  see 
the  reason  of  this ;  there's  an  insuperable  difficulty  yonder ;  we  had  better  delay 
;  the  execution  of  the  command."  It  would  be  monstrous,  although  it  might  be  that 
I  your  commander  is  mistaken,  or  perhaps  the  command  itself  is  ambiguous.  But 
I  in  this  case  the  command  is  net  ambiguous  ;  nothing  could  be  more  clear — go  ;  go 
*  everywhere,  go  everywhere  and  preach ;  preach  the  gospel  to  every  one.  Nothing 
could  be  plainer.  And  then  there  is  great  emphasis  given  to  the  command  by  the 
circumstances  under  which  it  was  uttered.  A  command  in  battle  may  be  given  in 
the  time  of  conflict,  and  so  the  order  may  be  mistaken  ;  but  this  command  was  not 
given  under  the  excitement  of  conflict ;  the  conflict  was  over,  the  battle  finished, 
the  victory  over  death  had  been  won,  and  calmly,  as  by  a  conqueror,  this  word  of 
command  was  given.  We  think  much  of  the  last  words  of  any  one  who  addresses  us. 
These  are  Christ's  last  words:  there  is  great  emphasis  about  them.  Part  of 
Christ's  work  was  complete,  the  great  work  of  offering  a  sacrifice  for  the  world ; 
but  part  of  Christ's  work  was  not  complete,  the  work  of  publishing  the  gospel.  His 
own  personal  ministry  was  limited — in  locality,  in  time — it  only  extended  over 
Palestine,  and  only  lasted  three  years.  But  the  ministry  of  Christ  in  the  publica- 
tion of  His  gospel  was  to  be  continued  through  the  agency  of  His  Church.  I. 
What  ?  what  is  it  we  have  to  do  ?  1.  Preach  the  gospel.  The  world  had  to  be 
possessed  for  Christ.  By  the  emplo3mient  of  what  weapons  ?  Shall  swordd  and 
spears  be  collected,  soldiers  trained,  armies  organized  ?  *'  Preach  the  gospel." 
Shall  the  arts  of  diplomacy  be  used  ?  Shall  statesmen  and  rulers  be  upraised  so 
that  they  may  pass  laws  by  which  whole  communities  under  their  influence  shall 
be  gathered,  at  least  outwardly,  into  the  Church?  "Preach  the  gospel."  Shall 
the  servants  of  Christ  be  engaged  to  amass  wealth,  so  that  by  money — which  is  said 
to  be  able  to  do  everything — we  may  purchase  the  adhesion  of  the  world?  "Preach 
the  gospel."  Disdaining  these  carnal  methods  referred  to,  shall  we  apply  ourselves 
to  other  methods  more  spiritual ?  Shall  we  apply  ourselves  to  philosophy?  Shall 
we  take  ourselves  to  the  current  theories  of  the  day,  and  try  to  overcome  the 
prejudices  of  the  learned,  and  win  the  intellect  of  the  wise  ?  **  Preach  the  gospel." 
2.  What,  then,  is  this  gospel?  Good  news.  That,  then,  is  the  gospel— the 
SftTioor— Christ    And  this  gospel  is  to  be  preached — not  displayed  in  outward 


9au9.  TfU]  8T,  MARK.  711 

forms  and  znystie  oeremonies,  ab  the  oeremonies  of  the  Old  Testament  indioated 
typically  the  glory  that  was  to  oome.  Go  and  preach  it,  declare  the  truth,  speak  it 
to  men's  minds,  that  it  may  enter  their  hearts.  3.  But  why  should  it  be  preached  f 
by  men  7  Why  should  it  not  have  been  made  knovra  by  some  supernatural, 
miraoolons  manner  to  every  one?  Why  the  delay  connected  with  preaching? 
There  are  mysteries  we  cannot  solve.  The  arts  and  sciences  have  been  left  for 
man  to  work  out.  God  gives  us  the  materials  for  food — we  prepare  them ;  pro- 
vides the  land — we  have  to  cultivate  it ;  gives  salvation — we  have  to  accept  it ;  the 
gospel  message — we  have  to  propagate  it.  Then,  again,  we  might  say  our  own 
spiritual  culture  requires  this  work  ;  it  would  be  an  injurious  thing  for  us  if  we  had 
not  this  work  to  do.  It  is  not  likely  we  oan  understand  all  the  mysteries  of  the 
Divine  procedure,  but  there  is  the  distinct  precept  we  have  to  obey.  "  Preach  the 
gospel."  II.  Why  ?  Ancient  predictions  prepared  us  for  this  commission.  Some 
say — ^we  all  say — charity  begins  at  home,  so  the  commission  runs,  *•  beginning  at 

,  Jerusalem."  The  apostles  unfurled  the  banner  of  the  cross  at  Jerusalem,  and  then 
went  forth  displaying  it  before  all  the  world.  Very  soon  after  they  began  to  preach 
at  Jerusalem  the  gospel  was  proclaimed  at  Damascus,  Ephesus,  Athens,  Borne,  and 
afterwards  it  extended  to  Macedonia,  Spain,  and  Britain.  Does  some  one  say  our 
own  eoontry  needs  all  we  can  do  to  benefit  mankind,  all  our  efforts  and  all  our 
money,  let  as  wait  till  all  evil  is  rectified  in  our  own  land  ?  Then  I  would  ask 
who  are  doing  the  most  for  their  own  land ;  are  they  not  generally  found  to  be 
those  who  are  doing  most  for  other  lands  7  But  cannot  man  be  saved  without 
bearing  the  gospel  ?  Why  therefore  go  to  them  ?  That  might  be  said  with  reference 
to  people  here  in  England.  Why  preach  at  home  ?  If  the  objection  holds  good 
in  one  case,  it  would  hold  good  in  the  other.  "  Go  into  all  the  world."  But  don't 
you  increase  the  responsibility  of  a  nation  when  you  make  known  to  them  the 
gospel,  supposing  they  reject  it  7  Is  not  the  man  more  guilty  the  more  he  knows  7 
Such  an  objection  would  apply  equally  to  preaching  at  home,  so  we  should  have  no 
preaching  at  all.  But  if  one  country  in  the  world  is  well  adapted  for  this  particular 
system  of  truth,  there  are  other  countries  that  are  altogether  different  from  that 
eoontry,  and  what  is  fit  for  it  cannot  be  good  for  the  other.  '*  Go  ye  into  all  the 
world."    We  keep  to  our  commission  ;  the  command  is  very  clear.    Well,  but  some 

^jUUZIitnejS  are  too  cold;  their  icy  mountains  frown  away  the  fanatics  who  would  go  to 
those  shivering  wretches  gorging  their  blubber  in  their  snow-huts  to  try  and  explain 
to  them  the  mysteries  of  Christianity.  "  Go  into  all  the  world."  But  some 
eountries  are  too  hot ;  the  burning  suns,  scorching  blast,  and  arid  deserts  forbid  the 
tBings  that  are  suited  to  temperate  climes.  "  Go  into  all  the  world."  But  some 
nations  are  highly  civilized,  and  don't  need  your  gospel  as  savage  nations  do. 
**Go  into  all  the  world."  But  some  are  two  barbarous,  eating  one  another,  and 
looking  hungrily  at  yon ;  it's  madness  to  go  and  teach  them  the  mysteries  of 
Christianity.  "Go  into  all  the  world."  Bat  some  parts  of  the  world  are  the 
homes  of  ancient  idolatries ;  their  gods  are  visible,  and  their  worship  is  fortified  by 
the  indulgence  of  cruelty  and  lust.  It  is  impossible  to  win  such  nations  to  the  pure 
worship  of  an  invisible  Spirit.  "  Go  into  all  the  world."  But  some  nations  are 
the  worshippers  of  one  God  with  a  comparatively  pure  form  of  faith ;  why  disturb 
them  7  "  Go  into  all  the  world."  But  your  religion  of  the  West  cannot  be  suited 
to  the  oostoms  of  the  East.  That  which  suits  Anglo-Saxons  cannot  suit  Orientals. 
But  onr  religion  had  its  birthplace  in  the  East.  Missionaries  from  Syria  first 
came  to  Britain  ;  now  we  take  back  the  gospel  that  we  received  from  them.  The 
gospel  has  been  preached  throughout  the  world :  it  has  gone  back  to  Palestine, 
^gyp^f  Jndea,  Samaria,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth.  The  Anglc-Saxon  race 
— Uie  depositories  of  Christianity — have  spread  through  the  world ;  our  commerce 
is  in  every  country,  our  ships  sail  over  every  sea,  our  language  is  spoken  in  every 
clime ;  by  the  aid  of  printing,  Bibles  and  books  are  multiplied  in  almost  every 
language.  XII.  To  whom  7  **  To  every  creature."  Not  only  to  nations,  you  will 
observe,  as  ^ongh  we  could  convert  a  nation  at  once  by  gaining  over  the  rulers 
and  their  passing  laws.  No;  "go  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature." 
Christianity  is  a  personal  thing.  Believe  thou  the  gospel.  It  is  for  every  creature. 
Ood  woold  not  invite  to  a  banquet  those  for  whom  there  was  no  room.  Yes,  for 
•*  every  creature."  Christ,  who  constitutes  the  gospel,  is  Divine,  and  therefore 
Infinite ;  if  not  Divine,  and  merely  human,  there  would  be  a  limitation  about  His 
powtf.  **  To  every  creature."  The  most  unlikely  persons  to  receive  the  goepel 
DATa  often  been  the  first  to  accept  it.  Publicans  and  harlots  enter  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  before  some  of  those  who  seemed  to  be  far  advanced  on  the  way ;  Uiere- 

46 


Tit  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0IL  [ohaf.  m. 

fore  we  are  to  piteaoh,  not  only  to  barbarous  tribes  as  saoh,  bat  to  the  most 
degraded  specimens  of  those  tribes.  What  1  to  this  hoary-headed  heathen  whose 
heathenism  is  bound  up  in  his  very  life?  "Every  creature."  What  I  to  this 
fierce  cannibal  gloating  over  his  victories?  *•  Every  creature.**  What  I  to  this 
wild  tenant  of  the  woods  whose  intellect  seems  little  above  the  intellect  of  the 
brutes ;  who  seems  as  if  he  had  no  wishes  but  the  most  debased  of  his  own  debased 
people.  "To  every  creature."  What  I  to  this  man  of  cultivation?  "Every 
creature.*'  It  is  for  sinners,  and  I  am  a  sinner.  It  is  for  all,  and  I  am  one  of  the 
all ;  and  so,  having  received  it,  I  publish  it  to  others.    {N.  Hall,  LL.B.) 

Ver.  16.     He  that  belleveth  and  li  baptlied  ahall  be  savtd. — On  that  belief 

which  is  necessary  to  baptism: — The  text  is  an  abridgement  of  our  Lord's  last 
instructions  to  His  apostles  before  His  ascension.  Other  parts  of  the  same  dis- 
course are  to  be  found  in  Matt,  xxviii.  18-20 ;  John  xz.  21.  See  also  Luke  xxiv. 
45.  By  comparing  these  passages  with  this,  it  will  appear  that  by  "  believing  and 
being  baptized,"  St.  Mark  plainly  means,  "  believing,  repenting,  and  obeying  the 
gospel " — three  things  which  cannot  be  separated  from  each  other.  He  who 
believes  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  when  preached  to  him,  and  by  baptism  enters 
into  an  obligation  to  live  suitably  to  that  belief,  and  verifies  that  obligation  by  his 
practice,  in  a  life  of  virtue,  righteousness,  and  charity — shall  be  saved ;  but  he  who 
rejects  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  when  duly  and  reasonably  proposed  to  him,  or 
pretending  to  embrace  it,  yet  obeys  it  not — shall  be  damned.      I.    The  subject- 

MATTEB  OF  THE   BELIEF  NBCESSABY  TO  SALVATION.      1.   A  doctrinC  of  practice,  virtUO, 

and  righteousness,  within  the  comprehension  of  all  men.  2.  It  is  to  be  found  in 
our  very  nature  and  reason.  3.  It  is  delivered  to  us,  over  and  over  again,  in  the 
Scriptures.  4.  It  is  briefly,  but  sufficiently,  stated  in  the  creeds  of  the  Church. 
II.  The  matubs  and  extent  of  the  act  of  BELiEviNa.  1.  A  firm  persuasion, 
founded  upon  reasonable  and  good  grounds.  Not  such  a  careless  credulity  as,  like  a 
foundation  in  the  sand,  quickly  suffers  whatever  is  built  upon  it  to  fall  to  the 
ground  (Prov.  xiv.  14  ;  Acts  xvii.  11).  Wise  believers  will — (1)  Consider  the  purity 
and  excellence  of  the  doctrine  itself,  and  its  accordance  with  reason,  and  the  nature 
and  attributes  of  God.  (2)  Ponder  the  evidence  of  the  miracles  wrought  by  Christ. 
(3)  Examine  the  prophecies  which  went  before  concerning  Him,  and  compare  the 
actions  of  His  life  therewith.  (4)  Consider  also  the  prophecies  that  He  Himself 
delivered,  and  His  apostles  after  Him,  and  compare  them  with  the  whole  series  of 
events  from  that  time  to  this.  Thus  they  will  work  in  themselves  ft  firm  per- 
suasion, founded  upon  reasonable  and  good  grounds.  2.  Such  a  persuasion  of 
mind  as  produces  suitable  and  proper  effects.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  The  necessity  of 
believing : — I.  Objections  which  have  been  made  to  the  fact  that,  in  the  great  con- 
cern of  man's  salvation,  so  much  stress  is  laid  upon  faith.  1.  Objections  respecting 
persons.  Many  have  never  heard  of  Christ  or  His  gospel.  True ;  therefore  they 
cannot  be  included  in  the  statement  of  the  text.  They  are  in  the  hands  of  » 
gracious  God,  who  may  bestow  on  them  the  mercies  of  a  redemption  of  which  they 
never  heard.  The  same  will  apply  to  infants,  idiots,  insane  persons,  and  those  of 
defective  understanding.  God  will  not  exact  the  tale  of  bricks,  where  He  has  not 
thought  proper  to  furnish  straw.  We  may  conclude,  in  like  manner,  concerning 
what  is  called  invincible  ignorance,  or  ignorance  so  circumstanced  as  to  admit  of  no 
remedy.  Where  nothing  is  taught,  nothing  can  be  learned.  But  let  a  man  be  very 
cautious  how  he  attempts  to  shelter  himself  under  this  plea.  At  the  great  day  it 
will  be  inquired  very  minutely,  not  only  what  we  did  know,  but  also  what  we  might 
have  known  had  we  so  pleased — had  we  been  in  earnest  and  taken  due  pains. 
However  it  may  fare  with  the  heathen  and  others,  in  a  state  really  destitute  of 
information,  we  shall  in  vain  attempt  to  excuse  our  unbelief,  or  misbelief,  by  our 
ignorance.  2.  Objections  respecting  doctrines.  (1)  They  are  mysterious;  they 
relate  to  persons  and  things  in  another  world,  which  are  therefore  hidden  from  us. 
What,  then,  is  to  be  done  ?  Why,  certainly,  we  must  believe  what  God  has  been 
pleased  to  reveal  concerning  them ;  and  we  must  form  our  notions  of  them,  as  well 
as  we  can,  by  comparison  with  those  things  which  are  the  objects  of  our  senses. 
Our  state,  with  regard  to  God  and  the  glories  of  His  heavenly  kingdom,  is  exactly 
like  the  state  of  a  blind  man,  with  regard  to  the  sun,  and  the  light  thereof.  He 
cannot  see  the  sun,  or  the  light  that  issues  from  it ;  yet  he  would  be  unreasonable, 
should  he  refuse  to  believe  what  his  friends,  who  do  see  it,  tell  him  concerning  it ; 
though,  after  all,  they  can  but  give  him  a  very  poor,  imperfect  idea  of  it.  If  it 
~  Ood  to  open  his  eyes,  and  bestow  on  him  the  blessing  of  sight,  he  would 


CHAP,  xn.}  ST.  MARK*  723 

Imow  more  of  the  matter  in  one  single  moment,  than  deseription,  study,  and  medi- 
iation  ooald  have  taught  him  in  ten  thousand  years.  Such  is  our  case.  We  cannot 
see  God — the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit — we  cannot  see  how  they  are 
three,  and  yet  one.  But  shall  we  therefore,  in  opposition  to  the  authority  and  word 
of  God  Himself,  deny  that  they  are  so  f  We  may  reason  and  dispute  upon  the 
eubject  for  ages ;  but  in  that  instant  when  we  are  admitted  to  His  presence,  and  see 
Him  as  He  is,  every  doubt  and  difficulty  will  vanish  at  once ;  and  we  shall  know 
bow  little  we  did  know,  or  possibly  could  know,  before.  (3)  Learned  men  have 
been  engaged  in  controversies  about  these  doctrines  for  many  hundred  years,  and 
are  not  yet  agreed ;  what,  therefore,  must  the  unlearned  do  ?  (i)  Learned  men  have 
carried  on  controversies  about  everything.  If  we  waited  till  they  were  agreed  among 
themselves,  we  should  believe  nothing,  and  do  nothing,  (ii)  All  the  £sputes  con- 
cerning the  Trinity,  have  been  owing  to  the  vain,  idle,  and  presumptuous  curiosity 
of  men,  who,  instead  of  believing  what  God  has  revealed  will  ever  be  prying  into 
that  which  He  has  not  revealed.  IL  Thb  obounds  and  bbaboms  ov  faith.  Little 
need  be  said  as  to  this.  For,  to  what  purpose  is  the  gospel  preached,  unless  that  it 
should  be  believed?  When  God,  with  so  stupendous  a  preparation  of  prophecies 
And  miracles,  has  published  His  Word,  can  it  be  a  matter  of  indifference  whether 
we  believe  it  or  not?  No ;  the  Divine  Word  is  not  an  insignificant  Word ;  it  is  set, 
like  its  Author,  for  the  falling  or  rising  of  many.  It  is  not  without  its  effect  in  every 
one  to  whom  it  is  preached.  A  strange  doctrine  has  of  late  years  been  diffused 
among  us ;  that  sincerity  is  everything,  and  that  if  a  man  be  but  sincere,  it  matters 
tiot  what  he  beheves,  or  what  he  does.  If  this  principle  be  carried  to  its  full  extent, 
it  must  take  away  all  distinctioc  between  truth  and  falsehood,  right  and  vrrong :  it 
«ets  upon  a  level  those  who  crucified  Christ,  and  those  who  accepted  Him  as  their 
Lord  and  Master ;  those  who  persecuted  the  Christians,  and  the  Christians  who 
were  persecuted.  Before  a  man  can  lay  any  claim  to  sincerity,  in  the  full  and 
proper  sense  of  the  word,  he  must  be  able  to  show,  when  God,  to  whom  all  things 
are  known,  and  all  hearts  are  open,  shall  call  upon  him,  that  he  has  not,  through 
indolence,  neglected  to  search  after  the  truth ;  nor,  through  passion,  prejudice,  or 
interest,  refused  to  receive  it.  This  will  go  to  the  bottom  of  the  dispute,  and  lay 
open  the  deception.  It  will  enable  us  likewise  to  answer  another  plea  sometimes 
urged  in  favour  of  infidelity,  viz.,  that  there  can  be  no  merit,  or  demerit,  in  be- 
lieving, or  disbelieving ;  that  a  man  cannot  believe  as  he  pleases,  but  only  as  the 
evidence  appears  to  him.  Answer :  If  God  have  given,  as  He  certainly  has,  good  and 
Boffioient  evidence,  it  is  at  any  man's  peril  that  he  rejects  it ;  and  he  rejects  it,  not 
beoanse  the  evidence  is  insuf&cient,  but  because  his  own  heart  is  corrupt.  {Biihop 
Home.)  ChrUVt  last  words: — These  words  require  as  serious  attention  as  any 
ever  spoken.  They  are  the  words  of  the  risen  Christ,  and  His  last  words.  They 
«ontain  in  them  the  sum  of  the  gospel.  Life  and  death,  and  the  conditions 
of  both ;  the  terms  of  eternal  happiness  and  misery.  If  a  malefactor  at  the 
bar  should  see  the  judge  going  about  to  declare  to  him  upon  what  he  might 
expect  life  or  death,  how  diligently  he  wocQd  attend.  All  sinners  are  male- 
factors. The  Judge  of  heaven  and  earth  declares  here,  upon  what  terms  we 
may  live,  though  we  be  cast  out,  found  guilty,  and  condemned.  It  is  not  a 
matter  of  credit  or  estate,  but  a  matter  of  life  and  death,  of  liie  life  of  our 
fionls.  It  is  no  less  than  eternal  life  or  eternal  death  that  these  words  concern. 
Faith  and  unbelief: — Salvation  or  damnation  depend  upon  faith  and  unbelief.  No 
salvation  but  by  faith.  Nothing  but  damnation  by  unbelief.  Faith  is  the  principal 
«aving  grace,  and  unbelief  the  chief  damning  sin.  No  sin  can  danm  without  this, 
mnd  this  will  danm  without  any  other  sin  (John  iii.  18).  Where  there  is  not  faith, 
the  sentence  of  condemnation  is  in  full  force.  UnbeUef  is  the  symptom  of  eternal 
death.  There  is  nothing  but  death  to  be  expected  where  this  continues ;  no  hope 
of  eternal  life  for  him  who  continues  in  unbelief.  He  is  dead  while  he  Uvea ;  in 
hell  while  on  earth.  This  being  so,  it  concerns  us  to  know  what  it  is  to  believe. 
Faith  comprises — 1.  Knowledge.  If  knowledge  be  not  faith,  yet  there  can  be  no 
faith  without  knowledge.  Blind  faith  is  good  for  nothing  but  to  lead  people  into 
the  ditoh.  That  ignorance  is  the  mother  of  devotion  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the 
father  of  lies.  Bather,  it  ii  the  nurse  of  unbelief.  The  first  step  to  conversion  is  to  open 
the  eyes,  to  scatter  darkness  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  The  first  thing  God  produces  in  the  soul, 
as  in  the  natural  creation,  is  light.  The  convert  must  have  a  competent  knowledge  of 
the  mysteries  of  the  gospel — a  knowledge  more  distino  ,  more  convincing,  more  affect- 
ing, than  that  which  he  had  in  the  state  of  unbelief  2.  Assent.  As  to  the  prin- 
«ipleB  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  so  wpecially  to  the  following  truths.    (1)  That  Le 


724  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  ifl. 

needs  a  Sayioar.    Soriptnre  declares  this  upon  three  groonds — (a)  the  sinfnhiess  oi 
a  natural  man;  (6)  his  misery;  (c)  hie  inability  to  free  himself  from  it.    (2)  That 
Christ  is  the  only  all-sufficient  Saviour.    3.  Reliance  upon  the  Lord  Jesos  Christ. 
Not  to  believe  Him,  but  to  believe  on  Him  (Acts  xix.  4;  Rom.  ix.  33  ;  Gal.  iii.  24; 
Eph.  i.  15 ;  &o.).     Not  to  give  credit  to,  but  to  rely  on  Him.     This  is  the  essence, 
the  formality  of  saving  faith.    There  cannot  be  justifying  faith  without  knowledge 
and  assent,  though  there  may  be  knowledge  and  assent  without  it ;  these  are  as  the 
body  to  faith,  this  relying  is  the  souJ ;  without  this,  knowledge  and  assent  are  but 
a  carcase.    The  devils  and  hypocrites  may  have  more  knowledge,  and  they  may  have 
as  firm  an  assent,  but  this  act  is  above  their  reach,  and  they  never  attain  it. 
{Ibid.)        The  nature  of  faith : — 1.  To  believe  is  to  come  to  Christ ;  to  betake  our- 
selves to  Him.    In  Heb.  x.  22,  we  are  exhorted  to  come  with  full  sail,  with  all  haste, 
as  a  ship  when  it  makes  all  its  sail.      There  is  no  sanctuary  for  a  guilty  soul  but 
Christ  only ;  therefore  the  sinner  must  fly  to  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  and  take 
hold  of  the  horns  of  the  altar.    2.  To  believe  in  Christ  is  to  lean  upon  Him,  to  stay 
and  rest  on  Him.    None  but  Christ  can  stay  the  sinner's  soul  from  falling  inta 
everlasting  burnings.    3.  To  believe  in  Christ  is  to  adhere  to  him,  to  cleave  to  Him, 
cling  about  Him.    A  man  that  has  suffered  shipwreck  is  left  to  the  mercy  of  the 
waves  ;  has  nothing  in  his  reach  to  save  him  but  some  plank  or  mast.    How  will 
he  cling  to  it !  how  fast  will  he  clasp  I    He  will  hold  it  as  if  it  were  his  life  (2  Kinge 
xviii.  5 ;  Deut.  iv.  4).     So  Christ  is  our  only  security.    4.  To  believe  in  Christ  is  to 
roll,  to  cast  ourselves  upon  Him  (Psa.  xxii.  8 ;  xxxvii.  5 ;  Iv.  23).    Sin  is  a  heavy, 
a  most  grievous  burden  (Amos  ii.  13).    The  weight  of  sin,  though  Christ  had  none 
of  His  own,  made  Him  sweat  blood.    It  is  burdened  with  the  wrath  and  heavy 
indignation  of  God ;  it  is  clogged  with  the  curses  and  threatenings  of  the  law.    Na 
wonder  if  one  sin  be  as  a  millstone  about  the  neck  of  the  soul,  able  to  sink  it  into 
the  bottom  of  hell.    But  though  so  burdensome,  yet  the  sinner,  before  conversion, 
feels  no  weight  in  it.    How  can  he,  seeing  he  is  dead  ?    Cast  rocks  and  moun- 
tains upon  a  dead  man,  and  he  feels  them-  not.     Ay,  but  when  the  Lord  begins  to 
work  faith,  and  brings  the  sinner  to  Himself,  then  he  feels  it  burdensome  indeed, 
and  groans  under  its  weight.    None  can  ease  him  but  Christ ;  and  Christ  bids  him 
come,  and  lay  his  burden  on  Him.    Glad  tidings  these ;  the  sinner  closes  with 
Christ,  rolls  himself,  oasts  his  burdened  soul  upon  Him,  and  so  believes.    6.  To 
believe  in  Christ  is  to  apply  Him.     It  is  an  intimate  application,  such  as  that  of 
meat  and  drink  by  one  pinched  with  hunger  and  fainting  with  thirst  (John  vi.  51- 
56).    Nothing  can  save  the  soul,  but  a  draught  of  the  water  of  life,  a  taste  of  Christ. 
6.  To  believe  in  Christ  is  to  receive  Him.    A  condemned  person  upon  the  scaffold* 
all  the  instruments  of  death  ready,  and  nothing  wanting  but  one  blow  to  separate 
soul  and  body,  while  he  is  possessed  with  sad  apprehensions  of  death  one  unex- 
pectedly comes  and  brings  him  a  pardon.    Oh,  how  will  his  heart  welcome  it  1    How 
will  his  hands  receive  it,  as  though  his  soul  were  in  his  hands  1    So  here.    7.  To 
believe  in  Christ  is  to  apprehend  Him,  to  lay  hold  of  Him,  to  embrace  Him.    As  in 
the  case  of  Peter  walking  on  the  water  to  come  to  Christ :  so,  to  walk  in  the  ways  of 
sin,  is  to  walk  as  it  were  upon  the  waters ;  there  is  no  sure  footing,  how  bold  soever 
sinners  are  to  venture.    If  God's  patience  were  not  infinite,  we  should  sink  every 
moment.    The  sensible  sinner  begins  to  see  his  danger,  patience  will  ere  long  with- 
draw, it  will  not  be  always  abused ;  a  tempest  of  wrath  will  arise ;  nay,  he  finds  it 
grow  boisterous,  it  does  already  ruffle  his  conscience,  he  is  as  sure  to  sink  as  if  he 
were  walking  upon  the  waves.    Nay,  he  feels  his  soul  already  sinking ;  no  wondev 
if  he  cry  out  as  a  lost  man,  as  one  ready  to  be  swallowed  up  in  a  sea  of  wrath.    Bnt 
now  Christ  stretches  out  His  hand  in  the  gospel,  and  the  soul  stretches  itself  out 
and  lays  hold  on  the  everlasting  arm  which  alone  can  save  it.    This  may  be  suffi- 
cient to  discover  the  nature  of  faith.    But  for  further  evidence,  observe  what  is 
included  in  it,  as  appears  by  what  has  gone  before.    (1)  A  sense  of  misery.    It  is  » 
sensible  dependence,  therefore  more  than  simple  assent.    A  man  who  has  read  or 
heard  much  of  the  sad  effects  of  war,  may  assent,  believe  that  it  is  a  great  misery 
to  be  infected  with  war.    Ay,  but  when  the  enemy  is  at  his  door,  when  they  are 
driving  his  cattle  and  plundering  his  goods  and  firing  his  houses,  he  not  only 
assents  to  it,  he  sees,  he  feels  the  miseries  of  it;  he  has  more  sensible,  more 
affecting  apprehensions  of  it  than  ever  before.      So  a  sinner  who  continues  in 
unbelief,  hearing  the  threatenings  and   wrath   denounced  against   onbelievers, 
may  assent  to  the  statement  that  unbelievers  are  in  a  miserable  condition ;  but 
when  the  Lord  is  working  faith,  he  brings  this  home  to  himself,  he  sees  justioe 
ready  to  leiae  on  him,  he  feels  wrath  kindling  upon  him.     EDb  now  not  only 


.  xn.]  ST.  MARK.  725 


believes  it,  bnt  has  a  qnick  sense  of  it.  (2)  A  rejecting  of  other  supports. 
Dependence  upon  Christ  alone.  When  the  soul,  feeling  the  flame  of  wrath  kindling 
upon  her,  cries  out  as  one  already  perishing,  "  None  but  Christ,  none  but 
Christ,"  then  he  is  on  the  highway  to  faith.  But  alas !  bo  averse  are  we, 
naturfiily,  to  Christ,  that  He  is  the  last  thing  a  sinner  looks  after.  Till  he 
apprehend  himself  as  an  orphan,  without  strength,  without  counsel,  all  his  sup- 
ports dead  which  were  a  father  to  him,  he  will  not  betake  himself  to  Christ  as 
his  only  guardian  ;  till  he  thus  betakes  himself  to  Christ,  he  beUeves  not. 
(3)  Submission.  Faith  is  a  very  submissive  grace.  Sin  and  wrath  lie  so  heavy,  that 
the  soul  bends  itself  gladly  to  whatever  the  Lord  will.  If  the  shipwrecked  man  can 
get  to  shore,  can  save  himself  from  drowning,  he  regards  not  the  wetting  of  bis 
clothes,  the  spoiling  of  his  goods  ;  a  greater  matter  is  in  danger.  So  it  is  with  a 
sinner  in  whom  faith  is  working.  His  soul  is  in  a  sea  of  wrath,  and  he  is  ready  to 
sink.  If  he  can  but  reach  Christ,  get  to  shore,  he  is  content,  though  he  come  there 
naked,  stripped  of  all  that  was  otherwise  dear  to  him.  (4)  Eesolution  to  persist  in 
his  dependence.  When  Satan  or  his  own  guilty  soul  tells  him  that  he  must  come 
forth,  there  is  no  mercy  for  such  a  traitor,  such  a  heinous  offender ;  nay,  says  the 
believing  soul,  but  if  I  must  die,  I  will  die  here ;  if  justice  smite  me,  it  shall  smite 
me  with  Christ  in  my  arms ;  though  He  kill  me,  yet  will  I  rely  on  Him  ;  here  will 
I  live  or  here  will  I  die ;  I  will  not  quit  my  hold,  though  I  die  for  it.  (5)  Support. 
He  is  on  the  Bock  of  Ages  ;  he  who  stays  on  Him  stands  firm ;  he  cannot  but  have 
some  support  for  the  present,  though  he  has  little  confidence,  no  assurance.  (6)  A 
consent  to  accept  Christ  on  His  own  terms.  The  will  is  naturally  closed  against 
Christ,  but  consent  opens  it ;  and  when  the  will  is  open  to  receive  Him,  it  always 
receives  Him ;  when  it  opens,  it  consents  ;  when  it  consents,  it  receives,  i.e.,  believes. 
(Ibid.)  T?ie  misery  of  unbelievers : — A  dreadful  representation  of  this  here.  1. 
The  unbeliever  is  without  Christ,  the  fountain  of  life.  His  heart  is  the  habitation 
of  the  devil.  He  has  no  rights  in  Christ.  Nothing  to  do  with  the  righteousness  ol 
Christ.  Nor  with  the  intercession  of  Christ.  No  life  in  him,  2.  He  is  without 
the  covenant,  the  evidence  of  life.  The  promises  are  not  for  him.  Nothing  is  sealed 
to  him  but  condemnation.  3.  Without  grace,  the  beginning  of  life.  How  finely 
soever  the  sepulchre  is  painted  and  beautified  without,  if  faith  be  not  within  there 
is  nothing  but  dead  bones  and  rottenness ;  nothing  bnt  what  is  as  loathsome  in  the 
eye  of  God  as  the  rottenness  of  a  dead  carcase  is  to  us.  4.  He  has  no  title  to  heaven, 
which  is  eternal  life.  5.  He  is  far  from  life ;  so  far  as  never  to  come  in  sight  of  it, 
never  see  it.  6.  The  wrath  of  God  abides  on  him.  (1)  Wrath.  Not  anger  or  dis- 
pleasure merely,  though  that  were  dreadful ;  but  wrath — subhmated  anger,  anger 
blown  up  into  a  terrible  flame.  A  consuming  fire,  the  furnace  made  seven  times 
hotter  (Isa.  xxxiii.  14).  (2)  The  wrath  of  God.  The  wrath  of  all  the  kings  of  the 
earth  and  all  the  angels  of  heaven  put  together  is  as  nothing  compared  with  this. 
Theirs  woold  but  be  as  the  breath  of  one's  nostrils ;  whereas  the  wrath  of  God  is 
as  a  whirlwind  that  rends  the  rocks,  and  tears  up  the  mountains,  and  shakes  the 
foundations  of  the  earth,  and  shrivels  up  the  heavens  like  a  scroll,  and  causes  the 
whole  fabric  of  heaven  and  earth  to  stagger  like  a  drunken  man.  Oh,  who  knows 
the  power  of  His  wrath  1  Their  wrath  is  but  like  a  spark ;  His  wrath  is  like  a  river, 
a  sea  of  kindled  brimstone.  This  wrath  of  God  will  be  thy  portion  if  thou  believe 
not.  (3)  It  is  the  wrath  of  God  on  him.  Not  near,  or  coming  towards,  but  on  bim. 
Not  that  all  the  wrath  of  God  is  on  him  already,  for  there  are  vials  of  wratii  that 
will  never  be  emptied,  never  emptier,  though  the  Lord  be  pouring  them  forth  to  aU 
eternity.  It  is  compared  to  a  river  which  is  continually  running ;  and  when  it  has 
run  some  hundred  years,  there  is  as  much  to  come  as  if  there  were  none  nm  by 
already ;  it  will  run  on  thee  to  eternity,  unless  by  believing  thou  stop  it,  divert  the 
course  of  it  in  time.  The  first-fruits  of  wrath  are  reaped  now,  but  a  full  harvest  ia 
coming ;  and  the  longer  thou  continuest  in  unbehef,  the  riper  thou  art  for  that 
dreadful  harvest.  (4)  It  is  abiding  wrath.  Not  on  and  off,  but  always  on  without 
intermission.  On  him  in  every  place,  in  every  state,  in  every  enjoyment,  in  every 
undertaking.  (Ibid.)  The  difficulty  of  faith :— Some  have  an  idea  that  faith  is 
a  business  of  no  great  difficulty.  They  wonder  why  any  should  make  such  ado 
about  believing  :  they  think  it  an  easy  thing  to  believe,  and  so  trouble  not  them- 
selves mnoh  about  it,  do  not  make  it  their  business  to  look  after  it.  Those  who 
think  thus  show  plainly  that  they  never  did  believe,  that  they  do  not  so  much  as 
know  what  it  is  to  believe.  1.  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God.  Not  the  work  of  man's 
hand,  or  head,  or  heart.  Something  without  him,  not  in  him  naturally ;  something 
above  him,  out  of  the  reach  of  nature.    It  most  be  reached  down  by  the  hand  of 


7U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  xn. 

God,  or  man  can  never  come  by  it.    Not  a  gift  of  nature,  but  of  graee.    2.  Man  if 
naturally  onwilling  to  receive  it  (John  v.  40).    Coming  is  believing,  but  men 
refuse  to  eome.     8.  This  opposition  is  so  strong  that  it  requires  an  exceeding 
mighty  power  to  overcome  it.     The  power  of  nature  cannot  master  it,  but 
only  the  power  of  Divine  grace  put  forth  in  a  special  manner  for  this  very 
purpose.      Such    a   power  is  required   to    raise  sinners  out  of  the  grave   of 
unbelief,  as  was  requisite  to  raise  Christ  from  the  dead  (Eph.  i.  19,  20).    [Ibid.) 
Wesley' t  improvement  of  infant  baptism : — Wesley's  teacning  on  Uiis  subject  is 
instructive.  He  recommends  to  us  all,  and  enjoins  upon  us  all,  to  follow  the  example 
of  Philip  Henry.     He  had  a  method  of  improving  infant  baptism,  superior  to  tiiat 
of  most  divines,  and  decidedly  better  than  I  have  at  any  time  met  with.    He  drew 
out  what  he  called  a  form  of  the  Baptismal  Covenant,  "I  take  God  the  Father  to 
be  my  Father ;  I  take  God  the  Son  to  be  my  Saviour ;  I  take  God  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  be  my  Comforter,  Teacher,  Guide,  and  Sanctifier ;  I  take  the  Word  of  God  to  be 
the  rule  of  my  actions ;  I  take  the  people  of  God  to  be  my  people  in  all  conditions : 
and  all  this  I  do  deliberately,  freely,  and  for  ever."    He  taught  all  his  children  to 
say  this  to  him  every  Sunday  night :  when  they  were  able  to  write,  he  made  every 
one  of  them  write  it,  and  sign  it.     "  Now,"  he  said,  **  I  shall  keep  this  as  a  testi- 
mony against  you."    And  he  did  keep  it.    And  there  is  found  among  his  papers  one 
of  the  most  affecting  documents  in  the  English  language — a  copy  of  this  covenant, 
signed  by  each  of  his  children  in  succession.   But  he  never  had  to  produce  it  against 
them.     By  God's  grace,  they  kept  it ;  and  thus  verified  his  own  frequent  adage, 
< '  Fast  bind,  fast  find."    (Dr.  Osbom.)        Saved : — You  remember  that  fearful  ship- 
wreck of  the  steamer  Atlantic^  which  took  place  some  years  ago  on  the  coast  oi 
Halifax.    Hundreds  of  lives  were  lost,  and  dreadful  scenes  were  witnessed  on  that 
occasion.      Among  the  passengers  on  board  that  steamer  was  a  merchant  from 
Boston,  who  was  a  Christian  man.      When  his  family  heard  of  the  wreck  they  were 
in  great  distress.    How  anxiously  they  waited  to  hear  from  him  1     How  eagerly 
they  examined  the  newspapers,  and  read  over  the  list  of  the  lost  to  see  if  his  name 
was  among  them  1    But  God  ordered  it  so  that  this  gentleman  was  permitted  to  get 
safe  to  shore.     As  soon  as  he  could  reach  the  telegraph  office  he  sent  a  telegram 
home  to  his  family.     There  was  but  a  single  word  in  that  telegram ;  but,  O,  it  was 
worth  more  to  his  distressed  family  than  all  the  world.     It  was  the  word  Saved. 
And  when  that  merchant  returned  home,  he  had  that  telegram  framed,  and  hung 
up  in  his  office  with  that  important  word — Saved — in  it,  so  that  he  might  see  it 
every  day,  and  be  reminded  of  God's  great  goodness  in  sparing  his  life.    Yet  it  was 
only  that  merchant's  body  that  was  saved  then.    And  this  is  nothing  compared  to 
the  soul.     But  when  we  become  the  sheep  of  Jesus,  the  Good  Shepherd,  He 
engages  to  save  our  souls  in  heaven  for  ever.    {Dr.  Talmage.)        The  tin  of  un- 
belief:— One  is  sometimes  asked,  What  is  the  use  of  preaching  about  infidelity  in 
church?  So  that  all  may  be  able  to  give  an  intelligent  explanation  of  their  groonda 
for  belief,  to  any  who  demand  it  of  them.    We  cannot  fail  to  notice  that  religion 
is,  in  our  day,  more  generally  and  freely  discussed  than  it  has  been  for  some 
preceding  generations ;  and  so  long  as  this  is  done  in  an  honest,  thoughtful,  truth- 
seeking,  kindly  spirit,  we  may  be  thankful  and  hope.  I.  What  are  the  oaubeb  of  un- 
belief?    1.  A  wrong  bias  in  the  heart.    Ever  since  the  Fall,  it  has  been  natural  for 
us  to  dislike  religion,  and  to  shirk  its  obligations  if  possible.    Satan  persuades  ua 
that  his  service  is  the  easiest,  and  pays  the  best ;  so  we  prefer  it.    2.  The  power  of 
things  seen  over  the  natural  man.     The  novel  and  the  newspaper  interest  us  more 
than  the  Bible :  we  neglect  the  latter :  and  then  comes  the  suggestion,  Perhaps  the 
Bible  is  not  God's  book  after  all,  <&o.    3.  Selfishness.    Behgion  thwarts,  opposes, 
reproves ;  so  we  naturally  hate  it.     8.    Pride — desiring  the  praises  of  men  rather 
than  the  favour  of  God,  and  exalting  itself  against  His  revealed  will.  Does  not  the 
pride  of  intellect  say,  "  I  will  not  believe  what  I  cannot  understand.    I  am  maoh 
too  clever  to  take  things  on  hearsay :  give  me  facts  and  proof."    And  does  not  the 
pride  of  society,  money,  health,  high  spirits,  exalt  itself  against  the  spirit  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  refuse  to  believe  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.    6.  Fear  of  the 
world.    Young  people,  especially,  find  it  very  hard  in  society,  or  in  an  irreligious 
home,  always  to  stand  up  for  truth  and  God.    Bidicule  possesses  a  cruel  and  often 
fatal  power :  if  those  exposed  to  it  do  not  pray  for  strength  to  resist,  it  will  over- 
come them  little  by  little :  the  pain  which  they  feel,  the  shame  which  is  a  glory  and 
grace,  which  troubles  them  when  they  hear  sacred  things  lightly  spoken  of,  will 
gradually  cease ;  their  spiritual  sight  will  lose  its  keenness :  the  ears  of  the  sold  will 
become  duU  of  hearing ;  and  ^ey  will  learn  at  last  to  mistake  the  false  for  the  tms^ 


.  m,]  8T.  MARK.  727 

and  to  enjoy  that  which  once  they  despised  and  abhorred.  6.  The  false  notion  that 
religion  is  impracticable.  7.  Evil  lives  at  professing  Christians.  Eemember,  as  to 
this,  the  question  is  not  whether  men  or  women  calling  themselves  Christians  are 
honest  or  hypocritical,  bat  whether  Christianity  is  true.  Do  yon  take  care  not  to 
behaye  so  inconsistentiy  as  to  cause  any  brother  to  offend.  II.  The  result  of  un- 
belief. As  the  causes  of  unbelief  are  contemptible,  so  the  process  is  miserable,  and 
the  result  is  vile.  In  most  cases,  before  a  man  can  be  an  infidel,  he  must  set  him- 
self against  the  witness  of  history,  and  his  forefathers'  faith ;  he  must  regard  as  lies 
the  lessons  of  his  childhood,  and  must  erase  from  his  memory  the  prayers  learnt  at 
his  mother's  knee ;  he  must  teach  himself  to  regard  those  cravings  for  happiness, 
for  life,  for  beauty,  and  for  truth,  as  fond  and  hopeless  desires ;  he  must  learn  to 
feel,  when  his  father  or  mother,  wife  or  child,  dies,  *'  there  is  an  end  of  everything, 
we  shall  meet  no  more."  And  when  he  has  surrendered  himself  wholly  into  the 
power  of  God's  enemy,  what  sort  of  a  creature  is  the  devil's  masterpiece,  after  all  ? 
1.  See  the  result  in  communities.  Look  at  him,  first,  with  full  scope  to  do  his  best 
and  worst ;  give  him  multitudes  of  companions,  who  think  as  he  thinks,  and  place 
a  great  city  in  his  power.  Look  at  infidel  Paris,  in  our  days,  shooting  down  an 
axvhbishop  in  her  streets.  What  foUows? — ^fire,  and  sword,  and  famine — defeat, 
and  degradation,  and  death.  Would  the  result  be  different,  do  you  suppose,  in  our 
land,  if  all  were  permitted  to  do  what  seems  right  in  their  own  eyes — would  life  or 
property  be  safe?  2.  Or  look  at  the  individual  man.  Who  would  trust  an  infidel? 
Who  would  make  him  a  guardian  or  trustee  7  What  motive  has  he  to  keep  him 
from  betraying  his  trust  ?  Follow  him  to  the  end.  His  heart  may  grow  harder,  his 
assertions  of  unbelief  may  be  louder;  but  what  of  him  when  his  health  and  strength 
begin  to  fail  ?  It  was  easy,  when  spirits  were  high,  to  say  that  clever  profanity  to 
applauding  friends,  easy  to  sneer  at  Church  and  Bible,  to  raise  the  ringing  laughter 
of  his  boon  companions  ;  but  what  are  his  thoughts,  now  that  he  must  spend  long 
dreary  days  and  nights  alone^ — alone,  for  his  old  mates  are  not  the  men  to  seek  the 
society  of  the  aged,  or  to  watch  by  the  sick ;  what  if  he  should  discover  that  he  has 
not,  after  all,  become  that  which  he  tried  to  be,  and  thought  that  he  was,  an  infidel? 
in.  The  cure  for  unbelief.  The  treatment  must  vary  with  the  ease.  For  some, 
books  of  evidence,  appetds  to  history,  logical  reasoning,  close  analogies.  But  here 
are  some  golden  rules,  applicable  to  all.  1.  Go  home  and  do  your  duty.  Never 
mind  how  mean  the  work  is :  the  lower  your  place  here,  the  higher  it  may  be  here- 
after. 2.  Pray.  3.  Study  the  Scriptures.  4.  Seek  Christ  in  the  humble,  teachable 
spirit  He  has  promised  to  bless.  6.  Seek  Him  in  His  children,  His  poor,  His  sick. 
(S,  R.  Hole,  M.A.)  Believing  and  talvation : — There  is  no  way  under  heaven  to 
be  interested  in  Christ,  but  by  believing.  He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved,  let  his 
sins  be  ever  so  great ;  and  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned,  let  his  sins  be 
ever  so  little.  (Thoa.  Brooks.)  Destiny  determined  by  belief: — There  is  the  way 
of  salvation,  and  thou  must  trust  Christ  or  perish ;  and  there  is  nothing  hard  in  it 
that  thou  shouldst  perish  if  thou  dost  not.  Here  is  a  man  out  at  sea ;  he  has  got  a 
chart  which,  if  well  studied,  will,  with  the  help  of  the  compass,  guide  him  to  bis 
journey's  end.  The  pole  star  gleams  out  amidst  the  clond-rifts,  and  that  too  will 
help  him.  "  No,"  says  he,  •*  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  your  stars ;  I  do  not 
beheve  in  the  North  Pole ;  I  shall  not  attend  to  that  little  thing  inside  the  box ;  one 
needle  is  as  good  as  another  needle ;  I  do  not  beheve  in  your  rubbish,  and  I  will 
have  nothing  to  do  with  it ;  it  is  only  a  lot  of  nonsense  got  up  by  people  on  purpose 
to  make  money,  and  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it."  The  man  does  not  get  to 
shore  anywhere ;  he  drifts  about,  but  never  reaches  port,  and  he  says  it  is  a  very 
hard  thing.  I  do  not  think  so.  Some  of  you  say,  "  WeU,  I  am  not  going  to  read 
your  Bible ;  I  am  not  going  to  Hsten  to  your  talk  about  Jesus  Christ ;  I  do  not  beheve 
in  such  things."  You  will  be  damned  then,  sir.  •*  That's  very  hard,"  say  you. 
No  it  is  not.  It  is  not  more  so  than  the  fact  that  if  you  reject  the  compass  and  the 
pole  star  yon  will  not  get  to  your  journey's  end.  If  a  man  will  not  do  the  thing  that 
IS  necessary  to  a  certain  end,  I  do  not  see  how  he  can  expect  to  gain  that  end.  You 
have  taken  poison,  and  the  physician  brings  an  antidote,  and  says,  *'  Take  it  quickly, 
or  you  will  die ;  but  if  you  take  it  quickly  I  will  guarantee  that  the  poison  will  be 
neutralized."  But  you  say,  "  No,  doctor,  I  do  not  beheve  it ;  let  everything  take  its 
course ;  let  every  tub  stand  on  its  own  bottom  ;  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  you, 
doetor."  '*  WeU,  sir,  yon  will  die ;  and  when  the  coroner's  inquest  is  held  on  your 
body,  the  verdict  will  be,  '  Served  him  right  1  "*  So  will  it  be  with  yoo  if,  having 
heard  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  you  say,  "  Oh  I  pooh,  pooh !  I  am  too  mueh  of  a 
eommon-sense  man  to  have  anything  to  do  with  that,  and  I  shall  not  attend  to  it." 


TS8  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiiP.  m. 

Then,  when  yon  perish,  the  verdict  given  by  your  conscience,  which  will  sit  npon 
the  King's  quest  at  last,  will  be  a  verdict  ot  felo-de-se — he  destroyed  himself.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  Rejection  of  grace :— A  man  being  sick  and  like  to  die,  the  physi- 
cian, knowing  his  case,  takes  with  him  some  preservative  to  comfort  him,  and  coming 
to  the  door  falls  a-knocking.  Now,  if  he  either  will  not  or  be  not  able  to  let  him  in, 
he  mnst  of  necessity  perish,  and  the  cause  cannot  properly  lie  at  the  physician's 
door,  who  was  ready  and  willing  to  relieve  him ;  but  in  himself,  that  is  not  willing 
to  be  relieved.  Thus  it  is  that  sin  is  a  disease  whereof  we  are  all  sick.  We  have 
all  sinned.  Now,  Christ  is  the  great  Physician  of  our  souls;  He  came  down 
formerly  from  heaven  on  purpose  to  heal  us,  and  He  comes  down  daily  to  the  door 
of  our  hearts,  and  there  He  knocks.  If  we  but  open  the  door  of  our  hearts,  He  will 
come  in  and  sup  with  us,  as  He  did  with  Mary,  and  forgive  all  our  sins ;  but  if  we 
will  not  let  Him  in,  or,  through  long  contagion  of  sin,  be  not  able  to  let  Him  in,  we 
must  of  necessity  die  in  our  sins ;  and  the  case  is  evident,  not  because  He  dotli  not 
offer  grace,  but  because  we  receive  it  not  when  it  is  offered.  (Inchinus.)  Chri$V§ 
sayings  determined  the  destiny  of  all  who  heard  them,  ana  this  peculiarity  He 
specially  pointed  out  as  enduring  for  ever.  To  have  heard  these  sayings  is  to  have 
incurred  the  gravest  responsibility.  A  man  may  read  the  Ethics  of  ^stotle,  and 
treat  the  reasoning  with  contempt  without  endangering  his  fate ;  but  no  man  can 
read  Christ's  sayings  without  finding  saved  upon  one  side  and  damned  upon  the 
other.  Is  this  dogmatism  on  the  part  of  Christ  ?  Undoubtedly.  God  must  be  dog- 
matic. If  God  could  hesitate,  He  would  not  be  God.  Do  we  stumble  at  the  solemn 
words  of  the  text?  Why  should  we?  An  agriculturist  says,  practically,  ''Go  ye 
into  all  the  world,  and  say  to  every  creature  that  there  is  a  particular  season  for 
sowing  seed :  he  that  believeth  shall  be  saved — shall  have  a  harvest ;  he  that  be- 
lieveth  not  shall  be  lost — shall  have  no  harvest."  There  is  a  gospel  of  agriculture: 
why  not  a  gospel  of  salvation  ?  Men's  disbelief  of  God  will  damn  them  in  farming; 
why  not  in  religion  ?  Does  God  speak  decisively  in  the  one  case,  and  hesitatingly 
in  the  other  f  There  must  be  a  climacteric  point — a  point  of  saving  or  danming — 
in  all  the  declarations  of  God,  because  He  has  spoken  the  ultimate  word  on  aU  the 
subjects  which  He  has  disclosed.  The  truth  upon  any  matter,  high  or  low,  is  the 
point  of  salvation  or  damnation.  The  man  who  merely  points  out  the  right  road  to 
a  traveller  is  in  a  position  (with  proper  modification  of  the  terms)  to  say  to  that 
traveller,  "  He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved ;  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned : " 
in  other  words,  "  Go  thus,  and  you  will  reach  the  object  of  your  journey ;  but  go  so, 
and  yon  will  never  reach  it."  This  is  the  position  which  Christ  assumes, — "He 
that  believeth  Me  hath  life ;  he  that  believeth  not  Me  hath  not  life."  Is  snch  a 
projection  of  His  personality  consistent  with  His  being  simply  one  who  spoke  with 
the  authoritative  tone  and  earnestness  of  a  Jew  ?  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Difference 
between  penalty  and  consequence : — It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  there  is  a  broad 
distinction  between  a  penalty  and  a  consequence,  as  those  terms  are  commonly  un- 
derstood. When  Christ  said,  "He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned,"  He 
announced  a  consequence.  He  did  not  threaten  a  penalty  in  the  usual  acceptation 
of  the  term.  A  consequence  is  the  direct  and  inevitable  result  of  certain  processes, 
partaking  of  their  very  nature,  and  inseparable  from  them ;  but  a  penalty  may  pos- 
sibly be  something  different,  something  arbitrarily  superadded,  regardless  of  adap- 
tation or  measure.  Being  chilled  is  a  consequence  of  exposure  to  cold  air,  but  being 
flogged  for  such  exposure  is  a  penalty.  Eternal  punishment  is  the  consequence  ol 
rejecting  the  gospel,  not  a  penalty  (in  the  low  sense  of  revenge)  attached  to  a  crime. 
(I6id.)  Saving  faith : — It  is  not  the  quantity  of  thy  faith  that  shall  save  thee.  A 
drop  of  water  is  as  true  water  as  the  whole  ocean.  So  a  little  faith  is  as  true  faiUi 
as  the  greatest.  A  child  eight  days  old  is  as  really  a  man  as  one  of  sixty  years ;  » 
spark  of  fire  is  as  true  fire  as  a  great  flame  ;  a  sickly  man  is  as  truly  living  as  a 
well  man.  So  it  is  not  the  measure  of  thy  faith  that  saves  thee— it  is  the  Blood  that 
it  grips  to,  that  saves  thee ;  as  the  weak  hand  of  a  child,  that  leads  the  spoon  to  the 
mouth,  will  feed  as  well  as  the  strong  arm  of  a  man ;  for  it  is  not  the  hand  that 
feeds  thee — albeit  it  puts  the  meat  into  thy  mouth,  but  it  is  the  meat  carried  into 
the  stomach  that  feeds  thee.  So  if  thou  canst  grip  Christ  ever  so  weakly.  He  will 
not  let  thee  perish.  All  that  looked  to  the  brazen  serpent,  ever  so  far  off,  they  were 
healed  of  the  sting  of  the  fiery  serpent,  vet  all  saw  not  alike  clearly,  for  some  were 
near  at  hand,  and  some  were  far  off.  Those  that  were  near  at  hand  might  see  more 
clearly  than  those  that  were  far  off ;  nevertheless,  those  that  were  far  off  were  at 
soonnealed  of  the  sting,  when  they  looked  to  the  serpent,  as  those  that  were  near  at 
hand ;  lor  it  was  not  their  look  that  made  them  whole,  bat  He  whom  the  seipent 


m.]  ST.  MARK.  729 

did  represent.  So  if  thou  canst  look  to  Christ  ever  so  meanly.  He  can  take  away 
the  sting  of  thy  conscience,  if  thou  believest ;  the  weakest  hands  fcan  take  a  gift,  as 
well  as  the  strongest.  Now  Christ  is  this  gift,  and  weak  faith  may  grip  Him  as  well 
fts  strong  faith,  and  Christ  is  as  truly  thine  when  thou  hast  weak  faith,  as  when 
thou  hast  come  to  those  triumphant  joys  through  the  strength  of  faith.  {WeUh.) 
A  sailor's  definition  of  faith: — A  sailor  who  had  been  brought  to  trust  in  Christ  for 
■alvation,  meeting  a  friend  who  was  anxious  to  find  rest  for  his  soul,  addressed  him 
thus :  **  It  was  just  so  with  myself  once ;  I  did  not  know  what  faith  was,  or  how  to 
obtain  it ;  but  I  know  now  what  it  is,  and  I  beUeve  I  possess  it.  I  do  not  know  that 
I  can  tell  you  what  it  is,  or  how  to  get  it ;  but  I  can  teU  you  what  it  is  not ;  it  is  not 
knocking  off  swearing,  and  drinking,  and  such  like ;  and  it  is  not  reading  the  Bible, 
nor  praying,  nor  being  good ;  it  is  none  of  these  ;  for  even  if  they  would  answer  for 
the  time  to  come,  there  is  the  old  score  still, — and  how  are  you  to  get  clear  of  that? 
It  is  not  anything  you  have  done,  or  can  do  ;  it  is  believing  and  trusting  what  Christ 
has  done ;  then  it  is  forsaking  your  sins,  and  looking  for  their  pardon  and  the  sal- 
vation of  your  soul,  because  He  died  and  shed  His  blood  for  sin ;  it  is  that,  and  it 
is  nothing  else."  Where  could  we  find  a  more  simple,  and  accurate,  and  telling 
definition  of  faith  ?  True  faith :— A  good  man  was  considerably  harassed  as  to 
the  nature  of  true  faith,  so  resolved  to  ask  the  assistance  of  his  minister.  Going  to 
the  minister's  house,  he  stated  that  his  fears  had  been  great,  that  he  had  sinned 
beyond  the  reach  of  mercy ;  but  that,  while  he  was  thinking  on  the  subject,  there 
was  suggested  to  his  mind  this  text  of  Scripture,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin,"  and  that  resting  on  this  truth  he  had  lost  all  his 
anxiety.  The  minister  told  him  that  this  was  nothing  else  than  true  faith.  Un- 
belief damning : — It  may  be  asked  how  it  can  be  just  in  God  to  condemn  men  for 
ever  for  not  believing  the  gospel  I  answer:  1.  God  has  a  right  to  appoint  His  own 
terms  of  mercy.  2.  Man  has  no  claim  on  Him  for  heaven.  3.  The  sinner  rejects 
the  terms  of  salvation  knowingly,  deliberately,  and  perseveringJy.  4.  He  has  a 
special  disregard  and  contempt  for  the  gospeL  5.  His  unbelief  is  produced  by  the 
love  of  sin.  6.  He  shows  by  this  that  he  has  no  love  of  God,  and  His  law,  and  for 
eternity.  7.  He  slights  the  objects  dearest  to  God,  and  most  like  Him.  8.  He  must, 
therefore,  be  miserable.  He  rejects  God,  and  must  go  into  eternity  without  a 
Father,  Ac.  And  he  has  no  comfort  in  himself,  and  must  die  for  ever.  There  is 
no  being  in  eternity  but  God  that  can  make  man  happy ;  and  without  His  favour 
the  sinner  must  be  wretched.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  The  perils  of  unbelief  .-—This 
is  speaking  out  plainly.  He  who  thus  spoke,  had  a  right  so  to  speak.  To  be  a  be- 
liever, as  scripturaUy  understood,  is  to  give  that  kind  of  credit  to  Christianity, 
which  is  associated  with,  and  supported  by,  a  holy  life, — not  the  faith  right,  and 
the  hfe  wrong  ;  but  the  life  and  faith  both  in  the  right.    We  proceed,  now,  to  show 

I.  That  Cheibtianity  presents  sufficient  bvidencb  to  warrant  rational  be- 

LiBF.  The  evidences  which  she  has  at  her  service  may  be  presented  in  the  form 
of  anawers  to  inquiries  which  may  be  instituted.  Thus — 1.  Was  Christianity 
necessary  f  Could  not  the  world  have  done  without  it  ?  These  questions  we  nega- 
tive most  emphatically.  It  could  not.  It  had  tried,  Ac.  2.  Was  such  a  revelation 
as  that  which  Christianity  professes  to  be  possible  ?  Certainly.  3.  Was  it  probable  ? 
It  was.  4.  Is  that  which  was  quite  possible,  and  very  probable,  now  a  reality— a 
fact  ?  Has  there  ever  been  such  a  person  as  Jesus  Christ  ?  Did  He  do  what  He  is 
said  to  have  done  ?  Our  answer  is  in  the  affirmative.  There  are  no  facts  that  are 
better  attested  than  those  which  relate  to  the  history  of  the  Author  of  the  Christian 
religion.  6.  Are  any  books  now  extant  purporting  to  contain  sketches  of  His  life, 
and  an  account  of  the  rise  of  His  religion  ;  and,  if  so,  are  there  arguments  sufficient 
to  evidence  their  genuineness,  and  uncorrupted  preservation  ?  Our  reply  again  is 
a  positive  one.  6.  Is  the  Divine  origin  of  Christianity  indicated  by  its  success,  and 
the  circumstances  with  which  that  success  was  associated  ?  It  is,  &c.^  7.  Is  there 
any  evidence  of  the  Divinity  of  Christ's  rehgion  from  human  consciousness  and 
experience  ?    There  is.     II.  That  th»  man  who  does  not  diligently  search  for, 

AND  OOBDIALLT  YIELD  TO,  THIS  EVIDENCE  IS  EIOHLY  OENBTTRABLE.  Man  is  respon- 
sible for  his  belief.  This  will  appear  from  the  consideration  that  our  belief  is 
mainly  influenced  by  the  following  circumstances  : — 1.  By  the  books  which  we  read. 
2.  The  company  we  keep.  8.  The  latitude  we  allow  to  our  hkings,  irrespective  of 
their  nature  or  tendency.  As  the  religion  of  Christ  presents  to  man  sufficient  proofs 
to  warrant  his  credence,  then,  if  that  be  refused,  the  results  will  be  inconceivably 
perilous.  ••  He  that  beUeveth  not  shall  be  condemned."  This  supposes  a  trial,  and 
a  sentence.    {J.  Quttridge.)        Salvation  through  believing : — ^L  Gonbideb  the  xm. 


730  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOM.  [chap.  xn. 

poBTAKOB  or  THIS  DECLABATioM.  1.  Because  of  the  character  of  the  Being  who  ham 
given  it.  He  is  God ;  therefore  He  has  power  to  perform  what  He  has  said.  3.  None 
can  escape  His  scrutiny,  as  He  is  all  wise  and  omnipotent.  8.  The  dechiration  re* 
mains  unchangeable  for  ever,  as  He  is  a  Being  who  posseseee  the  attribute  of  truth. 
II.  Explain  thx  obounds  on  which  binnkbs  are  to  bs  saved.  1.  Faith  in 
Christ  is  necessary  to  salvation.  2.  Baptism  is  necessary.  Ill,  Thk  awtui*  com- 
8BQUKNCB  ov  HOT  BELiBviNa.  1.  II  ws  do  not  behevo,  we  remain  in  sin.  2.  Guilt 
and  misery  of  mind  arise  from  this  condition.  3.  Temporal  punishment  in  this  life 
is  also  the  result.  Wherever  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  received  in  the  love  of  it,  there 
will  be  stability  of  principle,  and  an  inculcation  of  purity  of  morals ;  where  it  is 
absent  there  will  be,  in  a  less  or  greater  degree,  an  entire  want  of  its  holy  effects. 
Intemperance  produces  sickness  ;  extravagance  leads  to  poverty,  <&o.  4.  Our  not 
believing  will  have  an  evil  effect  on  society  at  large.  5.  Eternal  torment.  IV.  Ths 
BLESSED  EFVEOTS  OF  BELiEviNa.  1.  Deliverance  from  condemnation.  2.  Emanci- 
pation from  the  dominion  of  sin.  3.  Salvation  from  the  fear  of  death  and  heU. 
4.  In  proportion  as  our  faith  becomes  strong,  our  spiritual  wisdom  will  increase,  as 
well  as  our  happiness.  {W.  Blood.)  The  indissoluble  connection  between  faith  and 
salvation : — In  order  to  illustrate  this  subject — consider — I.  What  is  Faith  f  1. 
The  real  Christian  believes  the  pure  unadulterated  gospel ;  the  substance  of  which 
is,  '*  God  is  in  Christ"  (2  Cor.  5, 19).  The  ground  on  which  he  believes,  is  the 
testimony  of  God  (1  John  v.  10).  2.  The  gospel  which  he  thus  believes  he  believes 
to  be  most  important  It  rouses  his  attention  and  calls  all  the  powers  of  his  sool 
to  action.  like  a  man  whose  house  is  on  fire,  and  is  at  his  wit's  end  till  he  has 
found  means  to  extinguish  it — or  like  one  who  has  a  large  estate  depending,  and 
uses  eveiy  effort  to  get  his  title  confirmed.  8.  This  belief  in  the  gospel  is  acoom- 
panied  with  a  cordial  approbation  of  its  gracious  proposals.  We  have  heard  the 
gospel.  Have  we  believed  it?  Have  we  received  it  in  the  love  of  it 7  Are  cor 
hearts  and  lives  influenced  by  it?  II.  The  salvation  pbomised  to  them  that 
BEiiiEVE.  Here  a  scene  the  most  delightful  and  transporting  opens  to  our  view.  A 
scene,  the  contemplation  of  which  fills  the  Christian  with  admiration  and  wonder. 
1.  It  is  a  salvation  from  moral  evil.  2.  From  natural  evil.  3.  From  penal  evidences 
(Bom.  iii.  25 ;  Gal.  iii.  13).  To  these  miseries  are  to  be  opposed  the  joys  of  heaven, 
but,  oh  1  what  tongue  can  describe  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  III.  The  connection  between 
FAITH  AND  SALVATION.  It  is  neccssaiy  in  order  to  our  being  saved  that  we  believe. 
1.  It  is  the  Divine  appointment  (John  iii.  16 ;  Mark  xvi.  16).  It  is  not  a  mere  arbi- 
trary command,  but  the  result  of  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness.  2.  There  is  a  fitness 
or  suitableness  in  faith  to  the  end  of  its  appointment,  so  that  the  necessity  arises 
out  of  the  nature  of  things.  The  blessing  of  the  gospel  cannot  be  enjoyed  without 
the  medium  of  faith.  Sin  is  atoned  for — heaven  opened — but  the  actual  possession 
of  the  good  thus  procured  is  as  necessary  as  a  title  to  it.  How  is  that  good  to  be 
possessed  without  a  suitable  temper  ?  How  is  this  to  be  aoqoired  but  by  belieying  f 
(OtUUnei  of  Sermona.) 

Ver.  17.  And  these  signs  shall  toUovr.^New  (onpu««  .-—New,  because  strange  to 
the  natural  man,  because  acquired  not  by  nature,  but  by  grace.  As  the  world  of  old 
was  divided  by  the  confusion  of  tongues,  so  by  the  renewing  of  our  nature,  and  by  the 
oneness  of  our  speech,  shall  all  be  united  into  one  people,  having  one  heart  and  one 
soul.  This  new  tongue  must  be  given  as  the  special  gift  of  God  to  His  children, 
for  the  tongue  can  no  man  tame  of  himself.  This  new  tongue  we  have  if — (1)  in  the 
midst  of  adversity  we  refrain  from  murmuring,  and  are  able  to  submit  tn^y  to  the 
will  of  God,  rendering  Him  thanks  even  in  the  midst  of  our  sufferings  ;  (2)  we  can 
make  full  and  unreserved  confession  of  our  sins  to  God,  without  seeking  to  excu&i 
ourselves  in  His  sight ;  (3)  we  restrain  ourselves  from  the  censure  of  others,  ani 
use  our  tongue  for  the  edification  of  our  brethren.  {W.  Denton,  M^.)  Du- 
appearance  of  miraculous  powers  accounted  for : — Probably  God's  sliding  scale— 17 
which  supernatural  aid  increases  and  decreases  inversely  according  to  our  strength 
— may  explain  how,  in  the  course  of  time,  the  supernatur^  aids  of  the  Church  ha^e 
merged  into  the  more  ordinary  aids  of  grace.  (R.  Glover.)  Christ's  presence  in 
t/i<  Church  continuul : — The  co-operation  of  Christ  was  promised,  not  for  the  apos- 
tolic age  alone,  but  for  all  time.  The  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  wwe  with- 
drawn, and  the  third  generation,  at  the  latest,  buried  the  last  of  "  The  Twelve;  " 
but  other  men  entered  into  their  labours,  and  the  office  has  been  perpetuated  by  an 
imbroken  lineage,  so  that  those  who  minister  in  Christ's  Church  to-day  can  feel  thai 
the  Toice  which  sent  them  forth  was  but  the  echo  of  that  which  spake  on  the  Gall- 


OBAV.  ZTi.]  ST,  MARK.  7S1 

lean  hill  to  the  first  in  the  ministerial  line.  That  Presence,  which  arrested  the  atten- 
tion of  am  onbeUeving  age  by  startling  manifestations,  has  been  vouchsafed  to  the 
Chorch  through  all  its  chequered  history  in  the  power  of  an  unseen  but  undiminished 
eo-operation.  In  the  Church  at  large  it  is  borne  witness  to  by  the  influence  of 
Christianity  upon  the  evil  spirits  of  oppression  and  cruelty,  of  greed  and  profligate 
living.  It  has  shown  itself  in  a  thousand  ways  in  the  alleviation  of  sicbiess  and 
disease,  and  the  tenderer  care  for  the  bereft  of  reason ;  while  in  a  later  age  at 
least,  the  Pentecostal  gift  of  tongues  has  been  virtually  repeated,  by  the  transla- 
tion of  the  gospel  of  glad  tidings  into  wellnigb  every  spoken  language.  {H,  M. 
Luckock,  D,D.) 

Ver.  18.  They  shall  take  up  serpenta.— TA«  privilege$  of  heUeten  :—li  is  to  men 
who  believe,  through  their  belief,  that  privileges  such  as  these  are  to  be  given.  The 
essence  and  ground  of  the  promised  power  is  faith.  That  old  word,  Faith  I  That 
old  thing.  Faith  1  How  men  have  stumbled  over  its  definition,  and  bewildered  and 
ensnarled  themselves  and  those  who  heard  them !  God  forbid  that  I  should  be- 
wilder you  to-day.  I  want  to  be  as  clear  and  simple  as  I  can ;  and  though  I  would 
be  far  from  disparaging  any  of  the  subtler  and  more  elaborate  descriptions  of  what 
faith  is,  I  am  sure  that  we  may  give  ourselves  a  definition  which  is  true  beyond  all 
doubt,  and  which  is  full  enough  to  answer  all  the  need  of  definition  which  we  shall 
meet  to-day.  Faith,  then,  personal  faith,  is  this,  the  power  by  which  one  being's 
vitality,  through  love  and  obedience,  becomes  the  vitality  of  another  being.  Simple 
enough  that  is,  I  am  sure,  for  any  man  who  will  think.  I  believe  in  you,  my  friend ; 
and  your  vitality,  your  character,  your  energy,  the  more  I  love  and  obey  you,  passes 
over  into  me.  The  saint  believes  in  his  pattern  saint,  the  soldier  beheves  in  his 
brave  captain,  the  scholar  beheves  in  his  learned  teacher.  In  every  case  the  vitality 
of  the  object  of  faith  comes  through  love  and  obedience  to  the  believer.  Faith  is  not 
love  nor  obedience,  bat  it  works  by  both.  A  man  may  love  me  and  yet  not  have 
faith  in  me.  A  man  may  obey  me,  and  yet  not  have  faith  in  me.  Faith  is  a  dis- 
tinct relation  between  soul  and  soul ;  but  it  is  recognizable  by  this  result,  that  the 
life  of  one  soul  becomes  the  life  of  another  soul  through  obedience  and  love.  Now 
faith  in  Christ,  what  is  it  f  Just  in  the  same  simple  way,  it  is  that  power  by  which 
the  yitality  of  Christ,  through  onr  love  and  obedience  to  Him,  becomes  our 
vitality.  The  triumph  of  the  believing  soul  is  this,  that  he  does  not  live  by  him- 
self ;  that  into  him  is  ever  flowing,  by  a  law  which  is  both  natural  and  supernatural, 
a  law  that  is  supernatural  only  because  it  is  the  consummation  and  transfiguration 
of  the  most  natural  of  all  laws — there  is  always  flowing  into  him  the  vitaUty  of  the 
Christ  whom  he  loves  and  obeys.  His  whole  nature  beats  with  the  inflow  of  that 
Divine  life.  He  lives,  but  Christ  Uves  in  Him.  And  then  add  one  thing  more. 
That  this  vitality  of  Christ,  which  comes  into  a  man  by  faith,  is  not  a  strange  and 
foreign  thing.  Christ  is  the  Son  of  Man,  the  perfect  Man,  the  Divine  Man.  Add 
this,  and  then  we  know  that  His  vitahty  filling  us  is  the  perfection  of  human  life 
filling  humanity.  *'  They  that  beheve  "  are  not  men  turned  into  something  else 
than  men  by  the  mixture  of  a  new  and  strange  Divine  ingredient.  They  are  men 
in  whom  human  life  is  perfect  in  proportion  to  the  completeness  of  their  faith 
through  the  Son  of  Man.  They  are  men  raised  to  the  highest  power.  The  man  in 
whom  Christ  dwells  by  faith  is  the  man  in  whom  the  Divine  ideal  of  human  life  is 
perfect,  or  is  steadily  becoming  perfect,  by  the  entrance  into  him  of  the  perfect 
life  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  through  obedience  and  love.  {Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.) 
The  promise  to  believers : — These  signs  shall  follow  them  that  beUeve,  them  that 
have  the  complete  human  life  by  me— Christ  says,  •*  If  they  drink,"  4c.  Is  that 
a  prize  7  Is  it  wages  which  is  offered  for  a  certain  meritorious  act,  which  is  called 
faith?  Not  so,  surely  1  It  is  a  consequence.  It  is  a  necessity.  Safety  and 
helpfulness.  These  come  out  of  the  full  life  of  Christ  in  the  soul  of  man  as  the 
inevitable  fruits.  Safety,  so  that  what  hurts  other  men  shaU  not  hurt  him.  Help 
fulness,  BO  that  his  brethren  about  him  shall  live  by  his  life.  These  are  the  utter- 
ances of  the  vitality  of  him  who  is  thoroughly  alive.  It  is  by  Ufe,  by  full,  vigorous, 
emphatic  existence  that  men  are  safe  in  this  world,  and  that  they  save  other  men 
from  death.  Men  everywhere  are  trying  to  be  safe  by  stifling  hfe ;  by  living  just  as 
low  as  possible.  Men  everywhere  are  trying  not  to  do  one  another  harm,  trying  to 
spare  each  other's  souls  by  tender  petting,  by  guarding  them  against  any  vigorous 
contact  with  life  and  thought.  "  Not  so,"  says  the  Bible.  "  Only  by  the  fulness 
of  life  does  safety  coma.  Only  by  the  power  of  contact  with  life  are  sick  and  help- 
less souls  mada  whole.    None  but  the  live  man  saves  himself  or  quickens  the  dead 


78f  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

to  life,  Mves  himself  or  saves  his  neighboor.**  It  is  a  noble  assertion.  The  whole 
Bible,  from  its  first  page  to  its  last,  is  full  of  the  assertion  of  the  fondamental 
necessity  of  vitality ;  that  the  first  thing  which  a  man  needs  in  order  to  live  well, 
is  to  live.  (Ibid.)  The  safety  of  faith : — Let  as  consider  the  safety  which  Christ 
offers.  It  is  a  safety  not  by  the  avoidance  of  deadly  things,  bat  by  the  neatra- 
lizing  of  them  through  a  higher  and  stronger  power.  There  is  no  saoh  idle  promise 
as  that  if  a  man  believes  in  Christ  a  wall  shall  be  built  around  his  soul,  so  that 
the  things  out  of  which  souls  make  sin  cannot  come  to  Him.  The  Master  knew 
the  world  too  well  for  that.  His  own  experience  on  the  hUl  of  His  temptation  was 
still  fresh  in  His  memory.  He  knew  that  life  meant  exposure,  that  sin  must 
surely  beat  at  every  one  of  these  hearts.  Nay,  that  the  things  out  of  which  sin  is 
made,  temptation,  moral  trial,  must  enter  into  every  heart ;  and  so  He  said  not, 
"  I  will  lead  you  through  secluded  ways  where  none  but  sweet  and  healthy  waters 
flow,"  but,  "  Where  I  lead  yoa,  there  will  be  the  streams  of  poison.  Only  if  yon 
have  the  vitality  which  comes  by  faith  in  Me,  your  life  shall  be  stronger  than  the 
poison's  death.  If  you  drink  any  deadly  thing  it  shall  not  harm  you  "  .  .  ,  ,  Only 
those  temptations  which  we  encounter  on  the  way  of  duty,  in  the  path  of  con- 
secration, only  those  has  our  Lord  promised  us  that  we  shall  conquer.  He  sends 
as  out  to  live  and  work  for  Him.  The  chances  of  sin  which  we  meet  while  that 
Divine  design  of  life,  the  life  and  work  for  Him,  is  clear  before  as,  shall  not  hart 
as.  When  we  forget  that  design,  our  arm  withers,  our  immunity  is  gone.  It  is 
only  when  we  are  about  some  higher  task,  only  when  they  meet  us  as  accidents  in 
the  service  of  Christ,  that  we  have  a  right  deliberately  to  encounter  temptation  and 
the  chance  to  sin,  and  may  claim  the  Lord's  promise  of  immunity.  Think  in  how 
many  places  that  law  applies.  Have  I  a  right  to  read  this  sceptical  book — this 
book  in  which  some  able,  witty  man  has  gathered  all  his  skill  against  my  Christian 
faith  ?  It  is  a  book  of  poison.  Have  I  a  right  to  drink  it  ?  Who  can  say  ab- 
solutely yes  or  no  ?  Who  does  not  feel  that  it  depends  upon  what  sort  of  life  the 
reader  brings  to  meet  the  poison  ?  If  in  your  soul  there  is  a  passionate  desire  for 
truth,  if  you  do  really  love  and  serve  Christ,  and  want  to  know  Him  better,  that 
yon  may  love  and  serve  him  more,  if  this  book  comes  as  a  help  to  that  part  of  a 
study  by  which  you  shall  get  nearer  to  the  heart  of  the  truth  and  Him,  then  if  you 
drink  that  deadly  thing  it  shall  not  harm  you.  Nay,  you  may  rise  up  from  the 
reading  with  a  faith  more  deep.  Whatever  change  your  faith  may  undergo,  it  shall 
win  a  profounder  life.  But  if  there  is  no  such  earnestness,  no  such  life  as  this,  if 
it  is  mere  curiositv,  mere  desire  to  be  fine  and  liberal,  mere  defiance,  a  mere 
wantonness,  then  the  poison  has  it  all  its  own  way ;  there  is  no  vigorous  life  to 
meet  it ;  and  its  death  spreads  through  the  nature  till  it  finds  the  heart.  .  .  .  And 
BO  it  is  everywhere  with  all  exposure  of  the  spiritual  life.  "What took  yon  there?" 
"What  right  had  you  to  be  there?"  These  are  the  critical  questions  on  which 
everything  depends.  If  you  are  passing  through  temptation  with  your  eye  fixed 
on  a  pure,  true  Ufe  beyond  it,  temptation  being  only  a  necessary  stage  upon  your 
way,  so  long  as  you  keep  that  purpose,  that  resolution,  that  ideal,  you  shall  be  safe. 
If  you  are  in  temptation  for  temptation's  sake,  with  no  purpose  beyond  it,  you  are  lost. 
(Ibid.)  The  helpfulness  of  /att^;— Not  only  is  the  man  of  faith  promised  safety 
for  himself,  but  that  he  shall  be  helpful  to  others  too.  These  two  things — safety 
and  helpfulness — go  together,  not  merely  in  this  special  promise  of  the  Saviour, 
but  in  all  life.  So  is  the  whole  world  bound  into  a  whole,  so  does  the  good  that 
comes  to  any  man  tend  to  diffuse  itself  and  touch  the  lives  of  all,  that  these  two 
things  are  true.  First,  that  no  man  can  be  really  safe,  really  secure  that  the  world 
shall  not  harm  and  poison  him,  unless  there  is  going  out  from  him  a  living  and 
life-giving  influence  to  other  men.  And  second,  tJbat  no  man  is  really  helping 
other  men  unless  there  is  true  life  in  his  own  soul.  No  man  can  really  save  another 
unless  he  saves  himself.  It  is  the  good  man  by  his  good  deeds  that  gives  life  to  the 
world.  Always  it  is  the  living,  not  the  dead,  who  give  life.  It  is  the  man  not  who 
has  sinned  deeply,  but  who  has  known  by  intense  sympathy  what  sin  is,  how  strong, 
how  terrible,  and  yet  escaped  it  for  himself, — he  is  the  man  who  helps  the  sinners 
most ;  he  is  the  anointed  who  carries  on  and  carries  round  the  Christ's  salvation. 
In  their  deepest  need  the  wickedest  men  look  to  the  purest  men  they  know ;  the 
deadest  to  the  hvest ;  first  to  those  who  they  think  have  most  escaped  sin,  then  to 
those  who  they  think  have  been  moat  cleansed  of  sin  by  repentance  and  forgive- 
ness. .  .  .  Here  is  a  man  in  whom  I  know  that  the  promise  of  Christ  is  certainly 
fulfilled.  He  is  a  believer,  and  through  his  open  faith  the  life  of  Christ  flows  into 
him  conatantly,  and  is  his  life.    Fall  of  that  life,  he  gives  it  everywhere  he  goes. 


OAP.  zn.]  8T.  MARK,  TBI 

The  dek  in  ■onl  toneh  hii  loiil  and  are  well  again.  The  disooaraged  find  new 
braTeiy;  the  yielding  eools  are  dad  anew  with  fimmess.  The  frivolous  grow 
■eriocs,  the  mean  are  stong  or  tempted  into  generosity,  and  sinners  hate  their  sin 
and  orave  a  better  life,  wherever  this  man  goes.  (Ibid.)  Tfte  teeret  of  the 
believer'$  fulpfulne$$ : — The  power  of  these  life-giving  lives  seems  to  be  described 
in  these  two  words — ^testimony  and  transmission.  I.  Thb  tbstimoitt  which  thbt 
BBAB  BT  thb  txbt  vaot  ow  thbib  owm  abdmdamt  letb.  They  show  the  presence, 
they  assert  the  poesibility  of  vitality.  Very  often  this  is  what  soals  whose  spiritaal 
life  is  weak  and  low  need  to  have  done  for  them.  Men  half  alive  grow  to  doabt  of 
the  fnller  life  in  anybody.  Men  try  to  realize  the  descriptions  of  religion  which 
they  hear,  and,  falling  short  of  them,  tbey  grow  ready  to  believe  that  religion  is  a 
thing  of  excited  Imaginations,  and  to  give  ap  ail  thought  of  making  it  real  in  them- 
selves. It  is  not  only  the  badness  in  the  world,  it  is  the  dreadful  incredulity  of 
good,  it  is  the  despair  and  lack  of  struggle  which  tells  how  low  ebbs  out  the  tide  of 
spiritual  life.  Then  comes  the  man  in  whom  spiritual  life  is  a  real,  deep,  strong, 
positive  thing.  The  first  work  which  that  man  does  is  to  bear  the  simple  testimony 
of  his  life  that  life  is  possible.  Already,  just  in  acknowledgement  of  that,  the 
sick  faces  begin  to  revive,  and  the  sick  eyes  look  up  to  him.  The  brave  and 
godly  boy  among  a  group  of  boys  just  learning  to  be  proud  of  godlessness  and 
contemptuousness  of  piety— the  man  of  golden  principles  among  the  sceptics  of 
the  street — the  one  true  penitent  rejoicing  in  a  new  and  certain  hope  out  of  the 
ranks  of  flagrant  sin — these  instantly,  the  moment  that  they  begin  to  hve,  begin 
to  bear  their  testimony  of  life,  and  so  make  life  about  them.  U.  Tbansuisbiom. 
The  highest  statement  of  the  culture  of  a  human  nature  and  of  the  best  attain- 
ment that  is  set  before  it,  is  that,  as  it  grows  better,  it  grows  more  transparent  and 
more  simple,  more  capable  therefore  of  simply  and  truly  transmitting  the  life  and 
will  of  Ood  which  is  behind  it.  The  thought  of  a  man,  as  he  improves  and 
strengthens,  getting  the  control  of  his  own  powers,  and  becoming  more  and  more 
a  source  of  power  over  other  men,  this  thought,  which  has  doubtless  its  own  degree 
of  truth,  is  limited  and  vulgar  beside  the  breadth  and  fineness  of  the  other  idea, 
that  as  a  man  is  trained  and  cultured,  as  the  various  events  of  life  create  their 
changes  in  him,  as  tempests  beat  him  and  sunshine  bathes  him,  as  he  wrestles  with 
temptation  and  yields  to  grace,  as  he  goes  on  through  the  spring-time,  the  summer, 
and  the  autumn  of  his  hfe,  the  one  highest  purpose  and  result  of  it  all  is  to 
beat  and  fnse  his  life  into  transparency,  so  that  it  can  transmit  the  life  of  Qod. 
For  all  good  ii  from  God,  and  He  uses  our  lives,  aU  of  them,  to  reach  other  men's 
lives  wiUi.  Only  the  difference  is  this  :  upon  a  life  of  sin,  aU  hard  and  black,  God 
shines  as  the  sun  shines  on  the  black,  hard  marble,  and  by  reflection  thence  strikes 
on  the  things  around,  leaving  the  centre  of  the  marble  itself  always  dark.  But  on 
a  life  of  obeiienoe  and  faith,  God  shines  as  the  sun  shines  on  a  block  of  crystal, 
sending  its  radiance  through  the  willing  and  transparent  mass,  and  warming  and 
lighting  it  all  into  its  inmost  depths.  {Ibid.)  Signs  unneces$ary  novo : — Though 
the  mirade- working  power  remained  in  the  Church  after  the  ascension  of  our  Lord, 
Christianity  was  made  less  dependent  on  such  external  signs  and  tokens,  and  more 
and  more  on  the  moral  and  spiritual  power  of  the  Word  itself.  With  this 
promise  compare  the  still  more  general  one  of  Psalm  xci.  Such  signs  as  are 
indicated  here  are  not  needed  in  Uiis  age,  when  the  Divine  nature  of  Christianity 
is  witnessed  by  such  historical  evidences  as  are  afforded  by  the  moral,  the  religions, 
the  social,  the  political,  and  even  the  commercial  devdopment  which  has  every- 
where attended  on  and  resnlted  from  its  progress.  I  can  hardly  conceive  that 
occasion  ever  ean  arise  for  the  further  fulfilment  of  this  promise.  Christianity  is 
itself  A  greater  sign  than  any  the  apostles  wrought.    (Abbott.) 

Ver.  19.  He  waa  reoetred  itp  Into  haavea.— TA«  Aicension  and  iu  ^eeU  .-—The 
hidden  sonroe  of  the  Christian's  spiritual  life  is  with  Christ  in  God.  To  Him  he 
looks  as  his  treasure — his  treasure  in  heaven ;  thither  does  he  endeavour  in  heart 
and  mind  to  aseend ;  he  sets  his  affections  on  things  above ;  he  seeks  those  things 
i^eh  are  at  the  right  hand  of  Ood,  with  Christ,  to  be  dispensed  by  Him,  according 
to  His  piomiaa.  The  asoenaion  was  the  great  consummation  of  Christ's  work. 
Observe  in  this  oonneetion — I.  Thb  pbbiod  at  which  Hb  abcendbd  :  after  He  has 
epoken  to  the  apostles.  He  did  not  leave  them  u  til  His  prophetical  work  on  earth 
was  done,  and  He  had  provided  for  the  continu  d  application  of  the  benefits  He 
had  seowed  for  mankind.  IL  Whbhob  Hb  was  bbcbivbd:  from  the  Mount  of 
Oimib    A  tevoorite  spot,  and  one  hallewed  by  frequent  eommnnion  with  Hia 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOJL  [obap.  xfx. 

Father,  snd  elote  to  the  garden  where  He  rendered  His  wOl  to  God.  The  vallej  d 
humiliation  was  changed  into  the  mount  of  triumph.  III.  Br  whom  He  was 
received :  by  the  holy  angels.  What  joy  for  them  !  They  nshered  Him  into  the 
Presence-ehamber  of  Jehovah,  and  there  He  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  High.  IV.  Thb  pubpose  roB  which  Hs  ascended.  1.  To  prepare  a 
place  for  His  people.  2.  To  role  and  order  all  things  for  the  glory  of  God.  3.  To 
intercede  for  all  who  come  to  God  by  Him.  4.  To  send  the  Holy  Spirit  to  dwell 
with  His  people  and  guide  them  into  all  the  truth.  That  Blessed  Spirit  is  the  true 
remedy  for  aU  the  wants  we  feel,  for  the  coldness  of  our  hearts  towards  Him,  for 
our  many  departures  from  His  will,  our  many  shortcomings  and  turnings  aside  from 
Him.  (Bp.  F.  Barker t  D.D.)  Christ's  Ascension :— 0  happy  parting,  fit  for  the 
Saviour  of  mankind.  O  blessed  Jesu,  let  me  so  far  imitate  Thee,  as  to  depart  hence 
with  a  blessing  in  my  mouth  ;  let  my  soul,  when  it  ia  stepping  over  the  threshold 
of  heaven,  leave  behind  it  a  legacy  of  peace  and  happiness.  I.  Fbou  whbmck  du> 
He  ASCBNPf  From  the  Mount  of  Olives.  He  might  have  ascended  from  the 
valley  ;  all  the  globe  of  earth  was  alike  to  Him  ;  but  einoe  He  was  to  mount  op- 
ward.  He  would  take  so  much  advantage  as  that  stair  of  ground  would  afford 
Him.  Since  he  had  made  hills  so  much  nearer  to  heaven,  He  would  not  neglect 
the  benefit  of  His  Own  creation.  Where  we  have  common  helps,  we  may 
not  depend  upon  supernatural  provisions,  we  may  not  strain  the  Divine  Provi- 
dence to  the  supply  of  our  negligence,  or  the  humouring  of  oar  presumption.  O 
God,  teach  me  to  bless  Thee  for  means/when  I  have  them ;  and  to  trust  Tboe 
for  means,  when  I  have  them  not ;  yea,  to  trust  Thee  without  means,  when  I  have 
no  hope  of  them.  11.  Whxtheb  did  He  ascend  ?  Whither,  but  home  into  His 
heaven  t  From  the  mountain  was  He  taken  up  ;  and  what  but  heaven  is  above  the 
hills  r  Already  had  He  approved  Himself  the  Lord  and  Commander  of  earth,  of 
sea,  of  hell.  It  only  remained  that,  as  Lord  of  the  air,  He  should  pass  through  all 
the  regions  of  that  yielding  element ;  and,  as  Lord  of  heaven,  through  all  the 
glorious  contiguations  thereof.  He  had  an  everlasting  right  to  that  heaven ;  %a 
undoubted  possession  of  it  ever  since  it  was;  but  His  human  nature  took  not 
possession  of  it  until  now.  O  Jesu,  raise  Thou  up  my  heart  thither  to  Thee; 
place  my  affections  upon  Thee  above,  and  teach  me  to  love  heaven,  because  Thoo 
art  there.  UI.  How  did  Hs  ascend  r  As  in  His  crucifixion  and  resurrection,  so 
iklao  in  His  ascension,  the  act  was  His  Own,  the  power  of  it  none  but  His.  The 
angels  did  attend  Thee,  they  did  not  aid  Thee :  whence  had  they  their  strength, 
but  from  Thee  ?  Unlike  £lias.  Thou  needest  no  chariot,  no  carriage  of  angels ; 
Thou  art  the  Author  of  life  and  motion ;  they  move  in  and  from  Thee.  As  Thoo, 
therefore,  didst  move  Thyself  upward,  so,  by  the  same  Divine  power,  Thou  will 
raise  us  op  to  the  participation  of  Thy  glory.  {Bp.  Joseph  H<M.)  Comfort  from 
Christ's  Ascension .-'O  my  soul,  be  Thou  now,  if  ever,  ravished  with  theeontem- 
plation  of  this  comfortable  and  blessed  farewell  of  thy  Saviour.  What  a  sight  was 
this,  how  fall  of  joyful  assuranee,  of  spiritual  consolation  t  Methinks  I  see  it  still 
with  their  eyes,  how  Thou,  my  glorious  Saviour,  didst  leisurely  and  insensibly  rise 
ap  from  Thine  OUvet,  taking  leave  of  Thine  acclaiming  disciples,  now  left  below 
Thee,  with  gradoas  eyes,  with  heavenly  benedictions.  Methinks  I  see  how  they 
followed  Thee  wiUi  eager  and  longing  eyes,  with  arms  lifted  ap,  as  if  they  had 
wished  them  winged,  to  have  soared  up  after  Thee.  And  if  Elijah  gave  assorance 
to  his  servant  Elisha,  that,  if  he  should  have  beheld  him  in  that  rapture,  his 
master's  spirit  should  be  doubled  opon  him ;  what  an  accession  of  the  spirit  of  joy 
and  confidence  must  needs  be  to  His  happy  disciples,  in  seeing  Christ  thus 
gradually  rising  up  to  His  heaven !  0  how  unwillingly  did  their  intentive  eyes  let  go 
so  blessed  an  object !  How  unwelcome  was  that  oloud  that  interposed  itself  be> 
twixt  Him  and  them,  and,  dosing  up  itself,  left  only  a  glorious  splendour  behind 
it,  as  the  bright  track  of  His  ascension  I  Of  old,  here  below,  the  glozy  ol  the  Lord 
appeared  in  the  cloud ;  now,  afar  off  in  the  sky,  the  cloud  intercepted  thaiheayenl> 
glory;  if  distance  did  not  rather  do  it  than  that  bright  meteor.  Their  eyes 
attended  Him  on  His  way  so  fa  as  their  beams  would  reach ;  when  they  eonld  go 
no  f  urUier,  the  cloud  received  Him.  Lo,  even  yet  that  very  screen,  whereby  He  was 
taken  off  from  all  earthly  view,  was  no  other  than  glorious ;  how  maeh  rather  d« 
all  the  beholders  fix  their  sight  apon  that  oloud,  than  upon  the  best  piece  of  the 
firmament !  Never  was  the  sun  itself  gazed  upon  with  so  much  intention.  With 
what  long  looks,  with  what  astonished  acclamations,  did  these  transported  beholders 
follow  Thee,  their  ascending  Saviour  I  As  if  they  would  have  looked  throogh  that 
cloud,  and  that  heaven  that  hid  Him  from  tham.  ....  Look  not  after  Him,  O  j% 


OKAP.  XVI.]  8T.  MARK.  735 

weftk  disciples,  m  to  departed  that  ye  shall  see  Him  no  more;  if  He  he  gone,  yet  He 
is  not  lost ;  those  heavens  that  received  Him  shall  restore  Him ;  neither  can  those 
hlessed  mansions  decrease  His  glory.  Ye  have  seen  Him  ascend  upon  the  chariot  of  a 
bright  cloud ;  and,  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  ye  shall  see  Him  descend  again  to  His  last 
judgment.  He  is  gone :  can  it  trouble  you  to  know  you  have  an  Advocate  in  heaven  ? 
Strive  not  now  so  much  to  exercise  your  bodily  eyes  in  looking  after  Him,  as  the  eyes 
of  your  souls  in  looking  for  Him.  If  it  be  our  sorrow  to  part  with  our  Saviour,  yet, 
to  part  with  Him  into  heaven,  it  is  comfort  and  felicity :  if  His  absence  could  be 
grievous.  His  return  shall  be  happy  and  glorious.  Even  so,  Lord  Jesus,  come 
quickly  :  in  the  meantime  it  is  not  heaven  that  can  keep  Thee  from  me ;  it  is  not 
earth  that  can  keep  me  from  Thee :  raise  Thou  up  my  soul  to  a  life  of  faith  with  Thee ; 
let  me  ever  enjoy  Thy  conversation,  whilst  I  expect  Thy  return.  (Ibid.)  The 
enthroned  Christ ;— How  strangely  calm  and  brief,  this  record  of  so  stupendous  an 
event.  Something  sublime  in  the  contrast  between  the  magnificence  and  almost 
inconceivable  grandeur  of  the  thing  communicated,  and  the  quiet  words,  so  few,  so 
sober,  so  wanting  in  all  detail,  in  which  it  is  told.  The  stupendous  fact  of  Christ 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  is  the  one  that  should  fill  'the  present  for  us  all, 
even  as  the  Gross  should  fill  the  past,  and  the  coming  for  judgment  should  fill  the 
future.  I.  The  exalted  man.  In  His  ascension  Christ  was  but  returning  to  His 
eternal  Home  ;  but  He  took  with  Him — what  He  had  not  had  before  in  heaven — 
His  humanity.  It  was  the  Everlasting  Son  of  the  Father,  the  Eternal  Word,  which 
from  the  beginning  was  with  God  and  was  God,  that  came  down  from  heaven  to 
earth,  to  declare  the  Father ;  but  it  was  the  Incarnate  Word,  the  man  Christ  Jesus, 
who  went  back  again.  And  He  went  as  our  Forerunner,  to  prepare  a  place  for  us, 
that  where  He  is  we  also  might  be.  II.  The  bestino  Savioub.  Christ  rests  after 
His  cross,  not  because  He  needs  repose,  bat  in  token  that  His  work  is  finished,  and 
that  the  Father  has  accepted  it.  lU.  The  Intebcbdimg  Pbibst.  There  are  deep 
mysteries  connected  with  the  thought  of  Christ's  intercession.  It  does  not  mean 
that  the  Divine  heart  needs  to  be  won  to  love  and  pity ;  or  that  in  any  merely  out- 
ward and  formal  fashion  He  pleads  with  God,  and  softens  and  placates  the  Infinite 
and  Eternal  love  of  the  Father  in  the  heavens.  But  it  means  that  He,  our  Saviour 
and  Sacrifice,  is  for  ever  in  the  presence  of  God ;  presenting  His  Own  Blood  as  an 
element  in  the  Divine  dealing  with  us  ;  and  securing,  through  His  own  merits  and 
interoeBsion,  the  outflow  of  blessings  upon  our  heads  and  hearts.  lY.  The  eveb- 
▲OTiVB  HxLPEB.  The  **  right  hand  of  God  "  is  the  omnipotent  energy  of  God.  The 
Moended  Christ  is  the  ubiquitous  Christ.  Our  Brother,  the  Son  of  Man,  sits 
ruling  all  things ;  shall  we  not,  then,  be  restful  and  content  ?  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Duign  of^  Christ's  Ascension : — 1.  To  confirm  the  prophecies.  2.  To  commence  His 
mediatorial  work  in  heaven.  3.  To  send  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  To  prepare  a  place  for 
His  people.  He  went  up  as  our  Representative,  Forerunner,  High  Pnest,  and  Inter- 
cessor, and  as  the  King  of  Glory.  (G.  S.  Bowes.)  Manner  of  Christ's  Ascension : — 
The  manner  of  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  may  be  said  to  have  been  an  instance 
of  Divine  simplicity  and  sublimity  combined,  which  scarcely  has  a  parallel.  While 
in  the  act  of  blessing  His  disciples  (St.  Luke  xxiv.  50,  51),  He  was  parted  from 
them,  and  was  carried  up,  and  disappeared  behind  a  cloud  (Acts  i.  9).  There  was 
no  pomp ;  nothing  could  have  been  more  simple.  How  can  the  followers  of  this 
Lord  and  Master  rely  on  pomp  and  ceremony  to  spread  EUs  religion,  when  He,  its 
Founder,  gave  no  countenance  to  such  appeals  to  the  senses  of  men  7  Had  some 
good  men  been  consulted  about  the  manner  of  the  ascension,  we  can  imagine  the 
result.  {N.  Adams,)  Ascension  Day,  on  earth  and  in  heaven: — I.  On  babth. 
Think  of  the  marvellous  day  when  the  disciples  once  more  followed  the  Lord  as  far 
as  unto  Bethany,  now  truly  on  His  way  home.  All  the  glimpses  of  the  forty  days 
had  pressed  it  upon  them  that,  while  tmly  the  same  Jesus,  He  was  ^et  drawing  away 
from  them.  Still  loving  and  tender,  He  is  hedged  about  vrith  divmitv  that  makes 
a  king.  He  bends  not  again  to  wash  their  feet ;  Mary  does  not  touch  Him,  John 
does  not  lie  in  His  bosom.  Nature  is  losing  its  hold  on  His  hnmanity.  Suddenly 
He  comes  and  goes,  scarce  recognized  at  first,  then  quickly  hailed  with  rapturous 
confidence.  They  see  Him  no  longer  bearing  unweariness,  hunger,  or  the  contempt 
of  men.  Jew  and  Koman  are  now  out  of  the  contest.  Satan  dares  no  more 
assaults.  He  has  no  sighs,  no  tears,  no  nights  of  prayer,  no  agony  with  bloody 
sweat.  And  now  as  they  watch,  that  ohiefest  force  of  matter  on  which  the  systems 
stand,  slips  away  from  the  particles  of  the  form  He  wean,  and  He  ascends  in  their 
sight,  out  of  their  sight,  until  swathed  in  the  splendour  of  a  eloud  of  gloiy.  U.  Is 
HXAVKN.    Dare  wt  imagine  the  scene?    Angels  unnumbered,  their  facet  solemn 


im  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obap.  xfu 

with  a  new  awe  at  the  great  work  of  God  ;  the  first  woman  beholding  at  last  the 
Seed ;  the  first  man  Adam,  rejoicing  to  see  his  fearful  work  ondone  and  the  raoe 
left  free  to  join  itself  to  a  new  Head ;  the  patriarchs  no  longer  pilgrims  ;  priests  no 
longer  ministering  at  temple  and  altar ;  prophets  finding  prophecy  itself  looking 
backward  on  fulfilment ;  the  heroes  of  the  Church ;  the  babes  of  Bethlehem 
slaughtered  about  His  cradle — can  we  imagine  the  scene  as  He  passed  through  the 
midst  of  these  ?  Did  they  gaze  on  His  form,  with  print  of  thorn  and  naU  and 
spear,  which  mark  Him  for  ever  as  the  Lamb  that  hath  been  slain  ?  Up  He  passes 
through  the  bowed  ranks,  among  saints  and  elders  and  martyrs,  the  four  mystical 
living  ones,  beyond  the  glassy  sea,  amid  the  spirit's  seven  burning  flames,  beneath 
the  emerald  glittering  bow,  to  that  glory  whose  brightness  jasper  and  sardius  oan> 
not  express,  and  on  this  highest  height  of  the  supreme  throne  of  the  ineffable  God, 
He  takes  His  Own  place.  (C.  M.  Southgate.)  The  tomb  and  triumph: — Whenever 
you  think  of  our  Lord's  resurrection  and  ascension,  remember  always  that  the 
background  to  His  triumph  is  a  tomb.  Bemember  that  it  is  the  triumph  over 
suffering ;  a  triumph  of  One  who  still  bears  the  prints  of  the  nails  in  His  hands  and 
in  His  feet,  and  the  wound  of  the  spear  in  His  side  ;  like  many  a  poor  soul  who  has 
followed  Him  triumphant  at  last,  and  yet  scarred  and  maimed  in  the  hard  battle  of 
life.  Bemember  for  ever  the  adorable  wounds  of  Christ.  Bemember  for  ever  that 
St.  John  saw  in  tiie  midst  of  the  throne  of  God  the  likeness  of  a  Lamb,  as  it  had 
been  slain.  For  so  alone  you  will  learn  what  our  Lord's  resurrection  and  ascension 
are  to  all  who  have  to  suffer  and  to  toil  on  earth.  {G.  Kingsley  M.A.)  Christ  is  liv- 
ing now  : — What  good  would  it  do  to  you  if  you  were  suffering  from  some  peculiar 
accident  to  a  limb,  and  some  one  came  and  told  you  of  a  surgeon  who  lived  a  hundred 
years  ago,  and  who  had  been  wonderfully  olever  in  resetting  the  same  bone  after  that 
precise  kind  of  fracture?  You  might  feel  that  he  would  have  been  able  and 
willing  to  relieve  you  from  pain,  and  to  prevent  all  subsequent  deformity.  But 
if  you  were  told  of  some  living  man  who  had  shown  the  same  skill,  and  if  it  were 
explained  how  it  was  that  he  had  acquired  his  special  experience,  and  how  he  had 
succeeded  in  one  case  after  another  when  every  other  surgeon  was  helpless,  yoa 
would  say,  *•  Now  I  have  heard  all  this  I  will  send  for  him  at  once,  and  put  myself 
in  his  hands."  This  is  just  what  men  have  to  be  persuaded  to  do  in  relation  to 
Christ  ...  to  reaUze  that  He  is  living  still,  and  that  He  is  not  only  willing  bat 
able  to  give  every  man  who  asks  of  Him  forgiveness  of  all  past^vil  and  strength  to  do 
better  in  time  to  come.  (J2.  W.  Dale  D.I>.)  Jesus  at  the  right  hand  of  Ood : — 
John  Bunyan  was  walking  one  day  in  a  field,  in  great  trouble  of  soul  at  the 
discovery  of  his  own  vileness,  and  not  knowing  how  to  be  justified  with  Gk>d, 
when  he  heard,  as  he  imagined,  a  voice  saying  to  him,  "Your  righteoasness 
is  in  heaven."  He  went  into  his  house  and  took  his  Bible,  thinking  to  find 
there  the  very  words  that  he  thus  sounded  in  his  heart.  He  did  not  discover 
the  identical  expression,  but  many  a  passage  of  Scripture  proclaimed  the 
same  truth,  and  showed  him  that  Jesus,  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  is  complete 
righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth.  {Handbook  to  Scripture  Doctrines.) 
The  ascension  of  Christ : — We  cannot  contemplate  the  characters  of  men  who  have 
benefited  the  world  by  the  splendour  of  tiieir  talents  or  the  lustre  of  their  lives, 
without  feeUng  a  spirit  of  inquisitive  solicitude  to  know  how  they  finished  their 
course,  parted  with  their  friends,  and  made  their  exit.  We  labour  to  catch  the  lasft 
glance  of  departing  worth.  I.  The  period  when  Chbist  ascended.  1.  After  up- 
braiding His  disciples  with  their  unbeUef  and  hardness  of  heart.  2.  After  assigning 
to  them  their  work.  (1)  The  work  was  to  *'  preach  the  gospel,"  not  false  doctrines, 
not  human  opinions,  not  Jewish  ceremonies.  (2)  The  sphere  of  their  operation 
was  "  all  the  world."  (3)  Their  commission  was  to  *•  every  creature."  Hence  we 
infer  that  the  gospel  is  suited  to  the  circumstances  of  all — designed  for  the  benefit 
of  all — and  that  the  ministers  of  truth  should  aim  at  preaching  it  to  all.  3.  After 
comforting  them  by  the  promise  of  a  miraculous  influence  with  which  they  should 
be  invested.  II.  The  manneb.  1.  Christ's  ascension  was  accomplished  by  His 
own  eternal  power.  2.  It  was  publicly  witnessed  by  His  disciples.  3.  It  was  hailed 
with  transport  by  ministering  angels.  St.  Luke  declares  that  "  a  cloud  received 
Him;"  who  can  tell  what  amazing  scenes  were  unfolded  beyond  that  cloud? 
IIL  His  SUBSEQUENT  SITUATION.  *•  He  sat  ou  the  right  hand  of  God."  This  signi- 
fies— 1.  The  honour  and  dignity  to  which  our  Saviour  is  exalted.  2.  The  rule  and 
government  with  which  He  is  invested  (Eph.  i.  20-22 ;  John  iii.  35 ;  Matt.  xi.  27 ; 
Bom.  viii.  34).  3.  The  tranquiUty  and  happiness  of  which  He  is  possessed. 
CoMOLunoM:    From  this  subject  we  learn— L  Christ  finished  the  work  which  Ha 


.  Xfi]  8T.  MARK.  Tt7 

«ame  upon  earth  to  Moomplish.  3.  Christ  haa  highly  honoared  hnman  natiire. 
Z,  Christ  is  exalted  for  our  sake  (Heb.  ix.  24).  This  shonld  give  as  eonfidenoe  in 
oar  prayers,  excite  car  emolation,  and,  above  all,  inspire  our  hopes.  (Sketehta  oj 
Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Our  Lord's  Ascension : — ^I.  Thb  vact  or  thb  asobnsiom. 
Christ  was,  according  to  His  humanity,  translated  by  the  Divine  power  into  heaven. 
As  God,  He  transferred  Himself,  as  man,  thither :  to  sit,  thenceforward,  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  This  signifies — 1.  Pre-eminence  of  dignity,  power, 
^▼our,  and  felicity.  2.  The  solid  ground,  the  firm  possession,  the  durable  con- 
tinuance, the  undisturbed  rest  and  quiet,  of  His  condition.  8.  The  nature,  quaUty, 
and  design  of  His  preferment.  He  is  our  Ruler  and  Judge.  4.  His  glorification. 
II.  CoNFiBMATOBT  CONSIDERATIONS.  1.  Ooular  testimony.  The  apostles  witnessed 
Christ's  ascension.  2.  Rational  deduction.  His  arriving  at  the  supreme  pitch  of 
^lory,  and  sitting  there,  is  deduced  from  the  authority  of  His  own  word,  and  stands 
on  the  same  ground  as  any  other  point  of  Christian  faith  and  doctrine.  3.  Ancient 
predictions.  UI.  Thb  end  and  etfect  or  the  ascension.  1.  Our  Lord  did  ascend 
onto,  and  doth  reside  in,  heaven,  at  the  right  hand  of  Divine  majesty  and  power, 
that  as  a  King  He  may  govern  us,  protecting  us  from  all  danger,  relieving  us  in  all 
want,  delivering  us  from  all  evil.  2.  Our  Saviour  did  ascend,  and  now  sits  at  God's 
right  hand,  that  He  may,  in  regard  to  us,  tiiere  exercise  His  priestly  function. 
8.  Our  Lord  tells  us  that  it  was  necessary  He  should  depart  hence,  and  enter  into 
this  glorious  state,  that  He  might  there  exercise  His  prophetical  office  by  imparting 
to  us  His  Holy  Spirit  for  our  instruction,  direction,  assistance,  and  comfort. 
4.  Our  Lord  also  tells  us  that  He  went  to  heaven  to  prepare  a  place  there  for  His 
faithful  servants.  He  has  entered  heaven  as  our  Forerunner,  our  Harbinger,  to 
dispose  things  there  for  our  reception  and  entertainment.  6.  It  is  an  effect  of  our 
Lord's  ascension  and  glorification,  that  all  good  Christians  are  with  Him  in  a  sort 
translated  into  heaven,  and  advanced  into  a  glorious  state,  being  made  kings  tfhd 
priests  to  Gk)d.  6.  I  might  add  that  God  did  thus  advance  our  Saviour,  to  declare 
the  special  regard  He  bears  to  piety,  righteousness,  and  obedience,  by  His  so  amply 
rewarding  and  highly  dignifying  the  practice  thereof.  IV.  PsAoxiCAii  consideba- 
TiONS.  1.  It  may  serve  to  guard  us  from  divers  errors  with  regard  to  our  Lord's 
human  nature.  Our  Lord  did  visibly,  in  human  shape,  ascend  to  heaven,  and 
therefore  He  continues  still  a  Man  ;  and  as  such  He  abides  in  heaven.  He  is  indeed 
everywhere  by  His  Divinity  present  with  us  ;  He  is  also  in  His  humanity  present 
to  oar  faith,  memory,  affection ;  He  is  therein  also  present  by  mysterious  represen- 
tation, by  spiritual  efficacy,  by  general  inspection  and  influence  on  His  Church ; 
bat  in  body,  as  we  are  absent  from  Him,  so  is  He  likewise  separated  from  us ;  we 
most  depurt  hence,  that  we  may  be  with  Him  in  the  place  whither  He  is  gone 
to  prepare  for  us.  2.  Is  Christ  ascended  and  advanced  to  this  glorious  eminency 
ftt  God's  right  hand?  Then  let  us  answerably  behave  ourselves  towards  Him, 
rendering  Him  the  honour  and  worship,  the  fear  and  reverence,  the  service  and 
obedience^  suitable  and  due  to  His  state.  8.  These  points  afford  ground  and  matter 
of  great  joy  and  comfort  to  us.  Victory  over  enemies  ;  exaltation  of  Him  who  has 
■tooped  to  become  one  wi^  us — our  Elder  Brother ;  tiie  possession  of  a  Friend  in 
80  high  place  and  so  great  power,  <fec.  4.  The  consideration  of  these  things  serves 
to  cherish  and  strengthen  all  kinds  of  faith  and  hope  in  as.  We  cannot  surely 
distrust  the  accomplishment  of  any  promises  declared  by  Him,  we  cannot  despair  of 
receiving  any  good  from  Him,  who  is  ascended  into  heaven  and  sits  at  the  right  hand 
of  Divine  wisdom  and  power,  thence  viewing  all  things  done  here,  thence  ordering 
all  things  everywhere  for  the  advantage  of  those  who  love  Him  and  trust  in  Him. 
6.  These  points  likewise  serve  to  excite  and  encourage  our  devotion.  Having  such 
a  Mediator  in  heaven,  so  good  and  sure  a  Friend  at  court,  what  should  hinder  us 
from  cheerfully  addressing  ourselves  by  Him  on  all  occasions  to  God  ?  6.  It  may 
encourage  us  to  all  kinds  of  obedience,  to  consider  what  a  high  pitch  of  eternal 
glory  and  dignity  our  Lord  has  obtained  in  regard  to  His  obedience,  and  as  a  pledge 
of  like  recompense  designed  to  us  if  we  tread  in  His  footsteps.  7.  The  considera- 
tion of  these  points  should  elevate  our  thoughts  and  affections  from  these  inferior 
things  here  below  onto  heavenly  things  (CoL  iii.  1).  To  the  Head  of  our  body  we 
shoiUd  be  joined ;  continually  deriving  sense  ana  motion,  direction  and  activity, 
from  TTiw* ;  whei«  the  Master  of  our  family  is,  there  should  our  minds  be,  con- 
stantly attentiye  to  His  pleasure,  and  ready  to  serve  Him ;  where  the  city  is  whose 
denizens  we  are,  and  where  our  final  rest  must  be,  there  should  our  thoughts  be, 
oarafol  to  observe  the  law  and  orders,  that  we  may  enjoy  the  immunities  and 
priTiloeei  thereof  :in  that  country  where  only  we  have  any  good  ettate  or  valuable 

47 


7ae  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xfl. 

eoncemment,  there  our  mind  shonld  be,  studying  to  secure  and  improve  our  interest 
therein ;  our  resolution  should  be  conformable  to  that  of  the  holy  Psalmist : 
**I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  to  the  hills  from  whence  cometh  my  help."  {Iscuu 
Barrow,  D.D.)  ChrisVs  ascension  and  co-operation: — I.  Contemplate  thbsb 

APOSTLES  witnessing  THE  ASCENSION  OF  THEiB  LoRD.  1.  The  place  from  which  He 
ascended.  Mount  of  Olives.  Thither  He  had  been  accustomed  to  resort  after  the 
labours  and  fatigues  of  the  day ;  there  He  had  often  spent  a  whole  night  in  medi- 
tation  and  prayer ;  and  now  He  Himself  ascends  from  the  same  place.  There  His 
disciples  had  forsaken  Him  and  fled;  and  there  He  was  now  parted  from  them, and 
a  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight.    2.  The  manner  in  which  He  ascended. 

(1)  Visibly.  His  disciples  were  eye-witnesses  of  His  majesty,  as  He  rose  higher 
and  higher  from  the  mountain,  till  the  cloud  covered  Him,  and  concealed  Him  from 
their  sight.  (2)  While  He  was  in  the  act  of  blessing.  3.  The  place  to  which  He 
ascended.  Heaven.  His  own  home.  What  rejoicings  at  His  return  1  II.  Contem- 
plate THE  APOSTLES  GOINO  FORTH  TO  PREACH  HiS  GOSPEL.      1.    The  SubjCCt  of  their 

preaching.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ — the  crucified,  risen,  and  ascended  Saviour. 
2.  They  communicated  this  gospel  to  mankind  by  preaching.  (1)  A  Divine  ordinance. 

(2)  A  speedy  way  of  teaching.  (3)  A  method  admirably  adapted  for  impressing 
the  great  truth  of  the  gospel  on  men's  hearts.  3.  The  extent  to  which  they 
preached  this  gospel  was  universal,  "Everywhere."  "To  every  creature,"  was 
the  command.  III.  Contemplate  the  apostles  experiencing  their  Lord's  co- 
operation WITH  them  in  their  LABOURS.  Whercvor  they  worked  as  instruments. 
He  worked  also  as  the  efficient  agent;  for  His  power  is  omnipotent;  and  the 
"signs"  promised  were  the  result.  1.  These  Divine  influences  qualified  I:  li  e 
preachers  of  the  gospel.  2.  These  Divine  influences  confirmed  the  truth  of  the 
gospel.  3.  These  Divine  influences  ensured  the  success  of  the  gospel.  A  glorious 
conquest — a  triumph  over  mind  and  heart.  It  was  great  and  godlike  even  to  plan 
the  moral  conquest  of  a  world ;  but  when  the  plan  is  all  accomplished,  when  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth  become  one  holy  and  happy  family,  then  shall  the  world 
enjoy  its  millennial  jubilee,  and  Christ  the  Mediator  shall  be  Lord  of  aU. 
(J.  Alexander,  D.D.)  An  open  way  to  heaven: — When  He  ascended  up  on  high, 
He  opened  and  prepared  a  path,  along  which  we  may  travel  till  we  behold  His  face 
in  righteousness.  It  has  been  said,  that  in  the  early  ages  an  attempt  was  once 
made  to  build  a  chapel  on  the  top  of  the  hill  from  which  Christ  ascended  into 
heaven ;  but  that  it  was  found  impossible  either  to  pave  over  the  place  where  He 
last  stood,  or  to  erect  a  roof  across  the  path  through  which  He  had  ascended ; — 
a  legendary  tale,  no  doubt,  though  perhaps  intended  to  teach  the  important  tmtb 
that  the  moral  marks  and  impressions  which  Christ  has  left  behind  Him  can  never 
be  obliterated ;  that  the  way  to  heaven  through  which  He  has  passed  can  never  be 
closed  by  human  skill  or  power ;  and  that  He  has  set  before  as  an  open  door  whiob 
no  man  shall  be  able  to  shut.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  20.  And  preached  evexywhere.— r*«  puhlieation  of  the  gospel   fcy   tht 

apostles: — L  The  general  publication  of  the  gospel  by  the  apostles.  Their 
industry  in  this  work  was  almost  incredible.  What  pains  did  they  take  t  What 
hazard  did  they  run !  What  diflficulties  and  discouragements  did  they  eontend 
withl  And  yet  their  success  was  greater  than  their  industry,  and  beyond  all 
human  expectation,  as  will  appear  from  the  following  considerations.  1.  The  vast 
spreading  of  the  gospel  in  so  short  a  time  (Rev.  xiv.  6 ;  Isa.  Ix.  8).  In  the  space 
of  about  thirty  years  after  our  Lord's  death,  the  gospel  was  not  only  diffused 
through  the  greatest  part  of  the  Roman  Empire,  but  had  reached  as  far  as  Parthia 
and  India.  2.  The  wonderful  power  and  eflficacy  of  it  upon  the  lives  and  manners 
of  men  (Rom.  xv.  18).  The  change  of  religion  led  to  an  entire  change  of  life.  So 
strange  an  effect  had  the  gospel  upon  the  lives  of  its  professors,  that  Tertullian 
challenges  the  Roman  Senate  to  instance  in  any  one  who  bore  the  title  of  Christian, 
who  was  condemned  as  a  thief,  or  a  murderer,  or  a  sacriligious  person,  or  who  was 
guilty  of  any  of  those  gross  enormities  for  which  so  many  pagans  were  every  day 
punished.  t3.  The  weakness  and  insignificance  of  the  instruments  employed  in 
this  great  work.  4.  The  mighty  opposition  that  was  raised  against  the  gospel.  At 
its  firet  appearance  it  oould  not  be  otherwise,  but  that  it  must  meet  with  a  ^reat 
deal  of  difiiculty  and  opposition,  from  the  lusts  and  vices  of  men,  which  it  so 
plainly  and  severely  condemned,  also  from  the  prejudices  of  men  brought  up  in  a 
contrary  religion.  Moreover,  the  powers  of  the  world  combined  their  foroei 
against  it.    6.  The  great  discouragements  to  the  embracing  the  profession  of  it 


zn.]  5r.  MARK.  789 

There  was  nothing  to  invite  and  engage  men  to  it  bat  the  consideration  of  another 
world  ;  for  all  the  evils  of  this  world  threatened  every  one  who  took  the  profession 
of  Christianity  upon  him.  Yet,  in  spite  of  every  obstacle,  Christianity  not  only 
lived,  bat  grew  and  prospered.  Can  any  one  of  the  false  religions  of  the  world 
pretend  to  have  been  propagated  and  established  in  snch  a  manner,  merely  by 
their  own  force,  and  the  evidence  and  power  of  trath  upon  the  minds  of  men ;  and 
to  have  borne  np  and  sustained  themselves  so  long  under  such  fierce  assaults,  as 
Christianity  has  done  ?  II.  Thk  reason  of  the  obeat  efficacy  akd  success  of  the 
apostles'  pbbachino.  The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  accompanied  it,  both  inwardly 
operating  on  the  minds  of  men,  and  also  convincing  them  by  outward  and  visible 
signs.  1.  Consider  the  nature  of  the  Spirit's  gifts,  and  the  use  and  end  to  which 
they  served.  2.  Show  how  the  gospel  was  confirmed  by  them.  Conclusion  :  How 
sad  that  this  religic**  which  was  so  powerful  at  first,  and  has  Divinity  so  clearly 
Stamped  upon  it,  should  yet  have  so  little  effect  upon  most  of  those  who  call  them 
selves  Christians  1  (Heb.  ii.  1-4).  {Archbishop  Tillotson.)  Miracles  the  most 
proper  way  of  proving  the  Divine,  authority  of  any  religion : — An  account  of  the 
means  whereby  the  preaching  of  the  apostles  became  so  successful.  Not  from  any 
mighty  talent  of  persuasion,  or  extraordinary  faculty  of  reasoning  with  which  they 
were  endued;  not  by  any  intrinsic  evidences  of  truth,  which  the  distinguishing 
doctrines  they  preached  carried  with  them  ;  nor  by  any  other  method  purely  human 
and  natural ;  but  by  Divine  power  and  assistance,  accompanying  them  in  every 
step  they  took,  and  miraculously  blessing  their  endeavours.  Miracles  are  fitly 
termed  **  signs/'  because  done  to  signify  who  are  appointed  by  God,  as  the 
messengers  of  His  will  to  men.  Their  suitability  for  this  purpose  will  appear,  if 
we  consider — ^I.  Thk  common  sense  and  opinion  of  mankind.  Ail  religions,  whether 
true  or  false,  have  at  their  first  setting  out,  endeavoured  .to  countenance  themselves 
by  real  or  pretended  miracles.  II.  The  obnzbal  nature  of  this  sort  of  evidence. 
How  can  a  man  prove  his  Divine  mission  but  by  a  miracle,  i.e.,  by  doing  something 
which  all  confess  that  none  but  God  can  do.  III.  Some  peculiar  characters  and 
pBOPSBTixs  that  BELONG  TO  THEM.  1.  They  are  extremely  fit  to  awaken  men's 
attention.  Curiosity  is  the  first  step  towards  conviction.  When  once  men  are 
possessed  with  a  due  regard  for  the  messenger,  they  will  be  sure  to  listen  carefully 
to  the  message  he  brings.  2.  They  are  the  shortest  and  most  expeditious  way  of 
proof.  Other  kinds  of  proof  were  fitted  only  leisurely  to  loosen  the  knots,  which 
the  disputers  of  this  world  tied,  in  order  to  disturb  the  apostles  in  the  execution  of 
their  ministry ;  miracles,  like  the  hero's  sword,  divided  these  entanglings  at  a 
stroke,  and  at  once  made  their  way  through  them.  3.  They  are  an  argument  of 
the  most  universal  force  and  efficacy,  equally  reaching  all  capacities  and  under- 
standings. Some  have  not  leisure  for  philosophical  research,  and  others  have  not 
sufficient  ability  to  pursue  it ;  but  a  miracle  carries  its  own  evidence  in  its  face, 
and  is  patent  to  all.  {Bishop  Atterbury.)  Signs  follovoing  the  gospel: — While 
the  text  refers  immediately  to  facts  in  the  infancy  of  our  religion,  it  is  also 
identified  with  permanent  principles,  and  presents  matter  of  momentous  con- 
templation to  ourselves  and  all  generations  of  men.  I.  An  impobtant  communica- 
tion DELTVEBED.  1.  Its  nature.  2.  Its  extent.  II.  A  conclubivz  attestation,  by 
which  this  communication  was  confirmed.  1.  Miraculous  agencies.  2.  Spiritual 
changes  in  the  human  character.  (See  Acts  ii  41 ;  iv.  4 ;  iz).  III.  An  impebative 
CLAIM,  which  this  communication  urges  upon  all  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  1.  To 
be  believed.  2.  To  be  promulgated  (Rom.  x,  14-16).  {James  Parsons.)  Divine 
co-operation  in  Christianity : — I  know  not  precisely  what  advances  may  be  made  by 
the  intellect  of  an  unassisted  savage ;  but  that  a  savage  in  the  woods  could  not 
compose  the  '*  Principia  "  of  Newton,  is  about  as  plain  as  that  he  could  not  create 
the  world.  I  know  not  the  point  at  which  bodily  strength  must  stop  ;  but  that  a 
man  cannot  carry  Atlas  or  Ajides  on  his  shoulders  is  a  safe  position.  The  question, 
therefore,  whether  the  principles  of  human  nature,  under  the  circumstances  in 
which  it  was  placed  at  Christ's  birth,  will  explain  His  religion,  is  one  to  which  we 
are  competent,  and  is  the  great  question  on  which  the  whole  controversy  turns. 
Now  we  maintain  that  a  great  variety  of  facts  belonging  to  this  religion — such  as 
the  character  of  its  Founder ;  its  peculiar  principles ;  the  style  and  character  of 
its  records;  its  progress;  the  conduct,  circumstances,  and  sufferings  of  its  first 
propagators;  the  reception  of  it  from  the  first  on  the  ground  of  miraculous 
attestations ;  the  prophecies  which  it  fulfilled  and  which  it  contains  ;  its  influence 
on  society,  and  other  circumstances  connected  with  it ; — are  utterly  inexpUcable  by 
hmnan  powan  and  principles,  but  accord  with,  and  are  fully  explained  by,  tht 


Tie  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x?i. 

power  and  perfeotioni  of  God.    {Dr.  Charming,)      ChrutianxVU,  a  living  power  :— 
Miraoles  aad  tke  fnlfilments  of  prophecy  ought  no  longer  to  be  put  forwao^  in  thi 
forefront  of  our  plea  for  Christianity,  bat  shoold  be  subordinated  to  the  exhibition 
of  the  actual  power  of  Christianity  in  the  intellectoal,  moral,  and  spiritual  spheres 
of  our  being.    In  the  place  of  prophecy  we  have  history — the  history  of  eighteen 
centuries,  during  which  the  power  of  Christ's  light  and  grace  has  been  seen  in 
actual  operation,  subduing  to  Him  the  human  soul  and  human  society,  and  thus 
evincing  its  unique  and  supernatural  character.    Instead  of  the  miracles  of  the 
gospel  we  have  in  present  reality  what  may  fairly  be  called  a  moral  and  spiritual 
miracle,  in  the  transcendent  influence  which  Christ,  at  this  moment,  is  exercising 
over  the  world.     We  stand  face  to  face  with  an  actual  Christianity,  which  ia 
unquestionably  the  most  marvelloas  spiritual  phenomenon  in  the  world's  history ; 
and  it  cannot  be  right  for  us  to  endeavour  to  learn  Christ  by  proceeding  as  if  we 
could  obliterate  eighteen  centuries,  and  forget  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  living 
Christianity.    {Bishop  Alfred  Barry,)        The  Lord  working  vith  them: — Spread 
of  Christianity: — Arnobius,  a   heathen  philosopher  who  became  a  Christian, 
■peaking  of  the  power  which  the  Christian  faith  exercised  over  the  minds  of  men, 
says:   "Who  would  not  believe  it,  when  he  sees  in  how  short  a  time  it  has 
conquered  so  great  knowledge?     Orators,  grammarians,  rhetoricians,  lawyers, 
physicians,  and  phUosophers,  have  thrown  up  their  opinions,  which  but  a  little 
before  they  held,  and  have  embraced  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  1 "        The  gospel 
everywhere : — Close  the  eyes  for  two  and  a  half  centuries,  and  a  Boman  emperor 
has  torn  the  eagle  from  his  standard  to  set  there  the  cross,  and  the  mistress  of  the 
world  is  at  the  feet  of  Him  she  crucified.    Wait,  and  look  again;  a  thousand 
years  have  passed — just  a  day  with  God — and  the  power  of    this  Name  has 
■abdued  tiie  wildness  of  German  forests,  leaped  the  Channel,  and  raised  the  hewn 
timber  of  the  tree  of  Calvary  against  the  wild  Druids'  oak.    And  to-day,  when  all 
eivihzation  is  at  its  height,  and  the  world  is  quivering  with  fresh  powers  and 
measureless  hopes,  there  is  no  other  name  which  stands  for  a  moment  beside  that 
of  the  risen  Lord.    Nor  has  He  won  His  rights  unchallenged.     No  such  battles 
were  ever  fought  as  those  which  have  raged  about  Him.    His  teachings.  His 
n»tare,  His  very  existence,  have  been  the  strife  of  the  ages.    We  ourselves  have 
seen  the  combat;   and  now,  thanks  to  the  criticism  which  doubted  and    the 
infidelity  which  denied,  we  know  with  demonstration  never  had  before,  that  Jesus 
did  live  on  this  earth,  that  He  spoke  these  words  in  the  Gospels,  and  that  His 
character  and  His  influence  are  merely  inexplicable  on  the  supposition  of  His  mere 
manhood.    (C.  M.   Southgate.)        Divine  power  in  the  Church: — ^We  recall  the 
story  of  the  Book  of  the  Gospels— Cuthbert's  own  book — ^which  the  monks  at 
lindisf ame  carried  with  them  in  their  wanderings.     They  set  sail  for  Ireland ;  a 
storm  arose  ;  the  book  fell  overboard,  and  was  lost ;  they  were  driven  back  to  the 
English  coast.     Disconsolate,  they  went  in  quest  of  the  precious  volume:  for  a 
long  time  they  searched  in  vain ;  but  at  length  (so  says  the  story)  a  miraculous 
revelation  was  vouchsafed  to  them,  and,  following  its  directions,  they  found  the 
book  on  the  sands  far  above  high-water  mark,  uninjured  by  the  waves— nay,  even 
more  beautiful  for  the  disaster.    Does  not  this  story  weU  symbolize  the  power  of 
the  eternal  gospel  working  in  the  Church  ?    Through  the  carelessness  of  man,  it 
may  disappear  amidst  the  confusion  of  the  storms ;  the  waves  may  close  over  it 
and  hide  it  from  human  sight.    But  lost — ^lost  for  ever — ^it  cannot  be.     It  must 
reassert  itself,  and  its  glory  will  be  the  greater  for  the  temporary  eclipse  which  it 
has  undergone.     {Bishop  J.   B.  Lightfoot,)        Vitality    of   Christ's    religion: — 
Christianity  throughout  eighteen  centuries  has  shown  itself   possessed  of   the 
peculiar  power  of  recovering  life  when  apparently  almost  defunct — a  peculiarity 
entirely  absent  in  every  mythology,  which,  when  once  dead,  never  can  be  restored^ 
but  remains  for  ever  in  the  realm  of  shadows ;  that  Christianity  has  a  phoeniX' 
nature,  and  after  every  historic  death  arises  anew  from  the  grave ;  and  that  along 
with  the  resurrection  which  Christianity  has  had  in  our  day,  has  also  arisen  from 
the  grave  the  true  conception  of  humanity.     {Bishop  Martensen.)        With  signs 
following — The  Church's  evidences : — Where  the  spiritually  blind  are  enlightened, 
the  spiritually  dead  quickened,   the  spiritually  deaf  and  dumb  made  to  hear 
devoutly  and  to  speak  piously,  the  spiritually  lame  made  to  walk  in  the  paths  of 
righteousness  and  to  be  active  in  every  good  work,  and  the  spiritually  leprous  are 
cleansed  from  sins, — there  the  Lord  is  confirming  tbe  Word  with  signs  following  ; 
lor  these  are  signs  and  wonders  greater  than  physical  changes,  the  greater  deeds 
fhst  our  Lord  promised  that  His  disciples  would  periorm.    These  signs  sal)  follow 


CHXP.  XTX.J  ST.  MARK.  741 

the  preaching  of  the  Word ;   and  the  age  of  miracles  of  grace  if  not  past,  nox 

shall  it  ever  pass  while  time  lasts.    (T.  M,  Lindsay ^  D.D,)        Signs : That  is, 

such  miracles  as  should  be  the  seals  and  testimony  of  the  truth.  These  miracles 
were  therefore—l.  Signs  to  the  apostles  themselves,  so  that  they  might  not  despair 
at  the  greatness  of  the  work  which  they  were  commissioned  to  do.  2.  Signs  to 
others,  and  a  confirmation  of  the  tmth  which  the  apostles  taught.  Hence  Christ 
does  not  call  them  miracles,  but  signs  :  since  the  very  object  of  the  miracles  which 
followed  their  teaching  was  to  have  this  moral  effect,  and  to  testify  to  those  who 
needed  this  proof,  that  the  doctrine  which  they  delivered  was  from  God.    (W. 

Denton,  M. A.)        Signs: — Three  signs  which  follow  all  effectual  preaching (1) 

Compunction  of  the  hearers ;  (2)  conversion  of  sinners ;  (3)  confirmation  of  th« 
*ust.  Conclusion  :  The  figure  which  stands  oat  from  this  book  is  Jesus.  It  is 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  A  man  must  be  holy  to  comprehend 
the  holiness  of  Jesus.  Let  us  suppose  the  case  of  a  sharp  man,  who  has  neither 
taste  nor  genius,  standing  before  a  great  picture ;  he  will  point  out  flaw  after  flaw 
in  Baphael.  Place  one  who  has  neither  musical  appreciation,  nor  modesty  to 
admit  it,  where  he  must  hear  Beethoven.  It  is  an  unmeaning  noise,  which  gives 
him  a  headache.  Even  so,  the  lower  the  moral  and  spiritual  life  may  be,  the  less 
is  Jesus  understood  and  loved.  To  an  easy,  soft-mannered,  hard-hearted  man  of 
the  world ;  to  a  subtle,  bitter,  selfish  scholar,  with  the  delicate  intellectual  egotism, 
and  the  fatal  gift  of  analysis  a  outrance,  Gethsemane  and  the  cross  may  be  a 
scandal  or  a  mockery.  The  gospel,  which  seems  so  poor  and  pale  when  we  rise 
from  the  songs  of  poets  and  the  reasonings  of  philosophers,  is  a  test  of  our  spirit 
Let  some  ambitious  students  in  philosophy — some  who  have  been  commmimng  for 
hours  with  the  immortal  masters  of  history,  charmed  with  the  balaneed  masses 
and  adjusted  perspectives  of  the  composition,  speak  out  their  mind  to-day  upon 
this  Gospel  of  St.  Mark.  They  will  not  place  it  very  high  upon  their  list  But 
turn  to  it  to-morrow,  when  the  end  of  your  toil  finds  you  disappointed  men  ;  when 
sorrow  visits  you ;  when,  as  you  put  your  hand  upon  the  wall  of  your  room, 
memory,  like  a  serpent,  starts  out  and  stings  yon.  Then  yon  will  recognise  the 
infinite  strength  and  infinite  compassion  of  Jesus.  Out  of  your  wealmess  and 
misery,  out  of  your  disappointment,  you  will  feel  that  here  you  can  trust  in  a 
nobility  that  is  never  marred,  and  rest  that  tired  heart  of  yours  upon  a  love  that 
never  fails.^  ...  St.  Mark  is  the  Gospel  whose  emblem  is  the  lion,  whose  hero  is 
full  of  Divine  love  and  Divine  strength.  It  is  the  Gospel  which  was  addressed  to 
the  Eomans  to  free  them  from  the  misery  of  scepticism,  from  the  grinding 
dominion  of  iron  superhuman  force  unguided  by  a  loving  will.  Here,  brief  as  it 
is,  we  have,  in  its  essential  germs,  all  the  theology  of  the  Church.  Had  every 
other  part  of  the  New  Testament  perished,  Christendom  might  have  been 
developed  from  this.  A  man's  faith  does  not  consist  of  the  many  things  which  he 
affects  to  believe  or  finds  it  useful  to  believe  (as  men  are  said  to  hd  doing  in 
France),  but  of  the  few  things  which  he  really  believes,  and  with  which  he  stands, 
fronting  his  own  soul  and  eternity.  This  faith  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  the 
Son  of  God,  is  sufficient.  Hold  it  fast,  and  yon  shall  find  the  power  of  one  of  onr 
Lord's  promises  which  is  peculiar  to  this  Gospel.  If  you  are  called  upon  to 
"  handle  the  serpents,"  or  **  to  drink  the  deadly  things  "  of  science  and  philosophy, 
you  shall  lift  up  the  serpent  as  a  standard  of  victory.  The  cup  of  poison  shall 
not  reach  your  heart  as  it  reached  the  heart  of  Socrates,  when  the  sun  was  going 
down  behind  the  hiU-tops.  "  It  shall  not  hurt  you."  Hold  fast  this  gos^  in 
that  which  tries  many  who  are  undisturbed  by  speculative  doubt,  in  conscious  sin- 
fulness, in  the  allurements  of  lust.  Hold  it  fast  in  the  din  of  voices  that  fill  a 
Church  distracted  by  party  cries,  and  "  He  who  has  instructed  His  Church  by  the 
heavenly  doctrine  of  His  Evangelist  St.  Mark,  will  grant  that,  being  not  liks 
children,  carried  away  by  every  blast  of  vain  doctrine,  you  shall  be  established  im 
the  truth  of  His  holy  gospel."  {Bishop  William  Alexander.)  Eneowragement  oj 
God's  presence : — *'  I  have  lately  been  full  of  perplexities  about  various  temportd 
concerns.  I  have  met  with  heavy  afflictions ;  but  in  the  mount  the  Lord  is  seen. 
AU  my  hope  is  in  God;  without  His  power  no  European  could  possibly  be 
converted,  and  that  can  convert  any  Indian.  Though  the  superstitions  of  the 
Hindoos  were  a  thousand  times  stronger  than  they  are,  and  the  example  of 
Europeans  a  thousand  times  worse  ;  though  I  were  deserted  by  all,  and  persecuted 
by  all,  yet  my  hope,  fixed  on  the  Rock,  will  rise  superior  to  every  obstruction,  and 
triumph  over  every  trial  I  feel  happy  in  this,  that  I  am  engaged  in  the  work  of 
God,  and  the  more   I   am   engaged  in   it,   the   more     I  feel  it   a   rich   reward. 


741  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohat.  in. 

Indeed,  I  would  rejoioe  in  having  undertaken  it,  even  though  I  should  perish  in  th« 
attempt.  {William  Carey.)  God  vnth  Hi*  iervanU : — If  I  go  to  a  large  faetoxy 
and  see  a  hundred  straps  flying  in  all  directions,  I  a&k  where  is  the  motive  powor 
— the  engine.  So  you  are  walking  with  the  power  of  God,  upheld  by  the  arm  of 
righteoosness.  If  one  of  your  merchantmen  should  ask  me  to  go  to  Philadelphia 
to  conduct  a  business  for  him,  and  should  say  to  me :  "  I  expect  you  to  carry  on 
this  business  with  your  own  capital,**  I  would  think  it  very  strange.  It  would  not 
be  his  business,  but  my  own.  That  is  the  mischief  with  all  Christians.  They  ar« 
in  business  for  the  Lord,  but  working  with  their  own  capital.  {Henry  Varley.) 
Christians  implements  in  the  hands  of  Qod: — It  is  one  thing  to  attempt  to  row  • 
f^hip  ;  it  is  another  to  unfurl  the  sails,  and  send  her  leaping,  with  a  fresh  breese, 
like  a  thing  of  life,  across  the  big  opposing  wavea.  It  is  one  thing  for  a  man 
to  try  to  drag  a  car  on  a  railroad ;  it  is  another  to  flU  the  boiler  of  the  locomotive 
with  water,  put  in  fuel,  kindle  a  strong  fire,  and  soon  fly  like  the  wind  over  moun- 
tains and  plains,  counting  the  long,  loaded  train  a  mere  plaything.  But  these 
analogies,  drawn  from  our  human  employment  of  the  material  forces  of  nature, 
and  feeble  to  illustrate  the  difference  between  the  man  who  attempts  to  influenoa 
and  convert  men,  and  to  advance  spiritual  and  eternal  things  by  any  philosophy  ol 
the  wisest  of  men,  or  by  any  motives  of  time,  and  the  man  whose  whole  and 
sincere  aim  it  is  to  be  but  an  implement  in  the  hand  of  the  Almighty.  Then  hia 
prayers  "  move  the  arm  that  moves  the  skies.**  Then  his  labours  are  not  hia  own ; 
but'  the  eternal  Father,  the  loving  Bedeemer,  the  H0I7  Ohott,  the  ftngtia,  th« 
inspired  Word,  the  prayers  of  the  saints — ftU  th*  inflaite  powti*  o<  (ood  in  ' 
•tfth— work  through  him.    (2>r.  Ciiylir.) 


inspi 
aiM< 


Date  Due 


•A^€-r^^^(i 


j0^Slt- 


fffrrr^W^ 


ISH^'^^^t^i 


IN  U.  S.  A. 


