DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe26wesl 


T I-I  E 


W O R K S 


OF  THE 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 

/ 

Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-College , Oxford. 


Volume  XXVI. 


I 

BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  IVinc^Strect. 

MDCCLXXIV. 


[ 3 1 


x&W,  s-  ^ 

-•^-w  O i — ^ Lz.'CiTZ) 

^j£±A¥^£ 

V.  5.  4 

An  EXTRACT  from 


Dr.  CADOGAN’s  Dissertation 
ON  THE 

G O U T, 

AND  ALL 

CHRONIC  DISEASES. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


Few  things  in  this  excellent  traSl,  have  ban 
cenfured  with  fome  reafon.  Thefe  are 
omitted  or  altered  in  the  following  extraEl ; which 
I therefore  recommend  to  men  of  under  funding, 
as  the  mofl  maferly  piece  upon  the  fabjeB,  which 
has  yet  appeared  in  the  Englfh  language. 


A 2 


To 


[ 4 ] 


To  the  READER. 

1.II7E  may  give  the  due  praife  to  Dr. 

* * Cadogan's  traft,  without  undertaking 
to  defend  it  in  every  point.  It  may  be  allowed, 
that  he  fometimes  paints  too  ftrongly:  though  I 
believe  with  a good  defign.  He  knows  how 
apt  the  generality  of  people  are  to  aim  a little 
below  the  mark,  and  on  this  account,  perhaps, 
fometimes  places  it  higher,  than  otherwife  he 
would  have  done.  With  this  view  he  feems  a 
little  too  exaggerate  upon  the  unwholefomenefs 
of fmo'ked  and  failed  meats.  Undoubtedly  thefe 
are  hard  of  digeftion,  to  all  forts  of  people,  and 
extremely  unwholefome  for  fedentary  perfons, 
as  well  as  thofe  of  a weak  and  tender  conflitu- 
tion.  Yet  I would  not  condemn  them  in  fo 
flrong  terms,  confidering  how  many  thoufands 
in  the  kingdom,  live  chiefly  upon  them 
for  many  years,  and  flill  remain  in  perfeft 
health. 

2.  Another  inflance  of  this  exaggeration  we 

OO 

have,  in  what  he  fays  concerning  pickles.  It 
may  be  allowed,  that  they  are  not  wholefome 
to  perfons  of  a delicate  conftitution.  Perhaps 
too,  the  tiling  them  in  large  quantities  may  im- 
pair a.  good  conflitution.  But  flill  I cannot 

commend 


‘ [ 5 ] 

commend  the  condemning  them  univerfally,  as 
no  !efs  than  poifon.  I really  believe  a man  of 
a firm  conflitution,  might  ufe  a fmall  quantity 
of  them  daily,  yea,  for  forty  or  fifty  years  toge- 
ther, without  hurting  himfelf  at  all. 

3.  Perhaps  yet  another  inltance  of  the  fame 
kind  is  his  alfertion,  that  there  are  no  hereditary 
dillempers  : that  in  particular,  there  is  no  fucb 
thing  in  the  world,  as  an  hereditary  gout.  He 
mull  certainly  mean  no  more,  than  that  diltem- 
pers  are  not  near  fo  often  hereditary  as  we  ima- 
gine ; and  that  the  gout  in  particular  is  generally 
owing  to  one  or  more  of  the  three  caufes  he 
affigns;  confequently  is  contracted  by  ourfclves, 
and  not  derived  from  our  parents,  1 his  may 
be  allowed  : and  it  is  a very  important  truth, 
though  little  attended  to.  The  far  greater  part 
of  our  chronical  dillempers  are  doubtlefs  con- 
trafted  by  ourfelves.  But  not  all : I am  a living 
witnefs  of  the  contrary,  even  with  regard  to  the 
gout  itfelf.  Thofe  who  know  me,  do  not 
charge  me  with  intemperance , either  in  meat  or 
drink.  I am  not  indolent:  I never  travel  much 
lefs  than  five  thoufand  miles  in  a year.  And  I 
blefs  God,  I have  no  violent  pafpovs.  Yet  f have 
within  thefe  thirty  years,  had  frequently  the 
gout  (of  which  my  father  was  frequently  ill, 
and  my  mother  died)  nine  or  ten  times. 

4.  If,  therefore,  the  Doftor  really  means,  that 
there  are  abfolutely  no  hereditary  chflempers , I 
cannot  fubferibe  to  bis  opinion;  neither  to  his 

A 3 • condemning 


[ 6 j 

condemning  of  wine  in  general  : feveral  forts  £>i 
which  (as  Dr.  Hoffman  {hews  at  large)  are  fo  far 
from  being  unwholfome,  that  they  are  fome  of 
•the  moft  powerful  medicines  yet  known,  in 
fome  very  dangerous  difeafes.  I myfelf  was 
ordered  by  Dr.  Cheyne,  (not  the  warmeft  advo- 
cate for  liquors)  after  drinking  only  water  for 
fome  years,  to  take  a ffnall  quantity  of  wine 
every  day.  And  I am  perfuaded,  far  from  do- 
ing me  any  hurt,  it  contributed  much  to  the 
recovery  of  my  ftrength.  But  it  feems,  we  are 
to  make  a pretty  large  allowance  for  what  the 
Dodior  fays  on  this  head  : feeing  he  grants,  it 
will  do  you  little  or  no  harm  to  take  “ a plen- 
tiful cup  now  and  then.”  Enough,  enough! 
Then  it  will  certainly  do  you  no  harm,  if  in- 
ftead  of  drinking  that  cup  in  one  day,  (fuppofe 
once  a week)  yTou  divide  it  into  feven,  and 
drink  one  of  them  every  day. 

5.  I cannot  but  think,  if  your  wine  is  good  in 
kind,  fuited  to  your  conflitution,  and  taken  in 
fmall  quantities,  it  is  full  as  whoifome  as  any 
liquor  in  the  world,  except  water.  Yet  the 
grievous  abufe  of  it,  which  almoft  univerfally 
prevails,  might  eafily  prejudice  a benevolent 
man  againft  it,  and  make  him  endeavour  to 
prevent  the  abufe,  by  forbidding  the  ufe  of  it. 
But  what  could  prejudice  him  againft  fo  harm- 
lefs  a thing  as  bread?  “ Nay,  he  thinks,  it  is 
not  harmlefs  : for  if  it  ftand  but  two  or  three 
days  in  water,  it  will  turn  the  water  quite  four.’’ 

What 


[ 7 J 

What  if  it  did  ? Does  not  the  Doftor  know, 
that  mod  vegetables  are  accefcent  ? And  are  they 
ever  the  lefs  wholforae  for  that  ? But  in  fa  ft,  it 
does  not.  I have  occafionally  (not  through  de- 
fign,  but  forgetfulnefs)  made  the  experiment 
over  and  over.  I have  in  London,  let  a large 
toad  lie  feveral  days  in  water,  and  the  water 
did  not  contraft  the  lead  fournefs.  So  that  I 
cannot  but  dill  conceive,  of  ail  vegetable  food, 
there  is  none  more  wholfome  than  well  made 
wheaten  bread, 

6.  If  any  thing  in  his  excellent  traft,  is  mote 
whimfical  than  even  his  prejudice  againd  bread, 
it  is  what  he  fays  concerning  the  unwholfome- 
nefs  of  JleJh  throughly  roaded  or  boiled.  One 
would  wonder  any  one  fltould  imagine,  that 
fledt  is  more  wholfome,  by  being  half  raw.  I 
regard  no  theory  upon  this  head  : I appeal  to 
matter  of  faft.  Now  how  many  perfons  has  the 
Doftor  known,  with  whom  a proper  quantity  of 
fitch  flelh  as  failed  their  conditution,  agreed 
well  when  little  boiled,  and  difagreed  when 
much  boiled  ? Has  he  found  twenty  fuch  ? To 
this  day  I have  found  but  one,  among  the  many 
thoufand  perfons  with  whom  I converfe  every 
year.  Yea,  and  I doubt  the  faft  with  regard  to 
him:  I doubt,  it  is  pure  imagination,  arifing 
from  reading  the  Doftor’s  book.  And  this  may 
be  the  cafe  with  others  alfo. 

7.  But  allowing  the  Doftor  is  not  infallible, 
allowing  him  to  be  midaken  in  thefe  and  a few 

A 4 other 


[ * ] 

other  particulars,  his  general  plan  is  truly  ex- 
cellent. No  reafonable  man  who  looks  round 
about  him  can  doubt,  but  ninety-nine  chronical 
di (tempers  in  an  hundred  are  occafioncd  bv  one 
or  other  of  the  caufes,  which  he  has  fo  judici- 
oufly  afligned.  He  cannot  doubt  but  ninety- 
nine  in  an  hundred,  of  thofe  diltempers  which 
are  fuppofed  to  be  hereditary,  are  really  owing 
to  one  of  thefe  three  caufes,  intemperance,  in- 
dolence, or  irregular  paflions. 

8.  The  firft  of  thefe,  intemperance,  extends 
much  farther  than  is  commonly  imagined.  For 
that  may  be  intemperance  to  one,  which  is  not 
fo  to  another.  To  every  individual,  it  is  intem- 
perance to  ufe  any  kind  of  food,  or  fuch  a quan- 
tify of  any,  either  meat  or  drink,  as  in  any 
degree  .impairs  his  health.  Yea,  though  the 
eflefl  do  not  immediately  follow,  though  it  do 
not  produce  any  prefent  inconvenience.  But 
if  this  be  intemperance,  how  exceeding  few 
praflife  temperance  even  in  food?  And  how 
many  gouty,  fcrophulous  and  fcorbutic  diforders, 
are  owingto  the  want  of  it  ? 

g.  The  rnoft  fruitful  fource  of  chronical  dif- 
tempers,  next  to  intemperance,  is  indolence. 
But  this  word  alfo  we  are  to  underhand,  in  a 
very  wide  extent : it  here  means,  the  want  ot 
due  exercife;  the  not  ufing  fuch  a kind  and 
fuch  a degree  of  exercife,  at  lead  once  in  everv 
dav,  as  each  conflitution  requires.  One  would 
imagine  indeed  that  common  fetife  would  induce 

every 


r 9 ] 


every  cne  to  ufe  this.  i3ut  experience  {hews  it 
does  not:  although  it  is  hardly  credible,  to  what 
a degree  it  is  neglefled,  even  by  thofe  wfio 
have  the  greateft  need  of  it.  “do  how  many 
hundreds  (faid  Dr.  Friend  to  my  eldeft  brother) 
if  not  thoufands  have  I prefcribed  txercifc  ? And 
how  many  have punftually  iollowed  my  prefcrip- 
tion  ? To  this  day,  I know  not  one.'’ 

10.  Not  that  any  one  particular  kind  oi  exer- 
cife  is  neceffary  for  all  perfons.  Indeed  Dr. 
Cheyne  fuppofes  the  natural  exercife  of  walk- 
ing, where  the  flrength  fuffices,  to  be  preferable 
to  any  other.  But  it  fhould  be  ufed  every  day, 
not  lefs  than  an  hour,  before  dinner,  or  after 
fupper.  Where  the  flrength  will  not  admit  ot. 
this,  the  want  of  it  may  be  fupplied,  by  riding 
two  hours  at  leaft  on  horfeback,  every  day  before 
dinner  or  fupper.  If  neither  of  tliefe  can  be 
borne,  the  end  of  both  may  be  anfwered  by 
riding  in  a carriage.  But  then  it  muft  be  con- 
ftant,  and  long-continued  ; and  it  will  have  fur- 
priung  effe&s,  Dr.  P.  of  Effex,  has  cured  almoft  all 
his  neighbours,  who  were  afflicted  with  thegout, 
by  advifing  them  to  ride  in  their  carriages  eight 
hours  a-day,  four  in  the  morning  and  four  in  the 
afternoon.  Thofe  who  cannot  afford  this,  may 
ufe  a chamber -horje,  which  will  fuit  every  con- 
ftitution.  Add  to  this  a flriftlv  temperate  diet, 
and  few  chronical  difeafes  will  remain  long. 

11.  I believe  none  will,  provided  the  pajjions 
be  regular,  as  well  as  the  diet  and  exercife.  But 

A 5 violent  - 


[ ] 


violent  paflions  indulged,  without  any  other 
caufe,  will  deftroy  the  firmelt  conflitution.  As 
acute  paffions,  anger  and  joy  for  example,  have 
been  known  in  athoufand  inllances,  to  bring  on 
acute  dillempers,  fo  lingering  paffions  occafion 
chronical  diforders.  How  often  does  srief  or 
hopelefs  love  produce  incurable  confumptions  ? 
So  true  it  is,  the  Jorrow  of  tins  world  worketh 
death,  temporal  as  well  as  eternal, 

12.  So  far  the  Doftor  could  go.  None  could 
more  fkilfully  paint  out  the  fource  of  our  difor- 
ders. But  where  is  the  cure  for  either  lingering 
or  impetuous  paffions,  that  either  furioufly  over- 
turn this  houfe  of  earth,  or  fap  the  foundations 
of  health  and  life,  by  fure,  though  flow  ap- 
proaches? Who  knows  not,  that  the  whole 
materia  medica  is  of  no  avail  in  this  cafe  ? The 
poor  patient  mull  cry  out  Hill,  as  did  thofe  two 
thoufand  years  ago,  Rd  mihi,  quod  nullis  Amor 
ejl  medicabilis  herb'is ! Grief,  Defire,  Hope  de- 
ferred make  the  heart fick,  with  a ficknefs  which 
drugs  cannot  cure.  What  can  cure  it,  but  the 
peace  of  God  ? No  other  medicine  under  hea- 
ven. What  but  the  love  of  God,  that  fove- 
reign  balm  for  the  body  as  well  as  the  mind  ? 
And  this  the  poor  may  attain  as  well  as  the  rich : 
for  it  is  to  be  bought  without  money  and  without 
price.  It  is  purchafed  for  us  already,  not  with 
fiver  and  gold,  but  with  the  blood  of  a Lamb 
without  fpot  or  blemijh ■ It  is  purchafed  for  all : 

ajk 


[ “ 3 


Afli,  and  it  [hall  be  given  : Every  one  that  ajkdh 
receivdh. 

“ This  the  univerfal  blifs  ; 

Blifs  for  every  foul  defign’d  ; 

God’s  original  promife  this, 

God’s  great  gift  to  all  mankind. 

Bleft  in  Chrift  this  moment  be : 

Bled  to  all  eternity  ! 


Dr.  C A d o G A n ’ s 
P R E F A C E. 


HAT  men  in  good  health,  the  young  and- 


A gay  in  their  career,  fhould  be  negligent  of 
or  abufe  it,  refufing  to  flop  and  liften  to,  or 
take  warning  from  others  is  no  great  wonder  ; 
but  it  is  furpriling  that  mankind  in  general 
ihould  be  miftaken  and  raided  for  ever  in-  the 
fame  perpetual  round  of  fruitlefs  attempts  to  re- 
pair and  eftablilh  it ; not  the  ignorant  vulgar 
only,  but  the  fenfible,  the  judicious,  men  of 
parts  and  knowledge  in  other  things,  in  this  cafe 
equally  blind,  fhould  purfue,  with  the  fame 
rain  hope,  after  repeated  difappointmentsj  the 
thoufand  and  ten  thoufand  idle  arts  and  tricks  of 
medication  and  quackery. 


A 6- 


IE 


[ I*  ] 


It  lias  been  of  great  diflervice,  as  well  as  dis- 
credit to  the  art  of  phyftc,  and  every  fair  prafcti- 
fer  of  it,  that  men’s  expeftations  have  beert-raif- 
cd  by  the  ignorant  and  prefuming,  or  the  honed 
and  artful,  to  hope  for  too  much  from  it,  more 
than  it  ever  did,  or  can  do.  Refpite  and  relief 
may  be  had  in  the  moft  chronic  cafes;  reme- 
dy, I fear,  but  in  very  few,  if  it  be  expected 
from  art  alone.  But  a fkilful  and  honefl  phyfi- 
cian  (unlefs  he  be  fent  for  too-  late  and  rlifmided 
too  foon,  which  is  generally  the  cafe)  will  em- 
ploy thofe  intervals  of  relief  to  introduce  the 
powers  of  life  and  mature  to  aft  for  themfelves, 
and  infenfibly  withdrawing  all  his  medicines, 
and  watching  carefully  over  his  patient's  whole 
conduft,  leave  him  confirmed,  from  conviction 
of  their  necefhty,  in  fuch  habits  as  may  eflablifh 
his  health  for  life. 

PofTiblv,  if  men  were  better  informed  of  the 
real  caufes  of  their’difeafes,  they  might  be  lefs  un- 
reasonable in  their  demands,  and  learn  to  be 
contented  with  prefent  relief,  fubmitting'  with 
patience  to  that  plan  of  life  which  alone  can 
lead  them  to,  and  preferve  them  in,  permanent 
health. 


A DIS  SER- 


[ *3  ] 


A DISSERTATION  on  the 

G O U T,  See. 

However  common  it  may  be  for  men 
that  buffer  to  complain  of  the  evils  of  life 
as  the  unavoidable  lot  of  humanity  ; would  they 
Hop  for  a moment  to  confider  them  fn>  the  Iio-ht 
or  reafon,  they  would  find  little  or  no  founda- 
tion for  them  In  nature;  but  that  every  man  was 
the  real  author  of  all  or  moil  of  his  own  mlferies. 
Mod  of  the  complaints  which  the  learned  call 
chronic  difeafes,  we  undoubtedly  bring  upon  our- 
felves  by  our  own  indulgences,  excelfes,  or  mif- 
taben  habiis  of  life,  or  by  buffering  our  ill-condufl- 
ed  palhons  to  diflurb  our  peace  of  mind.  What- 
ever notions  men  have  been  taught  or  have  re- 
ceived of  other  caufes,  fuch  as  accidental  colds, 
or  particularities  of  conflitution,  this  or  that 
thing  difagreei'ng  or  forfeiting  ; thefe  are  too 
trifling  to  produce  difeafes  that  commonly  laft 
for  life  : -there  mufl  be  fomethin^  more  fubftan- 
tial,  fomething  more  conftant  and  permanent, 
to  produce  fuch  inveterate  evils.  Though  if 
vou  read  authors  or  confult  practitioners,  what 
do  you  find,  but  that  you  have  taken  cold  (though 
you  know  not  how,)  or  that  your  complaints  are 

gouty* 


1 


gouty,  rheumatic,  bilious,  nervous,  Sec.  words 
that  give  no  kind  of  idea,  and  feem  to  have 
gained  credit  only  by  the  politenefs  of  phyficians, 
who,  while  they  are  taking  their  patients  mo- 
ney, are  too  weil  bred  to  tell  them,  that  it  is  by 
their  own  faults  they  are  ill.  To  enquire  a little 
further  into  this  matter  may  be  well  worth  our 
trouble. 

Did  men  better  underhand  the  nature  of  chro- 
nic difeafes  in  general,  and  whence  they  pro- 
ceed, they  could  not  be  fo  unreafonab’e  to 
think  they  might  live  as  they  lift  with  impunity, 
expending  repeated  remedy  from  art  ; or,  did 
they  know  any  thing  of  the  nature  of  medicine, 
they  would  find  that,  though  fits  of  pain  have 
been  relieved,  or  ficknefs  cured  by  it  for  a time, 
the  eflablifhment  of  health  is  a very  different 
thing,  depending  upon  other  powers  and  princi- 
ples; the  firft  may  be  and  often  is  done  by  me- 
dicine, the  other  never.  That  their  opinion  of 
medicine  is  vain  and  ridiculous  muff  appear  very 
evidently  to  any  one  who  recolleffs  that  the  art 
of  phyftc  has  now  been  praftifed,  more  or  lefs 
regularly,  above  two  thoufand  years  ; and  moft 
affuredly  there  is  not  yet  difeovered  any  one  cer- 
tain remedy  for  any  difeafe.  Ought  not  this  to 
make  us  fufpeft:  that  there  is  no  fuch  thing  ? 
The  fkilful  in  medicine,  and  learned  in  nature, 
know  well  that  health  is  not  to  be  eftabiifhed  by 
medicine  ; for  its  effefts  are  but  momentarv,  and 
die  frequent  repetition  of  it  deftrufHve  to  the 

ffrongefl 


[ n ] 


flrongefl  frames ; that  if  it  be  reflored,  it  muff  be 
by  gently  calling  forth  the  powers  of  the  body  to 
aft  for  themfelves,  introducing  gradually  a little 
more  and  more  aftivity,  chofen  diet,  and,  above 
all,  peace  of  mind,  changing  intirely  that  courfe 
of  life  which  fu  ll  brought  on  the  difeafe:  medi- 
cine co-operating  a little.  1 hat  this  truth,  all 
who  know  any  thing  of  nature  or  art  mult 
know  : and  I may  fafely  take  upon  me  to  fay, 
that,  though  I firmly  believe  health  may  be  re* 
ftored  in  mofl  cafes  that  are  not  abfolutelv  mor- 
tal, I am  very  fure  that  no  invalid  was  ever  made 
a healthy  man  by  the  mere  power  of  medicine. 
If  this  be  the  cafe,  how  muff  the  initiated,  accord- 
ing as  their  humanity  is  touched,  either  laugh 
at  or  pity  the  poor  foolifh  world,  furrendering  at 
difcretion  to  the  mofl  ignorant  of  quacks,  pre- 
tending to  infallible  remedies  which  are  not  in 
nature  ? 

At  prefent  I would  fay  fomething  of  the  gout, 
as  I fee  fo  many  who  are  throwing  away,  not 
only  their  money  very  foolifhly,  but,  all  their 
future  health  alfo,  in  hopes  of  a medical  cure  for 
it,  whereas  fuch  hopes  are  chimerical,  and  con- 
tradiftory  to  every  idea  of  true  philofophy  and 
common  fenfe. 

I think  the  real  original  caufes  of  all  chronic 
difeafes  are  not  many  ; may  be  reduced  to  three : 
indolence,  intemperance,  and  vexation. 

From  one  or  more  of  t’nefe  three  caufes,  all  or 
mod  chronic  difeafes  are  produced  ; for  different 

difeafes, 


[ 3 


difi'afes  may  have  the  fame  original  caufe,  the 
difference  prpceeding  from  the  various  degrees 
of  ftrength  and  vigor  in  bodies  : fo  that  what 
would  be  gout  m one,  in  another  might  be  rheu- 
matifm,  ffone,  colic,  jaundice,  palfy,  &c. 
The  gout  is  confelfedly,  a difeafe  of  the  beft  corr- 
flinuion,  arid  may  therefore  fairly  Hand  as  a re- 
prefentative  of  all  the  reff ; as  fuch  1 fhall  confi- 
der  it  for  the  prefent,  and  fpeak  of  thefe  caufes 
in  their  order  ; but  it  may  be  neceffary  to  fay  a 
word  or  two  of  the  gout  itfeif  before  we  enquire 
into  its  caufe. 

The  gout  is  fo  common  a difeafe,  that  there  is 
fcarcely  a man  in  the  world,  whether  he  has  had 
it  or  not,  but  thinks  he  knows  perfectly  what  it 
is.  So  does  a cook-maid  think  lire  knows  what 
fire  is,  as  well  as  Sir  Ifaac  Newton.  It  may 
therefore  feem  needlefs  to  fav  what  it  is  ; but  I 
will  venture  to  fav  what  it  is  not.  though  con~ 
trary  to  the  general  opinion.  It  is  not  heredi- 
tary,!- it  is  not  periodical,  and  it  is  not  incurable. 

If  it  were  necefiarilv  hereditary,  it  would  be 
neceffarily  tranfmitted  from  father  to  fon,  and  no 
man  whofe  father  had  it  could  poffibly  be  free 
from  it ; but  this  is  not  the  cafe,  the  father’s, 
having  it  only  inclines  or  difpofes  the  fon  to  it. 
This  is  the  caufa  pradijponent  of  the  learned, 
which  of  itfeif  never  produced  any  effect  at  all  ; 
there  muff;  be  joined  the  caufa  procataridica,  or 

aftive 

+ That  it  is-fometimes  hereditary,  I know  by  experience  ; b&t 
3 believe  not  very  frequently. 


[ *7  ] 


sflive  efficient  caufe,  that  is,  our  own  intemper- 
ance ormiffaken  way  of  life,  to  produce  it  ; and 
accordingly,  as  this  operates  more  or  lefs,  fo 
will  the  s;out  be. 

If  it  were  hereditary,  it  would  appear  in  in- 
fancy and  in  women,  which  in  general  it  doe  s 
not.  I may  be  told  of  fome  women  who  have 
had  it.  I believe  never  very  young,  nor  till 
they  have  contributed  to  it  themfelves  ; for  wo- 
men, as  well  as  men,  may  ahufe  a good  confli- 
tution.  I have  heard  likewife  of  a boy  or  two 
out  of  a million  that  had  it,  but  thefe  boys  bad 
been  buffered  to  ftp  wine  very  early,  and  been 
fed  and  indulged  every  way  mod  unwholc.fomelv. 

If  the  gout  be  a difeafe  of  indigeftion,  and 
therefore  of  our  own  acquiring,  we  muff  reafon 
very  ill,  or  rather  not  reafon  at  all,  when  we  fay 
it  is  hereditary  : for  furely  no  man  will  fay  that 
indigeftion  is  hereditary,  any  more  than  intem- 
perance. There  are  whole  nations  of  aflive  peo- 
ple knowing  no  luxury,  who  for  ages  have  been 
free  from  it  ; but  have  it  now,  ffinee  the  Euro- 
peans have  brought  them  wine  and  fpirits. 

If  the  gout  bethought  hereditary  becaufe  it  is 
incurable  by  medicine,  the  fame  may  be  laid  of 
every  other  chronic  difeafe,  none  of  which  ever 
are  cured  by  it ; I mean,  fo  as  not  to  return 
again.  When  was  there  a man  who,  having  had 
one  fit  of  rheumatifm,  ftone,  colic,  & c.  however 
happily  relieved  by  art  for  a time,  had  it  not 
again  and  again,  or  fomething  worfe  in  the  place 


i 18  J 


of  it  ; till  he  became  a confirmed  invalid,  and 
-died  long  before  his  time;  unlefs  fome  very 
remarkable  alteration  took  place  in  the  courfe 
of  his  life  to  confirm  his  health  ? So  it  is  in 
the  gout : a man  gets  a fit  of  it ; and  by  abfti- 
nence,  uaiience,  time,  and  nature,  the  crude 
acrimony  producing  it  is  fubduedand  exhaufled, 
and  he  is  relieved  for  that  time.  In  a few 
months  he  is  taken  again.  Why  ? Not  from 
any  thing  inherent  in  his  conftitution,  but  be- 
caufe  he  returned  to  that  way  of  habit  of  life 
that  produced  it  at  fir  Pi,  and  will  for  ever  pro- 
duce it,  while  the  flrcngth  of  his  body  lafls. 

It  is  natural  enough  for  thofe  who  believe  the 
gout  hereditary,  to  think  it  alfo  periodical,  as  if 
fome  thing  innate  and  inherent  in  onr  conflitu- 
tions  produced  it  at  certain  times.  But  this  is  a 
great  mi  flake;  for,  if  it  were  periodical,  it  mull 
be  regularly  fo.  The  only  periodical  difeafe  I 
know  is  the  intermittent  fever,  which,  is  as  re- 
gular as  a good  clock.  The  returns  of  the  gout 
are  always  very  uncertain,  according  to  the 
quantity  or  quality  of  accumulated  indigeflion 
within,  and  the  ftrength  of  our  bodies. 

I come  now  to  fhew  that  the  gout  is  not  in- 
curable. If  by  the  cure  of  the  gout  be  meant 
the  adminiftring  a pill,  or  a powder,  or  medi- 
cine of  any  kind  to  do  it,  I fear  the  gout  is  and 
ever  will  be  incurable.  It  has  been  long  and 
often  attempted  in  vain,  from  the  origin  of  phy- 
fic  to  this  day.  Indeed  there  is  a mofl  glaring 

abfurdity 


[ i9  ] 


abfurdity  at  firft  fight,  that  mull  ftrike  any  man 
of  common  fenfe.  If  the  gout  be  the  necefiary  ef- 
fect of  intemperance,  (as  I hope  to  {hew)  a me- 
dicine to  cure  it  mult  be  fomething  that  will  ena- 
ble a man  to  bear  the  daily  intemperance  of  his 
future  life  unhurt  by  the  gout  or  any  other  dif- 
eafe  ; that  is,  fomething  given  now  that  will 
take  away  the  effeft  of  a future  caufe.  As  well 
might  a medicine  be  given  now  to  prevent  a 
man’s  breaking  his  leg  or  his  neck  feven  years 
hence.  One  would  think  the  utmoft  that  any 
rational  man  could  expetb  from  medicine 
was,  that  it  fhould  have  power  to  relieve  and 
remove  prefent  diforders,  leaving  the  body 
quite  free,  without  pretending  to  iufure  it  from 
future  injuries.  Here  lies  the  error  ; men  think 
the  gout  to  be  fomething  latent  in  the  body  now, 
which,  once  well  eradicated,  would'  never  re- 
turn ; not  fufpefting  it  to  be  no  more  than  each 
days  indigeftion  accumulated  to  a certain  pitch  ; 
that,  as  long  as  the  vigor  of  life  lafts,  always 
brings  on  every  fit,  which  once  well  over,  the 
man  has  no  more  gout  nor  feeds  of  gout  in  him 
than  he  who  never  had  it ; and,  if  he  did  not 
breed  it  again,  moll  certainly  would  never  have 
it  again.  A proof  of  this  is,  that  the  gout  has 
been  often  cured  bv  a milk  diet,  which,  as  long 
as  it  lafted,  has  generally  kept  the  patient  free. 
But  this  method  of  cure  I cannot  approve,  be* 
caufe  it  relaxes  and  enervates  the  body. 

Though  I think  the  gout  incurable  by  medi- 
cine, 


[ 20  j 

cine,  it  is  fo  far  from  being  incurable  in  its  na- 
ture,  that  I am  firmly  perfuaded  it  maybe  more 
eafily  and  more  perfectly  cured  than  airooft  any 
other  chronic  difeafe.  For  it  is  confeffedly  a 
difeafe  of  the  heft  conftitution,  throwing  off  bad 
humours  from  the  vitals  upon  the  extremities, 
where  they  do  leaf!  harm  to  the  powers  and  prin- 
ciples of  life  and  health:  and  as  thefe  humours 
can  be  nothing  more  than  the  daily  accumula- 
tions of  indigeflion,  if  a man  can  live  without 
breeding  conflantly  this  indigelled  acrimony,  he 
may  mod  undoubtedly  live  free,  not  only  from 
the  gout,  but  every  other  chronic  difeafe  alfo. 
And  that  he  may  live  fo  even  with  great  eafe 
and  comfort,  I fhould  endeavour  to  prove,  I 
hope  to  the  fatisfaftionof  a!!  thinking,  reafonable 
men. 

I have  faid,  that  indolence,  intemperance, 
and  vexation,  are  the  original  caufes  of  all  or 
moll  of  our  chronic  difeafes.  Every  invalid  that 
will  be  candid  enough,  may  trace  all  his  com- 
plaints up  to  one  or  other  of  thefe  caufes.  An 
accidental  cold  that  happens  but  feldom  can 
have  no  fuch  effect;  and  men  otherwife  healthy, 
living  in  good  habits  foon  get  rid  of  it.  It  is  the 
conftant  courfe  of  life  we  lead,  what  we  do,  or 
neglefl  to  do,  habiiuallv  every  dav,  that  if  right 
eflablifhes  our  health,  if  wrong,  makes  us  inva- 
lids for  life. 

Men  ignorant  of  the  way  of  nature  in  the 
production  and  fupport  of  animals,  not  knowing 

what 


L 21  ] 

Avhat  (lie  requires  to  prefervc  them  in  health  and 
vigour  to  their  utmoft  period,  have  conceived 
very  ftrange  and  very  falfe  ideas  of  difeafes  in 
general,  and  feem  to  think  that  there  are  medi- 
cines oppofea  to  each  that  will  certainly  remove 
and  cure  it.  This  makes  them  fo  felicitous  to 
know  the  name  of  their  complaint,  which  once 
afeertained,  they  think  the  remedy  not  far  off. 
Poor  men ! Is  not  the  gout  fufliciently  diflin- 
guifhed  ? But  where  is  the  remedy  ? Certainly 
not  in  the  precarious  fkill  of  preferibing  doftors, 
or  the  fecret  of  enterprizing  quacks.  Tliey  fan- 
cy too  that  there  is  great  variety  of  conflitution, 
with  difeafes  unavoidably  peculiar  to  each  : that 
certain  times  of  life  mud  produce  many,  and  that 
it  is  impoflible  to  grow  old  without  ficknefs  of 
fome  kind  or  other.  There  is  certainly  no  foun- 
dation in  nature  for  any  of  thefe  opinions,  nor 
is  there  any  real  effential  difference  of  conltitu- 
tion,  but  of  flrong  or  weak,  and  this  is  produc- 
ed more  by  habit  than  nature.  The  flrong'  bv 
bad  habits  will  become  weaker,  and  by  good, 
the  weak  lironger.  But  the  mod  delicate  frames 
may  be  as  healthy  as  the  dronged,  for  the  fame 
reafon  that  a fparrow  may  be  as  healthy  as  an 
elephant.  There  is  no  difeafe  neceffanly  pecu- 
liar to  any  time  of  life,  however  the  changes  in- 
to the  different  dages  of  it  may  affeft  the  vale- 
tudinary. And  it  is  pofhble  for  men  to  live  to 
great  age  without  any  difeafe  at  all,  for  many 

have 


[ 22  ] 

have  lived  to  the  age  of  an  hundred  with  unin- 
terrupted health. 

Not  from  the  natural  defefls  of  our  conditu- 
tions  therefore,  but  the  abufe  of  them,  proceed 
our  chronic  difeafes.  That  is,  from  indolence, 
intemperance,  or  vexation. 

Let  us  now  proceed  to  enquire  what  mull  be 
the  necelfary  eftefls  of  one  or  more  of  thefe 
caufes  aiding  daily  upon  the  body;  whether  in 
the  dronged  and  moll  vigorous  frames  it  mud 
not  be  the  gout;  in  weaker,  rheumatifm,  colic, 
Hone,  palfy,  &c.  or  any  or  all  of  the  nervous  and 
hyllerical  clafs. 

Of  INDOLENCE. 

IT  feems  to  have  been  the  defign  of  Provi- 
dence, that  all  men  Ihould  labour : that  fome 
are  rich  enough  to  purchafe  the  labour  of  others 
is  a mere  accident  with  regard  to  individuals,  in 
which  the  care  of  Providence  appears  to  me  no 
otherwife  concerned,  than  in  having  unequally 
dillributed  thofe  powers  by  which  a£live  fpirits 
rife  uppermoll,  to  preferve  the  harmony  of  fub- 
ordination,  without  which  fociety  could  never 
exift.  The  rich  and  great  have  fo  far  forgot 
their  firfl  principle  of  nature,  that  they  renounce 
all  bodily  labour  : and  thus  facrificing  health  to 
indulgence  and  dignity,  they  do  not  enjoy  the 
advantages  of  their  fuperior  Rations;  but  in 
happinefs  fall  often  below  the  labouring  hind. 

Nothing 


[ 23  ] 

Nothing  undermines  the  foundation  of  all  our 
happinefs,  the  health  and  vigor  of  the  bodv, 
like  it,  or  lays  fuch  a train  of  difeafes  to 
come.  But  I mull  endeavour  to  fhew  in  what 
manner. 

It  is  upon  the  minuteft  and  almofl  invifible 
parts  of  the  body,  our  belt  health,  ftrength  and 
fpirits  depend:  thefe  fine  parts,  commonly  called 
capillaries,  are  little  pipes  or  tubes,  the  extended 
continuations  of  the  larger  blood-vefTels,  through 
which  the  fineft  parts  of  the  blood  muft  con- 
flantly  pafs,  not  only  to  keep  thefe  very  fmall 
channels  free  and  open,  but  alfo  that  the  particles 
of  the  blood  may  in  their  patTage  be  attenuated, 
broken,  and  rubbed  into  globules  perfeftly  fmooth 
and  round,  and  eafily  divifible  into  flill  lefs  and 
lefs,  till  they  efcape  the  fight  afiifted  even  with 
the  microfcope.  Now  the  ftrength  of  the  heart 
and  arteries  alone,  in  a fedentary  courfe  of  life, 
is  by  no  means  fufficient  to  keep  up  and  perpe- 
tuate this  motion  through  thefe  capillaries,  but 
requires  the  affiftance  and  joint  force  of  all  the 
mufcles  of  the  body  to  aft  by  intervals,  com- 
prefs  the  veins,  propel  the  whole  mafs  of  blood 
in  order  to  force  and  clear  thefe  pipes,  and  to 
triturate,  cribrate,  and  purify  the  fluid  paffing 
through.  Without  this  aid,  the  little  vefifels 
would,  by  their  natural  elafticity,  clofe  up  into 
fibres,  or  be  obftrufted  bv  rough  angular  parti- 
cles flicking  in  them,  and  flopping  all  paffage. 
Numberlefs  evils  of  the  chronic  kind,  efpecially 

all 


[ 24  ] 

ail  nervous  difeafes,  owe  their  origin  to  this 
caufe  alone.  Inaftivity  forms  obhruftions  in 
thefe  exquifitely  fine  parts,  upon  which  the 
vigor  both  of  body  and  mind  depend,  and  lavs 
the  foundation  of  many  difeafes  ; which  other 
circumdances,  fuch  as  a cold,  excels  of  any 
kind,  infeftion  from  without,  or  a particular 
difpofition  of  the  body  within,  often  make 
fatal. 

Now  I would  afk  any  reafonable  perfon, 
Whether  lie  can  conceive  it  pofhble,  to  fubfli- 
rute  any  medicine,  that  fhall  aft  upon  the  blood 
and  velfels  like  the  joint  force  of  all  the  muffles 
of  the  body,  aiding  and  re  afting  in  a regular 
courfe  of  daily  labour  or  exercife  ? Unlefs  this 
can  be  done,  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing  as  a 
lading  cure,  either  for  the  gout  or  anv  other 
chronic  difeafe.  Yes,  Sir,  fays  a practitioner, 
cordials,  volatiles,  bracers,  drengilieners,  will  do 
this,  will  keep  up  an  increafed  circulation. 
Poffibly  they’  may  for  a few  hours  ; but  their 
aftion  foon  fubfides,  and  the  flimulus  ceafes ; 
the\r  mud  therefore  be  repeated  and  repeated 
for  life.  And  woe  be  to  him  that  takes  them, 
and  to  him  that  leaves  them  off,  unlefs  it  be  done 
with  great  judgment.  While  they  aft,  they 
coagulate  the  juices  and  corrupt  the  whole  mafs 
of  blood;  and  when  omitted,  the  patient  mud 
feel  all  the  languors  and  horrors  of  a crapulary 
fever ; and  mud  have  recourfe  to  them  again, 

like 


3 


like  a dram  drinker,  who  cannot  bear  his  exig- 
ence but  in  a (late  of  intoxication. 

But  thefe  obftructions  form  crude  particles  of 
the  blood,  an:l  this  inaflion  of  the  capillaries, 
are  not  all  the  evils  produced  by  indolence. 
That  fprightly  vigor  which  we  feel  and  enjoy  in 
an  aftive  courfe  of  life,  that  zeft  nr  appetite,  and 
refrefhment  after  eating,  which  luxury  fecks  in 
vain  from  art,  is  owing  wholly  to  new  blood 
made  every  day  from  frefh  food  prepared  an  1 
diftributed  by  the.  joint  aflion  of  all  the  parts  of 
the  body.  No  man  can  have  thefe  delightful 
ferrfations  who  lives  two  days  with  the  fame 
blood.  To  introduce  new  juices,  the  old  mud 
be. firft  thrown  pffj  or  there  will  be  a plethora; 
the  firft  caufes  of  many  difeafes.  In  a date  of  • 
inactivity  the  oi  l humours  pafs  ofT  too  (lowly; 
the  infenfihlc  perfpiration  is  fo  inconfiderab'e, 
that  there  is  no  void  to  be  filled  ; confequcntiy 
by  degrees  the  appetite,  wlrich  is  the  laft  tiring 
that  decays,  that  is,  tire  defire  of  fupply,  mu  ft 
diminifh,  and  at  laft  be  totally  loft.  Here  art 
can  do  wonders  ; it  can  procure  evacuations  ; we 
can  bleed,  purge  and  vomit.  But  to  do  am 
good  by  thefe,  the  cafe  rnuft  be  recent,  before- 
tire  humours  are  vitiated  by  too  long  a ftav  in  tire 
body ; which  will  be  the  cafe  very  loon,  for 
they  are  all  in  a perifhable  ftate.  But  tlrefe  ar- 
tificial evacuations  difeharge  all  alike  ; the  new, 
tire  middle,  and  the  old  juices;  that  is,  the 
chyle,  the  blood,  the  ferum,  and  lymph  ; and 
Vol.  XXVI.  B by 


[ 26  ] 


by  this  indifcriminate  aftion  make  ffrange  con- 
fufion  on  thofe  that  remain.  Whereas  in  na- 
ture’s courfe  there  is  a regular  tranfmutation  and 
fucceflion  from  one  flate  to  another  ; from  chvle 
into  blood,  and  blood  into  ferum,  and  fo  on,  till 
they  are  all  elaborated  and  ground  to  fuch  a 
minute  finenefs,  that  they  pafs  off  in  the  vapour 
ofinfenfible  perfpiration.  In  a flate  of  indolence 
thev  do  not  pafs  off  either  fo  foon  or  fo  regularly 
as  they  ought,  becaufe  there  is  no  motion,  nor 
confequemlv  heat  enough  to  throw  off  the  va- 
pour : thev  lodge  in  the  body  too  long,  grow 
putrid,  acrimonious,  and  hurtful  many  ways ; 
like  the  matter  formed  in  an  ulcer,  which  while 
it  is  yet  fweet,  there  is  no  balfam  fo  healing.  But 
when  confined,  it  foon  becomes  corrofive,  and 
like  a cauflic  eats  its  way  all  round  in  fiftulas. 
Th:s  fhews  the  virulent  acrimony  of  thefe  con- 
fined and  flagnating  humours:  hence  the  breath 
and  perfpiration  of  indolent  people  is  never 
fweet.  And  hence  in  jails,  where  thefe  noxious 
vapours  are  co'lefted  and  condenfed  from  croud- 
ed  wretches  languifhing  in  indolence,  very  ma- 
lignant and  peffilential  fevers  arife. 

Perpetual  bliflers  have  been  fometimes  found, 
to  be  ferviceable,  in  draining  off  fome  of  thefe 
fuperfiuous  juices  before  they  are  much  cor- 
rupted, and  making,  by  a faint  refemblance  of 
nature's  affion,  a little  more  room  for  new.  It 
is  for  this  reafon  they  do  any  good  at  all,  by  in- 
crealing  the  general  circulation,  and  forcing  off 

a few 


[ 27  1 


a few  of  thofe  humours  that  had  been  too  long  in 
the  body,  and  were  becoming  acrid.  By  a 
vomit  or  a purge  the  difcharge  is  a hundred  fold 
more ; but  the  good  obtained  not  always  fo 
great,  becaufe  by  thefe  the  humours  are  indif- 
criminatelv  thrown  off,  and  much  more  of  the 
new  than  the  old.  Many  have  riled  frequently 
bleeding  to  renew  their  blood,  and  I have  known 
it  do  fome  good  ; but  then  it  mult  be  begun  be- 
fore the  whole  rnafs  of  humours  be  vitiated,  and 
continued  for  life.  Is  it  not  ftrange  that  men 
fhould  feek  and  prefer  thefe  violent  artificial 
methods  to  the  fimpie,  eafv  acfion  of  nature,  and 
chufe  rather  to  take  a vomit  or  a purge  than  a 
walk,  and  wear  a perpetual  blilter  than  make 
ufe  of  their  limbs  ? 

Thus  indolence  mult  lay  the  foundation  of 
difeafes  ; and  according  to  the  conftitution  and  a 
few  other  circumltances  will  be  the  kind  of  the 
difeafe.  In  the  belt  it  may  be  gout  or  rheuma- 
lifm  ; in  weaker  habits  cholic,  jaundice,  palfy, 
with  all  of  the  hyfterical  and  hypocondriacal 
clafs.  In  vain  have  ingenious  men  of  a feden- 
tary  life,  endeavoured  to  obviate  the  evil  by  ab- 
ftinence.  They  do  not  find  it  anfwer,  for  the 
reafon  I have  juft  given ; that  we  cannot  live 
two  days  in  health  and  lpirits  with  the  fame 
blood.  There  muft  be  a new  daily  fupply  of 
that  ethereal  part  of  our  food,  called  up  to  the 
brain  to  fupport  its  own,  as  well  as  the  labour  of 
the  whole  body.  By  this  I mean  the  raoft  re- 
B 2 fined 


1 


Iinea  part  of  all  our  juices  which  conflantly  re- 
pairs the  fmalleft  veflels  and  fibres.  Whenever 
this  fails  we  muft  feel  langour  and  Iaffitude  both 
cn  body  and  mind.  With  this  difference,  that 
in  wearinefs  of  the  limbs  from  much  aftion,  the 
lees  and  coarfer  part1-  are  thrown  off  alfo,  and 
the  firft  meal  and  fir  ft  fieep  foon  fupplies  the 
defeft.  In  mental  labour  the  feculence  remains 
to  obflruft  all  appetite;  there  is  no  room,  and 
therefore  no  call  for  f apply ; the  whole  man 
fulfers  and  finks. 

Of  I NT  E M P E'R'  A N C E. 

I come  now  to  fpeak  of  intemperance.  Indo- 
lence, blunting  all  our  fenfations,  naturally  leads 
us  to  intemperance  : we  want  the  whip  and  fpur 
of  luxury  to  excite  our  jaded  appetites.  There 
is  no  enduring  the  perpetual  moping  langour  of 
indolence:  we  fly  to  the  ftimulating  fenfualities 
of  the  table  and  the  bottle;  a momentary  relief 
is  obtained,  to  be  paid  for  feverelv  foon  after: 
the  next  morning  our  horrors  increafe,  and  i.i 
this  coutfe  there  is  no  remedy  but  repetition. 
Thus  whoever  is  indolent  is  intern  wrate  alfo, 
and  partly  from  neceflity  ; and  the  evils  follow- 
ing both  thefe  cattfes  otter  make  the  rich  ami 

O 

great  more  wretched  than  the  pot  and  the  bal- 
Ehce  of  happinefs  is  held  more  equal  h between 
them. 

I venture 


[ ^ ] 


I venture  to  fay  that  nine  in  ten  of  all  the 
chronic  difeafes  in  the  world,  particularly  the 
gout,  owe  their  firft  rife  to  intemperance.  In- 
deed many  a good  man,  who  piques  himfelf 
upon  being  the  molt  fober  creature  alive,  and 
never  eats  but  one  or  V-  plain  difhes,  as  he 
calls  them,  nor  exceeds  his  pint  of  wine  at  a 
meal ; keeps  good  hours,  and  never  fleeps  above 
eight  or  nine,  may  be  furprized  to  have  his  dil- 
eafe  imputed  to  intemperance.  And  yet  he  is 
often  ill,  lick  in  his  Itomach,  troubled  with  in- 
geft  i,  and  crippled  by  the  gout.  The  cafe 
is,  we  judge  of  temperance  and  intemperance 
from  our  own  habits,  without  any  juft  idea  of 
either.  The  belt  way  to  explain  what  I mean 
by  intemperance,  may  be  to  enquire  what  is  na- 
ture's law  of  temperance,  and  to  deviate  from 
that  mult  be  confidercd  as  intemperance.  And 
here  I mu  ft  obferve,  that  temperance  is  a thing 
ol  which  no  Enghfhman  can  have  the  leaft  idea, 
if  he  judges  from  his  own  or  his  neighbours  ha- 
bits. To  form  fome  notion  of  it  he  muft  have 
feen  other  countries,  particularly  Spain,  Portu- 
gal or  Italy,  and  obferved  how  men  live  there. 
What  they  call  temperance  or  even  tolerable 
living,  wiih  us  would  be  thought  downright 
ftarving.  In  this  view  temperance  is  local  and 
comparative  ; but  what  I mean  is  natural 
temperance,  not  depending  upon  place  or 
cuftora. 

I think  there  is  an  abfolute,  determined  tem- 
B 3 perance, 


[ 3°  ] 


perance,  to  be  meafured  by  every  man’s  natural 
appetite,  digeftion  and  confumption,  while  he 
continues  in  a good  hate  of  health.  As  long  as 
a man  eats  and  drinks  no  more  than  his  Oomach 
calls  for,  and  will  bear  without  the  leaft  pain, 
dihention,  eruflation,  or  uneafinefs  of  any  kind  ; 
lie  may  be  faid  to  live  in  temperance. 

This  is  nature’s  law  : and  the  reverfe  of  it,  or 
indeed  any  great  deviation  from  it,  mull  be  in- 
temperance : when  we  eat  without  appetite,  or 
urge  beyond  fatiety,  provoked  by  incentives  of 
any  kind  : or,  when  we  drink  without  third,  lor 
the  fake  of  the  liquor. 

Now  let  us  compare  this  idea  of  temperance 
with  the  courfe  of  mod  men’s  lives,  and  obferve 
their  progrefs  from  health  to  ficknefs.  I fear 
we  fhall  find  but  very  few  who  have  any  pre- 
tentions to  real  temperance.  In  early  youth 
we  are  infenfibly  led  into  intemperance  by  the 
indulgence  and  miltaken  fondnefs  of  parents,  by 
wifhing  to  make  us  happy  by  anticipation. 
Having  thus  exhaulted  the  firll  degrees  of  luxury 
before  we  come  to  the  dominion  of  ourfelves, 
we  Ihould  find  no  pleafure  in  our  liberty  did  we 
not  advance  farther.  Thus  we  go  on  till  fome 
friendly  pain  or  difeafe  bids,  or  rather  forces  us 
to  Hop.  But  in  youth  all  the  parts  of  our  bodies 
are  llrong  and  flexible,  and  bear  the  firll  loads 
of  excefs  with  lefs  hurt,  and  throw  them  offfoon 
by  their  natural  vigour,  or  with  a little  aflillance 
from  artificial  evacuation.  As  we  grow  older, 

either 


[ 3 1 ] 

either  by  nature  in  due  time,  or  exceiTes  before 
our  time,  the  body  is  lefs  able  to  free  itfelf  and 
wants  more  aid  from  art.  The  man  however 
goes  on  taking  daily  more  than  he  wants.  He 
feels  himfelf  oppreffed,  and  his  appetite  failing, 
his  fpirits  fmk  for  want  of  frefh  fupply.  He  has 
recourfe  to  dainties,  fauces,  pickles,  provoca- 
tives of  all  forts.  Thefe  foon  lofe  their  power ; 
and  though  he  wafhes  down  each  mouthful  with 
a glafs  of  wine,  he  can  relifh  nothing.  What  is 
to  be  done  ? Send  for  a phyftcian.  Do£ior,  I 
have  loft  my  ftomach  ; pray  give  me,  fays  he, 
with  great  innocence  and  ignorance,  fomething 
to  give  me  an  appetite  ; as  if  want  of  appetite 
was  a difeafe  to  be  cured  by  art.  In  vain  would 
the  phyftcian  give  him  the  beft  advice  in  two 
words,  quotre  Judando , feek  it  by  labour.  He 
would  be  thought  a man  void  of  fkill  if  he  did 
not  immediately,  or  after  a few  evacuations, 
prefcribe  llomachics,  bitter,  fpicy  infufions  in 
wine  or  brandy,  vitriolic  elixirs,  bark,  fteel,  &c. 
By  the  ufe  of  thefe  things  the  ftomach,  roufed 
to  a little  extraordinary  aftion,  frees  itfelf,  by 
difcharging  its  crude,  auftere  contents  into  the 
bowels,  to  be  thence  forwarded  into  the  blood. 
The  man  is  freed  for  a time,  finds  he  can  eat 
a^ain.  and  thinks  ail  well.  But  this  is  a fhort- 
lived  delufton  ; if  he  is  robuft,  the  acrimony 
floating  in  the  blood  is  throw  out,  and  a fit  of 
gout  fucceeds ; if  lefs  fo,  rheumatifm  or  colick. 
But  let  us  fuppofe  it  to  be  the  gout,  which  if  he 
B 4 lives 


[ 3*  ] 

ii\  cs  moderately,  drinking  no  Madeira  or  Brandy 
to  keep  it  out  of  his  flomach,  nature  will  relieve 
him  in  a certain  time,  and  the  gouty  acrimony  be- 
ing conduced  by  the  fymptomaic  fever,  he  will 
recover  health.  If  afhfled  by  judicious,  mild,  and 
folt  medicines,  he  would  recover  fooner.  But 
it  is  for  a nr  or  t tune  ; for  he  returns  to  his 
iormer  habits,  and  quickly  brings  on  the  fame 
round  of  complaints,  all  aggravated  bv  each  re- 
turn, til!  he  becomes  a confirmed  invalid  and 
cripple  for  life.  Then  wi  h a great  deal  of  ufe- 
leis  medication  and  a few  journies  to  Bath  he 
drags  on,  till,  in  fpite  of  all  the  dodlors  he  has 
confulted,  and  the  infallible  quack  medicines  be 
has  taken,  he  finks  below  opium  and  brandy, 
and  dies  long  before  his  time.  This  is  the 
eourfe  I have  lived  to  fee  many  take.  All  this 
chain  of  evils  is  brought  on  and  accumulated  by 
indolence  and  intemperance,  c ni'fiaken choice 
of  diet.  How  eafily  might  they  have  been  re- 
medied, had  the  real  caufes  been  known  and  at- 
tended to  in  time  ! 

I mufl  explain  a little  what  I mean  by  provok- 
ing the  appetite  ; which  I take  to  be  the  general 
mode  of  intemperance  among  men.  Cullom 
has  made  all  incentives  to  excefs  fo  common, 
that  thofe  of  daily  life,  far  from  being  confider- 
ed  as  intemperance,  are  by  people  thought  to  be 
falutary  and  neceffary.  They  never  fufpecl  the 
leaf!  evil  from  the  common  decoraments  of  the 
table,  fait,  pepper,  multard,  vinegar.  And 
yeti  will  venture  to  pronounce  that  excefs  in 


anv 


C 33  ] 

any  of  thefe  mull  be  doubly  prejudicial  to  health. 
They  are  hurtful  iu  themfelves  by  their  accri- 
mony  ; and  they  provoke, the  appetite  to  bear 
an  opprefhve  load,  which  the  flomach  itfelf 
would  foon  feel,  were  it  not  artificially  himu- 
lated  to  difeharge  it  by  wine  and  flrong  liquors 
immediately  after.  Thus  one  error  brings  on 
another,  and  when  men  have  eaten  too  muclr, 
they  drink  too  much  by  a kind  of  necefiity. 

If  this  be  true,  of  the  common  provocatives  at 
every  poor  man’s  board,  what  (hall  we  lay  of 
that  lludied,  labored,  extravagance  at  the  tables 
of  the  rich,  where  the  culinary  arts  are  pufhed 
to  that  excefs,  that  luxury  is  become  falfe  to  it- 
felf, and  though  variety  is  aimed  at,  every 
thing  has  the  fame  talle,  and  nothing  its  own  ? 

I am  lorry  and  afhamed  that  men  fhould  under- 
hand fo  little,  as  to  think  that  urging  the  appe- 
tite beyond  natural  fatiety  can  affhrd  any  real  en- 
joyment. But  this  they  do  by  all  the  refearches 
of  culinary  and  medical  art,  introducing  all  the 
foreign  aids  to  luxury,  every  provocative  that 
can  be  found  in  acids,  falts,  fiery  fpices  and  of- 
fences ol  all  kinds,  to  roufe  their  nerves  to  a little- 
feeling  ; not  knowing  the  more  they  are  irritat- 
• ed,  the  more  callous  they  grow.  The  fame  things 
mull  now  be  more  frequently  repeated,  increafed 
in  quantity,  and  exalted  in  quality,  till  they  know 
not  where  to  hop,  and  every  meal  ferves  only 
to  overload  the  homach,  to  foul  and  inflame  the 
blood,  obhrufl  the  capillary  channels, . bring  ca  a. 

B 5.  he  filter 


C 34  J 


heftic  fever  of  initation,  that  though  it  raife  the 
fpirits  for  the  evening  leaves  behind  it  all  the  hor- 
rid fenfations  of  inanition  and  crapula  the  next 
morning;.  And  but  that  nature  is  fo  kind  as  to 
flop  them  in  their  career  with  a painful  fit  of  the 
gout  or  fome  other  illnefs,  in  which  fhe  gets  a 
little  refpite,  they  would  foon  be  at  the  end  of 
their  courfe. 

Men  bring  all  thefe  evils  upon  themfelves, 
either  not  knowing  or  not  attending  to  two 
things ; the  one,  that  pleafure  is  a coy  coquet,  and 
to  be  enjoyed  muR  not  always  be  purfued  ; the 
other,  that  pleafure  and  happinefs  are  as  diRinfr 
things  as  riot  and  enjoyment.  Befides,  pleafure 
is  not  infinite,  and  our  fenfations  are  limited  . 
We  can  bear  but  a certain  meafure,  and  all  urg- 
ing beyond  if,  brings  pain  in  its  Read.  Let  the 
men  of  high  experience  bear  me  teflimony  that 
this  is  true  of  all  the  luxuries  of  the  table,  wine, 
mufic,  women,  and  every  fenfuality. 

But  there  are  fome  not  intemperate  from 
choice,  but  from  cufiom,  or  miRake,  not  knowing 
their  daily  diet  to  be  productive  of  their  difeafes. 
To  thefe  it  may  be  of  fome  ufe  to  have  the  un- 
wholfome  pointed  out.  Indeed  men  of  labori- 
ous occupations,  who  work  in  the  open  air,  bear 
great  exceffes  and  much  unwholfome  diet  with- 
out much  hurt ; I never  knew  a fick  or  gouty 
gardener,  that  was  not  a remarkable  fot.  But 
men  of  fedentary  trades  andbufinefs,  (hopkeepers 
of  all  kinds,  feel  much  fooner  and  more  heavily, 

the 


C 35  ] 

the  ill  effefls  of  intemperance  ormiflaken  choice 
of  their  meat  and  drink.  Their  firfl  care  there- 
fore ought  to  be,  not  to  add  the  difeafes  of  in- 
temperance to  thofe  of  inaflivity,  but  propor- 
tion what  they  take  as  pvell  in  quantity  as  in 
quality  to  their  confumption.  But  let  us  fee  how 
well  they  do  this.  They  all  fay  they  live  upon 
plain  things,  and  never  indulge  in  made  difhes; 
but  they  will  eat  heartily  of  a goofe  or  duck,  with 
a large  quantity  of  fage,  onion,  pepper  and  fait, 
a pig  with  fimilar  preparation,  and  a hare  with 
higher  and  more  compound  feafoning.  Do  they 
ever  eat  veal  without  fluffing,  or  even  a leg  of 
mutton  without  caper  fauce  ? They  are  furpriz- 
ed  that  fuch  meals  fhould  rife  on  their  flomachs 
with  flatulence,  fourand  bitter  hiccups  and  eruc- 
tations, which  if  they  did  not  keep  them  down 
with  a fufficient  quantity  of  wine  or  fometimes  a 
dram,  they  would  be  troubled  with,  all  the  time 
of  digeflion.  If  this  method  quiet  their  flomachs 
for  the  prefent,  they  go  on  with  it,  ignorant  of 
future  confequences.  Thus  are  thefe  fharp,  harfh, 
and  inflammatory  things  forced  out  of  the  flo- 
mach  into  the  blood,  before  it  has  had  time  to 
dilute  and  fubdue,  or  rejefl  them,  and  the  fu- 
perfluous  load'  they  bring  along  with  them.  And 
thus  is  laid  the  foundation  of  every  chfeafe,  that 
appears  when  thefe  acrid  and  fiery  particles  are 
accumulated  to  a certain  degree. 

There  are  others  whofe  pretenfions  to  plain 
diet  may  feem  better  founded,  but  who  never- 
B 6 thelefs 


[ 36  J 


thelefs  eat  things  unwholfome,  and  very  unfit 
for  men  of  fedentary  lives,  fuch  as  falted  and 
fmoaked  flefh  andfifh  of  all  kinds,  hams,  tongues, 
heavy  flour  puddings,  toafied  cheefe,  all  which 
are  of  an  hard  and  ahnoft  indiffoluble  texture; 
nor  is  it  polhble  good  nourifhment  fhould  come 
from  them  To  this  kind  of  food  is  owing  the 
bad  health  of  country  people,  and  their  child- 
ren’s rickety  heads  and  limbs, and  big  and  hard 
bellies. 

This  leads  me  to  another  obfervation,  that  man 
beintr  born  to  devour  mull  of  the  fruits  and  ani- 
mals  of  the  earth  and  water,  there  ought  to  be  a 
certain  proportion  ol  animal  and  vegetable  fub- 
flances  in  his  food  ; the  animal  tending  fpon- 
taneoufiy  to  putrefaction,  the  vegetable  correct- 
ing that  tendency  from  going  too  far  : thus  from 
the  due  mixture  of  both  qualities  refults  that 
natural  property,  that  is  eiTcntially  neceffary  to 
produce  good  blood.  And  here  I may  obferve, 
that  the  error  of  mod  men’s  diet  in  every  clafs  of 
life  is,  lint  the  acid,  crude  and  aultere,  almoll 
always  abound.  Not  that  they  do  not  eat  flefh- 
meat  enough,  but  they  fpoil  it  in  the  preparation- 
and  cookery,  taking  off  entirely  all  its  tendency 
t > difiolution  and  putrefaCtion  by  falling,  fmoak- 
ing,  pickling,  potting,  and  preferving  things- 
i hat  in  their  own  fimple  nature  would  foon  dif- 
f'olve  ; but  by  thefe  preparations  are  hardened 
and  embalmed  to  keep  for  years  like  mummies. 
The  fame  may  be  find  ol  every  kind  of  made 

diflies; 


[ 37  ] 

difhes ; the  falts,  fpices,  hot  herbs,  and  acids, 
with  which  they  are  feafoned  and  compounded 
preferve  and  harden  them  to  keep  for  ever;  the 
fauces  and  gravies  they  fwim  in  have  the  fame 
effetd  as  fo  much  pickle. 

The  nature  of  moll  chronic  difeafes,  and  their 
firft  fymptom,  heart-burn  plainly  fhew  the  ori- 
ginal caufe  to  be  acid  crudity  prevailing  in  the 
juices  ; producing  coagulations,  concretions  and 
obdruflions  of  various  kinds;  all  which  are 
very  manifeft  in  the  gout,  rheumatifm,  done, 
and  mofl  nervous  cafes  : many  may  he  furprized 
at  this,  and  fay  it  cannot  be  ; for  though  they 
have  thefe  difeafes,  they  take  little  or  no  acids  : 
but  there  are  many  things  they  take  that  areace- 
fcent,  that  is,  liable  to  become  acid,  efpecially  by 
the  heat  of  the  domaclr.  This  they  are  not  aware 
of;  but  they  are  in  their  nature  much  more  pre- 
judicial than  things  already  four.  It  may  here  he 
necedary  to  enumerate  fome  ofthofe  things  cal- 
led acefcent.  There  are  fweets  of  mod  kinds, 
puddings,  cakes,  rich  padry,  and  confeftions. 

In  this  light  we  mud  alfo  confider  mod  forts  of 
feafonings,  duffings,  forced-meats,  and  com- 
pound fauces.  But  the  greated  acefcent,  or  ra- 
ther bane  of  all,  high  and  low,  rich  or  other- 
wife,  whoever  they  are  that  take  it  largely,  is 
wine  ; wine  alone  produces  more  difeafes  than 
all  the  other  caufes  put  together. 

Water  is  the  only  liquor  nature  knows  of  or 
has  provided  for  all  animals;  and  wha’ever  nature 


gives 


[ 3§  ] 

gives  us,  we  may  depend  upon  it,  is  beft  and 
fafeft  for  us.  Accordingly  we  fee  that  when  we 
have  committed  exceftesor  miftakes  of  any  kind, 
and  fuffer  from  them,  it  is  water  that  relieves. 
Hence  the  chief  good  of  Bath,  Spa,  and  mam- 
other  medicinal  waters,  efpecially  to  hard  drink- 
ers. It  is  the  element  that  dilutes  and  carrie* 
off  crudities  and  indigeftions:  the  mineral  vir- 
tues they  contain  may  make  them  tolerable  to 
the  ftomach,  btu  do,  as  I believe,  little  more 
in  the  body,  it  is  the  water  that  cures. 

There  is  another  capital  miftake  many  labor 
under  in  the  choice  ol  their  wine,  preferring  the 
ftrong,  hot  and  coarfe  forts,  Maderia,  Port, 
Mountain,  to  the  milder,  more  elegant,  and 
certainly  lefs  unwholefome  wines,  accounting 
them  better  for  the  ftomach.  My  obferyation  has 
been  that  they  who  ufe  thefe  ftrong  ftomach 
wines  to  cure  wind  are  never  free  from  it,  and 
all  the  gouty  diforders  of  indigeftton.  Indeed, 
it  cannot  well  be  otherwife  ; for  there  is  nothing 
fo  repugnant  to  natural  digeftion  as  the  ufe  of 
thefe  ftrong  liquors,  which,  inllead  of  diffolving, 
harden  every  thing : and  thus,  for  ever,  when 
the  firft  warmth  is  gone  off,  leave  a crapulary, 
crude,  four  load  of  yefterday  to  ferment,  fret, 
and  irritate  the  ftomach  and  bowels  every  day. 

Of  VEXATION. 

I COME  now  to  the  laft  general  caufe  of  chro- 
nic difeafes,  vexation,  A very  fruitful  pa- 

lern. 


[ 39  3 

rent  of  many  bodily  eyils,  producing  general  dif- 
eafes  of  inanition,  much  more  difficult,  not  only 
to  be  cured,  but  relieyed,  than  thofe  we  fuffer 
either  from  indolence  or  intemperance.  But  as 
it  is  not  fo  common  a caufe  of  the  trout  as  the 

D 

other  two,  it  may  not  be  neceffiary  to  confider  it 
very  minutely  at  prefent.  I fib  all  content  myfelf 
with  observing,  that  every  great  degree  of  vexa- 
tion,  whether  in  the  ffiape  of  anger,  envy,  refent- 
ment,  difcontent  or  borrow,  has  mod  definitive 
effefts  upon  the  vitals,  whether  fudden  and  vio- 
lent, or  flow  and  lading  long. 

The  fird  immediate  effect  of  violent  grief  or 
vexation  is  to  take  off  the  aCtion  of  the  domach 
intirely.  Let  us  fuppofe  a man,  in  the  bed, 
health,  the  highed  good  humor  and  fpirits,  as 
well  as  good  domach,  fitting  down  to  dinner 
with  his  friends,  receives  fuddenly  fome  very 
afflicting  news.  Indantlv  his  appetite  is  gone, 
and  he  can  neither  eat  nor  fwallow  a morfel. 
Let  the  fame  thing  happen  after  he  has  made  a 
hearty  chearful  meal,  as  fuddenly  the  whole 
power  ofdigedion  is  cut  off,  as  if  it  were  become 
paralytic  ; and  what  he  has  eaten  lies  a mod  op- 
preffive  load. 

Befides  this  pernicious  effeCt  of  perverting 
the  natural  attion  of  the  domach  and  intedines, 
the  whole  circulation  of  the  blood  is  didurbed. 
The  contraction  and  dilatation  of  the  heart,  that 
is,  the  alternate  a&ion  by  which  it  opens  to  re- 
ceive the  blood  from  the  veins,  and  clofes  again 

to 


[ 4°  j 


to  force  it  out  through  the  arteries ; are  broken 
and  uneven  ; the  heart  flutters,  palpitates ; now 
is  overloaded  with  blood  and  in  danger  of  fuffo- 
cation,  now  receives  none  at  all  ; confequently 
all  the  fecretions  mull  be  as  irregular,  foine  of 
the  glands  receiving  too  abundant  a fupplv  that 
either  hurries  through,  or  oppreffes  and  over- 
powers them,  others  none  at  all.  Hence  that 
hafty  gufhing  of  pale  limpid  urin  in  amazing 
quantities,  thofe  fudden  burds  of  unmeaning 
tears  : fometimes  great  drynefs  and  choaking 
third,  fometimes  the  overflowing  of  the  mouth 
with  water  inflead  of  faliva,  and  many  other 
nervous  and  hyfterical  affeHions,  all  which  indi- 
cate the  greatefl  tumults  and  perturbations  in  the 
inmofl  receffes  of  the  nervous  and  vital  frame. 

In  flower,  more  filent,  but  longer  continued 
grief,  the  effects  are  fnnilar,  but  not  fo  violent. 
Many  little  ftrokes  repeated  will  do  the  fame 
thing  in  time  that  a great  blow  does  at  once. 
The  fun&ion  of  the  doinach  will  be  more  gent- 
ly difturbed,  its  juices  vitiated,  and  all  its  con- 
tents turn  four,  bitter  or  rancid  ; fo  that  no  mild 
milky  chyle,  or  wholefome  material  of  nourifh- 
ment,  can  ever  come  into  the  blood.  The 
patient  mud  languifh  with  cache&ic  inanition, 
univerfal  bad  habit  of  body,  or  pine  and  wade  ; 
whence  arife  various  difeafes  fucceeding  each 
other  always  from  bad  to  worfe  : and  unlefs  he 
can  fubdue  his  anxjety,  and  rcdove  peace  of 

mind* 


[ 41  ] 

mind,  he  mud  in  time  fink  under  it,  and  die,  as 
it  is  laid,  of  a broken  heart. 

Vexation  operating  in  this  manner  upon  the 
organs  of  digetlion  and  concoflion,  and  obilruft* 
ing  the  natural  progrefs  of  nutrition,  muff  often 
produce  difeafes  fimilar  to  tbofe  of  intemperance 
Its  firft  effedt  is  indigeltion  with  all  its  fymp- 
toins,  wind,  erudlation,  heart-burn,  hiccup.  It 
is  no  wonder  therefore  it  fhould  fometimes  bring 
on  a fit  of  gout,  which,  as  1 have  faid,  is  a dif- 
eafe  of  indigeflion  ; and  often  the  gout  in  the 
flomach  and  bowels.  Indeed  mod  cold,  crude 
colics  are  of  this  kind.  Schirrous  concretions 
will  alfo  be  formed  in  the  fpleen,  liver,  glands 
of  the  mefenterv,  and  throughout  the  whole  fyf- 
tem  of  the  belly.  Many  of  thefe  indurated  tu- 
mours in  time  degenerate  into  cancers  and  can- 
cerous ulcerations. 

All  the  paffions  when  they  are  inordinate  may 
have  injurious  eiTedls  upon  the  vital  frame  : ex- 
cefiive  joy  has  fometimes  given  a fatal  blow,  and 
fudden  burfis  of  laughter  done  great  mifchiefs, 
efpecially  to  delicate  people. 

I am  fully  perfuaded,  that  whoever  will  re- 
fledl  with  fome  degree  of  intelligence,  will  in 
general  be  able  to  trace  his  complaints  and  dif- 
eafes  up  to  one  or  other  of  thefe  three  caufes. 
And  whoever  does  this,  muft  infallibly  fee  how 
vain  and  idle  all  his  hopes  and  expeditions  of 
lading  remedy  and  eifablilhed  health  mull  be 
from  any  kind  of  quacks,  medicines,  or  indeed 
* the 


[ 42  ] 

toe  common  and  too  general  practice  ofphyfic. 
When  the  whole  is  refled  upon  fomething 
given  to  fwallow  ; how  inadequate  are  the  means 
to  the  end  propofed  ? How  can  vomiting  and 
purging  fupply  the  place  of  temperance  ; bleed- 
ing, bli firing  and  all  artificial  evacuation,  of  acti- 
vity ; cordials  and  opium,  of  peace  of  mind  ? Is 
not  this  to  fill  the  body  with  harfh  and  unwhol- 
fome  juices,  and  then  tear  it  to  pieces  to  get 
them  out  again  ? To  make  ar.ificial  holes  and 
fores  in  the  fkin,  to  renew  the  blood  and  dif- 
charge  fhperfluities,  inflead  of  employing  muf- 
cular  motion  to  rub  off  and  grind  down  all  the 
acrimony  of  angular  particles,  and  make  them 
fmooth  and  round,  and  eafily  divifible  ; and  to 
employ  intoxication  and  ftupefa&ion  to  take  off 
the  fenfe  of  pain,  and  leave  the  caufe  where  it 
was,  or  fix  it  fafler?  Can  any  reafonable  per- 
fon  hope  for  health  or  longlife  by  any  of thefe 
unnatural  methods,  when  thefe  only  are  employ- 
ed ? Let  him  look  round  among  his  neighbours, 
and  tell  me  whether,  not  only  all  the  gouty  but 
rheumatic,  colicky,  jaundiced,  paralytic,  drop- 
ftcal  people  he  has  ever  feen,  are  not  either  al- 
ways fo,  or  by  fits  fo  ; and  whether  thofe  return- 
ing fits  of  thefe  diforders  do  not  always  grow 
worfe  and  worfe,  in  fpite  of  all  their  medication 
and  quackery,  till  a complication  or  apoplexy 
comeson,  that  at  1 aft,  though  long  before  their 
time,  puts  an  end  to  their  miferable  lives. 


Of 


C 43  ] 


Of  the  cure  of  the  Gout,  and  all''  other  Chronic 
difeafes , and  the  repair  of  a broken  conjlitu- 
tion. 

A V I N G fet  forth  the  real  cattles-  of  the 


il  gout,  and  all  its  congenial  difeafes,  I 
come  now  to  the  molt  effential  part,  to  adminif- 
ter  all  poffible  comfort,  to  thofe  whom  fuffering 
may  have  made  attentive  and  docile,  and  wil- 
ling to  take  health  upon  the  terms  it  is  poffible  to 
have  it. 

Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  cure  not 
only  the  gout,  but  mod  other  chronic  difeafes* 
Antimony  and  Mercury  elaborated  into  poifons 
by  chemiftry  have  been  adminiftered,  particu- 
larly the  folution  of  fublimate  has  torn  many  a 
ftomach  to  rags,  fo  that  it  could  never  bear  com- 
mon food  afterwards.  The  deadly  night-fhade, 
and  hemlock,  and  many  fuch  dreadful  poifons, 
have  been  given  to  reftore  health.  The  inten* 
tion  here  feems  to  be,  kill  or  cure,  to  raife  a 
violent  agitation  or  fever  in  the  body,  in  hopes 
it  may  prove  ftrong  enough  to  throw  off  the  dif- 
gafe  and  medicine  together.  The  effeel  has  ever 
been,  notwithftanding  a little  apparent  relief 
from  the  fir  ft  efforts,  that  it  has  funk  under  both 
loads,  much  fooner  than  by  the  difeafe  alone. 

Can  a.ny  one  in  his  fenfes  fuppofe  that  difeafes 


a man 


[ 44  J 


a man  has  been  his  whole  life  contracting,  and 
to  which  he  is  adding  every  day  by  perfeverance 
in  unwholefome  diet,  and  bad  habits,  are  to  be 
thus  removed  ? Or  that  they  will  not  return,  be 
they  conjured  away  ever  fo  often,  whilft  he  con- 
tinues the  fame  mode  of  life,  that  brought  them 
on  at  firfl  ? 

What  then  is  to  be  done  P How  and  in  what 
manner  are  chronic  difeafes  to  be  cured,  and 
health  reftored  and  eflabl ifhed  ? The  remedies 
are  obvious,  a&ivity,  temperance,  and  peace  of 
mind.  It  will  be  faid,  the  remedies  are  obvious, 
but  impra&icable.  Would  you  bid  the  feeble 
cripple,  who  cannot  ftand,  take  up  his  bed  and 
walk  ? The  man  who  has  loft  all  appetite,  ab- 
ftain  ? And  the  fleeplefs  wretch  racked  with 
pain  enjoy  peace  of  mind  ? No  certainly  ; I am 
not  fo  abfurd.  Thefe  mull  be  aftifted  by  medi- 
cine : and  if  they  have  not  exhaufted  all  its 
power  already,  a little  refpite  may  be  obtained, 
that,  with  other  aids  co-operating,  may  be 
greatly  improved  to  their  advantage ; and  if 
rightly  employed,  they  may  get  on  from  ftrength 
to  ftrength,  till  they  recover  per fe£l  health.  But 
it  is  not  my  defign  to  expatiate  upon  that  parti- 
cular medical  relief  which  every  chronic  difeafe 
may  require.  My  prefent  purpofe,  is  to  fhew 
that  the  gout,  in  moft  of  its  ftages,  may  be  cur- 
ed, a prefent  fit  relieved,  its  return  for  ever 
fafely  prevented,  and  the  patient  eflablifhed,  in 
perfefl  health. 


Let 


[ 45  ] 


Let  usfuppofe  the  cafe  of  a man  from  forty  to 
fifty  years  of  age,  who'  has  had  at  leaft  twenty 
fits  of -the  gout ; by  which  mod  of  hisjoints  have 
been  fo  clogged  and  diflurbed,  as  to  make  walk- 
ing or  any  kind  of  motion  very  uneafy  : let 
him  have  had  it  fometimes  in  his  fiomach,  a lit- 
tle in  his  head,  and  often  all  over  him,  fo  as  to 
make  him  univerfally  fick,  and  low  fpirited, 
efpecially  before  a regular  fit  has  come  to  relieve 
him.  This  I apprehend  to  be  as  bad  a cafe  as 
we  need  propofe,  it  will  not  be  expected,  that 
every  old  cripple  whofe  joints  are  burnt  to  chalk, 
and  his  bones  grown  together,  who  muft  be  car- 
ried from  his  hed  to  his  table  and  back  a^ain. 
fhould  be  propofed  as  an  objeft. 

If  the  point  be  to  affuage  the  violent  ragancr 
of  a prefent  paroxyfm  ; this  may  be  fafely  done 
by  giving  fome  foft  laxative,  neither  hot  nor 
cold,  but  warm,  either  in  fmall  dofes  repeated 
lo  as  to  move  the  patient  once  or  twice  in  twen- 
ty-four hours,  or  by  a larger  dofe  oftener  in  lefs 
time,  according  to  the  firength  and  exigency. 
This  may  be  followed  by  a few  lenient  abforbent 
correktors  of  acrimony  or  even  gentle  anodynes  : 
proper  cataplafms  mayalfo  be  fafely  applied  to  the 
raging  part,  which  often  a Ullage  pain  furprizing- 
1 v ; with  as  much  mild  and  fpontaneoufly  dif- 
folvsng  nourifhment  as  may  keep  the  [pints from 
finking  too  low.  But  I would  wilh  them  to 
fink  a little,  and  exhort  the  pa  tent  to  bear  that 
lownefs  with  patience  and  refignation,  till  na- 
ture, 


[ 46  ] 

lure,  affifted  by  foft  and  fucculent  food,  can  have 
time  to  relieve  him.  This  eafy  method  of  treat- 
ing a fit  of  the  gout  would  anfwer  in  any  age; 
and  if  the  patient  was  young  and  vigorous,  and 
the  pain  violent,  there  could  be  no  danger  in 
taking  away  a little  blood.  Thus  in  two  or 
three  days  time  I have  of  en  feen  a fevere  fit 
made  tolerable.  And  this  is  a better  way  of 
treating  it  with  regard  to  future  confequences, 
than  fuflfering  it  to  take  its  courfe  : for  the  fooner 
the  joints  are  relieved  from  diftention  and  pain, 
the  kls  danger  there  is  of  their  being  calcined 
and  utterly  deftroyed.  But  infiead  of  this,  the 
general  pratiice  is  quite  the  reverie.  Oh  ! keep 
up  your  fpirits,  they  cry;  keep  it  out  of  vour 
flomach  at  all  events  ; where,  whenever  it  rages 
in  a difiant  part,  it  is  not  at  all  inclined  to  come. 
As  you  cannot  eat,  you  muff  drink  the  more 
freely.  So  they  take  cordials,  ftrong  wines,  and 
rich  fpoon-meats.  By  urging  in  this  manner,  a 
great  fever  is  raifed,  the  pain  enraged  and  pro- 
longed ; and  a fit,  that  would  have  ended  fpoma- 
neoufly  in  a week,  protraried  to  a month  or  fix 
weeks.  And  when  it  goes  off  at  laft,  it  leaves 
fuch  obfb  uriion  and  weaknefs  in  the  parts,  as 
cripple  the  man  ever  after. 

But  the  moil  capital  point  of  all,  is  to  prevent 
its  return,  and  to  eflablilh  health.  Moft  men 
would  be  very  wTell  pleafed  could  this  be  done 
by  any  medical  trick,  with  full  liberty  of  living  as 
they  lift. 


I think 


r 47  ] 

I think  it  needlefs  here  to  take  any  pains  to 
fhew  the  inefficacy  of  all  the  common  modes -of 
practice,  vomiting,  purging,  bleeding,  bliflering, 
iffues.  They  have  been  found  ineffectual  not 
only  in  the  gout,  but  all  other  chronic  cafes. 
All  fenfible  praclitior.ers  know  their  effects  aVe 
hut  temporary,  and  that  they  are  meant  only  as 
means  of  prefent  relief.  Let  us  fee  therefore  by 
what  practicable  plan  the  perfon  here  defcribed, 
w'hen  a fit  of  the  gout  is  happily  ended,  may 
prevent  its  return,  and  fo  confirm  his  health  that 
it  ffiall  not  again  be  overfet  by  every  flight 
cold  or  trifling  accident. 

I have  already  Ihewn  that  a certain  degree  of 
bodily  motion  is  neceffary  every  day,  to  raile 
the  circulation  to  that  pitch,  that  will  keep  the 
fine  veffels  open  and  the  old  blood  pure,  and 
alfo  make  new  from  the  frefh  juices.  If  the  pa- 
tient cannot  be  brought  to  this,  he  has  no  chance 
of  recovering  health.  Iftheiefore  he  can  nei- 
ther v\alk  nor  ride  at  all,  he  muff  by  degrees  be 
brought  to  do  both,  in  the  following  manner: 
Let  a handy  aCtive  fervant  or  two  be  employed 
to  rub  him  all  over  as  he  lies  in  bed  with  flan- 
nels, or  flannel  gloves,  fumigated  with  gums 
and  fpices,  which  will  contribute  greatly  to  brace 
and  flrengthen  his  nerves  and  fibres,  and  move 
his  blood  without  any  fatigue  to  himfelf.t  This 

may 

+ A little  iriftion  may  have  little  or  no  effe£>,  but  long  con- 
tinued, and  repeated  olten,  with  fumigated  flannels,  it  will  do 
more  to  recover  health,  and  fupport  it  afterwards,  than  raoft 
other  things  or  methods.  It  promotes  circulation  and  perfpira- 


[ 48  J 

may  take  up  from  five  to  ten  minutes  at  firft,  but 
mud  be  repeated  five  or  fix  times  a day,  fuppof- 
ing  him  totally  unable  'o  help  himfelf.  But  if 
he  can  walk  an  hundred  yards  only,  it  will  for- 
ward him  greatly  to  walk  thofe  hundred  yards 
every  two  hours ; and  if  he  can  bear  a carriage, 
let  him  go  out  in  it  every  dav,  till  he  begins  to 
be  tired.  The  firft  day  or  two  this  may  fatigue 
him  ; but  if  he  has  patience  to  perfevere  to  the 
fourth,  I dare  promife  him  an  increafe  of 
ftrength ; which  he  muft  employ,  as  young 
merchant  do  a little  money,  to  get  more.  Thus 
he  muft  go  on  rubbing,  walking,  and  tiding  a 
little  more  and  more  every  day,  flopping  always 
upon  the  firft  fenfation  of  wearinefs  to  reft  a 
little,  till  he  be  able  to  walk  two  or  three  miles 
at  a ftretch.  or  ride  ten  without  any  wearinefs  at 
all.  This  is  recommended  with  an  intention  to 
diflodge  and  throw  off  all  remains  of  crude 
gouty  concretions  that  may  have  obftrufted  his 
joints,  or  lain  concealed  in  any  of  the  recedes  of 
his  body  ; to  free  the  circulation  and  all  its  fie- 
cretions,  perfpirations,  and  difeharges ; and 
though  this  intention  can  be  but  very  dcfedtivelv 
ar.fwered  by  medicines,  it  may  be  aft: fled  and 
greatly  promoted  by  a few  well-chofen  mild  an- 
timonial,  abfoibertt  orfaponaceous  deobftruems,  ■ 
that,  like  putting  fhot  o.  grave!  into  a bottle, 

with 

tvon,  opens  the  pores,  forces  the  fine  veffels,  firains  and  pun  - 
ties  the  blood,  and  tbl^withont  the  alfilbncc  cf  any  interna!  In- 
RiSlaticn.  It  is  this  that  keeps  horfes  in  tolerable  heal'li  w :;h 
v;vy  little  exert  i-re. 


[ 49  ] 


with  a good  deal  of  agitation  will  greatly  help 
to  make  it  clean,  but  without  agitation  will  do 
nothing. 

While  we  are  thus  endeavouring  to  refolve 
all  old  obftrudtions,  to  open  the  fine  veffels,  and 
ftrain  and  purify  the  blood,  and  by  degrees  to 
enable  a man  to  ufe  a certain  degree  of  exercife 
every  day ; great  care  mull  be  taken  in  the 
choice  of  his  diet,  that  no  new  acrimony  be 
added  to  the  old.  His  food  mud  be  foft,  mild, 
and  in  moderate  quantity,  fo  as  to  give  the  leafi: 
poflible  labour  to  the  ftomach  and  bowels ; that 
it  may  neither  turn  four,  nor  bitter,  nor  rancid, 
nor  any  way  degenerate  from  thofe  qualities  ne- 
celfary  to  make  good  blood.  Such  things  are  at 
firft,  new-laid  eggs  boiled  very  lightly,  tripe, 
calves  feet,  chicken,  partridge,  rabbits,  mod 
forts  of  white  mild  fifh,  fucli  as  whiting,  or  cod, 
and  all  forts  of  fhell  fifli,  particularly  oyfters  rate. 
Very  foon  he  will  be  flrong  enough  to  eat  beef, 
veal,  mutton,  lamb,  pork,  venifon  ; but  thefe 
mull  all  be  kept  till  they  are  tender,  and  eaten 
without  any  compounded  fauces  or  pickles 
whatever:  inftead  of  which,  boiled  or  Hewed 
vegetables,  and  fallads  of  lettuce  and  endive, 
may  be  ufed : and  the  luxury  that  is  not  un- 
wholfome  may  be  allowed,  light  puddings,  cuf- 
tards,  creams,  blanc-manger,  and  ripe  fruits  of 
all  kinds  and  feafons.  But  becaufe  wine  un- 
doubtedly produces  nine  in  ten  of  all  the  gouts  in 
the  world,  it  mull  be  taken  very  fparingly. 

Vol.  XXVI.  C 


The 


[ 50  ] 

The  feverity  of  thefe  efforts  need  be  corn!* 
nued  no  longer  than  the  difeafe  or  the  effefts  of 
it  remain.  When  the  patient  {hall  have  reco- 
vered his  ftrength,  he  may  preferve  it  upon  the 
following  plan. 

He  muff  never  lofe  fight  of  the  three  great 
principles  of  health,  a&ivity,  temperance,  and 
peace  of  mind.  With  thefe  ever  in  view,  he 
may  eat  and  drink  of  any  thing  : but  his  diet 
muff  be  plain,  fimple,  folid  and  tender.  He 
muff  eat  but  of  one  thing  or  two  at  moll  at  a 
meal,  and  this  will  foon  bring  him  to  be  fatisfied 
with  about  half  his  ufual  quantity.  For  all  men 
eat  twice  as  much  as  they  ought  if  provoked 
by  variety.  He  muft  drink  but  little  of  any  li- 
quor : the  drier  every  man’s  diet  is,  the  better. 
He  muft  drink  little  wine.  Inftead  of  fupper, 
any  good  ripe  fruit  of  the  feafon  would  be  very 
falutary,  preventing  coflivenefs,  and  correcting, 
and  carrying  off  the  heats  and  crudities  of  his 
indigeftion. 

His  aClivity  need  he  no  more  than  to  perfe- 
vere  in  tire  habit  of  rubbing  all  over  night  and 
morning  for  eight  or  ten  minutes,  and  walking 
three  or  four  miles  every  day,  or  riding  ten,  or 
ufing  any  exereife  equivalent  to  it.  In  bad 
weather  I can  fee  no  evil  in  throwing  a cloak 
round  his  fhoulders  and  walking  even  in  the 
rain  ; the  only  difficulty  is  to  fummon  refolution 
enough  to  venture  out ; and  a little  ufe  would 
rake  off  all  danger  of  catching  cold.  If  he 

dares 


[ 51  ] 

dares  not  rifcjue  this,  fome  fuecedaneum  muff  be 
ufed  within  doors  ; more  efpecially  when  bad 
weather  continues  any  time.  I recommend  it 
to  all  men  to  wafh  their  feet  every  day,  the 
gouty  in  particular;  and  not  to  lie  a-bed  above 
feven  hours  in  fummer,  and  eight  at  moll  in 
winter. 

Some  perhaps  may  fay,  This  plan  of  yours  is 
very  fimple  : but  will  fuch  a regimen  cure  the 
gout,  hone,  dropfy  ? Will  it  repair  broken  con- 
Ifitutions  and  reflore  old  invalids  to  health  ? My 
anfwer  is,  that  if  I may  truft  the  experience  of 
my  whole  life,  and  above  all  the  experience  I 
have  had  in  my  own  perfon,  having  not  only 
got  rid  of  the  gout,  of  which  I have  had  four 
fevere  fits  in  my  younger  days,  but  alfo  emerged 
from  the  lowefl  ebb  of  life,  that  a man  could 
poffibly  be  reduced  to  by  colic,  jaundice,  and  a 
complication  of  complaints,  and  recovered  per- 
fect health;  w'hich  I have  now  uninterruptedly 
enjoyed  above  ten  years  : I fay,  if  I may  rely 
upon  all  this,  I may  promife  that  the  plan  here 
recommended,  afhfled  at  firff  with  the  collateral 
aids  of  medicine,  purfued  with  refolution  and 
patience,  will  certainly  procure  to  others  the 
fame  benefits  I received  from  it. 

What  can  the  belt  phyfician  do  more  than 
difeover  to  his  patients  the  real  caufe  of  their 
difeafes?  you  will  fay,  he  muff  find  a remedy: 
he  will  as  long  as  he  can.  But  I will  tell  you  a 
fecret:  his  remedies  are  chiefly  evacuations ; and 
C 2 as 


[ 52  ] 


as  long  as.  your  body  can  bear  fcouring  and 
cleanfing  he  will  do  you  fome  apparent  fervice ; 
but  when  it  begins  to  wear  out,  his  remedies  will 
anfwer  no  longer.  You  mull  not  repeat  the  caufe 
fo  often  ; for  he  cannot  build  up  as  fall  as  you 
can  pull  down.  In  Ihort,  you  change  all  your 
bad  habits  for  good  ones ; and  if  you  have  pati- 
ence to  wait  the  flow  operations  of  nature  pro- 
perly afli  fled,  you  will  have  no  reafon  to 
rem-et. 

I fay  this  to  invalids  in  general : for  thus  may 
be  cured  not  only  the  gout,  but  very  bad  rheu- 
matifms,  ifchiaticas,  rickets,  Hone,  jaundice, 
dropfy,  aflhma,  cachexies,  and  complications  of 
many  kinds.  Whatever  chronic  difeafes  will 
not  give  way  to  this  method,  will  be  found  too 
hard  for  any  other.  And  fhould  there  be  a par- 
ticular cafe,  in  which  fome  fortunate  violence 
may  apparently  fucceed  for  a time.,  the  return  of 
the  evil,  or  change  to  fomething  worfe,  cannot 
be  fo  well  guarded  againh,  as  by  fome  fuch  rati- 
onal and  natural  inftitution  of  life. 


A SHORT 


[ 5 3 ] 


A SHORT 

E N G L I S H 

GRAMMA  R. 


SECT.  I. 

Of  Letters. 

i.  T ETTERS  are  either  vowels  or  confonant; , 
• ^ 2.  A vowel  is,  a letter  that  may  be  pro- 

nounced alone,  as  a,  e,  i,  o,  u : a confonant  is,  a 
letter  that  cannot  be  pronounced  without  a 
vowel,  asb,  c,  d. 

3.  A diplkong  is,  two  or  more  vowels  put 
together  and  pronounced  like  one,  as  au,  owe. 

4.  A fllable  is,  a vowel  or  dipthong,  either  (in- 
gle, or  pronounced  with  a confonant, 

5.  There  are  in  Englifi  24  letters : a,  b,  c,  d, 
e,  f,  g.  h,  i,  j,  k,  1,  m,  n,  o,  p,  q,  r,  s,  t,  u,  v,  w,  x, 
y,  z. 

C 3 SECT, 


[ 54  J 


SECT.  II. 

Gf  Nouns. 

r | ’'HERE  are  feven  forts  of  words,  a noun, 
-*■  a pronoun,  a verb,  a participle,  an  adverb, 
a conjvti&ion,  and  a prepofition. 

2.  The  three  former  of  thefe  are  declinable, 
that  is,  often  vary  their  terminations. 

3.  A noun  is,  the  name  of  a thing. 

4.  Nouns  are  either  fubfantives  or  adjeelives. 

5.  A fubjlantiue  is,  a noun  that  may  ftand  by 
itfelf,  as  a man.  An  adjeftive  is,  a noun  that  is 
always  joined  with  a fubjlantive,  as  good. 

6.  A noun  JubJlantive  has  commonly  either  a 
or  the  fet  before  it,  as  a hone,  the  book. 

7.  There  are  three  genders,  the  mafcukne , the 
feminine,  and  the  neuter . 

8.  But  nouns  in  Enghfi  have  no gend  rs. 

9.  A cafe  is,  the  variation  of  the  lait  fy liable. 

10.  But  nouns  in  Enghfi  have  no  cafes . 

11.  The  number  of  nouns  are  two  : the  fingu- 
lar , which  fpeaks  of  one  thing,  as  a hone; 
the  plural,  which  fpeaks  of  more  than  one,  as 
{tones. 

12.  The  plural  number  of  nouns  is  formed,  by 
adding  s to  the fngular,  as  a book,  books, 

13.  But 


[ *55  3 

fg.  But  in  nouns  ending  in  ch,  lh,  fs  or  x,  by 
adding  es,  as  a fox,  foxes. 

14.  Nouns  ending  in  f or  fe  change  it  into  ves, 
as  a wife,  wives. 

15.  Only  thofe  ending  in  oof,  ff,  rf,  and  a few 
others,  are  regular : as  a roof,  roofs. 

16.  Nouns  ending  in  y form  the  plural  in  ies 
at  a city,  cities. 

17.  Only  thofe  ending  in  a dipthong  are  regu- 
lar : as  a boy,  boys. 

18.  A man  has  in  the  plural,  men  ; a woman, 
women;  a child,  children;  an  ox,  oxen;  a 
goofe,  geefe ; a foot,  feet ; a tooth,  teeth ; a 
moufe,  mice  ; a loufe,  lice;  a die,  dice  ; a penny, 
pence. 

19.  All  adjeElives  are  indeclinable,  having  no 
variation  either  of  gender,  cafe,  or  number. 

20.  Adjeclives  have  three  degrees  olcompamfon, 
the  poftive,  comparative,  and  fuperlative. 

21.  The  comparative  degree  is  formed  by  add- 
ing er  to  the  poftive-,  the  fuperlative  by  adding 
ell : as  rich,  richer,  richeft. 


22.  But  in  the  following  adjeflives  thus'*. 


good 

better 

beft 

bad 

worfe 

worft 

little 

lefs 

leall 

much,  many 

more 

molt 

c4 

1 

SECT. 


[ 56  ] 


SECT.  III. 


Of  Pronouns. 


i.  A Pronoun  is  a fort  of  word  which  is  put 
d-  for  a noun . 

2.  There  are  13,  I,  thou,  he  ; my  or  mine  ; 
thy  or  thine;  his,  her;  our,  your,  their;  this, 
that,  which,  who. 

3.  My,  thy,  his,  her,  our,  your,  their,  this,  that, 
which,  are  indeclinable. 

4.  The  other  pronouns  are  declined  thus  : 

Singular  Plural 

I,  me  we,  us 

,5.  Thou,  thee  ye,  you 

6.  He,  mafc.  £he,  fem.  if 


neut.  him,  mafc.  her,  (.they,  them 


fem.  it,  neut.  j 

7.  Who,  whom,  is  either  fingular  ox  plural. 

8.  This  has  in  the  plural , thefe\  that,  thofe. 

9.  Her,  our,  your,  their,  at  the  end  of  a fen- 
tence  take  s,  as,  it  is  hers. 

10.  That  is  often  ufed  for  who  or  which  : as, 
“ the  man  that  fpoke,”  for,  who  fpoke. 

11.  We  fay,  “ thou,  thee,”  when  we  fpeak  to 
God  ; “ you,”  when  we  fpeak  to  men. 

12.  Pronouns  have  alfo  three  perfons.  I,  we, 
are  of  the  firft  pcrfon',  thou,  you,  of  the  fecond  ■, 
and  all  the  reft  of  the  third , 


SECT. 


[ 57  ] 


SECT.  IV. 

Of  Verbs. 

l.  A Verb  is  a fort  of  word,  that  expreffes 
either  doing,  and  then  it  is  called  an 
a&ive,  buffering,  and  then  it  is  called  a paffwe,  or 
being,  and  then  it  is  called  a neuter  verb. 

2.  Verbs  are  not  only  varied  by  numbers  and 
perfons,  but  alfo  by  moods , tenfes,  and  conjuga- 
tions. 

3.  There  are  four  moods:  1.  The  indicative , 
which  fhews  that  a thing  is  done  : 2.  The  i?npa- 
rative,  which  commands  it  to  be  done  : 3.  The 
[ubjunElive,  which  generally  follows  another  verb, 
and  expreffes  that  a thing  may,  can  or  fhould  be 
done  : and  4.  The  injwitive,  which  has  neither 
number  nor  perfon. 

4.  There  are  five  tenfes : 1.  The  prefent  tenfe , 
which  fpeaks  of  the  prefent  time  : 2.  The  preter- 
imperfedl  which  fpeaks  of  the  time  not  perfectly 
paft:  3.  The  preterperfeB,  which  fpeaks  of  the 
time  perfeaiy  paft:  4.  The  preterpluperfeft , 
which  fpeaks  of  the  time  that  is  more  than  per- 
feaiy.paft:  and  5.I  he  future,  which  fpeaks  of 
the  time  to  come. 

5'  A conjugation  is,  the  manner  of  varying  the 
C 5 begin- 


beginning  or  ending  of  verbs , in  their  feveral 
vioods. 

6.  There  is  but  one  conjugation  in  Englijh . 


SECT.  V. 

Of  Auxiliary  Verbs. 
i.  HOSE  are  called  auxiliary  verbs , which. 


■A.  are  tifed  in  forming  the  moods  and  tenfes 
of  all  other  verbs. 

2.  There  are  two  auxiliary  verbs,  to  have  and 
,to  be,  befide  the  defective  ones  following  : 

3.  Indie,  pref.  fing.  I can,  thou  canft,  he  can  : 
Plur.  We  can,  ye  can,  they  can  : 

Imperfeft.  fing.  I cou’drthou  cou’dft,  he  cou'd  : 
Plur.  We  cou’d,  ye  cou’d,  they  cou’d. 

4.  Ind.  pref.  I may,  thou  inayft,  he  may — 03c. 
Imp.  I might,  thou  mighteft,  he  might — 03c. 

5.  Inch  pref.  I fhall,  thou  Cialt,  he  fhall — 03c. 
Imp.  I fhott’d,  thou  fliou’dll,  he  Ihcu’d* — 03c. 

6.  Ind.  pref.  I will,  thou  wilt,  he  will — 03c. 
Imp.  I wou’d,  thou  wou’d  ft,  he  wou’d — 03c. 

7.  Ind.  pref.  and  imp.  I mull,  thou  mull-St. 

8.  Ind.  pref.  and  imp,  I ought,  thou  oughteft — 


g,  To  have  is  conjugated  thus : 


Indicative 


[ 59  ] 


Indicative  mood. 

Pref.  fing.  I have,  thou  haft,  he  has  or  hath. 
Piur.  We  have,  ye  have,  they  have. 

Imp.  fing.  I had,  thou  hadft,  he  had  : 

Plur.  We  had,  ye  had,  they  had. 

Perfeft,  fing.  I have  had,  thou  haft  had,  he  has 
had : 

Plur.  We  have  had,  ye  have  had,  they  have 
had. 

Preterplup.  fing.  I had  had,  thou  hadft  had,  he 
had  had  : 

Plur.  We  had  had,  ye  had  had,  they  had  had. 

Fut.  fing.  I (hall  or  will  have,  thou  fhalt  or 
wilt  have,  he  ihall  or  will  have. 

Plur.  We  ihall  or  will  have,  ye  fhall  or  will 
have,  they  Ihall  or  will  have. 

Imperative  mood. 

Sing.  Have  thou.  Plur.  Have  ye. 

SubjtinHive  mood. 

Pref.  fing.  I may  have,  thou  mayft  have,  he 
may  have : 

Plur.  We  may  have,  ye  may  have,  they  may 
have. 

Imp.  fing.  I might  have,  thou.mighteft  have, 
he  might  have  : 

Plur.  We  might  have,,  ye  might  have,  they, 
might  have. 

Per.  fing.  I may  have  , had,  thou  mayft  have 
had,  he  may  have  had  : 

Plur.  We  may  have  had,  ye  may  have  had, 
they  may  have  had. 

C.6.,  Preterplup, 


[ 6o  ] 

Preterplup.  fing.  I might  have  had,  thou 
mighteft  have  had.  he  might  have  had  : 

Plur.  We  might  have  had,  ye  might  have  had, 
hey  might  have  had. 

Put.  fing.  I (hon’d  have,  or  have  had;  thou 
(hou'dft  have,  or  have  had ; he  fhou’d  have,  or 
have  had  : 

Plur.  We  (hou’d  have,  or  have  had ; ye  (hou’d 
have,  or  have  had ; they  (hou’d  have,  or  have 
had. 

Infinite  mood. 

Prefi.  To  have.  Perf.  To  have  had. 

Participles. 

Aftive,  having.  Paffive,  had. 

p.  A participle  is  a fort  of  word  that  has  num- 
bers, genders  and  cafes  like  a noun,  and  tenfes  like 
a verb. 

10.  Some  participles  are  active,  fome  paffive. 

1 1.  Again  : fome  are  of  the  prejent,  and  fome 
of  the  preterperjeEl  tenfe. 

12.  To  be  is  conjugated  thus : 

Indicative  mood. 

Pref.  fing.  I am,  thou  art,  he  is  : 

Plur.  W e are,  ye  are,  they  are. 

Imp.  fing.  I was,  thou  waft,  he  was: 

Plur.  We  were,  ye  we  e,  they  were. 

Per.  fing.  I have  been,  thou  haft  been,  he  has 
been : 

Plur.  We  have  been,  ye  have  been,  they  have 
been. 


Pre- 


r 61  ] 


Preterplup.  fing.  I had  been,  thou  hadft  been, 
he  hadbeen : 

Plur.  We  had  been,  ye  had  been,  they  had 
been. 

Fut.  fmg.  I will  or  fhall  be,  thou  wilt  be,  he 
will  be  : 

Plur.  We  will  be,  ye  will  be,  they  will  be. 

Imperative  mood. 

Sing.  Be  thou.  Plur.  Be  ye. 

Subjundtive  mood. 

Pref.  fing.  I may  be,  thou  mayft  be,  he  may 
be : 

Plur.  We  may  be,  ye  may  be,  they  may  be. 

Imp.  fing.  I were,  thou  wert,  he  were  : or,  I 
might  be,  thou  mightefi  be,  he  might  be  : 

Plur.  We  were,  ye  were,  they  were:  or,  we 
might  be,  ye  might  be,  they  might  be. 

Perf.  fing.  I may  have  been,  thou  mayft  have 
been,  he  may  have  been  : 

Plur.  We,  ye,  they  have  been. 

Preterplup.  I might  have  been,  thou  mighteft 
have  been,  he  might  have  been: 

Plur.  We,  ye,  they  might  have  been. 

Fut.  fing.  I Ihou’d  have  been,  thou  fhou’dft 
have  been,  he  fhou’d  have  been  : 

Plur.  We,  ye,  they  Ihou’d  have  been. 

Infinite. 

Perf.  To  be.  Perf.  To  have  been. 

Participles. 

Adlive,  Being.  Paffive.  Been. 

13.  The 


[ 62  ] 

13-  The  old  auxiliary  verb,  to  do,  is  conjugated. 
thus : 

Indie,  pref.  fing.  I do,  thou  doll:,  he  does  or 
doth : 

Plur.  We,  ye,  they  do. 

Imp.  fing.  I did,  thou  didll,  he  did : 

Plur.  We,  ye,  they  did. 

Participles  : allive,  doing.  Paffive,  doite. 


SECT.  VI. 

Of  Regular  Verbs. 

j.  A Regular  verb  is  conjugated  thus: 
dA-  Indicative  mood. 

Pref.  fing.  I fear,  thou  fearell,  he  feareth  of 
fears : 

Plur.  We  fear,  ye  fear,  they  fear. 

Imp.  fing.  I feared  or  fear’d,  thou  fearedlt,  he 
feared  : 

Plur.  We  feared,  ye  feared,  they  feared. 

Perf,  fing.  I have  feared,  thou  haft  feared,  he 
hath  feared: 

Plur.  We  have  feared,  ye  have  feared,  they 
have  feared. 

Preterpl.  fing.  I had  feared,  thou  hadft  feared, 
he  had  feared ; 


Plur. 


C 63  ] 

Plur.  We  had  feared,  ye  had  feared,  they  had 
feared. 

Fut.  fing.  I fhall  or  will  fear,  thou  (halt  or  wilt 
fear,  he  fhall  or  will  fear: 

Plur,  We,  ye,  they  fhall  or  will  fear. 

Imperative  mood. 

Sing.  Fear  thou.  Plur.  Fear  yes. 

Subjunhlrve  mood. 

Pref.  fmg.  I may  fear,  thou  mayff  fear — 

Imp.  fmg.  I might  fear,  thou  might  eft  fear- 
er. 

Perf.  fing.  I may  have  feared — &c. 

Preterpl.  fing.  I might  have  feared — £?c. 

Fut.  fmg.  I fh oil’d  have  feared — &c. 

Infinitive  mood. 

Pref.  To  fear.  Perf.  To  have  feared; 

Participles. 

Aftive,  fearing.  Paflive,  feared. 

The  pajfwe  voice  is  only,  the  auxiliary  verb  to 
be  conjugated  throughout  with  th a-.pajjive  parti - 
tiple,. 


SECT.  VII. 

Of  Irregular  Verbs. 

J.  r'J  ''HE  following  verbs  form  the  imperfeci 
ienfe  and  the  participle  pajfwe  irregularly. 

a.  Where 


C 64  ] 

2.  Where  no  participle  is  fet  down,  it  is  the 
fame  with  the  imperfeEl. 

Abide  (Imp.)  abode.  Bear  (Imp.)  bore,  bare, 
(Part.)  born.  Become,  became,  become.  Begin, 
began,  begun.  Bend,  bent.  Befeech.  befought. 
Bid,  bad.  Bind,  bound.  Bite,  bit.  Bleed,  bled, 
blooded.  Blow,  blew,  blown.  Brake,  broke, 
broken.  Breed,  bred.  Bring,  brought.  Burn, 
burnt.  Buy,  bought.  Build,  built.  Catch,  caught. 
Chide,  chid.  Chufe,  chofe,  chofen.  Cleave, 
clave  or  clove,  cloven.  Cling,  clung.  Creep, 
crept.  Deal,  dealt.  Die  (Part.)  dead.  Dig,  dug. 
Draw,  drew,  drawn.  Drink,  drank,  or  drunk, 
drunken.  Drive,  drove,  driven.  Fall,  fell,  fallen. 
Feed,  fed.  Feel,  felt.  Fight,  fought.  Find,  found. 
Flee,  fled.  Fly,  flew,  flown.  Fling,  flung.  For- 
fake,  forfook,  forfaken.  Freeze,  froze,  frozen. 
Get,  got.  Give,  gave,  given.  Go,  went,  gone. 
Grind,  ground.  Grow,  grew,  grown.  Hang, 
hung.  Hide,  hid.  Hold,  held.  Keep,  kept.  Know, 
knew,  known.  Lie,  laid.  Lead,  led.  Leave,  left. 
Lend,  lent.  Lofe,  loft.  Make,  made.  Meet,  met. 
Rend,  rent.  Ring,  rung.  Rife,  rofe.  Run,  ran. 
See,  faw,  feen.  Seek,  fought.  Sell,  fold.  Send, 
fent.  Shake,  fhook.  Shine,  fhone.  Shoot,  fhot. 
Shrink,  flirunk.  Sing,  fang  or  fung.  Sit,  fat. 
Slay,  flew,  flam.  Sleep,  flept.  Slide,  Aid.  Sling, 
flunk.  Slink,  flunk.  Smite,  fmote,  fmitten. 
Speak,  fpoke,  fpoken.  Speed,  fped.  Spend, 
fpent.  Spin,  fpun.  Spring,  fprung.  Stand,  flood. 
Steal,  ftole,  flolen.  Stick,  ftuck.  Stink,  flunk. 

Stride. 


[ 65  ] 

Stride,  Arid.  Strike,  ftruck.  String,  flrung: 
Strive,  drove.  Swear,  fwore,  fworn.  Sweep, 
fwept.  Swim,  fwum.  Swing,  fwung.  Take,  took. 
Teach,  taught.  Tear,  tore,  torn.  Tell,  told. 
Think,  thought.  Throw,  threw,  thrown.  Tread, 
trod.  Wear,  wore,  worn.  Weave,  wove,  woven. 
Weep,  wept.  Win,  won.  Wind,  wound.  Work, 
wrought.  Wring,  wrung.  Write,  writ  or  wrote, 
written. 

3.  A verb  muft  always  be  of  the  fame  number 
and  perfon , with  the  noun  or  pronoun  going  be- 
fore it : as  “ I love  you.  Chriftians  love  one 
another.” 


SECT.  VIII. 

Oj Adverbs,  Prepositions,  and  Con- 
junctions. 

1.  A N adverb  is  a fort  of  word  which  is  added 
to  a verb , to  perfeft,  explain  or  inlarge 

its  fenfe. 

2.  Adverbs  are  compared  like  noun  adjeElives. 

3.  Among  thefe  may  be  reckoned  thofe 
words  expreffing  fome  fudden  paffion,  which  are 
commonly  called  interjeElions  : as,  ah  ! oh ! 

4.  A prepojition  is  a fort  of  word  which  is  com- 

monly 


r 66  ] 

monly  fet  before  another,  or  compounded  with 
it,  as,  I go  to  London, 

5.  A conjundion  is  a fort  of  word,  which  joins 
words  or  fentences  together  : as  and,  or. 

I cannot  but  fubfcribe  to  the  remark  of  a late 
eminent  writer,  That  “ in  the  {implicit}’. of  its 
frrudlure,  the  Englijli  far  exceeds  all  modern 
tongues : and  I verily  believe,  all  ancient  too : 
at  lead  all  that  I have  any  acquaintance  with, 
Greek  and  Latin  in  particular. 


DIREC- 


t 67  ] 


DIRECTIONS 


CONCERNING 

PRONUNCIATION  ^GESTURE. 


Sect  I. 

I Hew  ice  may  /peak  fo  as  to  be  heard,  without  diffi  ■ 
cal/y,  and  with  pleafure. 

1.  IDEFORE  we  enter  upon  particular  rules, 
I would  advife  all  who  can,  Firft,  To 
Eudy  the  Art  of  Speaking  betimes , and  to 
pradife  it  as  often  as  poffible,  before  they  have 
contracted  any  of  the  common  imperfeftions  or 
vices  of  fpealdng.  For  thefe  may  eafily  be  avoid- 
ed at  firE,  but  when  they  are  once  learned,  it  is 
extremely  difficult  to  unlearn  them.  I advife  all 
1 young  perfons,  2.  To  be  governed  in  fpeaking 
as  in  all  other  things,  by  reafon  rather  than 
example,  and  therefore  to  have  an  efpecial  care, 
whom  they  imitate  therein : and  to  imitate  only 

wb#t 


[ 68  ] 

what  is  right  in  their  manner  of  fpeaking,  not 
their  blemilhes  and  imperfe&ions. 

2.  The  firfi:  bufinefs  of  a fpeaker  is,  fo  to 
fpeak,  that  he  may  be  heard  and  underftood 
with  eafe.  In  order  to  this,  it  is  a great  advan- 
tage to  have  a clear,  ftrong  voice  : fuch  at  leaft, 
as  will  fill  the  place  where  you  fpeak,  fo  as  to 
be  heard  by  every  perfon  in  it.  To  llrengthen 
a weak  voice,  read  or  fpeak  fomething  aloud, 
for  at  leaft  half  an  hour  every  morning.  But 
take  care  not  to  {train  your  voice  at  firfi.  Begin 
low  and  raife  it  by  degrees,  to  the  height. 

3.  If  you  are  apt  to  faulter  in  your  fpeech, 
read  fomething  in  private  daily,  and  pronounce 
every  word  and  fyllable  fo  diftinftly,  that  they 
may  all  have  their  full  found  and  proportion.  If 
you_are  apt  to  Hammer  at  fuch  and  fuch  particu- 
lar expreflions,  take  particular  care,  firfi,  to 
pronounce  them  plainly.  When  you  are  once 
able  to  do  this,  you  may  learn  to  pronounce 
them  more  fluently  at  your  leifure. 

The  chief  faults  of  fpeaking  are, 

j.  The  fpeaking  too  loud.  This  is  difagreeable 
to  the  hearers,  as  well  as  inconvenient  for  the 
fpeaker.  For  they  muft  impute  it  either  to  ig- 
norance or  affeflation,  which  is  never  fo  inex- 
cufable  as  in  preaching. 

Every  man’s  voice  Ihould  indeed  fill  the  place 
where  he  fpeaks ; but  if  it  exceeds  its  natural  key, 
it  will  be  neither  fweet,  nor  foft,  nor  agreeable, 
were  it  only  on  this  account,  that  he  cannot 
* then 


[ 69  ] 

then  give  every  word  its  proper  mid  diftinguifh- 
ing  found. 

2.  The  fpeaking  too  low.  This  is,  of  the 
two,  more  difagreeable  than  the  former.  Take 
care  therefore  to  keep  between  the  extremes : 
to  preferve  the  key,  the  command  of  your  voice, 
and  to  adapt  the  loudnefs  of  it,  to  the  place 
where  you  are,  or  the  number  of  perfons  to 
whom  you  fpeak. 

In  order  to  this,  confider  whether  your  voice 
be  naturally  loud  or  low  ; and  if  it  incline  to  ei- 
ther extreme,  correft  this  firit  in  your  ordinary 
converfation.  If  it  be  too  low,  converfe  with 
thofe  that  are  deaf : if  too  loud,  with  thofe  who 
fpeak  foftly. 

3.  The  fpeaking  in  a thick,  cluttering  man- 
ner. Some  perfons  mumble,  or  fwallow  fome 
words  or  fyilables  ; and  do  not  utter  the  reft  arti- 
culately or  diftinfily,  This  is  fometimes  ow- 
ing to  a natural  defeft : fometimes  to  a fudden 
flutter  of  fpirits:  but  oftner  to  a bad  habit. 

To  cure  this,  accuflom  yourfelf  both  in  con- 
verfation and  reading,  to  pronounce  every  word 
diftinflly.  Obferve  how  full  a found  fome  give 
to  every  word,  and  labour  to  imitate  them.  If 
no  other  way  avail,  do  as  DemofMunes  did  ; who 
cured  himfelf  of  this  natural  defefd,  by  repeating 
orations  every  day,  with  pebbles  in  his  mouth. 

4 The  fpeaking  too  faff.  This  is  a common 
fault  ; but  not  a little  one  : particularly  when 
we  fpeak  of  the  things  of  God.  It  may  be  cur- 
ed 


[ 70  ] 

ed  by  habituating  yourfelf,  to  attend  to  the 
Weight,  fenfe  and  propriety  of  every  word  you 
•fpeak. 

5.  The  fpeaking  too  flow,  is  not  a common 
fault  ; and  when  we  are  once  warned  of  it,  it  may 
be  eafily  avoided. 

6.  The  fpeaking  with  an  irregular,  defultory 
and  uneven  voice,  raifed  or  depreft  unnaturally 
or  irnfeafonably.  To  cure  this,  you  fhould  take 
care  not  to  begin  your  periods  either  too  high  or 
too  low:  for  that  would  necelfarilv  lead  you  to 
an  unnatural  and  improper  variation  of  the  voice. 
And  remember,  never  either  to  raife  or  fink 
your  voice,  without  a particular  reafon  : arifing 
either  from  the  length  of  the  period,  or  the  fenfe 
or  fpirit  of  what  you  fpeak. 

7.  But  the  greateft  and  mod  common  fault  of 
all,  is,  fpeaking  with  a tone  : fome  have  a wo* 
manilh,  fqueaking  tone : fome  a finging  or  cant- 
ing one  : fome  an  high,  fwelling,  theatrical  tone, 
laying  too  much  emphafis  on  every  fentence  : 
fome  have  an  awful,  folemn  tone ; others  an 
odd,  whimfical,  whining  one,  not  to  be  ex- 
preft  in  words. 

To  avoid  all  kinds  of  unnatural  tones,  the  on- 
ly rule  is  this,  endeavour  to  fpeak  in  public  juft 
as  you  do  in  common  converfation.  Attend  to 
your  fubjecl,  and  deliver  it  i*j  the  fame  manner, 
as  if  you  were  talking  of  it  to  a friend.  This,  if 
carei ully  obferved,  will  correct  both  this  and  al- 
moft  all  the  other  faults  of  a bad  pronunciation. 

For 


[ 7*  J 


For  a good  pronunciation  is  nothing  but  a na* 
tural,  eafy  and  graceful  variation  of  the  voice, 
fuitable  to  the  natute  and  importance  of  the  fen- 
timents  we  deliver. 

8.  If  you  would  be  heard  with  pleafure,  in  or- 
der to  make  the  deeper  impreffion  on  your  hear- 
ers, i.  Study  to  render  your  voice  as  foft  and 
fweet  as  polTible  : and  the  more,  ifit  be  natural- 
ly harfh,  hoai  fe  or  obftreperous ; which  may  be 
cured  by  conftant  exercife.  By  carefully  ufing 
this  every  morning,  you  may  in  a Ihort  time  wear 
off  thefe  defedls,  and  comraft  fuch  a fmooth 
and  tuneful  delivery,  as  will  recommend  what- 
ever you  fpeak. 

9.  Secondly,  Labour  to  avoid  the  odious  cuf- 
tom  of  coughing  and  fpitting,  while  you  are 
fpeaking.  And  if  at  fome  times  you  cannot 
‘wholly  avoid  it,  yet  take  care  you  do  not  Hop  in 
the  middle  of  a fentence,  but  only  at  fuch  times 
as  will  leaft  interrupt  the  fenfe  of  what  you  are 
delivering;. 

10.  Above  all,  take  care,  Thirdly,  to  vary 

your  voice,  according  to  the  matter  on  which 

you  fpeak.  Nothing  more  grates  the  ear,  than 

a voice  Hill  in  the  fame  kev.  And  yet  nothino- 
I • J J 0 

is  more  common.  Although  this  monotony  is 

not  only  unpleafant  to  the  ear,  but  deltroys  the 

effedl  of  what  is  fpoken. 

11.  The  bell  way  to  learn  how  to  vary  the 
voice,  is,  to  obferve  common  difcourfe.  Take 
notice  how  you  fpeak  yourfelf  in  - ordinary  con- 

verfation. 


[ 72  ] 

verfation,  and  how  others  fpeak  on  various  oc- 
cafions.  After  the  very  fame  manner  you  are  to 
vary  your  voice  in  public,  allowing  for  the 
largenefs  of  the  place,  and  the  diftance  of  the 
hearers. 

SECT.  II. 

General  Rules  for  the  Variation  of  the  Voice. 

1.  The  voice  may  be  varied  three  ways,  Firft, 
as  to  height  or  lownefs,  Secondly,  as  to  vehe- 
mence or  foftnefs,  Thirdly,  as  to  fwiftnefs  or 
flownefs. 

And  Firft,  as  to  height,  a medium  between 
the  extremes  is  carefully  to  be  obferved.  You 
muft  neither  flrain  your  voice,  by  raifing  it  al- 
ways to  the  higheft  note  it  can  reach,  nor  fink 
it  always  to  the  loweft  note,  which  would  be  to 
murmur  rather  than  to  fpeak. 

2.  As  to  vehemence,  have  a care  how  you 
force  your  voice  to  the  laft  extremity.  You  can- 
not hold  this  long,  without  danger  of  its  crack- 
ing, and  failing  you  on  a fudden.  Nor  yet 
ought  you  to  fpeak  in  too  faint  and  remifs  a man- 
ner, which  deltroys  all  the  force  and  energy  of 
what  is  fpoken. 

g.  As  to  fwiftnefs,  you  ought  to  moderate  the 
voice  fo  as  to  avoid  all  precipitation;  otherwife 
you  give  the  hearers  no  time  to  think,  and  fo 
are  not  likely  either  to  convince  or  to  perfuade 

them. 


[ 73  ] 

them.  Yet  neither  fhould  you  fpeak  flower  than 
men  generally  do,  in  common  converfation.  It 
is  a fault,  to  draw  out  your  words  too  flow,  or 
to  make  needlefs  breaks  or  paufes.  Nay  to  drawl 
is  (of  the  two)  worfe  than  to  hurry.  The  fpeech 
ought  not  to  drop,  but  to  flow  along.  But  then 
it  ought  to  flow  like  a gliding  ftream,  not  as  a ra- 
pid torrent. 

4.  Yet  let  it  be  obferved,  that  the  medium  I 
recommend  does  not  confift  in  an  indivifible 
point.  It  admits  of  a confiderable  latitude.  As 
to  the  height  or  lownefs  of  the  voice,  there  are 
five  or  fix  notes  whereby  it  may  be  varied,  be- 
tween the  (higheft  and  the  loweft  : fo  here  is 
abundant  room  for  variation,  without  falling 
into  either-  extreme.  There  is  alfo  fufficient 
room  between  the  extremes  of  violence  and  of 
foftnefs,  to  pronounce  either  more  vehemently 
or  more  mildly,  as  different  fubje&s  may  require. 
And  as  to  fwiftnefs  or  flownefs,  though  you  a- 
void  both  extremes,  you  may  neverthelefs  fpeak 
fafter  or  flower,  and  that  in  feveral  degrees,  as 
beft  anfwers  the  fubjeft  and  paflions  of  your  dif- 
courfe. 

5.  But  it  fliould  likewife  be  obferved,  that  the 
voice  ought,  not  to  ^be  varied  too  haflily  in  any 
of  theferefpefts : but  the  difference  is  to  be  “made 
by  degrees,  and  almoft  infenfibly ; too  fudden  a 
change  being  unnatural  and  affefted,  and  corife- 
quently  difagreeable  to  the  hearers. 

T) 


Vol.  XXVI. 


"•SECT, 


C 74  ] 


SECT.  III. 

Particular  Rules  for  varying  the  Voice. 

1.  If  you  fpeak  of  natural  things,  merely  to 
make  the  hearers  underftand  them,  there  needs 
only  a clear  and  diftinfl  voice.  But  if  you 
would  difplay  the  wifdom  and  power  of  God 
therein,  do  it  with  a flronger  and  more  folemn 
accent. 

2.  The  good  and  honorable  aftions  of  men 
dhould  be  deferibed,  with  a full  and  lofty  accent: 
wicked  and  infamous  actions,  with  a ftrong  and 
'earned  voice,  and  fuch  a tone  as  expreffes 
horror  and  deteflation. 

3.  In  congratulating  the  happy  events  of  life, 
we  fpeak  with  a lively  and  chearful  accent ; in 
relating  misfortunes  (as  in  funeral  orations)  with 
allow  and  mournful  one. 

g.  The  voice  fhould  alfo  be  varied  according 
to  thegreatnefs  or  importance  of  the  fubjeft  ; it 
being  abfurd,  either  to  fpeak  in  a lofty  manner, 
where  the  fubjefl  is  of  little  concern  : or  to 
fpeak  of  great  and  important  affairs,  with  a low, 
unconcerned  and  familiar  voice. 

5.  On  all  occafions  let  the  thing  you  are  to 
fpeak  be  deeply  imprinted  on  vour  own  heart  : 
and  when  you  are  fenftbly  touched  yourfelr,  vou 
will  eafily  touch  others,  by  adjufting  your  voice 
to  every  paffion  which  you  feel. 

6.  Love  is  fhewn  by  a foft,  finooth,  and 
melting  voice  : hate  by  a fliarp  and  lullen  one  : 

joy 


C 75  ] 

joy  by  a full  and  flouring  one  : grief  by  a dull, 
Janguifhing  tone  ; fometimes  interrupted  by  a 
figh  or  groan.  Fear  is  expred  by  a trembling 
and  hefitating  voice  : boldnefs  by  fpeaking  loud 
and  flrong.  Anger  is  {hewn  by  a fharp  and 
impetuous  tone,  taking  the  breath  often,  and 
fpeaking  fhort.  Companion  requires  a foft  and 
fubmiffive  voice. 

7.  After  the  expredion  of  any  violent  pafTion, 
you  fhould  gradually  lower  your  voice  again. 
Keadinefs  in  varying  it  on  all  kinds  of  fubjefts 
as  well  as  pafiions  is  bell  acquired  by  frequently 
reading  or  repeating  aloud,  either  dialogues, 
feleft  plays,  or  fuch  difcourfes  as  come  neared 
to  the  dramatic  flile. 

8.  You  fhould  begin  a difcourfe  low,  both  as 
it  expreffes  modedy,  and  as  it  is  bed  for  your 
voice  and  dreugth  ; and  yet  fo  as  to  be  heard 
by  all  that  are  prefent.  You  may  afterwards 
rife  as  the  matter  fhall  require.  The  audience 
likewife  being  calm  and  unmoved  at  fird)  are 
bed  fuited  by  a cool  and  difpadionate  addrefs. 

9.  Yet  this  rule  admits  of  fome  exceptions. 
For  on  fome  extraordinary  occafions,  you  may 
begin  a difcourfe  abruptly  and  padionately,  and  . 
confequently  with  a warm  and  padionate  ac- 
cent. 

10.  You  may  fpeak  a little  louder,  in  laying 
down  what  you  dedgn  to  prove,  and  explaining 
it  to  your  hearers.  But  you  need  not  fpeak  with 
any  warmth  or  emotion  vet  ; ’ris  enough,  if  you 
fpeak  articulately  and  diflinftly. 

D 2 


1 1.  When 


[ 7^  ] 

n.  When  you  prove  your  point,  and  refute 
your  adverfary’s  objections,  there  is*  need  of 
more  earneflnefs  and  extention  of  voice.  And 
here  chiefly  it  is,  that  you  are  to  vary  vour  voice, 
according  to  the  rules  above  recited. 

12.  A little  paufe  may  then  precede  the  con- 
clufion,  in  which  you  may  gradually  rife  to  the 
utmoft  ftrength  of  pronunciation  ; and  finifh  all 
with  a lively,  chearful  voice  ; expreflingjoy  and 
fatisfaCtion. 

13.  An  exclamation  requires  a loud  and  flrong 
voice  ; and  fo  does  an  oath  or  flong  affevera- 
tion : As,  “ O the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of 
the  wifdom  and  knowledge  of  God  !” — “ I call 
God  to  record  upon  my  foul.” 

14.  In  a projbpopceia,  the  voice  fhould  be 
vaired  according  to  the  character  of  the  perfons 
introduced  ; in  an  apojlroplit  according  to  the 
circumltances'  of  the  perfon  or  thing  to  which 
you  addrefs  your  fpeech  : which  if  directed  ei- 
ther to  God,  or  to  inanimate  things,  ought  to 
be  louder  than  ufual. 

15.  In  reciting  andanfwering  objections,  -the 
voice  fhould  be  varied,  as  if  two  perfons  were 
ipeaking.  And  fo  in  dialogues,  or  whenever  fe* 
veral  perfons  are  introduced,  as  difputing  or  talk- 
ing together. 

16.  In  a climax,  the  voice  mull  be  gradually 
raifed,  to  anfwer  every  flep  of  the  figure.  In 
an  apofiopefis , the  voice  (which  was  raifed  to  in- 
troduce it)  mull  be  lowered  confidcrablv.  In  an 
antithejis,  the  points  are  10  be  diflinguilhed,  and 

the 


C 77  ] 


the  former  to  be  pronounced  with  a ftronger 
tone  than  the  latter:  but  in  an  anadiplojls  the 
word  repeated  is  pronounced  the  fecond  time 
louder  and  ftronger  than  the  firft. 

17.  Take  care  never  to  make  a paufe  in  fpeak- 
ing,  in  the  middle  of  a word  or  fentence  ; but 
only  where  there  is  fuch  a paufe  in  the  fenfe  as 
requires,  or  at  leaft,  allows  of  it.  You  may  make 
a fhort  paufe  after  every  period : and  begin  the 
next,  generally  a little  lower  than  you  concluded 
the  laft  : but  on  fome  occafions  a little  higher  ; 
which  the  nature  of  the  fubjeft  will  eafily  deter- 
mine. 

18.  I would  likewife  advife  every  fpeakert© 
obferve  thofe  who  fpeak  well,  that  he  may  not 
pronounce  any  word  in  an  improper  manner. 
And  in  cafe  of  doubt,  let  him  not  be  afhamed  to 
afk,  How  fuch  a word  is  to  be  pronounced  ; as 
neither  to  defire  others  that  they  would  inform 
him  whenever  they  hear  him  pronounce  any 
word  improperly. 

19.  Laftly,  Take  care  not  to  fink  your  voice 
too  much,  at  the  conclufion  of  a period  : but 
pronounce  the  very  laft  words  loud  and  diftinH, 
efpecially  if  they  have  but  a weak  and  dull  found 
of  themfelves. 

SECT.  VI. 

Of  Gesture. 

1.  That  this  Glent  language  of  your  face  and 
D 3 hands 


[ 3 


hands  may  move  the  affeclions  of  thofe  that  fee 
and  hear  you,  it  mull  be  well  adjufted  to  the 
fubjeft,  as  well  as  the  paffion  which  yon  defire 
either  to  exprefs  or  excite.  It  muft  likewife  be 
free  from  all  afletlation,  and  fuch  as  appears  to  be 
the  mere,  natural  refult,  both  of  the  things  you 
fpeak,  and  of  the  affefftion  that  ni  oves  you  to  fpcak 
them.  And  the  whole  is  fo  to  be  managed,  that 
there  may  be  nothing  in  all  the  difpofttions  and 
motions  of  your  body,  to  offend  the  eyes  of  the 
fpeftators. 

2.  But  ’tis  more  difficult  to  find  out  the  faults, 
of  your  own  gellure,  than  thofe  of  your  pronun- 
ciation. For  a man  may  hear  his  own  voice, 
hut  he  cannot  fee  his  own  face:  neither  can  he 
obferve  the  feveral  motions  of  his  own  body  ; at 
leaft,  but  imperfeftly.  To.  remedy  this,  vou 
may  life  a large  looking-glafs,  as  Danofihene. r did, 
and  thereby  obferve  and  learn  to  avoid  every 
difogreeble  or  unhandfeme  gefture. 

3.  There  is  but  one  wav  better  than  this  ; 
which  is  to  have  fome  excellent  pattern  as  often 
as  may  be,  before  your  eyes  : and  to  defire 
fome  (killul  and  faithful  friend  to  obferve  all 
your  motions,  and  inform  you  which  are  proper, 
and  which  are  not. 

4.  As  to  the  motion  of  the  body,  it  ought  not 
to  change  its  place  or  pofture  every  moment. 
Neither  on  the  other  hand,  to  ftand  like  a flock, 
in  one  fixt  and  immoveable  poflure  : but  to  move 

in 


[ 79  1 

in  a natural  and  graceful  manner,  as  various  cir- 
cumflances  may  require. 

5.  The  head  ought  not  to  be  held  up  too 
high,  nor  clownifhly  thrufl.  forward ; neither  to  he 
call  down  and  hang,  as  it  were,  on  the  breaft;  nor 
to  lean  always  on  one  or  the  other  fide  ; but  to  be 
kept  modeftly  and  decently  upright,  in  its  natural 
flate  and  pofition.  Farther,  it  ought  neither  to  he 
kept  immoveable,  as  a ilatue  : nor  to  be  con- 
tinually moving  and  throwing  itfelf  about.  To 
avoid  both  extremes,  it  fhould  be  turned  gent- 
ly, as  occafion  is,  fometimes  one  way,  fome- 
times  the  other;  and  at  other  times  remain, 
looking  Jh  ait  forward,  to  the  middle  of  the  au- 
ditory. Add  to  this,  that  it  ought  always  to  be 
turned,  on  the  fame  fide  with  the  hands  and 
body  : only  in  re  fifing  a thing;  for  this  we  do 
with  the  right  hand,  turning  the  head  at  the 
fame  time  to  the  left. 

6,  But  it  is  the  face  which  gives  the  greatell 
life  to  aflion  : of  this  therefore  you  mull  take 
the  greatell  care,  that  nodring  may  appear  difa- 
greeable  in  it,  fince  it  is  continually  in  the  view 
of  all  but  yourfelf.  And  there  is  nothing  can 
prevent  this,  but  the  looking  glafs,  or  a friend, 
who  will  deal  faithfully  with  you.  You  fhould 
adapt  all  its  movements  to  the  fubjeft  you  treat 
of,  the  paffions  you  would  raife,  and  the  per- 
fons  to  whom  you  fpeak.  Let  love  or  joy  fpread 
a chearfulnefs  over  your  face  ; hatred,  forrow, 

D 4 or 


[ 8°  ] 

or  fear,  a gloorrunefs.  Look  with  gravity  and 
authority  on  your  inferiors  ; on  your  fuperiors 
with  boldnefs  mixt  with  refped. 

7*  ^ ou  fhould  always  be  catling  your  eVes 
upon  feme  or  other  of  your  auditors,  and  mov- 
ing them  from  one  fide  to  the  other,  with  an  air 
of  affeftion  and  regard  : looking  them  decently 
in  the  face,  one  after  another,  as  we  d©  in  fami- 
liar converfation.  Your  afpefft  fhould  always  be 
pleafant,  and  your  looks  direct,  neither  fevere 
nor  atkew  : unlefs  you  defign  to  exprefs  con- 
tempt or  fcorn,  which  may  require  that  parti- 
cular afpeft. 

8.  If  you  fpeak  of  heaven  or  things  abov«, 
lift  up  your  eye* ; if  of  things  beneath,  raft 
them  down : and  fo  if  you  fpeak  of  things  of 
difgrace;  but  raife  them,  in  fwearing,  or  fpeak- 
ing  of  things  wherein  you  glory. 

9.  The  mouth  mull  never  be  turned  awry  j 
neither  mud  you  bite  or  lick  your  lips,  or 
Ihrug  up  your  fhoulders;  or  lean  upon  your 
elbow  ; all  which  give  juft  offence  to  the 
fpedators. 

10.  We  make  ufe  of  the  hand  a thoufand  dif- 
ferent ways  : only  very  little  at  the  beginning  of 
a difeourfe.  Concerning  this,  you  may  obferve 
the  rules  following  : 1.  Never  clap  your  hands, 
nor  thump  the  pulpit:  2.  Ufe  the  right-hand 
rood,  and  when  you  ufe  the  left,  let  it  be  only 
to  accompany  the  other  : 3.  The  right-hand  may 
be  gently  applied  to  the  breaft,  when  you  fpeak 

of 


[ 3 


of  your  own  faculties,  heart  or  confcience  ; 4. 
You  muff  begin  your  aftion  with  your  fpeecb, 
and  end  it  when  you  make  an  end  of  fpeaking  : 
5.  The  hands  fhould  feldom  be  lifted  up  higher 
than  the  eyes,  nor  let  down  lower  than  the 
bread; : 6.  Your  eyes  fhould  always  have  your 
hands  in  view,  fo  that  they  you  fpeak  to  may 
fee  your  eyes,  your  mouth  and  your  hands,  all 
moving  in  concert  with  each  other,  and  expref- 
fing  the  fame  thing:  7.  Seldom  flretclwout 
your  arms  fide-ways,  more  than  half  a foot  from 
the  trunk  of  your  body  : 8.  Your  hands  are  not 
to  be  in  perpetual  motion  ; this  the  antients 
called,  The  babbling  of  the  hands. 

11.  There  are  many  other  things  relating  to 
aftion  as  well  as  utterance,  which  cannot  eafily 
be  expreltin  writing.  Thefe  you  muff  learn  by 
pra&ice  ; by  hearing  a good  lpeaker,  and  fpeak- 
ing; often  before  him. 

12.  But  remember,  while  you  are  a flu  ally 
fpeaking,  you  muff  not  be  ftudying  any  other 
motions,  but  ufe  thofe  that  naturally  arifefrom 
the  fubjeft  of  your  difcourfe,  from  the  place 
where  you  fpeak,  and  the  chacafters  of  the  per- 
fons  whom  you  addrefs. 

13.  I would  advife  you,  laftly,  to  obferve, 
thefe  rules  as  far  as  things  permit,  even  in  your 
common  converfation  ; till  you  have  got  a per- 
fect habit  ofobferving  them,  fo  that  they  are,  as 
it  were,  natural  to  you.  And  whenever  you 
hear  an  eminent  fpeaker,  obferve  with  the  ut- 

D 5 molt 


[ 82  ] 

moll  attention,  what  conformity  there  is  letween 
his  a6lion,  and  utterance,  and  thefe  rules.  You 
may  afterwards  imitate  him  at  home,  till  you 
have  made  his  graces  your  own.  And  when 
once  by  fuch  aflillances  as  thefe,  you  have  ac- 
quired a good  habit  of  fpeaking,  you  will  n« 
more  need  any  tedious  refleftions  upon  this  art, 
but  will  fpeak  as  ealily  as  gracefsllv. 


An 


[ 83  ] 


A N 

E X T R A C T 

OF  THE 

Rev.  Mr.  JOHN  WESLEY’s 

JOURNAL 

From  his  embarking  for  Georgia,  to  his 
return  to  London. 


What  Jhall  we  fay  then  ? — That  Ifrael  which  fol- 
lowed after  the  lazu  of  righteoufnef,  hath  not 
attained  to  the  law  of  righteoufnefs. — Where- 
fore? Becaufe  they  fought  it  not  by  faith,  but 
as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  law. 

Rom.  Ix.  30,  31, 


NUMBER  I. 


The 

\ 


D <§ 


[ «4  ] 


The  PREFACE. 

1.  TT  was  in  purfuance  of  a-n  advice  given  by 
bifhop  Taylor,  in  his  Rules for  Holy  Living 
and  Dying,  that  about  fifteen  years  ago,  I began 
to  take  a more  exaft  account  than  I had  don« 
before,  of  the  manner  wherein  I fpent  my  time, 
writing  down  how  I had  employed  every  hour. 
This  I continued  to  do,  wherever  I was,  till  the 
time  of  my  leaving  England.  The  variety  of 
fcenes  which  I then  pall  through,  induced  me  to 
tranfcribe  from  time  to  time,  the  more  material 
parts  of  mv  diary,  adding  here  and  there  fuch 
little  refledlions  as  occurred  to  my  mind.  Of 
this  journal  thus  occafionally  compiled,  the  fol- 
lowing is  a fhort  extraft  : it  not  being  my  defign 
to  relate  all  thofe  particulars,  which  I wrote  for 
my  own  ufe  only  ; and  which  would  anfwer  no 
valuable  end  to  others,  however  important  they 
were  to  me. 

2.  Jndeed  I had  no  defign  or  defire  to  trouble 
the  world  with  any  of  my  little  affairs  : as  it  can’t 
but  appear  to  every  impartial  mind,  from  my 
having  been  fo  long  as  one  that  heareth  not,  not- 
withllandirg  the  loud  and  frequent  calls  I have 
had,  to  anfwer  for  myfelf.  Neither  fhould  I 
have  done  it  now,  had  not  Captain  Williams’s 

affidavit 


[ ] 

affidavit,  publiffied  as  foon  as  he  had  left  England, 
laid  an  obligation  upon  me,  to  do  what  in  me 
lies,  in  obedience  to  that  command  of  God,  Let 
not  the  good  which  is  in  you  be  evilfpoken  of 
With  this  view  I do  at  length  give  an  anfwer  to 
every  man  that  ajkeih  me  a reafon  of  the  hope 
which  is  in  me,  that  in  all  thefe  things  I have  a 
confcience  void  of  offence  towards  God  and  towards 
man. 

3. 1 have  prefixed  hereto  a letter  wrote  feveral 
years  fince,  containing  a plain  account  of  the 
rife  of  that  little  fociety  in  Oxford,  which  has 
been  fo  varioiifly  reprefented.  Part  of  this  was 
.publifhed  in  1733  ; but  without  my  content  or 
knowledge.  It  now  Hands  as  it  was  wrote; 
without  any  addition,  diminution,  or  amend- 
ment ; it  being  my  only  concern  herein,  nakedly 
to  declare  the  thins,  as  it  is. 

4.  Perhaps  my  employments  of  another  kind 
may  not  allow  me  to  give  any  farther  anfwer  to 
them,  who  fay  all  manner  of  evil  of  me  jalftly , 
and  feem  to  think  that  they  do  God J'ervice.  Suf- 
fice it,  that  both  they  and  I ffiall  ffiortly  give  an 
account,  to  him  that  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick 
and  the  dead . 


0X0  iV 


[ 86  ] 


0 XO  N,  061.  18,  1730. 


S 1 R, 


HE  occafion  of  my  giving  you  this  trouble 


is  of  a very  extraordinary  nature.  On 
Sunday  laft  I was  informed  (as  no  doubt  you 
will  be  e'er  long)  that  my  brother  and  I had 
killed  your  fon  : that  the  rigorous  falling  which 
he  had  impofed  upon  himfelf,  by  our  advice, 
had  increafed  his  tllnefs  and  haflened  his  death. 
Now  though,  confidering  it  in  itfelf,  it  is  a very 
Jin  all  thing  with  me  to  be  judged  by  man  s judg- 
ment) yet  as  the  being  thought  guilty  of  fo  mif- 
chievous  an  imprudence  might  make  me  the  lefs 
able  to  do  ;he  work  I came  into  the  world  for,  I 
3nt  obliged  to  clear  mvfelf  of  it,  by  observing  to 
you,  as  I have  done  to  others,  that  your  fon  left 
off  falling  about  a year  and  a half  fince,  and 
that  it  is  not  yet  half  a year  fince  I began  to 
praEtife  it. 

I muff  not  let  this  opportunity  flip  of  doing 
mv  part  towards  giving  you  a jufler  notion'  of 
fome  other  particulars,  relating  both  to  him  and 
myfelf,  which  have  been  indulfrioufly  mifre- 
prefented  to  you. 

In  March  laft  he  received  a letter  from  you. 


which 


C 87  ] 

-which  not  being  able  to  read,  he  defired  me  to 
read  to  him  ; feveral  of  the  expreffions  whereof 
I perfeftly  remember,  and  {hall  do,  till  I too  aru 
called  hence.  I then  determined,  that  if  God 
was  pleafed  to  take  away  your  fon  before  me,  I 
would  judify  him  and  myfelf,  which  I now  do 
with  all  plainnefs  and  fimplicity,  as  both  my 
character  and  caufe  requires. 

In  one  practice  for  which  you  blamed  your 
fon,  I am  only  concerned  as  a friend,  not  as  a 
partner.  That  therefore  I {hall  confider  find  : 
your  own  account  of  it  was  in  effect  this,  “ He 
“ frequently  went  into  poor  people's  houfes  in 
“ the  villages  about  Holt,  called  their  children 
“ together,  and  infirufted  them  in  their  duty  to 
“ God,  their  neighbour,  and  themfelves.  He 
“ likewife  explained  tp  them  the  neceffity  of 
“ private  as  well  as  public  prayer,  and  provided 
“ them  with  fuch  forms  as  was  bed  fuited  to 
“ their  feveral  capacities  : and  being  well  ap- 
“ prized  how  much  the  fuccefs  of  his  endea- 
“ vours  depended  on  their  good-will  towards 
“ him,  to  win  upon  their  affe&ions,  he  fom^- 
“ times  didributed  among  them  a little  of  that 
“ money  which  he  had  faved  from  gaming,  and 
“ the  other  fadtionable  expences  of  the  place.” 
This  is  the  fird  charge  againd  him  ; upon  which 
all  that  I {hall  obferve  is,  that  I will  refer  it  to 
your  own  judgment,  whether  it  be  fitter  to  have 
a place  in  the  catalogue  of  his  faults,  or  of  thofe 

virtues,. 


t 88  ] 

virtues,  for  \vhich  he  is  now  numbered  among  the 
Jons  of  God. 

If  all  the  perfons  concerned  in  “ that  ridicu- 
lous fociety,  whofe  follies  you  have  fo  often 
heard  repeated,'’  could  but  give  fuch  a proof  of 
their  deferving  the  glorious  title  t which  was 
once  bellowed  upon  them,  they  would  be  con- 
tented that  their  lives  too Jhou/d  be  counted  mad- 
nefs , and  their  end  thought  to  be  without  honour. 
But  the  truth  is,  ths-ir  title  to  holinels  Hands 
upon  much  lels  liable  foundations;  as  you  will 
eafily  perceive  when  you  know  the  ground  of 
this  wonderful  outcry,  which  it  feems,  England 
is  not  wide  enough  to  contain. 

InNovember,  172 9,  at  which  time  I came  to 
refide  at  Oxford,  your  fon,  my  brother,  myfelf, 
and  one  more,  agreed  to  fpend  three  or  four 
evenings  in  a week  together.  Our  defign  was 
to  read  over  the  clafficks,  which  we  had  before 
read  in  private,  on  common  nights,  and  on 
.Sunday  force  book  in  divinity.  In  the  bummer 
following  Mr.  M.  told  me  he  had  called  at  the 
goal,  to  fee  a man  who  was  condemned  for  kill- 
ing his  wife  ; and  that,  from  the  talk  he  had  with 
one  of  the  debtors,  he  verily  believed  it  would 
do  much  good,  if  any  one  would  be  at  the  pains 
of  now  and  then  fpeaking  with  them.  This  he 
fo  frequently  repeated,  that  on  the  24th  of  Aug. 
tygo,  nay  brother  and  I walked  with  him  to  the 
callle.  We  were  fo  well  fatisfied  with  our  con- 

verfation 


+ The  Holy  Club. 


[ «9  3 


verfation  there,  that  we  agreed  to  go  thither 
once  or  twice  a week  ; which  we  had  not  done 
long,  before  he  defired  me,  to  go  with  him  to 
fee  a poor  woman  in  the  town  who  was  fick. 
In  this  employment  too  when  we  came  to  refleft- 
upon  it,  we  believed  it  would  be  worth  while  to 
fpend  an  hour  or  two  in  a week,  provided  the 
minifter  of  the  parifh,  in  which  any  fuch  perfon 
was,  were  not  againd  it.  But  that  we  might 
not  depend  wholly  on  our  own  judgments,  I 
wrote  an  account  to  my  father  of  our  whole  de- 
fign ; withal  begging  that  he,  who  had  li\‘ed 
feventy  years  in  the  world,  and  feen  as  much  of 
it  as  moll  private  men  have  ever  done,  would 
advife  us  whether  tve  had  yet  gone  too  far, 
and  whether  we  fhould  now  Hand  dill,  or  go 
forward  ? 

* Part  of  his  anfwer,  dated  Sept.  21,  1730, 
was  this : 

“ And  now  as  to  your  own  defigns  and  em- 
ployments, what  can  I fay  lefs  of  them  than 
valdt  probo : + and  that  I have  the  higheft  reafon 
to  blefs  God,  that  he  has  given  me  two  fons  to- 
gether at  Oxford,  to  whom  he  has  given  grace 
and  courage  to  turn  the  war  againfl  the  world 
and  the  devil,  which  is  the  bed  way  to  conquer 
them.  They  have  but  one  more  enemy  to  com- 
bat with,  the  flefh  ; which  if  they  take  care  to 
fubdue  by  fading  and  prayer,  there  will  be  no 

more 


+ I greatly  approve. 


t 9°  ] 

more  for  them  to  do,  but  to  proceed  deadily  in 
the  fame  courfe,  and  expebt  the  crown  which 
fadeth  not  away.  You  have  reafon  to  blefs 
God,  as  I do,  that  you  have  fo  faff  a friend  as 
Mr.  M.  who  I fee  in  the  mod  difficult  fervice 
is  ready  to  break  the  ice  for  you.  You  do  not 
know  of  how  much  good  that  poor  wretch  who 
killed  his  wife  has  been  the  providential  occafion. 
I think  I muff  adopt  Air.  M.  to  be  my  fon,  toge- 
ther with  you  and  your  brother  Charles;  and 
when  I have  fitch  a ternion  to  profecute  that 
war,  wherein  I am  now  Miles  Emeritus,  I lhall 
not  be  afhamed,  when  they  fpeak  with  their  ene- 
mies in  the  gate.'1 

“ I am  afraid  led  the  main  objection  you 
make  againfl  your  going  on  in  the  bufinefs  with 
the  prifoners  may  fecretly  proceed  from  flefh  and 
blood.  For  who  can  harm  you  f ) ou  are  followers 
of  that  which  is  \'o  good  ? And  which  will  be  one 
of  the  marks  by  which  the  Shepherd  of  Ifrael 
will  know  his  fheep  at  the  lad  day  ? — 1 hough  if 
it  were  pofhblefor  you  to  buffer  a little  in  the 
caufe,  sou  would  have  a confeflor’s  reward. 
You  own  none  but  fuch  as  are  out  of  their  fjenfes 
would  be  prejudiced  againd  your  abting  in  this 
manner  ; but  fay,  “ thefe  are  they  that  need  a 
phyfician.”  But  what  if  they  will  not  accept  of 
one,  who  will  be  welcome  to  the  poor  prifoners? 
Go  on  then  in  God's  name  in  the  path  to  which 
y'our  Saviour  has  direcled  you,  and  that  traci 
wherein  your  father  has  gone  before  you ! For 

when 


[ 91  ] 

when  I was  an  under  graduate  at  Oxford,  I vi- 
fited  thofe  in  the  cattle  there,  and  reflebh  on  it 
with  great  fatisfaftion  to  this  day.  Walk  as  pru- 
dently as  you  can,  though  not  fearfully,  and  my 
heart  and  p ravers  are  with  vou. 

“ Your  ftrfl  regular  ttep  is  to  corjfult  with  him 
(if  any  fuch  there  be)  who  has  a junfdiction  over 
the  prifoners,  and  the  next  is,  to  obtain  the  di- 
reftioti  and  approbation  of  your  bilhop.  I his  is 
Mond  ay  morning,  at  which  time  I lhall  never 
forget  you.  If  it  be  puffible  I fhould  be  glad  to 
fee  you  all  three  here  in  the  fine  end  of  thefum- 
mer.  But  if  I cannot  have  that  fatisfa6Iion,  I 
am  fure  I can  reach  you  every  day,  though  you 
were  beyond  the  Indies.  Accordingly,  to  him, 
who  is  every  where,  I now  heartily  commit  you, 
as  being 

Your  mo/1  affectionate  and  joyful father. 

In  purfuance  of  thefe  direflions,  I immedi- 
ately went  to  Mr.  Gerard,  the  Bilhop  of  Oxford’s 
Chaplain,  who  waslikewife  the  perfon  that  took 
care  of  the  prifoners  when  any  were  condemned 
to  die  : (at  other  times  they  were  left  to  their 
own  care)  I propofed  to  him  our  defign  of  fenc- 
ing them  as  far  as  we  could,  and  my  own  inten- 
tion to  preach  there  once  a month,  if  the  Bilhop 
approved  of  it.  He  much  commended  our  de- 
fign, and  faid  he  would  anfwer  for  the  Bilhop \s 
approbation,  to  whom  he  would  take  the  firtt  op- 
portunity of  mentioning  it.  It  was  not  long  before 

he 


[ 9^  ] 

he  informed  me  he  had  done  fo,  and  that  his 
lordfhip  not  only  gave  his  permiflion,  but  was 
greatly  pleafed  with  the  undertaking,  and  hop- 
ed it  would  have  the  defired  fuccefs. 

Soon  after  a gentleman  cl  Merlon- college,  who 
was  one  of  oyjr  little  company,  which  now  con- 
fided of  five  pcrfons,  acquainted  us,  that  he  had 
been  much  rallied  the  day  before  for  being  a 
member  of  the  holy  club ; and  that  it  was  become 
a common  topic  of  mirth  at  his  college,  where 
they  had  found  out  feveral  of  our  cufloms,  to 
which  we  were  ourfelves  utter  firan.gers.  Lpon 
this  I confulted  my  father  again,  in  whofe  an- 
fwer  were  thefe  words. 

Dec.  1. 

* “ This  day  I received  both  yours,  and  this 
evening  in  the  courfe  of  our  reading,  I thought 
I found  an  anfwer  that  would  be  more  proper 
than  any  I myfelf  could  dictate  ; though  fince  it 
will  not  be  eafily  tranflated,  I fend  it  in  the  ori- 
ginal. 2 Cor.  vii.  4.  ri'.X/.i)  no'.  Kavxw; 

vpnv'  7re7rX-/i(3cj[Aa.i  r/i  'TrccpccyJhriezi'  vireg  kepi? rstcuai  t>j 

i What  would  you  be  ? Would  you  be 
angels?  I queftien  whether  a mortal  can  arrive 
to  a greater  degree  of  perfection,  than  fleadily 
to  do  good,  and  for  that  very  reafon  patiently 
and  meekly  to  fuffer  evil.  For  my  part,  on 
the  prefent  view  of  your  actions  and  defigns, 
my  daily  prayers  are,  that  God  would  keep  you 

humble; 

+ Great  is  my  glorying  of  you.  Iam  filled  with  comfort.  I 
am  exceeding  joyful. 


[ 93  ] 

humble  ; and  then  I am  fure  that  if  you  con- 
tinue  to fujfer  for  righleovjnefs  fake,  though  it 
be  but  in  a lower  degtee,  the  Spirit  of  God  and  cj 
glory  (hall  in  dome  good  meafure  ref  upon  you. 
Be  never  weary  of  well-doing  ; never  look  back, 
for  you  know  the  prize  and  the  crown  are  be- 
fore you.  Though  I can  fcarce  think  fo  mean- 
ly of  you,  as  that  you  would  be  difcouraged 
with  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a pot  Be  not 
high-minded,  but  fear.  Preferve  an  equal  tem- 
per of  mind  under  whatever  treatment  you  meet 
with  from  a not  very  juft  or  well-natured  world. 
Bear  no  more  fail  than  is  neceffary,  but  fteer 
fteady.  The  lefs  you  value  yourfelves  for  thefe 
unfafhionable  duties,  (as  there  is  no  fuch  thing 
as  works  of  fupererogation)  the  more  all  good 
and  wife  men  will  value  you,  if  thev  fee  your 
afitions  are  of  a piece;  or,  which  is  infinitely 
more,  he  by  whom  actions  and  intentions  are 
weighed,  will  both  accept,  efteem  and  reward 
you.” 

Upon  this  encouragement  we  ftill  continued 
to  meet  together  as  ulual  ; and  to  confirm  one 
another  as  well  as  we  could,  in  our  refolutions, 
to  communicate  as  often  as  we  had  opportu- 
nity (which  is  here  once  a week  ;)  and  do  what 
fervice  we  could  to  our  acquaintance,  the  pri- 
foners,  and  two  or  three  poor  families  in  the 
town.  But  the  outcry  daily  increafing,  that  we 
might  fitew  what  grtJufid  there  was  for  it,  we 

proposed 


[ 94  ] 


propofed  to  our  friends,  or  opponents,  as  we 
had  opportunity,  thefe,  or  the  like  quefliens : 

I.  Vv^hether  it  does  not  concern  all  men  of  all 
conditions,  to  imitate  him  as  much  as  they  can, 
who  went  about  doing  good  ? 

Whether  all  Chriltians  are  not  concerned  in 
that  command,  “ White  we  have  time  let  us  do 
o ood  to  all  men'’ 

D * 

Whether  we  fhall  not  be  more  happy  here- 
after, the  more  good  we  do  now  ? 

Whether  we  can  be  happy  at  all  hereafter  un- 
lefs  we  have,  according  to  our  power.  Fed  the 
hungry , cloathed  the  naked , vi/ited  thofe  that 
are  fick,  and  in  prifon,  and  made  all  thefe  actions 
fublervient  to  a higher  purpofe,  even  the  hav- 
ing of  fouls  from  death  ? 

Whether  it  he  not  our  bounden  duty  always  to 
remember,  that  he  did  more  for  us,  than  we  can 
do  for  him,  who  allures  us.  In  as  much  as  ye 
have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  leaf  of  thefe  my 
brethren , ye  have  done  it  unto  me  ? 

II.  Whether  upon  thefe  confederations  we 
may  not  try  to  do  .good  to  our  acquaintance  ? 
Particularly,  whether  we  may  rtot  try  to  con- 
vince them  of  the  neceflity  of  being  Chrifiians  ? 

Whether  of  the  confequent  necelfity  of  being 
fcholars  ? 

Whether  of  the  neceflny  of  method  and  in- 
duflry  in  order  to  either  learning  or  virtue? 
Whether  we  may  not  try  to  perfuade  them  to 

confirm 


r 95  ] 


confirm  and  iricreafe  their  indufiry,  by  commu- 
nicating as  often  as  they  can  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  mention  to  them  the 
authors  whom  we  conceive  to  have  wrote  belt 
on  thofe  fubjefts  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  affift  them  as  we  are 
able  from  time  to  time,  to  form  refolutions  up- 
on what  they  rend  in  thofe  authors,  and  to  exe- 
cute them  with  lleadincfs  and  perfeverance  ? 

III.  Whether,  upon  the  confiderations  above- 
mentioned,  we  may  not  try  to  do  good  to  thofe 
that  are  hungry,  naked,  or  Tick  ? In  particular, 
whether  if  we  know  any  neceffitous  family,  we 
may  not  give  them  a little  food,  cloaths,  or  phy- 
fic,  as  they  want  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  give  them,  if  they  can 
read,  a bible,  common-prayer  book,  or  Whole 
Duty  of  Man  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  now  and  then  enquire 
how  they  have  ufed  them  ; explain  what  they 
do  not  underhand,  and  enforce  what  they  do  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  enforce  upon  them 
more  efpecially  the  necefhty  of  private  prayer, 
and  of' frequenting  the  church  and  facrament  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  contribute  what  little 
we  are  able  toward  having  their  children  cloath- 
ed  and  taught  to  read  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  take  care  that  they  be 
taught  their  catechifm,  and  fhort  prayers  for 
morning  and  evening  ? 


IV.  Lajly, 


[ 96  1 

IV.  LafUy , Whether  upon  the  confiderationS 
abdve-mentioned  we  may  not  try  to  do  good  to 
thole  that  are  in  prifon  ? In  particular,  Whether 
we  may  not  releafe  fuch  well-difpofed  perfons  as 
remain  in  prifon  for  fmall  fums  P 

Whether  we  may  not  lend  fmaller  fums  to 
thofe  that  are  of  any  trade;  that  they  may  pro- 
cure theinfelves  tools  and  materials  too  work 
with  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  give  to  them  who  ap- 
pear to  want  it  molt,  a little  money,  or  cloaths, 
or  phyfic  ? 

Whether  we  may  not  fupplv  as  many  as  are 
ferious  enough  to  read,  with  a bible,  and  whole 
Duty  of  man  ? 

Whether  we  may  not,  as  we  have  opportuni- 
ty, explain  and  enforce  thefe  upon  them,  efpe- 
eially  with  refpeft  to  public  and  private  prayer, 
and  the  blelfed  facrament  ? 

I do  not  remember  that  we  met  with  any  per- 
fon  who  anfwered  any  of  thefe  quellions  in  the 
negative,  or  who  even  doub  ed,  whether  it 
were  not  lawful  to  apply  to  this  ufe  that  time  and 
money,  which  we  fhould  elfe  have  fpent  in  other 
diverlions.  But  feveral  we  met  with  who  in- 
creafed  our  little  Hock  of  money  for  the  prifoners 
and  the  poor,  by  fubfcribing  fomething  quarter- 
ly to  it;  fo  that  the  more  perfons  we  propofed 
our  defigns  to,  the  more  we  were  confirmed  in 
the  belief  of  their  innocency,  and  the  more  deter- 
mined to  purfue  them  in  fpight  ol  the  ridicule, 

which 


[ 97  ] 


which  increafed  fail  upon  us  during  the 
winter.  However,  in  fpring  I thought  it 
could  not  be  improper  to  defire  farther  induc- 
tions from  thofe,  who  were  wifer  and  better 
than  ourfelves  ; and  according  (on  May  18,  1731) 

I wrote  a particular  account  of  all  our  proceed- 
ings to  a clergyman  of  known  wifdom  and  integ- 
rity. After  having  informed  him  of  all  the 
branches  of  our  defign,  as  clearly  and  fimply  as 
I could,  I next  acquainted  him  with  the  fuccefs 
it  had  met  with  in  the  following  words  : — “ Ai- 
rmail as  foon  as  we  had  made  our  firft  attempts 
this  way,  fome  of  the  men  of  wit  in  Chrift- 
church  entered  the  lift  againft  us,  and  between 
mirth  and  anger  made  a pretty  many  refleftions 
upon  the  Jacr amentanans , as  they  were  pleafed 
to  call  us.  Soon  after  their  allies  at  Merton 
changed  our  title,  and  did  us  the  honour  of  ftil- 
ing  us  The  Holy  Club.  But  moft  of  them  being 
perfons  of  well-known  charafters,  they  had  not 
the  good  fortune  to  gain  any  profelytes  from  the 
facrament,  till  a gentleman  eminent  for  learn- 
ing, and  well  efteemed  for  piety,  joining  them, 
told  his  nephew,  that  if  he  dared  to  go  to  the 
weekly  communion  any  longer,  he  would  im- 
mediately turn  him  out  of  doors.  That  argu- 
ment indeed  had  no  fuccefs ; the  young  gentle- 
man communicated  next  week ; upon  which  ' 
his  uncle  having  again  tried  to  convince  him  that 
he  was  in  the  wrong  way,  by  fhaking  him  by 
the  throat  to  no  purpofe,  changed  his  method, 
Vol.  XXVI.  E and 


and  by  mildnefs,  prevailed  upon  him  to  abfent 
from  it  the  Sunday  following,  as  he  has  done 
five  Sundays  in  fix  ever  fince.  This  much  de- 
lighted our  gay  opponents,  who  increafed  their 
number  apace,  efpecially  when  fhortly  after  one 
of  the  feniors  of  the  college  having  been  with 
the  doftor,  upon  his  return  from  him,  fent  for 
two  young  gentlemen  feverally,  who  had  com- 
municated weekly  for  fome  time ; and  was  fo 
fuccefsful  in  his  exhortations,  that  for  the  future 
they  promifed  to  do  it,  only  three  times  a year. 
About  this  time  there  was  a meeting  (as  one  who 
was  prefent  at  it  informed  your  fonj  of  feveral 
of  the  officers  and  feniors  of  the  college,  where- 
in it  was  confulted  what  would  be  the  fpeedieft 
way  to  flop  the  progrefs  of  enthufiafm  in  it. 
The  refult  we  know  not,  only  it  was  foon  pub- 
licly reported,  that  Dr.  , and  the  cenfors 

were  going  to  blow  up  the  godly  club.  This  was 
now  our  common  title,  though  we  Were  fome- 
times  dignified  with  that  of  the  euthufafcs,  or  the 
reforming  club” 

Part  of  the  anfwer  I received  was  as  follows: 

“ Good  Sir, 

A pretty  while  after  the  date,  yours  came  to 
my  hand.  I waved  my  anfwer  till  I had  an  op- 
portunity of  conf'ulring  your  father,  who  upon 
all  accounts  is  a more  propei  judge  of  the  affair 

than 


'[  99  J 


than  I am.  But  I could  never  find  a fit  occa- 
lion  for  it.  As  to  my  own  fenfe  of  the  matter,  I 
confefs,  I cannot  but  heartily  approve  of  that  feri- 
ous  and  religious  turn  of  mind  that  prompts  you 
and  your  afiociates  to  thofe  pious  and  charitable 
offices ; and  can  have  no  notion  of  that  man’s 
religion  or  concern  for  the  honour  of  the  uni- 
verfity,  that  oppofes  you  as  far  as  your  defign  re- 
flects the  colleges.  I fhould  be  loth  to  fend  a 
fon  of  mine  to  any  feminary.  where  his  converg- 
ing with  virtuous  young  men,  whofe  profeft  de- 
figu  of  meeting  together  at  proper  times,  was  to 
affill  each  other  in  forminggood  refolutions,  and 
encouraging  one  another  to  execute  them  with 
corffiancv  and  lleadinefs,  was  inconfiftent  with 
any  received  maxims  or  rules  of  life  among  the 
members.  As  to  the  other  branch  of  your  de- 
fign, as  the  town  is  divided  into  parifhes,  each 
of  which  has  its  proper  incumbent,  and  as  there 
is  probably  an  ecrlefiafiic,  who  has  the  fpiritual 
charge  of  the  prifoners,  prudence  may  dire£l 
you  to  confult  them  : for  though  I dare  not  fay 
you  would  be  too  officious,  fhould  you  of  your 
own  mere  motion  feek  out  theperfons  that  want 
your  inllruftions  and  charitable  contributions, 
yet  fhould  you  have  the  concurrence  of  their 
proper  pallor,  your  good  offices  would  be  more 
regular,  and  lefs  liable  to  cenfure.” 

Your  fon  was  now  at  Holt ; however,  we 
continued  to  meet  at  our  ufual  times,  though 
E 2 our 


I 100  J 


our  little  affairs  went  on  but  heavily  without  him. 
But  at  our  return  from  Lincolnlhire,  in  Septem- 
ber lafl,  we  had  the  pleafure  of  feeing  him  again  ; 
■when,  though  he  could  not  be  fo  aftive  with  us 
as  formerly,  yet  we  were  exceeding  glad  to 
fpend  what  time  we  could  in  talking  and  read- 
ing with  him.  It  was  a little  before  this  time 
my  brother  and  I w'ere  at  London,  when  going 
into  a bookfeller’s  fhop  (Mr.  Rivington’s  in  St. 
Paul’s  Church-vard)  after  fome  other  converfa- 
tion,  he  alked  us  whither  we  lived  in  town-; 
and  upon  our  anfwering,  “ No,  at  Oxford 
Then  gentlemen,  faid  he,  let  me  earnellJy  re- 
commend to  your  acquaintance  a friend  I have 
there,  Mr.  Clayton  of  Brazen-nofe.  Of  this, 
having  fmall  leifure  for  contracting  new  ac- 
quaintance, we  took  no  notice  for  the  prefent. 
But  in  the  fpring  following  (April  20)  Mr.  Clay- 
ton meeting  me  in  the  ftreet,  and  giving  Mr. 
Rivington’s  fervice,  I defired  his  company  to 
my  room,  and  then  commenced  our  acquaint- 
ance. At  the  firft  opportunity  I acquainted  him 
with  our  whole  delign,  which  he  immediately 
and  heartily  clofed  with  : and  not  long  after, 

Mr.  M having  then  left  Oxford,  we  fixed 

two  evenings  in  a week  to  meet  on,  partlv  to  talk 
upon  that  fubjefi,  and  partly  to  read  fomething 
in  practical  divinity. 

The  two  points,  whereunto  by  the  bleffing  of 
God,  and  your  fon’s  help,  we  had  before  attain- 
ed,  we  endeavoured  to  hold  fall  : I mean,  the 

doing 


[ 101  ] 

doing  what  good  we  can,  and  in  Older  thereto 
communicating  as  often  as  we  have  oppor- 
tunity. To  thefe,  by  the  advice  of  Mr.  Clay- 
ton, we  have  added  a third,  the  obferving  the 
falls  of  the  church  ; the  general  negleftof  which 
we  can  by  no  means  apprehend  to  be  a lawful 
excufe  for  neglefting  them.  And  in  the  refolu- 
tion  to  adhere  to  thefe,  and  all  things  elfe  which 
we  are  convinced  God  requires  at  our  hands,  we 
truft  we  fh all  perfevere,  till  he  calls  us  to  give  an 
account  of  our  flewardlhip.  As  for  the  names  of 
Methodids,  Supererogation-men,  and  fo  on, 
with  which  fome  of  our  neighbours  are  pleafed 
to  compliment  us,  we  do  not  conceive  ourfelve's 
to  be  under  any  obligation  to  regard  them,  much 
lefs  to  take  them  for  arguments.  To  the  law 
and  to  the  tellimony  we  appeal,  whereby  we 
ought  to  be  judged.  If  by  thefe  it  can  be  prov- 
ed we  are  in  an  error,  wc  will  immediately  and 
gladly  retradl  it  : il  not,  we  have  not  Jo  learned 
Chrijl , as  to  renounce  any  part  of  his  fervice, 
though  men  fhould  fay  all  manner  of  evil  againfl 
us,  with  more  judgment,  and  as  little  trutli  as 
hitherto.  We  do  indeed  life  all  the  lawful 
means  we  know,  to  prevent  the  good  which  is 
in  us  from  being  evil fpoken  of ; but  if  the  negleft 
of  known  duties  be  the  one  condition  of  fecur- 

ing  our  reputation,  why  fare  it  well ; we 

know  whom  we  have  believed,  and  what  we 
thus  lay  out  he  will  pay  us  again.  Your  fon  al- 
ready Hands  before  the  judgment-feat  of  him 
£ 3 who 


[ 102 


T- 

J 


ivho  judges  righteous  judgment  ; at  the  bright- 
nefs  of  whofe  prefence  the  clouds  remove  ; his 
eyes  are  open,  and  he  fees  clearly  whether  it 
was  <:  Blind  zeal  and  a thorough  miftake  of 
true  religion,  that  hurried  him  on  in  the  error 
of  his  wav,”  or  whether  he  abled  like  a faithful 
and  \vife  fervant,  who  from  ajult  fenfe  ; hat  his 
time  .was  fhort,  made  hide  to  finilh  his  work 
before  his  Lord’s  coming,  that  wdien  laid  in  the 
balance  lie  might  not  be  found  wanting, 

I have  now  largely  and  plainly  laid  before 
you  the  real  ground  of  all  the  Itrange  outcry  you 
have  heard  ; and  am  not  without  hope  that  by 
this  fairer  reprefentation  of  it  than  you  probably 
ever  leceived  before,  both  you  and  the  clergy- 
man you  formerly  mentioned  may  have  a more 
favourable  opinion  of  a good  caufe,  tho’  under  an 
ill  name.  Whether  you  have  or  no,  I fhall 
ever  acknowledge  my  bell  fervices  to  be  due  to 
yourfelf  and  your  family,  both  for  the  generous 
afhdance  you  have  given  my  father,  and  for  the 
invaluable  advantages  your fon has  (under  God} 
bellowed  on, 

SIR, 

Your  ever  obliged 
And  mojl  obedient  fervant. 

On 


r io3  i 


On  the  Death  of 


Mr.MoRGAN  of  Chri/t- Church, 

By  the  Rev.  Mr.  S A m u el  W e s l e y. 


We fools  counted  his  Ufe  madnefs. 


IF  ought  beneath  them  happy  fouls  attend. 
Let  Morgan  hear  the  triumph  of  a friend, 
And  hear  we!l-pleas’d.  Let  libertines  fogay 
With  carelefs  indolence  defpife  the  lay  ; 

Let  cmick  wits,  and  fools  fur  laughter  born 
Their  verdict  pafs  with  fupercilious  fcorn  : 

Let  jovial  crowds,  by  wine  their  fenfes  drowned, 
Stammer  out  cenfure  in  their  frantic  round  ; 

Let  yawning  fluggards  faint  diflike  difplay. 
Who,  while  thev  trull  to-morrow,  lofe  to-day  ; 
Let  fuch  as  thefe  the  facred  drains  condemn  ; 
For  ’tis  true  glory  to  be  hifs’d  by  them. 

Wife  in  his  prime,  he  waited  not  for  noon, 
Convinced,  that  mortal  never  lived  too  foon. 

E 4 


As 


[ it>4  ] 

As  if  foreboding  here,  his  little  flay, 

He  made  his  morning  bear  the  heat  of  day. 
Fix’d,  while  unfading  glory  he  purfues, 

No  ill  to  hazard,  and  no  good  tolofe  : 

No  fairoccafion  glides  unheeded  by  ; 

Snatching  the  golden  moments  as  they  fly, 

He  by  few  fleeting  hours  enfurcs  eternity. 
Friendfhip's  warm  beams  his  artlefs  bread  infpire, 
And  tend ’reft  rev’rence  fora  much-loved  fire. 

He  dar’d  for  heaven  this  flatt’ring  world  forego, 
Ardent  to  teach,  as  diligent  to  know. 

Unwarp’d  by  fenfual  views,  or  vulgar  aims. 

By  idle  riches,  or  by  idler  names. 

Fearful  of  fin  in  every  clofe  difguife, 

Unmov’d  by  threat ’ning  or  byglozing  lies. 
Seldom  indeed  the  wicked  came  fo  far, 

Forced  by  his  piety  to  defenfive  war  ; 

Whofe  zeal  for  other  men’s  falvation  (hewn, 
Beyond  the  reach  of  hell  fecured  his  own. 
Glad’ning  the  poor,  where’er  his  fieps  he  turn’d. 
Where  pin’d  the  orphan,  or  the  widow  motirn’d. 
Where  prifoner’s  fighed  beneath  guilt’s  horrid 
ffain, 

The  worft  confinement  and  the  heavieft  chain. 
Where  death’s  fad  (hade  th’  uninftructed  fight 
Veil’d  with  thick  darknefs  in  the  Land  of  light. 
Our  Saviour  thus  fulfill’d  his  great  defign, 

(If  human  we  may  liken  to  divine) 

Healed  each  difeafe  that  bodies  frail  endure. 

And  preach’d  th’  mrhop’d-for  gofpel  to  the  poor. 


To 


[ i°5  ] 


To  means  of  grace  the  laft  refpeft  he  fhew’d, 
Nor  fought  new  paths,  as  wifer  than  his  God  : 
Their  facred  ftrength  preferv’d  him  from  extremes 
Of  empty  outfide  or  enthufiaft  dreams; 

Whims  of  Molino,  loft  in  rapture’s  mift, 

Or  Quaker,  late -reforming  quietift. 

He  knew  that  works  our  faith  muft  here 
employ, 

And  that  ’tis  heaven’s  great  bufinefs  to  enjoy. 
Fixed  on  that  heaven  he  death’s  approaches  faw, 
Nor  vainly  murmur’d  at  our  nature’s  law  ; 
Repin’d  not  that  his  youth  fo  foon  Ihould  go. 
Nor  griev’d  for  fleeting  pleafures  here  below. 

Of  fharpeft  anguilh  fcorning  to  complain. 

He  fills  with  mirih  the  intervals  of  pain. 

Not  only  unappal’d  but  joyful  fees 

The  dark,  cold  paftage  that  muft  lead  to  peace  ; 

Strong  with  immortal  bloom  fecure  to  rife, 

The  tears  for  everbanilbed  from  his  eyes. 

Who  now  regrets  his  early  youth  would  fpend 
The  life  fo  nobly  that  fo  foon  ftiould  end  ? 

Who  blames  the  {tripling  for  performing  more 
Than  doctors  grave,  and  prelates  of  threefcore  P 
Who  now  efteems  his  fervour  indifereet, 

His  prayers  too  frequent,  or  his  alms  too  great  ? 
Who  thinks,  were  bleft  he  reigns  beyond  the  Iky, 
His  crown  too  radiant,  or  his  throne  too  hi<di  ? 
Who  but  the  fiend,  who  oncehis  courfe  withftood 

And  whifper’d “ Stay  till  fifty  to  be  good  ?”’* 

E 5 Sure, 


r i°6  ] 

Sure,  if  believ’d,  t’  obtain  his  hellifh  aim. 
Adjourning  to  the  time  that  never  came. 


JOURNAL 

From  OB.  14,  1735.  to  Feb.  1,  1731. 

'"jPUESDAY,  Oct.  14,  1735,  Mr.  Benjamin 
Ingham,  of  Queen’s-College,  Oxford,  Mr. 
Charles  Delamotte,  fon  of  a merchant  in  Lon- 
don, who  had  offered  himfelf  fome  days  before, 
my  brother  Charles  Wefley,  and  rnyfelf,  took, 
boat  for  Gravefend,  in  order  to  embark  for 
Georgia.  Our  end  in  leaving  our  native  coun- 
try, was  not  to  avoid  want  (God  having  given 
us  plenty  of  temporal  bleflings)  nor  to  gain  the 
dung  or  drofs  of  riches  or  honour:  but  fingly 
this,  to  fave  our  fouls  : to  live  wholly  to  the 
glory  of  God.  In  the  afternoon  we  found  the 
Simmonds  off  Gravefend,  and  immediately  went 
on  board. 

Wednefdav  and  Thurfday  we  fpent  with  one 
or  two  of  our  friends,  partly  on  board  and 
partly  on  fhore,  in  exhorting  one  another  to 
fjidic  off  every  weight,  and  to  run  with  patience 
race  fd  before  us. 


Friday 


C *°7  ] 

Friday  17.  I began  to  learn  German,  in  order 
to  converfe  with  the  Germans,  fix  and  twenty  of 
whom  we  had  on  board.  On  Sunday,  the  wea- 
ther being  fair  and  calm,  ''we  had  the  morning- 
fervice  on  quarter-deck.  I now  firft  preached 
ex  tempore , and  then  adminiftered  the  Lord's 
fupper  to  fix  or  feven  communicants.  A little 
flock.  May  God  increafe  it ! 

Monday  20.  Believing  the  denying  ourfelves 
even  in  the  fmalleft  inftances,  might,  by  the 
bleffing  of  God,  be  helpful  to  us,  we  wholly 
left  off  the  ufe  of  flefh  and  wine,  and  confined 
ourfelves  to  vegetable  food,  chiefly  rice  and. 
bifket.  In  the  afternoon  David  Nitchman, 
bifhop  of  the  Germans,  and  two  others  began 
to  learn  Englifh.  O may  we  be,  not  only 
of  one  tongue,  but  of  one  mind  and  of  one 
heart ! 

Tuef.  21.  We  failed  from  Gravefend.  When 
we  were  pall  about  half  the  Goodwin  Sands,  the 
wind  fuddenly  failed.  Had  the  calm  continued 
till  ebb,  the  fhip  had  probably  been  loft.  But 
the  gale  fprung  up  again  in  an  hour,  and  carried 
us  into  the  Downs. 

* We  now  began  to  be  a little  regular.  Our 
common  way  of  living  was  this.  From  four  in  the 
morning  till  five,  each  of  us  ufed  private  prayer; 
From  five  to  feven  we  read  the  bible  together, 
carefully  comparing  it  (that  we  might  not  lean  to 
our  own  underftandings)  with  the  writings  of  the 
earlieft  ages.  At  feven  we  breakfafted.  At  eight 
. E 6 weie.- 


[ »o8  3 


were  the  public  prayers.  From  nine  to  twelve  I 
ufually  learned  German,  and  Mr.  Delamotte, 
Greek.  My  brother  writ  fermons,  and  Air.  Ing- 
ham inftrufted  the  children.  At  twelve  we  met 
to  give  an  account  to  one  another  what  we  had 
done  fince  our  lafl  meeting,  and  what  we  defigned 
to  do  before  our  next.  About  one  we  dined. 
The  time  from  dinner  to  four,  we  fpent  in  read- 
ing to  thofe  of  whom  each  of  us  had  taken  in 
charge,  or  in  fpeaking  to  them  Severally,  as  need 
required.  At  four  were  the  evening  prayers  ; 
when  either  the  fecond  leffon  was  explained,  (as 
it  always  was  in  the  morning)  or  the  children 
were  catechifed,  and  inflrufted  before  the  con- 
gregation. From  five  to  fix  «e  again  ufed  private 
prayer.  From  fix  to  feven  I read  in  our  cabin  to 
two  or  three  of  the  pafiengers  (of  whom  there 
were  about  eighty  Englifh  on  board)  and  each  of 
my  brethren  to  a few  more  in  theirs.  At  feven  I 
joined  with  the  Germans  in  their  public  fervice  ; 
while  Air.  Ingham  was  reading  between  the 
decks,  to  as  many  as  defired  to  hear.  At  eight  we 
met  again,  to  exhort  and  inftrucl  one  another. 
Between  nine  and  ten  we  went  to  bed,  where 
neither  the  roaring  of  the  fea,  nor  the  motion  of 
the  fhip,  could  take  away  the  refrefhing  fleep 
which  God  gave  us. 

Friday  24.  Having  a rolling  fea,  moll  of  the 
pafiengers  found  theeffedls  of  it.  Air.  Delamotte 
was  exceeding  fick,  for  feveral  days:  Air. Ingham 
for  about  half  an  hour.  My  brother's  head  ached 

much. 


[ 109  ] 

much.  Hitherto  it  has  pleafed  God,  the  fea  has 
not  difordered  me  at  all ; nor  have  I been  hin- 
dered one  quarter  of  an  hour  from  reading,  writ- 
ing, compofing,  or  doing  any  bufinefs  I could 
have  done  on  ihore. 

During  our  flay  in  the  Downs,  forne  or  other 
of  us  went,  as  often  as  we  had  opportunity,  on 
board  the  fhip  that  failed  in  company  with  us, 
where  alfo  many  were  glad  to  join  in  prayer  and 
hearing  the  word. 

Friday  31.  We  failed  out  of  the  Downs. 
At  eleven  at  night  1 was  waked  by  a great 
noife.  I foon  found  there  was  no  danger. 
But  the  bare  apprehenfion  of  it,  gave  me  a 
lively  convrftion  what  manner  of  men  thofe 
ought  to  be,  who  are  every  moment  on  the  brink 
of  eternity. 

Sat.  Nov.  1.  WTe  came  to  St.  Helen's  har- 
bour, and  the  next  day  into  Cowes  road.  The 
wind  was  fair,  but  we  waited  for  the  man  of 
war,  which  was  to  fail  with  us.  This  was  a 
happy  opportunity  of  inftrubling  our  fellow-tra- 
vellers. May  he  whofe  feed  we  fow,  give  it  the 
increafe ! 

Sund.  16.  Thomas  Hird,  and  Grace  his  wife, 
with  their  children,  Mark,  aged  21,  and  Phebe, 
about  17,  late  quakers,  were,  at  their  often- 
repeated  defire,  and  after  careful  inftru&ion,  ad- 
mitted to  haptifm. 

Thur.  20.  We.  fell  down  into  Yarmouth  road, 
but  the  next  day  were  forced  back  into  Cowes. 

During 


[ 110  ] 

Daring  our  flay  here  there  were  feveral  ftorms : 
in  one  of  which  two  {hips  in  Yarmouth  road 
were  loft. 

The  continuance  of  the  contrary  winds  gave 
my  brother  an  opportunity  of  complying  with 
the  defire  of  the  minifter  of  Cowes,  and  preach- 
ing there  three  oi  four  times.  The  poor  people 
flocked  together  in  great  numbers.  We  diflri- 
buted  a few  little  books  among  the  more  ferious 
of  them,  which  they  received  with  all  poflible 
exprefiions  of  thankfulnefs. 

Fri.  21.  One  recovering  from  a dangerous  ill- 
nefs,  defired  to  be  inftructed  in  the  nature  of  the 
Lord’s  fupper.  I thought  it  concerned  her  to  be 
firft  inftrutted  in  the  nature  of  Chriftianity : 
and  accordingly  fixt  an  hour  a day  to  read  with 
her  in  Mr.  Law’s  Treatife  on  Chriftian  Perfec- 
tion. 

Sund.  23.  At  night  I was  waked  by  the  tolling 
of  the  ih ip  and  roaring  of  the  wind,  and 
plainly  (hewed  I was  unfit,  for  I was  unwilling  to 
die. 

Tuef.  Dec.  2.  I had  much  fatisfaflion  in  con- 
verfing  with  one  that  was  very  ill  and  very  feri- 
ous. But  in  a few  days  fire  recovered  from  her 
ficknefs  and  from  her  ferioufnefs  together. 

Sund.  7.  Finding  nature  did  not  require  fo 
frequent  fupplies  as  we  had  been  accuftoined  to, 
we  agreed  to  leave  off  fuppers ; from  doing, 
which  we  have  hitherto  found  no  inconve- 
nience. 

* WedneL 


t 3 

. * Wednef.  10.  We  failed  from  Cowes,  and  in 
the  afternoon  pad  the  Needles.  Here  the  ragged 
rocks,  with  the  waves  dalhing  and  foaming  at  the 
foot  of  them,  and  the  white  fide  of  the  ifland 
rifing  to  fuch  a height,  perpendicular  from  the 
beach,  gave  a drong  idea  of  him  that  fpanneth 
the  heavens,  and  holdeth  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of 
his  hand ! 

To  day  I fpoke  clofely  on  the  head  of  religion, 
to  one  I had  talked  with  once  or  twice  before. 
Afterwards  fhe  faid,  with  many  tears,  “ My -mo- 
ther died  when  I was  but  ten  years  old.  Some  of 
her  lad  words  were,  “ Child,  fear  God;  and 
though  you  lofe  me,  you  lhall  never  want  a 
friend.”  I have  now  found  a friend,  when  I molt 
wanted,  and  lead  expended  one.” 

From  this  day  to  the  14th,  being  in  the  Bay  of 
Bifcay,  the  fea  was  very  rough.  Mr.  Delamotte 
and  many  others  were  more  fick  than  ever : 
Mr.  Ingham  a little;  I not  at  all.  But  the  14th 
being  a calm  day,  mod  of  the  fick  were  cured  at 
once. 

Thurf.  18.  One  who  was  big  with  child,  in  a 
high  fever,  and  almod  waded  away  with  a vio- 
lent cough,  defired  to  receive  the  holy  commu- 
nion before  fire  died.  At  the  hour  of  her  receiv-. 
ing,  fhe  began  to  recover,  and  in  a few  days  was 
entirely  out  of  danger. 

Sund.  21.  We  had  fifteen  communicants,, 
which  was  our.  ufual  number  on  Sundays  : on. 

Chridmas- 


[ 112  ] 


Chriftmas-day  we  had  nineteen  ; but  on  New- 
year’s-day  fifteen  only. 

Thurf.  Jan.  15,  1736.  Complaint  being  made 
to  Mr.  Oglethorp,  of  the  unequal  diftribution  of 
tbe  water  among  the  paftengers,  he  appointed 
new  officers  to  take  charge  of  it.  At  this  the 
old  ones  and  their  friends  were  highly  exafpe- 
rated  againft  us,  to  whom  they  imputed  the 
change.  But  the  fercenefs  of  man  Jhall  turn  to  thy 
praife. 

Sat.  17.  Many  people  were  very  impatient  at 
the  contrary  wind.  At  feven  in  the  evening  they 
were  quieted  by  a (form.  It  rofe  higher  and  higher 
till  nine.  About  nine  the  fea  broke  over  us  from 
idem  to  hern;  burft  through  the  windows  of  the 
ft  ate  cabin,  where  three  or  four  of  us  were,  and 
covered  us  all  over,  though  a bureau  fhelteredme 
£rom  the  main  fhock.  About  eleven  I lay  down 
in  the  great  cabin,  and  in  a ffiort  time  fell  afleep, 
though  very  uncertain  whether  I ffiould  wake 
alive,  and  much  afhamed  of  my  unwillingnefs  to 
die.  O how  pure  in  heart  muft.he  be,  who 
would  rejoice  to  appear  before  God  at  a mo- 
ment’s warning!  Toward  morning,  he  rebuked 
the  winds  and  the  fea , and  there  was  a great 
calm . 

Sund.  18.  We  returned  God  thanks  for  our 
deliverance,  of  which  a few  appeared  duly  fenfi- 
ble.  But  the  reft  (among  whom  were  moft  of  the 
jailors)  denied  we  had  been  in  any  danger.  I 

could 


[ 413  ] 

could  not  have  believed  that  To  litde  good  would 
have  been  done  bv  the  terror  they  were  in  be- 
fore. But  it  cannot  be  that  they  fhould  long  obey 
God  from  fear,  who  are  deaf  to  the  motives  of 
love. 

Fri.  23.  In  the  evening  another  Form  began. 
In  the  morning  it  increafed,  fo  that  they  were 
forced  to  let  the  fit  ip  drive.  I could  not  but  fay 
to  myfelf,  How  is  it  that  thou  haji  no  faith  ? 
Being  Hill  unwilling  to  die.  About  one  in  the 
afternoon,  almoft  as  foon  as  I had  ftept  out  of  the 
great  cabin  door,  the  fea  did  not  break  as  ufual, 
but  came  with  a full,  fmooth  tide  over  the  fide 
of  the  fhip.  I was  vaulted  over  with  water  in  a 
moment,  and  fo  (tunned,  that  I fcarce  expedited 
to  lift  up  my  head  again,  till  the  fea  fhould  give 
up  her  dead.  But,  thanks  be  to  God,  I re- 
ceived no  hurt  at  all.  About  midnight  the  ftorm 
ceafed. 

* Sund.  25.  At  noon,  our  third  ftorm  began. 
At  four  it  was  more  violent  than  before.  Now 
indeed  we  could  fay.  The  waves  of  the  fea  were 
mighty  and  raged  horribly . They  rofe  up  to  the 
heavens  above,  and  cleave  down  to  hell  beneath . 
The  tvinds  roared  round  about  us,  and  (what  I 
never  heard  before]  whittled  as  diflinftly  as  if  it 
had  been  a human  voice.  The  fhip  not  only  rocked 
to  and  fro  with  the  utmofl  violence,  but  fhook 
and  jarred  with  fo  unequal,  grating  a motion, 
that  one  could  not  but  with  great  difficulty  keep 

one’s 


•Tie’s  hold  of  any  thing,  nor  Hand  a moment 
without  it.  Every  ten  minutes  came  a fhock 
againft  the  hern  or  fide  of  the  fitip,  which  one 
would  think  fhould  dafh  the  planks  in  pieces. 
At  this  time,  a child,  privately  baptized  before, 
was  brought  to  be  received  into  the  church.  It 
put  me  in  mind  of  Jeremiah’s  buying  the  field, 
when  the  Chaldeans  were  on  the  point  of  de- 
flroying  Jerufalem,  and  feemed  a pledge  of  the 
mercy  God  defigned  to  fhew  us,  even  in 
the  land  of  the  living. 

We  fpent  two  or  three  hours  after  prayers,  in 
converfing  fuitably  to  the  occafion,  confirming 
one  another  in  a calm  fubmifiion,  to  the  wife, 
holy,  gracious  will  of  God.  And  now7  a fiorm  did 
not  appear  fo  terrible  as  before.  Bleffed  be  the 
God  of  all  confolation  ! 

At  feven  I went  to  the  Germans.  I had  long 
before  obferved,  the  great  ferioufnefs  of  their 
behaviour.  Of  their  humility  they  had  given  a 
continual  proof,  by  performing  thofe  fervile  offi- 
ces for  the  other  pafiengers,  which  none  of  the 
Englifh  would  undertake  ; lor  which  they  defired, 
and  w'ould  receive  no  pay,  faying,  “ It  was  good 
for  their  proud  hearts,”  and  “ Their  loving  Sa- 
viour had  done  more  for  them.”  And  every  dayi 
had  given  them  occafion  of  fhewmga  meeknefs, 
which  no  injury  could  move.  It  they  were 
pufhed,  firuck,  or  throwrn  down,  they  rofe  again 
and  tvent  away;  but  no  complaint  was  found  in  i 
their  mouth.  There  w7as  now  an  opportunity  ol 

ryingjj 


[ “5  ] 


frying,  whether  they  were  delivered  from  the 
fpirit  of  fear,  as  well  as  from  that  of  pride,  anger 
and  revenge.  In  the  midll  of  the  pfalm  where- 
with their  fervice  began,  the  fea  broke  over,  fplit  . 
the  main -fail  in  pieces,  coveted  the  flrip,  and 
poured  in  between  the  decks,  as  if  the  great  deep 
had  already  fwallowed  us  up.  A terrible  fcream- 
ing  began  among  the  Englifh.  The  Germans 
calmly- fung  on.  I alked  one  of  them  afterwards, 

“ Was  you  not  afraid?”  He  anfwered,  “ I thank 
God,  No.”  I afked,  “ But  were  not  your  wo- 
men and  children  afraid  ?”  He  replied  mildly, 
“ No  ; our  women  and  children  are  not  afraid  to 
die.” 

From  them  I went  to  their  crying,  trembling 
neighbours,  and  pointed  out  to  them  the  differ- 
ence in  the  hour  of  trial,  between  him  that  fear- 
eth  God,  and  him  that  feareth  him  not.  At 
twelve  the  wind  fell.  This  was  the  molt  glorious 
day  which  I have  hitherto  feen. 

Mond.  £.6.  We  enjoyed  the  calm.  I 
can  conceive  no  difference,  comparable  to  that 
between  a fmooth  and  a rough  fea,  except  that 
| which  is  between  a mind  calmed  by  the  love  of 
God,  and  one  torn  up  by  the  ftorms  of  earthly 
paffions. 

* Thurf.  Jan.  29.  About  feven  in  the  even- 
ing, we  fell  in  with  the  fkirts  of  a hurricane.  The 
rain  as  well  as  the  wind  was  extremely  violent. 
The  fky  was  fo  dark  in  a moment,  that  the  failors 
' could  not  fo  much  as  fee  the  ropes,  or  fet  about 

furling 


[ “6  ] 

furling  the  fails.  The  fhip  mull  in  all  probability- 
have  overfet,  had  not  the  wind  fell  as  fuddenly 
as  it  role.  Toward  the  end  of  it,  we  had  that  ap- 
pearance on  each  of  the  mads,  which  fit  is 
thought)  the  ancients  called  Callor  and  Pollux. 
It  was  a fmall  ball  of  white  fire,  like  a liar.  The 
mariners  fay,  it  appears  either  in  a dorm 
(and  then  commonly  upon  the  deck)  or  pid  at 
the  end  of  it.:  and  then  it  is  ufually  on  the  mads  j 
or  fails. 

Frid.  30.  W e had  another  dorm,  which  did 
us  no  other  harm,  than  fpliting  the  fore-fail. 
Our  bed  being  wet,  I laid  me  down  on  the  door, 
and  dept  found  till  morning.  And  I believe,  I 
lhall  not  find  it  nec-dful  to  go  to -bed  (as  it  is 
called)  any  more. 

Sund.  Feb.  1.  We  fpoke  with  a fhip  of  Ca- 
rolina ; and  Wedn.  4.  came  within  foundings. 
About  noon  the  trees  werevifible  from  the  mad, 
and  in  the  afternoon  from  the  main  deck.  ] 
In  the  evening  lelfon  were  thefe  words,  A j 
great  door  and  effeciual  is  opened.  O let  no  one 
fhut  it ! 

Thurf.  Feb.  5.  Between  two  and  three  in  the 
afternoon,  God  brought  us  all  fafe  into  the  Sa- 
vannah river.  We  call  anchor  near  Tybee- 
illand,  where  the  groves  of  pines,  running  along 
the  Ihore,  made  an  agreeable  profpeft,  fhewing 
as  it  were,  the  bloom  of  fpring,  in  the  depth  of 
winter. 

Frid.  6.  About  eight  in  the  morning,  we  firft 

fet 


[ «7  ] 


fet  foot  on  American  ground.  It  was  a fmall  un- 
inhabited ifland,  over  agsinft  Tybec.  Mr.  Ogle- 
thorpe led  us  to  a rifing  ground,  where  we  all 
kneeled  down  to  give  thanks.  He  then  took  boat 
for  Savannah.  When  the  rcfl  of  the  people  were 
cotne  on  Ihore,  we  called  our  little  flock  together 
to  prayers.  Several  parts  of  the  fecond  lelfon, 
Mark.  vi.  were  wonderfully  fuited  to  the  occa- 
fion;  in  particular,  the  account  of  the  courage 
and  fufferings  of  John  the  baptift  ; our  Lord’s 
directions  to  the  firil  preachers  of  his  gofpel  and 
their  toiling  at  fea,  and  deliverance  with  thofe 
comfortable  words.  It  is  I,  be  not  ajiaid. 

Sat.  Feb.  7.  Mr.  Oglethorpe  returned  from. 
Savannah,  with  Mr.  Spangenberg,  one  of  the 
pallors  of  the  Germans.  I foon  found  what  fpirit 
he  was  of ; and  afked  bis  advice  with  regard  to 
my  own  conduct.  He  faid,  “ My  brother,  I 
“ mu  ft  firft  afk  you  one  or  two  queftions.  Have 
“you  the  witnefs  within  yourfelf?  Does  the 
“ Spirit  of  God  bear  witnefs  with  your  fpirit, 

1“  that  you  are  a child  of  God  ?”  I was  furprized, 
and  knew  not  what  to  anfwer.  He  obferved  it, 
and  afked,  “ Do  you  know  Jefus  Chrift  ?'■’  I 
paufed  and  faid,  “ I know  he  is  the  Saviour  of 
I the  world.”  “ True  ; replied  he  ; but  do  you 
“ know  he  has  faved  you  ?”  I anfwered,  “ I 
hope,  he  has  died  to  fave  me.”  He  only  added, 
“ Do  you  know  yourfelf  ?”  I faid,  “ I do.”  But 
I fear,  they  were  vain  words. 

Mond.  9.  I afked  him  many  queftions,  both 


concerning 


£ n8  ] 


concerning  himfelf,  and  the  church  at  Hernhuth. 
The  fubftance  of  his  anfwers  was  this. 

“ At  eighteen  years  old  I was  fent  to  the  uni- 
verfity  of  Jena,  where  I fpent  fome  years  in 
learning  languages,  and  the  vain  philofophy, 
which  I have  now  long  been  labouring  to  forget. 
Here  it  pleafed  God  by  fome  that  preached  his 
word  with  power,  to  overturn  my  heart.  I im- 
mediately threw  afide  all  my  learning,  but,  what 
tended  to  fave  my  foul.  I fhunned  all  company, 
and  retired  into  a folitary  place,  refolving  to 
fpend  my  life  there.  For  three  days  1 had  much 
comfort  here  ; but  on  the  fourth  it  was  ail  gone. 
I was  amazed,  and  went  for  advice  to  an  experi- 
enced Chriftian.  When  I came  to  aim,  I could 
not  fpeak.  But  he  faw  mv  heart,  and  advifed 
me  to  go  back  to  my  houfe,  and  follow  tbebufi- 
nefs  providence  called  me  to.  I went  back,  but 
was  fit  for  nothing.  I could  neither  do  bufinefs, 
nor  join  in  any  converfation.  All  I could  fay 
to  any  one,  was  Yes,  or  No.  Many  times  I could 
not  fay  that,  nor  underlland  the  plainefl  thing 
that  was  faid  tome.  My  friends  and  acquaint- 
ance looked  upon  me  as  dead,  came  no  more 
to  me,  nor  fpoke  about  me. 

“ When  I grew  better,  I began  teaching  fome 
poor  children.  Other's  joining  with  me,  we 
taught  more  and  more,  till  there  were  above 
thirty  teachers  and  above  two  hundred  fcholars. 

I had  now  invitations  to  other  univerfities.  But 
I could  not  accept  of  any:  defiling  only,  if  it 


were 


[ ] 

were  the  will  of  God,  to  be  little  and  unknown. 

I had  fpent  fome  years  thus,  when  profeffor 
Breithaupt  of  Halle  died : being  then  preft  to 
remove  thither,  I believed  it  was  the  call  of 
God,  and  went.  1 had  not  been  long  there,  be- 
fore many  faults  were  found,  both  with  my  be- 
haviour and  preaching  : and  offences  increafed 
more  and  more,  till  after  half  a year,  a petition 
againfl  me  was  fent  to  the  king  of  Pruffia,  who 
fent  an  order  to  the  commander  at  Halle,  in 
purfuance  whereof  I was  warned  to  leave  the 
city  in  forty-eight  hours.  I did  fo,  and  retired 
to  Hernhuth,  to  Count  Zinzendorf. 

“ The  village  of  Hernhuth  contains  about  a 
thoufand  fouls,  gathered  out  of  many  nations. 
They  hold  faff  the  difcipline,  as  well  as  the  faith 
and  practice  of  the  apoflolical  church.  I was  de- 
fired  by  the  brethren  there  Iafl  year,  to  conduct 
fixteen  of  them  to  Georgia,  where  two  lots  of 
ground  are  afhgned  us,  and  with  them  I have 
flayed  ever  fince.” 

I afked,  “Whither  he  was  to  go  next?”  He 
faid,  “ I have  thoughts  of  going  to  Penfyl vania. 
But  what  God' will  do  with  me,  I know  not.  I 
am  blind.  I am  a child.  My  father  knows, 
and  I am  ready  to  go  wherever  he  calls.” 

Frid.  13.  Some  of  the  Indians  fent  us  word  of 
their  intention  to  come  down  to  us.  In  our 
courfe  of  reading  to  day,  were  thefe  words ; 
Thus  faith  the  Lord  ofhofts,  It  f tail  yet  come  to 
pafs  that  there  fall  come  people , and  the  inhabi- 
tants 


[ 120  ] 


tants  of  many  cities.  And  the  inhabitants  of  on: 
city  fall  go  to  another , faying , Let  us  go  fpeedily 
to  pray  before  the  Lord,  and  to  feek  the  Lord  of 
hoj/s  : I will  go  alfo.  Yea  many  people  andfrong 
nations,  fiall  come  to  feek  the  Lord  of  hofs,  and 
to  pray  before  him.  Zech.  viii.  20,  c3c. 

Sat.  Feb.  14.  About  one  Tomo  Chacbi,  bis 
nephew  Thleeanouliee,  his  wife  Sinaukv,  with 
two  more  women  and  two  or  three  Indian  chil- 
dren, came  on  broad.  As  foon  as  we  came  in, 
they  all  rofe,  and  fhook  us  by  the  hand,  and 
Tomo-Chachi  (one  Mrs.  Mufgrove  interpreted) 
fpoke  as  iollows. 

“ I am  glad  you  arc  come.  "When  I was  in 
England  I defired  that  fome  would  fpeak  the  great 
word  to  me.  And  my  nation  then  defired  to 
hear  it.  But  now  we  are  all  in  confufion.  Yet 
I am  glad  you  are  come.  I will  go  up  and  fpeak 
to  the  wife  men  of  our  nation.  And  I hope  they 
will  hear.  But  we  would  not  be  made  Chrif- 
tians,  as  the  Spaniards  make  Cbriflians.  We 
would  be  taught,  before  we  are  baptized.” 

I anfwered,  “ There  is  but  one,  he  that  fitteth 
in  heaven,  who  is  able  to  teach  man  wifdom. 
Tho’  we  are  come  fo  far,  we  know  not  whether 
he  will  pleafe  to  teach  you  by  us  or  no.  If  He 
teaches  you,  you  will  learn  wifdom  ; butwe  can 
do  nothing:.”  We  then  withdrew. 

Sund.  15.  Another  party  of  Indians  came. 
They  were  all  tall,  well-proportioned  men,  and 
had  a remarkable  foftnefs  in  their  fpeech,  and 

gentlenefs, 


[ 121  ] 

geiitlenefs  in  their  whole  behaviour.  In  the 
afternoon  they  all  returned  home,  but  three,  who 
flayed  to  go  with  Mr.  Oglethorpe. 

Monday,  Feb.  16.  Mr.  Oglethorpe  fet  out 
for  the  new  fettlement  on  the  Alatamahaw  river. 
He  tpok  with  him  50  men  ; befides  Mr.  Ing- 
ham, Mr.  Hermfdorf  and  the  three  Indians. 

Thurf.  19.  My  brother  and  I took  boat,  and 
palling  by  Savannah,  went  to  pay  our  frnft  vifit 
in  America,  to  the  poor  heathens.  But  neither 
Tomo  Chachi  nor  Sinauky  were  at  home.  Com- 
ing back,  we  waited  upon  Mr.  Caullon,  the 
chief  magiftrate  of  Savannah.  From  him  we  went 
with  Mr.  Spangenberg  to  the  German  brethren. 
About  eleven  we  returned  to  the  boat,  and 
came  to  our  fhip  about  four  in  the  morning. 

Sat.  21.  Mary  Welch,  aged  eleven  days,  was 
baptized  according  to  the  cudom  of  the  firll 
church,  and  the  rule  of  the  church  of  England,  by 
immerfion.  The  child  was  ill  then,  but  recovered 
from  that  hour. 

Tu.  24.  Mr.  Oglethorpe  returned.  The  day 
following  I took  mv  leave  of  moll  of  the  paf- 
fengers  of  the  fhip  ; who  all  appeared  ferious. 
It  may  be,  all  the  feed  is  not  fallen  upon  flony 
ground. 

.In  the  evening  I went  to  Savannah  again, 

I whence  Mr.  Spangenberg,  bilhop  Nitfchman  and 
Andrew  Dober,  went  up  with  us  to  Mrs.  Muf- 
grove's,  to  chufe  a fpot  for  the  little  houfe, 
which  Mr.  Oglethorpe  had  promifed  to  build  us. 
Vol.  XXVI.  F Being 


[ 122  ] 


Being  "afterward  difappointed  of  our  boat,  we 
were  obliged  to  pafs  the  night  there.  But  wher- 
ever we  are,  it  is  the  fame  thing,  if  it  be  the  will 
of  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

* At  our  return  the  next  dav,  (Mr. 
Quincy  being  then  in  the  houfe  wherein 
we  afterwards  were)  Mr.  Delamotte  and  I 
took  up  our  lodging  with  the  Germans.  We 
had  now  an  opportunity  day  by  day,  of  ob- 
ferving  their  whole  behaviour.  For  we  were  in 
one  room  with  them  from  morning  to  night, 
unlefs  for  the  little  time  I fpent  in  walking. 
They  were  always  employed,  always  chearful 
themfelves,  and  in  good  humour  with  one  ano- 
ther. They  had  put  away  all  anger  and  llrife, 
and  wrath  and  bitternefs  and  clamour  and  evil- 
fpeaking.  They  walked  worthy  of  the  vocation 
wherewith  they  were  called,  and  adorned  the 
gofpel  of  our  Lord  in  all  things. 

Sat.  Feb.  28.  They  met  to  confult  concern- 
ing the  affairs  of  their  church  : Mr.  Spangen- 
berg  being  fhortly  to  go  to  Pennfylvania,  and  bi- 
fhop  Nitfchman  to  return  to  Germany.  After 
feveral  hours  fpent  in  conference  and  prayer, 
they  proceeded  to  the  election  and  ordination 
ofabilhop.  The  great  fimplicitv  as  well  as  fo- 
lemnity  of  the  whole,  almod  made  me  forget 
the  feventeen  hundred  years  between,  and  ima- 
gine mvfelf  in  one  of  thofe  afTemblies,  where 
form  and  Hate  were  not  : bat  Paul  the  tent-maker 


or 


C 123  ] 

or  Peter  the  fifiierman  prefided  ; yet  with  the 
demonflration  of  the  fpirit  and  of  power. 

Sund.  29.  Hearing  Mr.  Oglethorpe  did  not 
come  any  more  to  Savannah,  before  he  went  to 
Frederica,  I was  obliged  to  go  down  to  the  fhip 
again,  (Mr.  Spangenberg  following  me  thither) 
and  receive  his  orders  and  inftruflions  on  feveral 
heads.  From  him  we  went  to  public  prayers  : 
after  which  we  were  refrefned  by  feveral  fetters 
from  England.  Upon  which  I could  not  but 
obferve  how  careful  our  Lord  is,  to  repay  what- 
ever we  give  up  on  his  account.  When  I left 
England,  I was  chiefly  afraid  of  two  things ; 
one,  that  I fhould  never  again  have  fo  many 
faithful  friends  as  I left  there;  the  other,  that 
the  fpark  of  love  which  began  to  kindle  in  their 
hearts,  would  cool  and  die  away.  But  who 
knoweth  the  mercy  and  power  of  God  ? From 
ten  friends  I am  a w'hile  fecluded  ; and  he  hath 
opened  me  a door  into  a whole  church.  And 
as  to  the  very  perfons  I left  behind,  his  fpirit  is 
gone  forth  fo  much  the  more,  teaching  them 
not  to  truft  in  man,  but  in  him  that  raifed  the 
dead,  and  calleth  the  things  that  are  not,  as 
though  they  were. 

About  four,  having  taken  leave  of  Mr.  Span- 
genberg, who  wras  the  next  morning  to  fet  out 
for  Pennfylvania,  I returned  to  Savannah.  Sat. 
March  6.  I had  a long  converfation  with  John 
Reinier,  the  fon  of  a gentleman,  who  being 
driven  odt  of  France,  on  account  of  his  religion, 

F 2 fettled 


L 124  ] 


fettled  at  Vivay  in  Swilferland,  and  praclifed 
phyfic  there.  His  father  died  while  he  was  a 
child.  Some  years  after  he  told  his  mother,  he 
was  defirous  to  leave  SwifTerland,  and  to  retire 
into  fome  other  country,  where  he  might  be 
free  from  the  temptations  which  he  could  not 
avoid  there.  When  her  confant  was  at  length 
-obtained,  he  agreed  with  a mailer  of  a vefTel, 
with  whom  he  went  to  Holland  by  land;  thence 
to  England,  and  from  England  to  Pennfvl vania. 
He  was  provided  with  money,  books  and  drugs, 
intending  to  follow  his  father’s  profefTion.  But 
no  fooner  was  he  come  to  Philadelphia,  than  the 
captain  who  had  borrowed  his  money  before,  in- 
ftead  of  repaying  it,  demanded  the  full  pay  for 
hispaffage,  and  under  that  pretence  feized  on  all 
his  effetls.  He  then  left  him  in  a ftrange  coun- 
try, where  he  could  not  fpeak  to  be  underflood, 
without  neceffarics,  money  or  friends.  In  this 
condition  he  thought  it  bell  to  fell  himfelffora 
fervant,  which  he  accordingly  did,  for  feven 
years.  When  about  five  were  expired,  he  fell 
4ick  of  a lingering  illnefs,  which  made  him  ufelefs 
to  his  mailer  ; who  alter  it  had  continued  half  a 
year,  would  not  keep  him  any  longer,  but  turn- 
-ed  him  out  to  Ihift  for  himfelf.  He  fi rfl  tried  to 
mend  Ihoes,  butfoon  after  joined  himfelf  to  fome 
French  proteftants,  and  learned  to  make  buttons. 
He  then  went  and  lived  with  an  anabaptill : but 
foon  after  hearing  an  account  of  the  Germans 
in  Georgia,  walked  from  Pennfylvania  thither. 

where 


[ 125  3 

where  he  found  the  reft,  which  he  had  fo  long 
fought  in  vain. 

Sund.  March  7.  I entered  upon  my  miniftry 
at  Savannah,  by  preaching  on  the  epiftle  for 
the  day,  being  the  13th  of  the  firft  of  Corin- 
thians. In  the  fecond  leiTon,  Luke  xviii.  was 
our  Lord’s  predi&ion  of  the  treatment  which  he 
himfelf  (and  confequently  his  followers)  was  to 
meet  with  from  the  world  ; and  his  gracious  pro- 
mife  to  thofe  who  are  content,  Nudi  nudum 
Chnjlum  fqui  ; Verily  I Jay  unto  you,  there  is  no 
man  that  hath  left  houfe , or  friend*,  or  brethren,  or 
wife , or  children  for  the  kingdom  of  God's  Jake, 
whichjhall  not  receive  manifold  mere  in  this  prefnl 
time,  and  in  the  world  to  come  everlajling  life, 

* Yet  notwithftanding  thefe  plain  declarations 
of  our  Lord,  notwithftanding  my  own  repeated 
experience,  notwithftanding  the  experience  of 
all  the  ftncere  followers  of  Chrift,  whom  I have 
ever  talked  with,  read  or  heard  of  : nay  and  tiie 
reafon  of  the  thing,  evincing  to  a demonftration, 
that  all  who  love  not  the  light  muft  hate  him, 
who  is  continually  labouring  to  pour  it  in  upon 
them  : I do  here  bear  witnefs  againft  myfelf, 
that  when  I faw  the  number  of  people  crowding 
into  the  church,  the  deep  attention  with  which 
they  received  the  word,  and  the  ferioufnefs  that 
afterwards  fat  on  all  their  faces  ; I could  fcarce 
refrain  from  giving  the  lie  to  -experience  and 
reafon  and  feripture  all  together.  I could  hard- 
ly believe  that  the  greater,  the  far  greater  part 
F 3 of 


C »6  J. 

of  this  attentive,  ferious  people,  would  hereaftei 
trample  under  foot  that  word,  and  fay  all  man- 
ner of  evil  fallly  of  him  that  fpake  it.  O who 
can  believe,  what  their  heart  abhors  ? Jefus, 
Maher,  have  mercy  on  us ! Let  us  love  thy 
cro-fs;  then  fhall  we  believe.  If  we  Juff er  with 
ikee,  we Jhall  alfo  reign  with  thee  ! 

This  evening  one  of  the  Germans,  who'  had 
been  long  ill  of  a confumption,  found  himfelf 
much  worfe.  On  mv  mentioning  it  to  bilhop 
Nitfchman  he  fmiled  and  faid,  “ He  will  foon 
he  well ; he  is  ready  for  the  bridegroom.” 

Sund,  Mar.  14,  Having  before  given  notice 
of  my  defign  to  do  fo,  every  Sunday  and  holiday, 
according  to  the  rules  of  our  church,  I adminif- 
tred  the  holy  communion  to  eighteen  perfons. 
Which  of  thefe  will  endure  to  the  end  ? 

Mond.  Mar.  >5.  Mr.  Quincy  going  for  Caro- 
lina, 1 removed  into  the  minifter’s  houfe.  It  is 
large  enough  for  a larger  family  than  ours  and 
has  many  conveniences,  befides  a good  garden. 

I could  not  but  reflect  on  the  well-known  epi- 
gram, 

wok*  v.  v h MrwTrwB* 

How Jhort  a time  will  it  he  before  its pre fail  poffffor 
is  removed ! Perhaps  to  be  no  more Jeen  ! 

Sund.  28.  A fervant  of  Mr.  Bradley’s  fent  to 
dtefire  to  fpeakwith  me.  Going  to  him,  I found 
a young  man  ill,  but  perfectly  fenftble.  He  de- 

fired 


t 12  7 ] 

fired  the  reft  to  go  out,  and  then  faid,  “ On 
Thurfday  night,  about  eleven,  being  in  bed, 
but  broad  awake,  I heard  one  calling  aloud 
“Peter!  Peter  Wright !”  And  looking  up,  the 
room  was  as  light  as  day,  and  I faw  a man  in 
very  bright  cloaths  ftand  by  the  bed,  who  faid, 
“ Prepare  your  felf\  far  your  end  is  nigh  and 
then  immediately  all  was  dark  as  before.”  I told 
him,  “ The  advice  was  good,  whencefoever  it 
came/’  In  a few  days  he  recovered  from  his 
illnefs;  his  whole  temper  was  changed  as  well 
as  his  life  ; and  fo  continued  to  be,  till  after 
three  or  four  weeks  he  relapfed  and  died  in 
peace. 

Tuef.  Mar.  30.  Mr.  Ingham  coming  from  Fre- 
derica, brought  me  letters,  prefting  me  to  go 
thither.  The  next  day  Mr.  Delamotte  and  I 
began  to  try,  whether  life  might  not  as  well  be 
fuftained,  by  one  fort  as  by  variety  of  food.  We 
chofe  to  make  the  experiment  with  bread;  and 
were  never  more  vigorous  and  healthy  than 
while  we  tailed  nothing  elfe.  BlcJJ'ed  are  the  pure 
in  heart ! Who  whether  they  eat  or  drink,  or 
whatever  they  do,  have  no  end  therein  but  to 
pleafe  God  ! To  them  all  things  are  pure. 
Every  creature  is  good  to  them,  and  nothing  to 
be  rejefled.  But  let  them  who  know  and  feel, 
that  they  are  not  thus  pure,  ufe  every  help  and 
remove  every  hindrance:  always  remembering, 
He  that  defpifelh  little  things,  Jhall  fall  by  little 
and  little.  F 4 


Sund. 


[ 128  } 

5und.  Apr.  4.  About  four  in  the  afternoon,  I 
fet  out  for  Frederica,  in  a Pettiawga  (a  fort  of 
flat-bottomed  barge.)  The  next  evening  we 
anchored  near  Skidoway  ifland,  where  the  wa- 
ter at  flood  was  twelve  or  fourteen  foot  deep. 

I wrapt  myfelt  up  from  head  to  foot,  in  a large 
cloak,  to  keep  off  the  fand-flies,  and  lav  down 
on  the  quarter-deck.  Between  one  and  two  I 
waked  under  water,  being  fo  faff  afleep  that  I 
did  not  find  where  I was  till  my  mouth  was  full 
of  it.  Having  left  my  cloak,  I know  not  how 
upon  deck,  I fwatn  round  to  the  other  fide  of 
the  Pettiawga,  where  a boat  was  tyed,  and 
climbed  up  by  the  rope,  without  any  hurt,  more 
than  wetting  my  deaths.  Thou  art  the  God  of 
whom  cometh  falvation  : thou  art  the  Lord  by 
whom  we  efcape  death. 

The  winds  were  fo  contrary,  that  on  Sat.  10, 
we  could  but  juft  get  over-againfl  Dobov  ifland, 
twenty  miles  from  Frederica,  but  could  not  pof- 
ftbly  make  the  creek,  having  a ftrong  tide  alfo 
againfl  us.  Here  we  lay  beating  off  till  pafl  one  ; 
when  the  lightning  and  rain  which  we  had  long 
feen  at  a diflance,  drove  down  full  upon  us  ; till 
after  a quarter  of  an  hour,  the  clouds  parted, 
fome  palling  on  the  right,  and  fome  on  the  left, 
leaving  us  a clear  fky,  and  fo  ftrong  a wind  right 
after  us,  as  in  two  hours  brought  us  to  Frederica. 

A little  before  we  landed,  I opened  my  Tefta- 
ment  on  thefe  words,  If  God  be  for  us.  who  can 
be  againf  us  ? Coming  on  fhore,  I found  my 
brother  exceeding  weak,  having  been  for  fome 

time 


[ 129  ] 

time  ill  oFa  flux.  But  he  mended  from  the  hour 
he  faw  me.  This  alfo  hath  God  wrought! 

Sund.  April  1 1.  I preached  at  the  new  Store- 
houfe  on  the  firft  verfe  of  the  gofpel  for  the  day, 
Which  of  you  convincetk  me  of  fin ? And  if  I fay 
the  truth , why  do  ye  not  believe  me  ? There_was  a 
large  congregation,  whom  I endeavoured  to 
convince  of  unbelief,  by  Amply  propofing  the 
conditions  of  falvation,  as  they  are  laid  down  in 
fcripture,  and  appealing  to  their  own  hearts, 
whether  they  believed  they  could  be  faved  on  no 
other  terms  ? 

In  every  one  of  the  fix  following  days,  I had 
fome  frefh  proofs  of  the  abfolute  neceflity  of  fol- 
lowing that  wife  advice  of  the  apoftle,  fudge 
nothing  before  the  time  ; until  the  Lord  come , who 
both  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darknfs, 
and  will  make  manifefl  the  counfels  of  the  hearts. 

Sat.  April  ly.  We  fet  out  for  Savannah,  and 
reached  it  on  Tuefday  evening.  O blelfed  place, 
where  having  but- one  end  in  view,  diffembling 
and  fraud  are  not ; but  each  of  us  can  pour  out 
his  heart  without  fear  into  his  brother's  bofom  ! 

* Not  finding  as  yet  any  door  open,  for  the 
purfuing  our  main  defign,  we  confidered,  in 
what  manner  we  might  be  mo  ft  ufeful  to  the  lit- 
tle flock  at  Savannah.  And  we  agreed,  ill.  To 
advife  the  more  ferious  among  them,  to  form 
themfelves  into  a fort  of  little  fociety,  and  to 
meet  onceor  twice  a week,  in  order  to  reprove, 
inftrubl  and  exhort  one  another.  2.  To  feleft 
©ut  of  thefe  a fmaller  number  for  a more  intimate 
F 5 union 


[ 13°  ] 

union  with  each  other,  which  might  be  forward- 
ed, partly  by  our  converfing  fingly  with  each, 
and  partly  by  inviting  them  altogether  to  our 
houfe;  and  this  accordingly  we  determined  to 
do  every  Sunday  in  the  afternoon. 

Wed  .May  5.  I was  alked  to  baptize  a child  of 
Mr.  Parker’s,  fecond  bailiff  ofSavannah.  ButMrs. 
Parker  told  me,  “ Neither  Mr.  P.  nor  I will  con- 
fent  to  its  being  dipped.”  I anfwered,  “ If  von 
certify  that  your  child  is  weak,  it  will  fujjice  the 
rubrick  fays )to  pom  water  upon  it.’’  She  replied*, 
“ Nay  the  child  is  not  weak;  but  Jam  refolved 
it  (hall  not  be  dipped.”  This  argument  I could 
not  confute.  So  I went  home  ; and  the  child 
was  baptized  by  another  perfon. 

Sund.  9.  I began  dividing  the  public  prayers, 
according  to  the  original  appointment  of  the 
church  (dill  obferved  in  a few  places  in  Eng- 
land.) The  morning  fervice  began  at  five.  The 
communion  office  (with  the  fermo")  at  eleven. 
The  evening  fervice  about  three.  And  this  day  I 
began  reading  prayers  in  the  Court-houfe;  a 
large  and  convenient  place. 

Mond.  10.  I began  vifit  ng  my  pariffiioners  in 
order,  from  houfe  to  houfe  ; for  which  I fet  apart 
the  time  (when  they  can’t  work,  becaufe  of  the 
heat,  viz.)  from  twelve  till  three  in  the  afternoon. 

Sund.  May  16,  We  were  Turprized  in  the 
evening  by  my  brother  juft  come  from  Frederica. 
After  fome  converfation,  we  confirlted  how  the 
poor  people  there  might  be  taken  care  of,  during 
his  ablence.  And  it  was  at  laft  agreed,  that  Mr. 

Ingham 


[ ] 


Ingham  and  I fhould  take  our  turns  in  afliftirig 
them;  and  the  firft  was  allotted  me.  Accord- 
ingly on  Tuef.  18.  I walked  to  Thunderbolt ; 
whence  the  next  afternoon  we  fet  out  in  a fmall 
boat : in  the  evening  we  touched  at  Skidoway, 
and  had  a fmall,  but  attentive  congregation,  to 
join  with  us  in  evening  prayer. 

Sat.  May  22.  About  four  in  the  afternoon  we 
entered  upon  Doboy  Sound.  The  wind,  which 
was  right  a-head,  was  fo  high,  when  we  were  in 
the  middle  of  it,  and  the  fea  fo  rough,  being 
driven  in  at  the  inlet,  that  the  boat  was  on  the 
point  of  finking  every  moment.  But  it  pleafed 
God  to  bring  us  fafe  to  the  other  fide  in  half  an 
hour,  and  to  Frederica  the  next  morning.  We 
had  public  pravers  at  nine,  at  which  nineteen 
perfons  were  prefent;  and  (I  think)  nine  com- 
municants. 

* Fri.  28.  I read  the  commendatory  prayer  by 
Mr.  Germain,  who  lay  at  the  point  of  death. 
He  had  loft  his  Ipeech  and  his  fenfes.  His  eyes 
were  fet,  neither  had  he  any  difcernable  motion, 
but  the  heaving  of  his  bread.  While  we  flood 
round  him,  he  ftretched  out  his  arms,  rubbed  his 
head,  recovered  his  fight,  fpeeeh  and  underftand- 
Lng;  and  immediately  fending  for  the  bailiffs, 
fettled  the  affairs  of  his  family  ; and  then  lay 
down  and  died. 

At  the  firft  fervice  on  Sund.  May, go.  were 
only  five,  at  the  fec'ond  twenty-five.  The 
next  day,  I made  Mr.  Laffei’s-will ; who  not- 
F 6 withftanding 


C *32  ] 

withftanding  his  great  weaknefs,  was  quite  re- 
vived, when  any  mention  was  made  of  death,  or 
of  eternity. 

Tuef.  June  l.  After  praying  with  him,  I was 
fwrprized  to  find  one  of  the  mofl  controverted 
queflions  in  divinity,  difinterelted  love,  decided 
at  once  by  a poor  old  man,  without  education 
or  learning  or  any  inlfruftor,  but  the  Spirit  of 
God.  I afked  him,  what  he  thought  of  paradife 
(to  which  he  had  faid  he  was  going  ?)  He  faid, 
“ To  he  fure,  it  is  a fine  place.  But  I don't  mind 
tliat.  I don’t  care  what  place  I am  in.  Let  God 
put  me  where  he  will,  or  do  with  me  what  he 
will,  fo  I may  but  fet  forth  his  honour  and  glory.” 

Thtirf.  June  3.  Being  afcenfion-day,  we  had 
the  holy  communion;  but 'only  Mr.  Hird’s  fa- 
mily joined  with  us  in  it.  One  rea'on  why  there 
wTere  no  more,  was  becaufe  a few  words  which  a 
rvornan  had  inadvertently  fpoken,  had  fet  almoft 
all  the  town  in  a flame.  Alas  ! How  ihall  a city 
{land  that  is  thus  divided  againfl  itfelf  ? Wheie 
there  is  no  brotherly  love,  no  meeknefs,  no  for- 
bearing or  forgiving  one  another : but  envy, 
malice,  revenge,  fulpicion,  anger,  clamour,  bit- 
ternefs,  evil-fpeaking,  without  end  ! Abundant 
proof  that  there  can  be  no  true  love  of  man, 
unlefs  it  be  built  on  the  love  of  God. 

Sun.  6.  Calling  on  Mr.  Laffel,  and  afking  how 
he  did,  “ My  departure  (faid  he)  1 hope  is  at 
hand.”  I afked,  “ Are  you  troubled  at  that?” 
He  replied,  “ O uo ; to  depart  and  to  be  with 

C hr  iff, 


[ ‘33  ] 

Chrid,  is  far  better.  I defire  no  more  of  this  bad 
world.  My  hope  and  my  joy  and  my  love  is 
there.'’  The  next  time  I faw  him  he  faid,  “ I 
defire  nothing  more,  than  for  God  to  forgive  my 
mafiv  and  great  fins.  I would  be  humble.  I 
would  be  the  humbled  creature  living.  My  heart 
is  humble  and  broken  lor  my  fins.  Tell  me, 
teach  me,  what  final  1 I do  to  pleafe  God.  I would 
fain  do  whatever  is  his  will.”  I faid,  “ It  is  his 
will  you  fhould  fuffer.”  He  anfwered,  “ Then  I 
will  fuffer.  I will  gladly  fuffer  whatever  pleafes 
him” 

Mon.  7.  Finding  him  weaker,  I afked,  “ Do 
you  Hill  defire  to  die?”  He  faid,  “ Yes  ; but  I 
dare  not  pray  for  it,  for  fear  I fhould  dif- 
pleafe  my  heavenly  Father.  His  will  be  done. 
Let  him  work  his  will,  in  my  life,  or  in  my 
death.” 

Thurf.  10.  We  began  to  execute  at  Frederica 
what  we  had  before  agreed  to  do  at  Savannah. 
Our  defigil  was  on  Sundays  in  the  afternoon,  and 
every  evening  after  public  fervice,  to  fpendfome 
time  with  the  mod  ferious  of  the  communicants, 
in  finging,  reading  and  converfation.  This  even- 
ing we  had  only  Mark  Hird.  But  on  Sunday  Mr, 
Hird,  and  two  more  defired  to  be  admitted. 
After  a pfalm  and  a little  conversion,  I read 
Mr.  Law’s  Chrijlian  PerfeRion,  and  concluded 
with  another  pfalm. 

Sat.  June  12.  Being  with  one  who  was  very 
defirous  to  converfe  with  me,  “ but  not  upon 

religioj), 


[ *34  ] 

religion,  I fpoke  to  this  efTeft.  “ Suppofe  you 
•was  going  to  a country,  where  every  one  fpoke 
Latin  and  underflood  no  other  language,  neither 
would  converfe  with  any  that  did  not  underhand 
it:  fuppofe  one  was  fent  tp  flay  here  a fhort 
time,  on  purpofe  to  teach  it  you:  fuppofe  that 
perfon,  pleafed  with  your  company,  Ihould  fpend 
his  time  in  trifling  with  you,  and  teach  you  no- 
thing of  what  he  came  for:  would  that  be  well 
done.?  Yet  thi-s  is  our  cafe.  You  are  going  te  a 
country,  where  every  one  fpeaks  the  love  of  God. 
The  citizens  of  heaven  underhand  no  other  lan- 
crua^e.  They  converfe  with  none  who  do  not 

O o ' 

underhand  it.  Indeed  none  fuch  are  admitted 
there.  I am  fent  from  God  to  teach  you  this. 
A few  days  are  allotted  us  for  that  purpofe. 
Would  itthen  be  well  done  in  me,  becaufe  I was 
pleafed  with  your  company,  to  fpend  this  fhort 
time  in  u ifling,  and  teach  you  nothing  of  what  I 
came  for  ? God  forbid  ! I will  rather  nor  con- 
verfe with  you  at  all.  Of  the  two  extremes,  this 
is  the  beh.” 

Wed.  June  16.  Another  little  company  of 
us  met,  Mr.  Reed,  Davidfon,  Walker,  Dela- 
motte,  and  mvfelf.  We  fung,  read  a little 
of  Mr.  Law,  and  then  converfed.  Wednefdays 
and  Fridays  were  the  days  we  fixt  for  conhant 
meeting. 

Thui  f.  17.  An  officer  of  a man  of  war,  walk- 
ing juh  behind  us,  with  two  or  three  of  his  ac- 
quaintance, curfed  and  fwore  exceedingly  ; but 

upon 


[ 135  J 

upon  my  reproving  him,  feemed  much  moved, 
and  gave  me  many  thanks. 

Sat.  19.  Mr.  Oglethorpe  returned  from  the 
fouth,  and  gave  orders  on  Sunday  the  20th,  that 
none  fhould  profane  the  dav  fas  was  ufua!  be- 
fore) bv  filhing  or  fowling  upon  it.  In  the  after- 
noon I fummed  up  wbat  I had  feen  or  heard 
at  Frederica,  inconfifvent  with  Chriftianity,  and 
confequentlv  with  die  profperity  of  die  place. 
The  event  was  as  it  ought ; fome  of  the  hear- 
ers were  profited,  and  the  reft  deeply  offended. ” 

This  day,  at  half  an  hour  paft  ten,  God  heard  the 
prayer  of  his  fervant,  and  Mr.  Laffels,  according  to 
his  dafire,  was  dijfolved  that  he  might  be  with  Chrifl. 

Tuef.  22.  Obferving  much  coldnefs  in  Mr. 

’s  behaviour,  I afked  him  the  reafon  of 

it.  He  anfwered,  “ I like  nothing  you  do ; all 
your  fermons  are  fatires  upon  particular  perfons. 
Therefore  I will  never  hear  you  more.  And  all 
the  people  are  of  my  mind.  For  we  won’t  hear 
ourfelves  abufed.” 

'■  Beftde,  they  fay,  they  are  proteftants.  But 
as  for  you,  the}' cannot  tell  what  religion  vou  are 
of.  They  never  heard  of  fuch  a religion  before. 
They  do  not  know  what  to  make  of  it.  And 
then,  your  private  behaviour. — — All  the  quar- 
rels that  have  been  here  fince  you  came,  have 
been  long  of  vcu.  Indeed  there  is  neither  man 
nor  woman  in  the  town,  who  minds  a word  you 
fay.  And  fo  you  may  preach  long  enough ; but 
po  body  will  come  to  hear  you.” 

He  was  too  warm  for  hearing  an  anfwer.  So  I 

had 


had  nothing  to  do,  but  to  thank  him  for  his 
opennefs,  and  walk  awav. 

“ \\  ednef.  23.  I had  a long  converfation  with 

Mr. , upon  the  nature  of  true  religioj). 

I then  a iked  him,  “ \\  hy  lie  aid  not  endeavour 
to  recommend  it  to  all  with  whom  he  con- 
verfed?”  He  fatd,  “ 1 did  fo  once;  and  for 
fome  time,  I thought  I had  done  much  good  by 
it.  But  I afterwards  found  they  were  never  the 
better,  and  I myfelf  was  the  worfe.  Therefore 
now,  though  I always  drive  to  be  inoffenfive  in 
my  converfation,  I do  not  drive  to  make  people 
religious,  unlefs  thofe  that  have  a*  defire  to  be 
fo,  and  are  confequently  willing  to  hear  me. 
But  I have  not  yet  (I  fpeak  not  of  you, 
or  your  brother]  found  one  fuch  perfon  in 
America.’’ 

* He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  l 
Mark  the  tendency  of  this  accurfed  principle  ! 
If  you  will  fpeak  only  to  thofe  who  are  unlliag 
to  hear,  fee  how  many  you  will  turn  from  the 
error  of  their  ways!  If  therefore,  driving  to  do 
good,  you  have  done  hurt,  what  then  ? So  did 
St.  Paul.  So  did  the  Lord  of  life.  Even  HIS 
word  was  the  favour  of  death,  as  well  as  the  fa- 
vour of  life.  But  fhall  he  therefore  drive  no 
more  ? God  forbid  ! Strive  more  humbly,  more 
caltnlv,  more  cautioufly.  Do  not  drive  as  you 
did  before, — but  drive,  while  the  breath  of  God 
is  in  your  nodrils  1 

Being  to  leave  Frederica  in  the  evening,  I 

took 


C *37  ] 


took  the  more  notice  of  thefe  words  in  the  leflbn 
for  the  day.  Whereunto  JhciU  I liken  the  men  of 
this  generation  ? They  are  like  unto  children  fitting 
in  the  market-place,  and  faying,  i ue  have  piped 
unto  y-ou,  and  ye  have,  not  danced,  we  have  mourned 
to  you,  and  ye  have  not  wept.  For  John  the  bap- 
tijl  came  neither  eating  bread,  nor  drinking  wine, 
and  ye  fay.  He  hath  a devil.  The  Son  oj  Mams 
come  eating  and  drinking,  and  ye  fay.  Behold  a 
gluttonous  man  and  a wine  bibber,  a friend  of  Pub- 
licans and  Sinners.  Luke  vii. 

About  eleven  at  night  we  took  boat.  And  on 
Sat.  2 6,  about  one  in  the  afternoon  came  to  Sa- 
vannah. O what  do  we  w'ant  here,  either  for 
life  or  godlinefs ! If  buffering,  God  will  fend  it 
in  his  time. 

Sun.  June  27.  About  twenty  joined  with  us  in 
morning  prayer.  An  hour  or  two  after,  a 
large  party  of  Creek  Indians  came,  the  expec- 
tation of  whom  deprived  us  of  our  place  of  pub- 
lic worfnip,  in  which  they  were  to  have  their 
audience. 

Wednef.  go.  I hoped  a door  was  opened,  for 
going  up  immediately  to  the  Choftaws.  the  leaft 
polifh’d,  1.  e.  the  leaf!  corrupted  of  all  the  Indian 
nations.  But  upon  my  informing  Mr.  Oglethorpe 
ofourdefign,  he  objected,  not  only  the  danger 
of  being  intercepted,  or  khled  by  the  French 
there;  hut  much  more,  the  inexpediency  of 
leaving  Savannah,  deftitute  of  a miniller.  Thefe 
obje&ions  I related  to  our  brethren  in  the  even- 
ing* 


[ >38  ] 

ing,  who  were  all  of  opinion,  “ We  ought  not  to 
go  yet.” 

*Thurf.  July  i.  The  Indians  had  an  audience? 
and  another  on  Saturday,  when  Chicali,  their 
head-man,  dmed  with  Mr.  Oglethorpe.  After 
dinner,  I alked  the  grey-headed  old  man,  “What 
he  thought  he  was  made  for  ?”  He  faid,  He 
that  is  above  knows  what  he  made  us  for.  "We 
know  nothing.  We  are  in  the  dark.  But  white 
men  know  much.  And  yet  white  men  build  great 
houfes,  as  if  they  were  to  live  for  ever.  But 
white  men  cannot  live  for  ever.  In  a little  time, 
white  men  will  be  dull  as  well  as  I.”  I told  him, 
“ If  red  men  will  learn  the  good  book,  they  may 
know  as  much  as  white  men.  But  neither  we 
nor  you  can  underhand  that  book,  unlefs  we  are 
taught  bv  him  that  is  above : and  he  will  not 
teach,  unlefs  you  avoid,  what  you  alreadv  know 
is  not  good.”  He  anfwered,  “ 1 believe  that.  He 
will  not  teach  us,  while  our  hearts  are  not  white. 
And  our  men  do  what  they  know  is  not  good. 
They  kill  their  own  children.  And  our  women 
do  what  they  know  is  not  good.  They  kill 
the  child  before  it  is  born.  Therefore,  he 
that  is  above,  does  not  fend  us  the  good  book.” 

Hearing  the  younger  of  the  Mifs  Boveys  W2S 
not  well,  I called  upon  them  this  evening.  I 
found  fire  had  only  the  prickly  heat,  a fort  of 
rafh,  very  common  here  in  fummer.  We  foon 
fell  into  ferious  converfation,  after  I had  afked, 

“ if 


C *39  J 


“ If  they  did  not  think  they  were  too  young  to 
trouble  themfelves  with  religion  yet  P And,  whe- 
ther they  might  not  defer  it  ten  or  dozen  years  ?” 
To  which  one  of  them  replied,  “ If  it  will  be 
reasonable  ten  years  hence,  to  be  religious, 
it  is  fo  now  : 1 am  not  for  deferring  one  mo- 
ment.” 

Wednef.  July  7.  I called  there  again,  being 
determined  now  to  fpeak  more  clofely.  But 
meeting  company  there,  prudence  induced  me  to 
put  it  off  till  another  opportunity. 

Thurf.  8.  Mr.  O.  being  theie  again,  and  cafu- 
ally  Speaking  of  fudden  death,- Mils  B«,'ky  faid, 
“ II  it  was  the  will  of  God,  I Should  -chufe  to  die 
without  a lingring  illnefs.”  Her  filter  faid, 
“ Are  you  then  always  prepared  to  die  ?”  She 
replied,  “ Jefus  Chrilt  is  always  prepared  to 
help  me.  And  little  Itrefs  is  to  be  laid  on  fuch  a 
preparation  for  death,  as  is  made  in  a fit  of  fick- 
nefs.” 

Sat.  July  10.  Juft  as  thgy  had  done  drinking 
tea,  Mrs.  Margaret  feeing  her  colour  change, 
afked,  if  fhe  was  well  ? She  did  not  return  any 
anfwer;  and  Dr.  Talfer  foon  after  going  by,  fhe 
defined  him  t*o  ftep  in,  and  laid,  “ Sir,  my  lifter,  I 
fear  is  not  well.”  He  looked  earneftly  at  her, 
felt  her  pulfe,  and  replied,  “ Well,  madam  f 
Your  lifter  is  dying.”  However  he  thought  it  not 
impoffible,  bleeding  might  help.  She  bled  about 
at  ounce,  leaned  back  and  died. 

4s  foon  as  I heard  of  it,  I went  to  the  houfe, 

and 


[ 140  ] 

and  begged  they  would  not  ;ay  her  ou;  Immedi- 
ately, there  being  a poflibiiit;. , at  Jeaft,  fne  rrrcht 
only  be  in  a fwoon  : of  which  indeed  there  -••as 
home  flight  hope,  (he  not  only  being  a:  arm  as 
ever,  but  having  a frefh  colour  in  her  checks, 
and  a few  drops  of  blood  flariing  out.  upon 
bending  her  arm  ; but  there  was  no  puife  and 
no  breath;  fo  that  having  waned  foine  hours, 
we  found  her  Jpirit  was  indeed  relumed  to  God 
that  gave  it. 

I never  faw  fo  beautiful  a corps  in  mv  life. 
Poor  comfort  to  its  late  inhabitant!  I was  greatly 
furprized  at  her  lifter.  There  was  in  all  her  be- 
haviour, fuch  inexpreflible  mixture  of  tender- 
nefs  and  refignation.  The  firft  time  I fpoke  to 
her,  {he  Paid,  “ All  my  afflictions  are  nothing 
to  this.  I have  loft  not  only  a lifter,  but  a 
friend.  But  it  is  the  will  of  God.  I rely  on 
him;  and  doubt  not  but  he  will  fupport  me  un- 
der it.” 

This  evening  we  had  fuch  a ftorm  of  thunder 
and  lightning,  as  I never  faw  before  even  in 
Georgia,  d his  voice  of  God  too,  told  me  I was 
not  (it  to  die  ; ftnee  I was  afraid,  rather  than  de- 
fl rous  of  it ! O when  {hall  I wifti  to  be  diffolved 
and  to  be  with  Chrift  ! When  I love  him  with 
all  my  heart. 

Almoft  the  whole  town  was  the  next  evening 
at  the  funeral  : where  manv  doubtlefs  made  a 
world  of  good  refolutions.  O how  little  trace 

of 


[ 14 1 3 


of  moff  of  thefe  will  be  left  in  the  morning  ! ’Tis 
a true  faying,  “ Hell  is  paved  with  good  inters 
tions.” 

Tuef.  July  20.  Five  of  the  Chicafaw  Indians 
^twenty  of  whom  bad  been  in  Savannah  feveral 
days)  came  to  fee  us,  with  Air.  Andrews,  their 
interpreter.  They  were  all  warriors  ; four  of 
them  head  men.  The  two  chief  were  Pauftoobce 
and  Minsio  Alattaw.  Our  conference  was  as 
follows  : 

* O.  Do  you  believe,  there  is  one  above  who 
is  over  all  things  P 

O 

Pauftoobce  anfsvered,  We  believe, there  are 
four  beloved  things  above,  the  clouds,  the 
fun.  the  clear  Ik}',  and  he  that  lives  in  the  clear 
fky. 

O.  Do  you  believe,  there  is  but  one  that  lives 
in  the  clear  fkv  ? 

A.  We  believe,  there  are  two  with  him,  three 
in  all. 

O.  Do  you  think  he  made,  the  fun,  and  the 
other  beloved  things  ? 

A.  We  cannot  tell-.  Who  hath  feen  ? 

Q.  Do  you  think  he  made  you? 

A.  We  think  he  made  all  men  at  fir  IF. 

Q.  Ho  w did  he  make  them  at  fir (l  ? 

A.  Out  of  the  ground. 

O.  Do  you  believe  he  loves  vou  ? 

A.  I do  not  know.  I cannot  fee  him. 

O.  But  has  he  not  often  faved  your  life  ? 

A.  He  has.  Alany  bullets  have  gone  on  this- 

fide, 


[ x42  ] 

fide,  and  many  on  that  fide,  but  he  would  never 
let  them  hurt  me.  And  many  bullets  have  gone 
into  thefe  young  men  ; and  yet  they  are  alive  ? 

O.  Then,  cannot  he  fave  you  from  vour  ene- 
mies now  ? • 

A.  Yes,  but  we  know  not,  if  he  will.  We 
have  now  fo  many  enemies  round  about  us,  that 
I think  of  nothing  but  death.  And  if  I am  to 
die.  I fhall  die,  an  1 I will  die  like  a man.  But 
if  he  will  have  me  to  live,  I fhall  live.  Though 
I hid  ever  fo  many  enemies,  he  can  deflroy  them 
All. 

O How  do  von  know  that  p 

A.  From  what  I have  feen.  When  our  en- 
emies came  againfl  us  before,  then  thebeloved 
clouds  came  for  us.  And  often  much  rain,  and 
fometimes  hail  has  come  upon  them,  and  that  in 
a very  hot  day.  And  I faw,  when  many  French 
and  Choftaws  and  odier  nations  came  againfl:  one 
of  our  towns.  And  the  ground  made  a noife 
under  them,  and  the  beloved  ones  in  the  air  be- 
hind them.  And  they  were  afraid,  and  went 
away,  and  left  their  meat  and  drink  and  their 
guns.  I tell  no  lie.  All  thefe  faw  it  too. 

O.  Have  you  heard  fuch  noifesat  other  times? 

A.  Yes,  often  : before  and  after  ahnoit  every 
battle. 

O.  What  fort  of  noifes  were  they  ? 

A.  Like  the  noife  of  drums  and  guns  and  fhout- 
ing. 

O.  Have  you  heard  any  fuch  lately  ? 


A.  Yes: 


[ M3  } 

A.  Yes  : four  days  after  our  lall  battle  with 
the  French. 

Q.  Then  you  heard  nothing  before  it  ? 

A.  The  night  before  I dreamed.  I heard  many 
drums  up  there:  and  many  trumpets  there,  and 
much  (lamping  of  feet  and  (homing.  Till  then 
I thought  we  (hould  all  die.  But  then  I thought 
the  beloved  ones  were  come  to  help  us.  And 
the  next  day  1 heard  above  a hundred  guns  go 
off,  before  the  fight  began.  And  I faid,  “ When 
the  fun  is  there,  the  beloved  ones  will  help  us  ; 
and  we  (hall  conquer  our  enemies.”  And  we 
■did  fo. 

O.  Do  you  often  think  and  talk  of  the  belov- 
ed ones  ? 

A.  We  think  of  them  always,  wherever  we 
■are.  We  talk  of  them  and  to  them,  at  home 
and  abroad;  in  peace,  in  war,  before  and  after 
we  fight  ; and  indeed  whenever  and  wherever 
we  meet  together. 

Q.  Where  do  you  think  your  fouls  go  after 
death  ? 

A.  We  believe  the  fouls  of  red  men  walk  up 
and  down  near  the  place  where  they  died,  or 
where  their  bodies  lie.  For  we  have  often 
heard  cries  and  noifes  near  the  place  where  any 
prifoners  had  been  burnt, 

O.  Where  do  the  fouls  of  white  men  go  after 
death  ? 

A.  We  cannot  tell.  We  have  not  feen. 

O.  Our  belief  is,  that  the  fouls  of  bad  men 

only 


[ *44  J 

only  walk  up  and  down;  but  the  fouls  of  good 
men  go  up. 

A.  I believe  fa  too.  But  I told  you  the  talk, 
of  the  nation. 

(Mr.  Andrews.  They  faid  at  the  burying, 
“ They  knew  what  you  was  doing.  You  was 
fpeaking  to  the  beloved  ones  above,  to  take  up 
the  foul  of  the  young  woman.") 

O.  We  have  a book  that  tells  us  many  things 
of  the  beloved  ones  above,  would  you  be  glad  to 
know  them  ? 

A.  -We  have  no  time  now,  but  to  fight.  If 
we  fiiould  ever  be  at  peace,  we  Ihould  be  glad 
to  know  ? 

O.  Do  you  expeft  ever  to  know  what  the 
white  men  know  ? 

(Mr.  Andrews.  They  told  Mr.  O.  They  be- 
lieve the  time  will  come,  when  the  red  and 
white  men  will  be  one) 

O.  What  do  the  French  teach  vou  ? 

-w 

A.  The  French  black  + kings  never  go  out. 
We  fee  you  go  about.  We  like  that.  That  is 
good. 

O.  How  came  your  nation  by  the  knowledge 
they  have  ? 

A.  As  foon  as  ever  the  ground  was  found, 
and  fit  to  Hand  upon,  it  came  to  us,  and  has 
been  with  us  ever  fince.  But  we  are  young 
men.  Our  old  men  know  more.  But  all  of 
them  do  not  know.  There  are  but  a few;  whom 

the 


+ So  they  call  the  pricfti. 


[ H 5 ] 


the  beloved  one  chufes  from  a child,  and  is  in 
them,  and  take  care  of  them,  and  teaches  them. 
They  knowthefe  things : and  our  old  men  prac- 
tife : therefore  they  know.  But  I do  not  prac- 
tife.  Therefore  I know  little. 

Mond.  July  26.  My  brother  and  I fet  out  for 
Charles-Town,  in  order  to  his  embarking  for 
England.  But  the  wind  being  contrary,  we  did 
not  reach  Port-Royal,  40  miles  from  Savannah, 
till  Wednefday  evening.  The  next  morning 
we  left  it.  But  the  wind  was  fo  high  in  the 
afternoon,  as  we  were  cro  fling  the  neck  of  St. 
Helena’s  found,  that  our  oldefl  failor  cried  out, 
“ Now  every  one  mull  take  care  for  himfelf.” 
I told  him,  “ God  would  take  care  for  us  all.” 
Almoft  as  foon  as  the  words  were  fpoken,  the 
malt  fell.  I kept  on  the  edge  of  the  boat, 
to  be  clear  of  her  when  fhe  funk,  (which  we  ex- 
pected every  moment)  though  with  little  prof- 
pe£t  of  fwimming  alhore,  againll  fuch  a wind 
and  fea.  But,  How  is  it  that  thou  kadji  no  faith  ? 
The  moment  the  malt  fell,  two  men  caught  it 
and  pulled  it  into  the  boat the  other  three 
rowed  with  all  their  might,  and  God  gave  com- 
mand to  the  wind  and  feas,  fo  that  in  an  hour  we 
were  fate  on  land. 

Sat.  July  31.  We  came  to  Charles-Town, 
The  church  is  of  brick,  but  plailtered  over  like 
ftone.  I believe  it  would  contain  three  or  four 
thoufand  perfons.  About  three  hundred  were 
prefent  at  the  morning  fervice  the  next  day 
Vol.  XXVI.  G (when 


[ M-5  ] 


(when  Mr.  Garden  defired  me  to  preach!  about 
fifty  at  the  holy  communion.  * I was  glad  to 
fee  feveral  negroes  at  church ; one  of  whom 
told  me,  “ She  was  there  conftantly ; and  that 
her  old  miftrefs  (now  dead)  had  many  times 
infiru&ed  her  in  the  Chrifdan  religion.”  I 
afked  her,  “ What  religion  was  ?”  She  faid, 
“ She  could  not  tell.”  I afked,  “ If  fhe  knew 
what  a foul  was  ?”  She  anfwered,  “ No.” 
I faid,  “ Do  not  you  know  there  is  fomething 
in  you,  different  from  vour  body  ? Something 
you  kannot  fee  or  feel  ?”  She  reply  d,  I never 
heard  fo  much  before.”  I added,  “ Do  yon 
think  then,  a man  dies  altogether  as  a horfe 
dies  ?”  She  faid,  “ Yes,  to  be  fure.”  O God, 
where  are  thy  tender  mercies  ? Are  they  not 
over  all  thy  works  ? When  fh all  the  Sun  of 
righteoufnefs  arife  on  thefe  outcafls  of  men, 
with  healing  in  his  wings  ! 

Mond.  Auguft  2.  I fetout  for  the  lieutenant 
governor’s  feat,  about  thirty  miles  from  Charles- 
Town,  to  deliver  Mr.  Oglethorp’s  leters.  It 
Hands  very  pleafant,  on  a little  hill,  with  a vale 
on  ebher  fide,  in  one  of  which  is  a thick  wood  : 
the  other  is  planted  with  rice  and  Indian  corn. 
I defigned  to  have  gone  back  by  Mr.  Skeene's, 
who  has  about  fifty  Chriflian  negroes.  But  my 
horfe  tiring,  I was  obliged  to  return  the  {freight 
wav  to  Charles-Town. 

I had  fent  the  boat  we  came  in  back  to  Sava  t- 
nah,  expending  a palfage  thither  nivicif  in 

Bull’s. 


/ 


[ H7  ] 


Bull’s.  His  not  going  fo  foon,  I went  to  Alh- 
ley-Ferry  on  Tlmrfday,  intending  to  walk  to 
Port-Royal.  But  Mr.  Belinger  not  only  provid- 
ed me  a horfe,  but  rode  with  me  himfelf  ten 
miles,  and  fent  his  foil  with  me  to  Cumbee-Fer- 
ry  twenty  miles  farther ; whence  having  hired 
horfes  and  a guide,  I came  to  Beaufort,  (on 
Port-Royal)  the  next  evening.  We  took  boat 
in  the  morning;  but  the  wind  being  contrary, 
and  very  high,  did  not  reach  Savannah  till  Sun- 
day in  the  afternoon. 

Finding  Mr.  Oglethorpe  was  gone,  I flayed 
only  a day  at  Savannah  : and  leaving  Air.  Ing- 
ham and  Delamotte  there,  fet  out  on  Tuefday 
morning  for  Frederica.  In  walking  to  Thunder- 
bolt, I was  in  fo  heavy  a fhower,  that  all  my 
cloaths  were  as  wet  as  if  I had  gone  through  the 
river.  On  which  occafion  I cannot. but  obferve 
that  vulgar  error,  concerning  the  liurtfulnefs  of 
the  rams  and  dews  of  America.  I have  been 
throughly  wet  with  thefe  rains  more  than  once: 
yet  without  any  harm  at  all.  And  I have  lain 
many  nights  in  the  open  air,  and  received  all 
the  dews  that  fell.  And  fo  I believe  might  any 
one,  if  his  confhtution  was  not  impaired  by  the 
foftnefs  of  a genteel  education. 

At  Thunderbolt  we  took  boat,  and  on  Friday, 
■Aug.  ig.  came  to  Frederica,  -where  I delivered 
Mr.  O.  the  letters,  I had  brought  from  Carolina. 
The  next  day  he  fet  out  for  Fort  St.  George. 
From  that  time  I had  lefs  and  lefs  profpeft  of  do- 
G 2 - in£r 

O 


[ >48  ] 

ing  good  at  Frederica ; many  there  being  ex- 
tremely zealous,  and  indefatigably  diligent  to 
prevent  it  : and  few  of  the  reft  daring  to  (hew 
themfelves  of  another  mind,  for  fear  of  their 
difpleafure.  , 

Sat.  28.  I fet  apart,  (out  of  the  few  we  had) 
a few  books  towards  a library  at  Frederica.  In 
the  afternoon  I walked  to  the  fort  on  the  other 
fide  of  theifland.  About  five  we  fet  out  home- 
ward. But  my  guide  not  being  perfect  in  the 
way,  we  were  foon  loft  in  the  woods.  We 
walked  on  however  as  well  as  we  could,  till  be- 
tween nine  and  ten,  when  being  heartily  tired, 
and  throughly  wet  with  dew,  we  lay  down  and 
fiept  till  morning. 

About  day-break,  on  Sunday  the  2eth,  we 
fet  out  again,  endeavouring  to  walk  {freight 
forward,  and  foon  after  fun-rife  found  ourfelves 
in  the  Great  Savannah  near  Frederica.  By  this 
good  providence  I was  delivered  from  another 
fear,  that  of  lying  in  the  woods,  which  experi- 
ence {hewed,  was  to  one  in  tolerable  health  a 
mere  lion  in  the  way. 

Thurf.  Sept.  2.  I fet  out  in  a (loop,  and  about 
ten  on  Sunday  morning,  came  to  Skidoway  ; 
which  (after  reading  prayers,  and  preaching  to  a 
fmall  congregation;  I left  and  came  to  Savannah 
in  the  evening. 

Mond.  13.  I began  reading  with  Mr.  Dela- 
rnotte,  Bp.  Beveridges  Paneled  a.  Canon  um  Conci- 
lioTum.  Nothing  could  fo  effectually  have  con- 
vinced 


[ *49  ] 


vinced  us,  that  both  particular  and  general  coun- 
cils may  err,  and  have  erred:  and  that  things 
ordained  by  them  as  neceffary  to  falvation,  have 
neither  fir ength  nor  authority , unlejs  they  be  taken 
out  oj  holy Jcripture. 

* Mond.  20.  We  ended  (of  which  alfo  I mull 
confefs,  I once  thought  more  highly  than  I 
ought  to  think)  the  apoftolical  canons  ; fo  cal- 
led as  bifhop  Beveridge  obferves,  becaufe  part- 
ly grounded  upon,  partly  agreeing  with,  the  tradi- 
tionf delivered  down  from  the  apoflles.  But  he 
obferves  farther,  (in  the  159th  page  oY  Yds  Codex 
Canont/m  Ecclejioe  Primitives  : and  why  did  he 
not  obferve  it  in  the  fir  ft  page  of  the  book  P) 
They  contain  the  di/cipline  ujed  in  the  church  at 
the  time  when  they  were  collected : not  zvhen 
the  council  oj  Nice  met ; for  then  many  parts  of  it 
were  ufelefs  and  obfolete. 

Tuefd.  Odlober  12.  AVe  confidered  if  any 
thing  could  yet  be  done,  for  the  poor  people  of 
Frederica.  And  I fubmitted  to  the  judgment  of 
my  friends,  which  was,  that  I fhould  take  ano- 
ther journey  thither  : Mr.  Ingham  undertaking 
[ to  fupply  my  place  at  Savannah,  for  the  time  I 
fhould  flay  there.  I came  thither  on  Sat.  the 
16th,  and  found  few  things  better  than  I expend- 
ed. The  morning  and  evening  prayers,  which 
were  read  for  a while  after  my  leaving  the  place, 
had  been  long  difcontinued,  and  from  that 
time  every  thing  grew  worfe  and  worfe  : not  ma- 
C 3 ny 

I 


[ *<5°  J 

ny  retaining  any  more  of  the  form  than  the 
power  of  godlinefs. 

I was  at  firfl  a little  difcouraged,  but  foon  re- 
membered the  word  which  cannot  fail,  Greater 
is  he  that  is  in  you  than  he  that  is  in  the  world. 

I cried  to  God  to  arije  and  maintain  Lis  own 
cavfe  : and  after  the  evening  prayers  were  end- 
ed, invited  a few  to  my  houfe  (as  I did  every 
night  while  I flayed  at  Frederica.)  I read  to 
them  one  of  the  exhortations  of  Ephraim  Syrus, 
tire  moil  awakening  writer  (I  think)  of  all  the  an- 
tients.  We  concluded  our  reading  and  cor.ver- 
fa  ion  with  a pfalm,  and  I truft,  our  God  gave  ; 
us  his  bl  effing 

Mond.  18.  Finding  there  were  feveral  Ger- 
mans at  Frederica,  who  not  underflanling  the 
Engliffi  tongue,  could  not  join  in  our  public 
Jervice,  I defined  them  to  meet  me  at  raj'  houfe  ; 
which  they  did  ever}'  day  at  noon  from  thence 
forward.  We  firfl  funga  German  hymn,  then  I 
read  a chapter  in  the  New  Teftament,  then  ex- 
plained it  to  them  as  well  as  I could.  After  ano- 
ther hymn  we  concluded  with  prayer. 

Mond.  25.  I took  boat,  and  after  a flow  and 
dangerous  paffiage,  came  to  Savannah  on  Sun-  1 
day  the  3 1 fl. 

Tuef.  Novem.  23.  Mr.  Oglethorpe  failed 
for  England,  leaving  Mr.  Ingham,  Mr.  Dela- 
rnotte  and  me  at  Savannah,  but  with  lefs  prof-  ■ 
pe£l  of  preaching  to  the  Indians,  than  we  had 
the  firfl  day  we  fet  foot  in  America.  When- 
ever 


[ >5*  ] 


ever  I mentioned  it,  it  was  immediately  replied, 
“You  cannot  leave  Savannah  without  a miniller. 
To  this  indeed  my  plain  anfwer  was,  I know 
not -that  I am  under  any  obligation  to  the  con- 
trary. I never  promifed  to  Hay  here  one  month. 
I openly  declared  both  before,  at,  and  ever  fine  t 
my  coming  hither,  that  I neither  would  nor 
could  take  charge  of  the  Englifh  any  longer 
than  till  I could  go  among.  the  Indians.”  If  it 
was  faid,  “ But  did  not  the  trullees  of  Georgia 
appoint  you  to  be  miniller  of  Savannah  ?’  Ire- 
plied  “ They  did  ; but  it  was  not  done  bv  my 
folicitation  : it  was  done  without  either  my  de- 
lire  or  knowledge.  Therefore  I cannot  con- 
ceive that  appointment  to  lay  me  under  any  ob- 
ligation of  continuing  there,  any  longer  than 
till  a door  is  opened  to  the  Heathens;  and  this  I 
e'tprefly  declared,  at  the  time.I  confented  to  ac- 
cept of  that  appointment,”  But  though  I had  no 
other  obligation  not  to  leave  Savannah  now,  yet 
that  of  love  I could  not  break  through  : I could 
not  refill  the  importunate  requell  of  the  more 
ferious  parifhioners,  “ To  watch  over  their  fouls 
yet  a little  longer,  till  fome  one  came  who  might 
fupply  my.  place.”  And  this  I the  more  willing- 
ly  did,  becaufe  the  time  was  not  come  to  preach 
the  gofpel  of  peace  to  the  Heathens ; all  their 
nations  being  in  a ferment  : and  Paulloobee  and 
Mingo  Mattaw,  having  told  me,  in  terras,  in 
my  own  houfe,  “ Now  our  enemies  are  all  about 
us,  we  can  do  nothing  but  fight  : but  if  the 
G 4 beloved 


[ 15z  ] 

beloved  ones  fhould  ever  give  us  to  be  at  peace, 
then  we  would  hear  the  great  ivord .” 

Thurf.  Dec.  9.  Hearing  of  one  dangeroufly 
ill,  I went  to  her  immediately  : fhe  told  me, 
“ That  the  had  many  things  to  fay  but  her 
weaknefs  prevented  her  faying  them  then  ; and 
the  next  day  God  required  her  foul  of  her. 

Wed.  23.  Mr.  Delamotte  and  I,  with  a guide, 
fet  out  to  walk  to  the  Cowpen  ; when  we  had 
walked  two  or  three  hours,  our  guide  told  us 
plainly,  “ He  did  not  know  where  we  were.” 
However,  believing  it  could  not  be  far  off,  we 
thought  it  belt  to  go  on.  In  an  hour  or  two  we 
came  to  a Cyprefs  Swamp,  which  lay  diretlly 
acrofs  our  way : there  was  not  time  to  walk 
back  to  Savannah  before  night  ; fo  w’e  waked 
through  it,  the  water  being  about  bread-high. 
By  that  time  we  had  gone  a mile  beyond  it,  we 
were  out  of  all  path  ; and  it  being  now  pad  fun- 
fet,  we  fat  down,  intending  to  make  a fire,  and 
to  day  there  till  morning  ; but  finding  our  tin- 
der wet,  we  were  at  a dand  ; I advifed  to  walk 
on  dill  : but  my  companions  being  faint  and 
weary,  were  for  lying  down,  which  we  accord- 
ingly did  about  fix  o’clock  : the  ground  was  as 
wet  as  our  cloaths,  which  (it  being  a fharp  frod) 
were  foon  froze  together  ; however,  I dept  till 
fix  in  the  morning.  There  fell  a heavy  dew  in 
the  night,  which  covered  us  over  as  white  as 
fnow.  Within  an  hour  after  fun-rife,  we  came 


to 


[ »53  3 

to  a plantation,  and  in  the  evening,  without  any 
hurt  to  Savannah. 

Tuef.  28.  We  fet  out  by  land  with  a better 
guide  for  Frederica.  On  Wednefday  evening 
we  came  to  Fort-Argyle,  on  the  back  of  the  river 
Ogeechy.  The  next  afternoon  we  croft  Cooa- 
noochy  river  in  a fmall  canoe,  our  horfes  fwim- 
ming  by  the  fide  of  it.  We  made  a fire  on  the 
bank,  and  notwithftanding  the  rain,  flept  quiet- 
ly till  ihe  morning. 

/ Sat.  Jan.  1,  1737.  Our  provifions  fell  fhort, 
our  journey  being  longer  than  we  expended: 
but  having  a little  barbecued  bears-flefh  (i.  e. 
dried  in  the  fun)  we  boiled  it,  and  found  it 
wholeforne  food.  The  next  day  we  reached  Da- 
rien, the  fettlement  of  the  Scotch  highlanders,  a 
fober,  induftrious,  friendly,  hofpitable  people; 
whofe  minifter,  Mr.  M'Leod,  is  a ferious,  re- 
folute,  and  (I  hope)  a pious  man. 

On  Monday  evening  we  left  Darien,  and  on 
Wed.  g,  came  to  Frederica-  Moft  here  were  as 
we  expefied,  cold  and  heartlefs  : we  found  not 
one  who  retained  his  firft  love.  O fend  forth 
thy  light  and  thy  truth,  that  they  mav  guide 
them  ! Let  them  not  yet  follow  their  own  ima- 
ginations ! 

Alter  having  beaten  the  air  in  this  unhappy 
place  for  twenty  days,  on  January  26,  I took 
my  final  leave  of  Frederica.  It  was  not  any  ap- 
prehenfion  of  my  own  danger  (though  my  life 
had  been  threatened  many  times)  but  an  utter 
G 5 defpain 


[ »54  ] 

dcfpair  of  doing  good  there,  which  made  me 
content  with  the  thought  of  feeing  it  no  more. 

In  my  paflage  home,  having  procured  a cele- 
brated book,  the  works  of  Nicholas  Machiavel, 
I fet  myfelf  carefully  to  read  and  confidei  it.  I 
began  with  a prejudice  in  his  favour;  having 
been  informed,  he  had  often  been  mifunderftood, 
gnd  greatly  mifreprefented.  I weighed  the  fen- 
timents  that  were  lefs  common  ; tranfcribed  the 
pafTages  wherein  they  were  contained ; com- 
pared one  palfage  with  another,  and  endeavoured 
to  form  a cool,  impartial  judgment.  And  mv 
cool  judgment  is,  that  if  all  the  other  dodtrines 
of  devils  which  have  been  committed  to  writing, 
lince  letters  were  in  the  world,  were  colledted 
together  in  one  volume,  it  would  fall  Ihort  of 
. this  : and,  that  Ihould  a prince  form  himfelf  by 
this  book,  fo  calmly  recommending  hvpocrifv, 
treachery,  lying,  robbery,  oppreflion,  adultery, 
whoredom  and  murder  of  all  kinds  ; Domitian 
or  JMero- would  be  an  angel  of  light,  compared  to 
that  mail. 

■ Mon.  Jan.  31.  We  came  to  Savannah.  Tuef. 
Feb.  1,  being  the  anniverfary  feaft,  on  account 
of  the  h; '1  convoy’s  landing  in  Georgia,  we  had 
a fermon  and  the  holy  communion.  Thurf.  24. 
It  was  agreed  Mr.  Ingham  fhould  go  for  Eng- 
land, and  endeavour  to  bring  over  (if  it 
ihould  pleafe  God)  fome  of  our  friends  to 
fliengthen  our  hands  in  his  work.  Sat.  26.  He 
left  Savannah. 


By 


[ 1S5  ] 

By  Mr.  Ingham  I writ  to  Dr.  Bray’s  affo- 
ciates,  who  had  fent  a parochial  library  to  Sa- 
vannah. It  is  expefted  of  the  minifters  who 
receive  thefe,  to  fend  an  account  to  their  bene- 
faffors  ol  the  method  they  ufe  in  catechifing  the 
children,  and  inftrufting  the  youth  of  their  re- 
fpe&ive  parifhes.  That  part  of  the  letter  was  as 
follows : 

“ Our  general  method  is  this  : A young  gen- 
tlcman  who  came  wdth  me,  teaches  betw'een 
“thirty  and  forty  children  to  read,  write,  and 
“ caft  accounts.  Before  fchool  in  the  morning, 
“ and  after  fchool  in  the  afternoon,  he  catechizes 
“ the  loweft  clafs,  and  endeavours  to  fix  fome- 
“ thing  of  what  was  faid,  in  fcheir  underfiandings 
“ as  well  as  their  memories.  In  the  evening  he 
“ infirutfs  the  larger  children.  On  Saturdav  in 
“ the  afternoon  I catechize  them  all.  The  fame 
“ I do  on  Sunday  before  the  evening  fervice. 
“ And  in  the  church,  immediately  after  the  fe- 
“ cond  lelfon,  a fele£f  number  of  them  having 
“ repeated  the  catechifm  and  been  examined  in 
“ fome  part  of  it,  I endeavour  to  explain  at 
“ large,  and  to  enforce  that  part,  both  on.  them 
“ and  the  congregation. 

* Some  time  after  the  evening  fervice,.  as 
4t  many  of  my  parifhioners  as  defire  it,  meet  at 
4<  my  houfe  (as  they  do  alfo  on  Wednefday  even™ 
ingj  and  fpend  about  an  hour  in  prayer,,  finging 
“and  mutual  exhortation.  A.  fmaller  number 
G 6;  “■  (moftly. 


r >56  j 

(moflly  thofe  who  defign  to  communicate  the 

next  day)  meet  here  on  Saturday  evening: 

and  a few  of  thefe  come  to  me  on  the  o.lier 
“evenings,  and  pafs  half  an  hour  in  the  fame 
“ employment.” 

Fri  March  4.  I writ  the  truffees  for  Georgia 
an  account  of  our  year’s  expence  from  March 
i,  1736,  to  March  j,  1737.  Which,  de- 
ducing extraordinary  expences  (fuch  as  re- 
pairing the  parfonage  houfe,  and  journies  to 
Frederica)  amounted  for  Mr.  Delamotte  and  me 
to  44/.  4 r.  4 d. 

From  the  directions  I received  from  God  this 
day,  touching  an  affair  of  the  gieatefl  importance, 
I could  not  but  obferve  as  I had  done  many 
times  before)  the  enthe  miftake  of  thofe,  who 
affert,  “ God  will  not  anfwer  your  prat  er,  unlefs 
your  heart  be  wholly  refigned  to  his  will.”  My 
heart  was  not  wholly  refigned  to  his  will.  There- 
fore, not  daring  to  depend  on  my  own  judgment, 
I cried  the  more  earnelily  to  him,  to  fupply 
what  was  wanting  in  me.  And  I know  and  am 
allured,  he  heard  my  voice,  and  did  fend  forth 
his  light  and  his  truth. 

Thurf,  24.  A fire  broke  out  in  the  houfe  of 
Robert  Hows,  and  in  an  hour  burnt  it  to  the 
ground.  A colleftion  was  made  for  him  the  next 
day';  and  the  generality  of  the  people  fhewed  a 
furprizing  willingneis,  to  give  a little  out  of  their 
little,  for  the  relief  of  a neceflity  greater  than 
their  own. 


About 


[ w 3 

About  this  time  Mr.  Lacy  of  Thunderbolt 
called  upon  me  ; when  obferving  him  to  be  in  a 
deep  fadnefs,  I alked,  What  was  the  reafon  of 
it  ? And  a terrible  one  indeed  he  gave  in  the 
relation  following. 

In  1733,  David  Jones,  a fadler,  a middle-aged 
man,  who  had  for  iome  time  before  lived  at 
Nottingham,  being  at  Briftol,  met  a perfon 
there  ; who  after  giving  him  fome  account  of 
Georgia,  afked,  Whether  he  would  go  thither  ? 
Adding,  his  trade  (that  of  a fadler)  was  an  exceed- 
ing good  trade  there,  upon  which  he  might  live, 
creditably  and  comfortably.  He  objefled  his 
want  of  money  to  pay  his  paffage,  and  buy  fome 
tools  which  he  fhould  have  need  of.  The  gen- 
tleman (Capt.  W.)  told  him,  he  would  fupply 
him  with  that,  and  hire  him  a fhop  when  he 
came  to  Georgia,  wherein  he  might  follow  his 
bufinefs,  and  forepay  him,  as  it  fuited  his  conve- 
nience. Accordingly  to  Georgia  they  went ; 
where  foon  after  his  arrival,  his  mailer  (as  he 
now  fliled  himfelf)  fold  him  to  Mr.  Lacy,  who 
fet  him  to  work  with  the  reft  of  his  fervants  in 
clearing  land.  He  commonly  appeared  much 
more  thoughtful  than  the  reft,  often  ftealing  into 
the  woods  alone.  He  was  now  fent  to  do  fome 
work  on  an  ifland,  three  or  four  miles  from  Mr. 
Lacy’s  great  plantation.  1 hence  he  defired  the 
other  fervants  to  return  without  him,  faying,  He 
would flay  and  kill  a deer.  This  was  on  Saturday. 
On  Monday  they  found  him  on  the  fhore,  with 

his 


[ 158  ] 


his  gun  by  him,  and  the  fore-par;  of  his  head 
fhot  to  pieces.  In  his  pocket  was  a paper-book, 
all  the  leaves  thereof  were. fair,  except  cue,  on 
which  ten  or  twelve  ve;  its  were  wri  . n ; two  of 
which  were  thefe,  (width  I t.  anfcribed  thence, 
from  hi-,  owi  hand  writing) 

Death  r.ou'd  no  I a piece  fad  redouejind ; 

Sick/idi  au  ifc.  ji  df.  , a id  durkntf:  id l behind! 

Sun.  April  3.  And  everyday  in  this  great  and 
holy  week,  we  had  a fermon  and  the  holy  com- 
munion. 

Mon.  4.  I began  learning  Spanifh.  in  order 
to  converfe  with  my  Jewifh  Parifhioners ; 
fome  of  whom  feem  nearer  the  mind  that  was 
in  Chrift,  than  many  of  thofe  who  call  him 
Lord. 

Tuef.  12.  Being  determined,  if  poflible,  to 
put  a hop  to  the  proceedings  of  one  in  Caro- 
lina,  who  had  married  feveral  of  my  parifhioners 
without  either  banns  or  licence,  and  declared, 

“ He  would  do  fo  ftill I fet  out  in  a floop  for 
Charles-Town.  I landed  there  on  Thurfday,  and 
related  the  cafe  to  Mr.  Garden,  the  bifhop  of 
London’s  commilfary,  who  affined  me,  “ he 
would  take  care  no  fuch  irregularity  fhould  be 
committed  for  the  future.” 

Sun.  17.  Mr.  Garden  (to  whom  I muff  ever 
acknowledge  myfelf  indebted  for  many  kind  and 
generous  offices;  defiling  me  preach,  I did  fo,  on 

thofn 


[ m ] 

thofe  words  of  the  epiflle  for  the  day,  What /Sever 
is  born  of  God , overcometh  the.  world . To  v a 
plain  account  of  die  Chriftian  Hate  which  the.e 
words  naturallylead  me  to  five,  a man  of  educa- 
tion and  character  ferioufly  objefted  '.fat  is  in- 
deed a great  truth)  “ Why  if  this  be  Cl . ) iianiij,  n 
Chiijhan  mttjl  have  more  courage  than-  Alexander 
the  Great.” 

Tuef.  19,  WeTeft  Charies-Town  ; hut  meet- 
ing with  ftormy  and  contrary  winds,  after  loftng. 
our  anchor,  and  beating  out  at  fea  all  night,  on 
Thurf.  21,  we  with  fome  difficulty  got  baci;  into 
Charles-Town  harbour. 

Fri.  22.  It  being  the  time  of  their  annual  vifi  • 
tation,  I had  the  pleafure  of  meeting  with  the 
clergy  of  South  Carolina:  among  whom  in  the 
afternoon  there  was  fuch  a ccnvrrfstion  for 
feveral  hours,  on  “ Chrift  our  Right:  oufnefs,”  as 
I had  not  heard  at  any  vifitation  in  England,  or 
hardly  on  any  other  occafion. 

* Sat.  23.  Mentioning  to  Mr.  Thompfon, 
minifter  of  St.  Bartholomew’s,  near  Ponpon,  my 
being  difappointei  of  a paffage  home  by  water, 
he  offered  me  one  of  his  horfes,  if  I would  go  by 
land,  which  I gladly  accepted  of.  He  went  with 
me  twenty  miles,  and  fent  his  fervant  to  guide 
me  the  other  twenty  to  his  houfe.  Finding  a 
young  negro  there,  who  feemed  more  fenftble 
than  the  reft,  I afked  her  how  long  fhe  had  been 
in  Carolina  ? She  faid,  two  or  three  years ; but 

that 


[ 160  ] 

that  (he  was  born  in  Barbadoes,  and  had  lived 
there  in  a minifter’s  family  from  a child.  1 
afked,  Whether  {he  went  to  church  there  ? She 
faid,  Yes,  every  Sunday, — to  carry  my  miftrefs’s 
children.  I afked  what  {he  had  learned  at 
church  ? She  faid,  Nothing  : I heard  a deal ; but 
did  not  underjtand  it.  But  what  did  your  mafler 
teach  you  at  home  ? Nothing.  Nor  your  mif- 
trefs  ? No.  I afked,  “ But  don’t  you  know, 
that  your  hands  and  feet,  and  this  you  call  your 
body,  will  turn  to  dull  in  a little  time  ? She  an- 
fwered,  Yes..  But  thereis  fomething  invou  that 
will  not  turn  to  duft,  and  this  is  what  they  call 
your  foul.  Indeed,  you  can’t  fee  your  foul, 
though  it  is  within  you,  as  you  can’t  fee  the 
wind,  though  it  is  all  about  you.  But  if  you  had 
not  a foul  in  you,  you  could  no  more  fee,  or 
hear,  or  feel,  than  this  table  can.  What  do  you 
think  will  become  of  your  foul,  when  your  body 
turns  to  duft  ? I don’t  know.  Why,  it  will  go 
out  of  your  body,  and  go  up  there,  above  the 
Iky,  and  live  always.  God  lives  there.  Do  you 
know  who  God  is  ? No.  You  can’t  fee  him,  any 
more  than  you  can  fee  your  own  foul.  It  is  he 
that  made  you  and  me,  and  all  men  and  women, 
and  all  beafts  and  birds,  and  all  the  world.  It  is 
he  that  makes  the  fun  fhine,  and  rain  fall,  and 
corn  and  fruits  to  grow  out  of  the  ground.  He 
makes  all  thefe  for  us.  But  why  do  you  think 
he  made  us  ? What  did  he  make  you  and  me 
for?  I can’t  tell.  He  made  you  to  live  with 

bimfelf 


C >61  J 


himfelf  above  the  fky.  And  fo  you  will,  in  a 
little  time,- — if  you  are  good.  If  you  are  good, 
when  your  body  dies,  your  foul  will  go  up,  and 
want  nothing,  and  have  whatever  you  can  defire. 
No  one  will  beat  or  hurt  you  there.  You  will 
never  be  fick.  You  will  never  be  forry  any  more, 
nor  afraid  of  any  thing.  I can’t  tell  you,  I don’t 
know  how  happy  you  will  be:  for  you  will  be 
with  God. 

The  attention  with  which  this  poor  creature 
liftened  to  iriftruflion  is  inexpreffible.  The  next 
da  Oie  remembered  all,  readily  anfwered  every 
queflion  ; and  faid^  She  would  ajk  him  that  made 
her,  to  Jhew  her  how  to  be  good. 

Sun,  24,  I preached  twice  at  Ponpon  chap- 
pel,  on  the  13th  chapter  of  the  firft  epiftle  to 
the  Corin  hians.  O how  will  even  thofe  men 
of  Carolina,  who  come  eight,  ten,  or  twelve 
miles  to  hear  the  gofpel.  rife  in  judgment  againft 
thofe  who  hear  it  not,  when  it  is  preached  at 
their  own  doors  ! • 

Wednef.  27.  I came  to  Mr.  Belinger’s  plan- 
tation at  Chulifinny,  where  the  rain  kept  me  till 
Friday.  Here  I met  with  an  half-Indian,  (one 
that  had  an  Indian  mother,  and  a Spanifh  father) 
and  feveral  negroes,  who  were  very  defirous  of 
inftru&ion.  * One  of  them  faid,  “ When  I was 
at  AfhFey- Ferry,  I went  to  church  every  Sunday. 
But  here  we  are  buried  in  the  woods.  Though 
if  there  was  any  church  within  five  or  fi-x  miles, 

I am 


[ ] 


I am  fo  lame  I can’t  walk,  but  I u ould ' crawl 
thither.” 

* Mr.  Belinger  fent  a negro- lad  with  me  to 
Purrylturg,  or  rather  to  the  poor  remains  of  it- 

0 how  hath  God  fhetched  over  this  place  the 
tines  of  conjufwn,  and.  ' th.e  ftones  of  emptinefs ! 
Alas  for  thofe  whole  lives’  were  here  vilely . call 
away,  through  oppre{£onl  through  divers-plagues 
and  troubles"!  O earth!  How  long  wilt  thou 
hide  their  blocd!  Hoiv  long  wilt  thou  cover  thy 
Cain  ? 

This  lad  too  I found  both  very  defirous  and 
very  capable  of  inflruftion.  And  perhaps  one  of 
the  eafiell  and  Hiortell  ways  to  inflruft  the  Ame- 
rican negroes  in  Chriflianity,  would  be  firlt  to 
enquire  after  and  find  out  fome  of  the  moll  feri- 
ous  of  the  planteis.  Then  having  enquired  of 
them,  which  of  their  Haves  wtr  e heft  inclined  and 
underllocd  Englilh,  to  go  to  them  from  planta- 
tion to  plantation, ‘Having  as  long  as  appeared 
neceflary  at  each.  Three  cr  four  gentlemen 
in  Carolina  I have  been -with,  that  would  be 
lincerely  glad  of  fuch  an  afiillant;  who  might 
purfue  his  work  with  no  more  hindrances  than 
muH  every  where  attend  the  preaching  of  the 
gofpel. 

Sat.  go.  I came  to  Savannah,  and  found  my 
little  flock  in  a better  Hate  than  I could  have  ex- 
pelled : God  having  been  pleafed  great ly  to 
blefs  the  endeavours  of  ray  fellow-labourer,  while 

1 was  abfent  from  them. 


Wednef. 


[ 3 

Wednef.  May  18.  I difcovered  the  firfl  con- 
vert to  deifm  that  (I  believe)  has  been  made 
here.  He  was  one  that  for  fome  time  had  been 
zealoufly  and  exemplarily  religious.  But  indulg- 
ing himfelf  in  harmlefs  company,  he  firlf  made 
thipwrecjc  of  his  zeal,  and  then  of  his  faith-  I 
have  fin ce  found  feveral  others  that  have  been 
attacked.  They  have  as  yet  maintained  their 
ground.  But  I doubt  the  devil’s  apoftles  are  too 
induftrious  to  let  them  long  halt  between  two 
opinions. 

Wednef.  25.  I was  fent  for  by  one  who  had 
been  feveral  years  of  the  church  of  Rome ; but 
was  now  deeply  convinced  (as  were  feveral 
others)  by  what  I had  occafionally  preached,  of 
the  grievous  errors  that  church  is  in,  and  the 
great  danger  of  continuing  a member  of  it. 
Upon  this  occafion  I could  not  but  refleft  on  the 
many  advices  I had  received,  to  beware  of  the 
increafe  of  Popery:  but  notone  (that  I remem- 
ber) to  beware  of  the  increafe  of  infidelity,  l his 
was  quite  furprizing,  when  I confidered,  1.  That 
in  every  place  where  I have  yet  been,  the  num- 
ber of  the  converts  to  Popery  bore  no  proportion 
to  the  number  of  the  converts  to  infidelity.  2. 
That  as  bad  a religion  as  Popery  is,  no  religion  is 
Hill  worfe  ; a baptized  infidel  being  always  found 
upon  the  trial,  two  fold  worfe  than  even  a bi- 
gotted  Papift.  3.  That  as  dangerous  a Hate  as  a 
Papift  is  in,  with  regard  to  eternity,  a Deift  is  in 
a yet  more  dangerous  ftate,  if  he  be  not  (without 

repen ■ 


[ 164  ] 

repentance)  an  afTured  heir  of  damnation.  And 
laftly,  That  as  hard  as  it  is  to  reco-  er  a Papift,  it 
is  is  ftill  haider  to  recover  an  infidel:  I imfelf 
having  known  many  Papiiis,  but  never  one  D 
re- converted. 

May  29.  Being  Whitfunday,  four  of  our  fchc 
lars,  after  having  been  inflru&ed  daily  • r feve 
ral  weeks,  were  at  their  earnefi  and  r peated 
defire,  admitted  to  the  Lord's  table.  I fruit  their 
zeal  hath  flirred  up  many,  to  remember  their 
Creator  in  the  days  0/  their  youth,  and  to  re- 
deem the  time,  even  in  the  midft  of  an  evil  and 
adulterous  generation. 

Indeed  about  this  time  we  obferved  the  Spirit 
of  God  tQ  move  upon  the  minds  I many  of  the 
children.  They  began  more  carefully  to  attend 
to  the  things  that  were  fpoken  both  at  home  and 
at  church,  and  a remarkable  ferioufnefs  ap- 
peared in  their  whole  behaviour  and  converfa- 
tion.  Who  knows  but  fome  of  them  may  grojj* 
up,  to  ike  meafurt  of  the  future  of  the  fullnefs  of 
Chrifi  ? 

June  25.  Mr.  Caufton  (the  llore-keeper  and 
chief  magiflrate  of  Savannah)  was  feized  with  a 
flow  fever.  I attended  him  every  day  (as  I did 
any  of  my  parifhioners,  who  were  in  any  painful 
or  dangerous  illnefs)  and  had  a good  hope  from 
the  thankfulnefs  he  (hewed,  that  ray  labour  was 
not  in  vain. 

Sun.  July  3.  Immediately  after  the  holy  com- 
munion, 


[ l65  ] 


munion,  I mentioned  to  Mrs.  Williamfon  (Mr. 
Caufton’s  neice)  fome  thoughts  which  I thought 
reproveable  in  her  behaviour.  At  this  {he  ap- 
peared extremely  angry,  faid.  She  did  not  exped 
fuch  nfage from  me ; and  at  the  turn  of  die  flreet 
(through  which  we  were  walking  home)  went 
abruptly  away.  The  next  day  Mrs.  Caufton  en- 
deavoured to  excufe  her,  told  me,  She  was 
exceedingly  grieved  for  what  had  puffed  the  day 
before,  and  defired  me  to  tell  her  in  uniting 
what  I difliked;  which  I accordingly  did  the 
day  following. 

But  firft,  I fent  Mr.  Caufton  the  following 
note : 

Sir, 

“To  this  hour,  you  have  fhewn  yourfelf  my 
K friend  : I ever  have  and  ever  (hall  acknow- 
ledge it.  And  it  is  mr  earneft  defire,  that  he 
“ who  hath  hitherto  given  me  this  blelling,  would 
“ continue  it  ftill. 

“ But  this  cannot  be,  unlefs  you  will  allow 
“ me  one  requeft,  which  is  not  fo  eafy  an  one 
“ as  it  appears,  Don’t  condemn  me  for  doing  in 
“ the  execution  oj  my  office,  what  I think  is  my 
“ duty  to  do. 

“ If  you  can  prevail  upon  yourfelf  to  allow  me 
“ this,  even  when  I aft  without  refpeft  of  per- 
“ fons,  I am  ne;  fuaded  there  will  never  be,  at 
“ leaft  not  long,  any  mifunderftanding  between 
“ us.  For  even  thofe  who  feek  it,  {hall  I truft, 

“ find 


[ *66  ] 


“ find  no  occafion  againft  me,  except  it  he  con- 
“ cermng  the  law  of  my  Gocl.'' 

July«5.  *737-  I am,  &c. 

Wednef.  6.  Mr.  Caufton  came  to  my  houfe, 
with  Mr.  Bailiff  Parker,  and  Mr.  Recorder;  and 
warmly  afked,  “ How  could  you  poflibly  think 
I fhould  condemn  you,  for  executing  any  part 
of  your  office?”  I laid  ffiort,  “ Sir,  what  if  I 
fhould  think  it  the  duty  of  my  office,  to  repel 
one  of  your  family  from  the  holy  communion  ?” 
He  replied,  “ If  you  repel  me  or  my  wife,  I 
fhall  require  a legal  reafon.  But  I (hall  trouble 
myfelf  about  none  elfe.  Let  them  look  to  them- 
felves.” 

Sat.  g.  Meeting  with  a Frenchman  of  New 
Orleans  on  the  Miffifippi,  who  had  lived  feveral 
months  among  the  Chicafaws,  he  gave  us  a full 
and  particular  account  of  many  things  which 
had  been  varioufly  related.  * And  hence  we 
could  not  but  remark,  What  is  the  religion 
of  nature  properly  fo  called;  or,  that  religion 
which  flows  from  natural  reafon,  unaffifted 
by  revelation.  And  that,  even  in  thofe  who 
have  the  knowledge  of  many  truths;  and, 
who  converfe  with  their  beloved  ones  day  and 
night.  But  too  plainly  does  it  appear  bv  the 
fruits,  That  the  gods  of  ti  tfe  Heathens  too  Jc  hut 
devils. 

The  fubftance  of  his  account  was  this  ; Some 
years  pall  the  Chicafaws  and  French  were  friends. 

The 


The  riench  wee  then  mingled  with  the  Naut- 
chee  Indians,  v/liom  they  ufed  as  flaves ; till  the 
Nautchees  made  a general  riling,  and  took  many 
of  the  French  prifoners.  But  foon  after,  a French 
army  fet  upon  them,  killed  many  and  carried 
away  the  reft.  Among  thofe  that  were  killed 
were  fome  Chicafaws,  whofe  death  the  Chica- 
faw  notion  relented  ; and  foon  after  a French 
boat  was  going  through  their  country,  they  fired 
into  it,  and  killed  all  the  men  but  two.  The 
French  refolved  on  revenge,  and  orders  were 
given  for  many  Indians  and  feveral  parties  of 
white  men,  to  rendezvous  on  the  26th  of  March, 
1736,  near  one  of  the  Chicafaw  towns.  The 
firft  party,  confifiing  of  fifty  men,  came  thither 
fome  days  before  the  time.  They  ftaid  there 
till  the  24th,  but  none  came  to  join  them.  On 
the  23th,  they  were  attacked  by  two  hundred 
Chicafaws.  The  French  attempted  to  force  their 
way  through  them.  Five  or  fix  and  twenty  did 
fo  ; the  reft  were  taken  prifoners.  The  prifoners 
were  fent  two  or  three  to  a town  to  be  burnt. 
Only  the  commanding  officer  and  one  or  two 
more  were  put  to  death  on  the  place  of  the  en- 
gagement.” 

“ I (faid  he)  and  one  more,  were  faved  by 
the  warrior  who  took  us.  The  manner  of  burn- 
ing the  refl  was,  holding  lighted  canes  to  their 
arms  and  leers  and  feveral  parts  of  their  bodies 
for  lome  time,  and  then  for  a while  taking  them 
away.  The)  likewife  ftuck  burning  pieces  of 

wood 


C l68  ] 

wood  into  their  flefh  all  round,  in  which  condi- 
tion they  kept  them  from  morning  till  evening. 
But  they  commonly  beat  them  before  they  burn 
them.  I faw  the  prieft  that  was  with  us  car- 
ried to  be  burnt  : and  from  head  to  foot,  he  was 
as  black  as  your  coat  with  the  blows  which  they 
had  given  him.’’ 

* I afked  him,  “ What  was  their  manner  of 
life  ?”  He  faid,  “ They  do  nothing  but  eat,  and 
drink,  and  fmoak,  from  morning  till  night,  and 
in  a manner  from  night  till  morning.  For  they 
rife  at  any  hour  of  the  night  when  they  wake  ; 
and  after  eating  and  drinking  as  much  as  they 
can,  go  to  lleep  again.”  See  The  religion  of 
nature  truly  delineated ! 

Saturday  23.  Reflecting  on  the  flate  I was 
now  in,  I could  not  but  obferve  in  a letter  to  a 
friend  “ How  to  attain  to  the  being  crucified 
with  Chriff,  I find  not,  being  in  a condition  I 
neither  defiled,  nor  expe&ed  in  America,  in 
eafe  and  honour,  and  abundance.  A ftrange 
fchool  for  him  who  has  but  one  bufinefs, 
icivloii  £ia£@tia.V'\ 

Wednef,  27.  I rejoiced  to  meet  once  more 
with  that  good  foldier  of  Jefus  Chriff,  Auguft 
Spangenberg;  with  whom  on  Monday,  Auguft 
j,  I began  my  long  intended  journey  to  Ebene- 
zer.  In  the  way  I told  him,  “ The  calm  wre 
had  fo  long  enjoyed,  was  now  drawing  to  an 
end  : that  1 hoped  he  would  fhortly  fee  I was 

not 

+ Toexercife  himjelf  unto  godllr.cjs. 


C ’99  3 


not  (as  fome  had  told  him)  a refpeRor  of  per- 
fons ; but  was  determined  (God  being  my  helper) 
to  behave  indifferently  to  all,  rich  or  poor, 
friends  or  enemies.”  I then  afked  his  advice  as 
to  the  difficulty  I forefaw,  and refolved,  by  God’s 
grace  to  follow  it. 

In  the  evening  we  came  to  New  Ebenezer, 
where  the  poor  Saltzburghers  are  fettled.  The 
indufiry  of  this  people  is  quite  furprizing.  Their 
fixty  huts  are  neatly  and  regularly  built ; and  all 
the  little  fpots  of  ground  between  them,  improv- 
ed to  the  bell  advantage.  One  fide  of  the  town, 
is  a field  or  Indian  corn  ; on  the  other  are  the 
plantations  of  feveral  private  perfons  : all  which 
together  one  would  fcarce  think  it  poffible  for  a 
handful  of  people  to  have  done  in  one  year. 

W ednef.  3.  We  returned  to  Savannah.  Sund. 
7,  I repelled  Mrs.  Williamfon  from  the  holy 
communion.  And  Mond.  8,  Mr.  Recorder  of 
Savannah,  ifltied  out  the  warrant  following  : 

Georgia.  Savannah  ff. 

O 

To  all  Conjlables , Tyfhingmen  and  others,  whom 
theje  may  concern  7 

“ You  and  each  of  you  are  hereby  required, 
“ to  take  the  body  of  John  Wefley,  Clerk  : 

“ And  bring  him  before  one  of  the  bailiffs  of. 
“ the  faid  town,  to  anfwer  the  complaint  of  Wil- 
“ ham  Williamfon  and  Sophia  his  wife,  for  de- 
Vo  L.  XXVI.  H “ faminS 


[ 200  ] 


“ faming  the  faid  Sophia,  and  refufing  to  admi- 
“ nifter  to  her  the  facrament  of  the  Lord’s  fup- 
“ per,  in  a public  congregation,  without  caufe ; 

“ by  which  the  faid  William  Williamfon  is  da- 
“ maged  one  thoufand  pound  flerling.  And  for 
“ fo  doing,  this  is  your  warrant,  certifying  what 
“ you  are  to  do  in  the  premilTes.  Given  under 
“ my  hand  and  feal  the  8th  day  of  Aug.  Anno 
“ Dom.  1737.” 

Tho.  Chriftie. 

Tuef.  9.  Mr.  Jones  the  conflable  ferved  the 
warrant,  and  carried  me  before  Mr.  BaiiifT Parker 
and  Mr.  Recorder.  My  anfwer  to  them  was, 
that  “ The  giving  or  refufing  the  Lord’s  flipper, 
being,  a matter  purely  ecclefiaflical,  I could 
not  acknowledge  their  power,  to  interrogate  me 
upon  it.”  Mr.  Parker  told  me,  “ However, 
you  mud  appear  at  the  next  court  holden  for  Sa- 
vannah.” Mr.  Williamfon  (who  flood  by)  faid, 
“ Gentlemen,  I defire  Mr.  Wefley  may  give 
bail  for  his  appearance.”  But  Mr.  Parker  im- 
mediately replyed,  Sir,  Mr.  Wefley  s word  is 
f affluent. 

Wedn.  10.  Mr.  Cauflon  (from  ajuft  regard, 
as  his  letter  exp  re  (Ted  it,  to  the friendfiip  which 
had fubfijled  between  us,  till  this  affair J required 
me,  to  give  the  reafons  in  the  court-houfe,  why 
I repelled  Mrs.  Williamfon  from  the  holy  com- 
munion ? I anfwered,  “ I apprehend  many  ill 

confequences 


C 201  ] 

confequences  may  arife  from  fo  doing.  Let  the 
caufe  he  laid  before  the  truftees.” 

Thurfd.  11.  Mr.  Caulton  came  to  my  houfe, 
and  among  many  other  {harp  words  faid,  “ Make 
an  end  of  this  matter,  thou  hadft  beft.  My  niece 
to  be  ufed  thus!  I have  drawn  the  fword,  and  I 
will  never  (heath  it,  till  I have  fatisfadlion.” 

Soon  after  he  added,  “ Give  the  reafons  of 
your  repelling  her,  before  the  whole  congrega- 
tion.” I anfwered,  “ Sir,  if  you  infill  upon  it, 
I will  ; and  fo  you  may  be  pleafed  to  tell  her.” 
He  faid,  “ Write  to  her,  and  tell  her  fo  your- 
felf.”  I faid,  I will ; and  after  he  went,  I wrote 
as  follows. 

To  Mrs.  Sophia  Williamfon. 

“ At  Mr.  Caufton’s  requefl,  I write  once 
“ more.  The  rules  whereby  I proceed  are 
“ thefe  : 

“ So  many  as  intend  to  be  partakers  of  the  Holy 
“ Communion , Jhall fignify  their  names  to  the  cu- 
“ rate,  at  leaf  fome  time  the  day  before.  This 
“ you  did  not  do. 

“ And  if  any  of  thefe — have  done  any  wrong  to 
“ his  neighbours  by  word  or  deed,  fo  that  the  con- 

“ gregation  be  thereby  offended,  the  curate 

“fall  advertife  him  that  in  any  wife  he  prefume 
“ not  to  come  to  the  Lord’s  table,  until  he  hath 
“ openly  declared  himf  If  to  have  truly  repented. 

“ If  you  offer  yourfelf  at  the  Lord's  table  on 
H a “ Sunday, 


[ 202  J 


“ Sunday,  I will  advertife  you  (as  I have  done 
“ more  than  once)  wherein  you  have  done 
“ wrong.  And  when  you  have  openly  declared 
“ yourfelf  to  have  truly  repented,  I will  adminif- 
“ ter  to  yon  the  myfteries  of  God.” 

Aug.  n,  1737.  John  Wefley. 

Mr.  Delamotte  carrying  this,  Mr.  Caufton 
faid,  among  many  other  warm  fayings,  “ I am 
the  perfon  that  am  injured.  The  affront  is  of- 
fered to  me  ; and  I will  efpoufe  the  caufe  of  my 
niece.  I am  ill  ufed  ; and  I will  have  fatisfac- 
tion,  if  it  be  to  be  had  in  the  world.” 

Which  way  this  fatisfa&ion  was  to  be  had,  I 
did  not  yet  conceive.  But  on  Friday  and  Sa- 
turday it  began  to  appear  ; Mr.  Caufton  declar- 
ed to  many  perfons,  that  Mr.  IV fey  had  repelled 
Sophy  from  the  Holy  Communion,  purely  out  of 
revenge  ; becaufe  he  had  made  propofals  of  mar- 
riage to  her,  which  fie  rejedled,  and  married  Mr. 
Willi  amfon . 

I could  not  but  obferve  the  gracious  provi- 
dence of  God,  in  the  conrfe  of  the  leffons  all  this 
week.  On  Mond.  evening  God  Ipake  to  us  in 
thefe  words.  Call  to  remembrance  the  former 
days,  in  which  you  endured  a great  fght  of  af- 
fibhons : partly  whilf  ye  were  made  a gazing- 
jlock,  both  by  reproaches  and  ajfiilions,  and 
partly  whilf  ye  became  companions  of  them  that 
were  fo  ufed. — Cajl  not  away  therefore  your  confi- 
dence, which  hath  great  recompence  of  reward. 

For 


[ 2°3  ] 

For  ye  have  need  of  patience,  that  after  ye  have 
done  the  will  of  God,  ye  might  receive  the  promife. 

The  evening  lefTon  on  Tuefday,  was  the  nth 
of  the  Hebrews  ; in  reading  which  I was  more 
particularly  encourged  by  his  example,  who 
chofe  rather  to  fujfer  ajfhElion  with  the  people  of 
God,  than  to  enjoy  the  pleafures  of  fin  for  afea- 
fon  : efeemmg  the  reproach  of  Chrifi  greater  riches 
than  the  treafures  of  Egypt. 

The  lefibn  on  Wednefday  began  with  thefe 
words,  Wherefore  feeing  we  are  compaf  about 
with  Jo  great  a cloud  of  witnffes,  let  us  lay  afide 
every  weight — and  run  with  patience  the  race  that 
is  fel  before  us : looking  unto  fefus  the  author 
and finfher  of  our  faith,  who  for  the  joy  that  was 
fet  before  him,  endured  the  crofs,  defpifng  the 
fiame , and  is fet  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
throne  of  God. 

In  the  Thurfday  lefTon  were  thefe  comforta- 
ble words,  I will  never  leave  thee  nor  jorfake 
thee.  So  that  we  may  boldly  fay,  the  Lord  is  my 
helper,  and  I will  not  fear  what  man  fall  do  un- 
to me. 

The  words  of  St.  James,  read  on  Friday  were, 
Blefed  is  the  man  that  endureth  temptation  : and 
thofe  on  Saturday,  My  brethren.  Have  not  the 
faith  of  our  Lord  fefus  Chrifi — with  refpetd  of 
per  fans. 

I was  only  afraid,  left  thofe  who  were  weak, 
fltould  be  turned  out  of  the  way,  at  leaft,  fo  far 
as  to  forfake  the  public  affembling  of  themfelves 
H 3 together . 


C 2°4  ] 

together.  But  I feared  where  no  fear  was.  God. 
took  care  of  this  alfo.  So  that  on  Sunday  14, 
more  were  prefent  at  the  morning  prayers,  than 
had  been  for  fome  months  before.  Many  of 
them  obferved  thofe  words  in  the  firfl  leffon, 
Set  Naboth  on  high  among  the  people  ; and  fet  two 
men,  fons  oj  Belial,  bejore  him , to  bear  witnejs 
againjl  him” 

1 uef.  16.  Mrs.Williamfon  fwore  to  and  figned 
an  affidavit,  infinuating  much  more  than  it  af- 
ferted;  but  afferting,  “ That  Mr.  Wefley  had 
many  times  propofed  marriage  to  her,  all  which 
propofals  fhe  had  rejefled.”  Of  this  I defired  a 
copy  : Mr.  Caufton  replied,  “ Sir,  You  may 
have  one  from  any  of  the  News  papers  in  Ame- 
rica.” 

On  Thurfday  or  Friday  was  delivered  out  a 
lift  of  twenty-fix  men,  who  were  to  meet  as  a 
grand  jury,  on  Monday  the  22d.  But  this  lift 
was  called  in  the  next  day,  and  twenty-four 
names  added  to  it.  Of  this  grand  jury  (forty- 
four  of  whom  only  met)  one  was  a Frenchman, 
who  did  not  underftand  Englifh,  one  a papift, 
one  a profeft  Infidel,  three  Baptifts,  fixteen  or 
feventeen  others,  Diftenters,  and  feveral  others 
who  had  perfonal  quarrels  againft  me,  and  had 
openly  vowed  revenge. 

To  this  grand  jury,  on  Monday  the  22d,  Mr. 
Caufton  gave  a long  and  earned:  charge,  To  be- 
ware offpiritual  tyranny,  and  to  opbofe  the  new, 
illegal  authority  which  was  ufurped  over  their  con- 

Jciences. 


[ 205  ] ' 

fciences.  Then  Mrs.  Williamfon’s  affidavit  was 
read  : after  which  Mr.  Cauflon  delivered  to  the 
grand  jury,  a paper  intitled 

“ A lid  of  grievances,  prefented  by  the  grand 
“jury  for  Savannah,  this  day 

“ of  Aug.  1737*” 

This  tlTe  majority  of  the  grand  jury  altered  in 
fome  particulars,  and  on  Thurfd.  Sept.  1,  deli- 
vered it  again  to  the  court,  under  the  form  of 
two  prefentments,  containing  ten  bills,  which 
were  then  read  to  the  people. 

Herein  they  afferted,  upon  oath,  “ That  John 
“ Wefley,  Clerk,  had  broken  the  laws  oj  the 
“ realm,  contrary  to  the  peace  of  our  Sovereign 
“ Lord  the  King,  Ins  crown  and  dignity. 

“ 1.  By  fpeaking  and  writing  to  Mrs.  Wil- 
“ liamfon,  againft  her  hufband’s  confent  : 

“ 2.  By  repelling  her  from  the  Holy  Com- 
“ munion  : 

“ 3.  By  not  declaring  his  adherence  to  the 
“ church  of  England  : 

“ 4.  By  dividing  the  morning  fervice  on  Sun- 
“ days : 

“ 5.  By  refufing  to  baptize  Mr.  Parker’s  child 
“ otherwife  than  by  dipping,  except  the  parents 
“ would  certify  it  was  weak,  and  not  able  to 
“ bear  it : 

“ 6.  By  repelling  William  Gough  from  the 
“ Holy  Communion : 

H 4 “7-  By 


[ 2o6  ] 

“ 7-  By  refufing  to  read  the  burial  fervice 
“ over  the  body  of  Nathaniel  Polhill : 

“ 8.  By  calling  himfelf  Ordinary  of  Savannah. 

“ 9*  By  refufing  to  receive  William  Aglion- 
*’  by,  as  a godfather,  only  becaufe  he  was  not  a 
“ communicant : 

“ io.  By  refufing  Jacob  Matthews  for  the 
“ fame  reafon  : and  baptizing  an  Indian  trader's 
“ child  with  only  two  fponfors.”  (This,  I own 
was  wrong ; for  I ought,  at  all  hazards,  to  have 
refufed  baptizing  it  till  he  had  procured  a third.) 

Frid.  2.  Was  the  third  court,  at  which  I ap- 
peared, fince  my  being  carried  before  Mr.  P. 
and  the  recorder. 

I now  moved  for  an  immediate  hearing  on  the 
firft  bill,  being  the  only  one  of  a civil  nature  : 
but  it  was  refufed.  I made  the  fame  motion  in 
the  afternoon  ; but  was  put  off  till  the  next 
court  day. 

On  the  next  court  day  I appeared  again;  as 
alfo  at  the  two  courts  following ; but  could  not 
be  heard,  becaufe  (the  Judge  faid)  Mr.  William- 
fon  was  gone  out  of  town. 

The  fenfe  of  the  minority  of  the  grand jurots 
themfelves  (for  they  were  by  no  means  unani- 
mous) concerning  thefe  prefentments,  may  ap- 
pear from  the  following  paper,  which  they  tranf- 
mitted  to  the  trufiees. 

To  the  Honourable  the  Trujlees  for  Georgia. 

“ Whereas  two  prefentments  have  been  made, 

* ‘the, 


[ 207  ] 


H the  one  of  Auguft  23,  the  other  of  Auguft  31, 
“ by  the  grand  jury  for  the  town  and  county  of 
“ Savannah  in  Georgia,  againft  John  Wefley, 
“ Clerk. 

“Wewhofe  names  are  underwritten,  being 
“ members  of  the  faid  grand  jury,  do  humbly 
“ beg  leave  to  fignify  our  dillike  of  the  faid  pre- 
“ fentments:  being  by  many  and  divers  circum- 
“ fiances  throughly  perfwaded  in  ourfelves,  that 
“ the  whole  charge  againft  Mr.  Wefley,  is  an 
“ artifice  of  Mr.  Cauflon’s,  defigned  rather  to 
“ blacken  the  character  of  Mr.  Wefley,  than  to 
“ free  the  colony  from  religious  tyranny,  as  he 
“ was  pleafed  in  his  charge  to  us  to  term  it. 
“ But  as  thefe  circumflances  will  be  too  tedious 
“ to  trouble  your  honours  with,  we  {hall. only 
“ beg  leave  to  give  the  reafons  of  our  diffent 
“ from  the  particular  bills. 

“ With  regard  to  the  firft  bill,  we  do  not  ap- 
“ prehend,  that  Mr.  Wefley  afled  againft  any 
“ law,  by  writing  or  fpeaking  to  Mrs.  William- - 
“ fon,  fince  it  does  not  appear  to  us,  that  the  faid 
“ Mr. Wefley  has  either  J poke  in  private,  or  wrote 
“ to  the  faid  Mrs.  Williamfon,Jin<e  March  12,  (the 
“ day  of  her  marriage,),  except  one  letter  of  July 
“ the  5th,. which  he  wrote  at  the  requejl  ojher  mile,. 
“ as  a pajlor  to  exhort  and  reprove  her. 

“The  fecond  we  do  not  apprehend  to  be  a 
“true  bill,  becaufe  we  humbly  conceive  Mr. 
'*  Wefley  did  not  affume  to  hirnfelfany  authority 
“ contrary  to  law  : for  we  underftand,  Every 
“ prerfon-  intending  to  communicate , Jhould  “ fig— 
H 5 <(  nify 


[ 2o8  ] 

“ nify  his  name  to  the  curate , at  leajl  fome  time  the 
“ day  before ,”  which  Mrs.  Williamfon  did  not 
“ do ; although  Mr.  Wefley  had  often  in  full 
“ congregation  declared,  he  did  infill  on  a com- 
“ pliance  with  that  rubrick,  and  had  before  re - 
“petted  divers  perfons,  for  non-compliance  there- 
“ with. 

“ The  third  we  do  not  think  a true  bill,  be- 
“ caufe  feveral  of  us  have  been  his  hearers,  when 
“ he  has  declared  his  adherence  to  the  church  of 
“ England , in  a ftronger  manner  than  by  a for- 
“ mal  declaration;  bv  explaining  and  defending 
“ the  Apojtles,  the  Nicene  and  the  Athanafian 
“ Creeds,  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  the  uhole 
“ Book  of  Common-Prayer,  and  the  Homilies  of  the 
“ faid  church  : and  becaufe  we  think  a formal 
“ declaration  is  not  required,  but  from  thofe  who 
“ have  received  inditution  and  induftion. 

“ The  fa£l  alledged  in  the  fourth  bill  we  can- 
“ not  apprehend  to  be  contrary  to  any  law  in 
“ being. 

“ The  fifth  we  do  not  think  a true  bill,  be- 
“ caufe  we  conceive  Mr.  Wefley  is  juflified  by 
“ the  rubric,  viz.  If  they  (the  parents)  certify  that 
“ the  child  is  weak,  it  fhallfuffict  to  pou  r water 
“ upon  it.”  Intimating  (as  we  humbly  fuppofe) 
“ it  lhall  not  fuffice,  if  they  do  not  certify. 

“ The  fixth  cannot  be  a true  bill,  becaufe  the 
" faid  William  Gough,  being  one  of  our  mem- 
“ bers,  was  furprized  to  hear  himfelf  named, 
!l  without  his  knowledge  or  privity;  and  did 

“ publiekly 


[ 209  ] 


“ pubHckly  declare,  It  was  no  grievance  to  him, 

“ becauje  the /aid  John  IVeJley,  had  given  him  rea- 
“ Jons  with,  which  he  was  faUsfied. 

“ The  feventh  we  do  not  apprehend  to  be  a 
“ true  bill,  for  Nathaniel  Polhill  was  an  Anabap- 
“ till,  and  dehred  in  his  life-time,  that  he  might 
“ not  be  interred  with  the  office  of  the  church  of 
“ England.  And  farther,  we  have  good  reafon 
“ to  believe,  that  Mr.  Welley  was  at  Frederica, 

“ or  on  his  return  thence,  when  Polhill  was 
“ I uned. 

“ As  to  the  eighth  bill  we  are  in  doubt,  as  not 
“ well  knowing  the  meaning  of  the  word  Ordi- 
“ nary.  But  for  the  ninth  and  tenth,  we  think 
“ Mr.  Welley  is  fufficientlv  juftified  by  the  ca- 
“ nons  of  the  church  , which  forbid  any  per- 
“ Jon  to  be  admitted  godfather  or  godmother  to  any 
“ child,  before  the  Jaid  perjon  has  received  the 
“ Holy  Communion  ; whereas  William  Aglionby 
“ and  Jacob  Matthews,  had  never  certified  Mr. 
“ Welley  that  they  had  received  it  ” 

This  was  figned  by  twelve  of  the  grand  jurors, 
of  whom  three  were  conltables,  and  fix  more, 
tythingmen  : who  confequently  would  have  made 
a majority,  had  the  jury  confided,  as  it  regular- 
ly Ihould  have  done,  of  only  fifteen  members, 
viz.  the  four  condables  and  eleven  tythingmen. 

Friday,  Sept.  go.  Having  ended  the  homilies, 
I began  reading  Dr.  Rogers’s  eight  fermons  to 
the  congregation  : hoping  they  might  be  a time- 
ly antidote  again!!  the  poifon  of  infidelity,  which 
H 6 was 


[ 2Io  ] 

was  now  with  great  inuudry  propagated  among 
us. 

Oftober  the  7th,  I confulted  my  friends, 
whether  God  did  not  call  me,  to  return  to  Eng- 
land P The.  reafon  for  which  I left  it  had  now  no 
force;  there  being  no  podibility  as  yet  of  in- 
drufting  the  Indians : neither  had  I as  yet 
found  or  heard  of  any  Indians  on  the  continent 
of  America,  who  had  the  lead  defire  of  being 
indrufted.  And  as  to  Savannah,  having  never 
engaged  myfelf,  either  by  word  or  letter,  to  day 
there  a day  longer  than  I fh  mid  judge  conveni- 
ent, nor  ever  take  charge  of  the  people  any 
olherwife,  than  as  in  my  paffage  to  the  Hea- 
thens, I looked  upon  myfelf  to  be  fully  difcharg- 
ed  therefrom,  by  the  vacating  of  that  defign. 
Bcfides,  there  w’as  a probability  of  doing  more 
ferviee  to  that  unhappy  people,  in  England, 
than  I could  do  in  Georgia,  by  reprefenting 
without  fear  or  favour  to  the  trudees,  the  real 
date  the  colony  was  in.  After  deeply  conftder- 
ing  thefe  things,  they  were  unanimous,  1 hat  I 
ought  to  go  : but  not  1 el.  So  I laid  the  thoughts 
of  it  aftde  for  the  prefent  : being  perfuaded,  that 
when  the  time  was  come,  God  would  make,  the 
v>ay  plain  before  my  face. 

Sat.  Oft.  ij.  Being  at  Highgate,  a village 
five  miles. from  Savannah,  confiding  of  (all  but 
one)  French  families,  who,  I found,  knew  but 
little  of  the  Englilh  tongue,  I offered  to  read 
prayers  there  in  French  every  Saturday  in  the 

afternoon. 


[ Hi  ] 

afternoon.  They  embraced  the  offer  gladly. 
On  Saturday  the  2 2d  I read  prayers  in  German- 
likewife,  to  the  German  villagers  of  Idamp- 
ffead  : and  fo  continued  to  do,  once  a week. 
We  began  the  fervice  (both  at  Highgate  and 
Hampftead)  with  Tinging  a pfalm.  Then  I read 
and  explained  a chapter  in  the  French  or  Ger- 
man teflament,  and  concluded  with  prayers  and 
another  pfalm. 

Sat.  08:.  9.  Some  of  the  French  of  Savannah 
were  prefent  at  the  prayers  at  Highgate.  The 
next  day  I received  a meffage  from  them  all, 
“ That  as  I read  prayers  to  the  French  of  High- 
gate, who  were  but  few,  they  hoped  I would 
do  the  fame  to  thofe  ol  Savannah,  where  there 
was  a large  number  who  did  not  underdand 
Englilh.”  Sund.  30,  I began  fo  to  do  : and  now 
I had  full  employment  for  that  holy  day.  The 
fird  Englilh  prayers  laded  from  dve  till  half  an 
hour  pad  fix.  The  Italian  (which  I read  to  a 
few  Vaudois)  began  at  nine.  The  fecond  fer- 
vice for  the  Englilh  (including  the  fermon  and 
the  holy  communion)  continued  from  half  an 
hour  pad  ten,  till  about  half  an  hour  pad  twelve. 
The  French  fervice  began  at  one.  At  two  I ca- 
techifed  the  children.  About  three  began  the 
Englilh  fervice.  After  this  was  ended,  I had 
the  happinefs  of  joining  with  as  many  as  my 
larged  room  would  hold,  in  reading,  prayer,  and 
finging  praife.  And  about  fix  the  fervice  of  the 
Moravians,  fo  called,  began  : at  which  I was 

glad 


C 212  ] 

glad  to  be  prefent,  not  as  a teacher,  but  a 
learner. 

Thurf.  Nov.  3.  I appeared  again,  at  the  court 
holden  on  that  day  : and  again,  at  the  court  held 
Tuefday,  Nov.  22.  On  which  day  Mr.  Caudon 
defired  to  fpeak  with  me.  He  then  readme  fome 
affidavits  which  had  been  made,  Sept.  15,  lad 
pad  : in  one  of  which  it  was  affirmed,  “ That  I 
then  abufed  Mr.  Caudon  in  his  own  houfe,  call- 
ing him  liar,  villain,  and  fo  on.”  It  was  now 
likewife  repeated  before  feveral  perfons.  (which 
indeed  I had  forgot)  “ That  I had  been  repri- 
manded at  the  lad  court,  for  an  enemy  to,  and 
hinderer  of,  the  public  peace.” 

I again  confulted  my  friends,  who  agreed  with 
me,  that  the  time  we  looked  for  was  now  come. 
And  the  next  morning  calling  on  Mr.  Caudon, 
I told  him,  “ I defigned  to  fet  out  for  England 
immediately.”  I fet  up  an  advertifement  in  the 
Great- fquare  to  the  fame  effeft,  and  quietly  pre- 
pared for  my  journey. 

Fri.  Dec.  2.  I propofed  to  fet  out  for  Carolina 
about  noon,  the  tide  then  ferving.  But  about  ten 
the  magidrates  fent  for  me,  and  told  me,  “ I 
mud  not  go  out  of  the  province  ; for  I had  not 
anfwered  the  allegations  bid  againd  me.”  Ire- 
plied,  I have  appeared  at  fix  or  fven  courts  fuc- 
cejfvely , in  order  to  an  finer  them.  But  I was  not 
fujftred fo  to  do,  when  I defined  it  time  after  time. 
Then  they  faid,  “ However,  I mud  not  go,  un- 
!efs  I would  give  fecurity  to  anfwer  thofe  allega- 
tions 


[ 213  ] 


tions  at  their  court.”  1 afked,  “ What  fecurity  V 
After  confulting  together  about  two  hours,  the 
Recorder  ffiewed  me  a kind  of  bond,  engaging 
me,  under  a penalty  of  fifty  pounds,  to  appear  at 
their  court  when  I fhould  be  required.  He  added. 
But  Mr.  Williamfon  loo  has  dejired  of  us,  that  you 
Jhould  give  bail  to  anjwer  his  achon.  I then  told 
him  plainly,  Sir,  you  ufe  me  very  ill,  and fo  you 
do  the  Irujlees.  I will  give  neither  any  bond,  nor 
any  bail  at  all.  You  know  your  bujinejs,  and  I 
know  mine. 

In  the  afternoon  the  magiftrates  publifhed  an 
order,  requiring  all  the  officers  and  centinels,  to 
prevent  my  going  out  of  the  province  ; and  for- 
bidding any  perfon  to  affift  me  fo  to  do.  Being 
now  only  a.  prifoner  at  large,  in  a place  whe  e I 
knew  by  experience,  ever,  day  would  give  frelh 
opportunity,  to  procure  evidence  of  words  I 
never  faid,  and  aftions  I never  did  ; I faw  clearly 
the  hour  was  come  for  leaving  this  place  : and 
as  foon  as  evening  prayers  were  over,  about 
eight  o’clock,  the  tide  then  ferving,  I (hook  off 
the  duff  of  my  feet,  and  left  Georgia,  after 
having  preached  the  gofpel  there  (not  as  I ought, 
but  as  I was  ablej  one  year,  and  nearly  nine 
momhs. 

During  this  time  I had  frequent  opportunities 
of  maxing  many  obfervations  and  enquiries, 
' concerning  the  real  ftate  of  this  province, 
(which  has  been  fo  varioufly  reprefented).  the 

Englifh 


[ 214  J 

Englifh  fettlements  therein,  and  the  Indians  that 
have  intercourfe  with  them.  Thefe  I minuted 
down  from  time  to  time ; a fmall  extiaft  of 
which  I have  fuhjoined. 

l.  Georgia  lies  in  the  30th  and  31ft  degree  of 
north  latitude.  The  air  is  generally  clear,  the  rains 
being  much  fhorter,  as  well  as  heavier,  than  in 
England.  The  dews  are  very  great.  Thunder 
and  lightning  are  expefted  almofl  every  day,  in 
May,  June,  July,  and  Augult.  They  are  very 
terrible,  efpecially  to  a flranger.  During  thofe 
months,  from  ten  in  the  morning  to  four  in  the 
afternoon,  the  fun  is  extremely  fcorching.  But 
the  fea  breeze  generally  blows,  from  ten  till 
three  or  four.  The  winter  is  nearly  of  the  fame 
length  as  in  England.  But  the  mid-day  fun 
is  always  warm,  even  when  the  mornings  and 
evenings  are  very  (harp,  and  the  nights  piercing 
cold. 

2.  The  land  is  of  four  torts,  pine-barren,  Oak- 
land, fwamp  and  marlh.  The  pine-land  is  of  far 
the  greateib  extent,  efpecially  near  the  fea-coafls. 
The  foil  of  this  is  a dry,  whitifh  fand,  producing 
fhrubs  of  feveral  forts,  and  between  them  a fpiry, 
coarfe  grafs,  which  cattle  do  not  love  to  feed  on. 
But  here  and  there  is  a little  of  a better  kind, 
efpecially  in  the  favannahs  (fo  they  call  the  low, 
watry  meadows,  which  are  ufually  intermixt 
with  pine-lands.)  It  bears  naturally  two  forts  of 
fruit,  hurtle-berries  (much  like  thofe  in  Eng- 
land) 


C 21<5  ] 

land)  and  Chincopin-nuts ; a dry,  harfh  nut, 
about  the  fize  of  a fmall  acorn.  A laborious 
man  may  in  one  year  clear  and  plant  four  or 
five  acres  of  this  land:  it  will  produce  the  firft 
year,  from  two  to  four  bufhels  of  Indian  corn, 
and  from  four  to  eight  of  Indian  peafe  per  acre. 
The  fecond  year  it  ufually  bears  half  as  much ; 
the  third,  lefs ; the  fourth,  nothing. 

3.  Vines,  mulberries  and  peach-trees  it  bears 
well.  The  white  mulberry  is  not  good  to  eat. 
The  black  is  about  the  fize  of  a blackberry,  and 
has  much  the  fame  flavour.  In  frefh  pine- 
land,  Indian  potatoes  grow  well  (which  are 
more  lufcious  and  larger  than  the  Irifh.)  And  fo 
do  water-melons  and  fewee-beans,  about  the  fize 
of  our  fcarlet,  but  to  be  fhelled  and  eaten  like 
Windfor  beans. 

4.  Oak  land  commonly  lies  in  narrow  ftreaks 
between  pine-land  and  fome  fwamp,  creek  or 
river.  The  foil  is  a blackifh  fand,  producing  fe- 
veral  kinds  of  oak,  (though  none  exaflly  like  the 
Englifh)  bay,  lawrel,  afh,  walnut,  fumac-trees, 
gum-trees  (a  fort  of  fycamore)  dog-trees  (covered 
in  fpring  with  large  white  flowers)  and  many 
hickary-trees,  which  bear  a bad  kind  of  walnut. 
In  the  moillefl  part  of  this  land  fome  porfim- 
mon-trees  grow,  (which  bear  a fort  of  yellow, 
clear,  lufcious  plumb)  and  a few  mulberry  and 
cherry-trees.  The  common  wild-grapes  are  of 
two  forts,  both  red  : the  fox-grape  grows  two 
or  three  only  on  a flalk,  is  thick-fkinned,  iarge- 

ftoned, 


[ ] 


iloned;  oF  a harfh  tafle,  and  of  the  fize  ofa 
fmall  Kentifh  cherry.  The  cluher-gi  ape  is  of  a 
harfh  tafte  too,  and  about  the  fize  of  a white 
currant. 

5.  This  land  requires  much  labour  to  clear  ; 
but  when  it  is  cleared,  it  will  bear  any  grain,  for 
three,  four,  or  fometimes  five  years,  without 
laying  any  manure  upon  it.  An  acre  of  it  gene- 
rally bears  ten  bufhels  of  Indian  corn,  befides 
five  of  peafe,  in  a year.  So  that  this  at  prefent 
is  juftly  efteemed  the  nvaft  valuable  land  in  the 
province. 

8.  A fwainp  is,  any  low,  watrv  place,  which  is 
covered  with  trees  or  canes.  They  are  here  of 
three  forts,  cyprefs,  river  and  cane  fwamps. 
Cyprefs  fwamps  are,  molllv,  large  ponds,  in  and 
round  which  cyprefTes grow.  Moil  river-fwamps 
are  overflown  every  tide,  by  the  river  which 
runs  through  or  near  them.  If  they  were  drain- 
ed, they  would  produce  good  rice  ; as  would  the 
cune-fwamps  alfo ; which  in  the  mean  time  are 
the  bell  feeding  for  all  forts  of  cattle. 

7.  The  marfhes  are  of  two  forts ; foft  marfh, 
which  is  all  a quagmire,  and  abfolutely  good  for 
nothing : and  hard-marfh,  which  is  a firm, 
but  barren  fand,  bearing  only  fower  rufhes. 
Marfhes  of  both  forts  abound  on  the  fea  iflands, 
which  are  very  numerous,  and  contain  all  forts 
of  land.  And  upon  thefe  chiefly,  near  creeks 
and  runs  of  water,  juniper-trees  and  cedars 
grow. 


8.  Savannah 


r 217  3 


8.  Savannah  hands  on  a flat  bluff  (fo  they 
term  any  high-land  hanging  over  a creek  or 
river)  which  rifes  forty-five  feet  perpendicular 
from  the  river,  and  commands  it  feveral  miles 
both  upward  and  downward.  The  foil  is  a white 
fand  for  above  a mile  in  breadth,  fouth-eaft  and 
north-weft.  Beyond  this,  eaflward,  is  a river- 
fwamp  ; weftward  a fmall  svood,  in  which  was 
the  old  Indian  town.  O11  the  other  fide  of  the 
river  is  a marfhy  ifland,  covered  with  large  trees. 
South-weft  of  the  town  is  a large  pine-barren, 
which  extends  backward  to  a branch  of  the  Ala* 
tamahaw  rive/. 

9.  St.  Simon's  ifland,  having  on  the  fouth-eaft 
the  gulph  of  Florida;  on  the  other  fides,  branches 
of  the  Alatamahaw,  is  about  one  hundred  miles 
fouth  of  Savannah,  and  extends  in  length  about 
twenty,  in  breadth  from  two  to  five  miles.  On 
the  weft  fide  of  it,  on  a low  bluff,  ftands 
Frederica,  having  woods  to  the  north  and  fouth; 
to  the  eaft,  partly  woods,  partly  favannahs, 
and  partly  marlhes.  The  foil  is  moftly  a black- 
ifh  fand.  There  is  not  much  pine-land  on  the 
ifland  ; the  greateft  part  being  oak-land,  inter- 
termixt  with  many  favannahs,  and  old  Spanilh 
or  Indian  fields. 

10.  On  the  fea-point,  about  five  miles  fouth- 
eaft  of  the  town,  is  the  fort  where  the  foldiers 
are  ftationed.  But  the  ftorehoufe  in  Frederica 
better  deferves  that  name  ; being  incompaft  with 
regular  ramparts  of  earth,  and  a palifaded  ditch, 

and 


[ 218  ] 

and  mounted  with  cannon,  which  intirely  com- 
mand the  river. 

11.  About  twenty  miles  north-weft  from  St. 
Simon’s  is  Darien,  the  fettlement  of  the  Scotch 
Highlanders,  a mile  from  Fort  King  George, 
which  was  built  about  feventeen  and  abandoned 
about  eleven  years  fince.  The  town  lies  on  the 
main  land,  clofe  to  a branch  of  the  Alatamahaw, 
on  a bluff  about  thirty  feet  above  the  river,  hav- 
ing woods  on  all  Tides.  The  foil  is  a blackifh 
fand.  They  built  at  firft  many  fcatlered  huts  ; 
but  laft  fpring,  (1736)  expe&ing  the  Spaniards, 
they  built  themfelves  a large  fort,  and  all  retired 
within  the  walls  of  it. 

12.  Augufta,  diftant  from  Savannah  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles,  and  five  from  old  Savannah 
Town,  is  defigned  to  ftand  in  an  old  Indian 
field,  on  a bluff,  about  thirty  feet  high.  A 
fmall  fort  of  wooden  piles  was  built  there  in 
1737  ; but  no  houfe  was  then  built,  nor  any 
more  ground  cleared,  than  Mr.  Lacy  and  his 
men  found  fo. 

13.  Old  Ebenezer,  where  the  Saltzburghers 
fettled  at  firft,  lies  twenty-five  miles  weft  of  Sa- 
vannah. A fmall  creek  runs  by  the  town,  down 
to  the  river,  and  many  brooks  run  between  the 
little  hills:  but  the  foil  is  a hungry,  barren  fand; 
and  upon  any  hidden  fhower,  the  brooks  rife 
feveral  feet  perpendicular,  and  overflow  what- 
ever is  near  them.  Since  the  Saltzburghers  re- 
moved, two  Engiifh  families  have  been  placed 

there : 


[ 219  ] 

there  : but  thefe  too  fay,  That  the  land  is  good 
for  nothing  ; and  that  the  creek  is  of  little  ufe', 
it  being  by  water  twenty  miles  to  the  river; 
and  the  water  generally  fo  low  in  Jammer -time, 
that  a boat  cannot  come  within  fx  or  feven  miles 
of  the  town. 

14.  New  Ebenezer,  to  which  the  Saltzburg- 
hers  removed,  in  March  1736,  lies  fix  miles 
eafiward  from  the  old,  on  a high  bluff,  near  the 
Savannah  river.  Here  are  fome  trafts  of  fruitful 
land,  though  the  greateft  part  of  that  adjoining 
to  the  town,  is  pine-barren.  The  huts,  fixty  in 
number,  are  neatly  and  regularly  built ; the 
little  piece  of  ground  allotted  to  each  for  a gar- 
den, is  every  where  put  to  the  heft  ufe,  no  fpot 
being  left  unplanted.  Nay,  even  one  of  the 
main  ftreets,  being  one  more  then  was  as 
yet  wanted,  bore  them  this  year  a crop  of  In- 
dian corn. 

13.  About  ten  miles  eafi  of  this,  on  a creek, 
three  miles  from  the  river,  was  the  village  of 
Abercorn.  Ten  families  fettled  here  in  1733; 
but  it  is  now  without  inhabitant.  Four  miles 
below  the  mouth  of  Abercorn-creek  in  jofeph’s-1 
town,  the  fettlement  of  two  Scotch  gentlemen. 
A mile  below  was  Sir  Francis  Bathurft's  planta- 
tion. And  a quarter  of  a mile  from  this,  Walter 
Augufline’s  fettlement.  But  both  thefe  are  left 
without  inhabitant. 

16.  A mile  below  this  is  Capt.Williams’s  plan- 
tation : a mile  from  thence,  Mrs.  Matthews’s, 

(late 


[ 220  ] 

(late  Mufgrove)  commonly  known  by  the  name 
of  the  Cowpen  : adjoining  to  which  is  the  land 
belonging  to  Capt.  Watfon;  on  which  is  an 
unfinifhed  houfe,  fwiftly  running  to  ruin.  A 
mile  from  this  is  Irene,  a houfe  built  for  an 
Indian  fchool,  in  the  year  1736.  It  hands  on  a 
fmall,  round  hill,  in  a little  piece  of  fruit- 
ful ground,  given  by  the  Indians  to  Mr. 
Ingham.  The  Indian  town  is  within  a furlong 
of  it. 

17.  Five  miles  fouth-weft  of  Savannah,  on  a 
fmall  rife,  hands  the  village  of  Highgate.  It  has 
pine-land  on  three  Tides,  and  a fwamp  on  the 
fourth.  Twelve  families  were  placed  here  in 
1733  ; nine  whereof  remain  there.  A mile  eah- 
ward  of  this  is  Hamphead,  fettled  with  twelve 
families  alfo,  a little  before  Highgate  ; five  of 
which  are  hill  remaining. 

18.  Six  miles  fouth-eah  of  Savannah  is  Thun- 
derbolt. Three  families  are  fettled  here,  near  a 
fmall,  ruinous  fort:  four  miles  fouth  of  this  is  the 
ifland  of  Skidoway : on  the  north-eah  point 
whereof  ten  families  were  placed  in  1734;  (a 
fmall  fort  was  built  here  likewife)  but  nine  of 
them  are  either  dead,  or  removed  to  other 
places.  A fmall  creek  divides  Skidoway  from 
Tybee  ifland,  on  the  fouth-eah  part  of  which, 
fronting  the  inlet,  the  light-houfe  is  built. 
Ten  families  were  fettled  here  in  1734;  but 
they  are  part  dead,  and  part  removed,  fo  that 

die 


L 221  ] 

the  ifland  is  now  again  without  any  fixt  inhabi- 
tant. 

19.  Twelve  miles  fouthward  from  Savannah 
(by  land)  is  Mr.  HouHoun’s  plantation:  and 
forty  or  fifty  miles  from  him,  up  Ogeechy  river, 
that  where  Mr.  Sterling  for  feme  time  lived. 
Fort  Argyle  Hands  twenty  miles  from  this,  on 
a high  bluff,  by  the  river  Ogeechy.  ’Tis  a 
fmall,  fquare,  wooden  fort,  inufket-proof.  Ten 
freeholders  were  fettled  near  it;  but  eight 
of  them  are  gone,  and  the  land  they  had 
cleared  lying  wafte,  will  in  a few  years  be  as  it 
was  before. 

20.  The  fouthermofl  fcttlement  in  Georgia, 
is  Fort  St.  Andrew.  It  Hands  fifty  miles  foutlr  of 
Frederica,  on  the  fouth-wefi  fide  of  Cumberland- 
ifiand,  upon  a high  neck  of  land,  which  com- 
mands the  river  both  ways.  The  walls  are  of 
wood,  filled  up  with  earth,  round  which  are  a 
ditch  and  palifade. 

21.  ’Tis  hard  to  pick  out  any  confident  ac- 
count of  the  Georgian  Indians,  from  the  contra- 
dictory relations  of  their  traders.  The  following 

- O 

is  extraCed,  partly  from  thofe  wherein  all,  or  the 
generality  of  them  agree  ; partly  from  the  rela- 
tions of  fuch  as  have  been  occafionally  amongfi 
them,  and  have  no  intereH  in  making  them  bet- 
ter or  worfe  than  they  are. 

* 22.  Of  the  Georgian  Indians  in  general  it 
may  be  obferved,  That  they  are  not  fo  properly 

nations, 


[ 222  ] 

nations,  as  tribes  or  clans,  who  have  wandered 
thither  at  different  times  ; perhaps  expelled  their 
native  countries  by  ftronger  tribes ; but  how  or 
when  they  cannot  tell,  being  none  of  them 
able  to  give  any  rational  account  of  them- 
felves.  They  are  inured  to  hardfhips  of  all 
kinds,  and  furprifingly  patient  of  pain.  But  as 
they  have  no  letters,  fo  they  have  no  religion, 
no  laws,  no  civil  government.  Nor  have  they 
any  kings  or  princes,  properlv  fpeaking;  their 
Meeko's  or  headmen,  having  no  power  either 
to  command  or  puniff),  no  man  obeying  them 
any  farther  than  he  pleafes.  So  that  every  one 
doth  what  is  right  in  his  own  eyes ; and  if  it  ap- 
pears wrong  to  his  neighbour,  the  perfon  ag- 
grieved ufually  fteals  on  the  other  unawares, 
and  fhoots  him,  fcalps  him,  or  cuts  off  his  ears: 
having  only  two  fhort  rules  of  proceedings,  to  do 
what  he  will,  and  what  he  can. 

* 23.  They  are  likewife  all,  except  (perhaps) 
the  Choctaws,  gluttons,  drunkards,  thieves,  dif- 
femblers,  liars.  They  are  implacable,  unmerci- 
ful; murderers  of  fathers,  murderers  of  mothers, 
murderers  of  their  own  children : it  being  a 
common  thing  for  a fon  to  fhoot  his  father  or 
mother,  becaufe  they  are  old  and  paft  labour; 
and  for  a woman  either  to  procure  abortion,  or 
to  throw  her  child  into  the  next  river,  becaufe 
flie  will  go  with  her  hufband  to  the  war.  Indeed 
hufbands,  firi&ly  fpeaking,  they  have  none  ; for 
any  man  leaves  his  wife  (fo  called)  at  pleafure 

who, 


L S23  ] 


who  frequently,  in  return,  cuts,  the  throats  of  all 
the  children  file  has  had  by  him.  Whoredom 
they  account  no  crime,  and  few  inftances  appear 
of  a young  Indian  woman’s  refuling  any  one. 
Nor  have  they  any  fixt  punifhment  for  adultery  ; 
only,  if  the  hufband  take  his  wife  with  another 
man,  he  will  do  what  he  can  to  both,  unlefs 
fpeedily  pacified  by  the  prefent  of  a gun  or  a 
blanket. 

24.  The  Chofitaws  only  have  fome  appear- 
ance of  an  entire  nation,  pofTeffing  a large  extent 
of  land,  eight  or  nine  hundred  miles  welt  of  Sa- 
vannah, and  many  well  inhabited  towns.  They 
are  faid  to  have  fix  thoufand  fighting  men,  united 
under  one  head.  At  prefent  they  are  in  league 
with  the  French,  who  have  fent  fome  priefls 
among  them  ; by  whom  (if  one  may  credit  the 
Cheftaw  traders]  ten  or  twelve  have  been  bap- 
tized. 

25.  Next  to  thefe,  to  the  north-eaft,  are  the 
Chicafaws.  Their  country  is  flat,  full  of  mea- 
dows, fprings  and  rivers.  In  their  fields,  though 
fix  or  feven  hundred  miles  from  the  fea,  are 
found  fea-fhells  in  great  numbers.  They  have 
about  nine  hundred  fighting  men,  ten  towns, 
and  one  Meeko  (at  leaft)  in  every  one.  They 
are  eminently  gluttons,  eating,  drinking,  and 
fmoaking  all  day,  and  almolt  all  night.  They 
are  extreme  indolent  and  lazy,  except  in  war ; 
then  they  a:e  the  moll  indefatigable,  and  the 
moll  valiant  of  all  the  Indians:  but  they 

Vo  L.  XXVI.  I 


are 


[ 624  ] 

are  equally  cruel  with  the  reft,  torturing  and 
burning  all  their  prifoners,  whether  Indian  or 
European.  v 

26.  Eaft  of  them,  in  the  latitude  of  35  and  36, 
about  three  or  four  hundred  miles  from  Savan- 
nah, lie  the  Cherikees.  Their  country  is  very 
mountainous,  fruitful,  and  pleafant.  They  have 
fifty-two  towns,  and  above  three  thoufand  fight- 
ing men.  In  each  town  are  three  or  more  head- 
men, who  keep  up  a fort  of  fhadow  of  govern- 
ment, having  power  to  fet  the  reft  to  work,  and 
to  punifh  l'uch  as  will  not  join  in  the  common 
labour.  They  are  civil  to  firangers,  and  will 
do  any  thing  for  them,  for  pay ; being  always 
willing,  for  a fmall  piece  of  money,  to  carry  a 
meftage  for  fifty  or  fixty  miles,  and,  if  required, 
a heavy  burthen  too  : but  they  are  equally  cruel 
to  prifoners  with  the  Chicafaws,  though  not 
■equally  valiant.  They  are ’feldom  intemperate  in 
drinking,  but  when  they  can  be  fo  on  free-coft. 
Otherwife,  love  of  drink  yields  to  covetoufnefs  : 
a vice  fcarceJy  to  be  found  in  any  Indian  but  a 
Cherikee. 

27.  The  Ucheeshave  only  one  fmall  town  left 
{near  two  hundred  miles  from  Savannah)  and 
about  forty  fighting  men.  The  Creeks  have 
been  many  time  on  the  point  of  cutting  them  off. 
They  are  indeed  hated  by  moll,  and  defpifed  by 
•all  the  other  nations,  as  well  for  their  cowardice, 
as  their  fuperlative  diligence  in  thieving, 

and 


[ 22,5  ] 

•^rui  for  out-lying  all  the  Indians  upon  the  con- 
tinent, 

28.  The  Creek  Indians  are  about  four  hundred 
miles  from  Savannah.  They  are  faid  to  be 
bounded  on  the  weft  by  the  Choftaws,  to  the 
north  by  the  Chicafaws,  to  the  eaftby  the  Cheri- 
kees,  and  to  the  fouth  by  the  Alatamahaw  river. 
They  have  many  towns,  a plain,  well-watered 
country,  and  fifteen  hundred  fighting  men. 
They  have  often  three  or  four  Meekos  in  a 
town;  but  without  fo  much  as  the  fhadow  of 
authority,  only  to  give  advice,  which  every  one 
is  at  liberty  t©  take  or  leave.  But  age  and  re- 
putation for  valour  and  wifdom,  hare  mven 
Chicali,  a Meeko  of  the  Coweta  town,  a more 
-than  ordinary  influence  over  the  nation  ; though 
not  even  the  fhew  of  regal  power.  Yet  neither 
age,  wifdom  nor  reputation  can  reftrain  him  from 
drunkennefs.  Indeed  all  the  Creeks,  having  been 
moft  converfant  with  white  men,  are  moft  in- 
fefted  with  infatiate  love  of  drink,  as  well  as 
other  European  vices.  They  are  more  exquifite 
diflemblers  than  the  reft  of  their  countrymen. 
They  know  not  what  friendftiip  or  gratitude 
means.  They  fhew  no  inclination  to  learn 
any  thing;  but  leaft  of  all,  Chriftianity  ; be- 
ing full  as  opiniated  of  their  own  parts  and 
wifdom,  as  either  modern  Chinefe,  or  ancient 
Romans. 

Sat.  Dec.  3.  We  came  to  Purryfburg  early  in 
I 2 the 


[ 226  ] 


the  morning,  and  endeavoured  to  procure  a 
guide  to  Port-Royal.  But  none  being  to  be  had, 
we  fet  out  without  one,  an  hour  before  fun-rife. 
After  walking  two  or  three  hours,  we  met  with 
an  old  man,  who  led  us  into  a finall  path,  near 
w hich  was  a line  of  blazed  trees,  (i.  e.  marked  by 
cutting  off  part  of  the  bark)  by  following  which, 
he  faid,  we  might  eafily  come  to  Port-Royal  in 
five  or  fix  hours. 

* We  were  four  in  all ; one  of  whom  intended 
to  go  to  England  with  me  ; the  other  two  to  fet- 
tle in  Carolina.  About  eleven  we  came  into  a 
large  fwamp,  where  we  wandered  about  till  near 
two.  We  then  found  another  blaze,  and  purfued 
it,  till  it  divided  into  two  ; one  of  thefe  we  fol- 
lowed through  an  almoft  impaffable  thicket,  a 
mile  beyond  which  it  ended.  We  made  through 
the  thicket  again,  and  traced  the  other  blaze  till 
that  ended  too.  It  now  grew  toward  fun-fet,  fo 
we  fat  down,  faint  and  weary,  having  had  no 
food  all  day,  except  a ginger-bread  cake,  which 
I had  taken  in  my  pocket.  A third  of  this  we 
had  divided  among  us  at  noon  ; another  third  we 
took  now  ; the  reft  we  referved  for  the  morning; 
but  we  had  met  with  no  water  all  the  day. 
Thru  king  a nick  into  the  ground,  and  finding  she 
end  of  it  moift,  two  of  our  company  fell  a digging 
with  their  hands,  and  at  about  three  feet  depth, 
found  water.  We  thanked  Cod,  dr  :;k,  ard  were 
refrefhed.  The  night  was  (liar-  ; however,  there 
was  no  complaining  among  us ; but  after  having 


com- 


[ 227  ] 

commended  ourfelves  to  God,  we  lay  down  clofe 
together,  and  (I  at  leaf!)  flept  till  near  fix  in  the 
morning. 

# Sun.  Dec.  24.  God  renewing  our  firength, 
we  arofe  neither  faint  nor  weary,  and  refolved  to 
make  one  trial  more,  to  find  out  a path  to  Port- 
Royal.  We  fleered  due  eaft;  but  finding  neither 
path  nor  blaze,  and  the  woods  growing  thicker 
and  thicker,  we  judged  it  would  be  our  belt 
courfe  to  return,  if  we  could,  by  the  way  we 
came.  The  day  before,  in  the  thickefl  part  of 
the  woods,  I had  broke  many  young  trees,  I 
knew  not  why,  as  we  walked  along:  thefe 
we  found  a great  help  in  feveral  places,  where 
no  path  was  to  be  feen  ; and  between  one  and 
two  God  brought  us  fafe  to  Benjamin  Arieu’s 
houfe,  the  old  man  we  left  the  day  before. 

In  the  evening  I read  French  prayers  to  a nu- 
merous family,  a mile  from  Arieu’s ; one  of 
whom  undertook  to  guide  us  to  Port-Royal.  In 
the  morning  we  fet  out.  About  fun-fet,  v,Te 
, afked  our  guide,  if  he  knew  where  he  was? 
Who  frankly  anfwered,  No.  However,  we 
puflied  on  till  about  feven  we  came  to  a planta- 
tion, and  the  next  evening  (after  many  diffi- 
culties and  delays)  we  landed  on  Port-Royal  ' 
ifland. 

Wcdnef.  7.  We  walked  to  Beaufort ; where 
Mr.  Jones  (the  minifler  of  Beaufort)  with  whom 
I lodged  during  my  fhort  flay  here,  gave  me  a 
lively  idea  of  the  old  Englifh  hofpitality.  On 
I g Thurfl 


[ 228  ] 

rhurf.  Mr.  Delamotte  came;  with  whom,  on 
Friday  the  gth,  I took  boat  for  Charles-Town. 
After  a flow  paffage  by  reafonof  contrary  winds, 
and  fome  confhti  four  provifions  falling  fhortj 
with  hunger  as  well  as  cold,  we  came  thither 
early  in  the  morning,  on  Tuefday  the  13th. 
Here  I expeftcd  trials  of  a different  kind,  and 
far  more  dangerous,  lor  contempt  and  want  are 
eafy  to  be  borne:  but  who  can  bear  refpect  and 
abundance  ? 

Wednef.  14  Being  defired  to  read  public 
prayers,  I was  much  refrefhed  with  thofe  glori- 
ous promifes,  contained  both  in  the  ~2d  Pfalm, 
and  in  the  firfl  leffon,  the  40th  chapter  of  Ifaiah. 
Yea,  they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  Jliall  renew 
their Jlrength,  and  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles', 
they  jhall  run  and  not  be  weary  ; they  Jhall  walk 
and  not  faint. 

In  the  afternoon  vifiting  a dying  man,  we 
found  him  hill  full  of  the  frefheh  advices,  and 
bufy  in  fettling  the  affairs  of  the  Czarina,  Prince 
Thames,  and  the  Ottoman  Porte.  How  natural 
then  is  the  thought 


Qua  cur  a nitentis 

Pajccre  equos , cadcm  fequilui  tellur e rtpojlosf 

* For  if  a foul  quivering  on  the  verge  of 
life,  has  hill  leifure  for  thefe  impertinen- 
cies,  one  might  almoft  believe  the  fame 

dreams 


[ 229  ] 

dreams  would  continue  even  in  the  deep  of 
death! 

Friday  16.  I parted  from  the  lafl  of 
thofe  friends,  who  came  with  me  into  Ame- 
rica, Mr.  Charles  Delamotte,  from  whom  I 
had  been  but  a few  days  feparate,  fmce  Off. 
M»  17S5- 

Sun.  18.  I was  feized  with  a violent  flux, 
which  I felt  came  not  before  I wanted  it.  Yet  I 
had  flrength  enough  given  to  preach  once  more 
to  this  carelefs  people : and  a few  believed,  our 
report. 

Thurf.  22.  I took  my  leave  of  America, 
(though  if  it  pleafe  God  not  for  ever)  going 
on  board  the  Samuel,  Captain  Percy,  with 
a young  gentleman  who  had  been  a few 
months  in  Carolina,  one  of  my  parifhoners  of 
Savannah,  and  a Frenchman,  late  of  Purrylburg, 
who  was  efcaped  thence  with  the  {kin  of  his 
teeth. 

Sat.  24.  We  failed  over  Charles-Town  bar, 
and  about  noon  loll  fight  of  land. 

The  next  day  the  wind  was  fair,  but  high,  as 
it  was  on  Sunday  25,  when  the  fea  affeffed  me 
more  than  it  had  done  in  Lhe  fixteen  weeks  of 
our  paflage  to  America.  I was  obliged  to  lie 
down  the  greatelf  part  of  the  day,  being  eafy 
only  in  that  poflure. 

Mon.  26.  I began  inftruffing  a negro-lad  in 
the  principles  of  Chri ff ianity.  The  next  day 
I refolved  to  break  off  living  delicately,  and 
I 4 return 


[ 23°  J 

return  to  my  old  fimplicity  of  diet ; and  after  I 
did  fo,  neither  ftomach  nor  my  head  much  com- 
plained of  the  motion  of  the  fhip. 

Wednef.  £.8.  Finding  the  unaccountable  ap- 
prehenfions  of  I know  not  what  danger,  (the 
wind  being  fmall,  and  the  fea  fmooih)  which  had 
been  upon  me  feveral  days,  increafe  ; I cried 
earneflly  for  help  ; and  it  pleafed  God  as  in  a 
moment  to  reflore  peace  to  my  foul. 

* Let  me  obferve  hereon,  1.  That  not  one  of 
thefe  hours  ought  to  pafs  out  of  my  remem- 
brance, till  I attain  another  manner  of  fpirit,  a 
fpirit  equally  willing  to  glorify  God  by  life  or 
by  death.  2.  That  whoever  is  uneafy  on  any 
account  (bodily  pain  alone  excepted)  carries  in 
himfelf  his  own  conviction,  that  he  is  fo  far  an 
unbeliever.  Is  he  uneafy  at  the  apprehenfion  of 
death  ? Then  he  believeth  not,  That  to  die  is 
gain.  At  any  of  the  events  of  life  ? Then  he  hath 
not  a firm  belief,  That  all  things  work  together 
for  his  good.  And  if  he  bring  the  matter  more 
dofe,  he  will  always  find,  befide  the  general  want 
of  faith,  every  particular  uneafinefs  is  evidently 
owing  to  the  want  of  fome  particular  Chnftian 
temper. 

Sun.  Jan.  1.  1738.  All  in  the  fnip  (except  the 
Captain  and  fteerfman)  were  prefent  both  at  the 
morning  and  evening  fervice,  and  appeared  as 
deeply  attentive,  as  even  the  poor  people  of  Fre- 
derica did,  while  the  word  ol  God  was  new  to 

their 


[ 231  ] 


their  ears.  And  it  mav,  be  one  or  two  among: 

/ 7 O 

thefe  likewife,  may  bring  forth  fruit  with  pa- 
i ence. 

Mon.  2.  Being  forrowful  and  very  heavy, 
(though  I could  give  no  particular  reafon  for  it) 
and  utterly  unwilling  to  fpeak  clofe  to  any  of 
iny  little  flock  (about  twenty  perfons)  I was  in 
doubt,  Whether  my  negleft  of  them  was  not  one 
caufe  of  mv  own  heavinefs  ? In  the  evening 


therefore,  I begun  inftrufting  the  cabin-boy; 
after  which  I was  much  eafier. 

* I went  feveral  times  the  following  davs,  with 
a defign  to  fpeak  to  the  failors,  but  could  not.  I 
mean,  I was  quite  averfe  from  fpeaking  ; I could 
not  fee  how  to  make  an  occafton,  and  it  feemed 
quite  abfurd  to  fpeak  without.  Is  not  this  what 
men  commonly  mean  by,  I could  not  fpeak?” 
And  is  this,  a fufficient  caufe  of  filence,  or  no  ? 
Is  it  a prohibition  from  the  Good  Spirit  ? Or  a 
temptation  from  nature  or  the  evil  one  ? Fri.  6. 
I ended  the  abridgment  of  Mr.  de  Renty’s  life. 
O that  fuch  a life  Ihould  be  related  by  fuch  a 
hiftorian  ! Who  by  inferting  all,  if  not  more 
than  all  the  weak  things  that  holy  man  ever  faid 
or  did,  by  his  commendation  of  almofl  every 
aftion  or  w ord  which  either  deferved  or  needed 
it  not ; and  by  his  injudicious  manner  of  relatipg 
many  others,  which  were  indeed  highly  com- 
mendable; has  call  the  fhade  of  fuperlhtion  and 
folly  over  one  of  the  brighteft  patterns  of  bea* 
venlv  wifdom, 

I z Sat. 


[ 232  3 

Sat.  7.  I began  to  read  and  explain  fome  paf- 
fages  of  the  bible  to  the  young  negro.  The  next 
morning,  another  negro  who  was  on  board,  de- 
fired  to  be  a hearer  too.  From  them  I went  to- 
the  poor  Frenchman,  who  underftanding  no 
Englifh,  had  none  elfe  in  the  (hip  with  whom  he 
could  converfe.  And  from  this  time,  I read  and 
explained  to  him  a chapter  in  the  tedament  every 
morning. 

Sun.  8.  In  the  fulnefs  of  my  heart,  I wrote 
the  following  words : 

* By  the  moll  infallible  of  proofs,  inward  feel- 
ing, I am  convinced 

t.  “ Of  unbelief,  having  no  fuch  faith 
in  Chrid,  as  will  prevent  my  heart  from 
being  troubled;  which  it  could  not  be,  if  I 
believed  in  God,  and  rightly  believed  alfo  in 
him 

2.  “ Of  pride,  throughout  my  life  pad,  in- 
afmuch  as  I thought  I had,  what  I find  I have 
not: 

3.  “ Of  grofs  irrecolle&ion,  inafmuch  as  in  a 
ftorm  I cry  to  God  every  moment ; in  a calm, 
not. 

4.  “ Of  levity  and  luxuriancy  of  fpirit,  recur- 
ring whenever  the  prehure  is  taken  off.  and  ap- 
pearing by  my  fpeaking  words  not  tending  to 
edify ; but  mod,  by  my  manner  of  fpeaking  of 
pay  enemies.’’ 

**  Lord  fave,  ,or  Ipevilhl  Save  me 


1.  “ By 


[ 233  ] 

1.  “ By  fuch  a faith  as  implies  peace  in  life 
and  in  death,” 

2.  *•  By  fuch  humility,  as  may  fill  my  heart 
from  this  hour  for  ever,  with  a piercing  uninter- 
rupted fenfe,  + Nihil  eft  quod  hailenus  feci,  hav- 
ing evidently  built  without  a foundation.” 

3.  “ By  fuch  a recolleflion  as  may  cry  to  thee 
every  moment,  efpecially  when  all  is  calm  ; 
give  me  faith  or  I die  ; give  me  a lowly  fpirit ; 
otherwife  i Mihi  non  fit  fuavt  vivere ” 

4.  “ Bv  fleadinefs,  ferioufnefs,  fobrie- 

tv  of  fpirit,  avoiding  as  fire  every  word  that  tend- 
eth  not  to  edifying,  and  never  fpeaking  of  any 
who  oppofe  me,  orfmagainft  God,  without  all 
my  own  fins  fet  in  array  before  my  face.” 

This  morning,  after  explaining  thofe  words 
of  St.  Paul,  / bejeech  you,  brethren , by  the  mer- 
cies of  God,  that  ye  prefent  your  bodies  a living 
facrifice,  holy,  acceptable  to  God,  I exhorted  my, 
fellow-travellers  with  all  my  might,  to  comply 
with  the  apoftle’s  direction.  But  leaving  them 
afterwards  to  themfelves,  the  ferioufnefs  they 
{hewed  at  firfl,  foon  vanifhed  away. 

On  Mond.  9,  and  the  following  days,  I re- 
flefled  much  on  that  vain  defire,  which  had  per- 
fued  me  for  fo  many  years,  of  being  in  foli- 
tude,  in  order  to  be  a Ghriflian.  I have  now, 
thought  I,  folitude  enough.  But  am  I therefore 
the  nearer  being  a Chriflian  ? Not  if  Jefus, 
Chrift  be  the  model  of  Chriftianity.  I doubt 
I 6 indeed  . 

+ T have  done  nothing  hitherto, 
t Letlif^be  a burden  to  me. 


C 234  ] 

indeed  I am  much  nearer  that  myftery  of  Satan, 
which  fome  writers  affedit  to  call  by  that  name. 
So  near,  that  I had  probably  funk  wholly  into  it, 
had  not  the  great  mercy  of  God  juft  now  thrown 
me  upon  reading  St.  Cyprian’s  works.  0 my  foul, 
come  not  thou  into  their  fecret  ! Stand  thou  in  the 
good  old  paths. 

Frid.  13.  * We  had  a thorough  ftorm,  which 
obliged  us  to  Ihut  all  clofe,  the  fea  breaking  over 
the  Ihip  continually.  I was  at  firft  afraid  ; but 
cried  to  God  and  was  ftrengthened.  Before  ten 
I lay  down.  I blefs  God,  without  fear.  About 
midnight  we  were  awaked  by  a confufed  noife, 
of  feas  and  wind  and  men’s  voices,  the  like  to 
which  I had  never  heard  before.  The  found  of 
the  fea  breaking  over,  and  againft  the  Tides  of 
the  fhip,  I could  compare  to  nothing  but  large 
cannon,  or  American  thunder.  The  rebound- 
ing, darting  quivering  motion  of  the  (hip,  much 
refembled  what  is  faid  of  earthquakes  The 
captain  was  upon  deck  in  an  inftant.  But  his 
men  could  not  hear  what  he  faid.  It  blew  a pro- 
per hurricane;  which  beginning  at  fouth  weft, 
then  went  weft,  north-weft,  north,  and  in  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  round  by  the  eaft  to  the 
fouth-weft  point  again.  At  the  fame  time  the 
fea  running  (as  they  term  it)  mountain  high,  and 
that  from  many  different  points  at  once,  the  fhip 
would  not  obey  the  helm;  nor  indeed  could  the 
fteerfman,  through  the  violent  rain,  fee  the 
compafs.  So  he  was  forced  to  let  her  run  before 


[ 235  ] 

the  wind,  and  in  half  an  hour  the  flrefs  of  the 
fform  was  over. 

About  noon  the  next  day  it  ceafed.  But  firft 
I had  refolved,  God  being  my  helper,  not  only 
to  preach  it  to  all,  but  to  apply  the  word  of  God 
to  every  fingle  foul  in  the  fhip ; and  if  but  one, 
yea  if  not  one  of  them  will  hear,  I know  my  la- 
bour is  not  in  vain . 

*Inofooner  executed  this  refolution,  than  my 
fpirit  revived  ; fo  that  from  this  day  I had  no 
more  of  that  fearfulnefs  and  heavinefs,  which  be- 
fore almoft  continually  weighed  me  down.  I 
am  fenfible  one  who  thinks  the  being  in  orco,  as 
they  phrafe  it,  an  indifpenfable  preparative  for 
being  a Chriflian,  would  fay,  I had  better  have 
continued  in  that  Hate  ; and  that  this  unfeafon- 
able  relief  was  a curfe,  not  a blefling.  Nay,  but 
who  art  thou,  O man,  who  in  favour  of  a 
wretched  hypothefis,  thus  blafphemeft  the  good 
gift  of  God  ? Hath  not  he  himfelf  faid,  This  al- 
fo  is  the  gift  of  God,  if  a man  have  power  to  re- 
joice in  his  labour  ? Yea,  God  fetteth  his  own 
feal  to  his  weak  endeavours,  while  he  thus  an - 
fwereth  him  in  the  joy  of  his  heart. 

Tucf.  24.  We  fpoke  with  two  (hips,  outward- 
bound,  from  whom  we  had  the  welcome  news, 
of  our  wanting  but  160  leagues  of  the  land’s-end. 
My  mind  was  now  full  of  thought ; part  of 
. which  I writ  down  as  follows  : 

* “ I went  to  America,  to  convert  the  Indians ; 
but  oh  ! Who  fhall  convert  me  ! Who,  what  is 

he 


C 236  ] 

he  that  will  deliver  me  from  this  evil  heart  of 
unbelief  ? 1 have  a fair  fummer  religion.  1 can 
talk  well ; nay,  and  believe  myfelf,  while  no 
danger  is  near  : but  let  death  look  me  in  the  face, 
and  my  fpirit  is  troubled.  Nor  can  I fay,  To  die. 
is  gain  ! 

“ I haVe  a fin  of  fear,  that  when  I’ve  fpun 

“ My  lad  thread,  I fliall  perifh  on  the  fhoie  !” 

“ I think  verily,  if  the  gofpel  be  true,  I am 
fafe:  for  I not  only  have  given,  and  do  give  all 
my  goods  to  feed  the  poor:  I not  only  give 
my  body  to  be  burned,  drowned,  or  whatever 
God  {hall  appoint  for  me  ; but  I follow  after  cha- 
rity, (though  not  as  I ought,  yet  as  I can)  if 
haply  I may  attain  it.  I now  believe  the  gofpel 
is  true.  / Jlitxv  my  Jaith  by  my  works , by  flaking 
my  all  upon  it.  I would  do  fo  again  and  again 
a thoufand  times,  if  the  choice  were  fill!  to  make. 
Whoever  fees  me,  fees  I would  be  a Chriflian. 
Therefore  are  mv  ways  not  like  other  mens 
ways.  Therefore  I have  been,  I am,  I am  con- 
tent to  be,  a by-word , a proverb  of  reproach. 
But  in  a ftorm  I think,  “ What  if  the  gofpel  be 
not  true  ? Then  thou  art  of  all  men  mofl  foolifh. 
For  what  hall  thou  given  thy  goods,  thy  eafe, 
thy  friends,  thy  reputation,  thy  country,  thy 
life  ? For  what  art  thou  wandering  over  the  face 
of  the  earth  ? A dream,  a cunningly  devifed fa- 
ble P O who  will  deliver  me  from  this  fear  of 

death ! 


[ 237  ] 

death ! What  fhalt  I clo  ? Where  fhall  I fly 
from  it!  Should  I fight  againft  it  by  thinking, 
or  by  not  thinking  of  it  ? A wife  man  advifecf 
me  fometime  fince,  “ Be  ft  ill  and  go  on.”  Per- 
haps this  is  bell,  to  look  upon  it  as  my  crofs  r 
w hen  it  comes,  to  let  it  humble  me,  and  quicken 
all  my  good  refolutions,  efpecially  that  of  pray- 
ing without  ceafing  ; and  at  other  times  to  take 
no  thought  about  it,  but  quietly  to  go  on  in  the 
•work  oj the  Lord” 

We  went  on  with  a final!,  fair  wind,  til! 
Thurfday  in  the  afternoon,  and  then  founding, 
found  a whitifh  fand  at  75  fathom  : but  having 
had  no  obfervation  for  feveral  days,  the  captain 
began  to  be  uneafy,  fearing  we  might  either  get 
unawares  into  the  Briflol  channel,  or  ftrike  in 
the  night  on  the  rocks  of  Scilly. 

Sat.  28.  Was  another  cloudy  day ; but  about 
ten  in  the  morning  (the  wind  continuing  fouther- 
ly)  the  clouds  began  to  fly  juft  contrary  to  the 
wind,  and  to  the  furprize  of  us  all,  funk  down 
under  the  fun,  fo  that  at  noon  we  had  an  exaft 
obfervation ; and  by  this  we  found  we  were  as 
well  as  we  could  defire,  about  eleven  leagues 
fouth  of  Scilly. 

Sund.  29.  We  faw  Englifh  land  once  more, 
which  about  noon  appeared  to  be  the  Lizard 
point.  We  ran  by  it  with  a fair  wind,  and 
at  noon  the  next  day,  made  the  weft  end  of  the 
Ille  of  Wight. 

* Here  the  wind  turned  againft  us,  and  in 

the 


[ «3»  ] 

the  evening  blew  frelh,  fo  that  we  expe&ed 
(the  tide  being  likewife  ftrong  againft  us)  to  be 
driven  fome  leagues  backward  in  the  night  : but 
in  the  morning,  to  our  great  furprize,  we  faw 
Beachy-head  juft  before  us,  and  found  we  had 
gone  forwards  near  forty  miles. 

Toward  evening  was  a calm;  but  in  the  night 
a ftrong  nortlv wind  brought  us^fafe  into  the 
Downs.  The  day  before  Mr.  Whitefield  had 
failed  out,  neither  of  us  then  knowing  any  thing 
of  the  other.  At  four  in  the  morning  we  took 
boat,  and  in  half  an  hour  landed  at  Deal  : it  be- 
ing Wednefdav,  February  1.  the  anniverfary 
feftival  in  Georgia  for  Mr.  Oglethorpe’s,  landing 
theie. 

It  is  now  two  years  and  ahnoft  four  months, 
fmcel  left  my  native  country,  in  order  to  teach 
the  Georgian  Indians,  the  nature  of  Chriftianity : 
but  what  have  I learned  myfelf  in  the  mean 
time  ? Why  (what  I the  leaft  of  all  fufpefted) 
that  I who  went  to  America  to  convert  others, 
was  never  mvfc-lf  converted  to  God.  I am  not 
mad. , though  I thus  fpeak  ; but  I /peak  the  words 
of  truth  and  fobtrntfs  ;if  haply  fome  of  thofe  who 
Hill  drtam  may  awake , and  fee,  that  as  I am,  fo 
are  they. 

Are  they  read  in  philofophy  ? So  was  I.  In 
antient  or  modern  tongues  ? So  was  I alfo.  Are 
they  vei  led  in  the  fdence  of  divinity  ? 1 too  have 
ftudied  it  many  years.  Can  they  talk  fluently 
upon  fpiritua!  things  ? The  very  fame  could  I 

do 


[ 239  ] 

do.  Are  they  plenteous  in  alms?  Behold,  I 
gave  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor.  Do  they 
give  of  their  labour  as  well  as  of  their  fubftance  ? 
I have  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all. 
Are  they  willing  to  fuffer  for  their  brethren  ? I 
have  thrown  up  my  friends,  reputation,  eafe, 
country  ; I have  put  my  life  in  my  hand,  wan- 
during  into  ftrange  lands  ; I have  given  my  bo- 
dy to  be  devoured  by  the  deep,  parched  up  with 
heat,  confumed  by  toil  and  wearinefs,  or  what- 
foever  God  Ihould  pleafe  to  bring  upon  me. 
But  does  all  this  (be  it  more  or  lefs,  it  matters 
not)  make  me  acceptable  to  God  ? Does  all  I 
ever  did  or  can,  know,  fay,  give,  do,  or  fuffer , 
juftify  me  in  his  fight  ? Yea,  or  the  conjlant  uft 
of  all  the  means  of grace  ? (which  nevertheless  is 
meet,  right  and  our  bounden  duty)  Or,  that  / 
know  nothing  of  rnyflf,  that  I am  as  touching 
outward,  moral  righteoufnefs  blamelefs  ? Or,  (to 
come  clofer  yet)  The  having  a rational  convidlion 
of  all  the  truths  of  Chriftianity  ? Does  all  this 
give  me  a claim  to  the  holy,  heavenly,  divine 
chara&er  of  a Clvijlian  ? By  no  means.  If  the 
oracles  of  God  are  true,  if  we  are  ftill  to  abide 
by  the  law  and  the  tefimony  ; all  thefe  things,  tho’ 
when  ennobled  by  faith  in  Chrift,  they  are  holy, 
and  j ufl  and  good,  yet  without  it  are  dung  and 
drofs,  meet  only  to  be  purged  away  by  the  fre 
that  never  Jhall  be  quenched . 

This  then  have  I learned  in  the  ends  of  the 
earth,  that  I am  fallen  [hort  of  the  glory  of  God : 

that 


[ 24°  ] 

that  my  whole  heart  is  altogether  corrupt  and  aba- 
minable,  and  confequently  my  whole  life,  (fee- 
ing it  cannot  he,  that  an  evil  tree  fhould  bring 
forth  good fruit : ) that  alienated  as  I am  from  the 
life  of  God , I am  a child  of  wrath,  an  heir  of 
hell:  that  my  own  works,  my  own  fufferfngs, 
my  own  righteoufnefs,  are  fo  far  from  reconcil- 
ing me  to  an  offended  God,  fo  far  from  making 
any  atonement  for  the  leaff  of  thofe  fins,  which 
are  more  in  number  than  the  hairs  of  my  head, 
that  the  mod  fpecious  of  them  need  an  atone- 
ment themfelves,  or  they  cannot  abide  his  righ- 
teous judgment  ; that  having  the  Jentence  of 
death  in  my  heart,  and  having  nothing  in  or  of 
myfelf,  to  plead,  I have  no  hope,  but  that  of  be- 
ing juftified  freely,  through  the  redemption  that  is 
in  Jefus ; I have  no  hope,  but  that  if  I feek  I 
fhall  find  Chrid,  and  be  found  in  him,  not  hav- 
ing my  own  righteoufnefs,  but  that  which  is  thro' 
the  faith  of  Chrifl,  the  righteoufnefs  which  is  of 
God  by  faith. 

II  it  be  faid,  that  I have  faith  (for  many  fuch 
things  have  I heard,  from  many  miierable  com- 
forters) I ar.fwer,  So  have  the  devils, — a fort  of 
faith  ; but  dill  they  are  drangers  to  the  covenant 
of  promife.  So  the  apoflles  had  even  at  Cana 
in  Galilee,  when  Jefus  fird  manifejled  forth  his 
glory  ; even  then  they,  in  a fort  believed  on  him  ; 
but  they  had  not  then  the  faith  that  overcometh 
the.  world.  The  faith  I want  is,  A fure  trufl  and 
confidence  in  God,  that  through  the  merits  of  Chrif, 

my 


[ 241  ] 

my  fins  are  forgiven,  and  1 reconciled  to  the  fa~ 
vour  of  God.  I want  that  faith  which  St.  Paul 
recommends  to  all  the  world,  efpecially  in  his 
epiftle  to  the  Romans  : that  faith  which  enables 
every  one  that  hath  it  to  cry  out,  1 live  not ; hut 
Chrif  liveth  in  me  ; and  the  life  which  / now  live , 
/ live  by  faitk  in  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me, 
and  gave  hirrfelffor  me.  I want  that  faith  which 
none  can  have  without  knowing  that  he  hath  it  ; 
(though  many  imagine  they  have  it,  who  have  it 
not)  for  whofoever  hath  it,  is  freed  from fin,  the 
whole  body  ef  fin  is  defrayed  in  him  : he  is  freed 
from  fear,  having  peace  with  God  through  Chrif, 
and  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  And  he 
is  freed  from  doubt,  having  the  love  of  God  fhed 
abroad  in  his  heart,  through  the  Holy  Gho/f  which 
is  given  unto  him ; which  fpirit  itfelf  beareth  wit - 
nfs  with  his  Spirit,  that  he  is  a child  of  God. 


[ 242  ] 


A N 

extract 

OF  THE 

Rev.  Mr,  John  Wesley’s 

JOURNAL, 

From  February  i,  1737-8, 

To  his  Return  from  Germany. 


For  this  caufe  I obtained  mercy , that  in  me  frjl 
Jefus  Chrijl  might  fhew  foitli  all  lengfujferi.ng, 
for  a pattern  to  them  which  Jhould  hereafter  be- 
lieve on  him  to  life  ever  lading.  1 Tim.  i.  16. 


Number  II. 


[ 243  ] 


The  PREFACE. 

x.  rJ~'HATmen  revile  me  and  fay  all  manner  of 
evil  againft  me,  that  I am  become  as  it 
were  a monft er  unto  many,  that  the  zealous  of  al - 
mof  every  denomination  cry  out.  Away  with  fuch 
a fellow  from  the  earth : this  gives  me  with  regard 
to  myfelf,  no  degree  of  uneafnefs.  For  I know  the 
fcripture  mujl  he  fulfilled , If  they  have  called  the 
mafler  of  the  houfe  Beelzebub,  how  much  more 
them  of  his  houlhold  ? But  it  does  give  me  a con- 
cern, with  regard  to  thofe,  who  by  this  artifice  of 
the  devil,  are  prevented  from  hearing  that  word, 
which  is  able  to  fave  their  fouls. 

2.  For  the  fake  of  theje,  and  indeed  of  all  who 
defire  to  hear  the  truth  of  thofe  things  which  have 
been  fo  varioufy  related,  / have  been  induced  to 
publifh  this  farther  account : and  I doubt  not  but 
it  will  even  hence  appear,  to  all  candid  and  impar- 
tial judges,  that  l have  hitherto  lived  in  all  good 
confcience  toward  God. 

3.  I fhall  be  eafily  excifed  by  thofe  who  either 
love  or  feek  the  Lord  Jefus  in  fmcerity  for  fpeak- 
mg  fo  largely  of  the  Moravian  church,  a city 
which  ought  to  be  fet  upon  an  hill.  Thar  light 
hath  been  too  long  hid  under  a bufhel  : it  is  high 
time  it  fiould  at  length  break  forth , and  fo  fhine 

before 


[ 244  3 

before  men,  that  others  alfo  may  glorify  their 
Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

4.  If  any  Jhould  afk , “ But  do  you  think  even. 
“ this  church  is  perfect,  without  fpot  or  wrin- 
“ kle  or  any  fuch  thing  ?”  I anfwer  plainly , 
“ No  ; though  I truft  it  will  be,  -when  patience  has 
“ had  its  perfect  work.”  But  neither  do  I think  it 
right,  to  entertain  the  world  with  the  fpols  of  God's 
•children. 

5.  It  has  been  farther  cfked,  “ Whether  I ima- 
“ gine  God  is  to  be  found,  only  among  them  P ’ I 
reply,  “ By  no  means.  I know  there  is  a Godin 
“ England,  and  we  need  not  go  to  feek  him  in 

{range  lands."  I know  that  in  our  own  he  is 
very  nigh  unto  all  that  call  upon  him  ; and  there- 
fore I think  thoje  unwife  ( to  fay  no  more ) who  run 
to  inquire  after  him  in  Holland  or  Germany. 

6.  When  I went,  the  cafe  was  widely  different. 
God  had  not  then  made  hare  his  arm  before  us  as 
he  hath  now  done:  in  a manner  ( I will  be  bold  to 

fay J which  had  not  been  known  either  in  Hollander 
Germany,  at  that  time,  when  he  who  ordered  all 
things  wifely,  according  to  the  counfels  of  his  own 
will,  was  pleafed  by  me  to  open  the  intercourfe  be- 
tween the  Engl fh  and  the  Mor  avian  church. 

7.  The  particular  reafon  which  obliged  me  to 
relate  fo  much  of  the  converfation  I had  with  thofe 
holy  men,  is  this.  In  September,  1738,  when  I 
returned from  Germany,  I exhorted  all  I could  to 

follow  after  that  great  falvation,  which  is  through 
faith  in  the  blood  of  Chrifl ; waiting  for  it,  in  all 

the 


C *45  ] 

the  ordinances  of  God,  and  in  doing  good  as 
they  had  opportunity,  to  all  men.  And  many 
found  the  beginning  of  that  ffalvation,  being  jufti- 
fied  freely,  having  peace  with  God  through 
Chrift,  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God, 
and  having  his  love  fhed  abroad  in  their  hearts. 

8.  But  about  September  1739,  while  my  brother 
and  I were  abfent,  certain  men  crept  in  among 
them  unawares , greatly  troubling  and  fubverting 
their  fouls  : telling  them , “ They  were  in  a delu- 
“ fwn,  that  they  had  deceived  themf elves , and  had 
“ no  true  faith  at  all . For  (faid  they)  none  has 
“ any  jujiifymg  faith,  who  has  ever  any  doubt  or 
“ fear  ( which  you  know  you  have ) or  who  has  not 
“ a clean  heart,  which  you  know  you  have  not : nor 
“ will  you  ever  have  it,  till  you  leave  off  ufing  the 
“ means  of  grace  (Jo  called ) till  you  leave  off  run - 
“ ning  to  church  and  facr  ament,  and  praying  and 
“ fnging  and  reading  either  the  biblc,  or  any  other 
“ book.  For  you  cant  life  tlufe  things  without 
“ tr lifting  in  them.  1 here) or  e,  till  you  leave  them 
“ of,  you  can  never  have  true  faith-,  you  can  never 
“ till  then  trufl  in  the  blood  oj  Chnjh" 

9.  And  this  doElrine  from  the  beginning  to  this 
day  has  been  taught,  as  the  doElrine  of  the  Mora- 
vian church.  1 think  therefore  it  is  my  bounden 
duty,  to  clear  the  Moravians  f rom  this  ajperfion. 
And  the  more,  becaufe  lam  perhaps  the  only  perfon 
now  in  England  that  both  can  and  will  do  it.  And 
/ believe  it  is  the  peculiar  providence  of  God  that  I 
■can  : that  two  years  fince  the  mojl  eminent  members 

cf 


C 246  ] 

of  that  church , Jhould  Jo  fully  declare  both  their 
experience  and  judgment,  touching  the  very  points 
now  in  queflion. 

10.  The  fum  of  what  has  been  afferted , as  from 
them,  is  this, 

1.  “ That  a man  can’t  have  any  degree  ofjufi- 
“ fy*n§.  faith,  till  he  is  wholly  freed from  all  doubt 
“ and  fear,  and  till  he  has  ( in  the  full,  proper 
“ fenfe J a new,  a clean  heart.” 

2.  “ That  a man  may  not  ufe  the  ordinances  of 
“ God,  the  Lord’s  Supper  in  particular,  before  he 
“ has  fuch  a faith  as  excludes  all  doubt  and  fear, 
“ and  implies  a new,  a clean  heart.” 

In  fat  oppofition  to  this  I offer  l, 

1.  “ That  a man  may  have  a degree  of  jujlify - 
“ ing  faith,  before  he  is  wholly freed  from  all  doubt 
“ and fear,  and  before  he  has,  in  the  full , proper 
“ fenfe,  a new,  a clean  heart.” 

2.  “ That  aman  may  ufe  the  ordinances  of  God, 
“ the  Lord's  Supper  in  particular,  before  he  has 
'■'■fuch  a faith  as  excludes  all  doubt  and  fear , and 
“ implies  a neiu,  a clean  heart.” 

I farther  afjert , “ This  I learned  (not  on’y 
“from  the  Engl fi,  but  afo ) from  the.  Moravian 
“ church  '' 

And  I hereby  openly  and  earne/llv  call  upon  that 
church  ( and  upon  Count  Zwzendorf  in  parti- 
cular, who  I trvfi  is  not  cf) \amed  or  afraid  to 
avow  any  part  of  the  gofptl  oj  Ckrifl ) to  correct  me 

and 


C 247  3 

and  explain  tkemfelves,  if  I have  mfunderjlood  or 
mfreprefented  them . 

London,  JOHN  WESLEY. 

Sept.  29,  1740. 


JOURNAL 

From  Feb.  i,  173 $,  to  SfjM.  16,  1738. 

WEDNESDAY,  Feb.  1.  After  reading 
prayers  and  explaining  a portion  of 
fcripture  to  a large  company  at  the  inn,  l 
left  Deal,  and  came  in  the  evening  to  Fever- 
fham. 

I here  read  prayers,  and  explained  the  2d 
lefTon,  to  a few  of  tliofe  who  were  called  Chrif- 
tians,  but  indeed  were  more  favage  in  their  be- 
haviour than  the  wildeft  Indians  I have  yet  met 
with. 

Fri.  3.  I came  to  Mr.  Delamotte’s  at  Blendon, 
where  I expefted  a cold  reception.  But  God 
had  prepared  the  way  before  me  : and  I no 
fooner  mentioned  my  name,  than  I was  wel- 
comed in  fuch  amanner,  as  conftrained  me  to  fay, 
Surely  God  is  in  this  place,  and  I knew  it  not ! 
Vo  l.  XXVI.  K Blejfed 


[ ] 

BJcffed  be  ye  of  the  Lord ! Ye  have  Jhewn  more 
kindnefs  in  the  latter  end  than  m the  beginning. 

In  the  evening  I came  once  more  to  London, 
whence  I had  been  abfent  two  years  and  near 
four  months. 

* Many  reafons  I have  to  blefs  God,  though 
the  defign  I went  upon  did  not  take  effefl,  for 
my  having  been  carried  into  that  flrange  land, 
contrary  to  all  my  preceding  refolutions.  Hereby 
I trull  he  hath  in  fome  meafure  humbled  me  and 
proved  me,  and  Jliewn  me  what  was  in  my  heart. 
Hereby  I have  been  taught,  to  beware  of  men. 
Hereby  I am  come  to  know  alfuredlv,  that  if  in 
all  our  ways  we  acknowledge  God,  he  will  where 
reafon  fails,  direbl  our  path,  by  lot  or  by  the 
other  means  which  he  knoweth.  Hereby  I am 
delivered  from  the  fear  of  the  fea,  which  I had 
both  dreaded  and  abhorred  from  my  youth. 

* Hereby  God  has  given  me  to  know  many 
of  his  fervants,  particularly  thofe  of  the  church  of 
Hernhuth.  Hereby  my  pallage  is  opened  to  the 
writings  of  holy  men  in  the  German,  Spanifh 
and  Italian  tongues.  I hope  too  fome  good  may 
come  to  others  hereby.  All  in  Georgia  have 
heard  the  word  ol  God.  Some  have  believed,  and 
began  to  run  well.  A few  Heps  have  been  taken 
towards  publilhing  the  glad  tidings  both  to  the 
African  and  American  Heathens.  Many  children 
have  learned  how  they  ought  to  Jerve  God,  and  to 
be  ufeful  to  their  neighbour.  And  thofe  whom 
it  molt  concerns  have  an  opportunity  of  knowing 

the 


[ 249  ] 


t(ue  Hate  of  their  infant  colony,  and  laying  a 
firmer  foundation  of  peace  and  happinefs  to 
many  generations. 

Sat.  4.  I told  my  friends  fome  of  the  reafons, 
which  a little  haftened  my  return  to  England. 
They  all  agreed  it  would  be  proper  to  relate 
them  to  the  trufiees  of  Georgia. 

Accordingly  the  next  morning  I waited  on 
Mr.  Oglethorpe,  but  had  not  time  to  fpeak  on 
that  head.  In  the  afternoon  I was  defired  to 
preach  at  St.  John  the  Evangelift’s.  I did  fo  on 
thofe  lirong  words,  Ij  any  man  be  in  Chrifl,  he  is 
a new  creature.  I was  afterwards  informed,  Many 
oj  the  be  ft  in  the  parijh  were  Jo  offended,  that  I was 
not  to  preach  there  any  more. 

Mond.  6.  I vifited  many  of  my  old  friends, 
as  well  as  molt  of  my  relations.  I find  the  time 
is  not  yet  come  when  I am  to  be  hated  of all  men. 

0 may  I be  prepared  for  that  day  ! 

Tuef.  7.  (A  day  much  to  be  remembered)  at 
the  houfe  of  Mr.  W einantz,  a Dutch  merchant, 

1 met  Peter  Bolder,  Schulius  Richter  and  Wen- 
fel  Neifer,  juft  then  landed  from  Germany. 
Finding  they  had  no  acquaintance  in  England,  I 
offered  to  procure  them  a lodging,  and  did  fo 
near  Mr.  Hutton’s,  where  I then  was.  And 
from  this  time  I did  not  willingly  lofe  any  oppor- 
tunity of  converfing  with  them,  while  I ftayed 
in  London. 

Wednef,  8.  I went  to  Mr.  Oglethorpe  again, 
but  had  no  opportunity  of  fpeaking  as  1 defigned. 

K 2 After- 


[ *50  ] 


Afterwards  I waited  on  the  board  of  truftees, 
and  gave  them  a lhort  but  plain  account  of  the 
ftateofthe  colony  : an  account,  I fear,  not  a lit- 
tle differing  from  thofe  which  they  had  frequently 
received  before  : and  for  which  I have  reafon  to 
believe,  fome  of  them  have  not  forgiven  me  to 
this  day. 

Sund.  12.  I preached  at  St.  Andrew’s,  Hol- 
born,  on  “ Though  I give  all  my  goods  to  feed 
“ the  poor,  and  though  / give  my  body  to  be 
“ burned,  and  have  not  chanty , it  profteth  me 
“ nothing 0 hard  fayings!  Who  can  hear 
them  ? Here  too  (it  feemsj  I am  to  preach  no 
more. 

Wedn.  15.  I waited  on  the  tru flees  again, 
and  gave  them  in  writing  the  fubflance  of  what  I 
had  laid  at  the  laft  board.  Whatfoever  farther 
queftions  they  alked  concerning  the  ftate  of  the 
province,  I likewife  anfwered  to  the  belt  of  my 
knowledge. 

Fri.  17.  I fet  out  for  Oxford  with  Peter  Bonier, 
where  we  were  kindly  received  by  Mr.  Samey, 
the  only  one  now  remaining  here,  of  many  who 
at  our  embarking  for  America,  were  ufed  to 
take  Ju'eet  counjel  together,  and  rejoice  in  bearing 
the  reproach  of  Clirijl. 

Sat.  18.  We  went  to  Stanton-Harcourt,  to 
Mr.  Gambold,  and  found  my  old  friend  reco- 
vered from  his  myjlicl  delufion,  and  convinced 
that  St.  Paul  was  a better  writer  than  eitherTauIcr 
or  Jacob  Behmen. — ■ — 1 he  next  day  I preached 

once 


[ 2 st  ] 

once  more  at  the  caflle  (in  Oxford)  to  a nume- 
rous and  ferious  congregation. 

All  this  time  I converfed  much  with  Peter 
Bohler,  but  I underftood  him  not  : and  leall  oi 
all  when  he  faid,  “ Mi  frater,  mi  j 'rater , exco- 
“ tjuenda  eji  ijla  tua  philofophia .”  (My  brother, 
my  brother,  that  philofophy  of  your’s  mull  be 
purged  away.) 

Mond.  20.  I returned  to  London.  On  Tues- 
day I preached  at  Great  St.  Helen’s,  on,  If  any 
man  will  come  after  me , let  him  deny  himfelf,  and 
take  up  his  crofs  daily  and  follow  me. 

Wedn.  22.  I was  with  the  truflees  again,  to 
whom  I then  gave  a Ihort  account  (and  after- 
wards delivered  it  to  them  in  writing)  of  the  rea- 
fons  why  I left  Georgia. 

Sun.  26.  I preached  at  fix  at  St.  Lawrence’s ; 
at  ten,  in  St.  Katherine’s  Creed-church  ; and  in 
the  afternoon,  at  St.  John’s,  Wapping.  I believe 
it  pleafed  God  to  blefs  the  firft  fermon  moll, 
becaufe  it  gave  moll  offence  ; being  indeed  an 
open  defiance  of  that  myfiery  of  iniquity  which 
the  world  calls  prudence:  grounded  on  thofe 
words  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Galatians ; As  many  as 
defire  to  make  a fair  Jhew  in  the  flefh,  they  conflrain 
you  to  be  circumcifed,  only  lejl  they  Jhould  J'uffcr 
pcrjecution fox  the  crofs  of  Chrif. 

* Mond.  27.  I took  coach  for  Salifbtary,  and 
had  feveral  opportunities  of  converfing  ferioufly 
with  my  fellow-travellers.  But  endeavouring  to 
mend  the  wifdom  of  God  by  the  worldly  wjfdom 
K 3 of 


V 252  ] 

of  prefacing  fenous  with  light  converfation,  and 
afterwards  following  that  advice  of  the  myjlicks , 
leave  than  to  them/elves,  all  I had  faid  was 
written  on  the  fand.  Lord,  lay  not  this Jm  to  my 
/ 

1 uef.  28.  I faw  my  mother  once  more.  The 
next  day  I prepared  for  my  journey  to  my  bro- 
ther at  Tiverton.  But  on  fhuifday  morning, 
March  2d,  a melfage  that  my  brother  Charles  zias 
dying  at  Oxford , obliged  me  to  fet.  out  for  that 
place  immediately.  Calling  at  an  odd  houfe  in 
the  afternoon,  I found  feveral  perfons  there, 
who  feemed  well-wifhers  to  reliction,  to  whom  I 
fpake  plainly  ; as  I did  in  the  evening,  both  to 
the  fervants  and  Grangers  at  my  inn. 

* With  regard  to  my  own  behaviour,  I now 
renewed  and  wrote  down  my  former  refolu- 
tions. 

1.  To  ufe  abfolute  opennefs  and  unreferve, 
with  all  I fhould  converfe  with. 

c.  To  labour  after  continual  ferioufnefs,  not 
willingly'  indulging  myfelf,  in  any  the  leaft  le- 
vity of  behaviour,  or  in  laughter,  no  not  for  a 
moment. 

3.  To  fpeak  no  word  which  does  not  tend  to 
the  glory  of  God,  in  particular,  not  to  talk  of 
worldly  things.  Others  may,  nay  muff.  But 
what  is  that  to  thee  ? And 

4.  To  take  no  pleafure  which  does  not  tend  to 
the  glory  of  God  ; thanking  God  every  moment 
for  all  I do  take,  and  therefore  rejetiing  even- 

fort 


[ 2 >53  ] 

fort  and  degree  of  it,  which  I feel  I cannot  fo 
thank  him  in  and  for. 

Sat.  4.  I found  my  brother  at  Oxford,  reco- 
vering from  his  pleurify  ; and  with  him  Peter 
Bohler:  by  whom  (in  the  hand  of  the  great  God) 
I was  on  Sunday  the  5th  clearly  convinced  of 
unbelief,  of  the  want  oi  that  faith  whereby  alone 
we  are faved. 

* Immediately  it  druck  into  my  mind  “ Leave 
“ off  preaching.  How  can  you  preach  to  others, 
“ who  have  not  faith  yourfelf?”  I afked  Bohler, 
whether  he  thought  I Ihould  leave  it  off,  or  not  ? 
He  anfwered,  “ By  no  means.”  I afked,  “ But 
“ what  can  I preach  ?”  He  faid,  “ Preach  faith 
“ till  you  have  it,  and  then,  becaufe  you  have  it, 
“ you  will  preach  faith.” 

Accordingly,  Monday  6,  I began  preaching 
this  new  dottrine,  though  my  foul  darted  back 
from  the  work.  The  firft  perfon  to  whom  I 
offered  falvation  by  faith  alone,  was  a prifoner 
under  fentence  of  death.  His  name  was  Clifford. 
Peter  Bohler  had  many  times  defired  me  fo  fpeak 
to  him  before.  But  I could  not  prevail  on  myfelf 
fo  to  do;  being  dill  (as  I had  been  many  vears) 
a zealous  aflertor  ol  the  impqfjibihty  of  a death-bed 
repentance. 

Fri.  10.  Peter  Bohler  returned  to  London. 
Tuef.  15.  I fet  out  for  Mancheder,  with  Mr. 
Kinchin,  Fellow  of  Corpus  Chridi,  and  Mr.  Fox, 
late  a prifoner  in  the  city  prifon.  Between  five 
and  fix  we  called  at  Chappel  on  the  Heath, 
K 4 where 


[ 254  ] 


where  lived  a poor  man,  fometime  prifoner  in 
the  cable  of  Oxford.  He  was  not  at  home  ; but 
his  wife  came  to  us,  to  whom  Mr.  Kinchin  fpoke 
a few  words,  which  fo  melted  her  heart,  that  fhe 
burft  out  into  tears,  and  we  went  on  rejoicing  and 
praifing  God. 

* About  eight,  it  being  rainy  and  very  dark, 
we  loft  our  way  ; but  before  nine,  came  to  Ship- 
fton,  having  rode  over,  I know  not  how,  a nar- 
row foot-bridge,  which  lav  a crofs  a lleep  ditch 
near  the  town.  After  fupper  I read  prayers  to 
the  people  of  the  inn,  and  explained  the  fecond 
lefton  ; I hope  not  in  vain. 

The  next  day  we  dined  at  Birmingham,  and 
foon  after  we  left  it,  were  reproved  for  our  negli- 
gence there  (in  letting  thofe  who  attended  us 
go,  without  either  exhortation  or  inftruftion) 
by  a fevere  fhower  of  hail.  At  Hedgeford, 
about  five,  we  endeavoured  to  be  more  faith- 
ful ; and  all  who  heard  feemed  ferious  and  af- 
fe£led. 

* In  the  evening  we  came  to  Stafford.  The 
iniftrefs  of  the  houfe  joined  with  us  in  family- 
prayer.  The  next  morning,  one  of  the  fervants 
appeared  deeply  affefled,  as  didtheoftler  before 
we  went.  Soon  after  breakfaft,  flopping  into  the 
liable,  I fpake  a few  words  to  thofe  who  where 
there.  A ftranger  who  heard  me,  faid,  Sir,  I 
wijh  I was  to  travel  with  you.  And  when  I 
went  into  the  houfe  followed  me,  and  began 
abruptly,  Sir,  I believe  you  are  a good  man,  and  I 

com* 


C 255  ] 

come  to  tell  you  a little  of  my  life.  The  tears 
flood  in  his  eyes  all  the  time  he  fpoke  ; and  we 
hoped  not  a word  which  was  faid  to  him  was 
left. 

At  Newcaftle,  whither  we  came  about  ten, 
fome  to  whom  we  fpoke  at  our  inn,  were  very 
attentive  ; but  a gay  young  woman  waited  on  us, 
quite  unconcerned : however  we  fpoke  on. 
When  we  went  away,  fhe  fixed  her  eyes,  and 
neither  moved  nor  faid' one  word,  but  appeared 
as  much  aftonilhed  as  if  fhe  had  leen  one  rifen 
from  the  dead. 

* Coming  to  Holms- Chappel  about  three,  we 
were  furprized  at  being  fhewn  into  a room, 
where  a cloth  and  plates  were  laid.  Soon  after 
two  men  came  in  to  dinner.  Mr.  Kinchin  told 
them,  “ If  they  pleafed,  that  gentleman  would 
afk  ablefling  for  them.”  They  flared,  and  as  it 
were  confented;  but  fat  flill  while  I did  it,  one 
of  them  with  his  hat  on.  We  began  to  fpeak 
on  turning  to  God,  and  went  on,  though  they 
appeared  utterly  regardlefs.  After  a while  their 
countenances  changed,  and  one  of  them  flole  off 
his  hat,  and  laying  it  down  behind  him  faid, 
“ All  we  faid  was  true  ; but  he  had  been  a grie- 
“ vous  finner,  and  not  confidered  it  as  he  ought: 
“ but  he  was  refolved,  with  God’s  help,  now 
*-  to  turn  to  him  in  earneft.”  We  exhorted 
him  and  his  companion,  who-  now  likewifc 
drank  in  every  word,  to  cry  mightily  to 
K 5 God, 


r *56  ] 

God,  (hat  he  would  fend  them  help  from  kis  holy 
place. 

Being  faint  in  the  evening,  I railed  at  Altring- 
ham,  and  there  light  upon  a Quaker,  well  {killed 
in,  and  therefore  (as  I foon  found)  fufficiently 
fond  of  controverfy.  After  an  hour  fpent  there- 
in (perhaps  not  in  vain)  I advifed  him,  “ To  dif- 
“ pute  as  little  as  pofhble,  but  rather  follow 
“ after  holinefs,  and  walk  humbly  with  his  God.” 

Late  at  night  we  reached  Manchefter.  Friday 
the  17th,  we  fpent  intirely  with  Mr.  Clavton,  by 
whom,  and  the  reft  of  our  friends  here,  we  weie 
much  refrefhed  and  ftrengthened.  Mr.  Hoole, 
the  reflor  ol  St.  Ann’s  church  beint*  taken  ill  the 

O 

next  day,  on  Sunday  19,  Mr.  Kinchin  and  I 
officiated  at  Salford  chappel  in  the  morning, 
by  which  means  Mr.  Clayton  was  at  liberty 
to  perform  the  fervice  of  St.  Ann’s  : and  in  the 
afternoon,  I preached  there  on  thofe  words  of 
St.  Paul,  Ij  any  man  be  in  Chrijl,  he  is  a new  crea- 
ture. 

* Early  in  the  morning  we  left  Manchefter, 
taking  with  us  Mr.  Kinchin’s  brother,  for  whom 
we  came,  to  be  entered  at  Oxford.  We  were 
fully  determined  to  lofe  no  opportunity  of  awak- 
ening, inftrufding,  or  exhorting,  any  whom  we 
might  meet  with  in  our  journey.  At  Knutsford, 
where  we  firft  flopped,  all  we  fpake  to,  thank- 
fully received  the  word  of  exhortation.  But  at 
Talk  in  the  lull,  where  we  dined,  fhe  with  whom 
we  were,  was  fo  much  of  a gentlewoman,  that 

for 


[ 2 <57  ] 

for  near  an  hour  our  labour  feemed  to  be  in 
vain.  However  we  fpoke  on.  Upon  a hidden, 
{he  looked  a?  one  juft  awaked  out'  of  a fleep. 
Every  word  funk  into  her  heart.  Nor  have  I 
feen  fo  intire  a change  both  in  the  eyes,  face 
and  manner  offpeaking,  of  any  one  m io  fhort  a 
time. 

* About  5,  Mr.  Kinchin  riding  by  a man  and 
woman  double-horfed,  the  man  faid,  “ Sir,  you 
ought  to  thank  God  it  is  a fair  day";  for  if  it 
rained,  you  would  be  fadly  dirty  with  your  lit- 
tle horfe.”  Mr.  Kinchin  anfwered,  True  : 
and  we  ought  to  thank  God  for  our  life  and 
health,  and  food  and  raiment,  and  all  things.” 
He  then  rode  on,  Mr.  Fox  following  the  man 
faid,  “ Sir,  my  miftrefs  would  be  glad  to  have 
fome  more  talk  with  that  gentleman.”  We  {fay- 
ed, and  when  they  came  up,  began  to  fearch  one. 
another’s  hearts.  They  came  to  us  again  in  the 
evening,  at  our  inn  at  Stone,  when  I explained 
both  to  them  and  many  of  their  acquaintance 
who  were  come  together,  that  great  truth,  “ Gcd- 
“ line/s  hath  the  promife  both  oj  this  life , and  cj 
“ that  which  is  to  come.'’ 

Tuef.  21.  Between  9 and  10  we  came  to 
Hedgeford.  Juff  then,  one  was  giving  an  ac- 
count of  a young  woman,  who  had  dropt  down 
dead  there  the  day  before.  This  gaVe  us  a fair 
occafion  to  exhort  all  that  were  preient.  So  to 
number  their  own  days  that  they  might  apply  their 
hearts  unto  wifdum. 

Mn 


K 6 


[ z5%  ] 

* In  the  afternoon  one  overtook  us,  whom 
we  foon  found  more  inclined  to  fpeak  than  to 
hear.  However  we  fpoke,  and  fpared  not.  In 
the  evening  we  overtook  a young  man,  a Quaker, 
who  afterwards  came  to  us,  to  our  inn  at  Henley, 
whither  he  fent  for  the  reft  of  his  family,  to  join 
with  us  in  prayer  : to  which  I added,  as  ufual, 
the  expofition  of  the  2d  lefton.  Our  other  com- 
panion went  with  us  a mile  or  two  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  then  not  only  fpoke  lefs  than  the  day 
before  ; but  took  in  good  part  a ferious  caution 
againft  talkativnefs  and  vanity. 

*An  hour  after  we  were  overtook  by  an  elder- 
ly gentleman,  who  faid,  “ He  was  going  to  en- 
“ ter  his  fon  at  Oxford.”  We  afked,  “ At  what 
“ college  ?’  He  faid.  He  didn't  know  : having 
“ no  acquaintance  there  on  whofe  recommenda- 
“ tion  be  could  depend.’’  After  fome  converfa- 
tion.  he  expreft  a deep  fenfe  of  the  good  pro- 
vidence of  God,  and  told  us,  “ He  knew  God 
“ had  call  us  in  his  way,  in  anfwerto  his  prayer.” 
In  the  evening  we  reached  Oxford,  rejoicing  in 
our  having  received  fo  many  frelh  inflances  of 
that  great  truth,  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge 
him,  and  he  Jhall  direCl  thy  paths. 

Thurf.  23.  I met  Peter  Bohler  again,  who 
now  amazed  m^  more  and  more,  by  the  account 
he  gave  of  the  fruits  of  living  faith,  the  holinefs 
and  happinefs  which  he  affirmed  to  attend  it. 
The  next  morning  I began  the  Greek  Teftament 
again,  refolving  to  abide  by  ike  law  and  the  te(H- 

mony, 


[ 2,59  ] 

n\ony,  and  being  confident,  that  God  would 
hereby  fhcw  me,  whether  this  doclnne  was  of 
God? 

Sund.  2 6.  I preached  at  Whitam,  on  the  new 
creature,  and  went  in  the  evening  to  a fociety 
in  Oxford,  where  (as  my  manner  then  was  at 
all  focieties)  after  ufing  a colleft  or  two  and  the 
Lord’s  prayer,  I expounded  a chapter  in  the 
New  TeJfament,  and  concluded  with  three  or 
four  more  colletls  and  a pfalm. 

Mond  27.  Mr.  Kinchin  went  with  me  to  the 
caftle,  where  after  reading  prayers  and  preaching, 
on  It  is  appointed for  men  once  to  die,  we  praved 
with  the  condemned  man,  firfl  in  feveral  forms 
of  prayer,  and  then  in  fuch  words  as  were  given 
us  in  that  hour.  He  kneeled  down  in  much  hea- 
vinefs  and  confufion,  having  no  ref  in  his  bones , 
by  re.afon  of  his  fins.  After  a fpace  he  rofe  up, 
and  eagerly  faid.  I am  now  ready  to  die.  I know 
Chrijl  has  taken  away  my  fins,  and  there  is  no  more 
condemnation  for  me.  The  fame  compofed  chear- 
fulnefs  he  fhewed,  when  he  was  carried  to  exe- 
cution : and  in  his  lafl  moments  he  was  the  fame* 
enjoying  a perfefl  peace,  in  confidence  that  he 
was  accepted  in  the  beloved. 

* Sat.  April  1.  Being  at  Mr.  Fox’s  fociety,  mV 
heart  was  fo  full  that  I could  not  confine  myfelf 
to  the  forms  of  praver,  which  we  were  accuflom- 
ed  to  ufe  there.  Neither  do  I purpofe  to  be 
confined  to  them  any  more  ; but  to  pray  indif. 

ferently* 


r 260  3 

ferently,  with  a form  or  without,  as  I may  find 
fuitable  to  particular  occafioris. 

Sund.  2.  Being  Eafier  day,  I preached  in  our 
college  chappel,  on  The  hour  comelh  and  now  is, 
when  the  dead  Jhall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
God , and  they  that  hear  flail  live.  I preached  in 
the  afternoon  firfl  at  the  Caftle,  and  then  at 
Carfax  on  the  fame  words.  I fee  the  promife. 
But  it  is  afar  off. 

Believing  it  would  be  better  for  me  to  wait 
for  the  accomplifhment  of  it  in  filence  and  re- 
tirement, on  iVIond.  3.  I complied  with  Mr. 
Kinchin’s  defire,  and  went  to  him  at  Dum- 
mer  in  Hampfhire.  But  I was  not  fuffered  to 
flay  here  long;  being  earneflly  preft  to  come 
np  to  London,  if  it  were  only  for  a few  days. 
Thither  therefore  I returned,  on  Tuef.  18th. 

Sat.  21.  I met  Peier  Bchleronce  more.  I 
had  now  no  objection  to  what  he  faid  of  the  na- 
ture of  faith,  viz.  That  it  is  (to  ufe  the  words  of 
our  church)  A fare  trujl  and.  confidence  which  a 
man  hath  in  God,  that  through  the  merits  of  Chr if , 
his  fins  are  forgiven,  and  he  reconciled  to  the  fa- 
vour of  God.  Neither  could  I deny  either  the 
happinefs  or  holinefs.  which  he  deferibed,  as 
fruits  of  this  living  faith.  The  Spirit  itfelf  bearelh 
witnefs  with  our  fpirit  that  we  are  the  children  of 
God : and,  He  that  bdieveth  hath  the  witnefs  in 
himfe/f  fully  convinced  me  of  the  former  : As, 
Whatfocver  is  bor  n of  God , doth  not  commit  fin $ 
and  Whtfoever  bdieveth,  is  born  of  God,  did  of 

the 


C e6i  ] 

the  latter.  But  I could  not  comprehend  what 
he  (poke  of  an  injianteous  work.  * 1 could  not  un- 
derhand how  this  faith  fhould  he  given  in  a mo- 
ment : how  a man  could  at  once  be  thus  turned 
from  darknefs  to  light,  from  fin  and  mifery  to 
righteoufnefs  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft.  I 
learched  the  fcriptures  again,  touching  this  very 
thing,  particularly  the  AEls  oj  the  apojiles.  But, 
to  my  utter  aftonilhment,  found  fcarce  any  in- 
ftances  there  of  other  than  injlantaneous  conver- 
fions;  fcarce  any  fo  flow  as  that  of  St.  Paul, 
who  was  three  days  in  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth. 
I had  but  one  retreat  left,  viz.  “ Thus,  I grant 
“ God  wrought  in  the  firji  ages  of  Chriflianity  : 
“ but  the  times  are  changed.  What  reafon  have 
“ I to  believe,  he  works  in  the  fame  manner* 
“ now  ?” 

But  on  Sund.  22.  I was  beat  out  of  this 
retreat  too,  by  the  concurring  evidence  of 
feveral  living  witnefles  ; who  tellified  God  had 
thus  wrought  in  themjelves ; giving  them  in  a 
moment,  fuc'h  a faith  in  the  blood  of  his  Son, 
as  tranflated  them  out  of  darknefs  into  light,  out 
of  fin  and  fear  into  holinefs  and  happinefs. 
Here  ended  my  difputing.  I could  now  only 
cry  out,  “ Lord  help  thou  my  unbchej!" 

* I alked  P.  Bolder  again,  “ Whether  I ought 
“ not  to  refrain  from  teaching  others  ?”  He  faid, 
“ No  ; Do  not  hide  in  the  earth  the  talent  God 
“ hath  given  you.”  Accordingly  o,n  Tuc-f,  25. 
.1  fpoke  clearly  and  fully  at  Blendon  to  Mr.  De~ 

lamotte’s 


[ 262  ] 


lamotte’s  family,  of  the  nature  and  fruits  01 
faith.  Mr.  Broughton  and  my  brother  were 
there.  Mr.  Broughton’s  great  objeclion  was. 
He  could  never  think  that  I had  not  Jaith,  who  had 
done  and  fuff ered  fmh  things.  My  brother  was 
very  angry,  and  told  me  I did  not  know  what 
nlfchief  l had  done  by  talking  thus.  And  indeed 
it  did  pleafe  God  then  to  kindle  a fire,  which  I 
trufl  lhall  never  be  extinguifhed. 

On  Wedn.  21.  The  day  fixed  for  mv  return 
to  Oxford,  I once  more  waited  on  the  truftees 
for  Georgia  : but  being  ftraitened  for  time,  was 
obliged  to  leave  the  papers  for  them,  which  1 
had  defigned  to  give  into  their  own  hands.  One 
of  thefe  was  the  inllrument  whereby  they  bad 
appointed  me  minifter  of  Savannah  ; which,  hav- 
ing no  more  place  in  thofe  parts,  I thought  it 
not  right  to  keep  any  longer. 

P.  Bolder  walked  with  me  a few  miles,  and  ex- 
horted me  not  to  flop  fhort  of  the  grace  of  God. 
At  Gerrard’s  Crofs  I plainly  declared  to  thofe 
whom  God  gave  into  my  hands.  The faith  as  it 
is  in  f’fus  : as  I did  next  day  to  a young  man  I 
overtook  on  the  road,  and  in  the  evening  to  our 
friends  at  Oxford  A flrange  dofdrine,  which 
fome,  who  did  not  care  to  contradi£l.  yet  knew 
not  what  to  make  of;  but  one  or  two,  who  were 
throughly  bruifed  by  fitly  willingly  heard,  and 
received  it  gladly. 

In  the  day  or  two  following,  I was  much  confirm- 
ed in  the  truth  that  is  after  godhnefs,  by  hearing 

the 


[ ] 


the  experiences  of  Mr.  Hutchins,  (of  Pembroke- 
college)  and  Mrs.  Fox  : two  living  witnelTes 
that  God  can  (at  lead,  if  he  does  not  always) 
give  that  faith  whereof  cometh  falvation  in  a 
moment,  as  lightning  falling  from  heaven. 

Mond.  May  1.  The  return  of  my  brother  s 
illnefs  obliged  me  again  to  haden  to  London. 
In  the  evening  I found  him  at  James  Hutton’s, 
better  as  to  his  health,  than  I expefted  ; but 
Ilrongly  averfe  from  what  he  called  The  New 
Faith. 

This  evening  our  little  fociety  bega-n,  which 
afterwards  met  in  Fetter-lane.  Our  fundamental 
rules  were  as  follow. 

In  obedience  to  the  command  of  God  by  St. 
James,  and  by  the  advice  of  Peter  Bolder,  it  is 
agreed  by  us, 

1.  That  we  will  meet  together  once  a week 
to  confefs  our  faults  one  to  another , and  pray  one 

f or  another,  that  we  may  be  healed  ; 

2.  That  the  perfons  fo  meeting  be  divided  in- 
to feveral  hands,  or  little  companies,  none  of 
them  confiding  of  fewer  than  five  or  more  than 
ten  perfons. 

3.  That  every  one  in  order  fpeak  as  freely, 
plainly,  and  concifely  as  he  can,  the  real  date 
of  his  heart,  with  his  feveral  temptations  and  de- 
liverances, fince  the  lad  time  of  meeting;. 

4.  That  all  the  bands  have  a conference  at 
eight  every  Wed nefday  evening,  begun  and  end- 
ed with  finging  and  prayer. 

5.  That 


[ ] 

S-  That  any  who  deft  re  to  be  admitted  into 
this  fociety  be  afked,  What  are  your  reafons  for 
defiring  this  ? Will  you  be  entirely  open,  uftng 
no  kind  ofreferve  ? Have  you  any  objeftion  to 
any  of  our  orders  ? (which  may  then  be  read.) 

6.  That  when  any  new  member  is  propofed, 
every  one  ptefent  fpeak  clearly  and  freely  what- 
ever objection  he  has  to  him. 

7.  That  thofe  againll  whom  no  reafonable  ob- 
jeblion  appears,  be  in  order  for  their  trial,  form- 
ed into  one  or  more  diflinft  bands,  and  fome 
perfon  agreed  on  to  adifi.  them. 

8.  That  after  two  months  trial,  if  no  objec- 
tion then  appear,  they  may  be  admitted  into  the 
fociety. 

9.  That  every  fourth  Saturday  be  obferved  as  . 
a day  of  general  intercefhon. 

3 0.  That  on  the  Sunday  feven-night  following 
be  a general  love-fealt,  Irom  feven  till  ten  in  the 
evening. 

1 t.  That  no  particular  member  be  allowed  to 
act  in  any  thing,  contrary  to  any  order  of  the 
fociety  : and  that  if  any  perfons.  after  being  thrice 
admonifhed,  do  not  conform  thereto,  they  be  v 
not  any  longer  efieemed  as  member?. 

Wednef  3.  My  brother  had  a long  and  par- 
ticular coriverfation  with  Peter  Bohler.  And  it 
now  pleafed  God  to  open  his  eyes;  fo  that  he 
alfo  f-iw  clearly,  what  was  the  nature  of  that  one, 
true  living  faith,  whereby  alone,  though  grace 
zve  are Javed. 


Thurf. 


[ *«S  ] 

Thurf.  4.  Peter  Bohler  left  London  in  order 
to  embark  for  Carolina.  O what  a work  hath 
God  begun,  fince  his  coming  into  England ! 
Such  an  one  as  fhall  never  come  to  an  end,  till 
heaven  and  earth  pafs  away. 

Friday  and  Saturday,  I was  at  Blendon. 
They  now  believed  our  report.  O may  the  arm 
of  t/ie  Lord  he.  fpeedily  revealed  unto  them  ! 

Sun.  7.  I preached  at  St.  Lawrence's  in  the 
morning ; and  afterwards  at  St.  Katherine’s 
Creed-church.  I was  enabled  to  fpeak  flrong 
words  at  both  ; and  was  therefore  the  lefs  fur- 
prized  at  being  informed,  I was  not  to  preach  any 
more  in  either  of  thofe  churches. 

Tuef.  9.  I preached  at  Great  St.  Helen’s,  to 
a very  numerous  congregation,  on  He  that 
/pared  not  his  own  Son  but  delivered  him  up  for  us 
all,  how  fiaH  he  not  with  him  alfo  freely  give  us 
all  things  ? My  heart  was  now  fo  enlarged,  to  de- 
clare the  love  of  God,  to  all  that  were  oppreft 
by  the  devil,  that  I did  not  wonder  in  the  leaft, 
when  I was  afterwards  told,  '■'Sir,  you  muf  preach 
here  no  more.” 

Wtdnef.  to.  Mr.  Stonhoufe,  Vicar  of  Ifling- 
ton,  was  convinced  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jefus. 
From  this  time  till  Saturday  13,  I was  forrow- 
ful  and  very  heavy  ; being  neither  able  to 
read,  nor  meditate,  nor  fmg,  nor  pray,  nor  do 
any  thing.  Yet  I was  a little  refrefhed  by 

Peter 


[ 266  ] 

Peter  Bohler’s  letter,  which  I infert  in  his  own 
words. 

ChariJJimt  £?  fwivijfime  Frater, 

* TNteiitiffimo  amore  te  diligo,  multum  tui 
recordans  in  itinere  meo,  optando  & pre- 
cando  ut  quam  primura  vifeera  mifericordiae 
crucifixi  Jefu  ChrilH,  Tui  gratia  jam  ante  6000 
Annos  coramota,  menu  tuae  appareant : Ut  gullare 
& tunc  videre  poffis,  quam  vehementer  te  Fi- 
lius  Dti  amaverit  & hucufque  amet,  & ut  fic 
confidere  poffis  in  eo  omni  tempore,  vitamque 
ejus  in  Te  & in  carne  tua  fentire.  Cave  Tibi  a 
peccato  Incredulitatis,  & ft  nondum  vicifli  illud, 
fac  ut  proximo  die  illud  vincas,  per  Sanguinem 
Jefu  Chrifti.  Ne  differ,  quaffo,  credere  Tuum 
in  Jefum  Chriftum  : fed  potius  promiffionum 
ejus  quae  pertinent  ad  miferandos  peccatores, 
coram,  facie  ejus  benigna  fic  mentionem  fac,  ut 
non  aliter  poffit  quam  proellare  tibi,  quod  multis 
aliis  praellitit.  O quam  tnultus  quam  magnus, 
quam  ineffabilis,  quam  inexhauftus,  ell  illius 
Amor!  II !e  certe  jam  jam  paratus  eft  ad  auxilium, 
& nihil  poteft  ilium  offendere  nifi  incredulitas 
noftra.  Crede  igitur.  Fratrem  tuum  Carolum 
& Flail,  nomine  meo  faluta  multum  ; & admonete 
vos  invicem  ad  credendum,  ik  tunc  ad  ambulan- 
dum  coram  facie  Domini  ir.Zl2u>Cy  Sz  ad  pugnan- 
dum  contra  Diabolum  & Mundum  V'jUiuyc  9 & ad 
crucifigendum  oc  conculcandum  peccatum  omne 

fub 


[ *6;  3 


fub  pedibus  noltris,  quantum  nobis  datum  eft 
per  gratiam  fecundi  Adami,  cujus  vita  excedit 
mortem  prioris  Adami,  & cujus  gratia  ante- 
cellit  Corruptionem  & Damnationem  prioris 
Adami. 

Dominus  tibi  benedicat.  Permane  in  Fide, 
Amore,  Doftrina,  Communione  Sauflorum,  Sc 
breviter,  in  omni  quod  habemus  in  novo  Fcedere. 
Ego  fum  8c  maneo 

Tuus  indignus  Frater 

Petrus  Bolder. 

In  Agris  Southamptonianis 
Die  8vo  Maii,  1738. 

I Love  you  greatly,  and  think  much  of  you  in 
my  journey,  wifhing  and  praying  that  the 
tender  mercies  of  Jefus  Chriil  the  crucified, 
whofe  bowels  were  moved  towards  you  more 
than  fix  thoufand  years  ago,  may  be  manifefied 
to  your  foul:  that  you  may  tall e and  then  fee, 
how  exceedingly  the  Son  of  God  has  loved  you, 
and  loves  you  fiill  ; and  that  fo  you  may  conti- 
nually trull  in  him,  and  feel  his  life  in  yourfelf. 
Beware  of  the  fin  of  unbelief ; and  if  you  have 
•not  conquered  it  yet,  fee  that  you  conquer  it 
this  very  day,  through  the  blood  of  Jefus  Chrift. 
Delay  not,  I befeech  you,  to  believe  in  your  Je- 
fus Chrifl > but  fo  put  him  in  mind  of  his  pro- 
inifes  to  poor  finners,  that  he  may  not  be  able  to 
refrain  from  doing  for  you,  what  he  hath  done 

for 


C 268  ] 


for.fo  many  others.  O how  great,  how  inex- 
preflible,  how  unexhaufled  is  his  love  ! Surely  he 
is  now  ready  to  help  ; and  nothing  can  offend 
him  but  our  unbelief. 

The  Lord  bids  you ! Abide  in  faith,  love, 
teaching,  the  communion  of  faints;  and 
briefly,  in  all  which  we  have  in  the  new 
teflament.  I am, 

Your  unworthy  brother, 

Peter  Bolder. 

Sun.  14.  I preached  in  the  morning  at  St. 
Ann’s,  Alderfgate;  and  in  the  afternoon  at 
the  Savoy  chappel,  free  falvation  by  faith  in 
the  blood  of  Chriff.  I was  quickly  apprized, 
that  at  St.  Ann’s  iikewife,  I am  to  preach  no 
more. 

So  true  did  I find  the  words  of  a friend,  wrote 
to  my  brotiier  about  this  time. 

“ I have  feen  upon  this  occafion,  more  than 
ever  I could  have  imagined,  how  intolerable  the 
doftrine  of  faith  is  to  the  mind  of  man  ; and 
how  peculiarly  intolerable  to  religious  men.  One 
mat'  fay  the  ruofl  unehriftian  things,  even  down 
to  deifm  : the  mod  enthufiaflic  things,  fo  thev 
proceed  but  upon  mental  rapiures,  lights  and 
unions;  the  moll  fevere  things,  even  the  whole 
rigour  of  afcetick  mortification  : and  all  this  will 
be  forgiven.  But  if  you  fpeak  of  faith  in  fu.ch  a 


manIier 


[ z69  J 

manner  as  makes  Chrifta  Saviour  to  the  utmofl, 
a moft  univerfal  help  and  refuge  ; in  fuch  a man- 
ner as  takes  away  glorying,  but  adds  happinef* 
to  wretched  man ; as  difcovers  a greater  pollu- 
tion in  the  bell  of  us,  than  we  could  before  ac- 
knowledge, but  brings  a greater  deliverance 
from  it  than  we  could  before  expect  : if  any  one 
offers  to  talk  at  this  rate,  he  (hall  be  heard  with 
the  fame  abhorrence,  as  if  he  was  going  to  rob 
mankind  of  their  falvation,  their  mediator,  -or~ 
their  hopes  of  forgivenefs.  I am  perfuaded  that 
a Montamji  or  a Ncvatian,  who  from  the  height 
of  his  purity  Ihould  look  down  with  contempt 
upon  poor  fmners,  and  exclude  them  from  all 
mercy,  would  not  be  thought  fuch  an  over- 
thrower of  the  gofpel,  as  he  who  Ihould  learn 
from  the  author  of  it,  to  be  a Iriend  of  Publicans 
and  Sinners,  and  10  fit  down  upon  the  level  with 
them,  as  foon  as  they  begin  to  repent.” 

* “ But  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  For  all 
religious  people  have  luch  a quantity  of  riglite- 
oufnefs,  acquired  by  much  painful  exercife,  and 
formed  at  laft  into  current  habits;  which  is  their 
wealth,  both  for  this  world  and  the  next.  Now 
all  other  fchemes  of  religion,  are  either  fo  com- 
plaifant,  as  to  tell  them,  they  are  very  rich,  and 
have  enough  to  triumph  in  : or  elfe  only  a little 
rough,  but  friendly  in  the  main,  by  telling  them, 
their  riches  are  not  yet  fufficient,  but  by  fuch 
arts  of  fell-denial,  and  mental  refinement,  thev 
may  enlarge  the  Hock.  But  the  doflrine  of 

faith 


[ 2/0  ] 

faith  is  a downright  robber.  It  takes  away  all 
this  wealth,  and  only  tells  us,  it  is  depofited  for 
us  with  fome  body  elfe,  upon  whofe  bounty  we 
mull  live  like  mere  beggars.  Indeed  they  that 
are  truly  beggars,  vile  and  filthy  finners  till  very 
lately,  may  Hoop  to  live  in  this  dependent  con- 
dition : it  fuits  them  well  enough.  But  they  who 
have  long  diftinguifhed  themfelves  from  the  herd 
of  vicious  wretches,  or  have  even  gone  beyond 
Dioral  men  ; for  them  to  be  told,  that  they  are 
either  not  fo  well,  or  but  the  fame  needy,  impo- 
tent, infignificant  veffels  of  mercy,  with  the 
others : this  is  more  lhocking  to  reafon,-than 
tranfubftantiation.  For  reafon  had  rather  refign 
its  pretenftons  to  judge  what  is  bread  or  flelh, 
than  have  this  honour  wrefted  from  it  to  be  the 
architect  of  virtue  and  righteoufnefs.  But  where 
am  I running  ? My  defig n was  only  to  give  you 
warning,  that  wherever  you  go,  this  joolijhneji  of 
preaching  will  alienate  hearts  lrom  you,  and  open 
mouths  againfl  you.” 

Fri.  19.  My  brother  had  a fecond  return  of  his 
pleurify.  A few  of  us  fpent  Saturday  night  in 
praver.  The  next  day,  being  Whitfundav,  after 
hearing  Dr.  Heylin  preach  a -truly  Chrillian  fer- 
mon  (on,  They  were  all  filed,  with  the  Holy  Gliojl : 
and  fo,  faid  he,  may  all  you  be,  if  it  is  not  your 
own  fault)  and  alhlling  him  at  the  holv  commu- 
nion (his  curate  being  taken  ill  in  the  church)  I 
received  the  furprizing  news,  that  my  brother 

had 


[ 271  3 

had  found  reft  to  his  foul.  His  bodily  ftrength 
returned  alfo  from  that  hour.  If  ho  is Jo  gr eat  a, 
God  as  our  God? 

I preached  at  St.  John’s,  Wapping,  at  three, 
and  at  St.  Bennett’s,  Paul’s- Wharf,  in  the  even- 
ing. At  thefe  churches  likewife  I am  to  preach 
no  more.  At  St.  Antholin’s  I preached  on  the 
Thurfday  following. 

Monday,  Tuefday  and  Wednefday,  I had 
continual  forrow  and  lieavinefs  in  my  heart: 
fomething  of  which  I defcribed,  in  the  broken 
manner  1 was  able,  in  the  following  letter  to  a 
friend. 

“ O why  is  it,  that  fo  great,  fo  wife,  fo  holy  a 
“ God  will  ufe  fuch  an  inftrumcnt  as  me!  Lord, 
“ let  the  dead  bury  their  dead?  But  wilt  thou  fend 
“ the  dead  to  raife  the  dead?  Yea,  thou  fended; 
“ whom  thou  wilt  fend,  and  fheweft  mercy  by 
“ whom  thou  wilt  {hew  mercy  ! Amen ! Be  it 
“then  according  to  thy  will!  If  thou  fpeak  the 
“ word,  Judas  (hall  call  out  devils. 

“ I feel  what  you  fay  (though  not  enough)  for 
“ I am  under  the  fame  condemnation.  I fee  that 
“ the  whole  law  of  God  is  holy,  juft  and  good. 
“ I know  every  thought,  every  temper  of  my 
“ foul,  ought  to  bear  God’s  image  and  fuperfcrip- 
“ cion.  But  how  am  I fallen  from  the  glory  of 
“God  ! I feel,  that  I am  fold  under  Jin.  I know, 
“ that  I too  defence  nothing  but  wrath,  being 
“ full  of  all  abominations : and  havino-  no  good 

O O 

“ thing  in  me,  to  atone  for  them,  or  to  remove 

Vo l.  XXVI.  L “the 


[ 272  ] 

“ the  wrath  of  God.  All  my  works,  my  righte- 
“ oufnefs,  my  prayers,  need  an  atonement  for 
“ themfelves.  So  that  mv  mouth  is  flopped.  I 
“ have  nothing  to  plead.  God  is  holy,  I am  un- 
“ holy.  God  is  a confuming  fire.  I am  altoge- 
“ ther  a flnner,  meet  to  be  confumed. 

“ Yet  I hear  a voice  (and  is  it  not  the  voice 
“ of  God  ?)  faying,  Believe  and  thou  / halt  be 
“faved.  He  that  believcth,  is  pafjed  from  death 
“ unto  life.  God  fo  loved  the  world  that  he 
“ gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whofoever  be- 
“ lieveth  on  him,  fiould  not perifn,  but  have  ever- 
**  lajling  hfe. 

“ O let  no  one  deceive  us  by  vain  words,  as  if 
“ we  had  already  attained  this  faith  ! By  its 
“ fruits  we  (hall  know.  Do  we  already  feel 
“ peace  with  God,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghof? 
“ Does  his  Spirit  bear  witnefs  with  ourfpint,  that 
“ vie  are  the  children  of  God?  Alas,  with  mine  he 
“ does  not.  Nor,  I fear  with  yours.  O thou 
“ Saviour  of  men,  fave  us  from  trufting  in  any 
“thing  but  thee!  Draw  us  after  thee!  Let  us 
“ be  emptied  of  ourfelves,  and  then  fill  us  with 
“ all  peace  and  joy  in  believing,  and  let  nothing 
“ feparate  us  from  thy  love,  in  time  or  in  eter- 
“ nity !” 

What  occurred  on  Wednefdav  24,  I think 
"heft  to  relate  at  large,  alter  premiling  what 
may  make  it  the  better  underllood.  Let 
him  that  cannot  receive  it,  afl:  of  the  Father 

of 


C 27  3 ] 

of  lights,  that  he  would  give,  more  light  to  him 
and  me. 

1.  I believe,  till  I was  about  ten  years  old,  I 
had  not  finned  away  that  zoafhing  of  the  Holy 
Ghojl  which  was  given  me  in  baptifm,  having 
been  firidly  educated  and  carefully  taught,  that 
I could  only  be  faved  by  univerfal  obedience,  by 
keeping  all  the  commandments  of  God ; in  the 
meaning  of  which  I was  diligently  inllruded. 
And  thofe  inllruffions,  fo  far  as  they  refpefted 
outward  duties  and  fins,  I gladly  received,  and 
often  thought  of.  But  all  that  was  faid  to  me  of 
inward  obedience,  or  holinefs,  I neither  under- 
ftood  nor  remembered.  So  that  I was  indeed  as 
ignorant  of  the  true  meaning  of  the  law,  as  I was 
of  the  gofpel  of  Chriff. 

2.  The  next  fix  or  feven  years  were  fpent  at 
fchool : where  outward  relfraints  being  removed, 
I was  much  more  negligent  than  before  even  ol 
outward  duties,  and  almolf  continually  guilty  of 
outward  fins,  which  I knew  to  be  fuch,  though 
they  were  not  fcandalous  in  the  eye  of  the 
world.  However  I Hill  read  the  fcriptures,  and 
faid  my  prayers,  morning  and  evening.  And 
what  I now  hoped  to  be  faved  by,  was,  l.  Not 
being  Jo  bad  as  other  people.  2.  Having  fill  a 
kinclnefs  for  religion.  And  g.  Reading  the  bible, 
going  to  church , and  fa.)  ing  my  prayers. 

g.  Being  removed  to  the  university,  for  five 
years,  I-  ftill  faid  my  prayers  both  in  public  and 
nr  private,  and  read  with  the  fcriptures  leveral 
L 2 other 


i 274  ] 

other  books  of  religion,  efpecially  comments  on 
the  New  Teftament.  Yet  I had  not  all  this 
while  fo  much  as  a notion  of  inward  holinefs  ; 
nay,  went  on  habitually  and  (for  the  moll  part) 
very  contentedly,  in  fome  or  other  known  fin : 
indeed  with  fome  intermiffion  and  Ihort  druggies, 
efpecially  before  and  after  the  Holy  Communion, 
which  I was  obliged  to  receive  thrice  a year.  I 
cannot  well  tell,  what  I hoped  to  be  laved  by 
now,  when  I was  continually  finning  agair.lt 
that  little  light  Iliad:  unlefs  by  thofe  trar.lient 
fits  of  what  many  divines  taught  me  to  call  re- 
pentance. 

4.  When  I was  about  22,  my  father  pr'elt  me 
to  enter  into  holy  orders.  At  the  fame  time  the 
province  of  God  directing  me  to  Kempis  s Ch nf- 
tian  Pattern,  I began  to  fee,  that  true  religion 
was  feated  in  the  heart,  and  that  God’s  law  ex- 
tended to  all  our  thoughts  as  well  as  words  and 
actions.  I was  however  very  angry  at  Kempis, 
for  being  too  jlnB,  though  I lead  him  only  in 
De’an  Stanhope’s  tranflation.  Yet  I had  fre- 
quently much  fenlible  comfort  in  reading  him, 
fuch  as  I was  an  utter  flxanger  to  before  : and 
meeting  likewife  with  a religious  friend,  which 
I never  had  till  now,  I began  to  alter  the  whole 
form  of  my  converfation,  and  to  fet  in  earned 
upon  a new  life.  I fet  apart  an  hour  or  two 
a day  for  religious  retirement.  I communicated 
every  week.  I watched  again  ft  all  fin.  whe- 
ther in  word  or  deed.  I began  to  atm  at, 

and 


[ 275  ] 


and  pray  for  inwaid  holinefs.  So  that  now,  do- 
ing fo  much , and  living  fo  good  a life , I doubted 
not  but  I was  a good  Chriftian. 

5.  Removing  foon  after  to  another  college,  I 
executed  a refolution,  which  I was  before  con* 
vinced  was  of  the  utmofl  importance,  fhaking  oft 
at  once  all  mv  trifling  acquaintance.  I began  to 
fee  more  and  more  the  value  of  time.  I apply- 
ed  myfelf  clofer  to  fludy.  I watched  more  care- 
fully againft  aftual  fins  ; I advifed  others  to  be 
religious,  according  to  that  fcbeme  of  religion 
by  which  I modelled  my  own  life.  But  meet- 
ing now  with  Mr.  Law’s  Ckriflian  PerfeShon  and 
Serious  Call , (although  I was  much  offended  at 
many  parts  of  both,  yet)  they  convinced  me 
more  than  ever  of  the  exceeding  height  and 
breadth  and  depth  of  the  law  of  God.  The  light 
flowed  in  fo  mightily  upon  mv  foul,  that  every 
thing  appeared  in  a new  view.  I cried  to  God 
for  help,  and  refolved  not  to  prolong  the  time 
of  obeying  him  as  I had  never  done  before.  And 
by  my  continued  endeavour  to  keep  his  whole  law, 
inward  and  outward,  to  the  utmoft  of  my  power, 
I was  pe:  fuaded  that  I fhould  be  accepted  of  him, 
and  that  I was  even  then  in  a Hate  of  falvation. 

6.  In  1730,  I began  vifiting  the  prifons,  af- 
fifling  the  poor  and  fick  in  town,  and  doing 
what  other  good  I could  by  my  prefence  or  my 
little  fortune  to  the  bodies  and  fouls  of  all  men. 
To  this  end  I abridged  myfelf  of  all  fuperfluities, 
and  many  that  are  called  neceffaries  of  life.  I 

L 3 foon 


[ 276  J 

foon  became  a by-word  for  fo  doing,  and  I re- 
joiced that  my  name  was  caji  out  as  evil.  The 
next  fpring  I began  obferving  the  Wednefday 
and  Friday  falls,  commonly  obferved  in  the  an- 
tient  church  ; tailing  no  food  till  three  in  the 
afternoon.  And  now  I knew  not  how  to  go  any 
farther.  I diligently  ftrove  againfl  all  fin.  I 
ommitted  no  fort  of  felf-denial  which  I thought 
lawful : I carefully  ufed,  both  in  public'  and 
in  private,  all  the  means  of  grace  at  all  oppor- 
tunities. I ommitted  no  occafion  of  doing 
good  ; I for  that  reafon  buffered  evil.  And  all 
this  I knew  to  be  nothing,  unlefs  as  it  was  di- 
refted  toward  inward  holinefs.  Accordingly 
this,  the  image  of  God,  was  what  I aimed  at  in 
all,  by  doing  his  will,  not  my  own.  Yet  when 
after  continuing  fome  years  in  this  courfe,  I ap- 
prehended myfelf  to  be  near  death,  I could  not 
find  that  all  this  gave  me  any  comfort,  or  any 
affurance  of  acceptance  with  God.  At  this  I 
was  then  not  a little  furprized;  not  imagining 
I had  been  all  this  time  building  on  the  fand, 
nor  confidering  that  other  foundation  can  no  man 
lay,  than  that  vshick  is  laid  by  God,  even  Chrijl 
Jefus. 

7.  Soon  after  a contemplative  man  convinc- 
ed me  flill  more  than  I was  convinced  before, 
that  outward  works  are  nothing,  being  alone  ; 
and  in  feveral  converfations  inftrudled  me,  how 
to  purfue  inwrard  holinefs,  or  a union  of  the 
foul  with  God.  But  even  of  his  inflruflions 

(though 


[ 277  j 


(though  I then  received  them  as  the  words  of 
God)  I cannot  but  now  obferve,  l.  That  he 
fpoke  fo  incautioufly  againft  tr lifting - in  outward 
works,  that  he  difcouraged  me  from  doing  them 
at  all.  2.  That  he  recommended  (as  it  were,  to 
fupply  what  was  wanting  in  them)  mental  prayer, 
and  the  like  exercifes,  as  the  molt  effeflual 
means  of  purifying  the  foul,  and  uniting  it  with 
God.  Nowthefe  were  in  truth,  as  much  my  own 
works  as  vifiting  the  fick  or  cloathing  the  nak- 
ed, and  the  union  with  God  thus  purfued,  was  as 
really  my  own  righteoufnefs,  as  any  I had  before 
perfued,  under  another  name. 

8.  In  this  refined  way  of  trufling  to  my  own 
works  and  my  own  righteoufnefs  (fo  zealoufiy  in- 
culcated by  the  my  flic  writers)  I dragged  on  hea- 
vily, finding  no  comfort  or  help  therein,  till  the 
time  of  my  leaving  England.  On  Chipboard 
however  I was  again  aflive  in  outward  works; 
where  it  pleafed  God  of  his  free  mercy,  to  give 
me  26  ot  the  Moravian  brethren  for  companions, 
who  endeavoured  to  Chew  me  a more  excellent 
way.  But  I underftood  it  not  at  firft.  I was 
too  learned  and  too  wife.  So  that  it  feemed 
foolilhnefs  unto  me.  And  I continued  preach- 
ing and  following  after  and  trufling  in  that  right- 
eoufnefs, whereby  no  flefh  can  bejuflified. 

9.  All  the  time  I was  at  Savannah  I was  thus 
beating  the  air.  Being  ignorant  of  the  righteou fi- 
nds of  Chrifl,  which  by  a living  faith  in  him 
bringeth  falvation  to  every  one  that  believeth , I 

E 4 fought 


C 278  ] 

fought  to  eftablifh  my  own  righteoufnefs,  and 
fo  laboured  in  the  fire  all  my  days.  I was  now, 
properly  under  the  law  ; I knew  that  the  law  of 
God  was  fpiritual  ; I conftnted  to  it,  that  it  was 
good.  Yea,  I delighted  in  it,  after  the  inner  man. 
^ et  was  I carnal,  fold  under  fin.  Every  day  was 
I conftrained  to  cry  out,  What  I do,  I allow  not: 
for  what  I would,  I do  not,  but  what  I hate,  that 
I do.  To  will  is  indeed prejent  with  me:  but  how 
to  perform  that  which  is  good,  1 fnd  not.  For 
the  good  which  1 would,  J do  not ; but  the  ei  it 
which  I would  not,  that  I do.  1 fnd  a law,  that 
when  1 would  do  good,  evil  is  prejent  with  me  : 
even  the  law  in  my  members  waving  aganji  the 
law  of  my  mind , and  full  bringing  me  into  capti- 
vity to  the  law  of  fin. 

10.  In  this  vile,  abjeft  Irate  of  bondage  to  fin, 
I was  indeed  fighting  continually,  but  not  con- 
quering. Before,  I had  willingly  ferved  fin  : 
now  it  was  unwillingly,  but  flill  I ferved  it.  I 
fell  and  rofe,  and  fell  again.  Sometimes  I was 
overcome,  and  in  heavinefs  : Sometimes  I over- 
came, and  was  in  joy.  For  as  in  the  former 
ftate,  I had  fome  foretafles  of  the  terrors  of  the 
law,  fo  had  I in  this,  of  the  comforts  of  the  gof- 
pel.  During  this  whole  ftruggle  between  nature 
and  grace  (which  had  now  continued  above  ten 
years)  I had  many  remarkable  returns  to  prayer, 
efpecially  when  I was  in  trouble  : I had  many 
fenfible  comforts,  which  are  indeed  no  other 
than  fhort  anticipations  of  the  life  of  faith.  But 

I was 


r 2 79  ] 

I was  ftill  under  the  law , not  under  grace  (the 
hate  moft  who  are  called  Chriftians  are  content 
to  live  and  die  in.)  For  I was  only  firiving  with, 
not  freed  from /in:  neither  had  I the  witnef  of 
the  Spirit  with  my  fpirit,  and  indeed  could  not ; 
for  I fought  it  not  by faith,  but  {as  it  were)  by  the 
works  of  the  law. 

n.  I n ray  return  to  England,  January  1738, 
being  in  imminent  danger  of  death,  and  very  un- 
eafy  on  that  account,  I was  ftrongly  convinced 
that  the  caufe  of  that  uneafinefs  was  unbelief, 
and  that  the  gaining  a true,  living  faith,  was  the 
one  thing  needful for  me.  But  ftill  I fixt  not  this 
faith  on  its  right  objeft:  I meant  only  faith  in 
God,  not  faith  in  or  through  Chrift.  Again,  I 
knew  not  that  I was  wholly  void  of  this  faith  ; but 
only  thought,  I had  not  enough  of  it.  So  that 
when  Peter  Bolder,  whom  God  prepared  for  me 
as  foon  as  I came  to  London,  affirmed  of  true 
faith  in  Chrift;  (which  is  but  one)  that  it  had  thofe 
two  fruits  infeparably  attending  it,  “ Dominion 
over  fin,  and  conftant  peace  from  a fenfe  of  for- 
givenefs,”  I was  quite  amazed,  and  looked  upon 
it  as  a new  gofpel.  If  this  was  fo,  it  was  clear, 

I had  not  faith.  But  I was  not  willing  to  be  con- 
vinced of  this.  Therefore  I di'fputed  with  all i 
my  might,  and  laboured  to  prove,  that  faith; 
might  be  where  thefe  were  not;  efpecially  where  r 
the  fenfe  of  fergivenefs  was  not:  for  alLtha: 
feriptures  relating  to  this*  I had  been -long  fincer 
taught  to  conftrue  awayy  and  to  call  all  Pretty- - 
L.5-.  teasaass 


[ 28  O ] 

terians  who  fpokeothenvife.  Befides,  I well  faw, 
no  one  could  (in  the  nature  of  things)  have  fuch 
a fenfe  of  forgivenefs,  and  not fed  it.  But  I felt 
it  not.  If  then  there  was  no  faith  without  this,  all 
my  pretenfions  to  faith  dropped  at  once. 

12.  When  I met  Peter  Bohler  again,  he  con- 
tented, to  put  the  difpute  upon  the  iflue  which 
I defired,  viz.  Scripture  and  experience.  I firfl 
confulted  the  fcripture.  But  when  I fet  afide 
the  globes  of  men,  and  {imply  confidered  the 
word  of  God,  comparing  them  together,  endea- 
vouring to  illuflrate  the  obfcure  by  the  plainer 
pafTages,  I found  they  all  madeagainft  me,  and 
was  forced  to  retreat  to  my  lafl  hold,  “ That 
“ experience  would  never  agree  with  the  literal 
“ interpretation  of  tliofe  fcriptures.  Nor  could 
“ I therefore  allow  it  to  be  true,  till  I found 
“ fome  living  witnefTes  of  it.’  Hereplied,  “He 
“ could  (hew  me  fuch  at  any  time  ; if  I defired 
u it,  the  next  day.”  And  accordingly  the  next 
day,  he  came  again  with  three  others,  all  of 
whom  tefiified  of  their  own  perfonal  experience, 
that  a true  living  faith  inChrift,  is  infeparable 
from  a fenfe  of  pardon  for  all  paff,  and  freedom 
from  all  prefent  fins.  They  added  with  one 
mouth,  that  this  faith  was  the  gift,  the  free  gift 
of  God,  and  that  he  would  finely  beflow  it  upon 
every  foul,  who  earneftly  and  perfeveringly 
fought  it.  I was  now  throughly  convinced  ; and 
by  the  grace  of  God,  I refolved  to  feek  it  unto 
the  end,  1.  By  abfolutely  renouncing  all  depen- 
dence. 


[ *8>  3 

dence,  in  whole  or  in  part,  upon  my  own  works  _ 
or  righteoufnefs,  on  which  I had  really  ground- 
ed my  hope  of  falvation,  though  I knew  it  not, 
from  my  youth  up.  2.  By  adding  to  the  ccn- 
jlant  ufe  of  all  the  other  means  of  grace,  con- 
tinual prayer  for  this  very  thing,  juftifying,  far- 
ing faith,  a full  reliance  on  the  blood  of  Chrift: 
filed  for  me  ; a trurt  in  him,  as  my  Chrift,  as  my 
foie  juftification,  fan&ification  and  redemption. 

13.  I continued  thus  to  feek  it  (though  with 
ftrange  indifference,  dulnefs  and  coldnefs,  and 
ufually  frequent  relap fes  into  fin)  till  Wednefday, 
May  24.  I think  it  was  about  five  this  morn- 
ing, that  I opened  myTeftamenton  thofe  words. 

Tit  fiyifa.  rifjav  x)  T£f/.ia.  tz-ccfyEXudla.  kd'afa.i,  \ta.  yivrLi 

9sia;  zoivowoi  cplaea;.  There  are  given  unto  us  ex- 
ceeding great  and  precious  promifes,  even  that  ye 
fiould  be  partaker s of  the  divine  nature.  2 Pet; 
i.  4.  Juft  as  I went  out,  I opened  it  again  on 
thofe  words,  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom 
of  God.  In  the  afternoon  I was  afkedto  go  to 
St.  Paul's.  The  anthem  was.  Out  of  the  deep 
have  I called  unto  thee,  0 Lord ; Lord  hear  my 
voice.  0 let  thine  ears,  cenfder  well  the  voice  of 
my  complaint.  If  thou,.  Lord,  will  be  extreme  to  ■ 
mark  what  is  done  amifs,  0 Lord, . who  may  abide 
it?  But  there  is  mercy  with,  thee  ; therefore  thou 
Jkalt  be  feared.  0 Ifruel,.  truf  in  the  Lord:  for 
with  the  Lord  there  is  mercy,  and  with  him  is 
plenteous  redemption-.  And  he  fall  redeem  Ifrael 
from  all  his fins. 


L6 


14.  In 


[ 2§2  ] 

14.  In  the  evening  I went  very  unwillingly  to  a 
fociety  in  Alderfgate-ftreet,  where  one  was  read, 
ing  Luther’s  preface  to  the  epiftle  to  the  Romans. 
About  a quarter  before  nine,  while  he  wras  de- 
fcribing  the  change  which  God  works  in  the  heart 
through  faith  in  Chrift,  I felt  my  heart  ftrangelv 
warmed.  I felt  I did  truft  in  Chrift,  Chrift  alone 
for  falvation : and  an  afthrance  was  given  me, 
that  he  had  taken  away  my  fins,  even  mine,  and 
faved  me  from  the  law  of  fin  and  death. 

15  I began  to  pray  with  all  my  might  for  thofe 
who  had  in  a more  efpecial  manner  defpitefullv 
ufed  me  and  perfecuted  me.  I then  teftified 
openly  to  all  there,  what  I now  firft  felt  in  my 
heart.  But  it  was  not  long  before  the  enemy 
fuggefted,  “ This  cannot  be  faith  ; for  where  is 
“ thy  joy  ?”  Then  was  I taught,  that  peace  and 
viBcry  over  fm,  are  ejfential  to  faith  in  the  Captain 
of  oar  falvation  : hut,  that  as  to  the  tranfports  of 
joy  that  ufually  attend  the  beginning  of  it,  efpe- 
cially  in  thofe  who  have  mourned  deeply,  God 
feme  times  giveth,  fomedmes  zvi th-holdeth  them,  ac- 
cording to  the  counfelsoj  his  own  will. 

16.  After  my  return  home,  I was  much  buf- 
feted with  temptations:  but  cried  out,  and  they 
fled  away.  They  returned  again  and  again.  I as 
often  lifted  up  my  eyes,  and  he  fent  me  help 
from  his  holy  place.  And  herein  I found  the 
difference  between  this  and  my  former  ftate 
chiefly  confided.  I was  driving,  yea,  fighting 
with  all  my  might  under  the  Iawh  as  well  asun- 
der 


[ 283  1 

der  grace.  But  then  I was  fometimes,  if  riot 
often,  conquered  ; now,  I was  always  con- 
queror. 

l/.Thurf.  May  25.  The  moment  I awaked, 

Jefus  Mafter,  was  in  my  heart  and  in  my 
mouth  ; and  I found  all  my  ftrength  lay  in  keep- 
ing my  eye  fixt  upon  him,  and  my  foul  waiting 
on  him  continually.  Being  again  at  St.  Paul’s 
in  the  afternoon,  I could  tafte  the  good  word  of 
God  in  the  anthem,  which  began,  My fongfhall 
he  always  of  the  loving-kindnefs  of  the  Lord : witk 
my  mouth  will  1 ever  be  filewing forth  thy  truth 
from  one  generation  to  another .”  Yet  the  enemy 
injefled  a fear,  “ If  thou  doft  believe,  why  is 
“ there  not  a more  fenfible  change?  I anfwered, 
“ (yet  not  I)  that  I know  not.  But  this  I know, 
“ I have  now  peace  with  God.  And  I jin  not  to 
“ day,  and  Jefus  my  Mafter  has  forbid  me  to 
“ take  thought  for  the  morrow.” 

18.  “ But  is  not  any  fort  of  fear  (continued 
“ the  tempter)  a proof  that  thou  doft  not  be- 
“ lieve  ?”  I defired  my  mafter  to  anfwer  for  me  ; 
and  opened  his  book  upon  thofe  words  of  St. 
Paul,  Without  were  fightings,  within  were  jears. 
Then  inferred  I,  well  may  fears  be  within  me; 
but  I muft  go  on,  and  tread  them  under  my 
feet. 

Friday,  May  26.  My  foul  continued  in  peace,, 
but  yet  in  heavinefs,  becaufe  of  manifold  temp- 
tations. I alked  Mr.  Telchig  the  Moravian, 
What  to  do  ? He  faid  you  muft  not  fight  with 

them. 


[ *4  3 

them,  as  you  did  before,  but  flee  from  them, 
the  moment  they  appear,  and  take  fhelter  in  the 
wounds  of  Jefus.  The  fame  I learned  alfo  from 
the  afternoon  anthem,  which  was,  My  foul  tru- 
ly rwaiteth  fill  upon  God:  for  oj  him  cometh  my 
falvation  ; he  verily  is  my  frength  and  my  falva- 
tion,  he  is  my  defence  fo  that  I fiall  not  greatly 
fall.  0 put  your  truf  in  him  always , ye  people 
pour  out  your  hearts  before  him  ; for  God  is  cur 
hope. 

Sat.  27.  Believing  one  reafon  of  my  want  of 
joy,  was  want  of  time  for  prayer,  I refolved  to  do 
no  bufinefs  till  Invent  to  church  in  the  morning, 
but  to  continue  pouring  out  my  heart  before  him. 
And  this  daymy  fpirit  wasinlarged  ; fo  thatthough 
I was  now  alfo  afTaulted  by  many  temptations,  I 
was  more  than  conqueror,  gaining  more  power 
thereby  to  truft  and  to  rejoice  in  God  my  Sa- 
viour. 

Sunday  28.  I waked  in  peace,  but  not  in  joy. 
In  the  fame  even  quiet  ftate  I was  till  the  even- 
ing, when  I was  roughly  attacked  in  a large 
company  as  an  enthufiafl,  a feducer,  and  a fet- 
ter forth  of  new  do&rines.  By  the  blefTing  of 
God  I was  not  moved  to  anger,  but  after  a calm 
and  fhort  reply  went  away  ; though  not  with  fo 
tender  concern  as  was  due  to  thofe,  who  were 
feeking  death  in  the  error  of  their  life. 

This  day  I preached  in  the  morning  at  St. 
George’s,  Bloomfbury,  on  This  is  the  viBory 
that  over  cometh  theioorld  even  our  faith-,  and  in 

the 


[ 285  ] 

the  afternoon  at  the  chappel  in  Long-Acre,  on 
God’s  j uflifying  the  ungodly;  the  laft  time  (I 
underhand)  I am  to  preach  at  either.  Not  as  1 
will,  but  as  thou  wilt, 

Mond.  29.  I fet  out  for  Dummer  with  Mr, 
Wolf,  one  of  the  firfl-fruits  of  Peter  Bohler’s 
miniflry  in  England.  I was  much^ftrengthened 
by  the  grace  of  God  in  him  : yet  was  his  hate  fo 
far  above  mine,  that  I was  often  tempted  to 
doubt,  whether  we  had  one  faith  ? But,  without 
much  reafoning  about  it,  I held  here  ; (i  Tho’ 
his  be  Jlrong  and  mine  weak,  yet  that  God  hath 
given  fome  degree  of  faith  even  to  me,  T know 
by  its  fruits.  For  I have  conjlant peace;  not  one 
uneafy  thought.  And  I have freedom  from fn  : 
not  one  unholy  defire.” 

Yet  on  Wednefday  did  I grieve  the  Spirit  of 
God,  not  only  by  not  watching  unto  prayer,  but 
likewife  by  fpeaking  with  fharpnefs  inftead  of 
tender  love,  of  one  that  was  not  found  in  the 
faith.  Immediately  God  hid  his  face  and  I was 
troubled  ; and  in  this  heavinefs  I continued  till 
the  next  morning,  June  1.  When  it  pleafed 
God,  while  I was  exhorting  another,  to  give 
comfort  to  my  foul,  and  (after  I had  fpent  fome 
time  in  prayer)  to  direft  me  to  thofe  gracious 
words,  Having  therfore  boldnefs,  to  enter  into 
the  holiejl  by  the  blood  of  Jefus — Let  us  draw 
near  with  a true  heart , in  full  offurance  of  faith. 
Let  us  holdfafl  the  prof ejjion  of  our  faith  without 
wavering ; (for  he  is  faithful  that  promifed ) and. 

letr 


[ 286  ] 


let  us  confider  one  another , to  provoke  unto  love 
and  to  good  works. 

Sat.  June  3.  I was  fo  flrongly  aflauhed  by 
one  of  my  old  enemies,  that  1 had  fcarce  ftrength 
to  open  my  lips,  or  even  to  look  up  for  help. 
But  after  I had  prayed,  faintly,  as  I could,  the 
temptation  vanifhed  away. 

Sun.  4.  Was  indeed  a feafl-day.  For  from  the 
time  of  my  rifing  till  part  one  in  the  afternoon,  I 
was  praying,  reading  the  fcriptures,  fmging 
praife,  or  calling  finners  to  repentance.  All 
thefe  days  I fcarce  remember  to  have  opened  the 
ieflament,  but  upon  fome  great  and  precious 
promife.  And  I faw  more  than  ever,  that  the 
gofpel,  is  in  truth  but  one  great  promife,  from 
the  beginning  of  it  to  the  end. 

Tuef.  6.  I had  flill  more  comfort,  and  peace, 
and  joy:  on  which  I fear  I began  to  prefume. 
For  in  the  evening  I received  a letter  from  Ox- 
ford which  threw  me  into  much  perplexity.  It 
was  afferted  therein,  “ That  no  doubting  could 
“ confifl  with  the  leaf:  degree  of  true  faith  : that 
“ whoever  at  any  time  felt  any  doubt  or  fear,  was 
w not  weak  in  faith , but  had  no  faith  at  all : and 
“ that  none  hath  any  faith,  till  the  law  of  the 
“ fpirit  of  life  has  made  him  wholly  free  from  the 
“ law  of  fin  and  death.” 

Begging  of  God  to  direft  me,  I opened  my 
teftament  on  1 Cor.  iii.  ver.  1,  &c.  where  St. 
Pauls  fpeaks  of  thofe  whom  he  terms  bales  in 
Chrfp  who  were  net  able  to  bear  Jlrong  meat,  nay 

(im 


[ 28;  ] 

(in  a fenfe)  carnal ; to  whom  neverthelefs  he 
fays,  Ye  are  God’s  building,  ye  are  the  temple 
of  God.  Surely  then  thefe  men  had  fome  degree 
of  faith  ; though  it  is  plain,'  their  faith  was  but 
weak. 

After  fome  hours  fpent  in  the  fcripture  and 
prayer,  I was  much  comforted.  Yet  I felt  a 
kind  of  forenefs  in  my  heart,  fo  that  I found  my 
wound  was  not  fully  healed.  O God,  fave  thou 
me,  and  all  that  are  weak  in  the  faith,  f com  doubt- 
ful difpulations ! 

Wednefday,  June  7.  I determined,  if  God 
fhould  permit,  to  retire  for  a fhort  time  into 
Germany.  I had  fully  propofed  before  I left 
Georgia  fo  to  do,  if  it  fhould  pleafe  God  to  bring 
me  back  to  Europe.  And  I now  clearly  faw 
the  time  was  come.  My  weak  mind  could  not 
bear  to  be  thus  fawn  afunder.  And  I hoped  the 
converfing  with  thefe  holy  men,  who  werethem- 
felves  living  witneifes  of  the  full  powrer  of  faith, 
and  yet  able  to  bear  with  thofe  that  are  weak, 
would  be  a means,  under  God,  of  fo  efiablifhing 
my  foul,  that  I might  go  on  from  faith  to  faith, 
and from  jlrength  to  frength. 

Thurf.  8.  I went  to  Salifbury  to  take  leave  of 
my  mother.  The  next  day  I left  Sarum,  and  on 
Saturday  came  to  Stanton-harcourt.  Having 
preached  faith  in  Chrift  there  on  Sunday  11,  I 
went  on  to  Oxford  ; and  thence  on  Monday  to 
London,  where  I found  Mr.  Ingham  juft  fetting 

out,. 


[ 288  ] 

out.  We  went  on  board  the  next  day,  Tuefday 
*3>  and  fell  down  to  Gravefend  that  night. 
About  four  in  the  afternoon  on  Wednefday  we 
loft  fight  of  England.  We  reached  the  Meafe  at 
eight  on  Thurfday  morning,  and  in  an  hour  and 
a half  landed  at  Rotterdam. 

*We  were  eight  in  all,  five  Englifh  and  three 
Germans.  Dr.  Koker,  a phyfician  of  Rotter- 
dam, was  fo  kind,  when  we  fet  forward  in  the 
afternoon,  as  to  walk  an  hour  with  us  on  our 
way.  I never  before  faw  any  fuch  road  as  this. 
Jor  many  miles  together,  it  is  raifed  for  fome 
yards  above  the  level,  and  paved  with  a fmall 
fort  of  brick,  as  fmooth  and  clean  as  the  Mail  in 
St.  James’s.  The  walnut-trees  hand  in  even 
rows  on  either  fide  : fo  that  no  walk  in  a gen- 
tleman’s garden  is  pleafanter.  About  feven  we 
came  to  Goudart,  where  we  were  a little  fur- 
prized,  at  meeting  with  a treatment  which  is  not 
heard  of  England,  Several  inns  utterly  refufed  to 
entertain  us;  fo  that  it  was  with  difficulty  we 
at  laft  found  one,  where  they  did  us  the  favour 
to  take  our  money  for  fome  meat  and  drink,  and 
the  ufe  of  two  or  three  bad  beds.  They  preft 
us  much  in  the  morning  to  fee  their  church,  but 
were  difpleafed  at  our  pulling  off  our  hats  when 
we  went  in  ; telling  us,  “ We  mud  not  do  fo ; 
“ it  was  not  the  cufiorn  there.”  It  is  a large  old 
building,  of  the  Gothick  kind,  refembling  fome 
of  our  Englifh  cathedrals.  There  is  much  hif- 
^ory-painting  in  the  windows,  which  they  told 

us, 


[ 2 Sg  ] 

us,  is  greatly  admired.  About  eight  we  left  Gou- 
dart,  and  in  a little  more  than  fix  hours  reached 
Yffelftein. 

Here  we  were  at  BaronWattevil  s,  as  at  home. 
We  found  with  him  a few  German  brethren  and 
lifters,  and  feven  or  eight  of  our  Englifh  acquain- 
tance, who  had  fettled  here  fome  time  before. 
They  lodged  juft  without  the  town,  in  three  or 
four  little  houfes,  till  one  fhould  be  built  that 
would  contain  them  all.  Saturday  17,  was  their 
interceflion-day.  In  the  morning,  fome  of  our 
Englifh  brethren  defired  me  to  adminifter  the 
Lord’s  fupper:  the  reft  of  the  day  we  fpent  with 
all  the  brethren  and  fifters,  in  hearing  the  won- 
derful work  which  God  is  beginning  to  work 
over  all  the  earth,  and  in  making  our  requefts 
known  unto  him,  and  giving  him  thanks  for  the 
mightinefs  of  his  kingdom. 

* At  fix  in  the  morning  we  took  boat.  The 
beautiful  gardens  lie  dn  both  fides  the  river,  for 
great  part  of  the  way  to  Amfterdam,  whither  we 
came  about  five  in  the  evening.  The  exa£l  neat- 
nefs  of  all  the  buildings  here,  the  nice  cleannefs 
of  the  ftreets  (which,  we  were  informed,  were  all 
walked  twice  a week)  and  the  canals  which  runs 
thro’  all  the  main  ftreets,  with  rows  of  trees  on  ei- 
ther fide,  make  this  the  pleafanteft  city  which  I 
have  ever  feen.  Here  we  were  entertained  with 
truly  Chriftian  hofpitality,  by  Mr.  Decknatel, 
a minifter  of  the  Mennonifts,  who  fuffered  us  to 
want  nothing  while  we  flayed  here,  which  was 

till 


[ 29°  3 


till  the  Thurfday  following.  Dr.  Barkhaufen  (a 
phyfician,  a Mufcovite  by  nation)  who  had  been 
with  Mr.  Decknatel  for  fome  time,  fhewed  us 
likewife  all  poffible  kindnefs.  Remember  them , 0 
Lord,  for  good ! 

Mond.  17.  I was  at  one  of  the  focieties,  which 
ladled  an  hour  and  an  half.  About  fixty  perfons 
were  prefent.  The  finging  was  in  Low-Dutch, 
(Mr.-  Decknatel  having  tranfiated  into  Low- 
Dutch,  part  of  the  Hernhuth  hymn-book)  but  the 
words  were  fo  very  near  the  German,  that  any 
who  underllood  the  original,  might  underlland 
the  tranflation.  The  expounding  was  in  High- 
Dutch.  I was  at  another  of  the  focieties  on 
Tuefday,  where  were  prefent  about  the  fame 
number.  On  Wednefday,  one  of  our  company 
found  a fheep  that  had  been  loft : his  filler, 
who  had  lived  here  for  fome  time  with  one 
whom  Hie  loved  too  well,  as  he  did  her.  But 
they  were  now  both  refolved,  by  the  grace  of 
God  (which  they  accordingly  executed  without 
delay)  To  pluck  out  the  right  eye,  and  cajl  it  from 
them. 

Thurf.  22.  We  took  boat  at  eight  in  the  even- 
ing, and  landing  at  four  in  the  morning,  walked 
on  to  Uutfafs,  which  we  left  about  two,  having 
now  another  boy  added  to  our  number.  A little 
before  eight  we  came  to  Beurn,  a fmall  ill-built 
city,  belonging  to  the  Prince  of  Orange.  Setting 
out  early  in  the  morning,  we  came  to 
Nimwegen,  the  laft  town  in  Holland,  about 

two- 


r z9i  ] 

two  in  the  afternoon : and  leaving  it  at  four, 
came  before  eight  to  an  inn,  two  hours  fhort  of 
Cleve. 

Sun.  25.  After  {pending  an  hour  in  finging 
and  prayer,  we  walked  till  near  noon,  before  we 
could  meet  with  any  refrefhment.  The  road 
would  have  appeared  exceeding  pleafant,  being 
broad  and  ftrait,  with  tall  trees  on  either  fide, 
had  not  wearinefs  and  rain  prevented.  We 
hoped  to  reach  Reinberg  in  the  evening,  but 
could  not ; being  obliged  to  Hop  two  hours 
fhort  of  it,  at  a little  houfe,  where  many  good 
Lutherans  were  concluding  the  Lord’s-dav  (as 
is  ufual  among  them)  with  fiddling  and  danc- 
ing ! 

Mond.  26.  We  breakfafied  at  Reinberg,  left 
it  at  half  an  hour  pall  ten,  and  at  four  came  to 
Urding.  Being  much  tired,  we  refled  here,  fo 
• that  it  was  near  ten  at  night  before  we  came  to 
Neus.  Having  but  a few  hours  walk  from  hence 
to  Colen,  we  went  thither  eafily,  and  came  at 
five  the  next  evening,  into  the  uglieft,  dirtied; 
city,  Ieveryetfaw  with  my  eyes. 

Wednef.  28.  We  went  to  the  cathedral,  which 
is  mere  heaps  upon  heaps;  a huge,  mithapen 
thing,  which  has  no  more  of  fvmmetrv,  than  of 
neatnefs  belonging  to  it.  I was  a little  furprizei 
to  obferve,  that  neither  in  this,  nor  in  any  other 
of  the  Romifli  churches  where  I have  been,  is 
there,  properly  fpeaking,  any  fuch  thing  as  joint 
worfhip  : but  one  prays  at  one  fhrine  or  altar, 

and 


I 292  ] 


end  another  at  another,  without  any  regard  to, 
or  communication  with  one  another.  As  we 
came  out  of  the  church,  a procefiion  began  on 
the  other  fide  of  the  church-yard.  One  of  our 
company  fcrupling  to  pull  off  his  hat,  a zealous 
Catholic  prefently  cried  out,  Knock  down  the  Lu- 
theran dog.  But  we  prevented  anyconteft,  byre- 
tiring  into  the  church. 

Walking  on  the  fide  of  the  Rhine  in  the  after- 
noon, I faw  to  my  great  furprize  (for  1 always 
thought  before,  no  Romanift  of  any  falhion  be- 
lieved any  thing  of  the  ftory)  a frelh  painting, 
donel aft  year  at  the  public  expence,  on  the  out- 
fide  of  the  city  wall,  in  memory  of  the  bringing  in 
the  heads  of  the  three  kings  (fays  the  Latin  in- 
fcription)  through  the  gate  adjoining  : which  in- 
deed, in  reverence  (it  feems)  to  them,  has  been 
flopped  up  ever  fince. 

* At  four  we  took  boat,  when  I could  not  but 
obferve  the  decency  of  the  Papifts,  above  us 
who  are  called  reformed.  As  foon  as  ever  we 
were  leafed,  (and  fo  every  morning  after)  they 
all  pulled  off  their  hats,  and  each  ufed  by  himfelf, 
a fliort  prayer  for  our  profperous  journey.  And 
this  juflice  I mull  do  to  the  very  boatmen  (who 
upon  the  Rhine  are  generally  wicked  even  to  a 
proverb)  I never  heard  one  of  them  take 
the  name  of  God  in  vain,  or  faw  any  one 
laugh  when  any  thing  of  religion  was  menti- 
oned. So  that  I believe  the  glory  of  Jjiorting 

with 


[ 293  ] 

tuitk  facred  things , Is  peculiar  to  the  Englilh 
nation  ! 

We  were  four  nights  on  the  water,  by  reafon 
of  thefwiftnefs  of  the  dream,  up  which  the  boat 
was  drawn  by  horfes.  The  high  mountains  on 
each  fide  the  river,  rifing  almolt  perpendicular, 
and  yet  covered  with  vines  to  the  very  top,  gave 
us  many  agreeable  profpefts  : a religious  houfe, 
or  old  caftle,  every  now  and  then  appearing  on 
the  brow  of  one  of  them.  On  Sunday  even- 
ing,  July  2,  we  came  to  Mentz ; and  Mon- 
day the  3d,  at  half  an  hour  pall  ten,  to  Franck- 
fort. 

Faint  and  weary  as  we  were,  we  could  have 
no  admittance  here,  having  brought  no  palfes 
with  us,  which  indeed  we  never  imagined 
would  have  been  required,  in  a time  of  fettled 
general  peace.  After  waiting  an  hour  at  the 
gates,  we  procured  a melfenger,  whom  we  fent 
to  Mr.  Bolder  (Peter  BohleFs  father)  who  imme- 
diately came,  procured  us  entrance  into  the  city, 
and  entertained  us  in  the  mofl  friendly  manner. 
W e fet  out  early  in  the  morning  on  Tuefday  the 
4th,  and  about  one  came  to  Marienborn.  But  I 
was  fo  ill,  that  after  talking  a little  with  Count 
Zinzetidorf,  I was  forced  to  lie  down  the  reft  of 
the  dav. 

The  family  at  Morienborn  confifts  of  about 
ninety  perfons,  gathered  out  of  many  nations. 
They  live  for  the  prefent  in  a large  houfe  hired 
by  the  Count,  which  is  capable  of  receiving  a far 

greater 


[ 294  ] 

greater  number;  but  are  building  one,  about 
three  (Englifh)  miles  off,  on  the  top  of  a fruitful 
hill.  0 how  pleafant  a thing  it  is,  for  brethren  to 
dwell  togeiher  in  unity  ! 

* Thurf.  6.  The  Count  carried  me  with  him 
to  the  Count  of  Solmes,  where  I obferved  with 
pleafure  the  German  frugality.  Three  of  the 
young  Countefles  (though  grown  up)  were  drefl 
in  linen  ; the  Count  and  his  fon  in  plain  cloth. 
At  dinner,  the  next  day,  a glafs  of  wine  and  a 
glafs  of  water  were  fet  by  every  one,  and  if  ei- 
ther were  emptied,  a fecond.  They  all  con- 
verfed  freely  and  unaffe&edly.  At  ten  at  night 
we  took  coach  again,  and  in  the  morning  reached 
Marienborn. 

I lodged  with  one  of  the  brethren  at  Ecker- 
fhaufen,  an  Englifh  mile  from  Marienborn, 
where  I ufually  fpent  the  day,  chiefly  in  con- 
verfing  with  thofe  who  could  fpeak  either  Latin 
or  Englifh  ; not  being  able,  for  want  of  more 
praftice,  to  fpeak  German  readily.  And  here  I 
continually  met  with  what  I fought  for,  viz.  Liv- 
ing proofs  of  the  power  of  faith  : perfons  fared 
f rom  inward  as  well  as  outward  fin , by  the  love  of 
God  Jhed  abroad  in  their  hearts  ; and  from  all 
doubt  and  fear,  by  the  abiding  wilnefs  cf  the  Ilo'v 
Ghojl  given  unto  them. 

Sund.  9.  The  Count  preached  in  the  old  caflle 
at  Runneberg,  (about  three  Englifh  miles  from 
Marienborn)  where  is  alfo  a fmall  company  ei 
thofe  who  feek  the  Lord  Jefus  in  fincerity. 

. W cdncfJay 


[ 295  ] 

Wednefday  12,  was  one  of  the  conferences  for 
Grangers ; where  one  of  Frankfort  propofing  the 
queftion,  Can  a man  be  jufiified  and  not  know 
it  ? The  Count  fpoke  largely  upon  it  to  this 
effefl : 

1.  Juftification  is,  the  forgivenefs  of  fins. 

2.  The  moment  a man  flies  to  Chriflhe  is  juf- 
tified : 

3.  And  has  peace  with  God,  but  not  always 

j6>': 

4.  Nor  perhaps  may  he  know  he  is  jufiified, 
till  long  after. 

5.  For  the  affurance  of  it  is  diflinfil  from  jufli- 
fi-cation  itfelf. 

6.  But  others  may  know  he  is  jufiified  by  his 
power  over  fin,  by  his  ferioufnefs,  his  love  of 
the  brethren,  and  his  hunger  and  thirjl  after  righ- 
teoufnej) , which  alone  prove  the  fpiritual  life  to  be 
begun. 

7.  To  be  jufiified  is  the  fame  thing  as  to  be 

born  of  God.  (Not  fo.) 

8.  When  a man  is  awakened,  he  is  begot-- 
ten  of  God,  and  his  fear  and  forrow  and  fenfe 
of  the  wrath  of  God,  are  the  pangs  of  the  new 
birth. 

I then  recollefled  what  Peter  Bohler  had 
often  faid  upon  this  head,  which  was  to  this 
effefl: 

1.  When  a man  has  living  faith  in  Chrifl,  then 
is  he  jufiified  r 

2.  This  is  always  given  in  a moment, 

v Vo  l.  XXVI.  M 3.  And 


[ 296  ] 


3.  And  in  that  moment  he  has  peace  with 
God ; 

- 4.  Which  he  cannot  have,  without  knowing 
that  he  has  it: 

5.  And  being  born  of  God,  he  finnetli 
not  : 

- 6.  Which  deliverance  from  fin  he  cannot  have 
without  knowing  that  he  has  it. 

Sat.  15.  Was  the  interceffion  day,  when  many 
Hi  angers  were  prefent  Irom  different  parts.  On 
Monday  17.  having  {laved  here  ten  days  longer 
than  I intended  (my  firft  defign  being  only  to  reft 
cue  or  two  days)  I propofed  fetting  out  forHern- 
huth  ; but  Mr.  Ingham de firing  me  to  (lay  a little 
longer,  I ftaved  till  Wednefday  19.  when  Mr. 
Hauptman  (a  native  of  Drefden)  Mr.  Brown  and 
I fet  out  together. 

We  breakfafted  at  Gchlenhaufen,  an  oil,  un- 
handfome  town,  dined  at  Offenau  (where  is  a 
f {range  in  Ranee  of  moderation,  a church  ufed 
every  Sunday,  both  by  the  Papids  and  the  Luther- 
ans alternately)  and  notwithftandinct  folue  fharp 
fhowers  of  rain,  in  the  evening  reached  Steinau. 
Tluirfday  20  we  dined  at  Braunfal,  and  pafttng 
through  Fulda  in  the  afternoon  (where  the  Duke 
has  a pica  (ant  palace)  travelled  through  a delight- 
ful country  ot  bills  and  \alcs,  and  in  the  evening 
catne  to  Rickherfch.  The  next  night  („fter 
having  had  the  tnuR  beautiful  profpecl  which  I 
think  I ever  law,  from  the  too  of  a high  hill, 
commanding  a vaft  extent  of  various  land  on 


every 


[ 297  ] 


every  fide)  we,  with  fome  difficulty,  and  many 
words,  procured  a poor  accommodation  at  an  inn 
in  Markful.  Saturday  22.  having,  pa  (Tea  through 
Eifenach  in  the  morning,  we  came  through  a 
more  level  open  country,  to. Saxe- Gotha  in  the 
afternoon,  a neat  and  pleafant  city,  in  which  the 
Prince’s  palace  is  indeed  a fine  building.  We 
Hopped  an  hour  here  with  a friendly  man,  and 
in  the  evening  came  to.  Ditleben  ; and  thence  in 
the  morning  to  Erfurt,  where  we  were  kindlv  en- 
tertained by  Mr.  Reinhurt,  to  whom  we  were  di- 
refted  by  foine  of  the  brethren  at  Marienborn.  In 
the  afternoon  we  came  to  Weymar,  where  we 
had  more  difficulty  to  get  through  the  city  than 
is  tifual,  even  in  Germany:  being  not  only  de- 
tained a confiderable  time  at  the  gate,  but  alfo 
carried  before  I know  not  what  great  man. (I  be- 
lieve, the  Duke)  in  the  fquare:  who  after  many 
other  queffions,  afked,.  What  we  were  going  fo 
far  as  Hernhuth  for?  I anfwered,  To  fee  the 
place  where  the  ChriHians  live.”  He  looked 
hard,  and  let  us  go. 

Mond.  24.  W e Came  early  to  Jena,  which  lies 
at  the  bottom  of  feveiial  high,  deep,  barren  hills. 
The  ftudents  here  are  diftinguiffied  from  the 
townfmen  by  their  fwords.  They  do  not  live  to- 
gether in  colleges  (nor  indeed  in  any  of  the  Ger- 
man univerfin.es)  as  we  do  in  Oxford  and  Cam- 
bridge  , but  are  fcattered  up  and  down  the  town 
in  lodging  or  boarding-houfes.  Thofeof  them  to 
whom  we  were  recommended,  behaved  as  bre- 
M 2 thren 


[ 298  ] 

thren  indeed.  O may  brotherly  kindnefs,  and 
every  good  word  and  work,  abound  in  them 
more  and  more  ! 

At  Jena  the  ffone  pillars  begin,  fet  up  by  the 
Eleftof  of  Saxonv,  and  marking  out  every  quar- 
ter of  a German  mile,  to  the  end  of  his  Elector- 
ate. Every  mile  is  a large  pillar,  with  the  names 
of  the  neighbouring  towns,  and  their  di dances 
irifcribed.  It  were  much  to  be  wifhed,  that  the 
fame  care  were  taken  in  England,  and  indeed  in 
dH  countries. 

We  left  Jena  early  on  Tuefdav,  reached  Wei- 
fenfeltz  in  the  evening,  and  Merfeberg  on  Wed- 
nesday morning.  Having  a deftre  to  fee  Halle 
(two  German  miles  off)  we  fet  out  after  break- 
faff,  and  came  thither  at  two  in  the  afternoon. 
But  we  could  not  be  admitted  into  the  town, 
when  we  came.  The  King  of  Pruflia’s  tall  men, 
who  kept  the  gates,  fent  us  backward  and  for- 
ward, from  one  gate  to  another,  for  near  two 
hours.  I then  thought  of  fending  in  a note  to 
profeffor  Francke,  the  fon  of  that  Auguft  Her- 
man Francke-  who fe  name,  is  indeed  as  pre- 
cious ointment.  O may  I follow  him,  as  he 
did  Chriff  ! And  by  mani/dflation  of  the  truth , 
commend,  my f elf  to  every  man's  confcience  in  the 
fghl  of  God  ! 

* He  was  not  in  town.  However  we  were  at 
length  admitted  into  the  orphan-houfe,  that 
amazing  proof,  that  all  things  are  ffill  pofible  to 
him  that  believeth.  There  is  now  a large  ) ear- 
ly 


C -299  ] 

ly  revenue  for  its  fupport,-  befide  what  is  con- 
tinually brought  in  by  the  Printing-office,  the 
books  fold  there,  and  the  apothecary’s  ffiop, 
which  is  furnifhed  with  all  forts  of  medicines. 
The  building  reaches  backward  from  the  front 
in  two  wings,  for,  I believe,  a hundred  and 
fifty  yards.  The  lodging-chambers  for  the  chil- 
dren, their  dining  room,  their  chappel,  and  all 
the  adjoining  apartments,  are  fo  conveniently 
contrived,  and  fo  exafdly  clean,  as  I have  never 
feen  any  before.  Six  hundred  and  fifty  chil- 
dren (we  are  informed)  are  wholly  maintained 
there,  and  three  thoufand  (if  I miftake  not) 
taught.  Surely,  fuch  a thing  neither  we  nor 
our  fathers  have  known,  as  this  great  thing 
which  God  has  doneheie  ! 

Thurfday  27.  We  returned  to  Merfeberg,  and 
at  five  in  the  evening  came  to  the  gates  of  Leip- 
fig.  After  we  had  fent  in  our  pafs,  and  waited 
an  hour  and  an  half,  we  were  fuffered  to  go  to  a 
bad  inn  in  the  town. 

Friday  28.  We  found  out  Mr.  Merfchall,  and 
the  other  gentlemen  of  the  univerfity,  to  whom 
we  were  direBed.  They  were  not  wanting  in 
any  good  office  while  we  flayed,  and  in  the  af- 
ternoon went  with  us  an  hour  forward  in  our 
journey. 

* After  a pleafant  walk  on  Saturday,  on  Sun- 
day 30,  about  feven  in  the  morning,  we  came 
to  Meilfen.  In  MeifTen-Caflle,  the  German 
china-ware  is  made,  which  is  full  as  dear  as  that 
M 3 imported 


[ 3°°  ] 


imported  from  the  Indies;  and  as  finely  ffiap'ed, 
and  beautifully  coloured,  as  any  I have  ever 
feen.  After  breakfaft  we  went  to  church.  I 
was  greatly  fuprized  at  all  I faw  there  : at  the 
cofllinefs  of  apparel  in  mam-  and  the  gaudinefs 
of  it,  in  more  ; at  the  huge  fur  caps  worn  by  the 
women,  of  the  fame  fhape  with  aTurkifh  tur- 
ba-nd  ; which  generally  had  one  or  more  ribbands 
hanging  down  a great  length  behind.  The  rmnif- 
ter’s  habit  was  adorned  with  gold  and  fcarlet, 
and  aVaft  crofs  both  behind  and  belore.  Moft 
of  the  congregation  fat  (the  men  generally  with 
their  hats  on,  at  the  prayers  as  well  as  fermonj 
and  all  of  them  flayed,  during  the  holy  commu- 
nion, tho’  but  very  few  received.  Alas,  alas  1 
what  a reformed  country  is  this ! 

At  two  in  the  afternoon  we  came  to  Drefden, 
the  chief  city  of  Saxony.  Here  alfo  we  were 
carried  for  above  two  hours  from  one  magifirate 
or  officer  to  another,  with  the  ufual  imperti- 
nent folemnity,  before  we  were  fullered  to 
go  to  our  inn.  I greatly  wonder  that  common 
fenfe  and  common  humanity  (for  thefe  doubtlefs 
fubfifl  in  Germany  as  welt  as  England'  do  not  put 
an  end  to  tln’sfenfelefs,  inhuman  ufage  of  flran- 
gers,  which  we  met  with  at  almofl  every  Ger- 
man city,  tho’  more  particularly  at  Frankfort, 
Weymar,  Halle,  Leipfig  and  Drefden.  I know 
nothing  that  can  reafonably  be  faid  in  its  de- 
fence, in  a time  of  full,  peace,  being  a breach 
pf  all  the  common,  even  heathen  laws  of  hofpi- 

talitv. 


[ 301  ] 

tality.  If  it  be  a cuftom,  fo  much  the  woife;  the 
more  is  the  pity  and  the  fhame. 

In  the  evening  we  fawthe  palacethe  late  eleftor 
was  building,  when  God  calledhim  away.  The 
ilone-work  he  had  very  near  finifhed,  and  home 
of  the  apartments  within.  It  is  a beautiful  and 
magnificent  defign but  all  is  now  fwiftly  run- 
ning to  ruin.  The  new  church  on  the  outfide  re- 
fembles  a theatre.  It  is  eight  fauare  built  of  fine 
free-done.  We  were  defired  alfo  to  take  notice 
of  the  great  bridge  which  joins  the  new  with  the 
old  town  ; of  the  large,  brafs  crucifix  upon  it, 
generally  admired  for  the  workmanfhip  ; and  of 
the  late  king  AugulWs  ilaiue  on  horfeback, 
which  is  at  a fmall  diftance  from  it.  Alas ! 
Where  will  all  thefe  things  appear,  when  the 
earth  and  the  zuorks  thereof Jhall  be  burnt  up  ? 

Between  five  and  fix  the  next  evening  (hav- 
ing left  .Mr.  Hauptman  with  his  relations  in 
Drefden)  we  came  to  Neufladt,  bnt  could  net 
procure  any  lodging  in  the  city.  After  walking 
h&lf  an  hour,  we  came  to  another  little  town, 
and  found  a fort  of  an  inn  there  : but  they  told 
us  plainly,  zve Jhould  have  no  lodging  with  them  ; 
for  they  did  not  like  our  looks. 

About  eight  we  were  received  at  a little  houfe. 
in  another  village,  where  God  gave  us  fweet  rell. 

Tuefdav,  Auguft  1.  At  three  in  the  afternoon, 
1 came  to  Hernhuth,  about  thirty  Englifh  miles 
from  Drefden.  It  lies  inUpper-Lufatia,  on  the 
border  of  Bohemia,  and  contains  about  an  hun- 
M 4 dred 


[ 3°2  ] 

dred  houfev  built  on  a rifmg  ground,  with  ever- 
green woodson  two  Tides,  gardens  and  c orn-fields 
on  the  others,  and  high  hills  at  a fmall  diflance. 
It  has  one  long  fireet,  through  which  the  great 
road  from  Zittau  to  Lobau  goes.  Fronting  the 
middle  of  this  fireet  is  the  orphan-houle  ; in  the 
lower  part  of  which  is  the  apothecary's  fliop,  in 
the  upper,  the  chappel,  capable  of  containing 
fix  or  feven  hundred  people.  Another  row  of 
houfes  runs  at  a fmall  diflancc  from  either  end  of 
the  orphan-houfe,  which  accordingly  divides 
the  refl  of  the  town  (befide  the  long  ftreet)  into 
two  fquares.  At  the  end  end  of  it  is  the  Count’s 
houfe,  a fmall,  plain  building  like  the  refl:  hav- 
ing a large  garden  behind  it  well  laid  out,  not  for 
fhow,  but  for  the  tife  of  the  community. 

We  had  a convenient  lodging  afligned  us  in 
the  houfe  appointed  lor  flrangers  : and  I had 
now  abundant  opportunity,  of  obferving  whe- 
ther what  I had  heard  was  inlarged  by  the  rela- 
tors, or  was  neither  more  nor  lefs  than  the  nak- 
ed truth. 

I rejoiced  to  find  Mr.  Hermfdorf  here,  whom 
I had  fo  often  converfed  with  in  Georgia.  And 
there  was  nothing  in  his  power  which  he  did  not 
do,  to  make  our  flay  here  ufeful  and  agreeable. 
About  eight  we  went  to  the  public  fervice,  at 
which  they  frequently  ufe  other  inflruments 
with  their  organ.  They  began  (as  ufual) 
with  finging.  Then  followed  the  expounding, 
clofed  by  a fecond  hymn  : prayer  followed  this ; 

and 


[ 3°3  ] 

and  then  a few  verfes  of  a third  hymn  ; which 
concluded  the  fervice. 

Wednefday  2.  At  four  in  the  afternoon  was 
a love-feaR  of  the  married  men,  taking  their 
food  with  gladnefs  and  finglenefs  of  heart,  and 
with  the  voice  of  praife  and  thankfgiving. 

Thurfday  3.  (and  fo  every  day  at  eleven)  I was 
at  the  bible  conference,  wherein  Mr.  Miller 
(late  maRer  of  a great  fchool  in  Zittau,  till  he  left 
all  to  follow  ChriR)  and  feveral  others,  read  to- 
gether, as  ufual,  a portion  of  fcripture  in  the 
original.  At  five  was  the  conference  for  Rrang- 
ers,  when  feveral  quefiions  concerning  juRifica- 
tion  were  refolved.  This  evening  Chrifiian 
David  came  hither.  O may  God  make  him  a 
rnefiTenger  of  glad  tidings. 

On  Friday  and  Saturday  (and  fo  every  day  in 
the  following  week)  I had  much  converfation 
with  the  moR  experienced  of  the  brethren,  con- 
cerning the  great  work  which  God  had  wrought 
in  their  fouls,  purifying  them  by  faith  : and  with 
Martin  Dober,  and  the  other  teachers  and  elders 
of  the  church,  concerning  the  difcipiine  ufed 
therein. 

- * Sund.  6.  We  went  to  church  at  Bertholdf- 
dorf  a Lutheran  village  about  an  Englifh  mile 
from  Hernhuth • Two  large  candles  Rood 
lighted  upon  the  altar  : the  lafl  fupper  was  paint- 
ed behind  it ; the  pulpit  was  placed  over  it,  and 
over  that,  a brafs  image  of  ChriR  on  the  crofs. 

The  miniRer  had  on  a fort  of  pud  ding- Reeve 
gown,  which  covered  him  all  round.  At  nine 
M ,5  began 


[ 3°4  3 

began  a long  voluntary  on  the  organ,  clofed 
with  a hymn,  which  was  fung  by  ali  the  people 
fitting  (in  which  poflure,  as  is  the  German  cuf- 
tom,  they  fung  all  that  followed.)  Then  the 
niinilter  walked  up  to  the  altar,  bowed  ; fung 
thefe  latin  words,  Gloria  in  excelfis  Deo;  bowed 
again  and  went  away.  This  was  foliowed  by 
another  hymn,  fung  as  before,  to  the  organ  by 
all  the  people.  Then  the  minifler  went  to  the 
altar  again,  bowed,  fung  a prayer,  read  the  epif- 
tle  and  went  away.  After  a third  hymn  was 
fung,  he  went  a third  time  to  the  altar,  fung  a 
verficle  (to  which  all  the  people  fung  a refponfe) 
read  the  third  chapter  to  the  Romans,  and  went 
away.  The  people  having  then  fung  the  creed 
in  rhyme,  he  came  and  read  the  gofpel,  all 
{landing.  Another  hymn  followed,  which  be- 
ing ended,  the  minillerin  the  pulpit  ufed  a long 
extemporary  prayer,  and  afterwards  preached  an 
hour  and  a quarter  on  a verfe  of  the  gofpel. 
Then  he  read  a long  interceffion  and  general 
thatikfgiving,  which  before  twelve  concluded 
the  fervice. 

After  the  evening  fervice  at  Hernhuth  u'as 
ended,  all  the  unmarried  men  (as  is  their  cuf- 
tom)  walked  quite  round  the  town,  finging 
praife  with  inftruments  of  mufic  ; and  then  on 
a fmall  hill,  at  a little  diflance  from  it,  calling 
themfelves  into  a ring,  joined  in  prayer.  Thence 
they  returned  into  the  great  fquare,  and  a little 
after  eleven,  commended  each  other  to  God. 

Tuefday 


C 3°<5  ] 

Tuefday  8.  A child  was  buried.  The  burying 
ground  (called  by  them  Gottes  Acker,  i.  e. 
God’s  ground)  lies  a few  hundred  yards  out  of 
the  town,  under  the  fide  of  a little  wood.  There 
are  diflimfl  fquares  in  it  for  married  men  and  un- 
married ; for  married  and  unmarried  women  ; 
for  male  and  female  children,  and  for  widows. 
The  corpfe  was  carried  from  the  chappel,  the- 
children  .walking  firfi:  : next  the  Orphan-father 
(fo  they  call  him  who  has  the  chief  care  of  the 
Orphan-houfe)  with  the  minilier  of  Bertholdf- 
dorf ; then  four  children  bearing  the  corpfe, 
and  after  them,  Martin  Dober.and  the  father  of 
the  child.  Then  followed  the  men,  and  1 aft  ctf 
all  the  women  and  girls.  They  all  fung  as  they 
went.  Being  come  into  the  fquare  where  the 
male-children  are  buried,  the  men  Hood  on  two 
fides  of  it,  the  boys  on  the  third,  and  the  wo- 
men and  girls  on  the  fourth.  There  they  fung 
again  : after  which  the  minifter  ufed  (I  think 
read)  a fhort  prayer,  and  concluded  with  that 
bl  effing,  “ Unto  God’s  gracious  viercy  and  protec- 
tion I commit  you." 

Seeing  the  father  (a  plain  man,  a taylor  by 
trade)  looking  at  the  grave,  I afked,  “ How 
“ do  you  find  yourfelf?”  He  faid,  “ Praif- 
“ ed  be  the  Lord,  never  better..  He  has  taken 
“ the  foul  of  my  child  to  hitnfelf.  I have  feen, 
“ according  to  my  defire,  his  body  committed  to 
“ holy  ground.  And  I know  that  when  it  is 
M.6  “ raifed 


[ 3°6  ] 

w raifed  again,  both  he  and  I {hall  be  ever  with 
“ the  Lord.” 

Several  evenings  this  week  I was  with  one  or 
other  of  the  private  bands.  On  Wednefday  and 
Thurfday  I had  an  opportunity  of  talking  with 
Michael  Linner,  the  eldeft  of  the  church,  and 
largely  with  Chriftian  David,  who,  under  God, 
was  the  firfb  planter  of  it. 

Four  times  alfo  I enjoyed  the  bleffing  of  hear- 
ing him  preach,  during  the  few  days  I fpent 
here:  and  every  time  he  chofe  the  very  fubjeft 
which  I fhould  have  defired,  had  I fpoken  to 
him  before.  Thrice  he  defcribed  the  flate  of 
thofe  who  are  weak  in  faith , who  are  juflified, 
but  have  not  yet  a new,  clean  heart ; who  have 
received  forgivenefs  through  the  blood  of  Chriff, 
but  have  not  received  the  conftant  indwelling 
of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  This  Hate  he  explained 
once,  from  Bleffed  are  the  poor  in  fpirit\  for 
theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ; when  he  fliew- 
ed  at  large  from  various  fcriptures,  that  many  are 
children  of  God  and  heirs  of  the  promifes,  long 
before  their  hearts  are  foftened  by  holy  mourn- 
ing, before  they  are  comforted  by  the  abiding 
wttnefs  of  the  Spirit,  melting  their  fouls  into  all 
gentlcnefs  and  meeknefs;  and  much  more,  before 
they  are  renewed  in  all  that  righteoufnefs,  which 
they  hungered  and  ihirfied  after,  before  they  are 
pure  in  heart  from  all  felf-will  and  fin,  and  ?ner- 
cful  as  their  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  merci- 
ful. 


A fecond 


r 307  ] 

A fecond  time  he  pointed  out  this  hate  from 
thofe  words,  Who  Jhall  deliver  me  from  the  body 
of  this  death ! I thank  God,  JeJus  Chrijl  our 
Lord.  There  is  therefore  no  condemnation  to  them 
which  are  in  Chrijl  JeJus.  Hence  alfo  he  at 
large  both  proved  the  exiftence,  and  fhewed  the 
nature  of  that  intermediate  hate,  which  mod 
experience  between  that  bondage  which  is  de- 
fcribed  in  the  7th  chapter  of  the  epiftle  to  the 
Romans,  and  the  full  glorious  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God,  defcribed  in  the  eighth  and  in 
many  other  parts  of  fcripture. 

This  he  yet  again  explained  from  the  fcriptures 
which  defcribe  the  hate  the  apoftles  were  in, 
from  our  Lord’s  death  (and  indeed  for  fome 
time  before)  till  the  defcent  of  the  Holy  Ghoft 
at  the  day  of  Pentecoh.  They  were  then  dean 
as  Chrift  himfelf  had  borne  them  witnefs,  by 
the  word  which  he  had  fpoken  unto  them.  They 
then  had faith , otherwife  he  could  not  have  pray- 
ed for  them,  that  their  faith  might  not  fail. 
Yet  they  had  not  in  the  full  fenfe  new  hearts  ; 
neither  had  they  received  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghofl. 

The  fourth  fermon  which  he  preached,  con- 
cerning the  ground  of  faith,  made  fuch  an  im- 
predion  upon  me,  that  when  I went  home,.  I 
could  not  but  write  down  the  fubflance  of  it, 
which  was  as  follows  : 

“ The  word  of  reconciliation  which  the  apof- 
tles preached,  as  the  foundation  of  all  they  taught 

was^ 


[ 3o8  .] 


was,  that  we  are  reconciled  to  God,  not  by  our  own 
works , nor  by  our  own  righteoufnejs,  but  wholly 
and  folely  by  the  blood  oj  Chrijl. 

“ But  you  will  fav,  muft  I not  grieve  and 
mourn  lor  my  fins  ? Mu  ft  I not  humble  myfelf 
before  God  ? Is  not  this  juft  and  right  ? And 
rauft  I not  firft  do  this  before  I can  expefci  God 
to  be  reconciled  to  me  ? I anfwer,  it  is  juft  and 
right.  You  mull  he  humbled  before  God.  You 
muft  have  a broken  and  contrite  heart.  But 
then  obferve,  this  is  not  your  own  work.  Do 
you  grieve  that  you  are  a finner  ? This  is  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Are  you  contrite  ? 
Are  you  humbled  before  God  P Do  you  indeed 
mourn,  and  is  your  heart  broken  within  you? 
All  this  worketh  the  felf-fame  fpirit. 

“ Obferve  again,  this  is  not  the  foundation. 
It  is  not  this  by  which  you  ate  juftified.  This  is 
not  the  righteoufnefs,  this  is  no  part  of  the  right- 
eoufnefsby  wrhich  you  are  reconciled  unto  God. 
You  grieve  for  your  fins.  You  are  deeply 
humble.  Your  heart  is  broken.  Well:  but  all 
this  i?  nothing  to  your  jollification.  The  remif- 
fion  of  your  fins  is  not  owing  to  this  eaufe,  ei- 
. ther  in  whole  or  in  part.  Your  humiliation  and 
contrition  have  no  influence  on  that.  Nay,  ob- 
ferve farther,  that  it  may  hinder  your  juftifica- 
tion,  that  is,  if  you  build  any  thing  upon  it ; if 
you  think,  I muft  be  fo  or  fo  contrite.  I muft 
grieve  more , before  I can  be  juftified.  Under- 
ftand  this  well.  To  think  you  muft  be  more  con- 
trite. 


[ 3°9  ] 

trile,  more  humble,  more  grieved,  more  fenfible 
of  the  weight  of  fin,  before  you  can  be  juftified; 
is,  to  lay  your  contrition,  your  grief,  your  hu- 
miliation for  the  foundation  of  your  being  jufti- 
fied ; at  leaftfora  part  of  the  foundation.  There- 
fore it  hinders  yourjuftification  ; and  a hindrance 
it  is  which  mull  be  removed,  before  you  can  lay 
the  right  foundation.  The  right  foundation  is, 
not  your  contrition  (though  that  is  not  your  own) 
not  your  righteoufnefs,  nothing  of  your  own  ; 
nothing  that  is  wrought  in  you  by  the  Holy 
Ghoft  : but  it  is  fomething  without  you,  viz.  The 
righteoufnefs  and  the  blood  of  Chrift. 

“ For  this  is  the  word,  To  him  that  believeth  on 
God  that  jujlifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted 
for  righteoufnefs.  See  ye  not,  that  the  founda- 
tion is  nothing  in  us  ? There  is  no  connexion 
between  God  and  the  ungodly.  There  is  no 
tie  to  unite  them.  They  are  altogether  feparate 
from  each  other.  They  have  nothing  in  com- 
mon. There  is  nothing  lefs  or  more  in  the  un- 
godly, to  join  them  to  God.  Works,  righte- 
oufnefs, contrition  P No,  Ungodlinefs  only. 
This  then  do,  if  you  will  lay  a right  foundation. 
Go  ftreight  to  Chrift  with  all  your  ungodlinefs. 
Tell  him,  thou  whofe  eyes  are  as  a flame  of  fire 
fearching  my  heart,  feeft  that  I am  ungodly.  I 
plead  nothing  elfe.  I do  not  fay,  I am  humble 
or  contrite;  but  I am  ungodly.  Therefore  bring 
me  to  him  that  juftifieth  the  ungodly.  Let  thy 

blood 


[ 310  3 

blood  be  the  propitiation  for  me.  Tor  there  is  no- 
thing in  me  but  ungodlinefs. 

“ Here  is  a myflerv.  Here  the  wife  men  of 
the  world  are  loft,  are  taken  in  their  own  crafti- 
nefs.  This  the  learned  of  the  world  cannot  com- 
prehend. It  is  foolilhnefs  unto  them  : fin  is  the 
only  thing  which  divides  men  from  God.  Sin 
(let  him  that  heareth  underftand)  is  the  only 
thing  which  unites  them  to  God,  i.  e.  the  only 
thing  which  moves  the  Lamb  of  God  to  have 
compaftion  upon,  and  by  his  blood,  to  give  them 
accefs  to  the  Father. 

“ This  is  the  word  of  reconciliation  which  we 
preach.  This  is  the  foundation  which  never  can 
be  moved.  By  faith  we  are  built  upon  this  foun- 
dation : and  this  faith  alfo  is  the  gift  of  God.  It 
is  his  free  gift,  which  he  now  and  ever  giveth 
to  every  one  that  is  willing  to  receive  it.  And 
when  they  have  received  this  gift  of  God,  then 
their  hearts  will  melt  for  borrow  that  they  have 
offended  him.  But  this  gift  of  God  lives  in  the 
heart,  not  in  the  head.  The  faith  of  the  head, 
learned  from  men  or  books,  is  nothing  worth. 
It  brings  neither  remiffion  of  fins,  nor  peace 
with  God.  Labour  then  to  believe  with  your 
wdiole  heart.  So  fhall  you  have  redemption 
through  the  blood  of  Chrift.  So  (hall  you 
be  cleanfed  from  all  fin.  So  fhall  ye  go  on 
from  ftrength  to  ftrengh,  being  renewed  day 
by  day  in  righteoufnefs  and  all  true  hoH- 
nefs.” 


Satur, 


[ 3*;i  ] 

£>atur.  12.  .Was  the  interceflion-day,  when 
many  firangers  were  prefent,  fome  of  whom 
came  twenty  or  thirty  miles.  I would  gladly  have 
fpent  my  life  here;  but  my  mafter  calling  me  to 
labour  in  another  part  of  his  vineyard,  on  Mon- 
day 14,  I was  condrained  to  take  my  leave 
of  this  happy  place  ; Martin  Dober,  and  a few 
others  of  the  brethren,  walking  with  us 
about  an  hour.  O when  (hall  THIS  Chrif- 
tianity  cover  the  earth,  as  the  zuaters  cover  the 
ftal 

To  hear,  in  what  manner  God  out  of  darknefs 
commanded  this  light  to fane,  mull  be  agreeable 
to  all  thofe  in  every  nation,  who  can  teftify  from 
their  own  experience,  The  gracious  Lord  hath 
fo  done  his  marvellous  adds,  that  they  ought  to  be 
had  in  remembrance.  I dial]  therefore  here  fub- 
join  the  fubdance  of  feveral  converfations, 
which  I had  at  Hernhuth,  chiedy  on  this  fubjefil. 
And  may  many  be  incited  hereby  to  give  praife 
unto  him  that  fitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the 
Lamb  for  ever  and  ever ! 

It  was  on  Auguft  10,  (old  ftile)  that  I had  an 
opportunity  of  [pending  fome  hours  with  Chrif- 
tian  David.  He  is  a carpenter  by  trade,  more 
than  middle  aged,  though  I believe  not  fifty  yet. 
Mod  of  his  wmrds  I underftood  well ; if  at  any 
time  I did  not,  one  of  the  brethren  who  went 
with  me,  explained  them  in  Latin.  The  fu fi- 
nance 


[ 312  ] 

ftance  of  what  he  fpoke,  I immediately  after 
wrote  down  ; which  was  as  follows  : 

“ When  I was  young,  I was  much  troubled  at 
hearing  fome  affirm,  that  the  Pope  was  Anti- 
chriffi  I read  the  Lutheran  books  writ  againft 
the  Papifls,  and  the  Popifh  books  writ  aganft  the 
Lutherans.  I eaftlv  faw  that  the  Papifts  were  in 
the  wrong;  bat  not  that  the  Lutherans  were  in 
the  right.  I could  not  underhand  what  they 
meant,  by  being  juftified  by  faith,  bv  faith  alone, 
by  faith  without  works.  Neither  did  I like  their 
talking  fo  much  of  Chrift,  Then  1 began  to 
think,  How  can  Chrift  be  the  Son  of  God  ? But 
the  more  I reafoned  with  rnyfeif  upon  it,  the 
more  confided  I was,  till  at  laft  I loathed  the 
very  name  of  Chrift.  I could  not  bear  to  men- 
tion it.  1 hated  the  found  of  it ; and  would 
never  willingly  have  either  read  or  heard  it. 
In  this  temper  I left  Moravia,  and  wandered 
through  many  countries,  feeking  reft  but  finding 
none. 

In  thefe  wanderings  I fell  among  fome  Jews. 
Their  objeftions  againft  the  new  teftament,  threw 
me  into  frefh  doubts.  At  lail  I fet  myfelf  to  read 
over  the  old  teftament,  and  fee  if  the  prophecies 
therein  contained  were  fulfilled.  I was  foon 
convinced  they  were.  And  thus  much  I gained 
a fixt  belief,  that  Jefus  was  the  Chrift. 

But  foon  after  this  a new  doubt  arofe,  Are  the 
new  teftament  prophecies  fulfilled  ? This  I next 
fet  myfelf  to  examine.  I read  them  carefully 

ovei», 


[ 3l3  3 


over,  and  could  not  but  fee  eveiy  event  an- 
fwered  the  prediflion  : fo  that  the  more  I com- 
pared the  one  with  the  other,  the  more  fully  I 
was  convinced  that  All-J'cnpiure  was  given  by  vn- 
fpiration  of  God. 

Yet  hill  my  foul  was  not  in  peace  : nor  in- 
deed did  I expeft  it,  till  I lhould  have  openly 
renounced  the  errors  of  Popery:  which  accord- 
ingly I did  at  Berlin.  I now  alfo  led  a very  drift 
life.  I read  much,  and  prayed  much.  I did  all  I 
could  to  conquer  fin  ; yet  it  profited  not ; I was 
dill  conquered  by  it.  Neither  found  I any  more 
red  among  the  Lutherans,  than  I did  before 
among  the  Papids- 

At  length,  not  knowing  what  to  do,  I lided 
myfelf  a foldier.  Now  I thought  I fhould  have 
more  time  to  pray  and  read,  having  with  me  a 
new  tedament  and  a hymn-book.  But  in  one 
day  both  my  books  were  dole.  This  almod 
broke  my  heart.  Finding  alfo  in  this  way  of  life 
all  the  inconveniences  which  I thought  to  avoid 
by  it,  after  fix  months  I returned  to  my  trade, 
and  followed  it  two  years.  Removing  then  to 
Gorlittzin  Baxony,  I fell  into  a dangerous  illnefs. 
I could  not  dir  hand  or  foot  for  twenty  weeks. 
Pador  SJeder  c?me  to  me  every  day.  And  from 
him  it  was,  that  the  gofpel  of  Chrid  came  fird 
with  power  to  my  foul. 

* Here  I found, the  peace  I had  long  fought  in 
vain;  for  I was  allured  my  fins  were  forgiven. 
Not  indeed  all  at  once,  but  by  degrees ; not  in 

one 


[ 3*4  1 

one  moment,  nor  in  one  hour.  For  I could  rfot 
immediately  believe,  that  I was  forgiven,  be- 
caufe  of  the  miftake  I was  then  in  concerning 
forgivenefs.  1 law  not  then,  that  the  fir  11  pro- 
mife  to  the  children  of  God  is,  Sin  Jhall  no  more 
reign  over  you  ; but  thought,  I was  to  fee!  it  in  me 
no  more,  from  the  time  it  was  forgiven.  There- 
fore, although  I had  the  maftery  over  it,  vet  I 
often  feared  it  was  not  forgiven,  becaufe  it  Hill 
fir  red  in  me,  and  at  Sometimes  thrujl  fore  at  me 
that  I might fall : becaufe  though  it  did  not  reign , 
it  did  remain  in  me;  and  I was  continually 
tempted,  though  not  overcome.  This  at  that  time 
threw  me  into  many  doubts  : not  underllanding, 
that  the  devil  tempts,  properly  Speaking,  only 
thofe  whom  he  perceives  to  be  efcaping  from 
him.  He  need  not  tempt  his  own:  for  they  lie 
in  the  wicked  one  (as  St.  John  obferves)  and  do 
his  will  with  greedinefs.  But  thofe  whom  Chrift 
is  Setting  free,  he  tempts  day  and  night,  to  fee  if 
he  can  recover  them  to  his  kingdom.  Neither 
faw  I then,  that  the  being  jufified,  is  widely  dif- 
ferent from  the  having  The  fullajfwrance  of  faith. 
I remembered  not,  that  our  Lord  told  his  apof- 
lles  before  his  death.  Ye  are  clean;  whereas  it 
svas  not  till  many  days  after  it,  that  they  were 
fully  allured  by  the  Holy  Gholf  then  received, 
of  their  reconciliation  to  God,  through  his  blood. 
The  difference  between  thefe  fruits  of  the  Spirit 
was  as  yet  hid  from  me  ; fo  that  I was  hardly  and 
' (lowly 


[ 3*5  ] 

llowly  convinced  I had  the  one,  becanfe  I had 
not  the  other. 

• When  I was  recovered  from  my  illnefs,  I re- 
folved  to  return  into  Mo:  avia,  and  preach  Cliriffc 
to  my  relations  there.  Thence  I came  back  to 
Gorlitz,  where  I continued  five  years,  and  there 
was  a great  awakening  both  in  the  town  and 
country  round  about.  In  this  fpace  I made  two 
more  journies  into  Moravia,  where  more 
and  more  came  to  heai  me,  many  of  whom  pro- 
mifed  to  come  to  me,  wherever  I was,  when  a 
door  fhould  be  opened  for  them. 

After  my  return  from  my  third  journey,  Count 
Zinzendorf  fent  to  Gorlitz,  the  minifler  of  Bert- 
holdfdorf  being  dead,  for  Mr.  Rothe  who  was  in 
a.gentleman’s  family  there,  to  be  minifler  of  that 
place.  Mr.  Rothe  told  him  of  me,  and  he  writ 
to  me  to  come  to  him,  and  when  I came,  faid, 
“ Let  as  many  as  will  of  your  friends  come  hi- 
“ ther;  I will  give  them  land  to  build  on,  and 
“ Chrill  will  give  them  the  reft.”  I went  im- 
mediately into  Moravia  and  told  them,  God  had 
now  found  out  a place  for  us.  Ten  of  them  fol- 
lpwed  me  then  ; ten  more  the  next  year ; one 
more  in  my  following  journey.  The  Papifts  were 
now  alarmed,  fet  a price  upon  my  head,  and  le- 
velled the  houfe  I had  lodged  in  even  with  the 
ground.  I made  however  eleven  journies  thither 
in  all,  and  conduced  as  many  as  defired  it 
to  this  place,  the  way  to  which  was  now  fo 

well. 


r 3i6  i 

well  known,  that  many  more  came  of  them* 

felves. 

Eighteen  years  ago  we  built  the  fir  ft  houfe. 
We  chofe  to  be  near  the  great  road  rather  thin  at 
Bertholdfdorf  (for  the  Count  gave  us  our  choice' 
hoping  we  might  thereby  find  opportunities  of 
inftrubting  fome  that  travelled  by  us.  In  two 
years  we  were  increafed  to  a hundred  and  fifty; 
when  I contracted  an  intimate  acquaintance 
with  a Calvinift,  who  after  fomcJ  time  brought 
me  over  to  his  opinion  touching  elefiion  and  re- 
probation : and  by  me  were  moft  of  our  brethren 
likewife  brought  over  to  the-  fame  opinion'. 
About  this  time  we  were  in  great  fi rails,  where- 
with many  were  much  dejected.  1 endeavoured 
to  comfort  them,  with  the  fenfe  of  God’s  love 
towards  them.  But  they  anfwered,  Nav.  it 
“ mav  be  he  hath  no  love  towards  us  ; it  mav  be 
“ we  are  not  of  the  election  : but  God  hated  us 
“ from  eternity,  and  therefore  he  has  fiiftered 
all  thefe  things  to  come  upon  us.'’  The  Count 
obferving  this,  defired  me  to  go  to  a neighbour- 
ing minifter,  paftor  Steinmetr,  and  talk  with 
him,  fullv  on  that  head,  “ Whether  Chriftdied 
“ for  all  ?”  1 did  fo,  and  by  him  God  fullv  con- 
vinced me  of  that  important  truth.  And  not 
long  after,  the  Count  defired  we  might  all  meet 
together,  and  confidbr  thefe  things  throughly. 
We  met  accordingly  at  his  houfe,  and  parted 
not  for  three  days.  We  opened  the  fcriptures, 
and  confidered  the  account  which  is  given  there- 
in. 


C 31 2/  ] 


in,  of  the  whole  oeconomy  of  God  with  man, 
from  the  creation  to  the  confummation  of  all 
things,  and  by  the  bleffing  of  God  we  came  all 
to  one  mind  ; particularly  in  that  fundamental 
point,  that  He  will  elk  all  men  to  be  faved , and  to 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  his  truth. 

Sometime  after,  the  Jefuits  told  the  Emperor, 
that  the  Count  was  gathering  together  all  the 
Moravians  and  Bohemians,  forming  them  into 
one  body,  and  making  a new  religion.  Com- 
miflioners  were  immediately  fent  to  Hernhuth, 
to  examine  the  truth  of  this.  The  fubftance 
of  the  final  anfwer  returned  through  them  tc  the. 
Emperor  was  as  follows. 

* An  extradl  of  the  public  inf  r urn-ftt  Jighed  at 
Hernhuth,  in  Augujl,  tyug, 

l.  "T  17E  believe  the  church  of  the  Bohemian 
V V and  Moravian  brethren,  from  whom 
we  are  defcended,  to  have  been  a holy  and  un- 
defiled  church,  as  is  owned  by  Luther  and  all 
other  Proteflant  divines:  who  own  alfo  that  our 
doHrine  agrees  with  theirs.  But  our  difcipline 
they  have  not. 

2.  But  we  do  not  reft  upon  the  holinefs  of 
our  anceftors;  it  being  our  continual  care  to 
fhew  that  we  are  paft  from  death  unto  life,  by 
worfhippmg  God  in  Spirit  and  in  truth.  Nor 
do  we  account  any  man  a brother,  unlefs  he  has 

either 


eithegpreferved  inviolate  the  covenant  he  made 
with  God  in  baptifm,  or,  if  he  has  broken  it, 
been  born  again  of  God. 

3.  On  the  other  fide,  whofoever  they  are 
who  being  fprinkled  by  the  blood  of  Chrift,  arc 
fan&ified  through  faith,  we  receive  them  as 
brethren,  although  in  home  points  they  may  dif- 
fer from  us.  Not  that  we  can  renounce  or  give 
up  any  doflrine  of  God,  contained  in  holy  writ ; 
the  leait  part  of  which  is  dearer  unto  us,  than 
thoufands  of  gold  and  filver. 

4.  Difcipline  we  judge  to  be  neceffary  in  the 
higheft  degree,  for  all  thofe  who  have  any  know- 
ledge of  divine  truth  : and  wre  can  therefore  in 
no  wife  forfake  that,  which  we  have  received 
from  our  forefathers.  Yet  if  it  fliould  ever  be 
(which  God  forbid)  that  any  of  11s  fliould  fpeak 
or  aft  perverfe  things,  w-e  could  only  fay,  with 
St.  ]ohn,  They  wait  forth  from,  us,  but  were  not 
of  us  : for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they  would  have 
continued  with  us. 

5.  The  public  worfhip  of  God  at  Bertholdf- 
dorf,  which  we  have  hitherto  Irequentcd,  we 
are  the  lefs  able  now  to  forfake,  becaufe  we  have 
there  an  affembly  of  true  believers,  a doflrine 
free  from  error,  and  a paftor  who  having  labour- 
ed much  in  the  word , is  worthy  of  double  honour. 
Therefore  we  have  no  caufe  to  form  any  congre- 
gation, feparate  from  this  ; efpecially  feeing  we 
both  ufe  that  liberiv  which  Chrift  hath  purchafed 
for  us  ; and  fo  often  experience  the  pot\ei  of 


[ 3*9  J 


the  fio&rine  which  is  taught  there,  and  agree 
with  the  evangelical  proteftants  (i.  e.  Luthe- 
rans) in  all  truths  of  importance.  As  for  the  con- 
troverted points,  which  require  a fubtle  wit,  we 
either  are  ignorant  of  them,  or  defpife  them. 

6.  The  name  of  brethren  and  fillers  we  do  not 
rejefl,  as  being  agreeable  both  to  fcriptune  and  to 
Chriftian  fimplicity.  But  we  do  not  approve  of 
being  called  by  the  name  of  any  man  : as  know- 
ing, we  have  one  father , even  him  which  is  in 
heaven . 

In  1732  we  were  again  required  to  give  an 
account  of  ourfelves.  This  was  then  done,  in 
the  manner  following. 


An  ex  trad  of  a letter  wrote  by  the  church  of  Hern- 
huth,  to  the  f ref  dent  of  Upper  Lufatia,  24  fan, 
1732. 

1.  "VTONE  can  be  ignorant  of  the  religion  of 
our  ancellors,  who  have  read  the  hif- 
tory  of  John  Hufs.  Some  of  his  followers  en- 
deavoured to  repel  force  by  force.  The  reft, 
having  better  learned  Chrift,  obtained  leave  of 
George  Podibrad,  king  of  Bohemia,  to  retire 
and  live  apart.  Retiring  accordingly  in  the  year 
1453>  to  a place  on  the  borders  of  Silefia  and 
Moravia,  they  lived  in  peace,  till  the  time  of 
Lutherand  Calvin,  with  both  of  whom,  as  with 
their  followers,  they  maintained  a friendly  inter- 
Vo  L.  XXVI.  N courfe, 


C 320  J 

courfe,  efpecially  when  by  the  providence  of 
God,  they  were  placed  among  thofe  of  either 
opinion. 

c.  In  the  year  1699,  David  Earned  Jablonfky, 
grandfon  to  Amos  Comenius,  the  laft  bifliop  of 
-the  Moravians,  was  confecraled  bithop  of  the 
united  brethren  in  Moravia,  Bohemia  and  Po- 
land, in  a fynod  regularly  afTembled.  To  him 
Count  Zinzendorf  dignified,  that  feveral  of  the 
Moravian  brethren,  having  efcaped  from  the  ty- 
ranny of  the  Papifts,  were  fo  joined  to  the  Lu- 
therans, whofe  do&rine  they  approved,  as  ne- 
verthelefs  to  retain  their  antient  difcipline.  His 
entire  approbation  of  this,  bifliop  Jablonfky  tef- 
tified  to  the  Count  in  feveral  letters. 

3.  It  muff  be  acknowledged,  that  many  of  our 
anceflors,  about  the  beginning  of  the  reforma- 
tion, from  fear  of  man,  did  not  openly  confefs 
the  truth.  And  hence  it  was  that  the  Rornifh 
paflors  bore  with  them  ; being  little  concerned 
what  their  private  opinions  were.  But  hence  it 
alfo  wras,  that  continually  ufing  diffimulation, 
and  not  walking  in  fimp.licit' , they  were  no 
longer  fervent  in  fpirit,  as  of  old  time,  neither 
could  they  find  any  peace  to  their  fouls. 

4.  It  was  in  the  year  17m,,  that  a foldier  of 
the  Emperor’s,  latelv  dtfcharged  came  to  Sell!,  a 
village  of  which  the  Tefuits  are  Lords,  and  be- 
ean  to  talk  with  Ausullin  Ncufler  and  his  bro- 
ther.  He  fharply  reproved  their  hypocrify,  in 
pretending  to  be  Romamfls,  and  difiembhng  the 

true 


321  ] 

true  faith.  Yet  .they  conferred  with  JleJh  and 
blood,  till  the  year  1722,  when  at  length  they 
forfook  all,  and  retired  into  Upper  Lufatia. 
They  left  three  brothers  behind  them,  who  were 
foon  after  call  into  prifon,  and  grievoufly  perfe- 
cted by  the  Papifts  : fo  that  as  foon  as  ever  a 
door  was  opened,  they  alfo  left  all,  and  follow- 
ed their  brothers  into  Lufatia.  The  fame  did 
many  others  foon  after,  as  finding  no  fafetv,  ei- 
ther for  body  or  foul  in  their  own  country : 
whence  about  the  fame  time,  Michael  and  Mar- 
tin Linner,  and  the  Haherlands  were  driven  out, 
with  their  families,  after  having  fuffered  the  lofs 
of  all  things,  for  not  conforming  to  the  Romifh 
worfhip,  and  for  receiving  thofe  they  called  He- 
reticks  into  'heir  lioufes. 

5.  But  the  brethren  at  Kuhnewald  were  treat- 
ed with  ftill  greater  feverity.  All  their  books 
were  taken  away  ; they  were  compelled  by  the 
mod  exquifite  torments,  to  conform  to  the  Po- 
pifh  fuperftiiions  and  idolatries  ; and  in  the  end 
call  into,  and  kept  in,  the  moll  loathfome  pri - 
fons : whereby  David  Schneider,  the  Nitfch- 
mans,  and  many  others,  were  conltrained  alfo 
to  leave  their  country,  and  all  that  they  had. 
Thefe  are  the  plain  reafons  of  our  leaving  Mo- 
ravia, of  which  your  excellency  defired  an  ac- 
count from  us.” 

In  the  mean  time  we  found  a sweat  remiffnefs 

O 

of  behaviour  had  crept  in  among  us.  And  in- 
deed the  fame  was  to  be  found  in  moil  of  thofe 
N 2 round 


[ 3*2  ] 


round  about  us,  whether  Lutherans  or  Calvi- 
nifts,  fo  infilling  on  faith,  as  to  forget  at  lead  in 
prabtice,  both  holinefs  and  good  works. 

Observing  this  terrible  abufe  of  preaching 
Chrift  given  for  us,  we  began  to  infift  more  than 
ever,  on  Chrift  living  in  us.  All  our  exhorta- 
tions and  preaching  turned  on  this ; we  fpoke, 
we  writ,  of  nothing  elfe.  Our  conftant  inqui- 
ries were,  “ Is  Chrift  formed  in  you  ? Have  you 
a new  heart  ? Is  your  foul  renewed  in  the  image 
of  God?  Is  the  whole  body  of  fin  deftroved  in 
you?  Are  you  fully  afTured,  beyond  all  doubt  or 
fear,  that  you  are  a child  of  God  ? In  what  man- 
ner, and  at  what  moment  did  you  receive  that 
full  alfurance  ?”  If  a man  could  not  anfwer  all 
thefe  queftions,  we  judged  he  had  no  true  faith. 
Nor  would  we  permit  any  to  receive  the  Lord’s 
fuppei  among  us,  till  he  could. 

* In  this  perfuafion  we  were,  when  I went  to 
Groenland,  five  years  ago.  There  I had  a cor- 
refpondence  by  letter  with  a Danilh  minifter, 
on  the  head  of  jufiification.  And  it  pleafed 
God  to  Ihew  me  by  him  (though  he  was  by 
no  means  a holy  man,  but  openly  guilty  of 
groTs  fins)  that  we  had  now  leaned  too  much 
to  this  hand,  and  were  run  into  another  ex- 
treme : that  Chrift  in  us  and  Chrifl  for  us,  ought 
indeed  to  be  both  infilled  on ; but  firft  and 
principally  Chrifi for  us,  as  being  the  ground  of 
all.  I now  clearly  faw,  we  ought  not  to  infift 

on 


[ 323  ] 


on  any  thing  we  feel,  any  more  than  any  thing 
we  do,  as  if  it  were  necelfary  previous  to  juhifi- 
cation,  or  the  remilfion  of  fins.  I faw,  that  leall 
of  all  ought  we  fo  to  infill  on  the  full  alfurance 
of  faith,  or  the  deftruttion  of  the  body  of  fin, 
and  the  extinflion  of  all  its  motions,  as  to  ex- 
clude thofe  who  had  not  attained  this  fr<?m  the 
Lord's  table,  or  to  deny  that  they  had  any  -faith 
at  all.  I plainly  perceived,  this  full  alTurance 
was  a diftincl  gift  from  jultifying  faith,  and  often 
not  given  till  long  after  it:  and  that  jullification 
does  not  imply,  that  fin  fhould- not  jlir  in  us, 
but  onlv  that  it  fhould  not  conquer. 

* And  now  firll  it  was,  that  I had  that  full  alfurance 
of  my  own  reconciliation  to  God,  through  Chrill. 
For  many  years  I had  had  the  forgivenefs  of  my 
fins,  and  a meafure  of  the  peace  of  God  ; but  I 
had  not  till  now,  that  witnefs  of  his  Spirit,  which 
Units  out  all  doubt  and  fear.  In  all  my  trials  I 
had  always  a confidence  in  Chrill,  who  had  done 
fo  great  things  for  me.  But  it  was  a confidence 
mixt  with  fear:  I was  afraid,  I had  net  done 
enough.  There  was  always  fomething  dark  in 
my  foul  till  now.  But  now  the  clear  light  fhin- 
ed  : and  I faw  that  what  I had  hitherto  fo  con- 
flantly  infilled  on,  the  doing  fo  much  and  feeling 
fo  much,  the  long  repentance  and  preparation 
for  believing,  the  bitter  forrow  for  fin,  and  that 
deep  contrition  of  heart  which  is  found  in  fome, 
were  by  no  means  elfential  to  jullification.  Yea, 
that  wherever  the  free  grace  of  God  is  rightly 
N 3 preached. 


C 324  ] 

preached,  a finner  in  the  full  career  of  his  fins, 
will  probably  receive  it,  and  be  juflified  by  it, 
before  one  who  infills  on  fuch  previous  prepa- 
ration. 

At  mv  return  to  Hernhuth,  I found  it  difficult 
at  firfl,  to  make  my  brethren  fer.fible  of  this,  or 
to  perfuade  them  noi  to  infill  on  the  alfurance  of 
faith,  as  a neceffary  qualification  for  receiving 
the  Lord’s  fupper.  But  from  the  time  they  were 
convinced,  which  is  now  three  years  fince,  we 
have  all  chiefly  infilled  on  Chnjt  given  for  us  ;t 
This  we  urge  as  the  principal  thing,  which  ir 
we  rightly  believe,  Chrifl  will  furely  be  formed 
in  us.  And  this  preaching  we  have  always  found 
to  be  accompanied  with  power,  and  to  have  the 
blelhng  of  God  following  it.  By  this,  believers 
receive  a fleddy  purpofe  of  heart,  and  a more 
unfhaken  refolution,  to  indure  wiih  a free  and 
chearful  fpirit  whatfoever  ourLcrd  is  pleafed  to 
lay  upon  them. 

The  fame  day  I was  with  Michael  Linner,  the 
elded  of  the  church  ; the  fum  of  whofe  converfa- 
tion  was  this : 

“ The  church  of  Moravia  was  once  a glorious 
church.  But  it  is  now'  covered  with  thick  dark- 
nefs.  It  is  about  fixteen  years  ago,  that  I began 
to  feek  for  Iiedit.  I had  a New  Teilament  which 

O 

I conflantly  read  : upon  which  I often  faid  to 
myfelf,  “ This  fays,  I-  ought  to  be  humble  and 
meek  and  pure  in  heart.  How  comes  it  that  I 

am 


I dare  fay,  this  is  righ  . 


[ 325  ] 


am  not  fo  ?”  I went  to  the  beft  men  I knew,  and 
alked,  “ Is  not  this  the  word  of  God  ? And  if 
fo,  ought  I not  to  be  fuch  as  this  requires,  both 
in  heart  and  life  They  anfwered,  t:  The  firfb 
Chrillians  were  fuch  ; but  it  was  impoffible  for 
us  to  be  fo  perfect.”  This  anfwer  gave  me  no 
fatisfa&ion.  I knew  God  could  not  mock  his 
creatures,  by  requiring  of  them  what  he  faw  it 
was  impodible  for  them  to  perform.  I afked 
others,  but  had  fill  the  fame  anfwer,  which 
troubled  me  more  and  more. 

About  lourteen  years  ago,  I was  more  than 
ever  convinced,  that  I was  wholly  different  from 
what  God  required  me  to  be.  I confulted  his 
word  again  and  again  ; but  it  fpoke  nothing  but 
condemnation  ; till  at  lafl  I could  not  read,  nor 
indeed  do  any  thing  elfe,  having  no  hope  and 
no  fpiiit  left  in  me.  I had  been  in  this  Hate  for 
feveral  days,  when  being  miffing  by  myfelf,  thefe 
words  came  Rrongly  into  my  mind,  God  fo  loved 
the  world , that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  to 
the  end  that  all  who  believe  in  him ,fiould  not 
perifh  but  have  everlaJUng  lifeA  I thought,  “All? 
Then  I a:n  one.  Then  he  is  given  for  me . But 
I am  a Turner.  And  he  came  to  fave  Tinners. " 
Immediately  my  burden  dropped  off,  and  my 
heart  was  at  reft. 

But  the  full  alfurance  of  faith  I had  not  yet  ; 
nor  for  the  two  years  I continued  in  Moravia. 
When  I was  driven  out  thence  by  the  Jefuits.  I 
retired  hither,  and  was  Toon  after  received  into 
N 4 the 


C 3s6  ] 

the  church.  And  here  after  fome  time  it  pleaf- 
ed  our  Lord  to  manifeft  himfelf  more  clearly  to 
my  foul,  and  give  me  that  full  fenfe  of  ac- 
ceptance in  him,  which  excludes  all  doubt  and 
fear. 

Indeed  the  leading  of  the  fpirit  is  different  in- 
different fouls.  His  more  ufual  method,  I believe 

is,  to  give  in  one  and  the  fame  moment  the  for- 
givenefs  of  fins,  and  a full  affurance  of  that  for- 
givenefs.  Yet  in-  many  he  works  as  he  did  in  me : 
giving  fir  ft  the  remiffion  of  fins,  and  after  fome 
weeks  or  months  or  years,  the  full  affurance  of 

it. 

This  great  truth  was  farther  confirmed  to  me 
the  next  day  by  the  c.onverfation  I had  with  Da- 
vid Nitfchman,  one  of  the  teachers  or  pallors  of 
the  church  ; who  expreft  himfelf  to  this  effefl : 

“ In  my  childhood  I was  very  ferious ; but  as 
I grew  up,  was  fo  carelefs,  that  at  eighteen  years 
old,  I had  even  forgot  to  read.  When  I found 
this,  I was  ftartled.  I foon  learned  again,  and 
then  fpent  much  time  in  reading  and  prayer. 
But  I knew  nothing  of  my  heart,  till  about  the 
age  of  twenty-fix,  I bought  a bible,  and  began 
to  read  the  New  Teftament.  The  farther  I read, 
the  more  I was  condemned.  I found  a law 
which  I did  not,  could  not  keep.  I had  a will 
to  avoid  all  fin  : but  the  power  I had  not.  I con- 
tinually llrove ; but  was  continually  conquered. 
The  thins  which  1 would  I did  not : but  what  I 
would  not  have  done,  that  I did.  In  this  bond. 


age 


acre  I was,  when  I fell  into  a fit  of  ficknels ; dur- 
ing  my  recovery  from  which  I felt  a llronger  de» 
fire  than  ever,  to  avoid  all  fin.  At  the  fame 
time  I felt  the  power.  And  fin  no  longer  reign- 
ed over  me. 

But  foon  after  I fell  into  grievous  temptations, 
which  made  me  very  uneafy.  For  though  I 
yielded  not  to  them,  yet  they  returned  again, 
and  again,  as  fall  as  they  were  conquered.  Then 
it  came  into  my  mind,  “ I take  all  this  pains  to 
ferve  God.  What  if  there  be  no  God  ? How- 
do  I know  there  is  ?”  And  on  this  I mufed  more 
and  more,  till  I faid  in  my  heart,  “ There  is  no 
God!” 

In  this  Bate  I was  when  I came  to  Hernhuth,. 
about  fourteen  years  ago.  And  every  day  for  a 
full  year,  from  morning  to  night,  I groaned  under 
this  unbelief.  Yet  I prayed  continually,  unbe- 
lieving as  I was ; particularly  one  Sunday,  when 
being  in  the  church  of  Bertholdfdorf,  and  quite 
weary  of  hearing  fo  much  of  him,  whofe  very 
being  I did  not  believe,  I vehemently  faid,  O 
God,  if  thou  be  a God,  thou  mud  manifeft  thy* 
felf,  or  I cannot  believe  it.”  In  walking  home, 
I thought  of  an  expreffion  of  Pallor  Rope’s, 
“ OnXy/uppoJt:  thefe  things  are  fo  : fubpofe  there 
be  a God.”  I faid  to  myfelf,  “ Well,  I will,  I 
do  fuppofe  it.”  Immediately  I felt  a hrange 
fweetnefs  in  my7  foul,  which  increafed  every  mo- 
ment  till  the  next  morning  : and  from  that  time, 
sf  all  the  men  upon  earth,  and  all  the  devils  in 


C 328  ] 

he!l  had  joined  in  denying  it,  I could  not  have 
doubted  the  being  of  God,  no,  not  for  one  mo- 
ment. This  firft  fweetnefs  lafted  for  fix  weeks, 
without  any  intermillion. 

I then  fell  into  doubts  of  another  kind.  I be- 
lieved in  Gcd  ; but  not  in  Chi  id.  I opened  my 
heart  to  Martin  Dober,  who  ufed  many  argu- 
guments  with  me,  but  in  vain.  For  above  four 
years  I found  no  red,  by  reafon  of  this  unbelief, 
till  one  dav,  as  I was  fitting  in  my  houfe  defpair- 
ing  of  any  relief,  thofe  words  fhot  into  me,  “ God 
was  in  Chrifl,  reconciling  the  world  to  hitnfeif.”  I 
thought,  “Then  God  and  Chrid  are  one.”  Im- 
mediately my  heart  was  filled  with  joy ; and 
much  more  at  the  remembrance  of  thefe  words 
which  I now  felt  I did  believe.  “ The  word  was 
with  God,  and  the  word  was  God.  And  the  word 
was  made  flejh,  and  dwelt  among  us.” 

Yet  in  a few  days  I was  troubled  again.  I be- 
lieved Chrift  was  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  But 
I could  not  call  him  my  Saviour,  neither  did  I 
believe,  he  would  fave  me.  And  one  day,  as  I was 
walking  acrofs  the  fquare,  that  text  came  ftrongly 
into  my  mind,  “ The  unbelieving  Jk all  have  their 
part  in  the  lake  zihuh  burnetii  with  fire  end  brim- 
jloaeT  I returned  home,  terrified  beyond  expref- 
fion,  and  indantly  began  crying  out  to  our  Sa- 
viour, telling  him,  “ I deferved  no  lefs  than  hell, 
and  gave  myfelfup,  if  it  were  his  will,  to  fuffcr 
what  I had  deferved."  In  a moment  I found  a 

clcant 


[ 329  3 

gleam  of  hope,  that  he  would  have  mercy  even 
on  me. 

Bat  this  in  a fhor t time  vanifned  away,  and  my 
uneafinefs  returned  again.  Many  endeavoured  to 
perfuade  me  that  I had,  but  I knew  I had  not,  a 
right  faith  in  Chrift.  For  I had  no  confidence  in 
him  ; nor  could  I lay  hold  upon  him  as  my  Sa- 
viour. Indeed  reading  one  day  (in  Arndt’s  True 
Chriftianity)  “ That  if  all  the  fins  of  all  the  men 
upon  earth  were  joined  in  one  man,  the  blood  of 
Chrifl  was  fufficient  to  cleanfethat  man  from  all 
fin  I felt  for  a time  comfort  and  peace  : but  it 
was  but  for  a time,  and  then  I was  overwhelmed 
as  before  with  fadnefs  and  unbelief.  And  I was- 
oppreft  almofl  beyond  my  flrength,  when  i a 
year  ago  I went  into  this  little  wood.  At  firPt  I 
was  tempted  to  break  out  into  impatience;  but 
then  I thought,  our  Saviour  knows  'oefl ; nor 
would  he  Puffer  this  trouble  to  continue  fo  long, 
if  he  did  not  fee  it  was  good  for  me.  I delivered 
myfelf  wholly  into  his  hands,  to  difpofe  of  me  ac- 
cording to  his  good  pleafure.  In  that  hour  I faw, 
that  all  who  believe  in  him  are  reconciled  to  God" 
through  his  blood,  and  was  affimed,  that  I was 
N 6 thereby 

+ N.  B.  i.  e.  In  the  year  1737,  Severer  years  before 
which  he  was  elefted  one.  of  the  four  public  teachers  of  the 
church ; which  office  he  retains  to  this  day.  Now  which  of 
the  two  confequences  will  you  chute,  (for  one  or  the  other  is  un- 
avoidable,) Either  that  a man  may  preach  the  gofpel  yea,  and 
with  the  demonftration  of  the  Spirit)  who  has  no  faith;  or- 
that  a man  who  has.  a degree  of  true  faith,  may  yet  have  doubts. 
and  fears-ih 


C 330  ] 

thereby  reconciled,  and  numbered  among  the 
children  of  God.  And  from  that  hour,  I have 
had  no  doubt  or  fear,  but  all  peace  and  joy  in 
believing.” 

Some  of  the  circumfiances  of  this  uncommon 
relation,  were  made  more  clear  to  me,  by  the 
account  I received  in  the  afternoon  from  a flu- 
dent  at  Hernhutb,  Albinus  T'heodorus  Feder. 

“ I ffaid  he)  for  three  years  fought  againfl  fin 
with  all  my  might,  by  faffing  and  prayer  and  all 
the  other  means  of  grace.  But  notwithflanding 
all  my  endeavours,  I gained  no  ground  ; fin  flill 
prevailed  over  me  ; till  at  lafl,  not  knowing  what 
to  do  farther,  I was  on  the  very  brink  of  defpair. 
Then  it  was  that  having  no  other  refuge  left,  I 
fled  to  my  Saviour  as  one  loll  and  undone,  and 
that  had  no  hope  but  in  his  power  and  free  mer- 
cy. In  that  moment  I found  my  heart  at  reft,  in 
good  hope  that  my  fins  were  forgiven  ; of  which, 

I had  a flronger  aftlirance  fix  weeks  after,  when 
I received  the  Lord’s  flipper  here.  But  1 dare  not 
affirm,  I am  a child  of  God  ; neither  have  I the 
feal  of  the  Spirit.  Yet  I go  on  quietly  doing  my 
Saviour’s  will,  taking  fhelter  in  his  wounds,  from 
all  trouble  and  fin,  and  knowing  he  will  perfeft 
his  work  in  his  own  tune.” 

* Martin  Dober,  when  Idefcribed  my  fiate  to 
him,  faid,  “ He  had  known  very  many  believers, 
who  if  afkea  the  quelfion,  would  not  have  dared 

to- 


[ 33i  ] 

to  affirm,  that  they  were  the  children  of  QoS', 
And  he  added,  It  is  very  common  for  perfons  to 
receive  remiffionof  fins,  or  juftification  through 
faith  in  the  blood  of  Chrift,  before  they  receive 
the  full  affurance  of  faith,  which  God  many  times 
with-holds,  till  he  has  tried  whether  they  will 
work  together  with  him,  in  the  ufe  of  the  firft 
gift.  Nor  is  there  any  need  (continued  he,  Dober) 
to  incite  any  one  to  feek  that  afTurance  by  telling 
him,  the  faith  he  has  is  nothing.  This  will  be 
more  likely  to  drive  him  to  defpair,  than  to  en- 
courage him  to  p refs  forward.  His  fingle  bufi- 
nefs,  who  has  received  the  firft  gift  is,  credendo 
credere.  & in  credendo  per  fever  are,  (to  believe  on, 
and  to  hold  fall  that  whereunto  he  hath  attained) 
To  go  on,  doing  his  Lord’s  will,  according  to  the 
ability  God  hath  already  given  ; chearfully  and 
faithfully  to  ufe  what  he  has  received,  without 
folicitude  for  the  reft.” 

In  the  converfation  I afterwards  had  with 
Auguftine  Neuffer,  a knife-fmith,  (another  of 
the  pallors  or  teachers  of  the  church,  about 
fixty  years  of  age)  as  alfo  with  his  brothers, 
Wenfel,  and  Hantz  Neulfer,  the  nature  of  true 
faith  and  falvation  was  yet  farther  explained 
to  me. 

Auguftine  Neulfer  fpoke  to  this  effefl  : 

“ By  experience  I know,  that  we  cannot  be 
jullified  through  the  blood  of  Chrift,  till  we  feel 

that 


[ 332  3 

that  all  our  righteoufnefs  and  good  works  avail 
nothing  towards  our  juftificalion.  Thereforewhat 
men  call  a good  life,  is  frequently  the  greatefl  of 
all  hindrances  to  their  coming  to  Chrift.  For 
it  will  not  let  them  fee,  that  they  are  loft,  undone 
finners,  and  if  they  fee  not  this,  they  cannot 
come  unto  him. 

Thus  it  was  with  me.  I led  a good  life  from  a 
child.  And  this  was  the  great  hindrance  to  my 
coining  to  Chrift.  For,  abounding  in  good 
works,  and  diligently  ufingall  the  means  of  grace, 
I perfuaded  myfelf  for  thirteen  or  fourteen  years, 
that  all  tvas  well,  and  I could  not  fail  of  falvation. 
And  yet,  I cannot  fay,  my  foul  was  at  reft,  even 
till  the  time  when  God  fhewed  me  dearly,  that 
my  heart  was  as  corrupt,  notwithftanding  all  my 
good  works,  as  that  of  an  adulterer  or  murderer. 
Then  my  felf-dependence  withered  away.  I 
wanted  a Saviour,  and  fled  naked  to  him.  And 
in  him  I found  true  reft  to  my  foul,  being  fully 
aftured,  that  all  my  fins  were  forgiven.  Yet  I 
cannot  tell  the  hour  or  day,  when  I firft  received 
that  full  afturance.  For  it  v'as  not  given  me  at 
firft,  neither  at  once1;  but  grew  up  in  me  by  de- 
orees.  But  from  the  time  it  was  confirmed  in  me, 

I never  loft  it ; having  never  fince  doubted,  no, 
not  for  a moment.” 

What  Wenfel  NeulTcr  faid  was  as  follows  : 

‘ From  a child  I had  many  fits  of  lerioufhefi 

ami-. 


C 333  ] 

and  was  often  uneafy  at  my  fins : this  uneafinefs 
was  much  increafed  fifteen  years  fince  by  the 
preaching  of  Chriftian  David.  I thought  the  way 
to  get  eafe  was,  to  go  and  live  among  the  Luthe- 
rans, whom  I fuppofed  to  be  all  good  Chriftians,- 
But  I foon  found  they,  as  well  as  the  Papifts, 
were  carnal,  worldly-minded  men.  About  thir- 
teen years  ago  I came  from  among  them  to 
Hernhuth  ; but  was  fiill  as  uneafy  as  before  : 
which  I do  not  wonder  at  now  (though  I did 
then)  for  all  this  time,  though  I faw  clearly,  I 
could  not  be  faved,  but  by  the  death  of  Chrift, 
yet  I did  not  truft  in  that  only  for  falvation,  but 
depended  on  my  own  righteoufnefs  ol/o,  as  the 
joint  condition  of  my  acceptance. 

After  I was  fettled  here,  feeing  the  great  di- 
verfity  of  fefis  wherewith  we  were  furrounded,  I 
began  to  doubt  whether  any  religion  was  true  ?' 
For  half  a year  thefe  doubts  perplext  me  greatly; 
and  I was  often  juft  on  the  point  of  calling  off  all 
religion  and  returning  to  the  world.  The  fear  of 
doing  this  threw  me  into  a deeper  concern  than 
ever  I had  been  in  before.  Nor  could  I 
find  how  to  efcape,  for  the  more  I ftruggied 
the  more  I was  intangled.  I often  reflefted 
on  my  former  courfe  of  life,  as  more  de- 
finable than  this.  And  one  day,  in  the  Litternefs 
of  my  foul,  befought  our  blelfed  Saviour,  “ at 
lcaft  to  reftore  me  to  that  Hate,  which  I was  in 
before.  I left  Moravia.”  In  that  moment  be  ma- 

nife  fleet 


[ 334  1 

mfefted  himfelf  to  me,  fo  that  I could  lay  hold  on 
him  as  my  Saviour,  and  fhewed  me,  it  is  only  the 
blood  of  Chrift  "which  cleanfeth  us  from  all  fin. 
This  was  ten  years  fince,  and  from  that  hour,  I 
have  not  had  one  doubt  of  my  acceptance.  Yet 
I have  not  any  tranfports  of  joy.  Nor  had  I when 
he  thus  revealed  himfelf  unto  me.  Only  I well 
remember,  that  manifeftation  of  himfelf  was  like 
a cool,  refrefhing  wind,  to  one  that  is  fainting 
away  with  fultry  heat.  And  ever  fince  my  foul 
has  been  fweetly  at  reft,  defiring  no  other  portion 
in  earth  or  heaven.” 

“ I was  awakened  (faid  Hantz  Neufter)  by  my 
grandfather  when  a child,  and  by  him  carefully 
inftrufted  in  the  new  teflament.  1 married  ymung, 
and  being  from  that  time  weak  and  fickly,  was 
the  more  earneft  to  work  out  my  falvation : and 
nineteen  or  twenty  years  ago,  I had  a ftiong  con- 
fidence in  our  Saviour,  and  was  continually  warn- 
ing others  againft  trufting  in  themfelves,  in  their 
own  rightcoufnefs  or  good  works.  Yet  I was 
not  free  from -it  rnyfelf.  I did  not  truft  in  him 
only  for  acceptance  with  God.  And  hence  it 
was,  that  not  building  on  the  right  foundation, 
the  blood  and  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  alone,  I 
could  not  gain  a full  viftory  over  my  fins,  but 
fometimes  conquered  them,  and  fometimes  was 
conquered  by  them.  And  therefore  I had  not  a 
full  or  conftant  peace,  though  I was  commonly 
eafy,  and  hoping  for  mercy. 

Sixteen  years  ago  (on  Saturday  next)  I came 


to 


[ 335  ] 


to  my  brother  Augudine  at  Hernhuth.  There 
was  then  only  one  little  houfe  here.  Here  I 
continued  eight  years  in  much  the  fame  Hate, 
thinking  I traded  in  Chrid  alone  ; but  indeed 
trading  partly  in  his  and  partly  in  my  own  righ- 
teoufnefs.  I was  walking  one  day  in  this  little 
wood,  when  God  difcovered  my  heart  to  me.  I 
faw  I had  till  that  hour  traded  in  my  own  right  e- 
oufnefs,  andatthe  fame  time,  that  I hadnorighte- 
oufnefs  at  all,  being  altogether  corrupt  and  abo- 
minable, and  fit  only  for  the  fire  of  hell.  At  this 
fight  I fell  into  bitter  grief,  and  an  horrible  dread 
overwhelmed  me,  expending  nothing  (as  I faw  I 
deferved  nothing  elfe)  but  to  be  fwallowed  up  in 
a moment.  In  that  moment  I beheld  the  Lamb 
of  God,  taking- away  my  fins.  And  from  that 
time  I have  had  redemption  through  his  blood, 
and  full  aflurance  of  it.  I have  that  peace  in  him 
which  never  fails,  and  which  admits  of  no  doubt 
or  fear.  Indeed  I am  but  a little  one  in  Chrid  ; 
therefore  I can  receive  as  yet  but  little  of  him. 
But  from  his  fulnefs  I have  enough  ; and  I praife 
him,  and  am  finished.” 

In  the  three  or  four  following  days  I had  an  op- 
portunity of  talking  wdth  Zacharias  Neufier,  (cou- 
fin  to  HantzJDavid  Schneider,  Chridoph.Demutb, 
Arvid  Gradin  (now  at  Condantinople)  and  feve- 
ral  others  of  the  mod  experienced  brethren.  I 
believe  no  preface  is  needful  to  the  account 

they 


they  gave  of  God’s  dealings  with  their  fouls, 
which  I doubt  not  will  flir  up  many,  through 
his  grace,  to  glorify  their  Father  which  is  in  hea- 
ven. 

“ I was  born  (faid  Zacharias  Neufferj  on  the 
borders  of  Moravia,  and  was  firfl  awakened  by 
my  coufin  Wenfel,  who  foon  after  carried  me 
to  hear  Mr.  Steinmetz,  a Lutheran  minilter, 
about  thirty  Englifh  miles  off.  I was  utterly  afla- 
nifhed.  The  next  week  I went  again:  after 
which,  going  to  him  in  private,  I opened  my 
heart,  and  told  him  all  my  doubts,  thofe  efpect- 
ally  concerning  Popery.  He  offered  to  receive 
me  into  communion  with  him,  which  I gladly 
accepted  of;  and  in  a fhort  time  after  I received 
the  Lord’s  fupper  from  his  hands.  While  I was 
receiving,  I felt  Chrifl  had  died  for  me.  I knetv 
I was  reconciled  to  God,  And  all  the  day  I was 
overwhelmed  with  joy,  having  thofe  words  con- 
tinually on  my  mind,  This  day  is  J'alvaiion  come 
to  my  houfe : I alfo  am  a fon  of  Abraham. 
This  joy  I had  continually  for  a year  and  a 
half,  and  my  heart  \sras  full  of  love  to  Chrifl. 

After  this  I had  thoughts  of  leaving  Moravia. 
I was  convinced  it  would  be  better  for  my  foul. 
Yet  I would  not  do  it,  becaufe  I got  more  money 
here  than  I could  elfewhere.  When  I reflected 
on  this,  I faid  to  rnyfelf,  “ This  is  mere  covet- 
oufnefs.  But  if  I am  covetous,  I am  not  a child 
of  God.”  Hence  I fell  into  deep  perplexity, 
rjor  could  I find  any  way  to  efcape  out  of  it.  In 


[ 337  3 

this  flavery  and  mifery  I was  for  five  years;  at 
the  end  of  which  I fell  fick  : in  my  ficknefs  my 
heart  was  fet  at  liberty,  and  peace  returned  to- 
my -foul,  I now  prayed  earneftly  to  God,  to  re- 
ftore  my  health,  that  I might  leave  Moravia. 
He  didreftore  it,  and  I immediately  returned  to 
Hernhuth.  After  I had  been  here  a quarter  of 
a year,  the  Count  preached  one  day,  upon  the 
nature  of  fanciification.  I found  I had  not  ex^ 
perienced  what  he  defcribed,  and  was  greatly 
terrified.  I went  to  my  coufin  Wenfel,  who  ad- 
vifed  me  to  read  over  the  3d,  4th  and  5th  chap- 
ters of  the  epiflle  to  the  Romans.  I did  fo.  I 
had  read  them  an  hundred  times  before,  yet  now 
they  appeared  quite  new,  and  gave  me  fuch  a 
fight  of  God’s  j uftifying  the  ungodly,  as  I never 
had  before.  On  Sunday  I went  to  church  at 
Bertholdfdorf,  and  while  we  were  finging  thofe 
words,  “ Wir  glauben  auch  in  Jefum  Chri/i,’1'  (we 
believe  alfo  in  Jefus  Chrift)  I clearly  faw  him  as 
my  Saviour.  I wanted  immediately  to  be  alone, 
and  to  pour  out  my  heart  before  him.  My  foul 
was  filled  with  thankfulnefs,  and  with  a ftill,  foft, 
quiet  joy,  fuch  as  it  is  impofiible  to  exprefs.  I 
had  full  affurance  that  my  Beloved  was  mine , and  I 
u as  his,  which  has  never  ceafed  to  this  day.  I fee 
by  a clear  light,  what  is  plea-fing  to  him,  and  I 
do  it  continually  in  love.  I receive  daily  from 
him  peace  and  joy;  and  I have  nothing  to  do. 
but  topraife  him,” 

The 


[ 338  ] 

The  mofl  material  part  of  David  Schneider’s 
account  was  this : 

“ Both  my  father  and  mother  feared  God,  and 
carefully  inftru&ed  me  in  the  holy  fcriptures.  I 
was  from  a child  earnellly  defirousto  follow  their 
inftru£Hons,  and  more  fo  after  my  father’s  death. 
Yet  as  I grew  up*  many  fins  got  the  dominion 
over  me.  Of  which  God  began  to  give  me  a 
fenfe,  by  the  preaching  of  Pallor  Steinmetz  ; 
who  fpeaking  one  day  of  drunkennefs,  to  which 
I was  then  addi&ed,  I was  fo  grieved  and  alham- 
ed,  that  for  feveral  days  I could  not  bear  to  look 
any  one  in  the  face.  It  pleafed  God  afierwards 
to  give  me,  though  not  all  at  once,  a fenfe  of  my 
other  both  outward  and  inward  fins.  And  be- 
fore the  time  of  my  coming  out  of  Moravia,  I 
knew  that  my  fins  were  forgiven.  Yet  I cannot 
fix  on  any  particular  time,  when  I knew  this  firlt. 
For  I did  not  clearly  know  it  at  once  : God  hav- 
ing always  done  every  thing  in  my  foul  by  de- 
grees. 

When  I was  about  twenty-fix,  I was  prell  in 
Spirit  to  exhort  and  inflruft  my  brethren.  Ac- 
cordingly many  of  them  met  at  my  houfe,  to  read, 
pray,  and  fing  pfalms.  They  ufually  came  about 
ten  or  eleven,  and  flayed  till  one  or  two  in  the 
morning.  When  Chrillian  David  came  to  us, 
we  were  much  quickened  and  comforted,  and 
cur  number  greatly  increafed.  We  were  undis- 
turbed 


[ 339  ] 

ttirbed  for  two  years.  But  then  the  Papifts  were 
informed  of  our  meeting.  Immediately  fearch 
was  made.  All  our  books  were  feized,  and  we 
were  ordered  to  appear  before  the  Confiftory.  I 
was  examined  many  times  ; was  imprifoned,  re- 
leafed and  imprifoned  again  five  times  in  one 
year.  At  laft  I was  adjudged  to  pay  fifty  rix- 
dollars,  and  fuffer  a year’s  imprifonment.  But 
upon  a re-hearing,  the  fentence  was  changed, 
and  I was  ordered  to  be  fent-  to  the  gallies.  Before 
this  fentence  was  executed,  I efcaped  out  of  pri- 
fon,  and  came  to  Sorau  in  Silefia.  Many  of  my 
brethren  followed  me,  and  here  for  near- ten 
years  I taught  the  children  in  the  orphan-houfe. 
I foon  fent  for  my  wife  and  children.  But  the 
magiftrates  bad  juft  then  ordered,  that  the  wives 
and  children  of  all  thofe  who  had  fled,  fhould  be 
taken  into  fafe  cuftody.  Tire  night  before  this 
order  was  to  be  executed,  fhe  efcaped  and  came 
to  Sorau. 

Soon  after,  fome  of  my  brethren  who  had  been 
there,  preft  me  much  to  remove  to  Hernhuth : 
Chriftian  David,  in  particular,  by  whofe  conti- 
nued importunity,  I was  at  length  brought  to 
refolve  upon  it.  But  all  my  brethren  at  Sorau 
were  ftill  as  flrongly  againft  it,  aslmyfelfhad 
formerly  been.  For  a whole  year  I.  was  ftrug- 
gling  to  break  from  them  or  to  perfuade 
them  to  go  too.  And  it  coft  me  more  pains  to 
get  from  Sorau,  than  it  had  done  to  leave  Mo- 
ravia. 


At 


[ 34°  ] 


At  length  I broke  loofe  and  came  to  Hern- 
huth,  which  was  about  three  years  ago.  Find- 
ing I could  fcarce  fubfift  my  family  here  by  hard 
labour,  whereas  at  Sorau  all  things  were  provid- 
ed for  me,  I grew  veryuneafy.  The  more  un- 
eafy  I was,  the  more  my  brethren  refrained 
from  my  companyd;  fo  that  in  a fhort  time  I was 
left  quite  alone.  Then  I was  in  deep  diftrefs  in- 
deed. Sin  revived  and  almoft  got  the  maftery 
over  me.  I tried  all  ways,  but  found  no  help.  In 
this  miferable  hate  I was  about  a year  ago,  when 
the  brethren  calls  lots  concerning  me,  and  were 
thereby  direfted  to  admit  me  to  the  Lord's  ta- 
ble. And  from  that  hour  my  foul  received  com- 
fort, and  I was  more  and  more  allured  that  I had 
an  advocate  with  the  Father,  and  that  I was  ful- 
ly reconciled  to  God  by  his  blood." 

Chriltoph.  Demuth  fpoke  to  this  effefl: 

“ My  father  was  a pious  man  from  his  veuth. 
He  carefully  inhrufled  all  his  children.  I was 
about  fifteen  when  he  died.  A little  before  he 
died,  having  been  all  his  life-time  under  the  law, 
he  received  at  once  remiffion  of  fins,  and  the  full 
witnefs  of  the  Spirit.  He  called  us  to  him  and 
faid,  “ My  dear  children,  let  your  whole  trull 
be  in  the  blood  of  ChrilL  Seek  falvation  in  this, 
and  in  this  alone,  and  he  will  fhew  vou  the  fame 
mercy  he  has  to  me.  Yea,  and  he  will  (hew  it 

to 

T This  was  cruel  and  unchriftian. 


r 341  3 

to  many  of  your  relations  and  acquaintance, 
when  his  time  is  come,” 

From  this  time  till  I was  twenty-feven  years 
old  I was  more  and  more  zealous  in  feeking 
Chrift.  I then  removed  into  Silefia,  and  mar- 
ried. A year  after  I was  much  preft  in  fpirit,  to 
return  and  vifit  my  brethren  in  Moravia.  I did 
fo.  We  had  the  New  Tellament,  our  Moravian 
hymns,  and  two  or  three  Lutheran  books.  We 
read  and  fung  and  prayed  together,  and  were 
much  {Lengthened.  One  day  as  we  were  toge- 
ther at  my  houfe,  one  knocked  at  the  door.  I 
opened  it  and  it  was  a Jefuit.  He  faid,  “ My 
dear  Demuth,  I know  you  are  a good  man,  and 
one  that  inftrufds  and  exhorts  your  friends,  I 
mull  fee  what  books  you  have.”  And  going  into 
the  inner  room,  he  found  the  tellament,  and  the 
rell  together.  He  took  them  all  away  ; nor  did 
we  dare  to  hinder  him.  The  next  day  we  were 
fummoned  before  the  Conli-ftory,  and  after  a 
long  examination,  ordered  to  appear  in  the 
church  before  the  congregation  on  the  following 
Sunday.  There  they  read  a long  confeffion  of 
faith,  and  afterwards  bid  us  fay,  “In  the  name 
_of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghoh.”  We  did  fo,  though  not  knowing  what 
they  meant.  They  then  told  us,  “ We  had  ab- 
jured the  Lutheran  errors,  and  called  the  blelfed 
Trinity  to  witnefs,  that  we  alfented  to  that  con- 
feffion  of  faith.”  My  heart  funk  within  me 
when  I heard  it,  I went  home,  but  could  find 


no 


[ 342  ] 


no  reft.  I thought  I had  now  denied  ray  Savi- 
our, and  could  expeft  no  more]mercy  from  him. 
I could  not  bear  to  ftay  in  Moravia  any  longer, 
but  immediately  returned  into  Silefia.  There 
I continued  fix  years,  but  there  too  I was  per- 
petually terrified  with  the  thoughts  of  what  I had 
done.  I often  enquired  after  my  brethren  whom 
I had  left  in  Moravia.  Some  of  them  I heard 
were  thrown  into  prifon,  and  others  efcaped  to  a 
little  village  in  Lufatia  called  Hernhuth.  I wilh- 
ed  I could  go  to  that  place  myfelf,  and  at  laft 
meeting  with  one  who  had  the  fame  defire,  we 
agreed  to  go  together.  But  our  defign  being 
difcovered  he  was  apprehended  and  thrown  into 
prifon.  Expefting  the  fame  treatment,  I ear- 
neftly  prayed,  “ That  God  would  (hew  me  a 
token  for  good.”  Immediately  my  foul  was  fil- 
led with  joy,  and  I tvas  ready  to  go  to  prifon  or 
to  death. 

* Two  days  pafTed,  and  no  man  afked  me  any 
queftion]  when  doubting,  what  I ought  to  do, 

I went  into  a neighbouring  wood,  and  going  in- 
to a little  cave,  fell  on  my  face  and  prayed, 

“ Lord,  thou  feeft  I am  ready  to  do  what  thou 
wilt.  If  it  be  thy  will  I Ihould  be  caft  into  prifon, 
thy  will  be  done.  If  it  be  thy  will,  that  Tlhould  j 
leave  my  wife  and  children,  I am  ready.  Only 
fhew  thy  will.”  Immediately  I heard  a loud  voice 
faying,  “ Fort,  fort,  fort"  (Go  on.  go  on)  I 
rofe  joyful  and  fatisfied  ; went  home  and  told  my 
wife,  “ It  was  God’s  will  I fbould  now  leave 

her ; 


[ 343  3 

her;  but  that  I hoped  to  return  in  a fhort  time, 
and  take  her  and  my  children  with  me.”  I went 
out  of  the  door,  and  in  that  moment  was  filled 
with  peace  and  joy  and  comfort. 

We  had  above  two  hundred  miles  to  go  (thir- 
ty-five German)  and  neither  I,  nor  my  friend 
who  went  with  me,  had  one  Kreutzer.f  But 
God  provided  things  convenient  for  us,  fo  that 
in  all  the  way  we  wanted  nothing. 

In  this  journey  God  gave  me  the  full  affurance 
that  my  fins  were  forgiven.  This  was  twelve 
years  ago,  and  ever  fince,  it  has  been  confirmed 
more  and  more,  by  my  receiving  from  him  every 
dayfrefh  fupplies  of  ftrength  and  comfort. 

* By  comparing  my  experience  with  that  of 
others,  you  may  perceive,  how  different  ways 
God  leads  different  fouls.  But  though  a man 

O 

fhould  be  led  in  a way  different  from  that  of  all 
other  men,  yet  if  his  eye  be  at  all  times  fixt  on 
his  Saviour,  if  his  conftantaim  be  to  do  his  will ; 
if  all  his  defires  tend  to  him  ; if  in  all  trials  he 
Can  draw  ftrength  from  him  ; if  he  fly  to  him  in 
all  troubles,  and  in  all  temptations  find  falvation 
in  his  blood;  in  this  there  can  be  no  delufion: 
And  whofoever  is  thus  minded,  however  or 
whenever  it  began,  is  finely  reconciled  to  God 
through  his  Son.” 

Vol.  XXVI,  O Arvid 


+ A fraall  coin  of  about  a half-penny  value. 


r 

L 


344  ] 


Arvid  Gradin  (a  Swede,  born  in  Dalecaxlia) 
fpoke  to  this  purpofe : 

“ Before  I was  ten  years  old,  I had  a ferious 
fenfe  of  religion,  and  great  fervour  in  mv  prayer. 
This  was  increafed  by  my  reading  much  in  the 
New  Teftament ; but  the  more  I read,  the  more 
earneffly  I cried  out,  “ Either  thefe  things  are 
not  true,  or  we  are  not  Chrifiians.”  About  fix- 
teen  my  fenfe  of  religion  began  to  decline,  by 
my  too  great  fondnefs  for  learning,  efpecially  the 
oriental  tongues,  wherein  I was  inftrudled  by  a 
private  preceptor,  who  likewife  did  all  that  in 
him  lay,  to  infiruft  me  in  true  divinity. 

At  feventeen  I went  to  the  univerfity  of  Up- 
fal,  and  a year  or  two  after  was  licenfed  to  preach. 
But  at  twenty-two  meeting  with  Arndt’s  True 
Chriftianity,  found  I myfelf  was  not  a Chriflian. 
Immediately  I left  off  preaching,  and  betook  mv- 
felf  wholly  to  philofophy.  This  ftifled  all  mv 
convidiions  for  fome  years ; but  when  I was 
about  twenty-feven,  they  revived,  and  continu- 
ed the  year  after,  when  I uTas  defired  to  be  do- 
meRic  tutor  to  the  children  of  the  Secretarv  of 
State.  I now  felt  I was  carnal,  fold  under  Jin,  and 
continually  firuggled  to  burft  the  bonds,  till  'be- 
ing about  thirty-one  years  old)  I was  unawares  in- 
tangled  in  much  worldly  bufinefs.  Tl:>  cooled 
me  irr  my  purfuit  of  holinefs  ; yet  for  a v;  r arid 
a half  my  heart  was  never  a:  peace.  Being  then 
in  a bookfeller’s  fit  op,  I faw  the  account  : the 

church 


[ 345  ] 


church  at  Hernhuth.  I did  not  think  there  could 
be  any  fuch  place,  and  afked  the  bookfeller,  if, 
that  was  a real  account  ? His  anfwer,  “ That  it 
was  no  more  than  the  plain  truth,”  threw  me  in- 
to deep  thought,  and  fervent  prayer,  that  God 
would  bring  me  to  that  place.  I went  to  the  Se- 
cretary, and  told  him,  “ I did  not  defign  today 
at  Upfal,  having  a defire  to  travel.”  He  faid, 

“ He  had  a defire  his  fon  fhould  travel,  and  was 
glad  of  an  opportunity  to  fend  him  with  me.”  I 
was  grieved  but  knew  not  how  to  refufe  any 
thing  to  my  patron  and  benefaQor.  According- 
ingly  we  left  Upfal  together,  and  after  a year 
fpent  in  feveral  parts  of  Germany,  went  through 
Holland  into  France,  and  fo  to  Paris,  where 
we  fpent  another  year.  But  I was  more  and 
more  uneafy  till  I could  be  difengaged  from  my 
charge,  that  I might  retire  to  Hernhuth.  In  our 
return  from  France,  my  pupil’s  elder  brother  re- 
turning from  Italy  met  us  at  Leipfig.  I immedi- 
ately writ  to  his  father,  and  having  obtained  his 
confent,  delivered  him  into  his  hands. 

April  23,  1738.  (N.  S.)  I came  hither.  Here 
I was  as  in  another  world.  I defired  nothing 
but  to  be  cleanfed  inwardly  and  outwardly  from 
fin,  by  the  blood  of  Jefus  Chrift.  I found  all 
here  laying  the  fame  foundation.  Therefore, 
though  I did  not  think  with  them  in  all  points  of 
do&rine,  I waved  thefe,  and  fingly  purfued  re- 
conciliation with  God  through  Chrift. 

On  the  2 2d  of  May  laft,  I could  think  of  no- 
thing but,  He  that  believeth  hath  everlajliug  life. 

O 2 But* 


[ 346  ] 

But  I was  afraid  of  deceiving  myfelf,  and  con- 
tinually prayed  I might  not  build  without  a foun- 
dation. Yet  I had  a fweet,  fettled  peace,  and 
for  five  days  this  fcripture  was  always  in  my 
thoughts.  On  the  28th  thofe  words  of  our  Lord 
'vere  as  ftrongly  imprefl  upon  me,  “ If  ye  being 
"evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  to  your  chit- 
“ dren,  how  much  more fiall your  heavenly  Father 
f£  give  the  Holy  Ghof  to  them  that  ajk  him.”  At 
the  fame  time  I was  inceffantly  carried  out,  to 
afk,  that  he  would  give  me  the  wiinefsof  his  Spi- 
rit. On  the  29th  I had  what  I afked  of  him,  viz- 
the  7rXr,%t(pogix.  wirtv c,  which  is, 

“ Requies  in  fanguine  Chrifti.  Firma  fiducia 
“ in  Deum  & perfuafio  de  gratia  divina  ; tranquif- 
“ litas  mentis  fumma,  atqtie  ferenitas  & pax  ; 
“ cum  abfentia  omnis  defiderii  carnalis,  & ceffa- 
“ tione  peccatorum  etiam  internorum.  Verbo, 
“ Cor  quod  antea  inllar  maris  turbulenti  agita- 
“ balur,  in  fumma  fuit  requie,  inftar  maris  fe- 
“ reni  & tranquiili.” 

Repofe  in  the  blood  of  Chrift.  A firm  confi- 
“ deuce  in  God,  and  perfuafion  of  his  favour: 
“ ferene  peace  and  ftedfaft  tranquillity  of  mind, 
“ with  a deliverance  from  every  flefhly  defire, 
“ and  from  every  outward  and  inward  fin.  In  a 
“ word,  my  heart  which  before  was  toft  like  a 
“ troubled  fea,  was  ftill  and  quiet,  and  in  fweet 
“ calm.” 

In  the  prefent  difcipline  of  the  church  of 

Hernhuth 


[ 34  7 ] 

Hernhuth,  all  which  is  alterable  at  the  difcretion 
of  the  fuperiors,  may  be  obferved, 

I-  The  officers  of  it. 

II.  The  divifion  of  the  people. 

Ill  The  conferences,  leftures,  and  govern- 
ment of  the  children, 

IV.  The  order  of  divine  fervice. 

I.  The  officers  are,  1.  The  deleft  of  the  whole 
church ; behde  whom,  there  is  an  eldeft  of  every 
particular  branch  of  it.  There,  is  alfo  a diftinft: 
eldeft  over  the  young. men,  and  another  over  the 
boys;  a female  eldeft  over  the  women  in  ge* 
neral,  and  another  over  the  unmarried,  andano- 
ther  over  the  girls.  2.  The  Teachers , who  are 
four.  3.  The  Helpers  (or  Deacons).  4.  The 
Overfeers  (or  Cenfors ) eleven  in  number  at  Hern- 
huth. 5.  The  Monitors,  who  are  eleven  like- 
wife.  6.  The  Almoners,  eleven  alfo.  7.  The 
Attenders  on  the  Tick,  feven  in  number.  Laftly, 
The  Jervants,  or  deacons  of  the  loweft  order, 

• II.  The  people  of  Hernhuth  are  divided,  j. 
Into  five  male  daffies,  viz.  the  children,  the  mid-; 
die  children,  the  big  children,  the  young  men,' 
and  the  married.  The  females  are.divided  in  the 
fame  manner,  2.  Into  eleven  claffieS,  according 


[ 348  ] 

to  the  houles  where  they  live  : and  in  each  clafs 
is  an  helper,  an  overfeer,  a monitor,  an  almoner 
and  a fervant.  3.  Into  about  ninety  bands,  each 
of  which  meets  twice  at  leafl,  but  mod  of  them 
three  times  a week,  To  confefs  their  faults  one  to 
another , and.  pray  for  one  another , that  they  may 
be  healed, . 

III.  The  rulers  of  the  church,  i.  e.  The  elders,, 
teachers,  helpers,  have  a conference  ever)'  week, 
purely  concerning  theftate  of  fouls,  and  another 
concerning  the  inftitution  of  youth.  Beiide 
which,  they  have  one  every  day,  concerning  out- 
ward things  relating  to  the  church. 

The  overfeers,  the  monitors,  the  almoners, 
the  attenderson  the  fick,  the  fervauts,  the  fchool- 
mafters,  the  young  men,  and  the  children,  have 
likewife  each  a conference  once  a week,  relat- 
ing to  their  feveral  offices  and  duties. 

Once  a weekalfo  is  a conference  for^lrangers ; 
at  which  any  perfon  may  be  prefent,  and  propofa- 
any  queflion  or  doubt,  which  he  defires  to  have 
refolved. 

In  Hernhuth  is  taught  reading,  writing,  arith- 
metic, Latin,  Greek,  Hebrew,  French,  Engliih, 
hiftory  and  geography. 

There  is  a Latin,  French,  and  an  Engliffi 
IeFture  every  day,  as  well  as  an  hiftorical  and 
geographical  one.  On  Monday,  Wednefday, 
Friday  and  Saturday  is  the  Hebrew  le&ure;  the 
Greek  on  Tjiefdav  and  Thursday, 


It. 


C 349  J 

In  the  Orphan-houfe,  the  larger  children  rife 
at  five  (the  fmaller,  between  five  and  fix.)  After 
a little  private  prayer  they  work  till  feven.  Then 
they  are  at  fchool  till  eight,  the  hour  of  prayer. 
At  nine  thofe  who  are  capable  of  it  learn  Latin, 
at  ten  French.  At  eleven  they  all  walk.  At 
twelve  they  dine  together,  and  walk  till  one.  - 
At  one  they  work  or  learn  writing  ; at  three 
arithmetic;  at  four  hiftory ; at  five  they  work; 
at  fix  fup  and  work ; at  feven,  after  a time  fpent 
in  prayer,  walk;  at  eight  the  fmaller  chil- 
dren go  to  bed,  the  larger  to  the  public  fervice. 
When  this  is  ended,  they  work  again,  till  (at 
ten)  they  go  to  bed. 

IV.  Every  morning  at  eight  is  finging  and  ex- 
pofition  of  fcripture  ; and  commonly  fhort 
prayer. 

At  eight  in  the  evening,  there  is-  commonly 
only  mental  prayer, + joined  with  the  finging  and 
expounding. 

The  faithful  afterwards  fpend  a quarter  of  an 
hour  in  prayer,  and  conclude  with  the  kifs  of 
peace. 

On  Sunday  morning  the  fervice  begins  at  fix  ; 
at  nine  the  public  fervice  at  Bertholdfdorf.  At 
one  the  eldeft  gives  feparate  exhortations  to  all 
the  members  of  the  church,  divided  into  four- 
teen little  claffes  for  that  purpofe,  fpending  about 
a quarter  of  an  hour  with  each  clafs.  At  four 
begins  the  evening  fervice  at  Bertholdfdorf, 
clofed  by  a conference  in  the  church.  At  eight 
O 4 is 

t This  is  unfcriptural. 


E 3S°  1 

i«  the  ufual  fervice  ; after  which  the  young 
men,  Tinging  praifes  round  the  town,  conclude 
the  day. 

On  the  firlt  Saturday  in  the  month,  the  Lord’s 
fupper  is  adminiftered.  From  ten  in  the  morn- 
ing till  two,  the  eldefl  fpeaks  with  each  com- 
municant in  private,  concerning  the  date  of  his 
foul.  At  two  they  dine;  then  wafh  one  ano- 
ther’s feet,  after  which  thev  fing  and  pray. 
About  ten  they  receive  in  lilence  without  any 
ceremony,  and  continue  in  filence  till  they  part 
at  twelve. 

On  the  fecond  Saturday  is  the  folemn  prayer- 
day  for  the  children  : the  third  is  the  day  of  ge- 
neral intercelfion  and  thankfgiving  : and  on  the 
fourth  is  the  great  monthly  conference  of  all  the 
fuperiors  of  the  church. 

For  the  fatisfa&ion  of  thofewho  defire  a more 
full  account,  I have  added, 


An  Extract  of  the  conjlitution  of  the  church  of  the 
Moravian  brethren  at  Hernhuth,  laid  before  the 
Theological  Order  at  JVirte/nberg,  in  the  year 
1733* 

i.  rT,'HEY  have  a fenior,  or  eldef,  who  is  to 
affift  the  church  by  his  counfel  and 
prayers,  and  to  determine  what  fhall  be  done 
in  matters  of  importance.  Of  him  is  required, 
~hat  he  be  well  experiened  iia  the  things  of  God, 

and 


[ 35*  1 

and  witneffed  to  by  all  for  holinefs  of  converfa- 
tion. 

2.  They  have  deacons,  or  helpers,  who  are  in 
the  private  affemblies,  to  inflruft  r to  take  care 
that  outward  things  be  done  decently  and  in  or- 
der; and  to  fee  that  every  member  of  the  church 
grows  in  grace,  and  walks  fuitable  to  his  holy  call- 
ing. 

3.  The  pajlor , or  teacher , is  to  be  an  overfeer 
of  the  whole  flock,  und  every  perfon  therein  ; to 
baptize  the  children  ; diligently  to  form  their 
minds,  and  bring  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  ad~ 
monition  of  the  Lord : when  he  finds  in  them  a 
fmcere  love  of  the  crofs,  then  to  receive  them 
into  the  church:  * to  adminifler  the  fupper  of 
the  Lord : to  join  in  marriage  thofe  who  are  al- 
ready married  to  Chrifl  : to  reprove,  admonifh, 
quicken,  comfort,  as  need  requires  : to  declare 
the  whole  counfel  of  God  : taking  heed  at  ail 
times,  to  fpeak  as  the  oracles  of  God,  and  agree- 
ably to  the  analogy  of  faith  : to  bury  thofe  who 
have  died  in  the  Lord,  and  to  keep  that  fafe 
which  is  committed  to  his  charge,  even  the  pure 
doftrine  and  apoflolical  difcipline  which  we  have 
received  from  our  fore-fathers. 

4.  We  have  alfo  another  fort  of  deacons  who 
take  care  that  nothing  be  wanting  to  the  orphan- 
houfe,  the  poor,  the  tick,  and  the  Grangers. 
Others  again  there  are,  who  are  peculiarly  to 
take  care  of  the  fick  ; and  others,  of  the  poor. 

And 


[ 35»  ] 

And  two  of  thefe  are  intrufted  with  the  public 
flock,  and  keep  accounts  ©f  all  that  is  received  or 
expended. 

5.  There  are  women  who  perform  each  of  the 
above-mentioned  offices,  among  thofe  of  their 
own  fex  : for  none  of  the  men  converfe  with 
them,  befide  the  eldeft,  the  teacher,  and  one,  or 
fometimes  two  of  the  deacons. 

6.  Towards  magiftrates,  whether  of  a fuperior 
or  inferior  rank,  we  bear  the  greateft  reverence. 
We  chearfully  fubmit  to  their  laws;  and  even 
when  many  of  us  have  been  fpoiled  of  their 
goods,  driven  out  of  their  houfes,  and  every  way 
oppreft  by  them,  yet  they  refilled  them  not,  nei- 
opening  their  mouths,  nor  lifting  up  their  hands 
againft  them.  * In  all  things  which  do  not  im- 
mediately concern  the  inward,  fpiritual  king- 
dom of  Chrift,  we  limply,  and  without  contra- 
difling, obey  the  higher  powers.  But  with  re- 
gard to  confcience,  the  liberty  of  this  we  cannot 
fuffer  to  be  any  way  limited  or  infringed.  And 
to  this  head  we  refer  whatever  direftly  and  in  it- 
felf  tends  to  hinder  the  falvation  of  fouls : or, 
whatfoever  things  Chrift  and  his  holy  apoftles 
(who  we  knowr  meddled  not  with  outward  w'orldly 
things)  took  charge  of,  and  performed,  as  ne- 
ceffiary  for  the  conftiluting  and  well-ordering  of 
his  church.  In  thefe  things  we  acknowledge  no 
head  but  Chrift  ; and  are  determined,  God  being 
our  helper,  to  give  up,  not  only  our  goo'ds  (as 

we 


[ 353  ] 

•we  did  before)  but  life  itfelf,  rather  than  this  K- 
*berly  which  God  hath  given  us. 

7.  As  it  behoves  all  Chriftians  not  to  be  floth- 
ful  in  bufinefs,  but  diligently  to  attend  the  works 
of  their  calling ; there  are  perfons  chofen  by  the 
church,  to  fuperintend  all  thofe  who  are  em- 
ployed in  outward  bufinefs.  And  by  this  means 
alfo,  many  things  are  prevented  which  might 
©therwife  be  an  occafion  of  offence. 

8.  We  have  alfo  cenfors  and  monitors.  In  thofe 
experience  and  perfpicuity  ; in  thefe  wifdomand 
modefty  are  chiefly  required.  The  cenfors  fig- 
nify  what  they  obferve  {and  they  obferve  the 
fmalleft  things)  either  to  the, deacons  or  monitors. 
Some  monitors  there  are,  whom  all  know  to  be 
fuch ; others  who  are  fecredy  appointed;  and 
who,  if  need  require,  may  freely  admonifh  in 
-the  love  of  Chrilf,  even  the  rulers  of  the 
church. 

9.  The  church  is  fo  divided,  that  firft  the  huf- 
bands,  then  the  wives,  then  the  widows,  then  the 
maids,  then  the  young  men,  then  the  boys,  then 
the  girls,  and  laflly  the  little  children,  are  in  fo 
many  diflinfl  claffes  : each  of  which  is  daily 
vifited,  the  married  men  by  a married  man,  the 
wives  by  a wife,  and  fo  of  the  reff.  t Thefe 
larger  are  alfo  (now)  divided  into  near  ninety 
fmaller  claffes  or  bands,  over  each  of  which  one 
prefides  who  is  of  the  greateft  experience.  All 

thefe 

+ This  work  all  the  married  brethren  and  fitters,  as  well  as  at! 
the  unmarried,  perform  in  their  turns. 


[ 854  ] 

tfcefe  leaders  meet  the  fenior  every  week,  and 
lay  open  to  him  and  to  the  Lord,  whatfoever 
hinders  or  furthers  the  work  of  God,  in  the  fouls 
committed  to  their  charge. 

* 10.  In  the  year  1727,  four  and  twenty  men 
and  as  many  women  agreed,  That  each  of  them 
would  fpend  an  hour  in  every  day,  in  praying  to 
God  for  his  bleffirig  on  his  people  : and  for  this 
purpofe  both  the  men  and  the  women  chofe  a 
place,  where  any  of  their  own  fex,  who  were  in 
diftrefs,  might  be  prefent  with  them.  The  fame 
number  of  unmarried  women,  of  unmarried  men, 
of  boys,  and  of  girls,  were  aftenvards  at  their  de- 
fire, added  to  them  ; who  pour  out  their  fouls 
before  God,  not  only  for  their  own  brethren,  but 
alfo  for  other  churches  and  perfons,  that  havede- 
fired  to  be  mentioned  in  their  prayers.  And 
this  perpetual  interceffion  has  never  ceafed  day 
or  night,  ftnce  its  firft  beginning. 

11.  And  as  the  members  of  the  church  are  di- 
vided, according  to  their  refpeftive  ftates  and 
fexes ; fo  they  are  alfo,  with  regard  to  their  pro- 
ficiency in  the  knowledge  of  God.  Some  are 
dead,  fome  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  God : 
of  thefe,  fome  again  are  untra£iable,  fome  dili- 
gent, fome  zealous,  burning  with  their  firll  love.; 
fome;,  ^abes,  and  fome  young  men.  Thofe  who 
are  ftili  dead,  are  vifited  every  day.  And  of  the 
babes  in  Chrift  efpecial  care  is  taken  alfo, 
that  they  may  be  daily  infpe&ed  and  afiifled  to 


5 row 

O 


L 3 55  ] 

grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
Jefus. 

s * 12.  In  the  Orphan-houfe,  about  fevrenty  child- 
ren are  brought  up  feparate,  according  to  their 
fex : befide  which,  feveral  experienced  perfons 
are  appointed  to  confult  with  the  parenls,  touch- 
ing the  education  of  the  other  children.  In  teach- 
ing them  Chridianity,  we  make  ufe  of  Luther’s 
catechifm,  and  dudy  the  amending  their  wills  as 
well  as  their  underftanding;  finding  by  experience, 
that  when  their  will  is  moved,  they  often  learn 
more  in  a few  hours,  than  otherwife  in  many 
months.  Our  little  children  we  indraft  chief- 
ly by  hymns ; whereby  we  find  the  mod  impor- 
tant truths  mod  fuccefsfully  infinuated  into  their 
minds. 

* 13.  We  highly  reverence  marriage,  as 
greatly  conducive  to  the  kingdom  of  Chrid. 
But  neither  our  young  men  nor  women  enter 
into  it  till  they  affuredly  know,  they  are  married 
to  Chrid.  When  any  know  it  is  the  will  of 
God,  that  they  fhould  change  their  date,  both 
the  man  and  woman  are  placed  for  a time,  with 
fome  married  perfons,  who  indruft  them  how 
to  behave,  fo  that  their  married  life  may  be  pleaf- 
ing  to  God.  Then  their  defign  is  laid  before 
the  whole  church,  and  after  about  fourteen  days, 
they  are  folemnly  joined,  though  not  otherwife 
habited,  than  they  are  at  other  times.  If  they 
make  any  entertainment  (which  is  not  always) 
P they 


[ 356  ] 

they  invite  only  a few  intimate  friends,  by  whofe 
faithful  admonitions  they  may  be  the  better  pre- 
pared to  bear  their  crofs  and  fight  the  good  fight 
of  faith.  If  any  woman  is  with  child,  not  only 
efpecial  mention  is  made  of  her  in  the  public 
prayers,  but  fhe  is  alfo  exhorted  in  pri- 
vate, wholly  to  give  herfelf  up  into  the 
hands  of  her  faithful  Creator.  As  foon  as 
a child  is  born,  prayer  is  made  for  it,  and 
if  it  may  be,  it  is  baptized  in  the  prefence 
of  the  whole  church.  Before  it  is  weaned, 
it  is  brought  into  the  affembly  on  the  Lord  s 
days. 

14.  Whoever  either  of  the  male  or  female  child- 
ren, feek  God  with  their  whole  heart,  need  not 
be  much  incited  to  come  to  the  Lord’s  fupper. 
Before  |hey  receive,  they  are  examined  both  in 
private  by  the  pallor,  and  alfo  in  public:  and 
then,  after  an  exhortation  by  the  fenior , are  by 
him  through  laying  on  of  hands,  added  to  the 
church  and  confirmed.  The  fame  method  is  ufed 
with  thofe  who  renounce  the  papal  fuperflitions, 
or  who  are  turned  from  the  fervice  of  Satan  to 
God;  and  that,  if  they  defire  it,  although  they  are 
not  young;  yea,  though  they  are  well  flricken  in 
years.  * 

15.  Once  or  twice  a month,  either  at  Bert- 
holdfdorf,  or  if  it  may  be,  at  Heruhuth,  all  the 
church  receives  the  Lord’s  fupper.  It  cannot 
be  exprell  how  great  the  power  of  God  is  then 
prefent  among  us.  A general  confeflion  of  fins 

is 


[ 3 57  ] 

is  made  by  one  of  the  brethren  in  the  name  of  all. 
Then  a few  folid  queftions  are  alked;  which 
when  they  have  anfwered,  the  abfolution  or  re- 
miflion  of  fins  is  either  pronounced  to  all  in  ge- 
neral, or  confirmed  to  every  particular  perfon, 
by  the  laying  on  of  hands.  The  feniors  firft  re- 
ceive ; then  the  reft  in  order,  without  any  regard 
had  to  worldly  dignity,  in  this,  any  more  than  in 
any  other  of  the  folemn  offices  of  religion.  After 
receiving,  all  the  men  (and  fo  the  women) 
meet  together,  to  renew  their  covenant  with 
God,  to  feek  his  face,  and  exhort  one  another 
to  the  patience  of  hope  and  the  labour  of 
love. 

16.  They  have  a peculiar  efteem  for  lots,  and 
accordingly  ufe  them  both  in  public  and  private, 
to  decide  points  of  importance,  when  the  rea- 
fons  brought  on  each  fide  appear  to  be  of 
equal  weight.  And  they  believe  this  to  be 
then  the  only  way,  of  wholly  fetting  afide 
their  own  will,  of  acquitting  themfelves  of  all 
blame,  and  clearly  knowing  what  is  the  will  of 
God. 

17.  At  eight  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  even- 
ing we  meet  to  pray  to  and  praife  God,  and  to 
read  and  hear  the  holy  fcriptures  : the  time  we 
ufually  fpend  in  deep,  is  from  eleven  at  night  till 
four  in  the  morning.  So  that  allowing  three 
hours  a day  for  taking  the  food  both  of  out- 
bodies  and  fouls,  there  remain  fixteen  for 

P 2 work- 


[ 358  ] 

work.  And  this  fpace  thofe  who  are  in  health 
fpend  therein,  with  all  diligence  and  faith- 
fulnefs. 

18.  Two  men  keep  watch  every  night  in  the 
ftreet,  as  do  two  women,  in  the  women’s 
apartment:  that  they  may  pour  out  their 
fouls  for  thofe  that  deep;  and  by  their  hymns 
raife  the  hearts  of  any  who  are  awake  to 
God. 

19.  For  the  farther  birring  up  the  gift  wMch 
is  in  us,  fometimes  we  have  public,  fometimes 
private  love-feafls : at  which  we  take  mode- 
rate refrefhment,  with  gladnefs  and  fmglenefs 
of  heart,  and  the  voice  of  praife  and  thankfgiv- 
ing. 

20.  If  any  man  among  us,  having  been  often 
admonifhed,  and  long  forborn,  perfifts  in  walking 
unworthy  of  his  holy  calling,  he  is  no  longer  ad- 
mitted to  the  Lord’s  fupper.  If  he  hill  continues 
in  his  fault,  hating  to  be  reformed,  the  laft  hep 
is,  publicly,  and  often  in  the  midft  of  many 
pravers  and  tears,  to  call  him  cut  of  our  congre- 
gation. But  great  is  our  joy,  if  he  then  fee  the 
error  of  his  ways,  fo  that  we  may  receive  him 
among  us  again. 

* 21.  Moll  of  our  brethren  and  fillers,  have  in 
fome  part  of  their  life,  experienced  holy  mourn- 
ing and  forrow  of  heart;  and  have  afterwards 
been  allured,  that  there  wras  no  more  condemna- 
tion jor  them , being  pajfed  from  death  unto  life. 
They  are  therefore  far  from  fearing  to  die,  or 

defiring 


[ 359  3 

defiring  to  live  on  earth;  knowing  that  to  them 
to  die  is  gain , and  being  confident  that  they  are  the 
*rare  of  him,  whofe  are  th  ei/fues  of  life  and  death. 
Wherefore  they  depart  as  out  of  one  chamber 
into  another.  And  after  the  foul  has  left  its  ha- 
bitation, their  remains  are  depofited  in  the  earth, 
appointed  for  that  purpofe.  And  the  furvivors 
are  greatly  comforted,  and  rejoice  over  them? 
with  a joy  the  world  knoweth  -not  of. 


The  End  of  the  Twenty  fixth  Volume, 


. .j  , ' 


THE 


CONTENTS 


Of  the  Twenty -Sixth  Volume. 


Page 

An  extraft  from.  Dr.  Cadogan’i  dijfertation 
on  the  gout,  and  all  chronic  difeafes  — 3 

A Jhort  Englifh  grammar  — — 53 

Diredions  concerning  pronunciation  and 
gflure  — — 67 

Journal  I. — An  extrad  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John 
Wefleys  Journal  from  his  embarking  for 
Georgia,  03.  14,  173 5,  to  his  return  to 
London , Feb.  1.  1737-8.  — — 83 

Journal  II. — An  extrad  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John 
Wefeys  Journal, from  Feb,  1,  1737-8,  to 
his  return  from  Germany,  * — — 245 ; 


•• 


Date  Due 

Demco  293-5 

