iiMi^i?l^i^':fe^^i«^^^^iaa^I



CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRflHV



3 1924 098 499 5



CORNELL

UNlVERSm

LIBRARY




052023




The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924098499514



THE

PULPIT COMMENTARY,

EDITED BY THE

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D.,

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ;
AND BY THE

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY THE



VEN. AECHDEACON E. W. FAEEAE, D.D., F.E.S.— EIGHa EBV. H. COTTEEILL, D.D., F.E.S.B.

— VEET EEV. PEINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— EEV. CANON G. EAWLINSON, M.A.

— EEV. A. PLUMMBE, M.A., D.D.



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
New York and Toeonto.



THE

PULPIT COMMENTARY,



EDITED BT THB



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A.,

TIOAS ASD BDBAI. DEAN OF 8T. PAN0BA8, AND BXAMUmO CHAPLAIN TO THB UMB
BIBBOP or OLOCaBgTBB AND BBISTOL ;



AND BY THB

KEY. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A.



EXODUS.

(Kiposition anil l^omfletfts
By EEV. GEOKGE KAWLINSO^^, M.A.,

•AlIDBB PBOFESSOB OF ANCIENT BISTORT IN THE UNITEBSITT OF OXFOBD, AB£
OANOH or OANTEBBUBT.



l^omfUes bg l^'attous autfiots.

EEV. J. OKR. MJL, B.D. BEV. D. YOUNO. B.A,

BBV. a A. GOODHAET, M.A. BEV. J. UEQUHABT, M.\,
BBY. H. T. BOBJOHNS, BJL.

roL. n.



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
New Yokk and Toronto.



THE



BOOK OF EXODUS.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XV.

Vers. I — 21. — The Sono op Moses. Full of
gratitude, joy, and happiness — burning with a
desire to vent in devotional utterance of the
most fitting kind, his intense and almost
ecstatic feelings, Moses, who to his other
extraordinary powers, ndded the sublime gift
of poesy, composed, shortly after the passage,
a hymn of praise, and sang it with a chorus
of the people as a thanksgiving to the
Almighty. The hymn itself is generally
alluwed to be one of transcendent beauty.
Deriving probably the general outline of its
lorm and character of its rhythm from the
Egyptian poetry of the time, with which
Moses had been familiar from his youth, it
embodies ideas purely Hebrew, and remark-
able for grandeur, simplicity, and depth.
haturaUy, as being the first outburst of the
poetical genius of the nation, and also con-
nected with the very commencement of the
national life, it exerted the most important
torraative influence upon the later Hebrew
poeric style, furnishing a pattern to the later
lyric poets, from which they but rarely



deviated. The " parallelism of the memben,"
which from the middle of the last century hw
been acluiowledged to be the only real
rhythmical law of Hebrew poetry, with its
three forms of " synonymous, antithetic, and
synthetic (or verbal) parallelism " is here
found almost as distinctly marked as in any of
the later compositions. At the same time, a
greater lyrical freedom is observable than was
afterwards practised. The song divides itself
primarily into two parts : — the first (vers.
1 — 12) retrospective, celebrating the recent
deliveranqe; the second (vers. 13 — 18) pro-
spective, describing the effects that would flow
from the deliverance in future time. The
verbs indeed of the second part are at first
grammatical preterite.'; but (as Kalisch ob-
serves; they are " according to the sense,
futures " — their past form denoting only that
the prophet sees the events revealed to him
as though they were already accomplished.
Hence, after a time, he slides into the future
(ver. 16). The second part is continuous, and
has no marked break : the first sub-divides
into three unequal portions, each coinmenciu);
with an address to Jehovah, and each tercu-



JtlODtJS — H.



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CU. XV. 1-



Bating with a statement of the great fact,
that the Eg^-ptians were swallowed up. These
three portious are : 1. vera. 2 — 5, " The Lord
is my strength," to " Thej sank into the bot-
tom as a stone." 2. vers. 6 — 10, " Thy right
hand, Lord," to " They sank like lead in
the mighty waters." 3. vers. 11 — 12, " Who
is like unto Thee, Lord," to " The earth
swallowed them." The first verse stands
separate from the whole, as an introduction,
and at the same time as the refrain. Moses
and a chorus of men commenced their chant
with it, and probably proceeded to the end
.of rer. 5, when Miriam, with the Hebrew
women, interposed with a repetition of the
refrain (see 'ei. 31). The chant of the
males wu resumed and carried to the close of
Ter. 10. when again the refrain came in. It
was f n>-ther repeated after ver. 12 ; and once
more at the close of the whole " song." Simi-
lar refrains, or burdens, are found in Egyptian
melodies

Past L

Ver. 1. — Then lang Hoses and the children
sf IsraeL It is in accordance with the general
modesty of Moses, that he says nothing of the
aomposition of the " song." No serious doubt
of his authorship has ever been entertained ;
but the general belief rests on the improba-
bility of there having been among the Is-
raelites a second literary genius of the highest
order, without any mention being made of him.
The joint-singing by Moses and " the children
of Israel " implies the previous training of a
choir, and would seem to show that the Is-
raelites remained for some days encamped at
the point which they had occupied on quitting
the bed of the sea. He hath triumphed glo-
liously. Literally, " He is gloriously glorious."
(^v5ii|(us S«S<(fa<rTai, LXX.) The horse
and his rider. Bather, " The horse and
his driver." Chariots, not cavalry, are in the
mind of the writer.

Ver. 2. — ^The Lord is my strength and
song. Literally, " My strength and song is
Jah." The name Jah bad not previously been
used. It is commonly regarded as an abbre-
viated form of Jehovah, and was the form
generally used in the termination of uames, as
Abijah, Ahaziah, Hezekiah, Zedekiah, Mount
Moriah, etc. It takes the place of " Jehovah "
here, probably on account of the rhythm. He
is become my salvation. Literally, " He has
been to me for salvation," i.e., " He has de-
livered me out of the hand of Pharaoh and his
host, and so saved me from destruction." I
will prepare him a habitation. This traus-
Ution seems to have come originally from the
Targum of Unkelos, who paraphrases the



single word of the text by the phrase " 1 will
buUd him a sanctuary." The meanmg is a
possiblB one : but most modem commentators
prefer to connect the verb used with a root
meaning " beautiful," and translate " I wiU
glorify him." (So Geseuius, Kosenmiiller,
Knobel,Kalisch,Cook. The LXX have Sojio-ia.
The Vulgate has glorifiedbo. The Syrian and i i
Coptic versions agree, as do also the^argums
of Jonathan and of Jerusalem.) The Qod of
my father. See the comment on ch. iii, 6.

Ver. 3. — ^A man of war. A strong anthro-
pomorphism, but one that could scarcely be
misunderstood — " a man of war," meaning
commonly "a warrior," or "one mighty in
battle " (Ps. xxiv. 8). God's might had just
been proved, in that he alone had discomfited
and destroyed the most potent armed force in
the whole world. The Lord is lis name.
Jehovah — ^the alone-existing One "truly de-
scribes him," before whom all otiier «\.^ence
fades and falls into nothingness. On the full
meaning of the name, see the eommeut on
ch. iii. 14.

Ver. 4. — Pharaoh's chariots and his host.
The " host " of this passage is not the " array "
of ch. xiv. 9, though in the original the same
word is used, but the whole multitude of tliaiie
who rode in the chariots, and were drowned in
the sea. Hath he oast. Or "hurled." The
verb commonly expresses the hurling of a
javelin or the shooting of an arrow. His
chosen captains. Compare ch, xiv. 7. Are
drowned. Literally, " were submerged." The
word describes the act of drowning, not
the state of lying drowned in the depths of
the sea.

Ver. 6. — ^The depths have covered them.
Eather " covered them." Into the bottom.
Literally, " into the abyss." Like a stone.
The warriors who fought in chariots com-
monly wore coats of ma3, composed of bronze
plates sewn on to a linen base, and overlap-
ping one another. The coats covered the arms
to the elbow, and descended nearly to the
knee. They must have been exceedingly
heavy; and the warrior who wore one must
have sunk at once, without a struggle, like a
stone or a Imnp of lead (verse 10).

Vers. 6 — 18. — Between verses 5 and 6,
Miriam's chorus was probably interposed —
" Sing ye unto the Lord," etc. Then began
the second strophe or stanza of the ode. It
is, in the main, expansive and exegetical of
the preceding stanza, going into greater de-
tail, and drawing a contrast between tht
antecedent pride and arrogance of the Egyp-
tians and their subsequent miserable fall.

Ver. 6.— Thy nght hand, Lord. Another
anthropomorphism, here used for the first time
Compare ver. 12 ; Deut. xxxiii. 2 ; and the



OH. XV 6— 18.3



TITE BOOK OF EXODUS.



Fsalmg, passim. It become glorioas. Or
"is glorious." Kalisch rightly regards verses
6 and 7 as containing " a general description
of God's omnipotence and justice," and notes
that the poet only returns to the subject of the
Egyptians in verse 8. So also Knobel. Hath
d^hed in pieoes. Bather, "Will dash in
pieces," or "dashes in pieces" — a general
statement.

Ver. 7. — ^Thou hast overthrown, etc. Here
again the verbs are future. Translate — " thou
wilt overthrow," or " thou overthrowest them
that rise up against thee; thou (wilt send)
sendest forth thy wrath, which consumes them
as stubble." The metaphor in the last clause
was one known to the Egyptians.

Ver. 8. — With the blast of thy nostrils the
waters were gathered together. Poetically,
Moses describes the east wind which God set
in motion as "the blast" or "breath of his
nostrils." By means of it, he says, the waters
were "gathered together," or "piled up;"
then, growing bolder in his imagery, he repre-
sents the floods as " standing in a heap " on
either side, and the depths as "congealed."
No donbt, if these terms are meant to be taken
literally, the miracle must have been one in
which " the sea " (as Kalisch says) " giving
up its nature, formed with its waves a firm
wall, and instead of streaming like a fluid,
congealed into a hard substance." But the
question is, are we justified in taking literally
the strong expressions of a highly wrought
poetical description ?

Ver. 9. — The enemy said. This verse is
important as giving the aniimis of the pursuit,
showing what was in the thoughts of the
soldiers who flocked to Pharaoh's standard at
his call — a point which had not been pre-
viously touched. It is remarkable as a de-
parture from the general stately order of
Hebrew poesy, and for what has been called
its "abrupt, gasping" style. The broken
speech imitates the utterance of one at once
eager and out of breath, I will divide the
spoil. The Israelites, it must be remembered,
had gone out of Egypt laden with ornaments
of silver and of gold, and accompanied by
flocks and herds of great value. Pharaoh's
soldiers regarded this wealth as legitimate
plunder, and intended to appropriate it. My
lust. Literally, " my soul. Eage and hate
were the passions to be satiated, rather than
lust. My hand shall destroy them. So the
Vulgate, Onkelos, Eosenmijller, Knobel, Ka-
lisch, and others. The LXX. have xvpuvaet,
"acquire the lordship over them" (whence
our marginal rendering) But the drawn
•word points to death rather than recapture.

Ver. 10.— Thou didst blow with thy wind.
Here we have another fact not mentioned in
the direct narrative, but entirely harmonising
with it The immediate cause of the return
af the waters, aa of their retirement, was a



wind. This wind must have come from a new
quarter, or its effects would not have been tc
bring the water back. We may reasonably
suppose a wind to have arisen contrary to the
former one, blowing from the north-west or
the north, which would have driven the watei
of the Bitter Lakes southward, and thus ]«ra
duced the effect spoken of. The effect may,
or may not, have been increased by the flow of
the tide in the Bed Sea. They sank as lead.
See the comment on verse 5.

Vers. 11, 12 contain the third stanza of the
first division of the ode. It is short compared
to the other two, containing merely a fresh
ascription of praise to God, cast in a new form ;
and a repetition of the great fact which the
poem commemorates — the Egyptian over-
throw. We conceive that Miriam's chorui
(ver. 21) was again intei'posed between verses
10 and IL

Ver. 11.— Who is like nnto thee, Lord,
among the gods 1 It was one great object of
the whole series of miraculous visitations
wheretf Egypt had been the scene, that the
true God, Jehovah, should be exalted far abnve
all the gods of the heathen. (See ch. vii. 5 ;
xiv. i, 18.) Moses therefore makes this one
of his topics of praise ; and at the same time
notes tliee points in which God has 110
rival — 1. Holiness; 2. Awfulness; and 3. .Mi-
raculous power. Compare Ps. Lxxxvi. 8 ;
" Among the gods there is none like i.uto
thee, Lord ; neither are there any works like
thy works." Fearful in praises — i.e., "tu be
viewed with awe even when we praise Him."

Ver. 12.— Thou stretohedst out thy right
hand. Thou hadst only to stretch out an
arm, and at once thy enemies perished. The
earth swallowed them np — i'.e., the sea, which
is a part of the earth.

Part XL

Ver. 13. — ^Thon in thy mercy hast led
forth. Or "leadest forth." See the Intro-
duction to the chapter. Which thou hast
redeemed. See the comment on ch. vi. 6.
Thou hast guided. Or " thou guidest." Tuj
holy habitation. By "God's holy habita-
tion" some understand Mount Sinai, others
Canaan, others Mount Moriah, or even the
temple there to be built ultimately. That
Sinai is not intended seems clear from verses
14, 15, where the nations mentioned are surh
as were untouched by the occupation of lliat
mountain. Canaan might sufficiently auawer
the requirements of the present verse, but
scarcely comes up to those of verse 17.
Altogether, it is clear that Moses knew tlie.-«
would be a place in the laud of Cana.ui wiiers
God would "put his name" {ULut. nil. i,

B 2



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[oh. rr. 1»— 20.



1 1, 14 ; xiT. 23, 24 ; xvi. 6, 11 ; xxvl. 2 ; etc.) ;
aud it would seem to be not unlikely that he
majr have known where the place would be by
•pecial revelation.

Ver. 14. — The people shall hear. — Bather,
"the peoples" — i.e., the tribes, or nations, of
these parts — ^Philistines, Amalekites, Bdom-
ites, Moabites, etc. — will hear of the wonders
done in Egypt, especially of the crowning
wonder of all — Israel's passage through the
Bed Sea and Egypt's destruction in it — and
will in consequence tremble with fear when
the Israelites approach them, and offer them
no effectual opposition. Falestina. This is a
Greek form. The Hebrew is PhUdsheth,
which would perhaps be best translated
" Phjlistia." (Compare Ps. Ix. 8 ; Ixxxvii.
4; cviii. 9.) The Philistine country was a
strip of territory extending along the coast of
the Mediterranean from a little below Gaza
on the south, nearly to Mount Carmel on the
north. It is curious that the Philistines are
not mentioned under that name on any of
the early Egyptian monuments. They may
perhaps be the Puruiata of the time of
Ruueses III., whom some however identify
with the Pelasgi.

Ver. 15. — ^Ihe Dnkes of Sdom. Compare
Qen. xxxvi. 15. By the time that the Israel-
ites approached the borders of Edom, the
dukes had given place to kings (Num. xx. 14),
and eveiyding like abject fear of Israel had
passed away. The Edomitea " came out
against Moses with much people and with
a strong hand," and refused to allow the
Israelites passage through their borders (ib.
vers. 20, 21). The mighty men of Uoab.
The alarm of the Moabites was indicated by
Balak's efforts to induce Balaam to curse the
Israelites (Num. xxii.-xxiv.). By their
" mighty men " some understood men of un-
usual strength and stature (Cook) ; but the
expression, which is very frequent both in the
prophetical and the historical books, seems to
be a mere periphrasis for " warriors." All the
inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.
This prophecy received a remarkable accom-
olishment when " it came to pass that all the
kings of the Canaanites heard that the Lord
had dried up the waters of Jordan from before
the children of Israel, and their heart melted,
neither was their spirit in them any more "
(Josh. T. 1).

Ver. 16. — ^Fear and dread shall fall upon
them. Compare Deut. ii. 25 ; xi. 25. The
Edomites of Mount Seir and the Moabites
gave Israel a free passage through their bor-
ders (Deut. ii. 4-8, 18, 29), being afraid to
oppose them. Till thy people pass over,
Lord. Some see in this an anticipation of
the crossing of Jordan; but perhaps Moses
meant no more than the crossing of the
Canaanite frontier, in some place or other,
which must take place if the land was to be



occupied. The event made the expression
used peculiarly appropriate. When thou hart
purchased. By bringing his people out of
Egypt, their ownership had passed to him
from the Egyptians, just as if he had bought
them. (See ch. vi. 6, 7 ; xix. 5.)

Ver. 17. Thon shalt bring them in — t.t.,
give them possession of the hmd. And plant
them — i.e., fix them firmly in it— enable
them to take root there. The moontam of
thine inheritanoe. The land of Canaan, which
is almost whoUy mountainous, and which Grod
had given as an inheritance to his people
(Gen. XV. 7; Heb. xi. 8). The sanotoary.
See the comment on verse 13. Whioh thy
hands have established. Moses sees in idea
the sanctuary already set np, and God dwelling
in it ; and emphasises his conviction by using
the past tense.

Ver. 18. — In terms most simple yet most
grand, often imitated (Ps. X. 16; xxix. 10;
cxlvi. 10, etc.), but never surpassed, the poet
gives the final result of all God's providential
and temponuy arrangements, to wit, the eter-
nal establishment of his most glorious kingdom.
And here reaching the final consummation of
all things (1 Cor. xv. 28), he will not weaken
the impression made by adding another word,
but ends his ode.

Vers. 19— 21.— Sequel to the Song. The

" sequel " treats of two quite separate matters.
1, It asserts, in verse 19, the historic groundwork
of the song, reiterating in a condensed form
the three principal facts of the passage— already
recorded in ch. xiv. — (o) Israel's safe transit
across the sea-bed ; (b) the pursuit attempted
by the Egyptian chariot-force ; and (o) the
return of the waters upon the pursuers by
God's providential action. 2. It relates, in
verses 20 and 21, the part taken by Miriam
in the recitation of the ode, which has been
noticed in the " introduction " to the chapter.

Ver. 19. — The horse of Pharaoh, with his
chariots, and with his horsemen. Bather,
" with his chariots, and with his chariot men."
Compare ch. xiv. 23. The Lord brought
again the waters of the sea upon them. See
ch. xiv. 26, 27 : and xv. 10. The waters did
not merely return to their natural place when
the east wind ceased to blow, but were
"brought back" by miraculous power, and
with abnormal rapidity.

Ver. 20. — ^Miriam, the prophetess. Miriam
is regarded by the prophet Micah (vi. 4),
as having had a share in the deliverance of
Israel, and claims the prophetic gift in Num
xii. 2. Her claim appears to be flowed both
in the present passage, and in Num. xii. 6-8,
where the degree of her inspiration is placed
below that of Moses. She is the first womaa



CH. XT. 1—18.]



THE BOOK OF KXOnUS.



whom the Bible honouis with the title of
" prophetess." Prophetesses were common \a
Ggjrpt at a much earlier date ; and tlms, that
. «,«„»„ should have the gift would hare

It VTUUlall

seemed no strange thing to the Hebrews.
For examples of other prophetesses, see Judg.
It. 4 ; 2 Kings xxii. 14 ; Is. yiii. 3 ; Luke
ii. 36. The sister of Aaron, Compare Nmu.
xxvi. 59. Miriam is generally regarded as
the sister of Moses mentioned in Ex. ii. 4-8,
whose name is not there given. If so, she
was considerably older than either Moses or
Aaron. Took a timbrel. By "a timbrel"
our translators meant what is now called " a
tambourine." Such instruments were conmion
in Egypt (Wilkinson, Ancient Egi/ptiana,
vol. i. p. 93), and in the representations are
generaUy played by women. The separation
of the men and women into distinct bands was
an Egyptian custom; as likewise was the
execution of dances by performers who ac-
companied their steps with music (ibid. vol.
n. pp. 233, 301).

ver. 21. — Uiriam answered them, Miriam,
with her chorus of women, answered the
chorus of men, responding at the termination
of each stanza or separate part of the ode with



the refrain, " Sing ye to the Lord," etc. (Sw

the " Introduction to this chapter.) Whil«

responding, the female chorus both danced

and struck their tambourines. This use oi

. ,, ■ ceremonial, so contrary

dancing m a religious ' ■'

to Western ideas of decorum, is quite con-
sonant with Oriental practice, both ancient
and modern. Other examples of it in Scripture
are David's dancing before the ark (2 Sam. vi.
16), the dancing of Jephthah's daughter (Judg.
xi. 84), and that of the virgins of Shiloh (il>.
xxi. 21). It is also mentioned with approval
in the Psalms (cxlix. 3; cl. 4). Dancing
was practised as a religious ceremony in
Egypt, in Phrygia, in Thrace, by the Phoe-
nicians, by the Syrians, by the Komans, and
others. In the nature of things there is
clearly nothing unfitting or indecorous in a
dedication to religion of what has been called
" the poetry of gesture." But human infirmity
has connected sncb terrible abuses with the
practice that the purer religions have either
discarded it or else denied it admission into
their ceremonial. It stiU however lingers in
Mohammedanism among those who are called
" dancing dervishes," whose extraordinary pe^
formances are regarded as acts of devotion



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 1 — 18. — The song of Moses a pattern thanlcsgiving. There is nothing in the
whole range of sacred or profane literature more fresh, more vigorous, more teeming
with devotional thought than this wonderful poem. In rhythm it is grand and
sonorous, in construction skilful and varied, in the quality of the thoughts lofty, in the
mode of expression at once simple and sublime. Partly historic, partly prophetic, it
describes the past with marvellous power, and gives with a few touches a glorious
picture of the future. Throughout it breathes the warmest love of God, the deepest
thankfulness to him, the strongest regard for his honour. We may well take it for our
model when we have to thank Gud : —

I. FoK A TEMi'ORAL DELiVEnANCB ; and observe (1) its matter; (2) its manner; (3)
its form. (1) Its matter comprises (a) distinct and repeated enunciation of the deliver-
ance itself with expatiation on its circumstances ; (6) anticipation of further advantages
to flow from the deliverance in the future; (c) transition from the particular mercy to
the consideration of God's power, greatness and goodness in the abstract ; and (d) glorifi-
cation of God on all three accounts. (2) Its manner comprises, among other points,
(a) beginning and ending with praise ; (h) intermixture of the praise with the grounds
of praiso; (c) persistence and repetition, but with the introduction of new touches.
(3 1 Its form is (a) poetic ; (b) discontinuous, or broken into stanzas ; (c) irregular. Our
thanksoivin<'8 for great national or even great personal deliverances may weU, if our
powers°suiBce, take a poetic shape. Poetry is more expressive than prose, more heart-
stirrine, more enthusiastic. It is also bettor remembered, and it is less diffuse.

II Ion SPIRITUAL DELivEBAKCE FuoM THE EoYPT OP SIN. Each man s dehverance
willhave its own peculiar features, which he will do weU to note and make special
mibiects of thankfulness, not sparing repetition, that he may present the natter to
himself in various lights, and see all God's goodness in respect of it. Each deliverance
will also lead naturally to prospective thoughts extending beyond the wilderness of this
Ufe to the Canaan which is our inheritance. Each will profitably lead us to go beyond
ourselves, and dwell for a while on the general attributes of God, whence proceed th,
mercies that we indivi.lually experience ; and we shall do wefl to praise God on aU tbeM
^uDts. Manner and form are of less importance than matter, and admit of more



6 THE BOOK OF EXODTJS. , [oh xv. 1—19.

variety without sensilile loss; but even here "the song" furnishes a pattern oq which
it would he hard to improve. 'J he grounds for preferring poetry to prose for sucli an
outpouring of the heart as a thanksgiving have been already stated. The propriety ol
beginning and ending with praise is unquestionable. Repetition has a value as deepen-
ing impressions, and affording opportunity for remedying accid^tal coldness or inatten-
tion In private devotion the actual repetition of the very same words has an occasional
place, as we see by our Lord's example in the garden of Gethsemane (Matt. xxvi. 44) ;
but in a composition, phrases should be varied. Moses's song may well guide us as to
the extent and character of such variation (f.g., vers. 5, 10, and 12).

Vers. 20, 21. — The aid which devout womin can render to the Church. There are
religions which exclude women from consideration altogether, express a doubt whether
they have souls, and assign them no special Church work. But Judaism did not make
this mistake. It utilised the services of women —

I. As PEOPHETESSES. Miriam was a prophetess. So was Deborah, whose song is one
of the most beautiful compositions in the Bible (Judges v. 2 — 31). So was Huldah,
who delivered God's message to Hezekiah (2 Kings xxii. 14 — 20). So was Anna
(Luke ii. SG), whom the tradition makes the virgin's mother. God did not disdain to
hold spiritual converse with women and enlighten them supernaturally ; nnr did the
Israelites omit to take cognizance of the fact and give such persons their due honour.

II. As NATIONAL DELiVEEEES. Deborah "judged Israel" (Judges iv. 4), and it was
she, rather than Barak, who delivered the Israelites fi-om Jabin (ib. vers. 8, 14). Esther
saved her people from the malice of Haman. Judith is said to have delivered them
from Holofernes. Sex was no disqualification for high place among the Jews, any more
than among their neighbours, the Arabs. 'J he queens of Judab obtain constant men-
tion in Kings and Chronicles.

III. As FARTiciFATOBS vn BELioious CEBEMOKIALS. In the instance of Miriam we
see how an important part of the thanksgiving service which Moses celebrated on the
passage of the Red Sea was assigned to females. Apparently, on this occasion, half the
chanting, and the whole of the instrumental music, was placed in their hands. Miriam
acted as Choragus, or conductor, of the female chorus. Music is one of woman's com-
monest gifts; and, though not eminent as composers, as lenderers of the music of
others, they have a fame exceeding that of men. 'J hey can do much for the glory of
God in contributing to, and even sometimes superintending, the musical services of the
sanctuary. In the Christian Church, there has been, equally from the first, a recogni-
tion of the services that may be rendered to religion by women. The apostles, after the
ascension of our Lord, " continued with one accord in prayer and supplication with the
women, and Mary, the wothtr of Jesus" (Acts i. 14). Phoebe, who conveyed to Rome
St. Paul's E] ictle to the Romans, was " a deaconess of the church that was at Cenchrea "
(Rom. xvi. 1) ; and an Order of deaconesses was generally recognised in the primitive
Church, and believed to have been instituted by the apostles (Apost. Const, vi. 17). In
all periods some church work, in many very important church work, has been assigned
to women, with great advantage both to themselves and to the community. Though
St. Paul forbade their speaking in the Church (1 Cor. xiv. 35), anil they thus cannot be
ministers, subordinate employments of various kinds, suited to the nature of women,
are everywhere open to tljem. The work of Sisters of Charity in various parts of the
world is above all praise. That of district visitors, teachers in Sunday schools, Scrip-
ture readers, etc., though less attracting the praise of men, is most valuable. Devout
women, working under their ministers, can be the instruments of incalculable good, and
do as much for the promotion of true religion as if they were men.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 19. Moses' Song. The sublimity of this noble ode is universally admitted.
It brings Moses before us in the new character of " poet." Moses does not seem to have
devoted himself largely to this species of composition ; but the three specimens of hia
work which remain to us — this ode, his " Song " and " Blessing" in Deuteronomy, and
Pb. xc. — show him to have possessed a poetical genius of the very highest order • te



CH. XT. 1— WJ THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



have lieen as great as poet, as we know him to have been as warrior, leader, statesman,
legislator, historian, patriot, and saint. The grandest features of poetry belong to tbt
thrilling piece before us. It is the magnificent outburst of the feeling of uncontrollable
triumph, awakened by the sight of the overthrow of the Egyptians in the Red Sea, and
by the sense of deliverance and safety thence resulting. The language quakes' and
thunders in keeping with the grandeur of the theme. The presentation of the idciir
is in the highest degree picturesque. The strokes of imagery are masterpieces— tlia
whole scene of defeat and disaster being repeatedly revealed, as by lurid lightning-
flashes, in single sentences, and even single words. The movement is rapid, rhythmical,
inspiring. The art displayed in the minutiae of literary construction is very greit^
wUle in all, arid through all, pervading, as its energising soul, every syllable and stanza
of the composition, is the spirit of adoring awe and wonder, blending with gratitude,
which ascribes all the greatness, and honour, and renown, of the victory to Jehovah.
We have to touch at present, however, less on the literary beauties than on the
eli^ous teaching of the ode ; and the nature of this, after what has been said on ch. xiv.,
admits of being briefly indicated.

I. Thb triumph celebrated (vers. 1, 2). This celebration of the deliverance at
the Ked Sea was — 1. Natural. Adoring and exultant feeling naturally passes into
song. It seeks expression. It tends to become rhythmical. It unites itself with
music. Like mountain torrents, tearing down to the plain, and cutting their channels
as they flow, pent-up emotion of this kind will not be denied utterance, and if suitable
channels of rhythmical expression are not provided for it, will cut out channels for
itself. 2. Appropriate. It was right that, having experienced this great deliverance,
the children of Israel should give utterance, in strains of praise, to the feelings of
wonder, gratitude, and adoration with which it inspired them. It was due to God, nad
it would be beneficial in its reactive effects upon themselves. The duty of praise for
benefits received is one to which no religious mind can be indifferent. If God bas
gifted us with the faculty of song, it is right that the first use we make of it should be
to extol his goodness. See the Psalms (l^s. xcii. 1 ; xoviii. 1 ; cv. 1, 2 ; cxi. 1; etc.).
3. Jihvating. The faculty of song is not merely one of the faculties of our natiu-e.
It is connected with that which is deepest in us. When the Psalmist bids his faculty
of song awake, he speaks of it as his " glory." — " Awake up, my glory " (Ps. Ivii. 8 ;
of. Ps. xvi. 9 ; XXX. 12). It is Carlyle who says — '' AU deep things are musical." Song,
in its higher reaches, unites all the faculties of the soul in consentaneous exerciiie —
heart, intellect, conscience, the religious nature, imagination, the artistic and tuneful
sentiments, the social feelings. It arouses, elevates, fructifies, enkindles. It awakens
the spirit to the sense of its own infinitude ; fills it with scorn of what is base ; attune*
and harmonises it to what is noble. We do well, therefore, to cultivate the faculty of
song ; to exercise it in public and in private worship ; to make it the daily vehicle of
the expression of our religious feelings. " Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns,"
etc. (Eph. V. 19). See that the melody is from the heart, yet with the understanding
also (I Cor. xiv. 15).

II. Tub triumph described (vers. 3 — 13). The quick, abrupt, vivid language of
the ode brings the whole scene of Pharaoh's pursuit and destruction before us, almost as
if it were transacting in our sight. The hot, breathless, intensely eager pursuit is
depicted in ver. 9, but it is chiefly the destruction that is dwelt on, and dwelt on in such
terms, with the use of such similes, and in such relations of contrast to the proud
monarch's insolence and boasting, as limns it with photographic distinctness on the
mental vision. The design in the description being to exalt and glorify God's power
in the overthrow, the points chiefly exhibited are these — 1. The ease of this destruction.
It is done in an instant, and without effort. In striking contrast with Pharaoh's para-
phernalia of war, with his savage exertions in pursuit, and with his elaborate drawing
out of his purposes in ver. 9 — " I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil,
etc. — God simply blows with his wind, and the enemy is annihilated. " Thou didst
blow with thy wind ; the sea covered them i they sank as lead in the mighty waters "
(ver. 10). A movement of his hand, a blast of his nostrils, a solitary waft firom the
heat of his anger, suffices to destroy them. 2. 'i'he swiftness of it. This, which was •
most impressive feature of the overthrow, is brought oui in various images. " The
depths have covered them ; they sank to the bottom as a stone , . . they sank eu lead is



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. L<^H. XV. 1—21,



the mighty waters " (vers. 5 — 10). 3. The fatality of it. The destruction was com-
plete. There was no recovery from it. Horse and chariot and charioteer j the chosen
captains ; the whole array of Pharaoh's military strf ugth — all went down in one swift,
fell swoop, to the sea-bottom. " Thy right hand, Lord, hath dashed in pieces the
enemy " (ver. 6). Pondering these images, we cannot but be impressed by the folly,
the insanity, as well as the futility, of aU attempts at contending with the Almighty.

III. The attributes of God as bevbaled in tub tbiumph. These, naturally,
are made conspicuous in the ode. It was Jehovah, not Israel, who had achieved the
triumph ; and to Jehovah, accordingly, was all the praise due. Further, the design in
the transaction had been precisely this : to display the character of God as Jehovah,
and give a new demonstration of his possession of the attributes denoted by the name
Jah (vers. 2, 3). The attributes of Jehovah specially extolled are — 1. Fewer. " Thy
right hand, Lord, is become glorious in power " (ver. 6). The greatness of this power
is seen by its being measured against the military might of Pharaoh, which thereby
becomes a foil to it : another measure being found in the might and fury of the elements
which it controls — winds, mighty waters, etc. Its resistlessnesB is seen in the sudden-
ness and decisiveness of the overthrow. 2, Supremacy (vers. 11 — 18). This attribute,
which is of the very essence of the Jehovah conception, was signally illustrated in the
Red Sea catastrophe (Ps. cxxxv. 6). Not only was God therein revealed as absolute
Ruler in the domain of nature, but it was shown how Pharaoh himself, pursuing his
own end, was yet bent to be an instrument in accomplishing God's ; how, when he
thought he was freest, and most certain of victory, God had the hook in his jaws,
and was leading all his host straight into the grave prepared for him; how,
accordingly, God is Supreme Ruler in the moral as well as in the natural world, in the
region of human wills as well as in that of natural causation. 3. Holiness. The
holiness of God, burning like fire among stubble, and utterly consuming the
hosts of the enemy, is justly celebrated in these verses (ver. 7). God was revealed as
" glorious in holiness" (ver. 13) ; and because he was so, Israel was filled with awe in
his presence (ver. 13), and his habitation is spoken of as an " holy habitation " (ver. 13),
a sanctuary (ver. 17). 4. Mercy. This is the other side of the transaction of the Red
Sea — the side of deliverance, as the former was of judgment, and mention is made of it
in vers. 2, 13. Here, then, is a wonderful constellation of Divine attributes — exhi-
bited, too, not in word, but in suitable action, in deeds which gave them embodiment,
and impressive manifestation. They are the same attributes which have been at work
all down history, operating for the good of the Church, and for the overthrow of evil.

IV. The effects of the triumph (vers. 13 — 18). It is viewed — 1. As inspinng fear in
the surrounding nations, in Edom, in Moab, among the Philistines, and other inhabi-
tants of Canaan. Every powerful manifestation of God's attributes is fitted to awaken
terror among his enemies, and actually does so. Results similar to those here de-
scribed will follow the great predicted judgments on the last representatives of Anti-
christianism (Rev. xi. 13). The nations who heard of Israel's deliverance would have
reason to fear, for their position exposed them to risk of attack, and Canaan wag
actually the destination of the tribes. This may suggest to us that if Israel had gone
up to conquer these tribes, at the time when God wished them, they would not have
found the conquest so hard as their fears represented. The Philistines and Canaanites
were " melted " with terror : they were paralysed by their fears, and " still as a stone "
(vers. 15, 16). Yet, through the unbelief and cowardice of the attacking force, this
great opportunity was missed. 2. As a pledge that God would complete the work he had
begun, and would ultimately " plant them in the mountain of his inheritance " (vers.
13 — 17). In several of the expressions, the tenses are past, as though the thing pro-
phesied were already as good as done. This also is an apostle's mode of arguing — God
who has done the greater, will not now fail to do the less, and perfect the work he has
begun (Rora. v. 9, 10 ; viii. 32 ; Phil. i. 6). Mark in this ode the designation of Israel
as a redeemed, a purchased people (ver. 13) — the Red Sea deliverance being viewed as •
second purchasing of Israel by God to himself. — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 20, 21. — The song of Moses and of the Lamb, We cannot fail to connect in
our thoughts the circumstances of this magnificent triumph-celebration with that othei
Kone, described in the Apocalypse, where they who have " gotten the victory over th«



oiLXT, 1— 19.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. I

beaBt, and over his imagA, and over the number of bis name, stand on — i.e., on tbc
margin of — tbe sea of glass, baying the harps of God," and " sing tbe song of Moses,
the servant of God, and tbe song of tbe Lamb " (Eev. xv. 2). We do not enter into any
elaborate explication of tbe Apocalyptic symbols. Tbe beast and bis followers obviously
represent the Antichristian foes of tbe Church — tbe worldly secular powers that lesist,
oppose, and persecute the true servants of Christ. God's judgment on these hostile
world-powers, already summarily depicted in ch. xiv. 19, 20, is to be afterwards
more fully described under the imagery of the seven last plagues. This vision of tbe
multitudes on tbe sea of glass is anticipative, and represents the celebration by the
Church of her own deliverance, and of the completion of judgment upon her enemies.
The " sea of glass " has obvious reference to the Bed Sea, made to roll back, and stand up
like a sea of crystal (ver. 8), yet illuminated and filled with lurid radiance, by the fiery
glow of tbe pillar which shone on Israel. Tbe " sea " is the symbol (in this instance)
of deliverance achieved, of victory won, of enemies judged and overwhelmed — the fire
in the crystal pointing to tbe burning wrath which consumed them. But what we have
immediately to do with is tbe fact that the saved multitudes sing the "song of Moses,
and of the Lamb." This plainly does not mean that they sing two songs ; nor yet that
the song which they sing is tbe song recorded here ; for the terms of what they sing are
subsequently given (Bev. xv. S, 4). The meaning is that the Church, having
experienced a deliverance similar to that experienced by Israel at the Bed Sea, but as
much greater than that old deliverance, as Christ is greater than Moses, and his salva-
tion greater than tbe salvation from Egypt, — tbe old song is re-cast, and its terms
re-adapted, to express both victories at once, tbe lower and the higher. The old is
taken up into the new and is celebrated along with it. No victory of God for his Church
will ever pass out of remembrance. Each will be the theme of grateful celebration to
all eternity. But type must merge in antitype, and be celebrated with it in a single
strain. Tbe song of tbe redeemed over tbe defeat of the Antichristian powers at the
end — over the defeat of all their enemies — is the true counterpart of this song of Moses,
and the one (the latter) remains for ever the background of the other (the former), and
is blended with it in tbe united celebration. Glancing at the two songs, this in Exodus,
and that in the Eevelation, we note — 1. That tbe scope of both is tbe same — the defeat of
hostile, pursuing, persecuting powers. And as the defeat of Pharaoh was the natural
sequel to the exodus, and confirmed to Israel that redemption then achieved, so will
the defeat of Christ's enemies in the end appear as the appropriate sequel to his work
upon the Cross, and will complete the deliverance of bis Church from those that trouble
her (2 1 hess. i. 6). 2. That the attributes of God extolled in both are the same. This
of necessity, for the work being similar, so must be the attributes revealed in it — holi-
ness, power, unchallengeable supremacy, justice and truth, which here include mercy.
" Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty," etc. (Eev. xv. 3). The
effects produced on the nations by this display of God's attributes are also similar —
" who shall not fear thee, Lord, and glorify thy name ... for all nations shall come
and worship before thee." A higher result this, however, than in the case of the type.
3. The singers in both cases are tbe same — those viz. who have experienced the
deliverance which they celebrate. Would we join them ? We, too, must be in Christ,
and partakers with those who, in the strength which he gives, are overcoming the
world (1 John iv, 4).— J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 19. — The song of triumph— Ood exalted in the lips of the people. This song
we may take as being in some measure tbe result and expression of tbe state of feeling
mentioned in ch. xiv. 31. People who feared Jehovah and believed in him were very
likely, in such a rush of feeling, to sing as did the Israelites here : at the same time we
must be careful not to rest content with attributing this song merely to natural causes.
There is no need to deny the presence of genius ; if only we bear in mind at the same
time, that it is genius elevated and sanctified by the inspiration which Jehovah alone
eon give. Who else than God himself can lead into a true acquaintance with him ? and
If they who thus know him would speak of him and sing of him, it must be with such
an arrangement of thoughts and choice of expressions as he alone can supply. The
history of hymnology makes it very evident that genius is not enough for distinction in
ihis sacred service. Poema full of genius, and almost faultless in form, are yet worthiest



10 THE BOOK OS EXODUS. [oh. XW. 1—19.



for praise. For in this as other matters God has taken the weak things of the world to
confound tfee things that are mighty. He puts the holy and eternal fire on lips that
the world despises. They who have made the praises of the Church have not been the
writers of epics ; they are not found among the poets-laureate ; and so here we must look
for the power of God as much in the construction of this song, as in the production of
the events it celebrates. We are called on to observe him who somehow makes men to
utter even more than they know. It may be needful at the proper time to consider
this as a contribution to Hebrew poetry ; it is better still ever to remember it as a con-
tribution to the worthy praise of God, that praise which while it celebrates him,
instructs and ennobles the man who renders it. The question of authorship here, bear
in mind, is not to be settled right off by saying that Moses composed it. He and the
people sang it, but who composed it is quite another question. And that this point is
left undetermined only throws us back more on the thought of God as the great agent
in bringing this song into existence. As to the topics treated of in the song, the very
fact that there have been so many different ways of dividing it, makes one more disposed
to consider it in its unity, without any attempt to divide it into sections at all. Thus
then let us notice in succession the dominant truths and convictions which run through
the song. The first point is the exaltation of God amongst his people. This is the
word with which the song begins. "I will sing unto Jehovah, for he is highly
exalted."

I. Notice the fact that there is exaltation of (km. God, in ruling the com-
position of this song, takes care of this most important point. It was tke very point
that needed to be brought out in all its prominence, so that no man should be exalted
instead of God. Men exalt one another. They are constituted so as to admire that
which is great and powerful, and when they are not men of faith, able to comprehend
the greatness of the invisible God, their admiration must needs expend itself on the
visible man. All temptation of this kind is here kept out of the way. The feeling
that Jehovah is exalted runs all through the song. Everything is ascribed to him.
Moses himself makes no claim, expects no praise. The people do not gather round
him and hail him as deliverer. The tone of the praise is thus in perfect harmony with
the deed that has been done. God becomes practically everything and man nothing.
For what had Israel done here t They had indeed walked down to the Red Sea, through
it, and on to the other side, but no one who regards the proprieties of language would
speak of this as contributing to their salvation. We do not praise a man for availing
himself of the conditions of safety. Thus we have a type of the way in which God is
exalted and glorified in spiritual salvation. When we consider what has to be done in
saving a man from his sins; and when we consider also the manifestations, so abundant,
so transcendent, of God's power in doing so, then how plainly incongruous it is to begin
praising man for that simple act of faith by which he avails himself of God's goodness
in Christ. The more we consider, the more we shall feel that whatever praise man may
deserve is better left to God to express. B}' all means let us have brotherly appreciation
for brotherly kindness ; brotherly gratitude encouraging brotherly love. Cut God only
can praise rightly. 'J hough nothing is said of Moses in this song, God took ample care
of the fame and reward of his faithful servant. We had better keep to that which God
requires from us, namely, praise to himself. As he requires it, so we may be sure be
will fit us to render it,

II, The exaltation of Jehovah is an exaltation to bupremact. He is supreme
over physical force in one of its most imposing forms, " The horse and his rider hath he
thrown into the sea." Perhaps those who have had to meet a charge of cavalry in the
battle-field can best appreciate this expression. Jehovah is a man of war, and he goes
out with strange weapons against great kings and their chosen captains ; weapons which
they cannot understand and cannot meet. He does not meet sword with sword, and
chariot with chariot; the elements of nature are at his instant and entire command.
In his liand the mightiest are as nothing. What is the excelleucy of Pharaoh, even
though he be king of Egypt, before the greatness of the excelleucy of Jehovah ? The
answer is that as stubble before the fire, so is opposing man before Almighty God.
" What a wind that must be, that strong east wind which laises waters, even from the
deep, and keeps them when they are raised ! " So we imagine man speaking in iijs
Inevitable submission to the powers of nature when they are roused. But when Qod



CH. XT. 1—10.] TUB BOOK Of" EXOUUS. 11

has to speak of the east wind, it is as of something which conies as ea:8ily as a hlast
from the nostrils. True, this expression is chiefly used to indicate his wrath ; but it
also indicates the ease — if e.ise be a fitting word to use of Jehovah — with which his
work is done. In ver. 9, man is represented as resolving and rushing forth in the
utmost confidence ; anticipating the end from the beginning ; certain of his resources
and certain of the result, and then as he advances in all his pride and ostentation, God
meets him in equal simplicity and sublimity. " Thou didst blow with thy breath, the
sea covered them ; they sank as lead in the mighty waters." One breath irom God,
and the mightiest fabric goes down like a house of cards! Man accumulates his
resources, he strains with prodigious efforts, he gathers his forces without mercy and
without scruple ; and then when all is in array, God calmly lifts his right band, and the
earth swallows the preparation and the pride of years.

III. THEHE IB THE EXALTATION OF GoD ABOVE ALL OTHER DEITIES WOBSHrPPED BY

MEN. " Who is like unto thee, Jehovah, among the gods ? " ITiis, of course, is also
an illustration of Jehovah's exaltation to supremacy. Moses and the IsraeUtes had not
attained the feeling that all other deities than Jehovah were but empty and delusive
names. That discovery was reserved in the wisdom of God for later and prepared gene-
rations. The feeling that the gods of the nations were real beings with terrible power,
was very potent in the breasts of the Israelites, as was evidenced by their frequent and
facile lapses into idolatry. Therefore this uplifting of Jehovah above the gods was most
appropriate praise to put into the lips of Israel at this time. The gods of Egypt repre-
sented the strength of Egypt ; the gods of Philistia the strength of Philistia ; the gods
of everv country the strength of every country where they were worshipped. When
the strength of a land was broken, it was like writing Ichabod on the statue of its
presiding deity

IV. This was ah exaltation in supremacy which extended to the future.
God, shown supreme in the midst of his people and over their enemies, will maintain
and manifest that supremacy in all the time to come. The calamities of Egypt travel-
ling, as it had done, in the path of ten humiliations, and now utterly overthrown, are to
be made known in Philistia, in Edom, in Moab, and all through Canaan. Here we find
some explanation of the apprehension with which the progress of Israel was afterwards
viewed, as by the Edomites and Balak. The Israelites came to be looked on to some extent
as a peculiar foe. The utter destruction of a whole army in the lied Sea was not an
event which could be kept in a corner. God had now done something for Israel which
enemies might notice as a measure and an index of what would yet be done. Then from
the mention of these typical enemies, Philistia, Moab, etc., we are led to consider the
abiding enemies of Ood's abiding people, those invisible ones who are fully known
only to God himself. They have some sense that what has been done by Jesus against
them is the measure of what will yet be done. Just as the Philistines felt the sound of
Pharaoh's destruction echoing against their fastnesses, and even in the very echo, shak-
ing them, so we may be sure the principalities and powers of evil felt the greatness of
what had been achieved when Christ was raised from the dead. That great act of
Jehovah has been far more appreciated in the invisible world, among the powers of evil,
than it is among us. They cannot but feel what the end will be. What forgetting
fouls the Israelites were in after ages, to act in contradiction to this exultant song oi
praise, trembling and fleeing before the nations that were round about. — Y.

Vers. 1 — 19. — The song of triumph. The sense of Israels obligation to Jehovah
fully expressed. God, we have noticed, is lifted up in this song. We now proceed to
observe how he is lifted up in the midst of his people, whom he encompasses with his
protection, whom he cheers and illuminates with his favour. His destruction is not
mere destruction ; his supremacy is not only over his enemies, but also as the guide,
the comforter, and the portion of his own. Hence we discover almost immediately on
breaking into the song, how Israel is found expressing complete dependence on

Jehovah. ^ . > ^ t i • u

i. TiiEBB 18 THE EXPRESSION OF INDEBTEDNESS. GoQ has como to Israel m Its
8ufi"ering, need, and helplessness. Israel is weak, and God gives the strength it needs.
Israel is sad-hearted, and God enables it to burst forth in songs of gladness. Israel ii
In peril, and God has interposed with effectual and abiding salvation. He has not onlj



12 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oH. «▼. 1— 1ft



supplied some needs, but all needs wherein Israel was able to receive bis aid. Mor«
needs would have been supplied, if more had been felt; more causes of gratitude given,
if more could have been brought into operation. God is now felt to be a guide (ver.
13), and the land that was thought to fasten the people in, now takes its right place m
the memory of the devout as an evident part of the highway of Gods holy ones.
What expressions of indebtedness ciuld be more complete? It was impossible to
exaggerate the debt, and God took ca.* that the words of the song should not fall
short" in acknowledging it. Thus let it ever be our aim to thank God for his goodness
to us, in such words as he supplies, and fill his forms full with the devotion of
meditative and observant hearts. „ , . ,

II. This expression is a personal one. The word "I stands out prominently.
The song was not only for a delivered nation, but for a nation in whose deliverance
every individual was blessed. It was emphatically a song for every Israelite. God
had done all this for Israel, not that he might have a nation for his own to be looked
at in the mass, averaged over the whole, the good aluiig with the bad; it was to be a
nation made up of holy, obedient, and grateful indiviiluals. Even already, God is
indicating that his true people must be bound to him hy personal attachment and
seriiice. Pharaoh had said in his haste and thoughtlessness, " I and my people are
wick^ " (ch. ix. 27). Here Jehovah gives something for each one of his own people
to say ; and if each of them labotirs to say it with a feeling corresponding to the words,
then indeed there will come an outburst from the nation such as could not in any
other way be produced.

III. This expression beino personal, is also an expression as to the bocboi or
PERSONAL ABILITY. "The Loud IS my strength." The strength of a believer just
amoimts to that which God puts into him according to his need and according to his
faith. Bring to God as many vessels as you will, and if it be wise to fill them, then
God can fill them all. Learn that the natural strength of man, even at its best, is
inadequate for some purposes and uncertain for any. It breaks down, often without
warning and without recovery. 'ITierefore it is a great matter for me to feel that " the
Lord is my strength." He himself comes in, not to supplement human efforts, nor to
fill up human depots, but rather to make his presence felt with men in the choosing of
riijht purposes, and the carrying of them out to a full and satisfying attainment.
The Israelite had been nothing in himself; nothing as against the tyranny of Pharaoh
in Egypt ; nothing as against the pursuing chariots by the Bed Sea. And now all at
once he is able to sing as if he were a portion and a factor of Omnipotence.

IV. This expression being personal is also an expression as to the soubci
OF personal olauness. "The Lord is my song." From him comes real and abiding
gladness, such gladness as becomes man at his best estate. The world has its great
singers, and what it reckons imperishable songs. Each nation has its own patriotic
effusions, and excited and often half-drunken crowds will roar themselves hoarse over
national anthems. There are love songs, drinking songs, war songs, and all that great
number besides which elude classification. It would be foolish indeed of the Christian,
in his haste, to despise these productions, for many of them are very beautiful, and
they have an unquestionable and not astonishing hold on the general heart. But aftei
all, we must escape into higher and holier associations, and dwell in them, if we would
have gladness, such as will satisfy. The Lord must he our song. He, in his attributes,
his actions, and the history of his dealings with the children of men, must be the topic
of our praise. The great thing to make each of us glad must be that our minds are
kept in perfect peace because they are stiyed upon him. All other gladness, sweet as it
may ho in the beginning, will prove bitter, perhaps very bitter, in the end. Nor was
Jehovah any less the song of every true Israelite here, because he was shown acting in
•uch a stem, uncompromising way. The people had to praise God for an actual, pre.-ent,
and overwhelming mercy ; and if they had to sing of destruction, that was a necessity
not to he escaped. True, there is no word of pity all the way through this song for the
destroyed host of Pharaoh, simply because it was not the place for such an expression.
The thing to be here expressed and dwelt upon is praise to Jehovah, because of the
greatness and completeness of the Divine action. And what an impressive contrast
there is between the conduct of these Israelites when delivered and the conduct in the
hour of victory, which only too many pages of history record- indeed, such conduct is



ou.XT.llJ THE BOOK OJJ" EXODUS. 13

not absent from the pages of the Old Testament itself. It was, of course, impossible,
that any scene of butchery, pillage, and violation, could be presented to us here ; but
there is not even any tone o( savage, revengeful exultation over the destroyed. Israel
stands by the mighty waters, looks on the corpses of the Egyptians, and sends up
this volume of undiluted, unqualified praise to Jehovah. Let us, for the moment,
forget the personal unworthiness of the singers, their past unbelief, their future lapses
into idolatry, rebellion, and self will. The words of praise here were the right words
to speak ; and at the time, we may be sure, many of them felt them. The words were
true, the feeling real ; the fault was that the singers did not continue to live so as to
root the feeling more deeply in their breasts.

v. This expression being pebsonal, ib also an expression ab to the souboe of
PERSONAL SAFETY. " He has become my salvation." There is thus an experience to
dwell on that peculiarly inspires grateful acknowledgment. We are grateful to those
who provide for us, who instruct us, who supply us with comforts and pleasures; but
there is a peculiar tie to him who saves us in any hour of peril. God himself cannot
but look with pfculiar interest to those whom he has delivered; and the delivered
should look with peculiar devotion to him. If it is much to create men and to provide
for them in their natural existence, it is mord still to save them from death and to give
them eternal life in Christ; and thus God must lonk in a special way on those who
believe and are being saved. And so also, if it is much to be created and much to be
provided for, it is even more to be saved ; to have the sure feeling that beyond this
changing, corruptible scene, there is the house of God, not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens. There are untold millions who owe existence and all their power of
enjoyment to God, yet not one syllable of real thankfulness has ever passed their lips.
But as to those who are saved, if they he truly in process of salvation, thankfulness is
part of their life. Of this be perfectly sure, no salvation is going on if thankfulness
for it be not in the heart and some sort of praise on the lip and in the life.

VI. In view of all that has thus been considered, it will be seen as a fitting con-
sequence that Jehovah should be distinctly set forth as worthy of adoration
AND honour. " He is my God and I will glorify him, my father's God and I will
exalt him." Ily father's Ood. Here is the response, more or less appreciative, to all
declarations in which Jehovah spuaks of himself as the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. True praise of God takes in the great historic past, yes, and also the past
which is not historic; a past none the less real, none the less contributory to the
present, even though there be no record of it such as we can read. Jehovah was
deliverer to Israel that day by the lied Sea, because of what he had been to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob centuries before. What God is to each of us to-day, is possible
because of what he was to our fathers long ago. Explore then and discover how
present blessings are rooted in the past. This will not only be an interesting
study, but will increase gratitude, and fix it more surely in the regions of the
understanding. — Y

Ver. 11. — Jehovah among the gods. As long as these deities — the deities, say, oi
Egypt, Philistia, Edom, Moab, Canaan — were simply to be compared among them-
selves, there might be room for rivabies among them; there might be reasons for
asserting superiority because of a more splendid worship and a larger host of wor-
shippers. But, when Jehovah steps in upon the scene, all discussions as to the com-
parative excellences of other deities cease to have interest. The most renowned of
them becomes of no more account than the most obscure. Even the temple of the
great goddess Diana is then despised, and her magnificence destroyed, whom all Asia
and the world worshippeth. At Ephesus, under the very shadow of the far famous
building, Paul persuades and turns away much people, saying that they be no gods
which are made with hands. Whether stars be of the first magnitude or not ceases to
be a question of interest when the sun ri.xes ; for then they all vanish alike. " Who is
like unto thee, Jehovah, among the gods V " Nor is this question left as a mere vague
vociferation. It is pursued into instructive detail, and illustrated by the mention of
three particular features of pre-eminence. 'J hese words are spoken with the signs of
Jehovah's glory right before the eyes of those who speak. Not mere symbolic signs,
Buch as the burning bush, the rod changed to a serpent, and the leprous hand ; but



1* TUE BOOK OF EXODUS. |.0H. XV. 11

signs that were also great benefits and judgments. Fresh fi-om the miraculous passage,
and with the destruction of Pharaoh's host scarcely faded from their eyes, these singers ol
praise very fitly ask, Who is like to Jehovah, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises
doing wonders i'

I. GiiOBions IN noLiNEBa. Some word is needed to indicate the distinction lietweeb
deity, and all lesser existence, and that word we find in "holiness." Hence holiness and
even some sort of glory in their holiness might be attributed to all the gods. All
places and symbols associated with them would be approached with scrupulous venera-
tion and only too often with abject terror. But who had such holiness as Jehovah
possessed? We may take the question as running — "Whose glory in holiness is like
unto thine?" Then, standing in our position as Christians, with the light we thus
enjoy, and considering all the conceptions of Deity which our present knowledge
of the world, in all lands and through past ages, supplies, we can put this question
with a richness of meaning which was not possible to Moses or to his brother Israelites.
Consider the deities of the Grecian and Roman mythology — for with that wa are
perhaps best acquainted — or any deities the wide world over, either among barbarous
peoples or civilised ; and then consider the Jehovah of the Hebrew Scriptures, the
God who revealed himself more fully and in due time by his Son. Look how the
worship of an idolater drags him down. Think of the unutterable prostitution and
sensualities connected with certain idolatries. Think of those miserable parents in
whom idolatry had so destroyed natural afiection that they could cause their sons
and daughters to pass through the fire to Moloch. Many are rigorous, fanatical
and even furious in their religion, who yet show by their lives that they care
nothing for great duties; their religion, alas! seems to make them worse instead
of better. How great, then, is the privilege of him who has indeed come to perceive
that Jehovah is glorious in holiness! He is light, and in him is no darkness at
all._ He is love — such love as is set forth in John iii. 16. His wrath is revealed
against all unrighteousness of men. The very nation that he chose, sanctified and
cherished, he made to be " scattered and peeled," because it would not do righteousness
according to his will. What a cheering and inspiring thing to turn from the inspection
of our own hearts with its dismal results, and from our observation of tlie seething
selfishness of the world, to think of the God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ I For
Christ moves before us in the beauty of holiness, a great, attractive, rebuking reality ;
and we know that as is the Son, so is the Father ; as is the visible and Incarnate One,
so is the invisible and purely spiritual Jehovah above. It is through the Son we know
the Father ; and it is everything to feel that he is not a mere imagination. He it
drawing us to himself; so that as he is glorious in the holiness of the Uncreated and
Pure, so we, even though sadly fallen, may become glorious in the holiness of the
restored and the perfected. We have yet to sing the new song from those who are
glonous in the holiness of matured sonship to him who is elorious in the holiness oi
om: Father in heaven.

II. Fearful in praises. Though this expression is beyond exact definition, yet it
IS obvious that a certain way of understanding it is appropriate to the present occasion
Jehovah is a God to be praised for his terrible doings. It is part of his very holiness
that he makes that holiness to be respected by his treatment of those who presump-
tuously despise it. J f he be not approached with reverence and obeyed with prompti-
Uide, and from the heart, he can make the irreverent ones to feel the evil consequences.
Me IS not one to make claims which he cannot authenticate and enforce, it was not

plaraoh^"t™stfn.Tv'/rT f'''^\ '"l'^ T^'^ P°'°P> '^"^ ^°««« '^^^ forth before
Pharaoh, trustmg by a great show to terrify nim into ac.,uiescence. There is mani-

fested power ; power so widespread and various in its manifestations, so overwhelming in
Its concluding operations, that even the most ignorant can api)reciate it. If God is not
loved, he must be feared ; if his good and perfect gifts arc nut accepted, then his visi-
tations of periect and holy wrath must take their place, 'ilie mercies for which Israel
had now to praise Jehovah were such as could not be sung without recountin-^ an awful
story, l^or must we ever shrink from dwelling on such scenes when newied. We
must praise God for his severity to the wicked, as much as for anything else We
eould not truly praise him for his love, unless we were also able to praise him for hla



OH. XT. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. U

nL DoiNO WONDERS. Here is another peculiar Divine prerogative. Jehovah does
wonders such as none among the gods can do. One has almost forgotten the magicians,
it is so long since they retreated into obscurity and shame. This is praise to Jehovah^
which at onco pushed aside all magicians and pretenders to the supernatural The
wonders they do would cease to be wonders, if they would only allow us to become a
little better acquainted with them ; and not only would they cease to be wonders, they
would even become despicable, as wo consider the lying with which they are suprwrted,
and the knavish ends for which they are produced A conjuror's tricks are only like
common things hidden away; show us where they are hidden, and the mystery
ceases. T/ie mystery is in the concealment and nothing else. But Jehovah's dealings,
as in Egypt, are true wonders. They are brought out to the light so that all men can
gaze on them and examine them, and the more they are examined the more mysterious
they prove. It would not be good for us — ^it would, indeed, be very bad, as starving a

thing as could happen to our imagination and our highest capacities of enjoyment

were we to cease from wondering in the presence of God. Wonder must ever arise
within us when we consider his operations, alike in nature and in grace. — Y.

Vers. 20, 21. — Woman's part in the song of triumph. In the history of Israel, we are
called on to observe woman coming forward, not continuously, but every now and then, to
show how real is her share in the lot of I srael. She has had that share in suffering, being
consumed with anxiety as to the fate of lier offspring. (Ch. i.) She has had it in minis-
tration, — Jochebed, Miriam and Pharaoh's daughter, being combined in the work — ^un-
conscious ministration towards the fitting of Moses for his great work. Whatever
may be said of women speaking in the Church, we here behold them joining, in themost
demonstrative way, in the public praises of Jehovah. The blessing by the Red Sea was
one which went down to that common humanity which underlies the great distinction of
sex. But it was also a very special blessing to women. Trials, such as had come to
Jochebed when Moses was bom, were to cease. Woman would have her own trials in
the time to come — the pangs of childbirth, the cares of offspring, and all a mother's pecu-
liar solicitudes ; but it was a great deal to have the special curse of bondage in Egypt
removed. Then there would be deep thankfulness for the escape of the first-born ; a
feeling, too, of self-congratulation that they had been obedient in slaying the lamb and
sprinkling the blood, and had thus escaped the blow which had fallen heavily on so many
homes in Egypt. All these considerations would lead up to and prepare for the final out-
burst of praise and triumph. And so, if women consider still, they will be both astonished
and profoundly grateful because of all that God in Christ Jesus has done for them. They
have gained not only according to their simple share in humanity, but according
to their peculiar relation towards man. If it be true, that Eve fell first, dreadfully
have all her daughters suffered since. As belonging to this fallen world, woman is now
in a double subjection. In her creation she was to be subordinate to man, and if she
had stood, and he had stood, then what glory and blessedness would have come to both I
But when man became the slave of sin, she became doubly slave, as being now linked to
one who had himself the servile spirit. What had been subordination in Eden became
servitude outside of it. He who is himself the abject slave of passion and selfishness
makes woman his slave, so that in addition to aU that comes through her own sin as a
human being there is the misery that comes through her having got into a wrong rela-
tion to man. Hence the peculiar hideousness of a bad woman, a Jezebel or a Herodias.
Hence, too, through the work of redemption we get the peculiar beauty of the good
woman. Whence should we have got those types of saintly women which beam from
the pages of Scripture and Christian biography, save for that great work one stage of
which is celebrated in this song? — Y.

Vers. 1 ^21. — Song of Moses and the Lamb. " And they sing the song of Moses,"

etc. (Kev. xv. 3). It is quite impossible to sever in thought the song by the sea, and
the' reference in the Book of the Eevelation. We therefore take for our text the words
chosen, and in our homily keep ever in view— the passage of the sea.

1. l^HE SINGERS. " They that have gotten the victory." But conquerors must first
have been soldiers. Here they are Christians who have become part of the Church
militant by laith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Over what victorious? As a matter o(



M THE BOOK OP EXODUS. lcB.Tr.l—n



fact Christians are brought off more thau conquerors over " the world, the flesh, and
the devil." But In Eev. xv. 2, only " the world " is referred to ; and of it only two
constituents are mentioned : " the beast " and " the image " or likeness " of the beast."
[On these and that " other beast " see i^ev. xiii. ; and for such exposition as is calculated
to place the symbols in a reasonable light, see Porter's " Christian Prophecy :" Maclehose,
Glasgow; and "The Apocalypse" by Prof. Godivin: Hodder and Stoughton.] The
enemies overcome were, and ever are : — 1. Force : as directed against the Kingdom of
God. The "beast" of Eev. xiii. is anti-theistic, or anti-Christian civil despotism,
wherever found. Head Bev. xiii. 1 — 10, with this idea in the mind, and the description
is seen to be vividly true. Illustrations of battle and victory may be found in Egypt
tyrannising over Israel, in early persecutions of the Christian Church. As soon as ever
Christianity became a spiritual power conspicuous enough to attract attention, forae
set itself against it. So ever since down to martyr history in Madagascar. Note : there
are instances now in which force, in varied forms, will set itself against the conscience.
[The " mark " and " number " of the image are the signs, open or secret, of being iden-
tified with anti-theistic despotism.] 2. Opinion. That which resembles godless
government, viz. godless opinion, the tone of society, etc. This power of society
against the Divine Kingdom, this pressure of opinion must have been terrible in Egypt.
Felt to-day, not only at the " club," but in every workshop. One may add to this, not
mentioned in Eev. xv., but in Eev. xiii., " another beast," viz. : — 3. Fraud,. Specially
as associated with " Priestcraft," whether of false religions, or of corrupted forms of
Christianity. [For illustration of the despotism of Egyptian priestcraft, see Bbers*
" Uarda."] This power seems mild as a lamb, with the speech of a dragon ; rises out of
the earth (does not descend fi-om heaven) ; wields civil power for its own purpose («s in
the case of Home) ; pretends to miracle ; gives power to anti-Christian public opinion ;
iifliots social wrong. How strong their enemies are, viz., anti-Christian government,
jLnti-Christian public opinion, anti-Christian religion, every Christian comes sooner or
later to know.

n. Theie position. " And I saw as it were a sea of glass," etc. Here note : — L
Tht tea. A sea of crystal flaked with fire. Such as we may sometimes see imder light
of setting sun. The symbol of the experience of life, i.e., of mingled mercy and judg-
ment (Ps. ci. 1). 2. The shore, i.e., the position of the victorious — eVl t-^k BaKaa-irai/ —
not in the sense of standing on the wave, but of an army encamped " upon the sea," t. e.,
upon the shore. 3. The (illusion. To Israel on the eastern shore of the Bed Sea. 4.
The reality in this symbol. The victorious redeemed Church, on the fiirther side of
Che experience of life, singing the new and everlasting song.

III. The song. It is " of Moses . . . and of the Lamb." A song like that of old,
springing out of similar circumstances, celebrating a like deliverance. Here observe : —
1. 2 Ae j3?oce o/'Ji'oses in relation to Christ. Moses is " the servant," etc. Incidental
evidence of Christ's superiority and Deity. Christ is not a servant, save as he volun-
tarily took that position (Phil. ii. 7). 2. The central place of tht Lanib throughout the
Book of the Bevelation. Argument for the transcendent import of the Atonement.
The song is — 1. One. Not two. 2. Thankful. Some of the songs of earth are
penitential, prayerful, plaintive. 3. Of the Saved. From guilt, sin, darkness, sorrow.
[Go into detail.] What a song it will be! 4. (if the l^ree. The three despotisms of
force, opinion, fraud, were left by Israel behind. So with the redeemed Church of Gud.
6. Of the New-born. A new departure for Israel ; the unending life before the Church
triumphant. 6. Of the Seers, who now see past all subordinate and second causes —
past Moses — ^past even the Mediator Jesus, to the First Origin of all, "great and
marvellous . . . Lord God Almighty!' 7. A song of review. This is the final verdict,
" Just and true," etc.

IV. Lessons. 1. To Christians. Do not wait for the final song. Sing in the
passage of the sea. Poetry and music the natural expression of praise. Some can pour
forth their own song, e.g., Keble and Watts, Wesley and Lyte. Others must adopt
praise furnished to their lips. But for all there is the poetry and the music — the sweet
psalm — of a pure and holy life. 2. To those not Christians. To dng the song of tba
laved, we must be saved.

" No lips untuned can sing that song
Or jom the music there." — R.



m. XV. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS IT

Vers. 1 — ^21. — One of the first songs in the Bible — the first Jewish song — we may almost
call it the tap-root whence springs the main stem of Jewish psalmody. The art of poetry
and instruments of music were no doubt brought from Egypt ; the land of slavery was
yet the land of science. Such "spoils" were made all the more valuable, and appropriated
all the more firmly by consecration (of. Keble, Christian Year, 3rd Sunday in Lent), All
the wealth of the world is at the disposal of God's children — for the earth is the Lord's,
and the fulness thereof — the problem which they have to solve is how to use it without
abusing it (of. 1 Cor. x. 23 — 28). Turn to the song itself, and see what lessons it has
to teach- 'I'hree stanzas (vers. 1 — 5, 6 — 10, 11 — la) — each begins with ascription of
praise to Jehovah; each ends with a reference to Jehovah's treatment of his foes.
Notice : —

I. Peesent GRATiruDB. Vers. 1 — 5. — ^In the excitement of the great deliverance,
words almost fail to express the praise. The name of the deliverer is repeated four
times in eight hnes. Yet not once is it a " vain repetition." All the diiference in the
world between using God's name to disguise an empty heart and using it to express the
feelings of a f uU one. Here, " out of the fulness of the heart the mouth speaketh."
God loves such praise, the praise of a heart which cannot help praising. Suine try to
praise because they think God expects it of them ; their hearts are like dry wells whilst
yet, out of supposed respect to God, they keep on working the pump-handle ! Fill the
heart first and all such artificial efibrts will be needless ; the full heart is a springing
well. " How fill ? " By letting the thought of God's great mercies pierce through to
the heart's deeps. If the thought of God and of his deeds comes home to us, our praise
will soon fiow forth freely.

II. Past mbbcies the cause op present qbatitude. Vers. 6 — 10. — This is what
called forth the praise. All real, all genuine. Moses is not sending up his song to
a "possible " God, but to one whom he believes in utterly as a living, present, powerful
ruler. Notice — 1. The reality of the enemy. No doubt about the tyranny in Egypt.
Brickfields and scourges had left their mark upon the memory. No doubt either as to
the late danger (ver. 9). The exasperated pursuers determined to repossess their prey.
2. The reality of the deliverance. Where were the pursuers now? The wreckage
Jrifting within sight marked the spot where they had sunk for everl 3. The reality of
the ddiverer. No doubt as to his existence — no doubt as to his goodness — in face of
such overwhelming evidence. We also, if we would but realise it, have been as truly
deUvered fi:om dangers just as real. If we but half believe in God, and offer him only
a make-shift praise, it is not because he has done less for us ; it is because we think less
on the meaning of his mercies.

III. Past mercies the pledge of future triumphs. Vers. 11 — 18. — ^Moses was
confident about the future because he had no doubt about the past. He was prepared
to go "from strength to strength," because he could start from a strong position.
From what God has done, we may rightly infer what he will do. If he has made a
way for his people through the sea of waters, he will also make a way for them through
yet stormier and more perilous seas (ver. 16). The first deliverance is a pledge and
prophecy of aU future deliverances. Thus the song of Moses, strong in a present con-
fidence, firmly based upon past mercies, finds its outcome in a good hope, inspiring men
along the path of progress. If we would sing the song as it should be sung, we must
learn from memory to praise truly ; and true praise will soon quicken hope. To live for
the future we must live upon the past. The song of the Lamb, the song which
specially expresses the full satisfaction of all our hopes, can only be sung by those who
have sung first this other song ; the song which still feeds hope at the same time that
it expresses gratitude. — G.

Vers. 1, 2. — The sacrifice of praise, I. The place of praise. The first provision
for God's ransomed is a song. God's hand must be recognised in the mercy, other-
wise its blessing is missed. The place bright with God's goodness is meant to be a
meeting-place between the soul and himself.

II. The reasons fob praise. 1. The greatness of God's deed. The chariots and the
horses had been the reliance of Egypt- and the terror of Israel ; and " the horse and
his rider " had Ctod cast in the sea. 2. Ho who had been their strength and their song
had become their salvation. Their confidence haA not been misplaced: he had not



M



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



£oH. XV. Ji2— 27.



felled them in their need. 3. The individualising love of God : he is " my God. God
had appeared for each : not one had been lost. 4. The glory of God's past deeds— h«
was their fathers' God. This was but one of many like judgments and deliverances,
and their song was only swelling the mighty chorus of God's unending praise.

III. The resolves op peaisb. 1. They will prepare a habitation for God. It is the
work of God's people in every age to prepare a dwelling-place for him where his
character is made known, his voice heard, and his love and fear shed abroad. 2. To
exalt God's fame. He was their fathers' God, and that was a call to make him known.
He had given a fuller revelation of himself than even this great mercy contained.
There were purposes and protnises in that record which outran this mercy and them-
selves. Our praise must ever add, " these are but part of his ways," and exalt God as
the world's refuge and help. — ^U.

Vers. 3 — 21. — The results of deliverance to OocTs people. I. The knowledge of thk
MAEVBLLOUSNBSS OF God's POWER (3 — 12). 1. The might of Egypt, when measured
with the strength of God, was utter vanity (4, 5). The Lord's right hand had dashed
in pieces the enemy. What can make the heart afraid which knows the power of God ?
2. The deadly malice of Egypt was extinguished in a moment like a spark beneath the
heel. The picture of the foe's deadly purpose (9) set side by side with God's deed:
" Thou didst blow with thy wind — they sank as lead in the mighty waters."

IL Confidence fob the onward way. 1. In his mercy and strength God will lead
them to the rest he has promised (13). 2. This deliverance will fight for them (14 — 16).
The heart of their foes will die within them. And when led into their land this fear of
the Lord will be a wall between them and the nations round about. They shall not
only be led in, but planted there in undisturbed security (17). 3. God will, as now,
triumph through all the ages, and accomplish, no matter how his people may fear and
his enemies may vaunt themselves, all his righteous will (18). — ^U



EXPOSITION



Ven. 22 — 27. — ^The joubnkt from the
Bed Sea to Eliu. After a stay, which cannot
be exactly measured, but which was probably
one of some days, near the point of the Eastern
coast of the Gulf of Suez, at which they had
emerged from the sea-bed, the Israelites, under
the guidance of the pillar of the cloud, re-
sumed their journey, and were conducted
southwards, or south-eastwards, through the
arid tract, called indifferently " the wilderness
of Shur " (verse 22), and " the wilderness of
Etham " (Num. xxxiii. 8), to a place called
Marah. It is generally supposed that the
first halt must have been at Ayun Musa,
or " the springs of Moses." This is " the only
green spot near the passage over the Bed
Sea " (Cook). It possesses at present seventeen
wells, and is an oasis of grass and tamarisk in
the midst of a sandy desert. When Wellsted
visited it in 1836, there were abundant palm-
trees. It does not lie on the shore, but at the
distauce of about a mUe and a half from the
beach, with which it was at one time connec-
ted b/ an aqueduct, built for the convenience
of the sliips, which here took in their water.
The water is regarded as good and wholesome,



though dark-coloured ana somewhat brackish.
From Aynn Musa the Israelites pursued their
way in a direction a little east of south
through a barren plain where sand-storms are
frequent — part of the wilderness of Shur — for
three days without finding water. Here their
flocks and herds must have suffered greatly,
and many of the animals probably died on the
journey. On the last of the three days water
was found at a spot called thenceforth
" Marah," " bitterness," because the liquid was
undrinkable. After the miracle related in
ver. 25, and an encampment by the side of the
sweetened spring (Num. xxxiii. 8), they pro-
ceeded onward without much change of direc-
tion to Elim, where was abundance of good water
and a grove of seventy palm-trees. Here " they
encamped by the waters," and were allowed
a rest, which probably exceeded a fortnight
(See the comment on ch. xvi. 1.)

Ver. 22. — So Hoses brought Israel from
the Eed Sea, There is no such connection
between this verse and the preceding narra-
tive as the word " so " expresses. Translate
"And Moses brought." The wilderness ol
Shur, called also that of Etham (Num. xxxui.



CH. XV. 23—20.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS



M



8) appean to have extended from Lake Ser-
bonis on the north, across the isthmus, to the
Red Sea, and along its eastern shores as far as
the Wady Ghurundel. It is almost wholly
<raterles3 ; and towards the south, such wells
as exist yield a water that is hitter in the
extreme. Three days. The distance from
Ayun Musa to Ain Howarah, the supposed
representative of Marah, is not more than
about 36 miles ; but the day's march of so
large a multitude through the desert may not
hare averaged more than twelve miles. And
fonnd no water. No doubt the Israelites
carried with them upon the backs of their
asses water in skins, sufficient for their own
wants during such an interval ; but they can
scarcely have carried enough for their cattle.
These must have suffered greatly.

Yer. 23. — ^And when they came to Marah.
It is not clear whether the place already bore
the name on the arrival of the Israelites, or only
received it from them. Marah would mean
" bitter " in Arabic no less than in Hebrew.
The identification of Marah with the present
Am Howarah, in which most modem writers
acquiesce, is uncertain from the fact that there
are several bitter springs in the vicinity — one
of them even bitterer than Howarah. (See
Winer, BealwSrterbuch, ad voc. Marah.)
We may, however, feel confident that the
bitter waters of which the Israelites " would
not drink " were in this neighbourhood, a
little north of the Wady Ghurundel.

Ver. 24. — And tjie people murmured
against Hoses. As they had already done on
the western shores of the Bed Sea ^ch. xiv.
11, 12), and as they were about to do so often
before their wanderings were over. (See
below, ch. xvi. 2 ; xvii. 3 ; Num. xiv. 2 ;
xvi. 41 ; Deut. i. 27, etc.) " Murmuring "
was the common mode in which they vented
their spleen, when anything went ill with
them ; and as Moses had persuaded them to
quit Egypt, the murmuring was chiefly
against him. The men who serve a nation
best are during their lifetime least appreci-
ated. What shall we drink 1 Few disap-
pointments are harder to bear than that of the
man, who after long hours of thirst thinks
that he has obtained wherewith to quench his
intolerable longing, and on raising the cup to
his lips, finds the draught so nauseous that
he cannot swallow it. Very unpalatable water
is swallowed when the thirst is great (Eotlien,
p. 197). But there is a limit beyond which
nature will not go. There " may be water,
water everywhere, yet not a drop to drink."

Vers. 25, 26. — ^Ihe Lord shewed him a tree.
— Several trees or plants belonging to dif-
ferent parts of the world, are said to possess
the quality of rendering bitter water sweet
and agreeable ; as the nellimaram of Coro-
mandel, the eassa/rcu of Florida, the yeroa
Ouikmi of Peru, and the jMrni nelli (Fhy-



lanthus embliea) of India. But none of then
is found in the Sinaitic peninsula. Burck-
hardt suggested (Travels in Syria, p. 474)
that the berries of the ghurlrud (Peganum
retusum), a low thorny shrub which grows
abundantly round the Ain Howarah, may have
been used by Moses to sweeten the drink;
but there are three objections to this. 1.
Moses is not said to have used the berries, but
the entire plant ; 2. The berries would not
have been procurable in April, since they do
not ripen till June ; and 3. They would not
have produced any such effect on the water ai
Burckhardt imagined. In fact there is no
tree or shrub now growing in the Sinaitie
peninsula, which would have any sensible
effect on such water as that of Ain Howarah ;
and the Bedouins of the neighbourhood know
of no means by which it can be made drink-
able. Many of the Fathers believed that the
" tree " had no natural effect, and was com-
manded to be thrown in merely to symbolise
.the purifying power of the Cross of Christ.
But to moderns such a view appears to savour
of mysticism. It is perhaps most probable
that there was some tree or shrub in the
vicinity of the bitter fountain in Moses' time
which had a natural purifying and sweetening
power, but that it has now become extinct.
If this be the case, the miracle consisted in
God's pointing out the tree to Moses, who had
no previous knowledge of it. The waters
were made sweet. Compare the mu-acle of
Elisha (2 Kings ii. 19—22). There he made
for them a statute and an ordinance. See
the next verse. God, it appears, after heal-
ing the water, and satisfying the physical
thirst of his people, gave them an ordinance,
which he connected by a promise with
the miracle. If they would henceforth ren-
der strict obedience to all his command-
ments, then he would " heal " them as he
had healed the water, would keep them free
at once from physical and from moral evil,
from the diseases of Egypt, and the diseases
of their own hearts. And there he proved
them. From the moment of their quitting
Egypt to that of their entering Canaan, God
was ever " proving " his people — trying them,
that is— exercising their faith, and patience
and obedience and power of self-denial, in
order to fit them for the position which they
were to occupy in Canaan. He had proved
them at the Bed Sea, when he let them be
shut in between the water and the host of the
Egyptians — ^he proved them now at Marah by
a bitter disappointment — he proved them
again at Meribah (ch. xvii. 1 — 7) ; at Sinai
(ch. XX. 20); at Taberah (Num. xi. 1—8);
at Kibroth-hattaavah (iJ. verse 34) ; at
Kadesh (ib. xiii. 26 — 33), and elsewhere. For
forty years he led them through the wilder-
ness " to prove them, to know what was ia
their heart " (Dent, viii.), to fit them for tbaii

3



TflE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[OH. XT. t»-27.



glon'oiu and conquering career In the land of
promise All those diseases. See Deut. vii
15; xxTiii. 27. Kalisoh correctly observes
that, thongh the Egyptians had the character
in antiquity of being among the healthiest
and most robust of nations (Herod, ii. 77), yet
a certain small number of diseases have always
raged among them with extreme severity
He understands the present passage of the
plagues, which, however, are certainly no-
where else called " diseases." There is no
reason why the word should not be taken
literally, as all take it in the passages of
Deuteronomy above cited.

Ver. 27. — ^They came to EUm. Elim was
udoubtedly some spot in the comparatively
fertile tract which lies south of the " wilder-
ness of Shur," Intervening between it and the
" wilderness of Sin " — now El Murkha. This
tract contains the three fertile wadys of
Ghurundel, Useit, and Tayibeh, each of which
is regarded by some writers as the true Elim.
It has many springs of water, abundant
tamarisks, and a certain nimiber of palm-trees.
On the whole, Ghurundel seems to be accepted
by the majority of well-informed writere as
having the best claim to be considered the
Klim of this passage Twelve wella. Bather



« springs." The " twelve springs " have no<
been identified ; but the Arabs are apt to con-
ceal the sources of their water snppliei
(Niebuhr, Arable, p. 347). A large stream
flows down the Wady Ghurundd in the
winter- time (ibid.'), which later becomes •
small brook ^urckhardt, Syria, p. 778), and
dries up altogether in the autumn. The pas-
ture is good at most seasons, sometimes rich
and luxuriant ; there are abundant tamarisks,
a considerable number of acacias, and some
palms. Three score and ten palm trees. The

fialm-trees of this part of Arabia are "not
ike those of Egypt or of pictures, but either
dwarf — that is, trunkless— or else with savage
hairy trunks, and branches all dishevelled"
(Stanley, Sinai and Palettine, p. 68). There
are a considerable number in the Wady Ghu-
rundel, and others in the Wady Tayibeh {ib.
p. 69). They encamped there. It has been
observed that the vast numbers of the host
would more than fill the Wady Ghurundel,
and that while the main body encamped there,
others, with their cattle, probably occupied the
adjacent wadys — Useit, Ethal, and even
Tayibeh or Shuweikah — which all offer good
pasturage



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 23 — 27. — The trials and vicissitudes of life. Israel in the wilderness is a type
of our pilgrimage through life.

L Monotony. The long weary sameness of days each exactly resembling the last
(ver. 22) — the desert all around us — and no water! No refreshing draughts from
that living spring, which becomes in them that drink it " a well of water springing
up into everlasting life" (John iv. 14). Israel was afflicted by want of earthly water
for three days. Many poor pilgrims through the wilderness of life are debarred the
spiritual draughts of which Jesus spoke to the Samaritan woman for twenty, thirty,
forty years I Debarred, it may be, by no fault of their own, born in heathenism, bred
up in heathenism, uneducated in what it most concerns a man to know. How sad
their condition ! How thankful those should be who may draw of the water of life freely
(o) from the written word ; (6) from the Living and Eternal Word who has said — " If
any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink ! "

II. Disappointment. Hopes long cherished seem about, at last, to be satisfied. The
long sought for treasure — of whatever kind it may be — is announced as found. Now
we are about to enjoy ourselves, to take our fill of the delight long denied us. Alasl
the dainty morsel as we taste it proves to be—

"As Dead Sea fruit, which, fair to view
Yet turns to ashes on the lips."

The delicious draught, as we expected it to be, is " Marah," « bitterness." Most of life
is to most men made up of such disappointments. Men crave happiness, and expect it
here, and seek it through some earthly, some temporal means — wealth, or power, or
fame, or a peaceful domestic life, or social success, or literary eminencij — and no sooner

do they obtain their desire, and hold it in their grasp, than they find its savour gone

its taste so bitter that they do not care to drink. Then, how often do they turn to
vent the anguish of their heart on some quite innocent person, who, they say, has led
tbem wrong 1 Their disajipoiutmeftt shouid take them- with humbled spirits to Go4.



oa. XV. 22—27.] THE BOOK OP BXODtJS. tt

It actually takes them with furious words to the presence of some man, whom it is «
relief to them to load with abuse and obloquy, 'i'hey imitate the Israelites, not Mose*
—they murmur, instead of crying to the Almighty.

III. Unexpected relief. God can turn bitter to sweet. Often, out of tho bittei
agony of disappointment God makes gladness to arise. Sometimes, as in the miracle of
Marah, he reverses the disappointment itself, turning defeat into victory, giving us the
gratification of the desire which had been baulked of fruition. But more often he relieves
by compensating. He gives something unexpected instead of the expected joy which
he has withheld, lie makes a temporal evil work for our spiritual good. He takes
away the sting from worldly loss, by pouring into our hearts the spirit of contentment.
He causes ill-success to wean us from the world and fix our thoughts on him.

IV. A TIME OP REFRESHMENT. Marah led to Elim. If there are times of severe trial
in life, there are also "times of refreshing from the Lord" (Acts iii. 19) — ^times of
enjoyment — even times of mirth (Bccles. iii. 4; Ps. cxxvi. 2). But lately toiling
wearily through an arid wilderness, only to reach waters of bitterness, on a sudden the
Israelites found themselves amid groves of palms, stretched themselves at length on
the soft herbage under the shadow of tall trees, and listened to the breeze sighing
through the acacias, or to the murmur of the babbling rill which flowed from the
" twelve springs " adown the dale. ' Encamped there by the waters " (ver. 27) they
were allowed to rest for a while, secure from foes, screened from the heat, their eye*
charmed by the verdure, their ears soothed by gentle sounds, their every sense lapped
in soft enjoyment by the charms of a scene which, after the wilderness, must have
appeared " altogether lovely." And so it is in our lives. God does give us, even here
in this world, seasons of repose, of satisfaction, of calm content. It were ingratitude in
us not to accept with thankfulness such occasions when they arise. He knows what ii
best for us ; and if he appoints us an Elim, we were churlish to withdraw ourselves from
it. The Church has its festivals. Christ attended more than one banquet. " Times of
refreshing " are to be received joyously, gratefully, as " coming from the Lord," and
designed by him to support, strengthen, comfort us. They are, as it were, g\imgBe§
into the future life.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 22 — ^27. — Marah and Elim. " So Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea, and
they went out into the wilderness of Shur," etc. The main topics here are —

I. The sweet followed by the bitter. Singing these songs of triumph, and
praising God with timbrel and dance, on the further shores of the Red Sea, the Israelites
may have felt as if nothing remained to them but to sing and dance the rest of their
way to Canaan. They would regard their trials as practically at an end. It would be
with regret that they broke up their pleasant encampment at the Bed Sea at alL
Their thought would be, "It is good for us to be here, let us make here tabernacles"
(cf. Matt. xvii. 4). But this was not to be permitted. The old call comes — "Speak
to the children of Israel that they go forward" (ch. xiv. 15), and the halcyon days of
their first great exuberant joy are over. Their celebration of triumph is soon to b«
followed by sharp experience of privation. 1. The Israelites were conducted by the
wilderness of khur. ' There they went three days without water. God might, as after-
wards at Rephidim (ch. xvii. 6), have given them water ; but it was his will that they
should taste the painfulness of the way. This is not an uncommon experience. Every
life has its arid, waterless stretches, which may be compared to this " wilderness of
Bhur." " There are momenta when the poet, the orator, the thinker, possessed, inspired
tiith lofty and burning thoughts, needs nothing added to the riches of his existence ;
finds life glorious and sublime. But these are but moments, even in the life of genius ;
•nd after them, and around them, stretches the weary waste of uninspired, inglorious,
untimeful days and years" (Dr. J. Service). It is the same in the life of religion.
Seasons of spiritual enjoyment are frequently followed by sharp experience of triaL
We are led by the wilderness of Shur. Spiritual comforts fail us, and our soul, like
Israel's at a later period, is "much discouraged because of the way" (Num. xxi
4). We are brought into " a dry and thirsty land, where no water is" (Ps. Ixiii. 1)^
otrttdn Bovereignty is to be recognised in the dispensation of Divine comforts. Gm



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xr. 21!— 27.



leaves us to taste the sharpness of privation, that we may be led to cry after him
(Ps. cxix. 81, 82). 2. They came to Marah, where the waters were bitter. This was a
keen and poignant disappointment to them — " sorrow upon sorrow." As usual, it drove
the people to murmuring, and Moses to prayer. Bear gently with their infirmity. Do
them the justice of remembering that there is no record of their murmuring during
the three past days of their great privation in the wilderness. It was this disappoint-
ment at the well of Marah which fairly broke them down. Would many of us have
borne the trial better ? It is easy to sing when the heart is full of a great fresh joy.
But let trial succeed trial, and disappointment follow on disappointment, and how soon
do the accents of praise die away, to be replaced by moaning and complaint I The
" Song of Moses," which was so natural on the banks of the Red Sea, would have had a
strange sound coming from these dust- parched throats, and fainting, discouraged hearts.
The note of triumph is not easily sustained when the body is sinking with fatigue, and
when the wells to whch we had looked for refreshment are discovered to be bitter.
Take Marah as an emblem (1) of life's disappointments. Our life-journey is studded
with disappointments. Hard to bear in any case, these are doubly bitter to us, when
they come on the back of other trials, and cheat us of an expected solace. When
friends, e.g., turn their backs on us in time of need, or come with cold comfort when
we expected ready help, or give chiding instead of sympathy ; when trusted projects
fail, or fond anticipations are not realised ; most of all, when God himself seems to desert
us, and grants no answer to our prayers ; the waters given us to drink are bitter indeed.
(2) Of fife's bitter experiences generally. "0*11 me not Naomi," said the mother-
in-law of Ruth, " call me Mara : for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me "
(Ruth i. 20). The only wells that never become bitter are the " wells of salvation "
(is. xii. 3)— the waters of Divine consolations (cf. John iv. 14). The waters of our
creature-comforts admit of being very easily embittered. Relationships, friendships,
possessions, business, social position — sweet to-day, any or all of these may be made
bitter to us to-morrow. The life of Israel was made " bitter " by bondage (oh. i. 14).
God dealt " bitterly " with Naomi in taking husband and sons from her, and reducing
her to poverty (Ruth i. 21). Hannah was " in bitterness of soul" because she had no
child, and " her adversary provoked her sore, for to make her fret " (1 Sam. i. 6 — 10).
Job was embittered by his afflictions (Job vii. 11 ; ix. 18 ; x. 1). The tears of the
Psalmist were his meat day and night, while they continually said unto him, where is
thy God? (Ps. xlii. 3). Mordecai cried, when the decree went forth against his nation,
" with a loud and bitter cry " (Esther iv. 1). Bitter waters there are, too, in our own
hearts, and in society, engendered by sin — ^by the presence of envy, jealousy, strife,
hatred, malignity, and revengefulness. No scarcity, then, of Marah experiences, no
want of wells that stand in need of the healing tree being cast in to sweeten them.
3. God's ends in permitting Israd to suffer these severe privations. We do not ask
why God led the Israelites by this particular way, since probably there was no other
way open by which they could have been led. But we may very well ask why, leading
them by this way, God, who had it in his power to supply their wants, permitted them
to suffer these extreme hardships? (1) We may glean one hint in reply from Paul's
experience in 2 Cor. xii., " Lest," he says, " I should be exalted above measure through
the abundance of the revelation, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure " (ver. 7).
(2) A second hint is to bo drawn from ver. 25 — " 'There he proved them " Cf. Deut. viii. 2
— " To humble thee, and prove thee to know what was in thine heart, whether thou
wouldest keep his commandments, or no." We do not know what unbelief, what
rebellion, what impatience there is in our hearts, till trial comes to draw it out.

II. The bitter guanoed into the sweet. Moses, we read, " cried unto the Lord,
and he showed him a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the watftrs were
made sweet" (ver. 25). Observe, \. The agency employed. The tree had probably
some peculiar properties which tended in the direction of the result which was pro-
duced, though, of itself it was incompetent to produce it. The supernatural does not,
•3 a rule, contravene the natural, but works along the existing lines, utilising the
natural so far as it goes. 2. The spiritual meaning. That God intended the healing
of these bitter waters to be a " sign " to Israel — a proof of his ability and willingness to
heal them of all their natural and spiritual diseases, is abundantly plain from vers. 25, 2A.



OH. XV. 22— 27.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. at

The lesson God would have them learn from the incident was — "I am Jehovah that
healeth thee." His Jehovah character guaranteed that what he had shown himself to
be in this one instance, he would be always, viz., a Healer. As Jehovah, GK>d is the
Being of exhaustless resource. As Jehovah, he is the Being eternally identical with
himself — self-consistent in all his ways of acting ; so that from any one of his actions,
if the principle of it can but be clearly apprehended, we are safe in inferring what he
always will do. God sweetens, or heals, the bitter waters of life — (1) By altering the
outward conditions — e.g., by removing sickness, sending aid in poverty, taking away the
caus- of bitterness, whatever that may be. He healed Naomi's bitterness by the happy
marriage of Ruth (Ruth iv. 14, 15) ; Hannah's by giving her a son (1 Sam. i. 20) ; Job's
by restoring his health and prosperity (Job xlvii. 10), etc. The tree here is whatever
agency GkKi employs to accomplish his purpose. (2) And this is the diviner art, by
infusing sweetness into the trial itself. He makes that which is bitter sweet to us, by
adding himself to it. This Divine change in our experiences is accomplished by means
of a very simple but potuut secret — as simple as the casting of the tree into the waters,
as potent in its efBcacy. Would we know it? It is simply this — denying our own
natural will, and taking God's instead. " Not my wUl but thine be done " (Luke xxii.
42). This it is which will make even the bitterest of trials sweet. Call it, if you will,
the taking up of the cross ; it is, at all events, the spirit of the cross which is the
sweetening, heavenly element in all affliction — the tree that heals. It is invaluable to
bear this in mind, that be our trial, our grief, what it may, half its pain has departed the
moment we can bring ourselves to embrace God's will in it. Heavenly consolations will
sweeten what remains. • Medieval mystics, like Tauler, dwelt much on this thought,
and it is the true and all-important element in their teaching. With God at hand to
bless, " lUs have no weight, and tears no bitterness ; " or as another " sweet singer "
expresses i^— '

" Jnst to let thy Father do

What he will.
Just to know that he is true,

And be still.
Just to let him take the care

Sorely pressing,
Finding all we let him bear

Changed to blessing.
This is aUl and yet the way.

Marked by him who loves thee best I
Secret of a happy day,

Secret of his promised rest."

Fbances BmLET Haveboal

(3) By removing the cause of all evil and bitterness — sin itself. It is as the God
of liedemption that Jehovah reveals himself pre-eminently as the Healer. His
Gospel goes to the root of the matter, and strikes at the malum oriyin ite of the
bitterness in us, and around us. From this point of view, it is not fanciful to trace
an analogy — we need not allege a direct typical relation — between this tree cast in to
fweeten the bitter waters, and the Cniss of the Redeemer. God through Christ;
Christ through what he has accomplished by this Cross ; the Cross, by being made
the object of faith, and again, by being set up in men's hearts, eftects this sweetening of
the waters. We have but to compare ancient with modern civilization, to see how
much the Cross of Christ, cast into the bitter waters of society, has already done to
sweeten them. Trusted in for salvation, it renews the heart in its inmost springs, and
80 heals the bitter waters there; while, as the power of God untu salvation, it will ulti-
mately heal the world of all its woes, abolishing even death, from which abeady it
extracts the sting and bitterness. ttt ^ u

III. The eight improvement op Makah experiences (ver. 26). We should accept
them, 1. As a motive to obedience. If God has healed us that is a new reason for
loving trusting, and obeying him (Ps. cxvi.). Accordingly, consequent on this healing
of the bitter waters, God made "a statute and an ordinance" for Israei, taking them
bound to serve him, and promising them new blessings, if they should prove obedient



24 IflE BOOK OF fiXODUS. tea. xv. 22— 2?



This "statute and ordinance" is the comprehensive germ of the subsequent covenant
(ch xxiv 3—9). 2. As a pledge. The sweetening of the waters, as already seen, was
a revelation of Jehovah in his character as Healer. It pledged to Israel that he would,
if only they obeyed his statutes, exempt them from such plagues as he had brought
upon the Egyptians, and, by implication, that he would heal them of whatever diseases
WMO already upon them. He would be a God of health to them. The hejdthx
condition of body is one which not only throws off existmg disease, but which fortifies




whole." are represented by the same Greek word. We may state the relation thus:—




experience of healing is a pledge -. , .

God is a healer (cf. Ps. ciii. 1 — 4). Every recovery from sickness is thus, m a way,
the preaching of a gospel. It pledges a complete and perfect healing — entire deliverance
from natural and spiritual evils— if only we will believe, obey, and use God's method.

IV. Elim (ver. 27). 1. An illustration of the chequered experiences of life. The
alternation of gkdness and sorrow ; of smiles and tears ; followed again by new com-
forts and seasons of joy. 2. There are Elim spots — places of cool shade, of abundant
waters, of rest and refreshment provided for us all along our way through life. In the
times of hottest persecution, there were intervals of respite. The Covenanters used to
speak of these as " the hlinles." 3. These Elim-spots should not lead us to forget that
we are still in the wilderness. The prevailing aspect of life, especially to one in earnest,
is figured by the wilderness, rather than by Elim. Our state here is one of trial, of
discipline, of probation — no passing snatches of enjoyment should cause us to forget
this.— J. 0.

Vers. 22 — 27. — 2V want of water and the want of faith — Marah and Elim. — It will
6e noticed at once how the interest of this passage is gathered round that great natural
necessity, water. It is a necessity Jx) man in so many ways. He needs it for drinking,
for cleansing, for cooking, and for helping to renew the face of the earth. We may
note also that Israel was soon to discover the necessity of water in ceremonial duties.
A great deal of water had to be used in the tabernacle service. (Ex. xxix. 4 ;
XXX. 18 — ^21 ; Lev. vi. 27, 28 ; chaps, xiii. — xvii.) Hence it is no wonder that the
very first thing Jehovah does after delivering the Israelites finally from Pharaoh, is to
bring them face to face with this great want of water. We see them passing in a short
time through a great variety of experiences with regard to it. First, they go three days
in the wilderness and find no water ; next they come to the waters of Marah and find
them undrinkable ; then these waters are suddenly made sweet ; and lastly, they journey
on to the abundant supplies, and therefore mviting neighbourhood of Elim.

I. The IsBABLiTBs EXPERIENCE THE WANT OF WATER. There is here a curious con-
trast between the fate of the Egyptians and the want of the Israelites. Water proved
the ruin of Pharaoh and his host, while the want of water led Israel rapidly into
murmuring and unbelief. Thus we have another illustration of how temporal things —
even the very necessities of life from a natural point of view — are only blessings as God
makes them so. He can turn them very rapidly and easily into curses. We call to
mind the grotesque words of Laertes over his drowned sister : — " Too much of water hast
thou, poor Ophelia." So the Egyptians had too much of water, and' the Israelites could
not get any at all. God was immediately beginning to teach and test his own people
according to the explanation of Moses in vers. 25, 26. They were to learn faith in
Jehovah for support as well as deliverance ; and the first lesson was to be taught by a
three days' deprivation of water. If they had had the believing spirit in them this was
an opportunity to say, " Assuredly such an awfiil deliverance has not been wrought
that we may straightway perish of thirst." Notice also how the reality of the wildemest
Wt i* at once brouyht before us by these three days of waterless wandering. Bo short a
time had they been out of Egypt, and so little distance had they got away ; and yet
they are as it were in the very worst of wilderness experiences. Thus even the moment
thev became effectually clear of the external bondage of Egypt, the truth was impressed



6a. XT, 22— 2t.3 •the book ov EXoDtJs. a

apon them that they were without a home. There was no swift exchange from ont
itorehouse of temporal comforts to another. For remember, Egyj,! with all its misery
was a sort of home ; there the Israelites had heea born and trained ; there they had got
Into a bondage of habits and traditions which was not to be removed in a day. And
now Jehovah would have them understand that to be free and able to serve him meant
that they must endure with these privileges the privations of the wilderness. We
cannot have everything good all at once. If we would be clear of the bondage of this
world's carnal ways, we must be ready for certain consequent and immediate privations.
We cannot get away from Egypt and yet take with ua the pleasant waters of Egypt.
Unless our springs be in God, and heaven begun in the heart, the needM change of
external associations may bring little but pain. External circumstances, and to some
extent external companionships, may remain the same ; the new home feeling must be
produced by the change within.

II. When the Isbaelites find watbb it is bittbb. Imagine, when they see the
water after three days privation, how they run to it. But taste does not confirm
sight. The water is not drinkable. Possibly this was a just complaint ; although it
may rather be suspected that the water, even if bitter, was not so bitter but that it
could have been drunk by thirsty people. The Israelites, however, were thinking of the
sweet waters of Egypt. A little longer privation and they might have found sweetness
even in bitter waters. Still one cannot but consider how it is there should be this
difference between the bitter waters and the sweet, between Marah and Elim. And
then we are at once reminded that bitterness is no essential part of water, but comes
from foreign and separable matters. So the comforts and resources flowing from God
get mixed on the way with human and embittering elements ; and these elements are
so strong and disturbing that we utterly forget the sweet Divine part because of the
discomforts of the bitter human one. We are ready to cast all away as if the nauseous
could not be expelled. When Jesus told his disciples certain things which required a
changed mind, and the creation of spiritual perceptivity in order to lay them to heart,
they called these things hard sayings ; not considering that hardness might be made
easiness. In our early experiences of religion there is sure to be something of the bitter.
The exhortation, " Taste and see that the Lord is good," is a serious and experimental
one, yet many on their tasting find bitterness. The water of life has flowed through
nauseating channels. Moses had his Marah : he got a taste of it even here, and he had
full draughts afterwards. (Ch. xxxii. 19 ; Num. xi. 10—15 ; xii. 1 ; xiv. 5 ; xvi. 3.) David
also had his Marah. (Ps. xlii. 3; Ixxx. 5; cii. 9.) One can see a good deal of
Marah even in the letters of the Christian Paul to his brethren in Corinth and Gralatia.
He had expected great things from the gifts of the Spirit, and correspondingly bitter
would be his disappointment. We must have our Marah water to drink. Water may
&il altogether for a while, and then when it does come it may seem worse than none
at all.

III. God quickly makes the water palatable. Note the request of the people.
They do not stop to consider even for a moment whether this water, bitter as it is, may
be made palatable. They turn from the whole thing in disgust and despair. " What
shall we drink ? " If Moses had straightway replied, " Ye shall drink of Marah," they
would have counted him a mocker ; yet his reply would have been correct. In the
very things from which we turn as obviously useless, we may be destined to find an
ample and satisfying bupply. Moses himself knew not at the moment what they were
to drink, but he takes the wise course and cries to Jehovah. More and more does his
now habitual faith come out in contrast with the imbelJef of the people. With regard
to the casting in (/ the tree, it may have been that the tree had in itself some salutary
effect ; but the probability rather is that Moses was asked for another pure act of faith.
This is more in harmony with the miraculous progression observed hitherto. When
we remember the multitude that had to be supplied from these v.-aters, there is some-
thing ludicrously inadequate in the supposition that the branches gathered to them-
selves the saline incrustations. The casting in of the tree was rather a symbolic
channel for the sweetening than the actual cause of it.

IV. God seizes the oppoetunity to show Isbael whbeein thbie safety libs.
" He proved them " (ver. 25). He points out, as it were, that they have been subjected
to a test and have failed. At Marah they are shown forth aa inattentive to past expe-



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xr. 22— 27.



rienceB, forgetful as to how God had remembered them and delivered them. Bemg now
free from the bondage of Egypt, they must no longer blame outward wnstramts but
look earnestly on inward defects, for these are about to prove their greatest hindrance
and danger. Yet this was not a time to speak sternly, even though unbelief had put
forth its baleful front ; they were but at the beginning of the journey, and gentle admo-
nition was more proper than stern reproach. Therefore he counsels them— 1. lo hsten
steadily to his voice; 2. To make his will, as expressing most clearly that which u
right the rule of their conduct; 3. To carry out all his commandments and statutes,
some' of the most important of which had already been laid before them m connection
with their departure from Egypt. Let them attend to aU this, and they mil be free
from Bcypt's calamities. Notice the negative aspect of this promise. God promises
exemptfon from suffering rather than attainment of good. It was well thus to make
Israel give a backward look, not only towards the Ked Sea, but across it, and into
Egypt, where so many troubles had come on their recent oppressors. It would almost
seem as if already the hearts of many were filling with the expectation of carnal
comforts. They were thinking, eagerly and greedily, of what they were to get. But
God speaks out very plainly. He demands obedience ; and the most he has to say is
that if obedience is given, there will be exemption from suffering. The positive element
is left out, and doubtless there is wisdom in the omission. That element wUl come in
due time. Yet of course it is there even now, for the devout and discerning, who can
penetrate below the surface. The keeping of Jehovah's commandments is, infallibly,
the attaining of the highest and purest blessedness.

V. After Marah has done its work, the Ibkaelites comb to Elih. The pillar ol
cloud doubtless led them to Marah purposely before Blim, and to Elim purposely after
Marah. Thus the people got a rest before coming to another trial of their faith and sub-
ujssiveness ; God did not take them straight from the difiSculty with regard to the water
to the next difficulty with regard to the bread. It is easy to understand that there were
many attractions at Elim which would make them wish to linger there ; but at Elim
they could not stay. It had water in abundance ; but water, great blessing as it is, is
not enough. Pleasant it was to rest for awhile at these wells and seventy palm-trees ;
but before them lay a still better land where they would have, not only brooks of water
and fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills, but also wheat and barley
and vines and fig-trees and pomegranates; and all the rest of the good things men-
tioned in Deut. viii. 7—9. The great lesson of Elim is that we must not make •
resting-place, however attractive, into a home. — Y.

Vers. 22 — 27. — / will hear what Qod, the Lord, will say. There is no reason why
a powerful sermon should not be preached from a seemingly strange text. All depends
on how the text is treated. God himself is the ^.Teatest of all preachers. See what
sort of a sermon he preached from a text which most would have thought unpromising.

I. The text (ver. 22 — 25). 1. What it was. Israel three days without water;
at length " a large mound, a whitish petrifaction," from which flowed a fountain.
Eagerness followed by disgust. The water bitter, loathsome, undrinkable. " Marah."
The people murmured against their leader. A bitter fountain and an embittered mur-
muring people. Such the text. 2. Sow treated. The text was improved by applying
to it the context. Many other texts might be best improved in like manner. " The
Lord showed him a tree," etc. (ver. 25). Clearly somewhere close at hand. The bitter
waters made sweet. Discontent changed to satisfaction.

II. The sermon (vers. 25, 26). Israelites too much like the bitter water. When
God looked to refresh himself by their confidence and gratitude, he was met by mur-
muring and distrust. They, too, must learn not to fix attention wholly on disagreeables,
but to tai'e the bitter out of them by considering the never-absent context. Gd
himself is the context to every incident which could befall them, but they must apply
his help by obedience and simple trust. Obey him and no bitter, in the heart or out
of it, but his presence would sweeten. " I am the Lord that healeth thee," even as I
have healed the waters. Notice : — 1. The sermon does not dwell upon the text, thouch
it springs out of it quite naturally. Exceedingly plain and simple, so that a child can
understand it. 2. The text (the ordinance) illustrates the sermon (the statute). Yet
the illustration is not forced ; not even strongly emphasized ; just allowed to speak ioi



Ml. XT. 22-2R.5 THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



Itself. Some preachers make so much of an illustration, that that which it illustrates
is forgotten. [You may drive a brass-headed nail so " home," that while it is fixed
nothing will hang upon it.]

III. A RETREAT FOE MEDITATION AFTERWARDS (ver. 27). Some excellent sermons
«re forgotten directly in the hurry and bustle that succeeds them. To gain by sermons
we must recollect them ; and to recollect them we must have time and place for recol-
kctedness. This God gave to the Israelites at Elim ; yet, even so, they failed to profit
by it. Had they used their time for meditation better, much after trouble, caused by
forgetfulness, would have been saved.

Application. " A sermon for preachers I " Yes, but a sermon for people also. If
God's sermons can be so soon forgotten, even when he gives time for pondering them,
how much sooner those we preach ! Everything does not rest with the preacher.
If the people will not take pains to remember — to ponder, meditate, inwardly digest —
the best of preachers, even God himself, may preach home to them, and the result
be nil. — G.

Vers. 22 — 27.— Trial and Blessing. I. The cloud and sunshinb of the pilgrim
LIFE. The weariness of the wilderness journey, the disappointment of Marah, and the
comforts of Elim, all lie along the appointed way.

n. A HEAVY TRIAL BADLY BORNE. The wildemess thirst had been endured without
a murmur ; but when in addition they were mocked by the bitter springs of Marah their
spirit broke. 1. The end of a prayerless faith is soon reached. If we have not learned to
cast burdens upon God and to wait upon him, but expect him to fill our life with ease
and pleasure, we shall soon be offended. 2. A spirit with such a faith speedily turns
away from G-od and breaks into complaint against man.

III. Faith's triumph in difficulty (25). 1. Moses " cried unto the Lord." The
need of the time was rightly read. It was a call to prayer. In times of difBculty and
reproach our first recourse should be to God. 2. In answer to believing prayer tlie bitter
waters are sweetened, and the soul finds God in the gift as without the previous dis-
appointment he could not be manifested.

IV. God's covenant time. 1. In the full experience of his mercy. We must know
God's love in Christ before his covenant of service and blessing can be made with us.
2. In the midst of self-knowledge and repentance. At the sweetened waters the faith-
less ones knew themselves and were ashamed. 3. The nature of the covenant. If they
cleave to and serve him, there may be affliction, but there shall be no judgment. 4.
How God will be known in Israel. " I am the Lord that healeth thee." Note : — When
God's goodness has rebuked our unbelief, he means us to listen to the assurance of his
love and to renew our vows. — U,

Vers. 22 — 26. — The well of bitterness. " For I am Jehovah that healeth thee " (Ex.
IV. 26). A new chapter of history now opens, that of the wandering ; it comprises the
following passages. 1. Two months to Sinai. 2. Eleven months at Sinai. 3. Thirty-
eight years of virtual settling down in the wildemess of Paran. 4. March upon Canaan
in the last year. Introductory to this sermon give description of the journey from the
sea to Marah, keeping prominent these points, the first camp probably at "The Wells
of Moses," the road thence varying from ten to twenty miles wide, the sea on the right,
the wall-looking line of mountain on the left for nearly all the way — this the wilderness
of " Shur," t.e., of " the wall." There may indeed have been a city called " Shur," but
the wall of moimtain may have given name both to city and desert, ^n the line of the
Roman wall in Northumberland is a village " Wall.") The route here quite unmis-
takable. More than forty miles. No water. The modern caravan road marked by
bleached camel bones. Num. xxxiii. 8, gives the impression of a forced march. At length
Marah, to-day a solitary spring of bitter water with stunted palm-tree beside it. Here
too is the place to point out, that Israel's wanderings are not so much allegorical, but
tautegorical. The phenomena of spiritual life and those of Israel's desert history are not
80 much two sets of things — one pictorial the other real, but one and the same. This
truth lies at the base of all successful practical homiletic treatment.

I. Mak may not live in the past. " And Moses brought [forced away] Israel fi-om
%k» Bed Sea." Not* :— 1. Sence/orth Moses is supreme leader, Aaron and Mirinni sink



MB BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xt. M— 28



to Buboriinate places. Besides these, the entourage of Moses consists of Hur, Miriam'l
husband ; Jethro for guide j and Joshua, a sort of body servant. All over the desert are
names witnessing to this hour to the sole supremacy of Moses. 2. Divine Ouid<mce
did not impair his individuality. Inspiration and the " Cloud and Fke " did not to
lead as to leave no room for the exercise of judgment or the spontaneity of consecrated
genius. Lesson: — Ood does not crush indivwluaKty, hut develops it into fidness and
power. 3. Moses brought Israel quickly from proximity to Egypt, and even from the
scene of victory. [See Heb. verb, to cause the camp to remove.] The last cadences of
the song, the last sound of dancing had hardly died away ; Miriam's timbrel was
scarcely out of her hand, before " Forward 1 " Out of this, two lessons. Leave behind :
— L 2%emeTOoryo/^yj(p<; of old sins, of old sorrows. 2. Thememory of victory. As
in common life, so in spiritual, e.g., the schoolboy. (John Singleton Copley, a painter's
ion, had for motto " Ultra pergere," and became Lord Lyndhurst.) Graduate at
University. Young tradesman. So with things spiritual, each victory the point of a
new departure, even with the aged. "Christian progress by oblivion of the past."
Phil. m. 13, 14.

II. FlEBT STAGES IN NEW 0HAPTEK8 OF LIFE'S HISTOET ABE TEDIOUS. Lookhcre at: —

1. The experience of Israel. They had left behind many sights, they, even though
slaves, would greatly miss ; the Kile and its green line of fertility ; cities in all their
splendour ; life in all its rich variety. Now, the hardship and silence of the desert,
only trumpet-broken at morn and eve. And this first stage was terrible. (For accurate
idea of this road, see " Forty days in the desert," pp. 30, 31.) Nothing so bad as this
further on — further on oases, wells, filmy streams, tamarisk, palm, mountain shadows,
and even cultivated regions. Excitement perhaps of the first day, the experience novel,
the sea in view ; but on the second and third, plodding, fainting, and disgust. 2. The
present reality. So is it with all new chapters in life ; the first steps are tedious, e.g.,
child going to school; boy to college; first steps in business; so with every serious
break-up and change in life's pilgrimage. The first steps are arduous. And so too is
spiritual life — to break with sin, to stand ridicule, to keep advancing in spite of com-
parative ignorance, etc. 3. The temptation. Many faU to stand it. Young men yield
and go back to the fleshpots of Egypt — loneliness with duty and God does not suit
them. If we can march from the sea to Marah, all may be well. 4. The encouragement.
To say nothing of truths like these, that the way was right, the guidance sufficient, the
land of Promise was before them ; there was a nearer benediction. " The far horizon'
in front was bounded, not by a line of level sand, but by sharp mountain summits,
tossing their peaks into the sky in wild disorder, and suggesting irresistibly the thought
of torrents and glens, the shadow of great rocks, and groves of palms." The view was
of the range of Sinai, and there Israel was to have nearly a year of high commvmion
with God.

III. Disappointment waits us on odb way. The high-wrought expectation of the
people : and lo I the spring is bitter. So with life. So much is this the case, that men
of genius have described life as one long illusion. Things are never what they seemed.
Neither school nor college, courtship nor marriage, home nor church, business nor
pleasure. So much the worse for those who have ideality large.

IV. Into disappointment comes healino. All through nature, it is probable, that
every poison has its antidote, every evil its corrective, every disappointment its com-
pensation. " Dr. Johnston, in his ' Chemistry of Common Things,' explains at length
how the bark of a certain tree has power to precipitate the mineral particles, which
embitter the waters, and to make them sweet and clear." Did God " show " this secret
thing to Moses ? Let every man examine his own life, and he will find by the side of
every disappointment a compensating mercy ; and more, that out of every such has
come a lesson to sweeten life. It is as when (to take the most striking illustration of
all) the Saviour came down into human nature, turned to bitterness by sin, and made
the bitter sweet.

V. Life is one lono pbobation. This is a truth illustrated by the journey to, and
by the incidents at Marah. There Ood laid down a Fixed Principle [ph], and om
that was absolutely Righteous. [DSB'p]. 1. Israel was to hear (i.e. believe) and do.

2. And then Jehovah would be to Israel, what the " wood " had \seea to the water, thdl
Healer.- -E,



0B.XTL1— 3.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



Ver. 27.- Elim. " And they came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water,"
etc. (Ex. XV. 27). Describe locality, and point out the great change from Marah, and
the miserable preceding three days in the desert. And then note the following sugges-
tions as to the pilgrim path of a human soul.

I. OuB PILGEIMAGE LIES THKOUQH EVER-VARIED SCENERY. The changes here are so
great that they cannot fail to suggest the corresponding truth, e.g., fear on the west of
the Red Sea, deliverance, triumph, three days' march, disappointment and healing at
Marah, Elim.

II. The scenebv will include " Elims." In dark days we believe no bright will
dawn, and vice versa. So the sorrowful must be reminded of Elims to come. Many
oases for Israel ; so to-day even in Sahara. Our Elims. — 1. Lift the mind to their
Qiver. 2. Are earnests of the Better Land.

III. "Elims" ARE the creations of truth. Imagine all the beauty of Elim, and
ask, what made it ? It was the water that made the Paradise. Now, note the place of
water in the economy of nature ; as a constituent of the human body, in vegetation ; as
the chief element in all food, medicine, drink ; as the universal solvent and purifier; as
an agent in all dyes, gorgeous and homely ; as " the eye " in every landscape, etc. It
is no wonder then that water in Scripture is so often the emblem of truth, for which
the soul thirsts, which is given as " water of life " from the throne of God and the Lamb.
Doctrine " distils as the dew." God " pours clean water upon us that we may be clean."
Kote the analogy between truth and water implied in Matt, xxviii. 19. (See illustra-
tions further in Bayley's " Egypt to Canaan," pp. 110—^112). And is it not new dis-
covery of truth at crises in our lives, that make our " Elims " ? Not at all anything
external to the soul ; but internal uncoverings of the goodness, grace and glory of our
Heavenly Father, etc., etc. [Develop and illustrate.] Will it be considered fanciful to
■dd, that : —

IV. OuB " Elims " have an individual impress. " Twelve wells," as many as tribes
of Israel. " Seventy palms," for the tent of each elder a palm. There is any way
a speciality in our Father's mercies, which marks them as for us, and reveals to us his
personal love.

V. The "Elims" op our pilgrimage are not far from our "Marahs." Only
some eight or ten miles is that journey of Israel. Then : — 1. At Marah let us hope/or
Elim. 2. From Marah push on for Elim. Never good to lie down and nurse sorrows
and disappointments. Push " forward " along the pilgrim path of duty. 3. Marjh
frepwresf<yr the delight of Elim.

VL " Elim " is only for encampment. " They encamped there by the waters ;"
did not dwell, or build a city there.

VII. The changing scenery leads to Canaan. All the succeeding transformations
of life are intended to prepare for the heavenly stability and rest. — B»

EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XVI

Vers. 1 — 3. — The first mcbmubing for
FOOD. Prom Elim, or the fertile tract extend-
ing from Wady Ghurundel to Wady Tayibeh,
the Israelites, after a time, removed, and en-
camped (as we learn from Num. xxxiii 10) by
the Bed Sea, probably along the narrow coast
tract extending from the month of Tayibeh
to the entrance upon the broad plain of El
Markha. Hence they entered upon "the
wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and
Sinai " — a tract identified by some with the

eoast plain. El Markha, by others with the | narrative in ch. xviii. In favour of the rout»
■olwidasdulating region known at the present ' by the Pebbet-er-Kanileh wsi 1 The f|u:t ttiafi



day as the Debbet-er-Bamleh It is diflicnlt
to decide between these two views. In favoni
of El Markha are: 1. The fact that the
Egyptian settlements in the Sinaitic penin-
sula would thus be avoided, as they seem to
have been, since no contest with Egyptians
is recorded ; 2. The descent of the quails, who,
wearied with a long flight over the Red Sea,
would naturally settle as soon as they reached
the shore ; 3. The greater openness and facility
of the El Markha and Wady Feiran route,
which is admitted by all ; and 4. The suita-
bility of the latter to the particulars of the



so



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[oh. m. 1—3.



it la better watered at present than the other ;
2. Its being somewhat less removed from the
direct line between Wady Ghumndel and
Sinai than El Markha; and 3. A certain cor-
respondency of sound or meaning between
some of the present geographical names along
this route and those of the Mosaic narrative.
In " the wilderness of Sin " the Israelites for
the first time found themselves in want of
sufficient nourishment. They had consumed
the grain which they had brought with them
out of Egypt ; and though no doubt they had
stiU considerable flocks and herds, yet they
were unaccustomed to a mere milk and flesh
diet, having in Egypt lived principally upon
bread (ver. 3), fish (Num. xi. 5), and vege-
tables (t'Md.). They therefore " murmured,"
and accused Moses and Aaron of an intention
to starve them. It is quite possible that many
of the poorer sort, having brought with them
no cattle, or lost their cattle by the way, and
not being helped by their brethren, were in
•ctual danger of starvation. Hence God was
not angry, but " heard their murmurings "
(ver. 9) patiently, and relieved them.

Ver. 1. — ^They jonmeyed from Elim, and
all the oongregation oame. It has been
noted (Cook) that the form of expression
" seems to imply that the Israelites proceeded
in detachments from Elim, and were first
assembled as a complete host when they
reached the wilderness of Sin." This accords
well with their mmibers and with the character
of the localities. They could only assemble
all together when they reached some consider-
able plain. Between Elim and Sinai. This
expression must be regarded as vague to some
extent. On the direct line, as the crow flies,
there is no " wilderness " (jjiidftor) between
Wady Ghumndel and Sinai. All is mountain
and valley. All that the writer means is that
" the wilderness of Sin " lay upon the ordinai7,
or at any rate an ordinary route between Elim
and the great mountain. Tbis is equally true
of El Markha and the Debbet-er-Eamleh. On
the fifteenth day of the second month — i.e.,
on the 15th of Zif, exactly one month after
their departure from Egypt. As only seven
camping places are mentioned (Num. xxxiii.
5 — 11), and one jonmey of three days through
a wilderness (ch. xv. 22), it is evident that
there mii"!t either have been long stays in
•everal places, or that they most have often



encamped in places which had no name.
Viewed as an itinerary, the record is mani-
festly incomplete.

Ver. 2. — ^The whole congregation .. .mur-
mured, It has been observed above, that only
the poorer sort could have been as yet in any
peril of actual starvation ; but it may well have
been that the rest, once launched into the
wilderness, and becoming practically ac-
quainted with its unproductiveness, foresaw
that ultimately starvation must come upon
them too, when all the cattle were eaten up,
or had died through insufficient nourishment
Nothing is more clear than that, without the
miracle of the manna, it would have been im-
possible for a population of two millions to
have supported themselves for forty years, or
even for two years, in such a region as the
Sinaitic peninsula, even though it had been
in ancient times three or four times as pro-
ductive as at present. The cattle brought out
of Egypt must have rapidly dmiinished
(ch. xvii. 3) ; and though the Israelites had
brought with them also great wealth in the
precious metals, yet it must have been some
time before they could establish commercial
relations with the neighbouring nations so as
to obtain such supplies as they needed. Thus
we can well understand that at the expiration
of a month the people generally should kave
recognized that their situation was one of
great danger, and should have vented their
discontent upon their leaders.

Ver. 3. — Would to God we had died by
the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt —
i.e., " Would that God had smitten us with a
painless death, as he did the first-bom of the
Egyptians 1 Then we should have avoided
the painful and lingering death from starva-
tion which we now see before us." The cry
puts on the garb of piety, and names the name
of Jehovah, but indicates a want of faith m
him, his power, and his promises (ch. iv. 8, 17 ;
vi. 8 ; xii. 25 ; xiii. 5, 11), which was sinful,
and, after the miracles uiat they had seen,
barely excusable. When we sat by the
flesh-pots of Egypt. Compare Num. xi. 5.
Both passages make it clear that, whatever
the sufferings of the Israelites in Egypt from
the cruelty of the taskmasters and the bard
tasks set them, at any rate their sustenance
was well cared for — they had abundance of
agreeable food. Did eat bread. It has been
said that " bread " here means " food in
general " (Kalisch) ; and no doubt the word
has sometimes that sense. But it was pro-
bably actual bread, rather than anything else,
for which the Israelites were longing. See
the Introduction to the chapter.



,XTi. 1— 3.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. SI



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 3. — The unreanonableriess of discontent. The people of Israel expe-
rience Qow the second trial that has come upon them since the passage of the Ked
Sea. First, they had nothing which they could drink (oh. xv. 24) ; now they are
afiaiil that they will soon have nothing to eat. They have consumed their dough (oh.
lii. 3!!), their grain, their flour; many of them have consumed, or lost, their beasts.
The land around them produces little or nothing that is edible; no settled inhabitants
show themselves from whom they may purchase food. If there are Egyptiaa store-
houses in the district, they are shut against the enemies of Egypt. So the Israelites,
one and all, begin to despair and murmur. How irrational their conduct! The
unreasonableness of discontent is shown —

I. In DI8TRUSTINQ God's POWER OP DELIVERANCE, WHEN WB HAVE BEEN FREQUENT

INSTANCES OF IT. The Israelites had been brought out of Egypt " by a mighty hand"
^^elivered through means of a series of wonderful miracles. They had escaped the
pursuit of Pharaoh by having a path made for them through the waters of the Bed
Sea. They had witnessed the destruction of Pharaoh's choicest warriors by the return
of the waves on either side. They had very recently thought themselves on the point
of perishing with thirst ; and then by the simplest possible means God had made the
bitter water sweet and agreeable. Now, they had found themselves fallen into a new
difficulty. They had no bread, and foresaw a time when all their food would be
exhausted. They were not really, if the rich imparted of their superfluous cattle to
the poor, in any immediate danger. Yet, instead of bearing the trial, and doing the
best they could under the circumstances, they began to murmur and wish themselves
dead. They did not reflect upon the past ; they did not use it as a standard by which
to estimate the future. They acted exactly as they might naturally have done, had they
had QO previous evidence of God's power to deliver. And so it is to this day in human
life frequently. We do not witness miracles, but we witness signal deliverances of
various kinds^ — an enemy defeated at the moment that he seemed about to carry all
before him — the independence of a nation saveil when it appeared to be lost — drought
succeeded by copious rains — overmuch rain followed by a glorious month for harvest.
Yet, each time that a calamity threatens, we despond; we forget all the past; we
distrust God's mercy ; we murmur ; we wish, or say we wish, that we had died before
the trial came.

II. In CONTRASTINO all the disadvantages of cub PRESENT POSITION, WITHOUT ITS
COMPENSATING ADVANTAGES, WITH ALL THE ADVANTAGES, AND NONE OF THE DISADVAN-
TAGES, OF SOME PREVIOUS ONE. The Israelites, fearing starvation, thought of nothing
but the delight of sitting by the flesh-pots of Egypt, and eating bread to the full.
They omitted to reflect on their severe toils day after day, on the misery of feeling
they were slaves, on the murder of their children by one tyrant, and the requirement
of impossible tasks by another, on the rudeness to which they were daily exposed, and
the blows which were hourly showered on them. They omitted equally to consider
what they had gained by quitting Egypt — the consciousness of freedom, the full liberty
of worshipping God after their conscience, the constant society of their families, the
bracing air of the Desert, the perpetual evidence of God's presence and providential
care in the sight of the pillar of the cloud and of fire, which accompanied them. And
men still act much the same. Oh! for the dehghts of boyhood, they exclaim,
forgetting all its drawbacks. Oh I for the time when I occupied that position, which 1
unwisely gave up (because I hated it). The present situation is always the worst
conceivable — ^its ills are magnified, its good points overlooked, thought nothing of
Again, how unreasonable ! The allegorical tale which tells of a pilgrim who wished to
change his cross, and after trying a hundred others, found that the original one alone
fitted him, is applicable to such cases, and should teach us a lesson of content.

III. In ITS VENTING ITSELF TOO OFTEN ON THE WRONG PERSON. MoseS and AarOU

were not to blame for the situation in which the Israelites found themselves. Thej
had done nothing but obey God from first to last. God had commanded the exodus-
God had led the way— God had forbidden the short route along the shore to th«
eountrvof the Philistines, and had brought them into the "wilderness of the Bed



12 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xvi. 1—4.

Sea," and that desolate part of it called " the wilderness of Sin." Moses and Aaron
were but his mouthpieces. Yet the Israelites murmured against them. Truly did
Moses respond — " What are we ? Your murmurings are not against us, but against the
Lord." And so are all murmurings. Men are but God's instruments ; and, in what-
soever difficulty we find ourselves, it is God who has placed us there. Murmuring
against men is altogether foolish and vain. We should take our grief straight to God ;
we should address him, not with murmuring, but with prayer. We should entreat
him to remove our burthen, or to give ua strength to bear it. We should place all in
his hands.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 4. — Murmurings. In the " Wilderness of Sin," between Elim and Sinai,
on the 15th day of the second month after the departing of Israel out of Egypt
(ver. 1). One short month, but how much can be forgotten even in so brief a space of
time I (of. ch. xxxii. 1). Egypt now lay at a little distance. The supplies of the
Israelites were failing them. God lets the barrel of meal and the cruse of oil run
out (1 Kings xvii. 12), before interposing with his help. Thus he tries what manner
of spirit we are of. Our extremity is his opportunity. Consider here —

I. The people's muemubings (ver. 2). These are brought into strong relief in the
course of the narrative. "The whole congregation of the children of Israel mur-
mured " (ver. 2). " He heareth your murmurings against the Lord, and what are we
that ye murmur against us?" (ver. 7). "The Lord heareth your murmurings which
ye murmur against him, and what are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but
against the Lord " (ver. 8). " He hath heard your murmurings " (ver. 9). " I have
heard the murmurings of the children of Israel " (ver. 12). 1. They murmured, and
did not pray. They seem to have left that to Moses (cf. ch. xiv. 15). Remembering
what Jehovah had already done for them — the proofs he had already given them of
his goodness and faithfulness — we might have thought that prayer would have been
their first resource. But they do not avail themselves of it. They do not even raise
the empty cries of ch. xiv. 10. It is a wholly unsubmissive and distrustful spirit
which wreaks its unreasonableness on Moses and Aaron in the words, " Ye have
brought us forth into the wilderness to kill this whole assembly with hunger" (ver. 3).
Wo who blame them, however, have only to observe our own hearts to see how often
we are in the same condemnation. (See Hamilton's " Moses," Leot. xiv. — " Murmurs.")
It is ever easier, in times of difficulty, to murmur than to pray. Yet how much better
for ourselves, as well as more dutiful to God, could we learn the lesson of coming with
•very trouble to the throne of grace.

" But with my God I leave my cause;
From Him I seek relief ;
To Him in confidence of prayer
Unbosom all my grief "

Had Israel prayed more, relief might have come sooner. 2. Their behaviour affords
■ome interesting illustrations of vAat the murmuring spirit is. Distinguish this spirit
firom states of mind which bear a sunerficial resemblance to it. (1) From the cry of
natural distress. When distress comes upon us, we cannot but acutely feel the pain
of our situation, and with this is connected the tendency to lament and bewail it.
The dictates of the highest piety, indeed, would lead us to imitate David in studying
to be still before God. " 1 was dumb, I opened not my mouth because thou dids*
it" (Pa. xxxix. 9). Yet listen to this same David's lamentations over Absalom
(2 Sam. xviii. 19). There are few in whom the spirit of resignation is so perfectly
formed — in whom religious motives so uniformly and entirely predominate — that a
wail of grief never escapes their lips. It would, however, be cruel to describe theai
purely natural expressions of feeling as "murmurings," though it is to be admitted
that an element of murmuring frequently mingles with them. (2) From the expos-
tulations of good men with God, caused by the perplexity and mystery of his dealingii
with tfeen). Suph expostulations, e.g., as thos? of Moses in ch. v. ?2, 23 ; gr gf Jot^



m. XVI. 1—4.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS 88

In several of his speeches (Job vil. 11 — 21 ; x. 1 — 22, etc.) ; or of Jeremiah (Jer. iv. 10 ;
XX. 7). As Augustine says of Moses, "These are not words of contumacy or
indignation, but of inquiry and prayer." 3. Even from the desperate speeches of
good men, temporarily carried beyond bounds by their sorrow. Job enters this plea
for himself — "Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is
desperate, which are as wind" (Job vi. 26); and we feel at once the justice of it.
This was not murmuring. These wild speeches — though not blameless — ^were but a
degree removed from raving. What elements, then, do enter into the miumuring
spirit — ^how is it to be described? (1) At the basis of it there lies distrust and
unsuhmissiveness. There is distrust of God's goodness and power, and waat of
submission to his will in the situation in which he has placed us. The opposite spirit
is exemplified in Christ, in his first temptation in the wilderness (Matt. iv. 1 — 4 ; cf.
Deut. viii. 3). (2) Connected with this, there is forget/ulness of, and ingratitude for,
benefits formerly received. This is very conspicuous in the case of these Israelites
(ver. 3). (3) The characteristic feature of this spirit is the entertaining of injurious
tJioughts of Qod — the attempt to put God in the wrong by fastening on him the
imputation of dealing harshly and injiiriously with us. The murmuring spirit keeps
the eye bent on self, and on selPs fancied wrongs, and labours hard to make out a case
of ill treatment. Its tone is complaining. It would arraign the Eternal at its puny
hax, and convict him of injustice. It is narrow, self-pitying, egoistic. (4) It
expresses itself in accusations and reproaches. The mental point of view already
indicated prepares the way for these, and leads to them being passed off as righteous
charges. God is charged foolishly (Job i. 22). (5) It is prone to exaggeration. The
Israelites can hardly have been as well off in Egypt as they here pretend, though their
words (ver. 3) show that their rations in bondage must have been fairly libersd. But
the wish to make their present situation look as dark as possible, leads them
to magnify the advantages of their former one. They did not think so much of it
when they had it. (6) Murmuring against God may not venture to express itself
directly, and yet may do so indirectly. The murmuring of the Israelites was of this
veiled character. They masked their rebellion against God, and their impeaching of
his goodness, by directing their accusations against his servants. It was God against
whom they murmured (ver. 7, 8), but they slightly veiled the fact by not mentioning
God, but by speaking only of Moses and Aaron. We should remember this, in our
contendings with Providence. The persons on whom our murmuring spirit wreaks
itself may be secondary agents — the voluntary or involuntary causes of our mis-
fortunes — or even persons in no way directly concerned with our trouble — but he they
who they may, if the spirit be bitter and rebellious, it is God, not they, whom we are
contending against (cf. Gen. 1. 19, 20; 2 Ham. xvii. 10).

II. God's surpbisino treatment of these MURMnBiNos (ver. 4). It is a most
astonishing fact that on this occasion there is not, on God's part, a single severe word of
reproof of the people's murmurings, far less any punishment of them for it. It could
not at this time be said — " Some of them also murmured, and were destroyed by the
destroyer^ (1 Cor. x. 10). The appearance of the glory in the cloud warned and abashed,
but did not injure them (ver. 10). The reason was not that God did not hear their
murmuring, nor yet that he mistook its import, as directed ostensibly, not against him,
but against Moses and Aaron. The Searcher of Hearts knows well when our murmurings
are against Him (vers. 7, 8). But, 1. He pitied them. They were really in great need.
He looked to their need, more than to their murmurings. In his great compassion,
knowinc their dire distress, he treated their murmurings almost as if they were prayers
—gave "them what they should have asked. The Father in this way anticipated the
Son (Matt. xv. 32). 2. He was forbearing with them in the beginning of their wau.
God was not weakly indulgent. At a later time, when the people had been longer
under training, they were severely punished for similar offences (cf. Num. xxi. 5) ; but
in the preliminary stages of this wilderness education, God made large and mercifiii
allowances for them. Neither here, nor at the Red Sea, nor later, at Eephidim, when
they openly " tempted" him (ch. xvii. 1—8), do we read of God so much as chiding
them for their wayward doings: he bore with them, like a father bearing with his
chadren. He knew how ignorant they were ; how much infirmity there was about
them ; how novel and trying were the situations in which he was placing them ; and

■X0DU8 — n. *



THE BOOK OP BXODUa



[oh. XTt 4 — *



he mercifuUy gave them time to improve by his teaching. Surely a.^-od who acts m
this way is not to be called " an hard master." Instead ot sternly punishing the"r jnur^
murings, he took their need as a starting-pomt, and sought to ed'^^^*/ *^«"\°"* °V™
murmSring disposition. 3. lie purposed to praue thmn. He would fully supply ihett
wants, and so |ive them au opportmiity of showing whether their murmuring wasa
result of mere inflrmity-or was connected with a deeply ingrained 8pu:it of dwobft-
ience. ASThen perversity began to show itself, he did not spare reproof (ver. 28>— J.O.



EXPOSITION.



Vera. 4 — 8. — ^Thb Pbomise or Bread raoM
Heaven. When men who are in real distress
make complaint, even though the tone of their
eomplaint be not such as it ought to be, God
hi his mercy is wont to have compassion upon
{hem, to " hear their murmurings," &c., and
grant them some relief. But the relief is
seldom of the kind which they expect, or
pray for. The Israelites wished for actual
bread, made of wheaten or barley flour. God
gave them, not such bread, but a substitute
for it. And first, before giving it, he promised
that it should be given. Thus expectation
was aroused ; faith was exercised ; the super-
natural character of the relief was indicated ;
the power and the goodness of God, were,
both of them, shown forth. And with the
promise was given a law. They were on
each occasion to gather no more than would
sufiice for the day. Thus they would con-
tinually "live by faith," taking no thought
for the morrow, but trusting aU to God.

Ver. 4. — ^Bread from heaven. Compare
?s. Ixxviii. 24 ; Neb. ix. 15 ; John vi. 31—51.
The expression is of course not to be under-
stood literally. The substance was not actual
bread, neither was it locally transferred from
the distant region called "heaven" to the
soil of the Sinaitic peninsula. But it was
called "bread,"' because it was intended to
serve instead of bread, as the main support of
life during the sojourn of Israel in the wilder-
ness ; and it was said to be " from heaven,"
first, as descending on the ground out of
the circumambient air; and secondly, as
miraculously sent by him, whose seat is in
heaven. Taa people shall gather a certain
rate every day. Bather " a day'g supply
every day," such a quantity as shall seem
to each man reasonably sufficient for himself
and his family. That I may prove them. As
in Paradise God coupled with his free gift of
" every tree of the garden " the positive pre-
eept, " But of the tree of the knowledge
of good an i evil thou shalt not eat," — that
he might prove our first parents, whether
they would obey him or not — so now ha



" proved" the obedience of tfie Israelites liy a
definite, positive command — they were not to
gather on ordinary days more than was snfS-
cient for the day. All life is intended as •
probation,

Ver, 5. — On the sixth day. That a period of
seven days was known to the Hebrews as a week
appears from the story of Jacob and Laban (Gen.
xxix. 27), But there is no distinct evidence
that the year was as yet divided into weeks,
much less that the several days of the week
were as yet distinguished as the first, second,
third day, etc " The sixth day," here pro-
bably means (as Kalisch says), "the sixth
day after the first snpply of the manna."
They shall prepare. The preparation wonld
be, first, by measurement (ver, 18), and then
by pounding and grinding (Num. xi, 8), It
shall be doable. Some commentators snp-
pose that in these words is implied an order
that on the sixth day they should set them-
selves to gather a double quantity. But the
natural meaning of the words is, that, having
gathered the usual quantity, they should fin^
when they measured it, that, by miracle, the
supply sufficient for one day was multiplied,
so as to suffice for two. (So Ealisch, Knobel,
Kurtz, and others.) This view is in harmony
with verse 18, which tells of a miiacnloni
expansion and diminution of the manna aftei
it had been gathered, and with verse 22, which
shows us " the rulers " surprised by the miiade
of the sixth day.

Ver. 6. — At even, then ye shall Imow. See
verses 12 and 13. The iurst evidence which
the IsraeUtes would have, that God had heard
and considered their complaints, would be the
descent of the quails at even of the day on
which Moses and Aaron addressed them
That the Lord hath brought yon out— j.ei,
" that it is not we who, to gratify our own
personal ambition, have induced you to quit
Egypt under our guidance : but that all which
we have done has been to act as G«d's instni
ments, and to carry out his designs,"

Ver, 7, — ^And in the morning then ye shall
aee the glory of the Lord, This has been
supposed to refer to the manifestation of God'l
presence recorded in verse 10 ; but the balance
of the two clauses in veises 6 and 7 impliei
two eimilar manifestations, and their arrange-
ment shows the priority of tlw ereniiig <■•



OH. XTt 4— 8.J



THE BOOK OF EXODU&



Now the manifestation of verse 10 preceded
the coming of the quails. The manifestation
which followed it, which was similar, and in
the morning, was the fall of the mannsi. For
that ha heareth yonr murmurings. The
connection of this clause with the preceding
furnishes an additional argument in favour of
the exposition that " the glory of God," spoken
of in this verse is the manna. Against the
lord. Professedly and directly against ut,
but indirectly and really against God, whose
instruments we have been in the whole matter
of the exodus. What are we t — i.e., " What
power have we of our own ? We have no
hereditary rank, no fixed definite position.
We are simply the leaders whom you have
chosen to follow, because you believed us to
have a commission from God. Apart from
this, we are nobodies. But, if our commission
if conceded, we are to you in the place of God ;



and to murmur against na is to murmut
against Jehovah."

Ver. 8. — When the Lord shall give yon
in the evening flesh to eat. Moses must Imve
received a distinct intimation of the coming
arrival of the quails, though he has not re-
corded it, his desire of brevity causing him to
retrench aU that is not absolutely necessary
for the right understanding of the narrative
It is, comparatively, seldom that he records
both the Divine message and his delivery of it.
In general, he places upon record either the
message only, or its delivery only. Bread to
the full, dompare above, verse 4 ; and infra,
verses 12 and 18. The lord heareth your
murmurings. The latter part of this verse
is, in the main, a repetition of verse 7 ; but it
emphasises the statements of that verse, and
prepares the way for what followik



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 4 — 8. The mercy of Ood in hearing and helping even an ungrateful and dii-
eontented people. — God is very merciful to those who are in covenant with him, whom
he has chosen for his own, and made " the sheep of his pasture." Very often, and very
far may they go astray, turn from the right way, rebel against him, refuse to hearlien
to his voice, murmur, misuse his ministers and slander them, yet not alienate him
wholly. Indefectible grace must not indeed be claimed by any man as his own ptir-
tion ; for none can know that he possesses it ; yet the way of God, on the whole, appears
to be to reclaim his wandering sheep ; recall them to a sense of what is their duty ; and
restore them to the fold whence they have strayed. All that can be done with this
object he does for the Church now, as for the congregation of the children of Israel in
the wilderness.

I. He pardons thbib offences. Distrust, discontent, ingratitude, even when openly
expressed in speech, he forgives in his mercy, not seven times only, but " seventy times
seven." How many murmur at their lot ; complain of their worldly condition, or
their lack of spiritual gifts, or their unhappy position under ministers of whom they do
not approve ; or the coldness and unsympathetic temper of their friends, or the want of
any due appreciation by others of their merits 1 It is, comparatively speaking, rarely
that we meet vrith a contented person. Yet God is bo merciful, that he bears with the
murmurers — yea, even " hears their murmurings," and devises means for their relief.

II. He gives them bread feom heaven. " Every good gift and every perfect gift "
is from him, and " cometh down from the Father of Lights." The material sustenance
of daily life is one form of " bread from heaven," wherewith he daily provides the mil-
lions who look to him. His holy word is another form, a heavenly gift, the sustenance
of many souls. But, as he tells us, he himself is " the true bread from heaven " (John
vi. 32 — 51). In and through the Eucharist, he gives us himself to be our spiritual food
and sustenance, the bread of life, the true manna, meat indeed. If we worthily receive
the blessed sacrament of his body and blood, then we "spiritually eat the flesh of Christ
and drink his blood ; then we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us ; we are one with Christ,
and Christ with us " — " our sinful bodies are made clean by his body, and our souls
washed through his most precious blood." Thus, he gives us, in the highest, most
perfect, and most spiritual way, that which is the great need of our souls, " bread from
heaven." . j •

III. He gives them laws to prove them. With blessing duty goes ever hand u
hand. To every gift God attaches some law of direction for its use. The gift of the
manna had its own laws— its law of gathering, and its law of reserving or not reserving.
The holv Eucharist has also its one great law— a law fixing the mental attitude—" Do
this in retnemhrcmce of nte." To make it a mere supper, as the Oorinthiana did (1 Cad

2



i9



THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xti. 4—16.



xi. 20—34), albeit a love-feast, symbolical of Cbristian fellowship and unity, is to break
this law. The Eucharist is " for the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of tha
death of Christ "—for the calling to mind his sufferings for our sins, his atonement for
our <milt, his deliverance of us from Satan, death, and hell, by his one oblation of him-
self once offered upon the Cross. It is by this remembrance that our penitence s made
acute, our gratitude called forth, our hearts enabkd to "lift themselves up," our spmU
itirred to love, and joy, and thanlifulness ; and obedience to this law on our pirt is a
accessary condition to our receiving the benefits of the Eucharist. Thus we too, vi hen
" bread from heaven " is rained upon us, have a law given to us to prove us, whether
we will walk in God's law or not.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Van. 4 16. — The gift of Manna. Quails also were given, oa this occasion In men^,

aod on a later occasion in wrath (Num. xi. 31 — 34) ; but it was the manna which wa«
the principal gift, both as providing Israel with a continuous supply of food, and as
having a permanent significance in the history of God's dealings with his Church (vera.
82—35).

I. The Manna pbomised (vers. 4 — 9). 1. Ood would rain tread from heaven for
them (ver. 4). He would spread a table for them, even in the wilderness, a thing they
had deemed impossible (Ps. Ixxviii. 19). He would give them to eat of " the com of
heaven " (Ps. Ixviii. 24). He would thus display himself as Jehovah, — the God of
ttihaustless resources, — able and willing to supply all their need (cf. Phil. iv. 19). He
would remove from himself the reproach wherewith they had reproached him, that he
had brought them into the wilderness, " to kill this whole assembly with hunger "
(ver. 3). He would testify of his loving care for them (cf. Deut. i. 31). 2. T%e supply
would he continuous — " Every day " (ver. 4). '1 he regularity of the supply would be
a daily proof of God's faithfulness — another of the Jehovah attributes. We have a
similar proof of the Divine faithfulness in the constancy of the laws of nature on which
our own supplies of food depend; in particular, in the regular succession of seed-time and
harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, which God has promised to main-
tain (Gen. viii. 22 ; cf. Ps. cxix. 89 — 92). 3. The gift of quails and manna would he a
manifestation of his glory as Jehovah (vers. 6, 7 ; also ver. 12 — " and ye shall know
that I am Jehovah your God"). His Jehovah character would be revealed in it.
Note, in addition to what is said above, the following illustrations of this. (1) The
gift of maima was an act of free origination. Compare with Christ's multiplication of
the loaves, brought in John vi. into close association with this miracle. (2) So far as
natural materials were utilised in the production of the manna (dew, etc.), it was shown
how absolutely plastic nature was in the hands of its Creator. (3) The gift of quails
was a further testimony to God's supreme rule in nature. (4) It was a special feature
in this transaction that God was seen in it acting solely from himself — finding the law
and reason of what he did in himself alone. He interposes with a simple " I wiU "
(ver. 4). It was neither the people's merits nor the people's prayers, which moved him
to give the manna. Merits they had none ; prayers they did not offer, liut God, who
brought them out of Egypt, and had bound himself by covenant with their fathers,
found a reason in himself for helping them, when he could find none in them (cf. Deut.
ix. 4, 5). He showed them this kindness for his own name's sake (cf. Ps. cvi. 8) ;
because he was Jehovah, who changed not (Mai. iii. 6). 4. TJie gift of manna would
prove a trial of obedience (ver. 4). God bound himself to send the manna day by day,
and this would be a test of his faithfulness. But rules would be prescribed to the
people for gathering the manna, and this would be a test of their obedience. God's
design in giving the manna was thus not merely to supply the people's natural
wants. He would also train them to dependence. He would test their characters.
He would endeavour to form them to habits of obedience. A like educative
and disciplinary purpose is to be recognised as bound up with all God's leading
of us. Gifts are at the same tune trusts. They impose duties upon us, and lay
na under responsibilities. There are rules to be obiserved in the use of them
Fhioh teat our inner disposition!. There is a law of temperance in tha uie cf



Ctt. xTi. 4—16.] The book of EXODUau 47



food. There is a law of modesty in dress. 1 here are the laws relating to the acqvuai-
tion and expenditure of money — ^honesty in acquisition, economy in use, liberality ia
giving (of. Deut. xv. 7 — 12), devotion of the first fruits of income to God. There is the
supreme law, which includes all others — " Whether, therefore, ye eat or drink, or what-
soever ye do, do all to the glory of God" (1 Cor. x. 31). There is no action, no
occupation, however seemingly trivial, which has not important relations to the forma-
tion of character. " The daily round, the common task," etc.

II. The preparatory theophant (vers. 9 — 13). Moses summoned the people to
draw near before the Lord. Then, as they came together, and looked toward the
wilderness, lo 1 " the glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud." It is a suggestive cir-
cumstance that it is Aaron, who by command of Moses, collects the congregation (ver. 10).
Moses, according to his wont, had probably withdrawn to pray (cf. ch. xiv. 15). In this,
as in other instances, Moses might be taken as an example of secrecy in prayer. His
prayers are never paraded. They are even studiously kept in the background — a proof
surely of the Mosaic authorship of the book. When they come to light, it is often in-
cidentally (ch. xiv. 15). On one notable occasion an intercessory prayer of his
was not made known till near the end of his life (Deut. ix. 25). We know
of his prayers mostly by their results. This appearance of the glory of God to
Israel may be viewed: — 1. As a rebulce of the people's murmurings. Unlike the
"look" from the pillar of fire with which the Lord discomfited the Egyptians
(ch. xiv. 24), it was a look with as much mercy as anger in it. Yet it con-
veyed reproof. It may be compared with the theophany which terminated the dispute
between Job and his fi lends, and caused the patriarch to abhor himself, and to repent in
dust and ashes (Job xxxviii. 1 ; xlii. 6) ; or to the look of sorrow and reproof which
the Lord cast on Peter, which caused him to go out, and weep bitterly (Matt. xxvi. 75).
How abashed, humbled, and full of fear, those murmurers would now be, as with mouths
stopped (Rom. iii. 19), they beheld that terrible glory forming itself in the cloud, and
looking down full upon them ! 2. As a fitting introduction to the miracle that was to
follow. It gave impressiveness to the announcement — showed indubitably the source
of the miraculous supply — roused the minds of the people to a high pitch of expectation
— prepared them for something grand and exceptional in the Divine procedure. It thus
checked their murmurings, convinced them of their sin in distrusting God, warned
them of the danger of further rebelHon, and brought them back to their obedience.
God's words — "I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel" — at the same
time reminded them that he was fuUy aware of all their " hard speeches " which they
had spoken against him. 3. As an anticipation of the revelation of Sinai. These
chapters are full of anticipations. In ch. xv. 25, 26, we have " statute and an ordinance,"
anticipatory of the later Sinaitic covenant ; in this chapter, we have an anticipation of
Sinai glory and also of the sabbath law (ver. 23) ; in ch. xviii. 16, we have an anticipa-
tion of the civil code of Sinai ; for Moses makes the people " know the statutes of God,
and his laws."

m. The Manna given (vers. 13 — 16). Quails came in the evening, and next
morning the manna fell with the dew. We observe concerning it — 1. That it came
in a not imfamiliar form. The "angel's food" (Ps. Ixxviii. 25), wore the dress,
and had the taste of the ordinary manna of the desert. We miss in the miracles
of the Bible the grotesque and bizarre features which mark the supernatural stories
of other books. They testify to the existence, as well as respect the laws, of an
established natural order. The plagues of Egypt, e.g., were thoroughly true to the
natural phenomena of that country, and made the largest possible use of existmg
agencies. The crossing of the Bed Sea was accomplished by the supernatural employ-
ment of natural conditions and agencies. There is in all these miracles the constant
observance of the two laws: (1) Of economy— utilising the natural so far as it will go;
and (2) of congruity— keeping as closely as possible to the type of the natural, even
when originating supernatural phenomena. 2. That it was a direct production of the
power of Ood. It was in the truest sense bread from heaven, and is thus a type of
Christ, the Bread of Life (see below). Yet the power exerted in the creation of the
manna— and it is important to remember this— is but the same power, only more
visibly put forth, which operates still in nature, giving us our yearly supplios of the
good things of the earth. The annual harvest is only not a miracle, because it comes



Sa THE BOOK OF BX0DU3. [oh xn. 9—21



regularly, season after scnson, and because numerous secondary agencies are employed
in its production. You plough, that is, brealc up the ground to receive the seed ; but
whence came the seed? From last year's gift. You sow it in the fields, cover it uj
again and leave it— to whose care ? To God's. It is he who now takes the matter into
his own hands, and in what remains you can but wait upon his will. It rests with him
to send his rains or to withhold them ; to order the sunshine and heat ; to bless or blast
your harvest. What man does is but to put matters in train for God's working — God
himself does the rest ; in the swelling and germination of the seed, in all the stages of
its o-rowth, in the formation of the blade, in the modelling of the ear, in the fiUing of it
with the rich ripo grain, his power is absolutely, and all throughout, the only power at
work. And how great the gift is when it comes I It is literally God opening his hand
and putting into ours the food necessary for our sustenance. But for that gift, year by
year renewed, man and beast would utterly perish. It is calculated that a year's pro-
duce in Great Britain alone amounts in money value to over £160,000,000. The corn
crop alone was valued in 1880 at £90,000,000. It is as if God had made a direct gift of
that S lim of money to our nation in the year named, only it was given in a better than
money form — in food. How little we think of it 1 Men are proud and self-sufBcient,
and speak sometimes as if they would almost disdain to accept or acknowledge a favour
even from the Almighty. While yet, in truth, they are, like others, the veriest
pensioners on his bounty, sustained by his power, seeing by his light, warmed by his
sun, and fed year by year by the crumbs that fall from his table. Were God for a
single year to break the staff of bread over the whole earth, where would either it or
they be ? 3. That it was given day by day, and with regularity. Thus the manna
taught a daily lesson of dependence on God, and so played an important part in the
spiritual education of Israel. Yet familiarity must have done much then, as it does
still, to deaden the impression of God's hand in the daily gift. Because the manna
came to them, not by fits and starts, but regularly ; because there was a " law " in its
coming — they would get to look on it as quite a common occurrence, no more to be
wondered at than the rising and setting of the sun, or any other sequence in nature.
" Laws of nature " tend, in precisely the same way, to blind us to the agency of God
working behind and in them, as well as to hide from us his agency in the origination
of the sequences that now flow so uniformly. We have spoken of God's agency in
the production of the harvest. But there is good ground for speaking of our cereal
crops as in yet another sense — "bread from heaven." These cereal plants, it is
affirmed, are never found in a wild state ; cannot by any known process be developed
from plants in a wild state ; and if once allowed to degenerate, can never again be
reclaimed for human food. Not inaptly, therefore, have they been represented as even
now a kind of standing miracle — a proof of direct creative interposition for the good of
man. (See " The Cerealia : a Standing Miracle," by Professor Harvey, in " Good Words,"
vol. ii.) Yet how entirely is this veiled from us by the fact that " all things continue
as they were from the beginning of the creation" (2 Pet. iii. 4). 4. 2'hat it was a food
entirely suitable to the circumstances of the Israelites. It was light, nutritious, palat-
able; comprised variety by admitting of being prepared in different ways (baked,
seethed, ver. 23 ; of. Num. xi. 8) ; was abundant in quantity, readily distinguishable
by the eye, and being of a granulated nature, and strewn thickly throughout all the
camp, could be collected with a very moderate expenditure of labour. It was thus,
like so much in our own surroundings, and in the provision which Gtod makes for our
wants, a constant witness to the care, goodness, wisdom, and forethought of the great
Oiver. — J. 0.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 9 — 21. — The pbomisb fttlpilled.
Moses had made a double promise to the
Israelites in God's name. " The Lord shall
give you," he had said, " in the evening flesh to
tat, and io the morning bread to the full" (ver. 8).
And now the time for the fulfilment of the



double promise appioaehed. First, however,
before they received the blessings, he required
them to present themselves before the Loid.
As they had rebelled in mnimuring, an act ol
homage was proper; and as they had called ia
question the conduct of Mose* and Aaroo.



OH. XTI. 12 — 14.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



39



■ome token that God approved the action of
these his faithful servants, and would support
them, was needed. Hence the appearance of
the Lord to the congregation in the cloud
(ver. 10). After this, when evening ap-
proached, the quails fell. A vast flight of
this migratory bird, which often arrives in
Arabia Fetreea from the sea (Diod. Sic. i. 60),
feU to the earth about the Hebrew camp, and,
being quite exhausted, lay on the ground in a
state which allowed of their being taken by
the hand. The Israelites had thus abundant
" flesh to eat" (ver. 8), for God " sent them
meat enough" (Ps. Ixxviii. 26). The next
morning, the remainder of the promise was
fulfilled. When they awoke, they found that
the vegetation about the camp was covered
with A sort of dew, resembling hoar-frost,
which was capable of easy detachment from
the leaves, and which proved to be an edible
substance. While they were in doubt about
the phenomenon, Moses informed them that
this was the " bread from heaven" which they
^ad been promised (ver. 15). At the same
time he instructed them as to the quantity
which they should gather, which he fixed at
an omer for each member of their family
(ver. 16). In attempting to carry out these
instmctions, mistakes were not unnaturally
made ; some exceeded the set quantity, others
fell short of it. But the result was found to
be the same. Whatever the quantity gathered,
when it was brought home and measured, the
amount was by miracle made to be exactly an
omer for each (ver. 18). Afterwards, Moses
gave another order. The whole of the manna
was to be consumed (ordinarily) on the day on
which it was gathered. When some wilfully
disobeyed this command, the reserved manna
was found on the next day to have become
bad— it had bred worms, and gave out an
offensive odour. This circumstance put a stop
to the malpractice.

Ver. 12. — At even. Literally, "between
the two evenings." For the meaning of the
phrase, see the comment on ch. xii. 6. Ye
shall eat flesh. The quails, as appears by the
subsequent narrative, were supplied, not regu-
larly, but only on rare occasions ; in fact (so
far as appears), only here in the wilderness of
Sin, and at Kibroth-hattaavah in the wilder-
ness of Paran (Num. xi. 31 — 34). They were
not a necessary, but an indulgence. Ye shall
know that I am the Lord. The miracle of
tb* "■""■t and the timely appearance of the



quails at the hour announced, will sufficiently
show that it is God himself who has you
under his charge and watches over you.

Ver. 13. — The quails oame up. The word
here translated, " quails" has been supposed to
designate the flying-fish {Trigla leraelitarum
of Ehreuberg), or a species of locust (Ludolf).
But Ps. Ixxviii. 28, makes it clear that
" feathered fowls" are intended ; and modems
generally, are agreed that the rendering
" quails" is right. It has the authority of the
Septuagint, of Josephus, and of the Vulgate.
Diodorus says that " the inhabitants of Arabia
Petrsea prepared long nets, spread them near
the coast for many stadia, and thus caught a
great number of quails which are in the habit
of coming in from the sea" (ii. 60). The
quail regularly migrates from Syria and
Arabia in the autumn, and winters in the
interior of Africa, whence it returns north-
wards in immense masses in the spring (Schu-
bert, Beise, vol. ii. p. 361). Kalisch thinks
that the particular species of quaU intended is
the kata of the Arabs (Telrao Alchata of
Linnaeus) ; but the common quail (^Tetrao
cotumix) is preferred by most commentators.
When these birds approach the coast after a
long flight over the Red Sea, they are often so
exhausted that they rather fall to the ground
than settle, and are then easily taken by the
hand or killed with sticks. Their flesh is re-
garded by the natives as a delicacy. Covered
the oamp — i.e., covered all the gronnd be-
tween the tents in which the Israelites lived
in the wilderness. The dew lay. Literally,
" there was a layer of dew" — something, <.«.,
lay on the ground outside the camp which
looked like dew, and was in part dew, bat not
wholly so.

Ver. 14. — ^When the dew that lay was gone
np. The moisture which lay upon the herbage
soon evaporated, drawn up by the sun ; and
then the miracle revealed itself. There re-
mained upon each leaf and each blade of grass
a delicate small substance, compared here to
hoar frost, and elsewhere (Num. xi. 7) to
" coriander seed," which was easily detached
and collected in bags or baskets. The thing
was altogether a novelty to the Israelites,
though analogous in some degree to natural
processes still occurring in the country. These
processes are of two kinds. At certain times
of the year there is a deposit of a glutinous
substance from the air upon leaves and even
upon stones, which may be scraped off, and
which resembles thick honey. There is also
an exudation from various fa'ees and shrubs,
especially the tamarisk, which is moderately
hard, and is found both on the growing plant
and on the fallen leaves beneath it, in the
shape of small, round, white or greyish
grains. It is this last which is the manna of
commerce. The Biblical manna cannot b«
identified with either of these two substtmoea



40



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xvl 16—21.



In some points it resembled the one, in other
points the other; in some, it differed from
both. It came out of the air like the " air-
honey," and did not exnde from shrubs ; but it
was hard, like the manna of commerce, and
could be " ground in mills " and " beaten in
mortals," which the " air-honey " cannot. It
was not a medicament, like the one, nor a
condiment, like the other, but a substance
suited to be a substitute for bread, and to
become the main sustenance of the Israelitish
people. It was produced in quantities far
exceeding anything that is recorded of either
manna proper, or air honey. It accompanied
the Israelites wherever they went during the
space of forty years, whereas the natural sub-
stances, which in certain points resemble it,
are confined to certain districts, and to certain
seasons of the year. During the whole space
of forty years it fell regularly during six con-
secutive days, and then ceased on the seventh.
It " bred worms" if kept till the morrow on all
days of the week except one : on that one —
the Sabbath — it bred no worms, but was sweet
and good. Thus, it must be regarded as a
peculiar substance, miraculously created for a
special purpose, but similar in certain respects
to certain known substances which are still
produced in the Sinaitic region.

Ver. 15. — ^They said one to another, this is
manna. Eather, " this is a gift." To sup-
pose that they recognised the substance as one
Known to them in Egypt under the name of
menu or mennu, is to make this clause con-
tradict the next. To translate " what is this ? "
gives good sense, but is against grammar,
since the Hebrew for " what " is not man but
mah. The Scptuagint translators (who ren-
der rl tirri toCto) were probably deceived by
their familiarity with the Chaldee, in which
man corresponds to "what" Not knowing
what to call the substance, the Israelites said
one to another, " it is a gift " — meaning a gift
from heaven, God's gift (compare verse 8) ;
and afterwards, in consequence of this, the
word man (properly " gift ) became the ao-
eepted name of the thing.
Ver. 16. — ^An omer foi eveiy man. Ac-



cording to Ealisch, the omer is about two
quarts (English) : but this estimate is proba-
bly in excess. Josephus makes the measure
one equal to six cotyles, which would be about
a quart and a half, or three pints. In bia
tents. Bather, " in his tent."

Ver. 17. — The ohildrcn of Israel did so
The Israelites set themselves to obey Moses,
and gathered what they supposed to be about
an omer ; but, as a matter of course, some of
them exceeded the amount, while others fell
short of it. There was no wilful disobedience
thus far.

Ver. 18. — When they did mete it with
an omer. On returning to their tents, witli
the manna which they had collected, the
Israelites proceeded to measure it withtheii
own, or a neighbour's, omer measure, when
the wonderful result appeared, that, whatevcj
the quantity actually gathered by anyone, th'
result of the measurement showed, exactly n
many omeis as there were persons in tli
family. Thus, he that had gathered much found
that he had nothing over, and he thai
had gathered little found that he had nci
lack.

Ver. 19.— Let no man leave of it till the
morning. Moses, divinely instructed, warned
the people that they were not to lay np in
store any of their manna to be eaten the next
day. Gfod would have them trust their future
wants to him, and " take no thought for the
morrow." Some of them, however, were
disobedient, with the result stated in ttie next
verse.

Ver. 20. — ^It bred worms. This was a super-
natural, not a natural result. It served as a
sort of punishment of the disobedient, and
effectually checked the practice of laying up
in store.

Ver. 21. — When the sun wazed hot it
melted. The manna had to be gathered
early. What had not been collected before
the sun grew hot, melted away and disap-
peared from sight. In this respect the
miraculous manna resembled both the i
of commerce and the " air-haney."



I HOMILETICS.

Vers, ft— 21. — Ood and Natun. I. God is the master op natcbb, not natuee's
BBEVANT. A school of modem thought places nature above God, or at any rate on a
par with God. It is an absolute impossibility, we are told, that a law of nature should
be broken or suspended. Miracles are incredible. But all this, it must be borne in
mind, IS mere assertion, and assertion without a tittle of proof. AU that we can knov-
IS, that we ourselves have never witnessed a miracle. We may further beUeve that
none of our contemporaries have witnessed any. But that miracles have never 'taken
place, we cannot know There is abundant testimony in the records of humanity that
they have. To say that they are impossible, is to assume that we knoTthe exact
relation of God to nature, and that that relation is such as to preclude any infracMon
w fuspeiuion of a natural law. This would only be tne ^ 1. If natur^ww



OH. x^ 9— IS.] THE BOOK OP EXODtTS. 41

entirely independent of God ; or, 2. If God had bound himself never under any circum-
stances to intei'feie with the course of nature. But neither of these positions is true.
So far from nature being independent of God, nature wholly proceeds from God, is hii
creation, and muiiieniarily depends on him both for its existence and its laws. Its
laws are simply the laws which he imposes on it; the rules which he sees fit under
ordinary circumstances to lay down and maintain. And he has nowhere bound
himself to maintain all his laws perpetually without change. He will not, we may be
sure, capriciously or without grave cause, change or suspend a law, because he is
himself immutable, and " without shadow of turning." But, like a wise monarch, or a
wise master of a household, he will make exceptions under exceptional circumstances.
And thus it was at this time. Israel was brought out of Egypt — was promised Canaan
— ^but required a prolonged course of training to be rendered fit for its promised
inheritance. Geographically, Canaan could only be reached through the wilderness;
and so the wilderness was the necessary scene of Israel's education. How then was the
nation to be supported during the interval? Naturally the wilderness produced only a
scanty subsistence for a few thousand nomads. How was it to support two millions
of souls? There was no way but by miracle. Here then was a "dignus vindice
nodus" — a fitting occasion for the exertion of supernatural power — and God gave by
miracle the supply of which his people had need.

n. God, even when proddcino effects that aeb beyond nature, wobeb to a
LABOE extent thbough NATURE. The Israelites needed, or at any rate craved for
flesh. God did not create for them new animals, as he might have done (Gen. i. 25),
or even give them meat by any strange and unknown phenomenon. He brought a
timely flight of quails — a migratory bird, in the habit of visiting Arabia at the time of
year — and made them alight exactly where the camp was fixed, in too exhausted a
condition to fly further — a phenomenon not at all unusual at the particular season and
in the particular country. The Israelites needed bread, or some substitute for it. God
gave them manna — not a wholly new and unknown substance, but a modification of a
known substance. He made previously existing nature his basis, altering and adding
qualities, greatly augmenting the quantity, but not exerting more supernatural power
than was necessary, or departing further from the established course of nature than the
occasion required. The same " economy " is seen in the sweetening of the waters of
Marah by the wood of a particular tree (ch. xv. 21), etc. The method of Ood's
supernatural working is to supplement, not contradict, nature.

Verses 14 — 18. — Bread from heaven. Our Lord tells us that the manna was •
type of him, and that he was the " true bread from heaven" (John vi. 32). We may
profitably consider, in what respects the type held good.

I. It was the nourishment of the body, as Christ is of the soul. The manna
constituted almost the sole nourishment of the Israelites from this time forth until they
entered Canaan (Josh. v. 12). So Christ is the food of the soul during its entire
pilgrimage through the wilderness of this world, until it reaches the true Canaan,
heaven. The Israelites were in danger of perishing for lack of food — they murmured —
and God gave them the manna. The world was perishing for lack of spiritual nourish-
ment — it made a continual dumb complaint — and God heard, and gave his own Son
from heaven. Christ came into the world, not only to teach it, and redeem it, but to be
its " spiritual food and sustenance." He feeds us with the bread of life. He ^ves us
his own self for nourishment. Nothing else can truly sustain and support the so»il —
not creeds, not sacraments, not even his own Word without him.

II. It was given freely foe all the people of Isbael, as Cheibt ib aiVEN
TO BE THE Savioub OF THE WHOLE WORLD. The manna fell all around the camp of
Israel, close to them, so that they had but to stretch out the hand and take it. None
could lack sufScient sustenance except by his own fault. If he refused to gather, he
might starve ; but not otherwise. So Christ gave himself for all men, " not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance." His was "a full, perfect,
and sufficient sacrifice for the sins of the whole world." Even they who know him not
may be saved by him, " if they will do the works of the law written in their hearts," or,
in other words, act up to the light that has been vouchsafed them. Thus, his salvation
is ftaa, and open to all. In Christian lands it is close to all, made palpable to all, ahowa



4a THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ch. xvi. 19—20

them openly, daily pressed upon them. He who starves here in England can icarcely
Btarre save by his own favilt— because he will not stretch out his hand to gather ol
the bread of life, will not take it when it is offered to him, rejects it, despises It,
"loathes "it.

III. It was white, and sweet to the taste, as Christ is pubb asd spotless,
AND SWEET TO THE SouL. A master mind of these modern times has made his hero,
a well-disposed heathen, see in Christ, even before he could bring himself to believe in
him, " the White Christ." " Holy, harmless, undeflled, separate from sinners," he
presents himself to all who will read his life, and contemplate his character, as pure,
stainless, innocent. The Lamb is his fitting emblem. Diiven snow is not purer or
more speckless. " Thou art all fair, my love ; there is no spot in thee " (Cant. iv. 7).
And he is sweet also. " Thy lips, my spouse, drop as the honeycomb ; honey and
milk are under thy tongue " (ib. 11). " How sweet are thy words unto my taste ! yea,
sweeter than honey unto my mouth!" (Ps. cxix. 103). His words, his life, his
promises, his influence, his presence, are all sweet, especially the last. Let those who
know him not, once " taste and see how gracious the Lord is," and they will desire no
other nourishment.

IV. It descehbed noiselessly in the night. So Christ comes to us, not " with
observation " — not in the wind, or in the fire, or in the earthquake, but in silence and in
quietude, when other voices are hushed within us and about us, when we sit and watch,
in patience possessing our souls. His doctrine drops as the rain, and his peace distils as
the dew. It comes down " like the rain into a fleece of wool, even as the drops that
water the earth." In the whirl of passion, in the giddy excitement of pleasure, in the
active bustle of business, there is no room for Christ, no fit place for his presence.
Christ comes to the soul when it is calm and tranquil, when it waits for him, and
believing in his promise that he wiU come, is at rest.

V. It beqtjibbd to be gatuebed early, and if not gathered melted away.
" Eemember thy Creator in the days of thy youth." Unless vre will seek Christ early,
we have no warrant to expect that he will condescend to be found of us. If we slight
him, if we dally with the world, if we put off seeking him till a " more convenient
season," we may find, when we wake up from our foolish negligence, that he has with-
drawn himself, has (as it were) melted away. If an Israelite put off his gathering of
the manna until the sun was hot, he obtained nothing — the manna no longer lay ready
to his hand. So with the Christian who is slothful, self-indulgent, careless — ^when,
after long neglect, he at length seeks spiritual food, he may find it too late, the oppor-
tunity may be irrevocably gone.

Vers. 19, 20. — God's curse upon ill-gotten gains. — In order to try the Israelites,
whether they would be obedient to him or no (ver. 4), God gave them, by the mouth
of Moses, a positive law — " Let no man leave of the manna till the morning." By
some the law was disobeyed. Disregarding the Divine command — perhaps distrusting
the Divine promise (ver. 4), to give them food day by day, a certain number of the
Israelites, kept some of the manna till the morning. They wished to have a store laid
up, on which they might subsist, should the daily supply fail. But God would not
be disobeyed with impunity. His curse was on the ill-gotten gain — it bred worms and
stank, becoming a source of annoyance both to themselves and their neighbours. So,
Gk)d's curse is ever on ill-gotten gains — e.g. : —

I. When men set their hearts on hoarding all they can. Some provision for
the future is required of us. " Go to the ant, thou sluggard," says the wise man,
" consider her ways, and be wise." " He that doth not provide for them of his own house-
hold," St. Paul declares, " is worse than an infidel." Prudence is a Christian, no less
than a heathen virtue. But to hoard everything, to give nothing away, to make the
accumulation of wealth our main object, is to fly in the face of a hundred plain
precepts, and necessarily brings God's curse upon us- The wealth rots — the concerns
wherein it is invested fail — it disappears and is brought to nought — and all our careful
saving advantages us nothing. God vindicates his own honour; and disperses or
destroys the hoard accumulated contrary to his will.

II. When, to augment their hoards, men break a Divink command. There are
•0100 who, in their haate to be rich, disregard the Divine inhuiction to keep holy OM



CH. XVI. 4-36,] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 41

day in seven, and pursue their secular calling without any intermission. Conveyancers
draw out their deeds, barristers study their briefs, business men balance tlieir books,
authors ply their pens, as busily on the Sunday as on week days. What blessing
can be expected on the gains thus made? Is it not likely that they will breed
corruption ? Still more wholly under a curse are gains made by unlawful trades or
dishonest practices — by the false weight or the scant measure, or the adulterated
article — or again by usurious lending, by gaming, by brothel-keeping.

III. When the motive for the HOABDiNa is distrust of God's promises. Gkxi
bids us not to be anxious for the morrow, what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or
what we shall put on (Matt. vi. 31) — and promises that, if we will "seek first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, all these things shall be added unto us" (ib. 33).
He caused holy David to declare — " I have been young and now am old, yet saw I
never the righteous forsaken, nor his, seed begging their bread." If men hoard in
distrust of these gracious words, not believing that God will make them good, and
thinking to assure the future of wife or child, or both, by their own accumulations,
they provoke God to bring their accumulations to nothing. Riches, however invested,
can make themselves wings and disappear, if God's blessing does not rest on their
possessor.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Chap. xvi. — The manna of the body. — A homily on provvhnce. "They said one
to another, what is this ? (marg.) for they wist not what it was " (Ex. xvi. 15). Intro-
duction : — Trace the journey from Elim to the sea (Num. xxxiii. 10) ; and thence to
the wilderness of Sin ; and give a thoroughly good exegetical exposition of the facts of
the manna story. It would be well also to show the supernatural character of the
manna ; and, at the same time, that the manna supernatural was not unlike (and yet
unlike also) the manna natural of the desert of to-day ; that God, in a word, did not
give the food of either Greenland or Australia in the Arabian wilderness. The spiritual
lessons of the miracle move on two levels, one higher than the other. There is a body,
and a soul : food for the one, and for the other. There are then in the manna story
truths concerning Divine providence, and also touching Divine grace. Hence two
homilies on the manna. This on the manna of providence.

I. Bodily need is an appeal to God. Before Israel articulately prayed, its need
cried : so now with twelve hundred millions of men. No man " gets his own living,"
but Gud gives it. Imagine one famine round the world, and every living thing would
become dumb and dead. The world's need is one majestic monotone of prayer.

II. The answer is full and fbeb. No stint in that desert — no stint now. A
picture of the fulness with which God ever gives bread. There has never been such an
event as universal famine. Ps. ciy. 21 — 28.

III. Theue is mystery in the AKSWEii. Note the question of the text, and the
wonder of the people, which was never relieved through aU the forty years. So with
bread to-day. A great mystery I A common thing to cbmmon minds ; and perhaps to
uncommon minds, that would like, as scientists, to bow all mystery out of the
universe. But as there was mystery in the manna, so is there in every grain of com.
No scientist could produce one, were he to try for fifty years. Why ? Because the
secret of life is a secret of God ; and the creation of organization lies in his own power
alone.

IV. The BLAME OF want is not with God. The question arises : if God hears the
moaning of the world's need, and gives answer, why is there so much want? Mur-
muring against Moses and Aaron, Israel murmured against the Lord ; so we, grumbling
against secondary causes, may be ari'aigning the First Cause. But the blame lies not
there. Political economy might give answer to the question: — Why want? But
behind its answers lie deeper causes — all summed up in the one word sin — not only the
folly and sin (improvidence, drunkenness, etc. etc.) of the individual, but of aU the
ages, that is to say, self-centredness (the root principle of sin), forming and solidifying
customs and institutions, which have fur their effect the oppression and privation 01
millions. The instances are numberless.

V. But if all the heritage of sin were to disappear KAN MOST WOBK. Imd must



44 THE BOOK Of EXODUS. [ce. xVi. 4— 3b.

gather manna. Here enforce, not only the dignity of work, but the Christian duty
thereof. The idle, whether in high life or low, are the dangerous classes. If exempted
from toil for bread, all the more obligation to labour for the good of mam to the glory
of God.

VI. YkT — THERE MnST BE SaBBATH.

Vn. A HINT AOAiNBT MEEB HOAWiNo. Distinguish between extravagance, a due
providence, and hoarding after a miserly fashion. The via media here, as elsewhere,
the right ethical path.

Vin. The manna story gives us the teub theokt op life. See the view of Moses
as to the purpose of the manna, in the light of experience, after the lapse of forty years,
in Deut. viii. 3. (comp. Matt. iv. 4). Man is to live, not for that which is lowest in
him, but for that which is highest. Life is to be dependence upon God ; 1 : — For
leading. 2 : — For support. This was the object of the giving of the manna. — B.

Ch. xvi. — Manna for the said ; a homily on grace. " I am the living bread . . .
he shall live for ever." John vL 51. Having given the manna story, discussed the
miracle, and given the lessons bearing on our providential path, we now go up to the
higher level, and listen to the truths taught in relation to the kingdom of God's grace.
These gather round the central truth — that the Lord Jesus Christ is the nutriment of
the souL For that truth we have his own supreme authority. [See the full discourse
from his own lips on the manna, in John vi.] Avoid small typologies— small every
way — e.g., that the roundness of the manna stands for Christ's eternity ; its whiteness
for his purity ; its sweetness for the preciousness of Christ. When men wovdd estimate
the majesty of a mountain they play not with the pebbles at its feet.

I. The object of God in the gift of the heavenly manna. Why Christ?
Long before Israel cried, the Father saw the coming distress ; and resolved to give the
manna to meet it. So with Christ. Christ was given for atonement, and to bring
from under the cloud of condemnation ; but also for other reasons beyond, to give life
and strength to the moral and spiritual man. There is a rich provision in the world
for the body and for the mind [describe] ; but there is something higher in man — the
spiritual — not only a i/'i'x^, but a iri/eCpo — for which provision must be made.

II. The famine of thk soul without Christ. Very difficult to imagine a world
without bread ; more to suppose a world without Christ. His name, his history, his
death, his reign, his presence, power, and love are implied, and involved always, every-
where, in aU the phenomena of life. But endeavour to imagine Christ annihilated —
no name of Christ to entwine in the lullaby at the cradle, and so on through every
stage and circumstance of life, till the dying moment — no Christ for the guilty, sinning,
sorrowing, tempted, etc. etc. What a famine of the soul !

III. The supply of the soul with Christ. Having seen what the world would
be without Christ, see po.sitively what Christ is to the world. The understanding
cannot live without objective truth (mere opinion will not suffice) ; Christ is that
truth : nor the heart without a supreme object of love ; Christ that object : nor the
conscience without authority behind its moral imperative ; Christ is that authority :
nor the will without a living inward abiding power; and Christ is that power. In very
real and intelligible sense, Christ is the manna, bread, nutriment, sustenance, vitaUty,
•nd power of the believing soul.

IV. The fulness op the supply. AU we need certainly in bread, probably in the
manna, assuredly in Christ.

V. Its fbeeness. Men may confuse themselves, and imagine they "get" their
ovm bread. But manna was manifestly the free gift of heaven. So Christ. This
the one truth, which it is so difficult for men to receive. See 1 John v. 11, 12 ;
Rom. vi. 23.

VI. Its mystery. The name of the desert provision was " Man-Hu ? " — " What it
it?" Men did not solve the mystery ere they ate. Why should men wait to solve
the mystery of Christ's person, office, etc. etc., ere they eat " the living bread " ?

VII. Its kbarnbsb. Both the manna and Christ at every man's tent-door.

VIII. Its appkopeiation. Vain that manna for the two millions, if no man went
out to gather; so vain the all-sufficiency of Christ, if no mau "comes," "helievfl^*
Appropriates. John vi. 35, 37, 40, 47, 67.



OH. XTt 1— 16.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 41

IX. Its KTEBT-DATIIE88. Xo man can live upon a past experience of the 8u£Bcieno]i
gf Christ.

X. Its obdeb. Full and free as the supply of manna was, its appropriation and us«
nreie under Divine direction, were accordiag to a certain order. So are there now
channels, means, ordinances of grace, which no man can safely neglect.

XI. The aim in man's appropbiation. Not self-indulgence ; not merely his own
growth. No man an end unto himself. The final end of food is strength, work, good
for others. The danger of middle-class evangelicalism is that of making personal
salvation the ultimate aim of God's grace. We are saved, that we may save. The end
of bread is labour.

XII. The subject carries our thoughts on to the hidden manna. Rev. ii. 17.—
Christ wUl be the soul's nutriment in heaven. " Hidden," for there will be in heaven
•a yet undiscovered glories of Christ the Lord. For the final lesson see John
Ti. 27.— B.

Vers. 1 — 15. — The provision of the manna. This chapter contains an account of the
first provision of miraculous bread for Israel in the wilderness. We are told very fully
the circumstances in which it was given and the regulations for obtaining and using it.
This provision of bread comes very appropriately after the visits to Marah and Elim.
The waters had been made sure, and were soon to be made sure again (ch. xvii.) ; and
now the bread is given (Is. xxxiii. 16). Before God takes the people to Sinai, he does
everything to show that they may confidently depend on him for necessities, however
vainly they look for superfluities. Consider —

L The state of mikd amono the Israemtes which preceded this gift. It is
Important to notice that such an ample, gracious and miraculous gift as Jehovah here
bestowed was bestowed on the unthankful and the evil. With many reasons for faith,
they were unbelieving ; instead of being patient and submissive, considerate towards
their leader, and thankful for liberty, they broke out into selfish and unjust complaints.
Things were going far otherwise than as they wanted them to go. They have now
been a month or more out of Egypt and it is wilderness, wilderness, wilderness still!
They have got water, but what is water without bread ; and what is bread, unless it
be the bread along with the flesh of Egypt? And, letting their minds dwell on these
lost delicacies, their discontent breaks out in the most expressive way. Discontent is
assm'edly at a high pitch in a man's mind, when he begins to talk of death as a thing
to be desired. It shows that he has got so reckless and peevish as not to care what he
gays, what others may think, or who may be hurt by his random talk. The low ideal
of life on the part of Israel is here revealed. God has delivered a whole nation, and
this is their idea of why he has delivered them. They think a life, from which the
flesh pots and the fulness of bread are absent, is not worth living ; and such is indeed a
very excusable conception of life,. if hunger and thirst after righteousness have not
become vigorous desires within us. If one is to become a freeman simply to die, then
it seems as if one might just as well live a little longer as a slave. Note further how
the people try to throw the responsibility of their present position on Moses. It was a
consequence of their camal-miudedness that they could not think of the Jehovah who
was behind and above the visible leader. They are where they are because Moses has
brought them. Thus they utter an unconscious but weighty and significant testimony
to the fact, that they had not come there of their own accord or wandered there in an
aimless fashion. But for the mighty power that held them fast together, they might
have straggled back to Egypt with its comforts and delights. Strange that with such
a rebellious spirit, there should yet be such a measure of outward obedience. Evidently
they had invisible constraints all around them, so that they could not help but follow
the cloud

II. The manner in which God treats this state of mind. As he dealt in
Bupplying the water so he deals in supplying the bread. There was a real and pressing
want, and though the {jeople made it the occasion for tbolish talk, it was also to be the
occasion for immediate Divine supply. God does not let the existence of the un-
thankful and evU fail, for presently, at Sinai, they will have the chance of learning
•uch things as may lead them into a thankful, trustful and noble spirit ; and so he
hastens to meet Moses with the cheering promiae — cheering in the siibstance of it, wid



4« THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xvi. 1— 1«.



cheering none the less in the expression — " I will rain bread from heaven." 1. They
$hall have bread. He does not yet tell Moses what shape the bread will take ; but the
people shall have something to sustain them, and that something in sufficient quantity.
2. The bread shall be rained from heaven. We do not read that Moses repeated this
expression to the Israelites; but it must have been very cheering to himsilf. The
words " rain " and " heaven " were enough to put fresh courage into the man. Then
we find too that when the promise came to be fulfilled, these words were not taken in
a figurative way. The manna came with the dew, and when the dew disappeared there
the manna lay, waiting to be gathered. Hence for the supply of bread the people were
to look heavenward ; and doubtless Moses himself did so look. In whatsoever part of
the wilderness they might he, however sterile and unpromising the earth was below,
the same heavens stretched out above them, distilling from their treasuries the daily
manna. The contrast is thus very striking between the varying earth aud tlie un-
changing, exhaustless heaven ; and as to the rain, we may he very sure that when God
says, " I will rain," he means a copious and adequate shower. But even in this imme-
diate promise of copious giving Jehovah combines demands with gifts. If there is great
grace, there are great expectations. He gives and at the same time he asks. He
points out to Moses the manner in which the food was to be gathered. Though given
copiously, it was not therefore given carelessly ; nor was it to be used carelessly. It
was given on certain principles and with certain restrictions, so as to be not only the
means of staying hunger but of disciplining Israel at the same time. In eating bread,
they were to learn habitual faith and habitual and exact obedience. God is ever
showing men how he can make one thing to serve more purposes than one.

III. The expostulations of Moses and Aabon with the people (vers. 6 — 10).
Though it is not expressly said that he spoke thus by Jehovah's instructions, yet these
remonstrances evidently accorded with his will. For the people to complain as they
did was not only an unjust thing to Moses ; it was also a perilous thing for themselves.
They could not thus vent their spleen on the visible Moses without despising the
invisible God. Th; ir insult to their brother man on earth was as no'thing compared with
their insult to Jehovah on high. And, indeed, we cannot too much consider that all
murmuring, when it is brought to its ultimate ground and effects, is a reproach against
God. For it is either a complaint because we cannot get our own way, or it is an
impeachment of God's way as not being a loving and a wise one. What a different
scene life would become, how much more equable, serene and joyous, if we could only
take the invisible as well as the visible into all our thoughts. The people felt the lack
of bread, the loss of Egypt, the hardships of a life unfamiliar and unprepared for; and
Moses could sympathise with all these feelings ; although of course, after forty years of
shepherd life in Midian, the hardships his brethren complained of were as nothing to
him. But at the same time, Moses felt very keenly what many of his brethren did not
feel at all, the mysterious presence of God. More and more distinctly would the words
now be rising to his mind, "Ye shall serve Gud upon this mountain" (ch. iii. 12); for
the cloud was taking the multitude nearer and nearer to Sinai. It is ■»ery significant of
the feeling in Moses' mind that he dwells on this charge of murmuring, returning to the
word again and again, lie wanted these people who so felt the pangs of hunger to be
equally sensitive to the perils of impiety. Jehovah had heard their reckless speeches
as well as Moses; and now, in recognition, he was about to make manifest his glorious
presence. The connection of the cloud with himself was to be proved by the appearing
of his glory in it. What the people found fault with was that they had been guided
wrong : and now the nature of the guidance stands out, distinct, impressive, and full of
warning. He who found fault with Moses really found fault with Jehovah. Remember
the words of Jesus : " He that despiseth you despiseth me ; and he that despiseth me
despiseth him that sent me." (Luke x. 16.) If we presumptuously neglect the apostle-
ship of any one, we have to do with the Being who made him an apostle. Wherefore
we should show all diligence to keep mmmuring off our hps ; and the only effectual way
is to keep it out of our hearts by filling them with a continual sense of the presence of
God. Instead of murmuring, let there be honest shame because of the selfishness that
runs riot in our hearts. God can do everything to make our lives joyous, and banish
causes of complaint for ever, if only we will take right and sufficient views of his purpoa«f
toward us and his claims upon us.



1 11. xvi 11, 12.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 47



rV. The actual givinq. Here again we notice the tender and gentle dealings ol
God. The nctessary and permanent supply of bread is preceded by a special and occa-
sional supply of quails. By this gift he, as it were, runs towards Israel to soothe theii
murmurings. The flesh of Egypt was the thing they missed the most, and it comes
first, in the evening ; whereas the manna did not come tiU the next morning. By this
supply of the quails God showed an attentiveness to the feelings of the people which
should have had the best effect on their minds. They murmured against Moses forgot
Jehovah, and yet Jehovah gave them in reply a delightful feast of quails. So to' speak,
he was heaping coals of fire on their heads : and we should take special note of this
Divine conduct, just in this particular place. It is very natural that as we consider
Israel in the wilderness, we should think of God's severity rather than' any other featiu-e
of his character. The whole tenor of the New Testament — the contrast between the
law and the gospel — makes this view inevitable. But as we read the whole of this
chapter, and ponder it carefully, how shall we do other than confess " Verily, Jehovdi
is love " ? It is love that leads to Sinai. And assuredly there is not less of love in
the thunders, lightnings and terrors of Sinai than in the gift of the quails. The
expression is different — that is all. The quails were but a slight, passing thing,
bestowed upon Israel much as a toy is bestowed on a child. There is love in the gift
of a toy ; but there is love also in the discipline and chastisement which soon may foUow
from the same hand. So there was love in the quails ; but there was equal love,
stretching out to far deeper results, in the demonstrations of Sinai and the command-
ments wMch accompanied them. — Y.

Vers. 11 — 12. He nurtured them in the wildemesB. Continual mention of murmur-
ings ; yet all such murmurings do not meet the same treatment (cf. Kum. xi. 31 — 33).
Much alike to outward seeming, but not so in the sight of God. (Illustration — ^the
ruddy hue of health ; the hot flush of passion ; the hectic of consumption. All much
alike in appearance, yet how different to those who know what they betoken !) Com-
paring the history of one murmuring with that of another, we can see by God's treatment
of each how different must have been the states firom which they resulted. Here it is
the impatience of ill-instructed children ; later on, it has become hostility and rebellion.
Consider in this case : —

I. The symptoms. Cf. vers. 3. The monotony of the wilderness had had time to tell
upon the people ; so different firom the varied routine of Egypt. Slavery, too, had
become, fi-om long use, almost a second nature virith many ; they had chafed under it,
yet, in some sort, they had relied upon its restraint as a support. After the first novelty
has passed, unaccustomed freedom is felt to be a weariness. (Illustration : The cripple
rejoices to be quit of his supporting irons and crutches, but without them, at first, he
soon tires.) Present privation, contrasted with past sufiiciency, intensified the misgiv-
ings which were sure to come when the new life was fairly entered upon. Freedom
wedded to starvation seemed to be but a poor exchange for tyranny. " 'I'he people
murmured." It was the murmuring of the half-weaned child, the yet weak though
enfirauchised cripple ; it expressed itself in strong language ; but the language was
stronger than the offence. Under the circumstances murmuring was so natural that it
did not call for severe censure ; it was rather a symptom of imperfect health, suggesting
the need of strengthening medicine.

n. The treatment. God knew what was the matter ; His action shows His know-
ledge. No rebuke, only a promise, which is to be, and is, fulfilled immediately. (Illus-
tration : The doctor does not take offence at the irritability of the convalescent ; says,
" I will send some strengthening medicine," sends it, and relies on the effect.) A table
spread in the wilderness ; the love of freedom revived and strengthened, nurtured by
the longed-for food. What should be the effect of such treatment ? It stays murmur-
ing, of course ; but, further, it should strengthen against further murmuring. On the
other hand, whilst it may, as it ought to do, lead to reliance upon the provider,' it may
also lead to reliance upon the food provided. (Illustration : One patient, strengthened
by medicine, will have more confidence in the doctor. Another, strengthened in like
manner, will be always grumbling, whatever the circumstances, iif he do not experience
like treatment.)

Practical lestoni. — I. G'od treats ut all according to our reaJ character and po$iiitm,



48



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. XTi. 16,



"How unjust," says one, "that that man should have so much easier a time than L
That my comparatively slight ofience should he punished so much more heavily than
his, which is far more heinous 1 " Nay 1 By what standard do you measure the relative
enormity of the offences ? God's standard is character and experience ; the child's open
defiance is less heinous than the man's half-veiled impatience. 2. QodCa treatment
should inspire confidence in llimstlf. All God's gifts are index fingers saying, " Look
off from us to God." Our tendency is to rest upon them and credit them as the cauiet
of the satisfaction they occasion. The same medicine may not he appropriate next time,
but the same dodor may he trusted, if we forget the doctor and think only of the
medicine, we shall he as irritable and dissatisfied as ever ; only by confidence in the
Physician himself can we hope to go on " from strength to strength."— G.

Ver. 15. — Christ the hread/rom heaven. The manna, which is described in ver. 4
as " bread from heaven," was typical of Christ, who is " the true bread from heaven" —
" the bread of God which cometh down from heaven and giveth Ufe unto the world "
(John vi. 31-34). The connection in John vi. is with the Jews' demand for a sign.
The interrogators reminded Christ of how their fathers did eat manna in the desert ; as
it was written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat ! (Ps. cv. 40). The design of
Jesus in his reply was, first, to wean their hearts away from merely carnal expectations
in connection with his appearing, and, secondly, to lead them to see in the gift of manna,
as well as in the miracle he had just performed — the feeding of the multitudes — some-
thing more than the mere supplying of bodily necessities; — to see in them "signs"
(John vi. 26 — " Ye seek me, not because ye saw signs," etc. Eev. Ver.) i.e. types,
allegories, suggestive earthly symbols, of spiritual realities — of what he was in himself,
of the work he came to do, of the relations in which he stood to perishing men. The
manna is thus figured as " spiritual meat " (1 Cor. x. 3), a type of Christ as the living
bread for the souls of men. Consider in illustration of this analogy —

I. The nbbd which existed fob this peovision. The Israehtes were in the desert,
where nature, if left to itself, would inevitably perish. Their supplies of food were
exhausted. The whole multitude would have died of hunger, had not Divine mercy
interposed for their relief. The manna which God gave them literally stood between
them and death. In .this circumstance we see one feature imaged in which Christ
clearly appears as the bread of life. When he uses this language of himself he means
to tell us, that just as these Israelites under Moses absolutely hung for any hope of life
they had on that food which was miraculously supplied to them ; so does the world
hang — hang absolutely — for its life, its salvation, its eternal well-being on him. It
needs eternal Ufe. Its heart craves for it. It is perishing for want of it. But if it
is ever to get it, Christ says, it must get it through him, through receiving him, through
appropriating what he is, and what he has done for it as Saviour.

II. The supernatural character of the provision. Tliere could be no question
as to the supernatural character of the supply in the case of the manna. The Israelites
needed to be saved, and God saved them by a miracle. 'J'here was, as it were, a
distinct opening of heaven for their benefit. The hand that fed them came from the
unseen. In like manner, Christ lays emphasis on the fact that he — the bread of life
for men — is " bread from heaven." The salvation that embodies itself in him is no
salvation of man's devissing, nor one which, even had the thought of it entered his mindi,
man could ever from his own resources have achieved. If the world is to be saved at
all, if it is to be delivered from its woes, if it is to have eternal life. Saviour and salva-
tion must come from heaven. Our hope, as of old, is in God, and in God only. It is
not for us to provide, but only thankfully to receive, and earnestly to appropriate the
salvation. God giues us the bread from heaven ; gives it freely ; gives it as bread
which no efforts of our own, however laborious, could have enabled us to procure ;
gives it, that is, as a Divine, supernatural bread, the boon of soveieign grace.

III. The ample abdndance of the provision. The manna was given in abundance.
There was neither lack nor stint. The table that was spread in the wilderness was one of
royal bounty ; as in the later miracle of the loaves, " they did all eat, and were filled "
(Matt. xiv. 20). There was, as in the father's house in the parable, " Enough and to
spare" (Luke xv. 17), overflowing provision. How significant a fact when the heart is
putting to itielf the question. Will Christ's death avail for rree ? He calls himself " th»



CH. XVI. 16.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 4$

true bread which cometh down from heaven;" and it cannot be but that this feature in
the type will be reflected in the antitype. There is provision in Christ for all. H«
rives his flesh for the life of the world (yet. 61). He is come that men " might have
Dfe, and that they might have it more abundantly" (John x. 10). No stint, no lack
no scarcity in the salvation of Christ.

IV. The provision now, as then, needs to be appropbiated. It was nothing
to the Israelites that the manna, sparkling like pearls in the morning sunshine, lay all
around them ; they must gather, they must eat, they must make the " bread from
heaven" food for their own life. So with Christ and his salvation. He calls himself
" bread," to bring out strongly, not only what he is in himself in relation to human
wants, but what men must do with hrm, if they would partake in the life he comes
to give. He must be received, " eaten," in-vjardly appropriated, fed upon, made part, so
to speak, of our veiy selves ; only thus will the new life be begotten in us. This
"eating" of Christ is parallel with the "believing" of other verses (vers. 29, 40, 47).
Some, remembering this, may be disposed to say, it is only believing. But the use
of such a metaphor should rather teach us how real, and inward, and appropriating
a principle, this believing on Jesus is. It is clearly no slight, transitory act of mind
or heart which is denoted by it, but a most spiritual, most inward, most vital and
prsonal energy of appropriation; a process of reception, digestion, and transformation
into spiritual substance, and new powers of spiritual life, of what we have in the Saviour.
How great Christ must be, who thus declares himself to be the bread of life for the
whole world — the support and food (consciously or unconsciously) of all the spiritual
life there is in it I No wonder that the work of works which God requires of us is that
we believe on him whom he has sent (John vi. 29).

V. What there is in Chbist which cokstitutes him the world's bread oj
LIFE. We set aside as unsupported the analogies which some have sought between the
roundness, sweetness, whiteness, etc., of the manna, and qualities iu the person and
work of the Bedeemer. It is, however, clear that if Christ is the antitype of the manna,
and the true bread which cometh down from heaven, it must be in virtue of certain
qualities in him which admit of being specified. And what these are, it is not difficult
to show. He is the bread of life to men — 1. As incarnate Ood. In the humanity oi
Jesus Christ, the Divine is brought near to us, and made apprehensible, and provision
is also made for the communication of the Divine life in its ftiUest, richest form to our
souls. In him dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily (Col. ii. 9). He is the medium
of the communication of that Divine fulness to us (1 John i. 16). In him, the Divine
life is embodied in a holy, perfect humanity ; and in that form— a form which brings
it within our reach, which makes apprehension and assimilation possible — ^it is pre-
sented to us to be partaken of. 2. As an atoning Havlour. Did Christ not bear this
character of Atoner, he would not be truly bread of life to the guilty. Our guilt, our
sin, our whole moral condition, stands between us and God, an insuperable barrier
to the peace and fellowship for which we crave. But Christ has taken away that
barrier. He has made a sacrifice of himself for sin (John vi. 51). To appropriate
wbat I have in Christ, is, accordingly, to appropriate to myself the certainty of forgive-
ness through hi« death, the assurance of peace with God, the knowledge of recon-
ciliation. And to have done this is already to have begun to live. It is to feel the
awakening within me of new-born powers of love, and trust, and service ; to feel the
dread and despair that before possessed me vanishing like a dark nightmare from my
■pint, to be replaced by the joy of pardon, and the sense of the Divine iavcur. It is tr
realise the accomplishment of that spiritual change which the Scriptures describe as a
" passing from death unto life " (John v. 24). " Old things have passed away ; behold,
all things have become new " (2 Cor. v. 17). 3. As a life-giving Spirit. Jesus is what
he is to man, in virtue of his possession of the holy, life-giving Spirit — the personal
Holy Ghost — by whom he dwells in the hearts of his people, and through whom he
communicates to them all the fulness of his own life. This operation of the Spirit is
already implied in what we have said of the results of faith in him. He is the
effectual agent in converting, quickening, enlightening, sanctifying, comforting,
strengthening, beautifying, and spiritually edifying the souls of such as attain to salva-
tion. The influences of this Spirit in the soul are but another name for eternal life. And
Christ is the ^ver of this Spirit. It is from him the Spirit comes. His work on earth

EXODUS — n. *



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xtl 16— 22.



has opened the way for the free communication of the Spirit's Influences. He dwelli
by this Spirit in each of his members, nourishing, strengthening, and purifying them,
To nourish ourselves upon Christ is to take more of this Spirit into our hearts and lives.
Thus is Christ the bread of life. — J. 0.

Vers. 16 — 22. — The law of the manna. God had said (ver. 4) that rules would be
given in connection with the mauna by which the people would be proved, whether
they would walk in his law, or no. One rule is given in ver. 5, and the rest are given
here. Consider —

I. The law as to quantity (vers. 16 — 18). "According to his eating," in this
passage, means, according to the quantity allowed to each person for consumption.
This was fixed at an omer a head (ver. jl6). The simplest way of explaining what
follows is to suppose that each individual, when he went out to gather, aimed, as
nearly as possible, at bringing in his exact omer ; but, necessarily, on measuring what
had been gathered, it would be found that some had brought in a little more, some a
little less, than the exact quantity ; excess was then to go to balance defect, and the
result would be that, on the whole, each person would receive his omer. It may be
supposed, also, that owing to differences of age, strength, agility, etc., there would be
great room left for one helping another, some gathering more, to eke out the deficiencies
of the less active. If the work were conscientiously done, the result, even on natural
principles, would be pretty much what is here indicated. The law of averages would
lead, over a large number of cases, to a mean result, midway between excess and defect,
i.e., to the net omer. But a special superintendence of providence — such, e.g., as that
which secures in births, amidst all the inequalities of famiUes, a right proportion of the
sexes in society as a whole — is evidently pointed to as securing the result. We cannot
suppose, however, that an intentionally indolent or unconscientious person was per-
mitted to participate in this equal dividend, or to reap, in the way indicated, the benefit
of the labours of others. The law here must have been, as with St. Paul, " if any would
not work, neither should he eat " (2 Thess. iii. 10). There is nothing said as to the share
to be allotted to juveniles : these may be supposed to have received some recognised
proportion of an omer. The lessons of all this and its importance as a part of the
spiritual education of Israel, are very obvious. It taught — 1. That what is of Divine
gift is meant for common benefit. The individual is entitled to his share in it ; but he
is not entitled selfishly to enrich himself, while others are in need. He gets that he
may give. There was to be a heavenly conmiunism practised in respect of the manna,
in the same way as a common property is recognised in light and air, and the other free
gifts of nature. This applies to intellectual and spiritual wealth. We are not to rest
till all have shared in it according to their God-given capacity. 2. 'J 'hat in the
Church of Christ it is the duty of the stronger to help the weaker, and of the richer to
help the poorer. This is the lesson drawn from the passage by St. Paul in 2 Cor. viii.
12—10. It is presumed in his teaching, first, that there is the " willing mind," in
which case a gift " is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that
he hath not " (ver. 12). Bach gatherer of the manna was honestly to do his part, and
put what he could into the common stock. The end is not, secondly, that other men he
eased, and the Corinthians burdened (ver. 13). But, each doing what he can, the
design is, thirdly, that the abundance of one may be a supply for the deficiency cpf
another, that so there may be equality (ver. 14). This is a principle of wide appli-
cation in Church finance, and also in the aiding of the poor. Strong congregations
should not he slow to aid weak ones, that the work of the latter may go on more
smoothly, and their ministers may at least be able to subsist comfortably, 'ihe
Scottish Free Church has given a praiseworthy illustration of this principle in her noble
" Sustontation Fund." 3. That where a helpful spirit is shown by each towards all,
there will be fovmd no lack of what is needful for any. God will see that all are
provided for. The tendency of the rule is to encourage a friendly, helpful, unselfish
spirit generally, and in all relations. The gatherer of manna was forbidden to act
selfishly. A Nemesis would attend an attempt on the part of any to appropriate more
than his proper share.

II. The law as to time. 1. The manna was to be gathered in early morning.
The people had to he up betimes, and had to bestir themselves diligently, that theii



OH. ivL 13—81.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS, U

manna might be collected before " the sun waxed hot" (ver. 21). If not collected then,
the substance melted away, and could not be had at all. A lesson, surely, in the first
instance, of diligence in business ; and secondly, of the advantage of improving morning
hours. The most successful gatherer of manna, whether in the material, intellectual, or
spiritual fields, is he who is up and at his work early. Albert Barnes tells us that all
his commentaries were due to this habit of rising early in the morning, the whole of
them having been written before nine o'clock in the day, and without encroaching on
his proper ministerial duties. 2. On six days of the week only (ver. 5). God teaches here
the lesson of putting forward our work on week days, that we may be able to enjoy a
Sabbath free from distraction. He puts honour ou the ordinance of the Sabbath itself,
by reqmring that no work be done upon it.

III. The law as to use (ver. 19). None of the manna was to be left till the
morning. We have here again a double lesson. 1. A lesson against hoarding. God
gave to each person his quantity of manna ; and the individual had no right to more.
What excess he had in his gathering ought to have gone to supplement some other
person's deficiency. But greed led some of the Israelites to disobey. It would save them
trouble to lay by what they did not need, and use it again next day. They might
make profit out of it by barter. All such attempts God defeated by ordaining that the
manna thus hoarded should breed worms, and grow corrupt. A significant emblem of
the suicidal effects of hoarding generally. Hoarded treasure is never an ultimate
benefit to its possessor. It corrupts alike in his heart and his hands. It breeds worms
of care to him, and speedily becomes a nuisance (cf. Matt. vi. 19, 20). 2. A lesson against
distrust. Another motive for laying up the manna would be to provide for the morrow
in case of any failure in the supply. But this was in direct contradiction to God's
end in giving the people their manna day by day, viz., to foster trust, and keep alive
their sense of dependence on him. Christ warns us against the spirit of distrust, and of
anxiety for the morrow, and teaches us to pray for " daily bread " (Matt. vi. 11, 31).
We should not even desire to be independent of God.

IV. The failure of the people to observe these laws. They failed at each
point. They tried to hoard ("ver. 20). They went out to gather on the Sabbath
(ver. 27). "This showed bott diM)hedience and unbelief, for it had been distinctly said
of the seventh day, "in li, thf i ^iiall be none" (ver. 26). What a lesson! — 1. Of the
sottish insensibiUty of huiuiiij ualure to God's great acts of goodness. God had miracu-
lously supplied their wants, yet so little sensible were they of his goodness — so little
did it influence them — that they declined to obey even the few simple rulos he had
laid down for the reception and use of his benefits. 2. Of its ineradicable contumacy
and self-will (cf. Deut. ix. ; and Psalms Ixxviii. and cvi.). — J. 0.

Vers. 13 — 31. — Divine provision for daily need. 1. The Lord's faithfulness.
1. Their varied need was met. Flesh as well as bread was given. God gives uh
richly all things to enjoy. 2. They came in the order and at the time God said they
would come. The evening brought the quails — the morning the manna. Nothing
failed of all that he had promised. 3. They were given in abundance. The quaib
" covered the camp ; " of the manna they " had no lack." There is princely bounty with
God for all who trust in him. He gives richly, even where he has made no covenant :
he fills " men's hearts with food and gladness." How much more then wiU he bless
those whom he has pledged himself to sustain I

II. The spirit of those who are thus fed from God's table. 1. They wait on
him. The supply he sends is only for the day, and he is trusted for the days that
are to follow. They do not refiise to pass on further upon the wilderness path, because
they do not see at the beginning all the needed provision for the way. ii. They obey
God's call to toil. (1) They "-gathered" of it every man according to his eating."
(2) They did not miss the opportunity God gave them. " When the sun waxed hot
it melted ; " and they therefore gathered it " in the morning." Be " not slothful in
business."

III. Israel's faithlessness. 1. In attempting to save themselves from the toil
which God commanded, they kept the manna for next day's use in defiance of the
command to preserve none of it till the morning (ver. 27). 2. In refusing to rest on the
Sabbath. The contradiction and wilfulness of imbeUef : it hoards to be able to abiitaio

s »



THE BOOK OF EXODUR



[oh. xTt 22— aa



from toU, and refuses to obey God's command to rest.. 3. Public mdiffennce to tha
existence of sin. These things were done by a few only ; but they called forth no
public condemnation or holy fear of Gods anger. The Christian community which
does not mourn the sin abounding in its midst has itself no livmg trust in Orod.— U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 22—30. — Thb oatherino of the
SIXTH DAT. When the Israelites, having col-
lected what seemed to them the usual quantity
of manna on the sixth day, brought it home
and measured it, they found the yield to be, not
on omer a head tor each member of the family,
but two omers. The result was a surprise
and a difficulty. They could not consume
more than an omer a-piece. What was to be
done with the remainder ? Was it to be de-
stroyed, or kept? If kept, would it not
"breed worms"? To resolve their doubts,
the elders brought the matter before Moses,
who replied — " This is that which the Lord
hath said." It is to be supposed that, in his
original announcement to the elders of God's
purposes as to the manna, Moses had informed
them that the quantity would be double on the
sixth day (ver. 5) ; but his statement had not
made any deep impression at the time, and
now they had forgotten it. So he recalls it
to their recollection. "This is no strange
thing — nothing that should have surprised
you — it is only what God said would happen.
And the reason of it is, that to-morrow, the
seventh day is, by God's ordinance, the rest of
the Holy Sabbath," — or rather " a rest of u
holy Sabbath to the Lord." Whether or no
the Sabbath was a pruneval institution, given
to our first parents in Paradise (Gen. ii. 3),
may be doubted : at any rate, it had not been
maintained as an institution by tlie Hebrews
during their sojourn in Egypt ; and this was,
practically, to them, the first promulgation of
it. (See Hessey's Bamplon Lectures, p. 149.)
Hence, in the original, it is not called " the
sabbath," as if aheady known, but " a sab-
bath," — i.e., a rest — ^until verse 29.

Ver. 22. — This is that which the Lord hath
said. Bather, " said," i.e., declared to me
when he announced the manna. See verse 5.
It has been supposed that Moses had not com-
municated the declaration to the elders ; but
this seems anlikely. The rest of the holy
sabbath. If this toanslation were correct, the
previous institution of the sabbath, and the
knowledge of its obligation by the Hebrews,
Tould follow ; but the absence of the article



is a strong indication that the whole idea was
new, at any rate to l^hose whom Moses was
addressing. Bake that which ye will bake,
etc. " Do," ».e., " as you have done on other
days — bake some and seethe some — ^but also
reserve a portion to be your food and suste-
nance to-morrow."

Ver. 24. — ^They laid it up. The great bulk
of the Israelites obeyed Moses, and laid by a
portion (half ?) of the mauna gathered on the
sixth day. On the morning of the seventh,
this was found to be perfectly good, and not
to have " bred worms " in the night. Either
this was a miracle, or the corruption previously
noticed (ver. 20) was miraculous.

Vers. 25, 26.— And Moses said. The Sab-
bath being come, Moses explained fully the
reason for the order which he had given, and
generalized it. God required the Sabbath to
be " a day of holy rest " — ^no manna would
fall on it, and therefore none could be
gathered — the produce of the sixth day's
gathering would be found to suffice both for
tile sixth day and the seventh.

Ver. 27. — There went out some of the
people on the seventh day for to gather.
There will always be some persons in a nation,
or in a Church, who will refuse to believe
God's mmisters, and even God himself. They
persuade themselves that they " know better
— it will not be as announced — it will be as
they wish it to be. More especially is this so
where the idea of continuance comes in —
whore some interruption of the ordinary course
of things is announced, which they deem un-
likely or impossible. Compare Gen. xix. 14.

Ver. 28. — ^How long refuse ye to keep my
commandments 1 Though Moses is addressed,
it is the people who are blamed. Hence the
plural verb, " refuse ye." Already there had
been one act of disobedience in connection
with the manna (see ver. 20) — now there was
another — when would such sinful folly come
to an end? When would the people learn
that they could gain nothing by disobedience ?
It was " long " indeed before they were
taught the lesson.

Ver. 29.— See, for that, etc. Bather, " See,
that." Consider that God has given yon the
Sabbath, or the holy rest : and therefore it is
that he gives you on the sixth day the food
for two days — that the rest may not be inter-
fered with. Abide ye every man in his
place. One Jewish sect, the Masbothei, took
this command absolutely literally, and hdd
that in whatsoever position a man WH •!



XVI. 22—30.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



the commencement of tbe Sabbath day, he
was bound to retain it to the close. But
generally it was held that the " place " in-
tended wa£ the camp, which the Israelites
were forbidden to quit ; and hence was derived
the idea of the " sabbath day's journey," which
was reckoned at six stadia — the supposed dis-
tance of the furthest bounds of the camp from
its ceutn.



Ver. 30. — So the people rested. Having
found by experience that nothing was to be
gained by seeking manna on the sabbath, and
received the severe rebuke of verse 28, the
people henceforth obeyed the new command-
ment, and " rested on the sabbath day." Of
the nature of the " rest " intended more will
be said in the comment on Ex. xx. 8 — 11.



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 23 — 30. — The institution of the Sabbath. That, in some sense, the Sa1)l)ath
was instituted in Paradise seems to follow from Gen. ii. 3. It was at any rate then set
apart by Divine counsel and decree. And it is quite possible that a revelation of its
sanctity was made to Adam. The week of seven days may, however, have arisen
simply out of the lunar month, the four weeks corresponding to the moon's four phases.
In any case, as the early Egyptians had no such institution as a weekly sabbath, and
certainly would not have tolerated abstinence from work on the part of their Hebrew
slaves one day in seven, we must suppose that the sabbatical rest, if ever known to the
Hebrews, had fallen into desuetude during their Egyptian sojourn. God now formally
either instituted or re-instituted it. He seized the occasion of giving the manna, to
mark in the strongest way, and impress upon the people, the strict observance of a
sabbatical rest, which forty years' experience would engrain into the habits of the
nation. The chief practical points of interest connected with Sabbath observance in
the present condition of the Christian world are — 1. The relation of the Christian
Simday to the Jewish Sabbath ; 2. The authority upon which the change of day has
been made ; and 3. The proper mode of keeping the Lord's day at the present time.
A few words will be said on each of these points.

I. The relation of the Christian Sunday to the Jewish Sabbath. Both
the Christian Sunday and the Jewish Sabbath have for their basis the expediency of
assigning to the worship and contemplation of God some definite and regularly recur-
ring portions of human life, instead of leaving individuals free to choose their own times
and seasons. Temporal concerns so much occupy men, that, if there were no definite
rule, they would be apt to push religious observance into the odd corners of human
life, if not even to oust it altogether. This evU is prevented, or at any rate checked,
by the appointment of a recurrent day, which is also almost a necessity for the practice
of common worship. In both the Christian and the Jewish religion the same propor-
tion of time is fixed upon, the appointment being that of one day out of seven, or one-
seventh part of life, which certainly cannot be said to be an undue requirement. Thus
far then the two institutions resemble one the other ; but in the primary characteristics
of the observance there is a remarkable contrast. The Jewish Sabbath was empha-
tically a day of holy rest — the Christian Sunday is a day of holy activity. The key-
note of our Lord's teaching on the subject is to be found in the words — " It is lawful
to do good on the Sabbath day." The Jews thought they " hallowed the Sabbath " by
mere inaction — some, as we have seen, would not move all day from the place and
attitude in which their waking moments found them. Christ taught that there was
no virtue in idleness. " My Father worketh hitherto " (on the Sabbath), he said,
" and I work." On the Sabbath day he did his miracles, he taught the people, he
walked through the cornfields, he journeyed to Emmaus. And the Christian Church
has, in the main, continued true to her Pounder's teaching. The Christian Sunday has
been, and is, a day of holy joy and holy activity. Ministers are of necessity more
active on it than on any other. Lay people have felt it to be the special day for
imitating their Lord in "going about and doing good" — in teaching the ignorant,
visiting the poor and the affiic.ted — treading to them, praying with them, ministering to
their necessities. Cessation from worldly business has come to be the rule on the
Lord'"! day. not fr im any superstitious regard for mere rest, but in order that the activ*
duties peculiarly belonging to the day shall not be neglected.

IL Although exception may be taken to the expression — ^used in a tract attributed to



54 THE BOOK OF EXUDUd. [oh. \vl 22—30,

Athanasiug — ^that " our Lord changed the Jewish Sabbath into the Lord's day," yet,
practically speaking, it cannot be denied that such a change has been made ; the Chris-
tian Sunday has taken the place of the Jewish Sabbath, and occupies in the Christian
system the position which the Sabbath occupied in the Jewish. By what authority^
then, has the change been made ? How are Christians justified in keeping holy the first
day instead of the seventh ? Not, certainly, by any direct command of our Lord, for
none such is recorded. Not even by any formal decision of the Apostolic college, for
the question was untouched at the only council which they are known to have held
(Acts XT. 6 — 29). But, as it would seem, by consentient apostolic practice. The apostles
appear, both by Scripture and by the records of primitive Christian antiquity, to have
practically made the change — t.e., they sanctioned the discontinuance of seventh-day
observance (Col. ii. 16 ; Gal. iv. 9, 10), and they introduced first-day observance in its
stead (John xx. 19, 26 ; Acts ii. 1, xx. 7 ; 1 Cor. xvi. 2). They regarded the Jewish
sabbam as abrogated with the rest of the ceremonial law ; and they established by their
own authority, and doubtless by the direction of the Holy Ghost, the keeping holy of
the " Lord's Day," by meetings for Holy Communion, worship, and instruction on that,
the first day of the week, instead.

Ul. With respect to the proper mode of keeping the Lord's Day at the present time,
there would seem to be different degrees of obligation as to different parts of the
customary observance. Attendance at Holy Communion, and by analogy at other
services, has distinct apostolic sanction (Acts xx. 7 ; Heb. x. 25), and is obligatory in
the highest sense. Cessation from worldly business is a matter of ecclesiastical
irrangement, in which individual Christians should follow the regulations or traditions
Df their own ecclesiastical community. Mere inaction should not be regarded as in
my sense a " keeping " of the day — the time abstracted from worldly affairs should be
given to prayer, reading of the Scriptures, and works of mercy. Gentle and healthful
exercise should not be interrupted, being needful to make the body a useful instrument
of the soul. Relaxations, not required by adults or by those who are rich, should be
allowed to children and to the poor, every care being taken that Sunday be not made to
them a day of gloom, restraint, and discomfort. Sunday was intended to be the Chris-
tian's weekly festival, a day of cheerfulness and holy joy, a foretaste of the joys of
Heaven.

"The Sundays of man's life.
Threaded together on Time's string,

Make bracelets for the wife
Of the Eternal King.

On Sunday, heaven's gate stands ap%
Blessings are plentiful and np^~

More plentitnl than hope.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUl'HOES.
Vers. 22 — 30. — T%e Manna and the Sabbath. — I. The fact of maiwa beino given ok

SIT DATS, AND NOT ON THE SEVENTH, 18 A PBOOP OF THE EXISTENCE OF THE SaBBATH.

It would certainly seem from this passage that the Israelites had not up to this time
been very good Sabbath keepers ; that if they knew of any special distinction attaching
to the seventh day, they had no very strict ideas as to its observance ; that its sanctity
was but little recognised by them. It could scarcely have been otherwise with a
people just escaped from a long and degrading bondage. It does not follow, however,
that this was the first institution of the Sabbath. There is everj' reason for believing
the contrary. That Q<Mi had the Sabbath in view in the arrangements made, and the
laws laid down, about the manna, every one admits. The only question which arises is,
whether these arrangements were modelled on the basis of a division of time already
existing, or whether this was absolutely the first indication to mankind of a weekly
day of rest. 1. Presumptively — this latter alternative seems improbable. It is incredible
that so important an institution as the Sabbath should be introduced in this casual, un-
anuounced way — should be taken for granted in certain outward arrangements relating
to a dillerent matter, and then, when curiosity has been excited by these arrangements,



OH. XVL 22— 30.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. I<

should be first made known by the side-door of an explanation of the novel injunctionii.
Such a case of the existence of an important institution being assumed before th<
law which gives it existence has been either promulgated or heard of, is without
precedent or parallel in history. It seems plain that whether Israel knew ol
the existing Sabbath or not, G-od did, and framed his arrangements in view of it.
The inference is that the religious observance of the seventh day had been sanctioned
by old tradition, but had fallen largely into desuetude. 2. On Biblical grounds —
it seems certain that the Sabbath is of older date than the sojourn in the wilder-
ness. We need not review all the evidence which points in the direction of a
primeval institution of the Sabbath. It is sufficient to instance the primary text
upon the subject (Gen. ii. 1 — 4), which speaks with a voice as plain as could well be
wished to those who are willing to hear. 3. HistoricaMy — it has been recently
proved that the Sabbath was known in ancient Assyria and Babylonia, long before the
days of Moses. No Orientalist will any longer question, in fjice of the evidence
furnished by the recently deciphered cuneiform tablets, that a Sabbath was observed
in Assyria in the days of Sardanapalus, and for ages previously. Bat the ancient
Accadian records, which go as far back as 2000 b.o., and many of which have been
deciphered by the aid of competent Assyrian translators, show that a Sabbath was
observed in the very earliest time. The very name " Sabattu," with the meaning " a
day of rest for the heart," has been found in the old Accadian tongue (see " Records ot
the Past," vol. iii. p. 143 ; " Assyrian Discoveries," by George Smith ; the Academy,
Nov. 1875). Special points in these researches will need confirmation, but on the
whole, the early and wide-spread observance of the Sabbath must be held as established.
In the light of Oriental discovery, it will soon be regarded as an anachronism to speak
of prolepsis in connection with Gen. ii. 1 — 4 ; or to urge the view that the Sabbath is a
purely Judaic institution, and originated with Moses.

II. The bulk fob gathbbino a dodble supply of UAmiA on the sixth day, and

LATINO BY FOB THE SEVENTH, TAUGHT THE LESSON OF A PBOFEB BE8PE0T FOE THE

Sabbath. It taught — 1. That the Sabbath was to be kept free from imnecessary
work. 2. That in order to leave the Sabbath clear, as a day of rest, work was tc
be/oncor«fed on week days. 3. That God has a respect for his own ordinance.

III. By gbantino this double supply on the sixth day, and sboueino its peb-

SBRVATION ON THE SEVENTH, GoD TAUOUT THAT HIS BLESSING RESTS UPON THE SaBBATH,
AND THAT HIS PEOPLE WILL BE NO LOSERS BY KEEPING IT.

IV. Qod's CARE THUS EARLY TO RE-ESTABLISH THE ORDINANCE OF THE SaBBATH Dt
ISBAEL, SHOWS THE IMPORTANCE OF THE INSTITUTION AS BEARING ON HEALTH, MORALS,

AND RELIGION. It must be reckoned a noteworthy circumstance that, in arranging the
affairs of Israel, with a view to the recovery of his people firom the low and demoralised
condition, physically, morally, and spiritually, into which they had fallen, and with a
view to their elevation to a state of prosperous national existence, God's first step, even
before the law was given from Sinai, was to put on a proper foundation, the observance
of the Sabbath.

V. GJod'S displeasure at the breach of this law by the PEOPLE WHO WENT OUT

ro gather on the Sabbath, shows his zeal fob the honoue of the commandment
(vers. 27—29). The thing chiefly condemned, no doubt, was the spirit of disobedience,
which showed itself in more ways than one (cf. ver. 20). But is it not plainly reckoned
a special aggravation of the offence of these would-be gatherers, that they so defiantly set
at nought God's ordinance of a day of rest? Does God show a like zeal for the observ-
ance of any purely ceremonial precept ? — J. 0.

Vers. 16 — 36. — The manna— regulations for the gathering and wng of it, L Thb
EFFECTIVE dibtbibution OF IT IS PROVIDED FOB. The responsibilities and oppor-
tunities of the family relation, which had been touched upon in the institution of the
Passover, are here touched upon again. Each head of a household had to see that the
daily supply was gathered for his family. Thus God shows that he is not only atten-
tive for that great nation which now, as a whole, is so clearly dependent on his
providing, so visibly cut oflf from secondary grounds of confidence, but also hag his ey«
on the under-providers. What he is to all the children of men, he expects earthly
parents to be in their measure and opportunity. Earthly parenta, even though evil, ar«



IHE BOOK OJP EXODUS. [oh. xn. 16—36.



yet able to give some good gifts ; and God will hold them responsible thus to give what
they can. The peculiar and transcendent gifts of grace they are not able to bestow ;
but seeing God has constituted them the channels of certain blessings, woe be to them
if they block up the channels, or in any way diminish the flow of blessings through
them.

II. A BUTFicrENT SUPPLY IS PROVIDED FOB. Somo gathered more and some less ;
but the gathering amounted to the same thing in the end. There was neither defect
Qor superfluity. We may take it that those wlw gathered more did it in a spirit of
unbelief and worldly wisdom, a spirit of anxious questioning with regard to the
morrow. They wanted to make sure, lest the morrow's manna did not come. God
disappointed their plans, and doubtless soon altered their conduct, by reducing the
quantity gathered to the stipulated omer. Thus unbeliefs labour was lost. And those
who gathered less did so through straitened opportunity. It may be they had less time ;
it may be they were feeble or aged. But we are sure that, whatever the cause of their
deficiency, they must have been those who did their best ; and God honoured their
honest endeavours by making up the deficiency. If they had been careless, it is pretty
certain they would have had to go starving. God has ever taken care of the principle that,
if a man will not work, neither shall he eat. All that is required is, that we should do
our best according to our opportunities ; but so much, at least, assuredly is required.
Remember the teaching of the parable (Matt. xx. 1 — 16). The lord of the vineyard
gave the same amount to those coming in at the eleventh hour as to those who began
early in the morning. He considered pressing need to be as important a thing as
actual exertion. But at the same time he had his eye on what had really been done.
Those who entered at the eleventh hour had to do their best even though it was but
for a short time. Thus the lord of the vineyard respected need on the one hand and
disposition and embraced opportunities on the other. And so with the manna in the
wilderness : every Israelite had to do his best, with a believing mind and an industrious
hand. Then God took care that he should have enough ; and " enough is as good as
a feast."

III. God made plain that it was to be a daily supply. He did this, first of
all, by diminishing the quantity gathered to the stipulated omer. Then, when the
omer was secured, he made the daily character of the supply still more evident by
commanding that none should be left till morning. This was but carrying the former
provision — that of gathering an omer full — out to its logical conclusion. Nor must we
take this to mean, of necessity, that all the manna was to le eaten up. " Leave it not
till the morning" can only mean "leave it not as food." 1'here could hardly have been
an obligation on the Israelites to eat more than nature demanded or appetite desired.
Let no fond, economising parent quote this regulation to a child by way of enforcing
the request to eat up its food. How much harm is done by forcing children to empty
the plate, lest anything be wasted 1 Surely it is more waste to cram a recalcitrant
stomach than to throw vmdemanded food away, if that be the only alternative. Evi-
dently what God meant here is, that Israel should not keep its manna for to-morrow's
supply. There is more likelihood of imperilling the spirit of faith than the habit of
economy. Note, too, that the efficacy of this reyulation was soon exemplifled when the
people broke it. Indeed, it is curious to notice how, all through the passage, the regu-
lations and the exemplification of them are mixed up. They were regulations which
came into operation at once ; for there was a. present need, and the people learnt to
meet it by paying at first the penalties of disobedience or imperfect obedience. They
could put away the manna ; but they could not therefore preserve it. Putting it away
was only turning it into one of the treasures which moth and rust corrupt. Even if
we could imagine that it had been possible to seal the manna hermetically, and keep it
from the germs of corruption in the air, the result would have been the same. What-
ever the precautions adopted, it would have bred worms and stunk by morning. God
is ever turning our boasted prudence into ridiculous folly ; faith and obedience are the
only real prudence.

IV. Not only was it a daily supply, but a mobning supply. An early morning
supply, for when the sun waxed hot the manna was melted. They were to go out and
gather the manna the first thing, and then, whatever else might be lacking that day, the
great temporal necessity of food was provided for. God demanded of his people that



.Jm.19— 86.] THE BOOK Of* EXODUS.



they should be trustful and satisfied m the reception of a daily supply ; but that supp'y
was brought at the very beginning of the day. It was not at their option to gather it
at any time of the day they chose. The supply was at the beginning of the day, because
day is the time for eating as night is for sleeping. Then, with minds free from anxiety
and bodies duly supported, they could each one set about his appointed business.

V. In his method of supply God made special provision fob the Sabbath. On
the sixth day of the week, a double portion was provided, and was to be gathered in
correspondence with the provision. Certainly it must be adinitted that the regulation
ho'e gives no means of judging how far the Sabbath was a recognised institution in
Israel, if indeed it was an institution at all. This is a matter on which we are not able
to affirm ; nor are we able to deny. To whatever extent there may have been a weekly
Sabbath among the patriarchs, it could not have been kept up through the hardships of
Egypt 1 Anyway, tiiis remarkable increase of an extra omer on the sixth day — when
the reason of it was explained — was the very thing to prepare the people for the exact
commandment which so soon followed. Jehovah had thus more ways than one of
impressing upon them the sanctity and peculiarity of the Sabbath. In Egypt they had
doubtless been required to toil every day, knowing little rest, save the inevitable rest of
sleep, and it would be hard to break them away from this expectation of daily drudgery.
Early association and training are wanted to make one day different from others ; and
we may conclude that it was only the generation growing up in the wilderness and
becoming habituated to the Sabbath rest that really took to it in a natural and easy
way. But this regulation of the manna must have been a great help even to the elder
generation. As each sixth day came round they were reminded that God himself was
remembering the Sabbath day to keep it holy, and therefore they should do the same.
And as we think of this special provision for the weekly interval of rest, continued
through forty years, we may well ask ourselves what feelings God entertains as he looks
down en the world and sees the incessant, driving, suicidal toil in which many men
engage, on the plea that it is necessary. They say they have no choice. Toil all day,
and when evening comes utter exhaustion 1 and thus life is wasted in the struggle to
maintain it. When we consider such struggling in the light of this sixth day's double
provision, a strong suspicion rises in our minds that this plea of necessity is a delusiou.
Is it not probable that if men would only throw off, boldly and trustfully, many of
what are reckoned social necessities, they would have a healthier piety and a happier
life ? At present, with only too many, wheu they are asked for a little more attention
to the things of God and a little more interest in them, the plea comes in reply, easily
urged and not easily met, that there is no time. See then what God did for his own
people. He made time for them, and jealously hedged it about ; a time for needed rest,
holy rest and holy service. When they went out food-seeking on the morning of his
day, he manifestly cursed their disobedience and unbelief. May we not be perfectly
sure that if in a spirit of faith, we give all the time and effort that are necessary to
cultivate personal religion and diffuse gospel truth, God will see to it that we get the
manna? and if we have the manna, we need nothing more. Whatever else be left
unsought and unenjoyed, seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness. Seek
these, for they bring in their train everything a Christian can lawfuUy enjoy. — Y.

Vers. 19 — 36. The law of the manna. I. There must be individual effort fob
raDiviDUAL NEED. 1. The manna lay around their tents, but it had to be gathered. To
feed on Christ each must lay hold of him for his own soul by meditation and prayer and
trust. 2. If we do not " taste and see that the Lord is gracious," his nearness to us will
only deepen our condemnation. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation ?

II. Christ must be laid hold of daily dubikg the week's toil. 1. The sabbath
has its provision without labour. This law is sometimes inverted — sabbath day's toil,
Bx days' negUgence — but in this way Christ will be fed upon neither in labour nor in
rest. They who come from daily walking with Christ, find the sabbath feast spread for
them. 2. The life of labour in striving to lay hold of and feed upon him, is followed by
the rest that remaineth and the feast which his own hand will spread.

III. Gbaoe will not consort with disobedience. The manna stored up to save
fix)m toiling, when God coiumands to toil, was unfit for use. We cannot live on tha
memories of past experiences of Christ's graciousness. He must be daily sought for.



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XTi. 31—36,



IT. Ohbht ihb boul'b food dubmo the entibk babthlv f n-of^AGB (yer. 35).
During the whole forty years Israel fed upon the manna. We must feed daily upoD
oSm we reach the inheritance. They who will he sustained in their journey m«rt
determine to know nothing save Christ and him crucified.— U.



EXPOSITION,



Vers. 81— 36.— The appbabanoh or thb

MANNA, ITS OONTINTTANOB, AND ITS DEPOSITION

IN THB Tabebnaolb.— In bringing the subject
of the manna to a conclusion, the writer adds a
few words. 1. On its appearance ; 2. On its
deposition by divine command in the Ark of
the Covenant; and 3. On its continuance
doring the forty years of the wanderings. It
is evident that verses 32 — 34 cannot have been
written until after the sojourn in Sinai, and
the command to make a tabernacle (ch.
XX vi.) : as also that verse 35 cannot have been
written till the arrival of the Israelites at the
verge of the land of Canaan. But there is
nothing in the passage that militates against
the Mosaic authorship of the whole.

Ver. 31. — The house of Israel. This ex-
pression is unusual, and is not admitted by the
Septuagint, the Syriao, or the Arabic ver-
sions, which all have "the children of
Israel." Several Hebrew MSS. have beni,
" sons," instead of beyth " house." Manna.
Literally, as in the Septuagint, man — ^the
word used when they first beheld the sub-
stance (verse 15), and probably meaning " a
gift." The elongated form manna, first
appears in the Sept. rendering of Num. xi.
6, 7. It was like ooriander seed. This is " a
small round grain of a whitish or yellowish
grey." The comparison is made again in
Num. xi. 7, where it is added that the colour
was that of bdellium — either the gum so
called, or possibly the pearl. The taste of it
was like wafers made with honey. Such
wafers or cakes were constantly used as offer-
ings by the Egyptians, Greeks, and other
nations. They were ordinarily compounded
of meal, oil, and honey. Hence we can
reconcile with the present passage the state-
ment in Num. xi. 8, that " the taste of it was
as the taste of fresh oil."

Ver. 82. — And Moses said. Not at the
moment, but some time subsequently. See
the introductory paragraph. Fill an omer.
In the original it is " the omer," and so the
LXX : but the reason for the introduction of
the article is obscure. For your generations —
i.e., " for your descendants."

Ver. 33.— Take a pot. The word here
translated " pot " does not occur elsewhere in
Scripture, and is beheved to be of Egvptian
origm Gesanini translates it " basket ; but



the author of the Epistle to the Hehrewi
(ix. 4) follows the LXX. in representing
the word used by ard/ivos, which certainly
means "a jar" or " pot." Lay it up before
the Lord. The " pot of manna " was laid up
before the Lord with the " tables of the cove-
nant," and "Aaron's rod that budded" as
symbolical that God's mercy was as eternal
and essential, and as much to be remembered
as his justice, and perhaps also as especially
symbolising the " true bread of life."

Ver. 34. — ^Aaron laid it up before the tes-
timony. " The testimony " is not the Ark of
the Covenant, which is never so called, but
the Covenant itself, or the two tables of stone
engraved by the finger of God, which are
termed " the testimony " in ch. xxv. 16 — 21 ;
xl. 20 ; etc. The pot of manna was laid up
inside the ark (Heb. ix. 4) in front of the two
tables.

Ver. 35. — The children of Israel did eat
manna forty years. Ealisch observes that
the actual time was not forty fuU years, but
about one month short of that period, since
the maima began after the fifteenth day of
the second month of the first year (verse 1)
and terminated just after Passover of uie forty-
first year (Josh. v. 10 — 12). It may be added
that Moses cannot have written Uie present
passage later than about the eleventh month
of the fortieth year (Dent. i. 3 ; xxxiv. 10 ;
Josh. iv. 19) ; when the manna had continued
thirty-nine years and nine months. ITntU
ttey came to a land inhabited. Ealisch
translates " the land of their habitation," or
" which they were to inhabit," remarking
that they had reached inhabited countries,
e.g., those of Sihon and Og, much earlier.
But the words will not bear this rendering.
What the writer intends to note is, that the
manna continued all the time they were in
the wilderness, until they reached inhabited
territory, and then furfiier (in the next
clause), that it lasted after that, until they
came to the borders of Canaan. He does not
say that it even then left off. He writes
exactly as Moses might be expected to have
written towards the close of his life. A later
writer would, as Canon Cook observes, have
been more specific.

Ver. 36. — An omer. The "omer" must
be distinguished from the " homer " of later
times. It was an Egyptian measure, as also
was the " ephah." It is not improbable that
the verse is an addition by a later writer, M
Joshua, or Ezra.



aa. XTL 32— 34.] THB BOOK OF EZODUS. B»



HOMILETIOS.

Yen; 82 — Mi— Memorials o/mereies. It is indicative of the weakness and imperfec-
tion of human nature, that memorials of mercies should he needed. But frail himianity
cannot do without them ; and God in his goodness, knowing this, sanctions them. As
be had the rod of Aaron, which hudded (Num. xvii. 10), and the pot of manna, made per-
manent portions of the fiu-niture of the tabernacle for memorials, so be had memorial days
established, Sabbath, and Passover, and Pentecost, and memerial seasons, as the feasts of
unleavened bread and tabernacles, that the children of Israel might keep his mercies in
perpetual remembrance. We Christians have no such material memorials as the tables
of stone, the rod, and the manna ; for the "True CSross" is historically untrustworthy,
and the "Holy Coat" could not have been a Jewish garment. We have, however,
memorials of mercies. —

L In oub holt days. Out Sunday is a perpetual memorial and reminder of tlis
great mercy of Christ's Resurrection, the earnest, and efficient cause, of our own.
Christmas-day, Qood Friday, Ascension-day, are memorials of the same kind ; not so
universally acknowledged, but useful memorials, where they are established and
observed. Christianity commands that no man shall judge another in respect of such
observances ; but it would be an ill day for Christendom, if they were imiversally given
up. Thousands find them great helps to devotion, great stimulants to gratitude and
love.

II. In ottb holt emblems. The Cross, the Lamb, the Eagle, the Crown of Thorns,
the Yine, the Hose, the Lily of the Yalley, wherever we behold them, are memorials of
divine mercies, never sufficiently remembered, most useful in recalling to our minds the
acts, events, persons, wherewith they are scripturally connected. Some minds are so
constituted as not to require such reminders. But to the mass of men they are of
inexpressible value, waking up (as they do) twenty times a day holy thoughts that
might otherwise have slumbered, and stirring the heart to devotions that might other-
wise have been unthought of.

ILL In oub holy buildings. What the entire tabernacle was to the Israelites in the
wilderness, what the temple, so long as it stood, was to the Israelite nation, such to
Christiana are their cathedrals, abbeys, churches, chapels, oratories, perpetual reminders
•f holy things, memorials pointing heavenwards, and bringing to mind all that God has
done for us. That they are also intended for practical use as places where we may
worship in common, and be taught in common, does not prevent their being at the same
time memorials. It is as memorials that they lift themselves up so high, ascending in
tier over tier of useless pinnacle, and high-pitched roof, and spire-crowned tower. They
um at catching our attention, forcing us to look at them, and making us think of Qoda



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

yen. 32 — 34. — 3%e pot of manna. Aaron was ordered to take a pot, and put tt
omer full of manna therein, and lay it up before the Lord, to be kept for future genera-
tions. The pot of manna is alluded to in Hebrews, where it is described as " golden,"
and as laid up in the ark (Heb. ix. 4). It may be questioned how so corruptible a sub-
stance admitted of preservation. But it is not so plain that the manna had in itself any
tendency to corrupt, so that the miracle is perhaps to be looked for, not in the keeping
fresh of the portion laid up in the ark, but in the smiting with corruption of any portions
sinfully hoarded by the Israelites (ver. 20). We are taught —

I. That the asEATEB mbecies op God odght specially to be bbmbmbebed by ub.
It is fitting, even in the Church, to appoint memorials of them.

n. That the feodliab lessons of the manna ought specially to be kept in
BEMBMBBANCB. Among these note the following : — 1. " Man doth not live by bread
alone," etc. (cf. Deut. viii. 4 ; Matt. iv. 4). 2. The lesson of dependence on God ffflr
■upply of daily wants (Matt. vi. 2). 3. Typical lessons. The manna reminds us «l
Christ, oiu: Bread of Life, in heaven. " Your life is hid with Christ in God " (Col. iii. S).
The "hidden manna" in Bev. iL 17, would seem to indicate the spiritual nourishmaat



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xvn. 1—7.



In communion with God and Christ which will maintain soul and body for erer in tht

possession of an incorruptible life— life undecaying, self-renewing, everlasting.

III. The mDiBsoLUBLE onion of law and grace in God's dealinos with ms
Chubch. The pot of manna was laid up (after the ark was made) " before tne testi-
mony, to be kept " (ver. 34). The law is the stern background, but near it is the golden
pot, filled with the manna which told of God's goodness and grace to a people whom
mere law would have condemned. God can be thus gracious to his Church, not
because his law has been set aside, but because it has been magnified and made
honourable by Christ, whose blood pleads at the mercy-seat for the transgressor*— J. O.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER xvn.



Vers. I — 1. — The second MUEMCBmo fob
WATEB. When the Israelites had come to
Eephidim, which was probably in the Wady
Peiran, near its junction with the Wady Esh-
Sheikh, complaint arose, not, as at Maiah (ch.
XT. 23), that there was no drinkable water,
but that there was no water at all. Water
had been expected, and consequently no supply
had been brought ; but none was found.
Violent murmurs arose, and the people were
ready to stone their leader (ver. 4), who
had, they considered, brought them into the
difficulty. As usual, Moses toot his grief to
God, and laid it before him, with the result
that God gave miraculous relief. Moses was
bidden to ^ke his rod, and go with the elders
to a particular rock known as " the rock in
Horeb " (ver. 6), and there strike the rock,
and water would flow forth. This he did, and
a copious stream welled out, which furnished
abundant drink to the whole multitude. In
remembrance of the murmuring, he called
the place Massah (trial) and Meribah (qnarrel)_

Ver. 1. — ^From the wilderness of Sin. See
the comment on ch. xvi. 1. The satidy coast
tract (El Murka) was probably quitted in lat.
28° 42' nearly, and the Wady Feiran entered
on at its south-western extremity. Two
stations, Dophkah and Alush, lay between
the Sin wHdemess and Rephidim, as we learn
from Num. xxxiii. 12, 13. It is unpossible
to locate these places with exactness. After
their journeys. The three stages — from Sin
to Dophkah, from Dophkah to Alush, and
from Alush to Eephidim — seem to be alluded
to. According to the commandment of the
lord. Literally, " at the mouth of Jehovah,"
i.e. as God ordered them. The command was
signified by the movement of the " pillar of
the cloud." And pitched in BepMdim, The
word Eephidim signifies " resting places," and
" is the natural name for the paradise of the
Bedouins in the palm-grove where the church



and palace of the bishops of Paran formerl}

stood " (Stanley, Sinai and Palestine, p. 41).
There was.no water. The Wady Feiran is
watered ordinarily by a copious stream ; but
at times the brook is dry (J&id. p. 40, note 3).

Ver. 2. — The people did chide. I.e
" quarrelled," made open murmurs and com-
plaint — as before frequently (ch. xiv. 11, 12 ,
XV. 24; xvL 2, 3). Give as water. As
Moses had already given them flesh (the
quails) and bread (the manna), so it perhaps
seemed to the people easy that he should give
them such a common thing as water. Stanley
notices (p. 70) that the wadys suggest tht
idea of water, and make its absence the more
intolerable — they are " exactly like rivers,"
with " torrent bed, and banks, and clefts in
the rock for tributary streams, and at times
even rushes and shrubs fringing their course "
— signs of " water, water everywhere, yet not
a drop to drink." Wherefore do ye tempt
the Lord 1 To " tempt the Lord " is to try
his patience by want of faith, to arouse his
anger, to provoke him to punish us. It was
the speciiil sin of the Israehtes during the
whole period of their sojourn in the wilder-
ness. They " tempted and provoked the most
high God " (Ps. Ixxviii. 56) ; " provoked hira
to auger with their inventions (ib. cvi. 29),
" murmured in their tents " (jh. 25), " pro-
voked him at the sea " (t6. 7), " tempted him
in the desert " (ib. 14). God's long-suffering,
notwithstanding all, is simply amazing I

Ver. 3. — The people thirsted there for
water. There is probably no physical afBic-
tion comparable to intense thirst. His thirst
was the only agony which drew from the Son
of Man an acknowledgment of physical suffer-
ing, in the words " I thirst." Descriptions of
thirst in open boats at sea are among the most
painful of^the records of afflicted humanity.
Thirst in the desert can scarcely be less hor-
rible. The people murmured and said When
the worst comes on men, if they are alone, they
bear it silently ; but if they can find a scape-
goat, they murmur. To lay the blame cf the
situation on another is a huge satisfactiun to the
ordinary human mind, which shrinks from re-
sponsibility, and would fain shift the bm-then on
some one else. To kill na. Compare dt. xiv. li,



OH. XTO. 1—7 J



THfi BOOK OF EXODUS.



«1



iri. 3. The circumstances of their life in the
wiMcmess were such, that, until accustomed
to them, the people thought that, at each step,
they must perish. It may he freelj admitted,
that without continual miraculous aid this
would have been the natural denouement.
And onr oattle. It is interesting to see that
the " cattle " still surrived, and were regarded
as of great importance. How far they served
as a secondary head of subsistance to the
people during the 40 years, is a point not yet
sufficiently elaborated.

Ver. i. — And Hoses cried nnto the Lord. It
19 one of the most prominent traits of the
character of Moses, that, at the occurrence of
a difficulty, he always carries it straight to
God. (See ch. xv. 25; xxiv. 15; xxxii. 30;
xxxiii. 8; Num. xi. 2,11; xii. 11; xiv. 13 — 19,
etc.) They be almost ready to stone me. This
is the iiist which we hear of stoning as a
punishment. It is naturally one of the easiest
modes of wreaking popular vengeance on an
obnoxious individual, and was known to the
Greeks as early as the time of the Persian war
(Herod, ix. 5), to the Macedonians (Q. Curt.
Vit. Alex. vi. 11, 88), and others. There is,
however, no trace of it among the Egyptians.

Ver. 5. — Go on before the people. "Leave
the people," •.«., "where they are, in Rephidim,



and go on in front of them, with some of thi
elders as witnesses, that the miracle may b«
sufficiently attested." On the other occasion,
when water was brought forth out of the rock
(Num. XX. 8 — 11), it was done in the presence
of the people. Perhaps now there was a real
danger of their stoning Moses, had he not
quitted them. Thy rod \rith which thou
smotest the river. See above, ch. vii. 20.

■Ver. 6. — Behold, I will stand before thee
there. A visible Divine appearance seems to
be intended, which would guide Moses to the
exact place where he should strike. The rook
in Horeb must have been a remarkable object,
already known to Moses during the time that
he dwelt in the Sinai-Horeb region ; but its
exact locality cannot be pointed out. It can-
not, however, have been very far distant from
Bephidim. (See ver. 8.)

ver. 7. — He called the name of the plaoe
Uassah. Massah is from the root ntuoA, " to
try," or " tempt," and means " trial " oi
"temptation." Meribah is from riib, "to
chide, quarrel," and means " contention, chid-
ing, strife." Moses gave the same name to
the place near Kadesh, where water was once
more brought out of the rock, near the end of
the wanderings. (See Num. zz. 18; Dent
xxxii. 61 ; Fs. cvi. 82.)



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 1 — 7. — Water out of the rock. "They did all drink the same gpiiitual drink ;
for they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ "
(I Cor. X. 4). When man is at his last gasp, perishing for lack of what he sorely
needs, then God lavishes his mercies. All previous trials were as nothing compared with
that which befel Israel at Eephidim. Lips parched, throats dry, bodies fevered with
heat, hearts expectant and buoyed up with hope till the close of the day, then suddenly
despairing — they lay on the arid soil around the ill-named " resting-places," maddened,
furious, desperate. Without water, they must perish in the course of a few hours —
they, " and their children " (ver. 3>— the little tender innocents, a while ago so gay and
sprightly and joyous, now drooping, listless, voiceless. What wonder that some hearts
were stirred with fury against Moses, that some hands clutched stones, and were ready
to launch them at their leader's head ? Men in such straits are often not masters of
themselves, and scarcely answerable for the thoughts they think or the acts they do.
But the greater the need, the richer the manifestation of God's mercy. At God's word,
Moses strikes the rock ; and the outcome is an abundant copious stream — aye, " rivers
of living water ! " All were free to drink at once — men, women, little children, cattle,
asses — dl could take without stint, satiate themselves, drink of the water of life freely.
And the water " follow^ them." From Eephidim, in the second year, to Kadesh, in
the thirty-eighth year of the wanderings, there is no more complaint of want of water
at any time, no need apparently of any new and distinct miracle.

And we too have water otrr of the Eock, wliich is — 1. Miraculous ; 2. Abound-
ing ; 3. Life-giving. 1. Miraculous. For our Eock is Christ himself— not the type,
not the shadow, but the reality. Christ himself, the true and only-begotten Son of
God, makes himself to us a perpetual, abiding, exhaustless source of a constant
living stream, from wliich we may drink continually. " If any man thirst," he says,
" let him come unto me and drink" (John vii. 37) ; and again — " Ho, every man that
tbifstoth, come ye to the waters " as. Iv. 1). He " opens rivers in high places, and
fc'witam* io the midst cf the valleys*— he " makes the wildemess a pool of water, and



Sa THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xvn. 1— 7.



the diy land springs of water" (ib. xli. 18). As from his riven side, upon the Cross,
blood and water flowed down in a mingled stream, so ever does he give us by a
standing miracle his atoning blood to expiate our guilt, and his pure spiritual mfiuences
to cleanse our hearts and purify our souls. And the supply is — 2. Abounding. Th«
water that he gives, is in each man " a well of water, springing up into everlasting life"
(John iv. 14). It is given without let or stint — freely to " every one that thirsteth."
This is his promise — " I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground; I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring"
(Is. xliv. 3). Men have but to thirst for the living stream, to desire it, long for it, and
he pours it forth. As in heaven, " a pure water' of life, clear as crystal, proceeds out of the
throne of God and of the Lamb " (Rev. xxii. 2), so even here there is a fountain opened
for sin and for uncleanness, abundant, copious, never-failing — of which all may drink
freely. And the draught is — 3. Life-giving. However weak we are, however droop-
ing, however near to death, once let us drink of the precious water that he gives, and
we are saved. Death is foiled, the destroyer forced to release his prey, life springs up
again within the heart ; every nerve is invigorated ; every fibre of our frame recovers
its tone. True " water of life " is that stream which wells forth from the riven side of
the Lamb. Christ is " our Life ; " and in him, and through him we have life. The
water that he gives us is " living water " — for it is in truth the Spirit of him who is
"the true God and the eternal life" (1 John v. 20)— who "hath life in himselt"
Lord, evermore give us this " life I "

EOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 7. — The water from the rock. The Israelites pursued their journey to the
mount of God. It was — 1. By stages — " after their journeys." It is well to discipline
the mind to look at life as a succession of stages. " Most people can bear one day's
evil ; the thing that breaks one down is the trying to bear on one day the evil of two
days, twenty days, a hundred days." 2. According to God's commandment — following
still the guiding cloud. 3. It brought them in due course to Bephidim, the scene of
a new trial, and of a new theocratic mercy.

I. The situation. Its horrors can be better imagined than described. 1. TTie want
of water. " There was no water for the people to drink" (ver. 1). Even where water
was comparatively abundant, it would be a task of no small difficulty to supply the
wants of so immense a multitude. Now they are conducted into a region where water
absolutely fails them. The last drop in their water-skins is exhausted. There is a
famine of the needful element. Scouts bring in the intelligence that the place is one of
utter drought, without streams, wells, rivulets, oozing rocks, or any other means of
renewing the supplies. Consternation sits on every face. Dismay is in every heart.
2. The consequent thirst. " And the people thirsted there for water " (ver. 3). The
pangs of imallayed thirst constitute an intolerable torture. Hunger is attended by
gnawings and tearings in one organ of the body — that concerned in the reception of
food. But thirst possesses the whole being. It mounts to the brain. It bums and
rages like fever in the blood. Draining the body of its juices, it causes every nerve to
throb virith acute suffering. " Heart and flesh " cry out for the boon of water. It has
been remarked that " I thirst" was the only expression of bodily suffering wrung from
our Lord upon the cross. 3. The spiritual analogue. God brought the people into a
situation in which they not only experienced acute thirst, but were made to feel that in
their sore strait, nature could do nothing for them. If left to the resources of nature,
they must inevitably perish. They cned for water, but it was not to be had. The
depth said. It is not in me. The thirsty sand said, It is not in me. The sky that was
as brass above them said. It is not in me. The dry, dead rocks around said, It is not
in us. From no quarter could they extract so much as a drop of the precious liquid.
The analogue to this is the condition of the spirit which has become awakened to the
emptiness and unsatisfyingness of the world around it, of the finite generally ; which
feels the need of a higher life than the world can give it. In the renewed nature, if
becomes definitively the thirst for God, for the Uving God, for his love, his favour, foi
knowledge of lum, for partici^-ation in bis life (Ps. xKi. 1, 2 ; Ixiii. 1 — 3). Under eon-



OH. XTii. 1— 7.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 6S

viction of sin, it U specially the thirst for paidon and holiness (Ps. li. ; cxix. 41, 81, 123,
166, 174). By bestowing on the Israehtes supernatxiral water to quench their tldrst, God
declared at the same time his ability and wUlingneas to supply these higher wants of
the soul ; nay, held out in type the promise of this gift. This is not a far-fetched appli-
cation of the incident. The word spoken to the Israelites at Marah, " I am Jehovah
that healeth thee" (ch. xv. 26), gave them a key to the interpretation of this whole
series of miraculous facts. We cannot say to what extent they used it ; but the key
was there. Just as at Marah, the healing of the waters was a symbol of the truth
that Jehovah would bo their healer in every sphere of their existence ; as the gift of
manna was the type and pledge of the gift of " that meat which endureth unto ever-
lasting life" (John vi. 27) ; so, in the case before us, was the water from the rock, this
supernatural water, an emblem and token of a supply in God for the satisfaction of
spiritual thirst, and a pledge to his people that this supply would actually be made
available for their wants.

n. The chidinq (vers. 1 — 5). The behaviour of the people (making all allowance
for their sore necessity) showed how little they had profited by past experiences of
God's kindness. 1. They chided with Moses. This is, they blamed, rebuk^ reproved,
reproached him for having brought them into this unhappy situation. How unreason-
able was this, to chide with Moses, when they knew that in every step by which he had
led them, Moses had only done God's bidding. It was God's arrangements they were
quarrelling with, not the arrangements of Moses. But it is usually in this indirect way
that murmuring against God, and rebellion against his wUl are carried on. Because of this
chiding of the people, the place was called Meribah (ver. 7). 2. They asked Moses for
the impossible. They said, " Give us water to drink (ver. 2). Here was further unrea-
sonableness. They knew very well that Moses could not give them water. There was
none to give. Probably they meant that he should supply their wants loy miracle. If so,
the spirit of their demand was wholly unbecoming. (1) They addressed themselves
to Moses, not to God. They ought to have addressed themselves to God, but they
did not. (2) They did not in a becoming manner os/c for the water, but violently
demanded it. (3) The demand was made in a spirit of unbelief. This is evident from
verse 7 — " they tempted the Lord, saying. Is the Lord among us, or not ? " They did
not believe that water could be provided for them. 3. They taunted Moses with a
design to kill them. This was a further disclosure of their unbelief. Twice, on
previous occasions, they had made the same complaint, ostensibly against Moses, but
really against God (ch. xiv. 11 ; xvi. 3), and twice had God shown them how unfounded
were their ungenerous suspicions. He had saved them from the Egyptians. He had
supplied them with bread. Could they not now trust him to supply them with water ?
Perhaps, as a writer has remarked, had the combination of circumstances been exactly
the same as before, their hearts would not have failed them. " But when are combina-
tions of circumstances exactly the same ? and when the new combination arises, the
old faith is apt to fail " (Gibson on the miracle at Marah, " the Mosaic Era "). This, how-
ever, was part of the design, to reveal the Israelites to themselves, and show them the
strength of this " evil heart of unbelief" within them, which was ever prompting them
anew to depart from the living God (Heb. iii. 12). We have equal need to beware of
its operations in ourselves. 4. They were Wee tu stone Moses. Moses speaks, in verse
6, as one driven to his wits' end by the unreasonableness and violence of the mob. He
did, however, the right thing — betook himself in his strait to God. There is perhaps
no prayer, which in the discharge of public duties, servants of God are more frequently
tempted to offer, or do offer with greater heartiness than this, that they " may be deli-
vered from unreasonable and wicked men ; for all men have not faith " (2 Thess. iii. 2).

III. The deliverance (vers. 5, 6). God, as before, grants a supply for the people's
wants. By bringing streams out of the rock for them, and causing waters to run down
Uke rivers (Ps. Ixxviii. 15, 16 ; Is. xlviii. 21), he showed bow wanton and ungrateful had
been their suspicions of him, and bow foolishly they had limited his power. Notice —
1. God's loving-kindness in this gift. This was very marked, when we remember how
•oon the people had forgotten previous mighty works. (1) The water was given with-
out chiding and rebuke. Save, indeed, as it was itself the most pointed of all rebuke*
of the unbelief of the murmurers. They had chided with Moses; but God, in return,
does not chide with them. He is merciful to their unrighteousness, and seeks to over-



64 THE BOOK OP EXODUa [ch. xm. 1— ^t.



oome it by showering on tliem his undeserved benefits. He does not return thena oril
for evU, but seeks to overcome their evil with his good. It is the same loving-kindness
which we see in the GospeL God seeks to conquer us by love. (2) The gift was
jjentifuL All scripture allusions to the miracle confirm this idea (Ps. Ixxviii. 20 j
cv. 41; Is. xlviii. 21). The tradition was, that the waters continued to flow, and
followed the Israelites wherever they went. The Kabbins had a fable that the rock itself^
in some way, accompanied the people in their journeys. In a figure, or parabolically
even this was true, for the real rock was Goii himself, whose presence and agency in the
miracle is denoted by the words, " Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock
in Horeb " (ver. 6). It was probably in the parabolic sense that the Rabbins iised the
expression. 2. The manner of the gift. This is to be carefully noted. (1)_ Elders
were to be taken as witnesses of the transaction (ver. 5). This denoted that in what
he did, God was looking beyond the immediate supply of the people's bodily wants.
The design was, of course, to secure for posterity a properly authenticated account of
the miracle. The importance attached to evidence in this whole series of transactions
is very marked (cf chs. iv. 1 — 10 ; vii. 9). A similar importance is attached to evidence
in the law (Deut. xvii. 6, 7; xix. 15 — 21). This suggests to us how far we are, in
believing scripture, from relying on " cuimingly-devised fables " (2 Pet. L 16). God took
pains that his mighty works should not lack contemporary authentication. Christ, in
like manner, took security for the transmission to posterity of a faithful account of his
words and works, by appointing twelve apostles (Luke xxiv. 48 ; Acts i. 21, 22).
What additional confidence all this inspires in the historic ground-work of our religion I
The direction for the appointment of formal witnesses had no doubt in view the
character of the miracle as a pledge and type of spiritual blessings. As myths, these
miracles might still suggest to us certain spiritual ideas ; but their value would be gone
as Divine acts, fiositively pledging the Divine fulness for the supply of " all the need "
of the children of faith. (2) Moses was to work the miracle by means of the rod
(ver. 5). The rod appears here as the symbol of the authority with which Moses was
invested, and also as the vehicle of the Divine power. The personal character ol
Moses sinks in this miracle as nearly out of sight as possible. God stands before him
on the rook, and is all in all in the cleaving of it, and giving of the water. God is
everything, Moses nothing. (3) The rock was to be smitten (ver. G). The distinction
made between this miracle and that at Kadesh in the 40th year (Num. xx. 7 — 12j,
where the rock was only to he spoken to, shows conclusively that the act of smiting was
meant to be significant. The smiting was, first, a cleaving of the way for the passage of
the waters, which otherwise would not have flowed, as contrasted, in the later miracle,
with a renewal of what was practically the same supply. God would plainly have the
people recognise a continuity in the supply of water at different stages of the journey,
the outward rock merging in the spiritual and invisible one from which the supply
really came, and which was with them at aU times and places (cf. 1 Cor. x. 4). But
this is not the whole. The singular fact remains that the rock was to be smitten, and
smitten vrith the rod wherewith " thou smotest the river." In other words, the way
was to be opened for the waters by an act of violence, the smiting here, as in the
case of the river, almost necessarily suggesting judgment. If there were indeed in this
any typical allusion to the actual mode in which Uving waters were to be given to the
world, viz. by the smiting of the rock Christ, it must have remained an enigma till
later prophecies, and ultimately the event itself, threw light upon it. 'Ihere is, how-
ever, nothing extravagant in believing that this form was given of design to the
transaction, that, when the truth was known, believing minds, reverting to this smitten
rock, mig' t find in it all the more apt and suggestive an emblem of the great facts of
their redemption. 3. Its spiritual teaching. The rock points to Christ (1 Cor. x. 4).
The waters which flowed from it, accordingly, are to be taken, not simply as streams of
literal refreshment for the Israelites, but spiritually, typically, symboUcally — ^may we
not almost say sacramentally ? — as representative of spiritual blessings. So, in the
above-cited passage, the apostle calls ihe water " spiritual drink," even as the manna was
" spuitual meat " (1 Cor. x. 3, 4). See below. We may extend the figure, and think
of Christ, in turn, smiting with his cross the bard rock of the human heart, and causing
living waters to flow forth from it (cf. John vii. 38). While this obvious lesson if
taught in addition, that in providing and mlnistei-ing spiritual refreehmeut to his peo^^



ttLZTii.1— 7J THE BOOK OF EXODTJS. 65

God can, and will, bi«ak through the greatest outward hindrances and impediments
(of. Is. XXXV. 6).

IV. Temptino God. " They tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us or
not?" (ver. 7). The peculiarity of this sin of Bephidim deserves to be carefully noted.
Bephidim, it is true, is not the only instance of it ; but it is the outstanding and typical
one, and, as such, is frequently alluded to in Scripture (of. Deut. vi. 16 ; Ps. xov. 8, 9 ;
Heb. iii. 8, 9). The allusion in Ps. Ixxviii. 18, 19 — " They tempted God in their heart
by asking meat for their lust. Yea, they spake against God ; they said. Can God
furnish a table in the wilderness?" is to the incident in Num. xi. Comparing the
different scripture references to this sin of " tempting," it will be found that both in
the Old and New Testaments, it is invariably connected with the idea of proposing
tests to God, of putting him in some way to the proof, of prescribing to him conditions
of action, compliance or non-compliance with which is to settle the question of his con-
tinued right to our trust and obedience. It is the spirit which challenges God, and is
even peremptory in its demand that he shall do as it requires, if, forsooth, he is not
to &11 in its esteem. It is, as in the gospels (Matt. xvi. 1, etc.), the sign-seeking spirit,
which, not satisfied with the ordinary evidences, demands exceptional ones, and lays
down conditions on which belief in the revealed word is to be made to depend. Cf.
Kenan's demand for "a commission, composed of physiologiE.,s, physicists, chemists,
and persons accustomed to historical criticism," to sit in judgment on the miracles
(" Life of Jesus," Introduction). It is, in short, the spirit which requires from God
proofs of his faithfulness and love other than those which he has been pleased to give
us, and which even presumes to dictate to him what these proofs shall be. It is, therefore,
a spirit which carries distrust on the face of it, and is, besides, daringly presumptuous
and irreverent. This fiirnishes the key to Christ's second temptation in the wilderness.
It was a temptation to put his father's care and faithfulness to the test by casting
himself down from the pinnacle of the temple (Matt. iv. 5 — 8). And he repelled it by
quoting the passage in Deuteronomy which alludes to this sin of Massah, " Ye shall
not tempt the Lord your God " (Deut. vi. 16). It is forgotten by those who are guilty
of this sin, that God brings us into situations of trial, not that we may test him, but
that he may test us. Professor TyndaU's proposal of a prayer- test may be cited as a not
irrelevant illustration of the type of transgression referred to. — J. 0.

Ver. 6. — " That rock was Clirist." In the statement of Paul — " They drank of that
spiritual Bock that followed them, and that Bock was Christ " (1 Cor. x. 4) — ^we have
a clear assertion of the typical character of this transaction at Bephidim. We may
either suppose the term " Bock " in the first clause to be used by metonymy for the
water which flowed from the rock, or we may understand the allusion to be to him of
whom the rock was bat a symbol, and who did accompany the Israelites in their
wanderings, abundantly supplying their wants. The latter view, which conserves the
grain of truth in the Babbinical traditions above referred to, to which the apostle
seems to make allusion, is most in keeping with the further statement, " that Bock was
Christ." An interesting comparison is with the words of Christ himself, when, on " the
last day, that great day of the feast," he " stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink" (John vii. 37). The libation of water from the pool
of Siloam, which was a ceremony connected with the feast of tabernacles, and which
most commentators take to be the subject of Christ's allusion in these memorable
words, was commemorative of this miraculous supply of water in the desert. Dr.
Godet goes further, and takes this passage in Exodus to be itself the " scripture" (John
vii. 38), and the bringing of the water from the rock the event, which Jesus had in view
when he gave his invitation. " Why," he siys, " should not Jesus, instead of stopping
at the embleiu, go back to the Divine fact which this rite commemorated. ....
He had in ch. ii. (of John's Gospel) represented himself as the true temple, in ch. iii.
lis the truB brazen serpent, in ch. vi. as the bread of heaven ; in ch. vii. he is the true
rock : in ch. viii. he will be the true light-giving cloud, and so on tiU ch. xii., when
he will at length realise the type of the Paschal Lamb" (Godet on John viL 37). The
points to be noted here are these : —

I. Human nature is in a condition of thibst. Its state is figured by that of
the Israelites in the desert. It thirsts for a satisfaction which the world cannot give it.

BZOSUI— U. '



THE BOOK OP EXODUS. oh- »▼"■ *""'•



Oire man all of the world he asks for, and still his soul is deeply athirst. Hu
increasing cry is, who will show us any good ? (Ps. iv. 6), Lea/rning does not satisfy
this thirst (Ecclesiastes, Goethe's "Faust"). Pleaswres do not satisfy it (Byron's
"Childe Harold"). Colonel Gardiner told Dr. Doddridge how, on one occasion, when
his companions were congratulating him on his distinguished felicity, a dog happening
to come into the room, he could not help groaning inwardly, and saying to himself,
•■ Oh, that I were that dog." Riches do not satisfy it. It is, however, when spiritual
awakening comes, and the sinner is brought to realise his true condition as alienated
from the life of God, that his thirst enters on the phase which makes satisfaction of it
possible. It is now spiritual thirst — thirst for pardon, for holiness, for salvation.
Note, in passing, how this deep-seated thirst of man testifies to his spiritual dignity.
If man is merely a natural being — ^the highest of the animals — why does not nature
satisfy him? Why are all things thus full of labour — the eye not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing (Eccles. i. 8) ? The mere animal is easily
satbfied, and returns into its rest. How different with man 1 His bodily com-
forts may be every one attended to ; his senses fiUcd with gratefiil pleasures ; his
imagination fed with the most gorgeous images of beauty ; his intellect stored with the
facts and laws of every department of finite science, but all does not slake the thirst of
his spirit. His soul still cries, " Give, give; I want not this, nor this; give me livirig
water, of which, if a man drink he wUl never thirst again."

II. Christ is the satisfaction or this thirst. He says — " If any man thirst, let
him come unto me and drink " (John viL 37). He understands better than any one
else the nature, causes, and intensity of our thirst, yet he promises to gratify it. And
who that puts his word to the test is ever sent disappointed away ? His salvation is
found by every one that tries it, to have really this property of quenching spiritual
thirst. He meets the special thirst of the sinful soul, by satisf^ng its desires for
pardon and holiness. He meets the more fundamental thirst of our nature — the thirst
for blessed life — ^by admitting us to fellowship with himself, the perfect embodi-
ment of truth, purity, aud goodness ; by giving us a true end in our existence ; by
fiirnishing the soul, in the living God (1) with a spiritual object, congruous to
its own nature ; (2) with an adequate object, capable of filling and occupying
all its powers; (3) with a living object, in communion with whom it specially
attains to the blessedness of life eternal : finally, by imparting to us, in fiillest measure,
the influences of the Spirit, source of all light, joy, strength, and powers of holy
obedience.

III. Christ satisfies this thirst in virtue of his havino been smitten. It was
only as a rock "smitten" that Jesus could yield waters of salvation to mankind.
Atonement must be made for sins. The Christ must be smitten for the transgressions
of the world. He came tc save. He must appear as the Lamb of Gkid, that taketh
•way the sin of the world (John i. 29). Jesus was thus smitten in the garden and on
Calvary. John notes how fi:om his wounded side there came forth the water and the
blood (John xix. 34, 35). " lock of Ages," etc.

IV. The waters of Christ's salvation are free and plentiful. 1. Free.
"Ho, every one that thirsteth " etc. (Is. Iv. 1), "Whosoever will" (Rev. xxiL 17),
2. Plentiful. " Preach the Gospel to every creature " (Mark xvL 15).— J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 7. — Christ our Spring. " They drank of that spiritual rock," etc. [1 Cor.
X. 4). Introduction may deal with the following important items, as all leading up to
the theme of the homily — the journey fiom Sin to Bephidim (Num. xxxiii. 12 — 14),
the incidents connected with fiirnishing water out of the rock — the fact that the
water may have followed Israel for at least a few stations — and on that fact (not on the
Babbinical legend) found the New Testament application of the Apostle Paul — ^which
justifies us in speaking here of Christ as The Eternal Spring of ffefreshment to all
believers. Expound tlje connection of 1 Cor. x. 4 ; thus : — By passing under the cloud
and through the sea " our fathers " were baptised unto Moses, committed to him as to a
leader, they being his disciples. Thereupon two necessities — ^bread and water — ^both in
a spiritual sense found in Christ. Even in the desert the water came not ao much
from the rock, as from the Lord of the rock : i.e. Christ.

L Thk iouL NEEDS REFRESHMENT — ».«., not Only food for strength, but spiritual



Jii. xvn. 1—7.] THE BOOK OP BXODU& M

influences for refreshment. Show from Chnstian experience how many and powerful
are the causes of depression, weariness, and fainting.

II. Out of the bock — Christ— repbbshmbnt spbhtob. Refreshment does come
from time to time to the faint. (See Dr. Raleigh on refreshing influences of " The
Dew," in " Quiet Resting Places," p. 34 — 37.) But the cause is Christ, the living and
the ever near. As to tlie way in which the ministration comes, it does not concern
us much to point out ; enough to know the fact. StiU there are many channels of
this grace, e.g., a gleam of morning sunshine, the song of a bird, the pleasant letter
of a friend, etc. etc. Channels of the grace, mark I But what is the water itself? See
John vii. 37, 38, 39. " This spake he of the Hpirit," etc. The water is the consolation
of the Spirit ; and the rook (from whom proceeds the Spirit) is Christ.

III. The refreshment springs in unlikely places. As out of the very desola-
tions of Rephidim came the water; so out of our very sorrows come our deepest
oonsolations.

IV. The rook — Christ — ever follows us. Here give the fable of the Rabbis ;
and show that in it there was a deeper truth than the liabbis knew. Paul saw it.
The refreshments of the Spirit are not like angels' visits ; for tlie Dispenser of tha
grace is never far away.

V. We a^b refreshed that wk mat befresh. See John vii. 38. " Out of hii
belly," etc.— R.

Vers. 1 — 7. The giving of water in Rephidim. L Observe how thb people oamb to
Rephidim. There is a distinct intimation that it was according to the commandment of
Jehovah. He it was who led them where there was no water to drink, and equally he
must have given them the intimation to pitch their tents. And we who read the narra-
tive are not at all discomposed on learning that there was no water in this place of
encampment. We remember how God has already shown that his ways are not as men's
ways, by taking his people where they were entangled in the land, and the wilderness
shut them in (ch. xiv. 3). And we are sure that as he then showed what men count
folly to be the highest vrisdom, so it would prove again. Water is a necessity, and when
Jehovah takes his people where there is no water to drink, it must be under the compul-
sion of a still higher necessity. If water had been one of the chief things to consider,
the people would never have gone to Rephidim at alL But at present the great matter
for consideration was Sinai, the mountain where the people were to serve God. Every-
thing else was in subordination to the sojourn at Sinai. God could bring Rephidim to
Sinai, and he did so when he caused Moses to smite the rock ; but it wa<i not possible
to bring Sinai to Rephidim.

II. Observe their first request, and the answer of Moses. "Give us water th»t
we may drink." The mere words, of com-se, tell us nothing as to the spirit of the
request. In certain circumstances such a request would be innocent and natural enough.
Jesus began his conversation with the woman at the well by asking .her for a drink of
water. The request here, however, was evidently expressed in a complaining, chiding
tone ; and we can only understand it as we come to study the rejoinder of Moses. That
rejoinder shows how ne is becoming more and more alarmed at the perils into which the
unbelief of the people is taking them. They are still looking towards Moses ; they
cannot be got to understand that he is as much dependent on the cloudy pillar as are the
rest of them. Him who had been given to help and encourage their faith, they treat in
such a way that he becomes a stumbling-block. Hence he tries his best to move away
their thoughts from himself to Jehovah, with whose long-suffering he warns them that
they are making very presumptuous and perilous experiments. They are on dangerous
ground, and none the less dangerous because they tread it with such profane unconcern.
There had now been seveial trials of the Divine long-suffering in the short time since
they had left Egypt (ch. xiv. 11, xv. 24, xvi. 3, 20, 27); and through all these God had
moved gently, providing and protecting, even in the midst of their unbelief. But this
gentleness of dealing could not go ou fur ever ; and Moses felt it was quite time to warn
them, so that none in Israel might delude themselves with the notion that whatever
they said and however they complained Jehovah would not smite them.

III. In dub course, there is a second appeal to Moseb. Their first request
I to have come immediately on encamping. They look round with an instiijotivi

f 2



THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xvn. 1— I



feeling for the water supplv ; and, missing it, they ask for it. Then they wait awhile j
and, of course, the longer they wait the more thirst hegins to assert itself. Their children
ery ; and all the cattle signify, in an equally impressive way, their want of water.
(Eememher what a terrible calamity the want of water is in eastern countries.) No
wonder then that increasing thirst drove the Israelites to the bitter complainings of ver. 3
It was not without a profound reason in the plans of God that waterless Eephidim
lay so near Sinai. He will make his people to know the utter privations that belong
to Eephidim as well as the bitterness of Marah and the abundance of Elim. Thus they
passed in a very remarkable way, and in a very short time, through three great repre-
sentative experiences with regard to the resources of nature. 'I hey found those resources
existent but impaired at Marah ; well-nigh perfnot at Elim ; and at Kephidim alto-
gether absent. Then, to add further to the significance of Eephidim, God made the
people to wait there till their want of water became Uttle short of agony. Not that he
delights in inflicting pain ; but pain is often needful to teach great lessons. He seems
to have made them wait longer at Eephidim where there was no water, than at Marah
where the water was only bitter. Hence the exasperation, defiance, almost despair
which find utterance in their second cry. For all they can see, they are on the point of
death ; they, their children and their cattle. And yet this very reference — excusable as
it might be in their half-maddened state — suggested at once its own confutation. Gtod
had worked by special interventions to bring those very children and cattle out of Egypt
faltact. Those &st-bom especially, for whom the lamb had been slain and the blood
■prinkled, was it likely they would perish from a thing so entirely within Divine
eontrol as lack of water ? The truth seems to be that one more great discovery had to
be made by Israel before they came to Sinai. They had known Jehovah appearing to
them in bondage and more and more manifesting his power; giving them at last
an exceeding abundant dehverance from bondage and overwhelming their great enemy
in all his strength. These were all completed experiences. There remained one thing
more, namely that they should be made to feel their dependence on Jehovah for bread
And water. That dependence must be taught in the most practical way, before he pro-
ceeded formally to ask as he did at Sinai, for the unreserved regard and obedience of his

iV. This ocoasion evidentlt became the means of drati no Moses himself
REABEB TO GoD. We feel that he was comiug into peril from tht exasperated people.
They were, indeed, past all argument and expostulation — suffering t emselves, and made
more frantic still by the cries of their children and the threatei ed damage to their

Eroperty. So here again we see how Moses' own path was the path of faith. Jehovah
as ever some fresh revelation of power to deepen the impression already made on the
mind of his servant with regard to his omnipotence. Moses must be brought to feel
by all sorts of illustrations that God can do everything which is not by its very nature
impossible and which does not contradict his own character.

V. Obsekve the method of sdpplt. 1. Ood has the elders called out from am<mg
the people. Thus, for his own purposes, he stiU further extends the period of waiting.
Possibly it was through these very elders, chosen and responsible men among the people,
that the complaints and threats had come. The Israelites, even in their unbelief and
worldliness, did not degenerate into a rabble. They had their leaders, whom they chose,
recognised from the human point of view, as well as that leader whom (Jod had sent,
and whom they so often had despised and rejected. The time had come to make these
elders feel their responsibility. Many who made light of Moses looked to them ; and
according to the way they spoke and acted, they would do much either to produce faith
throughout the people, or, on the other hand, to produce unbelief. 2. God brings the
rod mice more into requisition, and as he does, makes a special connection of it with one
accomplished work in particular. With that rod Moses had been the means of smiting
the river and turning it to blood ; the import of the reference evidently being that water
everywhere is under the Divine control. By this time there must surely have been
neat virtue in the sight of the rod to call forth faith and expectation. Hitherto it had
been used to destroy — ^it delivered, indeed, at the same time that it destroyed — but now it
ia called to a work of immixed beneficence. AH that had been done so far was rio'ht and
Becessary ; but it is well that there should now be one work of the rod which, in blessing
UmA, does not inflict harm on a single human being. 3. The fourc* whence the voatei



HH. xvn. 1— 7.] THE BOOK OF EXUUUS.



comet. From a rock. The smiting, of course, was simply a symbolic action, just as tiM
smiting of the water was. It was not as if some blow had been struck, suddenly opening
up a hidden reservoir. What God did here by smiting he commanded, at a later (Uite, to
be done by speaking. (Num. xx. 8.) The water came, and was to be understood as coming,
from a most unlikely place. Did we know more of the details, more as to the kind of rock
that was smitten and the way in which the water gushed forth, we might be even more
deeply impressed with the miracle. It may not be goiog too far to say that no amount
of excavating or tunnelling would have got water from that rock. He who turned the
water to blood made water to flow from an arid rock in some altogether mysterious
way. Doubtless many of the Israelites were beginning to think that it was with a
rocky God they had to deal ; a hard, unsympathising Deity ; that, in short, they had
exchanged a human Pharaoh for a Divine one. And so God shows them that even the
rock holds unexpected, abundant, and exactly appropriate blessings. The rock at Meribah
was a good symbol of Jehovah for the time. He had already presented to the people
much that was in aspect stern and unyielding ; and he would have to do this still more
in the fiiture. And yet in the midst of all neoeasiiry hardness, he took care to refresh
his people with gracious comforts and promises. He who demands that everything shall
he done in righteousness, truth, and profound reverence for his will, is by no means one
of those tyrants who seek to reap where they have not sown. Rather does he take his
people into circumstances seemingly the most unfavourable, seeking there to teach
them how, if they only sow a spirit of faith, obedience, and expectation, they shall reap
a sufBcient and steady supply for all their daily wants.

VI. Observe the name that was given to the place. Massah and Meribah.
These words did not so much mark the power and providence of God as the unbelieving,
self-regarding spirit of the people. This they constantly needed to be reminded of. It
might well happen that some of the more sanguine would say, " We shall never be
unbelievers again ; we shall go with confidence into any place whatever, whither the
Lord may lead us." And so these warning names are fixed for them to look back
upon. The unbelief of the people was not to be lost in the glory of the Divine action,
as if it were a thing of no consequence. We cannot dispense with any recollection of
the past, however disagreeable it may be, which keeps before us our own deficiencies,
and impresses upon us the need of constant humility. — T.

Ver. 7. — They tempted Ood in the desert. Illustration. Giild cries ; parent sends
for doctor ; pleasant medicine is prescribed. Later the child cries again ; cry is appa-
rently addressed to parent, but real aim is to see if the doctor will give more pleasant
medicine. Chiding with the parent is a cover for experimenting upon the doctor.
H( re — ^previous murmuring against Moses had resulted (xvi. 2 — 5) in food from God.
I'he people would see whether like conduct might not leaid to a like result ; they chode
with Moses, but, in reality, they were tempting — trying experiments upon — God.
Notice : —

L The cHiniNa (ver. 2). An outward manifestation of displeasure against the visible
leader. Why should Moses have brought them, thirsting, to this barren an^ inhospit-
able spot? The fact that their journeys were "according to the comma_dmrnt of
Jehovah " (ver. 1) is altogether forgotten or ignored. Not a rare offence : the people,
displeased, blame the minister, quite forgetting that he has a master other than them-
selves. Churches are called Eben-ezers and the like; they might often as truiy bo
called Meribahs. The question which must be put in such cases is one not easy to
answer : " Why strive ye with mef" The answer is involved in that other question
which few grumblers care to face— "Why do ye tempt Jehovah?" Chiding can only
be passed on with the motive which inspires it to its true object ; he who tries to
answer it otherwise does but stand in God's light, doing that which Joash declined to
do for Baal (Judges vi. 31), and which, with yet more reason, God's servants had best
abstain from in his cause.

H. The temptation. The inner motive for the outward manifestation was to s«e
whether (Jod was really among them, and would indicate his presence by supporting
his servant. He had given quails and bread, would he now shield Moses by supplying
the demand for water? Observe— 1. The favourable side of the offence. The peopU
wmembered that God had helped, whence they inferred that he might help again.



iO THE BOOK OJ EXODUS. [ch. xvu. 1- '<

Memory fed hope. So far it was welL Memory, however, was but half instructed
The remembered gift was more thought of than the giver. Hope was not faith ; it
oould not prompt the prayer of faith. God was not regarded as he should have been,
and consequeuuy men could net state their needs with confidence, " nothing doubting."
2. The un/avowrable side of the offence. Jehovah, they thought, was the friend, if of
any one, of Moses. They regarded him as a being apart, quite as likely to be their
enemy as the enemy of the Egyptians. Perhaps, however, if they put his friend in
difficulties, to help his fnend he might appease them. Is not the same thought latent
still in like cases ? " If the minister is a good man, God will help him, and we shall
be the gainers. If not, we shall get quit of him, and possibly his successor may remedy
lus defects." A kind of witches' ordeal from which the accusers hope to profit any way.
Trouble should strengthen trust, and when it does, trust will be rewarded. Beware,
however, lest imperfect trust take the form of temptation. God will justify his own
elect, but experiments made on him are apt to recoil on the experimenters.

III. Thb BES0LT (vers. 5, 6). The people spoke at God instead of to him. Moses,
instead of being the channel for their prayers, was the rock whence might echo their
complaints. God, in answer, draws himself yet further off from the complainers. They
get their water ; but they lose that which they might have had as well, the sense of the
presence of their God. The experiment was successful, physical thirst was slaked ; it
was also a disastrous failure : instead of gaining a strong assurance that Gh>d was
indeed among them, they gained rather a confirmation of their suspicion that he was
not among them, but at a distance.

Condusion. — Beware how you tempt God. Whether is it better to endure discom-
fort and have a nearer sense of his presence, or to escape discomfort and endure his
absence ? Thirst endured trustfully must have brought the Israelites such a realisation
of the Divine presence as would have quenched, what was worse than thirst, the irre-
pressible desire to murmur. Temporary satisfaction then, as ever, thus obtained, led on
to yet deeper doubt. — G.

Vers. 1 — 7. — Triid and failure. I. The purpose of EEOURRnio tbialb. Israel,
tried before at Marah, is now led from the comforts of Elim to the thirsty land oi
Eephidim. They might have learned something of their own heart and of God's
unfailing goodness, and now they are led hither that he may prove whether they will
serve him or no. Trial comes that the teachings of truth may be changed into the
convictions of trust.

II. Israel's crime. 1. It was not unbelief, but impums presumption. They
demand water, believing that it can be produced. They regard themselves as having
a right to the choicest of God's blessings. This presumptuous claim lies in the heart oi
all unbelief 2. Their accusation of Moses and of God (ver. 3). They have belief but
no prayer, no trust, only strife and bitterness. (1) Their Ijase ingratitude. All past
mercies are blotted out because of a little present suffering. (2) Their blindness. Ihey
might have asked themselves whether there was cause for this rebuke. (3) Their
stubbornness. They refiised to bow themselves in prayer, or even to ask Moses to
intercede for them. (4) Their readiness to entertain the grossest suggestions of
doubt.

III. God's lono-sdffering. 1. Their murmuring is met with help. He might
have proved himself to be among them by his judgments ; but he gives them water from
the flinty rock. Not till mercy has done her utmost is judgment let loose against his
people. 2. He labours to estabUsh their faith in himself. The elders are taken as
witnesses, and the rock is smitten with the rod of God.

(Second sketch.) I. A picture of the seekers after moral improvement who do
NOT FOLLOW THB PATHWAY OF FAITH. 1. Their unqueuched thirst. 2. Their despair.
It had been better for them, they say, that the desire to go forth had never been
awakened ; that the quest after a better country had never been entered upon. 3. Theb
cry, "Is the Lord among us or not?" Does God take thought of us? Is there a
God ? How often has youthful earnestness come to rest at last in the blankest
unbelief I

II. A picTUBB OF Christ, the answer to the sbekbb'b need. 1. The livin"
rock, the changeless one, the sure fbundation. 2. How he is made to ub the fountaip



SB. XVII. 8 — 16.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



of living waters : he is smitten by the rod of God on behalf of the sinful. 3. Th«
water " followed them." Christ's consolations the one perennial stream for refreshment
and strength. 4. How he may be found: by following the guidance of tJbosa who
testify of him. — ^U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 8 — 16. — ^Thb wab with Amalek.
The Amalekites seem to have been descendants
of Amalek, the grandson of Esau (Gen. xxxvi.
12). They separated themselves off from the
other Edomites at an early date, and became
the predominant tribe in the more northern
parts of the Sinaitic peninsula, claiming and
exercising a sovereignty over the whole of the
desert country between the borders of Pales-
tine and Egypt. We do not find the name
Amalek in the Egyptian records; but the
people are probably represented by the Meutu,
with whom so many of the early Egyptian
kings contended. The Pharaohs dispossessed
them of the north-western portion of the moun-
tain region ; but they probably claimed the
•uierainty of the central hills and valleys,
which the Egjrptians never occupied ; and on
these they no doubt set a high value as afford-
ing water and pasture for their flocks during
the height of summer. When the Israehtes
pressed forward into these parts, the Amale-
kites, in spite of the fact that they were a
kindred race, determined on giving them
battle. They began by "insidiously attacking
the rear of the Hebrew army, when it was ex-
hausted and weary" (Dent. xxv. 18). Having
cnt off many stragglers, they attacked the
main body at Eephidim, in the Wady-
Feiran, and fought the long battle which the
text describes (vers. 10 — 13). The result was
the complete discomfiture of the assailants,
who thenceforth avoided all contact with Israel
until attacked in their turn at the southern
frontier of Canaan, when, in conjunction with
the Canaanites, they were victorious (Num.
xiv. 45). A bitter and long continued enmity
followed. Aitialek, " the first of the nations"
to attack Israel (ib. xxiv. 20), was pursued
with unrelenting hostility (Deut.xxv. 17 — 19),
defeated repeatedly by Saul and David (1 Sam.
xiv. 48 ; XV. 7 ; xxvii. 8 ; xxx. 17 ; 2 Sam.
viii. 12) ; the last remnant of the nation being
finally destroyed by the Simeonites in the
reign of king Hezekiah, as related by the
inthorof Chronicles (1 Chr. iv. 41—43)

Ver. 8 — ^Ihen oame Amalek, The bulk o



the Amalekites would have been passing the
spring in the lower plains, where herbage is
abundant after the eaily rains, while later in
the year it dries up. They would hear of the
threatened occupation of their precious sum-
mer pastures by the vast host of the Hebrews,
and would seek to preveut it by blocking the
way. Hence they are said to have " come" —
«.e.,tohave marched into a position where they
were not previously, though it was one situated
within their country. We must remember
that they were nomads. And fought with
Israel. Fur the natuie of the fighting on the
first day, see Deut. xxv. 18 ; by which it ap-
pears that the original attack was made on
the rear of the long column, and was successful.
The Amalekites " smote the hindmost" of
the Israelites, " even all that were feeble be-
hind them, when they were faint and weary."
Ver. 9. — And Moses said to Joshua. On
hearing what had happened. Moses summoned
to his presence an Epiiraimite in the prime of
life — about 45 years old — and devolved on
him the military command. The man's nama
at the tune was Hoshea or Oshea (Num. xiii.
8). He was the son of a certain Nun (tbid.)
or Non (1 Chr. vii. 27), and the tenth in
descent from Ephraim, the son of Joseph
(ib. 23 — 27). Some forty years later Mose*
changed his name from Hoshea to Jehoshua
which became contracted into Joshua. The
occurrence of this form in the present
passage may be accounted for. 1. By Moses
having written (or reviewed) Exodus late in
his life ; or 2. By a later authorised reviser
(Ezra ?) having altered the text. Choose out
for us men — i.e. " Select from the congrega-
tion such a number of fit men as appear tu
thee sufiicient, and with them fight Amalek."
To-morrow. It was probably evening, when
Moses heard of the attack on his rear, and
there was consequently no possibility of re-
trieving the disaster till the next day. He
could but make his arrangements for retriev-
ing it. I will stand on the top of the hill.
It is implied that there wa.i a conspicuous hill
(gibeah), not a rock (<»«r) in the near vicinity
of Eephidim, whence Moses could see tha
fight, and be seen by those engaged in it
Dean Stanley finds all the conditions answered
by an eminence on the south side of the Wady
Feiran (^Sinai and Paletitine, p. 41). Others
suggest the Jebel Tahuneh north of the same
wEuiy. With the rod of Ood in my hand.
Moses meant to indicate by this, that h«
looked for victory to God alone, and did mat



THB BOOK OP EXODUS.



[oh. xvn. 8— 16k



Inut in an "arm of flesh," while, nererthelen,
k« sent his soldieia to the comhat.

Yer. 10. — ^Hnr. Hnr has not been men-
tioned hitherto. According to one Jewish
tradition, he was the son, according to
another, the husband of Miriam. Scriptnre
sniy tells ns of him, that he was descended
from judah, through Caleb the son of Hezron
(1 Clir. ii. 18 — 20), and that his grandson,
Bezaleel, was the artificer of the tebemacle
(Ex. xxxi. 2). He is again associated with
Aaron in ch. xxir. 11.

Yer. 11. — ^When Hoses held np bis hand,
,. . Israel prevailed. The elevation of
Moses' hand, with the rod held in it, was an
appeal to God for aid, and must be supposed
to have been accompanied by fervent prayer
to God, that he would help his people and
give them victory over their enemies. So
kmg as the hand was upraised, the Israelites
prevailed ; not because tbej saw it, and took
it as directing them to continue the fight
(Kalisch), but because God gave them
strength, and vigour and courage, while Moses
interceded, and left them to themselves when
the intercession ceased. It may be said, that
Moses might have continued to pray, though
his hands were weary; but only fliose who
have tried, Imow how difficult a thing it
is to pray with any intensity foi a con-
tinuance. Probably Moses' spiritual and
physical powers collapsed together ; and when
be dropped his hand through physical fatigne,
he rested also from his mental effort. To im-
press upon Israel the importance of interces-
iory prayer, God made success and failure
•Uemate with its continuance and discon-
tinuance, thus teaching his people a lesson of
inestimable value.

Yer. 12. — Bnt Hoses' hands vreie heavy.
Moses, no doubt, held the rod alternately with
one hand and ihe other, until both were so
tired that he could hold them up no longer.
It is this natural weariness which is expressed
by the words — "his hands were heavy."
When Aaron and Hur perceived this, they
brought a stone for him to sit on, and then,
standing one on either side of him, alternately
•npported his hands untU the sun set and the
battle was over. To reward the faith and
perseverance of the three, God gave Israel in
the and a complete victoiy.



Yer. IS. — Amalek and his people— i.e. " tht
Amalekites proper, and the tribes subject to
them, who fought on their side."

Ver. 14. — ^Write this in a book. Iht

original has, " Write this in (Zte book." It il
clear that a book already existed, in which
Moses entered events of interest, and that now
he was divinely commanded to record in it
the great victory over Amalek, and the threat
uttered against them. The record was to be
for a memorial — 1. that the victory itself
might be held in remembrance through all
future ages, as a very signal instance of God's
mercy ; and 2, that when the fulfilment of
the threat came (1 Chr. iv. 43), God might
have his due honour, and his name be glorified.
Behearse it in the ears of Joshua. " Hand
down," t.e., to thy successor, Joshua, the
tradition of perpetual hostility with Amalek,
and the memory of the promise now made,
that the whole nation shall be utterly blotted
out from under heaven. (Compare Dent. xxv.
19.) The special sin of Amalek was, 1. That
he attacked God's people, not fearing God
(ib. verse 18) ; 2. That he had no compassion
on his own kmdiei ; and 3. That he fell on
them when they were already suffering afflic-
tion, and were " feeble, and faint and weaij "



'V.



'er. 15. — Hoses built an altar. An altar
naturally implies a sacrifice, and Moses may
well have thought that the signal victory
obtained required to be acknowledged, and as
it were requited, by offerings. In giving his
altar a name, he followed the example of
Jacob, who called an altar which he built, El-
Elohe-Israel (Gen. xxxiii. 20). Moses' name
for his altar, Jehovah-nissi, meant " the Lord
is my banner," and was intended to mark his
ascription of the entire honour of the victory
to Jehovah but had probably no reference to
the particular mode m which the victory was
gained.

Yer. 16. — Because the lord hath swam.
Rather, as in the margin, " Because the hand
of Amalek was against the throne of the
Lord " — " because," t.e., " in attacking Israel,
Amalek had as it were lifted up lus hand
against God on his throne," therefore should
there be war against Amalek from genentim
to generation



H0MILETIC8.

▼•w-S — IS.— The wdessneu of fighting against God. Amalek was "the flnt ol

the nations" in audacity, in venturesomeness, perhaps in military qualities, but
•carooly in prudence or longsightedness. Amalek must precipitate its quarrel with
Israel, must "come to Eephidim" and offer' battle, instead of letting Israel go- on iti
own way unmolested, and shunning a contest. They might have known thai they wera
•bout to fight against God, and that to do so is useless. None can contend with him
WMWBsfiilly. It is curious that sinners do not see this. Some of them seem to hope
to escape the notice of God; others appear to doubt his nower; a few seem to di»-



aLXTii.9— 1&] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 71

believe in his existence. The uselessness of contending against him would be generally
recognised, if men would bear in mind, as most sure-

I. That thbbb is a God, deserving of the name, the Makes and Eulbe of
THE UNIVERSE. The disbelief in a Personal God underlies much of the resistance
which men offer to his will on earth. They admit an impersonal something external
to themselves, which they call " Nature," and speak of as having immutable " laws."
These they profess to respect. But the law of righteousness, decreed by a God who is
• Person, and written by him in the hearts of his human creatures, is not among these
"laws of nature," they think, since in many people it is not found to exist. Neither to
this law, nor to the God who made it, do they profess any allegiance. They claim the
liberty to do that which is right in their own eyes. But, as surely as they are con-
founded, if they set themselves in opposition to a law of physical nature — walk on the
sea, or handle fire, or seek to fly without wings — so surely does a Nemesis attend their
efforts, if they transgress a moral law, be it the law of chastity, or of truth, or of
general kindliness, or of special regard for God's day, God's house, God's ministers,
God's people. The Amalekites attacked the last, and were overthrown. Final dis-
comfiture will assuredly overtake all who attack anything that is God's or in any way
set themselves in opposition to his wiU.

II. That God is really omnipotent. It often pleases God to allow for a time
the contradiction of sinners against himself, and even to let the ungodly enjoy a long
term of worldly prosperity. Some of the worst men have prospered during their wholi
lives, and have died at the height of earthly greatness, self-satisfied, so far as men could
see, happy. Men have questioned whether God, if really omnipoteut, could have
allowed this, and have doubted his ability to carry on a real moral government of the
entire uni^^erse. But omnijjotence is included in the very idea of God; and it is quite
inconceivable that any of uls creatures should be really able to thwart or resist him
further than he himself permits. Their very existence depends on him, and unless he
sustained them in being, they would perish at each moment. He temporarily allows
the opposition of other wills to his, not through any defect of power, but for his owi
wise purposes. Some time or other he wUl vindicate himseu, and show forth hit
Almighty power, to the utter confusion of his enemies.

III. That God is also omniscient. The Psalmist tells us (Ps. kxiii. 11) of those
who said — " Tush, how should God perceive ? Is there knowledge in the Most High ?
and, again, " God hath forgotten ; he hideth away his face, and he will never see it '
(Fs. X. 11). These are bold utterances, such as men scarcely make nowadays ; but stil
there are many who in their inmost heart seem to cherish the Epicurean notion
" Deos seourum agere asvum" that the Divinity does not care for what men do, or that
at any rate, words or thoughts are beyond his cognisance. He, however, himself
declares the contrary. "For every idle word that men shall speak they shall give
acsount." " Thou knowest the very secrets of the heart." " All things are open and
revealed unto him with whom we have to do." We cannot resist him secretly or
without his knowledge. He knows all our words, and all our thoughts, as well as all
our acts, " long before." We cannot take him by surprise and gain an advantage over
him. There is not a word in our mouth, or a thought in our heart, but he " knows it
altogether" — has always known it, and has provided accordingly. If we were " wise,'
if we were even moderately prudent, we should give up the idea of resisting God
Instead of "raging" and "imagining vain things" — instead of "taking counsel
together against the Lord and against his Anointed " — instead of seeking to " break
their bands asunder and cast away their cords from us" (Ps. ii. 1 — 3), we should submit
ourselves — ^we should be content to " serve the Lord with fear and rejoice unto Him
with reverence " — ^we should " kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and so we perish from tht
right way, if his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little "—we should " take his yoke upon
us, and learn of him" — satisfied that in no other way can we prosper, in no other way
can we obtain rest, or peace, or happiness.

Vers. 9 — 13. — Divenities of gifts, hut the eame spirit. Divebbitibs of gifts. The
needs of life are various, and the gifts which God imparts to his saints are correspond-
ingly diversified. In Moses, at the age of eighty (ch. vii. 7), the qualities required for tht
MoeMsAQi conduct of military matters were not wesent. It may be doubted whethei



t* THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xTn. »— 1*

ne would at any period of his life have been a good general. But his age, his tempen*
ment, and his training made him emphatically a man of prayer. _ Joshua,_on the other
hand, in the full vigour of middle life, active, energetic, bold, intrepid, indefatigable^
was a bom soldier, and a man well suited for military command. To Moses belongs
the credit of having recognised the needs of the occasion, and the " diversity of gifts "
in himself and his " minister." He took the duties, for which he felt himself fit, upm
himself; he delegated those, for which he knew that he was unfit, to the indivic) jal
who, among the thousands of Israel, appeared to him, and no doubt was, the most per-
fectly fitted for them. In a minor way, it may be noticed that Aaron and Hur, unauited
for either military command or the leading part in sustained intercessory prayer, had
yet gifts which enabled them to play a useful secondary part in support of Moses, and
were selected by him for their fitness. The recognition of divbbsitibs op gifts is
required — 1. For the best utilisation of all the powers possessed hy OocTs people at any
given time. Unless diversity be recognised, all aspirants naturally seek the same posts.
All are rivals. Jealousies, sure to arfse, are intensified. Discontents multiply. Bulen
find the difficulty of government augmented. Again, special talents are wasted. Tha
man most suited to one post occupies another. The gifts which he iieeds he often does
not possess; those which he possesses he cannot exercise. 2. For the satisfaction of
individuals. It is a sore grief to feel unfit for the work which we have to do; but it is
a still sorer grief to be conscious of powers which have no field of exercise, while we see
others in possession of the field without the powers. Individuals perhaps ought to be
content if they can perform satisfactorily the work that is set them. But minds of
superior capacity are not, and never will be, thus satisfied. They want a congemal
sphere, an occupation which would put their powers to the proof, a task which they
would feel that they, and they alone, could perform properly. Hence, it is of great
importance, for the contentation of those under their charge, that such as have the rule
over men should both recognise the fact of " diversity of gifts," and seek to obtain a
fall knowledge of the special gifts of those to whose services they have to ^ve employ-
ment. 3. For the general advance of QocFs kingdom. It is only by utilising to the
utmost all the gifts possessed by members of the Church at any given time, that the
Church can be brought into the highest possible state of efficiency. " Diversities ot
gifts " are a fact (1 Cor. xii. 4). " To one is given the word of wisdom ; to another, tha
word of knowledge ; to another, faith ; to another, the gifts of healing ; to another, the
working of miracles ; to another, prophecy ; to another, discerning of spirits ; to
another, divers kinds of tongues ; to another, the interpretation of tongues " (ib. & — 11).
Unless this be recognised, unless each gifted one is put to his proper use, there is •
waste of power — an absolute loss to the Church — a stoppage of possibilities which
might have occurred, had things been better ordered.

The same bfibit. Different as are the duties of life, various as are the calls made
upon the individuals who compose the Christian community — now for courage, now
for counsel, now for governmental capacity, now for military skill, anon for earnest and
prolonged prayer — there is, after all, but one spirit in which all have to act, as there is
also but One Spirit from whom the power to act aright in all cases comes. The mer-
chant in his trade, the soldier on the battle field, the minister in his parish, the man of
learning in his study, all may and all ought to act in one and the same spirit, diligently,
manfully, earnestly, striving to do their duty, under their various circumstances, in
singleness of heart, as unto the Lord and not unto man. The true Christian temper is
one and the same, whatever a man's occupation may be ; and it is not very difficult to
recognise in a Havelock or a Lawrence the identical tone and temper which we have
admired in a Channing and a Wesley, a Pascal and a Fenelon. From One Spirit flow
all the graces that adorn the Christian character; and the unity of the source is
traceable ip the graces themselves, which, amid all their diversity, have an elemeat of
likeness.

Vers. 14 — 16. — GodCe mercies need memorial, and obtain it th several trays. Deliver-
ance firom Amalek was a great and noticeable mercy. It was. 1. Undeserved, as the
people had just been murmuring against God, and threatening to stone his prophet
(vers. 3 — 4). 2. Timely. Defeat, or even an indecisive success, would have brought
wxm the Israelites a host of enemies, under whose combined or continuous attacks the|



«.xvn.6— 16.] tBE BOOK Of EXODtlS. II

nnut have Bucoumbed. The complete discomfiture of the powerful Amalek struck
terror into the hearts of the neighbouring peoples, and induced them to leave Israel for
nearly forty years unmolested. 3. Wondekful. Amalek was warlike, accustomed to
contend with the great nation of the Egyptians ; Israel had had all warlike aspirations
checked and kept down by above 400 years of servitude and peace. Amalek was no
doubt well armed ; Israel can have possessed few weapons. Amalek knew the country,
could seize the passes, and select a fitting moment for attack ; to all Israel, except
Moses and Aaron (ch. iv. 27), the country was strange, the passes miknown, and per-
haps the very idea of their being attacked unforeseen and unexpected. The attack
actually came close upon the great suffering from thirst, when Israel was " feeble " and
" faint and weary " (Deut. xxv. 18). So signal a mercy deserved special remembrance.
Men soon forget the favours they receive at God's hands. That this favour might not
be forgotten, God required two things : 1. That a record of it should be inserted in his
hook. There is no other memorial comparable with this, whether we consider the
honour of it, since to obtain record there, an event must be indeed an important one ; or
the enduringness, since God's book will continue to the world's end ; or the celebrity
since it is read by all nations. And God's special command for the insertion, stamps
the event with an extra mark of dignity. 2. That it should be handed on traditionally
to Joshua, and through him to others. Tradition is one of the modes by which God
miuntains the knowledge of his truth in the world, and is at no time wholly super-
seded by the written Word, since there are at all times persons in the world too young
or too illiterate to have direct access to the Word, who must receive their reUgious
instruction orally from teachers. Tradition alone would be a very unsafe guide ; but
tradition, checked by a book, is of no little value in enlarging the sphere of reUgious
knowledge, and amplifying and rendering more intelligible the written record. To the
two modes of securing continued remembrance of the defeat of Amalek required by God,
Moses added a third — the erection of a material monument, to which he gave a com-
memorative name. Many victories have been thus commemorated, as those of Mara-
thon, Blenheim, Trafalgar, Waterloo, etc. , but no erector of such a memorial has ever
given to his work so noble and heart-stirring a name as Moses gave. " The Lord is my
banner" — ^under no other standard will I serve or fight — no other leader will I acknow-
ledge — ^no other lord shall have dominion over me. " The Lord is my banner " — under
this banner I engaged Amalek — he, and he alone, gave me the victory — through him,
and him alone, do I look to discomfit my other enemies. Be the enemies material or
spiritual, external or internal, to him only do I trust to sustain me against them.
None other name is there under heaven, through whom salvation is to be obtained, the
adversary baffled, Amalek put to confusion.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 8 — 16. Christ our Banner. — " Jehovah-Nissi." Ex. xvii. 15. Historical
introduction: The Amalekites — their territory — reasons why they barred Israel's way.
1. Fear. 2. Religious animosity — incidents of tlie engagement — the two memorials,
book and altar — judgment pronounced on Amalek, and why — the slow execution
through the centuries, ending in the final blotting out of the nation. " The counsel ol
the Lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations." Show further
that the rod of Moses was in reahty the banner of Israel ; the pole of a banner without
drapery, affording a rallying-point for Israel's armies, a memorial of past achievement,
a force therefore, a guide, an appeal to neaven, an earnest of victory. By that banner
Israel conquered. But again, as with the water and the rock we ascended to the First
Cause of all refreshments, so here we ascend beyond the rod-banner to the Real Cause
and Giver of all victory, i.e., to Jehovah, i.e., to Christ,

I. All in the wilderness mdst fight. — In the moral wilderness there are only two
great hosts (on this division into two only, see most valuable and suggestive paper in
Dr. James Martineau's " Hours of Thought " on " The Soul's Forecast of Retribution.")
Ama'ek and Israel, pilgrims going to the heavenly country, and children of the desert
that withstand their way. 1. Amalek cannot let Israel alone — if of the world w«» must
fightr-for there seems a certain constraint that wUl not permit us to leave the ttuu.



n THE BUOK Oi!' EXODUS. [oh. xvn. 8— 16



Ohrtrt and God, without antagonism. 2. Israel will fights—dutifully — and inspired
thereto.

IL PlLOniM WARM0B8 MAT BE TAKEK AT A DISADVANTAGE. See Deut. XXT. 18.

The attack of Amalek was — 1. Sudden. 2. On an undefended rear. 3. On the faint.
4. On the demoralised hy sin. Trace the analogies in moral conflict.

lU. OuB Banner compensates for all disadvantage. Jehovah-Nissi — Christ
our banner. See Is. xi. 10 — 12 ; Rom. viii. 37 ; Rev. xii. 11 ; Constantine's " In hoc
signo." The tanner Christ : — 1. Rallies to decision. Christ lifted up in the realms ol
thought, domestic life, business, social life, political life, men must take sides ; must
answer the question. What think ye of Christ ? A Christ-side to every moral question.
Reason why Christian men not always on the same side in reference to particular
questions (e.g., abstinence) may be, because in actual conflict issues get confused. But ,
wilful trimming not permissible. Nothing like the conduct of the Frenchman, who at
the outbreak of the revolution wore both cockade and tricolour, one under one coat
lappel, the other under the other. Rather should we be like Hedley Vicars, who, the
morning after the great decision for God, unfurled his banner by laying an open Bible
on his table for all his comrades to see. 2. Is a memorial of victories achieved. It was
BO with the rod of Moses (go over instances). So is it with regimental ensigns, inscribed
oft with glorious names, e.y. Salamanca, Vittoria, etc. Picture the shot-rent, tattered
banners, hung under vaulted roof, lor a memorial. So Christ — he shines before us in
the light of ten thousand victories— on " his head many crowns." Recall the history of
the Church, public and more private, its confessors and martyrs. 3. Is a force therefmt
(ver. 11). The moral jwwer for a regiment in the possession of its colours ; its demoral-
isation when lost. Christ seen in the host. Illustration : Castor and Pollux at the
battle of Lake Regillus. 4. It direction in the fray. No man in a battle can see it^
understand it. Leadership necessary by trumpet, by signal, by aide-de-camp, by
banner. So was it here. Moses directed the battle by the standard in his hand. Sc
Christ to every soldier-saint. We may not fight for our own hand, nor according to our
own whims ; but take direction from him. 5. Is appeal for heavenly help. That banner-
pole of Moses was not only for encouragement and lead to Israel, but also was an appeal
to God for that aid which ensures victory. So, wherever Christ is, the intercessor is.
6. Is- earnest of victory. Christ is a force that cannot fail (Rom. viii. 37). — B.

Vers. 8 — 16. — Amalek. Various circumstances are to be noted in connection with
this attack of Amalek on Israel. 1. It was unprovoked. " Then come Amalek " (ver. S).
2. It was unfriendly. The Amalekites were descended from a grandson of Esau, and
BO were related to the Israelites (Gen. xxxvi. 12). 3. It was bitterly hostile. This
fierce and warlike tribe attacked Israel in the rear, and with great cruelty smote those
who had fallen behind, whether from natural infirmity or from weariness and faintnesa
in the march (Deut. xxv. 18). This was a peculiarly malignant and vindictive act, and
as perpetrated upon the people with whose well-being God had specially identified him-
seli, was never fc be forgotten. It was in truth one of those wrongs which burn
themselves into the memory of a nation, and never can be forgotten. A special Nemesis
waits on acts of flagrant inhumanity. 4. It was not without knowledge of the mighty
works which Ood had wrought for Israel. We may be certain of that from what was
said in ch. xv. of the effects produced on the surrounding peoples by the deliverance of
the Red Sea. The Amalekites knew that the children of Israel were the people of
Jehovah. They knew wha'; great things Jehovah had done for his nation. They
probably shared in the fear which these wonders of Jehovah had inspired. Their
hostility to Israel, indeed, may partly have sprung firom this cause. The opportunity
seemed ^ven them of making a successful raid upon a people whom they both dreaded
/ind despised, and they hastened to avail themselves of it. Knowing that the Israelites
were inexperienced in war, and being themselves numerous and powerful, they may have
counted on an easy victory, especially as the people were fatigued with marching and
encumbered with baggage, with women and children, and with the aged and infirm. It
was a time well chosen for delivenng an attack, and for inflicting a mortal injury on th«
advancing host. 6. It was the first attack of its kind. And this circumstance gives it
• very special significance. It makes it typical. In the issue of the conflict with
Amalek is to be seen the result of the whole conflict, prolonged down the ages, betveen



OH. xvn. 8— 16.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. Tl

the Mends and the enemies of Qoi, between the Church of living helievera and the world
that hates and seeks to destroy it, waging against it an incessant warfare. Consider —
I. The battlk. 1. How fouyht. Observe (1) Fighting was in this case called for.
It was not a case, like that at the Bed Sea, where the Israelites could do nothing to
help themselves. The conuuand, accordingly, is not, " Stand still, and see the salva-
tion of the Lord" (ch. xiv. 13), but, "Go out, fight with Amalek" (ver. 9). When
means of help are put within our reach, God expects us to use them. He would have
us exercise our own powers, still, however, in the spirit of due dependence upon him.
"Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God which worketh
in you," etc. (Phil. ii. 12, 13). (2) The conflict was entered upon with a full appre-
ciation of the gravity of the crisis. The leaders did not commit the error of despising
their enemy. They knew how ill-prepared they were for entering upon a contest of
the kind. There was no disguising the fact that the men of Israel were raw, undis-
ciplined, wanting in courage, and prone to panic, while those of Amalek were men of
the desert, bold, warlike, fierce, able to hold their own with the stoutest foe. This was
the first battle of the former ; it was but an episode in the life of continual warfare
of the latter. Judged by appearances, the chances of war were, therefore, greatly
against the Israelites, and it was felt that the most strenuous efforts, aided by earnest
intercessions, would he needed to gain a victory. The Church, in like manner, will do
well not to take too poor an estimate of her spiritual enemies. They are not to be made
light of. They are not to be fought with sham weapons, or in the indolent, half-in-
eamest spirit, with which so many are content to attempt the conquest. " We wrestle
not against flesh and blood," etc. (Eph. vi. 12). The Church need not count on cheap
victories. (3) The dispositions for the fight were made with skill and judgment. Tbe
men sent into the battle were picked men, and over them was appointed a brave general
—Joshua (ver. 9). This is the first appearance of Joshua in the history, but he must
have been already known to Israel as a man possessed of the strategical and other
qualifications needful in a military commander. Another lesson as to the use of means,
and as to the adaptation of means to ends in God's service. The battle was God's, but
it was to be fought through human instrumentalities. The strongest, bravest, most
valorous men in the camp were, accordingly, selected for the service. No measure
was omitted which was likely to ensure success. It is the old law of the economy
of miracles. What man can do for himself, God will not work miracles to do for
him. Doubtless, but for Moses' intercession on the hill, the battle would still have
been lost; on the other hand, had thfe military arrangements been less perfect,
even Moses' prayers might not have turned the tide of conflict so decisively in
fevour of the Israelites. Cf. Cromwell's advice to his men—" Trust in Providence, and
keep your powder dry." Note, further, how the same G-od who gave the Israelites a
Moses, gave them also a Joshua, when a man of Joshua's gifts was specially required.
Cf with the promise as to Christ, Is. Iv. 4. It is for our own benefit that God thug
summons our gifts into exercise, and furnishes occasions for their trial and development.
2. Row won. First, as seen above, by dint of hard fighting, but second, and more
jpecially, by Moses' intercessions. This portion of the narrative (vers. 10—12) is full
af richest instruction. Observe — (1) Moses took with him Aaron and Hur, and
ascended to the hill summit, to watch the battle, and to pray (ver. 10). Advanced in
years, he could not personally take part in the melee ; but he could pray for those who
were in it. His prayer was as essential to success as their fighting. It was fighting of
its own kind (cf. Col. iv. 12). Real prayer is hard, exhausting work. Even had Moses
been physically capable of taking part in the conflict, he was better employed where he
was, in this work of earnest intercession. Gifts differ. Joshua's right place was on the
field ; that of Moses, on the hill. Many can pray who are debarred from flghtmg, e.g.,
invalids— Moses sitting on the stone (ver. VZ), they, perhaps, lying o^ their
couches— and it is well for them to realise the value of their work, how much they can
still do, how useful they are. Note, also, it was in view o/the battle that this inter-
cession of Moses was carried on. Prayer needs to be fed by knowledge, by watchtui
interest in events as they shape themselves around us, by study of the special needs ol
circumstances of the time. Of what essential service would it be in the warfare of tha
Church were praying men and women to act more on this principle- seeking, as
br as possible, to keep themselves im":>rmed of the progress and vicissitudes of the liord'i



n THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xTn. 8—16

work at home and abroad, and endeavouring to order their prayers with constant
reference to the fluctuations in the battle 1 Moses praying on the hill may remind
us of Christ in heaven, interceding for his Church militant on earth. (2) Moses inter-
ceded, while holding up in his hands the rod of God (vers. 9, 11). The rod was
the symbol of God's power as pledged for the defence of Israel. Faith holds up the rod Ib
laying hold on God's word and promise, and pleading the samo before him. (3) Moses
had able coadjutors. Aaron and, Hur stayed up his hands when they grew heavy through
fatigue (ver. 1'^). It is a happy circumstance when those who bear the principal burden
of responsibility in spiritual work can rely on being aided by the sympathy and
coHjperation of others, " like-minded " (Phil. ii. 20), with themselves in their desire to
see God's kingdom making progress. God's people hold up the hands of ministers by
praying for them (1 Thess. v. 25). (4) The intercession of Moses had a decisive
mfluence upon the tide of battle. When Moses held up his hands, Israel prevailed ;
when he let down his hands, Amalek prevailed (ver. 11). His hands being steadily
supported till the going down of the sun, Amalek was completely discomfited (ver. 13).
The letting down of Moses' hands may have been accompanied by a corresponding
flagging in the earnestness of his supplications ; or it may have been that the outward
act, as indicative of the need of sustained and persevering entreaty of God, was itself
made essential to the victory. In either case, we have a testimony to the power of
prayer. Would that the Church were more alive to this secret of gaining victories by
earnest supplication 1 The influence of prayer cannot be overrated. It decides battles.
It sways the tides of history. It opens and shuts the windows of heaven (Jas. v, 17,
18). It puts to the rout spiritual enemies. Paul made use of this mighty power

!Rom. i. 9, 10; Phil. i. 4, 9, etc.). But even Paul did not pray so much as Christ
Matt. xiv. 23 ; Mark i. 35 ; Luke vi. 12, etc.). 3. Connection with previous miracle. Is
it fanciful to ti^ace in the boldness, valour, and spiritual confidence of the Israelites in
this battle, some relation to the wonderful deliverance they have just experienced? It
was " at Rephidim," the scene of the miraculous supply of water, that the attack of
Amalek took place (ver. 8). This water, in the first place, refreshed the Israelites
physically, and so enabled them to fight ; but we may believe that it had also a powerful,
if temporary, effect upon their minds. It would banish doubt, restore trust, inspire
enthusiasm. They drank of the brook by the way, and now lifted up the head (Ps. ex. 7).
Thus does God time his mercies to our trials, and make the one a preparation for the other.
II. The bbcoed in the book (ver. 14). This command to insert in " the book " an
account of the battle with Amalek was connected : 1. With Ood's design to give his
Church a Bible. A " book " is presupposed, in which, apparently, a journal was kept of
the transactions of the march. Such a contemporary record was plainly necessary, if
exact accounts of these mighty acts of God in the desert wore to be preserved. In no
other way could the knowledge of them have been handed down to posterity without
distortion, mutilation and adulteration. And God was not giving these mighty
revelations of himself, to waste them on the air of the wilderness, or to leave them to
the risk of being mixed up with legendary matter of man's adding. This part of
Israel's history was being shaped and guided with a view to the instruction of the
Church to the end of time (1 Cor. x. 6, 11); and it was requisite that a proper account
should be kept of its memorable events. Hence the existence of " the book," out of the
contents of which, we may believe, these narratives in the book of Exodus are princi-
pally compiled. 2. With a special significance attaching to this particular event.
Amalek's attack on Israel was, as already observed, the first of its kind. " In Amalek
the heathen world commenced that conflict with the people of God, which, while it
aims at their destruction, can only be terminated by the complete annihilation of
the ungodly powers of the world" (Keil). This explains the severe sentence pro-
nounced upon the tribe, as also the wei^ility significance attached to this first defeat.
It takes many types to set forth completely the many-sided enmity of the world to
God and to his Church. Pharaoh was one type, Amalek is another. Pharaoh was more
especially the type of the enmity of the world against the church, viewed as having
escaped from its power. Amalek, as Edom afterwards, is peculiarly the type oi
Tin(fictive hostility to the kingdom of God as such — of implacable hate. Between
Amalek (spiritually^ and the church, therefore, there can never be aught but warfare
" Beonuse his hand is against the throne of the Lord " (marg.), tltere/ore " the Lord will



OH. xm. 8—16.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. W

have war with Amalek from generation to generation " (ver. 16). In this first defeat
we have the type of all.

III. Jehovah-Nissi. Moses reared an altar in commemoration of the vlctoiy, and
Inscribed upon it the name — "Jehovah-Nissi" — "Jehovah, my banner," (ver. 15).
This name inscribed upon the altar is at the same time the name of God. It extracts
and generalises the principle involved in the victory over Amalek, as a former name,
" Jehovah- jireh " (Gen. xxii. 14) extracted and generalised the principle involved In
the interposition on Morlah ; and as the words, "I am Jehovah that healeth them"
(ch. XV. 36), extracted and generalised the principle involved In the miracle at Marah.
The truth taught by the name is precious and consolatory. Jehovah is the Church's
banner._ His mvisible presence goes with her in her conflicts. His help is certain.
With him on her side, she is assured of victory. His name is her sure and all-sufflcient
trust. Learn 1. God's deeds reveal His name. The revelation of the Bible is a fact-
revelation. 2. It is the Church's duty gratefully to remember the interpositions of God
on her behalf. 8. It is her duty to seek to apprehend the principle of God's dealings
with her, and to treasure up the knowledge for further use. — J. O.

Vers. 15, 16. — Jehomh-Nisd. The use of this name by the Church bespeaks — 1. Her
militant condition. ' ' The Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to genera-
tion." 2. The side on which she fights — "Jfy banner." 3. The name round which she
rallies—" Jehovah." " One Lord, one faith, one baptism " (Eph. vi. 5). 4. The confi-
dence by which she is inspired. The inscription on a banner frequently sets forth
the nound of confidence. " God and my right." 5. The certainty she has of victory.

Ver. 9. — " Thou Jiast given a banner unto them that fear thee. 1. Thk attack by
Amalek. It was cowardly, malicious, merciless (cf. Deut. xxv. 17 ; 1 Sam. xv. 2) ;
not open, straightforward enmity ; cutting off the feeble and the stragglers ; a vulture-
like hostility ; a type and sample of diabolical hatred. Notice the parallel between
Israel's position with regard to Amalek and our position with regard to Satan and his
emissaries. 1. Israel was passing through the wilderness. So God's people are passing
through this world (Heb. xi. 14). The country through which the route lies is not
claimed by those who use it. 2. Amalek considered the wilderness as their own. So
Satan clams to be the prince of this world. In either case the authority is usurped.
3. Amalek took Israel at a disadvantage. No cause of enmity assigned, oiuy apparently
the right assumed for the stronger to prey upon the weaker. Satan, too, always
endeavours to take us at a disadvantage. He did not attack Christ until "he was
an hungered ; " he attacks us, also, when we are weakest.

II. "ivM DEFENCE AND CONFLICT. — 1. A chosen coptaiu. Joshua — "Jehovah is
help." Perhaps name changed from Hoshea at this time ; shows, at any rate, whence
the leader derived his ability to lead. Our captain, " manifested to destroy the works
of the devil." Had it not been for Satan's enmity, how should we have known the power
of Christ ? 2. SeHeeted soldiers. Not all the people, but chosen from the people. All
share the danger, but the defence may best be undertaken by a few, though, no doubt,
these few are supported and encouraged by the general sympathy. In the war with
Satan the brunt of the battle must fall on the selected soldiers — Christ chose apostles,
and in every age the majority has been protected by representative champions. Satan
must make more headway than he does, were it not that the weaker and more ignorant
are sheltered from direct attack behind the bulwarks raised by the stronger and the
wiser. 3. An uplifted banner. Usually the colours go before the army ; here the
banner— God's rod— is upheld upon the mountain— (1) in full sight of all ; (2) in a
position of comparative security. Notice— 1. This banner was a sign of God's helpful
presence. 2. It was in fuU view of the fighters, and the fortune of the battle VEuded
according as it was raised or lowered. Two things were necessary to ensure victory—
(1) that the banner should be held up ; (3) that the fighters should keep looking at it
In the fight with Satan the same principle applies. God's law, God's righteous purpose,
must be upheld by the Prophet, supported on one hand by the priest, on the other by
the noble ; but, further, the fighters must keep it well in view, nothing less than the
issurance of Its fixedness can nerve them so as to ensure victory.

III. The memorial. 1. A book. This victory a pledge of Amalek's final exter



THE BOOK OF BXODUa [oh. rvn. 8— la



mination. 2. An altar. "Jehovah our Banner," sign of a continuous war to be ended
only with the fulfilment of God's purpose. In the fight with Satan our Lord's victoiy
In the wilderness and on the cross, a pledge of final victory for aU. 1. It is written In
a book. Who has not read of it? 2. It is conunemorated by a memorial, which all
may see. " 'I'his do as a memorial of me." So long as there is evil in the world, so long
there must be war. God's soldiers must fight firom generation to generation until the
final victory be achieved. What is the secret of their strength ? The banner uplifted
upon the mountain. The rod of God. " It is written." The prophet uprears it. Priest
and noble, in so far as they fulfil their ofBce, unite to support the prophet. The fighters
look up to the banner, and, encouraged by its steadfast maintenance, fight on till victory
be secured. — G.

Vers. 8 — 16. — The discomfiture of Amalek in Rephidim. I. Amalbk'b _I8NOBano«
OF THE RESODBCES OF IsBAEL. Amalek attacked Israel in Bephidim. Eephidim stands
very well as the type of aU places and positions where human resources appear utterly
wanting. It was a place where no water could be found, and where of course there
must also have been little growth. Everything therefore would lead Amalek to say,
"We shall easily conquer these people, being but an undisciplined, unmanageable
crowd." How should outsiders understand anything of the way in which the Lord had
led Israel ? To Israel itself, the way had been one which it knew not ; and to Amalek,
able to judge only by first appearances it wovdd seem the way of folly, rashness, and
certain ruin. The Amalekites could very well see that there was no ordinary source of
supplies open, and extraordinary sources were beyond their ken, beyond their powers of
imagination. We shall do well to consider, before we oppose anything, what its
resources are ; apparent weakness may not only hide real strength, but may be almost
the condition of it. We shall do well also to consider whether under erroneous notions
of self-preservation, we may not often be found fighting against God. Those Amalekites
went out to war against Israel upon motives of self-interest. It seemed to them if they
did not destroy Israel, Israel would destroy them. Yet if they had only inquired, if
they had only asked the question how this great company had managed to get so far,
they might have been spared all anxiety and the great destruction which came upon
them. The wisest plan would have been to leave Israel alone and wait ; then it would
have been seen that Israel was not going to stop in that district.

II. The way in which Isbael meets Amalek. — 1. The spirit and conduct of Most*
are to he considered. Hitherto in his difficulties he has cried to the Lord, not of course
despairingly, but feeling deeply his need of Divine direction. Here however he is ready
for action at once. No mention is made of recourse to God, from which we assume that
the line of action was at once apparent to Moses. The promptitude of his action is
indeed remarkable ; and yet it is clear fi:om the result that there was nothing presump-
tuous in it. Everything evidently accorded with the will and purpose of God. This was
an occasion when Israel could do something, and they were bound to make the attempt.
MoGes was a man who appreciated the principle that God helps those who help them-
selves. When the people were entangled in the land by the Eed Sea they could do
nothing ; when they came into the wilderness with its scarcity of food and drink, they
could do nothing; they had simply to wait on God's provisions. But here where
fighting men appear against them, and there is space and time for resistance, Moses
rightly takes means to bring the strength of his people into operation. 2. The spirit
and conduct of the people are also to he considered. Their faith, promptitude and com-
posure are also very remarkable, more remarkable even than the like conduct on the part
of Moses. Those who had been so long, and only so lately, unbelieving and unmanage-
able, all at once manifest a surprising readiness to meet the foe. Considering the way
in which they had recently behaved, it is .a marvellous thing that all was not thrown
into panic and confusion, immediately on the appearance of Amalek. To what then can
this composure and readiness be attributed ? Evidently it was the effect — a temporary
effect certainly, yet not insufficient for its purpose — of the gift of the manna and of the
water in a dry and thirsty land. God took care that all troubles should not come on
them at once. They were strong with a strength Amalek knew nothing of; and it was
in the/resh consciousness of that strength that they made ready for the battle. Wa
imagine that on tliis occasion, Joshua found abundance of volunteers, and that those
who went out against Amalek were the very pick and pride of Israel's warriors.



OH. xnn. 1—12.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



81



in. ThX WAT IN WHICH QOD SiaNIFIGS HIM8BLF TO BB THB CONTBOLLSB OF TIOTOBT.

MoBes knows right well that after all preparations, the victory must come from Jehovah.
He sets the discriminating Joshua to lead a chosen and competent army against Amalek,
•8 if everything depended upon them, and yet at the same time he remembers that Qod
must be glorified in the very best of human preparations. Ood will have us to honour
him by our very best, and yet our very best must be considered as no more than the
humble channel of his power. We must not suppose, because it pleases G-od in his
wisdom, to put the excellency of his treasure into earthen vessels, that we are at liberty
to offer him anything which first comes to hand. And then Moses, having done his best
in the choice of means, takes his conspicuous position on the bill, to cheer his fighting
friends with the sight of the lifted rod. Through the lifting of that rod the energies of
victory were to flow into the bodies of Israel's warriors. To Amalek the sight of Moses
told notldng. They knew nothing of the significance of the rod, and may rather have
wondered why he should stand so long in this position of constraint. But Israel, we
cannot doubt, quickly discerned the significance of their leader's attitude and the cloaa
connection between tiie lifted hand and the progress towards victory. The lesson for us
il the oft taught one, that while God would have us to labour strenuously and bear the
heat and burden of the day in all the inevitable conflicts of life, we must do it with the
remembrance that victory really comes from him. We are only strong, as Paul felt he
was, by the strength which Christ puts into us. — Y.

Vers. 8 — ^16. — Victory through faith. — ^I. In the warfare of faith, pbatbb and
BFFOBT MUST BB JOINED ToOETHEB. 1. Arrangements are carefully made for both.
Men are picked out for a battle, and Joshua descends with them into the valley.
Moses, with Aaron and Hur, climbs to the hill-top with the rod of God in his hand.

'Joshua discomfited Amalek with the edge of the sword; but the battle was for or
against Israel, as Moses' hands were lifted up in strong supplication or hung down in
weariness, (1) To pray without using means is to mock God. (2) To use means
without prayer is to depise God.

n. An)s TO PREVAILING PBAYBB. 1. The remembrance of past deliverances and
services. Moses takes the rod of God in his hand. 2. The union of many hearts : he
sat on the hiU-top in sight of IsraeL 3. Friendly help in weakness. Aaron and Hur
hold up the wearied hands.

IIL In the VICTORY of the riohteoub, a yet further triumph is promised. The
promise is recorded in the book that that against which they war shall be swept from
under heaven.

IV. The gratitude of the redeemed in the eoub op tbiuufh. The monument <«
Tiotory is an altar and its name Jehovah-Nissi. — U.



SECTION Xn.— CHAPTEE XVIIL

JsTHBo's Visit to Moses.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEE XVm.



Ver. 1 — 12. — Jbthbo's visit to Moses. It
has been noticed, in the comment on ch. iv.,
that shortly after the circumcision of Eliezer,
Moses' second :ion, he sent back his wife,
Zipporah, to her own kinsfolk, the Midianites,
together with her two sons, Eliezer and
Oershom. Beuel, Zipporah's father, t* as then
aead (ch. iiL 1), and had been succeeded in
his priesthood and headship of the tribe by
Jethro, probably his son, and therefore the
brother-in-law, and not the father-in-law, of
■zoDoa— II.



Moses. (The Hebrew word used, u already
observed, has both meanings.) Jethro gave
protection to his sister and her children nntil
he heard of the passage of the Bed Sea, when
he set forth to meet and congratulate his
kinsman, and to convev back to him his wife
and his sons. The meeting took place "at
the mount of God " (verse 5), or in tiie near
vicinity of Sinai, probably in some part of the
plain Er-Bahah, which extends for five miles,
or more, to the north-west of the Sinaitic
mountain-group



•f



THE BOOK OP EXODUa



[oh. xvm. 1 — 12i



Ver. 1. — Jetliro, the priest of Uidian,
Koses' father-in-law. Bather, "Jethro,
priest of Midian, Moses' brother-in-law." See
the comment on ch. iii. 1 ; and note that the
Seventy use the ambiguous word fauPpis,
whUe the Vulgate has oognatta. And that.
Bather " in that." The clause is exegetical of
the preceding one.

Ver. 2. — After he had sent her back.
Literally " after her dismissal." It is curious
th.it the fact of the dismissal had not been
f reviously mentioned, yet is here assumed
as known. Some commentators (as Knobel)
find, in what is said of Zipporah, the trace of
two distinct writers who give two contradic-
tory narratives ; but the difficulties and ob-
scurities of the history are sufficiently intelli-
gible, if we bear in mind — 1. That Moses was
addressing inmiediately those who knew the
facts ; and 2. That he was studious of brevity.

Ver. 3. — ^And her two sons. That Zipporah
had borne Moses at least two sons berare his
return to Egypt from Midian, had appeared
from ch. iv. 20. The name of the one,
Oershom, and the ground of it, had been
declared in ch. ii. 22. The repetition here
may be accounted for by the present chapter
having been originally a distinct and separate
composition, written on a distinct roll, and
subsequently incorporated by Moses into his
great work.

Ver. 4. — Eliezer. Eliezer had not been
previously mentioned by name ; but he was
probably the son circumcised by Zipporah, as
related m ch. iv. 25. We learn from 1 Chr.
xxiii. 15 — 17, that he grew to manhood, and
had an only son, Behabiah, whose descendants
were in the time of Solomon very numerous.
For the God of my father, said he, was my
help. Eliezer means literally, " My God (is
my) help." It would seem that Zipporah,
when she circumcised her infant son, omitted
to name him; but Moses, before dismissing
her, supplied the omission, calling him
Eliezer, because God had been his help against
the Pharaoh who had sought his life (ch. ii.
15), and of whose death he had recentty had
intelligence (ch. iv. 19). Thus the names of
the two sons expressed respectively, the des-
pondency natural to an exile, and the exultant
gratitude of one who had just learned that by
God's goodnens, the term of his banishment
was over.

Ver. 5. — The wilderness. This term,
which has the article, seems to be here used
in Ihat wide sense with which we are familiar
from ch. lii. 18 ; iv. 27 ; v. 3 ; vii. 16 ; etc. It
is not " the wilderness of Sin. " or " the wilder-
ness of Sinai," that is intended, but generally
the tract between Egypt and Palestine.
Jethro, having entered this tract from Midian,
had no difficulty in discovering from the
inhabitants that Moses was encamped at th*
■osat of God, — <.«., Sinai, and there sought



and found him. There is no trace of my
previous " engagement " to meet at a par-
ticular spot.

Ver. 6. — ^And he said. It is suspected that
the true reading here is, " and they said," — i.e.,
some one said — " to Moses, behold thy father-
in-law " (or " brother-in-law "), " Jethro, ii
come unto thee." So the LXX., and many
modems, as Kennicott, Geddes, Boothroyd,
Canon Cook, and others. But the explana-
tion, that Jethro, on arriving in the vicinity
of Moses, sent a messenger to him, who spoke
in his name (Bosenmuller, Patrick, Pool,
Ealisch, Keil, etc.) is at any rate plausible,
and removes all necessity of altering the
text.

Ver. 7. — ^Hoses went out to meet his
father-in-law. Oriental ideas of pc^iteness
require such a movement in case of an honoured
or even of a welcome visitor (see Gen. xviii.
2 ; xix. 1 ; xxxii. 6 ; xxxiii. 1 ; Luke xv. 20 ;
etc.). It was evidently the intention of Moses
to receive Jethro with all possible marks of
honour and respect. He not only went out to
meet him, but did obeisance to hhn, as to a
superior. They asked each other of their
welfare. Bather " exchanged salutations ; "
addressed each other mutually with the cus-
tomary phrase " Peace be unto you." Came
into the tent — i.e., went together into the
tent of Moses, which had been already glanced
at in the word " encamped " (verse 5).

Ver. 8. — Moses told his father-in-law.
Jethro had heard in Midian the general out-
line of what had happened (verse 1). Moses
now gave him a full and complete narrative
(mhphar) of the transactions. Compare
Gen. xxiv. 66 ; Josh. ii. 23 ; where the same
verb is used. All the travail. Literally,
"the weariness." Compare Malachi i. 13,
where the same word is used. The lord de-
livered them. The Septuagint adds "from
the hand of Pharaoh and from the hand of
the Egyptians."

Ver. 10. — Blessed be the Lord. Compare
Gen. xiv. 20 ; xxiv. 27. The heathen blessed
Qod no less than the Israelites ; but Jethro'j
blessing the Lord (i.e. Jehovah) is unusual
As, however, Moses had attributed his own
deliverance, and that of Israel, entirely t^
Jehovah (verse 8), Jethro, accepting the laew
to be as stated, blessed the Lord. Who hath
delivered you. Kalisch takes the plural
pronoun to refer to Moses and Aaron; but
Aaron seems not to nave been present, since
he afterwards "came" (veme 12). It is
better to regard Jethro as addressing all those
who were in the tent with Moses. From
them he goes on in the last clause to " the
people." And out of the hand of Pharaoh. —
t.e., especially out of the hand of Pharaoh,
who had especially sought their destruction
(ch. xiv. 6, 8, etc.).

Ver. 11.— Now know I that the Lord il



BH. xvm. 1 — 12.]



THE BOOK OP BXODUa



sa



greater Qian all gods. It would seem that
JetiiTo, like the generality of the heathy
believed in a plurality of gods, and bad
hitherto regarded the God of the Israelites as
merely one among many equals. Now, he
renounces this creed, and emphatically de-
clares his belief that Jehovah is above all other
gods, greater, higher, more powerful. Com-
pare the confessions of Nebuchadnezzar (Dan.
li. 47 ; iii, 26, 27) and Darius the Mode
(ib. vi. 26). For in the thing wherein they
dealt wickedly he was above them. There is
no " he was above them " in the original, nor
is the clause a distinct sentence from the pre-
ceding one. It is merely a prolongation of
that clause, without any new verb; and
should be translated, " Even in the very mat-
ter that they (the Egyptians) dealt proudly
against them " (the Israelites). The superiority
of Jehovah to other gods was shown forth
even in the very matter of the proud dealing
of the Egyptians, which was brought to
shame and triumphed over by the might of
Jehovah. The allusion is especially to the
passage of the Bed Sea.
Ver 12. — Jethro took s ^nmt offering.



Or " brought a burnt offering ;" as the same
verb is rendered in ch. xxv. 2. It is not
distinctly related that he offered the victim ;
but as no other offerer is mentioned, andas he
was a priest (ch. iii. 1 ; xviii. 1), we may
assume that he did so. Moses, Aaron,
and the elders, partook of the sacrificial
meal, regarding the whole rite as one
legitimately performed by a duly qualified
person, and so as one in which they could
properly participate. Jethro, like Melchise-
dek (Gen. xiv. 18), was recognised as a
priest of the true God, though it would seem
that the Midianites generally were, a genera-
tion later, idolaters (Num. xxv. 18 ; xxxi
16). To eat bread . . . before God.
This expression designates the feast upon a
sacrifice, which was the universal custom of
ancient nations, whether Egyptians, As-
syrians, Fhenicians, Persians, Greeks, or
Eomans. Except in the case of the " whole
burnt offering" (iXoKaiTa/ta), parts only of
the animals were burnt, the greater portion
of the meat being consumed, with bread, at •
meal, by the offerer and his friends and rela-
tives



HOMILETICa

Vers. 1 — 12. — The blessedness of family reunions, when rightly ordered. Tli»
femily is God's ordinance, and among the most sacred and blessed of his ordinances.
All fatherhood is based upon his (Eph. iii. 15) ; and human family ties reproduce those
of the celestial region. Upon earth partings must and will occur, the family bond
being thereby not broken, but strained and impaired. Sometimes necessity breaks
up the household. Wife and children may not go whither the husband and father is
ordered to proceed, as in the naval and military services. Sometimes prudential
considerations assert themselves, and the children must quit the domestic hearth to
get their ovm living, or even the wife and husband must seek separate employments
with the same object. OccasionaLly, the husband, having to go on a difficult or
dangerous mission, where wife ani children would be encumbrances, has to part
from them temporarily, and to provide for their support and sustenance during his
absence. This last was the case of Moses. In returning to Egypt, and coming forward
as the champion of his nation, he confronted great dangers. The presence of wife and
children would have hampered him, and, therefore, he resolved to return alone.
Zipporah and his infant sons were left with her nearest male relative. But now the
time had come for re-union. We may note as blissful elements in the re-union —

I. That it was complbtb, no deaths having occurred since the parting. The
bitterness of parting is especially in the uncertainty whether we shall ever see ^ain in
this life the individuals from whom we part. Death comes suddenly, and vidthout
wamin" ; infants are especially subject to his attack ; and when Moses, having recently
parted from Jethro (ch. iv. 8), sent back his wife and two young sons to be under his
charge, he must have felt that it was exceedingly doubtful whether there would ever
again be a meeting of the five near relations. But God brought it to pass. Jethro,
with a promptitude which indicates a warm heart, no sooner heard of his kinsman's safe
arrival in the region of the " wilderness," than he put himself to the trouble of a long
journey, partly to congratulate him, but mainly to restore to him the wife and children,
whom he had received as a sacred trust. He could not be content unless he himself
delivered them safe into the hands of Moses, and thus "gave a good account of his
stewardship." And he was fortunate in being able to deliver them all safe and sound,
•nd apparently in good health. No insidious disease had nipped the life of either cihiU



M THE BOOK OF fiXODUa [oh. xvdi. 1—18.

In the bud; no unlucky accident had removed either from the land of the living.
Mosea was able to greet, at one and the same moment, hia wife, his two sons, and hii
brother-in-law. DoubCless, he felt that God had been specially good and gracious to
him in restoring to him all his treasures.

n. That it was characterised bt courtesy and good FEBLiNa, and free fbou
ANT reproach ON EITHER SIDE. Jethro Sent a message to announce his arrival, which
was a courteous act, not strictly necessary. He relieved at once any anxiety which
Moses might naturally feel, by letting him know that he had brought with him his wife
and both his sons. That they had been able to make the long journey implied that
they were well. Moses, on his part, responded by going out to meet his brother-in-law,
thus requiting courtecsy with courtesy ; when he met him, he " did obeisance," not
standing upon his own present dignity; having done obeisance, he rose and "kissed
him," thus showing tender affection. Grreetings by word of mouth followed, and then
friendly conversation. The great leader had much to relate, and gave a full account,
both of his perEs and hair-breadth escapes, and of his divinely-wrought deliverances.
Hereat Jethro " rejoiced." No word of reproach or blame seems to have been uttered
on either side. No discord marred the perfect harmony. Over the still tenderer
meeting of the husband and father with his wife and children, the sacred historian, with
• wise reticence, draws the veil. There are scenes which are at once too private and too
■acred for description ; and this was one of them.

III. That it was crowned bt an act of religious thankfulness and acknow-
ledgment OF the goodness of God. The sense that God has been good to us should
lead in all cases to an act of acknowledgment. Jethro was not content with mere
words of joy and gratitude — not even with a solemn ascription of praise and blessing
to Jehovah (ver. 10). He must shew his feelings by an act ; so, in accordance with
the ritual of the time, he "took a burnt-offering and sacrifices." Christians should
similarly signalise their own re-imions, and other important events in their lives, by
joining together in the highest act of Christian worship — the Holy Communion. Joint
participation in the " bread of life " and " cup of the Lord " brings home to us the sense
of family oneness, as nothing else has the power to do. Prayers uttered side by side
bind men's hearts together in indissoluble union ; participation in the same precious gifts
gives the sense of unity in him who is the source of unity to all who are his. Aaron
•nd the elders do well to join ; their presence does not mar the family concord ; it does
hut enlarge the family circle, and add new links to the chain that binds Heaven to
earth. Some day the whole Church will be one family, of which aU the members will
worship God perpetually in the Father's house. The nearest approach to happiness on
aorth is that anticipation of the final bliss which Holy Communion furnishes,

HOMILIES B"X VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 13. — The visit of Jethro. When Jethro " heard of all that God had done
for Moses," — a hint that the news of the great events of the past few weeks had spread
for and wide through the Sinai tic peninsula, — and when he learned that the Israelites
were encamped at the Mount of God, ivithin reachable distance of the Midianitish
settlement (cf. ch. iii. 1), he at once resolved on paying his former friend, who had sc
■uddenly blazed into an unexpected greatness, a personal visit. He came, accordingly,
accompanied by Moses' wife and two sons.

I. Jethro'b coming (vers. 1 — 7). This visit of Jethro to Moses may be considered
with reference to the following particulars. He came^l. Cordially recognising the
honowr which Qod had put on Moses (ver. 1). Moses had stood to Jethro for years in a
relation of dependence. He had kept the priest's flocks (ch. iii. 1). Yet Jethro was
■ot offended or made envious by this sudden greatness which had fallen to the lot of his
old associate. The proverb was for once falsified that " a prophet is not without honour,
save in his own country, and in his own house " (Matt. xiii. 5 — 7), for Jethro heartily
acknowledged and rejoiced in all that the Lord had done for Moses and for Israel. It
might have been otherwise. He might, like the Nazarenes in their slighting of Christ,
have asked— "Was not this my shepherd? Is not his wife called Zipporah? and hia
•ooa, Qersbom and EUezer, are they not with us ? Whence then hath this man all



TH. xvm. 1—13.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. M

ihese things?" But a far different spirit possessed him. In this, Jethro showed hia
freedom from a very common littleness of nature. 2. Aa an act of personal friendship.
A large part of the joy of life springs from friendship. We see friendship at its best in
the case of those who are thrown much into each other's society, and who cherish for
each other, under the conditions which most of all reveal and test character, a cordial
respect and esteem. " Friendship," says Cicero, " is nothing else than a perfect con-
currence on all subjects Divine and human, accompanied by a feeling of kindness and
attachment, and I am not sure that any better boon than this, with the exception oi
wisdom, could be conferred on man by the immortal Gods." The bond of attachment
thus created between good men makes association a pleasure, and, of necessity, causes
pain at parting. WhUe separation lasts, longings do not cease to be felt for a renewal
of the prized intercourse, and when, after years of severance, an opening for such
renewal of intercourse is presented, the opportunity is eagerly and joyfully embraced.
Such friendship may be presumed to have existed between Jethro and Moses.
The two had lived in close intimacy for the space of forty years. According to
the text, Moses was Jethro's son-in-law ; according to the more probable view,
his brother-in-law. Jethro, with his stores of practical wisdom, his desert coxirtesy,
and his evidently sincere piety, was a man whom Moses would early learn to respect,
and with whom he would find it pleasant and profitable to associate ; and the Midi-
anitish priest, in turn, would never weary of the companionship of Moses, whose
learning was so ripe, whose spirit was so excellent, whose early life had been spent
under such different conditions from his own, and who had consequently so much to
tell, which he (Jethro) woald delight to hear. This intercourse had been suddenly
broken up by Moses' determination to return to Egypt (ch. iv. 18) ; but an opportunity
now presented itself of renewing it, and of this .Tethro gladly availed himself. 3.
Desirous of "hearing more perfectly of the wonderful worlts of Qod. This, as is apparent
from the sequel (ver. 8), was another motive of Jethro's visit. He had come to be
more fully and exactly instructed, in the wonders which God had wrought "for Moses,
and for Israel, his people" (ver. 1). Something of these "mighty acts" he had heard
from current report, but what he had heard only whetted his appetite to hear more. It
is the mark of the good man that he earnestly desires to grow in the knowledge of God
and of his ways. 4. With the intention of restoring to Moses his wife and two sons
(vers. 2 — 6). In taking this earliest opportunity of bringing Zipporah and her two
sons to Moses, Jethro acted rightly. A ■infe's proper place is with her husband. Sons,
again, in view of the special responsibility resting on the father in connection with
their proper up-bringing, should be as much as possible under direct paternal influence.
The kingdom of God, doubtless, is to be more to us than father, or mother, or wife, or
child; and should its interests imperatively demand separation, this must be sub-
mitted to (Matt. viii. 21, 22): but relationships are not thereby dissolved, and the
active discharge of the duties connected with them should be resumed at the earliest
opportunity. For the sake of Moses himself, reunion was desirable. He was not a
man who spumed the joys of domestic existence, but, like Peter, led about a wife (of
Num. xii. 1 ; 1 Cor. ix. 5). It would contribute to his happiness to have his family
beside hiin. Attention is anew called to the significant names of his sons (vers. 3, 4).
These noteworthy names woidd be perpetual reminders to Moses of the lessons of
his stay in Midian. The one spoke of human weakness, the other of Divine aid. If
the one embalmed the memory of his heart-loneliness in a strange land, the other told
of how God had been his help even there. The one recalled trials, the other mercies.
While in both was embodied a memorial of the heart-discipline, of the solitary com-
munion with God, of the lonely days and nights of prayer, watching, and spiritual
meditation, which had helped so largely during the forty years of that weary but
precious exile, to make him the man he was.

II. Jetebo and Moses (vers. 7 — 13). The visit here described is a model of brotherly
and religious intercourse. Christians would do well to study and imitate it. Observe —
1. The courtesy of their greeting (ver. 7). The two men stood on a very different moral
and intellectual level, but, in their exchanges of civility, Jethro is treated as the superior,
and is received by Moses with every outward demonstration of respect. As on Jethio'i
side there is no trace of mortification or jealousy at finding Moses, once the keeper of hk
■heep^ in w ezAlted » position, so, on the side of Moses now Israd'i deliverer and leaAm,



THE BOOK OF EXODOa t""' »*™- ^—^^



there is an utter absence of pride and hauteur, and a painstaliiug desire to put Jethro — •
plain wilderness pi iest— as fully as possible at his ease. Everything is real. The greetingi
of the friends are unaffectedly cordial— their behavioiu- towards each other studiously
poUte. Lesson — the duty of courtesy. Courtesy is an essential part of what has been defined
as the outward grace of life, " By the grace of life is meant all that embellishes, softens,
4nd brightens our present existence. It is that which is to human life what the shape
and bloom and odour .are to the plant. The flower is not simply usefuL It is pleasing
There is grace about it. . . . The grace of life has its simplest manifestation in oui
external behaviour — in our manners. There is a joy to observed and observer in graceful
motion and pleasant phrase. . . • Politeness is the science and art of the outward
grace of life. It enunciates that strange code of salutations and fareweUs — those buffers
which soften approach, and with a last gentle touch make parting easy. Under the
fiction of giving information as to the weather, one spirit expresses to its fellow respect
and continued friendship. That spirit, in turn, under the form of confirming the afore-
said meteorological intelligence, reciprocates the kindly feeling. In such queer fashion
is human kindliness flashed from heart to heart." (Eev. David Bums.) 2. Their
afffctumate interest in each other's welfare. " They asked each other of their welfare"
(ver. 7). Burdened as he was, almost beyond endurance, with " the cumbrance, and
burden, and strife " (Deut. x. 12) of the congregation, Moses could unbend to show his
kindly interest in what was taking place in the quiet tents at Midian. This is a point
of greatness. The greatest man is not he who occupies so serene an elevation of spirit,
or whose mind is so engrossed with the duties of an exalted station, that he cannot stoop
to share in, and, as occasion offers, to testify his sympathy with, the joys and sorrows
of humbler people. No deficiency of this kind is seen in Moses — or in Jesus. It
is well to cultivate the habit of putting ourselves in the place of others, however
remote in station from ourselves, and of trying to feel a kindly interest in all that
concerns them. This will prevent us from becoming self-absorbed and egoistic.
Tlieir lives, we should remember, are of as much importance to them as ours are
to us, and the interest we show in them will be proportionately valued. A minister
once wrote in his note-book : " Don't pretend an interest in the members of your
congregation, but try to/eel it." " Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly
love " (Kom. xii. 10). 3. The theme of their converse. " Moses told his father-in-law
(brother-in-law) all that the Lord had done to Pharaoh," etc. (ver. 8). As imder
a former head we had a model meeting, so here we havG a model conversation.
Jethro and Moses conversed on the affairs of God's kingdom. No greater subject could
have occupied their thoughts. It is the subject of deepest and most central interest
in history — the grandest in its essential nature, the widest in its relations, the most
momentous in its issues. All other movements in time are side issues as compared with
this one. In considering it man passes out of sight, and the only question is, What
hath God wrought 1 (Nvun. xxiii. 23). We renew this conversation of Jethro and Moses
every time wo "speak of ihe glory of (God's) kingdom and talk of (his) power"
(Ps. cxlv. 11). Cf. the conversation of Christian with Prudence, Piety, and Charity in
the House Beautiful : — " Now the table was furnished with fat things, and wine that
was well refined; and all their talk at the table was about the Lord of the Hill; as,
namely, about what he had done, and wherefore he did what he did," etc. (PUgrim's
Progress^ Converse in heaven will turn on the same themes. Note — (1) It is profit-
able lor Christians to exchange experiences as to the manner of the Lord's dealings vsdth
them. Few but can tell something of " the travail that has come upon them by the
way, and how the Lord delivered them." (2) It is a mark of grace to feel an interest
in what relates to God's work, and to the progress of his kingdom at home and abroad.
This will show itself in a desire to read, hear, and converse on such subjects, and in the
interest discovered, and zeal shown, in the general work of the Church, in special
spiritual movements, in the success of missions, in spiritual operations in our own town
anil neighbourhood. (3) Some are called to more active service in God's work than
others. There are those that fight the battle, and there are those who tarry at home
and divide the spoil (Ps. Ixviii. 12). And those who have been personally engaged m
Unl's work — especially those who have returned from the high places of the field
(nassiimaries, etc.)— have always much to tell which it is of interest to hear, and which
wiii eiili Millie our heart* with new ardour in the cause of the GospeL W« »t"^'H wek



OB. xvm. 1— S.] TH£ BOOS Of E^ObUS. 81

the society of such, and take the opportunity of hearing them when they are to he heard,
that we ina,y be instructed and profited. What a thrilling history, e.g., is that ol
Christian missions, but what an additional interest it gives to its narrations when we heat
the story from the hps of the men who have actually fought the battles 1 (4) Christian
workers cannot converse together on the plans, methods, difBculties, conflicts, and
successes of their work without being mutually helped and edified. 4. Jethro'sjoy in
the relation (vers. 9 — 11). We are reminded of Barnabas, who, " when he came " to
Antioch, " and had seen the grace of God, was glad. , . . For he was a good man, and
full of the Holy Ghost and of faith " (Acts xi. 23). The history which Moses gave to
Jethro— (1) Filled Jethro with joy ; (2) Strengthened his faith in God — " Now 1 know
that the Lord is greater than all gods" (ver. 11) ; (3) Incited him to praise — "And
Jethro said. Blessed be the Lord," etc. (ver. 10). It will be observed how distinctly in
ver. 11 Jethro seizes the point in the contest between Jehovah and Pharaoh, and draws
the proper inference from it. God had chosen as a field for the display of his perfections
a case in which all the pride and power of man were arrayed against him in a determined
effort to resist, oppose, and make void his will, and he had demonstrated his supremacy
by completely annihilating that opposition, and overwhelming the Egyptians, who em-
bodied it, in the lied Sea. The army of Egypt was in some sense the country's pride
and boast, so that (though the translation in ver. 11 is apparently incorrect) it was
literally true that " in the thing wherein they dealt proudly " Jehovah was " above
them." God exalts himself by discomfiting his enemies in what they deem their points
of special strength. " I'oor perfection which one sees an end of! yet such are all those
things in this world which pass for perfections. David, in his time, had seen Goliath,
the strongest, overcome; Asahel, the swiftest, overtaken; Ahithophel, the wisest,
befooled ; Absalom, the fairest, deformed" (M. Henry on Ps. cxix. 96). " It is written,
1 will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of
the prudent" (1 Cor. i. 19). 5. The sacr^/ieial /east (ver. 16). We have here— (1)
Friendship cemented by an act of worship; (2) Eeligious converse culminating in
devotion ; (3) A feast sanctified by the enjoyment of the Divine presence — " before
God ; " (4) A foreshadowing of the union of Jews and Gentiles in the fellowship of the
church ; (6) An instance of catholicity in worship. Moses did not scruple to join in
sacrifice or to sit down at the same festival board with the Midianitish Jethro. The
lesson is thus enunciated by Peter: "Of a truth 1 perceive that God is no respecter of
persons; but in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is
accepted with him " (Acts x. 34, 35). — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 5. — The claims of home. "And Jethro, Moses' kinsman (not fether-in-law)
came with his sons and his wife imto Moses into the wilderoess, where he encamped at
the mount of God " (Ex. xviii. 5).

I. ClBOUMSTANCES MAT JTJSTIFT THE TEMPORARY REMISSION OF HOME RBSPONSI-

BiMTiES UPON OTHERS (vcr. 2). For example — and the history of Moses will illustrate
each point — we may he justified by — 1. The nature of external duty. We may be
providentially called away from home ; or the discharge of public responsibihtiea may
fur the time be incompatible with our usual attention to the interests of the domestic
circle, e.g., Moses going to Egypt (Ex. iv. compare with Ex. xviii. 2). 2. Tht
probability of danger. 3. Defective sympathy. It is clear that Zipporah was not in
sympathy with the religious object of Moses, nor yet with his specific mission. Need,
however, to be oi. our gua/d against making this a reason for withdrawal permanently
from homci responsibility. Want of perfect compatibiUty in domestic hfe makes
marriage to be an occasion for self-discipline, and is thus converted into a means of
grace. (Eph. v. 25—27.)

II. ClEOUMBTANCES SCARCELY EVER JUSTIFY THE PERMANENT REMISSION. There are

m few cases, perhaps, in which this responsibility may be devolved : e.g., the case of the
missionary who must, for various reasons, send home from his station his children to
be educated ; and not seldom the wife with them. Other cases there are, no doubt.
But generally the father may not devolve this obligation. It is one — 1. Of necessity.
No one else can meet the responsibility as the natural head of the family — this is true
in all cases — even in that of the missionary named above — for the childien suffer. 2.
0/ duty •'— (1) To eurselves. We owe it to our own convictions of truth, as tc



m THE BOOK OF EXODUS. las. xtul 1—12.

thought, 'ife, and work, to perpetuate them. (2) To dependents. Whether wife,
children, or servants. [On this point some valuable suggestions in Dr. Taylor's
" Moses the Lawgiver," pp. 173 — 176.] (3) To our generation ; and (4) to the Great
Father in heaven.

lU. If tempted to this ebmission God will bbikq home to us oub duty.
Probably by some providence, may be painful or otherwise. At such a time, on such
an occasion (Moses face to fa<!e with Sinai and the giving of the law) in such a place,
Jethro reintroduced to Moses wife and children. Even such duties as his could not
siempt him from domestic responsibility. — B.

Vers. 1 — 12. — 2%e Consolations of those who suffer loss for the Kingdom of Ood.
I. The reunion of the separated. To Moses, who had to leave behind him wife
and children because God's errand would brook no delay, these are now restored.
1. There is no loss to those who suffer for the kingdom of God's sake. 2. God fills the
cup of his servants with consolations. God's care had been exercised not only over
him in Egypt, but also over wife and children in Midian.

II. The theme of those who fear God. God's marvellous works (vers. 8, 9). It
was not the subject of public discourse or formal greeting, but of private converse
within " the tent." This is a mark of the true servant of Qfld ; to him God and his
goodness are the most real and wondrous of all things.

III. The result of the testimony. 1. Jethro's confession of Jehovah. 2. His
sacrifice to him. The stranger makes a feast before Israel's God for the princes of
Israel. Those whom we bring to God make a feast, in their £iith and love, for our soul
before the Lord. — U.

Vers. 6 — 12. — Friendship in its loftiest form. " They asked each other of their
welfare." Ex. xviii. 7. The visit of Jethro comes between the agony of Bephidim
and the solemnities of " Sinai," like the insertion of a sweet pastoral poem between
two tragedies. Something may be learnt from it as to what should characterise
£iendship in its highest form, that is, between two devout souls, as consecrated and
elevated by religion.

L Constancy. Moses and Jethro met as in the earlier years ; no assumption witk
Moses, no sycophancy with Jethro.

II. Courtesy. Yer. 7. The nearer our relations to each other, the more indispen-
sable this grace.

HI. M utual solicitude. Ver. 7.

IV. Interchange of experience. Vers. 8 — 11. Happy time, when the deeper
experiences (religious) can be exchanged to mutual advantage.

V. Communion in worship. Ver. 12. It is clear that Jethro and Moses were one
as to Monotheism, in their common possession of the great Divine traditions of the
race. Jethro spiritually was in the descent of Abel, Enoch, Noah, and Melchisedek.
B^or him but one God, the God of heaven and earth, and therefore the Cbd of InaeL
Contrast with Amalek ! Hence the sacrifice and the sacrificial feast.

VI. Fidelity in giving council. Vers. 14, 17 — 23. Great courage required.

VII. Humility in receiving it. This the moral attitude of Moses.

VIII. An ultimate beferenob in all intercourse to the Divine Friend. Ver.
23. " And God commanded thee so."

IX. Sympathy as to great object. Jethro knew the destiny of Israel, and was
concerned for the realisation.

X. Peaceful parting at life's diveroino paths. Ver. 27. Apply this to moral
and intellectual cross-roads; and to that which is so difficult — agreeing to differ —
and that with mutual respect and affection. All in view and hope of the perfect and
immortal amity that is beyond the sky. — B.

Vers. 1 — 12. — Jethro's visit — Moses in his domestic relaiioiu. In this virit of
Jethro three persons are brought prominently before us — ^Moses, Jethro, his father-in>
aw, and Zipporah,* his wife. Let us consider the details of the viut in their hearing on
»U these three persons.

L On Moses. Mot>es is usually seen either in the presence of God or in the i



OH. xnn. 1—12.1 THE BOOK OP EXODOii. 8»

of the people ; but here we get a peep at his private and domestic life, and nothing la
levealed but what adds dignity and beauty to his character. A servant of God must
have the same character, in all circumstances. It is not every public man that could
afford to have his private life laid open ; and only too often an earnest plea for pity hag
to be based on the remembrance of how frail and infirm a thing human nature is. But
in the instance of Moses neither veil nor plea are needed. This meeting with Jethrt
has to take place, and there was no reason to evade it ; it had also to be mentioned,
and there was no reason to conceal it. Moses had done nothing in his past residence in
Midian to make him ashamed or a&aid of returning to it. He had been a faithful
shepherd to Jethro ; a loving husband to Zipporah ; an equally loving father to Gershom
and Eliezer. It was Zipporah who had forsaken him, and not he Zipporah. He
returned as a prophet into what, in a certain sense, was his own country, and, if not
exactly honoured neither could he be dishonoured. Again we behold Moses showing,
in the most practical way, Ma respect for the family relation and the ties of kinship
generaHy. The importance of the family relation we have seen aheady brought out in
the institution of the Passover and the provision of the manna. Here Moses puts
emphasis on the relation by his own example. He showed himself one who regarded
domestic obligations as of the first importance Zipporah has failed him once, and that
in circumstances of great perplexity ; but he does not make this a plea for getting rid
of her. He knows his duties towards her, and by undertaking them in a manful and
conscientious way, he may bring her to a full recognition of her duty towards him. A
truly great nation, having a strong and beneficial society, is only possible by an aggre-
gation of households where household claims are respected by all. And evidently he
who must lead the way in acknowledging the claim is he who stands at the head. So
Moses did here. Lastly, Moses makes clear by his reception of Jethro and Zipporah
that he was the same kind of man as in the old shepherd days. Altered circumstances
with all their temptations had not miuie alterations for the worse in character. How
many there are who while Ufted in one way are lowered in another I They become
bigger men; but, alas! not better. Everything that reminds them of former and
humbler scenes is as wormwood to the taste. 'J o all such Moses, by his conduct here,
teaches a most powerful lesson. His strength among the thousands of Israel was not
that of a Human ruler who was to be girt about with all the paraphernalia of govern-
ment, in order to overawe the populace. Moses can step out of his tent, as if he were
one of the humblest of Israel, not only in character, but also in position. He can go
out and welcome his kindred, show to Jethro the outward signs of filial respect, talk to
them all in the old familiar way, and do it without the slightest fear that his authority
as leader is in any way affected. And this conduct would be all the more beautiful i^
as we may easily imagine, Zipporah came back to him rather lifted up because of het
husband's new position, and disposed with feminine vanity to make the most of it for
her own satlsfacti'in.

IL On Jetheo. This chapter, fuU as it is of Jethro, is another forcible illustration as to
how much ruvelation of character the Scripture record can put into a small space. Jethro,
hitherto known only as the near connectionr of Moses, stands before us here as a noble,
pious, and truly affectionate and considerate man. Much, indeed, he has had to try and
perplex him. Moses, who had made his first acquaintance with him under prepossessing
circumstances, who had become his brother-in-law and faithful shepherd, all at once
comes to him, without any previous notice, and asks his permission to return to Egypt.
Moses, we know, had been sternly shut up to this course by Jehovah, and to Jethro
it must have seemed entirely inexplicable. He had to part with his near rela-
tions; and a great void must thus have been left in his heart. Then presently
Zipporah returns, with her sons, in a very sore and rebellious frame of mind. All
Jethro can yet see is that this departure of Moses has brought nothing but domestic
discoid. And j et it is impossible for him to say that Moses has not done right. Ho
can only wait for the unfoldings of time, hstening meanwhile with what patience be
can muster to 'reproaches from neighbours and daughter and perhaps giandsons, with
respect to the unaccovmtable vagaries of Mosbs. And at last reUef comes, and not only
relief, but abundant justification. The information is such as to make Moses stand out
In the esteem of his father-in-law more highly than ever. All suspense as to Zip-
porah's duty is removed ; she must rejoin her husband. It was Moses and not Jethro



M THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [<*• "™- ^

who was tesponsible for her ; and, besides, Moses and Zipporah had a joint responei-
bility for their ofispring. Jethro is commonly set before us, in contrast to Amalek, aa
the illustration of heathenism, looking I'avourably and amicably upon IsraeL But even
more let us look upon him as the great illustration of those noble souls who strive to
unite what sin divides. Jesus in his teaching had occasion to lay emphasis on the
dividing effect of discipleship to himself. He intimated that the acceptance o' himself
would only too often rupture, or at least strain, natural ties. But this of course was
not presented as a thing to cause satisfaction. It was only another sad evidence of how
sin turns to evil what God meant for good. And yet here we see the other side,
reunion as well as separation. The liberation of Israel, glorious in its total result, and
lifting Moses to high eminence in respect of personal character, has yet involved at the
same time the wreck of his domestic peace. Whatever the comforts of wife and
children in this world may be, he has lost them. But now these comforts are coming
again, and coming in the most satisfactory of all ways, by the voluntary entrance of his
old Mend Jethro on the scene. Blessed are the peacemakers ; and surely of all peace-
making, that is not the least fruitful of good which reunites and reconstitutes a sepa-
rated family. Moses acting with a single eye to what is right has to part from his wife,
and let her go back to her own family. Jethro acting m the same spirit, brings the
wife to her husband again. Often we may have to become agents and helpers in
division ; but if we only go on, union and harmony will return. What Zipporah's future
was we know not ; but Jethro had done his utmost to put matters right.

III. On Zippobah. Her name occurs but little, and her appearance hitherto has not
been such as to make us think she would prove a helpful companion to Moses (ch. It.
25, 26). Still we must not judge too hastily from silence, it is not for Zipporah's
sake she happens to be mentioned here. It is sufBcient to learn, by the way, that an
opportunity for repentance and for devotion to him who had such a burden to bear, was
now given her. — ^Y.

Ver. 5. — " Te are come unto Mownt Zion." The way in which we view facts depends
a great deal on the eyes through which we look at them. Here, as regards Moses and
the Israelites in the wilderness, we may look on them through the eyes of Jethro, or of
Zipporah, or of the children ; for a change let us use the children's eyes, and enquire
how they transmit the fitcts to us. Sketch previous history of the children, their stay
in Midian, and journey to the camp. Notice : —

L What the childben saw and heard. As they came they would notice, first,
the moimtains, then the camp in the plain, then, perhaps, people moving about and
cloudy pillar suspended over all. At last, one man comes to meet them ; their father is
the leader of the host. 1. A new flock. In the old days Qershom must often have looked
out for his coming home ; then (cf. iii. 1) he had sheep to care for, now his flock is of
another kind (Ps. Ixxvii. 20). No longer Jethro's shepherd, but the shepherd of
Jehovah. Not really changed his profession — still the same kind of work — only,
having served his apprenticeship with Jethro, he has been called to a higher grade of
service. 2. A memorable spot. How had he come to change his service ? The very
place would remind them of the answer. There is the rough hill-side — ^there, perhaps,
the very bush where the angel appeared. The whole scene a fulfilment of God's pro-
mise and a pledge of his faithfulness (cf. iii. 12). 3. New-found relatives. A new uncle
and aunt, never seen before — could tell them about the old life in Egypt, their father's
birth and escape — ^the cruel slavery of their kindred — all the past would seem more
real now that they were confronted by these witnesses to its reality. Comparing the
past with the present, a suggestive commentary on Eliezer's name ; Moses had good
reason for saying, " my God is a help."

II. Parallel with ourselves. (Cf. Heb. xii. 22 — 24.) We, too, like the sons of
Moses, have been brought into new relations with our Father. As we approach him,
what may we see and hear ? 1. We find him in a holy place. Not a camp of wanderers
in the wilderness, but a holy city, one which hath foundations, the settled home of its
redeemed inhabitants. Pleasant for Gershom and his brother to find their father, but
they still had to look on to the day when they should find their home j for us home ia
our Father's house in the holy city upon the holy mountain. 2. Be introduces us to
holy fellowships. As Moses' children found new relatives, so do we: "an innomerablt



im. %rm. 18—26.]



THE BOOS OF EXODUS.



•1



dompany, the general assembly of the angels, and the Church of the first-horn, and th«
■pints of the justified." We may picture the interest with which Qershom and Eliezer
must have viewed the camp and listened to the story of deliverance ; hut the company
to which they had come was very different to that to which we have come ; the de-
liverance of which they heard was but a first step to freedom. They, no doubt, learnt
to sing, perhaps firom Miriam, the song of Moses; from those with whom we have
commimion we may learn the song of the Lamb.

Condtision, After all, the children, amid all the new sights, would rejoice most at
meeting their father — at seeing him, and remaining with him. As Jethro led them
towards the mount, their father was, doubtless, the subject of their talk ; all else derived
its interest only from its relation to him. Just so, too, with us. Heaven is our Father's
house ; it is our Father's presence that makes it home to us. As our Lord leads us
thitherward, it is still of the Father whom he speaks. Those whom the Father has
ipven into hia care he will bring to their journ^'s end in safety. — Q-.



EXPOSITION.



Ven. 18—26. — Jethro's advice to Moses,
AND ITS ADOPTION. The office of ruler in
ancient times, whether exercised by a king, a
prince, or a mere chieftain, was always under-
stood to include within it the ofiSce of judge.
In the Greek ideal of the origin of kingly
government (Herod, i. 96), the able discharge
of judicial functions marks the individual out
for sovereignty. The successors of Moses, like
the chief rulers of Cartha.Ere, bore the title of
" Judges " (shophetim, tuffetet). Moses, it ap-
pears, had from the time when he was accepted
as leader by the people (ch. iv. 29 — 31), re-
garded himself as bound to hear and decide
all the causes and complainls which arose
among the entire Israelite people. He had
not delegated his authority to any one. This
can scarcely have been because the idea bad
not occurred to him, for the Egyptian kings
ordinarily decided causes by judges nominated
ad hoc. Perhaps he had distrusted the ability
of his countrymen — so recently slaves — to dis-
charge such delicate functions. At any rate,
he had reserved the duty wholly to himself
(vor. 18). This course appeared to Jethro
unwise. No man could, he thought, in the
ease of so great a nation, singly discharge such
an office with satisfaction to himself and others.
Moses would "wear himself away" with the
fatigue ; and he would exhaust the patience of
the people through inability to keep pace with
the number of cases that necessarily arose.
Jethro therefore recommended the appoint-
ment of subordinate judges, and the reservation
by Moses of nothing but the right to decide
inch cases as these judges should, un account
of their difficulty, refer to him (ver. 22) On



reflection, Mosei accepted this eonise as the
best open to him under the circumstances, and
established a multiplicity of judges, under a
system which will be discussed in the com-
ment on verse 25.

Ver. 13. — On the morrow. The day after
Jethro's arrival. Moses sat to judge the peo-
ple. Moses, I. «., took his seat in an accustomed
place, probably at the door of his tent, and
was understood to be ready to hear and decide
causes. The people stood hy Moses. A crowd
of complainants soon collected, and kept Moses
employed incessantly from the morning, when
he had taken his seat, until the evening, i.<.,
until nightfall. It is conjectured that many
complaints may have arisen out of the division
of the spoil of the Amalekites.

Ver. 14. — Why sittest thou thyself alone
etc. A perverse ingenuity has discovered that
the emphatic words in this passage are "sittest"
and " stand," Jethro having blamed Moses for
humiliating the people by requiring them to
stand up while he himself sat 1 But the con-
text makes it abundantly clear that what
Jethro really blames, is Moses sitting alone
and judging the whole people single-handed,

Ver. 15. — And Moses said .... Because the
people come unto me, to inquire of &od. To
inquire of God is certainly not a mere " juridi-
cal phrase," meaning to consult a judge (Ka-
lisch), nor, on the other hand, is it necessarily
" to consult God through an oracle." It can-
not, however, mean less than to seek a decision
from some one regarded as entitled to speak
for God ; and it is certainly assigned by Moses
as the reason why he judged all the causes
himself, and did not devolve the duty upon
others. They could not be supposed to know
the mind of God as he know it. Jethro, how-
ever, points out, that it is one thing to lay
down principles, and another to apply them
Moses might reserve the legislative function —
the inculcation of principles — ^to himielf, and



THE BOOK OF EXODUa



[oh. xTm. 13—20



» still, " be for the people to Godwaid " (ver.
VJ); but he might find "able men" among
the congregation, qnite capable of applying
the principles, and delegate to them the judicial
function (vers. 21, 22).

Ver. 16. — ^I judge . . . and I do make them
know the statutes of God. As the Israelites
were, up to this time, without any code of
written laws, Moses took the opportunity fur-
nished by such cases as came before hbu, to
lay down principles of law, and enjoin them
upon the people ; thus making them to know
the statutes of God and his eternal unwritten
laws. Such a practice would not have been
necessary after the giving of the law on Mount
Sinai ; and its existence at the time of Jethro's
visit helps to fix that visit as occnrring be/ore
the giving of the law.

Ver. 18. — ^The thing ... is not good — i.e.,
not expedient, and so not the right thing to
do. It is a man's duty to have regard to his
health, and not unnecessarily overtask his
strength.

Ver. 18. — ^Thou wilt surely wear away.
Literally, "Wasting thou wilt waste away,"
Thy strength, i.e., will not long hold out, if
thou continuest this practice. Both thou, and
this people. The people's strength and patience
will also fail, if, owing to the number of the
complaints, they have — some of them — to wait
all day at the bibunal before they can obtain
a decision.

Ver. 19. — ^I will give thee counsel, and Qod
shall be with thee. Eather — " And may God
be with thee 1 " May God incline thine
heart to accept my counsel and act upon it.
Be thou for the people to Qod-ward, etc.
" Continue," t.e., as at present, to be the inter-
mediary between God and the people — still be
the whole and sole source of legislative power
(ver. 20), and still be the fount and origin of
judicial authority; but commit the actual
decision of the lighter causes to others chosen
by thyself for the office (vers. 21, 22). The
separation of the legislative and judicial func-
tions was well known in Egypt, where the
kings alone made new laws (Herod, ii. 109,
13(), 177, etc.), but causes were ordinarily
determined by a body of judges. Bring the
eauses unto Ood. In difHcolt cases, Moses
actually laid the cause before God, and ob-
tained directiotis from God as to the manner
in which he was to decide it. See Num.
xxvii. 5 — 11.

Ver. 20. — Ihon shalt teach them ordinances
and laws. Or, "statutes and laws," as in
ver. 16. It is not quite clear how these differ.
Some regard " statutes " as connected with
religion, and laws as regulations with respect
to civil and social matters. Others explain
the first as " specific " and the second as
" general enactments." The way wherein
they must walk. The general line of conduct
which all are bound to pursue. The work that



they must do. The special task which each
has to perform individually.

Ver. 21. — ^Able men. Literally, "men of
might" — i.e., of capacity or ability — ^men com-
petent for the office of judge ; who are further
defined to be, such as possess the three qnalitiei
of piety, veracity, and strict honesty, or incor-
ruptness. Jethro's conception of the true ju-
dicial character leaves little to be desired. If
among every ten Israelites ttere was one such
person, the moral condition of the nation can-
not have been so much depressed by the
Egyptian servitude as is sometimes repre-
sented. Place such ovei them to be rulers of
thousands, etc. A decimal organisation natu-
rally presents itself to men's minds as the
simplest in a simple state.of society, and was
probably already in use among the Arab tribes
with whom Jethro was familiar. The gradu-
ated series — ^rulers of tens, of fifties, of hun-
dreds, and of thousands, implies a power of
three-fold appeal, from the " ruler of ten " to
the " ruler of fifty " — ^from him to the " ruler
of a hundred " — and from him to the " ruler of
a thousand." Whether there was an appeal
from the last-named to Moses, is doubtful.
Probably there was not ; Moses deciding those
cases only which the "rulers of thousands"
reserved for him as being specially difficult or
important.

Ver. 22. — Let them judge the people at all
seasons. Instead of occasional court-days, on
which Moses sat from morning to evening
hearing causes, judgments were to be given
continually by the nJers of tens, fifties, etc.,
the accumulation of untried causes being thus
avoided, and punishment following promptly
on the committal of an offence. The elabor-
ately minute organisation was only suited for
the period of the wanderings, and was of a
semi-military character, such as might have
suited an army on the march When the
Israelites became settled dwellers in Palestine,
such a multiplicity of judges was uimecessary,
and was discontinued. fk> shall it be easier.
Literally, " So make it easier." Compare
ver. 18.

Ver. 23. — And God command thee so.
Jethro does not suppose that Moses will take
his advice without further consultation. He
assumes that the matter will be laid by Mcses
before God, and God's will leamt concerning
it. The entire narrative supposes that there
was some established means by which the
Israelite leader could refer a matter to Jehovah
and obtain a decision upon it. This can
scarcely have been as yet the Urim and
Thummim. Probably Moses held frequent
conimmucation with Jehovah by means of
waldng visions. Thou shalt be able to en-
dure — i.e., " the work will not be tou much
for thee — ^thou wilt be able to bear it." This
people shall also go to their place in peaoe.
The " place " mtuuded would seem t<> b*



, x\m. 14—23.]



THE BOOK OF EXODU&



Palestine. Keil supposes that the word
" peace " is to be taken literally, and concludes
from it that breaches of the peace had pre-
viously been frequent, the people having
"often taken the law into their own hands
on account of the delay in the judicial de-
cision ;" hut this is to extract from the words
more tiian they naturally signify. " In peace "
means " cheerfully, contentedly.'* If the
changes which he recommends are carried
out, Jethro thinks that the people wiU make
the rest of the journey to Canaan quietly and
contentedly, without complaint or dissatis-
faction.

Ver. 24. — So Moses hearkened. Moses
took the advice tendered him, not iimnediately,
but aftei the law had been given at Sinai, and
the journeying was about to be resumed. See
Dent. i. 9-15.

Ver. 25. — glioses chose able men. It appears



from Deut. i. 13, that instead of selecting the
men himself, which would have been an
invidious task, Moses directed their nomination
by the people, and only reserved to himself
the investing them with their authority. Heads
over the people. From the time of their
appointment, the " rulers " were not merely
judges, hut " heads " of their respective com-
panies, with authority over them on the march,
and command in the battle-field (Num. xxxi.
14). Thus the organisation was at once civil
and military.

Ver. 26. — ^At all seasons. See the comment
on verse 22. The hard causes they brought
unto Moses. It must have been left to the
discretion of the judges to determine whether
a cause was hard or easy, a great or a little
matter. Probably only those causes which
seemed " hard " to the " mleis of thousands "
were brought before Moses for decisioiL



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 14 — 23.— The unwisdom of a monopoly of power. The principle of the division
of labour, which is essential to progress in the arts, was well known in Egypt, and was
applied there, not to the arts only, but also to government and administration. Moses,
who had resided forty years at the court of a Pharaoh (Acts vii. 23), must liave been
thoroughly acquainted with the fact that, in a well-ordered community, judicial
fimctions were separated from legislative and administrative, and entrusted to a laiee
number of persons, not monopolised by a single individual. But it had appeared fo
him that the conditioli of his own people was exceptional. Just released firom the
cruel bondage of a hard and pitiless slavery, without education, without habits of com-
mand or self-control, without any knowledge of the principles of law or experience in
the practice of courts, they seemed to him unfit for the exercise of the judicial office —
especially as he understood it. For his view was, that each particular decision should
be made an occasion of educating the people in the principles of law and justice (ver. 16),
and upon these it was his habit to descant in connection with each judgment that he
delivered. As lie felt that he alone among all the Israelites was equal to this task, he
had undertaken to discharge singly the office of judge in a community consisting of
above two millions of persons. Jethro, on visiting him, was struck with the unvrisdom
of such an attempt, and honestly gave expression to his feelings. Jethro saw —

I. That to monopolise the judicial function in so large a communitt was

UNWISE, AS AN UNDUE STBAIN UPON THE MENTAL AND PHYSICAL POWERS OF THE

MONOPOLISBB. So numerous were the causes brought before him that Moses had to sit
" from morning to evening " — probably from early dawn until the dusk of the evening
twilight — hearing them. At eighty years of age, or more (ch. viL 7), his physical
strength was not equal to this exertion. Our physical powers have to be considered.
No one is justified in overtaxing them unnecessarily. The body needs change of attitude
and employment, air, gentle exercise, freedom from restraint, confinement, tension. No
one could habitually sit at any one task for twelve hours continuously without its telling
on his bodily frame and injuring his constitution. Again, the mental strain must have
been injmious to him, and if not actually impairing his faculties, must have interfered
with their due exercise and rendered him unfit to perform the delicate duties of a judge
late in the day. Had necessity been laid upon him, had God appointed him to be the
sole judge of the people, or had there actually been no one else among the Israelites
competent to the performance of any part of the work, he would have been right in
acting as he did, for health is not the first consideration ; but this was not so. GJod had
not spoken upon the point ; and there was an abundance of men in the congregation,
quite competent to perform minor judicial functions, as Jetiiro clearly percraved, «>d m



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xvol 14—23,



he himself also saw when it was pointed out to him. Thus he was exhausting himself
unnecessarily, a proceeding which cannot be justified.

IL That it was also unwise, as unduly taxing the patience of thepeoplb.
One man could not keep pace with the number of constantly arising causes, which niust
have tended to accumulate, whence would arise a delay of justice. It was inconvenient
enough to have to wait from the morning until the evening before obtaining a hearing ;
but probably the case was not uncommon of a cause being put off to the next court-day,
which, if the people were on the march, might be several days distant. The con-
venience of suitors is an important consideration in the administration of justice,
which should be prompt as well as sure, to content men's natural sense of what is
fitting.

lU. That, fuetheb, it tended to cramp the exercise bt the people of powers

■WHICH THEY POSSESSED, AND THE EMPLOYMENT OF WHICH WOULD HAVE ELEVATED THEM.

There were in Israel and will always be in every community, " able men," well fitted to
take part in the decision of causes. Such men will commonly be very numerous ; and
if they have no part in the administration of justice, a large section of the community
will at once be dissatisfied with the slight passed upon them, and debarred firom an
employment which would have tended to their moral education and elevation. The
jury system of modem states is a recognition of the fact, that judicial capacity is vfidely
spread, and that society ought to provide a field for its exercise. It is important to
utilise the powers possessed by all members of the community, both for their own con-
tentation and for the general welfare of the community itself. The world is over-full of
despots and monopolists, persons who desire to grasp as much power as possible, and
are unwilling to share their office with others. We may acquit Moses of such selfish-
ness ; but we cannot acquit all those who follow in his footsteps. It would be well if
persons in positions of authority nowadays sought generally to associate others la
their work — to call out latent talent, exercise it, and so educate its possessors.

Ver. 21. — The necessary qualifications of such as are to exercise the office of jvdgex. —
Few positions in life are more important than that of the judge. Not only are the lives
and liberties of individual citizens at his disposal, but the very existence of the State
depends on him, since unless justice is in the main administered states fly to pieces. It
has been said that the whole elaborate machinery of the British Constitution has been
designed and arranged with the ultimate object of putting twelve honest men together
into a jury box. Where the functions to be discharged are so important, it is of the
utmost moment that qualifications should be laid down in theory, and strictly adhered
to in practice. Jethro saw that judges ought to be —

1. Men of ability. Ordinary, common-place powers are not enough.. " Non ex
quovis ligno Mercurius fit." Something above the average is necessary. Jethro thought
one man in ten among the Israelites might possess sufficient intelligence and discrimi-
nation to judge the lowest class of causes, those of the least account. This was a some-
what sanguine estimate. In modem communities, which boast of their general
enhghtenmeut, considerably less than one-tenth of the citizens have their names
mscribed upon the jury lists. The standard of intelligence however varies in diiferent
ages and countries, so that no hard-and-fast hue can be laid down on the subject. All
that can be insisted upon is this — the judge should be a person recognised to possess
ability for his office, i.e., sagacity and practical discernment. If he has not these gifts,
it is no use his possessing others, as learning, scholarship, artistic or scientific attain-
ments. He will not be respected ; no confidence will be felt in him ; his decisions will
carry no weight, and will injure rather than benefit the community.

2. Men or piety. " Provide out of all the people such as fear God," said Jethro. It
is greatly to be feared that this qualification is in modern times but slightly regarded.
How seldom do we hear it asked of any newly-appointed -judge — Is he a religious man?
And yet unless God is feared, there can be no security that justice wiU be done even
by the judge of the greatest possible intelligence. If a man be not God-fearing, ha
may allow prejudice, passion, even caprice to sway his judgments. He may gradually
become like the " unjust judge," who " feared not God neither regarded man." Or,
again, he may have to pronounce judgment in matters concerning religion, for such
Will often come before courts, and then what weight can be expect his decisions tl



m. XTin. 18— 27.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. N

haTe? It is a wise and venerable custom which makes it incumbent on our "judges
of assize " to preface the opening of their commission in each assize town by attend-
ance at Divine service and hearing of God's word preached by a minister of the GospeL
It would be still better if those who nominate judges would follow Jethro's counsel,
and take care in each instance to select for the oiKoe " such as fear God " — i.e., sincerely
religious persons. The reality of religion is preferable to the show of it ; and the only
security for righteous judgments is that the judge bo himself a rij;hteous man.

3. Men of truth. Thcsre can be no real piety without truthfulness, so that this
qualification is, in fact, included in the last. But there is a semblance of piety which
is not over-scrupulous with regard to truth, or " pious frauds " would not have passed
into a bye-word. Truth, the love of it, the honest desire to search it out, and make it
manifest, is so essential a quality in a judge, that it deserves separate mention, and can
never be dispensed with, whatever other qualifications a man may have. Let tliere be
any suspicion of a man's truthfulness, and then, whatever reputation for piety may
attach to him, he is not fitted to be a judge, and ought not to be selected for the
judge's office.

4. Men of probity, who would scorn to take a bribe. The " corrupt judge " is the
opprobrium of debased nations, the disgrace of his calling, the destroyer of the state to
which he belongs. In many ancient kingdoms corruption, when detected in a judge,
was punished by instant execution. Where it has been regarded as venial and
punished inadequately, as at Rome, society has rapidly deteriorated and a revolution has
shortly supervened. We may congratulate ourselves that judges in our own country
are not only incorrupt, but beyond suspicion, so far above taking a bribe that no one
would dare to offer them one. In the East, on the contrary, according to the universal
testimony of travellers, it is scarcely possible to find the office of judge exercised by any
oue who is not notoriously open to corrupt influence, who does not expect, and is not
anxious to receive, bribes. Among the Jews, judicial corruption is first noticed among
the sons of Samuel, who " turned aside after lucre, and tooh bribes, and perverted judg-
ment " (1 Sam. viii. 3). In the decline of the nation, the evil grew and increased, and
is frequently denounced by the prophets (Is. i. 23 ; Jer. v. 28 ; Ezek. xxii. 27 ; Micah
iii. 11 ; vii. 3, etc.).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 13 — 27. — The appointment of judges. During the few days that Jethro was
with Moses, he did the latter an essential service, and initiated nothing short of a
revolution in the manner of conducting judicial business. Besides its immediate
lessons (noted below), this incident of the appointment of judges is valuable as illus-
trating — 1. The scope left in the arrangements of Israel for the independent action
of the human mind. Various examples of this occur in the history — e.g., the retention
of Hobab as a guide in the wanderings (Num. x. 31), and the suggestion of the spies
(Deut. i. 22). 2. The truth that in God's ways of dealing with Israel, existing
caiiabilities were utilised to the utmost. We have seen tliis in regard to the miracles,
ind again in the conflict with Amalek ; it is now to be noted in the formation of a
polity. The same principle probably applies to what is said in ver. 16 of Muses
making the people to "know the statutes of God and his laws." That Moses,
in ^ving forth these statutes, acted under supernatural direction, and frequently by
express instruction of God, is not to be denied ; but it is equally certain that existing
usages, embodying principles of right, were taken advantage of as far as they went.
We cannot err in supposing that it is this same case-made law which, in its com-
pleted form, and under special Divine sanction, is embodied in the code of chs. xxi-xxiii.
I3ut neither in substance nor in form is this code, so various in its details, a direct
Divine product. It grew up under Moses' hand in these decisions in the wilderness.
Traditional materials were freely incorporated into it. 3. The assistance which a man
of moderate gifts is often capable of rendering to another, greatly his superior.
Jethro's was certainly a mind of no ordinary capacity ; but we do this excellent man no
injustice in speaking of his gifts as moderate in comparison with the splendid abilitieg
of Moses. Yet his natural shrewdness and plain common-sense enabled him to detect
a blunder in Moses* system of administration of which the lawgiver himself wm



THE BOOK OF EXODUa fcH. xvm. 18—27.



apparently oblivious, and furnished him, moreover, with the suggestion of a remedy.
The greatest minds are in this way often dependent on the humblest, and are, by the
dependence, taught humility and respect for the gifts of others. There is no one who
is not his neighbour's superior in some matter — ^none from whom his neighbour may
not learn something. The college-bred man may learn from the rustic or mechanic,
the merchant from his clerk, the statesman from the humblest ofBcial in his depart-
ment, the doctor of divinity from the country minister, studious men generally, from
those engaged in practical callings. Let no man, therefore, despise another. Jethro
could teach Moses ; and the plainest man, drawing on the stores with which experience
has furnished him, need not despair of being of like service to those above him. It is
for our own good that God binds us together in these relations of dependence, and wo
should be thankful that he does so. " The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need
of thee : nor, again, the head to the feet, I have no need of thee," etc. (1 Cor. xiL
14-3 1\ Observe—

I. MosBs' EBBOB (ver. 13). He took upon himself the whole burden of the congregar-
tion. He sat from morning till evening to hear their causes. We naturally wonder that
the suggestion of appointing judges was left to come from Jethro — that so obvious
an expedient for getting rid of the difficulty did not occur to Moses himselt It is
astonishing, however, how wise a man may be in great things, and yet miss some little
bit of sense which is right before his vision, and which is picked up at once by another
and possibly a more ordinary mind. It is of Sir Isaac Newton the story is told, that
being troubled by the visits of a cat and kitten, he fell on the expedient of making two
holes in his study door to admit of their entrance and exit — a large hole for the cat, and
a small hole for the kitten I Moses' error, we may be sure, did not arise from that which
is a snare to so many in responsible positions — an exaggerated idea of his own import-
ance. Ho would not fancy that everything must be managed by himself, because no one
else was able to do it so well. But : — 1. Tiie burden which now pressed upon him had
probably grown from small beginnings. It is proverbially easier to set a system in
operation, than to get rid of it again, when it prassss and becomes inconvenient. 2.
Moses probably accepted the position of judge^and arbiter, as inseparable from the
peculiar relation in wliich he stood to the people.' They naturally looked to him, God's
delegate, and in some sense their spiritual father, as the proper person to hear their
causes, and settle their disputes. He felt the burden, but submitted to it as inevitable.

3. It was a fiirther difficulty in the situation that no code of laws had as yet been
formed ; he was making the law as well as deciding cases. This may have seemed a bar
in the way of the appointment of deputies. 4. The method by which the reform could
be accomplished was not obvious. Jethro's scheme exactly met the case ; but it had uot
as yet been suggested. Even had it occurred to Moses, he might have shrunk from
entertaining it. There is always a hesitancy felt in entering on reforms which neces-
sitate a large recasting of the frame-work of society, which involve new and untried
arrangements. Difficulties might have been anticipated in finding the requisite number
of men, in imparting to them the requisite amount of instruction, in making the scheme
popular among the people, etc. It is useful to observe that when the scheme was
actually set on foot, these difficulties did not prove to be insuperable. Nor, when Jethro
made his proposal, do the difficulties seem to have been much thought of. Moses saw
the wisdom of the plan, and readily adopted it. We are often thus kept back from
useful undertakings by the ghosts of our own fears.

II, Jethbo's expostulation (vers. 14 — 19). If Moses did not see the mistake he
was committing, Jethro did. To his clearer vision, the evils of the system in vogue were
abundantly apparent. He saw : — 1. That Moses was taking upon himself a task to
which his strength was quite unequal (ver. 18). 2. That, notwithstanding his exer-
tions, the work was not being done. 3. That the time and energy which Moses wa»
expending in these labours could be bestowed to infinitely better pin-pose (ver. 20).

4. Above all, that this expenditure of strength on subordinate tasks was unnecessary,
seeing that there were men in the camp as capable as Moses himselfof doing a large part
of the work (ver. 21). t)n these grounds he based his expostulation. The lessoni
taught are of great importance. (1) The negle(!t of division of labour in Christian work
leads to serious evils. The work is not overtaken, the strength of those engaged in it il
greatly overtaxed, while energy is bestowed on inferior tasks which might be applied ta



OH. iviii. 13—27.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. VI

better purpose. (2) The adoption of division of labour in Christian work secures
obvious advantages. It relieves the responsible heads, expeditesbusiness and promotes
order, secures that the work is better done, and utilises a great variety of talent which
would otherwise remain unemployed. These are important eonsiderations, and the
application of them to hard wrought clergymen, and to others in responsible positions, is
sufBciently obvious (see an essay by Dr. Caird, on " The co-operation of the laity in the
government and work of the Church," in Qood Words for 1863). Not a little work is
heaped by congregations on ministers which could be far better done by persons among
themselves, and the doing of which by laymen would leave the minister free in mind
and heart for the discharge of his higher and proper duties.

III. The proposal or the appointment of judges (vers. 19 — 27). Jethro's scheme
had every merit which a scheme of the kind could have. It relieved Moses, provided
for the overtaking of the work, and secured that, while being overtaken, the work would
be done with greater efficiency. It was a bold, comprehensive measure, yet withal
perlectly workable. It would also have an important eflect in welding the nation
together. It is to be noted concerning it : — 1. That it reserved to Moses various
important duties (vers. 19, 20). He was still to be the teacher of the people in the
ordinances and laws of God, and had the duty of trying and of deciding upon causes
of special difficulty. This would fully occupy his powers, while his relation to the
people, as God's vicegerent, would be better preserved by his retaining a position apart,
and keeping himself from their petty strifes. 2. That special stress is laid upon the
character of the men to be selected as judges (ver. 21). Ability is not overlooked, but
peculiar importance is attached to their being men that fear God, love truth, and hate
covetousness. Happy the country which has such judges ! Jethro's insistance on these
particulars shows him to have been a man of true piety, and one who had an eye to the
true4nterests of the people, as well as to the good of Moses. 3. The scheme, before leing
adopted, was to be submitted for God's approval (ver. 23). This should be done with
all our schemes. Jethro, having accomplished this useful bit of work, returned to his
home in peace (ver. 27).— J. 0.

Vers. 13 — 16. — The Christian in Public Paths. "Moses sat to judge the people:
and the people," etc. (Ex. xviii. 13). Explain with accuracy the work of Moses. On
such a text might be based a homily on the functions, work and bearing of a civil magis-
trate or judge. But it is better to give the subject a wider application, and to treat it-
under Christian lights.

L The functions of a Christian. Moses sat as a prophet, expounding the Divine
will, as revealed to his exalted soul by the Spirit of God ; and as a Judge, deciding contro-
versies. Indeed the two functions were blended ; in giving legal decisions, he treated
the suitors as intelligent and moral beings, assigning the principles on which they were
based. These functions of Moses may suggest what should be those of a Christian in
the public paths of life. 1. To expound the mind and will of Ood: i.e., his truth and
his law. 2. To promote peace : i.e., in all the relations of life (Matt. v. 9).

II. The manner of their discharge. 1. With patierux. " From the morning unto
the evening." 2. In the spirit of brotherhood. " The people stood by Moses." No airs
of superiority. 3. With diligence. Moses went on with his work, though (1) He had
distinguished visitors. Jethro might have been an excuse for a vacation or a sh (rt
session. No ! " on the morrow " he went on with duty, and worked as long as it wa*
light. " Necessary business must always take the place of ceremonious attention. It
is too great a compliment to our friends to prefer the enjoyment of their company
before our duty to God." (2) Ee had come to great honour. Moses did not take
his ease and throw the burdens upon others. " Koblesse oblige." It is the
honour of angels to minister (Heb. i. 14 ; Matt. xx. 28). (3) Me had received great
provocation. (4) Advancing in years. To life's last hour Moses worked for the public
good. — E.

Vers. 17 — 27. — The Economy of Force. " The thing that thou doest is not good," etc.
Ex. xviii. 17, 18. In the error of Moses, and the amendment suggested by Jethro, are
to be discovered most valuable lessons. This day in the life of Moses was a microcosm of
all his days. His whole life was service. So with all true life. But in such a life mit>-

EXODUS — u. H



M THE BOOK OF EXODUii [ch. xviu. 18—27.

takes are possible. We inquire then what are the Divine conditions of a life of
true ministry ?

L Ceabaoteb. The elements were laid down by Jethro as qualifications of the new
judges. Certain that Moses possessed them. So must all who aim at usefulness
(ver. 21). 1. Ability . Strange that ability comes first ; but so it must be. Piety with-
out ability can adorn only obsciuity. Service and responsibility demand the man of
power. Ability may be natural ; but is also to be acquired. Hence duty of hard work,
especially in morning of life. 2. Piety. Ability is the engine of the soul, the fear of
God the helm. Richard Cobden was wont to say : — " You have no security for a man
who has no religious principle." Said his colonel to Hedley Vicars, offering him in 1852
the adjutancy of his regiment : — " Vicars, you are the man I can best trust with responsi-
bility." 3. Trrtih. 4. Disinterestedness.

II. Economy, ».«., of force and of resource ^vers. 17, 18). Remark : — 1. That the
most earnest are likdy to neglect it. It is not the hack but the thoroughbred that needs
to be held in. The energy of Moses led him into error. So earnestness kills itself with
excess of work. 2. That there is necessity for economy. As with money, one must not
spend 25s. a week, if one has only 20s. ; so there is a Umitation as to strength (of every
kind), time, and opportunity. 3. Tliat the economy is easy. The Christian worker
should not attempt that which is above, beside, or beneath hits power or vocation. >i or
ail that is on the level of his ability. 4. That the consequences will be abundant
and ridi. The result of division of labour in a factory ; so with spiritual enter-
prise, the effects will be the enrichment of the Church, and the largest service for the
world.

III. CoNOEKTEATiON. The more we withdraw effort from that which is not within
our own province, the more must we accumulate and concentrate energy upon that
which is. — H.

Vers. 13 — ^27. — Oood counsel well taken. I. Zeal mat outedn discbetion.
L Moses' strength was overtaxed, his spirit needlessly burdened. 2. There was delay
for the people with its vexation and loss. The most self-sacrificing love will not of itself
make our methods the best and wisest.

IL What is needful fob the giving of advice. 1. Affectionate interest and
care. The people's need and Moses' burden both weigh upon Jethro's spirit. 2. Wis-
iom. A better way is clearly conceived, all the requirements of the case are grasped
and met. 3. Honest plainness. 4. Piety. He asked Moses to take his advice only so
far as God vnll command him.

III. What is needful foe profiting by good counsel. 1. Readiness to listen.
There is on Moses' part no proud resenting of a stranger's interference. The voice was
heard as if it rose up within his own bosom. 2. Obedience to conviction. He not only
heard and assented, he went and did it. — U.

Vers. 13 — 26. — Jethro's advice. In considering this passage it is desirable to form
some distinct opinion as to the time of Jethro's visit to Moses. How comes this episode
to be mentioned at alt, and what is its point of attachment to the main course of the
history? Evidently it would not have been inserted unless as explaining how these
rulers of thousands, hundreds, fifties and tens, had first been appointed. The origin of
this appointment is then seen to be traceable to Jethro's prudent and sagacious sugges-
tions. It has then to be further explained how Jethro happens to be in the camp atalL
And so we have another illustration of how things which seem utterly disconnected from
one another yet have a very real connection. Bee Zipporah on the way from Midian to
Egypt rebelling against the ordinance of the Lord ; and then look on all this orderly and
careful provision for the administration of justice through the tribes of Israel. What
connection should there be between these? Yet one leads to the other. As to the
time of the visit, any exact determination is of course out of the question, but this
much at least may be guessed that the visit was after the giving of the law. What if
it happened just about the time of Miriam's jealousy against Moses, and was in some
measure the cause of it ? (Num. xii.) Such a supposition too would better harmonise
with the reference in Ter. 16, when Moses represents himself as explaining the statutes
■ Uod and his laws. May we not almost say that if this chapter were inserted som»>



m. XTin. 13—26.] THE BOOK- OF EXODUS. ftft

where in the earlier part of the book of Numbers, and from it we looked back on all th«
mass of legislation in Exodus and Leviticus, it would read with far greater force ?

I. We have God's people presented to ds as abounding in occasions or dispjtb
AKONO themselves. This appears as a certain consequence of that spirit of self-seeking
so manifest and strong among them. The law from Sinai of course conflicted with
many old and honoured traditions. That law had been given to secure in the first
place a nation devoted to the service of God; and in the second place the mutual
prosperity of all the members of that nation. If only every Israelite had obeyed these
laws from the heart, and entered into the spirit of them, then the prosperity of all
would have been ensured. But as a matter of fact most part of the Israelites wanted to
conform to the laws just so far as suited their convenience and no further. Laws were
to be interpreted very strictly when such interpretations were for their advantage, and
very loosely when the contrary. The disputes, misunderstandings, and lawsuits of
society are a great reproach, and ought to be a great humiliation. Think of all the
machinery wluch is in daily operation through such a land as England to secure, as far
as may be, the doing of right between man and man. And yet this machinery,
expensive and elaborate as it is, works in a very unsatisfactory way ; indeed that which
is meant to work justice very often works injustice, and certainly very seldom ensures
the exact attainment of right. Hence, however pleased we are to look on Jethro's sug-
gestions here, and see them carried out with a measure of success, we feel that they
must not be suffered to hide an end more desirable still. Law reformers cry out, and
with ample cause, for the adoption of such means as will secure a cheap and speedy
settlement of aU disputes. But how much more would be gained if only there was a
universal acceptance of the Gospel, with all its powers and principles ! That Gospel
puts into man a loving and unselfish heart and a spirit of brotherliness, which, if
allowed fair play, would soon do away with litigation and all that leads to it. A world
of Christians would be a simple-hearted, plain-living people, ever acting towards one
another in truth, kindness, and goodwill. Cheap justice is good ; but the new heavens
and the new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness, are much better.

II. We see Moses doino his best, by individual effort, to reconcile and satisft
THESE disputants. We get the impression of a man whose hands are full with his
judicial work. When his own dear kinsfolk come in such affecting and pressing circum-
stances, he can only spare for them a brief interval ; and a large part of that interval
seems to have been occupied with religious exercises. With the morning light Moses
settles down to what he must have found a weary and discouraging work. Many
a perjury, many an impudent claim, many a reckless slander, many a pitiful story
of oppression and extortion he would have to listen to. It is the daily work of judges
and magistrates to deal with the seamy side of human nature, but then this is their
business ; they look for it, they get used to it, above all they are paid for it. Perhaps
they would say, most of them, that it is no affair of theirs to ask too curiously whence
all this disputing comes and how it is to be cured. They are there to administer laws
and not to make them. But Moses was more than a judge. He had not only to settle
these disputes by the way, but also to guide the disputers towards Canaan. We are per-
fectly certain, too, that the great bulk of those against whom justice compelled him to
decide would become his enemies. Yet he struggled on, accepting the responsibility, and
trying to get the laws of God for Israel more and more accepted among the people. He
indeed sets us, in this matter, a noble example. The pressure which was upon him will
never rest upon us, for all men sought him ; but we also have our limited opportunity,
larger alas 1 than we seek to use, of advancing the things that make for peace. There
Is so much to promote discord, so much to excite partisan spirit ; there are so many
to tear every rent wider, instead of putting in the little stitch in time that saves nine,
that we may well ask for grace, gentleness, fidelity, and impartiahty, in order to put in
our intervening word when such a word may be possible and acceptable. The more we
think of all t&t there is in this world acting, often alas 1 consciously and deliberately,
to spite, separate, and irritate, the more let us determine to form part of a reuniting and
cementing force.

III. Notice the timely presence and counsel of Jbthro. Truly there is appear-
ance here of something unaccountable in the dealings of God. Such a seemingly
important matter as the judicial system of Israel owes its existence to the suggestion it

H 2



U» THE BOOK OF EXODUa [oh. xviii. 1»— 26.

•n outsider. And yet it might have been thought that this was exactly one of thf
tilings which Jehovah would provide for by express enactments. When it is a matter
of making the tabernacle, he is very particular as to measurements and materials, but
when it is a matter of judging causes, he leaves it to be determined by the advice of an
apparently casual visitant to the camp. There is nothing really strange in aU this, if
we remember that Gud only instructs us where we cannot make discoveries for ourselves.
Revelation does not supersede, it rather assumes and requires the exercise of common
sense and natural judgment. We find a somewhat parallel case to this in the New
Testament when the deacons were appointed. Common sense told the apostles they
were becoming burdened with work which did not properly belong to them, and only
hindered them in the doing of work for which they were specially responsible ; and so
here the common sense of Jethro steps in to suggest to liuaes a more excellent way.
Why did not Moses think of it himself? The very fact that he did not shed a great
deal of light on his character. His strength lay not in personal initiation, but in com-
plete waiting and dependence on God. If God had commanded the institution of these
rulers, he would very quickly have iiad the command in operation ; but he never thought
of proposing the plan himself. But when another proposes it, he can see at once that
it is a wise, practicable, and necessary one. Moses is not to be blamed as wanting in
sagacity in that he failed to see this remedy before. Great discoveries are simple
enough when once they are made; and then everyone wonders they were not naade
long before.

IV. Ubsebvb the details of Jbthko's advice. Not only does he suggest the
obtaining of help from somewhere, but taking in the whole situation at a glance, he can
iuggest exactly the best thing to be done. Probably as a priest in Midian he had seen
a great many disputings and helped to some extent in the settlement of them. We
cannot but feel as we read through the details of the counsel, that whatever may be
lacking in Jethro's formal standing, he acquits himself as one who is really and oppor-
tunely the messenger of God. He speaks as a good and true man ought to speak
both for the relief of his kinsman and for the abiding good of the whole people. He
judges that in Israel itself there are resources enough to meet the emergency, if only
properly searched out and arranged. Given 600,000 men, surely among them there
will be a fair proportion who have the qualities required. Notice that Jethro aims at a
high standard (ver. 21) ; able men are wanted, and wherein does the ability consist ?
No doubt a certain acuteness and general power of mind was required, but the chief
elements of the ability lay in those qualities which Jethro went on to specify. An
efScient judge between man and man must be also one who fears God. The fear of man
that bringeth a snare miist not be allowed to enter his mind. He must measure things
by Divine standards, ever asking what God would wish his judgments to be. He must
be a man of truth, sparing no effort and avoiding no danger ; in order to get at it he
must try to keep his mind clear firom prejudices. If he has fallen into any error he
will promptly confess it, feeling that the interests of truth are more important than a
reputation for consistency. And he must be free from covetousness. No suspicion of a
bribe will cling to his judgments, nor will he be infected with that worldliness of spirit
which looks to the property of men a great deal more than to the interest and comfort
of their persons. But now the half-incredulous question cannot be kept out of the
mind, " where shall such judges be found ? " At all events let them be sought for.
We cannot find perfect men; br.t ..e know the direction in which to seek. Probably,
in the course of a long life, Je'hro has discovered that men are lx)th better and worse
than he thought at first ; and he is perfectly certain that men can be found to do all
that is indispensably requisite for the present need. Moses was wearing himself out
with duties which many in Israel were quite competent to perform ; but who of them
all could do the work which had been put specially into his hands ? — ^Y.

Vers. 19. — " The eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee.'' Men may
make a channel for the stream, but they cannot make the stream. Water-power is a
grand natural agency ; but it is by means of human agency that it may be applied to
tlio best advantage. So also in other matters ; power comes from God , the way to usa
and economise power it is left for man to discover and to act upon. Consider here : —

L The Divine poweb. " God shall be with thee," said Jethra The history shows how



em. xvuL 27.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



101



God had been with him already, how he was with him all through his life, Especiallj
we may notice — 1. 1 1 is relation to Pharaoh. The shepherd facing the king. Whence
his boldness ? He had shrunk beforeliaud at the mera prospect ; when the hour came
Pharaoh quailed before him. It was not Moses, it was the power which manifested
itself through Moses, that humbled Pharaoh. Jloses was but the visible rod in the
outstretched hand of the invisible Jehovah. 2. His relation to the people. Harder to face
a fickle multitude than to face an obstinate and powerful monarch. Here too the
Divine power was manifested ; the glory of Jehovah was, as it were, reflected from the
face of his servant. It was the radiancy of the reflected glory which again and again cowea
the rebels to submission. As with Jeremiah (Jer. i. 4 — 8), Zerubbabel (Zed. iv. 6),
St. Paul (2 Cor. xii. 9, 10), so also with Moses ; human weakness the more evidently
testified to Divine power.

II. The human cuuksel. Notice : — 1 Tlie need of it. Men are so weak that they
are soon unhinged by a great trust reposed iu them, 'i'heir attention is so fixed upon
the one thing, that other things are seen out of perspective. Moses was so filled with
the consciousness of a Divine power working through him, that he failed at first
to realise the fact that he was unequal to the friction necessitated by such a power.
He realised the eflect of the power in prospect more accurately than he could do after it
possessed him (cf. ch. iv.). As the mediator between God and Israel, had it not been for
Jethro's counsel, he must soon have been worn out through forgetting the necessities of
his own nature. Lives are still wasted and shortened through a like oversight. The
man who feels that he is the channel of Divine power is, for the time, so God-intoxi-
cated, that it does not occur to him to share his responsibilities. He must be
both head and hands in everything, and the head in consequence soon grows heavy,
and the hands hang down. Under the force of inspiration, common-sense is in abey-
ance ; all the more need for wise counsel fi:om those who occupy a neutral stand-point.
2. The wisdom of it. Jethro saw that the great thing was not that Moses should do
all the work, but that all the work should be done. The power to do it, was no doubt
lodged with Moses (cf. water-power lodged with keeper of sluice gates). The work,
however, might be best done by a distribution of the power through selected agents.
Moses need not to be head and hands ; he might choose other hands, making them
responsible to himself as head. Moses showed his wisdom by accepting the_ wise
counsels of Jethro ; many men would have shown their folly by setting them aside as
the suggestions of ignorance.

Concluding considerations. Inspiration is a grand thing ; but it may be best utilised
by common-sense. God's power enables for action ; but that power is best applied when
the counsels of Jethro are attended to. All men have not the same gifts ; and those
who have what seem to be the higher gifts, are apt to set too small a value upon
advice given by those less gifted. Even the gift of faith, however, needs the gift
of wisdom to direct it. Moses was able to do more than he otherwise could have
done because he was wise enough to hearken to the voice of Jethro, his father-in-law



EXPOSITION.



Ver.27. — ^Depaetube op Jethbo. The time
of Jethro's departure, and indeed of his entire
visit, has been matter of controversy. Kurtz
is of opinion that Jethro waited till the news
of Israel's victory over Amalek reached him,
before setting out from his own country.
Hence he concludes, that " a whole month or
more may easily have intervened between the
Tictory over Amalek and the arrival of Jethro,"
whose arrival in that case " would not even
(all into the very earliest period of the sojourn
»t Sinai, but after the promulgation of the first
Bmaitic law ^ Those who identify Hobab



with Jethro find in Num. x. 29 — 32 a proof
that at any rate Jethro prolonged his visit
until after the law was given, and did not
" depart to his own land " before the removal
of the people from the wilderness of Sinai to
that of Paran, " in the 20th day of the second
month of the second year " (ib. ver. 11). The
position, however, of ch. xviii., together
with its contents— both what it says and what
it omits — are conclusive against this view.
Jethro started on his journey when he heard
"that the Lord had brought Israel out ol
Egypt " (ver. 1), not when he heard that bntl



103



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xvm. 27.



fcad been victoiioos over Amalek. His con-
Tersation with Moses (vers. 7 — 11) ranged
ever the entire series of deliverances from the
night of the departure out of Egypt to the
Amalekite defeat, but contained no allusion to
the giving of the law. The occupation of
Moses on the day after his arrival (ver. 13)
U suitable to the quiet period which followed
the Amalekite defeat, but not to the exciting
tune of the Sinaitio manifestations. It may
be added that the practice of inculcating
general principles on occasion of his particular
judgments, of which Moses speaks (ver. 16),
is suitable to the period anterior to the promul-
gation of the law, but not to that following it.



The argument from Num. x 29—32 fails
altogether, so soon as it is seen that Jethro and
Hobab are distinct persons, probably brothers,
sons of Beuel (or Bagnel), and brothers- in-law
of Moses.

Ver. 27. — ^Moses let his father-in-law
depart. Literally, "dismissed him," "sent
him away." This single expression is quite
enough to prove that Uie Hobab, whom Moses
made strenuous efforts to keep with him after
Sinai was left, is not the Jethro whom he was
quite coutent to let go. He went his way into
hisownland. HereturnedtoMidian, probably
crossing the Elanitic gulf, which divided Midian
from the Sinaitic region. The exact time of
the departure is uncertain ; but it was probably
before the main events related in ch. xix



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 27. — Jethro the model of a friendly adviser. A man's friends often hesitate to
offer advice, from the fear of its being ill received. Jethro showed himself superior to
this weakness, and risked being rebuffed for ufBciousness, confident in his singleness
of purpose and honest intentions. He had all the qualities of a good adviser. He
was — 1. Saoacious. There can be no doubt that he rightly forecast the results, if
Moses had continued his unwise monopoly of the judicial oflSce, or that he suggested a
prudent course in place of that whereof he disapproved. His reservation of a certain
judicial power to Moses (vers. 20 — 22) was especially wise, since had he not done so, it
is highly probable that his counsel would not have been followed ; — 2. Sympathetic.
Kindness and warm feeling breathed in his warning words : — " Thou wilt surely wear
away, both thou and this people ... for this thing is too heavy for thee ; thou art
not able to perform it thyself alone." He feels for Moses; he feels for the people;
he has no thought for himself; he is solely anxious, and deeply anxious, to save others
from unnecessary suffering ; — 3. Straightforward. He does not use periphrases, or
beat about the bush, but goes straight to his point, making his purpose clearly intel-
ligible, and indeed unmistakable — " The thing that thou doest is not good" — " provide
out of the people able men." 4. Wholly disinterested. The advice which he
tenders can do him no good. He asks no employment, no place for timself. He
will not even participate in the general prosperity of Israel if good results follow the
adoption of his counsel; for he is not about to cast in his lot with the Israelites.
On the contrary, he is bent on withdrawing at once into his own country. Moses
will not find him that keen annoyance, an ever-present friend, who because his advice
has been taken once, regards himself as entitled to obtrude it whenever he pleases,
and to feel aggrieved if it is not in every case followed. If advisers generally acted
in the spirit of Jethro, there would be far less unwillingness than there is to ask
advice, and far more gratitude felt towards those who volunteer it.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 27. Jethro^s departure. I. Jethro departs after a most satisfactory visit.
That visit was made not perhaps without some anxiety and doubt as to the results, but
still under the clear dictation of duty. Therefore, it would have been satisfactory even
if less successful. Moses might, conceivably, have looked > n Zipporah coldly and
received her reluctantly ; but there would have remained to Jethro the priceless satisfac-
tion that he had done the right thing. But Jethro, we have seen, had more even thau
the satisfaction of a good conscience ; he had been successful, and successful beyond all
that he could have anticipated when he set out. To a man of Jethro's disposition, that
would indeed be a joyous visit, which had proved so useful to Moses, to Zipporah. to
their children, to Israel, and may we not add, towards tlie glorifying of Jethro himself?
Keep ever in the path that is clearly nght, and you have Jethro's experieuoa ta



XIX. 1—2.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



IM



encourage you in the expectation that it may also be the path of noble and joyou*
oppoTtunities.

II. JeTBBO DEPABT8, AND MOSES IB MADE TO FEEL, MORE THAN EVER, THAT JeHOTAB

BEMAIN8. Very helpful are human counsel and sympathy, and especially when they come
from old friends. There are no friends like old friends, and Jethro was a very old friend
to Moses. But Jethro's abilities and opportunities as adviser extended only a little way.
Like Moses we may all have our Jethros whom we may love, cherish and venerate ; for
God distributes such men everywhere about the world to be, as it were, fellow-
workers with him in giving stability and illumination to the perplexed. But we cannot
keep them ; we may lose them at any moment ; and while it is great wisdom to listen
to them, it would be great folly to put them in the place of God. Though Jethro was
very decided in the counsels he gave, he knew equally when to stop. We may look at
him as coming in here to teach us that what we can expect from the most competent
and loving of human friends is but a trifle compared with the great tota of our nee s.
We are allowed to have but small expectations from the brother sinnler, the brothei
mortal, the brother who is liable to ignorance and error, just as much as we are our-
selves. When Jethro went away, Moses would feel himself all the more shut up to
Jehovah. When the earthly is dumb, misleading, estranged, or dead, then the heavenly
will speak in clear and loving accents to all who have ears to hear.

III. Jethro departs into his own land, for he had doubtless pressing claims upon
Bm there. He was just the kind of man to make his presence, as long as he lived, a
kind of necessity to his neighbours. He had come on a matter of urgency, not for his
own pleasure or ease ; and we may imagine he went back as soon as he conveniently
could to finish such affairs at home as had been left unfinished. Note, however, that
in going back to his own land, and away from Moses, he did not therefore retire from
the service of God and the reach of God's blessings. Jethro and Moses seemed to be
going different ways ; but they only differed in external circumstances. Moses does not
seem even to have asked Jethro to stay with him ; whereas we know that he pressed
and urged Hobab. Perhaps he felt that he had no sufiScient reason for asking Jethro^ or
that it would be of no use. — Y.



SECTION XHL
Israel at Sihal— Peeparations fob the Givinq of thb Laidix



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XIX.



Ven. 1 — 2. — The journey to Mount
Sinai. From Eephidim in the Wady Feiran,
where they had discomfited Amalek (ch. xvii.
8 — 13), the Israelites moved towards Sinai, pro-
bably by the two passes known as Wady Solaf
and Wady-esh-Sheilsh, which gradually con-
verge and meet at the entrance to the plain
of Er-Eahah. This plain is rcnerally allowed
to be "the Desert of Sina." It is "two
miles long, and half -a-mile broad" (fi^r Work
in Paleetine, p. 268), nearly flat, and dotted
with tamarisk- bushes. The mountains which
enclose it have for the most part sloping sides,
cad form a sort of natural amphitheatre.
Hie plain abuts at its south-eastern extremity
<m abrupt cliffs of granite rock rising from it
nearly perpendicularly, and known as the Eas
Snfsaf eh. " That «ach • plain should exist at



all in front of such a cliff is," as Dean Stanley
well remarks, " so remaikable a coincidenca
with the sacred narrative, as to furnish >
strong internal argument, not merely of its
identity with the scene, but of the scene itself
having been described by an eye-witness"
(^Sinai and Palestine, pp. 42-3). All the
surroundings are such as exactly suit the
narrative. "The awful and lengthened
approach, as to some natural sanctuary, would
have been the fittest preparation for the com-
ing scene. The low line of alluvial mounds
at the foot of the cliff exactly answers to the
' bounds ' which were to keep the people off
from 'touching the mount.' The plain
itself is not broken and uneven and narrowly
shut in, hke almost all others in the range,
but presents a long retiring sweep, against
which . the people could ' remove and stand
afar off ' The cliff, ruing like a huge altar, la



164



IHE BOOS 0^ EXODUa.



[en. XIX. l—X



front of the whole congregation, and visible
•gainst tbfl sky in lonely grandeur from end to
end of tne whole plain, is the very image of
' the mount that might be touched,' and from
which the voice of God might be heard far
and wide over the plain below, widened at
that point to its utmost extent by the con-
fluence of all the contiguous valleys. Here,
beyond all other parts of the peninsula, is the
adyltim, withdrawn as if in the end 'of the
world,' from all the stu- and confusion of
earthly things " (i6. p. 43). As an eminent
engineer has observed — " No spot in the
world can be pointed out which combines in
a more remarkable manner the conditions of
a commanding height and of a plain in every
part of which the sights and sounds described
in Exodus would reach an assembled multitude
of more than two million souls." Here
then, we may well say, in the words used by
the most recent of scientific explorers, " was
the scene of the giving of the law. From Bas
Sufsifeh the law was ' loclaimed to the



children of Israel, assembled in the plains o*
Er Kahah " (Oar Work in Palestine, p. 268).

Ver. 1. — In the third month, The month
Sivau, corresponding nearly with our June.
When the children of Israel were gone forth.
Eather, " after the children of Israel had gone
forth," or " after the departure of the children
of Israel out of the land of Egypt." Com-
pare ch. xvi. 1, where the expression used ia
the same. The same day. Literally, "on
that day " — which can only mean " on the day
that the month began " — on the 1st of Sivau.
The wilderness of Sinai. The plain Er-Eahah ;
as is now generally allowed, since the true
character of the Wady Sebaiyeh has been
shown by Dean Stanley (Sinai and PaJettine,
p. 76) and others.

Ver. 2. — They were departed from Beph-
idim. See the comment on ch. xvii. 1, and
compare Num. xxxiii. 15. There Israel en-
camped before the mountain. The bulk of
the tents were no doubt pitched in the plain,
Er-Bahah; but this may not have sufficed,
and some may have been located in the Wady-
ed-Deir, north-east of the Bas SufsS,teh, and
others in the Seil-Leja to the west. The Bas
Sufs&feh is visible from both these valleys.



HOMILETICS.

V ers. 1- — 2. — Localities shaped to suit Ood!s moral purpotet. It is scarcely possible to
read the descriptions of the Sinaitic localities by modem travellers, who pointedly note
their exact adaptation to the scenes transacted among them, without the feeling
stealing upon us, that God, in the countless ages during which he was shaping and
ordering the earth to be a fitting habitation for man was also arranging it in such sort
as would best conduce to the exhibition upon it of those supernatural occurrences, whicn
in his counsels were to constitute turning-points in the moral history of man. Take
for instance Jerusalem: are we to suppose that the valleys were furrowed and the
rocky platform upraised by the elements acting mechanically, as chance might direct,
or not rather that God lovingly shaped, age after age, the mountain where he was about
to set his name, and which was to be " the joy of the whole earth " ? (Ps. xlviii. 2.)
Eome again, with its seven hills: was not this remarkable formation brought into
existence to constitute the site for that capital which was to be, first and last, the pivot
of the world's secular history ; for five hundred years the seat of an almost imiversal
empire ; for a thousand the western ecclesiastical centre ; and having in the future
possibilities which the wisest forecast can only dimly indicate, but which transcend
those of any other existing city. And, if in these cases Providence contrived and shaped
the geographic features with a view to the future history, miist it not have been the same
at Sinai ? Must not that vast granite cluster have been uprearedin the place it holds by
a series of throes which shooli all the regions of the east, in order that from it the law
might be given in such a way as to impress men deeply? Must not the plain Er-
Eahah have been washed by floods into its present level surface to furnish a convenient
place from which the multitudinous host of Israel might at once see and hear? Must
not the entire Sinaitic region have been so modelled, that here should be the adytum —
here and here alone in the entire district, should be the natural " inmost sanctuary " —
penetrate — "holy of holies" — the centre of attraction — the fit spot for supernatural
events, on which the future of mankind was to hinge for fourteen centuries ? To us it
seems, that Grod did not so muoli select for his supernatural communications with man
the fittest of existing localities, as design the localities themselves with a new to Um
flommimications, shajdng them to suit his moral ptuposes



OH. XIX 1—2.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. IM



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1, 2. Arrival and encampment at Sinai. — ^We come now to the consideration
of what, next to the exodus, is the greatest event in Israel's history — the ratification
at Sinai of the nation's covenant with God, preceded hy the giving of the law. Wo
cannot attach too great importance to those Divine acts The covenant at Sinai placed
Israel in a totally unique relation to Jehovah. It conferred on that people an honour
the like of which no nation on earth ever had, or ever has since, enjoyed. It gave rise
to an economy, the express design of which was to prepare the way for Christ — to shut
men up under a conviction of the hopelessness of attaining righteousness by the law,
to the faith that should afterwards he revealed (Gal. iii. 23). This covenant, as befitted
the majesty of God, dealing with a sinful people, was to be ordained "in the hand of a
mediator " (Gal. iii. 19). Moses, accordingly, is seen in these verses entering on his
mediatorial functions. Once, a second, and a third time, in the course of this single
chapter, he is seen ascending the mount, to meet with God (vers. 3, 8, 20) ; and once,
a second, and a third time, he is sent back from its awful recesses with a message to tbo
people. Vers. 1, 2 relate the arrival at Sinai.

I. The note of time. — "In the third month," etc. (ver. 1). That is, about six
weeks — forty or fifty days— after leaving Egypt. This was close on the date of Pente-
cost, afterwards traditionally observed as the anniversary of the giving of the law.
It was probably with allusion to this fact that, in the new economy, the day of
Pentecost was chosen for the gift of the Spirit to the Church (Acts ii.). Thus was
fulfilled the prophecy — " Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a
new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah ... I will put
my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts" (Jer. xxxi. 31 — 33).
" Sinai, then, was the Pentecost of the old dispensation. And, conversely, Pentecost
is the Sinai of the new." (Gibson.)

II. The place of bkcampment. — " The wilderness of Sinsd . . . before the mount '
(vers. 1, 2). A fitter theatre for the awful revelation about to be given could scarcely
be imagined. 'I he heart of the desert,.it was — 1. A place of absolute solitude. The
people were absolutely alone with God — withdrawn from everything which could
distract their thoughts from him and from his message. Owen observes — " When God
deals with men by the law, he will let them see nothing but himself and their own
consciences . . . For the most part, when the law is preached to sinners, they have
innumerable diversions and reliefs at hand to shield them from its terror and efficacy.
. . . They have otlier things to do than to attend to the voice of the law ; at least, it
is not yet necessary that they should so do. But when God will bring them to the
mount, as he will here or hereafter, all these pretexts will vanish and disappear" (on
Heb. xii. 18). For the thorough awakening of conscience, we must get a man alone —
must, in some way or other, sever him from his ordinary surroundings. 2. A place of
great suhlimity. Travellers dwell with awe on its bare, desolate grandeur — on " the
lengthened approach " to the mount, " as to some natural sanctuary." The mind,
amidst such grandeiu-, is irresistibly drawn upwards. It is brought into the condition
most fit for the reception of thoughts of the everlasting and sublime. How suitable
was such a place for the promulgation of that moral law which Kant said aflected
him with such indesr.ribahle awe every time he thought of it I Every circumstance
was present which could lend body, vastness, volume, impressiveness, and reduplicated
sublimity to the terrors of the revelation. Ihe "sound of the trumpet and the voice
of words " would reverberate with strange power amid those rocky heights, and along
the echoing valleys. The sternness of the environment was itself a commentary on
the law's sanctities. 8. A place of barrenness. " It was a barren and fruitless desert,
where there was little water or food, and, answerably thereunto, the law in a state
of sin, would bring forth no fruit, nothing acceptable to God, nor useful to the soiils of
men." (Owen.) So entirely has the spirit of this scene — of this awful desert solitude
— passed into the revelation connected with it, that the two can no longer be dis-
sociated. Sinai, unconsciously to ourselves, acts u]x>n us to this hour, in every contact
of our minds with the truths of the law.

III. Tee design of the stit. Israel nbode at Sinai for eleven inonthai Duiiog



IM



THE BOOK OP BXODUa



[CH. XIX. 3— ft



this period the nation enjoyed a season of rest, received the law, ratified its covenant
with God, constructed a sanctuary, and was otlierwise equipped and organised. It wm
• time of repose, of retired communion with God, of receptivity. Such times are very
needful in the spirituallife. 1. Needful for aU. The Christian toiler needs seasons o(
rest (Mark vi. 31). His truest rest will be found in communion with God and study
of his will. By-and-by the call will come, summoning him to renewed activity —
" Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount," etc. (Deut. i. 6). 2. Specially needful in
the stage of spiritital. history immediately succeeding conversion. Young converts will do
well to ponder the example of Paul, who, after God had revealed his Son in him, and
before entering on his work as an apostle, " went into Arabia," perhaps revisiting this
very spot (Gal. i. 17). They are all the better for some such season of solitary com-
munion with God as is represented by Israel's stay at Sinai. They need repose of
mind. Like the Israelites, they have a covenant to ratify with God. Like the Israelites,
they stand greatly in need of instruction. They need time for lengthened study of the
Divine will. They need equipment and preparation for the trials they are afterwards
to encounter. Their coming, it is true, is rather figured as a coming to Mount Sion,
than as a coming to Mount Sinai (Heb. xii. 2'2) ; but none the less has Sinai important
lessons which it will be for their interest not to overlook. The Christian who does not
frequently in spirit visit Sinai will not readily understand his privileges at Sion. The
following words of Dr. Candlish express important truth : — " Individually, by a sepa-
rate process in each mind, a distinct spiritual change in every soul, God effects the
rescue of his people. 'J'here cannot, therefore, be any general gathering together, in a
literal sense, such as there was at Sinai. But practically, in a real though spiritual
sense, every converted soul has to pass through an analogous spiritual crisis. It is a
momentous crisis, as regards both the exodus and the pilgrimage ; the escape he has
made and the way he has to go. It is, in fact, the settlement, once for all, of the
terms upon which he is henceforth to be with his God as his Sovereign I^ord. It is
his being confronted and brought face to face with God, in a new state and character,
•s redeemed by his grace, and ready for his work." (" Fatherhood of God.") — J. 0.



EXPOSITION.



Ver. 3 — ^9. — ^Thi Fibst Covenant between
OoD AND IsBAEL. As Moses, having reached
the foot of Sinai, was proceeding to ascend
the mountain, where he looked to have special
revelations from God, God called to him out
of the mountain, and required a positive en-
gagement on the part of the people, before he
would condescend to enter into further direct
relations with them. If, through gratitude
for what had been done for them in the de-
liverance from Egypt, and since, they would
solemnly engage to obey God and keep the
covenant that he should make with them
(verse 5), then a fresh revelation should he
made, and fresh engagements entered into;
but not otherwise. Moses communicated the
message to the people through the elders, and
received the solemn' promise, which he carried
back to God. " All that the Lord hath spoken
we will do."

Ver. 3.— Moses went up unto God. From
the time of his call Moses had known that
Israel was to serve God upon Sinai (ch. iii. 12),
and had regarded either one special peak, or
the whole range as "the mount of God" — •



place dedicated and set apart to Jehovah. It
was natural, therefore, that, so soon as he
reached the near vicinity of the mount, he
should ascend it. The Lord called to >'i"' ont
of the Mount. God often accepts the will
for the deed, and spares his saints a needless
toU. Here, as Moses was on his way, God
anticipated him, and calling to him out of the
mountain sent him back to the people with a
message. The house of Jacob. This rare ex-

Eression, familiar to no sacred \iTiter but
iaiah, recalls the promises made to Jacob of
a numerous seed, which should grow from a
house to a nation (Gen. xxviii. 14: xxxv
11).

Ver. 4.— Te have seen what I did unto
the Egyptians. God prefaces his appeal to
Israel with respect to the future, by remind-
ing them of what he had done for them in the
past. In the fewest possible words he recalls
to their recollection the whole series of signs
and wonders wrought in Egypt, from the
turning of the water into blood to the de-
struction of Pharaoh's host in the Red Sea
These, he implies, ought to have taught thew
to trust him. I bare ;on on eagle's wingi
(compare Deut. xxxii. 11), where the meta-
phor is expanded at considerable length The
strength and might of God's sustaining care.



CB. xn. 6—9.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



IW



•nd its loving tenderness, are especially
glanced at in the comparison. Brought yon
onto myself, " Brought you," i.e., " to Sinai,
the mount of God, where it pleases me es-
pecially to reveal myself to you."

Ver. 5. — Nov therefore. Instead of asking
the simple question — ^"Will ye promise to
obey me and keep my covenant ? " — God
graciously entices the Israelites to their own
advantage by a most loving promise. If they
will agree to obey his voice, and accept and
keep his covenant, then they shall be to him
• pecoliar treasure ^segullahy—a precious
possession to be esteemed highly and carefully
guarded from all that might injure it. (Com-
pare Ps. cxxxv. 4 ; and see also Is. xliii. 1 — 4.)
And this preciousness they shall not share
with others on equal terms, but enjoy ex-
clusively — it shall be theirs above all
people. No other nation on the earth shall
hold the position which they shaU hold, or
be equally precious in God's sight. AU the
earth is his : and so all nations are his in
« certain sense. But this shall not interfere
with the special Israelite prerogative — ^they
alone shall be his "peculiar people" (Deut.
xiv. 2).

Ver. 6. — ^Te shall be unto me a kingdom of
priests. Or " a royalty of priests" — at once a
royal and a priestly race*-all of you at once
both priests and kings. (So the LXX. render,
$a(rl\etoi> Upireviia; the Targums of Onkelos
and Jerusalem, " kings and priests ;" that of
Jonathan, "crowned kings and ministering
priests.") They would be " kings," not only
as " lords over death, the devil, hell, and aU
evil" (Luther), but also partly as having no
earthly king set over them, but designed to
live under a theocracy (1 Sam. xii. 12), and
partly as intended to exercise lordship over
the heathen. Their unfaithfulness and dis-
obedience soon forfeited both privileges. They
would be " priests," as entitled — each one of
them — ^to draw near to God directly in prayer
and praise, though not in sacrifice, and also
as intermediaries between God and the heathen
world, to whom they were to be examples, in-
structors, prophets. And an holy nation. A
nation unlike other nations — a nation conse-
crated to God's service, outwardly marked as his
by the symbol of circumcision, his (if they
chose) inwardly by the purity and holiness
whereto they could attam. These are the
words. Much speaking was not needed. The
question was a very simple one. Would they
accept the covenant or no, upon the conditions
offered ? It was not likely that they would
reject such gracious proposals.

Ver. 7. — And Moses came. Moses de-
scended from the point of the mountain which
he had reached, and smnmoned a meeting of
the elders of the people. When they were
come together, he reported to them totidem
terbu the message which he had received from
God. H« ii said to have laid the words " be-



fore their faee^ — a Hebraism, meaning simply
" before them."

Ver. 8. — ^And all the people answered to-
gether. It would seem that the elders sub-
mitted to the whole congregation the questioD
propounded by Moses ; or at any rate sub-
mitted it to a popular meeting, fairly repre-
senting the congregation. No doubt the exact
purport of the question was made known by
the usual means beforehand, and the assembly
was summoned to declare, by acclamation, its
assent or dissent. The result was a unani-
mous shout of approval : — " All that the Lord
hath spoken we will do " — i.e., " we wiU obey
his voice indeed, and keep his covenant" (see
ver. 5). Inthis way they accepted the covenant
beforehand, not knowing wliat its exact pro-
visions would be, but assured in their hearts
that all would be right, just, and good ; and
anxious to secure the promised blessings
(vers. 5, 6) for themselves and their posterity
Moses returned the words of the people unto
the lord — f.e., Moses was the mouthpiece
both ways. He took the messages of God to
the people, and carried back ("returned")
their answer.

Vers. 9. — I came unto thee in a thick olond.
Literally, " in the thickness of a cloud." God
must always veil himself when he speaks with
man, for man could not bear " the brightness
of his presence." If he takes a human form
that form is a veil ; if he appears in a burning
bush, the very fire is a shroud. On the present
occasion it was the more needful that he
should cover himself up, as he was about to
draw near to the whole congregation, among
whom were many who were impure and im-
penitent. It was necessary, in order that all
might be convinced of the Divine mission of
Moses, for all to be so near as to hear him
speak out of the cloud; but sinners cannot
abide the near presence of God, unless he is
carefully hidden away from them. Probably,
the cloud out of which he now spoke was
that which had accompanied the Israelites out
of Egypt, and directed their march (ch. xiiL
21, 22), though this is not distinctly stated.
That the people may believe thee for ever
In " the people " are included their descend-
ants ; and they are to " believe Aloses for ever,
because the law is in some sense of eternal
obligation on all men " (Matt. v. 18). And
Moses told the words of the people unto th^
Lord. It is not easy to assign a reason for the
repetition of this clause from vers. 8, in almost
identical terms. There were no fresh " words
of the people " to report. We can only say
that such seemingly needless repetitions are
in the manner of archaic writers, who seem to
intend in this way to emphasise a fact. The
acceptance of the covenant by the people
beforehand, completed by Moses reporting it
to God, is the necessary basis of all that
follows — the required preliminary to the giving
of any covenant at all.



108 THIS Boos. OF EXoUUa. [ou. xix. 5, 6,



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 6, 6. — OocPi promises to such as keep his covenant. Three things are hen
specially worthy of consideration : — 1. The nature of the promises ; 2. The grounds on
which they may be believed and trusted ; and 3. The conditions attached to them.

I. The nature of the promises. God's promises to Israel are threefold — they shall
be kings ; they shall be priests ; they shall be his peculiar treasure. — (a) Kings. Most
men are slaves — servants of Satan, servants of sin, slaves to their evil passions, slaves
to opinion, abject slaves to those among their fellow-men on whom they depend for
daily bread, or for favour and advancement. The glorious liberty of the children of
God shakes off all these yokes. Man, awakened to his true relations with God, at once
asserts himself, realises his dignity, feels that he need " call no man, master." He
himself is supreme over himself; his conscience is his law, not the will of another. His
life, his acts, his words, are under his own control. Within this sphere he is " king,"
directing and ruling his conduct according to his own views of what is right and fitting ;
and this kingship is mostly followed by another. Let a man once show himself a true,
brave, upright, independent person, and he will soon have subjects enough. The weak
place themselves under his protection, the timid under his guidance. He will have a
cKentile, which will continually grow so long as he remains on earth, and in Heaven he
will be a " king " too. The " faithful and true servant " has " authority over ten cities."
He "reigns with Christ for ever and ever" (Rev. xx. 6; xxii. 5). (6) Priests. A
priest is one who is consecrated to God, who has free and ready access to him without
an intermediary at all times and seasons, and who acts as an intermediary between God
and others. As circumcision consecrated the Israelite, so baptism consecrates the
Christian. He receives " an unction from the Holy One " (1 John i. 20), and is thence-
forth a " priest to God," bound to his service, brought near to him, entitled to " go
boldly to the throne of grace," to offer up his own prayers and intercessions, nay — even
to " enter into the holiest " (Heb. x. 19). He is further not only entitled, but bound to
act as intermediary between God and those who do not know God ; to teach them ;
convert them, if he can ; intercede for them ; under certain circumstances, to baptise
them, (c) Sis peculiar treasure. The world despises God's servants, sets little store
by them, regards them as poor weak creatures, whom it may ill-use at its pleasure.
But God holds each servant dear, sets a high value on him, regards him as precious.
" They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels "
(Mai. iii. 17). Each saint is a jewel in the crown of the Lord Christ, and is estimated
accordingly. A king would as soon lose one of his crown jewels as Christ one of those
for whom he shed his precious blood. He has " bought them at a price ;" they are his ;
and the value which he sets on them no man can know. They are to him " more
precious than rubies."

II. The grounds on which the promises mat be believed and trusted. As we
have found of men in the past, so we look to find of them in the future. God bade the
Israelites look back, and consider what he had already done for them — whether in the
past he had proved himself faithful and true — whether he had supported and sustained
them, " borne them up on eagle's wings," protected them, delivered them firom dangers.
If this were so, could they not trust him for the future 1 Would they not believe the
promises which he now held out to them ? Would they not regard them as certain ot
accomplishment ? The Israelites appear to have believed ; and shall not Christians do
the like? Have not above three thousand years tested God's faithfulness, since he
thus spoke to Israel ? In the whole long course of these millennia has he ever been
proved unfaithful V Assuredly not. All that he promises, and more than all he pro-
mises, does he perform for the sons of men. >Jever does he disappoint them ; never doeg
he fail to make good his word. Each promise of God therefore may be trusted implicitly.
" Gcd is not a man that he should lie, or the son of man that he should repent." He is
true, and therefore must will to do as he has said; he is omnipotent, and therefore must
be able to do as he wills.

III. The conditions on which the pr.oMisES are given. " If ye will obey my voic«
Indeed, and keep my covenant." The precious promises of God to man are conditir^nai
upon (a) bis general obedience ; (6) his observance of a certain fomukl covenant. The



oo. ziz. 3— 10.] THE BOOK OF EXODUa lOS

obedience must be "an obedience indeed" — t.e., an obedience from the heart, sincere,
loving, complete, so far as human frailty permits — not partial, not grudging, not
outward only. The covenant must be kept in all its essentials. To the Jew, circum-
cision was necessary, after which ho had to make offerings, to attend certain festiv:ilg
year by year, to pay tithes, and to observe numerous minute regulations with regard tc
" cleanness " and " uncleanness." The Christian covenant has but two essenti^ rites.
Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Even these are only " generally necessary to salvation."
Still, ii .v. look for covenanted mercies and claim them, we must take care to be within
the covenant. We must inquire dispassionately, what the terms are upon which Christ
receives us into covenant with him, and not take upon ourselves a dispensing power,
absolving us from all such obligations. Christ rejected from the marriage-feast the
man who had not on a wedding- garment. No one who neglects either of the two
solemn and simple ordinances wluch alone Christ has ordained in his Church can be sui«
that he will not in the last day be rejected.

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 3 — 10. — The covenant proposed. A characteristic difference is to be observed
between the covenant made at Sinai and that formerly established with Abraham. Id
both, there is a wonderful act of Divine condescension. In both, God as well as man
comes imder engagements, ratified by outward formalities. But there is a difference in
the design. In Abraham's case, the covenant was obviously intended as an aid to faith,
an expedient for strengthening confidence in the Divine word. It is God who, in con-
descension to man's weakness, binds himself to be faithful to his word. At Sinai, on
the other liand, it is the people who bind themselves to be faithful to God. They take
the oath of allegiance to their invisible king. They pledge themselves to be obedient.
God, on his side, appears as the promiser. He will make this nation a peculiar treasure
unto himself, a kingdom of priests, etc. The present passage deals with preliminaries.

1. The Divine proposals (vers. 3 — 7). A covenant, firom its nature, is an act o(
freedom. Prior to the formation of this covenant, it was obviously necessary that
Jehovah should approach the people, should state his terms to them, and should require
them to declare whether they approved of these terms, and were willing to assent to
them. This is what is here done. Observe : — 1. The initiative in the covenant wa$
taken hy Jehovah. This was inevitable. " The characteristic thing about such ' cove-
nants ' with God lies here, that the engagement must originate on the side of God
himself, springing out of his free favour with a view to ratify some spontaneous promise
on his part. Man can exact no terms from Heaven. No creature dare stipulate for
conditions with his Creator. It is when the Most High, out of his own mere mercy,
volunteers to bind himself by a promise for the future, and having done so, stoops still
further to give a pledge for the execution of that promise, that what may fairly be
deemed a 'covenant ' is established" (Dr. Dykes). 2. The people are reminded of past
gracious dealings of God with them (yer. 4). God reminds them, to begin with, of how
he had taken them from Egypt, and had borne them on eagle's wings, and had brought
them to this desert place unto himself. " Eagle's wings " signify that his help had been
strong, sustaining, protecting. In Egypt, at the Red Sea, in the wilderness, they had
experienced this help, and h^ found it all sufficient. The resources of the infinite had
been placed at their disposal. The special point, however, is, that all this which had
been done for them was the fruit of free, unmerited favour ; of a grace which imposed
no conditions, and had as yet asked for no return. This was an important point to be
reminded of on the eve of a revelation of law. These past actings of God testified that
his relation to Israel was fundamentally a gracious one. Law might veil grace, but it
could not cancel or annul it. Like primitive rock, underlying whatever strata might
subsequently be reared upon it, this gracious relation must abide. With a relation
of this kind to fall back upon, the Israelite need not despair, even when he felt that
his law condemned him. It was a pledge to him that, not only amidst daily error and
ihortcoming, but even after grievous falls — ^faUs like David's — ^mercy would receive tht
man of contrite spirit (Ps. li.). Thus far, we are quite in the element of the Gospel
Salvation precedes obedience. Obedience follows, a result of the free acceptance of tb«



110 THE BOOK OP EXODUa [oh. xUL »— Itt

obligations which redemption imposes on us. 3. The condition if the fulfilment of
promise is tJiat the people obey God's voice, and keep his covenant (ver. 5). On no
other terms could God consent to be their God, and on no other terms would he consent
to have them for his people. Grace precedes law, grace accompanies law, grace passei
beyond law ; nevertheless, grace must conserve law (Rom. iii. 31). God can propose to
man no terms of favour, which do not include the need for an obedient will. He dees
not do BO under the Gospel any more than he did under the law (of. Matt. vii. 2.1 ;
Bom. ii. 6, 7 ; vi. ; 1 Cor. vii. 19 ; 1 John ii. 4, etc.). " It is exclusively Christ's
righteousness vrtiich is of grace imputed to us. Yet this has to be appropriated in an
upright heart ' (Martensen). When God took Israel out of Egypt, it was implied and
intended that the redeemed people should " obey his voice." The covenant but made
eacplicit an jTOpUcit obUgation. 4. Tlie promises themselves are of the grandest pos-
sible description (vers. 5, 6). (1) Israel would be to God " a peculiar treasm-e." Out
of all the nations of the earth — for all the earth was his — Jehovah had chosen this one,
to reveal himself to it, to give it laws and judgments, and to dwell in its midst as its
king, benefactor, and defender (of. Deut. iv. 33 — 37). What an honour was this!
And yet how inferior to the spiritual privileges of believers in Christ, who enjoy a
nearness to God, an interest in his love, a special place in his regard, of which, not the
earth only, but the universe, affords no other example. (2) Israel would be to God " a
kingdom of priests." There is implied in this, on the one hand, royalty, dignity, rule ;
on the other, special consecration to God's service, the privilege of acceptable approach
to him, and an intercessory and mediatorial function in relation to other nations. This
promise also, has its higher counterpart in the privileges of Christians, who are "a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people ' (1 Pet. ii. 9).
Grace in the soul is a kingly, a dignifying, an ennobling principle. It confers true
royalty of character. And in the future form of his kingdom, God, we may be sure, has
royal places for all his royal children (Luke xix. 17, 19 ; Eev. i. 6 ; ii. 26 ; iii. 21).
And believers are a " priesthood." Not, indeed, in the old sense of having to offer
atoning sacrifices, but priests in virtue of special consecration, of right of near approach
to God, and of their calling " to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ " (1 Pet. ii. 5), and to intercede for the world (1 Tim. ii. 1). (3) Israel would
be to God " an holy nation." This is involved in their calling to be priests. God
being holy, those who are about him — ^who serve him — ^who worship him, or who stand
in any near relation to him — must be holy also. " Be ye holy, for I am holy " (1 Pet. i.
16). This requirement of hoUness is unchangeable. Believers have in them the
principle of holiness, and are engaged in " perfecting holiness in the fear of God " (2 Cor.
vii. 1). Holiness is that essential qualification, " without which no man shall see the
Lord" (Heb. xii. 14). 5. 7'he promise contains a hint of the catholicity of Ood^t
design in the calling of Israel. " For all the earth is mine " (ver. 5). Israel was
called with a view to the ultimate benefit of the world. It was but the " first-born " of
many sons whom God would lead to glory.

II. The people's response (vers. 7 — 10). They willingly took upon themselves the
obligations indicated in the words, " Now, therefore, if ye will obey my voice i.ideed,
and keep my covenant," etc. (verse 5). They said at once " all that the Lord hath
spoken we will do." There is a certain nobleness in this reply — a temporary rising of
these long-enslaved minds to something like the dignity of their high calling as
sons of God. Yet — 1. It was a reply given without mucli knowledge of the law. They
apprehended but little of its breadth, and of the spirituality of its requirements,
else they would not have engaged so readily to do all that it enjoined. One design in
placing Israel under law was just that they might grow in this knowledge of the
breadth of the commandment, and so might have developed in them the v'onsoiousness
of sin (Rom. vii. 7 — 25). 2. It was a reply given without much knowledge of them-
telves. The people do not seem to have doubted their ability to keep God's word. They
thought, like many more, that they had but to try, in order to do. Accordingly, a
second design in placing them under law was to convince them of their mistake — ^te
discover to them their spiritual inability. There is no way of convincing men of their
inabihty to keep the law of God like setting them to try (Rom. vii.). 3. It was a reply
given, as respects the mass of the people, without heart-conversion. It was the out-
come of a burst of enthusiasm, of an excited state of feeling. There was not tbi



, XIX. S.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS 111



tnu "heart" in them to do what God commanded (Deut. v. 29). Hence their speedy
apostasy (oh. xxxii.) The test of true conversion is perseverance (Heb. iii. 14;
I John ii. 19). Moses, having received the reply of the people, returned it to God, who,
on hearing it, declared his purpose of coming in a thick cloud, and of speaking with
Moses in the audience of all the people (cf. verse 19). The design was " that the
people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever " (verse 9). — J. 0.

Ver. 5. — "My covenant." It may he proper at this stage to indicate briefly the nature ol
the constitution under which Israel was placed at Sinai, directing attention to some of the
resemblances and contrasts between it and the new and better covenant which has
Binoe superseded it. The nature of the old covenant, though set in a very clear light in
the writings of St. Paul, does not seem to be well understood. Sometimes it is too much
assimilated to the New Testament covenant : sometimes it is viewed as totally diverse
from it. The truth is, the covenant may be looked at from a number of very different
points of view, and according as it is thus regarded, it will present itself under very
different aspects. It was a covenant of law ; yet under it Israel enjoyed many privi-
leges which more properly belong to a state of grace. We should, e.g., greatly miscon-
ceive its nature, if, looking only to the tender, almost caressing words of this text, we did
not also take into account the manifestations of terror amidst which the law was given
from Sinai (verses 16 — 20), with such other facts as the planting of the stmes on
Mount Ebal (Deut. xxvii. 1 — ^9 ; Josh. viii. 30 — 35), and the recital of the blessir E;g
and curses (Deut. xxvii. 11 — 26). But we should do the covenant equal injustice if we
looked only to the latter class of facts, and did not observe the /orwer. That Israel's
standing under the law was modified by grace is shown : 1. From the fact of grace pre-
ceding law ; 2. From the employment of a mediator ; 3. From the " blood of sprink-
ling " at the ratification of the covenant (ch. xxiv.) ; 4. From the propitiatory arrange-
ments subse(iuently introduced; 5. From the revealed scope and design of the
economy ; 6. From the actual facts of Israel's history. Keeping in view this double
aspect of the covenant of Sinai — that on its inner side it was one of grace, on its outer
ride one of law — we have to consider its relations to the covenant of the Gospel.

I. The covenants akb, in certain obvious respects, btbikinqlt contrasted.
The contrasts in question arise from the particularistic character, the defective
■pirituality, and the psedagogic design, of the older covenant. That which has suc-
ceeded it is more inward and spiritual in its nature ; is universal in its scope ; and is
made primarily with individuals. Special contrasts are these: 1. The older
covenant is more preceptive in its character than the later one. " Tutors and
governors " (Gral. iv. 2). 2. It is more concerned with outward rites and ceremonies
(Heb. ix. 10). 3. It relies more on penalty and reward as motives. 4. The blessings
promised are largely temporal. In the new covenant, temporal promises hold a very
subordinate place. They are overshadowed by spiritual ones.

II. There are elements of contrast even in the resemblances between the
TWO covenants. The covenants of the law and of the Gospel are alike — 1. In requiring
that the people of God shall he " an holy people" But the holiness of Israel was made
to consist largely in the observance of outward distinctions. It was largely ceremonial.
The holiness of the new covenant is purely spiritual. 2. In requiring obedience as the
condition of fulfilment of promise. But (1) under the law, life and blessing were
attached to obedience in the way of legal reward. The rubric was : " Do this, and
thou shalt live " (Eom. x. 5). Under the Gospel, this element is wholly eliminated.
The law having done its work in showing that " by the deeds of the law there shall no
flesh be justified in (God's) sight " (Rom. iii. 20), the bestowal of reward is taken from
this ground, and placed explicitly on that of grace. AU we receive is for the fake of
Christ — a fruit of his righteousness. (2) The law, while requiring obedience, did not
raise the point of man's ability to render that obedience. But power to render
obedience is itself one of the blessings of the new covenant, which thus goes deeper,
•nd includes vastly more than the older one. (3) In general, the Gospel, while igreeing
with the law in aiming at forming a people unto righteousness, takes up the individuu
at a riper stage in his religious development. It assumes that the law has done its
work in him — has convinced him of sin, and of his inability to attain to life through legal
efforts. It supposes him to be aware ol his guilt and danger as a sinner. In this cou-



tit THE BOOK OP EXODUSb ch- xk. 6

dition — ^broken and humbled by the action of the law upon his conscience — it meets
him with the tidings of rsdemption, and of life and blessing (including spiritual
renewal) coming to him on the ground of " the righteousness of faith " (of. Acts ziiL
38, 39); 3. The privileges of the older covenant foreshadowed those of the new
(I Pet. ii. 9). But the contrast is great here also. See above.

III. These contrasts all depend upon a fundamental contrast. The deepest
contrast between the two covenants is to be sought for in the view which each takes
of the direction in which the individual (formerly the nation) is to look for acceptance
and happiness — for " life." 1. The law. The law appears in the covenant with Sinai
in its original, unqualified severity, as, on the one hand, awarding life to the obedient,
and on the other, denouncing penalties against the breakers of even the least of it8
commandments (Gal. iU. 10 — 13). Doubtless, but for daily pardon of daily offences,
the Israelite, under so strict a constitution, would have been totally unable to maintain
his footing. These offences, however, appear as so many breaches of the covenant
bond, which, in strictness, was the keeping of the whole law. A right apprehension
of God's design in placing Israel under this constitution will do away with any
appearance of harshness in the arrangement, as if Gud were purposely mocking the
weakness of the people by setting them to work out a problem — the attainment of
righteousness — in that way incapable of solution. The moral task given to Israel
among the nations was, indeed, to aim at the realisation of righteousness, of righteous-
ness as prescribed by the law. But God's design in this was not, certainly, to make
the salvation of any Israelite depend on the fulfilment of impossible conditions, but,
primarily, to conduct the seeker after righteousness by the path of honest moral
endeavour, to a consciousness of his inability to keep the law, and so to awaken in
him the feeling of the need of a better righteousness than the law could give him — ^to
drive him back, in short, from law to faith, from a state of satisfaction with himself to
s feeling of his need of redemption — of redemption at once from the guilt of past
transgressions, and from the discord in his own nature. The law had thus an end
beyond itself. It was a schoolmaster to lead to Christ. The later Jews totally
misconceived its nature when they clung to it with unbending tenacity as the sole
instrument of justification (Eom. x. 1 — 4). 2. The Oospel. In this is revealed " the
righteousness of faith " — the righteousness which is " unto all and upon all them that
believe." This is the only righteousness which can make the sinner truly just before
God" (Eom. iii. 21 — 27). But the law is not thereby made void. It remains, as
before, the standard of duty — the norm of holy practice. The design of the Gospel is
not to abolish it, but to establish it more firmly than ever (Rom. iii. 31). Faith
includes the obedient will. The end of redemption is holiness.

IV. The Israelite, while bound to God by a covenant of law, yet enjoyed
MANY benefits OF THE STATE OF GRACE. The better part of the Israelites were
perfectly aware that had God been strict to mark iniquities, they could not stand before
him (Ps. cxxx. 3) ; that their own law would have condemned them. But they knew,
too, that there was forgiveness with God, that he might be feared (ver. 4). Piously
availing himself of the expiatory rites provided for the covering of his sin, the godly
Jew had confidence towards God. Many in the nation grasped the truth that an
obedient will is, in God's sight, the matter of chief importance, and that, where this
is found, much else will be forgiven — that he that feareth God, and worketh righteous-
ness, is accepted with him (Acts x. 35), notwithstanding tlie special imperfections
which may mark his daily life. This was practically to rise from the standpoint of
the law, to that of the righteousness of faith. It enabled those who had attained to it,
though under the law, to cherish a delight in spiritual righteousness, and even to find
joy in the law itself, as the outward expression of that righteousness. It was not,
however, the complete joy of salvation. The law still hovered above the consciousness
of the Israelite with its unfulfilled demand ; and he had not the means of perfectly
pacifying his conscience in relation to it. While in those in whom the law haA
wrought its work most effectually, there was a deep feeling of sin, a painful conscious-
ness of frustration in efforts after the highest goodness, which day by day wrung from
them such cries as that of St. Paul — " O wretched man," etc. (Rum. vii. 24). Here, again,
the Gkwpel reveals itself as the termination of the law of Moses (Bom. x. 4).—^. O.



w. XIX. 3— 6.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 118



Ver. 3—6. — God's fint message to the people at Sinai. The cloud going on before
the people from Bephidim, brings them at last to what by pre-eminence is called the
mount. The mount, not because it was higher, but because there the burning bush
appeared, and there the people were to serve God. Moses goes up to the mount,

Erobably to the very spot where a while ago he had seen the burning bush and received
is great commission to Pharaoh. From this scene he had been travelling in a circle,
and had now come whence he had started, but not as many travellers in a circle do,
returning poor and profitless as they went. Here he is, treading once again the
hallowed mountain side; the people whom he has brought are below ; God, he knows,
is near, for he has just had most gracious experience of him in Rephidim ; and now he
waits for further revelations and conmiands. A great deal Moses has to listen to in
Sinai from Jehovah ; and therefore it is very interesting to notice the words with which
Jehovah begins. Consider —

I. The teems by which God indicates his people. "The house of Jacob" — "the
children of IsraeL" Thus Jehovah was ever sending the thoughts of his people far
back into the past, and making them feel its important and glorious connection with
the present. The house of Jacob was the house of him wtio had known many changes
of circumstances, many disappointments and trials. It was the house of one who,
born in Canaan, spent some of the best of his time at a distance with Laban, and died at
last in li^gypt. If he, the great ancestor, had thus been a man of change, what wonder
that trying changes came upon the posterity I Then they were also the children of
Israel. This was the name Uivinely given ; and if Israel forgets its purport and the
privilege involved, Jehovah himself assuredly did not. Significant names, that would
otherwise get hidden in the past, God takes special care to preserve.

II. The WAT IN which Gtod desckibes his recent dealings. To the Israelites all
had been very confused, tedious, and trying, in spite of all the miraculous exemptions,
escapes, and provisions they had enjoyed. They had not very well known what was
being done with them. But now, in the compass of a sweeping verse, the whole
course of affairs is presented as one rapid and decisive action. As a bird might snatch
its offspring out of captivity and bear it far on high to some safe shelter, so Jehovah
has done with Israel. He puts before them, as in a vision, these three things to be
considered — 1. The liberation. 2. The consequent journey. 3. The destination. And
these three things he describes in a peculiar way. 1. The liberation he indicates by
this signification, " what I did unto the Egyptians." He wished the people here to
ponder the extent and significance of his terrible dealings in Egypt. The Israelites had
gazed on a succession of varied and penetrating calamities coming on the Egyptians.
But Jehovah wishes the observers to mark that these things were of his doing.
Jehovah's actions are not to be buried in oblivion when once they are past, because
they are terrible actions. It is just because they are the terrible acts of a holy and
just God that they are to be remembered. There was in them nothing of a tyrant's
caprice; they were not wild gusts of power to be ashamed of in calmer moments.
There had been due prediction and preparation; there was an orderly, gradual,
impressive, instructive mounting to a climax : and if any of the people were inclined
to forget the doer in the deeds, the liberator in the liberation, here is a warning that
things must not be so thought on. God is ever devising to make us look at events in
their connection and continuity. The plagues of Egypt were only the preliminary
overturning to carry on the greater plan of God. Egypt had fast hold of Israel ;
wherefore Israel's God smote Egypt so that he might free his own people and bring
them to himself. 2. The jow-ney Jehovah indicates by a peculiarly beautiful and
inspiring figure. " I bare you on eagles' wings." This was an appropriate figure for
people dwelling in the wilderness. Moses had, doubtless, seen many eagles in his
shepherd experiences ; and the Israelites would become familiar with them during their
wanderings. Thus the eagle's ways would be known ; and after this word of Jehovah
Moses would study them more and more, and one result of such observation we find in
Deut. xxxii. 11. When men exalt themselves as the eagle, and set their nests among
the stars, God can bring them down ; but when he puts on the eagle's wings, it is to
exalt himself into a place which shall be one of perfect safety fur his people. One
imagines the eaglet thus lying oh the parent's wing. It may wriggle .about uneasily,
wondering at the speed with which it is taken, the shaking it has to undergo and the

BXODUS — a I



114 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xix. 3— 8.

unf&miliar scenes through which it is passing. But these struggles cotmt for littlo;
they are natural enough, hut they do not hinder the eagle in its progress. Patiently,
calmly, strongly, it rises towards its secure destination. These unfamiliar scenes
»re by-aud-hy to he the frequent path of the now struggling, bewildered eaglet ; in dm
time ita own wings will appear in them —



Sailing with supreme dominion
Through the azure deep of air



Paul himself, dazed and shaken to the very depths of his being on his first dealings
with Josus, had known what it was to he borne on eagle's wings, and he lived to render
a little of the same sort of ministry to the perplexed and desponding Timothy. The
Israelites had been struggling and unbelieving, as at the Red Sea, at Marah, at the time
when the manna was given, and at Eephidim ; but in spite of all these, the strong eagle
wings of God had borne them onward. Our struggles are but a trifle, if only God has
un really in charge. Let us think ever of the eagle wings rather than the ignorant
offspring carried thereon. 3. The destination. " I brought you unto myself." Just as
the eagle brings its young to a place where without distraction or fear of interruption it
can attend to their nourishment and growth. How beautifully God thus turns away
the thoughts of his people from the desolation of the visible scene ! True it was a
wilderness ; emphasis is laid upon this in vers. 1, 2 ; but if we are brought to God, this
is more than aU that may be barren and cheerless in mere circumstances. The place
which men do not care about and where they would not come of their own accord, is
the place where God reveals himself gloriously and graciously to his own. Israel will
now do weU to consider, not what carnal comforts they lack, but what dangers they
have escaped, and what Divine possessions they are in the way to acquire. To be
brought to Otod in the fullest sense of tlie word, and to lie comfortably imder hie
protection and nurture, what a great matter 1 (Bom. viii. 38, 39).

III. So much, then, for what Jehovah has done in the past, and now he turns to
the future, making a laeob pbomisb dependent on the fdlfilling of stkict condi-
tions. He had to bring the people to himself on eagle's wings, because they themselves
were helpless to achieve the deliverance and security they needed. And now the time
has come for response from them. He has brought them to himself, that being with
him they may become his, fully and acceptably. They are put into external conditicaa
such as make it possible for them to obey ; therefore Jehovah has a right, and do«s
right, to ask them for obedience. He who speaks about Jacob and Israel, cannot but
also speak tf the ancient covenant, with respect to which the children of Israel must
labour earnesffy to fulfil their part. God has already made certain requirements from
the people, such as the passover regulations and those concerning the manna. But
now his requirements are to flow forth in a great continuing stream. He will go on
asking, as if asking were never to be at an end ; and therefore it is well to start with a
solemn preparatory word. As to the promise itself, we notice that it is a promise to a
nation — to a whole people. As we see in the next chapter, the conditions are to be
achieved by individual obedience : God comes to the individual with his command-
ments, and says, " Thou." But the promise is for the nation. It is a promise, too,
which seems worded for appreciation in the future rather than in the present, or if in
the present, only by a few who had been prepared to understand it. Perhaps it may
be most fittingly described as a promise to be the stimulus and stay of truly patriotic
hearts. Wherever there is a man who glories in the race from which he sprang and the
land where he was born, there is one who may be expected to understand the force of
an appeal like this. No nation could really be more to God than another nation, unless
It were a better one. Israel had been made free from Egypt that it might then rise
into all the I'ujiess of what a nation ought to be; and therefore God sets these great
possibilities before the people. All the earth, he said, was his. He had proveil his
complete control over one much esteemed tract of territory by the confusions and
calamities he had brought into Pharaoh's domains ; and there was no nation among
men that he could not treat in the same fashion. But, if only men will submit, he can
make to himself a peculiar people, testifying to his power, not from among humiliation!
coniequent on despising him, but from the heights of glory and blessedness tu which



UH. xn. 1— 15.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 116

he lifts those who obey him. He mingles in one glorious expression the thought ol
all those blessmgs which come from the union of true religion and right government.
A kingdom of priests is one where harmony and right dealing will be found running
through all relations, because each member is continually serving God with the great,
loving, acceptable sacrifice of his own life. God is not really king in any society oj
men, unless each member of that society is fully a priest towards him. — Y.

Vers. 1 — 6. — 'I'/ie Lord and Ms people. I. AVho thk people op God are. 1. The
children of the promise, " the house of Jacob," etc., the household of faith. 2. Thej
who have expeiienced deliverance and known God's love: "Ye Ijave seen what
I did," etc. The law the picture of the Gospel : those only can enter into the
covenant of obedience who have known that God has chosen and blessed them.
" We love him because he first loved us."

II. What the Loed asks of them. 1. True obedience : not a profession, but a life.
2. To keep his covenant : to understand his will, and make that will their law. The
whole end of both law and gospel is missed if the life is not laid hold of, if the man is
not brought to wear again the image of him who created him.

HI. The glory God will give them in the earth. 1. They will be God's best
beloved — a, peculiar treasure unto him "above all people." Note the true position
of God's people. It is not that God cares for them only. He cares for all : " all the
earth is mine." They are the choicest of his earthly treasures. 2. They are to be " a
kingdom of priests." They will minister to the nations in the things of God — leading
them into his presence, teaching them his will. 3. They will be " a holy nation," a
consecrated people. The Spirit's anointing will rest upon them. 4. This threefold
glory the portion of God's people to-day: the knowledge that God has chosen us; our
priestly service among our brethren ; the unction from on high. — U.

Vers. 1 — 15. — Covenant before law. "Now, therefore, if ye will obey," etc. — Ex.
xix. 5, 6. 'ihis subject might well be introduced by : — 1. Phowing how exactly the
topography of Sinai (i.e., the plain of Er Rahah, Has Sufsafeh, and Jebel Musa) agrees
with the sacred history. [For material of description see " The Desert of the Exodus."]

2. How suitable mountains were to constitute the scenery of Divine manifestation.

3. An analysis of this section — (1) God and Moses; (2) Moses with the people;
(3) God and Moses again ; (4) Once more Moses with the people. In this prejiaration
for the law, we shall see the Gospel. The Gospel antedated law (see Gal. iii.). Here
we have several evangelical principles : —

I. No covenant, no living obedience. Here may be discussed and illustrated the
whole question whether God's grace precedes our obedient living unto him, or vice versa.

II. Ko overture from God, no covenant. The initiative is ever with God (vers. 3,
4). To illustrate : — Suppose the words had run this way : " Ye know what ye did in
Egypt, how ye sought me, if haply ye might find me; how'all the way through the
desert ye have followed hard after me, if peradventure ye might see my face, and hear
my voice in this mountain." Not one word would have been true. God ever first seeks
man, not man God.

III. No redemptive action, no overture possible. God's appeal is ever
strengthened by his deeds. In tlie case of Israel, there liad been the paschal lamb,
the passing over, the passage of the I'ed Sea, and the constitution of a Church.
'I hereafter covenant, and anon law 1 Show the analogies in Christian times — the
atonement, pardon, adoption, inclusion in the Church, the establisliment of covenantal
relations, the coming under the Cliristian rule of life.

IV. No C0NCURBE^•CE, NO RESULT (ver. 5). " Jf" etc. 1. In all God's dealing with us
he has respect to our liberty. 2. "The condition here is a believing obedience. The
llobrew word for "obey" seems to carry pregnantly within it all these meanings —
hearing, listening, heedin'r, trusting, acting according to what we hear and beheve. It
might be well to show that practically in Christian life the believing man is the
obedient, and vice versa. 3. And keeping the covenant. Bring out the sentinel idea in
the " keeping," and then show that we keep the covenant : (1) By complying with the
conditions on our side. (2) By jealously guarding the conditions on God's side againit
the uunperings of error.

1 i



lie



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[oh. ux. 10 — 5.



V. With concueeencb, the most blessed eesults. They who believe and keep
the covenant become: — 1. The private and peculiar treasure of the King of kings.
Amongst earthly potentates there is a distinction between the treasvires which they
hold in their public capacity and those which are their own private property. When a
king abdicates, he leaves behind him the public treasure, but carries with him his own.
In an analogous sense we become the priceless jewels of the King of kings, though " all
the earth is his " (same Hebrew word in Mai. iii. 17). 2. A kingly priesthood (ver. 6).
" A royalty of priests," ».e., every king a priest, and every priest a king. Here we have
— (1) The royalty of religion. Religion the most powerful factor in life. Hlustrate the
monarchy of religion — e.g., St. Paul on board the ship. (2) The priesthood of religion.
Priestcraft is vile ; priesthood a benediction. The priest receives from God for man ;
offers for man to God, e.g., the priesthood Aaronic, that of the Lord Jesus, that of Israel
for the nations, that of the Christian believer. 3. Separate. Negatively, from the
world, but also positively unto God. " A holy nation." — Bm



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 10 — 15. — The preparation of ths

PEOPLE AND OF THE MOUNTAIN FOB THE MANI-
FESTATION OP God upon it. The people having
accepted God's terms, the time had come for
the revelation in all its fulness of the covenant
which God designed to make with them.
This, it was essential, they should perceive and
know to come from God, and not to be the in-
vention of Moses. God, therefore, was about
to manifest himself. Bat ere he could do this
with safety, it was requisite that certain pre-
parations should be made. Before man can be
fit to approach God, he needs to be sanctified.
The essential sanctification is internal; but,
>8 inteinal purity and holiness cannot be pro-
duced at a given moment, Moses was ordered
to require its outward symbol, external bodily
cleanliness, by ablution and the washing of
clotVes, as a preliminary to God's descent upon
the mountain (vers. 10, 13). It would be
generally understood that this external purity
was symbolical only, and needed to be accom-
panied by internal cleanliness. Further, since
eren the purest of men is impure in God's
sight, and since there would be many in the
congregation who had attempted no internal
cleansing, it was necessary to provide that
they should not draw too near, so as to intrude
on the holy ground or on God's presence.
Moses was therefore required to have a fence
erected round the mountain, between it and
the people, and to proclaim the penalty of
death against all who should pass it and touch
the mount (vers. 12, 13). In executing these
•rdeiB, Moses gave an additional charge to the
leads of families, that they should purify
themselves by an act of abstinence which he
s)ioci>ied (ver li)



Ver. 10. — Go nnto the people. Moses had
withdrawn himself from the people to report
their words to God (vers. 8, 9). He was now
commanded to return to them. Sanctify them.
Or " purify them." Purification in Egypt was
partly by washing, partly by shaving the hair,
either from the head only, or from the entire
body (Herod, ii. 37), partly perhaps by other
rites. The Israelites seem ordinarily to have
purified themselves by washing only. To-day
and to-morrow. The fourth and fifth of Sivan,
according to the Jewish tradition, the Decalogue
having been given upon the sixth. The re-
quirement of a two-days' preparation marked
the extreme sanctity of the occasion. Let
them wash their clothes. Compare Lev. xv. 5.
Rich people could " change their garments "
on a sacred occasion (Gen. zxxv. 2); the
poorer sort, having no change, could only
wash them.

Ver. 11. — The Lord will come down, Jeho-
vah is regarded as dwelling in the heaven
above, not exclusively (Ps. cxxxix. 7-10), but
especially ; and therefore, when he appears on
earth, he " comes down " (Gen. xi. 5 — 7 ; xviii.
21 ; Ex. iii. 8 ; etc.). In the sight of all the
people. That a visible manifestation of the
Divine presence is intended appears, unmis-
takably, from verses 16 and 18.

Ver. 12. — Thou shait set bounds. The erec-
tion of a fence or barrier, between the camp
and the mountain — ^not necessarily all round
the mountain — seems to be meant. This bar-
rier may have run along the lino of low alluvial
mounds at the foot of the cliff of Kas Sufsafeh,
mentioned by Dean Stanley (Sinai and Pales-
tine, p. 43), but cannot have been identical
with them, since it was an artificial fence.
That ye go not np into the mount. Curiosity
might have tempted some to a.<!cend the mount,
if it had not been positively forbidden under
the penalty of death ; carelessness might have
brought many into contact with it, since the
cliff rises abruptly from the plain. Unlesi
the fence had been made, cattle would. Mtor-



oa. XIX. 10—15.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



117



ally, have grazed along its base. To impress
the Israelites with a due sense of the awful
majesty of God, and the sacredness of every-
thing material that it brought into close rela-
tions with him, the mount itself was declared
holy — ^none but Moses and Aaron might go np
into it ; none might touch it ; even the stray
beast that approached it must suffer death for
its unwitting offence (vet. 13). WhoBoeyer
tonoheth the mount. The mountain may be
"touched " from the plain — ^it rises so abruptly.
Shall be soiely put to death. A terrible pun-
ishment, and one which, to modem ideas, seems
excessive. But it was only by terrible threats,
and in some cases by terrible punishments
(2 Sam. vi. 7), that the Israelites could be
taught reverence. A profound reverence lies
at the root of all true religious feeling ; and
for the education of the world, it was requi-
site, in the early ages, to inculcate the neces-
sity of this frame of mind in some very marked
and striking way.

Ver. 13. — ^There shall not an hand tonoh it.
Rather, " there shall not an hand touch Attn."
The transgressor shall not be seized and appre-
hended, for that would involve the repetition
of the offence by his arrester, who must over-
pass the " bounds " set by Moses, in order to
make the arrest. Instead of seizing him, they
were to kill bun with stones or arrows from
within the " bounds," and the same was to be
done, if any stray beast approached the moun-
tain. When the trumpet soundeth long, they
shall come up to the monnt. By translating
the same Hebrew phrase differently here and
in verse 12, the A. V. avoids the difficulty
which most commentators see in this passage.
According to the apparent construction, the
people are first told that they may, on no ac-
count, ascend the mountain (ver. 12), and



then that they may do so, so soon as the trum-
pet sounds long (ver. 13). But they do not
ascend at that time (ver. 19), nor are they
allowed to do so — on the contrary, Moses ii
charged anew to prevent it (ver. 21-25); nor in-
deed do thepeople ever ascend, but only Moses,
Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and the seventy elders
(ch. xxiv. 1, 2). What, then, is the permis-
sion here given? When we scrutinise the
passage closely, we observe that the pronoun
" they " is in the Hebrew, emphatie, and, there-
fore, unlikely to refer to " the people " of ver
12. To whom then does it refer ? Not, cer-
tainly, to " the Elders " of ver. 7, which would
be too remote an antecedent, but to those
chosen persons who are in the writer's min<l
whom God was about to allow to ascend. Even
these were not allowed to go up until som-
moned by the prolonged blast of the trumpet.

Ver. 14. — In obedience to the commands
which he had received (ver. 10), Moses re-
turned to the camp at the foot of Sinai, and
issued the order that the people were to purify
themselves and wash their garments during
that day and the next, and be ready for a
great solemnity on the third day. He must
also, at the same time, have given direction*
for the construction of the fence, which was to
hedge in the people (ver. 12), and which ha
speaks of as constructed in ver. 23.

Ver. 15. — Come not at your wives. Com-
pare 1 Sam. xxi. 4, 5 ; 1 Cor. vii. 5. A similar
obligation lay on the Egyptian priests (Porphyr.
Ve Abstin. iv. 7) ; and the idea which under-
lies it was widespread in the ancient world
(See Herod, i. 198 ; Hesiod. Op. et Di. 733-4 ;
Tibul. Carm. iL 1 ; 11. 11, 12.) The subject is
well treated, from a Christian point of view,
by Pope Gregory the First, in his answers to
S. Augustine^ questions (Bede, HM. Ead. ii),



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 10 — ^16. The aw/ulnest of OocTs presence, and the preparation needed ere we
approach him. I. The awtulness of God's pbbsencb. The presence of God Is
awful, even to those holy angels who are without spot or stain of sin, having done the
holy will of their Maker from their creation. But to sinful man it is far more awful.
No man " can see God's face, and live " (Ex. xxxiii. 20). Jacob was mistaken when he
said, "I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved" (Gen. xxxii. 30). He
had really wrestled with an angel (Hos. xii. 4). When Moses requested to see the
Almighty's glory, he was told, " Thou shalt see my back parts ; but my face shall not
be seen " (Ex. xxxiii. 23). " No man has seen Wod at any time," says St. John the
Evangelist ("John i. 18). But, even apart from sieht, there is in the very sense of the
presence of doi an awful terribleness. " I am troubled at his presence," said Job ; " when
1 a)nsider, I am afraid of him" (oh. ixiii. 15). " Truly the Lord is in this place," said
Jacob, " and I knew it not. Bow dreadful is this place I " (Gen. xxviii. 16, 17). God
is at all times everywhere ; but he veils himself, he practicaUy withdraws himself; and,
though he is where we are, we do not see him, or perceive him (Job xxiii. 8, 9). But, let
hun reveal his presence, and at once all tremble before it. " Mine eye seeth him," sayi
Job Again, "wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes" (ch. xlii. 5, 6)
- When I heard," says Habakkuk. " my belly trembled, my lips quivered mt the f oie* ;



118 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xix. 10— 24^

rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself" (ch. iii. 16). In part, no
doubt, weakness trembles before strength, littleness before greatness, finiteness before
infinity ; but, mainly, it is sinfulness that quakes and shrinks before perl'ect holiness,
corruption that shivers before incorruption, rottenness before absolute purity.

n. The prepabation needed ere we approach him. Only the "pure in heart"
can " see God." In all our approaches to him, we must seek first to be made fit for
propinquity by separation from sin. Moses was bidden to " sanctify the people " (ver.
10), which he could only do outwardly. This true sanctification, the true purification,
was heart-felt repentance, deep contrition, and the earnest resolve to forsake sin, and
henceforth live righteously. This preparation each man had to make for himself. It
was in vain that he should wash himself seven times, or seven times seven, in vain that
he should purify his garments, and keep himself free from material pollutions of every
sort and kind — something more was needed — he required to be purified in heart ani.
suul. And so it is with Christians — with all men universally. God must be
approached with humility — not in the spirit of the Pharisee ; with reverence — head
bowed down, and voice hushed to a low tone, and heart full of the fear of his holiness ;
with a pure mind — that is, with a mind averse firom sin, and resolved henceforth to do
righteously. The publican's approach was better than the pharisee's. Let men
" smite upon their breast," let them be deeply convinced of sin, and own themselves
sinners; let them implore the blotting out of their sins, and the cleansing of their
entire nature ; let them heartily resolve to sin no more, but walk in newness of life,
and there is no contact which they need dread, no nearness of approach from which they
need shrink. We are not, indeed, to hope in this life for that vision of God, or for
that degree of communion, which our souls desire. " Now we see through a glass
darkly — ^now we know in part." The full vision of God, full access to him, complete
communion, is reserved for the next world, where it will form our perfect bliss and
consummation.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 10 — 25. — " The mount that might he touched, and that burned with fire"
(Heb. xii. 18). It is interesting to observe that, with the latter part of this chapter, wo
enter on an entirely new phase in the history of God's revelation of himself to Israel.
Terror enough there has been in the previous portions of the book — terror and "a
nughty hand " — awful manifestations of Uod's power and holiness ; but towards Israsl
there has been displayed only benignity and fatherly affection. Their wants have been
ungrudgingly supplied ; even their murmurings, as we have seen, did not elicit from
God more than a passing reproof. But now that Jehovah takes his awful seat on Sinai,
•nd proceeds to give forth his law, he clothes himself, even towards Israel, with a
majesty and terror which strike the people with dismay. The fact is obviously one of
deep significance, requiring, as it will repay, our close attention. What, meanwhile, we
have to note is, that God did not reveal himself in law and terror tiU he had given the
people many practical evidences of his love for them, and so had won their confidence.
Without this, the terrors of Sinai could scarcely have been borne by them.

I. The preparation (vers. 10 — 16). The revelation at Sinai was distinctively a
revelation of the Divine holiness. From this fact, rightly apprehehded, we may deduce
the necessity for the preparations and precautions referred to in the text. The design
of the lawgiving was to bring to light, and impress on men's minds, that holiness and
justice which are essential parts of God's character, and which underlie aU his dealings
with them, even when most veiled by tenderness and grace. The time had come which
God judged best for such a revelation being made. Made it had to be at some point or
other in the history of the Divine dealings with men ; and no time was so suitable fui
it as this of the constitution of the covenant with Israel. The instructions issued to
the people accord with this design, and have as their end the impressing of their minds
with a deep sense of the holiness of the Being into whose presence they are approach-
ing, and of their own unholiness and unfitness to draw near to him. Holiness is — 1.
JJbscHute moral purity and perfection. It is sanctity of character. It implies, whether
in God or man, the steadfast bent of the will towards all that is good and true and just
■nd pure. In God, it is an inflexible determination to uphold at all coati the interesti



.XIX. 10— 25.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 119



of righteousness and truth. It is an intensity of nature, a fire of zeal or jealouar,
directed to the maintenance of these interests. Hence the requirement that in pre-
paration for their meeting with him at the mount, the people should " sanctify" them-
selves for two whole days (ver. 10). The sanctification enjoined was mainly external
—the washing of clothes, etc. ; hut this, in itself a symbol of the need of heart
purity, was doubtless to be attended with mental and spiritual preparations.
Holiness is to be studied by us in all our approaches to God. The unholy will
not be spumed by God, if they come to him in penitence, relying on his grace
in Christ; but his end in receiving them is that he mcy make them holy, and
holiness is the condition of subsequent fellowship (Hor... vi. ; 2 Cor. v. 15 : Eph
L 4; vi 25—27; 1 Thess. iv. 3; Titus ii. 11—15; Heb. xii. 14; 1 John i. 6, 7).
2. The principle which guards the Divine honour. Thus Martensen defines it —
"Holiness is the principle tliat guards the eternal distinction between Creator and
creature, between God and man, in the union effected between them : it preserves the
Divine dignity and majesty from being infringed upon." Hence the command to Moses
to set bounds to the mountain, that the people might be kept back (vers. 12, 13). So
stringently was this to be enforced, that if a man, or even a beast, should touch the
mountain, the trespasser was to be put to death. The statement — " When the trumpet
soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount " (ver. 13), is probably to be read in
the light of ver. 17; The lesson taught is that of reverential awe of God. Even when
we have the fullest confidence in approaching God as a Father, we ought not to allow
ourselves to forget the infinite distance which still exists between him and us. Om
service is to be " with reverence and godly fear " (Heb. xii. 28).

II. God's descent on Sinai (vers. 16—19). God's descent on Mount Sinai was ia
fire (ver. 18), and with great terribleness. The scene, as described in these verses, is
sufficiently awful. The adjuncts of the descent were — 1. A thick cloud upon the mount.
2. Thunders and lightnings. 3. The voice of a trumpet exceeding loud. 4. A fire
"burning unto the midst of heaven" (Deut. iv. 11). 5. Smoke as of a furnace — the
residt of the action of the fire. 6. The mountain quaking. This awfulness and terror
are the more remarkable when we remember — (1) That what we have here is not God
the Judge, arraigning before him trembling and convicted sinners, to pronounce on them
sentence of doom ; but a God of grace, summoning to his presence a people whom he
loves, and has redeemed, and has just declared to be to him a peculiar treasure, above
all people. (2) That the design of this manifestation is to give to Israel a law which
shall ha the bond of a covenant between him and them, and by which it is intended
that they shall order their hves. The facts to be explained are— (1) That the pheno-
mena alluded to are all of an alarming nature, and (2) That most of them have a sym-
boUcal significance, which enhances the impression of terror. The fire, e.g., is the symbol
of holiness. 'I he thick cloud suggests mystery. It tells also of how God must veil his
glory from man, if man is not to be consumed by it. The smoke speaks of wrath (Deut.
xxix. 20). To the question thus raised. Why all this awfulness and terror ? the fol-
lowing answers may be made : — 1. Law is the revelation of God's holiness. It is the
expression of the demand of holiness. This is the one tiling it has to do, to declare what
are the requirements of holiness, and to enunciate these requirements in the form of
commands to be obeyed. But in order that law may serve its ends, it must be given in
its proper character as law with all the adjuncts of authority and majesty which right-
fully belong to it, and without dilution or weakening of any kind. 'Time enough, after
the law has been given, and the constitution is firmly settled on its bases, to say how
grace is to deal with such as fall short of the standard of its requirements. And, as
formerly remarked, a revelation of law, at some period or other in the history of God's
dealings with mankind, was plainly necessary — (1) That the full requirements of God's
holiness should be made known. ISIotbing was to be gained by the establishment of a
constitution in which the requirements of holiness should be glozed over, veiled, treated
as non-existent, kept out of view. Sooner or later they must be brought to light.
The relations of God with men could never be placed upon a satisfactory footing, till
the fullest recognition had been accorded to them. If the breach between heaven and
earth is to be healed — healed thoroughly — ^it is not to be by ignoring the claims ol
holiness, but by recognising them to the utmost, and then " devising means " whereby,
in oonsistency with these claims, God's " banished " may still not be " expelled from



120 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xix. 9—28.



him" (2 Sam. xiv. 14). The choice of this time for making the revelation was con-
nected with God's whole design iu the calUng of Israel (2) That men might have the
knowledge of sin. The law must be made known that men may understand the
number and extent of their transgressions. The lawgiving at Sinai, therefore, marks a
distinct stage in the progress of God's revelations. The design was to give Israel just
impressions of what the law really was — this law which they were binding themselves
tQ jjeep — to force upon them the conviction of its great awfulness and sanctity. Fitly,
therefore, was it promulgated with every circumstance which could arouse the torpid
conscience, and give impressiveness and force to the revelation. 2. Most of those to
whom the law was given, while outwardly the people of God, and about to take on them
the obligations of a solemn covenant, were really unregenerate. This circumstance,
which lay in the truth of their relation to God as distinguished from mere profession,
was fitly signified by the manner in which the law was given. The law shows by its
form that it was not made for a righteous man (1 Tim. i. 9). 3. For the sin which the
law brought to light, jw proper expiation was as yet provided. Typical atonements might
indeed be offered ; but not till the great propitiator came coidd the guilt be actually
removed. God's forgivenesses, under this first covenant, were not remission proper, but
praetenmssion (Rom. iii. 25). Christ came " for the redemption of the transgressions
that were imder the first testament " (Heb. ix. 15), which, therefore, were standing over
unexpiated. This fact, that the law had claims against the sinner, no proper means of
discharging which as yet existed, had also its recognition in the manner in which the
law was promulgated. 4. The law, in the peculiar way in which it entered into
the Binaitic covenant, was not a saving and blessing power, but, on the contrary, covld
only condemn. The law, as it entered into the covenant with Israel, could neither
justify nor sanctify. It concluded all under sin, and left them there. It proved itself
unequal even to the lower task of restraining outward corruptions. Its curb was in-
effectual to keep sin in check. It could give commandments written on stone, but had
no power to write them on the fleshly tables of the heart (cf. 2 Cor. iii.).

III. The ebnewed wabnino (vers. 19 — 25). (Sod, probably by a voice audible to
the whole congregation (cf. ver. 6), called Moses to the top of the mount. No sooner,
however, had he ascended than he was sent back again to renew the warning to the
people to keep strictly within their bounds. The reason given was — " Lest they break
through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish .... lest the Lord
break forth upon them" (vers. 21, 2i). The passage teaches, 1. That the heart is
naturally disobedient. Even under these most solemn circumstances the Israelites could
hardly be restrained. The very prohibition was a provocative to their self-will to
transgress the boundary. To gratify this impulse they were disposed to risk the con-
sequences. Had the danger not been very real, Moses would not have been sent back
so promptly as he was. Cf. what Paul says on the law — " I had not known sin but by the
law," etc. (Rom. vii. 7 — 14). 2. That temerity in Divine things exposes the trangressor to
severe punishment. Cf. the men of Bethshemesh and the ark (1 Sam. vi. 19), Uzzah,
Uzziah, etc. 3. That it is hard even for good men to credit the extent of the rebellious-
ness of the human heart. Moses thought it extremely unhkely that the people would do
what God told him they were just on the point of doing. He rehed upon his " bounds,"
•nd on the strict charges he had given them to keep them back (ver. 'IZ). Alas 1 it was
•oon to be discovered that even stronger bounds than his would not restrain them. One
design of the economy of law was to demonstrate the futility of every attempt to restrain
wickedness by the system of mere " bounds." What is needed is not " bounds," but
renewal 4. God's near presence is perilous to the sinner. — J. 0.

Vers. 9 — 25. — The manifestation of Ood^s glory at Sinai. I. The pdrposb of this
MANIFESTATION. God made this purpose known beforehand ; and it was that the people
who saw and heard these dreadful phenomena might beheve Moses for ever, might per-
manently acknowledge his authority as a messenger and representative of God. When
Moses was at Sinai before and then entrusted with a Divine message to Israel, he urged
it as one of his difficulties that Israel would not believe him. " They will say, the Lord
hath not appeared unto thee " (ch. iv. 1). Now without appeal in any way from Mos»6
Jeliovah provides a sublime demonstration of his presence, which he expressly mentions
u being intended to establish the position of Moses. Testimony must always be ohom



CH. XIX. 9— i;5.] THE BOOK OF EXODTJS. 121



corresponding with the character and circumstances of those to whom it is presented.
There is a time when it will do to change the rod into a serpent ; and so there is a tima
when the same people before whom this was done must he confronted with all the terrors
of Sinai. It was a great defect on the part of the people that they had no adequate
dense — it may almost be said they had no sense at all— of the holiness of God. ' Upon
the slightest interference with their self-indulgent desires, they broke out into reproach,
almost into rebellion. Therefore, in the very midst of gracious and unfailing providences,
they must be made to feel that it is a fearful thing as well as a happy thing to fall into
the hands of the living Grod. He is ever loving and desires our good ; but he is also
supreme in holiness, and in all ovir thoughts he must be hallowed as one who, when
the need appears, can make most terrible manifestations of his power. We must be
alive to God's presence in the terrible and destructive phenomena of the natural world
as much as in those which are gentle, attractive, and pleasing. By the terrors of Sinai
he intimated to his people, once for all, that he was a God not to be trifled with, but one
who demanded careful and humble attention at all times when he expressed his wiU.

II. The pebpabation fob it which had to be made by the people. The mani-
festation was not to come at once ; the people had to wait for it ; but waiting was not all.
The waiting indeed was necessary that they might have sufficient opportunity to prepare.
Even already it was being signified to them that in external things, and even in such a
slight matter as the washing of the clothes, they were to be a holy people. All the
defilements gathered by the way, all the dust of the conflict with Amalek had to be
washed off; and short of water as they had lately been, God, we may be sure, provided
an abundant supply before giving this command. He required his people through
certain symbolic actions to enter into a special state of readiness for himself. Then
when they were so far ready by what they did to themselves, they must take further
special precautions not to enter on the holy groimd. As God took from the dwellers of
the earth the house of Jacob to be his holy nation, so he took these steeps of Sinai to be
a holy place for himself. Evidently all these preparations being of the character they
were, must have produced a state of mind full of expectation and suspense. God fixed
the very day of this appearing. This is a thing he can do, sure that the reality will not
iall short of the popular notion formed beforehand. But there is another great day of
the Lord ; and the precise point of this in time no man knoweth. It was in mercy that
the date of the visitation on Sinai was made known to Israel ; it is in equal mercy that
the great day of the Lord yet remaining is veiled, as to its date, from us. Those who
live as they ought to live, trusting in Christ and knowing the indwelling of the Spirit,
are doing that which secures present profit and blessedness, makes meet for the
inheritance of the saints in light, and at the same time adequate jireparation for the
trials of the last great day. There is no way of being ready for them except to live near
to God in prayer and faith and faithfulness in little things. Believe in Christ, and
show yoiu: faith by your works, and then you are ready whatever comes.

III. The makifestation itself and its effects. Precisely how the manifestation
was to take place does not seem to have been indicated beforehand ; and even as it stands
described by all those terrible terms, thunder, lightning, the smoking and the quaking
mount, we feel that the reahty must far have transcended the power of human speech to
describe. It was truly an unspeakable visitation. The word telling us most is that
which says that before this visitation all the people trembled. Evidently it had an
overwhelming effect upon them. It is made perfectly plain that when God cannot
draw men by love, he can hold them fast by fear. If they will not go like mVited
children in his way, they are shaken nolentes volentes out of their own. Whatever else
men may refuse to God, love, worship, service, — this at all events is ensured, that they
shall be terrified before him. They have no choice. The earth cannot but quake when
he sets to work the mighty hidden powers underneath. And so the most atheistic life
must acknowledge by its disturbed emotions that there is a power it cannot resist. The
boasted discipline and sovereignty of human reason count for nothing then. The earth-
quake without gets its due result from the quaking heart withm. Man may set up his
will against God's will ; but that only means that he refuses obedience ; he cannot keep
God from shaking him to the very foundations of his being. Though the people in »
few months left Sinai, yet Sinai in a very important sense followed them. The fire that
went out from the Lord And devoured Kadab and Abihu— the fire that burned at



122



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XIX. 16 — 20.



Taberah among the complaining people (Num. xi. 1) — the opening earth and ths
devouring fire at the time of the conspiracy of Korah (Num. xvi.) — what are all these
but proofs of the God of Sinai travelling in all his terror and glory along with Israel and
making sharp visitations in the hour of worldliness, unbelief, and negligence ? Those
trained in idol.itry may well become sceptical and end in utter unbelief, for they never
see anything in the way of subduing power save the power of knavish priests over
superstitious devotees. There are great pretensions and professions, but never anything
done corresponding with them. But here as Jehovah begins to specify his requirements,
he first of all shows his power in the most impressive way. As an Israelite looked back
on Sinai, whatever other feelings he might have, he could not deny the terrible reality
that was tliere. And one very remarkable thing is, that through all this thunder and
lightning, smoking and quaking, there was no actual destruction. If there had been
such, it would certainly have been recorded. But so far from this being the case, there
were special and very earnest directions in order to avert it (ver. 12, 13, 21, 24.) So long
as they kept outside the Divinely appointed barrier and observed the cleansing regu-
lations, neither life nor property was lost. Sinai, with all its undescribed terrors, was
not Vesuvius : the people beneath were not gathered in a doomed Herculaneum or
Pompeii. The purpose of Jehovah was simply to manifest the reality, extent, and
proximity of his destroying power. Men were made to feel what it could do, if they
were so presumptuous or negligent a.' to come within its rightful exercise. — Y.

Vers. 7 — 25. The revdation of Jehovah. I. What is demanded ere the revelation
CAN BE IMPARTED. 1. The will must be surrendered to God, " All that the Lord hath
spoken we will do" (ver. 8). 2. The fllthiness of the past must be put away;
"Sanctify them" (ver. 10). There must be loathing of, and separation from, sin. 3.
There must be a sense of the distance sin has put between the soul and God ; " Take
heed to yourselves that ye go not up into the moimt, or touch the border of it "
(vers. 12, 13).

II. How THE REVELATION IS IMPARTED. 1. In thcawful manifestation of his majesty
(vers. 16 — 19). The first step is the recognition of the livingness and greatness and
holiness of God. Hitherto he has been to the soul a name only ; now the Creator, the
Holy One, against whom and in whose sight all sin has been wrought, the Eighteous
Judge from whom there is no escape, from whose face death itself affords no covering.
2. In the glorifying of a Mediator, to whom he speaks, and who shall declare him to us.
This is reflected in the Christian's experience— (1) Binai, the knowledge of sin; (2)
Calvary, peace through the blood of Jesus, acceptance in the Beloved. — U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 16 — 20. — The manifestation or God
UPON Sinai. All was ready. The fence had
been made (ver. 23) ; the people had purified
themselves — at least so far as externals went.
The third day was come — ^there was a breath-
less hush of expectation. Then suddenly, in
the morning, the presence manifested itself.
" There were thunders and lightnings, and a
thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of
the trumpet exceeding loud " (ver. 16) ; " and
Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, be-
cause the Lord descended upon it in fire ; and
the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a
furnace and the whole mount quaked greatly"
(ver 18; Or, as the scene is elsewhere
(Deut. iv. i 1, 12) described by Moses — " Ye
came near and stood under the mountain, and
the mountain burned with fire unto the luidtt



of heaven, with darkness, clonds, and (hick
darkness. And the Lord spoke unto you out
of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of
the words, but saw no similitude; only ye
heard a voice." The phenomena were not a
mere " storm of thunder and lightning, where-
of Moses took advantage to persuade the
people that they had heard (xod's voice" —
not " an earthquake with volcanic eruptions "
— not even these two combined — but a real
theophany, in which amid the phenomena of
storm and tempest, and fire and smoke, and
thick darkness, and heaviugs of the gi'ound as
by an earthquake shock, first the loud blast of
a trumpet sounded long commanding attention,
and then a clear penetrating voice, like that
of a man, made itself heard in 'distinctly arti-
culated wordf, audible to the whole moltitnd«|



OH. XIX. 16—20.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



128



■nd recognised hy them as superhuman — as
" the voice of God " (Deut. iv. 33). It is in
Tain to seek to minimise, and to rationalise
the scene, and tone it down into something
not supematuTal. The only honest course is
either to accept it as a plain record of plain
(albeit miracolous) facts, or to reject it alto-
gether as the fiction of a romancer

Ver. 16. — ^Ihere were thunders. Literally,
" voices," as in ch. ix. 23 ; but there can be no
doubt that " thunder " is meant. A thick
clond. Compare above, ver. 9, and the com-
ment ad he. The voice of the trumpet.
Literally, " a trumpet's voice." The word
used for " trumpet is not the same as in
ver. 13 ; but the variation does not seem to
have any importance.

Ver. 17. — Moses brought forth the people
out of the camp. The camp itself must have
been withdrawn to some little distance from
the foot of the mount, so that a vacant space
intervened between the first tents and the
" fence " which Moses had caused to be erected
almost close to the mount. Into this vacant
space Moses now led " the people ' — i.e., the
chief of the people — so bringing them as near
as they might come to God.

Ver. 18 — Mount Sinai was altogether on
a smoke. Literally, " smoked, all of it."
Kalisch suggests that " the dense clouds from
which the thunders broke forth had the
appearance of smoke." But the reason assigned
— " because the Lord descended on it in fire,"
seems to imply real imoke ; and the same re-
sults from the comparison of it to " the smoke
of a furnace." The whole mount quaked
greatly. Scarcely "through the vehemence



of the thunder " (Kalisch), for thunder doei
not shake the earth, though it shakes the air
— but rather by an actual earthquake. Com-
pare Ps. xviii. 7 ; Matt, xxvii. 51 — 54 ; Acts
IV. 31 ; xvi. 26.

Ver. 19. — When the voice of the trumpet
sounded long, and waxed louder and louder.
This is a somewhat free translation ; but it
gives well the real meaning of the Hebrew.
We may conclude that the trumpet's blast was
not continuous. It sounded when the mani-
festation began (ver. 16). It sounded again,
much louder and with a much more prolonged
note, to herald the actual descent of God upon
the mount. This time the sound was so pierc-
ing, so terrible, so intolerable, that Moses could
no longer endure to keep silence, but burst out
in speech. Were his words those recorded in
Heb. xii. 21—" I exceedingly fear and quake "
— ^words not found now in the Old Testament
—or were they others which have been wholly
lost to us? It is impossible to say. His speech,
however, had the effect of bringing the awful
preparations to a close — "Moses spake, and
God answered him by a voice, and the Lord
came down upon Mount Sinai."

Ver. 20. — On the top of the mount. Not,
probably, on the highest point of the Sinaitic
group, the Jebel Musa, which is out of sight
from the plain Er-Eahah, where the Israelites
must have been assembled; but on the highest
part of the face of Sinai fronting that plain,
the Eas Sufs^feh, which would be to the
Israelites at the base " the top of the mount."
The Lord called Moses up. Perhaps with
Aaron, who certainly accompanied him when
he next ascended (ver. 24), and who seems to
be glanced at in the phrase used at the «nd
of ver. 23



HOMILBTICS

Vers. 16 — 20. — God's various modes of manifesting himself. It has been well said
that " when God reveals himself it is in a manner suitable to the occasion." No
revelation that he has made of himself has ever been so terrible in its material accom-
paniments as that at Sinai ; and no occasion can ever be conceived of as more needing
the employment of solemn, startling, and impressive circumstances. Here was a people
gross of heart, delighting in flesh-pots, debased by slavery, careless of freedom, immoral,
inclined to idolatry, which had to be elevated into God's living witness among the
nations, the depositary of his truth, the teacher of the rest of mankind for ages. Uiven
the object of impressing such a nation permanently with the conviction that it had
received a Divine revelation, and that very dreadful consequences would follow the
neglect of it, and the need of the thunders and other terrors of Sinai becomes manifest.
At other times and in other places God has pursued quite different methods. To Elijah
he revealed himself in the " still small voice ;" to Isaiah and St. John in visions ; to the
apostles generally in the solemn teaching of his Sou ; to St. Paul in ecstasies, wherein
he heard unspeakable words. The contrast between the day of the giving of the law od
Sinai and the day of Pentecost has often been noticed.

"When God of old came down from Heaven,
In power and wrath he came ;
Before his feet the clouds were riven,
Half darkness and half flame "



144 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. t<^. six. 16— »

"But when he came the second time,
He came in power and love :
Softer than gale at morning primei
Hovered lus holy Dove."

The coming of the Spirit at Pentecost and the coming of Jesus were, both of them,
gentle and peaceful Kpiplianies, suited to the time when God, having educated the
world for four thousand years or more, was about to seek to win men to himself by the
preaching of " good tidings " — of the gospel of love. The clouds and terrors of Sinai
would here have been out of place — ^unsuitable anachronisms. In complete harmony
with the two occasions were — at Bethlehem, the retired village, the humble stable, the
angels singing of peace on earth, the lone shepherds watching their flocks at night — in
Jerusalem the voiceless wind, " mighty " yet subdued, the lambent light playing round
the heads of holy men, the unseen inward influence shed into their hearts at the same
time, impalpable to sense, but with power to revolutionise the world. And as God
reveals himself to his Church in manifold ways, each fitting the occasion, so does he
reveal himself to individuals. Now he comes clothed in his terrors. He visits with
calamity or with sickness, or with that awful dread which from time to time comes over
the soul, that it is lost, hopelessly lost, alienated from God for ever. Anon, he shows
himself in gentler guise — ^he whispers hope, he instils faith, he awakens love. In every
case he studies the needs of the individual, and adapts his revelation of himself to them.
Now he calls by his preachers, now he warns by the " still small voice " of conscience ;
now he wakes men out of sleep by a sudden danger or a sudden deliverance ; anon, he
startles them out of a self complacency worse than sleep by withdrawing himself and
allowing them to fall. It is for man to take advantage of every Divine manifestation,
to listen when God speaks, to obey when he calls, to make the use of each occasion
which it was intended to have, to " receive God's revelations of himself in his own
way."

HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 16 — 19. — Sinai and Sion. In studying these verses we caimot but be reminded
of the picture drawn by the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews of the contrast in
respect of Church state and privilege between believers of the Old and believers of the
New Testament dispensations. " Ye are not come," he says, " unto the mount that
might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and
tempest. . . . But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God,
the heavenly Jerusalem," etc. (Hebrews xii. 18 — 25). Briefly stated, what is set forth
here is the contrast of legal with Gospel privilege. The writer is addressing Jews, who
were in danger of apostatising from Christ. He seeks to dissuade them from going back
to Judaism by showing them the vast superiority of the privileges which they enjoyed
as Christians to those enjoyed under the law. M e, who are Christians, and are in no
temptation to return to Judaism, approach the subject from a different side. But the
verses are still of use as showing us, by contrast, the greatness of our privilege. We
have, 1. the negative side of Christian privilege — what we are delivered from, " Ye are
not come," etc. ; 2. The positive side of Christian privilege — ^what we have come to,
" Ye are come unto Mount Sion," etc. It will better suit our present purpose to view
the contrast along difl'erent lines.

I. The coktbast in the mountains. Sinai and Sion. 1. Sinai. Sinai, the
mountain of law, stands as the proper representative of the old economy. The Israelites,
as seen above, were under a peculiar constitution. Bound to God by a covenant of law,
they yet enjoyed many of the benefits of a state of grace. Sinai, however, was the
proper representation of their economy. Divest that economy of all that it derived
from the new and better covenant which has since superseded it, and it would have been
a Sinai economy pure and simple. The law said. Do this and thou shalt live ; and if
the Israelite did not do it, it could award no blessing to him, could only condemn. This
was the formal constitution. As placed under law, the people, in their approaches to
God, were constantly coming anew to the mount that might be touched, and that
burned with fire. 2. Sion. The first thing which strikes ua here is — (1) That then



CH. zix. 1ft— 19.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 126

torn (Am amtrast leltveen Sinai and Sion within Israel itself. Sinai and Sion were^ lo
to speak, the two poles round which the whole national and religious life of Israel
teTolTed. As Sinu, the mountain of the law, represents their position under law, so
the grace element in their economy comes to light in Mount Sion. As on Sinai, God
descended in awful siaoke and flame, so on Sion he dwelt in peace in the midst of Israel,
giving forth his oracles, receiving his people's worship, and dispensing mercy and favoiir
from between the cherubim, above the blood-sprinkled mercy-seat. God came down
for a seasoa only on Sinai ; on Sion, he was said to dwell (Ps. cxxzii. 13, 14). He
appeared in terror on Mount Sinai ; but Sion displayed the milder glories of his character,
Sion was the place of salvation (Ps. xiv. 7 ; Is. xlvi. 13, etc.). In Sion God ruled ; from
it he sent forth strength and help ; from it was to go forth the Gospel law (Ps. xx. 2;
ex. 2 ; Is. ii. 2, 3). Yet Sion, under that economy, was only the type of something better.
Grace at th.it time was only very imperfectly revealed ; it was hidden tmder types
and forms of law; it has now been made fully manifest, and the old covenant
has been superseded by a better and enduring one. (2) Sinai and Sion as repre-
senting the contrast heiween the two dispensations. Sion has not ceased to exist, it
has only, so to speak, gone up higher. Its special seat is now in heaven. There is the
ihrone of Go<l ; there, the capital or head-quarters of that great spiritual commonwealth,
Aere denominated "the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem," and else-
where, " the Jerusalem that is above," " New Jerusalem," in plain terms, the Church or
kingdom of God on earth and in heaven. This heavenly Sion alone perfectly realises
and fulfils the idea embodied in the earthly one. Do we ask why the Church or
kingdom of God, as respects its state of privilege, is in this text figured as on a mountain
— as a city set on Mount Sion ? The answer is — 1. Because the special seat of God's
holy abode in the midst of his Church is now literally in heaven, i.e., spiritually removed
from, and exalted above the earth. 2. Because the kingdom of God is spiritually the
' highest thing on earth — founded on the highest order of ideas, on those principles of
lighteousness and justice which dominate all others. 3. Because it is, in point of fact,
the central, commanding, controlling power in history. 4. Because entrance into it, and
growth in its spirit and power, involves a spiritual rise — is a true moral ascent. These
facts evince the propriety of this figurative representation.

II. The contrast in the accessories. Each mountain, in the passage in Hebrews,
is made the centre of a scene. We have, accordingly, two groups of attendant circum-
stances, the details of which are placed studiously in contrast. The series of manifesta-
tions at Sinai has already engaged our attention, and we need not dwell upon them
further. In contrast to Sinai is placed the picture of the convocation at Mount Sion.
The picture is ideal ; but the features in it are severally real, and the whole are needed
to set forth Christian privilege in its completeness. 1. The mount is represented as
crowned by " the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem " — the city denoting
that great spiritual polity into which believers are admitted, and in which they have
rights of citizenship, but which, like every other polity, has an existence of its own,
irrespective of the individuals who at any time compose its membership. The dvitas
endures, though the cives come and go. The ideas suggested are order, beauty, sym-
metry. God has founded this city. God defends it. It has salvation for walls and
bulwarks. The capital of this great " City of God " is heaven ; but believers, even on
earth, are enfranchised members of it, and, spiritually, have come to it (Eph. ii. 19 ;
PhU. iii. 20). 2. Crowding the mount, thronging its sides, and hovering above, behind,
around, is " an innumerable company of angels." Cf. 2 Kings vi. 17, where the servant
of Elisha saw the mountain " full " of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha ;
or Dan. vii. 10, where thousand thousands minister to the Ancient of Days, and
ten thousand times ten thousand stand before him ; or Eev. v. 11, where the
lumber of the angels round about the throne was " ten thousand times ten thousand,
ond thousands of thousands." The truths figured are these two — (1) That the angelic
hosts stand in a relation of ministry to the Church and kingdom of God (Heb. i.
14); and (2) That they take a deep interest in its fortunes (Eph. iii. 10; 1 Pet.
i. 12). Their bright forms, crowding the mount, add augustness, splendour, and
beauty to the scene. 3. The mount is further occupied by " the general assembly
and Church of the first-bom, which are written in heaven " — this designation including
the whole hc<dy of Chiistian believers both those on earth and those in heaven



12« THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xix 16—19.



the Church catholic, spiritual, invisible. " The whole family in heaven and earth "—
" one Church, above, below." But why called " first-bom " ? " They are partakers with
Christ in all the privileges of that right of primogenituie, which properly and essentially
belongs to him alone." (Candlish.) The truth figured here is, that in Christ we are
admitted to the " communion of saints." " I believe in the holy Catholic Church. ... I
believe in the communion of saints." Yet how little, sometimes, does this great privilege
mean to us I 4. Another part of the assembly on the mount is denoted by the words
— " the spirits of just men made perfect." These are the holy and good of the former
dispensation, now admitted to equality of privilege and blessedness with Christians
(cf. Heb. xi. 40). 5. God himself sits enthroned in the midst — " Judge of all." The
expression reminds us of the writer's design, which is not consolatory, but admonitory.
It is still the holy God with whom we have to do, the Judge (cf. Bom. ii. 6 ; 1 Pet. i. 1 i)
as well as Father ; one who will punish disobedience to hia voice now with even greater
severity than he did of old (Heb. xii. 25," 29). The God of Sinai and the God of Sion
are after all the same God. What, then, makes the difi'erence between Sinai and Sion?
The answer is — 6. " Jesus, the mediator of the new covenant, and the blood of sprinkling."
It is Christ's presence in the scene which has changed all the surroundings. To all
these things, if we are indeed in Christ, we come. How ? (1) By coming to Jesus
himself. To come to Jesus, as has been well said, is to come to all else that is here
described. We may or may not realise our privileges ; but they are there. We are
members of the spiritual commonwealth, enjoy the ministry of angels, are part of the
invisible Church, have rights of the first-born, etc. " (2) In the realisation of spiritual
privilege (cf. 1 Cor. ii. 12). (3) In the use of our rights. (4) We shall " come " more
perfectly at death. Hence —

III. The contrast in pkivilegb. 1. In the character of the privilege. In Israel's
case, the privilege was of so awful a kind, that the sense of privilege was well-nigh
swallowed up in the terror which the scene inspired. How dififerent with believers I
Their approach to this spiritual mount is solemnising indeed, yet joyful. They have
boldness in drawing nigh by the blood of Christ. 2. In the degree of the privilege. The
Israelites were not permitted to ascend, or even to come near the mount. Bounds were
erected to keep them back. Did they so much as touch it, they would perish. How
different the privilege of Christians, who not only ascend this spiritual Mount Sion, but
are enrolled as citizens in its heavenly city, and have boldness to enter the holiest of all
in their approaches to the throne of grace (Heb. iv. 14 — 16 ; x. 19 — 23). — J. 0.

Ver. 17. — Prepare to meet thy Ood. Gk)d's revelation of himself to man is gradual, as
man can bear it. [Cf. the way in which a parent reveals himself to his child. Is. xxviii.
li, with stammering lips and a feigned tongue.] Israel had learnt to know God as a
deliverer ; must learn to know him further as a lawgiver and ruler.

I. The SCENE. A long, broad valley. Rocks on each side widening out into a natural
amphitheatre. Facing down the valley is a steep, preciijitous mountain ; grey, streaked
with red. The whole scene, not unlike, on a huge scale, that presented by the avenues
leading up to the Egyptian temples. It is a place where those accustomed to Egypt
might expect to meet with God. " Now " probably the people may have thought, " we
shall see for ourselves this mysterious Jehovah ; he has brought us to his temple ; he
will introduce us to his shrine."

II. The mediator and his message. Israel is encamped. Moses ascends the moun-
tain (ver. 3). Again God meets with him and sends a message by him to the people.
Motice: — 1. lieminder of what he has done for them already (ver. 4). 2. Obedience the
condition of future favour (ver. 5); Fulfil the condition and the promise is secure. The
earth itself is God's temple ; if Israel will obey and keep his covenant they shall be " a
kingdom of prie.sts, and a holy nation." 3. The answer given (ver. 8). No hesitation,
no expression of doubt. The promised blessing so attractive that they are reaay to pro-
mise anything, never doubting their ability to fulfil their promise. It is easy enough
to say " I will " — the hard thing is to translate it into " I do."

III. The promised interview. The people shall be conscious of the presence of their
God. Jehovah will publicly attest the authority of his sorvant. Notice: — 1. TTie pre-
paration. Ood requires it. It is easy for familiarity to breed irreverence ; and irreverence
Kioii leads on tu low views of the Divine character. Love is degraded into mere kindli-



OH. xn, 17— 19.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



127



ness ; an easy-going people believe in an easy-going God. See here :— (1) The peopl«
have to prepare themselves for the meeting (ver. 10). (2) The place has to be prepared.
God reveals himself to prepared people in a prepared place. Why do so few have reve-
lations nowadays? Some come to the prepared place, but they omit the personal
preparation ; others, even after personal preparation, lose much through neglecting the
prepared place. We need to remember Eooles. v. 1, and Heb. x. 25. 2. The revelation.
Tlie third day comes (ver. 16). Storm, sound of trumpet, assembly of people without
the camp, trembling, earthquake, intense suspense. " Now surely God will show him-
self. Can we endure the sight and live ? " At length (ver. 19) " a voice " — cf. Deut. iv. 12 ;
" no similitude; only a voice." For the present it is enough ; reverence is the first lesson
those whom God has delivered have to learn; " Hallowed be thy Name" is the first
petitioa they are taught to offer. For effect (cf. xx. 18 — 22) which also teaches the
object of the revelation. " That his fear may be before your faces that ye sin not."

Conclusion. Wo have learnt many more lessons about God than the Israelites could
then leaiu. Have we not too often slurred over or half-forgotten that first lesson ?

"Let knowledge grow from more to more^

But more of reverence in ns dwell;

That mind and soul, according weU,
May make our music as before,
But vaster. We are fools and slight;

We mock thee when we do not fearj

But help thy foolish ones to bear;
Help thy vain worlds to bear thy light." — Q.

Ver. 19. — Only a voice. The people were expecting a revelation — a vision of tiM
hitherto unseen Jehovah — ^it came, but not as they expected ; no vision, only a voice
(cf. Deut. iv. 12). The fact was the law was not a final, only a, preparatory revelation ;
it is related to the Gospel as John Baptist was related to Christ. " A voice crying in
the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord. Consider in this view : —

I. The strength of the law. 1. Jt was a voice — a Divine voice. In spite of the
confusion not unmixed with disappointment, none doubted whence it came. It gave a
Divine authority to the commandment even when given through a mediator. 2. It
was adapted to the condition of those who heard it. A revelation must be fitted for those
to whum it is addressed. Qllust. a highly-finished picture is of small value to the half-
blind ; they can better appreciate a rough sketch in coarse, bold outline.) The animal,
or natural man, as exemplified in the character of Israel in the wilderness, could not
have understood anything more spiritual ; its religion is obedience. The natural man
can only be reached by such sensual methods as his nature can respond to. Through
them the spiritual nature, which is cradled in the natural, may be educated and fostered,
prepared to receive in due course that higher revelation which befits it.

II. The weakness of the law. 1. It was only a voice. As the spiritual nature grows
(cf. infants attaining consciousness) it craves for something more than this. It needs
not a voice only, but a presence. From the first we find Israel longing after a " simili-
tude." Even Moses (xxxiii. 18) beseeches that God will show him his glory. Later
the cry grows ever more distinct through psalmists and prophets, itself a continuous
preparation for the fulfilment ultimately reserved for it. 2. Evidence in the law itself
(cf. second commandment). A fence to guard an empty shrine, but a shrine kept empty
only in preparation for some coming inmate. A preparation for the Incarnation. The
Pharisee comes to worship the fence ; the idolater ignores it ; both illustrate the weak-
ness of the merely " vocal " revelation.

III. CoNTBAST WITH THE GosPBL. Chrfst is " the Pford made Flesii :" the express
image of God. Not a voice only, but a person. The more perfect revelaiion indicates a
fuller development in those to whom it is addressed, but we must remember that a fuUet
development implies also a greater responsibility. [The offence which we condone in
thu child, is unpardonable in the man. Mistakes made by the half-blind are no longer
excus;ible wIilu a man can see.] If Israel fell and was rejected, must not our far
greater privile"u» be followed, if profaned, with deeper ruin ? (Of. Heb. xiL 26, 20
lCor.x.1-12.)— Q.



12i



THE BOOK OP EXODUa



[oh. XIX. 21— 26b



EXPOSITION.



Vera. 21 — 25. — The further warning to the
people and the priests. It is very remarkable
that, after all the directions given (vers. 10 —
IS), and all the pains taken by Moses and the
Israelites themselves (vers. 14, 15, 23), God
should still have thought it necessary to inter-
pose with a fresh warning, and to send Moses
back from the top of the mount to the bottom,
in order to communicate the renewed warning
to the people. We can only suppose that, in
spite of the instructions previously given and
the precautions taken, there were those among
the . people who were prepared to " break
through " the fence, and invade the mount,
and who would have done so, to their own
destruction (ver. 21), but for this second
warning. The special mention of the
" priests " (vers. 22, 24) raises the suspicion,
that this proud and rebellious spirit was par-
ticularly developed among them. Accustomed
to the exercise of sacred functions, they may
have been inclined to regard their own purity
as equal to that of Moses and Aaron; and
they may even have resented their exclusion
from a sacred spot to which the two sons of
Amram were admitted. Apparently, they
had conceived that the injujiction to go
through the recognised ceremonies of purifica-
tion (ver. 10) did not apply to them, and had
■eglected to do so, on which account a special
eommand had to be issued, addressed to them
only (ver. 22).

Ver. 21. — Charge the people lest they
break through — i.e., "lest they force a
passage through the barrier made by Moses "
m accordance with the command given in ver.
12. And many of them perish. Irreverent
gazing on holy thmgs was forbidden by the
law (Num. iv. 20), and on one occasion
(1 Sam. vi. 19) was actually punished with
death. It did not, however, require a law to
make it an offence, natural reason being quite
suiiicient to teach the duty of reverence.

Yer. 22. — ^Let the priests also. It has been
objected, that no priests had been as yet ap-
pomted, and that we have here therefore ui



anachronism. But every nation in ancient
times had priests, appointed on one principle
or another : and the Levitical priesthood must
be regarded as having supei'seded one pre-
viously existent, not as the first priesthood
known to Israel. We have a second mention of
priests, previous to the i^ppointment of Aaron's
sons to the office (in ch. xxiv. 5), which con-
firms the present passage. Sanctify them-
selves. The verb used is identical with that
which occurs in ver. 10 ; and there is no
reason to believe that any different sanctifica-
tion was intended. The natural inference if
that the priests had neglected to sanctify
themselves. (See the introductory paragraph.)
Lest the Lord break forth. Compare 2 ^m.
vi. 8, where we have an instance of such •
" breaking forth " upon Uzzah.

Ver. 23. — ^The people cannot come np.
Moses can only have meant, that the people
could not approach the mount imwittingly,
since the fence commanded (ver. 12) was
made. But to scale the fence, or break
through it, was of course possible. (See ver
130

Ver. 24.— And the Lord said . . . Avay,
Get thee down. God whoUy rejected the
plea of Moses, that there was no need to give
an additional warning, ffe knew best, and
would not have issued the order to " go down
and charge the people " (ver. 21), unless there
had been a need for it. In the abrupt words
" Away, get thee down," we may see a
rebuke, addressed to Moses, for his folly in
thinking that he could change the purposes of
God. Thou and Aaron with thee. This is
the first express mention of Aaron as called to
ascend with Moses. But it is quite possible
that he may have accompanied his brother in
either or both the previous ascents (vers. 3,
20. Compare ch. x. 1, 3 ; xii. 21, 28 ; etc.)
But let not the priests and the people
break through. Both the priests and the
people were to be again solemnly warned that
it would be death to break through the fence.
This warning seems to have been sufficient.

Ver. 25. — So Moses went down. After the
sharp rebuke addressed to him in ver. 24,
Moses made no further resistance, but returned
to the camp, delivered the warning to priests
and people, and having so done re-ascended
the mount with Aaroa.



HOMILETICS.

Yen. 22 — ^24. — The priestly office does not dispense a man from personal purity, hvA
oMiges him the moie to it. Holiness of office, of profession, of function is too often
regarded as if it secured, by some occult power, the personal holiness of the individual,
or even of the class, exercising it. The priest castas of Egypt, India, and otbei



'ZIX.22— 24.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 129



oountnes, assumed to stand on a completely dififerent footing from the rest of the com-
munity m respect of nearness, and acceptabiUty to God. And botn unaer tne Jewish
and the Christian dispensation, there has been in different times and countries a vast
amount of sacerdotal' pretension, a wide-sproad disposition to assume that official
covers and includes personal holiness. But Holy Scripture abounds in warnintra
against any such assumption. "Let the priests sanctify themselves." Nadab
and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, were chosen among the first of the Levitical nriests




t'e^' r' oeiiai • <,! oam. u, iz;, whose " sin was very great

before the Lord (ib. verse 17). Even among the apostles there was a "son of
perdition. Priests nave to remember—

L That the priestly office does not secube them against bbino tempted.
Even Christ, our great High Priest— the only true priest that the world has ever seen,
was " m all points tempted like as we are " (Heb. iv. 15). Eli's sons were tempted by
greed and fleshly lusts (1 Sam. ii. 16, 22); Nadab and Abihu by pride; Judas by
coyetousness. All laen have the same nature, like passions, similar appetites. The

priest, after all, is a man. Satan watches for him uo less — or rather much more than

for others. It is a greater triumph for him to lead astray the shepherd than the sheep.
And the relations of a priest towards his flock are of such a nature — so close, so private
sometimes — as to lay him open to special temptations.

II. That the pbjestly office does not secubb them aqainst tibldino to temp-
tation. Jesus alone was " in all points tempted, yet without sin " (Heb. iv. 15). " At.t.
we the rest, although baptised and bom again in Christ, yet offend in many things,"
yield to the temptations which surround us, transgress the Divine law. Nadab, Abihu,
Eli's sons, Judas, were not only tempted, but fell. The priests of Judah, towards the
close of the Independent kingdom, were among those who provoked Grod the most
(3ei. xxxii. 32 ; Zeph. iii. 4). Christian ministers, even at the present day, too often
disgrace their profession, briug shame upon their church, and even upon religion itself,
by acts of sin or sometimes by scandalous lives, no better than those of the sons of Eli.
These terrible examples should be a warning to all of their danger, and should render
the minister distrustful of himself, circumspect, vigilant, and above all prayerfuL Only
by God's help can he hope to stand upright.

III. That sin is woese in the pbiest than in others, and will entah^
A SOBBB PUNISHMENT. Ministers of Christ pledge themselves by special vows, over
and above their baptismal vows, to lead godly lives. They are bound to be examples
to the flock. They have greater opportunities of grace than others. Their offences
eause greater scandal than the offences of others, and do greater damage to the cause of
religion. There is something shocking, even to the worldly man, in the immorality of
sne whose business in life is to minister in holy things. The impure minister is
a hypocrite ; and hypocrisy is hateful to God, and even in the sight of man con-
temptible.

IV. That the pbiestlt profession binds to holiness. Priests are they whose
office it is to " come near the Lord" (Ex. xix. 22) — to draw closer to him than others
— to lead others on to him, by exhortation, by example, by intercessory prayer.
Without holiness they are impotent to perform their work — they are of no service
either to God or man — they do but help forward the work of the devil. Ministering in
a holy place, in holy things, with holy words continually in their mouths, if they have
not holiness in their hearts, their lives must be a perpetual contradiction, a continual
profanity. Again, as already observed, they take special vows ; they profess before God
and the congregation to have an Inward call ; they spontaneously promise to live
as examples to others ; they enter on their position in life on these conditions : they bind
themselves. Not to live holy lives is to fly in the face of these obligaticns — ^to break
the promises made to man and the vows offered to God — to violate faith — to destroy,
so far as lies in their power, the great bond of human society. And what must not the
offence be to God which they commit, by continually drawing near to him with their
lips, when their hearts are for from him? He is "of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity." " Without holiness no one shall see him." " Lei the priests sanetify
tkmuelvei."



KZODU»— Oi



ISO



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[CH. XX. 1 — It.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XX.



Vers. 1 17. — The deliyebt of the mobal

LAW. Every necessary preparation had now
been made. The priests, as well as the peo-
ple, had "sanctified themselves." A whole-
some dread of " breaking " through the fence,
and " touching " the mount, had spread itself ■
among the people. Moses had returned from
the camp to the summit of the mount ; and
both he and the people were attent to hear
the words of the " covenant," which had been
announced to them (ch. xix. 5). Then, amid
the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the
noise of the trumpet, and the smoke, and the
earthquake throbs which shook the ground, a
voice like that of a man, distinctly articulate,
pronounced the words of that "moral law,"
which has been from that day to this the
guide of life to thousands upon thousands, the
only guide to some, a very valuable and help-
ful guide to all who have known of it. It is
wen said by Kalisch, that the delivery of the
Decalogue on Sinai " formed a decisive epoch
in the history of the human race," and was
even perhaps " the greatest and most im-
portant event in human history," up to the
time of its occurrence. Considering the
weakness, imperfection, and moral obliquity
of man, it was to the last degree important
that an authoritative code should be put forth,
laying down with unmistakahle clearness the
chief heads of duty, and denouncing the chief
classes of sins. It may be true that the
educated moral sense of mankind in civilised
conmiunities is sufficient to teach them all,
or nearly all, of what the Decalogue forbids
and enjoins ; but this is the effect produced
upon the internal constitution of our nature
by long centuries of moral training ; and no-
thing like it existed in primitive times. Then
the moral sense was much duller ; men's per-
ceptions of right and wrong were confused,
uncertain, and not unfrequently perverted and
depraved. Even in Egypt, where a priest
class, established as the spiritual guides of the
nation for a thousand years or more, had
elaborated a moral system of considerable
merit, such a code as that of the Decalogue
would have been a marked improvement upon
anything that they had worked out for them-
■elvet And the authoritative sanction by the



"voice" and the " finger of God" was aa
enormous advantage, being imperatively
needed to satisfy doubt, and silence that per-
verse casuistry which is always ready to ques-
tion the off-hand decisions of the moral
consciousness, and to invent a more refined
system, wherein " bitter is put for sweet, and
sweet for bitter." Altogether the Decalogue
stands on a moral eminence, elevated above
and beyond all other moral systems — Egyptian,
Indian, Chinese, or Greek, unequalled for
simplicity, for comprehensiveness, for solem-
nity. Its precepts were, according to the
Jewish tradition, " the pillars of the law and
its roots." They formed to the nation to
which they were given " fons omnis publicl
privatique juris." They constitute for all
time d condensed summary of human duty
which bears divinity upon its face, which is
suited for every form of human society, and
which, so long as the world endures, cannot
become antiquated. The retention of the
Decalogue as the best summary of the moral
law by Christian communities is justified oc
these grounds, and itself furnishes emphatic
testimony to the excellency of the com-
pendium.

Ver. 1. — God spake all these words. It
hiis been suggested that Moses derived the
Decalogue from Egjrpt, by summarising the
chief points of the Egyptian teaching as to
the duty of man. But neither the second,
nor the fourth, nor the tenth commandment
came within the Egyptian ideas of moral
duty ; nor was any such compendious form
as the Decalogue known in Egypt. More-
over, Egyptian morality was minute and
complex, rather than grand and simple t'orty-
twii kinds of sin were denied by the departed
soul before Osiris and his assessors. The
noble utterances of Sinai are wholly unlike
anything to be found in the entire range of
Egyptian literature.

Ver. 2.— I am the Lord thy God. The
ten precepts were prefaced by this distinct
announcement of who it w is that uttered
them. God would have the Israelites clearly
understand, that he himself gave them the
commandments. It is only possible to re-
concile the declarations of the New Testament,
that the law was given by the ministration of
angels (Acts vii. 53 ; Gal. iii. 19 ; Heb. ii. 2)
with this and other plain statements, by re-
garding God the Son as the actual speaker
As eent by his father, be too was, in a certain
sense, au angel (t.e., • messenger) WMeb



«H. XX. 3 — 5.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



131



biovsrht thee ont of the land of Egypt. God
does not appeal to his authority as creator,
but to bis mercy and kindness as protector
■nd deliverer. He would be obeyed by his
people from a sentiment of love, not by fear.
Oat of the house of bondage. Compare
ch. xiii. 3, 14; and for the ground of the
expression, see ch. i. 14 ; vi. 9.

Ver. S. — Thou shalt haT& The use of
the second person singular is remarkable
when a covenant was being made with the
people (ch. xix. 5). The form indicated that
each individual of the nation was addressed
geveraUy, and was required himself to obey
tlie law, % mere general national obedience
being insufficient. No one can fail to see how
much the commands gain in force, through all
time, by being thus addressed to the in-
dividual conscience. No other gods before
me. " Before me " — literally, " before my
face," is a Hebrew idiom, and equivalent to
" beside me," " in addition to me." The
commandment requires the worship of one
God alone, Jehovah — the God who had in
BO many ways manifested himself to the
Israelites, and in^lies that there is, in point
of fact, no other God. A belief in the unity
of God is said to lie at the root of the esoteric
Egyptian religion; but Moses can scarcely
have derived his belief from this source, since
the Egyptian notions on the subject were
tinged with pantheism and materialism, from
which the religion of Moses is entirely free.
Outwardly the Egyptian religion, like that
of the nations of Western Asia generally,
was a gross polytheism ; and it is against
polytheistic notions that the first command-
ment raises a protest.

Ver. 4. As the first commandment asserts
the unity of God, and is a protest against
polytheism, so the second asserts his spirit-
uality, and is a protest against idolatry and
materialism. Verses 4 and 5 are to be taken
together, the prohibition being intended, not
to forbid the arts of sculpture and painting,
or even to condemn the religious use of them,
but to disallow the worship of God under
material f onus. AVhen the later Jews con-
demned all representations of natural objects
(Philo, De Orao. 29 ; Joseph. Ant. Jud. viii.
7, § S), they not only enslaved themselves to a
literaUsm, which is alien from the spirit of
both covenants, but departed from the practice
of more primitive times — representations of
iueh objects having had their place both in
the tabernacle (ch. xxv. 81 — 34 ; xxviii. 33,
34) and in the first temple (1 Kings vi. 18, 29,
82, &c.). Indeed, Moses himself, when he
erected the " brazen serpent " (Nimi. xxi. 9)
made it clear that representations of natural
objects were not disallowed by the law To
nod ems in civilized countries it seems almost in-
eredible that there should ever have been any-
where a real worship of image*. Bat acquaint-



ance with ancient history or even with thi
present condition of man in savage or back-
ward countries, renders it ajpparent that thera
M a subtle fascination in suoh material forms,
and that imperfectly developed minds will
rest in them not as mere enblems of divinity,
but as actually possessed <if Divine powers
The protest raised by the second command-
ment is still as necessary a j ever, not only in
the world, but in the very Christian Chm-ch
itself, where there exists even at the present
day a superstitious regard for images and
pictm-es, which is not only irrational, but
which absorbs the religious feelings that
should have been directed to higher objects.
Any graven image. Perhaps it would be
better to translate " any image," for the terra
used (pesel) is applied, not only to " graven "
but also to " molten images " (Is. xl. 19 ;
xliv. 10: Jer. x. 14; etc.), since these last
were in almost every instance fin'sheii
by the graving tool. Or any likeness of
anything that is in heaven above — i.e., " any
likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the
air." Compare Deut. iv. 17. The water undei
the earth. See Gen. L 6, 7. The triple
division here and elsewhere made, is intended
to embrace the whole material universe
Much of the Egyptian religion consisted in
the worship of auimals and their images.

Ver. 5. — Thou shalt not bow down thysell
to them. Every outward sign of honour waa
shown to images in the ancient world. They
were not regarded as emblems, but as actual
embodimente of deity. There was a special
rite in Greece (Theopoea) by means of which
the gods were inducted into their statues, and
made to take up their abodes in them. Seneca
says of the Romans of his own day — " They
pray to these images of the gocfe, implore
them on bended knee, sit or stand long day»
before them, throw them money, and sacrifice
beasts to them, so treating them with deep
respect, though they despise the man who
made them " (Ap. Lact. ii. 2). I, the lord
thy God am a jealous God. God " will not
give his glory to another " (Is. xlii. 8 ; xlviii
11), will not sufler a rival near his throna
He is not " jealous." as the Greeks thoughi
(Herod, vii. 10, § 5), of mere success, or great-
ness ; but he is very jealous of his own
honour, and will not have the respect and
reverence, which is his due, bestowed on othei
beings or on inanimate objects. Compare
with the present passage ch. xxxiv. 14;
Deut. iv. 24 ; V. 9 ; vi. 15 ; Josh. xxiv. 19 ;
etc. Visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children. Exception has been taken
to the plain meaning of this passage by a
multitude of writers, who dread the reproach
of the sceptic, that the G^d of the Old Testa-
ment is a God careless of juFtirc and bent
upon revenge. But neither does society, noj
doei civil justice itself, regard the visitjng \A



138



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XX. •— 10.



parents' sins npon their children as in all cases
unjust. Society by its scorn punishes for
their parents' transgressions the illegitimate,
the children of criminals, the children —
especially the daughters— of adulteresses.
Civil justice condemns to forfeiture of their
titles and their estates, the innocent children
of those executed for treason. God again
manifestly does by the laws which obtain in
his moral universe, entail on children many
consequences of their parents' ill-doing — as
the diseases which arise from profligacy or
intemperance, the poverty which is the result
of idleness or extravagance, the ignorance and
evil habits which are the fruit of a neglected
education. It is this sort of visitation which
is intended here. The children and grand-
children of idolaters would start in life under
disadvantages. The vicious lives of their
parents would have sown in them the seeds
both of physical and moral evil. They would
commonly be brought up in wrong courses,
have their moral sense early perverted, and so
suffer for their parents' faults. It would be
difficult for them to rise out of their unhappy
condition. Still, "each would bear his own
iniquity." Each would "be judged by that
he had, not by that he bad not." An all-wise
God would, in the final award, make allow-
ance for the disadvantages of birth and in-
herited disposition, and would assign to each
that position to which his own conduct — his
struggles, efforts, endeavour* after right —
entitled him.

To say that the threat " applies only to snch
children as follow the sins of their fathers"
(Kalisch) is to empty the passage of all force.
It applies to all ; but the visitation intended
consists in temporal disadvantages, not in the
final award of happiness or misery.

Ver. 6. — Shewing mercy unto thonsands.
Oi, "to the tlwtteandth generation." (Com-
pare Dent. vii. 9.) In neither case are the
numbers to be taken as exact and definite.
The object of them is to contrast the long
duration of the Divine love and favour to-
wards the descendants of those who love him,
with the comparatively short duration of his
chastening wrath in the case of those who are
bis adversaries. And keep my command-
ments. Thus only is love shown. Compare
John xiv. 15 — ^21 ; 1 John ii. 5 ; 2 John 6.

Ver. 7. — ^Thon Shalt not take the name of
the Lord thy Ood in vain. It is disputed
whether this is a right rendering. Shav in
Hebrew means both "vanity" and "falsehood ;"
so that the Third Commandment may forbid
either "vain-swearing" or simply "false-
swearing." It is in favour of the latter
interpretation, that our Lord seems to contrast
his own prohibition of unnecessary oaths with
the ancient prohibition of false oaths in the
words— .'< Te nave heard that it hath been said
Igr " (« " to ") " them of old tiin»— Thon ibolt



not forswear thyself, but shalt perform nnt4
the Lord thine oaths. But I say unto yoa—
Swear not at all " (Matt. v. 33—34). It is also
in favour of the command being levelled against
false-swearing, that perjury should naturally,
as a great sin, have a special prohibition di-
rected against it in the Decalogue, while rain-
swearing, as a little sin, would scarcely seem
entitled to such notice. Perjury has always
been felt to be one of the greatest both of
moral and of social offences. It implies an
absolute want of any reverence at all for God ;
and it destroys civil society by rendering the
administration of justice impossible. There
has been a general horror of it among all
civilised nations. The Egyptians punished
perjury with death. The Greeks thought that
a divine Nemesis pursued the perjured man,
and brought destruction both upon himself and
upon his offspring (Herod. vL 86). The Eomans
regarded the perjurer as infamous, and the
object of Divine vengeance in the other world
(Cic. De Leg. ii. 9). The threat contained in
the words — "The Lord will not hold him
guiltless " — may be taken as an argument on
either side. If viewed as equivalent to " the
Lord will punish severely" (Kalisch), it accords
best with the view that perjury was intended;
if taken literally, it would suit best a lesser
sin, of which men ordinarily think little.

Ver. 8. — Remember the sabbath day. The
institution of the sabbath dates, at any rate,
from the giving of the manna (ch. xvi. 23).
Its primeval institution, which has been
thought to be implied in Gen. ii. 3, is uncer-
tain. The word "remember" here may be
simply a reference to what passed in the
" wilderness of Sin " as related in ch. xvi. 22 —
30. On the sabbath itself, both Jewish and
Christian, see the comment upon that chapter.

Ver. 9. — Six days shalt thou labour. This
is not so much a command as a prohibition —
" Thou shalt not labour more than six (con-
secutive) days." In them thou shalt do all
thy necessary work, so as to have the Sabbath
free for the worship and service of God.

Ver. 10. — The seventh day is the sabbath
of the Lord thy God. Bather — " The seventh
day shall be a sabbath to the Lord thy God ; "
{.e., the seventh day shall be a day of holy rest
dedicated to religion. All unnecessary labour
shall be suspended and put aside — ^the law of
rest and ease, so far as bodily toil is concerned,
which was the law of man s existence before
the fall, shall supersede for tlie time that law
of heavy toil and continual unrest, which was
laid on man as the penalty of his transgression
(Gen. iii. 17 — 19). Eden shall be, as it were,
restored — man shall not "go out to his toil
and his labour " — even the very beasts, pressed
into man's service since the faU, shall rest. In
it thou shalt not do any work. On tlie ex-
ceptions to this rule, which even Judaism, witi
its extreme formality and Utaralisio, mm to \»



CH. XX. 10—12.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



IM



neeessaxj, see Mati xii. 5, 11. Still in manj
tespecte, a superstitious adlierence to the pre-
cept was maintained by religious Jews, who
wonld not even defend themselves on the
sabbath, if attacked by an enemy (1 Mac. ii.
82—38; 2 Mac. v. 25, 26; vi. 11; xv. 1).
Experience, however, taught them that the
law had not been intended to extend so far, and
after a time they determined, not to seek
battle, but to accept it, and do their best, on
the sabbath day (1 Ma£, ii. 41). Ihon, nor
thy son, nor thy daughter. The rest is to
extend to the whole family. Work is not to
be merely devolved by the parents upon the
children. Thy manservant, nor thy maid-
servant. It is to extend beyond the family
proper, to the domestics of the household, who
are to enjoy the respite from toil and to have
the advantage of flie religious refreshment,
no less than their masters. Nor thy cattle.
God's care for cattle is a remarkable feature
of the Old Testament dispensation. God, at
the time of the flood, " remembered Noah and
(he eattte which were with him in the ark "
(Gen. viii. 1). Soon after, his covenant, not
to drown the earth any more, was established
" with the fowl, and with the cattle, and with
every beast of the earth," no less than with
man (ib. ix. 9 — 11). In the Fsalms he de-
clares that " the cattle upon a thousand hills "
are hia (Ps. 1. 10). In Jonah, we find that
Nineveh was spared, in part because there was
in it "much cattle " (Jon. iv. 11). The pre-
cept, " Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he
treadeth out the corn" is characteristic of
the Mosaic dispensation, and had no par-
allel in the written codes or in the actual
customs of other ancient nations. Animal
suffering was generally regarded as of small
account in the ancient world ; and the idea of
protecting animals from ill usage was wholly
unknown. On the contrary, aa Dr. Dollinger
well observes (Jew and Oentile, vol. ii. pp.
346 — 7): "The law was specially careful
about the welfare of animals ; they were to be
treated with compassion and kindness. Do-
nestic animals were to be well fed, and to
enjoy the rest' of the sabbath. The Israelites
were to help to lift up the ass which had fallen
beneath its burden, and to bring back the
beast that had gone astray (Ex. xxiii. 5, 12 ;
Dent. XXV. 4) . . . . The young was not to be
taken from its mother before the seventh day
.... From these and similar ordinances — such,
for instance, as about the least painful method
of killing animals — it is plain that the law
tried to subdue that coarse turn of mind and
unfeeling cruelty, which are engendered by
the maltoeatment of animals." Nor the stran-
ger that is within thy gates. The " strangers
within the gates" of Israel are those foreigners
who volimtarily sojourned with them in their
(amps or (afterwards) in their towns. A
mixed naidtitude " had gone up out of Egypt



with them (ch. xii. 38), and accompanied
them in their wilderness wanderings. The
command that these too should rest, was at
once a restriction upon their liberty, requiring
them to conform to the habits of those among
whom they dwelt, and an admission of them
into participation in some portion of the privi-
leges of Israel. The sacred rest of the sabbath
prefigured the final peace and happiness of
the blest in heaven; and they who were
commanded to share in the first, were encour-
aged to hope that they might also participate
in the second.

Ver. 11. — For in six days the Eord made
heaven and earth. Two reasons are assigned
for the sanctification of the seventh day in the
Pentateuch: — 1. The fact that the work of
creation took six days, and that on the seventh
God rested ; and 2. The further fact, that God
brought the Israelites out of Egypt, and gave
them a time of rest after a time of labour and
toil (Deut. V. 15). It is not expressly said
that the deliverance took place on the Sabbath,
but such is the Jewish tradition on the subject.
The reason here assigned must be regarded ai
the main reason, man's rest being purposely
assimilated to God's rest, in order to show the
resemblance between man's nature and God's
(Gen. i. 27), and to point towards that eternal
rest wherein man, united with God, will find
his highest bliss and the true end of his being.
" There remaineth a rest for the people of
God."

Ver. 12. — Honour thy father and thy
mother. The obligation of filial respect, love,
and reverence is so instinctively felt by all,
that the duty has naturally found a place in
every moral code. In the maxims of Ptah-
hotep, an Egyptian author who lived probably
before Abraiam, " the duty of filial piety is
strictly inculcated " (Birch, Egypt from the
Earliest Times, p. 49). Confucius, in China,
based his moral system wholly upon the prin-
ciple of parental authority ; and in Rome it
may be regarded as the main foundation of
the political edifice. In the Decalogue, the
position of this duty, at the head of our duties
towards om: neighbour, marks its importance ;
which is further shown by this being " the
first commandment with promise" (Eph. vi. 2>
It is curious that the long life here specially
attached to the observance of this obligation,
was also believed to accompany it by the
Egyptians. "The son," says Ptah-hotep,
" who accepts the words of his father, will
grow old in consequence of so doing ; " and
again — " The obedient son will be happy by
reason of his obedience ; he will grow old ;
he will come to favour." Modem commen-
tators generally assume that the promise wa»
not personal, but national — the nation's days
were to be "long upon the land," if th»
citizens generally were obedient children
But this explanation cannot apply to Eph. vi



134



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XX. la— 16.



1 g. And if obedience to parents is to be

rewarded with long life under the new cove-
nant, there can be no reason why it should not
have been so rewarded under the old. The
objection that good sons are not always long-
lived is futile. God governs the universe by
general, not by universal laws.

Ver. 13.— Thou shalt not kill. Here again
is a moral precept included in all codes, and
placed by all in a prominent position. Our first
duty towards our neighbour is to respect his
life. When Cain slew Abel, he could scarcely
have known what he was doing; yet a terrible
punishment was awarded hun for his trans-
gression (Gen. iv. 11 — 14). After the flood, the
solemn declaration was made, which thence-
forward becamB a universal law among man-
kind — "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed : for in the image of
God made he man " (ift. ix. 6). In the world
that followed the flood, all races of men had
the tradition that only blood could expiate
blood. In the few places where there was an
organised government, and a systematic ad-
ministration of justice, the State acted on the
principle, and punished the murderer capitally.
Elsewhere, among tribes and races which had
not yet coalesced into states, the law of blood-
revenge obtained, and the inquisition for blood
became a private affair. The next of kin was
the recognised " avenger," upon whom it de-
volved to hunt out the murderer and punish
him. Here the sin is simply and emphatically
denounced, the brevity of the precept increas-
ing its force. The Israelites are told that to
take lite is a crime. God forbids it. As usual,
no exceptions are made. Exceptions appear
later on (Num. xxxv. 22—25 ; Deut. iv. 42 ;
etc.); but the first thing is to establish the
principle. Human life is sacred. Man is not
to shed the blood of his feUow-man. If he
does, of his hand will the life taken surely
be required. Tlie casuistic question whether
suicide is forbidden under this precept, pro-
bably did not occur to the legislator or to
the Hebrews of his time. Neither the
Hebrews, nor tiie Egyptians, among whom
they had so long lived, were addicted to sui-
cide; and it is a general rule that laws are not
made excepting against tolerably well-known
crimes. It has been argued that angry
thoughts and insulting words were forbidden
by it on the strength of our Lord's comment
in the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. v. 21, 22).
But it seems to the present writer that in
Matt. V. 21 — 47 our Lord is not so much ex-
plaining the Jewish law as amplifying it on
his own authority — note the repetition of the
phrase, " But I say unto you " — and making
it mean to Christiikns what it had not meant
to Jews.

Ver. 14. — ^Ihoa shalt not commit adultery.
Our second duty towards our neighbour is to
reaped the bond on which the family is based,



and that conjugal honour which to the true

man is dearer than life. Marriage, according
to the original institution, made the husband
and wife " one flesh " (Gen. ii. 24) ; and to
break in upon this sacramental union was at
once a crime and a profanity. Adulteresses
and their paramours were in most ancient
nations liable to be punished with death by
the injured party ; but the adultery of >
married man with an unmarried woman was
thought lightly of. The precept of the Deca-
logue binds both man and woman equally.
Our Lord's expansion of this commandment
(Matt. V. 27 — 32) is parallel to his expansion
of the preceding one (ib. 21—26). He shows
that there are adulterous marriages in conn ■
tries where the law gives a facility of divorce,
and that without any overt act adultery may
be committed in the heart,

Ver. 15. — Thou shalt not steal. By these
words the right of property received formal
acknowledgment, and a protest was made by
anticipation against the maxim of modem
socialists — "La propri^td, c'est le vol." In-
stinctively man feels that some things become
his, especially by toil expended on them, and
that, by parity of reasoning, some things
become his neighbour's. Our third duty to-
wards our neighbour is to respect his rights in
these. Society, in every community that has
hitherto existed, has recognised private pro-
perty ; and social order may be said to be
buUt upon it. Government exists mainly for
the security of men's lives and properties ; and
anarchy would supervene if either could be
with impunity attacked. Theft has always
been punished in every state ; and even the
Spartan youth was not acquitted of blame
unless he could plead that the State had
stopped his suppUes of food, and bid him
forage for himsell.

Ver. 16. — Thou shalt not bear false wit-
ness against thy neighbour. False witness
is of two kinds, public and private. We may
either seek to diuuage our neighbour by giv-
ing false evidence against hun in a court of
justice, or simply calumniate him to others in
our social intercourse with them. The form
of the expression here used points especially
to false witness of the former kind, but does
not exclude the latter, which is expressly for-
bidden in ch. xxiii. 1. The wrong done to a
man by false evidence in a court may be a
wrong of the very extremest kind — may be
actual murder (1 Kings xxi. 13 ) More often,
however, it results in an injury to his property
or his character. As fatal to the administra-
tion of justice, false witness in courts has been
severely visited by penalties in all well-
regulated states. At Athens the false witness
was liable to a heavy fine, and if thrice con-
victed lost all his civil rights. At Eome, by a
law of the Twelve Tables, he was hurled
headlong from the Tarpeian rock. In Egypt,



, 1 -17.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



IBS



false witness was punished by amputation of
the nose and ears (Becords of the Past, voL
viii. p. 65). Private calumny may sometimes
involve as serious consequences to individuals
as false witness in a court. It may ruin a
man ; it may madden him ; it may (frive him
to suicide. But it does not disorganise the
whole framework of society, like perjured
evidence before a tribunal ; and states gene-
rally are content to leave the injured party to
the remedy of an action-at-law. The Mosaic
legislation was probably the first wherein it
was positively forbidden to circulate reports
to the prejudice of another, and where con-
sequently this was a criminal offence.

Ver. 17. — Thou shalt not covet. Here the
Mosaic law takes a step enormously in
advance of any other ancient code. Most
codes stopped short at the deed ; a few went
on to words; not one attempted to control
thoughts. " Thou shalt not covet " teaches
men that there is One who sees the heart ; to
whose eyes " all things are naked and open ; "
and who cares far less for the outward act
than the inward thought or motive from



which the act proceeds. "Thou shalt no!
covet " lays it down again that we are not
mere slaves of our natural desires and passions,
but have a controlling power implanted with-
in us, by means of which we can keep down
passion, check desire, resist impulse. Man is
lord of himself, capable, by the exercise of his
free-will, of moulding his feelings, weakening
or intensifying his passions, shaping his
character. God, who " requires truth in the
inward paiis," looks that we should in all
cases go to the root of the matter, and not be
content with restraining ourselves from evil
acts and evil words, but eradicate the evil
feeling from which the acts and words proceed.
Thy neighbour's house, etc. The " house " is
mentioned first as being of primary necessity,
and as in some sort containing all the rest. A
man does not take a wife until he has a home
to bring her to, or engage domestic servants,
or buy slaves, except to form part of a house-
hold. The other objects mentioned are
placed in the order in which they are usually
valued. The multiplication of objects ii by
way of emphasis



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — ^17. — The ten comman'lments collectively. The ten commandments form a
summary of our main duties towards God, and towards man. They stand out from the
rest of the Old Testament in a remarkable way. 1. They were uttered audibly by a
voice which thousands heard — a voice which is called that of God himself (Deut. v. 26)
and which filled those who heard it with a terrible fear (verse 19). 2. They were the
only direct utterance ever made by God to man under the Old Covenant. 3. They were not
merely uttered by God but written by him, inscribed in some marvellous way hy the
finger of Ood on the two tables of testimony (oh. xxxi. 18 ; Deut. iv. 13). 4. They
have the additional testimony to their primary importance, that our Lord himself
appealed to them as laying down that which men must do to inherit eternal life
(Matt. xix. 18, 19). We may observe of them collectively —

I. That they are all-embbaciko. They include our obligations to both God and
man ; they are both prohibitive and directive ; they reach to the heart as well as to
the outward life ; they comprise both moral and positive precepts. According to the
division adopted by the English Church, and by the reformed churches generally, the
first four lay down our duty to our Maker, the last six our duty to our fellow men.
Mostly they are prohibitive ; but this is not the case with the fourth and fifth. The
generality are concerned with acts, but words form the subject matter of the third ;
and both the tenth and the fifth deal with thoughts. As the moral is much more
important than the positive, they are naturally in the main moral ; but, to show that
the positive is an essential element in religion, they are also partly positive — no moral
ground being assignable for the consecration of one Jay in seven, rather than one in
eight or six,°much less for the definite selection of " the seventh day " as the one to be
kept holy.

II. That they abe systematic, both m matteb asd abbangement. The
DecalooTie takes as its basis the fact that all our duties are owed either to God or man.
It resMds our duties to God as the more important, and therefore places them first.
The duties consist: 1. In acknowledging his existence and unity, and in "having
him " for our God and none other (first commandment) j 2. In conceiving aright of hit
incorporeity and spirituality, and worshipping him as a Spirit, in spirit and in truth
(second commandment) ; 3. In reverencing his holy Name, and avoiding the profane um
of it (third conunaudmeat) ; and, 4. In setting apart for his worship some stated jporuco



IM THE BOOK OF fiXODUa. [oa. xx. 1—17.



of our time, since otherwise we shall be sure to neglect it (fourth commandment). Oui
duties towards our fellow men are more complicated. First, there is a special relation
in which we stand towards those who bring us into the world and support us during
our early years, involving peculiar duties to them, analogous in part to those which we
owe to God, and so rightly following upon the summary of our Divine duties (fifth com-
mandment). Next, with respect to men in general, we owe it them to abstain from
injuring them in dead, word, or thought. In deed we may injure their person, their
honour, and their property, which we are consequently forbidden to do in the sixth, the
seventh, and the eighth commandments. In word, we injure our neighboiir especially
by false witness, public or private, both of which are forbidden in the ninth command-
ment. We injure him in thought, finally, when we covet what is his ; hence the tenth
commandment.

III. That thet abb the first geems out or which the whole op the mobal
LAW MAT BE EVOLVED. The Decaloguc is a collection of elementary moral truths. Its
predominantly negative form is indicative of this, since abstaining from evil is the first
step on the road to virtue. Each command asserts a principle ; and the principle is in
every case capable of being worked out to a thousand remote consequences. The letter
may be narrow; but the spirit of the commandment is in every case "exceeding
broad." This will appear, more clearly, in the ensuing section, in which the ten com-
mandments will be considered severally.

Vers. 1 — 17. — The ten commandments severally. The First Commandment. To the
Christian the First Commandment takes the iorm which ovir Lord gave it — " Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind. This is the first and great commandment " (Matt. xxii. 37, 38). Not merely
abstract belief, not merely humble acknowledgment of one God is necessary, but heart-
felt devotion to the One Object worthy of our devotion, the One Being in all the
universe on whom we may rest and stay ourselves without fear of his failing us. He is
the Lord our God — ^not an Epicurean deity, infinitely remote from man, who has created
the world and left it to its own devices — not a Pantheistic essence spread through all
nature, omnipresent, but intangible, impersonal, deaf to our cries, and indifferent to our
actions — ^not an inscrutable " something external to us making for righteousness," in
the words of the religious Agnostic — but a Being very near us, " in whom we live, and
move, and have our being," who is " about our path and about our bed, and spieth out
all oiu: ways," a Being whom we may know, and love, and trust, and feel to be with us,
warning us, and cheering us, and consoling us, and pleading with us, and ready to
receive us, and most wUling to pardon us — a Being who is never absent from us, who
continually sustains our life, upholds our faculties, gives us aU we enjoy and our power
to enjoy it, and who is therefore the natural object of our warmest, tenderest, truest, and
most constant love. The first commandment should not be difficult to keep. We have
only to open our eyes to the facts, and let them make their natural impression upon qui
minds, in order to love One who has done and still does so much for us.

The Second Commandment. On its prohibitive side, this Commandment forbids us
to have unworthy thoughts of God, to liken him to an idol, or regard him as " even
such an one as ourselves." Considered as directive, it requires us to form in our minds
a just and true idea of the Divine nature, and especially of its spirituality, its lofty
majesty, and its transcendent holiness. All materialistic ideas, and consequently all Pan-
theistic notions, are degrading to the dignity of God, who " is a Spirit," without body,
parts, or passions, not mixed with matter, but wholly separate fi:om it, yet everywhere

S resent after a supersensuous manner. Again, anthropomorphic notions of Qod arc
egrading to him, though it is scarcely possible to speak of him without anthropo-
morphic expressions. When we use such terms — ^as when we call God just, or merciful,
or long-suffering — we should remember that those qualities in him are mot identical
with the human ones, but only analogous to them ; and altogether we should be con-
scious of a deep mysteriousness lying behind all that we know of God, and rendering
him a Being awful, inscrutable — whom we must not suppose that we can fathom or
comprehend.

The Thibd Commandment. Primarily, the Third Commandment forbids perjury oi
false swearing ; secondarily, it forbids all imnecessary oaths, all needless mention of th<



OLD. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF BX0DU3. 187

holy name of God, and all irreverence towards anything which is God's — ^his nam^
house, day, book, laws, ministers. Whatever it any sense belongs to God is sacred,
and, if it has to be mentioned, should be mentioned reverently. The true main object
of the Tiiird Commandment is to inculcate reverence, to point out to us that the only
proper frame of mind in which we can approach God is one of self-abasement and
deeply reverential fear. " Keep thy foot, when thou goest to the house of God," sayt
the Preacher, " and be more ready to hear than to offer the sacrifice of fools, for they
consider not that they do evil. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be
hasty to utter anything before God : for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth ; there-
fore let thy words be few " (Bccles. v. 1, 2).

The Podeth CJomuandhgnt. In the Fourth Commandment we have the basis foi
■11 that is external in religion. The dedication of one entire day out of seven to God,
and the command to abstain on that day from the ordinary labours of life, led on
aaturally to the institution of sacred services, holy convocations, meetings for united
worship and prayer. Man is an active being, and a social being. If the ordinary
business of life is stopped, some other occupation must be found for him : he will not
sit still firom morning to night with folded hands wrapped in pious contemplation. The
institution of the Sabbath stands in close relation to the appointment of a priesthood,
the construction of a holy place, and the estabUshment of a ceremonial. On the Chris-
tian the Fourth Commandment is not binding in respect of the letter — ^he is not to
remember the Seventh day to keep it holy, but the First ; he is not tied to hallow it
by an abstinence from all labour, but encouraged to devote it to the performance of
good works ; but in the spirit of it, the commandment is as binding as any. Men need,
under Christianity as much as under Judaism, positive religious institutions, places of
worship, hours of prayer, a liturgy, a ritual, ceremonies. The value of the Lord's Day
as a Christian institution is incalculable ; it witnesses for religion to the world ; it con-
stitutes a distinct call on men to take into consideration the aim and intent of the day ;
and its rightful use is of inestimable benefit to all truly religious persons, deepening in
them, as it does, the sense of reUgion, and giving them time and opportunity for the
training of their spiritual nature, and the contemplation of heavenly things, which
would otherwise to most men have been unattainable. It has been well called "a
bridge thrown across Ufe's troubled waters, over which we may pass to reach the
opposite shore — a link between earth and heaven — a. type of the eternal day, when the
freed spirit, if true to itself and to God, shall put on for ever the robe of immortal
holiness and joy."

The Fifth Commandment. The honour which this commandment exacts from us is
Irrespective of our parents' personal merits or demerits. We are to honour them as
being our parents. Difficulties may be raised easily enough in theory; but they are
readily solvable in practice. Let us defer to our parents' commands in all things
lawful — let us do everything for them that we can — ^let us anticipate their wishes
in things indifferent — let us take trouble on their behalf— let us be ever on the watch
to spare them vexatious annoyance — let us study their comfort, ease, peace— and with-
out any sacrifice of principle, even if they are bad parents, we may sufficiently show
that we feel the obUgation of the relationship, and are anxious to discharge the duties
which it involves. Comparatively few men are, however, severely tried. We are not
often much better than our parents ; and it is seldom difficult to honour them. 1. For
their age and experience. 2. For the benefits which they have conferred on us. 3. For
tne disinterested affection which they bear to us, and which they evince in their conduct.
As a rule, parents have very much more love for their children than these have for them,
and make sacrifices on their children's behalf, which their children neither appreciate nor
reciprocate. The honour which, according to this commandment, has to be shown
to parents, must of course be extended, with certain modifications, to those who stand to
us in loco parentis — to guardians, tutors, schoolmasters, and the like. It is not perhaps
quite clear that the commandment extends also to those who are set over us in Church
and State, though it is usual so to interpret it. There are certain relations of parents to
their offspring which are altogether peculiar ; and these are absolutely incommunicable.
There are others, which are common to parents with rulers ; but these, unless in very
primitive commimities, can scarcely be said to rest upon the domestic relation as theii
basis. The ordinary relation of the governed to their governors is rather one parallel U



181 THB BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xx. 1—17,

that of children to their parents, than one which grows out of it ; and though either may
be used to illustrate the other, we must view the two as separate and independent
of each other.

Thb Sixth Commandment. How wide is the scope of this commandment to Christians,
our Lord has shown. Not only are murder and violence prohibited by it, but even pro-
voking words, and angry thoughts (Matt. v. 21 — 26). The " root of bitterness " whence
murder springs, is either some fierce passion, or some inordinate desire. To be secure
from murderous impulses, we must be free from such emotions as these, — ^we must have
tender and loving feelings towards all our fellow-men. "Love is the fulfilling of
the law;" and unless a man really " love the brethren," he has no security against being
surprised into violence towards them, which may issue in death. Nor is there one
species of murder only. The sixth commandment prohibits, not only violence to the
body, but — what is of far greater consequence — injury to the soul. Men break it most
flagrantly when they lead another into deadly sin, thereby — so far as in them lies —
destroying his souL The corrupter of innocence, the seducer, the persuader to evil, are
" murderers " in a far worse sense than the cut-throat, the bandit, or the bravo. Death
on the scaffold may expiate the crimes of these latter ; eternal punishment alone would
seem to be an adequate penalty for the guilt of the former. He that has eternally ruined
• soul should surely be himself eternally unhappy.

The Seventh Commandment. Here again we have the inestimable advantage of
our Lord's comment on the commandment, to help us to understand what it ought
to mean to us. Not only adultery, but fornication — not only fornication, but impurity
of any and every kind — in act, in word, in thought — ^is forbidden to the Christian. He
that looketh on a woman with the object of lusting after her, has already committed
adultery with her in his heart (Matt. v. 28). He that dallies with temptation, he that
knowingly goes into the company of the impure, he that in his solitary chamber defiles
himself, he that hears without rebuking them obscene words, transgresses against this law,
and, unless he repents, cuts himself off from God. And observe — the law is one both
for men and women. We are ready enough to speak with scorn of " fallen women," —
to regard them as ruined for ever, and treat their sin as the one unpardonable ofience ; but
what of " &llen men " ? Is not their sin as irreversible ? Is it not the same sin ? Is it not
.spoken of in Scripture in the same way ? " Whoremongers and adulterers God will
judge " (Heb. xiii. 4). " Mm'derers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and
all liars shall have their part in the lake which bumeth with fire and brimstone ; which
is the second death " (Eev. xxi. 8). And is it not as debasing, as deadening to the
Bonl, as destmctive of all tnie manliness, of all tme chivalry, of all self-respect ?
Principiis dbsta. Let the young keep that precious gift of purity which is theirs,
and not be induced by the ridicule of unclean men to part with it. Once gone it
can never return. Let them be pure, as Christ was pure. Blessed are the pure in
heart I

The Eiqhth Commandment. Simple direct stealing, being severely punished by the
law in most countries, is seldom practised, unless it be by children and slaves. But
indirect stealing of various kinds is common. It should be cleaily understood that the
Christian precept forbids any act by which we fraudulently obtain the property of
another. Adulteration, concealment of defects, misrepresentation of quality, employ-
ment of false weights or measures, are the acts of a thief, as much as pocket-picking or
shop-lifting. Servants steal when they take "commission" from tradesmen unknown
to their masters, or appropriate as "perquisites" what their masters have not expressly
agreed to allow, or neglect to do the work which they undertook, or do it in a slovenly
manner, or damage their master's property by carelessness or diminish it by waste.
Masters steal when they do not permit their servants the indulgences they promised, or
allow their wages to fall into arrear, or force them to work overtime without proper
remuneration, or deprive them of such " rest " as they had a reasonable right to expect
upon the Sunday. Those steal who cheat the revenue by smuggling, or false returns to tax-
collectors ; or who cheat tradesmen by incurring debts which they can never pay, or who
in view of coming bankruptcy pass over their property to a friend, with the understand-
mg that it is to be restored to them, or who have recourse of any of the " tricks ol
trade," as they are called. All men are sure to steal in one way or another, whc
tfe not pouessed by the spirit of honesty, who do not love justice and equity and iaii^



BR. zx. 1—17.] THB BOOK OF EXODUS. IM

dealing, who do not make it tlie law of their life to be ever doing to othera ai
they would that others should do unto them.

The Ninth Commandment. False witness in a court is but rarely given. We most
of us pass our lives without having once to appear in a court, either as prosecutor,
witness, or accused. The false witness against which the generality have especially to
be on their guard, is that evil speaking which is continually taking place in society,
whereby men's characters are blackened, their motives misrepresented, their reputations
eaten away. It is dull and tame to praise a man. \Ye get a character for wit and
shrewdness if we point out flaws in his conduct, show that he may have acted from a
selfish motive, " just hint a fault and hesitate dislike." It is not even necessary in all
cases to establish our character for shrewd insight that we should say anything. Silence
when we hear a friend maligned, a shrug of the shoulders, a movement of the eyebrows,
will do. Again, false witness may be given in writing as well as in speech. The re-
viewer who says of a book worse than he thinks of it, bears false witness. The writer
for the Press who abuses in a leading article a public man whom he inwardly respects,
bears false witness. The person who vents his spite against a servant by giving him a
worse character than he deserves, bears false witness. We can only be secure against
daily breaches of this commandment by joining the spirit of love with a deep-seated
regard for truth, and aiming always at saying of others, when we have occasion to
speak of them, the best that we can conscientiously say.

The Tenth Commandment. The tenth commandment is supplementary to the
eighth. Eightly understood, the eighth implies it, covetousness being the root from
which theft springs. The command seems added to the Decalogue in order to lay down
the principle that the thoughts of the heart come under God's law, and that we are as
responsible for them as for our actions. Otherwise, it would not be needed, being im-
plied in the eighth and in the seventh. Since, however, it was of the greatest
importance for men to know and understand that God regards the heart, and " requires
truth in the inward parts ;" and since covetousness was the cause of the greater portion
of the evil that is in the world, the precept, although already implied, was given ex-
pressly. Men were forbidden to covet the house, wife, slaves, cattle, property of theii
neighbour — in fact, " anything that is his." They were not forbidden to desire houses,
or wives, or cattle, or property generally — which are all, within limits, objects of desire
and things which men may rightfully wish for — but they were forbidden to desire for
themselves such as were already appropriated by their fellows, and of which, therefore,
they could not become possessed without their fellows suffering loss. A moderate
desire for earthly goods is not forbidden to the Christian (Matt. xix. 29 ; 1 Tim. iv. 8) ;
though his special covetousness should be for " the best gifts " — the virtues and graces
which make up the perfect Christian character (1 Cor. xii. 31 ; ziv. 1).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 1. — The moral law — Preliminary. The law given from Sinai is the moral law
h) pre-eminence. The principles which it embodies are of permanent obligation. It is
a brief summary of the whole compass of our duty to God and man. It is a law ot
supreme excellence — " holy, just, and good " (liom. vii. 12). God's own character is
expressed in it; it bears witness to his unity, spirituality, holiness, sovereignty, mercy,
and equity ; truth and righteousness are visible in its every precept. Listening to its
"thou sl^lts" and " thou shalt nots," we cannot but recognise the same stern voice
which speaks to us in our own breasts, addressing to us calls to duty, approving us in
what is right, condemning us for what is wrong. These ten precepts, accordingly, are
distinguished from the judicial and ceremonial statutes subsequently given— <1) As
the moral is distinguished from the merely positive ; (2) As the universally obligatory
is distinguished from what is local and temporary; (3) As the fundamental is dis-
tinguished from the derivative and secondary. The judicial law, e.g., not only draws
its spirit, and derives its highest authority, from the law of the ten commandments, but
is, in its own nature, simply an application of the maxims of this law to the problems
of actual government. Its binding force was confined to Israel. The ceremonial law,
again, with its meats and drinks, its sacrifices, etc. i^OT" thr^ijih""* *>>'» Bharactar of ■



140 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xx. 1—18.

positiTe institution, and had no independent moral worth. It stood to the moral lai»
in a triple relation of suhordination — (1) As inferior to it in its own nature. (2) As
designed to aid the mind in rising to the apprehension of the holiness which the
law enjoined. (3) As providing (typically) for the removal of guilt contracted by the
breaking of the law. This distinctness of the " ten words " from the other parts of the
law is evinced —

L I» THB MAiwEB OF THEiB PROMULGATION. 1. They alono Were spoken by the
voice of God &om Sinai. 2. They were uttered amidst circumstances of the greatest
magnificence and terror. 3. They alone were written on tables of stone. 4. They
were written by God's own finger (oh. xxxi. 18). The rest of the law was commu-
nicated privately to Moses, and through him delivered to the people.

II. fif THE NAMES GIVEN TO THEM, AND THB USB MADE OF THEM. 1. They are

" the words of the Lord," as distinguished from the "judgments " or "rights "derived
• &om them, and embraced with them in " the book of the covenant," as forming the
statutory kw of Israel (ch. xxiv. 3). 2. The tables on which they were written are —
to the exclusion of the other parts of the law — called " the testimony " (ch. xxv. 16),
" the covenant " (Dent. iv. 13), " the words of the covenant " (ch. xxxiv. 28), " the
tables of testimony " (Ex. xxxi. 18 ; xxxii. 15), " the tables of the covenant " (Deut.
ix. 9 — 11). 3. The tables of stone, and they only, were placed in the ark of the covenant
(ch. xxv. 21). They were thus regarded as in a special sense the bond of the covenant.
The deposition of the tables in the ark, underneath the mercy seat, throws light on the
natwre of the covenant with Israel. The law written on the tables is the siAstratum
of the covenant — its obligatory document — the bond ; yet over the law is the mercy-
seat, sprinkled with blood of propitiation — a testimony that there is forgiveness with
Gtod, that he may be feared (Ps. cxxx. 4), that God wiU deal mercifully with Israel
under this covenant. It is obvious, from these considerations, how fallacious is the
•tatement that the Old Testament makes no distinction between the moral, juristic,
>nd oeremonial parts of the law, but regards all as of equal dignity. — J. O.

Vers. 1 — 18. — The moral law — General survey. View this law of the ten com-
mandments as —

L Authoritatively dblivekbd. " God spake all these words, saying," etc. (ver. 1).
An authoritative revelation of moral law was necessary — 1. That man might be made
distinctly aware of the compass of his obligations. The moral knowledge originally
possessed by man had gradually been parted with. What remained was distorted and
confused. He had little right knowledge of his duty to God, and very inadequate con-
ceptions even of his duties to his fellow-men. This lost knowledge was recovered to
him by positive revelation. Consider, in proof of the need of such a revelation, the
ignorance of God which prevails still, men's imperfect apprehensions of his holiness,
their defective views of duty, etc. And this though the revelation has so long been
given. 2. That a basis of certainty might be obtained for the inculcation of moral
truth. This also was necessary. Man has ever shown himself ingenious in explaining
away the obligations which the law imposes on him. He may deny that they exist.
He may make light of holiness. He may take up utilitarian ground, and ride off on
disputes as to the nature of conscience, the origin of moral ideas, the diversities of
human opinion, etc. The law stops all such cavilling by interposing with its authori-
tative " Thus saith the Lord." See on this point a valuable paper on " Secularism," by
B. H. Hutton, in " Expositor," January, 1881. 3. That the authority of conscience may
be strengthened. Conscience testifies, in however dim and broken a way, to the
existence of a law above us. It speaks with authority. " Had it might as it has
right, it would rule the world." In order, however, that we may be made to feel that
it is a living wUl, and no mere impersonal law, which thus imposes its commands upon
us, there is a clear need for the voice within being reinforced by the voice without —
for historical revelation. Sinai teaches us to recognise the authority which binds us in
our consciences as GodCs authority. 4. For economic purposes. See previous chapter.

II. Gracioubly prefaced. " I am the Lord, thy God," etc. (ver. 2). This preface
to the law is of great importance. 1. It testified to the fact that OocFs relation to Israel
was fundamentaMy a gracwu* one. " The law was introduced with the words, ' I am
the Iiord thy Ood,' and speaks with the majestic authority of the Eternal, dispensing



OH. XI. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 14]



klessingg and cm^ings on the fulfilment and transgresaon of the law. But although
this \B given amidst the thunder and lightning of Sinai, whose roll seems to be heard
constantly in its mighty imperatives — 'Thou shalt not!' or 'Thou shakl' yet still
it points back to grace j for the God who speaks in the law is he who led the people
out of Egypt, freed them from the yoke of bondage — ^the God who gave the promise
to Abraham, and who has prepared a highest good, the Messianic kingdom, for his
people " (Martensen). 2. It furnished a motive for obedience to the laiv. Mark the
order— the same as in the Gospel ; God first saves Israel, then gives them his law to
keep. Because God had redeemed them from Egypt, and had given them, of his free
mercy, this glorious privilege of being his people, therefore were they to keep his
commandments. This was the return they were to make to him for the so great love
wherewith he had loved them. Their relation to the law was not to be a servile one.
Obedience was not to be a price paid for favour, but a return of grateful hearts for favours
already received. From this motive of gratitude, and that they might retain the
privileges he had given them, and inherit further blessing, they were to walk in the
prescribed way. If, notwithstanding, a pronouncedly legal element entered into that
economy, a curse even being pronounced against those who failed to keep the whole
law, while the good promised to obedience appears more as legal award than as a gift of
grace — ^we know now the reason for the covenant being cast into this legal form, and
can rejoice that in Christ our justification is placed on so much better a footing.
Obedience, however, is still required of us as a condition of continuance in God's favour,
and of ultimate inheritance of blessing. 3. It fwrnished to the pious Israelite a
pledge of merciful treatment when he transgressed or fell short of the requirements
of his law. What, e.g., had David to fall back upon in the hour of his remorse for
his great transgression (Ps. 11.), but just such a word as this, confirmed as it was
by acts of God, which showed that it was a word always to be depended on. This
one saying, prefacing the law, altered the whole complexion of Israel's standing
under law. It gave to the Israelite the assurance that he most needed, namely —
that, notwithstanding the strictness of the commandment, God would yet accept
him in his sincere endeavours after obedience, though these fell manifoldly short
of the full requirement, i.e., virtually on the ground of faith — in connection, however,
with propitiation.

III. Moral in its bubstanoe. This has been adverted to above. Though im-
posed on man by Divine authority, moral law is no arbitrary creation of the Divine
will. It is an emanation from the Divine nature. (Of. Hooker — " Of law there can be
no less acknowledged than that her seat is the bosom of God ; her voice the harmony
of the world.") Herbert Spencer was never guilty of a greater misrepresentation than
when he affirmed — " Religious creeds, established and dissenting, all embody the belief
that right and wrong are right and wrong simply in virtue of Divine enactment*
(" Data of Ethics," p. 50). We may reply with Stahl — " The primary idea of goodness
is the essential, not the creative, will of God. The Divine will. In Its essence, is infinite
love, mercy, patience, truth, faithfulness, rectitude, spirituality, and all that is included
in the idea of holiness, which constitutes the inmost nature of God. The holiness of God,
therefore, neither precedes his will Qsanctitas antecedens voluntatem' of fhe schoolmen)
nor follows it, but is his will itself. The good Is not a law for the Divine will (so that
God wills it because It Is good) ; neither is it a creation of his wlU (so that it becomes
good because he wills it) ; but it is the nature of God from everlasting to everlasting."
(See also Martensen's " Christian Ethics," on " God the only Good," and on " The
Law's Content.") The law, in a word, expresses Immutable demands of holiness. What
these are is determined in any given case by the abstract nature of holiness and by the
constitution and circumstances of the being to whom the law is given. Man, e.^., is a
free, immortal spirit ; but he is at the same time an Inhabitant of the earth, bound by
natural conditions, and standing to his fellow-men in relations, some of which at least
belong only to his present state of existence. Hence we find In the Decalogue precepts
relating to the weekly Sabbath, to marriage, to the institution of private properly, etc.
These precepts are founded on our nature, and are universally obligatory. They show
what duty immutably requires of us as possessing such a nature ; but obviously theii
application will cease under different conditions ef existence (Matt. xxll. 30). Only
in its fundamental principles of love to God and to our fellow-beings, and in Its spiriiuaH



Ua THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. x». 1—18.

domandB for truth, purity, uprightness, reverence, and fidelity, la the law absotuMy
onohangeable.

IV, Complete dj rra parts. Observe — 1. Its two divisions, turning, the one on the
principle of love to God, the othei;, on the principle of love to man. 2. The rdative
position of the two divisions — duty to God standing first, and laying the needful founda-
tion for the right discharge of our duties to mankind. True love to man has its
fountain head in love to God. Neglect of the duties of piety will speedily be followed
by the neglect of duty to our neighbour. The Scripture does not ignore the distinction
between religion (duties done directly to God) and morality (duties arising from earthly
relations), but it unites the two in the deeper idea that aU duty is to be done to God,
whose authority is supreme in the one sphere as in the other. 3. The scope of its
precepts. These cover the entire range of human obligation. The precepts of the first
table (including here the Fifth Commandment) require that God be honoured in his
being, his worship, his name, his day, his human representatives. The precepts of the
second table require that our neighbour be not injured in deed, in word, in thought ;
and in respect neither of his person, his wife, his property, nor his reputation. So com-
plete and concise a summary of duty — rehgious and ethical — based on true ideas of the
character of God, and taking hoUness, not bare morality, as its standard, is without
parallel in ancient legislation.

V. Spibitual IN ITS PUBPOBT. " The law is spiritual" (Rom. vii. 14). 1. The law
to be studied in its principles. Taken in its bare letter, it might appear narrow. Here,
however, as everywhere in Scripture, the letter is only the vehicle of the spirit. The
whole law of Moses being founded on this part of it — being viewed simply as an expan-
sion or amplification in different relations of the principles embodied in the ten words —
it is plain, and common sense supports us in the view, that the principles are the main
things, the true roots of obligation. Thus, the Third Commandment, in the letter of it,
forbids false swearing, or generally, any vain use of the name of God. But underlying
this, and obviously forming the ground of the command, is the principle that God's
name, t.e., everything whereby he manifests himself, is to be treated with deepest rever-
ence. This principle, in its various applications, carries us far beyond the letter of the
precept, liead in the same way, the Sixth Commandment forbids killing, but not less
the murderous motive than the murderous act ; while the principle involved, viz.,
reverence for, and care of, human life (cf. Gen. ix. G), branches out into a multiplicity
of duties, of which the other parts of the law of Moses furnish numerous illustrations.
The true key to the spiritual interpretation of the law is that given by Christ in the
sermon on the Mount (Matt. v. — vii.). 2. Summed up in love. " Love is the fulfilling
of the law " (Kom. xiii. 8 — 10). (1) It is the central requirement. " Them that love
me " (ver. 6). Implied in the first and all later precepts.. Whatever in the way
of outward service we render to God, or man, if love is withheld, the law is
not fulfilled. (2) It is needed to fill up the meaning of the special precepts. These
receive their fulness of interpretation only through love. And, in the spiritual
reading of them, they cannot be kept without love. It is impossible, e.g., to keep
the heart free from all envy, malice, hate, covetousness, save as it is possessed by
the opposite principle of love. Love is the root of fideUty to God, of spiritu-
ality in his worship, of reverence for his name, of delight in his day, etc. The more
deeply we penetrate into the meaning of the law, the more clearly do we perceive that
love to God and love to man are indispensable for the fulfilling of it. (3) Love secures
the fulfilling of the law. For " love worketh no ill to his neighbour" (Kom. xiii. 10).
It will not voluntarily injure another. It will not kill, rob, defraud, slander a fellow-
man, or covet his possessions. On the contrary, it will seek in every way it can to do
him good. It is the great impelling motive to obedience. " The love of Christ con-
Btraineth us " (2 Cor. v. 14). " Faith, which worketh by love " (Gal. v. 6).

\L PowEBFULLY ENFORCED, — 1. By Divine threatenings (vers. 5 — 7). 2. By Divine
example (ver. 11). 3. By Divine promises (vers. 6 — 12). See below. Behold, then,
the beauty and perfection of the law. "Thy commandment is exceeding broad"
(Ps. cxix. 96). We are not to be misled, 1. By the studied brevity of the law, which
is part of its excellency ; or, 2. By its prevailing negative form — a testimony, not to
the unspirituality of the law, but to the existence of strong evil tendencies iu tha
heart, needing to be repressed (Rom. viL 7, 8 ; 1 Tim. i. 9 10), Tet perfect aa It ii



cH.xx.1,2.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 141

of its kind, it is not to he compared, as a mirror of holiness, with the perfect human life
of Jegus Christ. No accumulation of separate precepts can exhaust all that is con-
tained in holiness. Precepts convey also a defective idea of the good by breaki^ up that
which is in its own nature one — an ideal — into a number of separate parts. What,
however, the law could not do for us, is done in the perfect example of our Lord. In
him, law is translated into life. The ideal is no longer presented to us, as even in the
Decalogue, in detached precepts, " broken lights," " words," which — just because holi-
ness is so vast a thing — are left to hint more than they express, but in its true tmbroken
unity, in the sphered whole of a perfect human character. Our law is Christ. — J. 0.

Vers. 1, 2. — The Ten Commandments — an introductory reminder. Before the speaker
of these commandments proceeded to the utterance of them, it was necessary that he
should call special and reverent attention to himself. Not one of the words he was
about to say could either be understood or obeyed without a constant reference in
thought to him who had delivered and arranged them. He did not bring them before
Israel as a far seeing legislator might bring such rules as were best adapted to the limita-
tions and infirmities of those whom he sought to guide. They were the laws of that
kingdom where the King himself is a real and immutable lawgiver, he whose reign never
comes to an end. Some of the commandments had a direct reference to himself; and
all had to do with his service. Should it not, then, be ever a helpful and sobering tnitk
to us that the great laws for human life thus come as expressions through a Divine will ?
We cannot overrate the importance of requirements which God himself solemnly declares.
And just as we Christians in repeating the Lord's prayer must think constantly of the
invocation to our Father in heaven, in order to enforce and enrich the plea of each
petition, so in carrying out these ten commandments, each Israelite was bound to think
of each commandment in connection with that Jehovah who had spoken it. The
thought that he had Ijrought them out of the land of Egypt and out of the house of
bondage was meant to give special force to everything he required from the hands of his
people.

L Jehovah speaks of himself in the light of what he has done foe them to
WHOM HE SPEAKS. He Solemnly charges them to look back on their own experience, to
consider their past suffering and helplessness, and how they had come to the present
hour entirely because of what he had done for them. Note that he does not, as on
former occasions, speak of himself as the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ; that was
a necessary mode of description when he made his first .approach to them, but now they
have their own rich and crowded experiences to constitute a claim for their attention
and obedience. God bases his expectations on services rendered to the present genera-
tion ; and the claim he makes is founded on the greatest Ixion that could be conferred,
liberty. When from this very mountain he sent Moses to them, they were in bitter
servitude ; now Moses finds himself at this mountain again, with a nation of freemen
around him. Jehovah is not afraid of referring to the land of Egypt, even though the
people had allowed the agreeable associations of the name to override the disagreeable
ones. They delighted in thinking of it as a land where they sat by the fieshpots and
ate bread to the full (ch. xvi. 3 ; Num. xi. 4, 5 ). But now in this reference to himself
which would henceforth be so conspicuous, Jehovah fixes together in a permanent
association the land of Egypt and the house of bondage. "When the people disparaged
the wilderness and glorified Egypt, he made them hear again the sound of the clanking
chain ; and if that sound, heard only in memory, was not dreadful as in the old reality,
yet God, who is not influenced by the lapses of time, knew how dreadful that reality
■vaa. it is a good thing that he remembers what men forget. Even though we be
Christians, and should have better aims and better joys, we too often catch our thoughts
turned longingly towards a forsaken world. And so God comes in to speak plainly and
burst the bubble of this world's attractions by the emphasised truth that spiritual
Egypt is the house of bondage. He that corunitteth sin is the slave of sin. While the
people were in Egypt they had not talked of these xhmgs as pleasant ; the life there, in
the actual experience of it, was intolerable. And so with perfect confidence God could
appeal to their past consciousness.

II. There was also an indication that God had taken awat all external binobanoes
xo OBEDIENOB, He bad taken them clean out of the house of bondage. They wer»



144 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xx. »— 6.



aow free to cany out all the observances which Jehovah was about to appoint. They
had no Pharaoh to struggle with, grudging them time to sei-ve their God (ch. t. 4) ;
they had no danger to fear from sacrificing the abominations of Egypt within its
borders. If God asks us for service, we may be sure that in the very first place, he
will provide all the conditions of rendering it effectually and comfoi-tably. As we read
our New Testament, we are made to feel that God expects very large things from us.
He is most exacting in his claims for self-denial and completeness of devotion to his
cause, but what of that? Has he not given us his own Spirit, which is a spirit of
liberty, working for the express purpose uf lifting us above the crippling restraints ol
natural life? The very largeness of God's demands helps us to measure the largeness
of God's spiritual gifts ; and the very largeness of the gifts should prepare us for large
demands. God's expectations are from the free. He asked nothing from Israel, save
silent and submissive waiting, until the verge of the last plague, which was also tne
verge of liberty ; and from the free because lie has/reed them, he entertains large expec-
tations. It was to those who believed in Jesus, risen from the dead, and making his
people to live ia newness of life, that he gave a spirit of such power in producing
obedience and conformity as never had been known before. — Y.

Vers. 3 — 6. — The first and second commandments : against polytheism and image-
worship. These two commandments seem to be bound together naturally by the reason
given in ver. 5. There Jehovah says, "I am a jealous God ; " obviously such a feeling
of jealousy applies with as much force to the worship of other gods as to the making of
graven images. Consider —

I. The possible tbansgbession here indicated. The having of other gods than
Jehovah, and the representation of them by images of created things. The declaration
here is not against more gods than one. Such a declaration would have been incom-
prehensible to the Israelite at this time, even to Moses himself. The utter emptiness
of all idolatry, the non-existence, except as the imagination of a superstitious and
darkened mind, of any other Deity than Jehovah was a truth not yet appreciable by
those to whom Jehovah spoke. He had to take his people as they stood, believers in
the existence and power of other gods, and proclaim to them with all the impressiveness
that came from the demonstrations of Sinai, that none of these gods was to be in the
smallest degree recognised. An idolater in the midst of his idolatries, and not yet laid
hold of by Jehovah's hand, might as well have a thousand gods as one. Jehovah
speaks here to those who are already bound to himself. Have they not made their
promise ? Did not the people answer and say, " All that the Lord hath spoken we
will do " 1 It was the right and dutiful course of every Israelite to worship him, serve
him, and depend upon him. The great and pressing peril was that, side by side with
Jehovah, the people should try to put other gods. And to have other gods meant,
practically, to have images of them. How necessary and appropriate these two
commandments were to come at this particular time and in this particular order, is
seen when we consider the image-making into which Israel fell during the seclasion of
Moses in the moimt. This seems to have been the accordant act of the whole people ;
Aaron, who was soon to be the chief official in Jehovah's ritual, being the eager
instrument to gratify their desues. Nor was this a mere passing danger to the
Israelites, a something which in due time they would outgrow. The peril lies deep
in the infirmities of human nature. Those whom Jehovah has brought in any
measure to himself, need to be reminded that he is master. Jesus has put the
thing as plain as it can be put, " No man can serve two masters." We cannot serve
God and Mammon. Dependence on something else than God, even though there be
nothing of religious form in the dependence, is a peril into which we are all liable to
come. It is hard to fight — harder than we imagine till we are fairly put to the struggle
—against the allurements of the seen and temporal. Even when we admit that there
is an invisible God whose claims are supreme, and whose gifts, present and future, are
bfyond anything that the seen in its pride and bea-uty can afl'ord — even then we have
the utmost difficulty in carrying our admission into practice.

II. Consider m paeticulab how the commandment aoainbt imaoe-wobship mat
APFi-T TO ns. Those who go in the way of right worship are in the way to a profitable
knowledge of Qod. They come to be recognised by him, accepted by him, and Ueaaed



«■. XX.3— 6.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. I4fi

by him. Having graven images inevitably led away from Jehovah. There was no
possibility of keepii^ the first commandment, even in the least degree, if the second
even in the least degree was broken. Certainly we are imder no temptation to make
images, but it comes to the same thing if we have images ready made. It is conceivable
that the day may come when not an image shall be left in the world, except on museum
shelves, and the trade of Demetrius thus come to an end. But what of that ? The
change may simply be one of form. Why men should first have made images and
called them gods is an impenetrable mystery. We cannot but wonder who was the
first man to make an image and why he made it. But that image-making, once
established, should continue and return into practice again and again in spite of all
attempts to destroy it, is easy enough to understand. Habit, tradition, training, will
account for everything in this way. Yet the practice of image-worship, at all events in
its grossest forms, can only exist together with dense intellectual darkness. When men
begin to think and question as to the foundation ef things, when they get away from
their mother's knee, then the simple faith in what they have been taught deserts them.
There is a frequent and natural enough lamentation that those who have been taught
concerning Christ in childhood, oftentimes in manhood depart from him by the way
of scepticism, into utter disbelief and denial. Yet we must remember that it is exactly
by this kind of process thousands in still image-worshipping lands have broken away
from their image-worship. It has not satisfied the awakened and expanding intellect.
There is this difference, however, that whereas the awakened intellect forsaking Christ
may come back to him, and indeed actually does so oftener than we think, the
awakened intellect forsaking image-worship cannot go back to it. But to something as
a dependent creature he must go. A man leaving his old idolatries and not finding
Christ, must needs turn to some new idolatry, none the less real as an idolatry, none
the less injurious to his best interests because the image form is absent. We must not
make to ourselves anything whatever to take the place of God, intercept the sight of
him, or deaden his voice. We may contradict the spirit of the second commandment,
in doing things which we think profitable to the religious life and glorifying to God.
A great deal that is reckoned beneficial and even indispensable in the Church of Christ,
that has grown with its growth and strengthened with its strength, might come to look
very questionable, if only the spirit of this commandment were exactly appreciated.
How many splendid buildings, how many triumphs of the architect, how many
combined results of many arts would then be utterly swept aw ly 1 Men delude
themselves with the notion that these things bring them nearer to God, whereas they
simply take his place. In worshipping him we should regard with the utmost jealousy
all mere indulgence of the senses and even of the intellect.

III. The Divine reason given foe attendins to these commandments. Many
reasons might have been given, as for instance, the vanity of graven images, their
uselessness in the hour of need, the degradation in which they involved the worshippers.
But God brings forward a reason which needed to be brought forward, and put in the
very front place, where human thought might continually be directed to it. Poly-
theism and image-worship are indeed degrading and mischievous to man — but what is
of far greater moment, they are also dishonoxiring to the glory of Deity. Those who
were shding away into the service of other gods were showing that they had no
truly reverent appreciation of Jehovah ; and in order to intimate the severity of his
requirements with respect to exclusive and devoted service, Jehovah speaks of himself
as possessing a feeling which, when found among men is hke a devouring and
unquenchable fire. A jealous man does well to be jealous, if he has sufficient ground
for the feehng at !4l, if the affection, service, and sympathies that should be reserved
for him are turned elsewhere. Think then of such a feeling, exalted into the pure
intensity of a holy anger and bursting into action fi-om God himself, and then you have
the measure of his wrath with those who think that the glory of the incorruptible
God can be changed into an image made like to corruptible man. He makes his
jealousy apparent in imquestionable, deeply penetrating action. It is the action of the
great I AM, who controk thousands of generations. God does, as a matter of fact, visit
the iniquities of the fathers on the children, and the magnitude of what he does is
accounted for by the intensity of his feelings with respect to those who give his glory to
tuuther. His almighty hand comes down with a blow the af^ctive energies of which

IXODUS — II. L



144 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xi 6, 7.

cannot be exhausted in one or even two generations. Say not that there is something
unjust about this. That each generation must take something in the way of suffering
from preceding generations is a fact only too plain, altogether apart from the Scriptures.
The mercy of God is that he here gives us something in explanation of the fact, and of
how to distinguish its working and at last destroy it. To serve idols, to depend upon
anything else than God, anything less than him, anything more easily reached and
more easily satisfied — this, when stripped of all disguise, amounts to hating Ood. And
a man living in this way is preparing, not only punishments for himself, but miseries
for those who come after him. Many times we have advice given us to think of
posterity. Depend upon it, he thinks most of posterity who serves the will of God
most humbly and lovingly, with the utmost concentration and assiduity, in his own
generation. Kote here also the unmistakable revelation of God's merciful disposition.
He visits iniquity to the third and fomth generation of them that hate him. But
those who love him are blessed to thousands of generations. Not that the blessing will
be actually operative, for, alas, there may come in many things to hinder. But the
expressed disposition of God remains. If the posterity of the faithful to Gt)d are
unblessed, it is because they themselves are utterly careless as to the peculiar privileges
into which they have been introduced. — Y.

Ver. 7. — The Third Commandment. Profanity fbrbidden. This Commandment
clearly comes as an appropriate sequel to the two preceding ones. Those who are
Jehovah's, and who are therefore bound to glorify and serve him alone, depend on him
alone, and keep themselves from all the degradations and obscuring influences of image
worship, are now directed to the further duty of avoiding all irreverent and empty use
of the sacred name. With respect to this, there must have been a very real danger in
Israel. We have only to observe the licence of modem colloquial speech in this
respect, we have only to call to mind some of the most common expletives in English,
French, and (ierman, and we shall then better understand that there may have been a
great deal of the same sad and careless licence among the ancient Hebrews. Not that
we are to suppose Jehovah directed this command exclusively or even chiefly against
profane swearers in the ordinary sense of the term. They are included, 'but after all
they are only a small part of those to whom the conmiandment is directed. It is
quite possible for a man to keep above all coarseness and vulgarity of speech, and yet
m Clod's sight be far worse than an habitual swearer. Many are concerned to avoid
profane swearing, not because it is offensive to God, but because it is ungentlemanly.
It needs no devoutness or religious awe to understand the couplet :-^

"Immodest words admit of no defence,
For want of decency is want of sense."

And there is as much want of decency in profane words as in immodest ones. The
thing to be considered is not only the words we avoid, but the words we use. Out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak. This commandment, like the rest,
must be kept positively, or it cannot be kept negatively. If we are found making a
serious and habitual use of God's name in a right way, then, and only then, shall we be
kept effectually from using it in a wrong one.

I. Evidently the first thing to keep us from empty words with respect to God is to

KEEP FROM AH EMPTINESS AND SHALLOWNESS OF THOUGHT WITH RESPECT TO HIM.

Thinking is but speaking to oneself; and God's commandment really means that we
must labour at all times to have right and sufficient thoughts concerning him. We
might almost say, take care of the thought and the speech will take care of itself. Ali
our thinking about God, as about every topic of thought, should be in the direction of
what is practical and profitable. Blessed is he who has made the great discovery, that
of the unseen cause and guide, behind all things that are seen, he can only get profit-
able knowledge as that Great Unseen is pleased to give it. We who live amid the
great declarations of the Gospel are really thinking of God in a vain and displeasing
way as long as we suppose it possible to get any true knowledge of him except in
Christ. Right knowledge of God, and therefore profitable thoughts of him must be
gained by experimental personal search into the riches of God in Christ Jesus. Think-



OT. XX. 7.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 147

ing of this sort will not be vain, shallow, fugitive tliinlcing, seeing that it springs out of
apprehended, personal necessities, has an immutable basis of fact, a rewarding element
of hope, and is continually freshened by a feeling of gratitude towards one who haa
conferred on us unspeakable benefits. Surely it is a dreadful sin to think little, to
think seldom, and to think wrongly of that profoundly compassionate God, who so
loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, to save it from perishing by the
gift of eternal life. No thoughts of ours indeed can measure the fulness of that
sublime love, and we shall even fall short of what the holiest and devoutest of men can
reach ; but there is all the more need why we should labour in constant meditation on
the saving ways of God, according to our abilities. Put the word " God" on a sheet of
paper, and then try to write underneath all that the name suggests, particularly all
that it suggests in the way of individual benefit. Perhaps the writing may come to an
end very soon, and even what is written be so vague and valueless as to make you feel
that this commandment of God here is not a vain one so far as concerns you.

II. Then we must kot take the name of God in vain, in oub intebcotibse
WITH ODK fellow-men. God, our God, with all his claims and all his benefits, cannot
be spoken about too much in the circles of men, if only he is spoken about in a right
way : but that right way — how hard it is to attain. Much speaking concerning him,
even by those who do it ofiioially, is very dishonouring to his name and hindering to
his rule in the hearts of men. Preachers of the word of life and duty, the word con-
cerning divine gifts and requirements, need to take great heed in this respect, for whenever
they speak without proper impressions as to the solemnity of their message, they are
assuredly taking Gud's name in vain. There has also to be a consideration of the
audience. The words of God's truth and salvation must be as far as possible words in
season, not wasted, as pearls before swine. It needs that we should strive and watch
incessantly to have all attainable fitness as the witnesses of God. Jesus would not have
the testimony of demons to his Messiahship, but chose, prepared, and sanctified such
men as he saw to be suitable ; and then when he had found fit witnesses, even though
few, he sent them forth to bear their testimony, sure that it would be sufficient for all
who had the right mind to receive it. It is awful, when one only considers it, in how
many instances God's name is taken in vain, by the use of it to sanctify unholy ends,
justify unrigliteousness, and give to error what dignity and force can be gained from an
appeal to divine authority. When the Scriptures were quoted to justify slavery, what
was this but taking the name of God in vain? How much of it there must have been
in theological controversy, where disputants have got so embittered by partisan spirit
that they would twist Scripture in any way so as to get God on their side, instead of
labouring as honest men to be on the side of God. Look at the glutton sitting down to
pamper his stomach from the loaded table ; but first of all he must go through the
customary grace and make a show of eating and drinking to the glory of God in heaven,
when in truth the god he really worships is his greedy, insatiable belly. We may do
many things in the name of the Lord, but that does not make them thb Lord's things.
" Lord, Lord " may ever be on our lips, we may even get a very general reputation foi
our devotednesa to God and goodness ; but all this may not prevent us from hearing at
the last, " Depart from me, ye that work iniquity."

III. Most particularly we must guard against profanity in oue appeoaches to God.
If we are his at all, there must bo constant approaches to him, and his name therefore
must be constantly on our lips. 1. We must fiuard against /ormaZi*!/. We must not
take a name on our lips that expresses no felt reality. To confess sins and needs and
supplicate pardon and supply when the heart is far away from the throne of grace, is
certainly taking God's name in vain. 2. We must guard against coming in other than the
anointed way. A very elaborate and comprehensive prayer may be constructed to the
God of nature and providence, but even though it may seem to be of use for a while, it
will show its emptiness in the end if God's own appointment of mediation through
Christ Jesus be neglected. Do not let us deceive ourselves with words and aspirations
that are only dissipated into the air. For a suppliant to know of Christ and yet ignore
his mediation, is assuredly to take God's name in vain, however honest the ignoring may
be. 3. Then surely there is an empty use of God's name La prayer, if we ask in other
than the appuirded order. The order of thought in all right approach to God is such as
OVi Great Teacher has himself presented to us. Is it the sinner who is coming, wretched

'. 2



us THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [cii. xx. 8—11.

and burdened? Jesus approves the prayer, " God be merciful to me a sinner." Sinneri
never take the name of God in vain, if they come to him with two feelings blended in
one irrepressible cry, the feeling of God's anger with all sin and the feeling of his
unfailing compassion for the sinner. Or if it be the disciple and servant who is coming
to God, then the order of thought for his approach Jesus has also given. We must ever
think of him as our Father in heaven, and first of all of such things as will sanctify his
name, advance his kingdom and procure the perfect doing of his will on earth. Wo
must make all our approaches to Gkid with our hearts entirely submitted to him, other-
wise we shall only find that we are taking his name in vain. — Y.

Vers. 8 — 11. — The Fourth Commandment: the sacred Sahbath. I. The ground of
THIS COMMANDMENT. God, who had spoken to Israel as to those whom he had brought
out of the house of bondage, and who had bidden Moses speak of him to the captives as
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, now takes the thoughts of his people as far back
as it is possible for them to go. They are directed to think of the great work of him who
in six days made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is. " AU the earth is
mine," he had bidden Moses say in ch. xix. 5 ; and of course the Israelites, whatever
their other difficulties in the way of understanding God's commandments, had no ques-
tion such as modem science has thrown down for us to ponder with respect to these
alleged days of creation. Though indeed, as is now generally agreed, no difficulty is
found in this question when we approach it rightly. God's thoughts are not as our
thoughts ; his ways are not as our ways ; and so we may add his days are not as our
days, seeing that with him one day is as a thousand years and a thousand years as one
day. The great matter to be borne in mind by ancient Israelites — and for every
(3iristian the consideration remains whether he also should not very strictly bear it in
mind — was that by tins seventh day of rest after creation, God gave the great rule for
the consecration of his people's time. It is to a certain extent correct to say that this
precept is a positive one ; but it is not therefore arbitrary. God may have seen well to
give the precept in such emphatic way, just because the need of setting apart one day
©ut of seven is in some way fixed in the nature of things. It is a question worth while
asking, why creation is set before us as having occupied six successive periods. Why
not some other number ? May not the periods of creation have been so arranged with a
viev? to the use of them as a ground for this commandment ? God sanctified the seventh
day becauf e it was the best day — best for human welfare and Divine glory ; and it seems
to have been at Sinai that he first distinctly made this sanctiflcation. Israel knew
already that God rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made (Gen.
ii. 2) ; now it is known — at least it is known in part — ^why this resting was not tUl the
seventh day, and also not later. May it not be that the expression "God blessed
the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from aU his work
which God created and made," (Gen. ii. 3) was inserted by Moses after the transactions
at Sinai, as a suitable addition to the statement that God rested from his work ? If this
verse was not inserted in the Genesis record until after the instructions from Sinai, then
we have some sort of explanation why no clear, indubitable sign of the Sabbath is found
in patriarchal times.

II. TuE MODE OP KEEPING THIS COMMANDMENT. Let US distinctly beat in mind the
ODJect to be attained. The seventh day was to be sanctified, and in order that it might
be properly sanctified, a scrupulous rest from ordinary work was necessary. The rest
was but the means to the sanctiflcation ; and the sanctiflcation is the thing to be kept
prominently in view. The mere resting from work on the seventh day did an Israelite
no good, unless he remembered what the rest implied. The commandment began,
" Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy," not " Kemember to do no work therein."
Certainly it was only too easy to forget the requirement of rest ; but it was easier still to
forget the requirement of holiness. A man might rest without hallowing, and so it had
to be enjoined on him to shape his rest that hallowing might be secured by it. Certain
of the animals required for holy purposes by God, were to be such as had not borne the

?roke. The animal could not be given to God and at the same time used for self. And in
-ike manner the Sabbath could not both be given to God and used for self. Therefore th«
Israelite is charged to do no work and let no work be done, even by the humblest of hii
■laves. Qe himself must get no temporal benefit from this day. Qod has so arranjjed.



•■.W.8— 12.] THE BOOK OP EXODUa 141

in bis loving providence and holy requirements, that six days' work shall supply seven
days' need. This lesson the manna distinctly teaches if it teaches anything at all. And
now that the Jewish Sabbath has gone, the Christian has to ask himself how far the
mode of Sabbath -keeping in Israel furnishes any guide for him in his use of the Lord'«
day. He is a miserable Christian who begins to plead that there is no distinct and
express commandment in the New Testament for the keeping of a sacred day of rest.
To say that the Sabbath is gone with the outward ordinances of Judaism is only making
an excuse for self-indulgence. True, the sacrifices of the law are done away with, but
only that imperfections may give place to perfections. In the very doing away, a solemn
claim is made that the Christian should present his body as a living sacrifice; and one
cannot be a living sacrifice without feeling that all one's time is for doing God's wilL
When in the inscrutable arrangements of Providence, we find that one day in seven has
actually come to be so largely a day of cessation from toil, surely the part of Christian
wisdom is to make the very best of the opportunity. Tliere is, and there always will
be, room for much improvement as to the mode of keeping the day of rest ; but in pro-
portion as we become filled with the spirit of Christ and the desire for perfection, in that
proportion we shall be delivered from the inclination to make Sunday a day for self, and
led forward in resolution, diligence and love, to make it a day for God. The more wt
can make our time holy time, the more we shall make ourselves holy persons. If in
God's mercy we find Sunday a day of larger opportunities, let it be according to our
individual opportunity, a day of larger achievements. Each one of us should say, " I
am bound to discover how God would have me use this day." My neighbour Christian
may feel constrained to use it in a way that, if 1 were to imitate him, might not promote
my own spiritual advantage, or the glory of God. Let every man be fuUy persuaded ic
his own mind, only let him take care that he has a persuasion and acts conscientiously
and lovingly up to it.

III. The pbculiab emphasis laid on this commandment. " Eemember." Not of
course that this commandment is more important than the rest. He who breaks one
breaks aU, for each is a member of tlie whole as of a living unity. But there must have
been a special reason in the mind of God for calling attention to this commandment.
We are told to remember vrhat we are likely to forget. Also, certain things we are
exhorted to remember, because if we only remember them we shall come in due course to
other things which cannot be so constantly in the mind, and which indeed the mind may
not yet be able properly to grasp. He who remembers the right way will assuredly come
to the right end, even though he may not be constantly thinking of it. We may be sure
that keeping the Sabbath day really holy, had a very salutary effect towards keeping all
the rest of the commandments. It gave time for reflection on all those affairs of daily
life in which there are so many opportunities and temptations to set at nought the
righteous claims both of God and of our fellow-men. And so the Christian may ever say
to himself, "Soul, remember the day of rest which God has so graciously secured to
thee." God, though he has condescendingly done so much to come near to needy men
with his supplies of grace, gets soon hidden by the cloud and dust of this world's busi-
ness. It is only too easy to forget the spirit of these commandments, and be unfair, un-
kind, malicious and revengeful toward our fellow-men in the jostlLngs and rivalries ol
life. Bemember then. Let tis but attend to this and the rest of Ood's remembers, and we
may be sure they will do a great deal to neutralise that forgetting which is inevitably
incident to the infirmities of fallen human nature. — Y.

Ver. 12. — The Fifth Commandment : the commandment/or children. I. Look at this
COMMANDMENT AB IT CONCERNED THE PABESTS. 1. This Commandment gave the parentt
an opportunity for telling the children how it originated. Not only an opportunity,
but we may say a necessity. It was a commandment to children, through their
parents. AU the commandments, statutes, and judgments, were to be taught diligently
to the children (Deut. vi. 7), and this one here would require very earnest and special
explanation in the family. It will be seen that it was a commandment which could
not be isolated ; a self-wiUed parent could not quote it with any advantage for the sake
of upholding arbitrary authority. The Israelite parent had to explain how these com-
mandments were given ; he had to narrate the events in Sinai, and these in turn com-
pelled a reference to the exodus and the bitter experiences of Egypt. Parents had well



IM THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh xx. 13—17.

to consider how much depended on themselves in making; their children duly acquainted
with all the glorious doings and strict requirements of Jehovah. If a parent had to
deal with a disobedient and despising chUd, he was able to point out that this requir»-
ment of honouring father and mother was God's most strict requirement, and God was
he who had rule and authority over parent and chUd alike. 2. Thus father and mother
were evidently required to honour themselves. No special verbal utterance was here
required, telling father and mother to remember the obligations to offspring, and any-
way this was not the proper place for it. The commandments here are universal
commandments, such as all men incur the temptation of breaking. Thus it was
eminently fitting to have a word for children, enjoining upon them the proper feeling
towards parents ; as all know the filial relation, but all do not know the parental one.
One of the merits of the Decalogue is its brevity and sententiousness. No father could
expect his children to honour the parental relation unless he did so himself; and in
measure as he more and more comprehended the import of the relation, in that measure
might his children be expected to respond to his treatment of them. " Honour all
men," says the apostle Peter ; and to do this we must begin at home in our own life,
and put the proper value on ourselves. God has put immense honour on father and
mother; and it is the curse, loss, and fearful reservation of penalty for many parents
that they do not see what momentous mterests have been put in their stewardship.
3. Ood thus showed his earnest desire to help parents in their arduous, anxious work.
The work of a parent in Israel wlio had weighed all his responsibilities was no light
matter. Great opportimities were given him, and great things might be done by him ;
things not to be done by any other teacher or guide, and he had thus a very comforting
assurance that fiod was his helper. Helper to the father, and, bear in .mind, to the
mother also. It is worthy of note that father and mother are specially mentioned.
Bhe is not left in the obscurity of a more general term. God would give to both
of them according to their peculiar opportunities aU understanding, wisdom, for-
bearance, steadfastness, discrimination of character, that might be necessary for their
work.

II. As rr coNCEHNBD THE CHILDREN. A Commandment was not needed to teach
children as to the making of some sort of distinction between their father and mother
and other men and women. But, in order that the distinction might be a right one,
and evermore real and deepening in its presence and influence, such a commandment as
this was imperatively needed. As we have said, it was a commandment universal in
its scope, because aU are or have been in the filial relation, but as a matter of fact it
wovdd address itself directly to the young. They were laid hold of as soon as anything
like intelligence, power to obey, and power to understand the difference between right and
wrong manifested themselves. God came and made his claim upon them, in a way as
suitable as any to their childish consciousness. They were to honour father and
mother, not because father and mother said so, but because God said so. Plainly the
honouring included both deep inward feeling and clear outward expression. The out-
ward expression, important as it was, could only come from real and habitual feeling
within. Outward expression by itself counted for nothing. Honouring with the lips
while the heart was far removed from the parent would be reckoned a grievous sin
agamst God. The child had to grow up esteeming and venerating the parental relation
everywhere. It could not honour its own father and mother and at the same time
despise the parents of other children. The promise here given obviously a suitable one
for children. To them the prospect of a long life, in the land already promised, was
itself a promise agreeable to the limitations of the old covenant, when there could be
no pointing in clear terms to the land beyond death ; and we may be very sure that,
according to this promise, filial obedience had a corresponding temporal reward. — Y.

Vers. 13 — 17. — The individual Israelite considered in his duties towards his neigh-
hour. Of these five commandments — namely, against murder, adultery, theft, slander
and covetousness, it almost goes without saying that their very negativeness in form
constitutes the strongest way of stating a positive duty. From a proper consideration
of these commandments aU possible manifestations of brotherliness will flow. They
•huw the spirit we shoxild cherish towards our neighbours ; those who equally with
(ursulvus are the objecta of Divine providence and mercy. They show what m are



ca. xz. la— 17.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. Ul

bound to give and what we have equally a right to expect. Pondering the serious and
injurious actions here indicated we note —

I. The great hasu which men can do to one anotheb. A man maliciously dis-
posed, sensual, reckless, unscrupulously selfish, has thus the extent of his power set
before him. That life which man has no power to give, he can take away at a single
blow. A man in the gratification of his sensual passions is able to destroy domestic
peace, gladness and purity. Property, which may be the fruit and reward of long
industry, is swept away by those who will not work for themselves as long as they can
get others to work for them. Eeputation may be taken away by adroit and plausible
slander. A man's whole position may be made uncertain by those who on the right
hand and the left look enviously on that position and wish to make it their own. It is
when these possibilities are borne in mind that we feel how true it is that even the best
guarded of earthly store-houses is nevertheless the one where the thief can break
through and steal. Industry, temperance, caution, vigilance, will guard many points of
human life, but what avails, if even a single one is left that cannot be called invulner-
able ? If, then, our fellow men are so much in our power, how it becomes us to quell
the very first outbreaks of all that is malicious, envious, selfish and sensual I If we
allow the evil in us to grow, we know not what evil it may inflict on the innocent and
happy.

II. But if these commandments show a dark and menacing side in our relations to
others, they equally show a bright one. Thebe is obeat good which we can do to
one another. The man who has power to kill, has, on the other hand, power to do
much in the way of preserving, cherishing and invigorating the lives of others.
Instead of piilling down others by a degrading companionship to the level of his own
impure heart, he can do something by seeking purity himself to draw others toward a
like quest. Instead of stealing, he will work not only to sustain himself, but that from
his superfluity, if possible, he may give to those who have not. He who has spoken ill
of men will find it just as easy to speak weU, if only ho is so disposed. That tongue
with which the renewed heart blesses God will also be constrained to say what is kind,
commendatory and helpful to others. Covetousness will give place to a gracious and
generous disposition that constantly takes for its motto, " It is more blessed to give than
to receive." It is only when we are doing our neighbours all the good we can, that we
may be really sure we are carrying out the commandments of God. There are only the
two ways, the forbidden and the commanded one ; and if we are not treading heartily
and resolutely in the commanded one, it follows as a matter of course that we are in the
forbidden one.

III. It is something to remember that the good we can do bt keeping thebk
commandments is gkeateb than the ill we can do by breaking them. God has
put us largely in the power of one another, that thereby we might have the happiness
coming from loving service and mutual association in giving and receiving ; but, at the
same time, he has made us so that while we are very powerful as co-workers with him,
yet even our greatest efforts are comparatively powerless against those who put them-
selves under his protection. Those injuring others do indeed inflict a great injury from
a certain point of view ; but they terribly deceive themselves in thinking that the injury
is such as can never be compensated for. Christ has given to his people the word
of comfort against all assault and spoliation from evil men : — " Fear not them that kill
the body." The priceless treasures, constituting the essence of every human life, are not
without a storehouse because the earthly storehouse proves insufficient. Ihe truth
seems to be that man has it in his power to do more good than he can conceive, more
pood certainly than he ever attempts. He has not the faith to believe that incessant
and plenteous sowing will bring good results, to be manifested in that day when all
secrets are brought fully to light. And so on the other haiid, the malicious man
exaggerates his power. He thinks he has done more than he possibly can do. Good is
left undone for want of faith, and evil is done through too much faith. Many an evil
act would never have been coromitted if the doer had only known how his evil, in tha
wondrous reach of God's providence, would be turned to good. And so the evil-doer,
the man of many crimes, if perchance the hour comes to him when he reflects in self-
coudenmation in the past, and says in his heart that all repentance is vain, should yet
find hope and illumination as he considers how the evil done to others is an evil whicb



Ul THE BOOK OF EXODUSk [oh. u. !•— 2(X

9od can neutralise, which he can even transmute into good. He who hurts his neigh"
6our and rejoices over the mischief, may find, when it is too late, that the only i«a,
•ril has been to himself, because he has persisted in an impenitent heart. — Y.

Vers. 16 — 21, — The ten words. " And God spake all these words." " And the people
utood afar off : and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where Ood was." (Ex.
XX. 1, 21). Oiir subject is the law of the ten commandments, and —

I. The NAMES of the code, for names are oft the keys to things. There are five chiei
names ; four in the Old Testament and one in the New. 1. " The ten words." [" Th(
ten commandments " is an unscriptural phrase.] (Ex. xxxiv. 28 ; Deut. iv. 13 ; x. 4
See Heb.) This name implies that the code was in a very special sense the distinct
utterance of God. The utterance touched that which was central in human life, viz.,
duty. 2. " The law," i.e., the heart and core of the Mosaic legislation. All the rest
was as the fringe to the robe of righteousness. 3. " The testimony." God's attestation
of his mind as to cut moral carriage through life. 4. " The covenant." But care
should be exercised as to the putting of this. Israel was not to keep the ten words in
order to salvation, but because Israel had been saved. Spiritual obedience springs from
gratitude — cannot be given as the price of salvation. 5. " The commandments " (Matt,
xviii. 17). The names of the code stamp it as unique. The Mosaic legislation stands
out like a mountain range from all other codes historic in the world ; but the " ten
words" are the ten peaks of that mighty range.

U. The momekt when God gave the "ten" was critical and significant. 1. Siib-
lequent to salvation (Ex. xx. 1). Trace the evangelical parallel, show that this is the
order of the divine love, first deliverance, and then direction for life. 2. Before rittud.
Hence the subordination, even for the Jew, of ritual to morals. For us the symbolic
ritual is no more. Our prerogative is that of unveiled gaze upon the spiritual.

III. The delivery of the " ten words." [The object here should be so to describe
the incidents of the delivery, on the basis of the sacred narrative, aided by topographical
illustration, as to exhibit the unique character of this code. The following hints may
be of service] : — The great plain north of Sinai ; Sinai to the south ; the barren cha-
racter of this huge natural temple [Stanley's " J. C." i. 128] ; on the third day every
eye turned to the mountain ; mists rising like smoke ; lightning ; thunder like ten
thousand trumpets ; reverberation, ; earth-trembling. 'I he people would have drawn
away, but Moses led them near the base. He ascended; but returned, that he,
as one of the people, and with them, might hear the code. God alone. Then the
very voice of very God, possibly pronouncing the " ten " in their shortest form. [Ewald :
" Israel," ii. 163, Eng. tr.] The cry of the people for a mediator. If we had to-day
• phonogram even of that awful voice, some would still say, " It is the voice of a
man, and not of a god."

IV. The pkesebvation. The "ten" were — 1. Graven by Ood. The record super-
natural, like the delivery. On granite ; not too large for a man to carry ; graven on
both sides ; symbol of the completeness, inviolability, and perpetuity of the Divine law.
Note the seven or eight weeks' delay ere the tables were given, and the intervening
incidents. 2. Kept in the ark. In that which was a memorial of the desert life ; the
wood, acacia of the wUdemess. In that which was central to the life of Israel. In
Israel a sanctuary, a holiest of all, the ark, and in the deep recesses of that the idea of
duty enshrined. The tables last seen at Sulumon's dedication. Are they now lying
with the wreck of Babylon in the valley of the Euphrates ?

V. The oedeb and the akbanqement. 1. There were five words on each table.
Bo we think. Great diversity of opinion as to the division and the throwing of the
"ten words" on the two tables. According to the division we adopt, the first table
concerned itself with God — his existence, worship, name, day, and representative. But
If the parent is the representative of God, then there are suggestions for the character
and the administration of the parent ; as well as for the intelligent obedience of the
child. 2. The five words concerning duty to Ood come first. Religion ever comes
before morality, and morality without that foundation must be partial and imperfect.
Man must first be in right relation with the Father in heaven, then he will come to be
right with all the chUdron.

YL Tax 00MFBMHENBIVIBNE88. Passages like Josh. i> 7, 8 ; Fa. cxiz. Itt, 72, imply



iia. XX. 3—12.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 15»

great depth and breadth in these " ten." Aie they really so comprehensive u is
implied ? 1. Olance at the " ten." We have seen how comprehensive are the first five.
[See above, v. l.J Note the comprehensiveness of the second. We are not to assault
the life, ^6 family, the property, the repuiation, the peace (by coveting and threatening
what they have), of our fellow-men. 2. Pierce into the spirit of the " ten," and note 1 —
(1) 2'he negative must indvde the positive ; e.g., we are bound to conserve life, lest by
neglect we kUl. (2) The absolute form covers all cases ; e.g., the sixth commandment
stands absolute, unless dispensed with by the supervention of a higher law. There may
be things more sacred even than life. (3) The external includes the internal. (Matt.
y. 27, 28.) Given the lust, its gratification does not depend upon the man, but upon
circumstances out of his control ; therefore he is guilty. Besides, what we are is of
more moment than what we do. (4) The principle of obedience in all is love.

VIII. The present use and office of "the Ten." [For detailed exposition of
each of " the ten," in relation to our own time and circumstances, see " The Ten Com-
mandments," by B. W. Dale, M.A.] On the use and ofBce the following positions may
be firmly laid down : — 1. The law of " the ten words " was, and is, something absolutely
unique. Of the unique character all that has been previously said is illustration. It
may, then, be reasonably inferred that "the ten" will have some special bearing on our
moral life. 2. It implies that Ood claims authority over the moral life of man. [On
this see valuable observations on the decay of the sense of authority, its evil effects, etc.,
Dale's " Ten Commandments," pp. 6—13.] 3. It was not intended to affoi-d man an
opportunity for winning salvation. That is God's free gift. 4. Salvation given,
Clod means the law to be obeyed. [On this see also Dale, pp. 13 — 16.] 5. The effort
to obey will de^en man's sense of the need of Oocts delivering mercy. The effort
brings a deeper acquaintance with the law, and so we come to know mure of — (1) the
righteousness of God — (2) the depravity of man. 6. A growing conformity is, however,
blessedly possible. 7. There comes with growing conformity freedom from law. Love
dispenses with the literal precept. This is the ideal of the New Testament. Still " the
ten words " have ever their use for those on the low planes of spiritual life. 8. And
even with those free from the law, it will still have the following offices : — (1) To keep
the Christian under grace as the source of all his serenity and bliss. (2) To restrain
from sin in the presence of temptation. (3) To keep liefore the aspiring saint the fair
ideal of righteousness. — B.

Vers. 3 — 11. — The soul for Ood only. L Qod's demand. "Thou shalt have no
other," &c. AU else is emptiness and falsehood. There must be nothing even of
our holy things put between the soul and God. His presence must be the soul's
life, the very air it breathes.

n. How THE DEMAND MAT BE FULFILLED. 1. By keeping ourselves from idols.
Our daily avocations, our interests, affections, pleasures, may lead to our esteeming
lomething our chief good and making it to be instead of God to us. God must be
«een behind his gifts, and be more to us than all besides. 2. By watchful fear and
hope. We bring evil not upon ourselves only, and the blessings wliich rest upon
obedience are an everlasting heritage. We sow seeds of evil or of blessing which yield
many harvests (vers. 5, 6). 3. By reverence (ver. 7). God's name must not be emptied
of its power to touch the heart by our lightness or hypocrisy. 4. By keeping sacred
the sabbath rest (vers. 8 — 11). (1) It will be a day of self-revelation, of rebuke foi
the evil in us, of strerTth^ning to the good. (2) It wiU be a day for the remembrance
of God ; and (3) of participation in his rest. — -U.

Ver. 12. — Hie commandment with promise. I. The duty imposed. 1, Its reason-
ableness. Reverent, loving subjection to parents is obedience to the deepest instincts of
the heart. 2. Its pleasantness. This subjection is rest and joy : it is ceasing from
doubt and inner conflict ; it lets into the spirit the sunshine of a parent's loving
approbation.

II. The promise : " That thy days," &c. Obedience to parents is the condition
of national prosperity. 1. It is respect for law and loyal acceptance of the teachings of
the past. 2. It is denial of the spirit uf self will and self pleasing. 3. It guards youth
from excess and lice. 4. It prepares for the understanding of and submission to thi



]M THE BOOK OB" EXODUa. {pa. XX, l—lt

»i]l of God- 6. It lays broad and deep in the nation's life the foundations of industrj
\nd strength and of moral, as well as material, greatness. — U.

Vers. 13 — 17. — Owr threefold duty to our neighbour. I. He is not to bb injubei
IN ACT. 1. ffis life is to he held sacred. It is God's great gift to him and it is God's
only to take it away, by express command, or by his own judgment. This is a law
for nations as well as individuals. In every imjust war this command is trampled
under foot. 2. His home is sacred. The wreck of homes which lust has made I The
holy, loving refuge of childhood and youth desolated, and its very memory made
a horror and anguish I 3. His property is sacred. It is the man's special stewardship
from God. God can bless us also, for all things are his, but this stands between our
neighbour and the Master, to whom he must render his account.

J I. He IS NOT TO BE INJURED BY woBD. We may lay no hand upon his life, his
home, his goods, and yet our tongue may wound and rob him. We may cause respect
and love to fall away from him wrongfully. Our dimininishing aught of these, save as
the servants of truth, is a crime before God.

III. He IS NOT TO BE WRONGED IN THOUGHT. God asks uot Only for a blameless life
but also for a pure heart, in which lust and hate and envy und greed have no place. Sin
is to be slain in its root. — U.

Vers. 1 — 2. — Utility of a course of teaching on the commandments, that Divine law
which can never be destroyed. Let those who object to the preaching of morality
rememher John Wesley's words : " I find more profit in sermons on either good tempers
or good works than in what are vulgarly called ' gospel sermons.' " Consider —

I. The DIVISION and grouping of the commandments. 1. Division. We know that
there are ten — the ten words — but how are the ten words made up ? The modem Jewish
method makes the introductory announcement, a " first word," and combines our first
and second as the '• second word." By others the first and second are combined as the
first, and then the tenth divided to complete the number. Our own ordinary division
is most likely to be correct ; but various usage shows that the importance attaches not
to the numher but the sense. 2. Grouping. Two tables, but how many on each ?
Augustine held that the first table contained three, the second seven, whence he drew
some mystical conclusions with regard to the Trinity. The popular view includes four
in the first table, and six in the second. Most likely, however, there should be five in
each table [perhaps connected with the hand as the symbol of action]. On this view wo
shall see that in each table the four first commandments are rooted in the fifth.

II. The speaker and the motive. 1. 'Ihs speaker (of. Deut. v. 22). — God,
Jehovah, a personal Deity, and one whose nature is changeless (Mai. iii. 6; Jas. i. 17).
Moses did not evolve the law out of his own head ; he heard it, he received it, he
enunciated it, but " God spake all these words." 2. The motive. — The motive appealed
to for obedience is too often /ear; the motive too which Israel was most inclined to act
upon. God, however, makes his appeal not to fear, but to the sense of gratitude : —
" Remember what 1 have done for you, then hear what I expect you to do for me." The
deliverer has a right to lay down rules of conduct for those whom he has delivered ; whilst
at the same time gratitude to him inspires them with a motive for obedience. Apply
to ourselves : God has redeemed us ; we should obey him not from fear, but from lovo-^
not that we may get somfething out ol him, but because we have got so much already.

III. General considerations. 1. There is an order in the arrangement. " Order is
heaven's first law," and it shows itself in the code from heaven. First God, our filial
relations ; then man, our fraternal relations ; the upward-looldng and the outward-
looking aspects of life. Under each, too, the order is maintained ; first we are shown
the blossom, then the stem, then the root. The flower of worship is rooted in the
home, and the flower of love is rooted in the heart. 2. The commandments are indica-
tions of the Divine will from which they spring. Our duty is to study what God has
taid in order that we may discover what he vnshes. The old covenant was on stone-
tables, easily intelligible and very definite ; the new covenant is on hearts of flesh, it
contains promptings to duty, rather than directions. We need both ; we must use the
old that we may give effect to the new, and the new that we may fulfil the old.
[JUustration.-^Foi engine to fulfil its work, steam needed inside to propel, line* outsidl



o&.xx.$--d.J THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 151



to ^lect.] The new covenant cannot render the old ni^tory; it is well to hare
motive power, but we still need the lines liud down by which to guide ourselves when
we have it. — O.

Vers. 3 — 6. These two commandments are complementary : one God only to ba
worshipped, one way only in which to worship him. Consider : —

I. The First Commandment. 1. Eow Israel would understand it. "No foreign
god in opposition to me." The natural idea would be that Jehovah was one amongst
many deities; that possibly, away from Egypt, some other god might have higher
authority (of. 2 Kings xviii. 33 — 35). In any case it would be hard to realise that he
was more than God of gods; others might be inferior to him, but surely they might
claim an inferior worship. All such notions are set aside at once. Whether there
are other gods or no, all such must be Jehovah's enemies ; to offer them worship of any
kind was to be disloyal to Jehovah, and to break the covenant. 2. Eow it applies to
ourselves. Polytheism, a thing of the past ! In theory perhaps, but how about our
practice ? Obedience is the best evidence of worship ; our God is he by reference to
whom we govern our conduct, and regulate our actions. Illustrate from the case of
the man whose life is given to the pursuit of wealth — wealth is practically his deity ; or
the case of one whose conduct is regulated by constant reference to public opinion ;
wealth, public opinion, and the like may be nothing more than personified abstractions,
none the less we may serve them far more consistently than we serve God. Such
service is worship, worship of an alien deity ; it involves disloyalty to Jehovah, and
enrols us amongst the forces of his foes. Quite as easy for us to break this command-
ment as it was for Israel ; it needs to be reiterated in our ears no less persistently than
it was in their ears.

n. The Second Commandment. As the first has to do with the object of worship,
K3 this has to do with the manner of worship. An image degrades the ideal, it can only
present God, and that imperfectly, under one out of many aspects. One image of God
alone is adequate (Col. i. 15). To the Jew, this stcond commandment was a fence to
guard the empty shrine, which shrine could only receive its occupant when " the Word
was made flesh " at the incarnation of our Lord. Notice : — 1. The effect of breaking
the commandment. Degrading the God worshipped, it led on naturally to the degrada-
tion of the worshipper, and through the worshipper his posterity was affected, so as to
become yet more degraded. Who could have a better excuse than Jeroboam, the son
of Nebat, for breaking the commandment ? Who could have broken it more carefully ?
Considerations of utility seemed to justify him. He might have ar_gued that the first
commandment was all-important, and that to ensure respect for it he must tamper with
the second. None the less the effect was manifest (2 Kings xvii. 22, 23). The sin
of Jeroboam was the ruin of his people. 2. The bearing of the commandment on our-
selves. Christ has come. The empty shrine is filled. We possess the true image, and
can worship God in Christ. " But Christ, you say, is unseen ; thoughts wander in
prayer, I need some object by which to fix them, some symbol upon which they may
stay themselves and rest." The excuse is plausible ; but it is the same excuse as a Jew
in old times might have offered. A man may use, as good men have used, the crucifix,
e.g., as an aid to devotion. But the crucifix, or any other symbol, is utterly inadequate ;
it diows Christ only under one aspect : we must worship him in all his fulness if we
take him as the image of the invisible Jehovah. To confine our thoughts to Calvary
is to limit, and by limiting to degrade the ideal. The crucifix has much to answer for
in narrowing men's views, and making their religion one-sided and incomplete. For a
Christian to obey the second commandment, he must worship Christ in all his fulnMB
Only so can he worship God with that pure worship which is alone acceptable).

•• Show me not only Jesus dying,

As on the cross he bled,
Nor in the tomb a captive lying,

For he has left the dead.
Not iinlr in that form suspended.

My Saviour bid me see ;
For tu the highest heavens ascended.

He reigns in majesty 1" — G



Ut THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xx. 7— ML

Vera. 7, 8. — ^The first commandment deals with the object of worship ; the second,
(rith the manner of worship ; in the third and fourth we have the metlwd of worship,
true reverence and genuine devotion.

L The Third Commandment. 1. Obedience to the letter insufficient. None ever
obeyed it thus more strictly than the Jews did. The Sacred Name, called the
shuddering name; only pronounced once annually hy the High Priest on the Great
Day of Atonement. So strictly was the command kept that the true pronunciation of
the name is lost to us. Even in our own Bibles we have evidence of the ancient
practice, " The Lord " being used as a substitute for Jehovah. Yet, with all this, cf.
Ezek. xxxvi. 20. The name, which was never uttered by the lips, was yet profaned by
the conduct of the worshippers. We, too, may never perjure ourselves, or speak pro-
&nely, yet the tenor of our whole life may bring God's name into contempt. The
commonest excuse made by those who never enter a place of worship is based upon
the inconsistent conduct of those who frequent such places regularly. They may
not go themselves, but they know well enough who do go, and they know also the kind
of lives which they who do go are leading. 2. The true obedience. They who worshij
God must worship him in spirit and in truth. True reverence is a thing of the heart,
which shines through and illuminates the conduct. This leads us to : —

II. The Fourth Commandment. True reverence will best show itself in copying
the example of the person reverenced. The fourth commandment shows us God's
example made plain for a man to copy. 1. The rest-day to be kept holy. (1) Nature
teaches us that a rest-day, a Sabbath, is a necessity. He who works seven days a week
is a bad economist of his time. He simply shortens life. The body must be laid aside
the sooner to keep its disregarded Sabbaths in the grave. (2) The Holy-day is no less
necessary than the holiday. Man's nature is complex, and his spirit needs rest and
refreshment, quite as surely as his body needs them, [lllust. : You may shut up
a man's piano, but that only rests the instrument, it does not necessarily rest the
instrumentalist.] The rest for a man's spirit is only to be obtained by sharing the
spiritual rest of God ; if the holiday be not a holy-diy this spiritual rest will still be
lackhig. 2. The days of labour to be modelled on Ood^s pattern. Labour as much
commanded as rest ; but labour, as rest, after the Divine model. All that God does, he
does earnestly and thoroughly. To work as God works is to work with the heart as
well as with the hands (Col. iii. 23). One cannot wonder that the rest-day is profaned,
when the days of toil are profaned no less, when a man's chief object seems to be not to
do his work, but to have done with it. if God had worked as we work, he could scarcely
have called his w6rk " very good." The world by now would have been a dilapidated
chaos, more appalling than the waste from which it sprang. The commandment is not
" Six days shalt thou loiter," but " Six days shalt thou labour."

Concluding reflections. — Mere literal keeping of the commandments may bring
them and their author into contempt. We can only " magnify the law and make it
honourable" by keeping it from the heart outwards. The Jews kept the third and
fourth commandments literally enough. Our own Sunday legislation dates from the
lime of Charles II., when, of all times, God's law was, perhaps, the most fearfully pro-
faned. " My son, give me thine heart," that is the invitation which first requires to be
accepted. If we would really keep the commandments, let our prayer be : " Lord have
mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep thy law." — G.

Ver. 12. — Previous commandments have dealt with the object and manner of worship;
this deals with the nursery and school of worship. Consider : —

I. The injunction in itself. 1. Absolute ; parents to be honoured, whether living or
departed, known or unknown, good or evil. 2. //ard to obey in some cases ; yet always
possible, for remember ihe/aiher and mother may be honoured, even though the individuals
fall short of the ideal they should exemplify. One can honour from the standpoint o<
the child, even those who from any other standpoint may be despicable. [lllust. : Dr.
Macdonald's story of " Robert Falconer ; " the father is a reprobate scamp, yet the son,
perdstently honouring his fatherhood, at length wins him back to respectability.]
3. Mischief of thoughtless disrespect. No honourable shame to be ashamed of one's
own parentage, especially when, if rightly looked at, there is nothing to be ashamed of in
a. No doubt apparent disrespect may sometimes grow out of a wholesome familiitrrtT:



cH. XX. 12, 13.] THE BOOK Off EXODUS. U7

•till, even so, painful to the parent, whilst it injures the child in the opinion of right-
Hinded people. [Common shame of doing, or refusing to do things out of respect to a
parent's wishes. At most, if the wish is respected, it is merely a " humouring of the oW
people," as though the command were " humour," instead of "honour" "thy father and
mother."] Why chafe at such simple duties as those which spring from the most sacred
of relations. There is a far worse bondage than that of " a mother's apron strings ; " it
is not well to rupture needlessly those cords of a man which are the bonds of love. 11
you want a reason for the command : —

n. Home beverence is ihb root or worship. That ladder which Jacob saw is
always reared within the shadow of the home. Even with him, an exile, it was the God
of Ilia father who stood above it. The parents, or those who stand in the place of parents,
are the only God a child knows at first. Worship, like other things, comes by practice
Mid experience : the first lessons are learnt in the home. Practically, God is revealed
through the parent; other things equal, no reverence for parents, there will be no
reverence for God. No doubt there are homes and homes ; some where you can almost
catch the rustle of the angel wings ; others, withered husks of home, blasted before
the breath of hell. Still, even in the worst homes the ladder is planted, could one but
•ee it. Take away home and its associations, and you leave it with no ground to stand
on. Notice in this light the great responsibility of parents. Further : —

in. Home reverence is the sourck of individual and national permanence.
The position of the commandment teaches its connection with worship, the promise
attached to it its connection with prosperity. It ensures : — 1. The prosperity of the
individual. The man who does not honour and respect his parents has not gained
the hahit of reverence ; he does not honour God, he does not honour all men. What
follows? — (1) Not honouring God, there is no power but self to restrain self. Impulses,
desires, etc., are likely, unreined, to run away with him. A man so run away with is
rushing post haste to death. (2) Not honouring men, he will hold aloof from men.
They may hinder, they are not Ukely to help him. The friction of life intensified ; all
that is done — done with twice the effort. Such a man may be successfvd, not likely to
be long-lived. The needless friction must wear out the life. Could the test be applied,
an insurance company would be justified in charging a lower premium on one who kept
this commandment, than on one who habitually disregarded it. 2. The prosperity of
the nation. For (1) That nation is most stable which founds itself in reverence for th«
past. The " Land of settled government " is the land —

" Where Freedom broadens slowly down
From precedent to precedent."

(2) That nation is most stable which adopts the principle of the fourth commandment
and respects authority above numbers. The commandment does not say, " Honour the
family vote," it says, " Honour thy father and thy mother."

Conclusion. — Home is linked with heaven ; the earthly parent with the Father of
eternity. Would you reach heaven, then reverence home; would you worship GK)d,
then honour your parents. — G.

Ver. 13, — The second table. Fraternal relations ; the outward-looking aspect of lifst
May classify them either (1) as they affect us personally, or (2) as they affect man
generally. According to (1) they deal with our actions, our words, and our thoughts.
According to (2) they teach us : — The sanctity of life, of home, of property, of character ;
whilst the tenth commandment shows further that the heart is the source whence
springs reverence for these sanctities. Notice as regards this sixth commandment : —

I. Its bearing on actions. Murder, the criminal taking of life, varies in character ;
according iv the nature of the life destroyed and according to the nature of the action ol
the destroyer. Life is threefold, of the body, of the mind, and of the spirit : and
murder, as against each, may be deliberate or careless, resulting from action or from
inaction. Illustrate from cases affecting the bodily life : — 1. Deliberate mv/rder. Life
taken of malice aforethought. 2. Gardess murder, resulting from negligence or cul-
pable ignorance ; e.g., the house builder who so builds his house as to injure the health
af a tenant, neglecting drains, etc. ; or the parent who spreads some infectious disorder



168 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xx 1»— li

through sending his children to school whilst tainted with it. 3. Inactive mwrder.
Paraphrasing James iv. 17, " He that knoweth to save life and doeth it not, to him it
is murder ; " e.g., a man who allows his neighbour to murder others deliberately or
through carelessness. Like kinds of murder apply to the cases of the mind and spirit.
The slave-owner who forbade his slaves to he educated, and who debarred them from
religious privileges; the parent who stifles the spiritual development of his child
through indifference. These and like cases might be instanced. " Thou shalt do no
murder," such is the command. To the question, "Am I my brother's keeper?" the
answer is, " Undoubtedly you are." If you can save life of any kind, and fau to do so,
you must he classed with Cain.

II. Its bearing on thoughts (Matt. v. 21 ; 1 John iii. 15). Really a special case of
the tenth commandment ; or rather, this commandment is viewed in the light of the
tenth. The unkind thought, fostered, soon becomes the malicious thought, and a
malicious thought acts like leaven, resulting in a murderous heart. \_Illustration :
cotton wool, pure, soft, innoxious. Treat it with certain chemicals. It looks just the
same ; but its character is completely altered, it is transformed into an explosive, gun
cotton. So, too, treat the human heart with the chemistry of envy, hatred, and malice,
and it too will become an explosive — ^murderous, and ready for murder.] From the
murderous heart proceeds murder of the worst kind ; but saturate the heart with indif-
ference or carelessness, and you still make it an explosive. " Keep," i.e., guard " thy
heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life," or death !

III. A SPECIAL CASE. SuioiDE. Self murder does not imply hatred or malice
Still it is unlawful killing, and may he classed with extreme forms of manslaughter. It
is however to be condemned on more general principles as against the spirit of the whole
table of the law. It is cowardly. It is selfish. If a brother commit suicide, what aK
your feelings ? What then your brother's feelings if you destroy your life ? Juries
should give in such cases more stringent verdicts. A verdict of temporary insanity
results from misplaced charity ; it cannot do much to alleviate the distress of friends ; it
helps to facilitate suicide, which would be far less frequent if the verdict on it were
usually more severe.

Conclusion. — The justification of this commandment is to be found in the sanctity ot
the life which it protects. Bear in mind that life is God's gift, an emanation from the
Deity. Keep the eyes open and keep the heart open, so will you soon find opportunities
to preserve life and ward off death. — Ot.

Ver. 14. — A correspondence between the two tables : to worship a false god is to aim
at the life of the true God. Idolatry is spiritual adultery. Besides this the sixth and
seventh commandments are clearly related ; the one guards the life of the individual, the
other the life of the family, the sanctity of the home. Consider : —

I. The sin itself. When a man by anticipation, or after marriage, breaks the
maiTiage vow ; when a woman acquiesces in the crime thus perpetrated, it is murder
aimed at the collective life of the family. Madness for society to make light of such a
crime, which, if permitted, niust destroy society. For notice, the family, not the indi-
vidual, is the ultimate social unit. [Illustration. Tree covered with foliage : individual
leaves and blossoms are connected with twigs and boughs ; you may kill a leaf without
injury to the bough, but kill the bough, and what about the leaves ?] Individuals are
leaves and blossoms on the tree of life ; it is through the family that they belong to the
tree at all. Adultery poisons the bough, and through that withers the leaves and
blossoms. Further, the sin involves a spreading plague. It spreads not merely far and
wide, but on and on through future generations. You may keep it hid, you cannot
keep it inactive. [Illustrate from case of David and Bathsheba ; may we not trace hit
mother's influence in Solomon's sin ? He goes after strange women, and then after
strange gods. On David's side we have Amnon's sin directly connected with Absolom's
rebellion, which again is connected indirectly with the successful rebellion of Jeroboam
and resulting idolatry of the northern kingdom. It is still the one sin which spreads ;
outwards and onwards.] A pure home is a sound spot in the social organism ; corrupt
its purity, and it becomes a centre of corruption. May notice also, in this connection,
that all sins of this class, fornication, unuleanness, etc., do and must manifest themselves in
spite of concealment. Other sins (1 Cur. vi. 18) are " outside the body." These axi



cH. XX. 14, 15.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 168

" against the body," and through the body they declare themselves. The pure may not
know why they shim the impure, but instinctively they discern the signs of hie
impurity. His sin shows through him, as a lurid light shows through a lantern.

II. Causes which occasion the sin. 1. A low ideal of womanhood. According to
the Divine ideal, " man" is " male and female ; " it is in the union of the sexes that the
" image of God " is reflected. A ccording to the human ideal, woman is rather man's
play-mate than his help-mate ; he chooses her as he would a picture, because he likes
the look of her. She is in thought his toy, his doU. In unchristian countries this low
ideal of woman is universally prevalent, but even in Christian countries it is too often
tacitly if not verbally accepted. Such an ideal cannot but be miscliievons. \_lllustra-
tion : Take lantern from summit of light-house and place it at the foot. It will still
guide the ships, though no longer off the rooks but on to them.] Woman must exert
influence ; place her high and it will be ennobling, set her low and it will become degrading.
2. A low ideal of manhood. If woman is a toy, then that part of a man's nature which
can require such a costly toy, will be the most important. The animal nature will be
uppermost. The desires will rule. 3. A low level of life. This results naturally from 1
and 2. A man cannot live above the level of his own ideals. If man is a mere animal,
woman a mere toy, then marriage is a mere convention. All its sanctity has evaporated.
A man wiU marry if he can afford a wife, if not he wiU take some cheaper substitute. In
the light of the Divine ideal, marriage becomes a duty and a privilege ; the completion of
that Divine idea of which man unmarried is a mere torso. Guard, of course, against impro-
vident marriages ; at the same time it is not improvidence to share, in common, sacri-
fice and self-denial. One man has two hundred pounds per annum and cannot marry
under four hundred pounds ; another has four hundred pounds and requires one thousand
pounds. If a man divides himself into his income and finds he goes once and nothing
over, he may set to work and make his income larger, or he may try to make self
smaller ; many a man could so reduce his divisor, that, without any increase in his in-
come, the quotient should be two, with a fair remainder.

Conclusion. — All such evils spring no doubt from a corrupt heart ; but a high ideal
will guard the heart and tend to purify it if impure. By the help of God's grace, let
man reverence woman, and woman reverence man, and each reverence in himself and in
the other that ideal which is their common glory. Before the splendour of the Divine
image as thus mirrored in their union, adultery and sins of uncleanness must he driven
afar off. — G.

Ver. 15. — The eighth commandment guards the sanctity of property. Consider ^—

I. Property and the rights op property. Property is that which gives expression
to individual and family life. In some sort it is an extension of the bodily organism, an
added possibility of self-revelatioa in the sphere of sense. Social usage allows a man's
right, or the right of a corporation, to absolute possession of certain things. Primarily,
probably, such right is founded on the right of the labourer to the product of his
labour ; a man's own is what he has made his own. Such limit, however, has come to
be enlarged on grounds of general utility ; we may say generally that a man's property
is that which social usage allows him to consider such.

II. Oppencbs against property. 1. Stealing. Appropriating a man's property
against the will of the owner. All condemn the thief, he is condemned even by
his own conscience; however much he may steal from others he can never think
it right for them to steal from him! There are, however, various kinds of diluted
theft which are equally offences against the eighth commandment, though not so
strongly stigmatised by society. 2. Cognate offences. Property in the old times con-
sisted mainly of land, crops, and cattle. The principle involved in the eighth command-
meat illustrated, as applied to them, by a number of cases in Ex. xxi., xxii., all
such acts as result in loss to one's neighbours, provided that loss was not inevitable, are
condemned by it. Circumstances, nowadays, are somewhat different, but the principle
of honesty stiU applies. Take a few instances : — (1) Acts of petty dishonesty, (a)
When in a bargain one party takes advantage of the ignorance of the other; e.g., a
collector finds some rarity in the possession of a man who does not know its value, and
secures it far below its proper price. (6) Borrowing without definite intention to
return; e.g., books, money, or other property, (c) Leaving bills unpaid for a nead*



MO THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. XX 16, Iflw

lessly long time. In such case, even though paid eventually, the creditoi is defraudei?
of the profit which he might have made by the use of his money. (2) Mischievovn
actions; e.g., marking books or scribbling in them. Cutting initials in trees and
buildings. No man has any right to depreciate by his actions the value of another
man's property. (3) Culpable negligence. Must be as careful with the property of
others as vrith our own property. A pure accident is not a pure accident if it would not
have happened had the property been our own.

III. Compensation fob offences against pkopbbty. Cf. Ex. xxii. 9. Not enough
to make good the original value, the law of restitution requires double and, in some
cases, fivefold or fourfold. Such a law: — 1. Emphasises the importance of strict
honesty. In view of it possible offenders will be more cautious as to- how they offend.
Should it be enforced now-a-days; how many struggling tradesmen and mechanics
might find themselves rescued from the verge of bankruptcy I How might charity in a
thousand places spring up to banish and destroy suspicion I 2. Secures something like
adequate atonement. Defraud a man of anything, and you defraud him of more than
the value of that thing. His loss occasions further loss ; loss of time, loss of temper,
anxiety, inconvenience, for all which the sufferer is entitled to a recompense. Fovu:fold
restitution may sound generous, yet even that may be less than just.

Conclusion. — ^Honesty is by no means such a common virtue as some suppose. It
behoves us to examine ourselves as to how far our conduct may bear strict scrutiny.
Are there none to whom we should make restitution ? If so, let us be thankful if we
can make it. There are losses which we occasion others, dues which we owe to God and
man, yet which now, it may be, we can never make good — ^no remedy now exists
for the lasting evil they have occasioned. There are debts we can still pay, there
are others which we can never pay; who has not need to join in the petition in
the Lord's Prayer, " Forgive us our debts " ? — G.

Ver. 16. — Connect with the preceding commandment. That guards the property,
what belongs to a man outside himself. This guards the character, what belongs to a
man inside himself. To steal the purse may be only to steal trash, but to defraud
• man of his good name is to do him an irreparable injury.

I. Commonest form of the offence. Most often committed against comparative
strangers. We calculate the effect of our words when speaking of people whom wo
know— the consequences may be impleasant to ourselves if we fail to use due care. Ai
regards others, we are far too ready to catch up and publish some prejudicial opinion ; it
is so much easier to speak evil than to keep silence and say nothing. Take, e.g., the
language current with regard to politicians of an opposite party; what disgracefii.
imputation of unworthy motives is constantly permitted without a protest ! Wc haV;
a right to our own opinion, if we have taken due pains to form it, as to the public acts
of public men ; we have no right to go beneath those acts and assume that the actors
are less honourable than we are. Partisans of the platform and the correspondence
column would seem to care nothing for the sanctity of truth, their one aim is to
blacken the character of their opponents, so as to emphasise by contrast their own
purity.

II. How HABIT STRENGTHENS BY PRACTICE. Bear falsc wltucss against a stranger
and it will be easier to bear false witness against a friend; the use of unmeasured
language in the one case will lead to less measured language in the other. As a
fact this is the case. People who express themselves so strongly when speaking of
political opponents, ar« just the people who behind your back will speak of you
with inaccurate unkindness. They misrepresent and misinterpret from the men
pleasure of lowering a man in the eyes of others : —

" Low desire
Not to feel lowest makes them level all;
Tea they would pare the mountain to the plain,
To leave am equal baseness "

We are aL mirrors in which our neighbours' characters Tuust be in some sort reflected ■
I«t lu take care lest we reflect folsely, distorting, through flaws in our own charactct;



CB. XX. 16, 17.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 161

the character which is reflected through ua. Two special cases should be noted: —
1. False witness embodied in accurate speech. We may use true words and yet create a
false impression ; e.g., a remark made and repeated verbatim. The way, however, in
which U is repeated, the special setting, the peciiliar intonation ; these things give it a
very different meaning to that intended by the original speaker. The words are
accurate, the testimony is false. (New music alters the character of a song.) 2. False
witness may be borne by silence. In discussing a man's character, silence, with or with-
out significant looks, is eloquent. " He could have spoken," it is argued, " had he been
«ble to say anything favourable." Silent acquiescence in the charges made is quite
,<uf&cient confirmation of their truth I

Conclusion. — The character of our neighbour, whatever his rank or position, whether
the neighbour be a Prime Minister or only a domestic servant, ought to be as precious to
us as our own character. It is easy enough to injure a man's good name by thoughtless
speech or cowardly silence. We cannot rid ourselves of the responsibility which
attaches to our carelessness or cowardice. By speech or silence we give our testimony,
whether the testimony be true or false. — G.

Ver. 17. — The last commandment of the second table. Murder, adultery, theft,
slander, all these spring from a corrupt heart. The wrong thought admitted nourishes
the wrong desire, which in time gives birth to the wrong action. Out of the heart are
the issues of life, therefore keep thy heart with all diligence.

I. The source op covetousness. There are two ideals by which men mould their
lives. One makes God the centre of all things, the other makes self the centre. One
says " Thy will be done," the other says " My will be done." It is in the heart that
accepts this latter ideal that covetousness has its home. Everything is regarded in its
relation to self — the neighbour's life and home, and property, and character, are only so
many possible instruments which may thwart or assist the gratification of selfishness.
The thought of something which may give pleasure, leads us to the desire for the
possession of that thing, and the desire will only be restrained from fulfilment by
external checks which may make fulfilment difficult. A man may refrain from
adultery or theft, because of the social penalties which attach to such transgressions ; all
the same in his inmost heart he may be a thief and an adulterer. Selfishness is the
parent of all sins ; its offspring is only dwarfed in growth when selfishness is restrained
by society. (Cf. Matt. v. 22, 28.)

II. The cure foe covetousness. The only radical remedy is that which starts by
cutting at the root of selfishness. God, not the individual man, is the centre of the
universe. Man is related directly to him, and to all other things through him. It is
God's will, not our own will, by reference to which we may live righteously. What
then is God's will ? It is that which corresponds with his character, which is love. To
live as in his sight is to live in the light of love. Love in us is kindled and developed
by contemplation and experience of the love which is in him. Love is that Divine
affection which alone has power to expel all selfishness. Love alone can purify the
heart, guard the thoughts, and discipline the desires. And what is love in practice ?
It is nothing more nor less than doing to others as we would they should do unto us.
All men as related to God are on an equality, all, as in his sight, have equal rights.
Here, however much we may differ, we are yet all on common ground. They who
acknowle Ige one God, who accept redemption through one Saviour, who yield to the
influence of one sanctifying Spirit, are in the way to the attainment of that love which
is the fulfilling of the law. (Eom. xiii. 10.)

Conclusion. — Notice how the last commandment links itself on to the fulfilment of
the first. The ten precepts of the two tables are ten golden links in a perfect circle.
Thus regarded, that circle is none other than the perfect bond of charity (Col. iii. 14),
a girdle wherewith whoso girds himself ensures a twofold peace, "Peace on earth
towards men of good will," and the peace of God to keep his heart. — G.



■X0D1T8— Hi



in



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[en XX. 18— *1.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 18 — 21. — ^Witedbawal of the Peo-

HiB, AND NEABBB APFBOACB OF MoSES TO

God. The effect produced upon the people
by the accumulated terrors of Sinai — " the
thunderings and the lightnings, the noise of
the trumpet, and the mountain smoking " —
the cloud, and the voice out of the cloud — was
an awful and terrible fear. They could not
bear the manifestation of the near presence of
God ; and therefore " they removed and stood
afar off." It seemed to them as if, on hearing
the voice of God, speaking out of the thick
darkness, they must die (ver. 19). Moses,
upon their expressing these feelings, comforted
them with an assurance that God had shown
his terrors, not tor their injury, but to put his
fear in their hearts (ver. 20), and allowed
them to retire to a distance from the mount,
while he himself "drew near unto the thick
darkness where God was " (ver. 21).

Ver. 18. — ^The people saw the thnnderings.
The use of a specific verb for a generic one,
with terms to all of which it is not, strictly
speaking, applicable, is common to many
writers, and is known to grammarians as
zeugma. " Saw " here means " perceived,
witnessed." The monntain smoking. Com-
pare ch. xix. 18. In Deut. v. 23 it is said
that "the mountain did bum with fire."
When the people saw it, they removed. It
appears, from Deut. v. 23, that, before retiring,
the people sent a deputation of heads of tribes
and elders up to Moses in the mount, to con-
vey to him their wishes, and suggest that he
should be their intermediary with God. Moses
laid their wishes before God, and was directed
to give them his sanction, whereupon they
withdrew to their tents (ib. 30).

Ver. 19. — And they said nnto Moses. Their
whole speech, as delivered in Deuteronomy,
was as follows : — " Behold, the Lord our God
hath shewed us his glory and his greatness,
and we have heard his voice out of the midst
of the fire : we have seen this day, that God



doth talk with man, and he liveth. Now,
therefore, why should we die ? for this great
fire will consume us : if we hear the voice oi
the Lord our God any more, then we shall die.
For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard
the voice of the living Grod, speaking out of
the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived ?
Go then near, and hear all that the Lord our
God shall say ; and speak thou unto us aU that
the Lord our God shall speak unto thet and
we will hear it, and do it " (Deut. v. 24- 27).
The speech is here abbreviated greatly ; but
its essential points are preserved — " Speak
thoa with us " — be thou our intermediary—
" Let not God speak with us, lest we die."

Ver. 20. — ^And Hoses said unto the people.
Not inmiediately — Moses first held colloquy
with God. God declared that the people had
" spoken well " (Deut. v. 28) ; and authorised
Moses to allow of their withdrawal (ib. 30).
Fear not. Here Exodus is more full in its
details than Deuteronomy. Moses, finding the
people in a state of extreme alarm, pacified
them — assured them that there was no cause
for immediate fear — God had not now come
in vengeance — ^the object of the terrors of
Sinai was to " prove " them — i.e., to test them,
whether they were inclined to submit them-
selves to God, or not — and to impress upon
their minds permanently an awful fear of God,
that they might be kept back from sin by
dread of his almighty power. The motive of
fear is. no doubt, a low one ; but where we
can appeal to nothing else, we must appeal tc
it. Israel was still a chUd, only fit for childish
discipline ; and had to be directed by the harsh
voice of fear, imtil it had learnt to be guided
by the tender accents of love.

Ver. 21. — The people stood afar oft They
retired from the base of Sinai to their tents,
where they "stood," probably in their tent
doors. And Moses drew near onto the thiok
darkness. As the people drew back, Moses
drew near. The display which drove them
off, attracted him. He did not even fear the
" thick darkness " — a thing from which human
nature commonly shrinks. Where God wa%
he would be



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 18 — ^21. — The Divine presence at once attractive and repellent. When Christ
was upon the earth, so winning was his graciousness that crowds flocked to him, and
one man at least exclaimed, " Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest." But
at the same time so terrible was the manifestation of his power, that there were those
who " besought him that he would depart out of their coasts." God is love, and God is
power, and wherever he is, he exhibits both qualities ; but there are some who see
mainly the love, and there are others who see only the power. Hence the Divine
presence at once attracts and repels, charms men and affrights them. The Israolitei
invited to draw near to Qod, and hold with him direct communication, after Inief tria^



OH. XX 22- 28] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. IfiS

decline the offer, and will hare an intermediaiy. Moses, given the same inTitation, and
a witness of the same sights and sounds, not only stands his ground, but at the end
draws more near. The reasons for the difference would seerc to he these—

I. Fbab, where it is excessive, expels love. The devils, who have no love,
" believe and tremble." Men, who have greatly sinned, and who therefore cannot help
geeing in God mainly a " consuming fire," and " an avenger to execute wrath," lose
sight of all his gentler attributes, cease to feel that he is their Father, no longer look upon
him as " merciful and gracious," and consequently no longer have any feeling of love
towards him. We cannot love one from whom we expect nothing but punishment.

II. Love, where it is strokq, counteracts fear and masters it. " The fear of
the Lord endureth for ever" — no love of wliich a creature is capable can altogether cast
it out. The very angels veil their faces before the Lord of Hosts, and feel themselves
unworthy to gaze upon the Divine perfections. But where loye increases, fear diminishes.
Let love gro^Y, and become strung, and glow witiiin the heart like a flame of fire — by
degrees fear changes its charactei', ceases to be a timorous dread, and Ijecomes awe.
Awe and love can very well co-exist ; and love draws us towards God more than awe
keeps us back. Love is glad to have no intermediary — rejoices tliat it may " go boldly
to the throne of grace" — seeks to draw as near as possible to the beloved one — so con-
strains fear, that fear ceases to act any longer as a deterrent, is mastered, and held under
restraint. "Moses drew near into the thick darkness where God was." The loving
soul presses towards God — would " see him face to face " — and " know even as it also is
known."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 18 — 22. — The terrors of Sinai — their design and their effedt. I. Theib
DESIGN. 1. Bot to slay the people. The people dreaded that if God spoke to them
again, they would die (ver. 19). But Moses said — No ; this was not the design of the
manifestation. " Fear not " (ver. 20). The voice of the law in Scripture, though it is
felt in the conscience to be a voice of death (l{nm. vii. 9 — 11), is nut intended to be
really so. It is meant to lead to Christ. 2. 'I'o prove the people {^ei. 2.0). God gave
this awful manifestation, that his fear might ever after be before their faces. They had
heard with their own ears the proclamation of the law, and they had seen these terrors.
If anything could awal<en fear in them — a salutary fear — and keep them from apostasy,
these things should. But, alas 1 terror is a very ineffective instrument of conversion.
These Israelites soon forgot their terrors, and within forty days were dancing in mad
glee round their golden calf (ch. xxxii.).

II. Theih effects. 1. They inspired the keenest alarm. This is the invariable
result in the sinful breast of any near approach of God. A fear akin to that of the
Israelites has often been mauifested^(l) in presence of unusual appearances of nature
(comets, eclipses, etc.). (2) Under the powerful preaching of the realities of judgment.
(3) In prospect of death. 2. They awakened the cry for a mediator (ver. 19). However
much, under ordinary circumstances, the unbeliever may scout the idea of being indebted
to a mediator, it will be strange if there do not come times in his life when he feels that
he needs one. Three principles in our nature give birth to this feeling — (1) The sense
of weakness and finitude. (2) The sense of sin. (3) The feeling of need. The
longing for fellowship with God gives rise to the desire for one to mediate that fellow-
ship, to bring it about by making peace. 3. 'They impelled the self-convicted Jsraelites
to flee from God's presence (vers. 18, 21). This is what wiU take place at the last
yidgmeat. How different with Moses, who had "boldness" to enter even into the thick
darkness 1 The good man need not fear to be anywhere with God — J. 0.

EXPOSITION.



Vers. 22 — 26. — ^The Book of the Cove-
■AKT, (chap. XX. ver. 22, to chap. xxii. ver. 23).
The Decalogue is followed by a series of laws,
eiiil, social, and religious, which occupy the
Nmaiuder of ch. xx. and the whole of the



three following chapters (ch. xxi., xxii ana
xxiii.). It appears from ch. xxiv. that these
laws, received by Moses on Sinai, iiu-
mediately after the delivery of the ten com-
maudmeuts, were at oucv committed t«



1«4



THE BOOK OF EXODUS



[oh. XX. 22—26.



writiiig and collected into a book, which was
known as "the Book of the Covenant"
(ch. xxiv. 7), and was regarded as a specially
lacred volume. The document, as it has
come down to ns, "cannot be regarded as
a strictly systematic whole " (Canon Cook) :
yet still, it is not whoUy unsystematic, but aims
in some degree at an orderly arrangement.
First and foremost are placed the laws which
concern the worship of God, which are two
in nmnber : — 1. Against idols ; 2. Concern-
ing altars (ch. xx. 23 — 26). Then follow the
laws respecting what our legal writers call
"the rights of persons" — which occupy
thirty-two verses of ch. xxi. and fall under
some twenty different heads, beginning with
the rights of slaves, and terminating with the
compensation to be made for injuries to the
person caused by cattle. The third section is
upon " the rights of property," and extends
faom ch. xxi. 33, to ch. xxii. 15, including
some ten or twelve enactments. After this
we can only say that the laws are mixed,
some being concerned with Divine things (as
ch. xxii. 20, 29, 30 ; and ch. xxiii. 10—19) :
others with human, and these last being of
various kinds, all, however, more or less
" connected with the civil organization of the
ftate " (Kalisch). In the fourth section the
enactments seem to fall under about twenty-
five heads. The result is that the " Book of
the Covenant " contains, in little more than
three chapters, about seventy distinct laws.

Ver. 22. — ^Ye have seen that I have talked
with yon from heaven. The book opened
with this reminder, which at once recalfed its
author and declared its authority. " I, who
give these laws, am the same who spake the
ten commandments amid the thunders of
Sinai. Reverence the laws accordingly."

Ver. 28. — Ye shall not make with me gcds
of silver, etc. This is a repetition, in part, of
the second commandment, and can only be
accounted for by the prohibition being
specially needed. The first idea of the
Israelites, when they considered that Moses
had deserted them, was to make a golden calf
for a god.

Ver. 24.— An altar of earth. Among the
nations of antiquity altars were indispensable
to Divine worship, which everywhere included
sacrifice. They were often provided on the
ipur of the occasion, and were then " con-
ftmcted of earth, sods, or stones, collected
npon the spot" The patriarchal altars had
probably been of this character, and it was
now provided that the same usage should con-
liBBa : at any rate, elaborate structures of hewn



and highly ornamented stone should not ba
allowed, lest thus idolatry should creep in, the
images engraved npon the altars becoming
the objects of worship. Thy burnt offerings
and thy peace offerings. The mode in which
these are introduced implies that sacrifice
was already a long-standing practice. The
patriarchal sacrifices are well known (Gen,
viii. 20 ; xii. 7 ; xxii. 9 ; xxxv 1). Jethro
had recently oiiered sacrifice in the camp of
Israel (ch. xviii. 12). If the Israelites had
not sacrificed to God during the sojourn in
Egypt, at any rate they had kept up the idea
of sacrifice ; and it was for the purpose of
offering sacrifices that Moses had demanded
permission to go with all his nation into the
wilderness. I will oome nnto thee and I
will bless thee. The promise is conditional
on the observance of the command. If the altars
are rightly constructed, and proper victims
offered, then, in all places where he allows
the erection of an altar, God will accept the
sacrifices offered upon it and bless the
worshippers.

Ver. 25. — And if thou wilt make me an
altar of stone — i.e., if, notwithstanding my
preference expressed for an altar of earth,
thou wilt insist on making me one of stone,
as more permanent, and so more honourable,
then I require that the stones shall be rough
stones shaped by nature, not stones chiselled
into shape by the art of man. Tor if thou
lift up thy tool npon it thou hast polluted it.
It is conjectured with reason that we have
here an old traditional idea, which God
thought fit under the existing circumstances
to sanction. The real object was that altars
should not be elaborately carved with objects
that might superinduce idolatry. The widely
prevalent notion, that nature is sacred, and
that all man's interference with nature is a
defilement, was made use of economicaUi/, to
produce the desired result. No tool being
allowed to be used, no forms of living
creatures could be engraved, and so no idolatry
of them could grow up,

Ver. 26. — Neither shalt thou go up by
steps trnto mine altar. Here the reason of
decency, added in the text, is obvious ; and
the law would necessarily continue until
sacerdotal vestments of a very diiierent
character from the clothes commonly worn
by Orientals were introduced (xxviii. 3 — 43).
After their introduction, the reason for the
law, and with it the law itself, would drop
The supposed " slope of earth " by which the
priests are thought to have ascended to the
" ledge " on the altar of burnt offerings, and
the " inclined plane," said by Josephus to
have given access ti) the great altar of
Solomon, rest on no sufiicient authority, and
are probably pure fictions. As soon as an
ascent was needed, owing to the height of the
altar, it was probably an ascent by steps (See
Ezek. xliii. 17.)



«i. XX. 22-26.] ME BOOK OF EXODUa IM



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 22 — 26. — The law of the altar. I. The objkct op worship. The true God,
not gods of silver, or gods of gold (ver. 23). The God who had talked with them from
heayen had appeared in no visible form. " Ye heard the voice of the words, but saw
no similitude ; only ye heard a voice " (Oeut. iv. 12). Let the sole object of our worship
be the invisible, spirituaJ, infinite, yet revealed God. (Jod's revelations of himself lay
the basis of right worship. God has spoken. How reverently should we hear 1

II. The place op worship. "In all places where I record my name" (ver. 24).
God records his name by making a revelation of himself, as at Bethel, Peniel, etc.
Whatever places he chose for the building of his altar, till the time came for the erection
of a permanent sanctuary, there would he meet with them. Religion is now set free
from places (John iv. 23). Wherever two or three are met in Christ's name, there will
he be in the midst of them (Matt, xviii. 20).

in. The altar of worship. To be built of unhewn stone — i.e., of natural mate-
rials (ver. 25). It was the altar of propitiation. Man is viewed as one whose sins are
yet unexpiated. His art, in that state, would have polluted the altar. Art came in
afterwards (ch. xxv. etc.). Nothing of man's own avails for propitiation.

IV. The materials of worship. Animal sacrifices (ver. 24). For purposes ci
atonement — as symbols of personal consecration (burnt offerings) — as pledges of peace
and renewed fellowship (peace offerings). Not in the first, but in the other meanings
of sacrifice, we are still summoned to bring them in our worship — " spiritual sacrifices"
of self-surrender (Rom. xii. 1), of the broken spirit (Ps. li. 17), of praise and thanks-
giving (1 Peter i. 5).

V. The manner op worship (ver. 26). Reverence and decency. — J. 0.

Ver. 22 — 26. — I mil go wnto the altar of Ood. The directions given shadow forth
the essentials of genuine worship. Amongst the heathen the idol is the central figure,
the human symbol of the unseen God. The true God will admit no such symbol ; it
Is a barrier against, not a step towards, the worship he desires. In true worship there
must be utter self-suppression. " Obedience is better than sacrifice ;" it is only through
obedience that the sacrifice becomes acceptable. In this light consider —

I. The altar. To be made of earth or unhewn stones. The simple unadorned
material as provided by God himself. Anything beyond this, any touch of human
handicraft, pollutes it. The principle which underlies this fact : — sacrifices ofiered ia
the appointed way are acceptable ; if we try to better the appointed way — to put some-
thing of our own into the sacrifice as a ground for acceptance — we spoil all. Self-
obtrusion, however well-intended, is pollution. The altar is the expression of God's
wiU : try to improve it, and it becomes instead an expression of the will of the would-be
improver. " 1 give thee this, God ; it is not worth much, but I give it thee in this
self-chosen manner, and surely that adds to its value." Not a bit : it deprives it of all
value. The altar of self is not the altar of God ; sacrifices offered upon it may perhaps
soothe the worshipper, they cannot propitiate the Deity. The pillar, e.g., of a St. Simeon
Stylites does not add to the value of his prayers ; they have a better chance of reaching
heaven from the contrite heart at the foot of the pillar. (Of. Col. ii. 22, 23.)

II. The approaches. If the offering be made with a pure motive, it must also be
offered in a pure and reverent manner. The special direction, no doubt, aimed against
the enthusiastic indecencies associated with idolatry. Still, it illustrates a principle :
" All things," in the worship of God, should be done " decently and in order." God
looks first at character, but he requires also that character be matched by conduct.
The Corinthian Christians (1 Cor. xi., xiv.) infringed the principle, if not the precept.
Many amongst modern worshippers infringe it also, e.g., by indecencies of dress,
behaviour, etc., in a place of worship or when engaged in prayer.

Conclusion. — Two things required of us, humility and reverence ; inward and outward
fc.lf-Buppression. Do we want a motive ? " Mine altar " (,ver. 26). Remember who U
b whom we worship. What place left for self when the heart is fixed on God ? — Q.



166



THE BOOK OP EXODUa.



[CH. XXL 1 — 6



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XXL



The Book of the CJotenant. — Continued.
I. LatBi connected unth the rights of per-
Kmi (vers. 1 — 32). The regulations of this
section concern — 1. Slavery (vers. 2 — 6) ; 2.
Murder and other kinds of homicide (vers.
12—15 and 20, 21); 3. Man-stealing (ver.
16) ; 4. Striking or cursing of parents (vers.
15, 17); 5. Assaults and injuria to the per-
son not resulting in death (vers. 18, 19, and
22 — 2T), both in the case of free men and of
slaves ; and 6. Injuries done by cattle both to
free men and to slaves (vers. 28 — 32). The
chief bodily injury whereto women are liable
is not mentioned. A later enactment (Deut.
xxii. 25 — 29) made it expiable by marriage,
or else a capital offence. There are no other
remarkable omissions.

Yet. 1. These are the Judgments. The
term "judgment" applies most properly to
the decisions of courts and the laws founded
upon them. No doubt the laws contained in
the " Book of the Covenant " were to a large
extent old laws, which had been often acted
on ; but we should do wrong to suppose that
there was nothing new in the legislation.
The Hebrew mishphat is nsed with some
vagueness.

Vers 2— U.— Slavery. Ver. 2. If thou buy
an Hebrew servant. Slavery, it is clear, was
an existing institution. The law of Moses
did not make it, but found it, and by not for-
bidding, allowed it. The Divine legislator
was content under the circumstances to intro-
duce mitigations and alleviations into the
■lave condition. Hebrews commonly became
slaves through poverty (Lev. xxv. 35, 39),
but sometunes through crime (ch. xxii. 3).

In the seventh he shall go out. Not in the
Sabbatical year, but at the commencement of
the seventh year after he became a slave. If
the jubilee year happened to occur, he might
be released sooner ^Lev. xxv. 40) ; but in any
case his servitude must end when the sixth
year of it was completed. This was an
enormous boon, and had nothing, so far as is
known, correspondent to it in the legislation
of any other country. Nor was this aU.
When he went out free, his late master was
bonnd to furnish him with provisions out of
his flock, and out of his threshing floor, and
oat of his winepress (Deut. xv. 12 — 14), so
tliat he might have something wherewith to



begin the world afresh. The humane spirit
of the legislation is strikingly marked in iit
very first enactment.

Ver. 3. — If he oame in by himself, etc.
The first clause of this verse is further
explained in the next ; the second secured to
the wife who went into slavery with her
husband a participation in his privilege of
release at the end of the sixth year.

Ver. 4. — If his master have given him a
wife. If the slave was unmarried when he
went into servitude, or if his wife died, and
his master then gave him a wife from among
his female slaves, the master was not to lose
his property in his female slave by reason of
having permitted the marriage. When the
man claimed his freedom at the end of the
sixth year, he was to " go out " alone. Should
children have been bom, they were also to be
the property of the master and to remain
members of his household. No doubt these
provisos, which caimot be regarded as unjust,
had the effect of inducing many Hebrew
slaves not to claim their release (vers. 5, 6).

Vers. 5, 6. — ^I love my master, etc. Affec-
tion might grow up between the slave and
the master, if he were well treated. The
Hebrew form of slavery was altogether of a
mild kind. Masters are admonished to treat
their slaves " not as bond-servants, but as
hired servants or sojourners," and again " not
to rule over them with rigour " (Lev xxv
39, 40, 43). Even among the heathen, slaves
often bore a true affection t« their masters.
Or, the slave might be so attached to his wife
and children as to be unwilling to separate
from them, and might prefer slavery with the
solace of their society to freedom without it.
For such cases the provision was made, which
is contained in ver. 6. On the slave declaring
to his master his unwillingness to go free, the
master might take bim before the judges, or
magistrates (literally " gods ") as witnesses,
and perhaps registrars of the man's declara-
tion, and might then reconduct him to hii
house, and by a significant ceremony mark
him as his slave " for ever." The ceremony
consisted in boring through one of his ears
with an awl, and driving the awl into the
door or doorpost of the house, thereby attach-
ing him physically to the dwelling of which
he became thenceforth a permanent inmate.
Almost all commentators assert that some
such custom was common in the East in con-
nection with slavery, and refer to Xen. Anab.
iii. 1, § 31 ; Plaut. Fcenul. v. 2, 21 ; JuT
Sat. i. 104 ; Plutarch. Vit. Cic. § 26, etc. But
these passages merely show that the Orientals
generally — not slaves in particular — ^had their
ears bored for the purpose of wearing ear-
rings, and indicate no usage at all comparably



BB. XXI. 7 — 14.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



167



to the Hebrew practice. The Hebrew
cnstom — probably a very ancient one —
•eems to have had two objects — 1, The
declaring by a significant act, that the man
belonged to the house ; and 2. The per-
manent marking of him as a slave, dis-
entitled to the rights of freemen. He shall
serve him for ever. Josephus (Ant. Jud. iv.
8, § 20) and the Jewish commentators
generally maintain that the law of the
jubilee release overruled tbis enactment ; but
this must be regarded as very doubtfuL

Yer. 7. — If a man sell his daughter to be a
maid-servant. Among ancient nations the
father's rights over his children were gene-
rally regarded as including the right to sell
them for slaves. In civilised nations the right
was seldom exercised ; but what restrained
men was rather a sentiment of pride than
any doubt of such sales being proper. Many
barbarous nations, like the Thracians (Herod,
v. 6), made a regular practice of selling their
daughters. Even at Athens there was a time
when sales of children had been common
(Pint. Vit. Solon. § 13). Existing custom,
it is clear, sanctioned such sales among the
Hebrews, and what the law now did was to
step in and mitigate the evil consequences.
(Compare the comment on verse 2.) These
were greatest in the case of females.
Usually they were bought to be made the
concubines, or secondary wives of their
masters. If this intention were carried out,
then they were to be entitled to their status
and maintenance as wives during their life-
time, even though their husband took
another (legitimate/ wife (ver. 10). If the
mtention was not carried out, either the man
was to marry her to one of his sons (ver. 9),
or he was to sell his rights over her altogether
with his obligations to another Hebrew ; or he
was to send her back at once inUuA to her
father's house, without making any claim on
him to refund the purchase-money. These
provisos may not have furnished a remedy
against all the wrongs of a weak, and, no
doubt, an oppressed class ; but they were im-
portant mitigations of the existing usages,
and protected the slave-concubine to a con-
siderable extent.

Ver. 8.— If she please not her master. If
he decline, i.e., to carry out the contract, and
take her for his wife. Then let her be re-
deemed. Rii(her, " Then let him cause her to
be redeemed." Let him, i.e., look out for some
3 who will buy her of him and take his
ligation of marriage off his hands To sell
to a strange nation he shall not have
ower. Onlv, this purchaser must be a
'ebrew, like' himself, and not a foreigner,
since her father consented to her becoming a
slave only on the condition of her being
wedded to a Hebrew. Seeing he hath dealt
ieceitfoll/ with her. By professing to take



her as a secondary wife, and not carrying oa(
the contract.

Ver. 9. — And if he hath betrothed her onto
his son. A man might have bought the
maiden for this object, or finding himself not
pleased with her (ver. 8), might have made
his son take his place as her husband. In this
case but one course was allowed — he must give
her the status of a daughter thenceforth in
his family.

Ver. 10. — ^If he take him another wife — i.e..
If he marry her himself, and then take an-
other, even a legitimate, wife — ^her food, her
raiment, and her duty of marriage shall he
not diminish — -she shall retain during her life
all the privileges of a married woman — he
shall not diminish aught from them. The
word translated " duty of marriage " seems to
mean " right of cohabitation."

Ver. 11. — If he do not these three unto
her. Not the " three " points of the latter
part of ver. 10 ; but one of the three courses
laid down in vers. 8, 9, and 10. She shall go
out free — i.e., she shall not be retained as a
drudge, a mere maidservant, but shall return
to her father at once, a free woman, capable
of contracting another marriage ; and without
money — i.e., without the father being called
upon to refund any portion of the sum for
which he had sold her.

Vers. 12 — 14. — Homicide. Ver. 12 reiterates
the Sixth Commandment, and adds to it a tem-
poral penalty — "heshall surely beputto death."
The substance of this law had already been
given to Noah in the words, " Whoso sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed "
(Gen. ix. 6). Real murder, with deliberate
intent, was under no circmnstances to be par-
doned. The murderer was even to be torn from
the altar, if he took refuge there, and relent-
lessly punished (ver. 14). See the case of
Joab (1 Kings ii. 28—34). But, if a man
happened suddenly upon his enemy, without
having sought the opportunity, and slew hira
(ver. 13), then the case was one not of
murder, but at most of manslaughter, or pos-
sibly of justifiable homicide. No legal penalty
was assigned to such' offences. They were left
to the rude justice of established custom,
which required "the avenger of blood" to
visit them with due retribution. According
to the general practice of the Eastern nations,
he might either insist on life for life or. take
a money compensation. With this custom,
deeply ingramed into the minds of the Oriental
people, the law did not meddle. It was con-
tent to interpose between the avenger of blood
and his victun the chance of reaching aa



168



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. XXI. 18 — 21.



asylum. Places were appointed, whither the
•hedder of hlood might flee, and where he
might he safe until his cause was tried before
the men of his own city (Num. xxxv. 22 — 25),
and afterwards, if the judgment were in his
favour. Some particular part of the camp was
prohahly made an asylum in the wilderness.

Ver. 13. — Ood deliver him into his hand.
This does not seem to mean more than, " it he
chance upon him without seeking him." God's
providence does in fact bring about the meet-
ings which men call accidental. I will appoint
thee a place. When we first hear of the
actual appointment, the number of the places
was six — three on either side of Jordan. (See
Josh. XX. 7, 8 ; and compare Num. xxxv.
10 — 15, and Deut. xix. 2.) Thus there was
always a city of refuge at a reasonable
distance.

Ver. 14. — ^Presumptnonsly. Or " proudly,"
"arrogantly." Thou shalt take him from
mine altar. See the comment on ver. 12.

Vers. 15—17. — Otlier capital offences. The
nnsystematic character of the arrangement in
this chapter is remarkably shown by this
interruption of the consideration of different
sorts of homicide, in order to introduce offences
of quite a different character, and those not
very closely allied to each other — e.g., 1. Strik-
ing a parent ; 2. Kidnapping ; 3. Cursing a
parent.

Vec 15. — ^He that smiteth his &ther, etc.
To " smite " here is simply to " strike " — to
c^er the indignity of a blow — not to kill,
which had already been made capital (ver. 12),
not in the case of parents only, but in every
case. The severity of the law is very remark-
able, and strongly emphasises the dignity and
authority of parents. There is no parallel to
it in any other known code, though of course
the patria potestaa of the Roman father gave
him the power of punishing a son who had
struck him, capitally.

Ver. 16. — ^He that stealeth a man. Kid-
napping, or stealing men to make them slaves,
was a very early and very wide-spread crime.
Joseph's brothers must be regarded as having
committed it (Gen. xxxvii. 28); and there
are many traces of it in the remains of anti-
quity. (See Herod, iv 183; Strab. vii. p. 467 ;
Sueton. Octav. § 32 ; etc.) Most kidnapping
was of foreigners ; and this was a practice of
which the laws of states took no cognizance,
though a certain disrepute may have attached
to it. But the Iddnapping of a fellow-country-
man was generally punished with severity.
At Athens it was a capital offence. At Rome
it made a man infamous. We may gather
from Dent. xxiv. 7, th^ the Mosaic law was



especially levelled against this form of th«
crime, though the words of the present passage
are general, and forbid the crime altogether.
Man-stealing, in the general sense, is now re-
garded as an offence by the chief civilised
states of Europe and America, and is punished
by confiscation of the stolen goods, and some-
times by imprisonment of the man-stealers.

Ver. 17. — ^He that curseth his father, etc.
Blasphemy against God, and imprecations
upon parents, were the only two sins of the
tongue which the law expressly required to be
punished with death (Lev. xxiv. 16). In later
times analogy was held to require that " curs-
ing the ruler of the people " (Ex. xxii. 28)
should be visited with the same penalty
(2 Sam. xix. 22 ; 1 Kings ii. 8, 9, 46). The
severity of the sentence indicates that in
God's sight such sins are of the deepest dye.

Vers. 18, 19 — Severe aieauU. Assault wai
punishable by the law in two ways. Ordin-
arily, the rule was that of strict retaliation —
" Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand,
foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for
wound, stripe for stripe " (vers. 24, 25 ; com-
pare Lev. xxiv. 20, and Deut. xix. 21). But
where the assault was severe, causing a man
to take to his bed, and call in the physician's
aid, something more was needed. The Rab-
binical commentators tell us that in this case
he was arrested, and sent to prison until it
was ascertained whether the person hurt
would die or no. If he died, the man was
tried for murder ; if he recovered, a fine was
imposed. This was fixed at such a sum as
would at once compensate the injured man
for his loss of time and defray the expanse of
his cure. A similar principle is adopted
under our own law in many cases of eivU
action.

Ver. 18. — ^If men strive together. If there
is a quarrel and a personal encounter. In onr
own law this would reduce this offence, if
death ensued, to manslaughter. With a
stone, or with his fist. The use of either
would show absence of premeditation, and of
any design to kill. A weapon would have to
be prepared beforehand : a stone might be
readily caught up.

Ver. 19. — ^If he rise again and walk upon
his staff. If he recovered sufficiently to leave
his bed, and get about with a stick to lean on,
his hurt was not to be brought up against the
injurer, though he died soon afterwards
Compensation was to be received, and the
score regarded as wiped off.

Vers. 20, 21. — Homicide of slave*. In most
ancient states the slave was the absolute Di«



tm. xn. 20—25.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



IM



perty of his master, and might be ill-used to
•ny extent, even killed, without the law in
any way interfering. It is said that the state
of things was different in Bgypt (Kalisch);
but we have scarcely sufiBcient evidence on
the point to be certain that the slave enjoyed
there any real and efficient protection. At
Athens, beyond a doubt, the law protected
the life of the slave ; and a very moderate
•mount of ill-treatment entitled a slave to
bring an action. At Borne, on the contrary,
"the master could treat the slave as he
pleased, could sell him, punish him, and pnt
him to death " {Diet, of Greek & Bom. Antiq.
p 1036). And this was the ordinary state
of the law, particularly in Oriental countries.
The Mosaic legislation must be regarded as
having greatly ameliorated the condition
of the native slave population. Hebrew
bondmen it placed nearly upon a par with
hired servants (Lev. xxv. 40) ; foreign slaves,
whether prisoners taken in war, or persons
bought in the market, it protected to a very
great extent. By the law given in verses 26,
27, it largely controlled the brutality of
masters, who had to emancipate their slaves
if they did them any serious injury. By the
law laid down in verse 20, it gave their lives
the same protection, or nearly the same, as
the lives of freemen. " Smiting " was allowed
as a discipline, without which slavery cannot
exist ; but such smiting as resulted in death
WIS, as a general rule, punishable like any
other homicide. The only exception was, if
the slave did not die for some days (ver. 21).
In that case the master was considered not to
have intended the slave's death, and to be
sufficiently punished by the loss of his pro-
perty.

Ver. 20. — If a man smite his servant, or his
nudd. "Maids" would commonly be chas-
tised by their mistress, or by an upper
servant acting under the mistress's authority.
"A man" here means "any one." With a
rod. The rods wherewith Egyptian slaves
were chastised appear upon the monuments.
They were long canes, like those used by our
schoolmasters. Under his hand. Criminals
in the East are said often to die under the
bastinado ; and even in our own country there
have been cases of soldiers dying under the
lash. A special delicacy of the nervous sys-
tem .will make a punishment of the kind fatal
to some, which would have been easily borne
by others.

Ver 21. — ^If he oontinae a day or two —



i.e., " If the slave does not die till a day oi
two afterwards." Compare the provision is
ver. 19, with respect to persons who were not
slaves. No special callotisness to the suffer-
ings of slaves is implied. He is his money.
The slave had been purchased for a sum oi
money, or was at any rate money's worth ; and
the master would suffer a pecuniary loss by
his death.

Ver. 22 — 25. — Ataault proditcing mil-
carriage. Betaliation. Women in all
countries are apt to interfere in the quarrels
of men, and run the risk of suffering injuries
which proceed from accident rather than
design, one such injury being of a peculiar
character, to which there is nothing corre-
spondent among the injuries which may be
done to man. This is abortion, or mis-
carriage. The Mosaic legislation sought to
protect pregnant women from suffering this
injury by providmg, first, that if death re-
sulted the offender should suffer death (ver.
23) ; and, secondly, that if there were no
further ill-result than the miscarriage itself,
still a fine should be paid, to be assessed by
the husband of the injured woman with the
consent of the judges (ver. 22). The mention
of " life for life," in ver. 23, is followed by an
enunciation of the general "law of retalia-
tion," applied here (it would seem) to the
special case in hand, but elsewhere (Lev. xxiv.
19, 20) extended so as to be a fundamental
law, applicable to all cases of personal injury

Ver. 22. — If men strive and hurt a
woman. A chance hurt is clearly intended,
not one done on purpose. So that her fmit
depart from her. So that she be prematurely
delivered of a dead child. And no mischief
follow. " Mischief " here means " death," as
in Gen. xlii. 4, 38 ; xlv. 29. He shall pay as
the judges determine. He was not to be
wholly at the mercy of the injured father. H
he thought the sum demanded was excessive,
there was to be an appeal to a tribunal.

Ver. 23. — ^Then thou shalt give life for
life. "Life for life" seems an excessive
penalty, where the injury was in a great
measure accidental, and when there was cer-
tainly no design to take life. Probably the
law was not now enacted for the first tune,
but was an old tribal institution, like the law
of the " avenger of blood." There are many
things in the Mosaic institutions which Moses
tolerated, like " bills of divorce " — on account
of " the hardness of their hearts."

Vers. 23, 24. — Eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
etc. Aristotle says in the Nicomachean
Ethics, that this was the pile of justic*



170



THE BOOK OF EXODUa



[oh. XXI. 26—31.



wliicli Bbadamanthiu was supposed to act on
in the judgment after death (book 5, sec. 3),
and that it had the approval of the Pytha-
goreans. Solon admitted it to a certain
extent into the laws of Athens, and at Borne
it found its way into the Twelve Tables.
There is a prima facie appearance of exact
equality in it, which would captivate rude
minds and cause the principle to be widely
adopted in a rude state of society. But in prac-
tice objections would soon be felt to it. There
is no exact measure of the hardness of a blow,
or the severity of a wound ; and " wound for
woimd, stripe for stripe," would open a door
for very unequal inflictionB " Eye for eye "
would be flagrantly unjust in the case of a
one-eyed man. Moreover, it is against public
policy to augment unnecessarily the number
of mutilated and maimed citizens, whose
power to serve the state is lessened by their
mutilation. Consequently in every society
retaliation has at an early date given way
to pecuniary compensation ; and this was the
case even among the Hebrews, as Kalisch has
shown satisfactorily. K the literal sense was
insisted on in our Lord's day (Matt. v. 38), it
was only by the Sadducees, who declined to
give the law a spiritual interpretation.

Vera. 26, 27. — AstatiUi on Slaves. The
general law of retaliation was not made to
extend to slaves. For ordinary blows the
slave was not thought entitled to compensa-
tion, any more than the child. They were
natural incidents of his condition. In ex-
tremer cases, where he was permanently
injured in an organ or a member, he was,
however, considered to have ground of com-
plaint and to deserve a recompense. But for
him to revenge himself upon his master by
inflicting the same on him was not to be
thought of. It would have put the slave into
a false position, have led to his prolonged ill-
treatment, and have been an undue degrada-
tion of the master. Therefore, compulsory
emancipation was made the penalty of all
such aggravated assaults, even the slightest
(ver. 27).

Vers. 26, 27. — ^If a man gmite the eye, etc.
The " eye " seems to be selected as the most
precious of our organs, the " tooth " as that
the loss of which is of least consequence.
The principle was that any permanent loss of
any part of his frame entitled the slave to his
liberty. A very considerable check must have
been put on the brutality of masters by this
enactment

Vers. 28—32. — Injuries done hy cattle to
•loM* and freemen. For the purpose of in-



culcating as strongly as possible the principll
of the sanctity of human life^ the legislator
notices the case where mortal injury is dona
to a person by a domesticated Animal. The ox
is taken as the example, being the animal
most likely to inflict such an injury. In ac-
cordance with the declaration already made to
Noah (Gen. ix. 6), it is laid down that the
destructive beast must be kUled. Further, to
mark the abhorrence in which murder ought ■
to be held, the provision is made, that none
of the creature's flesh must be eaten. The
question then arises, is the owner to suffer
any puuislunent? This is answered in the
way that natural equity points out — " If he
had reason to know the savage temper of the
animal, he is to be held responsible ; if other-
wise, he is to go free." In the former case,
the Hebrew law assigned a higher degree of
responsibility than accords with modem
notions ; but practically the result was not
very different. The neglectful Hebrew owner
was held to have been guilty of a capital
offence, but was allowed to " redeem his life "
by a fine. His modern counterpart would be
held to have been guUty simply of laches or
neglect of duty, and would be ponished b/
fine or imprisonment

Ver. 28.— The ox shall be snrely stoned.

He shall suffer the same death that would
have been the portion of a human murderer.
His fl.esh shall not be eaten. The animal
was regarded as accursed, and therefore, as a
matter of course, no Hebrew might eat of it.
According to the Rabbinical commentators, it
was not even lawful to sell the carcase to
Gentiles. The owner shall be quit — t.e.,
" shall be liable to no punishment."

Ver. 29. — If the ox were wont to posh
with his horns. If he were notoriously, and
to his owner's knowledge, a dangerous animal,
which required watching, and no watch was
kept on him, then the owner became blame-
able, and having by his neglect contributed to
a homicide, was " guilty of death."

Ver. 30. — If there he a fine laid npon
him. There can scarcely have been any
circumstances under which the penalty
of death would have bepn enforced.
No neglect could bring the ciime into the
category of murder. It is assumed, therefore,
that practically the penalty would be a fine,
proportioned no doubt to tiie value of the Ufa
taken.

Ver. 31. — Whether he have gored a son of
a daughter. If the sufferer were a child, the
value of the life, and tlierefore the amount vl
the fine, would be less



OB. XXI. 2— 32j



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



m



Ver. 82 — If the ox shall push a man-
■errant or a maidservant Hitherto, the
ease of free persons only has heen considered.
But the accident might have happened to a
dave. Where this was the case, the death
of the ox was still made indispensable, and



thus far the same sacredness was made ti
attach to the life of the slave and of the free-
man. But, in lieu of a varying fine, th«
average price of a slave, thii-ty shekels ol
silver, was appointed to be paid in all casM,
as a compensation to the master



H0MILBTIC8.

Vers. 2—11 ; 20, 21 ; 26, 27 ; 32. The slave laws. Slave laws Wong to all com-
mvmities, and not to some only, slavery being really a universal and not a partial institu-
tion. In the most civilised communities of modem Europe, there are two large classes
of slaves — lunatics and criminals. The law openly condemns these last to penal servi-
tude, which may be for life ; and this " servitude," as Lord Chief Justice Coleridge has
repeatedly jiointed out, is simply a form of slavery. Ancient communities differed from
modem — 1. In the extent to which slavery prevailed ; 2. In the grounds upon which
men were boimd to it ; and 3. In the treatment whereto those bound to it were sub-
jected.

I. Extent of ancient slavbby. The slaves in ancient states were almost always
more numerous than the freemen. At Athens they amounted to more than four-fifths
of the community. Every free person was a slave owner, and some owned hundreds of
their fellow-creatures. Perpetual insecurity was felt in consequence of the danger of
revolt ; and this fear reacted on the treatment of slaves, since it was thought necessary
to break their spirit by severities. The evil effects of the institution pervaded all classes
of the community, fostering pride and selfishness in the masters, dissimulation, servility,
and meanness in the slaves.

n. GEOtTNDS ON wfflCH ANCIENT SLAVERY BESTED. Ahclent slavery did not necessarily
imply any mental or moral fault in the slave. Some reached it through mental defect,
as our lunatics ; some through crime, as our convicts (see Ex. xxii. 3). But the great
majority were either bom in the condition, or became slaves through the fortune of war.
Thus slavery was not commonly a deserved pimishment, but an undeserved misfortune.
Men found themselves, without any fault of their own, the goods and chattels of another,
with no political and few social rights, bound to one who might be in all respects
inferior to themselves, but who was their lord and master. A sense of injustice conse-
quently rankled in the bosom of the slave, and made him in most cases dangerous.
Slave revolts were of frequent occurrence.

lU. 1'bbatment op slaves m ancient states. "Some considerable differences may
be observed between the treatment of slaves in different communities ; but there are
certain features which seem to have been universal. 1. Slaves were for the most part
the property of individuals, and depended largely on the caprice of individuals, who
might be harsh or mild, brutally tyrannical, or foolishly indulgent. 2. Slave families

ight at any time be broken up, the different members being sold to different masters.
3. Slaves might everywhere bo beaten, and unless in case of serious injury, there was no
inquiry. 4. Very severe labour might be required of them ; they might be confined in
workshops, which were little better than prisons, made to toil in mines, or chained to the
oar as galley slaves. 6. They might be badly lodged, badly clothed, and badly fed, with-
out the law taking any notice, 6. In most places there was no redress for any injury
that a slave might suffer short of death ; and in some the law took no cognisance even
of his murder. The Mosaic legislation, finding slavery established under these con-
ditions, set itself to introduce ameliorations, without condemning the institution
altogether. Compare St. Paul's conduct when he sent Onesimus back to Philemon
(Phil. 12, 16). It divided slaves into two classes, Hebrew and foreign, changing the
slavery of the former into a species of apprenticeship for six years, and guarding, not
merely the life, but the members and organs of the latter. It acknowledged the family
tie in the case of the slave, and laid down rules tending to check the separation of wives
from husbands. It protected slave concubines from the caprice of a sated husband. It
absolutely forbade the practice of kidnapping, whereby the slave-market was largely
Kcniited in most countries, putting men-stealers on a par with murderers, and requirinf



l?a THE BOOK OJJ' EXODUa. [cH. xxi. 12—21

that they should suffer death. We may gather from the Mosaic legislation on th*
subject —

I. That thbee abb cibcumstanoes under which blavbbt should be tempoeabili
HAiNTAiNED. Where a whole community is uncivilised, or half-civilised, where slavery
is an old-established institution, engrained not only into the laws, but into the habits and
manners of the people — where there are no prisons or means of building them, and where
the alternative for slavery would be the massacre of prisoners taken in war, and of
criminals, it may be well that even Christian legislators should for a time tolerate the
institution. The Europeans who obtain political influence in Central Africa, and other
similar regions are bound to bear this in mind ; and while doing their utmost to put down
man-stealing, should carefully consider in each case that comes before them, ivhether
slavery can in the particular community be dispensed with or no. To tolerate it for a
while is simply to act on the lines laid down by Moses and St. Paul.

II. That if undeb any circumstances slavery has to be maintained, ail

POSSIBLE ameliorations OP IT SHOULD BE INTRODUCED WITHOUT DELAY. The slaVC is

entitled to be protected in life and limb, to be decently Iddged, fed, and clothed, to have
the enjoyment of the Sunday rest, to be undisturbed in his family relations, to have the
honour of his wife and daughters respected, to have an appeal from his master if
he regards himself as in any way wronged. The efforts of missionaries and other humane
men in uncivilised communities, should be directed primarily to the introduction of such
reforms as these into the systems which they find established there.

III. That, where domestic service has superseded slavery, there is still boom
roB ameliorations in the conditions of service. It is not the masters of slaves only
who are hard and tyrannical. In all service there is room for the exhibition on the part
of the master, of indulgence on the one hand, or strictness and severity on the other.
We at the present day may either oppress our servants, or deal kindly with them.
True, they may leave us if we oppress them ; but a good servant will not readily leave
a respectable place, and a good deal of tyranny is often borne before warning is given. It
is the duty of masters, not only to " give to their servants that which is just and equal"
(Col. iv. i), but to show them sympathy and kindness, to treat them with consideration,
and avoid hurting their feelings. More warmth and friendliness than are at all usual in
the present treatment of servants, seem to be required by the fact that they are our
brethren in the Lord, joint-heirs of salvation with us, and perhaps to be preferred above
iu in another world.

Vers. 12 — 14 and 20, 21. Laws on homicide. Here again, in the time of Moses, »
custom, regarded as of absolute obligation upon all, held possession of the ground ; and
nothii^ was practicable but some modification of it. The next-of-kin was " avenger of
blood," and was bound to pursue every homicide to the bitter end, whether it was inten-
tional and premeditated (i.e., murder), or done hastily in a quarrel (i.e., manslaughter), or
wholly unintentional (i.e., death by misadventure). Moses distinguished between delibe-
rate murder, which the State was to punish capitally (vers. 12 — 14) and any other sort
of homicide, which was left to the avenger of blood. In mitigation of the blood-feud, he
interposed the city of refuge, whereto the man who had slain another might flee and be
safe vmtil his cause was tried. And in the trial of such persons he introduced the
distinctii/n between manslaughter and death by misadventure, allowing the avenger
of blood to put the offender to death in the former case, but not in the latter.
(Num. XXXV. 16 — 25.) Mercy and truth thus went together in the legislation.

I. Truth. The primary truth is the sacredness of man's life. In rude times, where
it is everywhere " a word and a blow," very severe laws were necessary, if human life
was not to be continually sacrificed ; and so manslaughter was placed on a par with
murder, made a capital offence ; the sudden angry blow which caused death, though
death might not have been intended, was to receive as its due punishment death at the
bands of the " avenger of blood."

II. Mercy. The " avenger of blood " was not allowed to be judge in his own cause.
Cases of unpremeditated homicide were to go before the judges, who were to decide
whether the death was intentional or by mischance. Mercy was to be shown to the
man who had blood on his hands through accident. He was to be safe within the walii
\t the " city of ref'ige." Cities of lefuge were mtltiplied, that one might be alwayi



CH. XXI. 15—17.] I'HK BOOK OF EXODUa 174

within easy reach. Legislation should always seek to comhine mercy ^th justice.
Draconian enactments defeat their own purpose, siace over-severe laws are sure not to
be carried out. The moral sense revolts against them. Thus, when in our own
country forgery was a capital offence, juries could not be got to convict of forgery.
Laws should be in accordance with the conscience of the community, or they will cease
to command respect. Good men will infringe them ; and even courts will be slow to
enforce obedience when they are infringed. Wise legislators will ever aim at embody-
ing in the law the judgments of the more advanced conscience, and making it thus ar
instrument for elevating the moral sentiments of the community

Verses 15 — 17. — Injuries to parents. The command to honour father and mothei
(ch. XX. 12), which is enough for the conscience, and which, if obeyed, would render all
further laws upon the subject unnecessary, is here reinforced by two important enact-
ments, intended to restrain those who do not scruple to disobey mere moral laws. The
penalty of death is affixed to two crimes : 1. Smiting a parent ; 2. Cursing a parent.

I. Smiting a parent. When it is considered that our parents represent Grod to us,
that they are in a real sense authors of our being, that they protect and sustain us for
years during which we could do nothing for ourselves, and that nature has implanted in
our minds an instinctive reverence for them, the punishment of parent-strikers by death
will not seem strange or excessive. A son must have become very hardened in guilt,
very reckless, very heartless, very brutal, who can bring himself to lift a hand against a
father, not to say a mother. There is as much moral guilt in a light blow dealt to one
whom we are bound to love, honour, and protect from hurt, as in the utmost violence
done to a stranger. However, according to the Talmud, it was not every light blow that
was actually punished with death, but only a blow which caused a wound ; and, of
course, the punishment was only inflicted upon the complaint of the party aggrieved,
who would be unlikely to take proceedings, unless the assault was of grave character.
Probably the law had very seldom to be enforced. What it did was to invest parents
with a sacred and awful character in their children's eyes, and to induce them to submit
to chastisement without resistance.

II. Cursing a pakknt. To curse a parent is almost as unnatural as to strike one.
All cursing is unsuitable to such a being as man — so full of faults himself, so liable to
misjudge the character and conduct of others ; but to curse those to whom we owe our
existence is simply horrible. The sin is akin to blasphemy, and is awarded the same
punishment. At the present day, when the Mosaic law is no longer in force, and when
on this point no echoes of the Mosaic legislation are to be traced in existing codes, it is
specially incumbent on conscientious persons to observe the spirit of the Mosaic enact-
ments, and (as it were) make a Christian use of them. (1) " Smite not a parent," said
the law, "or die the death." " tirieve not a parent" is the Christian paraphrase.
" Grieve him not by disobedience, by idleness, by extravagance, by misconduct of any
kind. Do not discredit his bringing up by misbehaviour. Do not stab his heart by
mgratitude. Do not wither up his nature by unkindness.'' A child may easily, with-
out lifting a finger, " bring down the grey hairs " of his father " with sorrow to the
grave." He may "smite" him in half-a-dozen ways without touching him. Let
Christian men beware of such " smiting " of their parents, and dread the " eternal
death " which may follow in the place of Moses' temporal death. (2) " Curse not a
parent," said the law again. We do not now, unless we part with religion altogether,
curse any one. But we too often break the spirit of this law, notwithstanding. We
speak slightingly of our parents ; we join in disrespectful comments on their manners or
behaviour ; we use language to them, face to face, which is wanting in reverence and
unsuitable. If we would act in the spirit of the law, " curse not a parent," v^e must
avoid all disrespectful words, all disrespectful thoughts towards them or concerning
them ; we must give them the honour due to parents ; we must seriously consider their
ctumsels, and as a general rule follow their advice. As temporal death was awarded to
those who "cursed" parents by the Jewish law (Ex. xxi. 17), so eternal death will be
the portion of such as are determinately " disobedient to parents " under the Christian
dispensation.

Vw. 16. — Th« erim$ iff man-stealing. To steal the purse of a man b a triyia)



174 THE BOOK OF EXODUSk [oh. xxi. 2»— 25.

crime ; to filch his good name is a serious one ; but the worst robbery of all is to steal
his person. Civilised, refined, polished, intellectual men, happy in the enjoyment ol
freedom, wealth, honour, domestic happiness, have gone to sleep in comfort, peace, and
fancied security, to wake up in the grip of lawless man-stealers, who have bound them
and carried them into a hopeless captivity, far from any relative or friend, to become
familiar with every sort of ill-usage and indignity. CiUcian and other pirates did this
in the olden time ; Norman sea-kings in the middle ages ; Algerine corsairs so late as
the last century. The blood boils when we think of the sufferings inflicted on thou-
sands of our species by these fiends in human shape, without pity, without conscience,
without remorse. Death was certainly a punishment not one whit too severe for this
atrocious crime, by which the happiest of the human race might become suddenly one
of the most wretched. In modern times, the conscience of mankind, enlightened by
eighteen centuries of Christianity, has revolted against the enormity long committed
with impunity on the negro races of Western Africa, and the slave-trade has been
proclaimed a form of piracy. Yet the accursed trafBc still continues in the centre and
in the east of the " Dark Continent ; " still quiet villagers are awakened in the dead of
night by the news that the kidnapper is upon them ; harmless, peaceable men, together
with their wives and children, are carried off in hundreds by Arab and sometimes by
so-called Christian traders, driven to the coast in gangs, shipped in crowded dhows, and
sold to the best bidder in the marts of Arabia and Persia. It is a subject well worthy
the consideration of Christian governments, whether a revival of the Mosaic enactment
is not required, to stop a trade the profits of which are so enormoiis, that nothing short
of death is likely to deter avaricious men from engaging in it.

Vers. 23 — ^25. — 7%e rule of retaliation. " To suffer that a man has done is strictest,
straightest right," was a line which passed into a proverb in ancient Greece. The admi-
nistration of justice is rendered very simple and easy by the adoption of the principle,
which approves itself to simple minds, and might work well in a simple state of society.
The law of " life for hfe " (ver. 23) remains, and must always remain, the basis on
which society justifies the execution of the murderer. If " eye for eye, hand for hand,
foot for foot" (ver. 24), were enforced, the criminal could not complain; but the State
would suffer by the mutilation and consequent debilitation of its members. In the
administration of " burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe " (ver. 25),
there would be difficulties, it being almost impossible for the public executioner to
inflict a burn, wovmd, or blow exactly similar to the bum, wound, or blow given by the
criminal. These difficulties lead naturally to the substitution of "compensation" for
" retaliation," which we find sanctioned in vers. 19, 22, 30, and 32. If the damage
caused by a wound, bum, blow, or even by the loss of a slave or wife, can be estimated,
and the injurer be made to pay that amount to the injured party, then the original loss
is in a certain sense retaliated, and the wrongdoer " suffers what he has done." In the
administration of justice the rule of retaliation has thus still a place. Beteliation is
made unlawful by Christianity (Matt. v. 38 — 42), not in the administration of justice,
but in the private dealings of man with man. We must not ourselves give blow for
blow, " wound for wound, burning for burning ; '' no, nor gibe for gibe, slight for slight,
insult for insult. Firstly, because we are not fair judges in our own case, and should be
almost sure to overestimate our own injury ; and, secondly, because we should provoke a
continuance of strife. We should not even be eager to prosecute those who have injured
US, if there be a chance that by patience and forbearance we may bring them to a better
mind. We should be content to " suffer wrong," if by so doing we may win souls to
Christ. The Christian law is, " Love your enemies ; bless them that curse you ; do
good lo them that hate you ; and pray for them which despitefully use you and perse-
cute you ; " and the ground of the law is, that by so doing we may " oTercome avilwitb
good " (Bom. xii. 21).

HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTH0B8.

.v7f- HT^ "Mgments." The "rights" or "judgments" contained In tUi and
tne two following chapters show the manner in which the spirit and principles of thi
preceding moral legislation were intended to be applied to the regulation <^ the bu»



OH. xH. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. IH

ward life of the Jewish state. (1) As respects their origin, not a few of these lawn
have obviously their root in old customs, while others may have been derived from
the decisions of Moses in the wilderness (oh. xviii. 16). The code, therefore, in its
present shape, cannot be supposed to have been verbally dictated by Jehovah to
Moses ; yet God may have instructed Moses as to the particular laws which were to
be embraced in it, and may have revealed his will on special points which were as
yet undetermined. The " judgments " were, in any case, given to Israel under express
Divine sanction (ver. 1). (2) As respects their nature, the laws relate to the deter-
mination of legal rights, and to the ordering of the course of justice ; in part, also,
to the behaviour of the members of the community to each other in various out-
ward relations, and to fundamental religious ordinances. The spirit of the code is
throughout that of the moral law ; the principles embodied in it are those of the com-
mandments. The point of view from which its statutes are to be regarded is, however,
a different one from that which was occupied in considering the moral law as such.
Moral law speaks with the voice of "the categorical imperative." It sets up the
perfect ethical standard. What falls short of tliis is wrong, involves sin, and is con-
demned. It knows nothing of a morality which is merely relative. The practical
legislator, on the other hand — much as he might wish to do so — cannot so mould
external institutions as to make them all at once, and at every point, correspond with
the requirements of ideal morality. He must, to a large extent, take things as they
are— must start with existing conditions and usages, and try to make the best of them.
Absolute morality, e.g., woiild refuse to recognise such a state as that of war ; yet, so
long as wars exist— and to this hour they are of frequent occurrence — some code must
be devised, representing such application of ethical maxims as is possible to military
life, and to that extent stamping a moral character on the profession of the soldier.
The cases of deviation from ideal morality in the laws of Moses are, however, remarkably
few, relating chiefly to war, slavery, and marriage. In regard to these subjects, the
legislation necessarily partakes of the backward character of the times. The statutes
given are not the absolutely/ best, but the best which the people, at that stage of their
moral and social development, could receive ; that is, the relatively best — the best for
them. This leads to a third point — (3) The incompleteness of the law. The statutes
here given, so far as they partook of the imperfection of the time, were not intended to
be final. Within the law itself, as will be readily perceived, there was large room for
development ; but even the letter of the law was not so fixed, but that, in course of
time, large parts of it might, and did, become obsolete ; new institutions, adapted to
now needs, and introduced by proper authority, taking the place of the old ones. Mr.
Robertson Smith is therefore not fair in his representation of what he calls the " tradi-
tional view," when he afBrms — " 'Ihe Divine laws given beyond Jordan were to remain
unmodified through all the long centuries of development in Canaan, an absolute and
immutable code " (" Old Testament," p. 333). On such a theory, if anyone held it,
his criticism would be quite just — " I say, with all reverence, that this is impossible,
(lod, no doubt, could have given by Moses' mouth a law fit for the age of Solomon or
Hezekiah, but such a law could not be fit for immediate application in the days of
Moses and. Joshua. . . . Grod can do all tilings, but he cannot contradict himself; and
he who shaped the eventful development of Israel's history must have framed this law
to correspond with it." The reply to this is, that the most conservative defenders of
the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch do not deny the necessity for, and admissibility
of, great developments of the principles of the law. It may suffice to quote Hengsten-
berg — " First, it is a gross error, though often repeated, that the Pentateuch embraces
the whole civil law of the Israelites. In that portion of the Scriptures there is shoum
the greatest aversion from all untimely interference with the course of historical develop-
ment. Only those points are determined which must be so, and in no other way,
according to the fundamental maxims of the theocracy," etc. ("Authenticity," voL iL
p. 498, Bng. trans.).— J. O.

Vers. 2 — 12. — Hebrew hond-service. The laws relating to this subject are to be found,
In addition to those in the present chapter, in chs. xli. 43 — 45 ; xxil. 3 ; Lev. xxv.
39—55 ; xxvi. 13; Deut. xli. 12, 18; xt. 15—19; xvi. 11, 14; xxi. 10—15 ; xxlii. 15;
ixiv. 7. An impartial examination of these laws will show how fallacious must ba



Mt THE BOOK OP EXODUflt ton. xxi. 3— li

every argument attempted to be deduced from them in favour of modern slave-holding.
(On the fallacy of all such arguments, based on the state of matters in primitive
society, see Maine's " Ancient Law," pp. 162 — 166.) The Mosaic law did not establish
slavery — at most it accorded to it a very modified toleration. It accepted it as an
existing visage, labouring to the utmost to reduce, and as far as that was practicable, to
abolish, the evils connected with it. It could not well do more, for slavery, under the
then existing conditions of society, was in some form or other almost inevitable, and
was often the only alternative to a worse eviL Yet the law in its entire spirit and
fundamental doctrines was opposed to slavery. Its doctrines of the dignity of man as
made in God's image, and of the descent of all mankind from one pair, contained in
principle the recognition of every human right. Aa a member of the theocracy,
redeemed by Jehovah for himself, every Israelite was free by constitutional right (see
the emphatic annimciation of this principle in Lev. xxv. 42, 55 ; xxvi. 13). If from
temporary causes, the Hebrew lost the use of his freedom, the right to it was not
thereby destroyedl It returned to him at the be^nning of the seventh year. A law can
hardly be regarded as &vourable to slavery which makes man-stealing a crime punish-
able by death (ver. 18), and which enacts that a fvigitive slave, taking refuge in Israel
from his heathen master, is not to be delivered back to him, but is to be permitted to
reside where he will in the lanJ (Deut. xxiii. 15, 16). Bondsmen (both Hebrew and
non-Israelite) were incorporated as part of the nation, had legal rights, sat with the
other members of the family at the board of the passover, took part in all religious
festivals, and had secured to them the privilege of the Sabbath rest. The master was
responsible for the treatment of his slave ; and if he injured him, even to the extent of
smiting out a tooth, the slave thereby regained his freedom (vers. 26, 27). A female
slave was to be treated with strictest honour (vers. 7 — 11), and with due consideration
for her womanly feelings (Deut. xxi. 10 — 15). Humanity and kindness are con-
stantly inculcated. When the Hebrew bondsman went out In the seventh year he was to
go forth loaded with presents (Deut. xv. 13 — 16). The legislation of Moses is thus seen to
be studiously directed to the protection of the slave's interests and rights. If there is a
seeming exception, it is the one precept in ver. 20, on which see below. The law as a
whole must be admitted to be framed in the spirit of the greatest tenderness and
consideration, recognising the servant's rights as a man, his privileges as a member of
the theocracy, his feehngs as a husband and father. As respects the Hebrew bondsman,
indeed, his position did not greatly differ from that of one now who seUs his labour to a
particular person, or engages to work to him on definite terms for a stated period
(Fairbairn). He could be reduced to servitude only by debt, or as the penalty for
theft. In this latter case (oh. xxii. 3), liberty was justly forfeited — is forfeited still in
the case of those convicted of felony, and doomed to compulsory labours, or to trans-
portation, or lengthened terms of imprisonment. The laws in the present section
embrace three cases — 1. That of the Hebrew servant who is 'anmarried (ver. 2). He
goes out at the beginning of the seventh year. 2. That of the Hebrew servant who ia
married. In this case, if the wife came in vrith her husband, she goes out with him in
the year of release (ver. 8) ; but if his master has given him a wife — presumably a non-
Israelite — he has not the privilege of taking her with him when he leaves. He
may, however, elect to remain in his master's service, in which case his servitude becomes
perpetual (vers. 5, 6). The retention of the wife may appear oppressive, but it was, as
Keil points out, "an equitable consequence of the possession of property of slaves at
all." 3. The third case is that of a Hebrew daughter, sold by her father to be a maid-
servant, /.fc, as the sequel shows, as a housekeeper and concubine (vers. 7 — 12). The
master may betroth her to himself, or may ^ve her to his son, but in either case the
law strictly guards her honour and her rights. If her full rights are not accorded her, sht
is entitled to her freedom (ver. 11). Lessons. (1) Ver. 2. — The natural right of mar
to his freedom. (2) Ver. 5. — Recognition of the slave's personality. " In modem
systems, the man is a mere chattel, but in the Mosaic system, the slave's manhood is
declared. He is sovereign over himself, and is allowed the power of choice. The
Southern slaveholder would not permit his slave to say, 'I will not*; but the Hebrew
slave is permitted to say, ' I lovo my master, my wife, and my children ; I will not go
out free ' " (Burrows). (3) Vers. 5, 6. — Love,- the true reconciler between serrituoe
and freedom. Paul the " edave " of Christ, yet the truest freeman. (4) Jehovah's



CH. XXI. 12—36.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 177

for the unfriended. This oomes beautifully out in the law for the protection of tne
woman. — J. 0.

Vers. 12 — 18. — Mwder and related capital offences. It is characteristic of the law of
Moses that its first care, in the practical ordering of the Hebrew theocracy, is for the
rights of the slave. These are dealt with in the opening paragraphs. The next laws
relate to murder, to man-stealing, and to smiting and cursing of parents.

I. MuBDBR (vers. 12 — 15). The same spirit of justice which attaches severe
penalties to proved crimes, leads to the drawing of a sound line of distinction between
voluntary and involuntary actions. Only for actions of the former class is the
individual held responsible. Homicide wliich is purely accidental is not treated as
a crime (ver. 13). Not only is the man who kills his neighbour inadvertently not
punished with death, but the law interposes to protect him from the fury of such as
might unjustly seek his life, by appointing for him a place of refuge. (Of. Num. ixxv. ;
Deut. xix.) The deliberate murderer, on the other hand, was to be taken even from
God's altar, and put to death (ver. 14). Deliberate murder implies " malice afore-
thought" — "intent to kill" — ^but it was sufBoient to expose a man to the penalty
attaching to this crime, that he had been guilty of an act of violence, resulting in
another's death (ver. 12 ; cf. vers. 19, 23). Note on this law — 1. The recognition of
Divine Providence in the so-called accidents of life (ver. 13). 2. The sacredness
attached to the human person. The religious ground of the enactment is given in
Gen. ix. 6 — " Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed : for in the
image of Ood made he man." " The true Shechinah is man " (Chrysostom). 3. The
ethical character of the Hebrew religion. The altar is to afford no sanctuary to the
murderer. The Bible knows nothing of a religion which is in divorce from morality.
This law condemns by implication all connivance at, or sheltering of, immorahty, under
religious sanctions (Bomish huckstering of pardons, etc.).

II. Man-stealino (ver. 16). The statute is perfectly general. There is no evidence
that it applied only to Hebrews, though these are specially mentioned in Deut. xxiv. 7.
The steaUng and selling of a Hebrew was a direct offence against Jehovah. (Of. Lev.
XXV. 42.) " For they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the land of Egypt :
they shall not be sold as bondsmen." The passage is a direct condemnation of the
modem slave trade.

III. Smitinq and cubsino op parents (vers. 15 — 17). These offences also were to
be punished with death. The fact that they are bracketed in the law with murder and
manstealing, gives a peculiar impression of their enormity. As if the statute book had
said, after laying down the law for murder — " And for the purposes of this law, the
smiting or cursing of a father or a mother shall be regarded as equivalent to the taking
of a life." And this view of the matter is, in a moral respect, hardly too strong. It
would be difBcult to say what crime a man is not capable of, who could deliberately
smite or curse father or mother. As special reasons for the severity of the law, observe
— 1. Hebrew society rested largely on a patriarchal basis, and the due maintenance
of parental authority was a necessity of its existence. Ji;ist as it is found stUl that,
whatever the form of social order, the spread of a spirit of insubordination to parents is
the invariable prelude to a universal loosening of ties and obhgations. 2. Parents are
regarded as standing to their children in the relation of visible representatives q'
lahovah (see fifth commandment). This, in the Hebrew theocracy, gave to the crime
>f cursing or smiting a parent the character of a treasonable act. It was an offence
against the majesty of Jehovah, and as such, required to be promptly avenged. On the
same ground it was forbidden to revile magistrates, or curse the ruler of the people
(ch. xxii. 28). The law is a standing testimony to the heinousness attaching in
the sight of God to the sin of filial disolwdience. — J. 0.

Vers. 18 — 36. — Bodily injuries. The laws in this section may be thus classified: —
I. INJ0EIB8 BY man. 1. StHvers (vers. 18, 19). The man who injured another
in strife was required to pay for the loss of his time, and to cause him to be thoroughly
healed. Had the man died, the case would have come under the law of ver. 12. As it
was, blame attached to both parties, and the law waived the right to further satisfaction,
ty'ute — (1) One way of atoning for wrong is to seek in every way in our power to und»

sjiovxsir—a. ■



178 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxl 18— 3&

the mischief we have caused. This, alas ! cannot always be accomplished. Not always
is " thorough healing " — ^whether bodily, mental, or moral — pssible. So far as it m
possible we are bound to attempt it. (2) Justice obtains her highest satisfaction when
the wrongdoer can be made to contribute to the undoing of his own wrong. This prin-
ciple might be more acted on than it is. 2. Servcmts (vers. 20, 21 ; 26, 27). A master
was not to be allowed to injure with impunity even a slave purchased with his "money."
If the slave was wantonly murdered, the case would come under the law of murder.
If he died under chastisement, the master was punished at discretion of the judges.
If the slave was in any way maimed, he obtained his freedom. It has been remarked
that this is the earliest certain trace of legislation for the protection of the slave. See
below. 3. A woman with child (vers. 22 — 26). The injury here is indirect. The
woman is hurt in interfering in the strife between two men. Yet the law holds the
man who has injured her responsible for his fault, and decrees that he shall pay heavy
damages. If evil effects follow, he is to be punished under the jus talionis.

II. Injobibs by beasts. The distinction formerly observed as made by the law
between voluntary and involuntary actions (vers. 13, 14) meets here with fresh illus-
trations. 1. If an ox gore a man or a woman, and the gored person dies, the ox is to
be stoned — a testimony to the sacredness of human life (of. Gen. ix. 5), but the owner
shall be quit (ver. 28). 2. If, however, the owner had been previously warned of the
dangerous habits of the animal, and had not kept it in, there devolved on him the
entire responsibility of the fatal occurrence. (1) If the person gored was a free Israelite
(male or female), the life of the owner of the ox was forfeited ; but an opportunity was
given him of redeeming it by payment of a ransom (vers. 29 — 32). (2) If the person
gored was a slave, the owner of the ox had to compensate the owner of the slave for
the loss of his servant. The price fixed was thirty shekels of silver (ver. 32). In
either case the ox was to be stoned.

III. Injdkies to beasts. The same principles of equity apply here. 1. If an ox
or an ass fall into a pit which has been carelessly left uncovered, the owner of the pit is
required to pay in fiiU (vers. 33, 34). 2. If one man's ox kill another's, the loss is to
fall equally on both owners (ver. 35). 3. If the owner of the ox was aware of its
propensity to gore, and had not kept it in, he must, as before, bear the whole loss
(ver. 36). The equity of this series of precepts is not more conspicuous than their
humanity. The important lesson taught by these enactments is, that we cannot evade
responsibility for our actions. Our actions abide with us. They cleave to us. We
cannot shake ourselves rid of them. We are responsible, not only for the actions
themselves, but for the consequences which flow from them — ^for the influences they set
in motion. And we are responsible, not only for direct, but for indirect consequences
(ver. 22). Involuntary acts are not imputed to us, but all voluntary ones are. We
»re responsible, as well for what we do not do (having the power to do it), as for what
we actually perform. We are responsible for the effects of negligence and carelessness.
These principles have wide application. They cover the whole range of conduct. They
apply to the moral sphere as well as to the physical. They apply, not simply to de-
finite acts, but to the entire influence exerted by our lives. What a responsibility is
this 1 Only grace wUl enable us to bear its burden. — J. 0.

Ver. 20. — The servant dying under chastisement. This law has frequently been
seized on as a blot on the Mosaic legislation — as inculcating the odious doctrine which
Ues at the root of modem slave-systems, viz. that the slave is a mere " chattel," and
as such, has no personal rights — is entitled to no protection of life or limb. The inter-
pretation put on this particular clause is the more unfair, that it must be admitted to
be opposed to the spirit and enactments of the law as a whole, taking, as this does, so
exceptionally humane a view of the slave's position (see above); and is, moreover,
lirectly in the teeth of such clauses as those in the immediate context — " If a man
smite the eye of a servant," etc. (vers. 26, 27). The enactment will appear in its right
light if we view it with regard to the following considerations ; — 1. The law deals with
slavery, not from the point of view of abstract right — from which point of view it could
only be condemned — ^but as a recognised part of the then existing constitution of society.
It takes its existence for granted. It deals with it as statesmen have constantly to deal
«rith Institutions and customs which they do not wholly approve of, but which the;



CH. XXI. 20-26.] THE BOOK OF EXODUSb 17«

eannot summarily abolish without entailing on society worse evils than those from
which escape is sought. But if the right to hold property in slaves — ^to however limited
an extent — be granted, the corollaries of this possession must he granted also. A slave
cannot be treated in the eye of the law quite as a free man. His position is relatively a
degraded one. The owner of slaves has pecuniary and proprietary rights in his bond-
servants, which the law must take account of. The slave is the owner's " money."
2. The aim of the law is not to place the slave at the master's mercy, but to restrict
the master's power over him. Ancient law recognised no restriction. The Mosaic law
does. It goes at least thus far, that if the slave dies under the rod, the master shall be
pimished. The drift and bent of the law is for the slave's benefit. 3. It is important to
remember that the case is treated here, not in its vwral aspects, but solely as a question in
criminal jv/rispritdence. The moral law has its own say in the matter, and pronounces
its own judgment, irrespectively of whether the individual is proceeded against under
criminal law or not. The master who, by the \mdue exercise of the large right of
chastisement which the usage of the time allowed him, occasioned his slave's death, was
responsible to God for the excess of passion which led to this catastrophe. The law of Moses
gave no sanction to the master to endanger his servant's life with the rod. But moral
offences do not always admit of being dealt with as crimes. To convict of murder, e.g.,
there is proof required of m-alice prepense, and this, in the case before us, was precisely
what was not forthcoming. The legal tribunals had authority to punish the master, if the
slave died under his hand; if immediate death did not take place, the master was to have
the benefit of the doubt, and in view of the heavy money loss sustained in the death of
the slave (on the average, " thirty shekels of silver," ver. 32), was not to be further pro-
ceeded against. 4. The law in this verse — ^taken in conjunction with others — was really
a powerftd deterrent from the misuse of authority on the part of the master. (1) It
relates only to chastisement with the rod. If the master assaulted his slave with any
lethal weapon, the case came under other Jaws, and might involve his being tried for
murder. (2) The case supposed is that of a slave dying under honafide chastisement.
If murderous intent could be proved against the master — whether the slave lingered a
day or two or not — ^there is no reason to doubt but that the law of ver. 14 would have
been applied, and the master would have been put to death. (3) Involving, as the
death of the slave did, criminal proceedings, and, on conviction, severe punishment, the
mere danger of a fatal result ensuing would be a powerful deterrent from exceptional
violence. The punishment appears to have been left to the discretion of the judges, and
probably ranged from the death penalty (if deliberate murder could be proved), to a
simple money fine. The mere risk of incurring such a penalty would inspire salutary
caution. (4) The master also knew that if, by his temporary violence, the slave should
suffer serious bodily injury, he would be entitled, if he did not die, to claim his freedom
(vers. 26, 27). The fear of losing a valuable property, whether by death, or, if the
slave did not die, in the way last mentioned, would infallibly co-operate with other
motives in the direction of restraint. - The case, therefore, stood thus, that failing proof
of direct intent to murder, the probabilities were in favour of the theory that the
death of the slave to whom severe chastisement had been administered, was a result not
designed ; and the money loss involved in the death of the slave being regarded as
equivalent to a heavy fine, the law, in ordinary cases, did not see it necessary to go
further. But if the case was so serious that the slave had actually died under his
master's hand, or within a short space of time, then, whether the death was designed or
not, the law took the matter up, and inflicted punishment according to discretion.
Criminal law could scarcely have done more. The amelioration of the condition of the
slave was to be looked for mainly from moral influences, which, under the Mosaic
system, were assuredly not wanting. — J. 0.

Vers. 23 — 26. — "An eye for an eye" etc. (cf. Matt. v. 38 — 43). The principle here
emmciated is that of the jus talionis. Stripped of its concrete form, it is simply the
assertion of the dictate of justice, that when a wrong has been done to anyone, and
through bim to society, an adequate compensation ought to be rendered. So rendered, it is
the principle underlying every system of criminal jurisprudence. We need not suppose
that (in Jewish society) it was ever literally acted upon. Commutations of various
I tiH^ would be ai^oitted (cf. ver. 30). As a rule far courts of justice, thereon, thia

K 2



ISO THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xm. 1—17.

principle must remain. But error arises when this rule, intended for the regulation of
public justice, is transferred into private life, and is applied there to sanction the spirit of
revenge. This is to pervert it from its proper ptirpose. So far from sanctioning private
retaliation, the object of this law is to set Umita to the passion for revenge, by taking
the right to avenge out of the hands of private individuals altogether, and committing
it to public officers. In contrast with the retaliatory disposition, our Lord inculcates on
his disciples a forbearing and forgiving spirit; a spirit which seeks to overcome by
love ; a spirit, even, which is willing to forego legal rights, whenever by doing so, it
can promote the good of a fellow man. — J. 0.

Vers. 1—11.— negulations for the treatment of slaves. I. The conhitional blsmbnt
EtTNNiNQ THROUOH THESE EEGULATIONS. What a difference there is here from the strong,
imcompromisJng imperatives of chapter xx. 1 There we feel that we have to do with
man, not only as he is at the time, a Hebrew in the wilderness, but with every man, in
every age, and in all sorts of social circumstances. The ten commandments simply
assume humanity and society. But the regulations now to be considered abound in the
word " if." If certain things are done, then certain other things must be done. But
then these things need not to be done at all. A man need not buy a servant ; a man
need not take a woman to be his companion in servitude, knowing tliat thereby he runs
the risk of being separated from her and his offspring afterwards. These regulations
have to be made for free agents, acting often thoughtlessly, or in a matter-of-fact com-
pliance with the customs of their country. There was no real need for any of these
" ifs " to pass into action. Consider how ludicrous such regulations would appear if pro-
pounded as possibilities in modem English society. The actions which they assume
would be scouted as scarcely conceivable. Our notions of property, of service, and of the
position of woman are quite different. And yet how many things there are even now,
commonly accepted indeed as right and proper, which are no more defensible on
the highest grounds than these practices of Israel in the wilderness. There are
practices among Christians now, considered proper enough according to the present
notions of society, and yet the day is assuredly coming when they too wUl seem as
strange and abhorrent as the practice of a man selling his daughter to be a maid-servant.
Things done without scruple, even by enlightened Christians, are far enough from what
Christ would have them be. And all that can be reached is to regulate and mitigate
what there is not sufficient enlightenment of conscience to abolish.

II. The evident desiee to be just to all the individuals concerned in these
EBG0LATIONS. The purchased individual must have his benefit by liberation in the
seventh year ; and yet the master is to be treated justly too by the recognition of the
woman whom, as it were, he had lent to be a companion to the slave. So also if
the slave has a notion of staying, he is compelled to treat it as a serious matter, and not
plaj fast or loose either with master or companion. She who had been, as it were, a
concubine, becomes by his desire to stay, lifted to the full privileges of a wife ; and
to leave then would be a wrong to her as well as the master. The principle holds good
all through human society — whatsoever we want in the way of temporal advantages
we must take with certain limitations. Whatever benefit there might be in buying a
slave must be taken along with tlie limitation of the seventh year. If the slave chose
to have a companion, he must make up his mind how to treat her at the six years' end ;
either to have liberty and lose her or keep her with life-long bondage. We should
choose our position in this world, looking steadily for the guidance of infinite wisdom in
our choice. If we be sure of that, then all advantages will be golden to us, and we shall
not for a moment think of grumbling because of the disadvantages that must inevitably
accompany them.

III. Still though there is a desire here to be just to all, it is evidbntlt the weak and
DNFOETUNATB WHO ARE CHIEFLY THOUGHT OF. It is for the Sake of the slave and the
despised woman that these regulations are here specified. The strong in such circum-
stances are as a rule well able — only too well able — ^to look after themselves. It is the
glorious mark, again and again appearing in God's dealings, that he loves to bring the
enslaved nearer to liberty, the degraded nearer to the normal elevation of himianity. — ^Y.

Ver*. 12 — 17. — OafiUd offenem. Afc we look through the penalties specified foe



ai. xmi. 12— 17.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 181

wrong-doing in chaps, xxi., xxii., we notice that they are divisible into two great
classes. Some offences are punished by death, and others by some sort of compensation
for the injury done. The graduated terms of imprisonment with which we are
familiar, were not of course possible to the Israelites, and if possible, perhaps would not
have seemed desirable. We notice that in this chapter five capital offences are speci-
fied ; there were doubtless many besides ; but these are enough to show the principles on
which Jehovah acted in taking away the life of the offender.

I. The muedbebr propeb. In chap. xx. we find the general command not to kill ;
and here is the instruction for the Israelites what to do with the man who deliberately
and maliciously took away the life of a fellow-man. This, it is plain, was done under
special authority and for special reasons. It was Jehovah's regulation for his people in
their then circumstances ; but we must not quote it as applicable to the punishment of
the murderer generally. If on the authority of this passage we are bound to punish
the mvffderer by death, obviously we are bound tq punish him who reviles his parents,
in the same way. There were reasons then for putting the murderer to death which do
not now apply. The principle underlying the enactment seems to be that murder is
one of the crimes wluch must be followed by the severest penalty man is disposed
to inflict. So long as the infliction of a death penalty at aU harmonises with the
general consciousness of men, it is plain that any lesser penalty for murder is inade-
quate. But if once we get to the position — and it is to be hoped we are ever getting
nearer to it — ^that only the sternest necessity justifies taking human life away, we shaQ
then substitute perpetual imprisonment as the extreme penalty. We shall aU feel then
that murder is assuredly a crime which should condemn the perpetrator to life-long
seclusion from the society of his fellow-men.

II. The smitbb of father or mother. Here we see how different are the principles
underlying Divine law from those underlying human law. In a modem English court
of justice the smiting of a parent might perhaps receive the highest penalty incurred
for the commission of an assault ; but it would never be exalted into a special offence.
But God in his government of Israel makes an offence against a parent to be one of the
first magnitude. The severe penalty specified here corresponds with the position
occupied in the Decalogue by the commandment to honour parents. God we see is ever
saying and doing things to set great honour on the family, and indicate great expecta-
tions from it. It has been a boldly proclaimed principle in all ages, never more pro-
claimed than now, and often with great arrogance and intolerance, that individuals and
families exist for the State. But here in the state that is under God's special govern-
ance provision is made that, in its punishments, that state shall honour parental
authority and dignity. And of course when once smiting a parent was made into such
a serious offence, it was but carrying the principle out to a logical and necessary con-
clusion to make the cwrse as great an offence. Generally, indeed, the rebellious reviling
word of the lips would do more injury, inflict more pain, and be more promotive of
insubordination than the blow of the hand. In the light of this enactment we see how
much God expects from the parental relation. One, who in the Divine order of things,
stood so high that smiting or cursing him was made a capital offence, must have been
a man to whom Jehovah looked for great services, great contributions to the Divine
glory, and to the prosperity of Israel.

m. The man-stealeb. Within the compass of the same chapter we find provision
made for recognised and openly practised customs of servitude, and also for a kind of
slavery which by the penalty attached to the procuring of it is indicated as one of the
worst of crimes. There was slavery and slavery. There was the buying of men in
such sort as is indicated in verse 2 ; there was also such stealing and selling as we find
an actual instance of in Gen. xxxvii. 28. Such crimes were evidently only too possible,
and once committed, it might be very hard to discover the criminal or restore the
captive to liberty. There was perhaps many a Joseph — and when we consider
his sufferings, and the sufferings of his father, we shall not wonder at the penalty
attached to the crime. Then suppose an Israelite were to sell a brother Israelite to some
band of Midian merchantmen, who would take him into a far country, what would the
upshot be ? Not only woidd he be lost to loving kindred, and shut out from the sight
of his dear native land, but excluded from religious privileges. God had brought out
Isiael/rom the house qf bondage, that in freedom, necessary freedom, they mi^t find



188 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. Icn. xxi. 22—25.

him their God, and become, in many privileges, his people. What a monstrous thing
then for an Israelite, through cupidity or revenge, to sell away his brother from peculiar,
from unique possibilities ! He would not find in any other land the things which God
intended him to have at home.

IV. The knowing owner op a danoerotjs beast. (Ver. 29.) Here is the sound
principle — a principle which goes deep in its application — ^that a man is responsible
for all foreseen consequences of an act which it is in his power to prevent.
Examine the illustrative instances mentioned, A man is the owner of a push-
ing ox, well known to be a brute of vicious and uncertain temper. The
owner indeed has been made specially acquainted with the fact. He can then take one
of the two courses, either put sufficient watch over the beast, as not knowing when it
may be dangerous to human life and limb, or else in sheer recklessness determine to
take the chance of all keeping right. How plain it is that a man of such a heedless
spirit is not fit to have free course among his fellow-men 1 A human life, be it that of
the veriest stranger, a mere waif and stray, or say that of an old man on the very verge
of the grave, is of much more account than the life of an ox, thougli it be in the very
prime of its strength and usefulness. The property even of a millionaire must perish
sooner than the life of the poorest bo imperilled. The owner of the ox is looked to
here, just because the brute itself cannot be looked to. The master would not be held
responsible for the action of a human servant as for that of a brute beast. And is it
not plain that the announcement of this penalty here has a very stringent application
to ail self indulgence ? When a man is told that his course of action, however profitable,
however pleasant to himself, has been actually injurious to some and is likely to be
injurious to others, what is he to do ? If he would do as Christ wishes him — the Christ
who came to fulfil the law and the prophets — he would straightway refrain from that
course of action. Commercial profits and temporal pleasures will be dearly purchased by
us, if one day we have to stand before the throne of him who judges righteous judg-
ment, to answer for selfish, reckless trifling w^ith the best interests of our neighbours
The owner of the ox may say, " Let people keep out of my animal's way and guard
themselves." God, we see, did not admit that principle with regard to the pushing ox ;
nor will he with regard to our pushing business habits or our pushing pleasures— our
reckless resolution to get all we can for ourselves, at whatever risk of loss to those who
may come in our way.

V. From the instances given, we may easily infer what otheb offences or the saue
KIND WOULD BE PUNISHED IN THE SAME WAY. Wherever there was anything peculiarly
presumptuous or daring, there the occasion for death seems to have been found. That
which most deeply affects the constitution of society is to be treated with the greatest
severity. One man might kill another; but because it was misadventure, he would
escape with temporary inconvenience. Aiiother man, for no more than the utterance of
the tongue, has to die the death. Thus, even in a scheme of government which had so much
to do with outward acts as had God's government of Israel, we have regulations which
got their severity almost entirely from the evidenced state of heart on the part of the
transgressor. In purely human laws the magnitude of the actual offence is always taken
into account ; there must be some tangible injury to person or property. But it is the
very glory of these illustrative penalties here, that cursing father or mother is punished
with as much severity as the actual taking away of life. How true it is from these five
instances that God's thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his ways as our ways 1 — Y.

Vers. 22 — 25. — The reqv/irement of ttrict equivalents in making compensation for
injuries. The particular illustration here is confessedly obscure ; but there can hardly
be a mistake as to the principle illustrated, viz., that when injury is inflicted on the
person, the very best should be done that can be done to make an adequate compensa-
tion. When property is taken it can often be restored or things put practically as they
were before ; but when the person is seriously injured, there is then no possibility of
exact restoration. Hence the injurer might be inclined to say that because he could not
do everything by way of compensation he was at liberty to do nothing. But the require-
ment comes in to stop him from such easy-going reflections. Bye for eye is wanted.
You must do your best to restore what you have destroyed. Obviously the purpose of
the regulation is, not to justify or aid in anything like revenge, but to make men be con-



QB.xxi.6,«.] THE BOOK OF BX0DU3. X8«

tented with the best they can get in substitution for the injury that has been done. The
regulation of course was never meant to be interpreted literally, any more than our Lord's
counsel that he who had been smitten on the right cheek, should turn the other to the
smiter. What good would it do literally to render an eye for an eye ? That would be
great loss to the person injuring and not the slightest gain to the person injured. Persis-
tent requirement of compensation is to be distinguished from a passienate seeking for
revenge. And be it noted that this requirement of compensation is not to be omitted
under any erroneous notions of what weakness and self-denial may compel &om us aa
Christians. We must keep to the principle underlying the regulation here, as well as to
that other glorious and beautiful principle which our Lord laid down in quoting this
regulation (Matt. v. 39). He spoke to stop revenge. But sui-ely he would have been
the first to say, on needful occasion, that reckless men must not be sulfered to inflict
injury on the supposition that Christians would not resent it. Certainly we are
not to seek compensation for injuries or punishment of those who injure simply to gratify
private feelings, or get a private advantage. But if conscience is clear as to its being for
the public good^ we must be very urgent and pertinacious in demanding compensation.
We may be sure our Master would ever have us contend with all meekness and gentle-
ness, but also with all bravery and stedfastness for all that is right. But the thing of
most importance to be learnt from this regulation is, that the most precious things attain-
able by us are beyond human malice or cai'elessness to spoil in the slightest degree. The
treasures God loves to make the peculiar possession of his children are such as eye has
not seen. The eye may be lost, and yet the enjoyment of these treasures remain — nay
more, the very loss of the natural may increase the susceptibility of the spiritual in us.
The very crippling of the body may help us to make wonderful advances towards the
perfect man in Christ Jesus. — ^Y.

Vers. 5, 6. — " Mine ears Jiast thou opened." — Slavery not usually considered a desir-
able condition. The Israelites as a people were just casting the slough of it, and God
helps them in their social ordinances by emphasising the value of freedom. 'Sone the
less, even here, a higher state than mere freedom is suggested ; voluntary servitude may
be preferred to liberty, and is very near akin to sonship. Consider: —

I. The pkbfeebncb. Naturally, to a slave freedom is an object. Slavery was a
misfortune or a punishment resulting from debt or misconduct (cf. Lev. xxv. 39 ;
Ex. xxii. 3). Thus viewed God only permitted it to continue at most for six years.
Every Hebrew had been redeemed by him ; and therefore permanent slavery to man
would have been an infringement of his rights of ownership. Temporary serfdom under
the conditions which he imposed secured his rights and the privileges of those whom he
had redeemed [cf. the right of a tenant to sublet a house by arrangement with the actual
owner]. The relation between a serf and his employer was thus carefully defined and
limited; in so far as they were linked together by a purely external bond, that bond
ceased to exist at the close of six years' servitude. During six years, however, a
firmer bond might have been formed and strengthened. Possession of the slave's body
du)3 not carry with it the possession of his affections ; they cannot be bought and sold,
but they may be won. If the owner during six years could find bands to bind the
heart (Hos. xi. 4) ; in such case, the serf desiring it, a permanent relation might be
established. It is not the abnegation of freedom, it is the exercise of freedom to choose
for oneself; if a man was so bound to his employer that he preferred continuing in his
service, God was willing to endorse such a preference with his consent. Nowadays,
the relation of servant and employer is still more temporary than of old. At the same
time, now as ever, love can prevail to win the affections and so weave by means of them
i permanent and enduring bond. Love transmutes the conditions of servitude. It
chiinwes them into something which is preferable to freedom. The cords of a man bind
more firmly than any other cords ; but they do not confine or fetter.

II. The sign of the pkefeeence. The servant who wished to remain a servant waa
to be brought before the judges (Elohim), the representatives of God. As God's minis-
ters they were empowered to permit the satisfaction of his desire. The ear pierced
against the door post was the outward sign of this sacrament of servitude. Henceforth
the man by his own desire was permanently united to the family of his employer. Th«
Dierced ear tcoiifled to the pierced heart. The sign of slavery was the badge of lova.



184



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XXI. 34—36.



III. SEBVANT8 OP God. The relation of the slave to his employer is analogous to th«
relation between the natural man and God. All men are his servants — debtors who
cannot pay their debts. The relation however may be of a temporary character ; God
seeks to make it permanent by winning our hearts and our affections. Work for him
in this world we must, willingly or unwUlingly. He would have us willing servants ;
compulsory service has no moral value. " The ears opened " (Ps. xl. 6), in token of
the heart won, are of more value than sacrifice and offering. Are we such willing
servants? (Is. 1. 5). He is willing to " open our ears," to take us as his own for ever,
but we must also ourselves be willing : — " He hath opened mine ears and I was not
rebellious." Slavery is a state of imperfection ; but so also is the miscalled liberty
of independence ; the only perfect state for man is that " service which is perfect
freedom." — Q.



EXPOSITION.



n. TJAWS CONNEOTBD WITH BIGHTS OF PBO-

FKBTY (vers. 33 — 36). From the consideration
of injuries to the person, the legislator pro-
ceeds to treat of injuries to property, and, as
he has been speaking of cattle under the one
head, places cattle in the fore-front of the
other. In this chapter two enactments only
are made — one providing compensation in the
case of a man's cattle being killed by falling
into the pit, or well, of a neighbour (vers. 33,
14) ; and the other making provision for the
ewe of one man's cattle killing the cattle of
•nothei (vers. 35, 3S)

Ver. 33. — If a man shall open a pit.
Bather, " If a man shall uncover a cistern."
Cisterns, very necessary in Palestine, were
usually closed by a flat-stone, or a number of
planks. To obtain water from them, they
had to be uncovered ; but it was the duty of
the man who uncovered them, to replace the
covering when his wants were satisfied. Or
dig a pit and not oover it. A man who was
making a cistern might neglect to cover it
while it was in course of construction, or even
afterwards, if he thought his own cattle would
take no hart. Bat in the onfenced fields of



Palestine it was always possible that a neigk-
hour's cattle might go astray and suffer injury
through such a piece of negligence. An ox,
ca an ass, falling into a cistern, would be
unable to extricate itself, and might be
drowned.

Ver. 34. — ^The owner of the pit shall maka
it good — i.e., "shall duly compensate the
owner of the cattle for its loss. And the
dead beast shall be his. Having paid the full
price of the slain beast, the owner of the cis-
tern was entitled to its carcase.

Vers. 35, 36. — U one man's ox hurt
another's, etc. The hurt might bo purely
accidental, and imply no neglect. In that
case the two parties were to divide the value
of the living, and also of the dead ox — i.e.,
they were to share between them the loss
caused by the accident equally. If, however,
there was neglect, if the aggressive animal
was known to be of a vicious disposition, then
the man who had suffered the loss was to
receive the full value of the slain animal, but
to lose his share of the carcase. This expla-
nation, which the words of the texS not only,
admit, but invite, seems better than the
Babbinical one, "that the dead ox should
also be the property of the injured party."



HOMILETICa.

Vers. 33 — 36. — The gmlt of neglect. Sins of omission are thought lightly of by most
men ; but God holds us answerable for them, as much as for sins of commission. The
Psalmist defines the wicked man as one who neglects to " set himself in any good way."
The neglect of the Israelites to cover their wells, or keep their cattle from goring others
was to be heavily punished. Neglect and carelessness are culpable —

I. Because theie effects ake ab Eumous as those op malice and bvu, intent.
Carelessness and neglect of precautions may set a town on fire and bum hundreds in
their beds. Or it may spread a loathsome and dangerous disease through a whole
district. Or it may destroy the cattle of a whole county. Or it may allow moral evil
to have free course, imtil an entire nation is sunk in corruption. Or, again, it may
tndanger our own lives, or destroy our souls. It is a question whether more evil does
not actual^ result from carelessness than from deliberate intent. Youth is naturally
Wl')*"^. Desultoiy habits intensify carelessness. A deficient sense of the seriousneai



OL SXII. 1— 3.J



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



of life encourages and fosters it. Advanced civilisation, with its foppishness and saper-
dliousness, developes its growth. The present age asks, " Is anything worth caring
ahout?" — and !s deaf to the Prophet's words, "Tremhle and be troubled, ye careless
ones " (Isaiah xxxii. 11).
II. Because God has implanted in us faculties of prevision and oaloulatioh of

CONSEQUENCES, WHICH WERE INTENDED TO PREVENT OUB BEING CARELESS AND NEGLIGENT.

Man differs from the lower animals chiefly in the possession of reason ; and it is an
essential part of human reason to look to the future, to forecast results, and calculate the
balance of ultimate advantage and disadvantage. We know instinctively that our
happiness depends on our actions ; and it is therefore wholly unreasonable to be careless
about how we act. If we have faculties which we might use and refuse to use them,
God will be righteous to punish us for despising his gifts.

m. Because Qod has expressly warned ns against being careless, and ex-
HOETED us TO prudence AND FORETHOUGHT. " I wiU Send a Are among them that dwell
carelessly" said the Lord by Ezekiel. " Rise up, ye women that are at ease ; hear my
voice, ye careless daughters ; give ear unto my speech ; many days and years shall ye
be troubled, ye careless women," are God's words by Isaiah. "Go to the ant, thou
aluggard," exclaims the wise man, " consider her ways and be wise." And again —
"Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established — ^keep thy heart with
diligence — remove thy feet from evil." A careful cautious walk through the dangers
and difficulties of life is everywhere enjoined upon us in the Scriptures ; and we are
plainlj disobedient if we are careless.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEE TCX-n



The Book of the Covenant, continued.

Laws connected with rights of properly,
eentinued (vers. 1 — 15). The first section —
vers. 1 — 6 — is upon theft. The general prin-
ciple laid down is, that theft shall be pnn-
jshed if possible, by a fine. There is a moral
fitness in this, since a man's desire to get what
was his neighbour's wotdd lead to the loss of
what was his own. In ordinary cases the
thief was to restore to the man robbed double
of what he had stolen (ver. 4) but, if he
had shewn persistence in wrong doing by
selling the property, or (if it were an animal)
killing it, he was to pay more — fourfold in the
ease of a sheep, fivefold in that of an ox. If
the criminal could not pay the fine, then he
was to be sold as a slave (ver. 8). Burglary,
or breaking into a house at night, might be
resisted by force, and if the burglar were
killed, the man who killed him incurred no
legal gnilt (ver. 2) ; but, if the house were
entered by day, the proviso did not hold
>er. 8).

Vers. 1 — 4. — Laws about theft. Ver. 1. —
If a man shall steal an ox. The principal
property possessed by the Israelites in the
wilderness was their cattle ; whence this
eeenrs to the legislator as the thing most
likely to be stolen It required more Hildneas



in a thief to cany off an ox than a sheep er
goat; and so the crime was visited with a
heavier penalty.

Ver. 2. — If a thief be found breaking up.
Bather, " Breaking in " — i.e., making forcible
entry into a house. The ordinary mode of
"breaking in" seems to have been by a
breach in the wall. Hence the word here
used, which is derived from khnthar, "to
dig." There shall no blood be shed for him.
Eather, "the blood- feud shall not lie upon
him " — i.e., the avenger of olood shall not be
entitled to proceed against his slayer. The
principle here laid down has had the sanction
of Solon, of the Boman law, and of the law of
England. It rests upon the probability that
those who break into a house by night have
a murderous intent, or at least have the
design, if occasion arise, to commit murder.

Ver. 3. — ^If the sun be risen upon him. If
the entry is attempted after daybreak. In
this case it is charitably assumed that the
thief does not contemplate murder. There
shall be blood shed for him. Or, " the blood-
feud shall hold good in his case '' — (.e., his
slayer shall be liable to be put to death by the
next of kin. For he should make full resti-
tution. Eather, " He shall make full restitu-
tion." The punishment of the housebreaker,
who enters a house by day, shall be like that
of other thieves — to restore double. If he have
nothing. Eather, " if he have not enough " —
i.e., if he cannot make the restitution required,
then he shall be sold for his theft. It is
somewhat fanciful to suppose, that this pun-
ishment aimed at enforcing labonr em those



IM



THB BOUK OJ? EXODUSw



LCH. xiil. 4 — 6.



•rho preferred stealing to working for their
own living (Ealisch). Protably the idea was
■imply the compensation of the injured party,
whj no doubt received the proceeds of the
man's sale.

Ver. 4. — ^If the theft be oertainly found in
His hand. If he be caught in flagrante delicto,
with the thing stolen in his possession,



" whether it be ox, or ass, or small cattle," h»
shall restore double. The law of theft in the
Mosaic legislation is altogether of a mild
character, as compared with the Boman, or
even with the English law, until the present
century. Double restitution was a sort of
" retaliation " — it involved a man losing the
exact amount which he had expected to gain



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 1 — i. — Pimishment, even for one cmd the same offence, ehould Je graduated.
Some codes treat a crime which can be given a single deflnite name, e.g., theft, as if it
were in all cases uniform, and prescribe a single penalty — death, the bastinado, a
month's imprisonment. The Mosaic Law, with greater refinement and greater propriety,'
graduated the punishment according to the special character of the offence. The worst
form of theft proper is burglary. Burglary destroys the repose of the household, intro-
duces a feeling of insecurity, trenches upon the sacreduess of the hearth, endangers life,
affrights tender women and children. By permitting the destruction of the burglar, the
law pronounced him worthy of death. Other forms of thievirg were punished in pro-
portion to the audacity and persistence of the thief. A man who had stolen without
converting the property, was to pay back double. If he had converted it to his own use,
or sold it, the penalty was heavier — fourfold for a sheep or goat, fivefold for an ox.
There was especial audacity in stealing an ox — an animal so large that it could not
readily be converted ; so powerful that it could not easily be carried off. The gradua-
tion of punishment for all crimes is desirable —

I. Bboausb the same outward offence involves vabioits degeebs op nrwAED
WICKEDNESS; e.jr., homicide varies between absolute blamelessness (ver. 2) and the
highest degree of culpability (ch. xxi. 14). Assault may be the lightest possible matter,
or approach closely to murder. False witness may arise from imperfect memory, or
from a deliberate design to effect a man's ruin. Lies may be " white," or the blackest
falsehoods which it is possible for the soul of man to invent. Punishment is, and ought
to be, in the main retributive ; and as the moral guilt varies, so should the penalty.

n. Because the outward offence itself is more ob less injubious. By an act
of stealing we may rob a man of a trifle, or reduce him to beggary. By a blow of a
certain force we may inflict on him a slight pain, or render him a cripple for life. By a
false statement in a court of justice we may do him no harm at all, or we may ruin his
character. All crimes short of homicide vary in the extent to which they injure a man ;
and it is reasonable that the amount of injury received should be taken into considera-
tion when punishment is apportioned. Therefore, a rigid unbending law, assigning
to each head of crime a uniform penalty would be unsuitable to the conditions of
human life and the varying motives of criminals. A wise legislator will leave a wide
discretion to those who administer justice, trusting them to apportion to each offence the
punishment which under the circumstances it deserves.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 6, 6. — ^Law of tbespass. — Next to
theft, and not much behind it, is the wanton
damage of what belongs to another — as when
« person injures his neighbour's crops, either
by turning beasts into his field, or by causing
• conflagration in it. To turn beasts in was
the more determinedlymaliciousact,and there-
fore the damage done was to be compensated
by making over to the injured party a like
luantity of produce out of the beat that a man



was possessed of ; whereas rimple restitution
was sufficient when fire had spread accident-
ally from a man's own land to his neighbour's.
We may conclude that if the trespass of the
cattle were accidental, simple restitution suf-
ficed ; and if the fire were kindled of set
purpose, the heavier rate of penalty waa ex-
acted.

Ver. 5. — ^If a man shall oause a Held «r
vineyard to ba eaten. — ^Bather " to be eaten



OH. xzu. 1 — 13.]



THE BOOK Oe EXODU&



m



tf," or "to be browsed mum." And slutll
feed.— Bather, " and it shall feed." Of the best,
etc. — ^This means that, without reference to
the quality of the crop damaged, the injorer
should forfeit an equal amount of his own
best produce.

Yer. 6. — ^If fire break out. — ^It is usual in
the East (as in England) to bum the weeds
cm a fami at certain seasons of the year.



When this is done, there is alwavs a danger,
in the dry parched- up Eastern lands, of the
fire spreading, and careful watch has to be
kept. If this watch were neglected, a neigh-
bour's sheaves or standing com might be
seriously damaged or even destroyed. The
law punished such carelessness, by requiring
the man who had kindled the fir« to mak«
restitution.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 5, 6. — 3%e law of love forbids oM injury to a neighlour. There are many who
would scorn to steal the property of a neighbour, who yet make light of injuring it in
other ways, as by trespass, or by negligence. But if we love our neighbour we shall
be anxious not to injure him in any way. " Love worketh no ill to his neighbour."
He that allows his cattle to pasture in a neighbour's field, or his hares and rabbits to
spoil a neighbour's crops, or his poultry to break bounds and damage a neighbour's
garden, cannot feel towards him as a Christian should feel. Love would hinder any
injuries, nay, even any intrusive or obnoxious act. Love would also be a strong check
upon neglect and carelessness. Men are careful enough not to damage their own
property; did they really love them, they would be as careful not to damage the
property of theii neighbours. And what is true of property is true of other things
also. We are bound —

L Not to injube oub neishboiib's ohabaoteb, either by direct attacks upon it, or by
carelessly suffering it to be maligned by others,

IL Not to injuke ras domestic peace. 1. By impertinent intrusion; 2. By spying
and tale-bearing ; 3. By scattering suspicions.

IIL Not to injure his interests. 1. By divulging without necessity what may
hurt him ; 2. By pushing our own interests at his expense ; 3. By knowingly advising
him ill ; 4. By setting pitfalls that he may fall into them. If we offend in any of these
respects, it is our duty, so far as possible, to "make restitution" — (1) By compensating
to him any loss he may have sustained ; (2) By disabusing those whose minds we may
have poisoned ; (3) By ample and humble apology. Too often this last will be all
that is in our power ; for " the tongue is a fire " (Jas. iil. 6), which scatters its brands
far and wide, and creates conflagrations that it is impossible to extinguish. Let each
and all seek to control that "unruly member" which "setteth on fire the course of
nature^" and is itself " set on fire of helL"



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 7—18. — Law of oefositb. — ^Deposi-
tion of property in the hands of a friend, to
keep and gnard, was a marked feature in the
life of primitive societies, where investments
were difficult, and bankers unknown. Persons
about to travel, especially merchants, were
wont to make such a disposition of the greater
part of their movable property, which required
some one to guard it in their absence. Be-
fusals to return such deposits were rare ; since
ancient morality regarded such refusal as a
cnme of deep dye (Herod, vii. 86). Some-
times, however, they took place ; and at
Athens there was a special form of action
which might be brought in such cases called



TopaKaTaSfiKiis Sficq. ^e penalty, if a nan
were cast in the suit, was simple restitu-
tion, which is less satisfactory than the
Mosaic enactment — ^"He shall pay double"
(ver. 9).

"Ver. 7. — Stuft — Literally " vessels "—but
the word is used in a very wide sense, of
almost any inanimate movables.

Ver. 8. — If the thief be not found.— It is
not clear what was to be done in this case,
Kalisch supposes that it came under the law
of the oath (ver. 10), and that if the man en-
trusted with the deposit swore that he had
not embezzled it. he was let go free. But ai
stolen cattle were to be compensated for to
the owner (ver. 12), it wonld seem to be more



188



THJB BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XXII. 14, 15.



consistent that stolen money or chattels should
also have been made good.

Ver. 9. — ^For all manner of trespass. — It
has been supposed that this refers to " every
case of tlisft ; " but Kalisch is probably right
in restricting it to cases where a person was
accused of having embezzled property com-
mitted to his care. He was in that case to
appear before the judges (ch. xviii. 23), to-
gether with his accuser, and to clear himself
u he could. When he failed to do so, and
was " condemned," he was bound to restore
double. Which another challenges to be hia.
— Bather, " which a man challenges to be the
very thing " (that he deposited). The case
is supposed of the depositor being able to
point out that the person to whom he en-
trusted the deposit has it still in his keeping.

Vers. 10, 11. — ^If a man deliver unto his
neighbour an ass or an ox, etc. — The deposit
of cattle is unheard of in classical antiquity ;
but it might well be the usage of a pastoral
race (Oen. zlvU. 3). The parallelism of the



verse with verse 6 indicates that a deposit of
the same kind is intended. If it die, or bt
hurt, or driven away. — The deposited beast
might "die" naturally; or "be hurt" by a
wild beast or a fall ; or be " driven away " by
thieves, without anyone seeing what had hap-
pened. In that case, if the man to whom the
animal was entrusted would swear that he was
no party to its disappeai'ance, the owner had
to put up with the loss.

Ver. 12.— If it be stolen. — If, however, the
case was not an ambiguous one, but certainly
known to be one of theft, restitution' had to
be made, since it was supposed that with
proper care the theft might have been pre-
vented.

Ver. 13. — If it be torn in pieces. — If again
there was evidence that the creature had been
killed by a wild beast, this evidence had to be
produced, before the owner or the judges, for
the trustee to be exonerated from blame. A
similar proviso is found in the laws of the
Gentoos (BosenmiUIer, Orient. voL i, p. 148).



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 7, 8. — The sacred character of trusts. The main teaching of this thiid para-
, . aph of ch. xxii. is the sacred character of human trusts. Men are taught that they
must carefully guard the property of others when committed to their charge, and
religiously restore it upon demand to its rightful owner. No conversion of such
property to the use of the trustee, under any circumstances whatever, is to be tolerated.
The principle laid down with respect to ancient, will apply equally to modern, trusts ; —

I. If the thing entrusted be stolen, without the trustee being justly chargeable with
havuig contributed to the theft by negligence, the loss must fall on the owner.

II. If it be lost by non-preventible accident, as when a lion carries off a lamb, or
when a ship goes down at sea, the case is the same — the trustee is not liable.

III. If, on the other hand, the trustee neglect to take sufficient care, and damage
occurs, he is bound to make good the injury caused by his ovra laches.

IV. If he actually embezzle the trust, simple restitution will not meet the full claims
of justice. He ought to be made to refund, and to be punished besides.

V. In doubtful cases the oath, or solemn assurance, of the trustee, that he has con-
Teyed no part of the trust to his own use, ought to be accepted.

Trusts are among the most important of the contracts and obligations, whereby
human society is carried on. Strict honesty and much thought and care are requisite
on the one hand, confidence, gratitude and tender consideration on the other. Trustees,
it is to be remembered, do, for the must part, unpaid work. No one can be compelled
to be a trustee. And unless a generous confidence is put in them, and their good
intentions are presumed, alike by the law and by those for whom they act, trusteeship
will be declined by prudent men, and great inconveniences will follow.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 14, 15 Law of bobrowlnq. — The act
of borrowing is connected with that of de-
positing, since in both cases, the property of
one man is committed to the hands of another ;
only, in the one case, it is at the instance and
for the benefit of the man into whose hands
■^he property passes ; in the other case, it is at



the instance and for the benefit of the othei
party. This difference causes a difference of
obligation. The borrower, having borrowed
solely for his own advantage, must take all the
risks, and in any case return the thing bor-
rowed, or its value, unless the owner was «tiU,
in some sort, in charge gf his own ptopcrty



OH. xzn. 1—10.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



IM



Things hired are not, however, tube regarded
■a borrowed. If harm come to them, the
owner mnst enfier the loss.

Ver. 14. And it be hurt or die. — The thing
borrowed might be animate or inanimate ;
lither might be " hurt ; " the former might
lot only be hurt, but " die." Whatever the
damage, and whatever the cause, unless in the
single rare case of the owner being in charge,
the law required the borrower to make good
the loss to the owner. This law must have
acted as a considerable check upon borrowing.

Ver. 15. If the owner thereof be with it.



— By "with it," we must understand, not
njerely present, but in charge of it, or at any
rate so near it that he might have prevented
the damage, had prevention been possible
It' it be an hired thing. — If anything werg
paid for the use of the thing, then it was not
borrowed, but hired ; and the owner was con-
sidered to have counted in the risk of loss or
damage in fixing the amount of the hire. He
was entitled therefore to no compensation
Our own law does not rule this absolutely, but
takes into consideration the proportion of the
sum paid for hire to the value of the thing
hired, and the general ta£it iinderstanding.



HOMILETIOS.

Ver. 14. — 77ie duty ofhyrrovaefn. The duty of borrowers ta rery simple. It is to
take care that that which they borrow suffers as little hurt as possible while it remains
in their possession, and to return it unhurt, or else make compensation to the lender.
People will not often be found to question the propriety of these niles ; but in action
there are not very many who conform to them. It is a common thing to take but little
care of what we hcve borrowed ; to keep it an unconscionable time ; to neglect returning
it until the lender has asked for it repeatedly ; to keep it without scruple, if he does not
happen to ask for it. Curiously enough, there are particular things — e.g., umbrellas
and books, which it is supposed not to be necessary to return, and which borrowers are
in the habit of withholding. Many go further, and feel under no obligation to repay
even money which they have borrowed. All such conduct is, however, culpable, since
it is tainted with dishonesty. Borrowers should remember —

I. That thet fail in theib duty to themselves if thet do not eestobb what
THEY have borkowed. Self-respect should prevent them from a line of conduct which
assimilates them to thieves, and is wanting in the boldness and straightforwardness that
characterise ordinary thieves.

II. That they fail eqkegiously in theib duty to the lendbb, who has put them
under a special obligation to him.

III. That they fail in theib duty to mankind at large, since they do their best
to deter men from ever lending, and so place difficulties in the way of borrowers. We
all need to borrow at times.

IV. That they fail in theib duty to God, who has declared in his word, that it is
* the wicked " who " borroweth and payeth not again " (Ps. xxxvii. 21).



HOMILIES BY VAETOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 16. — Bestitution. We have to mark again in this chapter with how even a
hand the law of Moses holds the scales of justice. The cases ruled by the principle of
restitution are the following : —

I. Theft (vers. 1 — 5). The illustrations in the law relate to thefts of cattle. But
the principles embodied apply to thefts generally (cf. ver. 7). Note — 1. The law which
punishes the theft, protects the thief's life. It refuses, indeed, to be responsible for him
in the event of his being smitten in the night-time, while engaged in the act of house-
breaking (ver. 2) — large rights of self defence being in this case necessary for the
protection of the community. The thief might be killed under a misapprehension of
his purjrxjse ; or by a blow struck at random in the darkness, and under the influence of
panic ; or in justifiable self-defence, in a scuffie arising from the attempt to detain him.
In other circumstances, the law will not allow the thief s life to be taken (ver. 3). All
the ends of justice are served by his being compelled to make restitution. Blood is not
to be spilt needlessly. The killing of a thief after sunrise is to be dealt with as murder.
We infer from this that theft ought not to be made a capital offence. English kw at



190



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxn. 16, 17,



the beginning of this century, was, in this respect, far behind the law of Mosea.
2. Theft is to he dealt with on the prinQiple of restitution. (1) It calls for more than
tinrnle restitution. At most the restitution of the simple equivalent brings matten
back to the position in which they were beforis the criminal act was committed. That

Sosition ought never to have been disturbed ; and punishment is still due to the wrong-
oer for having disturbed it. Hence the law that if the stolen animal is found in the
thief s hand alive, he shall restore double (ver. 4) ; if he has gone the length of killing or
selling it. he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep (ver. 1).
(2) Penalty is proportioned to offence. Both as respects the value of the things stolen,
and as respects the lengths to which criminality has proceeded. 3. If direct restitution
is impossible, the thief shall be compelled to make restitution by his labour — " He shall
be sold for his theft" (ver. 3). It would be an improvement in the administration of
justice if this principle were more firequently acted on. The imprisoned thief might be
made to vwrh out an equivalent for his theft ; and this, in addition to the hardships of
his imprisonment, might be accepted as legal restitution.

II. Damaqe (vers. 5, 6). The damage done, in the one case to a field or vineyard, by
allowing a beast to stray into it, and feed upon the produce ; in the other, by setting
fire to thorn hedges, and injuring the corn-stacks, or standing corn, is supposed to be
unintentional. Yet, as arising from preventible causes — from carelessness and neglect
— ^the owner of the beast, or the person who kindled the fire, is held responsible. He
must make good the damage from the hest of his own possessions. We are held fully
responsible for the consequences of neglect (cf. Heb. ii. 3).

III. Dishonest retention of property (vers. 7 — 14). Cases of this kind involved
judicial investigation. 1. If the charge of dishonest retention was made out, the fraudu-
lent party was to restore double (ver. 9). 2. If an ox, ass, sheep, or any beast, entrusted
to another to keep, died, was hurt, or was driven away, " no man seeing it," the person
responsible for its safety could clear himself by an oath from the suspicion of having
unlawfully "put his hand" to it (ver. 11). in this case, he was not required to make
good the loss. 3. If, however, the animal was stolen from his premises, under circum-
stances which implied a want of proper care, he was required to make restitution (ver.
12). 4. If the animal was alleged to have been torn to pieces, the trustee was required
to prove this by producing the mangled remains (ver. 13).

IV. Loss OP WHAT IS BORROWED (vers. 14, 15). 1. If the owner is not with his pro-
perty, the borrower is bound to make good loss by injury or death. 2. If the owner is
with it, the borrower is not held responsible. 3. If the article or beast be lent ou hiiei
the hire is regarded as covering the risk. — J. 0.



EXPOSITION.



HlBOELLANEOVS LaWS (vers. 1&— 31)

Vers. 16, 17. — Lawt againel teduction.
It has been already observed that in the
remainder of the Book of the Covenant there
is a want of method, or logical sequence.
Sednction, witchcraft, bestiality, worship of
false gods, oppression, are sins as different
from each other as can well be named, and seem
to have no connecting link. Possibly, Moses
•imply follows the order in which God actually
delivered the laws to him. Possibly, he wrote
them down as they occurred to his memory.
It is remarkable in his " law of sednction,"
that he makes the penalty fall with most
weight on the man, who must either marry
the damsel whom he has seduced, or provide
ker with • dowry, or, if she is a betrothed



maiden, suffer with her the penalty of death
(Deut. xxii. 23, 24).

Ver. 16. — If a man entice. Bather " seduce "
He shall surely endow her to be his wife.
In the East a man commonly pays money, or
money's worth, to the parents in order to
obtain a wife. The seducer was to comply
with this custom, and make over to the dam-
sel's father the sum of fifty shekels of silver
(Deut. xxii. 29), for his sanction of the
marriage. If the father consented, he wa»
compelled to marry the girl, and he was for-
bidden to repudiate her afterwards (ibid )

Ver. 17.— If her father utterly refiise, etc
Ihere might be such a disparity between the
parties, or such an ineligibility of the man for ■
son-in-law, that the father might refuse to re-
establish his daughter's status by the alliance.
In that case the offender was to pay such ■
•um ai wonld form a handsome dowiy for thf



OB. xzn. 18—26.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



lU



injnTed female, and enaTile her to enter with
proper dignity the house of whatever man
might he selected for her husband.

Ver. 18. — Law against witchcraft. Witch-
craft was professedly a league with powers in
rebellion against God. How far it was delu-
sion, how far imposture, how far a real con-
spiracy with the powers of evil, cannot now be
known. Let the most rationalistic view be
taken, and still there was in the practice an
absolute renunciation of religion, and of the
authority of Jehovah. Wizards (Lev. xix. 31)
and witches were, therefore, under the Jewish
theocracy, like idolaters and blasphemers, to
be put to death,

Ver. 19. — Law against unnatural crime.
The abomination here mentioned is said to
have -prevailed in Egypt, and even to have
formed part of the Egyptian religion (Herod.
ii 46 ; Strab. xvii. p. 802 ; Clem. Al. Coliort.
ad Gentes, p. 9 ; etc.). Though regarded by
the Greeks and Bomans as disgusting and
contemptible, it does not seem to have been
made a crime by any of their legislators. It
was, however, condemned by the Gentoo laws
and by the laws of Menu (xi. 17).

Ver. 20. — Law a^aimt sacrijieing to false
gods. Sacrifice was the chief act of worship ;
and to sacrifice to a false god was to renounce
the true God. Under a theocracy this was
rebellion, and rightly punished with temporal
death. In ordinaiy states it would be no
civil offence, and would be left to the final
judgment of the Almighty. Utterly destroyed.
Literally, " devoted ; " but with the meaning
of " devoted to destruction."

Ver. 21. — Law against oppression of
foreigners. It may be doubted whether such
a law as this was ever made in any other
country. Foreigners are generally looked
upon as " fair game," whom the natives of a
country may ridicule and annoy at their
pleasure. Native politeness gives them an
exceptional position in France ; but elsewhere
it is the general rule to " vex " them. The
Mosaic legislation protested strongly against
this practice (ch. xxiii. 9 ; Lev. xix. 33), and
even required the Israelites to " love the
stranger who dwelt with them as themselves "
(Lev. xix. 34). For ye were strangers. Com-
pare Lev. xrx. 34, and Deut. x. 19. In Ex
xxiii 9 the addition is made — " For ye know
the heart of a stranger"— ye know ; i.e., the
feelings which strangers have when they are
vexed and oppressed — ^ye know this by your
own sad experience, and should therefore have
• tenderness for strangers.

Vers. 22 — 24. — Law against oppressing
tuidows and orphans. With the stranger are
naturally placed the widow and orphan ; like
him, weak and defenceless ; like hma, special
objects of God's care. The negative precept
htrs gii en was foUowed np by numerous posi-



tive enactments in favour of the widow and th«
orphan, which much ameliorated their sad lot.
(See ch. xxiii. 11 ; Lev. xix. 9, 10 ; Deut. xiv
29 ; xvi. 11, 14 ; xxiv. 19—21 ; xxvi. 12, 18 )
On the whole, these laws appear to have been
fairly well observed by the Israelites; but
there were times when, in spite of them, poor
widows suffered much oppression. (See Ps.
xciv. 6 ; Is. i. 23 ; x. 2 ; Jer. vii. 3 — 6 ; xxiL
3 ; Zech. vii. 10 ; Mai. iii. S ; Matt, xxiii. 14.)
The prophets denounce this backsliding in
the strongest terms.

Ver. 22.— Te shall not afflict. The word

translated "afiflict" is of wide signification;
including ill-usage of all kinds. " Oppress,"
and even " vex," are stronger terms.

Ver. 23. — ^Aud they cry at all nnto me
Eather, " Surely, if they cry unto me." Com-
pare Gen. xxxi. 42.

Ver. 24. — I will kill you with the sword.
It was, in large measure, on account of the
neglect of this precept, that the capture of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and destruction
of its inhabitants, was allowed to take place
(Jer. xxii. 3 — 5). Your wives shall be widows,
etc. A guasj-retaliation. They shall be
exposed to the same sort of ill-usage as yon
have dealt out to other widows.

Vers. 25 — 27. — The law of lending moneg
and horiowing. It is peculiar to the Jewish
law to forbid the lending of money at interest
by citizen to citizen. Tn the present passage,
and in some others (Lev. .xxv. 35 ; Deut. xv
7), it might seem that interest was only for-
bidden in the case of a loan to one who was
poor ; but the general execration of usury
(Job xxiv. 9 ; Prov. xxviii. 8 ; Ezek. xviii. 13 ;
xxii. 12), and the description of the righteous
man as "he that hath not given his money
upon usury " (Ps. xv. 5 ; Ezek. xviii. 8), seem
rather to imply that the practice, so far as
Israelites were concerned, was forbidden alto-
gether. On the other hand, it was distinctly
declared (Deut. xxiii. 20) that interest might
be taken from strangers. There does not
seem to have been any rate of interest which
was regarded as excessive, and " usurious," in
the modern sense. In Scripture usury mean*
simply interest.

Ver. 26. — ^If thou take at all thy neighbonr'i
raiment to pledge. Lendiiig upon pledge,
the business of our modem pawnbrokers, was
not forbidden by the Jev/ish law ; only certain
articles of primary necessity were forbidden
to be taken, as the handmiU for grinding
flour, or either of its mill-stones (Deut. xxiv



l«t



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[oh. xxii. 27—91.



t). Borrswing upon pledge wa» practised
largely in the time of Nehemiah, and led to
veiy ill resnltB. See Neh. ch. v. Then Shalt
delivei it unto Lim by that the sun goeth
down. The reason is given in the next verse.
As it could not have been worth while to take
the pledge at all, if it was immediately to
have been given back for good, we must sup-
pose a practice of depositing the garment
during the day, and being allowed to have it
out at night.

Ver. 27.— Wherein shall he sleep t The
onter garment worn by the ancient Hebrews
was like that of the modem Bedouins — a sort
of large woollen shawl or blanket, in which
they enveloped the greater part of their
persons. It serves the Bedouins, to the pre-
sent time, as robe by day, and as coverlet by
night. When he orieth unto me. Com-
pare ver. 23. If the law is broken, and the
man cry unto the Lord, he wUl hear, and
avenge him.

Ver. 28. — Law against reviling God, or
rulers. It has been proposed to render
EloUm here either 1. " God ; " or 2. " The
gods;" or 8. "Judges."' The last of these
rendsrings is impossible, since Etohim in the
sense of " judges " always has the article.
The second, which is adopted by the Septua-
gint and the Authorised Version, seems pre-
cluded by the constant practice of the most
religious Jews, prophets and others, to speak
with contempt and contumely of the false
gods of the heathen. The passage must there-
fore be understood as forbidding men to speak
evil of (- od. (Compare Lev. xxiv. 15, 16.)
Vox curse the ruler of thy people. Bather,
" one exalted among thy people." The term
is generally used of the heads of families
(Num. iii. 24, 30, 35, etc.) and tribes (/b/d. vii.
10, 18, 24, etc.) in the Pentateuch. Later, it
is applied to kings (1 Kings xi. 34; Ezek.
xii. 10 ; xlv. 7, etc.). Our translators gener-
•lly render it by " prince."

Vers. 29, 30. — Law eancerning first-fruits.
God required as first-fruits from his people, 1.
The first-bom of their children ; 2. The first-
bom of all their cattle ; and 3. The first of all
the produce of their lands, whether wet or dry ;
wine, oil, grain of all kinds, and fruits. The



first-bom of their children were to be redeemed
by a money payment (ch. xiii, 13 ; Num. iii
46 — 48); but the rest was to be offered in
sacrifice. The phrase, " thou shalt not dday,"
implies that there would be reluctance to
comply with this obligation, and that the
offering would be continually put off. In
Nehemiah's time the entire custom had at one
period fallen into disuse. (Neh. z. 35, 36.)
The first of thy ripe fruits. Literally, " thy
fulness." The paraphrase of the A. V. no
doubt gives the tme meaning. The fiist-bom
of thy sons. Compare above, ch. xiii. 2, 12.

Ver. 30. — Seven days it shall be with its
dam. See Lev. xxii. 27. The main object is
that the dam may have during that time the
natural relief derivable from suckling its off-
spring. On the eighth day thou shalt give it
me. Some analogy may be traced between
this proviso and the law of circumcision. Birth
was viewed as an unclean process, and nothing
was fit for presentation to God excepting after
an interval.

Ver. 31. — ^And ye shall be holy men unto
me. Ye shall not be as other men, but " an
holy nation, a peculiar people; " and therefore
your separateness shall be marked by all
manner of laws and regulations with respect
to meats and drinks, designed to keep you free
from every uncleanness. One such law then
follows —

Law against eating (he flesh of an animai
killed by another. The blood of such aa
animal would not be properly drained from it.
Some would remain in the tissues, and thence
the animal would be unclean ; again, the car-
nivorous beast which " tore " it would also be
unclean, and by contact would impart of its
uncleanness to the other. Ye shall oast it to
the dogs, is probably not intended to exclude
the giving or selling of it to an alien, if one
were at hand, according to the permission
accorded in Deut. xiv. 21 ; but points simply
to the mode whereby the flesh was to be got
rid of, if aliens were not at hand, or if they
declined to eat the animals. Dogs were so
unclean that they might be fed on anything.
Their chief use was to be scavengers (2 S.
ix. 35, 36)



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 16 — 28. — The teverity and the tenderness of God. The mtsccllaneous lawa
thrown together, without any clear logical sequence or indeed any manifest connectian,
in the latter part of this chapter, may, generally speaking, be grouped under the two
heads of instances of the Divine severity, and instances of the Divine tenderness. Here, as
in so many places, " mercy and truth meet together — righteousness and peace kiss each
other." God ia as merciful to the weak and helpless as severe towards ihe bold and
iitubbom evil-doer. If his justice is an inalienable attribute, eo is his kindness and



CH. XXII. 16—28]. THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 1»3

ootn passion. The twofold aspect of the Divine Nature is steadily kept before
us by an arrangement in which its opposite sides are presented to our contemplation
alternately.

I. Instances op the Divine severity. 1. " Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live "
(rerse 18). 2. "Whoso lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death" (verse 19).
3. " He that sacrifices to any god, save unto the Lord only, he shall be utterly de-
st.cyed ' (verse 20). 4. " Thou shalt not revile the gods (God) nor curse the ruler of thy
people •' (verse 28). In these utterances it is Justice that makes itself heard, wrath that
manifests itself, severity that gives strict rules for human conduct, and threatens
tremendous penalties in case of their infringement. (1) Witchcraft is made a capital
offence. Modems constantly speak of witchcraft as founded on mere illusion, and
regard witches and wizards as unfortunate persons, labouring under a certain amount of
self-deception, and hounded to their death by persecutors far more to blame than their
victims. It is generally assumed at the present day that to hold actual communication
with evil spirits, and thus obtain supernatural power, is impossible. We are told that
" it is absolutely impossible to acknowledge sorcerers or witches," and that " those who
pretend to be such must be considered as impious and nefarious impostors " (Kalisch).
The whole round of natural phenomena is presumed to be known, and no mystery to
remain anywhere. Witches and wizards are tricksters ; demonology and magic, delu-
sions ; evil spirits themselves either non-existent, or relegated to another sphere, and so
entirely beyond human cognisance. But the language and ideas of Scriptu re are different.
There evil spirits are regarded as really existing, and the witch is considered to have
access to them. Death would scarcely be assigned as the penalty for mere trickery and
imposture. It is well deserved by those who renounce God, and place their trust in
spirits of darkness altogether. While the subject must be allowed to be one about which
much obscurity still lingers, it would seem necessary for those who accept Scripture as
an infallible guide, to put aside the shallow theories of modem sciolists, and hold, with the
wisest of all ages, that " there are more things in heaven and earth, than are dreamt of
in our philosophy." (2) Unnatural crime is made capital. All that is contrary to
nature, all that tends to produce " confusion " in his universe, is absolutely hateful to
God. Human legislators cared little about a sin which a natural repulsion caused to be
rare, and which had no very obvious ill effects upon siT-ielv. Some religions con-
secrated it and made it a portion of their ceremonial. Some, and they were the greater
number, viewed it with complete indifference. The Mosaic legislation, differing from
almost all others, placed upon the offence the brand of heinous guilt, and required that
both the man and the beast should die (Lev. xx. 15, 16). (3) The acknowledgment of
fdlte gods in an open and pvhlic way is forbidden under the same penalty. Thought is
left free — ^no inquisitorship is established — but if men parade their misbelief by offering
sacrifices to the gods of other nations, the insult to Jehovah is to be punished cnpitally.
It was flagrant rebellion against God, and a transgression of the fundamental law on
which the community was built (ch. xx. 3). It was a pollution to the land, and might
draw down Divine judgment on the nation. It was oflensive to the consciences of all
God-fearing men in the community. No punishment imder the death-penalty could be
adequate for a crime, which was against God, against the State, and against society.
The severity was, however, without parallel in other codes. (4) EevUing God, and
reviling rulers are toth sternly forbidden ; but the penalty is not as yet affixed. Eeviling
God was, like sacrificing to false gods, an overt act of iusult, challenging notice, and
if allowed, destmctive of the theocracy. The penalty afterwards affixed to it was death
(Lev. xxiv. 16). In the Book of the Covenant it was thought enough to forbid it, the
temptation to such an act not being great. Beviling rulers seems to have been coupled
with reviling God in order to introduce the idea that " the powers that be are ordained
of God," and consequently that those who resist them " resist the ordinance of God."
The death-penalty, though not positively enacted in this case, is the natural con-
sequence of resisting one who " beareth not the sword in vain." Thus far, therefore,
the legislation here placed before us is severe — almost Draconic. Expressly or impliedly
the death-penalty is threatened in every case. God is shown forth as an inexorable judge,
who " will by no means absolve the wicked " — and man can but tremble before him
On the other hand, in the remainder of the passage we have —

IL Inbtanoeb or tbk Divinb tenderness. 1. " Thou shalt neither vex a rtran{r>;r

SXODUB— II.



IM THE BOOK OF EXODUS, [oh. xxn. 16— 2a

nor oppress him " (ver. 21). 2. " Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child "
(ver. 2U). 3. " Thou shalt not lend thy money unto any of my people that is poor
upon nsury " (ver. 25). 4. " Thou shalt not take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge "

iver. 26). The Divine protection is extended especially over four classes of persons.
1) The stranger — the sojourner in a foreign land — alien in blood, in language, in
religion probably — cut off from the protection of his own government, or kinsfolk, or
fellow-tribesmen, and therefore all the more appealing for protection to the pity and
the providence of God. To him the Sabbath rest had been already extended by a
special provision (ch. xx. 10) ; if he would be circumcised, he might eat the passover
(ch. xii. 48, 49) ; he might make his offerings at the door of the tabernacle (Lev.
xvii. 8, 9) ; he was to have access to the cities of refuge (ib. xxxv. 15). It was now
enjoined that he should not be oppressed in any way ; that he should not even be
" vexed." Kindness, consideration, courtesy, were made the stranger's due. In the
final summary of the law (Deut. x. 18, 19) it was declared that God " loved" him, and
the general command was given to all Israelites — "Love ye the stranger; for ye were
strangers in the land of Egypt." (2) JTie widow. 'Bis widowed mother was especially
dear to our Lord ; and it is perhaps with secret reference to the boundless tenderness called
forth in him by her condition that throughout Scripture there is so deep a sympathy
with the widow's lot. From the sad Naomi, with her piteous outbreak — " Call me not
Naomi, but Mara " — to the blessed Anna and the pious Dorcas, the widows of the
Revealed Word have the testimony of the Spirit in their favour. For the widow of
Sarepta the great law of there being no return from the grave is first broken through,
and the mother is comforted by receiving back her dead child (1 Kings xvii. 9 — 24).
For the widow of Nain Christ wrought one of his three similar miracles. In the early
Church special care was taken of widows (Acts vi. 1 ; 1 Tim. v. 3 — 9 and 16) ; and
St. James was inspired to declare to the Church of all ages that " Pure religion and
undefiled before God is this — to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction,
and to keep himself unspotted from the world" (J as. i. 27). (3) The fatlierless. The
orphan is generally coupled with the widow in Scripture, and God's protection is
equally extended over both. In the present passage the oppression of both is alike
forbiddei^ and in other parts of the law both are secured certain advantages (Deut.
xiv. 29 ; xxiv. 17, 19, 21 ; xxvi. 12, 13, etc.). God proclaims himself in an especial
sense " the father of the fatherless " (Ps. Ixviii. 5), and " the helper of the fatherless "
Cib. X. 14) ; in him the fatherless " find mercy " (Hos. xiv. 2). That tender compas-
non of the Most High, wherewith he looks on affliction generally, is poured without
stint upon those who have so much need of his support and guidance, being left without
their natural earthly protector. (4) The poor. Poverty is a far milder affliction than
bereavement, since by nature all are poor, no man bringing with him into the world
any property. Still, in states where there has been an accumulation of wealth, it is a
disadvantage to be bom poor, and a still greater disadvantage to have known riches
and to have lost them. Poverty will ever be the lot of large numbers ; of the greater
portion through their own fault, but of many without fault of their own. " The poor
shall never cease out of the land," we are told (Deut. xv. 11) ; and, again, " The poor
ye have always with you " (John xii 8). God's pity embraces this large class also ;
and he seeks to attract to them the regards of their more fortunate brethren. Not
only were the Israelites forbidden to lend money to them upon usury ; bu± they were
expressly commanded to be ready to lend to them without (Deut. xv. 7 — 10). Such as
fell into servitude for debt, and completed their time, were not to be cast adrift or sent
away empty, but to be furnished liberally out of their master's flock and granary and
winepress (ih. vers. 13, 14), that they might begin the world again with a little capital,
and be saved from destitution. In modern times, owing to change of circumstances,
laws such as this do not admit of a literal obedience ; but we may act in the spirit of
them, by never pressing hard on the poor, l^ sharing with them our superfluity, by
pleading for them with others, and " seeing that such as are in need and necessity have
right." There is still much oppression of poor men even in Christian coimtries — ^much
need of improvement in their cottages, in the sanitary condition of their surroundings,
in the medical provision made for them, and in the administration of the laws for their
relief when old and infirm. A wide field is open tor those who would obtain the bleaung
promised to such ai " consider the poor" (Ps. xii. 1).



■. xxn. 16-31.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. IBS



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOSa

Ten. 16 — ^21. — Ahominationt. This series of precepts deals with seduction, witob-
cnft, bestiality, and the sin of sacrificing to other gods than Jehovah. The case ol
the seducer might have been brought under the laws embodying the principle of resti-
tution. It forms a transition to the others, in which we pass from the sphere of
judicial right to what is negatively and positively due from Israel as " an holy people "
to Jehovah. 1. Seduction. Lewdness in every form is sternly reprobated by the law
of Moses (cf. Deut, xxii. 13 — 30). The man who seduced an tmbetrothed maid was
to be compelled to marry her; or, if her parents refused, was to pay her a dowry.
2. Witchcraft. With equal strictness was forbidden all trafficking, whether in pretence
or in reality, with imholy powers. The crime — a violation of the first principles of the
theocracy — was to be punished with death. There cannot be perfect love to God, and
communion with him, and trafficking with the devil at the same time. The witch-
craft condemned by the law was evil in itself, and was connected with foolish and
wicked rites (cf. Deut. xviii. 9 — 15). 3. Bestiality. This, as an inversion of the order
of nature, and in itself an act of the grossest abominableness, was "surely" to be
punished with death. 4. Sacrificing to other gods. Possibly this crime is mentioned
here as, in a sense, the spiritual counterpart of the vices above noted, i.e., as involving
f 1) Spiritual adultery, (2) The worshipping of " devils " (Lev. xviii. 7 ; Deut. xxxii. 17),
(3) Filthy and impure rites (cf. Deut. xxiii. 17, 18). — J. 0.

Vers. 21 — 2d. — Jehovah's protegis and representatives. I. Jehovah's PROTioia
(vers. 21 — 28). These are the stranger, the fatherless, the widow, and the poor gene-
rally — all of whom the Israelites are forbidden to "afflict." The ground of Jehovah ■
interest in them is his own character — " for I am gracious " (ver. 27). In him, how-
ever little they may sometimes think of it or feel it, they have a constant Friend, a
great invisible Protector. They are (in the sense of Koman law) Jehovah's " clients."
He is their great Patron ; he identifies himself with their interests ; he will uphold
their cause. Injuries done to them he will resent as if done to himself, and will call
the wrong-doer to strict account. If earthly law fails, let them cry to him, and he will
put the jus talionis in operation with his own hands (vers. 23, 24, 27). Vers. 25 — 28
specially forbid exacting treatment of the poor. Liberal help is to be afforded them. A
neighbour is not to be harshly dealt with when driven to a strait. His garment, if
given as a pledge, is not to be kept beyond nightfall, which is practically equivalent to
saying that it is not to bn taken from him at all (ver. 27). What kindness breathes
in these precepts ! How justly does the law which embodies them claim to be a law of
love ! And how far, even yet, is our Christian society from having risen to the height
of the standard they set up I Let us seek ourselves to translate them more uniformly
into practice. Learn also, from these precepts, inculcatmg love to the stranger, how
little ground there is for accusing the religion of Moses of fanatical hatred of foreign
peoples.

II. Jehovah's repbesbntatives (ver. 28). Magistrates and rulers are to be treated
with respect. They are invested with a portion of God's authority (Eom. xiv. 1).
-J. 0.

Vers. 29 — 31. — Jehovah's dues. These, as part of the law's righteousness, are to be
faithfully rendered. Let us not forget, when reflecting on what is due from man to
man, to reflect also on what is due from man to God. When inwardly boasting of
conscientiousness in rendering to every man his own, let us ask if we have been equally
scrupulous in the discharge of our obligations to our Maker. In all spheres of life God
claims of our first and best (see on ch. xiii. 2, 12). God's highest due is that we be
" holy." The precept in ver. 31 is connected with the prohibition to eat flesh with the
blood in it. — J. 0.

Ver. 21. — The treatment of the stranger. L Note the fact that stbanqerb wom.1

DOME INTO SUCH CONTACT WITH ISRAEL AS TO PROVIDE OPPORTUNITY FOR THIS TRBAT-

■UT. Jehovah had done a great deal in Israel to make them a separated people—

OS



IM THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxn. 2L



separated in many ways as by the land of their dwelling, their national institutions,
their worship, their personal rite of circumcision ; but separation, with all its rigoun
tnd all the penalties for neglecting it, could never become isolation. Solemnly indeed
were the people enjoined to drive out the Canaamtes,.and trample down all idolatry ; but
there still remained the fact, that by a certain Divine and glorious necessity, strangers
were to come into considerable intercourse with them. That strangers should have been
drawn to them when they settled in their fertile home was only likely ; but this must
nave happened to some extent even before. We may be perfectly certain, considering
the analogies of after generations and what we read of proselytism in the New Testa-
ment, that from the very first there must have been some with the proselyte disposition
in them. Few perhaps of this sort were to be found in the mixed multitude coming out
of Egypt — ^but still there were some. The Lord knoweth them that are his. If ther«
are those of whom John might say, " They went out from us because they were not of
us," so there are those of whom the Church may ever say, " They come to us because
they are of us." For such God lovingly and amply provided from the first, even when
they came with all the disadvantages and difficulties of strangers to contend against.
There is in this very injunction, a foreshadowing of the power and attractiveness to
which Israel in due time would rise, though as yet it was hut a fugitive people without
discipline and without coherence. Strangers in their need were even now drawn to
Israel and would be drawn still more, just as years ago their needy ancestor and his
children were drawn to Egypt because of the corn that was there.

II. The strong temptation to treat these fokbionehs badly. There is a very
melancholy picture of human inconsistency here presented. Liberated slaves, forgetting
the horrors of their own servitude, treat with like cruelty those exposed to the oppor-
tunity of that cruelty. Men soon forget their past condition. Israel, we see, forgot
the horror of their own Egyptian experiences in two ways. 1. They lusted after the
flesh-pots of Egypt. 2. They failed in sympathy for the foreigners among themselves.
When we have possessions and power and thus get the chance of domination, we are
only too ready to treat foreigners either as interlopers wishing to spoil us, or tools fitted
to increase our possessions. The world, alas ! is always abounding in a great number of
the feeble and unfortunate, of whom it is only too easy to take advantage. More than
one class of these are mentioned in this chapter, and among them we see that the
foreigner occupies a conspicuous place. The stranger is the man without friends ; he
comes into a place where the very things that profit the knowing are traps and snares
for the ignorant. Consider the difficulties of a foreigner planted down in the midst
of a huge city like London, a place of dangers and difficulties even for an Englishman
who is thrown into it for the first time, and how much more for one whom ignorance of
the language makes doubly strange I Blanco White, who it will be remembered was an
exile from his native land of Spain, gives as an instance of Shakespeare's surprising
knowledge of the human mind and heart " the passage in which he describes the magni-
tude of the loss which a man banished from his country has to endure by living among
those who do not understand his native language." The words are those put into the
mouth of Mowbray Duke of Korfolk, on his banishment by Richard IL

" The language I have leam'd these forty years,
My native English, now I must forego.
And now my tongue's use is to me no moi8
Than an onstringed viol or a harp,
Or like a cunning instrument cased up
Or, being open, put into his hands
That knows no touch to tune the harmony s
Within my mouth you have engaoled my tongai^
Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips;
And dull imfeehng barren ignorance
Is made my gaoler to attend on me."

If this be 10, the stranger's feelings are some index to the temptations of those among
whom he is cast. There may not be downright robbery, but there are tricks of trader
extortionate charges on pretence of making hay while the sun shines ; in short there an
all torts of human foxes ever on the watch to catch the ignorant, the innocent, ind tbe



CH. xxn. 22— 24.] THE BOOK OF EXODUSw IW

eonfiding. But are God's people amenable to charges of this kind ? It is evident tlmt
the Israelites were, from this warning to them. It was so easy to tiim Jehovah's denuu-
ciations of the idolater into excuses for maltreating the stranger because he had the look
of an idolater. Nay more, how easy it was both to yield to the idolatry and maltreat
th3 stranger I

III. The gkeat consideration which is to lead to proper treatment op thk
BTHANOEB. " Ye Were strangers in the land of Egypt." Great as the temptation was to
treat strangers badly, such treatment if only looked at in a certain light would be scarcely
excusable at all. This possible treatment of the stranger is to be looked at in the clear
light of our Lord's parable concerning the forgiven yet unforgiving debtor. Israel had
been strangers in Egypt, not only foreigners among the Egyptians, but to some extent
exiles from God. who had put on the appearance ot having forgotten them. But now he
had brought them to himself, they were to be his people, a holy nation ; and it was
want of loyalty to God, it was behaviour unworthy of a holy nation lor them to treat
strangers as the Egyptians had treated Israel. God hates the oppressor everywhere and
pities the oppressed. The people of God never dishonour their name more than when
they trample on the alien from the commonwealth of Israel and' the stranger from the
covenant of promise. The alien may become as the home-born. The stranger may
become familiar with Divine covenants and promises as if he were an Israelite from the
womb. Even already the Israelites were being warned against counting too much on out-
ward signs and natural descent. We should ever be looking for the minimum of living
faith rather than the maximum of formal orthodoxy. A tiny seed is more to be
cherished than a huge log of timber ; for the one has whole living forests in it, and the
other is dead and dead it must remain. We must labour to get the insight whereby we
may penetrate through strange outward aspects and discern the spiritual life and sym-
pathies underneath. God will give us the eye to discover, the honest and good eye,
whether the stranger who comes is a wandering sheep seeking the true flock or a wolf
in sheep's clothing. To mistake the sheep for the wolf is equally lamentable with mis-
taking the wolf for the sheep. -The Pharisaic spirit so easily finds entrance, welcome and
dominion in our breasts. It is so natural to play the censor towards those who sin the
sins which we have no temptation to fall into. He without mercy for him that seems a
stranger to God, may suspect that he is still a stranger himself. Many even of the
Israelites at Mount Sinai had not been brought to God in the full sense of the term.
Theirs was but a local contiguity to the awful demonstrations, not an attachment of
the whole heart to the pure and glorious God who was behind the demonstrations. — ¥.

Vers. 22 — ^24. — The treatment of the widow and the fatherless. This injimction
is even more humiliating to receive than the preceding one. It was bad enough
to find those who had been foreigners in Egypt oppressing foreigners among them-
selves, and forgetting their own sufferings and deliverances. Still the slight excuse
was available tliat as God's mercy to Israel receded into the past, and became a
mercy to a former generation rather than a present one (at least, so it might be
plausibly put), it was only too likely to be forgotten. Men are unable to make
the past stand with any power against the influences of the present. But here are
those, the widow and the fatherless, whom Nature in her ever fresh and living power,
marks out herself as irresistible objects for pity and succour. What a disgrace to
human nature that an injunction not to afflict the widow and fatherless should be
necessary! And yet common observation only too often and sadly tells us that
the widow and fatherless children may easily become the victims of an inconsiderate
and unscrupulous self-seeking, which in its practical results is as afflicting as the
most deliberate cruelty. It is a very beautiful element of OotPs revelation of himself in
the Scriptures, thai he is so often set before us as caring for the fatherless and the widow,
and denouncing those who do not care for them. Widows in their needs, and his supply
for their needs, appear in some of the most prominent scenes of the sacred page.
Observe the provision that was made for the fatherless and the widow, along with
the Levite and the stranger, to eat of the tithe of the yearly produce (Deut. xiv. 29X
knd also to get their share in the rejoicings at the feast of weeks and the feast oj
tabernacles (Deut. xvi. 11 — 14). The neighbour's raiment might be taken to pledge
ind«r certain conditions, but s widow's raiment was not to be taken in pledge at



lag THE BOOK OF EXODUa. |,oh. xxii. 2fr— 27

all (Deut. xxIt. 17). The forgotten sheaf in the field, and the gleanings of the olive
boughs and of the vineyards, were to be left for the stranger, the fatherless, and the
widow (Deut. xxiv. 19 — 21) ; and cursed was he to be who perverted the judgment oi
the same (Deut. xxvii. 19). When God sustained Elijah, at the time of judicial drought
and &mine in the land, he sustained the widow and the fatherless at the same time ;
and who knows how many widows and fatherless besides? It is part of the
praise which is due to God in song, that he relieves the fatherless and the widow. A
Father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the widows is God, in his holy habitation
(Ps. Ixviii. 5; cxlvi. 9). There can thus be no mistake about God's interest in those
who are left without their natural provider and protector. But then on the other hand,
these very same Scriptures which assure us of Oo(Ps concern, remind us of man's
cruelty, unrighteousness, and oppression. Job tells us of those who drive away the ass
of the fatherless, and take the widow's ox for 'a pledge (xxiv. 3); and it was part
of memory's brightening, as he thought upon his happier past, that he had delivered the
fatherless and caused the widow's heart to sing for joy. God sent Isaiah to the
hypocrites, the formal religionists who satiated God with ceremonial observances, to bid
them turn to the realities of righteousness ; and one of the foremost things among these
was to judge the fatherless and plead for the widow. The faithful city had fallen, until
those whose duty it was to judge the fatlierless, and have the cause of the widow come
to them, had sunk into companions of thieves and seekers of bribes. In the parable of
the judge who feared not God, neither regarded man, we may be sure there is great
significance beyond the purpose for which it was spoken. While first of all it teaches
the need of importunity in prayer, it reminds us also how hard it is for the feeble
woman, whose sphere has been the seclusion of home, to come out in the world and
make her way against the oppressor and against the judge, who would be quick enough to
listen to her if she was only rich, and could bribe him. By sheer carelessness and
thoughtlessness, hy the sin of omission even more than the sin of commission, we may
fall into the wickedness of afflicting the widow and the fatherless ; and to be on the alert
to succour them is the only way in which we can effectually guard against this wicked-
ness. We see that even in the Church of Christ, and in those first days when all that
believed were together, and had all things in common — when all seemed so beautiful and
promising, heaven fairly begun on earth — even then, and only too soon, the widows
began *. ■ complain that they were neglected in the daily ministrations. Some of this
perhaps was mere mendicant grumbling, but much of it would have a real cause. The
only way we can keep the oppressor's heart out of us is to have the heart living
and acting under the power of a Divinely-inspired love. It is a first principle of
Christian ethics that if we are not doing good, we are doing ill ; and we may be parties
to the worst oppression, even when we are not thinking of oppression at all. In what
a light does this Mosaic injunction bring out the teaching of James as to that practical

element in pure religion of visiting the fatherless and the widow. If the Christian

his opportunities, his motives, his consolations, his resources to help and advise being
what they are — does not visit the fatherless and the widow, depend upon it others will
with very different designs. The greatest promptitude and decision are needed to
anticipate the action of the rapacious and selfish. — Y.

Vers. 25 — 27.— The treatment of the poor. Here are two regulations, commanding not
to be usurious in the lending of money to the poor, and not to retain the pledged
garment over night. How forcibly they bring out the one crowning iU connected with
poverty m the eyes of the world I The poor man is the man without money ■ and lack
of money bars his way in only too many directions. Let him be ever so noble in
character, ever so heroic, wise, and self-denying in action, it avails nothing. The poor
wise man delivered the httle city that was besieged by a great king ; yet no man
remembered that same poor man. These Israelites had gone out of E^ypt witt
immense wealth but probably even then it was very unequally distributedT and the
tendency would be, as the tendency always is, for the inequality to become greater still
Hence inthis regulation God was addressing those who from the inordinate feeliu<r oi
desire yrh\ch wealth inspires, would be peculiarly tempted to take advantage of "the
poor. God never shows any mercy to the rich man so far as his riches are concerned.
Those nches are fuU of penl, and fiiUer of peril to their owner than to any one ehw



. sxin. 1—19.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



19a



He who counselled, by his Son, to pluck out the right eye and cut off the right hand,
is not likely to pay respect to a thing like wealth, even more external stilL The chief
matter in these regulations is how the poor and needy may be most advantaged, and
whatever will do that most effectually is the thing to be done. Whether mere moneg
be lost or gained is a matter of no consequence whatever.

I. These provisions with bespeot to lending obviouslt do not exclude oivino.
" If thou lend money," etc. But God, in many instances, would be better pleased
with giving than with lending. If only men were seeking with all their hearts to do
his will, all these minute regulations would be unnecessary. The advantage of the
poor, as we have just seen, was the main thing to be considered here. And it might
be for the advantage of the receiver, and stiU more for the advantage of the giver in
the highest sense of the word advantage, to give, hoping to receive nothing again.
Just as money does untold harm when foolishly and wickedly spent, so when wisely
spent it may do untold good. Lending may serve well, but ^ving may serve much
better ; and that is the wisest course which is judged to do the most good. Some would
find it easier to give than to lend, being naturally generous, disposed to lavishness,
shrinking from the risk of being thought stingy. And yet sometimes in giving they
would be doing a very hurtful thing, for lending would be better.

II. Nor is there anything like a fobbiddino op the loan op monkt fob com-
MEBOiAL PUBPOSES. If One man lends to another a certain sum of money with which
to trade, it is plain that he acts lawfully in getting interest for the use of it. For if he
were not lending money to another, he would be using it himself, and the interest
represents his profit, which is the same whoever uses the money. The trade of the
world, and therefore the good of the world would be greatly limited and hampered but
for the use of borrowed capital. It may be that the man who has the capital has
neither the disposition nor ability to use it. Let him then, upon a fair consideration,
lend the capital to the man who can use it.

III. Chiefly we must strive to avoid the taking selfish advantaqe of cub
neiqhbouk's necessities. Rather we should rejoice to take advantage of these neces-
sities to show beyond all dispute, that the love of God is indeed the ruling principle of
our hearts. Man's extremity, it has often been said, is God's opportunity, and so it
should be the Christian's opportunity. By timely aid, if we have it to bestow, let ua
strive to deliver the poor from the clutches of the usiu:er, and especially let us give our
aid to what may be devised for the curing of poverty's disease altogether. Every
alteration either in laws or customs which will tend to diminish poverty — let it have
our strenuous support. Bear in mind that whatever each man has beyond a certain
moderate share of this world's goods can only come to him because others have less
than reasonable comfort demands. We should ever be aiming by all methods
that are reasonable, just, and practicable, to secure to each one neither poverty nor
riches, but just that food which is convenient for him. God wishes every man to have
his daily bread ; and it is an awful thing that we by our selfishness do so much to make
the question of daily bread the only one that many of our feUow-creatures have time or
inclination to ask. It seems to take every hour and every energy to keep the wolf firom
the door. — Y.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEE XXin.
The Book of the Covenant. — Continued,
Vers. 1 — 19. — ^Miscellaneous Laws — con-
tinued. The same want of logical arrange-
ment appears in this chapter as in the preced-
ing one. The first nine verses contain some
twelve laws, of which not more than two that
■le consecutive can be said to be on the same
subject. There is perhaps in the section a
piedominant idea of warning against sins and



errors connected with the trial of caoses befon
a court, but verses 4 and 5, at any late, h»
quite outside this idea. From verse 10 to
verse 19 the laws are connected with cere-
monial observance and include (1) The law
of the Sabbath, (2) of the Sabbaticfd year, (3)
of the Great Festivals, (4) of sacrifice, and
(5) of first-fruits.

Ver. 1. — The ninth commandment is het*
expanded and developed. Thou shalt Ml
raise a false report, forbids the origination of



200



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxin. 1—18.



a calunmj; the other clause prohibits the
joining with others in spreading one. Both
clauses have a special reference to bearing
witness in a court, but neither would seem to
be confined to it.

Ver. 2. — Then shalt not follow a mnltitnda
to do evil. Bather, " Thou shalt not follow
a multitude to evil." A law alike for deed,
for word, and for thought. The example of
the many is to be shunned. " Wide is the
gate and broad is the way that leadeth to
destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat." But "strait is the gate and
narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life ;
and few there be that find it " (Matt. vii. 13,
14). It is extraordinary that so many, even
of professing Christians, are content to go
with the many, notwithstanding the warnings
against so doing, both of the law and of the
Gospel. Neither shalt thou speak, etc.
Batiier, " Neither shalt thou bear witness in
a cause to go aside after a multitude to put
aside justice." The general precept is
followed by a particular application of it. In
judging a cause, if thou art one of the judges,
thou shalt not simply go with the majority,
if it be bent on injustice, but form thine own
opinion and adhere to it.

Ver. 3. — Neither shalt thou oonntenance
• poor man in his cause. After the many
precepts in favour of the poor, this injunction
produces a sort of shock. But it is to be un-
derstood as simply forbidding any undue
favouring of the poor because they are poor,
and so as equivalent to the precept in Lev.
xix. 15, " Thou shalt not respect the person
of the poor." In courts of justice, strict
justice is to be rendered, without any leaning
either towards the rich, or towards the poor.
To lean either way is to pervert judgment.

Ver. 4. — ^Ihine enemy's ox. A private
enemy is here spoken of, not a public one, as
in Deut. xxiii. 6. It is remarkable that the
law should have so far anticipated Christianity
as to have laid it down that men have duties
of friendliness even towards their enemies, and
are bound under certain circumstances to
render them a service. " Hate thine enemies "
(Matt. V. 43) was no injunction of the Mosaic
law, but a conclusion which Babbinical
teachers unwarrantably drew from it. Chris-
tianity, however, goes far beyond Mosaism in
laying down the broad precept — " Love your
enemies."

Ver. 5. — ^If thon see the ass of him that
hateth thee, etc. The general meaning of
the passage is clear — assistance is to be given
to the fallen ass of an enemy — but the exact
lense of both the second and third clauses is
doubtful. Many renderings have been sug-
pested ; but it is not clear that any one of them
IS an improvement on the' Authorised Version.
Thon shalt snrely help with him. The joint
participation in an act of mercy towards a



fallen beast would bring the enemies into
friendly contact, and soften their feelingi
towards each other.

Ver. 6. — ^As in verse 8 men were warned
not to favour the poor unduly in courts of
justice out of compassion for them, so here
there is a warning against the opposite, and
far more usual error, of leaning against the
poor man in our evidence or in our decisions
The scales of justice are to be held even ; strict
right is to be done ; our feelings are not be
allowed to infiueuce us, much less our class
prejudices.

Ver. 7. — Keep thee far from a false matter.
Hold aloof, i.e., from anything like a false
accusation. Neither bring one, nor coimte-
nance one, else those mayest cause the death
of an innocent and righteous man, and bring
down on thyself the vengeance of him, who
will not justify the wicked.

Ver. 8. — ^Aud thou shalt take no gift. The
worst sin of a judge, and the commonest in
the East, is to accept a bribe from one of the
parties to a suit, and give sentence accordingly.
As such a practice defeats the whole end for
which the administration of justice exists, it
is, when detected, fur the most part, punished
capitally. Joseph us tells us that it was so
among the Jens (Coittr. Apion. ii. 27) ; but the
Mosaic code, as it has come down to us, omits
to fix the penalty. Whatever it was, it was
practically set at nought. Eli's sons " turned
aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted
judgment" (1 Sam. viii. 3). In David's
time, men's hands were " full of bribes "
(Ps. xxvi. 10). Solomon complains of wicked
men " taking gifts out of their bosoms to per-
vert the ways of judgment " (Prov. xvii. 23).
Isaiah is never weary of bearing witness
against the princes of his day, who " love gifts
and follow after rewards " (Is. i. 23) ; who
"justify the wicked for reward, and take
away the righteousness of the righteous from
him " (ib. v. 23). Micah adds his testimony
— " Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the
house of Jacob and princes of the house of
Israel, that cCbhor judgment and pen^ert aS
equity. They bnild up Zion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity. The heads thereof
judge for reward (ch. iii. 9 — 11). The
gift blfndeth the wise. See Deut. xvi. 19.

Ver. 9. — Thou shalt not oppress a stranger.
This is a repetition of ch. xxii. 21, with perhaps
a special reference to oppression through
courts of justice. For tiion knowest l£a
heart of a stranger. Literally, " the mind of
a stranger," or, in other words, his thoughts
and feelings. Thou shouldest therefore b«
able to sympathise with him.

Cekemonial Laws (vers. 10 — 19).

Vers. 10, 11. — Law of the Sabbatical year
Days of rest, at regular or irregular intervals,
were well known to the ancieiits * and nuu



OH. XXUI. 10—17.]



IHE BOOK OF EXODUa.



m



tegulations of the kind existed in most
eoontries But entire years of rest were
wholly unknown to any nation except the
Israelites, and exposed them to the reproach
of idleness. (See Tacit. Hist. v. 4 : — " Sep-
timo die otium placuisse ferunt, quia is finem
laborom dedit ; dein, bldndiente inertia, sep-
tlmnm quoque annum ignavisa datum "). In a
primitive condition of agriculture, when rota-
tion of crops was unknown, artificial manure
unemployed, and the need of letting even
the best land sometimes lie fallow unrecog-
nised, it may not have been an uneconomical
arrangement to require an entire suspension
of cmtivation once in seven years. But
great difficulty was probably experienced in
enforcing the law. Just as there were persons
who wished to gather manna on the seventh
day (ch. xvi. 27), so there would be many
anxious to obtain in the seventh year some-
thing more from their fields than Nature
would give them if left to herself. If the
" seventy years " of the captivity were in-
tended exactly to make up for omissions of
the due observance of the sabbatical year, we
must suppose that between the time of the
exodus and the destruction of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar, the ordinance had been as
often neglected as observed. (See 2 Chron.
xxxvi. 21.) The primary object of the re-
quirement was, as stated in ver. II, that the
pool of thy people may eat, what the land
brought forth of its own accord in the
Sabbatical year being shared by them (Lev.
XXV. vL). But uo doubt it was also intended
that the Sabbatical year should be one of
increased religious observance, whereof the
solemn reading of the law in the ears of the
people at the Feast of Tabernacles " in the
year of release " (Deut. xxxi. 10) was an in-
dication and a part. That reading was properly
preceded by a time of religious prepara-
tion (Neh. viii. 1 — 15), and would naturally
lead on to further acts of a religious character,
which might occupy a considerable period
(iMd. chs. ix. and x.). Altogether, the year
was a most solemn period, calling men to
religious self-examination, to repentance, to
the formation of holy habits, and tending to
a general elevation among the people of the
standard of holiness. What they leave the
beasts of the field shall eat. There was to
be no regular ingathering. The proprietor,
his servants, the poor, and the stranger were
to take what they needed; and the residue
was to be for the cattle and for the beasts
that were in the land (Deut. xxv. 6, 7). Thy
vineyard — thy oliveyard. Com, wine, and
oil were the only important products of
Palestine ; and this mention of the vineyard
and the oliveyard shows that one and the
same law was to hold good of all the lands in
the country, however they might be cultivated.
The whole land was to rest



Ver. 12.— Law of the Sahhath, repealed.
Nothing is here added to the teaching of the
Fourth Commandment ; but its mercyul cha-
racter is especially brought out. Men are
called on to observe it, tn order that their
cattle may obtain rest, and their servants,
together with the stranger that is within
their gates, may find refreshment. It is to
be borne in mind that the foreign population
of Palestine was mostly held to hard service.
(See 2 Chron. ii. 17, 18.)

Verse 13 contains two injunctions — one
general, one special : — 1. " Be circumspect "
(or cautious, careful) " in respect of aU that
I command you." 2. "Do not so much ac
utter the name of any false god." Not even
to mention their names, was to show them
the greatest contempt possible; and, ii fol-
lowed out universally, would soon have pro-
duced an absolute oblivion of them. Moses,
it may be observed, scarcely ever does men-
tion their names. Later historians and pro-
phets had to do so, either to deliver the true
history of the Israelites, or to denounce idola-
tries to which they were given. There are
many words one would wish never to utter ;
but whUe wicked men do the things of which
they are the names, preachers are obliged to
use the words in uieir sermons and other
warnings.

Vera. 14— 17.— Law of Feativdh. " The
sanctification of days and times," says Bichard
Hooker, " is a token of that thankfulness and
a part of that public honour which we owe to
God for admirable benefits, whereof it doth
not suffice that we keep a secret calender,
taking thereby our private occasions as we
list ourselves to think how mnch God hath
done for all men ; but the days which are
chosen out to serve as public memorials of such
his mercies ought to be clothed with those
outward robes of holiness whereby their differ-
ence from other days may be made sensible "
(Ecdes. Pol. V. 70, § 1). All ancient reli-
gions had solenm festival seasons, when par-
ticular mercies of God were specially com-
memorated, and when men, meeting together
in large numbers, mutually cheered and ex-
cited each other to a warmer devotion and a
more hearty pouring forth of thanks than
human weakness made possible at other times.
In Egypt such festivals were frequent, and
held a high place in the religion (Herod, ii.
58 — 64). Abraham's fanuly had probably
had observances of the kind in their Heio-
potamian home. God's providence saw go^d
now to give supernatural sanction to the
natural piety which had been accustomed



201



THE BOOK OP EXODUa.



[oh. xxia 16—17



thni to express itself. Three great feasts
were appointed, of which the most remark-
ahle tealares were — 1. That they were at once
agricultural and historical — connected with
the regularly recurrent course of the seasons,
and connected also with great events in the
life of the nation; 2. That they could be
kept only at one spot, that namely whore the
tabernacle was at the time located ; 3. That
they were to be attended by the whole male
population. The three festivals are here
called — 1. The Feast of Unleavened Bread
(ver. 15), the early spring festival, at the
beginning of barley harvest in the month
Abib (Nisan), commeaorative of the going
forth from Egypt ; 2. The Feast of Barveit
(elsewhere called " of weeks ") at the begin-
ning of summer, when the wheat crop had
been reaped, commemorative of the giving of
the law; and 3. The Feast of Ingathering
(ver 16) in Tisri, t-t the close of the vintage,
when all the crops of every kind had been
gathered in, commemorative of the sojourn in
the wilderness. The first of the three, the
feast of unleavened bread, had been already
instituted (ch. xiii. 3 — 10) ; the two others
are now for the first time sketched out, their
details being kept back to be fiUed in sub-
sequently (Lev. xxiii. 15 — 21, and 34 — 36).
Here the legislator is content to lay it down
that the great feasts will be three, and that
all the males are to attend them.

Ver. 15. — The feast of unleavened bread,
rhis commenced with the Passover, and con-
tinued for the seven days following, with a
" holy convocation " on the first of the seven
and on the last (Lev. xxiii. 5 — 8). Un-
leavened bread was eaten in commemoration
of the hasty exodus from Egypt (ch. xii. 34).
A sheaf of new barley — the first-fruits of the
harvest — ^was offered as a wave-offering before
the Lord (Lev. xxiii. 10 — 14). Every male
Israelite oi fuU age was bound to attend, and
to bring with him a free-will offering. In
the time appointed of the month — i.e., on
the fourteenth day (ch. xii. 18). None shall
appear before me empty. This rule applies,
not to the Passover only, but to all the
feasts.

Ver. 16.— The feast of harvest. Fifty days
were to be numbered from the day of offering
the barley sheaf, and on the fiftieth the feast
of harvest, thence called " Pentecost," was to
be celebrated. Different Jewish sects make
different calculations ; but the majority cele-
brate Pentecost on the sixth of Sivan (May
, 25) The main ceremony was the offering to
Qod of two leavened loaves of the finest flour



made out of the wheat just gathered in, and
called the first-fruits of the harvest. The
festival lasted only a single day ; but it wai
one of a peculiarly social and joyful character

g)eut. xvi. 9 — 11). Jewish tradition connects
e feast further with the giving of the law,
which must certainly have taken place about
the time (see ch. xix. 1—16). The first-
fruits. Bather, "Of the first-fruits." The
word is in apposition with "harvest," not
with " feast." Which thou hast sown. Tho
smen harvest was gathered in by Pentecost j
what remained to collect afterwards was the
produce of plantations.

The feast of ingathering. Called else-
where, and more commonly, "the feast of
tabernacles " (Lev. xxiii. 34 ; Deut. xvi. 13 ;
xxxi. 10 ; John vii. 2), from the circumstance
that the people were commanded to make
themselves booths, and dwell in them during
the time of the feast. The festival began
on the 15th of Tisri, or in the early part of
our October, when the olives had been gathered
in and the vintage was completed. It lasted
seven, or (according to some) eight days, and
comprised two holy convocations. In one
point of view it was a festival of thanksgiving
for the final getting in of the crops ; in another,
a commemoration of the safe passage through
the desert from Egypt to Palestine. lie
feast seems to have been neglected during
the captivity, but was celebrated with much
glee in the time of Nehemiah (Neh. viii. 17).
In the end of the year — i.e., the end of the
agricultural year — when the harvest was over
— as explained in the following clause.

Ver. 17. — Three times in the year all thy
males shall appear before the Lord God. This
seems to modems a very burthensome enact-
ment. But we must remember that Pales-
tine is not bigger than Wales, and that great
gatherings had great attractions for many in
the ancient world, when they were the only
means by which information was spread, and
almost the only occasions on which friends
and relations who lived far apart could expect
to see each other. The European Greeks had,
in their Olympian and other games, similar
great gatherings, which occurred once or
twice in each year, and, though under no
obligation to do so, attended them in enormous
numbers. It may be doubted if the religious
Hebrews /e2( the obligation of attendance to
be a burthen. It was assuredly a matter of
great importance, as tending to unity, and to
the quickening of the national life, that they
should be drawn so continually to one centre,
and be so frequently united in one common
worship. Most students of antiquity regard
the Greek games as having exerted a strong
unifying influence over the scattered mem-
bers of the Grecian family. The Hebrew
festivals, occurring so much more frequently,
and required to be attended by aU, must aisfi



QB. xxm. 1 — 9.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



tot



had a limilar, bat mneh greater, effect of the
same kind.

Ver. 18. — Lan of the Patchal laerifiee.
That the Paschal lamb is here intended hj
" my sacrifice," seems to be certain, since the
two injiinctions to put away leavened bread,
and to allow none of the victim's flesh to
remain till the morning (see eh. xii. 10),
ore combined in the Paschal sacrifice only.
Of aU the offerings commanded in the law
the Paschal lamb was the most important,
since it typified Christ. It may therefore well
be termed, in an especial way, " God's sacri-
fice.'' By the fat of my feast some under-
stand the fat of the lamb, others the best
part of the feast (Eeil) — i.e., the lamb itself.
In ch. xxxiv. 25, which is closely parallel to
the present place, we read, for "the fat of
my feast," " the sacrifice of the feast of the
passover."

Ver. 19. — Law of firit-fruitt. The first of
fha flist-fraits may mean either " the best of
the first-fruits" (see Num. xviii. 12), or "the
very first of each kind that is ripe " (ib. verse
18). On the tendency to delay, and not bring
the very first, see the comment on ch. xxii.
29. The honsa of the Lord. Generally, in
the Pentateuch we have the periphrasis —
" the place which the Lord thy God shall
choose to j)ut his name there " (Deut. xii, 5,
11, U; xvi 16; xxvi, 2, etc.) ; out here, and



in ch. xxxiv. 26, and again in Dent xxiiL
18, this " place " is plainly declared to be ■
" house " or " temple.

Law against seething a kid in the mothet't
milk. The outline of law put before the
Israelites in the "Book of the Covenant"
terminated with this remarkable prohibi-
tion. Its importance is shown — 1. By its
place here; and 2. By its being thrice re-
peated in the law of Moses (see ch. xxxiv,
16; and Deut, xiv, 21), Various explana-
tions have been given of it ; but none is satis-
factoiy, except that which views it as "•
protest against cruelty, and outraging the
order of nature," more especially that pecu-
liarly sacred portion of natures order, the
tender relation between parent and child,
mother and suckling. No doubt the practice
existed. Kids were thought to be most palat-
able when boiled in milk ; and the mother's
milk was frequently the readiest to obtain.
But in this way the mother was made a sort
of accomplice in the death of her child, which
men were induced to kill on account of the
flavour that her milk gave it. Beason haa
nothing to say against such a mode of pre-
paring food, but feeling revolts from it ; and
the general sense of civilised mankind re-
echoes the precept, which is capable of •
wide application — Then shalt not seethe •
land in his mother's znilk.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 3; 6 — ^9. — Go<rs care for the administration of Justice. The well-Mng of
a cominunity depends largely on the right administration of justice within its limits.
It has been said that the entire constitution of England with all its artifices, complica-
tions, balances, and other delicate arrangements, exists mainly for the purpose of
putting twelve honest men into a jury-box. Fiat justitia, ruat caelum. Anything is
preferable to the triumphant rule of injustice. The present passage clearly shows that
God recognises very decidedly the importance of judicial proceedings. By direct
communication with Moses, he lays down rules which affect — 1. The accuser ; 2. The
witnesses ; and 3. The judge.

I, With bespect to the accusee. False accusation is to be avoided, and especially
capital charges against the innocent (ver, 7).

II, With bespect to witnesses. Men are to beware of either inventing an untrue
tale or giving any support to it when it has been invented by others (ver, 1),

III, With respect to judges, 1. They are not to act like Pilate and " follow a
multitude to do evil " (ver, 2), 2. They are not either unduly to favour the poor (ver, 3) ;
or 3, To wrest justice against them (ver, 6). 4, They are not to oppress strangers (ver. 9).
And 5, They are, above aU things, not to take a bribe.

Accusers, beware I Be sure that your charge is true, or do not make it. A false
charge, even though proved false, may injure a man for life — ^he may never be able
to recover from it. Particularly, be careful, if your charge is a serious one, involving
risk to life. You may, if successful, " slay the innocent and the righteous " (ver, 7).
Nay, you may slay a man by a false charge which does not directly affect his life — you
may so harass and annoy him as to drive him to suicide, or " break his heart," and sc
shorten his days. Even if you have a true charge to bring, it is not always wise or
Christian to bring it. St. Paul would have us in some cases " take wrong " and
" suffer ourselves to be defrauded " (1 Cor. vi. 7).

Witnwsim, beware I Do not give untrue evidence, either in the way of raising falM



EM THE BOOK OP EXODUS, [oh. xxm. S— 11

reports yourselves, or of supporting by your evidence the false reports of others. The
witnesses who cause an innocent person to he condemned are as much to blame as the
false accuser. Be very careful in giving evidence to speak " the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth." Depose to nothing of which you are not sure. If you are
uncertain, say that you are uncertain, however much the adverse counsel may browbeat
you. In cases of personal identity, be specially careful. It is exceedingly easy to be
mistaken about a man whom you have seen only once or twice.

Judges, beware ! On you the final issue depends. Be not swayed by popularity.
Yield not to the outcries either of an excited mob, or a partisan press, when they shout,
" away with him ! " Hold the scales of justice even between the rich man and the poor,
neither suffering your prejudice of class to incline you in favour of the former, nor a
weak sentimentality to make you lean unduly towards the latter. Be sure not to
oppress foreigners, who must plead to disadvantage in a country, and amid proceedings,
that are strange to them. Above aU, do not condescend to take a bribe from either side.
A gift is a weight in the scales of justice; and "a false balance is an abomination to
the Lord" (Prov.xi.1).

Vers. 5, 6. — The duties which men owe to their enemies. These duties may be con>
■idered as they were revealed to men. 1. Under the kw : and 2. Under the gospel.

I. Under thb law. Men were required to protect the interests of their enemies,
when they could do so without loss to themselves. For instance — 1. They were not to
cut down fruit trees in an enemy's country (Deut. xx. 19, 20). 2. They were not to
remove a neighbour's landmark, even though he might be an enemy. 3. They were tc
hasten after an enemy's ox or ass if they saw it going astray, to catch it, and bring it
back to him. 4. They were to approach him, if they saw his ass fallen under tl '
weight of its load, and to help him to raise it up. 5. If he were suffering from hunu
or thirst, they were to give him bread to eat and water to drink (Prov. xxv. 21). i,.
They were to refrain from rejoicing over his misadventures (ii. ch. xxiv. 17).

n. Under the Gosi'el. Men are required under the Gospel to do all this, and
much more. 1. They are to " love their enemies " (Matt. v. 44). 2. To do good to
them in every way — feed them (Eom. xii. 20), bless them (Matt. l.s.c.), pray for them
(iJ.), bo patient towards them (1 Thess. v. 14), seek to convert them from the error of
their ways (Jas. v. 20), save them (t'i.). Christ set the example of praying for his
enemies upon the cross — God set the example of loving his enemies when he gave his
Son to suffer death for them — the Holy Spirit sets the example of patience towards his
enemies, when he strives with them. We have to forgive our enemies day by day their
trespasses against us — ^to pray and work for their conversion — to seek to overcome their
evil with our good. In temporal matters, it is our business to be most careful that we
do them no injury, by misrepresentation, by disparagement, by unfair criticism, by lies,
even by " faint praise." We are to " love" them ; or, if poor human natiure finds this
too hard, we are to act as if we loved them, and then ultimately love will come.

Vers. 10, 11. — The Sabbatical year. The Sabbatical year — an institution peculiar to
the Israelites, and quite contrary to anything of which they had had experience in
Egypt — is a remarkable proof,

L Of the Divine wisdou. Under the ordinary circumstances of tillage, land from
time to time requires rest. In Egypt it was otherwise. There, under the exceptional cir-
cumstances of a soil continually recruited by the spread over it of a rich alluvium from the
great river, not only was the whole arable area capable of producing good crops year after
year, without over lying fallow, but from the same soil several crops were ordinarily taken
in the course of the twelvemonth. The Israelites had had no experience of any other agri-
culture than this for above four centuries. Yet now, suddenly, a new system is adopted by
them. Gfod knew that the system of Egyptian tillage was not suitable for Palestine — that
there the soil would not recruit itself — that, cultivated on the Egyptian system, it would
rapidly become exhausted ; and therefore he devised, in the interests of his people, a
new system for Palestine. The whole land should have rest one year in seven. Thus
only, in the then existing condition of agriculture, could exhaustion be prevented, pro-
ductiveness secured, and the land enabled to retain its character of " a good land,*^ " a
land flowing with milk and honey," " a land of com and wine, of bread and Ti&eyard.<i.



GH. xxm. 12— 17.] THE BOOK OF EXODUa flOS

tnd oil olive," " a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig-trees, and pomegranates
— a land of oil olive, and honey — a land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarce-
ness, thou shalt not lack anything in it " (Deut. viii. 8, 9).

II. Of the Divine beneficence. Under the system thus Divinely imposed upon
the Israelites, three beneficent purposes were accomplished. 1. Tke proprietor wa»
benefited. Not only was he prevented from exhausting his farm by over-cropping, anJ
so sinking into poverty, but he was forced to form habits of forethought and providence
He necessarily laid by something for the seventh year, and hence learnt to calculate
his needs, to store his grain, and to keep something in hand against the future. In thi£
way his reason and reflective powers were developed, and he was advanced from a mere
labouring hind to a thoughtful cultivator. 2. The poor were benefited. As whatever
grew in the seventh year grew spontaneously, without expense or trouble on the part of
the owner, it could not be rightfully considered to belong exclusively to him. The
Mosaic law placed it on a par with ordinary wild fruits, and granted it to the first
comer (Lev. xxv. 5, 6). By this arrangement the poor were enabled to profit, since it
was they especially who gathered the store that Nature's bounty provided. In the dry
climate of Palestine, where much grain is sure to be shed during the gathering in of the
harvest, the spontaneous growth would probably be considerable, and would amply
suffice for the sustenance of those who had no other resource. 3. ITie leasts were
benefited. God "careth for cattle." He appoints the Sabbatical year, in part, that
" the beasts of the field " may have abundance to eat. When men dole out their food,
they have often a scanty allowance. God would have them, for one year in seven at
least, eat their fill.

Ver. 12. — The rest' of the Sdbbatk. In the fourth commandment it is the main object
of the Sabbath that is put prominently forward. It is a day to be " kept holy " — a day
which God has " blessed and hallowed." Here, on the contrary, our attention is called to
its secondary object — it is for " rest " and " refreshment." Perhaps men of the classes
who are in easy circumstances do not sufficiently realise the intense relief that is fur-
nished by the Sunday rest to the classes below them, to the over-taxed artisan, the
household drudge, the wearied and stupefied farm-labourer — nay, even to the clerk, the
accountant, the shopkeeper, the salesman. Continuous mechanical work of one and
the same kind is required of most of those who labour, from morning till night, and
from one end of the week to the other. The monotony of their occupations is terrible —
is deadening — ^is sometimes maddening. For them, the treat that the Sunday affords is
the single gleam of light in their uniformly murljy sky, the single ray of hope that
gilds their else miserable existence, the single link that connects them with the living
world of thought, and sentiment, and feeling, for which they were bom, and in which
their spirits long to expatiate. Best I To the tired brute, forced to slave for his owner
up to the full measure of his powers, and beyond them — ^ready to sink to the earth the
moment he is not artificially sustained— who goes through his daily round in a state
that is half-sleep, half-waking — what a blessed change is the quietude of the Sunday,
when for four-and-twenty hours at least he enjoys absolute and entire repose, recruits
his strength, rests all his muscles, is called on to make no exertion! Refreshment'.
How thrice blessed to the overwrought man, and still more to the overwrought woman,
is the relaxation of the dreadful tension of their lives which Sunday brings ! " No
rest, no pause, no peace," for six long days — days beginning early and ending late-
days without change or variety — without relaxation or amusement — wretched, miserable
days, during which they wish a hundred times that they had never been bom. On
8uch the Sunday rest falls as a refreshing dew. Their drooping spirits rise to it. They
inhale at every pore its beneficent influences. They feel it to be " a refuge from the
storms of life, a bourne of peace after six days of care and toil, a goal to which they may
look with glsid hearts, and towards which they may work with hopeful spirits amid the
intense struggles, and fervid contests, and fierce strifes of existence." Without the
Sunday rest, modern hfe, at any rate, would be intolerable ; and the mass of those wnu
are actively engaged in its various phases would drift into idiocy, or be driven to madness !

Vers. 14 — 17. — Festival times. I, Festivals abb commemobations. The joyfU
occurrenoae of our own lives we by a natural instinct commemorate yearly, as the day



20< THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxui 14—17.

cornea round when they happened to us. Our hirth-day, our wedding-day, are thai
made domestic festivals. Similarly, a nation commemorates the Day of its Indepen-
dence, OT the three glorious days of its Bevolution, or the day on which its anniea
guned a great and crowning victory. It is reasonable that the practice thus established
should be followed also in the Church of God, and the days on which great spiritual
blessings or deliverances were granted to it kept in remembrance by some appropriate
and peculiar observance. The Jews kept three great festivali*, to which afterwards two
others were added, all of them more or less commemorative. The Passover commemo-
rated the passing over of the houses of the Israelites by the destroying angel and the
hasty flight out of Egypt ; the feast of Pentecost commemorated, according to Jewish
tradition, the giving of the law ; tabernacles recalled and perpetuated the dwelling in
tents in the wilderness ; Purim, the deliverance from the malice of Haman ; the Dedi-
cation, that from Antiochus Epiphanes. And Christian festivals are of a similar
character. Advent commemorates the approach, and Christmas the birth, of Christ,
Epiphany his manifestation to the Gentiles, Easter his resurrection from the dead,
Ascension-day his ascent into heaven, Whitsuntide the coming of the Holy Ghost.
" Saints' days," as they are called, commemorate the entrance into final bliss of those
whose names they bear. All the greater, and almost all the lesser, festivals of the
Christian Church are commemorations, days appointed for perpetuating the remem-
brance of events dear to the Christian heart and deeply interwoven with the Christian
life. It follows that —

II. Festivals aek times of spibitital jot. There are some to whom reli^on
seems altogether a melancholy thing, lieligious persons they suppose to be dwellers
in perpetual sadness, gloomy, ascetic, dull, cheerless, miserable. But this is altogether
a mistake. Holy joy is continually required of men as a duty in the Bible. " Rejoice
evermore," says the great apostle of the Gentiles (1 Thess. v. 16) ; and again, " Rejoice
with them that do rejoice " (Rom. xii. 15). " be joyful in the Lord," is a constant
cry of the Psalmist. Our Lord bade us " rejoice and be exceeding glad," even when we
are persecuted, and assured us that " our joy no man taketh from us." There may be
a sobriety in Christian joy which distinguishes it from the fitful, feverish, and excited
joy of the world ; but it is joy — true joy — ^nevertheless. And for this joy no times
are so fitting as festival times. "This is the day which the Lord hath made," said
holy David ; " ht us rejoice and be glad in it." " Offices and duties of religious joy," as
Hooker notes, "are that wherein the hallowing of festival times consisteth" (Eccl. Pol.
V. 70, § 2). The set services of religion on festival days take a tone of gladness beyond
the common ; and the " psalms and hymns and spiritual songs " suited for such occa-
sions are of a still more jubilant type. Then especially do the precepts hold — " Rejoice
in the Lord," " Serve the Lord with gladness," " Show yourselves joyful unto the Lord
—sing, rejoice, and give thanks."

III. Festivals should be times of thanksoivinq. Nothing is more remarkable
in man than his deadness, and dulness, and apathy in respect to all that Gk>d has
done for him. Warm gratitude, lively thankfulness, real heartfelt devotion, are rare,
even in the best of us. Festivals are designed to stir and quicken our feelingb,
to rouse us from our deadness, to induce us to shake ofif our apathy, and both with
Jieart and voice glorify God, who hath done so great things for us. Festivals bring
before us vividly the special Divine mercy which they commemorate, and at the same
time present to our view the beneficent side, so to speak, of the Divine nature, and lead
us to contemplate it. God is essentially love ; " he declares his Almighty power most
chiefly in showing mercy and pity" (Collect for Eleventh Sunday alter Trinity).
Festivals remind us of this. We lose the advantage of them wholly if we do not stir
ourselves, on occasion of them, to some real outpouring of love and thanks to him who
granted us the blessing of the time, as well as every other blessing, and every " good
and perfect gift " of which we have the enjoyment.

IV. Festivals should be times op bounty. When the soul of a man is glad, and
penetrated with the sense of God's goodness and mercy towards it, the heart naturally
opens itself to a consideration of other men's needs and necessities. Being glad itself, it
would fain make others glad. Hence, in the old world, great occasions of joy were always
occasions of largess. The Israelites were commanded to remember the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow at the time of their festivals (Deut. xvi. 14) ; and the praotio*



HH. xxin. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. Wf

was to "send portions" to them (Neh. viii. 10; Esth. ix. 22). We shall do well to
imitate their liberality, and to make, not Christmas only, but each festival season a
time of " sending portions " to the poor and needy.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa

Vers. 1 — 10. — Doing justice and loving mercy. In pursuance of its great require-
ment of love to one's neighbour, the law next prohibits the raising of a false report, the
bearing of false witness in a court of justice, and the wresting of judgment. Recognising
however, that " oat of the heaft proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, /aZse Witness, blasphemies" (Matt. xv. 19), the law, in addition to forbidding
the outward acts, is at pains to warn against the motives and influences which most com-
monly lead to these acts. This section naturally follows the catalogue of " rights ''
in previous chapters, as dealing with cases of litigation arising on the basis of these
"rights." Notice:—

I. The sins pbohibited. 1. The raising of a false report. This also is a species of
false witness, though of a less formal character than the bearing of false witness in a
court of justice. The forms it may assume are innumerable. The three principal are :
— (1) Deliberate invention and circulation of falsehoods. (2) Innuendo, or malicious
suggestion. (3) Distortion or deceitful colouring of actual facts. . In God's sight
slander ranks as one of the worst of offences. It indicates great malevolence. It is
grievously unjust and injurious to the person traduced. It is certain to be taken up,
and industriously propagated. For a calumny is never wholly wiped out. There are
always some evil-speaking persons disposed to believe and repeat it. It affixes a mark
on the injured party which may remain on him through life. Everyone is interested in
the suppression of such an offence — the parties immediately concerned, the Church,
society at large, the magistracy, God himself — of one of whose commandments (the 9th)
It is a daring violation. It is a form of vice which should incur the emphatic reproba-
tion of society, and which, where possible, should be visited with heavy legal penalties.
2, False witness in court. This, as a deliberate attempt to poison the stream of public
justice, is a crime which admits of no palliation. It is a form of vice which, so far as
we know, has never found a defender. All ages and all societies have united in con-
demning it as an offence deserving of severe punishment. Yet many a privately-circu-
lated slander may do more harm than a falsehood uttered in the witness-box. God
judges of these matters, not by their legal but by their moral turpitude. 3. Wresting
of judgment. The corruption of public justice here reaches the fountain head. The
judge who gives dishonest decisions betrays the cause of righteousness. He misrepre-
sents the mind of God. He inflicts irremediable injury on the innocent. He opens a
floodgate to iniquity. Pew men, therefore, are guiltier than he. God will not spare
him in the day of his judgment. Even in private life, however, we need to beware of
judging rashly, of judging with bias and prejudice, of judging so as to do wrong to indi-
viduals, of judging so as to injure truth and retard progress and improvement. This also
is " wresting* judgment."

n. Motives leading to these sins. 1. The influence of the crowd (ver. 2). There
is an infectiousness in the example of a crowd which only a firm back-bone of prin-
ciple, and some independence of mind, wiU enable us to resist. The tendency is to
follow the multitude, even when, it is to do evil. (1) Men like to be on the side that is
popular. They dread the reproach of singularity. There are those who would almost
rather die than be out of the fashion. (2) A crowd can ridicule, and a crowd can inti-
midate. It may put pressure upon us which we have not the moral courage to resist.
(3) A thing, besides, does not look so evil, when many are engaged in doing it. They
do not, of course, call it evil. They put new names upon it, and laugh at us for oxu:
scruples. This may lead us to think that the course in which we are asked to join is
not so very bad after all.. So we belie or dissemble our real convictions, and do what
the crowd bids us. To such influences we are certain to fall a prey, if we are governed
by the fear of man more than by the fear of God (Acts iv. 19, 20), or if we seek the
praise of man more than the honour which comes from God (John v. 44 ; xii. 43). As
oounteractives to the influence of the crowd we do well to remember that the " vox



Ml THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xxm 10—20

populi " is not always " vox Dei ;" that the fashion of the day can never make that right
which the law of God declares to be wrong ; that the voice of the multitude is one thing
to-day, and another thing to-morrow, while truth and duty remain one and the same ;
that whatever others think, it can never be lawful for us to act contrary to our oum con-
victions ; that if the multitude are bent on doing evil, it is our duty, not to go with
them, but to be witnesses for the truth in opposition to their courses ; that great guilt
attaches to us if we do wrong simply in deference to popular sentiment ; finally, that
there is one who judges us, that is, God, and that he wiU surely call us to account for all
such unfaithfulness to conviction (ver. 7). 2. False sympathy. Judgment was not to bs
wrested, nor false witness given, out of any quasi-benevolent wish to do a good turn to
the poor (ver. 3). The poor man is not to be unjustly dealt with (ver. 6), but neither
is he to receive favour. A court of law is not the place for sentiment. Equal measure
is to be meted out to all. Judgment is to be given impartially as between brother and
brother ; rich and poor ; citizen and foreigner (ver. 9) ; applying the same principles
to each case, and keeping in view the essential merits as the sole thing to be regarded.
3. Enmity. Enmity to auother, or the consideration of another's enmity to us, is not to
be allowed to sway us in giving judgment in his cause, or in any other matter in which
his rights are affected. This seems to be the connection of vers. 4, 5, with what pre-
cedes and follows ; but the duty is taught somewhat indirectly by laying down the prin-
ciple that enmity is not to be allowed to influence us at all, in any of our dealings with
our neighbours. The illustrations taken are very striking, and fairly anticipate the
gospel inculcation of love to enemies (cf. Deut. xxii. 1, 4). If an enemy's ox or ass was
seen going astray, the Israelite was not to hide himself, and let it go, but was " surely "
to take it back again. Or if his enemy's ass fell under a burden, he was not to yield to
the temptation to forbear help, but was " surely " to help him to lift it up. A fortiori,
he was not to allow himself to be in any way influenced by enmity in giving evidence
before the judges, or in pronouncing judgment on a cause brought before him. 4. Gove-
tousness. (Ver. 8.) This forbids bribery. It is impossible for a judge to take a bribe,
whether given directly or indirectly, and yet retain his integrity. Despite of himself,
the gift will blind his eyes, and pervert his words. For the same reason a man can
never be an impartial judge in his own cause. — J. 0.

Vers. 10 — 20. — Sahbaths and feasit. I. Sabbaths. 1. The Sabbatic year (vers. 10^
11). Every seventh year the land was to lie fallow, and what it spontaneously pro-
duced was to be a provision for the poor, and for the beasts of the field. There was con-
nected with the ordinance a special promise of unusual fertility in tfee sixth year — of
such plenty as would make the nation independent of a harvest in the seventh (Lev.
XXV. 21, 22). The Sabbatic year was (1) A period of rest for the land. Even nature
requires her seasons of rest. Only thus will she yield to man the best of her produce.
The seventh year's rest was an agricultural benefit. (2) A period of rest for the labourer.
It gave him time for higher employment. Moses enjoined that the whole law should be
read on this year at the feast of Tabernacles (Deut. xxxi. 10, 14). This may have been
designed to teach, " that the year, as a whole, should be much devoted to Hie meditation
of the law, and engaging in services of devotion " (Fairbairn). (3) A merciful provision
for the poor. It laid an arrest on man's natural selfishness, and taught beneficence and
consideration for the needy. It showed that if man cared not for the poor, Ood did.
(4) It was a test of obedience. It would test conclusively whether the people were dis-
posed to obey God, or would be ruled only by their own wills. In point of fact, the
ordinance was not kept. It proved to be too high and Divine a thing for covetous and
selfish dispositions. The neglect of it commenced very early, and lasted till the period of
the captivity (2 Chron. xxxvi. 21). (5) A periodical reminder that the land, and every-
thing that grew upon it, belonged to God. Had the Israelites observed the ordinance,
the recurrent plenty of the sixth year would, like the double supply of manna on the
sixth day in the wilderness, have been a visible witness to them of the supernatural pre-
sence of Jehovah in their midst. 2. The weekly iSabbath (ver. 12). The in'^aluable
seventh day's rest was also to be sacredly obsenred by the nation. Well-kept Sabbaths
have much to do with national prosperity.

n. Feasts. The stated festivals were three (vers. 14 — 17). The design in their
^pointment was to commemorate mercies, to keep alive the memory of national events



CH. xxin, 1—9]. THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 209



to foster a sense of unity in the people, to quicken religious life, to furnish opportunities
of public worship. They affordod a means of strengthening the bond between the people
and Jehovah, promoted brotherly intercourse, infusSi warmth and gladness into religious
service, and were connected with a ritual which taught the worshippers solemn and im-
pressive lessons. The feasts were : — 1. The Fasamer—heio called " the feast of un-
leavened bread " (vers. 15—18). It commemorated the great National Deliverance (see
on Ex. xii.). The use of unleavened bread was a call to spiritual purity (1 Cor. v. 8).
The blood was offered (ver. 18) as an ever-renewed atonement for sin. The " fat " of tht
sacrifice betokened the consecration of the best. 2. Pentecost — ^here called " the feast
of harvest, the first-fruits of thy labours " (ver. 16). Its primary reference was agricul-
tural. It was a recognition of God in the gift of the harvest. It besought his blessing
upon the labours of the field. It consecrated to him the first-fi:uits (ver. 19) of what he
had given (two wave-loaves, Lev. xxiii. 17). In the dedication of the wave-loaves, as in
the weekly presentation of the shewbread in the tabernacle (ch. xxv. 30), there was
further symbolised the dedication to God of the life which the bread nourished. Fitiy,
therefore, was this day chosen for the presentation to God of the first-fruits of his Church
(Acts ii.). 3. The feast of Tabernacles—" the feast of ingathering " (ver. 16). This was
the feast of the completed harvest, when the com, the wine, and the oil, had all been
gathered in. During the seven days of the feast the people dwelt in booths, in com-
memoration of their wanderings in the wilderness. The dwelling in booths was a sym-
bol also of their present pilgrim condition on earth, as "strangers and sojourners"
(Ps. xxxlx. 12). 'i'he precept in ver. 19, which seems related to this feast, — " Thou shalt
not seethe a kid in his mother's milk," had probably reference to some harvest super-
stition. On its moral lessons, see Deut. xiv. 21.— J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 9. — Seeking the things which make for justice. The illustrations adduced
in these nine verses show the various ways in which men may be tempted to injustice
in judicial procedure. Those who believe themselves wronged have to appeal to their
fellow men to settle the matter so far as human capacity can settle it. Hence the
positions indicated in this passage. We see plaintiffs, defendants, witnesses, judges, and
supporters and sympathisers, and the great aim set before all of them is the attainment
of just conclusions. Men feel nothing more bitterly than imjust treatment ; and yet
just treatment is one of the most difficult of aU things to get. Even he who himself
has been imjustly treated cannot be induced to treat others justly. Thus there are put
before the individual Israelite here illustrations of all the ways in which it is possible
for him either to help or to hinder justice.

I. The Israelite is cautioned lest by yielding to unworthy motives, he bhouu)
HELP OTHERS TO GAIN VICTORIES OF UNRIGHTEOUSNESS. It is Only too easy to Send
abroad an empty story which may end in the ruin of an innocent man. We may
become afBicted with a spirit of partisanship which, even if it lead not to downright
lying, may prompt to exaggerations and distortions, just as valuable for the attainment
of malicious purposes. He who would not deliberately fabricate a lie wiU nevertheless
be well disposed to believe it when fabricated by another, and will then utter it for
truth. We easily believe what we want to believe. It is so pleasant to be with the
multitude ; to go against it requires a great deal of courage, and a deep devotion to what
is just, as the paramount thing to be considered in all judicial enquiries. Let us feel
that justice is not a matter of majorities, but of great principles honestly and ably
applied to particular cases, the nature of these cases being determined by evidence which
has been carefully sifted and arranged so as to get at the truth. He who comes into a
court of justice comes there in the simple and sufficient claims of his humanity ; all
considerations of popular applause, all sympathy with a poor man, merely as a poor man,
are entirely out of place. We must guard against all cheap sentiment ; we must be
just before we are generous. Adroit appeals to the feelings of a jury are part of the
stock-in-trade of a practised advocate ; and witnesses themselves understand how to
profit by the prejudices and weaknesses of sensitive minds. The poor, the sick, the
maimed only too often think that they may gain by their poverty, their feebleness, their
mutilation, what is not to be gained by the righteousness of their cause. Everyone,
therefore, who has to do with a court of justice needs great circumspection to keep
himself clear uf aU words and actions such as might lend themselves to injustice. The

KIODUa — u. r



aiO THE BOOK OF EXODUS. toH. xiui. 14—17.

effort of one may not secure a just judgment, but each individual must do his pari

Then the stain of injustice is not on his garments.

II. Am INJURED PERSON MUST KEEP CLEAR OP PERSONAL ANIMOSITT IN THE tXJBSOIl

OF HIS BIOHTS. An illustration is given from the misfortune which may happen to his
enemy's ox or ass (vers. 4, 5). We must never forget that our enemy is also our
neighbour. If a man wrongs us, it does not cancel that wrong to do him wrong in
return. There is a certain appointed way of getting all such wrong put right, and if
it cannot be put right in that way there is no other to be found, — ^no other at least so far
as human aid avails. For a man to see his enemy in this position, with ox or ass goLe
astray or in any way needing help, is a capital chance for showing that no petty grudg?
actuates him in legal proceedings. He who is treated wrongly must seek for justice,
but he will gladly Imil the opportunity of showing that it is justice only that he seei*.
It is often those who are most unyielding in the matter of right who are aisi Si^
tender and assiduous in the matter of compassion. It is an easier thing tnnraga
sentimental weakness to countenance a poor man in his cause than to take the trouble
of driving home a lost ox or ass to its owner. The very !;ame considerations of right
which make a man feel that he cannot sit down tamely under injustice, should also
make him feel that he cannot allow tha property of others to go to ruin, when his
timely intervention will save it.

III. There are directions in particular for those who have to judbb. The
instructions in vers. 6 — 9 seem specially to concern the judge. Plaintiffs, defendants
and witnesses are only occasionally in courts of justice, but the judge is always there.
It is his daily work to settle right as between man and man. Those who have to come
before him are instructed and cautioned to come in a just spirit ; but inasmuch as many
of them will not attend to the instructions, it is the business of the judge to neutralise
as far as he can their unrighteouj approaches ; and it seems to be particularly implied
that he must keep himself from all temptations such as come so fascinatingly through
the rich and the powerful. He with whom judicial decisions rest wiU have many to
tempt him if he shows himself at all open to temptation. Let the judge remember that
his judgment, though it may gain a cause, does not effect a final settlement. Through
prejudice or bribery he may justify the wicked ; but that does not hold them justified. He
must not say of anyone who comes before him, that he is only a poor man or a foreigner
and therefore his interests cannot matter. It should be his joy to feel and his pride to
say that no one went away from him with wrongs unredressed, so far as any searching
of his could discover the doer of the wrong. A judge has great opportunities. Evary
upright, discerning and scrupulous judge does much in the circle of his own in-
fluence to keep a high standard of right and wrong before the minds of his fellow
men. — T.

Vers. 14 — 17. — A three/old cord is not quickly broken. To forget is far easier than
to remember. Festivals are like posts to which we can fa:u3n the cords of memory, so
tha,t, securely fastened, we may not drift down the stream of Lethe. To forget facts is
to Ignore the duties to which facts prompt us. We must leave undone what we ought
to do, unless we take measures to keep us in remembrance. The great fact which the
Israelites needed to remember was the relation of dependence in which they stood to
God. He had freed them from slavery, he had provided them with food, he had given
them, besides, the means of enjoyment— wine and oil— above aU that they could ask or
thmk. By means of the three great annual festivals threefold security was given
agamst forgetfulness of this fact. To keep the festivals was to realise the relation! and
to strengthen it by practical acknowledgment. Consider —

I. The Feast of Freedom. In this connection (ver. 15) the unleavened bread is
the pomt emphasised— to be eaten for seven days, a full week, at the commencement of
tne sacred year. As a reminder it suggested— 1. Past slavery. The tyrannous oppres-
sion of Egypt ; hopeless condition ere God looked upon them ; life but a synonym for
bare existence; even sustenance depending upon the caprice of others. 2. Pastde-
hverance. The paschal night ; unleavened bread the accompaniment of the first paschal
teast; lood a very secondary consideration when freedom was in question. 3. Present
dutiet. God had delivered them from slavery that they might serve him as his freo
people; an inner slavery worse than the outer; a purification needed in the heart eveo



OH. xzin. 20— 31.J



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



211



more important than that in the home. The leaven of malice and wickedness must ba
sought out and put away ; so long as they retained that, freedom was but a nominal
privilege.

II. The Feast of FntsT-FBUiTS. Linked on to the second day of unleavened bread.
God would have his children look forward ; and so he makes the first blessing a seed in
which are enwrapped others. Freed by God, the people could appropriate, as his children,
the promise made to children (Gen. i. 29, as modified by the fall, Gen. iii. 19). The
gift of food was God's gift, but their cooperation was needed for its fruition ; it was to
be the /rait, not the creation of their labours. Familiarity breeds forgetfulness as often
as it breeds contempt. A reminder needed that human labour can, at most, work up
God's raw material. [The ceiealia, or com plants, well called " a standing miracle."
Apparently a cultivated grass, yet no known grass can be improved into com by cul-
tivation. Com can be degraded by artificial means into a worthless perennial ; as it is,
it is an annual, exhausting itself in seeding, needing man's labour to its perfection and
presenration.] To get his food, man is constantly reminded that he must be a fellow-
worker with God.

III. The Feast op Inqathbrino. As the year rolls on, it exhibits more and more
of God's goodness and bounty. It calls for ever flresh acknowledgment of that love
which gives " liberally and upbraideth not." Freedom a great gift, the capacity to work
for one's own liveliliood ; so, too, food, the means through which that capacity may find
exercise; further, (Jod gives all the fruits of the earth in their season, so that man
through his labour may find not merely health but happiness. Naturally this was the
most joyful of all the festivals — the blossoms which glorified the stem springing from
the root of freedom. To rejoice in the Lord is the final outcome of that faith which
enables us to realise our sonship.

Conclusion. — These festivals have more than an historical interest. They teach the
same truths as of old, but for Christians their meaning is intensified. Unleavened bread
is associated with Calvary, freedom from the tyranny of sin (1 Cor. v. 7, 8). Linked to
this is our first-fruits festival ; Christ, the first-fruits (1 Cor. xv. 20), made our food
through the gift of the Spirit at Pentecost. The feast of ingathering is not yet, but
we may rejoice in it by anticipation (1 Peter i. 6). Tlie final festival is described for us
by St. John in the Eevelation (vii. 9 — 17). Blessed are they who, with robes washed ,
white, shall share the joy of that feast of Ingathering. — Q.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 20 — 31. — The Bewabss ov Obedi-

■NCE. God always places before men " the re-
compense of the reward." He does not require
of them that they should serve him for nought.
The " Book of the Covenant " appropriately
ends with a number of promises, which God
rndertakes to perform, if Israel keeps the
terms of the covenant. The promises are : —
1. That he will send an angel before them to
be their guide, director, and helper (vers. 20
— 23). 2. That he will be the enemy of their
enemies (ver. 22), striking terror into them
miraculously (ver. 27), and subjecting them
to other scourges also (ver. 28). 3. That he
will drive out their enemies "by little and
little" (ver. 80), not ceasing until he has
destroyed them (ver. 23). 4. That he will
give them the entire country between the
Bed Sea and the Mediterranean on the one
bund, the Desert and the Euphrates on the



other (ver. 81). And 5. That he will bless
their sustenance, avert sickness from them,
cause them to multiply, and prolong their
days upon earth (vers. 25, 26). At the same
time, all these promises — except the first — are
made conditional. If they will " beware " of
the angel and " obey his voice," then he will
drive their enemies out (vers. 22, 23) : if they
will serve Jehovah, and destroy the idols of
the nations, then he wiU multiply them, and
give them health and long life (vers. 24 — 26),
and " set their bounds from the Bed Sea even
unto the Sea of the Philistines, and from the
desert unto the river" (ver. 31). So far as
they fall short of their duties, is he entitled to
fall short of his promises. A reciprocity ia
established. Unless they keep their engage-
ments, he is not bound to keep his. Though
the negative side is not entered upon, this i«
sufficiently clear. None of the promises ex-



2U



j^HS BOOK OF EXODUS.



£oH. xxia. a0-2&



cept the promise to send the angel, is absolute.
Their realisation depends on a strict and heartj
obedience.

Ver. 20.— Behold, I send a messenger
before thee. Jewish commentators regard the
messenger as Moses, who, no doubt, was a
specially commissioned ambassador for God,
and who might, therefore, well be termed
God's messenger. But the expressions — " He
wUl not pardon your transgressions," and " My
name is in him," are too high for Moses. An
angd must be intended — probably "the
Angel of the Covenant," — whom the best
expositors identify with the Second Person
of the Trinity, the Ever-Blessed Son of God.
To keep ttee in the way is not simply " to
guide thee through the wilderness, and pre-
vent thee from geographical error," but to
keep thee altogether in the right paths, to
guard thy going out and thy coming in, to
prevent thee from falling into any kind of
wrong conduct. The place which I have
prepared is not merely Palestine, but that
place of which Palestine is the type — viz..
Heaven. Compare Jolm xiv. 2: — "I go to
pr^are a place for you."

Ver. 21. — Provoke him not. On the dis-
obedience of the Israelites to this precept, see
Num. xiv. 11; Ps. Ixxviii. 17, 40, 56, etc.
My name is in him. God's honour he will
not give to another. He does not set His Name
in a man. The angel, in whom was God's
Name, must have been cu- equal with God —
one of the Persons of the Blessed Trinity.

Ver. 22. — If thou shalt indeed obey his
voice, and do all that I speak. The change
of persons in the latter clause — ^"all that I
speak," instead of " all that he speaks " — im-
plies the doctrine of the perienchormis or
eircaminaesaio, that God the Father is in the
Son and the Spirit, as they are in him. An
adversary to thy adversaries. Rather "an
afflictor of thy afflictors."

Ver. 23. — The Amorites, and the Hittites,
etc. The nations of Canaan proper, to whom
the Gergashites are sometimes added. See the
conmient on ch. iii. 8. I will cut them o£
Or "cut them down," i.e., destroy them from
being any longer nations, but not exterminate
them, as is generally supposed. David had a
" Hittite " among his " mighty men " (2 Sam.
xxiii. 39), and was on friendly terms with
Araunah the " Jebusite " {ibid. ch. xxiv. 18 —
24).

Ver. 24. — Thou shalt not bow down to
their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their
works. It is always to be borne in mind that
with the idolatries of the heathen were con-
nected "works of darkness," which it is
■hamefnl even to speak of. The rites of
Baal and Ashtoreth, of Chemosh, Molech,
Binunon, and the other Canaanite and
Syrian deitief were at once defiled by the



abomination of human sacrifices, and pollnted
with the still more debasing evil of religioui
impurity. " The sacrifice offered to Ash-
toreth," says Dr. Dollinger, " consisted in the
prostitution of women : the women submitted
themselves to the visitors of the feast, in the
temple of the goddess or the adjoining pre-
cinct. A legend told of Astarte (Ashtoreth)
having prostituted herself in Tyre for ten
years : and in many places matrons, as well as
maidens, consecrated themselves for a length
of time, or on the festivals of the goddess,
with a view of propitiating her, or earning
her favour as hieroiuli of unchastity. . . .
In this way they went so far at last as to con-
template the abominations of unnatural lust as
a homage rendered to the deity, and to exalt
it into a regular cultus. The worship of the
goddess at Aphaca in Lebanon was speciallj
notorious in this respect. The temple in a
solitary situation was, as Eusebius t^ls us, a
place of evil-doing for such as chose to ruin

their bodies in scandalous ways

Crimmal intercourse with women, impurity,
shameful and degrading deeds, were practised
in the temple, where there was no custom
and no law, and no honourable or decent
human being could be found." (Jevo and
Gentile, vol. i. pp. 428, 429 ; DarneH's trans-
lation.) Thou shalt utterly overthrow them.
The heathen gods are identified with their
images. These were to be torn from their
bases, overthrown, and rolled in the dust for
greater contempt and ignominy. They were
then to be broken up and burnt, till the gold
and the silver with which they were overlaid
was calcined and could be stamped to powder.
Nothing was to be spared that had been de-
graded by idolatry, either for its beauty or its
elaborate workmanship, or its value. All was
hateful to God, and was to be destroyed.

Ver. 25. — ^He shall bless thy bread and thy
water. If the Israelites were exact in their
obedience, and destroyed the idols, and served
God only, then he promised to bless "their
bread and their water" — the food, i.e., whether
meat or drink, on which they subsisted, and to
give them vigorous health, free from sickues*
of any kind, which he pledged himself to take
awa,y from the midst of them. Though
Christians have no such special pledge, there
is, no doubt, that virtuous and godly living
would greatly conduce to health, and take
away half the sicknesses from which men
suSer, even at the present day.

Ver. 26. — There shall nothing cast thoii
young, nor be barren in thy land. This
blessing could not have followed upon godly
living in the way of natural sequence, but only
by Divine favour and providential care. It
would have rendered them rich in flocks and
herds beyond any other nation. The nnmhei
of thy days I will fulfil. There aball be no
premature deaths. All, both men and women.



26-81.]



Iii£ BdOK OF KXODU&



21S



shall reach the term allotted to man, and die
in a good old age, having fulfilled their time.
Godly living, persisted in for several genera-
tions, might, perhaps, produce this result,

Yer. 27. — I will send my fear hefore thee.
The fear which f eU upon the nations is seen
first in the case of Bnlak and the Moahites.
" Moab was sore afraid of the people, because
they were many " (Num. xxii. 3). Later it is
spoken of by Bahab as general (Josh. ii. 9,
11). A veiy signal indication of the alarm
felt is given in the history of the Gibeonites
(0). ix. 8, 27). I will make all thine enemies
turn their backs nnto thee. For the fulfil-
ment of this promise see Num. xxi. 3, 24, 35 ;
zxzi. 7 ; Josh. viil. 20 — 24; x. 10, etc. Had
their obedience been more complete, the power
of the Canaanitish nations would have been
more thoroughly broken, and the sufierings
end servitudes related in the Book of Judges
would not have had to be endured.

Yer. 28. — And I will send hornets before
thee. This is scarcely to be taken literally,
since no actual plague of hornets is mentioned
in the historic^ narrative. " Hornets " here,
and in Deut. vii. 20 ; Josh. xxiv. 12, are prob-
ably plagues or troubles of any kind, divinely
sent to break the power of the heathen nations,
and render them an easier prey to the Israelites,
when they made their invasion. Possibly, the
main "hornets" were the Egyptians, who,
under Barneses III., successfully invaded
Palestine about the time of Israel's sojourn
in the wUdemess, and weakened the power of
the Hittites (Ehita). The Hivite, the Canaan-
ite, and the Hittite. By a common figure of
speech, a part is put for the whole — three
nations for seven. The three names seem to
be taken at random, but include the two
nations of most power — ^the Canaanites and
the Hittites.

Yer. 29. — ^I will not drive them out from
before thee in one year. The Divine action
is for the most part "slack, as men count
slackness " — it is not hasty, spasmodic, preci-
pitate, as human action is too often. Men
are impatient ; God is strangely, wonder-
fully patient. He would not drive out the
Canaanitish nations aU at once — 1. Lest the
land should become desolate, there being an
insnfiScient population to keep down the weeds
and maintain the tillage; and 2. lest the
beast of the field should multiply so as to
become • danger to the new-comers. It is



related that when the kingdom of Samarit
was depopulated by the removal of the Ten
Tribes, there was a great increase of lions,
which preyed upon the scanty remnant left
(2 Kings xvii. 25). Even in France, after the
Franco-German war, it was found that in many
districts wolves increased. A third reason
why the nations were not subdued all at once,
not menlioned here, is touched in Judg. ii. 2]
— 23 — " The Lord left those nations, without
driving them out hastily, that through them
he might prove Israel, whether they would
keep the way of the Lord to walk therein, or
not."

Ver. 31. — And I will set thy bounds from
the Bed Sea even nnto the sea of the PbiUa-
tines. This passage by itself would be suf-
ficient to confute Dr. Brugsch's notion, that
the Yam Suph (or " Ked Sea " of our transla-
tors) is the Lake Serbonis, which is a part of
the Mediterranean or "Sea of the Philistines,"
and cannot stand in contrast with it. The
" Sea of the Philistines" and the " Bed Sea"
mark the boundaries of the Holy Land East
and West, as the " Desert " and the " Eiver "
(Euphrates) do its boundaries North and
South. That Moses here lays down those wide
limits which were only reached 400 years
later, in the time of David and Solomon, and
were then speedily lost, can surprise no one
who believes in the prophetic gift, and regards
Moses as one of the greatest of the Prophets.
The tract marked out by these limits had
been already promised to Abraham (Gen. xv.
18). Its possession by Solomon is distinctly
recorded in 1 Kings iv. 21, 24 ; 2 Chr. ix. 26.
As Solomon was " a man of peace," we must
ascribe the acquisition of this wide empire to
David. (Compare 2 Sam. viii. 3 — 14 ; x. 6 —
19.) The river (han-nahar) is in the Penta-
teuch always the Euphrates. The Nile is
ha-y or. A powerfiJ kingdom established in
Syria is almost sure to extend its influence to
the Euphrates. I will deliver the inhabitants
of the land into yonr hand. Compare Josh,
xxi. 44, for the first fulfilment of liis pro-
phecy. Its eonwlete fulfilment was reserved
for the time of David. Thou shalt drive them
out. The mass of the Canaanites were no
doubt " driven out " rather than exterminated.
They retired northwards, and gave strength
to the great Hittite kingdom which was for
many centuries a foimidable antagonist of the
Egyptian and Assyrian empires



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 20 — 31. — OocFspromists sometimes absolute, but for the most part eonMnpenf
on obediaice. " Beliold, I send an angel before thee." Here was a positive promise. An
•ngel, a guide, a protector, would go before them throughout their wanderings in the
wiMemess, and lead them into the promised land — lead, at any rate, some remnant of
them, out of which God would make a great nation. Thus much was certain. God'i
wmd to give his descendants the laud of Canaan was pledged to Abraham, and ht



214 THE BOOK OF EXODUd. [oh. xxiu. 20— 3^.

would not go back from it. They should reach Canaan, and an angel should lead them ,■
but the rest was all more or less uncertain. If they indeed obeyed Glod, and did as he
commanded, then he would be an enemy to their enemies, and give them full possession
of the land of promise. If they truly served Jehovah, and not idols, then he would
grant them health and long life, and other temporal blessings. And so it is with
Christians. God gives absolutely certain blessings to all whom he accepts into covenant
with him ; but the greater part of the blessings which he has promised are contingent
on their behaviour.

I. Blessings promised to Chmstians absohjtblt. 1. A Divine guide is promised
to all. The Holy Spirit, speaking in men's hearts, directing and enlightening their
conscience, teUs them continually how they ought to walk, points cut the way, offers
his guidance, nay, presses it on them, and seeks to lead them to heaven. The guide is
more than an angel — God's holy name is in him. Nor does he guide only. He supports
the footsteps, strengthens, sustains, comforts men. 2. Membership in Christ is promised.
" I am the vine ; ye are the branches." " Abide in me." We are as branches cut out of
a wild olive, which have been grafted, contrary to nature, into a good olive-tree, to par-
take of its root and fatness (Eom. xi. 17 — 24). We are " made members of Christ,"
for the most part, in our infancy, without effort or merit of our own, by God's great
mercy.

II. Blessings which are contingent on omt obedience. 1. The answer of a
good conscience towards God — a great blessing — can only, by the very nature of the
case, belong to those who have striven always to be obedient, and have served the Lord
from their youth. 2. Growth in grace is granted only to such as cherish and follow
the grace already vouchsafed them. 3. Spiritual wisdom and understanding are attained
by none but those who, having " done the will of God, know of the doctrine " (John
yii. 17). 4. Assistance against spiritual enemies is contingent on our doing our best to
rerast them. 5. Length of days is attached as a special blessing to obedience to parents
(Eph. vi. 2, 3). Finally, and above aU — 6. The eternal bliss which is promised us in
another world is conditional upon our " patient continuance in well-doing " in this.
We must " so run that we may obtain." Most of those to whom the promises of Ex. xxiii.
were addressed, forfeited them by their misconduct, and did not enter Canaan. They
" lusted," they became " idolaters," they " tempted God," they " committed fornication,"
they " murmured " — and the result was that they " were overthrown in the wilderness."
And " all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him that
thinketb he standeth take heed lest he fall" (1 Cor. x. 11, 12).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 20 — 33. — Promises and warnings. These conclude the Book of the Covenant.

I. Fromiseb. 1. An angel guide (vers. 20 — 23). But this angel was no ordinary or
created angel. He is repeatedly identified with Jehovah himself. God's " name " — his
essential nature — was in him. He is one with Jehovah, yet distinct from him — ^no mere
personification, but a real hypostasis. See the careful treatment of " the doctrine of the
Angel of the Lord," in Oehler's " Old Testament Theology," vol. i. pp. 188—196 (Eng.
trans.). We view the " angel " as the pre-incamate Logos — Christ in the Old Testament.
Israel's guide was the Son of God — the same Divine Person who is now conducting
" many sons unto glory," and who is become " the author of eternal salvation to all them
that obey him" (Heb. ii. 10; v. 9). 2. Defence against enemies (ver. 22). If Israel
obeyed God's voice, and did all that God spake, their enemies would be reckoned his
tnemies, and their adversaries his adversaries. And " if God be for us, who can be
against us ? " (Rom. viii. 31). 3. Aid in the conquest of Canaan (vers. 23, 27 — 31).
Apply throughout to the spiritual warfare of the individual and of the Church. (1) Thr
way for the conquest would be prepared. God would send Iiis/ear before the Israelites
(ver. 27) — would, as stated in Deuteronomy, put the dread of them, and the fear of them,
upon the nations that were under the whole heaven (Deut. ii. 25 ; xi. 25 ; cf. ch. xv.
15, 16). There is a presentiment of defeat in the hearts of the enemies of GckI, especially
whan the Church is energetic and fearless in her work, which goes far to secure the



. xxin. 20— 88.J THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 215



▼ictory for the latter. Something whispers to them that their " time is short" (1 Oor.
vii. 29 ; Rev. xii. 12 ; cf. Matt. viii. 29). Moral forces are all on the side of the kingdom
of God. ^ They assist its friends, and operate to enervate and discourage its enemies,
The Christian worker may rely on numerous invisible allies in men's own hearts.
Workings of conscience, stings of fear, dread of God, etc. God would also send
hornets before the Israelites, to drive out the Canaanites from their strong castles
(ver. 28). To us there seems no good reason for taking this declaration otherwise than
literally. If taken symbolically, the " hornets " are equivalent to the stings of fear, etc.,
above referred to. A veritable hornet warfare this, and one of great value to the Gospel
cause. Taken literally, the " hornets " may be regarded as types of secret providential
allies — of the co-operation of God in his providence, often by means of things insignificant
in themselves, but working, under his secret direction, for the furtherance of his king-
dom, and the defeat of those opposed to it. In a million unseen ways — how en-
couraging the reflection ! — Providence is thus aiding the work of those who fight under
Christ's captaincy. (2) They would be prospered in battle (ver. 27). The individual, in
his warfare with the evil of his own heart — the Church, in her conflict with the evil of the
>7orld — enjoy a similar promise. If Christ inspires, if he, the captain of the Lord's host,
gives the signal to advance, victories are certain. However numerous and powerful our
spiritual enemies, greater is he that is with us than they that are against us (1 John iv. 4).
(3) The conquest would be given by degrees. God would drive out their enemies before
them, "little by little" (ver. 30). The reason given is, " lest the land become desolate,
and the beast of the field multiply against thee " (ver. 27). The method was a wise
one. It doubtless had its dangers. Remaining idolatry would tend to become a snare.
The delay in the extirpation of the Canaanites had thus its side of trial—it would act
as a moral test. In other respects it was attended with advantage. It would make the
conquest more thorough. It would enable the Israelites to consolidate, organise, and
secure their possessions as they went along. It would prevent the multiplying of the
beasts of the field. And quite analogous to this is God's method of conducting us
unto our spiritual inheritance. The law of " little by little " obtains here also. " Little by
little " the believer gains the victory over evil in self, and the heart is sanctified. " Little
by little " the world is conquered for Christ. In no other way is thorough conquest
possible. Suppose, e.g., that, as the result of extraordinary shakings of the nations, a
multitude of uninstructed tribes, peoples, communities, were suddenly thrown into
the arms of Christendom — even supposing the conversions real, how difficult would it
be to prevent mischiefs from arising ! Compare the troubles of the Beformation Churches.
Make the yet more extravagant supposition that by some supreme moral effort — ^the
evil of our own hearts being suddenly aroused to intense activity — it pleased God to
give us the victory over the whole of this evil at once. How little could we do with
such a victory when we had it ! Thrown at once upon our own hands, how difficult it
would be to know what to do with ourselves ! Would not new foes — ^fantastic conceits
— speedily arise from the ground of our yet undisciplined natures, to give us new
troubles ? The surest method is " little by little." It is not good for any man to have
more than he needs — to have a greater victory than he can rightly use ; e.g., a man who
reads more books than he can mentally digest and assimilate ; who has a larger estate
than he can manage ; who has more money than he can make a good use of. And yet
the fact of evil still lurking in our hearts, and continuing in the world around us,
exposes us to many perils. It acts as a moral test, and so indirectly conduces to the
growth of holiness. 4. Material blessings (vers. 25, 26). In the land to which he was
conducting them, God would give the people of Israel abundance of food and water ;
would take away all sickness from their midst (cf. " I am the Lord that healeth thee."
ch. XV. 26) ; would greatly bless their flocks and herds ; and would lengthen out their
days to the full term (cf. Dent, xxviii. 1 — 14). The blessings of the new covenant are
predominantly spiritual (Eph. i. 3). Yet even under it, " godliness is profitable unto
all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come " (1 Tim.
iv. 8). Godliness has a natural tendency to promote temporal well-being. So ample a
measure of prosperity as that promised in the text could, however, only accrue from
direct Divine blessing. The absolute form of the expression answers to the absoluteneai
of the requirement — " Obey my voice, and do all that I speak " (ver. 31). Falling
•hort of the ideal obedience, Israel fell short also of the ideal fulness of the blessing. 5.



itt THB BOOK OF EXODUS. (jra. xSUl 21.

Expantion of bormds (ver. 81). Only once or twice was this maximum of poBsessios
touched by Israel. Failure in the fulfilment of the condition kept back fulfilment ol
tiie promise. The Church's destiny is to possess the whole earth (Ps. ii. 8).

n. Wahnings. If these glorious promises are to be fulfilled to Israel, they must
obey the voice of God and of his angel. Let them beware, therefore, — 1. Of provoking
the angel (ver. 21). God's name was in him, and he would not pardon their trans-
gressions. That is, he would not take a light view of their sins, but would strictly
mark them, and severely punish them. He was not a Being to be trifled with. If his
wrath against them were kindled but a little, they would perish from the way (Ps. ii.
12). He was one with Jehovah in his burning zeal for holiness, and in his determina-
tion not to clear the guilty. See below. The Gospel is not wanting in its similar side
of sternness. There is a " wrath of the Lamb " (Rev. vi. 17). There is a " judgment "
which "begins at the house of God" (1 Pet. iv. 17). There is the stem word — "It
shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed
from among the people" (Acts iii. 23). Cf. also Heb. ii. 2, 3; z. 26 — 39; xii. 25.
2. They must not serve other gods (ver. 24). Conversely, they were utterly to over-
throw the idol gods, and to break down their images. " Where Jesus comes, he comes to
reign." No rival will be tolerated alongside of him. We cannot serve (1) God and
Manmion (Matt. vi. 24). (2) God and fashion (1 John ii. 15 — 18). (3) God and our
own lusts (2 Pet. i. 4 ; ii. 20, 21). (4) God and human glory (John v. 44). The
worship of Jehovah and that of any of the world's idols will not amalgamate. See
reflected in these commands the principles which are to regulate the relation of God's
servants at this hour to the world and to its evil — (1) No toleration of it (Matt. v.
29, 30). (2) No communion with it (2 Cor. vi. 14—18; Eph. v. 3, 11). (3) Un-
ceasing war against it (2 Cor. x. 4 ; Col. iii. 5). 3. They must make no league with the
Canaanites (ver. 32). The lesson taught is, that believers are to seek their friendships,
their alliances, their consorts, etc., elsewhere than among the ungodly. We are
not only to keep out of harm's way, and avoid occasions of sin, but we are to labour to
remove from our midst entirely what experience proves to be an incurable snare. — J. 0.

Ver. 21. — The angel provoked. The language in this passage is very strong, and
may occasion diflBculty. " Provoke him not, for he wiU not pardon your transgressions ;
for my name is in him." If this angel is the Son of God, he who afterwards became
incarnate for man's salvation, and who died to procure forgiveness for us, it startles us
to hear of him — " he will not pardon your transgressions." When we think, too, on
what God's name imports — on the revelation subsequently made of it, — " The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-sufiering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin," etc., it
astonishes us to learn that this angel, in whom the name is, will not pardon Israel's
sin. The history, also, may be thought to create difficulties. For, undeniably, the
Israelites were often pardoned. They were, in truth, continually being pardoned ; for,
" stiff-necked " as they were, they could not have stood for a day in their covenant, had
not God's mercy been constantly extended to them. It is plain, therefore, from the
nature of the case, that the expression is not to be taken absolutely ; the sense in which
it is to be understood well deserves investigation.

L In what sense tbub of Isbael. The general meaning is, as stated above, that
the angel would not look lightly on their offences, would not pass them over, but
would severely punish them. This accorded with the constitution under which they
were placed, to which it belonged, that " every transgression and disobedience " should
" receive a just recompense of reward" (Heb. ii. 2). The context suggests, or admits
of, the following qualifications — 1. The statement refers, it wUl be observed, to what
the angel will do when " provoked " — ^to what will happen when his wrath is " kindled "
against Israel (cf. Ps. Ixxviii. 21, 49, 50, 59, etc.). But how long did this Divine
conductor bear with Israel before permitting his wrath to be thus kindled against
them ! He was " slow to anger." What pardon was implied in his very long-
suffering ! 2. The transgressions alluded to are not ordinary offences — not the sins of
Infirmity and short-coming which mark the lives even of the best — but such out-
■tanding acts of transgression as are mentioned in the context — fundamental breaches
of the covenant. These were the sins which would specially provoke th* angel (c',



ctt.zxai.21.] IBB BOOK OF EX0DU3. 217

Deut, xxxii. 6, 16—28). They would be "surely" punished. 8. The general asaw
lion that transgressions will not be pardoned does not imply that there is no room left
for intercession and repentance; that, e.g., on alteration in the spiritual conditions
might not procure, if not remission, at least a sensible alleviation of the penalty ; that
prayer, proceeding from a contrite heart, might not obtain the removal of afSiction, or
the restoration of the penitent to Divine favour. Great severity, nevertheless, attaches
to this announcement. The history is the best commentary upon it. It is literally
true that, after the ratification of the covenant at Sinai, no serious transgression of
Israel was allowed to go unpunished. In no case did even repentance avail wholly to
avert chastisement. At most, the penalty was lightened, or shortened in duration.
Thus, on the occasion of the sin of the golden calf, the earnest intercession of Moses
availed to save the people from destruction, and obtained from God the promise that he
would still go with them ; but it did not save the idolaters from being smitten with the
Bword of Levi (ch. xxxii. 28), or prevent the Lord from still " plaguing " the people
" because they made the calf, which Aaron made " (ch. xxxii. 35). Cf. later instances,
e.g., Nadab and Abihu (Lev. x. 1 — 8) ; the murmuring at Taberah (Num. xi. 1 — 3) ;
the lusting at Kibroth-hattaavah (Num. xi. 4 — 35) ; the rebellion at Kadesh, punished
by the rejection of that whole generation (Num. xiii., xiv.) ; the revolt of Korah (Num.
xvi., xvii.) ; the sin at Meribah, when even Moses forfeited his right to enter the land
of promise (Num. xx. 1 — 13) ; the later murmuring, when the people were punished
by fiery serpents (Num. xxi. 7 — 9) ; the idolatry and fornication of Baal-peor (Num.
XXV.). This severity is the more remarkable when we remember how leniently God
dealt with the people be/ore the ratification of the covenant with Sinai. " All mur-
murings before they came to Sinai were passed over, or merely rebuked ; all murmur-
ings and rebellions after Sinai bring down punishment and death " (Kitto). We trace
the same principle of dealing through the whole history of the Old Testament. David,
t.g., is personally forgiven for his sin of adultery ; but the temporal penalty is not
remitted (2 Sam. xii.). He is punished on a later occasion for numbering the people,
and has the choice given him of three evils; and this, notwithstanding his sincere
repentance (2 Sam. xxiv.). So Manasseh is said to have "filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood, which the Lord would not pardon" (2 Kings xxiv. 5). The con-
gruity of this strict dealing with a dispensation of law is sufficiently obvious ; and, in
the light of the examples quoted, the language of the text will not be felt to be too
strong.

n. How FAB TRUE uNnBB THE GosPEL. The Gospel, as befits its nature, places
in the forefront, not the declaration that God will not pardon sin, but the announcement
of the terms on which he will pardon. It is a declaration of mercy to those who are
viewed as already under wrath — the law having accomplished its design of convincing
men of sin. The terms, however, on which the Gospel proposes to grant forgiveness are
of such a nature as fully to establish the truth underlying this text ; viz., that God, as
a God of holiness, will not clear the guilty (cf. Ex. xxxiv. 7). 1. This truth is the
presupposition of the Gospel. Else whence its demand for atonement ? Why is sin
not simply condoned — not simply waived aside as something admitting of unconditional
pardon ? In view of the fact that the Gospel absolutely refuses pardon save on the
ground of " the shedding of blood," it certainly cannot be accused of making light of
guilt, or of ignoring its relations to justice. God remains the just God, even while he
is the Saviour (Rom. iii. 26). Stated otherwise, it is on the ground of the principle in
the text, that a Gospel is needed. " The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men" (Rom. i. 18). No clearing of the guilty
here. The principle in question is the general principle of God's moral administration
(Bom. ii. 6 — 12). 2. This truth still applies in its rigour to those who " disobey " the
Gospel. For these there is no pardon. There remains for them only judgment and
fiery indignation (Heb. x. 27). So solemn is the truth that " there is none other name
under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved " (Acts iv. 12). 8. Even
believers, notwithstanding that they receive spiritual pardon, must not expect to escape
temporal chastisements, appropriate to their offences. So far as sin's penalties are
bound up with natural law it is certain that they will not escape them. They may ba
(piritually pardoned, yet, as respects the temporal penalty, may, like Esau, find no
puuw for lepentoDoe, though they aeek it carefully with tetn (Heb. xii. 17). God



118 THE BOOK OF EXODUa [oh. miii. 20—23.

_ -

alone is judge of how far, and with what measure of benefit to the individual, and ol
glory to himself, he can remit temporal chastisements (Ex. xxxiii. 19). Respect will
doubtless be had to the circumstances under which the sin was committed, to the depth
and sincerity of the repentance, to the publicity of the scandal (cf. 2 Sam. xii. 14), to
the moral benefit likely to accrue, etc. 4. Hypocritical professors of Christ's name will
be dealt with according to this rule. They will be punished with special severity
(Matt. xxiv. 51).

ni. How EBCONOILABLE WITH God'S REVEALED ATTRIBUTE OF MERCY. Our thoughts

revert to the revelation of God's name in ch. xxxiv. 6, 7. The attributes of mercy
occupy the foreground, yet not to the denial of the sternness of holiness, which, in tho
latter clauses, finds distinct expression. " Forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin,
and that will hy no means clear the guilt;/, visiting the iniquity of the fathers," etc.
God's mercy to Israel was exhibited compatibly with what has been seen to be the
meaning of the text — (1) In his great long-suffering in bearing with their provocations.
(2) In his turning aside the fierceness of his anger, in answer to earnest intercession, or
when signs were shown of repentance. (3) In limiting the measure of his wrath —
either by exchanging a severer penalty for a lighter one, or by shortening the time of
infliction. Cf. Ps. Ixxviii. 38— "But he, being full of compassion, forgave their
iniquity, and destroyed them not, yea, many a time turned he his anger away and did
not stir up all his wrath. For he remembered that they were but flesh," etc. (4) In
granting spiritual pardons, even when temporal penalties were not revoked. (5) In
restoring the penitent to favour, after punishment had taken effect in inducing con-
trition. (6) In keeping covenant with the children, even when rejecting the fathers.
(7) The full reconciliation is seen in the Gospel, in the fact of the atonement. — J. 0.

Vers. 20 — 23. — The angel of the covenant. Certain sf the matters on which Jehovah
had been speaking immediately before the promise of the angel, assumed that the
people would assuredly come to dwell in a land very different from that in which they
were now sojourning. God had done so much to call forth faith that, in spite of aU
ugly symptoms of unbelief and murmuring, he could only go on speaking as if the faith
would become a regular habit steadily finding deeper root in the Israelite heart. Thus
we find D131 giving rules for the cultivation of comlands, vineyards and oliveyards into
which they had not yet come ; rules for the harvest feast and a feast of ingathering of
aU the fruits, when as yet there was no indication of such an ingathering being possible.
It was fitting, therefore, that Jehovah should follow up his statement of regulations by
speaking confidently of the people's entrance into the land where the regulations were to
be observed. That land was not yet in sight. So far, indeed, they had been travelling
away from it rather than towards it, and the district in which they now were was
suggestive of anything but comlands, oliveyards and vineyards.

I. There is the distincit assurance of sufficient guidance. The reference here
is presumably to that glory-cloud in which God was to manifest his presence right
onward till Canaan was reached. That cloud was to be unintermitting and unmis-
takable in its guiding efficiency. Whatever perplexities might come to a devout and
attentive Israelite because of other things, no perplexities were possible as to the way in
which he should go. He might wonder why God led him in such a way ; but that it
was really God's way he need not have any doubt whatever. Thus we see how lovingly
God ever deals with the ignorance of his people. What is necessary for them to know
is made as plain as the necessity demands. They did not need any discussions and
counsels among themselves, any balancing of the pros and cons which might determine
them to one path rather than another. God perfectly knew the way and the needs and
dangers of the way. He himself is never in doubt ;is to what his people should do.
He is no blind leader of the blind. He was taking Isi 'el into the land which he had
prepared, and the way was prepared as much as the de^ tination. Whatever uncertainty
and vacillation there may be about the Christian life jomes not from him who leads,
but from those who follow. Indeed, our very vacillation becomes more conspicuous as
we contrast it with the steady undeviating path marked out by our leader. Compare
the announcement that is made concerning the angel here with th; demand of Jesus
upon his disciples — ' Follow me."

n. There is the indicated peril of neqlectino TiiAT suidanoi. iiot to follow



OH. xxm. 24— 33.] THE BOOK OF EXODUa 111



the true guide, of course, means all the loss, pain and destruction that come fronj
getting into false ways. But such consequences are not dwelt upon here. The
thoughts of the people are rather directed to the sin they would commit hy neglecting
the intimations of the angel. " My name is in him." It was not a mere creature of
Jehovah, which he used for an index. There was in the guiding-cloud a peculiar
manifestation of Jehovah himself, whom the people would neglect if in a fit of self-will
they were to turn away and follow the superficial intimations of their earthly surround-
ings. The great peril was that of coming under the wrath of God because of dis-
obedience. It was only too easy to become used even to the presence of a miraculous
cloud. The after conduct of the people shows that the tone of warning here adopted
was a wise tone. They were likely to forget how much the presence of the ange)
demanded from them. That angel was there not only in mercy but in authority. Tc
neglect him was to offend him. And because the cloud, in the ordinary circumstances
of it, had nothing to terrify, because the penal consequences of neglecting it did not lie
on the surface, it was needful to remind the people how much of holy wrath with un-
belief and self-reliance lay within this messenger from God. The negligent Israelite
needed to be solemnly assured that there was something even worse than mere failure
to attain the earthly Canaan. The foreshadowing is here given of that dreadful doom
which fell upon Israel shortly after and kept them in the wilderness for forty years.
God can turn all the wanderings of the disobedient into a species of imprisonment and
punishment from himself.

III. There is a most instructive intimation as to the results or accepting
THAT guidance. The very results show how indispensable the guidance is. Enemies
and adversaries are in front, and God makes no concealment of the fact. If Israel has
had already to deal with Amalekites in the comparative barrenness of the Sinaitic
peninsula, what may not be expected when the confines of the fertile promised land are
reached ? That which is to be a good land to Israel, has long been a good land to the
nations at present dwelling in it. But though these enemies lie in front,— enemies
fighting with all the valour of desperation for their homes and their property, — yet al
will prove victorious lor Israel, if only Israel acts obediently towards God's angel. Th:
enemies of God's people are not great or little in themselves. That which is great a
one time may become little at another, and that which is little, great ; and all because ot
the fluctuations in the spirit of faith. In Ex. xvii. we read of Amalekites discom-
fited and Jehovah threatening utterly to put out the remembrance of Amalek from
imdor heaven. But turn to Num. xiv. and a very diiferent story has to be told of how
the Amalekites smote and discomfited the children of Israel. If we would be strong for
every conflict and assured of every victory, it must be by a calm looking towards the
will of God. The will of God tells the way of God ; and when we meet our enemies in
that way all their preparations avail them nothing. — Y.

Vers. 24 — 33. — The prospect m the promised land. I. The treatment op its former
occupants. 1. The avoidance of their idolatries. God cautions us against those dangers
which we are most likely to overlook. When once the Israelites entered the promised
land and were fairly settled there, they would show no lack of energy and discrimina-
tion in doing their best to guard their temporal possessions. But the most serious
dangers are those against which walled cities and great armies are no defence. God could
easily cut off the idolaters and put Israel in their place ; but what about the idolatries ?
Whether these should also be expelled would depend upon the guard which God's people
kept over their own hearts. It is very noticeable that as God takes the thoughts of his
people forward to their future habitation, he begins with a solemn caution against
idolatry and closes with the same. There is thus a kind of correspondence with the
order occupied in the Ten Commandments by those against polytheism and image-
worship. It was not possible to make mention too often of the subtle perils which lay
in the Canaanitish gods. 2. Jehovah's complete defeat and expulsion of the former
inhabitants. This is indicated in a variety of impressive ways. Only let his people be
faithful to him, and Jehovah will go before them as a dread to all who come in contact
with them. Evidently God wovdd have his people understand that nothing was to Oe
feared from the very greatest external resources available against them. Let enemies
threaten and unite and seek allies far and wide. The irreatar their efforts, the msre



22i THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [tm. ^xm. U—S'i

rignal will be their defeat. We must ever believe that our true strength is In God. It
was never intended that Israel should be looked on as a mighty military power, liathei
It should be a cause of astonishment among the nations that it was able to stand against
all the resources gathered against it. Whenever the Israelites began to trust in them-
selves and thiiilj they were able to awe their enemies, then they were lost. God only
can terrify with the terror that lasts. We may confidently leave him to scatter con-
***^ »>?"»enf tboee whom we, with all our demonstrations, are unable to impress.
S. Vtte tttjmneiiim to ttiter into no covenant with the former inhabitants. He who had
been expelled by nothing less than an awful Divine force was not to be allowed to return
under pretence of a peaceful submission. Peace, concord, mutual help — ^we may say God
would ever have these between man and man, nation and nation — ^but at the same time
we constantly get the warning against crying, peace ! peace ! when there is no peace. If
a foreigner came forsaking his idolatries, there was an appointed way for him into Israel,
and a welcome to be cordially given. But by no stretching of charity could it be made
attainable for the idolater to settle down side by side with the worshipper and servant
of Jehovah.

II. The large positive blessings to come upon Israel. The expulsion and per-
manent exclusion of the former inhabitants, much as they are insisted on, were but the
negative condition, the clearing of the ground, so as to bless Israel with something
positive. Very fittingly does God blend together the mention of these positive
blessings with cautions and warnings as to the treatment of the former occupants. Ab
the blessings were considered, the wisdom of the cautions would appear ; and as the
cautions were considered, so earnest and express, the greatness of the blessings would
appear. God presents himself here as one very solicitous to make the land not only a
good land for his people, but one cherished so as to make the best of its advantages.
For this purpose he begins with a kind of graduated expulsion of the former inhabitants.
Instead of expelling them by a sudden overwhelming blow, he rather does it little by
little. The enemies of Israel were not to be multiplied needlessly by exposing their
land to wild beasts ; and the human enemies, contrary to their own designs and desires,
were to leave for Israel the firuit of their own industries. If the Israelites had been
asked which would be better, — to cast out their enemies at once or by a gradual process,
they would probably have replied, " at once." God wUl ever adopt the right plan to
secure the most of blessing for his people. Thus we may learn a lesson with regard to
the expulsion of evil still. God is still driving out evil little by little, and in so doing
he is building up good little by little. Thus the Israelites were to get a gradual and
secure settlement in the land ; and then that settlement was to prove eminently profit-
able. Four great elements of prosperity are mentioned. 1. The blessing of the bread
and the water. All that was connected with the obtaining of food and drink would be
under God's watchful providence. What are the bread and the water \mless he blesses
them ? God can turn the most fertile of lands into a very proverb of barrenness. Why,
this very Canaan had been afilicted with famine. It was because for some reason the
blessing of God had been withheld from the bread and the water that the fathers of
Israel had found their way into Egypt. 2. llie maintenance of health. This is put in
ike most expressive way by indicating it in the aspect of banished sickness. Disease is
such a common sight to us, and presents itself in such varied forms, that in no way
can God's blessing of health be more emphatically revealed than by describing him as
the one who healeth all our diseases. To a large extent this health was to be the con-
sequence of blessing the bread and the water, giving by them, thus blessed, abundant
and nutritious food. 3. The productiveness d/" animal life. In a perfectly obedient
Israel there were to be no abortions, no barren wombs. It was just because there was
disobedience in Israel that such cries as those of Hannah were heard (1 Sam. i. 11).
Evidently all this normal generative eflicacy largely depended on the blessing of the
bread and water and the blessing of health. That any animal whatever, either human,
or lower than human, should cast its young or be barren, was in itself a sort of disease.
4. The fulfilling of the days. The hoary he,id with its crown of glory is the appointed
possession of God's people. That so few obtained it only showed how much there was
of imperfection in Israelite national life. These purposed blessings did not find their
way into reality. The people were disobedient, unbelieving, self-regarding ; and hence
the seeds of blessing which assuredly God soweid among them either remahied dead of
struggled forth into a very imperfect life. — I.



OH. xxm. 20— 33.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 221

Ver. 20. — Mine angel shall go lefore thee. A prepared people have to be led into a
prepared place (ver. 20). To lead them a guide is necessary, and God provides a guida^

I. The guide and his office. 1. Bis nature and character. (1) An angel, i.e.,
a Divine messenger ; not merely a messenger of God's appointment, but a messenger
from God's presence. Men may be empowered to act as angels ; but naturally during
his time of probation man is made " lower than the angels." The angel guide is
superhuman ; he helps to direct affairs in this world, but his home is in another. The
history certainly implies so much as this ; and no theory save that which assumes the
fact of such superhuman guidance can adequately account for the marvellous coinci-
dences through which progress was ensured. The enthusiasm of Moses might fire a
people, but it is not enough to fire them ; they must be fired at the right moment, and
with a definite aim. Some superhuman agent, who could view time from the stand-
point of eternity and direct men's actions in accordance with the real necessities of the
position, there must have been. [Cf. a game of chess played, as sometimes in India,
with living pieces. Success does not depend so much on the strength of the armies on
the board as on the skill of the players off the board, who view the whole position
from above.] History cannot be explained if we ignore the imseen hand which directs
and controls the movements of the actors. (2) " My name is in him." The Divine
guide must share the Divine character. God's deputy must be God-like. As viewing
things from the standpoint of eternity, he is able to guide through the maze of time ;
but to view things from the standpoint of eternity he must be a sharer in the life of
eternity, the eternal name must be so written on his heart that his guidance may be
free from all suspicion of caprice. 2. Bis office. (1) To keep in the way. The guide
must be a guardian as well. Guides who forget the dangers of the way, intent only on
reaching their destination, may push on to the goal themselves, yet lose their charge
before they reach it. God-commissioned guides are empowered also to keep and guard
those who are given into their care (John xvii. 12). (2) To bring to the prepared place.
If the guide must be a guardian, the guardian must also be a guide. He must protect
during the advance, but he must not protect at the expense of progress ; his charge has
to be brought through the wilderness, not to be maintained there behind barricades and
bulwarks. The people of Jehovah are led by the minister of Jehovah, who secures
their entrance into the place prepared, if only they wiU accept his guidance. A place is
prepared for us, as for Israel (John xiv. 2). A guide also is given us (John xiv. 16 — 18).
We must not forget his twofold ofBce, to keep in the way and to insist upon our moving
forward.

II. Those guided and theie duties. The angel guide has to direct men ; that ho
may direct them, they must acknowledge his authority. Two things necessary ; — 1.
Beverence. The disposition of the heart which cannot but show itself in the conduct.
Assured that the angel bore the Divine name, men must beware of him, assured that
he had the right to speak with authority. A command from such a guide needed no
reasons to enforce it. 2. Ohedience. (1) Positive. His commands must be obeyed.
There must be no delay, no shrinking back. (2) Negative. There must be no attempt
to evade their real fuMlment by a merely apparent and formal compliance. True
obedience is obedience of the spirit as well as of the letter ; mere literal obedience may
consist with actual provocation. Remembering who our guide is, we must remember
also that the like duties are required of us in relation to him. To resist the Spirit is to
grieve him, and grieving may eventually quench his power with us ; one more step
seals our destruction — " He that blasphemeth the Spirit of God" sins the unpardonable
sin.

III. Blessings consequent on fulfilment or duties. We may call them tem-
poral and eternal ; blessings of the pilgrimage and blessings of the home. By the way,
guarded by our guide, no enemy has power to hurt us ; at the last we reach our home,
to find there eternal health and happiness.

Concluding question. — What is our relation towards the guide whom God has given
us? (Heb. ii. 2— 3.)^.

Vers. 20 — 33. — The Mediatorial Guide. "Behold I send an angel before thee^"
etc. (Exodus xxiii. 20). [We omit from homiletio treatment Exodus xx. 22 — ^xxiii. 19,
<vint9iniiig a large amount of minute legislation ; but if any one for special reasoi



•.^it THE BOOK OF EXODUa [ch. xxiii. 20— 3S,

wishes to deal with aay of these laws, he will find a careful and exhaustive analysis in
Lange on " Exodus." Most of them have strict and sole reference to the Hebrew
Commonwealth, and are obsolete for the Christian.] This passage contains a series of
promises, which all centre in an august personage, called here an " angel." That this
is so will determine the character of our exposition, and the Christian uses of it.

I. The Ansel. None other than the " Angel of Jehovah," the Angel-God of the
Old Testament, i.e., the Lord Jesus Christ. Reference is here made to those many
epiphanies, which preceded the Great Epiphany of the incarnation. That these were
appearances of the Lord Jesus may be argued : — 1. It seems reasonable that there should
be anticipations of the incarnation. True, we could not prophesy them beforehand ;
but when they do take place, they commend themselves to our reason. It seems in ,a
sense natural, that He, who was coming to dwell here, should once and again " come
down to deliver." 2. l%e history of the appearance of the angel shows : — (1) That he
was Divine, (i.) Perfection implied in the authority he wields, and the promises he
gives, (ii.) Swears by himself, (iii.) The object of worship, (iv.) Subject of Divine
names and attributes. (2) And yet there is that which differentiates Him from the
Eternal Father. AU this accords with the doctrine of the Trinity ; and that the
angel was Christ the Lord.

U. His office. We assume now that the angel was the Lord Jesus ; that what he
was to the ancient Church he is now. He is ever present — sometimes unseen — often
recognised. His office as here set forth is that of: — 1. A Leader. He led Israel,
mainly by the piUar of cloud ; but not in such a way as to dispense with Israel's
action. The Lord acts, but never so as to swamp our individuality. It was for Israel :
(1) To watch the cloud : (2) To exercise their own judgment on minor matters. See
Num. X. 31. Our danger is to rely exclusively on our own judgment, and not to look
for the waving of That Hand. 2. A Sentinel. " To keep in the way " in the double
sense ;— (1) To hold us in the path, and (2) to defend us on that path. The practical
truth here is, that Christ's keeping is not absolute or independent of our will and action.
He watoBes, that we may watch. This vital practical truth seems to us to be well
Uustrated by Swedenborg's doctrine of the " Proprium ; " which is well exhibited in
" Outlines of the Eeligion and Philosophy of Swedenborg " by Dr. Parsons. Ch. viii.

3. Moral magistracy. " He wiU not pardon your transgressions, for my name is
in Him" — ^what can this mean ? There is reference here to the moral magistracy exer-
cised over us, on our pilgrim way, noting transgression, visiting for it, chastising,
chastening, with a view to ultimate removal. Appeal to life for evidence of the reality
of that corrective jurisdiction.

III. Oxm DDTT. 1. Loyalty to Ood, ver. 25. 2. Recognition of his representative ;
i.e., the angel ; i.e., the Lord Jesus. 3. Obedience ; i.e., to the leader, etc. (vers. 21, 22.)
N.B. " If thou shalt indeed obey His voice, and do all that 1 speak." Mark how God
identifies himself with the angel. 4. Avoidance of fellowship and complicity with evil
(vers. 32, 83). Any intercovu'se for the Jew i with the heathen was full of peril. It
seems now to be assumed that no companionship for the Christian has any danger.
This assumption false, as the tendency to worldliness and open sin shows. 5. Active
antagonism to all Anti-theisms (v. 24). It will not do to be content with standing on
the defensive. Has not the time now come to carry the war into the enemy's camp ?

IV. The promises. These cover really all the blessings consequent da a life of
practical godliness. Thinking rather of our own position than of the literal meaning of
the promises in relation to the life of Israel, they may be classified as foUow : — 1. Ood
on our side (vers. 22, 23). 2. Our daily provision blessed (ver. 25). There shall be
enough; but whatever there is shall have gladness with it. 3. Health (ver. 25).

4. Wealth (ver. 26). 5. Long life (ver. 26). 6. Influence, before which even adversarien
shall bend (ver. 27). 7. Enlargement of power and of room for its exercise (v. 31).
8. In the bestowal of these blessings, our Father in heaven wiU show to us great
considerateness (vers. 29, 30). 9. Safe conduct to the promised rest (ver. 20). Those
who know the argument of Binney : — " Is it possible to make the best of Both
Worlds ? " will well understand how, under what conditions, and with what limitations.
blessings of this sort — ^mainly secular in character — fall to the lot of the Lord's



CB. zsm. 32, 33.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 82, 83. — ^Ftnal WABmNO against
IDOLATBT. The " Book of the Covenant " ends
as it began, with a solemn warning against
idolatry. (See ch. xx. 23.) " Thou shalt make
no covenant with them nor with their gods."
Thou shalt not even suffer them to dwell side
by side with thee in the land, on peaceable
terms, with their own laws and religion, lest
thou be ensnared thereby, and led to worship
their idols and join in their unhallowed rites
(ver. 33). The after history of the people of
Israel shows the need of the warning. From
the exodus to the captivity, every idolatry
with which they came into close contact
proved a sore temptation to them. As the
author of Kings observes of the Ten Tribes —
" The children of Israel did secretly those
things which were not right against the Lord
their God, and they built them high places in

all their cities And they set them up

images and groves in every high hill, and
under every green tree ; and there they burnt



incense in all the high places, at did the

heathen whom the Lord carried away before
them ; and wrought wicked things tii provoke
the Lord to anger; for they serviid idols,
whereof the Lord had said unto them, " Te
shall not do this thing " (2 Kings xvil 9 — 12).
•

Ver. 82. — ^Thon shalt make no onvenant
with them. See below, eh. xxxiv. 1.2—15.
According to the forms usual at the time, a
treaty of peace would have contained an ac
knowledgnient of the gods of either nation,
and words in honour of them. (See tho
" Treaty of Rameses II. with the Hittites,"
given in tlie Hecnrds of the Past, vol. iv. pp.
27 — 32.) This would have been equivalent
to " making a covenant with their gods."

Ver. 33.— They shall not dweU in tbe land.
This law did not, of course, affect proselytes ;
nor was it considered to preclude the continu-
ance in the land of the enslaved Gibeonites.
It forbade any Canaanite communities being
suffered to remain within the limits of Pales-
tine on friendly terms with the Hebrews. Th^
precaution was undoubtedly a wise oneb



HOMILETICS.

Vera. 32, 33. — The Peril of Idolatry. Idolatry is the interposition of any object
between man and God, in such sort that the object takes the place of God in the heart
and the affections, occupying them to his exclusion, or to his disparagement. Idolatry
proper, the interposition between God and the soul of idols or images, seems to havt
possessed a peculiar fascination for the Israelites, either because their materialistic
tendencies made them shrink from approaching in thought a mere pure Spirit, oi
perhaps from their addiction to the sensual pleasures which accompanied idolatry, as
practised by the greater part of the heathen. (See the comment on ver. 24.) In modern
times, and in countries where Protestantism is professed by the generality, there
is little or no danger of this gross form of the sin. But there is great danger of other
forms of it. In order to make any practical use of those large portions of the Old
Testament which warn against idolatry, we have to remember —

I. That covbtousness is idolatry. Wealth is made an idol by thousands in these
latter days. All hasten to be rich. Nothing is greatly accounted of which does not lead
to opulence. God is shut out from the heart by desires, and plans, and calculations which
have money for their object and which so occupy it that there is no room for anything
else. The danger has existed at all times, but it has to be specially guarded against at
the present day, when Mammon has become the most potent of all the spirits of evil, and
men bow down before, not an image of gold, but gold itself, whatever shape it may take.

II. That selfishness is idolatry. Men make idols of themselves — of their own
happiness, quiet, comfort — ^allowing nothing to interfere with these, and infinitely pre-
ferring them to any intrusive thoughts of God, his glory, or his claims upon them.
Persons thus wrapped up in themselves are idolaters of a very gross type, since the
object of their worship is wholly bad and contemptible.

III. That profligacy is idolatry. Men idolise a wretched creature, — a girl, or
woman, possessed of some transient beauty and personal attractions, but entirely devoid of
a single estimable quality. For such a creature they peril all their prospects, both in
this life and the iiuxt. They make her the queen of their souls, the object of their
adoration, the star by which they direct their course. The ordinary conseauence ii
Hhipwreck, both here and hereafter. When so poor an idol as a weak wanton Has



SM



THE BOOK OF EXODUa



[oh. XXIV. 1 — 8.



stepped in between the soul and God, there is little chance of a Nal repentance and
return of the soul to its Maker.

IV. That amusement mat be ioolatby. It is quite possible so to devote oneself
to amusement as to make it shut out God from us. Those who live in a whirl of gaiety,
with no time set apart for serious duties, for instructing the ignorant, consoling the
afflicted, visiting the poor and needy — nay, with scant time for private or family prayer
— are idolaters, and will have to give account to a "jealous God," who wills that his
creatures should worship him and not make it their highest end to amuse themselves.

V. That love op fashion may sg idolatry. Vast numbers of persons who find
no amusement in the pursuit, think it necessary to do whatever it is the fashion to do.
Their life is a perpetual round of employments in which they have no pleasure, and
which they have not chosen for themselves, but which the voice of fashion forces upon
them. They drag themselves through exhibitions which do not interest them ; lounge
at clubs of which they are utterly weary ; dine out when they would much rather be at
home ; and pass the evening and half the night in showing themselves at balls and
assemblies which fatigue and disgust them. And all because Fashion says it is the
correct thing. The idol, Fashion, has as many votaries in modern Europe as ever the
Dea Syra had in Western Asia, or Isis in Egypt ; and her votaries pass through life as
real idolaters as the worshippers of the ancient goddesses, albeit unconscious ones.



SECTION XIV.— CHAPTEE XXIV.

COMFLETIOII OF THE COVENANT, AND ASCENT OF MoSES INTO THB OLOITS ON 8IVA].



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XXIV.



Vers. 1 — 8. — ^The Eatifioation of the
Covenant. The giving of the Book of the
Covenant being now completed, Moses, having
received directions with respect to another as-
cent into the moimt (vers. 1, 2), descended to
the people, and in the first instance declared to
them the main heads of the Covenant, which
they received with favoiu,and expressed their
willingness to obey (ver. 3). Not, however,
regarding this as a sufficiently formal ratifica-
tion, the Prophet proceeded to write out in a
" Book " the whole of the commands which he
had received. He then built an altar, erected
twelve pillars, offered sacrifice, and havmg
collected half the blood of the victuns in
basins, svmunoned the people to an assembly.
At this, he read over solemnly all the words
of the Book to them, and received then solemn
adherence to it (ver. 7) ; whereupon, to com-
plete the ceremony, and mark their entrance
into covenant, he sprinkled the blood from the
baiins on the twelve tribes, represented by
their leaders, end declared the acceptance
complete (ver. 8). The ceremony was pro-
bably modelled on some customary proceed-
ings, whereby important contracts between



man and man were ratified among the HebrewE
and Syrians.

Vers. 1, 2. — It has been supposed that these
verses are out of place, and suggested to
remove them to the end of verse 8. But no
change is necessary. It is quite natural that
God should have given the directions before
Moses descended from the mount, and that he
should have deferred executing them until the
people had accepted the covenant. Nadal
and Abihu were the two eldest of Aaron's
sons, and so his natural successors in the
priesthood, had they not sinned by offering
" strange fire " (Lev. x. 1, 2). They had been
mentioned previously, in ch. vi. 23. Seventy
of the elders. On the elders of Israel, see ch.
ill. 16, and xviii. 21. The " seventy " elders
may, together with Nadab and Abihu, have
represented the twelve tribes, six from each.
W orship ye afar offi Though all were to ascend
the mount to a certain height, only Moses was
to go to the top. The others, being less hol\
than Moses, had to worship at a distance.

Ver. 3. — And Moses came. Moses descended
from the mount, and reported to the people
all the words of the lord — all the legislation
contained in the last three chapters and a hall
(ch. XX. 19, to ch. xxiii. 33), not perhaps in
extenso, but as to its main provisions. And
all the people answered with one voie«,
promising obedience. In times of excitement,
a common impulse constantly animates an
entn-e multitude, and an exaltation of feeling



•H. XXIV. 3—8].



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



22»



leads them to make pledges, which they are
very anwiUing to stand by afterwards. Hence
Moses requires something more than a verbal
assent.

Ver. 4. — Moses wrote all the words of the
Lord. We may presume that tbey were mi-
raculously brought to his remembrance by
that Spirit of Truth which guided all the
Prophets (2 Pet. L 21 ; John xiv. 26). Hav-
ing written the words, he waited till the next
day, and then rose ap early and builded an
altar, in preparation for the sacrifice without
which no covenant was regarded as binding.
And twelve pillars. Symbolical of the twelve
. tribes. Compare Josh. iv. 3, 9, 20.

Ver. 5. — ^And he sent young men. TheLevi-
tical priesthood not being as yet instituted,
either all the people were regarded as holy, and
so any one might offer sacrifice, or the " young
men selected may have been of the number
of the first-bom, who were priests in their
respective families until the appointment of
Aaron and his sons to be priests of the nation
(ch. xxviii. 1). No doubt young men were
selected as most competent to deal with
struggling animals.

Ver. 6.— Moses took half of the blood. The
blood, which symbolised the life of the victim,
was tiie essential part of every sacrifice, and
was nsuaUy poured over the altar, or at any
rate sprinkled upon it, as the very crowning
act of offering. (See Lev. i. 5; ill. S;
etc.) On this occasion Moses retained half
of the blood, and put it in basins, for the pur-
pose of so uniting all the people in the sacrifice,
and thereby the more solemnly pledging them
to the covenant, which the sacrifice at once
consecrated and consummated. (See Heb. is.
18—20.) The other half of the blood was,
according to the luual practice, sprinkled
npon the altar.

Ver. 7. — ^And he took the Book of the Cove-
nant. In this book we have the germ of the
Holy Scriptures — the first "book" actually
mentioned as written in the narrative of the
Bible. Genesis may contain other older docu-
ments, inserted by Moses, under the sanction
of the Holy Spirit, in his compilation. But
his own composition, if we except the burst of



poesy called forth by the passage of the Bed
Sea (ch. xv. 1 — 18), would seem to have com-
menced with "the Book of the Covenant.'
Upon this nucleus the rest of the law was
based ; and it was to explain and enforce the
law that Moses composed the I'sutateuoh.
In the audience of the people, Literally, " in
the ears of the people," which is equally intel-
ligible, and more graphic. And they said, elc
The people made the same answer as before
(ver. 3), adding a general promise of obedi-
ence to all that God might command in future.
Ver. 8. — Moses then proceeded to the final
act — He took the blood from the basins, and
sprinMed it — not certainly upon all the people,
who numbered above two millions — but upon
their leaders and representatives, the " elders "
and other chief men, drawn up at the head of
each tribe, and thus brought within his reach.
It has been supposed by some that he merely
sprinkled the blood on the twelve piUars, as
representing the twelve tribes ; but, had this
been the case, the expression in the text
would probably have been different. We
read, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that he
" sprinlded both the book, and all tlie people "
(Heb. ix. 19). As he sprinkled, lie said.
Behold the blood of the covenant, etc. It was a
common practice among the nations of an-
tiquity to seal covenants with blood. Some-
times the blood was that of a victim, and the
two parties to the covenant prayed, that, if
they broke it, his fate might be theirs (Horn.
11. iii. 298 ; lix. 252 ; Lev. i. 24 ; xxi. 45 ;
etc.). Sometimes it was the blood of the two
parties themselves, who each drank of the
other's blood, and thereby contracted a blood-
relationship, which would have made their
breaking the covenant more unpardonable
(Herod, i. 74 ; iv. 70 ; Tacit. Ann. xii. 47).
Moses seems to have followed neither practice
at all closely, but, adopting simply the prin-
ciple that a covenant required to be sealed
with blood, to have arranged the details as he
thought best. By the sprinkling of both the
altar and the people the two parties to the
covenant were made partakers of one and the
same blood, and so brought into a sort of w-
cramental union.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 3 — 8.—Man*s readiness to enter into covenant with God, and promise unlimited
obedience. In any covenant which God proposes to man, the advantages offered to hira
are so great, and the requirements made of him so manifestly " holy, just, and good,"
that It is almost impossible that he should calmly consider the terms and reject them.
It is his natural instinct to exclaim — " AH that the Lord hath said I will do, and be
obedient." There are many reasons for this feeling, of which the following are some : —

L The cebathbe is moballt bound to obey its Cbbatob. That which an intelligent
agent has made belongs to him absolutely, and cannot resist his will without rebellion.
Now, " it is God that has made us, and not we ourselves." We are his, whether we
choose to obey him or no — his to punish or reward — to kill or make alive — to exalt to
happiness or condemn to misery. We cannot resist his will without beii^ self-coc-

IXODUB — iU 9



tM THE BOOK OP EXODUa [oh. xxw. I— IL

demned. The reasons which make disobedience to a father morally 'wrong tell witli
increased force if applied to Gtod, who is far more truly than our father, — 1. The author
of our existence ; 2, The preserver of our life ; and 3, The bestower upon us of favours
and benefits which we cannot possibly repay.

TT- Mam's best ktbbests abb peomoted by a pebfect obedience. Every law ever
imposed by God on man has been imposed for man's sake, and tends to his advantage.
If a man were truly wise, he would lay down for himself as rules of conduct exactly
those laws which are laid down for his guidance in Holy Scripture. The man whose
obedience approaches nearest to perfection is the happiest. For every act of disobedience
there is a natural penalty.

TTT. The highest aspiration of mam's natube is to do God's will. Angels have
no other desire but this. Man has a thousand desires, but, together with them, has an
inward conviction that it is better for him to resist than to gratify the greater number,
His passions draw him one way, his reason another, his affections, perhaps, a third. He
has no unmixed satisfaction but in following the lead of the highest principle within
him ; and this principle is the love of God, which prompts him to make it the sole
object of his life to please God by so acting as God would have him. Man, therefore,
readily promises obedience — as of old at Sinai, so now at baptism and confirmation, or,
again, after. a sudden conversion; and, imder the excitation of stirred feelings and an
awakened conscience, imagines that he will keep to his brave resolve; but when the
excitement is past, and the feelings have calmed down, and the tame, dull course of
ordinary life is entered upon, then it is found not so easy to observe the promises made,
and " do all that the Lord has said, and be obedient." The flagrant contrast between
the conduct of the Israelites and their words is known to aU. The contrast is,
perhaps, less, but it is still great, between the pledges given by Christians and their
acts. Performance ever lags for behind promise. " The spirit, indeed, is willing, but the
flesh is weak." Temptations assail — Satan spreads his wiles — the lower nature turns
traitor, and men fall away. Happy, if, while there is still time, they " return and repent,
and do the first works," and casting themselves upon Christ obtain pardon for their
disobedience from the ever-merciful God.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 2, 9 — ^11. — The vision of God for the selected few. L Those selected fob
THIS vision. That Moses himself went up was a matter of course. It was good for
him to be there for the strengthening of his own faith. He himself would rejoice in the
assurance thus given that the promise of the people was accepted. As to those who
went up with him, it is clear that in the revelation something was being done to prepare
them for official positions afterwards. They got this glorious sight not because they
deserved it more than others, but because they needed it more. Moses required helps in
order that he might be a mediator between God and the whole nation, and so these
men, the seventy elders in particular, needed help in acting as mediators between Moses
and the people. Doubtless it was intended that they should go down again among the
people and be witnesses as to what they had seen. Would it not give an elder greater
influence in after days if the people took knowledge of him that he had been with Moses
in the mount? Notice, that in spite of this great revelation, Aaron soon feE away into
the great transgression of the golden calf, and a little later Nadab and Abihu perished
before the Lord for their disobedience. And may we not say that their sin was a}l the
greater, just because they had been favoured vrith a privilege which they had failed to
profit by?

II. The vision itself. "They saw the God of Israel." There is a mysterious yet
most instructive reticence as to exactly what it was that they saw. As to what shape
and form were seen nothing is said ; and even concerning the circumstances nothing
more is ventured than an indication of the sapphire work on which he stood. And since
we find this reticence of description it behoves us to put corresponding restraint on our
conjectures: we may infer that the purpose of this vision was to give a plain and
encouraging contrast between what was now seen and what had been seen before. Wheo
God's people are at peace with him— and there was a symbolic peace at this time— then



OH. xxiT. S-8.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 231

there is a cessation of such terrorising manifestations as we read of in ch. six. Whei
we see all that strange mingling of terrible darkness, light, and sound, which make up
the thunderstorm, we know that Nature is striving to recover her balance. That balance
recovered, the body of heaven resumes its clearness ; nay it often appears in even more
than its accustomed beauty. All the dark and frowning appearances of God, all things
that shake and confuse the soul, are meant to lead on to a calming and attracting revela-
tion of Qod such as this revelation to Aaron and his companions but feebly typifies.
First, the presence of God is made known amid thunder, lightning and smoke, and
everything trembles to its centre at but the touch of his feet : then there is the change
to where he is lifted clean above the polluting earth. Instead of disturbance there is
unruffled peace, the beauty and profundity of the cloudless heaven. Thus by this
outward symbol should we think of the quiet, untroubled heart where dwells the
reconciled God. The more complete that reconciliation, the more settled the peace
which we have with God, the more may the state of our hearts be indicated by the
language which is here employed.

III. The bxperiencbs of this chosen company dukinq the vision. 1. They were
made to/eel immistakahly Oo(ta benignity towards them. He did not lay his hand upon
them. That they were not swiftly stretched in death upon the mountain side is spoken
of as if in itself a subject of congratulation. The negative must come before the
positive. The thought of complete salvation from danger must precede the thought of
positive growth and enrichment. It was scarcely credible that men should see God
and live. How dependent we are for our conclusions on narrow experiences, sometimes
on most superstitious fears ! The day is coming when, if we only accept all purifying
ministrations, we shall not only see God and live, but also wonder that so long we should
have been able to live without seeing him. 2. This henignity is particularly experienced
in their being allowed to eat and drink before Ood. It is in the companionship of the
table that social intercourse is commonly supposed to reach its perfection. This eating
and drinking before God indicated that a certain composure of mind had been attained,
and that the company had some real enjoyment of the position in which it was placed.
There is a setting forth of the Divine blessing which ever rests on true fellowship of the
saints. As many as are right with God personally are drawn together for united
enjoy^ment as well as for united service. There is no place where the hearts of men are
really one but when they are gathered before him who has the sapphire work under his
feet. There, and there only, do we find the secret of that penetrating harmony which
dissolves and utterly destroys all discords. — Y.

Vers, 3 — 8. — The terms of the covenant accepted. I. Observe how cleablt these
TEEMS HAD been STATED. Moses Came and told the people all the words of the Lord
and all the judgments. All the way to Sinai the people had the opportunity of seeing
the power of Jehovah ; at Sinai something of his glory had been manifested ; and now
in these words and judgments the character and will of Jehovah were made known. It
is observable that at their first approach to Sinai the people had expressed their willing-
ness to be obedient to God (ch. xix. 8). But he does not seek to bind them down by
a formal contract until he has made clear the laws under which he would have them to
live. It is well for \is to bear in mind that God distinctly and emphatically states ali
things of practical and present importance. We indeed may have a very imperfect
understanding of his statements ; but the statements in themselves are perfectly plain,
only requiring that our minds should be brought into a right state of humility, and
concentrated upon the study of God's holy commandments with the requisite degree of
attention.

II. OBSEBVB also the way in which THESE TERMS HAD BEEN ACCEPTED. The

people answered with one voice. There was a remarkable unanimity. Are we to take
it that there was a complete, univOTsal, cordial shout of acceptance? There is no reason
to suppose otherwise, no reason to suppose but that a profound impression had been
made on every mind. Not the slightest word appears to indicate discord. But of
course, although there was no discord in the expression, there was great diversity in the,
state of mind which underlay the shout of acceptance. The emotion finding vent io
this unanimous acceptance could be traced back in a few instances to a thoroughly
awakened conscience, desiring to live a thoroughly righteous life, and be in true and

4-2



sat THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxtw. S— a

eomplete conformity to the will of God ; for there were men of David's spirit long before
David's time. But in how many was there nothing more than the inconsiderate shout of
those who, after all God had said, had yet not the slightest knowledge of his will 1 And
yet with all these profound differences the superficial enthusiastic agreement evidently
served a purpose. For not only was there a word, but also a highly significant aiid
impressive deed. Notice that all the preparations in the way of altar, pillars, offermgs,
etc., made so carefully by Moses, are not said to have been made by God's command-
ment. The most we can say is, that they were not out of harmony with his will
They were a visible representation, a kind of writing out of the great contract into
which the people thus entered. There stood the altar signifying the presence of God,
ftnd there the pillars signifying the twelve tribes, and there was the blood with its
principle of life joining together, in a glorious unity, Jehovah and his people. The
great and lamentable differences underneath are neither forgotten nor undenated ; but
for the time they are not regarded. The unity of feeling thus secured was made to
serve a great symbolic purpose. These people, by word and deed, by the erection of
these pillars, and by the acceptance of the sprinkled blood, took piu^ in a great historic
act, and declared that they were the people of God in a way the consequences of which
they could not afterwards escape.

ill. Observe this very remarkable thing — that God should hav£ accepted their
ACCEFTANCE. He knew how much and how little it meant, and yet he did not point
out the rashness of the utterance, he did not interfere with the symbolic actions by
which Moses more deliberately set forth the adhesion of the people. We are boimd,
therefore, to conclude that in whatever ignorance and sudden enthusiasm the people
might subscribe to this covenant, yet that subscription was right. The laws that God
gave fi'om Sinai are the laws for men to live by. The constitution of God's kingdom
was by this great symbolic act solemnly introduced into Israel, and made the con-
stitution of Israel also. Every nation, if it is to be anything more than a mere crowd,
must have a constitution. Some constitutions grow, and like all things that grow, they
occasionally branch out in unexpected directions. Other constitutions, men meet
together to determine and formulate, like that of the American republic. But here is a
constitution which comes down out of heaven from God ; and in a great historic act,
the nation into which it comes accepts it. Hence those bom under that constitution
were bound to accent it also. There was no nation on the face of the earth that had
such secm-ities, privileges, and prospects as Israel had under these laws from Sinai.
The government was neither a despotism nor a democracy. The people were neither
under an arbitrary wiU which might capriciously change, nor did they depend upon
their own fluctuating opinions. God, if we might use such an expression, was bound
by these laws, even as the people were themselves. — Y.

Vers. 4. — " If any man wUl do the will he shall know of the doctrine." What a
man receives must depend upon what he is able to receive. [Illustration. The sponge
absorbs more water than the wood, because its pores are more open.] To receive the
light of revelation the spiritual pores must be well opened ; and this depends upon
inward conditions — the will to obey, followed by obedience. Here a revelation is im-
pending. Notice —

I. Readiness of the would-be becipibnts. Moses had declared the Divine wilL
The hearers might have been indifferent, or they might have been disheartened by the
stringency of the injunctions. In either case, through their imperfect condition, more
perfect light must have been delayed. For a little, however, they were rapt out of self;
and though, it may be, the momentary enthusiasm did not pierce clouds which years
only could disperse, yet they were ready for the moment to gain a glimpse, at any rate,
of the Divine glory. " All the words which the Lord hath said will we do : " such
was the utterance of the people's disposition at the moment. Temporary inclination,
however, is not everything ; at best it only marks out tlie way along which effort m^
compel habit. For a nation to speak with " one voice " is something ; but it nee^
discipline and training to secure the " one heart " as well. The first step towards
securing this has next to be taken : —

II. Beadikebs uoiTFiRMEO AND ACCEPTED. A lecoid needed to impress the memory ;
t wcramental symbol to impress the imagination. L Tht reeord. " Moses wrote all



c&urr. S— 9.] THE BOOK OF EXODUa 2»

the words of the Lord," and, when he had read what he had written, the people con-
firmed their previous promise (ver. 7). A written reminder of the covenant as accepted
by them was all-important ; a dying enthusiasm goes hand in hand with a waning
memory ; only a record which will revive the memory can avail to rekindle the enthu-
siasm. Our own experience illustrates this. The diary, the marked Bible— what •
suggestive eloquence they have, not only to remind of old times, but to re-awaken old
feelings ! 2. The sacramental symbol. Bumt-offerings, the outward sign of dedication
and obedience ; peace offerings, the outward sign of gratitude and thanksgiving. Half the
blood sprinkled on the people and half on the altar, symbol of the union between man
and God so long as his commands were thankfully obeyed. So long as man is in the flesh
he needs such sensible and visible emblems. His senses are a function of himself; to
lay hold of them is to lay hold of him through them. The Bible is our record of what
God requires of us ; but baptism and the Lord's Supper give outward expression to the
teaching of the Bible. Each confirms the influence of the other ; we need both to
support our resolutions.

III. The partial bkvelation. The people had expressed their willingness to obey ;
and, further, they had openly confirmed that expression. Time, however, was needed
to test and strengthen their resolution : they could not be admitted to the full blaze of
light merely because, in partial darkness, they had for a little gazed towards its dawning.
A few are selected to represent the multitude (vers. 1, 9 — 11) j and even of these few,
not all are admitted to equal nearness. Enough is revealed to help faith, more would
probably have only injured its growth. [Illustration : Plants are kept from too much
light until they are firmly rooted.] Faith, here, needed rooting : imtil that was accom-
pUshed an economy of reserve was necessary.

Concluding considerations. — 1. The honest promise of obedience is accepted by God
as of moral value. He encourages sincerity by glimpses of the reward in store. 2. Only
obedience tested by difficulty can win the realisation of the beatific vision. The people
must share the life-long training of Moses before they can enjoy with the like freedom
his privilege of intimacy with God. Willingness to obey brings knowledge ; but full
knowledge comes with full obedience. — O.

Vers. 3 — 9. — The ratification of the covenant. These verses contain the account of
the formal ratification of the covenant between Israel and Jehovah — an event, the
most momentous in the history of the nation, big, for weal or woe, with unimaginable
issues, and a shadow of the better covenant which God now makes with Christians.
Observe —

I. The bationality of the covenant. God desires from his people " reasonable
service" (Rom. xii. 1). He would not have them enter it in haste. Vows made under
the influence of sudden impressions are not to be trusted. Once committed to his
service, God will deal with us with strictness (ch. xxiii. 21). But he does not wish us
to commit ourselves till we have carefully considered the nature of the step we are
taking, and the magnitude of the issues involved (cf. Luke xiv. 26 — 34). See this
illustrated in the history of the covenant with Israel. Tlie covenant was entered into —
1. With great deliberation. It was not forced on Israel. The negotiations connected
with it were intentionally drawn out and prolonged, just that the people might have
the opportunity of pondering well the character of the proposed engagement. Alike in
the events of the exodus, and in the miracles of the desert, they had had abundant
experience of the character of the Being with whom they were allying themselves.
Arrived at Sinai, preliminary proposals were made to them, and an opportunity given
them at the outset or saying Yea or Nay (ch. xix. 3 — 9). Their acceptance of these
proposals was followed by the giving of the law, which drew from them a new promise
to do whatever God should speak to them (ch. xx. 19 ; Deut. v. 27). An interval
ensued, during which Moses was in the mountain (ch. xx. 21). On descending, he
recites to them " All the words of the Lord, and all the judgments " (ver. 3) ; and once
again they promise full obedience. Even then the matter is allowed to stand over till
the morrow, when Moses appears with the written book in his hand, and they are asked,
finally, if they adhere to what they have said (ver. 7). Greater precautions against
rash committal could scarcely have been taken. 2. After careful instruction. Paine
were taken fully to inform the people of the terms of the covenant, before asking them



liW THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxiT, 8— 9.

to enter into it The law was uttered by God's own voice. The "judgments " were
recited to them by Moses. They were read a second time from the " book." Their
assent to the covenant was thus sought to be made an intelligent one. If we engage
ourselves to God, he would have us do it with " understanding." 3. Amidst impressiv*
sohmnitiei. These — the reading of the words from the book, the sprinkling of the
blood, etc. — ^were of a nature adapted to arouse the minds of the people to a just sense of
the momentousness of the transaction. From the whole we learn that if dedication is
the result of an act, it should be of a calm, sober, thoughtful act ; it cannot be done too
solemnly or too intelligently. Our religious life should have a rational basis.

II. The bond or the covenant. The nucleus of the transaction is the people's
promise — " All the words which the Lord hath said will we do " (ver. 3) — " All that the
Lord hath said will we do, and be obedient" (ver. 7). There is a tone of rashness— of
telf-confidence — in this promise, as given by Israel, which forewarns of subsequent
defection. The people evidently had but little knowledge of their own hearts. They
had little perception of the spiritual requirements of this law. They had not learned
to distrust themselves. Their surrender to the Divine wiU was not thorough or heart-
whole. (See on ch. xix. 8.) It remains true, however, that surrender of the will to
God, in the spirit of obedience, is an indispensable condition of being received into
covenant with him. " The idea of the servant of God is complete only when he who
is bound to God also binds himself to God's will, following God perfectly." (Oehler.)
This is as true of the Gospel as of the law. The obedient will is implicit in faith. The
end contemplated in salvation is obedience. We are made free from sin that we may
become servants of righteousness (Bom. vi. 18). The recognition of this — the acceptance
of the obligation — is involved in conversion, in saving faith, in the new birth, in the
coming to Christ, or however else we may express the change from death to life. If we
no longer speak of the promise of obedience as the " bond " of the covenant, it is only
because that which the Gospel primarily demands of us, viz. faith, goes deeper than
such a promise, while implicitly containing it. The object of spiritual trust is, ulti-
mately, God himself, and in the Gospel, Clu'ist, as the sent of God to be the Saviour of
the world ; but such trust invariably involves the yielding up of the will to God, and is
on its practical side, an energy of holiness. The true believer is, of necessity, a doer of
the will of the Father. " Faith, without works, is dead" (James ii. 17 — 26). (See
further, on ch. xix. 5.) It is, however, well that this implicit element in faith should
also be allowed to become explicit in distinct acts of consecration or of self-dedication
to God. This brings us very near to what we have in this covenant with IsraeL See
below.

III. The ceremonial of batifioation. (1) Moses "builded an altar under the
hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel " (ver. 4). (2) Young
men of his appointment sacrificed burnt-offerings and peace-offerings unto the Lord
(ver. 5). (3) The blood of the sacrificed animals was divided : half was put in basins,
and half sprinkled on the altar (ver. 6). (4) The words of the book of the Covenant
were next solemnly read in the audience of the people ; and the latter renewed their
assent to them (ver. 7). (5) The blood was then cast upon the people out of the basins,
and the Covenant was declared to be concluded (ver. 8). Two points here claim our
attention. 1. The ratifying of the Covenant with saciifice ; and 2. The action with the
blood. Both were significant. 1. The sacrifices. The burnt-offering was primarily a
symbol of self-surrender (ci'. Ps. li. 16 — 19). The idea embodied here, therefore, was,
that in the institution of the Covenant, what was required was the unconditional sur-
render of the offerer, with all that belonged to him, to God. The peace-offering sym-
bolises reconciliation and fellowship. But the offering of the sacrifices had also a
propitiatory reference. This is plain from the sprinkling of the blood on the altar. It
is sprinkled there as atoning for the people's sins. It was through the blood of propi-
tiation that peace was made, that reconciliation was brought about. This teacnet
several things. It shows (1) That Israel was viewed by God as sinful. (2) That it
was not on legal grounds, but as an act of grace, that they were being admitted into
covenant. (3) That the covenant embodied grace as well as law. (4) That God
would deal graciously with Israel, if they sincerely endeauoured to keep his law, not-
withstanding many defects and failures. (5) That their attitude under the law, in
■eeking to Mfil its righteousness, ought to bu an evangelical, not a legal one, t,e., tiiof



.XMv. 7,8.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. SSI



ought to draw their motives, their encouragement, and their hope, not from the thought
of their self-sufficiency to keep the law, or from the idea that they were actually
keeping it in such a way as legally to entitle them to the hlessing, but from the
sonviction of God's mercy to them, which, as it was the fowndation of their national
existence, so was it the real ground of their standing all along. 2. The sprinkling of
the blood on the people. It is, as Keil remarks, the <me blood which is sprinkled on the
altar and on the people ; and it is not sprinkled on the people, till it has been presented
and accepted on the altar. Applied to the people, the blood had the effect of formally
cleansing them from sin, and of consecrating them to God's service. God thereafter
claimed them as his special property. Redeemed life is his. Made free from sin, w«
becosie servants of God (Bom. vi. 22). — J. 0.

Vtrg. 7, 8. — Gonsecration. By the sprinkling of the blood of sacrifice, and by their
voluntary acceptance of obligations to obedience, the children of Israel became, formally,
the people of Jehovah. They had avouched themselves to be the Lord's. They had
taken on them the vows of his service. They were now consecrated to be doers of his
(rill. The same idea of consecration is embodied in the New Testament word " saint."
The believer is one of a sanctified, a consecrated, a priestly people, set specially apart
"to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ" (1 Pet. ii. 5).
Consider —

I. 'J'ke natubb op conseckation. Consecration, as a Christian duty, involves three
ideas — separation from evil, devotement to God, and ceaseless pursuit of holiness in
heart and life. It has its ground in the fact of redemption, and in the sense of God's
mercies. The consecrated heart then becomes a sanctuary in which God dwells by his
Holy Spirit ; while this sacred indwelUng in turn becomes a new source of obligations
to holiness. The holiness we are to aim at is a holiness like God's own — nothing lower
(1 Pet. i. 15, 16). Consecration, if never so complete as the Christian could wish, may
always be- perfect, at least in aim, in spirit, in intention, in desire. We are expected,
like Caleb, to follow the Loid fidly. The Divine ideal is the absolute consecration of
him who said — " Lo, I come to do thy will, God." " My meat is to do the will of
him that sent me, and to finish his work " (Heb. x. 9 ; John iv. 34). " I would rather,"
says Spurgeon, " my child had a perfect copy to write by, though he might never equal
it, than that he should have an imperfect copy set before him, because then he would
never make a good writer at all." The Scripti ral idea of consecration comes out in the
light of the usage of the cognate word — " sanctify." God himself is the fountain of
sanctity or holiness. The whole Mosaic ritual was a grand apparatus for impressing this
thought of God's holiness upon the minds of his worshippers. Everything to be used
in his service, as contaminated by sin, required to be purged with blood (Heb. ix. 21).
To this, in special cases, succeeded an anointing with oU (ch. xxx. 25 — 32). Thus purged
and anointed, the sanctuary, person, sacred vessel, or whatever it might be, was
regarded as completely sanctified ; in other words, as separated from common uses to
the service of a holy God. The High Priests and Levites of the Old Covenant were all
thus specially sanctified to Gk)d. But these things were only shadows; we have the
realities corresponding to them under the New Covenant. If a man is really in Christ,
he is already, by God's act, through the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, and the
holy anointing of the Spirit, a consecrated person, and ought to regard himself as such.
This is the Divine side of the matter. There is clearly, however, a vast difference
between the consecration of a mere utensil, say the golden candlestick, or the pots and
Teasels of the sanctuary, and the consecration of a living, moral, intelligent being. A
material thing is sanctified simply by the act of setting it apart to sacred uses ; its
nature admits of nothing more. But the cons?cration of a moral being implies an act
on his own part, as well as on God's, else the consecration has no reality ; it is such
only in name and form. The essence of it lies in a free, cheerful, se^-dedication of the
parson (cf. Bom. xii. 1). Here, then, are two sides of this subject, the Divine and
human — the ideal and the real — which two sides are constantly reappearing in Scripture,
sometimes apart, sometimes blending together, sometimes standing side by side, almost
with the force of contradictions, e.g., " Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may
be a new lump, even as ye are wnleavened " (1 Cor. v. 7). In short, God's consecration
gives us a standing and an ideal ; but it is only as we consciously accept this standinf



S81 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. *W. f, &

and ideal as our own, and seek to give them reality by se^-dedication, and the strenuous
pursuit of holiness, that our consecration becomes tnaly effectual. God's consecration
of us becomes, so to speak, the ground of our own consecration of ourselves, and oi
constant striving after that perfection which is implied in the ideal he sets before us.
Ilence all those manifold Scripture images which imply sanctification as a process, and
a work of God's grace constantly going on within us.

II. Advantages of consecration. We come back to the old point that consecration,
regarded as a duty, is a personal act whereby, out of a sense of God's mercies, and
specially his grace in redemption, a believer solemnly dedicates himself and all that he
has to the service and glory of God. Such consecration, with the surrender of the
obedient will, is already, as seen in the previous homily, implicit in every exercise of
saving faith. Great moral advantages, however, accrue from making one's conseora
tion to Christ a distinct solemn act, again and again to be repeated, each time, we shall
hope, with more perfect self-surrender ; and the remembrance of which is to go along
with us in the discharge of every duty. This corresponds pretty nearly to the meaning
of the Israelitish covenant.

Consecration is the basis of acceptable service. (1) Consecration of self precedes all
other consecrations ; as of time, substance, talents, service, etc. It is only where self
is consecrated, that the consecration of anything else is acceptable. What St. Paul says
of charity, that without it all special gifts and acts, even feeding the poor, or giving his
body to be burned, are valueless, we may say with equal truth of self-dedication.
It is self God wants — ^the love, reverence, devotion, service of self; not a mere share of
self 8 possessions. On the other hand (2), the consecration of self includes all other
ronsecrations. If we are God's, then all is God's that is ours. Our time is God's ; so is
our money, our talents, our influence, everything we have. Let Christians ask, whether,
in this view of the matter, consecration is in their case being carried out into all its
legitimate results. Not that God desires " a gift ;" but he desires " fruit that may
abound to our account " (PhU. iv. 17).

Consecration secures nobler service ; it is likewise a source of immense strength in the
active pursuit of holiness. In any course of conduct, we know the value of a definite
purpose and aim. Most of all is it important to have as the clear, definite motto of our
lives — " To me to live is Christ." We know then exactly what we are living for.
Consecration invests a man's whole being with a sanctity from which evil shrinks back
repelled. The same sanctity spreads itself over all he luis and does. He feels that he
must be holy " in all manner of conversation." Even on the bells of his horses he sees
something written, " holiness to the Lord." He has " holy garments ;" and his great
business is to watch and keep his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his
shame (Rev. xvi. 15). His body is the temple of the Holy Ghost ; and he dare not
desecrate with worldly pollutions the place where God dweUa. He has definitely
separated himself from evil ; and he must not return to it.

Consecration resolves questions of casuistry. How often do we find good people^ or
people who wish to be good, puzzling and perplexing themselves with questions of this
kind — Dare I read this book ? Should I go to this party ? May I engage in this
amusement? Can I take this profit? Unless we greatly mistake, most of these
difficulties would disappear with more perfect consecration. A truly consecrated man
carries in his breast a principle which easily guides him through all such cases, and
makes many things right and pure to him which others would stumble at, wl^e it
leads him to discountenance and condemn much that they would pass imnoticei

Finally, consecration is absolutely essential to success in prayer. The heart that has
not said — " All for Christ," is in no fit state to approach God's throne to supplicate
blessings for Christ's sake. There must be iniquity hidden away in that heart some-
where; and "if I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me" (Ps. Ixvi.
18). But the consecrated man, as a true priest of God, has free access to the holiest of
all. He asks what he will, and it is given him. Prayer, indeed, is no prayer, unless it
Is the outcome of a heart which is the seat of deep consecration, and where the Lord is
hibitually sanctified. Only to such prayer are the promises yea and amen.

From all this, it is manifest that consecration pertains to the deepest essence of
religion. Yet many feel as if sometimes they could almost close with Christ, were it
■ot for this very matter of consecration. Their hearts an still clinging to aomethicg



OB. XXIT. 9— 11,J



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



which God requires them to forego ; and clinging to thif., they rightly judge that they
cannot he Christ's disciples. Let them reiiect that for this something they sacrifica
eternal life. — J. 0.

Vera. 1, 2, 9— 11.— The Covenant made. 1. The visjon ot God (1, 2, 9, 11).— 1. It

is for the called alone. God manifests himself only to the repentant and the believing.
2. These are commanded to approach. This is our v> arrant fur confident boldness of
access: he has called us. 3. The vision is bestowed ujion those from whose midst the
mediator has gone into God's immediate presence and who wait his return (ver. 2).
4. It is given as they go upwards into the mount where the Lord's wiU is declared (9).
The heart which seeks after holiness admits the light, in which God will by-and-by be
manifested. 5. The vision is sure : " they saw the God of Israel." 6. For the called
the vision of God is not destruction, but safety and joy. We meet the unveiling, not
only of infinite holiness, but also of infinite love, I'he vision of the Divine glory
was a wonder and delight ; and the place of vision i ecame a place of feasting.

n. The ratifying of the covenant. — 1. It was nade with a willing people : " all the
words which the Lord hath said will we do." 2. It was made with a people who were
in possession of God's testimonies : he " told them all the words of the law," he " wrote
all the words of the Lord." God's light must reveal sin and need before it may
manifest his salvation. 3. God and his people are bound together by the blood of
accepted sacrifice. The blood of sprinkling is peace and power to the saved. — ^U.



EXPOSITION.



Ven. 9 — 11. — The baobifioial feast and
THB VISION OP God. After the covenant had
been ratified by the unanimous voice of the
people, Moses proceeded to carry out the injunc-
tions with respect to Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and
the elders, which he had received while still
in the mount (see the comment on vers. 1, 2).
Taking them with him, he ascended Sinai
once more to a certain height, but clearly not
to the summit, which he alone was privileged
to visit (vers. 2 and 12). The object of the
■scent was twofold. 1. A sacrificial meal
always followed upon a sacrifice; and the
elders might naturally desire to partake of it
as near the Divine presence as should be per-
mitted them. This was their purpose in
ascending. 2. God desired to impress them
with a sense of his awful majesty and beauty,
and was prepared for this end to manifest
himself to them in some strange and wonder-
ful way as they were engaged in the solemn
meal (ver. 11). This was his purpose in
inviting their presence. The manifestation
is described in ver. 10. It was a " vision of
God," but of what exact nature it is impos-
sible to say. Havmg recorded it, the author
parenthetically notes that the Divine vision
did not destroy any of those who beheld it, or
cause them any injury, as might have been
•spected.

y«(, 9. Tbea vtnt up Compare ver. 1.



The mountain was to be partially ascended,
but not to any great height. Nadab, Abihu,
and the elders were to "worship God afar
off."

Ver. 10. — They saw the God of Israel.
These words can scarcely mean less than that
they saw with their bodily eyes some appear-
ance of the Divine being who had summoned
them to his presence for the purpose. Moses,
we know, saw a "similitude of God" (Num.
xii. 8). Isaiah " saw the Lord sitting upon
his throne " (Is. vi. 1). Ezekiel saw upon
the throne " the appearance of a man "
(Ezek. i. 26). It does not follow from Dent,
iv. 12, 15, that the elders saw no similitude,
since in that passage Moses is speaking, not
to the elders, but to the people, and referring,
not to what occurred at the sacrificial feast
after the ratification of the covenant, but to
the scene at the giving of the Ten Command-
ments previously (ch. xx. 1 — 18). What the
form was which the elders saw, we are not
told ; but as it had " feet," it was probably a
human form. It may have been hazy, inde-
finite, " too dazzling bright for mortal eye " to
rest upon. But it was a true " vision of God "
— and, as Keil says, "a foretaste of the
blessedness of the sight of God in eternity."
There was under his feet, as it were^ a paved
work of a sapphire stone. Bather, "and
under his feet was, as it were, a work of clear
sapphire." Nothing is said concerning a pave-
ment, but only that below the feet of the
figure which they saw was something, which
looked as if it were made of bright blue
sapphire stone, something aa clear and as
blue as the blue of heaven. Canon Cook



2U



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XXIV. 9—12.



•apposes the actnal skj to be meant ; but the
sxpression, " aa tl were, the body of heaven,"
or " like the very heaven," makes this impos-
sible. A thing is not like itself.

Ver. 11. — The nobles — ».e., the notables —
the seventy elders, and other persons, already
mentioned (vers. 1, 9). He laid not his hand.
Ood did not smite them with death, or pesti-
lence, or even blindness. It was thought to
be impossible to see dod and live. (See above,
Gen. xxxii. 30 ; Ex. xxxii. 20 ; Judg. vi.
22, 23, etc.) Man was unworthy to draw
near to God in any way ; and to look on him



was viewed as a kind of profanity. Tet some
times he chose to shqw himself, in vision ot
otherwise, to his people, and then, as there
could be no gnilt on their part, there was ao
pimishment on his. It is generally supposed
that, in all such cases, it was the Second
Person of the Blessed Trinity who conde-
scended to show himself. Also they saw God.
Bather, " they both saw God, and did eat and
drink." The two were simultaneous. As
they were engaged in the sacrificial meal,
God revealed himself to them.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 9 — 11. The Govenant Meal on Sinai.— The Old Testament contains no mention
of any other meal so wonderful as this. Newly entered into covenant with God, fresh
from the blood of sprinkling, which was representative of the blood of Christ, Moses,
Aaron with his two sons, and the seventy elders, half-way up Sinai, engaged in the
sacrificial feast upon the peace-offerings (ver. 5), when lo ! the heaven was opened to
tnem, and there burst upon their astonished sight a vision of Jehovah in his glory and
his beauty, standing on peUuoid sapphire, dazzling in its brilliance. As the meat and
drink entered their mouths, God shone in upon their souls. It was indeed a " wondrous
festivity," and certainly not without a spiritual meaning, extending to all tune, and
even beyond time into eternity. Surely, we may say, without over-great boldness, or
any undue prying into holy things : —

I. That the meal was a type of that Divine fbast which thr Lord insti-
tuted ON THE NIOHT OP HIS BETRAYAL, FOB THE SUSTENTATION OP HIS VEO.-LK. The

Holy Communion is a feast upon a sacrifice— the sacrifice of Christ — i.iUL.i.'^en of by
Christians as the most solemn rite of their religion, in the wilderness of this life, for
tlieir better sustentation and support through its trials. It brings them very near to
him, as it were into his presence. As they partake of the bread and wine, they partake
of him ; his light shines into their souls ; his beauty and glory are revealed to their
spirits ; they obtain a foretaste of heaven. Blessed is the man who thus eats and drinks
io his kingdom — eating and drinking and seeing Ood.

II. That the meal was, pubtheb, a type of that markiage-suppbr of the Lamb,

WHEREOF all THE FAITHFUL SHALL ONE DAY PARTAKE IN HeAVEN (Rev. xix. 7 9).

There the saints shall eat and drink in the Divine presence, their meat the heavenly
manna, angels' food, their drink the wine which they " drink new " in their Father's
kingdom. The glory of God shall shine on them. For the place of their dwelling " has
no need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine in it ; " for it is " the glory of God that
lightens it, and the Lamb that is the light thereof" (i6. xxi. 23). The sapphire of Sinai
has there its counterpart; for "the first foundation" of the city wherein they dwell "is
jasper, and the second sapphire" (ib. 19). The Divine presence is with them perpetually ;
for the " throne "of God is there, and they " see his face," and " his Name is in theil
foreheads " (ib. xxii. 4). Thrice blessed they who attain to this heavenly feast, and are
counted worthy of that beatific vision I



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1, 2, 9 — 12. A vision of Ood. — Prior to the ratification of the covenant, God
had given Moses instructions that, immediately on the conclusion of the ceremonies, he,
together with Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu (representatives of the future priesthood), and
■eventy of the elders of Israel (representatives of the body of the people), should again
ascend the raountsun (vers. 1, 2). The design was to partake of a sacrificial feast,
perhaps held on the flesh of the peace-offerings of ver. 5, by way of solemn con-
clusion to the proceedii^s of the day. Another part of the design was that the elden
might receive a new revelation of Jehovah, setting forth the milder glories ot hit



OH. xxiT 12— 18.J THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 231

character as a God reconciled with Israel, in contradistinction to the manifestations on
Sinai, which revealed him solely as the God of law and terror. The later revelation was
the counterbalanoe of the earlier. It does that justice to the character of God, as
standing in friendly relations to his people, which was not possible in harmony with
the special design, and within the special limits, of the revelation from the summit of the
motmt. It showed him as the God of grace. It taught Israel to think of him, to love
him, to trust him, and to worship him as such. It kept them from being overwhelmed
by the remembrance of the former terrors. It forestalled that view of the graciousness
of God which was afterwards peculiarly associated with the mercy-seat and with Mount
Zion, and is now the aspect of his character predominant in the Gospel (see on Sinai and
Zion, oh. xix. 16 — 19). We are told, accoi'dingly, that when the company ascended the
mount, " they saw the God of Israel " (ver. 10). What they did see is not further described
than that " there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as
it were the body of heaven in his clearness " (ver. 10). The vision, however, was
plainly one addressed to the outer or inner sense, an " appearance " of God in soma
recognisable way. So mild and beneficent was the spectacle, nevertheless, that it seems
+o have disarmed all terror ; and Aaron and his sons, with the " nobles," ate and drank
while still witnessing it. We may regard the vision, in its relation to the situation of
Israel, as — 1. Declarative. It gave a view of the character of God. (1) To some extent
of his essential character. The blue of the sapphire symbolised his holiness, while in
the deep, clear ether was mirrored his untroubled purity, his superiority to earthly passion
and disturbance, his perfect blessedness, his transcendency over creation, etc. (2) More
especially of his gracious character. The idea suggested was that of a God at peace with
Israel — reconciled. The vision would be read in its contrast with the previous revelation.
The terrors of the law-giving were now laid aside ; all is sweetness, beauty, mildness,
serenity, love. This vision of God as a God at peace with Israel, is mediated by the
offering of sacrifice. It is so also under the Gospel. " God was in Christ reconciling
the world imto himself " (2 Cor. v. 19). 2. SymhoUc of privilege. (1) The "nobles,"
though in God's presence, suffered no harm. " Upon the nobles of the children of Israel
he laid not his hand " (ver. 11). He m,ight have done so, for they were by nature
sinners. But they were safe, as sprinkled with blood of atonement, and as in presence of
a QroA. of mercy. Though sinners, we are permitted in Christ to draw nigh to God.
He will not harm us ; he will welcome, accept of, and bless us. (2) Though in God's
presence, they "did eat and drink" (ver. 11). They had this freedom before him; this
feeling of confidence. It is only the revelation of God as a God of grace which can
inspire this confidence. Their eating and drinking was symbolical of the privilege of
every pious Israelite, sheltered from his sin in God's mercy, and taking confidence from
his word of grace. Much more is it symbolic of the privilege of Christians, in whom
perfect love casts out fear (1 John iv. 18). 3. Frefigurative (^future blessedness. The
goal of the kingdom of God is the feast of perfected bliss in gloiy, where the ssunts shall
eat and drink and see God with no intervening veils, and in the full beauty of his love
and holiness. 4. A warning. These seventy elders ate and drank in God's presence,
yet at last perished in the desert. Nadab and Abihu were consumed by fire. Cf. the
warning (Luke xiii. 26, 27).

Lessons — 1. The vision of God in Christ disarms fear. 2. Let us try to see God,
even in our eating and drinking (1 Cor. x. 31). 3. Those sheltered by Christ's blood
are safe. Note the following — " (1) There are those who eat and drink, and do not see
God. (2) There are those who see God, and cannot eat and drink. (3) There are those
who eat and diink, and see God " (Bev. W. B. Robertson, D.D.). — J. 0.

EXPOSITION.
Vers. 12 — 18. — Moses' entet d»to the | material about it — holy places, holy things,



OLODD, AND FOBTT DATS COMMUNK WITH

God. It was necessary now that Moses should
receive full directions for the external worship
of God, the sanctuary, and the priesthood.
Every religion has something tangible and



rites, ceremonies, rules, forms, regulations. B
man sets himself to devise these things of his
own head, he may very easily go wrong, and
find his elaborate inventions " an offence " te
God. To avoid this — to secure the ranilt thai



23«



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[cH. xzrr. 12— la



■U ihonld he pleasing and acceptable to " the
High andHoly One which inhabiteth eternity,"
it was thought fitting that " patterns " should
be shown to Moses of all that was to be made
for the worship (Heb. viii. 5), and exact details
given him with respect to the material, size,
shape, and construction of each. The results
are put before ns in seven chapters (chs.
XXV. — ^xxxi.). For the purpose of allowing
ample time for the communications which
had to be made and of securing that un-
divided attention which was requisite in order
that all should remain fixed in the memory,
God summoned his servant to a long and
solitary colloquy, on the mountain summit
whereon the cloud rested (ch. xix. 18), apart
from all his people. Moses, of course, obeyed ;
but before ascending, arranged with the elders
that in his absence Aaron and Hur should
have the direction of affairs, and decide all
doubtful questions (ver. 14). He then went
np the mountain, accompanied for part of the
way by Joshua, who is now spoken of as his
" minister," or " attendant " (ver. 13). Joshua
probably remained with him for six days,
while Moses waited for a summons to enter
the cloud. On the seventh day the summons
came: and Moses, leaving Joshua, entered
the cloud, and was hid from the sight of all
men.

Ver. 12. — Come up to me. Moses, appa-
rently, had descended again into the plain,
with Aaron and the seventy elders, after the
festival was over. (See ver. 14, and compare ch.
xxxii. 1.) He is now commanded to reascend,
and be there — <.«., "And continue there "
— ^foreshadowing the length of the stay. Tables
of stone, and a law, and commandments, etc.
Literally, " Tables of stone, and the law and
the commandments which I have written."
The three expressions alike refer to the De-
calogue, which alone God wrote. That thon
mayest teach them. Rather, " to teach them."
God wrote the commandments on stone, in
order to inculcate them with the greater force
upon his people.

Ver. 13. — Moses went np. Prompt to obey,
Moses, though he had only just descended
from the moimt, immediately made ready to
set forth and again ascend it. This time he
was attended by his minister, Joshua, whose
arm he ,had employed on a former occasion
against the Amalekites (ch. xvii. 9 — 13).
The name, Joshua, is, however, still given
bim by anticipation, since he did not receive
it nntil he was sent by Moses to explore the
land of Canaan (Num. xiii. 8, 16).

Vei 14. — ^And he said unto the elders.



Before taking his departure for the long
sojourn implied in God's address to him,
" Come up to me into the mount, and he
there " (ver. 12), Moses thought it necessary
to give certain directions to the elders as to
what they should do in his absence — 1. They
were to remain where they were — i.e., in the
plain at the foot of Sinai, ur*il his return,
however long it should be delayed. 2. They
were to regard Aaron and Hur as their
leaders, and his (Moses') representatives. In
case of any difliculty arising, they were to
refer the matter to them. On Hur see the
comment upon ch. xvii. 12.

Ver. 15. — ^Uoses went np into the monnt.
Having made the necessary arrangements for
the government of the people during his
absence, Moses ascended, in company with
Joshua, to the upper part of the mountain,
and there waited for some further summons.
A cloud, or, rather, the cloud previously men-
tioned (ch. xix. 16), stood gathered upon the
highest eminence, and marked the special
presence of God there. Moses, though called
up into the mount, would not intrude into
this inner sanctuary, nntil specially bidden to
enter it.

Ver. 16. — Now occurred a remarkable
pause. The summons had been given to
Moses, and he had obeyed it. He was there
on the platform a little below the summit,
ready, but waiting for a further calL The
call was not made for six days. A holy
calm reigned upon Sinai — ^the cloud rested
upon the summit, and in the cloud was the
gloiy of the Lord. Moses and Joshua waited
near — ^but tor six days there was no sign.
God thus taught Moses, and through him the
world, that near approach to him requires
long and careful preparation. Moses, no
doubt, was occupied during the six days in
continual prayer. At last, on the seventh
day, the call, which Moses had expected,
came. Ood called unto Uoses out of the
midst of the cloud. God summoned him to a
closer approach — ^bade him enter the doud —
and draw as nigh to him as possible.

Ver. 17 — Meanwhile, to those below in the
plain, " the glory of the Lord " on the summit
above them, was like devouring fire on the
top of the mount. They had but to lift their
eyes thither, and they saw his wonderful
glory — showing like a huge fire — on the spot
from which he had spoken to them (ch. xx.
18). This manifestation continued certainly
for the first six days ; whether it lasted longer
or not is open to question.

Ver. 18. — And Hoses went into the midst
of the cloud. Quitting Joshua, Moses at last,
in obedience to the call out of the midst of
the cloud, entered within its shadow and dis-
appeared from human vision In this ab
normal condition, alone with God, he con-
tinued for thirty-foor days, making, togethci



OH. XXIT. 12— 18J



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



2Sf



witli the six days tef ore he entered the cloud,
the forty days and forty n^hts of the text
before i» It is noted in Deut. ix. 9, that



during the whole of this time he was withonl
food. Compare Elijah's fast (1 Kings xiz
8), and our blessed Lord'a (Matt iii. i).



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 12 — 18. — Prolonged commune with Ood. Prolonged commune with God is the
soul's truest strengthening, and sweetest refreshment. Without it our spirits languish—
we grow weary and faint — worldliness creeps upon us— our thoughts and discourse become
" of the earth, earthy " — we have no life or liveliness in ourselves, and can impart none
to others. Moses' commune was abnormal, extraordinary, inimitable by us in its main
features-r-its duration, locality, nearness of access, and completeness of isolation. But
it may serve as a pattern to us in many respects, nevertheless.

I. In the PEEi'ARAiioN FOE IT. Here we note (1) a ready heart. " Moses rose
up" — did not delay, did not oflfer objections, did not say, " Suffer me 6rst " to do this or
that, but responded to the call of God at once. (2) A thoughtful regard for others.
Moses instructed the elders how to act while he was away. " Tarry ye here " — " Seek
ye to Aaron and Hur, if ye have matters to do." (3) A willingness to help others
towards the higher life, to carry them on with him, as far as he might. " Moses rose
up, and his minister, Joshua. (4) A patient and reverential waiting. Summoned,
called up, bidden to di'aw near, he yet rested for six days outside the cloud, longing to
enter in, but withheld by a sense of vmworthiness and a fear of intrusion, fasting all the
while, and seeking to prepare himself for the nearer approach by supplication and
meditation.

II. In the place or rr. A holy place — "the mount of God" — a place sacred from
common uses — into which worldly thoughts could scarcely penetrate. We, who have
no Sinid, have at any rate our churches, and other sacred buildings — some of them
always open, not merely for public worship, but for private prayer and meditation —
inviting us to enter in and draw nigh to God. In our houses we have, or may easily
have, our oratories — spots reserved for prayer and praise, and sacred thought — sanc-
tuaries in the desert of life — places in which all that we see will remind us of heavenly
things.

III. In the seclusion of it. The world was shut out. Belations, elders, people,
left below in the plain — left with strict injunctions to remain — " Tarry ye here." Even
the faithful Joshua parted firom — and " the cloud" entered. The cloud — ^the awful cloud
— " thick darkness " (ch. xx. 21) ; yet within the darkness a marvellous light. Such
•eclusion we cannot obtain — but we may obtain an approach to it. We may " enter
our closet, and shut to the door" (Matt. vi. 6), and let it be known that we would be
undisturbed ; or we may seek the solitude of a church at an hour when there is no
public service, and no one present who will meddle with us ; or we may, even at the
present day, find solitudes in nature, deep woods, or lone mountain tops, or imfrequented
glens, where we may feel ourselves secure from intrusion, and stand face to face with
God, and know him near, and pour out our hearts before him. A modem poet, in one
of bis bitter moments, says —

"My altars are the moontains, and the ocean.
Earth, air, sea — all that springs from the Great Whole^
Who hath produced, and will receive the soul"—

and truly on any lone spot an altar may be raised, and worship offered, as acceptable to
QoA as any that is addressed to him " in pillared fanes, 'neath fretted roofs, 'mid storied
glass or sculptured monuments." Even in the whirl and bustle of a great city, solitude
is not very far from us. Half an hour's journey by steamer or rail, and ten minutes'
walk, may take vis into still woods, or shady lanes, or on to open heaths, where we shall
not see a feUow creature or hear a sound reminding us of man.

IV. In the continttancb of it. " Forty days and forty nights 1 " As we cannot
have the complete seclusion which Moses enjoyed, so neither can we look for such
nutitoed oommune m his. W« nust Mt and drink — lee can rarely leave our worldly



ass THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxi». 12— la

work to others — family claims, correspondence, business imperatively require oui
attention — six weeks' interruption of communication between ourselves and the outer
world would, in most cases, break or tangle all the threads of which our life is composed.
But still some prolonged periods of religious contemplation and commune between the
loul and God are needed, if the soul is to retain the vigour of its Ufe, or its abUity to be
of service to others. With this view religious "retreats" have been devised, lasting
lometimes a week or ten days. Where men's duties allow of it, they may be well worth
a trial. The weary spirit may derive more refreshment from them than from the
ordinary " holiday." The heart may be purified, the aspirations raised, the insight into
doctrinal truth augmented, above all, the love of God so intensified in the soul, by the
suspension of all secular thought and the devotion of the whole mind to religion and
worship, during the three, or five, or seven, or ten days of a " retreat," as would
scarcely be possible, under the present conditions of our life, in any other way.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 12 — 18. — Moks ctscends the mount. Observe, 1. He aleme ascends (ver. 12).
Aaron and his sons, with the seventy elders, were left behind. I'heir privilege was
great as compared with that of the body of the people. Yet even they are not per-
mitted to enter the cloud — to draw nigh into God's immediate presence. The
limitations and imperfections of the legal economy are stamped 6n these arrangements.
How superior the standing of Christians, who are all permitted to draw nigh ; who
have now the privilege, formerly possessed only by Moses, of beholding with unveiled
face the Divine glory in the ecstasy of immediate vision (2 Cor. iii. 18). 2. The design
of this ascending was primarily to receive the atone tables (ver. 12). These were to be
written by God's own finger. God took every pains to impress upon the minds of the
people that the law they had to deal with was his law. Its perpetuity was symbolised
by the rook tablets. 3. Moses made arrangements /or the conduct of business in his
absence (ver. 14). His absence would be a trial of the faith and disposition of all
parties. 4. The five still burned on the summit of the mount (vers. 16, 17). This, not-
withstanding the vision of ver. 10. The economy was outwardly and characteristically
one of law ; interiorly, one of grace. Even Moses had to wait seven days for the
summons (ver. 16). — J. O

JHoses' sojourn with Ood the type of Christ's. L The mbdiatob : Moses the type
OF Jesus. He must needs pass up into Grod's presence : " Come up to me . . . and be
there." It is there, in communion with God, that gifts are received for men. The
jwwer and blessing we now receive there, are prophecies of the power and glory with
which Jesus will come again. 2. He must pass up to receive the law and command-
ments which God had written. Jesus will return with the perfected will of the Father.
3. The days of seclusion are numbered. Moses was in the mount forty days and forty
nights. We know not how many or few they be; but each hour the coming of
the Lord draws nearer.

II. The attitude op God'b people meanwhile. They tarry for the Mediator :
" tarry ye here for us until we come t^ain unto you." The attitude of the Churches
to-day diould be confident, joyous expectation : " this same Jesus will in like manner
come again." 2. They are ministered unto by those who tarry with them (ver. 14).
(1) The blessing bestowed m these temporary leaders. (2) Their responsibility : let
them not be leaders or helpers to the people in their idolatry, as Aaron.

III. The vision orakted them. The mountain is covered with clouds ; but from
the mountain top flames out the glory of the Lord. The eye cannot follow him who
has entered within the veU ; but we can behold the glory of the Lord, and know that
eveiy word of God will be fulfilled. — U.



OH. XXV. 1 — 7.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



23t



SECTION XV.— CHAPTEE8 XXV.— XXXI.

iBBTBtronOMS CONCEimiNO THE TaBEBNACLB and its rUBNITUBB, INOLDDINO THl

PBIESTLY ATTIBB.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XXV



Vers. 1 — 7. — ^Thb tabeenaolb and the
OIFTS FOB IT. The great principles of the moral
law had been given in the Ten Cominandments
nttered bj God amid the thunders of Sinai.
The " Book of the Covenant," or short siim-
maij of the main laws, civil, political, and
fecial, had been communicated to Moses, and
by him reduced to a written form (ch. xxiv. 4) .
A solemn league and covenant bad been
entered into between God and his people, the
people undertaking to keep all the words of
the Lord, and God to be their Protector,
Guide, and King. But no form of worship
had been set up. Abstract monotheism had
been inculcated ; and worship had been so far
touched upon that an " altar " had been men-
tioned, and certain directions, chiefly negative,
had been given with respect to it (ch. xx. 24
— ^26). It remained that the abstract mono-
theism should be enshrined in forms, obtain a
local habitation, and be set forth before the
eyes, and so fixed in the heart and affections
of the people. God was now about to declare
to Moses what the character of the habitation
should be, its size, form, and materials. But
before doing this, as a first and fitting, if not
necessary, preliminary, he required of the
people to bring of the best of their possessions
for the service which he was about to institute,
enumerating the substances which he would
condescend to receive at their hands, and
especially enjoining upon them that all should
be offered wiUingly and from the heart (ver. 2).

Ver. 2. — Speak nnto the children of Israel
that they bring me an offering. The word
translated " offering " is that commonly ren-
dered " heave-offering;" but it seems to be used
heie (as in ch. xxx. 13; xxxv. 5, etc.) in a
generic sense. The propriety of the people,
when God was about establishing his habita-
tion among them, presenting to God all the
materials needed, is self-evident and requires
no comment. Of every man that giveth it
willingly. Literally, " of every man whose
heart &ives him." God will have no gifts but
inch as are freely offered. He " loveth a
cheerful giver." U a man gives " grudgingly
«r of necessity," God rejects the gift. On the



noble spirit which the people showed when
the appeal was made to them, see ch. xxxv.
21—29 ; and ch. xxxvi. 3—7.

Ver. 3. — ^Ihis is the offering — gold and
silver and brass. Gold was needed for the
overlaying of the boards, whereof the ark was
composed (ver. 11) ; for the " crown of gold,"
which surmounted it (ibid.) ; for the " rings "
(ver. 12) ; the " mercy-seat " (ver. 17) ; the
cherubim (ver. 18) ; the dishes, the spoons,
the covers, the bowls (ver. 29) ; the candlestick
(ver. 31) ; the tongs and snuff dishes (ver.
28) ; the hooks and taches (xxvi. 6, 32) ; for the
covering of the table of shew bread (ch. xxv.
24) ; and of the staves and pUlars (ib. 28 ; ch.
xxvi. 32, 37) ; and also for many parts of the
dress of the High Priest (ch. xxviii. 6, 8, 11,
14, etc.). Silver was required for the sockets
which supported the boards of the Tabernacle
(ch. xxvi. 19) ; and for the " hooks " and " fil-
lets " of the pillars of the court (ch. xxvii. 10)
Brass, or rather bronze, was wanted for the
" taches " which coupled together the curtains
of the tent (ch. xxvi. 11) ; for the "sockets "
which received the pillars or tent-poles (ib.
37); for the external coating of the altar
(ch. xxvii. 2) ; for the vessels and utensils of
the altar (ib. 3) ; for the covering of its staves
(ib. 6) ; for the sockets of the pillars of the
Court (ch. xxvii. 10) ; for the " pins " of the
Court (i?). 19) ; and generally for the vessels of
the Tabernacle (iftia.). To understand how
the Israelites could supply all that was wanted,
we must remember, 1. That they had a cer-
tain amount of ancestral wealth, as that which
Joseph had accumulated, and what Jacob and
his sous had brought with them into Egypt.
2. That they had received large presenl^ of
gold and silver from the Egyptians just before
their departure (ch. xii. 35) ; and 3. That
they had recently defeated, and no doubt
despoiled, the Amalekites (ch. xvi. 8 — 13).
Whether they had further made money by
trade since they entered the Sinaitic peninsula,
may be doubted. The supposition is not at all
needed in order to account for their wealth,

Ver. 4. — ^And bine, and purple, and scarlet.
Cloths of these three colours seem to be meant.
The material was probably wool; the blue
dye probably indigo, which was the ordinary
blue dye of Egypt ; the purple was no doubt
derived from one or other of the shell-fish so
well-known to the Syrians (of which the one
most used was the Murex trunculus), and was
of a warm reddish hue, not far from crimson ;
the scarlet (literally, " scarlet leorm " oi
" titorm scarlet,") was the product of thf



240



THE BOOK OF EXODDb.



[oh. XXV. 1 — 7



Ooetui Oieit, at cochineal insect of the holm
oak, which has now been superseded by the
Ooeeus cacti, or cochineal insect of the prickly
pear, introduced into Europe from Mexico.
And fine linen. The word used is Egyptian.
It seems to have designated properly the fine
linen spun from flax in Egypt, which was
seldom dyed, and was of a beautiful loft white
hue. The fineness of the material is extra-
ordinary, equalling that of the best Indian
muslins (Wilkinson's Ancient Egyptians, vol.
iii. p. 121). It would seem that tiie Israelite
women spun the thread from the flax (ch.
xxxT. 25), and that the skilled workmen
employed by Moses wove the thread into
linen (ib. 35). And goat's hail. The soft
inner wool of the Angora goat was also spun
by the women into a fine worsted (ib. 26),
which was woven into cloths, used especially
as coverings for tents.

Yer. 5. — And raais' sklni dyed red. The
manufacture of leather was well-known in
Egypt from an early date, and the Libyan
tribes of North Africa were celebrated for their
skill in preparing and dyeing the material
(Herod, iv. 189). Scarlet was one of the
colours which they peculiarly affected (ibid.').
We must suppose that the skins spoken of had
been brought with them by the Israelites out
of Egypt. And badgers' skins. It is gene-
rally agreed among modems that this is a
wrong translation. Badgers are found in
Palestine, but not either in Egypt or in the
wilderness. The Hebrew takhash is evidently
the same word as the Arabic tukhash or du-
khash, which is applied to marine animals only,
as to seals, dolphins, dugongs, and perhaps
sharks asd dog-fish. " Seals' skins " would
perhaps be the best translation. (Compare
Pliu. H. N. ii. 55; Sueton. Octav § 90.)
Shittim wood. It is generally agreed that the
Shittah (phiialShittim') was an acacia, whether
t^e seyal (Acaoia teyal) which now grows



so abundantly in the Sinaitic peninsula, orthf
Acacia Nilutica, or the Seritaa, is uncertain.
The seyal wood is "hard and close-grained,
of an orange colour with a darker heart, well-
adapted for cabinet work ;" but the tree, as it
exists nowadays, could certaiiJy not furnish
the planks, ten cubits long by one and a half
wide, which were needed for the Tabernacle
(ch. XXXV. 21). The Seriasa might do so, but
it is not now found in the wilderness. We
are reduced to supposing either that the seyal
grew to a larger size anciently than at present,
or that the serissa was more widely spread
than at the present day.

Ver. 6. — Oil for the liight That the saactnaiy
to be erected would require to be artificially
lighted is assumed. Later, a " candlestick" is
ordered (vers. 31 — 37). The people were to
provide the oil which was to be burnt in the
" candlestick." In ch. xxvii. 20, we are told
that the oil was to be " pure oil olive beaten."
Sploes for anointing oiL Anointing oil would
be needed for the sauctification of the Taber-
nacle, the ark, and all the holy vessels, as also
for the consecration of Aaron and his sons
to the priesthood. The spices required are
enumerated in ch. xxx. 23, 24. They con-
sisted of pure myrrh, sweet cinnamon, sweet
calamus, and cassla» And for sweet incensOb
The spices needed for the incense were, accord-
ing to our translators, stacte, onycha, galbanns
and frankincense (ib. 3i).

Ver. 7. — Onyx stones. On the need of onyx
stones, see ch. xxviii. 9, 20. Stones to be set
in the ephod, etc Eather, " stones for setting,
for the ephod and for the breastplate." The
only stones required for the ephod were two
large onyx stones ; for the breastplate twelve
jewels were needed (ibid. 17 — 20), one of
them being an onyx. It has been proposed
to translate the Hebrew shoham by "beryl"
instead of " onyx ;" but onyx, which is more
suitable for engraving, is probably right.



HOMILETICa

Vers. 1 — 7. — The law of accejitable offerings. — For ofieiings to he acceptable to God,

it is necessary —

I. That they be feeelt offered by a wrLLmo heabt. OflFerings were to be taken
of those " whose heart drove them to it" (compare Tennyson — " Ills own heart drove
him, like a goad"), not of others. There was to be no tax — no chiu'ch rate. Tke
entire tent-temple was (with one unimportant exception) to be the produce of a free offer-
tory. Thus was generosity stirred in the hearts of the people, and emulation excited.
They gave so liberally that they had to be " restrained from bringing " (ch. xxxvi. 6).
This is noble and acceptable service, when no exhortation is required, no persuasion, no
" pressing "-—but each man stirs himself up, and resolves to do the utmost that he can, not
seeking to obtain the praise of men, but desirous of the approval of God. A like spirit ani-
mated those who lived in David's time (1 Chr. xxix. 6— 9) ; and again those who returned
from the Babylonian captivity with Zerubbabel (Ezr. ii. 68, 69 ; Neh. vii. 70 — 72).

II. That they be of things excellent in theib kind, and the best that wi
POSSESS OF EACH. All that is rich and rare, all that is lovely and beautiful, all that is
expensive and magnificent, is suitable for an offering to God. We must not " give to
him of that which costs us nothing." We must not offer " the blind, and the lame, and



OH. XXV. 1—7]. THE BOOK OF EXODUS. ««

the sick " (Mai. L 8) to him. Things excellent in their kind hefit Mb service. Gold
and silver, of metals ; of fabrics, silk, and velvet, and fine linen ; of woods, cedar, and
acacia, and olive, and sandal- wood ; of stones, ruby and diamond, and emerald ; ol
spices, myrrh, and cinnamon, and cassia, and frankincense. Each, however, can only
give what he has. Cedar, and olive, and sandal-wood were unattainable in the desert,
and so acacia suf&ced ; silk and velvet were unknown, wherefore God accepted linen
and wooUen fabrics, and goat's hair ; rubies and diamonds were uncut, so God was con-
tent with emeralds and sapphire, and onyx. The widow's mite pleases him, as much as
the alabaster box of spikenard very precious, or the price of an estate brought and laid
at the apostles' feet. If men " have little," he is content when they " give gladly of
that little," provided still that they give him of their best. And this is true of other
offerings besides material ones. The best of our time should be his — the fair promise
of youth — ^the strength of manhood — not the weakness of decrepitude. The iwst of
our powers should be his — our warmest affections, our intensest thoughts, our highest
aspirations — not the duU tame musings of an exhausted and jaded spirit. Each man
should seek to consecrate to God's service the best that he possesses in intellect, in
knowledge, in fortune.

m. That they be buoh in kind as he has declabbd his willingness to accept.
There were " unclean animals " which were an abomination if offered to God. There
are gifts of intellect, valuable in their way, which are unsuitable for the service of the
sanctuary. Many a picture of the highest power, and exhibiting the greatest genius,
would be out of place in a church. God points out with sufficient clearness in liis
holy word, the kinds of gifts with which he is pleased. It will be well for man to " do
all things after the pattern showed him in the mount " — to avoid " will- worship " — and
even in his offerings, to follow in the line of precedent, and see that he has a warrant
for what he proposes doing in God's honour.

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 7. — IVie materials for the sanctuary. I. God ebqtjired these pbom the
PEOPLE. It might have been thought that in order to make this holy habitation, this
tent for God travelling along with his people, God himself would have in some way
supplied the material. Kven as he gave Moses the stones on which the law was written
(in the first instance at all events), so he might have made a sanctuary to descend in
marvellous manner into the midst of Israel. But it pleased him, who we may be sure
always does the wise and fitting thing, to act differently. He required the materials
for this sanctuary from the people. They covdd not provide food for themselves — bat
they could provide such a dwelling-place for Jehovah as he would approve and accept.
These people who had required so many interventions of God to deliver and secure them
had yet been carrying with them in the midst of aU their helplessness the great store of
wealth indicated in this passage. It is somewhat perplexing to consider the revelation
thus afforded of the Israelite condition. In their hearts these people were sinful, idola-
trous, unbelieving, unstable — ^it is humiliating to gaze on the sad exhibition of human
nature they present — and yet they had managed to surround themselves with these
treasures. They were those who had been laying up treasures on earth ; and so far
these treasures had been of little use ; for what will it profit a man to have all this store
of gold and silver, and brass and fine linen, and what not, if he lack the daily bread ? — all
the efforts of the people, all their scraping, had ended in the bringing of these things
into the wilderness where they seemed of no use. Even gold and silver would not buy
bread in the wilderness. But now, behold how God can take this gold and silver ana
show how to make a profitable and acceptable use of it. When we begin to look regret-
fully on the results of our natural efforts as if those efforts had been wasted, he comos
in to overrule our ignorance and foUy. By his consecrating and re-arranging touch,
the treasures upon earth can be transmuted into treasures in heaven.

II. The wtllinonbss that maekbd these gifts. These materials, valuable as they
were' yet yielded in respect of worth to an element more valuable still. These rare and
beautiful materials, workable into such beautitul forms, could have been gotten without
human intervention at all, if that had been the whole of the necessity. As not even
Solomon in all his glory was arrayed like one of the lilies, so nothing man can mako

SI0DU8 — II. R



Ml THE BOOK OP BXODUa. [ob. xxv. 1—7.

with Ub utmost art is so beautiful as the handiwork of God. Nor is the question
altogether one as to what is beautiful to the outward eye. The value of beautiful forms
is a thing only too easily exaggerated. But no one can exaggerate the beauty of a
spiritual action, the beauty of a gift where the willingness and devotion of the whole
heart are manifest. This tabernacle might be a very inferior structure, when measured
by such principles as dictated Grecian art ; but this was a thing of no consequence
when compared with the higher consideration that its materials were freely brought.
There was none of that extortion and slavish toil, such as we read of in connection with
some of the huge fabrics of ancient civilisations. What blood and tears, what reckless
expenditure of human life, for instance, in the construction of buildings like the pyramids 1
When we look at the great buildings — aqueducts, roads, of ancient times — we must not
look at the outward appearance only. These Israelites doubtless had helped in the
building of splendid structures; but the foundation of these structures was laid in
oppression, and therefore on their topstone rested a destroying curse. There was nothing
about all the tabernacle more beautiful than the willingness that marked the gift of the
materials. There was no specific demand on any particular person. Let everyone con-
sider for himself whether he will give, and how much. A free-will offering of the inferior
brass would be of ever so much more value than an extorted one of gold or silver, or
precious stones.

III. The matbeialb of the gifts. Evidently such things were taken as the people
had by them ; but of these things the very best were taken. Being already in the posses-
sion of the people, and valued by them, they were exactly the things to test the willing-
ness of their disposition. When God asks us to give, he asks us to give of our best.
AU this gold and silver symbolised what was most precious in the heart within. One
is reminded of Paul's words with respect to the materials that might be laid upon the
foundation given in Christ (1 Cor. iii. 12). We must not bring to God just what we
do not want ourselves. The value of the gifts constituted a most searching test of
willingness, and willingness was the particular quaUty that needed to be tested at this
time. Men wUling to give gold and silver, might be reasonably supposed as willing to give
anything else within their power. Then there was a test also in the variety of the ^ts.
The man without gold and silver would not escape the responsibility of considering
what he could do in the way of another gift. For the needs of the tabernacle God
required a large diversity of materials ; and probably there were few in Israel but could
do something towards the supply if only they were so disposed. — Y.

Vers. 1, 2. — Ood loveth a cheerful giver. A message to the people. Like messages
are often sent, but seldom welcomed. Even when God demands an offering, many
people grudge to give it ; they yield, as to a kind of heavenly highwayman, of necessity
if at all. Consider here : —

I. The offering kequieed. 1. Purpose. Jehovah will give the people a visible
sign of his presence in their midst. He will have a home amid their homes, a tent
dwelling Hke in character to their dwellings. More than this — he will be their guest.
They shall provide for him the sacred tent. Jf we count it an honour for a town to
receive and entertain a member of our royal family, how much greater an honour to be
permitted to entertain the head of the royal family of heaven ! 2. Materials. All
manner of things required (vers. 3 — 7), so that all can share the privilege of providing
them. Some may give a few gold ornaments ; even a poor man may yet find some
goat's hair for cloth. Not a member of the nation but can do his part in helping to rear
the tabernacle for God. All gifts can be used, so that each may have a share in the work.
3. A precedent for ourselves. God treats us as he treated Israel. He asks our help in
building for him a spiritual temple, a dwelling-place in which men are the living stones.
Some can give personal effort ; some can give money to assist the actual workers ; lo one
so poor but that he can give something. Surely the opportunity of helping God is one
which ought not to bo undervalued.

II. The condition of acceptance. All may help, but on one condition— they must
help " willingly," with the " heart." The offering is valued not on its own account, but
as a symbol of that which is more valuable. Gifts to God are a kind of human sacra-
ment, which God deigns to receive at the hands of man : they are acceptable as outward
and visible signs of an inward and spiritual grace. If the grace be wanting, the gifta



OH. TXT. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. S«

are worthless. God is good enough to make needs for himself that his creatures majr
have the privilege of satisfying them ; if they degrade the privilege into a tax, he would
rather be without their assistance. How often is this forgotten I We give to God,
when asked, for many reasons. It is the proper thing to do, and respectability requires
it ; or it will get our name into some subscription list ; or we may have an uneasy feeling
that we ought to give, and to soothe our uneasiness we must do something. " Grudg-
ingly and of necessity" is the epitaph which must be written above such wasted
offerings. God cannot accept as gifts offerings which are never truly given. He may
use them, for they are his in any case to do as he wills with them ; he cannot, however,
enter them in his inventory as received from the giver who nominally presents them.
Only he who gives with his heart has his name set down in the inventory of God. The
two mites of the widow are remembered ; the talents of the ostentatious tax-payer are
forgotten.

HI. The kebponse madb. The people of Israel realised their privileges. They
remembered what God had done for them, and were eager to manifest their grati-
tude. They gave even more than enough (xxxvi. 6, 7). Their hearts stirred them up,
and their spirits made them willing (xxxv. 21) ; so that they even had to be restrained.
What an example for us 1 Church debts, fettered missionary enterprise, ministers of the
Gospel converted into persistent yet unsuccessful beggars ; what are the Lord's people
doing when such phenomena abound ? Do we not need to be reminded of the privilege
offered us, which is so fearfully profaned ? Do we not need to stir up our hearts, and
to take active measures to make our spirits willing? The roused heart loosens the
purse-strings ; only the willing spirit can offer the willing and generous gift. — G.

Vers. 1 — 9. — The rearing of the Lord's sanctuary. I. Prom what it is fobhed.
1. Of material supplied by his redeemed. To them only request and direction come —
" Let them make me a sanctuary that I may dwell among them." This is still our
high calling, to make God a dwelling-place in the earth. Are we obeying V Is God
being glorified by us ? 2. Of their free-wiU offerings. There is no constraint ; every-
thing is free and spontaneous — the loving gifts of children, not the forced labour of
slaves. 3. Of their choicest and best, and yet, 4, of things named by God himself.
Even here we are not left to impose burdens upon ourselves. God's word and the
Spirit's voice in the heart will direct us.

II. God 18 THE ABCHiTBCT OF BIS OWN 8AN0TUABY. The building and furniture
are to be in every particular according to his own plan (ver. 9). We may not bring
into God's worship or service our own devices. The stepping aside from the simplicity
of God's ordinances is disservice. It is contempt of God or open rebellion to his
authority. — U.

Vers. 1 — 10. — The command to huild a sanctuary. The covenant being now ratified,

everything was prepared for Jehovah taking up his abode with the people. He would
dwell among them as their King. In keeping with the genius of the dispensation,
commands are given for the erection of a visible sanctuary. It is here called " mik-
dash," or sanctuary (ver. 8), and " mishk&n," or dwelling-place (tabernacle, ver. 9), the
latter being the name most commonly applied to it. Considering the purpose which
the sanctuary was to serve, and the "plenitude of meaning" designed to be conveyed
by its symbolism, it was necessary that the whole should be constructed imder imme-
diate Divine direction. A plan of the tabernacle, embracing minute details, was
accordingly placed before the mind of Moses on the mount (ver. 9). It was presented
in its completeness to his inner eye, before any part of it was set up on earth. The
ark of Noah, the tabernacle of Moses, and the temple of Solomon (cf. 1 Chron.
xxviii. 11, 12, 19), are probably the only buildings ever erected from plans furnished
by direct 'revelation. In the building of the spiritual temple — the Church — God is
himself not merely the architect, but the builder ; and the beauty and symmetry of the
structure wiU be found in the end to be perfect (cf. Rev. xxi.). Consider —

I. The MATERIALS OF THE TABBBNAOLB. These were ordered to be collected before
Ihe'work began. They were to be — 1. Costly and various — representing (1) every
department of nature (mineral, vegetable, animal) ; (2) the richest products of each, so
for w accessible in the desert (gold, silver, fine linen, dyed skins, precious stones, etc);

b2



94* THE BQOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xx». I— Itt

(3) all Tarieties of human skilL The design was to make a palace for Jehovah : a
beautiful and glorious house. 2. Abundant. There was to be no stint in the gifts.
Profuse liberality befitted the occasion. Grudging in our gifts to God betrays an
unworthy spirit. 3. Free-will offerings (ver. 2). This point is put in the foreground.
The people were to bring an offering — " Of every man that giveth it willingly with his
heart ye shall take my offering." Observe in this — (1) The people first offered themselves
to God (ch. xxiv. 7), then their gifts. This is the true order. Compare what is said of
the Macedonian believers (2 Cor. viii. 1 — 6). (2) The giving of themselves to God was
followed by the devotion to his service of the best of their possessions. The consecra-
tion of self, as formerly remarked, includes all other consecrations. If we are God's,
then all is God's that is ours. He has the first claim on everything we have. Our best
ought cheerfully to be dedicated to him. (3) God values only such gifts as come from
a willing heart. He loves the cheerful giver (2 Cor. is. 7). He puts no value on
givings which are not cheerful. (4) Free-will offerings are necessarily various in kind
and amount. Not aU could give gold, or silver, or precious stones. Some, whose means
were small, could probably give only their labour in working up the gifts of the
wealthier. Each gave as he was able, and according to the kind of material in his
possession. So far, however, as the gifts were offered willingly, they met with God's
acceptance. The giver was accepted in his gift, not according to its absolute amount,
but according to his ability, and to the spirit in which he gave. (Cf. 2 Cor. viii. 12.)
And all the gifts were needed. The variety which they exhibited was part of their
appropriateness. What one could not furnish another could. Many kinds of gifts are
required in Christ's service, and there is none so poor but he can furnish something
which others have not at command. The I^ord acceijts, and will use, all. (5) God's
dwelling with his people must rest on a voluntary basis. They must wish him to dwell
among them, and must prove their wish by voluntarily providing the materials for his
sanctuary. A living Church will show its desire for God's presence, and will evince its
gratitude, and its sense of obligation to him, by large and willing gifts in his service.
These, indeed, are not conclusive as proofs of genuine spiritual interest ; but the absence
of them speaks with sufficient plainness of spiritual coldness. (6) The ideal state in
the Church is that in which " ordinances of Divine service " are freely supported by the
gifts of the people. This principle found distinct expression, not simply in the free-
wi? offerings for the making of the tabernacle, but in the general arrangements of the
Jewish economy. The law prescribed amounts — commanded tithes, etc., but the ful-
filment of the obligation was left to the individual conscience. It was not enforced by
legal means. What was given had to be given freely,

n. The idea of the tabbbnaolb. Some remarks on this subject seem called for
before entering on the study of details. A firm grasp of the central idea is essential to a
right understanding of the parts. The tabernacle may be considered — (1) Actually, as the
literal dwelling-place of Jehovah with his people ; (2) symbolically, as in its different
parts and arrangements symbolical of spiritual ideas ; and (3) ty ideally, as prophetic of
better things to come. The typical treatment, however, will best be connected with
what is to be said under the two former heads. 1. Actually, the tabernacle was the
place of Jehovah's dwelling with his people (ver. 8). This is to be viewed as, on the
one side, a privilege of the Church of Israel ; but, on the other, as a step towards the
realisation of the great end contemplated by God from the first, as the goal of all his
gracious dealings with our race, namely, the taking up of his abode among them. God
seeks an abode with men. He cannot rest with perfect satisfaction in his love to them
till he has obtained this abode (Ps. cxxxii. 13, 14). He wishes to dwell with them.
The history of revelation may be viewed as but a series of steps towards the realisation
of this idea. The steps are the following — (1) God dwelling with men in the visibla
lanctaary of the Jews — the tabernacle and temple. This served important ends. It
brought God near to men. It enabled them to grasp the reality of his presence. It
was, however, but a very imperfect stage in the realisation of the truth. It would not
have suited a universal religion. There was, besides, no congruity between the nature
of the spiritual Deity and a building " made with hands." It was but an outward,
local presence which this visible sanctuary embodied. The union between the dwelling
and the Dweller was not inherent or essential ; it could at any moment be dissolved.
Higher realism iuas of the idea were possible. (2) God dwelling with men in Christ,



dH. xkT. 8, d.]



IHE BOOK OP EXODUS.



241



Christ pointed to himself as the antitype of the temple (Matt. lii. 6 ; John ii. 19 — 22),
He was Immanuel, God with us (Matt. i. 23). The fulness of the Godhead dwelt in
him (John i. 14 ; Col. i. 15 ; ii. 9). The temple in this case is not a mere material
structure, hut a holy, and now perfected, humanity. The union is personal and indis-
soluhle. The revelation of God, through the medium of humanity, cannot rise higher
than it has done in Christ. The life of God in the individual and in the Church is hut
the unfolding of the fulness already contained in him (John i. 16). This unfolding,
however, is necessary, that the temple-idea may reach its complete fulfilment. A third
stage, accordingly, is (3) God dwelling in the soul of the believer. Bather, we should
say, in the humanity of the heliever — hody, soul, and spirit forming, unitedly, a habi-
tation for God through the Holy Ghost (1 Cor. vi. 19). In this tahemacle, as in the
former, there is the innermost shrine — ^the holy of holies of the spirit, the " inner
man " in which is deposited the law of the Lord (Eph. iii. 16) ; a holy place — the soul or
mind, with its lamps of understanding, etc. ; and an outer court — the body — ^the external
side of the being, open and visible to aU. The individual, however, taken by himself,
is but a firagment. The full idea is realised (4) in the Church as a whole — ^the whole
body of believers, in heaven and on earth, with Christ as Plead. This is the true and
the living temple (Eph. ii. 21, 22). Realised in part on earth, and wherever a portion of
the Church of Christ exists, the perfection of the manifestation of the idea is reserved
for the future and for glory. Cf. Rev. xxi. 3 — " The tahemacle of God is with men," etc.
The idea of the Jewish tabernacle thus finds its fulfilment (1) in the body of Christ ;
(2) in the body of the believer ; (3) in the body of the Church. 2. Symbolically — ^the
tahemacle figured out, in its structure, its contents, and its arrangements, various
spiritual truths. (1) On the ark and its symbolism, see next homily. (2) The sepa-
ration into two apartments had as its basis the twofold aspect of God's fellowship with
man. The holy of holies was Ood's part of the structure. Its arrangements exhibited
God in relation to his people. The outer apartment — the holy place — exhibited in
symbol the calling of the people in relation to God. The shew-bread and the lighted
lamps, with the incense from the golden altar, emblematised aspects of that cidling.
See next homily, (3) The arrangements of the tabernacle had further in view the
symbolising of the imperfect condition of privilege in the Church under the old economy.
A veil hung between the holy place and the holy of holies. Into this latter the high
priest only was permitted to enter, and that but once a year, and not without blood of
atonement. The mass of the people were not allowed to come nearer than the outer
court. They could enter the holy place only in the persons of their representatives, the
priests. AU this spoke of distance, of barriers as yet unremoved, of drawbacks to
perfected communion. The arrangements were of such a nature as studiously to impress
this idea upon the mind. Accordingly, at the death of Christ, the removal of these
barriers, and the opening of the way for perfected fellowship between God and man,
was signified by the striking circumstance of the rending of the veil (Matt, xxvii. 51).
It is implied in the teaching of Scripture that a like imperfection of privilege marked
the condition of the departed just, and that this also was removed by Christ, who,
passing into the highest heavens, made manifest, both for them and for us, the way
into the holiest of alL (Cf. Heb. ix. 6—13 ; x. 19, 20 ; xi. 39, 40 ; xii. 23.)— J. 0.



EXPOSITION.



Vei8. 8, 9.— Genbbal bibbcitions. After
the gifts which God wUl accept have been spe-
cified, and the spirit in which they are to be
offered noted (ver. 2), God proceeds to nnfold
his pnrpose, and declare the object for which
the gifts are needed. He will have a " sanc-
tuary" constructed for him, an habitation in
which he may " dwell" Now, it is certainly
poBsihle to conceive of a religion which should
admit nothing in the nature of a temple or



sanctuaiy ; and there axe even writers who teU
us that a religion has actually existed without
one (Herod, i. 131, Strab. xv. pp. 1039—41)
That God should " dwell" in a house, as a man
does, is of course impossible ; and the Hebrewa
were as deeply impressed with this truth ai
any other nation (1 Kings viii 27 ; 2 Chr, ii.
6 ; Is. Ivi, 1 ; Jer, xxiii. 24, etc.). But a religion
without a temple was probably unknown ia
the days of Moses ; and, with such a people u



240



THE BOOK OF BXODUSi



[oa. xzT. 8, 9.



the Hebrews, it ii inconceivable that religion
could have nuuntained its ground for long with-
ont something of the kind. " It vraa," as Ka-
lisch says, " above all things necessaiy to create
a firm and visible centre of monotheism, to keep
perpetuallj the idea of the one omnipotent God
alive in the minds of the people, and so to ex-
dude for ever a relapse into the pagan and
idolatrons aberrations" (Comment on Exodut,
p. 865) A sanctuary was therefore to be con-
strDcled ; but, as the nation was in the peculiar
position of being nomadic, without fixed abode,
that is, and constantly on the move, the usual
form of a permanent building was unsuitable
nnder tbe circumstances. To meet the diffi-
culty, a tent-temple was designed, which is
called mxiKkAn, " the dwelling," or 'Shd, " the
tent," which was simply an Oriental tent on a
large scale, made of the best obtauiable mate-
rials, and guarded by an enclosure. The
details of the work are reserved for later men-
tion. In the present passage two directions
only are given : — 1. A sanctuary is to be con-
structed ; and 2. Both it, and all its vessels, are
to be made after patterns which God was about
to show to Moses.

Ver. 8. — A sanctuary well expresses the
Hebrew micdasli, which is derived from
eadaih — "to be holy." It is a name never
given to the temples of the heathen deities.
That I may dwell among them. Compare



ch. xxix. 45; Num. xxxv. 34. There is ■
sense in which " God dwelleth not in temples
made with hands" (Acts vii. 48; xviL 24) — 1'.«.,
he is not comprehended in them, or confined
to them ; but there is another Sense in which
he may be truly said to dwell in them, viz.,
as manifesting himself in them either to the
senses, or to the spirit. In the tabernacle
he manifested himself sensibly (ch. zl. 34,
35, 38).

Ver. 9. — ^The patterns. Many of the old
Jewish commentators supposed, thatMoses was
shown by God a real material sixucture, which
actually existed in theheavens,f ar grander than
its earthly copy, after which he was to have
the tabernacle fashioned. Some recent Chris-
tian writers, without going these lengths, sug-
gest that " an actual picture or model of the
earthly tabernacle and its furniture was shown
to him" (Keil). But the words of the text, as
well as those of Acts vii. 44, and Heb. viii. 5,
are sufficiently justified, if we take a view less
material than either of these — i.e., if we sup-
pose Moses to have had impressed on his mind,
in vision, the exact appearance of the taber-
nacle and its adjuncts, in such sort that he
could both fully understand, and also, when
necessary, supplement, the verbal descriptions
subsequently given to him. It is unnecessary
to inquire how the impression was produced,
God who in vision communicated to £zekiei
the entire plan of that magnificent temple
which he describes in ch. xL — xlii., could
certainly have made known to Moses, in the
same way, the far simpler stnictnte of the
primitive Tabernacle.



HOMILETICSw

Ver. 8. — Earthly tanctuaries tj/piad ^tTie heavenly dweUing-plaee. Such habitations
as God condescends to acknowle(^e for his in this earthly sphere, are, all of them, more
or less types of the New Jerusalem, the eternal heavenly home. " The temple of God
was opened in heaven," says St. John the Divine, " and there was seen in his temple the
ark of his testament" (Rev. xi. 19) ; and again, " After that I looked, and, behold, the
temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened " (ch. xv. 5). Note the
following common features : —

L The obnteal cardinal pact m each and au, is, the manifest presence of
Qop. Of the Tabernacle we are told—" Then a cloud covered the tent of the congre-
gation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle. And Moses was not able to enter
into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the
Lord filled the tabernacle " (Ex. xl. 34, 35). Qiristian churches have the promise, " Lo,
I am with you always, even imto the end of the world" — ^and again, "Where two or
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of you." In the New
Jerusalem " the city has no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it ; for the
glory of God doth lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof" (Bev. xxL 23). And
the saints " see his face " (ib. xxii. 4).

IL The second leadinq fact is tub existence in each of "mant maksions."
An outer court, a porch, a holy place, and a holy of holies, are features manifestly
common to the Hebrew tabernacle and temple with Christian churches. These give
different degrees of access to God, and imply different degrees of fitness to contemplate
him. In Leaven there is a throne — the throne of OtoA and of the Lamb — and rottad



OH.zxT.8^9.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 247



about the throne four and twenty seats for four and twenty elders to sit on (Rev. iv. 4);
and beyond these angels (ib. v. H), and martyrs (*. vii. 14); and, last of all, "the
nations of them that are saved" (»6. xxi. 24). And each individual of the "nations"
Gnds his fitting place.

HI. In all, the occupation op those who have found entrance is the ?baibe
AND woBSHip OF GoD. " Enter into his courts with praise," says holy Davil, cf thp
tabernacle (Ps. c. 4) — " be thankful unto him, and bless his name." " When ye come
together, every one of you has a psalm," says St. Paul of a Christian Church. In heaven
there is " a great voice of much people, saying, Alleluia : Salvation and glory, and
honour, and power, unto the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his judgments . . .
and again they say, Alleluia : for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth ; let us be glad and
rejoice, and give honour to him" (Rev. xix. 1 — 7).

IV. In all, the worshippers enjov a bacrbd feast. Of the worship of the taber-
nacle sacrifice was an essential part; and a sacrificial feast, of which the offerer partook,
always followed the sacrifice. In Christian worship upon earth, the crowning act is a
heavenly banquet, to which the minister in Jesus' name invites all the faithfuL

"Hail sacred feast, which Jesns makes
Bich banquet of his flesh and blood t
Thrice happy he, who here partakes
That sacred siieam, that heavenly food."

In the New Jerusalem there is a " tree of life," which bears " twelve manner of fruits ;*
and they who enter in " have right to the tree of life " (Rev. xxii S, 14), and are " given
to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God " (ib. ii. 7). How
far this is literal, how far allegorical, we shall scarcely know till we are translated to tiiat
celestial sphere, and become dwellers in that glorious city.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOSa,

Vers. 8, 9. — OoiFs dwelling-place among his people. God announces to Israel that he
Is about to take up his abode in their midst, and that various offerings are to be used
in the construction of a suitable dwelling-place. Observe here —

I. Jehovah's ookdesobndinq regard fob the wants op Israel. This tabernacle
with all its belongings was not constructed for any real need that Jehovah had of it.
The people had to construct tents for themselves because they needed them, and the
making of a tent for Jehovah was also in condescending compliance with their need.
This thought is brought out still more clearly by the parallel reference to the incarnation
in John i. 14, where it is said that the Word tabernacled among us. Something in the
shape of an ever visible dwelling-place of God was given to the people, that thus they
might comfort their hearts with the assurance that he was constantly near them, sym-
pathising with them in their changing circumstances and requirements. The people had
been compelled to go to Sinai, there to be impressed with the majesty of God and
receive his commandments ; but at Sinai they could not stay. With all its glories and
revelations, it was but a halting place on the way to Canaan. God had indeed already
given an assurance of his daily providence in the manna ; but he now added a further
sign than which none could be more expressive, none more illustrative of the desire of
G?d to adapt himself to the spiritual blindness and infirmity of men. He took for
himself a tent like the rest of the travellers through the wilderness. Where a dwelling
place is we look for an inhabitant, and especially where it is manifestly kept in order
and regularly attended to. If at any moment an Israelite was in doubt whether God
was indeed with the people, here through the sight of the tabernacle was his readiest
resource to expel all doubt. God's own house with its services and attendants was
continually before him to rebuke and remove his unbelief.

II. Though Jehovah condescended to dwell in a tent, yet that tent had w
BE A holy place. The condescension was simply a condescension in circumstances.
God himself remained the same. He who was holy and jealous, when removed to a
distance from the people, amid the clouds and sounds of Sinai, was not the least altereo



218



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[oh, «v. 10—22.



as to his vigilant holiness by coming down to the apparent limitations of a tent. Coarsa
and humble though the tent appears, there is an unspeakably glorious inhabitant within
whose presence exalts and sanctifies the tent. God himself thus furnishes an illustration
of the truth that those who humble themselves shall be exalted. He needs not to pre-
serve his glory by extraneous and vulgar pomps. And just because this dwell ing-pJace
of God was a tent, the people needed to remember its function with peculiar carefumess.
Though it was only a tent, it was God's tent. A very mean tent, that in ordinary cir-
cumstances would excite no attention, would be carefully guarded if the king happened
for a night to make his abode therein.

III. This holinebs was made conspicuous bt the charaotbb and fobm of the
TABERNACLE AND ITS ruBNiTUBE. Just imagine if, instead of prescribing an exact
pattern for everything, God had left the people to make any sort of structure they liked.
In the first place there would hardly have been unanimity. Those who might have
been very willing and united in the bestowal of raw material would at once have split
asunder in attempting to settle how the material was to be used. Then, even if a
majority had proceeded to action, they would probably have introduced something
idolatrous, assuredly something that savoured rather of human error than Divine truth ;
and the error would have been none the less because those who committed it, committed
it in a spirit of cordial devotion to what they believed was best. What an exposure is
thus made of the plausible notion that if only men are in earnest, Gtid will accept the
will for the deed ! As to the supply of the raw material, God stipulated for free will
there — perfect liberty either in giving or withholding. But the raw material once
gathered, the freedom of the givers was at an end. God himself supplied the moulds in
which the gifts were to flow. A dwelling-place for God must supply aU his wants for
the time being. He must have just exactly those ordinances of worship and those
channels of Divine distribution which he deems best. God's wants, as we see more and
more from a careful study of the Scriptures, are not as man's wants ; and therefore we
must wait humbly for him to reveal what it is impossible for man to conjecture. The
materials for the tabernacle and the instruments thereof were human and earthly, but
the patterns are Divine and heavenly. We know not into what beautiful, glorious, and
serviceable forms man and his belongings may be wrought, if only he will humbly and
attentively wait for directions from God above. These Israelites, when all was finished
according to the pattern in the mount, had then something to show which would make
an impression on men of the right sort in the outside world. Here was an answer to
the question, " Where is now your God ? " Visible he himself is not ; but here is a
dwelling-place not in anything constructed after art and man's device, but entirely of
Divine direction. All our institutions are nothing unless we con trace them to the
inspiration and control of God. — Y.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 10 — 22. — The pattern of the abk.
— Moses is first shown, not the pattern of the
tabernacle, but the patterns of those things
vrLich it was to contain — ^the ark, the table
of shew-bread, and the seven-branched candle-
stick, or lamp ^and, with its appurtenances.
The ark, as the very most essential part of the
entire construction, is described first.

Ver. 10. — ^Ihon shalt make an ark of
shittim wood. Arks were an ordinary part of
the religious furniture of temples in Egypt,
^Bd were greatly venerated. They usually
contained a figure or emblem, of some deity.
Occasionally they were in the shape of boats ;
but the most ordinary form was that of a cup-
board or chest. They were especially con-
•tructed for the purpose of being carried about



in a procession, and had commonly rings at the
side, through which poles were passed on such
occasions. It must be freely admitted, that
the general idea of the " Ark," as well as cer-
tain points in its ornamentation, was adopted
from the Egyptian religion. Egyptian arks
were commonly of sycamore wood. Two
cnblts and a half, etc. As there is no reason
to believe that the Hebrew cubit difiered
seriously from the cubits of Greece and Borne,
we may safely regard the Ark of the Covenant
OS a chest or box, three feet nine inches long
two feet three inches wide, and two feet three
inches deep.

Ver. 11.— Thou shalt overlay it wifh pure
gold. Or, "cover it with pure gold." As
gilding was well known in Egypt long before
tiie time of the ezodns, it is quite possible
that the chert wh liiiiply gilt without and



eft. XXV. 11—18.]



THE BOOK OE* EXODtJS.



i4i



witniii. It may, however, have been overlaid
with thin plates of gold (a practice also known
in Egypt, and common elsewhere)— which ia
the view taken by the Jewish commentators.
The oiovn of gold was probably an oma-
mentii] moulding or edging round the top of
the chest.

Ver. 12. — ^Ponr rings ot gold. These rings
were to be fixed, not at the upper, but at the
lower comers of the chest, which are called
pa'amolh, literally " feet" or " bases." The
object was, no doubt, that no part of the chest
should come in contact with tue persons of
the priests when carrying it (see ver. 14).
As Ealisch notes, "the smallness of the
dimensions of the ark rendered its safe trans-
portation, even with the rings at its feet, not
impossible."

Ver. 13. — Staves of shittim wood. Similar
staves, or poles, are to be seen in the Egyptian
sculptures, attached to arks, thrones, and
litters, and resting on the shoulders of the
men who carry such objects.

Ver. 14. — ^Ihat the ark may be borne with
them. The Hebrew ark was not made, like
the Egyptian arks, for processions, and was
never exhibited in the way of display, as they
were. The need of carrying it arose from the
fact, that the Israelites had not yet obtained a
permanent abode. As soon as Canaan was
reached, the ark had a fixed locality assigned
to it, though the locality was changed from
time to time (Josh, xviii. 1 ; 1 Sam. iv. 3 ;
vii. 1 ; 2 Sam. vi. 10, etc.) ; but in the desert
it required to be moved each time that the
congregation changed its campmg-ground.

Ver. 15. — The staves, when once inserted
into the rings of the ark, were never to be
taken from them. The object probably was
that there might be no need of touching even
the rings, when the ark was set down or taken
op. The bearers took hold of the staves
only, which were no part of the ark. On the
danger of touching the ark itself, see 2 Sam.
vi. 6, 7.

Ver. 16. — The testimony which I will give
thee, is undoubtedly the Decalogue, or in other
words, the two tables of stone, written with
the finger of God, and forming his testimony
against sin. (Compare Deut. xxxi. 26, 27.)
The main intention of the ark was to be a re-
pository in which the two tables should be
kid up.

Ver. 17. — ^Thon shalt make a mercy seat
Modem exegesis has endeavoured to empty
the word happoreth of its true meaning, wit-
nessed to by the Septuagint, as well as by the
Epistle to the Hebrews (ix. 5). It tells us
that a Impporeth is simply a cover," being
derived from kaphar, to cover," — used in Gen.
T. 14, with respect to covering the ark with

Sitch. But the truth is that kapporeth is not
erived from kaphar, but from kipper, the
Piel farm at the lome verb, which lutf never



any other sense than that of covering, or for-
giving sins. In this sense it is used in the
Old Testament some seventy times. Whether
the mercy seat was the real cover of the aik of
the covenant, or whether that had its own lid
of acacia wood, as Kaiisch supposes, is uncer-
tain. At any rate, it was not called kipporeth
because it was a cover, but because it was a
seat of propitiation. On the importance of
the mercy seat, as in some sort transcending
the ark itself, see Lev. xvL 2, and 1 Chr
xxviii. 11. Atonement was made by sprink-
ling the blood of expiation upon it (Lev.
xvi. 14, 15). Of pure gold. Not of wood,
plated with metal, or richly gilt, but of solid
gold — an oblong slab, three feet nine inches
long, two feet three inches wide, and probably
not less than an inch thick. The weight of
such a slab would be above 750 lbs. troy, and
its value above 25,O0OZ. of our money." The
length and breadth were exactly those of the
ark itself, which the mercy seat thus exactly
covered (ver. 10).

Ver. 18. — Two ohembini*. The form " che-
rubims," which our translators affect, is ab-
normal and indefensible. They shoidd have
said either "cherubim," or "cherubs." The
exact shape of the Temple cherubim was kent
a profound secret among the Jews, so thad
Josephus declares — " No one is able to state,
or conjecture of what form the cherubim were "
( Aiit. Jud. viii. 3, § 3^. That they were
winged figures appears bom verse 28 of this
chapter, while from other parts of Scripture
we learn that cherubim might be of either
human or animal forms, or of the two com-
bined (Ezek. i. 5—14 ; x. 1—22). These last
have been with some reason compared to the
symbolical composite figures of other nations,
the andro-sphinxes and crio-sphinxes of the
Egyptians, the Assyrian winged bulls and
lions, the Greek chimserse, and the griffins of
the northern nations. But it is doubtful
whether the cherubim of Moses were of this
character. The most sober of recent inquirers
(Bp. Harold Browne, Canon Cook, Kaiisch,
Keil) , while admitting the point to be doubtful,
come to the conclusion that they were in all
probability, "winged human figures, with
human face too." In this case their proto-
type would seem to have been the winged
figures of Ma, the Goddess of Truth, fre-
quently seen inside Egyptian arks, sheltering
with their wings the scarabseus or other em-
blem of the deity. (See Lepsius, DenkmSler,
pt. iii. pi. 14 ; Wilkinson in Rawlinson's Hero-
dotat, vol. ii. p. 85, 2nd edition ; Smith's Dic-
tionary of the Bible, vol. i. p. 804.) Of beaten
work Shalt thon make them. Not cast, i.e.,
but hammered into shape (LXX. Topevrd.
The word " cherub" is thought to be derived
from an Egyptian root, karabu, signifying
"to hammer" (Speaket'a Commentary, vol. iv.
p. 207). Ia the two miM, Bather, " iTroo!



2fiO



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



rcii. XXV. 10—22.



(he two ends"— i.«, "rising," or, "standing
up from the two ends."

Ver. 19. — On the one end . on the other
rod ... on the two ends. The preposition
used is in every case the same as that ef the
last clause of ver. 18 — viz., min, " from." The
idea is that the figures rose from the two
ends.

Ver. 20. — The chernbimB shall stretch forth
their wings on high. Compare ch.xxxvii, 9. It
would seem that the two wings of both cherubs
were advanced in front of them, and elevated,
so as to overshadow the mercy seat. This
was a departure from the patterns furnished
by the figures of Ma (see the comment on ver.
18), since in them one wing only was elevated,
and the other depressed. It is clear that in
no case was any part of the Hebrew sacred
furniture a mere reproduction of Egyptian
models. Whatever was made use of was so
trausfornied or modified as to acquire a new
and independent character. Their faces, etc.
The words are not without difiiculty ; but the
generally received meaning appears to be cor-
rect — that the faces were bent one towards the
other, but that both looked downwards, to-
wards the mercy seat Thus the figures,
whether they were standing or kneeling,
which is uncertain, presented the appearance



of guardian angels, who watched over the
precious deposit below — ^to wit, the two

Ver. 21.— Then shalt put the meroy seat
above the ark. Bather, "upon the ark" —
" thou shalt cover the ark wiui it" This had
not been expressed previously, though tks
dimensions (ver. 17), compared with those of
the ark (ver. 10), would naturally have sug-
gested the idea. In the ark thou shalt put
the testimony. This is a mere repetition of
verse 16, marking the special importance
which attached to the provision.

Ver. 22. — And there I will meet with thee.
The whole of the foregoing description has
been subordinate to this. In all the arrangje-
ments for the tabernacle God was, primarily
and mainly, providing a fit place where he
might manifest himself to Moses and his suc-
cessors. The theocracy was to be a govern-
ment by God in reality, and not in name
only. There was to be constant " commun-
ing " between God and the earthly ruler of the
nation, and therefore a place of communing.
Compare ch, xxix. 42 — 45. The special seat
of the Divine presence was to be the empty
space above the mercy seat, between the two
cherubim, and above the ark of the cove-
nant.



H0MILETIC3.

Vers. 10 — 22. — T^ symbolism of the ark of the covenant. The symbolical meaaing
of the ark of the covenant may be considered, either (1) separately, as to its parts ; or
(2) collectively, as to the bearing of its several parts one upon the other.

I. Sbpaeatelt, as to its pahts. These were (1) The ark itself, or chest ; (2) The
mercy seat ; and (3) The cherubim. (1) The ark, or coffer of acacia wood, coated
within and without with pure gold, and intended as a receptacle for the law written by
the finger of God, would seem to have represented Divine law as enshrined in the pure
nature of God. Acacia is said to be one of the most incorruptible of woods, and gold is
undoubtedly the most incorruptible, as well as the most precious, of metals. The law
of God — "holy, just, and good" (Rom. vii. 12) — ^needs such a receptacle. It dwells
fitly in God himself — in the incorruptible hearts of the sinless angels-— and in the unde-
filed hearts of godly men. It is in itself pure and incorrupt, an emanation from him
who is essential purity. It is a " golden " nile, perfect, lovely, beautiful. It is no cruel
code of a tyrant, but the only rule of action by which the well-being of man can be
secured. At the same time there is severity and sternness in it. It was written on
stone, and shrined in gold. It was fixed, unbending, unchangeable. (2) The mercy
seat represented God's attribute of mercy. It covered up the law, as he " covers up "
the sins and offences of his people (Ps. xxxii. 1 ; Ixxxv. 2 ; Bom. iv. 7). It was pre-
pared to receive the expiatory blood wherewith the high-priest was to sprinkle it, the
blood that typified the propitiatory sacrifice of Christ (Lev. xvi. 14). It was of gold
because mercy is the most precious of God's attributes. It was placed over the law,
because mercy transcends justice. (3) The cherubim represented at once guardianship
and worship. Doubtless holy angels at all times guarded invisibly the ark, and espe-
cially the " testimony " which it contained. The presence of the two golden figures
signified this holy watchfulness to the Israelites, and spoke to them of the intense
holiness of the place. The shadowing wings represented protecting care; and the
cherubic form showed that the most exalted of creatures were fitly employed in watching
and guarding the revelation of the will of the Almighty. By their attitude, standing oi
kneeling with bent heads end faces turned down toward the mercv seat, they furStm



CH. xxT. 10— 1«.) THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 851

spoke of worship. On the Divine presence, which was manifested "from between
tiem," they dared not gaze — their eyes were lowered, and fixed for ever on the mercy
seat— the embodiment of the Divine attribute of mercy. As under the new covenant
angels desired to look into the mystery of redemption (1 Pet. i. 12), so, mider the old,
angels doubtless saw with admiring wonder God' commencing the recovery of a lost
world ; they looked on his attribute of mercy with rapture but with amaze ; it was a
new thing to them ; the angels who lost their first estate had not elicited it ; man alone
had been thought worthy of the " afterthought," whereby sin was condoned, and thii
salvation of sinners made possible.

n. CtoliLEOTIVELT, AS TO THE BBARINO OP THE 8EVEEAL PABT8 ONE UPON ANOTHER.

The teaching of the ark in this respect was, primarily, that of David in the eighty-fifth
psalm : " Mercy and truth are met together ; righteousness and peace have kissed each
other." Mercy without justice is a weak sentimentality, subversive of moral order.
Justice without mercy is a moral severity — theoretically without a flaw, but revolting
to man's instinctive feelings. The synthesis of the two is required. The law, enshrined
in the holiest place of the sanctuary, vindicated the awful purity and perfection of God.
The mercy seat, extended above the law, assigned to mercy its superior directive
position. The cherubic figures showed the gaze of angels riveted in astonishment and
admiration on God's mode of uniting mercy with justice, by means of vicarious suffer-
ing, which he can accept as atonement. Finally, the Divine presence, promised as a
permanent thing, gave God's sanction to the expiatory scheme, whereby alone man can
be reconciled to him, and the claims both of justice and of mercy satisfied.

HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS.

Chap. XXV., vers. 10 — 16 ; chap, xxxrii,, vers. 1 — 5. — The arh of (he testimony.
When Jehovah provided for Israel an abiding record of his holy will, it was needful that
Israel should also provide an appropriate receptacle. Nor was it left to Moses and the
people to determine what might be most appropriate. Jehovah arranged things so that
all the religious service of the people gathered around the two tables of stone. An
Israelite gazing upon the great holy place of another nation and inquiring what might
be its innermost treasure hidden and guarded from all presumptuous approach, would
get for answer that it was some image graven by art and man's device ; and he would
further learn that the supposed will of this deity found its expression in all licentious
and abominable rites. But, on the other hand, a gentile, looking towards Israel's holy
place and inquiring what might be behind the curtains of the tabernacle, and expecting
perhaps to hear of some magnificent image, would be astounded with a very difierent
reply. No image there ! and not only no image, but words graven by God's desire
which forbade fabrication of everything in the shape of an image. Within that gilded
box of shittim wood there lie written the leading requirements for those who would obey
the wUl of Jehovah. Litera scripta ma/net. The spot where that ark had a resting-place
was a sacred spot, not approachable by the common multitude : but this was not because
there was anything to conceal. The recesses of heathenism wiU not bear inspection.
The character of the deity worshipped corresponds with the degradation of the worshippers.
But here is the great distinction of that Divine service found in Israel, that however vile
the people might be, and even the officiating priests, an exposure of the hidden things of
their sacred place would have been an exposure of their apostasy. No Israelite needed
to be ashamed of what lay within the ark on which he was bound to look with such
veneration, which he was bound to guard with such assiduity ; and if it be true that
every human heart ought to be a sanctuary of God, then the very heart of hearts should
be as the ark of the testimony in the sanctuary of old. Our hearts should be better than
our outward services. We should have the consciousness that God's will has a real,
an abiding, a cherished, a predominating place In our affections. All the actions of life
should flow from the fountain formed by the ever living force of a Divine will within us.
Let us ever consider the internal more than the external. If the internal be right, the
external will come right in due time. If God's commandments — the full scheme of
Christian virtues — ^are indeed written in our hearts, then aU superficial hindrances and
roughness can only last for a little time. The Divine life ruling within must subdue aU
thingB to itseH— 1.



iSi tHte BOOK Of ElODUS. tcH. x»T. 10^40.

Chap. XXV., vers. 17 — 22; chap, xxxvii., vers. 6 — 9. — The mercy Mat and th*
theruhim. The ark already indicated as the repository of the two tables, is now further
indicated as the resting-place of the mercy seat and the cherubim. Thus there was pre-
sented to the thoughts of the people a Divinely constituted whole, a great symbolic unity
which set forth the glory and the mystery of God's presence as no unaided human
conception could have done, however sublime, however sincere. The ark, the mercy seat,
and the cherubim once made and placed in position, were hidden away from the general
gaze. Bezaleel looked no more upon his handiwork. But though the things behind the
veil were themselves hidden, yet their general character and relations were known.
Hidden in one sense, in another sense they were all the more manifest just because
they were hidden. It was perfectly well known that behind the veil God made himself
known as the God of the commandments, the God of the mercy seat, the God shining
forth between the cherubim. The proximity of the mercy seat to the tables of the law
was an excellent way of showing that the requirements inscribed on these tables were
to be no dead letter. If they could not be honoured by a heartfelt and properly corre-
sponding obedience, then they must be honoured by a heartfelt repentance for trans-
gression, an adequate propitiation, and an honourable forgiveness. There was a place
for profound and permanent repentance, and a place for real and signal mercy to the
transgressor : but for a slurring over of disobedience there was no place at all. Very
close indeed are the law and the gospel. The law, when its comprehensiveness and
■everity are considered, magnifies the gospel ; and the gospel, when we consider how
emphatically it is proclaimed as being a gospel, magnifies the law. Then we have also to
consider u hat may be signified by the presence of the cherubim ; and surely we shall not
go far wrong in connecting these golden figures here with the presence of those awful
guardians who prevented the return of Adam and Eve to the scene of earthly bliss
which they had forfeited. The presence of these cherubim suggested a solemn con-
sideration of aU that man had actually lost ; God looking from between the cherubim,
was looking as it were from the scene of the ideal human life on earth ; that life which
might have been the real, if man had only persisted according to the original injunction
of his Maker. Thus the cherubim are associated, first with the barrier against return,
and then with the working out of a plan for glorious and complete restoration. There is
here no word of the flaming sword. The cherubim seem to be regarded as contemplative
rather than active, somewhat as St. Peter phrases it when he speaks of things which the
angels desire to look into. Over against the delight of those faithful ones who
guarded Eden, we must set the thought of those in whose presence there is such inex-
pressible joy over the repenting sinner. God looked forth from between these symbols
of the unsullied creatures who serve him day and night continually, and towards those
people whom, though at present they were disobedient, camalised, and unsusceptible, he
nevertheless called his own. Sinners may be so changed, renewed, and energised as to
be joined in the most complete harmony of service even with the cherubim. — Y.

Vers. 10 — 40. What must be found with every soul that is God's dwelling-place : —
L The ark (vers. 10 — 22). The place where the Lord meets and communes with ut.
L It contained the testimony. The light of the meeting-place with God is the word
concerning righteousness and sin. There is no communion with God if that be left out.
The law which searches and condemns us must be honoured as God's testimony. 2.
Between God and the law we have broken is the mercy seat, sin's glorious covering, on
which the cherubim — emblems of the highest intelligence and purity of creation — look,
and before which we also bow, with adoring awe. 3. Over the mercy seat rests the
cloud of God's glory. We shall meet God only as we seek him here. His glory can be
fully revealed and the might of his salvation proved here alone.

II. The table op shew-bread, the soul's entire consecisation. 1. The bread
was the emblem of God's people. The twelve cakes represented the twelve tribes. The
ftuit of the great Husbandman's toil is to be found in us. 2. (lod's joy is to be found
in us. The Lord's portion is his people. 3. We are to be prepired and perfected for
Ms presence, and to be for ever before him (ver. 30).

III. Thb candlestick, the emblem of the Lord's people, and theib ^ovkd-
■IRTIOB. 1. It is made of pure gold, the only metal that loses nothing, though pa«r%d
through the fire and whose lustre is never tai-nished. 2. It was the only light nt the



OH. ZZT. 10-40.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 26S

holy place. The true Christian Church the only light which in the world's darknesa
leveals the things of God and the pathway to his presence. — U.

Vers. 10 — iO.— The ark, the table, and the candlestick. The instructions for the
making of these essential parts of the tabernacle furniture occupy the remainder of the
chapter. The directions for making the altar of incense are postponed to ch. xxx. 1 — 10.
The reason seems to be that the uses of this altar could not be described without refe-
rence to commands which were to be given respecting the altar of blunt-offering — to
which the altar of incense stood in a certain relation of dependence — and to the ordi-
nance for the institution of the priesthood. The instructions have respect to the internal
relation of the parts.

L The ark and mebct seat (vers. 10 — 23). This was the heart of the sanctuary
— the throne of Jehovah. As the nucleus of the whole structure, it is described first.
1. The ark proper (vers. 10 — 17). For details, consult the exposition. A plain
wooden box or chest, overlaid within and without with pure gold, and borne upon
staves, for the insertion of which rings were provided in its feet or corners, its structure
could not well have been simpler. On the resemblances and differences between this
ark and the religious arks of the Egyptians, see the interesting article in " Kitto's
Cyclopaedia." The ark, in the religion of' Israel, was simply a depository for the two
tables of stone — the tables of the covenant. In its freedom from idolatrous symbols
(in this respect a contrast to the Egy[>tian arks), it was a testimony to monotheism;
in the character of its contents, it testified to the ethical foundation of the religion — to
the severe and stem morality which formed its basis. If ever doubt is cast on the
pure moral character of the Hebrew faith, it should suffice to refute it, to point to the
ark of the testimony. What a witness to the ruling power of the moral in this religion
that, when the sacred chest is opened, the sole contents are found to be the two stone
tables of the moral law (ver. 16) I The deposition of these tables in the ark, under-
neath the mercy seat, had three ends. (1) They testified to the fact that God's kingdom
in Israel was founded on immutable justice and righteousness (Ps. Ixxxix. 15 ; xcvii. 2).
Even grace, in its actings, must respect law. Favour cannot be dispensed on terms
which make the law "void" (Hom. iii. 31). If sin is pardoned, it must be with full
recognition of the law's claims against the sinner. The ultimate end must be to " esta-
blish the law " (Rom. iii. 31). Only in the Gospel have we the clear revelation of how,
on these terms, mercy and truth can meet together, and righteousness and peace can kiss
each other (Ps. Ixxxv. 10 ; Eom. iii. 21 — -27). (2) They testified to the covenant
obligation. The tables were, as Oehler calls them, " the obligatory document of the
covenant." As such they were laid up in the heart of the sanctuary. (3) They testi-
fied against Israel's sins and backslidings. They testified against cM sin in Israel, but
especially against rebellion and deliberate apostasy. This appears to be the special
force of the expression — " the testimony," " tables of testimony," etc. (Cf. Deut.
xxxi. 26, 27 — " Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the
covenant of the Lord your God, that it may he there for a witness against thee.
For I know thy rebellion," etc.) 2. 7%e mercy seat (ver. 17). The mercy seat, or
propitiatory, made of pure gold, served as a lid or covering to the sacred chest. The
name, however, as the Piel form implies, had more especial reference to the covering of
sins. Sprinkled with blood of atonement, the mercy seat cancelled, as it were, the con-
demnatory witness of the underlying tables — covered sin from God's sight (ver. 21).
Prom above this mercy seat, and from between the two cherubim that were ujion it,
God promised to meet with Moses, and to commune with him (ver. 22). The graoicus
element in the covenant with Israel here reaches its distinct expression. Jehovah could
" by no means clear the guilty ; " i.e., he could not call sin anything else than what it
was, or tamper in the least degree with the condemnatory testimony of the law against
it ; but he could admit atonements, and on the ground of expiatory rites, could forgive
sin, and receive the sinner anew to his favour. The mercy seat thus foreshadowed
Christ, as, in his sacred Person, the great Propitiatory for man (Rom. iii. 25) — ^priest,
sacrifice, and mercy seat in one. On the basis of mere law, there can be no communion
between God and man. The blooa-sprinkled mercy seat must intervene. Only on tb«
ground of Christ's mediation and intercession, can God transact with sinners. 3. ThK
cheruiim (ver*. l&— 23). The cherubic figures were formed fl-om the same piece o|



2C4 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [on xxv. 10—40.

gold which constituted the mercy seat, and rose at either end of it, with wings over-
spreading the place of propitiation, and faces turned inward. On the various interpre-
tations, see the exposition. The view which finds most favour is that which regard*
the cheruhim, not as real and actual, hut only as symbolic and imaginary beings-
hieroglyphs of creation in its highest grade of perfection. Egyptian and Assyrian arl
abound in similar ideal forms, most of them representative, not of qualities of th«
creature, as distinct from its Creator, but of attributes of God revealed in creation.
This view, also, has been taken of the cherubim of Scripture, but it must be rejected as
untenable. We confess that, after all that has been written of the purely ideal signifi-
cance of these figures — " the representative and quintessence of creation, placed in
subordination to the great Creator" — we do not feel the theory to be satisfactory. We
incline very much to agree with Delitzsch : " The Biblical conception considers the
cherub as a real Jieavenly being, but the form which is given to it changes ; it is sym-
bolical and visionary." (^Hist of Redemption, p. 29.) It seems fair to connect the
cherubim with the seraphs of the temple-vision in Isaiah (vi. 2; ; and this, taken with
Gen. iii. 24, points strongly in the direction of an angelic interpretation. The concep-
tion, however, unquestionably underwent development, and in the highly complex form
in which it appears in Ezekiel may quite possibly take on much more of the ideal
character than it had at first ; may, in short, closely approximate to what is commonly
given as the meaning of the symboL Confining oiirselves to the figures of the taber-
nacle, we prefer to view them, with the older writers, and with Keil and others among
the modems, as symbolic of the angel hosts which attend and guard the throne of
Jehovah, zealous, like himself, for the honour of his law, and deeply interested in the
counsels of his love (1 Pet. i. 12 J. The angel-idea is so prominent in the theology of
Israel that we should expect it to find some embodiment in this symbolism. And what
finer picture could be given of angels than in these cherubic figures, who, with wings
outspread and faces lowered, represent at once humility, devotion, adoration, intelligence,
service, and zeal? On the angels at the giving of the law, see Deut. xxxiii. 2. On the
assembly or council of holy ones, see Ps. Ixxxix. 6 — 9. The wings of the cherubs con-
stituted, as it were, a protecting shade for those who took refuge under them in the
Divine mercy (Ps. xci. 1). Jehovah's guards, they appear in the symbol as ready to
defend his Majesty against profane invasion ; as avengers of disobedience to his will ; aa
sheltering and aiding those who are his friends. They are, when otherwise unemployed,
rapt in adoration of his perfections, and deeply attent on the study of his secrets. So
interpreted, the cherubs are hieroglyphs of the heavenly spiritual world.

II. The table of shbw-bkead (vers. 23 — 31). The table was part of the belongings
of the holy place. This shows it to have been primarily connected, not with the relation of
God to Israel, but conversely, with the works and services of the people, in their relation
to Jehovah. Like other articles in the sanctuary, the table was to present a golden exterior,
and on it were to be placed twelve cakes of shew-bread (ver. 30 ; Lev. xxiv. 5 — 9), with
flagons for purposes of libation (ver. 29). The shew-bread had thus the significance of a
meat-offering. The sense may be thus exhibited. Bread is the means of nourishment of
the natural life. The twelve cakes represented the twelve tribes. The presentation of
the bread on the table was, accordingly, 1. A recognition of Jehovah's agency in the
bestowal of what is necessary for the support of life. Natural life is supported by his
bounty. The cakes on the table were a grateful acknowledgment of this dependence.
Spiritually, they pointed to the higher bread with which God nourishes the soul. They
remind us of our duty to give thanks for this, not less than for the other. The true bread
is Christ (John vi. 32). 2. A dedication of the life so nourished to him whose goodness
constantly sustained it. We take this to be the essential feature in the offering. The life-
sustaining food and drink is placed upon the table of Jehovah. In the act of placing it
there, the tribes ofier, as it were, to God, the life which it sustains, and which is derived
from his bounty. The meaning could not be better expressed than in words borrowed
from St. Paul — " Unto which promise, our twelve tribes, instantly serving Ood day and
night, hope to come " (Acts xxvi. 7). Perpetual consecration — ^a life fruitful in good
works, and acts of holy service to God. This is the conception which is embodied in
the shew-bread. Here, also, the symbolism points to a life higher than that nourished
un material bread, and might almost be said to pledge to Israel the gift of the highei
bi«ad needed for it. Fed on thin bread from heaven — i.e., on Christ, who gave hinuaU



CB. xrr. IS— 21.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 255

for us (John vi. 51), we are to live, not to ourselveA, but to him who died for us, and
lose again (2 Cor. v. 15).

III. The golden candlestick (vers. 31 — 40). This sacred ornament was. like the
mercy seat, to be made of pure gold. Art was to be allowed to do its best to make it
massive, shapely, beautiful. Stem and branches were to be wrought with great artistic
skilL The lamps, seven in number, fed with beaten olive oil (oh. xxvii. 20, 21), were
to bum all night in the sanctuary. The immediate design of its introduction was, of
course, to illuminate the holy place. Symbolically, the candlestick represented the
calling of Israel to be a people of light. Compare, as regards Christians, Matt. v. 14,
16 ; Phil. ii. 15. The church is the abode of light. It has no affinity with darkness.
The light with which it is lighted is the light of truth and holiness. The lamps are the
gifts of wisdom and holiness, which Christ bestows upon his people. Their own souls
being filled with light, they become, in turn, the lights of the world. The oil which
feeds the light is the oil of God's Holy Spirit. Note — we cannot make a higher use
even of natm-al gilts, say of knowledge or wisdom, than to let their light bum in the
s&nctuary — in the service of God. — J. 0.

Vers. 18 — 21. — He maketh the wmda his messengers, and his ministers a flame of
fire. The cherubim were to be of one piece with the mercy seat, the whole a lid, or
guard above the lid, to the ark or chest which contained the tables of the law.

I. The cherubim and thbie meaninq. 1. The symbol. They are not described
here ; but by comparing the various passages in which they are referred to we may get
a general notion as to their appearance. Ezekiel, who must have been familiar with
their appearance, describes them as seen in his vision (Ezek. i.), four wings, four faces,
etc. In Rev. iv. the same idea is seen in a developed form, four creatures having each
a difl'erent face, and each having six wings. This latter feature suggests identity with
the seraphim in Isaiah's vision (ch. vi.), and the name " seraphim," which seems con-
nected with fire or burning, reminds us of the " flaming sword " with which the
cherubim are associated in Gen. iii. 24. In any case wings, fire, and a mixture of the
human and the animal in their appearance are characteristic features. 2. That which it
tymbolised. Wings in Scripture almost always represent the wind. The appearance of
the cherubim is as fire. Tlieir faces are those of the chief boacts — the lion, the buU-
calf, the man, the eagle. Their form tends towards the human. On the whole, we may
say they represent nature under her manifold aspects, nature as interpreted chiefly
through the natural man in his perfection regarded as a part of nature. The cherubim
shadow forth the natural creation according to the Divine ideal. The clause in the
Te Deum— " To thee, cherubun and seraphim continually do cry," is the Benedioite
condensed into a sentence I

II. I'osiTioN AND OFFICE OP THE CHERUBIM. 1. Position. One piece with the mercy
seat. Nature, in spite of appearances, is a manifestation of God's mercy to man. His
voice may not be in the tempest or the fire, yet the tempest and the flre form a canopy
to that throne whence issues the " stiU, small voice." if we regard the mercy seat as
typical of Christ (cf. Bom. iii. 25), then we are reminded of the mysterious relation
which exists between Christ and nature (Col. i. 17 ; John i. 1, etc.). 2. Office. Here
they protect the ark and its contents, as in Gen. iii. 24, they " keep the way of the
tree ot life.'' The way of the tree of life is the way of righteousness, the way of the
law of God. Thus the chembim above the ark declare that nature, a manifestation
of God's mercy, is also the guardian of God's law.

III. Pbactioal conclusions. 1. Nature does guard the way of the tree of life, the
law of God. There is a tendency implanted in the very constitution of nature which
" makes for righteousness." Break a law, and, by God's merciful ordinance, you are
compelled to reap the penalty. Sin in secret, yet you cannot escape the cognisance of
this vigilant, sleepless, unconscious sentinel [cf. Eugene Aram's dream]. It is " full ol
eyes within and without." 2. Nature is a manifestation of mercy. Undiscoverabla
transgression would be irretrievable damnation. Christ, too, is one with the mercy
seat; nature is rooted in the Divine Word. If we go to that throne of graoe we may
still obtain mercy, and win, thi'ough Christ, peace with the avengers. — G.



26«



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



fcH. XXV. 23—80



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 23 — 30. — ^The table of bhbw-bkead.
I^roin the description of the ark, which con-
•titiited the sole furniture of the most holy
place, God proceeded to describe the furniture
of the holy place, or body of the tabernacle,
which was to consist of three objects — 1. A
table, called the table of shew-bread ( " bread
of presence" or "bread of setting-forth ").
2. A candelabrum, or lamp-stand ; and 3. An
altar for the offering of incense. Of these the
table seems to have been regarded as of
primary importance; and its description is
therefore made to follow immediately on that
of the ark. It was of acacia wood, overlaid
with pure gold, and was of the most ordinary
shape — oblong-square, i.e., with four legs, one
at each comer. The only peculiar features of
the table, besides its material, were the border,
or edging, which surrounded it at the top, the
framework which strengthened the legs (ver.
25), and the rings by which it was to be
carried from place to place.

Ver. 23. — ^Ivo cubits shall be the length
thereof, etc The table was to be three feet
long, one foot six inches broad, and two feet
three inches high. It was thus quite a small
table, narrow for its length, and about two
inches below the ordinary height.

Ver. 24. — Thou shalt overlay it with pore
gold. Again, gilding may be meant ; but a
covering with thin plates of gold is perhaps
more probable. A crown of gold round about
A border, or edging round the top, which
would prevent anything that was placed on
the table from readily falling ofi. (Compare
ver. 11.)

Ver. 25. — A border of a hand-breadth.
Bather " a band " or " framing." This seems
to have been a broad fiat bar, placed about
half-way down the legs, uniting them and
holding them together. It was represented
in the sculpture of the table which adorned
the Arch of Titus. (See the Speaker's Com-
mentary, vol. L p. 363.) A golden crown to
the border — t.e., an edging at the top of the
bar, which could be only for ornament.

Ver. 26. — The four comers that are on the
four feet, is scarcely an intelligible expression.
Fe'oth, the word translated " corners," means
properly " ends ;" and the direction seems to
be. that the four rings should be affixed to the
four " ends " of the table ; those ends, namely,
•rhich are " at the four feet." It is a peri-
phrasis, meaning no more than that tbe^ should



be affixed to the feet, as Josephus tells ns that
they were. (Ant. Jud. iii. 6, § 6.)

Ver. 27. — Over against the border. Bather
"opposite the band" or "framing" — i.».,
opposite the points at which the " band " or
" framing " was inserted into the legs. Bishop
Patrick supposes that the table " was not
carried up as high as the ark was, but hung
down between the priests, on whose shoulders
the staves rested." But it is carried upright in
the bas-relief on the Arch of Titus, and might
have been as easily so carried as the ark.
(See the comment on ver. 12.) Of the staves,
Bather, "for staves." Staves for the table
had not yet been mentioned ; and naturally
the word has no article.

Ver. 29. — The dishes thereof. Literally « ifi
dishes," or rather perhaps, " its bowls " (LXX.
TpiffKia). They were probably the vessels in
which the loaves were brought to the table.
Loaves are often seen arranged in bowls in the
Egyptian tomb decorations (Lepsius, Denk-
maler, pt. ii., pis. 5, 19, 84, 129, &c.). Spoons
thereof. Bather, " its incense cups " — small
jars or pots in which the incense, offered with
the loaves (Lev. xxiv. 5), was to be burnt.
Two such were represented in the bas-relief of
the table on the Arch of Titus. Covers
thereof and bowls thereol Bather, "its
fiagons and its chalices" (LXX. airovieTm
Kol KvaSoi) — vessels required for the liba-
tions or " drink offerings " wWch accompanied
every mcat-ofiering. To cover withal. Bather,
as in the margin, " to pour out withal." So
the Septuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, and most of
the Targums.

Ver. 30. — Thou shalt set upon the table
shew-bread before me alway. Here we have
at once the object of the table, and its name,
explained. The table was to have set upon
it continually twelve loaves, or cakes, of bread
(Lev. xxiv. 5), which were to be renewed
weekly on the sabbath-day ((6id. ver. 8), the
stale loaves being at the same time consumed
by the priests in the holy place. These
twelve loaves or cakes were to constitute a
continual thank-offering to God from the
twelve tribes of Israel in return for the bless-
ings of life and sustenance which they re
ceived from him. The bread was called
" bread of face," or " bread of presence,"
because it was set before the " face " or
" presence " of God, which dwelt in the holy
of holies. The Septuagint renders the phrase
by SpToi iviniot " loaves that are face to
face — St. Matthew by Sproi t5)j irpofleVecos,
" loaves of setting-forth " — whence the Sehtm-
brode of Luther, and onr " shew-bread," which
is a paraphrase rather than a translation



XXT. 23— 30]. THE BOOK OP EXODUS 267



HOMILETICS.

Ten. 23 — 30. — The mfmbolma of the table of shew-bread. Before the holy of holies,
within which was the Divine Presence, dwelhng in thick darkness behind the veil, was
to be set perpetually this golden table, bearing bread and wine and frankincense. The
bread and wine and frankincense constituted a perpetual thank-offering, offered by Israel
as a nation to the high and holy Q-od. The idea was that of a constant memorial
(Lev. zzIt. 8), a continual acknowledgment of the Divine goodness on the part of the
nation. The essence of the offering was the bread — ^we know of the wine only by iiL
plication; the frankincense is distinctly mentioned (ib. ver. 7), but is altogethe.
subordinate. Israel, grateful to God for maintaining and supporting its life, physical
and spiritual, expressed its gratitude by this one and only nev&r ceasing offering. It
was intended to teach —

I. That OBATrruDE was due to God from his people febpetctallt. Men are so
cold by nature, so selfish, so little inclined to real thankfulness, that it was well they
should be reminded, as they were by the shew-bread, of thankfulness beii^ a continuous,
unending duty, a duty moreover owed by all. Ko tribe was ever exempt, however
reduced in numbers, however little esteemed, however weak and powerless. The twelve
loaves were perpetually before the Lord.

IL That gratitude must be shown by offehinqs. The best offering is that of
a " pure heart ; " but no man of a pure heart, who possessed aught, was ever yet content
to offer merely " the calves of his lips " — men instinctively give of their best to God.
Bread, the staff of life — wine, that maketh glad the heart of man — ^frankincense, the
most precious of spices, are fitting gifts to him. The pffering of bread signifies the
devotion of our strength — of wine, the devotion of our feelings — of frankincense, the
devotion of our most sublunised spiritual aspirations to the eternal. Israel, as a nation,
perpetually offered these offerings, and thereby incvdcated on each individual of the
nation the duty of doing the same, separately and individually, for private, as the natiuu
did for public, benefits.

Ill, That no offering could be acceptable to God, unless all its surround-
ings WERE pure and HOLT. The loaves were to be of the finest flour (Lev. xxiv. 5).
The frankincense was to be " pure frankincense " (ib. ver. 7). The table was to be
overlaid with " pure gold" (Ex. xxvi. 24). All the utensils of the table were to be ci
the same (ih. ver. 29). Nothing " common or unclean " was to come into contact witl.
the offering, which was " the most holy unto the Lord " of all the offerings made to
him (Lev. xxiv. 8). The purity and perfection of all the material surroundings of the
oflTering suggested the need of equal purity in those who offered it.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0E8.

Chap. XXT., vers. 23 — 30; chap, xxxvii., vers. 10 — 16. — The table of thew-hread.
Between the ark of the testimony and the table of the shew-bread we see this great
corresnondence — that they were of the same material of shittim wood and had the same
naornment of gold. But along with this correspondence there was a great difference, id
♦hat the ark of the testimony stood within the veU, while the table of shew-bread stood
without. The ark of the testimony had the mercy seat above it, while the table uj
«he shew-bread had the lighted candlestick over against it. There -must be some
significance in having the table on the people's side of the veil rather than God's side :
and may it not be that the table with its bread and the candlestick with its light were
meant to set forth God's providential support and illumination of all his people? The
shew-bread was not so much an offering presented to God as something placed on the
table by his command, regularly and unfailingly, to symbolise the unfailing regularity
with which he supplies his people in their ordinary wants. The daily meat offering
with its fine flour was the representation of the labour of the people : and so we may
take the shew-bread as representing that blessing of God without which the most
diligent toil in sowing and watering avail nothing. The God of the shew-bread is the
God in whom we live and move and have our being ; we cannot do without him for the
necessities and comforts of natural life. Were he to cease the operations of his energy

■xoDui — ^n. ;.



J58



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



fcH. XXV. 81— 4a



in nature, it> would soon be seen how utterly fruitless is all our working just by itael£
A great and efficient providing power cannot be denied by whatsoever name we choosa
to call him. Would we know bun and more of him than we can ever know in nature—
we must think of what lies within the veil. He gives us the things belonging to th«
outer holy place, the bread and the light, the natural strength and the natural wisdom.
In order that we may come to know him in his spiritual demands and his ability to
satisfy the deepest demands of our hearts. The God who gives that bread to his people,
of which the shew-bread was an ever renewed sample, gives it that we whose Uves are
continued by the bread may spend them to bis glory. God feeds us that wo may be in
aU things his servants, and not *» anything our own masters. — Y.



EXPOSITION.



Tm soLDBB OANDLEsnoK (reo. 81 — 10).
Thongh the holy of holies was always dark,
nnless when lighted by the glory of God
(ch. xl. 84, 35), the holy place, in which
many of the priests' functions were to be per-
formed, was to be always kept light. In the
day-time sufficient light entered from the
porch in front ; but, as evening drew on, some
artificial illumination was required. In con-
■ection with this object, the golden candle-
stick, or rather lamp-stand, was designed,
which, together with its appurtenances, is
described in the remainder of the chapter.

Ver. 81. — A oandlestiok. The golden
candlestick is figured upon the Arch of Titus,
and appears by that representation to have
consisted of an upright shaft, from which
three curved branches were carried out on
either side, all of them in the same plane. It
stands there on an octagonal pedestal, in two
stages, ornamented with figures of birds and
sea-monsters. This pedestal is, however,
clearly Boman work, and no part of the
originaL Of beaten work. Not cast, but
fashioned by the hand, like the cherubim
^er. 18). His shaft. Rather, "its base"
Qiterally " flank "). His branches. Our ver-
sion follows the Septuagint ; but the Hebrew
noun is in the singular number, and seems to
designate the upright stem, or shaft. The
"branches are not mentioned till ver. 32,
where the same noun is used in the plural.
His bowls, his knops, and his flowers. Bather,
"its cups, its pomegranates, and its lilies."
The " cups " are afterwards likened to almond
flowers (ver. 33) ; they formed the first orna-
ment on each branch; above them was a
representation of the pomegranate fruit ; above
this a lily blossom. The lily-blossoms sup-
ported the lamps, which were separate (ver.
87). The remainder were of one piece with the
candlestick.

Ver. 82 — Six branches. The representa-
tion on the Arch of Titus exactly agrees with
this description. It was a peculiarity of the
' candlestick," ai compared with other cande-



labra, that an the branches were in the same

plane;

Ver. 33. — Three bowls made like unto
almonds. Cups shaped like almond blossoms
seem to be intended. Each branch had three
of these in succession, then a pomegranate and
a lily-flower. The lily probably represented
the Egyptian lotus, or water-lily. In the
other branch. Bather, " on another branch."
There were six branches, not two only. The
ornamentation of two is described; then we
are told that the remainder were similar.

Ver. 34:. — ^In the candlestick : i.e., in the
central shaft or stem, which is viewed as " the
candlestick " par excellence. Here were to be
twelve ornaments, the series of cup, pomegra-
nate, and lily being repeated four times, once in
connection with each pair of branches, and a
fourth time at the summit.

Ver. 35. — A knop under two branches of
the same. The branches were to quit the
stem at the point of junction between the
pomegranate (knop) and the lily.

Ver. 36.— All It. Bather, "aU of it"
Shall b« one beaten work. Compare ver. 31

Ver. 37. — The seven lamps. The lamps
are not described. They ^pearby the repre-
sentation on the Arch of Titus to have been
hemispherical bowls on a stand, which fitted
into the lily-blossom wherewith each of the
seven branches terminated. They shall light
the lamps. The lamps were lighted every
evening at sunset (ch. xxvii. 21 ; xxx. 8 ;
Lev. xxiv. 3, etc.), and burnt till morning,
when the High Priest extinguished them and
"dressed" Ihem (ch. xxx. 7). That they
may give light over against it. The candle-
stick was placed on the southern side of the
holy place, parallel to the wall, the seven
lamps forming a row. The light was conse-
quently shed strongly on the opposite, or
northern wall, where the table of shew-bread
stood.

Ver. 38.— The tongs thereof. Tongs or
pincers were reqnired for trimnung the wicks
of the lamps. Compare 1 Kings vii. 49;
2 Chr. iv. 21. Snnff-dishes were also needed
for the reception of the fragments removed
from the wicks by Uie tongs. "Snuffers,"



CH. xxT. 31—40.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



tu



though the word is used in Ex. xxvii. 23,
in the place of tongs, had not been in-
rented, and were indeed unknown to the
ancients.

Ver. 89. — Of a talent of pure gold shall he
make it. The candlestick, with all its appur-
tenances, was to weigh exactly a talent of
gold. The value of the Hebrew gold talent it



supposed to have been between 10,0002. and
11,OOOZ. of our money.

Ver. 4.0. — Their pattern, which was shewed
thee in the mount. Compare ver. 9, and the
conmient ad loo. It would seem from this
passage that the " patterns " were shown to
Moses first, and the directions as to the
making given afterwards



HOMTLETICS.

Vers. 31 — 40. — The tymlolism of the candlestick. The light which illuminated the
darkness of the tabernacle can represent nothing but the Holy Spirit of God, which
illuminates the dark places of the earth and the recesses of the heart of man. That the
light was sevenfold is closely analogous to the rc]iresentation of the Holy Spirit in the
Bevelation of St. John, where there are said to be " seven lamps of fire burning before the
throne, which are the seven Spirits of God " (Rev. iv. 5). It is generally allowed that
these " seven spirits" represent the one indivisible but sevenfold Spirit, who imparts of
his sevenfold gifts to men. Seven is, in fact, one of the numbers which express perfection
and completeness ; and a sevenfold light is merely a light which is full and ample, which
irradiates suiliciently all that it is designed to throw light upon. The light from the
golden candlestick especially irradiated the opposite wall of the tabernacle where the
table of shew-bread was set, showing how the ofl'erings of the natural man require to be
steeped in the radiance of the Spirit of God in order to be an acceptable gift to the
Almighty. We may see —

I. In the fuse gold of the candlestick the spotless perfection of him,

WHOSE EMBLEM IS THE INNOCENT DOVE — WHO IB " THE SPIRIT OF PURITY." The pure

light of the refined olive oil, and the pure gold of the candlestick were in harmony.
Both indicated alike the Spirit's awful holiness. Both taught the presence of One, who
was " of purer eyes then to behold iniquity."

II. In the SIMPLE YET BEAUTIFUL ORNAMENTATION OF ALMOND BUDS, AND POME-
GRANATES, AND LILIES, WE MAT SEE THE DELIGHT OF THE SpIBIT IN ALL THINQS

LOVELY, SWEET, AND INNOCENT. The Spirit of God, which, when the earth was first
made, " brooded upon the face of the waters " (Gen. i. 2), still tenderly watches over
creation, and rejoices in the loveliness spread over it by his own influences. Flowers
»nd fruits are among the most beautiful of created things, and., well befit the interior
of the sanctuary where God's presence is manifested, whether cunningly carved in
stone, or fashioned in metal-work, or, best of all, in their ovm simple natural fresh-
ness.

III. In the soft BADIANCE shed around by the candlestick, we MUST SEE THE
ILLUMINATINO POWBB OF THE SPIRIT, WHICH GIVES LIGHT TO THE WORLD. Spiritual

gifts, however diverse, are his gifts. " To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom ;
to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit ; to another gifts of healing ; to
another faith ; to another prophecy ; to another miracles ; to another tongues ; to
another the interpretation of tongues ; but all these worketh that one and the self-same
Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he wiU " (1 Cor. xii. 8 — 11). It is he who
" doth our souls inspire, and lighten with celestial fire." It is he from whom all wisdom
and knowledge, and spiritual illumination are derived. He informs the conscience,
guides the reason, quickens the spiritual insight, gives us discernment between good and
evlL Christ is " the light of the world," but Christ diffuses his light by his Spuit.
Man's contact is closest with the Third Person of the Trinity, who communicates to
the soul every good and perfect gift which has come down to it from the Father of
lights. Illumination is especially his gift ; and it is therefore that light and fire are
nmde the especial symbols of his presence (Matt. iii. 11 ; Acts ii. 3, 4 ; Eev. iv. 5).

IV. In THE SEVENFOLD LIGHT OF THE SEVEN LAMPS WE MAY SEE THE FULNESS
AND COMJ'LETENBSS OF THE ILLUMINATION WHICH THE SpIRIT VOUCHSAKKS TO MAN.

Fulness and completeness in respect to man's needs — ^not absolute completeness or
fulness ; for " Now, we see through a glass darkly," " we know in part only — ^not as we

B 2



2i0 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xx». 31—40

m known." But " Ms grace is suflScient for us." We know all that we need to know
— wo see all that we need to see. " Full light " and " true knowledge " are for another
sphere ; but still, even here, we are privileged to see and know as much as would be
of advantage to us. Inspired messengers have declared to us what they have felt
justified in calling " the whole counsel of God " (Acts xx. 27). We are familiarly
acquainted with mysteries, which the very " angels desire to look into " (1 Pet. L 12).

V. In the PBOVISION of tongs and StrUFF-DISHBS WB MAT SEE THAT THE CO-OPEBA-
TION OF MAN 18 EEQUIBED, IF THE BRIGHTNESS OF THE SPIRITUAL LIGHT VOnOHSAFED

TO HIM IB TO BEMAiN UNDIMMED. The lamps of the golden candlestick had to be
" dressed " each morning. Perpetual vigilance is necessary. Phrases once instinct with
power lose their force ; and new phrases, adapted to each new generation, have to be
coined and circulated. The translation of the word of God in each country has from
time to time to be revised, or an accretion of usage will dim the light of the pure word,
and overshadow it with traditional glosses. Teachers must be watchful, that they do
not suffer the light of their teaching to grow dim ; hearers must be watchful, that they
do not by their obstinacy refuse to give the light passage into their souls.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES.

Chap. XXV., vers. 31 — 40; chap, xxvii., vers. 17 — 24. — 'JTie candlestieh. Am the
■hew-bread was a symbol of what Jehovah gave to his people in one way, so the lighted
candlestick in all the preciousness of its material and elaboration of its workmanship was
a symbol in another way. And even as the shew-bread was in magnitude only as a
crumb of all the great supply which God gives in the way of food, so the candlestick
even in full blaze was but as a glimmer compared with all the light which God had
gathered and arranged in various ways to guide and cheer his people. But glimmer
though the light of the candlestick might be, it was quite enough to act as an inspiring
and encouraging symbol for all who, seeing, were able to understand. From that place
between the cherubim, shrouded as it was in awful sanctity, there radiated forth
abundance of light for every one in Israel who was disposed to profit by it. In heathen-
dom the perplexed went long distances to consult renowned oracles, only to find that for
all practical purposes they might just as well have stayed at home. There was a great
boast of illumination ; but the r^Uty turned out ambiguous and delusive. But here is
the seven-branched candlestick (seven being the perfect number) to indicate that God
would assuredly give all needed fight to his people. On one side stood the shew-bread,
and over against it the fight. So we need God's guidance to show us how to use what
materials he puts in our hands for our support. It is only too easy for man, following
the light of a corrupted nature, to waste, abuse, and degrade the choice gifts of God.
Consider the vast quantities of grain that instead of passing through the bands of the
oaker to become food, pass through the hands of the brewer and distiller to become
alcohol. In all our use of the resources which God has placed in our hands, we must seek
with simpUcity of purpose and becoming humility for Gfld's fight, that we may be
assmed of God's will. God has placed us in the midst of such profusion that we may
use it for him and not for self. And is not a lesson taught us in this respect by the
very candlestick itself? It was made of gold. The Israelites at this time seem to
have had great store of gold ; and left to their own inclinations, they gave it for shaping
into an image to be worshipped. Now, by causing this candlestick to be niade of gold,
Jehovah seemed to summon his people to give their gold to aid in supporting and dif-
fusing_ his fight. What God gives may be a curse or a blessing, just according to the
spirit in which we receive and use it. We can desire no nobler office than to be our-
selves as lamps, doing something to shed abroad that great, true fight of the world,
which radiates from the person of Christ. He who is fiving so as to make Christ better
known amid the spiritual darkness of the world has surely learnt the great lesson
tiiat God would tMch to all ages by this golden candlestick in his sanctuaiy cl



oiL ixTL 1— S7.i



lH£ BOOK OF EXODtJS.



m



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XXVI



Vei8.1 — 37. — The TABERNACLE. The sacred
fuiuiture which the tabernacle was to contain
having been described, with the exception of
the "altar of incense" — ^the description of
which is reserved for ch xxx. (vers. 1 — 10) —
directions were next given for the sacred
structure itself. This was to consist of three
main things — 1. A quadrangular enclosure
thiity cubits long by ten broad, open at one
end, and on the other three sides enclosed by
boards of acacia-wood overlaid with gold —
called the mithkan, or "the dwelling-place,"
in our version usually translated "tabernacle."
2. A tent of goat's hair, supported upon poles,
and stretched by means of ropes and tent-
pegs in the ordinary manner over the mishlcdn.
This is called the 'ohel — which is the usual
word for a " tent " in Hebrew, and is so trans-
lated generally (Gen. iv. 20 ; ix. 21 ; xiii. 31 ;
sviii. 1, etc.), though in this chapter, unfor-
tunately, " covering " (ver. 7) ; and 3. A
"covering" — mikaeh, to be placed over the
'okel, composed of rams' skins dyed red, and
seals' skins (ver. 14). Subordinate parts of the
structure were — (a) The sockets, or bases,
which were to receive and support the up-
right boards (vers. 19—25); (6) The bars
which were to hold the boards together (vers.
26 — 29); (o) The veil, stretched on pillars,
which was to be hung across the " dwelling-
house," and to separate it into two parts, the
" holy place " and the " holy of holies " (vers.
31—33); and(d) The curtain or "hanging"
at the open end of the "dwelling-place,"
where there were no boards, which was in-
tended to close that side of the structure
when necessary (vers. 36, 37).

The fine linen covering (vers. 1 — 6).

Ver. 1. — Thou shalt make the tahemaole
with ten curtains. These " ten curtains " are
explained in the verses which follow to be ten
" breadths," so fastened together bs to form
practically a single curtain or awning, which
constituted the cieling or inner covering of
the tahemade. The mode of its arrange-
ment is not quite certain Some suppose that
it was really a part of the " tent," being laid
over the same framework as the goats' hair
curtain (Fergusson, Cook) ; others believe it
to have been strained across the miehhdn and
fastened to the top of the boards on either



side, thence depending, either faiside or out-
side (Bahr, Keil). The former supposition
appears the more probable. Tine twined
linen is linen the threads of which are formed
of several fine strands twisted together. This
is often the case with Egyptian linen. On
blue and purple and scarlet, see the com-
ment upon ch. XXV. 4. Chexubims of cunning
work. Bather, "cherubim, the work of a
skilled weaver." Figures of cherubs were to
be woven into the hangings in the loom itself,
not embroidered upon them afterwards.

Ver. 2. — Eight and twenty cubits. This it
the exact length required for a rectangular
tented roof over such a space, which should de-
scend (as tent roofs usually do) within about
seven feet of the ground. Thecomparisonmade
in vers. 12, 13, between the fine linen covering
of the mishkdn and the goats' hair covering (3
the " tent," implies that the one was directly
under the other, and that both were arranged
in the same way. The breadth of four cubits.
This gives for the entire length of the curtain
(4 by 10), 40 cubits, or ten cubits more than
the length of the boarded space. The roof
must thus have been advanced some distance
in front of the tabernacle proper, or rectan-
gular boarded space. Dvery one of Uie oor-
taius shall have one measure. They shall
all, i.e., have the same measure.

Ver. 3. — When the ten " breadths " had
been woven, five were to be sewn together to
form one portion of the awning, and the
other five to form another portion, the reason
for this being, probably, that if all the ten
breadths had been sewn together, the awning
would have been too cumbrous to have been
readily fulded together, or easily conveyed
when the people journeyed.

Ver. 6. — The Authorised Version gives the
sense fairly. The two curtains, each com-
posed of five "breadths," were to be united
by means of one hundred loops, fifty on each
curtain, which were to be coumed together by
fifty "taches" or clasps. The loops were
to be of the " blue " material used generally in
the textile fabrics of the tabernacle (ch. xxv.
4 ; xxvi. 1, 31, 36), and the " taches " or
clasps were to be of gold. In this way the
covering of the mishkan was to be completed.

The gout's skin tent-doth (vers. 7 — 13).

Ver. 7. — From the inner covering of the
tabernacle the directions proceed to the ex-
ternal covering, or rather coverings, which
constituted the real strength of the structure,
and its protection from wet or stormy
weather. Curtains of goats' hair, such as the
Arabs still use, as the ordinary covering of
their tents (Layard, Nin. and Bab., p. 171),
were to form a true " tent " ('6hd) above thi



THB BOOK OF EXODUS.



[en. XXTL 8—18,



ta1>eniacle, lieing sapported by tent -poles,
■nd kept tant by means of cords and pegs
(oh. zxviL 19; xxxt 18V See the repre-
sentation in Dr. W. Smith s Dictionary of tlie
Bible, vol. iii. p. 1454, which is reproduced in
the Speaher't Commentary, vol. i. p. 376. To
be a oovering. In ch. xxxvi. 14, we have — " he
made cartaius of goats' hair /or the tent over
the tabernacle," which is far better. The
word used in both places is the same (_'d]iel).
Eleven onrtains — i.e., " eleven breadths."
Compare ver. 1.

Ver. a— The length . . . shall be thirty
onbits. A tent with a rectangular roof, over
such a chamber as the mishkdn, brought down,
as tents usually are, within six or seven feet of
the ground, would have required a covering
of this length. If the slope of the roof had
been greater, the covering must have been
longer. The breadUi . . . four onbits. This
gives for the entire covering, when made up,
a width of forty four cubits, or sixty-six feet.
As the entire length of the mishlcan was only
thirty cubits, or forty-five feet, it is evident
that the tent projected considerably beyond
the tabernacle, either at both ends, or, at any
rate, at one end. Probably the projection
was at one end only — viz., in front ; where
>t constituted a porch, eighteen or twenty
feet deep. The temple, which was modelled
i^ter the tabernacle, had a porch fifteen feet
deep.

Ver. 9. — ^Thon shalt oonple, etc. As with
the inner awning of linen, so with the goats'
hair tent-cloth. The whole when made up
was to be in two pieces, for convenience of
transport. (See the comment on ver. 3.)
The number of breadths in the tent-cloth
being uneven, the two pieces were to be of
different sizes, one containing five, and the
other six, "breadtlis." Thon shalt double
the sixth onrtain in the forefront of the
tabernacle. "Tabernacle" here is a mis-
translation ; since the Hebrew word is 'Shel,
"tent" The meaning may be, either that
the sixth breadth was to be doubled back
upon the fifth, or that half of it was to be
doubled back npon the other half. The
latter view is to be preferred, since otherwise
the extra breadth would have been super-
fluous.

Ver. 10. — ^Fifty loops in the edge of the
onrtain that oonpleth the second. Rather,
" fifty loops at the edge of the second curtain
of coupling." The two portions of the goats'
hmr covering were to be united in exactly
the same way as those of the inner awning of
linen. Fifty loops were to be sewn on to the
edge of the extreme, or outermost, breadth of
each portion, and these loops were to be
connected by clasps or links. The outermost
breadth on which the loops are sewn, is called
the curtain of coupling.
Ver. 11.— Fifty taohes of braw. Bather



" of bronze." The links of the inner cnrtain
were of gold (ver. 6).

Ver. 12. — ^The remnant which remaineth,
etc Both this and the next verse presume a
very close connection between the fine linen
covering of the mishkdn and the goats hair tent-
cloth which protected it. " The remnant that
remaineth" is the half-breadth by which the
tent-cloth would overlap the linen covering at
the back of the tent, when at the front half of
the eleventh breadth had been turned back
upon the other half (see comment on ver. 9).
This "remnant" was to be allowed to hang
down over the back part of the tabernacle.

Ver. 13. — ^And a cubit. Rather, " And the
cubit." The cubit by which the goats' hair tent-
cloth, which was thirty cubits across (ver. 8),
would exceed the linen covering, which was
twenty-eight cubits (ver. 2), on either side of
the tabernacle, was to be allowed to hang
down, like a valance, hiding so far the golden
boards of the tabernacle.

The outer protection (yet. 14).

Ver. 14. — ^And thou shalt make a covering
for the tent. Nothing is said of the size of
this covering ; but, as its object was clearly to
protect the roof of the tent from penetration
by wet, it seems reasonable to suppose that it
extended at least as far as the boards of the
tabernacle. To do this, it must have been
thirty cubits long, and fourteen broad.

The howrding of the tahemacle (vers. 15 — 30).

Ver. IS. — Boards ... of shittim wood.
These boards were to be fifteen feet long by
two feet three inches broad, and, if they were
each of a single plank, can scarcely have been
furnished by any of the acacias which now
grow in the Sinaitic peninsula. It is pos-
sible, however, that they were made up of two
or more planks, since the name by which they
are designated, kereth, is thought to be applied
in Ezek. xxvii. 6, to the " deck of a ship."
Standing np. The way in which they were
to be made to " stand np" is explained in vers.
17 and 19. They were not to have one end
sunk in the ground, but to be fitted by
means of " tenons " into silver " sockets."

Ver. 17. — Two tenons. Literally, " hands.''
Projecting rods, such as those common in our
dinner tables, seem to be meant. They may
have been of metal, let into the boards to a
certain depth, and projecting several inches
beyond them. Or, possibly, ihey may have
been of acacia wood. In one board — i.e.
" In each board" — no doubt, at the bottom of
each. Set in order one against the other.
Arranged, i.e., at regular intervals, the posi-
tion of each corresponding to the position of
its fellow.

Ver. 18. — ^Twenty boards. Each board be-
ing a cubit and a half in width (ver. 16), tb;



OH. XXVI. 19—33.]



THB BOOK OF EXODUa



tu



length of the chamher was, necessarily, thirty
cubits. On the south side southward. Liter-
ally, " On the south side, to the right." The
Orientals regarded it as natural to look to
the east, and spoke of the east as " in front,"
the west as " behind," the north as " on
the left," and the south as "on the right
hand."

Ver. 19 — Porty sockets of silver. Nothing
is said of the shape of these " sockets." They
were certainly very massive, as each contained
• silver talent (ch. xxxviii. 27), and thus
weighed from eighty to ninety pounds. It has
been supposed that they stood on the ground,
and formed a sort of continuous base, out of
which the planks rose. But this would have
constituted a very unsafe structure. Kalisch
is probably right in his view, that the sockets
were let into the ground — ^resembling those at
the bottom of a gate, into which the bolt is
pressed down. Each socket received one of
the " tenons."

Ver. 20. — The seoond side ... the north
side. The north side, or left hand, was always
regarded as less honourable than the south side
or right hand (see Gen. xlviii. 1!} — 20),
probably because in the northern hemisphere
the sun illumines the south side. It showed
the superior dignity of the south side that
the golden candlestick was set against it
(ch. xl. 24).

Vers. 22, 23.— For the sides of the taber-
nacle westward. Bather, " for the back "
(t4 oir((ro>— LXX.). Here there were to be
six hoards only, which would give the ab-
normal and improbable width of nine cubits.
The additional cubit required was no doubt
obtained from the comer boards, or posts,
each of which added to the (internal) width
half a cubit (see ver. 23).

Ver. 24. — They shall be oonpled together
beneath . . . unto one ring. This is very ob-
scure, and might be explained in several ways.
Perhaps it is best to suppose that the coupling
was by the " bars," cf. vers. 26 — 29, the ends
of which fitted into a sort of double ring, like
the figure 8, attached to the corner posts.
Above the head. Bather " at " or near the
head."

Ver. 25. — And they fhall he eight hoards.
Counting in the two comer hoards, or posts,
the boards of the back would be eight. Each
of them was to have two " tenons," like the
boards of the sides, and every " tenon" was
to have its own silver " socket." Thus the
" sockets" would be sixteen, two under each
board.

Vers. 26 — 28. — Bars of shittim wood. To
give greater stability to the stmcture, to keep
the boards in their places, and to prevent there
being any aperture between them, five bars
were to be made for each side, and the same
number for the end, of the miahh&n, which
were to be passed through rings attached to



the boards — one at least to each — and thus to
hold the boards firmly together. The middle
bar m each case was to extend the whole
length of the enclosure (ver. 28), and thus in
two cases to be thirty cubits, or forty-five feet
long. The exact length, and the disposition
of the other bars is not indicated ; but it is
with reason conjectured that two were above
and two below the "middle bar" — ^that all
were horizontal — and that each coupled to-
gether one half of the boards of each side. The
length of each was probably fifteen cubits ;
and the ends which reached the two comer
posts at the back ran into the comer rings,
which were shaped so as to receive the two
bars (see ver. 24). It is not said whether the
bars were inside or outside the mishlcan ; but
the best authorities suppose them to have been
outside.

Ver. 29. — The rings were to be of solid
gold ; the boards and the bars of acacia wood
overlaid with gold.

Ver. 30. — According to the fashion. Where
the description was incomplete (and it could
not but be incomplete in many points), Moses
was to follow his recollection of the " pattern,"
which either in vision, or otherwise — he had
seen in the mount This would be his best
guide, for

" Segnius irritant animum demissa per auree,
Quam qads sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus."

Vers. 31 — 35. — The veil and the ordering
of the holy places.

Ver. 31. — A vail. The veil was to he of
the same material and workmanship as the
inner covering extended over the mishhan,
and like that, was to have figures of cherubim
woven into its texture by a skilled weaver.

Ver. 32. — ^Four pillars. The contrast be-
tween these four pillars of the interior, and
the "five pillars " at " the door of the tent "
(vers. 36, 37), is striking, and justifies the
supposition that the veU in the tabernacle did
not completely divide the holy of holies from
the holy place, but formed a screen, above
which the ^ace was open. If the veil had
been hung from the top of the tented roof, so
as completely to separate the two places, there
must have been five piUars, or at any rate an
odd number, m the interior. Their hooks
shall be of gold. These are hooks attached to
the pillars, for the purpose of their having the
curtains hung upon them. Upon the four
Bookets. The word " sockets " has no article.
Translate — " Thou shait hang it upon four
pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold,
with their ho6k» of gold, and standing upon
four sockets of silver." The pillars probably
had " tenons, like the boards (ver. 17), which
were inserted into silver sockets, let into the
ground.

Ver. 33.— Thou shalt hang ap the vdl



2M



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[cH. xzTi. 89—37



■ndar the taohei. If the " taches " of ver. 6,
or even of ver. 11, are intended, and '■ under"
is to be taken strictly as " immediately under,"
the mUhkdn must have been divided by the
▼eil into two equal, or very nearly equal parts ;
and the tabernacle must in an important par-
ticular have completely differed from the
temple. In the temple the holy place was
twice the length of the holy of holies (1 Kings
yi. 16, 17). It is possible that " under " may
be used vaguely, or that the " taches " of this
verse are the " hooks " of ver. 32. That thou
mayest bring in. Bather, " And thou shalt
bring in." The clause is directive. The most
holy. Literally, "the holy of holies" — ^the
inner chamber, that within the veU, which
constituted the adytum, or innermost recess of
the tabernacle. The ark and the mercy-seat
were the special furniture of this inner sanc-
tuary. To these is added later (ch. xxx. 1 — 10)
the altar of incense.

Ver. 35. — The table here is, of coarse, " the
table of shew-bread" described in the pre-
ceding chapter (vers. 23 — 30), immediately
after the mercy-seat. It was to be set " with-
out the veil," in the holy place or outer
chamber, against the north wall. The oandle-
stiok is the seven-branched lamp-stand de-



scribed in ch. zxv. 31 — 39. It was to b«
placed over against the table, and c<iiis»
quently on the south side (ch. xL 24).

Vers. 36, 27.— The entranoe to the tent.

Ver. 36. — Thou shalt make a hanging. A
curtain which could draw up and down, seems
to be intended. When let down, it probably
covered the entire eastern side, or front of the
tabernacle. When raised, it allowed the eye
to penetrate into the holy place.

Ver. 37. — rive pillars. The central pillar
was, no doubt, as Mr, Fergusson long ago
pointed out, one of two tent-poles, which sup-
ported between them a ridge-pole, over which
were thrown the coverings that formed the
roof of the tent. Its height was probably
fifteen cubits, so as to give a due slope to the
roof. The two piUars nearest to the central
one probably measured ten cubits, and stood
in line with the two walls of the miahkdn.
The outer pair would then have a height of
five cubits, and support the two extremities of
the goats' hair covering. Their hooks. The
hooks whereby the "hanging" was attached
to the pillars. Compare ver. 32. Sockets of
brass — i.e., of bronze. These were probabl/
let into the ground, like the other socketiL



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 37. — 2%e symlolism of the tabernacle structitn. L That the holt of houes
typified heaven itself is declared in the Epistle to the Hebrews (ch. is. 7 — 12). In it
were the forms of cherubim, representing the angelic choir, and between them was the
manifestation of the presence of God himself. It was cut off from the rest of the sanc-
tuary by the veil, which none was to lift save the High Priest once a year : " the Holy
Ghost thus signifying, that the way into the holiest of all " — i.e., into heaven — " was not
made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing " (s6. ver. 8).

II. The veil thus typified and represented the separation between man and Gkxi — ^the
awful barrier which shuts out from the Divine presence all, even the holiest, unless they
have with them the blood of expiation, " that speaketh better things than that of Abel."
The veil was covered with cherubic forms, reminding men of those watchers at the gate
of Eden, who with " a flaming sword that turned every way, kept the way of the tree
of life " (Gen. iii. 24). Men saw in the thick curtain that hid the holiest from view,
that heaven was shut to them, unless a " new and living way " could be found, whereby
they might enter. They had impressed upon them the awful holiness and inaccessibility
of the Supreme Being, and their own unworthiness to approach him. They learnt that
God had hidden himself from them, until some " better time," when the veil would be
rent, and in and through their true High Priest, and through faith in his blood, they
might " haive boldness to enter into the holiest."

III. The tabernacle outside the veU — the holt place, as it was called — ^represented
the church miUtant. Here was perpetual worship offered to the God behind the veiL
Hither were all who had received the holy anointing, and so been made " priests to God "
(Rev. i. 6) privileged to enter. Here was a perpetual thank-offering presented to Qod in
the shew-bread that lay always upon the table. Here was illumination from the seven-
fold lamp which typified the Holy Spirit (see above on "the symbolism of the
candlestick"). The place was "all glorious within" (Ps. xlv. 13) — on the walls
" clothing of wrought gold," — above, a canopy of " fine twined linen, and blue and
purple and scarlet, with cherubim of cunning work" interwoven into it — at either
end • ourtunof nearly similar materials. Those who looked on the tabernacle from



cH. zxvi. 1— 37.] THE BOOK OF EXODUa 261

without saw the goats' hair, and the rains' skins, and seals' skins, and perceiTod
in it no beauty that they should desire it. The beauty was revealed to those only
who were within. So now, the Church is despised and riliSed by those without,
valued as it deserves only by those who dwell in it. Again, the structure seems
weak, as does the structure of the Church to worldlings. A few boards, an awning,
a curtain or two — what more frail and perishable! But, when all is "fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth " (Bph. iv. 16), when by a
machinery of rings and bars, and tenons and solid sockets, and pillars and hooks, the
whole is welded into one, under Divine direction and contrivance, the fragility dis-
appears. " God's strength is made perfect in weakness." A structure is produced which
continues, which withstands decay, which defies assaults from without, which outlasts
others seemingly far stronger, and bids fair to remain when all else is shattered and
destroyed. " Behold ! I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." The
tabernacle, frail as it was, lasted from the exodus until the time when Solomon
expanded it into the temple. Our tabernacle, the Church, will endure until it shall
please God to merge it in a new and wonderful creation — " the new Jerusalem " (Eev.
xxi. 2, 10—27 ; xxii. 1—5).

IV. The oubtain at the bntbance symbolises the fact, that there is a division
between the Church and the world. The curtain may be lifted at times ; but the world
has only glimpses of the real inner life of the Church, does not fully see it, does not
comprehend it. The life consists in worship — ^in contemplation, prayer, and praise.
The world " cares for none of these things." It may glance curiously at the external
fabric, and scoff a little at the contrast between the homely goats' hair that shows itself
in one part, and the " blue and purple and scarlet, and fine twined linen wrought with
needlework " that is seen in another ; it may be angered at the sight of " pillars overlaid
with gold," and ask scornfully, " Wherefore this waste ? " But it does not care to consider
seriously the fitness of these things, or to weigh the reasons for them. The only
interest which it feels is one arising from cupidity : the Church, it thinks, would be
worth plundering ; and it looks forward hopefully to the time when it will " divide the
spoil."

y. The support of the entire fabric upon tenons and sockets indicates that the
Church is detached from earth, has here no resting-place, no continuing abode, awaits
removal to heaven. What is of the earth, is earthy. If the Church were of the earth, if
it were a human institution, if it rested on human wisdom, or power, or affection, it
would be swayed by human emotions ; it would seek those things which are the main
objects of human desire ; it would cease to witness for God ; it would be powerless to raise
man above himself and fit him for the life which is to come. But the Church is not of
man's building. Christ built it. It is his. He is its " chief comer-stone;" and then-
fore^ " while it touches earth, it belongs altogether to heaven."



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Yers. 1 — 37. — Jehovah's dwelling. Instructions are now given for the making of
the " dwelling-place," of that sacred house or tent which was to be the special abode of
Jehovah, and within which, when reared according to the fashion shown to Moses in
the mount (ver. 30), the sacred articles described in the previous chapter were to be
deposited. We need not encumber our homily with the minuti» of construction. It
will suffice to direct attention to the general arrangement of parts, and to the costly
and beautiful character of the erection as a whole. 1. General arrangement. The
tabernacle may be described as a quadrangular enclosure of boards, sumptuously over-
laid with gold, and fitted beneath into sockets of silver (vers. 15 — 30). Over this were
placed (1) the tabemaole-cloth proper — a finely-woven double curtain of byssus, glowing
all over with figures of cherubim, in blue, and purple, and scarlet (ver. 1). (2) A tent
cloth of goats' hair (ver. 7). (3) Exterior coverings. These consisted of rams' skins
dyed red, and of skins of seals (ver. 14). Loops and taches united the two divisions
of the tabernacle and tent-cloths. The clasps in the one case were of gold (ver. 6), in
the other of brass (ver. 11). Internally, four piUars supported a magnificent veil, also
wrought in blue, and purple, and scaiiet with figures of.cherubiu (vers. 31, 32). Thii



an THB BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxvt 1— »7.

divided the sacred enclosure into two apartments, the outer, the holy place, and tha
inner, the holy of holies, the true dwelling of Jehovah. The division, as already seen,
" corresponded to the design of the tabernacle, where Jehovah desired not to dwell alone
by himself, but to come and meet with his people" (Keil). The holy of holies,
accordingly, contained the ark; the holy place, the symbols of the vocation of the
people. It was the place of the people's approach to God. Another curtain, " wrought
with needlework," and, like the veil, suspended from pillars by hooks of gold, hung
before the entrance in front. The piUars, in this case, vierefive in number (vers. 36, 37).
For details, dimensions, and theories of arrangement, consult the exposition. No
scheme yet propounded is entirely free from difficulties. The general measurements,
and the mention of " pins " in ch. xxvii. 19, point strongly in the direction of a tent
form such as that suggested by Mr. Fergusson (Diet, of Bible, art. Temple), A
difficulty, on this theory, arises from the statement that the veil was to be hung " under
the taches" (ver. 33). But the expression, " under the taches," may be used of a high-
roofed structure with some degree of latitude, otherwise we must suppose that the veil
originally divided the sanctuary into two apartments of equal size. 2. Olory and
heauty of the divelUng-place. Within the limits of its dimensions, the tabernacle was
really a place of gi-eat splendour — ^a costly and magnificent erection. We should err,
however, in going much beyond the general effect to be produced in seeking for
symbolical meanings. The shittim wood, the precious metals, the colours, the finaely-
embroidered linen fabrics, have significance only as adding to the beauty and richness
of the place designed for Jehovah's abode. The end was, as far as possible, to rear a
residence worthy of " the King of glory," or, from another point of view, to set forth, by
the external splendour of the dwelling, the surpassing glory and magidficence of him
who dwelt in it. Thus also was enhanced the idea of the singular honour enjoyed by
those who were permitted to minister before him (see Fairbairn). The cherubic figures
woven into the tabernacle drapery, point, if our interpretation of these figures is
correct — to the host of angels who continually attend Jehovah, who are his willing
servants in all that relates to his kingdom, who take so deep an interest in its progress,
who furnish to his people a constant model of obedience (Matt. vi. 10), and who may
be viewed as joining with them, in all their services, in the worship of their King.
They are part of the heavenly community, to which, as citizens in God's kingdom, we
belong (Heb. xii. 22). The chapter suggests the following general reflections: —
1. Whatever glory or beauty the tabernacle possessed was derived ultimately from God.
)Ian could but work up materials furnished to him by the Maker of aU. So with the
"beauties of holiness" in the Church. It is God who gives us of his grace, and who
works in us to will and to do of his good pleasure (Phil. ii. 13). 2. The tabernacle, in
another aspect of it, was a product of human art and skilL The plan was Divine :
the materials were from God ; but the workmanship was man's. It is a
characteristic of the " spiritual house " which God is now building on earth, that it
also is being reared by human agency, and that each individual has it in his power to
contribute something to its beauty. Every holy life that is being lived is the weaving
of a beautiful fabric for the adornment of this house. 3. God's condescension is seen
in his willingness to dwell with Israel in this wildemess-made abode. Magnificent as it
was, it was but a paltry abode to offer to the maker of heaven and earth — to the
possessor of all things. Yet Jehovah did not spurn it. He sought an abode with men.
His dwelling in the tabernacle was, in some aspects of it, a grander thing than his inhabi-
tation of the infinities of space. It told of a God who does not spurn to enter into
personal relations with his creatures. He will stoop as far as holiness permits, in his
endeavour to reach them, and to lift them up to communion with himself. 4. The
tabernacle, glorious as it was, was but the type of dwelling-places more glorious than
itself. We have found the antitypes in the once abased, but now glorifi^ humanity
of Christ ; in the renewed heart of the believer ; in the redeemed Church as a whole.
Ood prefers the temple of the humble and contrite heart to the grandest building ever
reared by hands of man (Is. Ivii. 15).— J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 37. — The tabernacle itself. Consider hero —

L_ God's commandment that a dwellino-plaob should be fbotided roB mii.
Agkioat aren the least degree of image-making there was a stem edict ; and we might also



OR. zxvi. 1— 37.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. >•'

have expected that there would be equal Bternness in forbidding the creation of aught in
the shape of a holy he ' we. For what on the face of it would seem more probable than this,
that the erection of a holy house would be a strong inducement towards the fashioning of
some visible representation of Deity ? Thus we might conjecture ; but oiu: conjectures soon
get swept away as we are made clearly to understand that it was a good thing for Israel
that Jehovah their God, their guide, and their unfailing support, should have a dwelling-
place in the midst of their dwelling-places. Such a dwelling-place was no necessity for
him, but to the people it was a help so great, that it became a necessity ; and so wo see
they were more than permitted, they were even commanded, to construct an enclosure
which should be reckoned the house of God. When we want to find one of our fellow-
men, we reckon that it is at his house we shall find him easiest ; and just as it is
possible, by going and making proper request at the palace-gates, to get a great favour
from a king without even a momentary vision of his face, so an Israelite was to be taught
that by going to the holy dwelling of Jehovah — ^whom no man had seen or could see —
he might unquestionably secure Divine benefits. As there was a condescension in the
new dispensation, so there was in the old. He who became to a certain extent circum-
scribed in the limits of a human body, only carried out into a more abiding and far-
reaching mystery, the circumscribing which first became a fact at Sinai. He who has
the heaven for his throne and the earth for his footstool, chose to make the narrow
limits of the tabernacle his peculiar dwelling-place. He meant Israel to understand
that he was there, as he was nowhere else.

n. The peculiab fobm which this DWELLrNO-FLACB ASSTTMED. Evcu as the
people dwelt in tents, easily set up and easily taken down, so God, in the midst of them,
likewise dwelt in a tent. There was of course an elaboration and costliness about the
tent of Jehovah, such as could not be found in the tents of even the noblest and
wealthiest of the people ; but still it was essentially a tent. A correspondence obtained
between this tabernacle with all its splendid adornments which could not have obtained,
if even the plainest of true buildings had taken its place. It is most needful for us to
remember that the house of God in the midst of his people was not a building that had
foundations. It was strictly suited to their wants. It was more suited to their imme-
diate future than they themselves had any apprehension of ; and we cannot but feel
that for one thing, Giod had in view their forty years' wandering. They had not yet
sinned the sin which led to this penalty ; but that sin was before the mind of him who
knew their expectations and their instability. Then it would appear also that God had
nothing else than a tabernacle in view, even after his people secured each one their place
in the lot of their temporal inheritance. It is not perhaps too much to say that the
erection of the splendid temple which glorified Solomon's reign was no part of the Divine
intent. God made the erection of that imposing mass to work in with his intent ; but
in the end it proved to have no more stability than the tabernacle which preceded it.
Bear in mind what Jesus said of the temple which was standing in his time. His
disciples in admiration pointed to the great stones which went to compose it ; but Jesus
in the discernment of his heart nevertheless was able to point out that not one stone
should be left on another. The temple seemed more stable than the tabernacle ; but it
was only a seeming. Well-meaning men, not able to escape from carnal notions, may
make God's house to take the temple-form, but God himself will take care that it haa
the tabernacle-reality. It is not in what we can make with our hands, be we ever so
liberal, be we ever so diligent, that God can find a real abode. His real abode is in our-
selves, in each of us who are holy and perfected individuals through our believing connec-
tion with Christ, and still more in the midst of his perfected people, joined together in
the inexpressible, indestructible harmony of heaven. — T.

Ver. 30. — " Ood dwelleth not in temples made with hands." An idea, to be realised,
must be embodied ; e.g., thoughts must be expressed in words •„ the vision of the artist
must take form on canvas or in marble. So, too, with the Divine ideas ; they also must
be embodied, and as presented for man's instruction, they must be so embodied that
man may apprehend them. The unseen must be made visible ; the pattern on the mount
must De modelled and reared up upon the plain. Notice —

I. The Divise ideal. Moses was shown the original Divine embodiment, not ■
mere toy mode) which he was to enlarge, but the actual Ckxl-fashianed tabernacle^ la



alt TSB book of exodus. [oh. xxvn. i—k



all the perfection of its related parts. So far as man was concerned, it might be a purely
ideal structure ; but the ideals of earth are the realities of heaven. The holy of holies,
and the holy place, and the outer court — all these must exist, or Moses could not have
been shown them. May we not also discern dimly that reality which Moses saw ? The
holy of holies, where God's throne is set — ^heaven in its innermost recesses, screened ofl
from earth by the blue sky-curtain, which no unaided eye can pierce. The holy place
and the outer court, God's earthly sanctuary, his Church in this world, related on the
one side to heaven, and on the other to the world around it ; the visible heavens are, in
some sort, an expression of this Divine idea, illimiinated by the sun (cf. Ps. xix.), and
with the earth — ^from man's standpoint — forming a kind of outer court. Even this true
tabernacle (cf. Heb. viii. 2) is only an embodiment of the Divine idea ; but then it is the
Divine embodiment, the expression found for it by God himself.

II. The human copy. The divine ideal as divinely embodied is still beyond man'a
understanding ; it needs to be translated for men into language with which they are
familiar. The child must be spoken to as a child (Is. xxviii. 11), " with stammering
lips and a feigned tongue." The tabernacle of nature expresses God's idea in poly-
syllables ; the tabernacle which Moses reared translates it into easier language. Notice
— 1. The holy of holies. (1) The sanctity of the Divine dwelling-place emphasises the
sanctity of its Divine inmate. " Clouds and darkness are round about him." " Holiness
becometh his house for ever." (2) " Righteousness and judgment are the establishment
of his throne ; " it is founded upon a guarded law. (3) Mercy rejoiceth over judgment.
God is just, or righteous, but also the justifier who makes righteous. " Mercy and truth
are met together ; righteousness and peace have kissed each other." 2. T?ie holy place.
God has made it possible for man to approach him. They who may not bear the
presence may yet be admitted to the ante-chamber. The Church is the link between
heaven and earth, as the high priest is the link between the Divine and human.
Notice— (1) The golden altar. The fumes of the incense may penetrate the veil, which
shuts out the priest who offers it. Prayer can go where the worshipper cannot go.

(2) The golden candlestick. No lamp needed in the holiest place (cf. Eev. xxi. 23).
Here, when man meets with God, for man's sake the lamp is needed. The light derived
from God must be guarded by man, so only is the required illumination to be secured.

(3) The golden, table. Furnished week by week with food satisfying alike to Ghjd and
man. Such the Church — a heaven on earth. Prayer ascending towards the unseen holy ;
liglit from God carefully guarded ; offerings wherein God and man both find satisfaction
— such are the notes of a true Church, one wherein man may have communion with his
Maker, holy as preluding to the holy of holies. (4) The outer court. Here we have the
first stage in man's progress from the world God-wards. The altar and the laver, sacrifice
and purification, must come before communion. Consecration and cleansing precede
intercourse and fellowship, and these again prepare for the beatific vision.

Condusion. — AVhat is the central thought thus shadowed forth? Is it not this: —
God's holiness can only be approached step by step, whilst the road by which we must
approach it is that which will ensure for us growth in holiness. " The pure in heart
shall see God ; " the beatific vision is for those only whose spiritual eyesight has been
prepared for its reception. We cannot come up to the throne of God save through the
outer court and through the sanctuary ; sacrifice and cleansing, illumination and
communion ; then, for those who can receive it, the open vision and the presence oi
God.— O.

EXPOSITION.

CHAPTEB XXVn



Vers. 1 — 8. — The altab op burnt offer-
dig. From the description of the tabernacle, or
■acred tent in which worship was to be offered
by the priests, it followed in natural sequence,
that directions should be given concerning the
court, or precinct, within which the taber-



nacle was to stand Ancient temples were
almost universally surrounded by precincts
which the Greeks called refi^ini, whereto a
sacred character attached ; and this was par-
ticularly the case in Egypt, where the temenos
seems to have been a regular adjunct to the
temple (WUkinson in EawUnson's Serodotut,
vol. ii. p. 202, 2nd edition). Among the chief



, XXTII. 1—8.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



iB«e of snch m open spaee, was the offering
of victims on altais, as these could not be con-
reniently consnmed elsewhere than in the
open air, on account of the clouds of smoke
and the fumes of the sacrifices. As in the
description of the tabernacle, the furniture
was first described, then the structure, so now
the altar takes precedence of the court which
was to contain it.

Ver. 1. — Thou shalt make an altar.
Bather, " the altar." God had already de-
clared that he would have an altar made to
him in the place where he should " record his
name " (ch. xx. 24). And, even apart from
this, an altar would be regarded as so essential
'an element in Divine worship, that no place
of worship could be without one. Of shittim
wood. Ood had required (1. s. c.) that his
altar should be " of earth," or else of unhewn
■tones (ch. xx. 25). The command now given
was to make, not so much an altar, as an altar-
case (see ver. 8). There can be no doubt that
Jarchi is right in supposing that, whenever
the tabernacle for a time became stationary,
the hollow case of the altar was iilled up with
earth, and that the victims were burnt upon
this. Fonr-sqnaxe. Altars were commonly
either square or round. An Assyrian trian-
gular one was found by Mr. Layard at
Nineveh ; but even this had a round top. The
square shape is the most usual, and was pre-
served, probably in all the Temple altars, cer-
tainly in those of Solomon (2 Chr. iv. 1) and
Herod (Joseph. BeU. Jud. v. 5, § 6).

Ver. 2. — The horns of it. Literally, "its
horns." Horns were not usual adjuncts of
altars ; indeed they seem to have been peculiar
to those of the Israelites. They were projec-
tions at the four top corners, probably not un-
like the horns of bulls, whence their name.
Criminals clung to them when they took
sanctuary (1 K. i. 50 ; ii. 28) ; and the blood
of sin-offerings was smeared upon them (ch.
xxix. 12 ; Lev. viii. 15 ; ix. 9 ; xvi. 18, etc.).
Victin's -so were sometimes, when about to
be sacrificLJ, bound to them (Ps. cxviii. 27).
According to Kalisch, " The horns were sym-
bolical of power, of protection and help ; and
at the same time of glory and salvation."
His horns shall be of the same. Fart and
parcel of the altar, that is, not extraneous
additions. Thou shalt overlay it with brass.
A solid plating of bronze is no doubt intended,
inch as would protect the shittim wood and
prevent it from being burnt.

Ver. 8. — His pans to receive his ashes.
LiiBrally, "to cleanse it from fat" — i.e., to
receive what remained after burning the vic-
tims, which would be ashes mixed with a good
deal of fat. His shovels. These wonld be
nsed in removing the ashes from the altar, and
iltpositing them in the pans. Eis basins.



Vessels for receiving the blood of the victims
and from which it was ponred on the altar.
Compare ch. xxiv. 6. His flesh hooks. S«
the Septuagint, and our translators again io
1 Sam. ii. 13. They would seem by the latter
passage to have been three-pronged forks, the
proper use of which was, no doubt, to arrange
the various pieces, into which the victim was
cut, upon the altar. His fire-pans. The
word used is generally translated " censers "
(Lev. X. i. ; xvi. 12 ; Num. iv. 14 ; xvi. 6, 17,
etc.), but sometimes " snuff-dishes " (eh. xxv
S8 ; xxxvii. 23). It here perhaps designates
the vessels used for carrying burning embers
from the altar of burnt-offering, to the altar
of incense on certain occasions (Lev. xvi. 12).
Btymologically, it means simply "a re-
ceptacle." All the vessels thereof thon shalt
make of brass. Bather, " of bronze." Bronze
was the usual material of utensils and imple-
ments in Egypt (Birch, Guide to British
Museum, pp. 13—21 ; 28, 29 ; 35—41 ; etc.).
Copper was scarcely used without the alloy of
tin which converts it into bronze; and brass
was wholly unknown. A trace of iron is some-
times found in Egyptian bronze.

Ver. 4. — Thou shalt make for it a grate.
Rather, "a grating." This was probably a
protection for the lower part of the altar, and
prevented it from being touched by the feet
of the ministrant priests. It was outside the
altar, and had the rings attached to it, by which
the altar was caiTied when the Israelites
journeyed.

Ver. 5. — Thon shalt put it under the com-
pass. The " compass " (karkSb) is spoken of
as if it were something well-known ; yet it
had not been previously mentioned. Btymo-
logically the word should mean " a cincture "
or " band " round the altar ; and thus far
critics are generally agreed. But its position,
size, and object, are greatly disputed. Some
hold that it was a broad bench, or step, on
which the officiating priests stood at the time
of a sacrifice, and that its position was about
the middle of the altar. Others think that it
was a mere border round the top, from which
the net-work depended, and that the object of
both was to catch anything that might tall from
the altar. Others again, while placing it
mid- way in the altar, regard it as a mere orna-
ment, only projecting slightly, and forming a
sort of finish to the net- work. This, which is
the view of Knobel, seems to be, on the whole,
the most probable one. That the net may be
even to the midst of the altar. If the " com-
pass " was at the top, the net must have
extended thence to the middle. If it was
mid-way in the altar, the net must have
covered the lower half. To us this latter
seems the more probable view. But the point
is uncertain.

Vers. 6, 7. — Staves, or poles, were needed
for the carriage of the altar from place to



270



THE BOOK OF EXODUa



[oh. xxtil 1—*.



place, u for the ark (ch. zxt. 13) and the
table of shew-bread (t6. ver. 28). They were
to be inserted into the rings mentioned in
rer. 4 As the altar was of bronze, so the
rings were to be of bronze, and the staves
overlaid with bronze. There is a gradual
descent in the preciousness of the materials
from the holy of holies to the holy place,
and from that to the court



Ver. 8. — Hollow with boards shalt thov
make it. See the comment on ver. 1. The
term here used for " boards," (which is different
from that in ch. xxri. 15 — 29) implies strength
and solidity. As it was showed thee in th«
mount. Compare ch zzri. 80, with the com-
ment ad loo.



HOMILETICJa.

▼ers. 1 — 8. — The symbolism of the brazen altar. The noticealle points of tUs altar
•18 its position, material, ornaments, and purpose or use.

I. Its position. (1) It was without the sanctuary, in the open court beyond; (2)
under the canopy of heaven ; (3) directly in front of the sanctuary, and so of the ark
and the mercy-seat. (1) It was without the sanctuary, that none might venture
inside the holy structure, and so draw nigh to God without passing it, and obtaining
from it the purification which it could confer. Even if the priests on the way to the
tabernacle did not always stop at the altar to ofTer a victim as a sacrifice, they woxild
have the thought of the need of expiation brought home to them by the sight of it, and
might as they passed propitiate the Most High by the offering of a prayer. The position
of the altar taught that man's first nesd is to hav3 his sins and impurities purged
away ; and that until this is done, ho must not presume to worship God, or enter into
his presence, or offer the sacrifice of praise, or mingle in the company of those who form
" the general assembly and church of the first-born, which are written in heaven."

(2) It was under the open canopy of heaven, visible to all, accessible to all, for all
Israel might enter the court; thereby teaching, that the necessary purification was
intended by God to be open to all, and that his eye looked down from heaven with
favour upon all who desired to be purged from their impurities, and were willing to
accept the appointed mode of purging. (3) It was directly in front of the sanctuary,
and so of the ark and the meroy-soat. By this position it pointed to them, led the eye
towards them, reminded men of them. With God, in the holy of holies, was at once
justice, and also mercy — the law and the mercy-seat. Here, at the altar, was the place
where the two could be reconciled, where "mercy aad truth might meet together,
righteousness and peace kiss each other." Here was to be begun that purging, both of
the nation and of individuals, which was only complete when once in the year the
high priest entered into the holiest, with the blood of the sin-offerings, and sprinkled
it on the horns of the altar that was within the veil (ch. xxx. 10), and " on the mercy-
seat eastward" (Lev. xvi. 14), so atoning both for himself and for the sins of the people
(Heb. ix. 7).

II. Its material. The material was (1) shittim or acacia wood ; (2) bronze ; and

(3) earth ; the earth alone constituting the true altar (ch. xx. 24), and the wood and
metal a casing, by means of whicli the earth was kept together. (1) Shittim, or acacia,
the most incorruptible of woods, typified the purity required in all that is set apart for
God. (2) Bronze, the metal most common in the use of the time, indicated that the
altar was for every-day employment by the mass of the people (Lev. i. — vii.). (3)
Earth, pure fragrant mould, that of which man was formed at the first (Gen. ii. 7), and
into which he is resolved at the last (Gen. iii. 19), may well have represented Humanity ;
so that in the altar, which God had required to be made of earth (Ex. xx. 24), he saw
Humanity making its offerings to him,— peace-offerings in thankfulness for his mercies,
sin-offerings in deprecation of his anger, burnt-offerings in complete dedication of the
whole being to his service. Or the mould may primarily have represented this earth,
on which we live, whereof it is the essence as being the life-sustaining portion, and only
secondarily man, for whom the earth was brought into existence, and of which he is
the master.

III. Its obnambnts. These were, (1) perhaps, its cincture ; (2) certainly, its homa,
(1) The cincture, or " compass " (ver. 5), if it was whoUy for ornament, may simply
hare indicated the propriety of Morning and beautifying everything wliich is brought



oa. xivii. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF KXUUUS. 271

into the service of the sanctuary. Without some wreath, or moulding, where th«
grating began, the altar would have had a hare and unfinished look. It would have
been wanting in elegance and beauty. The pattern shown to Moses in the mount did
not allow of this. It left nothing bare, unsightly, inelegant, out of taste. God chose
to be worshipped " in the beauty of holiness." It is easy to disparage beauty ; and
certainly beauty alone, not accompanied by purity and goodness, is worthless, vain,
trivial. But, as men desire beauty in their own houses, furniture, utensils, vessels,
implements, so natural piety leads them to desire even greater beauty for the houses,
vessels, etc., used in the service of God. " The house," said David, " that is to be
builded for the Lord, must be exceedingly magnifical " (1 Chron. xxii. 5). And oongruity
requires that, if a house be magnifical, all its contents, down to the meanest vessel,
should possess some beauty ; otherwise, the law of harmony is broken — a discord
manifests itself. (2) The horns at the four corners, uprearing themselves to heaven,
and showing conspicuously, as symbols of power and strength, spoke of the God to
whom the altar was reared, and indicated his ability to help, protect, and succour his
worshippers. But there was also a human side to their symbolism. They further
indicated the victory which man gains over death and Satan by means of expiation, the
height to which he is exalted when the atonement made for hhn cleanses him from all
sin. " death, where is thy sting ? U grave, where is thy victory ? The sting of
death is sin ; and the strength of sin is the law ; but thanks be to God, who giveth us
the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord 1 "

IV. Its pubposb. We have assumed throughout that the purpose of the altar — its
main purpose — ^was expiation. Its proper title was "the altar of burnt-c Bering." All
offerings, except those which the high priest offered at the altar of incense in the holy
of holies, were to be made at this brazen altar before the door of the tabernacle.
Hither were the Israelites to bring alike their peace or thank-offerings, their burnt-
offerings, and their sin-ofl'erings. Expiation was the sole idea of the last of these, and
a main idea of the second ; it was absent only from the first. Thus it was the pre-
dominant idea of sacrifice. The altar witnessed to the guilt of man in God's sight, and
the need of an atonement being made for him before he coTild be reconpiled to " the
High and Holy One." It witnessed also to God's eternal purpose, that a way of recon-
ciliation should be devised, and made known to man, and that thus it should be put
into his power to make his peace with God. The true victim was not indeed as yet
offered. Bulls and goats, lambs and rams, could never of themselves, or of their own
proper force, sanctify the unclean or take away sin. It was only by virtue of the death
which their sacrifice prefigured, that they had any atoning force, or could be accepted
by God as expiatory. Each victim represented Christ — the one and only sacrifice for
sin which could propitiate the Father. And the altar therefore represented and
typified the cross on which Christ died, offering himself thereon to the Father as both
priest and victim. Shape and material were different, and the mode of death was
different ; but each was the material substance on whicli the atoning victim died, each
was stained with the atoning blood ; and each was unspeakably precious to the
trembling penitent who felt his need of pardon, and, if possible, even more precious to
him who knew that atonement had thereon been made for him, and felt his pardon
sealed. No true Israelite would sacrifice on any altar but that of the sanctuary. No
true Christian will look for pardon and atonement anywhere but to the cross of Chlist,
and to him who on that altar gave his life for man.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEa

Vers. 1 — 21. — The tabernacle and its teachings. I. The altabofbacbifice. 1. The
rituation of the altar. (1) It faced the worshipper as he entered. The cross of Christ
must be held up before men, if they are to he brought nigh to God. (2) It stood before
the holy place, and had to be passed by all who entered there. The realisation of Christ's
atonement for sin is the only path to God's presence. 2. The altar, on which the sacrifice
for sin i.-' laid, is the place of power. The horns, the symbol of Divine power. The gospeJ
of Christ is the power of God unto salvation. 3. In Christ God gives us a place foi
iMXiepteu oflerings. The altar was Israel's as well as God's: upon it were laid theii



378



THE BOOK OP EXOUUa



[oh. xxm. 9— 1&



offerings as well as those prescribed for the daily service and the great day of atonement
In Christ we are able to offer sacrifices that are well pleasing to God.

II. The cotJHT of the tabeenaolk. 1. Its limits were appointed by Gk)d himself.
The Church must be made no broader than his conmiandment makes it. In hia own
time he will make it conterminous with the world ; but meanwhile we must obey his
commandment and fulfil his purpose by making it conterminous with living faith. 2.
It was for all IsraeL Living faith in Christ should be a passport to all his churches.
3. How the court was formed — (1) Its walls were made of fine linen. The distinction
between the world and the Church is righteousness. (2) The gate was formed of blue
and purple and scarlet. Entrance is had not by man's righteousness, but by bowing
beneath the manifested grace of God in Christ.

nL The oil foe the lamps. 1. It was the free-will offering of the people. The light
of the world springs from the consecration of believers. 2. It was to be pure. BelieverB
must keep themselves unspotted from the world. 3. It was to be beaten, not pressed,
and thus be the finest which the olive could yield. The highest outcome of humanity
is the Christ-like life. 4. The lamps were to bum always. Our light, the flame of
love, must bum constantly before God, and its radiance be shed always before men.
6. The lamps were to be tended by the ministers of God, The aim of those who labour
in word and doctrine should be tiie development of Christ-like life, love to God and
man. — U.



EXPOSITION.



Ver. 9 — 18. — The oocbt befobe the ta-
bernacle. The description of the altar is (as
already observed) naturally followed by that
of the court which was to contain it, and in
which it was to be the most conspicuous
object This is given with great clearness in
ten verses, and presents scarcely any problem
for solution. The court was an oblong square,
three hundred feet in length and seventy-five
in breadth. It was enclosed by curtains, hung
on sixty pillars, placed at intervals of seven
feet and a half apart. The pillars were con-
nected by rods, and each of them fitted into a
socket. There was but one entrance, which
was at the eastern side, midway in it. It was
thirty feet wide, and had its own curtains
and its own pillars. These curtains were of
similar material with those at the entrance to
the tabernacle , but the hangings round the
rest of the court were merely of fine white
linen.

Ver. 9. — Thon shalt make the court.
Kather, " a court." For the south side south-
ward. Bather, " For the south side, upon the
right." Compare the comment on ch. xxvi.
18. Hangings. The word used is a rare one
in this sense, quite different from those which
have been employed for " curtains " or " hang-
ings" previously (ch. xxvi. 1, 7, 36). The
LXX. translate by laria "sails;" and the
Jewish commentators believe a loosely woven
sail-cloth to be intended. Fine twined linen.
See the comment on ch. xxvi. 1.

Ver. 10. — ^And the twenty pillars thereof,
lite. Literally, "And its pUlars, twenty (in



number), and their sockets, twenty (in nnm-
ber, shall be) of bronze." The hooks of the
pillars are loops whereto the curtains were to
be attached. See ch. xxvi. 32. Their fillets.
It is now generally agreed that the word used
designates " connecting rods," which joined
the pUlars at the top, and probably helped to
support the "hangings." These, and the
" hooks," were of solid silver.

Ver. 11, — The north side of the eonrt is
to be exactly similar to the south in all
respects.

Ver. 12. — The west side is also to be
similar, except that it is to be half the length,
fifty cubits — and, therefore, requires only half
the number of pillars and sockets.

Ver. 13. — The breadth of the oonrt on the
east side eastward. Rather, " in front toward
the east." The Rabbinical tradition was that
Adam found himself on his creation fronting
towards the east, and had consequently the
south on his right, the north on his left, and
the west behind him. Hence, they said, the
four cardinal points received the names of
kedem, " in front " (the east) ; yamin, " the
right hand " (the south) ; 'akhSr, " behind *
(lie west) ; and shem6l, " the left hand " (the
north). For this use of all four words, see
Job xxiii. 8, 9.

Ver. 14. — The hangings of one side.
Literally, " of one shoulder." The two
extreme parts of the east side, between the
entrance (ver. 16) and the comers are fhus
named. They were to extend on either side a
distance of fifteen cubits, and to have theil
curtains suspended to four pillars, one of them
being the comer pillar, which is not connted.
Hence the pillars are said to be three

Ver. 16.— For the gate. Tne word wed ii



OH. XXVII. 9—18.]



THE BOOK OF EXODOb.



2T8



the common one for "gate;" bnt here it
rather Bignifies "entrance." Strictly speak-
ing, there was no " gate ; " the worshippers
entered by drawing aside the curtain. This
was a hanging of similar material, colours,
and workmanship to that which hung in front
of the tabernacle (ch. xxvi. 36). By its con-
trast with the white linen screen which sur-
rounded the rest of the court, it would show
very clearly where men were to enter



_Ver. 17.— TUleted with silyer. Bather,
" joined by silTer rods." See the comment on
ver. 10. They were also to have their capitals
overlaid with silver (cb. xxxviii, 17).

Ver. 18. — The length and the breadth of the
court had been already implied in what had
been said of the external screen-work, or
"hangings" (vers. 9 and 12). What thu
verse adds is the height of the pillars, which
was five cubits, or seven feet six inches.



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 9 — 18. — The Court of the Tabernacle. I. The use of the coubt. The court
was primarily a precinct inclosing the sacred structure, and preserving it from contact
with the roughnesses of the rude world without. It formed a sort of vestibule to the
tent-temple, which awoke solemn thoughts, and gave men time to piii awaj ^ocular
considerations, and attune their minds to the Divine har-nonies, before entering the
house itself, which contained the manifestation of the Div>ne presence. God must be
approached with preparation, humbly, reverently, tremblingly. The court at once pre-
served the sacred structure from accidental or intentional profanation, and helped to
prepare the priests for the duties of their office. Secondly, the court was the place of
sacrifice. It contained the brazen altar, whither all Israel was to bring their gifts.
Here were offered, at once all the stated sacrifices, daily, or weekly, or monthly, or yearly,
and all the irregular and voluntary offerings which the piety of the Israelites induced
them to bring in. The smoke of victims continually ascended from it to heaveiL Here
was the place for expiation — for thankfulness — for self-dedication to the service of Grod.

II. The persons entitled to have the itse op it. These were all Israel — young
and old, rich and poor, great and small, priests and laymen. Into the holy of holies
none but the high priest, into the holy place none but the priests might enter. But the
court was common to the priesthood with the laity. Hither came, to " the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation," every pious Israelite who was minded to offer a sacrifice
of any kind — whose heart swelled with gratitude for mercies received, and who there-
fore brought a " thank-offering " — whose soul was weighed down with the sense of sin,
and who sought relief by the sacrifice of a " sin-offering " — whose awakened spirit told
him that unless the soul wholly rests on Grod there is no peace for it, and who, as a sign
of absolute self-dedication, came to ofier a " burnt-oHering." Hither came many a man,
and many a woman, like Hannah (1 Sam. i. 7 — 11), in sore trouble, and offered to the
Lord Almighty their vows. Whatever may have been the practice with respect to the
temple, while the tabernacle endured, the whole congregation had free access to it.
Here they felt themselves to be that " kingdom of priests " — that " holy nation " —
which God had declared that they should be (ch. xix. 6). Here they realised, at any
rate to some extent, that blessing which is among the greatest of the Christian's privi-
leges — the right to " come boldly to the throne of grace " (Heb. iv. 16) — to " draw near
to God," without an earthly mediator, " in full assurance of faith " (ib. x. 22) — to " cast
all our care upon him " — to have direct communion with him — to speak with him, " as
a man speaks with his friend."

III. The position of the couet with eespeot to the eest of the tabeekaolb.
There was clearly a gradation in holiness. The inner shrine had a sanctity peculiar to
Itself, expressed by the very name, " holy of holies." Here was the greatest beauty and
the greatest magnificence. Walls entirely of gold, curtains of cunning work, inter-
\voven with the graceful forms of cherubim, furniture all covered vrith gold, golden
cherubs of beaten work upon the mercy-seat — above all, the glory of God showing in
the space between these figures. A lesser degree of sanctity belonged to the outer

chamber " the holy place ;" and this was indicated by inferior richness and magnificenca

Though gold was still the metal chiefly used, silver, and even bronze (ch. xxvi. 37),
were introduced. The outer curtain was not wrought with cherubim (ver. 36). The
change was even greater between the " holy place " and the court. In the court was no
gold, but only silver and bronze. The " hangings " were for the most part plain. Only

KxoDin— n. T



8T4



THE BOOK OF KXODUB.



[o«. xivn.



1<J



at the entrance did the eye rest upon the mingled glory of blue and purple and soanet,
and upon the cunning work of embroidery. The furniture and utensils were of bronze
only A-rain, the gradation was marked by the law of admission : mto the court, all
the congregation; into the "holy place," the priests only; into the " holy of holies,
none but the high priest. And thus it will be always, as we are nearer to God or further
from him. If we dwell only in his courts, on the outer verge of his kingdom, we must
be content with the bronze and plain linen of bare acceptance ; we must not expect
favour, glory, beauty. If, on the other hand, we press forward from his courts into his
sanctuary ; if we strive ever to advance in holiness, then he has better things in store
for us. " For brass he will ^ve gold" (Is. Ix. 17), for acceptance, approval— for mere
pardon, communion and fellowship ; and to such as press into the inner shrine, with
the " boldness" that is now legitimate (Heb. x. 19), he will reveal himself in the ful!
splendour of his majesty, and in the perfect glow of his love.



EXPOSITION.



Ver 19. — The vessels of the tabebnaolb.
i'here were many " vessels of the tabernacle "
which have not hitherto been mentioned, as
Ihe great laver in the court (ch. xxx. 18 ; xl.
.SO) with the basins for washing which must
have belonged to it ; the pins or pegs whereby
the various curtains were extended and sup-
ported; and probably much sacrificial ap-
paratus besides what is enumerated in ver. 3.
All these were to be of bronze, the commonest
metal of the time, but one very suitable for
the various purposes, being, as the Egyptians
manufactured it, of great hardness, yet ex-
ceedingly ductile and ready to take all shapes.
Its usefulness and convenience caused it to
retain its place, even in the gorgeous and
"magnificent" temple of Solomon (1 Chrou.
xxix. 2, 7), where it was employed for the
two great pillars, Jachin and Boaz, for the



great laver or " brazen sea," for the smallei
lavers upon wheels, for the pots, the shovels,
the basins, the snufEers, the spoons, and many
other sacred vessels (1 Kings viL 15 — 45 :
2 Kings XXV. 13, 14). Though "common,"
it was never reckoned " unclean," or lesii
fitted for the service of the sanctuary tliai:
silver or gold. It had, however, its own
proper place, an inferior place to that held by
the more precious metals.

Ver. 19. — All the pins thereof The
" pins " of the tabernacle are undoubtedly the
pegs or tent-pins, whereby the tent-cloth
wherewith it was covered was extended and
kept taut. There were also probably similar
pegs or pins for cords used to keep tlie
"pillars" (ch. xxvi. 37) or tent-poles in
place. The pins of the court supported in
the same way the pillars of the court (vers.
10—15).



H0MILETIC3.

Ver. 19. — T7ie value in OoeTs sight of what is common and homely. (Jod does not

despise anything that he has made. " His mercy is over all his works " (Ps. cxlv. 9).
Each of them has its fit and proper place. Each one of them is needed in his universe.
Much less does he despise any of his human creatures. He has seen fit to gift them
variously, to make some of gold, some of silver, and some of brass, some to honour, and
some to comparative dishonour ; but for all he has a use. No intellect is too homely,
no nature too rude and unrefined to find a place somewlier/', in his Church where it can
do him service, and even perhaps do it better than a more refined and more highly gifte'".
nature. Difference, gradation, variety, is the law of his universe. " There is one glory
of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars ; for one star
differeth from another star in glory " (1 Cor. xv. 41). In the angelic hierarchy there art
angels and archangels, principalities, and powers ; in the Church triumphant there are
grades — princes who sit on thrones, judges of tribes, rulers over ten cities, rulers over
five cities, and a "great multitude" who have no authority, but are simply "saints."
And so it is, and must ever be, in the Church militant. " There are diversities of gifts,"
higher and lower natures, minds of extraordinary power, and dull, homely iatellecta.
But all have their use ; for all there is room ; and God values each. God will hav«



CH. xxvii. 20, 21.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUa



27B



none despised. The brazen vessels of the outer court — ash-pans and basins, and flesh-
hooks, and fire-pans, and tent-pins — were as much needed for the tabernacle and iti
service, as the Rilver sockets and rods, or the golden taches, and rings, and snuff-dishes.
Bronze is more suitable Tor many purposes than gold ; and ordinary human naturfe can
do God's work better in many positions than great gifts or extraordinary intellect.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 20, 21. — The oil fob the lamp. It

has been observed that this paragraph is some-
what out of place. It would more appro-
priately, according to human ideas, have
terminated ch. xxt. But " God's ways are
not as man's ways, nor his thoughts as man's
thoughts." It is frequently difficult — some-
times impossible — for the keenest human in-
tellect to trace the connecting links between
one portion of God's word and the next. In
such cases it is best not to speculate on the
nature of the connection, hut to content our-
selves with laying to heart the lesson which
each portion teaches separately.

Ver. 20. — Thou shalt oommand. Compare
ch. XXV. 6, where the general command had
been given. -Here certain additions are made
as to the quality of the oil which was to be
brought. The oil was to be pure olive oil
beaten — that is to say, it was to be olive oil
purified from any admixture of that watery
juice which the Romans called amurca; and
it was to be of the kind which is obtained by
mere beating or pounding in a mortar, and
not by crushing in a mill. Oil of this kind,
which is usually made from the umripe fruit,
is reckoned much the best; it is clear and
colourless, and gives a bright pure light with
little smoke. To canse the lamp to bum
always. It has been supposed from this ex-
pression that the lamp must have been kept
constantly burning both day and night ; and
Josephus declares that this was actually so, at
least with three out of the seven ligbfe (Ant.
Jud. iii. 7, § 7). But there are several places
m Scripture which state, or imply, the con-
trary. (See especially Ex. xxx. 8 ; and
1 Sam. iii 8.) It seems to have been the



duty of the high-priest to light the lamps
every evening, and to give them a sufficient
supply of oU to last till daybreak, at which
time " the lamp of God went ont " (1 Sam.
1. s. c.) The supposition that " one light at
least was always burning " (Kalisch), because
no daylight could penetrate into the structure
through the fourfold covering, ignores the fact
that light would enter through the single cur-
tain at the entrance, as well as the probability
that some portion of that curtain may gener-
ally have been looped up. If we regard the
lamp as extinguished during the daytime, we
must understand " always " here to mean
" regularly every night."

Ver. 21. — ^The tabernacle of the congrega-
tion. Bather, "the tent of meeting" — ^the
tent where God would meet the earthly ruler
of the people (ch. xxv. 22), and give him
commands and directions — ^not the place of
meeting for the people themselves, who might
in no case go beyond the entrance to the
structure. The testimony — i.e., the ark which
contained the "testimony," or two tables of
stone written with the finger of God. Aaron
and his sons. Compare ch. xxiv. 1. The
intention to confer the priesthood on the
descendants of Aaron, first openly revealed
in the next chapter (vers. 1 —43), is tacitly
assumed from time to time in the earlier
narrative. Shall order it from evening to
morning. See the comment on ver. 20. It
is difficult to assign these words any distinct
meaning unless we accept the view, that the
lamp burnt during the night only. It shall
be a statute for ever. This expression is not
at all common. In Exodus it occurs only here
and in four other places. In Leviticus it is met
with some six or seven times. The portions
of the law thus characterised must be regarded
as of special importance. (See the homiletieg
on this yene.)



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 20, 21. — Oil for the lamp. I. The pegplb's nnrr. (1) The people were to
bring the oil regularly — to attend to what may have seemed to them a little matter, but
what was in God's sight of such importance that he made it "a statute for ever" — and
to attend to it with such regularity that oil should never be lacking. (2) They were to
bring of their best. The oil was to be from the olive — ^not firom the sesam^ plaat, or the
castor-oil plant, or the Haphanus ol ifer, or from any vegetable which fiimished oil of a
coarse kind. It was to be " pure," not adulterated, as oils often were in Egypt (Plin.
5. N. jiii. 1), and not mised with the amviroa, or watery juice of the olive, which made



27« THE BOOK OF EXODUa [CH. xXTit. 1— 20

it unfit for burning. Next, it was to be " beaten oil "—oil made with extra trouble by
careful pounding with the liaad, instead of rough mechanical crushins; in mills.

II. The priests' duty. '1 lie priests were perpetually to trim and tend the lamps.
Daily, at even, they were to light them ; daily, in the morning, they were to extinguish
them, if any were still alight ; to trim th(i wicks ; to cleanse the bowls which held the
oil ; and to replenish them with a proper supply. They were to take every care tliat a
pure light was constantly maintained night after night, so that the house of God should
never be dark, or even obscure, but be ever ready for worship, ever illumined, ever pre-
pared for any visitation of its Lord, who might come at the third, or the sixth, or the
ninth, or the twelfth hour. It does not appear that there were any night services in the
tabernacle ; but the lighted lamp was a testimony that the Church continued ever on
the watch, strove ever to be " the light of the world " (Matt. v. 14) — ^like the wise virgins,
" kept its lamp burning." And this is the duty of ministers at all times. The Christian
ministry must take care that the light of the Church shines pure and bright continually
— that nothing dims it — that it glows ever as a beacon light, a guide and a help amid the
storms and tempests of the world. If the people do not bring a due supply of oU — i.e., of
loving, faithful service— the Church must sufier, its Ught be dimmed. If the people do
their duty, and the ministers fail, if they are careless, or slothful, or self-seeking, or
worldly, or wanting in faith, the result is the same — the flame flickers ; the light sinks
and threats as to go out ; gross darkness settles down upon the people. A Chiu'ch in this
condition must expect to have its candlestick removed, unless it repents, and bestirs
Itself, and turns to God, and " does the first works " (Bev. ii. 5), and " strengthens the
• hings that remain and are ready to die" (ib. iii. 2).

III. The tbub light. After all, let ministers and people be as faitliful as they will,
let them " keep their lamps burning," and cause " their light to shine before men " ever
so brightly, stiU they are not, they will never be, " the true light." Clu-ist is " the
true light" — " the light that shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it
not " — " the light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world " (John i. 4 — 9).
In him are hid " all the treasures of wisiiom and knowledge " — ^nothing needful for man
to know but he has taught it — nothing expedient for man to see but he has revealed it.
" His word is a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths." He is both an
outward and an inward light. His gospel illumines the world without — ^penetrates its
dark places, exposes its unholy doings, throws a flood of light upon the past, makes
plain to us the ways of God with man. And his Spirit illumiues the soul withio:,
quickens and guides the conscience, makes our own way plain before our face, "enables
with perpetual light the dulness of our blinded sight." He is the only true " light oi
the world " — the light which will endure throughout all time — ^the one Teacher who
cannot deceive — the one Guide who cannot lead astray I And he is the light of the world
to come. " In him is the well of life ; and in his light shall we see light " (Ps. xxvL 9)l
The " holy city. New Jerusalem," has therefore " no need of the sun, neither of the moon,
to shine in it," because " the glory of God doth lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 20. — 77ie brazen altar and court of the tabernacle. From the sanotoaiy, we
pass in this chapter to tho outer court, the principal object in which was the brazen
altar, or altar of burnt offering.

I. The bbazen altab (vers. 1 — 9). 1. Fwm of the aXtar. The altar was a four-
square case of shittim wood, five cubits long and fire broad, made with four horns, and
overlaid with plates of bronze. Round it, at some distance from the grotmd, was apparently
a ledge, on which the priests stood when engaged vrith the sacrifices. We must suppose
that the central part was filled with earth, or with the unhewn stones commanded in
ch. XX. 24, 25. The " grate of network " of ver. 4, seems to us to haye supported the ledge,
or compass of ver. 5. Some take a different view of it. 2. Its horns. These are rightly
understood as the points in which the force or virtue of the altar concentrated Itself.
3. Its uses. It was — (1) the place to which the people brought their offerings to God ;
^2) the place at which reconciliation was made for »n ; (3) the place on which the parts
f the saerifices which belonged to God were consumed hj fire. Here, at the altar, were



OH. xxvn. 20, 21.] THE BOOK OF EXOUUS. til

the victims slain ; around the altar the atoning blood was poured or sprinkled; in the
case of the sin offering, the blood was smeared upon the horns : with live coals from thi
altar did the priest replenish his censer when he went in to burn incense before the Lord.
On this altar was laid the daily burnt-offering, together with the " sacrifices of righteous-
ness," " the burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering " (Ps. li. 19), by which the people
expressed their consecration to God. Here were consumed the fot and choice parts of
the peace-offerings, etc. 4. Its typical significance. (1) 'I'he altar, as the place of
atonement, reminded the worshipper of sin, and of his need of cleansing from sin's guilt.
In this way, it pointed forward to Christ, in whom the whole ritual of sacrifice reaches
its consummation. (2) As the altar of bumt-offering, it taught the duty of uncondi-
tional and entire surrender to the will of God. This offering up of the whole being to
God in inward consecration underlies the special acts of consecration symbolised in the
shew-bread, in the lighted candlestick, and in the ascent of incense from the golden
altar. (3) As God's altar, it was a witness to the Divine readiness to pardon ; yet a
testimony to the stem truth that without shedding of blood there is no remission
(Heb. ix. 22).

II. The comtT of the tabernacle (vers. 9 — 20). On the general construction of
the court, see the exposition. We have to view it as a spacious enclosure of a hundred
cubits by fifty, its sides formed by linen hangings, five cubits in height, and supported
by pillars of brass (bronze) five cubits apart, to which the hangings were attached by
hooks and fillets of silver. The brazen altar stood in , the forepart of the court ; the
tabernacle towards the rear. Between the brazen altar and the tabernacle was the laver.
The design of this court was to furnish the people, who were precluded from entering
the sanctuary, with a place in which they might still, though at some distance, per-
sonally appear before Jehovah. The court conferred a privilege, yet taught a lesson.
The fact that he could approach no further than its precincts painfully reminded the
Israelite that, as yet, the work of atonement was incomplete — that he still stood, because
of his unholiness, at a great distance from God. In the gospel of Christ, these barriers
are all done away with. — J. O.

Vers. 20, 21. — TAe burning lamp. God's care for his sanctuary descends even to so
small a matter as the replenishing and trimming of its lamps. Note — 1. The end of
the ordinance. God desires that the light obtained from the lamps in his sanctuary be
^1) pure, (2) bright, (3) constant. The best light possible. Such shovdd be the light
of the Christian life. 2. The means to this end. (1) The lamps wore to be fed with
the hest and purest oil. The Holy Spirit. (2) The lamps were to be dvdy trimmed and
ordered. Watchfulness, care. The light needs to be attended to. — J. O.

Vers. 20, 21. — The oil/or the lamp. A special commandment was given that the oil
should be pure and rich : —

I. That thbeb might be a due cobbespondenoe between the light and the
OLOBY or the candlestick. The candlestick was composed of the most precious of
all metals, and it had been fashioned by the hands of an artist Divinely chosen and
inspired. Great, therefore, would have been the incongruity, if any but the steadiest
and most brilliant light haid shone forth from this candlestick. Indeed the provision
of the very best material might seem to have been self-suggested and to require no
commandment at all, did we not know how forgetful, how inconsiderate human nature
is. Man needs to be kept up to the mark by sharp and frequent admonitions ; else he
will keep the best for himself, and let anything be put forward for such a mere
formality as too often he reckons the service of God to be. Still it surely would not
require much thought to perceive how disgraceful a dim light would be in connection
with such a glorious fabric as the candlestick presented. But there is a more glorious fabric
far than this candlestick, if we only consider each human life that comes into this
world ; if we only consider the riches and strength that are in each one of us by
natural constitution. There is something very glorious about the natural life of man,
in spite of its depravity, its miseries and its mortality ; and God has given mb the
opportunity of still further glorifying our natural life in this world by offering to make
OS supports such as may aid in sustaining and diffusing the light he would shed abroad
amongst men. When God puts hia gospel into the charge of human beings ha calls



21$



THE BOOK Oi' EXODUS.



[oh. xxmu. 1 — 12



attention to the peculiar glory and eminence of our nature. The more faithful hif
servants have heen to the gospel charge put into their hands, the more they havt
revealed how vile a thing humanity la. God wishes us in all our connection with him
to be worthy of our humanity, and to keep ever in our thoughts the gulf that divides
us from even the highest of the brutes. Man is never more truly human, never mora
fully an exponent of the peculiarities of his nature than when he is doing his best to
leveal the saving light of God to men. The Christian, no matter what he may lack in
:, jch endowments as the world values, is the best kind of man ; and the better
Christian he becomes, the higher he stands in that best kind wherein he is already
numbered.

II. That there might be a due cobrbbpondence between the light and the
GLORY OF THE MOST HOLY PLACE. From between the cherubim within the veil God
shone forth when it was so required with a glory and impressiveness which no light of
human invention could rival. But outside the veil the seven-branched candlestick was
ever to be lighted in the night-time to symbolise the glorious illumination which came
from Jehovah himself. How important, therefore, that the light should be the very best
which man could afford ! Nowhere in all the tents of Israel was there to be a brighter
light than that which shone in the holy place. A symbol was needed of such Dght,
instruction and wisdom, as are not to be found in the most sagacious and experienced of
men, advising simply upon the grounds of hmnan sagacity and experience. When we
look at a Christian we must he able to look at one whose light, while it does not fail in
a certain sense to glorify himself, glorifies still more his Father who is in heaven.
Every Christian is meant to live so as to arrest the attention of men, and make them
ask whence comes the power to inspire him with such remarkable motives and make
him the agent of such remarkable eifects. Whereas the humiliating confession is to
be made that most Christian lives are lived on such a low level that one is led to ask
" Is this all ? " We read of remarkable manifestations and approaches of the Divine
in the way of an incarnate Son of God, a resurrection of the dead, a descent into the
Church of a life-giving and transforming Spirit, so that all believers may become new
creatures in Christ Jesus ; and then, when we look at these professed new creatures,
and see how much remains tmchanged, inveterate as ever, we ask " Is this aU the
product of Christ's appearance on the earthly scene?" It is a dreadful reproach thit
we should let our inconsistency and infirmity be made an excuse for unbelievers
to mock at God. We ought to be so under Divine influences, as to combine in one
the bright candlestick and the pure, rich oil ; and then from us there might shine forth
in a pure inviting radiance, a light such as would guide, and cheer while it guided,
many a wanderer to God. — Y.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XXVin.



Vers. 1 — 12. — The holy garments. The
•pecial object of the present chapter is to
prescribe the form, materials, colour, etc., of
the holy garments — or the attire of those
who were to minister in the tabernacle
at the time of their ministration. As the
service of the tabernacle was about to be
committed to Aaron and his sons, their selec-
tion for this office is mentioned in verse 1,
and their investiture and consecration briefly
touched in verse 41. Otherwise the \\hole
chapter is concerned with the attire That of
Aaron ie first prescribed (vers. 4 — 39). It
consists of au ephod (vers. 6 — 12) ; a breast-
plate (vers. 13—30) ; a robe 'vers. 81—85) ; »
iiJitr«(ver9 86— S8); a coat, or tunis ; and a



girdle (ver. 89). The dress of his sons fol-
lows. It comprises drawers (ver. 42), tunics,

girdles, and caps or turbans (ver. 40). Inci-
dentaJly it is mentioned in verse 43, that
diawers are also to be worn by Aaron ; and,
in conclusion, the neglect of this ordinance in
the case of either Aaron or his sons is forbidden
under penalty of death

Ver. 1. — Take thou unto thee. Literally,
"Make to draw near to tliee." Moses had
hitlierto been of all the i)eo])le the one nearest
to God, llie medium uf cummunication. He
was now to abdicate a portiuu of his functions,
ti-ansferring them to his brother and his
brother's sons. \iy this act he would draw
them nearer to hmi than they were before.
It is worthy of remarlt that he makes no
remonstiance or opposition, but carries out
Ood'a will in this matter m reAdily tmi



OH. xznn. 1—6.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



m



irillinglr as in all others. (See Lev. viii.
1 — SO.)' From among the children of Isiael.
The LxX. read " And from among the child-
ren of Israel," as if others besides the family
of Aaron had been admitted to the priesthood.
Bat this is contrary to the entire tenor of the
later narrative. The existing Hebrew text
is correct. Hadab and Abihn, and again,
Eleazar and Ithamar, are always coupled to-
gether in the Pentateuch (ch. vi. 23; xxiv.
1 ; Lev. X. 1, 12 ; etc.), while a marked divi-
sion is made between the two pairs of bro-
thers. It is probably the sin and early death
of the two elder (Lev. x. 1 — 2) that causes
the separation. Of Ithamar after the death
of his brothers, nothing is known. Bleazar
became high priest (Num. xxxiv. 17 ; Josh.
xiv. 1 ; xvi. i ; etc.).

Ver. 2. — Holy garments have provoked an
extreme aversion and an extreme affection at
different periods of the world's history* In
Moses' time probably no one thought of rais-
ing any objection to them. Priestly dresses
of many different kinds were worn in Egypt,
and some costume other than that of ordinary
life, was probably affected by the priest class
of every nation. Without entering into any
elaborate "philosophy of clothes, we may
say that the rationale of the matter would
seem to be that expressed with great modera-
tion by Bichard Hooker — " To solemn actions
of royalty and justice their suitable ornaments
are a beau^. Are they in religion only a
stain?" (See Eecl Pol. v. 29, § 1.) The
garments ordered to be made for Aaron and
his sons (ver. 41), are said to have been for
glory and for beauty. 1. " For glory." To
exalt the priestly office in the eyes of the
people — ^to make them look with greater
reverence on the priests themselves and the
priestly functions — to place the priests in a
class by themselves, in a certain sense, above
the rest of the nation. 2. " For beauty."
As fit and comely in themselves — suitable to
the functions which the priests exercised — in
harmony with the richness and beauty of the
sanctuary wherein they were to minister.
God, himself, it would seem, is not indifferent
to beanty. He has spread beauty over the
earth. He will have beauty in his earthly
dwelling-place. He requires men to worship
him "in the beauty of holiness" (Ps. xxix.
2 ; xcvi. 9 ; 1 Chron. xvi. 29). He ordains
lor his priests rich and splendid dresses " for
glory and for beauty."

Ver. 8.— Wise-hearted. In modem par-
lance the heart is made the seat of the affec-
tions and emotions, the brain of the intellect.
But the Hebrew idiom was different. There
the heart was constantly spoken of as the seat
of wisdom. (See below, ch. xxxi. 6 ; xxxv.
10, 25; xxxvi. 1, 2; Job ix. 4; Prov. xi. 29,
etc.) The spirit of wisdom might seem to
lie icarcely necessary for the work of con-



structing a set of priestly garments; but
where " glory and beauty" are required, high
artistic power is needed; and this power is
regarded by the sacred writers, as indeed it is
by most of those who have written on the
human understanding — notably Plato and
Aristotle — as a very important part of th«
intellect. Teehn^, says Aristotle, involves
theoria, as well as ussthem and genesis, re
quires, i.e., a knowledge of high abstract
truths, as well as the perceptive faculty
which we commonly call "taste," and the
constructive one known as " power of execu-
tion." (See Eth. Mo. vi. 4, § 4.) It is,
with him, one of the five chief intellectual
excellences. To consecrate him. Investi-
ture in the holy garments was made a part of
the ceremony of consecration (ch. xxix. 5 — 9 ;
Lev. viii. 7 — 9, 13), as it is in the English
Ordinal in the consecration of a bishop.

Ver. 4. — These are the garments. The
enumeration does not follow the same
order exactly as the description. The two
agree, however, in giving the precedence to
the same three articles of apparel out of
the six — viz., the breast-plate, the ephod, and
the robe. His sons — i.e., his successors in
the office of high priest.

The materials of the priestly garments.

Ver. 5. — ^The materials for the priestly
gannents were to be limited to six —
— precious stones, which are not here men-
tioned, as being ornamental, rather than es-
sential, parts of the apparel ; a blue thread,
known as " blue " (compare ch. xxv. 4) ; a
purple or crimson one, known as " purple ;"
a scarlet one, known as " scarlet ; and a
white one, which is called "fine linen."
These were the same materials as those used
for the veU (ch. xxvi. 31), and curtains (ib.
1, 36) of the sanctuary; but probably the
fabric was of a more delicate quality. They
shall take — i.e., " They," the wise-hearted men
to whom the work was to be entrusted — " shall
take," or receive from Moses — " the (necessary)
gold, blue, purple," etc. In the original all
these words have the definite article prefixed.
The Ephod.

Ver. 6. — ^They shall make the ephod
The word epliod signifies etymologically
any " vestment " or " garment ; but in its
use it is confined to the special vestment
here described, the great object of which was
to be a receptacle for the "breast-plate."
The ephod was a sort of jerkin or waistcoat,
consisting of two pieces, one to cover the
chest and the other the back, joined together
probably by a seam, above the shoulders, and
united at the waist by a band called "the
curious girdle of the ephod." This band was
of one piece with the ephod, being woven on
either to the front or the back put ; it held
the other fact in place, and was passed round



210



THE BOOK OF EIXODUS.



[oh. zxTm. 7—12.



the body and fastened nther with a clasp, or
with bnttons, or strings. Of gold, of bine, of
purple, etc.— {.«., " of the same materials as
the curtains and veil of the sanctnaiy, with
the addition of gold." The gold was probably
in the shape of gold thread, or wire of ex-
treme tenuity, and was introduced by the
needle after the fabric had been woven, as
was commonly done in Egypt (Herod, iii. 47 ;
Wilkinson's Ancient Egypliatu, vol. iii. p.
128: compare below, cb. zxxix. 3). The
white, blue, purple, and scarlet threads were
doubtless woven mto a pattern of some kind ;
but it is impossible to say what the pattern
was. In Egypt patterns were not much
affected, the dress worn being commonly
white, with a stripe sometimes at the edge ;
but the Semitic tribes, who bordered Egypt
"a the East, affected gay colours and varied
lesigns, if we may trust the Egyptian wall-
)aiutings. With onnning work. Literally,
work of the skilled (workman)." Some of
lie Hebrews had evidently carried on the
rade of weaving in Egypt, and had brought
Jieir looms with them. The Egyptian looms
were hand-looms, and of no great size ; they
admitted of easy transport.

Ver. 7. — The two dionlder-pieoes thereof.
Literally, " Two shoulder-pieces." There is
no article, and no possessive pronoun. At
the two edges thereof. Literally, "at its
two ends." A union of the back and front
flaps of the dress by a seam at the top ol
the shoulder seems to be intended. Female
dresses were made in this way among the
Greeks, but fastened with a brooch or buckle.
Ver. 8. — ^The oorions girdle. Josephus says
of the ephod, fcoi/p nfpiiT<t>lyyeTai fidfinacri
StairejrotKi\^4i/p, XP^^^^ ffvyvtpatrfi^vov, ''it is
fastened with a girdle dyed of many hues,
with gold interwoven in it." Hence its name,
lelti$heb, which means properly " device " or
"cunning work." Of the ephod. Bather
" of its girding " — i.e. " wherewith it (the
ephod) was to be ghrded." Shall be of the
same. Compare above, ch. xxv. 19. The
girdle was to be " of one piece " with the
ephod, woven on to it as part of it, not a
separate piece attached by sewing. Accord-
ing to the work thereof. Bather, "of like
workmanship with it."

Ver. 9. — Two onyx stones. The correct-
ness of this rendering has been much dis-
pnted. The LXX. give aitdpaySos, "eme-



rald," as the Greek equivalent in the preseni
passage, while many argue for the beryl
(Winer, EosemnUller, BoUermann), and others
for the sardonyx. This last rendering has the
support of Josephus and Aquila. The sard-
onyx is, in fact, nothing but the best kind of
onyx, diJEfering from the onyx by having three
layers — ^black, white, and red — instead of two
— ^black and white — only. When large, it
fetches a high price, as much as a thousand
pounds having been asked for one by a dealer
recently. The probability is, that it is the
stone here intended. It is an excellent ma-
terial for engraving. With respect to the
possibility of Moses having in the congrega-
tion persons who could engrave the sardonyx,
we may remark that the Egyptians cut stones
quite as hard, from a date long anterior to
the exodus. Grave on them the names of
the children of Israel. Egyptian names
are frequently found engraved on rings and
amulets in hard stone ; these rings and
amulets date from the time of the twelfth
dynasty. The names here intended are evi-
dently the Israelite tribe names, which are
reckoned as twelve, the double tribe of Joseph
counting as one only. (Compare Num. i. 10 ;
Dent, xxxiii. 13 — 17.)

Ver. 10. — The other six names of the lest.
Literally, " The remaining six names." Ac-
cording to their birth — i.e., in the order of
seniority — or perhaps, in the order observed
in ch. i. 2 — t, where the children of the two
legitimate wives are given the precedence.

Ver. 11. — With the work of an engraver.
Bather, " an artificer." The engravings of a
signet. Signets in Egypt were ordinarily
rings, on the bezel of which the name of
the owner was inscribed Some were of solid
gold ; others with cylindrical bezels of glass
or hard stone. On the early use of such
signet rings in Egypt see Gen. xli. 42. Cylin-
ders, strung round the wrist and engraved
with a name and titles, were common in
Mesopotamia from B.C. 2000. Onohes of
gold. Settings in open-work or filagree
seem to be intended — a kind of setting which
is very common in Egyptian ornamente.

Ver. 12. — Stones of memorial onto the
children of Israel. Bather "for the child-
ren of Israel "—stones, i.e. which should serve
to remind God that the high priest repre-
sented the twelve tribes, olHciated in their
name and pleaded on their behalf.



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 1 — 6. — The glory of holy garments. " Holy garments" — garments appropriated
to the service of Ghxi in his sanctuary — will always be " glorious," however simple they
•re : — 1. As the dress of office for those whose office is oi <in exalted and glorious charatcer,
who are " ambassadors for God," and " stewards of his mysteries." 2. As associated
with rites, which show forth, and help forward, the glorious work of redemption : and
IL As typical of the glorious robes which will be worn by the saints in heaven. Tha



OB. zxvm. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. Ml

garments assigned by the will of God to the Levitical priesthood were, further, glorioiu
in themselves, i.e., splendid, magnificent, of rich and beautiful materials. They thus
harmonised with the richness and magnificence of the tabernacle, and afterwards of the
temple, and taught the people, by the eye, that whatever is rich and rare should be
devoted to the service of God. Bat the highest glory of holy garments is to be found io
those " robes of righteousness," which the set apparel of priests is intended to suggest
and signify (Ps. cxxxii. 9 ; Is. bd. 10). The white linen of priestly robes tells of purity
and innocence — gold and jewels, of precious gifts and graces — azure, the hue of heaven,
speaks of heavenly thoughts and aspirations — the scarlet and the purple are signs of the
martyr spirit, which is willing to " resist unto blood" fHeb. xii. 4;. K the priest or the
Levite have no other adorning but that of the outwara apparel, if they are not " clothed
with the garments of salvation" (Is. L s. c), and robed with righteousness, " holy gar-
ments" will little avail either themselves, or those to whom they minister. The " mar-
riage garment" required of each Christian in Holy Scripture is purity of life and conduct ;
md certainly without this, "holy garments" are vain, and lose both their "glory" and
their " beauty."

Vers. 6 — 12.— The symloUsm of the ephod and its onyx stone$. The ephod was, par
excellence, the priestly garment. When idolatrous rites grew up in Palestine, which
sheltered themselves under the pretence of being modifications, or adaptations, of the
Sinaitic religion, an ephod was always retained, and made a prominent feature in the new
form of worship (Jud. viii. 27 ; xvii. 5 ; xviii. l4 ; etc.). The ephod came to be worn by all
Israelitish priests (1 Sam. xxii. 18 ; Hos. iii. 4), and even by laymen when er^aged in
sacred functions (2 Sam. vi. 14 ; 1 Chron. xv. 27). Its materials and workmanship imited
it pointedly with the tabernacle (ch. xxvi. 1), and especially with the holy of holies
(jh. vet. 31). It may be considered —

I. As TTPiFYiNQ THE UNITY OP THE Church. The shoulder pieces of the ephod were
to be "joined together" (ver. 7). The " curious girdle" was to be of one piece with it
(ver. 8). Though formed of various parts, it was to be one single indivisible garment,
united both above and below, and always worn in its entirety. The seamless robe of
our Blessed Saviour is generally allowed to prefigure his one Church. The ephod as
worn, was, perhaps, not seamless ; but still it was " woven of one piece," and so far
resembled the Lord's garment.

II. As BBPRESBNTINO THE VABIETT OF 0IFT8 AKD GRACES WITHIN THE ChUBCII. The

blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and gold, and gems of the ephod gave it a
variety and a beauty which made it the most glorious of aU the priestly vestments.
Variety has a charm of its own, and is a mark of the Church, in which there is such
vast " diversity of gifts," though there is but one spirit. Gold is especially appropriate
for the dignity of those whom God has made " both priests and kings." " The king's
daughter is all glorious within ; her clothing is of wrought gold" (Ps. xlv. 13). Purple,
too, is an imperial colour, and suits those who shall " reign with Christ for ever "
(Bev. xxii. 5).

III. As CONSTITUTING, WHEN WORN BY THE HIGH-PRIEST, A PRESENTATION OF THE

Church to God in perfect beauty. The onyx, or sardonyx stones, with the twelve
names engraved upon them, completed the representative character of the ephod, and
showed clearly that the high priest, when, thus attired, he entered the sanctuary, pre-
sented before God the Church whereof he was the head, as freed from sin by the expia-
tion which he had made at the altar before entering, and made meet for the presence of
the Most High. And this presentation was, we are distinctly told (Heb. ix. 9 — ^12 ;
X. 19 — 22), a type or figure of that far more precious one, which Christ is ever makmg
before his Father's throne in heaven, where he presents to him his Church, " a glorious
Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but holy and without blemish"
(Eph. T. 27), washed in his blood, redeemed by his death, sanctified by his in-dwelling.
Christ can and will purge his elect from all sin (1 John i. 7) ; Christ can and will pre-
sent them pure before God. He has his " sealed" ones of all the twelve tribes (Kev. vii,
4 — 8) ; and, besides these, he has others who are equally his — " a great multitude, which
no man could number, of aU nations, and kindreds, and peoples, and tongues" (ib. 9) —
who " have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the LamV (fb. 14),
and whom he will " present faultless" to bis Father.



281 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [ok. xxviu. 1— 4



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 1 4. — The priests' garments. I. Obsbbvb how thb nroiviDnAL n hebb

BUBOBDINATBD TO THB OFHiCE. JehoTah tells Moses here, amid the solemnities of the
mount, that his brother Aaron and Aaron's sons are to be taken for service in the
priest's office ; but no word is said concerning the characters of any of these men, not
even Aaron himself. There is a demand that those who made the priestly garments should
be wise-hearted, men with a spirit of wisdom which Jehovah himself would put into
them; but nothing is said as to Aaron himself being wise-hearted. Nor is there any
indication given beforehand of any personal fitness that he had for the office. We
gather much as to the way in which God had been training Moses ; but Aaron so far as
we can see, seems to have been led by a way that he knew not. All the com m a n d m ent
to Moses is, " take to thee Aaron thy brother." He is indicated by a natural relation,
and not by anything that suggests spiritual fitness. It is interesting to compare the
utter absence of any reference here to personal character with the minute details of what
constitutes fitness for bishop and deacon, as we find these details in the epistles to
Timothy and Titus. In the old dispensation where .there was but the shadow of good
things to come, the trappings of the official and the ceremonies of the office were of more
importance than the character of any individual holder. The purpose of Jehovah was
best served, in proportion as the people, beholding Aaron, forgot that it was Aaron,
and were chiefly impressed by the fact that they were looking on the appointed priest
of the Most High.

II. Observe what was aimed at in the construction of the pbiestlt oab-
MENT8. They were to be for glory and for beauty. Not only different from the gar-
ments of the common people, but much more splendid. Gold was worked into the
very substance of these garments ; precious stones glittered upon them ; and everything
was done to make them beautiful and impressive. Nor was the splendour of these gar-
ments for a mere occasional revelation. Though not worn constantly, yet they had to
be assumed for some part of every day ; and thus aU eyes were continually directed to
symbols of the glory, beauty, and perfection which God was aiming to produce in the
character of his people. There was as yet no finding of these things in human natm-e.
The gold of human nature could not yet be purified from its debasing dross ; but here
for a symbol of the refined and perfected man, was gold, pure and bright, we may
imagine, as ever came out of the furnace ; and here were these precious stones, inesti-
mably more precious since the tribal names were graven on them, and with the precious-
Qess crowned when they took their place on the shoulders and breasts of the priest.
Thus, whenever these stones flashed in the light, they spoke forth afresh the great truth,
that this priest so gloriously attired, was the representative of the people before God ;
Qot a representative whom they had elected for themselves, and who would therefore go
to God on a peradventure, but one who, because God himself had chosen him, could not
fail to be acceptable. The principle underlying the direction to make these splendid
siarments is that which underlies the use of all trappings by government and authoiity.
The outward shows of kingly state, the crown, the sceptre, the throne, the royal robes —
these may not be impressive now as once they were ; but they have been very serviceable
once, and may still serve an important purpose, even though it be not easily perceived.
It might make a difference in the administration of justice, if the garb of those who are
the chief administrators were to differ nothing in public from what it is in private.

III. Obsbkvb that to show fobtheb the importance attached to these gab-
MENTS, God himself provided skill fob the making op them. Much skill might be
needed, far more than could be guessed by the observer, to make these garments
gracefvil and impressive. What was all the richness of the material unless there was
also dextrous, tasteful, and sympathetic workmanship ? The gold, and the blue, and
the purple, and all the rest of the promising materials would have availed nothiug in
some hands to avert a clumsy and cumbrous result. The people provided all they
could, and it was a great deal ; but God had to provide the craftsmen in order to aake
full use of the people's gift. — \,

Vers. 1, 2. — " Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord f " The tabernacle (cf. outUna
an sxvi. 80) ihowi through what Bteps a man must pass who would approach God. The



on. xxvut. 1, 2.] 'IHifi BOOii. Oi!' KXODUS. 28»

high priest shows what the man must be like who would attempt to take those stepi.
The ^ess of the high priest is usually said to have consisted of eight pieces, viz. ;
breast-piate, ephod with its girdle, robe of the ephod, mitre, gold plate or holy crown,
broidered robe, drawers, girdle. Such a dress is meant to be characteristic, to shadow
forth what ought to be the character of the man who wears it. As the high priest
represents the people in their relation to God, the character required in him must be the
character required in all would-be worshippers. Take a few points : —

I. The worshipper must be in habmont with his surroundings. The colours and
materials of the garments are the same as those of the tabernacle with its veil and
entrance curtain — gold, blue, purple, scarlet, fine linen. So, too, the character of the
worshipper must match with the character of the sanctuary. What can a man do in
heaven & he be not heavenly-minded? Every one, in the end, like Judas, must go to
his own place; the character of the individual must decide the character of his surround-
ings (cf. Matt. xxii. 11—13).

II. He must be capable of beflectiko the light amid which he wales and
THE OLOBT WHICH HE 18 APPROAOHINO. The breast-plate is, amongst the garments of
the high priest, what the mercy seat is amongst the furniture of the sanctuary. In
some sort, also, the two are related; the mercy seat is the throne of glory, the resting-
place of the shechinah, whilst the breast-plate reflects the same glory, and glorifies the
wearer by reflecting it. 1. Man is glorified hy reflecting the glory of Ood. The more
he can reflect, the more manifold the ways in which he can reflect it, the more perfect is
the glory which is revealed on him. We may note, however, that the high priest repre-
senting the nation, the breast-plate which he wears suggests rather the national than the
individual reflecting power. The one grows out of the other, but amongst individuals
some may reflect as the sardius, some as the topaz, etc. The great thing is that they do
reflect, though each may reflect differently to others. Eemember, too, that the glory of
each helps to make and to intensify the glory of the whole. 2. The reflector is the breast-
plate. The breast-plate covers and symbolises the heart or the affections. " God is love,"
and the glory of God is the glory of love made manifest. Only love can reflect love ; the
loving heart is the enlightened and the enlightening heart.

ni. Progress must not be silent but musical. The robe of the ephod with its
border of embroidered pomegranates, blue, red, and crimson ; bells of gold alternating
with the pomegranates. The music of the priest's movement is associated with fruit-
fulness ; look whence the sound comes and you see the varicoloured pomegranates. So,
too, the melody of a holy life rings out from amongst good deeds ; deeds which like the
varicoloured pomegranates are all one fruit, " the fruit of the Spirit " (cf. Gal. v. 22).
Such fhiit advertises to his fellows a man's progress along the way of holiness (cf. Eccle-
siasticus xlv. 9, " a memorial to the children of his people ") ; yet specially is it required
by God for his own pleasure and satisfaction (cf. xxviii. 35) : whether men hear or no, the
golden bells must not be silent.

IV. The worshipper must be helmetbd and ckownbd with holiness. (Cf.
xxviii. 36.) The golden plate with its inscription. 1. Generally, it may be said, that
they who approach a holy place must approach it as a holy people. We have safe-
guards s^ainst unseemUness and impurity (xxviii. 42). 2. Specially does the head, asso-
ciated with the intellect, need consecration. Unless the head be protected the heart
must soon cease to reflect. He who lays aside the helmet of holiness cannot retain the
breast-plate of glory.

Cwiclusum. — We want to draw nigh to God. The tabernacle shows us by what
successive stages we must approach him ; the high priest shows us how in character
and conduct we must be prepared for those successive stages. As we should put it now-
a-days, — to get to heaven a man must be like Christ ; the journey thither can only be
achieved by those who are in communion with the great High Priest. In and through
him we may draw nigh ; growing daily more heavenly-minded, and therefore more fit
for heaven; reflecting more and more of the light and glory which shines out upon us;
making life musical witli tlio melody of good works, a sweet sound in God's ears and n
sign to direct men's attention God-wards ; consecrated wholly to God's service, hallowed
now by outward dedication ; at length like the great High Priest himself, to be not m rrel v
hallowed but altogether holy.— G.



284 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxvin. 1—43.

Vera, 1 — 43. — Tlw priests and tJieir garments. From instructions about inanimat*
Ibings, we come now to persons. Aaron and his four sons were to be set apart fol
the office of the priesthood, and garments were to be made for them, " for glory and fol
beauty." Aaron was to be high priest (" the priest who is higher than his, brethren,
upon whose head the anointing oil was poured," Lev. xxi. 16) ; his sons were to be
ordinary priests. The high priest was a very especial type of Christ.

L The Institution of the Pbiesthood (ver. 1). Hitherto there had been no dis-
tinct class invested with the ofHce of the priesthood. The need for a separate priesthood
arose with the giving of the law, with the entrance of Israel into covenant relationship
with God, and with the founding of a sanctuary. 1. With the giving of the law. A
distinct revelation had been made of God's holiness. But God's holiness had as its
correlative the unholiness of the people. By the law came the knowledge of sin. A
priesthood, specially sanctified to God's service, became necessary to mediate between
an unholy people and a holy God. 2. With the establishment of a covenant relation-
ship letween Israel and Jehovah. In virtue of the covenant, Israel became to God " a
kingdom of priests and an holy nation " (ch. xix. 5). It was this priestly calling of the
nation which found official expression in the priesthood of the house of Aaron. The
priests were " vicars," in the sense of the following passage — " A truly vicarious act
does not supersede the principal's duty of performance, but rather implies and acknow-
ledges It In the old monastic times, when the revenues of a cathedral or

cure fell to the lot of a monastery, it became the duty of that monastery to perform
the religious services of the cure. But inasmuch as the monastery was a corporate body,
they appointed one of their number, whom they denominated their vicar, to discharge
those duties for them. His service did not supersede theirs, but was a perpetual and
standing acknowledgment that they, as a whole and individually, were under the obli-
gation to perform it " (Robertson of 13righton, Sermons, vol. ii. p. 92). That is to say,
the priests stood in a representative relation to the body of the people. They acted in the
name of the community. 3. With the founding of a saitctimry. " The groundwork of
this new form of religion stood in the erection of the tabernacle, which God chose for his
peculiar dwelling-place, and through which he meant to keep up a close and lively
intercourse with his people. But this intercourse would inevitably have grown on
their part into too great familiarity, and would thus have failed to produce proper
and salutary impressioTis upon the minds of the worshippers, unless something of a
counteracting tendency had been introduced, fitted to beget feelings of profound and
reverential awe toward the God who condescended to come so near to them. This could
no otherwise be effectually done than by the institution of a separate priesthood, whose
prerogative alone it should be to enter within the sacred precincts of God's house, and
perform the ministrations of his worship" (Fairbairn). The Aaronio priesthood had
thus a twofold function to discharge in relation to the people. 1. Bepresentative. It
represented the nation in its priestly standing and vocation. It performed sacerdotal acts
in the name of the tribes. The representative character culminated in the person of the
high priest. 2. Mediatory. The priesthood mediated between the people and Jehovah.
It was the link of communion between the holy and the unholy. Gifts and offer-
ings, which otherwise, on account of the unholiness of the people, would not have been
accepted, were accepted at the hands of the priests. The high priest transacted with
God on behalf of his constituents as well as in their name. It pertained to him, and to
the other priests, " to make reconciliation for the sins of the people " (Heb. ii. 17). The
priesthood, and especially the high priest, thus typifies Christ — (1) in his Divine
appointment to his office (Heb. v. 5, 6) ; (2) in his personal and official holiness (Heb. iv.
15 ; vii. 26) ; (3) in his representative relations to his people (Heb. vi. 20) ; (4) in his
work of mediation and intercession (Heb. ix. 11, 12, 24) ; (5) in his heavenly glory
(Heb. ii. 9). Note, however, the following point of difference (one among many) between
the high priest and Christ. The Jewi.sh high priest embodied priestly rights already
existing in the nation. Believers, on the contrary, derive their priestly rights /ro??!
Christ. They are admitted to a share in his priestly standing. Their priesthood, vmlike
that of the old covenant, is purely spiritual. It includes privileges formerly possessed
only by the official classes, bm., the right of direct access to God (Eph. ii. 18 : iii. 12 ;
Heb. X. 19).

IL Thx fbiestly OAB1IEMX8 (tbtb. 2 — iSX Having chosen his priests, God next



tn. zxTDi. 1— 43.] THE BOOK Of EXODUS. 8W

proceeds to cl'>the them. As the office was of his appointment, so must the garments
be which are to be the insignia of it. Nothing is left to individual taste. The
articles of attire; their shape, material, colour, workmanship; the manner of theii-
ornamentation ; everything is fiked after a Divine pattern. The garments are to be " for
glory and for beauty " (vers. 2, 40), indicative of the official dignity, of the sacred
character, and of the honourable prerogatives of the wearers of them. Men are even to
be inspired with " the spirit of wisdom " (ver. 3), for the purpose of making them, so
entirely are they to be garments of Divine origin. Look (1) at what these garments
were, and (2) at the functions and privileges of the priesthood as shadowed forth ia
them. 1. The parts of the priestly dress. The dress of the ordinary priests, with the
exception of the girdle of needlework (cf. ch. xxxix. 29), was to be of fine white
linen. It consisted of an embroidered coat, a cap, and plain white linen drawers. The
hijih priest's garments were of a much richer order. They embraced (1) the ephod,
with its curious girdle (vers. 6 — 15). (2) The breast-plate, in which were to be placed
" the Urim and Thummim " (vers. 15—31). (3) The robe of the ephod, " all of blue,"
and embroidered along the hem with pomegranates. Alternating with the pomegranates
were to be little golden bells, which should give a sound when the priest went into the
holy place, and when he came out (vers. 31 — 36). (4) The mitre, on which was to be a
plate of gold, fastened with blue lace, and engraved with the words—" Holiness to the
Lord" (vers. 36 — 39). (5) A broidered coat, girdle, and drawers, similar to those of the
ordinary priests (ver. 39). 2. The symbolism of the dress. The blue of the robe of the
ephod denoted the heavenly origin of the priest's office ; the shining whiteness of the
ordinary garments, the purity required in those who served before Jehovah ; the gold,
the diversified colours, the rich embroidery and gems, in the other articles of attire, the
exalted honour of those whom Jehovah had chosen, and caused to approach to him,
that they might dwell in his courts (Ps. Ixv. 4). More specifically, the garments bore
testimony (1) to the fundamental requirement of holiness in the priesthood. This
requirement found its most distinct expression in the engraved plate on the high
priest's mitre. Holiness was to be the characteristic of the people as a whole. Most of
all was it required in those who stood in so peculiarly near a relation to Jehovah, and
on whom it devolved to make atonement for the others. The requirement is perfectly
fulfilled in Christ, whose people, in turn, are called to holy living. (2) To the repre-
sentative character of the priesthood. This was beautifully imaged by the fact that,
both on his shoulders and on his breast, the high priest bore precious stones engraved
with the names of the twelve tribes of Israel (vers. 9 — 13 ; 17 — 23). Another indi-
cation of this representative character is found in the order to place bells upon the hem
of the robe of tlie ephod, that the people might hear the sound of his movements as he
went in and out of the holy place (ver. 35). Conscious that he was transacting in
God's presence in their name, they were to follow him with their thoughts and prayers
in the different parts of his sacerdotal task. It was, however, the wearing of " the
breast-plate of judgment" (ver. 29), which most specially declared that the high priest
appeared before God as the people's representative. His function, as clothed with the
breast -plate, was to sustain the " right " of the children of Israel before Jehovah (ver.
30). 'The " right " included whatever claims were given them on the justice and mercy
of Jehovah by the stipulations of the covenant, it was a "right" derived, not from
tmfailing obedience to the law, but from Jehovah's goodness. It was connected with
atonement. Our " right," in like manner, is embodied in Christ, who bears us on his
heart continually in presence of his Father. (3) To the priestly function of mediation.
The onyx stones on the shoulders of the high priest, each having engraved on it six of
the names of the tribes of Israel (ver. 12), indicated that on him rested the burden or
responsibility of the entire congregation. A more distinct expression of this idea ^s
given in ver. 38, in connection with the gold plate of the mitre, engraved with holiness
TO THE Lord — " It shall be upon Aaron's forehead, that Aaron may bear the
iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy
gifts ; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the
Lord." A shadow of the higher mediation. Our persons, gifts, and works find accept-
ance only in Christ. (4) To the need of sympathy in the priest, as a qualification fur
his office. The high priest was to bear the names of the children of Israel upon hii
heart, graven on the stones of the breast-plate (ver. 89). Christ has perfect sympathy



289



TUB BOOK OF EXODUS.



[OH. xxvui. 13—30.



(Heb. ii. 14 — 18 ; iv. 14 — 16). The people also, as is hinted in ver. 35, were to hav*
sympathy with their priest. (5) To the function of the priest, as revealer of God's will
(ver. 30). Urim and Thummim — whatever these were — are now superseded by th«
external word, and the inward illumination of Christ's Spirit. Christ gives forth irner*
ring revelations of the will of the Father. " Lights and perfections" is not too high a
name to bestow upon the Scriptures (Ps. xiz. 7 — 12 ; 2 Tim. iii. 15, 16).— J. Q,



BXPOSITIOIT.



Vers. 18— 80.— The BBSAar-FLATB. It has
been noticed that the ephod had for its main
object or purpose to be a receptacle for the
breast-plate which was attached to it after
it had been pat on, and formed its principal
ornament. The Hebrew word khoshen, which
is translated " breast-plate," means " orna-
ment ; " and the khoslien mnst certainly have
been the most striking and brilliant object in
the whole attire of the high priest. Exter-
nally, it did but repeat the symbolism of the
ephod, exhibiting the high priest as the repre-
sentative of the twelve tribes, whose names
were engraved upon its twelve stones, as well
as upon the onyxes of the ephod. Internally,
it had, however, another, and a deeper import.
It contained within it the tJrim and the
Thummim (ver. 30), by means of which God
was consulted, and signified bis will to his
people. This must be regarded as its main
end and use. It was from the dedaions thus
given that it received the name of " the breast-
plate (or ornament) of judgment."

Ver. 13. — Ouches of gold. "Buttons"
according to one view (Cools) : " sockets,"
according to another (Kalisch) : " rosettes,"
according to a third (Keil). Some small
ornament of open-work (see the comment on
ver. 11), which could be sewn on to the ephod,
and whereto a chain might be attached, seems
to be intended. The object was to fasten the
" breast-plate " firmly to the ephod.

Ver. 14. — ^At the ends. The meaning of
the Hebrew word migbdUth is very doubtful.
Jarchi and Rosenmuller approve of the render-
ing of our translators. Geddes, Boothi-oyd,
and Dathe render "chains of equal length."
Gesenius, Kalisch, Canon Cook, and others,
believe the true meaning to be " wreathed," or
" of wreathen work," so that the next clause,
" alter the manner of a rope," would be simply
exegetic. Of wreathen work. Literally,
"after the manner of a rope." Cords of
twisted gold wire were frequently used, instead
of chains, by the Egyptians.

Ver. 15. — The breast-plate. As the Iclwshen
was to be worn upon the breast (ver. 29), this
name is appropriate ; but it is not a transla-
tion «l Mmthen Of judgment See the



introductory paragraph to this section. Kalisdi
translates " the breast-plate of dedtUm." It
was to be made, so far as its main fabric was
concerned, of exactly the same materials as
the ephod. See ver. 6.

Ver. 16. — Pour square . . . being donbled.
It has been generally supposed that the doub-
ling was merely for the purpose of giving
additional strength to the work, which was to
receive twelve heavy gems ; but Gesenius and
others are of opinion that the object was to
form a bag, in which the Urim and Thum-
mim, which they regard as material objects,
miglit be kept. A span. Half a cubit, or
about nine inches.

Ver. 17. — Settings of stones. These wew
similar to those of the two shoulder stones —
».«. of fflagree or cloisonne work — as appears
from ch. xxxix. 13. The first row of the
stones is said to have been composed of a sar-
dins, or sard, a topaz, and a corbimole. Of
these names the first only would seem to be
tolerably certain. The second cannot be
right, since the topaz was too hard a stone to
be engraved by the ancient engravers. We
may conjecture that the chrysolite, a pale
stone not unlike the topaz, but far less hard,
was the gem intended. The "carbuncle"
is also thought to be wrong ; and the " beryl "
is suggested by some ; by others " a sort of
precious corundum." Emerald, to which the
"smaragdus" of the LXX. and Josephus
would seem to point, cannot be right, since
ihsA stone is fully as hard as the topaz.

Ver. 18. — The second row an emerald, a
sapphire, and a diamond. Here all the
names must be wrong, for none of these three
stones could be cut by the ancient engravers.
Probably, carbuncle (or garnet), lapis lazuli,
and onyx are intended.

Ver. 19. — The third row a lignre, an agate,
and an amethyst. The term " ligure " is un-
known in modem mineralogy ; and it is to the
last degree uncertain what stone the ancients
intended by their Ungurium or lapis liguritu'
Some think that " jacinth," others that " tour-
maline," is the stone here meant. A few
suggest amber, but amber cannot receive an
engraving. " Agate " and " amethyst " are
generally allowed to be right translations.

Ver. 20. — The fourth row a beryl, and
an onyx, and a jasper. If the identifications
above suggested are allowed, two at least of
these translations must be rejects. We hii.v«



tm. XXVIII. 20—30.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



287



inpposed the third stone in the first row to
have been the " beryl," and the third in the
second the " onyx." Perhaps we should trans-
late, " a turquoise, a sardonyx, and a jasper."
(See the comment on ver. 9.) Their inclosings.
Bather, " their eettingg," as in ver. 17.

Yer. 21. — ^Iha stones shall be with the
names. Bather, " according to the names ; "
the number of the stones shall agree with that
of the names, viz., twelve. Everyone with his
name shall they be aooording to the twelve
tribes. Rather, " every one according to its
name, they shall be for the twelve tribes," i.«.,
each, according to the name that is on it, shall
stand for one of the twelve tribes.

Ver. 22. — Chains at the ends. Compare
the comment on ver. 14. Ealisch translates,
' chains of wreathen work, twisted in the
manner of ropes."

Vers. 23 — 28. — These verses present no
difficulty. They describe very minutely, and
with some tautology, the niode in which the
breast-plate was to be fastened to the ephod.
It was to have four rings, two at its two upper
corners (ver. 23), and two just behind its two
lower corners (ver. 26) ; a gold twist or cord
was to be passed through each of the two
upper rings, and then attached to the " ouches "
or settings of the shoulder stones (ver. 25 ;
compare vers. 11 — 14). A blue lace or ribbon
was to be passed through each of the two
lower rings, and these laces were to be tied to
two rings, sewn for the purpose on to the
front of the ephod a little above the " curious
girdle " (vers. 26, 27). By these four fasten-
ings at its four comers, the breast-plate was
securely attached to the ephod, and could not
readily get loose from it.

Ver. 27. — Over against the other coupling
thereof. Bather, "near its joining." The
" joining " of the ephod is perhaps the place
where the "curious girdle" was woven on
to it.

Ver. 29. — ^And Aaron shall hear, etc.
" Aaron," »'.«., " shaU not only bear the names
of the twelve tribes upon his shoulders (ver.
12), but also upon his heart." He shall thus
make a double presentation of them to God
continually. The explanation is somewhat
fanciful, that the names on the shoulder-
stones indicated that the people were a burthen
to him, while those on the stones of the
breast-plate, being upon his breast, indicated
that he bore them affection. The breast and
the shoulder were probably chosen as being
conspicuous and honourable positions.

Ver. 30. — Thou shalt put in the breast-plate
of judgment the TJrim and the Thummim.
The words Urim and Tliummim mean respec-
tively " Lights " and " Perfections," or perhaps
"Light" and "Perfection — the plural form
bemg merely a plural of honour. They were
irell translated by Aquila and Symmachus,
^MTuriuil Kal TeKfi6T7)Tfs : lass well by th»



LXX. ri MiXairis kcX ii li.Kl]Btta: still worse bj
the Vulgate, Doctrina et Verita$. What ex-
actly the two words represented is doubtful in
the extreme. It has been supposed by some
that they were not material objects, but a
method by which God communicated his will ;
e.g., a miraculous light, or a miraculous voice.
But such things as these could not have been
put by Moses either " in," or " on the breast-
plate of judgment." Modern critics are gene-
rally agreed that the Urim and Thummim
must have been material objects of one kind or
another. The objects suggested are — 1. The
engraved stones of the breast-plate. 2. Two
small images, like the teraphim. 8. A gold
plate, engraved with the name of Jehovah.
4. Three plates or slips ; one blank, one en-
graved with " yes," and one with " no." 5.
Diamonds, cut and uncut, with marks engraved
on them. Against the first of these views it
is urged with very great force that the present
passage shows the Urim and Thummim to be
something quite distinct from the breast-
plate — something which was to be added to
the breast-plate after all the stones had been
set in it ; and which Aaron was to bear upon
his breast in addition to the breast-plate and
its jewels (compare ver. 29 with ver. 30).
Against the fourth and fifth, it is sufficient to
observe that they are pure conjectures, without
any basis of authority, either in Scripture or
tradition. The second and the third remain.
The third has important Jewish names in its
favour, but is open to the objection that it
makes a single object correspond to both
words. The second alone seems to have any
basis in Scripture, which certainly ■ onnects
the use of lerapldm with the use of aj ephod
(Judg. xvii. 5 ; xviii. 14, 17, 20 ; Hosea iii
4). On the whole, while admitting that there
is no sufficient evidence to determine the
question, we incline to regard the Urim and
Thummim as small images, kept in the bag of
the "breast-plate" (ver. 16), by means of
which the high priest gave a decision when he
was consulted. How the decision was arrived
at, is an even more difficult problem than the
one which we have attempted to solve. Some
suppose the two images to have been used as
lots, one giving an affirmative and the other a
negative answer. Others imagine, that by
gazing attentively upon them, and fixing his
thoughts on the qualities which they sym-
bolised — illumination and perfection — the
high priest was thrown into an ecstatic state
which enabled him to prophesy aright. The
notion has even been started, that an "angel
spoke by their lips, and answered any question
that was put to them. The truth seems to be
that no theory on the subject can be more than
a theory — quite arbitrary and conjectural —
neither Scripture nor tradition fumishir.g any
hint on the matter. If we knew how men
divined from teraphim (2 Kings xxiu 24 '



2W



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XXV m. 18 — 80



Ezek. xxi. 21 ; Zech. x. 2), we might thence
obtain some iiL^ing of the truth, since there
is much probability in the view, that the
teraphim wore employed as an unauthorised
substitute for the Urim and Thiimmim.
(See Judg. xvii. 5 ; XTiii. 5, 6, 14—20.) But
the method of this divination is wholly un-
knc im. It is not however likely to have been
a ncere casting of lots, which is a very simple
process, and requires no images ; nor can this
explanation of the decision by Urim and
Thummim be regarded as having probability
in its favour. Perhaps, of all the theories,
that which supposes the Urim and Thum-
mim to have been objects gazed at by the
high priest until he entered the ecstatic state,
is the least objectionable. It must not, how-
ever, be considered an essential part of this



theory, that the material objects were derived
from the religion of Egypt (Plumptre). The
objects must have been well known to Mosea
and to those for whom he wrote ; otherwise,
they could not have been introduced, without
any account of their nature, as, " The Frim "
and " The Thummim." Thej had probably
been long possessed and consulted by the
nation, which was accustomed to believe that
It received enlighteament from them. Perhaps
they were a sort of teraphim, but unconnected
with any idolatrous worship. It is quite con-
ceivable that an old usage, hitherto on-
anthorised, but not debased by any flagrant
corruption, should have been adopted by
Divine command into the Mosaic ritual, puri-
fied of any evil that attached to it, and conu-
crated to an important purpose.



H0MILETIC3.

VoM. 13 — 30. — The Teachings of the Sreast-plate. The breast-plate of judgment Iiaa
many aspects, and teaches us several important truths — e.g. : —

I. Thf "rbciousness of souls in God's sight. The tribes of Israel are represented
by gems -gems of the most precious kinds known to, and workable by the engravers of
thp lay — sard, and onyx, and carbuncle, and lapis lazuli, and chrysolite, and perhaps
turquoise. We are reminded by this of the saying of the Lord recorded by the
prophet Malachi — " They (that fear me) shall be mine in that day when I make up my
jewels" (Mai. iii. 17). His own elect are the "jewels" of Christ, wherewith he decks
himself as a bridegroom with his ornaments (Is. Ixi. 10). As Israel was of old, not only
his " special people," but his " peculiar treasure " (Ex. xix. 5), so are Christians now —
each one of them dear to him ; each one of them purchased with his blood ; each one of
thom a stone in that glorious temple whereof he is the chief comer stone — ^a " white
stone," having on it " a new name written " (Rev. ii. 17 ; iii. 12).

II. 1 HE VARIETY IN THEiB GIFTS. Each stonc in the breast-plate was different from
all the rest — each had its own peculiar beauty. One was more brilliant, one more
lovely in its hue, one more curious from its complexity. Yet the breast-plate needed all,
would not have been perfect without all. None could say to its neighbour — " I have no need
of thee." Contrast with its neighbours heightened the effect of each and so added to its
beauty. It is the eame with Christ's "jewels" — no two are alike — each has his own
peculiar characteristics, his idiosyncrasy. And the crovra in which tLe jewels are set
is rendered more beautiful than it would otherwise have been by this diversity and
variety. An endless repetition of even that which is most lovely palls. Of the
thousands upon thousands whom Christ has saved and wiU save, no two but will
be different , Jo ona but will add somewhat to the majesty and beauty of the Church
in heaven by its peculiar and distinctive character.

HI. The HIGH VALUE OF HIDDEN GIFTS OF WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE. It Was GOt

from its external beauty — ^from the gold and purple, and scarlet, and blue, and fine
linen of its main fabric, or from its ouches and its golden chains of wreathed work ;
or even from the dazzling briUianoy and varied hues of its twelve gems — that the
brei.st-plate of the high priest drew either its main value or its honourable title.
It was "the breast-plate of judgment;" and this "judgment" was wholly unconnected
with the external beauty and gorgeous appearance of the breast-plate. Hidden away
m the treasury of its innermost folds lay the mysterious objects, known as " light "
and "perfection," by means of which the priest pronounced his "judgments," and
decl*~^ the will of God to the people. 'J'hese constituted the true glory of the breast-
plate. While the twelve stones symbolised the twelve tribes, with their varied gifts
and faculties (Gen. xlix. 3 — 27 ; Deut. xxxiii. 6 — 25), the Urim and the 'J hummim
f^bolised light and perfection — intellectual and moral excellence — those best gifts at



OB zwnL 31—36.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



SS9



■wisdom and moral knowledge which are the crowning graces of the regenerate human
being (Eph. 1. 8, 17 ; Fhil. i. 9 ; Col. i. 9, 10 ; etc.).

IV. The propbiett of eeferrino all our doubts to God for decision. Though
the Christian Church does not enjoy, any more than did the post-captivity Jewish
Church (Ezra ii. 63), the advantage of oracular responses from on high, though our
High Priest is gone before us into the holiest, and has taken with him the light ami
perfection, which are his alone, yet it is still possible to refer doubts to God, and
so obtain light enough to serve as a nuide to conduct. If we talie our difficulties to God
on our knees, and ask his counsel upon them in a faithful spirit, we have full reason
to trust that we shall receive illumination from him. What after prayerful commimion
with God appears to us the best course to take, we may accept as his decision, his voice
speaking to us. How consoling and encouraging the thought that we can, each one
for himself, in the solitude of our chambers cast the burthen of our cares upon One
who is perfectly good and perfectly wise, and who has promised to be oiu guide unto
death!

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHGilS.

Vers. 1 — 38. — Aaron in his priesthood the type of Jesus.

I. In his appointment (ver. 1). 1. He is chosen of Gca (Heb. v. 4), and inerefore
our accepted intercessor. 2. He is taken from among his brethren ; " from among the
children cf Israel, that he may minister unto me." The priest who ministers before
God for us must go up with a brother's heart and with experience of human infirmity
(Heb. iv. 15).

n. In his array. The holy garments were " for glory and for beauty," the symbol
of the perfect humanity of Jesus ; " holy, harmless, imdefiled and separate &om
sinners."

ni. In his sympathy. 1. The names of the tribes were engraved upon and
identified with the choicest jewels. Christ not only remembers us; we are loved,
honoured, treasured by him. 2. The name of each tribe was engraved upon a separate,
and different kind of jewel. We are not grasped by our high priest in a mass ; we are
individually known, loved, cared for. 3. The names were borne upon Aaron's heart
whenever he went into the holy place (ver. 29), for a memorial before the Lord con-
tinually. We are held in perpetual remembrance before God.

IV. In his viCARionsNESs. 1. That remembrance was burden-bearing ; he went in
for them, his heart was bowed before God in the consciousness of their sin and need.
For U8 in our sin and need Christ's entreaties ascend day and night. 2. In his zeal for
holiness (vers. 36 — 38). Christ, sin's sacrifice, shall also be sin's destruction. — U.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 31 — 35. — The Eobe of the Ephod.
Underneath the ephod and breast-plate the
high priest was to wear a robe, or frock,
wholly of blue. This robe was to have a hole
for the head at the top, and was to be woven
without seam (ch. xxxix. 22). It was put on
over the head, like a habergeon or coat of mail,
and probably reached below the knee. Jose-
phus says that it had no sleeves.

Ver. 31. — All of blue. This plainness and
uniformity offered a strong contrast to the
variegated hues of the breast-plate and ephod,
and threw those portions of the attire into
greater prominence. If the blue nsed was
indigo, the effect of the contrast must have
been heif^btened

ExoDut— n.



Ver. 32. — An hole in the top of it. A mere
circidar hole for the head to go through, un-
accompanied by a slit or longitudinal opening.
In the midst of it, Midway between the two
arm-holes. A binding of woven work round
about the hole of it. This would strengthen
the edge of the opening, and prevent it from
tearing or fraying. The binding was probably
sewn on after the frock was woven. As it were
the hole of an habergeon. Linen corselets or
habergeons have been found in Egypt. They
were sometimes covered with metal scales, and
were of the make here indicated. (See the
author's Eistory of Egypt, vol. i. p. *46.) The
word here used for " habergeon " (tahhdrdh) is
Egyptian.

Ver. 33.— Upon the hem of it. Literally
" at its edge " Pomegranates Tassels in tie



290



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxvm. SI — 8R



sliapo of pomegranates, of three colours, seem
to be intended. An ornament of the kind is
eommon in Assyria, but not in Egypt. Bells
of gold between them. The bell is not often
found in Egypt, and seems certainly not to
have been in common use there. It was, how-
ever, often hung round the necks of horses in
Assyria (^Ancient Monarchies, vol. ii. pp. 8, 14,
15, 27), and is so simple an object that its
invention was probably very early. The
Assyrian bells are shaped almost exactly like
our own, as are the classical ones.

Vers. 34, 35. — ^A golden bell and a pome-
granate. Hebrew tradition gives a most un-
certain sound with respect to the number of
the bells. According to some, they were 12
only ; according to others, 72 ; according to a
third school, 365 1 Equally conflicting are
the explanations given of their symbolism — (1)
that they typified the proclamation and ex-
pounding of the law by the high-priest — (2)
that they were a musical offering of praise — (3)
that they marked kingly dignity, since Oriental
kings sometimes wore bells— and (4) that



they were a call to vigilance and attention.
This last view is supported by the words of
verse 35— it shall be upon Aaron to minister,
and his sound shall be heard, or " that it£
sound may be heard." The bells were a meaus
of uniting priest and people in one common
service — they enabled the people to enter into
and second what the priest was doing for them,
and so to render his mediation efficacious —
they made the people's worship in the court of
the sanctuary a "reasonable service." And
hence the threat, which certainly does not
extend to all the priestly gannents, implied in
the words, "that he die not." If the high
priest neglected to wear the robe with th«
bells, he separated himself off from the people ;
made himself their substitute and not their
mouthpiece ; reduced their worship to a drear
formality ; deprived it of all heartiness and lite
and vigour. For thus abusing his office, he
would deserve death, especially as he could not
do it unwittingly, for his ears would tell him
whether he was wearing the bells or not



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 31. — The Teachings of the Robe. I. The need of heavenly calm and purity.
The robe was to be of one hue — uniform, peaceful; without glitter; something on
which the eye could rest itself with a quiet satisfaction. And it was to be "blue" —
the colour of heaven, the hue which God has spread over " that spacious firmament on
high," which in his word represents to ut his dwelling. " The blue sky is an image of
purity." Nothing purer, nothing calmer, nothing more restful, than the deep soft azure
of the eternal unchanging s>ky. The high priest's robe was to mirror it. He was to
present himself before God in a robe " all of blue.'' S.^ let us present ourselves before
him arrayed in purity and peacefulness.

II. The need or unity. If the ephod was to some extent emblematic of the one-
ness of the Church, so, and much more, was " the robe of the ephod." It was of woven
work (ch. xxxix. 22), absolutely seamless — one, emphatically, in material, in hue, in
texture. So Christ prayed that his Church might be one — "as thou. Father, art in me,
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us — one, even as we are one ; I in them,
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one" (John xvii. 21 — 23). Visible
unity is broken up ; but something of invisible unity there may still be, if all true
lovers of Christ will cultivate the spirit of unity ; judge cliaritably ; think the best they
can of all branches of the Church ; look to the good points of each ; pray for their
advance in holiness and in the knowledge of Christ ; work with them so far as they can
— e.g., for charitable and moral objects, amicably. If we thus act, if we be thus minded,
we shall, in a true sense, put on " the robe of the ephod " — we shall be promoters, and
not hinderers, of unity.

III. The need of keeping our attention fixed on the actions of our true
High Priest, and JtixiNo in them. The bells of the robe were to advertise the
people of every movement made by the high priest, and enable them to take their part
in his actions. To profit by the contrivance, they had to keep their ears attent to the
sound, and their minds fixed on the service which was in progress within the sanctuary.
We Christians have equal need to mount up in thought continually to that holy place,
whither Christ has taken our nature, and set it down at the right hand of God — to join
with him as he pleads his meritorious sacrifice on our behalf; to " have boldness" with
him " to enter into the holiest ;" with him to ask the Father to pardon our sins ; with
him to intercede for the whole Church; with him to pray that strength may be given us
to persevere. We do not, indeed, need bells to tell us how he is employed at eacL



OE. xzTiu. 86—38.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



nt



successive moment, because he is always doing all these things for us — always inter-
ceding, always pleading his sacrifice, always beseeching his Father to forgive us and
sustain us. We may join him in these acts at any moment. Thus, bells are not neces-
sary for us ; but still they may sometimes help us. Many an Israelite, whose thoughts
wandered and became fixed on worldly things, when no sound issued from the sanctuary,
was recalled to a sense of religion, and the recollection of his soul's needs, by the tink-
ling of the priest's golden bells. So Christians, who ought in heart and mind ever to
ascend to where Christ sits at the right hand of God (Col. iii. 1 — 3 ; Eph. ii. 6, etc.),
but whose attention will wander to earth and earthly objects, may sometimes by the
chime of bells, or by their solemn toll, be woke up to higher thoughts, — ^recalled, as it
were, from earth to heaven, taken back from the vain distractions of the world to that
bdy place where their High Priest is ever interceding for them.



EXrOSlTION.



Vers. 36 — 38. — The Mitbe. Josephus tells
us that the head-dress of the high priest wa^
" not a conical cap, but a sort of crown, made
of thick linen swathes " {Ant. Jud. iii. 7, § 3).
It was thus really a species of turban. The
colour was white ; and the only ornament on
it was the gold plate, with its blue ribbon or
fillet.

Ver. 36. — Thou shalt make a plate of pore
gold. The plate, though a mere ornament of
the mitre, was, at once, its most conspicuous
and its most significant feature. Placed di-
rectly in front, right over the forehead, and
probably of burnished gold, it would attract
universal attention, and catch the eye even
more than the breast-plate. Its position made
it " the culminating point of the whole priestly
attire " (Kalisch)— and its inscription gave to
that position extraordinary force and signi-
ficance. For it taught that " holiness to the
Lord" is the very highest crown and truest
excellence of religion — that to which all cere-
monial is meant to conduce — that without
which all the paraphernalia of worship must
ever be in God's sight a mockery. It set this
truth conspicuously before the eyes, and was
apt to impress it upon the hearts of all. It



taught the high priest himself not to rest
upon outward foims, but to aim in his own
person, and teach the people to aim contin-
ually, at internal holiness. The extreme im-
portance of this, causes the putting forward at
once of the plate and its inscription before any
account of the " mitre " is given.

Ver. 37. — Thou shalt put it on • blue lace.
In ch. xxxix. 31, it is explained that the blue
lace, or ribbon, was " tied to it," probably at
either end. That it may bs upon the mitre —
i.e., " that it may be kept in place, and not
slip from its position on the mitre."

Ver. 38. — It shall be upon his forehead,
that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the
sacred things. Imperfection attaches to
everything tliat man does ; and even the sacri-
fices that the people offered to God required
to be atoned for and purified. It was granted
to the high priest in his official capacity to
make the necessary atonement, and so render
the people's gifts acceptable. For this purpose
he was invested with an official holiness, pro-
claimed by the inscription upon the plate,
which exhibited him as the type and repre-
sentative of that perfectly Holy One, through
whom alone can any real atonement be made
to the Father. It shall be always upon his
forehead — i.e., whenever he ministers.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 36 — 38. — The Teachings of the Mitre. The main lesson taught by all the
priestly garments is intensified in the mitre, namely, the need of holiness. " Without
holiness no one shall see God ; " " Holiness becometh thine house for ever." • The high
priest was to be —

I. Holt, officially. By his birth, of Levi and Aaron — by his bringing up— by
his consecration — ^by his investiture — by his representative position as priestly head ol
his nation and type of Christ — he was set apart from all others, dedicated to holy em-
ployments, assigned a holy character. Of these things he could not dispossess himself.
Even a Caiaphas " prophesied, being high priest that same year."

II. Holy, personally. To wear holy garments, to be employed about holy things,
»nd yet to be impure in heart and life, is to be a " whited sepulchre," beautiful out-
wardly, but " within full of dead men's bones and of all unoleanness " (Matt, xxiii. 27).
Nothiiig can be a greater offence to God. A high priest, with " holiness to the Lord '

u 2



2M



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxTnt 3a



written upon his brow, and unholiness working in his brain and nestling in his heart
was a moral contradiction, a paradox, a monstrosity. Such there may have been, and
their official acts for the benefit of others God may have accepted and flowed, since
Qtherwise the innocent would have suffered for the guilty ; but theurhatefulness m his
sight must have been great, and their punishment wUl be proportionate. We may
believe that such cases were few. Not many men can bear to be hypocntes. ihe holy
attire, the holy ofSoes, the profession of holiness upon the brow, must have helped to
make the great majority holy, or o t least hai-mless, in life— true " examples to the flock
(1 Pet. V. 3)— holy, not merely officially, but personally.

III. A CAUSE OP HOLINESS IN OTHERS. The high priest, as the religious leader of
the nation, had to help forward holiness in every possible way— (1) Ceremonially, by
his official actions ; (2) Ministerially, by teachings and exhortations ; (3) Individually,
by the force of example. It was his mission to make the people " accepted before the
Lord." The mediation which he offered not only purified from legal defilements, but,
by virtue of his typical character, purged the conscience and cleansed the soul from sin.
ffis exhortations and example had the natural force of one in authority, and must have
been potent at all times. It was at his peril if he took life too easily, and rebuked sin
too mildly, and was not " a faithful priest," as appears from the history of Eli (1 Sam.
iL 22—36 ; iii. 13 ; iv. 11—18). Unfaithful priests are, in truth, an abomination, and
have need to tremble at the " terrors of the Lord." Those who have undertaken a holy
office are doubly bound to holiness. If men " corrupt the covenant of Levi," God will
" send a curse upon them, and curse their blessings " (Mai. ii. 2, 8).



EXPOSITION



Ver. 39. — Thb Tnuio and Gibdlb. Prom
the outer garments, which were the most impor-
tant and distinctive, a transition is now made
to the inner ones, in which there was nothing



gown or cassock, worn immediately over the
drawers. It reached to the feet, and had
tightly-fitting sleeves (Joseph. Ant. Jud. iii.
7, § 2). Whether it showed beneath the
"robe of the ephod," or not, is uncertain;



very remarkable. The linen drawers are for ! but the sleeves must certainly have been

the present omitted, as not peculiar to the i visible. The kgldneth was white. Thou shalt

high priest. Directions are given for the make the mitra of fine linen. This direction

1 • J iv. ~-.ji» Tt- f„™™ J, t„ 1,= I had not been previously given. It is a little

tumc and the gndle. The former is to he ^^^, ^^ ^^^^^ e^^^ ^^^/j ^^^^ ^^^ ^^^ ^^



woven in some peculiar way — so as to be
diapered, as some think — and the latter is to
be "the work of the embroiderer."

Ver. 89. — ^Thon shalt embroider. This is
certainly not the meaning of the Hebrew.
Some peculiar mode of weaving the coat is
intendei The ooat. Bather, "the tunic"
or " shirt." The k&dnelh was a long linen



needlework. Literally, " of the worls of the
embroiderer." The girdle was worn directly
over the linen shirt, and under " the robe of
the ephod." It would seem that it was not
seen at all, unless its ends hung down below
"the robe of the ephod." It was however
to be artistically embroidered (See ch.
xxxix. 29.>



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 39. — The Lesson of the Tunic. The tunic, or inner vest, was to be of fine linen,
and of spotless white. Both the material and the hue denoted purity. God's priests
must be clothed in purity from top to toe. Purity must wrap them round on every
side. This purity may be hidden — ^unseen of man, or nearly unseen. But God sees it
and honours it. The tunic, though it must be all of white, shall not lack its ornamen-
tation. It is to be diapered with a pattern, like the best damask cloths, and so to be
rich and costly.

The Lessons of the Oirdle. (1) Girdles were less for beauty than for use. Men girded
themselves for battle, for a race, for active exertion of any kind. The high priest was
to have his loins continually girded, that he might be ready at all times for QtoXi
service. But he was not to make a parade of this readiness. The girdle was to ba
bidden under the robe of the ephod. (2) Hidden as it was, the girdle was to be costly



ca. xxTin. 40—43.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUa



and lieautiful — of many colours, the work of the skilled embroiderer. The Israelitei
were taught by this, that things devoted to God's service, whether they le seen or not,
should be of the best. The intention is not to please men's eyes by beauty of colour or
form, or richness of material, but to do honour to God. Scamped work in places where
it is not seen has been thought allowable by many a church-architect ; dust and untidi-
ness in hidden corners are tolerated by many who have the care of sacred buildings.
True piety will make no difference between the seen and the unseen, the hidden and
that which is open to sight, but aim at comeliness, fitness, beauty, in all that appertain*
to the worship of God.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 40 — 43. — ^Thb appabel of the obm-
NABT PRIESTS. The chapter concludes with
brief directions concerning the official attire of
the ordinaty priests. This was to consist of
linen drawers like those of the high priest ; of a
tunic, also of linen (ch xxxix. 27), shaped like
his, but not diapered ; of a linen girdle, the
exact character of which is not stated ; and of
a close-fitting cap. The entire dress, with
perhaps the exception of the girdle, was
white. The linen drawers were regarded as
of primary necessity, and the priest who did
not wear them was threatened with death.

Ver. 40. — For Aaron's sons. His actual
sous at this time — his descendants afterwards,
to whom the priesthood was rigidly coniiued.
Thou shalt make ooats. The verb is different
from that used in ver 39, and seems to imply
that the priests' tunics were not to he pat-
terned. Oirdles. It has generally been sup-
posed that these were of the same material
and workmanship as the high priest's ; hut
this is nowhere stated. In ch. xxxix. 29, the
high priest's girdle alone is spoken of. Bon-
nets. Certainly not " bonnets " in the modem
sense. Plain, close-fitting caps, shaped like
a cup, or rather basin, seem to he meant.
Such caps were often worn in Egypt, hut not
by the priests. For glory and for beauty.
See above, ver. 2. It is very noticeable, that
the extremely simple attire of the ordinary
priests — a dress of pure white, without any-
thing ornamental about it, unless it were the
girdle — is still regarded as sufficient " for
glory and for beauty." White robes have
certainly a vast amount of scriptural testimony



in their favour (Lev. zvi. 4; Maik ix. 8;
John XX. 12 ; Acts i. 10; Rev iv 4- vi 11 ;
vii. 9, 14, etc.).

Ver. 41. — Thou shalt put them npon
Aaron thy brother, etc. These words serve
to connect the present chapter with the follow-
ing one. They contain the first intimation
that Moses is not only to cause the holy gar-
ments to be made, but to invest the priests in
them, and further to consecrate both Aaron
and his sons by anointing. On this point, see
the comment on ch. xxix. 7 — 9.

Ver. 42. — Linen breechei. Bather, ■■ linen
drawers " (Kalisch), such as we see worn by
the Egyptians generally, reaching from the
waist to a little above the knee. (See
Wilkinson in Eawlinson's Eerodotiu, voL u.
p. 113, 2nd ed.) This also was of linen
(Herod, ii. 83). TTnto the thighs— <.e., to
the bottom of the thighs where they adjoin
on the Imee.

Ver. 43. — When they go into the taber-
nacle of the congregation. Literally, " when
they go into the tent of meeting — i.e., the
place where God and the high priest were to
meet. The holy place. The " holy place "
seems in this passage to include the court of
the tabernacle, wherein the altar was situated.
That they bear not iniquity. To "bear
iniquity" is to incur guilt, or have sin im-
puted to one. If even through forgetfulness
a priest entered the sanctuary without this
necessary article of clothing, and so risked an
unseemly exposure of his person, he was to be
accounted guilty, and punished by death.
This was to be a " statute for ever," and to
apply both to the high priest and the ordinaty
priests. Compare ch. xx. 26.



HOMILETICa

Vers. 40 — 42. — The priests' attire. The dress of the ordinary priests teaches i
1. That not only the chief, but the subordinate, ministers of the baikv
TUARY MUST BE CLAD IN HOLINESS. The prfests' garments aie called "holy," no less
than the high priest's (ver. 4). They are almost entirely of fine white linen. The linen
drawers denote the need of holiness with respect to sins of the flesh. The linen cap
implies purity of thought and imagination. The linen tunic is symbolical of the com-
plete sanctiflcation in which the whole man should be wrapped. The girdle, also of
linen, marks the need of purity in respect of all the active part of life. In metj on;



9M



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxix. 1 — 87.



of them respects the ordinary priests were on a pal with the high priest. The same
holiness was required of both.

II. That in extreme simplicity there mat be a hioh degree of beauty.
The priests' garments were, like the high priest's (ver. 2), "for glory and for beauty"
(ver. 40). And, being designed by God for those ends, they doubtless attained them.
Yet, unless the girdle was an exception, they were all white. So, when Jesus was trans-
figured, " bis raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow ; bo as no fuller on earth
can white them " (Mark ix. 3). There is a wondrous beauty in pure, spotless, snow-white
raiment. Still more is there beauty in the simplicity of a spotless life. A pure mind--
a pure heart — pure conduct — simple, uniform performance of every-day duty — what ii
more lovely, more glorious ? To such the Divine Bridegroom will address the words —
" Thou art all fan:, my love ; there is no spot in thee " (Cant. iv. 7).



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XXIX



Vera. 1 — 37. — The Consecration of the
Priests. From the description of tlie priestly
attire, the Divine Law-giver passed to the
form of priestly consecration, whereof investi-
ture in the " holy garments " was a part. The
ceremony of consecration was to consist of
four things : — 1. Ablution ; 2. Investiture ;
3. Chrism or Anointing with oil; and 4.
Sacrifice. In the directions given, we have,
first, the preparation of the offerings (vers.
1 — 3) ; secondly, du:ections for the ablutions
(ver. 4) ; thirdly, directions for the investiture
of Aaron (vers. 5, 6), of his sons (vers. 8, 9) ;
fourthly, directions for the anointing (ver. 7) ;
and fifthly, directions as to the mode in which
the sacrifices should be offered and disposed of
(vers. 10 — 34). A command is then given
that the ceremonies should be repeated every
day for a weeli (ver. 35) ; and another, that
the altar should receive consecration at the
same time as the priests (vers. 36, 37). Addi-
tional light is tlirown on most of these matters
by the account contained in Leviticus (ch.
viii.), of the manner in which Moses carried
out the directions here given to him.

Ver. 1. — ^Ihis is the thing that thou shalt
do to them — i.e., " This is the ceremonial that
thou shalt use on the occasion." There is a
tacit reference to verse 41 of ch. xxviii., which
had announced that the priests were to be
consecrated. Take one young bullock. The
offerings were to be provided beforehand, so
as to be in readiness when the investiture
and anointing were over. Hence they are
mentioned first. Bams without blemish.
Literally " perfect." On the offence to God of
offering him blemished offerings, see Mai. i.
6—14.

Ver. 2. — Unleavened bread was regarded as
pater than leavened, since fermentation is a



sort of corruption. See the comment on ch.
xii. 15. Cakes tempered with oil. Literally,
" mixed with oil," i.e., having oil as one of
their ingredients, in contrast with the wafers,
which had oil poured over them.

Ver. 3. — Thou shalt bring them in the
basket. Kather, " Thou shalt offer them."
A preliminary offering of the animals and of
the "meat-offerings," in the lump seems to
be intended. This, apparently, preceded the
ablution.

Ver. 4. — Tlie Ablution.

Ver. 4. — TTnto the door of the tabernacle.
The great laver was to be placed between
the entrance to the tabernacle and the altar
of burnt-offering (ch. xxx. 18). It was to
this probably that Aaron and his sons were to
be brought. Its main purpose was to be a
lustral vessel, placed ready for the various
ablutions which the law required (ib. 19 — ^21).
Thou .... shalt wash them with water.
Ablutions were an important part of the cere-
monial of almost all ancient religions. In
Egypt, the priests were compelled to wash
themselves from head to foot in cold water
twice every day, and twice every night (Herod,
ii. 37). In the religion of Zoroaster frequent
washing with water was prescribed for many
kinds of impurity (Zendavesta, viii. p. 271, et
seq.). The Greeks were particularly addicted
to ceremonies of which ablution formed a part ;
and it is to Home that we are indebted both
tor the word and for the idea of " lustration."
It is a true instinct which has taught men the
analogy between physical and moral purity,
and led them to typify the removal of spiritual,
by the cleansing from pliysical, defilement.
The religion given at Sinai set a stamp of ap-
proval in many points on what may be called
" the religion of nature ;" and among them on
this. Ablutions were required of the priests,
not only at consecration, but every time that
they entered the tabernacle, or sacrificed on
the altar of bmnt-offering (ch. xxx. 20).
Washing was a main feature in the cleansing
of leprosy (Lev. xiii. 51, 58) and of the lepei



CH. XXII. 5—12.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUa



291



(ib. xiv. 8). It was also employed for the
purification of many minor delilements (ib.
xi. 25 ; XV. 5 ; xvii. 15, etc.). At what date
it first came into use in the admission of prose-
lytes is uncertain. Whether the washing of
consecration extended to the whole body, or
was limited to the hands and feet, is also a
point on which critics have disagreed, but one
of no great importance. (See John xiii. 9,
10.)

Vers. 5, 6. — 27te Investiture of Aaron.

Ver. 5. — Thou shalt take the garments.
The directions, as here given, are incomplete,
and not quite in the right order. In the LXX.
they are still more incomplete. For the full
process of investiture, we must look to Lev. viii.
7 — 9. There we find that the process included
nine acts. — 1. The putting on of the linen
tunic. 2. The girding with the under-girdle.

8. The putting on of the robe of the ephod.
4. The putting on of the ephod. 5. The
girding with the curious girdle of the ephod.
6. The putting on of the breast-plate. 7. The
putting into the breast-plate of the Urim and
Thunimim. 8. The putting on of the mitre.

9. The affixing to the mitre of the golden
plate.

The second and seventh are omitted here ;
and the order of the fifth and sixth is inverted.

Ver. 6. — The holy crown. The plate of
gold with its blue ribbon, or lace, formed a
species of diadem, such as in the East seems
to have been always regarded as the special
emblem of royalty. An ornament of the kind
seems to have been introduced into Egypt by
Kh uenatcn or Amenophis IV. It marked the
royal character of the high priest, who, as
the main type of Christ in the Mosaic law,
was bound to be " Prophet, Priest, and King."
(Compare Lev. viii. 9.)

Ver. 7. — J7ie Chrism or Anointing.

Vei . 7. — The anointing oil had been men-
tioned previously in ch. xxv. 6, when " spices "
had been required from the congregation to
form a portion of it. Its cojnposition is given
in ch. XXX. 23—25 ; a passage from which we
gather that it was exceedingly rich and costly.
And pour it upon his head. Compare Ps.
cxxxiii. 2. While ablution is a rite common
to many religions, the religious use of unction
is peculiar to the Mosaic and the Christian.
In the Mosaic it was applied to initiate into
their office the prophet, the priest, and the
king. In Christianity it was originally a
rite by which sick persons were miraculously
cured (Jas. v. 14, 15), from which use it was
afterwards extended by ecclesiastical authority
to other impdttant ceremonies. The typical
meaning under Christianity is clear ; the oil
represents the Holy Spirit, and the anointing
the outpouring of that Spirit on those who are
the objects of it. Christ himself obtained his



title of Christ (or Messiah), because he \nt
" anointed with the Hohr Ghost and with
power " (Acts x. 38). Under Mosaism this
idea was, at most, latent. Unction was un-
derstood to mark (1) Dignity, because the
olive was the first of trees (Judg. ix. 9) ; and
(2) Continuance, because oil preserves things
for a long time from corruption. Unction
with the holy oil of the sanctuary no doubt
further signified consecration to God's service.
It was appli^ not only to the priests, but to
the tabernacle, the ark, the table of shew-bread
with its vessels, the seven branched candle-
stick, the altar of incense, the altar of burnt
offering, and the laver, all of which thereupon
became " most holy " (ch. xxx. 26 — 29).

Vers. 8, 9. — The Investiture of Aaron's soju

Ver. 8. — Thou shalt bring his sons. See
verse 4. They were to be brought to the door
of the tabernacle. Put coats upon them. The
investiture of the high priest consisted of nine
acts (see the comment on ver. 5) ; that of the
ordinary priests of three only. 1. The putting
on of the linen tunics. 2. The girding with
the girdles. 3. The putting on of the cap
They do not seem to have been anointed, as
Aaron was, by having the holy oil poured
upon their heads, but only by having some of
it sprinkled upon their garments (ver. 21 ;
Lev. viii. 30).

Ver 9. — The bonnets. Kather "caps"
There is no article. Thou shalt consecrate
Aaron and his sous. Literally, " Thou shalt
fill the hand of Aaron and the hand of his
sons." Installation in an office was usually
effected among the Eastern nations by putting
into the hand of the official the insignia which
marked his functions. In this particular case
certain portions of the offerings were used as
the insignia. See ver. 24.

Vers. 10 — 34. — The Consecration Offeringi.

Ver. 10. — Thou shalt cause a bullock to
be brought. Eather, "the bullock," — i.e.,
" the bullock mentioned in ver. 1, which was
to be made ready before the ceremonies com-
menced." Aaron and his sons were to put
their hands upon the head of the bullock,
in order to identify themselves with it, and
transfer to it the guilt of their own sins and
imperfections, since it was to be a " sin-offer-
ing " (ver. 14 ; compare Lev. iv. 4).

Ver. 12. — Thou shalt take of the blood,
and put it upon the horns of the altar. The
virtue of the altar was regarded as residing
especially in its horns. Here expiation was
obtained by the blood — " which is the life " —
of the victim being first smeared upon the
four horns, and then the remainder poured
out at the altar's base. Such was the uauW
practice with " sin-offerings " (Lav. iv. 7)
whereof this was to be the fint exampb



286



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[ott. xiiX. 13—22



Ver. 13. — IhOTi shalt take all the fat, etc.
Among all natious who have offered sacrifices,
it has been very usual to select certain parts of
the victim only for burning upon the altar,
and to dispose otherwise of the remainder.
The Greeks commonly burnt on the altar the
thighs and the fat only. The Romans burnt
certain parts of the intestines only, and called
them prosecta, prosieix, or ablegmina. In
Egypt, according to Herodotus, the greater
part of the body was burnt ; but the head, the
neck, the shoulders, and the lower part of the
legs, as well as the paunch, were reserved and
not burnt (Herod. U. 40). The fat was
generally regarded as the best part of the
offering, and most acceptable to the gods.
This was probably on account of its bm'ning
with a bright flame and helping to consume
the rest of the offering. The caul that is
above the liver. Probably the membrane
which covers the upper part of the liver, some-
times called " the srnall omentum." {reticulum
jecorie, Vulg.)

Ver. 14. — The flesh . . . shalt thou bum
with fire without the camp. Such was the rule
with sin-offerings generally (Lev. iv. 11, 12).
The curse of sin which was on them, made
them unfit for food and even unworthy of
burial within the camp. On the symbolism of
the bui'ial, see Heb. xiii, 11 — 13. His dung.
That which the bowels contained at the time
of death.

Ver. 15. — One ram. Literally "the one
ram " — i.e., " one of the two rams mentioned
in verse 1." Put their hands. Here, again,
the object was to identity themselves with the
victim, and make it their representative;
though now, as the ram was to be a burnt
offering, self-sacrifice, rather than expiation,
was the leading thought.

Ver. 16. — Thou shalt take his blood and
sprinkle it. Eather, "and cast it." The
blood was to be thrown from a basin, not
sprinkled with the hand or with hyssop. Eab-
binical tradition says that it was so cast at two
of the corners, and thus moistened all the four
sides. This was regarded as casting it " on
the altar round about."

Ver. 17. — Thou shalt cut the ram in pieces.
Literally, " into its pieces," which Kalisch
supposes to mean " into its natm-al limbs."
Egyptian sculptures show us animals thus cut
up, and offered at sacrificial feasts to ancestors.
Wash its inwards — t.e., its " intestines " — pro-
bably the stomach and bowels only. Its legs.
The lower joints of the leg, with the foot, to
which it was likely that dust might attach.
Put them unto his pieces — i.e., "replace
them after washing with the other pieces,"
or joints, into which the animal had been
cut.

Ver. 18. — ^Thou shalt burn the whole ram
upon the altar. This became the general law
tf the bmnt-offering (Lev. i. 9, lii, 17). Xt



indicated that self-sacrifice was wholly accept'
able to God; whereas in sin-offerings then
was a taint of evil which rendered all but
certain pai-ts of the victim unacceptable (ver.
14). A sweet savour. This is not to be
understood in th« coarse sense in which heathen
writers used similar expressions, meaning by
them (as it would seem) that the gods were
reaUy pleased with the odour of sacrifices.
No candid mifid can ascribe to the Hebrews
such anthropomorphism. Evidently no more
is meant than that the offering would be
pleasing to God. See Gen. viii. 21 ; Lev. i.
9, 13, 17, etc.

Ver. 19. — ^The other ram. Compare ver.
15; and see also vers. 1 and 3, where two ■
rams had been mentioned. This second ram
is called, " the ram of consecration " in ver.
22, and agam in Lev. viii. 22. It was "by
far the most peculiar part of the whole cere-
mony " (S. Clark). It must be viewed as a
" peace-offering " (Lev. iii. 1 — 17), but one of
a peculiar character. The application of the
blood to the persons of the priests was
altogether imique, and most significant. It
was the crowning act of consecration, and
implied the complete dedication of their life
and of all their powers to the service of the
Almighty.

Ver. 20. — The victim having been offered
and accepted, its blood had s sanctifying
power. Placed upon the tip of the right ear
of Aaron and his sons, it sanctified that organ,
which was to be ever open to the Divine voice ;
placed upon the thumb of their right hand,
it sanctified their ministerial actions ; placed
upon the great toe of their right foot, it
sanctified their whole walk in life, their
"going out," ajid their "coming in." The
consecrated life of the victim which they had
offered " was given back to them, in order
that it might be devoted to the service of
the Lord."

Ver. 21.— Thou shalt take of the Wood .
. . . and of the anointing oil. Appa-
rently, this is the only unction that the ordi-
nary priests were to receive. (Compare Lev.
viii. 30.) The mixture of the biood with the
oil is unusual, and presents some difficulties ;
but perhaps it is best to view it as symbolising
the intimate union which exists between
justification and eanctification — ^the atoning
blood, and the sanctifying grace of the Holy
Spirit. And sprinkle it. The verb is differ-
ent from that used in ver. 16, and is rightly
rendered, " sprinkle." He shall be hallowed
and his garments. As the garments shared
in the sprinkling, they shared also, so far as
was possible, in the consecration. It was
hence especially that they became " holy gar-
ments."

Ver. 22.— The rump. Eather, " the taiL"
Oriental sheep have very commonly a broad
fat tail, which weighs from six to twenty



. XXIX. 23—37.]



THE BOOK OF EX0DU8.



2M



ponnda, and is sometimes laid upon a little
cart with two wheels, which the sheep drags
after it (Herod, iii. 113; Leo African, ix. p.
293 A ; Fellows, Asia Minor, p. 10 ; Gesenius
ad voc. ni^x)- There is no doubt that a
" tail " of this kind is here meant. The oaul.
Rather, " the membrane." See the comment
on ver IS. The right shoulder. Or " leg,"
according to some. The difference is not
important.

Ver. 23. — One cake of oiled bread — i.e., one
of the " unleavened cakes tempered with oil,"
mentioned in rer. 2. Oat of the basket of
the unleavened bread. See ver. 3.

Ver. 24. — Thou shalt put all in the hands,
or " on the hands." The offerings were to be
laid first, on the bands of Aaron, and then on
those of his sons, which were to suppoi-t them ;
while Moses, putting his hands under theirs,
made a waving motion with them towards the
four comers of the heavens, to indicate that
the gifts were offered to the omnipresent God.
This process was that " filling of the hand,"
by which the actual installation in office took
place. Moses, b/ the act, transferred the
priestly functions, which he had hitherto exer-
cised, to his brother and his brother's descend-
ants. He made them by his muscular energy
perform their first priestly act.

Ver. 25.— Thou shalt receive them at their
hands and bum them. Moses was still to
continue the priestly acts, and to complete the
peace-offering by burning the selected parts
(ver. 22) on the brizen altar. (See Lev. iii.
3—5.)

Ver. 2S. — Thou shalt take the breast.
Henceforth Aaron and his sons were to have
the breast of all wave-offerings (Lev. vii. 81 —
34:) ; but on this occasion, as Moses ofiSciated,
the breast was to be his.

Vers. 27, 28. — A short digression is here
made, from this particular offering, to all
future offerings for consecration. For the future
both the breast and the right shoulder are to
belong to the priests. The shoulder, more-
over, is to be " heaved," and only the breast
" waved ;" " heaving " being a single lifting up
of the offeringtowards heaven, while " waving "
was a repeated movement in a horizontal
direction. Wave and heave offerings are
always connected with the portions of the
priests, or with things dedicated to God's
service. (See ch. xxv. 2 ; xxxv. 22, 24 ;
xxxviii. 24, 29; Lev. vii. 30—34; Num.
xviu. 11, 19, 24, etc.)

Vers. 29, 30. — Here we have a second
digression, also concerning future consecrations.
The holy garments made for Aaron were to
be preserved after his death, and used at the
consecration of each successive high priest,
who was to be anointed and consecrated in
them, and to wear them for seven days from
the time that he entered upon his office.
Bleazar's investment in them is mentioned



(Num. XX. 28); but not that of any latei
high priest.

Ver. 31. — The ram of oonseoratlon— {.«.,
the part of the ram that was left and had not
been burnt (ver. 25). Seethe his flesh in the
holy place. This was understood to mean
boUing at the door of the tabernacle (Lev
viii. 31). A sacrificial meal followed on every
peace-offering, in which the offerers partici-
pated. (See above, ch. xviii. 12.)

Ver. 32. — The bread that is in the basket
— i.e., the loaf, cake, and wafer which still re-
mained in the basket after one of each had been
subtracted (see ver. 23, and compare vers. 2, 3).

Ver. 33. — They shall eat those things
wherewith the atonement was made. An
atoning force pervaded all sacrifice. Sin-
offerings were wholly expiatory ; burnt-offer-
ings and peace-offerings partially so (Lev
i.4). A stranger shall not eat thereof. "A
stranger " in this place does not mean n
foreigner, but anyone who is not a priest.

Ver. 34. — Thou shalt bum the remainder
with fire. Compare above, ch. xii. 10.

Vers. 35 — 37. — 7Vie repetition of the cere-
monial, and the consecration of the altar.

Ver. 35. — Seven days shalt thou oonseorate
them. The repetition of the ceremony seven
times on seven separate days seems to be
intended. Thus was an ideal completeness
given to it. Compare the seven days' com-
passing around of Jericho (Josh. vi. 3, 4,), the
seven washings in Jordan by Naaman (2 Kings
V. 14), the seven ascents to the top of Carmel
by the servant of Elijah (1 Kings xviii 43,
44), etc.

Ver. 36. — ^Thou shalt cleanse the altar,
when thou hast made an atonement for it.
Kather, " thou shalt purifi the altar by
making an atonement for it. The sin-offer-
ing for the altar was the same bullock which
served for Aaron and his sons. Its virtue was
applied to the altar by smearing the blood
upon its horns and pouring the remainder at
its base (ver. 12). See Lev. viii 11 . — " And
Moses took the blood, and pji, it upon the
horns of the altar round about with his finger,
and purified the altar, and poured the blood
at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified it."
And thou shalt anoint it. In his execution
of these directions, Moses separated the anoint-
ing of the altar from the cleansing, placing it
even before the anointing of Aaron. He
anointed it by sprinkling the holy oil upon
it seven times (Lev. viii. 11).

Ver. 37. — Seven days shalt thou make an
atonement. ^122 the ceremonial was to be
repeated seven times, not only the atonement
for the altar (Lev. viii. 33). An altar molt
holy. Literally, " holiness of hclinesses," ai
in ch. xl. 10. Whatever toaoheth the altu
shall be holy. Bather, "must be holy." No-
thing that is not holy must touch it (Kaliscb)



298 THE BOOK OF EXODUa [oh. ixix. 1—38



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 37. — TOe Consecration of the first High Priest. Aaron may be viewed ai
either (1) a type of Christ, or (12) a pattern to all ministers who shall come after liim.

I. As A TYPE. OF Christ, he typifies especially Christ's priestly character. (1) Christ
" glorified not himself to be made an high priest " (Heb. v. 5), but was appointed by his
Father, when he sware to him, " Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Mel-
chizedek " (Ps. ex. 4). So Aaron took not the honour of the high priesthood to himsell
(Heb. V. 4), but was chosen by God (Ex. xxviii. 1 — 38), and invested with his office by
Moses (Lev. viii. 6 — 36). (2) Christ was " the Messiah " — the anointed one— anointed
with that profusion and abundance, with which none other ever was or will be — for
" God gave not the Spirit unto him by measure " (John iii. 34). Aaron received the
holy oil in profusion, by pouring. "The precious ointment nn down upon his beard"
— nay, "went down to the skirts of his clothing" (I's. cxxxiii. 2). (3) Christ was at
once priest and king — " bom king of the Jews " (Matt. ii. 2) ; crucified as " king of the
Jews " (lb. xxvil. 37) ; crowned by the soldiers in mockery (ib. 29) ; founder of an
imperishable "kingdom" in reality. Aaron, in his capacity of priest, wore a diadem, a
"holy crown" (Ex. xxix. 6; Lev. viii. 9), and may thus be regarded as having had
committed to him "a royal priesthood." (4) Christ has " all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge hid away (anoKpv^oi) in him " (Col. ii. 3), and could freely declare the
will of God to man. Aaron had the precious Urim and U'humraim hid away in the
folds of his breast-plate, and by their means could obtain a knowledge of God's will in
any practical matter. Lastly, (5) Christ is the great mediator between God and man,
the one and only man who can intercede for his brethren effectually, who can make
real atonement for their sins, and reconcile them to his Father. Aaron's special office
was to make continual atonement for all the sins of the people by such sacrifices as were
appointed by the law, to intercede for his brethren with God continually, and to be a
mediator between them and him, representative of the true mediator.

II. As A PATTERN TO MINISTERS, Aarou is (1) Solemnly called by God and set apart
for his high office. (2) Prepared for it by an ablution, which typifies the .removal of
all impurity. (3) Invested with it by a human authority, viz,, Moses. (4) Required
on all occasions of its exercise to wear robes of office. (5) Anointed with a holy oU,
typical of the gi'aces of the Holy Spirit. (6) Appointed to minister continually before
God in the tabernacle of the congregation. (7) Appointed to resolve doubts by
declaring God's will in difficult cases which should be brought before him. (8) Required
to bear upon his brow, in the sight of all men, a profession of " Holiness to the Lord."
The official Aaron is thus, in numerous respects, a pattern and example to all — even
Christian ministers ; but the personal Aaron is, on the contrary, rather a warning. The
weakness which allowed the worship of the golden calf, and the presumption which led
to " murmuring against Moses " (^um. xx. 10 — 12) indicate a character which, if it had
some virtues, had many and very serious defects.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1—38. — The rites of consecration for the priesthood. The next portion of the
Divine directions relates to the formal investiture of Aaron and his sons with the
priests' office. This was to be made the occasion of a solemn and imposing ceremonial.
" The rites of consecration proclaimed the necessity of holiness — a holiness not their own,
but imputed to them by the grace of God ; and following upon this, and flowing from
the same source, a plentiful endowment of gifts for their sacred office, with the manifest
seal of heaven's fellowship and approval" (Fairbairn). We may view the inaugurative
ceremonies as having reference —

I. To THE PRIESTHOOD, IN THE SIMPLEST IDEA OF IT (vers. 4 — 10). Aaron and his
sous were to be — 1. Washed with water — symbol of purification from all uncleaiuiess
(ver. 4). 2. Clothed with the holy garments— which robing was the real installation.
Aaron was to be first robed (vers. 6, 7), afterwards his sons (vers. 8, 9). 3. Anointed
— symbol of the abundant communication of Divine influences (ver. 7). The anointing
to«* place immediately after investiture. See exposition. Nothing could be simpler



OH. xxn. 88— 42.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 291

than these introductory ceremonies, which yet, in connection with the symbolism of
the dress, meant a great deaL They " filled the hand " of the priest with his offica
(ver. 9), declared the need of holiness in the discharge of his duties, and conveyed to
him the gifts of heavenly grace necessary fcr their right performance. So Christ
" glorified not himself to be made an high priest " (Heb. v. 5), but was formally installed
in his office by the Father ; was " holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners "
(Heb. vii. 26) ; and is endued above measure with the Spirit (John iii. 34).

II. To THE PRIESTHOOD, A8 HELD BT SINFUL MEN (vcrs. 10 — 15). The direct in-
stallation to the priesthood is followed by ceremonies having reference to the personal
sinfulness of the holders of the office. The fact could not be overlooked that the law
was making men priests that had infirmity (Heb. vii. 28). Themselves sinful, Aaron
and his sons were not as yet fit to transact with Ood as mediators for others. The true
High Priest, having no sin, laboured under no disqualification of this kind (Heb. vii. 27);
but it was different with priests " taken from among men " (Heb. v. 1). They needed
to have sacrifices offered for themselves. " This, therefore, was what was next provided ;
and through an entire series of sacrifices and offerings they were conducted as from the
depths of guilt and condemnation to what indicated their possession of a state of blessed
peace and most friendly intercourse with G-od " (Fairbaim). The sacrifices were three —
a sin-offering (vers. 10 — 15) ; a burnt-offering (vers. 15 — 19) ; and a peace-offering
(vers. 19 — 22) : and these sacrifices, with the accompanying ceremonies, were to be
repeated on seven successive days (ver. 3:i). The altar, as defiled by the sin of those
officiating at it, was likewise to be cleansed by the blood of the sin-offering (vers. 36, 37).
This is the first appearance of the sin-offering in the law.

III. To QUALIFICATIONS, DUTIES, AND EMOLUMENTS (vers. 15 — 38). The sin-offering
had especially to do with the removal of guilt. The second sacrifice — the burnt-offering —
denoted the duty of unconditional and entire surrender to Jehovah. The third — " the
ram of consecration " (ver. 22) — was that by which the newly-made priests were wholly
put into the functions and rights of their office. 1. The ram's blood was significantly
applied to different members of the person (ver. 20). It was put upon the tip of the
right ear, upon the thumb of the right hand, and upon the great toe of tlie right foot,
of Aaron and of his sons. This denoted, of course, entire dedication of the person to
God's service, in hearing, in acting, and in the daily walk. It beautifully symbolises,
not only the perfect consecration of him whose meat it was to do his Father's will
(John iv. 34), but the completeness of devotion which ought to characterise each of his
disciples, who also are priests to God. 2. The priests were sprinkled with the ram's
blood and oU. mingled (ver. 21). This symbolised the new Ufe of God, in which the
priest was " henceforth to move and have his being, in conjunction with the Spirit, on
whose softening, penetrating, invigorating influence all powers and movements of that
Divine life depend " (Fairbaim). 3. The portions of the sacrifice which belonged to
God, with a loaf, cake, and wafer, of the meat offering — symbolic of fruitfulness in good
works — were next to be placed on the priests' hands, and waved before the Lord (ver. 24).
This signified, (1) " The conveyal of the function which belongs to the priest to offer
the fat pieces of God's altar ; and (2) the infeoffment of the priests with the gift, which
they receive in future for their service, but which they must now give over to Jehovah,
because they are not yet fuUy dedicated, and therefore cannot yet themselves act as
priests " (Oehler). The conclusion of the ceremony was a sacrificial meal, indicative of
restored fellowship, and happy communion with God (vers. 31 — 35). Vers. 29, 30,
provide for the handing down of the high priest's office to Aaron's sons. The priest-
nood continued till superseded bv that of the greater Priest " after the order of Mel-
chizedek" (Heb. vii.).— J. 0.

EXPOSITION.



Vers. 38 — 42. — The daily saorifioe. The
consecration of the altar, which is made a
part of the consecration of the priests, is to be
loUowed immediately by the establishment of
the daily sacrifice. Two lambs are to be
offered day by day to the Lord, one in the



morning and the other in the evening, ai
" a continual burnt-offering " (ver. 42), in
acknowledgment that the life of the people
belonged to Jehovah (Cook), and that they
were bound to offei perpetually "themselves,
their souls and bodies, to be a reasonable



800



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XXIX. 38—42



holy, and lively sacrifice " to him. The burnt-
offerings were to be accompanied by appro-
priate " meat and drink-offerings " — i.e., by a
certain quantity of flour mingled with olive
oil for the one, and a certain quantity of wine
for the other — indications of the debt of
gratitnde which the nation owed to God for
bis continual benefits

Ver. 88.— Iambs of the ftrst year. Com-
pare ch. xii. 5. The LXX. add " without
blemish." But this is unnecessary, as all
victims were to be without blemish (Lev*
xxii. 20 ; Deut. xv. 21, etc.)

Ver. 39. — At even. Literally, "between
the two evenings." (See the comment on
ch. xii. 6.) Josephus says (^Ant. Jud. xiv. 4,
{ 3) that the hour in ordinary use was three.

Ver. 40. — A tenth deal — «.«., a "tenth
part." The tenth part of an ephah is no
doubt meant. This was sometimes called " an
omer" (ch. xvi. 36), and would be about
three pounds weiglit of flour, or a little more.
One fourth part of an hin of beaten oil. The
word hin is said to be Egyptian. It occurs
here for the first time. The hin was the sixth
part of a hath, and probably contained about
one pM and a hiuf English. The fourth



part of an bin of wine for a drink-ofFering.
The application of the " drink-offerings " il
uncertain. Josephus says QAnt. Jud. iii. 9,
§ 4) that they were poured out round the
brazen altar. But the analogy of the " meat
offering " makes it probable that a portion
only was thus treated, while the greater part
belonged to the priests. In the entire pro-
vision by which burnt and peace-offering were
to be necessarily accompanied with meat-
offerings and drink-offerings, we can scarcely
be wrong in seeing an arrangement made
especially for the convenience of the priests.

Ver. 41. — ^Thon Shalt do thereto according
to the meat - offering, etc. " Thou shall
offer " — I.e., " the same meat-offering and
drink-offering with the evening as with the
morning sacrifice." For a sweet saToui.
See the comment on ver. 18.

Ver. 42. — Ihroughont your generations.
Bather, "for yom- generations." The taber-
nacle of the congregation. Bather, " of
meeting " — " the tabernacle of meeting, where
I will meet yon." The verb and substantive
are modifications of the same word, "f^y It
is this passage which definitely fixes the
meaning of the phrase incorrectly rendered
" the tabernacle of the congregation " by ou
translators.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 38 — 42. — The value of a daily service. Perpetual remembrance of God is one of
the greatest needs for the maintenance and furtherance of religion. " Pray without ceasing."
"In everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made
known unto God" (Phil. iv. 6). " I have set the Lord alway before my face" (Ps. xvi.
8). These and numerous other texts lay down the perfect law — constant worship of the
Almighty. But human weakness, and the pressing concerns of life, make literal com-
pliance with the perfect law impossible. And in his mercy God relaxes the law. " At
evening and morning, and at noonday, will I pray," says the man after his own heart
(Ps. Iv. 17) ; " and he shall hear my voice." Daniel prayed " three times a day, with
his window open towards Jerusalem " (Dan. vi. 10). Coldness and worldliness have
in the Christian CJhurch reduced, for the most part, the " three times " to twice ; but
still the obligation is acknowledged under all circumstances at mom and even to lift the
neart to God, and " look up." Now, it is a great help towards maintaining this
minimum that there should be, twice a day, a public service. The daily morning and
evening sacrifice were a perpetual remindei" to the Israelites of their duty in respect of
prayer — they felt the " lifting up of their hands " to be — according to the time of it — a
morning or "an evening sacrifice" (Ps. cxli. 2). And so, in the Christian Church,
public service twice a day, which prevails widely, is of great value.

I. As BEMINDING MEN OF THE DUTY OF SUCH CONSTANT SUPPLICATION — aS keeping it

before them, by the sight of open church doors, and the sound of chiming bells, that
God is, at the least, to be addressed twice a day, at morn and even, in earnest, heartfelt
prayer; to be praised and thanked for his mercies, intreated for his forgiveness, besought
for his support, and help, and blessing. What is done by public authority rouses atten-
tion, provokes inquiry, raises a general feeling that it would not be done unless it were
right. Many a man, who has long neglected private prayer, has been led to acknowledge
himself wrong, and to revert to the practice of it by the witness home — the protest made
—by those chuichos which persistently keep up the substitute for the morning and
ireoing sacrifice of the tabernacle and temple, to wit — ^that daily morning and evening



;h. xxOL 43—48.]



THB BOOK OF EXODUS.



801



service in the sanctuary, which the Church of England, among others, enjoins upon h«(
ministers.

n. As ENABLING THEM TO PERFORM THE DUTY IN QUIETNESS, WITHOUT DISTEAOTIOH.

In many homes there is no quietness, no retired spot to which husband, or wife, or child
can go for sUent communion with the Almighty Father, or the Saviour. All is noise,
tumult, bustle, hurry — ^nay, sometimes, all is quarrel, angry words, cruel blows, threats,
curses. Private prayer in such households, if it was ever known, drops out of use.
Frequently, it is not allowed — it provokes an outbreak — if done at all, it has to be done
secretly, hastily, in fear and trembling. In such cases, how great a blessing is It to
those who feel the need of prayer, that there should be somewhere near them a sacred
spot, whicher they can, occasionally at any rate, betake themselves to pray their own
prayers, or joiu in the jxayers of others as may seem best to them, and feel the near
presence of the Almighty ! " How amiable are thy tabernacles, Lord of Hosts I My
soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord 1 " " One day in thy courts is
better than a thousand " elsewhere^



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 38 — 43, — 2%e daily hurnt-offermg. Symbol of consecration of life of the nation.
1. Offered at mom and even. 2. Continually. 3. With meat-offering — dedication at
life in its practical activities.-^. 0.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 43 — 46. — God's promises. The chap-
ter terminates with a parenthetic insertion of
Tarious piomises, intended to cheer the
Israelites under the hard circomstaiices of
their wanderings in the wilderness, and grow-
kig out of the mention of the tabernacle as
"the tabernacle of meeting" (ver. 42).
" There," says God, " He will meet, not only
Moses, to speak to him, bnt also the children
of Israel, to receive their offerings, hear their
prayers, and grant their requests. There will
he meet them, and there bis glory shall be ;
and the tabernacle shall be thereby sanctified.
He will sanctify both the tabernacle and the
altar ; he will sanctify, moreover, both Aaron
and his sons ; and he will dwell among the
children of Israel, and be their God ; and they
shall know him." Very precious and gracious
promises, made absolutely; though, as the
result showed (2 Chr. xxxvi. 14^18), con-
tingent on their obedience ; and faithfully
performed, as long as even a remnant was
obedient, during a space of above seven
hundred years from the Exodus to the Cap-
tivity 1

Ver. 43. — There will I meet the children
of Israel. Lay Israelites might not enter
the tabernacle, and could only "meet God"
at its entrance, when they brought their
sacrifices to the altar. He promises, however,
to meet them on these occasions with favour



and acceptance. The tabemaole riisll b«
sanctified by my glory. Compare ch. xl. 84.
The presence of the Shecbinah was the true
sanctification of the tabernacle — all the rest
was mere t}rpe and figure. God not only
" put his name there," but put his presence
there visibly.

Ver. 44. — I will sanctify ... the altar.
See Lev. ix. 24, where we learn that on the
first occasion of Aaron's offering sacrifice upon
the brazen altar, " there came a fire out from
before the Lord, and consumed upon the altar
the burnt offering and the fat. Thns the
altar had its miraculous sanctification, as well
as the tabernacle, and was not merely con-
secrated by human instrumentality. I will
sanctify also both Aaron and his sons. It
would seem to follow, by parity of reasoning,
that here also something more is intended
than had been accomplished by the rites of
consecration. The verb is in the future — " I
aill sanctify " — and must allude to something
which has not yet taken place. Probably,
sanctification of the spirit is intended — ^that
Divine influence upon the heart which alone
makes men really and truly " holy." (Com-
pare Lev. xxi. 8, 15; xxii. 9, 16.) But in
this case the promise must have been con-
ditional. God would sanctify them so far as
they would allow him.

Ver. 45. — I will dwell among the children
of Israel. Compare ch. xxv. 8. Primarily,
the indwelling of the Shechinah in the holy
of holies is, no doubt, meant ; but the expres-
sion need not be limited to this. God would
be present with his people in manifold wayt



an



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[oh. xxit. 43 — 4«,



—to direct, sustain, enlighten, defend, and
lave them. And will be their Ood. Com-
pare ch. vi. 7. What treasures of love, pro-
tection, bounty, tenderness, and pardon, are
there in this phrase I

Ver. 46. — ^And they shall know, etc. When
they experience my protection, bounty, love,
tenderness, pardon ■ they shall truly feel and



know in their inmost hearts, that I am tha
same God who delivered them out of the
bondage of Egypt, and brought them forth,
for the very purpose of " dwelling among
them." I am Jehovah, their Ood. No other
God could deliver after this sort. No other
God could be so long-suffering to a "stiff-
necked people."



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 43 — 46. — OocFs promises to Israel. Here we may note — I. The Divinb
aooDNESs AS SHOWN IM THE UAKiNO OF PROMISES. Man has no claim upon bis Maker.
Out " goodness extendeth not to him." So far forth as we " do him true and laudable
service," we are " unprofitable servants — we have done that which was our duty to do "
(Luke xvii. 10). But how little of such service is rendered I How great are our short-
comings! How many our "sins, negligences, and ignorances!" How little do we
deserve anything but evil at God's hand I And yet, he not only bears with us, but
makes us gracious promises. He binds himself to us beforehand by express engage-
ments — ^he pledges his own sacred word to bestow upon us divers blessings. Here
he promised Israel five things — 1. The saactification of the tabernacle by the Shechinah ;
SJ. The sanctification of the altar ; 3. Holiness in Aaron and his sons ; 4. His own per-
manent abiding presence with them as their God ; and 5. Their own recognition of him
as their Lord God — the deliverer who brought them out of Egypt — the eternal — Jehovah
Eloheyhem. And to Christians he has promised far more — pardon, redemption, accept-
ance, sanctification by the Holy Spirit, eternal life ! Utterly unworthy as we are, these
promises have been made to us. God's infinite goodness has caused him to condescend
to enter into covenant with his creatures ; and the promises which he has made to us,
" he for his part will most surely keep and perform."

n. The Divine faithfulness, as shown in the fulfilment of the promises
MADE. (1) The sanctification of the tabernacle was effected by the entrance into it of
the Shechinah (ch. xl. 34) ; (2) That of the altar by the fire which " came out from
before the Lord " (Lev. ix. 24) ; (3) Aaron and his sons were sanctified to the effectual
performance of all their ministerial acts, and were further personally sanctified, so far as
their own wills would permit ; (4) God did abide with his people Israel, notwithstanding
aU their short-comings, for at least seven centuries ; defended them from their enemies ;
taught them by his prophets ; made them a praise and a wonder among the nations.
And, on the whole, (5) notwithstanding occasional defections, Israel did recognise
Jehovah as their God, did maintain his worship, did observe his laws, did believe that he
dwelt among them, and was " the Lord their God." Shall we think that to us he will
be less faithful ? Shall we doubt that he will give to us the covenanted blessings —
pardon, and redemption, and acceptance, and sanctification, and eternal life ? Surely,
" God is not a man that he should lie, or the sou of man that he should repent." He is
" the faithful and the true" (Eev. xix. 11). He never broke a promise. All to which
he is pledged he will most assuredly perform, if we only are not wanting on our part



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 43 — 46. — Israd sanctified by OocTs presence. 1. Three grades of sanctification.
(1) By blood. (2) Unction of the Spirit. (3) Personal Divine indwelling. 2. Gcd'i
awelling with Israel sanctifies (1) the tabernacle; (2) his servants; (3) the whole
f»apia.—J. 0.



COL zxz. 1 — 10.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



8M



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XXX



Vers. 1 — 10. — The altar op incense. This
chapter has the appearance of being one in
which accidental omissions are supplied. The
natural place for a description of the altar of
incense — part of the furniture of the holy
place (ver. 6) — would seem to have been
ch. XXV. 10 — 40, where we have the descrip-
tions of the ark, the mercy-seat, the table of
shew-bread, and the candlestick ; the natural
place for " the ransom of souls," the earlier
part of the same chapter (ver. 3), where the
silver is required which was to be collected in
this way ; the natural place for an account of
the bronze laver, ch. xxvii., where the bronze
altar, near which it stood, is described ; the
natural place for the composition of the holy
oil, ch. xxix., where its use is commanded
(vers. 7, 21) ; and the natural place for a
description of the perfume the same as
tor the altar on which it was to be offered.
Whether Moses made the omissions in writing
his record, and afterwards supplied them in
the present chapter, or whether Divine wisdom
saw fit to give the directions in the order in
which we now have them, cannot be deter-
mined. Hitherto certainly no sufficient
reason has been shown for the existing order,
which hence appears accidental. The altar of
incense was to be in many respects similar to
the altar of burnt-offering, but of smaller
size and richer material. Both were to be
'' four-square," and both of shittim wood cased
with metal ; but the former was to be taller,
the latter shorter, than it was broad; and
while the latter was to be cased with bronze,
the former was to have a covering of gold.
The place for the altar of incense was the
main chamber of the tabernacle, a little in
front of the veil ; and its purpose was, as the
name implied, the offering of incense to
Almighty God. This was to be done by
the officiating priest, twice a day, morning
and evening, and in practice was performed
before the morning, and after the evening
sacrifice.

Ver. 1. — An altar to bom incense upon.
The offering of incense was an element in the
religious worship of most ancient nation^!.
In Bgyp*- frankincense was especially used
in the (tisti'als of the god Ammon (Becordi



of the Past, vol. x. pp. 18, 19) ; and on one

occasion an Egyptian sovereign sent a
naval expedition to Arabia for the express
purpose of bringing frankincense and frank-
incense trees to Egypt, in connection with the
Ammon feasts (Brugsch, History of Egypt,
vol. i. pp. 305 — 311). The Babylonians burnt
a thousand talents' weight of frankincense
every year at the great festival of Bel (Herod,
i. 183). The Greeks and Bomans offered
frankincense, as a rule, with every offering;
and in the early ages of Christianity it was
made the test of a Christian whether he
would do this or no. What exactly the
religious notion was which underlay these
acts, or whether it was the same everywhere,
may be questioned. In the Mosaic religion,
however, there can be little doubt that, in
the main, incense symbolised prayer. (See
Fs. cxli. 2 ; Luke i. 10.) Of shittim wood.
Compare above, ch. xxvii. 1.

Ver. 2. — Four square shall it be. Like the
altar of burnt-offering. See the comment on
ch. xxvii. 1. Two cubits shall be the height
thereof. Altars of this small size are often
represented on ancient vases and other
remains. (See Dr. Smith's Dictionary of
Greek and Boman Antiquities, pp. 117 and
1174.) The horns thereof. It seems to be
assumed that an altar must have horns. Those
of the altar of incense were to have the blood
of certain sin-offerings smeared upon them
(Lev. iv. 7, 18). Shall be of the same — i.e.,
" shall be of one piece with the top of the
table " — not projections added to it Compare
ch. xxvii. 2.

Ver. 3. — Thou shalt make unto it a crown
of gold — i.e., a border, or moulding, all
round the top, to prevent anything from
falling off. Compare what is said of the
table of shew-bread, ch. xxv. 24.

Ver. 4. — By the two comers. Rather, " on
its two sides." The ensuing clause is redun-
dant. AU that is meant is, that the altar
should have two rings only — not four — one at
each side, directly below the moulding. As
it was so small, two rings were enough,
Tor the staves. Rather, " for staves."

Ver. 5. — The staves were to be of acacia
wood, overlaid with gold, like those used for
carrying the ark (ch. xxv. 13) and the table
of shew-bread (ib. 28).

Ver. 6. — Thou shalt put it before the vail.
It might have been doubtful from what is
said here, which side of the veil the altar was
to be placed. The doubt is precluded by the
narrative of what Moses actually did in ch.
xl. 21 — 29, which makes it clear that the
altar was placed with the golden candlestick
and the table of shew-bread, outside the veil,
in the "holy place," and not within tht



304



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[CH. XXX 1 — 1(X



" holy of holies." Where I will meet with
thee. See above, ch. xxr. 22.

Ver. 7. — Sweet incense. Literally, "in-
cense of perfumes." For the composition of the
incense, see vers. 31—38. When he dresseth
the lamps. The lamps of the golden candle-
stick were to he trimmed and cleaned, their
wicks looked to, and fresh oil added, if neces-
sary, every morning, immediately after day-
break. See the comment on cb. xxvii. 21.
The duty devolved on the priests.

Ver. 8. — At even. Literally, " between the
two evenings." (See the comment on ch.
xii. 6.) The offering of incense by the high
priest twice a day, at the time of the morning
and evening sacrifice, indicated that prayer
was needed as constantly as expiation, and
that neither might for a single day be inter-
mitted. A perpetual incense. " Perpetual,"
in the sense that it was to be burnt twice a
day, as long as the religion lasted — not in
the sense that it was to be kept burning con-
stantly,

Ver. 9. — 'Ry strange inoense is meant any
which was not prepared according to the
du-ections given in vers. Si — 38. None such
was ever to be offered. Nor was the altar to
be nsed for bnmt-offeiing, meat-offering, or
drink-offering. For burnt-offering it was
manifestly unfit; but the prohibition of the
others seems to show a determination to keep
its nse markedly distinct from that of the
brazen altar in the court, which was to receive
all that was offered either for expiation, or for
self-dedication, or in gratitude. On the sole



exception made to this general law, see thf
comment on the next verse.

Ver. 10. — Aaron shall make an atone-
ment upon the horns of it once in the year.
Once in the year, on the great day of atone-
ment — ^the tenth day of the seventh month —
the high priest, after burning incense within
the vcU, and sprinkling the blood of a bullock
and a ram towards the mercy seat, was to
take of the blood, and put it on the horns of
the altar of incense " to make an atonement
for it — to cleanse it and hallow it from the
nncleanness of the children of Israel" (Lev.
xvi. 18, 19). This was not making it an altar
of expiation, but merely expiating it. There
was, however, another use for the altar, where
it seems to have served for an altar of
expiation. When the high priest had sinned
in his official character, and offered a sin-
offering for his cleansing (Lev. iv. 3 — 12), or
when the whole congregation had committed
an offence through inadvertence, and did the
same (ib. 13 — 21), the high priest was to put
of the blood of the sacrifice on the horns of the
altar of incense, " for the expiation of his own
sin and the sin of the people " (Keil). In
these two cases, the altar of incense served the
purpose of the altar of burnt-offering, on which
was put the blood of private sin-offerings (ib.
22 — 35). It is most holy. There seems to
be sufficient reason for considering the altar of
incense as, next to the airk and mercy seat,
the most sacred object in the furniture of the
tabernacle. This precedence indicates the
extreme value which God sets upon prayer.



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 1 — 10. — The symbolism of the Attar of Incense. We have seen that the ascent
tf incense signifies the mounting up to heaven of the grateful odour of man's earnest
and heart-felt prayers. The altar, therefore, symbolises the heart which offers such
prayers, —

I. In its materials. The altar is of acacia wood and gold — the one a symbol of
soundness and strength, the other of purity. Prayer, to be acceptable, must proceed out
of a true heart — a sound, honest, sincere, strong heart — ^not one that is weak and un
stable, one thing to-day and another to-morrow; but one that is consistent, steady,
firm, brave, resolute. And it must also proceed out of a pure heart. The gold of the
altar was to be " pure gold," refined till every atom of the native dross was purged
away. And the heart of the worshipper should be refined similarly. There is much
native dross in the hearts of all men. The discipline of life, the furnace of affliction,
under God's blessing, does much to purge the dross. But something of it always
remains. One only was absolutely pure. We must approach God through the inter-
cession of Christ, and then our incense will mount up from a golden altar heaven-
wards.

II. In its situation. The altar was "by the ark of the testimony" — directly in
front of the mercy seat — very close to the Divine presence, therefore. Prayer brings us
into the presence of God. The heart that is drawn upward, and fixed in worship and
adoration in its Creator and Redeemer, feels itself near to him. Near, very near ; yet
still separated by a veil. The eyes of the body cannot pierce that impenetrable curtain,
which shrouds the invisible world from our eager, curious gaze. The heart itselt
cannot so lift itself up as to rise out of the present conditions of its mortal, finite nature,



OH. XXX. 11—16.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



805



and really enter the empyrean. There is still a veil between man and the Bpiritnal
world. Through death only can he pass beyond it.

III. In its horns, which webe symbols op poweb. Great is the might of prayer.
By means of it the heart has power with God, can wrestle with him, as Jacob did ; and
as it wore, force him to bless it (Gen. xxxii. 26). The parable of the importunate widow
illustrates this power. Let us follow her example; let us persist, let us besiege God
with our prayers, for ourselves, for others, and we shall prevail with him ; at length he
will hear us. It has been questioned in these " last days " whether prayer is ever
answered ; and tests have been proposed, by which men have hoped to demonstrate its
inefficiency. But God will not be tested. "Thou shalt not tempt" (i.e. "try" or
"test") "the Lord thy God." He does not undertake to answer faithless, or even
■ doubting, wavering prayers. The promise is — " Whoever shall say to this mountain,
Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doult in his heart, hut
shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass, ho shall have what-
soever he saith " (Mark xi. 23).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.
Vers. 1 — 11. — The Altar of Incense. See below, vers. 34 — 38.-



.0.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 11 — 16. — The eansom op souls. The
various commands given with respect to the
tabernacle and its furniture would necessarily
involve a very considerable outlay ; and it was
important that Moses should receive directions
as to the source, or sources, whence this ex-
penditure was to come. In ch. xxv. 2 — 7,
one source had been indicated, viz., the volun-
tary contributions of the people. To this is
now added a second source. On occasion of
the numbering of the people — an event which
is spoken of as impending (ver. 12) — Moses
was told to exact from each of them, as atone-
ment money, the sum of half a shekel of silver.
The produce of this tax was to be applied to
the work of the sauctuary (ver. 16), and it
is found to have fonned an important ele-
ment In the provision for the cost, since the
total amount was above a hundred talents, or,
more exactly, 301,775 shekels (ch. xxxviii. 25).
The requirement of atonement money seems
to have been based on the idea, that formal
enrolment in the number of God's faithful
people necessarily brought home to every man
nis unworthiness to belong to that holy com-
pany, and so made him feel the need of
making atonement in some way or other.
The payment of the half -shekel was appointed
as the legal mode under those circumstances.
It was an acknowledgment of sin, equally
binding upon all, and so made equal for all ;
•nd it saved from God's vengeance those who,
IXODUI — I^



if they had been too proud to make it, would
have been punished by some "plague" oi
other (ver. 12).

Ver. 12. — When thou takest the sum. The
sum had been taken roughly at the time of
the exodus (ch. xii. 37). Moses was now, it
would seem, about to take it again, more ac-
curately. No command had ever been given
that the people should not be numbered ; and
the Egyptian habit of compiling exact sta-
tistics naturally clung to one who had had an
Egyptian training. (See the " Statistical
Tables of Kamak," in the " Beeorda of the
Past," vol ii. pp. 19 — 28.) A ransom. Ra-
ther " an expiation," " an atonement " — (as in
ch. xxix. 33, 36) — something to show that
he was conscious of sin, and of his not de-
serving to be numbered among God's people.
That there be no plague. " That they be
not punched for undue pride and presump-
tion." There is no thought of such a " plague"
as was provoked by David's numbering (2 Sam.
xxiv. 15).

Ver. 13. — Half a shekel The shekel of
later times was a silver coin, about the size
round of our shilling, but considerably thicker,
and worth about one shilling and eightpence.
But at the date of the exodus coins were un-
known, and the "shekel" meant a certain
weight. The burthen imposed by the tax
was evidently a light one. The shekel of the
sanctuary. A standard weight in the posses-
sion of the priests, equal probably to about
22T) grains troy. Twenty gerahs. The word
" gerah "means" a bean ;" and the gerah must
have beeji a weight equal to about eleven



SOS



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[cH. XXX. 12— la



grains tioj. It remained iu use to the time of
the captivity (Ezok. xlv. 12).

Ver. 14. — From twenty years old and up-
ward. Twenty was the age at which an
Israelite was reckoned a man ; at twenty he
became liable to serve in the wars (2 Chron.
XXV. 5), and entered otherwise on the duties
of citizenship. At twenty the Levites began
their service in the temple (1 Chron. xxiiL 24,
27 ; 2 Chron. xxxi. 17 ; Ezra iii. 8).

Ver. 15. — The rich shall not give more,
and the poor shall not give less. This is
very emphatic testimony to the equal value of
soiJs in God's sight. The payment was " the
ransom of a soul " (ver. 12) — an acknowledg-
ment of Ood's mercv in sparing those whose



life was justly forfeit. As each soul that he
has created is equally precious in his sight,
and as he designs equally the salvation of all
— it was fitting, that the same exact som
should be paid in every case.

Ver. 16. — The application of the "atone-
ment money " is stated more distinctly in ch.
xxxviii. 27, 28. It was employed for the
silver sockets that supported the boards of the
tabernacle, and for the hooks, capitals, and
connecting rods of the pillars which sur-
rounded the court. Thus employed, it was a
continual "memorial" in the eyes of the
people, reminding each man of lua privileges
and duties



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 12 — 16. — The atonement money. Remark three things ^-•

I. The atonement money was required of all. " All have sinned, and come short
of the glory of Grod " (Bom. iii. 23). " If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our-
selves, and the truth is not in us " (1 John i. 8). There was to be no exemption.
Moses and Aaron were to bring their half-shekel no less than the others ; the priests
had to make the offeriDg, just the same as the laity ; the rulers, as much as the com-
mon people. The lesson taught was, that every soul was guilty before God — all uncleiin
in his sight, who " is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity " — all in need of pardon and
cleansing. So far there was certainly "no diflFerenoe" (Rom. iii. 22). "Every mouth
was stopped" {ib. 19). Boasting was excluded — the right attitude of the soul towards
God shown to be one of humility, deprecation, penitence.

II. The same atonement money was required of each. It is true to say, that all
men equally are guilty in God's sight ; but it would not be true to say that all are
equally guilty. Yet the same atonement was requked of all. " The rich shall not
givo more, and the poor shall not give less." This marks that one and the same atone-
ment is required, whatever be the degree of a man's guilt, whether he be (so far as is
possible) " a just man needing no repentance," or " the chief of sinners." On the man's
part is required in every case " repentance and faith ;" these, however, cannot atone.
The true " atonement money," the true " redemption," the real " ransom of souls," is
the death of Christ — one and the same for all — necessary for all — not too much for the
least, not too little for the most guilty ; but " a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice for
the sins of the whole world." It saves all that trust in it — saves them from wrath
and death — saves them from sin — atones for them — puts them "at one" with the
Father.

III. The atonement was to be kept dj mind, to be for a perpetual memorial.
There are those who are content to acknowledge that Christ has died for them, and has
saved them, who yet object to giving the fact, what they call, undue prominency.
They would acknowledge it once for all, and then have done with it. But this is not
the general teaching of the Bible, nor is it that of the present passage. The " atone-
ment money" was to be so employed as to be "a memorial unto the children of Israel
before the Lord" perpetually. They were to have the shapes of silver, into which it
had been cast, ever before their eyes. And assuredly there is nothing in the whole
»nge of spiritual facts which deserves such continual remembrance, such constant
dwelling upon in thought, as the atonement made for us by Christ. Herein alone
l^ve we hope, trust, confidence. Hereby alone are we saved. The cross of Christ
jhould be ever before the Christian's eye, mind, heart. He sbou'd not for a moment
fcl|;et it, much less be ashamed of it



•B. XXI. 17— 21.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. aoT



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 11 — 16. — The numbering of Israel and their ransom. L The nttubebino of
THE "EOPLB, AN EMBLEM OF THE JUDGMENT. God's claims Were brought Lome to them ;
their unworthiness was contrasted with the place assigned to them as the people whom
God had visited with his light and salvation. When we remember that we are the Lord's,
and the light of that just claim is shed upon our life, it is to our shame and confusion.
But life will be read at last in this very light I

IL The atonement which shields us. 1. It is a ransom for the life : " that there
be no plague among them when thou numberest them." God's wrath will not smite if
this be provided. 2. It must be given from one's own in that judgment day. Christ to
avail us then must have been made ours by faith. It must be Christ in us. 3. It is
required from alL None are guiltless. 4. The same is demanded from each. All alike
are in themselves lost and under God's wrath. 5. The atonement is for the service of
the tabernacle. The changed life of God's people through the indwelling of Christ is
for God's service now, and the manifestation of his glory hereafter. — ^U.

Vers. 11 — 17. — The atonement money. It pertained to the full admission of Israel to
theocratic privilege, that, the nation as a whole having been admitted into covenant, a
formal registration should be made of at least the grown part of the community. Direc-
tions were accordingly issued for the taking of a census, which had also in view a more
complete military organisation of the nation than as yet existed. The males of the tribes
from twenty years old and upwards were to be made to pass before Jehovah, and were to
be regularly counted and enrolled as members of the holy commonwealth. This act, how-
ever, which involved a near approach to Jehovah, and was on the part of the individual an
entrance into the full rights of his citizenship, called for some new recognition of the
principle of atonement on which the covenant was built. Hence the ordinance that each
individual of those who were numbered should make an offering of half a shekel of silver,
as a ransom or atonement for his soul (ver. 15). The silver thus obtained was to go for
the service of the tabernacle (ver. 16). On which observe — 1. The money was money of
atonement. It was paid in ransom for life. If we seek the principle on which the
ransoming proceeds, we must view the half shekel in the light of the practice of com-
mutation. In strictness, atonement could be made only by blood. Here, as in other
cases, the animal sacrifice is commuted for money, and the money, in virtue of that for
which it is commuted, is admitted as atonement. The purpose to which the silver was
to be applied required that the ransom should take this form. 2. All were to he taxed
alike. " The rich shall not give more, nor the poor less " (ver. 15). This intimates
that, as respects his need of atonement, no man has any advantage over his neighbours.
" There is no difference" (Rom. iii. 22). It intimates, too, the essential equality of men
in the eyes of God. 3. The money was to be applied to the work of the tabernacle. The
greater part of it was used in making the silver sockets for the dwelling-place (ch.
zxxviii. 27). Thus (1) the tabernacle — symbol of God's kingdom in Israel — was founded
on the silver of atonement. This, surely, was a profound testimony to the fact that
only on the basis of atonement can communion exist between heaven and earth.
(2) Each Israelite was individually represented in Jehovah's sanctuary. His tribute
money formed part of it. He had a stake and interest in it. The honour was great :
not 1^ so the responsibility. — J. 0.

EXPOSITION.



VeiB. 17—21 —The bbazen laveb. That
the tabernacle was to have an ample supply
of water had been implied in the directions
giren for the washing of Aaron and his sons
at its outer door (ch. xxix. 4). That it would
contain some provision of the kind is further
indicated by the command to " wash the in-



wards" of victims (t!). 17). We have now,
in this place, the special directions given to
Moses on the subject. He was to provide a
brazen, or rather a bronze laver, which was to
stand on a separate " foot," or base, of bronze,
in the court (4 the tabernacle, between the
entrance to the tabemajle and the " brazen

X*



•08



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. XXX. 18— 2L



altar." This was to be kept constantly snp-
plied with water, and was to furnish whatever
might be needed for the various ceremonies.
Among its other uses, it was to supply liquid
for the constant ablution of the priests, who
were to wash both their hands and their feet
on every occasion of their entering the sacred
tent, and even on every occasion of their
ministering at the brazen altar (ver. 20). This
law was to be « a statute for ever " (ver. 21),
and its violation was to be punished by death.

Ver. 18. — ^A laver. It is remarkable that
nothing is said respecting either the shape or
the size of the laver. In 1 Kings we have an
elaborate description of the "molten sea,"
which replaced it in Solomon's temple, as
well as an almost equally elaborate one of ten
other lavers made by Hiram, Solomon's artist,
at the same time. We may perhaps assume
from these examples that the brazen laver of
the tabernacle was a large bronze vase or
basin, standing upon a stem, which was fixed
into a base. It was probably fitted up with an
apparatus of taps and cocks. Between the
tabernacle .... and the altar. The Rab-
binical commentators say that it was not



exactly in the middle, but a little towards th<
south side.

Ver. 19. Aaron and his sons shall vash
their hands and their feet. Ablution by
clear fresh water is so plain and simple a
type of purity as to have been used in almost
gII religions. The hands and the feet would
designate symbolically all a man's active doings,
and even his whole walk in life — ^his " goings
out " and his " comings in," in the phraseology
of the Hebrews. There would also be a special
practical need for such ablutions in the case of
persons who were employed about bloody sacri-
fices, who slew the victims, sprinkled the blood,
and even dashed it against the base of the
altar. On some rare occasions the priests
were required to bathe their whole persons,
and not their hands and feet only (see above,
ch. xxix. 4 ; and below. Lev. xvi. i).

Ver. 20.— That they die not. Compare
ch. xxviii. 35 and 43. Contempt of the
simple and easy regulation to wash at the
laver would imply contempt of purity itself ;
and so an entire hypocrisy of life and cha-
racter, than which nothing could be a greater
offence to Grod.

Ver. 21.— It shall be a statute for ever.
Compare ch. xxvii. 21 ; xxviii. 43 ; xxix. 9,
etc Even to him— ».e., to Aaron.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. Ig— 21.— !%« Brazen Zover.— Primarily, the brazen altar has its antitype in the
Christian font. "Baptism saves us," says St. Peter (1 Pet. iii. 21). "Arise and be
baptised, and wash away thy sins," said Ananias (Acts xxii. 16). " There is cm
baptism for the remission of sins," said the Nioene Fathers. As the priests had to
wash at the laver ere they might enter the sanctuary, so entrance into the Church bv
tiie mstitutiou of Christ (Matt, xxviii. 19; Mark xvi. 16; John iii. 5), is by baptism.
lo wash, of course, is by itself not enough— each of us must " lead the rest of his life
according to this beginning." So the priests, besides washing, had to observe all God's
other ordinances.

Ultimately, both the laver and the font, both the priestly ablutions and the
Christian sacrament of baptism, are types of the true washing, which is washino in the
BLOOD OF Christ. This washing is—

I. Absolutelt, and in all cases, needful. Only " the blood of Jesus Christ
oleanseth us from all sm" (1 John i. 7). " If Christ wash us not, we have no part in
him (John xiii. 8). The saved in heaven are those who have " washed their robes and
made them white in the blood of the Lamb" (Rev. vii. 14). Baptism is "generaUv
necessary smce Christ came and instituted it ; yet no one doubts that many unbaptiz^
persons have entered heaven. But not one has entered, or will ever enter, whom the
blood of Chnst has not cleansed. « Wash me. Saviour, or I die," is the constantly
repeated cry of every Christian heart. '

II. A sovereign remedy that never fails to save. Thus " washed." we are
at once both "justified and sanctified" (1 Cor. vi. 11) ; both pardoned and made pure.
Ihus washed we have access to the Father; we are made fit to enter his courts: our
robes are made white, and not only our robes, but our souls. God wiU never reject one
who comes to hira in the wedding garment of a robe that Christ has cleansed. Unlv we
must be sure to keep our robes clean- we must not " defile our garments" (Rev iii ^)
-we must wash them again and again in the purifying blood ; we must Iwk nowhai
•)«e for salvation, but only to the Cross, and we must look to that perpetuaJly.



ck XXX. 22—3^]



The boos oP exodus.



Ml



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 17 — 34. — The laver and tlie anointing oil.

I. The laveb (vers. 17 — 22). This was to be made of brass (bronze), and was to bt
placed near the door of the tabernacle between it and the altar. It was to be used by
Aaron and his sons for purposes of ablution. A new symbol of the purity required in
those who serve before Jehovah. The Christian contracts daily defilements in his walk,
for which also daily cleansing is required (cf. John xiii. 10 ; 1 John i. 7).

II. Tub anointino oil (vers. 22 — 34). Precious, fragrant, holy. To be applied not
only to Aaron and his sons, but to the tabernacle and all its vessels. See Homily on
Consecration (ch. xxiv. 6, 7). The oil is the symbol of the Spirit. The holiness
imparted to Aaron and his sons by this anointing, and by the rites of consecration
generally, was indeed no more than a ceremonial or official holiness. It pertained to the
ofQce rather than to the man. Yet the holders of the office were, in virtue of their con-
secration, laid under obligations to personal holiness as well. The private character of
the priest might not avail to nullify his official acts ; but the absence in the public
representative of the spiritual qualifications for his office would not be allowed to gc
unpunished. Iniquity in the priest would be visited both on priest and people. — J. Ol



EXPOSITION.



Vers. S2 — 33. — The holt oil. The com-
position of the oil required for anointing the
priests (ch. xxix. 7), the altar (Jib. 36), the
tabernacle itself (ver. 26), and its furniture
(vers. 27, 28), was a necessary matter for
Moses to know, and is now declared with
much minuteness ; the exact weight of each
spice, and the exact quantity of the olive oil
being given (vers. 23, 24). Directions are
added for its use (vers. 26 — 30) : and finally,
a warning is given against its application to
any persons except the priests, or its com-
position for any other purpose besides the use
of the sanctuary (vers. 31 — 33).

Ver. 23. — Trinoipal spices. The ancients
recognised a vast variety of spices. Pliny
notices an ointment which was composed of
twenty-six ingredients, chiefly spices {H. N.
xiii. 2, § 18). Herodotus mentions five " prin-
cipal spices " as furnished by Arabia (iii. 107),
of^whieh four seem to be identical with those
employed m the holy oil. Pure myrrh.
Literally, "myrrh of freedom," or "freely
flowing myrrh." The shrub which yields
myrrh (Bal'amodendron myrrha) produces
two kinds — one, which exudes spontaneously,
uld is regarded as the best (Plin. H. If.
xii. 85; Theophrast. De Odoribus, § 29) ; and
another, of inferior quality, which flows from
incisions made in the bark. It is the former
kind which is here intended. Myrrh was
among the ancients in high request as a spice.
It was used by the Egyptians for embalming
(llcrud ii. 86), in Persia as an odour (Athen.
Deipn. xii. p. 514, A),; by the Greeks for
incense (fioph. Fr. 340) and in unguents
(Azistcyb Eq 1. 1832) ;dj the later Jew« in



funerals (John xix. 89) ; and was largely
exported from Arabia and Ethiopia into vari-
ous parts of Asia and Europe. Sweet oinna-
mon. Cinnamon was a far rarer spice than
myrrh. It is only mentioned three times in
the Old Testament (cf. Prov. vii. 16; Cant.
iv. 14). I am not aware of any trace of it in
Egypt; but Herodotus says that it was ob-
tamed by the Greeks from, Arabia in his day
(iii. 111). It is the inner bark or rind of a
tree allied to the laurel, and called by some
Laurus cinnamnmum, by others (Xnnamomum
zeylanicum. The tree now grows only in
India on the Malabar coast, in Ceylon, Bor-
neo, Sumatra, Cochin China, and China. If
its habitat has not suffered contraction, we
must regard the mention of it here as indica-
tive of a very early commerce of a very exten-
sive character. Sweet calamus. Aromatic
reeds, probably of several distinct kinds, seem
to have been the produce anciently of Pales-
tine, Arabia, Mesopotamia, and India. It is
impossible to say what exactly was the species
here intended. Calamus is mentioned as a
spice in Is. xliii. 24 ; Jer. vi. 20 ; Ezek. xxvii.
17 ; and Cant. iv. 14 ; but the term used
(haneh, " cane ") is vague ; and it is not at all
clear that one species only is alluded to.

Ver. 24.— Cassia. The modern cassia is
the inner bark of a tree distinct from the cin-
namon tree, known to botanists as Cinnamo-
mum cassia, which is a native of India, Java,
and the Malay peninsula. In taste and scent,
it " bears a strong resemblance to cinnamon,
but is more pungent and of coarser texture "
(Cook). It is uncertain, however, if this is
the spice here indicated. The Hebrew word
used IS kiddah, not h&sidth (as in Ps.'xlv^ 8) ;
and it is very doubtful whether the two art
identical On the shekel of tlia suotnary.



SIO



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. XXX. 23—33.



see the comment on ver. 13 ; and on the hin,
see ch. xxix. 40.

Ver 25. — An oil of holy ointment. Liter-
ally, " an oil of holy anointing," or " a holy
anointing oil," as our translators render in
ver. 81, and also in the last clause of the
present verse. An ointment compoond after
the art of the apothecary. Not a simple
mixture of the ingredients mentioned, but the
product of trained skill and knowledge ap-
plied to the materials. Jewish tradition says
that the essence of each spice was extracted
from it, and only these essences mingled with
the olive oil. We are told later (ch. xxxvii.
29} that the task of preparing the holy oil
was committed to Bezaleel.

Vers 26— 29.— Thou shalt anoint the tahei-
naole. The first application of the holy oil
was to be to the inanimate objects constituting
the paraphernalia of worship— viz., 1. The
tabernacle itself as a whole ; 2. The furniture of
the holy of holies — ^the ark and mercy seat ;
3. The furniture of the holy place — the shew-
bread table, the candlestick, and the altar of
incense ; and 4. The furniture of the court —
the idtar of burnt-offering, and the laver.
After applying the oil to these, Moses was to
proceed to the anointing of the priests. (Com-
pare Lev. viii. 10 — 12.)

Ver. 27. — ^Ihe table and all his vessels.
See above, ch. xxv. 29. The oandlestlok and
his vessels. See ch. xxv 37, 38. '

Ver. 28.— The altar of bornt-offeiiag with
all his vessels. See ch. zxvii. 8.



Ver. 30. — And thou shalt anoint Aaion,
etc. Not till all bis surroundings had re-
ceived sanctificatlon was Aaron to be con-
secrated. The tent, the ark, the table, the
candlestick, the altar of incense, the brazen
altar, the laver, and its base, each and all
were to be touched with the holy oil, and
thereby formally dedicated to God's service
(Lev. viii. 10, 11), and then at last was
Moses to "pour of the anointing oil upon
Aaron's head, and anoint him, to sanctify
him " (i6. 12). So God constantly prepares
men's spheres for them before he inducts
them into their spheres. Even in the next
world our Blessed Lord " prepares places for
ns."

Ver. 82. — ^ITpon man's flesh shall it not he
poured — i'.e., "it shall not be used by any
privately as a mere unguent, but shall be
reserved wholly for sacred purposes." Neither
shall ye make any other like it, after the
composition of it. Bather, " after its propor-
tion." The Israelites were not forbidden the
use of the different materials in their
unguents, or even the combination of the
same materials, provided they varied the
proportions. The object is simply that the
holy oil should remain a thing separate
and apart, never applied to any but a holy
use.

Ver. .33. — ^ITpon a stranger. A " stranger "
here means any one not of the family of Amob.
Compare ch. xxix. 33.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 23 — 25. — 7%« tweetness of the Holy anointing Oil. The holy oil had infused
into it the essence of four "principal spices" — ^myrrh, that scents the garments of the
great king (Ps. xlv. 8 ; Cant. iii. 6) ; cinnamon, the choicest of the spices of distant Ind ;
sweet calamus, that exhales its best fragrance when bruised ; cassia, which, together
with sweet calamus, formed one of the glories of the market of Tyre (Ezek. xxvii. 19).
How passing sweet must have been the odour of these blended perfumes— each delicious
alone — ^all enhanced by the combination, which had taxed the best skill of the
" apothecary " (ver. 25) ! But the sweetness of our anointing oil is greater. " We have
an unction from the Holy One." Our " anointing oil " is the Blessed Spirit of God.
What is there in all the experiences of this world so sweet to the weary soul as he?
How sweet and dear is he —

L In the soft oentlbness of his descent upon va. Silently, unperceivedly,
without sight, or sound, or stir, the gentle influence comes — steals into the heart — only
by degrees makes its presence known to us. A crisis — a manifest change — " tongues of
fiie," or the rush of a "mighty wind" would cause the weak believer to tremble with
fear, and perhaps drawback to his undoing. Our "anointing oil" descends upon us
soft as " the dew of Hermon, which fell upon the hill of Sion."

" He comes, sweet influence to impart)
A gracious willing guest.
While he can find one humble heart '

Wherein to rest"

n. Ih the method of his oedinabt workinq. Not by rade shook*, or radden
terrible aUmu; but by the mild coercioD of little checks and scarcely-felt restrunti—



OH. XXX. 34— Saj



liUi BOOK OF £lXODU£k



Ul



by whispers softly breathed into the ear of the soul — ^by the suggestion of good thoughts
— ^by the presentation of holy memories — does he effect his ends. Wise as any serpent,
harmless as his own emblem, the dove, he feeds us as we are able to receive of him.
He has " milk" for such as stand in need of milk. He has " strong meat" for such as
oaa bear it. Manifold and diverse are his gifts, but given to every lasai " to profit
wiUi«l"(lCor.xii. 7).

** His is that gentle voice we hear,
Soft as the breath of even,
That checks each fault, that calms each fMi^
And speaks of Hearen.

■ And every virtne we possess.
And every conquest won,
And every thought of holiness,
Are his alone."

in. In HIS PATIENCE WITH ITS WHEN WE ARE WATWARD. God once declared,
" My spirit shall not always strive with man " (Gen. vi. 3) ; and Scripture warns
us that the Holy Ghost may be "resisted" (Acts vii. 51) and even "quenched*
(1 Thess. v. 19). But how wonderful is his patience and forbearance towards those who
thwart and oppose him I How unwilling is he to give them up ! How loth to quit then
souls, and leave them to their own guidance ! Assuredly he is " provoked every day "
by each one of us. But he is not even angry — he simply " grieves " (Eph. iv. 30)^— is
"vexed" (Is. Ixiii. 10) — ^made sorrowfuL No sooner do we show any signs of
relenting than he forgives — encourages us, cheers, comforts, consoles. "There is a
friend that sticketh closer than a brother." Such a friend to man is " the Comforter."

IV. In Hib KINDNESS TOWARDS UB WHEN WE TURN TO HIM. It is the Christian's
privilege to speak with God "as a man to his friend" (Ex. xxxiii. 11). With the
in-dweUing Spirit we may ever have this " mystic sweet communion." Would we speak
to him at any moment, his ear is attent to hear. Unworthy as we are, unclean as we
are, rebellious as we are, and self-willed, and self-seeking, he will commune with us,
if we will commune with him — ^he will tell us of the things of heaven, " guide us into
all truth" (John xvi. 13), " receive of Christ's and show it unto us" (ib. 14). Th»
sweetness of such commune is inexpressible — it may well " ravish our heart " (Caut. It.
9) and make us " sick of love " (ib. v. 8).



EXPOSITION.



VeiB. 34 — 38. — The holt incensb. It
remained t> ^ire directions concerning the
composition of the incense, which, according
to verse 7, was to be burnt upon the altar of
gold. That it was to be of one and one only
peculiar kind had been already implied in the
prohibition to bum "strange incense" (ver.
9). Moses is now told exactly how it was to
be composed. As the oil was to contain four
spices, so was the incense to be made of a
like number-^^-stacte, onycha, galbanum, and
frankincense— of each the same quantity (ver.
84). The art of the apothecary was to be
called in for making it up (ver. 85). A
portion of it was to be " beaten very small,"
and placed in front of the ark of the covenant,
probabl} on the golden altar outside the vail
(wm 86) A prohibition is added, similar to



that given with respect to the holy tSl : no
one is to make any like it for private use,
under pain of being " cut off from his people "
(vers. 37, 38).

Ver. 34. — Take onto thee sweet spioes.
Bather, " Take unto thee spices," or " per-
fumes." The word has no epithet. Stacte.
The Hebrew word used means simply
"a drop" (Job xxxii. 27), and might be
applied to any gum or resin which exuded
from a tree. We have no clue to the
gum here intended but that which is fur-
nished by the rendering of the LXX., o-raKT^,
which our translators have followed. Now
the Greeks seem to have called two gums by
this name — one, the natural exudation from
the myrrh tree, called above (ver. 23) *' pnr«
myrrh," or "the myrrh that flows freenr;"
and the other gnm storaz. As it is not likely
that the same substance hai been given tw«



m



Mb Book of fixoDds.



tou. xxz. H—S&



names within 1he space of ten verses, we
must suppose tlie latter to be meant. Gum
stoiax is the produce of a tree allied to the
poplar, and known as Styrax officinalis, which
grows abundantly in Syria and Palestine. It
was frequently used as a perfume by the
ancients (Herod, iii. 107 ; Plin. H. N. xii.
17, §40> Onyoha. The Hebrew word, shl-
Hheleth, seems to mean a " shell " of some
kind or other. The Oreek im^, Lat. rniycha,
was applied to the opermlum — ^the " nail " or
"claw — of certain shell-fish of the genus
Strombidse, which were common in the Red
Sea, and elsewhere. The particular stronibus
which furnishes the enycha of the ancients is
thought to have been the UnguU odm-atiu
or Blatta Byzantina. The opercula of these
shell-fish have, when burnt, a strong odour,
" something like castoreum." The onycha is,
again coupled with galbanum and gum storax
in Eccl. xxiv. 15. Galbanum. The Hebrew
word Ichdb'nah, is so near the Greek xi"Aj8i£ir)
and the Latin galhamtm that it has with
good reason been assumed to designate the
same substance. Galbanum is a gum well
known both to ancients and modems. It is
admitted into the pharmacopeia'. Several
plants seem to produce it, as the Opoidia gal-
hanifera, the Galbanum Persieum, and a plant
which grows in Northern Persia, very like
the Ferula eruJiescens. When burnt, galba-
num has a strong pungent odour, which is
said to be disagreeable by itself, but to im-
prove and preserve other odours (Plin. H. N.
-xii. 54). FranHncense. On the wide use of
frankincense, see the comment on ver. 1. It
was the produce of a tree which anciently
flourished in Arabia, but which appears to
have degenerated, and now produces only an
mf erior (quality. The best frankincense comes



now from the high lands of India. It exudei
from a tree called ealai (the SosweUia ler-
rata or tlmrifera of botanists). Some think
that the frankincense exported largely from
Arabia to the neighbouring nations was in
part the produce of this tree imported by the
Arab merchants from Hindustan.

Ver. 35. — ^A confection after the art of the
apothecary. Like the holy oil, the incense
was to be artistically compounded by one
accustomed to deal with such ingredients.
It was actually, in the first instance, the
work of Bezaleel (ch. xxvii. 29). Tempered
together. This translation is supported by
the authority of the Septuagint and the Vul-
gate, and is defended by Canon C!ook. But
the mass of modern critics is in favour of the
translation "salted," or "with salt." (So
Buxtorf, Gesenius, De Wette, Kalisch, Keil,
etc.) Knobel suggests " comminuted," identi-
fying mdlalth with marakh. The point is
not one of much importance.

Ver. 86. - -Then shalt beat some of it very
small. This is against Knobel's rendering
of molaJch, which would imply that aU was
broken into small pieces. A certain portion
only was to be thus prepared from time to
time and placed ready for offering. It was
to be put before the testimony — i.e., opposite
the ark, but outside the vail. This near
vicinity to the Divine Presence rendered it
most holy.

Vers. 37, 38. — ^Ye shall not make unto
yonrselves, etc. None shall be made by any
man for private use according to the same
recipe, since the compound, as described, is
" holy unto the Lord." If any man does so,
he shall be " cut oS from among his people "
— i.e., " put to death by the ciwl anuiority."
(See ch. xxxi. 14.)



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 34 — 38. — The Holy Incense. Let us note here—

I. The composition of the incense (vers. 34, 35). The utmost care was taken In
the law that the incense should be properly composed, of the right materials, in the
right proportion. Equal care is to be taken by Christians with their incense. Prayer
is not to be adventured on rashly, carelessly, unpreparedly. The matter, even the very
words, of prayer should be carefully weighed beforehand. To approach God with
unworthy thoughts, to beseech him for those temporal advantages which we ought to
regard as of no moment at all, is to " pray amiss " — to approach him with " strange
incense." Ei^ually unbecoming is it to use homely or over-familiar expressions in prayer.
What we have to aim at is to reflect " the mind of Christ." Christ has given us three
pattern prayers— 1. The Lord's prayer ; 2. The intercessory prayer after the last suppei
(John xvii.), and 3. The prayer in the garden of Gethsemane (Matt. xxvi. 39). Lei
these be our frankincense, and stacte, and onycha. For a fourth material, we may usi
the Psalms of David — especially the penitential Psalms. We need not then to fear lesl
our incense should be " strange."

II. The continual pkbbentation op the ikcense (ver. SO). — A portion of tht
incense was to be " beaten very small, and put before the testimony " — iM, before the ark
and the presence of God, where it was to remain continually. It waa not to be lighttd



^ixz. 1—38.1 1:M£ ^oo!& 0^ £^ot)U^ lis

but to be in constant readiness for lighting. So there is in the Christian heart a prayer-
ful temper, ever present before God, which God accepts and values, in the intervals
Between actual prayer. Our incense cannot always be mounting in cloud after cloud to
the courts of heaven. But the temper may be in us, ready to kindle, at all times.

III. The value of the incense. The incense was among the things that were " moit
holy " (ver. 36). God set special store by it. He would have it near him — ^in front of
the tabernacle — only just outside the vail — and he would have it there constantly. So
it pleases him to value the prayers of his saints. Angels offer them (Eev. viii. 3). They
ascend before his throne (ib. 4). They are acceptable to him. They have power with
him. " The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much " (Jam. v. 16).
One humble prayer, breathed by the publican, gained him forgiveness — "justified" him.
One earnest prayer, uttered by the penitent thief, obtained him Paradise. There is no
limit to the value of faithful prayer, whereby we draw upon the bank of omnipotence.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS

Vers. 1 — 11, 34 — 38. — The golden altar and the perfume. The golden altar was of
small dimensions, a cubit in length, a cubit in breadth, and two cubits high. It was a true
altar, as shown by its square shape, and by its horns. Its place was immediately in
front of the vail dividing the two portions of the sanctuary, with the innermost of
which — the holy of holies — it was regarded as having the more intimate connection
(1 Kings vi. 22 ; Heb. ix. 4). The command was that Aaron should burn upon it
sweet incense morning and , evening— in the morning when he trimmed, and in the
evening when he lighted, the lamps. This was done, in the one case, at the offering of
morning, in the other, at the offering of evening sacrifice, the synchronism of the
acts deserving our attention. Once a year the horns of the altar were to be smeared
with the blood of the sin-offering. Minute directions are given for the making of the
incense (vers. 34 — 38). It was to be " salted, pure, and holy " (ver. 3o). The burning
of this incense on the altar was at once a symbol of prayer and devotion, and a call to
the congregation to engage in these spiritual exercises (Ps. cxli. 2 ; Luke i. 10 ; Eev. v.
8 ; viii. 3, 4). As an act of the priest, it may be viewed as a type of the Intercession
of Christ. The service of this altar suggests the following ideas — 1. Frayer — taking
the word in its widest sense, as denoting the exercise of all devout feeling and spiritual
desire towards God — is the holiest act of the spiritual life. It is figured as incense.
And the altar of incense stood in immediate relation with the holy of holies. The altar
and the incense offered upon it, are declared to be " most holy" (vers. 10, 36). The
reason is not difficult to find. The very essence of the devotional life expresses itself
in prayer. Its love, its awe, its thankfulness, its aspirations, its unutterable yearnings
after God — its breathings after holiness, its very contrition and sorrow for its sins — all
ascend to Jehovah in this supreme act of the nature. Words bear but a small part in
prayer. The province of words is to define. Hence the soul, in the intensity of its
aspirations, in its renchings out towards the infinite, often feels the need of escaping
from words, of leaving them behind. Prayer becomes " the burden of a sigh" — " the
falling of a tear" — perhaps a purely inward act of the mind realising union with
Jehovah. Or its uncontrollable desires may express themselves in " groanings which
cannot be uttered" (Rom. viii. 2d). And it is precisely these unutterable parts of our
prayers which are the sweetest to God. The appropriate symbol of them is the incense,
rising in its unconfined wreaths from the priest's censer, or from the golden altar.
2. Prayer is an act of sacrifice. " In prayer," says Martensen, " the profoundest act
of conscience and obedience is inwardly accomplished, for prayer is only in so far a
laying hold and appropriation of God, as it is likewise a sacrifice ; and we can only
receive God into us when we likewise give ourselves to him. He who offers no sacrifice
in his prayer, who does not sacrifice his selfwill, does not really pray." 3. The con-
nection with the sacrifice of burnt-offering. The coals for the, altar of incense were
brought from the altar of "burnt-offering (cf. Lev. xvi. 12, 13). This teaches that the
irorshipper needs reconciling before he can acceptably offer the sacrifices of his devotion.
But there is a further connection, arising from the significance of the bumt-oflering as a
symbol of dedi'ition. Keil says truly — " The incense-offering was not only a spirituaire-



U4



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



TcH. XXXI. 1 — IL



ing and transfiguring of the bumt-offering, but a completion of it also." The connection
may be stated thus. The yielding up of the life to God, symbolised in the continual
bumt-offering, transforms itself in practice into the three following modes of self-sur-
render. 1. Boly practical activity, of which the fruit, good works, is represented in the
ihew-bread. X Public witness-bearing for God, by manifestation of the truth, and by
holiness of walk — ^represented by the candlestick. 3. Devotion — "the soid's going
forth to unite itself in appropriate actings with the great centre of Being, and to devote
its own inmost neing to him" (Fairbaim) — symbolised by the burning of the incense.
This is the culminating act of self-devotion, and crowns the sanctuary-worship, raise*
it to its consummation. 4. Connection with light. The incense was to be burned at
the time of the trimming, and again of the lighting of the lamps. The brighter the
light, the purer tlie devotion. In Christianity no countenance is given to fhe maxim
that devotion is lonnected with ignorance. Christ and his apostles attach the utmost
importance to the possession of right knowledge, and to growth in it. Growth in
knowledge is the ctndition of sanctification, of spiritual fruitfulness, of enlargement of
nature, of being filied with all the fulness of God. 5. Prayer a daily duty. The
"perpetual incense before the Lord" reminds us of the apostolic injunction, "Pray
without ceasing " (1 Thess. v. 17). Prayer, devotion, is to be the element we live in.
And prayer, "with thanksgiving," is to sanctify everything we do (Eph. v. 20;
PhiL iv. 6 ; CoL iii. 17 ; 1 Tim. iv. 4, 5).— J. O.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XXXI



Vers 1 — 11. — Thb call of Rezaleel
ANT Aholiab. The directions for the con-
struction of the tabernacle and its furniture
being now complete, and the composition of
the holy oil and the holy incense having been
laid down minutely, it only remained to desig-
nate the persons to whom the oversight of the
work was to be especially entrusted. These
were to be two — ^Bezaleel, of the tribe of Judah,
as head and chief ; Aholiab, of the tribe of Dan,
as his assistant. There can be no doubt that
they were selected, primarily, as already possess-
ing superior artistic powers and acquiremenis ;
but in appointing them God promised an in-
fusion of special wisdom and knowledge, so
that they were at once naturally and super-
naturally fitted for their task. It is impor-
tant to note that artistic ability is thus dis-
tinctly recognised as being quite as much a
gift of God as any other, and indeed as
coming to man through the Spirit of God
(ver. 8). Artistic excellence is not a thing
to be despised. It is very capable of abuse ;
but in itself it ia a high gift, bestowed by
God on a few only, with the special mtent
that it should be used to his honour and
glory — not indeed in his direct service only —
but always so as to improve, elevate, refine
mankind, and thus help towards the advaocc-
nwat of God's kingdom



Ver. 2.— I have oalled by nam*. Ood
" calls by name " only these whom be ap-
points to some high office, as Moses (eh. iiL
4 ; xxxiii. 12), Cyrus (Is. xlv. 3, 4), and here
Bezaleeil and Aholiab. He honours us highly
in even condescending to " know us by name,"
still more in " calling " us. Bezaleel is traced
to Judah in Chronicles through five ancestors
— Uri, Hur, Caleb, Hezron, and Fharez, Jn-
dah's son by Tamar. The genealogy, though
less contracted than most of those in £xodus,
probably contains two or three omissions.
The son of Eur. Ilur, the grandfather of
Bezaleel, is thought to be the person men-
tioned in ch. xvii. 10, and ch. xxiv. 14.

Ver. 3.— The Spirit of God. There is no
article in the Hebrew, any more than in
Gen. i. 1 ; and some would therefore trans-
late "a Divine Spirit"; bnt no change is
needed. Suakh ehhim contains in itseU the
idea of singularity, since God has but one
Spirit. The Holy Spirit is the medium of
communication whereby God the Father be-
stows dU gifts upon us. In wisdom, and In
understanding, and in knowledge. By the
first of these terms is meant the power to m-
vent and originate ; by the second ability to
receive and appreciate directions and sugges-
tions; by the third, such information as is
acquired by experience and acquaintance with
facts. Bezaleel was to hare all these, and, in
addition, was to be wise in all manner of
workmanship ; i.e. — to possess manual dex-
terity, the power of artistic execution.

Vers. 4, 6. — The result of these gifts
would be to enable him — 1. To devise onn-
ning works — t.e., to design everything excel-
lenUy; and 8. To work in all maimw «(



OB. XXXI. S— 10.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUSb



•U



woTknianship— t.e., to carry out his designs
witl> success. It has been said that "as
everything that bad to be done was prescribed
in strict and precise detail, there was to be no
exercise of original powers of invention nor
of taste " (Cook) ; but this was scarcely so.
The forms of the cherubim, the patterns to
be woven into the stuffs, or embroidered on
them, the shapes of the vessels, of the capi-
tals of the piUars, and of the laver were not
prescribed m the directions. Bezaleel and
Aholiab would have had to design them after
such a description as Moses could give of the
" pattern " which he had seen in the mount.
In doing this, there would be much room for
the exercise of inventive power and taste.

Ver. 5. — In cutting of atones — i.«., "in
gem-cutting." The fabric of the tabernacle
was entirely of metal, cloth, and wood. In
oarving of timber. Bather " cutting." The
word is the same as that used of the stones.
And no ornamental " carving " of the wood-
work was prescribed.

Ver. 6. — ^Aholiab appears to have had the
entire charge of the textile fabrics, both
woven and embroidered (ch. xxxviii. 23).
Of the tribe of Dan. It is remarkable that
Hiram, the chief artist employed by Solomon
lor the ornamental work of the temple, was
tlto a descendant oi Dan (8 Chron. ii. II).



Yet the Danites were in general rather narlik«
and rude than artistic (Gen. xlix. 17; Deut
xxxiii. 22 ; Judg. xiii. 2 ; xviii. II, 27). la
the hearts of all that are wise hearted have
I put vrisdom. "Unto him that hath shall
be given." Those who were already "wise
hearted" — possessed, that is, of artistic power
— were selected by God to receive extra-
ordinary gifts of the same kind.

Ver. 7 — II contain an enumeration of the
various works already commanded to be made
The same order is observed, except that here
the tabernacle itself is placed first, and the
altar of incense takes its natural position next
to the candlestick.

Ver. 10. The cloths of serrloe. Bather
" the vestments of o£Bce " — i.e., the dis-
tinguishing vestments of the High Priest,
which he alone was allowed to wear. These
were the blue robe, the ephod, the girdle of
the ephod, and the breast-plate (ch. xxviiL
6—35). The holy garments. The rest of the
High Priest's dress — i.e., the linen drawers,
the diapered tunic, the inner girdle and the
mitre (ib. 39, 43; Lev. xvi. 4), which con-
stituted his whole apparel on the great day ot
atonement. The garments of his sons — 1'.8,
the linen drawers, tunics, girdles, and caps,
mentioned in ch. xxviii 40, 12



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 8 — 6. — Artistic excellence, I. Its footidation a natdrai, gift. God singled
out from the mass of the people such as were " wise hearted." A natural foundation was
necessary for his spirit to work upon. It is generally allowed, in the case of a poet,
that " nascitur, non fitP But the same is true of all art-genius. Every artist, be he
poet, painter, sculptor, musician, or mere designer of furniture, requires to have a some-
thing implanted within him from the first, out of which his artistic power is to grow,
and without which he could never attain to excellence. Bezaleel and Aholiab were such
persons. They were men of natural genius, with a special aptitude for the task to which
they were set.

II. The natubal gift mat be labqelt wcreased and improved by qbaoe.
There is a natural affinity between artistic excellence and spirituality. God, who gives
artistic power originally for wise and good purposes, wiU, if men use the power worthily,
augment it by the direct action of bis Spirit on their intellects. Those poets, painters,
etc., who have been good men, have found their artistic ability improve with time.
Those who have lived evil lives have found it deteriorate. The spirit of devotion gave
to the school of Angelico, Francia, and Perugino, its wonderful power and intensity.
Milton's religious ardour sublimised his poetry. The best art has always had a religious
purpose, and derived' much of its excellence from its association with religion. Men
who regard their gifts as a trust, and exercise them in the fear of God, find constantly
that their conceptions grow in grandeur and dignity, while their execution becomes
more and more happy. The spirit of God fills them with wisdom, and understanding,
and knowledge, and even with " all manner of workmanship."

III. On the other hand, the natural gift may be perverted to evil, and
BECOME A CURSE BOTH TO ITS POSSESSOR AND OTHERS. There is BO intellectual power

^ which is not liable to misuse. Artistic excellence is perhaps more liable to it than most
others. If it is divorced from moral goodness, and made a mere instrument of self-
glorification, it becomes debased at once. And the decline is easy from bait to worse
"liieAM tfeMSMiw AaefWir 'then are few things which luva sorkad oreater evil la



il« IBE book of teXODttS. toH. XXXI 1—12

the world than high artistic genius combined with moral depravity. A whole genera-
tion may be utterly corrupted by a single sensualistic poet. Sculpture and painting
have less influence ; yet still a sensualistic school of either may have a most deleterious
effect upon the morals of an age. It is of the greatest importance that such a perversion
of artistic genius should not take place. It should be impressed on all that their
artistic powers are the gift of God, to be accounted for just as much as other gifts ; to
Jn mad, u all gifts are to be used, to his honour ; to be made to subserve the ends for
which his kingdom has been established upon earth — ^the advance of holiness, the
general elevation, refinement and spiritualisation of mankind, and the special purifying
to himself of a peculiar people, zealous of good works.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1 — 12. — Bezdleel and Aholiab. The calling of these two craftsmen for the
work of the sanctuary, and the statement concerning Bezaleel that Jehovah had " filled
him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in
all manner of workmanship" (ver. 3), suggest various important lessons. On the
distinction of the terms — " wisdom," " understanding," " knowledge," see the exposi-
tion, and consult the valuable notes on Eph. i. 8, Col. i. 9, in the Bishop of Durham's
Commentaries. The general moral is, that when God has any important work to be
done, whether in Church or State, he will not fail to raise up, and in due time to " caU
by name," the individuals needed for the doing of it. The preparatory training school
of these individuals may be far removed from the scene of their future labours. Bezaleel
and Aholiab were trained in Egypt. Cf what is said in " Prom Log Cabin to White
House " of Presidents Lincoln and Garfield, of the United States — " Both of these states-
men were bom in log-cabins, buQt by their fathers, in the wilderness, for family homes.
Both were poor as mortals can well be. Both were bom with talents of the highest
order ; but neither enjoyed early advantages of schools and teachers . . . Both worked
on a farm, chopped wood, and did whatever else was needful for a livelihood, when eight
years of age," etc. Thus God gifts, trains, prepares men, without a hint of the use to
which he' means afterwards to put them. Till the event discloses it, the honour in
reserve for them is kept a secret, even from themselves. The gem is polished in
obscurity by the master's hand. Ultimately it is brought to light, and astonishes the
beholders by therare finish of its beauty^ The tabernacle was built with the spoils of
the Egyptians in more senses than one. More special lessons are the following —

I. All gifts are fbom God. • Not simply gifts of intellect, of oratory, of holiness,
of spiritual understanding, but gifts of every kind, from the highest to the lowest
Grace, in the case of Bezaleel, Aholiab, and their fellow-craftsmen, proceeded on a basis
of natural endowment. Cf. ver. 6 — " into the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have
put wisdom." Skill in handicraft is a species of mental excellence, and deserves the
name " wisdom." It, also, is from God. So with ail natural talents ; with, e.g., the
poetic gift ; gifts of music, painting, sculpture, architecture ; business faculty ; the gift
of statesmanship ; the power to " think out inventions " ; the skill of the artificer. This
truth lies at the basis of the demand for a religious use of gifts.

II. Natural gifts admit of indefinitb expansion and enlargement undeb
THE influence OF God's Spibit. The workers in the tabemacle were supematuraUy
assisted in their work. Nothing less than this is implied in the words — " And 1 have
filled him with the spirit of God " (ver. 3) ; " into the hearts of all that are wise hearted
I have put wisdom " (ver. 6). Grace aids nature. Regeneration is often accompanied by
a mysterious and almost miraculous improvement in the powers of knowledge, so much
BO that, from a state of stolid imbecility, a person may be seen rising up and standin"
forth an acute argumentative pleader for the truth. (Cf. Dr. Wm. Anderson on
" Regeneration," p. 37.) What holds good of the general invigoration of the powers,
may be expected to apply in the particular. Dedication of self carries with it dedication
of gifts. And if an individual dedicates to God any special gift which he possesses,
•eeking, whether in the Church or in pursuit of an ordinary calling, to use the same for
God's glory, it will be his privilege to have it aided, strengthened, purified, and largely
•nhaaced in iii operations by the influences of Divine grace. The oominonest



OH. xxxL 12— 17.] TH£ BOOK OF KXODUS. 817

work will thus be better done, if done in the spirit of prayer. And so with the noblest.
Milton speaks of his great epic as a work " not to be raised from the heat of youth, or
the vapours of wine, like that which flows at waste from the pen of some vulgar
amourist or the tirencher-fury of a rhyming parasite— nor to be obtained by invocation
of Dame Memory and her siren daughter, but by devout prayer to that Eternal Spirit
who can enrich with all utterance and knowledge, and sends out his seraphim, with the
hallowed fire of his altar, to touch and purify the lips of whom he pleases."

III. Beliqion sanctifies laboub. The Bible is a text-book of instruction on the
dignity of labour, it has no sj mpathy with the contemptible foppishnpss which looks
on labour as degrading. It includes labour in religion. It sees in the occupation of the
humblest handicraftsman the exercise of a Divine gift. The good man who, whether
he eats or drinks, or whatsoever he does, does all to the glory of God (1 Cor. x. 31) does not
demean himself by an honest calling, but transfigures his calling into part of his service
to his Maker. In his case, laborare est orare. The shewbread on the table in the
sanctuary was a recognition of the sacredness of labotir. It had as one of its meanings
the dedication to God of the exercise of the calling by which Israel won its daily bread.
So manual labour was sanctified to God in the making of the tabernacle. But it
was reserved for Christianity to give the crowning proof of the dignity of labour by
showing it ennobled and glorified in the person of its Founder. The fathers of the
Christian Church, in contrast with the Greeks and Romans, who looked on artisans and
barbarians with contemptuous disgust, preached in their noblest tones the duty and
dignity of honourable toil. "The proudest bishops were not ashamed to dig; a
Benedict worked six hours a day with hoe and spade ; a Becket helped regulariy to
reap the fields. The monks at once practised labour, and ennobled and protected it.
The towns and the middle classes grew up under their shelter. Laborare est orare
became the motto of Christian life" (Farrar; cf. Lecky, "History of Rationalism,'
toL ii. p. 261).

IV. The highest use of gifts is to dedicate them to the service or GfoD in
THE WORK OF HIS Church. Transformed by grace, and employed in the service of
religion, gifts become graces — " Charismata." All labour, all gifts, admit of being thus
devoted. The handicrafts can still bring their tribute to God, if in no higher way, in
the erection of places for his worship. Art can labour in the adornment of the sanc-
tuary (cf. Is. Ix. 13). The service of praise affords scope for the utilisation of gifts of
music, vocal and instrumental. There is need fur care lest art, ministering to the
worship of God, should overpower devotion ; but, considered in itself, there need be no
jealousy of the introduction of the tasteful and beautiful into God's service. It is meet
that the Giver of gifts should be served with the best our gifts can yield. Earthly
callings may minister to God's kingdom in another way, by bringing of their lawful
gains and laying them at Christ's feet. There is, besides, the private consecration of
gifts to God, as in the case of Dorcas, making coats and garments for the poor (Acts ix.
39), or as in the case of a Miss Havergal, or an Ira U. Sankey, consecrating to God a
gift of song. Minor lessons taught are---(l) Gifts are not all alike, yet God can use all
(2) Some are made to lead, others to serve and follow, m the work of God's kingdom.
We glorify God most when unambitiously content to fill our own place ; when not
envious of the greater gifts of others. The humblest is needed. Bezaleel could ill
have dispensed with the artificers ; Aholiab, with the needle-workers. They in tiim
needed the master minds to direct them. 'Ihere should be no jealousy among those
engaged in the same work (cf. 1 Cor. xii.). (3) Diversity of gifts gives rise to division
of labour. (4) Bezaleel and Aholiab, though of different tribes (Judah and Dan),
wrought together as friends, were not opposed as rivals. What kept out the spirit oi
rivalry was the consciousness that both were working in a sacred cause, and for Gbd'a
glory, not their own. The feeling that we are working for Christ should keep down
dissensions among Christians. — J. O.

EXPOSITION.



Vers. 12 — 17 — Thb pmtAMT fob not

OBSEKVINQ THE SABBATH. Various reasons
have been given for tbia recurrence to the



sanctity of the sabbath. Kurtz eonneeti H
with the giving of the two tables, in which " th(
bwof the sabbath held a particularly promineai



tu



THE BOOK OF EXODUS,



[oh. XXXI. 13 — 17.



place." EaliEch and others view it rather as the
iequel to the directions concerning the taber-
nacle, and as designed to teach " that the holy
service in the tabernacle could not supersede
tJie observance of the sabbath, but derived from
that ooservance its tme value." A third set
of critics regard the recurrence to the subject
as purely practical — ^being intended to meet
an immediate danger — that of the people, in
their zeal to erect the tabernacle, setting sab-
bath observance at nought. (SoJarchi, Aben-
Ezro, Clark, Bosenmiiller, Canon Cook, and
others.) It is to be observed, however, that
the present passage is not a mere repetition.
It adds to former notices (ch. xx. 8 — 11;
xxiii. 12) two new points : — 1. That the
■abbath was to be a sign between God and
Israel, a " distinguishing badge," a " sacra-
mental bond " (Cook) ; and 2. That its dese-
cration was to be punished with death (ver.
15). These were supplementarj points of so
mnch importance as to furnish ample reason
against their announcement being delayed.

Ver 13. — Verily.* BosenmuUer suggests,
" Nevertheless." But there is no need for any
change. It is a sign- Hitherto circumcision
had been the only visible "sign" that the
Israelites were under a special covenant with
God — his people, bound to him by special ties
(Gen. xvii. 9—14 ; Acts vii. 8). The adop-
tion of circumcision b^ the Egyptians and
other nations (Herod. li. 104) had produced
the effect that this " sign " was no longer dis-
tinguishing. It might be still " a sign of pro-
fession " ; but it had ceased to be " a mark of
difference " ; and some other mark was there-
fore needed. Such the observance of the sab-
bath by entire abstinence from servile work
became. No other nation adopted it. It con-
tinued to Roman times the mark and badge of a
Jew (Juv. Sat. vi. 159 ; xiv. 96). That ye may
know, etc. By keeping the sabbath day as a
day of holy rest the Israelites would know —



i.e., would realise severally in their own per
sons, that God was their sanctifier. Sanctifi-
cation would be the fruit of their obedience.

Ver. 14. — ^Every one that defileth it shall
surely be pnt to death. To defile the sabbatk
was to do any unnecessary servile work upon
it. Works of mercy, works of necessity, and
works connected with religious observance
were not prohibited. (See Matt. xii. 1 — 7 ;
10 — 12.) The penalty of death for breaking
the sabbath seems to modems over-severe;
but the erection of sabbath-observance into
the special sacramental sign that Israel was in
covenant with God made non-observance an
offence of the gravest character. The man
who broke the sabbath destroyed, so far as in
him lay, the entire covenant between God and
his people — not only broke it, but annulled it,
and threw Israel out of covenant. Hence,
when the sin was committed, no hesitation
was felt in carrying out the law, (See Numb
XV. 32—36.)

Ver. 15. — ^Ihe sabbath of rest. Bather, "a
sabbath." There were other sabbaths besides
that of the seventh day (ch. xxiii. 11 ; Lev.
XXV. 2 — 12 ; &c.). By the expression, " a
sabbath of rest " — ^literally, " a rest of resting '
— ^the idea of completeness is given. Perhaps
the best translation would be—" in the seventh
is complete rest."

Ver. 16. — For a perpetual covenant. The
sabbath is itself a covenant — i.e., a part of the
covenant between God and Israel (ch. xxiv. 4)
— and it is, also, a sign of covenant — t.e., a
perceptible indication that the nation has en-
tered into a special agreement with God, and
undertaken the observance of special laws.

Ver. 17. — ^It is a sign. See above, ver. IS.
For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth. See the comment on ch. xx. 11. And
was refreshed. Literally, " and took breath."
The metaphor is a bold one, but not bolder
than others which occur in holy scripture
(Ps. xliv. 23; bcxviii. 65). It does but cany
out a little further the idea implied in God's
" resting." We cannot speak of any of
God's acts or attributes without anthropomor-
phisms.



HOMILETICa

Vers. 13 — 17. — Covenant tigns. To each covenant which ho Las made with man,
Ood has attached some special sign or signs. And each sign has been significant, has
set before the mind of those to whom it was given some great religious truth.

I. The first covenakt sign was the eainbow. God had destroyed by a deluge
the whole human race, except eight persons. It pleased him, after this, to enter into a
covenant with Noah and his sons ((Jen. ix. 8, 9), and through them with the human
race, that he would never bring such a destruction upon the world again (ib. 11). Of
this covenant he appointed the rainbow to be the sign, symbolising by its brightness
and beauty his own mercy (ib. 14 — 17). Hero the religious truth taught and im-
pressed by tb* sign wm that precious one, that God is not only a just, but also a
aMniMQgd.



H. XXXI. 12— i8J lltE BOOK OF EXODUS. Ut



n. The second covenant sign was circumcision. When God selected Abraham
out of the entire mass-of mankind to be the progenitor of the chosen race and of him
especially in whom all the families of the earth should be blessed, and entered into a
covenant with him, it was in these words — " Thou shalt keep my covenant, thou and
thy seed after thee in their generations — this is my covenant which ye shall keep
between me and you, and thy seed after thee, every man child among you shall be
circumcised " (Gen. xvii. 9, 10). Hence the covenant itself was called " the covenant
of circumcision" (Acts vii. 8). This rite of initiation, the covenant sign of the
Abrahamic dispensation, shadowed forth the great truth that man has an impurity of
nature, which must be put away before he can be brought near to God and received
int^o his full favour.

III. The third covenant sion was the sabbath. Its institution to be a covenant
sign is set forth in the words, " Verily, my sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign
between me and you throughout your generations" (Ex. xxxi. 13). it witnessed to
the truth that God requires distinct and open acknowledgment at the hands of men,
and not only so, but material worship at stated times, the least that will content him
being^ one day in seven. The nations, when they served him at all (Acts x. 35), served
him irregularly. They knew nothing of a definite day, or a formal apportionment of
time, for his service. By the institution of the Sabbath the Israelites were taught, and
through them the world, that God is interested in man, claims his thoughts, sets a value
on his worship, and will not be satisfied with mere occasional acknowledgment, but
demands that a fixed proportion of our time shall be dedicated to his worship
exclusively.

IV. Other covenant bionb. No further covenant signs were given until our Lord
came upon earth. Then two were instituted in the Sacraments. Baptism taught the
same truth as circumcision — the need of putting away impurity ; but taught it by a
simpler rite, and one to which no exception could be taken. The Lord's Supper taught
a new truth, the necessity of reconciliation through the death and atoning blood of
Christ. It witnessed to the certain fact that man cannot save himself, cannot atone
for his own sins, but needs a mediator, a redeemer, an atoner, to make satisfaction
for him*

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vim. 12 — 18. — The Sabhath. If this prohibition to work upon the Sabbath is intro-
duced, as probably it is, lest the people, in their zeal for the service of the sanctuary,
should be tempted to infringe upon the holy day, it has certain obvious sides of
instruction turned towards ourselves. We cannot but see in it the high honour whirli
Ood puts upon his Sabhath. 1. It is the one command of the Decalogue to which
reference is made in the conclusion of this series of instructions. This implies its great
importance. It shows that, in God's esteem, the observance of the Sabbath was inti-
mately bound up with the best interests of Israel. 2. The Sabbath is declared to be a
sign between God and the Israelites. It was to be a memorial to future generations
that Jehovah had made a covenant with the nation, and had sanctified them to himself.
But its very selection for this purpose was a tribute to its importance. 1 he reason of
the selection could only be that the Sabbath was in itself a boon of the highest kind to
I srael, and had important bearings on the state of morals and religion. A well- or ill-
spent Sabbath, as all history shows, has much to do with the character both of the
individual and of the community. 'Ihe Sabbath, further, is a " sign " in this respect,
that it is at once a means for the promotion of true religion, and a test or indication of
its presence. A disregard of Divine authority shows itself in nothing more readily than
in a disposition to break in upon the day of rest — to take from it its saored character.
3. The Sabbath is not to be infringed upon, even for the work of the tabernacle. There
was no such excessive haste, no such imperative call, for the sanctuary being finished,
that the Sabbath needed to be broken by the plying of handicrafts, in order to get it
done. We are taught that even our zeal for God's work is not to be allowed to Mtray
us into unnecessary infractions of the day of rest. This is not, of course, to be applied
to spiritual work, to afford an opportunity for which is one end of the giving of the
Sabbath. 4. The breaker of the Sabbath was to be put to death. This was not toe



SIO



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[cH. XXXI. 18



severe a punishment for the deliberate breaking of a law so repeatedly enforced, and the
observance of which had been made by Jehovah a " sign " of the covenant between
himself and Israel. Slight as the act seems, it was, in this case, a crime of a verj
flagrant order. It was punished as an act of treason. At the conclusion of these com-
mands, God gave to Moses the two tables of testimony, " tables of stone, written with
the finger of God." A symbol (1) of the perpetuity of the law, (2) of its want of power
to regenerate (2 Cor. iii. 7). — J. O.



EXPOSITION.



Ver. 18. — Thb tables of testimont. It
had been assumed, in the directions given for
the construction of the ark, that God would give,
in some material form, a document to be called
" the testimony," which was to be laid up in-
side it (ch. XXV. 16). It is not too much to say
that the tabernacle, with its various appurte-
nances, was constructed for this purpose ; the
rest of the tabernacle was designed with a view
to the holy of holies — ^the holy of holies was
designed as a receptacle for the ark — and the
ark was designed as a receptacle for the tables
of testimony. ITiis section could, therefore,
scarcely is concluded without some definite ac-
"oiint of the document which was to give the ark
aad the tabernacle itself, its main significance.



Ver. 18. — VlTiea he had made an end of
communing. Literally, " when he had finished
speaking." Two tables. Rather, "the two
tables" — i.e., the tables promised when he
went up into the mount (ch. xxiv. 12).
Of stone. Stone was the ordinary material
on which Egyptian documents were engraved,
both at the time of the Exodus, and before
and after. They were, however, for the most
part, either inscribed upon the natural rock,
or engraved on the walls of temples or tombs.
Inscriptions upon slabs of stone are rare, more
especially in the early times, and would
scarcely have occurred to Moses himself.
Written with the finger of God — i.e., " in-
scribed supernatm-ally " — not cut by any
human hand. Compare ch. xxxii. 16. It is
idle to speculate on the exact mode of the
Divine operation.



H0MILETIC3.

Ver. 18. — The Tables of Teslimony were in many respects like the document impressed
upon them. For instance, they were—

I. Of stone, and THERErORE ENDTTRINO AND WELL NIGH IMPERISHABLE. Few

things are more enduring than some kinds of stone. Inscriptions exist, engraved on
stone, which are certainly anterior to Abraham. No remains in metal go back so far.
Gold and silver are, comparatively speaking, soft. Iron corrodes. Steel was unknown
at the period. The material selected to receive the moral law was as nearly inde-
structible as possible. The tables may still exist, and may one day be discovered under
the mounds of Babylon, or in the bed of the Euphrates. The character of the material
was thus in harmony with the contents of the tables, consisting, as they did, of laws
whereof no jot or tittle shall pass away till the fulfilment of aU things (Matt. v. 18).

II. Written with the finger of God. The stones had the laws engraved upon
them by a Divine agency which is called " the finger of God." The laws themselves
had been long previously vn-itten with the finger of God in the fleshly tables of men's
hearts. The Divine power, which was competent to do the one, could no doubt with
ease accomplish the other. The human heart is the most stubborn of ai -rtaterials, and
the most difficult to impress permanently.

III. Two-fold. Twin tables, alike in the main, but inscribed differently. So was
the law of the tables two-fold — containing ( 1 ) man's duty to God, and (2) bis duty to
his neighbour. It is uncertain how the Ten Commandments were divided between the
two tables, but quite possible that the first four were written on one table, and the last
six on the other. In that case the material division would have exactly corresponded
to the spiritual.

IV. Written on both their sides (ch. xxxii. 15). So the moral law — the law of
the Decalogue — ^is wTitten both within and without the human heart — presses exter-
nally upon men as a rule of right which they are constrained to obey, and approves
'Cielf tp thei|i from within, as ojie which the voipe of conscictice declares to tie binding,



OH. XSXII. 1—6.]



THE BOOK OF EZODUS.



823



apart from external sanction. The book seen in vision by Ezekiel (Ezek. ii. 9) was
"written within and without" (ib. 10), like the tables; but its entire contents were
"lamentation, and mourning, and woe." The moral law, as convincing us of sin, has a
painful side; but it sustains as much as it alarms, and produces as much effort as
mourning.



EXPOSITION.



CHA?TBB XXXn.



Vers. 1 — G. — The inoLATBT of the Goldbn
Calf. During the absence of Moses in Mount
Siniu, au absence of nearly six weeks, the
Israelites grew impatient, and regarding their
leader as lost to them, and the Divine Presence
■which they had hitherto enjoyed as lost with
him, insisted on having a symbol of that pre-
sence made for them, which should henceforth
go in front of the host and so lead them on in
their journeyings. It would seem that the
piUar of the cloud, which had gone before
them from Succoth to Sinai, was now removed
from the camp, and resting upon the " mount "
where Moses was (ch.xxiv. 1.5). Under these
circumstances they wanted a visible tangible
something, in which they could regard the
Divine Presence as resting, and whereto they
might ofEer worship and sacrifice (ver. 8).
They therefore went to Aaron, whom Moses
had bid them consult in any difficulty (ch.
xziv. 14), and requested him to " make them
a god." Aaron had not the courage to meet
this request with a plain negative. As Augus-
tine and Theodoret conjecture with much
probability, he sought to turn them from their
purpose by asking them to give up those
possessions which he conceived that they most
valued — viz. the personal ornaments of their
wives and children. But he had miscalculated
the strength of their fanaticism. The people
immediately complied — the ornaments were
brought in — and Aaron was compelled, either
to fly from his word, or to lend himself to the
people's wishes. He did the latter. Either
looking to Egypt for a pattern, or falling back
on some old form of Syrian or Chaldsean
idolatry (see the comment on ver. 4), he
melted down the gold and cast it into the form
of a calf. The " god " being thus made, an
altar was built to it (ver. 5) and sacrifice offered
(ver 6). Such was the condition of affairs
when Moses, having just received the two
tables of stone, was warned by God of what h«d
o^urred, and bidden to descend from Sinai.

Ver. 1. — The people saw that Xoses delayed

BIODUS — II.



to come down. He had been absent, probably,
above a mouth. It was the first day of their
worship when he descended ; and a week
would suffice for the collection of the orna-
ments, the formation of the mould, and the
casting of the idol. Unto Aaron. It is not
clear why no mention is made of Hur, who
had been made co-regent with Aaron (ch.
xxiv. 14); but perhaps Aaron was known to
be the weaker of the two. Up, make us gods.
Most moderns translate " a god." But the
word is vague, and the speakers did not them-
selves perhaps care whether one idol was made
or more. Which shall go before ns. The
Israelites were apparently tired of their long
delay at Sinai, and were anxious to proceed
upon their journey. They wanted a visible
god at their head, to give them confidence
and courage. Compare 1 Sam. iv. 3 — 8. We
wot not what is become of him, He might,
they thought, be dead — ^he might have re-
turned to Egypt — he might be going to stay
always with God in the mount which they did
not dare to approach. At any rate, he was
lost to them, and they might never see him
again.

Ver. 2.— Break oft " Take off " would per-
haps be a better translation. The ear-rings
would not require any breaking. They were
penannular, and could be removed by a smart
pull. Your wives, your sons, and yoirr
daughters. See the comment on ch. iii. 22.
It is implied that the men did not wear ear-
rings. At an earlier date the household oi
Jacob, chiefly men, had worn them (Gen
XXXV. 4).

Ver. 3. — All the people broke off the golden
ear-rings. Thus, as is supposed, disappointing
Aaron, who had counted on the refusal of the
women to part with their finery, and the
reluctance of the men to compel iJiem. Had
ear-rings been still regarded as amulets (Gen.
1. s. c.) it is not likely that they would have
been so readily given up.

Ver. 4. — And fashioned it with a graving
tool Bather, " and bound it (the gold) in a
bag." Compare 2 Kings v. 23, where the
same two Hebrew words occur in the same
sense. It is impossible to extract from the
original the sense given in the Authorised
Version, since the simple copula vau cannot
mean " after." When two verbs in the same
tense are conjoined by vau " and," the two
actions must be simtutaneous, or the latter
foUow the former. But the calf cannot have
been graven tirst, and then molten. It is



•21



THE BOOK OP EXODUa.



[CH. xxxu. 1 — 6.



objected to the rendering, " he bound it in a
bag," that that action is so trivial that it would
be superfluous to mention it (Keil). But it is
qnite consonant with the simplicity of Scrip-
ture to mention very trivial circumstances.
The act of putting up in bags is mentioned
both here and also in 2 Kings v. 23, and 2
Kings xii. 9. They said. The fashioners of
the image said this. These be thy gods.
Bather, " This is thy God." Why Aaron
selected the form of the calf as that which he
would present to the Israelites to receive their
worship, has been generally explained by sup-
posing that his thoughts reverted to Egypt,
and found in the Apis of Memphis or the
Mnevis of Heliopolis the pattern which he
thought it best to follow. But there are
several objections to this view. 1. The
Egyptian gods had just been discredited by
tteir powerlessness being manifested — ^it was
ui odd time at which to fly to them. 2. Apis
and Mnevis were not molten calves, but live
bulls. If the design had been to revert to
Egypt, would not a living animal have been
selected? 3. The calf when made was not
viewed as an image of any Egyptian god, but
cs a representation of Jehovah (ver. 5). 4.
The Israelites are never taxed with having
worshipped the idols of Egypt anywhere else
than in Egypt (Josh. xxiv. 14 ; Ezek. xx. 8 ;
sxiii. 3). To ns it seems probable that Aaron
reverted to an earlier period than the time of
the sojourn in Egypt, that he went back to
those " gods on the other side of the flood,"
which Joshua warned the Israelites some sixty
years later, to " put away " (Josh. 1. s. c).
The subject is one too large for discussion
here ; but may not the winged and human-
headed bull, which was the emblem of divine
power from a very early date in Babylon,
have retained a place in the recollections of
the people in all their wanderings, and have



formed a portion of their religious symbolism T
May it not have been this conception which
lay at the root of the cherubic forms, and the
revival of which now seemed to Aaron the
smallest departure from pure monotheism with
which the people would be contented ?

Ver. 5. — Ke built an altar before it. Aaron
thus proceeded to " foUow a multitude to evil"
(ch. xxiii. 2), and encouraged the idolatry
which te felt himself powerless to restrain.
StiU, he did not Intend that the people should
drift away from the worship of Jehovah, or
view the calf as anything but a symbol of him.
He therefore made proclamation and said.
Tomorrow is a feast to the Lord (literally, "to
Jehovah").

Ver. 6. — They rose up early on the morrow.
The people were like a child with a new toy.
They could scarcely sleep for thinking of it.
So, as soon as it was day, they left their beds,
and hastened to begin the new worship
Burnt offerings and peace offerings. It is
evident that both of these were customary
forms of sacrifice — neither of them first intro-
duced by the Law, which had not— except so
far as the " Book of the Covenant " was con-
cerned — ^been promulgated. Compare Jethro's
offerings (ch. xviii. 12). The people sat down
to eat and drink. A feast almost always
followed upon a sacrifice, only certain portions
of the victim being commonly burnt, while
the rest was consumed by the offerers. See
the comment on ch. xviii. 12. And rose up to
play.. This " play " was scarcely of a harm-
less kind. The sensualism of idol-worship
constantly led on to sensuality; and the feasts
upon idol-sacrifices terminated in profligate
orgies of a nature which cannot be described.
See the application of the passage by St. Paul
in the First Epistle to the Corinthians (x 7),
and compare verse 25



H0MILETIC3.

Vers. 1 — 6. — TTie hanhering after idoh, and its consequences. There is a war ever
going on in human nature between the flesh and the spirit (Rom. vii. 23 ; viii. 1 — 13).
The two are " contrary the one to the other." From the time of their leaving Egypt, the
Israelites had been leading a spiritual life, depending upon an unseen God — following his
mandates— reposing under the sense of his protection. But the strain was too much for
them. So long as they had Moses with them, to encourage them by his exhortations
and support them by his good examine, they managed to maintain this higher life, to
" yalk in the spirit," to " live by faith and not by sight." When he was gone, when
he seemed to them lost, when they had no hope of seeing him again, the reaction set in.
The flesh asserted itself. They had given way to idolatry in Egypt, and worshipped,
in part, Egyptian gods, in part, "the gods which their fathers served on the other side
of the flood" (Josh. xxiv. 14, 15) ; they had, no doubt, accompanied this worship with
the licentiousness which both the Egyptians (Herod, ii. 60) and the Babvlonians
(ih. i. 199) made a part of their religion. Now the recollection of these things re-
curred to them, their desires b«cam« inflamed— the flesh triumphed. The conseq^uenew



OH. xxxu. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS, S23

L That they bbokb a plain command or God, akd one to which they had
BECENTLY PLEDQED THEMSELVES. " All the words which the Lord hath said," they
had declared " we will do " (oh. xxiv. 3) ; and among these " words " was the plain
one — " Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image, nor the likeness of anything
that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth ; thou
shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them." Nevertheless they required
Aaron to make them a material god, and it was no sooner made than they hastened to
worship it with bumt-oflferings and other sacrifices.

II. That they proceeded to bbeae the moral law written in their hearts,

AND LATELY BEINFOECBD BY THE PLAIN PROHIBITION OP THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT.

" They sat down to eat and di-ink, and rose up to play" They engaged in licentious
dancing (ver. 19), and perhaps laid aside some of their usual garments (ver. 25). They
turned a worship, which they still pretended to render to Jehovah (ver. 5) into an
orgy. If they did not proceed to the lengths of completed sin, they entered upon the
slippery path which, almost of necessity, leads to it. By this conduct they so provoked
God—

III. That they ban the bisk op being swept away feom the eaeth. A
sentence of death was at first pronoimced against the whole people (ver. 10), and would
infallibly have taken effect, had not Moses interceded, and by his intercession prevailed.
Universal apostasy deserved universal destruction. There is no reason to beueve that
the execution of the sentence pronounced would have been stayed, but for the expostu
lation and the prayer recorded in verses 11 — 13.

IV. That they actually brought upon themselves a heavy punishment
The immediate slaughter of three thousand was required to purge the oflence (ver. 28)
The sin was further visited upon the offenders subsequently (see comment on ver. 34)
Some were, on account of it, " blotted out of God's book " (ver. 33). Christians should
take warning, and not, when they have once begun " living after the Spirit," fall back and
" live after the flesh " (Bom. viil. 13). There are still in the world numerous tempting
idolatries. "We may hanker after the "lusts of the flesh," or "of the eye" — we may
weary of the strain upon our nature which the spiritual life imposes — we may long to
exchange the high and rare atmosphere in which we have for a while vnth difficulty
sustained ourselves, for the lower region where we shall breathe more easily. But we
must control our inclinations. To draw back is to incur a terrible danger — no lesB a
one than " the perdition of our souls." It were better " not to have known the way of
righteousness," or walked in it for a time, " than, after we have known it," and waUied
in it, " to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto us " (1 Pet. ii. 21).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 6. — The Golden Calf. L The people's request to Aaron. 1. The canst
of the request. There are really two causes to be considered here, first, a cause of which
they were conscious, and then, secondly, a deeper cause of which they wew not
conscious. The delay of Moses to return was the reason they put forward. We must
do them the justice of noticing that they seem to have waited till the forty days were
well-nigh expired before preferring their request ; and an absence of forty days was inex-
plicable to minds as yet so spiritually darkened and benumbed as those of the majority
of the people. What he could have to do, and how he could live so long, away up on a
barren mountain, was beyond their power of imagination. Moses was given up just as
• ship is given up when it has not been heard of for many days after the reasonable
period of the voyage. It was not a case of being out of sight, out of mind ; he had
been a great deal in mind, and the general conclusion was that in some mysterious way
he had vanished altogether. But there is also the deeper reason of the request to be
found in the people's continued ignorance of the real hold which Jehovah had upon
them, and the sort of future toward^s which he would have them look. Their action hen
was founded not on what they knew, but emphatically on what they did not know
They could not say, " Moses is dead," or " he has forsaken us." They could only say
" We wot not what is become of him." So far as outward circumstances were concemeJ
the people seem to have been in a state of comparative security and comfort Whei

Y 2



nd THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [cn. xxxn. 1—6.

MoMJS went up into the mountain, he knew not how long he would have to wait ; that
was not for him or Aaron or any man to know. Bat however long he was to be away,
•U due provision had been made for the people's welfare. The daily morning manna
was there ; and Aaron and Hur were appointed to settle any disputes that might arise.
There is no word of any external enemy approaching ; there is no threatening of civil
strife; there is not even a recurrence of murmuring after the fleshpots of Egypt. All
that was needed was quiet waiting on the part of the people ; if they had waited forty
months instead of forty days, there would have been nothing to cause reasonable
astonishment ; for Jehovah and not man is the lord of times and seasons. 2. Tlie request
itself. There is a certain unexpectedness in this request. Who is it that is missing ?
Moses, the visible leader, " the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt." Hence
we might suppose the first feeling of the people would be to put some one in Moses'
place ; even as later they said, " Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt "
(Num. xiv. 4). But instead of this their cry to Aaron is, " Make us gods." How little
did Moses expect, when he put Aaron to be counsellor of the people in his absence, that
it was for image-worship they would seek his help ! And yet the more we ponder, the
more we shall be led to feel that this was just the kind of request that might be expected
from the people. Their ancestors, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob believed in the invisible
Jehovah ; but faith in the invisible will not go down from generation to generation, as if
it were a blood quality. The God of Abraham was one whom, though Abraham could
not see, he could hear as speaking with most miraculous organ. But these people at
Sinai wanted above all things a gnd whom they could see, even though it was but a life-
less, sightless, voiceless image. Great is the mystery of idolatry. How men have come
to bow down to stocks and stones is not a question to be dismissed with a few contemp-
tuous words. These idolatrous Israelites were seeking satisfaction for a desire of the
heart as imperious in its own way as bodily hunger and thirst. They wanted something
to be a centre of worship and religious observances in general, and the quickest way
seemed to fabricate such a centre by the making of gods. Whereas, if they had only
been patient and trustful and waited for Moses, they would have found that, even by the
very absence of Moses, God himself was providing for the worship of the people. We
have here another illustration of the frequent foUies of popular decisions. The greatest
thing that required to be done for these Israelites was the thing that needed to be done
tn them.

n. Aabon's compliance with the request. He shewed great readiness in faUing
in with the request ; and it has been suggested that his readiness was only in appear-
ance, and that he hoped the women would refuse to surrender their cherished ornaments,
thus making the construction of a suitable image impossible. It may have been so ; but
why should we not think that Aaron may have been as deeply infected with the idola-
trous spirit as any of his brother Israelites ? There is everything to indicate that he
went about the execution of the request with cordiality and gratification. And it must
not be forgotten that in the midst of aU his forgetfulness of the command against image-
worship, he evidently did not think of himself as forsaking Jehovah. When the image
and the altar were ready, it was to Jehovah he proclaimed the feast. What Aaron and
the people along with him had yet to learn was that Jehovah was not to be served by
will-worship or by a copy of the rites observed in honouring the gods of other nations.
Thus all unconsciously, Israel demonstrated how needful were the patterns given in the
mount. The feast to Jehovah, indicated in ver. 6, was nothing but an excuse for the
most reckless and degrading self-indulgence. How different from the ideal of those
solemn seasons which Jehovah himself in due time prescribed ; seasons which were meant
to lift the people above their common life into a more hearty appreciation of the Divine
presence, goodness and favour, and thus lead them into joys worthy of the true people
of God. — Y.

Vers. 1 — 7.— The sin of the golden calf. Disastrous effects followed in the camp of
Israel on the withdrawal of Moses to the mount. Moved as by a common impulse,
tiie people " gathered themselves together," and demanded of Aaron that he should
make them " a god," i.e. an idol, that it might go — be carried in procession— before them
(cf. Amos V. 26). It was a ca.se of " hamd joined in hand " to do iniquity (Prov. xi. 21).
Many, doubtless, looked cm tht movement with dismay and horror (of. ver. 26) •' hwi



CB. XXXII. 1—7.] THE BOOK Of EXUUUS. 82E

their voices were drowned in the general clamour. The " lewd fellows of the basei
Bort" (Acts xvii. 5) had, for the moment, the upper hand in the host, and swept all
before them. Intimidated by the show of violence, Aaron weakly acceded to the people's
request. The whole incident strikingly illustrates the commanding space which must
have been filled in the camp of Israel by the personality of Moses, and affords some
measure of the turbulent and refractory dispositions of the multitude whom ordinarily
he had to deal with. It sheds light, also, on the greatness of Moses' character, set as
that is in contrast with the weakness and irresolution exhibited by Aaron. Consider —

I. The people's trial (ver. 1). Every situation in which we can be placed has ita
elements of trial. These are purposely mingled with our lot (I) that dispositions may
be tested, and (2) that life may be to us in fact, what it is needful that it should
be for the proper development of character, viz. a succession of probations. The
trial of the Israelites consisted : I. In the delay in the return of Moses. Moses had
disappeared in the mountain. Weeks had passed without his return. It had not been
told the people how long his absence was to last. This constituted a trial of faith and
patience. It gave colour to the allegation that Moses had perished— that he had gone
from them for ever. Cf. what is said in Luke xii. 87 — i9 of the uncertainty left to
rest upon the time of the Lord's second advent. Faith has its trial here also. Because
Christ's coming is delayed, there are those who would fain persuade themselves that he
will not return at all (2 I'et. iii. 4). 2. In the scope given by his absence for the mani-
festation of character. On this, again, compare Luke xii. 37 — 49. It was the first time
since the departure from Egypt that the people had been left much to themselves.
Hitherto, Moses had always been with them. His presence had been a check on their
wayward and licentious tendencies. His firm rule repressed disorders. Whatever inclina-
tions some of them may have felt for a revival of the religious orgies, to which, perhaps,
they had been accustomed in Egypt, they had not ventured, with Moses in the camp,
to give their desires publicity. The withdrawal of the lawgiver's presence, accordingly,
80 soon after the conclusion of the covenant, was plainly of the nature of a trial. It
removed the curb. It left room for the display of character. It tested the sincerity of
recent professions. It showed how the people were disposed to conduct themselves
when the tight rein, which had hitherto kept them in, had been a little slackened. It
tested, in short, whether there were really a heart in them to keep aU God's command-
ments always (Deut. v. 29). Alas I that in the hour of their trial, when so splendid
an opportunity was given them of testifying their allegiance, their failure should have
been so humiliating and complete.

II. The people's sin. Note — 1. The sin itself. They had made for them " a molten
calf" (ver. 4), which, forthwith, they proceeded to worship with every species of dis-
graceful revelry (ver. 6). The steps in the sin are noted in the narrative. (1) They
approached Aaron with a demand to make them " a god." The light, irreverent way in
which, in connection with this demand, they speak of their former leader — " As for this
Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is
become of him " (ver. 1) — betrays an extraordinary levity, ingratitude, and callousness
of nature. (2) They stripped themselves of their ornaments of gold for the making of
the "god" (ver. 3). They did this gladly. People, as a rule, spend freely on their vices.
They are not so ready to part with theii valuables for the service of Jehovah. (3) They
mixed up their calf worship with the service of the true God. On the supposed con-
nection with the ox- and calf-worship of Egypt, see the exposition. The calf made by
Aaron was evidently intended as a symbol of Jehovah (ver. 4). The result was an
extraordinary piece of syncretism. An altar was built before the calf, and due honours
were paid to it as the god which had brought Israel out of Egypt (vers. 4, 5). A feast
was proclaimed to Jehovah (ver. 5). When the morrow came, the people " offered
burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings," only, however, to engraft on the sacrificial
festivities the rites of the filthiest heathen worships (ver. 6 ; cf. ver. 25). It was their
own passions which they sought to gratify ; but, in gratifying them, they still
endeavoured to keep up the semblance of service of the revealed God. Strange that
the wicked should like, if possible, to get the cloak of religion even for their vice&
But light and darkness will not mingle. The first requirement in worship is obediencai
" To obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams " (1 Sam. xy. 22).
" The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord " (Prov. xv. 8)u It wai



826 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xxxil 1— l

monstrous to propose to worship the spiritual Jehovah, who had expressly forbidden the
use of graven images in his service, under the symbol of a cailf, albeit the idol was o/
gold. It was worse than monstrous, it was hideous, to employ the name of the Holy
One to cover the shameless and revolting orgies with which their calf-worship was
associated. (4) They were eagw in this worship. They rose up early in the morning
to engage in it (ver. 6). Would that God's people were as eager in Ais service as these
servants of Belial were in the service of their idol 1 2. The sin in its generic character.
The sin at Sinai was a case (1) of sense reasserting its supremacy over faith. " As for
this Moses, we wot not what has become of him" (ver. 1). (2) Of carnal tendencies
regaining the ascendancy over temporary religious impressions. (3) Of engrained evil
habits resuming their sway after having been for a time forcibly kept in check. The
incident shows that nothing short of a thorough regeneration, of a radical change of
heart, can be relied on to keep men in the way of good. It is the heart that needs
renewal. David seized the matter at the root when he was led to pray, " Create in me a
clean heart " etc. (Ps. li. 10). It was the want of this thorough renewal which was the
bane of Israel (Deut. xxxi. 27 — 30). 3. Aggravations of the tin. The circumstances
under which the sin was committed added greatly to its enormity. (1) It was a sin
committed immediately after solemn covenant with God. The transactions recorded in
ah. xxiv. were not yet forty days old. The people had literaUy heard God speaking to
them. They had acknowledged the solemnity of the situation by entreating Moses to
act as mediator. They had formally, and under awful impressions of God's majesty,
pledged themselves to life-long obedience. Yet within this brief space of time, they
had thrown off all restraints, and violated one of the main stipulations of their agreement.
A more flagrant act of impiety it would be difficult to imagine. (2) It was a sin com-
mitted while Moses was still in the mount transacting for them. He had gone to receive
the tables of the law. He had been detained to receive instructions for the making of
the sanctuary — that God might dwell among them. A solemn time, truly I While
it lasted, the people might surely have been depended on to conduct themselves with
at least ordinary propriety. Instead of this, witness their mad gambols round their
calf. The very time when, of all others, their frame of mind ought to have been
devout, sober, prayerful, was the time chosen for the perpetration of this great
iniquity.

III. Aaedn's bhaee in the transgression. This, it is to be noted, the narrative
makes no attempt to conceal. It tells the story with perfect impartiality. The Bible,
like its tuthor, is without respect of persons. If Aaron leads the people astray, he
must, like others, submit to have the truth told about him. This is not the way of
ordinary biographies, but it is the way of Scripture. It is one mark of its inspira-
tion. It is a guarantee of its historic truthfulness. The conduct of Aaron cannot be
justified; but suggestions may be offered which help to render intelligible. 1. Aaron
was placed in a situation in which it was very difficult to know exactly what to do.
A mob confronted him, evidently bent on gratifying its dangerous humour. Its
demand was peremptorv. To resist its will was to run the risk of being stoned. The
temptation which, in these circumstances, naturally presented itself to a timid mind,
and to which Aaron yielded, was to put the people ofi; and endeavour to gain time by
some show of concession. In the interval, Moses might return, and the difficulty would
be solved. See the mistake of this policy. It was (1) wrong. It involved a sacrifice
of principle. It was temporising. (2) Weak. Had Aaron been brave enough to take
a firm stand, even at the risk of losing his life for it, not improbably he might have
crushed the movement in its bud. As it was, his sanction and example gave it an
impetus which carried it beyond the possibility of being subsequently controlled. (3)
Belt-deteating. A temporising policy usually is. The favourable chance on which
everything has been staked, does not turn up. Moses did not return, and Aaron,
having yielded the preliminary point, found himself hopelessly committed to a bad
cause. 2. Aaron may have thought that by requiring the women of the camp to part
■with, their personal ornaments, he was taking an effectual plan to prevent the movement
from going further (ver. 2). They might, he may have reasoned, be very willing to
get gods, and yet not be willing to make this personal sacrifice to obtain them. If this
was hu wea, he was speedily undeceived. The gold ornaments came pouring in
(T«r. 8), and Aaron, committed by this act also, had no alternative but to proceerf



cH. xxxii. T — 14.]



THB BOOK OF EXODUS.



827



furtW. " He received them at their hands," etc. (ver. 4). 3. Aaron may have thought
that, of the two evils, it would be better to put himself at the head of the movement, and try
to keep it within bounds, than to allow it to drift away, without any contrail whatever.
He may have argued that to allow himself to be stoned would not make matters better,
but would make them greatly worse. On the other hand, by yieilding a little, and
placing himself at the head of the movement, he might at least succeed in checking
its grosser abuses. This is a not uncommon opiate to conscience, in matters involv-
ing compromise of principle. It is the idea of the physician who humours a mad
patient, in the hope of being able to retain some control over him. The step was
a false one. Even with madmen, as wiser doctors tell us, the humouring policy if
not the most judicious. With a mob, it is about the worst that could be adopted.

IV. Gbnekai, lessons. 1. The strength of evil propensities in human nature. 2.
The fleetingness of religious impressions, if not accompanied by a true change of heart.
3. The degrading character of idolatry. Sin bestialises, and the bestial nature seeks a
god in bestial form (of. Rom. i. 21— -32). " Men," says Xenophanes, " imagine that
the gods are bom, are clothed in our garments, and endowed with our form and figure.
But if oxen or lions had hands, and could paint and fashion things as men do, they
too would form the gods after their own similitude, horses making them like horses,
and oxen like oxen." But we have seen that men also can fashion their gods in the
similitude of oxen. " They that make them are like unto them" (Ps. cxv. 8). 4.
Mammon-worship is a worship of the golden calf. Of. Carlyle on " Hudson's Statue'
(" Latter-Day Pamphlets ").— J. 0.



EXPOSITION.



Ven. 7—14. — The intebcsssion of
Mosea, in Sinai, was so far removed from the
camp, and the cloud so shut oat his vision of
it, that he had neitlier seen nor heard anything
unusual, and was wholly ignorant of what had
happened, until God declared it to him (vers.
7, 8). After declaring it, God announced his
intention of destroying the people for their
apostasy, and fulfilling his promise to Abraham
by raising up a " great nation " out of the seed
of Moses (ver. 10). No doubt this constituted
a great trial of the prophet's character. He
might, withont sin, have acquiesced in the
punishment of the people as deserved, and
have accepted the promise made to himself as
a fresh instance of God's goodness to him.
There would have been nothing wrong in
this; but it would have shown that he fell
short of the heroic type, belonged to the or-
dinary ran of mortals, was of the common
" delf," not of " the precious porcelain of ha-
man clay." God's trial of him gave him an
opportunity of rising above this ; and he re-
sponded to it. From the time that he reached
full manhood (ch. ii. 11) he had cast in his
lot with his nation ; he had been appointed
their leader (ch. iii. 10) ; they had accepted
him as such (ch. iv. 31) ; he had led them
ont of Egypt and brought them to Sinai ; if
he had looked coldly on them now, and readily
separated bii fate from theirs, he would have



been false to his past, and wanting in tender-
ness towards those who were at once his wards
and his countrymen. His own glory naturally
drew huu one way, his affection for Israel the
other. It is to his eternal honour that he
chose the better part ; declined to be put in
Abraliaui's place, and generously interceded
for his nation (vers. 11 — ISJ. lie thereby
placed himself among the heroes uf humanity,
and gave additional strength and dignity to
his own character.

Ver. 7. — Go, descend — «'.«., " make haste to
descend — do not tarry — there is need of thy
immediate presence." Thy people, whiob
thou broughtest, etc. Words calculated to
awaken tlie tenderness between which and
self-love the coming struggle was to be.

Ver. 8. — They have turned aside qnioldy.
A few weeks have sufficed to make them for-
get their solemn pledges (ch. xix. 8 ; xxiv.
3), and fly in the face of a plain unmistakable
commani^ent. A molten calf. In the con-
lemptuous language of Holy Scripture when
speaking of idols, such an emblematic figure
as the Babylonion man-ball would be a mere
" calf." That the figure made by Aaron is
called always " a molten calf " — Uterally, " a
calf of fusion" — disposes of the theory of Keil,
that it was of carved wood covered with gold
plates hammered on to it. These be thy gods,
which have brought thee. Bather, " This it
thy god, which has brought thee." The pluri]
must be regarded as merely one of dignity.

Ver. 9. — A stif&ieoked people. TUi



3:18



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxxii. T — 14



epithet, which becomes epifheton usitatum, is
here used for the first time. It does not so
much mean " obstinate " as " perverse " — like
a horse that stiffens the neck when the driver
pulls the right or left rein, and will not go
the way he is wanted to go. (Compare ch.
xxxiii. 3, 5 ; xxxiy 9 ; Deut. ix. 6, 13 ;
xxxi. 27 ; etc.)

Ver. 10. — ^Now, therefore, let me alone.
This was not a command, but rather a sug-
gestion ; or, at any rate, it was a command
not intended to compel obedience — ^like that
of the angel to Jacob — " Let me go, for the
da/ breaketh " (Gen. xxxii. 26). Moses was
not intended to take the command as absolute.
He did not do so — he " wrestled with God,"
like Jacob, and prevailed. That my wrath
may wax hot. Literally, "and my wrath will
wax hot." I will make of thee a great na-
tion. (Compare Num. xiv. 12.) God could,
of course, have multiplied the seed of Moses,
as he had that of Abraham ; but in that case
all that had been as yet done would have gone
for nought, and his purposes with respect to
his " peculiar people " would have been put
back six hundred years and more.

Vers. 11 — 13. — Moses has three pleas triiere-



with he " wrestles with God ; " — ^1. Israel ig
God's people, for whom he has done so much
that surely he will not now destroy them, and
so undo his own work. 2. Egypt will be tri-
umphant if Israel is swept away, and will
misapprehend the Divine action. 3. The pro-
mises made to Abraham (Gen. xv. 5 ; xrii.
2 — 6; etc.), Isaac (ib. xxvi, 4), and Jaeob
(t6. xxviii. 14 ; xxxv. 11), which had received
a partial fulfilment, would seem to be revoked
and withdrawn it the nation already formed
were destroyed and a fresh start made.

Ver. 14. — The Lord repented of the evil.
Changes of purpose are, of course, attributed
to God by an " economy," or accommodation
of the truth to human modes of speech and
conception. " God is not a man that he should
repent." He "knows the end from the be-
ginning." When he threatened to destroy
Israel, he knew that he would spare ; but, as
he communicated to Moses, first, his anger,
and then, at a later period, his intention to
spare, he is said to have " repented." The ex-
pression is an anthropomorphic one, like so
many others, on which we have already com-
mented. (See the comment on ch. ii S4, 25 ;
iii 7, 8 ; szzi. 17 ; etc.)



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 7 — 10. — TTie anger of God. God may well be angry when his people aposta-
tise; and having recently professed entire submission to his will (ch. xix. 8 ; xxiv. 3),
rebel suddenly, and cast his woris behind their backs. God's auger against Israel
was at this time intensified —

L By THEIR EXTREME iNREATiTUDE. He had just delivered them by a series of
stupendous miracles from a cruel bondage. He had brought them out of Kgypt — he
had divided the Bed Sea before them, and led them through it — ^he had given them a
complete victory over the Amalekites. He was supporting them day after day by a
miraculous supply of food. He had condescended to enter into covenant with them,
and to make them his " peculiar treasure" — " a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation"
(ch. xix. 5, 6). He was further engaged in giving them a law which would place them
far in advance of other nations, and render them the main source of life and light in a
world of moral darkness and deadness. There had been no moment in their history
when they were more bound by every consideration of duty, honour, and thankfulness
to cling to Jehovah — yet, spite of all, they had rebelled and rushed into idolatry.

n. By the suddenness op their apostasy. " They have turned aside quickly out
of the way," said the Almighty to Moses (ver. 8). A few weeks only had gone by
since they had declared themselves God's willing servants — had entered into covenant
with him, and promised to keep all his commandments. What had caused the sudden
and complete change ? There was nothing to account for it but the absence of Moi-es.
But surely it might have been expected that their convictions would have had sufficient
root to outlive the disappearance of Moses for as long as six weeks. The fact, however,
was otherwise. They were of those who had " no root in themselves" — and as soon as
temptation came, they fell away. The remembrance of their old idolatries came upon
them with a force that they had not strength to resist — and it happened unto them
according to the true proverb : " The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow
that was washed to her wallowing in the mire " (2 Pet. ii. 22).

III. By TUEUi SINNING AGAINST ABUNDANT LIGHT. Until the delivery of the second
commandment at Sinai, it might perhaps have been a doubtful point whether the worship
of God under a material form was, or was not, affensive to him. But after tha|



uH. ~.uu. 7— li.] THE BOOK OF EXODU& 329

delivery, all doubt was removed. The bowing down to an image had been theu and
there declared an " iniquity," an oifence to a "jealous God," which he would visit unto
the third and fourth generation. Nor was this all. An express prohibition of the
very act that Israel had now committed, had been put in the forefront of the " Book of
the Covenant" — which opens thus — " Ye have seen that I have talked with you from
heaven — ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto you gods
of gold" (oh. XX.. 22, 23). It was impossible therefore that they should plead ignorance.
Knowingly and wilfully they had transgressed a plain command of the Great God, whose
power and glory had so lately been revealed to them. They had sinned in the full light
of day. Christians in their manifold idolatries — of covetousness, lust, fashion-worship,
etc. — are more ungrateful than even the Israelites, since they sin against One who has
died to redeem them, and they sin against a still clearer light — the double light of a full
revelation of God's will, and of a conscience enlightened by the Holy Ghost. God's
wrath may well " wax hot against them, to consume them from the face of the earth."

Ver. 11 — 15. — The intercession of Moses. This intercession should be studied and
laid to heart by all Christians, especially by Christian ministers, whose duty it ia t»
" watch for the souls" of others, as " they that must give account." It was —

L Earnest and impassioned. No feeble voice, no lukewaim, timid utterance, was
heard in the words whereby the leader sought to save his people. Prayer, expostula-
tion, almost reproach, sound in them. God is besought, urged, importuned, to grant
the boon begged of him. The tone of Jacob's answer rings in them, — " I will not let
thee go, except thou bless me" (Gen. xxxii. 26).

II. Unselfish, ob bather SELF-RENonNciNO. The promise, " I will make of thee a
great nation," has evidently taken no hold of the unselfish nature of the prophet. He
declines to give it a thought. God must keep his promises to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob — not make a new promise, as if everything was now to begin afresh. The offer,
which might have tempted any man, is simply set aside, as if it had not been made, or
at any rate could not have been seriously meant ; and the whole energy of the speaker
concentrated on inducing God to spare his people.

in. Wbll-ebasosed. Three arguments are used, and each of them has real weight.
(1) Israel is God's people — ^has been chosen, called, taken into covenant, protected and
defended after a marvellous fashion. All this Divine effort would have been simply
thrown away, if the announced purpose were carried out and Israel destroyed. God
does not usually allow his plans to be baulked, his designs to remain unaccomplished.
If he " has begun a good work," he (commonly) wills to " bring it to good effect."
Will he not do so in this case ? (2) Are the enemies of God to be allowed a triumph ?
Israel's destruction would afford to the Egyptians an ample field for scoffs, ridicule, self-
glorification. Would God suffer this ? (3) Promises had been made, with great solem-
nity (" Thou swarest by thine own self," ver. 13), to the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, that the " peculiar people" should spring from them. These might be kept
in the letter, but would they be kept in the spirit, if all their descendants were now
destroyed, except some three, and a new nation was created out of the descendants of
Moses? , , , ^.

IV. Ef FEOTUAL. " The Lord repented of the evil, which he thought to do unto hia
people" (ver. 14). The intercession of Moses prevailed — ^the announced purpose was
given up. God spared his people, though his anger against them continued ; and thoy
were punished in a different way (vers. 33 — 35).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ygfg, 7 14. The wrath of Jehovah and the inlt-rcession of Moses. L Jehovah

DB80BIBE8 TO MosES THE APOSTABT OF Ibrael. Jehovah is omniscient; even wliile
spreading before Moses, with all elaboration, the patterns in the mount, his all-observant
eye is equally on the doings of the people below. And now, just when Moses is expecting
to be dismissed with his instructions for the peopie, he is fated to learn that they have
proved themselves utterly unworthy of Jehovah's great designs. The thing described ii
•D utt«r, shameless, and precipitate apostasy from Jehovah. Previous outbreaks of th«



J30 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxxii. 7—14.

siiLful heart were as nothing compared to this. If it had only heen the sin of a few, some
half-secret departure from Jehovah confined to a comer of the camp ; if there had been a
prompt repudiatioij of it and punishment of it on the part of the great majority : then,
indeed, Jehovah might have found cause even for rejoicing that the apostasy of the few
had been occasion to prove the fidelity of the many. But alas ! the transgression is
general ; there is a public adoption of the golden calf with worship and sacrifice. The
idolatrous spirit has been shown in the completest and most demonstrative way. Ido-
latry, with its awful degradations and its fatal influences, must always be an abomination
to God ; but how peoiiliarly abominable when it rose in the midst of a people with
whom God had Imen dealing with the tenderest compassion and the sublimest power !
It is to be notice.1 that God calls special attention to the quickness of this apostasy.
" They have tum.)d aside quickly out of the way." The fact of course was that they
had also been turned quickly into that way, and kept in it by a kind of external force.
They might promise, and while they promised mean to keep the promise, but nature was
too much for thero ; and as soon as the Divine constraint was in any way relaxed they
returned to the o)d path. The impression Jehovah would make on the mind of hu
servant is that nothing can be expected from them.

II. Jehovah indicates to Moses the RioHTEOtrs severity ■with which he fbofobeb
TO treat Israel (vers. 9, 10). We have to think here not only of the words of
Jehovah, but also of the attitude of Moses, which seems to be indicated by these words.
Even before Moses puts in his earnest intercession, we have a hint of what is in his
heart. Jehovah says, " Let me alone ;" as one man, about to strike another, might speak
to some third person stepping between to intercept the blow. In the speaking of
Jehovah's words there must have been an indication of wrath, such as of course cannot
be conveyed by the mere words themselves. And what, indeed, could Jehovah do, but
give an unmistakable expression of his wrath with such an outbreak of human un-
righteousness as is found in idolatry ? No doubt there is great difficulty in under-
standing such expressions as those of Jehovah here. When we remember the low estate
of the Israelites spiritually, and the infecting circumstances in which they had grown
up, it seems hardly just to reproach them for their lapse into idolatry. But then we
must bear in mind that the great object of the narrative here is to show how Jehovah
cannot bear siiu The thing to be considered first of all is, not how these Israelites
became 'dolaters, but the sad and stubborn fact that they seemed inveterate idolaters.
Such a decided manifestation of idolatry as the one here revealed, when it came to the
knowledge of Jehovah, was like a spark falling into the midst of gunpowder. It matters
not how such a spark may be kindled ; it produces an explosion the moment it touches
the powder. The wrath of God must be revealed against all ungodliness and vmrighteouo-
ness of men. Yet doubt not that the God who spoke here in such wrath and threatening
loved these Israelites in the midst of their apostasy. But it was not possible in one and
the same moment, and from one and the same voice, to make equally evident love for the
benighted apostate himself, and wrath because of the evil that was so intimately mixe^
with his nature. On such an occasion it became God to give a direct and emphatic expr&j-
sion of wrath from his own lips, leaving his love and pity to be known indirectly
through the intercession of his servant Moses. When Jehovah is angry, it is thin
we need most of all to remember that love is the great power in his nature.

III. Jehovah further indicates a certain tempting possibility to Moses. "I w ill ,
make of thee a great nation." Thus we see how the word of Jehovah is made to serve
two purposes. It both expresses the fulness of wrath with an apostate people, and at
the same time puts a cherished servant upon a most effectual trial of his m&gnanimlty
and mediatorial unselfishness. Thus this proposition of Jehovah comes in most beauti-
fully to emphasise the simplicity and purity of the feeling of Moses in his subsequont
mediation. And though Moses makes no reference to this proposition, it is well to be
enabled to see how little hold any self-seeking thoughts took of his mind.

IV. The reply of Moses has now to be considered. Not that we need stay to
Investigate the merits of the considerations which Moses here puts forward. He could
only speak of things according as they appeared to him. We know, looking at these
game things in the light of the New Testament, that even if God had destroyeil these
people at :it first he hinted, his promises would not therefore have been nullified. The
temporal destruction of a single generation of men, however perplexing it might bavt



■H. xxxn. 7— 14.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. Stt

■eemed at the time, would afterwardB have been seen as neither any hindrance in th
fulfilment of God's purposes, nor any dimming of the brightness of his glory. Be it
remembered that these same people whom God brought out with great power and a
mighty hand, yet nevertheless perished in the wilderness. Spared this time, they were
in due season cut down as cumberers of the ground. And as to any scornful words the
Egyptians might speak, God's glory was not at the mercy of their tongues ; for it had
been manifested beyond all cavil in a sufficiently terrible chapter of their own history.
Then as to the words spoken to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, even if all but Moses had
been swept away, yet in him the seed of Abraham would have been continued, just as
in the days of the flood. God did not utterly destroy the human race, but narrowed it
down to one family. And more than all we should bear in mind that the true fulfilment
of God's promises was to Abraham's spiritual seed ; they who being of faith are blessed with
faithful Abraham. Hence we must not too readily conclude that what Moses said was
the thing which here influenced Jehovah in what is called his repentance. The influ-
ential power was, that here was a man to say something, to act as a mediator, one deeply
concerned to secure escape for these people, even while they, revelling in the plain below,
are all unconscious of their danger. Notice that Moses says nothing by way of excuse
for the people. Indeed, the full magnitude of their offence had not yet been compre-
hended by him ; and it is interesting to contrast his pleadings here with an angry God,
and his own wrath when he came actually in sight of the golden calf. The one thing
Moses fixes on, in his appeal to God, is the great Divine purpose for Israel. He recalls
how great that purpose is ; he is profoundly concerned that it should not be interfered
with ; and so we are led to think of Jesus the true Mediator, with a knowledge of Divine
purposes and human needs, such as it was not for Moses to attain. Consider how Jesus
dwells and caused his apostles to dwell on God's great purposes for the children of men.
Thus both fi:om Moses the type, and Jesus the antitype, we shovdd learn to think of
men not as they are only, but as they ought to be, and as God proposes they should be.
Evidently Moses kept constantly in mind God's purposes for Israel, even though he
loiew not how profound and comprehensive those purposes were. So let us, knowing
more than Moses of God's purposes for men in Christ Jesus, keep constantly in mind
that which wiU come to all who by a deep patient, and abiding faith approve them-
gelTes true children of Abraham. — Y.

Yer. 14. — Some pmjotra restrain, some compel. Here we see a restraining power, and
one wliich can even restrain God. Notice —

L Evil threatened. 1. Justly merited. Remember all that had gone before:
deliverance after a series of awe-inspiring judgments on the oppressors ; warnings after
previous murmurings ; now, with a fuUer revelation of God's majesty, this act of impa-
tient apostasy : all compelled to the conclusion that the people were utterly stiflF-necked
(ver. 9). 2. Complete emd final. As a moulder in clay, when he finds his material
getting hard and intractable, throws it down, casts it away, and takes up with something
more pliable, so God determines with regard to Israel (ver. 10). Let the children of
Israel go, and let the children of Moses inherit the promises.

II. The intercession. Only one thing held back the judgment (ver. 10). Aa
though God could not act without the consent of Moses. [Cf. Hot sun would melt
snow but for shadow of protecting wall.] The heat of God's wrath cannot consume so
long as Moses stands in the way and screens those against whom it bums. What a
power! See how it was exercised: — 1. Unselfishly. He might have thought, "A
disgrace to me if these people are lost when I have led them ; " this fear, however, pro-
vided against by the promise that he shall be made " a great nation." The intercession
is prompted by pure unselfishness; Moses identifies himself with those for whom
he pleads; and this gives the power. To come between the sun and any object,
you must be in the line of the sun's rays ; and to come, as Moses did, between God and
• people, you must be in the line of God's will. 2. With pi r/ect freedom. Moses talks
with Jehovah as a trusted steward might with his employer : (1) Why so angry when
he has exercised such power on their behalf? (ver. 11). (2) V/hy should the Egyptian!
be permitted to taunt him with caprice and cruelty ? (ver. 12). (3) Let him remember
his oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (ver. 13). The unse'^sh man need rot fear to
speak thus openly with Odd Unselfishness is so God-like that it penuita familjwitj
vbilst it guards against iiiuverence.



8S2 I'UE BOOK OF EXODUS. [cii. xxxii. 7-15



ni. Evil repented op. Notice: — 1. The repentance was in direct answer to th«
intercession (cf. vers. 12, 14). God did as Moses begged that he would do. Had Moses
been less firm, God's wrath would certainly have consumed the people. ¥et — 2. God
cannot change I No : but Moses kept his place [cf. the wall screening the snow] ; and
therefore the conditions were never such as they must have been for judgment to be
executed. God's repentance was one with Moses' persistence. The evil threatened was
against the people, but the people apait from Moses. Moses identifying himself with
them altered the character of the total.

Conclusion. — What Moses did for his people that our Lord does for his Church (Bom.
viii. 34 ; Hob. vii. 25). That also we may do, each in his measure in behalf of others.
It is the Pharisee who thanks God that he is not as other men are 1 True men love
rather to identify themselves with their race, thus, salt-like, saving it from corruption j
giving it shelter by the intercession of their lives. — G,

Vers. 7 — 15. — The first intercession. If Israel has been forgetting God, God has not
been forgetting Israel. His eye has been on all their doings. There has not been a
thought in their heart, or a word on their tongue, but, lo 1 it has altogether been well
known to him (Ps. cxxxix. 4). It is God's way, however, to permit matters to reach a
crisis before he interposes. For a time he keeps silence. During the inception and
early stages of the movement in Israel, he makes no discovery of it to Moses. He
allows it to ripen to its full proportions. Then he tells his servant all that has hap-
pened, and orders him to repair at once to the scene of the apostasy (vers. 7 — 11).
Mark the expression : — " Thy people, which thou broughtest out of the laiid of Egypt,
have corrupted themselves" — indicating that they are no longer God's, that the covenant
is broken. Moses intercedes for Israel, urging various pleas why God should not destroy
them (vers. 11 — 14). Consider —

I. The Divine wkath. " Let me alone," says God, " that my wrath may wax hot
against them, and that I may consume them " (ver. 10). This wrath of God against
the sin of Israel was — 1. heal. What we have in these verses is no mere drama, acted
between God and Moses, but a most real wrath, averted by most real and earnest inter-
cession. But for Moses' intercession, Israel would actually have been destroyed.
2. E(dy. Wrath against sin is a necessary part of God's character. Not that we are to
conceive of the thrice Holy One as swayed by hmnan passions, or as needing to be
soothed by human entreaty. But sin does awaken God's displeasure. He would not be
God if it did not. " Resentment against sin is an element in the very life of God. It
can no more be separated from God than heat from fire. . . . God is mercifuL What
does this mean? It means a willingness to lay aside resentment against those who have
sinned. But it follows that the greater the resentment, the greater is the mercy ; if
ihere is very little resentment, there can be very little mercy ; if there is no resentment
at all, mercy is impossible. The difference between our religion, and the religion of
other times, is this — that we do not believe that God has any very strong resentment
against sin, or against those who are guilty of sin ; and since his resentment has gone,
his mercy has gone with it. We have not a God who is more merciful than the God of
our fathers, but a God who is less righteous ; and a God who is not righteous, a God
who does not glow with fiery indignation against sin is no God at all." Put otherwise, —
a God who cannot be angry with my sin, is one from whom it would be meaningless in
me to sue for pardon. His pardon, could I obtain it, would have no moral value.
Yet, 3. Restrained. The expression is peculiar — " Now, therefore, let me alone, that
my wrath may imx hot," etc. The meaning is, that God is self-determined in his
wrath, even as in his love (cf. ch. zxxiii. 19). He determines himself in the exercise of
it. It does not carry hun away. In the present instance he restrained it, that room
might be left for intercession. The words were a direct encouragement to Moses to
entreat for his erring charge.

II. MosBs' ruTEBCESsioN (veis. 11 — 15). The last occasion on which we met with
Moses as an intercessor was at the court of Egypt. We have now to listen to him in his
pleadings for his own people. Pour separate acts of intercession are recorded in three
chapters (cf. vers. 31 — 35; chs. xxxiii. 12—18; xxxiv. 9). Taken together, they
constitute a Herculean effort of prayer. Each intercession gams a point not granted to
the previous one. First, the reverb of the sentence of destruction (ver. 14) ; next, thi



CH. xixii. 15— 19.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. «33

consent of Ood to the people going up to Canaan, only, however, under the conduct of an
aiig; >' (oh. xxxiii. 1 — i) ; third, the promise that his o\Vu presence would go with thera
(ch. xxxiii. 14) ; finally, the perfect re-estahlishment of friendly relations, in the rcnewni
of the covenant (ch. xxxiv. 10). Like Jacob, Moses, as a prince, had power with Guii,
and prevailed (Gen. xxxii. 28). It is to be noted, also, that this advance in power of
prayer is connected with an advance in Moses' own experience. In the first intercession,
the thought which chiefly fills his mind is the thouglit of the people's danypr. He does
not attempt to excuse or palliate their sin, but neither dues he make direct confession o\
it. He sees only the nation's impending destruction, and is agonisingly earnest in hit>
efforts to avert it. At this stage in his entreaty, Moses might almost seem to us more
merciful than God. A higher stage is reached when Moses, having actually witnessed
the transgression of the people, is brought to take sides with God in his wrath against it.
His second intercession, accordingly, is pervaded by a much deeper realisation of the
enormity of the sin for which forgiveness is sought. His sense of this is so awful, that
it is now a moot question with him whether God possibly can forgive it (ver. 32). The
third intercession, in like manner, is connected with a special mark of Jehovah's conde-
sceuding favour to himself (ch. xxxiii. 9), emboldening liim to ask that God will restore
his presence to the nation (ver. 15) ; while the fourth follows on the sight which is givuu
him of Jehovah's glory, and on the revelation of the name (ch. xxxiv. 5 — 8). Observe
more particularly in regard to the intercession in the text — 1. The loon sought. It is
that God will spare the people, that he will turn aside his fierce anger from them, and
not consume them (ver. 12). Thus far, as above hinted, it might almost seem as if
Moses were more merciful than God. God seeks to destroy ; Moses pleads with him to
spare. The wrath is in God ; the pity in his servant. (Contrast with this the counter
scene in Jonah iv.) The affinity of spirit between Jehovah and Moses, however, is
evinced later, in the hot anger which Moses feels on actually witnessing the sin. God's
mercy, on the other hand, is shown in giving Moses the opportimity to intercede. It
was he who put the pity into his servant's heart, and there was that in his own heart
which responded to it. 2. The spirit of the supplication. (1) How absolutely disin-
terested. Moses sets aside, without even taking notice of it, the most glorious offer ever
made to mortal man — " I will make of thee a great nation" (ver. 10). This was Moses'
trial. It tested " whether he loved his own glory better than he loved the brethren who
were under his charge." He endured it nobly. (2) How intensely earnest. He seems
to clasp the feet of God as one who could not, would not, leave, till he had obtained
what he sought. (3) How supremely concerned about God's glory. That is with Moses
the consideration above all others. 3. The pleas urged. Moses in these pleas appeals
to three principles in the Divine character, which really govern the Divine action —
(1) To God's regard for his own work (ver. 11). The finishing of work he has begun
(1'hil.i. 6). - ~ ~ " " ■



(2) To God's regard for his own honour (ver. 12). Moses cannot bear to



think of God's action being compromised. (3) To God's regard for his ovm servants
(ver. 13). The love he bears to the fathers (cf. Deut. iv. 31 ; x. 15). These are points
in God's heart on which all intercession may lay hold. 4. The effect produced. God
repented him of the evil he thought to do to Israel (ver. 14). Repented, i.e., turned
back firom a course which his displeasure moved him to pursue, and which, but for
Moses' intercession, he would have pursued. It does not appear, however, that Moses
was at this time informed of the acceptance of his intercession. Notice, also, that the
actual remission was bestowed gradually. In this first act of intercession God sees, as it
were, the point to which the whole series of intercessions tends, and in anticipation
thereof^ lays aside his anger. — J. 0,

EXPOSITION.



Ver. IS — 19. — ^Moseb breaks tbb two

TABLES. The entire conference between Grod
and Moses being now ended, Moses hastened to
descend from the mount, and interpose in the
crisis that had arisen. He took carefully the two
tables of stwe, which he hod received, in bis



two hands (Dent. iz. 16), and set oat on hit

return to the camp. On the way, he fell in
with Joshua, who must have been on the
watch for his descent, and the two proceeded
together. When a certain portion of the dis-
tance had been traversed, Uie sonnds of ths



334



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. xxxu. 15-



-IS



festivity which was going on in the camp
reached their ears ; and Joshua, mistaking the
nature of the shouts, suggested that fighting
was in progress (ver. 17). Moses, however,
better instructed in the actual nature of the
proceedings (vers. 7, 8), caught their charac-
ter more correctly, and declared that what he
heard was nothing but shouting (ver. 18).
Soon afterwards, the camp came into sight —
a disorderly crowd, half stripped of their
garments (ver. 25), was singing choruses
and dancing round the figure which Aaron
had cast — ^the sights and sounds were those
of a diuolnte orgy — Moses was struck with
horror and in the frenzy of his indignation,
dashed the two tables to the ground and
broke them into fragments (ver. 19). The
people, he felt, were utterly unworthy of the
holy laws which he had brought them — they
had " altogether gone out of the way " — ^they
had become "abominable" — at the moment
lie perhaps despaired of obtaining mercy for
I hem, and expected their entire destruction.
Ood bad not as yet told him whether he
n-ould " turn from his fierce wrath," or not.

Ver. 15. — The two tables . . . were in his
hand. In Dent. ix. 15, using greater par-
Mcularity, Moses says that they were " in his
two hcma$." One was in each hand probably.
Written on hoth their sides. This is the
case generally with Assyrian and Babylonian
tablets, but not with Egyptian ones, which
are moreover scarcely found at this early date.
Here we seem to have again an indication
that some of the Israelitic civilisation had
come to them from " Ur of the Chaldees."

Ver. 16. — ^The tables were the work of
Sod. Shaped, (.e., by the same power by
which the commandments were inscribed
upon them ; not, necessarily, of matter newly
created for the purpose.

Ver. 17. — ^When Joshua heard. This abrupt
introduction of Joshua, who has not been men-
tioned for seven entire chapters, is curious.
Probably he had considered himself bound, as
Moses' minister (ch. xxiv. 13), to await his
return, and had remained in the middle por-
tion of the mount, where he may have fed
upon manna, until Moses came down from the
top. The noise of the people. It is noted
by travellers, that in all the latter part of the
descent from Sinai, the plain at its base is



shut out from sight ; and that sounds would
he heard from it a long time before the plain
itself would open on the view (Stanley, Sinai
and Palestine, p. 44). Sounds, however, which
come circuitously, are always indistinct ; and
it is not Burorising that Joshua, knowing
nothing of the proceedings in the camp,
should have fancied he heard a sound of
war.

Ver. 18. This verse is difficult to translate,
being markedly antithetical and at the same
time idiomatic. Perhaps it would be best to
render — "It is not the voice of them who
raise the cry of victory, nor is it the voice of
them who raise the cry of defeat — ^the voice
of them who raise a cry do I hear." The
verb is the same in all the three clauses ; and
it would seem that Moses simply denied that
there was any sound of war without making
any clear suggestion as to the real character of
the disturbance.

Ver. 19. — The dancing. Bather " dancing."
There is no article; and as the subject had
not been mentioned before, the use of the
article would have been unmeaning. Dances
were a part of the religious ceremonial in
most ancient nations. Sometimes they were
solemn and grave, like the choric dances of
the ancient Dorians, and (probably) that of
David in front of the Ark (2 Sam. vi. 5—22) ;
sometimes festive and joyous, yet not im-
modest, like the Pyrrhic and other dances at
Sparta, and the dancing of the Salii at Rome ;
but more often, and especially among the
Oriental nations, they were of a loose and
lascivious character. In Egypt, the dancers
appear to have been professionals of a de-
graded class, and the dancing itself to have
been always sensual and indecent; while in
Syria, Asia Minor, and Babylon, dancing was
a wild orgy, at once licentious and productive
of a species of phrenzy. We must suspect
that it was this sort of dancing in which the
Israelites were engaged — whence the terrible
anger of Moses. He saw idolatry before his
eyes, and idolatry with its worst accom-
paniments. In the extremity of his nnger,
he oast the tables out of his hands, dashed
them violently against the ground, and brake
them. For this act he is never reprehended.
It is viewed as the natural outcome of a
righteous indignation, provoked by the ex-
treme wickedness of the people. We must
bear this in mind when we come to consider
the justice or injustice of the punishment
which he proceeded to inflict QB them for
theur sin (vers. 26— 29>



HOMILETICa

Vers. 16 — 19. — The act <^ Moses in breaking the tablet. At first sight the act seenu
Impious, and wholly inexcusable. Here was a marvel — the greatest marvel existing in
all the world — transcending the finest statue, the most glorious picture — ^more wonderfii)



DH. xxxii. 16—25.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 8M

than the pyramids themselves or the great temple of Kamak — here was a monument
shaped by the hand of Gud, and inscribed with his finger in characters that would have
possessed through all ages an imdyin; interest for man. Here, moreoyer, was a precious
deposit of truth — God's great revelation to his people — ^put in a written form, and so
rendered unalterable ; no more liable to be corrupted by the uncertainty of human
memory, or the glosses of tradition — pure, changeless, perfect truth; the greatest blessing
that man can receive. All this, covamitted by God to his servant's care, and knowingly,
wilfully destroyed in a moment of lime I The thing seems, at first, incredible ; yet we
have the witness of God that it Is true. Then we ask, How could Moses have so acted,
and was not his action inexcusable ? We look to Scripture, and we find that he is never
blamed for it. He relates it of himself without any sign of self-condemnation — nay I
ho, at a later date, reminds the people of it in a tone which is evidently one of self-
approval (Dent. ix. 17). What is the explanation of all this ? It may help us to find a
satisfactory answer, if we consider —

I. The provocation to the act. Moses had left the people devoted apparently to
God's service. When he reported to them the entire contents of the " Book of the
Covenant," they had answered with one voice, "All the words which the Lord hath
said, we will do" (ch. xxiv. 3). He had given them in charge to Aaron and H\u-, on
whose faithfulness he might well imagine himself justified in placing complete reliance.
He had been absent less than six weeks — it might seem to him that he had been absent
but a few days. And now — now that on rounding a corner of the gorge through which
he was descending — he comes in sight of them once more and has them fully presented
to his view, what is it he beholds? He sees the entire people— Levites and priests
as well as laymen — dancing around a golden idol in a lewd and indecent way I Was not
this enough to move him ? Was it not enough to transport him out of himself, and
render him no longer master of his actions ? The wickedness of the people stood revealed
to him, and made him feel how utterly unworthy they were of the treasure which
he was bringing them. Yielding to an irresistible impulse, in a paroxysm of indig-
nation, to shew his horror at what he witnessed, he cast the tables to the ground. God
ieems to have regarded the provocation as sufficient, and therefore Moses receives no
blame for what he did.

II. The act itself. The act was the destruction of a record which the people were
at the moment setting at nought. It was akin to the action of God in withdrawing
light from them who sin against light. It was a deserved punishment. It was a way of
declaring to the people that they were unworthy to receive the truth and should not
receive it. Those who saw Moses descend saw that he was bringing them something,
carefully, in his two hands, and must have felt that, as he had gone up to the summit to
God, it must be something from God. When he lifted up his two hands, and with a
gesture of abhorrence, cast the "something" to the ground, there must have gone
through them a sudden thrill of fear, a sudden sense of loss. They must have felt that
their " sin had found them out " — that their punishment had begun. Casting the tables
down and breaking them, was saying to the multitude in the most significant way —
" God has cast you off from being his people."

III. The sequel op the act. If anything could have brought the Israelites gene-
rally to a sense of their guilt aud shame, it would have been the act of Moses which they
had witnessed. As it was, a deep impression seems to have been made ; but only on
the men of his own tribe. When Moses, shortly afterwards, demanded to know, " Who
was on the Lord's side ? " (verse 26), " all the men of Levi " — i.e., the great mass of the
tritie — ^rallied to him, and were ready to become the executioners of his wrath upon the
most determined of the idolaters. This revulsion of feeling on their part was probably
brought about, in a great measure, by the exhibition of indignation on the part of Moses,
which culminated in his dashing the tables to the earth.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 15 — 25. — The return of Mones to the camp. It may well be believed that It wm
witii deeply agitated heart that Moses, stunned by the tidings he had just received,
Kjoined his faithfUl attendant, and as speedily as possible descended the rocky sidM ol



M« THE BOOK OP EX0DU8. [ch. sxxii 15—25.

the movmtain. Oreat was the contrast between the things heavenly on wMch for forty dayi
and forty nights his eyes had been uninterruptedly feasting, and the scenes he was now to
witness. Even the light of common day could hardly seem otherwise than strange to
him, emerging from his ecstasy. His bodily aspect, too, would be considerably altered.
But in his spirit there is a stored-up energy, the product of his long rapture, which it
only needs the sight of Israel's sin to kindle into awful heat of wrath.

I. The bbbakinq op the tables (vers. 15 — 19). The downward journey was s
silent one. Moses refrains from communicating to Joshua the news he has receive d.
He is absorbed in his own thoughts. And while he musea, the fire burns (Ps. xxxix. !5).
So soon as they approach the camp, sounds of revelry are heard. Joshua, with his soldier's
instinct, thinks at once of war, but Moses can tell him that it is " not the voice of them
that shout for mastery," nor yet " the voice of them that cry for being overcome " that
he hears, but " the voice of them that cry " (ver. b). Even Moses, however, is unpre-
pared for the spectacle which presents itstlf, as, pursuing the descent, some turn in the
road at length puts before his eyes the whole scene of folly. The tables of testimony
are in his hands, but these, in his hot anger, he now dashes from him, breaking them in
pieces on the rooks (ver. 19). It was an act of righteous indignation, but symbolic also
of the breaking of the covenant. Of that covenant the tables of stone were aU that still
remained, and the dashing of them to pieces was the final act in its rupture. Learn,
I. The actual sight of wickedness is necessary to give us full sympathy with God in the
hot displeasure with which he regards it. 2. The deepest and most loving natures are
those most capable of being affected with holy indignation. Who shall compete with
Moses in the boundlessness of his love for Israel ? But the honour of Jehovah touches
him yet more deeply. 3. It is right, on suitable occasions, to give emphatic expression
to the horror with which the sight of great wickedness inspires us.

n. The dbsteuotion op the calf (ver. 20). Eeturning to the camp, Moses brought
the orgies of the people to a speedy termination. He had little difficulty in restoring
order. His countenance, blazing with anger, and exhibiting every sign of grief, surprise,
and horror, struck immediate dismay into the evil-doers. No one, apparently, had the
courage to resist him. The Idolaters slunk in guilty haste to their tents, or stood
paralysed with fear, rooted to the spot at which he had discovered them. He, on hia
pan, took immediate steps for ridding the camp of the visible abomination. " He took
the calf which they had made and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and
strewed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel djink of it." View this —
1. As a hitter humiliation. What could be more humiliating to these idolaters than to
see their god ground to powder, and its dust made into a nauseous mixture, which after-
wards they were compelled to drink ? But is not this the end of all sin ? The instru-
ments of our sin become the instruments of our punishment. Our sin turns to
bitterness. The golden sheen by which it at first allured us disappears from it. It ends
in humiliation and degradation. 2. As a righteous retribution. Why was the calf
thus ground to powder, and given to the Israelites to drink ? It was no mere act oi
revenge on Moses' part. It was no hasty doing of his anger. It was a just retribution
for a great sin. It was a method deliberately adopted of branding idol and idolaters
alike with the print of the Almighty's judgment. It suggests to us the correspondence
between sin and its punishment ; the certainty of our sins coming home to roost ; the
fact that sin will be paid back to us in its own coin. Sin and retribution hang together.
We " receive the things done in the body ^' (2 Cor. v. 10). 3. As a prophecy of worse
evil to come. Bitter as this humiliation was, it was not the whole. It was but the
mark put upon the deed by God, which told those who had committed it that they must
abide by it, and be prepared to eat the fruit of their doings. The drinking of the dust
had its sequel in the slaughter and the plagues (vers. 27, 35). Even so, the bitterness
and humiliation following from sins in this life do not exhaust their punishment. They
warn of worse punishment in the world to come.

IlL Aaron's excuses (vers. 21 — 25). The first duty was to destroy the calf.
This accomplished, or while the work was proceeding, Moses addresses himself to
Aaron. Hiii words are cuttingly severe, — " What did this people unto thee? " etc. (ver.
21). Aaron, on his side, is deprecating and humble. He is afraid of Moses' anger. He
addresses Moses as " my lord," and proceeds to make excuses. His excuses are typical,
■nd deserve oonsideration. 1. He falls back upon the old, old plea— as old as Edwr-



t«. XXXII. 15—32.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. Ml

that the blame of his sin vested on some one else than himself. " Let not the anger ol
my lord wax hot : thou knowest the people, that they are bent on mischief. For they
Baid to me," etc. (vers. 22 — 24). It is, as we say, the old, old story of all evil-doers —
" It wasn't me, indeed it wasn't ; it was those wicked people who made me do it." It
is the weak, childish excuse of all who, having been tempted into sin, or having through
their own irresolution fallen into it, have not the honesty or manliness to make at once
a frank avowal of their fault. An easy way this, were the excuse admissible, of getting
rid of our responsibility ; but transgressors were early taught that they will not be
allowed to avail themselves of it (Gen. iii. 12 — 20). It is not a plea which will be held
valid on the day of judgment. All, more or less, are conscious of pressure exerted on
them by their circumstances. There is, however, no fatality binding us to yield to that
pressure, if yielding means sin. The pressure is our trial. Aaron's sin lay in his
unmanly fear, in his not having the resolution to say at the critical time, No. Probably
Aaron would have urged that if he had not yielded, the people would have killed him.
" Then," Moses would have answered, " let them kill you. Better a thousand times
tliit they had killed you than that you should have been the means of leading Israel
into this great sin." Yet how often is the same species of excuse met with! "I
couldn't help it ; " " The necessity of my situation ; " " Compelled by circumstances ; "
" Customs of the trade ; " " If I hadn't done it, I would have oflended aU my friends ; "
" I should have lost my situatioa," etc. It may be all true : but the point is, Was the
thing wrong ? If it was, the case of Aaron teaches us that we cannot shield ourselves
by transferring the blame of what we have done to circumstances. 2. If Aaron's first
excuse was bad, the second was worse — it just happened. He put the gold, poor man,
into the fire, and " there came out this calf ! " It came out. He did not make it ; it just
came out. This was a kind of explaining which explained nothing. Yet it is precisely
paralleled by people attributing, say, to their " luck," to " chance," to " fate," to " des-
tiny," what is really their own doing. Thomas Scott says — " No wise man ever made
a more unmeaning or foolish excuse than Aaron did. We should never have supposed
' that he could speak well,' were we to judge of his eloquence by this specimen." Note
— (1) The right way of dealing with a fault is frankly to acknowledge it. (2) Though
Moses so severely rebuked Aaron, he could yet intercede for him (Deut. ix. 20). The
future high priest, who truly had "infirmity" (Heb. v. 2), needed, on this occasion, an
intercessor for himself. The severity of Moses was the severity of aggrieved love. — J. O.

Vers. 15 — 35. — Judgment and mercy. L The descent of Moses the emblem of this
law's estbanoe into a wobld op sin (vers. 15 — 29). 1. He came with tables written by
God's own finger. The Divine origin and claims of the law are still attested by its own
nature and by man's conscience. 2. He was met by the exhibition of gross and defiant sin.
The law does not come to a people waiting to receive the knowledge of God's wiU, but
busy with their idolatry and breaking what they already know to be his will. 3. The
law's advent, therefore, is in wrath (ver. 19). (1) The broken tables declare that God's
covenant is broken. This is still shown in the taking away of God's word from the
sinful : it is not understood. Though held in the hand, a veU is drawn between the
soul and it. Spiritual death, rationalism, and infidelity, are tokens to-day of God's
broken covenant. (2) The burning of the idol, etc. The broken law is a prophecy and
foretaste of wrath. (3) The slaughter of the persistent idolaters. The place of feasting
becomes the place of death.

II. The intebcessok. 1. His deep consciousness of the evil of their sin (vers. 30,
31). The intercessor cannot make light of man's iniquity. He who bore our burdens
felt their weight and terribleness as we have never yet done. 2. His love. Though he
hates their iniquity, his life is bound up with theirs (ver. 32).

III. The TERBIliLENESS OP SIN AS SEEN IN THE MIBBOB OP THE DiVINB ANGEB.

1. The impossibility of ransom. " Whosoever hath sinnsd against me him will I blot
out of my book." There is but one sacrifice which avails, and that reaches the heart of
the sinful and changes it. 2. Mercy to the unrenewed only means a delayed judgment :
" Nevertheless, in the day when I visit I wUl visit their sina upon them." — U.



iXODua — ^o.



»3i



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[uH. xxxn. 2Qi



EXPOSITION.



Ver. 20. — ^MosEa destroys the golden
OALF. The first vengeance which Moses took
was upon the idol. It was probably hollow, and
possibly of no great size. He might easily
break it to pieces and subject the pieces to the
■ction of fire, whereby they would be cal-
cined, and might then be easily reduced to
powder. This powder he caused to be mixed
with the stream of the brook that flowed from
Sinai, so that the Israelites were obliged to
swallow with their drink particles of their
own idol Compare the action of Josiah with
respect to the " grove " set up in the temple
precincts by Manasseh (2 Kings xxiii. 6),
which was not identical, but still was similar.
It has been suggested that this portion of the
narrative is out of proper chronological order ;
and this may be so far true that the calcin-
ing and mixing with the water were at this
point commanded rather than executed; but
the destruction of the idol would naturally be
tba first thing wluch Hoses would take in



hand, and provide for, before proceeding to
anything else. Only when the " aborainft-
tion " was removed and its destruction com-
menced, would he turn his attention to other
points.

Ver. 20. — Burnt it and ^OTind it to pow-
der. Silver and gold subjected for a short
time to a white heat, which may be easily
produced by bellows, readily calcine, and an
then easily crushed to a fine powder. Sil-
ver becomes detonating. I am not aware
whether the case is the same with gold
also. Strawed it — i.e., " sprinkled it." We
need not suppose Moses to have done the
whole — or even any part — himself. It was
enough that he directed it to be done. The
water. The article shows some particular
water to be meant. We learn from Deutero-
nomy that it was the water of " the brook
that descended out of the mount." Hade the
children of brael drink of it The brook
being the only water readUy accessible, the
Israelites, if they drank at all, were compelled
to risk swallowing particles of their " god."



HOMILETICS.

Ver. 20. — Idolatry condemned by the idoTs weakness and nofhingnest. An idol ii
"nothing in the world" (1 Cor. viii. 4) — ^has no power — cannot even save itselfl
Nothing convinces men of the vanity of if^olatry so much as to see their idol destroyed.
We read in Bede that Northumbria was converted chiefly through the priest Coifi
running a tilt at the great idol of the day, and throwing it to the ground {Ecdes.
Sist.ii. 13). Hence the command given " utterly to abolish idols "(Is. ii. 18). And
what is true of idols proper, is true also, in its measure, of all those substitutes for Q-od
which the bulk of men idolise. Riches readily make themselves wings, and vanish,
leaving their worshipper a beggar. Wife, mistress, favoiirite child, lover, erected into
an idol, is laid low by death, decays, and crumbles in the grave. Reputation, glory,
sought and striven for throughout long years as the one sole good, fades suddenly
away before the breath of slander or the caprice of fortune. And when they are gone
— ^when the bubble is burst — ^men feel how foolish was their adoration. Their idolatrr
stands self-condemned by their idol's weakness and nothingness.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 21 — 24. — Aaeon tries to excuse
HDiSELF. Having taken the needful steps for
the destruction of the idol, Moses naturally
turned upon Aaron. He had been left in charge
of the people, to guide them, instruct them,
counsel them in difficulties (ch. xxiv. 14).
How had he acquitted himself of his task ?
He had led the people into a great sin — had
at any »ate connived at it — assisted in it.
Mosei tbereforo asks, " What had the people



done to him, that he should so act? How
had they injured him, that he should ss
greatly injure them ? " To this he has no
direct reply. But he will not acknowledge
himself in fault — he must excuse himself.
And his excuse is twofold: — 1. It was the
people's fault, not his; they were "set on
mischief." 2. It was a fatality— he threw the
gold into the fire, and " it came out this calf."
We are not surprised, after this, to read is



Of. xxxn. 21—24.]



THE BOOK OF EXODDS.



m



Deuteronomy, that " the Lord was very angry
with Aaron to have destroyed him," and was
only hindered from his purpose by the inter-
cession of Moses

Ver. 21. — What did this people nnto theel
Moses does not suppose that lie people had
really done anything to Aaron. He asks the
question as a reproach — they had done nothing
to thee — had in no way injured thee — and
yet thou broughtest this evil upon them. So
great a sin. Literally, "a great sin" — ^the
sin of idolatry. If Aaron had offered a stren-
uous opposition from the first, the idolatry
might not have taken place — the people
might have been brought to a better mind.



Ver. 22. — Let not the anger of my lord
wax hot. Aaron's humility is extreme, and
the result of a consciousness of guilt. H*
nowhere else addresses Moses as "my lord."
Set on misohiefl Or "inclined to evil*
(Kalisch).

Yer. 23.— Hake u gods. Rather « Make
ns a god."

Ver. 24. — There oame ont this oalf. Aaron
speaks as if he had prepared no mould, bnt
simply thrown the gold into the hot fur-
nace, from which there issued forth, to his
surprise, the golden calf. This was not only
a suppressio veri, but a suggestio falai. Hav-
ing no even plausible defence to make, he il
driven to the weakest of snbterf uge^



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 22 — 24. — Aaron's excuses. We are all ready enougli to condemn Aaron for Ua
insincere and shifty answer; but do not the apostle's words occur to any of us?—
"Therefore, thou art inexcusable, man, whosoever thou art that judgest, for wherdn
thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself ; for thou that judgest doest the same
things " (Bom. ii. 1). Do not we all, when we are taxed with faults, seek to shift tha
blame of them «lsewhere ? e.g. : —

L On the people with whom iirai uve. Society, we say, is corrupt — ^is " set oa
mischief." Its customs are wrong, we know ; but it is too strong for us. We must
conform to its ways. There is no use in resisting them. Public men say — " Such and
such changes in the law would be bad — we know it — we admit it — but the people ask
for them, so we must lend ourselves to their wishes, and take steps to get the changes
made." Or again — " This or that war would be unjust, iniquitous, a flying in the face
of Christian principle. To engage in it would be a crime — a disgrace to the age we
live in." But let the popular voice call for the war a little loudly — and the public man
yields, silences the remonstrances of his conscience, and becomes an active agent in
bringing the war about. And the case is the same in private life. Ask a man why he spends
on entertainments twice as much as he spends in charity, and he will immediately lay
the blame on others — " every one does it." Ask him why he wastes his whole time in
frivolous pursuits, newspaper-reading, club-gossiping, card-playing, party-going, and his
reply is the same. Descend a little in the social scale, and ask the manufacturer
why he scamps his goods ; the shopkeeper why he adulterates ; the ship-owner why he
insures ships that he knows to be unseaworthy and sends out to be wrecked — and his
answer is parallel — " every one in his line of business does the same." They compel
him to follow their bad example. Descend again, ask the confidential servant why he
takes "commission" from tradesmen; the cook, why she hides fresh joints among the
broken victuals ; the footman, why he purloins wine and cigars ; they defend themselves
with the same plea — " It is wrong, they know : but their class has established the
practice." " We are all the victims of our social surroundings ; it is not we who are in
fault, but the crowd that pushes us on."

II. On the nature that God has given ub, on the craouMSTANCBS in which
WE ABE PLACED. Sins of temper and sins of impurity are constantly set down by
those who commit them to their nature. Their tempers are naturally so bad, their
passions naturally so strong. As if they had no power over their nature ; as if agaiu,
they did not voluntarily excite their passions, work themselves up into rages ; " make
provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof." In thus doing they construct tha
mould into which the sins run. Sins of dishonesty are commonly attributed to dream'
stances : the temptation came in their way, men say, without their seeking it, and was
too much for them, was not to be resisted. So vrith drunkenness, idleness, and the other
sins connected with evil companionship ; men's plea is they were brought into contact
with persons who dragged them, almost forced them into evil courses. Had thfy bera

<8



MO



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxsil tS— 28.



more happily circumstanced it would have heen different. As if a man did not to a
large exteiit make his own circumstances, choose his companions, construct his own way
of life. We are not forced to company with any men, much less any women, out of
business hours. VJe are not compelled to go to places of puhlic amusement where we
are tempted. The " circumstances " which lead to sin are usually circumstances which
we might easily have avoided, if we had chosen, as Aaron might hare avoided malring
the mould, or even asking for the ornaments.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 25 — 29. — JIosES punishes tue binq-
LBADaBs. The presence of Moses in the camp
— ais impressive act in breaking the tables —
even his seizure of the idol and consignment
of it to destruction — did not arrest the licen-
tious orgy in which the people had engaged
before his coming. The " play " that had
followed on the feasting still continued ;
though we may suppose that many had been
impressed and had desisted. Moses felt that an
example must be made, and a stop put to
conduct which was more and more provoking
the Almighty, and might at any moment
bring down the judgment of complete de-
•truction upon the whole people. He there-
fore took his station at the main gate of the
camp (ver. 2G), and shouted the words —
" Who is on Jehovah's side ? Here, to me 1 "
The sound of the words could not, of coarse,
have reached very far — but they rallied to
him those of his own tribe who stood near,
and thus placed a strong force at his disposal.
Moses bade them get their swords, and proceed
through the camp from end to end, slaying
the idolaters — not, we may be sure, indis-
criminately, but executing God's judgment on
those who were most conspicuous and persis-
tent. They were especially bidden not to
spare their own nearest and dearest, which
implies that many Levites were among the
ringleaders. The result was the destruction
by the sword of three thousand men — and
the suppression of the festival. It is not to
be doubted that Moses had Divine sanction
for what he did in this matter (ver. 27).

Ver. 25. — The people were naked. It has
been suggested that "licentious" or "un-
ruly '' would be a better rendering (Gesenius,
Dathe, Roseninuller, Kalisch, Cook), but the
primary sense of phdrua is " naked," " stript ;"
and of the licentious orgies of the East,
•tripping or uncovering tiia person was a



feature (Herod, ii. 60), so that there ii ao
reason for changing the expression used in
the Authorised Version. Moses saw that
most of the people were still without the
garments that they had laid aside when they
began to dance, and were probably still en-
gaged in dancing and shouting. Aaron had
made them naked. Aaron is said to have
done that to which his actions had led. He
had made the calf and proclaimed a festivaL
The " nakedness " had naturally followed.
Unto their shame among their enemies.
Ainalekites were no doubt still hovering about
the camp ; indeed, the tribe probably stiU held
most of the surrounding mountains. They
would witness the orgy, and see the indecent
md shameful exposure.

Ver. 2G. — Moses stood in the gate of tha
oamp. We must understand " the principal
gate," since the camp had several (ver. 27)
Who is on the Lord's side t let him oom*
to me. Literally, " Who for Jehovah ? To
me " — but expressed, as the Hebrew idiom
allows, in three words, forming an excellent
rallying cry. All the sons of Levi — t.e., all
who heard the cry. It is evident that there
were Levites among the idolaters (vers. 27,
29).

Ver. 27. — Go in and ont from gate to
gate, etc., — i.e., " pass through the whole
camp — visit every part of it — and, where yon
see the licentious rites continuing, use yonr
swords — do not spare, though the man be a
brother, or a companion, or a neighboni^—
strike nevertheless, and bring the revel to la
end."

Ver. 28. — About three thousand. We can-
not gather from this, as some have done, that
the Levites who rallied to Moses were only
3,000 — for every Levite was not obliged to
kill a man — but only that, when this number
was slain, the idolaters desisted from their orgy

Ver. 29. — For Moses had said. Moses, on
giving them their commission (ver. 27), had
told them, that their zeal in the matter would
be a consecration, and would secure them
God's blessing. They earned by it the semi-
priestly position, which was soon afterwaidl
assigned to them (Num. iii. 6 — U).



a. xxxji. 25— 30.] THIS BOOK OF iilXODUS. Ml



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 26 — ^28. — The pimhliment of idolatry. God did not long allow the sin against
his majesty to remain unpunished. He declared his will to Moses (ver. 27) — " Thus
saith the Lord God of Israel" — and Moses, with his usual dutifulness, was prompt to
execute his will. Having obtained the necessary force, he lost no time in inflicting the
punishment. Of the punishment itself, we shall do well to note —

L Its bevbritt. Men talk and think very slightingly in these days of sins against
God's majesty. They profess scepticism, agnosticism, atheism, " with a light heart."
The idea does not occur to them that their conduct is likely to bring upon them any
pimishment. Hut " God's thoughts are not as man's thoughts" — God visits such sins
with death. Three thousand are slain with tlie sword on one day because of a few
hours of idol-worship. Such is God's award. And the record of it has been "written
for our learning, upon whom the ends of the world are come." It is intended to teach us
that God will visit for these things ; and, if not in this world, then assuredly in the next.

II. Its justice. Idolatry is apostasy. It is a " casting of God behind the back" —
• turning away from him, and a deliberate preference to him of something which is not
he, and which cannot therefore but be infinitely inferior. U'he heart witnesses against
idolatry ; it tells us that we are bound, being God's creatures, to devote our whole
existence to him. Idolatry might well be punished with death, if it had never been
positively forbidden. But the Israelites had heard it forbidden amid the thunders of
Sinai (ch. xx. 4, 5). 'They had a law against it in " the Book of the Ctovenant"
(ch. XX. 23). They had pledged themselves to obey this liw (ch. xxiv. 3). They
could not therefore now complain. If all who had taken part in the calf- worship had
perished, no injustice would have been done. But God tempers justice with mercy.
There were well-nigh six hundred thousand sinners ; but the lives of three thousand
only were taken.

I II. The method whereby it was escaped. Those escaped who put away their sio
as, 1. The Levites, who hastened to repent, and placed themselves on the Lords side at
the first summons made by Moses. This was the best course, and the only safe one.
This was " turning to the Lord with all the heart ;" and, though no atonement for past
sin, was accepted by God through the (coming) atonement of his Son, and obtained from
him, not only forgiveness, but a blessing (ver. 29). 2. Those escaped who desisted
either when Moses made his first appeal, or even when they saw the swords drawn, and
vengeance about to be taken. To draw back from sin is the only way to escape its
worst consequences. Even then, all its conser|ueiices are not escaped. Their iniquity
was still " visited " on those who were now allowed to escape with their lives — " the
Lord plagued the people because they made the calf" (ver. S5) at a later data

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 25 — 30. — The zeal of Levi. Panic was in the camp. The idolaters stood at
they had been taken in their guilty revels. Their sin had been of too heinous a nature
to admit of its being passed over without severe punishment. Law must be vindicated.
Vengeance must be taken for the injury offered to the majesty of Jehovah. Stern as
the duty is, the mediator does not shrink from immediately addressing himself to the
execution of judgment.

L The bummonb. He stood in the gate of the camp and said, " Who is on the
Lord's side? Let him come unto me" (ver. 26). This must be taken to mean, not,
"Who is willing to be on the Lord's side now?" but " Who has shown himself on the
Lord's side during the recent apostasy ? " Note — the Lord's side, though for a time the
unpopular one, proves in the end to be the side of honour, of safety, and of comfort.
Fidelity has its ultimate reward. Wisdom is justified of her children. (Matt. xi. 19.)

n. The response. " All the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him "
(ver. 26). The Levites, as a tribe, would thus appear to have been lese implicated it
Vb» idtdakn than the rest of the people.

"Faithful found
Among the faithless, faithful onl^ ha*



312 THE BOOK. OF EXODUS. [oh. xxxil 30— 3&

This now turns to their honour. The text, however, does not forbid the supposition
that individuals from the other tribes also came out, and separated themselves at th*
call of Moses.

III. The commission. This was sufficiently sanguinary. It put the fidelity of Levi
to a terrible test. " Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his
side, and go in and out," etc. (ver. 27). 1. In the work of executing Jehovah's
vengeance, the Levites were to " consecrate " themselves (ver. 29). They were to devote
themselves. They were to be actuated in what they did by pure zeal for God's glory.
They were to obey to the letter the command he had given them. 2. In the doing of
this work, thei/ were sternly to repress all natural impulses : " every man upon his son,
and upon his brother" (ver. 29; of. Dent, xxxiii. 9). So earthly ties are not to be
permitted to stand between us and duty to Christ (Matt. viii. 21, 22 ; x. 27).

IV. The execution of the mandate. 1. The Levites showed unflinching zeal in
the tvorh entrusted to them. By their zeal on this, and on other occasions (Deut. xxxiii.
8), they reversed' the curse which lay upon their tribe, and won for themselves great
honour and blessing. In particular, they won the privilege of serving in the
sanctuary. 2. They sliw three thousand of the people (ver. 28). " Terrible surgery
this," as Carlyle says of the storming of Drogheda ; " but is it surgery, and judgment, or
atrocious murder merely ? " The number of the slain was after all small as compared
with the whole body of the people. Probably only the ringleaders and chief instigators
of the revolt were put to death, with those who still showed the disposition to resist.
Note, that notwithstanding their great zeal on this occasion, the Levites were among
those afterwards excluded from Canaan for unbelief. This is a striking curcumstance.
It shows how those that think they stand need to take heed lest they fall (1 Cor. x. 12).
It reminds us that one heroic act of service is not enough to win for us the kingdom of
God. " We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence
fast unto the end" (Heb. iii. 14). It may suggest to us also, that many of the Israelites
who failed under the later trial, and so were excluded from Canaan, thus forfeiting the
earthly inheritance, may yet have had the root of the matter in them, and so
spiritually, were saved. — J. 0.

Ver. 26. — " Who is on the Lord's side f Let him wme unto me." The following
points suggest a practical treatment of the passage —

I. In the waepaee between good and evil, there is need foe taking sides.
Some side we must take. We caunot remain neutraL Not to be on the Lord's side, is
to be on the side of his enemies. It is our duty to choose the Lord's side. (1) He
has a claim on our allegiance. (2) It is the side of honour and of duty. (3) It is the
side we will ultimately wish we had chosen.

II. The example of one good man, in declaeing himself on the Lord's side
AFFOEDS a ealltinq-point FOB OTHERS. He gathers others around him. His influence
decides and emboldens them.

III. The TEST OF being on the Lord's side is, that, when others are apostatis-
ing around us, we remain faithful. Weak natures will always go with the multitude.
Decided piety shows itself in being able to resist the contagion of numbers. It needs
courage to be singular.

IV. Being on the Lord's side carries with it certain obligations. (1) The
obligation of personal consecration. (2) The obligation of renouncing earthly ties so
far as inconsistent with the higher allegiance. (3) The obligation of doing the Lord'i
work,

V. FlOELITT OB THE LoBd'b BIOK WILL MBKT WITH AN ULTIMATE BBWABD.— J. O,

EXPOSITION.



Vera. 30 — 35.— Moses onob more inteb-
OEDEs WITH God fob the people — God
ANSWERS HIM. No distinct reply seems to
have been given to the previous intercession
of Moees (vera. 11 — IS). He only knew that



the people were not as yet consumed, and
therefore that God's wrath was at any rata
held in suspense. It might be that the
puniBhment inflictea on the 3000 had ap-
peased God'i wiatli: or something aon



OH. xszn. 83—86.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



848



might be needed. In the latter cas?, Moses
was ready to sacrifice himself for his nation
(ver. 32). Like St. Paul, he elects to be " ac-
cursed from God, for his brethren, his kinsfolk
after the flesh" (Eom. ix. S). But God will
not have this sacrifice. " The soul that sin-
neth, it shall die " (Ezek. xviii. 4). He de-
clares, "Whosoever hath sinned against me,
him win I blot out of my book " (Ex. xxxii.
33). Moses shall not make himself a victim.
Without any such sacrifice, God will so far
spare them, that they shall still go on their
way towards the promised land, with Moses as
their earthly, and an Angel as their heavenly
leader. Only, their sin shaU still be visited
in God's own good time and in his own way.
How, is left in obscurity ; but the decree is
issued — " In the day that I visit, I will visit
their sin apon them" (ver. 34). And, writing
long years after the event, the author observes
— ^" And God did plague the people because they
made the calf which Aaron made " (ver. 35).

Ver. 80. — On the morrow. The day must
have been weU-nigh over when the slaughter
of the 3000 was completed : and after that the
corpses had to be buried, the signs of carnage
to he effaced, and the wounded, of whom there
must have been many, cared for. Moses would
have had to direct, if not even to superintend,
everything, and therefore could not reascend
Sinai until the next day. Hoses said nnto
the people. Not now to the eldei-s only, as in
ch. xxiv. 14, but to all the people, since all
had sinned, and each man is held by God
individually responsible for his own sin. Ye
have sinned a great sin. One which com-
bined ingratitude and falseness with impiety.
Feradventnre I shall make an atonement.
Moses has formed the design, which he
executes (ver. 32); but will not reveal it to
the people, from modesty probably.

Ver. 31. — Gods of gold. Bather " a god of
gold."

Ver. 32. — ^If thou wilt forgive their sin.
The eUipsis which follows, is to be supplied
by some such words, as " well and good " — " I
am content" — " I have no more to say."
Similar cases of ellipses will be found in Dan.
iii. S ; Luke xiii. 9 ; xix. 42 ; John vi. 62 ;
Bom. ix. 22. And if not, blot me, I pray
thee, out of thy book. Some interpret this as
merely equivalent to, "Blot me out of the
book of the living," and explain that phrase as
meaning simply — ^"Take my life — ^kiU me
instead of them " — ^but something more seems
to be meant. " The book of the hving " —
" the book of life " — the book of God's writing
—is not merely a register of those who happen
to be aUve at any given time. It " contain!



the list of the righteous, and ensures to those
whose names are written therein, life before
God, first in the earthly kingdom of God, and
then eternal life also" (Eeil). Thns Moses
declared his willingness — ^nay, his wish — that
God would visit on him the griult of his people,
both in this world and the next, so that he
would thereupon forgive them. St. Paul has a
similar burst of feeling (Eom. ix. 1 — 3) ; but
it does not involve a formal offer — it is simply
the expression of a willingness. Ordinary men
are scarcely competent to judge these sayings
of great saints. As Bengel says — " It is not
easy to estimate the measure of love in a Moses
and a Paul; for the narrow boundary of our
reasoning powers does not comprehend it, as
the little child is unable to comprehend the
courage of heroes." Both were wiBing— /eK
willing, at any rate — to sacrifice their own
future for their countrymen — ^and Moses made
the offer. Of all the noble acts in Moses' life it
is perhaps the noblest ; and no correct esti-
mate of his character can be formed which
does not base itself to a large extent on hii
conduct at this crisis.

Ver. 33. — Whosoever hath sinned against
me, him will I blot out of my hook. Beyond
a doubt, it is the general teaching of Scripture
that vicarious punishment wiU not be accepted.
" The son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father, neither shall the father bear the in-
iquity of the son — the righteousness of the
righteous shall be npon him, and the wicked-
ness of the wicked shall be upon him " (Ezek.
xviii. 20). Man " cannot deliver his brother, or
make agreement with God for him ; for it cost
more to redeem their souls, so that he must let
that alone for ever " (Ps. xlix. 7, 8). One only
atonement is accepted — ^that of him who is at
once man and God — who has, himself, no sin
— and can therefore take the punishment of
others.

Ver. 34. — Lead the people unto the plaoa^
etc. This was a revocation of the sentence of
death passed in verse 10. The people was to
be spared, and Moses was to conduct them to
Palestine. Uine Angel shall go before thes.
Mine Angel — not I myself (compare ch.
xxxiii. 2, 3). Another threatened punishment,
which was revoked upon the repentance of the
people (lb. 4, 6), and the earnest prayer of
Moses (i6. 14 — 16). I will visit their sin
upon them. Kalisch thinks that a plague was
at once sent, and so understands verse 35.
But most commentators regard the day of
visitation as that on which it was declared
that none of those who had quitted Egypt
should enter Canaan (Num. xiv. 35), and re-
gard that sentence as, in fact, provoked by tfat
golden calf idolatry (t6. 22).

Ver. 35.— The Lord plagued, or " struck"—
i.e., " punished " the people. There is nothmg
in the expression which requires w to under.
stand the sending of « pestilence.



Ui THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxxu. 31-84.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 30 — 34. — Moses as the forerunner of Christ. " A prophet shall the Lord youi

God raise up unto you like unto me," said the great lawgiver, ere he left the earth
(Deut. xvii. 15, 18) ; and the parallelism between Christ and Moses is in many respects
most striking. 1. Both were of obscure birth — " the son of a carpenter " — the son of " a
man of the house of Levi." 2. Both were in great peril in in&ncy — their life sought by
the civil ruler — Herod — Pharaoh. 3. Both passed their youth and early manhood in
obscurity — Christ for thirty, Moses for forty years. 4. Both felt they had a mission, but
on coming forward were rejected by their brethren. " He came unto his own, and his
own received him not" (John i. 11). " He supposed his brethren would have under-
stood how that God by his hand would deliver them : but they understood not" (Acts
vii. 25). 5. Both showed " signs and wonders," such as have rarely been seen upon
earth, and thus made it manifest that their missions were from Grod. 6. Both were
law-givers — promulgators of a new moral code — ^Moses of an imperfect, Christ of a per-
fect law — (" the perfect law of love"). 7. Both were founders of a new community —
Moses of the Hebrew state, Christ of the Christian Church. 8. Both were great
deliverers and great teachers — Moses delivered his people from Egypt and Pharaoh, and
led them through the wilderness to Canaan ; Christ delivers his from sin and Satan,
and leads them through the wilderness of tlus life to heaveiL 9. Both willed to be •
sacrifice for their bretliren — Grod could not accept the one sacrifice (ver. 33), but could
and did accept the other.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 31, 32. — The confession and intercession of Moses. Notice here^
L The amplitude op this confession. It is very necessary to contrast the wotda
of Moses in vers. 31 and 32 with his previous words in vers. 11 — 13. What a difierence
there is in the ground, elements, and tone of the two appeals I and this diflference is folly
explained by the experience through which he had been in the interval. It was a bitter
and humiliating experience — we may almost say an unexpected one. For, although,
before he had gone down from the mount, Jehovah had given him a clear forewarning
of what awaited him, somehow he seems not to have taken in the full drift of Jehovah's
words. It is not till he gets down into the camp and sees the golden image, and the
revelry and riot, and the implication of his own brother in a broken covenant, that he
discerns the full extent of the calamity, and the difficulty, almost the impossibility of
bringing together again Jehovah and his revolted people. Vain is it to seek for any-
thing like sure conclusions in the details of Moses' conduct on this occasion. The
things he did were almost as the expressions of a heart beside itself with holy grief.
There is a good deal of obscurity in this portion of the narrative ; and our wisest course
Is to turn to what is clear and certain and most instructive, namely, the great result
which came out of this experience. It was truly a result, bey on i all estimation, to have
been led to the conclusion — " This people have smned a great siu." That was just the
light in which Jehovah looked upon their conduct ; and though Moses could not see all
that Jehovah saw, we may well believe that he saw all that a brother man could see,
one whose own heart's vision was not yet perfectly clear. Blessed is that man who, for
himself and for others, can see the reality and magnitude of the human heart's departure
from God. It would not, indeed, be hard, from a certain point of view, to frame a very
plausible story on behalf of these Israelites ; but it is far better to bear in mind that just
at this particular juncture this very Moses who at first had expostulated with Jehovah,
making not the slightest reference to the people's sin, is now found on account of that
sin bending himself in the utmost submission before God. Aaron came to Moses with
an excuse (vers. 22—24) ; he spoke m the spirit of Adam, laying the blame elsewhere.
But Moses attempts neither excuse nor extenuation. Nor was any enlargement needed.
The brief sentence he spoke, standing in all its naked severity, was quite einough.

II. How UNOEBTAiN MosBs IS IN HIS EXPECTATIONS. The confession is as ftill and
emphatic as it can be, but the heart is of necessity very doubtful as to what may conn
out of the confession. The words of Moses here are very consistent with the quick



OH. xxau. 30— 35.] THE BOOK QIT EXODUS. W6

fluctuations of human nature. From extreme to extreme the pendulum swings. Vn-
vlouslf he spoke as almost rebuking Jehovah for thinking to destroy his people; now
even when the insulting image is ground to powder, and the ringleaders in transgression
destroyed, he makes his way into the Divine presence as one who is fully prepared for
the worst. "If thou wilt forgive them." One can imagine the stammering, half
ashamed tones in which these words would issue from the lips of Moses. The man wh«
was so fruitful of reasons before is silent now. Jehovah's past promises and past dealings
he cannot urge ; for the more he thinks of them, the more by an inevitable consequence,
he thinks of the broken covenant. The light of these glorious promises shines for the
present, upon a scene of ruin and shame. Then it is noteworthy that Moses had to go
up, from the impulse of his own heart. We do not hear as yet of any general confes-
sion ; it is not the weeping and wailing of a nation returning in penitence that he bears
before God. If only the people had sent him to say, " We have sinned a great sin ;" if
only they had made him feel that he was their chosen spokesman ; if only their cou-
tinued cry of contrition, softened by distance, had reached his ears, as he ventm-ed before
God, there might have been something to embolden him. But as yet there was no sign
of anything of this sort. He seems to have gone up as a kind of last resort, unencouraged
by any indication that the people comprehended the near and dreadful peril. Learn
from this that there can be no availing plea and service from our great advocate, except
as we look to him for the plea and service, in full consciousness that we cannot do
without them. We get no practical good from the advocacy of Jesus, imless as in faith
itnd earnestness, we make him our advocate.

III. How COMPLBTELY MOSBS ASSOCIATES HIMSELF WITH THE FATE 0» HI8 BBBTHBEK.

He could not but feel the difference there was between his position and theirs ; but at
the moment there was a feeling which swallowed all others up, and that was the unity
of brotherhood. The suggestion to make out of him a new and better covenant people
came back to him now, with a startling significance which it lacked before. Israel, <u
the people of Ood, seemed shut up to destruction now. If God said the covenant could
nut be renewed ; if he said the people must return and be merged and lost in the general
mass of human-kind, Moses knew he had no countervailing plea ; only this he could
pray that he also might be included in their doom. He had no heart to go unless where
his people went; and surely it must have a most inspiring and kindling influence to
meditate on this great illustration of unselfishness. Moses, we know, had been brought
very near to God ; what glimpses must have been opened up to him of a glorious future.
But then he had only thought of it as being his future along with his people. In the
threatenings that God was about to forsake those who had forsaken him, there seemed
no longer any brightness even in the favour of God to him as an individual. Apostate
in heart and deed as his brethren were, he felt himself a member of the body still ; and
to be separated from them would be as if the member were torn away. He who had
preferred afBiction with the people of God rather than the pleasures of sin for a season,
now prefers obliteration along with his own people rather than to keep his name on
God's great book. It can hardly be said that in this he spurns or depreciates the favour
of God ; and it is noticeable that God does not rebuke him as if he were preferring
human ties to Divine. Jehovah simply responds by stating the general law of what la
inevitable in all sinning. He who sins must be blotted out of God's book. God will
not in so many words rebuke the pitying heart of his servant ; but yet we clearly see
that there was no way out by that course which Moses so very deferentially suggests.
When first Moses heard of the apostasy of Israel he spoke as if the remedy depended
upon Jehovah ; now he speaks as if it might be found in his own submission and self-
sacrifice- but God would have him understand that whatever chance there may be"
depends on a much needed change in the hearts of the people, a change of which all sigi
■0 far was lacking. — T.

Vers. 30 35. — The second intercession. This second intercession of Moses is even moi»

wonderiful than the first. The question raised on that former occasion — Is Moses mor«
merciful than God ? — will, indeed, no longer occur. Those who might have been disposed
to press that question then will probably not be disposed to press it now. They hav«
since had sufficient evidence of Moses' severity. They have found that, whatever
elements of character are lacking to him, he is not wanting in energy of indignation •<



SM THE BOOK OF EXODUS. (oh. xxxn. 30—35.



patent wickedness. The temptation, on the contrary, may now be to accuse the kw-
giver of unjustifiable and unholy anger — of reckless disregard of human life. Tha
charge is groundless ; but if, for a moment, it should appear natural, the reply to it i«
found in the study of this second scene upon the mount. Surely, if ever human heart
'aid bare its intense and yearning love for those whose sin fidelity to duty yet compelled
it to reprobate and loathe, it is the heart of Moses in this new, and altogether marvel-
lous, juncture in his history. Consider— _ » . •

1. The confession made (vers. 30, 31). Moses makes a full confession of the Bin
of the people. This confession was — 1. Holy. He has just views of the demerit of the
gin for which he seeks forgiveness. His impressions of its enormity are even stronger
than at the time of his first intercession. So heinou? does it now appear to him that
he is mentally in doubt whether Grod possibly can forgive it. 2. Perfectly truthfvL
Moses fully admits the people's sin. He does not make light of it. He does not seek to
minimise it. Not even to secure the salvation of the people over whom he yearns with
so intense an affection will he unduly palliate their o Hence, or feign an excuse where he
knows that there is none to ofier. Mark how, in both of these respects, Moses answers
to the true idea of a mediator. " A mediator is not a mediator of one " (GJaL iii. 20).
It is his function, in conducting his mediation, to uphold impartially the interests of hoth
of the parties between whom he mediates. Both are represented in his work. He stands
for both equally. He must do justice by both. His sympathy with both must be alike
perfect. He must favour neither at the expense, or to the disadvantage, of the other.
These acts of intercession show in how supreme a degree this qualification of the
mediator is found in Moses. He has sympathy vfith the people, for whose sin he is
willing, if need be, even to die ; he has also the fullest sympathy with GknL He looks
at the sin from God's standpoint. He has sympathy with God's wrath against it. He
is as jealous for God's honour as he is anxious for the forgiveness of the people. He is
thus the true daysman, able to lay his hand upon both. 3. Vicarious. He confesses
the people's sin for them. On the depth to which this element enters into the idea of
atonement, and on the place which it holds in the atonement of Jesus, see J. McLeod
Campbell's work on The Nature of the Atonement.

U. The atonement offered (ver. 32). The new and awful impressions Moses had
received of the enormity of the people's conduct gave rise in his mind to the feeling of
the need of atonement. " Kow I will go up to the Lord," he says to them, "peradven-
ture 1 shall make an atonement for your sin " (ver. 30). That the intercessory element
entered into Moses' idea of " making an atonement " is not to be denied. But it is not
the only one. So intensely evil does the sin of the people now appear to him that he is
plainly in doubt whether it can be pardoned without some awful expression of God's
punitive justice against it ; whether, indeed, it can be pardoned at all. This sense of
what is due to justice resolves itself into the proposal in the text — a proposal, probably,
in which Moses comes as near anticipating Christ, in his great sacrifice on Calvary, as it
is possible for any one, bearing the limitations of humanity, to do (cf. Rom. ix. 3).
Observe — 1. The proposal suhniitted. It amounts to this, that Moses, filled with an
immense love for his people, offers himself as a sacrifice for their sin. If God cannot
otherwise pardon their transgression, and if this will avail, or can be accepted, as an
atonement for their guilt, let him — Moses — perish instead of them. The precise
meaning attached in Moses' mind to the words, " If not, blot me, I pray thee, out of
the book which thou hast written," must always be a difficulty. Precision, probably,
is- not to be looked for. Moses' idea of what was involved in the blotting out from God's
book could only be that afforded him by the light of his own dispensation, and by his
sense of the exceeding greatness of God's wrath. His language is the language of love,
not that of dogmatic theology. Infinite things were to be hoped for from God's love ;
infinite things were to be dieaded from his anger. The general sense of the utterance is,
that iloses was willing to die ; to be cut off from covenant hope and privilege ; to
undergo whatever awful doom subjection to God's wrath might imply ; if only thereby
his people could be saved. It was a stupendous proposal to make ; an extraordinary act
of self-devotion; a vvv^udrous exponent of his patriotic love for his people; a not lesi
wondrous recognition of what was due to the justice of God ere sin could be forgiven —
a glimpse even, struck out fiom the passionate yearning of his own heart, of the actual
method of redemption. A type of Christ has been seen in rhe youthful Isaac ascending



CH. X&XIU.



1-6.1



THE BOOK OW EXODUS



m



the hill to he olTereil on the altar by Ahiaham his father. A much nearer type is Moses,
" settiug his face " (cf. Luke ix. 51) to ascend the mount, and bearing in his heart
this sublime purpose of devoting himself for the sins of the nation. " Greater love
hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends " (John xv. 13).
2. 2%e alternative desired. If the people must perish — this meaning also seems
to be conveyed in the words — Moses would wish to perish with them. Not only has
the proposal to make of him " a great nation " (Ex. xxxii. 10) no allurement for
his mind, but, if the people are to be destroyed, he would prefer to die with them.
He desires no life outside of theirs. Patriotic devotion could no further go. Noble
Moses ! Yet only the type of the nobler than himself, who, devoting himself in the
same spirit, has actually achieved the redemption of the world. See in this incident
(1) The connection of a feeling of the need of atonement with just views of sin's
demerit. (2) The certainty, when just views of sin are entertained, of this feeling of the
need of atonement arising. In declining the proposal of Moses, Grod does not say that
atonement is not needed. He does not say that his servant has exaggerated the enor-
mity of the sin, or the difiSoulties which stand in the way of its forgiveness. He does
not say that it is not by means of atonement that these difficulties connected with the
forgiveness of sins are ultimately to be removed. On the contrary, the spirit of Moses
in this transaction is evidently in the very highest degree pleasing to Jehovah, and so
far as atonement is made for the people's sins, it is by Jehovah accepting the spirit of
his sacrifice, even when rejecting the proposal in its letter. (3) The naturalness of this
method of salvation. The proposal sprang naturally from the love of Moses. It
expressed everything that was grandest in his character. It shadowed forth a way in
which, conceivably, a very true satisfaction might be offered to Divine justice, while yet
mercy was extended to the sinner. The fulfilment of the prophecy is the Cross.

III. The reply given. 1. The atonement is declined in its letter. God declares
that so far as there is to be any blotting from the book of life, it will be confined to
those who have sinned. It may he noted, in respect to this declinature of the proposal
of Moses that, as above remarked, it does not proceed on the idea that atonement is nut
needed, but (1) Moses could not, even by his immolation, have made the atonement
required. (2) God, in his secret counsel, had the true sacrifice provided. (3) Atone-
ment is inadinissible on the basis proposeii, viz. that the innocent should be " blotted
out firom the book of life." Had no means of salvation presented itself but this, the
world must have perished. Even to redeem sinners, God could not have consented to
the " blotting from his book " of the sinlass. The difficulty is solved in the atonement
of the Son, who dies, yet rises again, having made an end of sin. No other could have
offered this atonement but himself. 2. WTiile declining the atonement in its letter, God
accepts the spirit of it. In this sense Moses, by the energy of his self-devotion, does
make atonement for the sins of Israel. He procures for them a reversal of the sentence.
Fm'ther intercession is required to make the reconciliation complete. 3. Ood make*
known his purpose of visiting the people for their sin (ver. 34). The meaning is —
(1) That the sin of the people, though for the present condoned, would be kept in mind
in reckoning with them for future transgressions. (2) That such a day of reckoning
would come. God, in the certainty of his foreknowledge, sees its approach. — J. 0.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XXXm.
Vers. 1 — 6. — The thbeat op God's with-

DBAWAL, AND THE HUMILIATION OF THE

FEOFLE. The intercession of Moses, and his
offer to sacrifice himself for his people had ob-
tained from God some great concessions, viz.
— 1. That the people's lives should be spared
(ch. xxxii 14); 2. And that they should be led
into Palestine (itnd. ver. .14) But a change



had been introduced into the conditions nnder
which the future journeys were to be made,
somewhat obscurely indicated in the words
— " Behold, mine angel shall go before thee "
(ibid.) — which was now to be more distinctly
set forth. " God's angel " may mean his
Presence in the Person of his Son — as it
appears to mean in ch. xxiii. 20 — 23 — or it
may mean simply one of the created angelic
host, which seems to be its sense in ch. xxxii



348



THJfi BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxxm. 1 — 6.



34, and in vei 2 of this chapter. By vers. 2
and 3 taken in combination it was rendered
manifsst, both to Moses and to the people
(ver. 4), that they were threatened with the
loss of God's actual presence and personal
ijtrotection during the remainder of their
• jateiB|ii Wd would have, instead of it, the
mere gnidance and help of an angel in the
inferior sense of the word. This was felt to be
" evil tidings" — and the people consequently
" mourned " and " stripped themselves of their
ornaments " (ver. 6). Real penitence at last
entered their hearts, and led to self-abase-
ment

Ver. 1. — ^The lord said nnto Moses. In
continuation of what he had said in ch. xxxii.
83, 34, but possibly at another time ; and with
the object of fully explaining what had been
meant in ver. 34. The land which I sware
unto Abraham. See Gen. xii. 7; xiii. 15;
XT. 18, eta

Yer. 2. — I will send an angel before
thee. Note the change from " my angel " (ch.
zxxii. 34) to " an angel ;" which, however,
would still have been ambiguous, but for what
follows in ver. 3. The angel of God's pre-
sence is " an angel " in ch. xxiii. 20. I will
drive out. The whole covenant had fallen
with Israel's infraction of it, and it was for
God to retract or renew his part of it as it
pleased him. He here of his free grace
renews thepromise to drive out the Canaanitish
nations. Compare ch. xxiii. 23 — 31.

Ver. 8. — Unto a land. Ver. 2 is paren-
thetic, and ver. 3 coheres with ver. 1—" Go
np hence, thou and the people, unto the land
which I sware nnto Abraham — unto a land
flowing," etc. On the milk and honey of
Canaan, see the comment upon ch. iii. 8. For
I will not go up in the midst of thee. At
length there was an end of ambiguity — God's
purpose was made plain — the people had
ihown themselves unfit for his near presence,
and he would withdraw himself. So it would
be best even for them ; since, if they were
•bout to show themselves as perverse in the
fntore as they had in the past, his near pre-
tence conld only lead to their entire destruc-



tion. Some day they would so provoke him,
that he would consume them in the way.

Ver. 4. — ^Wheu the people heard. Moses
had communicated to the people what God
had said to him. They felt it to be evil
tidings — ^they woke up at last to a feeling of
the ineffable value of the privileges which
they bad hitherto enjoyed — ^his guidance by
the pillar of the cloud (ch. xiii. 21) — ^his
counsel, if there were need to ask anything
(ch. XV. 25) — ^his aid in the day of battle
(ch, xvii. 8 — 13) — ^his near presence, by day
and by night, constantly (ch. xiii. 22) — and
they dreaded a change, which they felt must
involve a loss, and one the extent of which
they could not measure. " An angel " is »
poor consolation when we are craving for
Jehovah 1 So the people mourned — ^felt tme
sorrow — were really troubled in their hearts—
and, to show their penitence, ceased to wear
their customary ornaments. These may have
consisted of armlets, bracelets, and even, per-
haps, anklets, all of which were worn by men
in Egypt at this period.

Ver. 5. — For the Lord had said nnto
Moses, etc. Bather, " And the Lord said
unto M." (so most recent conmieutators, as
Keil, Kalisch, etc.) The message was sent to
the people after their repentance, and in reply
to it. It was not, however, as our version
makes it, a threat of destruction, but only a
repetition of the statement made in ver. 2,
that, if God went up with them, the probable
result would be their destruction. Translate —
" Ye are a stiff-necked people ; were I for one
moment to go np in the midst of thee, I
should destroy thee." Fnt off thy orna-
ments. The command seems strange, when
we had just been told that " no man did pat
on him his ornaments" (ver 4) ; but the word
translated "put off" probably means "lay
aside altogether." The intention was to make
their continued disuse of the ornaments a test
of their penitence.

Ver. 6. — The people accepted the test and
stripped themselves of their ornaments — i.e.,
ceased to wear them henceforward By tht
Mount Horeb. Bather, "from Mount
Eoreb." From and after this occurrence
at Horeb (= Sinai), the Israelites wore no
ornaments, in token of their continued CMl-
trition for their apostaqr



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 8. — The hiding of God's face from man. When Glod hides away his &ce
from his people, it may be —

L Ab A jnsoMENT. It was as a judgment that God separated between himself and
man after the Fall, and " drove man forth " from the Garden of Eden (Gen. iii. 24). It
was as a judgment that he withdrew from Saul, and " answered him not, neither by
dreams, by Urim, nor by prophets " (1 Sam. xzviii. 6). When he " hid his face" from
David, and forgot all his misery and trouble, it was because David had offended him kf



CH. XXXIII. 7 — 11.3



TliE BOOK OF EXODU&



t46



the grifvous sin into which he had fallen. This, again, was a judgment. Of a Bimilai
characU T was his " removal of Israel out of his sight " (2 Kings xvii. 23) in the reign
of Hosnea, and his " casting of Jerusalem and Judah out of his sight " (2 Kingi
xiiv. 20), in the reign of Zedekiah. And so, when, at the present day, he ceases to
make his light shine upon us, withdrawing, as it were, behind a cloud, and no longer
shedding the brightness of his radiance upon o\ir souls — ^it may be, it sometimes is, in
judgment. Our sins separate between us and him. They raise the barrier which con-
ceals him from us. They constitute the cloud which shuts him out from our sight. And
he judges us for them. Or, the withdrawal may be made —

II. As AN ACT OF MERCY. When Jesus "did not many miracles" at Capernaum
" because of their unbelief," it was in mercy. When he retired to Galilee, and " walked
to more in Jewry," it was in mercy. When he spake in parables, " that hearing they
might not understand," it was in mercy. Our responsibilities are co-ordinate with the
light vouchsafed us ; and the more God reveals himself to us, the more he makes-hii
presence manifest, the greater the peril which we incur. Unless his near presence
purifies us and spiritualises us, it deadens us. Two disciples were the nearest to Jesui
—one "lay upon his breast," the other habitually " dipped with him in the dish" —
one was " the beloved disciple," the other was " the traitor." In either case, the with-
drawal is properly regarded —

III. As A GROUND KOR SADNESS. "The people mourned when they heard the evil
tidings." Justly, for, if it was in mercy, how sad that they should ncM such a mercy I
How sad that to be removed further froiji God should be a mercy to them I And, if it
was in judgment, how much more sad that their conduct should have brought upon
them such a judgment — have caused God to withdraw himself — have led him to punish
them by banishment from his near presence ! What real satisfaction is there in exist-
ence except his presence? Whom have we in heaven but him, or who is there upon
earth that we can desire in comparison with him ? In him is life ; " in his presence
is fulness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore." If we lose him, we
lose all ; if we are shut out, even for a time, from him, we lose more than we can express.
He is to our spirits more than the sun to all material things. " In him we live, and
move, and have our being." Happily for us, while we live, we may recover his favour ;
we may prevail on him once more to " lift up the light of his countenance upon ub."
Mourning, self-abasement, real heart-felt sorrow for sin will in every case find acceptance
with him fur his tSon's sake, and obtain for us a restoration of the light of his presenoOi



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 7 — 11. — The first ebeotion op a
TABERNACLE. The decision of the matter still
bung in suspense. God had not revoked his
threat to withdraw himself and leave the host
to the conduct of an angel. He had merely
reserved his final decision (ver. 5). Moses was
anxious to wrestle with him in prayer unt I
he obtained the reversal of this sentence ; bui
he could not he always ascending Sinai, when
the camp needed his superintending care,
and the camp as yet contained no place of
worship, where a man could pray and he
lecore against distiurbance. Moses, under
these circumstances, with the tabernacle in
his mind, but without leisure to construct it,
contrived " for the present distress " a tem-
porary tabernacle or tent. He took, ap-
parently, the tent that had hitherto been his
(wn, and removed it to a position outside the



camp, erecting it there, and at the same thne

giving it the name of " the tent of meeting "
(ver. 7). Hither he decreed that all persons
should come who desired communion with
God (ver. 7), and hither he resorted himself
for the same purpose (ver, 8). It pleased Ood
to approve these arrangements ; and to show
his approval by a visible token. Whenever
Moses entered the "tent of meeting," the
pillar of the cloud descended from the top of
Sinai, and took up its station at the door of
the tent (ver. 9), thus securing Moses from
interruption. At the sight the people " wor-
shipped," each at his tent's door, while Moses
was privileged to speak with God "face to
face, as a man speaketh unto his friend " (ver.
11). Joshua accompanied him on the first
occasion, and remained behind, to goard tht
tent, when Moses left it (tUd.).



350



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxxm. • — IL



Ver. 7 — ^Koses took the tabernacle. The
" tabernacle " proper was not yet constructed.
(See chs. xsxt. — ^xl.) And the word used is
not that properly rendered "tabernacle" —
viz., mishkdn (cb. xxvi. 1) ; but the far more
common word '6hel, which means "tent."
The proper translation would be, "Moses
took the tent." But the question at once
arises — What tent? It is suggested that
the article may hare the force of the
possessive pronoun, and indicate that he
took " his tent." (Compare Matt. ix. 10,
where " the house " undoubtedly means " hit
house.") Moses took his own tent, pro-
bably as the best in the encampment, and
converted it to a sacred use, transferring his
own abode to another. Afar off from the camp.
The sacred and the profane must not approach
each other too closely — an interval must be
set between them. But the distance, evidently,
was not great (ver. 10). The tabernacle of
the congregation. Bather, "the tent of
meeting " or " of conference " — i.e., the tent
in which he expected to meet and converse
with God. See the comment on ch. xxvii. 21.
Every one which sought the Lord went out.
Muses must have commanded this. The
" tent " was not to be a mere oratory for him-
self, but open to aU Israelites.

Ver. 8.— When Moses went out .... all
Uke people rose up. Probably Moses " went
out " at a set time, or at set times, each day ;
and the people watched for his going, and

" rose up OB a TMOrt nf racTtai.^ an/4 ^^Trayanna

They

pray for them.

Ver. 9. — ^As Moses entered into the taber-
nacle. Bather, " When Moses was gone into
the tent." The cloudy pillar descended. It is
not quite clear whether this was done once
only, or whether the pillar, during the con-



e up," as a mark of respect and reverence.
' felt that he went to the tent mainly to



tinuance of this " tent of meeting," alternated
between the top of Sinai and the door of tha
tent, descending when Moses entered the tent
and reascending when he quitted it. Tha
latter supposition is most consonant with tha
previous statement (ver. 7) that " every one
which sought the Lord went out nnto the
tabernacle " (tent), for the people were at no
time allowed to approach the cloud. And the
Lord talked with Moses. Literally, "And
talked with Moses." The cloud;y pillar, in
and through which God made his presence
felt, is here identified with God, and said to
have conversed with Moses.

Ver. 10.— And all t^e people saw . . .
and all the people rose np. This is a
literal translation; but it would make the
sense clearer to the ordinary reader if the
passage were rendered — "And when all the
people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the door
ol the tent, then all the people rose np," etc
Worshipped. Literally, "bowed themselvea
down " — " made an obeisance," in token that
they recognised the presence of God.

Ver. 11. — The lord spake unto Hoses &ee
to face, As one present — not as one at a
distance — " month to mouth," as we read in
Num. xii. 8 — ^but not under any visible form
(see vers. 20, 23, and compare Dent. iv. 12,
15). He turned again. After each con-
ference, Moses returned to the camp, where,
no doubt, he had put np for himself another
tent, and where his presence was needed
He left, however, his personal attendant
(" minister "), Joshua, to watch and guard the
sacred structure during his absence. It is
remarkable that the trust was committed to
Joshua, rather than to Aaron, or any of the
Levites. Probably the reason of this was,
that Joshua alone had had no part in the
idolatry of the calf. (See ch. xxxii. 17.)



HOMILETICS.

_ Vers. 9 — 11.— The mode of recovering OocCs presence. Moses felt that he could not rest
till he had obtained for the people the complete return of Clod's favour, and the assurance
of his perpetual presence. But this was no easy task. The offence given was so grievous
that it could not be condoned at once. Even the penitence of the people had produced no
more than a promise that (iod would take the matter into his consideration, and deter-
mine later what he would do to the people (ver. 5). Moses sought to hasten a favourable
decision. It is well worth noting the means whereto he had recourse. These were —

I. The erection or a house op prayer. Moses called it "the tent of meeting";
because he hoped that there God would be met with or wovdd suffer himself to be
addressed — would let his people draw nigh to him. He erected it " without the camp,"
afar off— partly on account of the recent pollution of the camp — partly to separate and
sunder it from secular sights and sounds. Intolerant of delay, he thought it better to
take the best of existing structures, rather than wait till he could erect a new one. Aj
his own tent was the best in the camp, he gave it, not without some self-sacrifice.

II. The resort of the peoile to the house. " Every one which sought the Lord
went out unto the tent" (ver. 7). Doubtless Moses urged the need of all the people's
seeking the Lord, turning to him, besieging him with their prayers, importuning him.
TUra Md bean, lo for as appears, no set times c€ prayer hitherto, and no set place oi



OH. XXXIII. 1—12.] THE BOOK OP EXODUa S61

prayor. All had been left to indiTidual feeling or conviction. And the people, we may
be sure, had for the most part neglected prayer. In their difficulties they had been
content that Moses should pray for them (ch. xiv. 15 ; xv. 25 ; xvii. 4, 11, 12, eto.)i
Now at length they had awoke to the need of personal religion ; they had " mourned "
and " put off their ornaments " ; they — some of them, at any rate — " sought the Lord,"
•nd resorted to the " tent of meeting," in the hope of finding him there.

III. His own frequent eesort to it, and constant, babnebt xntbrcebsioh.
The narrative of verses 8 — 11 describes a continual practice. Moses made it his habit
to go forth from the camp to the " tent of meeting" at a fixed hour each day — possibly
more than once a day ; and, when there, no doubt prayed to the Lord with all the
fervour that we observe in the recorded prayer of the next section (vers. 12 — 16). " The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much " (Jam. v. 16). The daily
intercession, recorded in verses 8 — 11, culminated in the "wrestle with God," which
obtained the gracious promise — " I will do this thing that thou hast spoken" (ver. 17).
The general lesson taught is the might of prayer (1) for oneself; (2) for others. There is
a further particular lesson upon the value of a "house of prayer" — most appreciated,
through the perversity of human nature, where least readily obtainable, least regarded
where closest to men's doors and most accessiblsL



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 12. A nation in garb of penitence. On this section consider^—

L The conditioned promise (vers. 1 — 4). God has consented to spare the nation.

|hey are to set out forthwith on the journey to Canaan. But his presence is no longer

> go with them. He would send an angel. Notice — 1. Everything, in one sense,

remains the same. The people are to be conducted to Canaan. They are to inherit the

promises. God will drive out their enemies before them. The land will stUl flow with

milk and honey. It will still be able to be said of them, that there is no nation on earth

80 favoured as they are. Yet, 2. Everything, in another sense, is different. Blessings

without God in them are not the same blessings. They want that which gives them

their chief value. See below, on ver. 15.

II. The summons to repentance (vers. 4 — ^7). A command is next given to the
people to strip off their ornaments. They are to humble themselves before Jehovah that
Jehovah may know what to do with them. This command they obeyed. From this
time forward they ceased to wear ornaments. On this observe, 1. Repentance for sin
is an indispensable condition of restoration to Qod^sfavowr. It was required of Israel,
It is required of us. There can be no salvation without it (Luke xvii. 5). " Cease to
do evil ; learn to do well " (Is. i. 16, 17). Had Israel not repented, Moses would have
interceded in vain. 2. Repentance, if sincere, must approve itself hy appropriate deeds.
— " Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance " (Matt. iii. 8). The people put
off their ornaments. Ornaments do not become those with whom God is displeased.
This act of the people was a first step in obedience. 3. A very imperfect repentance it
sometimes accepted hy God as a reason for forbearance with the sinner. The people
mourned ; but their repentance, as events showed, did not amount to a real change of
heart. They mourned for " the evil tidings." It was the consequences of their sin which
distressed them, more than the sin itself. Yet do them justice. The " evil tidings "
was not the loss of any material blessings, but, solely, the loss of God's presence.
There is still good in a heart which feels the withdrawal of God's presence to be a loss to
it. 4. It is well that the remembrance of great sins should go with us aU our days.
Those who have committed them should go softly ever after.

III. The withdrawal op Jehovah's presence from the camp (vers. 7 — 9). Moses,
we are next informed, took a tent, possibly his own, possibly one which had hitherto
served as a sanctuary, pitched it " without the camp, afar off from the camp," and called
it " the tent of meeting." Thither came out every one that sought the Lord. The act
was, 1. A symbol of Jehovah's formal withdrawal from the midst of the people. 2. A
token that a linal decision had not yet been come to as to how God meant to deal with
them. Communications were not wholly broken off. Space was left for repentancai
God might still be entreated of them. Learn (1) iniquities separate between man and



3S2



THE BOOK OF EXODUS,



foH. xxxm. 12 — 17.



QoA (of. Is. lix. 2) ; (2) the withdrawal of God's presence is not necessarily the end of
the day of grace. There is an " accepted time " during which, if the sinner repents, ha
will be forgiven, and God's presence will be restored to him (2 Cor. vl. 2). Meanwhile,
even God's keeping back from him has its side of mercy. God's near presence would
consume (cf. ver. 5). (3) The day of grace which sinners enjoy is won for them by the
intercession of another. Israel's "accepted time" was based on the intercession of
Moses. Ours, as the passage above referred to implies, rests on the intercession of Christ,
" I have heard thee (Christ) in a time accepted " (cf. Is. xlix. 8) — " Behold, now is the
accepted time " — ^for men (2 Cor. vi. 2). (4) it is our duty to seek the Lord while h»
may be foimd, and to call on him while he is near (Is. Iv. 6).

IV. The token of favoub to Moses (vers. 9—12). The cloudy pillar descended,
•nd stood at the door of the tabernacle. There the Lord talked with Moses, as a man
talkcth with his friend. This was (1) a mark of favour to Moses himself; (2) an honour
put upon him before the people ; (3) an encouragement to further intercession. — J. O,



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 12 — ^17. — ^Thb eevooation of the
THREAT OF WITHDRAWAL. After some days'
" wrestling with God " in the " tent of meet-
ing," Moses prayed to know definitely what
God had determined on. " Show me thy way,"
he said (ver. 13) — " Whom wilt thou send with
me?" To this demand, God made the gracious
reply — '• My presence shall go with thee, and
I will give thee rest" (ver. 14). This was
satisfactory, except that it did not distinctly
include the conduct of the people — it might
be merely a promise to himself. So Moses
(vers. 15, 16) requires a more explicit assur-
ance, and, closely associating the people with
himself, declares that he will not move a step
further, unless God allows the people to find
grace in his sight, and consents to "distinguish"
them by " gomg up " with them. Then at
length God yields and gives the assurance —
"I will do this thing also that thou hast
•poken " (ver. 17)— i.e. « I will go up visibly
with the people and distinguish them." (See
the comment on ver. 16.)

Vers. 12, 13. — See, thou sayest Moses
takes advantage of his privilege of speaking
•8 friend with friend, and uses familiar terms
— " See," he says, " thou hast told me to con-
duct the people to Canaan, yet thou hast not
made it clear whom thou wilt send with me.
K it is to be an angel, whai angel ? Why not
the angel of the original promise (ch. xxiii. 20
— 23j ? Thou hast distinguished me with thy
favour — Consider that this nation is thy
people, and extend thy favour to them. At any
rate shew me thy way — tell me plainly what
Hiott wilt dOk"



Ver. 14. — ^Uy presence shall go with that.
Literally, " My presence shall go up " — ^my ow«
presence, not that of an angel. That for
which Moses had been so earnestly pleading
is, seemingly, granted. Groi wlU go np, I
will give thee rest. — i.e. "bring thee to
Canaan." (Compare Deut. iii. 20 ; Heb. iv. 8.)

Vers. 15, 16. — And he said. Still Moses is
not quite satisfied. God had said — "I will
give thee rest" — not "I will give yo» rest."
Moses must see distinctly that the people are
associated with bim before he desists. So he
replies — " If thy presence go not np, cany tH
not up hence. For wherein shall it be known
that 1 and thy people have found grace in thj
sight ? Is it not in that thou goest with im i"
The reply in ver. 17 sets his doubt finally at
rest.

Ver. 16. — So shall we be separated. Bather,
•' So shall we be distinguished." God's pre-
sence with them would distinguish them &t>m
aU the other nations of the earth — ^place them
in a category alone and apart from all others.
Angelic guidance would not have done this ;
for even heathen nations had their protecting
angels (Dan. x. 13, 20 ; xi. 1).

Ver. 17. — ^I will do this thing also. " I
will extend my favour to thy people also, and
distinguish them, as well as thee, by going up
with them. I will do this for thy sake, be-
cause thou hast found grace in my sight."
Moses' petition is at last fully granted — ^the
threat of withdrawal cancelled — the promise
of Divine guidance and protection renewed
I know thee by name. It is a supreme favour
for God to know us hy name. It marks " a
specifically personal relation to God " (Keil).
The expression is perhaps taken from the
phraseology of Oriental Courts, where not one
in a hundred of the courtien is known to tke
nouarch by muae



OH. xxxuL 12—18.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 368



HOMILETIOS.

Vers. 12 — 17. — Effectual importunity. Ovir Lord Jesus Christ spake a parable to show
" that men ought always to pray and not to faint " (Luke xviii. 1). The present record
is, we may be s\a% inserted in the Old 'I'estament for the same purpose. God wills to
be importuned. Not, however, for his own sake, but for ours. He would have us
fervent and persistent in prayer, for the improvement of our characters, the increase of
our faith by exercise, the intensifying of our sense of dependence upon him. Especiall}
he would have us persistent in intercessory prayer, because we are then exercising, not
only faith, but love ; and by increasing in love, we advance in resemblance to hmself.
For " God is Love." Note, that, to be importuned effectively, God must be im-
portuned —

L With pbrvoue. Mere repetition will not do. Cold prayers, repeated day after
day for blessings on ourselves or others, are a mere lattologia, no more effectual than the
involuntary repetitions of a stammering tongue. God grants nothing to coldness, nothing
to mere words, nothing unless it be earnestly desired by a fervid heart. The Buddhists, in
many parts of Asia, erect praying-machines, which are turned by a small windmill,
believing that in every revolution of the machine a prayer is offered, and that, after so
many turns, Buddha is bound to grant it. As well expect God to respect the requests
of a praying-machine, as the utterances of many who languidly repeat the prayers of the
Church after the clergyman, or say a set form, with small thought and no heart, morn-
ing and evening. It is " the fervent prayer of a righteous man " — ^nay, even of a sinner
—that U " effectual."

II. Unselfishly. Moses postponed his now earnest desire to behold for his own
satisfaction God's glory, until he had obtained the restitution of the people to favour.
His importunity was for them. Let us importune God for the conversion of our relatives
and friends, the forgiveness of their sins, the awakening of their consciences, their per-
severance in well-doing, and their final entrance into his glory, and we may feel confident
of prevailing with him. But, if we importune him for our own worldly advancement, or
even if we ask increase of grace for our own sakes solely or mainly, we must not be
surprised if our prayers remain unanswered. " Ye ask and obtain not, because ye ask
amiss." The spirit of sacrifice is required to sanctify prayer. Those who in a spirit of
self-seeking asked to sit on the right hand and left hand of Christ in his kingdom
obtained no promise. Our prayers even for our spiritual advancement will scarcely be
answered, unless we desire it to promote God's glory, or to help forward the salvation of
OUT fellow-men.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOBa

Ver«, 12 — 18. — The third intercession. Moses on this occasion pleads with God to
restore his presence to the people. Very noteworthy are the steps in his entreaty.
1. He veils his request under the form of a desire to know the divine intentions (ver.
12). Will God go up with them or not ? God has not yet told him — will he tell him
now ? What, underneath this form of expression, the heart of Moses really presses for,
is, of course, the assurance that God mil go with them. 2. He urges the friendship
God has shown him as a reason for granting his request — " Thou hast said, 1 know thee
by name," etc. (ver. 12). 3. He entreats God to consider that Israel is his own people
(ver. 13). He has chosen them ; he has redeemed them ; he has declared his love for
them; can he bring himself now to cast them off? 4. When God at length— reading
in his servant's heart the thought which he has not as yet dared openly to express-
says, "My presence shall go with thee, and I wiU give thee rest" (ver. 14); Mosei
eagerly seizes on the promise thus given him, and pleads with God to make it good.
" If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence " (ver. 15). This, in Moserf
view, is the greatest distinction of Israel, that it has God in its midst, and if this dis-
tinction is withdrawn, he cares not what else remains (ver. 16). The earnestness of his
entreaty secures for him a confirmation of the promise, this time given without reserve.
For in the utterance of ver. 14, perhaps, a certain tone of distance is utiU to bo detected.
This disappears in ver. 17. View the passage as illustrating —

XXODUS — IL S A



3S4



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oB. xxxm. 18— 2a



I. The pbivileges of feiendship with GJod (vers. 12, 13). 1. Friendship with Qoi
gives holdness of approach to him. It casts out fear (1 John iv. 18). 2. Friendship
with God admits to intimacy with his secrets (ver. 13). " The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him" (Ps. xxv. 14). Cf. God's words concerning Abraham — " Shall
I hide from Abraham that thing which I do, seeing that Abraham shall surely become
a great and mighty nation," etc. (Gen. xviii. 17) ; and Christ's words to his disciples —
" I call you not servants ; for the servant knoweth not what his Lord doeth : but I have
called you friends ; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known
unto you" (John xv. 15). 3. The best use we can make of friendship with God ii tt>
intercede for others. So Abraham for Sodom (Gen. xviii. 23 — 33). So Moses here. So
Daniel (Dan. ix.). So Christ for his disciples (John xvii.).

II. The BLESsmo of God's pbesence (vers. 14, 15). 1. God's presence is the highest
blessing. Nought else can be compared with it (Ps. Ixxiii. 2o, 26). 2. It is the Moss-
ing which enriches all other blessings. It is that which makes earthly blessings truly
worth having. They are not the same to us without it as with it. 3. God's presence
going with vis, invariably conducts to rest.

III. The poweb of PBBSEVfiRiNO PKAYn (vera. 16, 17). — J. O.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 18—23. — The bequest to see Gk>D'B
SLOBT, AND THE REPLT TO IT. Having obtained
the full restoration of the people to God's
favour, Moses felt emboldened to ask a boon
for himself. He had already been admitted
to closer communion with God than any one
«f the race of man since Adam in Paradise.
But what had been granted him, instead of
satisfying, only made him desirous of some-
thing further, something closer, something
than which nothing more close could be
imagined. So he asks to see the unveiled
gloiy of God (ver. 18). He asks, that is, to see
exactly that which man in the flesh cannot see,
or at any rate cannot see and live. But, of
course, he does not know this. God, in reply,
tells him he shall see all that can be seen of
him — more than anything which he has seen
before. He shall see " all his goodness " — ^he
shall have another revelation of the name of
God (ver. 18); and, further, ho shall be so
placed as to see as much as mortal man can
behold of " his glory " — God will pass by him,
and when he has passed, Moses shall he allowed
to look after him, and see what is here called
" his back." This was probably some after-
glow or reflection from the Divine glory, which
language must have been as inadequate to de-
scribe as it was to embody the " unspeakable
words" heard by St. Paul in the "thhd
heaven," and declared by him " impossible for
• man to ntter " (2 Cor. xii. 4).

Ver. 18. — Shew me thy glory. The glory
al God had been seen by Moses to a certain
■xtent, when God "descended in fire" upon



Mount Sinai (ch. xix. 18). It had been seen

with more distinctness when he was called up
and " went into the midst of the clo^id " (ch.
xxiv. 18). But he felt, nevertheless, that he
had not as yet really beheld it. He longed
for that ineffable blessing of tlie full "beatific
vision," which is promised to us after death,
if we die in the faith and fear of Christ (1 Cor.
xiii. 12). " Increase of appetite doth grow by
what it feeds on " — and the veiled splendours
that he had been allowed to see only made him
hunger the more for the unveiled radiance
that he had not seen as yet.

Ver. 19. — I will make aU my goodness pass
before thee. It is not quite clear what this
means, or how it was fulfilled — whether the
reference is to the revelation of God's goodness
in ch. xxxiv. 7, or to the entire experience
that Moses would have of God in his later life.
It is against the former view, that, if we take
it, we can assign to the ensuing clause no dis-
tinct and separate sense. I wUl proclaim the
name of the lord before thee. See ch. xxxiv.
5, 6. And I will be gracious to whom I will
be gracious — i.e., I am not bonnd to do all
this for thee. It is of my free grace that I do
it. I intend, however, to be gracious, and
■how meroy to thee, because thou hast found
favour in my eyes.

Ver. 20. — No man can see me and live.
The inability proclaimed in these words is nol
an absolute inability to see God, but an in-
ability to see and survive the sight. Swob,
when he wrestled with the angel, marvelled
that he could see God, even in that interme-
diate way, and live (Gen. xxxii. 80). It may
well be that actually to see God, while we an
is the flesh, would kiH us.

Ver. 21.— Behold, there ii a plaoe by me,
No sufficient indication is given by these
words, or by any other words in Scripture, ol
the exact locality of the manifestation t«



CH. xxxm. 18—23.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



816



Mcses. The so-called " traditions " are worth-
less; and we can only say that the scene was
probably some portion of the apper part of the
Bas Sufsafeh.

Ver. 22.— I will put thee in a olift of the
rook. The "clift" has been identified with
the " cave of Elijah " (1 Kings xix. 9) ; but
the words used are different ; and even were
they the same, no identity could be established.
It is rather in the broader lines of their mis-
sions and characters that resemblance is to be
sought between Moses and Elijah than in the
miauter details of their careers. Cover thee
with my hand — i.e., " at once conceal thee
tnd protect thee." Without these precautions,
it is unplied, the nearness of the Divine Fre-
HDce might have had injurious effects



Ver. 23. — ^Thon shalt tee mj baok parts.
Literally, " my back." The anthropomor-
phisms of the passage are numerous and strong
— they must, of course, be regarded as accom-
modations to human ideas. After the Divine
Presence had passed by, Moses was to be per-
mitted to look out, and would see so much of
the Divine glory as he would be able to bear ;
but still something far short of that which he
had desired to see. The explanation that
" the back of God " means " his works — ^the
consequences of his activity " (Kalisch) is fan-
ciful, and not borne out by the context My
face oannot be seen. See above, ver. 20 ; and
compare John L 18 ; n. 46; 1 Tim. L 17{
1 John iv. 12,



H0MILETIC3.

Ver. 18. — The craving/or cloae communion with Ood, may be considered^
L As BASED ON A NATURAL INSTINCT. Man wlthout God — without the conscioiu-
ness of being sustained and upheld by an eternal omnipotent being — can have no
strength or confidence in the present, no hope in the future. He is a feeble part of the
vast mechanism of a great incompreiiensible universe — a form which matter has assumed
for a time — powerless to shape his future — the sport of circumstance. Prom this his
better nature revolts, and, like some marine organism, throws out tentacles to seek a
hold on some firm solid object without him. God is the only such object truly firm and
stable ; and hence man may be said to have a natural desire for God. As soon as the
idea of God is in any way brought before him, he feels that it exactly answers an instinc-
tive craving of his nature. His soul goes out to it— seizes it — appropriates it — restson it
as a sure prop and stay. Intellectually, the idea clears up the riddle of the universe ;
morally, gives a firm foundation to right and wrong, explains the authority of con-
tcience, and supplies a motive for virtue ; even physically it has a value, reducing the
infinitude of nature within limits, and furnishing a reasonable origin to nature's laws.

II. As A TEST OF sPiRiTUALiTT. Man needs the idea of God, and cannot be satisfied
without it ; but whether, having got it, he shall thrust it into the background, or ever
more and more cling to it, and seek to realise it, depends on his spiritual condition.
Adam and Eve, after they had sinned, " hid themselves from the presence of God
amongst the trees of the garden" (Gen. iii. 8). The Gergesenes " besought Christ that
he would depart out of their coasts" (Matt. viii. 34). The guilty conscience cannot bear
the near presence of the Most High, shrinks from the keen inspection of the all-seeing
Eye, would fain skulk and hide amcng the bushes. The worldly heart is indifferent to
the thought of God — turns away from it in the present — reserves it for a more con-
venient season. Only the spiritually minded delight in dwelling on the thought of God
— seek him constantly — crave for communion with him. Only they can say with sin-
cerity — " As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee,
God. My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God" (Ps. xlii. 1, 2). _ They, however,
can, and do say this continually. And the more communion they obtain, the more they
desire. It is after Moses had entered into the cloud, and " spoken with God face to face,
as a man speaketh unto his friend " (ver. 11), that he beseeches him to " show him his
glory." We cannot while on earth obtain the/ull communion for which our spiritual
nature craves. We cannot therefore while on earth be satisfied, but must ever be
craving for something more, ever crying—" Nearer, my God, to thee, nearer to thee 1"
Only in heaven, if we be found worthy, shall we " see &ce to face, and know as wa
•re known" (1 Cor. xiii. 12).

Ver. 22.— Cli/ts in the rock. God has many places of safety—" clifts in the rock"—
where he puts us when trials approach. " As our day is, so is our strength." Bereave-
ment comes upon us, and he elevates us on a pinnacle of £iitb to which we had nevei

2a2



THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxxin. 18—21



belvre mounted. Poverty and disgrace fall on us, and he gives us insensibility to them,
Paid comes, and he enables us to see that pain is exactly the chastening we want, and
to thank him for it. We. do not cry out, with the Stoic, " How sweet 1" for " no chasten-
ing for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous" (Heb. xii. 11) ; yet we have the
spiritual strength to cry out to him — " How kind 1 How gracious I" The best " clift is
the rock," is that cleft in the " Rock of Ages," which the soldier's spear made, wherein,
if we please, we may lie hidden from every danger that can assail us.

" Hock of Ages, cleft for me.
Let me hide myself in thee I "

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOEi

Vers. 18—23. — " Shew me thy glory." On this incident, remark —
I. The good man thirsts fob ever fuller manifestations of the diyink olort.
fhe more he knows of God, the more he would know. The nearer he gets, he presse*
nearer still. He " longs" to see God's power and glory" (Ps. liiii. 2). He prays to see
as much of it as may be possible to him on earth. He will only be satisfied when ad-
mitted to the full vision of it in heaven (Ps. xvi. 11 ; xvii. 15 ; 1 John iii. 2).

IL God's glory is twof-old — essential and ethical. 1. God's essential glory.
This is the glory which pertains to his exigence. It is compared in Scripture to th*
white dazzling light — "light which no man can approach unto" (1 Tim. vL 16).
2. God's ethiad glory. This is the glory of his character. It was revealed when God
proclaimed his " name" to Moses (ver. 19 ; ch. xxxiv. 5 — 8).

III. Man, in his present state of existence, can receive the vision or God's
BS8E5JTIAL oi.oRT ONLY UNDER GREAT LIMITATIONS. The full discovery of it would slay
him (ver, 20), Moses beheld it but partially, hid in a clift of the rock — saw but its
reflection (vers. 21 — 23). Even thus to perceive it implied an exaltation of the con-
sciousness — an opening of the spiritual eyes — net vouchsafed to ordinary men. A
mediate revelation is at present all that is possible to us. We have this in the reflec-
tion of the Creator's glory in creation (Ps. xix. 1,2).

IV. God's ethical glory admits of being revealed with much greater ruLNEsa,
I. No barrier, either to the revelation or the perception of it, exists in physical conditions.
It is glory of character. It is discerned by the same faculties by which we discern
spiritual beauty and goodness in the characters of our fellow-men. 2. God has revealed
it. We are not straitened in him. He has kept nothing back. He has made his good-
ness pass before us. He has revealed his name. The Divine Son is a perfect embodi-
ment of the moral glory of the Father (John i. 14). 3. The sole barrier to the percep-
tion of it is the limitation of moral capacity in ourselves. It is in ourselves we ai«
straitened. We lack the purity of heart necessary to give right spiritual discernment.
Our perception of the glory of truth, righteousness, holiness, love, and mercy in God,
will be in precise proportion to the degree in which these qusdities are formed in our
own natures. — J, 0,

Ver. 19. — Divine sovereignty. On this note-^

L God is sovereign m the exercise of hib merot. He dispenses it to whom he
ffilL He is free and unconstrained in its bestowal. The sinner cannot claim it as a
right. He is not entitled to reckon upon it, save as the free promise of God gives him a
warrant to do so. He dare not dictate to God what he shall do. God is sovereign as
respects (1) The objects, (2) The time, (3) The manner, (4) The measure of his mercy.
He gives no account of his matters to any one. He allows none to challenge him,

n. Gtod's sovereignty is best studied on its side of mercy. This is the easier and
more approachable side. It is the least disputable. It does not raise the same dark and
knotty problems as the other side—" Whom he will he hardeneth " (Rom. ix. 18). The
TOntemplation of it is purely delightful and consolatory. It is, besides, the side to which
the other — the side of judgment — is subordinate. See this sovereignty of God illus-
trated in the history of Israel— (1) In the initial, choice of the nation in Abraham.
(2) In the deliverance from Egypt, with its attendant circumstances. (3) In tb«
forming of the covenant at SinaL (4) In the restoration of the people to favour after tin
covenant hsd been broken.



OH. xxxm. 1—32.1 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. SM

m. God's bovereiqnty in the exercise of meiict is not ARBrrBARiNESs. (See on
eh. vi. 14 — ^28.) It has, as there shown, its self-imposed limitations and inherent \svn
of operation. It is holy, wise, and good. It aims, we may believe, at the ultimate
calvation of the largest number possible, consistently with aU the interests inTolved. —
J. C.

Vers. 1 — 32. — The restoration to Divine favour completed. This is a chapter which,

beginning very gloomily, ends very gloriously. In the beginning Jehovah seems as if
bidding farewell to the people for whom he had done so much ; but at the close he is
seen giving a revelation to Moses their leader, which must have sent him forth to resume
his arduous work with greater encouragements than he ever had before. It is therefore
Tery interesting to trace how this change was brought about.

L We SEE THE PEOPLE ARE BROUGHT TO A MEASURE OP PENITENCE. We Cannot

assume that this penitence went very deep, so far as the general apprehension of
unworthiness of conduct was concerned. But there was this depth in it, that the people
perceived they had done something wrong, something insulting to Jehovah, something
very dangerous to their own prospects. And how had this been brought about? Simply
by the statement of Jehovah that he would not go up with those who had hitherto been
his people. He would not go — the real truth was that he could not go. The sin of the
people, their reckless, thoughtless trifling with holy things made his presence among
them a peril. Something, indeed, had to be done to get these people from Horeb to
Canaan, and settle them in possession ; but that could be done by a sort of exercise of
physical force. So much Jehovah could do for these Israelites, howsoever idolatrous
they became. But his great blessing for them was not in the mere possession of Canaan,
with its temporal riches and comforts. The temporal riches of Canaan were no more
than those of any other land, save as God himself was in the midst of those who pos-
sessed the riches. What a humiliating thing to consider that God had to threaten with-
drawal from his people in a sort of exercise of mercy. Suppose for a moment that the
people had continued obdurate, what would the end have been ? They would, indeed,
nave gone forward and got Canaan, and then sunk back, so that Israelite would have
had no more importance in the history of the world and the development of God's pur-
poses than Amorite, Hittite, or any of the other tribes mentioned in ver. 2.

II. Consider the significance op the separated tabernacle. In all probability
this was the tent of Moses, and if so, we see at once a beautiful mingling of grace with
necessary severity. Moses was prompted to separate from the people, but not to depart
from them. Jehovah could not come down in the pillar of cloud into the midst of the
camp ; and for this no reason needs be sought other than the peril to the people flowing
from his holiness. Thus there was everything to fill the minds of the people with a
suitable mingling of humility and hope. Moses, true type of the greater Mediator yet to
come, gave a point where God and the people could meet together. Jehovah will not
depart, unless, so to speak, he is driven away. These people could not bear his presence ;
and yet — apparent contradiction — they could not do without him. Individual Israelites
made it plain by their seeking Jehovah that they could not do without him ; and he
in his never-failing loving-kindness and pity, provided for such. The fate of the nation
was trembling in the balance ; but ample access and counsel were secured to the indi-
vidual believer. There was a definite and favoured place for every individual who in
fa's need sought the Lord. National trouble did not eclipse, it rather intensified and
aggravated, individual trouble and need.

III. Note the points op interest in the conversation between Moses and
Jehovah with which this chapter ci ncludes. 1. There is what we may call tJte
holy holdness of Moses. There is an illustration here of the importunity and great
confidence with which God's people should persist in their approaches to the throne ci
the heavenly grace. Only just before God !nd spoken in great anger; and Moses,
when he became aware from his own observation of the extent of the people's trans-
gression, approached Jehovah with the utmost deference. Put as time went on, and he
was able to take all the elements of the position more and more into consideration, he
felt mmself shut up to persistent waiting upon God. A return to God's favour and
guidance is the only way out of the difficulty ; and therefove Moses cannut but be bold
tnd pertinacious in doing his best to secure that way. 2. Ee makes the 'most mU of
OotPs favour to him as an indiuidiuU. Not only have the people l-ieen apostate and



ttS THE BOOK OF EXODUa [oh. xixih. 1— 11.

reckless, but their very apostasy and recklessness bring out into stronger relief tha
clinging obedience of Moses. He has done well, and, more than that, Jehovah haa
approved him ; and now, therefore, he pleads that the approval may not be in word
only, but in deed ; not in the promise of some future and distant recompense, but in
deliverance from a present difficulty near at hand. Moses is not slow to avail himself
of every legitimate consideration which he may plead with God. There were times
when he would have been the first to allow and indeed affirm his unworthiness before
God ; but God had counted him worthy, and in his present need he avails himself of
God's gracious regard to gain as much as he can for his needy brethren. Thus some
slight hint is given to us of the way in which, for Christ's sake, God regards men. God
had made it plain to Moses that he regarded him ; and in effect Moses says, " If this
regard be real, I will try it by large requests for my people." So let us feel that from
the undisputed regard of God for the person, obedience, and everything belonging to his
weU-beloved Son, there will also come a regard to all the intercessions of that Son on
behalf of a world so much alienated from God ; and yet the more it is alienated, only th9
more in need of his mercy and deliverance. 3. The determined manner in which Most*
associates himself with his people. He and Israel were as one. He may not in so many
words speak of them as his people ; on the contrary, he very emphatically alludes to
them, in addressing Jehovah, as " thy people ;" but we feel that imdemeath mere ex-
pressions there lies this natural and beautiful resolution, not to be separated from those
who were one with him in blood. He felt that if Israel was to be frowned upon, he
could not, so far as his consciousness was concerned, be favoured ; and so we are led to
think of the intimate association of Jesus with the children of men. Human nature is
his nature ; and however unworthy and polluted human nature often shows itself, how-
ever low it may sink in forgetfulness of its original constitution and purpose, tlie fact
remains that the Word of God became flesh, and the consequent kinship and claim must
ever be recognised. 4. The cry to Ood for a revelation of his glory. Much intercourse
Moses had enjoyed with Jehovah, and often had he heard the voice that gave com-
mandment and guidance. Indeed, as our minds go back over the past experience of
Moses, and we consider how much he had been through, this strikes us at first a,s a
somewhat puzzling request : — " I lieseech thee show me thy glory." But the puzzle
rises rather from unspiiltuality in our mimls than from anything in the circumstances of
Moses himself. Consider well the point to which he had attained, the distance which there
was between him and his brethren, heart-infected as they still were with image-worship,
and there will seem little wonder that in the heart of this lonely servant of God there
should rise desires for what strength and satisfaction might come to liim from the
vision of God. He had asked much for his people, and it was fitting that he should
ask something for himself. And he asked something worthy, something pleasing to
God, something of highest profit to himself, even as Solomon did later on. He asked
that he might no longer have to deal with a voice as behind a vail, but might see the
face firom which that voice came. The request was right and acceptable ; but it could
not be fully granted. What a fact to ponder over 1 What a humbling and yet hope-
inspiring fact that sinful man cannot look upon the glory of the Lord and live 1 What
of Divine glory is manifested to us has to be manifested in a way that is safe ■ and
surely this is part of the salvation wherewith we are saved, that by-and-bye, when all
pollution is cleansed away, we may be able to bear visions and revelations which, if they
were to be attempted now, would only destroy us. — Y.

Vers. 1 — 11. — Mercy vailed in judgment. I. God's separation from the peoplk
AND ITS EFFECTS. 1. The Separation. (1) In wrath he remembers mercy. They will
receive the land, but for the fathers' sake and his oath's sake, not because he has delight
in them. God's goodness is not always a proof of his being pleased with us, any more
than his chastisements prove his auger. The former may be a loud call to repentance,

(2) The reason for God's absence ; his presence would be judgment, not mercy : " Lest

I consume thee m the way." If God's face be hidden, and the sense of his presence and
guiding gone from us, his next revelation may be judgment. 2. Its effects. (1) The
people mourned. It was no satisfaction that God and they were no longer to walk
together. (2) Other delights lost their attractiveness ; — " Ko man did put on his orna-
menta." (3) They were troubled by fear of judgment, for the Lord had said, " I wUI



DH. XZZIT. 1—4.]



THE BOOK OF EXODU&



8M



come up into the midst of thee in a moment and consume thee." These are the effect!
of the Spirit's work to-day. The same cry is lifted: — " Flee from the wrath to come."

n. The SEFABATION of Qod'S people FBOM the midst of BUBBOUNBINa BIN ADS

ITS BESULTS. 1. Its necessity as a testimony to OwPs separation from tin. This is
the duty of the Church to-day : — " Come ye out from among them and he ye separate."
The tahernaole of the congregation, meant though it he for all, must he pitched " with-
out the camp." 2. The results. (1) Moses' example led others to declare themselves on
God's side (ver. 7). (2) The people " looked after Moses." Yearning for the light oi
Qod's face is stirred up in the hearts of men by those who go forth to meet with him.
(3) God manifests himself to the separated (ver. 9). A living Church is ever the mean*
of revealing God's reality. (4) The people worshipped " every man in his tent-door."
A true Church will send forth a cry for mercy from the homes of the sinfiiL — U.

Vers. 12 — 23. — Intercession and its reward. I. The intbkoessob's poweb. 1. Gkid,
who had disowned Israel, and refused to go with them, consents to go with him : —
" My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest." The first step in suc-
cessful intercession for others is the receiving of power to serve God among them.
This is the dropping which foretells the shower. 2. God is brought back by persistent
asking into the midst of Israel : — " I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken "
(ver. 17). We must not be content tlU our whole desire is given us. lie can make not
only our words a power to others, but also his own presence felt by them.

II. The intekoessoe'b plbab. 1. God's love to himself: — " Thou hast said I know
thee by name," etc. The realisation of our personal interest in God's love is the
basis of intercession for others. It gives confidence that God will hear us. It gives
hope. He who has blessed us can also bless them. 2. God's relation to them for whom
he entreats : — " Consider that this nation Is thy people." "We can lu-ge on behalf of the
vilest that God created them, and gave Christ to die for them. 3. That God's presence
anc favour are needful to make himself and the people what God desires them to
become : — " So shall we be separated." They can be consecrated only by the might of
God's revealed love.

III. The intebcessor'b bewabd: the vision of God's olobt. 1. "And he said.
Show me thy glory." The lifting up of availing prayer for others quickens our desire
to know more of him with whom we speak. 2. The full vision of God Is for the sinless
life. The splendour of the Divine purity would slay us. John fell at Christ's feet as
one dead. 3. How the fuller vision granted in the present may be had. (1) By
listening to the proclamation of the Lord's name in his word. (2) We can see the
glory which has passed us. God's deeds reveal him. 4. The pkce of vision : — " A
rock," " ]by me." Taking our stand upon Christ, the glory of God's words and deeds
breaks upon us. 5. The place of safety, " in a clift of the rock." Only in the riven
side of Jesus the vision of God is not to condemnation and death, but to justificatioa
and life.— U.



SECTION XVI.— CHAPTER XXXIV.

The Bestobation of the Two Tables, and benewal or the Cotekabt.

EXPOSITION.



CHAPTBE XXXIV.

Vers. 1 — 4. — The two tables renewed
The fervent and prolonged intercession of Moses
had brought about tHe pardon of the people ;
and that, together with their repentance and
their prayers (oh. xxxiii. 7), had been accepted
OS a renewal of the covenant on their part ;
but it remained for God to renew the covenant
■B his part The first step (o this was the



restoration of the tables, which were essentia]
to the covenant, as being at once the basis of
the law and of the ordained worship. To
mark, however, that something is always for-
feited by sin, even when forgiven, the new
tables were made to lose one glory of the first
— they were not shaped by Ood, u the fiiii
were (ch. xxxii. 16), but by Mosei.

Ver. I.— Hew thee two tables of etona.
Literally, "of «(one("— two lepaiata UUm^



3«0



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxznr. 1 — k



ije., made of two Eeparate stones. Moses is
required to do this with strict justice, since it
was hj his act that the former tables were
broken (ch. xxxii. 19). Upon these tables.
Literally, " upon the tables," which has exactly
the same force. The words that were in the
first tables. It is quite true that we have not
yet been explicitly told what these words
were. (See ch. xxxi. 18 ; xxxii. 15, 16, 19.)
It has been left to our natural intelligence to
understand that they must have been the " ten
words " uttered in the ears of all the people
amid the thunders of Sinai, as recorded in ch.
XX. 1 — 19, which are the evident basis of all
the later legislation. We have, however, in
ver. 28, and still more plainly in Deut. x. 4,
and T. 22, the desired statement. The fiction
of a double decalogue, invented by Goethe and
supported by Eitzig, and even Ewald, is ab-
solutely without foundation in fact.

Ver. 2. — Be ready in the morning. An
interval was required for the hewing of the
tablih It was made as short as possible. In



the top of the mount. Where he had beeg
with God previously (ch. xix. 20 ; xxiv. 12, 18)

Ver, 3. — Ko man shall come np with thee.
This time, no one, not even Joshua, was to ac-
company Moses. The new manifestation ol
the glory of God was to be made to him alon&
Neither let any man be seen thronghout all
the mount, etc. Compare the injunctioni
given in ch. xix. 12, 13. The present orden
are even more stringent.

Ver. 4. — Moses obeys all the directions
given him to the letter — hews, or causes to be
hewn, the two tables, making them as like aa
he can to the former ones — arises early, and
ascends the mountain to the appointed spot —
and takes with him the tables, for God to
perform his promise (ver. 1) of writing the
commandments upon them. It has been ques-
tioned whether God did actually write the
words upon the second tables ; but Kurtz's
arguments upon the point are unanswerable.
(Misiory of the Old Covenant, vol. iii p. 186,
E.T.)



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 1 — i. — J%e second promulgation of the moral law, hy the renewal of the hm
tables, may teach us —

I. That all covenant with God must best on the basis of the moral law.
Moses had not asked for a renewal of the tables. He had requested the return of God's
favour and the renewal of God's share of the covenant. It was God who made the
restoration of the tables a condition. God, that is, will not divorce favour from
obedience, privilege from the keeping of his law. Man desires the rewards that God
has to bestow, but is not anxious to have the rewards tied to a certain course of action.
God insists on the combination. He can only enter into covenant with those who
accept his law as their rule of life. This is not for his own sake, but for their;. They
can only be fitted to enjoy his favour, and the rewards which he has to bestow on them,
by leading a life ia accordance with his law and acquiring the character which such a life'
forms in them.

II. That the mobal law is eternal and unalterable. The broken table*
must be restored. In restoring them no change must be made. Their very form must
resemble as nearly as may be the form of the preceding ones. This, of course, was
typicaL It foreshadowed the further — ^not mere resemblance, but — identity of the words
that were to be written on the tables. Prom first to last, " the words were those that
were in the first table " (ver. 1). There is no hint of any alteration. Even Christianity
changes nothing in the law that is moral. " Think not that I am come to destroy thf
law and the prophets," says our Lord; " I am not come to destroy but to fulfil" (Matt
V. 17). Ko "jot or tittle" of the moral law is to pass away. Even with respect to
the Sabbath, which verges upon positive law, nothing is changed but the day of thf
week", and to a small extent the method of observance. Apostolic writings show uf
the Decalogue as stUl binding (Rom. xiii. 9 ; Eph. vi. 2 ; James iL 11 ; etc.).

m. That breakino the moral law imposes on us fresh obligations. "Hew
thee" — literally, " hew /or thyself" — "two tables of stone," said the Lord to Moses;
repair the loss caused by thine own action. Repentance is no part of man's ori<nnai
duty to God ; but if he once break the moral law, it becomes obligatory on him. Every
infraction involves this new duty ; some infractions involve more. Fraud involves the
duty of restitution ; calumny, that of retractation ; insult, that of apology ; and the like.
Each of our sins lays upon us as a new burthen, not only of guilt, but also of laboiu- to
efface it. We had best refrain from evil, even in our own interest, or we may increiw
our burthen till we mOs. under it.



m.xxsrr.1—4.} THE BOOK OF EXODU& Ml



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 1 — 4. — The renewal of God's covenant. I. The first EPrECT of reconcilia-
tion IS THE BE- WRITING OP THE LAW. Moses ascends that God may again inscribe bis
commandments upon the tables of stune ; Jesus, that God may write them upon the
fleshly tables of the heart. The sprinkling of the blood is " unto obedience." We ara
to be " zealous of good works."

II. The- awfolness of God's holiness more evident in the restoration thah
IN THE FIRST GiviNQ OP THE LAW. Formerly Moses had been accompanied so far by
the elders, and further still by Joshua. Now he must go up alone. No man is to be
seen throughout the mount. Neither flocks nor herds are to feed before it. The
terrors of yinai awe the heart less than the cross of him who treads the wine-press
•lone.

III. The Bedeemer's zeal. "And Moses rose up early in the morning." He
cannot loiter ; for man's life hangs upon the issue ; the world's cry rings in his ears.
" For Zion'a sake I will not hold my peace," etc. (Isaiah Ixii. 1).

IV. The mediator must mould the heart to receive God's law. " He hewed
two tables of stone, like unto the first." The power of Christ's love must cut between
as and sin, and give again the form man wore when he came from the hands of God.
We must experience the circumcision of Christ. Christ's work may be measured by the
heart's tender receptivity for the re-writing of God's law.

V. There must be union bt faith with Christ in his risen life. He "took
in his hand the two tables of stone." We pass up with Jesus into the presence of God.
That the law may be written upon the heart, our life must be hid with Christ in God.
— U.

Vers. 1 — i. — The second set of tables. Jehovah graciously answered the supplications
of Moses (xxxiii. 12 — 23) so far as it was possible to answer them. Supplications may
be very importunate, and, therefore, so far well pleasing to God, and yet at the same time
they may be faulty in two respects : first, they may ask for things which it is impos-
sible altogether to grant ; and, secondly, they may omit from the field of view, certain
other things which form a necessary accompaniment of every Divine gift. In all his
supplications, Moses said nothing about these broken tables ; it would be too much to
say that they were never in his thoughts. But whether in his thoughts or not, they
assuredly had to be considered and provided for. Moses had asked for the presence of
God to go with Israel ; and the presence of God meant for one thing the commandments
of (3od. Furthermore, all the elaborate furniture of the tabernacle had for the centre
•round which it was gathered, these very tables of stone. When Moses broke them, he
broke the holiest thing in all Israel's belon^ngs ; these tables, appointed to rest within
the ark, and underneath the cherubim. No word of censure indeed is uttered against
Moses for having broken them ; but it does not therefore follow that he is to be praised
for having broken them. The action, so to speak, was one to be regarded neither with
praise nor blame, but simply as an inevitable result of Moses' sudden and violent wrath.
When Moses broke the tables, he was not in a mood of mind for considering anything
but the monstrous transgression before his eyes. , What had happened to the fragments
we are not told ; except this much, that they were no longer available. All that Jehovah
does is simply to command from Moses the preparation of new tablets. As Moses pre-
pares them, he may safely be left to his own thoughts. Whatever lesson he needed in
respect of self-control, the opportunity was given him to learn. Opportunity was also
given to learn the need of being continually on the watch for manifestations of human
weakness and instability. If Moses was in so many things the type of Christ in respect
of mediatorial office, it was, alas 1 also true that he was unlike Chnst in respect of pene-
trating insight into human nature. Moses was not like Christ ; it could not be said of
him that he knew what was in man. — Y.

Vers. 1 — 10, 28. — Senewal of the tables, and fourth intercession. One more mighty
effort of intercession, and Moses will bear away the blessing which he seeks. It needt^
however, that it te • mighty one. The covenant is not yet restored in its integrity.



8«l THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxxit. 1— lU

The people's sin U not yet perfectly for^ven. God, indeed, has promised to go with
them, but he has not said, as of old, " I will take you to me for a people, and I will be
to you a God" (Ex. vi. 7). The new relations are not those of perfected friendship.
They are moreover, unstable. New transgressions of the people may at any moment
upset them. Moses, accordingly, would not only have the cov^inant renewed — ^restored '
in its old completeness and integrity — the last trace of the Divine displeasure wiped
t^ay — ^but would have God give him a pledge of grace beyond anything he has yet
received — a pledge that he will show great forbearance with the people : that he will not
deal summarily with them, or cast them off, on account of backslidings which he now
perceives to be inevitable (ver. 9). It was a high thing to ask : too high, Moses may have
thought, for him to be able to attain to it. If he did, it could only be as the result
of an earnestness, a perseverance, and a sublimity in intercesssion beyond everything of
which he had yet felt himself capable. The strength he needed, however, was not to
be withheld from him. He had already, though, probably, without this being present
to his mind as a motive, put himself in the way of getting it, by asking for a vision of
the Divine glory. From this would flow into his soul a spiritual might which would make
" all things possible" to him (cf. Mark ix. 23). By sheer power of prayer, he would
obtain what he desired. Jehovah, on his side, was too well pleased with his servant's
zeal and devotion, too willing to be entreated of Iiim, too entirely in accord with the
object of his supplication, not readily to grant him the opportunity of pressing his request.

L Jehovah's " comb dp hitheb" (vers. 1 — t). 1. The command to hew out tablet
(ver. 1). Formerly, it was God himself who furnished th3 tables on which the law was
written (ch. xxxii. 16). Now, the tables are to be provided by Moses. This may have
had leference to the facts (1) that it was Moses who had destroyed the former tables
(ch. xxxii. 19) ; and (2), thatt it was by the mediation of Moses that the covenant was
being renewed. It was a suitable reward for his intercession, that God should give him
this honour of supplying the tables on which the covenant terms were to be inscribed.
View the command to hew out tables as (1) Retrospective. God had already promised
, that his presence should go with Israel (ch. xxxiii. 14). This implied, on the part of
the people, return to their obedience. The law is unalterable. God can walk with men
only as they are willing to walk with him in the way of his commands. The tables
testified to the unchangingness of the obligation. (2) Anticipative. It had in view
the fact that, through Moses' intercession, the covenant was about to be restored.
(3) Promissory. It gave Moses encouragement to entreat for its restoration. 2. ITit
command to ascend the mount (ver. 2). The summons to ascend the mount was, (1)
An answer to prayer — " Shew me thy glory" (ch. xxxiii. 18). (2) A preparation for
vision. (3) An opportunity for intercession. 3. The command topreserve the sanctity
tf the mount (ver. 3). This was to be done by keeping man and beast from approach-
ing it. Moses was to ascend alone. The command — a parallel to that in Ex. xix.
12—13 — has for its end the warning back of intruders from what, for the time being, is
" holy ground" (cf. ch. iii. 5). Other reasons are, that there might be (1) No interrup-
tion of communion. (2) No distraction in intercession. (3) No injury done by the
manifestation of the Divine glory. " The manifested glory of the Lord would so surely
be followed by the destruction of man that even Moses needed to be protected before it"
(ch. xxxiii. 21, 22).

II. The name ebvealbd (vers. '4— 8). (1) Jehovah "passed by before him"
(ver. 5), i.e., gave him the glimpse of his glory promised in ch. xxxiii. 22, 23. (2) He
"proclaimed his name"— i.e., made known to Moses the essence of his character.
This was the higher revelation. The other is only alluded to ; this is dwelt on and
expanded (vers. 6, 7). 1. Tlie name itself. Note here in regard to it — (1) It unites
mercy and justice. (2) The merciful attributes preponderate. (S) The word which
syllables it is " Love." Love is the union of goodness and holiness. The history oi
revelation has been but the spelling out of this name. Christ is the perfect embodi-
ment of it. 2. The effects on Moses. (1) It awed him (ver. 8). (2) It encouraged him.
It gave him a new ground of confidence in entreaty (ver. 9). (3) It Btren»thened
*-'— Ct the chorus of the archangels in Goethe's " Faust" -

"Though none may fathom thee— thy sigl4
Upoo the angels power bestows," ete



CH. SXXIT. S— &]



THE BOOK OF EXODUSb



in. The covenant bestoebd (vers. 9, 27, 28). 1. The intercession. This fourth
and last intercession presents us with several noteworthy features. (1) It was very pro-
longed. The account here is summary ; but Moses tells us in Deuteronomy (ch. ix. 25),
that he " fell down before the Lord forty days and forty nights as at the first," and prayed
earnestly that the people might not be destroyed (cf. ver. 28). (2) It included inter-
cession for Aaron (Deut. ix. 20). (3) It is marked by a deep perception of the root of
depravity in the people's nature. Moses has no longer the same optimistic views re-
garding them as when he disputed with God the necessity of giving them further
warning about not approaching the mount (ch. xix. 23). Note how, in the first
intercession, it is the people's danger ; in the second, the people's guilt ; and in the last,
the people's depravity, which is chiefly before the intercessor's mind. He here pleads
the innate tendency as a reason why God should deal mercifully with them (ver. 9).
Human nature does not improve on closer inspection. But there is weakness as well as
sin in its condition. The Divine ruler may be trusted to make the requisite allowances
(cf. Gen. viii. 21). (4) It is marked — ^and this is the outstanding circumstance in
connection with it — by the degree in which Moses is now able to identify himself with
the people for whom he intercedes. " Let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us ... ,
And pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance" (ver. 9). More
than ever he feels himself one with his nation. Intercession has perfected sympathy.
But not intercession alone. It may be inferred that no act had more to do with tins
result than the supreme act of self-devotion, already considered, in which he expressed
his willingness to die, and, if need be, to be blotted out of God's book, for the salvation
of the people. In that amazing act, the last traces of selfishness must have perished.
He has given himself for Israel, and is thenceforth one with it. Subsequent inter-
cessions can but develop, and give clearer and fuller expression to the sense of unity
with his people bom within him in that supreme hour in his experience. Sinfiil as the
people are, accordingly, Moses, in his present entreaty does not shrink from including
himself among them. " Our iniquity" — " our sin." The just takes part with the
unjust. He makes their sin his, and pleads for its forgiveness. The worse they
^ow themselves, the more earnestly he holds by them, and endeavours to sustain
them by his prayers. If sympathy be a qualification for the task of mediation, Moses
thus possesses it. His intercession, in this respect, throws striking lights on Christ's.
2. The success. The prolonged, fervent, and sympathetic intercession of Moses did not
fail of its reward. " The Lord," he tells afterward^ " hearkened unto me at that time
also " (Deut. ix. 19). Nothing was wanting to the completeness of his success. The
last frown had disappeared from the countenance of Jehovah. Covenant relations were
perfectly restored. The people were reinstated in privilege. No wonder that the
mediator's face " shone" as he descended from the mount I We, too, have an intercessor
whom the Father " heareth always" (John xi. 42).— J. 0.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. S — 8. — The ruunLMEirr by Gtod of
HIS PEOMiSB TO MosES. This section coheres
closely with the last section of the preceding
chapter, and must be regarded as the historical
account of how God fulfilled the promises there
made by him to Moses (ch. zzxiii. 19 — 23).
The promises were mainly two — 1. That he
would proclaim his name to him afresh ; and 2. ,
That he would pass by him, and let him see,
after he had passed, what man might see of his
glory. The fulfilment of the first promise ap-
pears in the long enumeration of attributes
eontauied in vers. 6, 7 ; the fulfilment of the
second is expressed with extreme brevity in
kk« words — " And tht Iiocd pasisd by beJEow



him " (ver. 6). Probably no further descrip-
tion could he given of that marvellous mani-
festation beyond those words in which it was
promised (ch. xxxiii. 21 — 23). Its effects were
seen in that permanent reflection of God's
glory on the face of Moses, which thenceforth
compelled him to wear a veil mostly when he
showed himself to the people (vers. 33 — 35).

Ver. 5. — The Lord descended in the olond.
The cloudy pillar, which had stood at the door
of the Tent of Meeting (ch. xxxiii. 10), was
withdrawn while Moses ascended Sinai, and
prc».bly disappeared from men's sight. When
Moses reached the top, it descended once mora
from the sky, and stood with him tbera.



3M



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xxut. &— 8l



of the Loid in the manner more fully
■tated in the enduing versee.

Vers. 6, 7. — The Lord passed by before him.
God did as he had promised in ch. xxxiii. 22,
23. He made his glory pass by Moses, as he
stood in a " clift of the rock," and " covered
him with his band aa he passed by," and, when
<ia iti nmnnj, "took away his hand," and
allowed Moses to look after him, and see a
glorious and transcendent vision — a vision so
bright and radiant, and eo real, that the light
which streamed from it settled on Moses' face,
and remained there (rer. 30). And proclaimed.
In his passage God proclaimed his name ; not
however, as in the burning bush, an actual
name contained in a single word — but a de-
•cription in many words of his essential nature
— a description setting forth especially his
three qualities of mercy, truth, and jastice,
bnt dwelling most upon the first of the three
— perhaps, as most essential, for " God is love "
(1 John iv. 8) — certainly, as most needing to
be prominently set forth at the time, when
his favour had been justly forfeited, and but
for his mercy could not have been restored.
Note the accumulation of terms that are nearly
synonymous — 1. Merciful (or pitiful); 2. Gra-
cious; 8. Long-suffering; 4. Abundant in
gsodness; 6. Keeping mercy for thousands;



and 6. Forgiving iniquity and transgression
and sin — an accumulation for the purpose of
emphasis — ^to assure Moses, and through him
mankind at large, of the reality of this
attribute, on which the possibility of our
salvation depends, and which had never
hitherto been set forth with anything like
such fulness. That will by no means clear
the guilty. Some critics take this clause
in an entirely different sense, translating
" who in destroying will not wholly de-
stroy" (Maimonides, Pool, De Dieu, Patrick),
or, " who acquits even him who is not inno-
cent" (Geddes); but the rendering of our
translators (which agrees with the LXX.), it
approved by EosenmiiUer, Gesenius, Kalisch,
Keil, and others. It seems to have been also the
meaning assigned to the passage by the pro-
phet Nahmn, who quotes it (i. 3) when he is
threatening Nineveh. Visiting the iniquity.
See above, ch. xx. 5. While setting forth his
attribute of mercy in all its fulness, God will
not have his attribute of justice forgotten
(ver. 8).

Ver. 8. — Koses made haste and bowed hii
head. Worshipping the glory that had passed
by, and accepting the gracious words ad&essed
to him.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 6, 7. — The second proclamation of God's name. — God had proclEumed Ui
name to Moses, when he spoke with him out of the burning bush. He had declared
it to be JEHOVAH, " the Self-Existent One." Under this name the people of Israel
had known him from the time of Moses' return to Egypt from Midian, until that of
which he is here speaking. Hitherto it had sufficed for them. It had marked him as, 1.
eternal ; 2. uncaused ; 3. unconditioned ; 4. self-sufficient ; 5. aU-powerfiU. But it had
not revealed his moral nature. Something of that had always been known to man.
Something more had become known to Israel through the law already given from
Sinai. But in their present state of sorrow and depression (oh. xxxiii. 4 — 6) something
further was needed. God accordingly " proclaimed his name " afresh. Of this second
proclamation we may note —

L That it oauobls nothino, but adds. The first words of the name are "Jehovah,
Jehovah El, " or " the Self -Existent, the Self -Existent God." What had been revealed
before is confirmed; nay, is still put in the fore-front, as the proper foundation of all
the rest. For a true knowledge of God, we mast, first and foremost, have the con-
viction that there is a self-existent being, eternal, uncaused, the cause of aU things, and
therefore of our own existence, on whom we are absolutely dependent. It follows
after this, to inquire and learn the moral character of this Eternal One. '

II. That it sets fobtU God as, above all things, merciful. The Jewish
commentators make out thirteen epithets of God in these two verses, and say that all
but one are epithets of mercy. This seems to be an overstatement of the actual
fact, that the epithets of mercy form a large numerical majority. They are 1. Bakhum,,
" the tender or pitiful one," who is full of kindness and compassion ; 2. Khunnun,
"the gracious one," ;vho bestows his benefits out of mere favour, without obligation-
8. Erek appayim, " the long-suffering one," who is not easily provoked, but "suffers
long and is kind"; 4. Sab-khesed, "the great in mercy" which needs no explanation •
6. Notser-khesed, "the keeper of mercy," he who does not desert those he loves, but is
merciful to them, and their children, from generation to generation ; 6. Nose 'avon
mifetha vekhattaah, " the forgiver of iniquity and transgression and ain " tin bemg wht



CI. zxxiv. 6— 8.] THE BOUJi OF EXODUa 866

■lone can forgive sin and give peace to the guilty BotiL Moses did well to make appeal
to this description of himself by God himself, when Israel had a second time provoked
God to destroy them (Num. ziv. 17, 18). We shall do well to make our appeal to the
same, whenever we have offended our Lord and Master by our faults and shortcomings,
our " sins, negligences, and ignorances." Conjured by this " name," God can scarcely
refuse to reply, as he replied to Moses, "I have pardoned according to thy word"
(Num. xiv. 20).

III. That it fuktheb sets him forth as just and tbub. God gives it as part of
his name, that he " will by no means clear the guilty," or rather perhaps that he will
not "always" do so (Kalisoh). There is some guilt that he will not, cannot pardon.
" ITiere is a sin unto death — I do not say that a man shall pray for it " (1 John v. 16).
Unrepented sin cannot be forgiven. " Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost " cannot be
forgiven. God's justice is an essential part of his natiire, no less than his mercy ; and
is perhaps, as has been argued, a necessary Consequence of his love.* _ Again, God
is true — " abundant in truth " (ver. 6). There can be no trust in any being who is not
true. Truth lies at the root of all moral goodness ; and the truth of God is pre-supposed
in any revealed religion, since without it revelation could have no force or value.
Further, both in the Old and the New Testament, God reveals himself as " true," or
sometimes as " the truth." " Thy truth reacheth unto the clouds " (Ps. oviii. 4). " The
truth of the Lord endureth for ever " (ib. cxvii. 2). " God is true." " I am the truth."
It is essential to a right conception of him that we should believe in his absolute
veracity. If we " make him a liar," we ruin our whole idea of him. We might as well
make him non-existent.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 6 — 8.— The " name." Consider on this

L Thk coNifEOTioN WITH THE NAME Jehovah. " Proclaimed the name of JeJimnh "
(ver. 5). Observe — 1. The name Jehovah connotes moral attributes. The absolute
being is, at the same time, the most perfect being. His excellence includes all possible
perfection. This implies the possession of moral attributes. "That character,*
says Dean Graves, " from which the acutest reasoners have endeavoured demonstra-
tively to deduce as from their source all the Divine attributes, is self-existence.
Is it not then highly remarkable that it is under this character the divinity
is described, on Ms first manifestation to the Jewish lawgiver?" 2. Former
revelations implied moral attributes. The attributes on which, in former revela-
tions, the main stress needed to be laid, were those to be illustrated in the event*
of the exodus — power, freedom, supremacy, changelessness (cf. on ch. ili. 14 ; vi. 2, 3).
But that moral attributes — the attributes of truth, mercy, goodness, justice, also
belonged to Jehovah was shown— (1) From the nature of his purpose. (2) From the
character of his actings. (3) From the simple fact of his revealing himself. 3. The
new revelation declares moral attributes. Formerly, the revelation was in deeds, now it
is in worck. Formerly, God told Moses what, as Jehovah, he would do. Now he
declares what, as Jehovah, he is. The name was first spelt, tiien pronounced. Cf. with
law of ordinary historical progress — ^1) action ; (2) reflection on what has been done,
with generalisation of principles. Or of scientific progress — (1) accumulation of facts ;
(2) generalisation of law. For this annotmcement of the name, the renewal of the
covenant fvimished an appropriate historical occasion.

II. Teaching of the name. The name exhibits the Divine character. It lays
bare to us God's very heart. It reveals his essence. Learn — 1. There is justice in
Ood. " That will by no means clear the guilty," etc. (ver. 7). (1) This attribute is
essential. Without it, God would not be God. Says the pet, " A God all mercy is a
God imjust." We go fvui;her, and affirm that without justice, there would be no mercy
left to exercise. See Homily on ch. xxxil. 10. We have defined love in God as the
perfect union of goodness and holiness. Mercy we Would define as a mixed feeling of
|«ty and resentment. See this point well illustrated in the chapters on " the Law of

* Dante makes Hell in part the creation of the Frimal Love, In/trno, Canto iii 11 S, 6



3M THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. xxuT. 6— 9.

Meicy " in " Ecce Homo." (2) Justice cannot be laid aside. God " will by no means deal
the guilty." See Homily on ch. xxiii. 21. But if God cannot dear the guilty, cannot, ».&
call guilt other than what it is, or refuse to punish it, he can, on the ground of hii
Bon's atonement, which fulfils every condition of a perfect satisfaction to justice, /o-r^i»«
the guilty. (3) Manifestation of justice. In his personal dealings with individuals — ^not
clearing the guilty. In his general government of the world — " visiting the iniquity
of the fathers," etc. (cf. on ch. xx. 5 ; Deut. v. 9). 2. There is merer/ in Ood. This
side of the Divine character is exhibited with much greater fulness than thd other.
" Merciful and gracious, long-sufiering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping
mercy, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin " (vers. 6, 7). (1) God delights in
mei'cy ; he does not delight in judgment. Judgment is " his work, his strange work "

ils. xxviii. 21). The visitation of sin is viewed as extending only " unto the third and
burth generation" ; mercy is kept for "thousands" (cf. Ps. ciii. 17). (2) Mercy is
" abundant." _ Cf. Is. Iv. 7 — " will abundantly pardon." A wonderful utterance this
from the standpoint of the Old Testament. Anticipates Paul — " where sin abounded,
grace did much more abound" (Rom. v. 20). (3) Mercy qualifies judgment. It leads
\a forbearance with the sinner — " long-suffering " (cf. Rom. ii. 4). It secures ^arcton on
repentance — " forgiving iniquity," etc. (4) It is yet exercised in strictest harmony with
the requirements of justice. The mode of the reconciliation of these two sides of the
Divine character, however, remains in the Old Testament a partially unsolved problem.
3. Mercy rules in the character of God. This is a fair inference (1) from the prepon-
derating place assigned to the attributes of mercy, and (2) from the fact that the
attributes of mercy stand before the attributes of justice. It is but an earlier
expression of the truth which the Gospel has now made a great spiritual certainty to
us — "God is love" (1 John iv. 16). Not simply Urns, but is love. But if God is
love, and love constitutes his essence, then must love dominate, wield, work through his
other perfections, using all for its own purposes, transmuting aU into its own nature.
There cannot be discord or division in the breast of the Eternal. What God is, he must
ever have been, must be at all times, through all ages, in all his works, under all
forms of his manifestation. This is a conception so deep and far-reaching as to pass
in its length and breadth beyond our grasp. Its lines prolong themselves to infinity.
There lie in it possibilities which it is not given to man to fathom.

ni. The name as eevealed. 1. We need a revelation. It is but a dumb, in-
articulate revelation of this name which we have in nature. What is revealed relates
more to God's justice than to God's love. If there is much in nature which supports,
there is also much which seems to discredit, belief in the entire goodness of God.
Nature in particular, has no answer to give to the questions — Can God forgive and
restore sinners? Can he undo their evU? Can he turn back fi-om its avenging
course that terrible law of retribution which holds us in its grasp ? 2. We may expect
• revelation. If God loves men, we may expect him in some way personally to attest
his love to them. ' " Gracious thoughts never revealed are not gracious thoughts
•t all. It is essential to the being of grace or love that it manifest itself. Love im-
revealed is love unreal" (Dr. A. B. Bruce). 3. The revelation has been given. (1) In
deeds. (2) In words. (3) In the Son.-^. 0. " \ ■>

Vers. 5 — 9. — The Manifestation of Ood. I. God's glory veiled that it mat
BB eevealed. "The Lord descended in the cloud." The glory of Jesus was veiled by
his humanity. There is but one avenue through which the knowledge of God can come
— the spirit ; it cannot come by the senses. God reveals himself by a word, by one
in whom he has put his name, and by the Spirit's unveiling of the word in the heart.

IL God's name. 1. Faithfulness : he proclaimed " Jehovah." He changes not, his
purpose abides, his word is fulfilled. 2. Faithfulness and might. " Jehovah, Elohim."
God's power waits upon his unchanging purpose. 3. "Merciful." He will not spurn
need. He is moved by, and drawn to, it. 4. " Gracious." God is not merely a just
master, bestowing rewards which have been earned. There is favour to be found with
hmi, umnented and free. 5. " Long-suffering." He is patient with blindness and weak-
ness and sm. He waits to be gracious. The great husbandman waiteth for the precious
t» SS.*^ ^^^ "'^^^^ ^°°S patience for it." 6. "Abundant in goodness and
IruB. Tm ages have been unveiling their fulness; but the story is no* yet told.



OH. zxxiT. 6, 7.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. MT



Eternity wiU never know all the length and breadth and depth and height. 7. Th«
largeness of God's mercy (1) toward persons. " Keeping mercy for thousandis," (2)
toward sms, " forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin." 8. The severity of God.
(1) He will not always leave sin unpunished. (2) His mercy may save men from sin,
but will not acquit them in sin. " Be not deceived." (3) The father's sins are visited
upon the children. The inheritance of wrong is accompanied by an inheritance of wrath.
What is punishment for the fathers may be mercy for the children.

in. The fruits of the knowledge op God. 1. Adoration, For deep and
true worship the soul must know God in the reality of his existence and the glory of his
nature. 2. Prayer for himself' and his people. To Jesus the vision of God is inter-
cession for his Church and the world. (1) Prayer for God's presence. " Let my Lord, I
pray thee, go among us." (2) That God may come in mercy, not in judgment. " Pardon
our iniquity." (3) The transforming power of the presence of God. " And (so) take ui
for thine inheritance." — ^U.

Vers. 6, 7. — The name of the Lord. Moses had asked to see the glory of Jehovah, a
request which it was possible to grant only in a very modified way. As much as Moses
could bear to see he was allowed to see ; and for, what he was not able to see he received
a most abundant and timely compensation in the revelation made to him of the Divine
character. For this of course is what the proclamation of the name of Jehovah amounts
to. The name of Jehovah is what we should call the character of Jehovah. It is always
a great comfort and stay to know that the character of one with whom we have to deal
is satisfactory through and through. Nay more, it is well to know character, whether
it be good or bad ; not to go to a man, uncertain of his disposition and altogether in
doubt as to what we may expect. From the proclamation here made we may judge Moses
to have been up to this point ignorant of certain fundamental qualities in the character
of God. He might have certain guesses, certain inward promptings, which led him into
supplication and conduct accordant with the Divine character ; but now he is lifted
above all guess-work. From God's own lips he gets an account of all that is deepest in
the disposition and relations of God toward man. He is made to see that God's recent
action towards apostate Israel was based, not on incessant importunity in supplication,
but on what was a constant source of the Divine action. God was pleased to see Moses
so importunate ; importunity we may even say was needful to the occasion ; but God
had not in him the spirit of the unjust judge, that he should be moved by importunity
alone. The character here revealed doubtless gave Moses confidence in all future
necessary intercession. Henceforth he knew, and knew from as solemn and authoritative
a communication as could be made, what there was in the great Disposer of his move-
ments upon which he could at all times rely. The aspect of Jehovah's character here
presented is of course one which it is important for his sinful creature man to know.
Qod does not tell us here aH that may be known of him ; he singles out that, the
knowledge of which we cannot do without in our hours of deepest need, and although
there is thus revealed to us only a part of the Divine nature, it is a part which has the
hannony of a whole, God is here made known as indescribably considerate of all the
needs of men, and yet at the same time inexorably just. His mercy and love are not
as human mercy and love too often are. There is a mercy which, while it may soothe
present agonies and smooth present difficulties, is yet essentially nothing more than an
opiate ; it does not go to the root of the trouble and show how it may be entirely swept
away. The tender mercies of the wicked, it is said, are cruel ; and so in another sense
the tender mercies of the thoughtless and the ignorant may be called cruel. Stopping
suffering for the immediate present, they may be sowing the seed of suffering a hundred
times greater in the future. But God's mercy is so offered and exercised that it needs
never to be regretted. It is mercy gloriously allied with great considerations of righteous-
ness. It is mercy for the repentant ; for those who confess and forsake their sins ; and
although from a superficial glance this visitation of suffering upon children and
children's children may seem to contradict the mercy of God, we find on further
reflection that it is a great warning against human selfishness. What a rebuke
to the man who, knowing that his sin will involve posterity in suffering, yet goes
on with the sin I Who are we, to indulge in aspersions on the mercy of God, when
perhaps at the very moment we ore sowing in self-indulgence what others mnal



868 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [oh. Xkit «^2S.

reap in pangs which our self-denial and regard for Gud's wise will might have utterly

prevented ? — Y.

Vers. 6, 7. — Ood is love. A previous revelation, cf. ill. 14. Then the emphpsia
was on the name, now it is on the character of him who bears the name. Mosks, in
common with the people, longed after some visible manifestation of the glory of the
unseen God who spoke to him (xxxiii. 18). His desire is granted ; but at the same time
God turns his thoughts from the visible to the invisible. " It is not," he ceems to say,
" what I appear to be that man has to trust to ; it is what I am" Consider —

I, The character revealed. 1. It implies intelligence in the Being who i»
eharacierised. The name Jehovah might, conceivably, be given to " a stream of tan-
dency." Law, irresistible and impersonal, might be described as " the eternal." You
cannot, however, speak of law as " merciful and gracious," etc. There must be scna
one who works through law. A divine heart is the mainspring whence flow all
" streams of tendency," the issues of the universal life. 2. It is not such as man could
have imagined. Men do create their own gods ; deifying the exaggerated and distorted
shadows cast by their own characters— so the mountaineer is at first awe-struck whsn
confronted by his own gigantic shadow. Here, however, is a character which caimot be
traced to such an origin ; it is not man's thought about God, it is God's revelation of himself
to man. Contrast the character of the shadow, man-created, god, with that of Jehovah.
The one is revengeful, arbitrary, cruel, etc. ; the other is merciful and gracious, etc.
The man-made god is at best kindly with a weak and sentimental kindliness ; with
Jehovah, love is the heart-root of his nature, a love which will by no means clear the
guilty. Nature "red in tooth and claw" scarcely suggests such a god as this; man
could never have conceived him. The character is a revelation of himself, made her*
to Moses ; made, yet more clearly, later, in the life of " the Word made Flesh."

II. The character as expressed in action. Men are treated by some one or
aome thing as God says he treats them. The " stream of tendency " makes for righteous-
ness ; it is not ptirposeless, it must be purposed. Though experience was insufficient to
suggest the character, it yet helps us to verify the revelation. Notice, specially, the
stern side of love. The latter part of the revelation seems at first inconsistent with the
first part ; they give, however, two aspects of the same homogeneous character. True
love is quite distinct from kindliness ; its brain is wisdom, and justice nerves its right
hand. 1. The action which love will take, must depend vpon the circumstances which
call for action. Our own experience shows sufficiently that love does not shrink from
giving pain. The parent will forgive his child, and yet, at the same time, not " clear "
him ; he cannot pass over without notice conduct of which he disapproves. Love may
wield the surgeon's knife ; or the scourge, with a view to rtwral surgery. So long as
the child keeps sound and well, physically and morally, love is all sunshine ; with
illness or danger, physical or moral, love — seeking the good of the beloved object —
may strike and pierce like lightning. Apply the general principle and it explains : —
2. A special case. Can love visit upon children the sins of their parents ? Yes, for
children inherit the sinful tendencies of their parents ; and it is just this visitation which
may best secure them against falling into sin. Sad that the drunkard's child should be
an epileptic ; yet epilepsy may be a loving visitation if it guard against the confirmed
drunkenness which might otherwise have ruined body and soul. A warning for
parents ; yet consolation for the victims of their sins, when it is seen that love has
inspired severity (cf. Heb. xii. 11).

CoruHusion. Such the God revealed to Moses, and such the God revealed in Christ.
Before such a Being what attitude so fitting as that of Moses ? (ver. 8 : cf. Job xliL

I— 6).-a.

EXPOSITION.



Vers. 9—28. — ^Thb benbwal op the covk-
■INT. Dazed, as it would seem, by the
tplendour of the vision which he had beheld.
forgot that God bad already pledged



himself to renew the covenant, and lead the
people in person to Canaan. In his forgetful-
nesa. he once more set himself to intercede with
God on their behalf, and besought him — ^1. That



OH. xxriv. 9 — 16.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



369



he wonld go up with them ; 2. That he
would paTdon them; and S. That he would
once more take them as his inheritance (ver.
9). Without replying separately to these
requests, God formally renews the covenant ;
promises not only to go up with the people,
but to work miracles for them (ver. 10), and
to drive out the nations before them when
they have arrived (ver, 11) ; and makes a
brief summary of the chief points of positive
observance, which he requires of them in addi-
tion to the moral law. These points may be
reduced to twelve: — 1. That no treaty of
peace should be made with the Canaanite
nations (ver. 12). 2. That all their images,
altars, and groves should be destroyed (ver.
13). 8. That no molten image should be
made to represent God (ver. 17). 4. That
the Passover festival should be observed as
previously commanded (ver. 18). 6. That
the fiist-bom should be dedicated, or re-
deemed (vers. 19, 20). 6. That the Sabbath
rest shoold be observed at all times of the
year (ver. 21). 7. That the feast of Pente-
cost (weeks) should be observed regularly
(ver. 22). 8. That the feast of tabernacles
should also be observed (ib.). 9. That at all
the three great festivals all the males should
appear before God (ver. 23). 10. That no
leaven should be used with any sacrifice (ver.
25). 11 That first-fruits of all things
■hould be offered to God (ver. 26). 12. That
no kid should be seethed in her mother's
milk (ver. 26).

Ver. 9.— If now I have found grace in
thy sight. The vision vouchsafed him makes
Moses feel that he has indeed been received into
favour with God. The first use which it oc-
curs to him to make of his position is to inter-
cede anew for his people. He, apparently,
forgets that God has already promised to go
with them (ch. xxxiii. 17), and prefers exactly
the same request which he had made on the
preceding day, and which had been granted.
To this he adds a prayer for pardon, and a
request that God would take Israel for his
inheritanoe. The last phrase is a new one,
but expresses perhaps no more than has been
implied in such phrases as " thy people, which
thou hast purchased " (ch. xv. 16) — " ye shall
be a peculiar treasure nuto me " (ch. xix. 5).

Ver. 10. — ^I make a covenant— ».«., " I lay
down afresh the terms of the covenant be-
tween me and Israel." On my part, I will go
with them (implied, not expressed), and do
miracles for them, and drive out the nations
before them (vers. 10, ll)i and enlarge their

KXOSUB — n.



borders, and not allow their land to be in-
vaded at the festival seasons (ver. 21) : on
then: part, they must " observe that which I
command them" (ver. 11). Uarvels such as
have not been done in all the earth. As the
drying up of the Jordan (Josh. iii. 16, 17) ; the
failing down of the waJls of Jericho (46. vi.
20), the slaughter of the army of the five
kings by hai^tones (&>. x. 11), and the like.
It is a terrible thing that I will da with
thee. Terrible, not to Israel, but to Israel's
enemies. Compare Deut. x. 21 ; Fs. cvi. 22 ;
crV. 6, etc

Ver. 11. — Observe thou that whioh I com-
mand thee this day. The precepts expressly
given (vers. 12 — 26) are, as observed above,
almost wholly positive. The moral law did
not require recapitulation, because it was en-
joined on the people afresh by the writing on
the two tables (ver. 28). I drive ont before
thee. Compare iiL 8, 17; vL 4, 8; xiii. S,
11; xxxiii. 2.

Ver. 12. — Take heed to thyself lest thou
make a oovenant. See above, ch. xziii 83
A snare. See ch. xxiii. 33.

Ver. 13. — ^Ye shall destroy their altars,
etc This command is more sweeping than
the corresponding one in the "Book of the
Covenant (ch. xxiii. 24), which expressly
mentions only the " images." Here the de-
struction of idol-altars and idol-groves is
further commanded. On idol-altars, see Num.
xxiii. -,29; Judg. ii. 2; 1 Kings xvi. 32;
xviii. 26, etc. Groves are here for the first time
mentioned. They appear to have been arti-
ficial constructions, either of wood or metal,
or both, more or less imitative of trees, and
regarded as emblems of the Oriental nature-
deities, especially Baal and Astarte or Ash-
toreth. The word translated " grove " (ashirah)
is a modification of the name Ashtoreth. The
well-known " sacred tree " of the Assyrians is
probably an ashirdh,

Ver. 14. — ^FoT then shalt worship no other
God. This is a reference to the Second Com-
mandment (ch. XX. 5). The meaning is —
" Thou shalt not spare the idolatrous emblems
of the Canaanite nations, for thou couldst
only do so to worship them, and thou art
already forbidden to worship any other god
beside me." The existence of the Decalogue
and its binding nature, is assumed throughout
this chapter

Vers. 15, 16. — The probable consequences ol
making treaties with the Canaanite nations,
alluded to in ver. 12, and in ch. xxiii. 33, are
here fully set forth. They include — 1. Join-
ing in their idol-feasts ; 2. Intermarriages ;
3. The actual apostasy of those who married
idolatrous wives. The event fully justified
the warning here given. See Judg. ii. 2,
11 — 13, 17; vi. 25; x. 6, etc. They go a
whoring. This expression, so common in the
later books, is here used for the first time It

& s



•70



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[oh. xxxiT. 9—26



implies that the relation between man and
God is analogous to that of the marriage-bond,
10 that deserting him for other gods is a species
of adultery. Compare the frequent represen-
tations in the New Testament of Christ as
the "Bridegroom" and the Church as his
"Bride."

Ver. 17. — ^Thou shalt make thee no molten
gods. An express allusion to the recent sin
of the golden calf.

Ver. 18. — The feast of unleavened bread
■halt thou keep. See ch. xxiii. 15, and
compare chs. xii. 14 — 20, and xiii. 3^ — 10.
The month Abib. See the comment on ch.
xiii. 4.

"Vers. 19, 20. — ^All that openeth the matrix
is mine, etc. This is a repetition of the com-
mand given in ch. xiii. 12, 13, which had not
been inserted in the " Book of the Covenant."
It is again enjoined in Lev. xxvii. 26, 27.
None shall appear before me empty. Be-
peated from ch. xxiii. IS.

Ver. 21. — Six days, etc. This is repeated
from the " Book of the Covenant " (ch. xxiii.
12), but with a remarkable addition — in ear-
ing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.
" Earing time " is " ploughing time " — ^to
" ear " being to " plough " in Old English, a
word cognate with the Greek &pa and the
Latin aro; and the command to rest both
then and at harvest time is a command not to
break the Sabbath rest at the seasons when it
might seem most necessary so to do The
temptation to "save the harvest" is readily
intelligible to Englishmen, To appreciate the
other temptation, we require to know the
peculiar circumstances of the East. It is
necessary there to complete the ploughing
before the spring rains are over. These last
but a short time; and when they are once



past no rain can be looked for till thi

autumn.

Ver. 22.— Of the first-fruits. There is
here an unfortunate ambiguity. The English
reader naturally supposes that three festivals
are mentioned — 1. That of weeks ; 2. That of
the first-fruits of wheat harvest ; and 3, That
of in-gathering. But in reality the feast of
weeks i^ that of the first-fruits of wheat
harvest. See Lev. xxiii. 17; Num. xxviii.
26. The observance of this feast, as well ai
that of the feast of in-gathering, was com-
manded in the " Book of the Covenant " (ch.
xxiii. 16).

Ver. 23. — ^Thrioe in the year. Bepeated
from ch. xxiii. 17.

Ver. 24. — ^I will .... enlarge thy border*.
The original promise to Abraham was to give
to his sjed "the land of Canaan" (Gen. xii.
5 — ^7). Afterwards this promise was enlarged,
and he was told that the land assigned them
was the entire tract between the Nile and the
Euphrates (ib. xv. 18). And practically, they
took possession first of the one, while at a
later date their border was enlarged, and they
became masters of the other. See 1 Kings iv
21, 24 ; 2 Chron. ix. 26. Neither shall any
man desire thy land, etc. This promise is
nowhere else made. It would serve as a great
encouragement to the proper observance al
the festivals.

Ver. 25. — Repeated from ch. xxiii. 18.

Ver. 26. — Repeated from ch. xxiii. 19. It
is remarkable that both legislations terminate
with the same, somewhat strange, proviso.
There must liave been an intention of im-
pressing strongly upon the people the prin-
ciple of tenderness involved in it. (Seettw
comment on ch. xxiii. 19.)



HOMILETICa

Vera. 9—26. — The covenant renewed. That God should have consented to renew the
covenant with Israel after it had been violated so flagrantly is evidence of two things :
1. His faithfulness towards his true followers, which makes him "merciful unto
thousands of those that love him,'' and renders him tender to the children for the sake
of the fathers ; 2. The value that he sets on intercessory praver, when offered earnestly
by a believer. In the renewal itself we may notice : —

I. That the promises now made exceed all those which had been hade to
THE PEOPLE PKEviousLT. Leadership had been promised ; help in driving out the
nation had been promised; the possession of Canaan had been promised. ° But not
" marvels such as had not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation " (ver. 10)— not

an enlargement of the nation's boundaries beyond the limits of Canaan (ver. 24) not

security against their land being invaded when they went up to the three great
festivals (_ibid.). These, so far as the people were concerned, were new and additional
pledges. God is apt " to do exceeding abundantly beyond all that we ask or think."
He ties himself down to perform certain promises ; b\it he does not tie himself down
not to do more than he has promised. He will give to man ultimately, not only mor«
than he is bound to give, but more than " it has entered into the heart of m^ ^
ooDCttve."



OH. xxxiT. 10-29.] THE BOOK OP EXODUS. 371

n. That the prohibitions abb is bomb oases hobs stbikgeiit than befobBi
According to the former covenant, idolatrous inlagea were not to be spared ; according
to this neither images, nor altars, nor groves (ver. 13) ; according to that, the Sabbath
rest was not to be infringed, as a general rule — according to this, not even on account ol
the most necessary operations of husbandry (ver. 21) ; according to that, treaties were not
to be made with the Caaaanitish nations — according to this, neither treaties nor matri-
monial alliances. To balance the greater favours, there were imposed greater obligations^
whereby was inculcated the lesson that the two are correlative.

III. Tub pkecepts reimposed were, in addition to the decalogue, chiefly
THOSE cossEOTED WITH WORSHIP. It was the attraction of a corrupt worship which had
caused Israel to fall away. Their best security against a second similar fall would be
careful and constant observance of the pure worship prescribed to them. If they kept
properly the Sabbath, the great festivals, the laws of sacrifice, of redemption, of first
fruits, and whatever was similar to these, it might well content their religious aspi-
rations, and leave no such vacuum in their lives as they had hoped to fill with their
calf-worship. True, that many of the precepts could not be observed until they reached
Canann ; but, as a compensation, they would have in the wilderness the daily worship —
morning and evening — of the tabernacle, and the near presence of God in the pillar of
the cloud, not henceforth to be withdiawn from them. The true spiritual life could be
amply sustained on these — ^it was only a pseudo-spiritualism that the calf-worBhip
would have exercised.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 10. — " I make a covenant." I. A covenant benewbd. Mark how in con-
nection with this there is — (1) A new command to ascend the mount. (2) A new
command that the mount shall not be touched. (3) A new manifestation of the Divine
glory. Yet how different 1 (4) A new giving of the law. (5) A new rehearsal (in
summary) of the "rights." (li) A new fast of forty days and forty nights.

II. A COVENANT RENEWED ON THE BASIS OP INTERCESSION. We have eVeU fDOn

than this — we have a "shadow of the Cross" (ch. xxxii. 32). Peace made by (1)
mediation, (2) atonement, (3) intercession. The bestowal of the blessing on this
ground — 1. Prevented the people from looking lightly on sin, or from imagining that
God looked lightly on it. 2. Conserved the Divine honour. 3. Gave a higher value
to the gift. 4. Put honour upon Moses. 6. Taught that blessings can be vron from
God by intercession. — J. 0.

Vers. 10 — ^29. — Revived ohligations. Former instructions are renewed ; only, how-
ever, so far as relates to the duties of religion. Renewal of the civil code was not
required. Subject to this limit, the new book of the covenant (ver. 27) revives, sup-
plements, expands, and endorses the teachings and precepts of the old one. We have
in it —

L Promise (vers. 10, 11). God, as on the former occasion (ch. xxiii. 28 — 30),
pledges himself to drive out all their enemies. The work would be — 1. Wonderful—
" Before all the people will I do marvels," etc. 2. Terrible — " For it is a terrible thing
which I will do with thee." Men have passed the same judgment upon it. Gk)d
however, called it terrible before they did. They should remember this when they build
on it an objection to the Bible. God can do terrible things. 3. Thoroiigh. The
extirpation would be complete.

II. Caution (vers. 12 — 18). The Israelites were to beware of being snared into
idolatry. To this end they were — 1. To make ru> leagvs with the Canaanites. " Evil
communications corrupt good manners " (1 Cor. xv. 33). 2. To destroy all signs oj
their idolatrous worship. No good comes of retaining in our midst that which can only
be a snare to us. 3. To avoid intermarriages. " Be ye not unequally yoked togethei
with unbelievers " (2 Cor. vL 14).

m. Command (vers. 18 — 27). The command relates to the three feasts. See formal
Bsmilies.— J. <X



sn



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



foH. xxxiT. 27—81



EXPOSITTON.



Vers. 27 — 35. — Final descent op Moses
fBOM Sdiai. The covenant having been re-
newed, Moses prepared to descend, having first
however received a command to commit to
writing the words of this second covenant (ver.
27). He received back the tables from God,
inscribed with the Ten Commandments, and
after a stay in Sinai of equal duration with
the former one (ver. 28), descended, having
the tables in his hands. He was not aware
that the skin of his face had become radiant
(ver. 29), and first learnt the fact by the
rulers being afraid to come near him (ver. 30).
After conversing with them and with the
people he resolved to " put a vail on his face "
ordinarily, only taking it oft when he " went
in before the Lord " into the " tent of meet-
ing," and when, having received a message
from the Lord to the people, he came out to
deliver it

Ver. 27. — ^Write thou these words. Lite-
rally, " write thee these words " — i.e., " write
them for thyself and for thy people." Acoord-
ing to the tenor of these words have I made
a covenant. That is, " the covenant on my
part is conditional on the observance of these
words on the part of Israel." The " words "
intended are those of vers. 10 — 26.

Ver. 28. — He was there with the Lord
forty days and forty nights. As on the
former occasion (ch. xxiv. 18). The patience
and faith of the people was tested by this
second long delay. Happily, they stood the
test ; and on Moses' final descent from Sinai
the Israelites were found expectant and
obedient (vers. 30 — 32). He did neither eat
bread nor drink water. This was so also on
the former occasion (Deut. ix. 9), though it is
not mentioned in Exodus. The near presence
of God sustained the vital powers and made
food unnecessary. Moses, Elijah (1 Kings
xix. 8), and our Lord have alone accom-
plished a fast of this duration. Modem
parodies are not held by scientific men to
belong to the category of established facts.
He wrote npou the tables. It has been
argued from this expression that Moses wrote
the words on the second tables ; and it would
be natural so to understand the passage, had
nothing else been said on the subject. But in
ver. 1 we are told that " God said, I will write
upon these tables ;" and the same is repeated
im Deut. x. 2. Moreover in Deut. x. 4, it is
distinctly declared " He " (f .«. God) " wrote
CB the tables according to the first writing."
We must therefore regard " he " in this pas-
Mge as meaning "the Lord," which is quite
possible according to the Hebrew idiom.

Ver. 29 — Ibe skis of his face shone while



he talked with him. Bather, " through hit
talking with him." The glory of God, as re-
vealed to Moses on this occasion, caused his
face to become henceforth radiant. Compare
the effect of the transfiguration (Matt. xvii. 2).
The Vulgate wrongly translates karan, " to
shine," as if it were derived from keren, " s
horn" — whence the painters of mediseval
times commonly represent Moses as horned.
St. Paul's words (2 Cor. iii. 7) are conclusive
as to the true meaning.

Ver. 30. — They were afraid. They shrank
from Moses, as if he were more than man.
(Compare Ezek. i. 28 ; Rev. i. 17.) Perhaps
they thought that what they saw was his spirit.

Ver. 31. — Uoses called unto them. Moses
bade them approach — no doubt assured them
that there was no cause for fear (cf . Luke xxiv.
38, 39) — and by his manner and familiar
voice dispelled their fears and re-assured them.
Aaron and all the rulers . . . returned
unto him. Apparently, in their alarm they
had drawn back. Being re-assured, they " re-
turned."

Ver. 32. — All that the lord had spoken.
" All," i.e., " that the Lord had commanded
him to enjoin upon them" — especially the
precepts in vers. 10 — 26 — not all that he had
heard from God m the space of forty days and
forty nights.

Vers. 33— 36.— Till Moces had done speak-
ing with them. The Hebrew text wiU not
bear this rendering. All the ancient versions
(LXX. Vulg. Syr. etc.) and the Targums
agree that the meaning is — " when Moses had
done speaking, he put a veil on his face."
And this agrees with the plain meaning of
vers. 34 and 35, which are to be taken con-
nectedly. Moses first delivered his message
with face unveiled, then he veiled himself,
and thenceforth he wore a veil at all times
except when he sought the Divine presence in
the " tent of meeting " or the tabernacle, and
when he delivered to the people any message
sent them from God by him. He wore the
veil ordinarily to prevent them from being
dazzled. He took it off when he entered the
tabernacle, that the Divine presence might
shine fuUy on him and renew his strength.
He kept it off when he returned, if he had any
message to the people, untU he had delivered
it, in order the more fully to authenticate the
message and shew to the people that it was
from God. Then the children of Israel saw
the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face
shone (ver. 35). Having discharged himself
of the message intrusted to him, he once more
covered himself, and continued veiled until ht
again entered the tabernacle. The only
objection that can be taken to this exegesis ii
derived from 2 Cor. iii. 7—16, which has been
thought to imply that Moses wore the veij
whenever be was in the sight of the peoplei



CH. XXXIV. 29—35.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



37S



Bnt the parage does not really assert any snch
thing It is quite enough for the argument,
that under the old covenant a veil had been
worn to conceal some of its glory. This con-
•ealmeut St. Paul contrasts with the openness



of Christianity (vers. 13, 18) ; while at tiM
same time he argues that it may be viewed as
typical of that blindness and darkness which
was characteristic of the Jewish nation of his
day.



HOMILETICS,

Vers. 29, 30, 35. — The sTiining of Mose^face. This strange phenomenon, one of the
^stinctive marks which most closely assimilate the Jewish with the Christian law-
pver, is well worthy of our attentive consideration.

I. As TO ITS OKioiN. Admission to the Divine presence within the cloud had not,
on the former occasion, left any such visible trace. It cannot, therefore, be ascribed
simply to communion with God for a period of a certain duration. We must endeavour
to see how the second sojourn in Sinai was differentiated from the first, if we would
discover the real cause of the wonder. Now the difference was mainly this : that Moses
in the interval had been severely tried, and had emerged from the trial better, purer,
fitter for close intercourse with the Supreme. He had shown zeal, fervour, promptness,
in checking the revolt against Jehovah ; he had shown a spirit of extraordinary self-
•acrifice in refusing to become the sole male progenitor of a people whom God would
substitute for the existing Israel (ch. xxxii. 10), and in offering himself as an atonement
for the people's sins (ib. 32) ; and he had shown that persistent importunity in kindly
intercession for others (ch. xxxiii. 12 — 16) with which God is especially pleased. Under
these circumstances — ^thus elevated above his former self — he had been admitted, not
only to a second conference of forty days' duration, but also to a special vision — never
vouchsafed to any but him — of the Divine glory {ib. 8 — 28 ; ch. xxxiv. 5, 6). The
radiance that rested on his face is ascribed especially to his long " talk " with God
(ver. 29) ; but we can scarcely doubt that a portion of it was due to the transcendent
vision which passed before him prior to the forty days' conference. The brightness
then shed upon his face increased from day to day during the long and close com-
fcunion — closer now than before, from his greater fitness ; and he, " with open face
beholding the glory of the Lord, was changed into the same image from glory to glory "
(2 Cor. iii. 18), until his countenance was such that it could not be steadfastly beheld
for long ; and he, in mercy to his people, veiled it.

II. As TO ITS EFFECT. 1. Its immediate effect was to alarm. " Aaron and the
elders were afraid to come nigh him." The unknown and unexpected is always fearful
to man ; and this was a novelty which might well startle. What did the sight portend ?
Certainly, an increase of supernatural power. Would this power be used to punish and
avenge? Would the radiance bum like fire, or scathe like the thunder-bolt? They
could not tell. Knowing their own sinfulness, they trembled, conscience making
cowards of them, as it does of us all. And they feared to approach — ^nay, they drew
back — ^perhaps fled. 2. Its after effect was to increase Moses' authority. The glow was
a perpetual credential of his Divine mission. Like the moon, it witnessed, whenever
seen, to the absent sun. Always beheld, whenever Moses had any new orders to give,
it was a sanction to his entire legislation, and caused the laws which were least palatable
to be accepted without resistance. Though it did not prevent partial revolts, it kept
the bulk of the nation faithful to their leader for forty years. Even when they did no*
see the brightness, the veil that hid it showed that it was there. Its presence could
never be forgotten. Moses was exalted by it into a condition half-Divine, half-human ;
and was felt to be marked out by Heaven as the supreme chief of the nation.

III. As TO ITS INTENT. Its intent would seem to have been — 1. To strengthen and
support Moses in his difficult position as leader of a wayward and " stiff-necked" people.
2. To impress the people, and render them more submissive and obedient. (See the
preceding section.) 3. To symbolise the great truth, that by drawing near to God, by
communion with him, we become like him — like him and ever more like ; changing
" from glory to glory ;" reflecting his attributes, as snow-summits reflect the sunset ;
recdvlng from him a real effluence, which shows itself in our lives, in our acts, in our
very features. There is in the countenances of God's most advanced servants a bright-
Dess, a gladness, a beaming radiance, which can come only of long communion with
l^im, <md which is a sensible evidence, to those who "have eyes to see," that they an



«74 THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xxxit. 8S— »

indeed his friends, his favoured ones. The best artists — Penigino, Francia, GafaeU«
Bometime,s, Fra Angelico, Fra Bartolomeo, Bellini, Luini, Basaiti — express this in
their pictures. But it is not a grace that has passed away. The eye that has true
spiritual vision may still see among those who walk the earth faces with such an
unmistakable glow of true piety upon them as marks their owners for God's friends,
Christ's loved ones, souls constant in their communion with him who is " the Light of
the world," and " in whose light we shall see light."

Vers. 33 — 35. — The lymholism of the veil. The veil upon Moses? fitce shrouded
the glory of his countenance from Israel, except at such times as he spake to them the
commands of God. So God himself shrouds his glory from us ordinarily, and only at
rare intervals, when he would impress us most deeply, lifts the veil and lets the bright-
ness flash forth. So Christ, when he came on earth, emptied himself of the glory
which he had with the Father, hid it away, and seldom let it be seen. Tenderness and
compassion for man's weakness is the cause of the concealment in such case. Human
nature, while we are in the flesh, cannot bear the blinding light of Divine glory, any
more than the eye can bear to gaze upon the noonday sun. The veil was thus,
primarily, a token of Moses' love for Israel ; but it was also a token of many other
things besides ; e.g. —

I. Of the darkness and mtstebf w which Divine teijth wab shboudbd
ITNDEB THE MosAicAL DISPENSATION. The Trinity, the Incarnation, the Atonement,
Justification, Sanctification, even Immortality — all the great doctrines which constitute
the heart and kernel of true religion, though in a certain sense contained in Mosaism,
were concealed, hidden away, wrapt in a veil. Men " saw through a glass darkly "
fewer or more of these truths — had, that is, some dim conception of them, but saw none
of them clearly till they were " brought to light " by the Gospel. " Lord, now lettest
thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy
Balvation," said holy Simeon, when he looked upon the Lord, then first having made
plain to him what had been darkness and cloud previously. Much of the Divine
scheme of man's salvation had been a mystery even to angels until it was revealed to
them by and through the Church (Eph. iii. 4 — 10). When Christ came, and lived,
and preached, " the people which sat in darkness saw great light, and to them which
sat in the region and shadow of death light sprang up" (Matt. iv. 16). A solemn
thought to Christians that this is so ; for responsibility is in proportion to the light
vouchsafed. " He that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three
witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy who hath
trodden under foot the Son of God ? " (Heb. x. 28, 29).

II. Of the blindness which lies permanently upon the HEARTS AND MINDS

or THE Jews. The veil of obstinate unbelief has so shrouded, and stiU so shrouds, the
intelligence of the race, that, though Moses is read to them every Sabbath day, and the
words of the prophets are continually sounded in their ears, they cannot see or under-
stand. Still they remain " fools and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have
spoken " (Luke xxiv. 25). Like the Ethiopian eunuch, they " imderstand not what
they read " (Acts viii. 31) ; but, unlike him, they will not accept guidance. " The veil
is upon their heart" (2 Cor. iii. 15). Christians should ever pray that the time may
come, and come speedily, when " the veil shall be taken away " (fo. 16), and so " all
Israel be saved" (Bom. xi. 20). Hopeless as the task seems, Christians should still
labour for the conversion of the eight millions of Jews dispersed throughout the world.
Christians should beware lest they themselves, by their sinful lives, intensify and
prolong the blindness of Israel, pressing the veil down upon the brows that otherwise
might have cast it off, and dimming the brightness of the Gospel of Christ that
otherwise might have pierced through the veil's folds, and have given sight to the
shrouded eyes.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 29 — 85. — The shining face. Consider —

I. The SHINING OP Moses' face (vers. 29, 80). (1) A result of personal communiofc.
(2) A symbol of the glory of his dispensation (2 Cor. iii. 7). (3) A foreshadowiav of 'im



OB. zxziT. 29— 3&] THE BOOS OF EXODtTS. 8Ti

transfiguration (Matt. xvii. 1 — 8). (4) Partly a consequence of inward mental exalta-
tion (rf. Acts vi. 15). Communion with God, vision of Jesus, the joy of salvation,
fulness of spiritual life, make both face and character to shine (of. 2 Cor. iii. 18).

II. The fear of the people (ver. 30). The beauty of the glory had something of
terror in it. Symbol of the dispensation — " a ministration of death" (2 Cor. iii. 7). See
sermon by Dr. John Ker on Moses and Stephen — " The Old Testament and the New"
(" Sermons," p. 170).

III. The veh, (vers. 31 — 33). The notable fact is that Moses did not veil his &ce
during the time when veiling might seem to be most required, viz., while speaking to
the people. The commandments were delivered with the face unveiled. When he
had " done " speaking, Moses put this screen before it. The act, therefore, must be taken
as symbolic. A symbol — 1. Of the veiled character of the dispensation — types,
carnal ordinances, " broken lights," etc. Its " end" was not manifest. 2. Of the veiled
hearts of the people. This kept them from perceiving even what might have been seen
(ci. 2 Cor. iii. 12—18). The Gospel, in contrast with the law, is an unveiled system
(2 Cor. iii. 14). Preachers of the gospel, bearing this in mind, should use " great plain-
ness of speech" (vers. 11, 12). The later system provides further for the removal of
the veil from the heart (vers. 16, 17). It ministers " the Spirit."

IV. The veil taken off on entebino the sanotuaet (vers. 34, 35). "When
Moses went in before the Lord," etc. Again symbolic — 1. Of what is necessary for the
removal of the veil from the heart. It must " turn to the Lord " (2 Cor. iii. 16). The
instant it does so the veil will be taken away (ver. 10). 2. Of the privilege of Christian
believers. They are admitted to gaze " with unveiled face " on the " glory of the Lord "
(ver. 18).

V. Eesemblanoks and contrasts. Compare and contrast the privilege of Moses with
that now enjoyed by believers in Christ (2 Cor. iii. 18). 1. Resemblances. (1) Both
have a vision of the divine glory. (2) Both are admitted to gaze upon it with face
"unveiled." (3) On both the vision exercises a transforming influence. (4) Both
must " go in" to the divine presence in order to obtain it. 2. Contrasts. (1) It is a
higher glory which is revealed in Christ. (2) That, the privilege of one man ; this, the
privilege of all — " we all." (3) That, an external transfiguration ; this, spirituaL
(4) TlSit, a transitory glory; this, permanent and progressive. "From glory to
glory."— J. 0.

Vers. 29 — 35. — Tlie shining of Motes' face, L The phenomenon itself. The skin
of Moses' face shone. As to the precise manner of this shining, it is of course vain to
speculate ; but we may be tolerably certain it was not anything in the way of a mere
teflcction from a mirror. It must surely have been the shining out for a little while of
some glorious gift which had entered, if one may say so, into the bodily constitution of
Moses. There may be some connection of this glory with the miraculous sustaining of
his life without the eating of bread, or the drinking of water. Thus we are led
to consider what wondrous capabilities there may be in matter, capabilities beyond our
present knowledge to conceive. Even with unorganised matter, man himself has been
able to do much. And the Ood of the physical universe has shown us how many
wonders, beauties, and enjoyments rise out of matter under the power of vital action.
Think of all that is exquisite in form, colour, and fragrance in plant-life. Think of the
refinement which distinguishes the face of a cultivated man from that of some embruted
savage. Think of that best of all charms visible in the face of one who is truly good.
Then think, on the other side, of the degradations of matter. Think of the physical
results of sottishness and sensuality. Think of the putrescence and corruption which
seem to dominate a body when its principle of life has passed away. We shall then feel
how, beyond anything we can at present conceive, there may be on the one hand an
exaltation of matter, and on the other a degradation of it.

II. The unconsoiousness of Moses. He wist not that the skin of his face shone in
this way. Of some change within him during the time when he was with God in the
mount, he was doubtless conscious. He may have felt himself getting a clearer view oi
Jehovah's purposes, and a heartier fellow-feeling with respect to them. He may have
felt himself conscious of a remarkable approach to inward holiness and purity ; but oi
tUs outward and visible expression of it he knew nothing at alL That which «m



Zn THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xxxir. 2«— 35.

Intolerable to his deeply-polluted brethren, so much alienated in heart from God, wag
utterly unperceived by him. Thus effectually separated from his brethren, the separa-
tion came from no pretension of his own, but from an inevitable confession made by
those who once and again tried to repudiate him. He who is filled with the spirit of
God becomes more glorious than he can imagine. And from those who live near to
God, we may be sure there goes out an influence, which, though they themselves be
utterly unconscious of it, is yet most mighty in its effect on others. As Moses came
down from the mountain, he would be anxiously thinking how he could convey to the
people some sense of that which he himself had been privileged to see. He may have
despaired of putting into words the impression made on his mind ; but now behold God
has taken the matter into his own hands. When we take care to keep right Oodwardi,
QtoA. will take care that we are kept right and powerful Tnanwards. Our greatest im-
pression upon men is to be made, not by that which we are labouring to achieve, but
by that which we achieve unconsciously, when we become as much as possible mere
instruments of the wisdom and power coming from above.

III. The conduct op the people. It is not made clear as to whether the people
were unable to gaze upon the splendour of Moses' face through the excess of light
which radiated thence, or whether they were filled with superstitious terror because one
who hitherto had looked but as themselves had become so changed in appearance.
Probably the latter way of accounting for their conduct comes nearest to the truth.
They were afraid of Moses, much as the disciples were of Jesus when they saw him
walking on the lake and thought it was an apparition. Hence we have another instance
of how men, whom God made to be so near to him, yet through their alienation from
him, and constant immersion in earthly concerns, start back when there is some over-
whelming manifestation of the unearthly and the divine. Presence of mind is lost just
when presence of mind would be most helpful. Moses put on the veil in necessary
toleration of human weakness ; but we should always read of such necessities with a
feeling of humiliatioru In only too many things these ungodly Israelites are our repre-
sentatives. God, who is our benefactor, cannot reveal himself in all his glory, because
of our weakness. When God honoured and enriched the mediator Moses by putting a
divine splendour into his countenance, as he came down among men with the laws of a
holy and a happy life, this very splendour became a cause of abject terror rather than of
confidence and gladness. Yet when the final Mediator came, full of grace and truth,
men rushed to the other extreme. They could see no divinity and authority, and in
their contempt and presumption, put the Mediator to death. It is very difficult for
men to make a right estimate of the outward shows of things. — T.

Vers. 28—36. — FeUowsTiip with Ood and its fruits. I. Communion with God.

1. The length of his sojourn — forty days and forty nights. Time sped unmarked in
the presence and fellowship of God. The future glory an untiring joy. The redeemed
serve him day and night in his temple. 2. Lower wants were forgotten: "he did
neither eat bread nor drink water." The need of the body was unfqlt in the satisfying
of the desires of the spirit. " In thy presence is fulness of joy." To escape from
temptation we have only to enter into the presence of God and to let the eye rest upon
his glory.

n. Mas oiiOBiFiBD through communion. 1. The descent of Moses, radiant with
ihe glory of God, the type of Jesus in his coming again the second time without sin
unto salvation. 2. A prophecy of the after glory of them who believe. " They that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness as the stars for ever and ever." " We shall be like him, for we shall see
him as he is." 3. An example of the present glory of those who have fellowship with
him who is light. We are " light in the Lord." 4. Its effect upon the worldly and the
sioful. They were afraid to come nigh. It awakens conscience. It proves the reality
of the Unseen. It reveals the distance between the soul and God.

m. The veilino op Moses' face. He was unconscious of the glory: "he wist not
that his face shone." The vision of God is ever accompanied with lowly self-judgment.

2. It was not worn ostentatiously. We may not boast of our nearness to God. Vanity
in the Divine life is an impossibility. 3. The glory was veiled in ao cordance with the
diqienBation which alone these men were able to receiveu The whole law with its tyiM



UH. ZZZT. 1—8.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



ST7



and shadows was a veiling of the sun of righteousness, and the redemption glory. Wi
must meet men where they are that they may be led to God. The Apostle who spoke
" wisdom among them that were perfect" knew how to give milk also to babes in Christ
•nd to speak to tho carnal. — U.

Ver. 29. — Moses wist not that the skin of Ms face shone while he talked with Mm, —
His face "shone" — literally, " shot out rays"— ^as we say, was irradiated, became
radiant. Notice: I. The cause of the phenomenon. "Talked with him." Self
had been forgotten in communion with Jehovah, in hearing him and attending to his
utterances. It is from such communion as this that the radiant countenance results.
1. What the communion is. God a Spirit. Communion must be spiritual. The fleshly
face cannot directly reflect spiritual light, that light " which never was on sea or land."
Spirit is kindled by spirit, the human by the Divine, when spirit meets with spirit and
realizes the sjrmpathy which exists between them. 2. What the communion does. The
illuminated spirit, reflecting God, kindled into brilliancy by his light, cannot but shine
out through the fleshly envelope which shrouds it. [Illustration : As opaque porcelain
shade to lamp, so is the body to the spirit ; light the lamp, illmninate the spirit, and the
shade, in either case, becomes radiant.] If you would have a happy face, a radiant
countenance, you must first have an illuminated spirit. That can only be gained from
the Fount of Ught in and through communion with God.

II. Unconsciousness or the subject op the phenomenon. " Wist not." His face
was radiant, but Moses knew nothing of it. His mind was so full of God that his atten-
tion was drawn off from all thought of his appearance. Notice : 1. All sincerity forgets
egotism (P. W. Eobertson). Attention is a fixed quantity ; to fix it on God is to draw
it off from self [of. a look on a river ; open the fiood-gatea of communion and the level of
self-love is soon lowered]. 2. Radiancy cannot he obtained hy trying for it. If aim in
prayer is to increase self-glory, it cannot succeed. God first ; God all in all ; then comes
the illumination, and the light flows forth. Self lost in God [cf. wick saturated with
oil] before we can ray out the light of God. How many selfish prayers are offered, and
the countenances of those who offer them are often anything but radiant I The puri-
tanical cast of countenance repels by its gloom rather than by its brilliancy. The best
prayer is that which rises from communion ; which seeks first, as in Christ's model prayer,
that G«d's name may be hallowed, and his kingdom come, and his will be done, before
going on further to seek satisfaction for personal needs.

C<mdusi(m. — Do you want to have a radiant face? The best way is not to think
•bout it. Lose self, as Moses did, in communion with God ; then your face will b*
radiant, though you know it not. — G.



SECTION XVII.-CHAPTEES XXXV.— XL.
The Conbtbuction and UpREAKiNa or the Tabebnaolk.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XXXV.



V«i». 1 — 3. — Itebation 0» TEI tAW COM-
oebniho the sabbath. The work comnmnded
daring the time of Moses' first stay npon Sinai
(ch. zzv. — xxxi.), and hindered first by the
infraction (ch. zxxii.), and then by the re-
newal (chs. xxxiii., xxxiv.) of the covenant, was
now abont to commence nnder the direction
of Moses, who alone knew what was to be
eonstmcted. Before giving his orders npon
the matter, he assembled the people (ver. 1}



and once more recited to them in ■ solemn
manner the law of the sabbath (ver. 2), add-
ing to the general law a special injunction
concerning the kindling of fire (ver. 3), which
may have been required by some recent
breach of the law in this respect. The ite-
ration of a command, aheadj so often en-
joined upon the people (ch. xvi. 23 — 30;
XX. 8 — 11 ; xxiii. 12; xxxi. 13 — 17), is best
accounted for by the consideration, that a
caution was needed, lest the people, in theii
leal to hnny on the work of the tabenude,



378



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



[oh. xxrr, 1— S.



and regarding that work as « sacred one, and
■o exceptional, might be tempted to infrac-
tions of the law, or even to an entire neglect
of it, while the work was in progress.

Ver. 1. — ^All the congregation. All the
Israelites were to be aEowed the privilege of
making offerings for the tabernacle (ch. xxt.
2 — 7), and all who were competent might
take part in the spinning and the weaving of
the materials for the curtains and the holj
vestments (chs. xxviii. 3; xxxv. 10, 25;
xxxvi. 4, etc.). All therefore had to be sxmi-
moned, to learn what was required. These
are the words, etc. — »'.«., " These are the in-
junctions especially laid upon you at this
time."

Ver. 2 is almost a repetition of ch. xxxi. 15.

Ver. 3.— Ye shall kindle no fire. The
kindling of fire io early times involved con-



siderable labour. It was ordinarily affected
by rubbing two sticks together, or twisting
one round rapidly between the two palms in
a depression upon a hoard. Fire only came
after a long time. Moreover, sa in the
warm climate of Arabia and Palestine arti-
ficial warmth was not needed, fire could only
have been kindled there for cooking purposes,
which involved further unnecessary work, and
had already been forbidden (ch, xvi 23).
The Karaite Jews stUl maintain the obser-
vance of this precept to the letter, even in
cold climates, as in that of the Crimea, and
allow neither fire nor light in their honsea
on the sabbath day ; but the Jews generally
view the precept as having had only a tem-
porary force, and have lights and fires, like
other persons, even in Palestine. Strict Jewi,
however, still cook no food on the sabbath
day



H0MILETIC3.

Vers. 1, 2. — 7%e sablath rest not to he broken even for sacred work. Note here •
difference. Some work is rendered necessary by the very nature of that public worship
which is especially commanded on the sabbath. " On the sabbath days the priests in
the temple," says our Lord, " profane the sabbath day and are blameless " (Matt. xii. 5).
Offering sacrifice was a heavy work — cleansing the altar and its precincts after sacrifice
was perhaps a heavier one — reading aloud, teaching, preaching are works, the last-named
to many a most exhausting work. Against such kinds of work there is no law. But
physical toil, not needed for Divine worship, and so not necessary to be undergone
on the sabbath day, stands on a different footing, and was forbidden, at any rate to
the Jews. The spinning, weaving, dying, embroidering, carpentering, metallurgy,
which occupied hundreds during the rest of the week, were to cease upon the sabbath.
Men were not to consider that the fact of the purpose whereto the fabrics were about to
be applied so sanctified the making of them as to render that a fit occupation for the
" day of holy rest "—of " rest to the Lord."

Application. — Christians will do well to apply the lesson to themselves, and not allow
themselves in occupations, on their " day of holy rest," which are really secular, be-
cause it may be argued that they have, in some respects, a sacred aspect. To play sacred
music, for the excitation of devotional feelings in themselves and others, is a fitting
Sunday occupation ; but to practise Handel as an exercise, for the acquirement of skill
in execution, would be no better than to practise Eossini or Auber. To write articles
for the press on Sundays, if otherwise wrong, is not justified by the fact that they are
written for a "religious" newspaper. To cast up accounts does not become a right act
because they are the accounts of a charity. Whatever our rule of Sunday observance,
let us beware of evading it under the excuse that our employment has a connection with
leligion when it is essentially secular in its character.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1 - 4:.—7Tie new start. Moses' second absence, though, like the first, it lasted
forty days and forty nights (ch. xxxiv. 28), was not followed by the same disastrous
effects as the former one. The people had meantime had enough of " gods of gold." They
were too frightened at what had happened to think of seeking out any more " inventions "
(Eccles. vii. 29). They were penitent and weU disposed. When at length the newi
came that God had forgiven them, no bounds could be set to their zeal for service
Learn— 1. How God brings good out of evil. The Divine physician so treated the
^stemper of the people that it ended, not simply in restored health, but in increased
ntelity tad energy. The lapse into sin was made the means of imparting to the



OH. xzxT. 4—20.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



37*



people the stimulus necessary for the erection of the tabernacle. 2.' That revival of
religion evinces its reality by the eflects which it produces. (1) Willingness to hear.
" I will hear what God the Lord will speak " (Ps. Ixxxv. 8). Ilappy would it have
been for Israel had it not " turned again to felly." (2) Willingness to give. Liberality
in the Lord's service. (3) Willingness to work. The joy of salvation cannot better
spend itself than in the doing of the work of the Lord's kingdom. Willing hearts,
ready hands. On the injunction to keep the sabbath, see Homily on ch. xxxi. 12 — 18
-J.O.



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 4 — 20. — The people invited to BRma

GIPTS, AND ASSIST IN THE WOHK OP THE TaBBB-

NAOLE. Having warned the Israelites against
breaches of the sabbath, Moses proceeded to
enamerate the offerings which God had said
that they might bring (vers. 4 — 9), and the
works which he had required to be con-
structed (vers. 10 — 19). In the former enume-
ration, he follows exactly the order and word-
ing of the Divine command to himself, as
recorded in ch. xxv. S — 7; in the latter, he
changes the order, mentioning first the build-
ing, with its component parts (ver. 11), then
the contents of the bnilding (vers. 12 — 15),
then the court with its contents (vera. 16, 17)
together with some details which had been
omitted in the former account (ver. 18), and
finally the holy garments (ver 19). After
hearing him, the people returned to their
several tents (ver. 20).

Vers. 5 — 10 correspond to vers. 2 — 7 of ch.
XXV., the correspondence in the list of offer-
ings being exact.

Ver. 11. — On the tabemaole, see ch. xxvi.
1 — 6 : on the teat, Ot 7 — 18 ; on the oover-



ing, i6. 14; the boards, ib. 15—25; the bars,
a. 26—29 ; the piUars. Hi. 32—37; and the
sockets, ib. 19, 21, 25, 82, and 37. The
enumeration comprises all the main parts of
which the tabernacle consisted.

Ver. 12. — On the ark and the staves there-
of, see ch. xxv. 10 — 15 ; on the mercy-seat,
tb. 17 — 22 ; on the vail of the covering, see
ch. xxvi. 31.

Ver. 13. — On the table and its appurte-
nances, see ch. xxv. 23 — 30.

Ver. 14. — For the candlestiok, its ftimi-
tnre, and its lamps, compare ch. xxv. 31 — 39.

Ver. 15. — The incense altar. See ch. xxx.
1 — 10. His staves. See ch. xxx. 5. The
anointing oil is described in the same chapter,
vers. 23 — 25 ; the sweet incense in vers. 34, 35 ;
the hangings for the door in ch. xxvi. 36.

Ver. 16 is a reference to ch. xxvii. 1 — 8,
ch. xxx. 18—21. Ver. 17 to ch. xxvii. 9—18.

Ver. 18. — The pins of the tabernacle and
the oonrt had not been previously mentioned.
They must be regarded as tent-pegs, whereto
were attached the oords which kept taut the
covering of the tent over the tabernacle, and
which steadied the pillars whereto the hang-
ings of the court were fastened.

Ver. 19.— The oloths of servio* Sm tba
comment on ch. zxxi. 10



H0MILETIC8.

On the symbolism of the Tabernacle and its parts, see the Homiletics on ch. xxv.
10 — 39 ; ch. xxvi. ; ch. xxvii. 1 — 8 ; and ch. xxx. 1 — 10. On the symbolism of the
anointing oil and the holy incense, see the Homiletics on ch. xxx. 23 — 28.

Vers. 6 — 19. — The duty and privilege of making offerings to Ood. That God allows
us to offer to him of his own, and accepts such offerings as free gifts, is one of his many
gracious condescensions. It is the part of all ministers to give opportunity for such
offerings — ^to encourage them, suggest them, elicit them. Moses now summoned " all
the congregation of the children of Israel," that he might give to all, without partiality
or favouritism, the opportunity for a good action, which would obtain its due reward.
Doubtless he pointed out that the object was one for the glory of God and the edification
of his people — ^no less an object than the substitution for that poor " tent of meeting,"
which he had extemporised on the morrow of his first descent from Sinai (ch. xxxiii. 7),
of a glorious structure, of the richest materials, designed by God himself, worthy of him,
and suited to intensify and spiritualise the devotions of all worshippers. It was fit that
the structure should, if possible, be raised by means of the free gifts of the faithfiil. Poi
this Moses now, like a faithful minister of Christ, made appeal to all. In doing so, he
pointed out the two modes in which such offerings may be made.

I. OFTBRINOa HAT BB MADB BT THB ABSiaNMENT TO A SACKED USB OF A FOBTIOS 01

OVB BUB8TAN0B. All wbo had gold, silver, brass, blue, purple, scarlet, flnfl linen, goat'i



880 THE BOOK OF EXODUS. [ch. xxiv. 4—20.

hair, etc., were invited to contribute out of their abundance to the erection of the new
sanctuary. It was especially urged that, if they did so, it should be with "a willing
heart "(ver. 1) — "not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loveth a cheerful giver"
(2 Cor. ix. 7). Such a mode of offering is open to those only who have property of some
kind or other, and is especially suited to the rich and well-to-do classes ; and it was no
doubt the wealthy who at this time chiefly contributed in this way. But, as Grod is
" no respecter of persons," and regards the poor and needy fully as much as those who
are of high estate, some further mode of making him an offering is necessary. Note, in
this connection, that —

II. Offerings mat be hade bt the devotion to a bached use of some portion of
CUB TIME AND LABOUR. " Every wise-hearted among you shall come, and make all that
the Lord hath commanded" (ver. 10). All who had sufficient skill were invited to join
in the actual work of preparing and making the various fabrics. Carpenters, weavers,
dyers, smiths, embroiderers, metallurgists, might contribute their time and work, and bo
make an offering to God as acceptable as that of the gold or jewels of the wealthy. Even
poor women, whose only skill was to spin thread with their hands (ver. 25), might
" bring that which they had spun," and were accepted as offering worthily. In this way
there were few families that might not have their part in the work, for spinning was a
wide-spread accomplishment. And so, in our own day, whenever any good work is
taken in hand, it will always be found that every one who wills can have some part in
it — can help, by headwork or by handiwork, to effect the end desu'ed. And the value
of such participation is quite equal to that rendered by rich contributors, at any rate, in
the sight of God. For observe, the women who spun goat's hair are placed side by side
with the " rulers " who " brought onyx stones," and costly spices, and jewels to be set
in the high-priest's breastplate (vers. 26 — 28).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTUOES.

Ver. 4 — ch. xxxvi. 8. — Oi/ts and worJceri, Learn from this section that the Lord's
work requires —

I. Liberal oivers. Almost everything needed for the sanctuary was provided by the
free gifts of the people. What was required was readily forthcoming. The only exception
to the voluntariness of the givings was the half-shekel of atonement money (chs. xxx.
11 — 17 ; xxxviii. 25, 26). These givings, which may well be made the model of our
own, were : 1. Willing — " Every one whose heart stirred him up, and whom his spirit
made willing" (ybt. 21). The Lord " loveth a cheerful giver" (2 Cor. ix. 7). 2. Ac-
cording to ability. Each gave as he was able (vers. 23 — 29). The princes gave costly
gifts. Others brought silver and brass. Others gave wood. Those who could not give
anything else gave work fvers. 25, 26). 3. Universal. All classes gave. The princes,
the people, young and old, men and women. 4. Overflowing. So zealous was the
spirit of the people, and so abundant were their gifts, that they had in the end to be
restrained (ch. xxxvi. 5 — 7). When will a like liberality be manifested in the cause of
Christ? Liberal givings are needed. There is still much land to be possessed at home.
Heathen lands are opening to the Gospel. 5. It sufiiced for the work (ch. xxxvi. 7).
Thus would God teach us that it is his wUl that his work should be supported by the
voluntary contributions of his people. 6. The giving was made an act of worship —
" Every man that offered, offered an offering (lit. a i«awe-offering) of gold unto the Lord"
(ver. 22). " Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the Lord's
offering " (ver. 24). This is the true spirit of religious giving. The humblest offering,
thus presented, will not fail of acceptance. Cf. the widow with her two mites CMark
xii. 41^4). ^

II. Willing workers (ch. xxxvi. 1, 2). The work, like the giving, was hearty.
Those only were asked to engage in this work whose hearts stirred them up to do it.
God desires no other kind of workers.

III. DrvEBSB GIFTS. These were needed for the different parts of the work. The man
who made the " pin" (ver. 18) was as truly a worker in God's service, as Bezaleel, who
drew the plans. He had his own gift, and use.

IV. The wisdom of the spirit. " He hath filled him with the spirit of Qod" (ver
81> " Them hath he filled with wisdom of heart," etc (ver. 35).— J. Ol



OB. xxxT. 21—29.]



XHB BOOK OF EXODUa



lei



EXPOSITION.



Vera. 21 — ^29 — Thb zbal o? the people m
armtstsa. Moses dismissed the people ; but
the^ soon began to retom, blinking their
offerings with them. There was a general,
if no^ a universal, willingnesn Men and
women alike " brought braceletn ("brooches ?).
and earrings, and rings, and armlets — all
articles of gold," and offered them to the
Lord (ver. 22). Others brought blue and
purple and scarlet and fine linen, and goats'
hair and rams' skins dyed red, and badger (or
rather, seal) skins (ver. 23). Silver and bronze
and shittimwood were contributed by others
(ver. 24). The women, who were the only
spinners, brought their spun yarn of blue
and purple and scarlet and fine linen, and
their yam of goats' hair (vers. 2S, 26) ; while
the richest class of all — " the rulers " — gave,
as their contribution, the onyx stones for the
ephod, the jewels for the high-priest's breast-
plate, and the oil needed for the light, to-
gether with rare spices for the anointing
ointment and the incense (vers. 27, 28).
Subsequently, we are told that what was
contributed was " much more than enough "
(ch. xxxvi. 5), and that the people had to be
*' restrained from bringing " (ibid. 6).

Ver. 21. — The lord's offering — I'.e., "their
offering to Jehovah." For all his service.
The use of " his " for " its " causes an unfor-
tunate ambiguity here. The antecedent to
the pronoun is not the Lord, but the taber-
nacle.

Yer. 22. — They came, both men and
women. That among the Hebrews gold
ornaments were worn by men, as well as by
women, is indicated by ch. iii. 22, and cb.
xxxii. 2. The Egyptian men at the time of the
Exodus wore armlets, bracelets, and some-
times anklets, but not often earrings Earrings,
however, had been worn by the household of



Jacob (Gen. xxxT. 2). BraoelatB. Bather,
"buckles" or "brooches." Kalisch says,
"nose-rings," and so Gesenius and Rosen-
miiUer. Tablets. Bather, " armlets " (Furst,
Cook), or perhaps " necklaces " (Gesenius
Kalisch, Knobel). Every man that offered,
offered an offering of gold. It is not meant
that every man who offered anything gave
with it an offering of gold, but simply that,
besides those who brought the articles named
there were otherd who brought gold offerings
of some different kind.

Ver. 23. — ^Bed skins of rams. The worda
are the same as those translated " rams' skina
dyed red " In ch. xxv. 5. The earlier render-
ing is the better one. Badger skins. Bather,
"seal skins," See the comment on ch.
xxv. 5.

Ver. 24. — Every one that did offer aa
offering of silver. It would seem that silver
was offered by some in the way of a free-wil'
offering, in addition to the compulsory half-
shekel (ch. XXX. 12 — 16). Curiously, how-
ever, the amount obtained in this way is not
given in ch. xxxviij. 24 — 29.

Ver. 25. — AU the women that were wiaa-
hearted — i.e., " skilful." See the comment
'on ch. xxviii. 3. Brought that which they
had spun, both of bine, et«. The flax itself
was dyed, so that the thread produced waa
already coloured. Of fine linen — i.«. " white."
All the threads were flaxen.

Ver. 26. — All the women whose heart
stirred them up in wisdom. This strong
expression seems to imply that peculiar skifl
was required for spinning goats' hair.

Vers. 27, 28. — ^The rulers are, no doubt,
the " elders " of ch. iii. 16 ; iv. 29 ; xxiv. 9,
etc. Moses had made them " rulers," or
rather, "princes" (earey), according to the
advice of Jethro (ch. xviii. 25). They
brought onyx stones for the ephod (ch. xxviii.
9 — 12) and stones to be set, — i.e., gems for the
breastplate (iMd. 17 — 20) ; oil of olive for the
lamp (ch. xxvii. 20) and the holy ointment
(ch. xxix. 24), and spice for the same (JSM,
23, 24) and for the incense (fttid. 34).



HOMILETICa

Vers. 21 — ^29. — ZeoH in offering. Appeals are made to men, In all parts of the world,

and in all ages, for material contributions towards the erection of structures in which
God is to be worshipped. The spirit in which such appeals are met varies. (1) Occa-
sionally, they are met in a scoffing spirit. "What, your God needs a house, and
cannot build one for himself I He must beg contributions, put out a subscription list I
And for what ? To make a huge building, which will be of no practical use — ^not a
school, not a hospital, not a corn-exchange, but a Church I Catch us giving anything 1 "
Or (2) it is met in a grudging spirit. "Why is so much required? What needia
there tor so large a building, oi for such rich om»meut, or for such arcMteotural dia-



882



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[oh. xixv. 30 — 35.



play ?" And the general inclination is <o give as little as it is decent to give. Or (3)
It is met in a fussy spirit. " Let the matter be well considered — let meetings be held —
let a committee be formed — let our advice be taken. If we give, we must be con-
■ulted — we must have a voice in the arrangements — we must examine the plans and
express our opinion upon them. Then perhaps we may head the subscription-list with
something handsome." Very different was the spirit which now animated the Israelites,
and which is here held up for our imitation. Their response to the appeal made to
them by Moses was —

I. Devout. None objected. None asked why a tabernacle was wanted, or why the
tent which Moses had made a place of worship would not suffice. None scoffed at the
idea of a " House of God." All seemed to see the propriety of it. All felt that what
they brought was "the Lord's offering" (vers. 21, 24)— a real gift to Jehovah. All
longed to have a place of worship of a worthy character.

II. Ungbudoinq and spontaneous. Their " hearts stirred them up," their " spirita
made them willing" (ver. 21). They "brought a willing offering unto the Lord"
(ver. 29). The rich brought jewels and precious spices ; the men and women of the
middle class brought their personal ornaments ; the poor men gave brass, or silver, or a
ram's skin, or a piece of acacia wood ; the poor women gave the labour of their hands,
and spun thread for the hangings. There was no murmuring, no complaining, no
fabrication of excuses — so far as appears, no open refusing to give, though there was
some abstention.

in. Immediate. In one verse we read "they departed" (ver. 20), in the next
(ver. 21) " they came." There was no delay, no considering, no discussing one with
another, no asking " How much do you intend to give ? " Each man seemed to be well
persuaded of the truth of the adage — " Bis dat qui cito dat," and brought his offering
at once. '

IV. Unselfish and unconditional. No one wanted to have a quid pro quo as the
condition of his giving. No one asked to •" see the plans." All were willing to leave
the ordering of the work to Moses, and put their contributions absolutely in his hands.
A spirit of enthusiasm was stirred up, and none thought of anything but how much he
could possibly spare for the grand work which they understood Moses to contemplate.
The wealth of Easterns is stored chiefly in the form of ornaments, and to denude them-
lelves of these was a great effort of self-sacrifice.



EXPOSITION.



Vera. SO — 35. — The appointment op Be-

lALEEL AND AlIOLIAB TO SUPERINTEND THE

WOBK. Though, in some real sense, " learned in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians," still Moses
was probably devoid of the technical knowledge
requisite for a " superintendent of the works "
on the present occasion. At any rate, his
other duties imperatively required that he
should decline to undertake, in addition to
them, so onerous an office. And God had told
him whom it would be best for him to set
over the work (ch. xxxi. 1 — 6). Accordingly,
be now made known to the people that the
eonstruction of the tabernacle and its appur-
tenances would be committed to two men

Bezaleel, the son of Uri, as principal, and
Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, as his assist-
ant — who would " teach " those under them
what they were to do (ver. 3-1)
Ver SO —The Lord hath called, etc See



en. xxxi. 2: — "1 have called by name Beza-
leel," etc. Of the tribe of Jndah. The de-
scent of Bezaleel from Judah has been already
traced. (See the comment on ch. xxxi. 2.)

Vers. 31 — S3 — Correspond almost word for
word with vers. S — 5 of ch. xxxi., q. vide.

Ver. 34. — And he hath put in his heart
that he may teaoh. Bather, " And he hath
put it into his heart to teach." He (God) has
given him the gift of being able to teach
others, and so has enabled him to form a body
of workmen competent to carry out his con-
ceptions. Both he and Aholiab. Ood has
given the same gift to AhoUab. On the
special talent of Ahohab, see the comment
upon ch. xxxi. 6.

Ver. 35.— Them hath he filled with wisdom
of heart— i.e., " with talent or genius." 01
the engraver. Rather, " of the artificer," »
general term, under which working in metal,
gem-engraving, and wood-carving are in-
cluded. And of the onnning workman. Ba-
ther, "and of the tkiljul weaver." Thk
clause seems to apply to Aholiab (eb xsxri)



cH. xxxT. 30—36.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



88S



23), the preceding one to Bezaleel. And of
the embroiderer. This also applies '.c Aho-
liab (l.s.c). And of the weaver — i.e., " the
ordinary weaver," vpho wove a cloth all of one
colour. The "skilful weaver" produced a
patterned fabric. (See ch. xxvi. 1.) The
methods of working here spoken of are, all of
them, such as were well known in Egypt at
the time, and which, consequently it would



have been qnite natural for some of the Israel-
ites to have learnt. We are not to supposs
that God snpematurally communicated to
Bezaleel and Aholiah the technical knowledge
required in their occupations, but only that
he gave thorn genius and artistic skill, so that
both their designs, and their execution of
them, were of unusual excellence.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 30 — 35. — ^Masteb-cbaftsmbn. The qualities needed for a master-craftsman
are fourfold. These are here enumerated (ver. 31) as —

I. Wisdom (Heb. khdkam ; LXX. a-o<f>ia ; Vulg. sapientia), the highest gift of all —
the power of original conception, which, if he combines with it the other necessary
qualities, makes the true artist, the master-workman, in whatsoever branch of art his
work may lie. This is appropriately placed first as the most necessary quality for
those who are to direct a great construction of an artistic character.

II. Undebstandinq (Heb. tdban ; LXX. trivea-is ; Vulg. intelUgentia), a desirable, but
very inferior quality, consisting in the power of appreciating the work of others, and
estimating it aright. This power is needed in master-craftsmen, to qualify them for
passing judgment on the work produced by those under their direction.

III. Knowledge (Heb. ydda' ; LXX. tWior^/ii; ; Vulg. scientia), or acquaintance
with the laws and facts of science bearing on their art. In the present case, acquaintance
with such things as elementary mechanics, the method of cutting hard stones, the
process of dyeing, the best mode of working different metals, and the like. An inferior
quality this, which the master-craftsman should not lack, but which will avail him
little without the higher excellences.

IV. Wobkmanship (Heb. m'lakah ; LXX. apxireKTovla ; Vulg. doctrina), or power of
execution, next to genius the most necessary quality of the artist, and accepted to a
large extent in lieu of genius, as placing a man high in the artistic scale. This
excellence does not consist in mere dexterity of hand, but in a happy way of working
out designed effects, producing the feeling of complete mastery over the materials. It
is by their wonderful execution that the genuine works of great masters are known
from copies. Note, that all these qualities were possessed by both of the master-
craftsmen in an eminent degree, and that all of them were the gift of " the Spirit of
God" (ver. 31), from whom comes down "every good gift and every perfect gift"
(Jam. i. 17). Artists should bear this in mind, and sanctify their art by directing it to
holy, or at any rate to good ends. What a sad spectacle is genius prostituted to the
■ervice of Satw I

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 30 — 35. — Bezaleel and Aholiah. Note — I. The fact that the Lobd chose mbb
TO DO THE WOEK. It might have been otherwise. As the people were requested of their
free-will to provide the materials, so they might have been requested to provide the
necessary artificers. But it is easy to see what differences and jealousies might have
resulted, all to end in some unsatisfactory compromise. There was no difiioulty as long
as each one gave of his- own decision ; and what further difficulty then threatened to
come, God immediately removed by himself selecting the men who were to carry out
his designs. It is very likely that Bezaleel and Aholiab were not the men whom the
people themselves would have chosen. So far as pure artistic originality was con-
cerned they may have been excelled ; for the possession in Israel of so much material
for artistic and precious work seems to show that there must have been many with the
ability requisite for such work. But God had his own principles of choice, his own
purposes to serve ; and it would appear in due time how wise God was in indicating
certain men and not others for what needed to be done.

IL The (juaufioations with which God endowed them. God, we may be nm^



384



THE BOOK OF EXODUa



[oh. xxxvl 1 — 38.



to Bome extent took them for what they were by nature. He always looks at tk»
natural basis on which he proposes to build up some Divine work. But he did not leave
them to their natural strength to carry out his designs. He did not leave them to toil
onward to impressive results through many attempts which had to be forsaken as
failures. Great works of art, which only too many spectators regard with but a glance,
are to the artist memorials of weary and tantalising hours. Sir Joshua Beynolds stud
of one of his completed paintings, " there are ten imder it, some better, some worse."
Bezaleel and Aholiab were spared all such disappointments, all vain hunts after the
unattainable ideal. A variety of words are used with respect to them, as if to signify
how eminently and abundantly God had endowed them with aU that was necessary for
the task. Thus it was to be made plain to the then living generation and their successors
that the tabernacle and its contents were in a very important sense the work of God.
These things were to be sacred in every way : they were not to be criticised and com-
pared, as if they were the outcome of art and man's device. Perliaps criticism did come,
for faidt-finders are numerous in every age ; but the two chosen artificers needed not to
trouble themselves about any complaining. And should we not all find it better if,
instead of straining to do work for God in our own strength and wisdom — which must
ever be a saddening failure as to spiritual results — we sought to be as tools directed by
the wisdom of God ? We have no riglit to complain if keen eyes discover the weak
points in what is fashioned by our own skill ; but if we are sure that God's Spirit
is ruling in all we do for him, then we may meet complaints with a meek indif-
ference. — Y.

Ten. 30 — 35. — Bezaleel and Aholiab. See Homily on chap. xxxi. vers. 1 — 12. J. 0.



EXPOSITION,



CHAPTER XXXVL



Ven. I — 3 and 8 — 38. — The progress of

THE work, AMD THE SUPBRPLrOUS LIBERALITY
OF THE PEOPLE — THE LATTER HAS TO BE RE-
STRAINED (vers. 8 — ^7). Bezaleel and Aholiab
felt that the time for action was now come.
They at once addressed themselves to their
task. Moses delivered into their hands all the
various offerings which the people, rich and
poor, had brought in (ch. xxxv. 21 — 29) ; and
skilled workmen were immediately called upon
to shape it for the designed uses. The fact of
the work being commenced did not stop the
inflow of gifts. More and yet more continued
to be brought " every morning " (ver. 3). At
last it became clear that the supply had
exceeded the demand ; and the workmen
reported so to Moses (vers. 4, 5), who there-
npos commanded that the offerings should
tease (ver. 6). The progress of the work is
then reported in detail, and in the following
order: — 1. The covering for the tabernacle
(vers. 8 — 13) ; 2. The goats' hair covering for
the tent above the tabernacle (vers. 14 — 18) ;
3. The outer coverings of rams' skins and
seals' skins (ver. 19) ; 4. The boards for the
walls of the tabernacle (vers, 20— 30); 5. The
ban for the boards (vers. 81—34) ; 6 The



veil of the most holy place (vers. 35, 36) ; 7.

The hanging for the entrance to the taber-
nacle (vers. 37, 38). The chapter, from ver
8, runs parallel with ch. xxvi., differing from
it mainly in describing as made that which in
ch. xxvi. is ordered to be made.

Ver. 1 — Then wrought Bezaleel, etc. This

is introductory to the entire sub-section, which
extends to the end of ch. xxxix. It means —
" Then, under the dhection of Bezaleel and
Aholiab, began the work of constructing that
place of meeting for which commandment had
been given to Moses in the mount." The
master-craftsmen, and those under them,
" wrought," and took care that all was done
according to all that the lord had com-
manded. It is to mark the exactitude of the
obedience that chs. xxxvi.— xxxix. follow so
closely, and with such minuteness, the word-
ing 01 chs. xxvi. — ^xxviii.

Vers. 2, 3. — Moses called Bezaleel, etc.
Having received sufficient materials for a be-
ginning, Moses summoned Bezaleel, Aholiab,
and theur chief assistants, to his presence, and
delivered into their hands the various offerings
—the wood, the metal, the precious stones,
the thread, the goats' hair, the rams' skins,
the seals' skins, etc. Upon these material!
they proceeded at once to work. They brought
yet unto him free offerings every morning.
The people still continued to give Freewill
offerings kept continnally flowing in. Mom-



CH. xsTvi, 3—38.]



THE BOOK OP EXODUS.



see



ing after morning a fresh supply was brought
to Moses, who passed it on to those engaged
in the work.

Vers. 4, 5. — At last, remonstrance had to be
made. The workmen were cumbered with
an overplus of material — an embarrat de
richessei — and come in a body to Moses, to
make complaint. All the wise men oame,
every man from his work, with the cry —
" The people bring mnch more than enough
—we are hampered in our work by the
too great abundance — ^let an end be put to
it"

Ver. 6. — Moses accordingly had proclama-
tion made through the camp, and so put a
■t^ to further offerings.

Vers. 8 — 38. — The remainder of this
chapter requires no comment, since it goes
OTor ground already covered. The passage
from ver. 8 to ver. 18 corresponds exactly
with ch. xxvi. 1 — 11 ; that from ver. 19 — 34
with cb. xxTL 14—29; that consisting of



vers. 35, 36, with ch. zxvi S3, 84 ; and ih«
two concluding vers, with ch. zxvL 86, S7.
Under these circumstances a few mistransla-
tions will alone be noticed.

Ver. 22. — ^Iwo tenons,- equally ^stant one
from another. Bather, as in ch. xxvL 17,
"two tenons, set in order one agaimt an-
other."

Ver. 27. — ^For the sides of the tabemacla
westward. Literally correct ; but it would
be more intelligible to render " for the tide,"
or " for the hack."

Ver. 32.— For the sides westward. Th*
same alteration should be made.

Ver. S3. — He made the middle bar to shoot
throngh the boards. Bather, as in eh. xzri.
28, " to reach from end to end of the boards."

Ver. 87. — ^For the tabernacle door. Bather,
as in ch. xxvi. 36, " for the door of the tent.
Their chapiters and their fillets. Bather
" their eapitaU and their rods." Iheso had
not been previously mentioned.



HOMILETICS.

Vera. 8 — 7. Superabundant giving. — ^Too much is fiur better than too little. Let »
great work be taken in hand, and it is impossible to anticipate the exact quantity of the
material that it will require, or the exact cost of work and material together. Care
should always be taken to have a margin beyond the supposed necessity. Unless this
is done —

I. The wobk la An to bb boaufes Ain> stinted towabds the olosk. Fear
naturally arises lest the material or the money should not hold out ; and economies are
practised which detract from the beauty, the finish, the perfection of the construction.
Or (which is worse) desirable, even necessary, adjuncts are omitted, given up as im-
practicable under the circumstances.

II. The woek may AcrnALLT havx to be left unfinished. All calculations of
cost are uncertain. Prices rise while a work is in progress ; material purchased, or
presented, turns out to be defective, and has to be replaced by something better.
Accidents occur. The actual cost of a work almost always exceeds the estimate — some-
times greatly exceeds it. How often do we hear of there being a debt upon a building !
This would occur far less frequently, if gifts and offerings kept flowing in until the
authority entrusted with the work cried " Stop."

Superabundant giving shows a truly liberal spirit in those who give. It la not a
very common thing. Cases are rare of its needing to be " restrained." The example of
the Israelites should stir Christians to emulate them. While these poor wanderers
in the desert were so generous, how is it that we are, for the most part, so niggardly?

Superabundant giving is a trial to those who receive the gifts. How easy to appro-
priate what is not required to our own advantage I Moses withstood this temptation
Bezaleel and Aholiab withstood it. It may be doubted whether all Christians have always
done so. The gifts that flowed in at the shrine of Becket, at the exhibition of the holy
coat of Treves, at the altar of St. Januarius, were intended as offerings for the service of
the sanctuary. Were they always used for sacred purposes ? Was there not often a
superfluity, which men converted to their own benefit ? There have certainly been
those in modem times who have enriched themselves out of moneys subscribed for
charitable purposes, as the records of our assize courts sufficiently show.

Vers. 8 — 38. — Exactitude in obe'fience. Kalisch observes on this passage, that,
" though even literal repetitions of the same occurrence, or the same command, are not
nnusual in the Biblical style, yet the lengthened and accurate reiteration" which here
occurs, is unusual and must have some special meaning. He himself considers that ha



mxomir—n.



i Q



386 THE BOOK OF EXODUflL [oh. xtxti. 1— 3a

hafl sufficiently accounted for it as intended to draw attention to the importance of the
tabernacle in the Mosaic system, and the significance, and especially the symbolical
character of the descriptions (' Commentary on Exodus,' pp. 449, 450). To us it seems
that there must have been some further reason for the phenomenon; and we are
inclined to find it in the importance of the example which Moses here sets of exactitude
in obedience. If any one might ever be supposed entitled to depart from the strict
letter of observance, where the commands of God are concerned, it wotild be such an one
as Moses, who had conversed as friend to friend with God, and had been twice summoned
to a conference of forty days' duration. But Moses does not seem to feel that he is so
privileged. The exact correspondency of paragraph with paragraph, verse with verse,
clause with clause, word with word, seems intended to teach and enforce the lesson that
what God commands is to he observed to the letter, down to its minutest point. Cer-
tainly, what these five concluding chapters of Exodus especially set forth, is the extreme
exactitude which Moses and those under him showed in carrying out all the diiectiona
that God had given with regard to the tabernacle. If "ftfty taohes" were ordered
(ch. xxvi. 6), "fifty taches" were made (ch. xxxvi. 13); if "five pillare" were com-
manded here (ch. xxvi. 37), and " four pillars" there (ib. 32), the five and the four were
constructed and set up accordingly (ch. xxxvL 36, 38) ; U this curtain was to have a
pattern woven into it (ch. xxvi. 31), and that curtain was to be adorned with em-
broidery (ib. 36), the embroiderer's and the weaver's art were employed upon them as
ordered (»S. xxxvi. 35, 37). Nothing commanded was ever neglected ; only in one or
two cases (notably in verse 38) small additions were made, if not to the orders given, at
any rate to- the orders recorded. Generally, however, there was an entire e£Eacement of
self, a complete restraint of private fancy and private preference. Note — 1. The rarity of
exact obedience ; 2. The difficulty of it ; 3. The scant praise which it obtains from men ;
4. The certainty that it is approved in God's sight. Examples — 1. The obedience of
Moses as here set out ; 2. The perfect obedience of Christ. " My meat is to do the will
of him that sent me " (John iv. 34). " I have finished die work which thou gavest me
to do " (ib. xvii. 4).
Vers. 8 — 37. — On Tabernacle symbolism see the Homiletics on oh. zxtL 1 — IL

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0E8.

Ver. 8; ch. zxxiz. 43. — Tfie Tabernacle made. These chapters recount how the

tabernacle, etc., was actually made. On the several sections, see the Homiletics and
Homilies on ohs. xxvi. — xxviii. We have in them —

I. WoBK DONE. The point to be observed here is that everythii^ was done pre-
cisely according to the Divine directions. The makers tvttned not aside, either to the
right hand or to the left, from what had been commanded them. They attempted no
alteration on the plans. They did not try improvements ; they added no ornaments.
This was their wisdom, and secured for their work the Divine approval. Work for
Christ should be done in the same way. We cannot improve upon his Gt>speL We are
not entitled to add to, or take from, his commands.

n. Work inspected (ch. xxxix. 33—43). When the work was finished the makers
brought it to Moses, who looked upon it and pronounced that all had been done accord-
ing " as the Lord had commanded " (ver. 43), The day of inspection will come for our
work also (1 Cor. iii. 14, 15). Happy for us if the same verdict can be passed
upon it I *^

in. WoBK BLESSED. " And Moses blessed them " (ver. 43). " If any man's woA
abide which he has built thereupon, ho nhall receive a rewMd" (l Cor. iii. 14).—^. 0.

Vers. 8 — 38. — Jehovah's dweUing-plaoe, See homily on chap. xxvi. J. Q,

J^«B. 1—38.— 3^6 work failt not either for gifts or skill.

I. MosBS GOES FOBWAED IN FAITH. 1. He makes an immediate beginning. He
might have doubted the people's liberality (so much was required) or the workmen's
ability, and have waited ; but it was enough that (Jod had commanded the work It
Christ has commanded us to rear up a tabernacle for God in every land nothing should
stay us. He will give ofierings and men, 2, He foUowed the Lord's guidmg. Hi



OH. XXZVIL 1—29.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



atr



called the men whom he had named and prepared. There must be obedience aa well
as faith, not calling those we would choose, but hailing gladly, and honouring, the men
whom God has prepared. 3. The materials are committed to them. If we are to b*
built into God's temple we must obey them who have the rule over us.

II. The feoplb hate to be restbained from oivma. 1. The glory of a liberal spirit.
There was no need of a second appeal. 'I'hough they knew that much had been con-
tributed they still gave. 2. It consecrated the work. (1) It was a joy for the work-
men to labour amid that generous liberality. (2) It was a joy to. Israel and their
children to remember the story of the tabernacle. To labourers in the Lord's vineyard
it is a inighty consecration when hearts are yielded on every side and more is thrust
upon them than they can well use for the Master ; and the remembrance of such times
is power and tefres^hing in after days.

III. The work prockeds ; the skill and labour failed not. First the frame-
work of the tabernacle is reared and the inner curtains niade and placed ; then the outer
curtains, and lastly the boards, and bars, and veils are set up. The heart is first gained
for God, then more and more of light and power is pouted upoa the outer life tUl the
vliole "grows unto an holy temple in the Lord." — ^U.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XXXVn.
Vers. 1—29.— The fubtheb peoqbbss or

THE WOBS — THE CONSTBCCTION OF THE FUB-
HITDBIS FOB THE HOLT OP HOLIES (veiB. 1,9) —
AMD FOB THE HOLT PLACE (verS. 10 — ^28) —
THE MAKIMO OF THE BOLT OIL AND OP THE

UJCENSB (ver.29). On the history of the con-
strttction of the tabernacle follows naturally
that of the construction of its furniture. The
order of dignity is followed, as in ch. xxv.,
and the fumitnre of the holy of holies taken
first. Vers. 1 — ^9 correspond to vers. 10 — 20
of ch. XXV. ; vers. 10—16 to vers. 23—29 ;
vers. 17 — 24 to vers. 31 — 39 of the same; and
vers. 23 — 28 to vers. 1 — 5 of ch. xxx. Ver.
29 is an abbreviation of ch. xxx. 23—25, and
31, 35.

Ver. I. — ^Bezaleel made the ark. The
particular maker of the various parts ai^d con-
tents of the tabernacle is not elsewhere pointed
out. Thus this meution of Bezaleel is em-
phatic, and Menu intended to mark the em-



ployment of the highest artistic skill on fliat
which was the most precious of all objecia
connected with the new construction.

Ver. 7. — Beaten out of one piece. Bather,
" of beaten work," as the same word is trans-
lated in the corresponding passage, ch. zxv. 18.

Ver. 23. — His snufEers. Or, " tonga," as in
ch. XXV. 38

Ver. 25. — The inoense altar here occnn in
its right place, among the fnmitnre of the
outer chamber of the tabernacle — ^not, as in
ch. xxx. 1 — 6, out of place.

Ver. 29. — The holy anointing oiL For the
composition of the oil, see ch. xxx. 23 — 25 ;
for the uses wliereto it was to be applied, ib.
26—30. The pure incense of sweet spices.
The composition of the incense is given in ch.
xxx. 34, 35. It is there said to have been
" a confection after the art of the apothecary —
tempered together, piu-e and holy. The com-
bination of artistic power with practical
knowledge in Bezaleel and Aholiab calls to
mind einque-cento Italy, and the wonderful
gra£p of art and science possessed by Michael
Angelo and Benvenuto Cellini



H0MILBTIC8.

Ver. 1. Art's higliest efforts should be concentrated on what U most essentiail to the

umrkinhand. " Bezaleel made the ark." Bezaleel, " filled with the spirit of God, in
wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship " (ch.
XXXV. 31), while he entrusted most of the rest of the work to others, reserved to himself
the construction of the ark, with the cherubim and mercy seat. The ark was clearly the
central object of the newly devised structure, that towards which the eyes of all would be
directed, on which the thoughts of all would rest, which, itself unseen, dominated tb«
entire edifice and formed its material basis and raison dFetre. Shrined in the holy-
holies, shrouded from sight by the veil, never seen but by the high-priest once a-year,
yet known to occUpy the innermost penetrate of the sanctuary, and to lie there in the
iii^ht of the Divine presence constantly, it challenged the attention of all, and occupied
• °uniail0 poeition among the sacred objects which the sanctuary was to contain

2 c 2



THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. mxtu. 1— 21>.



I3ezaleel, the master-artist, felt that there was a call on him to construct it. What
wealth of loving work he lavished on the construction, with what rich and delicate
tracery of fanciful ornament he adorned it, no one can say. The ark never returned
from Babylon ; and the master- work of the master-artist of these times has been lost to
humanity. But his choice asserted some important principles, and deserves imitatioD
through all ages. It pointed out —

L That the law of ornament is not onb of general itniforh elabobatiob
UP to a ceetain height, but one of special concentration upon a point OB
POINTS. Compare Magdalen Tower with the Houses of Parliament, the western front
of the Parthenon with the ordinary porch of a church of the Jesuits, the fa9ade of St
Zeno at Verona with even the front of St. Mark's at Venice, and it will at once be seen
how superior is ornament concentrated to ornament dispersed, elaboration of certain
parts, set off by the comparative plainness of others, to diffusion generally of equal
elaboration everywhere. A sense of heaviness, of over-loading, of weariness, is produced
by the one plan, a feeling of unmixed pleasure by the other.

II. That the concentration bhould be on such pabtb of the wobk mb au
most essential to it. If a campanile or bell-tower be the work in hand, the con-
centration should be towards the chamber in which the bells are hung, as in the great
campanile of St. Mark's, Venice. If a college, towards the parts common to all, the
chajjel, hall, library ; if a sepulchral monument, towards the tomb ; if a palace, towards
the state-rooms ; and the like. Here, in this case of the tabernacle, the concentration was
towards the holy of holies. Most properly. And on the ark : since, of the holy of holies,
the ark was the glory.

In Christian churches, according as preaching, or the administration of the sacraments,
or the elevation of the thoughts to heaven, are regarded as the main object of sacred
buildings, the concentration of artistic effort will naturally be towards the pulpit, or towards
font and altar, or towards the roof. Examples of the first are common in Germany
and Switzerland, of the second in Soman Catholic churches generally, of the third in
English churches of the Tudor period, e.g. Henry the Seventh's Chapel ia WestmiiutW
Abbey, and the like.

For further Homiletics, see those on chs. xxv. and zzz.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOBS.

Vers. 1 — ^28 — The furnishing of the tabernacle. I. All was accomplished ab God
HAD commanded. 1. SuccessfuUy. It might have been feared that though the taber-
nacle was erected there would be some failure in this more delicate and ornate work ;
but all is perfectly executed even to the smallest details. In the work of him whom
God has called by name there will be no failure. His work will be presented faultless,
and every word which God has spoken will be fulfilled. 2. Faithfully : as they failed
in nothing, so they added nothing. In God's wotk there must be no aUoy of human
devices. In worship, ordinances, life, our sole guide must be God's commandment

II. The contents of the tabernacle: the fourkold adornment of the
believer's life. 1. The ark, the meeting-place of righteousness and peace. The
heart in which God's law is set, on which the atonement rests, and which is bathed in
tho glory of the Divine love. There is, in a word, living faith. 2. The table of shew-
bread: a yielded life, the sacrifice presented before God of body, soul, and spirit
3. The candlestick : " ye are the light of the world." (1) There is life, which in the
measure it exists is, like Christ's, the light of men. It shows the reality and power of
God's grace. (2) There is labour in word and doctrine. God's mind and wUl are
imderstood. 4. The incense altar, the uplifting of holy desire and intercession for all
■ten. Are these things found in us ? They may be. It is Uie work to which Christ
lus been called, and he is waiting to accomplish it in us. — ^U.

Vers. 1— 25,— 2%« ark, the table, wnd the candlestick. See Homily on oh. xxt.
10— 40.— J. 0.

''■its. 25— 29.— r*. aitar of tncent*. See Homily on oh. xxi. 1—11 ; 84— 88r-J. Q,



a. xxxvui. 1—8.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XXXVm.



Vers. 1 — 8. — The ixibtbbb progbem or

nE WOBK — THB GON8TBT70TION OF THB FDB-

nruBB FOB THE cotJBT. — Vers. 9 — ^20. — And
OF THE couBT ITSELF. On the Completion of
the tabernacle, Bezaleel and his assistants
tamed their attention to the court and its fur-
niture ; and constructed, first, the altar of
burnt offering (vers. 1 — ^7); secondly, the
bronze laver (ver. 8); and thirdly, the hang-
ings, pillars, connecting-rods, hooks and pins
for the circuit of the comt (vers. 9 — ^20).
Vers. 1 — 7 correspond to vers. 1 — 8 of ch.
xxvii. ; ver. 8 corresponds to ver. 18 of eh.
xxz. ; and vers. 9 — 20 correspond to vera. 9 —
19 of ch. xxvil.

Ver. S. — ^Ihe pots. This translation is bet-
ter than that of ch. xxvii. 8, which is " pans."
Buckets or scuttles to convey the ashes from
the altar to the ash-heap (Lev. 1. 16) are in-
tended.

Ver. 8. — Of the looMng-glasses of the
women. This interesting fact has not been
previously mentioned. Bronze plates, circular
or oval, admitting of a high polish, were nsed
by the Egyptian women as mirrors from a
very early date, and may be seen in the
Egyptian collection of the British Museum.
They have bandies like those of our fire-
screens, generally also of bronze. It was
natural that the Hebrew women should pos-
sess similar articles, and should have taken



care to bring them with them out of Egypt.
The sacrifice of them for a sacred purpose is
rather to be ascribed to their own self-denying
piety than to any_ command issued by Moses
(Spencer). Whioh assembled. Literally,
" who came by troops." Women assembled
themselves by troops at the entrance of the
" tent of meeting " set up by Moses (ch. zxxiii.
7), as at a later date we find Hannah (1 Sam.
i. 9 — 12) and other women who were less
worthy (ib. ii. 22) doing. The women who
showed this zeal were those tiiat made the
sacrifice of their mirrors for God's service.
There is no reason to suppose (with Hengsten-
berg and others) that tney constituted a regi^
lai " order."

Ver. 10. — Their illets. Bather, «thdr
eonneding-rodi," as in ch. xzvii. 10.

Ver. 17. — ^Ihe overlaying of their ohapiteif
of silver. This is ad^tional to what is re-
corded in ch. xxvii, and is parallel to what we
find related of the tabernacle pillars in di.
xxxvL 88. Filleted with sUver. Bather,
"connected with silver rods." Compare ch.
xxvii. 17.

Ver. 18.— The height in the breadth wu
Ave cubits. The height of the hangings all
round the court was required to be five cubits,
or seven and a-half feet (ch. xxvii 18). It
appears by the expression here used — " in the
breadth " — ^that the material was woven of ex-
actly this width.

Ver. 19. — ^Their chapiters. This again is
additional to the directions given Compart
the comment on ver. 17



HOMILBTICS.

Ver. 8. — The triumph of female piety over femah vanity. Hebrew women were, it
must be presumed, much like other women in their natural dispositions, and therefore
not without their share of personal vanity. The fact, that in all the haste of their
sudden departure from Egypt they had not omitted to carry with them their metal
mirrors, is indicative of this. The mirror was the most valued of toilet articles, and the
most mdispensable for effecting that end, at whioh almost all women aim — the making
the best of those advantages of personal appearance which nature has vouchsafed to
them. It is difiScult to imagine any material sacrifice to which a woman would not more
readily have consented than the loss of her mirror. Yet we know that the sacrifice was
made by large numbers; for the laver was a vessel of considerable size. Let us consider
then, 1. The motive of the act ; 2. the antecedent conduct which led up to it ; 3. the
reward which it obtained.

I. The motive of the act. Ko other motive con be conceived of than true piety.
Piety loves to make offerings to God. Piety does not coimt the cost. Piety, the gift
of grace, can triumph over nature ; transform a poor vain worldling into a saint ; make no
sacrifice seem a hard one. It must have been piety which made these women give their
mirrors, either, 1. In addition to their personal ornaments (ch. xxzv. 22), or 2. In
default of them. Some after offering their ear-rings, rings, necklaces, bracelets, and the
like, may have desired, from pure love of God, to give more, taoii casting about to con-
sider what more they could give, may have bethought them of their mirrors, Otbm



390 THE BOOK OF EXODU& [oh. xxxviii. 1—21.

may have had no personal oinaments to give ; and if unable to spin, may have had
nothing else but their mirrors which they could contribute. In either case, piety wai
•t the root of their giving.

n. Thk antecedent conduct which led up to it. They who contributed their
mirrors were women wont to " assemble at the door of the tabernacle of the congrega-
tion." In other words, they were such as had previously made all the use they could of
theii religious opportunities. We see that God does not shower down his precious gifts
of grace at random — but " helps such as help themselves." He granted the priceless
grace of self-denying love to those who were constant in serving him at the place
where he had " set his name," and was to be found of them that sought him. Much
payer, much waiting upon Crod, had gone to form the character of those who now
fbimd themselves able to make a willing sacrifice of their vanity.

III. The reward wmon theib act of sacbifice obtained fob theh. It obtained
for them the high raward of special mention in God's holy word — a place in his
" Valhalla" — a record in his " Boll of worthies." Of the other offerings we know not,
for the most part, whether they were made by men or women — much less by what clasa
of men, or what class of women. Only here, and in ch. xxxv. 25, 26, is the sex speci-
fied, and only here the class. Let women take this to heart. Let them be ready to
■acrifice to him all their adornments — " braided hair and gold and pearls, and costly
array" (1 Tim. ii. 9) — let them be ready to sacrifice even, if need be, their personal
channs (as many do in fever or small-pox hospitals), and they will not be forgotten by
him — they will not go without a recompense. If their act be not recorded in any other
book it will be written in that heavenly record, out of which all will be judged at tha
last day (Rev. xx. 12).

For other HomileticB on the subjects of this chapter, see those on ch. xxviL

HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOBS.

Vers. 1 — 21. — The brazen altar, the laver, and the court. See Homilies on cits. xxriL
1—20; XXX. 17— 22.— J. 0.'

Ver. 8. — The mirrors of the women. The women assembling at the door of the
tabernacle (see Hengstenberg's " Egypt and the Books of Moses," — " The Institution of
Holy Women ") gave up their mirrors for the making of the laver. Learn — 1. Peculiar
devotion to God expresses itself in acts of sacrifice (cf. Mary of Bethany, Matt,
xxvi. 6 — 14). 2. Religion gives power to make sacrifices. 3. It weans the afiections
from the world. 4. It gives superiority to the motives of personal vanity. The mirror
is peculiarly a woman's instrument of self-pleasing. It is her means of pleasing the
world. 5. Religion teaches godly women to study simplicity in personal adornment
(1 Pet. iii. 1 — 5). 6. Self-denial in outward adornment is valueless, unless " in the hidden
man of the heart," there be the positive inward adornment of holiness (1 Pet. iii. 4).
This was taught by the tise to which Moses put the ofi'erings — the making of the
" laver." Regeneration is the true beautifier. — J. 0.

Vers. 1 — 31. — The Court and its lessons. I. The fubnishino aot) constbtjotion
OF THE couET (1) The altar on which the sacrifice for Israel's sin was hiid, and their
own offerings accepted. Christ is the foundation and the power of all our service. (2)
The laver. It was fashioned from the mirrors of the women. The adornment of the
outward was exchanged for inward purity, the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit. It
•tood there for the daily use of God's priests. They could pass into God's presence only
■s their defilement had been washed away. " Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord." Are we being washed ere that hour comes when we must appear before him ?
2. TJ« construction of the cowrt. (1) God's grace makes a separation between the
Church and the world. To break down this is to undo God's work. (2) The wall of
»ei>aration was fine twined linen. It is a separation not only between faith and unbelief
but between righteousness and unrighteousness. (3) The world sees the results only'
the means by which they are attained are hid from its view ; but the results are a cidi
to come and see. 8. Ti« order •» which they were made. The altar firet, then th(



OH. XXXTIII. 21—81.]



TUB BOOK OP EX0DU8.



891



layer, and, last of all, the enclosing of the court. First, Christ and his sacrifice ; next)
the washing of regeneration hy him through the Spirit ; and, last of all, the gathering
together of the Church. This is the Divine order. The true Church has ever thii
history. None have a right to be there on whom the work of altar and layer has not
first been done.

II. Tbb material. 1. The record of it ia kept. There is nothing of all that in
given for God's service, the history or place of which is forgotten. 2. The use to which
it is applied. The gold is put to the highest use'; the silver — the redemption money —
is the foundation of the sanctuary ; the brass is used for the altar, the laver, and the
court. Each is put to its proper use, and a place is found for all. No gift can be
brought to God which he will not employ. — U<



EXPOSITION.



Vers. 21 — 81. — Thb stm of thb tabeb-

■ACLE, OB WEIOHT OF THE METALS EMPLOYED

IN IT. Before dismissing the subject of the
construction of the tabernacle, Moses places on
record the smn of the gold, silver and bronze con-
tributed and consumed in the work. At the
same time be informs us who was the ac-
conntant by whom the sum was made up (ver.
21), and what were the portions of the work
formed of each metal (vers. 24, 27, 28, 30,
81). Incidentally he mentions the number of
the congregation at this period (ver. 26), and
the weight of the " sockets " or " bases " (ver.
27).

Ver, 21. — ^Thia is the Bnm. Or " number-
ing "(as in Num. xxvi. 63). The tabemaole
•f testimony. The tabernacle, i.e., of which
the great glory was that it contained " the
testimony " or " Two Tables." Compare ch.
XXV. 16. For the servioe of the Levites.
Literally "a service of the Levites by the
hand of Itbamar," etc. — i.e. " a service which
was performed by the Levites at the command
of Ithamar." It is somewhat remarkable that
the direction of the Levites should be assigned
to Itbamar, rather than to Nadab or Abihu.

Ver. 22.— Beialeel made all. The direc-
tion of the whole work by Bezaleel is here
asserted more definitely and decidedly than
elsewhere. Compare ch. xxxi. 2 — 6 ; xxxvi.
1,2.

Ver. 23. — Aholiab's special gifts are here
pointed out. He was 1. An artificer (a general
term with no special application) ; 2. A skilled
weaver ; and 3. An embroiderer. Altogether,
his business was with the textile fabrics — not
with the wood- work or the metal- work — of the
sanctuary.

Ver. 24.— -The gold. The value of the gold
has been estimated by Canon Cook at
£175,075 13». Od. of our money; by Thenuis
at 877,300 Prussian thalers, or about £131,595.
It was certainly under £200,000. De Wette
•nd others have argued that the possession of
W large* sum in gold at this time by the



Hebrew nation ii inconceivable. But molt
critics are of a different opinion. Gold was
very abundant in Egypt at the period, being
imported from Ethiopia, a rich gold-producing
country (Herod, iii. 23; Died. Sic. lii. 11), as
well as taken in tribute from the nations of
Asia. The wealth of Bbampsinitus (Barneses
HI.), a little later than the exodus, was
enormous (Herod, ii. 121 ; Eawlinson, Sistory
of Egypt, vol. ii. pp. 368, 378). According to
the preceding narrative (cb. xii. 35, 36) much
of the wealth of Egypt had, at the moment of
their quitting the country, passed from the
Egyptians to the Hebrews. If they numbered
two millions of souls, their gold ornaments are
likely to have been worth very much more
than £200,000 of our money. On the shekel
of the sanctuary, see the comment upon ch.
XXX. 13.

Ver. 25. — ^The silver. The silver seems to
have amounted to about four times the
weight of the gold ; but the value of it was
very much less, not exceeding £40,000 of our
money (Cook). It may seem surprising that
this should have been so; but there are
grounds for believing that both in Africa and
in Asia gold was more plentiful than silver in
the early ages. And it is certainly much
more suitable for ornaments. Of them that
were nnmbered. See above, ch. xxx. 12 — 16.
The silver for the sanctuary was collected by
a compulsory tax, of the nature of a church-
rate This produced the amount here given.
No estimate is made of the weight of the
silver freewill offerings fch. xxxv. 24), nor is
any account given of their application. It
has been suggested that they were returned to
the donors as superfluous, which is certainly
possible,

Ver. 26.— A bekah for every man. Liter-
ally, " for every head." From twenty years old
and upward. Compare Num. i. 3, 22, etc. Sis
hundred thousand, etc. It is remarkable that
this number agrees exactly with the sum total
of the numbering in Num. ii. 32, which took
place about six months later, and was exclu-
sive of 22,000 Levites. Perhaps the number
was lost in this place, and restored fromNum



393



THE BOOK OF fiXODUSL



[oh. xxxTm. 24—31.



ii. 82, without its being recollected that the
Iievites were not included in that reckoning.

Yer. 27. — ^Ihe sockets of the sanctuary and
•f the YuL See above, ch. xxxvi. 24, 26, 30,
•Dd 86. The nnmbers given are 40, 40, 16,
and 4, making exactly the hondred.

Var. 28. — Hooks foithe pillars. See above,
veis. 10, 12, 17, and 19. Chapiters. See
rer. 19. Filleted them. Bather, "connected
them with rods "



Ver. 29. — ^The brass of the offering— « a ,
the bronze which had been brought by tha
people in answer to the invitation of Mosea
(ch. XXXV. 2-1).

Vers. 30, 31. — ^Ihe sockets. See ch. xxztL
88. The brazen altar and the brazen grate.
See vers. 1 uad 4. The vessels. See ver. S.
The sockets of the oonrt. See above, vers. 11,
14, 15, 17, and 19. The pins of the taber-
nacle and of the oonrt. See above, ver. 80l



HOMILETICa.

Vers. 24 — 31. — Oreat wealth wmiTiUy employed. L The AKomsiT xzfensed bt tbb
Iboaglites was obeat ABBOLUTBiiT. Although the materials contributed for the con-
struction of the tabernacle are quite within the estimate which would reasonably be
formed of the wealth of the Israelites from the general tenor of the narrative, yet they
certainly reach altogether to such an amount of value as would constitute a very serious
call on the resources of such a people. The worth of the metals alone was not far
short of a quarter of a million of our money. (Gold, £175,000 ; silver, £40,000 ; bronze
(say) £15,000 — ^total, £230,000.) The precious stones, the spices, the wood-work, the raw
material for the cloths, the dyed rams' skins and seals' skins, have to be added, and would
raise the sum total to at least £250,000. This was contributed by a population of about
two millions ; which may be regarded as equivalent to 10s. a family, or half-a-crown
• head. Kow the entire taxation for imperial purposes of each British subject is about
£2 a head, of which the amount paid in direct taxation is not more than 6«. a head. So
that the Israelite of the 13th or 14th century, B.C., paid at one time for church pur-
poses of his own free will, half as much as the British subject of the present day pays
directly for State purposes in the whole course of the year. Thus the amotmt was great
absolutely, and showed a noble spirit in those who contributed.

n. The AMOtJNT BXPBNDED WAS ALSO QEEAT BELATIVELT TO THE FUBPOSE OF THE

EXPENDiTtJEE. What was required was a structure sixty feet long by thirty, with a
skirting for a court or precinct 150 feet long by seventy-five. The main structure, or
tabernacle, would be about the size of a small college chapeL The precinct would be
smaller than most churchyards. Yet upon these two objects, without making any
estimate for labour, a quarter of a million of money was spent. On the first blush,
one asks, how was it possible for so enormous an outlay to be made? The answer is,
by the lavish use of the precious metals, especially gold. That the structure might
te rich, splendid, magnificent, gold and silver were lavished upon it, both externally and
internally — scarcely any wood was seen— nothing caught the eye but costly fabrice of
rich colour, and masses of sUveror gold. A warm, hamionious, rich result was no doubt
produced ; and nomadic Israel, unable to compete with the settled nations in the size
and grandeur of its "holy place," erected for itself a sanctuary, which in its own war
was unequalled and imique.

III. The object of the bxfbnditdbe wab a wobtht one. If a people have templee
at all, men will always judge their religious views, more or less, by them. If Israel was
to have a place of worship— and it may be doubted whether any race of men will ever
be able to do without one— it would certainly be subjected to rough criticism and com-
parison. The Egyptian temples were magnificent— of vast size, of the most solid con-
struction, of handsome material, elaborately painted and adorned; they delighted those
who worshipped in them, and challenged the admiration of extraneous beholders. Israel




, ,, . . _ , ,^, . , , 7, — — I way its sense that men

should give to God of their best. It could secure an extraordinary degree of beauty, finish,
R.-1 elegance. The nations among which the tabernacle passed— even those who heard
»M account of it— must have been impressed with the feeling that here was a people
which thoroughly believed in its God ; which thought nothing too good for him; whMh



CH. XXXIX. 1— 31.J



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



3M



was ready for his sake to submit to much self-sacrifice. And the people itself must also
have been iiiipresBed by. its own work. Ko such apostasy as the worship of the calf
ever took place after the tabernacle had been constructed. It was no longer faith, but
sight, which told them, that " God was in the midst of them." The sense of this begat
a courage and a confidence, which supported the nation under many trials, and many
temptations. They had never to regret the outlay which they had made upon their
" tent-temple."

Application. — There has been much church-building in modern times, but in no
instance such a lavish outlay as that here held up to our imitation. Germany, indeed,
has completed the Dom of Cologne ; but not much of the money was subscribed ; for the
most part, it came out of the general taxation of the country. Glasgow, Edinburgh,
Calcutta, have raised cathedrals ; but the cost has not been very considerable. The
spirit of munificence has been shown rather by individuals than by any nation ; and, in
England at any rate, the nineteenth century will not, it is to be feared, be signalised
among others by the completion of any really first-rate ecclesiastical edifice. New
dioceses are formed ; but new cathedrals, worthy of taking rank with the masterpieces
of former times, do not arise. The prevailing practice is to convert a parish church into
a cathedral. May it not be hoped that ere long some new diocese, where wealth abounds,
will devote to its cathedral some such amotmt as the Israelites in the desert contributed
towards their tabernacle, and raise an edifice which wiU prove to the world that Post-
Beformation England does not yield to the England of the Middle Ages in the virtue of
Christiaa munificence ?

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 21 — 31. — TTie enumeration of the metals used. This served a useful purpose —
1. As an account remlered to the people of what had been done vrith their gifts. 2. Aa
gratifying a vei-y laudable wish of the contributors to know bow much the sum-total of
their contributions amounted to. 3. As giving a just idea of the splendour and costliness
of the buUding. 4. As a testimony to the liberality, willingness, and unstinting self-
sacrifice of all classes in the congregation. 5. As specially indicating the destination of
the atonement-money — the making of the " sockets " on which the tabernacle was reared
(ver. 27). 6. As a lesson of exactitude in church finance. A church is not at Uberty
to deal in a slovenly manner with its receipts and disbursements. Careful accounts
should be kept and pubUshed. This (1) Gives confidence in the management ; (2) is
«n encouragement to giving; (3) prevents charges of maladministration; (4) is a
prevention against waste. — J. 0.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XXXIX.



Vm. 1 — 31. — The pcbtheb peogress of

THE WOBK — THE MAKING OF THE PBIESTS'

DBBSSE8. Vers. 32 — 43. — The general ap-
PEOVAL OF THE WORK BY MosES. The entire
work for the structure of the tabernacle being
completed, it only remained for Bezaleel and
Aholiab to take in hand the priestly vestments,
which had been prescribed with the greatest
elaboration in ch. xxviii. 4 — 40. The present
chapter is mainly occupied in relating how
the Testments were made, and follows, very
nearly, the order of the directions. Vers.
X — 'J correspond to vers. 5—14 of ch. xxviii. ;
vers. 8—21 to vers. 15—38 ; vers. 22—26 to
fen. 81— M; ven. 27—29 to vers. 39, 40;



and vers. 30, 31 to vers. 36, 37. The re-
mainder of the chapter (vers. 32 — 43) coutaina
a recapitulation of the work done, and a state-
ment that it was all submitted to Moses and
approved by him.

Ver. 1.— Of the blue, and purple, and soar-
let — i.e., of the blue, pm-ple, and scarlet
thread which had been spun by the women,
and brought to Moses. See ch. xxxv. 25.
The omission of "fine linen" seems to be
accidental. Cloths of service. See the com-
ment on ch. xxxi. 10.

Ver. 3. — They did beat the gold into thin
plates and cut it into wires. This mode of
producing gold thiead is remarlcable, and had
not been previously mentioned.

Ver. 9. — For a memorial. Compare eh.
xxviii. 12.

Vers. 10 — 13. — On the probable stones ia-



3M



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



[CH. XXXIX. 16 ii.



tended, gee the comment npon ch. xzviii.
17—20.

Ver. 16. — Two ouohes of gold. Compare
eh. xxviii. 13 and 25.

Ver. 24. — And twined linen. Bather
"twined," i.e., twisted together. There was
no direction to use " fine twined linen " in
making the pomegranates. See ch. xxviii. 33.

Ver. 27.— Coats of fine linen of woven
work for Aaron and for his sons. Compare
ch. xxvii. 29 and 30.

Ver. 28.— A mitre . . . and goodly bon-
nets. The "mitre" for Aaron (ch. xxviii.
37 — 39), the "goodlj bonnets," or rather
'•caps'* for his sons (ib. 40). The linen
breeches, or "drawers, were for both (ib.
42, 43).

Ver. 29.— A girdle of fine twined Imen,
etc. In the directions of ch. xxviii. 39, this
is called simply, " A girdle of needlework."

Vers. 30, 31.— The plate of the holy orowa.
See ch. xxix. 6| and compare ch. xxviii 86.



To fasten it on high. This was not men-
tioned in the directions, which only ordered
that it should be placed in front (ch. xxviii.
87).

Vers. 32 — 43. — Everything was brought to
Moses for his approval — not perhaps all things
at once, but each as it was finished— and was
judged by him " according to the pattern
which he had seen upon the mount''
(ch. XXV. 40; xxvi. 30, etc.). The ordei
observed in the enumeration is nearly, but
not quite, the order in which it has been
stated that the various things were made.
We must suppose that if Moses disapproved
of anything, it was rejected; but no dis-
approval is mentioned. Uoses did look npon
all the work, and behold, they had done it
as the Lord commanded.. Accordingly Moses
concluded all by "blessing" them; thereby
signifying, not his own approval only, but
the Divine approval, of their diligence and
obedience.



HOMILETICa

Ver. 43. — A hletsing npon obedience. It is not every kind of ol>e^ence that Itrings
down a blessing upon it. To deserve the Divine approval, and obtain the Divine
benediction, obedience must be, as was that here recorded —

I. Exact. " According to all that the Lord commanded, so the children of Israel
made the work " (ver. 42). " As the Lord had commanded, even so had they don«
it "(ver. 48).

n. Pbompt. The work could not have conunenced before the sixth or the seventh
month, since Sinai was not reached tiU the third month (ch. xix. 1), and Mosei
passed in conference with Ood nearly three months. Yet the whole was finished before
the year was out (see ch. xl. 1). Thus it appears that six months sufSced for the
completion of everything.

III. Intelligent. There was little misunderstanding — ^few, if any, mistakes. All
comprehended the orders given to them, and each carried out his assif;ned portion. Un-
less this had been the case very generally, it is impossible that all would have been
ready by the end of the year. The rapid completion of the work proves the intelligence
of the workmen. Note what is said of their being " wise-hearted " (ch. xxxvi. 1, 2, 8).
Men, for the most part, think to obtain the supreme blessing of eternal life, though
their obedience has been 1. Partial and inexact ; 2. tardy ; 3. marred by misapprehension
of the commands given them. They do not seem to imagine that there vrill be any real
inspection of their work, such as that which is here ascribed to Moses. " Moses did look
upon all the work " (ver. 43). Yet surely at the last day, man's work will be tested in
Dome real, searching way. Whatever may be meant by the expression — " The fire shall
try every man's work " (1 C!or. iii. 13), at any rate, some trial there will be. Faithful
service to Christ will be rewarded by a blessing exceeding all that we can ask or think;
but there will be minute inquiry, whether the service has been indeed faithful.

For further Homiletics on the subjects of this chapter, see those upon ch. xxviiL



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,
Vers. 1 — 32. — The garmenU of the priests. See Homily on ch. xxviiL — J. (X

Vers. 1 — 41. — The Clothes of Service; the work perfected. I. The pkiestb' oakmksMi
1. Their splendour. They were fashioned of gold and jewels, and blue, and purple, and
Msrlet. God gives glory to his servants. He makes us kings and priests unto bunseUi



CH. XXXIX. 42, 43.J THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



The spiritual nobleness and beauty given now are but the earnest of the> glory which
will be hereafter. 2. Their purpose : they were clothes of service. The honour and
comeliness which God bestows are for service to him in the midst of our brethren,
not to minister to our own spiritual pride and unbrotherly judgment.

II. All the work was done in strict obedience to the Lobd's commandment.
" As the Lord commanded Moses" (5, 7, 21, 26, 29, 31). " The children of Israel did
according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they " (32). " And Moses did
look upon all the work ; and behold, they had done it as the Lord had commanded,
even so had they done it" (43). 1. There was no deficiency: no part of the work was
slighted. We may not abate anything of all the Lord has commanded. The ordi-
nances must be observed as they have been delivered to us. The cross which Jesus
has called us to take up in his service must not be laid aside. 2. There was no excess.
No room was given for the exercise of fancy, or taste, or judgment, as to what might
better impress, or improve, the vulgar. There was only one solicitude — to do what the
Lord had commanded. Ue alone is master here. We are merely servants. The things
which God had not commanded were as carefully kept out of the worship as the
things he had commanded were kept in it. 3. "And Moses blessed them."
Serving God thus, the blessing of a greater than Moses will rest upon us. And them
awaits us in the eternal light the "Well donel good and faithful servant!" — U.

Vers. 42, 43. — The commanded work completed and commended. I. Thebb is a fro-
FESSED COMPLETION. We kuow not exactly how long this work took to do. That it could
not be done in a few days or even a few weeks is plain ; but it is equally plain that
however Ibng the time was, the work was done with steadiness and devotion. There ia
no mention of any hitch or unseemly dispute ; all seems to have gone on with holy
industry and patience to the end. Looking, then, on this work, for which a special
endowment of the Spirit's help was given, and which was amvphted, we are boimd also
to feel that the work for which God in Christ has given his Spirit to his Church in these
latter days will also be accomplished. Hindered and fragmentary is the appearance
that it now presents ; but it is going on. The wonderful manifestations of Pentecost are
the pledge of a work that some day will have finis written upon it. Amid all the
uncertainties of prophecy ; amid all the hapless guesses with respect to the time of
events, one thing is clear, that the prophecies point to a consummation. There is a
mvriJviia to the work of the Church even as to this typical work of Bezaleel and
Aholiab.

II. These is a bioobotts inspection. Many human observers, we may be sure, had
also inspected the work of Bezaleel and Aholiab ; some to praise, some also to carp.
But it is not those whom men commend who are really praiseworthy, nor those whom
men censure who are censurable. Moses looks, and ever as he looks there is the
remembrance of his solemn sojourn in the mount. He has in his instructed mind the
standard of success and excellence. Let us also, as being invited to become temples of
the living God — temple and sacrifice comprised in the varied faculties of one living
organism — consider the rigorous demand which is made on us. These sacred articles,
fashioned from perishable materials, and by human hands, were yet such that they
could be stamped with Divine approval ; and thus they are meant to direct us, that we
may fashion all our life, in affections, in aims, and in service, according to the pattern
pven in the mount — that mount in Galilee, where Jesus talked with all who were
willing to admit his authority.

III, Thkoe is a hearty commendation. " Moses blessed them." There had been
so much disobedience and pursuit of selfish aims before, that when an obedience comes
like the one mentioned here, it is important to note the way in which God smiles upon
it. For the blessing of Moses is as the smile of God. Gtod is as quick to show approval
of all compliance with his wishes as he is to frown upon all disregard of them ; only, as
men will have it, there is more occasion for the frowning than for the favour. This
commendation is more fuUy expressed in ch. xL 34, where the wrapping of the taber-
nacle with the glory-cloud signifies that what God did through Moses in the well-
understood formula of blessing, he could also do himself by his own miraculous mani-
festations. The successful work here and the immediate recognition of it serve to show,
in a mora oandeumatory aspect, the subsequent transgression of the people. In thi



3M



THE BOOK Of EXODUS.



[CH. xfc 1— 3&



making of the tabernacle-furniture, they had recognised the claims of God, and God
had recognized their ability to meet his claims. He knew that they could not yet b«
obedient in all things ; he only asked that they should be obedient as far as they were
able to be obedient. They had shown their ability once ; and it was their great blame
that they did not show it again and again. — Y.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XL.



Vers. 1 — 33. — The commaitd to set op thb

TABEByAOLE, AND ITS PERFORMANCE. All WaS

now ready. Bezaleel and Aholiab bad com-
pleted their task. The work for the taber-
nacle had been given in, and had been
approved Moses did not however at once set
it up. He waited for a command from Ood.
After a short interval, the command came.
Qe was ordered to select the first day of the
ensuing year — ^the first day of the first year of
freedom — for the operation. Directions were
given him, which fixed the order in which the
various parts were to be set op, and assigned
to the various articles of furniture their proper
places (vers. 1 — 8). When he had arranged
the whole as directed, he was to anoint the
various parts (vers. 9 — 11). He was then to
wash and dress Aaron, and his sons ; to invest
them with their robes of oflBce (vers. 12 — 14),
and to anoint them to be priests (ver. 15).
The orders given were executed, except (as it'
would seem) those concerning the investiture
of the priests and the anointing, which were
deferred. ' (See Lev. viii. 6 — 30.) In one day
the sanctuary was completely set np (yen.
18— 33>

Vera. 1 — 8. — The directioni to let up the
tdbemadle.

Ver. 2. — On the first day of the first month.
The first of Abib, or Nisan, tiie " New Year's
Day " of Israel, coinciding nearly with the
opening of the vernal equinox, a very suitable
day for the inauguration of a place of worship.
The tabernacle was to be set np first of all ;
then the tent was to be placed over it. See
vers. 18, 19.

Ver. 3. — The first thing to be placed within
the tabernacle was the ark of the testimony,
as containing the foundation of the covenant
between God and Israel, and being the special
token of God's presence with his people. See
tlie comment on ch. xxv. 10. The " two
tables " were placed within the ark before it
was brought into the tabernacle (vers. 20,
SI ). Cover tho ark with the veil — t.e., " hang
np the veil in front of the ark, so as to cover
or conceal it"



Ver. 4. — ^Thon shalt bring In the table—
t'.e., "the table of ebew-bread" (ch. xxv. 23—
30; xxxvii. 10 — 16). And set in order the
things, etc. It has been observed with reason
that the directions of Lev. xxiv. 5 — 7 must
have been already given, though not recorded
till so much later. Bread and frankincense
were to be " set in order " on the table in a
particular way. The candlestick. The seven-
branched candelabrum (ch. xxv. 31 — 39 : ch.
xxxvii. 17 — 24). And thou shalt light the
lamps. The lamps would have to be lighted
on the first day at even (ch. xxvii. 21 ; xxx. 8).

Ver. 5. — The altar of gold. See ch. xxx.
1 — 10 ; ch. xxxvii. 25 — 28. Before the ark
of the testimony — i.e., " before the veil, oppo-
site the ark of &e testimony," not within the
veiL See the comment on ch. xxx. 6. The
hanging of the door — i.e., " the curtain which
closed tbe front or eastern end of the taber-
nacle." (See ch. xxvi. 36 ; ch. xxxvi. 37.)

Ver. 6. — The altar of bnmt-i^eriug. See
ch. xxvii. 1 — 8; ch. xxxviii. 1 — 7. Before
the door of the tabemaole. In tiie court,
directly in front of the entrance, but not close
to it, since the place of the laver was between
the entrance and the altar. See the next
verse.

Ver. 7.— The layer. See ch. xxx. 18 ; ch.
xxxviii. 8. Fat water therein. The water
was reqmred :— 1. For the ablution of the
priests (ch. xxx. 19—21 ; xh 12, 31 ; Lev.
viii. 6), and 2. For washing the victims (Lev.
viii. 21).

Ver. 8.— The oonrt. See ch. xxvii. 9—18 ;
ch. xxxviii. 9 — 20. The hanging at ttie oonrt
gate — i.e., the curtain at the entrance of the
court (ch. xxvii. 16; ch. xxxviii. 18).

Vers. 9— 16.— The direetione to anoint, ete.

Vers. 9 — 16. — It does not appear that these
directions were carried out at this time. Pro-
bably, there would not have been tune to go
through all the ceremonies enjoined (ch. xxix.
1 — 34) on the same day with the erection of
the sanctuary. They were consequently de-
ferred, either till the next day, or possibly to
a later date. (See Lev. viii.) The anointing
of the tabernacle is recorded in ver. 10 ; of the
vessels in ver. 11 ; of the altar and laver in the
same. The washing of Aaron and his sons in
ver. 6 ; their investiture in vers. 7 — 9 ; the
anointing of Aaron in ver. 12 ; and a furthet
anointing of Aaron together with hit icm to
ver. 80.



3H. XL. 10—33.]



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



s«r



Ver. 10.— An altar most holy. Not really
more holy than the rest of the tahernacle and
its contents, which are all pronounced " most
holy " in ch. xxx. 29 ; hut requiring more to
have its holiness continually borne in mind,
since "it was more exposed to contact with
the people " than the tabernacle and its vessels
CKeU).

Ver. 12. — ITnto the door of the tahernacle
— 4.«.| to the place where the laver was
■itnated (ver. 7).

Ver. 14.— Coats. Bather, » tunics." They
were to he " of fine linen, woven work " (ch.
xzxix. 27).

Ver. 15. — ^Thon shalt anoint them as thou
iidst anoint their father. The mode of
anointing does not seem to have been identical
in the two cases. The oil was first poured
upon Aaron's head (Lev. viii. 12 ; Ps. cxxxiii.
t), and afterwards sprinkled upon him (Lev.
Tiii. 30). It was, apparently, only sprinkled
upon the priests (<b.). This was a lower form
of anointing ; and hence the high priest was
sometimes called " the anointed priest " (Lev.
iv. 5, 16 ; vi. 22 ; xvi. 32, etc.). Their anoint-
ing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood.
The Kabbinical commentators maintain that
these words apply to the ordinary priests only,
and on the strength of them establish a difier-
ence between l£e ordinary priests and the
high priests. The latter were in every case to
be anointed to their office. A single anoint-
ing sufficed for the former. It is scarcely neces-
sary to say that there is no Scriptural ground
for this distinction. The natural sense of the
words is, rather, that as long as the anointing
eontinned, the priesthood should continue.

Vers. 17 — 33. — The actual setting up of the
tahernacle.

Ver. 17. — On the first day the tabemaole
vas reared np. Being constructed after the
fashion of a tent, it was quite possible to rear
up and also to take down, the tabernacle in
less than a day.

Ver. 18. — Fastened his sockets. Bather,
"placed its sockets." The "sockets" or
" bases " appear to have been simply laid on
the flat sand of the desert, not " fastened " to
it in any way. They were heavy masses of
metal and would remain where they were
placed. His pillars. The pillars that sup-
ported the "veil," and also those at the east
end ^ihere the entrance was.

Vsr. 19. — He spread abroad the tent over
the tabernacle. The entire distinctness of
the tent ['dhel) from the tabernacle (mishkan)
is here very strongly marked. The " tent "
was the goats' hair covering, with the frame-
work of wood that supported i t. The oovering.
The outer covering of rams' skins and seals'
■kins. (See ph. xxvi. 14.)

Ver. 20.-^ The testimony — i.e., the two
tables of itone containing the Ten Command-



ments (ch. xxT. 16; xxxi. 18). Set the

staves on the ark. "Put the staves," that
is, " into the rings, and left them there " (ch.
XXV. 14). Put the meroy seat above upon
the ark. See ch. xxv. 21.

Ver. 21. — Set np the veil of the oovering—
<.e., hnng the veil on the four pillars between
the holy place and the holy of holies, and
thus covered — (.«., concealed from sight, the
ark of the testimony. (See the comment on
ver. 8.)

Ver. 22. — ^TJpon the side of the tabemaole
northward. Upon the right hand, as one
faced the veil. No direction had been given
upon this point, but Moses probably knew
the right position from the pattern which he
had seen upon the mount.

Ver. 23. — He set the bread in order npoa
it. Upon the subject of this " order," see Lev.
zxiv. 6—8, and compare the comment on ver. 4^

Ver. 24. — Over against the table — (.a.,
exactly opposite to the table, on the left as
one faced the veil.

Ver. 25. — When evening came, he lighted
the lamps. (See the comment on ver. 4.)
Whatever the priests ordinarily had to do was
on this occasion done by Moses.

Ver. 26. — The golden altar, or " altar of
incense," was placed before the veil — i.e., out-
side it, in the holy place, midway between the
table of shew-bread and the golden candlestick.

Ver. 28. — He set np the hanging at the
door. He hung on the five pillars at the
entrance to the tabernacle the " hanging " or
" curtain," which had been made for the par-
pose (ch. xxxvi. 37).

Ver. 29. — He put the altar of bnmt-offering
by the door of the tabemaole. See the
comment on ver. 6. And offered upon it the
burnt-offering and the meat-offering — i.e., in
his priestly character inaugurated the altar by
offering upon it the first evening sacrifice
(See ch. xxix. 38—41.)

Ver. 30. — ^He set tiie laver. As directed
in ver. 7. For the position of the laver, set
ch. XXX. 18.

Vers. 81, 82. — Koses and Aaron and hii
sons washed their hands. This is not a part
of the narrative of what was done at this time,
but a parenthetic statement of the purpose to
which the laver was subsequently applied.
On the importance attached to these ablu-
tions, see ch. xxx. 20, 21.

Ver. 83 — He reared up the court, etc., as
directed in ver. 8. So Moses finished the
work. With the hanging of the curtain at
the entrance to the court, the erection of the
tabernacle was complete. It was probably not
till after this that Moses performed the acts
of worship mentioned in the course of the
narrative — put water in the laver (ver. 30),
offered sacrifice (ver. 29), lighted the lamps
(ver. 25), and burnt incense on the golden
altar (ver. 26).



•M Tllii BOOK OF EXODUS. lorn, xb 1— W



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 33. — The erection of the tabernacle. At last the work of preparation wai
over. The work for which God had begun to give instructions more than nine montbi
previously (ch. xxv. 1) was completed. All the parts of the structure, pillars, curtains,
l>oards, sockets, bars, taches, hooks, pins ; and all the furniture, ark, altars, table, can-
dlestick, laver, vessels, ceusers, tongs, ash-pans — were finished and ready. All had
been inspected by Moses, and approved (ch. xxxix. 43) ; they answered to the pattern
which had been shown him in the mount (ch. xxv. 40). Still, however, Moses waited
until he received from God : — 1. The order for erection. 2. Instructions as to details.

I. The okoeb for ekection. " On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up
the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation " (ver. 2). The order included : — 1. The
act. " Set up the tabernacle." 2. The agent. " Thou " — j.e., Moses. 3. The time.
" The first day of the first month." Concerning the act there is nothing to be said. It
was implied in the first order given, and lay at the root of every subsequent direction.
The tabernacle could only have been devised in order to be set up. But concerning
the agent and the time there was room for doubt. As to the agent : Bezaleel, the
master craftsman, might have been chosen to erect what he had constructed ; or Aaron
might have been deputed to arrange the temple of which he was to be chief minister ;
or Moses and Aaron and Bezaleel might have been constituted a commission to carry
out the work conjointly. But it pleased God ti appoint Moses alone. For every enter-
prise it is best to have one directing mind, one ultimate authority. Otherwise there
will be oonflicting views, waste of time and energy, and commonly an inharmonious
result. And Mosea, who had alone seen " the pattern on the mount," was beyond all
doubt the fittest director that could have been selected. As to the time: any day that
was not a Sabbath would have been fairly suitable ; but there seems an especial appro-
priateness in the selection of the first day of a new year. " To everything there is •
season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven " (Eccles. vii. 1). A new year
should begin with a good work. What better work for such a day than the opening of
a Bethel — a house of God — a " tent of meeting," where God himself was to bo met?
God, who is the first, should have the first. First fruits of all things should be given
to him. Thus, New Year's-day is a natural holy day. It opens the year. It is thus
the most appropriate for openings.

II. Instbcgtions as to details, a certain order had to be observed. Qod deter-
mined the order. First, the tabernacle itself was to be erected (ver. 2) ; then the ark
was to be brought in and placed in the holy of holies (ver. 3) ; then the veil was to be
hung up (lb.). After this the furniture of the holy place was to be brought in — the
table of shewbread (ver. 4), the candlestick (t6.), and the altar of incense (ver. 5).
Next, the hanging at the entrance to the tabernacle was to be put up (ib.) Lastly, the
outer court and its furniture were to be taken in hand. The laver and altar of burnt
oflering were to be set in their places (vers. 6, 7) ; the pillars and hangings which
enclosed the court were to be arranged, and the curtain hung at the entrance to it
(ver. 8). The general law which pervades the whole is the precedence of the more
important over the less important. We do not know what time intervened between
the delivery of these instructions to Moses and " the first day of the second year " ; but
probably the interval was not long. Moses would employ it in selecting a site, and in
preparing the artificers and others for the day's proceedings. When the appointed day
arrived, he applied himself to the work (ver. 17). First, he stretched, by means of
cords and tent-pins, probably on a light wooden framework, the tabernacle cloth of
blue and purple and scarlet and fine twined linen (ch. xxvi. 1 — 6). Then he laid down the
"sockets" of silver in their places, fitted the boards into them by means of their
" tenons," put in the bars which kept the boards together, and reared up the pillars for
the veil (d». xl. 18). After this he stretched the goats'-hair covering, which con-
■tituted the tent, outside and above the tabernacle cloth, and placed over the goats'-hair
covering the rams' skins and the seals' skins (ver. 19). So much constituted the erection
of the tabernacle proper. Next he proceeded to the furniture ; he brought in the ark
•nd mercy seat, and, having placed them in tiie holy of holies (ver. 21), set up th«
vail ; thus completing it, and isolating it from the holy place After this, he brought



CB. ^u 18—33.3 VHE BOOK OF EX0DTJ3. SM

— — ■

in the furniture of the holy place — ^the table,, the caudlcstlck, and the golden altar—
and arranged it (vers. 22—26). He then, and not till then, according to the direction
given to him (ver. 5), put up the hanging which separated the tabernacle from tha
court (ver. 28). Finally, he proceeded to set in order the court. He put the altar of
burnt offering and the la ver into their places (vers. 29, 30), carried the hangings
alongside the court's four sides, and arranged the curtain at the entrance (ver. 33). So,
with a minute observance of the directions given, " Moses finished the work." Note
the exactitude with which Moses followed all the directions given him, together with
the liberty which he claimed and exercised : — 1. To determine the time of their execu-
tion. 2. To fill up particulars with respect to which no directions had been given.
1. Of the first, the deferring of the consecration by anointment of the tabernacle and
its fiimiture, and of the consecration of Aaron and his sons (vers. 9 — 15), is the crucial
instance. It has been said that these may have taken place on the same day as the
erection of the tabernacle ; but the mode in which the narrative of the consecration is
introduced in Lev. viii. 1—6, no less than the separation of the narrative from that of
the present chapter, implies an interval between the two events. Probably, by the time
of the completion of the court, the day was far advanced, and it would have been
impossible to perform all the ceremonies commanded (ch. xxix. 1 — 36) in the remaining
space. 2. Of the second, the emplacement of the table and the candlestick (vers.
22, 24), the burning of incense (ver. 27), and the offering upon the altar of burnt offering
(ver. 29) are specimens. Evidently Moses considered that " God's instructions were not
always to be carried out with literal exactness, but sometimes with an enlightened
spiritual freedom."

Vers. 18 — 33. — The sanctification .of material things. Objections are raised to the
entire idea of a holiness in things. Holiness, it is said, being a personal quality, cannot
reside in things, or be communicated to them, or be rightly predicated of them. God is
holy ; angels are holy ; some men are holy ; but nothing else. To imagine a holiness in
things is superstition. This is to effect a complete severance of matter from spirit — to
dig an abyss between them — to regard them as asymptotes, which cannot ever touch
one the other. But if God became incarnate, if " the Word was made flesh " (John
L 14), then that matter which constituted the body of Christ, most certainly became
holy. And if that matter, why not other matter? Why not the food which he
"blessed and brake, and gave to his disciples"? Why not the drink which he called
" his blood " ? If there is a contact between matter and spirit, and some spirits are
holy, then it is readily intelligible that the matter which comes into contact with them
may be, in a certain sense, holy also. And this is, beyond all doubt, the language of
the Scriptures. We hear of "holy ground" (ch. iii. 5), " holy places" (ch. xxvi. 33),
» holy garments " (ch. xxviii. 2), " holy oil " (ch. xxx. 31), " a holy perfume " (i6. 35), etc.
Things material may become holy in various ways, e.g. —

I. By being taken into God. Christ took our nature upon him, joined for ever
the Manhood to the Eternal Godhead, and so gave to his own body an eternal sanctifica-
tion of the highest possible kind, which renders it most holy.

IL By being bbodoht into contact with him. The Cross of Christ, the crown
of thorns, the nails, the soldier's spear, the raiment, the vesture, the napkin which was
about his head when in the grave, became hallowed by association with him, and must
ever be regarded by all Christians as holy. If the garment shown at TrSves were indeed
what it professes to be — a garment once worn by Christ — it would well deserve the
name, by which it is commonly called, of the " holy coat." As it is, we have no sufB-
cient evidence of any existing piece of matter, that it ever came into contact with our
Lord's blessed body ; but, if we had, any such piece of matter would be " holy."

in. By designation fok a holy purpose. It is in this way especially that build-
ings, garments, vessels, cloths, and the like, are " holy." They are intended for and
serve a holy purpose — are employed in the worship or service of Almighty God. It is
felt on all hands that such things ought to be set apart from secular uses, reserved for
the sacred end to which they have been designated, and applied to that only. Now, in
cases of this kind, it does not appear to bo inappropriate that the designation should be
by a material act ; and certainly no more significant act than anointing with oil is
posaible. For oil is symbolical of the Holy Spirit ; and as it is by the Holy Spirit that



too IHE BOOK OF EXODUi [<«. n. 1—33.

indiyidualB are sanctified, not only personally but ofiScially, so as to be media of grace
to others, so it may well be conceived that even inanimate things may become chanDelt
of grace and blessing to men, through an effluence from the same Spirit. The Holy
Spirit does not disdain all contact with matter. At the beginning of creation he " moved,"
or rather brooded, " upon the face of the waters" TGen. i. 2). At the baptism of Jesus,
the Spirit was seen "descending like a dove, and lighting on him" (Matt. iv. 16). At
Pentecost ho showed himself in the form of "tongues of fire" (Acts ii. 3). In every
consecration it is quite possible that he may bear a part, though in general h» shroudi
himself, and does not let his presence be perceived.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 33. — Hie erection of the tahemads. I. The tjhx. 1. It reminded them d
their deliverance from Egyptian bondage; "wis month shall be unto you the beginning
of months" (ch. xii. 2). Godrs dwelling-place is ever erected amid the adoring remem-
brance of his redemptiou. " The love of Christ constraineth us." 2. It was a con-
secration of the year upon which they were entering. It struck the key-note of
the after time. The joy of the new year was to rise into the greater joy of the
new life. The joy which hallows all time is that of reconciliation to, and union with,
God.

II. The order of construction. 1. The tabernacle was first erected in which GJod
was to be served. The duty to serve God is confessed before the power is attained or
the way understood. (1) The emblem of the law in its strength and weakness. (2)
The story of all the saved. 2. The tabernacle is next furnished, and the altar and
lav«i and outer court set up. The means are given of reconciliation and service. It is
not enough to be convinced of duty. God must be waited upon for power. His way
must be taken. " No other foundation can any man lay." 3. All things are anointed
with the holy oil. The spirit haUows and energizes all the means of grace which God
has given. 4. The priests also are anointed ; we, too, must be so in order to serve, and
we shall be if we come, as they did, into the midst of what God has provided and
sanctified for man's redemption.

III. The krection ok the tabernacle was followed by its immediate use. So
soon as the shew-bread table was placed, the bread was set in order upon it. The lamps
were immediately lighted. He burnt sweet incense upon the altar before the veil. On
the altar of sacrifice he offeied burnt offering and meat offering. At the laver " Moses
and Aaron and his sons washed their feet." Belief should follow fast upon the heels of
knowledge. God has sent forth his salvation, not to be the subject of intellectual
interest and theological speculation, but to touch and change the heart. The bread of
life has been given to feed the perishing, not merely to be examined, weighed,
analysed. — U.

Ver. 10. — The altar most holy. There is a diflerence at once perceptible between the
words of sanctifying in ver. 9, and the words of sanctifying in ver. 10. Whereas the
tabernacle and all therein are declared as holy, a special sanctity is somehow attached to
the altar of burnt oflering. "It shall be an altar most holy." The reasonable
explanation of this is, not that there was any special sanctity in the altar of burnt
ofiering itself, but that from its exterior position it was in great danger of being treated
thoughtlessly, and therefore needed special attention to be called to it. Hence we are
led to note the existence of a similar distinction among such things as we are bound to
treat in a reverent and careful manner. Certain persons, things, and places are of such
a kind as to be their own protection. Perhaps it is still true to some extent, thougl
doubtless it was much more felt in former times, that there is a divinity which dot.
hedge a king. Men of coarse and scandalous tongues manage to put a check on them
selves in the presence of women and children. Some are still alive who remember the
horror and indignation excited by the resurrection-men of fifty or sixty years ago, and
how little watehhouses were built in some churchyards, and men took it in turns to
guard by night the resting-places of their beloved dead. But those who would shrink
with loathing from the bare possibility that they could be ^viuty of such desecration an



OH. 33.. 1-53.] THE BOOK OF EXODUS. Mi



nevertheless found treating great realities of holiness with indifference, if not with com-
tempt. Eemember with what profaning hands the Holy One of God was abused j ha
who spake concerning the temple of his body ; he who was holy, not by any mere asso-
ciation, not for the purposes of some temporary economy, but essentially holy. Aw
there not those who, thoughtless enough of all the evil they are doing, crucify the Son
of God afresh, and put hun to an open shame ? (Heb. vi. 6.) What a fearful outlook
is indicated for those who tread underfoot the Son of God, and count the blood of the
covenant, wherewith they are sanctified, an unholy thing, and do despits unto the
spirit of grace I (Heb. x. 29.) The very same thing may in one way be hallowed, and
in another be desecrated. There is a great semblance of hallowing in the huge family
Bibles so often seen in English houses, rich, and not unfrequently tawdry, in their bmd-
ing and gilding ; but after all they may only be there as part of a reputation for respect
ability. The true hallowing is in the dog's-eared, well-worn book, poorly printed it
may be, and on common paper, and with that indefinable appearance about it whi(^
tells of constant use. It is only too easy a thing to put superstition in the place
of an intelligent, diligent, profound, and practical reverence. Evon Christians ai«
strangely negligent concerning the holiness inherent in them if they ore really
bom again. Very unobservant are they of the persistent references in the New
Testament to the holiness of a Christian's personality. How much is done, as a
matter of course, that is inconsistent, yea, scarcely compatible with being, indeed, a
living sacrifice I — ^Y.

Vers. 1 — 33. — 7%e tahernade set up. The sanctuary did not take long In malring ^
When hearts are willing, gifts liberal, and hands active, work is soon accoimjlished.
Everything was ready by the first day of the new year after leaving Egypt. Tte new
year was inaugurated by the setting up of the finished dwelling. How suitable an
employment for the new year, to consecrate our hearts anew as dwelling-places for
Jehovah 1 The section conveys lessons as to —

L Obdeb in the sanctuakt. Every thing was done with order and deliberation.
" Set the bread in order " (vers. 4, 23). " Let all things be done decently and in order"
(1 Cor. XV. 40).

n. Beauty in the banotdabt. God's house, when completed, was a beautMt
house. Cf. Is. Ix. 13.

in. Holiness in the sanctuabt. The place was holy. Moses consecrated it by
anointing (vers. 9 — 12). Those who served in it were to be holy. This is signified hv the
wearing of " holy garments " (ver. 13), and by washing in the laver (ver. 31). liohness
becomes God's house (Ps. xciii. 5). His servants are to serve him in "beauties of
holiness " (Ps. ex. 3).

IV. WoKsiiip IN THE sakctuabt. Moses set the bread in order on the table, lighted
the lamps, burnt incense, etc. He ofTered burnt offerings and meat offerings on the
altar (ver. 30). The tabernacle was a picture Gospel.— J. 0.

Ver. 33. — The twoflnishingi. " So Moses finished the work." Cf. ch. xxxix. 32 — " Thus
was all the work of the tabernacle finished." View the tabernacle as a type of the
spiritual house — the Church. This tabernacle is being made. A time is coming when,
in a more special sense, it will be rea/red, — the " day of Christ " — ^the day of " the mani-
festation of the sons of God " (Bom. viii. 19. Cf. Eev. xxi. 2, 3).

L The tabebnaole was not bbabbd till all the labours in connection with
THE HAKiNO OF IT HAD BEEN FINISHED. 1. The tabemaclc was made with a view to
its being reared. This was the encJ. So the calling, saving, and perfecting of individuals
for the kingdom of God has always reference to their ultimate manifestation with Christ
in glory (Bom. viii. 17—26 ; 2 Cor. iv. Ifr— 18 ; v. 1—11 ; Eph. v. 25—28 ; PhiL i. 6,
10; Col. ill. 1 — 4, etc.). 2. The labours of making were entirely /niaM, before the
rearing was begun. The rearing was but the bringing into visibility of an already
finished work. (1) All the parts of the tabernacle were made. (2) All thafwmitwt
of the tabernacle was made. (3) The dress of the servwnta of the tabernacle was made. Not
till all this was done was the command given to rear. So the day of the manifeBtation
of believers will not arrive till all labounpreparatory to the setting up of the king-
dom of Gkid in glory ham been oonoladed. The Ghispel preached tbiough all th« world

xxoou»— u, S •



i02



tSB BOOK Ot EXODl^a



l<m. XL 44—38.



(Matt. xiiv. 14), the "elect" fver. 31) gathered in, the last soul saved, believers
sanctified, every " living stone " (1' Pet. ii. 4) shaped and fashioned for the place it is
ultimately to occupy in the heavenly building, etc. 3. These labours having been con-
cluded, the rearing was proceeded with withcmt dday. The rearing included (1) the
putting of the parts of the tabernacle together. (2) The arrangement of its furniture.
(3) The ordering of its service. So, when once the preparatory labours in connection with
the kingdom of God have lieen finished, no time will be lost in setting it up in its final
glory. Christ will appear, and his people -will appear with him (CoL iii. 4). He
and they will he glorified together (Bom. viii, 17). 4. The rearing of the taber<
uacle was the setting of it in visible glory before the eyes of the Israelites. So
will Christ come to be "glorified in his saints, and admired in all them that believe"
(2 Thess. i. 10). 6. The rearing of the tabernacle completed the preparation of it « a
tanctvary for JehovaA. The same will be true of the glorification of the Church
(Rev. xxi. 3, 4).

II. The tabernacle, made bt the peoplb, was bbabed bt Moses. 1. Christ
admits us to be fellow-workers with himself in the labours of his Church. These are
carried on by human agency (2 Cor. vi. 1). 2. He alone has to do with the glorification
of his Church.

III. Whbk the tabebnacle was seabed, it was found that nothino was waktino
TO ITS PEBFECTioN AS A BANOTUABY. So will the gloiification of the Church make
manifest the beauty, symmetry, completeness, and perfection of the spiritual structure.
It will be found to be " a glorious Church, not lutving spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing " (Eph. v. 27) ; complete as a place of habitation for Jehovah ; a unity, and ■
perfect one.— ^. 0.



EXPOSITION.



Vera. 34—38. — ^Thbdesoentof the olobt
ov God on the completed work. The work
was finished — ^the first incense burnt (ver. 27) —
the first sacrifice offered (ver. 29). Those who
had watched the proceedings, and those who
had been engaged in them, were probably
about to retire to rest. Even Moses Iiad with-
drawn, and left the tabernacle to itself — when
suddenly, there was a manifestation of Divine
Power. The cloud, which had gone before
the Israelites from Succoth onward (ch. xiii.
20 — 22), and which had recently settled upon
the extemporised " Tent of Meeting " (ch.
rxxiii. 9), left its place, and " covered " the
newly-erected structure externally (ver. 34),
while an intensely brilliant light— here called
• the glory of God " — filled the whole interior
ct the tabernacle (tb.). Moses, it appears,
would fain have re-entered the tabernacle —

to see the great sight " (ch. iii. 3) ; but he
could not — ^the " glory " was too dazzling (ver.
SS). Thus a distinct approval was given to
all that had been done. God accepted his
house, and entered it. The people saw that
he had foregone his wrath, and would be con-
tent henceforth to dwell among them and
journey with them. Henceforth, throughout
the wanderings, the cloud and tabernacle were
If the cloud was lifted a little



off it and moved in front, the tabemad* had
to follow (ver. 86) — ^if it settled down on the
roof, the people stopped and remained mitil it
moved again (ver. 37) The appearance was
as of a clond by day, and as of fire by night,
so that all could always see where the taber-
nacle was, and whether it was stationaiy or in
motion (ver. 38). After the first descent, it
woold seem that " the glory " withdrew into
the Holy of Holies, so that I>oth Moses and the
priests could enter the holy place, and minister
there (Lev. viiL 10 ; x. 13, etc.>

Ver. 84.— Then a olond. In the original
" the cloud," t.e. the cloud so often spoken of
(ch. xiu. 21, 22 ; xiv. 19, 20, 24 ; xix. 9 ;
xxiv. 15—18 ; zxxiii. 9, 10). Covered the
tent Descended on the outer covering and
rested there. Filled the tabemacde. Entered
inside, and filled both holy place and H<Jv of
Holies. ■'

Ver. 85.— Moses was act able to enter. It
is implied that he wished — nay, tried — ^to enter
— but the " glory " prevented him. (Compare
1 Kings viii. 11 ; 2 Chr. v. 14 ; vii. 2.) Be-
oanse the clond abode thereon. It was not
the external " cloud " which prevented Moses
from entering, but the internal " glory." Bnt
the two are regarded as inseparable.

Vers. 86— 88.— And when— <.«. " whenso-
ever." The last three verses describe th<
manner in which the dond henceforth lerred



OB. XI.. 34— 38.J



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



40S



the Israelites as guide — not only directing
their coarse, but determining when they were
to moTe, and how long they were to rest at
each encampment For a further accoont of
the same, see Num. ix. 15 — ^28.
Vei. 88.— The olond . . . was upon the taber-



naole by day and Are was on it hj nif kt
Compare ch. xiii. 21, 22 : and ch. xiv. 20, 24;
Num. ix. 15, 16. lie cloud had two aspects
—one ol)scure, the other radiant It was a
dork column by day — a pillar of fiie by night
Thus it was always Tisible.



HOMILETIOa

Yen. 34 — 38. — The tymboh of OocPt presence. L God ib been jt thosb who
urnmaNEULT love hiu as purb light. " I am the light of the world " (John riU.
12; ix. 6). "In him was life, and the life was the light of men" (ib. L 4). "In him
IB no darkness at all " f 1 John iL 5). With clear unclouded radiance he shmes on those
who tread his heavenly courts, which need no other light besides him. " The city
hath no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it ; for the glory of Qod doA
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof" (Rev. xzi. 23). With a radiance not
much less bright, he looks upon his saints on earth, cheering them, illimiining their
paths, making them glad with the light of his countenance. He may veil himself in
condescension to their infirmity ; but the veil is translucent ; it covers without con-
cealing ; it tempers the brightness, but only as a thin haze tempers the splendours of
the lord of day.

II. OOO SHOWS mHBGLF TO THE OENERALITT OF MEN AS UNOLED LIGHT ABS CLODD.

To Abraham he appeared as " a smoking furnace and a burning lamp " (Gen. xv. 17) ;
to the Israelites at Sinai as combined smoke and fire (Ex. xiz. 18) ; to Solomon, dazzled
by his glory, he was stiU one who "dwelt in the thick darkness" (1 Kings viii. 12).
When uaiaii beheld him Bitting in his temple "the house was filled with smoke" (Is.
▼i, 1 — 4) ; when Ezekiel " saw visions of God," he " looked and behold, a great cloud,
and a fire infolding itself." Wherever the glory of the Lord is seen, wherever he looks
upon men with mercy and compassion, there his proper symbolism is light, though it
may be a light partially obscured and mingled with darkness. For darkness symbolises
his anger ; and in the case of his wayward children, he cannot but be at once cornpas-
sionate and angry; displeased, yet anxious to forgive. Or the darkness may be the
dense cloud of human ignorance which the Divine light can only partially pierce
through. Any way, the bulk of men see God as a light amid smoke. " Clouds and
darkness are round about him " (Ps. xcvii. 2) — " he makes darkness his secret place, his
pavilion round about him with dark waters, and thick clouds to cover him" [ib. xviii.
11). Fire flashes out of the clouds occasionally ; gleams of light stream forth; "at the
brightness of his presence, his clouds remove " (ib. 12), and he is seen to be man's
"true light."

HI. (mD IB TO BOMB HEBE DAEKNEB8, A DENSE 0FAQX7E OLOUD. This he U: 1. To

agnostics — to them who know him not, and refuse to believe that he can be known ;
2. To them who have never heard of him, but have a dim unconscious feeling that some
infinite unknown being exists ; 3. To them that have been taught to view him as a
remorseless, revengeful being, without pity or mercy ; 4. To them that, having known
him aright, have cast his words behind their back, thrown off his authority, and placed
themselves in determined antagonism to his will and commandments. AJl is dark in
the future to such persons ; and in the thought of God is " the blackness of darkness
for ever." Because they have not chosen to retain God in iheir knowledge, God has
given them over to a reprobate mind (Rom. i. 28). They " put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter." He, in whom is no darkness at all, is to them mere darkness. Th«
Orod of this world has " blinded their eyes" that they cannot see ; and, like a blind maU;
looking at the sun, the darkness which is in their <3wn vision they ascribe to the object
which their dim sight fails to distinguish. God is " the true light, which lighteth every
man that cometh into the world" (John i. 9). But " if the light that ia within thet
b* '^ ftA"«Mt how great is that darkness I" (Matt vi 23.)



8d2



4M THE BOOK OP EXODUS. [oh. xu 84— S&



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 34 — 38. — Indwelling and guidance. ' I. God owns thb dwellino-flaok est
OP A000RDIN8 TO HIS COMMANDMENTS. "Then the cloud," etc. "And Moses was
not able to enter in," etc. ; it was claimed as his own and taken possession of by tha
Lord. 1. The soul which comes by God's way will be filled with God's glory. 2. Th«
Church which honours God he will glorify. 3. The full glory of the perfected Church,
th9 bride of Christ.

^. ^WuERE TB^ Lord dwells hs guides. When the cloud was taken up they went
onward ; when it rested they rested. 1. He is our guide in our onward journey.
(1) In providence. We must make sure that we follow him. It will not avul to
choose our own way and then ask God to be with <is. .. We are to foUow his leading,
not he ours. (2) In grace. We may be mourning departed joy. There may be no
longer the freshness and power we once felt in the ministration of the word, or in
prayer. We have been slumbering and loitering. We have not striven to press through
our sins and into fuller light. The cloud has lifted and gone onward, and we must
follow after. " This one thing I do." 2. He is our guide into patience. (1) He teaches
us to bear and so to overcome. (2) By the resting of faith to possess and to grow. — ^U.

Vers. 34 — 38. — The house filled with glory. The close of the book of Exodus ia
worthy of the greatness of its subject. It ends where the history of the world will end, wiA
the descent of Jehovah's glory to dwell with men (Rev. xxi. 3). We have seen Israel
in bondage ; have beheld its redemption ; have followed it through the wilderness ;
have heard the thunders of the law at Sinai ; have been witnesses of the nation's
.covenant with God ; have seen its shameful apostasy ; have traced the steps of its
reconciliation : have heard the instructions given for the building of this tabernacle ; have
viewed the tabernacle itself. We see now the symbol of Jehovah's glorious presence in
the midst of the people whom he has thus in so many ways made his own. What a
wondrous succession of subjects we have thus had before us in the course of our review.
The intolerable anguish of oppressed Israel ; the birth of the deliverer ; the singiUai
providence of his early life ; his great choice ; the call in Midian ; the revelation of the
name ; the return to Egypt ; first failures ; the long and tragic contest with Pharaoh
the hardening of Pharaoh's heart ; the exodus ; the Red Sea ; the miracles of the desert
the law ; the covenant ; the " patterns " shown to Moses in the mount ; the sin of thecalf ,
the great intercession ; the name of mercy ; the preparation of the sanctuary. There
reinains to, complete the series only this final scene of the entrance of Jehovah's glory
into the. house prepared for his habitation. This was the true consecration of the
sanctuary, and the true consecration of the nation. " A cloud covered the tent of the
congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle " (ver. 14). In what is related
in these verses we have : —

, I. A THREEFOLD PRiviLBQB. 1. Indwelling. The fillmg of the tabernacle with
the glory was the: symbol of Jehovah's taking up his abode in it, and so in Israel (ct
ch. XXV. 8). It testified (l).to the completeness of his reconciliation with the people.
Cf. Is; sii, 1 — " Lord, 1 wiE praise thee, though thou wast angry with me, thine
anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me," (2) To his complacency in the
beautiful house they had reared for him. Cf. Ps. cxzxii. 14 — "This is my rest for
ever, here will I dwell ; for I have desired it." (3) To his desire to dwell wnong them.
Note— 1. The true glory of the Church is God's residence in her midst. This was
Israel's highest distinction (oh. xxxiii. 16). 2. We should pray that the time may
come when the Church shall be, not only dwelt in by her Lord, but "filled" with the
" glory " of his presence (Is. be.). 2. Protedim. The glory filled the tabernacle within,
while the cloud spread itself above the tent as a protective covering without. So is
Jehpyah the. protection of his Church (Is. iv, 6, 6 1 Zech. iL 6i 8. Quidance (ttsta.
36— 38\ See Homily on ch. xiiL 21, 22. ^

IL A HINT OF mrERFECTioN. " Moses was not able to enter Into the tent of the
eongregation," etc. (ver. 35). Thus are we reminded that, amidst all these glorious
olrcumstances, that which is perfect is not yet come. 1. Law, not gospeL 2. A
material building, not a spiritual house. S. Earth, not heaven. It wai a glory (1) tot



0H.a.M— 38.J THE BOOK OF BXODUS. 40F

great for man to see. Even Moses, who had seen so much of the IKyine glorj, wm
not able to look upon it. (2) Too great for such a building — a mere material structure
— to contain. Mui longs for nearer communion. So great a glory needs a better house
to contain it — a spiritual (1 Pet. iL 6).

nL A F0BS0A8T OF WHAT SHALL BE. That which 18 perfect is not yet come, but it
vrill come by-and-by. 1. The tabernacle of God will be with men, and he \riU dwell
amons them (Rev. xxi. 3, 4">. His glory will fiU it. " The glory of God did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof" (Bev. zzi. 23). 2. This glory will be no longer un-
approachable. We shall be able to endure the sight. " His servants ahsM rierve him,
and they shall see his face" (Bev. xxii. 3, 4). We shall receive the Yision. 3. This,
however, wiU only be when earthly conditions have been exchanged for heavenly.
" This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality "
(1 Cor. XV. 63). Till that hour arrives, we must be content to " walk by &ith, not by
Bight " (2 Cor. T. 7), seeing only " as through a glass darkly " (1 Cor. xiU. L2).--J. O.



HOMILBTIOAL INDEX



TO



THE BOOK OF EXODUS.



CHAFTEB L



The Patriarchal Names ... ... 2

Joseph io Egypt ... ... ... 8

Joseph in Death with all hii Gene-

rations ... ... ... 8

Removal to Egypt ... ... 4

The Twelve Foundations ... ... 4

An Ending ... ... ... 5

The Prosperity of Israel ... ... 6

Tarry thon the Lord's Leisure ... 7

God the Protector of His People ... 12

Joseph Forgotten... ... ... 12

The Wisdom of the Wise brought to

nought ... ... ... 12

A Multiplying People and a King's

Fears ... ... ... ... 13

The Bondage ... ... ... 14

Israel in Egypt ... ... ... 15

Egypt's Sin ... ... ... 16

Steps in Sin ... ... ... 17

Duty of Opposing Authority when its

Commands are ngaiust God's Law... 18

A King's Edicts 19

The Policy of Pharaoh ... ... 20

The Conduct of the Midwives ... 22

The Way of Sin ... ... ... 23

CHAFTEB n.

The Birth of Hoses ... ..^ 25

The Beauty of Moses ... ... 26

The Escape of Moses m. ... 26

The Education of Moses m. ... 27

4 Child of riovjd«iM« M* M. tt



The Infancy of Moses m Ma M

By Works was Faith made Perfeot ... 82

A Picture of true Faith ... ... 8S

The ChUd of the Water ... «• 83

Moses as a would-be Deliverer ... 36

Moses as a Peace-Maker ... ... 87

Moses as a Fugitive ... ... 87

The Choice of Moses ... ... 88

Unpnrified Zeal ... ... ... 40

Moses, the Ardent bat Mistaken

Patriot ... ... ... 40

Moses the Hater of all Oppressian ... 42

Moses " was Grown " ... ... 44

Mistake in Life's Morning ... ... 45

Moses a Second Time the Champion

of the Oppressed ... ... 47

Moses as Husband and Father ... 47

The Long Exile ... ... ... 47

Gershom... ... ... ... 40

Moses in Midian ... ... ... 49

Sitting by the Well; • SoggestiTe

Comparison ... ... ... 60

Life and its Moods ... ... 60

Death Comes at Last, Even to the

Proudest Monarch ... ... 63

The Hour of Help ». ... 62

Moses and Christ ... ... ... 62

A Groaning Israel and an Observant

God ... ... ... ... U

CHAFTEB m.

The Burning Bush 67, 72, 81, 68, 64

The Impulse to Dnw Nigh m M



INDEX.



The Prohibition and the Ground of it 59

The Call of Moses ... ... 60

Fitness of Moses to be God's Instru-
ment in Delivering Israel ... 61
Moses' Timidity notwithstanding his

Fitness ... ... ••• 62

God's Bevelation of Himself nnder the

Name Jehovah ... ••• ... 62
The Divine Injunction to Gather the

Elders... ... .•• ... 63

The Promises to the Elders, and to

Moses 63

Pharaoh's Obdnraoy, and God's Mode

oi Overcoming it ... ... 64

God Brings Good ont of Evil ... 64

TheGodoftheFatherB ... ... 68

God's Sympathy with the Oppressed 68

Insufficiency ... ... ... 69

The Name 88,83,69

The Two Messagei ... ... 70

The God of Abraham, Isaiko, and

Jacob ... ... ... ... 73

A Large Promise for a Great Need ... 75

The First Difficulty 76

The Second Difficulty ... ... 77

The Coming Libation ... ... 79

Hindrances to Service and how God

Bemoves them ... ... ... 84

CHAPTEB IV.

The Intent of the First Sign ... 87
The Intent of the Second Sign ... 88
The Intent of the Third Sign ... 88
Slowness of Speech a Drawback on
Ministerial Fitness, but not a Dis-
qualification ... ... ... 88

The Sin of Self Distrust, and its

Punishment ... ... ... 89

The Love of Brothers ... ... 89

Diversities of Gifts, a Benefit both to

Individuals and to the Church ... 90

Unbelief 90

A Triology of Signs ... ... 92

Blow of Speech ... ... ... 93

God the Giver of our Faculties ... 95

A Servant's Difficulties ... ... 95

The Eod... ... ... ... 95

The Third Difficulty; How is Moses

to Deal with an Incredulous Israel ? 95
The Fourth Difficulty : Moses aUegei

Defect of Utterano* ... «. 97



Moses taking a Step too Far, is md-
denly Arrested ... ... m. 98

The Importance of the Bod: God
Guards Moses against a natural

Oversight 99

Weakness and Strength for God's
Service ... ... ... 100

God's Wrath will FaU where His Sar>
vice is Declined... ... ... 101

Divine Supplement! for Human In-
firmity ... ... ... 101

The Fact of having a Mission doei
not Belease a Man from several
Obligations ... ... ... 103

Obedience brings a Blessing ... 104

The Betum ... ... ... 105

Hardening ... ... ... 106

Israel a Type of Sonshlp m. ... 106

True Faith and its Joy m. ... 107

The Three Meetings ... ... 107

The Unsolicited Bemoval of a Source
of Great Anxiety ... ... 107

Facing Egypt ... ... ... 108

One Small Duty Neglected may Frus-
trate the Purpose of a Life ... 110
« My Times are in Thy Hand " ... Ill
Interpretation of Providence ... 112
Neglect of the Covenant on its Human

Side 112

God does not Stint His Help when He
Visits Man ... ... ... 114

Full Confidence necessary between
Fellow Workers... ... ... 114

The Blessing on Obedience ... 115

Worship the proper Outcome of Thank-
fulaesB... ... ... .. 116

A Meeting of Brothers ... m. 116

Preaching and Faith m« m* 116



CHAPTEB V.

God's Will often Opposed by the Great

and His Servants Bebuffed ... 117

Failure ... ... ... ... 118

A First Interview... ... ... 120

God's Demand and Pharaoh's Answer 122
Pharaoh's First Bcsponse : his Answer

in Word 122

The Picture of a Tyrant ... ... 125

Bricks without Straw ^ US, 125

Vain Words m> m m U5



INDEX.



r*as
Increased Oruelty... ... ... 126

The Increase of Trouble for God's

People no Proof of the Failnre of

His Purpose ... ... ... 128

A Blind Obedience to the Oommands

of Tyrants not Laudable ... 129

Vicarious Suffering ... ... 129

A. Wicked Man's Persistence in Wrong

Doing... ... ... ... 131

SuStrings, even at the hand of Lawful

Authorities, not Always Deserved... 182
Unheeded Expostulation ... ... 182

Pharaoh's first Response ; his Answer

in Deed 183

The Troubled find Consolation In God

only ... ... ... ... 134

The Servants of Ood Liable to Keproaoh

from Friends no less than Enemies 184
Mormuring and Faith ... ... 135

Thoughtless Smiters of a Brother in

Adversity ... ... ... 187

The Beligions Soul takes iti Oriefs to



Ood



189



OHAFTBB VL



God's Oondesoension to a Week Faith 140

Ood's Karnes and their Importance ... 141

God a Keeper of Oovenanta ... 141
A Divine Commentary on a Divine

Name ... ... ••. ■•• 141

A Rich Promise ... ... ... 143

God Enoooiages Moses in His Despon-
dency... ... ... ... 143

The Message to AfiSict Israel ... 145

The Lord thy God is Dae God ... 145

The New Commission ... ... 147

The Pains of the Lower Life Shutting

, out the Blessings of the Higher One 148
The Servant of Ood must Labour

Unceasingly ... ... ... ISI

Shaken Faith and an Unshaken Pnr-

poae ... ... ... — 151

The Undrcnmcised Lips ... ... 153

The Contagion of Despair ... ... 154

The Historical Oharaoter of Real Reve-



lation



CHAPTER VIL
Md Assigns to each Man his Intelleo-
toal Omda .m — •••



156



The Genealogy of Moiei and Aaicm... 1S7



160



The Fierceness of Man turns to Gkxl'i
Praise ... ... ... ... 160

Miracles the Credentials of an Ambas-
sador from Grod ... ... 101

A God to Pharaoh ... ... 161

Heart Hardening... ... ... 162

God still Glorified amid Human
Weakness and Sin ... ... 165

False Imitations of Tilings Divine not
difficult of Detection ... ... 166

The Rod turned into a Serpent ... 167
The First Sign to Pharaoh ; the Rod
becomes a Serpent ... ... 168

God's Punishments Appropriate and

Terrible 172

The Nile turned into Blood ... 173

The First Plagne ; the Water turned

into Blood 176, 174

The Power of Satan is with all Deceiv-
ableness ... ... ... 177

God Allows Men to Seek and Obtain
Alleviation of his Judgments ... 177

The Great Conflict 178

•< The Lord He is the God" ... 179

CHAPTER Vm.

God ean Scourge Men beyond En-
durance with n Whip of Straw ... 181
Three Plagues— Frogs, Lice, Flies ... 181
The Plagne of Frogs ... 185, 184
God's Mercy when Men Repent ever
so Little ... ... ... 187

Double-minded Men,&o. ... ... 188

Moral Avalanches not easily Arrested

Ac. 189

The Plague of Lice ... ... 189

The Third Plague— the Gnats, the

Finger of God ... ... HI

God puts Division between the QooA

and Bad, both Here and Hereafter 193
The Plague of Flies ... 195, 193

The Fourth Plague ... ... 196

Compromise not Allowable in Religion 198
The Duty of God's Servants to Rebuke

the Great of the Earth ... ~. 190

OHAFTEB IX.

The Burthen of Man's Sin Preesea on
the Brute Creation ... ... 199

The Plague of Murrain of Beast* .. 90S



mDBX



rAOB

The Fifth Plague 201

Bin Pnnished by Physical Suffer-
ing, 4o. ... ... •■■ 203

The Plague of Boils and Blaine 205, 206, 204
The Method of the Divine Kule over

Bad Men, &c 209

The Plague of Hail 210

The Eoad to Buin 212

« The Earth is the Lord's," &o. ... 213

"Harden not Your Hearts" ... 215
The Seventh Plague— Hail Mingled

with Fire ... ... ... 216

Mercy in Judgment ... ... 218

The Mock Bepentance of a Half-
Awakened Sinner, &o. .... ... 220

OHAFTEB X.

God's Mercies and Wondrous Works
to be Bemembered ... ... 225

Gk>d's Long Suffering Towards the

Wicked has a Limit 226

Man's Interposition with Good Advice
may oome Too Late ... ... 227

The TerriblenesB of God's Severer
Judgments ... ... ... 227

The Agency of Nature used by God
both in Inflicting and Bemoving
Judgments ... ... ... 228

A New Message ... ... ... 229

A Plague of Locusts ... 232,237,230

The Tales of a Grandfather ... 235

God's Judgments on Sin, &o. ... 236

The Ohildren of Darkness have Dark-
ness, &o. ... ... ... 238

Compromise, fte. ... ... ... 239

Bad Men, fte. ... ». ... 241

The Plague of Darkness ... 242, 244, 241

OHAPTEB XL

Crises bring out Men's Characters, &o. 246

The Beginning of the End ... ... 247

I low God Justifies the Trust of all

who Hope in His Mercy ... ... 248

The Issues of Life and Death are in

the Hand of God ... ... 249

Righteous Anger ... ... ... 250

A Finale ... ... ... 251

The Tenth Plague ... ... 253

Man's Ill-doing causes God's Wonders

to be Multiplied ^ w. 256



CHAPTEB Xn.

THEHB

The Advantages of the Ecclesiastical

Calendar ... ... ... 262

The Passover proper ... ... 263

The Passover contained in the Eu-
charist... ... ... ... 265

The Beginning of Months ... ... 265

The Passover 272, 266

The Institution of the Passover ... 268
The Passover Lamb, a Prophetic Pic-
ture of Christ and His Salvation ... 271
Christ His People's Salvation and
Strength ... ... , ... 271

The Passover Feast the Type of the

Christian Life ... ... ... 271

If One Died for all, then all Died ... 278
No Safety for Man beyond the Limits
Protected by the Lamb's Atoning

Blood ... ... ... ... 975

The Obligation of Men to Teach the
True Meaning of Bites and Cere-
monies to their Children ... ... 276

Christ our Passover ... ... 277

« What Mean ye by this Service ? " ... 278

The Children's Question in Canaan ... 278

Israel and the Sacrifice for Sin ... 280
The Death of the First-bom 283, 281
Israel's Going Forth from Egypt a

Pattern to Oppressed Churches 289. 285

Pharaoh's Prayer ... ... ... 286

The Dismissal ... ... ... 287

The Exodus as a Fact in History ... 290

The Mixed Multitude ... ... 291

Egypt's Sorrow : Israel's Joy ... 292

March at Midnight ... ... 293

God's Discipline of His Chosen Ones 294

The Exodus ... ... ... 296

Passover Precepts realized in Christian

Practice ... ... ... 297

The Spirit of the Passover Ordinance 898



OHAPTEB XIIL

The Dedication and Bedemption of

the First-bom ... ... ... 800

The Rightful Use of Church Ordin-
ances ... ... ... ... 801

The Sanctification of the First-born 303, 802

•■Remember this Day" ... ... SOS

How to Declare God's Salvation ... 804

Bemember „, m« m* 801



INDEX.



It is the Method of the Divine Action
to Aocomplish EudB by Circmtous
Ileans ... ... ... 806

It u a Christian Dnty to Oany with
1IB on the Path of Life the Bones of
OnrDead ... ... ... 307

llie Way of the Wilderness by the
Bed Sea ... ... ... 308

Joseph's Bones ... ... ... 309

Israel's Jonraey the Bmblem of the
Christian's Klgrimage ... ... 810

God's Ghiidance Of His People m* 811
The Fiery, Olondy Pillar ... ... 312

Ki* and Clond ... m* — SIS



CHAPTER XIV.

Ood's Trials of His Faithfol Ones ... 816

The Command to Encamp by the Sea 816
Israel Stricken -with Terror by Eeason

of a Deliverance not yet Completed 318

Trial and Jadgmeat m ... S19



THSm TMI

The (Jood Besolntions of the Worldly

ore Short Lived ... ... 321

TheParsait 322

Jehovah Hardening Pharaoh's Heart 321
Divine Trial a Tonchstone to Distin.

gnish Faith from ITnfaithfnlneBS ... 329

The Deliverance ... ... ... 329

Cruel Words out of Cowardly Hearts 831

The Passage of the Bed Sea ... 333

The Beward of Faith ... ... 336

Speak with the Children of Israel, &«. 335

Obedience necessary to Salvation ... 836
God Completes the Deliverance of the

Israelites, Ac. ... ... ... 836

God Protects His Own, but in Strange

Ways... ... ... ... 840

Light to the Friend, Darkness to the

Foe ... ... ... ••• 842

The Goodness and Severity of God ... 842

We Walk by Faith, not by Sight ... 843
God's Dealings with the Wicked and

Impenitent ... ... ••• 346

The Overthrow of the Egyptiaaa m 846



VOLUME n.



OHAPTBB XV.

The Song of Hoses a Pattern Thanks-
giving

The Aid which Devout Women can
render to the Church

Moses' Song

The Song of Moses and the Lamb ...

The Sonft of Triumph — God Exalted in
the Lips of the People ...

Jehovah among the Gods ...

Woman's Part in the Song of Triumph

The Sacrifice of Praise

The Eeanlts of Deliverance to God's
People ... ••• _ •••

The Trials and Vicissitudes of Life ...

Marah and Elim ...

The Want of Water and the Want of
Faith...

"I will Hear what God the I«rd
willSay"

Trial and Blessing .» ««•

The Well of Bitterness ... •»

Bliw ... ■•■ •♦» •'•



6
17,6
16,8

11,9
13
16
17

18
20
21

24

26
27
27



CHAPTBE XVL

The Unreasonableness of Discontent 81

Mnrmurings ... ... ... 82

The Mercy of God in Hearing and

Helping an Ungrateful People .u 85

The Gift of Manna ... .» 86

God and Nature ... ... m 40

Bread from Heaven ... .» 41

God's Curse upon Ill-gotten Gains ... 42
The Manna of the Body — a Homily on

Providence ... ... ... 43

The Manna for the Soul — a Homily on

Grace... ... ... ... 44

The Provision of the Manna ... 45
He Nurtured them in the Wilder

ness ... ... ... ... 47

Christ the Bread from Heaven ... 48
The Law of the Manna ... ... S7,50

Daily Provision for Daily Need ... 51

The Institution of the Sabbath ... 63
The Manna and the Sabbath S6, 54

Memorials of Mercies ... ... 69

The Pot of Manna m •«• O



INDEX.



CHAPTER XVIL



FAOB

Water ont of the Book .m 62, 61

'' That Bock was Chriat " ... .„ 65

Christ our Spring ,„ „. 66

The QiTing of Water in Rephidim ... 67

They Tempted God in the Desert ... 69

Trial and Failure ... ... 70

The UselessnesB of Fighting against

God ... ... ... ... 72

"Diversities of Gifts," bnt the same

Spirit... ... ... ... 73

God's Ileroies need Memorial, and

Obtain it in Several Ways ... 74

Christ our Banner ... ... 76

Amalek... ... ... 79,76

" Thou bast Given a Banner unto them

that Fear Thee " ... ... 79

The Discomfiture of Amalek in Bephi.

dim M. ... ... .„ 80

CHAPTEB XVni.
The Blessedness of Family Be-unions,

when Bightly Ordered ... ... 83

The Visit of Jethro ... ,., 84

The Claims of Home .., ... 87
The Consolation of those who Suffer

Loss for the Kingdom of God ... 88

Friendship in its Loftiest Form ... 88
Jethro's Visit — ^Moses in his Domestic

Eelations ... ... „. 88

"Ye are Come unto Mount Zion" ... 90

The Unwisdom of a Monopoly of Power 93
The necessary QnaMcationa of such as

are to Exercise the Office of Judges 94

The Appointment of Judges „, 96

The Christian in Public Pathi ^ 87

The Economy of Force ... ^. 97

Good Coansel well taken ... ... 98

Jethro's Advice ... ... ... 98

*< The Eye cannot say unto the Hand,

I hare no Need of Thee " ... 100

Jethro the Model of a Friendly Adviser 102

Jethro's Departure m m. 102

CHAPTEB XDC

Localities Shaped to suit God's MormI

Farposes ... „. „, 104

Amv«I and Encampment at Sinai ... 106

God's Promises to such as Keep His

Oorenant ... .„ ... 108

Tk« Oorenant PrepoMJl ^ ... lUO



THEHX rAQM

"My Covenant" ... ... ... Ill

God's First Message to the People at

Sinai ... ... ... ... 113

The Lord and His People ... ... US

Covenant before Law ... ... 116

The AwfnlnesB of God's Presence, dec. 116
" The Mount that might be Touched,"

*o 118

The Manifestation of God's Glory at

Sinai ... ... ... ... 120

The Bevelation of Jehovah ... 122
God's Various Modes of Manifesting

Himself ... ... ... 123

Sinai and Sion ... ... .„ 124

"PreparetoMeet Thy God" ^ 126

Only a Voice ... ... ... 127

The Priestly Office does not Dispense

a Man from Personal Purity, &o. ... 128

CHAPTEB ZZ.

The Ten Commandments CoIIeotiTely 186
u n n Severally... 136

The Moral Law — Preliminary ... 189

„ » , General Survey ... 140

The Ten Commandments — ^An Intro-
ductory Beminder ... ... 143

The First and Second Commandment*)
against Polytheism and Image
Worship 166,144

The Third Commandment : Profanitiy
Forbidden ... ... 166,146

The Fourth Commandment 1 The
Sacred Sabbath ... 166, 148

The Fifth Commandment : The Com-
mandment for Children ... ... 149

The Individual Israelite considered
in Ms Duties towards his Neigh-
^o^ - ... 160

The Ten Words ... .„ „. 162

The Soul for God only ... .„ I63

The Commandment with Promise ... 163

Oar Threefold Duty to our Neigh-
bour ... ... 164

Utility of a Course of Teaching on
the Commandment* ... ... 164

The Second Table ... ... nj

A Correspondence between the Tw«
Tables ... ... ... 168

The Eighth Commandment ... 169

The Last Commandment of theSeooad
Table... ... ... ... uj



INDEX.



▼fl



The Divine Presence at once Altrao.

tive and Repellent ... ... 162

The Terrors of Sinai ... ... 163

The Law of the Altar ... ... 165

• I wiU Go unto the Altar of God " ... 165



CHAPTER XXI.




The Slave Laws ._ „.


- 171


Laws on Homicide


... 172


Injuries to Parents


... 173


The Crime of Man-stealing


... 173


The Rnle of Eetaliation ...


... 174


The " Judgments " ...


... 174


Hebrew Bond Service


... 175



Murder and Belated Capital Offences

180, 177

Bodilj' Injuries ... ... ... 177

The Servant Dying under Chastise,

ment ... ... ... ... 178

"An Eye for an Bye" ... ... 179

RegulationsfortbeTreatmentof Slaves 180
The Requirement of Strict Equiva-
lents in making Compensation for

Injuries ... ... ... 182

" Mine Bars hast Thou Opened " ... 183

The Quilt of Kegleot .„ ... 184



CHAPTER XXIL

Fnniatiment Graduated ... ... 186

The Law of Love Forbids all Injury

to a Neighbour... ... ... 187

The Sacred Character of Trusts ... 188

The Duty of Borrowers ... ... 189

Restitution ... ... ... 189

The Severity and the Tendemeu of

God ... ... ... ... 192

Abominations ... ... ... 195

Jehovah's Dues ... ... ... 195

The Treatment of the Stranger ... 195
The Treatment of the Widow and the

Fatherless ... ... _. 197

The Treatment of the Poor m 198



CHAPTER XXIII.

God's Care for the Administration of
J»tice ... ... — 203

The Duties which, Men owe to their
Knemies •« — ■•• ^^



THEira '*•'

The Sabbatical Tear .m w. 204

The Rest of the Sabbath ... m. 205

Festival Laws ... ... ~. 205

Doing Justice and Loving Mercy ... 207

Sabbaths and Feasts ... ... 208

Seeking the Things which make for

Justice ... 209

A Threefold Cord is not Quickly

Broken ... ... ... 210

God's Promises sometimes Absolute,

but for the most part Contingent on

Obedience ... ... ... 213

Promises and Warnings ,„ m. 214

The Angel Provoked ... ... 216

The Angel of the Covenant ... 218

The Prospect in the Promised Land 219

" Mine Angel shall Go before Thee" 221

The Mediatorial Guide ... ... 221

The Peru of Idolatry m. m. S23



CHAPTER XXIV.

Man's Readiness to Enter into Cove,
nant with God, and Promise Un-
limited Obedience ... ... 225

The Vision of God for the Selected

Few 226

The Terms of the Covenant Accepted 227
" If any Man will do the WiU he shaU

Know of the Doctrine " ... ... 228

The Ratification of the Covenant ... 229

Consecration ... ... m— 281

The Covenant Made ... .» 883

The Covenant Meal on Sinai m. 234

A Vision of God ... ... m. 234

Prolonged Commune with God ... 237

Moses Ascends the Mount... ... 288

Moses' Sojourn with God a Type of

Christ's M. M M. W8



CHAPTER XXV.

The Law of Acceptable Offerings ... 240
The Materials for the Sanctuary 248, 241

" God Loveth a Cheerful Giver " ... 242

The Command to Bmld a Sanotuarj 243
Earthly Sanctuaries typical of the

Heavenly Dwelling-place ... 246
God's Dwelling-place among the

People ... ... ... 247

The Symbolism of the Ark of the

Covenant .« .„ m. UO



Tia



lilDEX.



TRKn rAOi

The Ark of the TesHmon^ ... 251

The Mero7-seat Euid the Cherabim ... 252
What must be Found with every Soul

that ia Ood's Dwelling-plaoe ... 252
The Ark, the Table, and the Candle*

Btiok 253

" He Uaketh the Winds His Uessen-

gen," Ao. ... 255

The Symbolism of the Table of Show-
Bread ... ... ... 257

The Symbolism of the Candlestick 260, 259

CHAPTER XXVL

The Bymboligm of the Tabernacle

Structnre ... ... ... 264

Jehoyah's Dwelling ... ... 265

The Tabernacle itself ... ... 266

" God Dwelleth not in Temples Made

with Hands" ... ... ... 267

OHAPTBE XXVn.

The Symbolism of the Brazen Altar 270

The Tabernacle and its Teachings ... S71

The Court of the Tabernacle ... 273

The Value in God's Sight of what is

Common and Homely ... ... 274

on for the Lamp... ... 277,275

The Brazen Altar and Court of the

Tabernacle ... ... ... 276

The Burning Lamp .» ... 277

CHAPTER XXVin.

The Glory of Holy Garments ... 280
The Symbolism of the Ephod and its

Onyx Stones ... ... ... 281

The Priests' Garments ... 284, 282

" Who shall Ascend into the Hill of

the Lord?" ... 282

The Teachings of the Breast-plate ... 288
Aaron in his Priesthood, the Type of

JesQS ... ... ... 289

The Teachings of the Bobe ... 290

„ „ „ Mitre ... 291

The Lesson of the Tnnio ... ^ 292

The Priests' Attire .„ „. Sas

CHAPTER XXIX.

The OonMormtion of the First High
Priest ... ... ... 298



THIHI *Aai
The Rites of Consecration for the

Priesthood ... ... ... 298

The Talue of a Daily Serric« ... 800

The Daily Bumt-OSering ... ... SO]

God's Promises to Israel ... ... 802

Israel Sanctified by God's Freaenoe... 802

CHAPTER XXX

TheSymbolismof the Altar of Incense 804
The Atonement Money ... 807, 806
The Numbering of Israel uid tk»

Ransom ... ... ... 807

The Brazen Laver ... ... 808

The Larer and the Anointing On ... 809
The Sweetness of the Holy Anointing

OU 810

The Holy Incense ... ... 812

The Golden Altar and the Perfume... U3



CHAPTER XXXL

Artistic Ezoellenoe m* m. 815

Bezaleel and Aholiab .m ••• 816

Corenant Signs ... .« m» 818

The Sabbath ... ... ... 819

The Tables of Testimony ... «. 880

CHAPTER XXXn.

The Hankering after Idols, &0. ... 822

The Golden Calf ... ... 824, 323

The Anger of God ... ... 828

The Intercession of Moses... ... 829

The Wrath of Jehovah and the Inter.

cession of Moses ... ... 329

Some Powers Restrain, others Compel 831

The First Intercession ... ... 832

The Act of Moses in Breaking the

Tables ... ... ... 884

The Return of Moses to the Camp ... 835

Judgment and Mercy ... ... 837

Idolatry Condemned by the Idols'

Weakness, &o.... ... ... 838

Aaron's Ezonses ... ... ,m 839

The Punishment of Idolatry m. 841

The Zeal of Levi... ... ... 841

" Who is on the Lord's Side t" ... 842

Moses as the Forerunner of Christ ... S-k'.
The Confession and Intercession of

Moses... ... ... ... 841

The Second Intercession „ m. S4t



INDIS,



CHAPTER XXXm.

The Hiding of God'a Face from Man 348
The Mode of BecoTering God's Pre-

■•"«*■•• ... ... ... 850

A Nation in Garb of Fenitenoe ... 851

ESeotnal Importunity „. „. 353

The Third Intercegsion ... ... 863

The Cnring for Close Commuiion

with God ... ... ... 855

Clefti in the Rook ... ... 855

"Shew Me Thy Glory" ... ... 856

Dirine Sovereignty ... ... 866

The Bestonition to Divine Favoor

Completed ... ... ... 367

Meroy Veiled in Jndgment ... 858

Interceision and iti Reward ». 869



CHAPTER XXXrV.

The Second Promulgation of the Moral
Law, ^. ... ... 361,860

Renewal of the Tablei and Fourth

Intercession ... ... ... 861

The Second Proclamation of God'a

Name ... ... ... 864

The "Name" 365

The Manifestation of God... ... 366

The Name of the Lord ... ... 367

" God ia Love" ... ... ... 868

The Covenant Renewed ... ... 370

"I Make a Covenant" ... ... 871

Revived Obligations ... ... 871

The Shining of Moses' Pace 875, 877, 373

The Symbolism of the Veil ... 874

The Shining Face ... ... 874

Psllowihip with God and its Fruiti 876



CHAPTER XXXV.

The Sabbath Rest not to be Broken
for Sacied Work ... ... 378

The New Start 878

On the Stuboliiu or the Tabik-

HACLE AND ITS FaKTS, SES THE HOUI-
I1BTIC8 ON CHAfTEKS XXV., XXVI.,

XIVII., XXVIII., AKD XXX. Ok

TKI SiMBOLISM OF THE AnOINTIN*

Oil AMD THE Holt Incense, ibe
HOKIIiIBt OK Chaptek XXX.



The Duty and Privilege of Making

Ofterings to God ... ... 879

Gifts and Workers .„ ... 880

Zeal in Offering ... ... ... 881

Master-Craftsmen ... ... 888

Beialeel and Aholiab m m. 883



CHAPTEE XXXVL

Superabundant Giving ... ... 885

Exactitude in Obedience ... ... 885

The Tabernacle Made ... ... 886

The Work Fails not either for Gift*

orSkiU 886



CHAPTER XXXVIL

Art'i Highest Efforts ihould be Con-
centrated on what is Moat Essen-
tial to the Work in Hand ... 887

The Furnishing of the Tabemaol* ... 888



CHAPTER XXXVni.

The Triumph of Female Piety over

Female Vanity ... ... 889

The Mirrors of the Women ... 890

The Court and its Lessons ... 890

Great Wealth Worthily Employed ... 892

The Enumeration of the Metab Used 893



CHAPTER XXXIX.

A Blessing upon Obedience ... 894

The Clothes of Service ... ... 894

The Commanded Work Completed and

Commended ... ... m. MS



CHAPTER XL.

The Erection of the Tabernacle 400, 401, 398

The Sanctification of Matei-ial Things 399

The Altar Moat Holy ... ... 400

The Two Finishings ... ... 401

The Symbols of God's Presence ... 403

Indwelling and Guidance ... „. 404

The House Filled with Gloiy .„ 404
