■liilljl 


ii'i8i!iiisiiiiii| 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  bool<  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104622 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ABCHDBACON  F.  W.  FAEEAE,  D.D.,  F.E.S.— EIGHT  EEV.  H.  COTTEEILL,  D.D.,  I'.R.S.K 

— VEEY  EEV.  PEINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-KEV.  CANON  G.  EAWLINSON,  M.A. 

—EEV.  A.  PLDMMEE,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK   &   "WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


// 


^■O, 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY   REV,  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 


AND   BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

SONG    OF    SOLOMON. 

ffi5E:position : 
Br  REV.  R.  A.  REDFORD,  M.A.,  LL.B. 

^omtletics : 
By  rev.  B.   C.   CAFFIN,  M.A., 

VICAR  OF  NORTHALLERTON,   AND  RURAL  DEAN  ; 
LATE  FELLOW  AND  TUTOR  OF  WORCESTER  COLLEGE,   OXFORD. 

^crmilies  bg  barions  <^utl)ors: 

REV.  PROF.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.  REV.  S.  CONWAY,  B.A, 

REV.  J.  D.  DAVIES,  M.A. 


"PUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoke  and  Toronto. 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON, 


INTRODUCTION. 


There  Ib  no  book  of  Scripture  on  whicli  more  commentaries  have  been 
written  and  more  diversities  of  opinion  expressed  than  this  short  poem 
of  eight  chapters.  That  it  was  held  in  great  veneration  by  ancient 
Jewish  autliorities ;  that  it  was  received  as  part  of  the  canon  of  the  Old 
Testament,  not  only  by  the  Jews  but  by  all  the  early  Christian  writers, 
with  very  few  and  insignificant  exceptions;  that  it  is  acknowledged  by 
those  who  are  entirely  disagreed  as  to  its  interpretation  to  possess  features 
of  extraordinnry  literary  excellence,  and  to  be  not  unworthy,  as  a  com- 
pnsition,  of  the  wise  king  whose  name  it  bears, — are  reasons  amply 
siifficieat  to  justify  the  largest  amount  of  attention  which  can  be  given 
to  it,  and  to  condemn  the  neglect  to  which  it  has  been  consigned  by  a 
great  proportion  of  the  Christian  Church  in  modern  times.  There  are 
difficulties  which  still  beset  the  interpreter  of  its  meaning;  but  they  are 
not  insuperable.  The  ingenuity  of  theorists  must  be  put  aside;  tne 
fanatical  prejudices  of  allegorists  must  be  disregarded;  the  solid  facts 
of  the  case  must  be  kept  in  view,  such  as  the  undoubted  canonicity  of 
the  book  and  the  almost  universal  feeling  of  both  +he  Jewish  and 
Christian  Churches  that  there  is  valuable  spiritual  truth  conveyed  in  it. 
Under  such  conditions  it  is  not  impossible  to  find  an  intermediate  ground 
on  which  to  stand,  on  the  one  side  recognizing  the  distinctly  human 
characteristics  of  the  work,  ou  the  other  tracing  in  it  the  marks  ot 
inspiration,  so  that  it  shall  be  retained  as  a  genuine  portion  of  the  Word 
of  God.  We  propose  in  this  Introduction  to  lay  before  the  reader  the 
results  which  have  been  carefully  gathered  by  the  ablest  modern  com- 
mentators on  the  questions  of  authorship  and  date,  form  and  method, 
meaning  and  purpose. 

§  1.   Authorship  and  Date. 

The  title  is  not  decisive,  "  The  Song  of  Songs,  which  is  Solomon's."    It 
may  be  later  in  date  than  the  book  itself,  and  added  by  another  hand ; 

SONG   OF   SOLOMON.  & 


fi  INTRODUCTION  TO 


but  the  fact  that  Solomon  is  not  described  by  any  royal  title  is  in  favour 
of  the  antiquity  of  the  words,  and  the  opinion  of  critics  is  almost 
unanimous  that  they  may  be  contemporaneous  with  the  book  itself.  The 
meaning  undoubtedly  is,  "  The  song  which  Solomon  composed,"  not  "  The 
song  -which  celebrates  Solomon's  love."  When  we  examine  the  internal 
evidence,  however,  we  ai-e  left  in  little  doubt  that  the  work  is  at  least 
of  the  Solomonic  period,  and  is  more  likely  to  have  been  the  production 
of  one  whose  literary  qualities  were  equal  to  it  than  of  an  author  who, 
while  capable  of  such  a  masterpiece,  still  remains  unknown.  The  opinions 
of  the  critics  vary,  as  they  always  do  when  variation  is  possible.  Some 
have  ventured  to  place  it  in  the  period  after  the  close  of  the  canon ;  but 
they  have  not  attempted  to  solve  the  enigma,  how  suuh  a  work  of  genius 
could  come  from  a  people  who  had  by  that  time  lost  so  much  of  their 
original  qualities.  To  attribute  it  to  the  Alexandrian  school  would  be 
entirely  against  both  the  spirit  of  it  and  its  linguistic  features.  The 
tendency  of  recent  criticism  is  to  go  back  to  the  early  view  and  connect 
the  work  with  the  age  of  Solomon.  Davidson  i.s  inclined  to  this,  and 
Ewald  decides  that  it  must  have  emanated  from  the  northern  kingdom, 
and  been  published  soon  after  the  death  of  Solomon.  He  withholds  hia 
assent  to  the  Solomonic  authorship  chiefly  on  the  ground  of  his  adherence 
to  the  peculiar  theory  of  interpretation  which  supposes  it  to  describe 
Rn  unsuccessful  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  king  to  secure  the  person  of 
a  young  shepherdess,  faithful  to  her  shepherd-lover.  There  are  many 
references  in  the  book  which  indicate  the  time  of  its  composition,  and 
which  could  scarcely  be  introduced  as  they  are  by  a  writer  at  a  later 
period.  The  scene  is  laid  partly  in  the  beautiful  northern  country  and 
partly  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem,  and  in  both  cases  there  is  a 
peaceful  prosperity  and  abundance  which  corresponds  to  the  age  of  the 
great  king.  The  knowledge  of  national  objects  of  all  kinds  and  of  the 
whole  land  of  Israel  befits  the  royal  pen  (see  1  Kings  iv.  23  ;  v.  13). 
The  reference  in  ch.  i.  9  to  •'  the  steed  in  Pharaoh's  chariots  "  is  eminently 
suitable  in  Solomon's  lips,  as  also  the  description  of  the  palanquin  as 
made  of  the  "  wood  of  Lebanon  "  (ch.  iii.  9).  The  familiarity  with  a  great 
variety  of  lovely  objects  and  scenes,  the  reference  to  the  splendour  of  the 
royal  household,  and  the  poetic  beauty  of  the  language  throughout,  make 
it  probable  that  it  was  the  recollection  of  the  early  life  of  the  monarch 
employed  by  him  at  a  subsequent  time  to  embody  Divine  truth.  The 
following  are  some  of  the  objects  introduced :  names  of  plants  and  of 
animals  in  thirty-one  instances ;  works  of  art  in  ten  instances ;  spices 
and  perfumes,  wine  of  Lebanon,  pools  of  Hebron,  forests  of  Carmel,  tents 
of  Kedar,  mountains  of  Gilead,  the  beauty  of  Tirzah  and  Jerusalem,  the 
royal  crown,  the  royal  bed  of  state,  the  royal  body-guard,  the  royal 
espousals  and  the  connection  of  the  queen-mother  with  them.  While 
such  allusions  do  not  absolutely  prove  that  King  Solomon  himself  was 
the  author,  they  confirm  the  likelihood  that  it  dates  from  his  age,  and 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  ifi 

show  that  it  breathed  mtich  of  his  spirit,  which  was  both  intensely  Jewish 
and  cosmopolitan,  dignified  and  human,  profonnd  and  poetic. 

Again,  there  is  a  considerable  resemblance  between  tiie  language  of 
Solomon's  Song  and  that  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs — especially  the  first 
nine  chapters  and  those  from  ch.  xxii.  to  xxiv.  (of.  Prov.  v.  15  with  Cant. 
iv.  15,  vii.  17  with  iv.  14,  v.  3  with  iv.  11,  vi.  30,  31  with  viii.  6,  7, 
xxiii.  31  with  vii.  10).  This  is  no  proof  that  Solomon  himself  wrote 
Canticles,  but  is  evidence  that  the  two  books  approach  one  another  in 
date.  The  substance  of  the  book  accords  with  the  facts  of  Solomon's 
history.  It  is  true  that  the  number  of  queens  mentioned,  three  score, 
and  four  score  concubines,  and  virgins  without  number,  seem  to  differ 
from  the  amount  given  in  1  Kings  xi.  3,  but  that  may  be  explained  by  the 
tact  that  the  reference  of  Canticles  is  to  the  early  period  of  Solomon's 
splendour,  when  his  life  was  less  voluptuous  and  degenerate.  The  tone  of 
the  book  is  not  that  of  a  corrupt  court,  but  rather  of  the  simple  purity 
of  a  country  maiden  blooming  in  the  presence  of  royal  magnificence, 
transforming  for  the  time  being  the  atmosphere  of  worldly  pleasure  into 
which  stie  is  introduced,  rebuking  th^j  fallen  monarch,  and  setting  forth 
oy  way  of  contrast  the  superior  glory  of  virtue. 

The  argument  for  a  later  date  deri » ed  from  the  language  itself  is  of  very 
little  force.  It  is  assumed  tJiat  Aramaic  forms  certainly  betoken  the  decay 
of  the  Hebrew  language.  But  this  is  by  no  means  the  case.  In  com- 
positions of  a  highly  poetical  and  lyrical  character  such  forms  are  found 
throughout  the  Old  Testament,  ae  in  the  Song  of  Deborah  (^Judg.  v.  7),  in 
Job,  and  in  Amos.  They  were  more  frequently  used,  no  doubt,  in  the 
northern  parts  of  Palestine  than  in  the  southern,  and  would  be  an 
evidence  of  the  provincial  cast  of  the  book  rather  than  its  late  origin. 
This  is  particularly  the  case  with  abbreviated  forms  such  as  the  B'  for  "lEyNj 
which  we  do  not  find  in  books  of  later  date  such  as  Jeremiah  and  Lamen- 
tations. Other  Aramaisms  are  nO^B'  in  ch.  i.  7 ;  iBi  for  nS3  (ch.  i.  6 ;  viii. 
11,  12);  nm  for  cm  (ch.  i.  17);  ir)ip,  "winter"  (ch.  ii.  11),  and  others; 
but  all  these  forms  are  confessedly  poetical.  There  are  also  some  few 
foreign  words,  such  as  pardes  (oh.  iv.  13).  appiryon  (oh.  iii.  9),  but  they 
are  such  as  do  not  again  appear,  and  such  as  we  may  well  suppose  to  be 
within  the  knowledge  of  such  a  writer  as  Solomon.  It  may  be  observed 
of  the  language  generally,  that  it  is  much  more  like  the  Hebrew  of  the 
Augustan  age  of  the  'language  than  of  times  when  its  native  vigour  was 
in  decay,  and  it  was  rapidly  becoming  a  dead  language.  There  is  no  work 
subsequent  to  the  Captivity  to  be  compared  with  it  in  literary  power,  nor 
can  we  suppose  that  all  reference  to  the  changes  in  the  national  life  could 
have  been  lacking  had  it  come  from  a  writer  of  the  later  times.  It  ia 
utterly  destitute  of  all  philosophical  thought,  which  would  certainly  have 
crept  into  it  had  it  been  composed  during  the  Greek  period.  On  the  whole, 
we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  it  is  an  early  work,  and  the  critical  authorities 
who    would   dispute   that  conclusion  are  of  n<>  great  weight.      Umbreit 


Tv  INTRODUCTION  TO 


would  ascribe  it  to  the  time  of  the  exile.  Eichhorn,  Bertholdt,  and  Eosen- 
mtiller  would  date  it  still  later,  in  the  Persian  age.  Gratz,  Hartmann,  and 
some  few  others  would  assign  it  to  the  Greek  period.  But  against  such 
names  we  must  place  the  much  higher  authority  of  Ewald,  Dopke,  Haver- 
nick,  Bleek,  Hengstenherg,  Zockler,  Delitzsch,  and  Davidson,  who  all 
agree  that  it  comes  from  the  period  of  Solomon,  though  they  do  not  all 
admit  the  royal  authorship.  Had  it  been  of  late  origin,  we  could  scarcely 
understand  the  extreme  reverence  with  which  it  was  regarded  in  the 
Jewish  Church.  "  No  man  in  Israel,"  said  Kabbi  Akiba  in  the  '  Mishna,' 
"  ever  doubted  the  canonioity  of  the  Song  of  Songs,  for  the  course  of  ages 
cannot  vie  with  the  day  on  which  the  Song  of  Songs  was  given  to  Israel ; 
all  the  Kethuvim  [i.e.  the  writings  of  the  Hagiographa]  are  indeed  a  holy 
thing,  but  the  Song  of  Songs  is  a  holy  of  holies"  (' Jadaim,'  iii.  6).  It 
seems  probable,  from  the  language  both  of  Hosea  and  Isaiah,  and  the 
familiarity  of  the  Jewish  people  with  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  book, 
the  intimate  relation  of  the  truths  of  religion  with  the  emotions  of  the 
human  soul,  that  it  was  well  known  from  at  least  as  early  a  period 
as  the  eighth  century  before  Christ.  There  is  no  direct  allusion  to  it 
in  the  New  Testament;  but  the  language  of  the  Psalms,  especially  such 
as  Ps.  xlv.  and  Ixxii.,  corresponds  with  it;  and  the  cast  of  the  Apostle 
Paul's  thoughts  is  often  in  harmony  with  it;  while  the  appeals  of  our 
Saviour  himself  to  the  hearts  of  the  people  to  recognize  their  loving  relation 
to  God  and  repent  of  their  unfaithfulness,  render  it  at  least  possible  that 
the  tenderness  and  persuasive  beauty  of  Canticles  was  not  ignored  in  the 
religious  teaching  of  his  day.  He  who  was,  in  his  own  words,  the  heavenly 
Bridegroom,  and  who  spoke,  both  by  his  own  life  and  by  those  of  his 
apostles,  of  his  bride  and  her  desire  towards  him,  anl  the  joy  and  glory  of 
his  nuptials,  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  left  this  book  unnoticed,  although 
he  never  quoted  from  it  or  mentioned  it  by  name.  It  stands  by  itself  in 
the  Old  Testament,  as  the  Apocalypse  stands  by  itselt  in  the  New ;  but 
only  those  who  have  given  it  a  hasty  and  superficial  reading  will  long 
doubt  that  it  contains  within  itself  the  mind  of  the  Spirit. 

§  2.  The  Liteeaey  Form  and  Method  of  the  Poem. 

Critics  have  been  almost  as  much  divided  on  the  literary  questions 
arising  out  of  this  remarkable  book  as  theological  writers  have  been  on 
the  interpretation  of  its  meaning.  Some  have  regarded  it  as  a  collection 
of  love-songs,  as  Herder  the  great  German  poet  and  philosopher,  whose 
interesting  and  able  work  on  the  subject  is  entitled,  •  Love  Songs,  the  most 
Ancient  and  Beautiful  from  the  East'  (published  in  1778).  The  old  name 
given  to  the  book,  '  Canticles,'  lends  some  weight  to  that  view.  The 
fact  that  no  persons  are  introduced  by  name,  and  that  the  conneotiou 
between  the  different  parts  of  the  pi  lem  is  difficult  to  trace,  seems  to  suggest 
an  anthology  of  songs  rather  than  a  composition  with  unity  of  method  and 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


purpose.  There  have  been  modifications  of  this  extreme  view  among  the 
critics  which  have  grown  out  of  the  more  careful  study  of  the  poem. 
Goethe,  e.g.,  while  he  onoe  held  that  it  was  a  mere  collection  of  separate 
songs,  afterwards  in  the  .' Kunst  und  Alterthum '  admitted  that  there  was 
dramatic  unity  to  be  recognized  in  it.  The  chief  representative  of  Herder's 
view  in  later  times  is  Mundt ;  but  there  are  few  writers  of  any  distinction 
who  would  deny  that  at  least  one  mind  is  traceable  in  the  ordering  and 
placing  of  the  songs.  Bleek,  e.g.,  admits  one  editor  who  has  put  together 
a  variety  of  erotic  compositions  referring  to  different  persons  and  composed 
at  different  periods.  And  some  Jewish  critics  have  supposed  that  while 
the  bulk  of  the  poem  refers  to  Solomon,  other  songs  of  a  later  date  have 
been  interpolated.  The  chief  authorities  for  the  unity  of  the  composition 
are  Ewald,  Umbreit,  Delitzsch,  and  Zookler.  The  following  considerations 
must  be  acknowledged  by  every  candid  reader  to  be  amply  sufficient  to 
support  the  view  that  the  poem  is  not  a  mere  collection  of  fragments  or 
isolated  songs,  but  has  a  definite  aim,  and  is  the  product,  at  least  in 
arrangement,  of  some  one  superintending  mind.  The  name  of  Solomon,  and 
of  "  the  king,"  who  is  plainly  Solomon,  is  prominent  in  the  poem  through- 
out. The  different  parts  seem  to  be  strung  together  by  the  introduction  of 
a  chorus  somewhat  after  the  manner  of  a  Greek  play ;  and  the  lover  and 
his  beloved  interchange  the  language  of  affection  in  a  kind  of  dialogue. 
The  references  to  the  family  of  the  bride  are  consistent  throughout.  The 
mother  is  introduced,  never  the  father,  but  only  the  brothers,  as  though 
the  father  were  deceased,  which  would  point  to  a  particular  history  (see 
ch.  i.  6 ;  iii.  4 ;  and  viii.  2).  Again,  the  occurrence  again  and  again  of  the 
same  or  similar  words  as  a  refrain,  and  the  repetition  of  similar  illustrations 
and  figures,  suggest  one  mind  at  work.  The  bride  speaks  in  much  the 
same  language  several  times.  In  ch.  ii.  16  and  vi.  3  she  says,  "  My  beloved 
is  mine,  and  I  am  his."  In  ch.  ii.  5  and  v.  8,  "  I  am  sick  with  love,"  and 
over  and  over  again  she  uses  the  expression,  "he  whom  my  soul  loves." 
She  is  addressed  by  the  chorus  in  a  similar  manner  throughout.  Delitzsch 
very  rightly  says,  "  He  who  has  any  perception  whatever  of  the  unity  of 
a  work  of  art  in  human  discourse  will  receive  an  impression  of  external 
unity  from  the  Song  of  Solomon  which  excludes  all  right  to  sunder  any- 
thing from  it  as  of  a  heterogeneous  character  or  belonging  to  different 
periods,  and  which  compels  to  the  conclusion  of  an  internal  unity  that  may 
still  remain  an  enigma  to  the  Scripture  exposition  of  the  present,  but  must 
nevertheless  exist." 

But  while  unity  of  authorship,  composition,  and  purpose  may  be 
substantiated,  it  is  still  a  difficult  question  to  decide  tohat  is  the  literary 
form  and  method  of  the  poem.  It  is  a  mere  abuse  of  literary  language  to 
call  it  a  drama.  There  is,  properly  speaking,  no  dramatio  action  and 
progress  in  it,  Ewald  has  gone  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  it  was  designed 
for  representation,  and  Bottoher  and  Eenan  that  it  actually  was  exhibited 
as  a  play.     But  all  that  can  be  said  in  favour  of  such  a  view  is  that  there 


INTRODUOTION  TO 


are  dramatic  features  in  the  poem,  such  as  the  dialogue  between  the  lover 
and  the  beloved,  the  introduction  of  the  chorus,  and  the  soenio  character 
of  some  of  the  descriptions.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  evidence 
that  any  such  representations  took  place  among  the  Jews  at  any  time, 
and  the  generally  idyllic  character  of  the  whole  makes  it  extremely 
improbable  that  it  was  intended  to  be  a  drama.  We  can  no  more  call  th« 
Song  of  Solomon  a  drama  than  we  caa  give  such  a  title  to  the  Book  of  Job, 
Nor  can  we  say,  on  the  other  hand,  that  it  is  a  mere  epithalamium,  or 
idyllic  song  prepared  for  some  nuptial  occasion  and  adapted  to  a  musical 
intention.  The  literary  problems  arising  out  of  the  mixed  character  of 
the  composition  seem  to  be  solved  in  the  higher  question  of  its  aim  and 
purpose.  It  is  the  adaptation  of  human  affection  and  sentiment  to 
religious  uses.  We  need  not  therefore  wait  for  a  satisfactory  theory  of 
its  literary  style,  but  rather  be  content  to  arrange  its  contents  as  they 
dispose  themselves  by  the  natural  divisions  of  the  subject-matter.  It 
has  been  observed  by  Dr.  Henry  Green,  of  Princeton  (in  a  note  to  his 
translation  of  Zockler's  '  Commentary '),  "  The  scenes  portrayed  and  the 
displays  of  mutual  fondness  indulged  seem  to  be  grouped  rather  than 
linked.  They  stand  forth  in  their  distinctness  as  exquisitely  beautiful, 
and  reflecting  as  much  light  on  each  other  and  on  the  subject  which  they 
illustrate  and  adorn  as  though  they  had  been  gathered  up  into  the  artificial 
unity  of  a  consecutive  narration  or  a  dramatic  plot.  And  this  looser 
method  of  arrangement  or  aggregation,  with  its  abrupt  translation  and 
sudden  changes  of  scene,  is  no  less  graceful  and  impressive,  while  it  is 
more  in  harmony  with  the  Oriental  mind  and  style  of  composition 
generally  than  the  vigorous,  external,  and  formal  concatenation  which 
the  more  logical  but  less  proud  Indo-European  is  prone  to  demand."  All 
that  seems  necessary  to  do  as  a  help  to  the  literary  appreciation  of  the 
poem  is  to  indicate  the  general  principle  and  method  of  its  arrangement, 
which  may  be  expressed  thus :  Love  is  first  set  forth  simply  in  its  ecstatic 
fervour  of  emotion  in  the  mutual  delight  of  the  lover  and  the  beloved.  It 
is  then  celebrated  as  nuptial  love  in  the  rejoicing  of  the  bridegroom  and 
the  bride.  And  in  the  second  half  of  the  poem,  ch.  v.  1  to  the  end,  love 
is  set  forth  as  tried,  for  a  time  in  danger  of  being  lost,  ultimately  recovered 
and  expanding  into  the  fulness  of  joy.  There  are  thus  three  parts  in  the 
poem.  Part  I-  extends  from  the  beginning  to  the  fifth  verse  of  the  third 
chapter,  and  may  be  described  as  The  rapture  of  first  love.  Part  II.  extends 
from  ch.  iii.  6  to  v.  1,  and  may  be  called  Nuptial  rejoicing.  Part  III. 
extends  from  ch.  v.  2  to  viii.  14,  and  may  be  named  Separation  and  reunion. 
But  while  these  main  divisions  are  traceable  in  the  composition,  there 
are  subdivisions  which  enable  us  to  arrange  the  whole  into  a  series  of 
lyrical  pieces,  and  to  discern  in  the  language  some  distinction  of  speakers 
and  some  variety  of  scene  and  aution  which  give  a  wonderful  life  and 
unity  to  the  poem. 

The  opening  words  prepare  us  for  the  general  scope  of  the  whole  work. 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  tH 

which  is  to  set  forth  the  theme  of  true  love,  and  thus  to  lead  our  thoughts 
to  the  highest  ideal  of  love.  "Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his 
mouth :  for  thy  love  is  better  than  wine."  We  are  prepared  for  the 
rapture  of  first  love,  which  is  poured  out  in  the  first  part  in  exquisite 
dialogue  and  monologue. 

(1)  Shulamith,  the  beloved,  is  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  her  lover, 
and,  surrounded  by  the  chorus  of  ladies,  pours  out  her  rapture  and  longing, 
which  is  responded  to  by  her  admiring  companions  (ch.  i.  1 — 8). 

(2)  The  royal  lover  appears,  and  the  rapturous  joy  of  mutual  delight 
is  poured  out  in  the  banqueting-house  (oh.  i.  9  to  ii.  7),  closing  with  the 
refrain  of  serene  contentment  addressed  by  the  beloved  woman  to  the  fair 
companions  of  her  chamber:  "I  adjure  you,  0  daughters  of  Jerusalem, 
by  the  roes  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field,  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awaken 
love  until  it  please." 

(3)  In  the  bright,  pure  atmosphere  of  this  new-found  rapture  the 
beloved  woman  sings  the  episodes  of  her  love,  tells  how  the  loved  one 
wooed  her,  how  the  first  love  mingled  with  the  loveliness  of  the  opening 
spring  and  summer  and  the  delights  of  a  pastoral  life,  how  the  heart 
longed  for  him  until  he  was  found,  and  when  it  found  him  would  not  let 
him  go,  concluding  with  the  same  refrain  of  satisfied  yearning  as  in 
ch.  ii.  7.  This  third  subdivision  of  Part  I.  occupies  from  oh.  ii.  8  to  iiL  6, 
and  contains  some  of  the  loveliest  poetry  in  the  whole  composition. 

Pait  II.  Nuptial  rejoicing  (ch.  iii.  6  to  v.  1).  Here  we  have  first  a 
description  of  the  nuptial  festival,  and  then  the  bride  and  bridegroom 
rejoicing  in  one  another. 

(1)  The  litter  of  Solomon  is  seen  surrounded  with  his  body-guard  advancing 
towards  Jerusalem.  The  daughters  of  Jerusalem  go  forth  to  meet  him. 
He  is  crowned  with  the  splendid  crown  made  by  his  mother  for  the  day 
of  his  espousal.  It  is  but  a  glimpse  of  the  festival,  but  it  suggests  the 
whole  (ch.  iii.  6 — 11). 

(2)  The  greater  part  of  the  beautiful  song  which  follows  (ch.  iv.  1—15) 
is  the  address  of  the  bridegroom  to  the  bride;  but  the  bride  responds  with  a 
biief  rhapsody  of  delight,  in  which  she  surrenders  herself  entirely  to  her 
husband  (ch.  iv.  16):  "Awake,  0  north  wind;  and  come,  thou  south; 
blow  upon  my  garden,  that  the  spices  thereof  may  flow  out.  Let  my 
beloved  come  into  his  garden,  and  eat  his  precious  fruits;"  to  which  the 
bridegroom  responds  with  the  words  of  delight  and  satisfaction  (ch.  v.  1). 

This  concludes  the  first  half  of  the  poem.  We  then  pass  into  another 
region  The  cloud  passes  over  the  face  of  the  sun.  The  brightness  of 
the  bridal  bliss  is  obscured  for  a  while.  The  bride  tells  of  her  forgetful- 
ness  and  the  recovery  of  her  peace.  This  we  may  call  Separation  and 
r6«mo«-Part  IIL  (ch.  v.  2  to  viii.  14).  The  subdivisions  of  this 
concluding  portion  may  be  distinguished  as  follows  :— 

(1)  Under  the  figure  of  a  dream  the  bride  describes  the  temporartf 
separation  of  her  heart  from  the  bridegroom;  her  misery;  her  longing  and 


Tfii  INTEODUOTION  TO 


searching  for  the  beloved  object ;  and  her  appeal  to  her  fair  companions 
to  help  her  (ch.  v.  2—8). 

(2)  The  sympathizing  companions  of  the  bride  draw  out  the  fulness  of 
her  love  by  their  questions,  a-kiug  "  why  she  so  loves  him,"  and  whither 
he  is  gone  from  her  (ch.  v.  9  to  vi.  3). 

(3)  The  royal  bridegroom  returns  to  his  bride  and  rejoices  once  more 
in  her  (ch.  vi.  4 — 9). 

(4)  The  companions  of  the  bride,  recognizing  the  effect  of  the  renewed 
bliss  in  the  appearance  of  the  bride,  burst  out  into  a  song  of  praise  of  her 
beauty  (ch.  vi.  10). 

(5)  The  bride  responds  with  a  declaration  of  her  ecstatic  delight 
(ch.  vi.  11,  12). 

(6)  The  companions  of  the  bride  pour  out  their  praises  as  they  behold 
the  bride  in  her  dance  of  ecstasy  (oh,  vi.  13  to  vii.  6). 

(7)  The  royal  bridegroom,  approaching  the  bride,  delights  in  her 
attractions  (ch.  vii.  6 — 9). 

(8)  The  bride,  full  of  satisfaction  in  the  love  of  her  husband,  invites 
him  to  return  with  her  to  the  scenes  of  her  maiden  life,  and  there  his  love 
would  beautify  all  that  was  i'a  miliar  to  her.  In  the  thought  of  such  bliss 
she  again  adjures  her  companions  to  acknowledge  the  perfection  of  her 
peace  (ch.  vii.  10  to  viii.  4). 

(9)  Bride  and  bridegroom  are  together  in  the  restful  joy  of  a  simple 
country  life,  exchanging  sweet  remembrances  and  confidences  (ch.  viii. 
5-7). 

(10)  In  the  peace  of  the  old  home  others  are  thought  of,  and  the  bliss 
ef  the  bride  overflows  upon  her  kindred,  to  which  the  royal  bridegroom 
responds  and  the  bride  rejoices  (ch.  viii.  8 — 12). 

(11)  The  royal  bridegroom,  delighting  in  his  bride,  bids  her  sing 
(ch.  viii.  13). 

(12)  The  poem  ends  with  the  sweet  melody  of  the  bride's  voice,  inviting 
the  bridegroom  to  hasten  to  her  side,  in  one  of  her  familiar  love-songs : 
"  Make  haste,  my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart 
upon  the  mountains  of  spices."  Thus  the  voice  of  the  bride,  which  opens 
the  poem,  lingers  on  the  ear  in  its  close,  and  suggests  to  us  that  the  whole 
is  as  if  from  her  standpoint  the  aspiration  of  an  ideal  love,  breathing  itself 
out  in  de&ire  afier  the  beloved  objects, — that  the  king  may  delight  himself  in 
her  beauty. 

§  3.   Theories  of  Interpretation. 

No  one  can  accept  the  Song  of  Solomon  as  a  book  of  Scripture,  the 
canonical  authority  of  which  is  undoubted,  without  forming  some  theoiy  of 
interpretation  which  shall  justify  the  position  of  such  a  book  amongst  the 
sacred  writings.  It  will  be  evident  that  our  fundamental  prin'jiples  in 
respect  to  the  nature  and  authority  of  inspired  books  will  modify  the  views 


THE   SONG  OP  SOLUiiO^.  is 

we  hold  on  any  piirticular  portion  of  Scripture.  If  the  sacred  writings  are 
no  more  than  a  loUotlion  of  Jewish  literature,  in  which  there  would 
naturally  be  great  variety,  and  not  necessarily  in  every  instance  a  lofty 
spiritual  aim,  then  we  can  regard  the  Song  of  Salomon  as  Herder  did,  as  a 
collection  of  beautiful  Easteiii  sungs,  and  there  is  no  need  to  seek  in  them 
either  unity  of  purpose  or  special  significance.  But  it  is  more  difficult  to 
reconcile  such  a  view  with  the  facts  than  to  find  a  tenable  theory  of  inter- 
pretation. It  is  simply  incredible  that  such  a  book,  if  merely  of  literary 
or  moral  worth,  should  be  introduced  into  the  collection  of  Jewish  Scrip- 
tores,  to  be  an  inexplicable  exception  to  the  whole  volume.  Ail  other 
books  have  some  distinct  and  easily  recognizable  connection  with  the 
religious  character  and  peculiar  national  position  of  the  Jewish  people. 
Not  one  is  where  it  is  because  it  is  a  piece  of  literature.  Why  should  the 
Song  of  Solomon  be  an  exception  ?  Moreover,  the  simple  fact  that  Jews 
themselves  have  always  sought  for  an  interpretation  of  the  book  shows 
that  they  were  not  satisfied  with  the  mere  literary  value  of  it.  We  must 
either  eliminate  it  altogether  from  the  Bible,  or  we  must  find  some  method 
for  its  profitable  use.  Those  who  have  renounced  all  attempts  to  explain  it 
have  either  been  impatient  with  the  difficulties,  or  out  of  humour  with  the 
expositors.  No  doubt  a  very  large  amount  of  folly  has  been  published  by 
those  who  have  endeavoured  to  support  a  theory  by  ingenious  manipulation 
of  the  language.  We  are  apt  to  be  revolted  by  such  extravagance,  and 
treat  the  whole  subject  with  indifference.  But  there  is  no  more  beautiful 
book  in  the  Old  Testament  than  the  Song  of  Solomon.  We  cannot  be  right 
in  leaving  it  unstadied  and  unused.  We  must  deal  with  it  as  a  part  of 
Holy  Scripture.  As  far  as  possible,  therefore,  we  must  put  it  in  intelli- 
gible relation  to  the  Word  of  God,  as  a  progressive  revelation  of  Divine 
truth.  We  must  understand  what  is  the  idea  of  the  book,  and  how  that 
idea  is  set  forth  in  the  form  in  which  the  poem  is  composed.  We  proceed, 
therefore,  to  give  an  accouot  of  the  different  theories  which  have  been  held 
as  to  the  interpretation  of  the  book,  and  so  to  justify  that  which  we  accept 
in  the  subsequent  Exposition. 

The  theories  of  interpretation  may  be  classed  under  three  heads.  1. 
Those  which  assume  that  the  work  is  an  allegory,  that  the  facts  contained  in 
it  are  merely  employed  for  the  purpose  of  framework,  the  language  being 
mystical  and  figurative.  2.  Those  which  are  founded  upon  a  naturalistic 
basis,  taking  the  literary  features  of  the  work  as  the  first  in  importance, 
and  regarding  it  as  some  form  of  love-poem  or  coUeotiou  of  erotic  songs.  3. 
Between  these  two  extremes  stands  the  typical  view,  which,  without  dis- 
carding the  historical  and  literary  basis,  not  to  be  disputed  on  the  very 
face  of  the  work,  endeavours  to  justify  its  position  in  the  Word  of  God  by 
analogy  with  other  portions  of  Scripture,  in  which  natural  and  national 
facts  and  interests  are  imbued  with  spiritual  significance.  In  each  of 
these  points  of  view  there  is  truth,  as  there  is  variety  of  interpretation. 
We   shall    be    best   prepared    to    understand    the    results    of    the   most 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


able  modem  criticism  by  placing  these  different  theories  clearly  side  by 
side. 

1.  The  (dlegorieal  theory .  This  is  much  the  most  ancient  method  of 
interpretation.  It  sprang,  no  doubt,  from  the  rabbinical  school  among  the 
Jews,  in  which  the  verbal  inspiration  of  Scripture  was  tenaciously  held, 
while,  at  the  same  time,  all  kinds  of  fanciful  interpretations  were  foisted 
into  the  divinely  authorized  words.  If  the  veil  of  the  language  has  to  be 
preserved  intact,  then  the  only  resource  of  the  dogmatist  or  the  speculator  is 
to  bring  forth  from  behind  the  veil  that  which  suits  his  purpose.  It  is  of  no 
consequence  to  prove  that  there  were  any  real  persons,  such  as  Solomon  and 
Shulamith,  whose  love  for  one  another  is  celebrated  in  this  book.  It  might 
be  so  or  it  might  not  be  so ;  these  things  are  an  allegory.  The  deepest 
truths  are  set  forth  in  the  dress  of  these  words  of  human  affection.  Some 
have  found  in  them  God  and  Ma  Church  throughout  all  time.  Others  the 
historical  and  political  relations  of  the  Jewish  people.  Others  have  sought  in 
them  profound  philosophical  mysteries  and  cabalistic  secrets.  There  is  one  point, 
and  one  alone,  in  which  all  these  allegorical  interpreters  agree,  and  that  is, 
that  nothing  is  to  be  made  of  the  book  taken  literally,  that  there  is  no  con- 
sistency and  order  in  it  if  we  attempt  to  regard  it  historically ;  therefore 
we  have  nothing  in  it  but  words,  which  may  be  applied  in  any  manner 
which  is  spiritually  or  otherwise  profitable.  Such  a  view  condemns  itself, 
for  it  deprives  us  of  any  ground  of  confidence  in  seeking  the  true  interpre- 
tation. That  surely  must  be  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  which  best  accords 
with  the  facts  of  the  case.  If  there  is  not  a  foundation  of  historical  truth 
anderlying  all  the  Scripture,  then  it  is  a  mere  unsubstantial  cloud  which  may 
be  blown  away  by  the  changes  in  the  atmosphere  of  human  opinion.  It  is 
against  the  analogy  of  Scripture.  It  opens  the  way  to  extravagance  and 
folly,  by  removing  all  bounds  and  inviting  the  licence  of  mere  individual 
speculation.  It  repels  the  common  senso  of  the  ordinary  reader  of  Scrip- 
ture, and  simply  shuts  the  book  which  it  misinterprets,  so  that  many  refuse 
to  look  into  it  at  all.  "This  mode  of  expounding  each  separate  particular, 
not  with  a  view  to  its  place  in  the  description  in  which  it  stands,  but  as  a 
distinct  reference  to  the  spiritual  object  typified  by  it,  necessarily  leads 
both  to  a  serious  distortion  of  the  lessons  to  be  conveyed,  and  to  a  marring 
and  mangling  of  the  symmetry  and  beauty  of  the  objects  depicted." 
Postponing  any  further  discussion  of  this  principle,  we  proceed  to  give  a 
summary  of  the  history  of  the  allegorical  interpretation. 

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Song  of  Solomon  was  allegorically  inter- 
preted among  the  ancient  Jews  previous  to  the  Christian  era.  Had  it  been 
a  well-known,  traditional  view,  it  would  certainly  have  appeared  in  some 
of  the  writings  of  the  Apocrypha,  or  in  the  works  of  Philo.  But  there  is 
no  clear  trace  of  it  in  either.  The  allusion  which  is  found  in  the  Fourth 
Book  of  Esdras  (v.  24,  26),  in  which  the  terms  "lily"  and  "dove"  are 
employed  of  the  Church,  must  be  referred  to  a  Christian  origin,  and  dates 
probably  about    the   end  of  the   first   century  a.d.     There  is  no  decided 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


evidence  of  the  allegorical  theorv  until  the  eighth  century,  when  there 
appeared  a  Targum  on  the  book  itself,  with  Kuth,  Lamentations,  Esther, 
and  Eoclesiastes.  The  allegory  is  taken  to  be  a  figurative  representation 
of  the  history  of  the  Israelites  from  the  time  of  the  exodus  to  their  final 
restoration  and  salvation.  The  Targum  is  marked,  like  most  similar  produc- 
tions, by  great  extravagance  and  absurd  anachronisms.  After  an  interval  of 
several  centuries,  distinguished  rabbis  published  commentaries  which  con- 
tained references  to  older  interpreters  who  had  followed  the  Targum  in 
the  allegorical  view.  Such  were  Eabbi  Solomon  ben  Isaac  (or  Eashi),  who 
died  1105;  David  Kimchi  (1190—1250);  Ibn  Ezra  (died  1167);  Moses 
Maimonides  (died  1204);  Moses  ben  Tibbon;  Immanuel  ben  Salome,  and 
others.  Some  of  these  rabbinical  writers  have  used  the  book  to  support 
their  peculiar  philosophical  views  and  their  rabbinical  interpretations  of 
Scripture ;  but  most  of  the  Jewish  writers  have  regarded  the  allegory  as 
Teiled  history  and  prophecy. 

It  was  very  different,  however,  with  the  Christian  commentators.  Not 
only  did  they  almost  without  exception  treat  the  book  as  an  allegory,  but 
they  strained  the  interpretation  beyond  all  limits  of  common  sense  and 
Scripture  analogy,  so  that  their  example  has  remained  a  warning,  which 
has  produced  a  healthy  reaction  in  the  Church,  and  has  led  to  the  more 
reasonable  view  which  is  now  adopted  by  all  the  best  critics.  The  rise  of 
the  allegorical  method  can  be  traced  chiefly  to  the  Alexandrian  school,  and 
to  its  great  representative  Origen.  It  was  the  fruit  of  philosophy  in  union 
with  Christianity.  Origen  wrote  two  homilies  on  the  Song  of  Solomon, 
which  were  translated  by  Jerome,  and  a  commentary,  part  of  which  still 
remains  in  the  Latin  of  Bufinus.  The  idea  of  the  book,  according  to 
Origen,  is  the  longing  of  the  soul  after  God,  and  the  sanctifying  and 
elevating  influence  of  Divine  love ;  but  he  varies  in  his  explanation  of  the 
allegory,  now  taking  it  of  the  individual  and  then  of  the  Church.  Hia 
example  was  followed  by  later  Christian  writers,  as  by  Eusebius,  Athanasius, 
Epiphanius,  Cyril,  Macarius,  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  Basil,  Gregory  Nazianzen, 
Theodoret,  Augustine,  and  Chrysostom.  There  were  slight  differences 
among  these  early  Fathers  in  their  application  of  the  method,  but  they  all 
adopted  it.  Ambrose  went  so  far  as  to  suggest  in  his  sermon  on  the  per- 
petual virginity  of  Saint  Mary,  that  there  are  allusions  to  Mary  in  such 
expressions  as  the  "  locked  garden "  and  the  "  sealed  fountain "  (ch.  iv. 
12);  and  Gregory  the  Great  regarded  the  crown  wherewith  Solomon's 
mother  crowned  him  as  a  mystical  emblem  of  the  humanity  which  the 
Saviour  derived  from  Mary.  There  were  some  of  the  Fathers,  however,  as 
Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  who  advocated  the  literal  and  historical  method 
of  interpretation,  and  he  was  challenged  by  some  of  his  critics  for  his 
sensual  view  of  the  book. 

When  we  come  to  the  Middle  Ages  we  meet  with  larger  and  fuller  com- 
mentaries, in  which  the  allegorical  method  ia  wrought  out  with  great 
ingennity.     The  highest  name,  perhaps,  is  that  of  the  mystic  Bernard  of 


xU  INTEODUCTIUN  TO 


Clairvaux  (died  1153),  who  wrote  eighty-six  sermons  on  the  first  two 
chapters,  followed  by  his  scholar,  Gilbert  von  Hoyland,  who  wrote  fifty- 
eight  discourses  on  another  portion.  Bernard's  discourses  are  mystical. 
The  soul  is  seeking  her  heavenly  Bridegroom,  and  introduced  by  him  into 
progressive  states  of  privilege — the  garden,  the  banqueting-hall,  the  sleep- 
ing-chamber. The  kiss  of  Christ  is  explained  of  the  Incarnation.  He  was 
followed  by  Eichard  de  St.  Victor,  and  by  the  great  theologian  Thomas 
Aquinas,  Bonaventura,  Gershon,  and  Isidore  Hispalensis.  The  whole 
mystery  of  the  soul's  intercourse  with  the  Saviour  is,  according  to  them, 
represented  in  the  language  of  the  Song.  The  book  was,  of  course,  greedily 
laid  hold  of  by  the  Middle  Age  mystics,  as  it  has  been  by  the  mystico- 
evangelical  school  of  modern  times,  and  amidst  a  dense  cloud  of  fanciful 
extravagance  there  are  here  and  there  to  be  found  in  their  commentaries 
gleams  of  highly  spiritual  discernment  and  profound  thought.  The 
Spanish  mystics  went  to  great  lengths  of  absurdity  ;  the  "  cheeks  "  of  the 
bride  were  outward  Christianity  and  good  works;  her  "golden  chains" 
were  faith ;  the  "  silver  points "  of  the  golden  ornaments  were  holiness  in 
the  walk  and  conversation  ;  "  spikenard "  was  redeemed  humanity  ;  "  the 
breath  of  myrrh  "  was  the  Passion  of  our  Saviour ;  "  the  thorns  about  the 
rose  "  were  temptations  by  tribulations,  crimes,  and  heretics ;  "  the  chariot 
of  Amminadab  "  represented  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  so  forth. 

When  we  come  to  the  time  of  the  Eeformers,  when  biblical  study  received 
an  entirely  new  impulse  and  direction,  we  find  the  allegorical  method, 
while  not  altogether  discarded,  somewhat  modified  by  the  historical  and 
critical  spirit  which  was  growing  in  the  Church.  Martin  Luther  was  to  a 
large  extent  under  the  influence  of  mystical  writers  in  the  early  part  of  his 
theological  course,  but  he  did  not  follow  them  in  their  allegorical  tendencies. 
He  saw  the  danger,  which  they  had  promoted,  to  the  healthy  use  of  Scrip- 
ture, and  the  mist  they  threw  around  its  simple,  practical  meaning.  In 
his  'Brevis  Enarratio  in  Cantica  Canticorum '  he  takes  the  book  as  written 
for  an  historical  purpose — to  glorify  the  age  and  kingly  power  of  Solomon, 
and  so  to  exalt  the  theocracy  at  its  highest  splendour.  It  is  to  help  the 
people  to  thank  God  for  the  blessings  of  peace  and  prosperity.  God  is  the 
Bridegroom,  and  his  people  are  the  bride.  Luther  was  followed  in  his 
view  by  other  Eeformers.  Nicolas  de  Lyra,  in  his  •  Portilla,*  regards  it  as 
a  representation  of  the  history  of  Israel  from  Moses  to  Christ,  and  in  the 
later  chapters,  of  the  Christian  Church  from  Christ  to  the  time  of  the 
Emperor  Constantino.  Starke  (in  his  'Synopsis,'  pt.  iv.)  sees  in  it  a 
prophecy  in  which  is  represented  the  coming  of  Messiah  in  the  flesh,  the 
outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  gathering  of  the  New  Testament  Church 
from  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  the  special  trials  and  providential  leadings 
of  the  people  of  God  in  every  age.  Bishop  Perez  of  Valentia,  in  1507, 
published  a  commentary,  in  which  an  elaborate  system  of  chronological 
interpretation  is  set  forth.  There  are  ten  canticles  setting  forth  ten 
periods — the  patriarchs,  the  tabernacle,  the  voice  of  God  from  the  taber- 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOJMUJS.  xiii 


nacle,  the  ark  in  the  wilderness,  Moses  on  Pisgah,  the  death  of  Moses, 
entrance  into  Canaan,  conquest  and  partition  of  Canaan,  conflicts  under 
the  Judges,  prosperity  and  peace  under  Solomon.  To  tliese  ten  Old  Testa- 
ment facts  correspond  ten  New  Testament  fulfilments — the  Incarnation, 
teaching  of  Christ,  his  life  and  miracles,  his  ascent  to  Jerusalem,  his  death 
on  the  cross,  the  ingathering  of  Jewish  converts,  the  mission  to  the 
Gentiles,  the  conflicts  of  the  martyr  Church,  prosperity  and  peace  under 
Constantine.  Cocceius  (1673),  in  his  '  Cogitationes,'  flnds  in  it  the  pre- 
diction of  the  events  of  his  own  time  ;  and  Cornelius  h  Lapide  treats  it,  in 
a  high  Buman  Catholic  manner,  as  significant  of  the  glory  of  the  Virgin, 
while  he  takes  it  as  a  kind  of  ^prophetic  drama,  setting  forth  the  history  of 
the  Church. 

When  we  come  to  more  modern  times  and  to  the  great  "  Introductions  " 
to  the  study  of  the  Bible,  written  by  the  most  learned  critics,  we  see  the 
influence  of  a  closer  attention  to  the  structure  and  language  of  the  book  in 
the  gradual  decay  of  the  allegorical  method,  and  the  attempt  to  unite  the 
facts  which  underlie  the  words  with  a  distinct  spiritual  significance.  In 
the  beginning  of  this  century,  the  great  Bomau  Catholic  theologian  and 
critic  Leon.  Hug  (1813)  made  a  novel  attempt  to  maintain  the  allegorical 
view.  The  bride  represented  the  ten  trihes,  the  bridegro  im  King  Hezekiah, 
the  brother  of  the  bride  a  party  in  the  house  of  Judah  opposing  the  reunion 
of  the  rent  kingdom.  He  was  followed  by  Kaiser  in  1825.  Kosenmiiller 
sought  to  put  fresh  life  into  the  worn-oat  theory  by  analogies  brought  from 
Hindoo  and  Persian  poetry;  as  Puffendorf  (1775)  introduced  in  his  para- 
phrase mystical  allusions  to  the  grave  and  the  hope  of  the  resurrection,  the 
•'  virgins "  being  "  pure  and  chaste  souls  shut  up  in  the  dark  grave,"  and 
waiting  for  the  light  of  the  Saviour's  resurrection.  Until  we  come  to  the 
time  of  Keil  and  Hengstenberg,  we  have  no  really  sensible  defence  of  the 
theory  put  forth,  and  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  make  the  remark  that  their 
defence  is  a  virtual  surrender,  for  their  use  of  the  allegorical  method  is  so 
moderate  that  it  barely  exceeds  the  ideal  and  typical  view,  and  is  sub- 
stantially the  same  as  that  of  Delitzsoh  and  Zookler.  Keil  (•  Introduction 
to  the  Old  Testament,'  vol.  i.  p.  603,  Eng.  transl.)  says,  "  The  book  depicts 
in  dramatico-lyrical,  responsive  songs,  under  the  allegory  of  the  bridal 
love  of  Solomon  and  Shulamith,  the  loving  communion  between  the  Lord 
and  his  Church,  according  to  its  ideal  nature  as  it  results  from  the  choice  of 
Israel  to  be  the  Church  of  the  Lord.  According  to  this,  every  disturbance 
of  that  fellowship  springing  out  of  Israel's  infidelity  leads  to  an  ever 
firmer  establishment  of  the  covenant  of  love,  by  means  of  Israel's  return  to 
the  true  covenant  God,  and  this  God's  unchangeable  love.  Yet  we  are  not 
to  trace  in  the  poem  the  historical  course  of  the  covenant  relation,  as  if 
a  veil  of  allegory  had  been  thrown  over  the  principal  critical  events  in 
the  theocratic  history."  Hahn,  e.g.,  finds  allegorically  represented  "that 
the  kingdom  of  Israel  is  called  in  the  service  of  God  finally  to  overcome 
heathendom  with  the  weapons  of  love  and  righteousness,  and  to  lead  it 


liT  INTEODUCTION   TO 


back  to  the  peaceful  rest  of  loving  fellowr-hip  with  Israel,  and  so  with  God 
again."  Hengstenberg,  in  hisi '  Prolegomena  to  the  Song  of  Solomon,'  and 
in  his  Exposition  (1853),  argues  for  the  allegorical  view  from  the  use  of 
similar  erotic  language  in  the  Psalms  and  prophets,  as  well  as  in  the 
general  tone  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  beloved  of  the  heavenly  Solomon 
is  the  daughter  of  Zion ;  the  whole,  therefore,  must  be  explained  of 
Messiah  and  his  Church.  But  he  proceeds  to  attempt  an  application  of 
this  view  to  the  details  of  the  language,  in  which  he  shows  that  it  can 
only  be  accepted  in  a  modified  form — the  hair  of  the  bride  Hie  a  flock  of 
goats  represents  the  mass  of  nations  converted  to  Christianity;  the  navel 
of  Shulamith  denotes  the  cup  from  which  the  Church  refreshes  those  that 
thirst  for  salvation  with  a  noble  and  refreshing  draught;  the  sixty  and 
eighty  wive*  of  Solomon,  the  admission  of  the  original  Gentile  nations  into 
the  Church,  140  being  7  multiplied  by  2  and  by  10 — the  "signature  of  the 
covenant,"  the  kingdom  of  Christ  being  prefigured  by  the  diverse  nations 
introduced  into  Solomon's  harem !  Such  follies  tend  to  blind  the  reader 
to  the  substantial  truth  of  the  theory,  which  is  that,  under  the  figure  of 
the  pure  and  beautiful  love  of  Solomon  for  Shulamith,  is  imaged  the  love 
of  God  in  Christ  for  hiimanity,  both  in  the  individual  and  in  the  Church. 

The  only  other  names  which  require  mention  in  connection  with  the 
allegoiical  theory  are  those  of  Thrupp,  Wordsworth,  and  Stowe.  Joseph 
Francis  Thrupp  published  a  revised  translation  with  introduction  and 
commentary  (Cambridge,  1862).  The  millenarian  view  dominates  his 
work  throughout.  It  is  a  prophecy  of  the  coming  of  Christ.  Wordsworth 
(Christopher), ■  in  his  'Commentary  on  the  Bible,'  published  1868,  also 
regards  the  poem  as  a  prophetic  allegory,  suggested  by  Solomon's  marriage 
with  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  describing  "the  gathering"  of  the  world 
into  mystical  union  with  Christ,  and  its  consecration  into  a  Church 
espoused  to  him  as  the  bride.  Calvin  E.  Stowe  defends  the  allegorical 
view  in  the  Biblical  Bepository  (April,  1847),  giving  a  partial  translation. 
The  fault  of  all  these  writers,  able  and  learned  as  they  are,  is  that  they 
push  their  theory  too  far,  and  that  they  are  led  away  by  it  into  a  misuse 
of  Scripture  to  support  that  which  does  not  fairly  rest  upon  it.  This  is 
the  danger  which  must  always  attend  upon  the  allegorical  method.  The 
ingenuity  of  the  interpreter  is  tempted  to  supply,  out  of  his  own  creed, 
what  is  lacking  in  the  scheme  of  the  allegory.  He  has  liberty  to  suggest 
what  analogies  he  discovers.  The  highly  figurative  language  of  such  a 
poem  as  the  Song  of  Solomon  is  easily  accommodated  to  the  demands  of 
any  system  of  thought  to  which  the  wish  is  father.  But  while  the 
allegorical  method,  as  a  formal  treatment,  may  be  erroneous,  it  recognizes 
the  spiritual  meaning  and  value  uf  the  book.  The  canonical  position  of 
such  a  work  requires  to  be  justified.  The  allegorist  attempts  to  do  so.  He 
is  certainly  right  in  demanding  that  a  distinct  religious  purpose  shall  be 
the  vital  centre  of  any  system  of  interpr..t.ition  put  forth.  As  Isaac  Taylor 
has  remarked,  in  his  'Spirit  of  Hebrew  Poetry,'  "The  book  has  given 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


animation,  and  depth,  and  intensity,  and  warrant,  too,  to  the  devoui, 
meditations  of  thousands  of  the  most  devout  and  of  the  purest  ininds. 
Those  who  have  no  consciousness  of  this  kind,  and  whose  feelings  and 
notions  are  all '  of  the  earth,  earthy,'  will  not  fail  to  find  in  this  instance 
that  which  suits  them,  for  purposes,  sometimes  of  mockery,  sometimes  of 
luxury,  sometimes  of  disbelief.  Quite  unconscious  of  these  possessions,  and 
happily  ignorant  of  them,  and  unable  to  suppose  them  possible,  there  have 
been  multitudes  of  earthly  spirits  to  whom  this,  the  most  beautiful  of 
pastorals,  has  been,  not  indeed  a  beautiful  pastoral,  but  the  choicest  of 
those  words  of  truth  which  are  'sweeter  than  honey  to  the  taste,'  and 
'  rather  to  be  chosen  than  thousands  of  gold  and  silver.' " 

2.  We  must  now  proceed  to  describe  the  theories  of  interpretation  which 
have  been  based  upon  a  naturalistic  principle.  These  may  be  styled  the 
erotic,  as  they  all  regard  the  work  as  a  collection  of  erotic  songs,  put  together 
simply  on  the  ground  of  their  literary  worth  and  poetic  arrangement, 
religiously  used  by  being  idealized,  just  as  the  language  of  secular  poetry 
may  be  sometimes  mingled  with  sacred,  though  the  original  intention  of 
the  words  had  no  such  application.  There  are  several  varieties  in  the 
form  of  this  erotic  theory.  The  songs  have  been  regarded  by  some  as 
separate  idylls  of  love,  collected  together  and  formed  into  a  poem  only  by 
a  predominating  reference  to  Solomon,  and  by  the  one  pervading  spirit  of 
pure  love.  But  others  have  attempted  to  trace  a  dramatic  unity  and  progress 
in  the  whole,  and  have  elaborated  a  history  on  which  to  found  the  draraa, 
while  those  who  have  renounced  all  such  attempts  to  find  a  drama  in 
Hebrew  poetry  have  yet  clung  to  the  idea  of  an  epithalamium,  composed  on 
the  occasion  of  Solomon's  marriage,  either  with  the  Egyptian  princess  or 
some  Israelifish  bride,  and  have  endeavoured  to  justify  their  view  by  the 
literary  form  of  the  poem.  It  is  not  necessary  entirely  to  reject  the 
naturalistic  basis  in  order  to  find  a  reason  for  the  position  of  Solomon's  Song 
in  the  Bible.  There  is  an  element  of  truth  in  all  the  erotic  theories.  They 
help  us  to  remember  that  human  love  is  capable  of  being  mingled  with 
Divine  ideas.  That  which  is  so  often  impure,  and  which  sinks  the  life  of 
man  below  that  of  the  beasts  that  perish,  may  yet  be  sanctified,  lifted 
above  the  evil  of  a  fallen  nature,  and  so  may  be  taken,  ideally,  as  the 
fitting  vehicle  by  which  to  convey  the  Spirit  of  God  to  the  spirit  of  man. 

The  earliest  writer  whose  treatment  of  the  book  was  based  upon  the 
secular  view  of  it  was  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  (died  a.d.  429).  He  dealt 
with  all  Scripture  much  in  the  same  way,  in  the  spirit  of  a  rigid  literalism, 
in  which  he  followed  the  school  of  Antioch.  Like  others  of  the  same  class,  he 
found  only  human  love  in  the  language,  and  his  '  Commentary '  was  publicly 
condemned  on  that  account  in  the  Fifth  fficumenioal  Council  (a.d.  553). 
The  Church's  anathema  crushed  this  commentary  out  of  existence.  The 
Middle  Agis  were  dominated  by  the  allegorical  spirit,  and  no  other  view 
was  put  forth  for  hundreds  of  years.  Until  the  free  spirit  of  the  Reforma- 
tion introduced  a  new  criticism,  the  secular  view  of  S(;lomon's  Song  did 


xyl  INTKODUCTION  TO 


jot  reappear.  In  the  time  of  Calvin,  Geneva  was  startled  by  the  hrochire 
of  Sebastian  Castellio  (1644),  •who  represented  Shulamith  as  a  concubine, 
and  denounced  the  book  as  unworthy  of  a  place  in  Scripture — to  the  great 
displeasure  of  Calvin  himself,  who  is  said  to  have  compelled  Castellio  to 
withdraw  from  Geneva.  The  next  name  in  the  bibliography  is  that  of 
Hugo  Grotius,  who  published  his  '  Annotations  *  on  the  Old  Testament  in 
1664.  In  his  view  the  work  is  a  nuptial  sonrj,  with  allegorical  and  typical 
meanings,  which  he  admits  are  to  be  found  in  it,  though  he  does  not 
himself  seek  them.  E.  Simon,  J.  Clericus,  Simon  Episcopius,  are  other 
instances  of  the  same  treatment  of  the  book  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
seventeenth  and  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  centuries.  The  rise  of 
rationalism  was  the  revival  of  the  theory.  Semler  and  Michaelis  led  the 
way,  in  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  disparaging  the  book  altogether. 

It  was  only  as  the  literary  spirit  of  German  criticism  began  to  deal  more 
fairly  with  the  whole  of  Scripture,  as  the  remains  of  a  great  people,  that 
the  poetic  merits  of  Solomon's  Song  began  to  be  recognized,  and  an  attempt 
was  made  to  understand  its  position  in  the  canon.  Lessing,  who  was  the 
greatest  critical  mind  of  Europe  at  that  time,  saw  that  there  was  great 
idyllic  beauty  in  these  *  Eclogues  of  King  Solomon,'  as  he  called  them,  and 
compared  them  with  those  of  Theocritus  and  Virgil ;  but  the  most  distin- 
guished name  is  that  of  Herder,  whose  celebrated  work  on  '  The  Spirit  of 
Hebrew  Poetry*  did  much  to  revive  the  interest  of  the  literary  world  in 
the  Bible.  Herder  wrote  a  separate  work  on  Solomon's  Song,  treating  it  as 
a  collection  of  songs  of  love,  and  as  intended  to  describe  ideal  Jiuman  love, 
for  the  purpose  of  setting  forth  the  example  of  purity  and  innocence  when 
it  was  most  needed  in  the  ancient  world.  His  criticism  is  in  many  respects 
valuable  and  highly  esthetic.  He  draws  attention  to  the  exquisite  poetry 
of  the  songs,  and  to  their  surpassing  worth  as  an  ideal  of  human  sentiment. 
But  delightful  reading  as  Herder's  work  undoubtedly  is,  it  is  yet  but  little 
help  to  the  biblical  student,  as  there  is  no  attempt  to  follow  out  the  religious 
intimations  of  the  language,  or  to  find  in  it  any  parabolical  intention.  The 
rationalistic  critics  have,  most  of  them,  regarded  the  songs  as  fragmentary 
and  isolated,  and  thus  have  deprived  themselves  of  their  true  position  as 
commentators ;  for  if  there  be  no  unity  in  the  book,  it  is  hard  to  find  any 
basis  on  which  to  rest  the  explanation  of  its  meaning  as  a  whole.  To  sup- 
pose a  sacred  v.'ork  written  simply  in  praise  of  human  feeling,  or  even  to 
cherish  the  ideal  of  human  relationship,  is  to  resist  the  analogy  of  Scripture. 
It  may  be  doubted  if  even  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  should  be  regarded  from 
so  wide  and  general  a  point  of  view  as  that. 

There  is  no  need  to  trouble  the  reader  with  an  account  of  the  many  books 
which  have  appeared  in  Germany,  treating  not  only  Solomon's  Song,  but 
every  other  book  in  the  Bible,  in  the  most  flimsy,  superficial  spirit,  as  though 
no  deeper  meaning  need  ever  be  sought  in  them  than  that  which  satisfies 
the  logical  understanding  of  a  narrow-minded,  pedantic  professor.  Eichhorn 
Jahn,  De  Wette,  Augusti,  Kleuker,  Doderlein,  Velthusen,   Gaab,   Juati, 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  xtU 

Dodke,  Magnus,  Eebenstein,  Lossner, — all  such  critics  have  proceeded  on  the 
principle  of  finding  a  literary  explanation  of  the  form,  not  a  spiritual  expo- 
sition of  the  matter.  Their  highest  aim  is  critical,  and  they  have  their 
reward — they  shake  together  a  heap  of  dry  bones,  and  their  own  dead  hearts 
hear  no  living  voice  of  response.  But  there  is  a  little  advance  upon  the 
barren,  dreary  emptiness  of  this  rationalistic  criticism  in  what  is  called  the 
dramatic  theory  of  interpretation,  which  has  received  a  considerable  acces- 
sion of  interest  during  the  present  century  by  the  development  of  a  new 
historical  hypothesis  by  which  it  is  attempted  to  explain  the  dramatio  unity 
and  progress  of  the  composition.  Jaoobi,  in  1771,  led  the  way,  in  a  work 
in  which  he  professed  to  defend  the  Song  of  Solomon  from  the  reproaches 
brought  against  it,  supposing  Solomon  to  have  fallen  in  love  with  a  young 
married  woman,  who,  with  the  husband,  is  brought  to  Jerusalem.  The 
husband  is  induced  to  divorce  his  wife  for  Solomon's  sake,  and  she  is  alarmed 
at  the  king's  approach,  and  cries  out  for  her  husband's  help.  The  whole  is 
a  worthless  attempt  to  work  out  a  baseless  hypothesis,  which  is  entirely  out 
of  harmony  with  the  pure  spirit  of  the  whole  book.  Other  G-erman  critics, 
such  as  Hezel,  Von  Ammon,  Staudlin,  and  Umbreit,  have  followed  Jaoobi 
in  endeavouring  to  unfold  the  dramatio  unity  of  the  poem,  but  none  have 
gone  further  than  the  great  historian  Ewald,  who  has  translated  it  with  an 
introduction  and  critical  remarks  (1826) ;  see  also  his  work  on  '  The  Poets 
of  the  Old  Testament'  (1866).  His  view,  as  set  forth  in  the  latter  work, 
is  that  it  was  actually  prepared  for  representation.  This  opinion  is  sup- 
ported by  the  hypothesis  that  there  is  an  actual  love-history  at  the  basis  of 
the  poem ;  a  young  shepherd,  of  the  north  of  Palestine,  being  the  real  lover 
of  Shulamith,  from  whom  Solomon  desires  to  alienate  her  affection ;  and 
that  the  main  idea  of  the  book  is  the  successful  resistance  of  Shulamith  to 
the  allurements  of  the  royal  lover  and  her  faithfulness  to  her  first  love,  to 
whom  she  is  restored  by  the  king  in  acknowledgment  of  her  virtue  and  as 
an  act  of  homage  to  faithful  affection.  This  theory  has  been  adopted  by 
many  critics  in  later  times,  as  by  Hitzig,  Vaihinger,  Eenan,  Eeville,  and 
Ginsburg;  but  it  is  not  only  exceedingly  improbable  in  itself,  but  out  ot 
harmony  with  the  place  of  the  work  in  the  canon  of  Scripture.  Even  if  we 
could  suppose  Solomon  capable  of  writing  such  a  history  of  his  own  delin- 
quencies, we  could  still  less  understand  how  such  a  "  confession  "  should  be 
incorporated  in  the  sacred  volume.  There  may  be  expressions  in  the  mouth 
of  the  bride  which  seem  at  first  sight  to  favour  such  a  theory,  but  the 
position  of  Solomon  throughout  is  quite  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  illicit 
solicitation,  or  indeed  with  any  other  relation  to  Shulamith  than  that  of 
chaste  and  legal  marriage.  The  only  forcible  argument  in  favour  of  this 
view,  which  is  generally  called  "  the  shepherd  "  theory,  is  the  use  of  language 
in  reference  to  the  bridegroom  which  supposes  him  a  shepherd  ;  but  this  is 
explained  by  the  fact  which  lies  on  the  surface  of  the  poem,  that  the  bride 
is  one  brought  up  in  country  life,  and  who  in  the  purity  and  simplioity  of 
her  heart  addresses  even  Solomon  himself  as  her  shepherd.     The  conclusion 

BONO  OF  SOLOMON.  " 


xviii  INTRODUCTION  TO 


of  the  poem  bears  this  out,  for  Solomon  is  so  captivated  by  the  beauty  ot 
her  character  that  he  follows  her  to  her  native  region  and  rural  home  where 
he  is  surroTinded  by  her  relations,  to  whom  he  vouchsafes  his  royal  favour. 
It  must  not  be  overlooked,  that  by  this  highly  artistic  method  not  only 
is  the  contrast  between  the  royal  splendour  and  the  pastoral  simplicity 
heightened,  but  ample  scope  is  given  for  the  introduction  of  spiritual 
analogies,  which  must  be  granted  to  be  the  main  purpose  of  the  book  and 
the  justification  of  its  place  in  the  canon.  The  theory  is  seen  in  all  its 
improbability  in  the  form  which  is  given  it  by  Benan,  who  represents  the 
shepherd  following  his  beloved  one  to  the  foot  of  the  tower  of  the  seraglio 
where  she  is  confined,  being  admitted  secretly  by  her,  and  then  exclaiming, 
in  the  presence  of  the  chorus,  in  a  state  of  rapturous  delight,  "  1  am  come 
into  my  garden,  my  sister,  my  spouse,"  etc.  (ch.  v.  1),  carrying  her  home 
when  she  is  at  last  released  from  the  king's  harem,  asleep  in  his  arms,  and 
laying  her  under  an  apple  tree  when  she  awakes  to  call  upon  her  lover  to 
set  her  as  a  seal  upon  his  arm,  etc.  The  shepherd-hypothesis  is  also 
defective  in  another  respect,  and  that  is,  that  it  fails  to  give  a  clear 
explanation  of  the  two  dreams  which  Shulamith  narrates,  which  certainly 
must  both  refer  to  the  same  object  of  love,  and  would  seem  to  imply  that 
there  was  some  defect  of  love  on  her  part.  The  spiritual  interpretation  is 
perfectly  simple  and  plain;  the  bride  representing  the  soul  of  man,  and 
therefore  its  inferiority  to  that  with  which  it  would  be  united.  But  if  we 
suppose  Shulamith  shut  up  in  a  harem,  the  representation  is  most  forced 
and  unnatural,  for  she  certainly  could  not  have  either  wandered  by  night 
in  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  nor  dreamed  of  such  an  adventure.  The  whole 
hypothesis  is  rendered  unnecessary  by  the  arrangement  which  disposes  the 
language  among  three  classes  of  speakers  only — the  bride,  the  chorus  of 
ladies,  and  the  king.  Thus  the  shepherd-lover  is  identified  with  the  royal 
bridegroom,  and  the  basis  is  still  left  secure  on  which  a  spiritual  interpre- 
tation of  the  whole  can  be  based.  Notwithstanding  the  very  ingenious 
attempts  made  by  Ginsburg  and  Beville  to  defend  the  theory,  it  must  be 
given  up,  with  all  the  erotic  explanations,  as  untenable  and  lowering  to  the 
character  of  the  poem.  We  can  only  justify  this  decisive  statement  of 
opinion  by  setting  forth,  in  opposition  to  what  we  oppose,  a  more  excellent 
way,  which  we  now  proceed  to  do,  giving  an  account,  at  the  same  time,  of 
the  various  shapes  which  have  been  given  to  the  typical  view,  which  we 
adopt. 

3.  The  typical  view.  It  should  be  frankly  admitted  by  those  who  reject 
both  the  allegorical  and  the  erotic  interpretation  of  the  Song  of  Solomon, 
that  no  theory  can  be  sound  which  does  not  recognize  what  forms  the 
principal  distinctive  element  in  each  of  these  views.  We  cannot  overlook 
the  fact  that  the  book  is  a  religious  book,  and  is  placed  as  such  in  the 
canon ;  therefore  in  some  sense  and  to  some  extent  it  must  be  allegorical, 
that  is,  there  must  be  a  deeper  meaning  in  it  than  that  which  appears 
on  the  surface,  and  that  meaning  must  be  in  harmony  with  the  rest  of 


THE  SON0  OF  SOLOMON. 


Scripture.  So  with  regard  to  the  various  erotic  and  naturalistic  explana- 
tions, it  cannot  he  denied  that  there  is  an  historical  basis  on  which  the  whole 
rests,  so  that  as  poetry  there  is  an  ideal  human  element  running  through 
it  which  gives  it  both  vitality  and  form.  It  is  the  attempt  to  carry  it  out 
to  an  extreme  which  has  vitiated  the  theory  in  each  case.  The  main 
principle  can  he  preserved  without  acceptance  of  the  details.  It  is  true,  as 
Zockler  has  observed,  that  it  was  "  the  greatly  preponderating  inclination 
of  the  Fathers  in  the  Middle  Ages,  which  soon  obtained  exclusive  sway,  to 
plunge  immediately  and  at  once  into  the  spiritual  sense,  which  stifled  at  its 
birth  every  attempt  to  assert  at  the  same  time  an  historical  sense,  and 
branded  it  with  the  same  anathema  as  the  profane-erotic  interpretation  of 
Theodore  of  Mopsuestia."  But  the  spirit  of  the  Eeformation  broke  the 
spell  of  the  allegorists.  The  desire  to  know  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  led  to 
a  truer  searching  of  the  Scriptures,  Even  in  the  Eoman  Catholio  Church 
there  were  signs  of  that  freedom,  especially  among  the  mystics,  one  of 
whom,  the  Spanish  mystic  Louis  de  Leon,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  wrote  a  translation  and  explanation  of  the  Canticles,  in  classical 
Spanish,  in  which,  recognizing  the  historical  basis  of  the  book,  he  lifted 
the  veil  from  the  spiritual  beauties  which  he  said  were  hidden  behind  the 
figures.  Others  followed  in  the  same  track,  as  Mercerus  (Le  Mercier), 
1573,  in  his  •  Commentary,'  and  Bossuet  in  his  work  on  the  '  Books  of 
Solomon'  (Paris,  1693),  and  Calmet  in  his  'Commentary;'  but  the  two 
great  English  names  in  connection  with  a  revival  of  the  study  of  the  book 
on  a  more  intelligent  foundation  are  John  Lightfoot  (1684)  and  Bishop 
Lowth  (1753).  The  latter,  especially  in  his  'Prelections  in  Hebrew 
Poetry,'  somewhat  after  the  style  of  Herder,  led  the  way  in  this  country  to 
a  profounder  attention  to  the  literary  form  and  critical  examination  of  the 
Bible.  Lowth's  view  is  substantially  that  which  has  been  adopted  by  the 
majority  of  evangelical  writers  since  his  time,  that  the  book  is  not  to  be 
regarded  as  a  "  continual  metaphor  "  nor  as  a  "  parable  properly  so  called," 
but  rather  as  a  "  mystical  allegory  in  which  a  higher  sense  is  superinduced 
upon  an  historical  verity."  He  is  certainly  wrong,  however,  in  his  view 
that  the  bride  referred  to  is  Pharaoh's  daughter.  Harmer,  the  author  of 
the  '  Observations  on  Passages  of  Scripture,'  followed  Lowth,  in  1778,  with 
a  commentary  and  new  explanation  of  Solomon's  Song ;  but  it  is  merely  of 
a  literary  kind,  no  attempt  being  made  to  explain  the  spiritual  application 
of  the  language,  and  it  is  of  no  great  value.  Dr.  Mason  Good,  the  learned 
physician,  translated  the  Song  with  very  interesting  notes,  regarding  it  as 
a  collection  of  idylls  in  praise  of  Solomon's  queen.  Charles  Taylor  has 
added  valuable  notes  to  Calmet's  '  Dictionary,*  and  Pye  Smith  advocated 
the  merely  literary  value  of  the  book  and  its  unspiritual  character.  Hoff- 
mann explained  it  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  Zockler  went  back  too  far 
towards  the  allegorical  theory.  The  two  great  German  commentators, 
Keil  and  Delitzsoh,  substantially  agree  in  their  view,  which,  while  admitting 
the  allegorical  intent  of  the  book,  refuses  to  see  hidden  meanings  in  every 


INTRODUCTION   TO 


detail  of  the  historical  basis.  One  would  find,  more  distinctly  than  the 
other,  reference  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  both  in  Israel  and  in  the  new 
dispensation,  hut  both  agree  that  the  love  of  Solomon  for  his  bride  is 
idealized,  and  so  used  spiritually.  Keil  sums  up  his  view  thus  :  "  It  depicts 
in  dramatized  lyrical  expression,  by  songs,  under  the  allegory  of  the  bridal 
love  of  Solomon  and  Shulamith,  the  loving  communion  between  the  Lord 
and  his  Church,  according  to  its  ideal  nature  as  it  results  from  the  choioe 
of  Israel  to  b©  the  Church  of  the  Lord.  According  to  this,  every  dis- 
turbance of  that  fellowship,  springing  out  of  Israel's  infidelity,  leads  to  an 
even  firmer  establishment  of  the  covenant  of  love,  by  means  of  Israel's 
return  to  the  true  covenant  God,  and  thus  God's  unchangeable  love.  Yet 
we  are  not  to  trace  in  the  poem  the  historical  course  of  the  covenant 
relation,  as  if  a  veil  of  allegory  had  been  thrown  over  the  principal  events 
iu  the  theocratic  history"  ('Introd.  to  Old  Testament,'  vol.  i.  p.  504).  The 
Rev.  T.  L.  Kingsbury,  M.A.,  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  has  accepted 
the  suggestion  which  seems  the  most  natural — that  the  history  which  is 
involved  in  the  Song  is  genuine,  and  that  it  refers  to  "  some  shepherd- 
maiden  of  Northern  Palestine,  by  whose  beauty  and  nobility  of  soul  the 
great  king  has  been  captivated ;  that  as  the  work  of  one  endued  by  inspira- 
tion with  that  wisdom  which  •  overseeth  all  things '  (Wisd.  viii.  23),  and 
so  contemplates  them  from  the  highest  point  of  view,  it  is  in  its  essential 
character  an  ideal  representation  of  human  love  in  the  relation  of  marriage ; 
that  which  is  universal  and  common  in  its  operation  to  all  mankind  being 
here  set  forth  in  one  grand  typical  instance."  "  No  allegorical  method  of 
exposition,"  he  rightly  observes,  "  which  declines  attempting  to  elucidate 
an  independent  literal  sense,  on  the  plea  that  such  endeavour  would  involve 
the  interpretation  in  a  succession  of  improprieties  and  contradictions," 
should  be  accepted.  It  is  both  untrue  and  dishonouring  to  a  sacred  and 
canonical  book.  The  fundamental  idea  he  would  take  to  be  "  the  awful 
all-constraining,  the  at  once  levelling  and  elevating  powers  of  the  mightiest 
and  most  universal  of  human  affections ;  and  the  two  axes  on  which  the 
main  action  of  the  poem  revolves  are  the  twofold  invitation,  the  king's 
invitation  to  the  bride  on  bringino;  her  to  Jerusalem,  the  bride's  to  the  king 
in  recalling  him  to  Shunem."  While  we  willingly  coincide  in  the  general 
truth  of  these  remarks,  we  incline  to  the  view  which  Keil  has  expressed  so 
moderately,  that  the  main  purpose  of  the  book  is  not  to  glorify  a  human 
sentiment  or  relationship,  which  seems  out  of  place  in  a  Hebrew  book,  but 
rather,  using  the  ideal  human  feeling  and  relationship  to  lead  the  soul 
of  man  into  the  thought  of  its  fellowship  with  God,  the  condescending 
privilege  which  is  included  in  that  feUowship,  the  exaltation  of  man  which 
it  brings  with  it,  and  the  mutual  character  of  religion,  both  in  the  indi- 
vidual and  in  the  Church,  as  based  upon  the  mystical  union  of  God  and  his 
creature  and  their  interchange  of  communications.  We  must  not  be 
deterred  from  a  moderate  and  chastened  employment  of  type  in  the  inter- 
pretation of  Scripture  by  the  aLuoe  which  has. been  only  too  freemen tly 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  xd 

made  of  it.  No  doubt,  if  we  look  above  the  historical,  or  natural,  or  literary 
aspects  of  the  book,  it  is  easy  to  find  in  it  the  meanings  which  we  may  be 
tempted  to  put  there;  but  the  same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  Lord's 
parables  and  of  all  Scripture,  The  historical,  literary,  and  spiritual  aspects 
blend  in  one,  and  that  interpretation  which  is  given  to  the  language  is 
most  likely  to  be  after  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  which  follows  his  own 
method  and  harmonizes  with  that  which  he  inspired  the  man  of  God  to  set 
before  us,  and  his  Church  to  hand  down  to  us  with  the  seal  of  its  appro- 
bation upon  it.  The  commentary  must  always  justify,  or  otherwise,  its 
own  main  principle;  and  if  as  a  whole  it  satisfies  the  language,  it  cannot 
be  very  far  astray. 

It  has  been  objected  by  some  that  we  ought  not  to  employ  Solomon  as 
in  any  sense  a  type  of  God  or  of  Christ,  because  he  was  a  sensual  man ; 
but  such  a  principle  would  simply  exclude  all  types,  for  they  must  be 
inferior  in  worth  to  that  which  they  typify.  The  patriarchs  were  far  from 
perfect  men  in  their  moral  features,  but  they  were  plainly  employed  in 
Scripture  typically  as  well  as  historically.  David  himself,  the  leading 
typical  character  and  norm  of  the  Old  Testament,  was  guilty  of  great  sins. 
Moreover,  while  Solomon  appears  in  the  poem  itself  as  a  sensual  Eastern 
monarch,  there  is  no  reference  to  the  sensuality  of  his  life.  Nor  need  wo 
doubt  that,  sensualist  as  he  became,  and  degraded  as  he  was  in  the  latter 
part  of  his  life,  he  would  in  the  earlier  portion  of  his  manhood  be  capable 
of  the  sincere  attachment  portrayed  in  the  songs.  At  the  same  time,  it 
may  be  allowed  that  the  facts  are  idealized.  Fundamentally  they  are 
historical.  For  a  religious  purpose  they  are  lifted  up  into  the  region  of 
poetry.  To  a  considerable  extent  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  Book  of 
Job,  which  builds  a  splendid  poem  on  a  basis  of  facts. 

There  remains,  then,  only,  in  conclusion,  to  justify  this  typical  interpre- 
tation by  showing  that  it  is  in  analogy  with  other  parts  of  Scripture.  It 
will  not  be  denied  by  any  one,  however  much  opposed  to  allegory  or  type, 
that  the  metaphor  of  marriage  is  common  through  the  Old  Testament  in 
connection  with  the  exhortation  to  covenant  faithfulness.  This  is  so 
familiar  in  the  prophetical  writings  that  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to  adduce 
instances.  The  fifth,  fiftieth,  and  sixty-second  chapters  of  Isaiah  and  the 
first  few  chapters  of  Hosea,  with  the  opening  words  of  Malaohi,  will  suffice 
to  remind  the  reader  that  it  was  an  illustration  which  all  the  sacred 
writers  made  use  of.  It  should  again  be  remembered  that  we  have  in  the 
forty- fifth  psalm  an  instance  of  what  the  title  describes  as  a  "Song  of 
Loves,"  or  Epiihalamium,  which  no  one  doubts  was  composed  on  the 
occasion  of  Solomon's  marriage,  or  on  some  similar  occasion  in  Israel.  It 
is  only  a  very  extreme  rejection  of  typical  interpretation  which  would 
refuse  to  such  a  psalm  any  higher  application  than  that  which  appears 
upon  the  surface,  especially  with  suoh  language  in  it  as  ver.  6,  "Thy 
throne,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever:  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom  is  a  right 
sceptre."    Admitting  that  such  terms  might  be  at  first  employed  only  as 


INTEODUCTION  TO 


royal  adulation  and  homage,  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  their  place  in 
the  Word  of  God  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Israelitish  king  was  regarded 
as  the  type  of  him  who  was  called  by  the  believing  "  Israelite  indeed,  in 
whom  was  no  guile,"  "  the  Son  of  God,  the  King  of  Israel "  (John  i.  49). 
The  reference  to  Messiah  was  certainly  believed  by  the  Jews  themselves, 
as  we  see  from  the  introduction  of  it  into  the  Chaldee  paraphrase  and 
others  of  the  Jewish  writings,  and  as  such  it  is  cited  in  Hebrews  (i.  8,  9). 
No  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  psalm  can  be  made  out  on  any  other 
view.     If  we  deny  a  Messianic  reference  in  such  a  case,  while  the  New 
Testament  confirms  it,  our  position  must  be  that  of  dealing  with  the  whole 
of  the  Old  Testament  only  as  a  fragmentary  Jewish  literature,  without 
proper  unity  and  without  inspired  authority.     In  that  case  we  are  thrown 
back  upon  far  greater  difficulties  than  any  which  the  older  view  meets,  for 
we  cannot  explain  the  history  and  character  of  the  Jewish  people  as  a 
whole,  and  we  must  be  prepared  to  answer  the  full  force  of  the  Apostle 
Paul's  emphatic  statement,  that  "  to  them  were  committed  the  oracles  of 
God"  (Eom.  iii.  2).     Such  bold  rationalism  is  now  completely  out  of  date, 
and  we  must  be  at  the  pains  to  study  the  language  of  the  Old  Testament 
with  a  reverent  acknowledgment  of  the  purpose  of  God  in  unfolding  the 
secrets  of  his  mind  and  will.     Hengstenberg  bases  his  argument  for  the 
allegorical  interpretation  of  Solomon's   Song  on   the  fact  that  Solomon 
himself  is  the  author,  and  that  we  cannot  otherwise  account  for  the  title 
and  place  given  to  the  work.     Had  it  been  a  mere  collection  of  love-songs, 
it  would  be  a  dishonour  to  the  Word  of  God  to  call  it  by  such  a  name  and 
place  it  side  by  side  with  the  sublime  inspired  songs  of  Moses,  Miriam, 
Deborah,  Hannah,  and  David.     There  is  certainly  considerable  force  in 
that  view.     And  the  close  correspondence  between  the  "  Song  of  Loves," 
the  forty-fifth  psalm,  and  the  "  Song  of  Songs "  seems  to  confirm  the 
typical  character  of  both.     We  find,  for  instance,  such  language  as  this, 
apparently  adopted  as  a  religious  phraseology,  "  fairest  among  the  children 
of  men  "  (Ps.  xlv.  3),  "  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  "  (Cant.  v.  10).    "  The 
king,"  as  the  highest  object  of  praise ;  "  lilies,"  as  the  emblems  of  virgin 
purity  and  loveliness;  loveliness  of  the  lip,  as  representing  excellence  of 
discourse ;  'heroic  might,  majesty,  and  glory  in  the  king ;  the  idea  which 
pervades  both,  of  conjugal  fidelity,  with  other  minor  resemblances,  lend 
considerable  weight  to  the  suggestion  that  the  forty-fifth  psalm  was  a  kind 
of  adaptation  of  the  Canticles  for  performance  by  the  sons  of  Korah  in 
the  temple.     Hengstenberg  mentions  many  instances  in  the  prophetical 
Scriptures  in  which  he  traces  allusion  to  the  language  or  metaphors  of  the 
Song  of  Solomon,  but  they  are  not  sufficiently  clear  to  be  relied  upon  as 
evidence.     And  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  instances  which  he  adduces 
from  the  New  Testament,  which  he  thinks  is  "  pervaded  with  references 
all  of  them  based  on  the  supposition  that  the  book  is  to  be  interpreted 
spiritually."    Our  Lord  refers  to  "  Solomon  in  all  his  glory ; "  can  we  safely 
affirm   that   he  alludes  to  the  description  in  Canticles?    Hengstenberg 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


points  to  the  metaphor  in  ch.  ii.  1,  "I  am  a  rose  of  Sharon,  a  lily  of  the 
valley,"  but  unfortunately  he  has  put  those  words  into  the  lips  of  Solomon 
instead  of  the  bride,  which  defeats  his  reference.  Most  of  the  other 
instances  are  equally  unsatisfactory.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  admitted 
that  the  use  of  metaphors  formed  from  the  marriage  relation  and  from  the 
language  of  human  affection,  in  application  to  the  highest  intercourse  of 
the  soul  with  the  objects  of  faith,  is  common  both  in  our  Lord's  discourses 
and  in  the  writings  of  the  apostles.  It  is  especially  prominent  in  the 
Apocalypse.  The  Church  is  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  Would  such 
metaphors  be  employed  by  the  Apostle  John  unless  he  had  found  them 
already  in  the  Old  Testament?  Would  the  Apostle  Paul  have  spoken  as 
he  does  of  the  mystical  meaning  of  marriage  as  setting  forth  the  union 
between  Christ  and  his  Church,  unless  the  Scriptures  had  familiarized  the 
people  of  God  with  the  symbol  ? 

We  entirely  sympathize  with  that  revulsion  of  feeling  with  which 
healthy  minds  turn  away  from  the  extravagant  fanoifulness  and  arbitrari- 
ness of  the  allegorical  school  of  commentators.  But  we  refuse  to  follow 
those  who,  in  their  avoidance  of  one  extreme,  fly  to  the  other.  The  hook 
cannot  be  a  mere  literary  product.  We  must  find  for  it  some  true  place 
in  the  sacred  volume.  "  Shall  we  then,"  asks  Mr.  Kingsbury,  in  the 
'  Speaker's  Commentary,'  "  regard  it  as  a  mere  fancy,  which  for  so  many 
ages  past  has  been  wont  to  find  in  the  pictures  and  melodies  of  the  Song 
of  Songs  types  and  echoes  of  the  actings  and  emotions  of  the  highest 
love,  of  love  Divine,  in  its  relations  to  humanity;  which,  if  dimly 
discerned  through  their  aid  by  the  synagogue,  have  been  amply  revealed 
in  the  gospel  to  the  Church  ?  Shall  we  not  still  claim  to  trace,  in  the 
noble  and  gentle  history  thus  presented,  foreshadowings  of  the  infinite 
condescensions  of  incarnate  love  ? — that  love  which,  first  stooping  in 
human  form  to  visit  us  in  our  low  estate  in  order  to  seek  out  and  win 
its  object  (Ps.  cxxxvi.  23),  and  thea  raising  along  with  itself  a 
sanctified  humanity  to  the  heavenly  places  (Eph.  ii.  6),  is  finally  awaiting 
there  an  invitation  from  the  mystic  bride  to  return  to  earth  once  more 
and  seal  the  union  for  eternity  (Eev.  xxii.  17)  ?  With  such  a  conception 
of  the  character  and  purpose  of  the  poem,  we  may  at  any  rate  sympathize 
with  the  glowing  language  of  St.  Bernard  concerning  it.  This  Song 
excels  all  other  songs  of  the  Old  Testament.  They  being,  for  the  most 
part,  songs  of  deliverance  from  captivity,  Solomon  for  such  had  no 
occasion.  In  the  height  of  glory,  singular  in  wisdom,  abounding  in 
riches,  secure  in  peace,  he  here  by  Divine  inspiration  sings  the  praises 
of  Christ  and  his  Church,  the  grace  of  holy  love,  the  mysteries  of  the  eternal 
marriage,  yet  all  the  while  like  Moses  putting  a  veil  before  his  face, 
because  at  that  time  there  were  few  or  none  that  could  gaze  upon  such 
glories"  (vol.  iv.  p.  674).  It  is  unworthy  of  any  devout  interpreter  of 
such  a  book  to  despise  and  disparage  the  spiritual  element  in  it.  What 
80  many  of  God's  people  have  recognized  must  be  substantially  the  mind 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE   SONG  OP   SOLOMON; 

of  tte  Spirit.  No  doubt,  aa  Delitzsch  has  observed,  "no  other  book 
ot  Scripture  has  been  so  muoh  abused  by  an  unscientific  spiritualizing 
and  an  over-scientific  unspiritual  treatment."  But  the  errors  of  commen- 
tators are  generally  gropings  towards  the  light.  The  truth  is  more  likely 
to  be  found  in  the  mean  between  the  two  extremes.  The  allegorist  gives 
the  reins  to  his  fancy  and  ends  in  absurdities ;  the  literalist  shuts  himself 
up  in  his  naturalism  and  forfeits  the  blessing  of  the  Spirit.  We  trust  that 
the  following  Exposition  will  show  that  there  is  a  better  way. 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBX  I. 


Ver.  1. — ^The  song  of  sngs,  which  is 
Solomon'B.  This  is  certainly  the  title  of 
the  book  which  follows,  although  in  our 
present  Hebrew  Bible  it  is  the  first  verse  of 
the  book,  preceded  by  the  shorter  form,  'The 
Song  of  Songs.'  The  Septuagint  lias  simply 
the  title  'Aa-fio,  so  that  our  English  title  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  'The  Song  of 
Solomon,'  has  no  ancient  authority.  It  is 
well  altered  in  the  Revised  Version  to  'The 
Song  of  Songs.'  The  word  "song"  (yd) 
does  not  necessarily  convey  the  meaning, 
composed  to  be  sung  tu  music.  If  the  per- 
formance of  the  words  were  chiefly  in  view, 
the  word  would  have  been  -nam,  carmen, 
"lyric  poem,"  "hymn,"  or  "ode."  TheGreek 
'Air/to  dfffiaTav,  and  the  Latin  of  the  Vul- 
gate, danticum  eanticorum,  accord  with  the 
Hebrew  in  representing  the  work  as  taking 
a  high  place  either  in  the  esteem  of  the 
Church  or,  on  account  of  the  subject,  in  the 
esteem  of  the  writer.  Luther  expresses  tiie 
same  idea  in  the  title  he  attaches  to  it, '  Das 
Holielied,'  tliat  is,  the  chief  or  finest  of  songs. 
The  reference  may  be  to  the  excellence  of 
the  literary  form,  but  probably  that  which 
suggested  the  title  was  the  supreme  beauty 
of  the  love  which  prompted  the  songs.  The 
title  may  be  regarded  as  applied  to  the  whole 
book,  or  to  the  first  portion  of  it  giving  the 
name  to  the  whole.  If  it  be  a  collection  of 
separate  songs  strung  together,  as  some  think, 
by  mere  resemblance  in  style  and  subject, 
then  the  words,  "  which  is  Solomon's  "  (i^>5 
in^K'^)  apply  to  the  first  song  alone.  But  the 
unity  which  is  clearly  to  be  traced  through 
the  book  to  the  end  makes  it  probable  that 
the  title  is  meant  to  ascribe  the  work  to  the 
authorship  of  Solomon.  This  is  tlie  opinion 
of  the  majority  of  critics.    It  must  have    I 

BONO   OF   SOLOMON. 


come  either  from  the  wise  king  himself,  oi 
from  some  one  of  his  contemporaries  or  im- 
mediate succesdors.  The  preposition  is  the 
lamedh  atictoria.  If  the  meaning  were 
"  referring  to,"  another  preposition  (hs)  would 
have  been  employed.  It  has  been  remarked 
by  Delitzsoh  that  the  absence  of  any  descrip- 
tion of  Solomon  as  "  King  of  Israel "  or  "son 
of  David,"  as  in  Proverbs  and  Ecclesiastes, 
confirms  the  view  that  Solomon  himself  was 
the  sole  author.  Some  have  argued  against 
the  authenticity  of  the  title  on  the  ground 
that  the  longer  form  of  the  relative,  lefK, 
is  used  in  it,  whereas  in  the  book  itself  the 
shorter  form,  E*,  is  found,  but  no  dependence 
can  be  placed  on  that  argument  regarded  by 
itself,  for  the  same  writer  employs  both  forms, 
as  e.g.  Jeremiah,  who  uses  the  longer  form 
in  his  prophecies  and  the  shorter  in  Lamen- 
tations. The  shorter  form  is,  in  fact,  the 
older,  being  Old  Canaaiiitish  or  PhcBuician, 
K^K,  which  is  a  lengthened  form  of  t!',  and 
afterwards  became  1^^.  One  vf  riter,  however 
(Fleischer),  holds  that  the  relative  pronoun 
has  a  substantive  origin,  and  compares  it 
witii  the  Arabic  ithe  and  the  Assyrian  asar, 
meaning  "  track  " or"  place,"  like  the  Ger- 
man weleher,  which  comes  from  wo.  But 
whether  this  be  so  or  not, it  is  certainly  unsafe 
to  date  any  book  by  the  form  found  in  it  of  the 
relative  pronoun.  We  know  that  in  poetry 
the  abbreviated  form  is  common.  It  was 
probably  a  North  Palestine  provincialism,  as 
we  see  in  the  Book  of  Kings.  It  became 
common  in  prose  writings  after  the  Captivity 
because  of  the  degradation  of  Hebrew,  but  it 
was  not  unknown  before  that  time  either  in 
prose  or  poetry.  With  regard  to  the  exact 
description  of  the  poetic  form  of  the  Song  of 
Songs,  the  difference  among  critics  is  con- 
siderable, but  the  question  is  scarcely  worth 
-'•"cuasing.    There  undoubtedly  is  unity  of 


THE  SONG  OP   SOLOMON. 


[oh.  1.  1—17. 


conception  in  the  Bongs  which  are  brought 
together,  but  it  cannot  be  of  importance  to 
prove  that  there  ia  dramatic  unity  strictly 
speaking;  there  is  no  dramatic  procedure, 
nor  can  we  suppose  tliat  there  is  any  ultimat* 
aim  at  dramatic  representation.  But  the 
Exposition  which  follows  will  suffice  to  show 
that  there  are  facts  of  history  in  the  back- 
ground of  the  poem ;  if  the  suggestions  of 
the  language  and  scenery  be  followed,  the 
facts  are  very  beautiful  and  even  romantic — • 
the  love  of  the  great  king  for  one  of  his  own 
subjects,  a  lovely  northern  maiden,  whose 
simplicity  and  purity  of  character  are  a  great 
attraction  and  lend  much  force  to  the  religious 
sentiment  of  the  song.  In  1  Kings  v.  12  we 
read  that  "the  Lord  gave  Solomon  wisdom, 
as  he  promised  him."  That  divinely  in- 
spired wisdom  enabled  him,  notwithstanding 
his  own  personal  errors,  to  idealize  and  sanc- 
tify the  lovely  episode  of  his  life  which  lii  s 
at  the  foundation  of  his  poem.  And  the 
Church  of  God  in  every  age  has  appreciated, 
more  or  less  widely,  the  inspii  ation,  both  of 
matter  and  of  form,  which  breathed  in  it. 
We  are  told  that  Solomon  composed  one 
thousand  and  five  songs  (1  Kings  iv.  32) ; 
whether  this  is  a  part  of  that  collection  or 
not  we  cannot  certainly  say,  but  that  it  is  a 
mere  fasdcului,  or  collection  of  separate 
songs,  strung  together  by  their  general 
erotic  character,  is  what  we  cannot  believe. 
No  doubt,  as  Dr.  Mason  Good  has  observed, 
the  Arabian  poets  were  accustomed  to  ar- 
range their  poems  in  what  they  compared  to 
a  string  of  pearls,  but  we  can  scarcely  carry 
such  a  fact  into  the  Bible,  and  deal  with 
sacred  books  as  mere  literary  remains.  There 
must  be  a  deep  religious  meaning  in  such 
language,  and  it  is  in  accoi  dance  with 
Eastern  usage  that  amatory  songs  should  be 
so  employed.  What  the  meaning  is  we  must 
persistently  ask,  and  however  much  has  been 
wrongly  said  in  the  past,  while  we  believe  in 
the  Divine  authority  of  the  Old  Testament 
we  must  not  renounce  the  endeavour  to  find 
the  Song  of  Songs  worthy  of  its  title  and  its 
place. 

Ver.  2 — ch.  ii.  7. — Parti.  Mutual  Love. 
Song  of  Shulamith  in  the  royal  chambers. 
Chorus  of  ladies,  daughters  of  Jerusalem. 

Yer.  2. — Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses 
of  his  mouth :  for  thy  love  is  better  than  wine. 
Whether  we  take  these  words  as  put  in  the 
lips  of  the  bride  herself,  or  of  the  chorus  as 
identifying  themselves  with  her,  is  of  little 
consequence.  It  is  certain  that  the  idea  in- 
tended to  be  expressed  is  that  of  delight  in 
the  approach  of  the  royal  bridegroom.  The 
future  is  used  optatively,  "  Let  me  be  taken 
up  into  the  closest  fellowship  and  embrace." 
All  nttempts  to  dispense  with  the  amatory 
phraceology  are  vain.    The  "  kisses  "  must 


be  interpreted  in  a  figurative  sense,  or  the 
sacred  character  of  the  whole  book  must 
be  removed.  The  words  may  be  rendered, 
with  one  of  liia  kisses ;  i.e.  the  sweetness  of 
his  lips  is  such  that  one  kiss  would  be 
rapture.  Some  have  thought  that  allusion  is 
intended  to  the  custom  among  idolaters 
referred  to  in  Job  xxxi.  27,  "  My  mouth  hath 
kissed  my  hand ; "  but  the  meaning  is  simply 
that  of  affection.  The  great  majority  of  Chris- 
tian commentators  have  regarded  the  words 
as  expressive  of  desire  towards  God.  Origen 
said,  the  Church  of  the  old  dispensation 
longing  after  higher  revelations,  as  through 
the  Incarnation,  "  How  long  shall  he  send 
me  kisses  by  Moses  and  the  prophets  ? 
I  desire  the  touch  of  his  own  lips."  It  is 
dangerous  to  attempt  specific  applications  of 
a  metaphor.  The  general  truth  of  it  is  all 
that  need  be  admitted.  If  the  relation 
between  God  and  his  people  is  one  that  can 
be  set  forth  under  the  image  of  liuman  affec- 
tion, then  there  is  no  impropriety  in  the 
language  of  Solomon's  Song.  "  To  kiss 
a  kiss "  (nj3»'j  pEi^)  is  the  ordinary  Hebraic 
form  (of.  "to  counsel  a  counsel").  Thy 
love  is  better  than  wine.  The  plural  is  used, 
"  loves,"  as  in  the  word  "  life  "  (D"n) — the 
abstract  for  the  concrete,  perhaps  in  order 
to  indicate  the  manifestation  of  love  in  many 
caresses.  The  change  from  tlie  third  person 
to  the  second  is  common  in  poetry.  The 
comparison  with  wine  may  be  taken  either 
as  denoting  sweetness  or  exhilarating  effects. 
The  intoxicating  power  of  wine  is  but  rarely 
referred  to  in  Scripture,  as  the  ordinary 
wine  was  distinguished,  from  strong  drink. 
Some,  as  Hitzig  and  Bottcher,  would  read 
'Jp»j,  changing  the  pointing,  and  trans- 
lating, "  Let  him  give  me  to  drink ; "  but  there 
is  no  necessity  for  a  reading  so  forced  and 
vulgar.  The  Septuagint,  altering  the  vowels 
of  the  word  "  love,"  turn  it  into  "  breasts," 
ami  must  therefore  have  supposed  it  addressed 
to  the  bride.  The  word  is  connected  with 
the  Arabic,  and  runs  through  the  languages, 
dodh  (cf.  Dada,  Dido,  David).  Perhaps  the 
reference  to  wine,  as  subsequently  to  the 
ointments,  may  be  explained  by  the  fact 
that  the  song  is  supposed  to  be  sung  while 
wine  is  presented  in  the  chamber,  and  while 
the  perfumes  are  poured  out  in  preparation 
for  the  entrance  of  the  royal  bridegroom. 
We  can  scarcely  doubt  that  the  opening 
words  are  intended  to  be  the  utterance  of 
lovxi?  desire  on  the  part  of  the  bride  in  the 
presence  of  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem. 
Some  have  susrgested  that  vers.  1 — 8  are 
from  a  kind  of  responsive  dialogue,  but  the 
view  of  the  older  interpreters  and  of  Ewald, . 
Hengstenberg,  Weissbach,  and  others  of  the 
moderns,  seems  more  correct,  that  all  the 
first  seven  verses  are  in  the  mouth  of 
Shulamith,  and  then  ver.  8  comes  in  naturally 


OH.  1.  1—17.] 


THE  SONG   OF  SOLOMON. 


as  a  chorus  in  reply  to  the  song  of  the  bride. 
The  use  of  the  plural,  "  We  will  run  after 
thee,"  etc.,  is  easily  explicable.  The  bride  is 
surrounded  by  her  admiring  companions  and 
attendants.  They  are  congratulating  her 
on  the  king's  love.  She  speaks  as  from  the 
midst  of  the  company  of  ladies. 

Ver.  3. — Thine  ointments  have  a  goodly 
fragrance ;  thy  name  is  as  ointment  ponred 
forth ;  therefore  do  the  virgins  love  thee. 
There  is  some  slight  difference  among  critics 
as  to  the  rendering  of  this  verse,  but  it  does 
not  affect  the  meaning.  Lovely  and  deligljt- 
ful  thou  art.  As  thy  perfumes  are  so  precious, 
so  is  tliy  name ;  the  more  it  is  spread,  the 
more  delight  is  found  in  it.  The  idea  is 
that  the  person  is  the  sweetest,  and  that  his 
communications  are  elevating  and  inspiring. 
The  "virgins"  may  be  taken  generally, 
"Those  who  are  full  of  the  sensibility  of 
youth  appreciate  thy  attractions."  The  word 
almah  is  uiucli  disputed  about,  but  the 
meaning  is  simply  that  of  "  young  womai)," 
whether  virgin  or  mariied.  "  Thou  art  the 
delight  of  all  the  young."  Mason  Good 
renders  the  verse — 

"Rich  thy  perfumes;  but  richer  far  than 

they 
The  countless    charms    that    round    thy 

person  play; 
Thy  name  alone,  more  fragrant  than  the 

rose. 
Glads  every  maid,  where'er  its  fragrance 

flows." 

Ver.  4. — ^Draw  me,  we  will  ran  after  thee : 
the  king  hath  brought  me  into  his  chambers : 
we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thee,  we  will 
make  mention  of  thy  love  more  than  of  wine : 
rightly  do  they  love  thee.  This  is  best  taken 
as  all  spoken  by  the  bride.  It  is  the  language 
of  the  purest  affection  and  adoring  admira- 
tion. "  I  drew  them,"  God  says  (Hus.  xi.  4), 
"  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of  love." 
"  The  Lord  appeared  of  old  unto  me,"  says 
Jeremiah  (xxxi.  3),  "saying.  Yea,  I  have 
loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love  :  there- 
fore with  loving-kindness  have  I  drawn 
thee."  In  the  same  sense  the  Greek  word  k\- 
Kvew  is  used  by  our  Lord  himself  of  the 
Fat  l)er  drawing  to  the  Son,  and  of  the  Son,  up 
lifted  on  the  cross,  "di awing  "  all  men  unto 
him  (of.  John  vi.  44 ;  xii.  32).  If  the  spiritual 
meaning  of  the  whole  poem  is  admitted,  such 
language  is  quite  natural.  The  king's 
chambers  are  the  king's  own  rooms  in  the 
palace,  i.e.  his  sleeping-rooms  and  sitting- 
rooms — the  penetralia  regis.  We  may  take 
the  preterite  as  equivalent  to  the  present; 
i.e.  "The  king  is  bringing  me  into  closest 
fellowship  witli  himself,  not  merely  as  a 
member  of  his  household,  but  as  his  chosen 
bride."  The  concluding  words  have  caused 
much  discussion.    The  meaning,  however,  is 


the  same  whether  we  say,  '•  The  upright  love 
thee,"  or  "Thou  art  rightly  loved."    The 
intention  ia  to  set  forth  the  object  of  love  as 
perfect.    The  plural,  Dn^''p,  is  used  to  signify 
the  abstract  of  the  word,  thought,  or  act ;  i  e 
"righteous,"  (or  "rightly  "  (cf  Ps.  Iviii.  2  ; 
Ixxv.  3) ;  but  the  best  critics  think  it  could  not 
be  the  abstract  for  tlje  concrete  plural,  as  in 
the  Vulgate,  Recti  diligunt  te.    The  same  use 
of  the  word  is  seen  in  eh.  vii.  9,  "  The  best 
wine    that  goeth  down    smoothly    for    my 
beloved  "  (cf.  Prov.  xxiii.  31).    Before  going 
further  in  tlie  song,  it  is  well  to  observe  how 
chaste,  pure,  and  delicate  is  the  language  of 
love;  and  yet,  as  Delitzsch  has  pointed  out, 
there  is  a  mystical,  cloudy  brightness.     We 
seem  to  be  in  the  region  of  the  ideal.    It  is 
not  a  mere  love-song,  though  it  may  have 
been  the  commemoration  of  an  actual  past. 
The  Eastern  Ibrm  of  the  words  may  be  leas 
suited  to  our  taste  than  it  would  be  to  those 
who  first  embraced  Christianity,  and  to  the 
nineteenth  century  than  to  the  first ;  but  tlie 
loving  rapture  of  the  Church  in  fellowship 
with  the  Saviour  is  certainly  seeking  a  more 
vivid  expression  in  song,  and    there  are 
many  of  the  most  simple-minded  and  de- 
voted Christians  whose  joy  in  Christ  pours 
itself  out  freely  in  strains  not  much  less 
fervid  and  almost  as  sensuous  as  anything  to 
be  found  in  Solomon's  Song.   Some  are  begin- 
ning to  remonstrate  against  this  freedom  of 
devotional  language,  but  the  instinct  of  the 
Church  seems  to  justify  it  as  the  demand  of 
the  heart  under  the  influence  of  the  Word  of 
God  itself.     Perhaps  there  is  a  state  of 
religious  feeling  coming  into  the  experience 
of  Christians  which  will  remove  the  veil  from 
such  a  book  as  the  Song  of  Songs,  and  we 
shall  yet  find  that  its  language  is  needful 
and  is  not  extravagant. 

Ver.  5. — I  am  black,  but  comely,  0  ye 
daughters  of  Jerusalem,  as  the  tents  of  Kedar, 
as  the  curtains  of  Solomon.  The  word 
"black"  (njinw)  does  not  necessarily  mean 
that  the  skin  is  black,  but  rather  sunburnt, 
dark-brown,  as  in  Lam.  iv.  8,  where  the  same 
word  signifies  the  livid  or  swarthy  appear- 
ance of  one  who  has  suffered  long  from 
famine  and  wretchedness.  There  is  certainly 
no  reason  to  take  the  word  as  an  argument 
for  the  bride  being  Pharaoh's  daughter; 
but  it  points  to  what  is  confirmed  by  the 
rest  of  the  poem — the  rustic  birth  and 
northern  blood  of  the  l>ride.  She  has  been 
living  in  the  fields,  and  is  browned  with  the 
ruddy  health  of  a  country  life.  The  best 
explanation  of  the  words  is  that  they  are 
drawn  out  by  the  fact  that  the  bride  is 
surrounded  by  her  ladies.  Some  think  that 
they  look  askance  at  hei,  or  with  indigna- 
tion at  the  boldness  of  her  words ;  but  that  ia 
quite  uimecessary,  and  would  be  inconsistent 
with  the  dignity  of  the  bride.    The  country 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[CH.  1. 1—17, 


maiden  feelB  the  greatness  of  the  honour, 
that  she  is  chosen  of  the  king,  and  with 
simple  modesty,  in  the  presence  of  courtly 
ladies  around  her,  sets  fortli  her  claim.  The 
simile  is  not  uncommon  in  poetry,  as  in 
Theocritus andVirgil.  Comely;  i.e. attractive, 
agreeable.  Kedar  (whether  from  the  Arabic, 
meaning  "  powerful,"  or  from  the  Hebrew, 
"  black  "  )  designates  the  tribes  of  the  North- 
Arabian  descendants  of  Ishmael  (Gen.  xxv. 
13;  laa.  xxi.  17),  Kedareens,  referred  to  by 
Pliny,  and  remaining  in  Arabia  until  the  time 
of  the  Mohammedans.  The  Bedouin  still 
nails  his  tent  his  "  hair-house ; "  it  is  covered 
with  goat's-liair  cloth,  mostly  black  or  grey. 
Whether  the  reference  is  to  the  colour  of 
the  goat's  hair  or  to  the  tents  being  browned 
or  blackened  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  we  can- 
not doubt  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  com- 
plexion, and  the  rest  of  the  simile  would 
then  be  applicable  to  the  lovely  shape  and 
features  of  the  maiden,  the  curtains  of 
Solomon  being  the  curtains  of  a  pavilion,  or 
pleasure-tent,  spread  out  like  "a  shining 
butterfly,"  i.e.  the  beautiful  cloth  or  tapes- 
try which  formed  the  sides  of  the  tent  or  the 
tent-coverings,  the  clothing  of  the  framework, 
or  tent-hangings  (see  Isa.  liv.  2 ;  Exod.  xxvi. 
36;  2  Sam.  vii. ;  1  Chron.  xvii.  1,  etc.). 
Egyptian  hangings  were  particularly  prized. 
The  custom  prevailed  among  Eastern  mon- 
archs  of  sojourning  once  in  the  year  in  some 
lovely  rural  district,  and  at  such  times  their 
tents  would  be  very  magnificent.  The  LX  X. 
has,  &s  Sefi^eis  ^okofi^Vf  '^as  the  skins  of 
Solomon ; "  but  this  is  a  mistake.  The  word 
is  derived  from  a  root  "to  tremble,"  i.e.  "to 
glitter  in  the  sun."  Those  who  desire  to  find 
an  allegorical  interpretation  think  there  is  an 
evident  allusion  here  to  the  sojourn  of  Israel 
in  the  wilderniiss,  or  the  admission  of  the 
Gentiles  into  the  covenant ;  but  there  is  no 
reason  for  any  such  strain  upon  the  meaning. 
The  simile  is  menly  poetical.  The  soul 
realizes  its  own  acceptance  before  God,  but 
ascribes  that  acceptance  to  his  grace.  "  The 
bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,"  sees  the  beauty  of 
the  Lord  reflected  in  herself,  and  rejoices  in 
her  own  attractions  for  his  sake.  There  is 
no  immodesty  in  the  consciousness  of  merit 
so  long  as  that  merit  is  ascribed  to  him  from 
whom  it  comes.  There  is  often  more  pride 
in  the  assumption  of  humility  than  in  the 
claim  to  be  acknowledged.  The  same  apostle 
who  declared  himself  less  than  the  least  of  all 
saints  also  maintained  that  he  was  not  a 
whit  behind  the  very  chiefest  apostles. 

Ver.  6. — look  not  upon  me,  beoanso  I 
am  swarthy,  because  the  sun  hath  scorched 
me.  My  mother's  sons  were  incensed  against 
me ;  they  made  me  keeper  of  the  'vineyards ; 
but  mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept. 
The  meaning  seems  to  be — Do  not  let  the 
6wa/thiuess  of  my  complexion  lower  me  in 


your  eyes.  Literally  the  words  are,  Do  not 
$ee  me  that  I  am ;  i.e.  do  not  regard  me  as 
being,  because  I  am.  There  is  no  necessity 
to  suppose  any  looks  of  the  ladies  to  have 
suggested  the  words.  They  are  the  words 
of  modest  self-depreciation  mingled  with 
joyful  sense  of  acceptance.  It  is  difficult 
to  render  the  Hebrew  exactly.  The  word 
translated  "  swarthy  "  (sheeharchoreh)  is 
probably  a  diminutive  from  thechorah,  which 
itself  means  "  blackish ; "  so  that  the  mean- 
ing is,  "that  my  complexion  is  dark."  The 
reference  to  the  sun  explains  the  word  still 
further,  as  pointing,  not  to  a  difference  of 
race,  but  to  mere  temporary  effects  of  an  out- 
door life :  "  The  sun  has  been  playing  with 
my  complexion ; "  or,  as  the  LXX.  renders 
it,  Ilap4p\&lie  nl  i  fiXlos,  "  The  sun  has  been 
gazing  at  me."  So  other  Greek  versions. 
Some,  however,  include  the  idea  of  burning 
or  scorching,  which  is  the  literal  meaning 
of  the  verb,  though  in  Job  iii.  9  and  xli.  10 
it  is  used  in  the  sense  of  looking  at  or  upon. 
The  sun  is  the  eye  of  the  heavens  (see 
2  Sam.  xii.  11),  and  with  delicate  feeling 
it  is  spoken  of  here  as  feminine,  the  bride 
playfully  alluding,  perhaps,  to  the  lady  seen 
in  the  heavens  preceding  the  ladies  of  the 
court  in  gazing  on  her  beauty.  It  is  difficult 
to  explain  with  perfect  satisfaction  the  next 
clause  of  the  verse.  Doubtless  "mother's 
sons "  is  a  poetical  periphrasis  for  brothers 
— not  "step-brothers,"  as  some  have  said. 
Perhaps  the  mother  was  a  widow,  as  no 
father  is  mentioned.  The  best  explanation 
is  that  the  bride  is  simply  giving  an  account 
of  herself,  why  she  is  so  browned  in  the  sun. 
The  brothers,  for  some  reason,  had  been  in- 
censed against  her,  possibly  on  account  of 
her  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  king,  but  more 
probably  for  private,  family  reasons.  They 
would  not  have  her  shutting  heiself  up  in 
the  house  to  take  care  of  her  complexion ; 
they  would  have  her  in  the  vineyards.  In 
the  word  "  keeper  "  (notOrah,  instead  of 
notz^'rah}  we  have  an  instance  of  the  northern 
dialect — a  kind  of  Platt-Hebrew — harden- 
ing the  pronunciation.  My  own  vineyard 
have  I  not  kept  no  doubt  refers  simply  and 
solely  to  her  complexion,  not  to  her  viiginity 
or  character.  She  means — I  was  compelled 
by  my  brothers  to  go  into  the  vineyards  in 
the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  the  consequence 
was,  as  you  see,  I  have  not  been  able  to 
preserve  the  delicacy  of  my  skin ;  I  have 
been  careless  of  my  personal  beauty.  The 
sun  has  done  its  work.  The  reference  helps 
us  to  recognize  the  historical  background 
of  the  poem,  and  leads  naturally  to  the  use 
of  the  pastoral  language  which  runs  through 
the  whole.  The  king  is  a  shepherd,  and 
his  bride  a  shepherdess.  Without  straining 
the  spiritual  interpietation,  we  may  yet  dis- 
cover in  this  beautiful  candour  and  sim- 


OH.  I.  1—17.] 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


plioity  of  the  bride  the  reflection  of  th  e  soul's 
virtues  in  its  joyful  realization  of  Divine 
favour ;  but  tlie  true  method  of  interpreta- 
tion requires  no  minute,  detailed  adjuotmeut 
of  the  language  to  spiritual  facts,  but  rather 
seeks  the  meaning  in  the  total  impression  of 
the  poem. 

Ver  7. — Tell  me,  0  then  whom  my  aonl 
loveth,  where  thou  feedest  thy  flock,  where 
thou  makest  It  to  rest  at  noon:  for  why 
should  I  be  as  one  that  is  veiled  beside  the 
flock  of  thy  companions  ?  These  words  carry 
on  tlie  associations  suggested  by  the  previous 
verse.  The  bride  is  longing  for  the  bride- 
groom ;  but  she  cannot  think  of  him  yet  in 
any  other  light  tlian  as  a  companion  of  her 
simple  country  life — he  is  a.  shepherd,  and 
she  a  shepherdess.  "Take  me  into  closer 
fellowship  with  thyself;  let  me  not  remain 
still  only  one  amongst  the  many."  Perhaps 
tliere  is  intended  to  be  an  allusion  to  the 
common  metaplior  —the  king  as  the  shepherd 
and  tlie  people  as  his  flock ;  but  the  upper- 
most thought  of  the  bride  is  separation 
unto  her  husband.  The  soul  which  longs 
for  the  enjoyment  of  fellowship  with  God 
desires  to  be  carried  away  out  of  all  distrac- 
tions, out  of  all  restraints,  lifted  above 
reserve  and  above  doubt  into  the  closest  and 
most  loving  union.  The  idea  of  the  veil 
may  be  either  the  veil  of  mourning  or  the 
veil  of  modesty  and  reserve.  Probably  the 
latter  is  the  true  reference.  The  LXX.  has, 
as  Trepi0aK\ofi4ini.  There  is  some  difference 
of  opinion  among  critics.  Ewald  tliiuks  it 
refers  to  strangeness — "  like  one  unknown," 
and  therefore  veiled;  Gesenius  says,  "one 
fainting;"  others  connect  the  word  with 
the  root  "  to  roam,"  "  to  wander  "  (see  Isa. 
xxii.  17),  which  is  confirmed  by  Symmaohus, 
the  Vulgate,  the  Syriac,  the  Chaldee,  Jerome, 
Venetian,  and  Luther.  The  simplest  ex- 
planation is  that  the  bride  compares  herself, 
in  her  absence  from  her  lord,  among  the 
ladies  of  the  court,  to  a  veiled  woman  travel- 
ling beside  the  flocks  of  the  shepherds, 
seeking  her  friend,  but  not  yet  brought  to 
him. 

Ver.  8. — (Chorus  of  ladies.}  It  thou  know 
not,  0  thou  fairest  among  women,  go  thy 
way  forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the  flook,  and 
feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents. 
That  another  voice  is  here  introduced  there 
can  be  no  doubt ;  and  as  it  is  not  like  the 
voice  of  tlie  bridegroom  himself,  which  is 
heard  in  the  next  verse,  we  must  suppose 
it  to  be  the  chorus  of  attendant  ladies. 
Delitzsoh  suggests  very  plausibly  tliat  they 
are  pleasantly  chiding  the  simplicity  of  the 
country  maiden,  and  telling  her  that,  if  she 
cannot  understand  her  position,  she  had 
better  return  to  her  coiDitry  life.  In  that 
case,  "  if  thou  know  not "  would  mean — If 
thou  canst  not  rise  up  to  thy  privilege ;  the 


knowledge  referred  to  being  general  know- 
led2;e  or  wisdom.  The  delicate  irony  is 
well  expressed,  as  in  the  reference  to  the 
kids — "feed  thy  kids,"  like  a  child  as  thou 
art.  But  there  may  be  no  inteiitinnal 
irony  in  the  words ;  rather  a  playfid  and 
sympathetic  response  to  the  beautiful  sim- 
plicity of  the  bride — If  thou  art  waiting  to 
be  brought  to  thy  beloved,  if  thou  art  i^eeking 
thy  shepherd,  thou  most  lovely  woman,  then 
go  quietly  on  thy  way,  like  a  shepherdess 
tending  the  kids  beside  the  sheplierds' 
tents ;  follow  the  peaceful  'footsteps  of  the 
flock,  and  in  due  time  the  beloved  one  will 
appear.  This  is  better  than  to  suppose  the 
ladies  presuming  to  indulge  in  irony  when 
they  must  know  that  Shulamith  is  the  king's 
favourite.  Besides,  the  first  scene  of  the 
poem,  which  is  a  kind  of  introduction,  thus 
ends  appropriately  with  an  invitation  to 
peaceful  waiting  for  love.  We  are  prepared 
for  the  eutr.iuce  of  the  beloved  one.  The 
spiritual  meaning  is  simple  and  clear — Those 
that  would  be  lifted  up  into  the  highest  en- 
joyments of  religion  must  not  be  impatient 
and  doubt  that  the  Lord  will  reveal  himself, 
but  go  quietly  and  patiently  on  with  the 
work  of  life,  "in  the  footsteps  of  the  flook," 
in  fellowship  with  humble  souls,  and  in  the 
paths  of  peace,  in  the  green  pastures  and 
beside  the  still  waters,  ready  to  do  anything 
assigned  them,  and  the  time  of  rejoicing  and 
rapture  will  come. 

Ver.  9. — {Entrance  of  the  bridegroom.)  I 
have  compared  thee,  0  my  love,  to  a  steiid 
in  Pharaoh's  chariots.  'There  oan  be  no 
reasonable  doubt  that  these  words  are  put 
into  the  mouth  of  the  king.  The  "  steed  " 
is  in  the  feminine  (npiD);  some  would  point 
the  word  with  the  plural  vowels,  that  is, 
"  to  my  horses,"  or  a  "  body  of  horses." 
There  is  no  necessity  for  that.  The  refer- 
ence to  a  particular  very  lovely  mare  is  more 
apt  and  pointed.  In  1  Kings  x.  26  we  read 
in  the  LXX.  Version  of  Tsa-a-dpes  x'^'i^Ses 
flijXeia!  'Iviroi,  which  Solomon  had  for  his 
chariots — fourteen  hundred  war-chariots  and 
twelve  thousand  horsemen.  The  Pharaoh- 
chariots  were  those  which  tiie  king  had 
imported  from  Egypt  (1  Kings  x.  28,  29 ; 
2  Ohron.  ix.  28).  It  may  be  that  the  refer- 
ence is  to  the  splendid  decoration  of  the 
trappings.  Delitzsch  very  rightly  sees  in 
such  a  flgure  a  confirmation  of  the  view  that 
Solomon  himself  was  the  author.  The  horses 
from  Egypt  were  famed  at  that  time  as  those 
of  Arabia  became  afterwards.  The  names 
both  of  horses  and  chariots  in  the  Egyptian 
language  were  borrowed  from  the  Semitic, 
as  they  were  probably  first  imported  into 
Egypt  by  the  Hyksos,  or  shepheid-ldngs. 
Other  examples  of  the  same  comparison  are 
found  in  poetry,  as  in  Horace,  Anacreon, 
and  Theocritus.     Iri  the  last  (•  Idyl.,'  xviil 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[OH.  1.  1—17, 


30,  31)  occur  the  following  lines,  rendered 
into  English  verse  : — 

"  As  towers  the  cypress  'mid  the  garden's 
bloom, 
As  in  the  chariot  proud  Thessalian  steed, 
Tlius  graceful,  rose-complexioned  Helen 
moves." 
The  idea  is  that  of  stately  beauty  and  grace- 
ful movements.    The  old  commentators  see 
tlie  Divine  love  of  espousals  (Jer.  ii.  2),  as 
in  the  wilderness  of  the  Exodus,  and  after- 
wards in  the  wilderness  of  the  vforld.     The 
Bible  is  full  of  the  expression  of  Divine 
tenderness  and  regard  for  man. 

Vers.  10, 11. — Thy  cheeks  are  comely  with 
plaits  of  hair,  thy  neck  with  strings  of 
jewels.  We  will  make  thee  plaits  of  gold 
with  studs  of  silver.  This  language  may  be 
suggested  by  the  comparison  first  employed 
— the  trappings  of  the  horse.  "  The  head- 
frame  of  the  horse's  bridle  and  the  poitral 
were  then  certainly,  just  as  now,  adorned 
with  silken  tassels,  fringes,  and  other  orna- 
ments of  silver.  Torim,  'round  ornaments,' 
which  hang  down  in  front  on  both  sides  of 
the  head-band  or  are  also  inwoven  in  the 
braids  of  hair  in  the  forehead."  The  strings 
of  jewels  were  necklaces — three  rows  of 
pearls.  The  ornamentation  is,  however, 
quite  in  accordance  with  female  dress.  The 
king  makes  the  promise  of  gold  and  silver 
decoration  as  an  expression  of  his  personal 
delight  in  bis  bride  and  acceptance  of  her. 
Gold  and  silver  were  closely  connected ; 
hence  silver  was  called,  in  the  Old  Egyptian 
language,  "white  gold."  The  idea  seems 
to  be  that  of  silver  points  sprinkled  over 
golden  knobs.  Compare  tiie  description  in 
'  Faust '  of  Margaret's  delight  in  the  easket 
she  finds  in  her  room.  The  LXX.  and 
Vulsiate  have  mistaken  the  word  torim  for 
a  similar  word  tor  "  doves,"  taking  the  simile 
to  be  the  beautiful  colours  of  the  dove's 
neck.  The  bride  does  not  seem  to  reply 
immediately  to  tlie  king;  but  we  may  sup- 
pose that  the  king  takes  his  bride  by  tbe 
hand,  and  leails  her  into  the  banqueting- 
cliamber.  But  the  next  three  verses,  wiiiob 
are  certainly  in  the  lips  "f  the  bride,  may 
be  taken  as  her  expression  of  delight  iu 
her  iiUMband,  eitlier  while  he  feasts  in  the 
banquet  nr  when  it  is  over.  The  banquet 
is  a  familiar  emblem  of  the  delight  of  mutual 
\ove.  Hence  the  feasts  of  love  in  the 
primitive  Church  were  regarded,  not  only 
as  seasons  of  fellowship  between  Christians, 
but  times  of  rejoicing,  when  the  soul  entered 
into  tlie  full  appreciation  of  the  Saviours 
presence. 

Vers.  12— 14.— While  the  king  sat  (or, 
lils)  at  his  table,  my  spikenard  sent  (sends) 
forth  its  fragrance.  My  beloved  is  unto  me 
as  a  bundle  of  myrrh,  that  lieth  betwixt  my 


breasts.  Uy  beloved  is  unto  me  as  a 
cluster  of  henna  flowers  in  the  vineyards 
of  Engedi.  The  preterite  is  best  taken 
poetically  for  the  present.  The  words  are 
evidently  a  response  to  those  of  the  king. 
As  such  they  refer  to  present  feeling  and 
not  to  a  past  state.  The  bride  expresses 
her  delight  in  the  king.  The  table  is  used 
generally.  The  Hebrew  word  is  from  » 
root  "  to  sit  round."  The  habit  of  reclining 
at  table  was  introduced  much  later,  during 
the  Persian,  Greek,  and  Roman  period. 
The  spikenard  was  a  powerful  perfume, 
probably  of  Indian  origin,  as  the  Indian 
word  nahidd,  meaning  "that  which  yields 
fragrance,"  shows.  The  Persian  is  ndrd^  the 
Old  Arabic  iidrdu.  It  was  made  from  an 
Indian  plant,  the  Valeriana,  called  Nardo- 
stachys  'Gatdmaiisi,  growing  in  Northern 
and  Eastern  India.  The  hairy  part  of  the 
stem  immediately  above  the  root  yields  the 
perfume.  That  it  was  "  very  precious  "  we 
see  from  the  account  of  Mary's  ottering, 
which  was  worth  more  than  three  hundred 
denarii,  i.e.  £S  10*.  (Mark  xiv.  5;  John 
xii.  2).  Horace  promised  Virgil  a  whole 
cask,  i.e.  nine  gallons,  of  the  best  wine  in 
exchange  for  a  small  onyx-box  full  of  the 
perfume.  The  metaphor  represents  the 
intense  longing  of  love.  Myrrh  was  an  exotic 
introduced  into  Palestine  from  Arabia, 
Abyssinia,  and  India.  Like  frankincense, 
It  is  one  of  the  amyridaa.  The  Balsamoden- 
dron  myrrha  is  the  tree  itself  with  its  leaves 
and  tlowers.  From  the  tree  came  a  resin 
or  gum  (_Gummi  myrrha),  which  either 
dropped  from  the  leaves  or  was  artificially 
obtained  by  incisions  in  the  bark.  The 
natural  product  was  the  more  valuable.  It 
was  much  prized  as  a  perfume,  and  em- 
ployed for  many  purposes.  The  H.brow 
women  were  accustomed  to  carry  little  bags 
or  bottles  of  myrrh  suspended  from  their 
necks  and  hanging  down  between  the 
breasts  under  the  dress,  diffusing  an  attrac- 
tive fragrance  round  them.  The  word 
tseror  is,  properly,  "  a  little  bag,"  snecului, 
"that  which  one  ties  up,"  rather  than  a 
"  bundle."  The  meaning,  of  course,  is 
rhetorical — He  is  at  my  heart  and  delight- 
ful to  all  my  thoughts  as  the  fragrance  to 
my  senses.  The  henna  flowers,  or  cypress, 
in  the  vineyards  of  Engedi,  is  a  very  beau- 
tiful figure.  Copher,  the  cypress  cluster, 
— in  Greek,  Kinpos :  in  Arabic,  al  henna 
(Lawsoida) — grows  in  Palestine  and  Egypt, 
us  we  are  told  by  Pliny  ('Nat.  Hist,'  xii. 
21).  It  is  a  tall  shrub  reaching  to  eight  or 
ten  feet,  exceedingly  beautiful  in  appear- 
ance, and  giving  forth  a  delightful  odour. 
It  is  named  from  a  root  "  to  be  white  or 
yellow  white."  The  Moslem  women  stain 
their  hanils  and  feet  with  it  to  give  them  a 
yellow  tint.    Engedi  was  a  lovely  distriot 


OH.  I.  1—17.] 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


on  the  west  of  the  Dead  Sea — Hazezon 
Tamar,  now  Ain  Tidy,  where  Solomon  made 
terraces  on  the  hillsides  and  covered  them 
with  gardens  and  vineyards.  The  allusion 
oouflrius  the  date  of  the  writing  as  con- 
temporary with  Solomon,'  as  the  gardens 
would  then  be  in  their  perfection.  The 
figure  is,  perhaps,  intended  to  be  an  advance 
in  rhetorical  force  upon  that  which  preceded 
— the  fragranot)  diffused  and  almost  over- 
powering, as  of  a  blossoming  tree. 

Ver.  15. — Behold,  thou  art  fair,  my  love ; 
beheld,  thou  art  fair;  thine  eyes  are  as 
doves ;  literally,  thine  eyes  are  doves.  The 
king  receives  the  worship  of  his  bride  and 
delights  in  her.  She  is  very  sweet  and  fair 
to  him.  The  dove  is  a  natural  symbol  of 
love ;  hence  it  was  attached  by  the  classical 
nations  to  the  garden  of  love,  together 
with  the  myrtle,  rose,  and  apple,  all  of 
which  we  find  introduced  in  this  Hebrew 
poem.  Hence  the  Arabic  name  for  a  dove, 
Jemima,  as  we  see  in  the  Book  of  Job,  was 
the  name  of  a  woman  (cf.  Columbina). 
The  language  of  the  king  is  that  of  ecstasy  ; 
hence  the  interjection  and  repetition.  The 
enraptured  munarcli  gazes  iuto  the  eyes  of 
his  beluved  bride,  and  sees  there  only  purity, 
constancy,  and  aflfeotion.  In  ch.  vii.  4  the 
eyes  are  compared  to  fish-ponds,  no  iloubt 
for  their  clear,  liquid  depth  and  serenity. 
Some  liave  tliought  that  the  allusion  is  to 
the  very  lovely  eyes  of  the  doves ;  but  there 
is  no  need  of  the  limitation. 

Ver.  16 — oh.  ii.  1. — Behold,  thou  art  fair, 
my  beloved,  yea,  pleasant;  also  our  couch 
is  green.  The  beams  of  our  house  are 
cedars,  and  our  rafters  are  firs.  I  am  a 
rose  of  Sharon,  a  lily  of  the  valley.  We 
take  these  three  verses  tngecher  as  being, 
in  all  probability,  the  address  of  the  bride 
to  her  royal  husband.  This  was  the  view 
taken  by  the  Masoretic  editors  and  pre- 
served in  our  present  pointing  of  the 
Hebrew,  as  we  see  in  the  masculine  form  of 
the  first  word,  ■^iiri,  which  replies  to  the 
feminine  form  in  ver.  15,  T|Ja.  The  seven- 
teenth verse  is  apparently  abru^jt.  Why 
should  the  bride  pass  so  suddenly  from  the 
general  address  of  affection,  "Xlioa  art  fair, 
thou  art  pleasant,"  to  a  particular  descrip- 
tion of  a  rural  scene  ?  The  explanation 
suggested  by  some  of  the  critics  is  not  far- 
fetched, that  Solomon  wliispers  to  her  that 
she  shall  go  back  with  him  to  her  country 
life  if  she  pleases,  or  she  reminds  him  of  his 
promise  made  at  some  otlier  time.  Un- 
doubtedly the  point  of  Shulamith's  response 
lies  in  ch.  ii.  1,  "  I  am  not  at  ease  in  this 
palatial  spkudimr;  I  am  by  nature  a  rose 
of  Sharon,  a  lily  of  the  valley.  Take  me 
to  the  green  couch,  and  let  me  lie  under  the 
cedars  and  the  firs."  The  couch  is  the 
divan  (cf.  Amos  vt  4),  from  a  root  "  to 


cover  over  " (like  "canopy"  In  Greek,  koji/m- 
ire7ov,    so  called    from  its    protecting    the 
person    under    it     from    the    K^panres,    or 
I' gnats").     It  is  not  that  the  nuptial  bed 
is  particularly  intended,  or  even  tiie  bridal 
bower,  but   the  home  itself  as  a    bowery 
resting-place.      "Our    home    is    a    sweel 
country  home  ;  take  me,  there,  beloved  one." 
The  word  "  green  "  is  very  suggestive  in  (he 
Hebrew.    It  is  said  to  "combine  in  itself  ihe 
ideas  of  softness  and  juiey  freshness,  perhaps 
of  bending  and  elasticity,  of  looseness  and 
thus  of  overhanging  ramification,  like  weep- 
ing willow.     Beams,  from  a  root  "  to  meet," 
"  to  lay  crosswise,"  "  to    hold    together." 
But  the  meaning  depends  upon  the  idea  of 
the  whole  description.     Some  would  render 
"  fretted  ceilings,"  or  "  galleries ;  "  but  Dr. 
Ginsburg  gives  it,  "our  bower  is  of  cedar 
arches,"  which  excludes  the  idea  of  a  formal 
structure  made  of  cedar  beams.     The  same 
meaning  is  conveyeil   in   the  last    clause, 
"  our  rafters  are  firs."     The  word  rendered 
" rafters "  (B'n;)  literally  signifies  "a  place 
upon  which  one  runs  "  (like  pm,  a  "  street "), 
i.e.   a  charming   or    pleasant    spot.     Tlie 
berotli  is  the  cypress  tree,  an  Aramaic  word, 
or  one  used  in  the  north  of  Palestine.     Tlie 
meaning     is,     "our    pleasant    reireat     is 
cypresses" — is  beautiful  and  fragrant  with 
the  cypress  tree.     Uelitzach,  however,  and 
others  would  take  it  differently  as  describing 
the  panels  or  hollows  of  a  wainscoted  ceil- 
ing, like  (puTval,  lacunse,  lacunaria,  and  the 
LXX.,  (jxtTfiDfidra:  Symmachus,  (parvoxre'is : 
Jerome,   laquearii  (cf.   Isa.  Ix.    13).      But 
the  concluding  words  would  then   be  un- 
fitting.     The    bride    is  not    describing    a 
splendid  palace,  but  a  country  home.     "I 
am  a  tender  maiden,"  she  s  lys,  "  who  has 
been  brought  up  in  retirement;  take  me  to 
a  forest  palace  and  to  the  green,  Ira^raut 
surroundings,  where  the  meadow-flower,  the 
valley-lily   will    be    happy."      We   are   so 
accustomed  to  the  rendering  of  oh.  li.   1, 
which  our  Revised   Version    has  adopted 
from    the   Authorized,   that    it   would    be 
wrong  to  destroy  the  effect  which  it  borrows 
from  long   familiarity  unh  ss  it  were  aiiso- 
lutily  necessary.     The   word  chaiiatseleth, 
however,  has   been   differently  translated; 
it  is  literally  any  wild  flower — rose,  saffron 
crocus  (Cotchicum  autumtdle),  tulip,  nar- 
cissus, lily.     The  crocus  is,  perhaps,  nearest 
to  the  meaning,  as  the  name  is  probably 
derived   from  a  root  "  to  form  bulbs  "  or 
bulbous  knolls.    It  occurs  only  once  again, 
in  Isa.  XXXV.  1,  where  it  is  rendered  "  rose  " 
in  the  Authorized  Version ;  LXX.,  Syfloj : 
Vulgate,  Jlos.    Some  derive  it  from  the  root 
chavaz,  "  to  be  bright,"  with  h  as  termina- 
tion.     Sharon    may    be    here    a    general 
denomination  of  the  open  field  or  plain, 
from  i!h(,  "  to  be   straight,  plain."    Thera 


THE  ^ONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  I.  1—17. 


was  a  district  called  Sliaron  on  the  coast 
from  Joppa  to  Osesarea.  There  was  another 
Sharon  beyond  the  Jordan  (see  1  Chron. 
V.  16).  According  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome, 
there  was  yet  another,  between  Tabor  and 
Tiberias,  and  this,  as  being;  in  the  north; 
may  be  referred  to.  Aquila  renders  "a 
rosebud  of  Sharon."  The  lily  (ehoshannah) 
is  only  found  as  here  in  tlie  feminine  foim 
in  the  Apocrypha.  The  red  and  wliite  lily 
were  both  known.  Some  would  derive  the 
word  from  the  numeral  (sh^sh)  "  six," 
because  the  liliaceoB  are  six-leavtd,  while 
the  rosacese  are  five-leaved;  but  it  is  pro- 


bably akin  to  the'h,  "byssus,"  ehayith, 
"white  marbles"  (cf.  Hos.  xiv.  5,  "He 
shall  bloom  as  a  lily  ").  Our  Lord's  refer- 
ence to  "  the  lilies  of  the  ficlil  "  reminds  us 
that  Ihey  were  in  Palestine  both  very  beau- 
tiful and  very  abundant.  Ziickler  thinks 
it  is  not  the  strongly  scented  white  lily 
(Lilium  candidum)  to  which  reference  is 
made,  but  the  red  lily  (Lilium  rubens) ;  but 
either  will  convey  the  sume  idea  of  h 
flower  of  the  field  which  is  meant.  "My 
beauty  is  the  beauty  of  nature — artless  and 
pure." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  prologue.  L  The  inscription.  1.  ThetiiJe.  We  aretold  (IKiuj..'- 
iT.  82)  that  the  songs  of  Solomon  v^ere  a  thousand  and  five.  This  is  the  chit-f  of  all, 
the  Song  of  Songs.  It  stands  alone  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  a  pastoral  drama  of 
singular  loveliness.  It  shows  a  delight  in  the  beauties  of  nature  such  as  we  might  look 
for  in  him  who  "  spake  of  trees,  from  the  cedar  tree  that  is  in  Lebanon  even  unto  the 
hyssop  that  springeth  out  of  the  wall ;  of  beasts  also,  and  of  fowl,  and  of  creeping  things." 
It  exhibits  a  touching  picture  of  early  affection  gradually  ripening  into  the  bles.sed  love 
of  wedlock — that  love  which,  when  pure  and  unselfish,  tends  more  than  anything  that 
is  of  this  world  to  elevate  and  refine  the  soul.  And  it  has  a  higher  meaning.  Holy 
men  of  widely  different  times  have  seen  in  it  the  spiritual  converse  of  the  Church,  or 
of  the  individual  soul,  with  the  heavenly  Bridegroom.  A  famous  Jewish  rabbi,  after 
saying  that  all  the  books  of  the  HMgiographa  are  holy,  describes  the  Song  of  S^ngs  as  a 
holy  of  holies;  and  a  great  Father  of  the  Church  says  that  in  this  book  the  perfected, 
who  have  the  world  beneath  their  feet,  are  joined  to  the  embraces  of  the  heavenly  Bride- 
groom. Thus  it  combines  all  the  elements  which  give  a  charm  to  poetry — beauty  of 
form  and  elevation  of  thought ;  a  delicate  appreciation  of  the  attractions  of  external 
nature ;  a  deep  sense  of  the  sweetness  and  power  of  the  most  universal,  the  most  domi- 
nant, of  human  affections;  and  an  uplook  to  higher  thmgs,  an  uplook  from  that  love 
which  is  of  God — for  such  surely  is  the  love  of  husband  and  wife  (see  E(jh.  v.  25 — 28) — 
to  God  who  is  love.  Thus  the  title  is  abundantly  justified.  There  are  great  difBoulties 
here  and  there ;  but  yet  much  of  the  Song  of  Songs  has  ever  sounded  to  believing  souls 
like  far-off  echoes  of  the  new  song  which  only  the  redeemed  from  the  earth  could  learn 
(Rev.  xiv.  3).  There  are  few  passages  of  Holy  Scripture  sweeter  to  the  Christian  heart 
than  those  thrice-repeated  words, "  My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his."  2.  T/ie  author- 
ship. "Which  is  Solomon's."  The  Hebrew  preposition  may  be  translated  "ot"  or 
"lor."  In  the  titles  of  Ps.  Ixxii.  and  cxxvii.  it  is  rendered  in  our  Authdrize.i  Version 
"for  Solomon,"  "of  Solomon"  standing  in  the  maigin.  Ps.  cxxvii.,  like  the  rest  oi 
the  "  songs  of  degrees,"  is  almost  certainly  post-Exilic ;  and  in  Ps.  Ixxii.  the  LXX.  trans- 
lators are  probably  right  in  regarding  Solomon  as  the  subject,  not  the  auti:or,  of  the 
psalm.  If  the  Song  of  Songs  was  written  by  Solomon  himself,  we  have  in  ii  a  most 
awful  warning  of  the  fickleness,  the  sinfulness,  of  the  human  heart.  Solomon,  who 
knew  so  well  what  is  the  sweetness  of  pure  and  holy  love,  was  led  astray  by  that 
sensual  passion  which  usurps  the  name  of  love.  Solomon,  who  was  calhd  Jedidinh,  "  the 
darling  uf  the  Lord,"  whom  "  the  Lord  loved  "  (2  Sam.  xii.  24),  who  himself  "  loved  the 
Lord  "  (1  Kings  iii.  3) — that  same  Solomon  "  loved  many  strange  women  "  (1  Kings 
xi.  1),  and  "  when  he  was  old,  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart  after  other  gods."  "  Let 
him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall ;  "  "  Ye  that  love  the  Lord,  see  that 
ye  hate  the  thing  that  is  evil."  The  soul  that  would  live  in  the  love  of  Christ  must 
hate,  and  reject  with  horror  and  loathing,  the  very  smallest  beginnings  of  that  sin  of 
impurity  which  separates  a  man  from  God  utterly  and  with  a  fearful  rapidity.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  was  written  by  some  prophet  or  poet  of  Northern  Palestine  in  Solo- 
mon's time,  we  have  an  explanation  of  those  peculiar  words  which  some  scholars  regard 


OH.i.  1— 17.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


as  Aramaic,  others  as  dialectic  peculiarities  of  tiie  Lebanon  country ;  and  we  have  a 
warning  not  to  trust  too  much  in  human  leaders.  We  must  not  put  our  Iru.st  in  mmi, 
but  only  in  God.  When  men,  once  honoured  and  esteemed,  fall  into  sin,  we  cannot  but 
be  distressed ;  but  we  must  not  allow  our  faith  to  waver.  God  is  the  truth ;  hecontinusth 
faithful;  we  must  trust  in  him.  The  iniernal  evidence  of  the  song  itself  points  to  a 
time  anterior  to  the  separation  of  the  northern  and  southern  kingdoms;  this  is  not  the 
place  to  discuss  the  arguments  for  a  later  origin.  3.  The  meaning.  The  song  seems  to 
rest  on  an  historical  ba^is ;  its  many  details,  its  geographical  notices,  its  many  refi-renci-s 
to  circumstances  of  Solomon's  time,  to  its  peace  and  prosperity  (such  a  period  ol'  pe.iC'- 
au'l  prosperity  as  perhaps  never  occurred  again  during  the  chequered  histoiy  of  IsraeiJ, 
to  its  commerce,  its  magnificence,  point  to  a  groundwork  of  actual  f.ict.  It  relates  the 
love  of  the  great  king  for  some  innocent  country  maiden — a  love  that  was  I'l-turneil, 
that  for  a  time  at  least  brought  happiness  to  both,  and  seemed  to  refine  and  i  luvate  the 
characters  of  both,  as  a  pure  love  which  leads  to  a  blessed  marringe  ever  does.  But 
holy  men  of  old  were  led  by  the  Spirit  to  incorporate  this  beautiful  nana  ive  ini;o  tne 
canon  of  Holy  Scripture.  That  lact  invests  the  song  with  anotlier  and  a  i.igher  mian- 
insj.  Jewish  rabbis  regarded  it  as  a  parable  of  the  relations  between  Gid  aud  Israel. 
Many  of  the  Christian  Fathers  have  seen  in  it  the  love  that  is  between  Christ  and  his 
Church  ;  the  longings  of  the  Christian  soul  for  the  presence  of  the  heavenh  Bridegroom ; 
the  vicissitudes  of  the  spiritual  life ;  the  blessed  union  of  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  with 
the  Loid  of  her  redempiion  at  the  last.  There  are  great  difficulties  iir  the  spiritual 
interpretation  of  some  passages ;  but  when  we  consider  the  position  of  the  song  in  the 
sacred  book ;  when  we  remember  that  "  every  Scripture  inspired  of  God  is  aiso  profitable 
for  teaching,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  which  is  in  righteousness;  "  when 
we  remember  the  great  value  which  many  of  God's  saints  have  set  upon  this  book,  the 
great  spiritual  benefit  which  they  have  derived  from  it,  we  feel  that  it  must  be  right  to 
regard  it  as  a  parable  of  Divine  love,  to  see  under  this  earthly  story  a  deep  and  holy 
htavenly  meaning. 

II.  The  first  song.  1.  The  hride'»  longing  for  the  beloved.  The  three  verses 
(2 — 4)  are  often  regarded  as  the  song  of  a  chorus  of  virgins,  the  companions  of  the 
bride ;  perhaps  the  mingling  of  the  singular  and  plural  pronouns  seems  rather  to  suggest 
that  we  have  in  this  first  song  the  voice  of  the  bride  herself  blended  with  the  strains  of 
her  virgin-friends.  The  bride  yearns  for  the  embrace  of  love.  In  the  pure  love  of 
Christian  man  and  maid,  the  maiden  long  desired  gives  at  last  the  full  treasure  of  her 
love  in  answer  to  that  love  which  had  with  earnest  devotion  sought  for  her  affection. 
Ancient  writers  see  in  these  words  the  longing  of  the  Jewish  Church  for  a  closer  union 
with  God,  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  given  through  the  prophet  (Hos.  ii.  16), 
"  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  thou  shalt  call  me  Ishi  ['my  Husband'],  and  shalt  call  me 
no  more  Baali  ['my  Lord']."  The  Christian  Church,  the  Christian  soul,  longs  for  the 
enjoyment  of  the  Saviour's  love.  We  notice  the  abrupt  beginning,  "  Let  him  kiss  me." 
The  bride  is  speaking  of  one  well  known,  greatly  loved.  There  is  no  need  of  exact 
description  ;  the  pronoun  is  enough  ;  there  is  only  One  whose  image  is  ever  present  to 
that  loving  heart.  When  the  Christian,  taught  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  learning,  slowly 
and  imperfectly  (as,  alasl  it  must  be  here),  to  fulfil  the  first  of  all  the  commandments, 
he  will  yearn  above  all  things  for  that  manifestation  of  himself  which  the  Lord  promises 
to  them  that  love  him  (John  xiv.  21,  23).  The  traitor's  kiss,  treacherous  as  it  was, 
shows  that  such  a  token  of  affection  was  usual  in  the  intercourse  between  our  Lord  and 
his  apostles.  His  love  is  unchanging,  everlasting;  still  the  Christian  soul  may  say, 
"  The  Son  of  God  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me ;  "  still  the  soul  longs  for  the  sense 
of  that  blessed  love  ;  "  the  love  of  Jesus,  what  it  is,  none  but  his  lo\  ed  ones  know."  Tne 
woman  that  was  a  sinner  kissed  the  Saviour's  feet.  The  kiss  of  peace  was  in  apostolic 
times  the  token  of  the  love  which  Christians  had  one  towards  another.  The  kiss  of 
pure  and  holy  love  is  a  parable  of  the  blessed  love  which  is  betwixt  Uhrist  and  his 
Church.  That  love  is  better  than  wine.  Now  the  bride  speaks  to  the  Lord.  "  Thy 
love,"  she  says  ;  she  feels  that  he  is  coming  in  answer  to  the  call  of  love.  Earthly  joys 
are  poor  indei  d  when  compared  with  that  joy  which  is  in  the  Lord.  St.  Paul  contrasts 
them  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Bphesians  (v.  18,  19).  Excess  in  wine  biings  degradation, 
misery.  The  Christian  soul  needs  not  this  spurious  excitement;  it  has  a  source  of  joy 
higher  beyond  all  comparison.    It  is  filled  with  the  Spirit,  aud  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is 


10  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  1. 1—17. 

ioy — joy  which  manifests  itself  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs.  2.  Theresponse 
of  the  chorus.  The  attendant  virgins  assent.  The  love  of  the  Bridegroom  is  better  than 
wine,  better  than  the  fragrance  of  the  sweetest  of  perfumes,  sweeter  than  ointnic  nt 
poured  forth  which  sheds  its  scent  around.  The  odnur  of  the  precious  ointment 
which  Mary  poured  upon  the  Saviour's  head  filled  the  house;  the  sweet  odour  of  the 
name  of  Jesus  fills  the  whole  Church;  it  sheds  its  penetrating  influence  everywhere 
throughout  the  Church  ;  "  therefore,"  the  chorus  sings,  "  do  the  virgins  love  thee."  The 
plural  number  seems  to  remirid  us  that  the  love  of  Christ  is  personal,  individual.  The 
bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  is,  indeed,  the  whole  company  of  the  elect.  But  the  Lord's  love 
is  not  only  general ;  it  d(ies  not  bless  only  the  Church  as  a  whole,  an  aggregate ;  he  loves 
all  and  each ;  the  whole  Church  and  each  separate  Christian  soul ;  therefore  each 
separate  Christian  soul,  all  who  take  their  lamps  and  go  forth  to  meet  the  Bridet!;ro(im, 
rejoice  in  the  Bridejjroom's  love,  and  desire  above  all  things  to  return  it.  "  We  love  him, 
because  he  fir^t  loved  us."  3.  The  blended  voices  of  the  chorus  and  the  hride.  (1)  The 
request :  "  Draw  me,  we  will  run  after  thee."  The  bride  is  listening  for  the  bridegroum'.s 
call ;  she  is  ready  to  answer.  Her  vir'^in-companions  join  in  assenting  chorus ;  they  will 
accompany  her.  The  Christian  soul  longs  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  Word,  "I 
drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of  love  "  (Hos.  xi.  4) ;  it  pleads  that  gracious 
promise,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me." 

"  Break  up  the  heavens,  O  Lord  I  and  far. 
Thro'  all  yon  starlight  keen. 
Draw  me,  thy  bride,  a  glittering  star, 
In  raiment  white  and  clean." 

It  seems  too  much  to  ask ;  none  feel  their  unworthiness,  their  guilt,  so  keenly  as  those 
whom  the  Lord  is  calling  nearer  to  himself.  But  faith  hears  his  voice  and  believes  in 
his  power.  If  only  he  will  draw  us,  we  shall  run  after  him.  Love  is  the  magnet  of 
love.  When  God  deigns  to  shine  into  his  people's  hearts  to  give  the  light  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  when  the  blessed  word, "  We  have 
seen  the  Lord,"  is  realized  in  the  heart,  then  the  soul  runneth  in  ever-deepening  desire 
to  respond  to  that  condescending  love.  None  can  come  to  Christ,  we  know,  "  except 
the  Father  who  hath  sent  me  draw  him  "  (John  vi.  44) ;  therefore  that  prayer,  "  Draw 
me,  we  will  run  after  thee,"  is  often  in  the  Christian's  heart,  often  plea.led  by  the 
Christian's  lips.  We  are  weak  and  helpless ;  but  when  he  draws  us  with  that  holy 
invitation,  "  Come  unto  me,"  we  must  arise,  we  must  run  after  him.  To  look  back  is 
ruin.  "  Remember  Lot's  wife."  And  his  call  giveth  strength  to  follow,  to  run  after 
him.  So  St.  Augustine  says  in  well-known  words  ('  Conf.,'  ix.  1), "  How  sweet  did  it  at 
once  become  to  nie  to  want  the  sweetnesses  of  those  toys ;  and  what  I  feared  to  be 
parted  fnjm,  was  now  a  joy  to  part  with  I  For  thou  didst  cast  them  forth  from  me, 
thou  true  and  highest  Sweetness.  Thou  castedst  them  forth,  and  for  them  enteredst 
in  thyself,  sweeter  than  all  pleasures,  though  not  to  flesh  and  blood ;  brighter  than  all 
light,  but  more  hidden  than  all  depths ;  higher  than  all  honour,  but  not  to  the  high  in 
tiieir  own  conceits  "  (2)  The  answer.  The  prayer  is  heard ;  we  hear  the  voice  of  the 
bride:  "  The  King  hath  brought  me  into  his  chambers."  Christ  loved  the  Church, and 
gave  himself  for  her,  that  he  might  present  her  to  himself  a  glorious  Church.  The 
chorus  answers,  "We  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thee."  Individual  believers  make  up 
the  great  Church  of  Christ.  Once  we  were  afar  off;  now  we  are  brought  near ;  we  are 
"  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God."  In  proportion  as  we 
realize  our  Christian  privileges  of  access  unto  God  we  learn  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord.  The 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  joy ;  that  joy  passes  all  earthly  pleasures.  Believers  will  remember 
the  tokens  of  the  Saviour's  love,  dwelling  on  them  in  holy  thought ;  they  will  leave 
no  place  in  their  hearts  for  sensual  dehghts ;  they  will  love  the  Lord  in  uprightness,  in 
sincerity,  and  truth. 

Vers.  5 — 8. — Dialogue  hetv>een  the  bride  and  the  chorus.  I.  The  bride's  sense  of 
uijy^ORTHiNESs.  L  "  1  am  black."  The  country  maiden  loved  by  the  great  king  feels 
K'er  own  imijerfections ;  she  artlessly  describes  her  misgivings  to  the  daughters  of 
Jerusalem,  who  constitute  the  chorus ;  she  has  been  accustomed  to  rustic  occupations ; 
she  has  been  ill-treated ;  the  sun  has  embrowned  her  cheeks  till  she  is  black  as  the 


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  SONa  OF  SOLOMON.  11 

tents  of  Kedar,  the  tents  of  goat's  hair  in  which  the  wandering  Arabs  lived.  The 
Christian  soul  knows  its  guilt.  Worship  begins  ever  with  confession;  when  we  draiv 
near  to  Christ,  we  are  most  sensible  of  the  plague  of  our  own  hearts.  Christians  will 
find  help  and  comfort  in  communiim  with  the  like-minded;  they  will  tell  them  their 
spiritual  troubles;  but  such  holy  communion  cau  be  held  only  with  the  like-minded, 
with  the  daughters  of  Jerunalem.  Christians  sometimes  have  home  troubles ;  they 
seem  unable  to  keep  their  own  vineyard,  to  attend  to  their  own  spiritual  needs,  because 
other  work  is  forced  upun  them,  because  their  time  is  taken  up  in  matters  which  seem  not 
to  belong  to  their  peace ;  they  must  be  patient  and  meek,  and  wait  for  ihe  bridegroom's 
call.  2.  "  But  comely"  In  her  artless  simplicity  she  mentions  her  owu  beauty :  she 
is  fair  as  the  curtains  of  Solomon.  The  king,  we  may  suppose,  had  a  stately  pavilion 
in  tlie  Lebanon  country,  near  the  dwelling  of  the  bride.  Tne  Christian  recognizes  with 
humble  and  adoring  thankfulness  the  working  of  the  Spirit  ol  G-od  within  his  soul. 
"  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am:  and  his  grace  which  was  bestowed  on  me  was 
not  in  vain  ;  but  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all :  yet  nor  I,  but  the  grace 
of  Wod  which  was  with  me."  If  G-od  is  drawing  us  nearer  to  himself  we  must  know  it. 
True  unaffected  humility  recognizes  his  working  in  our  unworthy  hearts,  and  longs  to 
be  found  in  Christ,  "  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  Law,  but  that 
which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith."  The 
bride  compares  herself  to  the  curtains  ot  Sil-mon;  the  Christian  owes  whatever  he  may 
possess  of  the  beauty  of  holiness  to  his  communion  with  the  King  of  saints. 

il.  The  bride's  longing  fob  the  bridboeoom's  prkbenob.  1.  Her  seeking  love. 
He  is  not  witii  her  now,  but  her  soul  goeth  forth  to  him;  she  apostrophizes  her  absent 
lord,  and  pours  forth  her  yearning  in  the  presence  of  her  companions.  (1)  The  address  : 
"  Thou  whom  my  sonl  loveth."  It  is  an  expression  of  intense  affection,  repeated  several 
times  in  the  song  (ch.  iii.  1,  2,  3,  4).  The  love  of  Christ  is  the  life-spring  of  the 
Christian  heart.  That  love,  when  real  and  true,  makes  the  Christian  seek  always,  every 
day  and  every  hour,  the  blessed  presence  of  the  Saviour.  That  love  is  the  soul's  love. 
It  is  not  a  thing  of  words  and  phrases,  not  a  matter  of  outward  form  and  observance; 
it  is  treasured  deep  in  the  heart;  it  is  the  mainspring  of  life  and  action;  it  comes  to 
Christ  with  the  question,  "Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  nie  to  do?"  and  ihat  in  the 
ordiiiaiy  concerns  of  life,  in  the  trifles,  the  little  joys  and  sorrows  of  everyday  life,  as 
well  as  in  the  emergencies  that  come  now  and  then,  the  dangers  and  distresses  which 
cross  our  p^th  from  time  to  time.  That  true,  deep  love  ia  exceedingly  precious ;  it  is 
the  perfect  love  that  casteth  out  fear ;  it  can  answer  like  St.  Peter,  "  Lord,  thou  knowest 
all  things  ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee."  It  is  of  all  graces  the  holiest  and  the  best; 
it  is  the  first  of  the  finits  of  the  Spirit;  it  is  granted  to  the  believer  in  answer  to  fervent 
persevering  prayer.  M-iy  we  whose  hearts  have  long  been  so  cold  and  dead  seek  it,  and 
gain  it  to  be  our  own  through  the  forgiving  mercy  of  our  God!  ('2)  She  asks  where  he 
leeils  his  flock.  The  Emg  of  Israel  is  represented  as  a  shepherd  like  his  father  David. 
The  bride  thinks  more  of  his  love  than  of  his  magnificence;  she  would  have  loved  him 
with  the  same  entiie  devotion  had  he  been  in  her  own  lowly  position.  Perhaps  it  was 
a  relief  to  her  to  regard  him  sometimes  not  as  a  king,  but  as  a  shepherd ;  perhaps  the 
great  king  had  been  pleased  to  assume  such  a  character  for  a  time  to  give  pleasure  to 
his  beloved  one.  The  bride  seems  sometimes  to  hint  that  this  description  is  fi-urative 
(ch  ii  16 ;  vi.  2, 3) ;  she  speaks  of  the  son  of  David  in  language  like  that  which  David 
himself  had  used  of  Almi:;hty  God  (Ps.  xxiii.  1,  2).  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
good  Shepherd ;  he  laid  down  his  life  for  the  sheep;  he  knoweth  his  own,  and  his  own 
know  iiim.  He  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords;  but  it  is  a  relief  to  the  soul, 
dazzled  by  the  awful  glory  of  the  Godhead,  to  remember  that  he  laid  his  ulory  by  that 
he  mi°-ht  save  us;  and  to  think  of  him  as  made  like  unto  us  in  all  things,  sm  only 
except^ed,  and  therefore  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  inflrmitips,  and  able  to  succour 
theni  that  are  tempted.  She  asks  where  he  feeds  his  flock.  It  is  hke  the  aspiration  of 
Job,  "Oh  that  1  knew  where  I  might  find  him!  that  I  might  come  even  to  his  seatl 
The  Christian  soul  yearns  for  the  good  Shepherd,  to  draw  ever  nearer  to  hitn,  to  share 
his  love  and  mercy.  He  maketh  his  sheep  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures ;  he  leadeth 
them  beside  the  waters  of  rest.  He  feeds  them ,  for  he  is  the  Bread  of  li  e--the  Bread 
that  came  down  from  heaven  to  give  life  unto  the  world.  Their  prayer  is,  'Lord,  ever- 
more give  us  this  bread."   They  feed  on  him  in  the  ciaiiy  life  of  faith,  and  in  the  blessed 


12  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  1. 1—17 

aacrameut.  His  presence  in  the  heart  is  the  food,  the  life  of  the  sonl.  "  He  that  cometh 
unto  me,"  he  saith,  "  shall  never  hunger,  and  he  that  believeih  on  me  shall  never 
thirst."  Aud  he  maketh  his  flock  to  rest  at  noon.  Iq  the  hot  sultry  noun  of  life,  amid 
troubles  and  anxieties  and  cares,  he  givetli  rest.  The  weary  and  the  heavy-laden  accept 
his  gracious  invitation  ;  they  find  rest — rest  for  their  souls.  There  is  uu  other  rest  for 
this  restless,  anxiuus  soul  of  ours,  but  only  that  rest  which  he  givetli — rest  in  the  Lord. 
He  can  give  rest  in  the  midst  of  trouble,  rest  even  in  the  busy  noon  of  life ;  such  rest  as 
Daniel  found  in  his  many  cares,  when  he  kneeled  upon  his  knees  and  made  his  supplica- 
tions three  times  a  day ;  such  rest  as  St.  Paul  found  when  he  had  learneil  to  count  all 
things  as  loss  lor  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord.  2.  Her 
fears.  Compare  Geseuius,  s.v.,  "  Lest  1  be  as  one  who  faints  by  the  flocks  of  thy  com- 
panions ;  lest  I  should  wander  in  search  of  thee  from  flock  to  flock,  lauguid  even  to 
fainting  through  the  noontide  heat."  The  bride  beeks  the  king  himself.  His  com- 
panions may  be  kind  and  good,  but  they  are  not  the  beloved.  The  soul  seeks  the 
good  Shepherd.  Other  shepherds  may  be  doing  what  they  can  to  feed  the  flcck  of  God 
(see  1  Pet.  v.  2 — 4),  but  they  can  only  bring  the  flock  to  the  chief  Bliepherd.  He  is 
the  Desire  of  all  nations ;  he  only  is  the  Saviour ;  without  him  ue  can  do  nothing.  It 
is  not  safe  to  wander  from  flock  to  flock,  to  heap  up  to  ourselves  teachers  (2  Tim.  iv.  3). 
We  must  SI  ek  Christ  himself,  for  the  true  sheep  are  his^  they  hear  his  voice  and  follow 
him.  They  that  are  his  shall  never  perish  ;  no  man  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  his 
Father's  hand.  But  they  must  not  listen  to  other  voices  which  are  not  his ;  they  must 
watch  with  earnest  attention  for  the  voice  of  the  good  Shepherd,  and  attend  to  every 
intimation  of  his  will ;  they  must  ask  him  with  lovinj;  entreaty — "  0  thou  whom  my 
soul  loveth  " — by  what  way,  in  what  path,  he  is  to  be  loiind ;  they  must  nut  weary  them- 
selves in  wandering  fiom  teacher  to  teacher,  seeking  always,  like  the  Athenians,  to  hear 
some  new  things ;  they  must  walk  in  the  old  paths,  where  is  the  i\ood  way ;  aud  they 
will  find  rest,  for  they  will  find,  not  Solomon,  whose  name  means  "  peace,"  but  the  Prince 
of  Peace  himself,  who  giveth  peace,  the  peace  of  God,  to  all  who  seek  his  lace  with 
faithful  and  true  hearts. 

in.  The  counsel  of  the  daughters  op  Jerusalem.  1.  The  address.  "  0  thou 
fairest  among  women."  The  bride  is  addressed  by  the  chorus  in  the  same  words  in  two 
other  places  (ch.  v.  9;  vi.  1).  She  had  described  herself  as  "  black,  but  comely."  The 
daughiers  of  Jerusalem  see  in  her  the  fairest  among  women.  Jerusalem  was  the  holy 
city,  the  dwelling-place  of  the  great  King.  Her  daughters  are  the  saints,  the  childreu 
of  the  kingdom.  The  true  Christian  knows  his  own  sinfulness,  though  he  feels  with 
thankfulness  the  work  of  grace  within  his  heart;  other  Christians  recognize  in  him  the 
beauty  of  holiness.  There  must  be  no  jealousies  among  the  people  of  God ;  they  must 
not  dispute  among  themselves,  as  even  apostles  once  did,  who  should  *be  the  greatest 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  they  must  gladly  acknowledge  the  workings  of  the  grace  ol 
God  in  other  Christian  souls ;  they  will  do  so  the  more  generously,  the  nearer  they 
themselves  are  to  the  Lord.  2.'  The  direction.  "If  thou  know  not,"  they  say;  as  if 
to  intimate  that  one  so  highly  favoured  must  surely  know  the  way  herself.  'Jhey  can 
but  guide  her  to  the  old  way  where  all  the  saints  have  walked ;  she  must  follow  the 
tracks  of  the  sheep,  the  footsteps  of  the  flock.  'I'liey  have  followed  the  good  Shepherd ; 
she  must  dn  the  like.  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me,"  said  St.  Paul,  "  even  as  I  also  am  of 
Christ."  It  is  good  to  read  the  lives  of  the  saints,  to  study  the  graces  of  holy  men. 
Holy  Scripture  bids  us  to  follow  their  faith,  considering  the  end  of  their  conversation. 
But  the  biide  is  also  told  to  feed  her  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents.  We  shall  most 
surely  find  the  Lord  in  faithful  work  for  him.  If  he  is  to  us  what  he  was  to  the  bride, 
"  0  thou  whom  my  soul  loveth ; "  if  we  can  say  in  truth,  "  Lord,  thou  knowest  all 
things ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee,"  we  shall  surely  hear  his  voice  speaking  in  our 
hearts,  "  Feed  my  lambs  ;  "  "  Feed  my  sheep."  Those  who,  like  St.  Paul,  labour  most 
abundantly  for  Christ  (if  only  that  labour  is  wrought  in  faith  and  love)  are  sure,  like 
St.  Paul,  themselves  to  win  Christ  and  to  be  found  in  him.  "  He  that  watereth  shall 
be  watered  also  himself;"  "They  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  shall  shine  as  the 
stars  for  ever  and  ever."  Christ  is  most  surely  found  by  those  faithful  servants  who 
do  their  best  to  bring  others  to  the  Lord. 

Vers.  9 — 17. — The  communion  of  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride.     L  The  approach 


9H.  1. 1— 17.]  THE   SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  13 

OP  THE  BRiDEGBOOM.  1.  Bis  address.  He  compares  the  bride  to  a  beautiful  mare  of 
his  own  in  the  chariots  of  Pharaoh.  The  words  come  fitly  from  the  lips  of  the  speaker. 
Be  was  the  first  king  of  Israel  who  took  delight  in  horses  and  chariuts,  and  he  impoited 
chem  from  Ejrypt.  The  words  are  thought  to  have  suggested  a  similar  comparison  in 
Theocritus  ('  Idyll,'  xviii.  80)  ;  they  indiortte  the  stateliness  of  the  bride's  beauty;  they 
remind  us  of  Ps.  cxlvii.  10, 11,  "  He  delighteth  not  in  the  strength  of  a  horse.  .  .  .  The 
Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  him,  in  those  that  hope  in  his  mercy."  M.n 
like  Solomon  take  delight  in  horses;  the  Lord  in  the  graces  of  his  people.  The  king 
calls  the  bride  "  my  love,"  or  "  my  friend ;  "  the  word  is  derived  from  a  verb  which  in 
its  secondary  sense  neans  to  take  delight  in  the  companionship  of  those  whom  we  love. 
We  are  reminded  of  the  Lord's  gracinus  words,  "  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants; 
for  the  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth:  but  I  have  called  youfri'nds;  for  all 
things  that  1  have  heard  of  my  Father  I  have  made  known  unto  you  "  (John  xv.  15). 
The  king  proceeds  to  commend  the  graces  of  the  bride;  he  promises  costly  gifts.  She 
was  wearing  the  simple -ornaments  of  a  country  maiden  (the  words  "jewils"  and 
"gold"  are  not  in  the  origin^il  of  ver.  10).  "  We  will  make  thee,"  he  says  (thai  is,  his 
servants  will  make  at  his  order),  "  borders  of  gold  with  studs  of  silver."  Whatever 
graces  the  Church  possesses  come  from  the  gift  of  the  heavenly  BrMegroom;  it  is  he 
who  will  "  present  her  to  himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any 
such  thing;  "  but  holy  and  « ithout  blemish  (Eph.  v.  27).  It  is  only  God  who  can  "  keep 
lis  from  lallinir,  and  present  us  at  the  last  laultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory  with 
exceeding  joy  "  (Jude  24).  The  fine  linen,  clean  and  white,  the  wedding-garment  of 
the  bride,  is  the  Bridegroom's  gift  (Rev.  xix.  8).  2.  The  bride's  delight  in  the  bride- 
groom. The  king  is  come ;  he  sitteth  at  his  table  in  the  midst  of  the  circle  of  his 
friends.  We  are  reminded  that  the  presence  of  his  father  David  was  once  required  to 
complete  such  a  circle.  "  We  will  not  sit  around  "  (the  literal  translation  of  Samuel's 
words)  "  till  he  come  hither  "  (1  Sam.  xvi.  11).  The  bride  (like  Mary  afterwards)  anoints 
him  with  "  ointment  of  spikenard  very  costly ;  "  the  house  is  filled  with  the  odour  of 
the  ointment.  While  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  is  present  in  the  blessed  sacrament,  or 
in  the  circle  of  true  worshippers,  whenever  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  his 
Name,  the  sweet  odonr  ol  prayer  and  adoration  giveth  forth  its  fragrance.  Such  worship, 
worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  is  always  acceptable.  "  My  Father,"  he  saith  in  his  con- 
descending love,  "seeketh  such  to  worship  him."  It  is  hi.s  presence  which  draws  Ibrth 
that  holy  worship.  W.hile  he  is  with  us,  in  the  circle  of  worshippers,  the  heart  goeth 
forth  unto  him.  "Lord,  it  is  good  to  be  here;  "  "Thy  Name  is  as  ointment  pouied 
forth."  It  is  sweet  to  the  believer;  it  refreshes  his  soul  in  sorrow,  and  in  the  hour  of 
death ;  therefore  do  thy  people  love  thee.  The  King's  presence  is  very  sacred  ;  those 
whom  he  deigns  to  visit  must  respond  with  their  heart's  love,  with  the  sweet  odours  of 
true  spiritual  worshii).  3.  WJiat  the  bridegroom  is  to  her.  The  odour  of  her  spikenard 
is  pleasant  to  him  ;  he  is  to  her  as  a  bag  of  myrrh,  or  a  cluster  of  henna  flowers.  So,  in 
Ps.  xlv.  8,  the  royal  Bridegroom's  garments  smell  of  myrih,  aloes,  and  cassia.  The  bag 
ol  uivrrh  w.is  kept  in  the  bosom  for  its  sweetness  and  its  medicinal  p'operties;  the 
henna  fluwois  which  grew  abundantly  among  the  vines  of  Engedi  were  high'y  esteemed 
foi-  iheir  fragrance.  The  Saviour's  presence  in  the  heart  sheds  a  fragrance  thrcugh  the 
soul.  "I-Ie°hat  hath  the  Son  hath  life;"  a  principle  of  life  which  preserves  the  soul 
from  the  ooimpiion  of  sin,  which  heals  its  diseases,  which  prepares  it  for  the  hour  of 
death.  The  Saviour's  body  lay  for  a  while  in  the  mixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes  which 
Nicod'emns  bronght;  that  holy  body  needed  not  the  earthly  unguent.  The  Christian 
needs  the  pn  servative  virtue  which  the  Saviour  giveth.  No  flowers  of  earth,  no  earthly 
fragrance  or  beauty,  can  compare  for  one  moment  with  the  blessedness  which  his  presence 

brinneth.  ■,     mi 

II.  The  conveese  op  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride.  1.  Ihe  voice  of  the 
behved.  He  commends  the  beauty  of  the  bride;  her  eyes,  as  they  look  on  him,  are 
like  doves,  gentle,  innocent,  loving.  So,  in  Ps.  xlv.,  the  king  greatly  desires  the  beauty 
of  the  bride.  She  "  is  all  glorious  within  :  her  clothing  is  ol  wrought  gold."  The  Lord 
would  have  the  Church,  his  bride,  to  be  "  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle, 
or  any  such  thing ; "  but  holy  and  without  blemish.  Alas !  in  the  visible  Church  the 
eviUire  ever  mingled  with  the  good,  and  there  is  none  that  sinneth  not.  But  just  in 
proportion  as  the  Christian  walks  in  the  Ught  (in  the  light  of  his  presence  who  is  the 


14  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [ch.  i.  1—17 

Light  of  the  world),  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  cleansing  him  from  all  sin,  and  he 
becomes  in  his  poor  measure  a  light,  shining  with  the  reflected  light  of  the  Saviour's 
holiness.  Christ  is  made  unto  his  people  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctiflcation, 
and  redemption  ;  whatever  beauty  of  character  they  possess  comes  only  fiom  communion 
with  him.  "  Beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  they  are  changed  into  the 
same  image  from  glory  to  glory."  They  must  be  harmless  as  doves,  gentle,  humble, 
innocent.  The  Lord  in  his  condescending  love  accepts  their  imperfect  service.  "  I 
know  thy  works,  and  thy  love,  and  faith,  iind  ministry,  and  patience ;  and  that  thy  last 
works  are  more  than  the  first."  2.  The  answer  of  the  bride.  Perhaps  they  have  now 
gone  forth  into  the  air ;  they  are  sitting  together,  as  the  words  seem  to  imply,  on  a 
green  couch,  on  some  grassy  slope  in  the  Lebanon  country,  under  the  interlacing  boughs 
of  cedars  and  fir  trees.  The  bride  enjoys  the  fair  prospect  around  her;  she  delights  still 
more  in  the  presence  and  love  of  the  bridegroom.  She  calls  him  "  my  beloved ; "  the 
Hebrew  word  is  another  form  of  the  name  of  the  king's  father,  David,  which  means 
"  beloved."  He  is  very  fair  in  her  eyes ;  yea,  pleasant.  The  Lord  is  fairer  than  the  children 
of  men ;  to  the  Christian  there  is  no  vision  of  earthly  beauty  which  will  bear  one 
moment's  comparison  with  the  tender  loveliness  of  the  Saviour's  character,  the  exalted 
beauty  of  his  self-sacrificing  love.  The  Christian  soul  delights  in  the  fair  beauty  ol  the 
Lord ;  it  is  to  him  the  one  thing  to  be  desired  above  all  others.  "  One  thing  have  I 
desired  of  the  Lord,  that  I  will  seek  after ;  that  I  may  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
all  the  days  of  my  life,  to  behold  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  xxvii.  4).  So  Isaiah, 
who  alone  of  the  prophets  uses  the  bride's  word  of  endearment,  "  my  Beloved  "  (Isa, 
V.  1),  has  the  blessed  promise, "  Thine  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  his  beauty  "  (Isa.  xxxiii. 
17).  The  kini;  is  pleasant  also;  not  only  fair  to  look  upon,  but  possessed  of  every 
charm,  of  all  spiritual  grace.  We  have  the  same  word  applied  to  God  in  Ps.  xxviL  4 
aud  xc.  17.  May  God  "  shine  into  our  hearts,  to  reveal  to  us  the  light  of  the  knowledge 
ol  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ "  i 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — "  The  Song  of  Songs,  which  is  Solomon's."    What  does  this  mean  ? 

I.  As  TO  THE  TiTLK  ?  "  The  Song  of  Sougs."  It  affirms  that  this  song  is  the  most 
excellent  of  all  souiis,  the  incomparably  beautiful  song,  a  song  beside  which,  as  one 
writer  says,  "  all  others  hide  their  heads." 

II.  As  TO  THE  NAME  AFFIXED  TO  IT  ?  Not  that  Solomon  toas  the  author.  For  the 
very  title  would  convict  him  ot  egregious  vanity.  A  writer  would  hardly  thus  speak 
of  bis  own  productions.  But  it  would  be  quite  lawful  that  another  should  so  speak  ; 
hence  the  poem  might  be  Solomon's  and  the  title  be  added  on  by  another  writer.  But 
even  then  we  question  his  authorship  of  this  song.  For:  1.  If  we  take  the  literat 
interpretation  of  it,  as  well-nigh  all  modern  competent  Bible  scholars  do,  in  greater  or 
less  degree  (cf.  Ginsburg,  Ewald,  Maurer,  Stanley,  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  Hartwell 
Home's  '  Introduction,' etc.), — then,  since  it  represents  Solomon  as  foiled  and  frustrated 
in  his  endeavours  to  persuade  the  maiden  Shulamith,  whose  constancy  nnii  fidelity  the 
poem  celebrates,  to  become  his  bride,  it  is  hardly  likely  that  he  woidd  depict  himself 
in  such  an  unlovely  light,  or  in  such  undignified  guise  as  that  in  which,  in  this  song,  he 
certainly  appears.  Or,  if  we  take  the  most  ancient  and  most  common  interpretation  of  the 
song,  the  spiritual  and  allegorical,  which  afiKrms  tiiat  the  bride — though  there  is  no  bride 
in  the  song  at  all,  but  only  one  who  is  betrothed — represents  the  Church;  and  that 
Solomon,  whom  this  interpretation  identifies  with  "the  beloved,"  is  a  type  of  our  Lord 
JesnsCiirist;  and  that  the  poem  is  intended  to  set  forth  the  niutnal  love  of  Christ  and  bis 
Church  ; — then  we  say  that  Solomon  is  in  no  sense  a  Ht  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for 
he  was  not  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,  but  very  far  from  it.  Moreover,  he  was  not  the 
man  to  write  a  spiritual  poem  of  such  exalted  character.  They  were  "  holy  men  of  old" 
whom  the  Spirit  inspired.  But,  certainly,  Solomon  can  lay  no  claim  to  that  character. 
Then :  3.  David  and  Solomon  are  both  spoken  of  in  snch  manner  as  wculd  hardly  he 
likely  if  Solomon  were  the  writer.  (Cf.  ch.  iii.  9,  11 ;  viii.  11,  12.)  It  is  the  manner 
of  one  speaking  of  them,  telling  facts  concerning  them ;  but  it  is  not  as  they  would 


OH.i.  1— 17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  IE 

speak  themselves.  4.  And  even  if  the  words,  •'  which  is  Solomon's,"  be  held  to  mean 
that  he  was  the  author,  such  ascription  need  have  no  more  valueiha,n  the  titles  of  many 
of  the  psalms,  which  are  allowed  to  be  of  no  authority.  5.  But  we  read  the  words  as 
"  concerning  Solomon."  True,  the  poem  literally  understood  has  nothing  to  say  in  his 
favour ;  for  what  was  there  to  say  ?  But  if  he  he  a  type  at  all,  and  we  think  he  is,  it 
is  of  that  greedy,  selfish,  soul-corrupting  world,  which  would  draw  away  the  faithful 
from  the  pure  love  of  God,  and  seek  to  replace  that  pure  love  by  its  own.  Shulamith 
loved  and  was  beloved.  Solomon  tried  by  all  manner  of  enticements  to  draw  her  Irom 
that  love.  But  he  utterly  fails.  So  that  the  poem  is  a  parable  of  the  faithful  soul  and 
its  constancy  to  its  true  Lord.  By  means  of  a  beautiful  earthly  story,  the  yet  more 
beautiful  fidelity  of  the  soul  truly  affianced  to  God  is  set  forth — a  fidelity  tried  so  as 
by  fire,  and  therefore  more  precious  than  all  gold  (of.  1  Pet.  i.  6,  7),  which  might  be 
taken  as  a  text  for  the  interpretation  of  very  much  Id  this  book.  It  was  written, 
probably,  near  the  age  of  Solomon,  but  we  think  subsequently ;  and  by  some  Israelite 
belonging  to  the  northern  tribes ;  and  from  the  absence  of  all  praise  of  Solomon,  and  the 
conduct  it  ascribes  to  him,  the  writer  was  probably  hostile  to  him,  perhaps  one  of  those 
who  in  Rehoboam's  day  raised  the  cry  of  "  To  your  tents,  0  Israel  1 "  and  broke  away 
from  the  kingdom  of  Judah  altogether.  The  poem  is  sensuous,  hut  not  sensual,  unless 
it  be  where  Solomon  is  to  be  understood  as  speaking,  when  such  speech  would  be  in 
character.  It  is  Oriental,  of  course,  and  not  to  be  interpreted  by  those  far  different 
canons  of  taste  which  prevail  in  our  more  Northern  and  Western  lands.  And  it  is  not 
a  mere  story  of  a  maiden's  constancy.  Were  it  so,  however  beautitul  (and  for  remarks 
on  its  beauty  cf.  Isaac  Taylor's  '  Spirit  of  the  Hebrew  Poetry'),  still  it  would  nor,  we 
think,  have  found  a  place  amongst  the  sacred  writings.  We  hold  it  to  be  an  allegory 
or  parable  of  the  soul's  true  love  to  Ood,  and,  so  read,  it  is  like  the  rest  of  Holy  Scripture, 
"  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,"  etc.  He  who  has  no  love  of  God  in  his  heart,  or 
even  little,  will  never  understand  it,  and  had  better  leave  it  alone.  But  to  the  pure, 
devout,  and  Christ-loving  heart  the  vision  of  him  who  is  for  them  the  "altogether 
lovely  "  is  seen  everywhere  in  it,  and  delighted  in  wherever  seen.  That  vision  may 
we  see ! — S.  G. 

Vers.  2 — 4. — Desire  after  Ood.  Translated  into  language  more  congenial  to  our 
ordinary  Christian  thought,  these  verses  may  be  taken  as  a  parabolic  setting  forth  of 
the  blessed  truth  contained  in  the  well-known  words  of  the  psalm,  "  My  soul  thirsteth 
for  God,  for  the  living  God ;  when  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  God  ?  "  It  surely 
would  be  speaking  blasphemy,  and  an  abasement  of  the  Bible,  if  we  were  to  look  on  the 
sensuous  words  with  which  tliese  verses  begin  as  meaning  nothing  more  than  they  say 
in  their  ordinary  plain  and  literal  meaning.  We,  therefore,  feel  bound  to  lift  them  up 
from  such  low  level,  and  to  look  upon  them  as  telling — ^no  doubt  in  a  vivid,  Oriental 
way — of  the  soul's  desire  after  God,  the  holy  thirst  of  which  the  verse  from  the  psalm 
is  the  expression.     And  we  observe — 

I.  That  the  conscious  possession  op  the  love  or  God  is  the  soul's  deep 
NEED  AND  DESIRE.  Men  try  all  manner  of  other  delights,  but  they  turn  out  mere 
apples  of  Sodom.  He  who  wrote  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  had  left  untried  no  single 
source  of  earthly  joy.  All  were  within  his  power,  and  he  did  his  best  to  get  their  best 
out  of  them.  And  no  doubt  he  succeeded.  But  what  then  ?  Was  he  satisfied  ?  did 
they  content  him  ?  "  Vanity  of  vanities ;  all  is  vanity  1 " — that  is  his  verdict  upon 
them  all.  And  his  experience  is  that  of  myriads  more,  all  which  goes  to  prove  that  the 
love  of  God  alone  can  satisfy.  "  Nostrum  cor  inquietum  est  donee  requiesoat  iri  te." 
This  sayinc  of  St.  Augustine's  is  the  sober  truth,  which  finds  such  impassioned 
expression  fn  our  text.  And  the  soul's  desire  for  that  love  is  the  fruit  of  that  love.  "  I, 
if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me,"  said  our  Lord  ;  and  it  is  because  of  his 
gracious  drawings,  the  mighty  lure  with  which  he  attracts  our  wUls,  that  we  are 
possessed  by  this  desire.  ,    i.  i, 

IL  The  Divine  love  is  the  exhilaration  of  the  boul.  "  Thy  love  Is  bettei 
than  wine."  "  Be  not  drunk  with  wine,  but  be  filled  with  the  Spirit,"  says  St.  Paul ;  and 
he  thereby  teaches  us,  as  does  the  text,  that  there  is  a  likensss  between  the  two— wine 
and  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  the  resemblance  lies  here — in  the  stir  and  joy  of  heart 
which  wine  for  a  while  causes  ;  and  this,  though  in  no  mere  physical  sense,  is  the  blessed 


1«  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  i.  1—17 

eflfect  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  For  his  office  it  is  to  shed  abroad  the  love  of  God  in  oui 
hearts,  and  that  causes  joy  indeed. 

III.  And  it  is  feaoeant  wheebveb  it  dwells.  It  is  likened  to  "  perfume  poured 
forth,"  and  it  fills  "  all  the  house." 

IV.  The  pukb  in  heart  love  it.  "Therefore  do  the  virgins  love  thee."  The 
desire  for  the  Divine  love  is  not  universal — far  from  it.  Bat  "the  pure  in  heart"  "see 
God,"  aud  heuce  their  desire. — S.  0. 

Ver.  3. — Christ's  Name.  "  His  Name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth.''  We  apply  the 
text  to  him.  It  cannot  be  shown  that  such  application  is  wrong.  Perfumes  largely  used 
in  the  East — in  acts  of  worship;  in  enrertainments,  as  marks  of  favour  to  honoured 
guests  (cf.  Ps.  xxiii.;  John  xii.).  The  Name  of  Chiist  is  here  likened  to  such  precious 
perfume,  the  sweet  odour  of  which  fills  the  whole  house,  as  did  that  which  Mury  poured 
on  the  Lord.  The  "  Name  "  stands  for  all  that  Christ  is  to  us.  The  comparison  is 
appropriate  if  we  consider  concerning  such  perfumes — 

I.  Theie  costliness.  They  were  on  this  account  exceeding  precious,  large  sums  of 
money  being  dtmanded  for  them  (John  xii.  3).  But  does  not  this  tell  of  the  "precious 
blood  of  Christ,"  aud  huw  "God  so  loved  the  world'?  Think  of  the  co-t  of  the 
"  unspeakable  (jift"  of  Christ :  1.  To  the  Father.  Was  the  heart  of  God  unmoved  by 
the  sorrows  of  the  Son  ?    Is  not  the  touching  story  of  Abraham's  offering  up  of  Isiiac, 

\nd  of  his  anguish  at  having  to  surrender  his  son,  his  only  son  Isaac,  "  whom  thou 
lovest,"  brought  before  our  mind^  when  we  read  how  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that 
he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son"?  Does  it  not  tell  of  the  anguish  of  the  Divine  mind 
in  that  sacrifice  ?  A  God  that  cannot  know  sorrow  or  joy,  that  is  not  "  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  is  not  the  God  of  the  Bible,  "  our  F.ither  which  art  in 
heaven."  Therefore  what  of  uttermost  sorrow  must  he  not  have  known  when  he  beheld 
the  "  beloved  Son,  in  whom  he  was  well  pleased,"  expire  in  agony  on  the  cniss  ?  2.  To 
Christ  himself.  Was  he  not "  the  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  yrief  "  ?  "  Come, 
see  if  ever  there  was  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow  " — to  whom  do  these  words  apply  as 
to  him  ?  Cf.  Ps.  xxii.,  that  psalm  which  was  in  the  mind  and  on  the  lips  of  our  Lord 
as  he  hung  upon  the  cross.  The  parable  of  the  pearl  of  great  price  and  of  the  treasure 
hid  in  the  field  may  have  other  meanings  than  those  commonly  given  to  them.  May 
they  not  tell  of  our  salvation,  and  how  our  blessed  Lord  was  set  upon  obtniuing  this, 
and  therefore,  though  "  he  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  he  became  poor,"  that  he  might 
obtain  this,  to  him,  most  precious  pearl,  this  treasure  of  untold  worth.  3.  Tu  the  holy 
Spirit.  For  he  it  is  who  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  shows  them  unto  us ;  who 
seeks  men,  and  woos  and  wins  them  for  Christ.  The  whole  of  the  Passion  of  our 
Lord  is  patterned  forth  and  perpetuated  in  the  grievings  and  outrages,  in  the  Gethse- 
mane-like  "  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered  "  (Rom.  viii.),  which  tell  of  whit  he 
suffers  to  save  men.  4.  And  it  we  think  of  the  Gift  itself,  the  very  Son  cf  Ood — no 
creature,  no  man,  no  angtl  or  archangel,  but  he  who  was  one  with  the  Father — that 
sacrifice  was  the  cost  of  our  redemption.  All  comparison  fails,  no  matter  what  of  worth 
and  value  in  earthly  things  are  thought  of;  they  can  but  faintly  image  the  worth  and 
preciousness  of  Christ. 

II.  '1'hkie  combined  excellence.  The  choicest  perfumes  were  composed  of  many 
ingredients.  Cf.  the  .sacred anointing  oil  (Exod.xxx.  31 — 38).  And  so  Christ  is  "  made 
unto  us,"  not  one  thing  only,  but  many — "  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and 
redemption  "  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  Whether  we  think  of  the  combined  excellences  that  are 
in  his  own  nature  and  character,  or  of  those  which  he  bestows  upon  us — so  many,  so 
mani  old,  so  precious  all  of  them — the  comparison  is  true. 

III.  How  grateful  thet  ake  to  those  on  whom  they  are  poured.  To  this 
day  Orientals  delight  in  such  perfumes.  They  deem  them  to  be  as  healthful  as  they 
are  pleasant;  and  still  they  are  given  to  honoured  guests,  as  Simon  should  have  given 
them  but  did  not,  but  as  the  Magdalen  and  Mary  of  Bethany  also  did  to  our  Lord. 
"Thou  anointest  my  head  with  oil,"'  tells  in  the  twenty-third  psalm  of  the  exuberance 
of  joy  that  the  believer  has  in  his  Lord.  "  How  sweet  the  Name  of  Jesus  sounds  1 "  so 
still  his  people  love  to  sing.     And  what  they  sing  is  true. 

IV.  Their  diffusive  fragkance.  "  Poured  Ibrth,"  released  from  the  vessel  which 
contained  it,  and  in  consequence  spreading  its  sweet  odours  all  around.     Again  th« 


OH.  I.  1—17.]  THE  SON»  OF  SOLOMON.  17 


comparison  is  just.  Has  not  human  life  become  sweeter  in  innumerable  places  because 
there  the  Name  of  Christ  has  been  poured  forth?  Heaven  is  heaveu  because  there  his 
*'  Name  is  above  every  name." 

V.  That  they  make  fragrant  as  well  as  are  so  in  themselves.  By  this 
may  we  linow  whether  we  are  Christ's.  If  character,  temper,  spirit,  lite,  be  of  ill  odour, 
how  can  we  have  Ijnown  Christ's  Name  ? — S.  0. 

Vers.  4 — 8. —  The  Ghriatian  soul,  Us  trials  and  triumphs.  The  maiden  who  speaks 
has  been  separated  unwillingly  from  her  beloved,  after  whom  she  incessantly  mourns; 
she  is  kept  in  the  king's  chambers,  the  apartments  of  the  women  in  his  palace  at 
Jerusalem.  Thi-y  ridicule  her  swarthy' look,  and  she  tells  how  her  half-brothers  had 
been  unkind  to  her,  and  had  made  her  work  in  the  lirudgery  of  the  vineyards,  beneath 
the  scorching  sun.  Those  about  her  wonder  and  scoff  at  her  persistent  affection.  The 
Btory  may  be  taken  as  telling  of  the  Christian  soul,  its  trials  and  triumphs. 

I.  Its  trials.  The  Christian  soul  may  be :  1.  Unwillingly  deprived  of  conscious 
enjoyment  of  her  Lord's  presence.  How  often  in  the  psalms  do  we  find  the  com- 
plaint of  the  Lord  being  "  far  from  me,"  of  the  failure  to  realize  his  presence  and  his 
lovel  And  how  often  the  same  thins  occurs  now!  Our  sun  is  hidden  behind  a  cloud, 
and  the  soul  grieves  over  her  absent  Lord.  2.  Despised.  This  is  another  though  a  less 
trial.  The  child  of  God  is  a  poor  kind  of  creature  in  the  world's  esteem,  and  it  is  not 
slow  to  let  the  believer  know  and  feel  its  contempt.  And  with  many  this  is  a  terrible 
thins;.  Not  a  few  who  would  lead  a  forlorn  hope  and  do  any  deed  of  daring  that 
required  only  physical  courage,  will  shrink  and  quail  beneath  the  world's  scorn.  '6. 
Persecuted  and  ill-used  also,  as  she  was  who  is  spoken  of  here.  So,  too,  is  it  and  has 
been  with  the  Christian  suul.  And  often  a  man's  foes  are  they  of  his  own  household. 
Our  Lord  toM  us  it  would  be  so,  and  so  they  have  found  it ;  but  have  found  also,  as 
here,  that  he  knows  how  to  sustain  his  servants  in  this  trial.  4.  Mockery  likewise  has 
to  be  reckoned  with.  For  though  ver.  8  tells  a  truth  which  has  very  real  and  blessed 
meaning  in  re>;ard  to  the  soul's  way  to  God,  yet  it  seems  to  us  to  have  been  spoken 
mockingly,  bidding  her  to  whom  it  was  spoken  track  the  footprints  of  the  sheep  if  she 
wanted  to  know  where  her  beloved  was,  if  she  would  persist  in  being  so  foolish,  rfuch 
is  the  force  of  the  words  rendered,  "If  thou  know  not."  They  a-e  coiitemiJtuous, 
and  contain  a  sneer.  But  "  cruel  mockings  "  have  been  the  lot  of  Christ's  people  in  all 
ages,  and  when  we  have  to  bear  them  we  are  not  to  be  surprised  "  as  if  some  strange 
thing  had  happened"  unto  us.     But  these  verses  tell  not  of  trials  alone,  but  of — 

II.  Its  triumphs.  For :  1.  Her  soul  still  clave  unto  her  beloved.  (Ver.  4.)  And  so, 
notwithstundmg  the  Christian  soul  may  be  by  one  cause  or  another  held  in  captivity 
and  "  walk  in  darkness,"  yet  it  will  all  the  more  cry  out  after  him  whom  it  loveth, 
and  remember  his  love  more  tlian  any  of  the  joys  of  earth.     Thus  the  very  design  of 

.  her  adversary  is  baffled,  for  her  heart  beats  true  to  Christ  still.  2.  She  is  certain  that 
Christ  delights  in  her.  Those  about  her  may  despise  her  because  she  is  "  black,"  because 
she  seems  contemptible  in  their  sight.  But  she  knows  that  the  Lord  looks  upon  her 
with  different  eyes,  that  in  his  sight  she  is  "comely."  Others  may  think  what  they 
will,  but  his  estimate  is  everything  to  her,  and  that  is  as  she  would  have  it  be.  3. 
She  desires  and  obtains  yet  more  of  happy  communion  with  him.  (Vers.  7,  8.)  Often 
is  it  with  the  faithful  soul  that  as  the  frowu  of  Christ's  foes  and  her  own  deepen,  the 
light  of  Christ's  countenance  shines  on  her  more  steadily,  brightly,  and  fully  than  ever. 
He  drew  her  (ver.  4)  by  her  need  of  his  grace,  and  she  ran  after  him,  seeking  that  grace 
and  finding  it.  4.  She  knows  that  her  present  lot  of  hardship  and  trial  is  not  her  true 
portiim.  "  Why  should  1  be  as  one  that  is  veiled  ?  "  (margin),  that  is,  one  despised  and 
despicable.  She  knows  that  such  portion  is  not  hers.  5.  She  cannot  he  moved.  She  is 
conqueror.     So  will  it  ever  be. — S.  0. 

Vers.  4 7. Tlie  smiFsjoy  in  the  love  of  Ood.    "  The  king  hath  brought  me  into  his 

chambers,"  etc.  If  we  may  take  this  book  as  only  an  allegory,  we  find  suggested  in 
these  verses  this  subject  of  the  soul's  joy. 

I.  Such  joy  is  because  of  the  king's  chambers.  He  has  opened  for  her  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  his  grace, "  filled  with  all  pleasant  and  precious  riches '  (cf.  Prov. 
xxiv.  4). 

BOKO  OV  SOLOMON.  ^ 


18  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  1. 1—17. 

II.  Is  VEKT  GREAT.  She  wiU  be  glad  and  rejoice.  She  will  "  remember  "  his  "  love 
more  than  wine."  That  is,  the  soul's  joy  is  more  than  any  earthly  means  of  delight  and 
exhilaration  can  afford. 

III.  Is  SHARED  IN  BY  ALL  THE  SAINTS  OP  God.  "  The  Upright  love thee."  "No  good 
thing  will  he  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  Our  joy  is  heightened  by  the 
fact  that  those  whom  we  most  esteem  count  it  their  joy  also. 

IV.  Hbb  own  omworthiness  does  not  shut  her  out  frou  rr.    "  I  am  black." 

"Binoe  therefore  I  can  hardly  bear 
What  in  myself  I  see, 
How  vile,  how  black,  I  must  appear. 
Most  holy  God,  to  thee  I 

"But  oh  I  my  Saviour  stands  between, 
In  garments  dyed  in  blood ; 
'Tis  he  instead  of  me  is  seen 
When  I  approach  to  God." 

The  remembrance  of  her  own  unworthiness  serves  as  a  foil  to  set  off  the  comeliness 
with  which  inwardly  he  has  endowed  her.  "  The  king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within  " 
(cf.  Ezek.  xvi.  14).  And  as  she  thinks  of  her  unwortuiness  she  tells  how  it  came  to  be 
so  with  her — by  the  crueltj'  of  others  and  her  own  neglect.  They  made  her  serve  in 
such  way  that  she  became  "  black."  How  often  our  foes  are  they  of  our  own  house- 
hold !  But  she,  too,  was  neglectful.  "  My  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept."  Never- 
theless, the  king  loved  her. 

V.  Hence  she  will  be  satisfied  with  nothinq  less  than  himself.  "  Tell  me 
where  thou  feedest  ?  "  etc.  (ver.  7).  She  appeals  to  him  to  bring  her  where  he  is.  She 
desires  to  know  the  rest  he  can  give.  His  "  companions "  will  not  compensate  for 
him  (cf.  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  "  etc. ;  cf.  Ps.  xlii.  9 ;  Ezek.  xxiiv. ;  Ps. 
ixv.  4,  5  ;  XVI.  2,  3).— S.  0. 

Ver.  6  (part).— 2%«  pastor^s  peril.  «  They  made  me  ...  I  have  not  kept."  If  we 
were  to  understand  these  words  literally,  then  what  is  told  of  might  be  without  either 
blame  or  loss.  Per  if,  as  seems  to  have  been  the  case,  the  speaker's  neglect  of  her  own 
vineyard  was  forced  upon  her  in  order  that  she  mi;iht  keep  the  vineyards  of  others,  then 
no  fault  attached  to  her.  She  could  not  help  herself;  she  was  made  to  work  for  others. 
She  might  grieve,  as  it  is  plain  she  did,  to  see  her  own  fair  vineyard  neglected,  and, 
in  consequence,  overgrown  with  weeds,  and  all  prospect  of  fruit  gone ;  but  no  blame 
belonged  to  her,  though  there  might  be  loss.  Aiid  it  is  quite  comprehensible  that 
there  mi^ht  be  neither  blame  nor  loss,  although  her  own  vineyard  was  neglected.  For 
it  might  be  far  more  profitable  to  cultivate  the  vineyards  of  others  than  one's  own;  and 
if  so,  why  should  there  be  blame,  and  how  could  there  be  loss?  But  when  we  come 
to  the  spiritual  suggestions  of  our  text,  when  we  look  upon  it  as  telling  of  those  whose 
office  and  duty  it  is  to  cultivate  the  vineyard  of  the  soul,  then  the  conduct  told  of  here 
can  never  he  without  blame  and  loss  both ;  blame  to  the  vineyard-keeper  who  kept  not 
his  own  whilst  keeping  others,  and  loss  both  to  him  and  them.     For — 

I.  Men's  souls  are  God's  vineyards.  They  were  created  to  bring  forth  fruit  for 
his  glory,  and  for  the  streugthejiing,  cheering,  and  every  way  helping  of  the  souls  of 
their  fellows.  For  this  purpose,  also,  were  they  redeeuied,  and  for  this  end  are  they 
supplied  with  manifold  Divine  gifts — the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  aid  which 
the' Church,  the  Scriptures,  and  the  ministers  ot  Christ  are  appointed  to  render.  Now, 
such — 

II.  Pastors  are  the  keepers  of  these  vineyards.  They  are  to  watch  over  them 
continually.  They  are  to  cultivate  them  with  all  diligent  care.  They  are  to  aim 
ever  to  render  help  to  those  committed  to  their  care  in  the  formation  of  that  character, 
and  in  the  exercise  of  those  graces  which  God  regards  and  rejoices  in  as  fruit.  Ti  py 
are  to  remember  always  that  the  vineyards  are  lor  fruit,  and  that  whatever  else  they 
may  yield,  if  they  yield  not  this,  their  work  has  failed.  Now,  this  verse  suggests 
that- 
ill.  There  is  a  great  peril  which  besets  these  kbepbes  of  the  vineyards.    It 


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  19 


ia  this,  that  whilst  keeping  the  vineyards  of  others,  their  own  they  should  not  keep. 
Now,  that  this  is  a  very  real  peril  is  evident  from :  1.  Their  own  confessions.  The 
words  of  our  text  are  a  confession,  and  a  sorrowful  one.  And  they  have  l>een  adopted 
by  such  vineyard-keepers  again  and  again.  Before  God,  on  their  knees,  they  have 
owned  how  marred  and  faulty  their  work  has  been,  owing  to  the  ill-prepared  oonditiou 
of  their  own  souls.  Pastors,  teachers,  and  all  who  toil  for  Christ,  in  striving  to  tell  of 
him  to  their  fellow-men,  and  to  persuade  them  to  come  to  him,  have  mourned—oh,  bow 
often ! — that  their  lips  have  outrun  their  hearts ;  that  they  have  uttered  words  to  which 
their  hearts  often  gave  but  faint  response.  They  have  declared  truths  which,  alas  I  they 
have  failed  to  realize.  They  have  spoken  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  had  but  little  con- 
sciousness of  it  within  them.  As  we  read  the  biographies  of  such  men,  or  as,  in  the 
confidence  of  friendship,  they  confess  how  it  has  been  with  them,  or  as  we  think  over 
our  own  experiences,  who  is  there  of  us  that  may  not  make  the  confession  of  the  text 
our  own?  It  is  the  perpetual  struggle  of  the  right-minded  servant  of  God  to  maintain 
the  balance  between  the  spoken  words  and  the  inward  thought ;  and  the  struggle  is 
never  easy,  but  often  the  reverse.  These  facts  show  how  real  the  peril  is.  2.  And  it  is 
evidently  possible  to  be  guilty  of  that  which  is  here  said.  For  wurds  and  work  are  both 
external  to  us,  and  they  can  be  assumed  and  adopted  even  when  there  is  but  little  or 
even  no  spiritual  reality  behind  them.  A  man  can  drill  himself  into  saying  or  doing 
almost  anything.  He  can  become  official,  perfunctory,  and  a  mere  actor  in  the  way  of 
expressing  sentiments  in  which  his  soul  has  no  share.  This  is  a  dreadful  possibility, 
from  which  may  God  graciously  deliver  us  all  1  And  our  Lord,  and  the  Scriptures 
generally,  declare  and  denounce  such  conduct.  God  says  to  the  wicked  in  the  fiftieth 
psalm,  "What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  statutes?"  It  is  certain,  therefore,  that 
wicked  men  can  do  this  and  have  done  it.  Our  Lord  utters  his  awful  warning  to  those 
who  say  "  Lord,  Lord,"  prophesy  in  his  name,  and  in  his  name  do  many  wonderful 
works,  to  whom  at  the  last  he  will  say,  "I  never  knew  you."  Yes,  God's  Word  is  very 
plain  as  to  the  possibility  of  this  sin  and  its  fearful  results.  3.  And  it  ia  wUhoui 
excuse.  There  is  no  need  for  it.  No  amount  of  busy  activity  in  keeping  the  vine^'arda 
of  others  need  hinder  our  duly  keeping  our  own.  On  the  contrary,  diligent  care  heie 
will  help  us  mightily  when  we  strive  to  do  good  to  others  and  to  keep  their  vineyards. 
For  when  we  remember  that  it  is  the  spirit  which  breathes  through  what  we  say  or  do, 
rather  than  the  words  and  deeds  themselves,  which  more  than  aiiglit  besides  influences 
our  fellow-men,  it  is  evident  that  the  right  cultivation  of  our  own  spiritual  life  is  ot 
unspeakable  importance.  As  one  has  saiH,  "  A  holy  minister  is  a  mighty  instrument  in 
God's  hand  for  the  conversion  and  sanctification  of  souls."  Therefore  whatever  of  time 
and  energy  we  give  to  the  keeping  of  our  own  vineyard  is  the  very  best  preparation 
and  aid  in  keeping  the  vineyards  of  others.  Moreover  :  4.  Not  to  give  this  is  fatal  to 
our  work.  There  is  nothing  men  detect  so  soon  or  despise  so  much  as  unreality,  want 
of  sincerity.  The  words  may  be  true  and  well  ordered,  and  lit  up  with  fine  imagina- 
tion and  beautiful  illustration;  be  very  interesting  to  hear,  and  command  lapt  attention; 
but  if  they  be  lacking  in  the  indispensable  quality  of  sincerity,  they  will  be  nothing 
but  words  after  all,  and  will  have  no  real  effect.  Religion  must  be  a  reality  to  ourselves, 
or  we  shall  never  persuade  others  to  become  religious  men.  "  Si  vis  me  flSre  dolendum 
est."  And  not  to  be  thus  real  ourselves  is :  5.  Most  perilous  for  our  own  souls. 
Being  so  busy  in  keeping  others'  vineyards,  caring  for  the  interests  of  others'  souls, 
what  can  we  lack  ?  Must  it  not  be  well  with  us  ?  And  people  praise  and  fliitter  us,  and 
count  us  to  be  all  we  should  be :  what  wonder,  then,  that  we  should  be  deceived  ?  And 
all  the  while  the  holy  truths  we  tell  of,  like  the  heated  iron  that  the  blacksmith 
handles,  affect  us  less  and  less;  we  scarcely  feel  them  though  we  talk  so  fluently 
about  them.  And  we  have  already  referred  to  Scripture  which  make  plain  the  mind 
of  God  on  this  matter.  "  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord." 
Such  is  the  perpetual  language  of  the  Word  of  God.  May  he  help  us  to  remember  it, 
and  that  always  1 

IV.  But  it  is  a  peril  into  which  they  need  not  fall.  For  Christ,  who  called  us 
to  keep  and  cultivate  the  vineyards,  our  own  and  others',  which  he  has  entrusted  to  our 
charge,  will  help  us  therein  if  continually  we  look  to  him.  Without  him,  indeed,  we 
can  do  nothing;  but  with  him  what  cannot  we  do?  Therefore,  see  to  it  that  our  souls 
are  committed  to  him,  that  day  by  day  we  do  our  all  unto  him.     Only  let  us  abide  in 


20  THE   SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [ch.  1. 1— 17. 


him,  and  then  all  our  outer  service  will  be  the  natural  product  of  our  inner  life ;  not 
mere  fruit  lasteiied  on,  but  fruit  grown,  produced  naturally  by  our  lile.  And  so  shall 
we  find  that  the  inner  and  the  outer  act  and  react  cue  upon  the  other  for  the  mutual 
good  of  each.  So,  whilst  we  keep  the  vineyards  of  others,  our  own  vineyard  will  also 
be  kept. — S.  C. 

Ver.  6  (part). — Not  faithless,  yet  not  faithful.  "  They  made  me  the  keeper  of  the 
vineyards  .  .  .  kept."  Text  a  sorrowful  confession,  but  it  is  not  the  most  sorrowful  of 
all.  That  will  come  from  those  who  cannot  say  even  as  much  as  is  said  here.  For 
tliere  was,  we  rnay  readily  suppose,  the  keeping  of  the  vineyards  of  others,  though  the 
speaker's  own  was  not  kept.  But  the  confession  suggests  sin  of  a  deeper  dye,  a  con- 
dition of  things  more  sad  than  this.     Let  us  speak  of  it,  first,  and  consider — 

I.  Those  who  keep  neither — the  vineyards  of  others  nor  their  own.  We  take  (see 
previous  homily)  the  vineyard  to  represent  the  soul  of  man.  Now,  we  are  all  of  us, 
and  some  especially,  appointed  to  keep  the  vineyards  of  others — to  watch  and  tend 
the  spiritual  interests  of  those  entrusted  to  our  care;  such  as  our  children,  our  class, 
our  congregation.  And  all  of  us,  not  merely  some,  are  appointed  to  keep  our  own 
vineyard,  to  care  for  our  own  souls.  Now,  our  text  speaks  of  those  who  did  fulfil  one 
part  if  this  duty — they  kept  the  vineyards  of  others,  though  they  did  not  keep  their 
own.  But  panial  failure  is  less  terrible  than  entire  failure.  And  it  is  of  this  we  speak; 
of  those  who  keep  neither  the  souls  of  others  nor  their  own,  who  neglect  both  alike. 
Deplorable  is  it  for  those  for  whom  they  were  appointed  to  care.  What  chance  have 
such  neglected  ones?  The  mightiest  influence  that  ca,n  possibly  bear  upon  them — I 
speak  especially  of  our  children — the  influence  of  parental  love  and  care  to  train  their 
aouls  for  God,  is  kept  back.  What  wonder  that  in  such  neglected  vineyards  "  ill 
weeds  grow  apace"?  But  yet  more  de|plorable  will  it  he  for  those  thus  guilty  to  such 
neglect.  What  will  they  say  when  at  the  last  great  day  it  is  asked  of  them  what  they 
have  done  with  the  vineyards  they  were  appointed  to  keep?  And  of  course  such 
persons,  as  a  rule,  keep  not  their  own  vineyards.  The  same  indlHerence  to  spiritual 
things  which  made  them  neglect  the  vineyards  of  others  makes  them  neglect  their 
own.  They  have  no  hunger  after  God,  no  thirst  for  the  living  water  which  Christ 
alone  can  give.  They  care  not  for  any  of  these  things.  And  so  the  rank  undergrowth 
which  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  sin  propagate,  spreads  over  all  their  spiritual  being, 
and  over  that  of  those  whom  they  were  appointed  to  keep.  Godless  parents  have 
godless  children ;  they  have  not  sought  that  it  should  be  otherwise.  And  the  teacher 
who  knows  not  Christ  for  himself  will  never  persuade  his  class  to  yield  themseli/es  to 
Christ.  And  the  unholy  minister — ah  1  what  will  his  congregation  be  ?  Oh,  dreadful 
will  it  be  for  those  who  huve  kept  neither  the  vineyards  of  those  others  that  have  been 
entrusted  to  them,  nor  their  own.    But  our  text  tells  especially  of — 

II.  Those  who  have  kept  but  one.  They  have  kept  the  vineyards  of  others,  but 
not  their  own.  Or  it  might  have  been,  for  it  often  is,  the  other  way — They  might 
have  kept  their  own,  but  not  others'.  Let  us  speak  of  these  first.  There  are  many  of 
them.  They  think  only  about  their  own  poor  wretched  souls,  and  how  they  can  make 
them  secure.  For  this  they  keep  up  certain  religious  habits  and  do  many  things.  But 
it  is  all  self-contained  ;  it  is  mere  selfishness,  for  it  all  centres  in  the  man's  own  soul. 
This  is  the  sin  of  the  Church  to-day.  Its  members  are  so  busy  keeping  each  their  own 
vineyards  that  they  care  but  very  little  indeed  for  those  of  others.  But  such  selfishness 
brings  with  it  its  own  proper  punishment,  as  it  ought  to  and  cannot  but  do.  "  The 
liberal  man  devisetb.  liberal  things,  and  by  liberal  things  he  shall  stand."  But  the 
churlish  common  Christianity  of  our  day  fails  to  devise  liberal  thirn^s,  and  therefore 
does  not  stand.  For  is  it  standing  high  in  men's  esteem?  Is  its  odour  fragrant;  its 
name,  like  his  of  whom  we  read  in  ver.  3,  as  "  perfume  poured  forth  "  ?  And  does  it  stand 
strongly,  firmly  on  its  faith?  Is  not  that  faith  faltering  in  many  places?  and  do  not 
many  fall  away,  and  that  daily?  If  we  would  have  onr  ovvu  vineyard  yield  large 
luscious  fruit  to  our  Lord,  care  for  the  vineyards  of  others  as  well  as  our  own.  2.  But 
the  text  tells  chiefly  of  those  who  kept  others  and  not  their  own.  Of  this  we  have 
spoken  alreadv  in  the  former  homily.  Therefore  we  come  to  speak  of  that  most 
desirable  and  blessed  condition  wliicli  is  found  in — 

IIL  Thosk  who  keep  both — the  vineyards  of  others  and  their  own.    Yes,  the  one  wei 


OH.  1.1—17.]  THE   SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  21 

should  do,  but  the  other  we  should  not  leave  undone.  Certainly  begin  with  your 
own.  It  may  be  an  awful  peril  to  begin  with  others.  Bat  having  committed  your 
own  soul  into  Christ's  blessed  keepini;,  and  found  him  your  very  Lord  and  Saviour, 
now  go  straight  away  and  try  and  persuade  others  to  do  just  what  you  have  dune. 
Then  you  shall  find  fulfilled  for  you  that  parable  of  reward  which  all  nature  is  full  of. 
See  that  running  brook.  How  merrily  it  prattles  over  the  pebbles  that  form  its  beil,  as 
it  speeds  away  to  render  up  its  little  tribute  to  the  larger  river,  which  will  bear  it  on 
to  the  great  and  wide  sea  at  last  1  The  miry  pond  hard  by  the  brook  sneers  at  it,  and 
gays,  "  You, haven't  got  so  much  water  that  you  can  atford  to  let  it  all  run  away  in 
that  wasteful  fashion;  you  should  take  care  of  what  you  have  got  as  I  do."  But,  the 
brook  took  no  heed,  and  went  on  singing  merrily  just  as  before.  And  ihe  hot  summir 
came  round  at  last,  when,  lo  1  the  pond  was  dried  up  almost  to  its  last  puddle ;  but  the 
brook  went  on  as  before,  bright  and  clear  and  merry,  sparkling  and  dancing  along  its 
appointed  way.  And  we  all  know  the  reason  why.  The  brook  gave  up  its  strength  to 
the  river,  and  that  to  the  sea ;  but  the  sea  gave  back  in  vapour  all  that  she  had 
received,  and  so  the  fountains  from  which  the  brook  flowed  forth  were  filled  again,  and 
the  brook  was  glad  and  not  sorry  that  she  had  given  her  strength  to  others,  for  now 
her  waters  had  not  failed  like  those  of  the  pond,  but  were  renewed  to  her  day  by  day. 
And  so,  when  the  water  of  life  flows  into  our  souls,  if  we  let  it  flow  out  again  to  bless 
the  souls  of  others,  be  sure  that  he  who  first  gave  us  of  this  grace  will  give  us  yet  more 
grace,  and  we  shall  find  that  there  is  that  which  scattereth  and  yet  iiicreaseth.  The 
life  of  the  merry  healthful  child  spends  itself  in  the  vigorous  activity  of  which  it  never 
seems  to  tire ;  but  that  active  exercise  replenishes  the  child's  life,  and  it  makes 
increase  in  strength  daily.  So,  then,  as  to  the  vineyards  of  your  own  soul  and  those  of 
others,  resolve  and  pray  that  you  may  not  be  found  amongst  those  who  keep  neither. 
Pray,  too,  that  you  be  not  so  unhappy  as  to  be  a  keeper  of  but  one,  and  especially  if 
that  one  be  not  your  own.  But  let  this  last  condition  of  which  we  have  been  telling  be 
yours.     Keep  your  own  vineyard  and  your  brother's  too. — S.  0. 

Ver.  8. — How  to  find  Ood.  The  daughters  of  Jerusalem — the  inmates  of  Solo- 
mon's harem — who  scornfully  addressed  these  words  to  the  faithful  girl  who  was 
mourning  after  her  beloved,  never  meant  to  utter  a  great  spiritual  truth  when  they 
thus  spoke;  any  more  than  Caiaphas  did  when  he  said,  "It  is  expedient  that  one  maa 
die  for  the  people."  The  doctrine  of  the  atonement  is  in  that  Caiaphas-speecb ;  and  so, 
sacred  suggestions  for  souls  that  seek  their  Lord  are  found  in  these  words  of  Jerusalem's 
daughters.  The  parallel  passage,  or  comment  on  this  verse,  is  Heb.  xi.  12,  "  Be  ye 
followers  of  them  who  through  faith,"  etc.  Now,  it  is  suggested  by  this  verse  that  if 
we  would  find  God —  ,       „       v     -.tt 

I.  Wb  must  go  forth.  (Cf.  Heb.  xiii.  13,  "  Let  us  go  forth  unto  him,  etc.)  We 
cannot  stay  (1)  in  the  world;  or  (2)  in  any  known  sin;  or  (3)  amid  the  common 
religionism  of  the  day. 

II.  Our  way  mxtst  be  the  way  of  the  Lord's  true  people.  We  must  go  by 
"  the  footsteps  of  the  flock."  As  to  who  the  flock  are,  cf.  John  x.  They  are  the  true 
sheep  of  Christ ;  those  wliom  he  calls  "  my  sheep."  They  consist  not  of  those  who  are 
indifferent,  still  less  strangers,  and,  least  of  all,  hostile  to  him  ;  but  of  those  who  have 
followed  him,  and  do  follow  him  "whithersoever  he  goeth."  It  is  good,  oftentimes, 
when  we  are  in  doubt  as  to  what  we  should  do,  to  ask  ourselves  what  some  sincere 
follower  of  Christ  whom  we  have  known  would  have  done  in  like  circumstances.  Such 
people  leave  footprints,  and  they  are  clearly  discernible,  and  if  we  track  them  we  shall 
come  where  they  are. 

III.  Wb  must  feed  our  souls  upon  the  words  of  the  Lords  shepherds. 
(Cf  Heb  xiii.  7,  "  Eemember  those  who  have  the  rule  over  you,  who  have  spoken  unto 
vou  the  Word  of  God,"  etc.)  Such  words  are  spoken  in  the  Scriptures,  and  from  many 
a  Christian  pulpit,  and  they  who  seek  the  Lord  have  ever  found  strength  and  help  in 
the  preaching  of  the  Lord's  true  pastors.  It  is  easy  to  joke  and  jibe  at  the  pulpit,  aud 
to  say  it  is  time  that  it  were  put  away  amidst  old  lumber;  but  let  the  pulpit  be 
filled  by  a  real  Christ-<Tiven  pastor,  the  words  that  are  uttered  from  it  shall  still  teed 
the  flock  of  God.  But  especially  let  us  feed  upon  the  Word  of  him  who  is  "  the  good 
Shepherd  "     We  shall  never  find  him  who--  we  seek  unless  we  obey  these  counsels. 


22  THE  SONa  OF  SOLOMON.  [ch.  i.  1—17. 

IV.  Those  who  would  thus  find  him  abb  very  deab  to  him.  The  speaker  had 
addressed  him  as  "thou  whom  my  soul  loveth,"  and  now  he  addresses  her  as  the 
"  Tail  est  among  women."  She  had  said  of  herself.  "I  am  black,"  but  he  says  to  her, 
"  Thou  fairest,"  etc.  All  this  suggests  what  so  many  Scriptures  teach  as  to  the  children 
of  Gud  being  "  beautiful "  in  his  sight,  and  as  to  his  rejoicing  over  them. — S.  0. 

Ver.  9 — ch.  ii.  7. — Love  assailed,  hit  steadfast.  According  to  the  interpretation  we 
have  taken  of  this  poem,  Solomon  is  here  introduced  as  endeavouring  to  win  the 
maiden's  consent  to  become  his  wife  by  flatteries  and  promises  of  rich  gifts  of  jewels 
and  adornments;  but  he  altogether  fails.  The  above-named  subject  is  therefore 
suggested.     Note,  therefore — 

I.  Love  assailed.  1.  By  flatteries.  Solomon  compares  her  to  whom  he  is  speak- 
ing to  the  "horses  of  Pharaoh's  chariot."  This  comparison  is  not  so  coarse  as  it 
Bounds.  It  was  not  unusual  amongst  the  ancients  to  compare  beautiful  women  to 
splemlid  horses  (cf.  Exposition).  The  ideas  intended  are  those  of  grace  in  form  and 
movement,  courage,  generosity,  rare  beauty.  Then  (ver.  15)  he  tells  her  that  her  eyes 
are  like  "doves'  eyes."  Then  (ch.  ii.  2)  he  disparages  all  other  women  in  comparison 
with  her.  They  are  as  thorns,  whilst  she  is  amongst  them  as  the  lily.  All  this  is  just 
such  flattery  as  Solotnon  may  be  well  conceived  as  employing.  And  it  suggests  how 
the  soul  affianced  in  God  is  often  assailed.  The  world  seeks  to  flatter  it,  that  so  it 
may  be  the  more  readily  bent  to  evil.  What  is  the  self-satisfaction,  the  pride,  the  serene 
content  with  itself,  in  wliioh  many  souls  are  weak,  but  just  the  effects  of  the  world's 
flatteries  ?  Satan  suggests  them  to  the  soul,  and  his  servants  repeat  them  continually, 
and  his  victims  believe  them.  Flattery,  what  harm  has  it  not  wrought  ?  So  seductive, 
BO  powerful,  so  ruinous  always  when  listened  to.  If  we  believe  what  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil  wliisper  to  us  about  ourselves  and  our  own  excellences,  such  as 
they  are,  we  shall  never  think  we  need  the  grace  of  God,  or,  if  for  a  while  we  have 
thonght  so,  we  shall  soon  give  up  such  thoughts  altogether.  2.  By  promises  that  the 
world  makes  of  its  pomps,  adornments,  and  wealth.  So  Solomon  here  tries  to  win  her 
to  whom  he  speaks.  "  Bows  of  jewels,"  for  head-dress,  strings  of  pearls  for  her  neck, 
gold  chains  studded  with  silver  (vers.  10,  11).  Such  gewgaws  and  finery  would  he 
give  her.  Homer  tells  ('  Odyssey,'  lib.  zv.)  how  attractive  and  tempting  such  thingi 
are — 

**  A  man  of  theirs,  subtle  and  shrewd,  produced 
A  splendid  collar,  gold  with  amber  strung. 
Witli  deep  delight  my  mother  and  her  maids 
Gazed  on  it." 

And  thus  Solomon  appealed  to  the  natural  love  of  adornment  in  a  young  maiden  all 
unused  to  such  rich  presents.  How  many  a  woman's  heart  has  been  won  by  them  I 
how  the  love  of  them  has  made  many  a  home  miserable  by  the  extravagance  to  which 
they  liave  been  the  temptation  1  how  many  a  fair  character  has  been  blasted  and  lives 
ruined  by  their  deceitful  glitter!  And  are  not  such  facts  parables  of  one  of  the  chief 
temptations  of  the  soul,  whereby  it  is  sought  to  seduce  it  from  God?  Jewels  and 
pearls  and  gold,  how  they  flash  and  sparkle!  how  they  dazzle  and  delight  poor  human 
nature !  Types  are  they  of  more  terrible  things  still — the  pomps  and  vanities  of  this 
wicked  world,  for  the  sake  of  which  all  too  many  men  are  only  too  ready  to  sell  their 
souls.  How  Moses  was  tempted  by  them!  How  brilliant  was  the  career  offered  him  I 
he,  the  cast-out  child  of  a  slave,  to  be  adopted  into  the  house  and  family,  the  pos- 
sessions and  honours,  of  the  imperial  dynasty,  the  Pharaohs  of  E;;ypt!  How  fiur  Lord 
was  tempted  in  like  manner  I  "  All  these  things" — all  the  kingdoms  of  the  wwld  and 
the  glory  of  them — "  will  I  give  thee  if,"  etc. 

n.  Love  steadfast.  Solomon  did  not  prevail  with  her  whom  he  tried  to  win.  All 
his  flatteries  and  fineries  failed.  Not  one  word  such  as  the  royal  tempter  would  fain 
Save  heard  did  she  address  to  him,  though  many  to  her  absent  beloved.  As  showing 
her  steadfastness,  note  here  :  1.  How  at  o.ice  her  heart  turns  to  him  she  loved.  (Ver.  12.) 
The  king  has  left  her  alone,  has  gone  to  his  banquet.  At  once  the  sweet  memories  of 
her  beloved  fill  her  soul  as  with  the  fragrance  of  myrih  (ver.  13).  "  While  the  king 
is  la  his  circle,  my  spikenard  sendeth  forth,"  etc.     Her  heart  is  always  perfumed  with 


OH.  1.1— 17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  23 

these  memories,  and  is  brisht  therewith  as  well  as  fragrant,  as  with  fair  flowers  and 
myrrh.  2.  See,  too,  how  she  transfers  all  praise  from  herself  to  him.  The  king  hnd 
told  her  she  was  fair  (ver.  15).  Her  thoughts  fly  away  to  him  whom  she  loves,  and  she 
gives  the  praise  to  him  (ver.  16).  3.  And  her  love  consecrates  all  the  scenes  where  she 
has  been  with  him.  The  soft  green  turf  (ver.  16),  on  which  they  had  cast  themselves 
down  baneath  the  cedars  and  fir  trees,  whose  branches  over  them  were  as  the  beams 
and  rafters  of  a  house.  4.  And  makes  her  think  all  lowlily  of  herself  hut  very  loftily 
of  him.  She  is — so  she  says — but  as  a  common  field-flower  (of.  ch.  ii.  1),  just  nothing 
at  all.  But  he,  her  beloved,  was  as  the  citron  tree,  fragrant,  stately,  fruitful,  affording 
refreshing  shade  (ver.  3).  Travellers  tell  of  the  beauty  of  this  tree.  And  amid  the  leafy 
arcades  of  the  vine,  and  beneath  its  o'erarohing  branches,  she  had  loved  to  linger  with 
him  (ver.  4);  for  with  him,  because  of  his  dear  love  fir  her,  she  was  safe  as  if  under 
tfct  protection  of  an  army,  following  the  banners  of  a  mighty  chief.  5.  And  these  are 
ever  the  eff&ts  of  a  steadfast  love.  "  Not  I,  but  the  grace  of  G-od  which  was  in  me : " 
so  does  Paul  transfer  praise  from  himself  to  God.  Places  where  fellowship  with  Christ 
have  been  enjoyed  are  consecrated  by  that  fact.  And  love  is  lowly.  "  Less  than  the 
least  of  all  saints:"  so  speaks  Paul  of  himself.  But  of  Christ,  what  does  he  not  say  of 
Awji?  What  is  not  Christ  to  him,  and  all  such?  Fruit, and  shade,  and  safeguard  sure. 
J II.  The  secret  op  all  this.  The  heart  possessed  by  the  love  of  Christ.  There 
is  no  other  antidote  that  will  serve  as  does  this  against  the  flatteries  and  the  bribes 
of  the  world.  Nothing  else  wiU  make  us  so  deaf  to  its  appeals,  so  blind  to  all  its 
blandishments. 

"Lord,  let  thy  fear  within  us  dwell, 
Tliy  love  our  footsteps  guide ; 
That  love  shall  all  vain  love  expel. 
That  fear  all  feai  beside." 

8.0. 

Vers.  9 — 11, 15. —  Characteristics  of  those  whom  Christ  loves.  We  need  not  mind 
who  said  what  is  written  in  these  verses ;  or  why  it  was  said,  according  to  their  literal 
interpretation.  But  we  may  consider  what  is  said,  for  it  is  true  of  all  people  who  are 
"  of  the  Lord  beloved." 

I.  Thbt  abb  his  beloved.  This  more  than  justice ;  for  that  would  have  regarded 
them  as  they  were  in  themselves — the  reverse  of  well-pleasing  to  him.  It  is  more  than 
mercy ;  for  that,  though  it  may  have  spared  the  wrong-doer,  would  not  have  received 
him  into  affection.  It  is  grace  ab"unding.  And  Christ  does  thus  regard  his  people. 
"Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants,  but  friends."  What  rich  store  of  consolation  to 
all  cast-down  souls  there  is  in  this ! 

II.  They  are  as  "a  compant  of  horses  in  Phabaoh's  chariot."  (Cf.  Zech.  x.  3, 
"  The  Lord  hath  visited  his  flock,  and  hath  made  them  as  his  goodly  horse  in  the  day 
of  battle.")  And  such  comparison  is  frequent  both  in  the  Scriptures  and  in  the  ordinary 
literature  of  that  age.  In  this  song  the  ideas  intended  are  their  alacrity  and  vigour, 
swiftness,  strength,  grace,  courage,  etc.  The  image  suggests:  1.  The  alacrity  and 
vigour  of  the  leliever's  service,  (i  f.  Ps.  cxix.,  "  I  will  run  in  the  way  of  thy  com- 
mandments when  thou  shalt  enlarge  my  heart.")  And  what  so  enlarges  the  heart,  so 
causes  it  to  swell  with  delijihtful  emotion,  as  the  consciousness  that  the  Lord's  love 
rests  upon  lis.  2.  Their  courage.  (Cf.  Job's  description  of  the  battle-horse — how  he 
"paweth  in  the  valley,"  and  "  rejoioeth  in  his  strength,"  "mocketh  at  fear,  and  is 
not  affrighted  ;■"  "suff'creth  the  quiver  to  rattle  against  him,  the  glittering  spear  and 
the  shiefd.")  And  how  often  the  dauntless  courage,  of  which  the  horse  is  a  symbol, 
has  been  found  in  God's  servants  (cf.  Daniel;  the  three  Hebrew  youths ;  Paul;  and 
many  more)  1     Think  of  the  martyrs  who 

"  Mocked  the  cross  and  flame. 
They  met  the  tyrant's  brandished  steel, 
The  lion's  gory  mane." 

And  in  less  marked  and  tragic,  but  in  equally  real  way,  has  this  courage  been  shown 
—is  shown— in  our  own  day.     Illustrate :  Arthur  kneeling  in  prayer  before  the  whoU 


24  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  1. 1—17. 

room  at  Rugby  (see  '  Tom  Brown's  School-days ').  And  such  courage  is  yet  needed, 
and,  thank  God,  is  yet  found.  3.  The  exquisite  symmetry  of  form  for  which  the  choicest 
Arabian  steeds  were  famous  tells  of  that  moral  symmetry  and  harmoniousness  of 
character  which  will  one  day,  and  should  now,  distinguish  his  Church  and  people.  It 
is  the  same  idea  as  in  St.  Paul's  image  of  the  symmetry  of  the  pi  rf to  ted  Church.  Hence 
he  tells  of  its  "breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height,"  which  "all  saints"  are  to 
"  comprehend,"  because  they  shall  share  in  and  exhibit  it.  4.  Bis  people's  unity  is  also 
suggested  by  the  comparison  with  "a  company"  of  horses.  The  Church  is  militant 
here  upon  earth,  and  therefore  the  idea  of  a  war-chariot  is  appropriate.  But  the 
company  of  steeds  who  draw  it,  are  they  not  so  esteemed  because  of  their  ordered 
obedience '!  Not  struggling  hither  and  thither  as  each  wills,  nor  each  struggling  to  get 
its  own  way  and  so  pulling  in  different  directions.  Alas!  it  is  a  sarcasm  to  liken  the 
Church  of  our  day  to  "  a  company  of  horses  in  Pharaoh's  chariot."  Would  to  God  it 
were  not,  and  that  what  is  may  not  much  longer  be ! 

III.  They  are  beautiful  with  adoenments.  (Ver.  10;  cf.  Prov.  i.  8,  9,  "My 
son  hear,  .  .  .  For  they  shall  be  an  ornament  of  grace  unto  thy  head,  and  chains 
about  thy  neck.")  What,  therefore,  these  adornments  are  is  evident.  They  are  the 
graces  wrought  by  the  Spirit ;  what  St.  Paul  calls,  "  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit " — love,  joy, 
peace,  etc.  These  are  the  golden  links  of  the  chain,  added  one  by  one,  each  connected 
with  and  dependent  on  its  fellow.  Frequently  is  the  adornment  of  the  soul  set  forth  in 
Scripture  under  the  imagery  of  the  adornment  of  the  body.  We  read  of  "  the  ornament 
of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,"  etc.  And  thus  Christ  will  array  his  Church  and  each 
individual  believing  soul. 

IV.  They  shall  becbive  "grace  for  grace;"  that  is,  grace  upon  grace— grace 
in  addition  to  grace  already  given  (cf.  ver.  11,  "  We  will  make  thee,"  etc.).  And  this 
is  so.  We  are  bidden  "  grow  in  grace ; "  and  the  soul  does  thus  advance,  does  receive 
more  and  more  of  those  beautiful  adornments  which  are  the  Spirit's  workmanship, 
those  good  works  for  which  we  were  created  in  Christ  Jesus. 

V.  The  loveliness  of  the  Holt  Spirit  is  been  in  them.  This  the  suggestion 
of  ver.  15,  "Thine  eyes  are  doves'."  We  read  of  the  "evil"  eye  (Matt.  xx.  15);  of 
"eyes  full  of  adultery"  (2  Pet.  ii.  14);  and  of  the  "high  look  and  proud  heart" 
(Ps.  ci.  5).  But  what  a  contrast  to  all  these  have  we  here !  Eyes  of  gentleness,  of 
purity,  of  heavenly-mindedness ;  eyes  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit — whose  chosen 
emblem  is  the  dove — looks  and  is  seen.  What  a  description  !  Would  that  all  we  who 
profess  and  call  ourselves  Christians  corresponded  to  it  far  more  than  we  dol — S.  0. 

Ver.  12. — Holy  Communion.  The  form  of  expression  in  this  verse  has  suggested 
thoughts  on  this  theme  to  so  many  devout  students  of  this  book  that,  whilst  not 
•dmitting  their  interpretation  as  correct,  we  may  nevertheless  avail  ourselves  of  such 
suggestions  in  order  to  set  forth  some  precious  and  important  truths  concerning  it — the 
soul's  communion  with  Christ.     And  we  note — 

I.  The  oedinanoes  of  the  gospel  are  Christ's  table.  (Cf.  Eev.  iii.  20,  "If  any 
man  will  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  me.") 
In  such  communion  we  have  the  "feast  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow"  of  which  the 
prophet  speaks  (cf.  also  our  Lord's  words,  "Come,  for  all  things  are  ready;  my  oxen," 
etc.).  Now,  such  communion  is  had  :  1.  In  prayer.  Not  mere  saying  prayers,  but  in 
true  prayer.  2.  In  the  worship  of  the  Church.  How  often  have  we  found  this  to  be  so. 
On  the  sabbath,  and  in  the  sanctuary,  how  often  we  have  there  found  that 

"  The  cares  which  infest  our  day 
Have  folded  their  tents,  like  the  Airabs, 
And  as  silently  steal  away  1 " 

3.  The  table  of  the  Lord  is  especially  the  King's  table.  Hence  to  our  service  there 
the  name  of  "holy  communion"  has  been  pre-eminently  given.  All  these  are  oppor- 
tunities of  such  communion,  and  were  designed  so  to  be.     But — 

II.  Their  validity  and  value  depend  on  the  King's  presence.  "  While  the 
King  sitteth,''  etc.  How  poor  and  wretched  are  our  prayers  if  there  be  no  realization 
of  the  presence  of  Christ  1   And  the  worship  of  the  Chui'ch,  what  an  empty  form  I   And 


CH.1. 1— 17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  25 

at  the  table  of  the  Lord  not  to  "discern  the  Lord's  body,"  that  is  to  make  the  service 
worse  than  useless ;  it  is  to  incur  his  judcrment  and  condemnation.  Let  us  never  come 
to  this  or  to  any  season  of  communion  without  invoking  his  presence. 

in.  And  are  manifested  by  theib  effects.  "While  .  .  .  my  spikenard  sendeth 
forth,"  etc.  "  It  is  in  seasons  of  communion  with  the  Lord  that  the  graces  of  the 
Spirit  are  called  forth  in  most  lively  exercise."  A  holy  fraiirance,  a  "sweet  smell," 
well-pleasing  and  acceptable,  is  yielded  at  such  seasons  by  the  hefirt  of  the  Lord's 
servants.  And :  1.  To  the  Lord  himself.  Our  prayers  rise  up  before  him  "as  incense, 
and  the  lifting  up  of  onr  hands  as  the  evening  sacrifice."  He  is  well  pleased.  He  told 
Nathanael,  "  When  thou  wast  under  the  fig  tree  I  saw  thee;"  there,  v^'here  he  had 
poured  forth  his  fervent  f)rayer.  And  in  our  assemblies  for  worship,  where  that 
worship  is  real,  the  Lord  loveth  such  "gates  of  Zion."  Of  such  worshippers  it  is 
written,  "The  Lord  hea'kened  and  heard,  and  a  book  of  remembrance  was  written 
befitre  him."  And  of  them  he  says,  "They  shall  be  mine  in  that  day  when  I  make  up 
my  jewels."  And  at  his  table,  if  we  do  indeed  commune  with  him,  the  faith  and  nope 
and  love,  the  contrition  and  humility  and  self-surrender,  all  which  the  soul  then  and 
there  offers  to  him,  tliese  are  fragrant  indeed,  sweet  and  precious  as  were  the  anointings 
of  his  sacred  body  by  the  penitent  Ma.;dalen  and  by  Mary  of  Bethany.  2.  And 
maiiy  others  are  conscious  of,  and  share  in  that  fragrance.  Our  fellow-guests.  Wliat 
a  Siiurce  of  true  blessing  and  manifold  help  to  anv  Church  is  the  presence  of  those  who 
live  in  constant  communion  with  their  Lord!  What  a  hallowed  influence  such  exertl 
what  real  good  they  do!  Like  their  Lcjrd's,  in  their  measure  and  degree,  the  name  of 
such  is  "as  ointment  poured  forth."  And  all  those  with  whom  such  persons  have  to 
do — their  children,  servants,  neighbours,  associates,  and  the  world  generally — will,  as 
it  was  with  the  apo-stles,  "take  knowledge  of  them  that  they  have  been  with  Jesus." 
3.  And  ihey  themselves  are  blessed.  For  is  it  not  good  to  have  all  tliat  is  pure  and 
holy  and  Christ-like  in  us  quickened,  confirmed,  strengthened,  as  is  the  case  tlirough 
communion  with  our  Lord?  Moses'  face  shone  after  he  had  been  in  the  presence  of 
the  Lord.  The  S|iiritual  help  which  comes  to  the  real  worshipper  is  so  great,  and  has 
always  been  so  recognized,  that  for  the  sake  of  having  opportunity  for  such  communion 
Chrisi's  people  have  risked  everything.  If  they  would  only  have  kept  their  religion 
to  themselves  no  one  would  have  said  anything;  but  they  would  not.  They  would 
come  together  for  worship  and  for  communion  ;  and  hence,  all  over  the  world,  they  have 
been  led  "as  sheei)  to  the  slaughter,"  and  for  Christ's  sake  they  "have  been  slain  all 
the  day  Ions."  What  proof  and  evidence  this  is  of  the  real  blessedness  of  communion 
with  Christ!  May  he  help  us  to  add  each  one  our  testimony  to  this  same  sure 
truth !— S.  C. 

Vers.  13,  14. —  What  Christ  is  to  his  people.  He  is  here  said  to  be  as — 
I.  "  A  BT'NDLE  OF  MYKRH."  See  ExpositioD  for  explanation  of  ancient  customs  alluded 
to  by  this  "  bundle,"  or  small  box,  or  other  such  receptacle  for  perfumes.  Its  religious 
teachings  are  such  as  arise  from  the  fact  that:  1.  Myrrh  was  used  in  the  "anointing 
oil"  with  which  Aaron  and  the  priests  were  anointed.  It  was  "  the  oil  of  gladness" 
with  which  Christ  was  anointed  above  his  fellows  (of.  Ps.  cxxiii.  2).  The  teachmg, 
therefore,  is  that  Christ  is  the  Joy  of  his  people.  Cf.  "  Then  will  I  go  ,jmto  the  altar 
of  God,  unto  God  my  exceeding  Joy"  (Ps.  xliii.  4).  Then:  2.  Myrrh  luas  largely  used 
for  incense.  Cf.  in  the  Revelation  the  vision  of  the  angel  to  whom  "was  given  much 
incense."  It  represented  the  acoeptableness  of  the  prayers  of  God's  saints.  And  it  is 
Christ's  Name  that  gives  worth  and  validity  to  our  poor  prayers.  We  join  them  on  to 
his  all-availiig  intercession,  and  we  find  ourselves  "accepted  in  the  Beloved."  3.  Myrrh 
VMS  used  for  embalming,  so  as  to  prevent  corruption  and  decay.  And  this  is  just  what 
Christ  is  to  us.  He  prevents  the  moral  corruption  which  would  destroy  our  souls 
having  power  over  them.  It  would  fasten  upon  them  as  it  does  on  those  in  whom 
Christ  is  not;  but  he  arrests  its  power,  and  preserves  our  souls  in  life.  And  he  will,  he 
does,  stay  the  corruption  of  the  grave.  That  does,  indeed,  fasten  on  the  poor  cast-off 
garment  of  the  soul ;  but  on  the  soul  itself  Christ  suffers  corruption  to  have  no  power, 
for  he  clothes  it  with  the  spiritual  body,  so  that  "mortality  is  swallowed  up  of  life," 
and  "this  corruptible  puts  on  incorruption."  But  note:  4.  In  order  to  be  all  this  to 
us  he  must  ever  abide  in  our  hearts.     (Cf.  "  He  shall  lie  always  on  my  bosom.")    So 


26  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  1. 1—17. 

speaks  the  maiden  who  is  the  type  of  the  believing,  Christ-loving  aoul.  Can  we  each, 
then,  say  of  Christ,  "  He  is  '  my  Beloved ' "  ?  If  so,  we  may  go  on  and  say,  "  He  is 
unto  me  as  myrrh." 

II.  "A  CLUSTER  OP  OAMPHiEE."  (Ver.  14.)  Such  flowers  were  used  for  the  decora- 
tion of  rooms  and  for  personal  adornment.  It  is  not  easy  to  fix  what  precise  flowet  is 
meant.  We  are  told  its  habitat,  but  not  its  special  characteristics,  amongst  the  many 
fl<  iwers  amid  which  it  is  found.  But  its  name  is  very  significant.  It  is  the  same  word 
that  elsewhere  is  rendered  "propitiation,"  or  "atonement."  The  Jewish  rabbis  took 
it  hs  a  type  of  the  Messiah.  Hence  they  rendered  this  verse  thus ;  "  My  beloved  is 
unto  me  the  man  who  propitiates  all  things."  And  is  not  this  a  most  true  and 
beautiful  rendering?  For  is  not  this  just  what  our  blessed  Lord  does  for  us?  Is  not 
his  cross  the  antitype  of  that  tree  which  Moses  had  shown  to  him,  and  which,  when 
he  had  cast  it  into  the  bitter  waters  of  Marah,  made  those  waters  sweet?  The  cross 
of  Christ  is  the  sweetener  of  life's  bitter  waters.  Well,  therefore,  might  the  flower 
which  bore  the  name  of  "  the  propitiation  "  be  taken  as  telling  of  him.  Is  it  not  he 
who,  by  his  grace,  propitiates  the  worries  and  cares  of  life,  so  that  they  no  longer  irk 
and  Iret  my  will ;  and  the  perplexities  and  mysteries  I  everywhere  meet  with,  so 
that  they  no  longer  bewilder  and  beat  down  my  faith ;  and  the  temptations  which 
would  defile  my  soul,  so  that  they  no  more  work  me  such  harm ;  and  the  sin  for 
which  I  miijht  have  been  condemned,  so  that  it  is  silent  for  ever  against  me;  and  the 
grave  and  its  corruption,  so  that  they  will  not  hold  me  therein  ?  True,  his  gracious 
work  is  done  on  me ;  but  it  is  as  if  the  mouths  of  the  lions  themselves  were  stopped, 
so  powerless  to  do  me  harm  are  they  if  Christ  be  to  me  my  Propitiation.  Oh,  most 
sweet  and  blessed  flower!     May  it  ever  beautify  my  home,  my  life,  ray  heart! — S.  C. 

Vers.  16,  17,  and  oh.  ii.  4. — The  house  of  the  Lord.  Before  the  soul  delightedly  tells 
of  the  house  of  her  Lord,  she  speaks — 

I.  Of  the  Lord  or  the  house.  She  declares  not  only  that  he  is  fair,  but  pleasant 
also.  How  many  of  his  people  fail  here  I  Some  are  fair,  but  not  pleasant.  Some  are 
pleasant,  but  not  fair.  Alas  I  some  are  neither.  But  of  him  supremely  can  it  be  said 
that  he  is  fair  and  pleasant.  Not  only  fair  in  outward  seeming,  but  pleasant  in  his 
spirit,  temper,  and  demeanour. 

II.  Of  his  house.  The  soul  says  "  our"  in  speaking  of  his  abode.  And  so  closely 
are  we  united  with  him,  that  his  people  may,  though  out  of  reverence  they  seldom  do, 
speak  of  that  which  is  his  as  theirs  also.  The  picture  drawn  in  these  verses  (16,  17)  ia 
one  of  rural  delight — the  soft  and  verdant  turf,  the  o'erarching  and  umbrageous  trees, 
the  noble  cedar,  the  stately  fir,  beneath  which  those  spoken  of  have  cast  themselves 
down.  The  ideas  suggested  are  those  of  happy  rest.  Ps.  xxiii.,  "  Thou  makest  me  to 
lie  down  in  green  pastures,"  etc.,  tells  substantially  of  the  same  spiritual  rest.  And  the 
bouse  of  the  Lord  is  the  place  of  such  blessed  rest  of  heart  and  soul  and  mind. 
Because  of  this,  we  find  those  many  impassioned  expressions  in  the  Psalms  as  to  the 
psalmist's  delight  in  the  house  of  the  Lord;  how  he  had  rather  be  a  doorkeeper  there 
than  hold  any  place  of  worldly  honour  or  pleasure,  however  exalted  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.).  The 
agitations  and  cares  of  the  mind  hush  themselves  to  rest  there.  The  psalmist  tells  in 
one  place  how  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  rule  over  men — wicked  men  often  prospering 
and  good  men  cast  down — how  this  distressed,  dismayed,  and  all  but  destroyed  his 
faith  in  God,  "until,"  he  says,  "I  went  into  the  sanctuary;  then  I  understood." 
Yes,  the  house  of  the  Lord  should  be,  and  often  is  to  his  people,  what  this  beautiful 
picture  of  rest  on  the  green  grass,  beneath  the  cool,  refreshing  shade  of  fragrant  and 
stately  trees,  presents  to  us — a  place  of  pure  delight,  rest,  and  refreshment  of  heart. 

III.  Its  provisions.  It  is  a  "  banqueting-house."  It  is  so  when  the  Lord  brings 
us  there  and  is  with  us  there  (cf.  on  ver.  12). 

IV.  Its  defence.  "  His  banner  over  me  is  love."  That  is,  the  soul's  protection 
and  guard,  so  sure  and  strong  as  that  of  a  banner-led  host,  is  the  Lord's  love.  Is  it 
not  so  ?  What  guards  us  there  and  everywhere  but  his  love  ?  What  is  the  defence  of 
the  home  but  the  father's  love?  What  the  safeguard  of  the  wife  but  her  husband's  love? 
Love  is  always  a  mighty  protector,  a  sure  defence,  a  strong  bulwark.  "  How  doth  the 
hen  protect  her  brood,"  but  by  her  love?  And  love  ever  guards  the  beloved  onest 
And  80  with  our  souls,  the  Lord's  love  is  their  defence. — S.  C. 


i«-i.  1— 17.]  THE  SONG   OF  SOLOMON. 


27 


Vers.  1 — i. — The  Bridegroom  and  the  bride.  Love's  native  language  is  poetry. 
■When  strong  and  happy  feeling  dominates  the  sou-l,  it  soon  bursts  into  a  song.  As 
young  life  in  a  fruit  tree  breaks  out  into  leaf  and  blossom,  so  the  spiritual  force  of  love 
uniolds  in  metaphor  and  music.  Among  the  lyrics  composed  by  King  David,  those 
which  celebrate  the  Messiah-Prince  have  the  richest  glory  of  fervour,  blossom  moat 
into  Oriental  imagery ;  and  inasmuch  as  Solomon  inherited  somewhat  the  poetic  genius 
of  his  father,  it  was  natural  that  he  should  pour  out  in  mystic  song  the  heart-th'-ob  of 
a  nation's  hopes.  The  deep  and  inseparable  union  between  Christ  and  his  saints  is  by 
no  ore  set  forth  so  clearly  as  by  Jesus  the  Christ ;  hence  love  is  strong  and  tender, 
because  love's  Object  is  noble,  winsome,  kingly.  Divine. 

I.  The  Bridegroom's  charms.  1.  77ie  love  of  Christ  is  incomparably  precious. 
"Thy  love  is  better  than  wine."  All  true  love  is  precious — a  sacred  thing,  a  mighty 
force.  The  love  of  Jesus  is  absolutely  perfect,  without  any  admixture  of  alloy.  Love 
is  the  mightiest  force  in  the  universe,  a  magnet  whose  attractive  power  reaches  from 
the  throne  of  God  to  the  very  gates  of  hell.  And  love  is  as  precious  as  it  is  potent. 
It  makes  a  desert  into  a  paradise ;  changes  base  metal  into  gold ;  transforms  foul  rebels 
into  loving  sons.  It  is  a  banquet  for  the  heart ;  a  perpetual  feast ;  a  fountain  of  purest 
joy.  What  the  rarest  wine  is  for  a  fainting  body,  that  the  love  of  Jesus  is  to  a 
burdened  soul.  2.  The  love  of  Christ  is  diffusive.  It  is  as  "  unguent  poured  forth." 
The  love  of  God's  Son  existed  long  before  it  was  manifested.  That  love  is  seen  in  all 
the  arrangements  of  creation.  That  love  is  unfolded  in  all  the  methods  of  daily 
providence.  "  By  him  all  things  consist."  That  love  is  shed  abroad  in  the  believer's 
heart  "  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  As  the  flowers  in  our  gardens  pour  out  their  essential 
life  in  their  sweet  fragrance,  so  the  love  of  Christ  is  Christ's  life  poured  out  for  us. 
All  the  love  which  angels  cherish  is  Christ's  love  diffused.  He  is  the  "  Firstborn  o( 
the  creation  of  God."  All  the  parental  love  that  has  ever  glowed  on  the  altar  of 
human  hearts  is  the  love  of  Christ  diffused.  All  practical  benevolence  for  the  well- 
being  of  mankind  is  the  outflow  of  Immanuel's  love.  The  love  that  constrains  ma 
to  compassionate  deeds  and  to  intercessory  prayers  is  the  love  of  Christ  diffused. 
Discovering  the  heavenly  savour  inspires  our  hearts  with  joy.  Heaven  is  knit  with 
silken  cords  to  earth.  3.  The  love  of  Christ  is  condescending  and  gracious.  "The 
King  hath  brought  me  into  his  chambers."  Had  we  been  told  that  God  admitted  into 
his  presence-chamber  the  unsinning  angels,  we  should  not  have  been  so  profoundly 
moved.  They  are  meet  for  his  service.  But  to  admit  the  base  and  degenerate  sons  of 
men  into  his  intimate  friendship,  this  reflects  a  singular  glory  upon  his  kindness ;  this 
is  a  miracle  of  love.  By  such  familiar  intercourse  he  trains  us  in  kingly  conduct, 
communicates  to  us  Divine  wisdom,  moulds  us  into  his  own  image.  Beyond  this  deed 
of  grace  not  even  God  can  go.  As  there  was  no  depth  of  humiliation  to  which  he  was 
not  willing  to  stoop  for  sinners,  so  there  is  no  height  of  excellence  from  which  he 
would  exclude  us.  Such  love  no  human  thought  can  measure.  It  is  higher  than 
heaven  :  how  shall  we  scale  it?    It  is  deeper  than  hell:  how  shall  we  fathom  it? 

II.  The  bride's  eesponse.  1.  Her  love  originates  in  the  high  renown  of  his  love, 
"  Thy  Name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth."  So  long  as  this  strong  force  of  love  was 
confined  within  the  heart  ot  Christ,  no  human  soul  could  suspect  its  existence.  On 
what  ground  could  any  dweller  on  earth  conjecture  or  imagine  that  he  was  the  object 
of  Immanuel's  love?  That  love  must  be  unfolded,  declared,  made  clearly  known. 
And  this  is  what  Jesus  has  done.  Not  content  with  warm  protestations  of  his  affei:tion, 
he  has  stooped  to  perform  impressive  deeds  of  kindness — yea,  prodigies  of  compassion. 
All  the  romantic  stories  of  heroic  love  Jesus  has  immeasurably  surpassed.  His  renown 
is  sung  in  all  the  courts  of  the  heavenly  palace.  He  has  made  for  himself  a  "Name 
above  every  name,"  human  or  angelic.  This  high  reputation  warrants  our  approach, 
our  admiration,  our  trust,  our  responsive  love.  "We  love  him,  because  he  has  first 
loved  us."  2.  Ow  love  craves  a  closer  fellowship  with  his  Person.  "  Draw  me ! "  Wa 
have  made  such  discoveries  of  excellence  in  our  Immanuel  that  we  long  for  larger 
acquaintance.  To  us  he  is  a  vast  mine  of  spiritual  wealth,  and  the  deeper  we  go  the 
rarer  jewels  do  we  find.  His  charms  seem  infinite,  and  no  fear  troubles  us  thut  we 
shall  exhaust  them.  We  are  troubled  that  our  own  love  is  so  inadequate,  so  unworthy; 
hence  we  desire  a  closer  approach,  that  his  spiritual  beauty  may  quicken  our  languid 
afi'ection.     Feeling  the  magnetic  power  of  his  love,  we  too  may  be  magnetized.     We 


28  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [ch.  i.  1—17 

cannot  command,  by  a  mere  volition  or  a  mere  resolve,  that  our  love  shall  flow  out. 
So  the  only  way  to  intensify  our  love  is  by  coming  into  fuller  contact  with  his.  Only 
life  can  generate  life,  and  only  the  love  of  Christ  can  stir  into  activity  the  principle  of 
true  love  in  us.  Therefore  we  pray,  "Draw  us  into  nearer  fellowship,  into  more  vital 
union  1"  3.  Our  love  desires  a  prompt  obedience.  "We  will  run  after  thee."  We 
love  to  walk  in  his  footsteps,  and  when  we  discover  where  his  haunts  lie,  we  run  to 
seek  him  there.  So  sincere  is  our  love,  that  we  long  to  do  his  will  promptly  and 
heartily.  We  wish  to  hear  every  whisper  of  his  commands.  We  deprecate  that 
anything  on  our  part  should  chase  the  smiles  from  his  face.  We  long  that  his 
thoughts  may  be  our  thoughts,  his  dispositions  our  dispositions,  his  purposes  our 
pur])oses ;  so  that  between  Christ  and  us  there  may  be  perfect  concord.  As  said  Ruth 
to  Naomi,  so  say  we,  "  Whither  thou  goest,  I  will  go ;  and  where  thou  dwellest,  I 
will  dwell."  We  can  do  without  food,  we  can  do  without  friends,  we  can  do  without 
health,  but  we  cannot  do  without  Christ.  Wrote  Samuel  Rutherford  to  a  friend,  "  If 
hell-fire  stood  between  you  and  Christ,  you  would  press  through  in  order  to  reach 
him."  All  service  is  delight  when  the  feet  are  winged  by  love.  4.  Love  6.  ings  us 
into  the  best  society.  "  The  upright  love  thee."  The  love  that  draws  the  best  men 
near  to  Christ  likewise  draws  them  near  each  other.  As  the  spokes  of  a  wheel  get 
near  to  the  hub  they  get  into  closer  proximity  to  each  other.  The  more  love  we  give 
out  the  more  substantial  good  we  get.  The  friendship  of  the  pious  is  a  precious 
treasure;  their  wisdom  enlightens,  their  piety  stimulates,  their  love  enkindles,  ours. 
In  their  society  we  are  elevated  and  gladdened.  The  story  of  their  experience  inspires 
us  for  new  endeavour;  their  triumphs  awaken  our  most  sacred  ambitions.  With 
Moses,  we  learn  meekness ;  with  Elijah,  we  learn  how  to  pray ;  with  Job,  we  learn 
endurance;  with  Martin  Luther,  we  learn  courage.  The  society  of  saints  throws  into 
the  shade  the  society  of  sages  or  of  kings.  5.  Love  treasures  up  the  recollection  of  past 
favours.  "We  will  remember  thy  love  more  than  wine."  What  Jesus  Christ  has 
done  for  us  in  the  past  he  will  do  again.  Since  his  love  is  infinite,  he  has  not  exhausted 
his  love-tokens  in  the  past ;  he  has  more  costly  things  yet  to  give,  richer  dainties  yet 
to  place  on  his  banquet-table.  Still,  there  are  times  when  we  cannot  realize  a  present' 
Saviour,  when  the  conscious  possession  of  his  love  is  suspended,  and  at  such  times  it 
is  a  cordial  to  our  spirits  to  bring  out  the  memorials  and  tokens  of  past  affection.  Our 
memory  is  a  vast  chamber,  hung  round  with  ten  thousand  mementoes  of  Immanuel's 
love.  Thus,  in  a  dark  hour  of  depression.  King  David  sang,  "  Vet  will  I  remember 
thee  from  the  land  of  Jordan,  and  of  the  hill  Mizar."  In  winter's  dark  days  we  will 
feast  upon  the  fruits  of  well-remembered  summer.  6.  Love  creates  the  purest  joy. 
"  We  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thee."  Joy  arises  when  a  felt  want  is  satisfied ;  but 
so  long  as  we  are  sensible  of  needs  and  cravings  for  which  no  supply  is  at  hand  we 
are  miserable.  A  thirsty  man  upon  a  scorching  desert,  leagues  removed  from  any 
well,  is  a  stranger  to  gladness.  The  misery  of  lost  spirits,  doubtless,  arises  from 
passionate  cravings  for  which  there  is  no  supply.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  can 
feel  that  Christ  is  ours — ours  in  bonds  which  nothing  can  sever — we  feel  that  every 
want  is  met,  every  ambition  is  realized,  every  aspiration  fulfilled.  "Then  shall  I  he 
satisfied,  when  I  awake,  in  thy  likeness."  Therefore,  although  outward  surroumlings 
may  tend  to  depress,  we  can  always  find  in  the  fulness  of  Christ  sources  of  hope  and 
joy.     "  With  him  is  the  fountain  of  life." — D. 

Vers.  5,  6. — Low  estimate  of  self.  A  genuine  Christian  will  take  a  modest  estimate 
of  himself.  "He  has  learnt  not  to  think  more  highly  of  himself  than  he  ought  to 
think."  Many  Christians  undervalue  themselves ;  and  though  this  practice  is  nut  so 
obnoxious  in  the  eyes  of  others  as  over-valuation,  yet  this  also  is  a  fault.  It  is  better 
to  pass  no  judijment  on  ourselves;  it  is  seldom  called  for;  it  is  often  a  lolly. 

I.  External  blemisu.  "  I  am  black."  1.  This  blemish  (if  it  be  one)  is  very 
superficial;  it  is  only  skin-deep.  A  strung  compaiison  is  emiiloyed  to  convey  more 
vividly  the  impression — "  black  as  the  tents  of  Kedar."  These  were  maaufaciured 
from  camel's  hair,  and,  from  long  exposure  to  sun  and  dew,  were  in  colour  a  dingy 
black.  So  when  a  Christian  views  himself  as  he  appears  externally  to  others,  he  sees, 
perhaps,  his  ignorance,  his  poverty,  his  imperfections,  his  obscurity,  the  contempt  with 
which  he  is  regarded  by  others.     If  the  heavenly  Friend  should  view  him  only  in  his 


0H.I.1— 17.J  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  29 

outward  appearance,  he  is  devoid  of  attraction,  destitute  of  ordinary  beauty.  2.  This 
blemish  arises  from  the  hard  treatment  of  others.  "My  mother's  children  weie  angry 
witli  me;  they  made  me  keeper  of  the  vineyards."  Compulsion  was  used.  The 
speaker  had  been  coerced  into  employmeut  which  was  menial  and  exhausting.  It 
demanded  long  exposure  to  scorching  sun  and  to  chilling  dews.  The  effect  was  to  mar 
the  beauty  ol  the  ouuntenance.  Yet  the  eye  of  love  would  detect  beneath  the  surface 
a  richer  beauty — the  beauty  of  patient  obedience  and  unmurmurin:;  submission.  Men 
of  the  world  may  oppress  and  persecute ;  they  cannot  injure  character.  Earthly  kings 
and  magistrates  may  scourge  and  imprison  the  bride  of  Christ;  they  may  despoil  her 
of  much  external  comeliness;  but  in  the  eye  of  reason — in  the  eye  of  God — she  is 
more  comely  than  before.  Only  the  dross  is  consumed ;  renl  excellence  of  soul  comes 
clearer  into  view.  3.  Or  this  may  be  a  real  blemish  through  self-ntglect.  "  My  own 
vineyard  have  I  not  kept."  Possibly,  in  the  endurance  of  suolT  hardships,  it  mi^ht 
have  been  possible  to  escape  the  blemish.  Suitable  precautions  were  not  taken. 
Under  stress  of  cruel  compulsion,  there  had  been  a  feeling  of  self-abandonment — a 
weak  yieldmg  to  despair.  It  is  hard  to  maintain  a  heavenly  temper  under  daily 
provocations ;  yet  it  can  be  done.  It  is  hard  to  cultivate  the  Christian  graces  amid 
scenes  of  suffering  and  mockery ;  yet  it  ought  to  be  done.  The  King  Omnipotent  has 
said,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  lor  thee."  We  shall  render  the  most  faithful  and  useful 
service  to  others  when  we  maintain  in  vigour  our  own  piety.  The  healthful  face  of  a 
holy  character  must  under  no  circumstances  be  neglected. 

11.  iNTEENAii  BEAUTY.  Thougli  black  (i.e.  sun-browned),  sho  was  yet  "comely " — 
yea,  beauteous  "as  tne  curtains  of  Solcimon."  Likely  enough,  there  is  in  tliis  poetic 
diama  a  conversation,  the  parts  of  which  are  not  distinctly  marked.  Likely  enough, 
the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  here  interject  the  remarks,  "comely;"  "as  the  curtains  of 
Solomon."  1.  The  judgment  of  others  respecting  us  is  often  more  equitable  than  self- 
iudgment.  Some  persons,  confessedly,  have  a  sad  habit  of  overrating  their  virtues ; 
but  others  are  diffident  and  over-modest — they  are  given  to  self-depreciation.  Through 
a  jealousy  for  truth,  or  through  a  four  of  self-delusion,  they  underrate  their  real 
goodness.  As  we  can  judge  the  merit  of  a  painting  or  a  statue  a  little  distance 
removed,  so  a  judicious  onlooker  can  often  more  accurately  jud^e  us  than  we  can 
jud^e  ourselves.  It  is  better  for  our  comfort  and  for  our  usefulness  neither  to  under- 
rate nor  to  overrate  ourselves.  Very  precious  is  the  inward  spirit  of  truth.  2.  Jnternal 
beauty  is  preferable  to  exttrnal.  It  is  not  so  apparent  to  the  eye  of  man,  but  it  is  more 
prized  by  God,  by  angels,  and  by  the  best  class  of  men.  It  is  superior  in  itself,  because 
it  belongs  to  the  soul.  It  is  more  influential  for  gDod.  It  brings  more  joy  to  the 
possessor.  It  is  permanent,  and  outlasts  all  changes  of  time  and  pain  and  death. 
The  genuine  Chiistian  may  be  poor  in  earthly  wealth,  but  he  is  endowed  with  the 
treasures  of  heaven.  He  may  wear  coarse  and  homespun  apparel,  yet  his  soul  is 
clothed  in  a  robe  of  perfect  righteousness.  His  face  may  be  marred  with  suffering  and 
ploughed  with  the  effects  of  arduous  toil,  yet  is  he  comely  with  holiness  and  beautified 
by  the  hand  of  the  great  Artificer.  3.  Internal  beauty  is  obtained  through  self- 
sacrificing  service.  The  bride  was  really  comely,  though  she  had  been  compelled  to 
work,  like  a  slave,  in  the  vineyards ;  yea,  she  was  comely  in  character,  as  the  result  of 
this  toil.  Very  true  is  it  that  no  persecution  can  injure  us;  it  brings,  sooner  or  later, 
real  advantage.  The  noblest  characters  have  been  fashioned  and  burnished  in  the 
furnace  of  suffering.  Even  of  the  Son  of  God  we  are  told  that  "  he  learned  obedience 
by  the  things  which  he  suffered."  The  statue  is  not  perfected  until  it  has  felt  ten 
thousand  strokes  of  the  chisel.  The  diamond  does  not  sparkle  at  its  best  until  it  has 
been  well  cut  on  the  wheel  of  the  lapidary.  The  pearl  of  great  price  is  the  fruit  of 
pain  The  verdict  of  experience  r-cords,  "It  was  good  for  me  that  I  was  afflicted. 
Sntierin"  is  God's  lancet,  whereby  he  produces  health.  A  vital  lesson  is  here  taught. 
Without'  personal  piety  there  can  be  no  permanent  usefulness.  A  mans  character  is 
the  mightiest  instrument  for  recoveriug  and  elevating  others.  If  we  long  to  see  the 
vineyards  of  others  fur  and  fruitful,  our  own  vineyard  must  be  a  pattern  of  good 
culture.  Our  first  duty  is  respeoiiuij  ourselves.  If  we  are  full  of  light,  we  can  lead 
others  along  the  path  to  heaven.     Personal  holiness  is  the  great  desideratum.— U. 

Vers.  7— 9.— Seeking  and  finding.     The  Christian  pUgrim  has  to  pass  through  a 


30  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  1. 1—17. 

variety  of  fortunes  in  hia  passage  to  the  celestial  city.  His  fluctuations  of  joy  and 
sorrow,  hope  and  fear,  resemble  an  April  day.  Sunshine  alternates  with  storm.  Now 
he  is  on  the  mountain-top ;  now  in  the  valley  of  humiliation.  Now  he  looks  into  his 
Master's  face,  and  sees  a  smile  of  heavenly  love ;  now  that  gracious  face  is  hid,  like  the 
Bun  during  eclipse. 

I.  Wb  havb  a  sense  of  dbsbbtion.  This  is  a  matter  of  personal  feeling,  not  an 
external  reality.  God  does  not  undergo  any  change,  nor  does  he  ever  forsake  his 
friends.  But  it  somftimes  happens  that  we  cease  to  realize  our  vital  interest  in  Jesus ; 
we  lose  for  a  season  the  enjoyment  of  his  favours.  The  sun  is  as  near  the  earth — yea, 
nearer — in  December  as  in  June;  yet,  because  our  northern  hemisphere  is  turned  away 
from  the  sun,  flowers  do  not  bloom,  nor  do  fruits  ripen,  on  our  side  the  globe.  So  we 
may  unintentionally  have  drifted  away  from  Christ ;  our  hearts  may  have  flagged  in 
devotion  or  in  zeal ;  the  bloom  of  our  love  may  have  vanished ;  some  cloud  of  earthli- 
nesa  may  have  intervened,'  some  mist  of  doubt  may  have  riseu  up,  and  we  no  longer  see 
the  radiant  face  of  our  Beloved.  In  proportion  to  our  appreciation  of  our  heart's  best 
Friend  will  be  the  sorrow  we  shall  endure.  No  earthly  good  will  compensate  for  the 
loss.  No  other  joy  can  take  its  place.  It  seems  as  if  the  natural  sun  were  veiled:  as 
if  earth  were  clad  in  mourning;  as  if  all  music  had  ceased,  because  Jesus  is  not  a 
Guest  in  the  soul. 

II.  Hbkb,  notwithstanding,  thebe  is  an  nNDZR-ouKRENT  OF  HOPE.  We  find  yet, 
within  the  soul,  strong  love  to  Jesus,  although  we  no  longer  realize  his  love  to  us. 
This  is  solid  comfort ;  for  it  is  evident  that  our  love  is  real,  and  not  simply  a  desire  for 
self-advantage.  It  is  not  a  refined  form  of  selfishness,  inasmuch  as  our  love  to  him 
abides,  although  it  brings  no  enjoyment.  And  we  still  perceive  and  appreciate  his 
office.  We  still  regard  him  as  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep.  As  such  he  will  not 
allow  a  single  lamb  to  stray.  It  is  the  part  of  a  good  shepherd  to  care  for  each 
member  of  the  flock,  and  to  restore  the  wanderer.  Though  we  no  longer  bask  in  the 
sunshine  of  his  favour,  we  are  sure  that  others  do,  and  we  love  him  for  his  compassion 
to  them.  Further,  we  are  sure  that  he  is  not  far  away.  He  is  busy  with  his  flock, 
feeding  them,  caring  for  their  needs ;  so  we  will  seek  him  out.  We  will  not  sullenly 
wait  until  he  shall  come  to  us ;  we  will  search  for  him,  for  we  are  sure  that  he  will 
approve  our  search.     If  we  heartily  desire  him,  this  is  hopeful. 

IIL  We  have  also  an  eager  inquiry.  "  Tell  me  where  thou  feedest,  where  thou 
makest  thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon."  So  fully  conscious  is  the  soul  of  its  loss  and 
injury,  that  it  longs  to  end  this  sad  experience.  Its  main  difficulty  is  what  to  do, 
what  step  to  take.  No  hindrance  in  the  way  of  finding  Jesus  shall  be  allowed  to 
remain.  If  we  have  been  guilty  of  any  misdeed  or  neglect,  we  will  confess  it  honestly. 
One  question  only  perplexes  us — Where  shall  we  find  our  Well-beloved  ?  We  want 
information,  guidance,  light.  Yet  this  same  Jesus  is  our  All  in  all.  He  is  our  Light. 
He  will  reveal  himself.  In  due  time  he  will  give  us  light.  So  we  speak  to  him 
directly,  and  we  employ  a  very  discreet  argument :  "  For  why  should  I  be  as  one  tha^ 
turneth  aside  by  the  flocks  of  thy  companions?"  In  other  words,  "Why  should  J 
seek  for  satisfaction  elsewhere  but  in  thee?"  If  I  seek,  I  shall  find  only  disappointi 
ment.  These  fancied  joys  will  be  as  apples  of  Sodom,  as  the  grapes  of  Gomorrah.  I 
must  have  some  object  on  whom  to  expend  my  love.  Let  it  be  no  other  object,  no 
inferior  object,  than  thyself.  Only  show  me  ihy  chosen  haunt,  and  I  will  find  thee 
out.    Distance  shall  be  annihilated.     Mountains  shall  be  levelled. 

IV.  A  GRACIOUS  RESPONSE.  "  Go  thy  way  forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the  flock,  and 
feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents."  Prayer  for  light  is  especially  acceptable 
to  God.  In  him  is  no  darkness,  and  nothing  is  further  from  him  than  to  keep  us  in 
darkness.  Most  of  all  does  he  delight  in  the  prayer  which  yearns  after  him.  It  has 
been  his  business  all  through  the  past  eternity  to  reveal  himself,  and  to  come  into 
nearer  union  with  the  human  soul ;  hence  our  prayer  is  only  the  echo  of  his  own  wish, 
our  desire  is  liis  desire,  and  response  is  ready.  How  tender  is  his  rebuke  of  our 
ignorance  I  "  If  thou  know  not."  It  is  as  if  he  said,  "  Yet  surely  you  ought  to  know. 
You  have  found  the  way  to  me  aforetime.  It  is  the  same  way  still,  for  I  change  not." 
Or,  "  If  thou  canst  not  find  the  way  to  me  directly,  then  act  as  my  friends  act.  Learn 
from  the  successes  of  others.  I  have  instructed  others  how  to  find  me.  They  have 
found  me,  and  now  they  are  patterns  and  helpers  for  all  seekers.  Gbserre  the '  footstep* 


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  81 


of  the  flock.' "  If  we  are  earnest  in  our  search  after  Christ,  we  shall  use  all  and  every 
means  likely  to  ensure  our  success.  Very  often  it  is  not  more  li^ht  we  want,  but  a 
humble  and  diligent  readiness  to  us?  the  light  we  have.  Uufaithfulness  to  our  light 
is  a  common  failing.  The  instruments  employed  to  convey  the  electric  current  must 
be  scrupulously  clean,  and  every  law  must  be  delicately  observed,  or  the  mystic  force 
refuses  to  act.  Our  spiritual  sensibilities  are  far  more  delicate,  and  a  neglect,  which 
may  seem  minute  or  insignificant,  will  defeat  our  purpose,  and  rob  us  of  our  joy. 
They  who  desire  intimate  fellowship  with  Jesus  must  be  compaoions  of  the  friends  of 
Jesus,  and  must  learn  lessons  in  the  humblest  school.  The  footprints  of  other  pilgrims 
we  must  carefully  note  and  faithfully  follow.  Jesus  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  Others 
have  found  him :  why  should  not  we?  They  have  not  exhHUsted  his  love;  they  have 
merely  tasted  a  sip  of  the  infinite  ocean.  1  may,  if  I  will,  drink  more  deeply  than 
»ny  mortal  yet  has  done. — D. 

Vera.  12 — 17. — Reciprocal  esteem.  Love,  manifested  and  known,  will  always  beget 
love.  As  every  plant  has  in  its  womb  seed  of  its  own  kind,  so,  too,  love  has  within 
itself  generative  power.  If  any  human  heart  does  not  love  our  Immanuel,  it  is  because 
that  heart  is  ignorant  of  him,  its  eyesight  is  blurred,  its  vision  is  obscured.  No 
sooner  is  Jesus  known  as  a  t  ue  and  substantial  Friend,  than  love  in  some  form  springs 
up.  In  the  form  of  gratituae  it  first  appears ;  then  in  the  form  of  admiration ;  then  in 
delight;  then  in  intimacy;  then  in  passionate  devotement.  Jesus  known  is  Jesus 
loved. 

I.  Observe  the  Christian's  love  fob  Jestts  Christ.  1.  The  soul  esteems  him  as 
its  Sovereign  King.  As  love  is  the  mightiest  force  in  the  human  breast,  love's  object 
is  at  once  promoted  to  the  supreme  place.  No  elevation  is  too  great  for  our  Beloved. 
It  would  be  a  restraint  upon  our  love — yea,  a  pain — if  we  did  not  give  to  Jesus  the 
highest  throne.  We  perceive  that  he  has  all  the  qualities  of  a  king,  and  that  it  is  for 
our  own  advantage  that  he  should  rule  within.  And  when  we  make  the  experiment 
we  find  such  rest,  such  security,  such  triumphs,  that  we  would  fain  exalt  him  to  a 
higher  place.  To  be  the  servant — ay,  the  slave — of  such  a  King  is  honour  infinite,  joy 
ineffable.  2.  The  renewed  soul  desires  to  have  the  closest  friendship  with  Jesus.  Where 
the  heavenly  King  comes,  he  always  spreads  a  feast  for  the  soul.  Out  of  his  fulness 
he  freely  bestows.  As  a  fountain  spontaneously  sends  up  its  limpid  waters,  so  doth 
Christ  our  Lord.  To  be  in  his  presence,  to  listen  to  his  ripe  wisdom,  to  realize  all  the 
advantage  of  his  friendship,  this  is  a  spiritual  feast.  The  wisdom  he  has,  he  gives. 
His  everlasting  righteousness  he  shares  with  us.  His  heavenly  peace  he  conveys  to 
us.  His  own  love  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts.  All  the  wealth  of  his  kingdom  he 
conveys  to  his  chosen.  We  are  "heirs  of  God,  joint-heirs  with  Jesus  Christ."  The 
friendship  of  Immanuel  is  a  perpetual  feast.  They  who  daily  eat  at  the  same  table 
enjoy  the  closest  intimacy  with  each  other.  3.  The  presence  of  Jesus  Christ  diaws  out 
our  hidden  graces.  "My  perfume  sends  forth  its  sweetest  odours."  Just  as  the 
summer  sun  draws  out  the  essence  of  our  garden  flowers,  so  the  energy  of  the  Saviour's 
love  stirs  into  activity  the  hidden  forces  of  our  souls.  In  every  man  is  a  principle  of 
imitation.  If  we  see  a  splendid  deed  of  generosity,  we  are  impelled  to  copy  it.  When 
the  heart  is  free  from  sinful  bias,  it  aspires  to  imitate  every  excellence  it  beholds.  So, 
when  the  glories  of  Christ's  nature  are  unfolded,  like  graces  begin  to  untold  in  us. 
Repentance,  gratitude,  humility,  faith,  patience,  devoted  love,  are  drawn  out  in  the 
sunny  atmosphere  of  Jesus'  presence.  Fragrant  flowers  and  spicy  herbs,  which  had 
lain  long  hidden  in  the  frozen  soil,  spring  up  and  send  out  a  rare  perfume.  When 
Jesus  dwelt  in  the  house,  Mary  was  constrained  to  break  the  alabaster  box,  and  to  set 
free  the  delicious  odour;  and  when  Jesus  dwells  in  our  hearts,  every  restiaint  gives 
way,  and  the  essence  of  our  graces  yields  a  sweet  pertume.  4.  We  esteem  the  love  of 
Jesus  for  its  constancy.  The  bundle  of  myrrh  abides  with  us  "all  night."  Our 
beloved  Friend  is  not  easily  offended.  "  He  hates  putting  away."  In  darkness  as  well 
as  at  noon,  in  times  of  pain  and  calamity  as  in  days  erf  prosperity,  his  love  remains 
unchanged.  If  for  a  season  we  should  neglect  him,  and  be  absorbed  in  other  pursuits, 
he  does  not  abandon  us.  He  may  visit  our  folly  with  chastisement,  and  to  the  soul 
there  may  be  temporary  night,  yet  the  remembrance  of  his  love  will  be  a  sweet  and 
reviving  cordiaL    It  will  have  a  healing  efficacy.    We  shall  be  touched  with  a  sense 


82  THE  SONG   OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  l  1—17 

of  shame;  and  as  myrrh  soothes  and  quiets  pain,  so  will  the  fragrant  breath  of  our 
Immanuel  heal  us.  5.  The  friendship  of  Jesus  satisfies  every  want.  "  My  Beloved 
is  uuto  me  as  a  cluster  of  catnphire  in  the  T-ineyards  of  Engedi."  The  cluster  of 
camphire  flowers  had  a  renown  both  for  beauty  and  for  fragrance.  So  the  excellence 
of  Jetius  has  a  fascination  for  every  sense  of  the  renewed  man.  Every  organ  is  a 
channel  through  which  Christ's  life  flows.  We  look  unto  Jesus,  and  we  are  charmed 
with  the  beauty  of  his  character.  We  listen,  and  his  words  of  promise  kindle  in  us  a 
holy  ra|iture.  His  deeds  and  sacrifices  for  us  have  a  sweet-smelliag  savour.  His 
intercession  for  us  is  like  the  temple  incense.  "  We  taste  that  the  Lord  is  gracious." 
He  is  to  us  heavenly  manna — "the  Bread  of  life."  The  coming  of  Christ  is  like 
autuma  abun^ lance.  "He  is  all  our  salvation  and  all  our  desire;"  "My  God  shall 
supply  all  your  need,  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus ; "  "  He  that 
ronieth  to  me  shall  never  hunger;  he  that  heli.veth  on  me  shall  never  thirst." 
Nothing  so  enchants  and  satisfies  the  soul  like  Jesus.  Amongst  the  verdant  and 
j!;enerous  vineyards  of  Engedi,  the  cluster  of  camphire  was  distinguished  for  fragrance 
and  for  usefulness;  so  among  the  charms  of  nature,  among  the  genial  society  of 
human  friends,  Jesus  stands  out  prominently  the  most  precious  and  the  most  prized  of 
all.  There  is  nothing  on  earth  we  can  compare  with  Mm.  He  is  without  a 
rival. 

IL  Obsbkve  the  eegaed  which  Jesus  Christ  has  foe  his  feiends.  1.  He  fully 
esteems  all  the  good  there  is  in  them.  "  Behold,  thou  art  fair,  my  love."  The  eye  of 
friendship  will  discover  many  virtues  in  a  man  which  the  eye  of  malice  can  never  find. 
It  is  not  love  that  is  Wind;  it  is  malice  that  is  blind.  Love  has  eyesight  keener  than 
an  eagle,  keener  thaa  an  archan>;el.  The  eye  of  Jesus  sees  in  us  excellences  which 
he  himself  has  created;  and  though  as  yet  these  are  only  in  tiny  germ,  yet,  with  the 
magnifying  power  of  love,  Jesus  beholds  them  as  they  shall  be,  full-orbed  and  beautiful. 
Theie  is  no  future  to  him.  What  to  us  is  in  the  future  is  with  him  present.  He 
looks  with  tenderness  upon  the  tiny  blade  of  pious  love,  and  lo  1  already  'tis  a  cedar  of 
Lebanon,  among  whose  branches  the  feathered  minstrels  sing.  If  only  a  heavenly 
ambition  begins  to  stir  within  the  breast,  he  hastens  to  Ibster  it.  Says  he,  "It  is  well 
that  it  was  in  thine  heart."  2.  He  repeats  the  commendation  in  ovler  to  confirm  it, 
"  Thou  art  fair ;  thou  art  fair,  my  love.''  Tlie  conscience  of  the  Christian,  tilled  with 
light  from  heaven,  is  painfully  sensible  of  its  faults,  and  asks  in  astonishment,  "Lord, 
Qidst  thou  call  me  lair  ?  "  Then,  to  banish  doubt  and  to  pierce  to  the  heart  unbelief, 
Jesus  repeats  his  approval,  "  Behold,  thou  art  fair,  my  love."  "  Though  it  may  be  that 
our  hearts  condemn  ns,  God  is  greater  than  our  hearts,  and  knoweth  all  things."  Full 
clearly  he  sees  the  young  germ  of  new-born  love,  and  this  he  will  make  to  grow  until 
it  shall  flU  the  soul  with  beauty.  Hence  he  already  says,  "  Thou  art  lair,  my  love." 
Under  the  magic  wand  of  love,  the  nature  that  had  sunk  into  a  beast  becomes  incarnate 
beauty.  Love  creates.  Love  transfigures.  3.  Love  makes  like  unto  itself.  Because 
Christ  our  Lord  is  lieautiful,  we  shall  be  beautiful.  Because  Christ  is  pleasant,  we 
shall  be  pleasant.  Every  quality  of  mind  and  heart  that  Jesus  possesses  he  will 
communicate  unto  us.  "He  emptied  himself "  that  he  might  fill  us.  It  is  a  special 
pleasure  to  discover  a  new  excellence  in  our  Immanuel,  inasmuch  as  that  excellence 
sliall  be  ours.  "We  shall  be  like  him  when  we  see  him  as  he  is."  4.  Jesus  identifies 
himself  completely  with  his  ransomed  ones.  The  couch,  or  resting-place,  in  the  palace 
garden  is  said  to  be  "ours."  "  Our  bed  is  green."  It  is  a  verdant  oasis  in  this  world's 
desert.  Or,  if  the  palace  is  described,  it  is  our  house.  To  all  the  possessions  of  the 
Bridegroom  the  bride  is  encouraged  to  lay  claim.  It  is  always  the  result  of  the 
marriage-tie  that  the  interests  and  fortunes  of  the  two  are  identical.  One  is  the 
complement  of  the  other.  Neither  is  complete  alone.  There  could  be  no  shepherd 
unless  there  were  sheep.  There  can  be  no  bridegroom  without  a  bride.  There 
can  be  no  king  without  subjects.  Nor  can  there  be  a  Saviour  unless  there  are  also 
thf  saved.  The  gloiy  of  Jesus  Christ  is  seen  nowhere  but  in  his  lansomed  Church. 
Tlier(4bre  Jesus  completely  ami  generously  identifies  himself  with  us.  All  his  posses- 
sions are  to  be  our  possessions.  All  his  noble  qualities  are  to  be  our  nnble  qualities. 
His  purity  is  to  be  our  purity.  His  tirone  is  to  be  our  throne  likewise.  It  is  hia 
everlasting  purpose  that  we  shall  be  "joint-heirs."  "They  shall  have  my  joy  fulfilled 
in  themselves." — D. 


OH.  1.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OP   SOLeMON.  33 

Ver.  1. — Holy  lyrics.  There  are  many  songs  in  Old  Testament  Scripture — the  song 
of  deliverance  from  the  Red  Sea  (Extd.  xv.);  the  song  of  the  well  (Numb.  xxi.  17,  IH); 
thesongif  Moses  (Deut.  xxxii.);  ihesongof  Deborah  (Judg.  v.);  the  song  (pie-eminently 
such)  of  David,  in  Ps.  xviii:;  and  the  song  of  Isaiah  (v.).  But  this  of  Solumon  is 
descrilied  as  the  Song  of  S  'iigs,  j.e.  of  all  the  most  excellent,  as  it  is  the  richest  in  imagery, 
the  inteiisest  in  feelin>.',  ihe  most  complete  in  poetic  form.  Although  there  is  something 
diamaiic  in  the  structure  of  this  poi-m,  inasmuch  as  several  speakers  are  introduced, 
uttering  varying  moods  of  feeling,  still  the  poem  is  mainly  lyrical,  inasmuch  as  its  spirit 
is  prevailingly  sentiment.     Song  expretses — 

I.  Feeling  generally;  and  feeling  occupies  a  pre-eminent  place  in  eeligiotjs 
LIFE.  True  religion  has  its  root  in' knowledge  and  belief;  a  God  not  known  cannot 
be  truly  worshipped,  a  religion  not  understood  cannot  be  acceptably  practised.  Yet 
religion  is  not  merely  an  exercise,  a  possession,  of  the  intellect.  Our  strongest 
convictions  are  naturally  accompanied  by  our  deepest  emotions.  The  measure  of 
feeling  wdl,  indeed,  vary  with  individual  temperament,  but  a  religion  with  nosentimerjt 
is  mechanical  and  unlovely.  Now,  it  is  iu  accordance  with  human  nature  that  leelmg 
should  break  forth  into  song.  Cheerfulness  finds  utterance  as  in  the  carol  of  the 
lark,  and  melancholy  as  in  the  plaintive  warble  of  the  nightingale.  The  Bible  without 
the  Canticles  would  not  correspond  with  the  whole  constitution  of  man. 

**  The  Church  delights  to  raise 
Psalms  and  hymns  and  songs  of  praise." 

The  words  of  inspiration,  exact  or  paraphrased  and  adapted,  have  ever  given  shape 
and  firm  and  utterance  to  the  profoundest  emotions  of  God's  worshippers. 

II.  Love,  which  is  the  characteristic  element  of  the  religious  life.  Human 
love  is  the  copy,  always  faint  and  imperfct,  yet  not  illusive,  of  love  Divine.  The  love 
of  the  Hebrew  king  and  his  mountain  bride  figures  forth,  as  does  all  true  wedded 
affection — the  love  which  exists  between  the  Eternal  and  his  intelligent  creatures, 
between  the  Church  and  the  adorable  Bridegroom  who  deigns  to  address  her  as  his 
spouse.  The  language  of  the  t/'anticles  has  often  seemed  to  cold  natures  extravagant, 
and  80  unreal.  "  Love's  language  is  a  foreign  language  to  those  who  do  not  love."  We 
have  the  foundation  of  ihe  Song  of  Songs  laid  in  the  forty-6fth  psalm — the  "song  ot 
love."  Christianity  is  admitted  to  have  introduced  into  religion  an  element  of  deeper 
personal  feeling  than  was  known  before.  The  love  of  Christ  is  declaied  to  "pass 
knowledge;  "  and  love  which  passes  knowledge,  which  cannot  express  itself  in  proposi- 
tions, must  pour  itself  forth  in  song.  The  nuptials  of  the  soul,  of  the  Church,  with 
Christ,  demand  a  poetic  epithalamium.  How  thoroughly  in  place,  so  regarded,  seem? 
the  "  Song  of  Songs  "1 

III.  Joy,  which  springs  from  love  felt  and  returned.  The  history  of  love  is 
not  always  one  of  uninterrupted  prosperity  and  glailness.  "  Our  sweetest  songs  are 
those  which  tell  of  saddest  thought."  And  even  in  the  Canticles  we  have  varying 
moods ;  shadows  lie  upon  the  land  for  a  season  as  clouds  obscure  tha  face  of  heaven. 
Yet  the  main  current  of  feeling  throughout  this  book  is  a  current  of  gladness ;  the 
music  is  of  the  nature  of  a  carol  of  spontanecjus  sweetness,  a  chorale  of  triumphant 
delight.  The  king  and  the  bride  alternately  siive  utterance  to  thsir  joyful  emotions,  tor 
heart  finds  heart.  So  with  the  relations  with  the  redeeming  Lord  and  those  whom  he 
has  saved.  God  rejoices  over  that  which  was  lost  but  is  found ;  and  man  rejoices  m  the 
great  salvation.  It  iiJ  thus  that  the  lyrics,  though  sacred,  are  glad,  breathing  a  "joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."— T. 

Ver  2  —Love  letter  than  wine.  The  desire  of  the  soul  awakened  to  the  higher  lif« 
is  a  desire  which  earth  cannot  satisfy;  it  is  a  desire  for  God,  for  the  mf.rifeslar-.ons  of 
Divine  lavour,  the  proofs  of  Divine  affection.  As  one  has  saiH,  "The-  U.nsf.ar.  is  not 
satisfied,  like  Mary,  to  kiss  the  Master's  feei  j  he  would  kiss  the  Masters  fure.  ihe 
eniovment  of  God's  kindt.ess  enkindles  a  desire  for  more  knowledga  of  Crrd,  a  closer 
intercourse  with  God.  This  is  the  result  of  a  sense-an  imperfect  V.t  gr.oum.-sense- 
of  the  incomparable  preciousness  of  Divine  friendship  and  favou         x  hy  Iot  e  .s  better 

'^L  GoD^s  gifts  are  good.     He  is  good  unto  all.     Every  good  gift  urJ  ev6fy  perfect 

BONO   OF    BflLOMON. 


84  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  1. 1—17. 

boon  miist  be  traced  to  his  bounty.  Wine  is  used  here  poetically  as  one  of  the  eyidences 
of  Divine  provision  for  man's  needs.  Wine  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man,  oil  maketh 
his  face  to  shine,  bread  strengtheneth  his  heart.  Heaven  bestows  in  abundance  gifts 
which  men  often  accept  with  ingratitude  or  misuse  to  their  own  detriment. 

II.  God's  love  is  better.  Material  possessions,  temporal  enjoyments,  the  pleasures 
of  sense,  are  contrasted  with  what  enriches,  purifies,  and  rejoices  the  spirit.  To  the 
spiritual  man  the  favour  of  Heaven  yields  more  true  joy  than  he  experiences  in  the  time 
when  corn  and  wine  increase.  1.  This  follows  from  the  very  nature  of  man,  who  is  a 
being  made  originally  in  the  Divine  image,  endowed  with  an  immortal  nature.  Such 
a  being  cannot  find  satisfaction  in  any  lower  source  of  happiness.  2.  It  follows  especially 
from  the  fact  of  man's  sin  and  salvation.  As  a  dependent  being,  man  is  a  recipient  of 
Divine  bounty ;  but,  as  a  being  who  has  departed  from  God,  and  has  been  restored  by 
forgiving  mercy  to  favour  and  fellowship,  he  is  especially  in  need  of  constant  revelations 
of  Divine  love.  And  as  Christians  we  gratefully  recognize  that,  in  besttiwing  upon  ug 
his  own  Son,  God  has  given  unto  us  that  love  which  is  better  than  wine.  3.  In 
partaking  of  JDivine  love  we  are  in  no  danger  of  excess.  It  had  been  better  for  many  a 
prufessirig  Christian  had  God's  providence  withheld  the  gifts  which  have  by  the  abuse 
of  worldliness  been  prized  above  the  Giver  himself.  Not  wine  only,  but  the  wealth 
and  luxuries  of  life  generally,  have  too  often  been  the  occasion  of  forgetting  and 
departing  from  God.  But  Divine  love  is  a  draught  of  which  none  can  drink  in  excess. 
4.  The  love  of  God  is  a  lasting  blessing,  a  perennial  joy.  The  gifts  of  Divine  bounty 
perish,  for  they  are  of  the  earth.     The  love  of  God  is  imperishable  as  God  himself. — T. 

Ver.  3. — The  fragrant  name.  The  sense  of  smell  furnishes  much  of  the  imagery  of 
this  poetical  book.  Perfumes  not  only  gratify  the  smell,  they  awaken  the  emotions, 
and  have  a  remarkable  power  of  reviving,  by  association,  bygone  scenes  and  far- 
distant  friends  and  companions,  in  whose  society  the  fragrant  wild  flowers  or  blooms  of 
the  garden  have  been  enjoyed.  Perfumed  unguents  were  in  the  East  employed  for 
anointing  the  body,  for  health  and  comfort.  Their  use  was  associated  with  hospitable 
reception  and  entertainment.  The  Name  of  our  Saviour  is  as  the  unguenta  pour^  upon 
his  form,  diffusing  sweet  fragrance  abroad. 

I.  The  Name  of  Cheist  is  feageant  to  the  spiritual  sense  of  his  people.  In 
fact,  the  Christ  is  "  the  Anointed,"  who,  by  his  appointment  and  devotion,  is  marked 
out  as  the  beloved  Son  of  God,  and  the  honoured  Saviour  of  the  world.  The  perfume 
of  Divine  grace,  treasured  up  from  eternity,  was  poured  forth  in  abundance  upon  the 
Word  when  he  "  became  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us." 

II.  The  Name  op  Chbist  has  a  costly,  precious  FEAaEANCE.  It  is  well  known 
that  large  sums  of  money  were  lavished  on  the  scented  unguents  stored  in  vessels, 
bottles,  and  vases  of  alabaster  and  other  expensive  materials.  The  perfumes  used  were 
brought  in  many  cases  from  distant  lands ;  they  were  distilled  from  rare  and  beautiful 
flowers ;  they  were  purchased  by  the  wealthy  and  used  by  the  luxurious. 

III.  The  Name  of  Christ  possesses  a  delightful  and  refreshing  fbaqeance. 
As  the  mere  mention  of  the  king's  name  was  welcome  to  the  bride  and  to  her 
compauions,  so  is  the  Name  of  our  Sayioiu",  when  pronounced  in  the  hearing  of  his 
friends,  the  occasion  of  delight.  The  Name  of  Jesus  is  music  to  the  ear,  and  is  as 
"  ointment  poured  forth."  It  dispels  the  lassitude,  the  discouragement,  the  despondency, 
which  are  sometimes  apt  to  steal  into  the  soul  of  the  disciple  during  the  Master's 
bodily  and  temporary  absence.  It  is  a  "Name  above  every  name."  "Ointment  and 
perfume  rejuioe  the  heart." 

IV.  The  Name  of  Jesus  diffuses  a  far-reaching  fragrance.  The  penetrating 
power  of  odours  is  well  known.  Poets  tell  of  the  "  spicy  breezes"  that  "  blow  soft  o'er 
Ceylon's  isle ; "  how  "  filled  with  balm  the  gale  sighs  on,  though  the  flowers  are  sunk  in 
death."  Thus  the  precious  Name  of  Christ  sheds  its  sweetness  far  and  wide,  bringing 
life,  hope,  and  salvation  to  those  in  remotest  lands.  The  Plant  of  Kenown  which  was 
bruised  upon  the  soil  of  Palestine  has  given  forth  perfume  of  blessing  which  has  reached 
the  uttermost  ends  of  the  earth,  reviving  those  ready  to  perish  with  its  refreshing  and 
reinvigorating  power. 

V.  The  Name  op  Christ  diffuses  a  lasting  and  permanent  fragrance.  It  is 
known  that  some  perfumes,  such  as  musk,  will  continue  to  pour  forth  their  sweetness 


OH.  1, 1—17.]  THE  SONa  OF  SOLOMON.  8S 

day  after  day  and  year  after  year,  diffusing  effluvia  unceasingly,  and  yet  suffering  no 
perceptible  loss  of  bulk,  no  diminution  of  power  to  give  forth  their  special  odour. 
Similarly  is  it  with  the  power  of  Christ  to  bless  mankind.  Generation  after  generation 
has  found  healing,  life,  and  blessing  io  the  gospel ;  yet  is  its  freshness  undimmed  and 
its  power  undiminished.  And  to-day  more  are  rejoicing  in  the  ever-fragrant  Name 
than  at  any  former  time.  Nor  shall  that  Name  ever  lose  its  sweetness  or  its 
power. — T. 

Ver.  4. — Divine  attraction.  There  is  evidence  of  attraction  throughout  the  physical 
universe.  The  earth  draws  all  things  upon  it  towards  its  centre ;  it  draws  t^e  moon 
and  keeps  it  revolving  round  itself.  The  sun  draws  the  planets,  which  in  their  regular 
orbits  unconsciously  yield  to  the  influence  which  he  unconsciously  exerts.  We  cannot 
study  any  bodies,  however  distant  and  however  vast,  without  perceiving  the  power  of 
attraction.  And  this  power  is  as  manifest  in  the  molecule  as  in  the  mass;  there  is 
attraction  in  the  smallest  as  in  the  greatest  of  material  bodies.  As  the  planets  by 
gravitation  are  held  in  their  courses  by  the  sun,  so  are  souls  led  to  feel  the  attraction  of 
our  Saviour-Grod.  But  whilst  material  things  obey  unwittingly,  it  is  for  spiritual 
natures  consciously  and  voluntarily  to  yield  to  the  spiritual  attraction  of  him  who  is 
the  Centre,  the  Law,  the  Life  of  all. 

L  The  spiritual  drawing  op  the  King  op  love.  1.  The  language  reveals  a  dread 
of  being  far  from  God.  The  soul  cries, "  Quicken  me  I  lest  I  remain  in  death ;  turn  me  1 
lest  I  continue  in  error;  draw  me!  lest  I  live  at  a  distance  from  thee."  2.  The 
language  reveals  a  recognition  of  authority.  The  cry  is  to  the  King.  Many  are  the 
attractions  of  the  world.  Trahit  sua  quemque  volupias.  Yet  these  attractions  should 
always  be  suspected,  should  sometimes  be  resisted.  But  when  God  draws,  his  is  the 
drawing  of  royalty  and  of  right.  3.  The  language  reveals  the  power  of  love.  "I 
drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of  love."  "  I  will  draw  all  men  unto 
myself."  Such  are  the  declarations  of  infinite  grace.  Those  whose  souls  they  reach 
and  touch  cannot  but  seek  to  be  laid  hold  of  by  the  silken  chains,  and  led  and  kept 
near  their  Lord. 

"  O  Christ,  who  hast  prepared  a  place 
For  us  beside  thy  throne  of  grace. 
Draw  us,  we  pray,  with  cords  of  love 
From  exile  to  our  home  above." 

IL  The  obedient  following  of  those  who  feel  the  Divine  attbaotion. 
1.  The  drawing  of  the  King  pioves  its  own  effectiveness.  "  With  loving-kindness 
have  I  drawn  thee."  The  charm  is  felt,  the  summons  is  obeyed,  the  presence  and 
society  which  bring  spiritual  blessing  are  sought.  2.  There  is  eagerness  and  haste  in 
the  response. 

"  He  drew  me,  and  I  followed  on. 
Glad  to  confess  the  voice  Divine." 

Eunning  denotes  interest  and  zeal.  The  willing  following  becomes  a  diligent  and 
strenuous  race.  The  soul  finds  in  Christ  a  Divine  Friend  and  Lover  and  Spouse,  and 
in  his  society  satisfaction  that  never  cloys,  and  joy  that  never  fails. 

Application.  Here  we  have  the  history  of  the  Divine  life  in  man,  related  in  a  few 
words  In  providence,  in  revelation,  in  the  incarnate  Word,  in  the  power  of  the 
spiritual  dispensation,— in  all  this  God  is  drawing  us.  And  every  movement  of  the 
spirit  every  impulse  towards  holiness,  every  true  endeavour  after  obedience,  may  be 
regarded  as  the  practical  yielding  to  the  Divine  attraction.  God's  work  on  earth  is 
just  "  drawing  "  us ;  our  religious  life  is  just  "  running  "  after  him.— T. 

Ver  4  —The  Joyful  celebration  of  Divine  love.  The  king  is  represented  as  conducting 
his  friVn'ds  and  guests  into  his  splendid  palace,  admitting  them  to  the  apartmenti 
reserved  for  his  most  intimate  and  favoured  courtiers,  and  thus  revealing  to  them  his 
condescension  and  affection.  Such  treatment  awakens  their  joy,  and  calls  forth  the 
celehration  of  his  love.  The  whole  scene  is  symbolical  of  the  privileges  and  the  sacred 
delights  of  those  who  share  in  the  "  shining  of  God's  countenance- 


86  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  l  1—17. 

I.  Divine  love  is  wobtht  of  being  celebrated.  1.  It  is  undeserved  love,  and 
therefore  love  of  pure  compassion.  2.  It  is  condescending  love,  on  the  part  ol  the 
Kiijg  of  heaven  towards  poor,  ignorant,  and  sinful  man.  3.  It  is  too  often  ill-requited 
love.  4.  Yet  ii  is  bountiful  and  beneficent  love.  5.  It  is  sacrificing  love — love  to 
display  which  costs  God  much.     6.  It  is  forbearing,  patient,  constant  love. 

II.  There  are  many  ways  in  which  redeemud  men  may  celebrate  the  Divine 
LOVE  BEVEALKD  TO  THEM.  1.  Its  piv-eiuiuence  may  be  maintained.  There  may  be 
other  prerogaiives  and  privileges  which  we  may  be  tempted  to  make  our  boast  and 
cause  of  rejoicing,  but  we  must  ever  keep  before  our  minds  the  supreme  excellence  of 
the  love  of  God ;  "  more  than  wine,"  and  more  than  blessings  far  more  desirable  and 
precious  than  this.  2.  Its  most  glorious  proof  may  be  commemorated.  First  and 
foremost  among  the  meanings  of  the  eucharistic  meal  celebrated  in  the  Church  of  the 
Redeemer  is  its  beauty  and  justice  as  a  memorial  of  that  love  "  whose  height,  whose 
depth  unfathomed,  no  man  knows."  3.  Its  natural  power  to  awaken  joy  and  praise 
should  be  pi  actically  confessed.  To  "be  glad  and  rejoice"  in  God  is  only  just  and 
becoming;  and  Ghiistians  should  not  so  steadfastly  contemplate  their  own  un worthi- 
ness as  to  lose  sight  of  the  infinite  worthiness  of  him  to  whom  they  owe  their  salvation. 
4.  Love  may  be  celebiated  in  the  exercise  of  willing  obedience.  There  is  on  our  part 
no  response  to  God's  kindness  so  acceptable  as  consecrated  service.  "The  love  of 
Christ  constiaineth  us ; "  this  is  the  practical  principle  of  the  new  lil'e.  There  is  a  world 
of  meaning  in  the  language  of  the  text,  "  In  uprightness  do  they  love  thee." — T. 

Ver.  6. — The  Jceeper  of  the  vineyards.  Men  have  put  into  their  charge  responsibilities 
concerning  others,  and  these  they  may  to  some  extent  worthily  observe.  They  may 
promote  the  interest  of  their  lamily,  the  comfort  of  their  household  and  dependants. 
They  may  even  give  time  and  money  to  advance  schemes  of  benevolence  and  religion. 
But  the  question  suggested  by  the  language  of  the  text  is  this — What  are  they  the 
better  for  regarding  the  welfare  of  others  if  they  neglect  their  own?  if,  being  guardians 
ol  vineyards,  they  must  acknowledge  in  all  sincerity  that  their  own  vineyard  they  have 
not  kept? 

I.  OdR  EELiaiON  18  LIKELY  TO  CONSIST,  TO  A  VERY  LARGE  EXTENT,  IN  A  SENSE  OF 
OUR    PROPER    RESPONSIBILITY    FOR    THE   WELFARE  OF   OUR    FELLOW-MEN.      1.   The    Very 

pnsiiion  of  Britain  among  the  nations  of  the  world  favours  this  view.  Our  range  of 
influence  is  immense,  our  power  is  vast,  our  work  of  colonizing  and  of  guverning  is 
heavy  and  serious.  How  can  we  serve  our  generation  according  to  the  will  of  God  ? 
2.  Add  to  this,  the  eHorts  which  are  called  for  on  behalf  of  the  ignorant  and  irreligious 
millions  around  us,  and  which  seem  to  demand  all  the  attention  and  zealous  energies 
of  the  Chun  h  of  Christ.  3.  Hence  a  conception  of  the  Christian  life  as  one  of  constant 
activity  and  progressive  usefulness. 

II.  This  very  sense  of  responsibility  for  the  welparB  of  oub  fellow-men 

MAY  occasion  THE  NEGLECT  OF  PERSONAL  DEVODTNBSS  AND  SPIRITUALITY.      To  explain 

the  action  of  this  principle  it  may  be  remaiked:  1.  When  we  care  for  others,  we 
naturally  take  it  for  granted  that  all  is  well  with  ourselves.  In  any  work  and  enter- 
prise, if  we  are  engaged  in  teaching  and  in  leading  others,  it  is  natural  that  we  should 
overlook  the  importance  of  exauiining  our  own  qualifications.  2.  The  opinion  of 
others  acts  as  an  auxiliary  in  bringing  about  this  state  of  feeling.  Not  only  do  we 
take  it  for  granted  tliat  all  is  well  with  ourselves;  others  do  the  same,  and  their 
attitude  encourages  us  in  our  good  opinion  of  ourselves.  3.  Time  and  thought  may 
be  so  taken  up  in  the  service  in  which  we  s^rt  engaged,  that  attention  is  drawn  away 
from  our  own  condition,  our  own  obligation  to  ourselves.  A  man  may  awaken  to 
the  fact  of  his  own  foolish  and  sinful  neglect  of  his  own  spiritual  state,  and  may  cry 
aloud,  in  anguish  and  remorse,  "  They  made  me  keeper  of  the  vineyards,  and  mine 
own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept  I " 

III.  Yet  there  is  no  necessary  connection  between  usefulness  to  others 

AND   neglect   of    ONE's    OWN    SPIRITUAL    SAFETY   AND    GROWTH.      One    duty    doCS    nOt 

conflict  with  another.  It  is  in  the  cultivation  of  our  own  hearts  that  we  gain  strength 
and  wisdom  to  be  of  benefit  and  service  to  others.  Works  of  Christian  benevolence 
are  to  be  undertaken,  not  under  the  influence  of  superficial  excitement,  not  under  the 
contagion  of  enthusiastic  example,  but  from  sober  conviction,  and  with  a  clear  under 


OH.n.  1— 17.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  37 


standing  of  the  law  that  only  those  who  themselves  have  received  can  to  any  purpose 
give  to  others. 

Application.  Let  those  whose  position  is  desoribi  d  in  the  text  bestir  themselves 
at  once,  apply  with  diligence  to  their  proper  worlj,  restore  the  hedges,  Hig  about  the 
vine-roots,  take  the  "foxes  that  spoil  the  grapes,"  and  climb  the  watch-tower,  that 
they  may  discern  the  approach  and  resist  the  incursions  of  their  foes.  Then  shall  they 
be  privileged  to  present,  even  from  their  own  vineyard,  some  fruit  which  shall  be 
acceptable  to  the  Divine  Master  and  Lord,  to  whom  all  must  at  last  give  in  their 
great  account. — T. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  shepherd's  care.  As  the  beloved  maiden  or  bride  seeks  her 
shepherd-lover  who  is  yet  the  king,  she  makes  use  of  language  which  gives  an  insight 
into  pastoral  duty  and  care,  and  which  serves  to  suggest  the  relations  borne  by  the 
flock  to  the  good  Shepherd  who  gave  his  life  for  the  sheep. 

L  The  good  Shbphebd  feeds  the  flook. 

II.  The  good  Shbphebd  pkovides  noonday  best  fob  the  flook. 

III.  The  good  Shepherd  protects  the  flook,  keeping  his  sheep  nbab  the 
well-guarded  tents. 

IV.  The  good  Shepheed  guides  his  sheep,  leading  the  footsteps  of  the  flook 
according  to  his  own  knowledge  and  wisdom. 

V.  The  good  Shbphebd  oabbs  fob  the  kids — the  toung  of  the  flock. — T. 

Vers.  9 — 15. — Love  and  admiration.  It  requires  imagination  and  a  knowledge  of 
Oriental  habits  of  thinking  fully  to  appreciate  the  language  of  this  passai^e,  which 
otherwise  to  our  colder  and  less  fanciful  natures  may  appear  extravagant.  But 
expressions  which  may  be  open  to  the  charge  of  extravagance  as  applied  to  ordinary 
human  affection,  may  well  come  short  of  the  truth  if  interpreted  as  indioating  the 
emotions  which  distinguish  those  spiritual  relations  of  absorbed  delight  subsisting 
between  Christ  and  his  spouse,  the  Church.  Beneath  the  rich  metaphors  of  the  poet 
we  discern  certain  principles  which  are  of  deepest  moment  and  beauty. 

I.  Christ's  interest  in  his  people  is  interest  in  his  own  workmanship,  in  his 
OWN  purchase  and  possession.  The  descriptions  of  the  charnis  of  the  beloved, 
couched  in  the  figurative  language  of  Eastern  poetry,  can  only  be  applied  in  any  sense 
to  the  Church  of  the  Lord  Christ  upon  the  distinct  understanding  that  whatever 
excellences  she  may  possess  she  owes  to  the  Divine  care  and  munificence  of  the 
heavenly  Spouse.  She  owes  her  existence  to  his  power,  her  safety  to  his  faithful 
watching,  her  gifts  and  excellences  to  the  provision  of  his  love  and  care,  her  position 
to  his  compassion.  Nothing  has  she  which  she  did  not  receive  from  him ;  nothing  of 
which  she  can  be  vain,  of  which  she  can  boast.  E^or  all,  her  lowly  acknowledgments 
of  gratitude  are  for  ever  due  to  her  Almighty  Lord. 

II.  Christ's  perfections  deserve  and  demand  the  adoring  and  affectionate 
admiration  of  his  Church.  1.  She  admires  him  for  what  he  is  in  himself.  In  him 
is  all  that  is  excellent  and  valuable,  sweet  and  lovable.  His  beauty  is  spiritual, 
incomparable,  delightful,  unfading,  and  unwearying.  2.  She  adores  him  for  bis 
treatment  of  herself  aud  his  regard  for  her.  The  Church  knows,  from  her  Lord's  own 
revelation,  that  he  holds  her  dear,  precious,  fragrant ;  that,  having  laid  down  his  lift 
for  her  redemption,  he  never  can  or  will  forget  her,  or  cease  to  cherish  towards  her  the 
affection  of  his  Divine  and  loving  heart.  3.  Hence  she  commemorates  his  love  in  the 
Eucharist,  honours  him  by  her  obedience,  and  by  her  witness  and  her  praise  commends 
him  to  the  world. — T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  n. 

Ver.  2.— As  a  lily  among  thorns,  so  is 
my  love  among  the  daughters.  The  king 
responds,  taking  up  the  lovely  simUe  and 


giving  it  a  very  apt  and  charming  turB, 
"  My  love  is  beyond  comparison  the  chief 
and  all  around  her  are  not  worthy  of  nutiue 
beside  her."  The  meaning  is  not  thorns  on 
the  tree  itself.    The  word  would  be  different 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[CH.  n.  1—17. 


in  that  case.  Bather  it  is  thom^plants  or 
bushes  (choacK);  see  2  Kings  xiv.  9.  The 
daughters;  i.e.  the  young  damsels.  The 
word  "son"  or  "daughter"  was  commonly 
80  used  in  Hebrew,  the  idea  being  that  of 
simplicity,  innocence,  and  gentleness. 

Ver.3. — As  the  apple  tree  among  the  trees 
of  the  wood,  so  is  my  heloved  among  the  sons. 
I  sat  down  under  his  shadow  with  great 
delight,  and  his  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste. 
That  these  are  the  words  of  the  bride  there 
can  be  no  doubt.  The  apple  tree  is  noted 
for  the  fragrance  of  its  blossom  and  the 
sweetness  of  its  fruit ;  hence  the  name  tap- 
puach,  from  the  root  naphach,  "  to  breathe 
sweetly."  The  trees  of  the  wood  or  forest 
are  specially  referred  to,  because  they  are 
generally  wild,  and  their  fruit  sour  and 
rough,  and  many  have  no  fruit  or  flower. 
The  Ohaldee  renders, "  citron ; "  Kosenmiiller 
and  others,  "quince."  The  word  is  rare 
(see  ProT.  xxv.  11 ;  Joel  i.  12).  It  is  some- 
times the  tree  itself,  at  other  times  the  fruit. 
It  occurs  in  proper  names,  as  (Josh.  xii.  17), 
"  The  King  of  Tappuah,"  etc.,  and  that 
shows  that  it  was  very  early  known  in 
Palestine.  It  occurs  frequently  in  the 
Taljnud,  The  word  is  masculine,  while 
"  lily"  IB  feminine.  "  I  sat  with  delight "  is 
expressed  in  true  Hebrew  phrase,  "I  de- 
lighted and  sat,"  the  intensity  of  feeling 
being  expressed  by  the  piel  of  the  verb. 
By  the  shadow  is  intended  both  protection 
and  refreshment;  by  the  &nit,  enjoymeot. 
Perhaps  we  may  go  further,  and  say  there 
is  here  a  symbolical  representation  of  the 
spiritual  life,  as  both  that  of  trust  and 
participation.  The  greatness  and  goodness 
of  the  tree  of  life  protects  and  covers  the 
sinner,  while  the  inner  nattire  and  Divine 
virtue  of  the  Saviour  comes  forth  in  deli- 
cious fruits,  in  his  character,  words,  ministry, 
and  spiritual  gifts.  If  there  is  any  truth  in 
the  typical  view,  it  must  be  found  in  such 
passages  as  this,  where  the  metaphor  is  so 
simple  and  apt,  and  has  been  incorporated 
with  all  religious  language  as  the  vehicle 
of  faith  and  love.  Hymnology  abounds  in 
such  ideas  and  analogies. 

Yer.  4. — He  brought  me  to  the  hanqneting- 
honse,  and  his  banner  over  me  was  love; 
literally,  to  the  house  of  the  wine.  Not,  as 
some,  "  the  house  of  the  vines  " — that  is,  the 
vineyard.  The  Hebrew  word  yayin  corre- 
sponds with  the  .fflthiopie  wain,  and  has  run 
through  the  Indo-European  languages.  The 
meaning  is — To  the  place  where  he  royally 
entertains  his  friends.  Hence  the  reference 
which  immediately  follows  to  the  protection 
with  which  the  king  overshadows  hia  be- 
loved. He  covers  me  there  with  his  feai- 
inspiring,  awful  banner,  love,  which,  be- 
CMiise  of  ito  being  love,  is  terrible  to  all 
suemies.     The   word  which   is   used  for 


"banner"(7n)  is  from  a  root  "to  cover,"  that 
which  covers  the  shaft  or  standard;  the 
pannus,  "  the  cloth,"  which  is  fastened  to  a 
shaft  (of.  pennon).  Her  natural  fear  and 
bashfulness  is  overcome  by  the  loving 
presence  of  the  king,  which  covers  her 
weakness  like  a  banner.  Some  versions 
render  it  as  an  imperative.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  of  the  meaning  that  the  banner  is 
the  military  banner,  as  the  word  is  always 
so  used  (see  Ps.  xx.  6 ;  Numb.  i.  52 ;  ii.  2). 
Perhaps  there  is  a  reference  to  the  grandeur 
and  military  strength  in  which  the  young 
bride  felt  delight  as  she  looked  up  at  her 
young  husband  in  his  youthful  beauty  and 
manly  vigour.  The  typical  significance  is 
very  easily  discovered.  It  would  be  straining 
it  too  much  to  see  any  allusion  to  the  ritual 
of  the  Christian  sacraments;  but  whether 
we  think  of  the  individual  soul  or  of  the 
people  of  God  regarded  collectively,  such 
delight  in  the  rich  provisions  of  Divine 
love,  and  in  the  tender  guardianship  of  the 
Saviour  over  those  whom  he  has  called  to 
himself,  belong  to  the  simplest  facts  of 
believing  experience. 

Ver.  5. — Stay  me  with  raisins,  comfort 
me  with  apples:  for  I  am  siok  of  love. 
Again  the  intensive  form  of  the  verb  is 
chosen.  She  is  almost  sinking;  she  cries 
out  for  comfort.  The  food  for  which  she 
longs  is  the  grape-cakes  —  the  grapes 
BufSciently  dried  to  be  pressed  together  as 
cakes,  which  is  very  refreshing  and  reviv- 
ing; not  raisins  as  we  know  them,  but 
with  more  of  the  juice  of  the  grape  in  them. 
So  date-cakes  are  now  offered  to  travellers  in 
the  East.  "  Refresh  me ;  for  I  am  in  a  state 
of  deep  agitation  because  of  the  intensity 
of  my  love."  Ginsburg  thinks  the  cakes 
are  baked  by  the  fire,  the  word  being 
derived  from  a  root  "  to  bum."  The  trans- 
lation, "  flagons  of  wine,"  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  follows  the  rabbinical  exposition, 
but  it  ia  quite  unsupported  by  the  critics. 
Love-sickness  is  common  in  Eastern  coun- 
tries, more  so  than  with  us  in  the  colder 
hemisphere.  Perhaps  the  appeal  of  the 
bride  is  meant  to  be  general,  not  imme- 
diately directed  to  the  king,  as  if  a  kind  of 
exclamation,  and  it  may  be  connected  with 
the  previous  idea  of  the  banner.  The 
country  maiden  is  dazzled  with  the  splen- 
dour and  majesty  of  the  king.  She  gives 
up,  as  it  were,  in  willing  resignation  of 
herself,  the  rivalry  with  one  so  great  and 
glorious  in  the  expression  of  love  and 
praise;  she  sinks  back  with  delight  and 
ecstasy,  calling  upon  any  around  to  sup- 
port her,  and  Solomon  himself  answers  the 
appeal,  and  puts  his  loving  arm  around  hei 
and  holds  up  her  head,  and  gives  her  the 
sweetest  and  tenderest  embraces,  which 
renew  her  strength.    We  know  that  in  tho 


OH.  n.  1 — ^17.] 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


39 


spiritual  life  there  are  Buch  experiences. 
The  intensity  of  religious  feeling  is  closely 
connected  with  physical  exhaustion,  and 
wlieu  the  soul  cries  for  help  and  longs  for 
Comfort,  the  presence  of  the  Saviour  is 
revealed ;  the  weakness  is  changed  into 
strength.  The  apostolic  seer  in  the  Apo- 
Ciilypse  describes  himself  as  overcome  with 
the  glory  of  the  Saviour's  appearance,  and 
being  brought  back  to.  himself  by  his  voice 
(Eev.  1.  17). 

Ver.  6. — His  left  hand  is  under  my  head, 
and  his  right  hand  doth  emhrace  me.  We 
may  render  the  verb  either  as  indicative  or 
imperative.  The  hand  gently  smooths  with 
loving  caresses.  The  historical  sense  is 
more  in  accordance  with  the  context,  as  the 
next  verse  is  an  appeal  to  the  attendant 
Indies.  Behold  my  happiness,  how  my 
Beloved  comforts  me  I 

Ver.  7.— I  adjure  you,  0  daughters  of 
Jerusalem,  by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of 
the  field,  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awaken 
love,  until  it  please.  The  fact  that  these 
words  occur  again  in  oh.  iii.  5  and  viii.  4 
shows  that  they  are  a  kind  of  chorus  or 
relrain.  It  is  also  evident  that  they  are  in 
the  iips  of  Shulamith  the  bride.  Some  have 
suggested  that  they  are  uttered  by  some 
one  else,  e.g.  the  queen  -  mother  subse- 
quently referred  to,  Solomon  himself,  the 
heavenly  Bridegroom,  the  shepherd  -  lover 
from  whom  Shulamith  had  been  taken. 
But  all  these  suggestions  are  unnecessary 
and  unsupported.  The  natural  and  simple 
view  is  that  the  same  voice  is  speaking  as 
in  ver.  6.  But  what  is  the  meaning  of  this 
adjuration  ?  Is  it  merely,  "  I  throw  myself 
on  the  sympathy  you  have  already  ex- 
pressed"? Bwald  well  remarks,  "In  com- 
mon life  people  swore  by  things  which  be- 
longed to  the  subject  of  conversation  or 
were  especially  dear  to  the  speaker.  As, 
therefore,  the  wamor  swears  by  his  sword ; 
as  Mohammed  by  the  soul,  of  which  he  is 
just  about  to  speak  (see  Koran,  ch.  xci.  7) ;  so 
here  Shulamith  by  the  lovely  gazelles,  since 
she  is  speaking  of  love."  The  Israelites 
were  permitted  to  ailjure  by  that  which  is 
not  God,  but  they  would  only  solemnly 
swear  by  God  himself.  Delitzsch  thinks 
this  is  the  only  example  of  direct  adjura- 
tion in  Scripture  without  the  name  of  God. 
The  meaning  has  probably  been  sought  too 
far  away.  The  bride  is  perfectly  happy, 
but  she  is  conscious  that  such  exquisite 
happiness  may  be  disturbed,  the  dream  of 
her  delight  broken  through.  She  compares 
herself  to  a  roe  or  a  gazelle,  the  most  timo- 
rous and  shy  of  creatures  (see  Prov.  v.  19). 
The  Septuagint  has  a  peculiar  rendering, 
which  points  to  a  different  reading  of  the 
original,  iv  Svran4<ri  xal  iffxiaecri  toS  iypov, 
"  by  the  power  and  virtues  of  the  field."  Per- 


haps the  meaning  is  the  same — By  the  pu  rity 
and  blessedness  of  a  simple  country  life,  I 
adjure  you  not  to  interfere  with  the  course 
of  true  love.  It  is  much  debated  whether  the 
meaning  is,  "Do  not  excite  or  stir  up  love," 
or,  "  Do  not  disturb  love  in  its  peaceful  de- 
light." It  certainly  must  be  maintained  that 
by  "  love  "  is  meant  "  the  lover."  The  refer- 
ence is  to  the  passion  of  love  itself.  A  similar 
expression  is  used  of  the  feeling  of  jealousy 
(Isa.  xlii.  13).  The  verb  n'ly  (piel)  is  added 
to  strengthen  the  idea,  and  is  always  used 
in  the  sense  "  to  excite  or  awaken,"  as  Prov. 
X.  12  of  strife;  Ps.  Ixxx.  3  of  strength  or 
power.  We  must  not  for  a  moment  think  of 
any  artificial  excitement  of  love  as  referred 
to.  The  idea  is — See  what  a  blessed  thing 
is  pure  and  natural  aifeotion :  let  not  love 
be  forced  or  unnatural.  But  there  are  those 
who  dispute  this  interpretation.  They  think 
that  the  main  idea  of  the  whole  poem  is  not  the 
spontaneity  of  love,  but  a  commendation  of 
pure  and  chaste  conjugal  affection,  as  opposed 
to  the  dissoluteness  and  sensuality  fostered 
by  polygamy.  They  would  therefore  take 
the  abstract  "  love  "  for  the  concrete  "  loved 
one,"  as  in  ch.  vii.  6.  The  bride  would  not 
have  the  beloved  one  aroused  by  the  in- 
trusion of  others ;  or  the  word  "  love  "  may  be 
taken  to  mean  "  the  dream  of  love."  Which- 
ever exphinatiou  is  chosen,  the  sense  ig 
substantially  the  same — Let  me  rejoice  in 
my  blessedness.  The  bride  is  seen  at  the 
close  of  this  first  part  of  the  poem  in  the 
arms  of  the  bridegroom.  She  is  lost  in  him, 
and  his  happiness  is  hers.  She  calls  upon 
the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  to  rejoice  with 
her.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  key-note  of  the 
song.  The  two  main  thoughts  in  the  poem 
are  the  purity  of  love  and  the  power  of  love. 
The  reference  to  the  roes  and  gazelles  of 
the  field  is  not  so  much  to  their  shyness 
and  timidity  as  to  their  purity,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  creatures  more  olo=e 
to  cities ;  hence  the  appeal  to  the  daughters 
of  Jerusalem,  who,  as  being  ladies  of  the 
metropolis,  might  not  sympathize  as  they 
should  with  the  country  maiden.  The  rest 
of  the  poem  is  a  remembrance  of  the  part 
which  illustrates  and  confirms  the  sentiment 
of  the  refrain — Let  tho  pure  love  seek  its 
own  perfection ;  let  its  own  pleasure  be 
realized.  So,  spiritually,  let  grace  complete 
what  grace  begins.  "  Blessed  are  all  those 
who  trust  in  him." 

Ver.  8 — ch.  iii.  5. — Part  II.  Sons  op 
Shulamith  in  the  Embbaoe  op  Solomoit. 
EecoUectioni  of  the  wooing-time  in  the 
north. 

Ver.  8. — ^The  voice  of  my  beloved !  behold, 
he  Cometh,  leaping  upon  the  mountains, 
skipping  upon  the  hills.  There  can  be  little 
doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  song.     Tha 


40 


THE  SON(J  OF  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  n.  1—17. 


bride  is  going  back  in  thought  to  the  scenes 
of  her  home-life,  and  the  sweet  days  of  first 
love.  "The  house  stands  alone  among  the 
rocka  and  deep  in  the  mountain  range  j 
around  are  the  vineyards  which  the  family 
have  planted,  and  the  hill-pastures  on  which 
tliey  feed  their  flocks.  She  longingly  looks 
out  for  her  distant  lover."  The  expression, 
"  The  voice  of  my  beloved ! "  must  not  be 
taken  to  mean  that  she  liears  the  sound  of 
his  feet  or  voice,  but  simply  as  an  interjec- 
tion, like  "  hark  I  "  (see  Gen.  iv.  10,  where 
the  voice  of  the  blood  crying  merely  means, 
"  Hark  how  thy  brother's  blood  cries ! "  that 
is,  "  Believe  that  it  does  so  cry  ").  So  here, 
"  I  seem  to  hear  the  voice  of  my  beloved ; 
hark,  he  is  coming  1 "  It  is  a  great  delight 
to  the  soul  to  go  back  in  thought  over  the 
memories  of  its  first  experience  of  the 
Saviour's  presence.  The  Church  is  edified 
by  the  records  of  grace  in  the  histories  of 
Divine  dealings. 

Ver.  9. — My  beloved  is  like  a  roe  or  a 
young  hart ;  behold,  he  staudeth  behind  our 
wall,  he  looketh  in  at  the  windows,  he 
■howeth  himself  through  the  lattice.  The 
tslvi  is  the  gazelle,  Arabic  ghazdl.  Our 
word  is  derived  through  the  Spanish  or 
Moorish  gazela.  The  young  hart,  or  chamois, 
is  probably  so  called  from  the  covering  of 
young  hair  (cf.  2  Sam.  11.  18 ;  Prov.  vi.  5 ; 
Heb.  iii.  19).  Shulamith  represents  herself 
as  within  the  house,  waiting  for  her  friend. 
Her  beloved  is  standing  behind  the  wall, 
outside  before  the  house ;  he  is  playfully 
looking  through  the  windows,  now  through 
one  and  now  through  another,  seeking  her 
with  peering  eyes  of  love.  Both  the  words 
employed  convey  the  meaning  of  searching 
and  moving  quickly.  The  windows;  literally, 
the  openings  ;  i.e.  a  window  broken  through 
a  wall,  or  the  meaning  may  be  a  lattice 
window,  a  pierced  wooden  structure.  The 
word  is  not  the  common  word  for  a  window, 
which  is  sjievaka  (now  sliabbdlcd),  from  a 
root  meaning  "  to  twist,"  "  to  make  a  lattice." 
Spiritually,  we  may  see  an  allusion  to  the 
glimpses  of  truth  and  tastes  of  the  goodness 
of  religion,  which  precede  the  real  fellow- 
ship of  the  soul  with  God. 

Ver.  10. — My  beloved  spake,  and  said 
nnto  me,  Rise  up,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and 
come  away.  The  word  "  spake  "  conveys 
the  meaning  in  answer  to  a  person  appearing, 
but  not  ntoessarily  in  answer  to  a  voice 
heard.  We  most  suppose  that  Shulamith 
recognized  her  beloved,  and  made  some  sign 
that  she  was  near,  or  looked  forth  from  the 
window.  As  the  soul  responds,  it  is  more 
and  more  invited ;  the  voice  of  the  Bride- 
groom is  heard  calling  the  object  of  his  love 
by  name,  "  I  have  called  thee  by  tliy  name ; 
thou  art  mine  "  (Isa.  xliii.  1). 

Vers.  II — 13. — For,  lo,  tke  winter  is  past, 


the  rain  is  over  and  gone;  the  flowers 
appear  on  the  earth ;  the  time  of  the  sing- 
ing of  birds  is  come,  and  the  voice  of  the 
turtle  is  heard  in  our  land;  the  fig  tree 
ripeueth  her  green  figs,  and  the  vines  are 
in  blossom,  they  give  forth  their  fragrance. 
Arise,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away. 
Winter;  i.e.  the  cloudy  stormy  time  (^sSthauv). 
The  Jews  in  Jerusalem  to  this  day  call  rain 
shatad.  The  rain ;  i.e.  the  showers.  The 
flowers,  or  the  flowery  time,  corresponding 
with  the  singing-time.  Several  versions,  as 
the  LXX.  and  other  Greek,  Jerome  in  the 
Latin,  and  the  Targum  and  Venetian,  render, 
"  the  time  of  pruning,"  taking  the  zdmir 
from  a  root  zamar,  "  to  prune  the  vine."  It 
is,  however,  regarded  by  most  critics  as  an 
onomatopoetic  word  meaning  "  song," 
"  music,"  like  zimrah,  "  singing."  The  re- 
ference to  the  voice  of  the  turtle-dove,  the 
cooing  note  which  is  so  sweet  and  attractive 
among  the  woo.ls,  shows  that  the  time  of 
spring  is  intended.  Ginsburg  says  wherever 
zdmir  occurs,  either  in  the  singular  or  plural, 
it  means  "  singing  "  (cf.  2  Sam.  xxiU.  1 ; 
Isa.  xxiv.  16).  The  form  of  the  word  conveys 
the  idea  of  the  time  of  the  action,  as  we  see 
in  the  >sords  for  "harvest"  (asiph)  and 
"  ploughing-time "  (chdrish).  The  fig  tree 
ftnd  the  vine  were  boi.h  employed  as  symbols 
of  prosperity  and  peace,  as  the  fig  and  grape 
were  so  much  used  as  food  (see  1  Kings  v. 
5 ;  2  Kings  xviii.  31).  The  little  fruits  of 
the  fig  tree  begin,  when  the  spring  com- 
mences, to  change  colour  from  green  to  led 
(cf.  Mark  xi.  13,  where  the  Passover-time 
is  referred  to).  The  word  "to  ripen  "  is 
literally,  "  to  grow  red  or  sweet."  Tlie  blos- 
soming vines  give  forth  a  very  delicate  and 
attractive  fragrance.  The  description  is 
acknowledged  by  all  to  be  very  beautiful. 
The  invitation  is  to  fellowship  in  the  midst 
of  the  pure  loveliness  of  nature,  when  all 
was  adapted  to  meet  and  sustain  the  feelings 
of  awakened  love.  The  emotions  of  the  soul 
are  blended  easily  with  the  sensations  de- 
rived from  the  outward  world.  When  we 
carefully  avoid  extravagance,  and  put  the 
soul  first  and  not  second,  then  the  delights 
of  the  senses  may  help  the  heart  to  realize 
the  deepest  experience  of  Divine  communion. 
But  the  bridegroom  first  solicits  the  bride. 
We  reverse  the  true  spiritual  order  when  we 
place  too  much  dependence  on  the  influence 
of  external  objects  or  sensuous  pleasures. 
Art  may  assist  religion  to  its  expression,  but 
it  must  never  be  made  so  prominent  that 
the  artistic  pleasure  swallows  up  the  religious 
emotion.  Love  of  nature  is  not  love  of 
Christ.  Love  of  music  is  not  love  of  Christ. 
Yet  the  soul  that  seeks  him  may  rejoice  in 
art  and  music,  because  they  blend  their 
attractions  with  its  devotion,  and  help  it  to 
be  a  joy  and  a  passion. 


OH.  n.  1—17.] 


THE  SONG-  OF  SOLOMON. 


41 


Ver.  14. — 0  my  dove,  that  art  in  the  clefts 
of  the  rock,  in  the  covert  of  the  steep  places, 
let  me  see  thy  countenance,  let  me  hear  thy 
voioe ;  for  sweet  is  thy  voice,  and  thy  counte- 
nance is  comely.  The  wood-pigeon  builds 
in  clefts  of  rocks  and  in  steep  rocky  places 
(see  Jer.  xlviii.  28 ;  and  of.  Ps,  Ixxiv.  19  ; 
Ivi.  1 ;  Hob.  vii.  11).  The  bridegroom  is 
still  addressing  his  beloved  one,  who  liaa  not 
yet  come  forth  from  the  house  in  the  rooks, 
though  she  has  shown  herself  at  the  window. 
The  language  is  highly  poetical,  and  may 
be  compared  with  similar  words  in  Homer 
and  Virgil  (of. '  Iliad,'  xxi.  493 ;  '  ^iieid,'  v. 
213,  etc.).  The  Lord  loveth  the  sight  of 
his  people.  He  delighteth  in  their  songs 
and  in  their  prayers.  He  is  in  the  mi.lst  of 
their  atsemblies.  Secret  religion  is  not  the 
highest  religion.  The  highest  emotions  of 
the  soul  do  not  decrease  in  their  power  as 
they  are  expressed.  They  become  more  and 
more  a  ruling  principle  of  life.  There  are 
many  who  need  this  encouragement  to  come 
forth  out  of  secrecy,  out  of  solitude,  out  of 
their  own  private  home  and  individual 
thoughts,  and  realize  the  blessing  of  fellow- 
ship with  the  Lord  and  with  his  people. 

Yer.  15. — Take  us  the  foxes,  the  little 
foxes,  that  spoil  the  vineyards ;  for  our  vine- 
yards are  in  blossom.  There  is  some  diffi- 
culty in  deciding  to  which  of  the  persons 
this  speech  is  to  be  attributed.  It  is  most 
naturally,  however,  assigned  to  the  bride, 
and  this  is  the  view  of  the  majority  of  critics. 
Hence  she  refers  to  the  vineyards  as  "our 
vineyards,"  which  the  bridegroom  could 
scarcely  say.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  the  words  are  abrupt 
regarded  as  a  response  to  the  beautiful 
appeal  of  the  lover.  The  following  are  the 
remarks  of  Delitzsch  on  the  subject:  "  This 
is  a  vine-dresser's  ditty,  in  accord  with 
Shulamith's  experience  as  the  keeper  of  a 
vineyard,  which,  in  a  figure,  aims  at  her  love- 
relation.  The  vineyards,  beautiful  with 
fragrant  blossoms,  point  to  her  covenant  of 
love,  and  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes,  which 
might  destroy  those  united  vineyards,  point 
to  all  the  great  and  little  enemies  and 
adverse  circumstances  which  threaten  to 
gnaw  and  destroy  love  in  the  blossom  ere  it 
has  reached  the  ripeness  of  full  enjoyment." 
Some  think  that  Shulamith  is  giving  the 
reason  why  she  cannot  immediately  join  her 
beloved,  referring  to  the  duties  enjoined 
upon  her  by  her  brethren.  But  there  is 
an  awkwardness  in  this  explanation.  The 
simplest  and  most  straightforward  is  that 
which  connects  the  words  immediately  with 
the  invitation  of  the  lover  to  come  forth  into 
the  lovely  vineyards.  Is  it  not  an  allusion  to 
the  playful  pleasure  which  the  young  people 
would  find  among  the  vineyards  in  chasing 
the  little  foxes  ?.and  may  not  the  lovei  take 


up  some  well-known  country  ditty,  and  sinj^ 
it  outside  the  window  as  a  playful  repetitioi 
of  the  invitation  to  appear?  The  words  d( 
seem  to  be  arranged  in  somewhat  of  a 
lyrical  form — 

"  Catch  us  the  foxes. 
Foxes  the  little  ones, 
Wasting  our  vineyards. 
When  our  vineyards  are  blossoming." 

The  foxes  (ahudUm),  at  little  jackals,  were 
very  numerous  in  Palestine  (see  Judg.  xv. 
4;  Lam.  v.  18;  Ps.  Ixiii.  11;  Neh.  iv.  3; 
1  Sim.  xiii.  17).  The  little  jackals  were 
seldom  more  than  fifteen  inches  high. 
There  would  be  nothing  unsuitable  in  the 
address  to  a  maiden  to  help  to  catch  such 
&mall  animals.  The  idea  of  the  song  is — 
Let  us  all  join  in  taking  them.  Some  think 
that  Shulamith  is  inviting  the  king  to  call 
his  attendants  to  the  work.  But  when  two 
lovers  thus  approach  one  another,  it  is  not 
likely  that  others  would  be  thought  of. 
However  the  words  be  viewed,  the  typical 
meaning  can  scarcely  be  missed.  The  idea 
of  clearing  the  vineyards  of  depredators  well 
suits  the  general  import  of  the  poem.  Let 
the  blossoming  love  of  the  soul  be  without 
injury  and  restraint.  Let  the  rising  faith 
and  affection  be  carefully  guarded.  Both 
individuiils  and  communities  do  well  to  think 
of  the  little  foxes  that  spoil  the  vines. 

Ver.  16. — My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am 
his ;  he  f  eedeth  (his  flock)  among  the  lilies. 
These  are  the  words  of  the  bride.  The 
latter  clause  is  repeated  iu  ch.  vi.  2,  with 
the  addition,  "in  the  gardens,"  and  it  is 
evident  that  Solomon  is  lovingly  regarded 
as  a  shepherd,  because  Shulamith  delights 
to  think  of  him  as  fully  sympathizing  with 
her  simple  country  life.  She  idealizes.  The 
words  may  be  taken  as  either  the  response 
given  at  the  time  by  the  maiden  to  the 
invitation  of  her  lover  to  come  forth  into 
the  vineyards,  or  as  the  breathing  of  love  as 
she  lies  in  the  arms  of  Solomon.  Lilies  are 
the  emblem  of  purity,  lofty  elevation  above 
that  which  is  common.  Moreover,  the  lily- 
stalk  is  the  symbol  of  the  life  of  regenera- 
tion among  the  mystical  medisevalists.  Mary 
the  Virgin,  the  Bosa  mystioa,  in  ancient 
paintings  is  represented  with  a  lily  in  her 
hand  at  the  Annunciation.  The  people  of 
God  were  called  by  tlie  Jewish  priests  "  a 
people  of  lilies."  So  Mary  was  the  lily  of 
lilies  iu  the  lily  community ;  the  sanotissima 
in  the  communio  sanctorum.  There  may  be 
an  allusion  to  the  lily-forms  around  Solomon 
in  his  palace — the  daughters  of  Jerusalem ; 
in  that  case  the  words  must  be  taken  as 
spoken,  not  in  remembrance  of  the  first  love, 
but  in  present  joy  in  Solomon's  embrace. 
Some  would  render  the  words  as  simply 
praise  of  Solomon  himself,  "  who,  wherever 


42 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  n.  1 — 17. 


he  abideB,  spreads  radiancy  and  loveliness 
about  him,"  or  "in  whose  footsteps  roses 
and  lilies  ever  bloom."  At  least,  they  are 
eiipressive  of  entire  self-surrender  and 
delight.  She  herself  is  »  lily,  and  the 
beloved  one  feeds  upon  lier  beauty,  purity, 
and  perfection. 

Ver.  17. — TTntil  the  day  be  oool,  and  the 
shadows  flee  away,  turn,  my  beloved,  and 
be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon  the 
mountains  of  Bether.  Tiiis  is  generally 
supposed  to  be  the  voice  of  the  maiden 
addressing  her  suitor,  and  bidding  him 
return  in  the  evening,  when  the  day  cools, 
and  when  the  lengthening  shadows  fall  into 
night.  Some  have  seen  in  such  words  a 
clear  indication  of  a  clandestine  interview, 
and  would  find  in  them  a  confirmation  of 
their  hypothesis  that  the  poem  is  founded 
OQ  a  romantic  story  of  Solomon's  attempt  to 
draw  a  shepherdess  from  her  shepherd.  But 
there  is  no  necessity  to  disturb  the  flow  of 
the  bride's  loving  reeollections  by  such  a 
fancy.  She  is  recalling  the  visit  of  her 
lover.  How,  at  first,  she  declined  his  invi- 
tation to  go  forth  with  him  to  the  vineyards, 
but  with  professions  of  live  appealed  to 
him  to  return  to  the  mountains,  and  in  the 
evening  come  once  more  and  rejoice  in  her 
love.  But  the  words  may  be  rendered, 
"  during  the  whole  day,  and  until  the  even- 
ing comes,  turn  thyself  to  me,"  which  is  the 
view  taken  by  some  critics.  The  language 
may  be  general ;  that  is,  "  Turn,  and  I  will 
follow."  "  The  mountains  of  Bether  "  are  the 
rugged  mountains ;  Bether,  from  a  root  "  to 
divide,"  "to  out,"  f.e.  divided  by  ravines; 
or  the  word  may  be  the  abstract  for  the 


concrete— "  the  mountains  of  separation," 
t.e.  the  mountains  which  separate.  LXX., 
ipi)  Tuv  KotAa/iaTav,"  decussated  mountains." 
The  Syriao  and  Theodotion  take  the  word 
as  for  bSshdmim,  i.e.  ofierings  of  incense 
(^du/uaiiaTcSy).  There  is  no  such  geographi- 
cal name  known,  though  there  is  Bitbron, 
east  uf  Jordan,  near  Mahanalm  (2  Sam.  ii. 
29).  The  Chaldee.  Ibn-Ezra,  Bashi,  and 
many  others  render  it  "separation"  (of. 
Luther's  sclieideberge).  Bochart  says, 
"Monies  scissionis  ita  dicti  propter  paxi^vs 
et  xifTynoTi."  The  meaning  has  been  thus 
set  forth :  "  The  request  of  Shulamith  that 
he  should  return  to  the  mountains  breathes 
self-denying  humility,  patient  modesty,  in- 
ward joy  in  the  joy  of  her  beloved.  She 
will  not  claim  him  for  herself  till  he  have 
accomplished  his  work.  But  when  he 
associates  with  her  in  the  evening,  as  with 
the  Emmaus  disciples,  she  will  rejoice  if  he 
becomes  her  guide  through  the  new-bom 
world  of  spring.  Perhaps  we  may  say  the 
Parousia  ot  the  Lord  is  here  referred  to  iu 
the  evening  of  the  world"  (of.  Luke  xxiv.). 
On  the  whole,  it  seems  most  in  harmony 
with  the  context  to  take  the  words  as  pre- 
paring us  for  what  follows — ^the  account  of 
the  maiden's  distress  when  she  woke  up 
and  found  not  her  beloved.  We  must  not 
expect  to  be  able  to  explain  the  language 
as  though  it  were  a  clear  historical  com- 
position, relating  facts  and  incidents.  The 
real  line  of  thought  is  the  underlying  con- 
nection of  spiritual  meaning.  There  is  a 
separation  of  the  lovers.  The  soul  wakes 
up  to  feel  that  its  object  of  delight  is  gone. 
Then  it  complains. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Converse  of  the  iridegroom  and  the  bride  continued.  I,  The  voice  op 
THE  BRIDE.  1.  'I'he  rose  of  Sharon.  They  were  sitting,  it  seems,  in  a  forest  glade  at 
the  foot  of  some  lofty  cedar,  sheltered  by  its  embowering  branches  ;  beneath  was  their 
gras.sy  seat,  bright  with  many  flowers.  The  bride  feels  that  she  is  as  one  of  those  fair 
flowers  in  the  bridegroum's  eyes.  "  I  am  the  rose  of  Sharon,"  she  says,  in  her  artless 
acceptance  of  the  bridegroom's  loving  approval.  We  cannot  identify  the  flower  called 
here  and  in  Isa.  xxxv,  1,  the  rose.  Our  rose,  we  are  told,  was  brought  from  Persia  long 
after  the  time  of  Solomon;  it  is  flrst  mentioned  in  the  Apocrypha  (Eoclus.  xxiv.  14  ; 
xxxix.  13 ;  1.  8).  The  rose  of  the  canonical  Scriptures  may  be,  as  many  have  thought, 
the  narcissus,  which  is  very  common  in  the  Plain  of  Sharon,  and  is  still  the  favourite 
flower  of  the  inhabitants.  The  word  "  Sharon  "  may  mean  simply  "a  plain ; "  but,  as  it  has 
the  article,  it  probably  stands  here  for  the  famous  Plain  of  Sharon,  so  celebrated  in  ancient 
times  for  its  fertility  and  beauty.  The  bride  is  like  a  lowly  flower  of  the  field,  not 
majestic  like  those  lofty  cedars,  but  yet  lovely  in  the  bridegroom's  sight.  The  Christian 
is  humble  of  heart ;  he  is  helpless  and  short-lived  as  a  flower.  "  All  flesh  is  as  grass, 
and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  uf  grass."  But  because  Christ  hath  loved  him 
and  died  for  him,  he  knows  that  he  is  dear  to  his  Saviour.  2.  The  lily  of  the  valleys. 
Here,  too,  there  is  an  uncertainty.  The  word  rendered  "  lily  "  (shushan,  the  name  of  the 
famous  Persian  city,  the  "  Shushan  the  palace  "  of  the  Book  of  Esther)  is  used  of  umny 
bright-coloured  flowers.     We  infer  from  ch.  t.  13  that  this  lily  was  led ;  hence  somt 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  48 

writers  identify  it  with  the  scarlet  anemone,  which  is  very  ahundant  all  over  Palestine. 
Solomon's  bride  compares  herself  to  the  lily ;  but  even  Solomon  himself,  the  Lord  said, 
"  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  as  one  of  these."  The  Lord  bids  us  "  consider  the 
lilies."  When  we  look  up  to  the  heaven,  to  the  vast  distances,  the  enormous  magnitude 
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  in  their  ordered  movements,  we  think,  as  the  psalmist  thought, 
"  Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  ? "  But  when  we  consider  the 
lilies,  we  see  that  he  who  framed  the  universe  in  its  vastness  regards  things  small  and 
humble.  The  delicate  pencilling,  the  gorgeous  colouring  of  the  flowers  of  the  field,  the 
complicated  structure  of  many  of  them,  the  arrangements,  for  instance,  for  fertilization, 
show  a  wisdom,  an  exact  accommodation  of  means  to  ends,  as  astonishing  as  the  celestial 
mechanism ;  a  great  and  loving  care,  too,  for  us  men,  in  providing  us  not  only  with  the 
necessaries  of  life,  but  also  with  objects  of  rare  and  exquisite  loveliness,  to  give  us  pure 
and  innocent  pleasures,  to  teach  us  lessons  of  truthfulness.  He  who  thus  clothes  the 
grass  of  the  field,  which  to-day  is,  and  to-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven,  will  surely  clothe 
us,  though,  alasl  we  are  of  little  faith.  The  bride  is  as  one  of  these  flowers,  frail  as  they 
are ;  she  trusts  in  the  bridegroom's  care.  The  Christian  must  learn  to  cast  all  hig 
anxiety  upon  God.    He  careth  for  us. 

II.  The  reply  op  the  bbidbgkoom.  The  king  takes  up  the  words  of  the  bride. 
She  is  to  him  as  a  lily ;  other  maidens,  when  compared  with  her,  are  but  as  thorns  in 
the  bridegroom's  eyes.  Alas !  there  are  tares  in  the  Lord's  field,  barren  fig  trees  in  his 
garden.  They  are  as  thorns ;  his  chosen  are  as  lilies.  The  thorns  set  forth  by  contrast 
the  beauty  of  the  lily ;  the  deformity  of  sin  brings  into  sharper  contrast  the  beauty  of 
holiness.  But  whatever  beauty  the  Christian  soul  possesses  comes  only  from  the 
Bridegroom's  gift ;  he  gives  it.  In  his  infinite  love  he  condescends  to  be  pleased  with 
that  which  is  truly  his,  not  ours ;  we  hope  to  be  "  found  in  him,  not  having  our  own 
righteousness,  which  is  of  the  Law,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the 
righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith  "  (Phil.  iii.  9). 

IIL  The  qbatitudb  op  the  bbide.  1.  The  excellence  of  the  bridegroom.  He  had 
compared  the  bride  to  a  lily  among  thorns ;  she  compares  him  to  an  apple  tree  among 
the  trees  of  the  vpood.  As  the  apple  tree  with  its  sweet  fruit  and  its  fragrant  smell 
excels  the  barren  trees  of  the  wood,  so  the  bridegroom  excels  all  other  men  in  the  eyes 
of  the  bride.  It  is  uncertain  what  the  tappuach,  called  in  our  version  "  apple  tree," 
really  is ;  it  has  been  identified  by  different  writers  with  the  quince,  the  citron,  or  the 
orange.  It  is  enough  for  our  purpose  to  know  that  it  excels  the  trees  of  the  wood,  that 
its  foliage  gives  a  plea:;ant  shade,  that  its  fruit  is  sweet  and  fragrant  and  possesses 
certain  restorative  properties.  The  fact  that  it  is  five  times  mentioned  in  the  Book  of 
Joshua  (xii.  17  ;  xv.  34,  53 ;  xvi.  8 ;  xvii.  7)  in  connection  with  the  name  of  various 
towns  or  fountains,  Beth  Tappuach  or  En  Tappuach,  shows  that  in  the  old  times  it  must 
have  been  widely  cultivated  and  greatly  valued.  It  excels  other  trees ;  so  does  the 
beloved  excel  all  other  men  in  the  estimate  of  the  bride.  Christ  is  very  dear  to  the 
Christian  soul.  He  is  the  Treasure  hid  in  the  field,  the  Pearl  of  great  price ;  those  who 
have  found  him  and  known  him  by  a  real  spiritual  knowledge  count  other  objects  of 
human  desire  as  nothing  worth  in  comparison  with  him,  "  What  things  were  gain  to 
me,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ ; "  and  again,  "  I  do  count  them 
but  dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him."  2,  The  bride's  delight  in  him. 
The  tappuach  offered  a  pleasant  shade ;  the  bride  delighted  in  it ;  she  sat  down  beneath 
its  bower  of  foliage ;  its  fruit  was  sweet  to  her  taste.  We  think  of  the  holy  women 
who  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus  (John  xix.  25).  The  shadow  under  which  the  Church 
finds  rest  must  be  the  shadow  of  the  cross.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  to  the  believer 
"  a  refuge  from  the  storm,  a  shadow  from  the  heat ; "  "  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a 
weary  land  "  (Isa.  xxv.  4 ;  xxxii.  2).  He  bids  the  weary  and  heavy  laden  to  come  to 
him  that  they  may  find  rest — rest  for  their  souls.  There  is  no  other  true  and  abiding 
rest  for  these  restless,  dissatisfied  souls  of  ours,  but  only  the  rest  which  he  giveth — rest 
in  the  Lord.  But  it  was  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat,  the  bitter  cross  and  passion, 
which  made  the  Lord  Jesus  what  he  is  to  the  believer ;  it  is  the  exceeding  great  love  of 
our  Master  and  only  Saviour  manifested  forth  in  that  sacred  suffering ;  it  is  the  blessed 
atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world  wrought  once  for  all  through  the  virtue  of  the 
precious  blood ; — it  is  this  which  makes  the  Saviour's  cross  a  place  of  rest  and  refresh- 
ment for  the  weary  soul,  which  causes  the  Christian  to  take  delight  in  the  shadow  o/ 


44  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  lcB.n.l—n. 

the  cross  rather  than  in  any  form  of  earthly  joy ;  hence  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  "  God 
forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  the 
world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world  "  (Gal.  vi.  14).  As  St.  Paul  gloried  in 
the  cross,  so  the  bride  delighted  in  the  shadow  of  the  beloved.  "In  his  shadow  I 
delighted,  and  I  sat  down,"  is  the  literal  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  words.  It  is  delight 
in  the  Saviour's  love  which  draws  the  penitent  to  the  cross ;  as  the  Lord  said,  "  I,  if  I 
be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  The  Lord's  love  draws  the 
penitent  soul  burdened  with  the  sense  of  sin ;  the  cross  is  to  such  a  soul  like  the  shadow 
of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land ;  there  only  is  a  sure  refuge  from  the  heat  and  turmnil 
of  the  world,  from  the  cares  and  the  manifold  temptations  of  this  life.  Therefore  the 
Christian  sits  down  beneath  it,  taking  the  cross  for  his  portion,  meditating  much  on  the 
Saviour's  cross,  seeking  to  live  ever  nearer  and  nearer  to  it,  within  the  inner  depths  of 
its  awful  shadow,  and  finding  there  a  deep  and  holy  peace  which  the  world  can  neither 
give  nor  take  away.  Under  the  shadow  of  the  cross  we  learn  ourselves  to  take  up  the 
cross,  and  to  follow  after  Christ ;  there  we  learn  that  in  patient  self-denials  practised  in 
the  faith  of  Christ  there  is  a  spiritual  delight,  a  joy  severe  indeed,  but  far  more  abiding, 
far  more  precious,  than  any  joy  this  world  can  give.  There  we  learn  what  St.  Paul 
means  when  he  says,  "We  glory  in  tribulations  also  "(Rom.  v.  3);  what  St.  James 
means  when  he  says,  "My  brethren,  count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers 
temptations."  For  "  his  fruit  is  sweet  to  the  taste."  The  soul  that  sits  under  the  shadow 
of  the  cross  of  Christ  feeds  upon  Christ,  in  spiritual  communion  with  him,  and  in  the 
blessed  sacrament  which  he  ordained,  and  finds  in  that  holy  food  a  Divine  sweetness, 
which  wholly  passes  every  form  of  earthly  delight.  Bat  it  is  only  they  who  sit  under 
the  shadow,  who  live  very  near  to  Christ  in  daily  bearing  of  the  cross,  in  patient 
continuance  in  well-doing,  who  can  realize  that  blessed  sweetness ;  they  "  by  reason  of 
use  have  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil "  (Heb.  v.  14) ;  they  know 
that  Christ  is  the  Bread  of  life,  that  his  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  his  blood  drink 
indeed ;  their  earnest,  persevering  prayer  is,  "  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread." 
3.  Ser  remembrance  of  his  love.  "  He  brougiit  me  to  the  banqueting-house,"  she  says ; 
literally,  "  to  the  house  of  wine."  The  bride  passes  from  metaphor  to  facts.  The 
bridegroom  is  no  longer  a  fair  and  fruitful  tree ;  he  is  once  more  the  King  of  Israel  who 
sought  and  loved  the  lowly  maiden ;  she  recounts  her  past  experience  of  his  love.  He 
had  brought  her,  humble  as  she  was,  into  his  palace,  into  the  banqueting-house.  The 
literal  translation  brings  to  our  thoughts  the  Lord's  words,  "  I  say  unto  you,  I  will  not 
drink  henceforth  of  this  fruit  of  the  vine,  until  that  day  when  I  drink  it  new  with  you 
in  my  Father's  kingdom"  (Matt.  xxvi.  29).  It  is  he  who  must  bring  his  people  into 
his  banqueting-house ;  it  is  his  presence  manifested  to  faith  which  makes  the  holy 
communion  what  it  is  to  the  believer.  He  gives  us  then  the  wine  that  maketh  glad 
the  heart  of  man,  when  he  saith,  "  Drink  ye  all  of  it :  for  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new 
testament,  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins."  We  are  not  worthy  so 
much  as  to  gather  up  the  crumbs  under  his  table ;  but  when  he  brings  us  thither,  when 
we  come  led  by  the  Spirit,  drawn  by  the  constraining  love  of  Christ,  then  we  know  th;it 
it  is  his  banqueting-house,  the  house  to  which  he  calls  his  guests,  where  he  seats  them 
at  his  own  hoard.  "  With  desire  have  I  desired  to  eat  this  Passover  with  you  before  I 
suffer."  There  he  bids  us  drink  :  "Drink  ye  all  of  it ;  "  we  all  need  that  cup,  for  it  is 
the  cup  of  the  new  covenant.  When  we  take  it  in  faith  and  love,  the  new  covenant, 
the  covenant  of  grace,  is  confirmed  to  us  afresh ;  for  he  gives  us  the  blood  that  was 
shed  for  the  remission  of  sins,  the  blood  that  cleanseth  from  all  sin  those  who  walk  in 
the  light.  But  we  must  ask  him  to  bring  us;  without  him  we  can  do  nothing.  If  we 
approach  without  him,  without  his  grace  and  guidance,  without  faith  in  him,  we  shall 
bring  no  blessing  away  with  us,  but  only  the  judgment  of  those  who  discern  not  the 
Lord's  body  (1  Cor.  xi.  29).  The  banqueting-house  of  the  King  of  Israel  was  signalized 
by  the  royal  banner,  the  standard  which  had  often  led  to  the  battle  the  warriors  of 
Israel.  That  standard  was  the  centre  round  which  the  king's  followers  were  wont  to 
flock,  to  guard  him  in  the  hour  of  peril,  to  honour  him  with  their  attendance  in  the  time 
of  peace.  But  what  drew  the  bride  thither  was  the  love  of  the  bridegroom ;  that  was 
the  banner  which  was  beautiful  in  her  eyes,  which  was  over  her.  The  banner  of  the 
cross  goeth  onwards  before  the  followers  of  the  Lord ;  it  is  the  centre  round  which  they 
press,  which  is  ever  drawing  them  nearer  and  nearer.     The  banner  which  draws 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  45 

Christians  to  the  blessed  sacrament  is  the  love  of  Christ.  The  banner  tells  of  battle  and 
of  victory.  _  We  are  told  that  after  the  conflict  between  Israel  and  Amalek  in  Eephidim, 
when  the  victory  was  won  through  the  sustained  persevering  prayer  of  Moses,  "  Moses 
built  an  altar,  and  called  the  name  of  it  Jehovai-nissi ;  for  he  said,  Because  the  Lord 
hath  sworn  that  the  Lord  will  have  war  with  Amalek  from  generation  to  generation  " 
(Exod.  xvii.  15, 16).  Moses  said,  "  Jehovah  is  my  Banner ; "  the  bride  says,  "  His  banner 
over  me  is  love."  The  Hebrew  words,  indeed,  are  different,  but  the  thought  is  similar. 
Jehovah  will  have  war  against  the  enemies  of  his  people.  "  When  the  enemy  shall 
come  in  like  a  flood,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  standard  against  him"  (Isa. 
lix.  19).  The  Lord  is  his  people's  banner,  their  rallying-point,  the  centre  round  which 
they  range  themselves  in  the  hour  of  danger,  when  trials  and  temptations  thicken,  and 
the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one  are  most  frequent  and  most  deadly.  The  bannei 
is  the  Lord  himself— his  presence,  his  love.  But  as  the  standards  round  which  our 
troops  have  fought  are  cherished  and  honoured,  and  reverently  preserved  in  our 
cathedrals ;  so  the  royal  banner  which  had  led  the  soldiers  of  the  cross  to  victory  floats 
ovt-r  the  banqueting-house  of  the  King.  It  is  the  token  of  his  presence.  He  is  there 
with  his  faithful  ones ;  he  receives  them  to  his  board ;  his  banner  is  love.  His  love, 
which  was  their  strength  in  the  day  of  conflict,  is  the  joy  of  their  souls  in  the  blessed 
hour  of  holy  communion  with  their  Lord.  But  the  words  run,  "  His  banner  over  me 
was  love ; "  "  The  Lord  is  my  Banner."  We  seem  to  see  here  a  foreshadowing  of  those 
very  precious  words  of  Holy  Scripture,  "  The  Son  of  God  loved  me,  and  gave  himself 
for  me."  The  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  a  personal,  an  individual  love.  "  The 
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his ; "  he  knows  them  one  and  all.  His  banner  is  over 
each  of  them  as  he  brings  them  into  his  banqueting-house,  as  he  draws  them  ever 
nearer  to  himself;  and  that  banner  is  love.  That  unutterable  love  is  their  defence  in 
times  of  danger,  their  joy  and  delight  in  seasons  of  spiritual  enjoyment.  Their  earnest 
effort  is  so  to  lift  up  their  hearts  unto  the  Lord  that  they  "  may  be  able  to  comprehend 
with  all  saints  what  is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height ;  and  to  know 
the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge."  The  banqueting-house  to  which  he 
brings  the  faithful  here  is  the  ante-room  of  the  true  presence-chamber  of  the  King. 
"  Here  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly ;  but  then  face  to  face :  here  we  know  in  part ;  but 
then  shall  we  know  even  as  also  we  are  known."  That  banqueting-house  is  the  house 
not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  There  also  his  banner,  which  is  love,  will 
be  over  his  elected  saints.  But  it  will  no  longer  lead  them  to  the  battle,  to  hard  and 
difficult  struggles ;  it  will  tell  of  victory  and  glory,  and  of  the  unveiled  presence  of  the 
King.  Heart  of  man  cannot  tell  what  is  the  joy  of  those  who  in  that  banqueting-house 
sit  down  at  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  Then  the  bride  shall  be  arrayed  in  fine 
linen,  clean  and  white,  the  fine  linen  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints  (Bev.  xix.  8). 
Then  each  true  soldier  of  the  cross,  who  with  that  banner  floating  over  him  has  fought 
the  good  fight  of  faith,  shall  see  that  banner  in  all  its  glorious  beauty,  and  sit  beneath 
it  very  near  the  King ;  for  it  is  written,  "  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit 
with  me  in  my  throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame,  and  am  set  down  with  my  Father  in 
his  throne."  4.  The  Iride's  longing.  She  is  sick  of  love.  The  joy  of  the  bridegroom's 
love  is  too  great  and  overwhelming ;  she  is  fainting  in  delight  too  sweet  for  her  powers. 
She  asks  for  restoratives,  "  cakes  of  raisins  "  (as  the  word  seems  to  mean,  not "  flagons  ") 
and  other  fruits  which  were  supposed  to  possess  strengthening  or  reviving  powers. 
When  the  Christian  comes  into  the  very  presence  of  the  King,  he  is  oppressed  with  the 
deep  sense  of  his  own  un worthiness,  his  own  cold  unloving  heart,  and  the  King's  awful 
holiness  and  adorable,  incomprehensible  love ;  he  needs  the  support  of  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit ;  he  needs  to  be  strengthened  with  all  might  by  the  Spirit  in  the  inner  man.  When 
God  reveals  his  great  love  to  us,  it  makes  us  feel  all  the  more  the  depth  of  our  ingratitude, 
the  coldness,  the  hardness,  of  this  stony  heart  of  oiirs. 

•*  O  Love  Divine,  how  sweet  thou  art  1 
When  shall  I  find  my  willing  heart 

All  taken  up  by  thee  ? 
I  thirst,  1  faint,  I  die  to  prove 
The  greatness  of  redeeming  lore, 

The  love  of  Christ  to  me." 


46  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1—17. 

The  bride  longs  for  yet  tenderer  tokens  of  affection.  Perhaps  the  words  of  ver.  6  would 
be  better  rendered  as  a  wish  or  prayer,  as  in  ch.  viii.  3,  where  they  occur  again:  "Oh 
that  his  left  hand  were  under  my  head,  and  his  right  hand  should  embrace  me !  "  The 
Christian  longs  to  be  drawn  ever  closer  into  the  Lord's  embrace ;  he  longs  to  lie  in 
spirit,  as  the  beloved  apostle  once  actually  lay, "  on  the  breast  of  Jesus."  Especially  he 
hopes  and  prays  to  be  supported  in  those  tender,  those  protecting  arms,  when  he  must 
pass  through  the  dark  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death ;  then  it  will  be  sweet  to  feel  that "  the 
eternal  God  is  thy  Eefuge,  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms"  (Deut.  xxxiii.  27). 
"  Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord,"  in  his  presence,  in  his  embrace.  But  if 
we  would  have  the  holy  comfort  of  that  dear  embrace  in  our  dying  hour,  we  must  try  to 
live  "  in  the  Lord  "  now,  to  walk  with  him  all  our  days,  to  cling  to  him  with  the  embrace 
of  faith.  The  Hebrew  verb  "embrace"  is  that  from  which  the  name  of  the  Prophet 
Habakkuk,  the  prophet  of  faith,  is  derived.  He  longed  for  the  Lord's  coming ;  he  ever 
watched  to  see  what  the  Lord  would  say  to  him ;  he  had  learned  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord 
in  the  midst  of  great  distress ;  he  taught  us  the  holy  lesson  which  St.  Paul  so  earnestly 
presses  upon  us,  "The  just  shall  live  by  his  faith."  Such  holy  souls,  being  justified 
by  faith,  shall  have  peace  with  Grod  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  5.  The  bride's 
charge  to  the  chorus.  There  is  an  error  in  the  old  version  of  this  thrice-repeated  charge 
(ch.  ii.  7 ;  iii.  5 ;  viii.  4).  The  bride  is  not  cautioning  the  chorus  not  to  awake  her  love,  the 
bridegroom ;  she  is  adjuring  (the  literal  translation)  them  not  to  awaken  love,  that  is, 
the  emotion,  the  affection,  of  love  till  it  please,  till  it  rise  spontaneously  in  the  heart. 
Hence  the  adjuration  by  the  gazelles  and  the  hinds  of  the  field.  They  are  gentle,  timid 
creatures.  Such  is  love  true  and  pure ;  it  is  retiring ;  it  shrinks  away  from  observation : 
it  is  a  sacred  thing,  between  the  lover  and  the  beloved.  The  bride  longs  for  the 
bridegroom's  love,  but  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  must  not  try  to  excite  it ;  it  is  more 
delicate,  more  maidenly,  to  wait  till  love  pleases  to  stir  itself,  till  it  sprina;s  up 
spontaneously  in  the  heart  of  the  beloved.  The  relations  of  the  soul  with  Christ  are 
very  sacred ;  they  may  be  mentioned  only  to  the  like-minded,  and  even  that  with  a 
certain  awe  and  reserve.  And  there  are  communings  of  the  heart  with  the  heavenly 
Bridegroom  which  may  be  divulged  to  none,  not  even  to  the  nearest  and  dearest.  And 
we  must  wait  in  patience  for  the  Bridegroom.  If  for  a  time  we  cannot  see  him,  or 
discern  the  tokens  of  his  love,  we  must  wait  for  his  good  time.  "  The  vision  is  yet  for  an 
appointed  time,"  wrote  the  prophet  of  faith ;  "  at  the  end  .  .  .  it  will  surely  come,  it  will 
not  tarry"  (Hab.  ii.  3).  God's  people  must  not  be  impatient;  they  must  trust;  they 
must  believe  that  "he  who  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  them  will  perform  it  until  the 
day  of  Jesus  Christ"  (Phil.  i.  6);  that  he  will  at  last  "fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of 
his  goodness,  and  the  work  of  faith  with  power"  (2  Thess.  i.  11). 

Vers.  8 — 17. — The  visit  of  tlieheloved.  I.  The  bride's  nabeativb.  1.  The  description 
of  his  first  coming.  The  bride  seems  to  be  relating  to  the  chorus  the  circumstances  of 
her  first  meeting  with  the  bridegroom.  The  King  of  Israel  sought  her  in  her  humble 
home  among  the  mountains  of  Lebanon  ;  there  he  wooed  and  won  her  to  be  his  bnde. 
So  the  heavenly  Bridegroom,  the  true  Solomon  who  built  the  spiritual  temple  of 
living  stones,  came  from  his  glory-throne  to  seek  his  bride,  the  Church ;  so  he  cometh 
now  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  The  bride  hears  the  voice  of  the  beloved  ; 
"  my  beloved,"  she  says.  In  that  little  pronoun  lies  a  great  meaning.  If  we  can  only 
say  in  sincerity  "  my  Saviour,"  "  my  Lord  and  my  God,"  "  my  King,"  "  my  Beloved,"  tuen 
we  can  realize  more  or  less  the  language  of  this  holy  Song  of  Songs,  and  see  the  spiritual 
meaning  which  underlies  its  touching  parable  of  love;  then  we  shall  often  look  back 
with  wondering  gratitude  and  tender  joy  to  the  days  of  our  first  conversion,  when  we 
first  heard  the  Saviour's  voice  calling  us  to  himself;  when  we  first  felt  that  "  he  1  >ved 
mp,  and  gave  himself  for  me ; "  when  we  first  tried  to  give  him  that  poor  love  of  ouis, 
which  in  his  blessed  condescension  he  sought  in  return  for  his  own  exceeding  great 
love.  The  beloved  is  seen  bounding  over  the  mountains;  he  is  like  a  gazelle  or  a 
young  hart,  fair  to  look  upon  and  graceful,  fleet  of  foot ;  he  stands  by  the  clay-built 
wall  of  the  humble  cottage ;  he  looks  in  at  the  windows.  So  the  Lord  came  to  this 
poor  earth  of  ours  to  seek  the  Church,  his  bride;  he  despised  not  the  stable  or  the 
manger.  So  now  he  seeketh  his  chosen  often  in  the  lowliest  homes;  he  looks  for  them 
shining  (such  is  one  possible  interpretation  of  the  word)  thiouch  the  lattice,  bringing 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  47 

brightness  into  the  poorest  abode ;  the  true  Light  "  lighteth  every  man  "  (John  i.  9). 
2.  The  call.  Those  first  words  of  love  are  treasured  up  in  the  memory  of  the  bride  ; 
she  remembers  every  tone  of  the  bridegroom's  voice,  the  place,  the  time,  all  the 
surroundings.  The  Hebrew  word  is  that  which  the  Lord  used  when  he  called  the 
little  daughter  of  Jairus  from  the  sleep  of  death:  "Talitha,  cumi."  So  now  he  calls 
his  chosen  one  by  one :  "  Rise  up."  They  that  have  earsto  hear  listen  to  the  gracious 
voice,  and,  like  Matthew  the  publican,  rise  and  follow  Christ.  The  soul  must  sleep  no 
longer  when  that  call  is  heard;  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep,  for  now  is  our 
salvation  near  at  hand.  When  he  bids  us  rise,  we  must  be  up  and  doing ;  we  must  ask, 
"  Lord,  what  wouldest  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  we  must  follow  whither  he  is  leading, 
and  give  him  the  love  which  in  his  love  he  desireth.  His  call  is  sweet,  exceedingly 
full  of  gracious  love ;  "  My  love,  my  fair  one."  "  My  love,"  perhaps  better,  "  my  friend  " 
(see  ch.  i.  9).  The  Lord  would  have  his  Church  "  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot, 
or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing."  The  Church,  alas  I  is  not  without  spot ;  it  is  stained 
with  many  sins ;  it  numbers  many  evil  men  within  its  fold.  But  the  Lord  said  of  the 
twelve,  the  first  germ  of  the  Church,  "  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world,"  "  Ye  are  the 
salt  of  the  earth,"  though  there  was  a  Judas  among  them;  and  so  now  his  great  love 
for  the  Church  makes  the  Church  with  all  her  faults  fair  in  the  Bridegroom's  eyes. 
Whatever  beauty  of  holiness  she  possesses  comes  only  from  his  beauty,  who  in  his 
love  has  chosen  her,  and  brought  her  near  to  himself,  making  her  shine  with  the  reflec- 
tion of  his  light,  who  is  the  true  Light.  But  the  call  comes,  not  only  to  the  Church 
in  the  aggregate,  but  in  God's  good  time  to  each  elect  soul.  The  Lord  knows  his  own ; 
he  calls  them  by  their  name.  "  Jesus  said  unto  her,  Mary."  And  they  who  answer, 
"  Eabboni,  my  Master,"  are  fair  in  the  Bridegroom's  sight.  Each  awakened  soul,  as  it 
rises  and  comes  to  Christ,  and  sees  something  of  his  heavenly  beauty,  and  of  its  own 
deformity  and  unworthiness,  is  filled  with  thankful  wonder.  There  are,  alas !  so  many 
stains  of  sin,  and  yet  he  says,  "  My  fair  one ;  "  so  much  weakness  and  unbelief  and 
selfishness,  and  yet,  "  My  (air  one ; "  so  much  ingratitude  and  hardness  of  heart,  and 
yet,  "  My  fair  one."  It  is  the  Saviour's  great  love  which  makes  our  sinful  souls  fair  in 
his  sight.  If  there  is  any  answering  love  in  our  hearts ;  if  we  rise  when  he  bids  us  and 
come  to  him;  if  we  can  say  in  any  sincerity,  though,  alasl  it  must  be  with  trembling 
and  a  deep  sense  of  sin,  "Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things;  thou  knowest  that  I  love 
thee ; " — then  the  soul  that  gives  its  love  to  Christ,  though  feebly  and  imperfectly,  is  fair 
in  the  sight  of  the  Bridegroom.  For  it  is  our  love  that  he  seeketh.  Love  covereth  a 
multitude  of  sins  :  "  Her  sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven ;  for  she  loved  much."  The 
soul  that  hears  the  Bridegroom's  call  must  rise  and  come  away ;  it  must  give  the  whole 
heart  to  Christ,  and  come  away  from  other  masters,  saying,  "  Babboni,  my  Master,"  and 
giving  itself  wholly  to  the  one  Master's  love ;  it  must  come  away  daily  from  every  little 
thing  which  tends  to  impede  its  communion  with  the  Lord,  or  to  deaden  its  sense  of 
his  love  and  presence ;  it  must  part  with  lower  ambitions,  lower  desires,  if  it  is  to  win 
the  pearl  of  great  price,  the  hidden  treasure.  So  we  are  told  in  Ps.  xlv.,  which  is  so 
like  the  Song  of  Songs,  "  Hearken,  O  daughter,  and  consider  :  incline  thine  ear;  foiget 
also  thine  own  people,  and  thy  father's  house ;  so  shall  the  King  have  pleasure  in  thy 
beauty."  The  soul  comes ;  for  the  Lord's  call  is  very  sacred,  and  touches  the  heart  with 
thrilling  power.  The  soul  comes  ;  for  the  joys  to  which  he  invites  us  are  beyond  all 
comparison  more  blessed  and  holy  than  all  besides.  The  winter  is  past  when  the 
Lord's  voice  is  heard — the  winter  of  coldness  and  indifference  and  unbelief;  the  spring 
of  hope  and  holy  joy  begins;  the  heart  singeth  unto  the  Lord,  making  in  itself  a 
melody  which  is  the  foretaste  of  the  new  song  which  only  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord 
can  learn  ;  the  voice  of  the  holy  Dove  is  heard  in  the  heart,  which  then  becomes  "  our 
land  " — the  kingdom  of  God. 

"  And  his  that  gentle  voice  we  hear, 
Soft  as  the  breath  of  even. 
That  checks  each  fault,  that  calms  each  ten. 
And  speaks  of  lieaven." 

When  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelleth  in  the  heart,  the  fig  tree  is  no  longer  barren,  the  Lord's 
vineyard  no  longer  bringeth  forth  wild  grapes ;  there  is  promise  of  the  fruits  of  the 
Scirit  in  ever  fuller  abundance.     Again  the  Bridegroom  calls  in  the  earnestness  of  his 


49  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [«!=■  n.  1—17. 

blessed  love,  "  Arise,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away."  It  may  be  that  in  that 
second  call  we  may  discern  an  anticipation  of  the  midnight  cry, "  Behold,  the  Bridegroun: 
Cometh;  go  ye  forth  to  meet  him."  Then  he  will  call  his  chosen  into  that  bk-sseil 
Paradise,  the  true  garden  of  the  Lord,  into  which  he  led  one  forgiving  soul  on  the  day 
of  his  own  most  precious  death.  Then  the  winter  will  he  past  indeed ;  the  eternal  spring 
will  begin  to  shine;  angel-voices  will  welcome  the  redeemed  into  that  blessed  rest 
which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  Grod.  They  that  are  ready  shall  enter  in ;  and  they 
will  be  ready  who  have  listened  to  the  first  call  of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom,  who  have 
arisen  in  answer  to  his  bidding  and  come  to  him,  giving  him  their  heart's  best  auctions, 
and  forsaking  for  his  dear  love's  sake  earthly  desires  and  earthly  ambitions. 

IL  The  bkidegeoom  and  the  bride.  1.  The  voice  of  the  bridegroom.  He  has 
climbed  the  steep  rock  by  the  ladder-like  path,  he  has  found  the  secluded  cottage ;  he 
calls  the  bride  his  dove ;  he  desires  to  see  her  and  to  hear  her  voice.  The  King  of  Israel 
climbed  the  rocks  of  Lebanon  in  search  of  the  maiden  whom  he  loved.  The  heavenly 
Bridegroom  climbed  the  steep  ascent  of  the  awful  cross  that  he  might  draw  to  himself 
the  love  of  the  Church,  his  bride  (John  xii.  32).  The  bridegroom  had  already  compared 
the  eyes  of  the  bride  to  doves  (ch.  i.  15)  ;  now  he  says,  "  0  my  dove."  It  tells  us  how 
dear  the  Christian  soul  is  to  the  Lord ;  it  tells  us  what  that  soul  ought  to  be — "  harmless 
03  doves."  The  rock-dove  lives  in  clefts  of  the  rocks.  The  soul  which  the  Lord  in  his 
holy  love  condescends  to  call  his  dove,  must  dwell  in  the  clefts  of  that  true  Rock  which 
is  Christ.  The  Rock  of  ages  was  cleft  for  us ;  the  Christian  soul  must  hide  itself  therein ; 
there  only  are  we  safe.  The  dove  is  in  the  secret  place,  which  can  be  reached  only  by 
climbing  up  the  precipitous  path.  There  is  a  steep  ascent  to  be  climbed  before  we 
can  be  hidden  in  the  clefts  of  the  Rock,  before  we  can  live  that  hidden  life  which 
is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,  before  we  can  be  safe,  hidden  in  the  wounded  side  of  our 
dear  Lord.  That  ascent  is  the  path  of  self-denial,  leading  ever  upward,  ever  closer 
to  him  who  trod  the  way  of  the  cross  for  our  salvation.  That  life  is  hidden.  "  In  the 
secret  of  his  tabernacle  shall  he  hide  me ;  he  shall  set  me  up  upon  a  rock  "  (Ps.  xxvii.  5). 
The  saint-like  character  is  like  the  dove,  retiring,  shrinking  from  observation;  some  oi 
God's  holiest  saints  live  silent,  humble  lives,  in  lowly  circumstances,  unseen  of  men.  But 
our  Father  which  seeth  in  secret  knows  their  prayers,  their  charity,  their  self-denials ; 
he  will  reward  them  openly.  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  deigns  to  see  a  sweetness  and 
a  beauty  in  a  lowly  Christian  life ;  such  a  life  is  comely  in  his  eyes,  for  it  hath  the 
beauty  of  holiness — a  beauty  derived  only  from  communion  with  him  who  is  the  eternal 
Beauty.  The  voice  of  hymn  and  psalm  ascending  from  that  lowly  dwelling  is  sweet 
in  the  Saviour's  ear.  The  loftiest  melodies  of  choir  and  organ,  if  love  and  faith  and 
reverence  are  absent,  cannot  reach  to  heaven ;  but  the  heart  that  is  practising  the 
new  song  in  thankfulness  and  adoration  maketh  a  melody  which  causeth  joy  in  the 
presence  of  the  angels  of  God.  2.  The  song  of  the  bride.  "  Take  us  the  foxes,  the  little 
foxes."  Some  scholars  regard  this  as  a  fragment  of  a  vintage-song.  The  bride  sings 
it  in  order  to  intimate  to  the  bridegroom,  as  she  does  more  plainly  in  ver.  17,  that  the 
care  of  the  vineyards  (see  ch.  i.  6)  must  prevent  her  from  joining  him  till  the  shadows 
lengthen  in  the  evening.  The  foxes  waste  the  vineyards,  and  the  vines  are  in 
blossom ;  therefore  the  little  foxes  must  be  caught.  The  little  sins  as  they  sometimes 
seem  to  us,  the  small  neglects,  the  prayer  carelessly  said,  the  worldly  thought,  the 
idle  word, — these  things  spoil  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord,  which  is  the  Christian  soul ; 
they  check  its  blossoming,  and  so  prevent  the  fruit  from  being  formed.  The  believer 
must  watch,  for  these  things  are  enemies  of  his  soul;  they  may  seem  to  be  like  little 
foxes,  small  and  of  no  strength,  but  they  mar  the  beauty  of  the  Christiiu  character, 
and  tend  to  check  the  promise  of  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  Therefore  they  must  be  caught 
and  destroyed  by  diligent  watchfulness,  by  earnest  persevering  prayer.  The  little 
foxes  do  not,  indeed,  root  up  and  devour  the  vineyard  like  the  wild  beasts  of  Ps.  Ixxx., 
but  they  check  its  fruitfulness.  And  the  small  transgressions,  if  they  do  no  worse, 
»t  least  prevent  the  Christian  from  attaining  that  saintliness  to  which  we  are  called. 
The  little  foxes  hide  and  skulk  about;  the  small  sins  are  apt  to  escape  detection. 
Therefore  there  is  need  of  constant  watchfulness  and  of  very  careful  and  diligent 
self-examination.  For  we  are  "  called  to  be  saints  "  (1  Cor.  i.  2 ;  Bom.  1.  7) ;  we  are 
bidden  to  follow  after  holiness,  to  aim  at  perfection,  to  walk  in  the  light.  The  little 
hindrances  must  be  oTeicome,  the  little  shadows  must  be  driven  away.    3.  The  happy 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  49 

union  of  love.  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his :  he  feedeth  his  flock  amoog 
the  lilies."  The  favoured  maiden,  it  may  be,  could  not  at  the  moment  join  her  royal 
lover ;  but  her  heart  was  wholly  his,  and  she  knew  that  his  love  was  fixed  upon  her. 
She  describes  him  as  a  shepherd,  but  her  words  are  figurative ;  he  feedeth  his  flock, 
not  in  common  pastures,  but  among  the  lilies  of  bis  garden,  the  garden  of  spices 
mentioned  again  in  oh.  vi.  2.  She  delights  in  dwelling  on  the  union  of  their  hearts ; 
three  times  she  repeats  the  happy  words  (ver.  16  ;  oh.  vi.  3 ;  vii.  10).  The  Church  is  the 
Lord's.  He  loved  her,  and  gave  himself  for  her,  and  presenteth  her  to  himself  as  his 
bride  (Eph.  v.  25,  27) ;  and  he  is  hers,  her  Bridegroom,  her  King,  her  Lord.  The 
Christian  soul  is  the  Lord's.  "  Whether  we  live  or  whether  we  die,  we  are  the  Lord's  " 
(Rom.  xiv.  8).  He  gave  himself  to  each  one  of  us  individually  when  he  called  us  to 
be  his  own ;  we  give  ourselves  to  him  at  the  moment  of  our  first  spiritual  awakening; 
we  renew  the  gift  continually  in  the  hour  of  prayer,  in  the  holy  communion :  "  We 
offer  and  present  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  ourselves,  our  souls  and  bodies,  to  be  a  reasonable, 
holy,  and  lively  sacrifice  unto  thee."  *'  My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his  " — to  know 
that  with  the  knowledge  of  personal  experience  is  the  highest  of  spiritual  blessings. 
He  gives  himself  first  to  us,  and  by  that  gift  he  enables  us,  cold  and  selfish  as  we  are,  to 
give  ourselves  to  him.  None  can  tell  the  blessedness  of  that  inner  spiritual  union  with 
the  Lord  save  those  happy  souls  to  whom  it  is  given ;  and  they  to  whom  he  has 
manifested  himself  must  very  jealously  keep  their  souls  from  any  unfaithful  leaning  to 
other  masters,  that  they  may  be  wholly  his,  that  no  unfaithfulness  may  mar  the  pure 
clear  truth  of  their  heart's  love  for  him  who  loved  them  even  unto  death,  and  deigns 
now  to  irradiate  ttieir  hearts  with  his  most  sacred  presence.  He  is  their  Lord,  and 
he  is  their  good  Shepherd ;  he  knoweth  his  own,  and  bis  own  know  him.  Once  he 
gave  his  life  for  the  sheep;  now  he  feeds  them,  and  leads  them  on  their  way,  till  they 
come  to  the  lilies  of  Paradise,  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  4.  The  adieus  of  the  bride.  She 
has  expressed  her  confidence  in  her  lover's  affection  and  her  own  devotion  to  him;  but 
now,  apparently,  she  repeats  the  intimation  of  ver.  15  in  plainer  words :  her  duties  in 
the  vineyard  will  occupy  her  time  till  the  evening.  She  wishes  her  lover  to  continue 
his  hunting  excursion  on  the  mountains  of  Bother,  or,  it  may  be,  "  of  separation  " — the 
mountains  which  for  the  time  separate  the  lovers.  She  invites  him  to  return  when  the 
day  is  cool,  when  the  day  breathes ;  that  is,  when  the  breeze  comes  in  the  evening,  and 
the  shadows  lengthen  and  flee  away  (see  Jer,  vi.  4).  The  Christian  must  not  neglect 
the  ordinary  commonplace  duties  of  life;  he  must  not  allow  himself,  like  the  Thessa- 
lonians,  to  be  so  distiacted  with  spiritual  excitement  as  to  be  unable  to  attend  to  the 
pursuits  of  his  calling.  The  bride  tends  the  vineyards  which  have  been  committed  to 
her  charge  ;  the  Christian  must  do  with  his  might  whatever  his  hand  findeth  to  do.  He 
must  not  neglect  his  duties  even  for  the  sake  of  giving  all  his  time  to  religious  exercises. 
Laborare  est  orare.  If,  whatever  he  does,  he  does  all  to  the  glory  of  God,  Christ  is  his, 
and  he  is  Christ's,  as  fully  in  the  midst  of  daily  work  as  in  the  hour  of  prayer.  Daniel, 
who  kneeled  upon  his  knees,  and  prayed  and  gave  thanks  three  times  a  day,  was 
faithful  in  all  things  to  the  kinu;  his  master ;  no  error  or  fault  could  be  found  in  the 
administration  of  his  arduous  office.  The  bride  will  welcome  her  lover  back  in  the  cool 
of  the  evening,  when  she  has  finished  her  work ;  the  Christian  will  take  delight  in  his 
eve'U'og  prayers  when  the  tasks  of  the  day  have  been  performed. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — The  rose  and  the  lily.  We  have  suggested  here  the  self-consciousness  of 
the  renewed  soul  as  to  its  true  character  and  condition.  It  is  the  maiden  who  speaks, 
not  her  beloved,  who  in  the  next  verse  lovingly  responds  to  what  she  says  of  herself. 
She  likens  herself — 

I.  To  THE  EOSB  OP  Shabon.  That  is,  to  a  common  field  flower,  not  rare  or  distin- 
guished, but  of  the  lowliest  if  also  of  the  loveliest  kind.  1.  It  is  the  utterance  of 
humility.  (Of.  Paul's  word  of  himself  as  "less  than  the  least  of  all  saints.")  Lowly 
thoughts  of  themselves  are  ever  the  characteristics  of  saints.  It  is  not  so  strong  an 
expression  as  the  "  I  am  black  "  of  ch.  i.  5,  but  it  is  of  similar  order  (of.  on  oh.  i.  5). 

BONS  or  BOLOUON.  •  K 


60  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMuN.  [oh. ml— 17 

2.  But  not  of  false  humility.  For  though  a  lowly  it  is  yet  a  lovely  flower.  The  rosa 
of  Sharon  was  that  "  excellency  of  Sharon  "  which  Isaiah  couples  with  "  the  glory  of 
Lebanon."  Here,  too,  the  resemblance  between  this  and  the  "  but  comely  "  of  oh.  i.  5 
is  evident.  And  the  saintly  soul  is  lovely — in  the  sight  of  its  Lord,  in  the  sight  of  the 
Ohiircb,  and  in  the  sight  of  men.  Of  our  Lord  it  is  said  that  "  the  grace  of  God 
was  upon  him,"  and  that  he  grew  "  in  favour  with  God  and  man."  And  this  is  so  with 
his  people,  for  he  makes  them  beautiful  and  precious  in  his  sioht.  She  who  is  here  the 
type  of  such  soul  is  called  "  the  fairest  among  women."  3.  And  the  rose  is  also  fragrant. 
True,  to  it  as  to  others  the  poet's  lines  apply — 

"  Full  many  a  flower  is  bom  to  blush  unseen, 
And  waste  its  fragrance  on  the  desert  air." 

But  the  saintly  soul  is  what  it  is  because  it  is  its  nature  to  be  so,  whether  admired  or 
not  (cf.  on  ch.  i.  12).  And  such  souls  are  :  4.  The  glory  of  the  places  where  they  are 
found.  The  Plain  of  Sharon  is  remembered  in  the  minds  of  men  for  this  its  "excel- 
lency"— the  roses  that  grow  there.  The  world  would  not  say  that  the  glory  of  a  place 
was  its  saints.  It  would  point  to  its  popular  heroes,  and  those  whom  it  calls  its  great 
men.  But  by  the  side  of  such  flowers  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  fades  by  comparison. 
How  plainly  the  Divine  estimate  of  men  is  seen  in  God's  choice  of  Israel — a  small,  insigni- 
ficant people,  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  the  great  empires  of  ancient  and  modern  days  I 
But  because  in  them,  as  in  none  other,  the  saints  of  the  Lord  were  found,  therefore  on 
ihem  and  on  their  land  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  rested  night  and  day.  According  to  our 
character,  according  as  we  are  governed  by  the  faith,  the  fear,  and  the  love  of  God,  are 
we  a  blessing  and  an  honour  to  our  land  and  age.  And  they  :  5.  Delight  in  the  sunshine 
of  his  love.  The  rose  is  the  child  of  the  sun.  Its  bright  rays  must  rest  upon  it  or  its 
radiant  beauty  will  not  be  revealed.  And  we  are  to  "  walk  in  the  light,"  and  to  be 
"  children  of  the  light." 

II.  The  lily  of  the  valleys.  This  is  another  emblem  of  the  saintly  soul.  1.  Of 
their  character.  Puriiy,  sweetness,  power  of  self-multiplication.  What  numbers  of 
them  there  are  1  Bushnell  speaks  in  his  '  Christian  Nurture '  of  "  the  out-propagating 
power  of  the  Christian  stock,"  by  which  he  means  the  power  given  to  Uhristiau  faith 
to  reproduce  itself  lieyond  the  like  power  possessed  by  that  which  is  unchristian.  And 
it  has  been  so.  How  soon  was  the  whole  Eoman  empire  converted  to  Christianity! 
It  is  the  truth  taught  in  the  parable  of  the  mustard  seed  (Matt.  xiii.).  And  it  will  be 
so  yet  more.  "  The  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord."  2.  Their 
home  is  in  the  "  valleys."  (1)  The  lowly  places.  They  "  mind  not  high  things."  They 
"  learn  of  "  him  who  said,  "  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;"  and,  "  When  thou  art  bidden 
to  a  feast,  take  the  lowest  place."  It  is  in  such  valleys  that  some  of  Christ's  fairest 
flowers  are  found.  Amongst  the  poor.  The  afflicted.  The  persecuted.  (2)  Where,  though 
exposed  to  much  peril,  they  are  yet  preserved.  How  wonderful  has  been  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  Church  when  we  think  of  the  perils  it  has  had  to  encounter  1  As  sheep 
amongst  wolves  Christ  sent  them.  But  yet  the  sheep  outnumber  the  wolves,  and  have 
long  done  so.  The  lilies  liable  to  be  plucked  by  any  passer-by,  trampled  on  or  devoured 
by  any  beast,  yet  they  live  on,  and  each  spring  sees  the  valleys  covered  with  them 
again.  3.  ITiey  are  found  where  the  living  streams  abound.  The  well-watered  valleys 
are  the  lilies'  natural  home.  And  so  with  the  saintly  soul.  It  lives  by  that  river  the 
streams  whereof  make  its  home  glad.  So,  then,  here  is  another  portraiture  of  such  a 
soul.     Do  we  behold  our  face  in  this  glass  ?— S.  0. 

Ver.  2. — The  Lord's  response  to  the  lily.  "  As  the  lily  among  thorns." 
I.  He  does  set  his  lilies  amid  such  subboundinqs.  By  the  thorns  we  may 
understand :  1.  The  world  of  the  ungodly.  "  Among  them  that  are  set  on  fire,  even 
the  sons  of  men,  whose  teeth  are  spears  and  arrows,  and  their  tongue  a  sharp  sword  " 
(Ps.  Ivii.  4).  "  The  saint  must  expect  to  find  himself,  while  in  this  world,  among 
uncongenial  and  hostile  spirits."  2.  Trials  and  temptations.  (Cf.  Paul's  "  thorn  in 
the  flesh.")  3.  Hindrances  to  our  growth  and  peril  to  our  life.  "  The  thorns  sprang 
up  and  choked  them  "  (Matt.  xiii.).  'Tis  a  wonder,  when  we  think  of  it,  how  any  of 
these  lilies  live  at  alL   4.  AU  others  than  they  who  are  tlie  Lord'*.    The  speaker  in  text 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  61 

compares  all  other  daughters  with  her,  and  classes  them  all  with  the  thorns  as  compared 
with  her.  If  whatsoever  be  not  of  faith  be  sin,  then,  whatsoever  it  be,  it  comes  under 
this  ill-sounding  name  of  "  thorns."    Such  are  the  surroundings  of  the  saintly  soul. 

II.  Nevbetheless,  they  grow  there.  As  a  fact,  they  do  and  increase.  And  the 
reason  is  that  given  to  Paul  when  he  "  besought  the  Lord  thrice  "  concerning  his  thorn  : 
"  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee :  .  .  .  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness."  There 
is  no  other  account  to  be  given  of  the  matter.     It  is  all  a  marvel  but  for  that. 

III.  And  it  is  in  his  grace  and  wisdom  that  they  abb  where  thbt  are. 
How  many  wise  and  holy  ends  are  secured  by  it !  1.  Ood's  grace  is  magnified  in  and 
by  them.  It  is  easy  to  grow  amid  favourable  surroundings,  where  much  helps  and  but 
little  hinders.  Growth  there  is  not  remarkable.  To  be  Christ's  servants  where  such 
service  is  general,  and  even  popular,  is  no  hardship.  But  if  amid  thorns,  amid  all  that 
hinders,  all  that  makes  it  difficult  to  serve  Christ,  if  there  we  serve  him,  then  is  his 
grace  magnified.  2.  The  world  is  kept  from  being  hell.  From  being  all  thorns,  dry, 
barren,  hurtful,  fit  only  for  the  fire.  What  would  this  world  be  if  God's  saints  were 
taken  out  of  it?  Life  would,  indeed,  then  be  not  worth  living.  It  would  be  better  had 
men  never  been  born.  3.  The  thorns  may  he  led  to  become  lilies.  Of  course,  this  is 
impossible  in  the  natural  world,  but,  thank  God,  not  in  the  spiritual.  And  such  trans- 
formation often  occurs,  and  that  it  may,  God  places  his  lilies  where  they  are.  "  As  the 
Father  hath  sent  me,  so  send  I  yoij,"  he  said  to  his  disciples.  But  the  Father  sent  the 
Son  to  save  the  world.  This,  therefore,  in  their  measure  is  the  mission  of  his  people, 
and  hence  they  must  be  where  they  are. 

IV.  Bdt  it  will  not  be  so  ALWAYS.  The  lilies  shall  be  transplanted  that  they 
may  bloom  for  ever  in  the  Paradise  of  God.  And  the  thorns  I — what  is  fit  for  such  will 
be  done.  Therefore  if  we  be  of  the  blessed  number  whom  the  lilies  of  the  valleys  repre- 
sent, let  tis  not  murmur,  but  remember  what  our  mission  is,  and  seek  to  fulfil  it.  And 
let  each  one  of  us  ask — Which  am  I,  lily  or  thorn  ? — S.  C. 

Ver.  3. — "  His  shadow."  St.  Bernard  takes  this  as  telling  of  the  Passion  of  Christ, 
and  especially  of  the  time  when,  as  he  hung  on  the  cross,  there  was  "  darkness  over  all 
the  land."  Now,  it  does  not  mean  this,  but  rather,  as  the  whole  context  of  the  verse 
tells,  of  the  cool  shelter  from  the  sun's  fierce  heat  and  glare  which  the.  speaker  enjoyed 
beneath  the  o'erarching  of  the  boughs  of  the  tree  under  which  she  had  seated  herself. 
Hence  it  tells  of  "  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty,"  of  which  Ps.  xci.  so  fully  speaks. 
Therefore  let  us  take  this — 

L  Its  true  meaning.  "Man  is  born  to  trouble;"  he  needs  shelter  continually. 
The  sun  smites  him  by  day ;  the  fierce  heat  of  life's  cares  and  distresses  often  make 
him  faint  and  weary.  Now :  1.  There  are  other  shelters  which  men  often  choose.  The 
world  ofifers  many.  (1)  Its  riches.  Men  think,  if  they  can  only  get  these,  they  will 
be  protected  from  all  liarm,  both  they  and  theirs.  Hence  men  struggle  after  them 
incessantly.  (2)  Its  friends.  If  we  can  gather  round  us  a  sufficient  number  of  these,  and 
of  the  right  kind,  we  sit  down  under  that  shadow  with  great  delight.  (3)  Its  pleasures 
also.  Men  plunge  into  them  as  into  some  leafy  covert,  where  they  can  hide  themselves 
from  the  darts  of  all  kinds  of  pursuing  pains.  But  are  not  all  these  what  the  prophet 
calls  "  walls  daubed  with  untempered  mortar ; "  or,  as  in  another  place  another  prophet 
speaks,  "  battlements  "  which  are  "  not  the  Lord's  "  ?  2.  But  what  harm  they  do  us  I 
They  are  short-lived,  and  when  our  sorest  need  comes  these  Jonah-gourds  have  all 
withered.  And  at  the  best  they  are  but  imperfect.  They  can  for  a  while  "affect  our 
circumstances,  but  the  soul,  the  true  seat  of  aU  trouble,  they  cannot  better,  but  only 
make  worse.  For  they  do  us  this  wrong  also — they  come  between  us  and  man's  only 
true  Shelter,  "  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty."  They  hinder  our  seeing  and  our  seeking 
it,  and  then,  sooner  or  later,  do  assuredly  fail  us  themselveg.  Under  the  image  of 
"cisterns,  broken  cisterns,  which  can  hold  no  water,"  and  for  the  sake  of  which  men  in 
their  folly  forsake  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  Jeremiah  mourns  the  same  infatuat-^n. 
3.  But  the  Lord  is  alone  man's  true  Defence.  The  failure  of  others,  the  tmvaried  pro- 
tection that  this  affords,  is  proof  incontestable.  This  blessed  shadow,  whilst  Israel 
rested  in  it,  sheltered  them  from  all  evil ;  and  it  does  so  still  for  every  one  that "  dwelleth 
in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High  " — every  one,  that  is,  who  abides  in  the  trust  of 
him  of  whom  the  secret  place  told.    That  secret  place  was  the  inner  chamber  in  the 


52  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1—17. 

tabernacle  which  was  known  as  the  most  holy  place,  and  which  was  emphatically  secret, 
for  it  was  never  entered  but  once  a  year,  and  then  by  the  high  priest  alone.  But  it 
told  of  man's  need  of  God's  grace,  and  of  that  grace  provided  for  him.  To  trust,  then, 
in  that  God  was,  and  is,  to  dwell  "  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty."  May  that 
happy  lot  be  ours ! 

II.  The  meaning  it  has  suggested.  The  shadow  of  the  cross,  the  shadow  into 
which  our  Lord  entered  during  his  Passion  especially.  1.  It  was  his  shadow.  See  the 
agony  in  the  garden ;  hear  the  cry  from  the  cross,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast,"  etc.  ? 
Bead  Ps.  xxii.,  which  tells  of  those  dread  hours.  We  read,  once  and  again,  in  the 
Gospels  of  his  being  troubled,  of  his  sighing,  of  his  tears.  Anticipating  his  death,  he 
said,  "  Now  is  my  soul  troubled."  Yes,  what  wonder  that  he  feared  as  he  entered  that 
dark  shadow  I  2.  But  we  may  sit  under  it "  with  great  delight,"  and  its  fruit  is  sweet 
to  our  taste.  (1)  For  that  shadow  has  flown  away.  The  cross  is  taken  down.  In  its 
special  form  the  Passion  is  past.  Now,  "  on  his  head  "  is  not  the  prown  of  thorns,  but 
the  "many  crowns"  of  his  people's  love.  With  great  delight  do  they  think  of  this. 
(2)  And  dark  as  that  shadow  was,  it  was  the  background  on  which  shone  out  respleii- 
dently  the  love  of  the  heart  of  God.  Man  had  never  really  seen  that  love  but  lor  that 
shadow.  (3)  And  because  of  all  that  has  come  forth  from  that  shadow.  Who  can 
reckon  up  in  order  or  number  the  sweet  fruits  of  that  tree  on  which  the  Saviour  hung  ? 
Have  they  not  been,  are  they  not,  and  will  they  not  yet  more  be,  blessed  for  man  ? 
What  of  redeeming  force  for  all  men  was  not  set  in  motion  by  that  act  of  redemption? 
Well,  therefore,  may  even  those  who  look  not  upon  our  Lord  as  we  do,  nevertheless 
sing,  "  In  the  cross  of  Christ  I  glory."  3.  But  his  shadow  mag,  will,  must,  he  ours. 
For  we  also  are  to  take  up  our  cross  and  follow  after  liim.  We  have  to  "  know  the 
fellowship  of  his  suifenngs,  and  to  be  made  conformable  to  his  death." 

"All  that  into  God's  kingdom  come 
Must  enter  by  this  door." 

In  some  this  fellowship  with  his  sufferings  has  been  manifest  to  all  in  that  which  they 
have  been  called  upon  to  endure.  In  others,  outwardly,  there  may  not  have  been  much, 
if  anything,  to  tell  of  such  fellowship.  But  there  is  the  spiritual  cross,  as  real,  as 
sharp,  as  heavy,  as  repellent  to  our  nature,  as  the  outward  anil  visible  one.  And  who 
may  escape  that  ?  But:  4.  We  may  sit  under  such  shadow  with  great  delight.  (1)  Men 
have  done  so  (cf.  "  I  glory  in  tribulations  also  ").  And  St.  Paul  again,  throughout  the 
Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  whose  key-note  is  joy.  Yet  he  was  in  prison  and  io  peril  of 
his  life  all  the  while.  And  his  experience  has  been  that  of  "  a  great  multitude  which 
no  man  can  number,  out  of,"  etc.  (2)  Why  is  this  ?  Because  it  has  been  his  shadow. 
The  reason  of  suffering  is  the  measure  of  its  power  over  us.  Does  the  fond  mother, 
watching  night  after  night  by  the  bed  of  her  fever-stricken,  darling  child,  think  rauoh 
or  complain  of  her  sufl'erings  ?  Does  she  not  glory  in  them  if  they  can  but  help  her 
child?  And  so  if  our  shadow  be  his  shadow,  that  which  he  has  bidden  us  bear,  then 
because  it  is  his  we  shall  '•  sit  down  under  it  with,"  etc.  St.  Paul  sprang  towards  it, 
counted  all  things  but  loss  that  he  might  attain  to  the  excellency  of  its  knowledge ;  so 
he  speaks  of  it  with  almost  rapture,  with  certainly  no  complaint.  He  was  one  of  those 
who  "  sat  dovim  under  ...  to  his  taste."  Then  let  it  be  our  sole  care  to  see  that  the 
shadows  which  draw  over  all  lives,  and  which  will  darken  ours  sometimes,  be  his  shadow, 
and  then,  all  will  be  well. — S.  0. 

Vers.  6 — 7. — Faint  for  love.  Keeping  to  the  spiritual,  not  the  historical,  interpre- 
tation, these  verses  suggest  what  is  common  to  all,  but  confessed  here  only  by  the 
saintly  soul. 

I.  Ohbist  SHABB8  IT.  He  Said  when  on  the  cross, "  I  thirst,"  and  that  told  not 
alone  of  his  physical  thirst,  but  of  that  sacred,  insatiable,  and  still  unsatisfied  thirst  for 
the  love  of  human  hearts.  He  could  say,  "  I  am  faint  for  love."  And  yet  he  yearns 
for  that  love,  though  much  he  already  possesses,  and  will  more  and  more.  The  Passion 
was  but  as  a  picture  thrown  upon  a  sheet  to  make  clear  and  conspicuous  to  all  what 
else  they  had  not  seen.  So  the  sufferings  of  Christ  serve  to  show  not  what  was  once, 
but  what  eternally  is,  in  the  heart  of  Christ — this  yearning  for  man's  love.  The  Holy 
Spirit,  the  unseen  and  spiritual  Christ,  is  yet  on  earth  amongst  men ;  and  yet,  as  he 


OH. Ill— 17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  63 

pleads  with  them,  is  grieved  and  done  despite  to,  as  he  was  in  the  days  of  his  flesh. 
His  thirst  is  not  yet  satisfied ;  all  the  loving  invitations  of  the  gospel  prove  this.  It  is 
our  joy  to  helieve  that  the  day  will  dawn  when,  though  now,  as  ever  in  the  past,  faint 
for  man's  love,  be  will  "  see  of  the  travail  of  his  sou^  and  be  satisfied."  Be  it  ours  to 
hasten  that  day  I 

II.  The  wobld  also,  but  knows  not  what  it  needs.  The  love  of  Christ  is  what 
the  world  wants,  though  it  wanders  wearily  off,  as  it  has  done  from  the  beginning,  after 
what  it  foolishly  deems  will  satisfy  its  need.  All  the  unrest,  the  agitation,  the  seething 
discontent,  the  wild  rush  after  this  scheme  and  that,  which  promise  its  betterment, — all 
show  how  great  its  need,  and  how  yet  that  need  remains  unmet.  If  the  Church  of  Christ 
on  earth  were  but  what  its  name  professes,  soon  would  the  weary  world  see  where  all  its 
wants  would  find  supply,  and  turn  to  him  for  whose  love  it  is  that  it  faints,  and  is  so 
wretched  and  woebegone.  It  needs  that  love  to  be  the  animating  principle  of  Christian 
people,  in  their  conversation,  conduct,  habits,  business,  and  ways ;  which  assuredly  it  is 
far  enough  from  being  at  present,  else  why  is  society  as  it  is  ?  why  are  there  "  sub- 
merged tenths"  and  "darkest  Englands,"  as  we  know  there  are?  Is  this  the  outcome 
of  a  Christian  civilization  ?  No ;  only  the  natural  product  of  a  civilization  which  is 
everything  but  Christian.  And  yet  more,  the  world  needs  Christ's  love  in  themselves. 
For  lack  of  that  it  is  as  it  is. 

III.  But  sfeoiallt  the  Christian  souii.  And  the  confession  of  faintness  for  Ms 
love  may  be  true  i  1.  In  a  sad  sense.  If  such  soul  be  faint,  as  many  are,  incapable 
of  real  service,  weakly,  inefiectual,  and  impoverished,  is  not  the  true  and  sad  cause 
revealed  in  this  confession  ?  As  plants  cannot  grow  without  the  light  and  warmth  of 
the  sun,  so  Christian  souls  cannot  prosper  that  do  not  come  into  and  "continue  in" 
Christ's  love.  But  the  confession  as  made  here  is  not  in  a  sad  sense,  but :  2.  In  a  very 
blessed  one.  It  is  the  very  presence  of  his  love  in  the  soul  that  leads  to  the  longing  for 
deeper  enjoyment  of  it.  "  My  soul  breaketh  for  the  longing  that  it  hath  after  thy 
commandments  at  all  times ; "  "  My  soul  longeth,  yea,  even  fainteth,  for  the  courts  of 
the  Lord ; "  and  Ps.  Ixiii.  1,  are  all  similar  expressions.  Great  saints  have  all  of  them 
known  this  holy  longing,  this  going  out  of  the  soul  after  God  in  great  vehemenoy  of 
desire ;  and  blessed,  blessed  indeed,  are  they.  My  soul,  be  thou  of  their  number  I  And 
such  revelations  of  the  Lord's  grace  often  affect  the  body  as  well  as  the  soul,  causing 
faintness  and  overwhelming  emotion  (cf.  Dan.  x.  8 — 19 ;  Judg.  vi.  22 ;  Eev.  1, 12— 
18 ;  2  Cor.  zii.  7,  in  illustration  of  this).  3.  But  in  such  faintness  tha  soul  craves 
support.  This  is  suggested  by  the  request  made  (ver.  5),  "  Stay  me  with  cordials,  com- 
fort me  with  citrons."  These  were  the  refreshments  she  had  enjoyed  when  "  nuder  his 
shadow,"  and  when  she  ate  of  the  "  fruit  sweet  to  her  taste  "  (ver.  3).  Translated  into 
their  spiritual  meaning,  they  tell  of  those  precious  truths  and  teachings  which  come 
from  and  cluster  round  the  cross  of  Christ.  The  soul  would  drink  again  of  such  "  cup 
of  salvation,"  and  eat  of  the  fruit  of  such  "  tree  of  life."  It  was  the  power  of  those 
truths,  brought  home  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  heretofore  had  quickened  and  sustained 
the  soul,  and  hence  they  are  desired  again.  And  they  seem  to  have  been  partaken  of 
(cf.  Ps.  cxxxviii.  3 ;  Prov.  xxxi.  6),  and  the  soul  to  have  been  thereby  brought  again 
to  the  rich  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  love.  And :  4.  It  Jmd»  what  it  hat  «o  eamesU}/ 
desired.    (Ver.  6.) 

"  As  in  the  embraces  of  my  Ood, 
Or  on  my  Saviour's  breast." 

This  sacred  enfolding  of  the  soul  in  the  love  of  God  is  the  meaning  of  the  verse,  or, 
at  least,  the  designed  teaching.  Think  what  must  have  been  the  joy  of  the  penitent 
prodigal  when,  after  his  weary  journey,  he  found  thrown  around  him,  in  loving  welcome, 
the  arms  of  his  father,  against  whom  he  had  so  sinned ;  and  on  his  brow  the  father's 
kiss.  That  rapture  of  the  soul  when  it  is  filled  with  the  sense  of  the  Divine  love, — these 
are  the  embraces  of  God  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  well-known  words,  "  He  fell  on  his 
neck,  and  kissed  him."  That  part  of  the  parable  which  tells  of  the  prodigal's  yearning 
for  home,  the  weary  journey,  and  then  the  welcome,  may  be  taken  as  the  gospel  com- 
mentary on  these  verses.  And  the  soul  shall  be  enfolded  in  this  Divine  love ;  it  shall 
not  be  faint  for  it,  and  ever  continue  so.  For  the  next  verse  tells :  5.  How  the  soul 
is  a/nxious  not  to  he  distwrbed  in  its  blessed  condition  until  the  Lord  wilL    The  maiden 


54  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1—17 

of  the  song  is  represented  as  addressing  a  passionate  adjuration  to  her  companions, "  by 
the  roes  and  hinds" — that  is,  by  all  beautiful,  loving,  timid,  and  easily  startled  things, 
as  these  were — that  they  should  not  awaken  her  beloved  from  his  repose  until  he  wilL 
And  so  the  soul  that  rests  in  the  realization  of  God's  love  would  linger  therein. 

"  My  willing  soul  would  stay 
In  such  a  tiame  as  this." 

And  this  side  of  heaven  there  is  no  such  joy  to  be  realized  as  this.  Alas  I  how  rare  it 
is,  or  rather,  how  rarely  we  find  it,  though  we  might  if  we  would  1  Still,  the  soul 
knows  that  its  life  is  not  to  be  all  enjoyment.  Service  has  to  be  rendered.  The 
disciples  would  have  liked  to  stay  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration ;  they  said,  "  It  is 
good  to  be  here ; "  but  the  poor  lunatic  lad  down  below  needed  healing,  and  therefore 
neither  their  Lord  nor  they  might  linger  where  they  were.  Hence,  though  the  soul 
would  rest  always  in  the  joy  of  his  realized  love,  yet  it  may,  probably  will,  as  with 
Paul,  be  sent  forth  to  stern  duty  and  patient  toil.  Therefore  it  is  added,  "  until  he 
please." 

"  O  Love  Divine,  how  sweet  thou  aiti 
'When  shall  I  find  my  willing  heart 
All  taken  up  by  thee?" 

8.0. 

Vers.  8 — 17. — The  totH  wooed  and  won.  la  this  lovely  pastoral  the  literal  meaning 
Is,  we  think,  as  stated  in  introduction  to  homily  on  ver.  15.  But  it  may  be  taken 
as  setting  forth  how  Christ  woos  and  wins  the  souls  he  loves.  The  various  stages 
are  shown. 

L  The  boul  hbabs  his  voice.  "  The  voice  of  my  Beloved  "  (ver.  8).  It  is  as  said 
in  John  X.,  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice."  They  hear  it  in  the  loving  exhortations  of 
those  who  would  win  them  for  Christ ;  in  hia  Word ;  in  the  silent  pleadings  of  his  Spirit ; 
in  his  providence.  And  it  is  gladly  heard.  The  tone  of  this  ver.  8  shows  that  she  who 
hears  is  pleased  to  hear.  There  is  the  response  of  her  heart ;  cf.  "  My  sheep  hear  .  .  . 
and  follow  me ;  "  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  heareth." 

IL  Then  the  soul  sees  him  cominq.  "  Behold,  he  cometh  leaping  upon,"  etc. 
Christ  says  to  his  Church,  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  There,  as  here,  his  coming  is : 
1.  Swiftly.  Conversions  to  Christ  very  rarely  are  sudden,  but  they  often  seem  so 
(cf.  those  of  penitent  thief,  Paul,  Philippian  gaoler).  The  conviction  that  Christ  alone 
can  save  us,  and  that  he  will,  is  borne  in  upon  our  souls  all  in  a  moment,  as  it  were ; 
the  truth  rushes  in  upon  us.  2.  No  distance  can  keep  him  back.  The  soul  has  been 
distant  enough  from  him ;  "  over  the  hills,  and  far  away."  How  we  have  kept  aloof 
from  him  I  What  space  we  have  put  between  him  and  ourselves !  Gone,  maybe,  into 
some  "  far  country."  3.  Difficulties  do  not  daunt  him.  Mountains  and  hills — heleapeth 
upon  them.  What  impossibilities  have  sometimes  seemed  to  stand  in  the  way  of  a 
soul's  salvation  1  Take  the  instances  above  named.  What  human  probability  was 
there  that  they  should  be  won  for  Christ?  But  he  makes  nothing  of  them;  they 
cannot  hinder  him.  "  Who  art  thou,  0  great  mountain  ?  before  Zerubbabel,"  etc.  (Zech. 
iv.  7).  4.  Very  near.  "  He  standeth  behind  our  wall."  Just  outside  (cf.  "  Behold,  I 
stanil  at  the  door,  and  knock  ").  Often  the  soul  when  sought  by  the  Saviour  is  conscious 
of  his  nearness,  and  that  he  is  seeking  her.  Sometimes  when  we  are  alune  and  in 
serious  thought ;  sometimes  in  sacred  services,  when  his  Word  has  been  preached  with 
power. 

III.  Knows  that  he  is  seaechino  fob  heb.  "He  looketh  in  at  the  windows" 
(ver.  9).  He  will  find  her  if  she  is  to  be  found,  and  so  his  eyes  search  for  her.  This, 
too,  the  soul  often  knows.  "  Thou  God  seest  me  "  (of.  Ps.  cxxxix.  1 — 12,  "  0  Lord, 
thou  hast  searched  me,"  etc.).  Our  hearts'  inmost  secrets,  unknown  to  our  nearest  and 
dearest  earthly  friend,  are  known  to  him ;  for  all  oxir  hearts  have  windows  through 
which  his  eyes  often  keenly  glance.  Conscience  shows  us  those  "  eyes  of  the  Lord 
which  are  in  every  place."  (For  illustration  of  this  loving  search,  cf.  parables  in 
l.uke  XV.) 

IV.  Is  AFFECTIONATEJ.T  ENTBEATED  BT  HIM.    He :  1.  Addresses  her  as  his  much- 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  65 

loved  one,  "  My  fair  one."  Such  name  of  endearment  tells  tlie  truth  as  to  what  our 
souls  are  to  him.  So  also  "  my  dove  "  (ver.  16).  We  should  not  call  them  fair — no, 
indeed  1  But  love  invests  all  it  loves  with  beauty.  What  mother  does  not  think  her 
child  lovelier  than  everybody  else's?  Other  people  do  not  see  it;  she  does.  And  so 
Christ  sees  in  our  souls  what  we  certainly  cannot  see.  2.  Bids  her  "  rise  up  and  come 
away"  (Of.  "He  arose  and  came  to  his  father.")  How  many  would  be  saved  willingly 
if  only  they  could  stay  where  they  are — in  self-indulgence,  iu  gainful  trade,  in  worldly 
conformity,  in  allowed  sin !  But  it  may  not  be.  The  soul  must "  rise  up,"  etc.  We  must 
leave  our  sins  behind  us  when  we  come  to  Christ.  3.  He  encourages  her  by  telling  of 
the  pleasure  he  desires  for  her.  He  would  have  her  go  forth  with  him  in  delightful 
walk  amid  the  flowers  and  fragrance,  the  sunshine  and  song,  of  a  lovely  spring  morning. 
No  more  exquisite  description  of  such  a  morning  was  ever  penned.  And  so  the 
Divine  wisdom  moves  us,  saying,  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,"  etc.  And  we 
are  taught  that  the  course  of  the  soul  should  be  as  a  going  forth  amid  the  loveliness  of 
such  a  morning  in  spring.  It  is  not  through  a  vale  of  tears,  but  amid  what  is  here 
told  of.  Joy  should  be  a  chief  element  in  the  soul's  life  in  Christ.  4.  He  lids  her 
cast  away  her  fear.  (Of.  as  to  her  fearfulness,  on  ver.  15.)  Young  souls  are  often 
learful — of  themselves,  of  the  world,  of  the  cross.  Christ  would  dispel  such  fears. 
5.  He  asks  for  response.  He  would  hear  her  voice.  The  voice  of  the  soul  in  prayer, 
in  praise,  in  self-surrender, — that  is  the  voice  Christ  loves  to  hear. 

V.  Is  FINALLY  AND  TCLLT  WON.  (Cf.  Ver.  16.)  See  how  gladly :  1.  She  confesses 
him,  openly  avowing  that  he  is  the  Beloved  of  her  heart,  and  that  she  is  altogether  his 
(cf.  "  She  fell  down  before  him,  and  told  him  all  the  truth  ").  Confession  is  the  law  of 
love.  2.  She  declares  that  he  dwells  in  her  heart.  Those  pure  graces,  the  lilies  of  his 
creating,  are  those  amongst  which  he  takes  delight.  Christ  dwells  in  our  hearts  through 
faith.  3.  She  desires  that  whilst  her  life  lasts  he  may  come  to  her  as  he  has  done. 
(Ver.  17.)  So  long  as  the  night  of  life  lasts,  and  until  the  eternal  dawn  breaks,  will 
she  welcome  his  presence  and  rejoice  in  his  coming. 

Conclusion.  Christ  does  so  woo  our  souls,  especially  those  who,  as  the  one  told  of 
here,  are  young.    May  he  win  them  as  he  won  this ! — S.  C. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Spring.  According  to  St.  Paul,  God's  natural  world  was  intended  to 
be — might,  would,  and  should  have  been,  but  for  man's  sin — the  Bible  for  the  great  part 
of  mankind.  "  Nevertheless,"  said  he  to  the  men  of  Lycaonia,  "  Gud  left  not  himself 
without  witness,  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  seasons, 
filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness."  And  again  (Eom.  i.),  he  declares  that  "  the 
invisible  things  of  God  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood 
by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead."  Not  the  Bible 
alone,  then,  but  nature  also,  was  intended  to  reveal  God,  and  men  ought,  as  we  are 
assured,  to  have  seen  God  in  the  things  that  he  made.  But  instead  of  being  a  revela- 
tion of  God,  it  has  been  perverted  into  an  impenetrable  screen  to  hide  and  to  conceal 
him ;  or,  still  worse,  to  distort,  misrepresent,  and  dishonour  him.  So  that,  left  to  nature 
only,  men  have  sunk  lower  and  lower,  as  all  experience  proves.  This  ia  true  of  man- 
kind generally.  But  it  is  not  universally  true.  Long  ere  the  written  Scriptures  were 
given,  and  in  parts  of  the  world  where  they  never  came,  there  have  been  those  who  by 
Bivine  illumination  have  learnt  much  of  God  through  the  works  of  God.  Doubtless 
many  of  those  of  whom  St.  Paul  speaks  as  having  by  nature  done  the  things  of  the 
Law,  though  they  never  had  the  Law,  these  learnt  from  the  great  Bible  of  nature — that 
page  having  been,  even  as  the  written  page  must  ever  be,  opened  up  to  them  by  the 
teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Hence  was  it  that  their  consciences  became  so  enlightened 
as  to  approve  or  condemn  according  as  they  did  good  or  evil.  But  if  it  was  expected 
of  them  who  had  not,  as  we  have,  the  written  Word,  but  only  nature  to  teach  them, 
that  they  should  understand  God  and  his  ways,  how  much  more  will  be  expected,  and 
justly  expected,  of  us!  There  are  many  who  rejoice  iu  the  natural  world  as  a  revela- 
tion of  God.  What  a  proof  we  have  of  this  in  that  glorious  Ps.  civ. !  There  the  devout 
writer  goes  over  the  whole  of  God's  creation,  animate  and  inanimate;  that  which  has, 
and  that  which  has  not,  the  gift  of  reason.  And  he  ends  his  devout  meditation  saying, 
"  Bless  thou  the  Lord,  0  my  soul.  Praise  ye  the  Lord."  Here,  then,  is  a  worthy  model 
for  us  to  follow  in  contemplating  the  works  oi  God.     Let  us  try  to  imitate  so  good  an 


66  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [can.  1—17. 

example.  Our  text  is  a  short  but  beautiful  description  of  an  Eastern  spring.  In  that 
land  of  the  sun  it  is  true,  as  it  is  not  always  here,  that  in  the  spring-time  "  the  winter 
is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone  .  .  .  heard  in  the  land."  But  let  us  listen  to  some 
few  out  of  the  many  holy  and  helpful  lessons  which  this  season  of  the  year  is  ready 
to  teach  us,  if  only  our  hearts  be  open  to  receive  them.  These  teachings  of  the  spring, 
then,  what  are  they  ?     Well,  one  of  them  is  surely  this— 

I.  "  Best  is  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  fob  him.*"  Try  to  imagine,  if  you 
can,  what  your  thoughts  would  have  been  during  the  dark  winter-time,  supposing  you 
had  no  idea  of  spring.  It  is  difficult  for  us  even  to  conceive  that  we  could  ever  have 
not  known  that  winter  gives  way  to  spring,  and  that  the  seasons  follow  in  their  orderly 
round.  But  suppose  one  waking  up  to  consciousness  for  the  first  time  at  the  beginning 
of  winter.  He  would  have  seen  the  days  getting  shorter  and  shorter,  the  cold  becoming 
more  intense,  every  leaf  stripped  from  well-nigh  all  trees,  and  their  unclothed,  skeleton- 
like branches  quivering  and  moaning  in  the  wintry  wind.  He  would  see  the  bare, 
brown  fields  stiffen  and  become  rigid  under  the  icy  blast  and  the  imprisoning  frost ; 
and  from  time  to  time  the  whole  land  would  put  on  its  white  shroud  of  snow  as  if  it 
were  indeed  dead.  He  would  see  all  this  and  the  many  other  familiar  features  of 
winter ;  and  had  he  never  known  or  heard  of  spring,  would  he  ever  think  that  such  a 
season  would  come — that  all  the  present  dreariness  would  give  way  to  brightness,  the 
sad  silence  to  the  joyful  song  of  birds,  and  the  gloomy  grey  tints  of  winter  to  the 
brightness  of  the  foliage,  the  blossoms,  and  the  flowers  of  spring  ?  I  do  not  think  he 
would.  For  this  is  how  many  of  us  feel  and  speak,  notwithstanding  perpetual  reminders 
to  the  contrary,  wJien  winter  reigns  in  the  heart.  Hearken  to  Jacob,  "  All  these  things 
are  against  me,"  etc. ;  Muses,  praying  God  to  kill  him  out  of  hand  because  he  could 
not  bear  the  people  nor  endure  his  wretchedness ;  Elijah,  too,  making  the  same  request ; 
and  Job,  and  many  more.  Are  they  not  all  instances  of  that  mournful  tendency  in 
our  minds,  to  think  that  when  like  sad  wintry  times  are  upon  us  so  they  will  always 
be  ?  Surely,  then,  the  teaching  of  the  spring  is  that  we  should  "  rest  in  the  Lord," 
etc. ;  for  spring  declares  of  him  that  he  is  the  gladness-giving  Ood ;  that  though  there 
be  winter,  yet  it  has  to  give  way  to  the  bright  and  joyful  spring.  In  the  natural  world 
the  "  oil  of  joy  is  given  for  mourning,  and  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heavi- 
ness." God  does  turn  Nature's  mourning  into  dancing ;  he  puts  off  her  sackcloth  and 
girds  her  with  gladness.  "  The  winter  is  over  and  past,"  etc.  Therefore  may  we 
not  be  well  assured  that  so  it  will  be  with  the  winter  of  our  hearts,  the  sadness  and 
the  alienee  there,  if  only  we  will  "  rest  in  the  Lord,"  etc.  ?    Let  our  prayer,  theu,  be — 

"  Lord,  let  thy  love. 
Fresh  from  above. 
Soft  as  the  suuth  wind  blow, 

Gall  forth  its  bloom. 
«  .  .  .  • 

"  Now  when  thy  voice 
Makes  earth  rejoice, 
And  the  hills  laugh  and  sing, 
Lord,  teach  this  heart 
To  bear  its  part, 
And  join  the  praise  of  spring." 

n.  The  iiiritiiTE  TENDERNESS  OF  GoD.  We  go  forth  into  the  country,  and  we  note 
all  around  us  the  first  springings  of  that  plant-life  which  wheu  matured  is  to  be  of  such 
vast  value  to  us  all.  But  how  fragile  everything  looks!  How  little  it  would  take  to 
destroy  the  whole  of  itl  A  too-severe  storm,  an  over-rough  wind,  a  frost,  any  out  of 
a  thousand  casualties,  would  destroy  all.  But  yet  God  takes  care  of  it.  He  will  not 
suffer  the  too-violent  storms  to  come,  but  only  gentle  showers ;  not  the  rough  wind, 
but  the  milder  gales.  Thus  wiih  infinite  tenderness  he  rears  up  the  young  plants. 
1.  Now,  how  all  this  rebukes  the  hard  thoughts  of  Ood  which  many  have  held  and 
taught  and  maintained,  in  books  as  innumerable  as  dreary.  We  wonder  at  the  heathen, 
in  view  of  the  loveliness  of  nature,  fashioning  their  gods  so  cruel  and  relentless  as  they 
dill.  But  that  we,  with  nature  and  the  gospel,  should  so  conceive  of  God  is  sad  indeed. 
We  little  know  the  mischief  such  hard  representations  do,  the  alienation  and  the  bitter- 


tm,    t.l— 17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  67 

ness  towards  God  which  they  foster.  It  is  the  source  of  the  Madonna  and  saint 
worship  of  Eome,  and  of  worse  things  still.  For  men  become  as  the  gods  they  worship. 
2.  It  shows  us  how  to  deal  wisely  with  all  young  life,  especially  the  beginnings  of  the 
Divine  life  in  the  soul :  how  to  train  our  children.  3.  And  it  bids  us  trust  God.  Will 
God  be  so  gracious  to  birds  and  blossoms  and  not  tenderly  care  for  us  ?     Impossible. 

III.  "  With  him  is  plenteous  redemption."  Spring  teaches  that  our  God  is  the 
redeeming  God.  For  spring  is  the  redemption  of  qutward  nature,  its  regeneration  and 
resurrection.  She  was  dead,  but  is  alive  again ;  was  lost,  but  is  found.  Darkness 
has  given  place  to  light,  barrenness  to  fruitfulness,  and  the  "  hills  rejoice  on  every 
side."  The  vision  of  Ezekiel  is  put  before  us  as  oft  as  the  spring  comes  round.  "  Can 
j'hese  dry  hones  live  ?  "  said  he.  "  Can  all  this  seemini;  deadness  live  ?  "  say  we.  And 
the  spring  is  our  answer.  And  we  are  told  further  of  our  dependence  upon  God  for  such 
redemption.  Who  can  bring  about  the  renewed  life  of  spring  but  God  ?  and  who  that 
yet  higher  life  of  the  soul  ?  And  how  visible  the  life  is  I  See  all  around  the  proofs 
of  the  presence  of  the  spring.  Not  less  visible  are  the  fruits  of  the  spring-tide  of 
the  soul.  And  as  the  spring  is  promised,  so  is  the  better  gift  of  redemption.  Each 
blade,  blossom,  and  bud  seems  to  say  to  us,  "Shall  God  redeem  me,  and  will  he  not 
redeem  thee  ?  "  And  the  mystery  of  the  cross  is  shown.  For  what  is  spring  but  life  out 
of  and  through  death  ?  Redemption  must  imply  a  Redeemer,  and  the  life  of  spring 
coming  forth  out  of  the  death  of  winter  patterns  forth  how  the  Christ  must  needs 
suffer  and  be  raised  again.  And  for  ourselves  it  tells  of  him  who  said  for  us,  "  I  am 
the  Resurrection  and  the  Life,"  and  bids  us  say,  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth." 

IV.  "  Put  ye  on  the  new  man."  All  Nature  does  this  at  spring-tide.  We  in  our 
dwellings  and  in  our  dress  try  to  imitate  her  and  do  the  like.  They  who  can,  get  new 
garments;  they  who  cannot,  try  to  make  the  old  look  new.  Let  us  learn  the  lesson 
in  things  higher  still.  Is  there  not  much  room  for  it?  In  too  many  even  Christian 
people  the  remains  of  what  Paul  calls  "  the  old  man  "  are  too  plentifully  visible — in 
homes,  in  habits,  in  speech,  in  thought,  in  temper.  How  much  we  need  yet  to  be 
created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  "  put  on  the  new  man " !  And  he  who  maketb  "all 
things  new  "  is  ready  to  help  us  herein  if  we  will  have  his  help. 

V.  Be  diligent.  Spring  is  a  time  of  great  activity.  The  husbandman  dare  not 
waste  those  precious  hours  if  he  would  rejoice  when  harvest  comes.  So  with  this  life 
of  ours,  all  which  is  given  us  for  preparation  for  the  great  harvest-time.  Then  let  the 
activities  of  the  spring  remind  us  that  we,  too,  must  be  diligent  if  we  would  be  found 
at  the  last  faithful  before  the  Lord. — S.  C. 

Ver.  15. — "  The  little  foxes"  This  verse  is  part  of  the  description  which  Shulamith, 
the  betrothed,  gives  of  her  beloved.  In  the  verses  preceding  she  relates  (ver.  8,  etc.) 
how  he  was  wont  to  come  to  her  home  after  her,  bounding  and  leaping  over  the  hills 
in  his  loving  haste,  like  a  young  hart.  And  how,  when  he  had  reached  the  house,  he 
would  "look  in  at  the  windows,"  and  beg  her  to  come  forth  to  him.  And  to  entice  her 
he  would  sing  the  beautiful  song  of  the  spring,  "  The  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and 
gone ;  the  flowers  appear  on  the  earth,  and  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come." 
And  then,  because  she  was  still  slow  to  come  forth,  she  tells  how  he  would  call  her 
again,  and  by  the  tender  name  of  his  timid  "  dove,"  that  hides  itself,  because  of  its  fear, 
in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  and  amid  the  inaccessible  crags  and  crevices  of  lofty  cliffs; 
and  then  how  he  would  ask  her  to  sing  to  him  her  song  of  the  foxes,  "Take  us  tlie 
foxes,  the  little  foxes  .  .  .  grapes."  Such  seems  to  be  the  circumstantial  setting  of 
this  verse;  but,  like  the  whole  poem  of  which  it  forms  part,  had  it  no  more  meaning 
than  lies  on  the  surface  it  would  not,  we  believe,  have  found  place  amongst  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  the  Bible  of  the  people  of  God.  If,  then,  the  words  suggest  to  devout  minds, 
as  they  have  done  in  all  the  centuries  since  they  were  written,  truths  which  belong  to  the 
region  of  the  soul,  to  our  relationships  with  God  more  than  to  any  relationship  of  earth, 
surely  we  may  believe  that  they  were  designed  so  to  do;  and  earthly  as  the  story  may 
be  on  which  such  truths  are  grafted,  like  the  parables  of  our  Lord,  it  has  a  heavenly 
meaning,  and  is  designed  to  help  us  on  our  heavenward  way.  Now,  of  some  of  these 
suggested  truths  let  u«  speak.  One  word  as  to  the  imagery  of  this  verse.  "  Foxes, 
jackals,  little  foxes,  are  very  common  in  Palestine,  and  are  particularly  fond  of  grapes. 
They  often  burrow  in  holes  in  hedges  round  the  gardens,  and,  unless  strictlj  watched, 


68  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1—17. 

would  destroy  whole  vineyards.  Their  flesh  was  sometimes  eaten  in  autumn,  when 
they  were  grown  fat  with  feeding  on  grapes.     Thus  Theocritus  says — 

"  *  I  hate  the  foxes  with  their  bushy  tails, 

Which  numerous  spoil  the  grapes  of  Mecon's  vines 
When  fall  the  evening  shades.' 

And  Aristophanes  compares  soldiers  to  foxes,  because  they  consume  the  grapes  of  the 
countries  through  which  they  pass  "  (Burrows).  But  now  as  to  the  spiritual  teachings 
which  are  contained  in  these  words.    We  have  brought  before  us  here — 

I.  A  BAD  POSSIBILITY.  Vines  that  promised  well,  spoiled.  Translated  into  the 
language  of  the  Spirit,  they  speak  of  blessed  beginnings  of  the  Divine  life  in  the  soul  not 
realized.  Few  things  are  more  heauti/ul  than  the  beginnings  of  the  Divine  life.  The 
promise  and  hope  they  give  rise  to  of  matured  and  rich  and  Christ-like  character  fill 
the  devout-minded  observer — especially  if  he  himself  has  prayed  and  watched  and 
toiled  for  such  beginnings — with  a  deep  and  sacred  joy.  What  does  he  not  anticipate 
from  them?  What  of  influence  on  others,  in  the  Church,  the  home,  the  business,  the 
world  generally  ?  What  of  service  for  Christ  and  truth  and  all  goodness  ?  Hence  when 
he  sees  that  tenderness  of  conscience,  that  prayerfulness,  that  gentleness  and  humility, 
that  alacrity  in  service,  that  delight  in  worship,  all  which  mark  these  beginnings,  how 
can  he  but  be  glad  ?  or  how  can  any  one  who  has  a  Christ-like  heart  in  him  ?  But  few 
things  are  more  sad  than  to  see  all  this  hopefulness  and  promise  spoiled.  And  such 
things  do  happen.  "  Ye  did  run  well ;  who  did  hinder  you  ?  "  so  said  St.  Paul  to  the 
foolish  Galatians  who  had  so  bitterly  disappointed  him.  And  how  often  in  our  Lord's 
ministry  had  he  to  bear  this  disappointment !  Again  and  again  there  would  come  to 
him  those  about  whom  bright  hope  might  have  been  cherished — amiable,  well-disposed, 
warm-hearted,  intelligent,  pure-minded,  generous,  much  esteemed,  kindly,  lovable,  and 
beloved.  Such  people  were  irresistibly  drawn  to  him,  and  for  a  while  they  would  follow 
him ;  but  then  after  a  while  we  find  something  offending  them,  and  they  go  away. 
Christ  drew  their  portrait  in  his  parable  of  the  sower,  where  he  likens  such  to  the  seed 
sown  on  the  stony  ground.  Quick  to  spring  up  and  present  the  appearance  of  vigorous 
life,  but  as  quick  to  wither  away  when  the  sun's  scorching  heat  smote  them  as  it  smote 
all  else.  And  surely,  in  the  spoiled  vines  told  of  in  our  text,  we  have  another  of  these 
Bible  portraitures  of  the  same,  or  a  similar  class.  And  where  there  is  not  the  actual 
destruction  and  perishing  of  what  is  good,  there  is  yet  the  spoiling.  The  vines  are  not 
cut  down,  they  are  not  hindered  from  bringing  forth  any  fruit ;  the  foe  told  of  "  spoils," 
which  is  less  than  to  destroy.  And  how  often  we  have  to  mourn  this  "  spoiling  of  the 
vine  "  I  Neither  we  nor  others  come  up  to  that  elevation  of  Christian  character  which 
might  fairly  have  been  expected.  Many  people  are,  in  the  main,  worthy;  there  is  very 
much  that  is  excellent  in  them,  but  their  characters  are  sadly  marred.  They  are 
ineffectual ;  they  do  not  tell  for  any  real  or  large  amount  of  good  in  any  one,  anywhere. 
Their  type  of  li  le  i s  lo w ;  tb sy  have  the  name  and  the  form  of  godliness,  but  all  too  little 
of  the  power.  They  are  respectable,  decorous,  outwardly  religious,  and  live,  as  we  say, 
consistently  with  their  profession.  But  if  you  come  to  know  them,  how  little  of  their 
real  life  is  touched  by  their  reUgion ;  what  a  mere  veneer  it  is  on  their  ordinary  exist- 
ence !  How  little  it  does  for  them  in  making  them  really  holy  or  happy,  or  powerful  for 
good !  They  began  well,  but  they  have  sunk  and  settled  down  to  this.  He  who  looks 
that  these  people  should  bring  forth  their  fruit  in  due  season — plentiful  fruit,  much 
fruit,  the  best  fruit — will  assuredly  be  disappointed.  "  And  what  hinders  them?  Now, 
mark  you,  it  is  not  said  here,  as  in  that  mournful  psalm,  '  The  wild  boar  out  of  the 
wood  doth  root  it  up,  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  devour  it.'  It  is  not  said  here,  '  It 
is  burnt  with  fire  and  cut  down,  and  they  shall  perish  at  the  rebuke  of  thy  countenance." 
It  is  not  said  here, '  Why  hast  thou  then  broken  down  her  hedges,  so  that  all  they  that 
go  by  pluck  off  her  grapes  ? '  No  j  it  is  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes,  that  spoil  the  tender 
grapes."    Therefore  let  us  now  look  at  this — 

II.  Its  too  much  neglected  cause.  It  is  the  little  sins,  tho  small  faults,  the 
slight  self-indulgences,  what  we  count  as  trifles  and  think  nothing,  or  almost  nothing, 
of — these  are  the  little  foxes  which  spoil  the  tender  grapes.  All  sins  waste  and  destroy 
the  soul.  Not  merely  the  wage  but  the  work  of  sin  is  death.  Some  there  are  so 
notorious  that  they  are  as  St.  Paul  says,  "  open  beforehand,  going  before  to  judgment." 


CH.  II.1— 17.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  59 

They  are  as  the  wild  boar  out  of  the  wood  and  the  beasts  of  the  field,  told  of  in  the 
psalm  we  quoted  just  now.  High-handed,  bold.  Heaven-defying  sins,  bringing  down 
on  the  doers  of  them,  sooner  or  later,  the  dread  judgments  of  God.  But  there  are  other 
masters  of  the  soul,  spoilers  of  the  grapes  of  God, — those  sins  which  here  are  pictured 
to  us  as  "  the  little  foxes."  "  Little"  so  we  call  them,  and  others  call  them  so  too ;  and 
hence,  though  we  be  all  wrong  together  in  so  calling  them,  we  have  come  to  think 
them  little  as  well  as  call  them  so.  And /oa;-?i^,  which  we  often  forget,  for  they  skulk 
and  lurk  and  hide ;  they  have,  as  our  Lord  said,  "  their  holes,"  and  there  they  burrow 
and  bury  themselves  out  of  sight.  And  many  of  them  have  other  characteristics  of  the 
fox — deceit,  cruelty,  foulness ;  true  vermin  of  the  soul  are  they.  And  they  all  of  them 
often  feign  death  as  the  fox  does.  And  we  think  them  dead,  and  lot  they  spring  to 
life  again,  and  are  as  active  as  ever.  Hence  we  do  indeed  need  to  be  on  our  guard 
against  them.  But  it  is  the  littleness  of  these  sins  to  which  our  thoughts  are  chiefly 
turned  by  the  vivid  image  of  the  little  foxes.  Their  littleness,  like  charity,  covers  a 
multitude  of  them,  and  so  conceals  them  from  our  own  censure  and  that  of  others.  And 
if  the  great  adversary  of  our  souls  can  persuade  us  not  to  mind  these  little  sins,  he  has 
almost  all  he  cares  for.  For  then  he  knows  that  we  shall  never  he  what  he  most  of  all 
hates,  that  is,  great  saints.  1.  For  such  have  ever  shunned  them  with  holy  care.  It 
has  often  been  pointed  out  how  Daniel  might  have  prayed  to  God  notwithstanding  the 
king's  decree,  and  yet  never  have  incurred  the  awful  peril  of  the  lions'  den,  if  he  would 
only  have  shut  his  window  when  he  prayed.  But  he  must  needs  open  it,  and  so,  of 
course,  he  was  seen.  But  he  would  not  compromise  with  what  he  deemed  his  duty  to 
God  even  in  so  slight  degree  as  this.  And  the  martyrs,  too.  The  Roman  judges  used 
perpetually  to  remind  them  how  trifling  was  the  concession  asked  for — just  sprinkling 
a  grain  or  two  of  incense  on  an  altar,  that  was  all.  "  Now,  if  men  have  been  able  to 
perceive  so  much  of  sin  in  little  transgressions,  that  they  would  bear  inconceivable 
tortures  rather  than  commit  them,  must  there  not  he  something  dreadful  after  all  in 
these  little  sins  ?  "  If  we  would  have  fellowship  with  the  great  saints  of  God,  the  eminent 
and  true  disciples  of  our  Lord,  we  must  give  no  quarter  to  these  so-called  trifling  sins. 
They  did  not,  or  they  would  not  have  been  what  they  were.  2.  And  the  little  foxes 
grow  into  great  ones.  Has  not  the  indulgence  in  one  glass  of  intoxicating  hquor  often 
led  on  to  the  liking  for  two,  and  that  to  the  taking  of  three,  and  that  has  been  followed 
by  the  man's  becoming  a  drunkard  and  a  sot?  "  Tremblez,  tyrans ;  nous  grandirons  1 " 
was  the  shout  of  the  young  B'rench  lads  who,  drilled  and  dressed  as  soldiers,  marched, 
in  the  days  of  the  Revolution,  through  many  a  town  and  village  in  France.  They  bade 
the  tyrants  that  oppressed  their  nation  tremble,  because  they,  though  but  little  lads 
now,  would  one  day  be  grown  up  into  men.  And  might  not  our  souls  be  well  made  to 
tremble  as  they  contemplate  one  of  these  little  sins  ?  for  it,  too,  will  grow  up,  and  then 
will  be  no  longer  little,  but  great  and  strong.  Scarcely  more  surely  does  the  boy  grow 
into  the  man  than  does  a  little  sin  tolerated  grow  into  a  great  one.  It  is  one  of  the 
ways  of  burglars,  in  effecting  an  entrance  into  a  house,  to  attack  a  small  window  not 
nearly  large  enough  to  admit  a  man.  But  they  bring  a  boy  with  them,  and  him  they 
thrust  through,  and  he  then  undoes  larger  windows  or  doors,  and  so  the  men  enter  too. 
Yes,  my  brother,  if  you  are  allowing  yourself  in  what  you  are  pleased  to  call  a  little 
sin,  it  may  be  but  the  boy  getting  in  at  the  window  who  will  let  in  the  greater  thieves 
as  soon  as  he  is  safely  in  himself.  Let  us  remember  that.  3.  And  how  these  little  sins 
multiply  themselves  I  Great  sins  are  rare.  Tremendous  transgressions  we  are  guilty  of 
but  now  and  then — but  once  in  our  lifetime,  it  may  be;  or  God's  grace  may  always 
keep  us  "  innocent  from  the  great  transgression ; "  we  trust  it  will.  But  these  little 
ones — they  are  like  the  myriad  insects  in  our  gardens.  How  they  swarm  1  The  more 
minute  they  are  the  more  they  multiply,  until  they  devour  everything  if  they  be  let 
alone.  They  never  come  singly,  but  in  troops.  And  so  is  it  with  these  little  sins  that 
are  like  them.  A  man  will  think  it  but  a  trifle  if  he  utter  a  profane  expression,  he 
counts  it  a  very  small  matter ;  but  it  soon  comes  to  pass  that  he  can  hardly  open  his 
mouth  anywhere  or  anywhen  without  some  miserable  profanity  dropping  from  it.  A 
little  temper  may  come  to  mean  an  explosion  half  a  dozen  times  a  day,  until  it  is  said 
of  the  man  that  he  is  always  in  a  temper.  That  great  Zuyder  Zee,  on  which  Amsterdam 
is  built,  was  once  a  fair  fertile  land  covered  with  farms,  villages,  and  hamlets;  a  strong 
embankment  shut  it  off  from  the  Northern  Sea.     But  that  embankment  had,  no  doubt 


60  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  11.1—17. 

somehow  began  to  yield  in  very  slight  degree,  when  one  stormy  winter  night  the  whole 
gave  way,  and  now  the  once  fruitful  land  is  turned  into  barrenness,  and  has  been  so  for 
centuries  past.  Oh,  take  heed  of  these  small  beginnings  of  sin.  Yes,  they  "  are  like 
the  letting  out  of  water :  first  there  is  an  ooze,  then  a  drip,  then  a  slender  stream,  then 
a  vein  of  water,  and  then  at  last  a  flood,  and  a  rampart  is  swept  before  it  and  the  whole 
land  is  devoured."  God  help  us,  therefore,  to  be  on  our  guard.  And,  indeed,  if  we  will 
think  of  it,  they  we  not  little.  There  may  be  but  a  handful  of  men  cross  the  frontier 
.  of  a  state,  but  that  is  as  much  an  act  of  war  as  if  an  army  had  come.  There  are  people 
who  never  cease  to  ridicule  the  idea  that  "  death  and  all  our  woe  "  were  the  result  of 
man's  once  eating  the  forbidden  fruit.  But  there  the  fact  is,  all  the  same.  It  was  the 
violation  of  the  Divine  Law,  and  it  did  not  matter  how  it  was  done.  And  so  with  all 
those  sins  which  we  are  pleased  to  call  little.  They  are  as  much  outrages  on  the  Law 
of  God  as  if  they  were  acts  so  flagrant  and  enormous  that  all  men  should  denounce 
them.  Broken  law  is  broken  law,  no  matter  whether  the  breach  be  great  or  small. 
Moreover,  these  sins  which  we  call  little  are  often  greater  than  those  which  we  call  great. 
"  If  you  have  a  friend  and  he  does  you  a  displeasure  for  the  sake  of  ten  thousand  pounds, 
you  say,  *  Well,  he  had  a  very  great  temptation.  It  is  true  he  has  committed  a  great 
fault,  but  still  he  has  wronged  me  to  some  purpose.'  But  should  your  friend  vex  and 
grieve  your  mind  for  the  sake  of  a  farthing,  what  would  you  think  of  that?  •  This  is 
wanton,'  you  would  say.  '  This  man  has  done  it  out  of  sheer  malevolence  towards  me.' " 
And  must  not  the  same  verdict  be  passed  when,  for  the  sake  of  one  of  these  trifles,  as 
we  term  them,  we  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God  and  outrage  his  holy  Law  ?  And,  remember, 
if  you  be  a  Christian,  these  sina  mil  ruin  your  peace  with  Ood.  You  cannot  be  happy 
in  him  whilst  you  walk  contrary  to  his  will.  Aind  if  you  be  not  a  Christian,  these  same 
sins  will  lessen  the  likelihood  of  your  ever  becoming  one.  They  may  be  but  as  small 
stones,  but  they  will  build  up  a  strong  and  high  wall  of  separation  between  you  and 
God,  which  will  more  and  more  effectually  shut  you  off  from  him.  Every  way  they 
are  deplorable  things.     Therefore  consider — 

III.  The  sxieb  ebmedt.  These  "little  foxes"  must  be  taken  and  destroyed.  Tou 
must  search  them  out  by  prayerful  and  diligent  self-examination.  You  must  drag  them 
forth  into  the  light  of  conscience  and  the  judgment  of  God  by  full  and  penitent  con- 
fession of  them ;  and  by  vigorous  acts  of  a  will  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God  you  must 
slay  them  before  him.  "  These  mine  enemies  which  would  not  that  I  should  rule  over 
them,  bring  them  hither  and  slay  them  before  me,"  These  are  our  Lord's  words,  and 
he  who  spoke  them  will,  if  you  do  really  desire  it,  give  you  grace  to  obey  them.  May 
he  help  you  so  to  do  1— S.  01 

Ver.  16. — Ee  mine ;  I  his.  This  verse  is  the  oft-repeated  and  rapturous  utterance  of 
her  who  is  the  type  of  the  redeemed  soul  concerning  her  beloved.  Of  course,  we  regard 
it  as  telling  of  the  soul's  joy  in  Christ. 

I.  He  MINE.  Let  us  ask  three  questions.  1.  Howt  (1)  By  his  free  gift  of  himself. 
"  He  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  (2)  By  believing  appropriation.  Faith  has 
this  marvellous  power.  (3)  By  joyful  realization  of  his  love  to  me.  His  love  has  been 
shed  abroad  in  my  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  "I  know  whom  I  have  believed." 
How  unspeakably  blessed  such  realization  isl  But  it  is  not  universal  nor  even  common. 
A  little  chUd  will  cry  even  in  its  mother's  arms.  But  the  arms  are  there  all  the  same. 
And  so  is  Christ's  love.  2.  What  for  t  "  He  is  mine  to  look  upon,  to  lean  upon,  to 
dwell  with ;  mine  to  bear  all  my  burdens,  discharge  all  my  debts ;  mine  to  answer  all 
my  accusers,  mine  to  conquer  all  my  foes ;  mine  to  deliver  me  from  hell,  mine  to  prepare 
a  place  for  me  in  heaven;  mine  in  absence, mine  in  presence,  mine  in  life,  mine  in  death, 
mine  in  the  grave,  mine  in  the  judgment,  and  mine  at  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  " 
(Moody  Stuart).  3.  What  thenf  (1)  All  that  is  his  is  mine.  His  righteousness, 
acceptableness,  worthiness;  his  incarnation,  atonement,  resurrection," and  intercession. 
(2)  I  ought  to  know  it  if  I  do  not.  It  is  all-important  to  me  if  he  be  mine.  (3)  1 
ought  not  to  be  so  anxious  about  other  things.  (4)  Let  me  take  care  not  to  lose  him. 
It  is  possible  (cf.  ch.  v.  6). 

II.  I  HIS.  We  ask  the  same  three  questions.  1.  Bow  t  (1)  By  creation.  "  It  is  he 
that  hath  made  us  "  (Ps.  c).  (2)  By  the  purchase  of  his  blood.  (8)  By  the  conquest 
of  his  Spirit.    (4)  By  my  own  free  choice.    (5)  By  open  avowal    2.  What  for  t    To 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  61 

work  and  to  -wittiess,  to  suifer  and  to  live,  and  if  needs  be  to  die,  for  him.  To  care  for 
those  for  whom  he  cares,  and  to  minister  as  he  ministered.  3.  What  then  t  (1)  All 
that  is  mine,  a  sad  inheritance  indeed,  is  his.  My  sin,  my  guilt,  my  sorrow,  my  shame. 
And  he  has  taken  them  on  himself  and  away  from  me  for  ever.  (2)  Others  should 
know  it.  I  may  not  be  a  secret  disciple.  (S)  He  will  be  sure  to  take  care  of  me,  teach 
me,  perfect  me,  and  bring  me  to  himself.  (4)  I  will  be  his  even  when  I  cannot  realize 
that  he  is  mine.    (5)  1  will  try  to  win  others  to  him. — S.  C. 

Ver.  2. — Eminent  piety  seen  in  contrast.  Some  similarities  must  exist,  or  the  contrast 
could  not  be  seen.  The  godly  and  the  ungodly  are  both  men,  or  we  could  not  put  their 
characters  in  contrast.  Thorns  are  rooted  in  the  same  soil  as  the  lily.  They  are 
nourished  by  the  same  sun,  watered  by  the  same  rain,  enjoy  the  same  course  of  the 
seasons.  But  the  inner  life  of  the  lily  deals  differently  with  the  natural  elements  than 
does  the  inner  life  of  thorns.  So  the  ungodly  live  in  the  same  land  as  the  godly ; 
they  have  the  same  access  to  Grod's  truth ;  they  dwell  amid  the  same  forth-puttings 
of  the  Spirit's  power ;  yet,  for  want  of  self-appropriation,  they  are  barren  of  good  results. 
They  are  as  noxious  thorns  compared  with  the  lily.  This  eminent  goodness  of  the  lily 
implies — 

L  Lowliness.  In  the  previous  verse,  the  king's  bride  had  designated  herself  as  a 
mere  "  lily  of  the  valley."  And  now  the  king  responds  and  says,  "  It  is  so;  but  others 
are  as  thorns  compared  with  thee."  Humility  is  the  distinctive  mark  of  all  the  godly. 
Native  pride  is  crucified  on  the  cross.  The  Christian  longs  to  have  a  just  estimate  of 
himself.  He  will  not  "  think  of  himself  more  highly  than  he  ought  to  think."  If  he 
discovers  any  goodness  in  himself,  he  attributes  it  to  the  active  grace  of  his  Benefactor. 
Ue  is  content  to  take  the  lowest  place  in  the  kingdom.  If  only  he  may  belong  to  the 
chosen  race«  be  is  ready  to  be  a  "  hewer  of  wood  and  a  drawer  of  water."  Hence  he 
sings— 

"  The  more  thy  glories  strike  my  eyes 
The  humbler  I  shaU  Ue." 

II.  FnBEinBBB.  The  white  colour  of  the  lily  is  a  pure  white.  It  has  approved 
itself  universally  as  the  best  emblem  of  innocence.  All  over  the  world  it  is  a  silent 
messenger  from  God.  As  every  plant  reaches  out  toward  perfection,  so  the  noblest 
yearning  of  the  human  soul  is  for  purity.  I  may  be  learned  and  rich  and  renowned, 
but  if  I  am  lacking  in  purity,  I  despise  myself;  my  heart  refuses  joy.  I  have  fallen 
from  my  high  estate.  Other  virtues  in  me  are  only  leaves  and  blossoms ;  purity  is  the 
proper  ripe  fruit,  which  the  owner  longs  to  see.  Yet,  so  full  of  grace  is  our  Immanuel, 
that  he  sees,  not  only  what  is  now  actually  in  us,  but  what  is  coming — the  perfect 
holiness  which  is  slowly  developing.  As  the  whiteness  of  the  lily  is  produced  by  its 
reflecting  back  again  all  the  rays  of  light  that  fall  upon  it,  and  is  whitest  under  the 
full  blaze  of  the  summer  sun,  so  the  Christian  gains  his  purity  by  reflecting  all  the  love 
and  grace  from  the  Sun  of  Righteousness. 

III.  Feageancb.  The  lily  of  the  valley  is  noted  for  its  delicious  odour.  The  subtle 
essence  of  the  flower  flows  out  in  a  perpetual  stream  of  blessing.  Its  very  life  is 
expended  in  doing  good.  It  cannot  do  much  ;  it  cannot  bear  clusters  of  juicy  fruit ; 
but  what  is  possible  for  it  to  do,  that  it  freely  does.  Is  not  this  a  portrait  of  a  genuine 
disciple  ?  Does  he  not  count  it  his  meat  and  his  drink  to  spread  blessing  on  every 
side?  And  can  he  prevent  the  sweet  savour  of  his  Master's  grace  flowing  out  day  and 
night  ?  However  obscure  and  insignificant  he  may  be,  his  piety  will  diffuse  a  heavenly 
fragrance,  and  men  will  feel  his  influence. 

*  As  some  rare  essence  in  a  vase  of  clay 

Pervades  it  with  a  sweetness  not  its  own ; 
So  when  thou  dwellest  in  the  human  sou], 
All  heaven's  own  fragrauce  seems  around  it  thrown." 

IV.  Bbadtt.  The  lily  charms  the  eye  no  less  than  it  pleases  the  nostril.  The 
eye  has  a  native  instinct  for  beauty,  and  through  the  eye  the  soul  is  enchanted.  "  A 
thing  of  beauty  is  a  joy  for  ever"  And  nothing  iu  human  character  is  half  so  beautiful 
•8  genuine  piety.      Heroism  is  beautiful,  philanthropy  ia  beautiful,  parental  love  is 


62  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1—17. 

beautiful ;  but  the  quality  of  godly  love  transcends  them  all.  It  has  a  sublimity  which 
cannot  be  described.  It  has  a  potent  influence  which  ennobles  the  whole  man.  It  is 
immortal  in  its  duration,  and  has  a  splendid  sphere  for  growth.  Well  may  we  think 
of  it  as  the  amaranthine  flower  that  blossoms  in  the  Paradise  of  God.  "  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart." 

V.  This  eminence  is  reached  thbough  difficulty.  This  lily  has  grown  up 
"  among  the  thorns."  They  robbed  it  of  the  nutriment  that  dwelt  in  the  soil.  They 
hindered  the  free  circulation  of  the  balmy  air.  They  shut  out  some  of  the  quickening 
sunshine.  Yet,  in  spite  of  hindrances,  the  lily  grew  and  flourished.  So  it  happens  with 
the  pious  love  of  the  Christian.  It  has  to  contend  with  hostile  influences.  Formidable 
opposition  bars  its  growth.  We  have  to  resist  the  chilling  influence  of  an  ungodly 
world.  Yet  these  very  difficulties  have  their  uses.  Difficulties  rouse  our  latent  energy ; 
difficulties  put  us  on  our  mettle;  difficulties  give  scope  to  heroic  effort.  No  one  of  us 
is  seen  at  our  best  until  we  are  coping  with  gigantic  opposition.  As  storms  root  the 
oak  more  firmly,  so  the  opposition  of  the  world  blows  up  the  fires  of  our  piety  into  a 
white  heat  of  sacred  fervour.  Thank  God  for  the  opposition  of  the  world.  Out  of 
antagonism  springs  the  noblest  life. — D. 

Ver.  3. — The  pre-eminence  of  Immanuel.  In  Eastern  lands,  far  more  than  In 
Western,  men  are  dependent  on  ripe  fruit  to  allay  their  hunger.  A  man  may  walk 
all  day  among  the  oaks  of  Bashau  or  among  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  and  find  no  food. 
To  discover  an  apple  tree  or  a  citron  tree  among  the  trees  of  the  forest  would  come  as 
a  surprise — as  a  meal  direct  from  Heaven.  Equally  true  is  it  that  men  wander  from 
teacher  to  teacher,  from  one  religious  system  to  another,  in  quest  of  saving  knowledge, 
and  find  it  nowhere,  until  they  find  Jesus,  the  Christ.  In  search  of  soul-rest  and 
soul-purity,  men  try  practical  morality,  asceticism,  bodily  mortification.  Church  sacra- 
ments ;  but  they  are  doomed  to  disappointment.  For  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  is  the  only 
Saviour,  and,  apart  from  him,  the  soul  is  starved,  diseased,  undone.  "As  the  citron 
tree  among  the  trees  of  the  wood,  bo  is  my  Beloved  among  the  sons." 

L  The  superlative  excellence  of  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Here  is  the  idea  of  rare- 
ness. The  event  was  rare  to  find  a  citron  tree  among  forest  trees.  So  Jesus  stands  alone. 
As  Adam  stood  alone,  the  head  of  a  new  order  of  life,  the  Head  of  the  human  race ; 
BO  Jesus  is  without  a  parallel,  the  covenant  Head  of  the  new  family.  He  is  "  the  only 
begotten  Son."  By  nature  and  by  right,  as  well  as  by  transcendent  goodness,  he  is 
unapproachable.  In  him  alone  "  dwells  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  He  is  the 
God-Man :  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  "  Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him."  2. 
Eere  is  implied  delicious  fragrance.  The  blossom  of  the  citron  is  not  only  beautiful  to 
the  eye;  it  is  sweet  and  refreshing  to  the  nostril.  And  it  is  a  constant  perfume.  While 
ripe  fruit  is  found  on  some  branches,  fresh  blossoms  are  adorning  others.  Impressive 
emblem  this  of  the  rich  fragrance  of  Immanuel's  love.  With  the  sweetness  of  his  dis- 
position nothing  can  compare.  It  spreads  to-day  from  the  frozen  plains  of  Greenland 
to  the  sultry  cities  of  Burmah.  From  the  equator  to  the  poles,  the  fragrance  of  the 
Saviour's  love  is  diffused.  It  refreshes  the  fainting;  it  revives  again  those  "who  are 
ready  to  perish."  Some  kinds  of  apples  are  named  "  nonpareils."  Jesus  is  the  real 
"  Nonpareil ;"  he  has  no  equal.  3.  The  figure  suggests  fruitfulness.  This  is  a  theme 
that  will  loosen  into  eloquence  every  Christian  tongue.  Every  part  of  Christ's  nature 
is  fruitful.  The  woman,  afflicted  with  old  disease  in  Canaan,  found  fruitful  blessing 
even  in  the  hem  of  his  garment.  He  is  fruitful  as  a  Teacher,  for  his  words  dispel  all 
the  perplexities  and  fears  of  the  humau  family  ;  he  is  fruitful  as  a  Healer,  for  his 
gracious  virtue  cures  every  disease  of  body  and  of  soul ;  he  is  fruitful  as  our  Priest, 
for  his  one  sacrifice  atones  for  every  sin ;  he  is  fruitful  as  Intercessor,  for  his  righteous 
pleadings  always  prevail;  he  is  fruitful  as  a  King,  for  his  reigu  brings  order,  content- 
ment, righteousness,  peace ;  he  is  fruitful  as  a  Friend,  for  all  that  he  has  he  shares  with 
his  saints.     For  fruitfulness  he  is  the  Vine. 

II.  The  superlative  usefulness  of  Jbsus  Christ.  "  I  sat  down  imder  his  shadow 
with  great  delight,  and  his  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste."  Jesus  is  not  simply  excellence 
in  his  Person;  his  virtues  are  suited  to  the  needs  of  men.  1.  T^ere  is  shady  rest.  The 
dwellers  in  the  temperate  zone  can  little  appreciate  what  shade  is  to  dwellers  in  the 
tropics.    The  fierce  neat  of  noon  means  exhaustion,  pain,  fever.    Best  in  cool  ihada 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  63 

is  like  life  from  the  dead.  And  the  rest  which  Jesus  gives  ia  more  precious  yet.  It  is 
rest  from  the  gloomy  fear  of  hell ;  it  is  rest  from  the  drudgery  of  sin ;  it  is  rest  from 
slavish  toil  to  work  out  a  personal  righteousness ;  it  is  rest  from  anxious,  worldly  care. 
2.  This  fruitfulness  of  Christ  is  life-giving.  All  other  trees  in  the  wood  are  impotent 
to  sustain  life.  This  is  the  tree  of  health — the  tree  of  life.  This  is  the  grand  prerogative 
of  our  Immanuel :  "  I  am  the  Eesurrection  and  the  Life ;  "  "I  am  come  that  ye  may 
have  life,  and  have  it  more  abundantly ; "  "  I  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they 
shall  never  perish ;  "  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  And  Jesus  has  always  acted 
up  to  his  word.  A  myriad,  human  souls  in  heaven  to-day  join  in  the  testimony,  "  Once 
we  were  dead  ;  now,  by  Christ's  grace,  we  live."  "  Thanks  be  unto  God  for  his  unspeak- 
able Gift."  3.  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  citron  tree,  imparts  joy.  "  I  sat  down  under  his  shadow 
with  great  delight."  It  is  an  unusual  joy,  an  overflowing  blessedness.  The  joy  which 
Christ  gives  is  real,  pure,  ennobling,  abiding.  He  gives  to  men  "  his  own  joy."  Do 
men  rejoice  when  pain  yields  to  medicine,  and  new  health  flows  in  ?  Do  men  rejoice 
in  tbn  brightness  of  spring,  or  amid  the  plenty  of  autumn?  Do  men  rejoice  on  their 
m*iriage-morn,  or  when  fortune  crowns  their  toil  with  large  success?  In  Christ's 
smile  all  joys  are  rolled  into  one.  He  who  has  Christ  has  a  pledge  of  heaven.  This 
joy  is  a  "joy  unspeakable."  4.  Jesus  Christ  is  eminently  adapted  to  our  needs.  As 
the  ripe  fruit  of  the  citron  tree  was  exquisitely  suited  to  travellers  in  those  hot  climes, 
so  Jesus  is  precisely  suited  to  our  necessities.  You  cannot  mention  a  want  of  yours 
which  Jesus  is  not  competent  to  satisfy.  He  is  Light  for  our  darkness.  Strength  for 
our  weakness,  Food  for  our  hunger.  Rest  for  our  weariness,  Freedom  for  our  bondage. 
Pardon  for  our  guilt.  Purity  for  our  uncleanness,  Hope  for  our  despondency.  As  a 
well-made  key  fits  a  lock,  so  Jesus  fits  all  my  needs.  I  want  no  other  Saviour.  He 
"  is  all  my  salvation,  and  all  my  desire."    Fitness  is  God's  sign-manual. — D. 

Ver.  4. — Royal  generosity.  The  testimony  of  personal  experience  is  specially  valu- 
able. We  may  argue  from  a  priori  data  what  generous  love  must  reside  in  God,  in  order 
to  harmonize  with  his  perfection ;  and  such  a  line  of  reasoning  has  its  value.  Or  we 
may  argue  from  analngy,  that  since  fervent  love  stirs  in  the  human  breast,  purer  love 
and  mightier  glows — an  uncreated  flame — in  the  heart  of  God ;  and  this  form  of  argu- 
ment leaves  a  comforting  impression  on  the  mind.  But  personal  testimony  has  a 
tender  force  all  its  own.  If  God  has  dealt  generously  and  graciously  to  one  member  of 
the  human  family,  no  more  deserving  than  I  am,  it  is  evident  that  he  will  deal  with 
equal  generosity  of  love  toward  me.  For  he  is  impervious  to  ohang(3.  If  it  brought 
him  joy  and  renown  to  show  practical  love  to  fallen  men  centuries  ago,  it  vrill  con- 
tribute to  his  renown  and  to  his  joy  of  heart  now.  If  it  added  to  his  glory  to  save  a 
lost  soul  in  Palestine,  it  will  add  to  his  glory  to  save  me.  One  deed  of  the  heavenly 
King  is  a  sample  of  all  his  deeds.    Ex  uno,  omnia  disce. 

I.  The  koyal  grace  of  Christ  pbovidks  a  banquet  of  good.  It  is  everywhere  a 
mark  of  friendship  if  a  king  invites  a  man  to  a  banquet ;  and,  through  every  part  of 
Scripture,  God  represents  himself  as  providing  for  penitent  men  a  "  feast  of  fat  things." 
Resentment  and  vindictiveness  towards  his  frail  creatures  are  things  not  to  be  thought 
of;  they  are  sentiments  familiar  in  hell,  but  unknown  in  heaven,  1.  Sere  is  the  idea 
that  hunger  is  satisfied.  At  a  banquet  the  primal  want  of  the  body  is  met.  And  there  is 
no  hunger  of  the  soul  so  widespread,  so  deep,  as  the  craving  for  reconciliation  with  God 
— the  craving  for  pardon.  What  bread  is  to  the  bodily  appetite,  God's  mercy  is  to  the 
convicted  soul;  it  is  "the  one  thing  needful."  Well,  God  has  provided  this  gift  in  no 
stinted  fashion.  It  does  not  come  to  us  as  a  bare  measure,  just  enough  to  meet  the  case. 
It  is  a  banquet ;  it  ia  supplied  in  sumptuous  abundance.  Nor  is  it  pardon  alone  that 
the  heavenly  King  supplies.  It  is  a  banquet  of  all  kinds  of  substantial  good ;  luxuries 
gathered  from  far  and  near.  Wisdom,  mercy,  righteousness,  sonship,  hope,  victory, 
eternal  life,  are  some  of  the  viands  spread.  The  Son  of  God  "  has  given  himself  for  us." 
And  ever  and  anon  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  King  himself,  "  He  that  cometh  to  me 
shall  never  hunger;  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst."  2.  Sere  is  also  the 
idea  of  renewed  friendship.  To  eat  together  is  an  act  of  friendship.  It  is  a  seal 
impressed  in  public  that  a  covenant  of  friendship  exists.  To  have  our  several  bodies 
nourished  from  the  same  meal,  from  the  same  loaf,  is  a  beautiful  bond  of  attachment. 
It  was  an  aggravation  of  Iscariot's  sin,  that  "  he  who  had  eaten  bread  with  Jeaua  had 


§4  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1—17. 

lifted  up  the  heel  against  him."  If  the  kin?;  invites  us  to  a  banquet,  it  means  that  he 
finds  a  pleasure  in  our  society ;  he  wishes  to  draw  closer  the  ties  of  sacred  intimacy.  Thus 
Jesus  acts.  He  wants  to  come  into  closer  fellowship  with  us.  He  calls  us, not  servants, 
but  friends.  He  undertakes  to  be  our  Surety,  our  Advocate  with  the  Father.  He  wili 
keep  nothing  from  us,  not  even  his  throne.  Other  friendships  may  languish ;  the  friend- 
ship of  Jesus  shall  eternally  abide.  Prom  his  love  nothing  shall  separate  us.  3.  Here  is 
ihe  idea  of  exuberant  joy.  A  banquet  is  not  spread,  and  lavishly  embellished  with 
beauty,  simply  to  allay  bodily  hunger.  It  is  a  royal  device  for  promoting  joy.  And  he, 
who  has  given  to  us  a  great  capE^city  for  joy,  intends  to  fill  that  capacity  to  the  very 
brim.  If  there  are  occasions  on  earth  when  joy  flows  in  upon  us  like  a  rising  tide,  these 
are  only  prophetic  moments  of  the  ineffable  and  eternal  joy  of  heaven.  Desire  gratified 
— this  is  joy;  effort  successful — this  is  joy;  hope  realized — this  is  joy;  development 
complete — this  is  joy.  To  be  with  God,  to  be  like  God, — this  is  noontide  gladness ;  thia 
is  the  "  fulness  of  joy.'' 

II.  The  kotal  grace  of  Christ  uses  gentle  constraints.  "  He  brought  me  into 
his  banquet-house."  A  man's  worst  enemy  is  usually  himself.  He  cannot  persuade 
himself  that  such  generous  love  is  intended  for  him.  Others  may  perhaps  be  invited, 
but  not  he.  Nor  does  he  see  that  this  unbelief  is  a  fresh  act  of  sin.  If  I  discredit  a 
person's  word,  I  may  do  him  a  great  injustice.  If  I  doubt  the  promise  of  a  friend,  it  is 
an  insult.  And  if  I  question  the  faithfulness  of  my  King,  I  give  him  pain.  1.  He 
sometimes  uses  the  rough  messenger  of  affliction  to  bring  us  to  his  banquet-hall.  Many  a 
pardoned  man  will  say  with  David,  "  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray."  Saul's 
blindness  made  him  sensible  of  Christ's  nearness.  The  peril  of  Jonah  taught  him  to  sav, 
"  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  When  Manasseh  was  in  affliction  he  sought  unto  Jehovah. 
In  times  of  earthly  prosperity  men  are  often  self-sufficient ;  they  have  all  that  heart  can 
wish  ;  they  have  no  sense  of  soul-hunger.  But  when  argosies  are  wrecked,  or  harvests 
fail,  or  death  sweeps,  with  black  pinions,  through  the  house,  then  they  discover  their 
impotence,  and  long  for  the  heavenly  supply.  Often  has  a  pitiless  storm  driven 
despairing  men  to  the  Refuge  on  Calvary ;  often  has  affliction,  in  some  form,  been  the 
messenger  employed  to  bring  men  to  the  gospel-feast.  2.  Sometimes  Christ  uses  his 
gospel-heralds  to  bring  men  in.  Our  heavenly  Friend  has  seen  fit  to  employ  renewed 
men,  though  imperfect,  to  persuade  the  prodigals  to  return.  He  does  not  so  employ  the 
angel-bands.  Pardoned  men  know  what  are  the  burdens  of  sin,  and  what  are  the 
seductions  of  the  tempter.  Pardoned  men  have  tender  sympathies  for  their  fallen  fellows. 
And  pardoned  men  know  by  experience  the  joy  of  acceptance;  the  blessedness  of  Gol's 
friendship  contrasted  with  his  frown.  Cleansed  and  consecrated  men  are  specially  fitted 
to  bring  sinners  to  Christ's  banquet.  Thus  Jesus  has  brought  many.  3.  Eis  otun 
Spirit,  the  Comforter,  is  the  great  Agent  in  filling  the  banquet-hall.  Said  Jesus,  prior  to 
his  crucifixion,  "He  shall  testify  of  me ; "  "  He  shall  take  of  mine,  and  show  it  unto  you." 
To  him  belongs  the  prerogative  of  enlightening  the  mind,  arousing  the  torpid  consciencp, 
convicting  of  sin,  and  quickening  into  life  dead  souls.  He  "  strives  "  with  the  op|)usi- 
tion  of  a  rebellious  will.  By  his  Divine  anointing,  men  are  empowered  to  use  the  arts 
of  heavenly  persuasiveness.  Jesus,  the  soul's  Bridegroom,  has  furnished  the  sumptuous 
banquet ;  now  it  is  the  mission  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  persuade  the  perishing  to  come. 
Have  we  not  heard  his  "  still  small  voice "  within  us,  imploring  us  to  accept  the 
generous  offers  of  a  Saviour's  grace  ?  Have  we  not  put  off  his  pleadings  again  and  ag>iin 
with  the  promise  that  we  would  before  long  come  ?  And  has  not  our  promise  been  as 
often  violated?  Thrice  happy  is  the  man  who  can  say,  "He  baa  conquered."  "He 
brought  me  into  his  banquet-house." 

III.  The  royal  grace  of  Christ  vouchsafes  new  tokens  of  affection.  "  The 
device  on  his  banner  is  love."  The  beginning  and  middle  and  end  of  the  banquet  is 
love.  This  is  the  solution  of  every  problem.  Whence  originated  the  feast?  In  love. 
Why  are  the  guests  rebellious  and  fallen  men  ?  Love  I  What  methods  are  employed 
to  induce  them  to  come?  Love!  What  end  is  contemplated  in  the  feast?  Love] 
On  every  banneret  the  symbol  is  love.  1.  This  banner  implies  triumph.  It  was  the 
banner  which  our  great  Champion  carried  in  the  war.  If  we  are  at  the  banquet-table, 
we  have  been  captivated  by  Immanuel's  love.  This  love  pursued  us  in  our  wanderings, 
convinced  us  of  our  folly,  bore  with  us  patiently,  sweetly  induced  us  to  lay  down  our 
arms  and  to  submit.    We  were  softened  and  subdued  by  love.    Now  "  we  love  him. 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE   SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  65 


because  he  first  loved  us,"  2.  This  lanner  means  devotement.  We  adopt  it  as  our 
own.  We  have  swom  to  serve  our  Master  under  this  peaceful  banner.  At  the  banquet 
we  enlist  ourselves  on  the  side  of  the  righteous  King.  Constrained  by  love,  we  freely 
devote  to  him  all  we  have,  all  we  are.  We  must  be  trained  and  disciplined  for  this 
noble  warfare  in  the  school  of  love.  The  love  that  has  conquered  us  shall,  through  us, 
conquer  others.  Love  is  the  heavenly  steel  from  which  we  fashion  all  our  weapons. 
Love  moulds  and  inspires  our  life.  "  The  banner  over  us  is  love."  3.  This  banner 
means  security.  If  I  am  the  object  of  Immanuel's  love,  I  am  safe ;  no  harm  can  befall 
me.  The  brood  under  the  wing  of  the  parent  hen  cannot  be  pierced  by  foeman's 
arrow,  unless  that  arrow  pierce  the  parent's  wing ;  so  the  blow  which  falls  on  me  must 
strike  my  Protector  first.  Whatever  apparent  evil  fall  upon  me,  it  is  by  the  permission 
of  infinite  love ;  therefore  is  only  apparent.  It  is  simply  disguised  blessing ;  a  sweet 
kernel  in  a  rough  shell.  If  over  me  floats  the  banner  of  Immanuel's  love,  I  have  a 
charmed  life.    Every  foe,  visible  and  invisible,  is  disarmed. 

**  And  so,  beside  the  silent  sea, 
I  wait  the  muffled  oar ; 
Assured  no  harm  can  come  to  me^ 
On  ocean  or  on  shore." 

D. 

Vers.  8 — 13. — Christ's  coming  makes  a  new  epoch  in  our  history.  Nature  is  a  mirror 
in  which  God  is  seen,  and  all  the  processes  of  nature  are  samples  of  God's  works  in  us. 
Such  analogies  we  ought  to  expect,  because  all  the  forces  in  nature  are  the  projections 
of  God's  thoughts  and  purposes.  The  same  God  who  works  so  mightily  in  the  material 
wurld  works  with  mighty  grace  in  us.  If,  in  the  visible  creation,  he  gives  life  to  dead 
matter,  bo  does  he  likewise  give  life  to  dead  souls.  The  sun  which  rides  in  royal 
majesty  across  the  heavens  is  a  picture  of  the  great  Sun  of  Righteousness,  who  arises 
on  the  soul  "  with  healing  in  his  beams."  As  the  coming  of  spring  makes  a  new  epoch 
in  the  material  world,  so  the  coming  of  Immanuel  is  the  opening  of  a  new  era  to  the 
soul.  It  is  nothing  short  of  a  spiritual  evolution.  We  pass  out  of  winter  into  spring ; 
on  t  of  death  into  life. 

I.  This  lansuage  is  a  pioturb  of  Christ's  incabnation.  "The  voice  of  my 
Beloved  I  behold,  he  cometh  leaping  upon  the  mountains,"  etc.  1.  He  overleaps  aU 
difficidty.  Principles  of  eternal  righteousness  stood  in  the  way  of  man's  redemption. 
The  interests  of  Divine  government  stood  in  the  way.  The  peace  and  welfare  of  the 
heavenly  hosts  seemed  to  be  obstacles.  Man's  enmity  was  a  tremendous  barrier.  But 
the  Son  of  God  was  deterred  by  no  obstacle.  Although  the  temporary  renunciation  of 
his  glory  and  dignity  was  required,  he  did  not  hold  back.  Immeasurable  condescension 
was  demanded;  yet  to  this  he  cordially  submitted.  In  view  of  the  splendid  result,  he 
triumphed  over  every  hindrance.  2.  His  coming  was  ajoyfuL  act.  "Leaping  upon  the 
mountains,  skipping  upon  the  hUls."  With  the  affectionate  purpose  to  save  men  strong 
in  his  breast,  he  felt  a  joy  in  self-hiimiliation;  a  delicious  pleasure  in  self-sacrifice. 
"  His  delights  were  already  with  the  sons  of  men."  Lo  I  "  said  he — "  lo !  I  come  to 
do  thy  will,  0  God  ;  yea,  thy  Law  is  within  my  heart."  When  our  globe  was  fashioned, 
there  was  new  gladness  in  heaven ;  "  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy."  And  when  the 
Son  of  God  appeared  on  earth  as  its  Eedeemer,  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  broke 
upon  the  midnight  silence  of  Bethlehem  with  the  song, "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest  I " 
Although  to  execute  his  task  he  was  "  the  Man  of  sorrows,"  nevertheless  in  his  heart 
there  glowed  the  fire  of  sacred  rapture.  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  he  endured 
the  cross,  and  despised  the  shame."  As  a  noble  Bridegroom  "he  rejoices  over  his 
bride."  In  his  completed  work  "  he  shall  be  satisfied."  3.  His  coming  was  discerned 
only  by  his  chosen.  The  bulk  of  men  knew  nothing  about  his  coming;  oared  nothing 
about  it.  To  Herod  it  was  a  perplexity  and  a  terror.  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and 
his  own  received  him  not."  Yet  a  few  chosen  ones  "  waited  for  the  hope  and  con- 
solaiion  of  Israel."  Andrew  and  Simon  Peter  and  Kathanael  had  been  pondering 
the  old  prophecies,  and  were  looking  hither  and  thither  for  signs  of  fulfilment.  Old 
Simeon's  heart  overflowed  with  gratitude  when,  embracing  the  holy  Child,  he  said, 
"  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace."  Not  to  the  eye  of  man  was  he 
revealed.    Outwardly,  "  there  was  no  beauty  in  him  that  men  should  desire  him."    To 

BONQ  OF   SOLOMON.  W 


«6  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1—17. 

many  he  was  known  through  his  voice  of  wisdom — through  his  voice  of  tender  invita- 
tion and  generous  love.  "  The  voice  of  my  Beloved."  "  Faith  oometh  by  hearing."  To 
the  heart  Jesus  Christ  still  speaks.  The  sweet  tones  of  his  love  win  us  to  obedience. 
'Tis  not  only  a  voice,  but  "  the  voice  of  my  Beloved." 

II.  This  LANatTAOB  is  a  picture  of  Christ's  coming  at  oue  conversion.  In  the 
day  of  our  personal  regeneration,  Immanuel  came  into  our  heart  to  dwell.  Then  all 
tlie  mountains  of  opposition  were  levelled,  and  all  the  abysses  of  degradation  were  filled 
up.  We  straightway  passed  out  of  darkness  into  light,  out  of  bondage  into  liberty,  out  of 
banishment  into  sonship.  If  it  were  not  a  time  of  harvest,  when  men  gather  up  the  ripe 
sheaves  of  plenty,  it  was  a  spring-time,  when  young  life  appears,  and  gives  fair  promise 
of  growth  and  fruitfulness.  So  we  could  sing,  "  For,  lo,  the  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is 
over  and  gone."  1.  A  surprising  change.  If  ever  a  miracle  has  been  wrought  on  earth, 
our  regeneration  is  a  miracle.  It  is  a  new  departure  in  life.  We,  who  once  loved  sin, 
now  hate  the  abominable  thing.  We  had  "  sold  ourselves  for  nought ; "  now  we  are 
redeemed  with  priceless  blood.  We  were  righteously  condemned ;  now  we  are  righteously 
accepted.  We  are  brought  into  covenant  relationship  with  Grod.  In  that  day  hell  was 
exchanged  for  heaven.  It  was  a  day  of  jubilee.  Through  all  the  ranks  in  heaven  a 
thrill  of  gladness  ran.  The  barrenness  and  death  of  winter  were  gone,  and  spring,  fresh 
with  life  and  hope,  filled  the  soul.  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  had  arrived.  2.  Varied 
beauty  is  here  represented.  "  The  flowers  appear  on  the  earth."  Bright  and  fragrant 
flowers  are  fit  emblems  of  Christian  virtues.  The  early  flowers  of  meekness  and  peni- 
tence send  forth  a  goodly  smell,  and  the  spicy  beds  of  obedience  produce  a  rich  aroma. 
Some  Christians  are  like  violets,  unconscious  of  their  sweetness ;  some  are  like  snow- 
<lrops,  lacking  character;  some  are  full  of  sacred  enthusiasm,  rare  roses,  like  Ausustines 
and  Ambroses  and  Luthers.  The  brightest  and  noblest  specimens  of  men  are  found  in 
I  he  Church.  3.  And  fruitfulness  is  also  foreseen.  "  The  fig  tree  putteth  forth  her 
ureen  figs."  True  religion  is  not  mere  sentiment;  it  is  practical;  it  is  beneficial  to 
mankind.  Whence  sprang  our  hospitals,  our  asylums,  our  penitentiaries,  our  alms- 
houses ?  They  have  all  sprung  from  Christ,  as  the  Root.  When  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
anointed  Jesus,  he  preached  good  tidings  to  the  poor;  he  announced  "liberty  to  the 
captive,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  those  who  were  bound."  No  life  has  been 
so  fruitful  in  good  results  as  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  every  true  disciple  aspires  to 
lie  fruitful  too.  In  the  first  age  of  Christianity,  Paul  saw  many  excellent  fruits — "love, 
joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  meekness,"  etc.  And  the  catalogue  has  been  growing  from 
that  day  to  this.  4.  Gladness  is  another  feature  in  the  coming  of  the  Bridegroom. 
"The  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come."  If  any  event  on  earth  can  awaken  joy, 
surely  this  must  in  a  superlative  degree.  If,  on  the  return  of  spring,  lark  and  linnet 
and  thrush  trill  their  notes  afresh,  and  fill  the  woods  with  music,  can  we  restrain  our 
joy  when  the  spring  is  within  us — a  new  incoming  of  heavenly  life?  This  joy  is  joy 
of  the  richest  quality.  It  is  the  cream  of  all  joy.  It  is  joy  akin  to  that  which  floods 
the  heart  of  God.  We  did  not  know  what  joy  was  until  Christ  visited  the  heart.  Said 
Rutherford,  "  Hold,  Lord !  it  is  enough.  The  vessel  cannot  contain  more."  "  It  is 
meet  that  we  should  make  merry  and  be  glad."  Let  nature  share  in  the  gladness ! 
It  is  the  birthday  and  bridal  of  the  soul  in  one !  5.  ITiis  new  love  is  held  precious  by 
Christ.  "Sweet  is  thy  voice,  and  thy  countenance  is  lovely."  We  cannot  understand 
why  our  attachment  and  our  loyalty  should  be  so  highly  esteemed  by  Jesus ;  yet  so  it  is. 
He  "  rests  in  our  love."  He  "  rejoices  over  us  with  singing."  He  calls  us  "  his  jewels 
— his  treasures."  He  has  his  "  inheritance  in  the  saints."  Where  the  disciples  meet,  he 
delights  to  come.  "  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  "  him.  And  such  complacent 
joy  does  he  find  in  his  consecrated  servants,  that  he  says,  "  I  am  glorified  in  them." 
In  the  visions  of  heaven  vouchsafed  to  St.  John,  the  redeemed  of  earth  occupied  a  place 
nearer  to  the  throne  than  the  unfallen  angels.  They  are  styled  "  messengers,"  "  ser- 
vants ; "  but  consecrated  men  are  designated  "  brethren." 

III.  This  language  is  descriptive  of  revival  after  temporary  deadness.  The 
coming  of  Christ  to  the  soul  is  like  a  restoration  to  life  after  fainting,  or  like  new  life 
after  sleep.  1.  2%e  novelty  of  spiritual  life,  arising  from  contiaH,  does  not  abide. 
The  joy  that  springs  from  pardon  does  not  remain,  just  as  the  freshness  of  spring  does 
not  continue  all  the  year.  When  the  new  experience  becomes  a  settled  thing,  the 
gladness  that  could  not  at  first  but  break  into  a  song  subsides  into  a  calmer  delight. 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  67 

At  conversion  the  change  was  so  great,  the  coctrast  with  the  former  state  so  striking, 
the  deliverance  so  welcome,  we  could  not  restrain  our  joy.  But  the  festivities  of 
marriage  do  not  remain  perpetual.  The  rosy  hues  of  dawn  do  not  continue  all  the 
day.  So  the  rapture  of  the  new  birth  does  not  remain  all  tlirough  the  pilgrim- 
age. 2.  The  Christian,  too,  Jias  seasons  of  dark  desertion.  There  are  seasons  when 
dark  clouds  gather  round  him,  and  the  face  of  his  best  friend  is  hidden.  Doubts,  like 
malignant  spirits,  haunt  his  mind,  and  rob  him  of  his  peace.  Satan  entangles  him 
in  his  enchantments,  and  lures  him  into  the  thickets  around  Doubting  Oastle.  They 
"  cannot  read  their  titles  clear  to  mansions  in  the  skies."  They  miss  the  warm  sun- 
shine of  Immanuel's  face.  And  they  are  perplexed.  If  they  are  the  Lord's,  why  this 
painful  discipline?  Why  this  loss  of  conscious  favour?  And  in  sad  despondency  they 
ask,  "  Will  God  oast  off  for  ever  ?  Will  he  be  favourable  no  more  ?  "  3.  Then  the  return 
of  the  Bridegroom  brings  new  life  and  joy.  "He  restoreth  my  soul."  Possibly  there 
was  some  fault  in  us  that  required  chastisement,  or  some  rival  to  our  best  Beloved  may 
have  appeared  in  the  heart  not  to  be  tolerated.  Wliatever  was  the  cause  of  this 
temporary  eclipse,  certain  it  is  that  the  reappearance  of  the  sun  will  be  a  festive  day — a 
jubilee,  a  resurrection-morn.  While  under  that  dark  cloud,  there  may  have  been  some 
needed  preparation  of  the  soul  for  higher  service,  as  witli  the  fields  of  earth  under  wintry 
skies.  Larger  fruitfulness  may  result.  The  friendship  of  Jesus  will  be  more  i>rized. 
"Absence  makes  the  heart  grow  fonder."  Where  silence  and  sadness  just  now  reigned, 
mirth  and  music  have  stirred  the  echoes.  Despondency  has  f;iven  place  to  hope.  The 
dark  shadows  of  night  have  fled  before  a  new  dawn ;  and  again  we  can  sing,  "  For,  lo, 
the  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone." — ^D. 

Ver.  16. — Marriage  jointure.  Marriage  is  a  mutual  identification  of  personal 
interests,  therefore  it  fully  represents  the  mystic  union  between  Jesus  and  the  believer. 
We  may  not  have  always  the  conscious  sense  of  our  Friend's  nearness  to  us,  still  wo 
can  always  say,  "My  Beloved  is  mine."  For  this  is  an  established  fact  —  a  f?.ct 
revealed — and  this  fact  is  ascertained  by  faith,  and  treasured  in  the  memory,  whether 
we  experience  it  at  the  moment  or  not.  If  dark  clouds  hide  the  face  of  our  Sun  ot 
Eighteousness,  we  know  still  that  he  is  affording  us  light  and  heat  and  life,  and  stili 
we  say,  "  My  Beloved  is  mine." 

I.  The  heart's  choice.  The  door  has  been  opened  to  Christ,  and  he  has  been 
admitted  to  the  innermost  shrine.  He  has  become  the  soul's  Husband  and  King  by 
sacred  covenant.  1.  This  choice  is  an  effect,  not  a  cause.  "  We  love  him,  because  he 
first  loved  us."  Said  Jesus  to  his  first  disciples,  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have 
chosen  you."  His  light  has  shiued  into  our  minds.  His  spirit  has  given  sensibility 
to  our  conscience.  He  has  made  us  sensible  of  our  need.  He  has  restrained  us  from 
further  rebellion.  He  caused  us  to  walk  in  the  King's  highway.  "  By  the  grace  of  God 
I  am  what  I  am."  2.  This  choice  of  Christ  is  our  supremest  wisdom.  To  have  made 
Jesus  our  soul's  Portion  is  an  act  of  pure  wisdom.  It  is  the  only  right  thing  to  do. 
He  has  a  right  to  the  chief  place,  and  it  would  be  sacrilege  to  give  our  best  love  to 
another.  Yet,  alas!  many  do.  There  are  men  who  make  money,  or  social  rank,  or 
fatrie,  or  pleasure,  the  best  beloved  of  their  heart.  The  world  is  their  beloved,  or  their 
children  occupy  the  place  which  should  be  Christ's.  We  may  sincerely  congratulate 
ourselves  if  we  can  say,  "  Jesus  is  my  Portion."  3.  Christ  has  been  chosen  because  of 
his  eoccellence.  Who,  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  can  be  compared  for  worth  with  Jesus  ?  A 
person  is  always  more  precious  than  a  thing.  A  man  is  "  more  precious  than  the  gold 
of  Ophir."  And  among  all  persons  Jesus  is  superlatively  precious.  Who  can  compare 
with  him  for  wisdom?  Who  has  dominion  over  nature  and  over  the  lower  world  like 
the  Son  of  God  ?  Who  can  impart  strength  like  him  ?  Can  any  one  convey  life  but 
Immanuel?     Or  who  has  such  influence  for  us  in  heaven  as  our  gracious  Intercessor? 

"  Infinite  excellence  is  thine. 
Almighty  King  of  grace." 

4.  Christ  has  been  chosen  hy  virtue  of  his  love.  Even  if  he  did  not  possess  so  many 
excellences,  we  should  have  chosen  him  for  his  love.  His  condescension  is  wonderfuL 
His  sweet  compassion  has  captivated  our  souls.  As  soon  as  we  realized  his  tender, 
strong  affection  for  us,  we  felt  that  we  must  have  his  friendship.    As  the  echo  responds 


«8  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1—17. 

to  the  speaker's  voice,  our  love  responded  to  his  love.  Or  as  the  flowers  respond  to  the 
summer  sun,  so  our  hearts  gave  out  the  fragrance  of  their  love,  under  the  quickening 
influence  of  his  grace.  For  his  love  is  not  a  vapid  sentiment.  His  love  is  an  ever- 
lasting force,  ever  active,  beneficent  in  ten  thousand  ways.  His  practical  love  persevered 
with  us,  touched  us  in  a  hundred  points,  and  finally  melted  our  ingratitude.  Love 
has  made  us  subjects,  servants,  slaves.     Such  love,  when  known,  is  irresistible. 

II.  This  choice  includes  pbopribtobship.  "My  Beloved  is  mine."  As  I  say, 
"  This  coat  is  mine,"  or  "  This  land  is  mine,"  so  I  can  say,  "  Christ  is  mine."  No  one  can 
dispossess  me.  It  is  an  inalienable  possession.  1.  Mark  the  nature  of  this  possession. 
I  do  not  possess  it  simply  with  my  hands.  It  is  not  something  outside  me,  from 
which  I  alone  can  derive  advantage.  It  is  a  possession  within  me.  It  becomes  part 
and  parcel  of  my  being.  It  enters  into  my  very  life.  I  am  a  totally  different  being, 
by  virtue  of  this  possession.  Jesus  is  identified  with  me,  and  I  with  him.  He  is  my 
Life,  my  Hope.  "  Christ  liveth  in  me."  We  possess  him,  as  the  branch  possesseth 
the  root.  2,  The  extent  of  the  possession.  As  the  bride  becomes  by  marriage  partici- 
pator of  all  the  lands  and  estates  and  honours  of  the  bridegroom,  so  is  it  with  every 
believer.  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  mine.  All  the  excellences  of  Christ  are  mine. 
The  wealth  of  Christ  is  mine.  "  I  am  joint-heir  "  with  him.  He  has  chosen  to  share 
with  me  all  that  he  has.  His  friends  are  my  friends.  His  servants  are  my  servants. 
His  world  is  my  world.  His  throne  is  my  throne.  "  All  things  are  ours,  for  we  are 
Christ's."  3.  The  utility  of  this  possession.  Does  it  not  bring  me  great  and  present 
advantages  ?  Does  it  not  make  me  rich  indeed  ?  "  He  is  mine  to  bear  all  my  burdens ; 
mine  to  discharge  all  my  debts ;  mine  to  answer  all  my  accusers ;  mine  to  conquer  all 
my  foes."  He  is  "  mine  in  absence,  mine  in  presence ;  mine  through  life,  mine  in  death; 
mine  in  the  judgment;  mine  at  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb."  I  am  secure  and 
honoured  and  happy,  because  "  Christ  is  mine." 

*'  With  bim  I'm  rich,  though  stripped  of  all  beside ; 
Without  him  poor,  though  all  the  world  were  miile." 

nL  This  choice  includes  devotement.  "  I  am  his."  As  Jesus  has  given  himself 
entirely  and  unreservedly  to  me,  I  have  given  myself  wholly  and  without  reserve  to 
him.  It  is  a  real  surrender.  1.  The  dignity  of  self-devotement.  The  man  who  devotes 
his  whole  self  to  his  king  or  to  his  country  does  not  degrade  himself  thereby.  He 
rises  in  the  scale  of  being ;  he  rises  in  honour.  Much  more  does  the  devoted  servant 
of  Jesus  Christ  rise  to  the  dignity  of  true  living.  Better  be  prime  minister  of  England 
than  king  in  Dahomey.  And  nobler  far  is  it  to  be  a  servant  in  Immanuel's  kingdom 
than  to  boast  of  vain  independence,  and  be  in  reality  a  vassal  of  Satan.  To  serve  is 
noble,  royal,  Divine.  Jesus  is  a  King  because  he  stooped  to  be  a  servant,  and  the  only 
road  to  kingliness  is  hearty  service.  The  heraldic  motto  of  our  Prince  of  Wales  is,  "  I 
serve."  Devotement  to  Jesus  Christ  is  eternal  honour.  2.  2%e  extent  of  self-devotement. 
It  embraces  our  whole  nature,  our  entire  life.  The  claim  of  Christ  is  complete.  There 
is  no  organ  of  our  body,  no  faculty  of  mind,  no  moment  of  time,  no  particle  of  our 
wealth,  which  does  not  of  right  belong  to  him ;  therefore  we  can  keep  back  nothing. 
We  are  "  not  our  own."  On  the  grounds  of  creation,  sustenance,  redemption,  Jesus 
has  a  triple  claim.  And  above  all,  he  has  our  personal  consent.  By  a  sacred  covenant, 
we  have  freely  surrendered  all  we  have  to  his  kingly  service.  The  consecration  must 
be  complete.  3.  2%is  devotement  brings  supreme  satisfaction.  There  is  no  joy  for  the 
human  soul  like  the  joy  of  entire  consecration.  This  is  our  proper  place,  and  we  cannot 
find  our  rest  elsewhere.  On  our  death-bed,  will  the  review  of  our  life  bring  us  satis- 
faction, unless  that  life  has  been  spent,  and  wholly  spent,  in  the  service  of  our 
Kedeemer?  Can  we  dare  to  appropriate  to  ourselves  all  that  belongs  to  Christ,  if  at 
the  same  time  we  do  not  give  up  all  to  him  ?  As  you  cannot  put  pure  water  into  a 
vessel  that  is  already  full  of  other  things,  so  you  cannot  put  Christ's  treasures  into  a 
soul  until  it  is  emptied  of  self.  To  do  my  Master's  will  I  must  surrender  all  to  him. 
To  become  like  Christ  I  must  be  wholly  consecrated  to  his  kingdom.  Then  shall  his 
joy  be  my  joy.    Then  shall  I  discover  the  truth,  and  shall  sing— 

"  Vm  in  the  noblest  sense  my  own 
When  most  entirely  thine." 


OH.  n.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  69 

Vers.  1,  2. —  Wild-flower  teauty.  The  scene  which  suggests  this  imagery  is  one 
abounding  in  rural  delights.  In  a  remote  country  retreat,  the  lovers  are  seated  on  a 
couch  of  veidant  turf,  decked  with  lovely  flowers.  It  seems  as  though  nature  has 
prepared  Cor  them  a  pleasant  house  whose  rafters  and  galleries  are  formed  by  the  lofty 
cedars  and  firs  above  them.  The  dialogue  is  coloured  by  the  suggestions  of  the  rustic 
spot.  To  the  praises  of  the  lover  the  bride  responds  with  simplicity  and  humility :  "  I 
am  as  the  wild  flower  of  the  vale" — the  crocus  ortlie  rose.  He  accepts  the  comparison. 
"  Yes ;  as  a  lily  among  tliorns,  so  is  my  love  among  the  daughters."  Thus  love  glorifles 
and  hallows  the  place  of  meeiing,  and  transf  irms  it  into  all  that  is  beautiful.  If  this 
world  is  to  the  poet  a  gift  of  the  Eternal  Father,  a  revelation  of  his  charactef,  a  means 
and  aid  to  piety — yea,  an  earnest  of  heaven  itself — then  we  may  well  see  in  the  rose 
of  Sharon,  in  the  lily  of  the  valley,  an  emblem  of  true  virtue  and  excellence,  especially 
as  apparent  in  the  Church,  which  is  the  garden  of  God's  delight.  Such  spiritual 
excellence  is  characterized  by — 

I.  Beauty.  The  mind  is  fashioned  so  that  it  must  recognize  and  admire  that  which 
is  beautiful,  both  in  the  natural  and  in  the  spiritual  realm.  There  is  a  beauty,  a  charm 
in  goodness  more  to  be  admired  than  the  ciimson  petals  of  the  rose  or  the  lily's  snow- 
white  chalice.  It  is  given  to  the  spirituid  to  apprehend  the  ideal  loveliness  of  virtue 
and  Christian  purity.  As  the  flowers  oi  the  fleld  and  of  the  forest  tell  of  the  Creator's 
delight  in  shapeliest  forms  and  fairest  hues,  so  the  graces  that  adorn  the  Christian 
character  are  witnesses  to  that  Spirit,  whose  worlimanship  and  design  and  whose  vital 
creation  they  surely  are. 

"  Thus  beauty  here  is  like  to  that  above, 
And  loveliness  leads  up  to  perfect  love." 

II.  PuBlTT.  The  wild  flowers  speak  to  the  poet's  mind  of  stainless  goodness ;  the 
lily  is  especially  the  emblem  of  maiden  purenesa.  Well  may  such  blossoms,  blooming 
far  from  the  oit>'s  defilements,  serve  to  symbolize  that  moral  excellence  which  is 
uncontaminated  by  sin  and  by  a  sinful  world.  Where  the  holy  Christ  is  himself 
spiritually  present,  his  presence  creates  a  purity  akin  to,  because  derived  from,  his  own. 

III.  Pkagbancb.  The  Song  of  Songs  contains  many  references  to  the  delicate  and 
delightful  odours  which  abound  in  the  plains  and  gardens  of  the  Bast.  To  the  sense 
of  smell  there  is  an  ethereal  side,  an  aspect  of  sentiment ;  and  to  this  the  royal  poet 
delights  to  appeal.  The  exquisite  arcsia  which  breathes  from  the  scented  blossoms 
tells  of  their  nearness  and  suggests  their  beauty.  There  is  a  perfume  in  the  pure  and 
unselfish  character  which  diffuses  itself  near  and  far,  witnessing  to  the  Divine  grace 
and  power  that  ever  live  and  work  in  the  spiritual  garden  of  the  Lord.  This  fragrance 
betrayeth  itself,  and  cannot  be  hid. 

IV.  Pee-eminbnce  heightened  by  oontbast.  The  lilj'  is  pictured  as  "  among  the 
thorns,"  by  whose  neighbourhood  its  fairness  and  sweetness  are  enhanced.  The  thorns 
are  a  foil  to  the  flower.  The  plants  which  our  heavenly  Father  hath  planted  in  this 
world  are  hard  by  the  useless  and  noxious  growths  of  sin.  Who  has  not  seen  a  pure 
and  gentle  member  of  a  coarse,  worldly,  and  selfish  circle — a  family  or  a  community — 
showing,  all  unconsciously,  as  a  lily  among  thorns,  moie  beautiful  and  charming  for 
the  uncongenial  surroundings? 

V.  Attbactivbness.  The  rose  and  the  lily  draw  to  them  the  innocent  child,  the 
maiden  gathering  flowers  with  wliich  to  decorate  the  lowly  home,  the  poet  whose 
heart  is  open  to  the  sacred  sweetness  of  nature's  symbols.  Where  there  are  spirits 
susceptible  to  beauty,  the  flowers  will  not  be  unheeded  or  unsought.  Alike  attractive- 
aess  is  exercised  by  the  pure,  the  devout,  the  benevolent,  and  sympaihizing.  No 
wonder  that  Christ  himself  has  been  named  the  Rose  of  Sharon.  Those  who  share 
hii  spirit  and  witness  to  his  love  are  the  ornaments  of  his  garden,  joining  to  render  it 
the  congenial  resort,  the  chosen  home,  of  all  who  are  sen^itlve  to  the  appeal  of  Divine 
love,  and  responsive  to  the  summons  of  Divine  holiness  and  authority. — T. 

Ver.  3. — Shadow  and  fruit.  Pleasant  was  it  at  noon  to  quit  the  close  tent  pitched 
upon  the  opea  plain,  and  to  seek  the  shelter  of  the  spreading  tree ;  pleasant,  beneath 
this  refuge  from  the  scorching  heat,  to  partake  of  the  cool  and  juicy  fruit  plucked  from 
its  boughs.     No  wuudb:  that  the  Church  has  delighted  to  find  in  the  apple  or  citron 


70  THJB  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [ch.  n.  1—17. 

tree,  chief  in  value  among  the  trees  of  the  grove,  an  emblem  of  that  "  Plant  of  Renown," 
the  Loid  and  Saviour  himself,  who  has  sheltered  multitudes  beneath  his  guardian 
presence,  and  supplied  multitudes  from  his  abundant  sufficiency. 

I.  Chbist's  supbemacy  asserted.  As  the  noble  citron  in  the  orchard  towers  above 
the  lesser  trees,  so  is  the  Saviour  exalted  above  all  human  teachers  and  leaders  of  men, 
and  even  above  all  inspired  seers  and  prophets.  This  supremacy  (1)  results  from  his 
very  nature ;  (2)  is  affirmed  upon  Divine  autliority ;  (3)  has  proved  itself  in  the  history 
of  the  Church ;  and  (4)  is  made  evident  in  the  experience  of  every  individual  friend 
and  disciple  of  the  Lord. 

II.  Christ's  peoteotion  bxperibnoed.  The  bride  not  only  looked  up  to  her  royal 
bridegroom  with  reverence  and  with  pride ;  she  placed  herself  beneath  his  guardian 
care.  He  was  her  husband,  in  whose  palace  she  abode,  and  in  whose  keeping  she  felt 
secure.  He  was  to  her  as  the  spreading  tree  which  protects  from  noonday  heat.  So 
the  spiritual  spouse  of  the  Divine  Bridegroom  rests  secure  beneath  the  guardianship 
of  her  rightful  Lord. 

"  Oppressed  with  noontide's  scorching  heat, 
To  yonder  crosB  I  flee ; 
Beneatli  its  shelter  tiike  my  seat — 
No  shade  like  this  for  me." 

in.  Chmbt's  swbktnbss  enjoyed.  The  tree  that  yields  the  shelter  supplies  also 
the  fruit,  which  is  "  sweet  to  the  taste.''  And  the  soul  partakes  of  Christ,  feeding  upon 
him  by  faith.  As  the  fruit  enters  into  the  body,  is  assimilated,  and  refreshes  the 
system,  in  like  manner  our  Divine  Lord  condescends  to  become  the  life  and  nourish- 
ment of  his  people.  His  sacramental  love  brings  health  and  nourishment,  vigour  and 
revival,  satisfaction  and  joy,  to  the  spiritual  nature  of  such  as  participate  by  faith  in 
his  sacrifice  and  in  his  spirit.  Such  are  happy,  for  they  "  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord 
is  good."— T. 

Ver.  4. — The  Icmquet  of  love.  Both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  New  the 
blessings  of  the  gospel  are  set  foith,  by  anticipation  or  in  reality,  under  the  image  of 
a  feast.  The  composite  nature  of  man  gives  point  and  effectiveness  to  this  metaphorical 
language.  The  soul  is  led  by  the  Saviour  into  his  banqueting-house,  where  hunger  is 
satisfied,  and  where  the  provisions  of  bounty  and  of  love  are  partaken  and  enjoyed. 

I.  It  is  Christ  who  brings  the  soul  to  himself.  He  does  not  wait  for  tho  needy 
and  poverty-stricken  spirit  to  find  liim  and  to  come  to  him.  He  came  in  pity  to  seek 
and  to  save.  And  as  when  he  was  upon  earth  Jesus  sought  out  many  a  sinner,  many 
a  sufferer,  so  does  he  still  and  ever,  in  the  exercise  of  his  Divine  compassion,  lay  his 
hand  uppn  needy  outcasts,  and  lead  them  into  his  banqueting-house. 

II.  It  is  Christ  who  provides  fob  the  soul  a  bountiful  entertainment.  It  is 
not  merely  bread  for  the  hungry  that  the  gospel  offers ;  it  is,  in  the  language  of  Scripture, 
a  "  feast  of  fat  things."  Salvation  means  soinethins;  more  than  deliverance  from  desti- 
tution. God  comes  to  us  in  Christ,  saying,  "  All  things  are  yours."  The  beggar  may 
be  relieved  at  the  gate;  but  the  guest  is  welcomed  to  the  banquet-hall,  and  has  his 
place  assigned  him  at  the  board  of  the  Divine  and  blessed  Host  himself.  He  whom 
Christ  leads  to  his  own  fellowship  shall  not  want  any  good  thing  ;  wisdom,  righteous- 
ueas,  sanctification,  and  redemption,  all  are  assured  to  him. 

III.  It  is  Christ  who  reveals  to  the  soul  the  mystery  of  Divine  love.  The 
banner  or  standard  is  the  sign  of  the  presence  of  the  king  or  the  commander.  Even 
over  the  "  house  of  wine  "  there  floated  the  symbol  of  the  royal  bridegroom.  Thus  for 
the  soul  that  Christ  finds  and  leads,  that  Christ  supplies  from  the  stores  of  his  spiritual 
bounty,  is  there  an  assurance  that  the  King  himselt  keeps  guard  over  its  safety.  There 
is  the  pledge,  not  only  of  the  king's  faithfulness,  but  of  the  bridegroom's  love.  The 
soul  may  feast  in  security  and  peace,  may  enjoy  the  companionship  of  Christ's  friends; 
for  high  over  the  banqueting-house  floats  the  banner,  which  is  the  emblem  of  a  Divine 
prisence,  and  the  earnest  of  an  xmchangiug,  an  eternal  love. — T. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — The  approach  of  the  beloved.  How  poetically  does  this  language 
pictuie  the  rural  maiden  m  her  mountain  home — the  lover  climbing  the  hill  like  a  young 


OH.  u.  1—17.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  71 

hart  for  strength  and  swiftness,  looking  in  through  the  lattice  window,  callinp;  to  his 
beloved,  and  inviting  her  to  join  him  amidst  the  beauty,  the  fragrance,  and  the  freshness 
of  the  spring  1     So  comes  Clirist  unto  the  soul. 

I.  Thk  voice  of  the  Beloved.  Jesus  speaks  in  his  Word  and  gospel,  and  his  utter- 
ance is  (1)  Divine;  (2) authoritative ;  (3)  gracious;  (4)  encouraging ;  and  (5)  welcome. 
There  is  no  voice  like  his ;  he  "  spake  as  never  man  spake." 

II.  The  glance  and  oazk  op  the  Beloved.  1.  Our  Saviour's  regard  is  one  of 
interest.  Never  is  his  Church  forgotten  or  neglected  by  him;  never  does  he  withdraw 
his  attention  or  treat  with  indifference  and  neglect  those  for  whom  he  died.  2.  He 
makes  himself  acquainted  with  our  state  and  our  wants.  3.  He  looks  with  affectionate 
kindness  upon  those  who  are  dependent  upon  his  favour  and  bounty.  4.  Christ's 
gracious  regard  awakens  in  the  minds  of  his  people  a  desire  to  know  him  more  inti- 
mately. To  see  him  once  is  to  wish  to  see  him  again  ;  to  see  hiui  now  and  here  is  to 
hope  for  the  nearer  and  perfect  vision  hereafter. 

ill.  The  invitation  of  the  Beloved.  We  may  notice  in  the  tenth  verse :  1.  The 
address — remarkably  kind,  familiar,  and  affectionate.  2.  The  appeal:  "Rise  up!"  Is 
there  slothlulness  and  inactivity?  The  summons  of  the  Lord  is  enough  to  rouse  to 
earnestness  and  animation.  3.  The  entreaty:  "Come  away!"  I'hus  Christ  calls  his 
people  to  himself,  and  bids  them  seek  his  society,  accept  that  spiritual  companionship, 
desire  that  affectionate  intercourse,  which  are  the  prerogative  of  those  whom  he  loves. 
Even  if  to  act  upon  this  invitation  be  to  leave  all  that  earth  can  offer,  still  there  is 
more  than  compensation  for  such  loss  in  the  joy  and  privilege  of  the  peerless  friendship 
of  the  Son  of  God.— T. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — Spring-time.  In  this  poetical  language  there  is  an  anticipation  of 
that  delight  in  rural  scenery  which  we  are  accustomed  to  regard  as  distinctive  of 
modern  feeling  and  modern  literature.  But  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  power  of  ardent 
love  to  colour  all  nature  to  the  eye  of  him  who  yields  himself  to  the  t-trong  emotion — 
the  power  of  ardent  love  to  make  all  this  world  melodious,  fragrant,  ami  fair.  l<)m"tion 
gives  keenness  to  the  sense  and  vigour  to  the  imagination.  And  he  whose  mind  is 
open,  not  only  to  the  power  of  nature  to  elicit  sentiment,  but  to  its  power  to  suggest 
spiritual  truth,  the  seasons  of  the  year  and  the  shifting  panorama  of  earth  speak  of  a 
Divine  presence  and  of  a  thousand  sacred  realities. 

I.  What  speinq-time  banishes.  "  The  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone." 
There  is  a  spiritual  winter — the  winter  of  darkness  and  gloom,  of  ignorance  and  error, 
of  sterility  and  death,  of  vice  and  crime  and  sin.  It  was  beneath  the  rignur  and  the 
depression  of  this  winter  that  the  world  lay,  in  seeming  hopelessness,  until  the  Sun  cif 
Righteousness  arose  upon  the  world  with  healing  in  his  wini^s.  It  is  well,  whilst  in  the 
enjoyment  of  the  blessings  of  the  spiritual  dispensation,  to  look  back  upon  the  winter 
of  humanity,  from  whose  dreariness  we  have  been  delivered. 

II.  What  speinq-timb  beings.  "Tlie  flowers  appear  on  the  earth ;  the  time  of  the 
singing  of  birds  is  come,  and  the  voice  ot  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land."  There  is  a 
blessed  spiritual  spring,  bringing  beauty  and  fragrance  as  of  flowers,  and  sweetness  as 
of  the  music  of  the  grove.  Life  is  the  distinctive  note  of  the  new  and  ^piritual  economy ; 
and  with  spiritual  life  all  gnod  things  come  to  us.  The  beauties  and  all  the  treasures 
of  the  spring  are  emblems  of  peaee  and  joy,  of  purity  and  glad  service,  of  obedience  and 
praise.  The  Easter  of  humanity  is  the  season  for  thanksgiving  and  triumph,  for  radiant 
hope  and  for  inspiring  song. 

III.  What  spkinq-time  hbealds.  "  The  fig  tree  ripeneth  her  green  figs ;  and  the 
vines  are  in  blossom,  they  give  forth  thrir  fragrance."  The  blossoms  of  the  spring  tell 
us  of  the  coming  fruit  in  abundance  and  Insoiousuess.  Far  off  as  the  woild's  spiritual 
summer  may  seem,  the  mission  of  the  »on  of  God  and  the  mission  of  the  Comforter 
assure  the  faithful  mind  ihat  there  is  a  harvest  yet  to  come.  He  who  could  call  life 
out  of  death,  could  banish  the  winter  of  humanity,  can  and  will,  in  his  own  time,  bring 
his  work  to  perfection.  The  blossom  shall  mature  into  fruit,  the  green  of  spring  shall 
mellow  into  autumn's  gold.  Fruits  of  the  Spirit  shall  abound,  and  the  heavenly  Vine- 
dresser and  Husbandman  shall  be  satisfied  and  glorified. — T. 

Ver.  15. — "  The  little  foxes/'     The  maiden    sings  a  vintage-song,  or  repeats  tin 


72  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1—17 

admonition  of  her  brothers,  who  have  left  her  in  charge  of  the  vineyard.  It  is  her  duty 
to  protect  the  precious  plants  and  fruits  from  the  incursions  of  enemies,  even  of  those 
wliicb  seem  the  most  unworthy  of  notice.  It  has  been  usual  to  regard  these  "  little 
foxes  "  as  emblematic  uf  evil  powers  which  perhaps  insidiously  threaten  the  welfare  of 
the  spiritual  vineyard. 

I.  The  Chuech  op  Christ  is  the  spiritual  vineyard  which  God  has  planted 
IN  THE  BARREN  SOIL  OP  THE  WORLD.  As  in  the  Old  Testament  Israel  i8  often  com- 
pared to  a  vine  (Ps.  Ixxx.)  or  to  a  vineyard  (Isa.  v.),  so  in  tlie  New  Testament  the 
spiritual  society  which  the  Son  of  God  has  founded  is  exhibited  under  the  same 
similitude. 

II.  The  Church  op  Christ  exists  por  the  sake  op  spiritual  pruit.  The 
vineyard  may  be  beautiful  to  behold;  it  may  be  a  charming  addition  to  the;  landscape; 
its  gracel'ulness  ajid  verdure  may  afford  pleasure  to  the  passer-by:  yet  it  exists  for  the 
sake  ot  fruit.  So  with  the  Church,  which  is  indeed  an  element  of  interest  in  history, 
•n  important  factor  in  the  state,  an  admirable  illustration  of  the  higher  capacities  of 
man's  being ;  but  which  yet  exists  for  the  sake  of  that  holy  life,  those  deeds  of  justice, 
mercy,  and  devotion,  which  are  the  true  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  the  very  vintage  of  God. 

III.  The  Chukch  of  Chhiht  is  optbn  assailed  by  mischievous  influences. 
Like  tne  eneuiies  of  the  vineyard,  evil  powers  enter  in,  and  damage  the  spiiitual  blossom 
and  threaten  to  destroy  the  spiritual  vintage.  False  doctrmes,  heresies,  and  schisms, 
delusions,  human  ambitions,  selfish  habits,  gross  corruptions,  sins  of  worldliness  and 
unspiritua'ity, — such  are  some  of  these  influences  which  portend  disaster  to  the  work 
which  has  been  undertaken  for  God  upon  earth. 

IV.  Though  apparently  teiplino,  these  mischievous  ikpluenobs  may  do  orbat 
HARM.  Like  the  "  little  foxes,"  the  power  of  harmful  influences  must  not  be  measured 
by  appearances,  by  magnitude.  Deflections  from  truth  or  from  virtue  may  appear  at 
first  slight  ami  insignificant;  but  the  entrance  of  evil  into  Christ's  Church  is  like  the 
letting  in  of  water ;  what  is  at  first  a  leak  becomes  a  flood.  To  change  the  figure,  the 
disease  may  in  its  first  approach  appear  unimportant,  yet  it  may  grow  until  it  threatens 
not  only  health,  but  life  itself.  The  vineyard,  if  left  open  to  the  incursions  of  vermin, 
will  soon  give  evidence  of  ravages  most  serious,  if  not  disastrous.  Let  no  one  concerned 
for  the  safety  and  welfare  of  Christ's  Church  be  indifferent  to  the  insidious  commence- 
ment of  harm.     No  one  can  say  whereunto  the  thing  may  grow. 

V.  These  evil  ikfluenobs  should,  therefore,  be  vigorously  attacked  and 
speedily  extirpated.  "  Take  us  the  little  foxes ; "  wage  war  against  even  apparently 
insignificant  foes.  Not  by  way  of  force  or  of  fraud,  but  by  the  presentation  of  truth, 
by  admonition  and  exhortation,  openly,  feelingly,  and  prayerfiiUy.  It  is  a  duty  which 
at  some  time  or  other,  and  in  some  way  or  other,  every  Christian  is  called  upon  to  fulfil. 
The  ministers  of  Christ's  Church  are  especially  bound  to  be  upon  their  guard  against 
the  introduction  of  false  doctrine,  and  of  lax  and  sinful  practice;  they  are  set  "  for  the 
defence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel,"  and  it  is  their  office  to  withstand  every  foe  that 
threatens  the  security  and  the  vitality  of  the  Divine  society  on  earth. — T. 

Ver.  16. — Mutual  possession.  One-sided  affection  is  incomplete,  unsatisfying,  and 
unhappy-;  it  may  be  disastrous.  Real  friendship  and  true  marriage  imply  mutual  love, 
reciprocal  kindnesses.  So  is  it  in  those  persona!  relations  between  Christ  and  the 
Christian  soul,  which  are  the  foundatiuns  of  the  spiritual  life  of  mankind.  It  is  only 
well  when  the  friend  of  the  Saviour  can  truly  say,  "My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am 
his." 

I.  The  claim  made  by  the  Christian  to  a  spiritual  property  in  Christ. 
1.  Our  Lord  and  Saviour  is  ours,  to  exercise  in  our  favour  his  mediatorial  offices,  as  our 
Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.     2.  He  is  ours,  to  roveal  his  intimate  affection  to  our  heart. 

"  The  opening  heavens  uiuund  me  shine 
With  beams  of  heavenly  bliss. 
While  Jesus  says  that  he  is  mine, 
And  whispers  I  am  his ! " 

3.  He  is  ours,  to  impart  a  value  and  a  charm  to  all  our  other  possessions.  These, 
whether  material  or  spiritual,  are  altogether  different  from  what  they  would  otherwiae 


OH.  m.  1 — 11.] 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


73 


be ;  they  are  irradiated  and  dignified  by  the  glory  which  shines  upon  them  from  out 
Divine  Friend.     "  All  things  are  ours." 

II.  The  claim  made  by  Christ  to  a  spiritual  peopbkty  in  the  Christian. 
1.  The  Saviour  regards  his  people  with  an  especial  favour  and  affection.  In  a  sense, 
all  men  are  Christ's ;  he  assum?d  the  human  nature  which  is  common  to  us  all,  and  he 
died  for  all.  But  in  a  peculiar  manner  ihey  are  his  who  acknowledge  his  mission, 
receive  his  gospel,  confide  in  his  mediation,  obey  his  commandments.  Towards  such 
his  regard  is  one  of  complacency  and  personal  affection.  2.  The  Saviour  regards  liis 
people  as  his  to  care  for,  to  protect,  and  to  save.  Having  loved  his  own,  he  loves  them 
unto  the  end.  There  are  no  circumstances  in  which  he  will  not  remember  them,  inter- 
pose upon  their  behalf  and  for  their  deliverance.  3.  The  Saviour  possesses  his  people 
in  order  to  exercise  over  them  a  peculiar  authority.  As  the  husband  is  the  head  of 
the  wife,  and  as  his  affection  docs  not  destroy  his  authority,  but  makes  it  benign  and 
welcome;  so  our  Divine  Lord,  who  loves  his  spouse,  the  Church,  which  he  purchased 
with  his  precious  blood,  directs  and  governs  the  object  of  his  tender  interest  with 
kindness  which  is  yet  authoritative.  It  is  the  prerogative  and  joy  of  Cli list's  people 
to  take  their  Lord's  will  as  the  binding  law  of  their  individual  and  social  life. 

Application.  It  is  for  every  Christian  to  remember  that  in  this  relation  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  the  superior.  "We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us."  This  fact  should 
infuse  gratitude  into  our  affection,  and  should  urge  us  to  responsive  conseciation  and 
obedience. — ^T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB   III. 


Ver.  1. — By  night  on  my  bed  I  sought 
bim  whom  my  soul  loveth:  I  sought  Mm, 
but  I  found  him  not.  The  bride  is  probably 
relating  a  dream.  The  time  referred  to  is 
the  close  of  the  day  on  which  she  liad  been 
visited  by  her  lover.  She  is  retired  to  rest, 
and  dreiims  that  she  searches  for  the  beloved 
object  in  the  neighbouring  city  (cf.  Job 
xxxiii.  15).  It  is  another  way  of  telling  her 
love.  She  is  always  longing  for  the  beloved 
one.  She  had  been  waiting  for  him,  and  he 
came  not,  and  retired  to  rest  with  a  heart 
troubled  and  anxious  because  her  lover  did 
not  appear  as  she  expected  at  the  evening 
hour.  The  meaning  may  be  "night  after 
night  (nib'^) "  (cf.  ch.  iii.  8),  or  the  plural 
may  be  used  poetically  for  the  singular.  Gins- 
burg  observes  that  "  by  night  on  my  bed  " 
is  o|iposed  to  midday  couch  (of.  2  Sam.  iv. 
5),  merely  to  express  what  came  into  her 
thoughts  at  night  in  her  dreams  or  as  the 
result  of  a  dream.  It  is  difficult  to  avoid 
the  conclusion  that  the  bride  intends  to  re- 
present herself  as  suffering  from  self-reproach 
in  having  grieved  her  lover  and  kept  him 
away  from  her.  In  that  case  the  typical 
meaning  would  be  simple  and  direct.  The 
soul  (grieves  when  it  is  conscious  of  estrange- 
ment from  him  whom  it  loves,  and  the  sense 
of  separation  becomes  intolerable,  impelling 
to  new  efforts  to  deepen  the  spiritual  life. 

Ver.  2.— (I  said)  I  will  rise  now,  and  go 
about  the  city,  in  the  streets  and  in  the 
broad  ways ;  I  will  seek  him  whom  my  soul 
tovetli :  I  sought  him,  but  I  found  him  not. 


Delitzsch  renders,  "So  I  will  arise,  then." 
The  words  uf  the  maiden  are  quite  incon- 
sistent with  the  hypothesis  of  a  shepherd- 
lover,  for  in  that  case  she  would  seek  him, 
not  in  the  streets,  but  outside  the  city. 
Some  think  the  city  referred  to  is  Jerusalem, 
with  its  markets  and  streets — the  royal 
city  (cf.  Prov.  vii.  11).  If  it  is  a  dream, 
it  w'ill  be  unnecessary  to  decide  to  wliat 
city  the  words  refer.  The  idea  of  tlie 
speaker  would  seem  to  be  either  that  she 
was  at  the  time  within  the  walls  of 
the  city  referred  to,  or  that  she  was  in 
some  dwelling  near.  But  a  dream  is  not 
always  consistent  with  the  real  circum- 
stances of  the  dreamer.  Taking  it  as  a  remi- 
niscence of  first  love,  it  seems  better  to  under- 
stand the  city  as  only  imaginary,  or  some 
neighbouring  town  in  the  north. 

Yer.  3. — The  watchmen  that  go  about  the 
city  found  me :  (to  whom  I  said)  Saw  ye 
him  whom  my  soul  loveth  T  The  simplicity 
of  these  words  is  very  striking.  They  con- 
firm the  view  that  the  bride  is  recalling  what 
occurred  in  her  country  life.  The  watchmen 
make  no  reply,  and  do  not  treat  her  ill,  as  in 
the  dream  related  in  ch.  v.  7,  where  tiiey  are 
keepers  of  the  walls,  and  smite  her  and  wound 
her.  In  a  small  country  town  she  might 
have  been  recognized,  or  known  to  be  really 
in  trouble.  But  such  incidents  must  not  be 
pressed  too  much  in  a  poem.  The  allegorical 
view  finds  considerable  support  in  tbe  fact 
that  it  is  difficult  on  any  hypothesis  exactly 
to  explain  the  language  as  descriptive  of  real 
occurrences.  In  such  instances  as  Ps.  cxxvii. 
1  and  Isa.  Hi.  8  the  reference  to  watchmen  iu 


74 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  m.  1 — 11. 


the  city  shows  that  such  a  metaphor  would 
be  familiarly  understood.  Wliether  adopted 
from  Solomon's  Song  or  not,  the  figure  of  a 
ofty  watched  and  guarded,  and  the  people 
of  God  as  watching  for  the  glory  of  Ziou, 
waa  common  in  the  prophetic  writings.  The 
Boul  seeking  for  its  object  and  for  the 
restoration  of  its  pt-aoe  calls  iu  the  aid  of 
the  faithful  guardians  of  the  holy  city,  the 
friends  alike  of  the  Saviour  and  of  those 
who  desire  to  be  his. 

Yer.  4.— It  was  but  a  little  that  I  passed 
from  them,  when  I  found  him  whom  my  soul 
loveth :  I  held  him,  and  would  not  let  him 
go,  until  I  had  brought  him  into  my  mother's 
house,  and  into  the  chamber  of  her  that  con- 
ceived me.  This  verse  plainly  points  to  the 
search  referred  to  jn  the  previous  verse  being 
limited  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Shulamith's 
home.  The  lover  was  not  far  off,  though 
he  bad  delayed  his  coming.  Possibly  it  is 
s  real  occurrence  which  is  related.  In  that 
case  we  must  suppose  that  the  night  was 
not  very  far  advanced.  But  the  hypothesis 
of  a  dream  is  the  most  natural  explanation. 
The  word  cherer,  which  is  used  of  the  house, 
denotes  the  inner  part,  penetralia.  The 
modesty  of  the  last  clause  is  very  beautiful. 
The  mother  would,  of  course,  at  that  time  be 
in  her  sleeping-chamber.  There  alone  would 
the  maiden  receive  her  lover  at  such  a  time. 
The  mother  would  gladly  welcome  the  young 
man,  and  thus  the  love  which  Shulamith 
declares  is  set  upon  the  ground  of  perfect 
chastity  and  homely  purity.  The  object  of 
ttiis  little  episode  introduced  by  the  bride 
into  her  song  as  she  lies  in  the  arms  of 
Solomon  is  to  show  that,  ecstatic  and  intense 
as  her  devotion  is,  it  is  not  the  lawless 
affection  of  a  concubine,  but  the  love  of  a 
noble  wife.  The  religious  emotions  are 
always  presented  to  us  in  Scripture,  not  as 
wildfauiiticism  or  superficial  excitement,  but 
as  pure  offering  of  the  heartwhich  blends  with 
the  highest  relations  and  interests  of  human 
life,  and  sanctifies  home  and  country  with 
all  their  ties  and  obligations.  The  mother 
and  the  child  are  one  in  the  new  atmosphere 
of  bridal  joy.  No  religion  is  worthy  of  the 
name  which  does  not  bring  its  object  into 
the  chamber  of  her  who  conceived  us.  We 
love  all  that  are  bound  with  ug  in  life  not 
the  less,  but  the  more,  because  we  love  Christ 
supremely.  We  revere  all  that  is  just  and 
holy  in  the  common  world  the  more,  and  not 
the  less,  because  we  worship  God  and  serve 
the  Lord.  What  a  rebuke  to  asceticism, 
monasticism,  and  all  unsocial  religion  I 

Ver.  5. — I  adjure  you,  0  daughters  of  Jeru- 
salem, by  the  roes,  and  by  the  hinds  of  the  field, 
that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awaken  love,  until 
it  please  This  is  the  refrain  which  divides 
the  poem.  We  thus  perceive  that  the  whole 
of  the  preceding  passage  has  been  uttered 


by  the  bride  in  the  presence  of  the  ladies. 
There  is  no  orcasion  to  connect  a  refrain 
very  closely  with  the  words  which  go  before 
it.  Like  the  ancient  Greek  chorus,  it  may 
express  a  general  sentiment  in  harmony  with 
the  pervading  feeling  of  the  whole  com- 
position. In  this  case  it  seems  to  be  a 
general  note  ot  praise,  celebrating  the 
preeiousness  of  pure,  spontaneous  affection. 
There  have  been  several  bi  autiful  and  cele- 
brated imitations  of  this  first  part  of 
Soliimon's  Song,  though  they  all  fall  far 
short  of  the  original.  Paul  Gerhard  has 
caught  its  spirit ;  Laurentius  has  copied  it 
in  his  Advent  Hymn.  Watts,  in  bk.  i.  6fi  —78 
of  his  '  Divine  Songs ; '  '  Lyra  Germanioa ; ' 
Schaff's '  Christian  Song ; '  and  Miss  Haver- 
gal,  in  some  of  her  compositions,  will  furnish 
examples.  Delitzsch  quotes  an  ancient  Latin 
imitation — 

"  Quando  tandem  venies,  meus  amor? 
Propera  de  Libano,  dulcis  amor  I 
Clamat,  amat,  sponsula.    Veni,  Jesu; 
Dulcis  veni  Jesu." 

This  ends  Part  II.,  which  sets  before  us  the 
lovely  beginning  of  this  ideal  love.  We  must 
then  suppose  that  the  writer  imagines  him- 
self in  Jerusalem,  as  though  one  of  the  court 
ladies,  at  the  time  that  Solomon  the  king 
returns  from  the  north,  bringing  with  him 
hig  bride-elect.  We  pass,  therefore,  from  the 
banqueting-chamber,  and  recall  the  scenes 
which  accompanied  the  arrival  of  Shulamith 
at  Jerusalem.  The  remainder  of  the  poem 
is  simply  the  celebration  of  married  love,  the 
delight  of  the  bridegroom  in  the  bride  and 
of  the  bride  iu  her  husband.  The  whole  book 
concerns  a  bride,  and  not  one  who  is  about  to 
be  made  a  bride.  Here  the  dream  which  is 
introduced  is  not  the  dream  of  a  lover  awaiting 
the  beloved  one,  but  the  dream  of  a  young 
wife  whose  bridegroom  tarries.  The  third 
part  is  the  nuptial  rejoicings ;  the  fourth  part 
is  the  reminiscence  of  love-days  or  of  the 
early  married  life ;  and  the  fifth  part,  which 
is  a  conclusion,  is  a  visit  of  Solomon  and  hig 
bride  to  the  country  home  of  tbe  latter, 
pointing  to  the  depth  and  reality  of  the  in- 
fluence whioh  this  pure  maiden  had  upon 
his  royal  nature. 

Ver.  6— oh.  v.  1.— Part  III.  NnPTiAt 
Bejoioinos. 

Ver.  6. — Who  is  this  that  oometh  np  out 
of  the  wilderness  like  pillars  of  smoke,  per- 
fumed with  myrrh  and  frankincense,  with 
all  the  powders  of  the  merchant?  This  may 
be  taken  as  spoken  by  a  single  voice,  one  of 


OH.  la.  1 — 11.] 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


76 


the  ladies  or  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  or  it 
may  be  regarded  as  the  exclamation  of  the 
whole  population  going  out  to  see  the 
splendid  sight— a  gorgeousprooession coming 
towards  the  city.  "Who  is  this  coming?" 
(H^J;,  feminine) ;  that  is,  "  Who  is  this  lady 
coming?"  Tliere  could  be  no  difficulty  in 
discerning  that  it  was  a  bridal  procession 
which  is  seen.  Curiosity  always  asks,  "  What 
bride  is  this  ?  "  "  Who  is  she  1 "  not, "  Who  is 
he  ?  "  A  maiden  from  Galileo  is  being  con- 
ducted to  Jerusalem ;  the  procession  natur- 
ally passes  through  the  valley  of  the  Jordan 
(Gli6r).  There  is  splendour  and  majesty  in  the 
sight.  It  must  be  some  one  coiuing  to  the 
royal  palace.  The  censers  of  frankincense  arc 
being  swung  to  and  fro  and  filling  the  aii-  with 
fragrant  smoke.  Columns  of  dust  and  smoke 
from  the  burning  incense  rise  up  to  heaven, 
and  murk  the  line  of  progress  before  and 
after.  "  The  spices  of  Arabia  "  were  famous 
at  all  times.  Hence  the  names  of  the  per- 
fumes are  Arabic,  as  murr,  levona,  iiml  the 
travelling  spice-merchant,  or  trader,  was 
Arabic  (cf.  the  Arabio  elixir).  We  can 
scarcely  miss  the  typical  colouring  in  such 
a  representation — the  wildernets,  typical  of 
bondage  and  humiliation,  sin  and  misery, 
out  of  which  the  bride  is  brought;  the 
onward  progress  towards  a  glorious  des- 
tination (see  Isa.  xl.  3;  Hos.  i.  16;  Ps. 
Ixviii.  8).  The  Church  must  pass  through 
the  wilderness  to  her  royal  home,  and  tue 
soul  must  be  led  out  of  the  wilderness  of  sin 
and  unbelief  into  everlasting  union  with 
her  Lord. 

Ver.  7 — Behold,  it  is  the  litter  of  Solomon ; 
three  score  mighty  men  are  about  it,  of  the 
mighty  men  of  Israel.  The  litter,  or  palan- 
quin, is  easily  recognized.  The  word  is 
mitldh,  which  is  literally  "bed,"  or  "litter," 
but  in  the  ninth  verse  we  have  anotlier  word, 
appiryon,  which  is  a  more  stately  word,  "the 
royal  car."  It  is  the  bringin;?  home  ot  the 
biide  wliioh  is  described.  In  the  forty-fifth 
psalm  the  idea  seems  to  be  that  the  bride- 
groom betook  himself  to  the  house  of  the 
parents  and  fetched  his  bride,  or  that  she 
was  brought  to  him  in  festal  procession,  and 
he  went  forth  to  meet  ner  (see  1  Mace.  ix. 
39).  That  was  the  prevailing  custom,  as  we 
see  in  tlie  parable  of  tlie  ten  virgins  (Matt. 
XXV.  1 — 13).  In  this  case,  however,  there  is 
a  vast  diiierence  in  rank  between  the  bride 
and  bridegroom,  and  she  is  brought  to  him. 
The  long  journey  through  the  wilderness  is 
implied  iu  the  mention  vt  the  budy-guard 
(cf.  Isa.  iv.  6;  xxv.  4).  The  intention  evi- 
dently is  to  show  how  dear  the  bride  was  to 
Solomon.  His  mighty  men  were  chosen  to 
defend  her.  So  the  Church  is  surrounded 
with  armies  of  guardian  attendants.  Her 
Lord  is  the  Lord  of  hosts.  The  description 
reminds  us  of  the  exquisite  lines  in  Shake- 


speare's '  Antony  and  Cleopatra,'  in  which  he 
describes  the  lovely  Egyptian  in  her  bnrge 
"like  u  burnished  throne,"  lying  "in  her 
pavilion  (cloth  of  gold,  of  tissue),"  with  the 
smiling  cupids  on  each  side,  while 

"...  from  the  barge, 
A  strange  invisible  perfume  hits  the  senst 
Of  the  adjacent  wharfs." 

(Act  ii.  80.  2.) 

The  word  mittdh,  "a  bed,  or  litter,"  comes 
from  a  root  "to  stretch  out,"  and  is  also 
used  of  a  bier  (see  2  Sam.  iii.  21).  The 
idea  is  that  of  a  portable  bed,  or  sitting- 
cushion,  hung  round  with  curtuins,  after 
the  manner  of  the  Indian  palanquin,  such  as 
is  still  found  in  the  Turkish  caiques  or  the 
Venetian  gondolas.  It  was,  of  course,  royal, 
belonging  to  Solomon,  not  to  any  nobleman 
or  private  person;  hence  its  magnificence. 
The  bearers  are  not  named.  Tlie  body- 
guard, consisting  of  sixty  chosen  men,  form- 
ing an  escort,  were  one-tentli  part  of  the 
whole  royal  guard,  as  we  see  from  1  Sam. 
xxvii.  2 ;  XXX.  9.  Delitzscli  suggests  that  in 
the  mention  of  the  number  there  may  be  a 
reference  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel — 60 
being  a  multiple  of  12.  The  term, "  mighty 
men,"  is  explained  in  the  next  verse  as  war- 
riors, that  is,  men  "  held  fast  by  the  sword  " 
(ann  ;!.ni<),  i.e.,  according  to  Hebrew  idiom, 
men  practised  in  the  use  of  the  sword ;  so  it 
is  explained  by  some  ;  but  others  take  it  as 
meaning  that  they  "  handle  the  sword ;  " 
hence  our  Revised  Version. 

Ver.  8. — They  all  handle  the  sword,  and 
are  expert  in  war :  every  man  hath  his  sword 
upon  his  thigh  because  of  fear  in  the  night. 
The  guard  of  warriors  round  the  litter  secured 
the  bride  from  any  sudden  alarm  as  slie 
travelled  through  the  wilderness,  and  so  gave 
her  quiet  rest.  Tne  journey  from  Shunem 
to  Jerusalem  would  be  about  fifty  miles  in  a 
direct  course,  and  it  was  therefore  necessary 
to  pLiss  at  least  one,  if  not  two,  niglits  on  the 
way ;  the  course  being  through  a  wild  and 
solitary  region.  The  Church  of  God  may  be 
often  called  to  pass  through  dangers  and 
enemies,  but  he  that  loveth  her  will  provii  le 
against  her  destruction — she  shall  have  j.  st 
in  the  love  of  her  Lord.  He  will  surround 
her  with  his  strength.  "  My  peace  1  give 
unto  thee" — provided  by  me,  coming  ixnm 
myself,  the  fruit  of  my  self-sacrificing  love. 

Vers.  9, 10. — King  Solomon  made  himself 
a  palanqnin  of  the  wood  of  Lebanon.  He 
made  the  pillars  thereof  of  silver,  the  bottom 
thereof  of  gold,  the  seats  of  it  of  purple,  the 
midst  thereof  being  paved  with  love,  from 
the  daughters  of  Jerusalem.  The  palanquin 
is  described,  that  the  attention  may  be  kept 
fixed  awhile  on  the  bridal  procession,  which, 
of  course,  forms  the  kernel  of  the  wliole 
poem,  as  represuutiug  the  perfect  union  of 


76 


THE  SONa  OP  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  m.  1 — 11. 


the  bride  and  bridegroom.  The  Greek  ver- 
sions translate  <popeicii' :  the  Vulgate,  fercu- 
lum.  We  read  in  Athenseus  (v.  13)  that 
the  philosopher  and  tyrant  Athemon  showed 
himself  on  "  a  silver-legged  (pope^ov  with 
purple  coverlet."  There  probably  is  some 
connection  between  the  Hebrew  appiryon 
and  the  Greek  phnreion,  but  it  is  exceedingly 
doubtful  if  tlie  Hebrew  is  merely  a  length- 
eTieil  form  of  tae  Grtek.  Delitzach  derives 
the  Heijrew  from  a  root  pirdh,  "  to  cut  or 
carve "  anything  of  wood.  The  Greek 
would  seem  to  be  connected  witli  the  verb 
<j>epa,"  to  bear,"  "carry."  The  resemblance 
may  be  a  mere  coincidence.  The  rabbinical 
tradition  is  that  the  Hebrew  word  means 
"  couch,  or  litter."  Hitzig  connects  it  with 
the  Sanscrit  paryana,  meaning  "  saddle," 
"  riding-saddle,"  with  which  we  may  com- 
pare the  Indian  paryang,  "bed."  Otiiers 
iind  a  Olialdee  root  for  the  word,  sno  "to 
run,"  SB  ourrua  in  Latin,  or  from  a  root  iNii, 
"  to  shine,"  i.e. "  to  be  adorned."  At  all  events, 
it  would  not  be  safe  to  argue  the  late  date 
of  the  book  from  such  a  word  as  appiryon, 
on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  a  Greek 
word.  The  "  wood  of  Lebanon  "  is,  of  course, 
the  cedar  or  cypress  (1  Kings  v.  10,  etc.). 
There  may  be  a  covert  allusion  intended  to 
the  decoration  of  the  temple  as  the  place 
where  the  honour  of  the  Lord  dwelleth,  and 
where  he  meets  his  people.  The  frame  of 
the  palanquin  was  of  wood,  the  ornaments 
of  silver.  The  references  to  the  high  value 
set  upon  silver,  while  gold  is  spoken  of  as 
though  it  was  abundant,  are  indications  of 
the  age  in  which  the  poem  was  composed, 
which  must  have  been  nearly  contempora- 
neous with  the  Homeric  poems,  in  which 
gold  is  spoken  of  similarly.  Eecent  dis- 
coveries of  the  tomb  of  Agamemnon,  etc.,  con- 
iirm  the  literary  argument.  The  palanquins 
of  India  are  also  higlily  decorated.  The 
daugliters  of  Jerusalem,  i.e.  the  ladies  of  the 
court,  in  their  affection  for  King  Solomon, 
have  procured  a  costly  tapestry,  or  several 
such,  which  they  have  spread  over  the  purple 
cusliion.  Thus  it  is  paved,  or  covered  over, 
with  the  tokens  of  love — while  all  love  is 
but  a  preparation  for  this  supreme  love. 
(For  the  purple  coverings  of  the  seat,  see 


Judg  T.  10 ;  Amos  iii.  12 ;  Prov.  vii.  16.) 
The  preposition  ]a  in  the  last  clause  is  ren- 
dered differently  by  some,  but  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  the  meaning  is  "on  the  part 
of,"  that  is,  coming  from.  The  typical  in- 
terpreter certainly  Hnds  a  firm  ground  here. 
Whether  we  think  of  the  individual  believer 
or  of  the  Church  of  God,  the  metaplior  is 
very  apt  and  beautiful — we  are  borne  along 
towards  the  perfection  of  our  peace  and 
blessedness  in  a  chariot  of  love.  All  that 
surrounds  us  speaks  to  us  of  the  Saviour's 
love  and  of  his  royal  magnificence,  as  he  is 
adored  by  all  the  pure  and  lovely  spirits  in 
whose  companionship  he  delights. 

Ver.  11. — Go  forth,  Oye  daughters  of  Zlon, 
and  behold  King  Solomon,  with  the  crown 
wherewith  his  mother  hath  crowned  him  in 
the  day  of  his  espousals,  and  in  the  day  of 
the  gladness  of  his  heart.  This  seems  to  be 
an  appeal  to  a  larger  company  of  those  who 
will  rejoice  in  the  bride  and  her  happiness. 
The  daughters  of  Zion  are  perliaps  intended 
to  represent  the  people  generally  as  distin- 
guished from  the  ladies  of  the  court,  i.e.  let 
all  the  people  rejoice  in  their  king  and  in 
his  royal  bride.  The  mention  of  the  royal 
mother  seems  to  point  to  tbe  beginning  of 
Solomon's  reign  as  the  time  referred  to.  The 
crown,  or  ohaplet,  with  which  the  proud 
mother  adorned  her  son,  was  the  fresh  wreath 
round  a  young  king's  head,  a  wedding 
coronet,  no  doubt  made  of  gold  and  silver. 
It  was  not  the  crown  placed  on  the  head  of 
Pharaoh's  daughter,  which  would  not  be  so 
spoken  of.  According  to  the  Talmud,  the 
custom  remained  even  to  later  times.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  of  Bathsheba's  special  delight 
in  Solomon  (see  1  Kings  i.  11;  ii.  13).  We 
must  not,  of  course,  push  too  far  the  typical 
interpretation  of  such  language,  which  may 
be  taken  as  the  poetical  form  r:<ther  than  the 
spiritual  substance.  And  yet  there  may  be 
an  allusion,  in  the  joy  and  pride  of  Bath- 
sheba  in  her  son's  gladness,  and  the  con- 
summation of  his  nuptial  bliss,  to  the  Incar- 
nation and  the  crowning  glory  of  a  Divine 
humanity,  which  is  at  once  the  essential 
fact  of  redemption,  and  the  bright  expecta- 
tion which,  on  the  head  of  the  Saviour,  ligbU 
up  eternity  to  the  faith  of  his  people. 


H0MILETIC5. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  dream  of  the  bride.  I.  The  absence  of  the  beloved.  1.  2%« 
bride's  distress.  In  the  last  chapter  the  bride  related  to  her  female  friends  some  of  the 
incidents  of  her  early  love ;  here  she  seems  to  be  relating  a  dream  of  those  same  well- 
remembered  days.  The  whole  narrative,  like  that  of  ch.  v.  2 — 8,  has  a  dream-like 
character.  The  circumstances  are  not  such  as  would  be  likely  to  occur  in  real  life;  but 
the  longing,  the  wandering,  the  search,  represent  in  a  vivid  truthful  way  the  images  of 
dreams.  She  was  lying  asleep  on  her  bed ;  her  thoughts  were  full  of  the  absent  bride- 
groom.  "  I  sought  him,"  she  says,"  but  I  found  him  not."    We  notice  the  dream-like 


c!H.  III.  1— 11.J  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  77 

repetition,  the  dwelling  upon  phrases.  Pour  times  in  these  five  verses  we  have  the 
fond  description  of  the  bridegroom,  which  occurred  for  the  first  time  in  ch.  i.  7,  "him 
whom  my  soul  loveth."  Twice  we  have  the  utterance  of  unsatisfied  longing,  "  I  sought 
liim,  but  I  found  him  not."  She  was  sleeping,  but  (as  in  oh.  v.  2,  "I  sleep,  but  my 
heart  waketh  ")  her  thoughts  were  busy  and  active.  Her  whole  hfart  was  given  to  her 
beloved.  Those  oft-repeated  words,  "  him  whom  my  soul  loveth,"  imply  a  very  deep 
affection,  a  great  love.  The  believer  remembers  God  in  the  watches  of  the  night.  The 
psalmist  says,  "  In  the  night  his  sung  shall  be  with  me,  and  my  prayer  unto  the  God  of 
my  life ; "  and  again,  "  I  call  to  remembrance  my  song  in  the  night :  I  commune  with 
inine  own  heart :  and  my  spirit  made  diligent  search  "  (Ps.  xlii.  8 ;  Ixxvii.  6).  If  our 
heart  is  given  to  the  heavenly  Bridegroom,  we  shall  think  of  him  as  we  lie  on  our  beds; 
our  first  waking  thoughts  will  be  of  him.  Alas  I  our  love  for  Christ  is  not  like  the 
bride's  love  in  the  Song  of  Songs.  How  few  of  us  can  in  truth  speak  of  the  Saviour  as 
"  him  whom  my  suul  loveth"!  The  bride  dwelt  upon  those  words  as  the  simple  truth, 
the  sincere  expression  of  her  feelings.  We  dwell  upon  them,  too ;  but,  alas!  with  a  sense 
of  much  coldness  and  ingratitude,  a  remembrance  of  much  insincerity  and  unreality. 

"  God  only  knows  the  love  of  God ; 
Oh  that  it  now  were  slied  abroad 

In  this  poor  stony  heart  1 
For  love  1  sigh,  for  love  I  pine ; 
This  only  portion,  Lord,  be  mine. 

Be  mine  this  better  part." 

The  Christian  dwells  on  the  words,  lonijing  for  grace  to  make  them  his  own,  the  utter- 
ance of  his  inmost  heart.  Here  is  the  spiritual  value  of  the  Sonj;  of  Songs.  We  see 
what  a  great  love  is  ;  liow  it  absorbs  the  heart  and  fills  the  soul.  Such  should  be  our 
love  to  Christ ;  such  should  be  our  "  songs  in  the  night "  (Job  xxxv.  10).  The  bride 
sought  her  beloved  in  the  visions  of  the  night.  We  seem  sometimes  in  our  dreams  to 
be  going  on  long  tracldess  journeys,  wandering  ever  in  search  of  something  we  know 
not  what.  So  the  bride  could  not  find  him  whom  her  soul  loved.  Such  are  sometimes 
the  experiences  of  the  Ciui-iti.in  soul.  So  Jobouce  complained,  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where 
I  might  find  him  I  that  I  might  come  even  unto  his  seat!  .  .  .  Behold,  I  go  forward, 
but  he  is  not  there;  and  backward,  but  I  cannot  perceive  him"  (Job  xxiii.  3,  8).  The 
Lord  has  said,  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find ; "  "  Every  one  that  seeketh  findeth."  But  he 
has  also  said,  "  Strive  to  euter  in  at  the  strait  gate;  for  many,  I  say  unto  you,  shall 
seek  to  euter  in,  and  shall  not  be  able."  Those  who  seek  shall  surely  find  at  last ;  but 
the  seeking  must  be  diligent  seeking,  patient,  persevering ;  there  must  be  striving  too, 
struggling  to  overcome  obstacles,  wrestling  against  the  spiritual  enemies  who  would 
bar  our  way.  It  is  not  enough  to  seek  by  ni^nt  on  our  beds;  there  must  be  effort, 
sustained  effort,  not  mere  dreamy  a-spirations;  and  that  not  only  by  night,  not  only  in 
the  hour  of  darkness :  "  in  the  day  of  my  trouble  I  sought  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  2).  We 
must  seek  the  Lordalways;  inthe  hour  of  liealth  and  strength,  in  the  days  of  our  youth; 
giving  him  our  best,  doing  all  things  to  his  glory.  Such  seeking  will  surely  find  him. 
2.  The  search.  "  I  will  rise  now,"  she  says.  The  Hebrew  tense  is  cohortative.  She  is 
addressing  herself,  arousing  herself.  Dreaming  as  she  is,  she  feels  that  this  is  not  the 
way  to  seek ;  she  must  leave  her  l)ed,  she  must  rise.  Perhaps  «.he  remembered  the 
bridegroom's  words  spoken  in  the  freshness  of  their  first  love :  "  Else  up,  my  love,  my 
lair  one,  and  come  away."  She  seems  to  rise ;  in  her  dreams  she  goes  about  the  city 
in  the  streets,  seeking  him  whom  lier  soul  loved.  We  must  arise  and  seek  the  Lord; 
we  must  not  lie  still  in  careless  slumber ;  we  must  seek  him  wherever  his  providence  has 
•<et  us,  whether  m  the  quiet  country  or  in  the  bustling,  crowded  city.  We  may  find  him 
in  any  place,  provided  it  be  one  where  a  Christian  may  safely  tread  ;  in  any  employment, 
provided  it  be  lawful  and  innocent ;  in  the  city,  in  the  streets,  and  in  the  broadways. 

"  There  are  in  this  loud  stunning  tide 
Of  human  care  and  crime, 
With  whom  the  melodies  abide 

Of  th'  everlasting  chime ; 
Who  carry  music  in  their  heart 
Througli  dusky  lane  and  wrangling  mart, 
Plying  their  daily  task  with  busier  feet. 
Because  their  secret  souls  a  holy  strain  repeaL" 


T8  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  in.  1— H. 


Still  the  bride  foxind  not  the  beloved ;  she  repeats  her  first  lament  like  a  plaintiTt 
refrain :  "  I  sought  him,  but  I  found  him  not."  The  soul  does  not  always  find  the  Lord 
at  once  when  it  first  feels  its  need  of  the  Saviour.  We  try  one  plan  after  another;  we 
make  effort  after  effort ;  but  for  a  time  all  our  efforts  are  vain.  We  know  that  he  may 
be  found,  that  others  have  found  him  and  have  felt  the  blessedness  of  his  love.  But 
the  search  seems  long  fruitless.  God  would  have  our  search  to  be  sincere,  thoughtful, 
earnest.  Therefore  he  tries  our  faith.  He  proves  us,  as  once  he  proved  Abraham ;  as 
the  Lord  Jesus  tried  the  faith  of  tiie  Syro-Phoenician  woman.  Again  and  again  she 
sought  his  help,  but  for  some  time  there  was  no  response ;  silence  at  first,  then  what 
seemed  to  be  a  stern  refusal.  Still  she  persevered,  she  urged  her  prayer ;  her  case  was 
like  that  of  the  bride — she  sought  hira,  but  she  found  him  not.  We  must  follow  her 
example,  remembering  the  Lord's  teaching,  that  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to 
faint.  We  must  imitate  the  bride  in  her  dream,  and  seek  on,  though  for  a  long  season 
our  search  may  seem  unsuccessful — ^though  we  find  him  not. 

II.  The  ultimate  success  of  the  bride's  search.  ].  She  meets  the  viatchmen. 
The  watchmen  found  her  (as  again  in  ch.  v.  7).  She  asks  them  the  question  which  was 
so  near  her  heart,  "  Saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  ?  "  They  were  going  about  the 
city  ;  they  mifrht  be  able  to  guide  her  to  the  object  of  her  search.  But  they  were  like 
the  watchman  of  Ps.  cxxvii.,  waking  but  in  vain  for  the  bride's  purpose,  unable  to  help 
her.  It  is  not  always  that  Christian  friends,  or  the  ministers  of  God's  holy  Word  and 
sacraments,  who  "watch  for  our  souls"  (Heb. xiii.  17),  can  help  us  iu  our  search  for 
Christ.  We  ask  them,  we  seek  their  help;  it  is  right  to  do  so;  sometimes  they  can 
help  us.  But  each  soul  must  find  Christ  for  itself.  "Work  out  your  own  salvation," 
St.  Paul  said  to  the  Philippians ;  and  that,  "  not  as  in  my  presence  only,  but  now  much 
more  in  my  absence  "  (ii.  12).  2.  She  finds  the  bridegroom.  The  walchmen  could  give 
her  no  good  tidings ;  but  she  did  not  faint ;  she  did  not  return  home  or  throw  herself 
down  in  despair  ;  she  continued  her  search  alone.  She  would  search  on  till  she  found 
the  beloved  of  her  soul.  And  her  search  was  rewarded  at  last.  "  It  was  but  a  little  that 
I  passed  from  them,  but  I  found  him  whom  my  soul  loveth."  God  is  not  far  from  us 
even  in  the  hour  of  deepest  gloom,  when  we  seem  to  strain  our  eyes  through  the  dark- 
ness, and  can  see  no  light.  If  we  seek  hira  earnestly  we  shall  surely  find  him  at  the 
last ;  for  he,  we  know,  is  seeking  us.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  to  seek  and  to  save 
that  which  was  lost.  He  seeketh  the  lost  sheep  until  he  find  it.  He  giveth  his  life  foe? 
the  sheep.  Then  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  he  who  loved  us  with  such  a  love,  a  lov? 
stronger  than  death,  will  not  suffer  any  penitent  soul  that  seeketh  him  in  faith,  in 
sorrow  for  the  past,  in  earnest  painful  longings  for  forgiveness,  to  lose  its  way,  to  wander 
on  without  finding,  to  inquire  everywhere  without  result,  "  Saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul 
loveth  ?  "  He  will  surely  manifest  himself  according  to  his  blessed  promise,  as  he  did  to 
the  two  disciples  who  on  the  first  Easter  Day  were  mourning  for  their  lost  Master,  and 
would  not  be  comforted  by  the  words  of  the  women  who  "  had  seen  a  vision  of  angels, 
who  said  that  he  was  alive."  He  will  come  in  his  gracious  love,  and  then  our  heart 
will  bum  within  us  as  he  manifests  himself,  and  our  eyes  shall  be  opened,  and  we  shall 
know  him ;  and  that  knowledge  is  eternal  life  (John  xvii.  3).  3.  She  brings  him  to  her 
home.  The  long  wanderings  of  the  dream  were  over.  She  had  foumi  him  whose  love 
filled  her  waking  thoughts,  of  whom  her  dreams  were  full  when  she  slept.  She  would 
not  let  him  go.  The  anguish  of  that  long,  almost  despairing  search  should  not  be  in 
vain.  She  held  him  fast,  and  brought  him  to  her  own  home,  into  its  inmost  chambers. 
The  soul  that  once  has  found  Christ  clings  to  him  with  the  strong  embrace  of  faith. 
He  may  "  make  as  thouuh  he  would  go  further  "  (Luke  xxiv.  28),  to  try  our  faith,  that 
we  may  feel  our  need  of  him.  But  as  the  two  disciples  then  "  constrained  him,  saying. 
Abide  with  us,  for  it  is  toward  evening,  and  the  day  is  far  spent,"  so  the  soul  holds  him 
and  will  not  let  him  go.  The  soul,  weak  as  Jacob  was  weak,  struggles  with  the  strength 
that  the  sense  of  weakness  gives.    "  I  will  not  lot  thee  go,  except  thoii  bless  me." 

"  Yield  to  me  now,  for  I  am  weak, 

But  confident  in  self-despair  : 
Speak  to  my  heart,  in  blessings  speak; 

Be  conquered  by  my  instant  prayer ; 
Bjieak  1  or  thou  never  hence  shalt  move, 
And  tell  me  if  thy  name  is  Love. 


OH.ni.  1— 11.]  THE  SONa  OF  SOLOMON.  79 

"My  prayer  hath  power  with  God :  the  graea 

Unspeakable  I  now  receive ; 
Through  faith  I  see  thee  face  to  face — 

I  see  thee  face  to  face,  and  live  I 
In  vain  I  have  not  wept  and  strove  : 
Thy  nature  and  thy  name  is  Love." 

This  noWe  hymn  of  Charles  Wesley's  expresses  the  feelings  of  a  soul  that  has  found 
Christ.  We  must  not  let  him  go,  not  for  any  perplexities,  not  for  any  temptations.  St. 
Paul  tells  us  that  no  difficulties  cm  draw  us  back  from  him  if  we  really  give  him  our 
heart.  "I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor 
powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other 
creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord  "  (Rom.  viii.  38,  39).  Then  we  must  cling  very  closely  to  him,  not  letting  go  any 
one  desire  to  serve  him  better  and  to  love  him  more.  We  must  stimulate  every  such 
desire  into  activity  by  actual  self-denying  effort.  We  must  try  with  all  our  heart  to 
realize  his  preaence  always,  at  all  times  and  in  all  places,  in  our  business,  our  amuse- 
ments, our  intercourse  with  friends  and  relations,  as  well  as  in  the  hour  of  private  prayer 
or  public  worship.  We  must  try  with  conscious  effort  to  please  liim  always  ;  seeking, 
indeed,  to  serve  him  much,  like  Martha,  but  still  more  to  please  him  perfectly,  like 
Mary.  And  we  must  bring  him  into  our  home,  into  the  very  inmost  chambers  of  our 
heart,  openins  them  all  to  liim,  dedicating  them  all,  every  purpose  of  ours,  every  hope, 
every  aspiration,  to  him,  beseeching  him  to  accept  our  imperfect  offering,  to  make  our 
hearts  his  temple,  to  fulfil  in  us  his  blessed  promise,  "  If  any  man  love  me,  he  will 
keep  my  words:  and  ray  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  make 
our  abode  [our  dwelling,  our  abiding-place]  with  him  "  (John  xiv.  23).  And  now  we 
have  again  the  adjuration  of  ch.  ii.  7.  The  bride  lias  related  her  dream  to  the 
daughters  of  Jerusalem.  The  subject  of  that  dream  was  love — pure  and  innocent  love ; 
its  sorrows  and  its  joys  ;  separation  and  blessed  reunion.  It  is  a  sacred  thing.  The 
daughters  of  Jerusalem  were  to  listen  in  silent  sympathy ;  they  were  not  to  praise  or  to 
blame ;  they  were  not  to  endeavour  to  stimulate  or  increase  the  love  of  bride  or  bride- 
groom ;  they  were  to  leave  it  to  its  free  spontaneous  growth  in  the  heart.  Human 
love  is  a  holy  thing.  The  love  that  is  between  Christ  and  his  Church,  the  love  that  is 
between  the  Lord  of  our  redemption  and  every  elect  soul,  is  holier  yet  by  far.  It  is  not 
to  be  much  talked  of;  it  is  to  be  treasured  in  the  heart ;  it  is  the  inmost  spring  of  that 
life  which  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God.  It  must  not  be  stirred  by  irreverent  talk  or 
disclosure ;  it  must  rest  unseen  "  till  it  please  " — till  the  fit  time  shall  come  for  speaking 
of  its  blessedness. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — The  espousals.  I.  The  appkoaoh  of  the  bbidb.  1.  The  question. 
"Who  is  this?"  We  have  here  one  ot  those  refrains  which  form  a  striking chaiaoter- 
istic  of  the  song.  The  question,  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  (the  pronoun  is  feminine,  "  Who  is 
she?")  is  three  times  repeated  (ver.  6;  ch.  vi.  10;  viii.  5).  It  indicates  always  a 
fresh  appearance  of  the  bride.  Here  the  words  seem  to  be  chanted  by  a  chorus  of 
young  men,  the  friends  of  the  bridegroom.  They  are  struck  with  admiration  at  the 
beauty  of  the  bride,  and  the  royal  state  bestowed  upon  her  by  the  king.  She  is  coming 
up  to  Jerusalem  from  the  distant  Lebanon  country,  here  described  as  the  wilderness — 
which  word  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  often  means,  not  a  desert,  but  a  thinly  populated 
country,  fit  for  feeding  flocks,  a  pasture-land.  She  comes  like  pillars  of  smoke  perfumed 
with  myrrh  and  frankincense.  Perfumes  are  burned  around  her  in  such  profusion 
that  pillars  of  smoke  appear  to  attend  her  progress.  The  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come, 
and  his  wife  hath  made  herself  ready.  She  is  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her 
husband.  She  comes  up  Irom  this  lower  world  to  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem.  The  incense  of  adoration  and  thanksgiving  rises  as  she  moves 
onward.  She  is  the  holy  Catholic  Church,  the  great  congregation  of  Christian  people 
dispersed  throughout  the  whole  world.  But  the  Church  is  made  up  of  individual 
Christian  souls.  And  that  the  Church  may  come  as  a  whole  to  Christ  the  Bridegroom, 
each  soul  must  come  personally,  individually.  The  soul  cometh  up  out  of  the  wilder- 
ness, out  of  the  far  country,  where  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  rule ;  up  to 


80  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON,  [oh.  m.  1—11. 

Mount  Zion,  to  the  city  of  God,  where  is  the  true  temple,  where  God  is  worshipped  in 
spirit  and  la  truth,  where  he  manifests  himself  to  them  that  seek  him.  And  the 
prayer  of  the  faithful,  as  they  draw  ever  nearer,  is  set  forth  in  God's  sight  as  the 
incense,  and  the  lifting  up  of  their  hands  as  the  evening  sacri6ce.  The  Lord  is  pleasnd, 
in  his  iufiuite  condesceusion,  to  ret;ard  our  poor  prayers  when  lifted  up  in  faith  as  holy 
incense  (Rev.  viii.  3,  4),  because  the  great  High  Priest  is  praying  for  us.  Our  poor 
prayer  joins  itself  through  the  power  of  faith  with  his  prevailing  prayer,  and  tlierefore 
rises  up  before  the  throne  as  a  pillar  of  sweetest  Inoense-smolse,  acceptable  to  God 
through  Christ.  The  thought  thit  God  Is  pleased  so  to  honour  the  prayers  of  the 
faithful,  that  he  condescends  to  seek  such  worship,  worship  offered  up  in  spirit  and  in 
truth,  makes  prayer  a  very  sacred  thing.  The  approach  of  the  Christian  soul  to  God  is 
very  solemn.  The  soul  Cometh  out  of  the  wilderness,  away  fmrn  its  old  haunts;  it  is 
ascending  up  to  Mount  Zion,  to  the  presence-chamber  of  the  King  of  heaven;  it  must 
onme  with  reverence  and  godly  fear,  remembering  that  God's  presence  is  very  awful  as 
well  as  very  blessed;  it  must  come  with  the  perfume  of  holy  thoughts  and  heavenly 
aspirations,  with  the  offering  of  prayer  and  praise  rising  up  like  the  smoke  of  holy 
imense  be  ore  the  mercy-seat.  2.  The  led  of  Solomon.  The  chorus  calls  attention  to 
the  litter  (for  such  seems  here  to  lie  the  meaning  of  the  word)  in  which  the  bride  is 
borne  in  her  progress  to  the  royal  city.  "  It  is  his  litter,"  they  say.  They  add  the  royal 
name  itself,  "  Behold  his  litter,  which  is  Solomon's,"  to  give  emphasis  to  the  honour 
bestowed  upon  the  bride.  The  king  has  sent  his  own  litter  to  convey  his  bride  to  the 
palace,  the  palanquin  in  which  he  himself  was  carried.  It  was  King  Solomon's ;  it  is 
the  bride's,  for  the  king  has  given  it  to  her.  God  has  given  us  all  things,  St.  Paul  says 
(Eom.  viii.  32).  If  only  we  are  Christ's,  thenall  things  are  ours — the  world,  life,  death, 
things  present,  things  to  come  (1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22).  And  the  Lord  himself  says,  "  The 
glory  which  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given  them"  (John  xvii.  22).  It  is  his  will  that 
his  chosen  should  be  with  him  where  he  is.  He  gives  them  now  all  that  is  necessary 
to  convey  them  thither.  "  God  rode  upon  a  cherub  "  (Ps.  xviii.  10).  The  Lord  will 
"send  his  angels  .  .  .  and  they  shall  gather  together  his  elect  from  the  four  windi, 
from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other "  (Matt.  zxiv.  31).  The  angels  carried  the  soul  of 
Lazarus  into  Abraham's  bosom.  But  we  may  learn  here  another  very  solemn  lesson. 
The  litter  of  Solomon  bore  the  bride  up  to  Mount  Zion ;  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesua 
Christ  brings  the  Christian  soul  to  heaven.  The  Lord  was  lifted  up  upon  the  cross. 
Several  ancient  writers  tell  us  that  in  Pa.  xcvi.  10  the  earliest  reading  was,  "  The  Lord 
hath  reigned  from  the  wood."  The  cross  is  his  throne ;  it  drew,  and  still  draws,  all 
faithful  souls  to  him ;  it  has  lifted  him  up  to  reign  over  the  hearts  of  all  the  best  and 
truest.  It  behoved  him  first  to  suffer,  ami  then  to  enter  into  his  glory.  "  He  humbled 
himself  even  unto  the  death  of  the  cross ;  where/ore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  him  " 
(Phil.  ii.  9).  And  he  brings  his  elect  to  God  by  the  same  way  which  he  trod  himselL 
The  cross  lifts  the  Christian  soul  to  God. 

"  Nearer  my  God,  to  thee, 
Nearer  to  thee  ; 
E'en  though  it  be  a  cioss 
That  raiseth  me." 

The  Christian  is  "crucified  with  Christ"  (Gil.  ii.  20).  He  is  lifted  up  by  the  cross  o( 
atonement,  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  then  by  the  cross  of  spiritual  self- 
sacrifice,  the  cross  borne  with  Christ,  into  the  very  i)resenoe  of  the  King.  Nothing 
else  can  bear  him  tliither.  He  niust  pray,  "  Thy  will  be  dune,"  before  he  asks,  "  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread."  He  must  learn  from  the  suffering  Lord  the  inner  meaning 
of  his  own  holy  prayer.  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  He  must  remember  that 
the  cross  is  the  cross  of  Christ;  that  the  Lord,  who  was  himself  lifted  up  "upon  the 
cross,  sends  the  cross  to  his  followers  to  lift  them  also  upwar>ls ;  that,  purified  and 
refined  by  holy  self-denials,  and  by  suffering  meekly  borne,  they  may  at  length  be  with 
him  where  he  is,  and  behold  his  glory,  aud  sit  with  him  in  his  throne  (Rev.  iii.  21). 
3.  The  guard.  The  king  had  sent  his  own  guard  to  escort  the  bride  to  her  new  home. 
King  David  had  a  guard  of  thirty  mighty  men ;  Solomon,  it  seems,  had  double  the 
number.  All  were  expert  in  war;  all  bore  the  sword  because  of  fear  iu  the  night. 
From  Ps.  i.,  especially  vers.  7 — 10,  we  learn  that  parts  of  Palostiue  were  in  David's 


OH.  m.  1—11.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  81 


lime  dangerous  from  bands  of  brigands.  The  king  had  cared  for  the  safety  of  the  bride , 
the  escort  was  not  given  her  merely  for  houour.  So  now  the  Lurd  giveth  his  angels 
charge  over  his  people  to  keep  (to  guard)  them  in  all  their  ways;  so  now  "the 
angel  of  the  Lord  encumpeth  round  about  them  that  fear  him,  and  delivereth  them" 
(Ps.  xci.  11 ;  xxxiv.  7).  They  "  shall  not  be  af]aid  for  the  terror  by  night "  (Ps.  xoi.  5), 
for  "  they  that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they  "  that  be  against  us  (2  Kings  vi.  16). 
The  description  of  the  armed  guard  reminds  ns  that  we  too  have  to  fight  the  good  fljiht 
of  faith,  that  we  have  to  wrestle  "  against  the  world-rulers  of  this  darkness,  against  the 
spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness  "  (Bph.  vi.  12).  We  have  to  take  to  ourselves  the  panoply 
of  God,  the  armour  of  light ;  like  the  misjhty  men  of  Israel  who  guarded  the  bride,  we 
must  take  "  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God."  That  sword  will  save 
us  from  the  "  fear  of  the  night,"  because  it  is  "  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the 
Scriptures  "  that  we  have  hope  (Rom.  xv.  4).  Thus  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  not  only 
the  sword  of  the  Spirit;  they  furnish  us  also  with  hope,  the  hope  of  salvation,  which 
is  the  helmet  of  the  Christian  warrior.  To  gain  that  sword  and  that  helmet  we  must 
study  the  Word  of  God  in  faith ;  that  living  faith  which  (St.  Paul  tells  us)  is  the 
shield  whereby  we  may  "  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked."  If  we  do  our  part, 
quitting  ourselves  like  men,  fighting  manfully  under  the  banner  of  the  cross,  we  need 
fear  no  evil.  Our  angel-gunrd,  sent  forth  because  of  them  that  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation, 
called  in  Holy  Scripture  "  their  angels,"  because  they  have  charge  over  them,  as  well  as 
God's  angels,  because  he  is  their  God  and  King,  will  ever  encamp  around  us  and  keep 
us  till  we  appear  before  God  in  Zion. 

II.  The  kino  goes  forth  to  meet  the  bbidb.  1.  The  chariot  of  the  king.  The 
bride  approaches  in  a  litter  sent  for  her  by  the  king.  Solomon  himself  goes  forth  to 
receive  her  in  his  car  of  state.  He  had  had  it  made  according  to  his  own  plans,  with 
that  artistic  skill  and  magnificence  Vfhich  were  chaiacteristio  of  him.  It  was  made  of 
the  fragrant  and  imperishable  cedar-wood  brought  from  Lebanon,  the  country  of  the 
bride.  Its  decorations  were  of  the  richest — gold  and  silver,  and  the  costly  Tyrian 
purple ;  in  the  midst  was  a  tesselated  pavement,  a  gift  of  love  from  the  daughters  of 
Jerusalem.  The  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  shall  have  the  glory  of  God  (Rev.  xxi.  9,  11). 
When  she  is  "prepand  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband,"  then,  we  are  told,  "  the 
tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his 
people,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God  "  (Rev.  xxi.  3).  When 
Christ,  the  true  Solomon,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  shall  bring  his  bride,  the  Church,  to  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  foundation  of  peace,  he  will  manifest  himself  to  her  in  his 
glory.  Now  he  is  interceding  for  us,  that  then  we  may  be  with  him  where  he  is,  that 
we  may  behold  his  glory.  Then,  if  we  are  his  indeed,  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is,  and 
shall  be  made  like  unto  him  (1  John  iii.  2).  It  was  a  great  thing  for  the  poor  bride 
from  the  LeVianon  to  be  brought  into  the  court  of  the  king  whose  magnificence  filled 
the  Queen  of  Sheba  with  wonder  and  delight.  But  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard, 
neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for 
them  that  love  him"  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  None  can  tell  the  blessedness  of  those  happy  souls 
who,  having  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
"  shall  see  the  King  in  his  beauty"  (Isa.  xxxiii.  17);  shall  sit  with  him  in  his  throne 
amid  the  glories  of  the  golden  city;  shall  see  his  face,  and  his  Name  shall  be  in  their 
foreheads.  Heart  of  man  cannot  conceive  the  exceeding  great  joy  of  that  moment  of 
most  entrancing  bliss,  when  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  shall  bring  home  the  Church, 
his  bride.  King  Solomon  issued  out  of  Jerusalem  in  royal  pomp  to  meet  his  betrothed. 
When  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  "the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from 
heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God : 
and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first :  then  we  which  are  alive  and  remam  shall  be 
caught  up  together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  and  so  shall 
we  ever  be  with  the  Lord  "  (1  Thess.  iv.  16,  17).  2.  The  glory  and  great  joy  of  the 
king.  The  chorus  calls  upon  the  daughters  of  Zion  to  go  forth  and  see  the  splendour 
of  the  royal  espousals.  King  Solomon  has  brought  home  his  bride  ;  his  heart  is  glad ; 
his  mother  has  crowned  him  with  the  royal  diadem ;  he  is  happy  in  the  love  of  his 
bride.  The  Prophet  Isaiah  comforts  Zion  with  the  blessed  promises  that  "  as  the  bride- 
groom rejoiceth  over  the  bride,  so  shall  thy  God  rejoice  over  thee."  "  Thou  shalt  no 
longer  be  termed  Forsaken ;  neither  shall  thy  land  any  more  be  termed  Desolate :  but 

eONO   OB   SOLOMON.  O 


82  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [ch.  in.  1—11 

thou  shalt  be  called  Hephzi-bah  ['  my  delight  is  in  her '],  and  thy  land  Beulah  ['  married ']: 
for  the  Lord  delighteth  in  thee,  and  tliy  land  shall  be  mairied  "  (Isa.  Ixii.  4,  5).  So  the 
Lord  "  Christ  loved  the  Church,  and  yave  himself  for  her;  that  he  might  sanctify  and 
cleanse  her  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word,  that  he  might  present  her  to 
himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  itiing  ;  but  that  she 
should  be  holy  and  without  blemish  "  (Eph.  v.  25 — 27).  It  was  for  the  joy  set  before 
him  that  Christ  endured  the  cros;i  (Heb.  xii.  2).  'I'he  Lord  bringeth  Lome  the  lost  sheep 
rejoicing.  He  saith,  "  Eejoice  with  me ;  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  that  was  lost." 
"  Eejoice  with  mel"  And  they  do  rejoice,  the  Saviour  of  the  world  and  ihe  holy  angels 
round  his  throne.  The  Lord's  exceeding  great  love  for  our  poor  dying  bmuIs  makes  the 
salvation  of  those  souls  very  precious  in  his  sight.  Nothing  can  show  the  depth  and 
tenderness  of  the  blessed  love  with  which  he  yearned  for  our  salvation  except  the  great 
agony  of  Gethsemane,  the  awful  anguish  of  the  cross.  Therefore  the  day  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  blessed  will  be  a  day  of  joy  in  heaven.  "  Let  us  be  glad,  and  rejoice, 
and  give  honour  to  him  :  for  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  made 
herself  ready  "  (Bev.  xix.  7).  He  is  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords ;  on  his  head  are 
many  crowns  (Rev.  xix.  12,  16).  His  virgin-mother  saw  him  once  wearing  the  irown 
of  thorns;  now  he  wears  the  crown  of  boundless  sovereignty.  He  had  come  down  from 
heaven  to  seek  his  bride;  now  she  is  with  him  in  his  glory.  "He  shall  see  of  the 
travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied  "  (Isa.  liii.  11). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — .5. — Lov^s  dream.  It  is  a  dream  that  is  told  of  in  these  verses.  It  was 
natural  for  her  who  tells  it  to  have  dreamt  such  a  dream.  Lifting  up  the  story  to  the 
higher  level  of  things  spiritual,  what  these  verses  say  suggests — 

I.  Concerning  dreams  qbnbbally.  They  are  often  revelations  of  life  and  character. 
Sometimes  they  are  mere  folly,  the  misty  vapours  exhaled  by  a  gross  and  over-fed 
body.  But  at  other  times,  as  here,  they  have  a  deeper  meaning.  They  show  the 
manner  of  a  man's  life,  the  bent  of  his  inclinations,  the  character  of  his  soul.  Our 
dreams  never  play  us  false.  The  motives  that  govern  their  acts  are  the  motives  that 
govern  ours.  A  man  dreams  about  the  sins  he  loves  too  well ;  about  the  sorrows  that 
haunt  his  life  ;  about  the  joys  on  which  his  heart  is  set.  Dreams  have  played  a  largo 
part  in  God's  governance  of  men.  They  often  show  us  what  we  should  avoid  and 
what  we  should  seek  after.  Though  some  are  foolish,  we  cannot  aflbrd  to  despise 
them  as  if  all  were  so. 

II.  Concerning  this  bream.  In  both  its  stages  it  reveals  the  fervent  love  of  the 
dreamer.  1.  It  began  sorrowfully.  She  thought  she  had  lost  her  beloved  (vers.  1,  2). 
This  the  deepest  of  distresses  to  the  renewed  soul  (of.  Ps.  Ixxvii.  1 — 4).  If  heaven 
would  cease  to  be  heaven,  as  it  would  were  Christ's  presence  withdrawn,  how  much 
more  must  this  life  be  all  dark  and  drear  if  we  have  him  not  1  And  she  tells  how  she 
sought  him.  (1)  In  the  city,  amid  the  business  and  turmoil  of  men.  But  it  is  but 
little  that  he  is  there.  They  would  most  probably  crucify  him  if  they  found  him,  so 
deadly  is  the  hate  the  world  hath  for  him.  It  is  not  true  that  virtue  needs  only  to 
be  seen  to  be  loved.  As  our  Lord  was  dealt  with,  so  would  it  be.  (2)  And  in  the 
a.ssemblies,  in  society.  And  we  cannot  be  surprised  tliat  he  was  not  there.  Society  I 
does  that  word  sunimon  up  the  idea  of  a  community  who  would  cherish  Christ's 
presence  ?  (3)  But  even  the  watchmen  could  not  tell  her  of  him.  How  wrong  this  I 
Zion's  watchmen,  and  not  know  where  Christ  is  to  be  found  1  They  had  found  her, 
and  very  likely  found  fault  with  her,  but  they  could  not  help  her  to  find  him.  Such 
pastors  there  are,  and  to  them  "the  hui  gry  sheep  look  up,  and  are  not  led."  We  can 
picture  the  soul's  distress  when  these  failed  her.  To  have  gone  to  the  house  of  God 
hungering  for  direction  Christwards,  and  to  come  back  with  none  at  all — that  is  a 
sorrow  not  unknown  nor  slight.  But  her  dream  did  not  end  so.  2.  It  ended  joyfully. 
(1)  Her  beloved  revealed  himself  to  her.  She  "■found  him."  But  what  is  our  finding 
other  than  his  showing  ?  (cf.  the  four  findings  of  Christ  told  of  in  John  i.).  How  often 
when  we  have  "  passed  from  "  Sundays  and  services  and  sermons,  and  have  not  found 
Chriit,  he  is  found  of  us  in  some  other  season,  place,  and  circumstances  1    If  he  be 


OH.  in.  1—11.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  83 

found  of  them  that  seek  him  not — as  he  says  he  is — how  much  more  will  he  fulfil  his 
word,  "They  that  seek  me  shall  find  me"!  (2)  And  she  ciave  to  him.  "I  held  him," 
etc.  The  soul  thus  holds  her  Lord  hy  her  jirayers,  her  trust,  her  cuminunion,  her 
service,  her  self-surrender.  These  grasp  the  Beloved,  and  will  not  let  him  go.  (3)  And 
she  will  be  content  with  nothing  less  than  the  full  assurance  of  his  love  (ver.  4).  Wa 
should  resolve  to  have  a  religion  that  makes  the  soul  happy.  The  religion  that  does 
not  do  this  does  but  little  at  all.  Cf.  the  elder  son  in  the  parable  of  the  prodigal.  He 
had  a  religion,  but  it  was  all  gloom.  Let  us  not  be  satisfied  so.  And  if  we  setk,  and 
find,  and  cleave,  and  so  continue  as  set  forth  here,  the  joy  of  the  Lord  shall  be  ours. 

III.  CoNCEENiNO  THE  AWAKING.  Ver.  5  shows  that  she  is  awake,  and  conscious  of 
the  love  of  her  beloved,  and  would  not  be  torn  therefrom  until  he  pleased  (cf.  on  ch.  li. 
7).  But,  awake,  the  soul  finds  that  what  was  sad  in  her  dream  was  but  a  dread,  but 
what  was  joyful  is  an  abiding  reality.  We  cannot  lose  Christ  really,  though  we  may 
think  we  do ;  and  the  soul  that  seeks  him  shall  find  him. — S.  C. 

Ver.  3. — The  watchmen.  In  this  verse  very  much  that  it  concerns  Christ's  ministers 
to  give  heed  to  is  suggested. 

I.  The  watch  thet  havk  to  keep,  Christ's  ministers  are  meant  (Isa.  lii.  8; 
Ixii.  6 ;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  7).  Their  watch  is  to  be  over  themselves,  over  their  teaching, 
over  the  Church  of  God. 

IL  The  reason  of  theib  appointment.  It  is  night,  when  men  sleep,  when  the  foe 
takes  advantage ;  hence  the  need  of  watchmen  (Isa.  xxi.  11,  12). 

III.  The  duty  they  have  to  discharge.  "  To  go  about  the  city."  The  ways  and 
windings  of  the  human  heart.  The  highways  of  the  Word  of  God.  The  streets  of  the 
city  of  God,  the  Church.     They  need  to  be  acquainted  with  all  these. 

IV.  What  they  will  meet  with.  Sucli  as  they  found  here.  They  "found  me;" 
that  is,  a  wearied  and  sorrowful  soul.  They  find  such  through  their  preaching  or  their 
pastoral  work  (1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25).  So  souls  are  found.  True  watchmen  are  sure  to 
find  such. 

V.  The  question  they  will  be  asked.  (Of.  John  xii.  21,  "Sir,  we  would  see 
Jesus.")  This  the  suggestion  of  what  we  read  here.  "  Saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul 
loveth?"  And  this  is  what  such  souls  need;  and  the  more  they  are  directed  to  him, 
the  more  will  the  watchmen  be  valued  and  their  word  heeded.  This  is  what  our 
congregations  want  from  us,  and  the  question  which  in  reality  they  put  to  us. 

VI.  The  importance  op  their  answer.  Had  they  told  her  where  he  was  whom 
she  sought,  she  would  have  passed  from  them  with  gratitude  and  joy;  as  it  was, 
because  they  could  not  tell  her,  she  went  away  in  deep  distress.  Such  issues  depend 
upon  their  word.  It  is  good  when  they  have  seen  Jesus  for  themselves.  It  is  better 
when  they  can  direct  seeking  souls  to  him.  But  it  is  sad  indeed  if  they  have  neither 
seen  him  nor  know  how  tu  direct  inquirers  to  him.  So  was  it  with  these  watchmen ; 
so  let  it  not  be  with  us. — S.  C. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — "Solomon  in  all  his  glory."  (For  explanation  of  details  in  these  verses, 
see  Exposition.)  We  have  set  before  us  here  such  glory  as  pomp  and  siilendour, 
strength  and  power,  great  riches  and  sensual  pleasure,  could  give.  All  that  iu  which 
Solomon  delighted,  and  for  which  his  name  became  famous.  Now,  these  things 
suggest — 

I.  A  great  temptation.  Tliey  were  so:  1.  To  Solomon,  f  jr  he  yielded  to  it.  All 
ihat  these  things  could  do  for  him  he  enjoyed  to  tlie  full.  The  tradition  of  "  Solomon 
and  all  his  glory  "came  down  through  the  centuries  that  followed.  And  the  like 
things  are  a  great  temptation  to  men  now.  What  will  they  not  do  for  them?  They 
were  the  last  of  the  temptations  with  which  Satan  tempted  our  Lord.  And  to  the 
good,  the  temptation  of  them  lies  in  the  suggestion  that  was  doubtless  made  to  the 
mind  of  our  Lord — so  much  good  may  be  done  by  them ;  they  will  so  help  iu  establisb- 
ing  the  kingdom  of  God.  His  mind  was,  we  may  well  believe,  absorbed  with  the 
question  how  the  great  work  he  had  come  to  do,  tlie  establishment  of  this  kingdom, 
could  be  accomplished.  And  here  was  the  point  and  force  of  this  temptation.  To 
yield  to  it  would  have  been  as  if  he  had  fallen  down  and  worshipped  the  evil  one. 
Hence  he  spurned  both  it  and  him.     And  still  "in  the  multitude,"  not  of  "words" 


84  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  m.  1—11 

only,  but  even  more  of  riches,  "there  wanteth  not  sin."  Therefore  these  things  are 
not  to  beciime  the  object  of  desire  in  a  good  man's  soul.  2,  They  were  designed  to 
tempt  her  of  whom  this  song  tells.  Solomon  would  dazzle  her  with  his  splendour  and 
wealth,  and  so  would  make  her  "forget"  her  "kindred"  and  lier  "father's  house;"  for 
the  king  desired  her  beauty.  And  in  like  manner  the  same  temptation  is  held  out 
still.  For  the  sake  of  these  things  what  sacrifices  are  made  of  loyalty  and  truth  and 
goodness  1  She  resisted  by  the  might  of  her  affection  for  her  "  beloved ; "  the. power  of 
her  true  love  enabled  her  to  overcome.  And  only  the  presence  in  our  hearts  of  a 
higher  love,  and,  best  of  all,  the  highest,  even  the  love  of  God,  will  drive  out  and 
overcome  all  lower  and  evil  love. 

II.  A  GREAT  LACE.  There  is  nothing  in  all  this  glory  of  pomp  and  wealth  which 
marks  the  presence  of  those  Godward  riches  which  alone  are  real ;  nothing  to  satisfy 
the  soul  of  man  or  to  help  it  in  its  life.  The  soul  might  starve,  as  Solomon's  did,  in 
spite  of  all  this  glory ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  soul  can  prosper  well  though  it  can 
call  none  of  this  glory  its  own.  We  cannot  help  desiring  earthly  riches — they  are 
designed  in  due  measure  to  attract  and  stimulate  us ;  and  they  will  do  us  no  harm  if 
we  are  careful,  all  the  while  we  seek  them,  to  be  rich  towards  God ;  to  possess,  as  we 
may,  "  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  But  poor  and  miserable  is  that  soul,  though 
he  have  all  Solomon's  glory,  if  he  have  not  these. 

III.  A  VIVID  TYPE.  This  is  what  expositors  in  all  ages  have  mostly  seen  in  the 
pomp  these  verses  describe.  Some  have  seen  a  setting  forth  of  the  glory  of  Christ  on 
his  return  to  heaven.  He  comes  up  out  of  the  wilderness  of  this  dreary  world.  The 
incense  of  praise,  fragrant  and  precious,  is  given  to  him.  He  is  borne  in  stately 
triumph  (cf.  Ps.  xxiv.  7 — 10).  He  is  attended  by  his  angel-guards.  He  has  prepared 
a  place  for  them  that  love  him,  and  will  receive  them  unto  himself.  All  who  love  him 
are  to  go  forth  and  behold  his  glory.  Thus  the  triumph  of  Jesus,  the  King  of  Zion, 
is  shown  forth.  Others  have  read  in  these  verses  the  unseen  glory  of  the  redeemed  soul. 
He  comes  up  out  of  the  wilderness,  as  Lazarus  was  carried  by  angels  into  Abraham's 
bosom.  The  entrance  into  glory  is  with  joy  and  praise.  Angel-guards  surround.  The 
King  hath  prepared  a  place,  a  throne — his  own  throne— on  which  the  redeemed  with 
their  Lord  shall  sit.  Love — Christ's  love — has  paved  all  the  way.  The  vision  ol 
Christ  in  his  glory  which  the  redeemed  shall  enjoy.  In  such  ways  as  this  have  devout 
souls  found  this  Scripture  full  of  profit;  in  this  or  in  other  ways  may  we  find  it 
likewise, — 8.  0. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  search  for  the  true  King.  When  once  the  Spirit  of  truth  has  begun 
his  work  in  the  heart,  there  is  a  strong  yearning  after  Jesus.  In  fulfilling  his  mission 
as  the  Eeveaier  of  Christ,  the  Spirit  excites  within  us  intense  longings  to  have  the 
friendship  of  Jesus.  We  take  this  as  clear  proof  that  a  work  of  grace  has  begun  in  us 
if  we  feel  that  none  but  Christ  can  satisfy.  Now  we  can  part  with  all  we  have  to 
obtain  this  goodly  pearl.  As  the  man  who  had  inadvertently  slain  a  fellow  flees  with 
lightning  speed  toward  the  city  of  refuge,  feeling  that  the  blood-aveuger  is  at  his  heels, 
so  the  convicted  sinner  has  an  eye  for  only  one  object — Christ.  This  persistent  search 
for  the  Saviour  is  a  token  for  good.  The  tree  that  does  not  easily  languish  in  summer 
drought,  but  grows,  blossoms,  unfolds  its  fruit,  has  most  certainly  deep  roots  in  the 
soil ;  so,  if  under  manifold  discouragements  we  steadily  seek  after  Christ,  we  may  be 
sure  that  we  are  planted  in  the  soil  sf  grace  by  the  Lord's  right  hand.  Three  main 
thoughts  are  in  this  text. 

I.  Jesus  sought.  "  I  sought  him  whom  my  soul  loveth."  1.  True  love  to  Christ 
glows  brightly  even  in  his  absence.  Genuine  love  is  of  all  things  the  most  unselfish.  We 
love  him  not  so  much  for  the  benefit  to  be  obtained ;  we  love  him  because  he  is  lovable. 
Having  once  known  him,  we  cannot  restrain  our  love.  To  give  the  shrine  of  the  heart 
to  another  would  be  self-degradation,  idolatry.  On  this  account  it  may  be  that  Jesus 
keeps  away.  He  sees  some  growing  rivalry  within.  Ho  sees  some  need  for  our  self- 
purging.  He  wants  the  soul  to  realize  a  deeper  need.  He  wants  to  make  his  love 
more  prized.  Many  worthy  reasons  has  Jesus  for  hiding  himself.  'Tis  a  temporary 
wint'er  in  order  to  bring  about  a  more  prolific  harvest.  So,  whether  we  have  any 
assurance  of  his  love  or  not,  we  will  love  him ;  we  will  seek  after  him.  2,  J%e  absence 
of  Jesue  makes  midnight  fbr  the  soul.     "By  night  ,  .  .  I  sought  him."     If  Jesut  has 


OH.  m.  1—11.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  85 

been  our  Sun  of  BighteousnesB,  then  his  departure  makes  our  night.  AH  the  things 
relating  to  the  spiritual  world  are  dark  to  us  if  Jesus  be  absent.  We  ca'.nnot  see  the 
face  of  our  Father.  We  cannot  read  our  titles  clear  to  the  heavenly  inheritance. 
There  is  no  growth  of  holy  virtues  in  us.  We  cannot  run  the  heavenly  race.  It  is  a  time 
of  wintry  darkness  and  wintry  barrenness  if  Jesus  keeps  away.  No  artificial  light  can 
take  the  place  of  Immanuel.  3.  There  is  sound  resolution.  The  soul  has  reached  a 
noble  resolution.  "  I  will  rise  now."  Some  resolutions  which  we  make  are  worthless. 
They  are  made  under  excited  feeling,  or  from  a  passing  fear,  or  they  arl  the  outcome 
of  a  shallow  nature,  which  lightly  esteems  a  pledge.  But  a  resolutiaa  made  in  the 
strength  of  God  is  a  firm  step  taken  in  advance.  It  is  the  first  step  in  a  series ;  for  the 
strength  of  God  is  behind  it.  Genuine  resolution  never  waits.  It  mores  onward  at 
once.  No  sooner  had  the  prodigal  boy  resolved  to  return,  than  "  he  areas  and  came  to 
his  father."  So  here  the  bride  says  in  the  same  breath,  "  I  will  seek  him.  ...  I  sought 
him."  The  future  is  instftntly  translated  into  the  present.  Good  resolution  is  not  a 
pillow  to  sleep  on ;  it  is  ft  horse  which  we  should  instantly  mount.  4.  There  is  active 
emd  persistent  search.  No  journey  is  too  great  if  we  can  only  find  our  Beloved. 
Thousands  travel  every  year  over  hot  sands  to  Mecca  in  the  hope  of  getting  nearer  to 
Mohammed,  and  so  gaining  his  empty  favour.  Sharp  privations  are  gladly  endured  in 
order  to  purchase  this  worthless  merit.  Gold-seekers  will  voyage  to  the  antipodes,  and 
will  run  a  thousand  risks  to  obtain  the  virgin  ore.  Then  does  not  highest  wisdom 
impel  us  to  seek  the  "  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ "  ?  Shall  the  common  adventurers 
of  earth  put  us  to  shame  ?  We  must  seek  everywhere,  in  all  likely  places.  If  in  one 
search  we  have  been  disappointed,  we  must  try  another.  Columbus  was  not  easily 
daunted  when  he  was  on  the  search  for  a  new  continent.  Many  noble  lives  have  been 
sacrificed  in  the  effort  to  find  a  sea-route  over  the  North  Pole.  Joseph  and  Mary  did 
not  easily  abandon  the  search  for  the  child  Jesus.  Pressed  down  with  sorrow,  they 
sought  him  in  one  company  after  another,  nor  gave  up  their  effort  until  they  found 
the  lad. 

"  The  subtle  chemist  can  dissect 
And  strip  the  creature  naked  till  he  find 
The  callow  principles  within  their  nest. 
What  hath  not  man  sought  out  and  found 
But  his  dear  God?" 

6.  First  disappointments  tviU  not  deter  us.  "I  sought  him,  but  I  found  him  not." 
The  earnest  seeker  after  Christ  is  not  easily  daunted.  The  first  hindrance  will  not 
depress  him,  nor  the  second,  nor  the  twentieth.  Delays  in  finding  Jesus  only  whet  his 
appetite,  and  spur  him  on  to  fresh  search.  Failure  in  finding  Christ  is  in  no  sense  a 
deteat.  It  is  a  gain  in  knowledge.  It  is  helpful  in  experience.  It  is  part  of  the 
process  in  the  attainment  of  success.  DifBculties  make  the  man.  If  one  road  does  i.ot 
lead  to  righteousness  and  rest,  another  road  will ;  for  there  is  a  road.  And  Christ  is 
watching  us  carefully  to  see  if  we  are  faint-hearted.  The  tirst  experiment  to  utilize 
electricity  for  illuminating  a  city  did  not  succeed,  nor  the  second ;  yet  mechanicians 
persevered  until  they  reached  the  goal.  And  every  awakened  sinner  is  resolved  to 
find  Christ,  or  to  die  in  the  attempt.  Our  own  blunders,  as  a  rule,  are  the  cause  of 
delay.  6.  There  will  he  inquiry  for  Christ  from  qualified  persons.  "  The  watchmen 
that  go  about  the  city  found  me :  to  whom  I  said,  Saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul 
loveth?"  These  watchmen  fitly  represent  the  pastors  of  the  Church.  They  know 
the  haunts  and  habits  of  the  Prince.  They  know  the  proneness  of  man's  heart  to  err. 
They  know  the  subtleties  of  the  adversary  and  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  Therefore  a 
faithftd  pastor  is  a  good  guide  for  seeking  souls.  These  under-shepherds  are  ever 
on  the  look  out  for  Christ-seekers.  We  read,  "  They  found  me."  Then  they  were 
searching  for  such.  This  is  their  business.  As  a  man  who  lias  navigated  a  ship  a 
hundred  times  through  an  intricate  rocky  channel  makes  the  best  pilot,  so  they  who 
have  themselves  found  Christ  and  walk  daily  with  him  are  best  qualified  to  lead 
wanderers  into  his  fold.  Shrink  not  from  asking  counsel.  Avail  yourself  of  every 
help. 

II.  Jesus  found.     "  I  foimd  him  whom  my  soul  loveth."     1.  Jesus  uses  consecrated 
men  to  bring  his  chosen  ones  into  his  presence.    Those  who  know  him  best  are  honoured 


8«  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  iil  1— 11 

to  be  chamberlains  in  his  palace,  and  to  introduce  guests  to  his  banquet-tahle.  His 
employment  of  ua  in  this  sacred  and  noble  work  is  an  unspealiable  honour.  A 
consecrated  man  is  sure  to  become  a  guide  to  others,  whether  he  fill  an  ofiice  in  the 
Church  or  not.  The  pious  women  who  tallied  with  each  other  of  Christ  in  the  cottage 
porch  at  Elstow  led  John  Bunyan  into  the  friendship  of  Christ.  As  men  who  have 
travelled  through  a  terra  inco'jnita  erect  guide-posts  for  those  who  may  follow,  so  every 
frichd  of  Christ  will  find  a  heavenly  pleasure  in  guiding  wayward  feet  into  the  right 
way.  Never  was  Paul  the  apostle  a  nobler  man  than  when  he  put  into  words  the 
burning  desire  of  his  heart, "  I  could  wish  that  myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my 
brethren,  my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh."  2.  Diligent  search  is  always  rewarded. 
If,  in  self-diffidence,  we  follow  the  light  of  Scripture,  sooner  or  later  we  are  sure  to 
succeed.  "Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  Men  have 
searched  long  for  the  philosopher's  stone  and  for  the  secret  of  perpetual  motion — have 
searched  long,  and  searched  in  vain.  But  no  sincere  lover  of  Christ  }  et  sought  him 
and  failed  to  find  him.  Not  more  surely  may  you  expect  a  harvest  where  you  have 
sown  good  seed  than  success  from  seeking  Christ.  It  prevails  With  the  uniform 
regularity  of  law.  "Then  shall  we  find  him  when  we  seek  him  with  all  the  heart." 
When  there  is  a  seeking  sinner  aud  a  seeking  Saviour,  they  are  sure  to  meet  ere  long. 
Calvary  is  an  old  trystiiig-place.  3.  Genuine  love  appropriates  Christ.  "  I  held  him." 
We  naturally  value  anything  a  great  deal  more  if  we  have  taken  many  pains  to 
acquire  it.  A  jewel  is  valued  for  its  rarity  as  well  as  for  its  intrinsic  beauty.  There 
is  but  one  Christ ;  hence  when  we  find  him  we  hold  him  fast.  But  in  what  way  can 
we  hold  him  ?  We  hold  him  by  frequent  communing  with  him.  We  hold  him  last 
when  we  hourly  try  to  please  him.  We  hold  him  if  our  love  is  strong  and  fragrant. 
We  hold  him  if  in  our  heart-garden  there  are  ripe  fruits  of  holiness.  We  hold  him  if 
there  is  harmony  of  purpose,  will,  and  life.  He  loves  companionship.  4.  Every  attempt 
of  .fesus  to  depart  is  energetically  resisted,  "I  would  not  let  him  go."  In  this  way 
jfesus  often  tests  our  love.  We  have  displeased  him,  and  he  rises  to  depart.  Then 
will  we  confess  the  evil  thing  ?  Will  we  make  some  fresh  self-sacrifice  in  order  to 
detain  him  ?  He  is  not  easily  offended.  He  hateth  putting  away.  But  he  loves  to 
gee  in  us  a  delicate  sensitiveness  of  feeling.  He  delights  to  find  a  tender  and  childlike 
afi'ection.  It  is  for  our  highest  good  that  he  should  be  appreciated.  As  he  did  at 
Emmaus  he  sometimes  deals  with  us:  "he  made  as  though  he  would  have  gone 
further;  but  they  constrained  bim."  And  now  he  gladly  yields  to  our  constraints.  It 
brings  him  delicious  joy  to  feel  the  embraces  of  our  love.  If  he  can  only  strengthen 
and  elevate  our  love,  he  has  conferred  on  us  the  verv  highest  good.  If  love  grows,  every 
grace  will  grow.  If  love  grows,  we  grow  like  Christ.  And  this  is  love's  firm  resolve, 
"I  would  not  let  him  go." 

111.  Jesus  made  known.  "Until  I  had  brought  him  into  my  mother's  house." 
1.  We  wish  our  best  friend  to  accompany  «s  everywhere.  The  genuine  disciple  desires 
to  take  Jesus  with  him  into  every  circle  and  into  every  occupation.  He  is  not  content 
to  have  Jesus  only  on  sabbath  days  and  on  special  occasions.  He  wants  Jesus  always 
at  bis  side — yea,  better,  always  in  his  heart.  He  has  no  friend  whom  he  cannot 
introduce  to  Jesus.  He  has  no  occupation,  no  recreation,  he  wants  to  keep  from  the 
eye  of  Jesus.  Into  every  chamber  of  the  house  Jesus  is  welcome.  He  is  a  fitting 
Guest  for  every  room,  a  fit  Companion  on  every  journey,  a  fitting  Partner  in  every 
enterprise.  We  do  all  things  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  2.  This  language  suggests 
benevolent  effort  for  our  households.  Love  is  generous.  Having  found  such  spiritual 
treasure  in  Jesus,  we  want  every  member  in  our  household,  viz.  children,  parents, 
servants,  to  share  in  the  "unsearchable  riches."  "I  brought  him  into  my  mother's 
house."  Happy  the  man  who  can  testify  that/  If  we  are  under  tremendous  obligations 
to  earthly  parents,  how  cau  we  better  discharge  the  debt  than  by  making  them  partakers 
of  Christ  ?  3.  This  language  suggests  our  usefulness  to  the  Church.  As  we  give  to  the 
imagery  of  this  book  a  spiritual  interpretation,  so  may  we  properly  regard  our  mother's 
house  as  the  Church  on  earth.  This  is  our  true  Alma  Mater.  We  bring  the  Bridegroom 
with  us  into  the  Church.  We  cannot  enjoy  our  piety  alone.  We  inspire  the  whole 
Church  with  a  nobler  life.  Our  sacred  love  to  Jesus  is  a  contagion.  Others  feel  the 
heavenly  charm,  and  they  desire  to  have  Jesus  too.  And  from  the  Church  the  benefit 
extends  to  the  whole  world.     Would  that  all  men  knew  our  Lord  1 — D. 


CH.  m.  1— 11.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  87 

Vers.  6 — 11. — The  King  coming  to  his  capital.  In  Asiatic  lands  wheeled  carriages 
were  rare,  and  are  rare  still.  This  is  accounted  for  by  the  absence  of  roads.  To 
construct  and  maintain  roads  through  a  hilly  country  like  Palestine  required  more 
engineering  skill  than  the  people  possessed ;  and  further,  there  was  a  general  belief 
that  to  make  good  roads  would  pave  the  way  to  military  invasion.  Hence  all  over 
Palestine  the  pathways  from  town  to  town  were  simply  tracks  marked  out  by  the  feet 
of  men  and  beasts.  Over  the  level  plain  of  Esdraelon  Ahab  might  ride  in  a  chariot ;  but 
if  Solomon  brought  up  wheeled  chariots  from  Egypt  he  had  a  prior  undertaking,  viz. 
to  make  a  road  from  Beersheba  to  the  capital.  Therefoie  travelling  princes  rode  in  a 
covered  palanquin,  which  served  to  screen  from  the  hot  sun  by  day,  and  became  a  bed 
at  night.  Owing  to  the  scorching  heat,  much  of  the  journey  would  be  taken  duriog 
the  cool  hours  of  night,  and  hence  the  need  for  a  strong  body-guard.  Before  the  rapi 
imagination  of  the  sacred  poet  such  a  scene  passed.  The  stately  procession  arrested 
his  attention,  and  he  asks,  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  What  great  king  is  this  ?  Such  is  the 
poetic  imagery.  Now,  what  is  the  religious  instruction  ?  It  is  the  march  of  Christ 
through  the  ages — a  march  beginning  with  the  wilderness  and  terminating  with  his 
coronation  in  the  new  Jerusalem.  Though  he  has  been  long  hidden,  the  day  is  coming 
when  the  King  of  Zion  shall  be  revealed  to  the  eyes  of  men,  and  he  shall  "  be  admired 
by  all  who  love  his  appearing." 

I.  Observe  the  march  op  Christ  to  his  glorious  throne.  1.  His  lowly  beginning 
is  indicated.  "  He  Cometh  out  of  the  wilderness."  This  is  how  he  appeared  to  the 
onlooker.  His  prior  state  was  hidden  from  mortal  eye.  So  far  as  men  saw,  Jesus 
began  his  strange  career  in  the  cattle-manger  of  a  stable.  The  world  to  him  was  a 
wilderness,  void  of  all  attractiveness.  In  this  respect  he  followed  the  fortunes  of 
ancient  Israel,  for  they  too  had  first  the  wilderness,  then  the  "  land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey."  When  Jesus  began  his  mission,  human  life  was  a  veritable  wilderness. 
The  beauty  and  joy  of  Eden  had  departed.  On  every  side  raged  jealousies,  hatreds, 
strifes.  The  civilized  world  was  under  the  iron  despotism  of  Rome.  The  prophets  of 
God  had  ceased  to  speak.  Hope  of  a  golden  age  had  almost  died  out,  except  in  a  few 
believing  hearts.  The  glory  of  Greece  and  Tyre  had  waned.  The  human  race  was  on 
the  verge  of  reckless  despair.  Our  earth  was  reduced  to  a  desert.  2.  Ohrisfs  coming 
was  fragrant  with  heavenly  hope.  Even  in  the  loneliest  desert  there  are  some  living 
plants,  and  these  ofttimes  possess  aromatic  essences.  The  shrubs  are  storehouses  of 
fragrant  spice.  The  sweetest  perfumes  come  from  the  Arabian  desert.  Such  things 
abate  the  mischief  of  noxious  miasma.  Bare  perfumes  refresh  the  senses,  and  betoken 
noble  rank.  The  mightiest  King  did  not  despise  the  sweet  odours  of  myrrh  and 
frankincense.  So  neither  did  Jesus  Christ  treat  with  contempt  the  simple  virtues  and 
courtesies  of  the  people.  He  stooped  to  learn  from  the  lips  of  Jewish  rabbis.  He 
gave  his  benediction  to  the  wedding-feast.  He  was  pleased  with  the  gratitude  of  a 
poor  leper.  He  commended  the  brotherliness  of  the  despised  Samaritan.  He  accepted 
the  hospitality  of  peasant  women.  He  praised  the  generosity  of  a  poor  widow.  A 
sweet  and  refreshing  savour  pervaded  all  his  words,  all  his  deeds.  Prom  his  cradle 
to  his  grave  he  was  perfumed  with  frankincense  and  myrrh.  3.  Sis  coming  was  a 
conspicuous  thing.  The  procession  was  seen  afar  off.  Possibly  the  flame  of  torches 
during  the  night-march  sent  up  in  front  and  in  rear  huge  pillars  of  smoke.  Or  possibly 
clouds  of  dust  from  that  dry  soil  rose  from  the  feet  of  the  host,  and  in  that  clear, 
transparent  air  was  seen  thirty  or  forty  miles  away — even  from  the  hills  of  Zion. 
Anyhow,  the  procession  is  seen  from  a  distance.  Curiosity  is  aroused.  Many  eyes 
are  turned  to  the  novel  spectacle,  and  the  question  leaps  from  lip  to  lip,  "  Who  is 
this?"  So,  too,  the  progress  of  Jesus  throuiih  our  world  has  excited  the  wonder  of 
successive  generations.  When  he  read  the  Scripture  in  the  rustic  synagogue  of  Nazareth, 
men  asked,  "  Who  is  this  ?"  When  he  fed  the  five  thousand  on  the  mountain-side,  or 
ruled  nature  with  a  nod,  they  asked,  "  Wtio  is  this  ?  "  When,  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost, 
the  whole  city  was  thrilled  with  astonishment,  men  asked,  "Who  is  this?"  At 
Corinth,  at  Ephesus,  at  Anfioch,  when  multitudes  left  th  ir  idols  for  the  new  faith, 
men  asked,  "  Who  is  this,  whose  onward  march  is  so  kingly,  so  triumphant?"  And 
still  they  ask  in  the  bazaars  of  India  and  in  the  temples  of  China,  "  Who  is  this?" 
His  march  is  the  march  of  a  Conqueror:  the  King  of  kings,  because  he  is  the  PrinoB 
of  Peace. 


88  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  m.  1— IL 

II.  Observe  his  bodt-guaed.  1.  This  is  a  ioJcen  of  peril.  But  the  peril  is  not 
that  of  open  war.  If  a  bannered  host  should  oppose  his  march,  he  would  meet  it  with 
his  invincible  forces.  Michael  and  all  the  powers  of  heaven  would  fight  his  battle.  It 
Is  nut  open  war.  The  foes  in  the  de.>ert  are  Ishmaelites.  They  seek  for  plunder. 
They  make  sudden  aud  covert  attack  in  the  night.  So  has  it  been  in  the  progress  ot 
our  Immanuel.  Prom  the  batid  of  his  owd  disciples  the  traitor  came,  and  came  by 
night.  Tlie  priests  of  Jehovah  were  his  worst  foes.  Professed  frieuds,  like  Ananias 
and  Sapi  ihira,  have  stabbed  his  cause  in  secret.  The  persecutors  of  his  gospel  have 
usually  laid  their  jjlots  in  the  dark.  Atheists  and  hypocrites  have  been  his  bitterest 
foes.  The  enemies  to  the  cause  of  heavenly  truth  still  lie  in  ambush.  2.  Variety  of 
service  can  he  rendered  to  our  gracious  King.  There  were  some  who  bore  on  their 
shoulders  his  palauquin;  some  who  carried  torches;  some  who  perfumed  his  Person; 
some  who  wielded  swords  in  his  defence.  And  various  service  is  needed  still.  If  one 
cannot  be  a  general  on  the  battle-fieldj  he  may  be  an  armour-bearer.  He  who  cannot 
fight  in  the  ranks  can  be  a  sentinel  at  the  gate  or  a  watchman  on  the  tower.  The 
child  wanting  yet  in  martial  strength  may  be  fleet  of  foot  as  a  messenger.  If  too  old 
for  field-service,  we  can  be  mighty  at  the  throne.  3.  The  life-guards  are  well  equipped. 
"  They  all  hold  swords."  And  iu  the  service  of  Immanuel  the  sword  is  keen  and  has 
a  double  edge.  In  the  olden  time  a  Damascus  blade  had  great  renown ;  but  the  sword 
of  truth  is  forged  and  furbished  in  heaven,  and  has  a  penetration  which  is  irresistible. 
If  once  we  get  this  sword  uf  truth  into  a  man's  conscience,  it  does  exploits  there.  The 
tongues  with  which  we  speak  winsomely  and  graciously  of  our  King  is  a  two-edged 
weapon.  The  pen  is  mightier  than  the  sword,  and  the  tongue  ol  fire  is  mightier  than 
the  pen.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  invincible.  4.  All  service  is  useful  in  this  King's 
progress.  It  made  the  maich  a  more  imposing  spectacle.  It  silenced  the  murmurers 
and  the  scomers.  Does  Jesus  Christ  require  human  service  ?  He  has  chosen  such 
plans  of  warfare  as  require  various  agencies  of  man.  He  prefers  to  work  through  feeble 
and  impel  feet  men,  for  thereby  he  confers  blessing  on  friends  and  on  foes  at  once. 
Through  exercise  our  spiritual  energies  become  more  robust.  Through  service  qui 
faith  and  love  are  tested.  The  more  fervid  zeal  we  bring  to  our  Master's  cause,  the 
more  honour  crowns  his  head.  We  serve  the  King,  we  serve  the  human  race,  we  aerve 
ourselves,  at  one  stroke.     Loving  service  is  the  richest  spiritual  perfume. 

III.  Note  his  palanquin.  It  is  made  of  cedar-wood  from  Lebanon;  the  bed  ig 
gold,  the  pillars  are  silver,  the  curtains  are  resplendent  with  imperial  purpie.  1.  This 
carriage,  or  palanquin,  may  fitly  represent  for  us  the  covenant  of  gjace.  In  this  our 
Immanuel  rides  triumphantly.  In  order  to  set  this  forth  so  as  to  impress  the  dull 
senses  of  humanity,  the  most  precious  things  of  earth  are  used  as  metaphors.  As 
cedar  is  the  richest  and  hardest  among  timber,  as  gold  and  silver  are  the  costliest  ot 
metals,  as  the  purple  colour  was  selected  for  royalty,  these  material  splendours  feebly 
adumbrate  the  eternal  covenant  oi  redemption.  Nothing  on  earth  can  adequately 
express  it.  It  is  notable  for  its  antiquity;  notable  for  its  rarity;  notable  for  its 
splendour;  notable  for  its  usefulness.  As  the  palanquin  must  be  made  worthy  of  a 
king,  the  covenant  of  grace  is  well  worthy  of  our  God.  To  .save  is  his  eternal  pm'pose. 
2.  The  curtains  were  the  handiwork  <f  virgins.  "Worked  by  the  daughters  of 
Jerusalem."  All  through  ihe  East,  women  are  despised,  down-trodden,  treated  as  an 
inferior  race.  If  iu  Western  lands  women  are  ennobled  and  honoured,  it  is  wholly  due 
to  the  grace  of  our  King.  So  from  the  very  beginning  Jesus  intimated  that  the  service 
of  women  would  be  acceptable.  He  was  dependent  on  an  earthly  mother's  care.  Once 
and  again,  women  ministered  to  him  "of  their  substance."  The  deed  whidh  he 
predicted  should  be  known  throughout  the  world  was  the  deed  of  a  woman.  Woaien 
gathered  round  his  cross  in  sweetest  sympathy,  while  others  laughed  aud  jeered. 
Women  performed  the  last  acts  of  care  for  his  dead  body.  Women  were  the  first  to 
greet  him  on  the  resurrection-morn.  "In  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  male  nor 
Icmale."  3.  These  curtains  and  carpets  are  adorned  with  emblems  of  love.  Our  version 
says,  "paved  with  love."  It  should  rather  be,  " inwrought  with  symbols  of  love." 
Just  as  in  our  day  meu  use  the  form  of  a  heart,  or  the  figure  of  a  fire,  to  denote  warm 
and  genuine  love,  so  some  device  of  love  was  interlaced  in  the  manufacture  of  these 
curtains  by  the  deft  fingers  of  devoted  women.  It  is  not  more  true  that  we  rest  in 
Christ's  lore  than  the  converse,  "  he  rests  in  our  love."    "  If  any  man  lore  me,  he 


OH.  m.  1—11.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  89 

will  keep  my  commandments :  and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto 
him,  and  will  malie  our  abode  with  him."  To  the  same  effect  we  read,  "  that  Christ 
may  dwell  in  your  hearts."     Love  has  a  thousand  devices  for  expressing  itself. 

IV,  Mark  the  adoration  which  bbwts  the  Kino.  "  Go  forth,  ye  daughters  of 
Zion,  and  behold  King  Sulomon."  In  some  respects  David  was  the  type  of  Christ. 
"He  was. despised  and  rejected  of  men,"  and  yet  a  mighty  king.  But,  in  respect  to 
the  magnlHcence  of  his  kin<;dom  and  the  peacefulness  of  his  reign,  Solomon  better 
prefigures  Jt-sus.  1.  To  appreciate  Jesus  as  King  we  must  know  him.  "  Go  forth, 
then,  and  behold  him."  Look  into  his  excellences.  Examine  his  claims  to  Kingship. 
Note  carefully  the  unstained  purity  of  his  character.  Behold  his  hands,  bearing  tlje 
marks  of  the  nails — marks  of  love  I  Behold  his  feet,  firm  "  as  fine  brass ;  as  if  they 
glowed  in  a  furnace,"  and  set  upon  the  serpent's  head.  Behold  his  heart,  still 
pulsating  with  everlasting  love  for  the  fallen  sons  of  men.  Learn  well  all  his  kingly 
qualities ;  for  no  true  loyalty,  no  complete  consecration,  can  spring  up  in  us  until  we 
know  him.  2.  Note  especially  that  he  is  crowned.  He  is  a|ipointed  to  this  supreme 
throne  as  the  world's  King  by  the  Eternal  Father.  "By  the  right  hand  of  God  he  is 
exalted."  Yet  the  symbols  of  his  reign  we  place  upon  his  head.  On  his  head  are 
already  "  many  crowns."  Every  ransomed  sinner  is  another  ornament  in  the  diadem 
of  our  King.  Never  did  king  wear  such  a  crown  as  this.  He  is  crowned  already  witli 
world-wide  renown.  Every  thorn  in  that  crown,  which  impious  mockeis  thrust  upon 
his  brow,  is  now  transmuted  into  a  ray  of  peerless  glory.  To-day  kings  and  princes 
bow  before  him,  and  already  his  "enemies  lick  the  dust."  Prom  a  hundred  enjpires 
the  shout  ascends,  "Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord!"  We  do 
not  hail  and  welcome  him  simply  as  the  Victim  of  the  cross ;  we  bow  to  him  as  our 
soul's  true  King.  3.  This  coronation  of  Jesus  is  attended  with  gladness  of  heart.  It  is 
not  always  so.  Sometimes  the  heir  to  a  nation's  crown  is  very  unfitted  to  wear  it. 
He  is  too  young  to  sustain  its  cares.  He  would  prefer  a  life  of  pleasurable  ease.  Or 
the  crown  itself  may  be  disgraced.  The  throne  is  planted  with  shaipest  thorns.  The 
empire  is  reeking  with  discontent.  That  coronation  may  be  no  better  than  a  crucifixion. 
Not  so  with  King  Jesus.  To  be  crowned  means  sticcess  for  his  great  redemptive 
mission.  "For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross."  As  his  grief 
was  unexampled,  so  shall  be  his  joy.  The  globe  shall  be  his  empire.  Because  his 
capacity  for  joy  is  infinite,  his  joy  shall  rise  until  the  capacious  heart  is  full.  The  joy 
will  be  eternal,  because  the  triumph  can  never  be  reversed. — D. 

Ver.  1. — The  soul's  love.  This  whole  book  is  a  glorification  of  love;  it  teaches  that 
human  love,  if  true,  is  sacred,  ennobling,  and  inspiring ;  it  shows  the  excellence  of 
human  love,  that  it  is  worthy  of  being  the  emblem  of  that  love  which  is  spiritual  and 
Divine.  As  St.  John  has  taught  us,  "  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God :  for  God 
is  love."  The  Object  of  the  Christian's  love  is  Christ,  in  whom  the  love  of  God  has 
been  revealed  and  communicated  to  us. 

I.  The  obounds  op  the  soul's  love  to  Christ.  The  soul  that  loves  the  Redeemer 
is  not  prompted  by  blind,  unreasonable  impulse ;  such  love  as  that  expressed  in  the 
language  of  the  text  is  rational  and  justifiable.  1.  The  soul  loves  Christ  for  his  own 
Divine,  unapproachable  excellence,  for  what  he  is  in  himself.  He  is  worthy  above  all 
to  be  thus  loved.  With  an  "  intellectual  love,"  as  the  English  Platonist  phrased  it, 
does  the  illumined  and  living  soul  love  him  who  is  the  Efi'ulgenoe  of  the  Father's  glory 
and  the  Revelation  of  the  Fnther's  heart.  2.  The  soul  loves  Christ  in  gratitude  for 
Divine  compassion,  ministry,  and  sacrifice.  The  cycle  of  Christian  doctrine  concerning 
the  Person  and  mediation  of  the  Redeemer  is  an  exhibition  as  much  of  God's  love  as 
of  his  holiness  and  his  wisdom.  What  our  Saviour  has  done  for  us  is  an  appeal  to 
the  soul  which  awakens  the  response  of  grateful  affection.  3.  The  soul  loves  Christ 
because  of  the  revelations  of  Divine  friendship  made  to  the  individual  nature.  The 
language  of  the  Canticles  is  rich  in  portraying  the  personal  element  in  the  relation 
between  the  Lord  and  humanity  as  redeemed  by  him.  And  every  Christian  is 
prompted  to  affection  by  those  intimate  displays  of  Divine  affection  which  experience 
records  in  the  recesses  of  the  spiritual  nature. 

II.  The  proofs  of  the  soul's  love  to  Christ.  An  emotion  such  as  this  cannot 
take  possession  of  the  mind,  and  dwell  in  the  mind,  without  becoming  a  principle, 


«0  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oH.ni.  1— 11 

controlling  and  inspiring  the  nature,  and  prompting  to  manifestations  of  marked, 
decisive  import.  1.  The  soul  keeps  him  whom  It  loveth  in  perpetual  memory.  2.  The 
soul  takes  an  ever-growing  delight  in  his  society;  places  the  highest  happiness  in 
spiritual  fellowship  with  Christ.  3.  The  soul  proves  the  sincerity  of  its  love  to  Chiist 
by  treasuring  up  his  precepts,  bv  seeking  to  live  under  the  inspiring  influence  of  his 
presence  and  character,  by  yielding  to  him  a  cheerful,  constant,  and  unquestioning 
obedience.  Whom  the  soul  loveth  the  hand  serveth,  the  tongue  witnesseth  unto,  the 
whole  life  honoureth  by  obeying  and  glorifying. — ^T. 

Vers.  2 — 4. — The  souVs  quest  rewarded.  The  romantic  incident  here  poetically 
related  has  usually  been  regarded  as  a  pictiue  of  the  experiences  through  which  many 
a  soul  is  permitted  to  pass  during  this  state  of  probation  and  Divine  discipline. 

I.  The  soul's  search.  1.  The  appreciation  of  Christ  involved  in  this  quest.  Men 
seek  for  gold  because  they  value  it ;  they  dive  for  pearls  and  dig  for  precious  stones. 
Multitudes  are  indifferent  to  the  Saviour  because  they  know  him  not ;  because  their 
s])iritual  susceptibilities  are  not  awakened.  But  those  to  whom  he  is  chief  among  tea 
thousand  cannot  be  satisfied  until  they  possess  him  and  enjoy  his  fellowship.  2.  The 
quest  may  be  both  earnest  and  prolonged.  The  desire  for  highest  good  is  amongst  the 
noblest  and  purest  of  all  human  characteristics.  And  seekin>i;  is  good,  even  though 
finding  be  better.  A  search  which  is  sincere  and  patient  is  in  a  sense  its  own  reward. 
And  there  are  those  whose  spiritual  experience  can  only  thus  be  justly  described.  It 
is  a  Imw  view  of  human  nature  which  looks  upon  such  high  quest  with  contempt ; 
which  takes  for  its  motto,  Nil  admirari — "  Not  to  desire  or  admire."  The  young  and 
ardent  will  do  well  to  make  the  search  after  God's  truth,  after  God  himself,  the 
occupation  of  their  life. 

II.  The  soul's  distress.  1.  Seeking  does  not  always  issue  in  speedy  finding.  The 
soul  may  seek  with  a  mistaken  purpose,  or  in  the  wrong  way,  or  with  a  misguided 
aim,  or  at  the  wrong  time,  i.e.  too  late.  2.  The  absence  of  the  sought  Saviour  is  the 
cause  of  distress  and  complaint. . 

"This  is  the  way  1  long  had  sought. 
And  mourned  because  I  found  it  not." 

There  is  no  repose  for  the  heart  until  Christ  be  found.  "  Cor  nostrum  inqnietnm  eit, 
donee  requiescat  in  te,"  says  St.  Augustine — "  Our  heart  is  restless  till  it  rests  in  thee." 
There  is  something  of  mystery  in  the  providential  arrangement  that  the  lot  of  man 
should  so  often  be  one  of  seemingly  fruitless  search  and  disappointed  endeavour.  Yet 
this  is  discipline  for  which  many  have  had  reason  to  give  thanks ;  it  has  called  forth 
courage,  it  has  braced  to  patience,  it  has  stimulated  aspiration,  it  has  sweetened 
success. 

III.  The  soul's  discovert.  1.  A  delayed  discovery.  The  soul  has  followed  hard 
after  him.  The  moment  of  revelation  has  been  again  and  again  deferred.  The  call 
has  been  loud,  but  has  met  with  no  answer  but  the  echo.  2.  A  promised  discovery. 
The  word  has  gone  forth  from  heaven,  "Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found." 
The  promise  has  been  proclaimed  by  Christ  himself,  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find."  He 
does  not  say,  "Seek  ye  iny  face  in  vain."  3.  A  gracious  discovery.  "I  found  him 
whom  my  soul  loveth."  How  condescending  the  revelation !  How  joyful  the  sight, 
the  apprehension,  the  hope's  fulfilment!  4.  A  discovery  which  the  soul  uses  for  its 
own  lasting  satisfaction.  As  the  bride  in  the  poem  "  held  "  her  spouse,  grasped  him 
by  the  arm  in  the  fulness  of  her  joy,  and  "  brought  him  into  the  house,"  there  to 
enjoy  his  society,  so  when  the  soul  finds  Christ  it  finds  in  him  One  who  satisfies  every 
deep  craving  of  its  nature.  And  to  find  him  is  to  retain  him,  not  as  a  wayfaring  man 
who  tarrieih  for  a  night,  but  as  an  inmate  never  to  be  displaced  from  the  heart,  a 
friend  to  go  no  more  out  for  ever. — T. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — The  Iridal  entry.  The  pomp  of  Oriental  poetry  is  nowhere  more 
dazzling  and  imposing  than  in  this  passage,  where  is  depicted  the  precession  of  the 
royal  bride,  who  is  escorted  with  magnificent  accompaniments,  and  welcomed  into  the 
metropolis  with  universal  and  cordial  joy.  Expositors  have  seen  in  this  gorgeous 
picture  a  description  of  the  dignity  and  beauty  of  the  Church,  the  bride  of  Christ. 


OH.  IV.  1 — 16.] 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON, 


91 


The  incense  rising  in  perfumed  clouds  heralds  the  approach  of  the  bridal  procession. 
The  palanquin  which  contains  the  bride  is  of  the  cedar  of  Lebanon ;  silver  pillars 
support  its  canopy  of  gold,  and  the  hangings  and  drapery  are  of  costly  purple.  The 
palanquin  itself  is  the  provision  of  the  king's  munificence,  and  the  ornaments  are  the 
gift  of  the  wealthy  ladies  of  Jerusalem.  Accompanying  the  festive  processioa  is  an 
escort  of  armed  and  valiant  warriors,  not  only  for  security,  but  for  state  and  dignity. 
The  royal  bridegroom  meets  and  joins  the  cortege,  having  upon  his  head  the  crown  of 
festivity  and  happiness,  for  it  is  the  day  of  his  gladness  of  heart.  The  daughters  of 
Jerusalem  go  forth  from  the  city  to  join  in  the  welcome,  and  to  swell  the  number  and 
add  to  the  dignity  and  attractiveness  of  the  bridal  train.  "Which  things  are  an 
allegory." 
L  The  Chttroh  is  summoned  to  quit  the  wildebness  of  the  would,  and 

BBCOME   the   bride   OP   OhEIST. 

II.  The  Chukoh  is  invested  bt  Divdib  liberality  with  all  that  can  con- 
tribute TO  hbb  spibitual  globt. 

III.  The  Chubch  in  her  passage  through  earth  is  accompanied  with  thb 

INCENSE   OF   DEVOTION  AND   OF   SEBVICE. 

IV.  The  Chubch  is  enviboned  with  Divinb  protection. 

V.  The  Chubch  is  the  object  of  Chbist's  affection  and  thb  occasion  of 
his  jot. 

VI.  The  Chubch  is  regarded  bt  angelic  intelligences  with  the  deepest 
intebest  and  satisfaction. 

VII.  The  CfiuBOH  is  assubed  of  an  eternal  house  vs  the  favour  and  oou- 

KONION  OF  THE  DiVINE   ElNG. — ^T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  rv. 


Ver.  I. — ^Behold,  thon  art  fair,  my  love ; 
bebold,  thou  art  fair;  thine  eyes  are  ai 
doves  behind  thy  veil ;  thine  hair  is  as  s 
flook  of  goats,  that  lie  along  the  side  of 
Mount  Gilead.  We  commence,  at  this  verse, 
the  loving  converse  of  the  bridegroom  with 
the  bride,  which  we  must  suppose  is  heard 
as  they  travel  together  in  the  bridiil  proces- 
sion. The  words  of  adoring  afiFection  are 
chiefly  spoken  by  the  bridegroom,  as  is 
natural  in  the  circumstances,  and  the  refer- 
ence to  the  journey,  and  its  consummation 
in  ver.  8,  make  it  certain  that  the  intention 
is  to  carry  us  in  thought  to  the  palanquin 
and  the  breathings  of  first  love  in  bridal  joy. 
The  poetry  is  exquisite  and  truly  Eastern, 
while  yet  absolutely  chaste  and  pure.  The 
praise  of  the  eyes  is  common  in  all  erotic 
poetry.  Her  eyes  gleam,  in  colour,  motion, 
and  lustre,  like  a  pair  of  doves  from  behind 
the  veil ;  showing  that  the  bride  is  thought 
of  as  travelling.  The  bride  was  always 
deeply  veiled  (see  Gen.  xxiv.  65),  as  the 
Roman  bride  ^otethevelum flamineum.  The 
LXX.  have  mistaken  the  meaning,  render- 
ing, iierhs  Tjjs  (nairlio'edis  aov.  The  veil 
might  typify  silence  or  reserve,  but  the  word 
is  tsammdh,  which  Is  from  a  root  "  to  veil," 
and  is  riglity  rendered  by  Symmachus 
KcUv/u/to.  The  hair  was  long  and  dark,  and 
lay  down  the  shoulders  uncovered  and  free, 
which  added  much  to  the  graceful  attraction 


of  the  bride.  In  later  times  it  waa  ens- 
ternary  for  the  hair  to  be  adorned  with  a 
wreath  of  myrtle  or  roses,  or  a  golden 
ornament  representing  Jerusalem.  The 
goats  in  Syria  and  tlie  neighbouring  ooun- 
tries  are  mostly  black  or  dark  brown,  while 
the  sheep  are  white.  Delitzsch  says,  "A 
flock  of  goats  encamped  upon  a  mountain 
(rising  up,  tu  one  looking  from  a  distance,  as 
in  a  steep  slope  and  almost  perpendicularly), 
and  as  if  hanging  down  lengthwise  on  its 
sides,  presents  a  lovely  view  adorning  the 
landscape."  It  would  be  especially  lovely 
amid  the  romantic  scenery  of  Gilead.  The 
verb  rendered  "  lie  along "  is  otherwise 
taken  by  the  LXX.,  direKoArf^Tjo-oy,  and  by 
the  Vulgate  ascenderunt.  The  rabliis  differ 
from  one  another  in  their  renderings.  One 
says,  "  wliioh  look  down ; "  another,  "  make 
bare,"  "  quit,"  or  "  descend ; "  another,  "  are 
seen."  The  modem  translators  vary.  Luther 
says,  "  shorn ; "  Houbigant,  "  hang  down ;  " 
Kleuken  and  Ewald,  "  shows  itself;  "  Gese- 
nius  and  otljers,  "  lie  down  ; "  Ginsburg, 
"ruUing  down,"  "running  down."  Our 
Bevised  Version  gives,  lie  along,  which  is  a 
very  probable  meaning.  The  reference  is  to 
the  luxuriance  and  rich  colour  of  the  hair. 
Gilead  would  be  a  recollection  of  the  bride's 
native  place. 

Ver.  2. — Thy  teeth  are  like  a  flock  of  ewes 
that  are  newly  shorn,  which  are  come  np 
from  the  washing  ;  whereof  every  one  hath 
twins,  aiid  none  is  bereaved  among  tltem.  Th« 


92 


THE  SONa  OF  SOLOMON. 


[CH.  lY.  1—16. 


Bimile  is  very  apt  and  beautiful.  Thy  teeth 
aie  perfectly  smooth,  regular,  and  white; 
the  upper  set  corresponding  exactly  to  the 
lower  set,  like  twin-births  in  which  there  is 
no  break  (of.  ch.  vi.  6).  The  moisture  of 
the  saliva  dentium,  heiglitening  the  glance 
of  the  teeth,  is  frequently  mentioned  in 
love-songs.  The  whiteness  of  wool  is  often 
used  as  a  comparison  (see  Isa.  i.  18  ;  Dan. 
vii.  9 ;  Eev.  i.  14 ;  Book  of  Enoch  xlvi.  1). 
Some  think  that  niaisp  should  not  be  ren- 
dered "newly  shorn,"  but  "periodically 
shorn  "  (see  Ginsburg) — a  poetical  epithet  for 
D'Sn).  The  newly  shorn  would  be  washed 
first.  Dftn,  "  to  be  double,"  "  to  be  pairs,"  in 
the  hiph.  is  "  to  make  double,"  "  to  make 
pairs,"  "to  appear  paired."  Perhaps  the 
reference  is  to  the  sheep  being  washed  in 
pairs,  and  going  up  side  by  side  from  the 
water.  This  would  seem  almost  more  exact 
than  the  idea  of  twin-lambs,  because  the 
difference  in  size  between  the  ewe  and  the 
Inmb  would  suggest  irregularity.  The  word 
n^;^?', "  deprived,"  "  bereaved  "  (Jer.  iviii.  21), 
may  point  merely  to  the  loneliness  of  the 
single  uheep  going  up  by  itself,  suggesting 
one  tooth  without  its  fellow.  Ginsburg  says, 
"  all  of  which  are  paired."  Each  l^eeps  to 
its  mate  as  they  come  up  from  the  pool. 
This  is  a  decided  improvement  on  the 
Authorized  Version.  But  the  figure  is  clear 
with  eitiier  rendering,  and  is  very  striking 
and  suggestive  of  the  pleasant  country  life 
to  which  the  bride  was  accustomed. 

Ver.  3. — Thy  lips  are  like  a  thread  of 
scarlet,  and  thy  mouth  is  comely;  thy 
temples  are  like  a  piece  of  a  pomegranate 
behind  thy  veil.  Scarlet;  that  is,  shining, 
glisteningred colour.  27j2^mo«<AC^i3^c).  Thy 
mouth  as  speaking.  So  the  LXX.,  Jerome, 
and  Venetian,  "  thy  speech,"  eloquium, 
conversation.  But  tliis  is  questioned,  as  it 
should  then  be  '^lU'j.  The  word  midlibar  un- 
doubtedly means  "  the  mouth,"  from  ddvar, 
"  to  speak,"  with  tlie  D  preformative,  as  the 
name  of  the  instrument.  It  is  the  preterite 
for  "^'E,  but  perhaps  as  referring  specially  to 
speecli.  Thy  temples;  Latin  tewpora,  fiora. 
the  adjective  pn, "  weak,"  meaning  the  thin 
piece  of  skull  on  each  side  of  the  eyes,  like 
tlie  German  sohlafe,  from  schlaff,  "  slack." 
The  inside  of  the  pomegranate  is  of  a  red 
colour  mixed  and  tempered  with  tlie  ruby 
colour.  Ginsburg,  however,  thinks  that  the 
cheeks  are  intended,  and  that  the  comparison 
is  with  the  outside  of  the  pomegranate,  in 
which  the  vermilion  colour  is  mingled  with 
brown,  and  resembles  the  round  clieek;  but 
then  why  say,  "piece  of  a  pomegranate"? 
nh&,  from  the  root "  to  cut  fruit "  (see  1  Kings 
iv.  39),  certainly  must  refer  to  the  cut  fruit 
and  the  appearance  of  the   inside.      The 


meaning  may  be  a  segment,  that  is,  so  as  to 
represent  the  roundness  of  the  cheek.  Pos- 
sibly the  reference  may  be  to  blushes  on 
the  bride's  cheek,  or  to  ornaments  which 
appeared  through  the  veil.  We  can  scarcely 
expect  to  make  out  every  particular  in  an 
Eastern  description, 

Ver.  4. — Thy  neck  is  like  the  towar  of 
David,  hnilded  for  an  armoury,  whereon 
there  hang  a  thousand  bucklers,  all  the 
shields  of  the  mighty  men.  There  is  an 
evident  change  here  in  the  character  of  the 
similitudes.  The  royal  bridegroom  does  not 
forget  to  praise  the  majesty  of  liis  biide. 
T-he  description  now  suits  a  royal  queen. 
She  is  full  of  dignity  aud  grace  in  her  bear- 
ing. The  tower  referred  to  was  no  doubt 
that  which  Wiis  sometimes  called  "  The  tower 
of  the  flock  "  (Micah  iv.  4),  that  from  which 
David  surveyed  the  flock  of  his  people  (cf. 
Neh.  iii.  16,  25)— the  government  building 
erected  on  Mount  Zion  which  served  as  a 
court  of  justice.  The  word  talpiyoth  is  an 
&ira^  Keydfieyov  ;  LXX,  6a\irtQ>6^  as  if  a  pro- 
per name.  Hengstenberg  would  render  it 
"built  for  hanging  swords,"  supposing  it 
composed  of  two  words — tal,  from  a  root 
"  to  hang,"  and  piyoth,  "  swords."  But  the 
word  piyoth  does  not  mean  "  swords,"  but 
the  "  double  edges  "  of  the  swords.  Kimchi 
renders,  "an  erection  of  sharp-comered 
stones."  G«senius  takes  it  from  two  roots, 
•'  to  perish  "  and  "  to  go,"  that  is,  exitialibus 
armis,  which  is  very  doubtful.  Ewald's 
explanation  seems  the  best,  "  built  for  close 
troops,  BO  that  many  hundreds  or  thousands 
find  room  therein,"  taking  it  from  a  root, 
connected  with  the  Arabic,  meaning,  "to 
wrap  together."  Delitzsch,  however,  ol  iserves 
that  both  in  Aramaic  and  Talmudic  Hebrew 
words  occur,  like  this,  in  the  sense  of  "  en- 
closure," I.e.  joining  togetlier,  one  working 
into  the  other,  so  that  it  may  be  taken  as 
meaning,  "in  ranks  together."  This  view 
is  supported  by  Doderlein,  Meier,  Aquila, 
Jerome,  Vulgate  (propugnacula),  and  Vene- 
tian (e7ro\|6is).  If  this  be  accepted,  it  may 
mean  "terraced,"  t.e.  built  in  stoiies  one 
above  another.  This  would  convey  the 
appearance  of  the  tall,  sitraight  neck  better 
than  any.  Surrounded  with  ornaments,  the 
neck  would  so  appear.  There  is  another 
suggestion,  supported  by  Ginsburg  and 
taken  from  Kashi  and  Kashbun,  Jewish 
writers,  that  the  word  is  a  contraction  for  a 
noun  meaning  "instruction,"  ami  means 
"  the  model  tower" — the  tower  built  for  an 
architect's  model.  It  would  be  rendered, 
"  built  for  the  builder's  model."  The  mean- 
ing "  armoury  "  takes  it  as  compo^ed  of  two 
words,  tael,  "  a  hill,"  and  piyoth,  "  swords." 
It  was  decorated  with  a  thousand  shields, 
which  was  a  customary  adornment  of  towers 
and  castles  (see  Ezek.  zxvii.  11).    All  the 


OH.  IV.  1—16.] 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


93 


shields  of  heroes.  "Wo  can  scarcely  doubt 
the  reference  in  such  words  to  the  time  of 
Solomon,  and  therefore  to  his  authorship,  as 
the  allusion  to  heroes,  or  mighty  men  of 
valour,  would  be  customary  soon  after  the 
time  of  David. 

Ver.  5. — Thy  two  breasts  are  like  two 
(awns  that  are  twins  of  a  roe,  which  feed 
ftmong  the  lilies.  This  is  a  beautiful  and 
yet  perfectly  delicate  figure,  describing  the 
lovely  equality  and  perfect  shape  and  sweet 
freshness  of  the  maiden's  bosom.  The 
meadow  covered  with  lilies  suggests  beauty 
and  frngianoe.  Thus  the  loveliness  of  the 
bride  is  set  forth  in  seven  comparisons,  her 
perfections  being  sevenfold.  "A  twin  pair 
of  the  young  of  the  gazelle,  lyinj»  in  a  bed 
covered  with  lilies,  representing  the  fragrant 
delicacy  and  elegance  of  a  chaste  virgin 
bosom,  veiled  by  the  folds  of  a  dress  redolent 
of  sweet  odour"  (cf.  ch.  i.  13).  The  bride- 
groom, having  thus  delighted  himself  in 
praise  of  his  bride's  loveliness,  then  proceeds 
to  declare  his  desire  for  hur  sweet  society, 
but  he  is  interrupted  by  the  bride. 

Ver.  6. — Until  the  day  he  cool,  and  the 
shadows  flee  away,  I  will  get  me  to  the 
mountain  of  myrrh,  and  to  the  hill  of  frank- 
incense. If  this  be  the  language  of  the 
bride,  n  hich  most  modern  iuterpi  eters  think, 
the  meaning  is  to  check  the  ardour  of  her 
lover,  in  the  modesty  of  her  fresh  and 
maidenly  feeling— Let  me  retire  from  such 
praises.  They  are  too  ardent  for  me.  It 
is  only  a  moment's  interruption,  which  is 
followed  by  still  more  loving  words  from 
the  bridegroom.  We  must  naturally  connect 
the  words  witli  ch.  ii.  17,  where  the  bride 
certainly  speaks.  Louis  de  Leon  thinks 
that  the  meaning  is  general,  "shady  and 
fragrant  places."  Anton  (1773)  suggests 
that  &be  is  desiring  to  escape  and  be  free. 
It  cannot  be  included  as  a  description  of  I  he 
neighbourhood  of  the  royal  palace.  She 
might,  however,  mean  merely — Let  me  walk 
alone  in  the  lovely  gardens  of  the  palace 
until  the  shades  of  night  shall  hide  my 
blushes.  It  is  unlikely  that  the  words  are 
in  the  mouth  of  Solomon,  for  then  it  would 
be  impossible  to  explain  their  use  by  Shula- 
mith  previously.  She  is  not  referring  to 
Lebanon  and  its  neighbourhood,  and  there 
can  be  no  idea  of  looking  back  to  a  lover 
from  whom  she  is  torn.  The  interpretation 
which  oonneols  it  with  maidenly  feeling  is 
certainly  the  most  in  harmony  with  what 
has  preceded.  Perhaps  the  typical  meaning 
is  underlying  the  words — Let  me  find  a 
place  of  devout  meditation  to  feed  my 
thoughts  on  the  sweetness  of  this  Divine 
love  into  which  I  have  entered. 

Ver.  7. — Thou  art  all  fair,  my  love ;  and 
there  is  no  spot  in  thee.  The  bridegroom 
speaks.    The  sweet  humility  and  modtsty 


of  the  bride  kindles  his  love  afresh.  He 
praised  the  loveliness  of  her  bodily  form, 
and  she  by  her  response  showed  the  exceed- 
ing loveliness  of  her  soul.  It  must  not  be 
forgotten  that,  whether  borrowed  from  this 
book  or  not,  such  lanj>;uage  is  undoubtedly 
employed  in  Scripture  of  the  Church,  the 
bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  who  is  described  as 
"  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
thing"  (Eph.  v.  27).  It  should  be  noticed 
that  the  king  immediately  addresses  his 
love  as  "  bride,"  and  "  sister-bride,"  to  sliow 
that  there  is  more  than  admiration  of  her 
person  in  his  thoughts.  She  is  his  by 
assimilation  and  by  eternal  union,  and  he 
invites  her  to  enter  fully  into  the  new  life 
which  he  has  prepared  for  her,  as  in  Ps  xlv., 
"forgetting  her  own  people,  and  her  father's 
house."  It  is  not  enough  that  feeling  should 
be  stirred,  or  even  that  it  should  take  pos- 
session of  the  soul,  if  it  be  only  feeling;  it 
is  required  of  us  that  our  inner  life  of 
emotion  should  become  practical  devoted- 
nesB,  "counting  all  things  but  loss"  for  the 
sake  of  him  we  love. 

Ver.  8. — Come  with  me  from  Lebanon,  my 
bride,  with  me  from  Lebanon:  look  from 
the  top  of  Amana,  from  the  top  of  Senir 
and  Hermon,  from  the  lions'  dens,  from  the 
mountains  of  the  leopards.  This  seems  to 
be  simply  the  bridegroom  rejoicing  over  the 
bride,  the  meaning  being,  "  Give  thyself  up 
to  me" — thou  art  mine;  look  away  from 
the  past,  and  delight  thyself  in  the  future. 
Delitzsch,  however,  thinks  that  the  bride- 
groom seeks  the  bride  to  go  with  him  up 
the  steep  heights  of  Lebanon,  and  to  descend 
witti  him  from  thence ;  for  while  ascending 
the  mountain  one  has  no  view  before  him, 
but  when  descending  he  lias  the  whole 
panorama  of  the  surrounding  region  lying 
at  his  feet.  It  is  stretching  poetical 
language  too  far  to  take  it  so  literally  and 
topically;  there  is  no  necessity  to  tliink  of 
either  the  lover  or  his  beloved  as  actually 
on  the  mountains,  the  idea  is  simply  that  of 
the  mountainous  region — Turn  thy  back 
upon  it,  look  away  from  it.  This  is  clearly 
seen  from  the  fact  that  the  names  connected 
with  Lebanon — Amana,  Senir,  Hermon — 
could  have  no  reference  to  the  bride's  being 
in  them,  as  they  represent  Anti-Libanus, 
separated  from  Lebanon  by  the  Coele-Syrian 
valley,  stretching  from  the  Hani  .s  north- 
wards to  the  plain  of  Hamath  ^^ee  2  Kings 
V.  12,  where  Amana  is  Abana,  overlooking 
Damascus,  now  the  Basadin).  Shenir,  or 
Senir,  and  Hermon  are  neighbouring  peaks 
or  mountains,  or  possibly  diflerent  names 
for  the  same  (see  Deut.  iii.  9).  In  1  Chron. 
T.  28  they  are  mentioned  as  districts. 
Hermon  is  the  chief  mountain  of  the  range 
of  Anti-Llbanus  on  the  north-east  border  of 
Palestine  (Ps.  fxxxix,  12).   The  wild  beasta 


94 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


[CH.  IT.  1—16 


abounded  in  that  district,  especially  lions 
and  panthers.  They  were  found  in  the 
clefts  and  defiles  of  the  rocks.  Lions,  how- 
ever, have  now  altogether  disappeared.  In 
the  name  Amana  some  think  there  is  an 
allusion  to  truth  (arn^ri)  (see  Hos.  ii.  22); 
but  that  would  be  too  obscure.  The  general 
intention  of  the  passage  is  simple  and  plain 
— Leave  the  rough  places,  and  come  to  my 
palace.  The  words  "with  me"  OfiN)  are 
taken  by  tlie  LXX.  and  Vulgate  as  though 
written  'n«,  the  imperative  of  nijlj,  "to 
come,"  as  a  word  of  invitation,  Sevpo.  The 
use  of  the  verb  'tjhan,  "thou  shalt  come," 
{.e.  thou  hast  come  and  be  content,  renders 
it  improbable  that  such  should  be  the  read- 
ing, whereas  the  preposition  with  the  pro- 
noun is  quite  in  place.  The  spiritual  mean- 
ing is  not  far  to  seek.  Tlie  life  that  we 
live  without  Christ  is  at  best  a  life  among 
the  wild,  untamed  impulses  of  nature,  and 
in  the  rough  and  dangerous  places  of  the 
world.  He  invites  us  to  go  with  him  to  the 
place  which  he  has  prepared  for  us.  And 
BO  the  Church  will  leave  its  crude  thoughts 
and  undeveloped  life,  and  seek,  in  the  love 
of  Christ  and  in  the  gifts  of  his  Spirit,  a 
truer  reflection  of  his  nature  and  will  (see 
Eph.  iv.  14 — 16).  The  Apocalypse  is  based 
upon  the  same  idea,  the  advancement  of  the 
kingdom  of  Clirist  from  the  place  of  lions 
and  panthers  to  the  new  Jerusalem,  with  its 
perfection  of  beauty  and  its  eternal  peace. 

Ver.  9. — Thou  hast  ravished  my  heart, 
my  sister,  my  bride ;  thou  hast  ravished  my 
heart  with  one  of  thine  eyes,  with  one  chain 
of  thy  neck.  The  bridegroom  still  continues 
his  address  of  love,  which  we  must  not,  of 
course,  press  too  closely,  though  it  is  notice- 
able that  the  language  becomes  somewhat 
more  sober  in  tone,  as  though  the  writer 
were  conscious  of  the  higher  application  to 
which  it  would  be  put.  Some  translators 
take  the  first  clause  as  though  the  word 
"ravished"  should  be  rendered  "embold- 
ened." Symmachus,  iSapirivas  /if.  The  He- 
brew word  33^,  literally,  "heartened,"  may 
mean,  as  in  Aramaic,  "  make  courageous." 
Love  in  the  beginning  overpowers,  unhearte, 
but  the  general  idea  must  be  that  of 
"  smitten  "  or  "captured."  So  the  LXX.,  Ve- 
netian, and  Jerome,  iKapSlaffas  /ne,  vulnerasti 
cor  meum  (cf.  Ps.  xlv.  6).  My  eister,  my  bride, 
is,  of  course,  the  same  as  "  my  sisterly  liride," 
a  step  beyond  "my  betrothed."  Gesenius 
thinks  that  "  one  of  thine  eyes "  should  be 
"  one  look  of  thine ; "  but  may  it  not  refer  to 
the  eye  appearing  through  the  veil,  as  again 
one  chain  of  the  neck  may  glitter  and 
attract  all  the  more  that  the  whole  orna- 
mentation did  not  appear  in  view  ?  If  but 
a  portion  of  her  beauty  so  overpowers,  what 
will  be  the  eflect  of  the  whole  blaze  of  her 


perfection?  As  the  Church  advances  in  her 
likeness  to  her  Lord,  she  becomes  more  and 
more  the  object  of  his  delight,  and  as  the 
soul  receives  more  and  more  grace,  so  is 
her  fellowship  with  Christ  more  and  more 
assured  and  joyful. 

Vers.  10,  11. — How  fair  is  thy  love,  my 
sister,  my  bride !  How  much  better  is  thy 
love  than  wine!  and  the  smell  of  thine 
ointments  than  all  manner  of  spices !  Thy 
lips,  0  my  bride,  drop  as  the  honeycomb; 
honey  and  milk  are  under  thy  tongue ;  and 
the  smell  of  thy  garments  is  like  the  smell 
of  Lebanon.  The  expression  of  thy  love,  that 
is,  the  endearments,  the  embraces,  are  de- 
lightful. The  allusion  to  the  lips  may  be  a 
mere  amplification  of  the  word  "  love,"  but 
it  may  also  refer  to  speech,  and  we  think  of 
the  nineteenth  psalm  and  the  description  of 
the  words  and  testimony  of  the  Lord, 
"  more  to  be  desired  than  gold,  and  sweeter 
tlian  honey  and  the  droppings  of  the  honey- 
comb "  (cf.  Gen.  iivii.  27;  Hos.  iv.  7; 
Ps.  xlv.  9).  The  words  of  pure,  inward  joy 
flowing  forth  from  the  lips  may  be  so  de- 
scribed. So  the  Lord  has  said,  in  Isa.  IxiL  5, 
that  he  rejoiceth  over  his  people  as  the 
bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  bride. 

Ver.  12. — A  garden  shut  up  is  my  sister, 
my  bride;  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fonntaia 
sealed.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  these 
words  are  supposed  to  be  spoken  on  the 
journey  in  the  marriage  procession.  The 
bride  is  not  yet  brought  to  the  ruyal  palace. 
Siie  is  still  travelling  in  the  royal  palanquiu. 
The  idea  of  a  paradise  or  garden  is  carried 
from  the  beginning  of  Scripture  to  the  end, 
the  symbol  of  perfect  blessedness.  The 
figure  of  the  closed  or  shut-up  garden  re- 
presents the  bridegroom's  delight  in  the 
sense  of  absolute  and  sole  possession — for 
himself  and  no  other.  The  language  is 
very  natural  at  such  a  time,  when  the  bride 
is  being  taken  from  her  home.  We  may 
compare  with  the  figures  here  employed 
those  in  Pro  v.  v.  15 — 20. 

Vers.  13, 14. — Thy  shoots  are  an  orchard 
of  pomegranates,  with  precious  fruits;  henna 
with  spikenard  plants,  spikenard  and  saffron, 
calamus  and  cinnamon,  with  all  trees  of 
frankincense ;  myrrh  and  aloes,  with  all  the 
chief  spices.  Thy  shoots;  i.e.  that  which 
comes  forth  from  thee,  thy  plants,  or,  as 
Bottcher  puts  it,  "all  the  phenomena  and 
life-utterances  of  her  personality."  All  the 
plants  had  their  meaning  in  fliwer  language. 
They  are  mostly  exotics.  But  it  is  difficult 
now  to  suggest  meanings,  though  they  may 
have  been  familiar  to  Jewish  readers  at  the 
time.  The  pardes,  "  park,  or  enclosure,"  was 
adorned  especially  with  foreign  and  fragrant 
plants  of  great  beauty.  It  is  an  Old  Persian 
word,  perhaps,  as  Delitzsch  suggests,  from 
pairi  (ircp!)  and  (i^z  (Pers.  diz),  "  a  heap." 


OH.  IV.  1—16.] 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


95 


Precious  fruit;  literally,  fruotui  laudum, 
"fruits  ttf  reuown"  or  excellence  (of.  Syriao 
magdo,  "dried  fruit").  The  carcom,  or 
saffron,  a  kind  of  crocus  (Ind.  iufran\  yields 
the  Siiffron  colour  frcim  ita  dried  flower-eyes, 
used  both  as  a  cosmetic  and  as  a  medicine 
(of.  Sanso.  kudkuma).  The  calamus,  simply 
a  reed,  the  sweet  reed,  a  corn  indigenous  to 
the  East.  Cinnamon  {Quinnamun),  Laurus 
einnamomum,  is  indigenous  on  the  east 
coast  of  Africa  and  Ceylon,  found  later  in 
the  Autibes.  The  inner  bark  peeled  off  and 
rolled  together  forms  the  cinnamon  bark 
(see  Pliny,  bk.  12).  There  are  seven  spices 
Uieiitioned.  We  need  not  trouble  ourselves 
to  identify  them  all,  as  they  are  mostly 
Indian,  and  such  as  Solomon  would  fetch 
from  the  far  East  in  his  celebrated  sliips 
The  description  is  highly  poetical,  and 
simply  means  that  all  sweetness  and  at- 
tractiveness combine  in  the  fair  one.  But 
symbolically  we  may  see  an  allusion  to  the 
•pread  of  the  Church  over  the  world,  and 
'■  all  the  glory  and  honour  of  the  nations  " 
being  introduced  into  it.  So  the  graces  of 
the  individual  soul  expand  themselves  under 
the  influence  of  Christian  truth  and  fellow- 
ship. 

Yer.  15. — Thon  art  a  fountain  of  gardens, 
a  well  of  living  waters,  and  flowing  streams 
from  Lebanon,  Referring,  of  course,  to  the 
clear,  cool  streams  coming  down  from  the 
snowy  heights.  The  sweet  freshness  of  the 
country  maiden  suggested  this.    May  we 


not  gee  a  symbol  of  the  spiritual  life  in  such 
language  (cf.  John  vii.  38)?  Ethically,  at 
least,  the  blending  of  the  fresliuess  of  a 
mountain  stream  witli  the  luxuriance  and 
fragrance  of  a  cultivated  garden  is  very 
suijaestive.  To  an  Eastern  monarch,  such 
purity  and  modesty  as  Solomon  found  in 
his  bride  must  have  been  a  rare  excellence 
which  might  well  be  made  typical. 

Ver.  Iti. — Awake,  0  north  wind;  and  come, 
thou  south ;  blow  upon  my  garden,  that  the 
spices  thereof  may  flow  out.  Let  my  beloved 
come  into  his  garden,  and  eat  his  precious 
fruits.  This  is  the  answer  of  the  bride  to 
the  lavish  praises  of  her  husband.  I  am  all 
his.  She  is  yet  unworthy  of  the  king  and 
of  his  love  until  the  seasonal  changes  have 
developed  and  unfolded  and  spread  forth 
her  excellences.  The  north  represents  oold ; 
the  south,  heat.  Let  the  various  influences 
from  different  quarters  flow  gently  over 
the  garden  and  call  forth  the  fragrance 
and  the  fruits  (cf.  Esth.  ii.  12).  Tiiere  is 
rich  suggestion  in  such  words.  Whether 
w^e  think  of  the  individual  soul  or  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  the  true  desire  of  those 
who  delight  in  the  love  of  the  Saviour  is 
that  all  the  gifts  and  graces  which  can  be 
bestowed  may  make  them  worthy  of  him 
who  condescends  to  call  his  people  his 
delight.  Surely  it  is  no  mere  romantic  idyll 
that  is  before  us.  Such  signiflcance  cannot 
be  a  mere  coincidence  when  it  i«  so  trani- 
parent  and  so  apt. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 6. — The  hridegroom  with  the  hride.  L  His  praise  op  the  bbise.  1,  The 
earthly  hridegroom.  The  bridegroom  rejoices  over  the  bride.  She  is  wholly  his.  He 
enumerates  her  beauties ;  they  are  very  precious  to  him ;  his  great  love  leaiis  him  to 
dwell  on  every  point.  The  love  of  the  espousals  (Jer.  ii.  2),  the  young  love  of  the 
newly  wedded,  is  a  beautiful  thing,  very  tender  and  touching;  it  leaves  a  fragrant 
memory  behind — a  memory  treasured  still  after  the  lapse  of  many  years,  when  the  love 
of  wedlock  has  become,  not  less  true,  not  less  blessed,  but  calmer  and  more  mellow ; 
and  perhaps  even  more  blessed,  when  no  jealousies,  no  quarrels,  have  tended  to  put 
asunder  those  whom  God  hath  joined  together,  but  love  has  continued  to  increase  with 
increasing  years,  with  less  and  less  of  earthly  passion,  but  more  and  more  of  holy 
tenderness  and  mutual  self-denials  for  the  loved  one's  sake.  Such,  alas  1  was  not  the 
love  of  Solomon.  The  fair  promise,  so  very  bright  and  beautiful  at  first,  was  soon 
blighted.  Corruptio  oplimi  pessima.  Nothing  in  this  world  is  more  beautiful  and 
blessed  than  that  holy  estate  of  matrimony  which  was  instituted  of  God  in  the  time  of 
man's  innocency,  which  God  has  consecrated  to  such  an  excellent  mystery  that  in  it  is 
signified  and  represented  the  spiritual  marriage  and  unity  betwixt  Christ  and  his  Church. 
And,  on  the  other  band,  nothing  is  more  degrading  and  ruinous  than  that  sensual 
passion  which  is  the  caricature  of  wedded  love.  The  early  goodness  of  Solomon,  the 
bright  promise  of  future  happiness  and  usefulness  which  gilded  his  youth,  excites  an 
interest  in  him  so  personal,  that  it  makes  us  feel  a  real  grief  and  disappointment  when 
we  read  that  "  King  Solomon  loved  many  strange  women;  "  that  "when  Solomon  was 
old,  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart;  "  that  "he  went  after  Ashtoreth,  the  abomination 
of  the  Zidonians ; "  that  he  "  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  And  so  it  came  to 
pass  that  that  bright  beginning  ended  in  utter  gloom,  in  the  mournful  cry  of  dis- 


9«  THE  SOSO  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  iv.  1—16. 

appointment.  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  saith  the  Preacher ;  all  is  vanity."  He  could  not 
find  satisfaction  in  his  wisdom  when  he  had  begun  to  fall  away  from  God.  He  found 
that  "in  much  wisdom  is  much  grief,  and  he  that  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth 
sorrow"  (Eccles.  i.  18).  And  so  the  wisest  of  men  betook  himself  to  pleasure.  "I 
said  in  my  heart,  Go  to  now,  I  will  prove  thee  with  mirth  ;  "  "I  got  me  servants  and 
maidens,  and  had  servants  born  in  my  house ; "  "I  gat  me  men-sinjeis  and  women- 
singers  ;  "  "  Whatsoever  mine  eyes  desired  1  kept  not  from  tliem,  I  withheld  not 
my  heart  from  any  joy"  (Bccles.  ii.  1,  7,  8,  10).  He  found,  as  they  that  are  lovers  of 
pleasure  rather  than  lovers  of  God  always  find  sooner  or  later,  that  all  this  was 
"  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,"  nothing  better  than  "  striving  after  wind."  "  There- 
fore," he  .says,  "I  hated  life;  because  the  work  that  is  wrought  under  the  sun  is 
grievous  nnto  me :  for  all  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."  And  this  is  King  Solomon, 
who  surpassed  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  for  glory  and  riches ;  who  was  wiser  than  the 
wisest  of  his  time;  who  had  won  in  his  youth  the  love  of  the  pure  and  innocent 
Shulamite ;  who  (and  this  is  the  saddest  thought  of  all)  once  loved  the  Lord  :  "  Solomon 
loved  the  Lord,  walking  in  the  statutes  of  David  his  father  "  (1  Kings  iii.  3).  While 
he  continued  to  love  the  Lord,  he  was  true,  we  must  believe,  to  the  wife  of  his  youth. 
One  who  walks  in  the  light  of  the  love  of  God  cannot  love  the  works  of  darkness,  can- 
not admit  into  iiis  heart  that  taint  of  impurity  which  so  utterly  shuts  the  soul  away 
from  the  love  of  God.  We  wonder  whether  Solomon  repented  as  his  father  David  did. 
We  know  that  God  warned  him,  and  chastised  him  for  his  sins,  but  we  know  also  that 
much  will  be  required  from  those  to  whom  much  has  been  given,  and  that  to  fall  from 
such  grace  as  had  been  bestowed  upon  Solomon  must  be  a  grievous  fall  indeed ;  to 
disobey  God  who  had  given  him  such  abundant  blessings  showed  a  depth  of  ingratitude 
which  utterly  startles  us,  till  we  learn  to  know  in  penitence  and  self-abasement  what 
Solomon  impressed  upon  others,  whether  he  felt  it  himself  or  not,  "the  plague  of  our 
own  hearts "  (1  Kings  viii.  38).  The  pure  love  of  wedlock  is  maintained  in  ever- 
growing affection  when  husband  and  wife  both  live  near  to  God.  "If  we  walk  in  the 
light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another  "  (1  John  i.  7).  That 
fellowship  which  "is  with  the  Father  aud  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ"  (1  John  i.  3) 
involves  of  necessity  the  holiest  grace  of  charity  in  our  mutual  relations  with  our 
brother  Christians ;  especially  those  whom  God  hath  joined  together  must  and  will,  if 
they  are  living  as  the  children  of  God,  live  together  in  holy  love  unto  their  lives'  end. 
We  wonder  whether  the  fair  Shulamite  lived  to  experience  the  change  in  her  royal 
bridegroom ;  if  she  did,  the  loss  of  his  affection  must  have  been  a  bitter  trial  indeed. 
Perhaps  God  in  his  mercy  took  her  to  himself  before  that  trial  came.  2.  The  heavenly 
Bridegroom.  It  is  the  will  of  the  Lord  Jesns  to  present  the  Church  unto  himself  as  a 
glorious  Church,  holy  and  without  blemish.  The  Lord  shall  rejoice  in  bis  works. 
Through  the  cleansing  power  of  his  most  precious  blood,  through  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  which  he  giveth  to  his  chostn,  the  Church,  his  bride  shall  at  the  last  be  " all 
glorious  within ; "  for  he  is  able  "  to  present  us  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory 
with  exceeding  joy  "  (Jnde  24).  Then  shall  there  be  joy  in  heaven,  when  the  Lord, 
who  endured  for  the  Church's  sake  the  great  agony  of  the  cross,  sees  the  reward  of  his 
bitter  Passion ;  when  he  looks  upon  the  Church,  a  glorious  Church  indeed,  no  longer 
marred  and  stained  by  sin  and  strife  and  error,  but  cleansed  and  purified  "  even  as  he 
is  pure"  (1  John  iii.  3),  made  like  unto  him  in  the  vision  of  his  love  and  holiness. 
Then  he  will  rejoice  over  her  as  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  bride.  "  In  that  day 
it  shall  be  said  to  Jerusalem  .  .  .  The  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is  mighty ; 
he  will  save,  he  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy;  he  will  rest  in  his  love,  he  will  joy 
over  thee  with  singing"  (Zeph.  iii.  16,  17).  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  will  rejoice  over 
his  bride  ;  he  will  see  in  her  the  beauty  of  holiness;  he  will  rejoice  in  her  graces.  She 
is  very  dear  to  him,  for  she  is  tlie  reward  of  that  long  anguish,  the  agony  and  bloody 
sweat,  the  bitter  cross  and  Passion.  And  now  she  is  wholly  his ;  she  has  left  all  other 
masters,  and  given  her  whole  heart  to  the  Lord  who  bought  her,  with  the  full,  pure, 
holy  love  which  she  has  learned  of  him — the  infinite  love.  3.  The  hride  must  make 
herself  ready.  (Rev.  xix.  7.)  Without  holiness  no  man  can  see  the  Lord.  The  holiness 
of  the  Church  consists  in  the  holiness  of  its  members.  We  must  follow  after  holiness, 
holiness  of  heart  and  life ;  for  without  the  wedding-garment,  the  white  robe  of  right- 
eousness, none  can  be  admitted  to  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb.    We  must,  each 


oe.it.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  97 

one  of  us,  make  ourselves  ready  and  prepare  to  meet  our  God.  The  Lord  rejoices  in 
the  holiness  of  his  p^'ople.  We  must  learn,  not  to  seek  glory  from  one  another,  not  to 
set  BO  muih  stire  on  human  praise,  but  to  seek  that  ^ilory  which  cometh  from  the  only 
God  (John  V.  44).  There  were  some  who  would  not  confess  the  Lord  Jesus  because 
"  thev  loved  the  praife  of  men  more  than  'he  praise  of  God  "  (John  xii.  43).  We  mnst 
look  onwards  to  the  praise  which  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  will  bestow  on  the  Church, 
his  bride;  then  shall  the  true  Israelite,  who  is  a  "Jew  inwardly,"  "whose  praise  is  not 
of  men,  but  of  God"  (Kom.  ii.  29),  have  praise  of  God  (1  Oor.  iv.  5).  We  must  seek 
that  praise  with  a  single  heart,  walking  with  God,  living  to  his  glory,  looking  for  tiu 
blessed  hour  when  we  trust  to  see  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  face  to  face. 

*•  He  lifts  me  to  the  golden  doors ; 

The  flaslies  come  and  go; 
All  Heaven  bursts  her  starry  floors, 

And  strews  her  lights  below. 
And  deepens  on  and  up  I  the  gatea 

Roll  back,  and  far  within 
For  me  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  waiti^ 

To  make  me  pure  of  sin. 
The  sabbaths  of  eternity. 

One  sabbath  deep  and  wide, 
A  liiiht  upon  the  shining  sea — 

The  Bridegroom  with  his  bride  I " 

n.  The  answbb  of  the  bride.  1.  She  must  withdraw  for  a  whtte.  She  repeats  in 
her  modesty  the  first  clause  of  her  own  words  in  ch.  ii.  17.  Then,  apparently,  she  asked 
her  lover  to  leave  her  till  she  had  fulfilled  the  routine  duties  of  the  day.  He  was  to 
return  when  the  day  should  be  cool,  and  the  shadows  should  lengthen  in  the  evening. 
Now  it  is  she  who  will  leave  her  Lord  for  a  time.  Perhaps  she  felt  herself  almost  over- 
burdened by  his  commendations ;  the  poor  country  maiden,  true  and  simple  as  she 
was,  could  scarcely  understand  such  praises  from  the  great  and  magnificent  king;  they 
were  too  much  for  her ;  she  must  retire  to  collect  herself.  When  the  Lord  commends 
the  faithful,  and  glorifies  their  works  of  love  as  done  unto  himself,  they  seem  oppressed, 
as  it  were,  for  a  season  by  the  greatness  of  his  praise.  They  were  only  doing  their 
duty ;  they  did  it,  all  of  them,  more  or  less  imperfectly ;  they  did  not  regard  those 
poor  works  of  theirs  as  so  exceeding  beautiful ;  they  did  not  think  that  they  had 
been  conferring  benefits  upon  the  Lord  himself,  that  they  had  so  greatly  pleaped  him ; 
they  were  humble,  self-distrustful;  they  seem  almost  to  shrink  from  the  praises  of  the 
King.  The  grace  of  humility  is  a  very  holy  thing ;  it  lies  at  the  entrance  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven ;  it  is  the  first  of  the  Beatitudes.  "  Not  he  that  commendeth  him- 
sell  is  approved,  but  he  whom  the  Lord  commendeth"  (2  Cor.  x.  18).  2.  Whither  the 
bride  retires.  "  I  will  get  me  to  the  mountain  of  myrrh  and  to  the  hill  of  frankincense." 
The  words  may,  taken  literally,  signify  some  retired  place  in  the  palace  garden,  as  many 
scholars  think ;  but  myrrh  and  frankincense  are  words  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Holy 
Scripture,  and  are  often  used  with  a  more  or  less  mystical  meaning.  The  Wise  Men 
from  the  East  brought  gold  .and  frankincense  and  myrrh  as  offerings  to  the  infint 
Saviour;  wine  mingled  with  myrrh  was  given  him  on  the  cross;  his  sacred  body 
was  laid  in  a  mixture  of  myrrh  and  aloes  brought  by  the  faithful  Nicodemus.  The 
mountain  of  myrrh  seems  to  suggest  the  necessity  of  purification  before  the  soul  can 
dwell  always  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  The  maidens  from  among  whom  the  Queen 
of  Persia  was  to  be  chosen  'lad  to  go  throu£;h  a  time  of  purification,  "  six  months  with 
oil  of  myrrh  "  (Esth.  ii.  12). '  It  tells  us  also  of  the  bitter  draught,  the  cup  of  sorrows, 
which  they  who  are  to  be  nearest  Christ  must  take.  "  Are  ye  able  to  drink  oi  the  cup 
that  1  must  drink  of?  "  Those  who  asi  ire  to  the  highest  places  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
mnst  learn  the  deepest  lessons  of  humility,  the  severest  lessons  of  entire  submission  of 
will  to  the  holy  will  of  God.  They  must  get  them  to  the  mountain  of  myrrh,  to  the 
cross.  Our  self-denials  are  small  and  un  worthy ;  the  cross  of  Christ  sets  belbre  us  a  moun- 
tain of  sell-sacrifice,  a  height  that  reaches  unto  the  heavens.  We  must  draw  nearer  and 
nearer  to  the  cross  in  daily  self-denial  and  self-abasement,  if  we  are  to  realize  at  last 
the  full,  deep  joy  of  uninterrupted  communion  with  the  Lord.     And  if  myrrh  mean* 

BONG   OF   SOLOMOK.  H 


98  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  it.  1—16. 

Belf-denial,  the  dying  unto  sin,  frankincenge  means  worship.  The  sweet  odour  of  the 
incense  going  up  from  the  golden  altar  is  a  meet  emblem  of  the  prayers  of  the  saints 
(see  Rev.  viii.  3,  4).  We  must  Ipam  the  blessed  lesson  of  worship  on  earth  before  we 
can  join  the  choir  of  happy  worshipfiers  around  the  glory-throne.  We  must  get  our- 
selves to  the  hill  of  frankincense,  to  the  Lord's  house,  where  the  incense  of  prayer 
and  thanksgiving  ever  ascends,  where  he  himself  is  in  the  midst,  among  those  who  are 
gathered  together  in  his  name.  There  we  may  be  trained,  if  we  come  in  the  Spirit  as 
Simeun  came  when  he  found  the  Lord  Christ,  in  that  holy  woiship,  worship  in  spirit 
and  in  truth,  which  is  the  true  preparation  for  the  glad  adoring  worship  of  triumphant 
saints  in  heaven.  Till  the  evening  of  life  comes,  till  the  shadows  lengthen  into  tho 
night,  we  must  get  ourselves  to  the  work  which  the  Lord  has  given  us  to  do — the  work 
of  self-discipline,  the  work  of  worship  here  below,  that  we  may  be  ready  when  ho 
cometh  to  take  our  part  in  the  never-ceasing  worship  of  heaven,  and  there  to  be  ever 
with  the  Lord. 

Vers.  7 — 16. — Further  conversation.  L  The  words  of  the  Bbideobooh.  1.  Eh 
entire  love  for  the  hride.  If  the  view  of  ver.  6  indicated  above  gives  the  true  meaning, 
the  bride  has  left  the  bridegroom  for  a  time.  In  the  evening  they  meet  ugain,  and  the 
king  again  expresses  his  affection :  "  Thou  art  all  fair,  my  love ;  there  is  no  spot  in  thee." 
Such  shall  the  Church  be  in  the  eyes  of  Christ,  when  he  has  sanctiSed  and  cleansed 
her  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word ;  when  she  is  clothed  in  the  fine  linen,  clean 
and  white,  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints;  when  he  "of  God  is  made  unto  her 
Wisdom,  and  Righteousness,  and  Sanctification,  and  Redemption  "  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  Such 
shall  the  saints  be  in  his  eyes  when  they  have  "  washed  their  robes,  and  made  them 
white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb;"  "they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God" 
(Rev.  xiv.  5).  But  it  is  Christ  who  has  cleansed  them.  They  were  stained  with  many 
sins,  as  David  was  when  he  cried  in  the  anguish  of  his  deep  penitence,  "  Purge  me 
with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean:  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow" 
(Ps.  li.  7).  We  have  sinned  w  long  and  so  greatly,  we  have  so  often  fallrn  back  into 
sin  after  imperfect  repentance,  that  to  be  "whiier  than  snow"  seems  a  hope  alto- 
gether too  high  for  us,  out  of  our  reach.  But  we  have  the  sure  Word  of  God.  He  is 
able  to  "  present  us  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory ; "  he  is  able  to  "cleanse 
us  from  all  unrighteousness;"  "the  Lamb  of  God  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the 
world."  Indeed  it  is  true  that  "  we  are  all  ab  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteous- 
nesses are  as  filthy  rags  "  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6),  but  we  may  have,  if  we  come  to  Christ  in  faith, 
"  that  righteousness  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ ; "  that  righteousness  which 
is  his,  not  our  own ;  and  yet,  if  we  abide  in  him,  it  becomes  through  his  grace  our  own ; 
for  it  is  given  to  us,  imparted  to  us,  infused  into  us  by  the  indwelling  influences  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God.  Then  we  may  dare  to  hope  for  that  spitless  righteousness;  we 
may,  we  must,  long  for  it  and  strive  after  it.  Not  to  do  so  is  not  humility,  but 
unbelief;  not  distrust  of  ourselves,  but  distrust  of  God;  for  we  have  the  sacred  word 
of  promise,  "Blessed  are  they  that  do  huni;er  and  thirst  after  righteousness:  for  they 
sliall  be  filled."  2.  Sis  invitation.  The  Hebrew  words  are  full  of  life :  "  With  me  from 
Lebanon,  0  bride,  with  me  from  Lebanon  shalt  thou  come."  The  bride  is  henceforth 
to  be  with  the  bridegroom,  with  him  always :  she  is  to  forget  her  own  people  and  her 
father's  house  (Ps.  xlv.  10, 11). .  She  is  to  come  away  from  her  old  haunts — from  Araana, 
Shenir,  and  Hermon ;  for  even  Hermon  in  all  its  grandeur  is  but  a  "  little  hill "  in  com- 
parison with  the  spiritual  glory  of  Mount  Zion,  where  God  is  pleased  to  dwell  (see 
Prayer-book  Version  of  Ps.  xlii.  6).  She  must  come  from  the  lions'  dens,  from  "the 
violence  of  Lebanon "  (Hab.  ii.  17),  to  Jerusalem,  the  foundation  of  peace.  The  Church, 
the  bride  of  Christ,  shall  be  in  the  eternal  blessedness  "  for  ever  with  the  Lord."  She 
shall  come  away  from  her  old  habitation,  the  earth  which  is  filled  with  violence 
(Gen.  vi.  11);  away  from  the  raging  of  the  roaring  lion,  who  walketh  about,  seeking 
whom  he  may  devour  (1  Pet.  v.  8),  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  city  of  the  living 
God.  And  the  Christian  soul,  which  looks  forward  in  living  hope  to  the  inheritance  of 
the  saints  in  light,  must  now  come  with  Christ  away  from  other  musters,  from  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh  and  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  piide  of  life.  "  To  depart  and  to 
be  with  Christ,"  St.  Paul  says  (Phil.  i.  23),  "  is  far  better  "—"by  much  very  far  better," 
for  such  is  the  full  meaning  of  the  emphatic  woids.     Then  the  soul  that  hopes  to  be 


OH.  IT.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  99 

with  Christ  in  Paradise  must  be  much  with  Christ  now ;  with  him  in  the  daily  life  ot 
faith,  in  prayer  and  praise  and  frequent  communion.  He  bids  us  come.  "  Come  unto 
me,"  he  says,  "  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  He  only  can  give  peace.  "  Peace  I  leave 
with  you ;  my  peace  I  give  >into  you :  not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you."  If  we 
listen  to  his  voice,  and  come  with  him  away  from  Lebanon,  which,  though  fair  to  look 
upon,  with  grand  and  wide-reaohing  prospects,  was  yet  the  haunt  uf  noisome  beasts;  if 
we  leave  the  love  of  the  world,  with  its  enticements  and  its  dangers,  for  the  blessed  love 
of  I  hrist,  we  shall  have  all  that  we  need  for  our  soul's  peace  and  safety.  " Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid."  3.  His  praises  of  the  hride.  He  calls  her 
repeatedly,  "My  sister-bride."  His  heart  is  hers;  every  little  thing  about  her,  the  very 
smell  of  her  garments,  is  dear  to  him ;  her  love  is  by  much  better  than  wine ;  her  voice 
is  sweet  as  honey.  He  dwells  now  less  on  graces  of  person,  as  in  vers.  1 — 5,  than  on 
her  looks  of  affection,  the  depth  and  beauty  of  her  love,  the  music  of  her  voice.  These 
words  tell  of  a  great  love  ;  but  the  love  of  Christ  for  his  Church  is  beyond  the  power 
of  language.  Solomon  left  his  first  love — he  loved  many  strange  women ;  but  the  love 
of  Christ  Tor  his  Church  is  "an  everlasting  love"  (Jer.  xxxi.  3),  unchangeable,  unutter- 
able. "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his 
friends ; "  but  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners, 
Christ  died  for  us "  (Rom.  v.  8).  And  because  he  loved  the  Church  with  so  great  a 
love,  the  responsive  love  of  the  Church  is  very  dear  to  him.  "  He  is  not  ashamed  to 
call  us  bretliren  "  (Heb.  ii.  11).  The  voice  of  the  Church  lifted  up  to  him  in  prayer 
and  praise,  making  melody  in  the  heart  unto  God,  is  sweet  to  the  Saviour.  He  praises 
the  sjracesof  the  Church,  though  those  graces  come  all  from  him;  they  are  his  gift.  He 
praises  in  the  Bo(jk  of  the  Revelation  the  Churches  of  Smyrna  and  Philadelphia  ;  he 
sees  the  beauty  of  holiness  in  those  afflicted  and  despised  Churches :  "  1  know  thy  works, 
and  t]  ibulation,  and  poverty,  but  thcju  art  rich  ; "  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I 
will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life ; "  "  They  shall  know  that  I  have  loved  thee ;  "  "  Him 
that  overcuraeth  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,  and  he  shall  go  no 
more  out:  and  I  will  write  upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,  and  the  name  of  the  city 
of  my  God,  which  is  new  Jerusalem,  which  cometh  down  out  of  heaven  from  my  God : 
and  1  will  write  upon  him  my  new  name  "  (Rev.  ii.  9,  10 ;  iii.  9,  12).  4.  He  compares 
her  to  a  garden  enclosed.  She  is  like  a  garden  shut  up,  barred  against  intruders,  kept 
sacred  fur  its  master's  use  ;  she  is  like  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed  as  with  the 
royal  signet  which  none  but  the  king  can  touch.  The  garden,  or  paradise,  is  full  of 
the  choicest  fruits,  flowers,  and  spice-bearing  plants,  the  produce  of  many  countries, 
some  of  them  brought  in  Solomon's  time  by  his  navy  from  Arabia  or  India.  The 
fountain  is  a  well  of  living  waters,  fresh  as  the  gushing  mountain-streams  of  Lebanon. 
Solomon  praises  the  bride  not  only  for  her  beauty  and  her  rare  endowments,  but  also 
for  her  purity  and  faithfulness.  The  "  garden  enclosed,"  the  "  fountain  sealed,"  remind 
us  of  our  marriage  vow :  "  Wilt  thou  .  .  .  forsaking  all  other,  keep  thee  only  unto 
him  so  long  as  ye  both  shall  live?"  Such  should  the  wedded  pair  be  each  to  the 
other ;  such  was  not  Solomon.  We  cannot  but  think  and  beheve  that  the  bride, 
innocent  and  artless  as  she  is  described,  kept  herself  pure  unto  the  end.  The  Church, 
which  is  the  bride  of  Christ,  should  be  as  a  garden  enclosed,  kept  sacred  for  the  one 
Lord.  The  garden  uf  Eden  was  a  garden  enclosed,  but  Satan  marred  its  sanctity;  he, 
in  the  words  ot  Milton, 

"  At  one  slight  bound  high  overleaped  all  bound 
Of  hill  or  highest  wall,  and  sheer  within 
Lights  on  his  feet.  .  .  . 

So  clomb  the  first  grand  thief  into  God's  fold ; 
So  since  into  his  Church  lewd  hirelings  climb." 

The  Lord  has  said,  "  He  that  entereth  not  by  the  door  into  the  sheepfold,  but  climbeth 
up  some  other  way,  the  same  is  a  thief  and  a  robber."  Again  he  has  said,  "  I  am  the 
Door :  by  me  if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved,  and  shall  go  in  and  out,  and 
shall  find  pasture."  They  who  are  called  to  minister  in  the  Church  of  God  must 
ever  remember  that  it  is  God's  Church,  that  "he  hath  purchased  it  with  his  own 
blood  "  (Acts  XX.  28) ;  that  it  should  be  "  a  garden  enclosed,"  kept  for  the  Master,  tilleil 
and  watered  for  him ;  that  every  barren  tree  should  be  carefully  tended,  that  it  may 


100  THE  SON&  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  iv.  1—16. 

bring  forth  fruit  before  the  awful  word  goeth  forth,  "  Every  tree  that  bringeth  not 
forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the  fli-e."  The  trees  in  the  Lord's  garden 
differ  much  from  one  another.  There  are  pomegranates  with  their  pleasant  fruit, 
henna  with  its  tragrant  flowers,  spikenard  with  its  costly  perfume,  frankincense  for 
sacred  uses ;  all  mauner  of  sweet  spices — myrrh  and  aloes,  which  tell  of  the  bitter  healing 
cup  of  sorrow,  which  point  to  death  and  burial.  I'he  saints  of  Grod  differ  much  from 
one  another.  Enoch,  Abraham,  Moses,  Daniel,  St.  Peter,  St.  John,  St.  Paul,  have  each 
his  own  place  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  All  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  but 
in  different  forms  and  degrees;  one  we  call  the  apostle  of  love,  another  the  apostle  of 
faith,  a  third  the  apostle  of  hope ;  "  but  all  these  worketh  that  one  and  the  selfsame 
Spirit,  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will "  (1  Cor.  xii.  11).  It  is  the  Lord 
himself  who  giveth  the  Spirit.  Mary  Magdalene,  on  the  first  Easter  Day,  supposed  him 
to  be  the  gardener  (John  xx.  15) ;  and  in  a  very  true  sense  he  is  the  Gardener  of  the 
garden  enclosed.  And  here  we  may  remember  that  it  was  in  a  garden  that  he  suffered 
that  dread  agony,  when  his  sweat  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  falling  down  to 
the  ground.  That  blood  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world ;  it  waters  the  garden 
enclosed  with  its  cleansing  stream.  And  again  we  are  told  that  "  in  the  place  where 
he  was  crucified  there  was  a  garden ;  and  in  the  garden  a  new  sepulchre,  wherein  was 
never  man  yet  laid.  There  laid  they  Jesus  "  (John  xix.  41).  The  Lord  suffered  in  a 
garden ;  he  has  purchased  with  his  own  blood  the  Church  to  be  his  own,  his  garden 
enclosed.  But  the  Chvircb  is  also  "  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed ; "  shut  up  in 
a  sense,  sealed  with  the  Master's  signet,  as  his  own  sacred  tomb  was  sealed  in  the 
garden  of  Joseph,  but  yet  (ver.  15)  "  a  fountain  of  gardens,  a  well  of  living  waters,  and 
streams  from  Lebanon."  The  fountain  is  sealed,  for  it  is  the  Lord's ;  it  hath  "  this 
seal,  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his.  And,  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  Name 
of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  But  its  living  waters  go  forth  to 
fertilize  the  Lord's  garden.  The  healing  waters  which  the  Prophet  Ezekiel  saw  in  his 
vision  issued  out  from  under  the  threshold  of  the  temple;  they  brought  fruitfulness 
wherever  they  went  "  because  their  waters  they  issued  out  of  the  sanctuary  "  (Ezek. 
xlvii.  1,  12).  In  a  true  sense  the  whole  world  is  the  Lord's  field :  "  The  field  is  the 
world  "  (Matt.  xiii.  38) ;  and  the  Church  has  the  Lord's  commandment,  "Go  ye  into  all 
the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  "  (Mark  xvi.  15).  The  well  is  the 
Lord's;  it  is  sealed  with  his  seal ;  but  the  living  waters  of  that  sacred  well  must  issue 
forth,  that  "  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  may  be  glad  for  them :  that  the 
desert  may  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose  "  (Isa.  xxxv.  1).  And  as  the  Church,  the 
bride  ot  Christ,  is  for  him  "a  garden  enclosed,  a  fountain  sealed,"  so  must  every  Christian 
soul  be  wholly  his.  "  We  are  Christ's,"  St.  Paul  says.  "  Whether  we  live  or  die,  we 
are  the  Lord's ; "  and  again,  "  God,  whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve  "  (Acts  ixvii.  23). 
Each  Christian  soul  must  keep  itself  as  "  a  garden  enclosed  "  ("  barred,"  or  "  bolted,"  is 
the  literal  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  word).  We  must  strive  earnestly  to  keep  out  earthly 
pas^ions,  earthly  ambitions,  and  every  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the 
knowledge  of  God.  We  must  keep  the  gate  barred  against  the  entrance  of  the  evil 
one.  And  we  must  take  heed  that  the  house  be  not  left  empty ;  it  must  be  kept  for 
"a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit"  (Eph.  ii.  22).  We  must  strive  to  keep  out 
worldly  cares,  coming  to  God  in  all  our  troubles,  whether  great  or  small,  that  so  the 
peace  ff  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  may  keep  (guard,  protect)  our  hearts 
and  though  IS  through  Christ  Jesus.  The  garden  must  be  barred;  the  peace  of  God 
must  rule  there  (Col.  iii.  15) ;  and  it  must  bring  forth  fruit,  the  blessed  fruit  of  the 
Spirit,  which  is  "  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meek- 
ness, temperance  "  (Gal.  v.  22).  The  tree  that  beareth  not  fruit  must  be  hewn  down 
at  last ;  it  cumbereth  the  ground ;  "  every  brani  h  that  beareth  not  fruit  is  taken  away." 
How  carefully,  then,  we  ou^ht,  every  one  of  us,  to  watch  for  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  in 
our  daily  life,  to  see  in  diligent  self-examination  whether  we  are  exhibiting  these 
holy  graces  in  our  Christian  walk  and  conversation ;  and  if,  alas  I  we  find  them  not, 
how  earnestly  we  ought  to  pray,  with  fervent,  untiring  supplication  for  the  help  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God  to  work  within  us,  to  assist  our  prayers,  to  make  intercession  for  us 
with  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered,  to  lead  us  nearer  to  Christ,  that  we  may  ever- 
more abide  in  bim,  without  whom  we  can  bear  no  fruit,  without  whom  we  can  do 
nothing  I     The  garden  needs  the  living  water ;  the  saint  of  God  is  a  fountain  sealed. 


ch.it.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  101 

The  living  water  is  the  Lord's ;  it  hears  his  seal.  The  Lord  himself  is,  in  the  truest 
sensOj  the  "Fountain  opened  ...  for  sin  and  for  unoleanness"  (Zech.  xiii.  1);  with 
him  is  "the  fountain  of  life"  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9).  He  leadeth  his  redeemed  to  living 
fountains  of  waters  (Rev.  vii.  17).  But  they  who  have  received  from  him  the  living 
water  hecome  themselves  fountains,  as  the  Lord  hath  said,  "  Whosoever  drinketh  of  the 
water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never  thirst;  hut  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him 
shall  he  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  And  again,  "  If 
any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink.  He  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the 
Scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  helly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water"  (John  iv.  14 j 
vii.  37,  38).  The  saint  of  God  is  indeed  "  a  fountain  sealed,"  sealed  with  the  Lord's 
seal,  dedicated  wholly  unto  him ;  "  a  spring  shut  up  "  from  all  other  waters  save  only 
the  living  water  which  the  Lord  giveth,  not  "a  fountain  which  sends  forth  at  the 
same  place  sweet  water  and  hitter"  (Jas.  ii.  11).  But  he  must  he  "a  fountain  of 
gardens  "(ver.  15);  he  that  is  watered  of  God  must  water  the  thirsty  ground  (Prov. 
xi.  25).  St.  Paul,  who  had  received  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  from  the  Lord,  passed  on  the 
living  waters  to  Apollos ;  Apollos  watered  the  garden  of  the  Lord  at  Corinth  (1  Cor. 
iii.  6).  So  must  all  God's  people  do.  They  know  in  their  own  hearts  more  or  less  of 
that  holy  calm,  and  blessedness  which  the  living  waters  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit 
(John  vii.  39)  bring  to  the  faithful ;  they  must  do  their  best  to  extend  to  others  the 
blessings  wliioh  they  have  themselves  received;  they  must  pray  and  labour  for  the 
spiritual  well-being  of  those  nearest  to  them,  within  the  sphere  of  their  personal 
influence ;  they  must  do  their  best  to  help  missionary  work  through  the  world,  resting 
not  till  "  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the 
sea"  (Isa.  xi.  9).  But  each  must  keep  himself  as  "a  fountain  sealed  "  for  the  Lord 
and  the  work  of  the  Lord,  that  at  the  last  he  may  be  sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  living 
God,  and  stand  on  the  Mount  Zion  among  the  mystic  hundred  and  forty  and  four 
thousand  who  have  the  Lamb's  Name  and  hie  Fathei^s  Name  written  in  their  foreheads 
(Rev.  vii.  2,  3 ;  xiv.  1). 

IL  The  voice  op  the  bride.  She  accepts  the  bridegroom's  parable.  She  is  a 
garden  enclosed.  She  calls  upon  the  winds,  north  and  south,  to  blow  upon  the  garden, 
that  the  fragrance  of  its  spices  may  flow  forth  to  give  pleasure  to  the  bridegroom. 
The  garden  is  hers;  for  it'is  herself,  her  love.  And  yet  it  is  the  bridegroom's,  for  she 
has  given  herself,  her  love,  to  him ;  she  invites  him  to  come  into  his  garden,  and  eat 
bis  pleasant  fruits.  So  the  Church,  the  bride  of  Christ,  longs  for  the  heavenly  Bride- 
groom ;  so  each  Christian  soul  seeks  the  Saviour's  presence.  The  soul  that  would  give 
itself  wholly  to  the  Lord  as  a  garden  barred  against  all  other  masters,  and  enclosed  for 
his  use,  strives  ever  to  please  him  more  and  more ;  she  would  have  her  inward  life  of 
prayer  and  meditation  and  spiritual  communion  with  him  to  become  more  and  more 
pleasing  to  him,  more  and  more  fragrant.  Therefore  she  calls  for  the  north  wind  as 
well  as  the  south  to  blow  upon  the  i;arden,  that  the  spices  thereof  may  flow  out.  She 
is  willing  to  submit  to  the  cold  blasts  of  adversity,  as  well  as  to  be  refreshed  with  the 
soft  breezes  of  joy  and  holy  gladness.  She  knows  that  God  will  make  all  things,  joy 
and  sorrow  alike,  to  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  him  (Rom.  viii.  28). 
Therefore  slie  prays  only  that  his  will  may  be  done  in  her,  whether  by  chastisements  or 
by  spiritual  joy  and  blessin,^.  She  would  have  the  garden  bring  forth  more  fruit,  even 
though  it  must  be  purged  with  the  pruning-knife  of  affliction.  For  the  garden,  though 
it  is  herself,  her  own  heart,  is  yet  the  Lord's ;  for  she  has  given  it  to  the  heavenly 
Bridegroom ;  therefore  she  yearns  for  his  irradiating  presence,  praying  him  to  enter  into 
his  garden,  and  eat  his  pleasant  fruits. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7. —  What  Christ  sees  in  those  who  love  him.  As  a  mere  story,  these  verses 
may  be  taken  as  a  further  attempt  on  the  part  of  King  Solomon  to  win  her  to  whom 
he  speaks  for  himself.  Therefore  he  extols  her  beauty.  Her  eyes  like  the  beautiful 
eyes  of  the  Syrian  dove ;  her  dark  glossy  hair  like  that  of  the  goats  that  browse  on 
the  slopes  of  Mount  Gilead ;  her  teeth  white  as  the  newly  cleansed  wool,  as  even  and 
regular  as  is  the  fleece  that  has  been  first  shorn,  and  perfect  as  is  the  breed  of  sheep 


102  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  nr.  1—16, 

he  tells  of;  her  lips  ruddy ;  her  mouth  so  comely ;  her  cheeks  rosy  red,  like  the  opened 
pomegranate ;  her  neck  graceful,  and  adorned  with  precious  jewels ;  and  so  on.  Even 
her  home,  hecause  it  is  her  home,  is  as  a  hill  bearing  trees  of  myrrh  and  frankincense, 
and  thither  would  he  resort.  And  he  sums  up  his  description  by  declaring  that  she 
is  "  all  fair  " — that  there  is  no  blemish  in  her.  Now,  on  such  flattery,  cf.  on  ch.  i.  9 — 
ii.  7.  But  had  these  verses  no  other  meaning  than  this  literal  one,  we  cannot  think 
they  would  have  found  place  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Therefore  we  take  them  as 
setting  forth,  under  their  rich  Oriental  colouring,  the  blessed  truth  that,  in  the  sight 
of  their  Lord,  his  people  are  without  blemish,  "  all  fair."  It  is  the  same  truth  as  was 
meant  by  that  at  present  unloved  phrase,  "  imputed  righteousness."  And  that  it  is 
unloved  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  its  meaning  has  been  grossly  perverted,  and  made  to 
stand  for  ideas  dishonouring  to  God  and  disastrous  to  the  spiritual  life  of  men.  But 
in  reality  the  phrase  means  just  that  which  in  these  verses  is  allegorically  set  forth. 
In  interpreting  these  verses  it  is  not  the  right  or  reverent  way,  though  many  have 
followed  it,  to  affix  some  definite  meaning  to  every  detail  of  the  description  given,  but 
to  take  the  description  as  a  whole,  as  attesting  the  beauty  of  the  redeemed  in  the  sight 
of  their  Lord.  Therefore,  though  some  have  interpreted  the  dove's  eyes  as  the  eyes 
that  are  ever  towards  the  Lord  in  holy  desire ;  and  the  hair  as  the  unshorn  locks  of 
the  soul's  consecration  to  Christ ;  and  the  teeth,  undecayed  and  perfect,  as  the  faith 
which  feeds  on  Christ;  and  the  lips  as  those  of  one  once  leprous,  but  now  purified  by 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  and  so  like  a  scarlet  thread ;  the  blushing  temples  no 
longer  bold  and  brazen,  but  suffused  with  crimson  as  the  pomegranate,  telling  of  the 
soul's  true  repentance;  the  neck,  tall,  stately,  graceful,  strong,  telling  of  the  liberty 
and  courage  Christ  has  given  the  soul ;  the  breasts  of  the  twin  graces  of  faith  and  love, 
which  Paul  says  are  the  believer's  breastplate ; — all  this  (cf.  Stuart),  though  interesting 
and  ingenious,  appears  to  us  unnecessary  and,  in  some  hands,  injurious.  We  therefore 
take  the  description  generally,  and  note — 

I.  The  fact  that  Christ  does  eeoard  as  beautiful  the  redeemed  soul.  She 
is  spotless  in  his  sight.  He  says,  "  The  glory  thou  gavest  me  I  have  given  them." 
Christ  is  made  unto  us  "  Righteousness  and  Sanctification."  He  shed  his  blood  that 
his  Church  might  be  "a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,"  etc.  (Bph.  v.  27).  He  will 
present  us  "  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory  "  (Jude  24).  "  Now  ye  are  clean 
through  the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto  you,"  said  our  Lord  (cf.  also  1  Cor.  vi.  11). 
And  if  he  did  not  so  regard  his  people  and  count  them  "  precious  in  his  sight "  (Isa.  xliii.), 
wherefore  should  he  have  done  and  suffered  for  them  all  that  he  has?  Whatever  we 
make  sacrifices  for  we  count  beautiful.  Our  love  pierces  through  the  outer  husk  of  cir- 
cumstance and  evil  habit,  and  sees  the  beauty  within ;  and  it  is  for  that  we  will  make 
sacrifice  if  need  be.  And  so  with  our  most  blessed  Lord — ^his  eye  of  love  pierced 
through  the  often  hideous  husk  of  men's  vile  habits  and  ways  to  the  soul  on  which 
his  heart  was  set,  that  he  might  redeem  and  save  it,  and  make  it  beautiful,  like  his 
own.  And  when  that  soul  turns  to  him  in  trust  and  penitence,  then  at  once  that  soul 
is  "  all  fair  "  in  his  sight,  and  "  there  is  no  spot  in  "  it. 

II.  Why  should  he  not  ?  Men  say,  "  It  is  wrong  to  represent  God  as  seeing  other- 
wise than  according  to  the  truth  of  things.  Therefore  to  say  of  a  soul, '  There  is  no 
spot  in  it,'  when  we  know  that '  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  to  the  crown  of  the  head 
there  is  no  soundness  in  it '  (Isa.  i.),  this  is  to  introduce  unreality  and  make-believe 
into  the  most  sacred  regions.  But  look  at  the  mother's  joy  in  her  babe.  Whence 
comes  that?  Is  it  not  largely  the  loving  onlook  she  takes  into  the  future  of  that 
child  ?  She  sees,  or  at  least  believes  she  sees,  that  child  grown  up  in  purity,  intelli- 
gence, goodness,  and  all  that  is  lovely  and  lovable.  She  is  a  believer,  and  you  cannot 
move  her,  in  imputed  righteousness ;  for  what  is  she  doing  but  imputing  all  that 
righteousness  to  her  babe  ?  See  the  shipbuilder  in  his  yard.  There  is  a  ship  in  its 
earliest  stages  of  construction.  You  can  see  nothing  but  chips  and  dirt  and  confusion. 
But  he  sees  that  ship  in  her  completion — in  all  her  strength,  the  beauty  of  her  lines, 
and  all  the  perfectness  which  he  intends  shall  belong  to  her.  And  he  "imputes"  to 
her  all  that.  And  so  with  our  Lord.  Ha  sees  all  that  the  soul  shall  be  when  he  ha? 
perfected  the  "  good  work  "  which  he  has  already  begun  for  and  in  it.  This  is  why, 
even  now,  it  is  fitting  that  he  should  see  and  say,  "  There  is  no  spot  in  thee." 

UL  And  what  if  an  does  ?    There  is :  1.  All  consolation  for  the  anxiotu,  mis- 


OH.  IV.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  103 

trusting  soul.  The  soul  is,  as  it  well  may  be,  often  overwhelmed  with  the  sense  of  its 
own  vileness  and  sin.  It  clings  to  Christ  with  the  grasp  of  all  but  despair.  What  a 
help  to  know  that  Christ's  estimate  of  us  is  not  our  own  I  How  often  we  are  able  to 
help  a  man  up  by  letting  him  see  that  we  believe  in  him,  notwithstanding  he  has 
done  wrong!  Arnold's  word,  "Trust  a  boy,  and  he  will  become  trustworthy,"  is 
most  true.  The  fact  we  are  considering  is  not  only  full  of  consolation,  but  full  of 
help  to  us  poor  sinful  men.  2.  Inspiration  far  the  letter  life.  If  Christ  thinks  me 
so,  1  will  strive  to  become  so.  Is  this  his  ideal  for  me?  I  will,  in  his  strength, 
strive  to  realize  it.  3.  The  enkindling  and  constant  rekindling  of  ow  love  for 
Christ— S.  0. 

Ver.  6. —  Where  Christ  is  now.    "  Until  the  day  break,"  etc. 

I.  By  this  is  meant  the  present  life.  It  does  not  matter  whether  the  words  be 
taken  as  telling  of  the  time  until  the  day  break  or  until  the  day  close.  In  the  former 
case,  the  speaker  would  mean  that  all  the  night  long  he  would  be  on  the  mountains  of 
myrrh,  etc. ;  but  in  the  latter,  he  would  mean  that  until  the  day  were  done  he  would 
be  there.  It  matters  not,  for  the  present  life  may  be  likened  to  either  night  or  day. 
If  to  the  night,  then  night-time  is  meant  to  suggest  the  darkness  in  which  men  live. 
As  to  knowledge :  "  We  see  through  a  glass,  darkly."  As  to  happiness :  "  Man  is  born 
to  trouble."  As  to  the  use  of  life:  men  choose  to  walk  in  darkness.  The  land  sits 
"  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death,"  because  they  who  dwell  in  such  land  are  in 
that  deep  spiritual  darkness  of  which  the  prophet  tells,  ff  to  the  day,  then  as  the  time 
for  toil,  the  season  for  diligent  work,  the  period  during  which  the  busy  affairs  of  men 
are  transacted — such  is  our  life  so  long  as  it  continues.  On  either  interpretation  the 
present  life  is  meant. 

II.  The  place  where  during  this  life  we  mat  find  Christ.  On  "  the  mountains 
of  myrrh,"  etc.  By  this  is  meant,  not  heaven,  for  we  cannot  ascend  into  heaven ;  and 
the  place  told  of  here  is  evidently  a  place  accessible.  Therefore  we  take  the  "  moun- 
tains of  myrrh,"  etc.,  to  mean  the  Church  (cf.  Isa.  ii.  2).  And  there  are  many  other 
Scriptures  in  which  the  Church  is  likened  to  hills  or  mountains  (Ps.  Ixviii.  15,  16 ; 
Ixxxvii.  1 — 3,  etc.).  Some  have  thought  that  the  throne  of  grace,  the  place  of  prayer, 
is  meant— and  so  it  is ;  but  more  than  that  is  Included.  Nothing  less  than  the  Church 
of  Christ.  And  the  similitude  employed  here  is  just.  For  the  Church  is  as  a  moun- 
tain. 1.  For  elevation.  The  Church  should  be  above  the  world.  Hence,  in  the 
magnificent  minsters  which  adorn  this  and  other  lands,  the  sacred  fabric  towers  in 
lordly  height  far  above  all  the  dwellings  that  cluster  around  it.  It  symbolizes  this 
very  truth.  Our  Lord  said,  "  Te  are  a  city  set  on  a  hill."  2.  For  visibility.  "  Which 
cannot  be  hid."  Goodness  ever  betrays  itself;  like  him  from  whom  it  comes,  and  of 
whom  it  was  said,  "  He  could  not  be  hid."  Does  the  visibihty  consist  in  anything 
else  but  character?  Is  not  the  Church  the  company  of  all  the  good?  3.  For  its 
majesty.  It  is  God's  vicegerent  here  on  earth.  By  it  "  kings  rule,  and  princes  decree 
justice."  Kings  were  its  nursing  fathers  and  queens  its  nursing  mothers  (cf.  Isa.  Ix.). 
4.  For  its  immovability.  (Ps.  cxxxv.  1.)  "  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against 
it,"  said  our  Lord.  And  here  it  is  to-day,  and  it  never  seemed  more  likely  to  continue 
than  it  does  to-day.  5.  Fur  its  fruitfulness.  The  mountains  and  hills  told  of  are  not 
mere  rocky  heights,  stony  and  barren,  but  rich  and  fruitful,  their  sides  covered  with 
noblest  trees.  "  They  that  be  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  6.  For  it* 
delightfulnesa.  Myrrh  and  frankincense  are  the  product  of  its  trees,  and  make  the 
whole  place  fragrant,  precious,  full  of  delight  to  him  who  dwells  or  comes  there  (cf. 
"  The  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion  more  than,"  etc.).  Christ  loves  to  be  there,  and 
his  people  love  to  meet  him  there.  For  it  is  the  place  of  accepted  prayer,  of  hallowed 
communion,  of  adoring  worship,  of  manifold  spiritual  help.  And  there  Christ  is  to 
be  found.  He  is  there  according  to  his  Word,  in  his  unseen  but  real  presence,  and  in 
his  gracious  power.     Myriads  attest  this.     Therefore — 

III.  We  should  seek  him  there.  The  verse  seems  to  be  a  suggestion  to  this 
effect.  To  forsake  the  assemblies,  communion,  and  fellowship  of  the  Church  is  to 
suffer  great  loss.  Some  say,  "  We  can  pray  at  home ; "  and  when  they  must  be  at 
home  no  doubt  they  can,  but  when  they  need  not  be  we  doubt  if  many  do.  And  when 
we  think  of  the  treasure-store  of  help  that  is  gained  by  them  who  seek  the  Lord  in  bia 


10»  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  it.  1—16. 

Church,  who  get  them  to  the  mountain,  etc.,  where  he  is,  we  commiserate,  even  whilst 
we  condemn,  those  who  never  get  themselves  there  at  all. — S.  0. 

Ver.  7. — 2%e  immaculate  soul.  "  Thou  art  all  fair,  my  love ;  there  is  no  spot  in 
thee."  This  word  has  many  parallels ;  of.  "  Ye  are  clean  through  the  word  which  I 
have  spoken  unto  you ; "  "  Ye  are  washed,  justified,  sanctified  ;  "  "  Ye  are  complete  in 
him ;  "  "  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus,"  etc.  Now,  how 
can  all  this  be  ?     We  reply — 

I.  Through  the  estimate  which  love  forms  op  that  which  it  loveb.  (Cf. 
former  homily,  on  vers.  1 — 7.) 

II.  Through  the  blood  of  Christ,  which  "  cleansbth  us  from  all  sin."  Christ 
is  our  Eepresentative,  the  second  Adam.  Our  connection  with  him  becomes  vitalized 
when  our  hearts  trust  in  him.  But  he,  in  and  by  his  death — ^his  blood — made  perfect 
confession  of  our  sins,  and  in  that  confession  absorbed  them  (of.  McLeod  Campbell  on 
the  Atonement).  Forgiveness,  therefore,  follows  for  all  in  him;  and  thus  we  are 
cleansed. 

III.  Through  the  power  of  the  Holt  Ghost.  He  is  ever  acting  on  our  hearts, 
to  lead  them  along  the  various  stages  that  will  bring  us  to  perfect  purity,  to  complete 
sanctification.  He  works  in  us  that  deep  sense  ot  sin  which  leads  to  a  genuine  repent- 
ance. He  reveals  Christ  to  us,  which  leads  to  a  livint;  trust.  He  inspires  us  with  love 
to  Christ,  which  leads  to  the  surrender  of  our  will.  He  prompts  us  to  and  aids  us  in 
prayer,  which  perpetuates  and  deepens  every  holy  purpose.  He  keeps  us  in  touch  with 
Christ,  which  bars  the  entrance  ot  sin  to  our  souls.  He  makes  all  the  means  of  grace 
full  of  help  to  our  souls.     Thus  step  by  step  the  blessed  work  is  done. 

IV.  Through  Christ's  gracious  anticipation  of  the  completed  work.  He  looks 
on  us,  not  as  we  are,  but  as  we  shall  be,  and  predates  what  has  yet  to,  but  certainly 
shall,  be  realized. 

Conclusion.  What  a  motive  all  this  supplies  to  our  earnest  striving  to  coma  up  to 
our  blessed  Lord's  ideal  1 — S.  C. 

Ver.  8. — The  beautiful  hut  dangerous  world.  For  once  the  literal  and  allegorical 
interpretation  largely  agree.  For  both  represent  the  places  spoken  of  here  as  full  of 
peril,  and  both  desire  the  beloved  one  to  "  come  away  "  from  them,  and  promise  delivei^ 
ance  if  she  wUl  come.  Let  the  peril  of  delivering  her  be  what  it  may — as  dens  of  Uons 
and  leopards — yet  will  he  accomplish  it.    Allegorically  we  may  read  here — 

I.  Christ's  description  op  the  world.  It  is :  1.  Beautiful  to  look  upon.  Some 
of  the  finest  scenes,  the  most  glorious  landscapes  the  world  can  show,  are  to  be  seen 
from  the  mouTitain  summits  named  here.  The  view  is  entrancing,  so  travellers  say. 
And  the  world  is  to  the  young  soul  fair  indeed.  But :  2.  It  is  full  of  peril  also.  The 
dizzy  heights,  the  steep  cliffs,  the  lofty  crags  of  mountainous  regions,  demand  a  ste<idy 
head,  well-balanced  nerves,  a  sure  foothold.  The  inexperienced  may  not  venture  there. 
Death  and  destruction  track  the  footsteps  of  the  traveller  on  such  heights,  and  if  he  be 
not  well  trained,  they  have  him  for  their  prey.  The  spiritual  analogy  is  illustrated  by 
only  too  many  sad  experiences.  To  preserve  the  soul's  balance  on  the  heights  of  the 
world's  prosperity,  how  difficult  for  all !  how  impossible  for  most  1  "  How  hardly  shall 
they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven ! "  "  Man,  vain  man,  dressed 
in  a  little  brief  authority,"  etc.  But  the  special  perils  named  here  are  the  beasts  of 
prey.  These  have  their  haunts  in  these  mountains  (cf.  Exposition).  In  all  languages 
and  literatures  the  designation  of  evil  men  by  the  name  of  some  noxious  beast  is 
common  (cf.  Psalms ;  also  our  Lord's  word,  "  Go,  tell  that  fox ; "  and  in  the  Scriptures 
passim).  And  the  world  is  full  of  such  creatures — pitiless,  cruel,  fierce,  ravenous, 
terrible.  Smooth  and  soft  and  sleek  as  a  leopard,  so  long  as  you  are  able  to  defy  them ; 
but  fall  down,  be  at  their  mercy,  and  what  mercy  will  you  get?  "The  tender  mercies 
of  the  wicked  are  cruel;"  yes,  cruel  as  lion,  leopard,  or  any  beast  of  prey.  Ask  the 
world's  victims  what  mercy  they  have  received.  Let  the  soul  once  give  the  world  a 
chance,  and  the  world  will  drive  it  hellward  with  relentless  cruelty.  There  is  no  mercy 
there.  What  a  contrast  to  "tbe  ranuntain*  of  myrrh"  (ver.  6)!  "No  ravenous 
beast  shall  be  there;"  "They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain" 
(Isa.  iixv.  9). 


oh.it.  1—ie.J  THE  SON(J  OF  SOLOMON.  105 

II.  Christ's  promise  op  help.  "  Come  with  me."  His  Word  is  full  of  such  promises 
and  of  the  records  of  their  fulfilment  (cf.  histories  of  Joseph,  Moses,  Nehemiah,  Daniel, 
etc.).  And  it  is  the  experience  of  every  Christian  soul.  Christ  does  not  take  us  out 
of  the  world,  but  he  keeps  us  from  the  evil.  He  keeps  us  "  as  the  apple  of  his  eye ; " 
hides  us  "under  the  shadow  "  of  his  wing  (cf.  Ps.  xci.).  He  knows  what  he  will  do, 
therefore  he  says,  "  Come  with  me." 

III.  The  condition  op  that  help.  We  must  "  come  with  "  him.  Some  wonder 
that  he  invites  us  at  all ;  that,  loving  the  soul  as  he  does,  he  should  leave  it  any  choice 
as  to  whether  it  will  or  will  not  come ;  that  he  does  not  deal  with  us  as  a  father  who 
would  compel,  not  merely  invite,  his  child  to  come  out  of  the  burning  house.  So  gome 
wonder  that  Christ  does  not  compel  the  soul,  carry  it  off  by  force.  No  doubt,  in  the 
literal  story  of  this  song,  he  who  spoke  was  prepared  to  do  this  by  her  whom  he  appeals 
to.  But  Christ  says,  "  Come  with  me."  He  solicits,  entreats,  invites.  For  there  can  be 
no  deliverance  of  the  soul  unless  there  be  the  response  of  its  own  will.  Even  Christ 
cannot  save  without  that.  If,  as  is  the  case  so  sadly  often,  men  "  will  not  come  unto  " 
him  that  they  "  might  have  life,"  they  have  it  not.  And  that  response  of  the  will  is 
from  faith  in  Christ's  Word  as  to  our  peril  and  his  loving  power.  Then  ponder  that 
Word ;  pray  to  know  the  truth ;  the  Divine  Spirit  shall  teach  you,  and  soon  the 
response  Christ  desires  will  be  given. — S.  0. 

Vers.  9 — 15. — "  Cur  Deus  homo  ? "  In  these  verses  the  beloved  tells  her  whom  he 
has  come  to  deliver  wherefore  he  would  run  all  this  risk  and  endure  so  much  for  her 
sake.  And  reading  them  as  an  allegory,  we  may  take  them  as  setting  forth  why  and 
wherefore  God  became  Man ;  why  "  he  who  was  rich  for  our  sakes  became  poor."  And 
amongst  these  rensons  are — 

I.  His  INTENSE  LOVE  FOR  VS.  The  speaker  tells  in  ver.  9  bow  but  a  small  portion 
of  the  beauty  and  of  the  adornments  of  her  whom  he  so  loved  had  "  ravished"  his 
heart,  had  filled  him  with  intense  desire  for  her.  And  translated  into  the  style  and 
teaching  of  the  gospel,  this  tells  of  the  heavenly  joy  (Luke  xv.)  over  the  repentance — 
the  very  beginning,  the  smallest  portion  of  the  beauty,  of  Divine  grace  in  the  soul. 
"  Behold,  he  prayeth,"  was  said  of  the  persecuting  Saul  to  the  Christ-taught  Ananias, 
who  immediately  rejoices,  and  is  ready  to  receive  as  "  brother  "  him  who  had  been  but 
a  few  hours  before  as  a  wolf  coming  to  make  havoc  of  the  flock  of  Christ.  A  very  little 
thing — the  mere  beginnings  of  grace — and  yet  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  Ananias  leapt 
for  joy. 

II.  The  soul's  hesponsb.  (Ver.  10.)  That  which  Christ  sees  in  the  souls  he  has 
redeemed  gratifies,  refreshes,  and  deliiihts  him.  As  wine,  as  perfumes,  as  all  spices. 
Precious  is  the  soul's  response  of  love  to  Christ.  See  how  he  asks  for  it.  "  Lovest 
thou  me  ?  "  was  thrice  said  to  Peter.  It  is  to  him  "  the  greatest  thing  in  the  world  " 
(cf.  1  Cor.  xiii.,  "  The  greatest  of  these  is  love  ").  What  argument  this  is  for  the  love 
that  is  in  Christ !  We  reason  back  from  the  known  likings  and  preferences  of  a  man 
to  what  he  is  himself.     So  reasoning,  what  will  not  our  Lord  appear  ? 

III.  Hee  gracious  words.  (Ver.  11;  cf.  parallels,  Prov.  xvi.  24;  Ps.  oxix.  103.) 
It  is  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh.  And  the  utterances  of 
loving  adoration,  of  contrite  confession,  of  pleading  prayer,  of  grateful  praise — these 
are  well  pleasing  in  his  esteem.     How  true  the  sabbath  evening  hymn — 

"  And  not  a  prayer,  a  tear,  a  sigh, 

Hath  failed  tliis  day  some  suit  to  gain; 
To  those  in  trouble  thou  wert  nigh— 
Not  one  hath  sought  thy  face  in  vain." 

Yes,  as  the  honeycomb,  sweet;  as  milk  and  honey,  delicious  and  healthful,  so  are 
the  fruits  of  the  lips  of  the  redeemed  soul  to  Christ.  We,  therefore,  can  give  him 
delight.  It  must  be  so.  For  we  know  we  can  "  grieve  "  him ;  but  if  we  can  grieve 
him,  we  can  also  give  him  joy ;  and  it  is  thus  we  do  so. 

IV.  The  fraobancb  op  her  life.  "  The  smell  of  thy  garments  is,"  etc.  (ver.  11). 
The  garments  are  the  symbol  of  those  outward  acts  and  deeds  which,  as  it  were,  clothe 
and  characterize  the  man.  We  know  men  by  their  dress ;  their  garb  bespeaks  their 
occupation,  tells  what  their  work  is.     Now,  the  holy  deeds  of  the  redeemed  soul  ore 


106  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.iv.  1— 16. 

as  fragrmce,  full  of  a  sweet  acceptableness  to  Christ  (cf.  Matt,  xxv.,  where  it  is  told 
how  the  loving  acts  of  his  people  done  to  the  poor  and  needy  for  his  sake  are,  though 
so  trifling  in  themselves,  so  wonderfully  recompensed).  Thus  the  lives  of  his  people 
diffuse  a  fragrance  most  acceptable  to  him  in  whose  name  they  are  done. 

V.  Hee  fidelity.  (Ver.  12.)  The  soul  of  the  believer  belongs  to  Christ.  It  is 
his  possession — a  garden  closed,  open  only  to  him.  All  manner  of  intruders  seek  to 
find  entrance  there,  and  some  of  them  seem  for  a  while  to  succeed ;  but  Christ  sees 
that  in  deed  and  in  truth  the  soul  owns  only  him  as  her  Lord.  You  can  force  the 
needle  of  a  compass  right  round,  so  that  it  should  point  the  reverse  of  its  right  direc- 
tion ;  but  take  your  hand  off,  and  back  it  swings  to  where,  if  left  to  itself,  it  always 
would  be.  And  so  with  the  soul  of  the  believer.  The  violence  of  the  world,  the  flesh, 
or  the  devil,  or  all  combined,  often  make  the  soul  seem  to  belong  to  any  one  rather 
than  Christ.  But  he  sees  how  it  is,  and  knows  that  when  that  violence  is  withdrawn 
the  Boul  will  surrender  itself  again  to  him,  with  cries  and  prayers  and  tears  that  it 
may  nevermore  belong  to  any  but  to  him,  and  him  alone. 

VI.  The  so0l's  eich  feuit.  (Ver.  13.)  What  these  are,  are  told  of  here  under  the 
imagery  of  the  fruits  of  an  Oriental  garden ;  and  in  Gal.  v.  22  as  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit. 
Like  the  fruits  this  ver.  13  speaks  of,  they  are  precious,  fragrant,  healthful,  abundant, 
delightful,  varied,  beautiful,  and  spontaneous.  Such  are  the  fruits  he  desires ;  and, 
"  supposing  him  to  be  the  gardener,"  such  as  he  would  surely  have  in  his  garden. 

VII.  The  ministries  of  the  soul.  (Ver.  15.)  The  grace  of  the  redeemed  soul  is 
not  confined  to  itself;  it  flows  out  to  others.  Allusion  seems  to  be  made  in  this  verse 
to  the  fountains  of  Solomon,  which  were  "  fountains  of  gardens."  And  we  are  reminded 
of  our  Lord's  words  as  to  the  "  well  of  water  "  which  should  be  in  his  people,  and  which 
should  spring  up  in  them  "  unto  everlastin;;  life."  And  because  our  Lord  foresaw  that 
through  the  souls  he  redeemed  so  many  others  should  be  blessed — each  one  becoming 
"  a  fountain  of  gardens,"  a  well  of  living  waters  for  the  help  and  salvation  of  others — 
herein  is  another  reason  why  God  became  man.  It  was  part  of  "  the  joy  set  before  him," 
for  which  he  "endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame."  Raskin  tells  how  in  the  slime 
taken  from  a  city  lane  you  have  clay,  soot,  sand,  and  water.  Submit  these  to  the  laws 
of  crystallization,  and  the  clay  becomes  sapphire,  the  sand  becomes  opal,  with  blue 
green,  and  golden  hues ;  the  soot  becomes  a  lustrous  diamond,  and  the  water  crystallizes 
into  that  thing  of  beauty,  a  snow-star.  And  more  than  science  sees  in  any  city  slime 
Christ  sees  in  the  soul,  sunken  in  the  mire  of  sin  though  it  be,  which  he  redeems. 
Already  he  sees  the  flashing  of  the  jewels  into  which  he  will  transform  it,  and  will 
place  in  his  diadem  for  ever:  such  is  part  answer  to  the  question,  "Cur  Deus  homo?" 
— S.  C, 

Ver.  16. — "  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus  1 "  This  is  the  state  of  mind  produced  by  the 
consciousness  of  Christ's  gracious  estimate  of  us.  We  can  scarce  believe  that  it  is  as 
he  says,  but  that  he  counts  us  such  makes  us  long  to  be  such.  Therefore  in  this  verse 
we  may  hear  the  cry  of  the  soul,  that  he  would  make  us  to  be  what  he  says  we  are. 
"  Even  so,  come,"  etc.     Note — 

I.  What  this  aspibation  of  the  soul  confesses.  1.  The  power  of  Christ  to 
produce  all  this.  Hence  the  appeal,  "  Awake,  0  north  wind,"  etc.  2.  That  -power 
actually  at  work.  There  are  various  precious  plants  of  his  own  planting;  his  garden 
is  not  a  wilderness.  And  there  are  the  heavenly  gifts  of  sun  and  rain  and  dew. 
3.  But  nevertheless  the  full  results  of  his  grace  are  not  forthcoming.  The  fragrance  so 
delightful  and  desirable  is  not  yielded;  there  are  fruits,  but  not  yet  ripened,  so  that 
the}'  might  be  pleasant  to  him  who  eats  them.  The  soul  lives,  but  does  not  flourish. 
It  has  life,  but  not  abundant  life.  How  common  all  this  is!  Hence  how  ineffectual 
the  lives  of  many  Christians  are !  4.  And  the  causes  of  this  are  indicated.  The  gloom 
and  mist,  the  clouds  so  earth-born  and  dense,  which  overhang  the  garden  of  the  soul 
and  hinder  it  from  yielding  its  fragrance  and  fruit  as  it  otherwise  would.  So  the 
sin-and-sorrow-laden  clouds,  and  those  which  doubt  and  unbelief  produce — t  hese  will 
mar  the  soul's  life,  and  make  it  ineffectual  for  joy  or  help. 

II.  Fob  what  it  is  willing.  1.  For  the  north  wind.  (Cf.  Prov.  xxv.  23 ;  Job 
xxxviJt  22.)  The  north  wind,  often  stern  and  terrible,  and  very  trying  to  plant-life. 
Yet  here  it  is  invited  to  come.    The  spirit  of  the  well-known  lines — 


OH.  lY.  1—16.]  THE  SONS  OF  SOLOMON.  107 

"  Nearer,  my  God,  to  theo^ 
Nearer  to  thee ; 
E'en  though  it  be  a  oroBi 
That  raiseth  me  " — 

is  in  this  invocation  to  the  Wtter  blast — the  north  wind.  And  the  Christian  soul  Is 
willing  for  whatever  of  trial  and  distress  God  may  be  pleased  to  send,  so  only  as  it  may 
lead  to  more  full  likeness  to  God.  As  the  inhabitants  of  the  Valais,  in  Switzerland, 
love  the  strong,  stern  winds  which,  sweeping  wildly  down  their  close  gorges  and  shut- 
up  vales,  scatters  and  drives  away  the  miasma,  bred  of  the  stagnant  air,  which  for  far 
too  long  a  time  broods  over  them,  unchanged,  and  hence  fuU  of  evil,  until  the  welcome 
wild  wind  tears  down  the  valley,  and  then  the  bad  air  is  driven  away,  and  that  which 
is  healthful  comes  instead ;  so  the  soul,  conscious  that  its  health  and  joy  are  hindered, 
would  welcome  that  which  corresponds  to  the  north  wind  told  of  here  (of.  Eom.  v.  3 — 5). 
2.  2%e  south  wind.  (For  its  effects,  cf.  Job  xxxvii.  7.)  The  soul  knows  that  without 
the  genial  influence  of  Christ's  love  realized  in  her  she  cannot  prosper.  Therefore  she 
prays  for  this  also. 

"  He  sendeth  sun,  he  eendeth  shower — 
Alike  they're  needful  for  the  flower ; 
And  joys  and  tears  alike  are  sent 
To  give  the  soul  fit  nourishment." 

III.  WfiAT  IT  stTPREMBLT  DESIRES.  "  Let  my  beloved  come  into  his  garden,"  etc. 
This,  translated,  means  that  the  soul's  supreme  solicitude  is,  as  Paul's  was,  to  be 
accepted  of  her  Lord  (cf.  2  Cor.  v.,  "I  labour,  whether  present  or  absent,  to  be 
accepted  of  him  ").  The  renewed  soul  seeks  to  be  well  pleasing  to  her  Lord ;  she  cares 
little  for  any  other  approval  (cf.  Paul,  "It  is  a  small  thing  to  me  to  be  jadged  of 
you,  or  by  man's  judgment ;  he  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord  ").  "  To  give  pleasure  to 
those  whom  we  love,  to  know  that  any  achievements  of  ours  will  gratify  them,  is  a 
greater  pleasure  than  any  derived  from  the  applause  of  strangers,  however  numerous  or 
distinguished.  The  lad  laden  with  prizes  at  his  school  is  pleased  enough  with  the 
clapping,  and  the  praise  of  masters  and  fellow-pupils ;  but  his  real  pleasure  is  to  come, 
when  he  gets  his  prizes  home  and  shows  them  to  his  loved  ones  there.  To  see  his 
mother's  eyes  glisten  with  gladness,  that  is  better  than  all  the  other  praise,  were  it 
from  all  the  world  beside.  And  so  to  be  approved  of  Christ,  to  please  him,  that,  to 
souls  like  Paul's,  is  everything." 

IV.  The  blessing  it  obtains.  Such  supreme  solicitude  cannot  exist  without 
obtaining  for  the  soul  that  cherishes  it  some  of  the  choicest  favours  of  God.  1.  It  will 
be  an  ever-present  regulating  force  in  our  souls.  It  wiU  act  as  a  law  to  ourselves, 
prompting,  checking,  directing,  impelling,  as  needs  be.  2.  It  will  win  blessed  freedom 
from  the  tyranny  of  the  world.  Such  soul  will  fear  neither  the  world's  frown — so 
formidable  to  well-nigh  all — nor  court  the  world's  favour,  all  but  universally  coveted 
though  it  be.  The  Son  will  have  made  him  free,  and  he  will  be  free  indeed.  3.  It 
will  make  every  cross  light.  Such  cross  being  his  cross,  borne  for  him,  its  sharpness, 
weight,  shame,  vanish.  4.  Death  is  abolished.  It  becomes  for  him  "an  abundant 
entrance  into  the  kingdom  "  of  Christ.  Freedom,  strength,  peace — these  are  some  of 
the  blessings  which  that  soul  wins  whose  supreme  desire  ia  to  be  accepted  of  Christ. 
— S.  0, 

Ver.  6. — Night  and  morning.  In  the  experiences  of  the  heavenly  life  in  the  soul 
there  are  fluctuations  of  health  and  joy  as  great  as  the  fluctuations  of  the  seasons,  as 
great  as  the  change  from  night  to  day.  Our  globe  is  as  near  to  the  sun  at  dead  of 
night  as  at  noon,  but,  being  turned  away  from  the  sun,  loses  the  enjoyment  of  his 
beams.  So  Jesus  may  be  equally  near  to  us  in  our  times  of  depression,  though  unbelief 
hides  him  from  our  eyes. 

I.  This  language  well  denotes  the  purpose  of  a  man  in  a  state  op  intel- 
LEOTUAL  DOUBT.  The  gloom  of  night  has  fallen  upon  him.  1.  Note  his  difficulties. 
Grave  doubts  haunt  his  mind  whether  there  be  a  personal  God.  The  probabilities  for 
and  against  seem  to  him  fairly  equal.  In  the  busy  world  honest  men  often  suffer. 
Innocent  children  sometimes  starve.     The  righteous  are  crushed  to  the  wall,  or  are 


108  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  it.  1—16. 

piniDg  in  a  gaoL  Is  this  consistent  with  the  jurisdiction  of  a  benevolent  God  ?  Or  if 
there  be  a  God,  the  man  has  serious  doubts  whether  the  Bible  can  be  accepted  as  a 
revelation  to  men  of  God's  plans  and  designs.  Evidently  the  book  is  marked  with 
imperfections,  traceable  to  man.  Or  he  is  perplexed  with  the  theories  respecting 
Christ's  atonement.  Is  it  possible  for  one  person  to  bear  the  penalty  of  another's 
guilt?  Or  he  is  in  darkness  touching  man's  future  state.  Will  there  be  a  resurrection 
of  the  body  ?  Will  the  identical  man  have  a  second  life  ?  What  will  become  of  the 
ungodly?  How  can  redemption  be  a  success  if  the  majority  of  men  peiish?  He  is 
compassed  and  overborne  with  these  shadows.  What  sliall  be  his  course?  2.  Note 
his  conduct.  "  I  will  take  me  to  the  mountains  of  myrrh,"  etc.  Now,  mountains  are 
the  emblems  of  substantial  durability.  Changes  may  pass  over  the  plains  of  earth,  but 
the  hiUs  abide.  So  amid  all  this  flux  of  doubt  some  things  are  certain.  It  is  certain 
that  I  ought  to  be  truthful.  I  must  ever  follow  the  truth,  and  must  hate  falsehood. 
It  is  certain  that  I  ought  to  be  meek,  patient,  industrious,  sober,  chaste ;  a  diligent 
inquirer  after  the  truth,  a  champion  of  righteousness.  These  are  our  "  mountains  of 
myrrh,"  and  on  these  we  will  dwell  until  clearer  light  dawns  upon  our  path.  3.  Mark 
his  expectation.  Certainly  these  shadows  of  night  shall  in  due  time  vanish ;  the  day  of 
perfect  certitude  will  dawn.  Perhaps  the  mind  itself,  as  an  instrument  for  discerning 
truth,  may  grow  more  perfect.  Perhaps  some  element  of  probability  has  been  under- 
rated. Perhaps  personal  inclination  has  biassed  judgment.  Very  likely  new  light 
from  some  quarter  will  break  upon  us  touching  the  destiny  of  mankind.  We  will 
calmly  wait.  We  will  keep  our  minds  open  to  instruction,  open  to  correction,  and 
light  will  assuredly  come.  We  find  a  sweet  and  healthful  fragrance  in  a  life  of 
conscientious  service,  and  we  are  in  the  best  position  to  catch  the  first  rays  of  the 
morning  sun. 

II.  This  LANOtrAGB  desokibes  the  pubposb  op  a  man  who  aspibes  to  a  hiqheb 
PLANE  OF  Chbistian  LIFE.  He  is  uow  among  the  mists  of  the  valley ;  he  resolves  to 
dwell  in  the  clear  bracing  air  of  the  breezy  hills.  1.  Note  his  lamentations.  He  is  in 
darkness  respecting  his  personal  relationship  with  God.  He  questions  the  reality  of 
his  faith.  His  religion  is  devoid  of  joy.  Now  and  again  some  old  lust  reasserts  its 
power.  The  old  life  and  the  new  still  struggle  for  the  mastery.  He  makes  no  progress 
in  holiness  or  in  self-conquest.  He  finds  no  liberty  in  prayer,  no  sweet  sense  of  the 
Brother's  friendship.  He  is  impotent.  He  waits  for  light  and  help  from  above.  'Tis 
a  dark  and  wintry  night.  2.  Observe  his  purpose.  "  I  will  betake  me  to  the  hills  of 
frankincense,"  etc.  There  are  some  things  he  cannot  do  for  himself.  But  there  are 
some  things  he  can  do.  He  cannot  create  light,  but  he  can  climb  into  the  place  where 
the  light  is  best  seen.  He  will  act  as  a  dependent  servant,  and  carefully  do  his 
Master's  will.  He  will  deny  himself  all  evil  indulgence.  He  will  dwell  upon  the 
fragrant  mountains  of  Divine  promise.  He  will  be  a  devout  searcher  of  the  Scriptures. 
He  will  confess  his  every  sin  before  God,  and  cherish  a  temper  of  self-humiliation. 
He  will  hope  for  clearer  proof  of  sonship.  He  will  aspire  for  the  full  light  of  God's 
cotmtenance.  What  God  has  done  for  others,  he  will  surely  do  for  him.  3.  Note  his 
outlook.  "  Until  the  day  breaks,"  etc.  Most  certainly  "  we  have  not  yet  attained." 
There  is  a  higher  experience  to  be  reached,  greater  conquests  to  be  gained.  It  is 
possible  to  have  closer  and  more  joyous  friendship  with  God.  It  is  possible  for  the 
principle  of  generous  love  to  be  fully  dominant  in  the  soul.  There  is  fine  scope  for 
the  development  of  faith.  We  want  a  more  entire  consecration  to  our  Lord.  In  a 
word,  we  want  the  heavenly  King  to  reign  in  us  more  manifestly.  And  that  spring- 
morn  of  consecration  and  of  gladness  shall  come.  The  "  shadows  shall  flee  away,  the 
day  shall  break." 

III.  This  li^NQtTAGB  will  express  the  Christian's  hope  respecting  the  triumph 
or  Christ's  kingdom.  Now  darkness  and  light  commingle  in  the  world  like  a  thick 
mist  in  the  valley.  But  presently  the  light  shall  conquer.  1.  Observe  the  present 
condition  of  Messiah's  cause.  In  some  empires  that  cause  moves  forward,  in  others  it 
apparently  retrogrades.  Once  flourishing  Churches  are  now  dead.  The  Churches  of 
Antioch  and  Samaria  and  Carthage  have  disappeared.  Waves  of  ritual  superstition 
have  swept  over  some  regions  where  once  godly  Churches  flourished.  Forms  of  faith 
have  disappeared.  The  seraphic  zeal  of  one  age  yields  to  spiritual  stupor  in  the  next. 
We  scarcely  know  whether  the  kingdom  of  grace  is  on  the  ebb  tide  or  on  the  flofr. 


OH.  IV.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  109 

The  outlook  is  checkered.  2.  Observe  tTie  Church's  present  duty.  In  this  case  duty  is 
clear.  She  should  resort  to  the  mountain  of  prayer — ^to  the  spicy  hills  of  a  new 
devotement.  Sensible  of  her  weakness,  she  must  get  into  closer  union  with  the 
eternal  Source  of  strength.  The  methods  which  have  been  successful  in  the  past  must 
be  plied  in  the  future.  We  must  be  better  instructed  in  the  will  of  God.  Perhaps  our 
zeal  has  been  sectarian  and  selfish  in  the  past,  and  we  want  a  purer  purpose,  a  simpler 
aim.  We  must  be  ready  for  greater  sacrifices  in  the  Master's  cause.  To  please  the 
Bridegroom  must  be  our  supreme  motive.  3.  The  outlook  of  faith.  The  day  shall 
certainly  dawn.  Great  is  the  truth ;  it  must  prevail.  The  prophecies  of  saintly  seers 
shall  certainly  be  fulfilled.  The  covenant  with  Christ  must  be  observed.  "  To  him 
every  knee  shall  bow."  The  heathen  is  "  given  to  him  for  an  inheritance."  "  He  shall 
see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied."  We  can  afford  to  wait.  Jesus 
"mtut  reign."  Love  is  the  mightiest  force  in  the  universe,  and  must  conquer.  In 
due  time  the  sun  of  conquest  shall  rise  on  man's  vision,  and  the  light  shall  expand 
into  the  glories  of  the  perfect  day. 

IV.  This  language  beeves  to  illustbatb  the  Christian's  prospect  op  heaven. 
1.  Eis  present  depression.  At  present  he  does  not  perceive  any  organic  difference 
between  himself  and  unconverted  men.  He  may  have  a  livelier  taste  for  religious 
pursuits.  He  may  find  more  enjoyment  in  prayer.  Yet  he  cannot  discover  any 
radical  difference  to  warrant  the  sublime  expectation  that  he  shall  be  claimed  as  a  son, 
and  join  in  the  occupations  of  angels.  Daily  he  feels  the  power  of  evil  principles 
within  him.  Certainly  the  realities  of  righteousness  and  the  things  of  the  spiritual 
world  do  not  absorb  his  thoughts.  He  is  of  the  earth,  earthy.  When  and  how  shall 
the  great  change  pass  over  me,  to  fit  me  for  the  society  of  the  redeemed?  When  vriU 
the  glorified  body  be  assumed  ?  Will  it  be  developed  out  of  the  present  organism,  or 
will  it  be  a  new  creation?  What  will  be  my  location  and  my  experience  immediately 
after  death  ?  Will  the  eternal  state  be  totally  different  from  anything  I  have  expected  ? 
Such  things  disquiet  me?  2.  Present  duty.  "I  will  get  me  to  the  hills  of  frank- 
incense." I  will  get  away  from  secular  pursuits  as  much  as  I  can,  and  will  get  into 
familiar  fellowship  with  God.  Inasmuch  as  his  presence  is  the  centre  of  all  joy  and 
activity  in  heaven,  it  is  well  to  have  his  society  and  fellowship  now.  The  veil  that 
hides  him  from  me  is  not  on  his  side,  but  on  mine ;  it  is  the  veil  of  unbelief.  I  will 
get  me  to  the  mount  of  communion,  and  in  close  heart-fellowship  with  God  I  shall 
await  with  calm  composure  the  tremendous  change.  I  want  purity  of  heart  wherewith 
to  see  God.  3.  Note  the  glorious  prospect.  "  The  day  shall  break,  and  the  shadows 
shall  flee  away."  All  dark  thoughts  of  God  and  of  God's  dealings  shall  by-and-by 
disappear.  All  his  mysterious  ways  will  be  Illuminated  in  the  blaze  of  noon.  Whereas 
now  we  feel  some  of  our  earthly  conditions  hard  to  bear,  then  shall  we  discover  that 
these  were  ordered  by  the  ripest  wisdom,  combined  with  tenderest  love.  Every 
puzzling  doctrine  shall  be  made  plain.  Paradoxes  will  blend  in  perfect  harmony. 
Gracious  reasons  will  appear  for  every  disappointment,  every  sorrow,  eveiy  conflict,  we 
endured  on  earth.  The  mysteries  of  pain  and  sin  and  death  will  all  be  solved,  and 
God's  great  plan  for  training  men  will  be  pronounced  the  best.  So  on  "  the  mountains 
of  myrrh  and  on  the  hills  of  frankincense  "  we  will  cheerfully  abide,  in  fllial  fellowship 
with  Jesus,  "  until  the  day  breaks,  and  the  shadows  flee  away." — ^D. 

Vers.  10, 11. — Christ's  appraisement  of  believers.  The  interest  which  God  takes  in 
men  is  marvellous.  Why  he  should  have  designed  to  save  men  from  sin's  curse,  at 
such  personal  cost,  is  a  mystery,  and  must  remain  so.  It  is  equally  a  mystery  why 
Jesus  should  have  set  such  strong  love  on  the  fishermen  of  Galilee.  Notwithstanding 
their  glaring  misconduct,  "  he  loved  them  to  the  end."  In  like  manner  Jesus  speaks 
in  this  passage  of  his  high  appreciation  of  his  people's  love.  The  love  of  Christ  to  us 
is  a  theme  on  which  any  Christian  may  well  become  eloquent.  But  to  hear  that 
Christ  sets  high  store  on  our  poor  love  to  him,  this  staggers  our  thoughts,  and  almost 
seals  our  lips.  Nevertheless  it  is  a  fact.  Full  of  blemish  and  imperfection  as  we  are, 
he  counts  ns  his  jewels,  his  choicest  possessions.  He  finds  "  his  inheritance  in  the 
saints."  With  his  generous  heart  he  discerns  all  the  goodness  there  is  in  us.  He  sets 
high  value  on  our  love,  and  in  this  way  encourages  us  to  give  him  more. 

L  Note  Chbibt'b    hioh  appbaibembnt  of  a  Chbibtias'b   love.     1.  The  very 


110  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  iv.  1—16. 

indefiniteness  of  the  language  is  instructive.  "  How  fair ! "  He  does  not  say  how 
precious  it  is.  It  is  not  the  languao;e  of  precise,  calculating  logic.  It  is  the  language 
of  strong  feeling.  It  is  the  generous  ejaculation  of  the  heart — "  How  fair ! "  This  is 
spoken  after  the  manner  of  men.  When  the  intellect  is  overborne  by  emotion,  we 
break  into  an  exclamation,  and  say,  almost  in  a  spirit  of  inquiry,  "  How  lovely !  how 
fair  I "  As  if  we  would  say,  "  We  cannot  measure  the  worth ;  if  any  one  else  can,  let 
him  say."  2.  It  is  the  love  of  tender  relationship.  "My  sister,  my  spouse."  This 
mention  of  earthly  relatives  is  used  by  way  of  comparison.  What  form  of  love  amonj 
us  is  winsome,  valued,  precious?  For  sweetness  and  purity,  what  love  is  like  a 
sister's?  For  strength  and  generousness,  what  affection  like  that  of  a  wife?  Jesus 
combines  these  both  in  his  thought.  Blend  the  love  of  sister  and  wife  into  one,  ar,d 
even  then  this  poorly  represents  the  love  which  Jesus  discovers  in  us  glowing  for 
himself.  He  sets  more  value  upon  our  love  than  we  set  upon  the  love  of  our  most 
intimate  friend.  3.  The  language  impresses  us  by  a  comparison.  "  It  is  better  than 
wine."  As  at  a  banquet  one's  bodily  sensations  are  refreshed  and  quickened  ard 
gladdened  with  choice  wine,  so  Jesus  finds  a  cordial  more  refieshing,  more  inspiring, 
in  his  creature's  love.  To  his  inmost  soul  this  love  of  man  is  a  luxury.  He  has  many 
sources  of  enjoyment  in  heaven,  but  this  enjoyment  is  his  choicest.  The  love  of  his 
ransomed  is  his  rarest,  sweetest  joy.  When  in  his  lifetime  he  sat  down  to  meat  at  the 
Pharisee's  table,  the  tears  of  the  penitent  harlot  were  more  delicious  fare  than  Simon's 
choicest  wine.  It  is  possible  that,  though  the  angels  "  excel  in  strength,"  they  may  he 
deficient  in  love.  Anyhow,  our  shallow,  inconstant,  imperfect  love  is  precious  in  the 
eyes  of  Immanuel ;  it  is  a  fountain  of  joy  to  his  heart. 

II.  Obsebvb  Christ's  appreciation  of  oub  holy  rNFLUENCB.  How  m^ch  better  is 
"  the  scent  of  thy  perfumes  than  all  spices "  I  In  the  East  the  dwellings  are  not  so 
sweet  as  in  our  own  land.  Want  of  general  cleanliness,  want  of  water,  want  of 
drainage,  will  account  for  this.  As  a  consequence,  unguents  and  perfumes  about  tlie 
person  are  very  common.  So  in  the  hallowed  savour  of  our  piety  there  is  a  delicate 
fragrance  very  acceptable  to  Jesus.  Our  influence  over  others  is  something  undefinable, 
yet  very  potent.  It  pertains  to  every  habit  of  life,  to  every  tone  of  voice,  to  every 
expression  of  countenance.  It  lives  in  a  smile  or  in  a  tear;  and  results,  begun  in  the 
minutest  circumstance,  stretch  far  away  into  the  great  eternity.  Jesus  highly 
esteems  this  quiet,  mystic  influence.  It  is  a  fragrant  atmosphere  created  by  love,  and, 
like  the  savour  of  Mary's  spikenard,  it  fills  the  house.  Obdurate  men  may  ridicule  our 
pious  words ;  they  cannot  ridicule  nor  resist  the  influence  of  a  holy  life.  Our  humility, 
our  heavenly-mindedness,  our  consecrated  zeal,  diffuse  a  delicate  perfume,  like  the 
subtle  scent  of  roses,  which  every  man  of  refinement  appreciates,  and  in  it  Jesus  finds 
delight.     It  is  richer  and  rarer  than  all  the  spices  of  Araby. 

III.  Mark  the  fact  that  Jesus  greatly  esteems  a  Christian's  testimony. 
"  I'hy  lips  drop  as  the  honeycomb."  The  gift  of  speech  is  a  noble  endowment  conferred 
on  us  by  God.  It  distinguishes  man  above  the  animals.  The  human  voice,  either  in 
oratory  or  in  song,  has  potent  enchantment  for  men.  Speech  is  man's  glory.  By  it 
he  rules  a  nation.  By  it  he  enlightens  and  inspires  the  young.  By  it  he  moulds  the 
destinies  of  mankind.  Jesus  loves  to  see  this  endowment  consecrated  to  his  cause. 
He  loves  to  hear  our  testimony  to  his  goodness.  He  loves  to  hear  our  pious  songs. 
On  one  occasion  Jesus  cast  out  a  demon  from  a  man  who  was  dumb,  and  immediately 
the  dumb  man  spake.  So,  when  Jesus  "sheds  abroad  his  love  in  our  hearts,"  our  lips 
cannot  be  silent.  The  desire  to  speak  of  his  grace  will  be  like  a  fire  in  our  bones.  A 
strange  impulse  stirs  within  to  make  all  men  know  of  his  mighty  virtue,  and  the 
tongue  of  the  dumb  will  be  unloosed.  As  the  richest,  sweetest  of  all  honey  is  that 
which  drops  freely  and  first  from  the  honeycomb,  so  the  words  of  our  fresh,  warm  love 
are  very  sweet  in  the  ear  of  Jesus.  He  intertwines  the  welfare  of  his  kingdom  with 
human  speech,  (or  he  has  ordained  preaching  to  be  his  great  weapon  in  the  sacred 
crusade  with  sin.  If  we  did  but  remember  that  Jesus  is  always  a  hearer — a,  generous, 
appreciative  hearer — of  all  that  drops  from  our  lips,  should  we  not  take  care  that  he 
heard  only  what  was  true  and  kind  and  beautiful?  Should  we  not  be  eager  to  "order 
our  conversation  aright,"  and  to  have  our  speech  like  the  droppings  of  the  honeycomb? 

IV.  Mark  that  Jesds  appreciates  oue  purposes  to  please  him.  When  David 
conceived  the  thought  that  he  would  build  a  substantial  temple  to  Jehovah,  and  the 


OH.  IV.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  lU 

plan  began  to  ripen  into  resolve,  God  sent  hia  prophet  to  say  this  to  David,  "  It  was 
well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart."  We  loudly  applaud  the  man  who  makes  heroic  self- 
iacrifice  for  the  cause  of  Christ ;  but  very  likely  there  is  a  purpose  burning  in  the  soul 
-jf  some  gentle  woman  to  do  battle  for  Christ  more  noble  still,  yet  which  cannot  be 
fealized.  Well,  that  secret  purpose  is  sweet  as  honey  to  Christ.  His  searching  eye 
sees  it  all — sees  every  right  motive,  every  heavenly  disposition,  every  upward  aspiration ; 
*nd  the  sight  is  a  delicious  joy.  It  is  the  fruit  of  his  incarnation.  It  is  the  work  of 
ttis  Spirit.  Just  as  every  man  finds  peculiar  delight  in  his  work,  be  it  a  building,  or  a 
painting,  or  a  mechanical  invention ;  so,  and  much  more,  does  Jesus  find  exquisite 
pleasure  in  his  successful  work  of  making  us  godlike  and  Divine.  "  Honey  and  milk 
are  under  thy  tongue."     Thy  secret  thoughts  and  purposes  bring  me  joy. 

V.  Jbsds  Ohbist  appraises  highly  evert  disciple's  skkvicb.  "  The  smell  of  thy 
garments  is  like  the  smell  of  Lebanon."  The  scent  of  pine  trees  and  of  cedar  forests  is 
peculiarly  pleasant,  and  in  this  respect  Lebanon  surpassed  all  other  forests  in  Palestine. 
It  is  in  keeping  with  the  symbolism  of  the  Bible  to  employ  "garments"  as  an  emblem 
of  human  actions.  We  have  a  similar  figure  in  our  own  language,  for  we  use  the  word 
"  habit "  to  denote  one  kind  of  apparel,  and  also  to  denote  a  constant  line  of  action. 
Acts  frequently  performed  become  habits.  So  the  "  garments  of  a  Christian  are  his 
everyday  actions — the  things  he  wears  wherever  he  goes."  The  lesson  here  is  tliat 
Jesus  finds  pleasure  in  everything  we  do,  however  trivial  and  insignificant.  For  there 
is  nothing  insignificant.  You  may  read  a  man's  character  more  clearly  in  the  hourly 
business  of  every  day  than  in  his  conduct  on  Sundays,  or  than  in  some  great  action  of 
his  life.  The  serving-woman  in  a  shop,  or  the  drudge  in  the  scullery,  or  the  hodman 
on  the  scaffolding,  can  serve  Christ  as  well  as  the  bishop  in  the  pulpit.  Jesus  loves  to 
see  how  faithfully  we  do  little  things.  In  his  sight  there  is  nothing  little.  It  gave 
him  untold  pleasure  to  see  the  farthing  which  a  poor  widow  dropped  into  his  treasury. 
He  counts  every  hair  upon  our  heads.  He  notes  when  a  sparrow  falls.  This  is  a  mark 
of  true  greatness  that  it  never  overlooks  the  tiniest  things.  If  from  a  disposition  of 
love,  and  with  cheerful  temper,  we  sew  a  garment  or  drive  a  nail,  we  bring  new 
pleasure  to  our  Lord.  "  Therefore,"  says  the  apostle,  "  whatsoever  ye  do,  whether  in 
word  or  in  deed,  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Sweetly  does  old  Herbert 
sing — 

**  A  servant  with  this  clause 

Makes  drudgery  Divine ; 
Who  sweeps  a  room  as  for  thy  lawa 
Makes  ^at  and  th'  action  fine." 

D. 

Vers.  12 — 16. — The  King's  garden.  The  Church  of  Christ  1b  fitly  likened  to  s 
garden.  It  is  a  piece  of  territory  separated  from  the  rest,  enclosed  from  the  beaten 
road  of  this  world's  traffic.  The  distinguishing  mark  of  a  Christian  Church  is 
separation;  i.e.  separation  from  evil,  separation  as  a  means  of  blessing.  As  in  a 
garden  a  king  finds  great  delight  and  solace,  so  in  this  sacred  garden  Jesus  Christ  has 
a  special  joy.  He  calls  it  "  my  garden."  We  do  not  hear  him  say,  "  My  star ;  my 
snow-capped  mountains;  my  veins  of  gold;"  but  we  do  hear  him  say,  "My  garden; 
my  people;  my  sister;  my  spouse."  Such  language  is  not  merely  the  language  of 
proprietorshi|) ;  it  is  the  language  of  endearment.  Every  plant  and  tree  in  this  garden 
has  been  planted  and  pruned  by  himself.  The  unfolding  of  every  blossom  on  the  fruit 
trees  he  has  watched  with  delight;  and  when  the  blossom  has  matured  into  fruit,  his 
delight  has  become  an  ecstasy.  One  high  ambition  fills  him,  viz.  that  his  garden  may 
bear  much  fruit. 

I.  Observe  that  this  emblem  op  a  garden  suggests  many  truths.  1.  There  is 
the  fact  of  separateness.  In  this  text  the  writer  lays  emphasis  on  this  point.  Every 
garden  is  more  or  less  marked  oflf  from  other  ground,  but  this  is  specially  described  as 
"  a  garden  enclosed."  It  is  made  inaccessible  to  thieves,  to  cattle,  and  to  wild  beasts. 
Boars  out  of  the  wood  would  soon  lay  it  waste.  So  is  it  with  the  life  of  God  in  the 
believer's  soul.  He  is  thereby  separated  from  the  ungodly  world.  The  chosen  of  God 
are  separated  by  God's  eternal  decree.  Their  names  are  registered  in  the  book  of  life. 
They  have  been  separated  by  redemption.    "  Christ  has  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  ol 


112  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  Loa.nr.l— 16. 

the  Law."  They  are  separated  by  virtue  of  the  new  birth.  They  are  separated  by 
their  own  personal  choice.  They  have  gone  to  Christ  "  without  the  camp,  bearing  his 
reproach."  They  are  no  longer  "  conformed  to  the  world."  As  Jesus  "  is  not  of  the 
world,  neither  are  they."  "My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world."  2.  There  is  the  idea  of 
secrecy.  This  is  not  altogether  the  believer's  choice;  it  is  inevitable.  The  new  life  of 
the  Christian  is  "  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  As  a  spring  or  fountain  has  its  source  out 
of  sight — ^yea,  far  down  in  secret  caverns  of  the  earth — so  the  believer  has  the  roots  of 
his  new  life  in  Christ.  He  has  experiences  now  which  others  do  not  share,  and  which 
he  had  not  aforetime ;  but  these  are  entirely  hidden  from  the  public  eye.  New  fellow- 
ship with  God ;  new  aims  in  life ;  new  motives  and  impulses ;  new  peace  and  hopes ; 
new  springs  of  joy  he  has,  with  which  a  "  stranger  cannot  intermeddle."  As  the  wind 
in  its  vagaries  defies  all  the  predictions  of  man  (none  can  "  tell  whence  it  cometh,  or 
whither  it  goeth),  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."  "  The  natural  man 
cannot  understand  the  things  of  the  Spirit ;  they  are  foolishness  unto  him."  All  life 
is  mysterious ;  spiritual  life  is  specially  so.  3.  There  is  set  forth  the  fact  of  security. 
As  a  shepherd  guards  his  flock,  so  the  great  Husbandman  secures  from  adversaries  his 
garden.  "  No  wolf  shall  be  there,  nor  any  ravenous  beast."  The  enclosure  resists  suc- 
cessfully even  the  "  little  foxes,"  who  spoil  the  precious  vines.  The  Christian  is  secure 
against  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil;  for  all  the  attributes  of  God  envelop  him 
for  his  protection.  He  dwells  under  the  shield  of  the  Almighty.  The  omnipotence  of 
Jehovah  is  his  fortress.  God  is  "  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  him."  Hence  "  no  weapon 
that  is  formed  against  him  can  prosper."  As  a  garden  enclosed,  he  enjoys  impregnable 
security.  4.  Here  is  the  idea  of  sacredness.  The  enclosed  garden  is  set  apart  for  the 
use  of  the  king.  It  is  devoted  to  one  person  and  to  one  purpose.  So  Jesus  claims  this 
garden  as  his  own,  and  what  is  true  of  the  Church  is  true  of  every  person  composing 
that  Church.  The  believer  is  a  sacred  person,  a  priest  consecrated  to  holy  service. 
He  is  God's  man,  attached  to  the  court  of  heaven.  Jesus  said  that  he  had  "  sanctified 
(or  consecrated)  himself,  that  they  also  might  be  sanctified  (or  consecrated)  through 
the  truth."  Every  part  of  the  Christian  is  consecrated,  viz.  his  endowments,  his 
learning,  his  property,  his  time.  For  "  we  are  not  our  own ;  we  are  bought  with  a 
price."  Our  business  is  to  serve  the  kingdom.  "  For  us  to  live  is  Christ."  We  are 
part  of  the  "  sacramental  host  of  God's  elect." 

IL  Observe  that  this  garden  is  famous  fob  fbuitfulness.  "Thy  plants 
are  an  orchard  of  pomegranates,  with  pleasant  fruits,"  etc.  1.  Abimdant  fruit/ulness 
is  asserted.  It  was  the  earnest  longing  of  Jesus  Christ  that  his  disciples  "  should  bear 
much  fruit,  and  that  this  fruit  should  abide."  Very  soon  rich  clusters  of  fruit  did 
appear  in  his  Church.  The  prayerfulness  culminating  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost ;  the 
generous  communism  of  the  saints ;  the  courage  and  zeal  of  many;  the  fervid  piety  of 
Stephen;  the  practical  sympathy  for  the  poor;  the  magnanimity  of  Barnabas;  the 
whole-hearted  consecration  of  Paul ; — these  were  the  firstfruits  of  discipleship.  And  from 
that  day  to  this  fruit  has  abounded  in  the  Church.  The  noble  qualities  of  mind  and 
heart ;  the  splendid  virtues ;  the  patience,  fortitude,  and  zeal ;  the  consecrated  heroism 
of  believers,  have  been  the  admiration  and  astonishment  of  the  world.  "  Whatsoever 
things  are  lovely,  excellent,  pure,  and  of  good  report,"  these  have  been  conspicuous  in 
the  Church.  The  elite  of  mankind  is  within  the  Church.  2.  There  is  also  variety  of 
fruit.  In  nature  God  has  made  his  goodness  most  manifest  in  the  vast  variety  of 
fruits  with  which  our  earth  teems.  Equally  in  the  Church  may  we  find  a  splendid 
variety  of  gifts  and  graces.  The  early  fruits  of  humility  and  repentance  and  tender- 
ness of  conscience  soon  appear.  The  spice  trees  of  prayer  and  sympathy  send  forth  a 
goodly  odour.  The  trees  of  righteousness  and  holiness  bear  large  stores  of  precious 
fruit.  In  each  succeeding  age  new  excellences  have  appeared,  new  fruits  have  made 
this  garden  famous.  Here  and  there  you  will  find  a  gnarled  and  crooked  tree  that 
bears  little  fruit.  But  this  is  the  exception ;  a  blot  upon  the  garden.  Tou  will  find 
even  in  a  royal  garden  some  withered  branch,  some  rank  shoot  that  is  unlovely  and 
unfrnitful.  Still,  we  do  not  on  that  account  condemn  the  whole  garden.  All  temper- 
ance reforms,  all  hospitals  and  asylums,  all  plans  for  the  betterment  of  humanity,  all 
alleviations  of  misery  and  woe,  have  appeared  among  us  as  the  fruits  of  Christ's  life. 
The  fruit  abounds  in  variety  almost  endless.  3.  Mark  the  utility  of  this  fruit.  The 
fruit  was  choice ;  the  rarest  fruits  were  there.    Some  were  full  of  cooling  juice,  pleasant 


OH.  IV.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  118 

to  the  taste  in  hours  of  scorching  heat.  Some  had  a  value  as  medicines  for  the  cure  of 
disease,  and  for  soothing  burning  pains.  Some  yielded  rich  perfumes  (as  spikenard), 
and  added  to  the  joy  of  royal  or  marriage  banquets.  Others  produced  myrrh  and 
frankincense,  and  were  consecrated  to  Divine  worship.  Others,  again,  conferred  a 
delicious  flavour  to  human  food.  Each  and  all  had  a  mission  of  usefulness  among 
mankind.  So  is  it  also  in  the  Church  nf  Christ.  You  cannot  put  finger  on  a  genuine 
Christian  who  is  not  more  or  less  a  blessing  to  the  race.  His  piety  has  a  delicious 
savour  in  the  circle  in  which  he  lives.  His  prayers  bring  blessing  upon  a  thousand 
bosoms.  As  God  blessed  Egypt  for  Joseph's  sake,  as  God  blessed  Israel  for  David's 
sake,  so  for  the  Church's  sake  he  often  blesses  the  world.  Every  Christian  is  a  light, 
illuminating  the  world's  darkness.  "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth."  Since  Christ  lived, 
and  because  he  now  lives  in  others,  the  moral  and  social  aspects  of  the  world  are 
changed.  Tyrannies  have  disappeared.  War  has  lost  its  barbaric  rigour.  Industry  is 
productive  of  substantial  good.    Agriculture  prospers. 

III.  Observe  the  dependence  of  this  garden  upon  sources  of  prosperity 
OUTSIDE  ITSELF.  It  needs  the  "  fountain ; "  "  the  well  of  living  waters ; "  "  the  streams 
from  Lebanon."  1.  this  may  well  teach  us  that  the  Church  needs  God  in  the  way  of 
providence.  While  yet  the  Church  remains  on  the  earth  it  needs  earthly  nood.  It 
needs,  at  least,  toleration  or  sufferance  from  earthly  governments.  It  needs  human 
teachers,  and  all  the  aids  of  human  learning.  It  needs  the  use  of  books  and  printing. 
It  needs  material  buildings  for  public  worship.  It  needs  earthly  wealth  to  carry  on  all 
the  agencies  of  instruction  and  of  blessing.  Likewise  the  individual  disciple  receives 
much  from  God  in  the  way  of  providence.  We  have  the  priceless  ministry  of  angels. 
We  have  the  pillar  of  cloud,  and  the  pillar  of  fire.  We  have  the  stimulating  influence 
of  godly  companions.  We  have  the  benefits  of  parental  teaching  and  holy  example. 
We  have  the  inspirations  that  come  from  the  biographies  of  heroic  men.  These  are 
wells  in  the  desert;  "streams  from  Lebanon."  All  that  is  requisite  to  make  this 
garden  fertile,  rich  in  umbrageous  shade,  rich  in  luscious  fruits,  rich  in  aromatic 
spices,  has  been  lavishly  supplied.  No  lack  can  be  found  in  the  thoughtful ness  of 
the  husbandman.  2.  Equally  the  Cliurch  needs  God  in  the  way  of  spiritual  gifts. 
"Awal<e,  0  north  wind;  and  come,  thou  south;  blow  upon  my  garden,  that  the 
spices  thereof  may  flow  out."  The  Hebrew  word  for  "  wind "  means  also  "breath," 
or  "spirit;"  hence  we  have  here  a  striking  emblem  of  the  work  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  To  him  belongs  the  sole  prerogative  to  impart  life  to  the  trees  of  tiie  garden. 
We  invoke  his  presence  bi  cause  be  is  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life.  For  the  largest 
prosperity  of  the  Church  the  good  Spirit  of  God  is  needed  in  all  his  offices,  in  all  his 
fulness  of  power.  A  blustering  gale  from  the  north  scatters  noxious  blight,  but  the 
soft  wind  Irom  the  south  will  quicken  the  flow  of  vital  sap,  and  will  nurse  the  tender 
blossoms  into  ruddy  fruit.  So  do  we  olten  need  that  the  Spirit  of  God  should  come 
like  a  northern  tornado,  and  scatter  to  the  ground  our  false  hopes  and  flimsy  errors 
and  earthly  ambitions.  And  we  need  him  also  as  the  Comforter,  who  shall  reveal  to 
us  the  virtues  of  our  Diviue  Healer,  and  shall  melt  us  into  sweet  obedience  by  the 
warmth  of  Immanuel's  love.  As  the  fragrant  odours  of  flowers  lie  hidden  in  their  t'ny 
cells  until  the  fresh  south  wind  coaxes  them  forth,  so,  too,  the  precious  graces  of  the 
Christian  remain  concealed  and  slumbering  within  until  the  Spirit  of  life  and  power 
brings  them  forth,  and  diffuses  them  through  the  Church.  Then  do  the  disciples  of 
Christ  become  "living  epistles,  known  and  read  of  men."  "Awake,  0  north  wind; 
and  come,  thou  south;  blow  upon  my  garden." 

"Come  as  the  wind,  the  dew,  the  rain; 

Come,  make  this  heart  thy  temple-home; 
Spirit  of  gract\  come  as  thou  wilt. 
Our  souls  adjure  thee — only  come !" 

D. 

Ver.  16 ch.  v.  1. — Prayer  and  its  quick  response.    "  Let  my  beloved  come  into  his 

garden,  and  eat  his  pleasant  fruits."  "  I  am  come  into  my  garden."  It  is  a  sign  of 
spiritual  health  when  we  heartily  desire  God's  best  gifts;  when  our  prayer  is  ths 
prajer  of  faith;  when  we  ask  and  have.    But  it  is  a  sign  of  higher  attainment  yet 

SONG   OF   SOLOMON.  ^ 


lU  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  iv.  1—16. 


when  we  have  but  one  desire,  viz.  the  desire  to  have  the  Q-iver  with  us  rather  than  his 
gifts.  A  wife  highly  prizes  the  love-tokens  she  receives  from  her  absent  lord,  but  she 
values  far  more  highly  his  personal  return.  So,  if  we  are  wise,  we  shall  more  desire  to 
have  Christ  in  our  hearts  than  any  gift  of  light  or  strength.  "  Let  my  Beloved  himself 
come."  To  have  the  source  of  life  is  better  than  having  the  streams.  If  Christ  is  with 
me  I  shall  want  nothing. 

L  The  CnnKCH's  invitation  to  hbb  Loed.  1.  She  addresses  him  'by  an  endearing 
title,  "My  Beloved."  In  dealing  with  Jesus  we  need  make  no  reserve  of  our  affection. 
He  will  never  resent  our  largest  confidence.  The  mere  suggestion  borders  on  the 
profane.  If  we  know  anything,  we  know  whether  we  love  the  Saviour.  Love  to  him 
is  the  same  thing  in  kind,  as  love  to  an  earthly  friend.  We  may  stand  in  doubt 
whether  Jesus  has  love  to  us  personally,  although  such  a  doubt  is  sin.  But  we  need 
never  be  in  doubt  whether  love  to  him  glows  in  our  hearts.  Many  tests  are  available ; 
and  when  love,  however  scanty,  is  found,  Jesus  delights  to  hear  himself  thus  addressed, 
"  My  Beloved ! "  Then  is  he  King  within,  firm  seated  on  the  throne.  2.  She  recognizes 
the  garden  to  he  his  property.  Yes;  and  not  only  is  the  garden  his,  but  each  particular 
tree,  each  separate  fruit.  Every  holy  principle  within  us  he  himself  planted.  It  was 
planted  by  his  own  right  hand.  It  has  been  trained  and  pruned  by  his  watchful  care. 
Every  blossom  has  been  under  hie  protection.  The  fruit  has  been  stored  with  juice 
from  his  treasuries.  It  is  a  delicious  joy  if  I  can  feel  that  every  grace  in  me  is  the 
handiwork  of  Jesus.  Am  I  prayerful  ?  Jesus  has  been  teaching  me.  Am  I  meek  and 
self-forgetting?  Jesus  has  been  busy  in  me,  and  has  gently  moulded  my  nature. 
Much  trouble  has  he  taken  to  bend  my  proud  will.  No  earthly  gardener  has  such 
labour  to  produce  fruit  in  his  frees  as  Jesus  has  to  make  us  fruitful  in  holiness  and 
love.  And  the  more  abundant  our  spiritual  fruits  are,  the  more  readily  shall  we 
ascribe  all  the  praise  to  him,  3,  Here  is  a  strong  desire  to  give  our  Master  pleasure. 
^  Let  him  come ;  let  him  eat  his  pleasant  fruits."  This  is  spoken  after  the  manner 
of  men.  It  is  a  peculiar  joy  for  a  man  to  walk  in  his  own  garden,  and  to  eat  the  ripe 
fruit  he  himself  has  carefully  nurtured.  A  similar  joy  our  Lord  tastes.  But  is  any 
virtue  or  goodness  in  us  so  ripe  and  sweet  that  Jesus  can  find  joy  in  it?  What 
generous  condescension  does  he  show  in  partaking  of  our  meekness,  and  patience,  and 
Caith,  and  sacred  zeal !  Just  as  a  father  finds  peculiar  pleasure  in  listening  to  the  first 
imperfect  lispings  of  his  child,  and  hears  sweet  music  in  the  broken  words,  so  Jesus 
sees  in  our  imperfect  graces  the  promise  of  future  good,  the  promise  of  illustrious 
service,  the  promise  of  high  attainment.  Never  did  a  friend  show  such  generous 
appreciation  of  our  loyalty.  To  be  fruitful  in  Christian  graces  is  in  itself  an  ample 
reward,  but  to  know  that  every  attainment  in  goodness  we  make  adds  to  our  Saviour's 
joy  is  a  higher  reward  still.  Who  will  not  brace  every  nerve  to  bring  new  pleasure  to 
Immanuel!  We  seek  our  joy  in  the  heavenly  paradise;  Jesus  seeks  his  joy  in  us. 
"  I  am  glorified  in  them." 

II.  Thb  Bridegroom's  prompt  response.  "  I  am  come."  1.  Observe  how  swift  is 
the  reply.  No  advantage,  in  this  case,  will  come  from  silence  or  delay.  The  Church 
has  asked  the  best  thing,  and  she  shall  at  once  have  it.  Here  he  has  acted  up  to  his 
own  promise,  "  Before  they  call  I  will  answer."  That  selfsame  desire  to  have  Christ's 
presence  was  a  desire  planted  and  nourished  by  himself,  therefore  he  answered  the 
desire  before  it  developed  into  spoken  prayer.  Already  lie  had  visited  that  garden, 
and  sowed  the  seed  of  noble  ambition.  Now  it  has  grown  to  fruitage,  and  he  has  come 
to  enjoy  it.  We  have  never  to  wrest  this  gift  from  a  clenched  hand;  it  is  a  gift 
waiting  our  acceptance.  Before  the  invitation  is  despatched  he  is  knocking  at  the 
door.  "  I  am  come."  2.  Mark  the  harmony  of  feeling  and  purpose  between  Christ  and 
his  people.  The  Church  has  learnt  a  lesson  of  unselfishness  from  her  Lord.  Aforetime 
she  had  desired  him  to  come  for  her  profit,  or  for  her  pleasure ;  now  she  asks  him  to 
come  for  his  own  gratification.  She  thought  that  he  would  find  delight  in  the  graces 
and  excellences  which  flourish  in  the  Church,  and  her  spiritual  instincts  were  true  to 
fact.  This  is  a  delightful  discovery.  When  our  thoughts  harmonize  with  Christ's 
thoughts,  when  our  dispositions  are  the  counterpart  of  his,  when  one  mind,  one  will, 
one  aim,  dwells  in  the  Saviour  and  the  saint,  then  is  heaven  begun  on  earth.  This  is 
joy  unspeakable;  the  foretaste  of  beatific  rest.  This  is  the  completion  of  the  sacred 
covenant.    This  is  his  seal  impressed  on  us.     3.  Note  the  satisfaction  which  Jesus  finds 


OH.rv.1— 16.J  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  115 

in  his  saints.  This  series  of  metaphors  is  suggestive  of  many  meanings.  In  our  holy 
principles,  in  our  sacred  dispositions,  in  our  prayers  and  our  praises,  in  our  words  and 
self-saorifloing  deeds,  Jesus  takes  delight.  The  myrrh  and  spice  may  indicate  the 
perfume  of  our  intercession,  or  the  pleasure  which  he  finds  in  our  harmony  of  praise. 
Since  he  has  constructed  all  musical  harmonies,  and  fashioned  the  human  voice  to 
produce  this  minstrelsy,  surely  he  is  moved  to  delight  when  love  to  him  stirs  all  the 
powers  of  song.  Every  endeavour  to  please  him,  every  aspiration  after  holiness,  every 
noble  purpose,  every  act  of  self-denial,  all  efforts  toward  a  freer  communion  with  him, 
— these  are  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  in  which  Jesus  finds  delight.  Blurred  as  these  are  with 
imperfection,  we  count  them  very  unworthy,  and  perhaps  too  much  underrate  them. 
If  Jesus  appreciates  them,  and  derives  satisfaction  from  them,  is  not  this  great 
encouragement  to  bring  forth  more  fruit?  Many  products  of  nature  are  here  brought 
into  service  to  illustrate  a  Christian's  spiritual  fruitfulness.  One  has  said  that  wine 
may  represent  those  labours  of  ours  which  result  from  deep  thought,  self-denial,  and 
generous  consecration,  for  wine  must  be  pressed  from  the  grape  with  toil  and  care.  But 
milk  is  a  natural  production,  and  may  represent  those  little  deeds  of  kindness  which 
flow  from  a  quiet  outgushing  of  daily  love.  A  vigorous  fancy  will  find  a  hundred 
suggestions  in  these  similitudes.  The  essential  lesson  is  this,  that  the  Son  of  God  has 
a  large  accession  of  joy  from  all  forms  of  genuine  piety.  His  people  are  his  vineyard, 
his  inheritance,  and  in  them  he  finds  deliglit. 

III.  A  GENEROUS  PARTICIPATION.  "Eat,  0  frieuds;  drink, yea, drink  abundantly,  0 
beloved."  The  satisfaction  which  Jesus  finds,  he  forthwith  shares  with  his  chosen.  If 
there  be  a  smile  on  the  Bridegroom's  face,  it  will  soon  communicate  itself  to  the  bride. 
If  the  Head  have  gladness,  so  will  all  the  members  in  the  mystical  body.  1.  Jesus  uses 
very  tender  titles  to  designate  his  saints.  He  calls  them  "friends."  The  old  explanation 
of  a  friend  suits  well  in  this  place,  viz.  one  soul  dwelling  in  two  bodies.  Jesus  com- 
pletely identifies  himself  with  us.  Once  we  were  aliens,  enemies,  rebels,  but  the  old 
enmity  is  changed  into  a  sacred  and  inseparable  friendship.  Jonathan  gave  proof  of 
his  friendship  with  David  when  he  stripped  himself  of  raiment  and  put  it  upon  his 
friend.  But  our  Immanuel  has  surpassed  all  orders  of  creatures  in  his  practical  deeds 
of  kindness.  Further,  he  calls  them  his  "beloved."  He  presseth  into  service  every 
human  form  of  speech.  May  I  take  this  word  as  addressed  to  me  ?  Most  certainly  I 
may,  for  I  am  not  excluded.  No  saint  has  attained  to  this  rapturous  privilege  by  any 
personal  merit.  "  He  died  for  the  ungodly."  Though  the  chief  of  sinners,  "  he  loved 
me;  he  gave  himself  for  me."  Yes;  mystery  though  it  is,  it  is  also  plainest  among 
facts,  that  into  my  penitent  heart  Jesus  comes  to  dwell,  and  into  my  ear  he  whispers 
this  endearing  word,  "  Beloved."  2.  Observe  the  provisions  prepared.  They  are  of  two 
kinds,  viz.  food  and  drink.  Very  properly  may  we  regard  the  food  as  revealed  truth. 
To  appreciate  the  eternal  facts  of  God's  redemption,  this  is  solid  food.  This  is  the 
manna  wbinh  cometh  down  from  heaven.    The  only  food  for  the  hungry  soul  is  truth. 

"  Christ  said  not  to  his  first  conventicle, 
•Go  forth  and  preach  Imposture  to  the  world,' 
But  gave  them  truth  to  feed  on." 

This  1b  heavenly  nutriment,  and  is  indispensable.  And  what  else  can  the  drink  be,  but 
the  mercy  of  our  God,  flowing  from  the  fount  of  his  eternal  love?  All  truth  and  all 
grace  are  in  Jesus ;  hence  he  says  to  us,  "  He  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger, 
and  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst."  3.  Mark  the  fulness  of  the  entreaty. 
•'  Drink ;  yea,  drink  abundantly."  No  generous  host  likes  to  see  his  guests  making 
pretence  of  eating  or  drinking.  It  implies  that  they  doubted  his  welcome,  and  took 
care  to  have  a  meal  before  they  came.  This  is  dishonouring  to  the  giver  of  the  feast. 
And  Jesus  will  have  none  of  that.  He  knows  well  that  the  thirst  of  the  soul  can  be 
allayed  nowhere  but  from  him.  He  knows  well  that  no  one  can  have  a  surfeit  of  his 
mercy.  Of  other  things  we  may  eat  and  drink  more  than  is  for  our  good,  but  of  the 
love  of  Christ  we  cannot  have  too  much.  The  love  we  partake  in  shall  become  in  us 
"a  well,  springing  up  unto  everlasting  life."  However  much  we  take,  we  do  not 
diminish  the  supply.  Trembling  at  his  table,  I  have  sometimes  said,  "  Lord,  I  am  too 
aaworthy  to  sip  a  drop  of  thy  mercy.    My  sin  is  unusual,  crimson,  aggravated."    Bnt 


lie  THE  SONa  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  nr.  1—16. 

he  straightway  replies,  "For  thee  it  is  provided.    Drink;  yea,  drink  abundantly, 
0  beloved."— D. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  charm  of  true  heauty.  The  bride  is  now  in  the  palace  which  is  to 
be  her  residence  of  state.  The  veil  is  removed  from  her  countenance,  and  as  her  royal 
lover  and  spouse  gazes  upon  her  form  and  features,  he  is  filled  with  admiration,  and 
breaks  forth  in  a  poetical  commendation  of  her  loveliness.  The  language  is  the  warm 
language  of  love,  and  the  figures  employed  ai«  more  Oriental  than  those  which  would 
be  used  amongst  ourselves.  But  all  is  natural  to  an  Eastern  imagination,  which  revels 
in  eulogium  ,that  to  our  colder  taste  would  seem  extravagant.  The  beauty  of  the 
figure  and  the  face  may  be  taken  as  emblematical  of  that  higher  beauty  which  attracts 
and  satisfies  the  spiritual  discernment.  The  description  has  been  taken  as  applicable  to 
"the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,"  faultless  and  flawless  in  the  view  of  him  who  has 
purchased  his  Church  unto  himself. 

L  The  BPiBiinAL  beauty  which  Chkist  discerns  in  his  Chueoh  is  his  own 
CREATION.  There  is  no  excellence  in  man  apart  from  Grod.  The  highest  excellence  to 
be  found  in  human  character  and  history  is  the  effect  of  the  Divine  interijosition  of 
grace.  God  in  Christ  has  created  anew,  and  in  his  own  likeness,  those  whom  he  has 
visited  with  his  favour.  The  beauty  of  regenerate  character  and  consecrated  life  is  the 
beauty  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  imparted.  It  is  Divine  grace  which  bestows  upon 
the  human  soul  the  virtues  and  graces  which  make  that  soul  admirable  and  invest  it 
with  a  spiritual  charm. 

'  Nought  God  in  us  but  his  own  gifts  doth  crown." 

II.  This  spimtuai.  beauty  is  akin  to  Christ's  own.  The  influence  is  well  known 
which  the  marriage  state  exercises  in  the  gradual  assimilation  to  one  another  in  character 
and  habits  of  those  wedded  for  long  years.  The  resemblance  between  the  Divine  Head 
and  his  spouse  the  Church  is  so  striking  that  none  can  overlook  it.  They  who  accept 
Christ's  doctrine,  place  themselves  beneath  his  guardianship,  cherish  his  love, cultivate 
his  society,  are  hereby  transformed  into  his  likeness.  Who  has  not  seen  in  faithful  and 
devoted  friends  of  Jesus  traits  of  their  Lord's  spiritual  character,  lineaments  unmis- 
takably his?  The  sympathy,  beneficence,  the  purity  and  tenderness,  the  patience  and 
self-denial,  which  are  "  notes "  of  the  true  Church,  are  evidently  Christ's ;  fi:om  the 
Divine  Lord,  and  from  no  lower  source,  have  all  these  virtues  been  derived. 

III.  Hbnob  this  spiritual  beauty  yields  satisfaction  and  delight  to  the 
Saviour  himself.  If  it  seems  at  first  an  extravagance  to  suppose  that  the  Lord  of  all 
can  find  joy  and  complacency  in  beholding  his  Church  on  earth,  the  explanation  must 
be  sought  in  the  principles  just  stated.  Humanity  was  originally  created  in  the  image 
of  God  and  for  the  glory  of  God.  The  purpose  of  Eternal  Wisdom  in  creating  this 
human  race  was  that  his  own  attributes  might  be  visibly  and  manifestly  embodied  and 
displayed,  according  to  the  measure  of  the  creature,  in  his  own  highest  handiwork  on 
earth.  Nor  has  this  purpose  been  defeated  by  sin.  The  image  sin  has  marred,  the 
grace  of  God  in  Christ  has  restored.  And  it  may  be  that  the  work  of  redemption 
brings  out  the  moral  and  spiritual  beauty  in  which  God  himself  delights,  with  a  bloom 
and  charm  and  perfection  which  would  otherwise  have  been  impossible.  Christ  sees  of 
the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  is  satisfied. 

Application.  The  Church  of  Christ  may  well  be  encouraged  and  cheered  by  the 
assurance  that  the  Divine  Spouse  appreciates  those  spiritual  excellences  which  are 
due  to  the  operation  of  his  own  Spirit.  "  Behold,  thou  art  fair,  my  love,"  is  the 
language  of  the  Bridegroom  as  he  looks  upon  his  beloved.  And  our  Saviour  is  Udt 
insensible  to  those  signs  of  grace,  those  revelations  of  spiritual  beauty,  which  he  daily 
discerns  in  his  ow^  Those  who  would  please  Christ  may  well  be  animated  by  the 
knowledge  that  he  never  looks  with  indifference  upon  the  proofs  of  sincere  affection,  upon 
the  evidences  of  spiritual  assimilation  to  himself.  Well  may  the  Christian  adopt  the 
language  of  St.  Augustine,  "  Take  from  me.  Lord,  all  that  injures  me  and  displeases 
thee,  and  give  me  tul  that  is  requisite  to  please  thee ;  give  me  words,  affections,  desires, 
and  works  which  may  draw  upon  me  thine  eyes,  thy  delight,  and  thy  love  1 " — T, 

Ver.  7. — "Without  spot."  Purity  is  an  element  of  beauty,  and  to  a  mind  judging  justly 


OH.  IV.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  117 

is  also  an  element  of  attractiveness.  In  the  maiden  he  had  brought  from  her  mountain- 
•  home  on  the  slopes  of  Lebanon,  the  royal  bridegroom  admired  a  purity  like  that  of  the 
snow  that  clothes  the  summit  of  Hermon.  She  was  meet  to  be  the  spouse  of  the  king, 
who  (speaking  not  only  of  the  absence  of  any  blemish  of  form  or  feature,  but  of  the 
qualities  of  the  mind  and  heart)  exclaimed,  as  he  looked  upon  her  fairness,  "  There  is 
BO  spot  in  thee  1 " 
L  Thb  pubity  of  thb  Ohitboh  is  in  oontbast  with  the   binfulnbss  of  the 

NATXTBAL,   UKBEaBNEBATE  STATE. 

n.  The  pubitt  of  the  Chuboh  is  bffegted  by  the  means  of  the   Sayioub's 

EBDEMPnON. 

in.  The  pubity  of  thb  Chuboh  ib  wbouoht  bt  the  cleanbing  powbb  of  the 
Holy  Spibit. 

IV.  The  pubity  of  the  Chuboh  bendebs  heb  the  acceptable  and  suitable 
BPousB  OF  heb  heavenly  Loed. 

V.  The  pubity  of  the  Chuboh  is  a  witness  and  bebukb  to  the  hobal 
defilement  of  a  sinful  wobld. 

VL  The  pubity  of  the  Chuboh  on  babth  is  an  babnbst  and  pbepabation 
fob  the  stainlbssness  of  the  btebnal  state  of  felicity — thb  nuptials  of 

HBAYEN. ^T. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — Heart  calls  to  heart.  The  richness  of  imagination  for  which  the  Song 
of  Songs  is  justly  renowned  is  especially  remarkable  in  this  passage.  All  the  senses  are 
summoned  to  deepen  the  impression.  The  sight  is  charmed  by  visible  beauty,  by  the 
glances  of  "  eyes  darting  love,"  by  the  necklace  lying  on  the  fair  white  neck.  Perfumes 
and  unguents,  spices,  aud  cedars  of  Lebanon,  address  the  sense  of  smell.  The  taste  is 
appealed  to  by  the  pleasant  wine,  the  honey  of  exceeding  sweetness.  And  what  is  the 
emotion  which  links  itself  with  beauty,  sweetness,  and  fragrance  ?  It  is  love,  with 
which  all  this  opulence  of  poetry  seems  most  harmonious.  Beneath  all  this  vesture 
of  splendour  are  certain  principles  which  may  well  be  brought  into  clearness  of 
knowledge. 

I.  All  love  involves  leaving.  The  bride  is  invited  to  quit  her  mountain-home, 
the  scenes  of  grandeur  with  which  she  was  familiar,  the  lonely  sources  of  historic  rivers, 
the  romantic  home  of  the  lion  and  the  leopard.  No  power  but  love  could  have  made 
her  think  with  acquiescence  of  such  a  change  as  that  to  which  she  was  now  urged.  Ever 
must  love  come  down  from  its  proud  heights,  from  its  vaulted  splendours,  from  its  ancient 
scenes.  It  is  so  with  human  love ;  and  how  willingly  is  the  call  obeyed  which  bids  to 
forsake  the  surroundings,  the  very  joys  and  excitements,  of  the  past  1  It  is  so  with 
Divine  love ;  and  no  soul  that  recognizes  the  sweet  authority  of  the  Saviour's  voice  will 
hesitate  to  quit  the  scenes  and  the  society  which  may  previously  have  afforded  pleasure, 
and  like  the  bride  to  forget  her  father's  house.  It  is  a  sound  test,  and  a  fair :  "  Come 
with  me  from  Lebanon." 

II.  All  love  involves  heabt-losing.  "The  heart  is  where  it  loves,  and  not 
where  it  lives."  The  lover  here  avers,  "  Thou  hast  ravished  my  heart  with  a  look  from 
thine  eyes."  Common  language  recognizes  the  distinction  between  him  who  is  "  heart- 
whole  "  and  him  who  has  "  lost  his  heart."  If  nothing  is  lost,  nothing  is  gained.  It 
is  the  same  in  the  spiritual  life.  Christ  gives  his  very  heart  to  his  people,  and  he 
expects  and  receives  from  them  their  hearts  in  return.  As  he  has  loved  us  with  an 
everlasting  love,  no  wonder  that  his  appeal  is,  "  Give  me  thy  heart." 

III.  All  love  involves  pkbfeeence.  The  language  of  love  is  the  language  of 
comparison.  No  similitudes  are  ample  or  rich  enough  to  set  forth  the  surpassing 
charm  and  attractiveness  of  the  bride.  Better  than  all  glories  and  all  gifts,  better  than 
all  rivals,  is  the  chosen  of  the  heart.  Certainly  in  the  religious  life  this  is  a  noticeable 
characteristic.  The  Saviour  prefers  the  soul  of  man  to  all  that  ease  and  pleasure  and 
worldly  dignity  can  offer.  Such  is  the  teaching  of  his  humiliation  and  obedience  on 
earth.  And  the  soul  that  knows  Christ's  love  deems  him  chief  among  ten  thousand 
and  fairer  than  the  sons  of  men.     None  can  compete,  none  can  compare,  with  him. 

IV.  All  lovb  involves  delight  in  mutual  society.  It  does  not  matter  whether 
life  be  passed  in  the  cottage  on  the  mountain-side,  in  the  tent  on  the  plain,  or  in  the 
palace  in  the  metropolis,  if  only  it  be  passed  in  that  companionship  which  is  congenial, 


118  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  iv.  1— le. 

I 

in  uninterrupted  fellowship  with  the  chosen  of  the  heart.  However  imperfect  in  its 
character  is  this  fellowship,  however  it  be  suspended  in  its  enjoyment,  the  communion 
of  the  soul  with  Christ  is  subject  to  no  such  drawback. 

"  They  who  once  his  kindness  prove, 
Find  it  everlasting  love." 

Nothing  in  Christ  can  mar  the  perfection  of  spiritual  intimacy,  or  can  bring  that 
intimacy  to  a  close.  The  love  of  Christ  is  the  purest  possession,  and  the  one  unfailing 
source  of  strength  and  joy. — ^T. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — The  garden  and  thefowntain.  The  bride's  beauty,  purity,  sweetness, 
and  delightfulness  are  set  forth  in  these  verses  of  the  song  with  all  the  richness  of 
Oriental  imagery.  The  poet's  fancy  takes  him  to  the  sunny  garden  of  the  half-tropical 
En-gadi,  to  the  breezy  heights  of  Lebanon,  whence  flow  the  streams  that  convert  the 
desert  into  a  paradise.  Orchards  of  pomegranates,  gardens  redolent  with  spicy  odours, 
murmuring  fountains,  all  serve  to  suggest  the  charms  of  the  peerless  one  whom  the 
king  claims  as  his  own. 

L  The  Church  ib  the  gaeden  of  the  Loed.  This  similitude  occurs  constantly 
both  in  Scripture  and  in  uninspired  Christian  writers,  and  has  given  a  tinge  of  poetry 
to  many  a  sacred  hymn. 

"Thy  vineyards  and  thine  orchards  are 

Most  beautiful  and  fair, 
Full  fumishM  with  trees  and  fruiia 

Exceeding  rich  and  rare. 
Thy  gardens  and  thy  gallant  walks 

Continually  are  green; 
There  grow  such  sweet  and  pleasant  flowen 

As  nowhere  else  are  seen." 

1.  The  Church,  like  the  garden,  is  the  scene  and  home  of  life.  The  world  is  the  arid 
wilderness,  the  stony  waste.  The  Church  has  been  breathed  upon  by  the  Eternal 
Spirit,  whose  influence  has  called  into  existence  the  living  plants  tliat  adorn  the  garden 
cf  Christ.  2.  The  Church,  like  the  garden,  is  a  spectacle  of  beauty.  But  in  this  case 
the  beauty  is  spiritual. 

"  The  lily  white  that  bloometh  there  is  purity ; 
The  fragrant  violet  is  surnamed  humility  ; 
The  lovely  damask  rose  is  here  called  patience  i 
The  rich  and  cheerful  marigold  is  obedience ; 
But  one  there  is  that  bears  a  crown  the  rest  above, 
A  crown  imperial,  and  this  flower  is  holy  love." 

S.  The  Church,  like  the  garden,  is  fruitful.  There  are  not  only  the  lovely  flowers,  there 
are  precious  fruits.  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit  have  been  described  by  tlie  apostle.  These 
are  they  which  afford  the  deepest  satisfaction  to  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  himself.  4. 
The  Church,  like  the  garden,  is  a  secure  seclusion  and  a  sole  possession.  Such  a 
representation  sometimes,  in  our  active,  bustling,  philanthropic  age,  arouses  resent- 
ment. Yet  it  contains  a  delightful  truth.  The  "  garden  walled  round  "  is  secure  from 
the  assaults  of  the  foe  and  the  incursion  of  the  wild  beast.  The  Church  is  indebted  to 
Divine  protection ;  here  is  its  only  security.  The  wall  encloses  the  domain.  The 
Church  is  Chiist's,  and  his  alone.  The  garden  of  the  Lord  has  "  a  wall  without,  a  well 
within."  It  is  the  sacred  and  exclusive  property  of  him  who  planted  it  for  his  own 
glory. 

II.  The  Church  is  the  fountain  of  the  Lobd.  The  garden  seems  to  suggest 
the  fountain,  which  in  the  Eastern  climate  was  necessary  to  keep  the  enclosure  moist, 
verdant,  and  fertile.  And  the  garden  well-spring  gushing  forth  and  watering  the  many- 
coloured  and  fragrant  beds,  seems  to  saggest  the  mountain-springs  far  up  in  the 
northern  heights  of  Lebanon,  beyond  the  early  home  of  the  fair  bride  herself.  Such 
springs  are  a  suitable  figure  of  the  living  Church  of  Christ,  which  to  set  forth  in  all  her 
exfiellence  needs  all  things  fair,  bright,  and  fragrant  that  earth  can  offer.    The  Church 


CH.  V.  1—16.] 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMOK. 


119 


of  Christ,  like  the  fountain,  (1)  brings  from  an  unseen  source  the  blessings  to  be  diffused ; 
(2)  yields  an  abundant  and  perpetual  supply  of  these  spiritual  gifts ;  (3)  freely  and 
generously  diffuses  knowledge  and  purity,  life  and  true  refreshment,  amongst  all  around  ; 
(4)  produces  results  of  beneficence  immediate  and  remote,  for  which  thanksgiving  must 
ever  be  rendered  to  God.  (5)  It  may  be  noted  that,  as  in  the  similitude  of  the  garden, 
so  here,  there  is  an  assurance  of  ownership  and  guardianship.  As  the  well-spring  was 
covered  with  a  great  stone,  sealed  with  the  owner's  signet,  so  the  Church  is  marked  by 
its  Divine  Lord  as  his  own.  "  It  hath  this  seal.  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his ; 
and.  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  Name  of  the  Lord  depart  from  iniquity." — T. 

Ver.  16. — The  response  of  love.  The  impassioned  encomium  of  the  bridegroom  is  not 
disregarded,  is  not  ineffectual ;  it  not  only  yields  satisfaction  and  pleasure  to  her  who 
is  the  object  of  unstinted  praise ;  it  elicits  the  response  of  appreciative  gratitude  and 
affectionate  welcome.  If  Christ  delights  in  the  Church,  the  Church  also  delights  in 
Christ,  and  yields  to  him  the  tribute  of  loyal  obedience. 

I.  Divine  influences  are  entreated.  The  breath  of  the  Spirit  of  God  passing 
graciously  and  gently  and  yet  mightily  over  the  Christian  society  alone  can  call  forth 
all  its  spiritual  fragrance.  The  silent,  jinseen,  benignant  influences  are  to  be  sought 
with  fervent,  earnest  prayer :  "  Awake,  0  north  wind ;  and  come,  thou  south ;  blow  upon 
my  garden  1 " 

II.  The  exhalation  of  spiritual  fbagkancb  is  desired.  "  That  the  spices 
thereof  may  flow  out."  Because  the  Church  is  Christ's,  it  has  great  capacities  for  good  ; 
yet  the  actual  exhibition  of  the  vital  qualities,  in  proofs  of  piety,  in  deeds  of  holiness, 
in  services  of  benevolence,  is  dependent  upon  the  "  Lord  and  Giver  of  life,"  whose 
quickening  grace  is  the  greatest  privilege  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  There  is  an 
aroma  of  spiritual  excellence  in  the  Church  of  the  Lord  Jesus  which  is  beyond  com- 
parison the  sweetest  and  divinest  quality  which  human  society  has  ever  manifested. 

III.  The  presence  or  the  Lord  himself  is  requested.  "  Let  my  beloved  come 
into  his  garden."  True,  he  has  given  his  Church  the  promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you 
alway."  He  is  among  his  people  to  know  their  works,  to  accept  their  service,  to 
inspire  their  devotion.  He  ever  visits  his  vineyard;  comes,  "seeking  fruit."  The 
Church  speaks  of  itself  as  both  "  my  "  garden  and  "  his "  garden  ;  and  it  is  both. 
When  the  Lord  is  invited  and  welcomed,  it  is  to  his  own  chosen  and   congenial 


IV.  The  fruit  that  is  due  to  the  Lobd  is  offered.  1.  In  what  do  these 
precious,  pleasant  fruits  consist  ?  Praise,  devotion,  love,  obedience.  2.  To  what  are 
they  owing  ?  To  Divine  care  and  protection ;  to  the  tilling  of  the  wise  and  forbearing 
Master ;  to  the  genial  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Hence  they  are  "  his  "  fruits. 
The  weeds  are  ours  ;  the  fruits  are  his.  3.  How  are  they  regarded?  Christ  delights 
in  them,  for  they  are  the  results  of  liis  purpose  and  of  his  sacriflce.  Christ "  eats  "  of 
them ;  i.e.  uses  them  in  his  condescension.  His  people  may  well  say  to  him,  "  Of  thine 
own  have  we  given  thee."  There  is  no  satisfaction  possible  to  Christ's  people  so  great 
and  so  pure  as  that  they  feel  when  their  Lord  accepts  their  offering  and  approves 
their  ende»vours. — T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Ver.  1. — ^I  am  come  into  my  garden,  my 
sister,  my  bride ;  I  have  gathered  my  myrrh 
with  my  spice  ;  I  have  eaten  my  honeycomb 
with  my  honey ;  I  have  drunk  my  wine  with 
my  milk.  Eat,  0  friends  ;  drink,  yea,  drink 
abundantly,  0  beloved.  My  myrrh  with  my 
haleam  (see  1  Kings  x.  10).  There  were  cele- 
brated plantations  at  tjerioho.  The  Queen  of 
Sheba  brought  "  of  spices  very  great  store ;  " 
"  There  came  no  more  such  abundance  of 


spices  as  these  which  the  Queen  of  Sheba 
gave  to  King  Solomon."  Is  there  a  reference 
to  the  conversion  of  the  heathen  nations  in 
this?  The  wine  and  milk  are  what  God 
offers  to  Ids  people  (see  Isa.  Iv.  1)  without 
money  and  without  price.  Oloyd\a  is  what 
Ohloe  gives  to  Daphnis  (cf.  Ps.  xix.  6).  It 
would  seem  as  though  the  writer  intended 
us  to  follow  the  bridal  procession  to  its 
destination  in  the  royal  palace.  The  bridal 
night  iutirvenes.  The  jiiy  of  the  king  in  his 
bride  is  complete.    The  cUmax  is  reached. 


120 


THE  SONG  OP   SOLOMON. 


[oh.  t.  1—16. 


and  the  rest  of  the  song  is  an  amplification. 
The  call  to  the  friends  is  to  celebrate  the 
marriage  in  a  banquet  on  the  second  day 
(see  Gen.  xxix.  28 ;  Judg.  xiv.  12  ;  Tobit 
xi.  18 ;  and  of.  EeT.  xix.  7  and  xix.  9).  A 
parallel  might  be  found  in  Ps.  xxii.  26,  where 
Messiah,  at  the  close  of  bis  sufferings,  salutes 
his  friends,  the  poor,  and  as  they  eat  at  his 
table  gives  them  his  royal  blessing,  "  Vivat 
cor  vestrurn  in  setemum  !  "  The  perfect  state 
of  the  Churcli  is  represented  in  Scripture.both 
in  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  New,  as 
celebrated  with  universal  joy — all  tears  wiped 
away  from  off  all  faces,  and  the  loud  harpings 
of  innumerable  harpers.  Oan  we  doubt  that 
this  wonderful  book  has  tinged  the  whole 
of  subsequent  inspired  Scripture  ?  Oan  we 
read  the  descriptions  of  triumphant  rejoic- 
ing in  the  Apocalypse  and  not  believe  that 
the  apostolic  seer  was  familiar  with  this 
idealized  love-song?- 

Ver.  2 — ch.  viii.  4 Part  IV.  Remini- 
scences OF  LovE-DATS.  The  bridegroom 
rejoicing  in  the  hride. 

Ver.  2. — The  bride's  reminiscence  of  a  love- 
dream.  I  was  asleep,  but  my  heart  waked. 
It  is  the  voioe  of  my  beloved  that  kuooketh, 
saying.  Open  to  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my 
dove,  my  nndefiled :  for  my  head  is  filled  with 
dew,  my  looks  with  the  drops  of  the  night. 
There  is  a  resemblance  between  this  account 
of  what  was  apparently  a  dream,  and  that 
which  is  related  in  ch.  iii.  1 — 4 ;  but  the 
difference  is  very  clear.  In  the  former 
case  the  lover  is  represented  as  dismissed 
for  a  season,  and  then  the  relenting  heart 
of  the  maiden  sought  after  him  and  found 
him.  In  this  case  he  "  stands  at  the  door 
and  knocks,"  coming  in  the  night ;  and  the 
maiden  rises  to  open,  but  finds  him  gone,  and 
BO  is  drawn  after  him.  The  second  dream  is 
much  more  vivid  and  eliiborate,  and  seems 
to  be  an  imitation  and  enlargement  of  the 
other,  being  introduced  apparently  more  for 
the  sake  of  dwelling  on  the  attractions  of 
the  beloved  one  and  his  preoiousness  in  the 
eyes  of  the  maulen  than  in  self-reproach. 
Is  it  not  possible  that  the  poem  originally 
concluded  at  ch,  v.  1  with  the  marriage,  and 
that  the  whole  of  the  latter  half  was  an 
amplification,  either  by  Solomon  himself,  the 
author  of  the  first  half,  or  by  some  one  who 
has  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the  song  ?  This 
would  explain  the  apparent  repetition,  with 
the  variations.  But,  at  all  events,  the  second 
part  certainly  is  more  from  the  standpoint 
of  married  life  than  the  first.  Hence  the 
bride  speaks  at  great  length,  which  she  does 
not  in  the  earlier  portion.  Delitzsch  thinks 
that  this  second  love-dream  is  intended  to 
represent  what  occurred  in  early  married 
life;  but  there  are  two  objections  to  that — 
first,  that  the  place  is  «vidently  •  country 


residence ;  and  secondly,  that  such  an  occur- 
rence is  unsuitable  to  the  conditions  of  B  royal 
bride.  It  is  much  more  natural  to  suppose 
that  the  bride  is  recalling  what  occurred  in 
her  dream  when  the  lover,  having  been 
sent  away  until  the  evening,  as  on  the 
former  occasion,  returned,  and  in  the  night 
knocked  at  the  door.  "  My  heart  waked " 
is  the  same  as  "  My  mind  was  active."  The 
"  heart "  in  Hebrew  is  the  inner  man,  both 
intellect  and  feeling.  "  I  was  asleep,  but  I 
was  thinking"  (cf.  Cicero,  'De  Divinatione,' 
i.  3  .).  The  lover  has  come  off  a  long  jour- 
ney over  the  mountains,  and  arrives  in  the 
ni;<ht-time.  The  terms  with  which  he 
appeals  to  his  beloved  are  significant,  de- 
noting (1)  equal  rank— mi/  Hater;  (2)  free 
choice — my  love;  (3)  purity,  simplicity,  and 
loveliness — my  dove ;  (4)  entire  devotion,  un- 
doubting  trust — my  undefiUd.  Tammanthi, 
"my  perfection,"  as  Arabic  tam,  teim,  "one 
devoted  to  another,"  as  a  servant.  Similar 
passages  are  quoted  from  heathen  luve- 
poetry,  as  Anacreon,  iii.  10;  Propertius,  i. 
16—23 ;  Ovid,  '  Amor.,'  iii.  19,  21.  The 
simple  meaning  of  the  dream  is  that  she 
is  full  of  love  by  night  and  by  day.  She 
dreamed  tliat  she  was  back  in  her  old 
country  home,  and  that  her  lover  visited 
her  like  a  shepherd ;  and  she  tells  how  she 
sought  him,  to  show  how  she  loved  him. 
When  we 'are  united  to  the  Saviour  with  the 
bonds  of  a  pledged  affection,  we  lose  the 
sen  se  of  self-reproach  in  the  delight  of  fellow- 
ship, and  can  even  speak  of  our  own  slow- 
ness and  backwardness  only  to  magnify  his 
grace.  We  delight  to  acknowledge  that  it 
was  his  knocking  that  led  us  to  seek  after 
him,  although  we  had  to  struggle  with  the 
dull  heart ;  and  it  was  not  until  it  was 
moved  by  his  approach,  by  his  moving 
towards  us,  that  we  hastened  to  find  him, 
and  were  full  of  the  thought  of  his  desir- 
ableness. There  are  abundant  examples  of 
this  same  interchange  of  affection  in  the 
history  of  the  Church's  revivals  and  re- 
storations. 

Ver.  3. — I  have  put  off  my  coat ;  how  shall 
I  put  it  on  I  I  have  washed  my  feet ;  how 
shall  I  defile  them  ?  Evidently  the  meaning 
is,  "  I  have  retired  to  rest ;  do  not  disturb 
me."  She  is  lying  in  bed.  The  cuttonefh, 
or  x'T'"''.  was  the  linen  garment  worn  next 
the  body — from  cathan, "  linen."  The  Arabic 
kutun  is  "  cotton ; "  hence  the  French  coton, 
"  calico,  or  cotton  "  shift.  Sliulamith  repre- 
sents herself  as  failing  in  love,  not  meeting 
the  condescension  and  affection  of  her  lover 
as  she  should.  Sloth,  reluctance,  ease,  keep 
her  back.  "  Woe  to  them  that  are  at  ease 
in  Zion  I "  The  scene  is,  of  course,  only 
ideally  true  ;  it  is  not  meant  to  be  a  descrip- 
tion of  an  actual  occurrence.  Fancy  in  dreams 
stirs  up  the  real  nature,  though  it  also  dis- 


CH.  V.  1 — ^16.J 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


121 


turbs  it.  Shulamith  has  forsaken  her  first 
liive.  She  relates  it  with  sorrow,  but  not 
with  despondency.  She  comes  to  herself 
again,  and  her  repentance  und  restoration 
are  the  occasion  for  pouring  out  the  fulness 
of  her  affection,  which  had  never  really 
changed,  though  it  has  been  checked  and 
restrained  by  self-indulgence.  How  true  a 
picture  both  of  the  individual  soul  and  of 
the  Church  in  its  decline  I  "  Leave  me  to 
myself ;  let  me  lie  at  ease  in  my  luxury  and 
my  smooth,  conventional  ways  and  self- 
flattering  deceit." 

Ver.  4.  —My  beloved  put  in  his  hand  by  the 
hole  of  the  door,  and  my  heart  was  moved 
for  him.  The  door-hole  is  a  part  of  the  door 
pierced  through  at  the  upper  part  of  the  lock, 
or  door-bolt  (linn-]p),  that  is,  by  the  opening 

from  without  to  within,  or  through  the  open- 
ing, as  if,  ».«.,  to  open  the  door  by  pressing 
back  the  lock  or  bolt  from  within.  There 
was  some  obstacle.  He  failed  to  open  it. 
It  had  not  been  left  so  that  he  could  easily 
obtain  admittance.  The  metaphor  is  very 
apt  and  beautiful.  How  much  he  loved  her  I 
How  he  tried  to  come  to  her  I  As  applied  to 
the  Saviour,  what  infinite  suggestiveness  I 
He  would  be  with  us,  and  not  only  knocks 
at  the  door,  but  is  impatient  to  enter ;  tries 
the  lock,  and  too  often  finds  it  in  vain  ;  he  is 
repelled,  he  is  resisted,  he  is  coldly  excluded. 
My  heart  was  moved  for  Mm.  'yo, "  in  y  inner 
being"  (cf.  Isa.  Ixiii.  15,  where  the  same  word 
is  used  of  God).  It  is  often  employed  to  ex- 
press sympathy  and  affection,  especially  with 
tender  regret.  The  later  authorities,  as  the 
older  translations,  have  "  to  him "  ( V^r),  i.e. 
over  him,  or  on  account  of  him,  in  the  thought 
of  his  wounded  heart. 

Ver,  5. — I  rose  up  to  open  to  my  beloved ; 
and  my  hands  dropped  with  myrrh,  and  my 
fingers  with  liquid  myrrh,  upon  the  handles 
of  the  bolt.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that 
the  lover  had  come  to  the  door  perfumed  as 
if  for  a  festival,  and  the  costly  ointment  which 
he  brought  with  him  has  dropped  on  the 
handles  of  the  bolts.  Similar  allusions  may 
be  found  in  Lucretius  and  other  heathen 
writers.  This  description  is,  of  course,  in- 
applicable to  the  sliepherd-theory.  It  would 
not  be  a  rough  country  swain  that  came  thus 
perfumed  ;  but  Solomon  is  thought  of  as  at 
once  king  and  lover.  It  would  be  stretch- 
ing the  poetry  too  far  to  suppose  that  Shula- 
mith meant  the  natural  sweetness  of  her 
lover  was  the  perfume.  Neither  is  there  any 
probability  in  the  explanation  that  siie 
dipped  her  hand  in  perfumed  oil  before  she 
opened  the  door.  That  would  destroy  all 
the  form  and  beauty  of  the  dream.  It  is  her 
lover  whose  fragrance  she  celebrates,  not  her 
own.  Whether  he  brought  perfumes  with 
him,  or  the  innate  pergonal  sweetness  of  bis 


presence  left  its  fragrance  on  that  whioh  he 
touched,  in  either  case  it  is  the  lover  himself 
who  is  spoken  of.  His  very  hand,  wherever 
it  has  been,  leaves  behind  it  ineffable  delight. 
His  presence  reveals  itself  every  where.  Those 
who  go  after  him  know  that  he  is  not  far  off 
by  the  traces  of  his  loving  approaches  to 
them.  The  spiritual  meaning  is  too  plain 
to  need  much  exposition. 

Ver.  6. — ^I  opened  to  my  beloved ;  but  my 
beloved  had  withdrawn  himself,  and  was 
gone.  My  soul  had  failed  me  when  ha  spake : 
I  sought  him,  but  I  oonld  not  find  him;  I 
called  him,  but  he  gave  me  no  answer.  The 
meaning  is  this — The  voice  of  my  beloved 
struck  my  heart;  but  in  the  consciousness 
that  I  had  estranged  myself  from  him  I 
could  not  opeuly  meet  hiru,  I  could  not  offer 
him  mere  empty  excuses.  Now  I  am  made 
sensible  of  my  own  deficiency.  I  call  after 
him.  I  long  for  his  return,  but  it  is  in  vain 
(of.  the  two  disciples  going  to  Emmaus,  Luke 
xxiv.,  "  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  us," 
etc.?).  Similarallusion  to theeffectof  the  voice 
of  the  beloved  is  found  in  Terence,  '  And.,' 
i.  5.  16,  "  Oratio  bssc,"  etc.  The  failing  or 
departing  of  the  soul  at  the  sound  of  the 
voice  must  refer  to  the  lack  of  response  at 
the  time,  therefore  it  was  that  she  sought 
him  and  cried  out  after  him.  When  he  spake; 
literally,  in  his  speaking ;  i.e.  when  be  said, 
"I  will  not  nowcome  because  at  first  refused;" 
cf  Prov.  i.  20 — 33,  the  solemn  warning 
against  the  loss  of  opportunity.  It  is  a  coin- 
cidence between  the  two  books  of  Solomon 
whioh  cannot  be  disregarded.  If  there  is  any 
spiritual  meaning  at  all  in  Solomon's  Song, 
it  certainly  is  a  book  which  he  who  wrote 
the  first  chapter  of  Proverbs  is  likely  to  have 
written. 

Ver.  7. — The  watchmen  that  go  about  the 
city  found  me,  they  smote  me,  they  wounded 
me ;  the  keepers  of  the  walls  took  away  my 
mantle  from  me.  The  intention  is  to  show 
into  what  evil  she  fell  by  having  to  seek  her 
beloved  instead  of  being  with  him.  She  is 
mistaken  and  misjudged ;  she  is  smitten  and 
wounded  with  reproaches  and  false  accusa- 
tions, as  though  she  were  a  guilty  and  evU- 
minded  woman.  She  is  subjected  to  abuse 
and  ill  treatment  from  those  who  should  be 
her  guardians.  She  bad  hard  work  to  escape, 
leaving  her  robe  behind  her  (cf.  Gen.  xxxix. 
12).  The  redhidh,  like  ridhd  in  Arabic,  is  a 
plaid-like  upper  garment  thrown  over  the 
shoulders — so  says  Abeu  Ezra ;  but  it  is  de- 
rived, no  doubt,  from  the  root  "to  make 
broad  or  thin,"  "to  spread  out" — perhaps, 
therefore,  "  a  thin,  light  upper  robe  "  which 
was  worn  over  the  chiton,  a  summer  over- 
dress, a  cloak  (LXX.,  flepio-rpov:  Jerome, 
paUium ;  Luther,  Sehleier).  If  we  take  the 
dream  thus  described,  and  which  seems  to 
conclude  at  this  point,  as  related  to  the  8UJ> 


122 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  v.  1—16. 


rounding  ladies,  then  we  mnBt  suppose  that 
it  la  introdueerl  for  the  sake  of  what  follows. 
The  bride  feels  that  she  does  not  love  her 
beloved  one  half  enough  ;  she  is  so  conscious 
of  deficiencies,  that  she  might  even  have 
acted  as  her  dream  represented.  It  had 
entered  her  soul  and  made  her  ill  with  in- 
ward grief  and  self-reproach.  She  might  so 
act,  she  might  so  treat  her  husband.  So  she 
adjures  her  companions  to  tell  him  how  much 
she  loves  him.  The  spiritual  application  is 
not  difScult  to  see.  Wlieu  the  soul  loses  its 
joy  in  Christ,  it  becomes  the  prey  of  fears  and 
■ell-accusations,  and  even  of  reproaches  from 
Christ's  servants  and  the  guardians  of  his 
Church.  For  when  our  rel  gion  ceases  to  be 
a  spontaneous  delight  to  us,  we  are  apt  to 
carry  on  even  the  active  work  of  our  life  in 
a  manner  to  be  misumlerstood  by  sincere 
believers  around  us.  Yea,  the  very  efforts 
we  make  to  recover  peace  may  bring  reproach 
upon  us.  Any  Christian  minister  who  has 
liad  to  deal  with  religious  despondency  will 
quite  understand  this  dream  of  the  bride's. 
We  may  olten  smite  and  wound,  and  even 
deprive  of  the  garment  of  reputation  and 
esteem,  those  who  are  really  seeking  for 
Christ,  because  we  have  misunderstood 
them. 

Ver.  8. — I  adjure  you,  0  daughters  of  Jeru- 
•alem,  if  ye  find  my  beloved,  that  ye  tell  him, 
ihat  I  am  sick  of  loye.  This  appeal  to  the 
ladies  suggests  that  the  bride  is  speaking 
from  her  place  in  the  royal  palace ;  but  it 
may  be  taken  otherwise,  as  a  poetical  trans- 
ference of  time  anil  place,  from  the  place 
where  the  dream  actually  occurred,  to  Jeru- 
salem. It  is  difficult,  in  a  p»em  of  such  a 
kind,  to  explain  every  turn  of  language  ob- 
jectively. We  cannot,  however,  be  far  wrong 
if  we  say  the  bride  is  rejoicing,  in  the 
presence  of  her  attendant  ladies,  in  the  love 
of  Solomon.  He  has  just  left  her,  and  she 
takes  the  opportunity  of  relating  the  dream, 
that  she  may  say  how  she  cannot  bear  his 
absence  and  how  she  adores  him.  The  ladies 
enter  at  once  into  the  pleasant  scheme  of  her 
fancy,  and  assume  that  they  are  with  her  in 
the  country  place,  and  ready  to  lielp  her  to 
find  her  shepherd-lover,  who  has  turned 
away  from  her  when  she  did  not  at  once 
respond  to  his  call.  The  daughters  of  Jeru- 
salem will,  of  course,  symbfdieally  represent 
those  who,  by  their  sympathy  and  by  their 
similar  relation  to  the  object  of  our  love, 
are  ready  to  help  us  to  rejoice — our  fellow- 
believers. 

Ver.  9. — What  is  thy  beloved  more  than 
another  beloved,  0  tbou  fairest  among 
women?  what  is  thy  beloved  mere  than 
another  beloved,  that  thou  dost  so  adjure 
us  I  This,  of  course,  is  poetic  artifice  in  order 
to  give  the  opportunity  to  the  bride  to  enter 
upon  a  glowing  deacriptiou  of  the  object  of 


her  love.      She  wishes  to  say  that  he  is 
perfect,  everything  that  he  can  be. 

Ver.  10. — My  beloved  is  white  and  ruddy, 
the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand.  The 
mingling  of  colours  in  ihe  countenance  is  a 
peculiar  excellence.  The  word  isaeh,  from 
the  root  tsachach  (of.  Lam.  iv.  7),  means  a 
bright,  shining  clearness ;  it  is  not  the  Siinie 
as  Idvdn,  which  would  mean  "  dead  white." 
So  in  Greek  Kaairphs  differs  from  \evicos. 
The  red  adhom,  from  the  root  dSm,  which 
means  "to  condense,"  is  dark  red  (rouge 
puce),  no  doubt  as  betokening  health  and 
vigour.  The  pure,  delicate  white  among  the 
Caucasians  denotes  high  rank,  superior  train- 
ing, hereditary  nobility,  as  among  ourselves 
the  "aristocratic  paleness"  (cf.  Horn.,  Ml.,' 
iv.  141,  "ivory  with,  purple;"  Virg.,  'iEn.,' 
xii.  65 ;  Ovid,  'Am.,'  ii. ;  '  Kleg.,'  v.  39 ;  Hor., 
0.1.,  i.  13,  etc. ;  TibuU., '  Eleg.,'  oxi.  4,  etc  ). 
The  chiefest,  that  is,  tbe  distinguished  one, 
the  chosen  (so  the  Greek  versions,  Syriao, 
Jerome,  Luther).  The  LXX.  has  ixKeKo- 
X"rii4vos,  e  cohorte  selectus.  Another  render- 
ing is  "  bannered,"  furnished  with  a  banner 
or  pennon  (^ji)  hence  the  word  ^ui  as  a  past 
participle  (so  the  Venetian  (r€(rriiiaiaij.4yos). 
The  numeral  (revdvd)  "ten  thousand"  is 
simply  used  to  represent  an  innumerable' 
multiturle :  "  myriad  "  is  so  used  among  our- 
selves (of.  Ezek.  xvi.  7). 

Vers.  11 — 16. — His  head  is  as  the  most 
fine  gold,  his  locks  are  bushy,  and  black  as 
a  raven.  His  eyes  are  Uke  doves  beside  the 
water-brooks ;  washed  with  milk  and  fitly 
set.  His  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as 
banks  of  sweet  herbs ;  his  lips  are  as  lilies, 
dropping  liquid  myrrh.  His  hands  are  as 
rings  of  gold  set  with  beryl ;  his  body  is  as 
ivory  work  overlaid  with  sapphires.  His 
legs  are  as  pillars  of  marble  set  upon  sockets 
of  fine  gold.  His  aspect  is  like  Lebanon, 
excellent  as  the  cedars.  His  mouth  is  most 
sweet ;  yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely.  This  is 
my  beloved,  and  this  is  my  friend,  0  daughters 
of  Jerusalem.  This  description,  which  is 
complete  in  itself,  is  best  regarded  in  its  un- 
broken perfection.  We  must  not  expect  to 
find  a  meaning  for  each  separate  part  ot  it. 
There  are  ten  corporeal  excellences  enume- 
rated. We  naturally  recall  the  descriptions 
in  Daniel  and  in  the  Apocalypse,  which 
certainly  have  reference  to  this,  and  mani- 
festly combine  the  attributes  of  greatness 
and  beauty  in  the  Son  of  man.  Solomon,  no 
doubt,  as  the  son  of  Bathsheba,  was  dis- 
tinguished by  his  personal  attractions.  Some 
of  the  details  of  description  are  differently 
rendered  by  different  commentators.  Do- 
litzsoh  regards  the  description  of  the  hair  in 
ver.  11  as  compared  to  a  hill  or  hilly  range — 
"  his  looks  hill  upon  hill,"  i.e. "  his  hair,  seen 
from  his  neck  upwards,  forms  in  undulating 
linea  bill  upon  luU."    The  black  colour  is  no 


OH.  V.  1— 16.J 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


123 


donbt  mentioned  as  a  contrast  with  the  fair, 
white  complexion.  The  eyes  are  not  only 
pure  and  clear,  but  with  a  glancing  moiat- 
ness  in  them  which  expresses  feeling  and 
devotion.  So  Plutarch  has  iyp6r-i\s  rav 
oftfidTiSv  to  denote  a  languishing  look,  and 
we  find  the  same  figure  in  the '  Gitagovinda ' 
and  Hafiz,  and  in  Ossian.  So  Luther,  "  Und 
stehen  in  der  Falle."  The  pureness  of  the 
white  of  the  eye  is  represented  in  the  bathing 
or  washing  in  milk.  They  are  full  and  large, 
"  fine  in  their  sttting,"  referring  no  doubt  to 
the  steady,  strong  look  of  fine  eyes.  "  The 
cbeelis "  are  compared  to  towers  of  plants ; 
that  is,  there  is  a  soft  elevation  in  them. 
LXX.,  tfiiov(rai  /ivpfxf/LKd:  Jerome.  Siout 
areolae  aromattcm  consitse  a  pigmentariiB.  The 
Targum  says,  "  Like  the  rows  of  a  garden  of 
aromatic  plants,  which  produce  deep,  pene- 
trating essences,  even  a»  a  (magnificent) 
garden  aromatic  plants  " — perhaps  referring 
to  the  "  flos  juventsB,"  the  hair  on  the  face, 
the  growth  of  the  beard.  "  The  lips  "  are 
described  as  the  organs  of  speech  as  well  as 
inviting  to  embrace.  They  drop  words  like 
liquid  fragrance.  "  The  hands"  may  be  diifer- 
ently  described  according  as  they  are  viewed. 
Delitzsch  says,  "  His  hands  form  cylinders, 
fitted  in  with  stones  of  Taishiah."  Gesenius 
thinks  the  comparison  is  of  the  closed  hand 
and  the  stained  nails,  but  that  seems  far- 
fetched. Surely  it  is  the  outstretched  hands 
that  are  meant.  The  form  of  the  fingers  is 
seen  and  admired ;  they  are  full,  round,  fleshy 
like  bars  of  gold.  The  word  "  Tarshish  "  may 
mean  clay-white,  as  in  the  Greek  versions ; 
that  is,  topaz,  called  Tarshish  from  Tartessus 
in  Spain,  where  it  is  found.  The  description 
of  the  body  is  of  the  outward  appearance  and 
figure  only,  though  the  word  itself  signifies 
"  inward  parts."  The  comparison  with  ivory- 
^work  refers  to  the  glancing  and  perfect 
smoothness  and  symmetry  as  of  a  beautiful 
ivory  statue,  the  work  of  the  highest  artistic 
excellence.  The  sapphire  covering  tempers 
the  white.  The  beautiful  blue  veins  appear 
througli  the  skin  and  give  a  lovely  tint  to 
the  body.     So  in  the  description  of  the  legs 


we  have  the  combination  of  white  and  gold, 
the  white  marble  setting  forth  greatness  and 
purity,  and  the  gold  sublimity  and  noble- 
ness; intended,  no  doubt,  to  suggest  that 
in  the  royal  bridegroom  there  was  personal 
beauty  united  with  kingly  majesty,  as  in  the 
following  description  of  his  general  aspect, 
which,  like  the  splendours  of  the  mountains, 
was  awe-inspiring  and  yet  elevating  and  de- 
lightful (cf.  Ps.  Ixxx.  11  (10);  Jer.  xxii.  7  ; 
Isa.  xxxvil.  24).  His  mouth,  <or  palate,  is 
sweetness  itself;  that  is,  when  he  speaks  his 
words  are  full  of  winning  love  (cf.  Prov. 
xvi.  4 ;  Ps.  Iv.  16).  We  may  compare  with 
the  whole  description  that  given  of  Absalom, 
Solomon's  brother,  in  2  Sam.  xiv.  25,  26.  It 
has  been  truly  remarked  by  Zoekler  that "  the 
mention  of  the  legs,  and  just  before  of  the 
body,  could  only  be  regarded  as  unbecoming 
or  improper  by  an  overstrained  prndishness, 
because  the  description  which  is  here  given 
avoids  all  libidinous  details,  and  is  so 
strictly  general  as  not  even  to  imply  that  she 
had  ever  seen  the  parts  of  the  body  in  ques- 
tion in  a  nude  condition.  It  merely  serves  to 
complete  the  delineation  of  her  lover,  which 
Shulamith  sketches  by  a  gradual  descent 
from  head  to  foot,  and,  moreover,  is  to  be  laid 
to  the  account  of  the  poet  rather  than  to  that 
of  Shulamith,  who  is  in  everything  else  so 
chaste  and  delicate  in  ber  feelings.  Cer- 
tainly it  would  be  much  less  delicate  re- 
garded as  the  description  of  a  shepherd-lover 
who  is  seeking  to  obtain  possession  of  the 
maiden  taken  from  him,  than  of  the  royal 
bridegroom  to  whom  Shulamith  is  at  all 
events  afSanced,  if  not  already  married.  The 
highest  spiritual  feelings  of  loving  adoratioa 
of  the  Saviour  have  welcomed  some  parts  of 
this  description,  and  adopted  them  into  the 
language  of  "spiritual  songs."  To  some 
minds,  no  doubt,  it  is  repellent ;  to  those  to 
whom  it  is  not  so,  the  warmth  and  glow  of 
Eastern  language  is  by  no  means  too 
realistic  for  the  feelings  of  delight  in  the 
Lord  which  express  themselves  in  rapturoua 
music. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  1. — Mcponse  to  ch.  iv.  16 :  the  hridegroom  accepts  the  brid^t  invitation.  He 
calls  her  again  by  the  endearing  title,  "my  sister-bride."  He  comes,  as  she  bids  him, 
into  the  garden  which  was  hers  and  yet  his.  He  takes  delight  in  its  produce,  in  the 
entertainment  which  she  has  prepared  for  him.  He  invites  his  friends  to  share  his 
enjoyment.  He  addresses,  apparently,  the  chorus  of  young  men,  his  companions,  who 
have  already  appeared  in  ch.  iii.  6 — 11,  calling  them  "  0  friends,"  and  "  0  beloved 
ones ; "  unless,  indeed,  the  last  clause  be  translated,  as  the  Hebrew  at  least  permits 
"  Drink  abundantly  of  love."  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  accepts  the  offering  of  the 
Church,  his  bride.  He  loved  her,  and  gave  himself  for  her ;  therefore  her  love  is  very 
precious  to  him.  He  comes  into  her  garden.  He  calls  it  his — "  my  garden  "—in  gra- 
cious acknowledgment  of  the  bride's  gift.    He  uses  the  seme  pronoun  of  all  its  varied 


124  THE  SONG  OS"  SOLOMON.  [oh.  ▼.  1—16. 

products.  They  are  his,  each  and  all.  He  gave  them  to  the  hride.  She  offers  them 
back  to  her  Lord.  He  invites  his  fdends  to  share  his  joy.  He  said  once  to  his  friends 
in  his  holy  parable,  "  Bejoice  with  me ;  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  lost ; " 
so  now  he  says,  "  Eat,  0  friends ;  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly  of  love."  "  Blessed 
are  they  which  are  called  unto  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  "  (Eev.  xix.  9).  So 
the  Lord  listens  to  the  call  of  the  Christian  soul  that  thirsts  for  him.  He  answers  the 
cry,  "Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus."  He  will  come  with  the  Father,  and  make  his  abode 
with  them  that  love  him  (John  xiv.  23).  He  graciously  accepts  the  offerings  of  love. 
He  welcomes  the  beauty  and  sweetness  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  the  believing  soul. 
They  are  his,  for  it  was  he  who  gave  the  Spirit,  who  watered  the  growing  fruits  with 
the  dew  of  his  grace;  his,  again,  because  the  heart  that  gives  itself  to  God  gives  with 
the  gift  of  self  all  its  belongings,  gladly  owning  that  whatever  it  has  of  good  comes 
from  his  only  gift.  He  acknowledges  their  imperfect  efforts :  "  I  know  thy  works,  thy 
labour,  and  thy  patience."  He  saith  unto  his  friends,  "  Rejoice  with  me ; "  and 
"  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  each  sinner  that  repenteth," 
Then  if  our  love  gives  joy  to  the  dear  Lord  who  gave  up  the  glory  of  heaven  for  us, 
and  for  us  endured  the  long  torture  of  the  cross,  how  very  earnestly  we  Christians 
ought  to  try  to  make  our  heart  indeed  a  "  garden  enclosed,"  wholly  dedicated  unto  him, 
and  separated  from  all  profane  uses !  If  our  poor  growth  in  holiness  pleases  him,  how 
earnestly  we  ought  to  pray  and  strive  to  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ;  how  earnestly  we  ought  to  try  never  to  grieve  his 
Holy  Spirit,  hut  to  give  him  our  whole  heart,  with  all  its  affections  and  desires,  that  we 
may  be  wholly  his — his  for  ever  I 

Vers.  2 — 8. — The  second  dream  of  the  Iride.  L  The  bbtdeobook  at  the  doob. 
1.  The  voice  of  the  ItHoved.  The  bridegroom  is  absent ;  the  bride  is  alone.  There  is  a 
temporary  separation,  something  approaching  to  an  estrangement ;  yet  the  old  love  is 
not  lost.  The  bride  is  sleeping  when  she  should  be  awake  and  watching  for  the 
bridegroom's  approach.  Yet  her  heart  waketh.  She  has  a  dreamy  consciousness  of 
what  is  going  on  around  her ;  she  seems  to  hear  in  her  dream  the  voice  of  her  beloved. 
So  the  Church  sometimes  sleeps — leaves  her  first  love — lapses  into  something  like 
spiritual  apathy;  yet  her  heart  waketh.  The  Lord  never  leaves  himself  without  a 
witness.  At  the  worst  times  of  indifference  there  has  always  been  some  dim  conscious- 
ness of  Iiis  presence,  some  faint  love  for  him  who  loved  the  Church  and  gave  himself 
for  her.  So  the  soul  sometimes  sleeps  when  it  is  high  time  to  awake,  when  the  night 
is  far  spent  and  the  day  is  at  hand.  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  will  not  let  us  slumber 
on  without  a  warning.  He  knocks  at  the  door  of  our  heart.  "  Behold,"  he  saith,  "  I 
stand  at  the  door,  and  knock :  if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will 
come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  me  "  (Eev.  iii.  20).  The  Church 
of  Laodicea  was  lying  wrapped  in  a  deep  sleep :  the  Lord  sought  to  arouse  her.  So  he 
knocks.at  the  door  of  our  hearts  now  by  his  Word,  by  his  ministers,  by  his  chastisements, 
by  the  warnings  of  his  Spirit.  If  we  can  in  truth  call  him  "  my  Beloved ; "  if  we  have 
really  set  our  love  upon  him,  and  given  him  our  heart  in  answer  to  his  seeking  love,  we 
shall  hear  him.  We  shall  know  bis  voice,  recognizing  it  in  judgments  and  in  mercies, 
in  warnings  and  in  consolations.  When  duty  calls  us,  even  if  it  be,  as  it  will  some- 
times be,  hard  and  displeasing  to  flesh  and  blood,  we  shall  say,  "  It  is  the  voice  of  my 
Beloved."  It  is  the  Master's  call ;  he  speaks.  The  heart  waketh  to  listen.  Does  he 
come  with  stem  reproof  for  indifference  and  coldness  of  heart  ?  No ;  his  words  are 
full  of  tenderness.  "  Open  to  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove,  my  undefiled."  It  is 
the  Lord's  great  love  for  the  souls  of  men  that  produces  those  utterances  of  yearning 
affection.  He  still  calls  the  bride  "  my  sister,"  as  he  had  done  before  the  cloud  had 
come  upon  her  love.  He  still  says  "  my  love,  my  dove,"  as  he  said  before ;  and  he  has 
a  fresh  term  of  endearment,  "  my  undefiled,  my  perfect  one."  We  know,  alas!  that 
we  are  not  undefiled,  we  are  not  perfect.  ("  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained, 
either  were  already  perfect,"  says  even  the  great  apostle,  St.  Paul.)  But  what  the 
Lord  would  haVe  us  to  be,  what  he  will  make  us  at  the  last  if  we  abide  in  him,  that 
he  is  graciously  pleased  to  call  us  now.  How  those  holy  words  of  deep  tenderness 
should  excite  in  us  repentance  for  the  past,  and  earnest  effort  to  become  by  his  grace 
less  unworthy  of  those  most  gracious  and  loving  titles  I    He  asks  us  to  open,  that  he 


OH.  V,  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  126 

may  enter  in.  He  has  been  wandering  in  the  darkness,  and  as  when  he  came  unto  his 
own  there  was  no  room  for  him  in  the  inn,  and  as  during  the  days  of  his  earthly  ministry 
he  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head,  so  now  he  knocks  at  one  heart  after  another,  and 
heart  after  heart  is  closely  barred  against  him.  They  will  not  open,  that  he  may  enter 
in  and  make  his  abode  with  them.  He  comes  now  to  the  sister  bride  of  old  times, 
asking  her  as  if  for  his  own  sake  (such  is  the  unutterable  depth  of  his  infinite,  self- 
abasing  love),  "Open  unto  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove,  my  undefiled."  Ah,  how 
can  any  of  those  souls  of  men  whom  he  loved  even  unto  death  shut  up  their  hearts  against 
that  call  of  unspeakable  affection !  He  pleads  as  for  himself,  as  if  needing  shelter :  "  My 
head  is  filled  with  dew,  and  my  looks  with  the  drops  of  the  night."  Alas  I  the  bride, 
still  half  asleep,  scarcely  heeds  the  bridegroom's  call,  does  not  realize  its  meaning— 

"For  none  of  the  ransom'd  ever  knew 
How  deep  were  the  waters  crosa'd ; 
Or  how  dark  was  the  night  that  the  Lord  pass'd  throngh 
Ere  he  found  his  sheep  that  was  lost." 

It  cost  more  to  redeem  our  souls  than  our  poor  thoughts  can  comprehend.  When  we 
try  to  realize  the  Lord's  sufferings,  we  seem  to  stand  afar  off  beholding,  like  the  people 
who  came  together  to  that  sight  of  awe,  who  smote  their  breasts  (Luke  xxiii.  48). 
The  Church  pleads  those  bitter  sufferings  in  her  solemn  Litany :  "  By  thine  agony  and 
bloody  sweat,  by  thy  cross  and  passion,  good  Lord,  deliver  us.''  "Remember,  good 
Lord  Jesus,"  we  say  in  the  ancient  hymn,  "  that  it  was  for  me  thou  didst  undertake 
that  long,  weary  journey ;  in  that  long  search  for  me  thou  didst  sit  faint  and  exhausted ; 
it  was  to  redeem  me  that  thou  didst  endure  the  cross.  Let  not  that  toil  and  labour 
be  in  vain,  0  Lord."  But  here  it  is  the  Lord  himself  who  pleads  with  us  in  our 
hardness ;  he  so  longs  for  our  salvation.  He  bids  us  remember  what  he  endured  for 
us.  It  is  the  expression  of  his  intense  yearning  love.  He  would  have  us  comprehend 
with  all  saints  something  of  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height  of  that 
great  love ;  to  return  it  in  our  poor  way,  to  open  our  heart  to  him,  that  he  may  enter  in 
and  take  that  heart  to  be  his  own  which  he  bought  with  the  price  of  his  most  precious 
blood.  2.  The  answer.  The  bride  does  not  realize  the  deep,  solemn  meaning  of  the 
bridegroom's  call.  She  is  half  asleep  still.  She  lies  dreaming  in  her  bed.  She  makes 
excuses  to  herself.  And  we,  alas  1  far  too  often  do  the  like  when  the  Lord  calls  us  to 
work,  to  deny  ourselves  for  his  sake.  We  slumber  on  in  careless  sleep ;  we  forget  what 
he  did  fur  us.  We  do  not  hear  his  voice ;  or,  if  we  hear,  we  listen  dreamily,  lying  still 
in  spiritual  sloth,  not  thinking  that  when  the  Lord  calls  it  is  time  to  bestir  ourselves, 
to  be  up  and  doing,  to  "  pass  the  time  of  our  sojourning  here  in  fear :  forasmuch  as  we 
know  that  we  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold  .  .  .  but 
with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ "  (1  Pet.  i.  18).  We  must  not  make  vain  excuses, 
like  those  that  were  bidden  in  the  parable  (Luke  xiv.  18),  for  the  time  is  short.  It  is 
our  eternal  salvation  that  is  at  stake.  It  is  Christ  the  Son  of  Grod  who  is  calling  us; 
and  he  loved  us,  and  gave  himself  for  us  (Gal.  ii.  20).  Alas  !  the  bride,  whom  the 
bridegroom  loved  with  so  great  a  love,  makes  poor  excuses  in  her  dream.  She  will 
not  rise  and  open  till  it  is  too  late;  she  will  not  take  a  little  trouble  Jor  his  sake. 
3.  The  repentance.  The  beloved  put  his  hand  through  the  hole  of  the  door  (  besought 
to  open  it.  The  bride's  heart  was  moved  at  last  by  his  earnest  appeals.  "  My  bowels 
were  moved  for  him,"  she  says,  as  she  repeats  her  dream.  She  thought  of  her  past 
love  for  him,  of  his  great  love  for  her,  of  the  hardships  he  had  gone  through  in  seeking 
her.  She  wonders  how  she  could  have  forgotten  all  this  even  in  a  dream ;  she 
rose  up  to  open  to  her  beloved.  So  the  soul  that  has  made  many  excuses,  that  has 
slumbered  long,  that  has  spent  its  time  as  in  a  dream,  forgetting  the  solemn  realities 
of  life,  hears  at  last  through  the  long-suffering  grace  of  God — listens  to  the  patient 
call  of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom.  Then  our  heart  burns  within  us  when  we  think  that 
he  has  indeed  been  talking  with  us,  opening  the  Scriptures  (Luke  xxiv.  32);  our 
bowels  are  moved  for  him.  We  think  that  it  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  our  Saviour, 
who  is  standing  without,  waiting  for  us  to  answer ;  that  the  hand  with  which  he  seeks 
to  open  the  door  was  once  pierced  through  for  us,  nailed  upon  the  cross  for  our  souls' 
sake.    We  listen  to  his  voice — 


126  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  ▼.  1—16. 

"  O  Jesu,  thou  art  pleading 

In  accents  meek  and  low: 
'  I  died  for  you,  my  children, 

And  will  ye  treat  me  eo  ? ' 
O  Lord,  with  shame  and  sorrow 

We  open  now  the  door ; 
Dear  Saviour,  enter,  enter, 

And  leave  us  never  more." 

The  bride  opens  to  her  beloved.  The  bridegroom's  hand  had  been  dipped  in  oil  of 
myrrh.  Some  of  the  unguent  remained  upon  the  bolt ;  it  dropped  upon  the  fingers  of 
the  bride.  It  vpas  a  token  of  the  bridegroom's  presence.  He  had  gathered  his  myrrh 
(ver.  1)  from  the  "  garden  enclosed  "  before  this  passing  shadow  had  fallen  upon  their 
love.  It  may  be,  too,  that  we  may  see  in  the  myrrh  a  parable  of  self-denial.  It  may 
be  regarded  as  a  loving  warning  left  by  the  bridegroom  to  teach  the  bride  a  necessary 
lesson.  She  must  not  slumber  on ;  it  is  time  to  wake  and  to  work.  Working  for 
Christ  is  sometimes  like  the  wine  mingled  with  myrrh  (Mark  xv.  23) ;  it  has  a  bitter 
taste  to  our  pampered  palate.  But  if  we  take  the  cup  which  the  Lord  gives  us  to 
drink,  we  shall  find  at  last  that  the  smell  of  it  is  sweet ;  even  as  bis  yoke,  hard  at  first, 
becomes  easy  in  the  discipline  of  obedience,  and  his  burden,  heavy  at  first,  becomes 
light  when  he  bears  it  with  us.  For  self-denials  meekly  borne  for  him  bring  us  nearer 
and  nearer  to  him  who  bore  the  supreme  self-sacrifice  of  the  cross  for  us ;  and  in  his 
presence  there  is  a  depth  of  sweetness  which  takes  away  the  bitterness.  4.  It  is  too  late. 
The  beloved  had  withdrawn  himself.  "My  beloved  withdrew  himself,  was  gone,"  she 
says,  in  the  plaintive  wailing  of  disappointment  (there  is  no  conjunction  in  the  original). 
"  My  soul  went  forth,"  she  continues,  "  as  he  spake."  My  soul,  my  heart,  my 
affections,  went  forth  to  him  at  the  sound  of  his  voice.  The  well-known  tones  aroused 
the  old  love.  She  had  once  given  her  heart  to  him;  and  now,  though  in  her  dream 
her  love  seemed  to  have  been  chilled,  and  she  seemed  to  lie  heedless,  unwilling  to 
rouse  herself  to  exertion,  yet  now  his  words  at  last  reached  her  heart.  Her  soul  went 
forth  to  him  in  response  to  his  calling.  Or  the  Hebrew  words  may  rather  mean,  as  in 
the  Eevised  Version,  "  My  soul  had  failed  me  when  he  spake."  The  same  words  are 
used  in  describing  the  death  of  Rachel :  "  It  came  to  pass,  as  her  soul  was  in  departing  " 
(Gen.  XXXV.  18).  His  words  awoke  in  her  soul  the  fear  lest  she  should  lose  him  by 
her  coldness  and  selfish  neglect.  The  thought  was  like  death  to  her,  "  Love  is  strong 
as  death  "  (ch.  viii.  6).  Her  soul  went  forth  ;  it  failed  her.  For  the  moment  she  was 
helpless — prostrate  as  in  a  death-like  swoon.  Then  she  aroused  herself.  It  was  time 
to  act,  to  bestir  herself.  He  was  gone;  she  miglit  lose  him  for  ever;  and  her  heart 
was  bound  up  in  him.  To  lose  him  was  death — worse  than  death.  She  sought  him, 
but  she  could  not  find  him  ;  she  called  him  in  her  dream,  but  he  gave  her  no  answer. 
The  dream  of  the  brida  is  a  parable  of  the  Christian  life.  The  soul  sometimes  sinks 
into  a  state  of  listlessness  and  apathy.  There  is  no  actual  transgression,  perhaps — ^no 
open  sin.  The  evil  spirit  is  not  there ;  the  house  is  empty  (Matt.  xiL  43,  44).  But 
the  Bridegroom  is  absent,  and  love  has  grown  cold.  There  is  no  recollection  of  the 
absent  Lord — no  regret,  no  longing  for  his  return.  The  soul  lives  on,  as  it  were,  in  a 
dream,  not  realizing  the  solemn  meaning  of  life,  not  thinking  of  the  awful  future.  But 
God  in  his  gracious  mercy  will  not  let  us  dream  away  our  lives  without  a  warning. 
He  calls  us  by  his  blessed  Son :  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,  and  knock."  Sometimes, 
alas!  we  will  not  hear;  sometimes  we  listen  dreamily,  hnlf-conscious,  recognizing  in  a 
sense  the  Bridegroom's  voice,  but  not  realizing  the  solemn,  holy  meaning  of  the  call ; 
not  thinking  of  his  love  and  of  our  ingratitude,  his  promises  and  our  broken  vows, 
what  he  did  for  us  and  what  retnrn  we  have  made  to  him ;  not  thinking  of  his  grace 
and  our  responsibility,  his  longing  for  our  salvation  and  our  fearful  danger.  That 
lethargy,  that  slumber  of  indifference,  creeps  over  us  all  from  time  to  time  when  we 
have  not  been  watchful — when  we  have  neglected  our  prayers  and  other  blessed  means 
of  grace.  But  the  dear  Lord  seeketh  that  which  is  lost  until  he  find  it.  He  "is  long 
suff'ering  to  usward,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to 
repentance "  (2  Pet.  iii.  9).  He  comes  again  and  again,  calling  us,  sometimes  in  the 
gentle  tones  of  entreating  love,  sometimes  in  the  sterner  language  of  reproof  and 
chastisement.    Sometimes  he  makes  as  though  he  would  force  his  way.    fie  puts  hii 


iH.Y.  1— 16.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  127 

hand  in  at  the  liole  of  the  door;  he  lays  the  cross  upon  us;  he  reminds  us  of  the 
burden  which  he  bore  for  us;  he  teaches  us  that  the  cross  is  the  very  badge  and  mark 
of  his  chosen — that  whosoever  doth  not  take  up  his  cross  cannot  be  his  disciple.  At 
last  we  are  stirred  in  our  slumbeis.  We  rise  from  our  sleep.  But  perhaps  we  are  only 
half  awake,  half-liearied.  Our  will  goes  back  to  our  old  slothful  rest.  We  say,  like 
the  sluggard  in  the  Proverbs,  "  Yet  a  little  sleep,  a  little  slumber,  a  little  folding  of 
the  hands  to  ^leep"  (Prov.  vi.  10).  Then  the  Lord  deals  with  us  as  a  wise  physician 
of  the  soul.  He  would  have  us  feel  our  weakness,  our  danger.  "  They  that  be  whole 
need  not  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick"  (Matt.  ix.  12).  He  would  have  us  feel 
our  need  of  him.  He  withdraws  himself;  and  when  we  open  to  him  he  is  gone.  He 
makes  as  though  he  would  go  further,  as  he  dealt  with  the  two  disciples  on  the  way 
to  Bmmaiis  (Luke  xxiv.  28).  Then  our  soul  goes  forth  to  him.  It  faints  within  us  ; 
we  feel  how  helpless  we  are  without  him ;  we  feel  that  without  him  life  is  not  worth 
living ;  and  we  try  to  constrain  him,  like  those  two  disciples,  sayiug,  in  their  words, 
"  Abide  with  us ;  for  it  is  toward  evening,  and  the  day  is  far  spent."  We  seek  him  in 
earnest  prayer,  sometimes  with  strong  crying  and  tears.  But  for  a  time  we  cannot 
find  him.  We  call  him,  but  he  gives  us  no  answer.  It  is  in  love  that  he  thus  deals 
with  us,  to  arouse  us,  to  make  us  feel  the  need  of  exertion,  of  active  effort.  He  cannot 
be  found  without  diligent  search.  The  bride  said,  in  relating  her  first  dream,  "By 
night  on  my  bed  I  sought  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  "  (ch.  iii.  1).  It  is  not  thus 
that  the  soul  should  seek  for  Christ,  still  lying,  as  it  were,  upon  the  bed  of  spiritual 
sloth,  thinliing  dreamily  of  Christ,  pleasing  itself,  perhaps,  with  the  poetry  of  religion, 
with  the  beauty  of  the  Saviour's  life,  with  the  comfort  which  the  Scriptures  offer. 
Religion  is  not  a  dream ;  it  is  not  mere  poetry,  mere  love  of  beauty ;  it  is  a  life — a  life 
of  action  and  energy — a  prolonged  effort  to  imitate  Christ,  to  please  Christ,  to  follow 
Christ's  holy  example.  The  first  cry  of  the  really  awakened  soul  is,  "  Lord,  what  wilt 
thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  (Acts  ix.  6).  The  soul  that  answers  in  earnest  to  the  Saviour's 
call  knows  and  feels  instinctively  that  God  has  work  for  us;  that  that  work  must  be 
done  even  in  fear  and  trembling  by  his  help,  who  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to 
do.  The  Lord  would  have  us  realize  this  truth ;  therefore  sometimes  he  withdraws 
himself,  to  make  us  feel  that  life  is  blank  without  him — to  make  us  cry  li^e  Job,  "  Oh 
that  I  were  as  in  months  past,  as  in  the  days  when  God  preserved  me ;  when  his 
candle  shined  upon  my  head,  and  when  by  his  light  I  walked  through  darkness ;  as  I 
was  in  the  days  of  my  youth,  when  the  secret  of  God  was  upon  my  tabernacle  I  "  (Job 
xxix.  2 — 4).  The  contrast  makes  us  feel  that  God  was  certainly  with  us  then,  even 
if  we  cannot  feel  liis  presence  now.  Therefore  we  seek  him,  even  though  for  a  time 
we  cannot  find  him.  It  was  so  with  Job  for  a  season.  "He  hideih  himself,"  he  said; 
"I  cannot  see  him."  He  trusted  God  even  in  the  midst  of  darkness.  "But  he 
knoweth  the  way  that  I  take:  when  he  hath  tried  me,  I  shall  come  forth  as  gold  " 
(Job  xxiii.  9,  10).  So  we  must  believe  in  his  love  even  when  he  seems  to  hide  his 
face  from  us  and  not  to  listen  to  our  prayers.  He  seemed  long  to  disregard  the 
supplications  of  the  Syro-phoenician  woman,  but  at  last  there  came  the  gracious 
answer,  "  0  woman,  great  is  thy  faith  :  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt." 

II.  The  sbaech.  1.  The  bride  goes  forth  in  her  dream.  Again,  as  in  ch.  iii.  2,  she 
goes  about  the  city  seeking  the  beloved ;  again  the  watchmen  found  her.  They  had 
not  been  unfriendly  in  the  first  dream,  though  they  were  not  able  to  guide  her  in  her 
search.  Now  they  seemed  to  treat  her  with  cruelty.  They  smote  her,  and  wounded 
her,  and  took  her  mantle  from  her.  Difficulties  will  always  arise  in  our  search  after 
Christ — sometimes  dangers  and  persecutions:  "We  must  through  much  tribulation 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  We  may  perhaps  also  see  another  lesson  here.  The 
bride  has  more  trouble  now  in  her  search  than  she  had  on  the  former  occasion.  She 
has  been  more  blamable.  Then  she  had  been  for  a  time  listless  and  slothful;  now 
her  sin  had  been  not  only  sloth,  but  selfish  disobedience.  She  refused  at  first  to  open 
to  the  beloved ;  she  did  not  heed  his  call ;  she  did  not  heed  the  hardships  which  he 
had  sufifered.  So  it  is  in  the  Christian  life.  To  sin  against  light  is  very  grievous ; 
repeated  sin  makes  repentance  each  time  more  difficult.  We  must  be  watchful  always, 
»s  the  Saviour  bids  us :  "  Watch  ye  therefore :  for  ye  know  not  when  the  master  of 
She  house  cometh,  at  even,  or  at  midnight,  or  at  the  cockcrowing,  or  in  the  morning : 
£st  coming  suddenly  he  find  you  sleeping.    And  what  I  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all, 


128  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON,  [oh.  v.  1—16. 

Watch  "  (lilark  xiii.  35 — 37).  We  must  learn  the  prayer  of  the  child  Samuel,  "  Speak, 
Lord;  for  thy  servant  heareth."  Each  time  we  refuse  to  listen  the  old  torpor  steals 
more  and  more  over  our  souls,  our  slumber  becomes  deeper,  the  difficulty  of  awakening 
ua  becomes  greater,  and  repentance  more  doubtful,  more  encompassed  with  dangers, 
calling  for  more  exertion  of  will,  more  determined  eflfort.  2.  The  charge.  The  bride 
caunot  find  her  beloved.  She  seeks  the  help  of  the  chorus  of  maidens,  the  daughters 
of  Jerusalem.  She  adjures  them  in  her  eager  anxiety,  "  If  ye  find  my  beloved,  what 
will  ye  tell  him  ?  That  I  am  sick  of  love."  She  had  used  the  last  words  once  before 
(ch.  ii.  5),  but  in  a  different  connection.  Then  his  banner  over  her  was  love ;  then 
the  joy  of  his  love  was  almost  too  great  for  her ;  she  was  sick  of  love.  Now  it  is 
her  longing  for  the  absent  bridegroom  which  produces  the  heart-sickness  which  she 
describes.  She  fondly  thinks  that  if  he  only  knew  her  yearning  for  him  he  would 
return ;  he  would  forgive  all  that  was  past,  and  bring  her  again  under  the  banner  of 
bis  love.  So  the  Christian  soul,  awakened  out  of  sleep,  longs  for  the  Saviour's  presence. 
She  feels  that  she  is  sick.  She  needs  the  great  Pliysician.  Without  him  all  is  dark ; 
without  him  there  is  no  spiritual  health,  no  joy,  no  hope.  She  seeks  him  in  earnest 
prayer.  She  asks  for  the  intercession  of  Christian  friends;  she  would  have  them  bring 
her  distress  and  longing  before  the  throne.  "My  God,  my  soul  is  cast  down  within 
me;"  "My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  for  the  living  God;"  "Why  art  thou  cast  down, 
0  my  soul  ?  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me  ?  hope  in  God :  for  I  shall  yet 
praise  him,  who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God." 

Vers.  9 — 16. — The  hride?$  praise  of  the  bridegroom.  L  Thb  question  or  the 
DAUGHTERS  OF  JERUSALEM.  1.  The  bride.  The  bride  is  dreaming  still.  The  chorus 
seem  in  her  dream  to  address  her  again  as  they  had  done  in  ch.  i.  8.  She  is  still  to 
them  the  fairest  among  women.  They  are  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  the  children  of  the 
kingdom ;  and  to  them  the  Church,  which  is  the  bride  of  Christ,  must  appear  exceed- 
ing fair.  She  is  not,  alas !  without  spot  or  blemish  now.  She  recognizes  her  own  faults, 
her  many  shortcomings.  But  the  children  of  the  kingdom  remember  the  holiness 
of  the  saints  departed.  They  see  traces  of  the  beauty  of  holiness  existing  always  in 
the  Church.  Being  themselves  children  of  God,  they  are  learning  that  grace  of  charity 
which  "  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things ;  which  rejoioeth 
not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the  truth."  And  so  they  regard  the  beauty  of  the 
bride  rather  than  her  blemishes ;  they  think  more  of  her  yearning  love  for  the  Bride- 
groom than  of  her  past  shortcomings.  It  is  a  sad  mistake,  a  sin  against  charity,  to 
refuse  to  recognize  the  real  goodness  of  Christian  people  who  have  from  time  to  time 
fallen  into  various  inconsistencies.  2.  The  bridegroom.  What  is  he  more  than  others  ? 
"  What  is  thy  beloved  more  than  another  beloved  . .  .  that  thou  dost  so  charge  us  ?  "  The 
daughters  of  Jerusalem  know  King  Solomon  well,  but  in  her  dream  the  bride  seems  to 
hear  them  asking  the  question  of  the  text.  She  has  always  loved  the  bridegroom  for 
himself,  not  for  his  crown,  his  magnificence.  She  fancies  that  the  maidens  of  the  chorus 
take  the  same  view  of  wedded  love,  and  ask  what  are  the  distinguishing  merits  of  her 
beloved.  Sometimes,  indeed,  that  question  is  asked  in  scorn  or  in  temptation,  "  What 
think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  What  is  he  more  than  other  masters  ?  Those  other  masters 
have  their  attractions  ;  they  offer  more  of  earthly  pleasure,  more  of  present  ease.  What 
has  Christ  to  offer  ?  .  What  are  his  attractions?  What  are  the  rewards  of  his  service  ? 
"What  is  thy  Beloved  more  than  another  beloved?"  men  say  sometimes  to  the 
Christian.  "What  is  thy  Master  to  us,  that  thou  dost  so  adjure  us?"  But  the 
daughters  of  Jerusalem,  in  this  second  dream  of  the  bride,  do  not  ask  the  question  in 
scorn  or  irony.  It  is  asked  with  a  dramatic  purpose  to  give  the  bride  an  occasion  for 
dwelling  upon  the  glorious  beauty,  the  many  endowments  of  her  beloved.  She  gladly 
takes  advantage  of  it. 

II.  The  bride's  answbb.  1.  The  bridegroom  is  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand. 
"  My  beloved,"  she  says,  "  is  white  and  ruddy."  We  think  of  him  whose  "  garment  was 
white  as  snow,"  and  "  his  throne  like  the  fiery  flame  "  (Dan.  vii.  9).  Ancient  writers 
have  applied  the  description  to  our  Lord.  He  was  white  in  his  spotless  purity ;  his 
sacred  body  was  reddened  with  the  precious  blood.  These  are  the  first  thoughts  of  the 
Christian  when  he  meditates  upon  the  Lord's  perfections — the  perfect  beauty  of  his 
most  holy  life,  the  glory  of  ielf-saorifice  which  sheds  a  golden  light  upon  bit  atoning 


OH.T.  I— 16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  129 

death.  His  life  exhibited  a  picture  of  holiness  such  as  the  world  had  never  seen,  such 
as  none  of  its  greatest  sages  had  ever  imagined.  It  stands  alone  in  its  pure  beauty, 
unique,  unapproachable.  We  know  that  no  human  intellect  could  have  imagined  such 
a  life ;  no  merely  human  pen  could  have  described  it.  It  is  unlike  the  accepted  moral 
ideals  of  the  time;  it  stands  apart  by  itself,  immeasurably  higher  than  all  beside. 
But  it  was  his  death,  he  said,  that  should  draw  all  men  unto  himself.  It  was  the  great 
love  manifested  upon  the  cross  that  would  constrain  the  best  and  noblest  hearts  of  all 
times  and  countries  to  live  no  longer  to  themselves,  but  unto  him  who  died  for  them 
and  rose  again  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15).  Therefore  he  is  our  Standard-bearer  (as  the  word 
rendered  "  chiefest "  seems  to  mean),  our  bannered  One.  He  is  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation.  He  goeth  before  us,  bearing  the  banner  of  the  cross.  The  thousands  of  his 
disciples  follow.  And  he  is  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand,  marked  out  and  dis- 
tinguished (as  the  word  may  perhaps  mean)  from  all  others  by  his  unapproachable 
holiness,  by  the  infinite  power  and  majesty  of  his  self-sacrificing  love.  The  bride 
enumerates  the  various  points  of  excellence  which  together  make  up  the  completeness 
of  the  bridegroom's  beauty.  The  Christian  loves  to  meditate  upon  the  various  graces 
which  make  up  the  holy  beauty  of  the  Saviour's  character — his  lowliness,  his  gentleaess, 
his  long-suffering  kindness,  his  holy  wisdom,  his  absolute  unworldliness,  his  unselfish 
devotion  to  his  sacred  mission,  his  meekness,  his  forbearance,  his  patience  with  the 
many  mistakes,  the  obstinate  misunderstandings  of  his  disciples,  his  endurance,  his 
calm  and  lofty  courage,  the  majestic  bearing  which  forced  even  Eoman  soldiers  to 
exclaim,  "  Truly  this  Man  was  the  Son  of  God."  2.  He  is  altogether  lovely.  The 
bride  sums  up  her  praises  of  the  bridegroom.  "  His  mouth  is  most  sweet :  yea,  the 
whole  of  him  is  desires  "  (for  this  is  the  literal  translation).  The  Prophet  Haggai,  using 
another  form  of  the  same  Hebrew  word,  says,  "  The  Desire  of  all  nations  shall  come  " 
(Hag.  ii.  7).  Daniel  is  called  three  times  "  a  man  of  desires  "  (Dan.  ix.  23 ;  x.  11,  19). 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Desire  of  all  nations.  He  is  the  Messiah,  the  Consolation 
of  Israel,  for  whose  coming  so  many  faithful  hearts  had  yearned.  He  spake  as  never 
man  spake.  His  mouth  was  all  sweetnesses  (the  literal  rendering),  both  his  holy  words 
and  his  gracious  looks.  How  often  we  are  told  significantly  that  Jesus  looked  upon 
his  disciples  as  if  that  look  was  (as  indeed  it  must  have  been)  a  thing  to  be  remembered 
all  one's  life,  full  of  heavenly  meaning,  full  of  Divine  love !  We  know  what  power  his 
words  had,  what  power  they  have  now.  The  very  tones  of  that  most  sacred  voice 
must  have  had  an  indescribable  sweetness.  "  Jesus  said  unto  her,  Mary."  That  one 
word  was  enough.  It  brought  sweet  comfort  to  the  penitent,  joy  unutterable,  heart- 
felt gladness  to  the  mourner.  And  who  can  tell  the  entrancing  sweetness  of  those 
most  blessed  words  which  with  all  our  heart's  deepest  yearning  we  long  one  day  to 
hear,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  children  of  my  Father "  ?  Therefore  we  desire  his  presence 
now.  "  The  whole  of  him  is  desires."  Therefore  God's  people  have  "  a  desire  to  be 
with  Christ "  (like  St.  Paul,  Phil.  i.  23) ;  for  they  know  that  to  be  with  him  here,  and 
still  more  to  be  with  him  in  the  paradise  of  God,  is  "far  better" — by  much  very  far 
better,  than  the  greatest  of  earthly  joys.  "  The  whole  of  him  is  desires."  Every  one 
of  those  holiest  graces  which  adorn  his  perfect  character  should  be  to  us  a  subject  of 
loving  study  and  adoration,  with  a  longing  desire  to  imitate  it  and  to  work  it  in  our 
poor  way  into  our  own  hearts  by  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  hath  all  things  who 
hath  Christ.  He  hath  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  to  satisfy  all  his  desires,  to  fill 
all  the  yearnings  of  his  heart.  He  will  count  all  things  else  as  dross — as  very  dung — m 
comparison  with  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord.  Then  how 
earnestly  we  ought  to  pray  that  by  the  grace  of  God  we  may  be  enabled  to  make  tho.-iH 
last  words  of  the  bride  our  very  own,  "  This  is  my  Beloved,  and  this  is  my  Friend,  0 
daughters  of  Jerusalem."  If  he  is  indeed  ours,  our  Beloved,  our  Friend,  our  Savioui-, 
then  we  have  all  that  we  can  need  for  our  soul's  truest  blessedness,  both  for  this  Life 
and  for  the  life  to  come. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. —  Ghrisfs  response.    "  I  am  come,"  etc.    Here  we  have  for  the  second  time  the 
name  of  "  sister  "  prefixed  to  that  of  "  spouse,"  and  it  seems  to  teach  that  this  song  is 

BONO    OF   SOLOUON.  '  K 


130  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  1ioB.r.l—W. 

not  to  be  understood  in  any  mere  dry,  literal,  earthly  sense ;  but  is  to  be  regarded  in 
such  spiritual  way  as,  in  fact,  most  leaders  have  regarded  it.  How  prompt  Christ's 
answer  is  1  Of.  Isa.  liv.  24,  "  Before  they  call  I  will  answer,"  etc.  The  soul  hears 
the  knock  of  Christ,  opens  the  door,  and  at  once  he  comes  in  (Kev.  iii.).  Cf.  Jacob, 
"  Surely  the  Lord  was  in  this  place,  and  I  knew  it  not ; "  Mary  Magdalene  at  tha 
sepulchre :  "  She  knew  not  that  it  was  Jesus."     In  this  verse  we  learn — 

L  SiTOH  SOUL  IB  Chbist'b  GARDEN.  For  it  has  beeu  chosen,  separated,  watered, 
cultivated,  adorned,  made  fruitful. 

II.  It  has  Chbist'b  pbesekoe  and  is  his  delight.  1.  The  aspirations  of  such 
soul  proves  his  presence.  They  are  his  footprints,  though  not  perceived  to  be  so.  Cf. 
"Their  eyes  were  holden,  that  they  should  not  know  him"  (Luke  xxiv.).  He  is  the 
unperceived  Author  of  its  lioly  desires  atid  purposes.  2.  And  he  delights  in  it.  He  calls 
it  "  my  garden  "  (cf.  on  ch.  iv.  9 — 15). 

III.  The  angels  are  summoned  to  share  in  his  delight.  "  Eat,  0  my  friends.'' 
Not  that  we  say  tliis  address  to  his  "  friends "  proves  this  truth,  but  suggests  it.  We 
know  that  "  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  au_els  of  God  over,"  etc.  (Luke  xv.) ; 
and  see  Bevelation.^'osstni,  where  the  joy  of  Christ  is  ever  shared  in  by  all  heaven. 
They  know  what  transpires  here,  and  they  rejoice  in  what  is  joyful.  They  are  the 
"  great  cloud  of  witnesses  "  by  which  we  are  surrounded  and  surveyed.  And  what 
gladdens  Christ  must  gladden  them.  They  "enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord."  The 
good  conduct  of  those  whom  we  behold  makes  us  glad.  Can  it  be  otherwise  with 
them  ?  What  great  encouragement,  therefore,  we  have  in  our  Christian  life  in  know- 
ing that  we  can  further  the  joy  of  our  Lord  and  of  the  holy  angels  I  Be  it  ours  so  to 
do.— S.  0. 

Ver.  2. — The  flesh  and  spirit.  "  I  sleep,  but  my  heart  waketh."  The  body  sleeping, 
the  heart  awake. 

I.  Sometimes,  as  here,  but  one  of  these  is  awake.  1.  Sere  it  was  the  spirit. 
(1)  This  fact  an  argument  against  materialism,  which  insists  that  the  spirit  is  alto- 
gether dependent  upon  the  body.  Hence  that  death  ends  all.  Bat,  as  here,  the  body 
may  be  weighed  down  with  sleep,  but  the  mind  is  active ;  the  body  is  dead,  but  the 
mind  alive.  Surely,  therelore,  the  mind  is  something  more  than  some  s|ieoial  arrange- 
ment of  the  molecules  of  the  brain.  (2)  It  is  well  that,  if  the  spirit  be  willing,  the 
flesh  should  be  weak.  As  a  general  rule  it  is  well,  for  else,  unless  the  wholesome  drag 
of  the  body  were  put  on,  brain-workers  would  not  live  out  half  their  days.  (3)  But  it 
is  at  times  the  occasion  of  much  harm.  It  was  so  here.  It  was  so  to  our  Lord  through 
his  disciples  yielding  to  the  sleep  that  weighed  on  them.  And  the  flesh  is  a  tyrant 
which  will,  if  allowed,  enslave  the  spirit.  Hence  we  need  to  "keep  under  the  body." 
For:  2.  Often  it  is  only  the  flesh  that  is  awake.  This  a  fearful  condition.  Cf.  St.  Jude, 
"  These  be  sensual,  not  having  the  Sijirit."  Men  may,  do,  sink  down  into  gross  animalism. 
It  is  horrible  as  well  as  disgraceful.  It  was  that  which  led  to  the  destruction  of  Sodom, 
of  the  Canaanites,  etc.  It  is  a  dread  possibility  threatening  very  many.  God  keep  us 
therefi:om  1 

II.  Sometimes  neither  are  awake.  There  are  many  people  of  whom  one  would 
have  much  more  hope  if  they  were  a  little  better  or  a  little  worse  than  they  are.  They 
are  such  as  we  have  just  named.  They  are  generally  decent  people  outwardly;  they 
never  offend  sgainst  the  conventionalities  ;  they  are  to  be  found  in  all  Co  arches,  moro's 
the  pity;  for  they  are  but  caricatures  of  the  Christian  character.  They  are  dull,  cold, 
.■^elfish,  hard,  and  spiritually  dead.  What  is  to  be  done  with  such  ?  They  are  the 
despair  of  the  earnest  Christian,  who  would  almost  be  willing  that  they  should  fall — 
>v  ere  it  possible — into  some  miserable  sin  if  so  only  their  present  self-content  could  be 
shattered  and  they  made  to  wake  up. 

III.  Sometimes  both  abe  awake.  This  the  ideal  condition.  It  is  that,  and  more 
tlian  that,  which  is  meant  by  the  "Sana  mens  in  corpore  sano."  For  wherever  this 
rendition  is,  the  spirit  will,  as  is  right,  rule  the  flesh,  having  it  well  in  hand,  causing  it 
li  e  a  properly  trained  dog  to  come  to  heel  at  once  at  the  word  of  command  (Huxley). 
The  body  will  be  the  active,  faithful  servant  of  the  master  will,  the  spirit  of  the  man. 
A  nd  when  that  spirit  is  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  then  that  is  salvation,  which 
means  "  health."    May  such  health  be  ours  1 — S.  C, 


OH.  V.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  131 


Vers.  2 — 8. — The  dream  of  Oethsemane.  Under  the  imagery  of  this  dream  devout 
students  have  seen  pictured  forth  the  pathetic  facts  of  the  gardun  in  which  our  Lord 
was  in  aguny,  and  his  disciples  slept  (of.  Matt.  xxvi.  40 — 43  and  parallels).  Wa 
have — 

L  The  distbbssbd  Saviour.  (Ver,  2.)  He  desired  his  disciples  to  watch  with  him. 
He  needed  and  desired  their  sympathy  and  the  solace  which  their  watchful  love  would 
have  given  him.  His  soul  was  troubled.  He  was  as  he  who  is  told  of  here,  and  to 
whom  the  cold  drenching  dews  and  the  damp  chills  of  the  dreary  night  hnd  caused 
much  distress,  and  who  therefore  asks  tlie  aid  of  her  whom  he  loved.  So  did  Jesus  seek 
the  aid  of  those  he  loved.  He  had  right  to  expect  it.  He  said  to  Peter,  "  Simon, 
sleepest  thouf" — thou  so  loved,  so  privileged,  so  loud  in  thy  profession  of  love  to  me, 
so  faithfully  warned,  sleepest  thouf  And  still  the  like  occurs.  The  Lord  looking  for 
the  aid  of  his  avowed  disciples,  distressed  by  manifold  causes,  and  that  aid  not  forih- 
cominij,  though  he  has  such  right  to  expect  it.  But  he  too  often  finds  now  what  he 
found  then — 

II.  His  DISCIPLES  ASLEEP.  (Ver.  3.)  So  the  spouse  here,  as  the  disciples  there,  and 
as  man  now,  had  composed  herself  to  sleep,  The  repeated  calls  of  him  who  by  voice 
and  knock  sought  to  arouse  her  failed.  And  so  did  the  repeated  visits  of  Jesus  to  his 
disciples  fail.  And  he  finds  the  same  still.  The  poor  excuses  of  ver.  3  serve  well  to 
set  forth  the  excuses  of  to-day  when  he  calls  on  us  now  to  aid  and  sympathize  with  him. 
Who  really  rouses  himself  for  Christ,  and  puts  forth  earnest  self-denying  endeavour  to 
help  his  work?  No  doubt  the  disciples  had  their  excuses,  and  Christ  then,  as  now, 
makes  all  allowances.  But  the  fact  remains  the  same.  Christ  wants  us,  and  we  are 
asleep.  The  sleeper  told  of  in  this  dream  evidently  was  filled  with  self-reproach.  It 
can  hardly  have  been  otherwise  with  the  disciples,  and  it  is  so  with  us  now  when  in 
our  holier  moments  the  vision  of  our  Lord  in  all  his  love  for  us  comes  before  our  hearts. 
Then  we  confess,  "  It  is  high  time  to  aw.ike  out  of  sleep." 

III.  The  sorrowful  awakbnino.  The  sleeper  told  of  here  awoke  (ver.  5)  to  find 
her  beloved  gone.  And  in  Grethsemane  the  disciples  awoke  at  last.  In  this  song  (ver. 
5)  we  are  told  how  he  had  thrust  in  his  hand  by  the  latch-hole  (see  Exposition).  But  he 
had  withdrawn  it,  as  she  whom  he  had  appealed  to  had  not  awaked;  and,  finding  this, 
her  heart  was  touched,  and  she  rose  to  open  to  him.  And  doubtless  when  the  disciples 
saw  the  gleam  of  the  lanterns  and  heard  their  Lord's  word,  "  Arise,"  and  the  tramp  of 
the  armed  multitude  who  had  come  to  arrest  him,  then  their  hearts  were  touched,  and 
they  arose.  But  it  was  too  late.  And  like  as  the  sleeper  here  (ver.  5)  did  not  withhold 
tokens  of  her  affection — she  richly  perfumed  herself,  her  hands  especially,  in  token 
thereof  as  the  Oriental  manner  was — so,  too,  the  disciples  in  their  way  made  plain  their 
love  for  their  Lord.  They  would  have  fought  for  him — Peter  drew  his  sword  at  once — 
had  he  let  them.  But  the  opportunity  for  real  service  was  gone.  The  sleeper  of  this 
song  tells  how  her  heart  smote  her  when  her  beloved  spoke,  and  we  may  well  believe 
that  it  was  so  when  the  disciples  heard  their  Lord's  voice.  But  in  both  cases  it  was 
too  late.  Who  does  not  know  the  sorrow  that  smites  the  soul  when  we  realize  that 
opportunities  of  succouring,  serving,  and  making  glad  the  heart  of  .some  beloved  one 
have  been  allowed  to  pass  by  us  unused,  and  now  cannot  be  recalled?  Oh,  if  we  had 
only  been  awake  then  I 

IV.  The  unavailing  search.  (Ver.  6.)  Cf.  Peter's  tears;  the  sorrow  of  the 
disciples.  The  reproaches  of  conscience — they  were  the  watchmen  who  met  and  sternly 
dealt  with  her  who  is  told  of  here,  and  made  her  ashamed.  Such  failures  in  duty  are 
followed  by  unavailing  regrets  and  prayeis.  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him! " 
Conscience,  the  Word  of  God,  faithful  pastors, — these  are  as  the  watchmen  who  meet 
such  souls,  and  scant  comfort  is  or  ought  to  be  had  from  them,  but  only  deserved  rebuke 
and  reproach.  It  is  all  true.  What  is  told  of  in  this  verse  must  have  happened  then, 
does  happen  now.  Our  Lord  has  left  us,  our  joy  is  gone,  we  cannot  find  him,  tears  and 
prayers  and  search  seem  all  in  vain. 

V.  The  help  of  the  holt  women.  (Ver.  8  and  ch.  vi.  1.)  It  was  wise  of  the  sleeper, 
now  awake,  to  solicit  help  from  the  friends  of  her  beloved.  And  in  the  Gospel  narrative 
it  is  plain  that  the  haly  women  who  loved  and  ministered  to  our  Lord  when  on  earth 
were  a  great  help  to  his  sorrowing  disciples.  They  were  last  at  the  cross  and  first  at 
the  sepulchre ;  they  first  brought  the  glaa  tidings  that  he  was  risen.     They  represent 


132  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  v.  1—16. 

his  true  Church.  And  the  sorrowing  soul  cannot  do  better  than  seek  the  sympathy 
and  prayers  of  those  who  love  the  Lord.  Eeatoration  often  comes  by  such  means. 
Here  is  one  of  their  intercessions :  "  That  it  may  please  thee  to  strengthen  such  as  do 
stand,  to  comfort  and  help  the  weak-hearted,  to  raise  up  them  that  fall,  and  finally  to 
btat  down  Satan  under  our  feet."  Blessed  is  he  who  hath  intercessions  such  as  that 
offered  for  him.     But  better  still  not  to  need  them. — S.  0. 

Ver.  9. — The  supremacy  of  Christ.  "  What  is  thy  beloved  more,"  etc.  ?  ITie  world 
asks  this  question.  Upon  the  answer  the  Church  gives  depends  whether  the  world 
remains  as  it  is — ^alienated  from  Christ  or  drawn  to  him.  If  the  Church  makes  it  evident 
that  Christ  is  "  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  "  and  "  altogether  lovely,"  then  the  blessed 
era  of  the  world's  conversion  will  be  at  hand.  The  Church  asks  this  question  of  those 
whom  she  receives  into  communion.  It  should  be  clear  that  Christ  is  enthroned  in  the 
hearts  of  those  whom  she  receives.  They  are  not  really  members  of  the  Church  unless 
it  is  so.  We  should  ask  ourselves  this  question,  so  that  we  may  see  to  it  that  we  are 
giving  him  the  chief  place  in  our  hearts,  and  that  in  all  things  he  has  the  pre-eminence. 
The  question  may  he  answered  in  various  ways.    As  for  example — 

I.  By  compakison  of  Christ  with  the  objects  of  woeship  in  othbb  faiths. 
(Cf.  Hardwiok's  '  Christ  and  other  Masters.')  There  have  been  and  are  "  gods  many 
and  lords  many ;  "  it  is  well  to  compare  and  contrast  with  them  the  all-worthiness  of 
him  whom  we  serve.  Missionaries  to  heathen  lands  do  well  to  make  themselves 
acquainted  with  the  points  of  contrast  and  resemblance — "  the  unconscious  prophecieg 
of  heathendom  " — which  they  will  find  in  the  faiths  they  seek  to  supplant  by  the  pure 
faith  of  Christ.   Often  will  they  find  in  such  study  that  he  is  "  the  Desire  of  all  nations." 

n.  By  coMPAEmo  the  objects  of  men's  peesbnt  pursuits  and  adtection  with 
Christ,  who  is  the  Beloved  of  the  believer's  heart.  Some  set  their  affections  only  on 
earthly  things — wealth,  power,  pleasure,  fame,  the  favour  of  men.  Some  on  those 
whom  God  has  given  them  to  love — wife,  lover,  children,  friends.  It  is  well  to  see  how 
Christ  surpasses  all  these,  and  deserves  the  chief  place  in  our  hearts :  such  place,  when 
given  to  him,  will  not  consign  to  a  lower  one  than  they  before  filled  those  objects  of  our 
lawful  love ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  will  uplift  and  enlarge  our  love  for  them,  making  it 
better  both  for  them  and  us.     But  we  prefer  to  take — 

III.  The  answer  given  in  this  sonq  itself.  See  vers.  10 — 16,  translating  its 
rich  imagery  into  the  plain  language  of  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  She  who  was 
asked  this  question  replied  by  giving  the  description  of  her  beloved  which  we  have  in 
these  verses.  And,  translated,  they  sugge.st  these  reasons  for  counting  Christ  chief  of 
all.  1.  Se  is  the  perfect  Pattern  and  Sacrifice  that  my  soul  needs.  (Ver.  10.)  It  is 
a  representation  of  tlie  beauty  of  perfect  physical  health:  "white  and  ruddy''  (cf. 
1  Sam.  xvi.  12 ;  xvii.  42).  Pit  type,  therefore,  of  that  perfect  moral  and  spiritual 
health  which  we  behold  in  Christ,  and  which  constitutes  him  our  all-perfect  Pattern. 
His  perfect  sacrifice  also  has  been  seen  in  this  same  description,  and  it  has  been  com- 
pared whh  that  similar  description  of  him  in  Eev.  v.  6,  "  a  Lamb  that  had  been  slain." 
Not  alone  the  whiteness  of  purity,  but  "  ruddy "  as  with  the  stain  of  his  precious 
sacrificial  blood.  2.  Be  is  Ood  in  his  essential  Person.  (Ver.  11.)  Gold  is,  in  the  sacred 
symbolism  of  Scripture,  ever  associated  with  that  which  is  of  God.  The  head  of  fine 
gold  suggests,  therefore,  that  which  St.  Paul  says  (1  Cor.  xi.  3),  "  The  head  of  Christ  is 
God."  3.  Yet  he  consecrated  himself  for  our  sakes.  The  un.-ihorn  hair,  "  his  locks  are 
bushy,"  was  the  sign  of  consecration  (cf.  the  vow  of  Nazarite).  4.  And  is  evermore  mighty 
to  save.  Youth  and  strength  are  signified  by  the  "  raven  "  hair.  Whilst  others  wax 
old  as  doth  a  garment,  he  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever  "  (cf.  Ps.  cii. 
27),  5.  Gentleness,  parity,  and  the  love  and  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit  beam  in  his  eyes. 
(Ver.  12.)  Cf.  New  Testament  notices  of  the  look  of  our  Lord — how  he  looked  with 
compassion,  how  he  "  looked  upon  Peter"  (Luke  xxii.  61).  6.  To  see  his  face  is  heaven. 
(Ver.  13.)  To  walk  in  the  light  of  that  countenance,  to  behold  it  fair  and  fragrant  as 
sweet  flowers.  7.  And  from  his  lips  drop  words  of  love.  Men  wondered  at  the  gracious 
words  which  he  spake.  "Never  man  spake  like  this  Man."  "  Grace  is  poured  into  thy 
lips  "  (Pa.  xlv.  2 ;  Isa.  I.  4).  8.  Ee  is  invested  with  the  authority  of  God.  (Ver.  14.) 
"  His  hands  are  rings  of  gold,"  etc.  The  ring  was  the  signet  and  seal  of  authority. 
•'  He  spake  as  one  having  authority ; "  " I  by  the  finger  of  God  cast  out  devils ; "  "All 


<JH.  V.  1— 16.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  133 

things  are  put  under  him."  9.  Stainless  purity  and  heavenly  mindedness  marked  hit 
life.  (Ver.  14.)  The  body,  or  rather  the  robe  that  covered  it,  as  bright  ivory,  tells  of  the 
purity  and  perfectiiess  of  his  life ;  the  heavenly  blue  of  the  "  sapphires  "  is  the  typo  of 
heaven.  His  conversation  was  in  heaven.  He  walked  with  God.  10.  He  was  firm 
and  steadfast  in  Ood.  (Ver.  15.)  The  legs,  as  "  pillars  of  marble,"  tell  of  his  steadfast 
strength ;  the  "  sockets  of  fine  gold,"  of  the  Divine  basis  and  foundation  of  that  strength. 
11.  Full  of  majesty  and  beauty,  as  Lebanon  and  its  cedars.  Of.  his  appearance  at  the 
Transfiguration  ;  to  the  guards  at  his  rising  from  the  deaH.  12.  And  yet  full  of  grace 
and  benignity.  (Ver.  16.)  "  His  mouth  " — his  smile — "  most  sweet."  The  little  children 
nestled  in  his  arms.  The  poor  fallen  women  read  the  benignity  of  that  look.  Publicans 
and  sinners  crowded  round  him,  irresistibly  drawn  by  his  exceeding  grace.  13.  No 
human  tongue  can  tell  how  fair  he  is.  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely."  The  words  tell 
of  the  giving  up  the  task,  of  ceasing  from  the  hopeless  endeavour,  to  fitly  fully  set  forth 
her  beloved.     She  could  only  say,  "  He  is  altogether,"  etc. 

Conclusion.  Such  was  the  answer  given  when  asked,"  What  is  thy  beloved  more," 
etc.  ?  (ver.  9).  And  such  answer  is  the  best.  The  testimony  of  the  loving  heart  to  what 
Jesus  is  to  such  heart  is  more  convincing  than  any  argument.  May  such  testimony 
be  ours  1 — S.  C. 

Ver.  16. — "  Altogether  lovely."  We  apply  these  words  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
afiBrm  that  they  are  true  of  him.  May  he  grant  us  grace  to  see  that  they  are  so !  And 
we  remark — 

L  That  whether  we  believe  them  ok  not,  they  are  assitredlt  tbob.  All 
generations  have  confessed  them  true.  The  hero  of  one  age  is  not  the  hero  of  another ; 
but  Christ  is  the  Beloved  of  all  ages.  Abraham  saw  his  "day  and  was  glad."  Prophets 
and  psalmists  beheld  him,  and  to  them  all  it  was  a  beatific  vision.  They  sang  of  him 
as  "  fairer  than  the  children  of  men ; "  they  exhausted  all  imagery  of  beauty  and  delight 
to  tell  of  him.  And  since  he  came,  apo.'»t.les,  martyrs,  and  generation  after  generation 
of  those  who  have  loved  and  toiled,  ana  often  died,  for  him,  have  confessed  the  truth  of 
oar  text.  And  to-day  myriads  of  souls  are  aglow  with  love  to  him,  and  gladly  take  up 
tlie  same  confession.  "  The  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets,  the  glorious  company  of 
the  apostles,  the  noble  array  of  martyrs,  the  holy  Church  throughout  all  the  world,  doth 
acknowledge  "  him.  And  so  will  aU  ranks  and  classes  of  men.  The  rich  and  the  poor, 
the  lofty  and  the  low,  have  met  together  in  this  confession.  And  all  ages,  the  young 
and  the  old.  And  all  lands,  north,  south,  east,  and  west.  And  all  characters  and 
dispositions.  See  how  varied  the  characters  of  those  who  gathered  round  our  Lord,  and 
of  the  saints  of  the  Bible,  and  of  all  ages.  And  .seen  in  all  aspects,  he  still  receives  the 
same  confession.  As  a  child,  as  a  man,  as  a  teacher,  as  a  sufferer,  in  his  death,  in  his 
resurrection,  in  his  intercession  for  us  in  heaven.  With  the  choicest  works  of  art,  with 
the  fairest  scenes  of  nature,  with  the  most  glorious  buildings  that  men  have  reared,  all 
depends  on  the  point  of  view  from  which  we  behold  them.  Seen  from  the  right  stand- 
point, they  are  beautiful  and  glorious ;  seen  from  another,  they  excite  no  admiration,  they 
may  appear  the  reverse  of  beautiful.  And  so  with  the  characters  of  men.  They  may 
be  excellent  in  some  things,  but  the  best  of  men  are  but  men  at  the  best.  There  are 
faults  and  flaws  in  the  fairest  human  soul.  But  with  our  Lord,  see  him  how,  when, 
and  whence  we  may,  to  the  heart  that  loves  him  he  is  still  "altogether  lovely."  The 
testimony  has  come  from  every  quarter,  from  every  age ;  it  is  fiiU,  clear,  complete,  varied, 
reiterated,  and  has  been  tested  and  tried  and  found  true  always  and  everywhere.  The 
holiest  saints  gaze  on  the  perfect  loveliness  of  their  Lord  as  the  one  model  to  which 
they  would  be  conformed,  but  from  wliich  they  own  they  are  far  removed.  His  enemies 
themselves  being  judges  confess  thai;  "  they  find  no  fault  in  him."  He  is  as  a  lamb 
without  blemish  and  without  spot.  But,  alas !  to  many  he  is  not  this ;  they  see  in  him 
no  form  or  comeliness,  no  beauty  that  they  should  desire  him.  Therefore  we  say  of 
these  words  of  our  text — 

II.  That  since  they  are  true  we  ought  to  see  them  to  be  true.  If  beautiful 
music,  or  works  of  art,  or  scenes  in  nature,  do  not  impress  men  with  their  beauty,  we 
pity  such  persons,  we  deem  them  lackiug  in  a  great  good.  And  if  they  have  no  appre- 
ciation of  moral  beauty,  we  do  not  merely  pity,  but  we  blame.  What,  then,  must  we 
say  of  those  who  fail  to  see  any  beauty  in  him  who  is  "  altogether  lovely  "  ?     But  what 


131  TMK  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  v.  1—16. 

is  it  that  hinders  in  any  soul  that  fails  to  see  in  Christ  what  the  holiest  and  hest  of 
men  always  and  everywhere  have  seen  in  him?  Well,  if  men,  will  not  look  they  will 
not  see.  And  this  is  one  hindrance.  The  portraiture  of  Christ  is  given  perfectly  in  the 
Gospels,  but  if  men  will  not  looli  into  them,  read  them,  and  consider  them,  what  wonder 
that  they  fail  to  see  ?  And  to  see  him  as  altogether  lovely,  that  demands  that  we  look 
long  and  attentively,  that  we  study  the  portraiture  that  is  given,  and  that  we  seek  to 
be  rid  of  all  that  would  hinder  the  truth  ol  our  seeing.  But  these  persons  never  do 
this.  Moreover,  to  see  him  as  he  is,  we  must  stay  with,  him.  You  cannot  Isnow  a 
fellow-man  by  a  short  interview.  To  know  a  man  you  must  live  with  him.  And  so 
if  we  would  really  know  Christ  and  see  him  as  his  sainis  have  seen  him,  we  must  live 
with  him,  keep  in  his  company,  commune  with  him  and  be  in  daily  intercourse  with 
him.  And  we  must  be  in  right  relationship  to  him ;  we  must  serve  him,  for  that  is  his 
due.  And  then  as  we  work  for  him,  his  inu  character  will  dawn  upon  us  more  and 
more ;  and  we,  too,  shall  come  to  see  him  a^  altogether  lovely.    Therefore — 

III.  Let  us  eesolvb  that  wb  will  Tuas  see  him.  To  encoura;ge  us  herein  let 
us  think  of  the  results  and  recompenses  of  such  beholding  him.  We  shall  come :  1.  To 
resemble  him.  For  we  shall  come  to  love  him,  and  nothing  so  assimilates  character  as 
love.  2.  To  rejoice  in  him.  Of  common  earthly  things  the  well-known  line  says,  "  A 
thing  of  beauty  is  a  joy  for  ever."  But  of  our  Lord  to  behold  him,  it  is  the  very  joy  of 
heaven.  For  there  "  they  shall  see  his  face."  3.  Best.  The  worries  and  frets  of  life 
will  vanish  in  that  beatific  vision,  like  as  even  an  unlovely  landscape  looks  beautiful 
when  the  bright  sun  shines  upon  it.  And  so  will  it  be  with  what  is  unlovely  in  life, 
that  in  itself  irks  and  distresses  us.  If  we  see  his  face,  if  that  vision  of  perfect  loveliness 
shines  before  us,  all  will  share  more  or  less  in  that.  4.  Beap  for  him,  as  never  we  did 
before.  With  our  souls  full  of  his  love,  even  the  stammering  tongue  will  become 
eloquent,  and  our  words  will  tell,  and  we  shall  wonder  and  rejoice  to  see  how  our 
children,  our  people,  our  friends  and  neighbours,  listen  to  us  and  believe,  and  turn  to 
him  from  whom  we  cannot  and  would  not  turn  away.  And  at  last  we  shall  be: 
6.  Beceived  hy  him  into  his  own  blessed  presence,  where  we  shall  own  that  "the 
half  was  not  told "  us,  and  even  the  best  of  our  seeing  was  but  as  through  a  glass, 
darkly.— S.  C. 

Ver.  2. — Languid  life.  The  experiences  of  the  saints  are  useful  guide-posts  on  the 
heavenly  road.  They  help  by  way  of  counsel,  caution,  inspiration,  comfort,  warning. 
Some  experiences  recorded  serve  as  lighthouses,  some  as  beacons.  A  wise  pilgrim  will 
not  despise  any  one  of  them.  If  a  traveller  is  about  to  cross  Africa  from  west  to  east, 
he  will  not  fail  to  ask  what  were  the  fortunes  and  experiences  of  those  who  have 
already  made  that  perilous  journey.  He  will  learn  from  their  mistakes  and  their 
sufferings  what  to  avoid.  He  will  learn  from  their  successes  how  far  he  should  tread 
in  their  footsteps.  The  journey  is  not  so  difficult  now  as  it  was  to  the  first  adventurer. 
A  similitude  this  of  the  heavenly  pilgrimage.  Others  have  passed  this  way  before  us. 
AVe  are  indebted  to  them  for  the  record  of  their  checkered  fortunes.  They  tell  us  how 
they  climbed  the  hill  Difficulty.  They  tell  us  how  they  were  overtaken  with  the  foe 
unwarily.  They  tell  us  how  they  fought,  and  by  what  methods  ihey  conquered.  They 
tell  us  how  at  times  spiritual  drowsiness  crept  over  them ;  how  they  bemoaned  their 
folly  ;  how  they  aroused  themselves  afresh.  Then  we  discover  that  this  infirmity  is 
not  peculiar  to  ourselves.  We  do  not  deny  ourselves  the  consolation  that  we  really 
belong  to  Christ,  though  we  have  been  foolish  enough  to  sleep  in  his  service.  There  is 
blight  upon  the  tree,  and  a  reduction  of  fruitf ulness ;  nevertheless,  the  tree  has  life  in 
its  roois.     Blemishes  are  upon  me;  still  I  am  in  Christ. 

1.  Herb  IS  A  STATE  OF  INSENSIBILITY  CONFESSED.  "  I  sleep."  It  is  a  figure  of  Speech 
borrowed  from  the  sensations  of  the  body.  Our  physical  nature  needs  periodic  sleep. 
But  mnny  indolent  persons  sleep  when  they  do  not  need  it;  and  it  is  this  needless  sleep — 
this  ignoble  sleep — that  is  here  described.  Unlike  the  body,  the  soul  requires  no  sleep. 
1.  It  is  a  slate  of  inaction.  For  the  time  being  sight  and  hearing  are  suspended.  All 
bodily  sensations  are  awanting.  The  sleeper  is  unconscious  of  all  that  is  occurring 
round  about  him.  Sleep  is  the  brother  of  death.  So,  if  the  soul  sleeps,  it  is  a  transient 
death.  Oar  best  Friend  is  near,  but  we  cannot  see  him.  If  he  speaks,  we  do  not  hear  his 
voice.     We  have  no  enjoyment  of  his  friendship.      The  sun  of  God's  favour  may  shine 


OH.  V.  1— 16.J  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  135 

upon  our  path ;  we  do  not  perceive  it.  We  have  no  conscious  communion  with  Jesua. 
We  find  no  nourishment  in  the  sacred  Word.  The  ordinances  of  the  sanctuary  have 
lost  their  charm.  We  do  not  grow  in  grace.  We  make  no  progress  heavenward.  It  is 
ins;lorious  inaction.  2.  It  is  a  blamable  condition.  We  are  servants  of  God,  and  to 
sleep  is  to  waste  our  Master's  time.  It  is  an  act  of  unfaithfulness.  The  Son  of  God 
has  entrusted  to  us  the  campaign  against  error  and  sin ;  yet,  lo !  we  sleep  on  the  battle- 
field. Tens  of  thousands  round  about  us  know  nothing  of  God's  salvation;  and  yet  we 
sleep.  Satan  is  busy  ensnaring  men  in  the  pitfalls  of  vice ;  and  yet  we  sleep.  The 
heathen  world  is  waiting  to  hear  Heaven's  gospel;  now  and  again  a  voice  booms  across 
the  sea,  "Come  over  and  help  us !  "  yet  we  sleep.  Our  own  crown  is  imperilled  j  yet 
we  sleep.  This  brief  life  is  slipping  from  us ;  the  day  of  service  will  soon  terminate ; 
the  great  assize  is  close  at  hand  ;  yet  we  sleep.  Is  it  not  matter  for  self-condemnation  ? 
3.  It  is  a  state  of  peril,  A  time  of  sleep  is  the  time  for  robbers  to  do  their  evil  work ; 
and  we  imperil  the  heavenly  treasures  when  we  slothfully  sleep.  Our  wily  adversary 
lies  in  wait  for  our  unguarded  niomi.'nts.  If  he  can  brenthe  upon  the  Church  a  spirit 
of  slumber,  he  has  sained  a  great  advantage  for  himself.  To  lull  Christians  into  sleep 
is  his  most  successful  stratagem.  In  one  of  his  parables  Jesus  tells  us  that  "while 
men  slept,  the  enemy  sowed  his  tares."  Snul,  the  King  of  Israel,  exposed  his  life  to 
imminent  danger  when  he  slept  in  the  cave.  If  a  man  is  insensible  to  the  deadly 
paralysis  that  is  creeping  over  him,  he  is  not  far  from  death.  And  if  we  Christians 
become  insensible  to  our  sin,  or  insensible  to  our  dependence  on  Christ,  or  insensible 
to  God's  claims,  we  are  in  great  danger.  What  if  God  should  say  to  us,  "  They 
prefer  their  sleep:  let  them  alone"!  Then  our  sleep  would  deepen  into  the  collapse 
of  death.  4.  Spiritual  sleep  entails  loss.  How  much  of  spiritual  blessing  the  eleven 
lost,  when  they  slept  in  Gethsemane,  no  tongue  can  tell.  We  lose  the  appmval  of  a 
good  conscience,  and  that  is  a  serious  loss.  We  lose  the  approving  smile  of  Christ, 
and  that  is  a  loss  far  greater.  We  lose  the  visiour  of  our  piety.  We  lose  ilie  freshness 
of  enthusiasm.  We  lose  courage.  We  lose  spiritual  enjoyment.  We  lose  self-respect. 
A  sense  of  shame  swee[)s  over  the  soul.  The  temperature  of  our  love  has  gone 
down.  Instead  of  pressing  forward,  we  have  gone  backward.  It  is  a  loss  immea- 
surable. 

II.  Here  is  a  very  promisingi  sion.  "My  heart  waketh."  How  true  is  this 
record  to  the  facts  in  ourselves!  The  heart  is  the  spiritual  organ  that  wakes  first.  For 
the  heart  is  the  seat  of  feeling,  desire,  ami  affection.  The  heart  must  move  before  the 
will,  and  the  will  before  the  feet.  1.  This  language  denotes  disquietude.  The  man  is 
neither  quite  asleep  nor  quite  awake.  This  is  an  uncotnfurtaiile  state.  It  denotes  a 
divided  heart.  It  is  not  altogether  with  Christ  nor  altogether  with  the  world.  We 
catmot  endure  the  thought  of  leaving  Christ,  and  so  forego  the  hope  of  heaven.  We 
like  some  of  the  experiences  of  religion.  But  then  we  love  self  in  about  an  equal 
proportion.  We  grasp  as  much  pleasure  as  we  can.  Hence  this  vacillation.  This  is  a 
great  loss  of  Christ's  friendship;  a  sin  to  treat  Jesus  thus.  This  self-indnlgence  nnw 
will  produce  a  large  fruitage  of  remorse  by-and-by.  2.  It  is  a  good  sign  that  this 
indecision  is  recognized.  It  might  have  been  otherwise.  The  sin  niisht  have  been 
unfelt.  Conscience  might  have  been  drugged  with  the  opiate  of  self-confidence.  When 
a  Christian  |)erciives  his  own  imperfections,  and  confesses  them,  there  is  manifestly 
some  spiiitual  life  within.  His  state  is  not  hopeless.  God's  Spirit  has  not  withdrawn 
his  activities  from  that  man.  If  he  will  diligently  follow  the  lisht  which  he  has,  it  will 
lead  him  to  his  true  home  and  rest.  3.  This  language  indicates  desire  for  a  letter  state. 
The  heart  is  the  seat  of  desire,  and,  thank  God,  the  heart  is  awake,  if  this  desire  be 
not  overpowered  by  stronger  desires  of  an  evil  sort,  all  will  yet  be  well.  This  desire, 
unhindered,  will  work  like  leaven,  till  it  has  leavened  the  whole  man.  It  will  disturb 
the  man's  peace  until  it  is  gratified.  This  desire  is  the  work  of  God's  good  Spirit;  and, 
if  we  will  only  yield  to  his  quickening  influence,  he  will  make  desire  ripen  into  resolve, 
and  resolve  into  action.  A  man's  desires  are  a  gauge  of  the  man's  character.  "  As  a  man 
thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."  4.  It  is  another  good  sign  when  a  sleepy  Christian 
recognizes  Christ's  vidce.  "  It  is  the  voice  of  my  beloved  that  knocketh."  The  bride  in 
our  text  not  merely  heard  a  sound,  but  she  was  so  far  awake  as  to  know  that  it  was 
her  lover's  voice.  It  is  a  fact  that  we  hear  the  voice  of  one  we  know,  and  of  one  we 
love,  much  sooner  than  we  hear  the  voice  of  n  stranger.     A  mother  will  hear  the  cry  of 


186  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  ▼.  1—16. 

her  babe  sooner  than  she  will  hear  the  cry  of  another  child.  If  we  hear  our  Macter's 
voice,  then  faith  is  not  asleep.  "  Faith  cometh  hy  hearing."  Of  all  Christ's  sheep 
this  is  a  sure  mark  ;  they  hear  Christ's  voice.  "  A  strano;er  will  they  not  follow,  for 
they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers."  We  know  well  that  if  any  one  strives  to  arouse 
us  out  of  sleep,  it  will  be  our  beat  Friend.  No  one  else  will  take  such  pains  to  bless 
us.  Ah  1  if  I  hear  in  my  soul  a  rousing  voice,  if  I  am  moved  to  hulier  aspiration,  I 
instinctively  say,  "  It  is  the  voice  of  my  Beloved  that  knocketh."  Then  ought  I  most 
gladly  to  respond,  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  heareth." 

III.  Heeb  is  a  gracious  call.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Christian's  heart  ii 
awake:  Jesus  calls  and  knocks.  A  Christian  cannot  sleep  under  such  an  appeal. 
1.  Christ's  whole  Person  engages  in  this  call.  He  not  only  speaks  with  his  voice; 
he  knocks  with  his  hand.  He  knocks  by  the  preacliing  of  faithful  ministers.  He 
knocks  by  the  counsels  of  a  pious  friend.  He  knocks  by  his  afSictive  providences. 
He  knocks  by  his  royal  bounties.  Every  fresh  gift  is  a  fresh  appeal.  He  knocks  by 
many  a  startling  event  that  happens  about  us.  He  knocks  at  the  door  of  memory,  at 
the  door  of  feeling,  at  the  door  of  conscience,  at  the  door  of  affection.  He  tries  every 
door,  if  so  be  his  kindly  errand  may  succeed.  He  has  too  much  earnest  love  for  us 
easily  to  desist.  Such  love  is  born,  not  on  earth,  but  in  heaven.  2.  Be  not  only 
knoclcs ;  he  speaks.  He  appeals  to  our  intelligent  nature.  He  will  not  use  force  or 
compulsion.  That  were  unseemly  on  the  part  of  love.  Jesus  will  use  measures 
equally  potent,  but  of  a  winsome,  spiritual  sort.  He  speaks  to  the  heart  of  saints  in  a 
"  still  small  voice."  There  is  a  latent  power  in  his  gentleness.  When  God  spake  to 
de-pondent  Elijah  in  the  desert,  he  did  not  speak  in  earthquake,  or  in  thunder,  or  in 
whirlwind,  but  in  a  soft  human  voice.  No  sound  breaks  on  the  ear ;  the  message  goes 
straight  to  the  conscience  and  to  the  heart.  Have  we  not,  in  hours  of  retirement,  often 
heard  the  music  of  his  voice,  gently  chiding  us  for  neglect,  or  sweetly  moving  us  to 
closer  fellowship?  We  may  resist  the  appeal,  but,  alasl  we  increase  our  guilt;  we 
cheat  our  souls  of  joy.  3.  He  addresses  us  hy  the  most  endearing  epithets.  "Mysisier, 
my  love,  my  dove,  my  undefiled."  Every  argument  that  can  move  us  to  a  better  life 
he  will  employ.  The  whole  vocabulary  of  human  speech  he  will  exhaust,  to  assure  us 
of  his  inten  St.  He  reminds  us  of  our  many  professions  of  attachment.  He  brings  to 
our  lemembrance  our  plighted  troth.  Did  we  not  at  one  time  say  that  we  were  his? 
Have  we  not  pledged  ourselves  to  be  faithful  over  and  over  again?  What  an  array  of 
perjured  vows  lie  on  his  book  ?  Can  we  think  of  them  without  self-condemnation  ?  4.  He 
appeals  to  us  on  the  ground  of  his  deeds  and  endurances.  "  My  head  is  filled  with  dew, 
and  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night."  It  is  the  pathetic  picture  of  a  friend  who 
has  been  refused  customary  hospitality,  and  who  has  spent  the  cold  night  appealing  for 
admission.  This  is  the  picture,  and  the  meaning  thereof  is  plain.  Jesus  Christ  has  to 
endure  hardship  and  pain  through  our  self-indulgence  and  our  spiritual  stupor.  Alas! 
we  shut  him  out  from  his  own  temple.  We  shut  out  our  best  Friend.  After  all  that 
he  has  done  for  us,  yea,  suffered  for  us,  in  proof  of  his  strong  affection,  shall  we  treat 
him  with  cold  neglect,  with  heartless  contempt?  Shall  he  be  all  ardour,  and  shall  we 
be  frigid  as  an  iceberg?  Shall  his  nature  be  all  love,  and  shall  ours  he  all  selfishness? 
Then  we  are  not  like  him.  Is  not  this  to  "  crucify  our  Lord  afresh,  and  put  him  to  open 
shame  "  ?  Surely  here  is  a  test  of  character.  He  who  can  hear  these  gracious  appeals 
unmoved,  hath  never  felt  the  stirrings  of  the  new  life ;  he  hath  no  part  in  the  covenant 
of  grace. — D. 

Vers.  9 — 16. — The  personal  excellences  of  Jesu^.  A  man  is  always  greater  than  his 
works,  for  his  best  work  is  only  a  part  of  himself.  As  there  is  more  virtue  in  the  tree 
than  ever  comes  out  in  the  fruit,  so  there  is  some  quality  in  the  man  that  has  not  come 
forth  in  his  deed.  The  same  is  true  in  larger  measure  with  respect  to  God.  If  there 
is  sublimity  in  his  works,  how  much  more  in  himself  I  The  redemptive  work  of  Jesus 
is  stupendous,  yet  his  love  is  more  stupendous  still.  That  love  of  his  was  not 
exhausted  in  the  great  atoning  act ;  it  was  only  disclosed,  and  made  visible.  We 
admire  his  incarnation,  his  benevolent  labour,  his  voluntary  suffering,  his  humiliating 
death,  his  strange  ascension.  We  love  him  in  return  for  his  great  love  to  us.  Yet  his 
greatest  claim  to  our  admiration  and  our  praise  is,  not  his  deeds  of  kindness,  but 
himself.      His  character  is  so  inlaid  with  excellences  that  it  demands  all  the  worship 


<JH.y.l— 16,]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  187 

of  our  hearts.  "  He  is  altogether  lovely."  Not  simply  is  his  doctrine  nourishing,  his 
example  inspiring,  his  self-sacrifice  attractive,  his  compassion  winsome,  but  his  very 
Person  is  an  enchantment  and  a  charm.  At  the  outset  of  our  acquaiatance  we  "  shall 
love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us ;  "  nor  will  his  compassion  ever  fail  to  be  a  spiritual 
magnet,  which  shall  win  and  hold  our  hearts.  Yet  we  gradually  rise  to  a  higher 
level  of  appreciation.  We  prize  hirn  for  what  he  is  in  himself,  even  more  than  for  what 
he  has  been  unto  us.  Our  best  love  goes  out  to  him,  because  he  is  so  transcendently 
good;  so  worthy  to  be  loved.  Love  of  gratitude  comes  first — 'an  early  fruit  of  the 
Christian  life ;  but  by-and-by,  under  the  culture  of  the  Divine  Husbandman,  there 
shall  be  the  sweeter,  richer  love  of  complacent  delight. 

I.  We  have  herb  a  pertinent  inquirt.  "  What  is  thy  beloved  more  than 
another  beloved  ?  "  1.  This  may  he  the  language  of  intellectual  curiosity.  The  inquiry 
about  Jesus  is  more  eager  and  widespread  to-day  than  in  any  epoch  since  his  birth. 
During  the  last  twenty-five  years  more  "than  twenty-five  lives  of  Jesus  Christ  have 
appeared  in  the  English  language.  Some  inquiries  are  of  a  sceptical  sort — are  not 
honest  searches  after  truth.  Some  inquirers  hope  to  reduce  Jesus  of  Nazareth  to  the 
level  of  a  common  mortal.  In  a  past  age.  Lord  Lyttelton  and  Gilbert  West  essayed  to 
demolish  the  Divine  credentials  of  Jesus;  but  they  were  conquered  by  the  evidence,  and 
became  disciples.  Many  inquirers  simply  attempt  to  solve  an  old  and  curious  question, 
"  Is  Jesus  more  than  man  ?  "  They  are  not  seeking  any  practical  issues.  Hence  they 
obtain  no  success.  2.  Or  it  may  he  the  language  of  simple  surprise.  The  kingdom  of 
Christ  hath  in  it  many  nominal  adherents.  For  earth ly  advantages  come  fiom  professing 
an  attachment  to  Christ.  It  wins  respect  from  men.  Itbrings  good  reputation.  It 
aids  success  in  our  worldly  calling.  Therefore  many  persons  avow  outwardly  an  indolent 
belief  in  Jesus  Christ  as  Lord  who  yet  can  give  no  reasonable  account  of  their  belief. 
These  see  with  wonder  the  ardour  and  zeal  of  genuine  disciples.  They  smile  when 
they  hear  the  effusive  and  familiar  language  of  true  saints.  They  deem  it  religious 
extravagance.  They  label  Christ's  friends  as  fanatics.  "  Omj* Christ,"  say  they,  "is a 
Being  far  removed  from  us.  We  offer  him  our  set  praises  and  our  set  prayers  on  the 
sabbath.  We  hope  for  his  rewards  by-and-by.  What  is  your  Beloved  more  than 
ours  1 "  3.  Or  it  may  he  the  language  of  nascent  desire.  The  speaker  has  seen  what 
a  real  and  present  Friend  Jesus  is  to  his  adopted.  To  them  his  friendship  is  sweeter  far 
than  the  friendship  of  a  thousand  others.  His  name  is  music;  fragrance,  health,  life. 
His  help  is  a  real  blessing,  which  gladdens  every  hour.  His  favour  is  a  present  heaven. 
They  consult  him  in  their  distress,  and  he  brings  to  them  prompt  sympathy  and 
unerring  wisdom.  They  find  in  him  a  restfulness  of  spirit  under  every  circumstance, 
a  peace  of  soul  no  one  else  can  impart.  Having  Jesus  within  them,  their  life  is  trans- 
figured. This  is  a  mystery  to  the  bulk  of  men.  So  one  and  another  yearn  to  attain 
this  joyous  life,  and  they  ask  in  a  spirit  of  sincere  desire,  "  What  is  thy  Beloved  more 
than  another  beloved  ?  " 

II.  We  have  herb  a  partioulae  rBsoRiPTioN  or  the  Bhidboroom's  person. 
"  My  beloved  is  white  and  ruddy,  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand ; "  "  He  is  altogether 
lovely."  1.  Generally,  he  is  pre-eminent.  "  Chiefest  among  ten  thousand."  Among 
all  the  tribes  of  men  he  stands  alone,  for  he  is  sinless.  He  is  pre-eminent  among  the 
angels,  for  they  are  only  servants  of  the  great  King ;  and,  when  the  Father  "  brought 
his  Only  Begotten  into  the  world,  he  said.  Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him." 
Among  the  gods  of  the  nations  he  stands  pre-eminent  in  power  and'  in  righteousness. 
They  are  dumb  vanities,  while  he  is  absolute  Power,  eternal  Eighteousness,  essential 
Love.  In  respect  of  the  Godhead,  he  is  eminent  for  condescension,  for  tender  sympathy, 
and  for  self-sacrifice.  Among  all  friends  he  stands  pre-eminent,  for  "he  is  a  Brother 
born  for  adversity."  Among  all  orators  he  is  pre-eminent  for  eloquence,  for  "never 
man  spake  like  this  Man."  Among  philanthropists  he  takes  the  highest  place,  for  "  he 
gave  himself  for  us."  "  For  our  sakes  he  became  poor."  "  In  all  things  he  has  the 
pre-eminence."  2.  Me  is  altogether  lovely  as  the  Son  of  God.  Such  perfect  Sonship 
was  never  before  seen.  His  reverence  lor  his  Father  was  unique,  was  beautiful.  At 
the  tender  age  of  twelve,  his  delight  was  "to  be  about  his  Father's  business."  His 
spirit  of  childlike  trust  was  perfect.  He  is  "  the  Leader  and  Finisher  of  faith."  During 
all  the  years  of  his  busy  life  he  "  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head,"  yet  he  declared  that 
it  was  his  "  meat  and  his  drink  to  do  the  will  of  his  Father  in  heaven."     His  own 


138  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  v.  1—16. 

explanation  of  his  ceaseless  benevolence  was  this :  "I  do  always  the  things  that  please 
him."  As  he  entered  the  black  cloud  of  the  final  tragedy,  he  interrogates  himself  thus  : 
"What  shall  I  say?  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour?"  But  instantly  he  adds, 
*'  Father,  glorify  thy  Name."  Filial  reverence,  filial  trugt,  filial  love  and  submission  in 
him  were  complete — things  till  then  unknown  on  earth.  "  Though  he  were  a  Son,  yet 
learned  he  obedience  by  tiie  things  which  he  suffered."  Upon  such  sacred  Sonship  the 
Father  expressed  audible  and  public  approbation — expressed  it  again  and  again  : 
"  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  wliom  I  am  well  pleased."  "  My  Beloved  is  white  and 
ruddy  " — the  quality  of  perfect  health.  3.  His  personal  qualities  transcend  all  com- 
parison. Every  virtue,  human  and  Divine,  blossom  in  his  soul.  There's  not  an 
excellence  ever  seen  in  men  or  in  angels  that  is  not  found,  the  perfect  type,  in  Jesus 
Christ.  For  nearly  nineteen  centuries  shrewd  men  have  turned  their  microscopes  on 
the  Person  of  Jesus,  if  haply  they  could  find  the  shadow  of  a  spot.  The  acutest  eye 
has  failed,  and  Jesus  stands  before  the  world  to-day  a  paragon  of  moral  perfection.  His 
character  is  better  known  and  better  appreciated  to-day  than  in  any  previous  age. 
Modern  criticism  confesses-at  the  bar  of  the  universe,  "  I  find  no  fault  in  him."  As  all 
the  colours  of  the  prism  meet  and  blend  in  the  pure  rays  of  light,  so  all  noble  qualities 
blend  in  our  beloved  Friend.  As  in  a  royal  garden  or  in  the  fields  of  nature  there 
is  unspeakable  wealth  of  flowery  bloom,  all  forms  and  colours  composing  a  very 
paradise  of  beauty,  so  is  it  in  the  character  of  Jesus.  Other  men  were  noted  for  some 
special  excellence — Moses  for  meekness.  Job  for  patience,  Daniel  for  constancy  ;  but 
Jesus  has  every  quality  of  goodness,  and  has  each  quality  full-orbed  and  resplendent. 
"  Whatever  things  are  true,  pure,  just,  lovely,  honourable,  of  good  report,"  they  all 
unite  in  Jesus.  Bansack  all  the  homes  of  humanity  if  you  will,  cull  out  all  the 
excellences  that  embellish  the  seraphim,  and  you  shall  not  find  a  single  grace  that 
does  not  adorn  our  Immanuel.  Yea,  his  soul  is  the  seed-bed  of  all  the  goodness  that 
flourishes  in  heaven  or  on  earth.  "  He  is  the  Fit  stborn  of  every  creature."  The  unfallen, 
no  less  than  the  fallen,  adore  him  as  worthy  to  be  worshipped.  "  He  has  by  inheritance 
a  more  excellent  name  than  they."  As  the  stars  of  heaven  pale  their  ineffectual 
fires  when  the  sun  rises,  so  in  the  presence  of  Jesus  Christ  even  Gabriel  veils  his  face 
and  bends  his  knee.  Human  thought  fails  to  reach  the  height  of  this  great  theme,  and 
we  can  simply  repeat  the  ancient  words,  "  Altogether  lovely."  4.  He  it  incomparable 
in  all  the  offices  Jus  fills.  A  splendid  theme  for  contemplation  is  Jesus  in  his  manifold 
offices.  As  a  Teacher  he  has  no  rival,  for  he  still  speaks  "  as  one  having  authority." 
"  In  him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge; "  and,  with  infinite  patience, 
he  unfolds  these  treasures  to  us  in  picture  and  parable,  as  we  "are  able  to  bear  them." 
Who  is  so  competent  to  teach  us  heavenly  things  as  the  living  Truth?  "The  words 
he  speaks  are  spirit  and  life."  "  His  lips  are  as  lilies,  dropping  sweet-smelling  myrrh." 
As  a  Priest,  does  he  not  excel  all  who  went  before  him?  Other  priests  had  to  offer 
oblation  first  for  their  own  sin.  Jesus  had  no  personal  sin.  Other  priests  "  could  not 
continue  by  reason  of  death."  Jesus  has  no  successor ;  his  priesthood  is  perpetual.  The 
best  of  earthly  priests  could  only  appear  in  material  temples,  gorgeous  in  marble  ami  in 
gold  though  some  of  them  were.  Our  great  High  Priest  has  gone  on  our  beljalf  into  the 
very  presence  of  God.  Our  Advocate  with  the  Father  cannot  fail,  because  he  is  "Christ 
the  Righteous."  And,  as  a  King,  Jesus  has  no  compeer.  The  sceptre  belongs  to  him 
by  eternal  right.  He  is  a  King  by  birth.  He  is  a  King  by  reason  of  inherent  fitness. 
Every  fibre  of  his  nature  is  kingly.  He  is  a  King  through  conquest.  Every  foe  is,  or 
shall  be,  vanquished.  He  is  a  King  by  universal  acclamation.  Angels  and  men  combine 
to  accord  to  him  the  highest  place — "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  As  the  good 
Shepherd,  he  has  given  his  very  "  life  for  the  sheep."  As  the  Husband  of  liis  Church, 
he  is  perfect  in  fidelity;  for  "having  loved  the  Church,  he  gave  himself  for  her,  and 
has  cleansed  her  for  himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  sjjot,  nor  wrinkle,  nor  any 
such  thing."  View  our  Master  in  any  aspect  or  in  any  office,  and  he  is  full  ol 
inexpressible  charm.    "  He  is  altogether  lovely." 

III.  We  have  HEBE  THE  IDEA  OF  INTIMATE  nELATiONSHiP.  "  This  ig  my  beloved, 
and  this  is  my  friend,  0  daughters  of  Jerusalem."  1.  This  means  high  appreciation. 
The  believer  in  this  passage  means  to  say,  "I  have  endeavoured  to  describe  my 
heavenly  Friend,  but  I  have  failed.  I  have  mentioned  some  of  the  features  of  hia 
character,  yet  1  scarce  think  that  these  are  the  most  precious.     The  theme  is  above  me. 


OH.  T.  1—16.]  THE  SONa  OF  SOLOMON.  130 

1  cannot  do  it  justice.  Mayhap  I  shall  only  lower  Jesus  in  the  estimation  of  mankind. 
Still,  I  have  said  enough  to  establish  his  superlative  excellence,  and  to  account  for  my 
enthusiastic  love."  Ah !  who  can  adequately  portray  the  Person  of  God's  dear  Sou  ? 
Can  Gabriel?  Can  Michael  ?  Can  Paul,after  centuries  of  sweet  companionship  with  him 
in  heaven?  I  trow  notl  "  What  think  ye  ot  Christ  ?"  is  a  question,  hkely  enough, 
often  asked  one  of  another  among  the  dwellers  in  glory.  By-and-by  we  "  shall  see  him 
as  he  is."  At  present  we  have  only  imperfect  glimpses  of  his  glorious  Person  ;  never- 
theless, we  know  enough  to  warrant  our  profound  admiration,  to  awaken  our  unfaltering 
faith,  and  to  excite  into  activity  our  most  passionate  love.  2.  This  means  a/ipropriation. 
This  Being  of  transcendent  excellence  I  claim  as  "  my  Friend."  Many  of  his  august 
perfectious  seem  to  forbid  my  bold  familiarity.  Sometimes  it  seems  like  presumption 
to  say  this.  But  then  his  simple  condescensiou  to  me,  his  genuiae  sympathy,  his 
unlimited  grace,  his  covenant  with  the  fallen,  "  without  respect  of  person,"  his 
repeated  assurances  of  love  for  me — yes,  for  me — encourage  me  to  call  him  mine.  He 
has  said  to  me,  "Thou  art  mine;"  is  not,  therefore,  the  converse  also  a  fact?  Must 
he  not  be  mine  ?  And  if  at  present  I  am  quite  unworthy  to  claim  this  relationship, 
will  he  not,  by  his  great  love,  make  me  worthy  ?  His  love  would  not  fiud  full  scope 
for  its  exercise,  if  it  were  not  for  such  an  unworthy  object  as  L  Thoujjh  deserving  of 
hell,  I  should  cast  fresh  dishonour  on  his  rojal  goodness  did  I  not  believe  his  promise, 
did  I  not  accept  his  friendship.  Yes,  "  he  is  mine."  3.  This  means  the  public  avowal 
of  Christ.  "  This  is  my  Beloved,  and  this  is  my  Friend."  It  is  as  if  the  Christian 
meant  to  say, "  I  have  chosen  Jesus  to  be  my  Friend,  and  I  call  the  universe  to  witness 
the  fact.  No  other  being  was  competent  to  save  me,  and  I  publicly  pledge  myself 
loyally  to  serve  him."  Such  avowal  is  a  fine  trait  in  a  renewed  soul.  To  profess 
loyalty  to  Jesus  while  no  love  glows  for  him  in  the  breast — this  is  an  offence  to  him, 
a  smoke  in  his  eyes,  a  spear-thrust  in  his  heart.  Nothing  to  him  is  so  odious  as 
hypocrisy.  But  when  there  is  sincere  love  to  our  Immanuel,  though  it  be  accompanied 
with  sell-diffidence  and  timidity,  there  ought  to  be  an  open  avowal  of  our  attachment. 
It  is  but  little  that  we  can  do  to  make  the  Saviour  known  and  loved  by  others,  therefore 
that  little  should  be  done  with  gladness  of  heart  and  with  unwavering  fidelity.  Nor 
can  we  ever  forget  the  words  of  our  Well-beloved,  "  Whosoever  shall  deny  me  before 
men,  him  will  1  also  deny  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven." — D. 

Ver.  1. — Hospitality  and  festivity.  This  verse  is  the  central  stanza  of  the  Song  of 
Songs.  It  brings  before  us  tiie  weddiag-ieast,  the  crisis  of  the  dramatic  interest  of  the 
poetn.  The  bride  is  welcomed  to  her  regal  home ;  friends  and  courtiers  are  gathered 
together  tu  celebrate  the  joyful  uniou;  and  festivity  and  mirth  signalize  the  realization 
of  liope  and  the  recompense  of  constancy.  Under  such  a  similitude  inspired  writers 
and  Christian  teachers  have  been  wont  to  set  forth  the  happy  union  between  the  Son  of 
God  and  the  humanity  to  which,  in  the  person  of  the  Church,  he  has  joined  himself  in 
spiritual  and  mystical  espousals. 

I.  The  presence  of  the  Divine  Brideqboom  and  Host.  "I,"  says  he,  "have 
come  into  my  garden."  It  is  the  presence,  first  visibly  in  the  body,  and  since 
invisibly  in  the  Spirit,  of  the  Son  of  God,  which  is  alike  the  salvation  and  the  joy 
of  man. 

II.  The  qkbeting  of  the  divinely  chosen  bbidb.  The  language  in  which  this 
greeting  is  conveyed  is  veiy  striking:  "My  sister-spouse."  It  is  the  language  of 
affection,  and  at  the  same  time  of  esteem  and  honour.  It  speaks  of  congeniality  uf 
disposition  as  well  as  of  union  of  heart.  Christ  loved  the  Church,  as  is  evident  from  the 
fact  of  his  giving  himself  for  it  and  to  it,  and  as  is  no  less  evident  from  his  perpetual 
revelation  of  his  incomparable  kindness  and  forbearance.  "  All  that  I  have,"  says  he, 
"  is  thine." 

III.  The  peovision  op  Divine  bounty.  How  often,  in  both  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ment Scripture,  are  the  blessings  of  a  spiritual  nature  which  Divine  goodness  has 
provided  fir  mankind  set  forth  under  the  similitude  of  a  feastl  Satisfaction  for  deep- 
seated  needs,  gratification  of  noblest  appetite,  are  thus  suggested.  The  peculiarity  in 
this  passage  is  the  union  of  the  two  ideas  of  marriage  and  of  feasting — a  union  which 
we  find  also  in  our  Lord's  parabolic  discourses.  We  are  reminded  that  the  Divine 
Saviour  who  calls  the  Church  his  own,  and  who  undertakes  to  make  it  worthy  of  him- 


140  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  t.  1— 1& 

self,  provides  for  its  life  and  health,  its  nourisbment  and  happiness,  all  that  infinite 
wisdom  itself  can  design  and  prepare. 

IV.  The  invitation  of  Divine  hospitality.  "Eat,  O  friends;  drink,  yea,  drink 
abundantly,  0  beloved  I "  Thus  does  the  Lord  of  the  feast  ever,  in  the  exercise  of  his 
benevolent  disposition,  address  those  whose  welfare  he  desires  to  promote.  This  invita- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  Lord  Christ  is  (1)  sincere  and  cordial ;  (2)  considerate  atid  kind ; 
(3)  liberal  and  generous. 

V.  The  fellowship  of  Divinb  jot.  True  happiness  is  to  be  found  in  the 
spiritual  companionship  oF  Christ,  and  in  the  intimacy  of  spiritual  communion  with 
him  whom  the  soul  loveth.  The  aspiration  of  the  heart  to  which  Christ  draws  near 
in  his  benignant  hospitality  has  been  thus  well  expressed :  "  Pour  out,  Lord,  to  me, 
and  readily  will  I  drink  ;  then  all  thirst  after  earthly  things  shall  be  destroyed ;  and  I 
sliall  seek  to  thirst  only  for  the  pleasures  which  are  at  thy  right  hand  for  evermore." 
The  spiritu«l  satisfaction  and  festivity  enjoyed  by  the  Church  on  earth  are  the  earnest 
and  the  pledge  of  the  purer  and  endless  joy  to  be  experienced  hereafter  by  those  who 
shall  be  called  to  "  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb." — T. 

Ver.  2. — Tlie  heart  that  viaketh.  Thus  opens  the  recital  of  a  dream — a  dream  which 
was  the  confused  expression  of  deep  feelings,  of  affection,  of  apprehension,  of  anxiety. 
The  expression  is  poetical ;  the  body  slumbers,  yet  the  mind  and  its  feelings  are  not 
altogether  asleep.  '  A  slumbering  heart  is  inaccessible  to  the  Divine  approach,  the 
Divine  appeal,  the  Divine  mercy.  It  is  well  when  the  heart  waketh,  for  the  wakeful 
heart  is — 

I.  Prompt  to  heak  the  voice  of  heaven.  The  mother  awakes  at  once  when  the 
babe  cries ;  the  surgeon  wakes  at  once  when  the  bell  rings ;  the  nurse  wakes  at  once 
when  the  patient  asks  for  medicine  or  for  food.  When  the  heart  is  awake,  the  ear 
hearkens,  the  eye  is  ready  to  unclose,  the  sleeper  is  half  alert  and  prepared  to  rise. 
The  heart  that  loves  the  Saviour  is  prompt  to  hear  any  word  of  his,  whether  it  be  a 
word  of  encouragement,  a  word  of  admonition,  a  word  of  command.  "Speak,  Lord; 
fur  thy  servant  heareth,"  denotes  the  vigilant  attitude,  the  true  preparedness  of  the  soul. 

II.  Prompt  to  respond  to  the  lovb  of  Christ.  The  true  heart  is  not  wakeful 
to  every  call,  to  every  presence,  to  every  appeal.  It  is  mutual  love  that  ensures  a 
heart  that  waketh.  The  Christian  gives  love  for  love.  "  We  love  him,  because  he  first 
loved  us."  Hence  the  very  sound  of  Jesus'  name  enkindles  upon  the  devout  and 
grateful  heart  the  flame  of  pure  and  fervent  affection.  Nothing  that  concerns  the 
Lord  is  indifferent  to  .the  Christian ;  for  his  heart  is  awake  to  every  token  of  the  Divine 
presence,  and  eager  for  the  s{>iritual  communion  which  is  the  privilege  of  the  friends  of 
Jesus. 

III.  Watchful  against  thotjqht8  and  purposes  or  evil.  The  deep  slumber  into 
which  the  careless  may  fall  is  likely  to  render  them  a  prey  to  the  assaults  of  the  tempter. 
Christ  found  his  three  nearest  friends  sleeping  in  the  garden  whilst  he  was  enduring  his 
bitter  conflict.  "  Watch  and  pray,"  was  his  admonition, "  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation." 
As  soldiers  during  a  campaign  must  take  rest  in  sleep,  yet,  as  it  were,  with  cue  eye 
and  one  ear  open,  so  that  they  may  spring  up,  and  fly  to  arms,  if  the  foe  approach  them 
under  cover  of  the  darkness ;  so  must  the  Christian  take  even  his  refreshing  rest  and 
recreation  as  upon  the  alert,  and  as  ready  to  resist  an  approaching  enemy.  Watchful- 
ness and  prayer  must  guard  him  against  surprise.  The  heart  must  be  ever  wakeful. 
"  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence." 

IV.  Kbady  to  engage  in  all  required  service.  The  service  of  the  hands,  of 
the  lips,  alone  is  unacceptable  to  our  Divine  Lord,  who  desires  above  all  things  the 
devdtion  and  loyalty  of  the  heart.  This,  if  the  heart  slumbers,  cannot  be  given.  But 
a  wakeful  heart,  being  ready  to  receive  impressions,  is  ready  also  to  obey  commands, 
to  summon  all  the  powers  of  the  nature  to  engage  in  that  service  \yhich  comliines 
dignity  with  freedom,  and  submission  with  joy. — T. 

Vers.  2 — 5. — Open  to  the  heloved  who  knocketh.  This  dream,  so  significant  of 
fervent  affection,  and  so  full  of  tender  pathos,  is  emblematic  of  the  relation  between  the 
Divine  Saviour  and  Lord  and  those  whom  he  approaches  in  bis  grace  and  kindness,  to 
whom  he  proffers  the  blessings  of  his  presence  and  his  love^ 


OH.  V.  1—16.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  141 

I.  The  summons.  1.  Its  nature.  There  is  the  knock  which  demands  attention,  and 
there  is  the  speech  which  articulately  conveys  the  appeal.  Christ  comes  to  the  world,  aud 
comes  to  the  heart,  with  such  tokens  of  Divine  authority  as  demand  that  heed  should 
be  given  to  his  embassage.  The  supernatural  arrests  the  attention  even  of  the  careless 
and  the  unspiritual.  That  in  Christianity  which  is  of  the  nature  of  portent,  the  "  miglity 
works  "  whicli  have  been  exhibited,  summon  men  to  yield  their  reverent  atteutiou  to  a 
Divine  communication.  But  the  miracle  is  a  "  sign."  The  display  of  power  is  revela- 
tion of  a  wisdom,  a  love,  which  are  deeper  and  more  sacred  than  itsalf.  The  knock  that 
arouses  is  fuUowed  by  the  speech  tliat  instructs,  guides,  comforts,  inspires.  Authority 
is  not  blind ;  it  accompanies  the  appeal  to  the  int«llig  nee,  to  the  heart.  2.  The 
danger  of  neglecting  it.  To  give  no  heed  to  the  Divine  appeal,  to  sleep  on  when  God 
himself  is  calling, — this  is  to  despise  the  Highest,  to  wrong  our  own  soul,  to  increase  our 
insensibility  and  to  cunhrm  ourselves  in  cpiritual  deadness,  and  to  ternpt  the  departure 
of  the  heavenly  Visitor.  3.  The  duty  of  welcoming  and  responding  to  it.  This 
appears  both  from  the  dignity  of  him  who  knocks,  his  right  to  the  affection,  gratitude, 
and  devotion  of  the  soul ;  and  from  the  complete  dependence  of  the  soul  upon  his  friend- 
ship for  its  highest  welfare. 

II,  The  ebsponse.  When  Christ  "  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks,"  there  is  but  one 
thing  to  do — to  open  wide  to  him,  the  Beloved,  the  door  of  the  heart.  This  is  the  true 
response,  and  it  should  be :  1.  Glad.  His  absence  is  mourned,  his  presence  is  desired ; 
his  summons,  therefore,  should  be  joyfully  acknowledged.  The  heart  may  well  beat 
strong  with  gladness,  high  with  hope,  when  the  voice  of  Jesus  is  heard ;  for  it  is  "  the 
voice  of  the  Beloved."  2.  Orateful.  The  picture  is  one  of  poetic  pathos  and  beauty. 
The  liead  of  the  Beloved  is  filled  with  dew,  his  looks  with  the  drops  of  the  night.  How 
suggestive  of  what  the  Saviour  has  endured  for  our  sake,  of  his  earthly  humiliation, 
ol  his  compassionate  sacrifice!  The  contemplation  of  Christ's  weakness  and  weariness, 
distress  and  anguish,  all  endured  for  us,  is  enough  to  awaken  the  strongest  sentiments 
of  gratitude  on  our  part.  To  wiiom  are  we  indebted  as  we  are  to  him  ?  Who  has  such 
claims  upon  oui  heart's  gratitude  and  devotion  ?  What  language  can  justly  depict  the 
moral  debasement  of  those  who  are  unafifected  by  a  spectacle  so  touching  as  that  of  the 
fiedeemer,  the  "  Man  of  sorrows,"  appealing  for  admission  to  the  nature  he  died  to  save 
and  bless?  3.  Immediate.  Delay  is  here  altogether  out  of  place.  The  sensitive  and 
responsive  nature  is  forward  to  exclaim,  "  Apparitio  tua  est  apertio  1 " — "  To  see  thee 
is  to  open  to  thee!"  The  hesitation  and  apologies  described  in  the  dieatu  are  intro- 
duced to  show,  by  suggestion  of  contrast,  how  utterly  unsuited  they  are  to  the  ciroum- 
Btances  and  the  occasion.  4.  Eager  and  expectant.  "  My  heart  was  moved  for  him  ;  I 
rose  to  open  to  my  Beloved."  The  hope  is  fulfilled,  the  prayer  is  answered,  the  vision 
is  realized,  Christ  has  come.  With  him  all  Divine  blessings  approach  the  soul.  The 
prospect  of  his  entrance  into  the  spiritual  nature  is  the  prospect  of  a  fellowship  and 
intimacy  fraught  with  purest  joys  and  tenderest  consolations — a  fellowship  and  intimacy 
which  wdl  never  fail  to  bless,  and  which  no  power  on  earth  can  avail  to  darken  or  to 
close. — T. 

Ver.  6. — The  dream  of  distress.  No  passage  in  the  Canticles  is  more  pathetic  than 
this.  Whilst  the  prevalent  tone  of  the  Song  of  Songs  is  a  tone  of  joyful  love,  we  meet 
here  with  the  sentiment  of  anxious  sorrow.  We  are  reminded  of  the  grief  of  Mary, 
when,  on  the  resurrection-morn,  she  exclaimed,  "  They  have  taken  away  my  Lord, 
and  I  know  not  where  they  have  laid  him."  A  true  transcript  of  the  moods  to  which 
experience  is  subject  1  And  not  without  spiritual  lessons  which  may  be  turned  to  true 
profit. 

I.  A  TRANSIENT  EBTEANGEMENT  AND  BBIBF  WITHDRAWAL.  There  havc  been  periods 
in  the  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  resembling  the  captivity  of  Israel  in  the  East, 
when  the  countenance  of  the  Lord  has  been  hidden  from  the  sight  of  his  people.  The 
heart,  which  knoweth  its  own  bitterness,  is  now  and  again  conscious  of  a  want  of  happy 
fellowship  with  the  best  and  dearest  Friend.  But  it  is  not  Christ  who  changes.  When 
the  sun  is  eclipsed,  it  does  not  cease  to  shine,  though  its  beams  may  not  reach  the 
earth.  And  when  Christ  is  hidden,  he  remains  himself  "  the  same  yesterday,  and 
to-day,  and  for  ever."  But  something  has  come  between  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  and 
the  soul  which  derives  all  its  spiritual  light  from  him,  and  the  vision  is  obscured. 


142  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  v.  1—16. 

Selfishness,  worldliness,  unbelief,  may  hinder  the  soul  from  enjoying  the  Saviour's 
presence  and  grace.     The  fault  is  not  his,  but  onrs. 

II.  D1STBESSIN8    SYMPTOMS    OF     SUCH    ESTRANGEMENT     AHD     WITHDRAWAI,.        HoW 

simple  and  how  touching  is  the  complaint  of  the  bride !  "  I  sought  him,  but  I  could 
not  find  him ;  I  called  him,  but  he  gave  me  no  answer."  Yet  it  is  the  nature  of  Christ 
to  delight  in  the  quest  and  the  cry  of  those  he  loves,  to  reveal  himself  to  such  as  ever 
ready  to  approach  and  to  bless.  There  may,  however,  be  a  reason,  and  faith  cannot 
question  that  there  is  a  reason,  for  the  withholding  of  an  immediate  response.  There 
may  be  on  the  Saviour's  part  a  perception  that  a  stronger  confidence,  a  more  evident 
desire,  a  truer  love,  are  needed,  and  are  thus  only  to  be  called  forth.  It  may  be  well 
that  for  a  season  the  soul  should  suffer  for  its  sin,  that  it  may  be  encouraged  to  deeper 
penitence  and  to  more  fervent  prayer. 

III.  Affectionate  yearning  the  earnest  op  speedy  reconciliation  and 
RENEWED  HAPPINESS.  The  parable  represents  the  bride  as  sad  and  anxious,  as  enduring 
bitter  disappointment,  as  oppressed  by  the  heartless  insult  and  injury  of  those 
indifferent  to  her  woes ;  yet  as  retaining  all  her  love,  and  only  concerned  as  soon  as 
may  be  to  find  her  beloved.  A  true  picture  of  the  devout  and  affectionate  friend  of 
Christ,  who  is  only  drawn  to  him  the  closer  by  the  sorrowful  experiences  and  repeated 
trials  of  life.  When  the  Christian  offends  his  Lord,  it  is  a  good  sign  that  he  is  not 
really  forsaken,  it  is  an  earnest  of  the  restoration  of  fellowship,  if  he  ardently  desires 
reconciliation,  and  takes  measures  to  recover  the  favour  which  for  a  season  he  has  lost. 
The  beauty  of  Christ  appears  the  more  inimitable  and  supreme,  the  fellowship  of  Christ 
appears  the  more  precious  and  desirable.  And  this  being  so,  the  hour  is  surely  near 
when  the  face  of  Christ  shall  appear  in  unclouded  benignity,  when  the  voice  of  Christ 
shall  be  heard  uttering  Divine  assurances  and  promises  in  tones  of  kindliest  friend- 
ship.—T. 

Ver.  10. — "  Vhi^est  among  ten  thousand"  The  figure  here  employed  by  the  bride 
to  depict  the  superiority  and  excellence  of  her  royal  husband  is  very  striking.  In 
reply  to  the  inquiry  of  those  who  mock  and  taunt  her  in  the  season  of  her  sorrow  and 
her  loss,  asking  what  her  beloved  is  more  than  another,  she  replies  that  he  is  the 
banner  in  the  vast  embattled  host,  rising  conspicuous  and  commanding  above  the 
thous9.nd  warriors  by  whom  he  is  encompassed.  Christians  are  often  reproached  with 
their  attachment  to  Christ.  Men  who  are  willing  to  acknowledge  him  as  one  of  many, 
to  rank  him  with  "  other  masters,"  cannot  tolerate  the  claims  advanced  by  his  Church 
on  his  behalf,  and  ask  what  there  is  in  him  to  entitle  him  to  adoration  so  supreme,  to 
devotion  so  exclusive.  The  answer  of  Christ's  people  is  one  which  gathers  force  with 
the  lapse  of  time  and  the  enlargement  of  experience.  Christ  is  "  chiefest  among  ten 
thousand."    He  excels  all  othei'  teachers,  leaders,  saviours  of  society,  in  every  respect. 

I.  In   the   profundity  of   his   insight  into   truth,  and  IN   THE   CLEARNESS  WITH 

WHICH  HE  RKVEALS  TRUTH.  Among  the  sages  and  philosophers  who  have  arisen  in 
ancient  and  in  modern  times,  and  to  whom  the  world  is  indebted  for  precious  communi- 
cations, for  great  thoughts,  which  it  will  not  willingly  let  die,  there  is  none  who  can 
compete  with  Christ.  His  sayings  are  more  oriuinal  in  their  substance  than  those  of 
others,  with  regard  both  to  the  character  and  service  of  God  and  to  the  duty  and  hupes 
of  men.  In  fact,  he  is  "  the  Truth,"  proved  to  be  such  by  the  persistence  of  those 
utterances  which  have  sunk  into  the  minds  of  men,  enlightening  and  enriching 
humanity  with  its  choicest  treasures. 

II.  In   THE   EFFECTUAL   COMPASSION   WITH   WHICH   HE  RECOVERS  THE  MORALLY  LOST. 

The  Lord  Jesus  is  not  merely  a  wise  Teacher;  he  is  a  mighty  Saviour.  He  knew  well 
that  little  good  is  done  by  communicating  truth,  unless  at  the  same  time  the  heart  can 
be  reached  and  the  character  moulded  anew.  During  his  earthly  ministry  he  put  forth 
his  moral  power  in  many  and  most  memorable  instances,  and  rescued  the  sinful,  the 
degraded,  those  abandoned  by  men,  restoring  them  to  integrity,  to  purity,  to  newness 
of  moral  life.  And  since  his  ascension  he  has  been  exercising  the  same  power  with 
the  same  results.  His  Name,  by  faith  in  his  Name,  has  made  many  whole.  His  gospel 
loses  none  of  its  efBcaoy,  his  Spirit  exercises  the  same  energy  of  grace,  as  generation 
succeeds  generation.     Ten  thousand  attempt  what  Christ  alone  performed. 

III.  In   THE   SPIRITUAL   POWER  WITH  WUIOH   HE   RULES   OVER   HUMAN   SOCIETY.      If  a 


CH.  VI.  1—13.]  THE  SONG   OF  SOLOMON.  143 

comparison  be  made  between  Christ  and  other  founders  of  religious  systems  and 
Churches,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  superiority  rests  with  him,  in  the  sway  wielded  over 
the  true  nature  of  men.  Compare  him,  for  example,  with  Gautama,  the  fouuder  of 
Buddhism,  or  with  Mohammed.  What  is  the  result  of  such  a  comparison?  There  can 
be  no  question  that,  in  the  matter  of  spiritual  authority,  it  will  be  to  establish  the 
supremacy  of  the  Son  of  man.  He  lays  hold,  as  none  othi^r  has  done,  of  the  afifections, 
the  moral  susceptibilities  and  convictions,  the  inner  principle-i,  of  men's  being,  and  thus 
controls  and  inspires  their  trne  life.  In  this  respect  ten  thousand  are  inferior  to  him  ; 
but  he  stands  alone — his  banner  towers  above  the  host. 

IV.  In  the  well-founded  prospect  which  he  imparts  to  the  world's  fdtuke. 
Every  well-wisher  to  his  race,  in  looking  forward  to  what  shall  be  after  him, 
must  often  be  assailed  with  fear  and  foreboding.  There  is  mnch  to  make  the  out- 
look gloomy  and  stormy  And  there  is  no  principle  which  can  subdne  such  natural 
anxiety,  which  can  inspire  confident  and  sustaining  hope  with  regard  to  the  future  of 
human  society,  except  the  prinoiple  of  Christianity,  i.e.  the  personal  and  spiritual 
power  of  the  Lord  Christ  to  govern  and  to  guide  mankind  to  glorious  issues. — T. 

Ver.  16. — "  AUogefher  lovely."  In  the  verses  from  the  tenth  to  the  sixteenth,  the 
bride  sets  forth  in  detail  the  excellences  and  the  attractiveness  of  her  spouse.  In 
similitudes  accordini;  with  Oriental  imagination  she  describes  the  charm  of  his  person, 
and  accounts  for  the  fascination  he  exercises.  And  she  sums  up  the  characterization 
by  the  assertion  that  he  is  "altogether  lovely" — "totus  est  desiderabilis,  totus  est 
amor."  Augustine,  in  language  dictated  by  the  fervour  of  his  heart,  expresses  the 
spiritual  truths  enshrined  in  this  exclamation  :  "  My  soul  is  a  sigh  of  God ;  the  heart 
conceives  and  the  mouth  forms  the  sigh.  Bear,  then,  my  soul,  the  likeness  of  the  heart 
and  of  the  mouth  of  God.     Sigh  thou  for  him  who  made  thee !  " 

L  Christ  is  altogbthbk  to  be  loved  and  desired  tor  what  he  is  in  himself. 
In  his  Person  and  character  Christ  is  a  Being  who  commands  and  attracts  the  love  of 
all  who  are  susceptible  to  the  charms  of  spiritual  excellence.  There  is  beauty  beyond 
that  which  is  physical,  beauty  of  which  the  charms  of  feature  and  of  form  are  the 
appointed  symbols.  And  for  this  beauty  in  most  perfect  manifestation  we  must  look 
to  Christ.  Others  have  their  excellences,  but  they  have  also  their  defects.  In  him 
alone  every  virtue  is  present  and  complete,  in  him  alone  every  blemish  is  absent.  He 
is  at  once  above  all  praise  and  free  from  all  blame.  The  soul  that  can  recognize  and 
delight  in  moral  excellence  finds  all  scope  for  such  recognition  and  delight  in  him  who 
is  "  fairer  than  the  sons  of  men." 

II.  Christ  is  altogether  ro  be  loved  and  desired  for  what  he  has  actually 
AND  already  done  FOR  HIS  FRIENDS.  These  know  that  he  loved  them,  and  that  he 
loved  them  even  "  unto  the  end,"  that  he  "  gave  his  life  for  his  friends ; "  and  this 
knowledge  is  ever  in  their  memory,  is  ever  affecting  their  hearts,  is  ever  influencing  the 
attitude  of  their  whole  being  towards  him.  Nothing  enkindles  love  like  love.  "  We 
love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us." 

III.  Christ  is  altogether  to  be  loved  and  desired  as  the  Saviour  of  the 
WORLD.  He  who  is  possessed  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  not  selfish  in  his  affections. 
He  feels  the  spiritual  power  of  his  Saviour's  self-sacrifice.  He  loves  his  Lord,  because 
that  Lord  has  pitied  and  has  died  for  men.  Our  love  to  Christ  is  not  pure,  is  not 
perfect,  until  it  springs  from  a  grateful  and  sympathetic  recognition  of  what  he  has 
done  who  "  oame  into  the  world  to  save  sinners." — ^T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VL 
Ver.  1. — Whither  is  thy  beloved  gone,  0 
thoa  fairest  among  women  T  Whither  hath 
thy  beloved  turned  him,  that  we  may  seek 
him  with  thee?  The  dialogue  still  con- 
tinues, possibly  because,  as  Delitzsch  sug- 


gests, the  effeet  of  the  dream  which  Shula- 
mith  narrates  is  not  passed  away  in  the 
morning.  Under  the  influence  of  it  she 
goes  forth  and  meets  the  daughters  of  Jeru- 
salem, who  offer  their  assistance.  But  there 
is  no  necesaity  for  this.  The  poetry  merely 
demand!  that  the  idea  of  the  dream  should 


144 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[cH.  VI.  1— la 


be  still  kept  before  the  mind  of  the  reader. 
The  scene  is  still  iii  the  palace.  The  laJies 
playfully  tarry  on  the  bride's  cue,  and  help 
her  to  pour  out  lier  leelings.  Tlie  bridegroom, 
they  know,  is  near  at  hund,  and  is  coming  to 
delight  hiiDsuU  in  his  bride ;  but  tlie  bride 
has  not  yet  drawn  him  back  completely  to 
her  side.  This  is  evident  from  the  fact  that 
there  is  no  distress  in  the  language  of  the 
bride.  She  is  not  cumplaining  and  crying 
out  in  agiiny  under  a  sense  of  desertion; 
she  is  waiting  for  the  return  of  her  beloved, 
and  so  she  calmly  sings  of  his  love  and  his 
perfect  truthfulness,  even  though  absent 
from  her.  He  is  where  his  perfect  beauty 
and  fragrance  might  well  be. 

Vers.  2,  3. — ^My  beloved  is  gone  down  to 
his  garden,  to  the  beds  of  spices,  to  feed  in 
the  gardens,  and  to  gather  lilies  I  am  my 
beloved's,  and  my  beloved  is  mine :  he  feed- 
etb  his  flock  among  the  lilies.  In  Eccles. 
ii.  5,  6  Solomon  says,  "  1  planted  me  vine- 
yards; I  made  me  gardens  itnd  parks,  and 
I  phiiited  trees  in  them  of  all  kinds  of  fruit; 
1  mnde  me  poiils  of  water,  to  water  therefrom 
the  forest  where  trees  were  reared."  In 
Rev.  vii.  17  it  is  said, "  The  Lamb  which  is 
in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  be  their 
Shepherd,  and  shall  guide  them  unto 
fountains  of  water  of  life :  and  God  shall 
wipe  away  every  tear  from  their  eyes."  We 
can  BcarCKly  doubt  that  the  meaning  is — 
Tlie  bridegroom  is  not  gone  far;  he  is 
where  he  is  congenially  employed;  where 
his  pure  and  lovely  nature  iinds  that  which 
is  like  itself — beauty  and  fragrance  and 
innocence.  It  is  his  resort,  and  it  corre- 
sponds with  Ids  perfection.  Delitzsch  thinks 
"  ihoughtfulness  and  depth  of  feeling  are 
intended"  (cf.  Ps.  xcii.  5).  "His  thoughts 
are  very  deep."  But  it  would  seem  more 
fitting,  in  the  lips  of  the  bride,  that  she 
should  dwell  on  the  aspects  of  her  beloved 
which  correspond  with  her  own  feelings. 
She  is  one  of  the  lilies.  The  king  is  coming 
into  his  garden,  and  I  am  rea<ly  to  receive 
him.  The  shepherd  among  his  flock.  They 
are  all  like  lilies,  pure  and  beautiful.  The 
bride  has  nothing  but  chaste  thoughts  of 
her  husband,  because  she  knows  that  he  is 
hers,  and  she  is  his.  Surely  such  language 
is  not  inaptly  applied  to  spiritual  uses. 
Ti'vmyson's  lovely  poem, '  St.  Agnes'  Eve,' 
has  caught  the  spirit  of  Shulamith.  A  few 
of  his  lines  will  illustrate  this — 

"  The  shadows  of  the  convent  towers 

Slant  down  the  snowy  sward. 
Still  creep. ng  with  the  creeping  hours 

That  lead  me  to  my  Lord. 
Make  thou  my  spirit  pure  and  clear 

As  are  the  frosty  skies. 
Or  this  first  snow^lrop  of  the  year 

That  in  my  bosom  lies. 


He  lifts  me  to  the  golden  doors ; 

The  flashes  come  and  go; 
All  Heaven  bursts  her  starry  floors, 

And  strews  her  lights  below, 
And  deepens  on  and  up !  the  gates 

Eoll  back,  and  far  within 
For  me  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  waits, 

To  make  me  pure  of  sin. 
The  sabbaths  of  eternity, 

One  sabbath  deep  and  wide, 
A  light  upon  the  shining  sea — 

The  Bridegroom  with  his  bride." 

Vers.  4 — 7. — Thou  art  beantifol,  0  my 
love,  as  Tirzah,  comely  as  Jerusalem,  terrible 
as  an  army  with  banners.  Turn  away  thine 
eyes  from  me,  for  they  have  overcome  me. 
Thy  hair  is  as  a  flock  of  goats  that  lie  along 
the  side  oi  Gilead.  Thy  teeth  are  like  a 
flook  of  ewes  which  are  come  np  from  the 
washing,  whereof  every  one  hath  twins, 
and  none  is  bereaved  among  them.  Thy 
temples  are  like  a  piece  of  a  pomegranate 
behind  thy  veil.  The  king  is  not  tar  off. 
The  bride  knows  that  he  is  near.  She 
prepares  herself  for  hiin  with  words  of  love. 
He  is  coming  among  his  "rosebud  garden 
of  girls."  His  voice  is  heard  as  he  ap- 
proaches. And  as  he  enters  the  chamber 
he  bursts  forth  with  lavish  praises  of  his 
bride.  Tirzah  and  Jerusalem,  two  of  the 
most  beautiful  cities  of  the  world,  are  taken 
as  symbols  of  the  surpassing  beauty  of  the 
bride — doubtless  also  with  an  intended 
reference  to  the  symbology  of  Scripture, 
where  the  people  of  God  are  compared 
throughout  to  a  city.  Tirzah  was  dis- 
covered by  Bobinson  in  1852,  on  a  height 
in  the  mountain  range  to  the  north  of 
Nablfts,  under  the  name  TuHizah,  high 
and  beautiful,  in  a  region  of  olive  trees. 
The  name  itself  signifies  sweetness,  which 
might  be  so  employed  even  it  there  were 
no  actual  city  so  called.  Jerusalem  is  said 
to  have  been  "the  perfection  of  beauty" 
(Ps.  xlviii.  2;  1.  2;  Lam.  ii.  15).  Cities 
are  generally  spoken  of  as  females,  as  also 
nations.  The  Church  is  the  city  of  God. 
The  new  Jerusalem  is  the  bride  of  the  Lamb. 
If  the  prophets  diil  not  take  their  language 
from  this  Song  of  Solomon,  then  the  phrase- 
ology and  sjmbology  which  we  find  here 
must  have  been  familiarly  known  and  used 
among  the  people  of  Israel  from  the  time 
of  Solomon.  The  beauty  of  the  bride  is 
overwhelming,  it  is  subduing  and  all-oon- 
quering,  like  a  warrior-host  with  flying 
banners  going  forth  to  victory.  Solomon 
confesses  that  he  is  vanquished.  This,  of 
course,  is  the  hyperbole  of  love,  but  it  is 
full  of  significance  to  the  spiritual  mind. 
The  Church  of  Christ  in  the  presence  and 
power  of  the  Lord  is  irresistible.  It  is  not 
until  he  appears  that  the  bride  is  seen  in 
her  perfection.     She  hangs  her  head  and 


OH.  VI.  1—13.] 


THE  BONO  OF  SOLOMON. 


145 


complains  while  he  is  absent ;  but  when  he 
oomes  and  reveals  hijnself,  delighting  in  his 
people,  tlieir  beauty,  which  is  a  reHeetion 
of  hii,  will  shine  fortli  as  the  sun  for  ever 
and  ever.  The  word  which  is  employed, 
"terrible,"  is  from  the  root  "to  be  impe- 
tuous," "  to  press  impetuously  upon," ''  to  in- 
fuse terror,"  LXX.,  dvairTfpovv,  "  to  make  to 
start  up,"  referring  to  the  flashofthe  eyes,  the 
overpowering  brightness  of  the  countenance. 
So  the  purity  and  excellence  of  the  Church 
■hall  delight  the  Lord,  and  no  earthly  power 
■hall  be  able  to  stand  before  it.  Heaven 
and  earth  shall  meet  in  the  latter  days. 
Wickedness  shall  fly  before  righteousness  as 
a  defeated  host  before  a  victorious  army. 
Is  there  not  something  like  a  practical  com- 
mentary on  tliese  words  in  the  history  of  all 
great  revivals  of  religion  and  eras  of  refor- 
mation ?  Are  there  nut  signs  even  now  that 
the  beauty  of  the  Churcli  is  becoming  more 
aud  more  army-like,  and  bearing  down 
opposition?  The  remainder  of  the  descrip- 
tion is  little  more  than  a  repetition  of  what 
lias  gone  before,  with  some  differences. 
Mount  Gilead  is  here  simply  Gilead.  The 
flock  of  shorn  sheep  is  liere  the  fliob  of  ewes 
with  their  yimug.  Perhaps  ttiere  is  intended 
to  be  a  special  significance  m  the  use  of  tlje 
same  description.  The  bride  is  the  same, 
and  therefore  the  same  terms  apply  to  her ; 
bnt  slie  is  more  beantiful  than  ever  in  the 
eyes  of  the  bridegroom.  Is  it  not  a  delicate 
mode  of  saying,  "  Though  my  absence  from 
thee  has  made  theu  complain  for  a  while, 
thou  art  still  the  same  to  me"?  There  is 
scope  here  for  variety  of  interpretation 
which  tliere  is  no  need  to  follow.  Some 
would  nay  the  reference  is  to  the  state  of 
the  Cliuroh  at  dift'erent  periods — as  e.g.  to 
the  primitive  Church  in  its  simplicity  and 
purity,  to  the  Church  of  the  empire  in  its 
splendour  and  growing  dominion.  The 
Jewish  expositors  apply  it  to  the  different 
stages  in  the  history  of  Israel,  "  the  congre- 
gation" being  the  bride,  as  under  the  first 
temple  atfd  under  the  second  temple.  Ibn 
Ezra,  and  indeed  all  expositors,  recognize 
tlie  reason  for  the  repetition  as  in  the  same- 
ness of  affection.  "The  beloved  repeats 
the  same  things  here  to  show  that  it  is  still 
his  own  true  bride  to  whom  he  speaks,  the 
sameness  in  the  features  proving  it."  So 
the  Targum.  The  flock  of  gouts,  the  flock  of 
ewes,  the  piece  of  pomegranate,  all  suggest 
the  simple  purity  of  country  life  in  which 
the  king  found  so  much  satisfaction.  He 
is  wrapt  up  in  his  northern  beauty,  and 
idolizes  her.  One  cannot  help  thinking 
of  the  early  Jewish  Church  coming  forth 
from  Galilee,  when  all  spoke  of  the  freshness 
and  genuineness  of  a  simple-hearted  piety 
drawn  forth  by  the  preaching  of  the  Son  of 
Mary — the  virgin-born  Bridegroom  whose 

lONiQ   OF   SOLOUON. 


bride  was  like  the  streams  and  flowers,  the 
birds  and  flocks,  of  beautiful  Galilee;  a 
society  of  believing  peasants  untouched  by 
the  conventionalities  of  Judsea,  and  ready  to 
respond  to  the  grand  mountain-like  earnest- 
ness and  heavenly  purity  of  the  new  Prophet, 
the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  "  who  feedeth  his 
flock  among  the  lilies."  There  is  a  corre- 
spondence in  the  early  Church,  before  cor- 
ruption crept  in  and  sophistication  obscured 
the  simplicity  of  faith  and  life  among 
Christians,  to  this  description  of  the  bride, 
the  Lamb's  wife.  There  must  be  a  return 
to  that  primitive  ideal  before  there  can  be 
the  rapturous  joy  of  the  Cliuroh  which  is 
promised.  We  are  too  much  turned  aside 
from  the  Bridegroom  to  false  and  wortliless 
attractions  which  do  not  delight  the  Beloved 
Que.  When  he  sees  his  bride  as  he  first 
saw  her,  he  will  renew  his  praises  and  lift 
her  up  to  himself. 

Vers.  8,  9. — There  are  three  score  queens, 
and  four  score  concubines,  and  virgins  with- 
out number.  My  dove,  my  nndefiled  is  but 
one ;  she  is  the  only  one  of  her  mother,  she  is 
the  choice  one  of  her  that  bare  her.  The 
daughters  saw  her,  and  called  her  blessed ; 
yea,  the  queens  and  the  concubines,  and  they 
praised  her.  The  account  given  us  of 
Solomon's  harem  in  1  Kings  xi.  3  represents 
the  number  as  much  larger.  Is  not  that  be- 
cause the  time  referred  to  in  the  poem  was 
early  in  the  reign  ?  The  words  are  an  echo 
of  what  we  read  in  Prov.  xxxi.  28  and  Gen. 
XXX.  13.  Perhaps  the  general  meaning  is 
merely  to  celebrate  the  surpassing  beauty  of 
the  new  bride.  But  there  certainly  is  a 
special  stress  laid  on  her  purity  and  inno- 
cence. There  is  no  necessity  to  seek  for  any 
exact  interpretation  of  the  queens  and  con- 
cubines. They  represent  female  beauty  in 
its  variety.  The  true  Church  is  in  closer 
relation  to  the  Bridegroom  than  all  the  rest 
of  the  world.  Even  in  the  heathen  and  un- 
converted world  there  is  a  revelation  of  the 
W  ord,  or,  as  the  ancient  Fathi  rs  of  the  Church 
said,  a  A6yos  airipiiaTlnos.  He  was  then  us 
ligbt,thoughthe  darkuess  comprehended  him 
not.  The  perfection  of  the  true  bride  of  the 
Lamb  will  be  acknowledged  even  by  those 
who  are  not  professedly  Christian. 

Ver.  10. — Who  is  she  that  looketh  forth  as 
the  morning,  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the 
sun,  terrible  as  an  armj  with  banners !  This, 
of  course,  is  the  praise  which  comes  from  the 
lips  of  the  queens  and  concubines,  the  ladies 
of  the  harem,  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem. 
The  word  rendered  "  looketh  forth  "  is  lite- 
rally "  bendeth  forward,"  i.e.  in  order  to  hiok 
out  or  forth  (cf.  Ps.  xiv.  2),  LXX.,  eKKujTToDo-o: 
Venet.,  TrapaKUTrroOiro  (cf.  Jas.  i.  23, "  stooping 
down  and  looking  into  the  Word  as  into  a 
well ").  The  idea  seems  to  be  that  of  a  rising 
luminary,  looking  forth  from  the  background. 


146 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  VI.  1— IS. 


breaking  through  the  shades  of  the  garden, 
like  the  morning  star  appearing  above  the 
horizon  (ojs  ia(r<l)6pas,  Venetian)  (of.  Isa.  xiv. 
12,  where  the  morning  star  ia  called  iriE'  ]  ^  ). 
The  moon  ia  generally  riT,  "yellow,"  but 
here  nah, "  white,"  i.e.  pale  and  aweet,  as  the 
lesser  light,  witli  true  womanly  delicacy  and 
fairness ;  but  the  rest  of  the  description,  wliich 
plainly  is  added  for  the  sake  of  the  symboli- 
cal suggestiveness  of  the  figures,  removes  all 
idea  of  mere  weaknesa.  Clear  (or,  bright)  as 
the  sun.  And  the  word  for  "  sun  "  is  not,  as 
usual,  shemesh,  but  chammdh,  "heat,"  the 
warming  light  (Ps.  xix.  7 ;  see  Job  xsxi. 
26 ;  Isa.  xlix.  2).  The  fierce  raya  of  the 
Eaatem  sun  are  terrible  to  those  who  en- 
counter them.  The  glory  of  the  Church  is 
a  glory  overwhelming  as  against  all  that 
opposes  it.  The  description  is  pure  hyper- 
bole as  applied  to  a  fair  bride,  referring  to 
the  blazing  beauty  of  her  face  an^l  adorn- 
ments, but  symbolically  it  has  always  been 
felt  a  precious  contribution  to  religious 
language.  Perhaps  no  sentence  in  the  Old 
Testament  has  been  more  frequently  on  the 
lipa  of  devout  men,  especially  when  they  have 
been  speaking  of  the  victories  of  the  truth 
and  the  glowing  prospects  of  the  Saviour's 
kingdom. 

Vers.  11,  12. — I  went  down  into  the  garden 
of  nuts  to  see  the  green  plants  of  the  valley, 
to  see  whether  the  vine  budded  and  the 
pomegranates  were  in  flower.  Or  ever  I  was 
aware,  my  soul  set  me  among  the  chariots  of 
my  princely  people.  There  cannot  be  much 
doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of  these  worda. 
Taking  them  as  put  into  the  lips  of  the  bride, 
and  as  intended  to  be  a  response  to  the  lavish 
praises  of  the  bridegroom,  we  may  regard 
them  as  a  modest  confesaion  that  she  had 
lost  her  heart  immediately  that  she  had  seen 
King  Solomon.  She  went  down  into  her 
quiet  garden  life  to  occupy  herself  as  usual 
with  rustic  labours  and  enjoyments,  but  the 
moment  that  her  beloved  approached  she  was 
carried  away — her  soul  was  aa  in  a  awift 
chariot.  Delitzsch  thinks  that  the  words 
refer  to  what  occurred  after  marriage.  He 
supposes  that  on  some  occasion  the  king  took 
his  bride  with  him  on  an  excursion  in  his 
chariot  to  a  plain  called  Etam.  He  refers  to 
a  description  of  such  a  place  to  be  found  in 
Josephus,  'Ant.,'  viii.  7.  3,  but  the  explana- 
tion is  far-fetched  and  improbable.  The  nut 
or  walnut  tree  {Juglans  regia,  Linn.)  came 
originally  from  Persia.  The  name  is  very 
similar  in  the  Persian,  .SJthiopio,  Arabic, 
and  Syriac.  One  cannot  help  comparing  the 
lovely  simplicity  of  the  bride's  description 
with  the  tender  beauty  of  Goethe's  '  Herman 
and  Dorothea.'  The  main  point  is  this,  that 
she  ia  not  the  mere  captive  of  the  king,  taken, 
ag  was  too  oltuu   the    case  with    Eastern 


monarchs,  by  violence  into  his  harem ;  she 
waa  aubdued  by  the  power  of  love.  It  was 
love  that  raised  her  to  the  royal  chariots  of 
her  people.  She  beholds  in  King  Solomon 
the  concentration  and  the  acme  of  her 
people's  glory.  He  is  the  true  Israel ;  she  is 
the  glory  of  him  who  is  the  glory  of  God. 

Ver.  13a. — ^Betnm,  return,  0  Shnlamite  ; 
return,  return,  that  we  may  look  npon  thee. 
Shulem  is  the  same  as  Shunem  (see  1  Kings 
i.  3 ;  2  Kings  iv.  8 ;  Josh.  xix.  18).  Shnlam- 
ite will,  therefore,  mean  "lady  of  Shulem." 
It  is  the  first  occurrence  of  the  name.  It 
cannot  be  a  pure  proper  name,  says  Delitzsch, 
because  the  article  is  attached  to  it.  It  is  a 
name  of  descent.  The  LXX.  has  ^  Sooj/o^iTir, 
t.e.  "  she  who  is  from  Shunem."  Abisbag  waa 
exceedingly  beautiful,  and  she  came  from 
the  same  district.  It  is  the  country  in  the 
tribe  of  Issachar,  near  to  little  Hermon,  to 
the  south-east  of  Carmul  atid  south  of  Nain, 
south-east  of  Nazareth,  south-west  of  Tabor. 
It  is  found  at  present  under  the  name 
Sawlam,  not  far  from  the  great  plain  of 
Jiszeal  (now  Zer'iTi),  "  which  forms  a  con- 
venient way  of  communication  between 
Jordan  and  the  sea-coast,  but  is  yet  so 
hidden  in  the  mountain  range  that  the 
Talmud  is  silent  concerning  this  Sulem,  as 
it  is  concerning  Nazareth."  It  is  impossible 
to  resist  the  impression  of  the  fact  that  this 
part  of  Galilee  so  closely  associated  with  our 
Lord  and  his  ministry  should  be  the  native 
place  of  the  bride.  Delitzsch  thinks  that  the 
Shulamite  is  on  her  way  from  the  garden  to 
the  palace.  That  the  words  are  addressed 
to  her  by  the  admiring  ladies  can  scarcely  be 
disputed;  hence  the  "we"  of  the  address. 
"The  fourfold  'come  back'  (or,  'turn')  en- 
treats her  earnestly,  yea,  with  tears,  to  return 
thither  (that  is,  to  the  garden)  with  them 
once  more,  and  for  thii  purpose,  that  they 
might  find  delight  in  looking  upon  her." 
But  Delitzsch  is  scarcely  right  in  thinking 
that  the  garden  of  nuts  to  which  the  bride  re- 
ferred is  the  garden  of  the  palace.  She  is,  per- 
haps, turning  to  leave  the  company  of  ladies, 
Solomon  himself  being  among  them,  as  though 
she  would  escape  from  their  gaze,  which  is  too 
much  for  her  in  her  simplicity,  and  the  ladies, 
seeing  her  intention  to  leave  them,  call  her 
back.  Another  viewis  that  the  word  "  return  " 
is  for  "  turn  round ;"  that  is, "  Let  us  see  thee 
dance,  that  we  may  admire  the  beauty  of  thy 
form  and  movements."  This  would  explain 
the  appropriateuess  of  the  bride's  reply  in  the 
latter  half  of  the  verse.  Moreover,  the  four- 
fold appeal  is  scarcely  suitable  if  the  bride 
was  only  slightly  indicating  her  intention  to 
leave.  She  would  surely  not  leave  hastily, 
seeing  that  Solomon  is  present.  The  request 
is  not  that  she  may  remain,  but  that  they 
may  look  upon  her.  It  would  be  quite  fitting 
in  the  mouth  of  lady-companions.   The  whole 


OH.  VI.  1—13.] 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


147 


is  donbtlesB  a  poetic  artifice,  as  before  in 
the  case  of  tiie  dream,  for  tlie  purpose  of 
introducing  the  lovely  description  of  her 
personal  attractions.  Plainly  she  is  described 
as  dancing  or  as  if  dancing.  Delitzsch,  how- 
ever, thinks  that  the  dance  is  only  referred 
to  by  the  ladies  as  a  comparison  ;  but  in  that 
case  he  certainly  leaves  unexplained  the 
peculiarity  of  the  description  in  ch.  vii.  1 — 5, 
which  most  naturally  is  a  description  of  a 
dancing  figure. 

Ver.  136. — Why  will  ye  look  upon  the 
Shulamite  as  upon  the  dance  of  Mahanalm  1 
The  Shulamite,  in  her  perfect  modesty  and 
humility,  not  knowing  how  beautiful  she 
really  is,  asks  why  it  is  that  they  wish  still  to 
gazo  upon  her,  like  those  tliat  gaze  at  the 
dance  of  Mahanaim,  or  why  they  wish  her 
to  dance.  But  at  the  same  moment,  with  the 
complaisance  of  perfect  amiability,  begins  to 
move — always  a  pleasure  to  a  lovely  maiden — 
thus  filling  them  with  admiration.  Mahanaim 
came  in  later  times  to  mean  "  angels,"  or  the 
"  heavenly  host "  (see  Gen.  xxxii.  3),  but  here 
it  ia  generally  thought  to  be  the  name  of 


a  dance,  perhaps  ooe  in  which  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Malianaim  excelled,  or  one  in  which 
angels  or  hosts  were  thought  toengage.  The 
old  translators,  the  Syriac,  Jerome,  and  the 
Venetian,  render,  "the  dances  of  the  camps" 
(clioroa  castrarum,  BCa<Tov  a-TpaToireSai''),  pos- 
sibly a  war-dance  or  parade.  The  word, 
however,  is  in  the  dual.  Delitzsch  thinks 
the  meaning  is  a  dance  as  of  angels,  "  only  a 
step  beyond  the  responsive  song  of  the  sera- 
phim "  (I»a.  vi.).  Of  course,  there  can  be  no 
objection  to  the  association  of  angels  with 
thu  bride,  but  there  is  no  necessity  for  it. 
The  woril  would  be,  no  doubt,  familiitrly 
known  in  the  age  of  Solomon.  The  sacred 
dances  were  often  referred  to  in  Scripture, 
and  there  would  be  nothing  degrading  to  the 
dignity  of  the  bride  in  dancing  before  the 
ladies  and  herown  husband.  "  After  throw- 
ing aside  her  upper  garment,  so  that  she  had 
only  the  light  clothing  of  a  shepherdess  or 
vine-diesspr,  Shulamith  danced  to  and  fro 
before  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  and  dis- 
played all  her  attractions  before  them." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Dialogue  between  the  bride  and  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem.  I.  Thb 
QUESTION  OF  THB  MAIDENS.  The  dream  is  past.  The  bridegroom  is  absent  for  a 
time,  but  the  bride  is  not  anxious ;  she  knows  where  he  is,  and  that  he  will  soon 
return.  Perhaps  it  was  such  a  short  absence  which. filled  her  thoughts  before,  and 
was  the  occasion  of  those  narratives  which  are  so  dream-like,  which  recall  so  vividly 
reminiscences  of  dreams  such  as  most  men  have  probably  experienced.  The  chorus 
again  address  the  bride  as  "  fairest  among  women."  They  recognize  her  beauty  and 
graces.  They  do  not  see  the  bridegroom  with  her  ;  they  ask,  "  Whither  is  he  gone  ?  " 
They  offer  to  seek  him  with  her.  So  we  sometimes  ask  others  who  have  more 
Christian  graces,  more  love  of  Christ,  than  we  have,  where  we  may  find  the  Lord. 
We  want  to  seek  Christ  with  them;  we  ask  for  their  prayers;  we  will  join  our  prayers 
with  theirs. 

IL  The  answer.  1.  The  hride  knows  where  her  beloved  may  he  found.  She  has 
no  doubts  now,  no  anxieties,  as  she  had  in  her  dream.  She  answers  without  hesitation, 
"  My  beloved  is  gone  down  into  his  garden,  to  the  beds  of  spices,  to  feed  [his  flock] 
in  the  gardens,  and  to  gather  lilies."  She  invests  her  beloved  with  the  ideal  character 
of  a  shepherd,  as  she  had  done  before  (ch.  i.  7).  We  see  that  the  words  are  not  to  be 
taken  literally;  he  is  no  shepherd  in  the  ordinary  sense.  He  is  said,  indeed,  to  be 
feeding  (his  flock),  but  not  in  ordinary  pastures.  He  is  gone  to  his  garden,  a  garden 
of  costly  spices ;  and  he  is  gone  to  gather  lilies,  apparently  for  his  bride.  The  bride 
never  dwells  on  the  wealth  and  magnificence  of  her  rojal  lover  as  the  chorus  do. 
Such  thoughts,  perhaps,  were  to  her  oppressive  rather  than  attractive ;  she  loves  to 
think  of  him  as  a  shepherd,  as  one  in  her  own  condition  in  life,  'Ihe  grandeur  of  the 
king  was  dazzling  to  the  country  maiden.  So  the  Christian  loves  to  think  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  as  the  good  Shepherd.  We  know,  indeed,  that  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are 
his ;  that  he  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords ;  that  be  is  the  Word  who  in  the 
beginning  was  with  God,  and  himself  was  God ;  that  all  things  were  made  through  him, 
and  without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made.  We  know  that  he  will  come 
again  in  majesty  and  great  glory  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  But  when  our 
souls  are  dafezled  by  the  contemplation  of  his  gloiy ;  when  we  shrink,  as  sinful  men 
must  shrink,  from  the  thought  of  the  great  white  throne  and  hirn  that  sitteth  on  it, 
from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  flee  away  (Eev.  xx.  11); — ^it  is  a  relief  then 


148  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vi.  1—13. 

to  our  weakness  to  remember  that  the  great  King  humbled  himself  to  our  low  estate, 
that  he  was  made  as  one  of  us,  that  he  shared  all  our  human  infirmities,  sin  only 
excepted ;  that  he  who  ia  the  Lite  of  the  world  bumbled  himself  fur  us  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross.  And  of  all  the  titles  by  which  he  has  been  pleased  to 
make  himself  known  to  his  people,  there  is  none  so  full  of  comfort  as  that  of  the 
Shepherd,  the  good  Shepherd,  who  calls  his  sheep  by  name,  who  guides  them  and  feeds 
them,  who  knows  his  own  and  his  own  know  him,  who  once  laid  down  Lis  life  for 
the  sheep.  Now  he  feeils  them  in  his  garden,  the  garden  enclosed  (ch.  iv.  12),  which 
is  the  Church,  among  the  beds  of  spices,  which  are  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  There  he 
gathers  tbe  lilies  one  by  one,  the  souls  of  his  redeemed,  the  souls  which  he  has  tended 
and  cared  for,  and  glorified  with  a  beauty  of  holiness  which  is  a  faint  reflection  of  his 
own  heavenly  beauty.  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  those 
precious  lilies.  He  gathers  them  one  by  one  when  they  have  grown  into  that  spiritual 
beauty  for  which  he  planted  them  at  the  first,  and  carries  them  into  a  better  garden, 
the  true  Eden,  the  Paradise  of  God,  there  to  blossom  into  purer  and  holier  beauty. 
2.  She  is  wholly  his.  "I  am  my  beloved's,  and  my  beloved  is  mine:  he  that  feedeth 
[his  flock]  among  the  lilies."  She  repeats  the  happy  assurance  of  ch.  ii.  16,  only  she 
inverts  the  order  of  the  clauses,  and  adds  the  description.  "  He  is  feeding  his  flock 
among  the  lilies :  but  I  am  his,  and  he  is  mine."  There  is  no  jealousy,  no  doubt  now, 
as  there  seemed  to  be  when  she  dreamed  of  his  absence.  The  shepherd  is  her  shepherd, 
the  lilies  are  for  her,  she  is  his.  She  thinks  first  now  of  her  gift  to  the  bridegroom. 
In  ch.  ii.  16  she  put  his  gift  first.  He  had  given  his  heart  to  her  in  the  first  happy 
days  of  their  young  love;  and  that  gift  had  won  from  her  the  responsive  gift  of  her 
affection.  She  knew  now  that  her  heart  was  wholly  his ;  she  delights  in  owning  it. 
And  she  was  sure  of  his  affection.  His  heart  was  wholly  hers.  "  We  love  him,  because 
he  first  loved  us  "  (1  John  iv.  19).  It  is  the  love  of  Christ  manifested  in  his  blessed 
life  and  precious  death,  revealed  into  the  believer's  heart  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit, — it  is  that  constraining  love  which  draws  forth  from  our  cold  and  selfish 
natures  that  measure  of  love,  real  and  true,  though  unworthy  and  intermittent,  with 
which  the  Christian  man  regards  the  Lord.  At  first  we  are  more  sure  of  his  love 
than  of  ours.  He  loved  us,  thp,t  is  certain;  the  cross  is  the  convincing  proof.  But 
we  are  not  sure,  alas  I  that  we  are  returning  his  love.  We  have  learned  from  long 
and  sad  experience  to  doubt  these  selfish  hearts  of  ours ;  we  are  afraid  that  there  is 
no  real  love  in  them,  but  only  excited  feeling,  only  transitory  emotion.  But  if  by 
his  grace  we  persevere  in  the  life  of  prayer  and  faith,  little  by  little  his  love  given 
to  us,  manifested  in  our  souls,  draws  forth  the  response  of  earnest  love  from  us ;  little 
by  little  we  begin  to  hope  (oh,  how  earnestly !)  that  we  may  be  able  at  last  to  say 
with  St.  Peter,  "Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee." 
But  to  say  that,  with  the  knowledge  that  his  eye  is  on  us,  that  he  is  reading  our 
heart,  involves  much  awe,  much  heart-searching,  as  well  as  much  hope,  much  peace. 
We  can  only  pray  that  "the  God  of  hope  may  fill  us  with  all  joy  and  peace  in 
believing,  that  we  may  abound  in  hope  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost " 
(Eom.  XV.  13).  And  if  that  love,  though  weak,  as,  alas !  it  must  be,  is  yet  real,  we 
may  make  ibe  hride's  words  our  own:  "I  am  uiy  Beloved's;  I  belong  to  him.  My 
heart  is  his ;  1  am  giving  it  to  him ;  and  he,  blessed  be  his  holy  Name,  is  helping  me 
to  give  it  by  first  giving  himself  to  me.  I  am  my  Beloved's,  and  my  Beloved  is 
mine."  Therefore  the  Christian  soul  may  say,  "I  hope  one  day  to  see  him  face  to 
face,  and  to  be  with  him  where  he  feedeth  his  flock  among  the  lilies  of  Paradise." 

Vers.  4 — ^9. — The  bridegroom's  praise  of  the  bride.  1.  Renewed  bnumbbatiok  of 
HEB  GBA0B8.  1.  General  praise  of  her  beauty.  Her  beauty  is  compared  to  the  beauty 
of  Tiizah  or  Jerusalem.  She  is  beautiful  as  Tirzah,  which  word  means  "  grace  "  or 
"  beauty ; "  comely  as  Jerusalem,  the  habitation  or  foundation  of  peace.  The  bridegroom 
mentions  Tirzah  as  well  as  Jerusalem,  which  seems  to  imply  that  the  song  wai 
written  before  ihe  division  of  the  kingdom.  The  bride  is  beautiful  as  Tirzah  was  to 
the  inhabitants  of  Northern  Palestine — a  fair  city  in  a  fertile  country,  deriving  its 
name  from  the  attractive  graces  of  the  surrounding  scenery.  She  is  comely  aa 
Jerusalem  was  to  every  loyal  Israelite.  "  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole 
earth,  is  Mount  Zion,  on  me  sides  of  the  north,  the  city  of  the  great  Slng ; "  "  Walk 


oa,vx,l— 13.]  THE  SONQ  OF  SOLOMON.  149 

about  Zion,"  the  psalmist  continues,  "and  go  round  alwut  her:  tell  the  towers 
thereof.  Miirk  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her  palaces;  that  ye  may  tell  it  to  the 
generation  luUowing"  (Ps.  xlviii.  2, 12, 13).  Zion  was  to  the  Israelites  "the  perfection 
of  beauty  "  (Ps.  1.  2 ;  Lam.  il.  15).  The  exiles  in  the  days  of  the  Captivity  sang  in 
plaintive  strains,  "  If  I  forget  thee,  0  Jerusalem,  let  my  iij;ht  hand  forget  her  cunning. 
if  I  do  not  remember  thee,  let  my  tongue  clsave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth;  if  I  prefer 
not  Jerusalem  above  my  chief  joy"  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  5,  6).  Thss  great  delight  in  return- 
ing from  their  long  captivity  was  to  think,  "Our  feet  shall  stand  in  thy  gates,  0 
Jerusalem."  "  Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,"  they  would  say :  "  they  shall  prosper 
that  love  thee.  Peace  be  within  thy  walls,  and  prosperity  within  thy  palaces" 
(Ps.  cxxii.  2,  6,  7).  And  what  Jerusalem  was  to  the  Israelites,  that  the  Church  is 
to  the  heavenly  Bridegroom.  Her  salvation  was  *'  the  joy  set  before  him,"  for  which 
"  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame  "  (Heb.  xii.  2).  He  tells  her  towers ;  for 
"  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his."  He  knows  every  living  stone  of  the  spiritual 
temple,  the  Chuich,  which  he  hath  built  upon  the  Rock  of  ages.  He  never  forgets 
her.  He  intercedi-s  for  her,  and  is  preparing  a  place  for  her,  that  hereafter  "the 
nations  of  them  which  are  saved  may  walk  in  the  light  of  her  "  (Rev.  xxi.  24).  He 
prays  now  for  her  peace,  and  giveth  her  his  peace — "  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth 
all  understanding."  She  is  beautiful  with  the  reflection  of  his  perfect  beauty.  He  will 
cleanse  and  purify  her,  and  at  the  last  present  her  to  himself  a  glorious  Church.  And 
if  the  Church  is  fair  in  the  Bridegroom's  eyes,  so  in  a  degree  is  each  converted  and 
sanctified  soul ;  in  each  such  soul  he  sees  something  of  that  beauty  of  holiness  which 
comes  from  the  indwelling  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  For  they  who  love 
him,  and  seek  to  live  in  that  fellowship  which  is  with  the  Father  and  with  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ,  must,  while  they  "  behold  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  be  changed 
into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  And  if  the  dear  Lord  is 
pleased  with  the  poor  holiness  of  his  people,  how  earnestly  we  ought  to  strive  to 
purge  otu'seh  es  from  all  pollution  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the 
fear  of  God !  Earthly  beauty  is  but  a  poor  endowment ;  it  soon  fades  and  passes 
away.  The  inner  beauty  of  a  holy  soul  abides  and  increases  continually,  and  is  very 
precious  and  sacred ;  for  such  fair  souls,  washed  and  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  shall  see  the  King  in  his  beauty,  and  dwell  in  the  light  of  the  golden  city. 
2.  She  is  terrible  as  an  army  with  tanners.  The  bride  is  beautiful  not  only  for  her 
attractive  gentleness ;  she  has  a  queenly  dignity  that  could  repel  any  presumptuous 
advances.  The  beauty  of  the  Church  is  a  severe  beauty,  like  the  martial  beauty  of  a 
bannered  host.  For,  indeed,  the  Church  is  an  army,  the  array  of  the  living  God ;  the 
banner  of  the  cross  shines  in  the  van,  advancing  ever  forward. 

"The  royal  banners  forward  go, 
The  cross  shines  forth  in  mystio  glow." 

That  bannered  host  is  terrible  to  the  enemy.  "  Our  wrestling  is  not  against  flesii  and 
blood,  but  against  the  principalities,  against  the  powers,  against  the  world-rulers  of 
this  ^rkness,  against  the  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness  "  (Eph.  vL  12). 

"They  march  unseen, 
That  sacred  band,  in  serried  ranks  arrayed. 
Each  cheering  on  his  brother  to  the  fight. 
The  Spirit-sword  flashes  in  each  right  hand ; 
The  shield  of  faith  protects  each  steadfast  breast; 
The  red  cross  banner  glitters  in  their  van. 
As  they  press  ever  forwards ;  breathing  all 
The  selfsame  prayer,  the  selfsame  Presence  high 
Abiding  in  each  heart,  the  selfsame  hope. 
The  glory-crown  in  heaven,  sustaining  all." 

Each  Christian  soul  has  its  place  in  that  vast  army ;  each  is  a  sworn  soldier  of  the 
cross;  each  such  soul  is  terrible  to  the  enemy,  because  Christ  is  the  strength  of  hii 
people,  and  they  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  who  loved  them. 

"  Satan  trembles  when  he  sees 
The  humbleot  saint  upon  his  knees." 


150  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  Ton.  vl  1—18. 

Then  we  must  pray  for  grace  to  follow  the  banner  of  the  cross  with  loyal  heart  and 
steadfast  purpose,  that  our  service  may  be  acceptable  to  the  Captain  of  our  salvation, 
and  pleasing  in  his  sight,  as  a  bannered  host  marshalled  and  ordered,  as  each  noble 
warrior  well  equipped  and  disciplined,  is  a  sight  that  gives  pleasure  and  joyful  pride 
to  the  commander.  3.  The  bridegroom  repeats  the  praises  of  ch.  iv.  1 — 6.  But  first 
Ije  says,  "Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  me,  for  they  have  overcome  me."  He  had 
praised  her  eyes  again  and  again ;  they  were  as  doves'  (oh.  i.  15 ;  iv.  1,  9).  Now  he 
says,  in  the  tenderness  of  a  great  love,  "  they  have  overcome  me."  We  may  compare 
the  Lord's  gracious  wonder  at  the  faith  of  the  centurion  (Luke  vii.  9).  He  con- 
descended to  "marvel  at  him,  and  turned  him  about,  and  said  unto  the  people  that 
followed  him,  I  say  unto  you,  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel."  The 
bridegroom  goes  on  to  praise  the  various  features  of  the  bride's  beauty.  He  had  done 
so  already  in  the  love  of  their  first  espousals.  His  affection  continues  unabated ;  he 
repeats  the  same  praises  in  the  same  words.  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  loves  his  bride 
the  Church  with  "  an  everlasting  love  "  (Jer.  xxxi.  3).  The  terms  of  affection  which 
are  bestowed  in  the  Old  Testament  upon  the  ancient  Jewish  Church  are  repeated 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  applied  to  the  Christian  Church,  the  Israel  of  God.  Thus 
St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  ii.  9)  calls  Christians  "a  chosen  generation;"  the  same  title  (in  the 
Greek  of  the  Septuagint  the  words  are  exactly  the  same)  is  given  in  the  Prophet  Isriiah 
(xliii.  20)  to  the  Jewish  people.  St.  Peter  calls  Christians  "a  royal  priesthood;"  in 
Exod.  xix.  6  the  Israelites  are  called  "a  kingdom  of  priests"  (here  again  St.  Peter 
has  used  the  exact  words  of  the  Septuagint).  St.  Peter  calls  Christians  "a  holy 
nation ; "  the  same  thing  is  said  of  the  Israelites  in  Exod,  xix.  6.  St.  Peter  describes 
Christians  as  "a  peculiar  people;"  his  words  represent  Deut.  vii.  6,  translated  in  our 
old  version  "  a  special  people,"  in  the  new  version,  "  a  peculiar  people."  He  applies 
to  the  Christian  Church  the  words  which  the  Prophet  Hosea  had  used  of  the  Jews, 
"  Which  in  time  past  were  not  a  people,  but  are  now  the  people  of  God ;  which  had 
not  obtained  mercy,  but  now  have  obtained  mercy"  (1  Pet.  ii.  10;  Hos.  ii.  23).  The 
Lord  JesuB  loves  his  Church  with  a  love  that  changes  not.  Almost  at  the  beginning 
of  the  New  Testament  stands  the  holy  promise,  "  Thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus :  for 
be  shall  save  bis  people  from  their  sins ; "  and  almost  at  the  end  we  read  the  blessed 
words,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  Bach  faithful 
Christian  may  trust  his  Saviour's  love,  for  it  is  written,  "I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee ; "  and  again,  "  He  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  perform  it 
until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ"  (Phil.  i.  6). 

11.  CoMPABisoN  OF  THE  BBIDB  WITH  OTHERS.  1.  They  are  many.  David  had  had 
sixteen  wives.  Solomon  had  early  followed  that  unhappy  example;  already  he  had, 
it  seems,  "  three  score  queens,  and  four  score  concubines."  He  had  transgressed  the 
commandment  of  Deut.  xvii.  17,  where  it  is  said  of  any  future  king,  "  Neither  shall 
he  multiply  wives  unto  himself,  that  his  heart  turn  not  away."  Solomon,  alas  I  broke 
the  commandment  of  God,  and  incurred  the  awful  peril  denounced  against  disobedience. 
"He  had  seven  hundrid  wives,  princesses,  and  three  hundred  concubines:  and  his 
wives  turned  away  his  heart.  For  it  came  to  pass,  when  Solomon  was  old,  that  his 
wives  turned  away  his  heart  after  other  gods"  (1  Kings  xi.  3,  4).  Now  he  was  young, 
but  even  in  his  youth  the  evil  desire  was  strong  within  him.  His  love  for  the  pure 
country  maiden  might  have  saved  him  ;  for  a  time,  perhaps,  it  did  check  his  sensual 
passions.  But,  alas  1  if  it  was  so,  the  evil  spirit  that  had  been  cast  out  soon  returned, 
and  brought  with  him  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  himself,  and  the  last  state 
v\  as  woi  SB  than  the  first  (Matt.  xii.  43 — 45).  2.  She  is  one  alone.  "  One  is  she,  my 
dove,  my  umlehled;  one  is  she  to  her  mother;  the  choice  one  is  she  to  her  that  bare 
her."  Such  is  the  literal  rendering  of  the  touching  words.  The  bride  was  an  only 
daughter;  she  was  the  joy  and  ilarling  of  her  mother.  The  good  daughter  makes 
a  gi)ud  wile.  She  was  the  bridegroom's  dove,  his  uudefiled  one,  and  she  stood  aion« 
in  his  aBections;  no  other  came  near  to  her.  So  good  was  she  and  so  lovely  io 
character  as  well  as  in  person,  that  even  those  who  might  have  been  expected  tp 
re>;ard  her  with  envy  praised  her  and  i;alled  her  blessed.  The  luxurious  nionarcl? 
seems  to  have  a  glimpse  of  the  blessedness  of  purity ;  he  seems  almost  to  feel  that 
"  to  love  one  maiden  and  to  cleave  to  her "  is  the  ideal  of  human  love.  Alas !  "  hi» 
uuodness  was  as  a  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  it  passed  away  "  (Hos.  vL  4) 


OH.  VI.  1—13.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  151 

The  evil  spirit  of  sensuality  returned.  When  he  was  old,  his  wives  turned  away  his 
heart ;  and  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  built  high  places  for  the  worship 
of  idols  in  the  hill  that  is  before  Jerusalem  (1  Kings  xi.  4,  6,  7).  How  earnestly  we 
ought  to  strive  to  retain  in  our  souls  those  happy  feelings,  those  aspirations  after 
purity  and  holiness  which  God  sends  from  time  to  time,  like  angels'  visits,  into  our 
hearts!  Tl}ey  can  only  be  fixed  and  wrought  into  our  characters  by  immediate  action. 
In  themselves  they  are  transitory,  and  rapidly  pass  away.  But  hold  them  firm,  make 
them  the  basis  of  real  effort,  the  beginuing  and  occasion  of  the  healthy  discipline  of 
self-denial, — then  God  will  help  us  to  keep  them  alive  in  our  souls;  the  little  seed  will 
grow  till  it  becomes  a  great  tree;  the  little  leaven  will  spread  through  the  whole  life 
with  its  quickening  powers.  Very  precious  are  those  moments  of  holy  emotion ;  very 
solemn,  tuo,  for  they  involve  a  great  responsibility.  To  let  them  go  is  perilous  exceed- 
ingly, to  use  them  aright  brings  a  priceless  blessing. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — Conversation  between  the  chorus  and  the  hride.  I.  Address  of  the 
CHORUS.  1.  The  question.  "Who  is  she?"  This  question  occurs  three  times  in  the 
song.  In  ch.  iii.  6  it  is  asked  apparently  by  a  chorus  of  young  men,  the  friends  of 
the  bridegroom ;  here  and  in  ch.  viii.  5  it  seems  to  be  put  into  the  mouth  of  the 
chorus  of  maidens,  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  an  expression  of  admiration. 
The  maidens  meet  the  bride  after  an  interval,  and  are  startled  by  hei-  surpassing 
beauty,  at  once  graceful  and  majestic.  Her  happy  love  has  shed  a  new  grace  around 
her;  she  is  clothed  in  qneenly  attire;  it  is  a  vision  of  rare  loveliness.  It  is  the  love 
of  Christ  which  gives  the  Church  whatever  beauty  she  possesses.  Christ's  love  for  her, 
drawing  forth  her  responsive  love  for  him,  gives  her  whatever  graces  she  may  possess. 
She  is  his  creation.  He  built  his  Church  upon  the  rock ;  all  that  she  is,  and  all  that 
she  has,  comes  only  from  his  gift.  2.  The  description.  She  looks  forth  as  the  dawn. 
The  bride's  sudden  appearance  is  like  the  early  dawn,  coming  forth  in  its  beauty, 
tinging  sky  and  clouds  with  rosy  light.  She  is  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  and  pure  as 
the  sun  (poetical  words  are  used  here,  as  in  Isa.  xxiv.  23 ;  xxx.  26 ;  the  moon  is  the 
white,  the  sun  the  hot  luminary) ;  and  the  comparison  of  ver.  4  is  repeated ;  in  her 
queenly  majesty  she  is  terrible,  awe-inspiring,  as  a  bannered  host.  Christ  is  the 
Bright  and  Morning  Star  (Bev.  xxii.  16);  He  is  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  (Mai.  iv.  2); 
He  is  the  true  Light,  the  Light  of  the  world.  The  true  Light  lighteth  every  man 
(John  i.  9);  and  they  who  believe  in  the  Light,  and  walk  as  children  of  light,  reflect 
something  of  its  brightness ;  so  that  the  Lord,  in  his  condescending  love,  says  of  them, 
"  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world"  (Matt.  v.  14);  and  so  St.  Paul  says  of  his  Philip|jian 
converts  that  "ye  shine  as  lights  [Inmiuaries]  in  the  world"  (Phil.  ii.  15).  "God  is 
light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  Christians  must  strive,  by  his  grace  and  the 
illumination  of  his  Spirit,  to  walk  always  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  that  so 
they  may  have  fellowship  with  one  another  in  the  light  of  holy  love,  and  that  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  may  cleanse  them  continually  frouj  all  sin,  making  their  souls 
white  and  clear  in  the  transparent  truth  of  that  purity  in  heart  which  must,  by  the 
Saviour's  compassionate  mercy,  belong  to  them  who  shall  see  God  (Matt.  v.  8). 

II.  Answer  of  the  bride.  1.  Her  lowliness.  The  maidens  praise  her  beauty  and 
stateliness;  she  reminds  them  of  her  former  low  estate.  She  seems  to  be  looking 
back  to  the  hour  of  her  first  meeting  with  the  bridegroom.  She  had  no  thought, 
country  maiden  as  she  was,  of  the  elevation  that  awaited  her.  She  was  engaged  in 
her  ordinary  occu))atii)iis.  She  had  gone  down  into  the  garden  tn  tend  it  and  to  walch 
the  budding  of  the  fruit  trees;  there  she  first  saw  the  king.  Whatever  graces  the 
Church  possesses  come  from  the  favour  of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom.  "Ihrough  him 
we  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father.  Now  therefore  ye  are  no  more  strangers 
and  foreigners,  but  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God" 
(Bph.  ii.  18,  19).  The  Gentiles  were  strangers  and  Ibreigners;  they  knew  not  the 
King;  they  were  not  looking  for  him.  As  the  Lord  God  called  Adam  and  Eve  when 
they  were  hiding  themselves  among  the  trees  of  the  garden,  so  the  Lord  called 
the  Gentiles  by  the  mission  of  his  apostles.  In  the  infancy  of  the  human  race  it  was 
the  protevangel,  the  promise  of  the  Seed  of  the  woman  who  shall  bruise  the  serpent's 
head,  that  first  shed  light  upon  the  gloom  of  sin  and  misery.  And  in  the  fulness 
of  time  it  was  the  Lord's  gracious  mission,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the 


162  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vi.  1—18. 

gospel  to  every  creature,"  that  first  called  the  Gentiles  into  the  city  of  God.  Till  he 
calls  us  we  are  like  the  bride  in  the  song,  immersed  in  worldly  pursuits  and  earthly 
cares;  he  brings  us  into  the  new  Jerusalem  and  maljes  us  fellow-citizens  with  the 
saints.  We  must  remember  always  that  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am ; " 
that  whatever  we  may  have  dune  of  good  or  right,  it  was  "Not  I,  but  the  grace  of 
God  which  \. as  with  me"(l  Cor.  xv.  10).  "By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith; 
and  that  not  of  yourselves:  it  is  the  gift  of  Gud"  (Eph.  ii.  8).  The  bride  was  poor 
in  this  world's  goods;  we  Christians  must  be  "poor  iu  spirit."  That  holy  poverty, 
that  sense  of  oui  own  helplessness  and  need  of  the  .Saviour,  is  very  blessed;  it  has 
the  first  place  in  the  Beatitudes.  2.  Her  exaltation.  "  1  knew  not,"  she  says,  "  my 
soul  made  me  the  chariots  ol  my  people,  a  princely  [people]."  She  uses  a  military 
figure,  perhaps  suggested  by  the  words  twice  addressed  to  her  in  this  chapter, 
"  Terrible  as  an  army  with  banners."  ^In  a  sense  she  accepts  the  metaphor.  Elijah 
aud  Elisha  had  been  severally  called  "the  chariot  of  Israel  and  the  horsemen 
thereof"  (2  Kings  ii.  12;  xiii.  14).  So  now  the  bride  had  been  raised  to  a  lofty 
position,  and  was  awe-inspiring  in  her  majesty,  like  a  bannered  host,  or  the  chariots 
of  a  princely  people.  Her  soul,  she  says,  had  made  her  this;  she  means  her  soul's 
love  for  the  bridegroom,  whom  she  so  often  describes  as  "  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  " 
(ch.  i.  7 ;  iii.  1,  2,  3,  4).  The  king  saw  her  and  loved  her.  His  love  won  her  innocent 
heart;  and  that  pure,  artless  love  of  hers,  the  love  which  fided  her  soul,  the  seat 
of  the  affections,  bad  lifted  her  up  into  the  very  highest  place  in  the  affections  of 
the  king,  so  that  now  in  her  queenly  majesty  she  was  not  only  fair  as  the  moon, 
but  awe-inspiring  as  a  bannered  host,  as  the  war-chariots  of  a  princely  people.  So 
it  is  love  that  makes  one  man  better  than  another  in  the  sight  of  God ;  nut  riciies, 
or  refinement,  or  learning,  but  love.  There  is,  as  it  were,  a  hierarchy  of  love  iu  the 
universe.  Good  men  love,  angels  love  more,  but  God  is  love — the  infinite,  ever- 
lasting Love.  "  He  prayeth  best  who  loveth  best."  He  is  nearest  to  God  who  by 
bis  Spirit  has  learned  the  great  grace  of  love.  "God  so  loved  tiie  world,  that  he 
gave  his  ouly  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life "  (John  iii.  16).  The  love  of  Christ  draws  forth  the  love 
of  his  people.  Their  love,  given  in  response  to  his  most  holy  love,  lifts  them  nearer 
to  the  King;  it  makes  them  take  up  the  cross  and  fullow  him  as  his  faithful  sol  iers, 
quitting  themselves  like  men  in  the  good  fight  of  faitb ;  it  makes  them  terrible  to 
the  powers  of  evil  as  a  bannered  host,  as  the  war-chariots  of  iron  were  in  the  days  of 
the  Judges  ( Judg.  i.  19 ;  iv.  3). 

III.  Shobt  dialogue  coNCLUDiNa  THE  CONVERSATION.  1.  Eequest  of  the  chorus. 
The  bride  retires ;  the  maidens  of  the  chorus  eagerly  call  her  back ;  they  desire  to 
look  again  upon  her  beauty.  They  call  her  for  tlie  first  and  only  time,  "  0  Shulamite  1 " 
What  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  ?  Is  it  equivalent  to  Shunamite  ?  Was  the  bride 
»  native  of  Shunem  in  the  Plain  of  Esdraelon,  where  Eiisha  afterwards  was  wont  to 
sojourn  (2  Kings  iv.  8 — 12)  ?  And  if  so,  cau  it  be  that  the  historical  basis  of  the 
tong  is  the  love  of  Solomon  for  Abishag  the  lair  Shunamite  of  1  Kings  i.  3  ?  Or, 
again,  i8  it  possible,  as  some  scholars  have  suggested,  that  the  Hebrew  name  Shula- 
mith  may  have  been  cliosen  as  a  near  approach  to  the  feminine  form  (Sh^vmith)  of 
Solomon  (Shelomoh),  signifying  the  bride's  relationship  to  the  great  monarch  ?  But 
the  bride  seems  to  belong  to  the  Lebanon  district;  and  wives  we.e  not  then  accustomed 
to  take  their  husband's  name.  Again,  Shulamith  may  possibly  have  been  the 
original  name  of  the  maiden,  though  it  occurs  nowhere  else  as  a  proper  name.  It  is 
enough  for  our  purpose  that  the  word  suggests  the  meaning  "  peaceful ;  "  the  Vulgate 
rendering  is  pacifica.  The  bride  is  modest  and  quiet,  she  is  peaceful ;  such  should 
Christians  be.  2.  Question  of  the  bride.  She  repeats  tlie  name  given  to  her  by  the 
chorus,  and  asks,  "  What  will  ye  see  in  the  Shulamite  ?  "  The  question  is  asked  in 
modesty.  The  last  clause  of  the  verse,  whether  taken  as  part  of  the  questiou  or  as 
the  answer  of  the  chorus,  is  exceedingly  difficult.  The  word  translated  "company" 
is  the  second  part  of  Abel-meholah  ("  the  meadow  of  the  dance  "),  tlie  home  of  Elisha 
(1  Kings  xix.  16).  The  Hebrew  for  "  two  armies  "  may  be  the  name  of  the  town  in 
Gilead,  "Mahanaim,"  so  called  by  Jacob  when  "the  angels  of  God  met  him  "there 
(Gen.  xxxii.  2).  Hence  the  translation  of  the  Revised  Version,  "  Why  will  ye  look 
upon  the  Sliulamite  as  upon  the  dance  of  Mahanaim  ?  "  as  if  the  chorus  was  inviting 


OH.  VI.  1—13.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  153 


the  bride  to  dance  some  stately  measure  called  from  the  Gileadite  town.  Some 
commentators  who  take  this  view  understand  the  bride's  words  as  a  modest  refusal ; 
others,  that  she  complies  with  their  request.  But  the  second  Hebrew  word  has  the 
definite  article,  which  would  scarcely  be  used  here  if  it  were  the  name  of  the  city. 
And  if  the  first  word  must  mean  "  dance,"  as  it  elsewhere  docs,  may  it  not  be  taken 
in  connection  with  the  preceding  titles  of  praise,  "the  bannered  host"  and  "the 
chariots  of  a  princely  people,"  as  a  martial  dance,  or  as  the  siately  and  well-ordered 
evolutions  of  two  bands  of  warriors?  This  interpretation,  which  is  suggested  with 
much  doubt,  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  yielding  a  more  suitable  explanation  than 
that  of  the  dance,  though  this  last  is  the  view  of  many  accomplished  scholars.  The 
chorus  looks  upon  the  bridu  with  the  interest  and  delight  with  which  thuy  would 
watch  the  evolutions  of  two  hosts  with  banners  and  chariots.  Warlike  images  occur 
several  times  in  the  song  (ch.  i.  9;  vi.  4,  10,  12).  To  the  Christian  the  words  recall 
the  onward  march  of  the  army  of  the  soldiers  of  the  cross  with  the  attendant  escort 
of  angels,  the  two  hosts  (Mahanaim)  of  Gen.  xxxii.  2.  For  the  angels  of  (iod  still, 
as  in  the  times  of  old,  encamp  round  about  them  that  fear  him  to  deliver  them 
(Ps.  xxxiv.  7).  And  still,  if  our  eyes  were  opened,  we  should  see,  as  the  servant  of 
Elisha  once  saw,  "  chariots  and  horses  of  fire  round  about "  the  faithful.  "  They  that 
be  with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  "  the  enemy  (2  Kings  vi.  16,  17). 


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Earnest  inquirers  after  Christ.  The  conversation  still  goes  on  between 
her  who  has  lost  her  beloved  and  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem.  She  has  just  poured  out 
her  heart  to  them  in  the  description  of  him  whom  her  soul  so  loved,  and  these  verses 
give  their  response.     We  learn — 

I.  That  thebb  is  a  spikitual  loveliness  in  the  soul  that  earnestly  sekks 
Christ.  (Of.  ver.  1, "  0  thou  fairest  among  women.")  It  is  not  merely  that  (Christ  sees 
this  loveliness,  we  know  he  does;  but  others  see  it  likewise.  It  is  not  the  beluved  who 
speaks  here,  but  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem.  (Of.  2  Cor.  vii.  10,  11,  where  are  set 
forth  some  of  those  graces  of  character  and  conduct  which  are  found  in  the  seeking  sonl.) 
And  that  humility,  tenderness  of  conscience,  zeal,  devoutness,  holy  desire,  and  gentle- 
ness of  spirit  which  accompany  such  seeking  of  Christ — how  beautiful  these  things  aie  I 
And,  like  all  real  beauty,  there  is  no  self-consciousness  in  it,  hut  rather  such  soul  mourns 
that  it  is  so  little  like  what  Christ  would  have  it  be. 

II.  It  will  win  sympathy  and  help,  which  once  it  did  not  possess.  At  the 
beginning  of  this  song  it  is  plain  that  the  raniden  who  speaks  did  not  have  the  sympathy 
but  rather  tlie  contempt  of  the  dauj^hters  of  Jerusalem  (cf  ch.  i.  5,  8).  But  miw  all 
that  is  altered.  They  are  won  to  her  love.  Great  love  to  Christ  will  blessedly  infect 
those  about  us.  We  can  hardly  live  with  such  without  coming  under  the  power  uf  its 
sweet  and  sacred  contagion.  Cf.  Jethro,  "  We  will  go  with  you,  for  we  see  that  the 
Lord  hath  blessed  you."  See,  at  the  Crucifixiou,  how  Joseph  of  Arimathjea,  Nioodemus, 
the  centurion,  and  others  ceased  from  their  cold  neutrality  or  open  opposition,  and 
showed  that  they  felt  the  power  of  Christ's  love. 

III.  It  will  become  the  wise  instructob  op  others.  This  inquiry  of  ver.  1 
had  Its  fulfilment  when  Christ  lay  in  the  tomb.  Those  who  sought  him  mourned,  but 
found  him  not.  Cf.  Christ's  words  concerning  his  absence,  "Ye  shall  have  sorrow,  but 
your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy.  Also  Mark  ii.  20.  And  the  reply  of  ver.  2 
had  part  fulfilment  at  that  same  period.  Cf.  "  Tliis  day  thou  shalt  be  with  me  in 
Faradise  "  (Luke  xxiii.  43).  Yes,  the  Beloved  had  gone  down  into  his  garden  (ver.  2). 
But  we  may  also  understand  by  the  garden  his  Church  (cf.  on  ch.  iv.  6).  And  thus  the 
soul  we  are  contemplating  instiucts  others.  She  tells  them  :  1.  Where  Christ  is  to 
be  found.  In  his  garden,  the  place  he  has  chosen,  separated,  cultivated,  leautified, 
and  whither  he  luves  to  resort.  And :  2.  What  he  delights  in  there.  The  spices — the 
fragrant  graces  of  regenerated  souls,  the  frankincense  of  their  worship  and  prayers. 
The  fruits  on  which  he  feeds — the  huly  lives,  the  manifestation  of  his  people's  faith  and 
love.  The  hlies — the  pure,  meek,  and  lowly  souls  that  spring  and  grow  there.  3.  What 
he  does  there-    He  "  leeda  "  there.    "  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  aiid  be  sati*- 


154  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  VL 1—13. 

Hed"  As  his  "  meat  and  drink ''  when  here  on  earth  was  "  to  do  the  will  of"  the  Father, 
so  now  his  sustenance  is  those  fruits  of  the  Spirit  which  abound  in  his  true  Church.  And 
he  "  gathers  lilies."  "  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  in  his  arms,  and  carry  them  in  his 
bosom  "  (Isa.  xl.).  Whenever  a  pure  and  holy  soul,  like  those  of  children  and  of  saints, 
is  transplanted  trom  the  earthly  garden  to  the  heavenly,  that  is  the  gathering  of  the 
lilies  "0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?"  Thus  doth  the  soul  that  loves  Christ  instruct 
othe^s. 

IV.  Gains  the  object  op  its  search.  (Ver.  S.j"'"  I  am  my  Beloved's  .  .  .  mme." 
It  is  the  declaration  of  holy  rapture  in  the  consciousness  of  Christ's  love.  They  that 
seek  him  thaXl  find  him.  There  may  be,  there  are,  seasons  when  we  fear  we  have  lost 
him,  but  they  shall  surely  be  succeeded  by  such  blessed  seasons  when  the  soul  shall  sing 
in  her  joy,  "  My  Beloved  is  mine,"  etc.  (ver.  3). — S.  0. 

Vers.  4 — 10  and  ch.  vii.  1 — 9. — The  friendship  of  the  world.  Those  who  take  the 
literal  and  historic  view  of  this  song  see  here  a  repetition  of  Solomon's  attempts  to  bend 
to  his  will  the  maiden  whom  he  sought  to  win.  It  is  a  repetition  of  ch.  iv.  1 — 5.  And 
in  the  extravagance  of  his  flattery,  his  mention  of  her  terribleness,  his  telling  of  his  many 
queens  and  concubines,  his  huge  harem,  all  of  whom  he  says  he  will  set  aside  for  her — 
all  this  is  like  what  he  would  say.  Now,  it  all  might  be,  as  it  generally  has  been,  taken 
allegorically,  as  we  have  taken  it  in  ch.  iv.  1 — 5,  and  as  setting  forth  Christ's  estimate 
of  his  Church.  But  here  the  representations  are  yet  more  extravagant  and  even  gross, 
80  that  we  prefer  to  take  them  as  telling  of  that  which  is  evil  rather  than  good ;  as  the 
language,  not  of  Christ,  but  of  the  world,  his  foe,  in  attempting  to  win  from  him  those 
who  are  his.     Let  it,  then,  teach  us  concerning  this  friendship  of  the  world — 

I.  Flattery  is  ever  one  of  its  forms.  It  is  compelled  to  adopt  this  in  order  to 
hide  away  t1  le  fatal  issue  of  its  friendship.  Like  as  the  vampire  is  said  to  fan  its  victim 
with  its  wings,  soothing  and  stupefying  it  so  that  it  may  the  more  surely  destroy  it, 
thus  the  world  soothes  and  sends  asleep  by  its  flatteries  the  soul  it  would  destroy. 

II.  This  flattery  has  marked  ohabacteristiob.  1.  It  is  extravagant.  Cf.  what 
is  here  said  in  the  verses  selected  concerning  her  of  whom  they  speak.  How  monstrous 
are  the  representations  as  addressed  to  any  maiden !  And  are  not  the  conceits  the  world 
engenders  in  men's  souls  of  this  order?  2.  It  is  always  fearful  of  losing  its  prey. 
(Ver.  4,  "Terrible  as  an  army;"  also  ver.  10.)  These  expressions  seem  to  indicate  cou- 
sciousness  that  the  soul  was  as  yet  anything  but  fully  won.  3.  Has  no  originality.  It 
says  the  same  things  over  and  over  again.  See  about  her  "  hair,"  her  "  teeth,"  her 
"  cheeks  "  (vers.  5,  6,  7 ;  cf.  ch.  iv.  1 — 5).  And  still  every  poor  fool  that  the  world 
successfully  flatters  is  plied  with  the  same  worn-out  arguments,  and,  alas !  yields  to  them. 
4.  Sensuous  and  sensual.  (Cf.  ver.  8  and  oh.  vii.  1 — 9.)  The  baser  instincts  are  the 
world's  happy  hunting-grounds.  It  knows  that  it  can  get  a  response  there  when  there 
Is  none  elsewhere.  5.  Muthless  and  cruel.  (Ver.  9.)  The  flatterer  professes,  but  let  all 
Buch  professions  be  doubted  vehemently — that  he  would  sacrifice  all  the  rest  for  her 
whom  he  would  now  win.  For  her,  the  "  dove,"  whom  he,  the  hawk,  would  devour,  the 
three  score  queens  and  the  four  score  concubines  and  the  virgins  without  number  (ver. 
8)  should  all  be  set  aside  and  lose  favour.  Anything,  no  matter  how  unjust,  so  Solomon 
may  please  his  sensual  phantasy.  They  who  are  ruthless  in  winning  will  be  ruthless 
when  they  have  won  (cf.  poor  Anne  Boleyn).  Oh,  the  all-devouring  world  !  Its  "words 
are  smoother  than  butter,"  but  "  the  poison  of  asps  is  under  its  lips." 

III.  True  love  will  reject  it.  Such  love  is  the  Ithuriel-like  spear  which  detects 
at  once  what  it  is.  So  this  maiden,  type  of  the  redeemed  soul,  will  have  none  of  it  (cf. 
ch.  vii.  10).  And  here  is  suggested — what,  indeed,  is  the  theme  of  the  whole  song — the 
invincible  strength  of  the  true  love  of  Christ  in  the  soul.  Let  us  have  that,  and  no 
flatteries  or  blandishments  of  the  world,  nor  its  fierce  frowns  either,  shall  seduce  u»  from 
him  whose  we  are  and  whose  we  hope  ever  to  be.  Such  love  will  he  "  terrible,"  must 
be  so,  to  all  who  would  come  against  it.  Christ's  love  to  us  is  sn  infinite  that,  therefore, 
nothing  less  than  these  many  dread  words  of  his  about  the  everlasting  fire  can  serve  to 
tell  ipf  his  wrath  at;ainst  flat  and  those  who  would  destroy  us  for  whom  he  died.  And 
if  we  love  him  as  we  should,  we  shall  give  no  quarter  to  sin;  it  will  be  to  us  "  the 
abominable  thing  which  I  hate,"  even  as  to  him.  Oh,  may  this  love  dwell  in  us  richly 
and  for  eveiinore  1 — S.  C. 


OH.  VL 1—13.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  166 

Vsr.  10 — ch.  vii.  9. — How  souls  come  into  perilous  places.  "  Or  ever  I  was  aware.*" 
This  section  coctains — so  the  literalists  say — the  account  of  the  speaker's  coming  to 
Solomon's  palace.  (For  right  rendering  of  text,  see  the  Revised  Versii)n  and  its  margin.) 
She  relates  how  she  met  the  king's  court  (ver.  11).  She  was  dwelling  at  home,  and 
occupied  in  her  customary  rural  labours,  when  Solomon,  on  a  pleasure  tour  (ch.  iii.  6, 
etc.),  came  into  the  neighbourhood  of  her  town,  Engedi.  There  the  ladies  of  the  court 
saw  her,  and  were  greatly  struck  with  her  beauty  (ver.  10).  Bewildered,  she  would  have 
fled  (vers.  12,  13),  but  thought  the  royal  chariots  were  those  of  the  nobles  of  her  conntry 
(ver.  12).  The  ladies  of  the  court  beg  her  to  return  (ver.  13),  and  when  she  asks  what 
they  want  of  her  (ver.  13),  they  request,  and  she  consents,  that  she  will  dance  before 
them,  as  the  maidens  of  her  country  were  wont  to  do.  Thus  Solomon  sees  her,  and 
is  enraptured  with  her,  and  begins  to  praise  her  in  his  gross  way  from  her  feet  upwards 
(ch.  vii.  2 — 9 ;  Miiller,  in  loc.)  as  he  had  seen  her  in  dancing.  And  he  seems  to  have 
brought  her  to  Jerusalem  and  to  his  palace  there,  where  she  relates  all  this.  Such 
appears  to  be  the  history  on  which  this  song  is  founded.  It  is  likely,  natural,  and 
enables  us,  whilst  still  regarding  it  allegorically,  to  avoid  assigning  to  Christ  language 
and  conduct  which  far  more  befit  such  a  one  as  Solomon  was.  From  the  narrative 
as  above  given  we  may  learn  that — 

I.  Kg  places  ABE  FB£E  FBOM  BFIBIT0AL  FEBIL.  This  maiden  is  represented  as  at  home 
and  occupied  in  her  usual  and  proper  employ,  when  suddenly  all  happened  as  is  here 
told.  And  what  places  are  there  in  which  the  world,  and  Satan,  do  not  seek  the  soul's 
harm?    At  home,  in  our  lawful  calling,  in  the  Church,  everywhere. 

II.  Those  whom  the  world  has  ensnared  are  used  to  ensnare  others.  The  women 
of  Solomon's  court  are  represented  as  actively  engaged  in  trying  to  secure  this  maiden 
for  him.    It  is  a  true  picture'of  bow  worldly  souls  try  to  make  others  as  themselves. 

UL  Mistakes  hatb  often  as  hurtful  consequences  as  sins. 

"  Evil  is  wrought 
By  want  of  thought 
As  well  aa  want  of  heart" 

It  was  so  here.  There  was  mistake  as  to  who  the  people  were ;  as  to  the  motive  of  the 
•request  made  her ;  in  not  at  once  escaping ;  in  yielding  to  their  requests.  It  does  seem 
very  hard  that  when  there  is  no  intention  of  evil,  evil  should  yet  come,  and  often  so 
terribly  (cf.  1  Kings  xiii.  11,  etc.).  But  it  is  that  we  may  learn  by  our  mistakes.  We 
learn  by  nothing  so  well,  and  they  are  never  suffered  to  have  irreparable  consequences. 

IV.  The  peril  of  parleying  with  spiritual  fobs.  Had  she  who  is  told  of  here  fled 
away  as  she  intended,  none  of  her  after-trial  would  have  followed.  To  hold  converse 
with  a  spiritual  enemy  is  next  to  giving  up  the  keys  of  the  fortress.  See  how  prompt 
our  Lord  was  in  repelling  the  suggestions  of  the  tempter. 

V.  Though  we  fall  we  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  down.  The  tempter  in  this 
history  was  baffled  alter  all.  She  whom  he  tried  so  much  kept  her  faith  and  love.  The 
soul  that  loves  Christ  may  wander  and  fall,  but  shall  assuredly  be  brought  back.  "  He 
restoreth  my  soul."     Faithful  love  will  soon  reassert  its  power. — S.  0. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Successful  quest  after  the  chief  good.  The  inquirer  has  taken  a  step  in 
advance.  Awhile  he  asktd,  "  What  is  there  in  Jesus  that  makes  him  so  attractive  ?  " 
To  this  question  the  loving  disciple  had  responded.  He  had  answered  the  question  fully. 
He  had  given  a  full  description  of  the  sinner's  Friend.  He  had  testified  to  the  worth  and 
exci-llence  of  the  heavenly  King.  And  now  the  inquirer  asks  further,  "  Where  may  I 
find  this  gracious  Friend?  My  heart  craves  the  good  which  this  Friend  alone  can 
bestow.     1  fain  would  have  him  too.     Tell  me  where  I  may  find  him." 

I.  Here  is  suooestbd  a  diliqicnt  search  fob  Jesus.  1.  Spiritual  life  and  Joy  in  one 
attract  others.  Genuine  piety  acts  like  a  magnetic  charm.  A  well-kept  garden,  stocked 
with  fragrant  flowers,  has  strong  attractions  for  a  thousand  men,  and  the  fragrant  graces 
of  true  piety  have  a  like  fascination.  If  "  a  thing  of  beauty  is  a  joy  for  ever,"  the  life 
of  a  true  Christian,  being  of  all  things  the  most  beautiful,  is  an  abiding  joy.  There  is 
nothing  so  capable  of  manifesting  beauty  as  character.  If  all  Christians  were  as  gracious 
and  loving  as  they  might  be,  what  a  benign  effect  would  this  have  on  the  ungodly  I 
This  is  Chiist's  method  for  propagating  his  gospel.    "  I  am  glorified  in  them."  By  which 


IM  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  n.  1— Ifc 

he  meant  to  say,  "  All  the  chann  of  my  character  and  all  the  fruit  of  my  redemption 
shall  be  seen  in  the  lives  of  my  disciples."  This  will  win  the  world's  attention.  2. 
Christian  Churches  are  the  objects  of  the  world's  respect.  This  is  not  true  of  every  com- 
munity that  styles  itself  a  Cliurch.  Bat  every  true  Church  commands  the  respect  and 
homage  of  mankind.  And  as  a  Church  is  simply  an  assemblage  of  individuals,  a  genuine 
Christian  has  a  similar  influence  over  men.  The  bride  of  Christ  is  here  addressed  as 
■"  the  fairest  among  women."  Purity  and  magnanimity  of  character  command  universal 
respect.  Prejudiced  men  may  malign  and  slander  consistent  Christians ;  they  may  envy 
their  high  attainments ;  yet  in  their  heart  of  hearts  they  do  them  homage.  They  crave 
a  good  man's  benediction.  3.  Active  search  is  needfid  if  we  would  find  Christ.  It  is 
quite  true  that  Jesus  seeks  the  sinner.  He  came  to  "  seek  the  lost."  This  first  desire 
to  have  the  friendship  of  the  Beloved  has  been  awakened  in  the  heart  by  the  good  Spirit 
of  Christ.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  part  we  must  perform,  or  we  shall  not  gain  success. 
We  must  strive  to  enter  into  the  kingdom,  or  the  portals  will  not  open.  The  salvation 
of  the  soul  is  not  to  be  attained  by  indolent  passivity.  There  must  be  search,  exertion, 
intense  effort.  We  must  break  away  from  old  companions.  We  must  forego  former  indul- 
gences. We  must  gain  knowledge  of  Christ.  We  must  search  the  Scriptures.  We 
must  be  much  in  prayer.  We  must  watch  the  stratagems  of  the  tempter.  We  must 
seek  if  we  would;find.  4.  To  find  Christ  it  is  best  to  have  a/n  experienced  guide.  "That 
we  may  seek  him  vrith  thee."  The  man  who  has  found  Christ,  and  knows  well  all  the 
favourite  haunts  of  Christ,  is  the  best  guide  for  others.  No  qualification  in  a  guide  is 
so  good  as  personal  experience.  Nothing  can  take  its  place.  No  titles,  no  diplomas,  no 
amount  of  intellectual  learning,  will  take  the  place  of  experience.  The  pilot  who  has 
navigated  a  hundred  ships  through  the  rocky  straits,  though  he  may  not  be  able  to  read  a 
word  in  any  language,  is  the  best  guide  to  bring  us  safely  into  port.  It  is  a  foolish  act 
to  refuse  the  practical  counsels  of  faithful  Christians.  A  learned  man  once  accounted 
for  his  eminent  acquisitions  by  the  fact  that  he  had  never  hesitated  to  ask  questions 
respecting  the  unknown.  To  find  Christ  is  eternal  life,  therefore  let  us  use  every  wise 
measure  in  order  to  gain  so  great  a  boon. 

II.  Valuable  counsel.  "  My  beloved  is  gone  down  into  his  garden."  1.  Here  is 
confident  assurance  upon  the  matter.  On  the  part  of  a  real  Christian  there  is  no  doubt 
where  Christ  can  be  found.  His  knowledge  is  clear,  for  it  is  well-founded.  As  surely 
as  men  know  in  what  part  of  the  heavens  the  sun  will  rise  or  will  set,  so  the  friend  of 
Jesus  knows  where  he  can  be  found.  So  he  speaks  in  no  doubtful  tones.  There  is  no 
peradventuTe.  "  My  Beloved  is  gone  down  into  his  garden."  There  he  had  always 
found  the  Saviour,  when  devoutly  he  had  sought  him.  For  "  his  delights  are  with  the 
children  of  men."  And  his  gracious  promise  to  his  Church  has  never  been  broken, 
'•  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  Name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of 
them."  2.  In  t?ie  society  of  living  and  fruitful  saints  Jesus  will  be  found.  He  has  gone 
"  to  the  beds  of  spices."  However  imperfect  and  insipid  our  graces  seem  to  ourselves, 
Jesus  finds  in  them  a  sweet  savour.  The  organ  through  which  Jesus  discovers  these 
graces,  and  enjoys  their  fragrance  and  sweetness,  is  far  more  highly  developed  in  him  than 
in  us.  To  his  sensitive  nature  there  is  a  fine  aroma  in  our  lowliness  and  patience,  in 
our  love  and  praise,  which  we  had  not  suspected.  Nor  do  the  sweetest  songs  of  angels 
attract  him  so  much  as  the  first  lispings  of  a  penitent's  prayer.  The  nearer  we  get  to 
Jesus  the  richer  joy  do  we  attain.  There  is  a  rare  delicacy  in  the  gladness,  easier  felt 
than  described.  So  in  our  fresh  passionate  love,  and  in  our  simple  zeal,  and  in  our 
childlike  trust,  Jesus  finds  profoundest  satisfaction.  In  the  midst  of  such  virgin  souls 
he  delights  to  dwell.  These  hold  him,  and  will  not  let  him  go.  What  spice-beds  are 
to  every  lover  of  innocent  pleasure,  the  piety  of  true  saints  is  to  Jesus.  Near  such  he 
may  at  any  time  be  found.  If  any  man  longs  to  find  the  Saviour,  he  will  find  him  in 
the  vicinity  of  genuine  believers.  He  is  gone  to  the  "  beds  of  spices,"  perchance  to 
some  bedside,  where  deep-rooted  love  is  blossoming  and  bearing  fruit.  3.  Purity  of 
heart  wins  Christ's  presence.  He  is  gone  "  to  gather  lilies."  Using  Oriental  language  to 
convey  heavenly  truth,  he  is  described  as  a  Shepherd  who  feeds  his  flock  "  among  the 
lilies."  In  tiie  former  chapter  we  read,  "  His  lips  are  like  lilies."  To  express  his  fond- 
ness for  purity,  he  portrays  his  bride  as  "  a  lily  among  thorns."  In  the  use  of  all  such 
language  he  utters  his  strong  affection  for  that  which  is  pure  in  moral  character.  If  ho 
stoops  in  his  pity  to  save  a  polluted  sinner,  he  at  the  same  time  makes  it  clear  that  he 


OH.  vt  1—13.]  THE  SONQ  OP  SOLOMON.  161 


loathes  and  abhors  sin.  His  companions  shall  be  spiritual  virgins.  Until  a  man  is  new- 
born he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  much  less  can  he  see  the  King.  Purity  of 
life  may  not  yet  bu  reached,  but  it  in  the  central  heart  the  purpose  and  firm  resolve  be 
for  purity,  then  Jesus  will  soon  be  found.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall 
see  God." 

III.  Faithful  testimony.  "  I  am  my  beloved's,  and  my  beloved  is  mine."  1. 
Religion  it  essentially  a  matter  of  the  heart.  This  title  of  endearment,  "  My  Beloved," 
implii'S  that  he  has  won  the  affections  of  the  heart.  True  piety  is  not  simply  a  matter 
of  Bonviction.  It  is  not  merely  a  doctrine  or  a  creed.  It  is  not  a  set  of  forms  and 
ceremonies.  It  is  an  aflfair  of  the  heart.  It  moves  and  holds  the  whole  man.  Feeling, 
desire,  choice,  strong  affection,  enter  into  the  warp  and  woof  of  true  religion.  I  may 
be  very  incompetent  to  set  forth  Christ's  claims  to  the  homage  of  mankind.  But  one 
thing  I  know — Jesus  is  supreme  in  my  heart.  None  is  so  worthy  of  the  central  shrine 
as  he.  I  have  given  myself  to  him,  as  the  only  possible  return  for  his  love.  2.  This 
testimony  is  the  outcome  of  vigorous  faith.  The  bride  of  Christ  had  used  this  language 
before,  but  now  she  reverses  the  order.  The  order  of  events  is  not  always  the  order  of 
our  experience.  There  are  times  when  the  Christian  loses  the  assurance  that  he  is  loved 
by  Christ.  The  sunshine  of  the  Master's  smile  is  hidden.  Yet  even  then  the  language 
of  faith  is,  "  Come  what  may,  I  give  myself  afresh  to  him.  Whether  he  count  me 
worthy  of  a  place  in  his  regards  or  not,  he  is  worthy  of  a  place  in  mine.  I  am  hia. 
Therefore  faith  says  (though  I  do  not  realize  it  now),  '  My  Beloved  is  mine.' "  3.  This 
renewed  testimony  is  required  hy  new  circumstance.  The  daughters  of  Jerusalem  were 
inquiring  where  this  Friend  of  sinners  might  be  found.  The  bride  of  Christ  undertakes 
to  guide  into  his  presence.  Then  she  wishes  to  make  it  plain  upon  what  terms  Jesus 
will  reveal  himself  to  seekers.  So  she  means  to  say,  "  I  gave  my  whole  self  to  him.  I 
opened  to  him  my  heart,  and  made  him  Monarch  there.  Do  you  likewise,  and  you  shall 
find  the  Saviour  too."  Jesus  Christ  craves  the  human  heart.  "  Lovest  thou  me  ?  "  is 
his  inquiry  still.  Even  the  city  harlot,  sick  of  sin,  and  opening  her  heart  to  Jesus, 
found  in  him  sympathy  and  pardon  and  a  new  life.  "  She  loved  much,  therefore  .her 
sins  are  forgiven  her." — D. 

Vers.  4 — 10. — Christ t  picture  of  his  Church.  The  value  of  an  encomium  depends  on 
the  qualification  of  the  speaker.  If  a  man  is  a  master  of  eloquent  phrases,  and  knows 
but  little  of  the  person  h6  eulogizes,  his  encomium  is  little  worth.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  speaker  is  a  skilful  judge  of  character,  and  knows  well  the  person,  and  speaks  from 
pure  motives,  his  estimate  is  priceless.  Now,  the  best  judge  of  the  quality  of  a  wife  is 
her  own  husband,  for  no  one  else  has  such  opportunities  of  knowing  her  virtues.  If  we 
regard  the  language  in  the  text  as  the  language  of  Christ,  then  he  has  all  the  qualities 
needful  to  be  an  accurate  judge.  As  tJicj  Bridegroom,  he  has  intimate  acquaintance  with 
his  bride;  and  so  righteous  is  he  that  he  will  neither  exaggerate  nor  detract  in  his 
delineation.  He  will  gauge  with  perfect  accuracy  her  merit  and  her  worth.  Others 
may  not  acquiesce  in  his  judgment.  She  herself  may  deem  it  a  flattering  portrait.  But 
Jesus  is  an  unerring  Judge,  and  we  accept  with  perfect  confidence  his  description  of  his 
Church. 

I.  This  languaqb  plainly  conveys  the  idea  or  spiritual  beauty.  "  Thou  art 
beautiful,  my  love,  as  Tirzah ;  comely  as  Jerusalem."  'I'irzah  was  a  city  on  the 
mountains  of  Samaria,  that  had  a  wide  renown  for  beauty.  The  name  meant  "  a  delight 
ful  place."  God  has  given  to  the  human  soul  a  faculty  that  discerns  and  appreciates 
what  is  beautiful.  We  detect  what  is  beautiful  in  material  nature,  viz.  symmetry  of 
form  and  harmony  of  colour.  We  discern  also  what  is  beautiful  in  human  character 
and  in  human  conduct.  All  beauty  springs  from  God,  the  Fount.  He  is  perfect  Beauty, 
as  much  as  perfect  Righteousness.  'l"he  constituent  elements  of  spiritual  beauty  are 
humility,  holiness,  and  love.  These,  wisely  blended,  form  a  comely  character.  It  is 
always  unsafe,  because  an  inducement  to  pride,  to  praise  the  bodily  beauty  of  a  maiden 
within  her  hearing.  But  one  of  the  elements  in  spiritual  beauty  is  lowliness ;  hence 
public  praise  is  an  advantage  rather  than  a  peril.  For  commendation  is  a  spur  to  fresh 
effort,  and  whatever  quickens  our  exertion  in  the  culture  of  humility  and  holiness  is  a 
boon  to  be  prized.  Nor  Is  this  spiritual  beauty  evanescent.  It  is  a  permanent  acqui- 
sition.    It  will  develop  and  mature  towards  perfection,  as  the  ages  roll  ou.     The  »un 


158  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vi.  1—13. 

will  be  quenched  in  darkness,  the  stars  will  disappear  or  else  assume  new  forms;  but 
the  ransomed  saints  will  be  rising  in  excellence,  and  adding  to  their  spiritual  adorn- 
ments, world  without  end.  This  high  estate  of  beauty  may  not  as  yet  be  in  esse,  but 
It  is  in  posse.  It  is  not  yet  an  actual  possession.  But  it  is  in  course  of  development,  from 
the  bud  to  the  open  flower.  It  is  clearly  seen  in  its  perfeotness  by  the  prescient  eye  of 
our  Immanuel. 

II.  Tais  LANGUAGE  BETOKENS  THETJNiTT  OP  THE  Chuech.  "My  clove, my  uudcfiled, 
is  one."  In  all  God's  works  we  find  unity  amid  diversity.  Throughout  all  material 
forces  we  discover  system.  Part  is  subordiuated  to  part.  Eveiything  is  linked  to 
everything  else.  All  forces  work  together  for  the  well-being  of  the  whole.  There  is 
organic  unity.  The  universe  shows  the  presence  of  one  Master-mind.  God  loves  order. 
Confusion,  conflict,  anarchy,  are  an  abomination  to  him.  Yet  variety  is  not  displeasing 
to  him.  Very  clearly  Jesus  has  not  ordained  a  system  of  rigid  uniformity  in  his  Church. 
That  would  not  add  to  her  beauty  nor  to  her  usefulness.  But  the  heart  of  Jesus  is  set 
upon  unity.  In  his  great  prayer  to  his  Father,  prior  to  his  crucifixion,  he  pleaded, 
"  Tl  lat  they  all  may  be  one,  as  thou,  Tather,  ait  in  me,  and  I  in  thee."  In  opinions  and 
beliefs  it  is  next  to  impossible  for  the  Church  to  be  one.  For  God  has  created  such 
diversities  of  taste  and  temper  in  men's  minds,  that  for  the  time  present  truth  presents 
itself  under  many  aspects.  Likely  enough,  this  will  continue  until  the  human  mind 
can  more  easily  grasp  the  system  of  truth  as  a  whole.  Yet,  while  opinions  and  beliefs 
may  vary,  Christians  can  be  one  in  feeling,  one  in  love,  one  in  loyalty  to  their  King,  one 
in  aggressive  service.  This  unity  of  life  and  love,  amid  diversities  of  belief  and  methods 
of  service,  will  add  to  the  Church's  beauty  and  the  Church's  success.  All  the  imagery 
which  God  has  employed  in  Scripture  to  set  forth  his  Church  conveys  this  idea  of  unity. 
Is  the  Church  a  vine,  springing  out  of  Christ  the  Root?  Then  the  manifold  branchesand 
twigs  imply  a  united  whole.  Is  a  human  body  employed  as  an  illustration?  Then  all 
the  members  and  organs  working  in  harmony  imply  unity.  So,  in  our  text,  the  bride 
is  the  representative  of  all  saints,  in  all  lands  and  in  all  ages.  A  dominant  note  of 
Christ's  Church  is  unity.     "  There  are  many  members,  yet  are  they  one  body," 

III.  The  LANGUAGE  DENOTES  FAME.  "  The  daughters  saw  her,  and  blessed  her ;  yea, 
the  queens  and  the  women  praised  her."  High  and  noble qtialities  of  character  are  sure 
to  command  fame.  Fame  is  a  doubtful  good.  Counterfeit  excellence,  like  tinselled 
brass,  sometimes  gains  currency,  and  imposes  on  credulous  people.  Successful  wicked- 
ness will,  now  and  then,  obtain  a  transient  fame.  Nevertheless,  real  and  permanent 
honour  belongs  only  to  substnntial  goodness.  Sooner  or  later  the  true  Church  will  secure 
high  renown.  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her."  "  The  highest  himself  shall  establish  her." 
Her  spiritual  beauty  and  her  beneficent  influence  shall  win  for  her  immortal  praise. 
Beyond  all  human  institutions,  the  Church  will  be  found  the  bond  of  human  society, 
the  bulwark  of  fieedom,  the  inspirer  of  intellectual  life,  the  guardian  of  the  nation's 
welfare.  Fame  is  of  secondary  importance,  yet  fame  must  not  be  despised.  For  fame 
is  power.  Fame  is  large  opportunity  for  doing  good.  Fame,  as  the  result  of  generous 
and  heroic  service,  is  inevitable.  Yet  the  Church  will  not  keep  her  fame  for  herself. 
She  will  lay  it  at  the  feet  of  her  Lord,  to  whom  all  belongs.  For  the  present  the  Church 
may  inherit  the  world's  scorn  rather  than  the  world's  fame ;  but  when  her  hidden  light 
and  power  shall  break  forth,  "  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  her  light,  and  kings  to  the 
brightness  of  her  rising."  Resplendent  fame  is  her  sure  reversion,  "  for  the  mouth  of 
the  Lord  hath  spoken  it." 

IV.  Here  is  fuether  the  idea  op  hope-oebating.  "  Who  is  this  that  looketh  forth 
as  the  morning  ?  "  Morning  is  the  dawn  of  hope  to  the  benighted  and  the  shipwrecked. 
Such  are  the  evils  that  infest  human  society,  that  many  thoughtftil  men  have  become 
pessimists.  "  Is  life  worth  living  ?  "  many  ask.  If,  after  all  the  struggles  and  toils  and 
endurances  of  this  life,  there  is  only  extinction,  or  if  the  future  is  a  dark  enigma,  then 
may  not  suicide  be  true  wisdom  ?  Hope,  the  backbone  of  all  energy,  is  destroyed.  The 
great  questions  are — Is  there  any  desirable  future  for  the  human  race  on  the  earth?  Is 
there  a  certain  prospect  of  a  better  liie  for  righteous  souls  after  death  ?  Now,  there  is 
no  oracle,  outside  the  Church,  that  can  respond  to  these  queries.  The  Church  is  the 
apostle  of  hope,  the  champion  of  humanity.  The  Church  is  a  pledge  of  a  better  future 
for  mankind.  The  Church  proclaims  a  universal  brotherhood.  The  Church  is  the 
fostet-mother  of  all  the  useful  arts  j  the  foster-mother  of  progress,  learning,  social  order, 


OH.  VL 1—13.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  159 

and  peace.  She  changes  deserts  into  gardens,  and  prisons  into  palaces.  Where  dark 
despair  awhile  reigned,  she  comes  like  the  light  of  morning,  and  opens  a  new  day. 

V.  Hebe  is  the  idea  of  usefulness.  "  Fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun."  As 
the  luminaries  of  night  and  of  day  perform  an  office  of  unspeakable  usefulness  to  man- 
kind, so  does  the  true  Church.  In  some  respects  the  Church  most  resembles  the  moon. 
Her  light  is  borrowed,  and  hence  is  enfeebled.  She  passes  oft  through  manifold  phases. 
The  world  often  obstructs  her  light.  It  is  only  now  and  then  that  her  light  is  full- 
orbed  and  at  its  best.  This  shall  not  always  be.  Her  light  shall  be  soft  and  gentle, 
like  the  light  of  the  moon ;  yet  for  clearness  and  brilliance  she  shall  be  like  the  sun. 
Who  can  measure  the  potent  usefulness  of  light?  How  destitute  of  beauty  and  of  life 
would  our  earth  be  without  light  I  If  to-morrow  the  sun  should  not  rise,  what  conster- 
nation would  prevail  in  every  home  of  man  I  The  wheels  of  commerce  would  stand  still. 
Agriculture  would  be  suspended.  Food  would  speedily  be  exhausted.  All  artificial 
light  would  soon  come  to  an  end,  and,  before  many  months  had  sped,  all  animal  and 
vegetable  life  would  expire.  Equally  useful,  yea,  more  beneficent  stiU,  is  the  Church  in 
the  moral  world.  Apart  from  the  truth  embodied  in  the  Church,  what  would  mankind 
know  of  God,  or  his  relationship  to  men,  or  his  purposes  of  redemption,  or  his  provision 
for  a  higher  home?  Or  what  would  men  know  of  themselves,  their  spiritual  capacities, 
their  Divine  origin,  their  possible  developments,  or  the  resources  of  Divine  help  open  to 
them  ?  If  you  could  blot  out  from  existence  the  Church  of  Christ,  this  world  would 
speedily  sink  into  darkness  and  ruin.  Within  a  single  generation  of  men  it  would  be  a 
chaos,  a  pandemonium.     Usefulness  is  predicated. 

VI.  A  FUETHBR  IDEA  IS  DEVELOPMENT.  "  Who  Is  this  that  looketh  forth  as  the 
morning  ?  "  The  morning  is  a  promise  and  a  pledge  of  perfect  day.  Light  and  warmth 
advance  by  regular  stages  until  noon  is  reached.  It  is  a  picture  of  certain  progress — 
advancement  along  an  appointed  way.  Such  is  the  destined  life  of  the  Church.  At  her 
birth  she  was  feeble.  Political  arrogance  at  Jerusalem  thought  to  crush  out  her  life. 
But  she  steadily  grew,  passed  safely  through  the  stages  of  infancy  and  childhood,  until 
now  she  appears  a  full-grown,  ruddy  maiden.  Development  is  evidently  God's  order. 
He  places  trees  at  zero,  and  from  the  lowest  point  gives  them  opportunity  to  reach  the 
highest.  At  the  present  hour  the  Church's  development  is  an  impressive  fact.  She 
grows  in  intelligence,  in  vigour,  in  power,  in  influence,  in  usefulness,  day  by  day.  At 
no  period  in  her  history  was  the  Church  of  Christ  so  highly  developed  as  she  is  to-day. 
Her  progress  is  assured. 

VIL  Hebe  is  also  the  idea  of  conquest  as  the  result  of  conflict.  "  Terrible 
as  an  army  with  banners."  The  metaphor  imports  a  majesty  of  active  power  that 
moves  onward  with  confident  step  to  overthrow  its  foes.  "  Terrible  as  a  bannered  host." 
The  Church  on  earth  is  a  Church  militant.  Many  regiments  of  believers  make  up  one 
army.  This  consecrated  host  of  God's  elect  is  commissioned  to  fight  against  error, 
ignorance,  superstition,  vice,  and  all  immorality.  Until  the  day  of  complete  triumph 
dawns,  she  must  station  her  sentinels,  discipline  her  recruits,  boldly  contend  with  sin, 
and  lead  men  captives  to  the  feet  of  Christ.  In  proportion  to  her  internal  holiness  and 
unity  and  zeal  she  will  be  "  terrible  "  to  ungodly  men.  The  main  secret  of  her  terrible- 
ness  is  the  fact  that  Jehovah  dwells  in  her  midst.  As  the  Canaanites  of  old  feared  the 
host  of  Israel  because  the  rumour  of  their  power  had  spread  on  every  side,  and  the 
mystic  presence  of.  Jehovah  was  with  them,  so  is  it  still.  The  more  that  evil  men 
discern  the  tokens  of  God's  presence  in  the  Church,  the  more  they  tremble.  On  the 
banner  of  the  Church,  men  see  the  pattern  of  the  cross.  This  inspires  courage  in  the 
army,  but  terror  among  opponents.  And  the  old  battle-cry  of  the  Crusaders  is  still  the 
battle-cry  of  the  Church,  "  By  this  we  conquer  I  " — D. 

Vers.  1 3. True  love  is  true  knowledge.    Knowledge  of  phenomena  and  of  physical 

laws  is  scientific,  and  is  of  the  intellect.  It  is  not  so  with  knnwiedge  of  persims,  which 
is  largely  intuitive,  and  depends  upon  the  qualities  of  the  heart.  It  is  sometimes  seen 
that  a  character,  misunderstood  by  the  learned  and  clever,  is  apprehended  by  a  very 
child.  A  man  who  is  not  loved  is  not  truly  known;  but  as  love  grows  warmer,  it 
may  well  be  that  knowledge  grows  clearer.  It  is  certainly  so  with  our  experimental 
acquaintance  with  our  Saviour  and  Lord. 

1.  ChBIBT  IB  NOT  EEALLT  KNOWN  BY  THOSE  WHO  STUDY  HIM  AT   A   DI8TAN0B.      HoW 


160  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  tl  1—18. 

is  it  that  tVie  Lord  Jesus  is  so  utterly  misunderstood  by  many  able  and  distinguished 
men?  that  some  such  class  him  with  impostors  or  with  fanatics?  that  others  are 
evidently  at  a  loss  to  explain  the  hold  he  has  over  the  heart  of  humanity  ?  How 
many  distressing  representations  of  the  Saviour's  character,  sayings,  and  ministry  are 
to  be  met  with  in  the  writings  of  even  learned  and  thoughtful  men  I  The  ex|>lanation 
is  to  be  found  in  a  law  which  governs  all  our  knowlerlge  of  persons  ts  distinct  from  our 
knowledge  of  phenomena.  These  latter  we  may  study  from  without,  as  cool  S]iectators. 
But  no  great  man  is  to  be  comprehen'led  if  stuilied  in  such  a  spirit;  far  less  any  man 
of  remaikable  moral  character  and  influence.  He  who  will  not  sympathize  with  such 
a  person  must  be  conlent  to  be  ignorant  of  him  ;  for  he  is  only  to  be  known  upon  a 
nearer  view,  a  closer  acquaintance,  and  by  meanci  of  a  profound  and  tender  association 
with  him  of  feeling  and  of  confidence. 

II.  Christ  is,  howkvbr,  known  bt  those  who  love  him,  and  are  upon  terms  of 
INTIMATE  FRIENDSHIP  WITH  HIM.  The  peasant  woman  who  is,  in  this  Song  of  Songs, 
pictured  as  the  beloved  of  the  king,  cherished  for  her  husband  the  warmest  affection; 
he  was  everything  to  her — ever  in  her  memory  when  absent,  and  ever  ia  her  heart. 
Hence  fhe  knew  him  better  than  others;  and  those  who  wished  to  know  of  his 
character  and  his  movements  did  well  to  inquire  of  her.  In  this  simple  fact  we 
discern  the  operation  of  an  interesting  and  valuable  moral  principle.  To  whom  shall  we 
go  for  an  appreciative  estimate  of  the  character  and  the  work  of  Immanuel  ?  We  shall 
go  in  vain  to  those  among  the  learneii  and  the  critical  who  care  not  for  Christ  save  as  for 
an  object  of  speculative,  psychological  or  historical  inquiry.  We  shall  fare  better  if  we 
appeal  to  the  lowly  and  the  unlearned,  if  only  they  are  persons  who  feel  their  personal 
indebtedness  to  Christ,  who  have  "tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  who  have  learned 
by  their  own  personal  experience  what  he  can  do  for  those  who  put  their  trust  in  him. 
It  is  those  who,  like  Mary,  can  exclaim,  "My  Master;"  who,  like  'J'homas,  can 
a<1dress  him  as  "  My  Lord  and  my  Grud  ; "  who,  like  Peter,  can  appeal  to  him,  saying, 
"  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee ; " — it  is  such  that  can 
tell  of  tha  mystery  of  the  Saviour's  love,  and  the  gracious  wisdom  of  the  Saviour's 
ways. 

Application.  These  consiilerations  are  a  rebuke  to  those  who  despise  the  experience 
and  undervalue  the  testimony  of  lowly  and  unlettered  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ.  And 
they  point  out  to  all  who  desire  intimate  knowledge  of  Christ,  that  the  true  method 
for  them  fo  adopt  to  that  end  is  to  yield  to  him  their  heart's  warmest  affection  and 
unreserved,  ungrudging  confidence.  By  the  way  of  lovewe  may  come  to  enjoy  clear 
knowledge,  and  to  give  effectual  witness. — T. 

Ver.  4. — The  spiritual  leauty  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  There  is  such  a  study  as 
the  sesthetics  of  the  soul.  Beauty  is  not  wholly  material ;  it  ha-i  a  spiritual  side 
apprecinble  by  the  spiritual  sensfi.  There  is  beauty  of  character  as  well  as  of  form — 
"  beauty  of  holiness,"  iu  which  the  holy  delight.  In  the  human  countenance  may 
now  and  again  be  seen,  shining  through  symmetrical  features,  the  loveliness  of  high 
enjotion  and  aspiration.  And  in  the  spiritual  society  of  the  redeemed,  even  where 
churches  are  lowly,  services  inartistic,  the  ministry  far  from  brilliant,  the  discerning  mind 
may  nevertheless  often  recognize  glimpsns  of  moral  majesty,  or  comeliness,  or  attractive- 
ness, speaking  of  a  Divine  favour  and  a  Divine  inspiration. 

I.  The  reality  and  nature  of  spiritual  beauty.  It  is  not  merely  imaginary, 
like  that 

*  Light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  land. 
The  consecration  and  the  poet's  dream," 

Though  not  physical,  it  exists,  and  partakes  of  the  character  of  moral  excellence.  It 
is  not  discernible  by  the  thotightless,  the  insusceptible;  it  may  be  passed  unnoticed 
by  the  haughty  and  the  worldly.  Yet  it  is  observed  by  the  enlightened  and  morally 
sensitive;  such  contemplate  it  with  a  saiisfactiun  dee|ier  than  that  of  the  artist  who 
gazes  entranced  upon  a  noble  statue  or  a  fascinating  picture. 

II.  The  source  of  spiritual  beauty.  The  Church  does  not  claim  to  be  in 
possession  of  such  a  quality  in  its  own  right,  to  take  credit  for  it  as  for  something  due 
to  its  own  innate  power  and  goodness.    On  the  contrary,  it  acknowledge!  that  all 


OH.VI.  1— 13.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  1«1 

moral  excellence  is  due  to  Divine  presence  and  operation.  The  beauty  which  adorns 
the  Lord's  Bpiritnal  house  is  the  Lord's  own  workman-^hip,  the  expression  of  the  Lord's 
own  wisdom  and  love.  It  is  derived  and  it  is  reflected — the  mirrored  image  of  the 
purity  and  benignity  which  are  essentially  and  for  ever  his  own.  It  is  sustained  and 
developed  and  pe  fected  by  the  same  grace  by  which  it  whs  origimdly  imparted.  The 
language  of  the  Church's  ))rayer  is  accurdingly,  "  Let  the  l)eauty  of  the  Lord  our  God 
be  upon  us,"  and  the  language  of  the  Church's  grateful  praise,  "  Not  unto  us,  0  Lord, 
not  unto  us,  but  untn  thy  Name  give  glory." 

in.   ThB   IMPBEBSIVENES8   AND  ATl'EAOTIVENESS   OP   SPIRITUAL    BEAUTY.      There  are, 

indeed,  unspiritual  natures  for  whom  it  has  no  interest  and  no  charm.  But  it  is  dear 
to  Christ,  who  delights  in  it  as  the  reflection  of  his  own  excellence.  The  King 
desires  and  greatly  delights  in  the  beauty  of  his  spiiitiial  spouse,  the  Church  ;  to  him 
she  is  beautiful  and  comely,  lair  as  the  moon,  and  clear  as  the  sun.  And  all  who 
share  the  mind  of  Christ  take  pleasure  in  that  which  delights  him.  The  purity  and 
unity,  the  Christ-like  compassion  and  self-Sricrifice  of  God's  people,  have  exercised  an 
attractive  power  over  natures  spiritual,  awakened,  and  sensitive.  By  his  living  Church 
the  Lord  has  drawn  multitudes  unto  himself.  And  thus  the  beauty  of  the  Church, 
reflecting  the  beauty  of  Christ,  is  the  means  of  winning  souls  to  the  fellowship  of 
immortal  love. — T. 

Ver.  4. — The  terrihleness  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  There  is  nothing  inconsistent  in 
the  assertion  that  the  same  living  society  is  possessed  of  beauty  and  of  terribleness. 
To  the  susceptible  mind  there  is  ever  something  awful  in  beauty ;  it  is  felt  to  be 
Divine.  There  is  a  side  of  beauty  which  verges  upon  sublimity.  We  feel  this  in 
gazing  upon  the  headlong  cataract,  the  glorious  sea.  It  SDmetimes  seems  to  us  as 
though  God  draws  near  to  o\ir  souls  when  we  suddenly  behold  a  iioble  woman's  grace 
and  charm  and  pure  ethereal  expression.  So  there  is  in  Christ's  Chur  h  a  .severity  as 
well  as  a  winningness  of  beauty ;  we  are  conscious  in  gome  phases  of  Christian  life  of 
an  aspect  of  deep  and  unspeakable  awe.     How  is  this  to  be  explained? 

I.  The  spiritual  Church  is  terrible  as  the  depositary  op  the  mysterious 
AND  BUPh.RNATUiiAi,  GRACE  OF  GoD.  It  is  the  soenc  of  the  "  real  presence  "  of  him 
who  ever  fulfils  his  own  assurance,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of 
the  wiirld." 

II.  As  POSSESSING  IN  HOLINESS  OF  CHARACTER  A   SUBLIMITY  WHICH    APPEALS   TO    THB 

CHASTENED  AND  APPRECIATIVE  IMAGINATION.  Moving  With  spotless  garments  amidst 
the  world's  defilement  and  contamination,  the  true  Church  pre-ents  to  the  enlightened 
vision  a  spectacle  of  true  sublimity,  aud  commands  our  reverence  as  that  which  on 
earth  is  most  truly  sublime. 

III.  Ab  REBUKINtf  AND  FORBIDDING  ALL   THAT  IS  MORALLY  EVIL.      To    penitents    the 

attitude  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is,  as  was  the  Master's,  benignant  and  onm passionate; 
but  to  hardened  sinners  and  to  contemptible  hypocrites  there  is  a  sternness  and 
severity  in  its  demeanour  which  may  well  make  its  presence  terrible. 

IV.  As  POSSESSED  OF  MILITANT  PROWESS  AND  POWERS.  "  Terrible  as  an  army  with 
banners."  The  Church  has  to  confront  the  hosts  of  ignorance,  of  error,  and  uf  sin; 
its  attitude  and  its  equipment  must,  therefore,  partake  of  the  nature  of  a  warlike  force. 
As  an  army,  the  Church  of  Christ  acknowledges  the  leadership  of  the  Divine  Captain 
of  our  salvation ;  is  supplied  with  weapons,  not  carnal,  but  mighty  to  the  pulling  down 
of  strongholds;  is  distinguished  by  a  duly  martial  spirit,  shrinking  from  no  confiict 
to  which  it  is  called,  by  steady  discipline  and  by  just  order.  Well,  then,  may  it  be 
likened  to  an  embattled  host,  with  banners  fioating  on  the  breeze,  and  the  voice  of  the 
Commatider  ringing  through  the  ranks.  The  spectacle  is  grand  and  awe-inspiring — 
an  earnest  of  victory,  an  omen  of  empire. — T. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Spiritual  promotion.  The  Shulamite  is  now  the  queen;  but  she 
has  not  forgotten  her  early  home,  her  youthful  training,  occupations,  and  companion- 
ship. She  takes  a  pleasure  in  looking  back  upon  bygone  days,  and  calling  to  mind 
the  remarkable  manner  in  which,  through  the  king's  admiration  and  favour,  she  was 
raised  from  her  lowly  condition  to  the  highest  position  amoni;st  the  ladies  of  the  land. 
The  contrast  may  be  used  to  illustrate  the  change  which  takes  place  in  the  experience 

SONG    OP   SOLOMON.  •• 


162 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON, 


[oh.  vn.  1 — 13 


of  the  soul  which  has  been  visited  by  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  has  been 
raised  from  a  state  of  pitiable  depression  and  hopelessness  to  participation  in  the 
fellowship  and  the  life  of  the  Son  of  God. 

I.  The  soul's  first  state  of  humiliatioh. 

II.  The  intervention  op  the  Divine  Friend  upon  the  boul'b  behalf,  1,  The 
several  steps  of  this  interposition  may  be  connected  with  the  facts  of  this  simple  and 
beautiful  narrative.  Christ  visits  the  soul,  bringing  himself  before  the  attention  of 
the  object  of  his  merciful  regard.  He  loves  the  soul,  and  makes  his  affection  known 
by  words  and  by  deeds.  He  appropriates  the  soul  as  his  own  chosen  possession.  He 
thus  elevates  the  soul  by  bidding  it  share  his  own  nature  and  life.  2.  The  manner  of 
the  Saviour's  approach  in  many  instances  corresponds  with  the  king's  revelation  of 
his  love  to  the  Shulamite  maiden.  It  may  be  sudden  and  impressive,  and  yet  at  the 
same  time  unspeakably  welcome  and  appreciated. 

III.  The  dignity  to  which  the  object  of  Divine  consideration  is  elevated. 
The  change  of  condition  experienced  by  the  maiden  from  Northern  Palestine,  when 
she  became  the  consort  of  Solomon,  may  serve  to  set  forth  the  elevation  of  the  soul 
that  Christ  has,  in  the  friendship  of  his  Divine  heart,  made  partaker  of  his  spiritual 
life.  Such  a  condition  involves:  1.  Fellowship  with  the  King  himself.  2.  Congenial 
society.  3,  Dignified  occupations.  4.  Honour  from  all  associates.  5.  Imperishable 
glories. 

Application.  The  soul  that  rejoices  most  gratefully  in  the  immunities  and  honours 
of  the  spiritual  life  and  calling  will  do  well  to  recollect  the  state  of  error,  sin,  and 
hopelessness  from  which  the  human  race  was  delivered  by  the  compassion  and  power 
of  the  Divine  Sedeemer.  The  Divine  communion  to  which  Christians  are  admitted 
is  a  privilege  which  was  forfeited  by  sin,  and  which  has  been  recovered  and  restored 
through  the  clemency  and  loving-kindness  of  him  who  is  love,  and  whose  love  is 
nowhere  so  conspicuous  as  in  the  salvation  of  his  people.  There  are  many  cases  in 
which  there  is  danger  lest  this  obligation  should  be  overlooked.  It  is  well  that  the 
polished  stone  in  the  temple  of  God  should  look  back  to  "  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  it 
was  digged." — T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  vn. 


Ver.  1. — How  beautiful  are  thy  feet  in 
sandals,  0  prince's  daughter!  The  joints  of 
thy  thighs  are  like  jewels,  the  work  of  the 
hands  of  a  CTuming  workman.  To  the  ladies 
who  are  looking  on  the  bride  appears  simply 
noble  and  royal.  The  word  naudhib  which 
is  used,  translated  "prince's  daughter," 
means  "noble  in  disposition,"  and  so  in 
birth  and  rank,  as  in  1  Sam.  ii.  8 ;  Ps.  cxiii. 
8  ;  so  in  ch.  vi.  12,  "  the  princely  people." 
The  description,  which  is  perfectly  chaste, 
is  intended  to  bring  before  the  eye  the  lithe 
and  beautiful  movements  of  an  elegant 
dancer ;  the  bendings  of  the  body,  full  of 
activity  and  grace,  are  compared  to  tlie 
swinging  to  and  fro  of  jewelled  ornaments 
made  in  chains.  The  cunning  workman  or 
artist  is  one  who  is  master  of  that  which 
abides  beautiful.  Jij^,  like,  J'Q;, "  whose  truth- 
ful work  can  be  trusted."  The  description 
passes  from  the  tlii^hs  or  loins  to  the  middle 
part  of  the  body,  because  in  the  mode  of 
dancing  prevailing  in  the  East  the  breast 
and  the  body  are  raised,  and  the  outlines  of 
the  form  appear  through  the  clothing,  which 


is  of  a  light  texture.  We  must  not  expect 
to  find  a  symbolical  meaning  for  all  the 
details  of  such  a  description.  The  general 
intention  is  to  set  forth  the  beauty  and  glory 
of  the  bride.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  most 
delightful  in  his  sight  when  it  is  most  full 
of  activity  and  life,  and  every  portion  of  it 
is  called  forth  into  manifest  excellence. 
"Arise,  shine,"  is  the  invitation  addressed 
to  the  whole  Church,  "  shake  thyself  froiE 
the  dust,"  "  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments," 
be  ready  for  thy  Lord. 

Ver.  2. — Tky  navel  is  like  a  round  goblet, 
wherein  no  mingled  wine  is  wanting ;  thy 
belly  is  like  a  heap  of  wheat  set  about 
with  lilies.  It  must  be  remembered  that 
ladies  are  speaking  of  one  who  is  in  the 
ladies'  apartment.  There  is  notliing  indeli- 
cate in  the  description,  though  it  is  scarcely 
Western.  The  "  round  goblet,"  or  basin,  with 
mixed  wine,  i.e.  wine  with  water  or  snow 
mixed  with  it,  is  intended  to  convey  the 
idea  of  the  shape  of  the  lovely  body  with 
its  flesh  colour  appearing  tlirough  the  semi- 
transparent  clothing,  and  moving  gracefully 
like  the  diluted  wine  in  the  glass  goblet. 
The  navel  is  referred  to  sinoply  as  the  centre 


OH.  Tn.  1—13.] 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


163 


of  the  body,  which  it  is  in  infants,  and  nearly 
BO  in  adults.  Perhaps  Delitzsch  is  right  in 
thinking  that  there  may  be  an  attempt  to 
describe  the  navel  itself  as  like  the  whirling 
hollow  of  water  in  a  basin.  In  the  latter 
part  of  the  verse  the  shape  of  the  body  is 
undoubtedly  intended.  "  To  the  present  day 
winnowed  and  sifted  com  is  piled  up  in 
gieat  heaps  of  symmetrical,  half-splierical 
form,  which  are  then  frequently  stuck  over 
with  things  tliat  move  in  the  wind,  for  the 
purpose  of  protecting  them  against  birds. 
The  appeiiranoe  of  such  heaps  of  wheat," 
says  Wetstein,  "  which  one  may  see  in  long 
parallel  rows  on  the  tlireshing-fioors  of  a 
village,  is  very  pleasing  to  a  peasant ;  and 
the  comparison  of  the  song  every  Arabian 
will  regard  as  beautiful."  According  to  the 
Moslem  Sunnas,  the  colour  of  wheut  was  that 
of  Adam.  The  white  is  a  subdued  white, 
dfuotiug  both  perfect  spotlessuess  and  the 
purity  of  health.  The  smooth,  round,  fair 
b'ldy  of  the  maiden  is  seen  to  advantage  in 
the  varied  movements  of  the  dance. 

Ver.  3. — Thy  two  breasts  are  like  two  fawns 
that  are  twins  of  a  roe.  So  in  oh.  iv.  5 ;  but 
there  the  addition  occurs,  "wliich  feed  among 
the  lilies."  This  is  omitted  liere,  perhaps, 
only  because  lilies  are  just  before  spoken 
of.  The  description  is  now  in  the  lips  of 
the  ladies ;  before  it  was  uttered  by  the  king 
himself. 

Ver.  4. — Thy  neck  is  like  the  tower  of 
ivory ;  thine  eyes  are  as  the  pools  in  Hesh- 
bon,  by  the  gate  of  Bath-rabbim  ;  thy  nose 
is  like  the  tower  of  lebanon  which  looketh 
toward  Damascus.  This  is  plainly  a  partial 
repetition  of  the  king's  description.  The 
ivory  tower  was  perhaps  a  tower  well  known, 
covered  with  ivory  tablets,  slender  in  struc- 
ture, dazzlinglv  white  in  appeariince,  impos- 
ing and  captivating.  No  doubt  in  the  lips 
of  tiie  court  lailies  it  is  intended  that  this 
echo  of  tiiO  royal  bridegroom's  praises  shall 
be  gi-ateful  to  him.  Heshbon  is  situated 
8omu  fivt!  and  a  half  hours  east  of  the  north- 
ern points  of  the  Dead  Si  a,  on  an  extensive, 
undulating,  fruitful,  liigh  table-land,  with  a 
far-reaching  prospect.  "  Tlie  comparison  of 
the  eyes  to  a  pool  means  either  their  glisten- 
ing like  a  water-mirror  or  their  being  lovely 
in  appearance,  for  the  Arabian  knows  no 
greater  pleasure  than  to  look  upon  clear, 
gently  rippling  water:"  of.  Ovid,  'De  Arte 
Am.,'  ii.  722— 

"Adspicies  oculos  tremulo  fuliore  mioantes, 
Ut  sol  a  liquids,  ssepe  refulget  aqua." 

The  nose  formed  a  straight  line  down  from 
the  forehead,  convejiug  the  impression  of 
symmeiry,  and  at  the  same  time  a  dignity 
and  majesty  inspiring  with  awe  like  the 
tower  of  Lebanon.  The  reference  is  perhaps 
to  a  particular  tower,  and  in  the  time  of 


Solomon  there  were  many  noted  epecimeng 
of  architectural  and  artistic  splendour.  "  A 
tower  which  looks  in  the  direction  of  Da- 
mascus is  to  be  thought  of  as  standing  on  one 
of  the  eastern  spurs  of  Hermon  or  "on  the  top 
of  Amana  (ch.  iv.  8),  whence  the  Amana 
(Barada)  takes  its  rise,  whether  as  a  watch- 
tower  (2  Sam.  viii.  6)  or  only  as  a  look-out 
from  which  might  be  enjoyed  the  paradi- 
saical prospect." 

Ver.  5. — Thine  head  upon  thee  is  like 
Carmel,  and  the  hair  of  thine  head  like 
purple;  the  king  is  held  captive  in  the 
tresses  thereof  (Jarmel  is  called  the  "  Nose 
of  the  mountain  range  "  (Arf  el-jehel).  It  is 
a  promontory.  The  meaning,  no  doubt,  is 
the  exquisite  fitness  of  the  head  upon  the 
neck,  whioli  is  one  of  the  most  lovely  traits 
of  personal  beauty.  Some,  however,  think 
that  the  reference  is  to  colour — Carmel  being 
derived  from  tliePersian, and  meaning"crim- 
8on."  This  is  rejected  by  Delitzsch,  as  the 
Persian  would  be  carmile,  not  carmel.  The 
transition  is  natural  from  the  position  and 
shape  of  the  head  and  neck  to  the  hair. 
The  purple  shell-fish  is  found  near  Oarmel 
(of.  Lucian's  Trop(j>6pios  TAdxanos  and  Ana- 
creon's  TroptjyvpaT  xa'Toi,  and  similar  expres- 
sions in  Virgil's  'Georgics,'  i.  405,  and 
Tibullus,  i.  4.  63).  The  locks  of  hair  are  a 
glistening  purple  colour,  i.e.  their  black  is 
purple  as  they  catch  the  lights.  Hengsten- 
berg,  however,  thinks  tliat  the  reference  ia 
to  the  temples,  and  not  to  the  hair  itself; 
but  the  use  of  the  term  in  classical  poets  is 
decisive.  The  lovely  head  shaking  the  locks 
as  the  body  moves  gracefully  in  the  d.inoe 
fills  the  king  with  delight  and  admiratio.i. 
He  is  quite  captivated,  and  tiie  ladies,  having 
finiohed  their  description  of  the  bride,  look  at 
tlie  bridegroom,  and  behold  liim  quite  lost  in 
the  fascination — "held  captive  in  tlie  tresses." 
Delitz.ich  quotes  a  similar  expression  from 
Goethe,  in  the '  West  Ostlicbe  Divan,'  "There 
are  more  than  fifty  hooks  iu  each  lock  of 
thy  hair."  The  idea  of  taking  captive  is 
frequent  in  Hebrew  poetry  (cf  Prov.  vi.  25 ; 
Sirach  ix.  3,  4).  Thus  ends  the  eoog  of 
the  ladies  in  praise  of  the  bride.  We  muot 
suppose  that  the  king,  who  is  probably 
present,  then  takes  up  the  word,  and  pours 
out  his  heart. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — (Song  of  the  bridegroom  re- 
joicing over  the  bride.)  How  fail  and  how 
pleasant  art  thou,  0  love,  for  delights! 
This  thy  stature  is  like  to  a  palm  tree,  and 
thy  breasts  to  clusters  of  grapes.  I  said,  I 
will  climb  up  into  the  palm  tree,  I  will 
take  hold  of  the  branches  thereof:  let  thy 
breasts  be  as  olnsters  of  the  vine,  and  the 
smell  of  thy  breath  like  apples ;  and  thy 
mouth  like  the  best  wine,  that  goeth  down 
smoothly  for  my  beloved,  gliding  througl 
the  lips  of  them  that   ar»  asleep.     The 


Ifi4 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  vn.  1 — 13. 


abstract  "  love  "  is  plainly  here  used  for  the 
coucrete,  "  O  loved  one."  It  is  just  possible 
that  the  meaning  may  he — How  delightful 
is  tile  enjoyment  of  love  I  but  the  bodily 
description  which  follows  suggests  that  the 
words  are  addressed  directly  to  Shulamith. 
We  certainly  have  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  an  apostolic 
apubtiophe  to  love,  which  Delitzsch  calls 
the  Apostle  Paul's  spiritual  song  of  songs. 
But  it  would  be  somewhat  irrelevant  here. 
The  king  is  deeply  moved  as  he  watches 
the  beautiful  figure  before  him,  and  delights 
iu  the  thought  that  so  lovely  a  creature  is 
his  own.  The  rapture  which  he  pours  out 
may  be  taken  either  as  a  recollection  of 
how  he  was  captivated  in  the  past,  or  the 
past  may  bo  used  for  the  present,  as  it  fre- 
quently is  in  Hebrew.  The  meaning  is  the 
SHme  in  both  cases.  The  palm  tree  mny  be 
selected  on  account  of  its  elegance,  but  it  is 
commonly  employed  in  Eastern  poetry  aa 
the  emblem  of  love.  The  mystical  writers 
use  it  to  denote  the  Divine  inanifeotation. 
The  conjparisun  of  the  breasts  to  clusters 
of  grapes  is  quite  natural,  but  no  doubt 
reference  is  intended  to  the  fruit  as  luscious 
and  refreshiijg.  Both  tlie  palm  and  the 
vine  in  the  Ea»t  are  reuiarkuble  for  the 
abundance  and  beauty  of  their  fmits.  In 
the  case  of  the  palm — "  dark  brown  or 
golden-yellow  clusters,  which  crown  the 
summit  of  the  stem  ami  impart  a  wonderful 
beauty  to  the  tree,  especially  when  seen  in 
the  evening  twilight."  The  palm  and  the 
vine  are  both  employed  in  Scripture  in 
close  connection  with  the  Church.  "  The 
righteous  shall  flourish  as  the  piilm  tree ; " 
*'  The  vine  brought  out  of  Egypt "  (Ps. 
Ixxx.),  and  the  "  vineyard  of  the  beloved  " 
(I»a.  v.),  and  the  "  true  vine,"  to  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  compares  himself,  re- 
mind us  that  the  illustration  was  perfectly 
familial  among  the  Jews ;  and  we  can 
scarcely  doubt  that  the  reference  in  this 
case  would  be  understood.  The  Lord 
delighteth  in  those  "fruits  of  righteous- 
ness "  which  come  forth  from  the  lite  and 
love  of  his  people.  They  are  the  true 
adcirnruent  of  the  Church.  The  people  of 
God  are  never  so  beautiful  in  the  eyes  of 
their  Saviour  as  when  they  are  covered 
with  gifts  and  graces  in  their  active  expres- 
sion in  the  world.  Then  it  is  that  he  liim- 
self  fills  hie  Church  with  his  presence. 
The  ninth  verse  is  somewhat  dithcult  to 
explain.  The  words  are  no  doubt  still  in 
the  lips  of  the  king.  There  is  no  change 
of  speaker  until  ver.  10,  when  Shulamith 
replies  to  the  king's  adoring  address.  Gius- 
buig  says,  "Her  voice  is  not  merely  com- 
pared to  wine  because  it  is  sweet  to  every- 
body, but  to  such  wine  aa  would  be  sweet 
to  a  friend,  and  on  that  account  is  more 
valuable  and  pleasant."    The   Authorized 


Version  is  supported  by  some  critics  aa  the 

best,  "  causing  the  lips  of  those  that  are 
asleep  to  speak."  Delitzsch  adheres  to  this. 
The  LXX.  renders  it  thus :  Uavovn^i/oi 
XeiAefff  {MOV  Kol  oSovffiv,  *'  accommodating 
itoelf  to  my  lips  and  teeth."  So  Symmiichus, 
irpo(XTt64^stJos.  Jerome,  Xa/jtiVgwe  ei  dentibua 
illius  ad  ruminandum.  Lutiier  strangely 
renders,  "  which  to  my  friend  goes  smoothly 
down  and  speaks  of  the  previous  year" 
(pointing  O'l^';  as  D'3»'.')-  Another  rendering 
is,  "  which  comes  unawares  upon  the  lips 
of  the  sleepers."  Some  ihink  it  retera  to 
the  smacking  of  the  lips  after  wine.  "  Gene- 
rous wine  is  a  figure  of  the  love-responsea 
of  the  beloved,  sipped  in,  as  it  were,  with 
pleasing  satisfactii  in,  which  hover  around 
the  sleepers  in  delightful  dreams,  and  fill 
tliem  with  hallucinations."  Another  read- 
ing substitutes  " the  ancient "  for  "them 
that  are  asleep."  The  general  meaning 
must  be  vrine  that  is  veiy  good  and  easily 
taken,  or  which  one  who  is  a  good  judge 
of  wine  will  praise.  It  is  possible  that 
there  is  some  slight  corruption  in  the  text. 
The  passage  is  not  to  be  rendered  with 
absolute  certainty.  Delitzsch  and  others 
think  that  it  is  an  interruption  of  the 
bride's,  but  they  have  little  support  for 
that  view.  The  bride  begins  to  apeak  at 
ver.  10. 

Ver.  10. — I  am  my  beloved's,  and  his 
desire  is  towards  me.  So  in  ch.  vi.  3  and 
ii.'16.  It  seems  possible  that  a  portion  of 
the  bride's  speech  m.iy  have  dropped  out 
— "My  beloved  is  mine  " — or  she  may  wish 
to  adopt  the  language  of  Gen.  ili.  16,  and 
represent  herself  us  a  true  wife,  whose  hus- 
band is  wrapt  up  in  her  love.  By  "  desire" 
is  intended  the  impulse  of  love,  npw'n,  from 
a  root  piB',  "to  move  or  impel."  The 
thought  seems  to  be  this — As  my  beloved  is 
full  of  worsldpping  affection,  and  I  am 
wholly  his,  let  his  love  have  free  cour,«e,and 
let  us  retire  together  away  from  all  the 
distractions  and  artificiality  of  the  town 
life  to  the  simplicity  aud  congenial  enjoy- 
ments of  the  country,  which  are  so  much 
more  to  my  taste.  The  more  real  and  fer- 
vent the  religious  emotions  of  the  soul  and 
the  spiritual  life  of  the  Church,  the  more 
natm-al  and  simple  will  be  their  expression. 
We  do  not  require  any  profuse  ceremonies, 
any  extr.ivagant  decorations,  any  compli- 
cated and  costly  religious  services,  in  order 
to  draw  forth  in  the  Christian  Church  the 
highest  realization  of  the  Saviour's  fellow- 
ship. We  want  the  Christianity  we  proless 
to  take  possession  of  us,  body  and  soul. 
And  so  it  will  be  as  Christians  learn  more 
of  Christ. 

Vers.  11,  12.— Come,  my  beloved,  let  us 
go  forth  into  the  field;  let  us  lod^e  in  the 


OH.  vn.  1 — 13.] 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


165 


Tillages.  let  ns  get  op  early  to  the  vine- 
yards; let  us  see  whether  the  vine  hath 
badded  and  its  blossom  be  open,  and  the 
pomegranates  be  in  flower:  there  will  I 
give  thee  my  love.  All  true  poets  will 
sympathize  with  the  exquisite  sentiment  of 
the  bride  in  this  paBsago.  The  solitude 
and  glory  and  reality  of  external  nature  are 
dearer  to  her  than  tlie  bustle  and  splendour 
of  the  city  and  of  the  court.  By  "  the 
field  "  is  meant  the  country  generally.  The 
village  or  little  town  surrounded  with  vine- 
yards and  gardens  was  the  scene  of  Shula- 
mith's  early  life,  and  would  always  be 
delightful  to  her.  The  word  is  the  plural 
of  an  unused  form.  It  is  found  in  the  form 
oopher  (1  Sam.  vi.  18),  meaning  "a  district 
of  level  country."  Delitzsoh  renders,  "  let 
us  get  up  early,"  rather  differently— "in 
the  morning  we  will  start " — but  the  mean- 
ing is  the  same.  The  word  dodhai,  "my 
love,"  is  "the  evidences  or  expressions  of 
my  love  "  (cf  oh.  iv.  16 ;  i.  2).  No  doubt 
the  bride  i3  speaking  in  the  springtime, 
the  Wonnemoiid  of  May,  when  the  pulses 
beat  in  sympathy  with  the  rising  life  of 
nature. 

Ver.  13. — The  mandrakes  give  forth  fra- 
grance, and  at  onr  doors  are  all  manner  of 
irecions  fruits,  new  and  old,  which  I  have 
laid  up  for  thee,  0  my  beloved.  The 
dudhai  after  the  form  Lulai,  and  connected 
pi-obably  with  -m,  are  the  "love-flowers," 


the  Mandragora  officinalis  (Linn.),  whitish- 
green  in  colour,  with  yellow  apples  about 
the  size  of  nutmegs;  they  belong  to  the 
order  of  Solanacese,  and  both  fruits  and 
roots  were  employed  as  apjirodisise,  to  pro- 
mote love.  We  are,  of  course,  reminded  of 
Gen.  XXX.  14,  where  the  LXX.  has,  /t^\a 
luavSpayopav,  when  the  son  of  Leah  found 
mandrakes  in  vintage-time.  They  produce 
their  effect  by  their  powerful  and  pleasant 
fragrance.  They  are  said  to  be  only  rarely 
foufld  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem, 
but  they  were  abundant  in  Galilee,  where 
Shulamith  was  brought  up.  The  Arabs 
called  them  dbd-el-sal'm,  "  servant  of  love  " 
— postilion  d'amour.  We  are  not  wrong  in 
usmg  that  which  is  perfectly  natural  and 
simple  for  the  cherishing  and  increasing  of 
devout  feeling.  The  three  elements  which 
coexist  in  true  spiritual  life  are  thought, 
feeling,  and  action.  They  support  one 
another.  A  religion  which  is  all  impulse 
and  emotion  soon  wears  itself  out,  and  ia 
apt  to  end  in  spiritual  vacuity  and  paralysis ; 
but  when  thought  and  activity  hold  up  and 
strengthen  and  guide  feeling,  then  it  is 
scarcely  possible  to  endanger  the  soul. 
The  heart  should  go  out  to  Christ  in  a 
simple  but  fervent  worship,  especially  in 
praise.  There  are  no  Christians  who  are 
more  ready  to  devote  themselves  to  good 
works  than  those  who  delight  much  in 
hearty  and  happy  spiritual  songs. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  chorus  of  maidens  praise  the  leauty  of  the  hride.  I.  The  prelude 
1.  The  addnss.  They  address  her  as,  "  0  prince's  daughter."  She  is  not  a  king's 
daughter,  like  the  bride  of  Ps.  xlv.,  but  she  is  of  honourable  extraction.  Though  she 
lived  in  the  retired  district  of  Lebanon,  and  had  been  brought  up  there  in  rustic 
occupations,  her  family  was  one  of  some  distinction.  So  Joseph,  the  carpenter  of 
Nazareth,  was  recognized  by  the  angel  Gabriel,  and  was  known  among  men  by  the 
testimony  of  accepted  genealogies  as  "the  son  of  David."  The  bride  always  speaks 
humbly  of  herself  (as  in  oh.  i.  5,  6),  but  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  praise  her.  Such 
praise  was  common  at  nuptial  festivals;  the  literal  translation  of  Ps.  Ixxviii.  63, 
"  Their  maidens  were  not  given  in  marriage,"  seems  to  be,  "  Their  maidens  were  not 
praised."  The  daughters  of  Jerusalem  do  not  regard  the  bride  with  envy ;  they  do 
not  despise  her  because  of  her  former  low  estate;  they  rather  bring  forward  every 
point  that  may  tend  to  her  praise.  We  should  be  like  them  in  this  respect.  Jealousy 
is  one  of  the  most  common  of  evil  tempers  ;  even  the  Lord's  apostles  were  jealou.s  of 
©ne  another,  and  that  in  the  very  presence  of  the  Master;  again  and  again  they 
disputed  among  themselves  which  should  be  the  greatest  (Matt,  xviii.  1 ;  Luke  xxii. 
24).  We  must  covet  earnestly  the  blessed  grace  of  charity — charity  which  "  envieth 
not,  vaunteth  not  itself,  is  not  puffed  up,  doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly,  seeketh  not 
her  own,  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no  evil,  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but 
rejoiceth  in  the  truth."  We  must  pray  fervently,  "  Prom  envy,  hatred,  and  malice, 
and  all  uncharitableness,  good  Lord,  deliver  us."  2.  The  bride's  approach.  "How 
beautiful  are  thy  feet  with  shoes!"  The  word  here  rendered  "  feet"  more  generally 
means  steps;  this  has  been  taken  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  "the  dance  of 
Mahanaim,"  mentioned  above.  It  is  used  also  for  "  feet ; "  but  even  if  we  take  it  ia 
its  more  common  sense,  the  words  of  the  chorus  may  be  well  understood  of  the 


166  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [ch.  vn.  1—13. 

approach  of  the  bride,  and  perhaps  also  of  the  queenly  grace  of  her  movements.  The 
opening  words  remind  us  of  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  quoted  by  St.  Paul  in  Rom.  x.  15, 
"  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings, 
that  publisheth  peace ;  that  bringeth  good  tidings  of  good,  that  publisheth  salvation  ; 
that  saith  unto  Zion,  Thy  God  reigneth  1 "  (Isa.  lii.  7).  We  have  learned  to  see  in  the 
bride  of  the  Song  of  Songs  a  figure  of  the  Church,  which  is  the  bride  of  Christ.  The 
mission  of  the  Church  is  to  "  make  disciples  of  all  nations,  baptizing  them  into  the 
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  teaching  them  to  observe 
all  things  whatsoever  the  Lord  commanded"  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  The  heavenly 
Bridegroom  is  with  the  bride  while  she  obeys  his  precept;  for  he  adds,  "Lo,  I  am  with 
you  all  the  days,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  ages."  Therefore  "the  Spirit  and  the 
bride  say.  Come  "  (Rev.  xx.  17).  The  Church,  taught  and  strengthened  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  calls  men  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  Her  feet  are  beautiful  as,  "  shod  with 
the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace  "  (Eph.  vi.  15),  she  moves  ever  onward,  bringing 
the  light  of  truth  into  the  regions  that  were  lying  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of 
death.  Missionary  work  is  a  most  important  part  of  the  duty  of  the  Church ;  when 
carried  on  in  faith  and  love  and  forgetfulness  of  self,  it  is  beautiful  in  the  sight 
of  God. 

II.  Pbaisbs  in  detail.  1.  Of  her  clothing.  The  chorus  begins  by  praising,  not 
simply  the  feet,  but  the  sandalled  feet,  of  the  bride ;  they  admire  her  sandals.  From 
this  we  may  infer  that  other  terms  used  here  relate  rather  to  the '  clothing  which 
covered  the  various  parts  of  the  body.  It  is  the  royal  robes,  with  their  ornaments  and 
embroidery,  which  are  like  rows  of  jewels,  or  like  a  round  goblet  (see  the  word  trans- 
lated "  round "  in  Isa.  iii.  18,  where  it  is  rendered,  "  round  tires  like  the  moon  "),  or 
hke  a  heap  of  wheat  set  about  with  lilies.  Comp.  Ps.  xlv.  9, 13,  14,  "  Kings'  daughters 
were  among  thy  honourable  women:  upon  thy  right  hand  did  stand  the  queen  in 
gold  of  Ophir."  "  The  king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within :  her  clothing  is  of 
wrought  gold.  She  shall  be  brought  unto  the  kins;  in  raiment  of  needlework:  the 
virgins  her  companions  that  follow  her  shall  be  brought  unto  thee."  So  the  bride,  the 
Lamb's  wife,  shall  be  "arrayed  in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white:  for  the  fine  linen  is  the 
righteousness  of  saints"  (Rev.  xix.  8).  "The  king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within." 
The  Hebrew  word,  indeed,  means  "  within  the  palace,"  in  the  inner  apartment.  But  we 
know  that  the  adorning  of  the  Church,  when  she  appears  "  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her 
husband "  (Eev.  xxi.  2),  is  "  not  that  outward  adorning  of  plaiting  the  hair,  and  of 
wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on  of  apparel,  but  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart" 
(1  fet.  iii.  3,  4).  She  will  then  be  all  glorious  within,  in  the  spiritual  sense  of  the 
word,  a  glorious  Church,  holy  and  without  blemish ;  and  the  Christian  soul  must  even 
now  put  on  that  white  linen  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints,  with  the  ornament 
of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price.  Indeed,  "  our 
righteousnesses  are  but  as  filthy  rags"  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6);  but  Christ  "of  God  is  made 
unto  us  Wisdom  and  Righteousness"  (1  Cor.  i.  30)  ;  and  St.  Paul  teaches  us  that  "as 
many  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ  have  put  on  Christ"  (Gal.  iii.  27).  We  must 
"  keep  ourselves  pure  "  (1  Tim.  v.  22) ;  we  must  take  jealous  and  anxious  heed  so  to 
live  in  the  faith  of  Christ  and  in  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  to  keep  that 
white  robe  unspotted  from  the  world  (Jas.  i.  27).  And  if  we  have  marred  and  stained 
it,  as,  alas  1  we  too  often  do,  by  carelessness  and  sin,  we  must  come  to  God  in  humble 
penitence  and  confession,  asking  him  to  give  us  grace  to  wash  our  robes  and  make 
them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb ;  for  we  believe  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
cleanseth  from  all  sin,  and  that  even  they  who  have  fallen  into  grievous  sin  may,  if 
they  turn  to  God  in  sorrow  and  contrition,  be  made  "  whiter  than  snow  "  (Ps.  li.  7). 
The  king's  daughter  must  be  all  glorious  within;  she  must  put  on  the  wedding- 
garment  of  righteousnees.  Let  us  seek  that  costly  robe  to  be  our  own;  we  may  gam 
it  through  the  grace  of  Christ  if  we  earnestly  desire  it,  hungering  and  thirstin.;  alter 
it.  2.  Of  hersdf.  Her  neck  was  white  as  the  ivory  which  King  Solomon  imporied 
and  used  largely  for  purposes  of  decoration  (1  Kings  x.  18,  22);  her  eyes  in  their 
liquid  beauty  were  like  the  pools  at  Heshbon ;  her  brow  stately  as  the  tower  of 
Lebanon;  her  head  beautiful  as  the  summit  of  Carmel;  her  hair  like  the  deepest  shade 
of  Tyrian  purple — the  king  (the  chorus  continues)  is  held  captive  in  its  tresses.  The 
beauty  of  the  bride  is  a  stately,  regal  beauty ;  her  neck  and  her  brow  are  compared  ta 


.OH.  vn.  1—13.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  167 


towers,  her  head  to  the  mountain  so  famous  in  the  history  of  Elijah.  So  in  the  Book 
of  the  Revelation,  when  the  angel  had  said  to  St.  John,  "  Come  hither,  I  will  show 
thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,"  "  he  carried  me,"  the  evanselist  continues,  "  away  in 
the  Spirit  to  a  great  and  high  mountain,  and  showed  me  that  great  city,  the  holy 
Jerusalem,  descending  out  of  heaven  from  God  "  (Rev.  xxi.  9,  10).  Here,  again,  the 
bride,  which  is  the  Church,  is  compared  to  a  city,  a  city  built  upon  an  exceeding  high 
mountain,  according  to  the  Saviour's  prophecy,  "  Upon  this  rook  I  will  build  my 
Church,  and  the  ^ates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it "  (Malt.  xvi.  18).  St.  John 
dwells  in  ardent  words  upon  the  heavenly  beauty  of  the  bride,  which  is  the  city  of 
the  living  God ;  he  tells  us  of  bei-  stately  gates,  of  her  vast  dimensions,  of  her  jewelled 
foundations,  of  her  "  streets  of  pure  gold  as  it  were  transparent  glass."  The  glories  of 
that  heavenly  city  draw  the  Christian  soul  mightily  with  a  constraining  power,  as 
King  Solomon  was  held  captive  in  the  dark  tresses  of  his  bride.  The  Lord  "loveth 
the  gates  of  Zion  "  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  1) ;  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  loved  the  Church,  and 
gave  himself  for  it.  Christians,  taught  by  him,  set  their  affection  on  the  heavenly 
city;  they  love  to  meditate  upon  its  glories;  they  count  its  towers  and  mark  its 
palaces,  the  many  mansions  in  our  Father's  house ;  confessing  that  they  are  pilgrims 
and  strangers  here,  they  seek  the  continuing  city,  which  is  to  come.  "  Blessed  are 
they  that  do  his  commandments,  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and 
may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city  "  (Rev.  xxii.  14). 

Vers.  6 — 13. — Dialogue  between  the  king  and  the  bride.  1.  Entrance  of  the  kino. 
1.  His  praise  of  love.  Perhaps  the  last  words  ol  the  chorus  were  overheard  by  the 
king  as  he  approached  the  bride.  He  assents ;  he  is  content  to  be  held  captive  in  the 
tresses  of  the  bride's  hair ;  for  love  is  fair  and  pleasant  above  all  delightful  things. 
The  bridegroom  is  not  here  using  the  word  with  which  he  so  often  addresses  the  bride 
(as  in  ch.  i.  9 ;  iv.  1 ;  vi.  4),  which  is  translated,  "  0  my  love,"  or  perhaps  better,  "  O 
my  friend."  In  this  place  we  have  the  word  ordinarily  used  for  the  affection  of  love; 
and  perhaps  it  is  best  to  take  it  in  that  sense  here.  Among  all  delightful  things 
there  is  nothing  so  beautiful,  so  fair  to  contemplate,  so  full  of  interest ;  there  is  nothing 
so  pleasant,  nothing  which  gives  so  much  comfort  and  peace  and  joy  as  true  and 
faithful  love.  The  king  is  happy  in  the  bondage  of  wliich  the  chorus  had  spoken. 
Indeed,  true  love  is  not  bondage  in  any  proper  sense  of  the  word.  It  was  God  himself 
who  said,  "  It  is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone ;  "  God  who  said,  "  I  will  make  him  an 
help  meet  for  him."  God  gave  man  affections.  When  he  made  man  after  his  own 
image,  he  set  in  his  heart  a  reflection  of  that  love  which  more  than  any  other  of  his 
attributes  enters  into  the  very  being  and  essence  of  Almighty  God.  That  love  needs 
objects  on  which  to  exert  itself;  the  love  of  parent,  child,  or  wife  is  a  preparation,  a 
training  for  the  highest  form  of  love,  the  blessed  love  of  God.  Loneliness,  as  a  rule,  is 
not  good ;  it  tends  to  concentrate  a  man's  thoughts  upon  himself.  He  finds  no  outlet 
for  the  affections  which  God  has  given  him :  some  of  them,  and  those  among  the  best 
and  highest,  are  in  danger  of  sinking  into  atrophy ;  there  is  great  risk  of  his  becoming 
a  prey  to  selfishness,  and  the  bondage  of  selfishness  is  hard  and  grinding  and  joyless. 
Sensual  love  is  not  love  in  the  true  sense ;  it  is  one  of  the  worst  and  most  unfeeling 
forms  of  selfishness ;  it  thinks  only  of  selfish  pleasure,  and  recks  nothing  of  the  misery 
and  ruin  which  it  brings  upon  others ;  it  makes  a  man  the  slave  of  evil  passions ;  it 
tends  to  wretchedness.  The  service  of  God  is  perfect  freedom ;  so,  in  a  lesser  sense, 
is  the  service  of  any  pure  and  holy  affection.  True  wedded  love  tends  to  set  a  man 
free  from  the  bonds  of  selfishness;  it  gives  him  scope  for  the  exercise  of  his  best 
affections,  and  helps  him  to  rise  upwards  towards  that  highest  love  which  alone  can 
give  abiding  happiness.  Love,  the  bridegroom  says,  is  among  all  delightful  things 
the  fairest  and  the  most  pleasant.  The  bride  in  the  next  chapter  expresses  the  same 
belief,  "  Love  is  strong  as  death."  "  Many  waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither  can  the 
floods  drown  it:  if  a  man  would  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for  love,  it  would 
utterly  be  contemned."  Wedded  love  is  a  parable  of  the  holy  love  of  God.  The  king 
in  the  song  is  led  captive  by  the  love  of  the  bride.  The  saints  of  God,  like  St.  Paul, 
St.  James,  St.  Jude,  delight  in  describing  themselves  as  "  the  servants  of  God,"  "  the 
slaves  of  God."  God  so  formed  our  nature  for  himself  that  the  soul  can  find  an  adequate 
object  for  its  supreme  affections  only  in  him.     Therefore  he  bids  us  love  him  with  »U 


168  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vu.  1—18. 

our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  with  all  our  mind,  and  with  all  our  strength,  because  our 
highest  powers  can  find  their  proper  exercise  only  thus;  and  it  is  in  the  exercise  of 
tiie  highest  powers  that  the  highest  happiness  is  found.  It  is  the  love  of  God  that 
sheds  glory  and  joy  and  blesseiiness  through  heaven,  his  dwelling-place,  because  the 
blessed  angels  love  him  peifeoily,  and,  dwelling  in  love,  do  his  holy  will  with  a  glad, 
undoubting  obedience.  And  so  in  various  lower  degrees  it  is  the  love  of  Gnd  which 
makes  religion  what  it  is  to  his  people,  very  blessed  and  holy  ;  whicjj  makes  life  worth 
living ;  which  gives  them  in  the  midst  of  their  shortcomings  glimpses  more  or  less 
vivid  of  that  holiest  joy  which  is  the  blessedness  of  heaven.  Joy  in  the  Lord  is  one 
of  the  fruits  of  the  -pirit;  it  follows  immediately  upon  the  highest  grace  of  love;  it 
issues  out  of  it  (Gal.  v.  22).  And  because  it  issues  out  of  love,  it  is  enjoined  upon  us 
as  our  duty  as  well  as  our  hi.;hest  privilege;  for  "  the  first  of  all  the  commandments 
is  this.  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God ;  "  and  a  corollary  of  that  first  command- 
ment is,  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway  ;  and  again  1  say,  Rejoice  "  (Phil.  iv.  4).  Among 
earthly  delights  the  pure  love  of  wedlock  is,  as  the  king  says,  the  fairest  and  the  most 
pleasant;  and  of  all  highest  joys  that  the  human  souL  can  attain  unto,  the  supreme, 
the  transcendent  joy,  comes  from  the  holy  love  of  God.  2.  His  praise  of  the  bride. 
He  compares  her  to  a  palm  tree,  to  a  vine.  Both  are  fair  to  look  upon,  both  have 
acred  associations.  The  image  of  the  vine  recalls  to  our  thoughts  the  holy  allegory 
in  John  XV.  The  Saviour  is  the  true  Vine;  his  people  are  the  branches.  They  must 
liring  forth  fruit,  for  the  branch  that  beareth  not  fruit  is  taken  away ;  and  in  order  to 
bear  fruit  they  must  abide  in  him,  in  spiritual  union  with  the  Lord,  who  is  the  Life. 
'I'hK  palm  tree  also  occurs  in  Scripture  imagery  :  "  The  righteous  shall  flourish  like  the 
oalm  tree"  (Ps.  xoii.  12).  Several  characteristics  make  the  palm  tree  an  apt  emblem 
u\'  the  faithful  servant  of  God.  There  is  its  tall  and  graceful  appearance,  its  evergreen 
foliage,  its  fruitfulness,  and  perhaps  especially  the  fact  that  both  fronds  and  fruit  grow 
at  the  topmost  height  of  the  tree,  high  above  the  earth  and  as  near  as  possible  to 
heaven.  An  apt  illustration  by  St.  Gifet;ory  the  Great  ('Moral.,'  on  Job  xix.  49)  is 
quoted  in  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible : '  "  Well  is  the  life  of  the  righteous  likened 
to  a  palm,  in  that  the  palm  below  is  rough  to  the  touch,  and  in  a  mariner  enveloped 
in  dry  bark,  but  above  it  is  adorned  with  fruit  fair  even  to  the  eye;  below,  it  is 
jomprissed  by  the  enfoldings  of  its  baik;  above,  it  is  spread  out  in  amplitude  of 
beautiful  greenness.  For  so  is  the  life  of  the  elect,  despised  below,  beautiful  above. 
Down  below  it  Is,  as  it  were,  enfolded  in  many  barks,  in  that  it  is  straitened  by 
innumerable  afflictions ;  but  on  high  it  is  expanded  into  a  foliage,  as  it  were,  of  beau- 
tiful greenness  by  the  amplitude  of  the  rewarding."  3.  The  bride  continues  the  bride- 
groom's words.  "  I  said,  I  will  go  up  to  the  palm  tree,  I  will  take  hold  of  the  boughs 
thereof."  These  words  have  been  regarded  by  some  commentators  as  spoken  by  the 
biide.  In  the  next  verse  certainly  the  bride  interrupts  the  bridegroom  and  finishes 
bis  sentence.  It  may  well  be  that  here  also  she  corrects  the  similitude  of  the  bride- 
groom, and  applies  it  to  him  rather  than  to  herself;  the  words,  "  I  said,"  seem  perhaps 
to  favour  this  view,  and  to  suggest  a  different  speaker.  The  bridegroom  is  the  palm 
tree  rather  than  the  bride  ;  she  modestly  and  humbly  transfers  the  similitude  to  him. 
The  palm  tree  resembles  the  king  in  its  lofty  stateliness  and  beauty.  And  certainly 
this  view  best  lends  itself  to  spiritual  applications.  The  palm  tree  to  the  Christian 
represents  the  cross.  We  think  of  St.  Peter's  words,  "His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in 
his  own  body  on  the  tree"  (1  Pet.  ii.  24).  We  remember  the  old  traditional  reading 
of  Ps.  xcvi.  10,  "  The  Lord  bath  reigned  from  the  tree."  We  recall  his  own  words, 
"  I,  if  I  he  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me  "  (John  xii.  32).  The 
Lord  reigned  from  the  tree  ;  above  him  was  the  title,  "  This  is  Jesus,  the  King  of  the 
Jews."  He  is  the  King  of  the  true  Israelites,  the  Israel  of  God.  And  the  cross  is 
the  throne  of  his  triumph ;  it  displays,  as  nothing  else  could  do,  the  Divine  glory  of 
holiness  and  entire  self-sacrifice  and  self-forgetting  love,  which  are  the  kingly  orna- 
ments of  the  Saviour's  lofty  dignity.  The  Saviour's  precious  death  has  made  the 
cross  a  thing  most  sacred,  most  awe-inspiring,  most  dear  to  Christian  souls,  most 
constraining  in  the  power  of  its  Divine  attraction.  It  draws  around  itself  all  the  elect 
of  God,  all  who  have  ears  to  hear  and  hearts  to  feel  the  blessed  love  of  Christ.  All 
such  say  in  their  hearts,  "I  will  go  up  to  the  palm  tree,  I  will  take  hold  of  the  boughs 
thereof,"     The  first  words,  "  I  said,"  seem  to  remind  us  of  many  faithless  promises,  of 


OH.  VII.  1—13.]  THE   SONG  OP  SOLOMON,  169 

many  broken  resolutions.  It  is  easy  to  say,  very  hard  to  persevere  in  bearing  the 
cross.  How  often  we  iiave  promised,  at  our  baptism,  at  our  confirmation,  in  the  Holy 
Communion,  in  the  hour  of  private  prayer  and  self-examination — how  often  we  have 
said,  "I  will  go  up  "I  But  the  ascent  is  steep  and  difBoult;  the  palm  tree  is  high, 
there  are  no  branches  to  assist  the  climber ;  the  fruit  is  at  the  very  top,  high  out  of 
oxa  reach ;  there  is  need  of  effort,  continued  persevering  eifort — effort  sometimes  very 
hard  and  painful  to  flesh  and  blood.  But  we  must  lift  up  our  hearts,  we  must  look 
upward.  The  Lord  was  lifted  up,  and  his  disciples  must  follow  him ;  they  know  the 
way  (John  xiv.  4).  We  must  set  him  ever  before  us,  aud  think  of  his  agony  and 
bloody  sweat,  his  cross  and  Passion,  when  we  are  tempted  to  regard  the  cross  as  hard 
and  paiuful,  and  to  relax  our  efforts  in  the  religious  life.  We  must  go  up.  God's 
saints  have  gone  before  us. 

"  They  climbed  the  steep  ascent  of  heaven 
Through  peril,  toil,  and  pain." 

We  must  do  the  like ;  "  we  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom  " 
uf  God.  And  if  we  would  persevere  in  well-doing  we  must  go  up  to  the  cross  of 
the  Lord  Jesus ;  it  is  only  there,  in  spiritual  communion  with  the  crucified  Saviour, 
in  his  strength  which  strengthens  all  who  trust  in  him,  through  a  living  and  true 
faith  in  him,  that  the  Christian  can  find  strength  to  bear  the  burden  of  the  cross. 
It  is  a  heavy  burden  to  flesh  and  blood,  but  the  Lord  makes  it  light  to  all  who  come 
to  him  in  obedience  to  his  gracious  invitation.  For  he  gives  to  his  chosen  power  to 
become  the  sons  of  God ;  he  strengthens  them  with  all  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner 
man;  he  bids  them  cast  their  burden  upon  him  (Ps.  Iv.  22),  he  bears  it  with  them. 
But  they  must  go  up  to  the  palm  tree  ;  they  may  i;ave  many  times  said  they  will  do 
so,  and  perhaps  many  times  have  failed.  They  must  go  up  with  sustained  effort. 
The  Lord,  indeed,  draws  us,  but  it  is  by  the  attraction  of  love  and  the  motions  of  his 
Spirit,  not  by  forcing  our  will.  We  must  go  up,  yielding  up  our  will  to  him,  asking 
him  to  give  us  grace  to  pray  aright  that  holy  piayer,  " Not  my  will,  but  thine  be 
done."  And  we  must  take  hold  of  the  boughs  thereof,  clinging  to  them  with  the 
embrace  of  loving  faith.  It  is  not  enough  once  to  go  up  to  the  tree ;  the  Lord  himself 
has  taught  us  our  need  of  continual  perseverance:  "  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you."  We 
must  take  hold  of  him  with  the  earnest  prayer  of  Jacob,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go 
except  thou  bless  me."  And  we  must  learn  of  him  who  endured  the  cross  for  us  to 
take  up  the  cross  ourselves,  to  crucify  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts,  so  that, 
like  St.  Paul,  we  may  be  crucified  with  Christ,  and,  dying  unto  the  world,  may  ever 
live  with  him.  We  may  well  take  to  ourselves  the  words  which  tiadition  puts  into  the 
mouth  of  St.  Andrew  when  he  first  saw  the  cross  on  which  he  was  to  suffer,  "  Hail, 
precious  cross,  that  hast  been  consecrated  by  the  body  of  my  Lord  1  I  come  to  thee ; 
receive  me  into  thy  arms,  take  me  from  among  men,  and  present  me  to  my  Master, 
that  he  who  redeemed  me  on  thee  may  receive  me  by  thee."  The  cross  goeth  before 
the  crown.  We  must  go  up  to  the  tree,  and  that  with  pains  and  striving,  before  we 
can  reach  the  fronds  at  the  summit.  They  are  the  prize  of  victory.  The  great 
multitude  that  no  man  could  number  stood  before  the  throne  clothed  with  white 
robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands.  That  blessed  vision  may,  indeed,  be  understood  as  a 
vision  of  the  true  Feast  of  Tabernacles  in  heaven ;  but  the  palm  has  ever  been  regariie<i 
as  the  martyr's  prize ;  we  must  look  upwards  to  it.  "  Brethren,  I  count  not  myself 
to  have  apprehended:  but  this  one  thing  I  do,  forgetting  those  things  that  are 
behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those  things  which  are  before,  I  press  toward  the 
mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus "  (Phil.  iii.  13,  14). 
4.  The  bridegroom  continues  his  praises.  He  repeats  the  compawson  of  the  vine,  and 
adds  that  the  breath  of  the  bride  is  fragrant  as  the  smell  of  the  choicest  fruits,  and 
the  tones  of  her  voice  .sweet  as  the  best  wine.  Here  the  bride  interrupts  the  king, 
adding  the  words,  "that  goeth  down  smoothly  for  my  beloved."  We  njark  the 
loving  controversy ;  each  seeks  to  put  the  other  first.  If  the  king  compares  the  bride 
to  a  palm  tree,  she  stops  him  with  the  answer  that  he  is  to  her  the  stately  tree ;  she 
will  f;o  up  to  the  palm  tree,  she  will  take  hold  of  its  bouglis.  If  he  compares  her 
voice  to  the  flavour  of  the  sweetest  wine,  she  adds,  interrupting  him,  that  that  wine 
is  for  her  beloved,  to  please  and  refresh  him  with  its  sweetness ;  her  joy  is  to  feel  that 


170  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vn.  1—13. 

she  is  wholly  his,  to  delight  in  his  love,  to  try  always  to  please  him.  It  i8  a  sweet 
picture  of  the  happiness  of  wedded  love,  when  each  seeks  to  please  the  other,  when 
each  puts  the  other  first.  Then  Christian  marriage  is  indeed  a  holy  estate,  a  great 
help  in  the  religious  life,  representing  to  the  wedded  pair  the  union  that  is  between 
Christ  and  his  Church,  so  that  having  in  their  own  mutual  relations  a  parable  of  that 
holy  union,  they  may  be  drawn  continually  nearer  to  Christ,  as  they  learn  continually 
to  love  one  another  with  a  purer  and  deeper  love,  and  in  their  daily  self-denials  for 
the  loved  one's  sake  find  how  blessed  is  self-sacrifice  for  his  sake  who  loved  us  and 
gave  himself  for  us. 

II.  The  bride's  answer.  1.  The  mutual  love  that  hindu  them  together.  She  repeats 
the  assertion  of  oh.  ii.  16 ;  vi.  3.  As  in  oh.  vi.  3,  she  puts  first  her  own  gift,  the  gift  of 
her  whole  heart,  to  her  beloved.  She  knows  now,  with  a  confident  and  happy  know- 
ledge, that  her  heart  is  his.  Perhaps  at  first  there  had  been  some  coyness,  some  hesita- 
tions, some  doubts ;  now  there  is  none.  She  has  given  her  heart,  and  she  knows  it. 
She  dwells  on  the  happy  truth ;  she  rejoices  in  repeating  it.  Blessed  is  the  Christian 
Boul  that  can  say  the  like,  "  I  am  my  Beloved's,"  "  I  am  Christ's."  Blessed  above  all 
others  are  they  who  can  say  in  sincerity  that  they  have  given  him  their  whole  heart ; 
that  they  desire  only  him,  his  presence,  his  love ;  that  their  one  highest  hope  is  to 
please  him  better,  to  live  nearer  and  nearer  to  him,  and  at  length  to  see  him  face  to 
face.  Such,  in  the  ancient  times,  was  the  hope  of  the  Psalmist  Asaph.  "  Whom  have 
I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  the  earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee.  My 
flesh  and  my  heart  faileth:  but  God  is  the  Strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  Portion  for 
ever  "  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  25,  26).  And  the  bride  is  sure  of  the  bridegroom's  love :  "  his  desire 
is  towards  me."  She  is  as  sure  that  his  heart  is  hers  as  that  hers  is  his.  She  applies  to 
him  the  Divine  words  of  Gren.  iii.  16.  As  Eve's  desire  was  to  her  husband,  so  now  the 
king's  desire  was  toward  his  bride.  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  loved  the  Church  ;  his 
desire  is  toward  his  people ;  their  salvation  was  the  joy  set  before  him,  for  which  hs 
endured  the  cross.  He  said  to  his  little  flock,  "  With  desire  I  have  desired  to  eat  this 
Passover  with  you  before  I  suffer "  (Luke  xxii.  15).  His  desire  is  toward  his  bride, 
that  she  may  be  washed  and  cleansed,  that  he  may  in  his  own  good  time  present  her 
to  himself  a  glorious  Church,  holy  and  without  blemish  (Eph.  v.  25 — 27).  2.  The 
bride's  invitation.  The  king  had  invited  her  to  his  royal  city  at  the  time  of  their 
espousals.  "  Come  with  me  from  Lebanon,  my  spouse  "  (oh.  iv.  8).  She  seems  here  to  be 
inviting  the  king  to  visit  in  her  company  her  old  home,  the  scene  of  her  labours  in  the 
vineyards.  "  Come,  my  beloved,"  she  says,  "  let  us  go  forth  into  the  field."  So  the 
heavenly  Bridegroom  calls  to  himself  the  souls  whom  he  so  dearly  loved :  "  Come  unto 
me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest ; "  so  the  Christian,  in  answer  to  the  Lord's  gracious 
invitation,  responds,  "  Even  so  come.  Lord  Jesus."  He  bids  us  come  to  him,  and  as  we 
come  we  pray  him  to  come  to  us,  for  without  him  we  can  do  nothing;  we  cannot 
come  unless  he  draws  us  by  himself  coming  to  us  (John  vi.  44 ;  xii.  32).  We  pray 
him,  "  Let  us  go  forth  into  the  field,  let  us  get  up  early  to  the  vineyards ; "  for  we 
need  his  presence  always ;  we  cannot  do  the  work  which  he  has  given  us  to  do ;  we 
cannot  work  in  his  vineyard  as  he  bids  us  without  his  help.  Therefore  we  ask  him 
to  be  with  us  always,  according  to  his  gracious  promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  all  the 
days,  even  to  the  end  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  20) ;  that  we  may  have  grace  to  get  up  early  to 
the  vineyards,  not  to  stand  all  the  day  idle,  not  to  wait  to  the  eleventh  hour,  but  to 
give  the  best  of  our  life  to  God,  to  remember  our  Creator  in  the  days  of  our  youth,  to 
do  with  our  might  whatsoever  our  hand  findeth  to  do  (Eccles.  ix.  10).  'The  word 
here  rendered  "  get  up  early  "  is  several  times  figuratively  used  for  "  to  be  earnest  or 
urgent."  God  calls  us  to  work,  to  labour  for  his  Name's  sake,  but  not  to  leave  our  first 
love,  like  the  Church  at  Ephesus  (Rev.  ii.  3,  4);  to  work  out  our  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling,  but  all  the  time  to  ask  him  to  come  and  help  us,  and  to  remember  that  it  is 
he  who  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure  (Phil.  ii.  13) ;  for 
without  that  inward  work  of  his  within  our  souls  we  can  do  no  acceptable  work  for 
him.  '  But  work  we  must,  for  he  bids  us ;  and  it  is  in  that  work,  wrought  ever  in 


1  working  1 

•aid ;  then  "  feed  my  lambs,  feed  my  sheep."    "  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments.* 


OH.  Til.  1—13.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  171 

Then  he  will  pray  for  us,  sending  the  gracious  Spirit,  the  Comforter,  to  strengthen  and 
to  help  us ;  then,  he  promises,  he  will  come  himself.  •'  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless : 
I  will  come  to  you  "  (John  xiv.  15—18).  Then  ,the  blessed  Spirit  will  help  us  to  bring 
forth  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit — the  fiuit  which  is  "  love,  joy,  peice,  long-suffering,  gentle- 
ness, faith,  meekness,  temperance  " — that  like  the  bride  iu  the  song  we  may  have  "  all 
manner  of  pleasant  fruits,  new  and  old, '  and  may  add,  in  her  words,  "  which  I  have 
laid  up  for  thee,  0  my  Beloved."  These  fruits  are  treasures  laid  up  in  heaven,  and  we 
know  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  we  have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day 
(2  Tim.  i  12). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — Christian  missions.  "  I  am  my  beloved's,"  etc.  The  scene  is  still 
in  "the  king's  chambers"  at  Jerusalem.  What  Solomon  has  said  to  her  whom  he 
would  win  is  of  no  avail ;  her  heart  is  true  to  her  beloved.  This  emphatic  redeclaration 
of  her  love  for  that  beloved  one  is  all  the  response  that  the  king's  flatteries  have  obtained. 
She  speaks  as  if  she  were  already  away  from  the  palace  and  back  at  her  country  iiome ; 
once  more  occupied  in  her  usual  occupations  and  enjoying  her  former  happy  intercourse 
with  her  beloved.  But  the  going  forth  to  her  work  suggests  the  idea  of  going  forth  in 
spiritual  work,  and  the  language  she  uses  points  to  the  manner  in  which  such  work 
may  be  successfully  done.  We  may  take  the  section  as  an  allegory  concerning 
Christian  missions.     It  suggests — 

I.  What  prompts  them.  (Ver.  10.)  The  profound  and  delightful  realization  of 
Christ's  love  towards  and  within  us.  Such  work,  if  done  only  because  we  are  afraid  of 
the  judgment-day,  when  we  all  must  give  account  of  our  stewardship ;  or  from  mere 
sense  of  duty ;  still  less  when  the  motive  is  ecclesiastical  ambition ;  or  even  when  pity 
for  the  ignorance  and  general  sad  condition  of  the  heathen  is  the  motive ; — all  such 
promptings  have  but  partial,  some  very  partial,  power.  The  true  motive  is  that  which 
the  rapturous  expression  of  ver.  10  reveals — 

II.  How  THEY  SHOULD  BE  CARRIED  ON.  "Come,  my  Belovcd,  let  us,"  etc.  1.  Tht 
presence  of  Christ  should  he  invoked.  (Ver.  11.)  "Let  us  go  forth,"  etc.  Then: 
2.  There  should  he  the  going  foi  th.  Away  from  accustomed  haunts,  away  from  the 
place  of  ordinances  and  privileges,  to  where  none  of  these  things  are  enjoyed.  3. 
With  diligence.  "  Let  us  rise  early "  (ver.  12).  4.  With  watchfulness,  not  alone  in 
planting,  but  for  growth  and  progress. 

III.  Their  tritb  natukb.  (Ver.  12.)  "  There  will  I  give  thee, "  etc.  They  are  an 
acceptable  offering  of  our  love  to  Christ  and  its  true  manifestation.  A  love  to  Christ 
that  is  not  expansive,  that  does  not  go  forth  to  bless  others,  is  no  true  love,  but  some- 
thing very  different  (1  Cor.  xv.  10). 

IV.  Thet  shall  be  rewarded  with  delightful  success.  (Ver.  13.)  May  not 
the  lack  of  this — though,  indeed,  it  is  not  entirely  absent — be  owing  to  some  grave 
defect  in  motive  or  manner  V 

V.  All  the  glory  will  be  rendered  to  Christ.  "Which  I  have  laid  up /or 
thee."  (Ver.  13.)  Cf.  the  account  of  the  first  missionary  meeting  and  report  (Acts 
xiv.  27).— S.  0. 

Ver.  10.—"  /  am  my  beloved's."    (Cf.  on  ch.  ii.  16).— S.  a 

Vers.  11 — 13. —  Useful  service.  Earth  is  a  great  picture-gallery,  full  of  illustrations 
of  heavenly  things.  This  material  universe  is  the  projection  of  God's  thoughts;  the 
visible  expression  of  his  dispositions ;  the  blossoming  of  his  love.  The  God  of  nature  is 
the  God  of  religion;  hence  the  same  lessons  appear  in  both.  As  we  have  seen  in  the 
home  of  a  great  artist  the  handiworks  of  his  genius  adorning  parlours  and  halls, 
corridors  and  bed-chambers — works  in  all  stages  of  development — so  is  it  in  God's 
world.  Pictures  of  him  abound.  Every  garden  is  a  lesson-book  for  humanity ;  every 
well-kept  garden  is  a  portrait  of  a  saint ;  every  fruitful  vineyard  is  an  emblem  of 
Christ's  Church.  Said  the  Prophet  Isaiah  to  the  godly  man,  "  Thou  shalt  be  as  a  well- 
Watered  garden."    "  My  Well-beloved  hath  a  vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful  hill."     The 


172  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vn.  1—13. 

Ughest  fhiitfulness  is  the  result  of  patient  culture.  Prosperitj  is  threatened  by  many 
foes.  Human  agency  must  co-operate  with  Divine  power  in  order  "  to  bring  forth  fruit 
unto  perfection."  Every  flower  and  blossom  is  an  outburst  of  God's  glory.  Earth  is 
crammed  full  of  heavenly  things. 

I.  In  all  holt  sbuviob  the  motive  power  is  love.  "  Come,  my  beloved."  Thus 
Jesus  speaks.  1.  Ood'i  works  spring  from  love.  We  cannot  conceive  any  other 
reason  why  the  eternal  God  should  have  begun  to  create,  unless  that  happiness  and  love 
might  be  multiplied.  Love  would  not  permit  him  to  keep  all  good'  within  himself. 
Love  im  [jelled  him  to  produce  various  orders  of  sentient  life.  His  joy  is  increased  by 
witnessing  the  joyi  of  others. 

•  Yes,  he  has  gemmed  with  worlds  the  abyi% 
Filled  them  with  beauty,  life,  and  bliss, 
Only  the  wider  to  dispense 
The  gifts  of  his  beneficence. 
Oh  yes  I  creation  planned  above 

Was  but  for  mercy's  stream  a  vent> 
The  outgushings  of  eternal  love — 

Ay,  this  is  love's  embodiment." 

2.  I%is  1ov»  in  u»  springs  from  our  assurance  of  Chrisfs  love.  The  love  that  is 
fruitful  in  service  realizes  the  personal  friendship  of  Christ.  If  I  am  tormented  with 
doubts  touching  my  acceptance  by  Christ,  I  shall  have  no  energy  for  service.  I  have 
only  a  limited  capacity  of  power,  and  if  1  expend  this  in  solving  difficult  questions,  or 
in  calming  my  own  fears,  I  shall  be  unfit  for  service.  If  the  Master  is  saying  to  me, 
"  Son,  go  work  to-day  In  my  vineyard,"  and  if  I  reply,  "  Lord,  I  know  not  if  I  be  a 
son,"  I  shall  not  accomplish  any  good.  But  when  1  know  that  I  am  "  accepted  in 
the  Beloved,"  there  is  a  mainspring  of  love  within  that  stirs  all  the  energies  of  my  soul. 
Then  my  daily  prayer  will  be,  "Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  Then,  "the 
love  of  Christ  constraineth  me."  "  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ."  It  would  be  a  painful 
restraint  on  my  new  nature  if  I  did  not  render  him  service.  Then  his  "  service  is 
perfect  freedom."  3.  True  love  hears  Tmmanuers  voice.  "  Come,  my  beloved."  Love 
moves  into  healthful  activity  every  organ.  It  not  only  gives  activity  to  the  feet ; 
it  gives  sensitiveness  to  the  ear.  The  voice  of  Christ  is  not  addressed  to  the  bodily 
organ ;  it  is  addressed  to  the  soul.  It  is  a  spiritual  communication ;  a  "  still  small 
voice."  As  In  the  days  of  his  flesh  the  multitude  did  not  understand  the  speech  that 
came  from  heaven — "  I  have  both  glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it  again  ; "  they  thought 
that  it  thundered,  or  that  an  angel  spake ;  so  is  it  still.  The  Christian  hears  a  voice 
that  no  one  else  can  hear.  The  passing  crowd  may  hear  a  faint  hum,  as  the  wind 
passes  through  the  telegraphic  wires,  but  the  message  conveyed  through  the  wire  is 
understood  only  by  the  person  trained  to  receive  it.  So  the  voice  of  heavenly  authority 
and  the  voice  of  heavenly  frlendshi|j  is  heard  only  by  wakeful,  tender  love.  4.  Love 
craves  to  give  itself  exjjression.  Love  Is  an  expansive  power.  It  is  a  law  of  its  nature 
to  spread;  to  go  out  in  practical  forms.  Like  the  force  of  steam,  it  cannot  be  held 
in  restraint.  The  hotter  steam  becomes,  the  more  it  expands.  The  present  motive 
power  in  commerce,  and  in  swift  locomotion,  results  from  the  expansive  power  of 
steam.  So  all  human  philanthropy  and  all  missionary  enterprise  are  the  outcome 
of  fervent  love.  It  would  be  painful  to  love  if  no  service  were  permitted.  She  is 
girt  and  sandalled,  waiting  to  scale  rugged  mountains,  waiting  to  cross  tempestuous 
seas,  waiting  to  traverse  perilous  deserts,  in  order  to  tell  the  perishing  that  Jesus  can 
save.  Love  never  wearies.  Service  is  her  delight.  There  is  within  an  irresistible 
instinct  to  do  good. 

II.  In  holt  sebvice  we  have  Divine  companionship.  "  Let  us  go, . . .  let  us  lodge." 
1.  This  is  a  real  expirience.  To  many  persons  the  presence  of  Christ  is  a  fiction ;  It 
may  be  a  part  of  their  creed,  nothing  more.  They  read  of  it  as  a  promise,  but  they  have 
never  realized  it.  Yet  they  may.  For  on  the  part  of  a  faithful  servant  of  Christ  his 
presence  is  a  real  enjoyment.  Every  inspiration  of  benevolent  desire  is  from  him.  He 
talks  with  us  by  the  way.  We  ask  for  strength,  and  he  gives  it.  We  lack  courage, 
and  he  supplies  it  abundantly.  He  makes  our  dumb  lips  eloquent.  As  truly  as  we 
hold  intercourse  with  an  earthly  friend — yea,  more  truly — do  we  have  real  and  joyoyifi 


OH.  vn.  1—13.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  173 

intercourse  with  Jesus.  If  he  spake  the  promise,  "Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway," 
certainly  he  will  fulfil  it.  Why  should  he  not?  Is  anything  too  hard  for  him  to 
accomplish  ?  Some  imagine  that  the  real  presence  of  Christ  is  to  be  found  only  in  the 
sacrament  of  the  Supperl  This  is  a  delusion.  His  real  presence  is  ever  in  the  spiritual 
temple,  i.e.  in  the  temple  of  a  Christian's  heart.  Saith  he,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  1 
will  never  forsake  thee ; "  so  that  we  may  boldly  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Helper."  2.  This 
companionship  with  Jesus  is  a  real  honour.  When,  in  olden  time,  the  King  of  England 
went  out  in  person  to  war,  every  peer  in  the  realm  counted  it  an  honour  to  go  with 
him.  It  was  dishonourable  to  stay  at  home.  Every  duke  and  earl  would  rather  dwell 
amid  hardship  and  danger  on  the  battle-field,  if  the  king  were  there,  than  amid  the 
luxuries  of  their  own  castle-lialls.  To  be  near  the  person  of  the  king  was  counted  high 
honour.  Yet  this  honour  was  as  nothing — an  empty  bubble — compared  with  companion- 
ship with  Jesus  Christ.  To  be  companion  with  the  King  of  heaven  is  real  honour  and 
real  advantage.  It  is  Christ  alone  who  can  teach  us  what  honour  is.  Honour  is  insepar- 
able from  righteousness,  and  he  is  Perfect  Righteousness.  And  Christ  is  a  Worker. 
He  is  the  good  Shepherd,  ever  going  out  in  search  of  lost  sheep ;  so,  if  we  wish  to 
have  companionship  with  Jesus,  we  must  be  workers  too.  Service  is  honourable.  It 
is  in  service  that  we  shall  find  Christ  nearest  us.  There  is  a  legend  of  a  pious  monk 
in  the  Middle  Ages,  who  had  a  vision  of  the  Saviour.  The  man  was  ravished  with  holy 
joy.  It  was  a  season  of  hallowed  communion  with  his  Lord.  At  that  moment  the 
bell  rang,  and  it  was  the  duty  of  this  monk  to  distribute  food  to  the  poor.  There  was 
a  struggle  in  his  mind.  Should  he  leave  this  vision,  and  break  up  this  sweet  fellow- 
ship? The  bell  called  him  to  a  sacred  duty,  and  he  responded  and  went.  At  the 
end  of  an  hour  he  returned,  and  lol  the  vision  was  still  there.  Then  the  lips  of  the 
Master  moved,  and  he  said,  "Unless  thou  hadst  fulfilled  thy  call  of  duty,  I  had 
departed."  If  Jesus  is  with  us,  almighty  strength  is  assured.  Unerring  wisdom  is 
ours ;  sweetest  sympathy  cheers  us ;  certain  success  is  in  sight.  "  I  will  go  in  the 
strength  of  the  Lord  God." 

III.  In  holy  service  thekb  will  be  self-denial.  "Let  us  go  forth  into  the 
field;  let  us  lodge  in  the  villages;  let  us  get  up  early  to  the  vineyards."  Now,  this 
language  does  not  seem  natural  or  customary  in  the  lips  of  an  earthly  king.  But  it  is 
natural  and  seemly  in  the  lips  of  the  Prince  of  heaven.  For  it  is  his  delight  to 
humble  himself,  and  to  become  the  Servant  of  all.  1.  Discomfort  and  hardship  are 
foretold.  "Let  us  go  into  the  field."  Jesus  is  very  frank  and  outspoken.  Nut  on 
any  account  will  he  hide  from  us  the  hard  conditions  of  his  service.  Plainly  did  he 
tell  his  first  disciples  what  toils  and  persecutions  they  would  have  to  endure.  And 
the  Word  still  abides,  "  They  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  must  sufi'er  persecu- 
tion." Paul  was  forewarned  of  the  perils  that  awaited  him  in  every  city.  Bat  the 
real  friend  of  Jesus  is  prepared  for  self-denial.  Apart  from  self-denial,  his  service 
would  not  be  like  the  service  of  Jesus.  "  The  disciple  is  not  greater  than  his  Master, 
nor  the  servant  than  his  Lord."  The  Son  of  God  says  to  us,  "  Let  us  go  forth  into  the 
field."  We  must  leave  for  a  time  the  fair  palaces  of  our  Prince,  and  lodge  in  narrow 
tenements.  Yet  is  there  any  ground  for  lamentation  ?  Any  roof  which  covers  us, 
however  humble,  sliall  be  a  palace  of  delight  if  only  Christ  be  with  us  there.  The 
palace  does  not  make  the  dweller  therein  a  king ;  but  the  presence  of  the  King  makes 
the  house  a  palace.  Difficulties  and  self-denials  will  be  quietly  borne  if  we  are  on 
Ohrist's  errands.  Yea,  they  will  be  welcome,  if  love  to  Jesus  prevail.  "  They  have 
put  me,"  said  Kutherford,  " into  a  prison;  but  Immanuel  came  and  made  it  into  a 
banquet-house."  Yes,  if  Jesus  come  with  us  into  our  lowly  cottage,  forthwith  "  the 
doors  shall  be  pearls,  and  the  windows  agates,"  and  the  fence  shall  be  made  of  all 
kinds  of  precious  stones.  2.  We  shall  he  willing  to  continue  in  this  self-denying  worh. 
"  Let  us  lodge  in  the  villages."  We  must  not  grow  weary  in  this  well-doing.  Many 
a  man  will  rouse  his  courage  to  face  some  herculean  task  or  to  fight  in  some  sharp 
conflict,  who  will  yet  faint  under  the  weariness  of  a  long  campaign  or  fail  in  patient 
endurance.  The  service  to  which  Jesus  calls  us  is  lifelong,  and  the  discomfort  may  be 
long  continued.  Still,  we  will  embrace  it  with  joy.  "  He  that  endureth  to  the  end, 
the  same  shall  be  saved."  The  Christian  missionary  who  goes  into  a  foreign  field  to 
iow  the  heavenly  seed,  must  be  prepared  for  long-continued  sacrifice.  So  should  every 
true  servant  of  the  King.    For  self-denial  is  not  long-continued  pain.     The  joy  of 


174  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vn.  1—18. 

pleasii  g  Christ,  and  the  blessedness  of  his  company,  nullifies  the  pain  and  overcomes 
the  discomfort.  Soon  the  self-denial  loses  its  sting.  The  loss  becomes  a  gain,  and 
every  thorn  blossoms  into  a  rose.  "  Out  of  the  eater  comes  forth  meat,  and  out  of  the 
bitter  conies  forth  sweetness."  The  love  of  Christ  changes  everything.  It  makes  our 
hell  into  heaven.  3.  There  will  even  he  eagerness  for  this  arduous  work.  "Let  us  get 
up  early  to  the  vineyards."  To  enter  upon  this  hard  toil  in  company  with  Jesus,  we 
shall  be  ready  to  forego  comfortable  sleep.  Soon  as  moru  breaks,  soon  as  the  opportimity 
allows,  we  shall  be  ready  to  leap  forth  to  the  task.  Our  old  inclinations  are  overcoiiie 
and  supplanted  with  new  desires  and  new  endeavours.  We  are  burning  with  ardour 
to  show  Jesus  our  love.  We  shall  feel  ashamed  if  our  zeal  does  not  in  some  measure 
resemble  the  zeal  of  our  Immanuel.  He  was  consumed  with  holy  and  intensest  ardour 
to  do  us  good.  Said  he,  "  How  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished ! "  He  panted 
to  reach  the  cross.  And  now  he  has  commissioned  us  to  take  his  place  and  to  carry 
out  his  work.  As  his  Father  had  sent  him  into  the  world,  so  has  he  sent  us.  His  love 
is  to  be  perpetuated  through  us.  His  devotion  to  humanity  must  reappear  in  us. 
His  self-consuming  zeal  must  glow  in  our  breasts.  As  he  could  not  represent  among 
men  the  everlasting  love  of  his  Father  except  by  incessant  toil,  humiliating  suffering, 
and  a  death  of  public  shame,  so  neither  can  we  adequately  represent  the  saving  grace 
of  Christ  before  men  except  by  enthusiastic  zeal  and  completest  consecration.  There 
will  be  a  constant  watchfulness  for  every  opportunity  of  service.  To  do  Christ's  work 
will  be  our  meat  and  our  drink.  A  principle  of  sacred  earnestness  must  possess  us.  As 
the  hallowed  fire  on  the  temple-altar  was  not  allowed  to  expire,  so  must  not  the  fire  of 
holy  zeal  ever  expire  on  the  altar  of  our  hearts.  "  Wo  are  not  our  own ; "  we  belong 
to  another ;  "  we  are  bought  with  a  price ; "  therefore  duty  demands  that  we  glorify 
our  Master  "  with  our  bodies  and  with  our  spirits,  which  are  his." 

IV.  In  holt  service  there  is  qkbat  variety  of  usefulness.  "Let  us  see  if  the 
vine  flourish,  whether  the  tender  grape  appear,  and  the  pomegranates  bud  forth." 
1.  Christ's  work  is  the  pattern  of  ours.  The  work  of  Jesus  among  men  was  manifold. 
He  opened  blind  eyes,  unstopped  deaf  ears,  straightened  paralyzed  limbs,  fed  the 
hungry,  brought  the  dead  back  to  life,  pardoned  men's  sins,  purified  corrupt  and  vicious 
lives,  led  the  erring  into  light.  We  dwell  in  the  same  world  in  which  Christ  dwelt. 
We  are  encompassed  with  suffering  humanity.  We  have  the  same  motives  for  labour. 
Here  there  is  scope  for  every  capacity.  If  you  cannot  preach  to  great  assemblies,  you 
can  speak  to  a  wayfarer  for  Christ.  If  you  cannot  vindicate  the  truth  against  the  assaults 
of  the  scoffer,  you  can  feed  a  hungry  child,  or  console  a  sorrowing  widow,  or  visit  the 
bedridden,  or  pray  for  the  outcasts.  The  youngest  disciple  may  find  something  to  do  for 
Christ's  kingdom  in  this  world  of  sin  and  suffering.  "As  ye  have  opportunity,  do 
good  unto  all  men;"  "Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give."  In  nature  each  drop  of 
foiling  rain  produces  a  distinct  effect,  so  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  a  cUp  of  cold  water 
given  to  a  thirsty  child  obtains  its  reward.  2.  Concern  for  the  young  is  here  suggested. 
"Whether  the  tender  grape  appear."  Every  living  Church  will  have  special  agencies 
to  gain  the  young.  They  have  special  claims  on  us.  The  heart  is  as  yet  unoccupied. 
Character  is  plastic.  Feeling  is  fresh.  There  is  eager  inquiry  after  the  truth.  Labour 
among  the  young  is  full  of  promise.  In  the  young  Jesus  Christ  feels  special  interest. 
Every  parent  should  see  to  it  that  their  children's  hearts  are  opening  to  Christ.  We 
ought  to  see  conversion  to  God  very  early.  If  faith  be  the  great  essential,  then  very 
early  do  children  put  faith  in  a  parent  or  in  a  friend,  and  such  faith  they  can  as  readily 
place  in  Jesus  the  Saviour.  Parents  have  special  promises  from  God  to  encourage  their 
liope.  "I  will  pour  my  Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and  my  blessing  upon  thy  offspring." 
Jesus  has  special  love  for  the  lambs  in  the  flock. 

"  The  flower,  when  offered  in  the  bud, 
1b  no  vain  sacrifice." 

3.  Pious  care  for  all  inquirers  is  indicated.  "  Let  us  see  whether  the  pomegranates 
bud  forth."  It  is  a  hopeful  sign  of  grace  when  one  is  inquiring  after  the  light. 
Already  there  is  a  stir  in  that  dead  soul.  The  deep  sleep  of  sin  is  broken.  The 
man  is  awaking.  Possibly,  like  some  inveterate  sluggard,  he  may  turn  over  on  the 
other  side,  and  fall  into  deeper  sleep  than  before.  Such  a  thing  often  happens, 
both  in  nature  and  in  grace.     Now  is  our  opportunity  while  he  is  half  awake.     Now 


OS.  vn.  1—13.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  1?5 

let  the  alarm-bell  of  the  gospel  sound  in  his  ear.  Such  methods  as  true  wisdom 
and  love  can  devise  should  be  vigorously  employed.  How  precious  is  the  moment ! 
Anon  it  will  have  fled.  There  is  much  to  be  done.  Impression  has  to  be  made, 
instruction  given,  feeling  aroused,  conviction  wrought,  desire  excited,  resolution  taken. 
Every  inquirer  after  God  should  be  sought  out — should  be  the  object  of  the  Christian's 
concern. 

V.  In  holt  service  there  is  a  present  reward.  "The  mandrakes  give  a  smell, 
and  at  our  gates  are  all  manner  of  pleasant  fruits,  new  and  old."  1.  The  reward  is  the 
outcome  of  natural  law.  As  the  fruit  is  already  in  embryo  in  the  seed,  so  is  reward 
already  in  the  service,  though  as  yet  undeveloped.  As  hell  is  the  ripe  fruit  of  sin,  so 
heaven  is  the  ripe  fruit  of  holy  service.  The  faithful  steward  of  ten  talents  shall  have 
ten  talents  more  entrusted  to  him:  this  is  his  reward.  The  pleasant  fruits  of  the 
garden  shall  be  the  reward  of  the  faithful  husbandman.  Such  fruits  are  "old  and 
new."  Others  preceding  us  have  sown  good  seed,  done  noble  work  in  the  vineyard. 
We  enter  upon  the  results,  and  gather  in  the  fruits.  Old  fruit  at  times  is  preferable 
to  new.  Apples  and  nuts  mellow  with  age.  So  the  ripe  wisdom  of  old  saints  is  a 
spiritual  banquet.  The  promises  given  to  Abraham  have  a  good  flavour.  The  faith 
that  has  been  of  long  standing — the  faith  of  Elijah  and  Paul,  e.g. — is  a  very  pleasant 
fruit,  while  fresh  zeal  and  fresh  courage  are  equally  delightful.  "  Fruits  old  and  new." 
2.  Qod's  provision  for  us  is  ample.  If  we  go  diligently  about  our  Master's  work,  be 
sure  that  he  will  provide.  He  had  said,  "  Let  us  get  up  early,  and  go  forth  into  the 
vineyards;  "  and  lo !  when  noon  came  and  hunger  looked  for  a  meal,  here  at  the  gate 
was  a  royal  provision.  So  Jesus  taught  his  first  disciples,  that  if  they  attended  to  his 
business  he  would  take  the  responsibility  for  their  wants.  He  gave  to  Peter  and  his 
comrades  a  miraculous  draught  of  fishes ;  then  he  said,  "Feed  my  sheep;"  "Goiuto 
all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel ;  "  "  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need,  out  of  his 
riches  in  glory  by  Jesus  Christ."  3.  Jesus  provides  a  reward  suitable  to  every  taste. 
'  All  manner  of  pleasant  fruits,  new  and  old,  which  I  have  laid  up  for  thee."  When 
our  Immanuel  spreads  for  us  a  banquet,  nothing  shall  be  wanting.  Is  tliere  a  fruit 
anywhere  in  God's  universe  that  will  meet  a  want  of  mine  or  satisfy  a  longing  ?  It 
shall  be  given  me.  "  He  will  give  thee  the  desires  of  thy  heart ; "  "  In  his  garden  is  all 
manner  of  pleasant  fruit."  4.  Present  rewards  are  the  pledge  of  greater.  These  fruita 
are  found  "  at  our  gates."  It  is  as  if  our  Immanuel  had  said,  "  This  is  only  the 
beginning  of  good.  There's  more  to  Ibllow."  And  this  is  mcist  assuredly  true.  Pre- 
sent possessions  are  only  pledges  and  earnests  of  higher  and  richer  good.  The  love  ol 
Christ  in  the  heart  is  an  entrancing  joy,  but  I  shall  have  a  larger  experience  of  it  by- 
and-by.  These  attainments  of  piety  and  excellence  are  "  treasures  of  the  kingdom," 
but  I  shall  grow  richer  yet.  My  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ  is  a  precious  possession, 
but  the  "  half  has  not  been  told  me."  Jesus  has  many  things  to  reveal  to  me,  but  I 
cannot  bear  them  yet.  No  1  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  hath  ear  heard,  nor  has  it 
entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  what  God  has  prepared  for  them  that  love  him." 

VI.  In  holt  service  we  gain  fullest  assurances  op  Immanuel's  love.  "  There 
will  I  give  thee  my  love-presents."  Toward  the  close  of  his  ministry.  Jesus  said  to  his 
disciples,  "  He  that  keepeth  my  commandments,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me ;  and  he  that 
loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  Father,  and  we  will  come  unto  bim,  and  will  make  our 
abode  with  him."  This  is  the  love-token,  or  the  love-present,  which  otir  Immanuel 
gives  us,  viz.  his  abiding  presence  in  our  hearts — the  sunshine  of  his  love.  The  idler 
in  God's  vineyard  need  never  be  surprised  if  he  lack  the  full  assurance  of  his  son- 
ship.  It  had  never  been  promised  him.  To  give  this  love-present  to  such  a  one 
would  be  a  premium  upon  indolence.  Mark  that  it  is  in  the  field  of  service  that  Jesus 
gives  his  love-tokens.  It  is  to  earnest  and  faithful  labourers  he  confers  the  full  assur- 
ance of  hope.  The  consensus  of  observation  testifies  that  in  seasons  of  apatliy  and 
slothfulness  we  lose  the  assurance  of  heaven.  But  when  we  mn  with  alacrity  in  the 
path  of  service,  then  heaven  opens  to  us,  and  we  read  our  title  clear.  Is  it  a  real  joy 
to  us  when  we  look  into  the  face  of  an  earthly  friend  and  realize  his  tender  sympathy  ? 
Must  it  not  be  a  greater  joy  to  look  into  the  face  of  Jesus  and  feel  that  he  is  our 
Brother  ?  Do  the  minstrels  of  the  woods  pour  out  a  fresh  tide  of  song  when  the  genial 
sun  of  May  shines  upon  them?  And  when  we  come  into  the  warm  sunshine  ol 
Immanuel's  love,  and  know  that  he  has  made  with  us  an  everlasting  covenant,  shall 


176  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [ch.  vn.  1— 13 

not  our  hearts  be  all  aglow  with  joy?  For  nothing  on  earth  is  more  sure  than  this, 
that  if  I  give  my  whole  self  unreservedly  to  Jesus,  he  has  impelled  me  to  do  it,  and 
upcin  me  he  confers  the  wealth  of  his  eternal  friendship.  "  My  Beloved  is  mine,  and 
I  am  his."— D. 

Ver.  6. — The/airness  of  love.  The  commendations  of  the  bride's  beauty,  which  occur 
in  the  early  verses  of  this  chapter,  lead  up  to  the  exclamation — so  much  in  harmony 
with  the  whole  spirit  of  the  Canticles — concerning  the  fairness,  the  pleasantness,  the 
delightsomeness,  of  true  love. 

I.  The  bkautt  and  good  service  of  love,  as  a  sentiment  is  the  human 
HEART  AND  AS  A  BOND  IN  HUMAN  80CIETT.  As  distinguished  from  mere  carnal 
passion,  that  conjugal  love  which  is  pictured  as  subsisting  between  the  king  and  his 
spouse  is  justly  in  this  Song  of  Songs  represented  as  of  the  purest  and  highest  excellence. 
It  is  true  that  religion  and  morality  put  a  restraint  upon  the  natural  impulses,  and  the 
Bible  abounds  with  warnings  against  yielding  to  the  temptations  which  are  favoured 
by  human  nature  and  by  sinful  society.  But  if  the  way  of  virtue  be  a  narrow  way,  it 
is  not  without  flowers  by  its  borders,  both  fair  and  fragrant.  The  path  of  self-govern- 
ment and  self-denial  is  a  path  which  has  pleasures  of  its  own.  And  one  aim  of  this 
Book  of  Canticles,  one  justification  for  its  place  in  canonical  Scripture,  appears  to  be  its 
effective  depicting  of  the  pure  joys  of  human  affection.  Where  marriage  is  the  result 
of  personal  preference  and  sincere  attachment,  and  where  it  is  entered  upon  under  the 
guidance  of  sober  reason  and  forethought,  it  may  well  be  expected  to  yield  delights. 
Toil,  anxieties,  mutual  forbearance  and  self-sacrifice,  the  endurance  in  common  of  life's 
cares  and  sorrows,  so  far  from  extinguishing  love,  may  refine  and  hallow  it.  And 
maturity  of  character  and  spiritual  discipline  and  strength  will  prove  more  than  a 
compensation  for  the  abandonment  of  the  "  primrose  path  "  of  pleasure,  in  which  the 
unspiritual  find  their  joys.  The  family  and  the  home  are  the  scene  and  the  embodiment 
of  wedded  love.  And  they  are  the  very  basis  of  human  society,  the  condition  and  meaus 
of  true  human  progress,  the  earnest  of  a  higher  state  of  Christian  civilization  in  the 
future. 

II.  Human  love  is  the  emblem  or  the  Divine  love  which  unites  the  soul 
AND  the  Saviour,  and  which  is  the  source  op  spiritual  and  heavenly  jots. 
The  highest  purpose  of  that  afiSnity  which  binds  heart  to  heart  is  to  elicit  emotions, 
and  to  lead  to  relations  with  which  our  highest  welfare  here  and  hereafter  is  associated. 
They  who  read  this  Book  of  Canticles  without  recognizing  the  divinely  appointed  con- 
nection in  question  miss  not  only  a  literary  charm,  but  a  spiritual  truth  and  law.  It 
is  to  be  feared  that  in  the  view  of  some,  human  love,  such  as  should  exist  between 
husband  and  wife,  appears  a  profane  and  common,  if  not  a  foolish,  thing.  But  God  is 
not  honoured  by  the  disparasement  of  his  own  provisions  and  plans.  If  he  has  made 
love  so  important  a  factor  in  human  life,  he  has  done  so,  we  may  be  sure,  with  a  purpose 
worthy  of  himself,  his  wisdom,  and  grace.  As  earthly  love  is  elevated  and  purified  by 
the  Divine  discipline  of  this  earthly  existence,  it  comes  to  symbolize,  with  ever-a;rowing 
force,  the  profound  affection  which  subsists  between  Christ  and  his  Church.  And  this 
significance  is  recognized  in  tlie  language  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  regarding  the  bride 
and  spouse  of  the  Saviour.  With  reference  to  the  emotions  which  are  cherished  by 
Christ  towards  his  chosen  and  beloved  people,  and  by  his  people  towards  him  to  whom 
they  are  indebted  for  all  they  have  and  for  all  they  hope  for,  how  appropriate  is  the 
exclamation,  "  How  fair  and  how  pleasant  art  thou,  0  love,  for  delights  1 "  Divine 
love  is  the  source  of  Divine  joy.  It  is  immortal  love  which  is  the  earnest  of  "  pleasures 
for  evermore." — T. 

Ver.  9. — The  sweetness  of  speech.  The  figurative  language  hel«  employed  by  the  royal 
lover  to  eulogize  the  voice  and  the  utterances  of  the  bride  is  to  our  colder  and  more 
measured  habits  of  thought  Oriental  extravagance.  Yet  it  is  in  harmony  with  'the 
highly  coloured  character  of  the  book  as  a  whole.  And  human  speech  does  often 
awaken  within  the  heart  emotions  not  easily  expressed  in  cool  and  justifiable  panegyric. 
The  human  voice  is  of  all  music  the  sweetest,  and  speech  is  sweeter  even  than  song, 
littering  as  it  does,  not  the  studied  and  artificial  sentiment  of  the  musical  composer,  but 
ihe  spontaneous  and  natural  emotions  of  the  speaker's  heart. 


OH.  vn.  1—13.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  177 

I.  Christian  speech  is  sweet  as  tbstiftino  to  the  chabaotek  op  the  speakeb. 
1.  Sincerity  is  the  first  condition  of  all  acceptable  speech  ;  it  is  above  all  things  desirable 
that  there  should  be  no  discordance  between  the  utterance  and  the  heart.  The  flatterer 
at  court  and  in  general  society  speaks  only  to  please;  and  in  tlie  case  of  those  who 
know  his  aim  and  his  motives,  he  fails  of  the  very  object  he  has  in  view.  The  Church 
is  bound  to  speak  "  words  of  truth  and  soberness,"  as  remembering  the  sacredness  of  the 
gift  of  utterance,  and  the  responsibility  attaching  to  its  exercise.  To  a  just  mind  sincere 
words  are  welcome,  even  thouiih  they  be  less  honeyed  than  the  words  of  the  time-server 
and  men-pleaser.  2.  Love  prompts  to  words  which  are  a  delight  to  hear.  Whilst  the 
tones  of  hatred  are  harsh,  and  the  utterances  of  coldness  are  repugnant,  kindness, 
sympathy,  affection,  give  a  sweetness  to  every  utterance.  Welcome  as  the  words  which 
come  from  the  heart  of  the  beloved,  telling  of  the  depth  of  unchangeable  affection,  are 
those  Christian  declarations  in  which  the  Church  gives  expression  to  her  love  fur  her 
'  Saviour  and  her  pity  for  the  world. 

IL  Cheistian  speech  is  sweet  when  it  testifies  to  the  love  and  faithful- 
ness OP  THE  Lord.  There  is  no  exercise  more  congenial  to  Christ's  people,  more 
acceptable  to  Christ  himself,  than  this.  The  powers  of  speech  cannot  be  more  hoHly 
and  honourably  employed  than  in  uttering  forth  the  high  praises  of  God,  in  lauding  and 
magnifying  the  redeeming  love  of  Christ.  The  hymn  which  is  lisped  by  the  little 
ehild,  the  anthem  which  rings  through  the  cathedral  aisles,  the  quiet  word  of  witness 
in  which  the  friend  commends  the  Saviour  to  him  who  is  dear  to  his  heart, — these  are 
but  some  of  the  forms  in  which  language  may  show  forth  the  greatness,  the  goodness, 
the  wisdom,  of  the  Eternal.  What  theme  so  worthy  of  the  tongue,  "  the  glory  of  the 
frame,"  as  this?  The  voice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  is  dear  to  the  heart  alike  of  God 
and  man. 

III.  Christian  speech  is  sweet  when  OT'tering  testimony  to  the  gospel  or 
God's  love.  Men's  hearts  have  to  be  reached  and  to  be  affected  by  the  tidings  of 
Divine  mercy  and  compassion.  It  is  most  condescending  and  gracious  on  God's  part 
that  he  deigns  to  employ  human  agency  in  the  service  of  his  own  Divine  beneficence. 
[f  men  avail  themselves  of  all  the  resources  of  human  rhetoric  in  order  to  obtain  earthly 
ends — power,  wealth,  and  fame — how  much  more  ready  should  they  be  to  use  all  the 
faculties  they  possess,  all  the  arts  and  means  they  can  acquire,  to  bring  before  their 
fellow-men  the  tidings  of  heavenly  and  immortal  love !  Well  may  every  preacher  and 
gvery  teacher  of  Divine  truth  put  up  the  prayer — 

"Jesus,  confirm  my  lieart's  desire, 

To  work,  to  thmk,  to  speak  for  thee: 
Still  let  me  guard  the  holy  fire. 
And  still  stir  up  thy  gift  in  me  I " 

T. 

Ver.  10. — The  desire  of  the  beloved.  The  assurance  of  mutual  possession  and  affection 
occurs  in  an  earlier  part  of  tlie  poem ;  but  its  repetition  here  is  not  without  significance. 
Love  has  not  lesseneil  as  time  has  passed ;  it  has  rather  deepened,  as  experience  has 


me."    Transferring  the  language  to  the  relations  and  sentiments  distinctive  of  the 
UiUtual  attachment  of  Christ  and  his  people,  we  observe  here  a  declaration — 

I.  Op  the  good  will  and  compassionate  aifbction  op  Christ  foe  his  Chitbch. 
1.  The  Lord  takes  a  deep  satisfaction  in  his  people,  and  regards  them  with  a  holy 
complacency.  2.  He  desires  that  they  should  participate  in  his  character  and  reflect 
his  image.  Spiritual  fellowship  with  him  tends  to  bring  about  this  result,  than  which 
Lothing^can  be  more  to  the  mind  of  the  Head  of  the  Church.  3.  He  desires  that  they 
may  be  qualified  witnesses  to  himself,  and  agents  in  promoting  his  cause  and  glory 
upon  earth.  And  this,  for  his  own  sake  indetd,  yet  also  for  the  Church's  sake,  and  for 
the  sake  of  the  world  for  whose  salvation  he  lived  and  died  on  earth. 

II.  Of  the  response  op  the  Church,  hbe  subeendeb  of  herself  completely 
TO  HEE  Spouse  and  Lord.  This  attitude  of  heart  has  been  beautifully  expressed  in 
these  words:  "I  attach  myself  to  God,  1  give  myself  to  himj  and  he  turn*  to  me 

SONa   OF  SOLOMON.  ■ 


178  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vu.  1—13. 

immediately ;  his  eyes  look  upon  me  with  favour ;  his  Spirit  is  attentive  to  my  good  i 
his  great  heart  bows  itself  and  stoops  to  my  nothingness ;  he  unites  his  heart  to  mine ; 
he  heaps  upon  it  new  graces,  to  attach  it  more  strongly  to  him.  Devote  thyself,  0  my 
soul,  wholly  to  thy  God."  1.  Spiritual  receptiveness  is  the  just  response  to  Divine 
di  sire.  If  it  is  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the  Saviour  to  take  possession  of  the  whole 
nature  and  life  of  his  people,  it  is  equally  their  will  and  pleasure  to  abandon  all  other 
aims  in  life,  and  to  devote  themselves  to  this,  with  the  view  of  becoming  his  only,  his 
altogether,  and  his  for  ever.  2.  Spiritual  consecration  completes  this  just  response. 
Human  nature  is  not  merely  passive  ;  it  is  energetic.  Human  life  is  an  opportunity, 
not  only  for  getting,  but  for  giving.  The  Church  must  indeed  receive  from  the  Divine 
Head  every  qualification  which  can  fit  for  the  discharge  of  duty,  for  the  rendering  of 
service.  But  it  is  hers  to  prove  her  gratitude  and  her  fidelity  to  the  trust  reposed  in 
her,  by  devoting  herself  to  those  high  ends  with  a  view  to  which  she  has  been  chosen, . 
loved,  and  redeemed. — T. 

Vers.  11,  12. — Divine  companionship.  Man  was  made,  not  for  solitude,  but  for 
society ;  not  for  selfishness,  but  for  love.  This  principle  of  human  nature  and  life  is 
taken  up  by  religion,  and  is  employed  for  man's  highest,  spiritual,  immortal  interests. 
The  soul  which  yielrls  itself  to  Christ  delights  in  his  fellowship,  and  finds  therein  ita 
true  satisfaction.  Like  the  bride  who  is  represented  in  this  poem  as  saying  to  her 
spouse,  "  Come,  my  beloved,  let  us  go  forth  into  the  field,"  etc.,  the  soul  craves  the 
society  of  the  Saviour,  and  longs  for  his  perpetual  companionship. 

I.  The  nattjbe  of  this  companionship.  1.  It  is  companionship  to  which  Christ 
invites  his  people.  None  could  address  him  thus  unless  first  assured  of  the  Lord's 
interest,  friendline.ss,  and  love.  2.  It  is  spiritual  companionship.  The  twelve  who 
were  with  him  in  his  earthly  ministry  were  admitted  to  close,  delightful,  and  profitable 
intimacy.  They  saw  his  form  and  heard  his  voice.  Yet,  in  our  case,  though  we 
cannot  perceive  him  as  they  did,  the  association  is  equally  real ;  for  he  is  with  his 
people  alway.  3.  It  is  companionship  in  which  he  is  the  superior,  and  we  are  the 
dependent.  It  is  true  he  sa^s,  "  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you; "  but  he  is  the  Vine,  and 
we  the  branches. 

II.  The  occasions  and  manifestations  or  this  companionship.  Observe  under 
this  consideration  how  Christ's  friendship  appears  superior  to  every  merely  human 
association.  We  may  enjoy  his  society :  1.  In  our  occupations,  whatever  be  their 
sjiecial  nature.  2.  In  our  enjoyments,  which  are  all  hallowed  by  his  gracious  presence 
and  approval.  3.  In  our  sufferings,  when  we  perhaps  most  need  him,  and  when  his 
sympathy  is  peculiarly  precious,  consolatory,  and  helpful.  4.  In  our  services ;  for  how 
can  we  do  his  work,  except  beneath  his  direction  and  the  encouragement  of  his 
smUe? 

III.  The  benefits  of  this  companionship.  When  Christ  is  with  us,  in  the  varied 
scenes  and  experiences  of  our  earthly  life:  1.  Our  gratitude  to  him  will  be  livelier. 
2.  Our  love  to  him  will  be  warmer.  3.  Our  conformity  to  his  will  and  character  will 
bo  more  complete.  4.  Our  inseparability  from  him  will  be  more  assured.  "  Who 
shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  " 

"  His  is  love  beyond  a  brother's, 
Faitliful,  free,  and  knows  no  end." 

T. 

Ver.  13. — Oarnered  fruits.  When  the  bride  invites  the  king  to  revisit  the  homo  of 
her  childhood  and  the  scenes  of  their  early  acquaintance  and  attachment,  among  other 
alluring  representations  she  assures  him  that  there  will  be  found,  laid  up  for  his  use  by 
her  thoughtful  affection,  all  manner  of  precious  fruits,  new  and  old.  A  suitable  emblem 
this  of  the  gathered  and  garnered  spiritual  fruits  which  in  this  earthly  life  Christ's 
people  are  expected  to  prepare  for  him  at  his  coming,  and  which  it  will  be  their  delight 
to  offer  to  him  as  the  expression  of  their  grateful  love.  Properly  understood,  the  main 
purpose  of  the  Christian  life  is  the  growing,  gathering,  and  garnering  of  precious  fruits 
for  the  approval  and  service  of  the  Lord. 

I.  What  these  feu  its  aue.    1.  'i  hey  are  the  fruits  of  spiritual  life  and  experience. 


OH.  vm.  1—14.] 


THE  SONG  OF  POLOMON. 


17$l 


2.  They  are  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit " — the  virtues  especially  Christian,  fruits  of  risiht- 
eousness,  those  qualities  of  character  which  are  the  peculiar  growth  of  grace.  3.  They 
are  fruits  of  service;  not  things  enjoyed  so  much  as  things  achievei. 

II.  Why  are  they  laid  up  j-ob  Christ  ?  Because :  1.  They  are  the  fruit  of 
his  own  garden,  the  growth  which  testifies  to  the  care  and  culture  of  the  Divine 
Husbandman.  2.  They  are  of  a  nature  to  yield  a  peculiar  satisfaction  and  pleasure  to 
him.  3.  They  are  such  as  he  will  use  for  his  own  purposes,  and  for  the  display  of  hia 
own  glory  and  praise. — T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  Vin. 


Vers.  1 — 3.— Oh  that  thou  wert  as  my 
brother,  that  sucked  the  breasts  of  my 
mother  I  When  I  should  find  thee  without, 
I  would  kiss  thee ;  and  none  would  despise 
me.  I  would  lead  thee,  and  bring  thee  into 
my  mother's  house,  who  would  instruct  me ; 
I  would  cause  thee  to  drink  of  spiced  wine, 
of  the  juice  of  my  pomegranate,  His  left 
hand  should  be  under  my  head,  and  his  right 
hand  should  embraoe  me.  The  meaning 
seems  to  be  this — Let  our  relation  to  one 
another  be  the  highest  and  the  purest  and 
the  most  permanent  possible.  The  sisterly 
relation  is  not  merely  one  of  affection,  but 
one  of  blood.  The  bond  between  husband 
and  wife  may  be  broken  by  the  caprice  and 
weakness  of  human  feeling,  but  nothing 
can  destroy  the  bond  of  blood.  "  A  friend 
loveth  at  all  times,  and  a  brother  is  born  for 
adversity "  (Prov.  xvii.  17)  ;  "  There  is  a 
friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother " 
(Prov.  zviii.  24).  The  brotherly  bond  re- 
presents the  strength  of  the  blood-relation- 
ship. When  to  that  is  added  personal  affec- 
tion, then  the  tie  is  perfect.  Shulamith 
means  that  she  would  have  their  love  freed 
from  all  the  uncertainties  of  human  fickle- 
ness. As  symbolically  interpreted,  there- 
fore, we  take  this  whole  passage  to  signify 
that  the  Church,  when  it  is  desiring  the 
closest  fellowship  with  the  Saviour,  would 
be  lifted  above  all  the  temptations  of  earthly 
life,  which  so  often  lower  the  standard  of 
Christian  feeling  and  service.  The  words 
are  specially  impressive  in  the  lips  of  the 
bride  of  Solomon.  It  is  a  testimony  to  the 
inspiration  of  the  whole  book  that  the  volup- 
tuous monarch,  whose  life  fell  so  far  below 
the  ideal  of  a  godly  king,  should  yet,  in- 
directly though  still  powerfully,  condemn 
and  rebuke  his  own  departure  from  God, 
setting  clearly  before  us  the  surpassing 
excellence  of  pure  love  and  the  sanctity  of 
married  life.  In  the  king's  address  to  his 
bride  he  called  her  "  sister "  and  '■  sister- 
bride;"  she  now  virtually  returns  his  own 
sentiment  and  calls  him  "brother."  She 
shows  that  she  has  risen  in  her  love  far 
above  the  mere  fleshly  desires — "the  lust 
of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the 


pride  of  life."  She  would  blend  her  whole 
existence  with  that  of  her  Lord.  I  would 
hiss  thee;  yea,  and  none  would  denpise  me. 
Nothing  can  more  exquisitely  and  delicately 
express  the  fulness  of  affection.  It  is  not 
merely  a  return  for  that  which  is  given ;  it 
is  free  and  spontaneous.  So  should  our 
spiritual  feelings  be.  They  should  be  the 
natural  outpouiiug  of  the  soul  towards  tlie 
Saviour;  not  a  worked-up,  artificial,  spas- 
modic impulse,  not  a  cold,  dead  formalism, 
not  au  unsympathetic  service  of  conscience ; 
but  "doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  lieart." 
"Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law;"  "Faith 
worketh  by  love."  The  second  verse  is 
differently  rendered  by  some.  Jerome, 
Venetian,  and  Luther  take  it  as  referring 
to  the  bride's  dependence  on  her  husband's 
superior  wisdom — "  Thou  wouldest  instruct 
me;"  which,  of  course,  is  a  very  suitable 
sentiment  as  addressed  to  the  wise  King 
Solomon.  The  Targum  expounds  it  thus: 
"I  would  conduct  thee,  O  King  Messiah, 
and  bring  thee  into  the  house  of  my  sanc- 
tuary; and  thou  wouldest  teach  me  to  fear 
God  and  to  walk  in  his  ways."  Hitzig  and 
our  Revisers  take  the  verb  as  in  the  third 
person  feminine,  and  applied  to  the  mother. 
"  She  would  teach  me  as  a  mother  teaches 
a  young  bride,  from  her  own  early  experi- 
ence." The  old  view  that  the  bride  is  the 
personification  of  wisdom  seems  quite  re- 
futed by  this  speech  of  Shulamith's.  She 
desires  and  waits  for  instruction.  Solomon 
is  wisdom.  She  is  the  soul  of  man,  or  the 
Church  of  God,  delighting  to  sit  at  ijis  feet 
and  learn  of  him.  Whichever  rendering 
we  choose,  whether  the  mother  or  Solomon 
be  regarded  as  teacher,  the  meaning  is  the 
same.  It  is,  as  Delitzsch  has  observed,  a 
deep  revelation  of  Shulamith's  heart.  "  She 
knew  how  much  she  yet  came  short  of  being 
to  the  king  all  that  a  wife  should  be.  But 
in  Jerusalem  the  bustle  of  court  life  and  the 
burden  of  his  regal  duties  did  not  permit 
him  to  devote  himself  to  her ;  in  her  mother's 
house,  if  he  were  once  there,  he  would  in- 
struct her,  and  she  would  requite  him  with 
her  spiced  wine  and  with  the  juice  of  the 
pomegranates."  The  "  spiced  wine,"  vinum 
conditura,  aromatic  wine,  probably  grape 
wine  "mixed  with  fragrant  and  pungent 


180 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  vni.  1 — 14.' 


essences,"  as  in  the  East.  The  juice,  or 
pressed  juice,  of  the  pomegranate  is  a  de- 
licious drink.  There  is  no  allusion  to  any 
love-symbol.  The  grains  of  the  pomegra- 
nates were  said  by  the  Arabians  to  be  from 
Paradise  (cf.  the  ^ofrTji,  or  "  vinum  de  pu- 
nicis  quod  roidem  vooant "  in  Dioscorides 
and  Pliny).  Perhaps  this  reference  to  ex- 
change of  gifts  may  be  taken  as  symbolizing 
the  happy  state  of  the  Church  when  she 
pours  out  her  treasures  in  response  to  the 
spiritual  blessings  which  she  is  freely  re- 
ceiving. The  meaning  is  something  beau- 
tiful and  precious.  And  that  is  the  highest 
state  of  religious  life  when  the  service  we 
reniler  and  the  gifts  we  place  on  the  altar 
are  felt  to  be  the  grateful  saori  floes  of  our 
hearts  under  a  sense  of  Divine  love.  When 
the  Church  of  Christ  depends  for  its  support 
on  such  fellowship  between  itself  and  the 
Saviour  there  wUl  be  no  limits  to  its  attain- 
ments, no  achievements  beyond  its  powers. 
"  All  that  see  "  such  a  state  of  the  Church 
"  shall  acknowledge  "  the  glory  of  it,  "  that 
they  are  the  seed  which  the  Lord  hath 
blessed"  (see  the  whole  of  the  sixty-first 
chapter  of  Isaiah,  which  breathes  the  very 
spirit  of  Solomon's  Song).  The  rejoicing 
bride  then  gives  herself  up  to  the  thought 
of  her  husband's  affection.  In  that  beau- 
tiful simplicity  and  purity  of  her  child- 
hood's life  she  would  realize  the  bliss  of 
her  new  relation.  Delitzsch  describes  her 
state  of  mind  thus :  "  Resigning  herself 
dreamily  to  the  idea  that  Solomon  is  her 
brother,  whom  she  may  freely  and  openly 
kiss,  and  her  teacher  besides,  with  whom 
she  may  sit  in  confidential  intercourse 
under  her  mother's  eye,  she  feels  herself 
as  if  closely  embraced  by  him,  and  calls 
from  a  distance  to  the  daughters  of  Jeru- 
salem not  to  disturb  this  her  happy  enjoy- 
ment." Perhaps  the  sense  of  weakness  and 
dependence  is  meant  to  be  expressed.  The 
bride  is  conscious  that  her  lord  is  every- 
thing to  her.  In  that  identification  which 
the  highest  love  brings  vividly  into  the  soul, 
there  is  the  joy  of  exultation.  "  All  things 
are  ours ;  and  we  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is 
God's." 

Ver.  4. — I  adjure  you,  0  daughters  of 
Jerusalem,  that  ye  stir  not  up,  nor  awaken 
love,  until  it  please.  This,  of  course,  as 
the  refrain  of  the  song,  must  be  taken  as  a 
general  sentiment.  Love  is  its  own  lord. 
Let  it  have  Iree  course.  Let  it  perfect 
itself  in  its  own  best  way.  The  form  of  the 
adjuration  is  abbreviated  in  this  case.  The 
omission  of  the  words,  "By  the  roes  and  by 
the  binds  of  the  field,"  is  not  without  its 
significance.  Is  it  not  intended  to  intimate 
that  the  natural  love,  to  which  reference 
was  made  by  the  introduction  of  the  beau- 
tiful wild  creatures  of  the  field,  is  now  no 


more  in  the  thoughts  of  the  bride,  because 
it  has  been  sublimated  into  the  higher 
sisterly  love  of  which  she  has  been  speak- 
ing? She  is  not  merely  the  lovely  woman 
on  whom  the  king  dotes  because  of  her 
personal  beauty ;  she  is  his  companion  and 
dearest  friend.  He  opens  his  heart  to  her. 
He  teaches  her.  He  lifts  her  up  to  his 
own  level.  She  participates  in  bis  royal 
dignity  and  majesty.  The  fpms  of  her  firot 
estate  of  love  is  now  exalted  into  the  dydwn, 
which  is  the  grace  never  to  be  without  its 
sphere,  abiding  for  ever.  We  must  not 
press  too  closely  the  poetic  form  of  the  song. 
Something  must  be  allowed  for  the  frame- 
work in  which  the  main  ideas  are  set  before 
us.  It  may  not  be  possible  to  answer  the 
question — Who  are  intended  to  be  symbol- 
ized by  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem?  There 
is  no  necessity  to  seek  further  into  the  mean- 
ing of  the  whole  poem  than  its  widest  and 
most  general  application.  But  the  daughters 
of  Jerusalem  are  in  a  lower  position,  a  less 
favoured  relation  to  the  bridegroom,  than 
the  bride  herself.  We  may,  therefore,  with- 
out hesitation,  accept  the  view  that  by  the 
adjuration  is  intended  the  appeal  of  the 
higher  spiritual  life  against  all  that  is 
below  it;  the  ideal  love  calling  upon  all 
that  is  around  it  and  all  that  is  related  to 
it  to  rise  with  it  to  perfection.  The  indi- 
vidual soul  is  thus  represented  claiming  the 
full  realization  of  its  spiritual  possibilities. 
The  Church  of  God  thus  remonstrates 
against  all  that  hinders  her  advancement, 
restrains  her  life,  and  interrupts  her  blessed- 
ness. Jerusalem  has  many  daughters. 
They  are  not  all  in  perfect  sympathy  with 
the  bride.  When  they  listen  to  the  adjura- 
tions of  the  most  spiritual,  the  most  devoted, 
the  most  heavenly  and  Christ-like  of  those 
who  are  named  by  the  Name  of  the  Lord, 
they  will  themselves  be  lifted  up  into  the 
bridal  joy  of  "  the  marriage  supper  of  the 
Lamb." 

Vers.  5 — 14. — Part  V.  Oonolusion.  Thb 
Bbidsqboom  and  the  Bbide  in  the  Scene 
OF  THEiB  First  Love. 

Ver.  5a. — Who  is  this  that  oometh  up  from 
the  wilderness,  leaning  upon  her  beloved  t 
We  must  compare  this  question  with  the 
corresponding  one  in  ch.  iii.  6.  In  that  case 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  are  supposed 
to  be  looking  forth,  and  behold  the  bridal 
procession  approaching  the  capital.  In  this 
case  the  scene  is  transferred  to  the  country, 
to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  bride's  home, 
where  she  has  desired  to  be  with  her  lord. 
The  country  people,  or  the  group  of  her  rela- 
tives, are  supposed  to  be  gazing  at  the  pair 
of  lovers,  not  coming  in  royal  state,  but  in 
the  sweet  simplioity  of  true  affection,  the 
bride  leaning  with  loving  confidence  on  the 


OH.  vm.  1 — ^14,] 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


181 


arm  of  her  husband,  as  they  were  seen  before 
in  the  time  of  their  "first  love."  The  restora- 
tion of  "  first  love  "  is  often  the  prayer  of  the 
disciple,  feeling  how  far  he  falls  short  of  the 
affection  which  such  a  Master  should  call 
forth.  The  first  feelings  of  the  heart  when 
it  it  won  to  Christ  are  very  delightful. 

"  Where  is  the  blessedness  I  knew 
When  first  I  saw  the  Lord  ? 
Where  is  the  soul-refreshing  view 
Of  Jesus  and  his  Word?" 

It  is  a  blessedness  when  we  come  up  from  the 
wilderness.  It  is  a  joy  to  ourselves  and  a 
matter  of  praise  to  our  fellow-believers  when 
we  are  manifestly  filled  with  a  sense  of  the 
Saviour's  presence  and  fellowship.  The  word 
midhiaur,  translated  "  wilderness,"  does  not, 
however,  necessarily  mean  a  desolate  and 
barren  desert,  but  rather  the  open  country, 
as  the  Valley  of  Jezreel.  The  LXX.  had 
either  a  different  reading  in  the  Hebrew  or 
has  mistaken  it.  They  have  rendered  the 
last  clause  "clothed  in  white,"  which  per- 
haps Jerome  has  followed  with  his  delieiit 
affluens.  The  word  is,  however,  from  the 
root  rauvciq,  which  in  the  hiph.  is  "  to  sup- 
port one's  self."  The  meaning,  therefore,  is, 
"  leaning  for  support."  It  might,  however, 
be  intended  to  represent  the  loving  confi- 
dencs  of  married  life,  and  therefore  would 
be  equivalent  in  meaning  to  the  Greek  and 
Latin  renderings,  that  is, "  Who  is  this  ?  Evi- 
dently a  young  newly  married  wife  with  her 
husbanil."  Perhaps  this  is  the  best  explana- 
tion of  the  words  as  preparing  for  what 
follows,  as  the  bridegroom  begins  at  once  to 
speak  of  the  first  love.  Some  think  that  the 
road  in  which  the  loving  pair  are  seen  to  be 
walking  brings  their  footsteps  near  to  the 
apple  tree  over  against  Shulamith's  house 
where  they  had  first  met.  But  there  is  no 
necessity  lor  that  supposition.  It  is  sufficient 
if  we  imagine  the  apple  tree  to  be  in  sight. 

Ver.  55. — Under  the  apple  tree  I  awakened 
thee ;  there  thy  mother  was  in  travail  with 
thee ;  there  was  she  in  travail  that  brought 
thee  forth.  I  awakened  thee ;  i.e.  1  stirred 
thee  up  to  return  the  aifection  which  I 
showed  thee  (cf  ch.  ii.  7).  The  Masoretio 
reading  prints  the  verb  ■'j'nTi'rj;,  as  with  the 
masculine  suffix,  but  this  renders  the  mean- 
ing exceedingly  perplexed.  The  bride  would 
not  speak  of  awakening  Solomon,  but  it  was 
he  who  had  awakened  her.  The  change  is 
very  slight,  the  ■^  becoming  ^,  and  is  sup- 
ported by  the  Old  Syriac  Version.  It  must 
be  remembered  that  the  bridegroom  imme- 
diately addresses  the  bride,  speaking  of  her 
mother.  The  apple  tree  would  certainly  he 
most  naturally  supposed  to  be  situated  some- 
where near  the  house  where  the  bride  was 
bom,  perhaps  overshadowing  it  or  branching 


over  the  windows,  or  trained  upon  the  trellis 
smrounding  the  house.  The  bridegroom 
points  to  it.  "  See,  there  it  is,  the  familiar 
apple  tree  beside  the  house  where  thy  dear 
self  wast  born.  There,  yonder,  is  where  thy 
mother  dwelt,  and  where  thou  heardest  my 
first  words  of  affection  as  we  sat  side  by  side 
just  outside  the  house  under  the  shade  of  the 
apple  tree."  The  language  is  exquisitely 
simple  and  chaste,  and  yet  so  full  of  the 
tender  affection  of  the  true  lover.  The  spot 
where  the  first  breathings  of  love  came  forth 
will  ever  be  dear  in  the  remembrance  of  those 
whose  affection  remains  faithful  and  fond. 
The  typical  view  certainly  finds  itself  sup- 
ported in  these  words.  Nothing  is  more  de- 
lightful and  more  helpful  to  the  believer  than 
to  go  over  in  thought,  again  and  again,  and 
especially  when  faith  grows  feeble,  when  the 
heart  is  cold  and  fickle  under  the  infiuence 
of  worldly  temptations  and  difficulties  of  the 
Christian  course,  the  history  of  the  first  be- 
ginning of  the  spiritual  life.  We  recall  how 
dear  the  Lord  was  to  us  then,  how  wonderful 
his  love  seemed  to  us,  how  condescending 
and  how  merciful.  We  reproach  ourselves 
that  we  faint  and  fail ;  we  cry  out  for  the 
fulness  of  grace,  and  it  is  given  us. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Set  me  as  a  seal  upon  thine 
heart,  as  a  seal  upon  thine  arm :  for  love  is 
strong  as  death ;  jealousy  is  cruel  as  the  grave : 
the  flashes  thereof  are  flashes  of  flre,  a  very 
flame  of  the  Lord.  Manywaters  cannot  quench 
love,  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it;  if  a 
man  would  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house 
for  love,  he  would  be  utterly  oontemned.  Is 
this  to  be  regarded  as  the  reply  of  the  bride 
to  the  tender  allusion  of  her  husband  to  their 
first  love ;  or  is  it,  as  some  think,  only  the 
first  words  which  belong  to  the  bride,  while 
the  rest  of  the  two  verses  are  a  kind  of  chorus 
echoing  her  loving  appeal,  and  bringing  the 
general  action  of  the  poem  to  a  conclusion  ? 
It  is  difficult  to  decide  this,  and  the  meaning 
is  not  affected  either  way.  Perhaps,  how- 
ever, it  is  best  to  take  it  as  spoken  by  the 
bride,  who  continues  her  address  to  the  end 
of  the  eighth  verse.  She  is  full  of  joy  in  the 
return  of  perfect  confidence  ;  she  prays  that 
the  full  tide  of  affection  may  never  cease  to 
flow,  that  there  be  no  ebbing  of  that  happy 
feeling  in  whicli  she  now  delights;  and  then 
sings  the  praise  of  love  itself,  as  though  a 
prelude  of  praise  to  a  long  and  eternal  peace. 
The  seal  is  the  signet-ring,  chotTidin,  from  a 
root  "  to  impress."  It  was  sometimes  carried 
by  a  string  on  the  breast,  and  would,  there- 
fore, be  near  the  heart  (see  Gen.  xxxviii.  18). 
It  was  sometimes  worn  on  the  hand  (see 
Jer.  xxii.  24 ;  and  cf.  Gen.  xli.  42 ;  Esth.  iii. 
12).  It  was  not  worn  on  the  arm  like  a 
bracelet  (2  Sam.  i.  10).  Probably  it  was  not 
the  signet-ring  which  is  referred  to  in  the 
second  clause :  "  Set  me  as  a  seal  on  thine 


182 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  vni.  1 — ^14. 


heart,  and  as  a  bracelet  on  thine  arm."  The 
same  simile  is  not  infrequent  in  the  prophets. 
The  desire  of  Sliulamith  was  to  escape  all 
possibility  of  those  declensions  of  whicli  she 
had  spoken  before.  "  Let  me  never  be  out 
of  thy  thoughts  ;  let  me  never  go  back  from 
my  fulness  of  joy  in  thy  love."  The  true 
believer  understands  well  such  language. 
He  knows  that  the  maintenance  of  devout 
affection  is  not  a  matter  of  mere  desire  and 
will.  The  Lord  himself  must  help  us  with 
his  blessed  gifts,  the  influence  of  hie  gracious 
Spirit  to  overcome  the  feebleness  and  fickle- 
ness of  a  fallen  heart.  We  want  to  be  close 
to  the  heart  of  the  Saviour ;  we  want  to  be 
constantly  in  his  eye,  and  so  diligently  em- 
ployed in  his  service,  so  closely  associated 
with  the  work  of  his  mighty  arm,  that  we 
shall  be  ever  receiving  from  him  the  signs 
and  evidences  of  his  approval  and  affection. 
The  purity  and  perfection  of  true  love  are  the 
theme  of  every  sincere  believer.  The  price- 
less value  of  such  love  is  described  in  tlie 
Book  of  Proverbs  (vi.  30),  in  Numb.  xxii.  1 8, 
and  1  Cor.  xiii.  3.  It  is  an  unquenchable  flame 
— nothing  can  resist  it.  We  cannot  but  re- 
call the  rapturous  language  of  one  who  iiim- 
self  was  an  example  of  the  highest  devoted- 
ness  to  the  Saviour,  who  rejoiced  over  death 
and  the  grave  in  the  consciousness  of  victory 
through  him  from  whose  love  nothing  can 
separate  us  (Eom.  viii.  38 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  54). 
Certainly  the  history  of  the  sufferings  and 
trials  of  the  true  Church  form  a  most  striking 
commentary  upon  these  words.  Floods  of 
persecution  have  swept  over  it,  but  they  have 
not  quenched  love.  The  flame  has  burst 
forth  again  and  again  when  it  seemed  to  be 
extinguished,  and  it  has  become  a  very  "  flame 
of  the  Lord."  The  bush  has  been  burning, 
but  has  not  been  consumed.  By  jealousy 
is  intended  love  in  its  intensity  not  bearing 
a  rival.  The  "  flame  of  the  Lord  "  may  be 
compared  with  "  the  voice  of  the  Lord,"  which 
is  described  in  Hebrew  poetry  as  connected 
with  the  fury  of  the  storm.  The  flame, 
therefore,  would  be  lightning  and  the  voice 
thunder.  The  whole  of  this  passage,  which 
forms  a  kind  of  key-note  of  the  poem,  is  more 
like  a  distinct  strain  introduced  to  give 
climax  to  the  succession  of  songs  than  the. 
natural  expression  of  the  bride's  feelings. 
It  has  been  always  regarded  as  one  of  the 
sublimist  apostrophes  to  love  to  be  found 
anywhere.  The  enemies  of  God  and  of 
humanity  are  represented  as  fulling  before 
it,  death  and  the  grave.  Its  vehemence  and 
force  of  manifestation  are  brought  vividly 
before  us  by  the  comparison  of  the  flash  of 
lightning.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  exal- 
tation of  love  should  be  included  in  the  Old 
Testament, thus  proving  that  the  Mosaic  Law, 
with  its  formal  prescriptions,  by  no  means 
filQln  the  whole  purpose  of  God  in  his  reve- 


lation to  the  world.  As  the  New  Testament 
would  not  have  been  complete  without  the 
message  of  the  beloved  disciple,  so  this  Old 
Testa  iient  must  have  its  song  of  love.  Nor 
is  it  only  the  ideal  and  the  heavenly  love 
which  is  celebrated,  but  human  afi'eotion 
itself  is  placed  very  high,  because  it  is  asso- 
ciated with  that  which  is  Divine.  It  is  a 
moie  precious  thing  than  mere  wealth  or 
worldly  honour,  and  he  that  trifles  with  it 
deserves  the  utmost  scorn  and  contempt  of 
his  fellows.  It  is  well  to  remark  how  con- 
sistently the  poetic  framework  is  maintained. 
There  is  no  attempt  to  leave  the  lines  of 
human  relations  even  at  this  point,  where 
evidently  the  sentiment  rises  above  them. 
The  love  which  is  apo.strophized  is  not  re- 
moved from  earth  in  order  to  be  seen  apart 
from  all  earthly  imperfections  and  impurities. 
We  are  invited  rattier  to  look  through  the 
human  to  the  Divine  which  embraces  it  and 
glorifies  it.  That  is  the  method  of  the  Divine 
revelation  throughout.  "  The  Word  was  made 
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us."  We  do  not  need 
to  take  Solomon's  Song  as  an  allegory.  It 
is  a  song  of  human  love,  but  as  such  it  is  a 
symbol  of  that  which  is  Divine. 

Ver.  8. — We  have  a  little  sister,  and  she 
hath  no  breasts :  what  shall  we  do  for  out 
sister  in  the  day  when  she  shall  be  spoken 
for  1  The  term  "  little  "  refers,  of  course,  to 
her  tender  age,  as  in  2  Kings  v.  2,  the 
"  little  maid;"  and  in  Gen.  xliv.  20,  "  a  child 
of  his  old  age,  a  little  one,"  referring  to 
Benjamin.  "  She  hath  no  breasts "  is 
equivalent  to  saying  she  is  not  yet  mature, 
of  marriageable  age  (see  Ezek.  xvi.  7).  The 
question  which  the  bride  asks  of  King 
Solomon  refers  to  the  promise  which  he  is 
supposed  to  have  made,  and  which  he  is 
virtually  pledging  himself  to  fulfil  by  this 
visit  to  the  country  home  of  his  queen. 
"  What  shall  be  done  for  the  advantage  of 
my  little  sister?  Let  us  consult  together" 
(cf.  Gen.  xxvii.  37 ;  1  Sam.  x.  2 ;  Isa.  v.  4). 
"  The  day  when  she  shall  be  spoken  for "  is 
the  day  when  she  shall  attract  the  attention 
of  a  suitor.  It  must  necessarily  be  difficult 
to  find  satisfactory  interpretations  for  every 
detail  in  such  a  poem  of  human  love  as  this. 
It  might  be  sufiScient  to  see  in  this  reference 
to  the  younger  sister  the  general  idea  of 
love's  expansion.  Those  who  are  themselves 
the  objects  of  it,  being  full  of  exquisite 
happiness,  desire  to  call  others  into  the  same 
joy.  This  is  true  both  of  the  individual  and 
of  theChurcli.  Whatshallbe  done  for  otherti 
That  ia  the  question  which  is  awakened  in 
every  heart  where  true  love  is  at  work. 
There  is  no  need  to  explain  the  language 
further.  But  the  allegorists  have  been  very 
ingenious  in  attempting  to  find  meanings 
for  every  allusion  of  the  poem.  Who  is  the 
little  sister  ?   What  is  her  virginity  ?    What 


OH.  vm.  1—14.] 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


1S3 


is  the  day  In  which  ehe  shall  be  spoken  for  ? 
Some  have  said  that  the  little  sister  repre- 
sents the  firstfruits  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles 
received  into  the  Christian  Church  imme- 
diately after  the  time  of  our  Lord's  ascension, 
as  Beza  and  others.  Some,  again,  take  it  to 
mean  the  whole  body  of  Jews  and  Gentiles 
yet  to  be  converted.  Others  would  see  in  it 
those  that  are  weak  in  faith,  the  beginners 
in  Christian  life.  And,  again,  it  has  been 
regarded  as  pointing  to  the  "daughter  of 
Zion  "  at  the  time  of  the  first  beginninga  of 
her  conversion  to  the  heavenly  Solomon, 
which  is  the  view  of  Heugstenberg  and  others. 
There  is  no  end  to  such  fancies.  The  broad 
general  meaning  is  all  that  we  can  rest 
upon.  The  bride  naturally  thinks  of  her 
sister.  It  is  a  lovely  incident  in  a  perfectly 
idyllic  poem.  The  visit  to  the  home  is  quite 
in  harmony  with  the  fresh,  pure,  and  simple 
life  which  reveals  itself  in  all  the  utterances 
of  the  bride,  and  is  honoured  by  the  devoted 
attention  of  the  splendid  monarch.  It  is  a 
real  touch  of  nature  when  the  young  bride, 
in  her  family  life  once  more,  asks  what  shall 
become  of  her  sister.  It  is  an  exquisite 
type  of  that  sisterly  solicitude  with  which 
all  true  Christians  will  care  for  the  souls 
around  them.  Delitzsch  thinks  that  the 
question  which  is  asked  by  the  bride  is 
answered  by  her  brothers,  as  they  were 
the  actual  guardians  of  the  little  sister  (see 
Gen.  xii.  50,  55 ;  xxxiv.  6 — 8).  But  there 
is  no  necessity  to  introduce  any  new  inter- 
locutors at  this  point.  The  words  are  cer- 
tainly addressed  to  Solomon.  It  is  quite 
natural  that  he  should  reply  to  them  in  a 
royal  style,  with  the  plaralis  majestatis 
which  suits  the  corresponding  position  of 
the  bride  as  a  suppliant  for  her  sister. 

Ver.  9. — If  she  be  a  wall,  we  will  build 
upon  her  a  turret  of  silver :  and  if  she  be  a 
door,  we  will  enclose  her  with  beards  of  cedar. 
The  interpretation  which  Delitzsch  suggests 
of  these  words  is  tha.t  the  "  wall "  represents 
firmness  of  character,  and  the  "  door  "  weak- 
ness and  insecurity.  If  she  firmly  and  suc- 
cessfully withstands  all  immoral  approaches, 
then  we  will  bestow  high  honour  upon  her, 
as  a  tribute  to  her  maidenly  virtue  and 
constancy.  The  turret  or  castle  of  silver 
would  mean  rewarding  her  with  increase. 
Silver  is  the  emblem  of  holiness,  gold  of 
nobility.  The  meaning  may,  however, 
merely  be, "  AVe  will  endow  her  with  plenty." 
The  boards  of  cedar  are  supposed  to  be 
special  protections,  as  cedar  is  noted  for  its 
hardness  and  durability.  Biit  is  not  the 
meaning  much  simpler  and  more  natural? 
It  would  be  rather  a  far-fetched  use  of 
the  figure  of  a  door  that  it  should  suggest 
seduction,  and  would  be  rather  unsuitable  in 
the  lips  of  the  bridegroom  when  speaking  of 
the  little  sister  of  his  own  bride.      May  not 


the  meaning  be  no  more  than  this  t — She 
may  become  one  of  the  most  substantial 
parts  of  the  building,  like  a  wall ;  in  that 
case  all  that  she  can  be  she  shall  be ;  we 
will  put  tlie  highest  honour  upon  her.  She 
may  be  a  door,  that  is,  though  not  so  great 
and  substantial  as  the  wall,  still  in  the  very 
front  of  the  building  and  before  the  eyes  of 
all.  In  that  case  we  will  beautify  her  with 
costly  and  fragrant  adornment.  The  gate 
shall  be  enclosed  in  cedar- wood.  "  The  wall 
and  the  door,"  says  Zockler,  "are  mostly 
understood  of  the  steadfast  and  faithful 
keeping  of  the  Word  of  God  and  of  its 
zealous  proclamation  to  the  Gentiles  (1  Cor. 
xvi.  9,  etc.) ;  but  some  also  explaiu  them  of 
the  valiant  in  faith  and  the  weak  in  faith, 
or  of  the  learned  and  simple,  or  of  faithful 
Christians  and  such  as  are  recreant  and  easily 
accessible  to  the  arts  of  seduction.  And 
then,  according  to  these  various  interpieta- 
tions,  the  'silver  bulwarks'  are  now  the 
miracles  of  the  first  witnesses  of  Jesus,  now 
the  distinguished  teachers  of  the  Church, 
now  pious  Christian  rulers,  now  the  testi- 
monies of  Holy  Scripture  by  which  faith  is 
strengthened.  And,  again,  by  the  '  cedar 
boards '  are  sometimes  understood  the  ten 
commandments  or  the  Law,  sometimes 
Christian  teachers,  sometimes  the  examples 
of  the  saints,  sometimes  the  salutarv  dis- 
cipline of  the  cross  and  sufferings  for  Christ's 
sake,"  etc.  All  such  attempts  at  detailed  in- 
terpretation fail  to  give  satisfaction.  Their 
eifect  is  to  repel  many  from  the  study  of 
the  book  altogether,  just  as  the  follies  and 
extravagances  of  the  interpreters  of  pro- 
phecy have  greatly  hindered  the  study  of  the 
prophetic  Scriptures.  The  wall  and  the 
door  need  not  be  taken  as  opposed  to  one 
another,  as  they  are  not  in  our  conceptions 
of  a  city.  They  fulfil  different  functions. 
The  wall  is  for  defence;  the  door  is  for 
admission.  In  the  one  case  we  think  of 
strength,  and  in  the  other  case  of  heauty. 
The  application  of  the  symbols  is  very  easy 
if  the  general  meaning  alone  is  regarded. 
There  is  a  variety  of  capacity  and  function 
in  the  Church  of  Christ.  There  are  differ- 
ences in  the  forms  of  Christianity  among 
different  nations.  But  the  Lord  will  receive 
and  bless  all.  Some  are  not  fitted  to  be 
built  upon  as  strong  walls,  but  they  may 
still  be  beautiful  examples  of  Chiistiau 
graces  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  through 
whom  many  gladly  enter  into  the  truth  and 
into  the  fellowsliip  of  Christ. 

Vers.  10— 12.— I  am  a  wall,  and  my  breasts 
like  the  towers  thereof:  then  was  I  in  his 
eyes  as  one  that  found  peace.  Solomon  had 
a  vineyard  at  Baal-hamon;  he  let  out  the 
vineyard  unto  keepers;  every  one  for  the 
fruit  thereof  was  to  bring  a  thoucand  pieces 
of  silver.     My  vineyard,  which  is  nine,  ii 


184 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  vm.  1 — 14, 


before  me :  thou,  0  Solomon,  shalt  have  a 
thousand,  and  those  that  keep  the  frnit 
thereof  two  hundred.  The  meaning  seems 
to  be  affectionate  approval  of  the  method  just 
described.  Solomon  says,  "If  the  young 
sister  be  worthy  of  love,  she  shall  receive 
more  and  more  of  defence  and  honour ;  she 
shall  be  all  that  I  can  make  her."  The 
bride  takes  up  this  thought.  "  So  it  is  with 
me,  and,  in  the  spirit  of  thaukful  acknow- 
ledgments and  praise,  I  will  respond  to  all 
the  favour  of  the  king.  King  Solomon  has 
loved  me,  and  now  I  am  rising  higher  and 
becoming  more  and  more  glorious  because 
of  hla  love."  The  typical  reference  can 
scarcely  be  migsed.  The  Church,  the  bride 
of  the  Lamb,  shines  only  in  the  light  of 
him  whose  favour  is  life,  and  whose  loving- 
kindness  is  better  than  life.  The  compari- 
son to  a  city  with  the  walls  and  towers, 
while  it  would  seem  a  little  far-fetched  in 
a  love-song,  is  quite  in  place  if  the  typical 
intention  was  in  the  mind  of  the  writer. 
He  was  thinking  of  the  city  of  God,  "  beau- 
tiful for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole 
earth."  "One  that  findeth  peace"  is  the 
same  as  "  one  that  findeth  favour,"  that  is, 
one  who  is  the  object  of  his  affection. 
There  are  several  references  which  confirm 
this,  such  as  Esth.  ii.  17;  Deut.  xxiv.  1; 
Jer.  xxxi.  2 ;  Ps.  xli.  10.  The  word  "  peace  " 
(j»hdl6m)  is  in  all  probability  purposely 
chcjsen  in  this  case  as  a  kind  of  play  on  the 
name  Solomon,  which  appears  immediately 
afterwards.  "  The  king  of  peace  delights  in 
me  because  I  am  peace  in  his  eyes."  The 
Church  is  after  the  image  of  the  King.  His 
liki  ness  in  her  makes  her  beautiful.  Men 
take  knowledge  of  Christians  that  they  have 
been  with  JesuS  (see  1  Ohron.  xxii.  9).  It 
is  scarcely  necessary  to  point  out  that  this 
language  of  the  bride  is  entirely  against  the 
shepherd-theory.  She  could  not  have  talked 
of  finding  peace  in  his  eyes  if  she  was  torn 
from  her  true  lover.  The  bride  then  goes 
on  to  express  her  devotedness  to  the  king 
and  her  desire  to  bring  forth  abundance 
for  him.  She  uses  as  an  example,  which 
perhaps  was  typical  in  her  time  and  country, 
some  remarkably  fruitful  vineyard  of  the 
king's.  She  will,  in  like  manner,  realize  nil 
his  highest  wishes.  All  that  she  has  shall 
be  his.  The  name  Baal-hamon  Qiog^ra) 
in  the  LXX.  3ee\aii<ii'  (cf.  Judith  viii.  3), 
desit,'nate8  probably  a  place  near  to  Suiiem, 
somewhere  to  the  north,  on  the  further-  side 
o(  the  Plain  of  Jezreel.  The  produce  of 
the  vineyard  must  have  been  very  large,  as 
every  keeper  was  to  bring  in  for  himself  a 
tiiousand  shekels  of  silver.  It  is  not  stated 
how  many  keepers  there  were,  but  the  word 
whioli  is  employed  is  not  "servants,"  but 
"  watchers,  or  overseers."  A  vineyard  was 
divided  into  portions,  with  a  certain  definite 


prescribed  number  of  vines  in  each  portion. 
In  Isa.  vii.  23  we  read,  "  And  it  shall  come 
to  pass  in  that  day  tiiat  every  place  where 
there  were  a  thousand  vines  at  a  thousand 
silverlings  shall  even  be  for  briers  and 
thorns."  Now,  a  thousand  silverlings  was 
one  shekel,  so  that  if  this  passage  can  be 
taken  as  throwing  light  on  what  the  bride 
says,  it  would  imply  that,  instead  of  one 
shekel  for  every  thousand  vines,  every  keeper 
brought  a  thousand  shekels.  That  would 
seem  impossible,  so  that  the  parallel  can 
scarcely  be  strict.  Perhaps  the  largeness 
of  the  vineyard  is  referred  to,  and  each  of 
the  keepers  would  have  many  thousands 
of  vines  under  his  inspection.  The  general 
meaning,  however,  is  not  obscure.  The  vine- 
yard was  a  celebrated  one,  and  wag  taken  as 
a  typical  instance  of  fertility  and  abundance. 
When  the  bride  speaks  of  her  vineyard 
which  is  before  her,  there  may  be  an  allusion 
to  her  previous  manner  of  life  as  a  rustic 
maiden  employed  in  the  vineyards,  and  to 
her  own  position  as  a  keeper  or  as  one  of 
the  family.  But  this  is  not  intended  to  be 
prominently  expressed.  The  whole  spirit 
of  the  poem  justifies  the  view  that  she 
is  speaking  of  her  person.  She  invited 
Solomon  to  rejoice  in  the  beauty  and  fra- 
grance of  her  garden,  to  pluck  the  fruits, 
to  revel  in  the  delights.  Everything  that 
is  pleasant  and  lovely  is  before  him  (see 
ch.  iv.  12 ;  v.  1).  Before  me ;  that  is,  in  my 
power  is  all  this  delight,  and  my  desire  is 
to  my  husband ;  aU  that  I  have  is  his.  Like 
the  far-famed  keepers  of  Baal-hamon,  I  will 
give  the  king  a  thousand  shekels,  that  is, 
the  utmost  that  the  vineyard  can  produce, 
and  "those  that  keep  the  fruit  thereof" 
shall  have  two  hundred — perhaps  meaning 
a  hundred  each,  that  is  a  tenth,  which  was 
the  ancient  tithe  due  to  tlie  priests.  It 
may  be,  however,  that  a  double  tithe  is 
intended.  The  king  shall  be  satisfied,  and 
all  those  who  labour  for  the  king  shall  be 
more  than  ever  rewarded.  If  we  take  such 
words  as  typical,  they  point  to  a  state  of 
things  in  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
when  the  spiritual  and  the  temporal  shall 
be  perfectly  adjusted.  The  keepers  of  the 
vineyard  have  often  made  sad  havoc  of  the 
vineyard  itself  because  of  their  greedy  dis- 
content. The  fruits  which  have  been  yielded 
by  the  Church  have  fallen  very  far  short. 
The  husbandmen  have  ill  treated  the  Lord's 
servants.  But  all  the  judgments  which 
have  been  poured  out  both  upon  ancient 
Jews  and  upon  the  corrupt  Christendom  of 
later  times  have  been  directed  to  one  end, 
to  make  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  more 
fruitful,  to  remove  the  things  which  are 
offensive  in  his  sight,  to  satisfy  him  whose 
soul  travailed  for  bis  people ;  for  herein  is 
the  Father  glorified  in  the  Son,  when  those 


OH.  vm.  1—14.] 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


186 


who  bear  the  name  of  the  Beloved  "bear 
much  fruit."  Then  the  keepers  of  the  vine- 
yard will  themselves  rejoice,  not  that  they 
■  reap  a  larger  harvest  of  this  world's  good,  not 
"  for  filthy  lucre's  sake,"  but  because  their 
hearts  are  one  with  his  whose  vineyard  they 
keep,  and  to  see  the  fruit  abound  is  to  fill 
them  with  joy.  Surely  we  shall  recognize 
in  such  language  an  anticipation  of  the 
many  allusions  which  are  found  both  in  the 
prophets  and  psalms  and  in  the  discourses 
of  our  Lord  himself.  "  The  vineyard  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts  is  the  house  of  Israel,  and 
the  men  of  Jodah  his  pleasant  plant" 
(Isa.  V,  7) 

Ver.  13. — Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gar- 
dens, the  companions  hearken  for  thy  voioe ; 
cause  me  to  hear  it.  There  cannot  be  much 
doubt  that  these  are  the  words  of  the  bride- 
groom. They  are  addressed  to  the  bride. 
She  is  the  dweller  in  the  gardens ;  that  is, 
one  who  is  at  home  in  the  gardens,  whose 
beauty  blends  with  the  rural  loveliness 
around  her.  The  king  wishes  his  bride  to 
understand  that  she  is  only  acceptable  in  his 
sight,  and  that  all  that  she  asks  shall  be 
granted.  It  is  delightful  to  him  to  hear  her 
voice,  as  it  is  delightful  to  those  who  have 
been  accustomed  to  that  voice  from  her  child- 
hood. "  Dear  country  girl,  sing  to  me,  and 
let  me  revel  in  the  sweetness  of  thy  music. 
'Thy  companions  hearken  for  it' — thy  former 
associates,  the  playmates  of  thy  youth.  And 
while  they  gather  round  us,  and  you  and  I 
rejoice  in  one  another,  let  the  sound  of  thy 
voice  mingle  with  the  peaceful  beauty  of 
this  earthly  paradise."  There  is  an  exquisite 
tenderness  in  this  conclusion  of  the  poem. 
The  curtain  falls,  as  it  were,  upon  a  scene  of 
mutual  confidence  and  affection,  the  simpli- 
city of  the  bride's  early  home  being  lifted 
up  into  the  royal  splendour  of  the  king's 
presence,  the  companions  beholding  and 
praising,  while,  in  the  midst  of  all  that  sunuy 
bliss  and  peaceful  content,  the  voice  of  the 
bride  is  heard  singing  one  of  the  old,  familiar 
strains  of  love  with  which  she  poured  out  her 
heart  in  the  days  when  her  beloved  came  to 
find  her  in  her  home.  It  is  impossible  to 
conceive  a  more  perfect  conclusion.  It  leads 
up  our  thoughts  to  the  land  of  light  and  song, 
where  "the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of 
the  throne  shall  be  the  Shepherd  "  of  those 
who  shall  "  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst 
any  more  ;  neither  shall  the  sun  strike  upon 
them,  nor  any  heat;"  "and  he  shall  guide 
them  unto  fountains  of  waters  of  lile  :  and 
God  shall  wipe  away  every  tear  from  their 
eyes  "  (Rev.  vii.  16,  17>  It  is  sad  to  think 
that  Solomon  himself  fell  from  such  an  ideal 
of  human  a  ffeot  ion,  and  was  unfaithful  to  such 
a  bride.  But  there  is  no  need  to  trouble  the 
clear,  transparent  beauty  of  this  typical  poem 
by  any  reference  to  the  incidents  of  the 


writer's  own  history.  He  placed  it  on  the 
altar  of  God,  no  doubt,  at  a  time  when  it 
represented  sincere  feelings  in  his  heart,  and 
because  he  was  inspired  to  see  that  it  would 
he  profitiible  to  the  people  of  God  as  a  mirror 
in  wliich  they  could  behold  the  reflection  of 
the  highest  truth.  But  though  he  himself 
fell  away  from  his  high  place  as  a  prophet 
of  God,  the  words  which  he  left  behind  him 
were  still  a  precious  gift  to  the  Church.  It 
is  otherwise  vfith  him  who  is  typified  by  the 
earthly  monarch.  He  who  is  the  heavenly 
Bridegroom  has  himself  to  lift  up  the  weak- 
ness and  fickleness  of  his  bride  by  fellowship 
with  her,  until  she  is  above  the  reach  of 
temptation,  and  partaker  of  his  own  glory. 
And  he  does  so,  as  this  exquisite  poem  re- 
minds us,  by  the  power  of  his  love.  It  is 
the  personal  influence  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  which  must  glorify  the  Churoh  and 
restore  it  to  its  original  simplicity  and  spirit- 
uality. The  scene  into  which  we  are  led  in 
this  story  of  bridal  affection  typifies  a  state 
of  the  Church  when  the  artificiality  of  court 
life  shall  be  abandoned,  the  magnificence  of 
mere  external  pomp  and  ritual  shall  be  left 
behind,  and  the  bride  shall  simply  delight 
herself  in  the  Bridegroom  among  the  pure 
and  peaceful  surroundings  of  a  country  home. 
The  Churoh  will  realize  the  greatness  of  her 
power  when  she  is  delivered  from  that  which 
hides  her  Saviour,  when  she  is  simply  human 
and  yet  entirely  spiritual ;  then  the  Lord  ol 
her  life,  the  second  Adam,  the  perfect  Man, 
who  is  from  heaven  and  in  heaven,  but  still 
on  earth,  changing  earth  to  heaven  by  his 
love,  will  fulfil  his  promise.  "  He  not  merely 
concludes  the  marriage  covenant  with  man- 
kind, but  likewise  preserves,  confirms,  refines, 
and  conducts  it  step  by  step  to  its  ideal  con- 
summation, which  is  at  the  same  time  the 
palingenesia  and  perfection  of  humanity." 

Ver.  14. — Make  haste,  my  beloved,  and  be 
thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart  upon  the 
mountains  of  spices.  This  is  a  snatch  of  the 
old  love-songs  which  the  bride  used  to  sing 
when  love  was  fresh  and  young.  She  sings 
it  now  at  the  request  of  her  bridegroom  him- 
self, and  in  the  delighted  ears  of  her  com- 
panions. She  goes  forth  from  among  them 
leaning  on  her  beloved,  to  rejoice  in  the 
beautiful  scenery  and  rural  pleasures  with 
him  whose  presence  heightens  every  joy,  the 
life  of  her  life,  the  soul  of  her  suul,  "  all  her 
salvation,  all  her  desire."  The  bridegroom 
and  the  bride  are  seen  disappearing  together 
over  the  flowery  hills ;  and  the  music  of  the 
Song  of  Songs  dies  away  in  the  sweet  fra- 
grance of  that  closing  scene  ;  the  vision  of 
love  has,  gazelle-like,  leapt  from  point  to 
point,  and  vanishes  away  at  last  among  the 
mountains  of  spices.  It  is  well  to  notice  that 
what  were  before  "mountains  of  Bother,"  that 
is,  of  "  separation,"  are  now  "  mountains  of 


THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 


[oh.  vin.  1 — 14. 


Besamin" — ^balsam  mountains.  There  is 
no  more  word  of  separation.  Henceforth 
the  only  note  is  one  of  peaceful  enjoyment. 
"  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his."  Oar 
home  and  haunt  is  the  same.  The  conclud- 
ing -words,  we  cannot  doubt,  arc  intended  to 
open  a  perfect  future  to  the  eye.     Yet  the 


poet,  with  consummate  art,  connects  that 
future  with  the  past  and  the  present  by  the 
voice  of  the  bride  heard  singing  the  lovej 
snng  with  which  she  first  expresseii  her  love, 
now  lifted  up  into  anticipation  of  the  ever- 
lasting hills  of  fragrant  and  joyful  life. 


HOMILBTICS, 

Vers.  1 — 4. —  Wisfies  of  the  hride.  1.  TTiat  she  had  known  the  hridegroom  cdways . 
The  bride  continues  the  address  of  oh.  vii.  She  is  still  speaking  to  the  king,  tellino; 
him  of  her  love.  He  had  again  and  again  called  her  his  sister — his  sister-bride.  She 
now  wishes  that  he  were  to  her  as  a  brother ;  that  they  could  have  been  children  of 
the  same  mother ;  that  they  could  have  known  one  another  from  infancy.  So  in  the 
close  union  of  love  between  husband  and  wife  there  comes  sometimes  such  a  longing, 
a  desire  that  each  could  have  known  the  other  from  the  beginning;  that  instead  of 
the  years  in  which  they  were  strangers,  and  never  heard  one  another's  voice,  or  touched 
one  another's  hand,  ihey  had  always  lived  together,  and  known  one  another  through 
and  through  in  all  the  varied  experiences  of  child-life,  of  girlhood  or  of  boyhood; 
sometimes  there  comes  a  sort  of  innocent  envy  of  the  brothers  or  sisters  who  then 
knew  one  or  other  of  the  wedded  pair  when  they  were  unknown  to  one  another.  The 
bride  wishes  that  she  had  always  thus  known  the  bridegroom ;  that  she  could  have 
loved  him  always  with  a  sisterly  affection ;  that  their  mutual  endearments  might  have 
been,  like  those  of  brother-*  and  sisters,  without  shame,  attracting  no  observation.  How 
often  the  converted  soul  longs  with  an  intense  longing  that  it  had  always  from  the 
beginning  known  and  loved  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  I  How  utterly  wasted  and  lost 
those  years  now  seem  which  were  spent  without  that  knowledge  of  Christ  which  is 
eternal  life  1  How  ardently  we  wish  that  they  could  be  blotted  out  of  our  remembrance, 
with  all  their  ignorance  and  all  their  sins,  as  we  humbly  hope  that  through  the 
atonement  of  the  jirecious  blood  they  are  blotted  out  from  the  handwriting  "that  was 
against  us,  that  was  contrary  to  us"  (Col.  ii.  14)!  Blessed  be  God  we  have  his  holy 
promise,  "  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy  transgressions,  and,  as  a  cloud,  thy 
sins :  return  unto  me ;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee  "  (Isa.  xliv.  22).  We  know  that  in 
his  gracious  mercy  he  so  putteth  away  the  sins  of  them  that  truly  repent  that  he 
remeiiibereth  them  no  more  (Jer.  xxxi.  34;  Heb.  viii.  12;  x.  17).  But  though  we 
believe  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  thank  God  heartily  for  that  blessed  revelation  of 
his  love,  yet  we  cannot  but  long — and  that  the  more  earnestly  the  nearer  we  draw  to 
.him — that  we  had  always  known  him  with  the  knowledge  of  faith  and  love,  that  we 
had  always  remembered  him,  that  we  had  kept  our  heart  pure  from  other  loves,  and 
loved  him  always.  There  is  a  difference  between  the  love  of  the  forgiven  penitent  and 
the  love  of  saints  like  Enoch  or  Samuel,  who,  as  far  as  human  imperfection  allows, 
have  always  in  the  main  bent  and  purpose  of  their  lives  striven  to  walk  with  God. 
The  love  of  the  pi  nitent  is  more  demonstrative,  more  pas.sionate — if  the  word  may  be 
used,  more  enthusiastic;  the  love  of  men  like  Samuel  is  calmer,  quieter,  fuller, 
dominating  the  entire  life  in  all  its  pursuits  and  amusements;  and  just  because  it  is 
not  intermittent,  but  uniform,  it  is  not  so  much  observed  of  men.  The  still  waters 
run  deepest;  the  interpenetration  of  the  heart  by  the  long-continued  influences  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  without  any  marked  and  sudden  change  visible  to  the  eyes  of  men, 
produces  a  very  high  type  of  Christian  character.  Enoch  seems  to  have  walked  with 
God  all  his  life.  "  He  was  not,  for  God  took  him ; "  "  He  had  this  testimony,  that  he 
pleased  God  "  (Heb.  xi.  5).  It  is  a  poor  offering  to  give  the  dregs  of  our  life  to  God, 
when  the  temptations  of  youth  have  lost  their  power  over  us;  "  when  the  evil  days 
come,  and  the  years  draw  nigh  when  thou  shalt  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them" 
(Eccles.  xii.  1).  A  life  dedicated  to  God  from  early  childhood  must  be  a  thing  well 
pleasing  in  his  sight,  as  Holy  Scripture  tells  us  it  was  in  the  case  of  Enoch,  Such  a 
£fe  is  very  rare,  and  we  may  well  be  fuU  of  thankfulness  to  Almighty  God  for  bis 


OH.  vra.  1—14.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  l87 

gracious  promises  to  the  penitent  sinner.  He  "  will  not  despise  the  broken  and  the 
contrite  heart,"  "  If  the  wicked  will  turn  from  all  his  sins  that  he  hath  committed, 
and  keep  all  my  statutes,  and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  surely  live, 
he  shall  not  die.  All  his  transgressions  that  he  hatt  committed,  they  shall  not  be 
mentioned  unto  him:  in  his  righteousness  that  he  hath  done  he  shall  live."  We 
tliank  God  for  these  gracious  words.  If  we  have  been  called  at  the  sixth  or  at 
the  eleventh  hour,  it  is  enough  to  fill  ua  with  adoring  gratitude;  we  wonder,  as 
we  look  back  upon  the  past,  that  God  bore  with  us  so  long  in  our  sin  and  unbelief; 
we  thank  him  with  all  our  heart  for  his  long-suffering  mercy.  But  when  we  remem- 
ber that  sin  and  that  unbelief,  we  cannot  but  long  that  we  had  given  to  God  those 
lost  and  wasted  years ;  that  we  had  remembered  our  Creator  in  the  days  of  our  youth, 
and  not  grieved  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  by  so  mauy  transgressions,  so  much  coldness 
and  hardness  of  heart.  2.  That  she  had  brought  him  into  her  mother's  house.  Those 
lost  years  involved  the  loss  of  many  opportunities  of  doing  i;ood  to  others.  The  bride, 
had  she  known  the  bridegroom  in  early  youth,  would  have  brought  him,  she  says,  into 
her  muther's  house.  There  (she  adds  in  what  seems  to  be  the  best  reading)  "thou 
shouldest  instruct  me."  How  much  good  we  might  have  done  in  our  families,  among 
our  friends,  if  we  had  given  our  earliest  years  to  God,  if  we  had  lived  then  as  in  his 
presence,  and  had  carried  the  consciousness  of  that  presence,  with  all  the  feelings  of 
awe  and  reverence  and  love  which  attend  it,  always  with  us  in  our  family  life,  in  our 
dealings  with  relations  and  friends ;  if  we  had  given  him  of  our  best,  and  willingly 
offered  up  for  his  service  all  that  we  mi)st  prized  and  valued,  how  much  calmer,  holier, 
happier,  our  life  would  have  been !  For  he  would  have  instructed  us.  He  bids  us 
learn  of  him.  He  is  the  great  Teacher,  the  Master.  "All  thy  children,"  he  says, 
"shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord  :  and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children"  (Isa.  liv.  13). 
3.  The  bride  repeats  the  aspirations  of  ch.  ii.  7.  If  we  had  listened  to  that  instruction 
from  the  time  when  we  were  first  made  his  disciples,  if  we  had  given  him  from  the 
beginning  that  for  which  he  thirsted — our  affections,  our  heart's  love — then  he  would 
now  be  wholly  ours ;  "  his  left  hand  should  be  under  my  head,  and  his  right  hand 
should  embrace  me."  That  blessed  union  with  the  Saviour,  growing  ever  nearer  and 
closer,  is  the  object  of  the  deepest  longings  of  the  Christian  soul.  We  think  sometimeg 
that  if  only  we  had  always  loved  him  and  walked  with  him,  our  walk  now  might  be 
very  close  with  God;  we  might  have  attained  to  that  calm  and  serene  trustfulness 
which  is  the  privilege  of  his  saints ;  we  might  have  found  rest  for  our  souls  in  the 
embrace  of  his  holy  love.  But  though  we  have  greatly  sinned,  and  have  lost  much 
through  past  neglect  and  unbelief,  yet  even  now  that  blessed  rest  is  not  beyond  our 
grasp.  It  was  to  Mary  Magdalene,  out  of  whom  the  Lord  had  cast  seven  devils,  that 
those  words  were  said  which  seemed  at  first  severe  and  forbidding,  but  really  involved 
the  promise  of  a  holier  union,  "  Touch  me  not ;  for  I  am  n»t  yet  ascended  unto  my 
Father,"  She  was  about  to  embrace  his  feet,  to  cling  to  the  human  form  of  him  who 
had  done  such  great  things  for  her.  The  Lord  implies  a  promise  of  a  better,  spiritual 
tommunion.  When  he  had  ascended  into  heaven,  when  he  had  sent  down  the  blessed 
Spirit  that  he  might  abide  for  ever  with  his  Church,  then  the  believing  soul  might 
touch  him  with  the  touch  of  faith ;  might  cling  to  him  with  a  holier,  a  more  blessed 
embrace;  then  he  would  be  with  us  all  the  days,  guiding,  strengthening,  comforting, 
his  left  hand  under  our  head  to  support  us  when  we  seem  to  be  ready  to  fall,  his  right 
hand  embracing  us  to  shield  us  from  all  evil,  to  assure  us  of  his  love.  4.  The  thrice- 
repeated  charge  to  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem.  The  bride's  longings  for  the  tokens  of 
the  bridegroom's  love  again  arouse  her  feelings  of  maidenly  reserve  :  as  in  ch.  ii.  7  and 
iii.  5,  she  bids  her  virj^in-friends  not  to  stir  up  or  awaken  love  until  it  please  to 
manifest  itself.  The  Christian's  aspirations  after  the  abiding  presence  of  God  arouse  in 
him  feelings  of  reverential  awe.  He  will  remember  the  Lord's  caution,  "  Touch  me 
not;"  he  will  avoid  expressions  of  love  which  savour  too  much  of  merely  human 
tenderness;  he  will  shrink  instinctively  from  any  approach  to  familiarity;  he  will 
remember  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Word  of  God,  the  King,  the  Judge  of  all ;  he  will 
be  reverent  in  all  his  approaches  to  the  Saviour;  he  will  endeavour  to  instil  reverence 
into  those  around  him  by  example,  by  tone,  by  manner,  by  word.  We  must  wait  on 
the  Lord  until  he  pleases  to  manifest  himself;  we  must  not  be  impatient;  we  must 
learn  to  say  with  the  psalmist,  "  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  ?  and  why  art 


188  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vm.  1—14. 

tliou  disquieted  within  me?    Hope  thou  in  God :  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him,  who  la  the 
health  of  my  countenance  and  my  God  "  (Ps.  xliL  11). 

Vers.  6 — 14. — Entire  union  of  wedded  love.  I.  Communion  of  the  BBisiaBOOX 
AND  THE  BEIDB.  1.  Approach  of  the  hride.  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  The  question  is  asked 
for  the  third  time  (see  ch.  iii.  6 ;  vi.  10).  In  ch.  iii.  6  the  chorus  of  youths  asks  the 
question  as  the  bride  is  borne  in  royal  state  to  meet  the  king  in  the  city  of  his 
kingdom ;  it  occurs  again  in  ch.  vi.  10,  when  the  maidens  of  the  chorus  are  struck 
with  admiration  of  her  queenlike,  majestic  beauty.  Now,  apparently,  we  have  a 
narrative  of  a  visit  to  the  scenes  of  the  bride's  early  life,  according  to  her  invitation 
in  ch.  vii.  11 ;  and  the  question,  "  Who  is  this  ? "  is  repeated  once  more.  Here  the 
circumstances  are  changed ;  there  is  no  magnificence  as  in  ch.  iii. ;  the  bride  is  alone 
with  the  king ;  she  is  seen  coming  up  from  the  wilderness,  leaning  on  her  beloved.  So 
the  Church,  the  bride  of  Christ,  cometh  up  from  the  wilderness,  leaning  on  the 
heavenly  Bridegroom.  So  the  Church  of  the  Old  Testament  went  up  from  Babylon 
when  the  wilderness  was  glad  for  them,  when  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  returned  and 
went  up  with  singing  to  Zion.  So  the  Church  of  the  New  Testament  came  up  from 
the  wilderness  of  persecution,  leaning  on  the  strength  of  Christ ;  so  the  same  Church 
shall  come  up  at  the  call  of  the  same  holy  Saviour  to  the  heavenly  Zion  when  that 
blessed  promise  is  fulfilled,  "  Upon  this  rock  will  I  build  my  Church,  and  the  gates 
of  Hades  shall  not  prevail  against  it."  Hades,  the  abode  of  the  dead,  shall  not  be  able 
to  retain  within  its  grasp  the  bride  of  Christ.  For  he  saith, "  I  will  ransom  them  from 
the  power  of  the  grave  [Sheol,  or  Hades] ;  I  will  redeem  them  from  death :  0  death, 
where  are  thy  plagues  ?  O  grave,  where  is  thy  destruction  ?  Repentance  shall  be  hid 
from  mine  eyes "  (Hos.  xiii.  14).  And  so  now  each  Christian  soul  cometh  up,  one 
after  another,  out  of  the  wilderness,  leaning  upon  her  Beloved.  When  he  calls  us  and 
bids  us  come  to  him,  we  feel  that  the  world  is  indeed  a  wilderness;  that  it  hath 
nothing  to  satisfy  our  cravings,  our  needs.  And  the  soul  cometh,  drawn  by  the 
Saviour's  love.  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  The 
soul  cometh  up ;  it  is  a  continual  ascent.  As  the  Lord  was  lifted  up  from  the  earth, 
so  the  soul  cometh  up,  away  from  the  world,  nearer  to  the  cross.  Christ  is  calling  us 
upwards.  The  holiness  to  which  he  bids  us  aspire  is  very  high;  it  seems  above  our 
reach ;  it  can  be  reached  only  by  persevering  effort ;  by  climbing,  little  by  little,  ever 
higher ;  by  making  all  the  little  matters  of  daily  life  opportunities  of  self-denial,  means 
of  disciplining  our  human  wills  into  submission  to  the  holy  will  of  God.  The  effort 
mnst  be  continuous,  conscious,  real ;  there  must  be  no  looking  back  to  the  wilderness ; 
no  hankering  after  the  flesh-pots  of  Egypt;  no  longing  for  the  other  masters,  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  which  we  renounced  when  we  gave  our  heart  to  Christ. 
The  soul  cometh  up  from  the  wilderness.  It  is  a  solemn  thing ;  a  sight  which  causes 
joy  in  heaven,  for  the  angels  know  the  meaning  of  that  ascent ;  they  know  the  perils 
of  the  wilderness,  the  utter  vanity  of  its  seeming  pleasures ;  they  know  the  toil,  the 
difficulty  of  that  ascent ;  they  know  the  great  glory  and  gladness  reserved  for  those 
that  have  achieved  it ;  they  know,  too,  how  very  precious  every  Christian  soul  is  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord,  who  bought  it  with  his  blood.  At  rest  in  heaven  themselves, 
they  watch  with  a  deep  interest  the  heavenward  progress  of  each  true  disciple  of  the 
Lord.  The  long  procession  upwards  of  the  ransomed  saints  must  be  a  spectacle  of 
varied  and  intense  interest  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God.  And  they  see  what 
was  once  seen  by  the  King  of  Babylon,  "  Behold,  I  see  four  men  loose,  walking  in 
the  midst  of  the  fire,  and  they  have  no  hurt;  and  the  form  of  the  fourth  is  like  the 
Son  of  God  "  (Dan.  iii.  25).  The  angels  see  that  each  soul  that  cometh  up  is  leaning 
on  her  Beloved.  The  journey  is  long  and  wearisome ;  the  ascent  is  steep  and  rugged ; 
but  the  soul  that  has  found  Christ,  and  clung  to  him  with  the  embrace  of  faith — the 
soul  that  can  say,  "My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his,"  is  not  left  alone  in  its 
weakness.  There  is  a  strong  arm,  unseen  by  the  outward  eye,  but  felt  and  realized 
by  faith;  there  is  a  hand  stretched  forth  to  help — the  hand  that  once  caught  the 
sinking  Peter,  and  lifted  him  up  out  of  the  depths.  Each  faithful  soul  leaneth  on  hei 
Beloved.  We  need  that  support  always,  at  every  point  of  the  .long,  wearisome  path ; 
at  every  step  of  the  toilsome,  upward  climbing.  Without  Christ  we  can  do  nothing ; 
we  sink  backwards ;  we  become  listless  and  slothful.    But  while  we  feel  his  presence, 


OH.  vni.  1— 14.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  189 


while  by  faith  we  lean  upon  him,  resting  our  weakness  on  his  strength,  then  our 
progress  is  assured.  We  need  that  presence  always,  in  all  the  little  trials  of  our  daily 
lives,  in  the  greater  sorrows  and  perplexities  that  emerge  from  time  to  time.  That 
presence  transfigures  our  life,  turning  troubles  into  blessings;  making  sorrows  so  many 
steps  upwards,  ever  nearer  to  God.  To  realize  that  presence,  the  Lord  Jesus  must  be 
"my  Beloved;"  I  must  give  him  my  whole  heart;  I  must  know  him  with  that  holy 
knowledge  with  which  the  true  sheep  know  the  good  Shepherd;  and  to  gain  the 
excellency  of  that  blessed  knowledge  I  must  be  content,  like  St.  Paul,  to  count  all 
things  else  an  dross,  as  very  dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him. 

"  I  need  thy  presence  every  passing  hour : 
What  but  thy  grace  can  foil  the  tempter's  power? 
Who  like  thyself  my  guide  and  stay  can  be? 
Through  cloud  and  sunshine.  Lord,  abide  with  me. 

"  I  fear  no  foe,  with  thee  at  hand  to  bless ; 
Ills  have  no  weight,  and  tears  no  bitterness ; 
Where  is  death's  sting?  where,  grave,  thy  victory? 
1  triumph  still,  if  thou  abide  with  me." 

2.  Tht  voice  of  the  bridegroom.  According  to  the  present  pointing  of  the  Hebrew,  the 
second  clause  of  ver.  5  is  an  utterance  of  the  bride.  Many  of  the  Fathers  and  other 
Christian  writers  assign  it  to  the  bridegroom.  This  last  arrangement  seems  by  far  the 
most  natural.  The  king  points  out  the  birthplace  of  the  bride;  he  recalls  to  her 
remembrance  an  incident  of  their  early  attachment — ^he  shows  her  the  tree  under 
which  they  first  met.  So  man  and  wife  now,  when  united  in  a  happy  marriage,  love 
to  visit  the  early  haunts  of  one  another,  and  especially  the  places  endeared  to  both  by 
the  memory  of  their  first  vows  and  promises.  So  to  the  Christian  those  places  must 
be  always  full  of  sacred  interest  where  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  first  won  the  love  of 
his  bride,  the  Church — Bethlehem,  Gethsemane,  Calvary.  So  to  each  Christian  soul 
those  spots  are  hallowed  ground  which  are  connected  with  events  in  our  own  religious 
life — our  baptism,  our  confirmation,  our  first  communion ;  or  associated  with  any  great 
and  abiding  impressions  or  influences  for  good  which  Almighty  God  has  been  pleased 
to  grant  to  us  from  time  to  time.  3.  The  response  of  the  bride.  The  bride  is  leaning 
on  the  bridegroom's  arm ;  perhaps  she  was  reclining  her  head  upon  his  breast.  She 
would  ever  remain  in  that  dear  embrace,  near  to  him  as  the  seal  which  was  attached 
to  the  arm  or  neck.  The  seal  of  the  king  had  great  weight  and  value;  it  gave  his 
authority  to  the  document  which  bore  it  (Dan.  vii.  17) ;  it  was  precious  and  sacred, 
and  woiid,  of  course,  be  jealously  guarded.  The  king  himself  would  wear  it ;  it  would 
be  fastened  on  his  arm,  or  it  would  be  suspended  from  his  neck  and  rest  upon  his 
heart.  There  the  bride  would  ever  be,  encircled  with  her  husband's  arms,  pressed  close 
to  his  heart ;  it  is  her  rightful  place,  for  she  is  bound  to  him  by  the  indissoluble  ties  of 
holy  wedlock.  So  the  Church,  the  bride  of  Chiist,  clings  to  her  Lord.  Without  him 
she  can  do  nothing ;  but,  borne  up  in  the  everlasting  arms,  she  hath  a  strength  not 
her  own.  She  would  be  near  to  him  as  a  seal.  She  hath  the  seal  of  God,  for  she  is 
"  sealed  with  that  holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance " 
(Eph.  i.  13, 14).  She  is  God's  foundation  upon  the  holy  hills  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  1),  built 
upon  the  Eock  of  ages ;  and  "  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,  having  this  seal, 
The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his.  And,  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of 
Christ  depart  from  iniquity  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  So  each  Christian  longs  to  be  borne  up 
in  the  arms  of  Christ— those  arms  that  were  opened  wide  upon  the  cross,  as  if  to  fold 
his  chosen  in  the  embrace  of  his  love ;  so  each  Christian  longs  to  rest,  as  once  St.  John 
rested,  upon  the  Saviour's  breast;  to  be  near  to  him,  cherished  as  a  seal  that  lies  in 
its  owner's  bosom;  so  each  Christian  hopes  to  bear  the  impress  of  that  sacred  seal 
stamped  more  and  more  deeply  into  his  inner  life,  that  being  now  sealed  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  promise,  he  may  one  day  stand  among  the  blessed,  sealed  with  the  seal  of  the 
living  God  upon  his  forehead  (Rev.  vii.  3).  4.  Her  praise  of  love.  Why  does  she 
desire  to  be  eo  close  to  the  bridegroom,  to  be  as  a  seal  upon  his  heart?  BecauFf,  she 
says,  "love  is  strong  as  death."  She  has  given  him  her  love,  and  that  love  entirely 
fills  and  dominates  her  soul;  she  has  taken  him  to  be  her  husband  till  death;  Bh« 


ifO  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vin.  1— 14. 

loves  him  with  a  love  like  that  of  Ruth :  "  The  Lord  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also,  if 
aught  but  death  pait  thee  and  me "  (Ruth  i.  17).  That  love,  strong  as  death,  the  love 
of  those  wedded  souls  vpho  in  true  affection  have  plighted  their  troth,  either  to  other, 
"  tUl  death  us  do  part,"  is  a  figure  of  the  holy  love  that  is  betvfixt  Christ  and  his 
Church.  Indeed,  the  love  of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom  was  stronger  than  death; 
stronger  than  a  death  of  lingering  torture,  a  death  of  ignominy  and  horror.  "We  love 
hiui,  because  he  first  loved  us."  His  Church,  drawn  by  the  constraining  power  of  his 
most  holy  love,  has  striven  to  return  it.  Many  of  hia  saints  have  loved  him  with 
a  love  strong  as  death ;  they  have  proved  by  the  martyr's  death  the  strength  of  their 
love.  How  should  we  have  acted  if  we  had  lived  in  those  days  of  fiery  trial?  It  is 
a  question  which  we  should  often  and  earnestly  press  upon  ourselves,  for  the  Lord  has 
taught  us  that  "  he  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it,  and  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this 
world  shall  keep  it  unto  life  eternal "  (John  xii.  25).  St.  Stephen,  and  the  long  line 
of  saints  who  followed  him,  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the 
death.  How  would  it  be  with  the  many  half-hearted,  careless  Christians  who  come  to 
church,  and  call  themselves  disciples  of  the  crucified  Saviour,  but  have  not  learned  to 
take  up  the  cross  and  deny  themselves  for  his  sake — how  would  it  be  with  them  if 
they  were  suddenly  summoned  to  choose  between  Christ  and  death?  Which  of  us 
would  be  faithful  unto  death  ?  Which  of  us  would  deny  his  Lord  ?  It  is  an  awful 
question — a  question  full  of  the  deepest  interest ;  for  it  is  only  such  a  love,  a  love 
strong  as  death,  which  can  give  us  strength  to  overcome  temptation,  and  to  fight  the 
good  fight  of  faith.  He  who  for  the  love  of  Christ  endures  hardness  now,  who  puts 
aside  his  own  wishes,  and  does  habitually  for  Christ's  sake  things  which  but  for  the 
love  of  Christ  he  would  not  have  done ;  he  who  habitually  for  Christ's  sake  leaves 
undone  things  which  but  for  the  love  of  Christ  he  would  have  gladly  done, — he  is 
learning  to  love  Christ  with  a  love  strong  as  death,  a  love  which  is  giving  him  strength 
to  kill  out  of  his  heart  worldly  thoughts  and  earthly  ambitions,  so  that,  dying  unto  the 
world,  he  may  live  unto  Christ.  We  must  all  pray  and  strive  for  that  love  strong  as 
death ;  it  should  be  the  object  of  our  highest  ambition,  our  most  fervent  longing.  We 
aeed  it  now  as  much  as  the  saints  and  martyrs  of  the  Lord  needed  it  in  the  old  times. 
For  if  they  had  to  lay  down  their  lives  for  Christ,  we  have  now  to  give  him  our  hearts, 
3ur  lives ;  and  to  do  that  always,  in  times  of  anxiety,  or  sickness,  or  lassitude,  requires 
a  great  love ;  a  love  strong  as  death ;  a  love  which  we  can  only  learn  of  the  Master 
who  loved  us  with  a  love  stronger  than  death,  who  himself  set  us  the  high  example  of 
self-sacrificing  love,  and  now  helps  and  teaches  us  by  the  gracious  influences  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  other  Comforter,  whom  he  sendeth  to  abide  for  ever  with  his  people. 
Love  is  strong  as  death,  and  jealousy  is  hard  as  the  grave  (Sheol,  or  Hades).  Death  is 
strong ;  he  is  the  last  enemy,  the  king  of  terrors.  Hades  is  hard  and  stern ;  it  is 
rapacious ;  it  hath  never  enough ;  it  holds  its  prisoners  firm.  But  love  is  strong  as 
death  and  Hades.  Christ,  who  is  Love,  hath  overcome  death,  and  opened  unto  us  the 
gate  of  everlasting  life;  the  gates  of  Hades  shall  not  prevail  against  his  Church. 
Neither  death  nor  life  can  separate  from  his  love  those  who  love  him  with  a  true  love, 
a  love  strong  as  death ;  they,  too,  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  who  loved 
them.  And  when  love  is  strong  as  death,  the  jealousy  (in  the  good  sense  of  the  word), 
which  is  one  of  its  developments,  is  hard,  tenacious,  as  Hades.  God  is  love,  the  infinite 
love,  and  he  is  a  jealous  God.  "  Thou  shalt  worship  no  other  God :  for  the  Lord,  whose 
name  is  Jealous,  is  a  jealous  God"  (Exod.  xxxiv.  14).  He  asks  for  our  whole  heart; 
he  is  jealous  of  a  divided  service ;  he  will  not  accept  a  service  to  be  shared  with  another 
master.  Such  a  service  is  stigmatized  in  Holy  Scripture  with  the  stern  name  of 
adultery.  "  Ye  adulteresses,"  says  St.  James,  in  language  of  awful  severity,  "  know  ye 
not  that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God?  ...  Do  ye  think  that  the 
Scripture  saith  in  vain.  The  Spirit  which  he  hath  made  to  dwell  within  us,  jealously 
yearnith  after  us ? "  or,  as  the  words  may  also  be  rendered,  " he  jealously  yearneth  for 
the  spirit  which  he  made  to  dwell  within  us"  (Jas.  iv.  4,  5).  God  once  breathed  into 
man's  nostrils  the  breath  of  life.  He  gave  to  man  as  his  distinguishing  possession  a 
spirit.  "  I  pray  God,"  says  St.  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians,  "  that  your  whole  spirit  and 
soul  and  body  may  be  preserved  blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ" 
(1  Thess.  V.  23).  That  spirit,  his  special  gift,  should  be  wholly  his.  It  is  that  part  of 
our  complex  nature  which  is  receptive  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  which,  when  illumined 


«H.  Tm.  1— 14.]  THE  SONQ  OP  SOLOMON.  191 

by  his  presence, can  attain  unto  such  knowledge  of  G-od  as  is  now  granted  to  U8  ("Now 
we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly  .  .  .  now  I  know  in  part,"  1  Cor.  xiii.  12),  ana  dwell 
in  communion  with  God.  God  jealously  desires  the  possession  of  that  spirit.  There- 
fore the  Christian's  love  for  God  must  be  a  jealous  love ;  he  must  be  very  jealous  of 
the  intrusion  of  other  loves,  other  ambitions,  into  the  heart,  which  should  be  given 
wholly  to  God ;  he  must  keep  his  heart  for  God  with  a  godly  jealousy  (see  2  Cor.  xi.  2) — 
jealousy  stern  as  that  with  which  Hades  retains  its  prisoners.  And  this  holy  jealousy  is 
ardent,  too — ardent  as  flames  of  fire ;  "  a  very  flame  of  the  Lord"  (vor.  6,  Revised  Version). 
For  ita  ardour  comes  from  him;  it  is  he  who  gives  that  ardent  zeal — that  zeal  for  the 
Lord  which  has  urged  his  holiest  servants  to  do  and  dare  such  great  things  for  his  love's 
sake.  The  great  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  for  our  souls  calls  for  something  more  than 
the  lukewarmness  of  Laodicea.  "  Be  zealous,"  it  says  to  us ;  "  be  zealous  and  repent " 
(Rev.  iii.  19).  The  name  of  God  occurs  only  in  this  one  place  in  the  song ;  we  read  it 
here  in  the  shortened  form  (^JaK)  of  the  adorable  name,  as  if  to  teach  us  the  sacred 
lesson  of  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  that  "  God  is  love :  and  he  that  dwelleth  in 
love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him"  (1  John  iv.  16).  Holy  love  comes  only  from 
him.  "  Love  is  of  God,  and  every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  kaoweth  God  " 
(1  John  iv.  7).  Such  love  cannot  be  quenched.  It  is  so  even  with  pure  human  love. 
"  Many  waters  cannot  quench  it,  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it."  The  many  waters 
of  trouble,  suffering,  old  age,  cannot  stifle  love;  it  lives  on  still.  It  cannot  be  bought. 
"If  a  man  would  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for  love,  he  would  utterly  be 
contemned."  Love  cannot  be  bought  or  forced ;  it  is  essentially  free  and  spontaneous ; 
it  springs  up  spontaneously  in  the  heart  ("  when  it  pleases,"  ver.  4 ;  also  ch.  ii.  7 ; 
iii.  5),  in  response  to  love,  at  the  presence  of  an  object  capable  of  calling  it  forth.  So 
it  is  with  the  holy  love  of  God.  God's  love  for  us  cannot  be  quenched.  The  many 
waters  of  our  unbelief,  ingratitude,  and  sin  have  not — blessed  be  his  holy  Name — 
quenched  his  gracious  love.  It  cannot  be  bought;  we  cannot  buy  it  with  earthly 
gilts,  with  gold  or  silver,  or  external  good  works;  it  is  given  freely,  graciously,  and  it 
abides  in  those  who  live  in  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God.  Our  love  for  God  is  a  faint 
reflection  of  his  blessed  love  for  us.  It  is  called  forth  by  that  holy  love.  "We  love 
him,  because  he  first  loved  us."  The  waters  of  trouble  and  sorrow  and  temptation 
cannot  drown  it  if  it  is  true  and  real.  These  verses  are  the  Old  Testament  psalm  of 
love  (see  Ps.  xlv.,  title),  corresponding  to  1  Cor.  xiii.  or  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  John, 
in  the  New  Testament.  They  have  a  singular  power  and  beauty ;  they  are  treasured 
in  the  memories  of  God's  people ;  they  have  brought  peace  and  comfort  to  many  a 
death-bed. 

II.  Intercessions  of  the  bride.  1.  For  her  sister.  The  bride  ias  a  sister  not  yet 
of  marriageable  years.  What  shall  be  done  for  her  ?  If  she  be  a  wall,  firm  and  stead- 
fast, she  shall  be  richly  dowered  ;  but  if  she  be  a  door,  too  easily  opened,  too  accessible, 
she  must  be  carefully  guarded.  The  bride  herself  is  a  wall,  strong  and  steadfast  in  her 
virtue ;  therefore  it  was  that  she  found  peace  in  the  bridegroom's  eyes.  There  may 
possibly  be  an  allusion  here  to  the  name  Solomon,  which  follows  in  the  next  verse : 
the  bride  found  peace  in  the  eyes  of  the  peaceful  one.  The  bride  is  the  Church,  the 
little  sister  perhaps  the  Gentiles.  Those  Gentile  Churches  that  will  be  steadfast  in 
the  faith,  like  Smyrna  or  Philadelphia,  shall  be  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the 
aposJes  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  Corner-stone  (Eph.  ii.  20). 
Those  that  are  like  Thyatira,  Sardis,  or  Laodicea,  still  open  to  those  other  masters, 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  must  be  treated  with  wholesome  severity ;  they 
must  be  carefully  guarded  and  fenced  in,  and  closed  against  the  enemies  of  the  Lord. 
The  bride  intercedes  for  her  little  sister.  She  herself  has  set  a  good  example.  Christian 
people  must  make  intercession  for  the  heathen,  that  they  may  be  converted;  for 
missionary  work,  that  it  may  be  prospered;  and  while  they  pray,  they  must  be  very 
careful  to  set  a  good  example  themselves,  that  the  great  work  may  not  be  hindered 
by  anv  fault  of  theirs,  but  may  go  on  and  prosper  till  the  earth  be  filled  with  the 
knowledge  of  God  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  2.  For  her  brothers.  She  had  spoken 
of  their  harshness  (ch.  i.  6).  "  They  made  me,"  she  said, "  keeper  of  the  vineyards ;  but 
mine  own  vineyard  [literally,  as  here,  'my  vineyard,  which  is  mine"]  have  1  not  kept. 
Now  she  intercedes  with  the  king  for  them.  She  would  have  them  to  be  keepers  of 
her  vineyard  and  to  receive  a  suitable  recompense.    She  compares  King  Solomon  s 


192  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vra.  1— 14. 

vineyard  with  her  own.  The  king,  she  says,  had  one  of  great  extent  and  valne ;  every 
one  of  the  keepers  was  to  bring  him  a  thousand  shekels.  Then  she  adds,  "  My  vine- 
yard, which  is  mine,  is  before  me."  Her  vineyai'd  was  small;  it  lay  before  her  eyes. 
It  now  passes  into  the  hand  of  Solomon ;  it  is  his.  He  must  have  a  thousand  shekels 
from  it.  She  wishes  the  keepers  (her  brothers,  apparently)  to  have  two  hundred.  The 
greater  than  Solomon,  the  heavenly  Bridegroom,  has  a  vineyard.  It  is  the  world 
(comp.  Matt,  xiii,  38,  "  The  field  is  the  world ").  Solomon's  vineyard  was  at  Baal- 
hamon,  which  means  "  the  Lord  of  the  multitude."  We  may  perhaps  see  in  the  word 
an  allusion  to  him  who  is  called  in  Holy  Scripture  "  the  prince  of  this  world  "  (John 
xiv.  30).  The  Lord  has  a  vineyard  in  the  world,  which  Satan  strives  to  rule.  And 
men  have  still,  as  in  Elijah's  time,  to  choose  whom  they  will  serve.  "  If  the  Lord  be 
God,  follow  him :  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him "  (1  Kings  xviii.  21).  But  though 
Satan  is  called  the  prince  of  this  world,  and  in  one  place  (2  Cor.  iv.  4)  "  the  god  of  this 
world,"  he  is  a  usurper ;  the  vineyard  is  the  Lord's.  And  the  Lord  has  done  all  that 
could  be  done  for  his  vineyard :  "  he  has  hedged  it  round  about,  and  digged  a  winepress 
in  it,  and  built  a  tower,  and  let  it  out  to  husbandmen  "  (Matt,  xxi  33).  The  husband- 
men were  to  bring  him  in  due  time  of  the  fruits  of  his  vineyard.  They  were  to  do  so, 
but,  alas!  they  did  not;  they  served  Baal,  many  of  them,  rather  than  the  Lord.  The 
Church's  vineyard  is  before  her;  it  lies  within  a  comparatively  narrow  space;  it  does 
not  cover  a  third  of  the  population  of  the  world.  It  belongs  now  to  the  heavenly 
Bridegroom,  for  the  Church  is  his.  He  loved  the  Church,  and  gave  himself  for  her ; 
and  that  unspeakable  gift,  that  stupendous  ransom,  has  made  her  and  all  that  she  has 
wholly  his.  The  fruits  which  that  vineyard  brings  forth  must  be  paid  duly  to  the 
Lord  of  the  vineyard.  Those  fruits  are  souls  converted,  sanctified,  saved.  The  keepers 
too,  if  they  are  found  faithful,  have  their  reward.  The  souls  saved  through  their 
means,  their  warnings,  their  example,  their  preaching,  their  labours,  are  their  best  and 
most  precious  reward  in  this  world  (1  Cor.  iii.  14),  and  in  the  world  to  come,  "  when 
the  chief  Shepherd  shall  appear,  they  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  which  fadeth  not 
away  "  (1  Pet.  v.  4).  Each  Christian  soul  is  the  Lord's  vineyard ;  it  must  be  cultivated 
for  him,  not  for  Baal.  It  may  he  a  vineyard  in  Baal-hamon,  set  among  a  multitude 
who  follow  the  prince  of  this  world  ;  but  it  is  the  Lord's,  bought  with  his  most  precious 
blood.  It  must  not  bring  forth  wild  grapes,  fit  only  for  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil ;  it  must  bring  forth  good  fruit — fruit  meet  to  be  rendered  to  the  Lord,  to  be 
treasured  in  his  granary ;  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit — ^love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering, 
gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance.  And  the  soul  Itself  which  keepeth 
the  fruit ;  the  soul  that  treasures  up  the  graces  of  the  good  Spirit  of  God,  that  listens 
with  reverent  attention  to  his  gracious  warnings,  and  follows  his  guidance ;  the  soul 
that  worketh  out  its  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  through  the  grace  of  God, 
who  worketh  within  both  to  will  and  to  do, — that  soul  shall  receive  of  the  fruit ;  for 
"blessed  are  they  that  do  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness:  for  they  shall  be 
filled."  Love,  trustfulness,  obedience  rendered  to  Christ,  bring  their  own  f;reat  reward 
in  the  irradiating  presence  of  the  Saviour.  "  If  any  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my 
word ;  and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  to  him,  and  make  our  abode 
with  him." 

III.  Final  words  op  love.  1.  The  voice  of  the  hridegroom.  He  addresses  the 
bride  as  "  Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens,"  meaning,  apparently,  the  vineyard  which 
she  had  just  mentioned.  She  has  done  her  best  for  it.  He  accepts  her  past  service. 
Now  the  king  and  his  companions  were  listening  for  her  voice ;  it  was  sweet  to  hear. 
"Cause  me  to  hear  it,", the  king  says,  meaning,  it  seems,  that  the  voice  of  the  bride 
was  very  sweet  to  him ;  he  loved  to  hear  it;  and  perhaps  also  implying  that  he  was 
ready  to  grant  any  request  that  she  might  make,  as  well  as  that  which  she  had  already 
made.  When  the  Church  does  her  duty,  dwelling  in  the  gardens  of  the  Lord,  tending 
his  vineyard,  then  there  is  joy  in  heaven,  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God ; 
they  hearken  to  the  prayers  and  praises  of  the  Church.  The  Lord  himself,  the 
1  eavenly  Bridegroom,  delights  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  bride;  her  prayers  and 
adorations  are  as  the  holy  incense,  acceptable  to  him  (Rev.  viii.  3,  4).  The  Lord 
would  have  all  Christian  men  to  pray,  and  that  constantly.  His  will  is  that  men 
should  pray  always,  and  not  faint.  He  graciously  listens  to  the  voice  of  his  people 
when  tbey  speak  to  themselves  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  when  they 


OH.  vm.  1—14.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  193 

make  melody  in  their  hearts  unto  the  Lord  (Eph.  v.  19).  And  he  grants  their  requests. 
"If  ye  ask  anything  in  my  Name,"  he  says,  "I  will  do  it;"  "Ask,  and  ye  shall 
receive,  that  your  joy  may  he  full ; "  "  Whatsoever  ye  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall 
receive."  We  must  claim  his  blessed  promise;  we  must  make  him  hear  our  voice 
while  we  are  "dwelling  ia  the  gardens,"  while  we  are  labouring  in  the  Lord's  vineyard. 
True  prayer  leads  to  faithful  work;  faithful  work  stimulates  prayer,  and  gives  it 
energy  and  devotion.  He  will  hear  our  prayers  for  ourselves,  our  intercessions  for 
others,  if  only  they  are  offered  up  in  faith,  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
2.  Tha  response  of  the  bride.  The  king  sought  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  bride.  She  in 
response  repeats  the  last  clause  of  her  song  in  ch.  ii.  17 ;  but  she  makes  one  important 
change— the  mountains  are  no  longer  "  mountains  of  Bether,"  which  means  "  separa- 
tion," but  "  mountains  of  Besamin  "  ("  spices  ").  Perhaps  there  is  a  reference  to  "  the 
mountain  of  myrrh  and  the  hill  of  frankincense"  in  the  royal  gardens  (ch.  iv.  6). 
The  bride  no  longer  thinks  of  the  possibility  of  separation.  Formerly  her  beloved  was 
separated  from  her  for  a  while  in  his  hunting  excursions ;  now  he  is  to  be  as  bright 
and  exultant  as  of  old,  but  with  her  in  their  common  haunts.  The  Church  prays, 
"  Thy  kingdom  come."  Her  prayer  is  that  God  of  his  gracious  goodness  would  be 
pleased  shortly  to  accomplish  the  number  of  his  elect,  and  to  hasten  his  kingdom. 
The  Christian  prays  and  longs  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  beseeching  him  in  ever- 
deepening  earnestness  to  come,  first  in  the  kingdom  of  grace,  into  his  people's  hearts, 
then  in  the  kingdom  of  glory,  when  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become  the 
kingdoms  <]f  God  and  of  his  Christ,  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever,  King  of  king*, 
and  Lord  of  lords. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vem.  1 — 4. — "07i  that  men  would  understand  I "  Such  seems  to  be  the  sentiment  of 
these  verses.  She  who  speaks  grieves  that  those  about  her  did  not  see  how  natural  and 
right  was  her  love  for  her  beloved.  She  could  almost  wish  he  were  her  brother  instead 
of  her  betrothed,  for  then  those  who  saw  her  love  for  him  would  not,  as  now  they  did, 
despise  her  for  it.  She  could  not  have  been  already  a  bride,  as  is  so  constantly 
assumed,  for  In  that  case  her  love  could  not  have  awakened  scorn.  But  they  despised 
her  for  clinging  to  one  who,  compared  with  Solomon,  was  in  their  esteem  despicable. 
We  may  take  the  section  as  in  part  parallel  to  the  sentiments  in  Rom.  ix.  1 — 3 ;  x.  1. 
She  who  speaks  could  not  wish  to  be  not  betrothed,  and  only  as  a  sister.  Some,  there- 
fore (Newton),  have  regarded  these  verses  as  an  address  to  the  unconverted  and  unsaved. 
Others  have  held  that  the  "  brother"  means  only  an  infant  brother.  But  we  take  it 
that  as  Paul  could  wish  himself  unsaved  for  Israel's  sake,  so  here,  she  who  speaks  could 
even  wish  that  she  did  not  hold  so  dear  a  relationship  to  the  beloved,  hut  only  that  of 
a  sister,  so  that  those  about  her,  etc.  (of.  supra).  The  words  in  Romans  and  here  are 
to  be  regarded  as  hyperbolical  expressions,  telling  of  strong  desire  for  others'  good,  but 
not  to  be  regarded  au  pied  de  la  lettre.     We  note  that — 

I.  Men  will  accept  that  which  they  rbgabd  as  natueal.  The  expression 
of  affection  between  brother  and  sister  all  understand,  allow,  and  approve.  And  some 
expressions  of  religious  feeling  they  will  also  admit,  provided  they  are  marked  by  what 
they  deem  sobriety  and  conformity  to  general  usage.    All  beyond  that  they  despise. 

II.  But  the  vehement  affection  of  the  soul  for  Ghkist  thet  despise. 
Several  marks  of  such  affection  are  suggested  here.  1,  Open  avowal  of  love  to  him. 
"  The  religion  of  every  sensible  man,"  said  one,  "  Is  that  which  every  sensible  man 
keeps  to  himself."  Therefore  such  confession  as  Is  suggested  by  ver.  I,  "  When  I 
should  find  ...  I  would  kiss  ihee,"  Is  of  course  extravagant  and  to  he  despised.  2. 
Proselytizing  in  the  family.  ("Ver.  2.)  "I  would  bring  thee  into  my  mother's 
house."  Sincere  religion  is  often  deprecated  as  bringing  strife  into  households,  and  it 
is  difficult  to  see  how  our  Lord's  word,  "  I  came  not  to  send  peace  on  earth,  but  a 
sword,"  can  be  escaped  under  such  circumstances.  And  even  if  there  be  not  absolute 
proselytizing,  the  mere  presence  of  an  earnest  disciple  in  a  house  troubles  those  therein 
who  have  no  or  but  little  love  for  Christ.  3.  The  habitual  heed  to  his  teaching. 
(Ver.  2.)     "That  thou  mightest  Instruct  me  "  (Revised  Version,  margin).    She  would, 

BONO  OF  SOLOUON.  <* 


194  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vm.  1—14. 

like  Mary,  sit  at  her  Lord's  feet  and  listen  to  him.  And  even  good  people  like  Martha 
think  Buoh  conduct  not  "  a  good  part,"  and  that  opportunity  for  it  ought  to  "  be  taken 
away  from  her."  4.  The  giving  to  him  of  her  best.  This  the  meaning  of  "  the  wine 
prepared  from  the  pomegranate  "  (ver.  2).  Such  a  sincerely  loving  soul  will  not  he 
content  with  mere  ordinary  and  routine  servicB,  but  the  best  of  all  she  has  to  give  she 
will  offer  to  him.  5.  But  all  this  wins  scorn  and  dislike.  She  who  speaks  here  was 
evidently  "despised"  for  her  devotion  to  her  beloved,  and  so  it  is  still  when  the  like  is 
seen  towards  Christ. 

III.  Our  aim  should,  therefoeb,  be  to  show  men  that  what  they  despisb 
IS  altogether  reasonable  and  eight.  That  men  might  see  this  is  what  is  so 
desired  here.  But  men  are  as  a  child  playing  on  a  railway  line  in  front  of  an 
advancing  train.  Some  kind  bystander  rushes  forward  and  clutches  the  child  and  puts 
it  out  of  danger  before  the  train  is  upon  it.  The  child  probably  only  stares  displeasedly 
at  him  who  has  roughly  interrupted  its  play ;  no  spark  of  gratitude  is  there.  So  men 
now  do  not  see  what  Christ  has  done  for  them  and  is  willing  to  do,  and  so  their  hearts 
are  cold  to  him.  The  truth,  therefore,  that  "  God  so  loved  the  world  "  must  be  held  up, 
insisted  on,  and  shown  by  lives  consecrated  to  him  under  the  sense  of  that  love. — S.  C. 

Ver.  5. — The  home-coming.  "Who  is  this  that  cometh  up,"  etc.?  The  end  of  this 
pastoral  song  is  approaohinjr.  The  speaker  in  the  former  verses  has  finished  her  recital 
with  words  telling  of  her  yearning  love  for  her  bel  .ved,  and  an  adjuration  to  those 
listening  to  her  that  they  should  not  attempt  to  alter  her  mind  towards  him  (vers. 
3,  4).  They  are  the  same  as  in  oh.  ii.  7 ;  iii.  5.  And  now  the  scene  changes.  She  has 
been  rescued  from  or  permitted  to  leave  her  gilded  but  none  the  less  hated  captivity 
in  Solomon's  palace,  and  with  her  beloved  is  returning  to  her  old  home.  A  band  ol 
friends  exclaim,  "  Who  is  this,"  etc.  ?  Applying  the  words  spiritually,  we  may  take 
them  of  the  soul's  home-coming.    And  they  tell — 

L  Whither  such  soul  comes.  It  is  ever  an  upward  coming.  For  all  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  soul's  true  home  are  far  above  the  soul's  natural  condition.  For  here, 
assuredly,  we  have  not  peace.  "  Man  is  born,"  not  to  peace,  but  "  to  trouble."  Whc 
knows  not  that?  For  sin  is  the  great  troubler.  Therefore,  for  the  soul  to  have  what  it 
so  desires,  it  must  come  up  and  away  from  the  wilderness.  Purity,  likewise.  How  here 
can  we  keep  ourselves  undefiled  ?  Who  amongst  men  unregenerate  and  unsaved  ever 
does  so?  But  as  the  soul  in  coming  home  enters  into  the  peace  of  God,  so  also  shall  it 
partake  of  his  purity.  Best.  The  trials,  crosses,  and  disappointments  of  life,  its 
manifold  adversities,  all  ceaselessly  proclaim  to  the  soul,  "  This  is  not  your  rest."  But 
"  there  remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God."  And  the  soul,  uprising  in  faith  and  love 
towards  God,  does  even  here  know  much  of  the  truth  of  Christ's  promise,  "  I  will  give 
you  rest."  And  then  there  is  the  course  and  consummation  of  all  these  in  the  presence 
of  God  eternally  in  heaven.  Here  we  have  pledges  and  foretastes,  but  there  only  are 
we  made  perfect. 

II.  Whence.  "  From  the  wilderness."  How  fit  that  word  for  the  soul's  condition 
here  ere  it  is  redeemed  by  Christ !  Are  not  the  distress  of  conscience,  the  sen.^e  of 
guilt,  the  tyranny  and  cruelty  of  sin,  the  trials  of  life,  and  at  length  the  grave, — are  not 
all  these  wilderness-like  things  ?  But  when  the  soul  comes  home,  it  comes  away  from 
all  these.  It  is  not  a  coming  to  them,  as  every  soul  has  to  make  acquaintance  with 
them  when  it  is  born  into  the  world;  nor  is  it  a  coming  through  them — that  is  what  we 
are  occupied  in  now  whilst  we  linger  here;  but  it  is  coming /rom  them,  leaving  them 
all  behind.    Oh,  blessed  home-coming  of  the  soul  t 

III,  How.  "  Leaning  upon  her  beloved."  This  tells  of  the  sovVs  relation  to  Christ. 
He  is  "  her  Beloved."  Of  its  union  luith  him.  As  it  were  linked  lovingly  together  as 
the  sonl  leans  upon  him.  Of  its  depemlence  upon  Christ.  It  is  a  long,  rough,  lonely, 
and  difBcult  way  that  the  soul  has  to  traverse.  It  needs,  therefore,  that  the  Lord 
should  be  her  "  arm  "  every  day  (Isa.  xxxiii.  2).  Of  its  communion  with  Christ.  Note 
the  affectionate  converse  of  the  next  verse.  The  maiden  is  represented  as  coming  to  a 
particular  tree  where  once  she  had  awaked  him  from  a  noonday  slumber,  and  where, 
too,  he  had  been  born.  "  In  Oriinte  non  raro  accidit  ut  muli^es  in  aperto  pariant" 
(cf.  Gen.  XXXV.  16).  And  they  talk  of  these  reminiscences.  It  was  natural,  and  tells  of 
the  familiar  intercourse,  the  happy  comtn union,  whiph  the  soul  enjoys  with  Christ.    Yes, 


OH.  Tin.  1—14.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON,  195 

it  is  thus  that  we  make  our  way  homeward,  heavenward.  In  union,  in  dependunce,  in 
communion,  with  Christ.  Thus  we  come  up  from  the  wildamess  leaning  on  our 
heloved  Lord. — S.  0. 

Ver  6. — Zove's  prayer.  "  Set  me  as  a  seal,"  etc.  1.  That  she  may  he  precious  in 
Chrisfs  esteem.  As  a  seal,  a  signet-ring,  of  great  value.  2,  That  she  may  dwell  in  his 
love,  "  On  thine  heart."  Also :  3.  That  she  may  enfoy  the  benefit  of  his  intercession. 
There  is  allusion,  apparently,  to  the  jewels  engraved  as  a  signet,  and  which  were  on 
the  breast  of  the  high  priest  of  Israel  (Exod.  xiviii.  15 — 30).  4.  That  she  may  be 
defended  hy  his  might.  "  On  thine  arm."  5.  That  she  may  express  and  satisfy  his 
will.  As  a  seal  does  this  for  any  writing  on  which  it  is  impressed.  Let  not  our 
"  Amen  "  be  lacking  to  such  a  prayer. — S.  0. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Love's  characteristics.  These  verses  may  be  regarded  as  the  theme  of 
the  entire  song.  All  its  chief  incidents  are  illustrative  of  the  vigour,  vehemence,  and 
victory  of  true  love.  The  literal  story  tells  of  the  triumph  of  such  love  as  seen  in  the 
maiden  and  her  beloved,  and  as  has  often  been  seen  in  like  human  love.  But  as  a 
parable  or  allegory,  it  tells  of  the  love  of  the  soul  to  Christ,  and  of  his  to  us. 

I.  Its  STBBNaTH.  "Strong  as  death."  Death  reigns.  Who  can  resist  his  will? 
"  PaUlda  mors,"  etc.  (of.  Ps.  xc).  So  love  is  all-powerful.  It  is  a  universal  passion. 
It  bears  away  all  men  in  its  might.  It  is  an  irrepressible  force.  This  is  true  of  human 
love.  And  in  the  love  of  the  redeemed  soul  for  Christ  it  has  proved  itself  again  and 
again  "  strong  as  death."  Every  one  of  the  noble  army  of  martyrs  has  faced  death 
and  vanquished  it.  "  They  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death ;  "  "  For  thy  sake  we 
are  killed  all  the  day  long."  And  yet  more  in  Christ's  love  for  us.  Physical  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross,  could  not  daunt  him.  Spiritual  death,  even  that  in  which 
we  all  were — dead  in  trespasses  and  sins — has  not  been  and  shall  not  be  too  strong  for 
him,  though  sometimes  it  seems  to  be  so.  His  love  is  surely  as  strong  as  that  death. 
"  Where  sin  did  abound,  grace,"  etc. 

n.  Its  tenacity.  "Jealousy,"  or,  rather,  ardent,  intense  love — this  is  what  is 
meant,  not  the  mean  passion  which  is  known  as  jealousy.  The  same  love  is  spoken  of 
all  through.  And  it  is  "  cruel,"  or  rather  firm,  tenacious,  unyielding,  "  as  the  grave," 
as  Sheol,  Does  hell  ever  give  up  its  dead  ?  Can  we  call  back  any  from  the  grave  ? 
Can  they  who  are  there  come  back  thence?  So  love  holds  fast  that  which  it  loves. 
The  story  of  this  song,  as  many  a  beautiful  human  story,  proves  the  tenacity  of  true 
love.  And  the  story  of  the  Christian  Church,  in  her  love  for  her  Lord,  shows  the  same. 
What  has  not  been  done  to  compel  redeemed  souls  to  give  up  their  love  for  Christ? 
And  his  love  for  us  above  all.  "  My  sheep  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck 
them  out  of  my  hand  "  (John  x.). 

III.  Its  VEHEMENCE.  "  The  coals  thereof  are  coals  of  fire,"  etc.  Think  of  what  such 
fire  is  and  does.  How  it  melts,  fuses,  and  subdues  that  which  comes  under  its  power  I 
How,  as  in  volcanoes,  it  struggles  for  the  mastery  until  it  finds  vent  in  victory  I 
How  it  burns,  consumes,  tortures !  Apply  all  this  to  intense  human  love — to  the  soul's 
love  for  Christ,  and  his  for  us.  Are  not  many  sinful  souls  conscious  of  Divine  love's 
torturing  power  ?  See  Peter  when  his  Lord's  look  of  love  drove  him  forth  in  agony 
from  the  scene  of  his  denial.  Listen  to  Christ's  word  to  Saul,  "  It  is  hard  for  thee  to 
kick  against  the  pricks."  The  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  baptism  of  fire  (cf. 
Luke  xii.  49,  50). 

rV.  Its  cnqubnchableness.  "  Many  waters,"  etc.  There  were  such  "  many  waters  " 
which  tried,  in  the  beautiful  human  story  of  this  song,  but  they  could  not  quench  the 
maiden's  love  for  her  beloved.  And  so  has  it  been  again  and  again  in  human  experience. 
And  think  of  the  waters  that  sought  to  quench,  and  the  floods  to  drown,  the  love  of 
Christ  in  saintly  souls.  And  they  have  failed,  and  will  fail.  And  think  of  the  hke 
that  could  not  extinguish,  though  so  many  more  and  fiercer  far,  the  love  which  Christ 
bore  towards  us.    Think  of  them,  and  see  if  Christ's  love  does  not  pass  knowledge. 

V.  Its  incorruptibility.  "  If  a  man  would  give,"  etc.  It  is  not  for  sale ;  it  cannot 
be  bought  or  bribed.  Again,  apply  this  test  to  the  three  forms  of  love  we  have  spoken  of 
— ^human.  Christian,  Christ's.  And  apply  all  these  tests  to  our  own  love,  and  see  if  it 
will  endure  them.    If  it  will,  be  thankful  indeed,  and  make  it  evident  to  all  that  it  is  sa 


196  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  thi.  1— 14. 

If  it  will  not — and  this  is  the  sadder  and  more  probable  truth — behold,  gaze  on,  contem- 
plate earnestly,  Christ's  love  to  us ;  and  then  for  us,  too,  it  may  come  to  pass,  "  whilst 
I  was  musing,  the  fire  burned." — S.  0. 

Vers.  8,  9. —  The  little  sister.  This  verse  seems  to  be  an  inquiry  on  the  part  of  those 
who  are  heard  speaking  in  ver.  5.  They  probably  knew  the  story  of  her  who  was  now 
returning  with  her  beloved,  and  their  question  shows  their  surprise.  Then  they  listen 
to  her  entreaty  addressed  tx)  him  whom  she  so  loved  (ver.  6),  and  to  her  recital  of  the 
characteristics  of  such  love  as  hers.  They  now  interpose  with  the  question  in  ver.  8 
concerning  a.  younger  sister,  who  is  not  merely  young,  but,  from  the  answer  given 
(vi  r.  9),  seems  also  to  have  been  of  uncertain  and  unsatisfactory  character.  But  the 
question  may  be  taken  as  addressed  to  the  beloved  by  her  who  has  just  been  speaking. 
Many  think  this ;  that  it  is  she  who  is  telling  of  her  little  sister,  and  asking  what  shall 
be  done  for  her.  If  so,  then  the  question  and  answer  lend  themselves  as  parables  of 
great  spiritual  truths.  It  is  not  likely  that  these  verses  have  been  or  will  be  often 
preached  upon ;  but  should  they  be,  they  may,  perhaps,  be  profitably  used  by  spiritual- 
izing them  as  telling  of  the  concern  for  others  which  the  redeemed  soul  cherishes. 
When  the  woman  of  Samaria  found  Christ,  she  sought  that  others  should  find  him  too. 
The  Prophet  Ezekiel  says, "  Thy  younger  sister  is  Sodom  "  (xvi.  46).  Hence  we  may 
take  this  sister  as  telling  of  the  whole  heathen  world,  and  that  world  in  its  worst  state. 
If  so,  then  we  may  learn — 

I.  That  the  heathen,  even  the  vilest,  ake,  as  we  aeb,  childeen  of  one 
Fathek.  "  We  have  a  sister."  "  Christ  stands  in  the  relation  of  an  elder  Brother  to 
the  Gentile  as  well  as  to  the  Jewish  Church ;  therefore  these  two  must  be  sisters."  All 
men  are  to  say,  "  Our  rather  which  art  in  heaven." 

II.  Chkist  will  call  foe  them  to  be  his  own.  There  will  come  a  "day  when 
she  shall  be  spoken  for."  Cf.  "  Other  sheep  I  have"  (John  x.  16) ;  "  Ask  of  me,  and 
I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for,"  etc.  (Ps.  ii.  8). 

III.  Thett  ABE  NOT  EEADS  FOB  HIM.  Not  ready  for  that  spiritual  union  with 
Christ  into  which  his  Church  shall  enter.    How  certain  this  is !     They  are  sunk  in  sin. 

IV.  This  is  a  mattbe  of  much  concern  to  those  who  aee  Chbist's.  "What 
shall  be  done  for  her  ?  "  This  has  been  the  impulse  of  all  true  missions,  of  all 
endeavours  to  bring  in  others  to  Christ. 

V.  Thbt  ask  and  gain  counsel  feom  him.  Ver.  8  gives  his  answer  to  the 
inquiry,  "  What  shall  be  done  '> "  "  If  she  be  a  wall,"  etc.  In  the  literal  story  this 
probably  refers  to  her  steadfastness  in  virtue  (cf.  ver.  10),  and  the  "  door "  to  an 
opposite  character.  We  may  take  the  words  as  telling  :  1.  Of  preparedness  to  receive 
the  truth.  There  is  amongst  some  people  a  preparedness  for  the  faith  which  greatly 
facilitates  its  reception.  That  preparedness  is  as  a  wall  which  shuts  out  the  inroads  of  the 
vile  vices  which  too  commonly  belong  to  heathenism,  and,  as  a  wall,  strengthens  them 
in  the  maintenance  of  many  excellences.  Where  this  is,  there  Christ  will  build  a 
glorious  Church  (of.  Ps.  xlviii.  12, 13).  2.  Of  ordinary  heathenism,  which  is  as  a  door, 
in  and  out  of  which  come  and  go  all  manner  and  kinds  of  evils.  If  it  be  so,  then,  as  in 
Eom.  ii.  7,  then  she  should  be  shut  in,  enclosed  with  sacred  restraints,  as  with  boards  of 
cedar.  And  the  providence  of  God  has  in  the  past  and  will  in  the  future  so  work  that 
it  will  restrain  the  grosser  practices  of  heathenism.  For  often  is  it  seen  that  even  where 
the  heart  is  not  yielded  to  Christ,  yet  the  sacred  restraints  of  religious  custom  do  tend 
to  regulate  conduct  and  hinder  it  from  much  evil  See  the  influence  of  Sunday  on  our 
national  life.  The  counsel  s  jggested,  therefore,  as  to  what  to  do  in  regard  to  those  as 
yet  not  Christ's,  is  th.it  where  there  is  preparedness,  encourage  it';  and  where  not, 
restrain  the  practice  of  evil,  make  sin  difficult  so  far  as  you  can. — S.  C. 

Vers.  10 — 12. — "  Oaudeamus  igitur."  The  question  has  been  asked  and  the  answer 
given  in  reference  to  the  "little  sister.''  It  was  not  clear  what  should  be  done, 
because  it  was  not  certain  what  her  disposition  might  be.  In  contrast  to  such  uncer- 
tainty, she  who  gave  the  answer  speaks  with  joyous  decision  about  herself  that  she  is 
as  a  wall — not  at  all  as  a  door — yea,  as  a  strong  tower ;  for  though  she  might  be 
assailed,  her  love  could  not  be  conquered.  Her  word  here  is  like  Paul's,  "  I  have 
fought  a  good  fight  ...  I  have  kept  the  faith,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  It.  7),    Solomon  haci 


OH.  vni.  1— 14.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  197 

sought  by  every  means  in  his  power  to  bend  her  will  to  his,  but  she  had  remained 
faithful  to  her  beloved.  She  tells  of  his  great  estate  aad  of  the  wealth  he  obtained 
from  it ;  but — speaking  of  her  own  love — she  says  she  has  kept  her  vineyard,  and  that 
it  needed  no  guardian.  King  Solomon  may  keep  his  wealth,  and  his  tenants  theirs. 
She  desired  neither,  but  was  glad  and  thankful,  her  heart  was  filled  with  joy,  that, 
tried  as  she  had  been,  she  had  yet  remained  true.  Taking  all  this  as  a  parable,  we 
may  learn  that — 

I.  The  coNBOionsNBSS  of  spiritual  victory  is  full  of  jot.  (Of.  ver.  10.)  What 
exultant  tone  there  is  in  it:  like  that  of  the  paalms  which  celebrate  victory  over 
enemies  I  The  battle  may  often  have  wavered,  defeat  may  have  been  very  near,  the 
struggle  very  severe ;  all  such  considerations  invest  the  victory,  when  it  comes,  with 
great  joy.  To  have  kept  ourselves  unspotted  from  the  world,  how  blessed  thisl  And 
our  own  experience,  we  trust,  has  often  known  this  union  of  joy  with  victory.  The 
calm  of  spirit,  the  sense  of  the  Divine  approval,  the  "  Well  done  1 "  of  conscience,  the 
sunshine  in  the  soul  when  we  have  overcome  some  spiritual  foe,  all  attest  what  we 
have  said. 

II.  Towards  such  victors  enemies  become  friends.  "Then  was  I  as  one  that 
found  peace."  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the  king,  finding  all  his  attempts  to 
win  her  to  be  in  vain,  and  struck,  it  may  be,  also,  with  admiration  of  her  constancy, 
ceased  from  his  solicitations,  and  let  her  depart.  How  often  the  like  of  this  is  witnessed  I 
True,  there  may  be  foes  who  will  remain  so,  though  they  cease  from  their  temptations. 
Satan  so  ceased  because  he  found  he  could  not  prevail  when  he  tempted  our  Lord. 
But  there  may  be  those  who  cease  their  persecutions  because  they  have  ceased  to  be 
our  foes.  The  centurion  at  the  cross  confessed,  "  Surely  this  was  a  righteous  Man." 
And  they  who,  returning  from  "  that  sight,"  smote  their  breasts  in  sorrow  and  repent- 
ance,— they  would  gladly  have  undone  the  work  which  that  morning  they  had  helped 
to  do.  And  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  how  perpetually  was  it  the  case  that  the 
constancy  and  fidelity  of  her  martyrs  won  over  those  who  before  had  been  her  foes ;  so 
that  the  saying  went  forth,  "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church  "  I 
And  similar  fidelity  still  wins  similar  triumphs;  foes  become  friends  (cf.  history  of  Daniel). 

in.  The  possession  of  one's  own  soul  is  better  than  any  other  possession 
BESIDE.  (Cf.  supra  as  to  the  probable  meaning  of  these  verses,  which  tell  of  Solomon's 
vineyard  and  her  own.)  She  spumed  all  his  wealth,  but  she  prized  her  own  truth  and 
faithfulness.  She  had  striven  as  Paul  had,  and  succeeded  in  having  a  conscience 
void  of  ofienoe.  And  no  earthly  honour  or  wealth  can  be  put  on  a  level  with  such 
possession,  and  can  never  compensate  for  its  loss.  Judas  lost  it,  and  went  out  and 
hanged  himself.  Hence  the  Bible  says,  "  Keep  thine  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out 
of  it,"  etc.  Not  only  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  your  own  kingdom — that  which  is  your 
own  indeed,  and  the  source  of  your  well-being — is  within  you. — S.  C. 

Vers.  13,  14. — The  last  appeal.  These  verses  are  spoken  not  by  but  to  the  beloved. 
Literalists  say  that  it  is  the  beloved  who  speaks,  and  asks  his  betrothed  to  sins  to  him, 
and  that  she  complies,  and  sings  to  him  her  song,  which  we  have  in  ch.  ii.  17.  But 
we  prefer  to  understand  the  whole  as  her  appeal  to  him.     Note,  therefore — 

I.  The  title  she  gives  him.  "  O  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens "  (ver.  13). 
The  gardens  are  the  souls  of  his  loving  people.  Rightly  are  they  so  called,  for  he 
chose  them  for  himself,  loves  to  dwell  in  them,  and  it  is  needful  for  them  that  he 
should.     (Cf.  sermon  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on  '  Supposing  him  to  be  the  Gardener.') 

II.  The  plea  she  puts  forward  that  she  may  hear  his  voice.  "The companions 
hearken  to  thy  voice."  We  regard  these  companions  as  the  angels  "  that  do  his 
commandments,  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  his  word  "  (Ps.  ciii.  20).  They  hear  his 
voice ;  then  why  should  not  the  soul  that  loves  him  ?  Doubtless  we  deserve  it  less  than 
they,  but  we  need  it  more  than  they.  Theirs  is  not,  as  ours,  the  perverse  and  unruly  will ; 
theirs  is  not,  as  ours,  the  daily  need  to  confess  sin  and  to  seek  its  forgiveness,  for  they 
are  holy  as  we  are  not.  But  then  all  the  more  we  need  to  hear  his  voice  causing  us  to 
know  the  way  wherein  we  should  walk.  And  we  love  it  as  much  as  they.  "  Sweeter 
is  thy  Word  to  me  than  honey,"  etc. ;  "  The  law  of  thy  mouth  is  better  unto  me  than 
thousands,"  etc.  (and  cf.  Ps.  cxix.).  And  we  will  strive  to  obey  it  even,  as  they ;  there- 
fore may  each  soul  plead,  "  Cause  me  to  hear  it." 


198  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vm.  1—14. 

III.  Heb  eaoebnkbs  fob  bis  coMiNa.  (Ver.  14.)  Cf.  last  verse  of  the  Bevelation, 
"Amen,  come  quickly.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus"  ^cf.  ch.  iL  17).  Wherefore 
this  eagerness  ?  Because  to  the  soul  aglow  with  love  to  hun  all  Joy  is  sorrow  without 
him,  and  all  sorrow  joy  with  him.  The  kingdom  of  evil  needs  to  be  subdued,  the 
kingdom  of  Grod  to  be  set  up.  Therefore  would  the  soul  have  it  that  Christ  should 
cume  swiftly  as  the  bounding  hart  or  the  springing  roe.  That  saintly  soul,  Samuel 
Rutherford,  thus  writes  on  this  verse,  "Oh,  how  long  is  it  to  the  dawning  of  the 
marriage-day  ?  0  sweet  Jesus,  take  wide  steps  I  0  my  Lord,  come  over  the  moun- 
tains at  one  stride  1  '  0  my  Blessed,  flee  as  a  roe  or  young  hart  upon  the  mountains 
of  separation  I '  0  time,  run,  run,  and  hasten  the  marriage-day,  for  love  is  tormented 
with  delays  1 "  And  what  is  St.  Paul's  word  but  an  echo  of  this  ?  "  Our  conversation 
is  in  heaven,  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Thus  "  looking  for  and  hastening  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord "  may  we  ever  be  I 
— 8.C. 

Ver.  6. — The  Christian  pilgrim.  Life  with  every  man  is  a  journey;  a  march  from 
the  cradle  to  the  grave.  To  the  pious  man  this  jovuney  is  religious ;  it  has  a  moral 
character.  It  is  not  simply  the  inevitable  moving  on  from  year  to  year ;  beside  this, 
it  is  a  progress  in  knowledge,  faith,  holiness,  and  usefulness.  The  grave  is  not  the 
Christian's  goal.  His  goal  is  perfection — perfect  excellence  and  perfect  joy.  Every 
day's  experience  is  related  to  the  great  eternity.  Each  duty  well  discharged,  each  sin 
conquered,  each  trouble  patiently  endured,  is  a  distinct  step  heavenward.  It  is  not 
merely  a  movement  onward ;  it  is  also  a  movement  upward.  The  journey  of  the 
Hebrews  through  the  wilderness  to  the  earthly  Canaan  furnishes  many  instructive 
analogies  with  the  Christian's  passage  to  the  skies.  We,  who  possess  the  new  life 
within,  "  seek  a  country,  that  is,  a  heavenly." 

I.  Observe  the  Chbistian'b  former  state.    It  is  described  as  a  "wilderness." 

1.  It  is  a  vnlderness  on  account  of  its  larrenness.  So  in  our  unregenerate  condition 
there  was  in  us  no  fertility  and  no  beauty.  There  may  have  been  a  few  barren  stalki 
of  common  morality;  but  they  yielded  no  fragrance,  they  bore  no  fruit.  In  this 
wilderness  there  was  nothing  to  satisfy  the  desires  and  aspirations  of  the  soul.  This 
world  has  its  possessions,  its  pleasures,  its  honours,  its  shows,  but  none  of  these  please 
or  elevate  the  soul.  We  aspire  after  righteousness,  after  moral  excellence,  after  the 
friendship  of  God  ;  and  with  respect  to  these  things  this  world  is  barren  and  empty. 
No  man  can  lie  down  fully  contented  in  it.  It  is  not  suitable  for  us  as  a  possession ; 
so  that  most  men,  burdened  with  care  and  infirmity,  sigh  out,  "I  would  not  live 
alway."  "He  that  loveth  silver  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  silver."  The  vapid  joys 
of  this  world  soon  pall  upon  the  appetite.  They  do  not  increase  the  capacity  for  joy ; 
they  diminish  it.  And  many  a  man  who  has  taken  his  fill  of  this  world's  pleasure 
concludes  life  with  this  dismal  verdict  on  his  lips,  "  Vanity  of  vanities ;  all  is  vanity ! " 

2.  Moreover,  this  wilderness  is  infested  with  foes.  If  in  the  Arabian  desert  the  Hebrews 
were  exposed  to  human  foes,  to  wild  beasts  and  fierce  serpents,  so  in  this  world  many 
foes  infest  the  way.  Many  and  subtle  are  the  snares  which  the  enemy  sets  for  our 
feet.  We  are  liable  to  ten  thousand  annoyances.  Evil  men  tempt  us  with  a  view  to 
ruin  us.  "  Satan  goeth  about  as  a  roaring  Uon,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  We 
have  need  for  perpetual  watchfulness.  We  have  to  fight  with  many  adversaries. 
Clearly  "  this  is  not  our  rest." 

n.  Mark  the  Christian's  present  asoent.  "  He  cometh  up."  'Tis  an  ascent. 
1.  Progress  is  the  only  way  to  perfection.  It  is  true  that  God  might  have  brought 
about  perfection  by  some  other  way ;  but,  as  a  fact,  he  has  ordained  this  way,  and  this 
only.  All  the  similitudes  employed  in  Scripture  to  set  forth  the  Christian  life  describe 
it  as  a  thing  of  progress.  The  progress  may  be  slow  or  more  rapid ;  nevertheless, 
if  there  is  Me  there  is  growth.  In  some  believers  the  processes  of  enlightenment, 
conversion,  and  edification  may  be  more  rapid  than  in  others  (just  as  in  some  climates 
the  processes  of  budding,  blossoming,  and  ripening  in  fruit  trees  are  more  rapid  than 
in  our  own  land) ;  still,  in  every  instance  perfection  is  attained  by  distinct  stages.  The 
life  of  every  Christian  is  a  progress  along  tbe  heavenly  way.  2.  Discomfort  is  incident 
to  a  pilgrimage.  No  one  expects  to  find  the  same  comforts  on  a  journey  which  he 
finds  at  home.    On  a  journey  one  is  content  with  the  bare  necessaries  of  existence^ 


OH.  vra.  1— 14.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  199 

Would  it  not  be  madnesB  to  encumber  one's  self  with  soft  couches  and  luxurious  Indul- 
gences while  on  a  journey  7  Would  not  such  things  seriously  impede  our  progress  ? 
And  is  it  not  the  one  desire  of  a  pilgrim  to  advance  as  rapidly  as  possible  ?  To  reach 
the  end  of  his  pilgrimage  at  the  earliest  hour  is  the  uppermost  desire  of  every  true 
pilgrim.  Therefore  needless  burdens  are  left  behind.  This  is  how  ordinary  pilgrims 
conduct  themselves.  And  should  not  every  Christian  be  more  eager  to  advance  along 
the  way  than  to  cumber  himself  with  lands,  or  houses,  or  worldly  honours  ?  He  who 
is  bent  on  heavenly  progress  is  bent  also  on  self-denial.  To  grow  like  Christ,  that  is 
the  Christian's  daily  business.  Every  day  another  step.  3.  The  pilgrim  of  ten  pwtuet 
a  $olHary  path.  He  is  much  alone.  In  the  vision  of  the  text  only  one  is  seen  "  coming 
up  from  the  wilderness."  She  had  left  the  broad  path  where  many  were  found.  She 
had  left  her  old  friends  and  companions.  More  and  more  the  Christian  has  to  walk 
alone.  When  first  he  resolved  to  follow  Jesus  he  had  to  abaodon  former  acquaintances ; 
and,  as  often  as  he  essays  to  reach  a  loftier  level,  he  has  to  part  with  some  comrades. 
He  has  learnt  the  art  of  personal  decision.  If  others  will  not  ascend  with  him  to  the 
higher  planes  of  holy  living,  he  must  go  alone.  He  would  rather  miss  the  company  of 
a  hundred  than  lose  the'company  of  his  Well-beloved.  Hence  the  frequent  solitariness 
of  the  pilgrim.  So  far  as  outward  connection  with  Christ's  disciples  is  concerned,  he 
will  not  separate  himself.  He  cultivates  all  possible  bonds  of  unity.  He  fosters  Church 
life.  But  with  regard  to  the  inner  life  of  his  soul,  i.e.  his  personal  fellowship  with 
Jesus,  he  is  much  alone.    Yet,  when  most  alone,  he  has  the  best  society. 

III.  NoTK  THE  Christian's  helpfdi.  Companion.  "  Leaning  on  her  Beloved."  1. 
7%iM  leaning  implies  a  sense  of  Christ's  nearness.  We  cannot  lean  upon  anything  that 
is  not  close  at  hand,  yea,  in  actual  touch  with  us.  Though  we  cannot  perceive  Jesus 
with  the  organ  of  the  body,  we  have  a  stronger  proof  still  of  his  nearness.  The 
experience  of  the  soul  is  far  more  real  and  far  more  reliable  than  any  sensation  of  the 
body.  No  organ  is  more  easily  deceived  than  the  eye.  Certainly  our  Immanuel  gains 
immediate  entrance  to  the  heart.  This  fact  is  contained  in  his  name,  "  God  with  us." 
So,  without  the  intervention  of  words  or  other  vehicle,  he  imparts  good  cheer  and 
strength  straight  to  the  soul.  He  comes  nearer  than  any  human  friend  can  come. 
He  knows  all  the  secret  doors  by  which  to  pass  in.  He  touches  all  the  secret  springs 
of  life  and  reanimates  them.  He  comes  "  to  give  life,  to  give  it  more  abundantly." 
2.  Leaning  means  the  transference  of  all  our  weakness  to  Jesus.  To  lean  is  to  find 
support  in  another.  If  I  am  too  weak  to  walk  a  distance  of  fifty  miles,  and  I  take  a 
seat  in  a  railway  train,  I  transfer  my  weakness  to  that  steam-engine,  and  I  take  the 
benefit  of  its  strength.  At  the  outset  of  our  Christian  life  we  laid  the  whole  weight 
of  our  sin  upon  our  Substitute.  We  said,  "  God  be  merciful,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  I " 
This  was  the  foundation  of  our  hope.  As  we  grow  in  grace  we  learn  more  and  more 
to  leave  our  burdens  in  the  hand  of  Jesus.  We  overcome  the  tempter,  not  by  our  own 
native  strength,  but  through  Christ,  "  who  strengtheneth  us."  "  I  live,"  said  St.  Paul : 
"  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  This  righteousness  I  have  is  Christ's  righteousness. 
This  love  for  sinful  men  is  Christ's  love  "  shed  abroad  in  my  heart."  This  wisdom  to 
instruct  and  guide  others  is  Christ's  wisdom.  I  am  "leaning  on  my  Beloved."  He 
takes  on  him  all  my  weaknesses.  He  imparts  to  me  his  all-sufficient  strength.^  It  is 
a  sacred  and  a  vital  partnership.  Faith  is  perpetual  dependence.  3.  This  leaning  implies 
that  Jesus  i»  a  consenting  Party.  He  loves  to  be  used,  loves  to  be  trusted.  Our 
weakness  can  never  be  a  strain  upon  him,  for  his  strength  is  omnipotence.  He  cannot 
fej],  for  such  faithfulness  was  never  seen  among  men — no,  nor  among  angels.  I_ could 
not  trust  to  him  for  my  eternal  well-being  if  I  did  not  know  that  he  shared  in  the 
Godhead.  Clearly  he  is  fully  competent  to  take  the  whole  weight  of  my  salvation. 
And  equally  certain  is  it  that  he  is  willing.  His  love  is  as  great  as  his  power.  His 
patience  has  often  been  severely  tried,  but  it  has  proved  abundantly  adequate.  The 
sun  may  cease  to  shine,  the  mountains  may  bow  their  snowy  crests,  the  sea  may 
vacate  it«  bed;  yet  Ixis  loving-kindness  and  his  faithfulness  eternally  abide — these 
cannot  fail.  It  is  to  him  a  real  delight  to  help  the  weak  and  needy.  After  fifty  or 
sixty  years'  experience  of  his  tender  grace,  he  says  to  us,  "  Tou  have  never  half  used 
me  yet;  you  have  never  trusted  me  half  enough.  Hitherto  you  have  asked  nothing, 
comparatively  nothing.  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive."  So  that  our  response  ought  to  be 
■pontaneous,  "Mv  souL  wait  thou  onlv  upon  God;  for  my  expectation  is  fi:om  him. 


f»  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  Tin.  1—14 

Ab  the  ivy  clings  for  support  to  the  oak,  or  as  the  limpet  clings  to  the  solid  rock,  so 
may  we  in  our  native  weakness  cling  to  the  eternal  Strength.  As  our  faith  grows,  so 
will  grow  our  love ;  and  love,  again,  will  encourage  faith.  There  is  a  beautiful  inter- 
action.   We  lean  upon  Jesus  because  he  is  our  Well-beloved. — D. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Prayer  for  full  assurance.  The  marrow  and  essence  of  true  religion  is 
love.  If  there  is  no  love  to  God,  there  is  no  religion.  If  I  am  not  the  object  of  God's 
love,  I  have  no  solid  hope  of  a  blissful  immortality.  Hence  it  is  our  primary  and 
supreme  concern  to  ascertain  whether  we  have  a  place  in  God's  affection.  Has  God  a 
care  for  me?  Has  he  put  my  name  on  his  book  of  life?  Is  he  engaged  by  solemn 
covenant  to  be  my  Friend  eternally  ?  I  want  to  know  this.  If  I  am  left  in  suspense, 
it  is,  of  all  things,  most  painful.  It  robs  me  of  the  inspiration  and  the  stimulus  of 
hope.  It  weakens  my  endeavour  after  holiness.  It  damps  my  zeal.  It  checks  my 
cheerfulness,  and  kills  my  inward  peace.  Unless  the  warm  sunshine  of  Immanuel's 
love  encircle  me,  I  shall  not  produce  the  ripe  fruits  of  goodness.  Will  my  love  be 
steadfast?  Shall  I  hold  out  to  the  end?  Well,  all  is  secure  if  1  know  that  I  share  in 
the  love  of  Christ;  for  that  love  is  endearing,  unchanging,  tender,  all- victorious, 
everlasting.  If  my  name  is  on  the  heart  of  my  Saviour,  then  my  eternal  fortune  is 
certain.  No  ill  can  come  to  me  through  time  or  through  eternity.  Therefore  this 
prayer,  "  Set  me  as  a  seal  upon  thy  heart." 

I.  Note  the  substance  of  this  pkatee.  1.  It  is  a  plea  for  love.  Unless  God  had 
revealed  to  us  the  fact  that  in  his  heart  there  glowed  a  vehement  flame  of  love  for 
sinning  men,  we  could  never  have  surmised  it.  We  might  have  carefully  noted  his 
many  arrangements  in  nature  for  ministering  to  our  happiness.  We  might  have 
reasoned  in  our  mind  that,  since  he  had  given  us  the  capacity  to  love,  the  spring  and 
fount  of  that  love  must  he  in  his  own  breast.  Yet  this  would  have  been  at  the  best 
cnnjecture.  We  could  not  have  built  on  it  any  hope  of  enjoying  his  personal  friend- 
ship, or  of  sharing  his  society  eternally.  But  he  has  given  us  a  veritable  gospel.  He 
has  assured  us  that  his  highest  love  centres  in  men.  He  has  given  us  plain  and 
practical  proofs  of  the  ardour  of  his  love.  He  has  given  us  the  sure  pledge  that  his  love 
is  a  permanent  force  in  his  nature ;  yea,  an  attribute  of  his  Godhead.  Therefore  this 
love  kindles  our  hope,  excites  our  profoundest  desire.  Gud  loves  me ;  hence  I  can 
become  a  better  man.  I  can  rise  out  of  the  mire  of  sin.  I  can  emerge  out  of  the 
grave  of  dark  despair.  I  can  become  a  child  of  God,  a  prince  in  the  kingdom  oi 
heaven.  My  heart  is  deeply  moved.  I  love  him  who  gave  himself  for  me.  I  want 
to  love  him  more.  But  he  must  soften  my  nature,  and  draw  out  my  love.  Will  he 
condescend  to  do  it ?  Will  he  have  pity  on  undeserving  me?  I  want  to  have  this 
question  solved.  Jesus,  I  pray  thee  make  me  thy  friend  I  2.  It  is  a  petition  for  the 
assv/rance  of  Christ's  love.  The  language  is  very  probably  borrowed  from  an  impressive 
scene  in  the  temple.  It  was  a  part  of  the  duty  of  the  high  priest,  when  he  went  into 
the  holy  place,  and  came  into  immediate  contact  with  God,  to  wear  upon  his  breast 
and  upon  his  shoulders  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  These  names  were  graven 
upon  precious  stones,  and  this  ceremony  indicated  the  affectionate  interest  which  the 
high  priest  felt  in  the  welfare  of  the  people.  He  lived  for  them.  He  made  oblation 
for  their  sins.  He  interceded  with  God  on  their  behalf.  Their  misfortunes  and  their 
falls  became  his  misfortunes  and  his  burdens.  He  identified  himself  completely  with 
the  people.  So  his  influence  with  God  was  used  for  them.  Now,  we  too  have  a  great 
High  Priest ;  not  a  frail,  erring  man  like  Aaron  and  his  successors.  We  have  a  perfect 
Mediator,  even  the  Son  of  God  himself.  He  has  passed  into  the  heavens  as  our 
Bepresentative.  If  he  will  identify  himself  with  me,  and  undertake  my  salvation,  I  am 
fully  content.  For  so  excellent  is  he  that  his  pleading  always  does  and  must  prevail. 
Can  I  be  sure  that  he  feels  an  interest  in  me?  Yes,  it  is  possible.  If  I  ask  for  this 
blessing  I  shall  have  it.  Hence  I  pray,  "  Set  me  as  a  seal  upon  thy  heart."  3.  This 
also  is  a  plea  for  practical  help.  "  Set  me  as  a  signet  upon  thine  arm."  The  love  of 
Jesus  is  not  an  inactive  sentiment.  It  is  sympathetic ;  it  is  personally  helpful.  His 
love  puts  into  gracious  operation  all  the  energies  of  his  being.  I  want  the  protection 
of  »  mighty  arm.  I  want  superior  help.  My  heart  has  grown  very  insensible 
through  sin,  and  I  want  him  to  soften  it.  I  want  him  to  eradicate  from  me  the  old 
toots  of  lust  and  folly.    I  want  him  to  break  off  my  fetters  of  evil  habit    I  want  him 


OH.  viii.  1— 14]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON. 

to  remodel  and  revitalize  my  whole  nature.  No  one  else  can  do  it.  His  strength  ia 
almightiuess.  If  he  will  use  his  Divine  power  for  my  good,  I  shall  be  emancipated 
and  purified  and  ennobled.  I  shall  run  gladly  in  his  ways.  And  he  is  willing  to  do 
it.  He  delights  in  saving  men  and  in  doing  good.  So  I  will  pray,  "0  Saviour,  let 
thy  great  power  work  in  me.  Put  forth  thy  strength  on  my  behalf,  '  Set  me  as  a 
signet  on  thy  arm.' " 

IL  Observe  the  argument  in  this  pbateb.  "  For  love  is  strong  as  death."  The 
ChriBtiau  has  large  hope  and  has  large  expectation,  because  the  principle  or  quality  in 
God  concerned  about  his  salvation  is  love.  So  he  argues  with  his  heavenly  Friend  in 
this  way  :  "  It  is  for  my  eternal  good  that  my  name  should  be  engraven  on  thy  heart, 
for  this  I  know  that  love  is  strong ;  yea,  the  mightiest  thing  in  the  world."  1.  This 
plea  for  the  assurance  of  Qod's  love  is  founded  on  the  power  of  love.  Commentators 
have  differed  whether  the  writer  had  in  view  here  Immanuel's  love  to  us,  or  our  love 
to  him.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  inspired  writer  is  thinking  about  love  in  the  abstract. 
Beal  love  everywhere  is  strong.  The  timid  bird,  that  usually  flees  from  man  or  dog, 
will,  to  defend  its  young,  risk  its  own  life  and  attack  its  fiercest  foe.  Love  is  strong. 
What  peril  has  not  a  human  mother  faced  to  save  her  child  ?  Can  we  measure  the 
strength  of  love  by  any  known  test  ?  Can  we  express  it  by  any  metaphor  ?  I  cannot 
conceive  any  difiScult  feat  too  formidable  for  love.  I  think  of  love  as  I  observe  its 
working  among  men.  I  think  of  it  as  I  experience  its  strength  in  me.  It  is  next  to 
omnipotent  in  man.  It  will  readily  confront  death  and  grapple  that  mysterious  foe. 
Amongst  men,  it  is  strong  as  death ;  yea,  stronger,  mightier  1  What,  then,  must  love  be 
in  our  Immanuel?  Here.it  exists  in  perfect  form,  in  uncreated  measure,  without  a  flaw 
or  blemish.  If  love  in  Christ  be  the  same  sort  of  thing  as  love  in  my  breast  (and  it  is), 
then  that  love  will  endure  anything  to  save  its  object.  If  my  name  is  on  Jesus'  heart, 
this  is  my  best-founded  security  for  all  good,  present  and  eternal.  2.  The  argitment 
proceeds  on  this  grovmd,  that  baffled  love  is  poignant  pain.  "  Jealousy  is  cruel  as  the 
grave."  This,  again,  is  spoken  of  jealousy  in  the  abstract.  If  I  love,  and  my  love  is 
encouraged,  and  for  a  time  reciprocated,  until  it  burns  with  ardour;  then,  if  a  rival 
comes  between  me  and  my  object,  what  pain,  what  fierce  indignation,  follows !  Such 
jealousy  springs  out  of  injured  love,  that  the  heart-passion  is  uncontrollable.  It  over- 
leaps all  barriers  of  law,  all  limits  of  reason.  You  cannot  hold  it  in  check.  "  It  is 
cruel  as  the  grave  ;  "  cruel  as  hell.  Now,  if  Jesus  has  set  his  heart  upon  me ;  if  he 
has  sacrificed  much  on  my  account ;  if  he  has  attested  his  affection  by  the  cross  and  by 
the  grave;  then  will  he  allow  any  rival  to  supplant  him?  Would  there  not  be  a 
feeling  of  intense  pain,  akin  to  jealousy,  burning  in  his  breast  if  anything  came  between 
him  and  the  object  of  his  love?  Hence,  for  his  own  sake,  he  will  not  cast  me  off.  For 
his  own  sake  he  will  not  cease  to  love  me,  nor  cease  to  win  my  love  in  return.  We 
are  told  that "  he  hates  putting  away."  Here,  then,  is  a  very  forceful  argument,  that  for 
his  own  peace  of  mind,  for  his  own  honour,  he  will  give  me — poor,  unworthy  me — a 
larger  place  in  his  heart.  "  Having  loved  his  own,  he  loves  them  unto  the  end." 
3.  The  argument  proceeds  an  love's  unchangeahlenesi.  Literally  translated,  it  is,  "  The 
coals  thereof  are  the  coals  of  God."  This  flame  never  decreases ;  it  is  fed  from  a  store- 
house of  infinity.  Changeableness  is  incident  to  man,  but  it  has  no  place  with  God. 
We  may  love  a  person  under  a  false  estimate  of  that  person's  excellence.  The  charms 
may  be  plausible  and  pretentious  rather  than  real.  Hence  our  aflections  may  diminish, 
undergo  complete  change.  This  can  never  happen  with  God.  He  does  not  love  us 
because  we  are  lovable.  He  loves  us  in  order  to  make  us  lovable  and  worthy  of 
himself.  His  love  chose  us  when  we  were  aliens,  rebels,  depraved,  dead  in  sin.  A» 
there  was  nothing  in  us  to  attract  him  at  the  first,  so  nothing  in  us  will  drive  him 
away.  He  will  correct,  chastise,  prune,  purify  us,  but  will  not  allow  his  love  to 
change.  Says  he,  "I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love."  The  flame  of 
love  which  glows  in  his  breast  is  a  flame  that  cannot  die  out,  so  long  as  God  is  God- 

III.  The  response  to  this  prater.  We  may  very  properly  regard  this  verse  as  the 
bridegroom's  response.  To  the  pathetic,  yearning  appeal  of  the  bride,  he  promptly 
replies,  "Thy  argument  is  most  valid;  cogent  in  the  extreme.  Yea,  verily,  many 
waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it."  1.  Love  is  all-victor iom. 
If  it  be  imaged  forth  as  a  flame  of  fire,  then  in  one  respect  the  figure  fails.  You  caa 
extinguish  flame  with  water,  if  only  you  can  pour  on  a  sufficient  quantity ;  but  on  this 


a02  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  toH-^™-!— In- 

flame of  loTe  no  amount  of  coldness  or  opposition  will  cool  it  in  the  least  degree.  Let 
Satan  and  his  legions  do  their  very  utmost  to  lessen  the  intensity  of  this  heavenly  flame, 
their  labour  is  vain.  They  only  prepare  for  themselves  a  bitter  disappointment.  Or 
let  the  floods  of  human  vice  and  human  antagonism  rise  as  they  may,  they  can  never 
rise  as  high  as  this  heavenly  flame.  The  finite  can  never  o'ermaster  the  Infinite.  The 
love  of  God  to  men  is  a  sacred  principle,  an  integral  part  of  the  Divine  nature.  There 
ii  nothing  outside  God  to  be  compared  in  potency  with  what  is  within  him.  As  the 
creature  can  never  be  a  match  for  the  Creator,  so  no  kind  of  oppositioo  can  ever  injure 
or  diminish  the  eternal  love  of  God.  Just  as  nothing  on  earth  nor  in  hell  can  dimiuish 
God's  power  or  tarnish  his  righteousness,  so  also  nothing  can  lessen  or  dim  the 
fervent  flame  of  his  eternal  pity.  "  Many  waters  cannot  quench  love ; "  yea,  love  turns 
all  human  hatred  into  fresh  coals  to  feed  the  flame.  2.  Love  has  a  prieeUsi  value.  The 
argument  on  the  part  of  the  Bridegroom  seems  to  be,  "  Wherefore  should  my  love 
abate  ?  If  it  should,  there  must  be  some  reason  for  it.  What  reason  can  there  be  ? 
what  advantage ?  what  gain?"  Even  were  there  some  advantage  to  be  gained,  this 
would  not  weigh  in  the  scale.  For  love  scorns  all  advantage.  Love  delights  in 
sacrifice.  Only  let  love  discover  how  it  can  make  some  new  surrender,  in  order  to  bless 
the  fallen  and  the  wretched,  and  straightway  love  makes  the  surrender.  Jesus  will 
give  up  his  heaven,  his  joy,  his  crown,  to-day ;  give  all  up  without  hesitation,  if  he  can 
thereby  lift  some  poor  sinner  into  a  righteous  life.  On  his  part  nothing  shall  impede 
the  activities  of  his  ardent  love.  Will  he  ever  listen  to  any  proposal  to  allow  his  love 
to  rest  ?  Never  1  Will  he  at  any  time  prefer  ease,  or  rule,  or  fame,  or  worship,  to  the 
outgoings  of  practical  love  ?  Never  1  A  thousand  times,  never  I  Do  I  feel  myself 
now  more  unworthy  of  his  love  than  ever  in  my  past  history  ?  Then,  my  soul,  be 
hopeful  I  Here  is  greater  scope  for  Immanuel's  love !  Spirit  of  truth,  show  me  more 
clearly  yet  my  guilt,  my  ingratitude,  my  inward  corruption  I  For  then  shall  I  see  how 
much  I  need  my  Saviour's  pity,  my  Saviour's  help.  Then  I  know  that  he  will 
run  to  my  deliverance.  For  "  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  He  loves  to  save  the 
needy.  If  I  have  had  much  sin  forgiven,  then  shall  1  love  much.  "  Therefore, 
Lord,  write  my  name  upon  thy  heart,  for  in  me  thy  love  shall  have  a  glorious 
kiumphl"— D. 

Ver.  11. — Stewardthrp.  This  language  is  Oriental,  yet  the  lesson  is  cosmopolitan.  In 
every  kingdom  there  must  be  a  system  of  economics.  For  »  prosperous  condition 
there  must  be  division  of  labour.  The  land  must  be  cultivated.  The  people  must 
have  food.  The  king's  household  must  be  sustained.  To  this  end  scope  should  be 
given  to  personal  skill  and  personal  enterprise.  So  a  wise  king  farms  out  his  land  to 
husbandmen,  who  are  under  obligation  to  render  back  a  fair  proportion  of  the  produce. 
This  system  brings  the  greatest  advantage  to  both  parties.  Now,  all  this  has  its 
counterpart  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  Every  man  is  a  steward  entrusted  with  God's 
property.  He  cannot  live  for  himself.  A  day  of  reckoning  is  appointed,  when  the 
account  must  be  produced  and  examined.  Life,  with  all  its  possessions  and  privileges, 
is  a  sacred  responsibility.    Independence  of  God  is  impossible. 

L  Obsebvb  that  God  is  the  great  Propbietob.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and 
the  fulness  thereof;  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein."  No  part  of  this  vast  and 
illimitable  universe  is  exempt  trom  his  lordship.  1.  Sis  claim  is  founded  on  creation. 
God  alone  is  uncreated.  The  unfallen  hosts  of  angels,  all  principalities  and  powers  in 
heaven,  no  less  than  the  tiniest  insect  on  earth,  are  the  workmanship  of  his  skilful 
bands.  Creation  gives  a  prescriptive  and  an  indisputable  right.  What  I  make  I 
claim  as  my  own,  though  probably  the  raw  material  belonged  to  another.  But  God 
created  out  of  nothing,  or  rather  out  of  himself;  therefore  his  title  is  without  a  flaw. 
2.  His  claim,  is  founded  on  preservation.  For  preservation  is  simply  a  continuous  act 
ef  creation.  He  sustains  in  existence  every  atom  of  material,  every  form  of  life, 
every  dynamic  force,  and  this  through  every  successive  hour.  In  this  way  he  asserts 
perpetually  his  supreme  rights  of  property.  Every  vineyard  is  his  workmanship.  The 
me  of  every  tree  is  his  gift.  The  nourishing  qualities  of  the  soil;  the  sunshine,  dew, 
and  rain ;  all  influences  of  the  revolving  seasons — all  are  his  contributions  to  the  main- 
tenance of  the  vineyard.  This  is  simply  a  sample  of  God's  sustaining  activity.  My 
life  hangs  upon  him  through  every  hour.    "  In  him  I  live  and  move ; "  **  By  him  ^ 


OH.  vin.  1— 14.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON,  SOS 

things  consist,"  3.  His  claim  itfowided  on  acknowledgment.  We  admit  that  we  are 
not  our  own.  The  enlightened  conscience  of  every  man  testifies  that  God  is  the  supreme 
Owner.  We  are  not  masters  even  of  ourselves,  nor  of  our  own  life.  We  did  not  choose  in 
what  year,  or  in  what  city,  or  in  what  family,  we  would  be  born.  We  have  no  control 
over  our  continuance  in  life.  The  voice  from  heaven  says,  "  Return  to  the  dust,  ye 
children  of  men  I "  We  have  no  control  over  the  mode  or  the  time  of  our  departure. 
Nor  have  we  unlimited  control  over  our  property.  Sudden  misfortune  may  scatter  our 
wealth.  "  Eiches  make  themselves  wings  and  fly  away."  We  feel  that  we  are  accountable 
to  God ;  for  to  the  bar  of  our  own  consciences  are  we  frequently  brought,  to  be  prejudged 
of  the  use  we  have  made  of  life,  and  the  decision  of  this* court  will  simply  be  ratified  in 
the  great  assize.  We  are  tenants  at  will.  We  have  only  a  life-interest  in  our  earthly 
possessions.    We  are  stewards,  not  proprietors. 

II.  Obsbsvb  that  God  has  uadb  ns  eebfebs,  ob  stewabds.  *He  let  out  the 
vineyard  unto  keepers,"  The  interest  of  the  Proprietor  is  to  be  kept  in  view.  We 
are  "  keepers  "  of  his  property.  Si$  good,  not  ours,  must  be  sought.  1.  This  steward' 
thip  comprises  everything.  My  body  is  not  my  own ;  it  is  a  temple  of  the  living  God. 
Every  organ  of  body  and  of  mind  is  simply  entrusted  to  my  care.  My  tongue  is  not 
my  own ;  it  is  an  instrument  for  praising  God.  My  learning  ia  not  my  own ;  it  should 
be  laid  on  God's  altar.  My  will  is  not  my  own ;  it  should  be  made  submissive  to  God's 
will.  Hourly  my  prayer  should  be,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  Even 
the  skill  for  gaining  money  belongs  to  another.  "  Say  not  in  thine  heart.  My  power, 
and  the  might  of  my  own  hand,  have  gotten  me  this  wealth.  But  thou  shalt  remember 
the  Lord  thy  God,  for  it  is  he  that  giveth  thee  power  to  get  wealth."  If  I  live  to 
please  myself,  I  am  usurping  the  place  of  my  Lord,  and  I  incur  his  displeasure.  2.  We 
are  stewards  who  know  the  will  of  our  Master.  He  has  not  left  us  in  ignorance 
respecting  the  business  of  our  life,  or  in  what  way  his  property  should  be  employed. 
The  vineyard  must  be  "  kept,"  and  must  be  made  fruitful.  His  Word  is  full  of 
instruction,  which  demands  our  careful  study  and  our  faithful  observation.  In  these 
living  oracles  he  clearly  speaks, "  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  "  As  ye  have 
opportunity,  do  good  unto  all  men."  "  Follow  me,"  says  Jesus.  In  other  words,  he 
means,  "  Live  as  I  live.  Spend  life  in  doing  good."  We  cannot  plead  as  an  excuse 
for  slothfulness  that  we  know  not  the  will  of  our  Master.  And  if  we  desire  to  obtain 
fuller  direction,  the  Master  himself  is  at  hand,  and  guides  every  submissive  souL  "  Ask, 
and  ye  shall  receive."  For  the  promise  still  runs,  "  I  will  guide  thee  with  mine  eye." 
8.  We  are  stewards  who  have  the  ability  to  do  our  Master's  will.  He  is  no  hard  Task- 
master, requiring  the  tale  of  bricks  without  providing  raw  material.  On  the  contrary, 
"his  yoke  is  easy."  In  every  circumstance,  his  friendly  voice  whispers,  "  My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee."  Often  do  we  put  up  the  prayer,  "Thy  kingdom  come,  thy  will  be 
done."  But  it  behoves  us  to  remember  that  the  means  for  attaining  this  great  end  lie 
within  our  reach.  Had  all  servants  of  God  been  faithful  in  their  office,  what  a  different 
world  would  this  he  to-day !  How  large  a  proportion  of  our  fellow-men  would  be  in  the 
kingdom  of  God  1  It  does  not  suffice  that  we  serve  Christ  with  one  talent,  while  we 
aUow  other  talents  to  lie  idle.  We  cannot,  with  our  money  gifts,  buy  release  from 
personal  service.  As  no  man  can  transfer  to  another  his  mental  endowments,  or  his 
social  influence,  or  his  personal  responsibility ;  so  no  man  can  transfer  to  another  man 
his  work.  In  these  vineyards,  service  by  proxy  is  not  allowed.  That  person  whom 
I  presume  to  employ  is  already  under  the  same  obligation  as  myself,  and  cannot  there- 
fore serve  as  my  substitute.  Nor  can  we  hope  to  see  any  great  enlargement  in  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  until  each  separate  disciple  feels  and  realizes  that  the  burden  of  the 
world's  salvation  rests  upon  him.  "As  each  one  hath  received  the  gift,  let  him  minister 
the  same,  as  a  good  steward  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God." 

III.  Note  that  God  appoints  a  eeckonino-timb.  In  the  annual  vintage  season, 
the  husbandman  was  required  to  make  a  proper  return  to  the  owner.  This  return 
might  be  made  either  in  kind  or  in  some  equivalent.  1.  There  is  a  special  season  for 
this  reckoning-time.  Speaking  generally,  the  reckoning-time  will  be  at  the  day  of 
judgment.  Yet,  for  all  practical  purposes,  this  tenure  termmates  at  death.  Then  our 
Lord  comes  and  convoys  his  servant  home.  Then  the  authoritative  voice  says, «  Give 
an  account  of  thy  steWardship,  for  thou  mayest  be  no  longer  steward."  Then  the 
fcathful  servant  gives  in  hU  account  with  joy.     "He  has  boldness  m  the  day  of 


204  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  vm.  1—14. 

judgment."  It  is  the  end  for  which  he  has  toiled  and  waited.  Just  as  the  husy  fanner 
rejoices  greatly,  when  his  last  harvest-sheaves  are  garnered,  because  his  toil  has  reached 
a  successful  end ;  so  the  disembodied  Christian  presents  himself  before  his  Lord  with 
rapturous  joy.  For,  with  the  fruits  of  his  toil  surrounding  him,  he  confidently  says, 
"  Here  am  I,  Lord,  and  the  children  thou  hast  given  me.  It  is  only  thy  talent  I  have 
thus  multiplied.  Not  unto  me,  not  unto  me,  but  imto  thy  Name  be  all  the  glory." 
2.  Note  the  system,  of  the  reckoning.  In  God's  kingdom  the  system  must  be  strictly 
equitable ;  on  God's  part  generous.  That  system  is  that  a  fair  proportion  of  the  gain 
belongs  to  God.  He  that  is  entrusted  with  ten  talents  is  required  to  bring  more 
gains  than  tlie  man  with  only  fiVe.  In  proportion  to  our  faith,  fidelity,  and  zeal  will 
be  the  measure  of  our  success.  Divested  of  all  imagery,  the  simple  fact  is  that  each 
Christian  is  required  to  increase  rigiiteousness,  loyalty,  and  love  in  God's  world.  I  am 
expected  to  leave  this  world  better,  t.e.  holier,  than  I  found  it.  My  business  in  life  is 
to  bring  men  nearer  to  God.  If  I  can  increase  in  men  repentance,  faith,  piety,  mutual 
benevolence,  I  have  fulfilled  my  stewardship  in  some  measure.  If  I  have  persuaded 
men  to  abandon  a  life  of  sin  and  to  follow  Jesus,  I  have  brought  honour  to  my  Master's 
Name.  My  life-work  as  a  Christian  is  to  enlarge  the  spiritusA  empire  of  Messiah.  As 
in  the  fields  of  nature  seed-corn  will  produce  sixty,  or  eighty,  or  a  hundredfold ;  so  each 
servant  of  Jesus  Christ  should  lead  sixty,  or  eighty,  or  a  hundred  men  out  of  a  state  of 
rebellion  into  the  covenant  grace  of  our  Immanuel.  Saved  ourselves,  it  should  be  our 
main  business  in  life  to  save  others. 

"  What  is  my  being  but  for  thee, 
Its  sure  support,  its  noblest  end  ? 
Thy  ever-smiling  face  to  see. 
And  serve  the  cause  of  such  a  Friend  T" 

D. 

Vers.  13,  14. — Sacred  fellowship.  The  love  of  Christ  to  men  amazes  us  by  its 
generosity ;  it  amazes  us  also  by  its  constancy  and  its  condescension.  He,  who  delighted 
in  human  companionship  when  on  earth,  delights  in  it  still.  In  his  irrepressible 
longing  to  do  us  good,  he  encourages  us  to  speak  freely,  to  tell  out  our  desires,  and  to 
ask  largely.  Our  requests  for  his  gifts  are  never  too  large ;  they  are  invariably  too 
small.  If  he  can  increase  our  faith  in  him  and  draw  forth  our  love,  he  has  done 
us  greatest  good.  So,  with  exquisite  tenderness,  he  says,  "  Cause  me  to  hear "  thy 
voice. 

I.  Obskevb  the  Chbistian'b  abode.  "  Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  gardens.'"  1.  Thii 
description  of  the  Christian's  dwelling  implies  quiet  retirement.  Formerly  he  loved 
bustle  and  excitement ;  now  he  loves  a  place  for  quiet  meditation  and  prayer.  He  finds 
more  pleasure  in  being  among  the  works  of  God  than  among  the  works  of  men. 
As  at  the  beginning  God  provided  for  Adam  a  garden,  because  most  suited  for 
healthfulness  both  of  body  and  of  soul ;  so  the  man  who  has  the  niiud  of  Christ 
feels  strongly  the  attractiveness  of  a  garden.  He  loves  to  be  shut  out  from  the  world, 
and  to  be  shut  in  with  God.  He  is  a  learner ;  and  in  deep  quietude  he  best  learns  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  A  garden  implies  privilege.  It  is  a  privilegi  d 
place.  It  is  not  open  to  all  comers.  The  believer  is  no  longer  a  rover,  wandering  up 
and  down  the  earth  in  quest  of  some  unpossessed  good.  He  is  not,  like  Cain,  an  outcast. 
He  does  not  inhabit  a  wilderness,  like  the  Edomites.  The  best  situation  this  earth 
can  furnish  is  for  him.  The  place  where  God  reveals  himself  is  the  place  for  him. 
Once  it  was  a  wililerness,  now  it  is  a  garden.  Among  the  lilies  the  good  Shepherd  feedi 
his  flock;  so  there  the  Christian  loves  to  abide.  In  the  cool  of  the  evening  God  walks 
among  the  trees ;  so  there  the  Christian  will  walk  also.  It  is  Christ's  garden,  Christ's 
workmanship;  a  place  of  special  privilege.  This  garden  is,  of  course,  the  Church. 
Here  the  Christian  sees  what  beauty  and  what  fruitfulness  adorn  others;  so  he  is 
emulated  to  be  fragrant  and  fruitful  also.  3.  A  garden  implies  useful  occupation.  For 
though  God  himself  is  the  chief  Husbandman,  there  is  something  for  every  Christian  to 
do  in  the  garden.  He  cannot  give  life  to  the  plants,  yet  he  can  water  them;  he  can 
shield  them  from  peril ;  he  can  prune  and  train  the  branches.  He  is  a  worker  along 
with  God ;  a  partner  in  service.  Such  occupation  is  contributive  to  his  own  life  and 
health  and  joy.     An  idle  Christian  is  an  anomkly.     So  long  as  I  am  in  the  Church,  my 


OH.  vni.  l^U.]  THE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  206 

influence  is  felt  in  moulding  the  Church.  The  Church  will  be  either  better  or  worse 
for  my  presence.  My  zeal  for  fruitfulness  will  be  contagious.  My  devoutness  will  lift 
the  Church  to  a  loftier  elevation.  Or  my  unspirituality  will  chill  the  ardour  of  the 
Church's  love.  I  cannot  be  an  idle  spectator.  I  must  do  good  work  in  the  Church  or 
bad.  lam  called  unto  usefulness.  4.  A  garden  implies  abundance  of  good.  What- 
ever can  meet  the  hunger  of  the  body,  or  gratify  the  nostrils,  or  please  the  eye,  or  bring 
delif;ht  to  the  whole  man,  is  found  in  a  perfect  garden.  The  word  suggests  abundance. 
So,  in  the  Church,  Jesus  Christ  spreads  a  perpetual  banquet.  He  well  knowB  our  every 
requirement,  and  he  anticipates  every  need.  Here  is  truth  for  the  nourishment  of  the 
soul,  wisdom  for  practical  guidance,  refreshing  cordials  for  hours  of  weariness,  strength 
for  daily  duty,  deep  wells  of  water  for  the  soul's  thirst,  grace  for  every  time  of  need. 
No  earthly  garden  can  fitly  picture  forth  the  lavish  provision  Grod  makes  for  our  souls. 
Not  a  blessing  is  withheld.  "  All  things  are  ours ;  for  we  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is 
Ood's."    Much  as  I  have  already  received,  there's  much  more  to  follow. 

II.  Maek  the  Christian's  speech.  "  The  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice."  1. 
This  means  that  a  Christian  is  social.  If  he  has  withdrawn  from  the  society  of  worldly 
men,  he  is  the  more  drawn  into  the  fellowship  of  the  saints.  A  Christian  cannot  be  a 
recluse.  This  is  a  mistaken  idea  of  his  position  and  his  obligation.  Christian  love 
excludes  selfishness.  His  new  instinct  impels  him  to  help  others.  He  yearns  that  all 
men  may  be  saved.  God  has  given  him  the  talent  of  speech.  It  is  a  wondrous  gift.  He 
can  convey  his  thoughts  to  others.  He  can  express  tender  feeling  and  brotherly  sym- 
pathy to  others.  He  can  reprove  faults  and  encourage  virtues  by  his  speech.  He  can 
have  intimate  friendships,  which  shall  be  helpful  to  him  and  to  others.  He  dare  not 
leave  neglected  the  social  side  of  his  nature,  or  he  will  be  disloyal  to  his  Master.  2.  Sis 
speech  is  attractive.  •'  The  companions  hearken  to  thy  voice."  They  did  not  complain 
of  the  harshness  or  bitterness  of  his  speech.  The  very  reverse :  "  they  hearkened." 
It  was  pleasant.  There  was  a  heavenly  savour  about  it,  that  made  it  winsome.  It 
was  like  a  breath  of  spring  that  quickened  and  refreshed  them.  The  Christian's 
converse  sheds  new  light  into  others'  minds.  It  stimulates  gently  all  the  better 
impulses  of  the  soul.  It  strengthens  faith  and  love  and  hope.  He  hears  new 
revelations  from  God's  lips,  and  communicates  the  message  to  his  fellows.  Each 
Christian  can  help  and  instruct  other  Christians.  Bach  has  his  own  peculiar  experience 
of  the  new  life,  and  the  interchange  of  experience  is  comforting  and  stimulating.  If 
we  speak  what  "  we  have  known,  and  tasted,  and  felt,  and  handled  of  the  good  word 
of  lile,"  if  we  speak  under  an  impulse  of  love,  our  speech  will  be  attractive,  and  will 
minister  grace  to  the  hearers.  "  As  iron  sharpeneth  iron,"  so  do  wise  and  gracious 
words  quicken  friendship.  3.  This  Christian  speech  was  praiseworthy.  Had  it  not 
been  so,  the  Divine  Master  would  not  have  asked  to  hear  it.  May  we  not  learn  here 
how  ready  our  Immanuel  is  to  find  occasion  for  commending  us  V  Instead  of  being  in 
a  mood  for  censoriousness,  he  is  always  ready  to  put  the  best  construction  on  our 
doings.  If  he  can  find  in  us  a  virtue  to  praise,  he  will  do  it.  It  well  behoves  us,  then, 
to  ask  ourselves  whether  our  converse  with  others  is  always  edifying.  Our  speech 
greatly  influences  men ;  is  that  influence  always  on  the  right  side  ?  In  the  dark  days 
of  Israel's  fall,  there  were  a  few  "  who  spake  often  one  to  another :  and  the  Lord 
hearkened,  and  heard,  and  a  book  of  remembrance  was  written  before  him."  During 
his  earthly  ministry,  Jesus  often  reminded  men  of  the  power  that  resides  in  human 
speech,  and  of  the  tremendous  issues  that  follow.  "By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be 
justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned." 

III.  The  Christian's  fellowship  sought  bt  Cheist.  "  Cause  me  to  hear  it."  1.  A 
rare  instance  of  Christ's  meekness.  There  is  nothing  more  edifying  or  more  delightful 
to  the  Christian  than  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  Jesus.  "Never  man  spake  like  this 
Man."  His  words  are  like  pearls  of  wisdom,  and  for  sweetness  are  like  the  droppings 
of  the  honeycomb.  But  how  comes  it  to  pass  that  Jesus  can  find  pleasure  in  Usteniug 
to  our  imperfect  speech  ?  'J'his  is  almost  a  crowning  act  of  condescension.  He  delights 
to  hear  our  voices.  He  asks  us  so  to  speak  that  he  may  hear.  He  loves  to  hear  us 
speak  as  his  witnesses  among  men.  He  is  pUased  to  hear  our  testimony  concernmg 
himself  His  ear  is  gratified  with  our  songs  of  adoration  and  gratitude.  Specially  he 
rejoices  to  hear  our  voices  in  prayer.  "  Hitherto,"  he  says,  "  you  have  asked  nothing 
—comparatively  nothing—"  in  my  Name.    Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may 


206  THE  SONQ  OF  SOLOMON.  [ch.  Tin.  1—14. 

be  full."  As  an  earthly  father  delights  to  hear  the  silvery  prattle  of  his  little  child, 
and  no  request  from  an  infant's  lips  goes  unheeded ;  so  our  God  finds  peculiar  pleasure 
in  hearing  our  voice  of  childlike  appeal.  Before  we  finish  our  petition,  the  answer  is 
on  the  way.  2.  This  request  is  an  outcome  of  Christ's  relationship  to  us.  Since  he  has 
entered  into  intimate  and  affectionate  union  with  us — ay,  made  with  us  a  marriage 
covenant — it  follows  that  communion  with  us  is  a  thing  to  be  desired.  If  he  had  not 
been  willing  to  live  with  us  on  familiar  and  reciprocal  terms,  he  would  not  have  entered 
into  this  mystic  and  organic  union.  Having  made  the  greater  sacrifice,  he  will  not 
refrain  from  the  lesser.  It  is  not  his  fault  that  his  intercourse  with  us  is  not  more 
frequent,  more  close,  more  sensibly  enjoyed.  He  is  ever  asking  us  to  treat  him  as  our 
bosom-Friend,  and  to  trust  him  for  every  kind  of  need.  It  is  as  if  he  said  to  us,  "  You 
tell  your  troubles  unto  others ;  why  not  tell  them  unto  me  ?  Cause  me  to  hear  thy 
voice  1 "  Would  a  loyal  wife  tell  her  cares  and  her  griefs  to  one  and  to  another,  while 
refraining  from  speakrag  of  them  to  her  husband?  Would  not  this  be  a  scandaloui 
folly  ?  Hence  Jesus  says  to  us,  "  Tell  me  everything.  There  is  nothing  that  disturbs 
your  peace  which  is  not  a  care  to  me."  .We  are  charged  to  "  cast  all  our  care  upon 
him."  And  our  simple  duty  is, "  in  everything ...  to  make  known  our  wants  unto  God." 
3.  This  request  of  Christ  will  serve  as  a  corrective.  To  remember  that  Jesus  wants  to 
hear  our  voice,  will  this  not  often  be  a  check  upon  our  speech  ?  Those  hasty  or  unkind 
wurds  uf  ours  respecting  another,  did  not  Jesus  hear  them?  Or,  if  we  are  forming  in 
our  minds  an  ungenerous  estimate  of  a  neighbour,  does  not  Jesus  whisper  to  us, 
"  Cause  me  to  hear  thy  voice  "  ?  Even  thoughts  are  heard  by  him.  The  voice  that 
Jesus  hears  is  not  always  the  voice  that  others  hear.  They  hear  the  words  which 
escape  the  lips.  Jesus  hears  the  intention  uppermost  in  the  mind.  Jesus  hears  the 
"  still  small  voice "  of  our  motives.  Our  every  feeling,  our  every  ambition,  has  a 
voice,  and  Jesus  says,  "  Let  me  hear  it."  It  is  for  our  good  that  he  should  hear  it  all. 
My  best  Beloved  is  ever  listening.  How  soft  and  loving  and  true  should  my  voice 
always  be  1  I  must  "  set  a  watch  on  the  door  of  my  lips,  that  I  sin  not  with  my 
tongue." 

1 V.  The  Chbistian's  kbspokse  to  ras  Lobd'b  bequest.  "  Make  haste,  my  Beloved, 
and  be  thou  like  to  a  roe  or  to  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains  of  spices."  1.  Note 
the  promptness  of  true  ohedience.  Jesus  had  said, "  Cause  me  to  hear  thy  voice."  Porth- 
witli  the  loving  soul  rtspunds,  "Lord,  thou  shalt  hear  it.  Come,  Lord  Jesus;  come 
quickly  1 "  No  word  could  be  more  welcome  to  Jesus  than  that.  It  is  as  if  the  spouse 
had  said,  "Mayhap  my  voice  may  express  feelings  and  inclinations  which  are  very 
faulty ;  but  do  thou,  beloved  One,  come,  and  thou  wilt  correct  all  faultiness.  Thy 
presence  will  be  food  and  medicine,  rest  and  growth,  in  one.  The  'one  thing  needful ' 
is  thyself.  1  pass  by  all  the  streams  of  help ;  I  come  to  the  Fountain-heal  Thou 
art  the  Fount  of  life.  '  All  my  springs  are  in  thee.' "  Love  is  swift  to  obey  2.  Tet 
absence  is  for  a  time  expedient.  The  night  is  as  needful  to  the  plant  as  the  day.  Winter 
is  as  useful  to  agriculture  as  summer.  It  was  expedient  for  the  first  apostles  that 
Christ's  visible  presence  should  be  withdrawn.  They  learnt  to  use  the  wisdom 
and  the  courage  which  he  had  given  them.  They  gave  themselves  more  to  the 
study  of  Scripture  and  to  prayer.  They  showed  far  more  enthusiasm  and  zeal  than 
when  he  was  among  them.  We  see,  as  a  fact,  that  great  advantage  accrued  to  them 
from  the  departure  of  Jesus.  So  is  it  still.  We  have  from  him  all  the  help  we  need. 
We  have  his  mighty  Spirit  in  our  souls.  To  have  the  visible  presence  of  Jesus  would 
fill  us  with  a  new  rapture.  But  enjoyment  is  not  the  main  thing  now.  We  want 
personal  holiness  and  personal  consecration ;  these  are  attained  through  faith.  3.  Th* 
Christian  interprets  this  command  of  Christ  as  a  fresh  proof  <^  his  love.  Did  he  say, 
"  Cause  me  to  hear  thy  voice  "  ?  then  this  is  a  love-token.  He  would  not  desire  to  hear 
my  voice  unless  he  loved  me.  What  delicate  reminders  of  his  love  does  oiir  Immanuel 
give  1  How  he  devises  to  do  us  good,  and  plans  to  give  us  pleasure  I  And  the  more 
love  grows,  the  stronger  grows  the  desire  to  see  him  as  he  is.  We  long  to  have  nearer 
access  to  Christ,  without  a  veil  between.  4.  Love  is  impatient  of  all  dday.  We  cannot 
climb  to  the  heavenly  heights,  or  sometimes  we  would.  Hence,  if  there  is  to  be 
B  meeting  between  Christ  and  me,  he  must  come  down  to  me.  Where  he  dwells  must 
be  a  mountain — a  mountain  of  fragrant  spice.  As  mountains  are  the  eminences  of 
nature,  the  loftiest  parts  of  this  material  globe,  so  they  he)))  ua  to  ascend  to  tboM 


CH.  vm.  1—14.]  TUE  SONG  OP  SOLOMON.  207 

empyreal  heights,  where  true  purity  resides,  where  the  Highest  dwells.  Love  can 
conquer  every  hindrance.  Love  annihilates  distance  and  time.  Already  Love  dwells 
in  the  future.  To  her  eye  the  final  consummation  is  reached ;  and  hence  she  sings, 
"  Come,  Lord  Jesus ;  coma  quickly  1 " — D. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  ardour  of  spiritital  love.  There  is  no  measure,  no  restraint,  in  this 
language.  If  it  is  possible  for  human  love,  when  duly  placed,  to  he  too  fervent  and 
absorbing,  this  is  when  that  is  given  to  the  creature  which  it  behoves  us  to  reserve  for 
the  Creator.  Passion  and  poetry  combine  to  express  the  deepest  emotions,  the  must 
ardent  wishes  of  the  soul. 

I.  The  object  op  spiritual  love.  1.  In  loving  Olirist  the  soul  centres  its  purest 
and  strongest  affections  upon  One  who  is  in  himself  infinitely  excellent.  Earthly  love, 
is  often  the  creature  of  the  imagination,  conceiving  beauty  and  excellence  which  do  not 
exist,  or  which  exist  in  a  measure  extravagantly  exaggerated.  There  is  no  possibility 
of  thinking  too  highly  of  the  Saviour,  of  admiring  him  too  absorbingly,  of  loving  him 
too  warmly.  He  is  all,  and  more  than  all,  that  our  imagination  can  picture.  2.  In 
loving  Christ  the  soul  does  but  render  to  him  what  his  services  and  his  sufferings  deserve 
from  our  hearts.  "  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us."  He  has  done  for  us  what 
none  other  could  or  would  have  done.  "  While  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us." 
Is  it  possible  to  overs  i  ate  our  obligations — to  offer  him  more  than  he  has  a  right  to 
expect  and  to  claim  from  us  ? 

II.  The  teaknlng  of  spieitual  love.  Love  would  receive  from  the  beloved.  Two 
points  are  suggested  by  the  passionate  and  glowing  language  of  the  text.  1.  A  desire 
for  intimacy,  for  closest  fellowship,  for  endearing  friendship.  2,  A  desire  for  instruction, 
for  lessons  such  as  Christ  only  can  convey  to  the  soul  of  the  disciple.  It  is  well  that  we 
should  look  to  our  Lord  for  all  things,  for  the  wisdom  that  guides,  the  love  that  cheers, 
the  grace  that  supports  and  sustains.  The  proper  attitude  of  the  Christian  towards  his 
Lord  and  Saviour  is  an  attitude  of  dependence,  of  supplication,  of  expectation. 

III.  The  tribute  or  spiritual  love.  Love  would  give  to  the  beloved.  And  the  saved, 
rejoicing  sovil  would  fain  offer  of  its  best  to  Christ.  The  kisses,  the  spiced  wine,  and  the 
pomegranate  juice  which  the  bride  would  offer  to  her  spouse  may  suggest  to  us  that 
Christ  looks  for  the  affection,  the  holy  service,  the  consecrated  devotion,  of  those  for  whom 
he  died.  What  can  we  give  him  ?  If  we  cannot  bathe  his  feet  with  tears  or  anoint  his 
head  with  precious  and  fragrant  unguents,  we  can  at  all  events  offer  to  him  the  sincere 
affection  of  the  heart,  a  constant  place  in  our  thoughts,  the  tribute  of  our  praise,  and,  to 
crown  all,  the  service  which,  being  rendered  to  his  people,  he  will  accept  as  given  to 
himself.— T. 

Ver.  5. — "  Leaning  upon  her  heloved."  As  a  skilled  artist  by  two  or  three  strokes 
brings  some  incident  vividly  and  picturesquely  brfore  the  eye,  so  does  the  poet  here  by 
a  few  words  picture  before  us  a  scene  harmonious  with  the  whole  composition,  and  depict 
the  mutual  relation  of  the  two  personages  of  this  exquisite  dramatic  idyll.  We  see  the 
bride  returning  to  the  home  of  her  youth,  quitting  the  familiar  pastures,  and  approach- 
ing the  dear  abode ;  she  is  "  leaning  upon  her  beloved."  If  true  love  is  suggestive  of 
true  religion,  as  is  not  to  be  doubted,  then  we  may  regard  this  attitude  as  having  its 
analogue  in  the  Christian's  wonted  experience  as  related  to  his  Lord. 

I.  The  Church's  innate  weakness.  Men  sometimes  use  extravagant  language  regard- 
ing the  Church,  as  though  in  itself  it  were  great  and  powerful.  But  the  juster  view  to 
take  is  that  suggested  by  the  posture  of  the  beloved  coming  up  out  of  the  wilderness. 
All  the  Church  has  is  derived ;  she  can  neither  stand  nor  walk  alone ;  her  steps  would 
falter  if  unsupported,  wOuld  stray  and  err  if  unguided. 

II.  The  Church's  Divine  Friend  and  Helper.  Christ,  who  has  called  his  Church  into 
fellowship  with  himself,  is  aloue  able  and  willing  to  take  her  under  his  protection  and 
control.  He  knows  the  way  in  which  she  is  to  walk,  the  enemies  she  will  encounter, 
the  danc^ers  by  which  she  will  be  assailed.  And  he  has  all  resources  of  spiritual  strength 
and  wisdom,  encouragement  and  love.  Every  eaithly  counsellor  and  friend  has  limited 
powers,  which  sooner  or  later  will  surely  fail.  There  is  no  measure  to  Chnst  s  capacity 
to  save  and  bless.  , 

m.  Thb  Chubch's  wiLLisa,  geatbful,  and  cLmoiNO  DBPENDEHOB.    They  who  would 


i!08  THE  SONO  OP  SOLOMON.  [oh.  Tin.  1—14. 

fain  go  alone  are  not  Christ's.  So  surely  as  he  chooses  his  own,  so  surely  does  he  put 
within  them  a  spirit  of  sulijeclion  and  attachment  to  himself.  A  cry  for  leading  and 
for  support  comes  up  from  the  depths  of  the  spiritual  nature— a  cry  to  which  Christ  i.- 
never  indifferent,  to  which  Christ  always  responds.  He  bids  her  "  lean  hard  "  upon  him, 
IV.  The  Church's  happy  secueitt.  Having  given  herself  into  his  keeping,  ihe 
knows  that  she  is  safe ;  that  he  will  lead  her  aright,  that  he  will  never  leave  and  never 
forsake  her ;  that  if  she  stumbles,  she  will  not  be  allowed  to  fall ;  that  if  she  is  faint  and 
weary,  he  will  uphold  her  tottering  steps ;  that  if  she  is  fearful,  his  words  and  his 
smile  will  banish  her  apprehensions  and  restore  her  peace. — T. 

Vers,  6, 7. — Tht  power  and  praise  of  love.  Literature  furnishes  no  eulogy  of  the 
passion  which  most  profoundly  stirs  the  heart  of  man  more  splendid  than  this.  Some 
of  the  clauses  have  passed  into  proverbs,  and  are  often  upon  the  lips.  Here  is  a  human 
scintillation  from  the  Divine  fire,  glowing  with  something  of  the  brilliancy  ol  the  ceiestiai 
original.  Such  language  as  this  has  been  adopted  as  their  own  by  those  ardent  souls 
with  whom  piety  is  a  passion,  and  for  whom  the  love  of  God  consumes  all  earthly 
emotion  and  desire.  To  analyze  such  poetry  seems  almost  a  profanation.  Tet  we  may 
trace  herein  some  of  the  characteristics  by  which  the  love  of  the  saints  of  God  has  ever 
been  in  some  measure  distinguished.  Of  that  love,  especially  as  enkindled  by  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Divine  Redeemer,  we  are  reminded  that  it  is — 

L  Abdent.  "  A  very  flame  of  the  Lord; "  "  the  flashes  thereof  like  flashes  of  fire."  The 
story  of  the  Church  tells  us  of  many  whose  affection  and  devotion  to  their  Lord  cannot 
be  justly  described  in  less  fervent  terms.  There  have  been  consecrated  apostles,  zealous 
missionaries,  seraphic  saints,  who  have  been  consumed  with  this  sacred  passion.  And 
lowly  Christians  have  lived,  and  yet  live,  unnoticed  by  the  world,  and  little  recognized 
even  by  the  Church,  in  whose  breasts  this  pure  fire  has  burned  with  fervour  so  glowing 
as  to  verify  this  glowing  language. 

II.  Stbono  and  tenacious.  There  is  a  frequent  belief  that  as  a  keen  bright  flame 
soon  burns  itself  out,  so  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  piety  should  long  retain  its  utmost 
fervour.  It  is  presumed  that  the  exalted  mood  must  pass  away,  that  the  spiritual  passion 
must  give  place  to  the  cold  ashes  of  indifference.  But  this  is  not  so  with  the  love  which 
consciously  responds  to  the  love  which  passeth  knowledge.  This  is  persistent,  and  b 
"  strong  as  death." 

III.  Unquenchable.  "Many  waters"  roll  over  it  in  vain,  "neither  can  the  floods 
drown  it."  Opposition  and  persecution  try  their  power  upon  this  spiritual  passion,  only 
to  find  that  it  is  more  than  able  to  resist  them.  The  oil  which  is  poured  upon  the  fire 
by  the  hand  that  is  unseen  is  mightier  than  the  water  which  is  dashed  upon  it  by  the 
carnal,  cold,  and  unbelieving  world.  Nay,  the  worldliness  and  indifference  too  often 
distinctive  of  professing  Christian  society,  more  dangerous  than  open  hostility,  is  power- 
less to  extinguish  the  flame  which  God  himself  has  kindled. 

IV.  Unpukchabeablb.  How  true  is  this  language  even  of  human  love,  which,  if  it 
be  sincere,  is  surely  spontaneous  and  unhought !  If  love  is  to  be  purchased,  it  is  love 
anri  not  money  which  must  be  paid  for  it ;  "  the  substance  of  a  man's  house "  is  no 
equivalent  for  the  priceless  treasure.  Gratitude  and  service  may  be  bought,  t.t  love 
is  beyond  the  value  of  jewels  and  of  gold.  We  are  taken  into  another  region  than  that 
of  market  value  and  of  merchandise.  It  is  the  love  of  the  Saviour,  that  love  which 
thone  through  the  lurid  darkness  of  Calvary,  which  wins  the  love  of  human  hearts. 

"  I  give  my  heart  to  thee, 

O  Jesus  most  desired ; 
And  heart  for  heart  the  gift  shall  be, 

With  grateful  ardour  fired." 

y.  Immortal.  It  is  sealed,  i.e.  for  an  everlasting  possession.  An  ancient  writtf 
said,  "  Christ  seals  us  in  the  heart,  that  we  may  love  him  ;  in  the  forehead,  that  we  may 
confess  him  ;  in  the  hand,  that  we  may  profess  him,  and  that  we  may  practise  what  we 
profess."  Over  this  love  time  and  deaili  have  no  power.  It  burns  brighter  when  the 
lamp  of  life  burns  low ;  it  breaks  forth  in  perfect  lustre  when,  beyond  this  murky 
atmosphere  of  earth,  it  reaches  the  clear  air  of  heaven. — T. 


OH.  Via.  1—14.]  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  209 


Vers.  11, 12. — 27le  reward  of  the/aith/ul.  The  vine  was  cultivated  very  generally  in 
lome  parts  of  Palestine,  and  afforded  the  Hebrew  poets  and  prophets  many  similitudes, 
especially  of  the  life  of  the  nation  and  the  Church.  The  incident  related  in  these  verses 
is  apart  from  the  main  interest  and  plot  of  the  work,  but  to  whomsoever  it  refers — and 
it  is  conjectured  to  refer  to  certain  rustic  blotters  of  the  bride — it  suggests  valuable 
spiritual  lessons  concerning  the  moral  government  of  God  and  the  responsibility  of  men. 

I.  A  TKT78T  ORACionsLY  COMMITTED.  As  Solomon  let  out  his  vineyard  at  Baal-bamon 
to  certain  tenants,  so  the  Divine  Lord  and  Buler  of  all  has  appointed  for  each  one  of  us 
a  certain  province  of  opportunity  for  improvement  and  for  service.  This  is  more  strikingly 
the  case  with  regard  to  those  who  occupy  positions  of  eminence,  but  in  reality  such  is 
the  position  of  every  intelligent  and  reasonable  creature  of  God.  We  are  tenants  to 
whom  his  goodness  has  assigned  a  sphere  of  action  in  which  we  may  be  negligent  or 
diligent,  responsive  to  his  behests  or  indifferent  to  his  claims. 

II.  A  TBU8T  FA.THFDLLT  FULFIU-ED.  In  the  parable  the  keepers  or  tenants  are 
represented  as  having  cultivated  the  vineyards  entrusted  to  them  with  skill  and  success, 
so  that  they  were  able  to  pay  the  king  the  rent  which  was  agreed  upon  or  the  tribute 
which  he  required.  In  this  they  are  representatives  of  all  those  who,  having  received 
privileges  and  enjoyed  opportunities,  turn  them  to  good  account.  The  scholar  who 
cultivates  his  mind,  enlarges  his  knowledge,  and  fits  himself  to  influence  aright  the 
opinion  and  convictions  of  his  less-favoured  fellow-men ;  the  man  of  wealth  who  employs 
his  riches  in  a  spirit  of  wise  and  expansive  knowledge;  the  Cliristian  minister  who 
cultivates  the  corner  of  the  spiritual  vineyard  committed  to  his  care ;  every  faithful  child 
of  God  who  diligently  and  prayerfully  endeavours  to  do  the  will  of  the  heavenly 
Husbandman,  may  be  said  to  be  faithful  in  his  discharge  of  the  obligations  of  his  trust. 

III.  Fidelity  to  thb  trust  amply  kbcoqnized  and  ebmunbrated.  Whilst  the 
king  received  his  thousand  pieces  of  silver,  the  cultivators  of  the  vineyard  were  rewarded 
with  two  hundred  pieces  as  the  recompense  of  their  toil.  And  God  suffers  no  faithful 
labourer  tc  be  the  luser  by  his  service.  True,  the  recompense  may  not  be  material  or 
temporal.  Many  a  diligent  servant  of  God  is  allowed  to  live  a  life  of  privation  and  to 
die  in  poverty.  But  there  is  a  rich  reward  reaped  by  such  a  faithful  trustee  and  steward 
(if  God's  grace.  He  has  the  recompense  of  a  good  conscience ;  he  may  have  the  affec- 
tionate gratitude  of  some  whose  best  interests  he  has  promoted;  and  he  certainly  has 
ihe  approval  of  him  who  can  appoint  to  a  higher  ministry,  who  can  confer  lasting 
honours  and  true  blessedness. — T. 

Ver.  13. — The  longed-for  voice.  "  The  companions  hearken  for  thy  voice :  cause  me 
to  hear  it."  Such  is  the  closing  utterance  of  the  royal  spouse,  who  thus  invites  the  bride 
to  give  expression  to  the  feelings  that  animate  her  breast.  May  we  not  believe  that 
the  King  of  kings,  who  is  yet  the  Lover  and  the  Friend  of  his  Church,  in  similar  language 
asks  for  the  free  communication  of  the  Church's  purest  thoughts  and  best  desires? 
Welcome  to  the  Saviour  is  the  outpouring  of  his  people's  hearts.  Never  can  they  speak 
to  meet  with  inattention  and  disregard  from  him  upon  whom  their  all  depends. 

I.  Christ  dbliohts  in  the  voice  of  his  people's  love.  He  has  not  refrained  from 
assurances  of  his  love  towards  us,  and  he  expects  that  we  shall  not  repress  the  utterance 
of  our  affection  towards  him.  His  kindness  evokes  our  affection,  and  that  affection  can- 
not be  speechless ;  it  must  needs  find  a  voice,  whilst  its  expression  will  ever  be  welcome 
and  grateful  to  his  tender  heart. 

II.  Christ  delights  in  the  voice  of  his  people's  sinoeeb  supplioatiohs.  The 
relation  being  such  as  it  is,  our  acidresses  to  our  Lord  must  be  constantly  taking  the 
form  of  prayer.  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  withhold  our  petitions.  We  are 
altogetlier  dependent  upon  him,  and  in  our  dependence  he  takes  pleasure,  because  it 
aHords  him  the  opportunity  of  constantly  displaying  his  kindness.  When  we  come  into 
his  presence  as  suppliants,  we  do  not  come  unbidden.  "  Cause  me,"  says  Christ,  "  to 
hear  thy  voice." 

III.  Christ  delights  in  the  voice  op  his  people's  gratitude  and  praise.  For  such 
acknowlc  dgments  there  is  incessant  occasion.  He  does  not  cease  to  give,  nor  should  we 
cease  to  bless  the  Giver.  If  supplication  is  the  special  exercise  of  the  Church  on  earth, 
praise  is  the  undying  exercise  of  the  Church  ia  heaven.  Gratitude  and  adoration  are 
as  immortal  as  is  love  itsel£ — T. 

BOKO  or  SOLOMON.  ' 


HOMILETIOAL   INDEX 


TO 


THE   SONG   OP   SOLOMON. 


OHAFTBB  L 


The  Frologna      ...  ...  ... 

Dialogae  between  the  Bride  and  the 

Chonu 
The  Oommnaion  of  the  Bridegroom 

and  the  Bride  ... 
"The     Song    of    Songs,   which     is 

Solomon'a"     ... 
Deaire  after  God  ...  ... 

Ohriatfi  Kame 

The  Ohristian  SonI,   its  Trials   and 

Trinmpha 
The  Sonl's  Joy  in  the  liove  of  God ... 
The  Pastor's  Peril 
Kot  Faithless,  yet  not  Faithfal 
How  to  find  God  ...  ... 

Lore  Assailed,  bnt  Steadfast 
Cbaraoteristios  of  those  whom  Christ 

loves ... 
Soly  Oommnnion  ... 

V7hat  Christ  is  to  his  People  ... 

The  House  of  the  Lord     ... 
The  Bridegroom  and  the  Bride        ... 
Low  Bstimate  of  Self        ... 
Seeking  and  Finding         ...  ... 

Beoiprooal  Bsteem  ...  ... 

Holy  Lyrics         ...  ...  .m 

Lore  Better  tluui  Win*     m  w> 


riam 
8 

10 


12 

14 
15 
16 

17 
17 
18 
20 
21 


24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
81 
83 
8S 


iHxm  MSI 

The  Fragrant  Name          ,„  ...  34 

Divine  Attraction               ...  ...  36 

The  Joyfol  Celebration   of   Divine 

Love  ...             ...             ...  ,.,  85 

The  Keeper  of  the  Tineyards  ...  86 

The  Shepherd's  Oare          ...  ...  87 

Love  and  Admiration         ...  ...  87 


CHAPTER  n. 


Converse  of  the  Bridegroom  and  the 
Bride  continned  ...  ... 

The  Visit  of  the  Beloved  ...  ... 

The  Bose  and  the  Lily 

The  Lord's  Besponse  to  the  Lily     ... 

"His  Shadow"    ... 

Faint  for  Love     ... 

The  Sonl  wooed  and  won  ... 

Spring  ... 

"  The  Little  Foxes  " 

He  mine  ;  I  his  ... 

Eminent  Piety  seen  in  Contrast 

The  Pre-eminence  of  Immannel 

Boyal  Generosity 

Chrisf  B  Coming  makes  a  New  Epoch 
in  onr  History  ...  ... 

Marriage  Jointure  ...  ... 

Wild-flower  Bemtf  m  m 


.  42 

.  46 

.  49 

.  60 

.  61 

.  62 

.  64 

.  65 

67,  71 

.  60 

.  61 

.  62 


65 
67 


INDEX. 


THBKS 

fiOB 

Taou 

rAoi 

Shadow  and  Frait 

69 

The  Supremacy  of  Christ  ... 

182 

The  Banquet  of  Love 

70 

"Altogether  Lovely"        ...            188, 

148 

The  Approach  of  the  Beloved 

70 

Languid  Life 

134 

Spring-time 

71 

The  Personal  Excellences  of  Jesus  ... 

136 

Mutnal  Possession 

72 

Hospitality  and  Festivity  ... 

139 

The  Heart  that  waketh      ... 

140 

Open  to  the  Beloved  whoknooketh  ... 

140 

CHAFTER  III. 

The  Dream  of  Distress 

141 

"Chiefest  among  Ten  Thousand"   ... 

1-42 

The  Dream  of  the  Bride    ... 

76 

The  Espousals     ... 

79 

Love's  Dream      ...             ... 

82 

OHAPTKB  VL 

The  Watchmen    ...             ... 

83 

"  Solomon  in  All  his  Glory  " 

83 

Dialogue  between  the  Bride  and  the 

The  Search  for  the  True  King 

84 

Daughters  of  Jerusalem 

147 

The  King  coming  to  his  Capital 

87 

The  Bridegroom's  Praise  of  the  Bride 

148 

The  Sonl's  Love  ... 

89 

Conversation  between  the  Chorus  and 

The  Soul's  Quest  rewarded              ... 

90 

the  Bride 

151 

The  Bridal  Entry 

90 

Earnest  Inquirers  after  Christ 

153 

The  Frieodship  of  the  World 

154 

How  Souls  come  into  Perilous  Places 

155 

CHAPTER  IV 

Successful  Quest  after  the  Chief  Good 

155 

Christ's  Picture  of  his  Church 

157 

The  Bridegroom  with  the  Bride 

95 

True  Love  is  True  Knowledge 

IW 

Farther  Conversation 

98 

The  Spiritual  Beauty  of  the  Church 

What  Christ  sees  in  those  who  love 

of  Christ 

160 

him    ... 

101 

The  Terribleness  of   the   Church  of 

Where  Christ  is  now 

103 

Christ 

161 

The  Immacnlate  Soul 

104 

Spiritual  Promotion 

161 

The  Beautiful  but  Dangerous  World 

104 

"Cur  Dens  Homo?" 

105 

"  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus! " 

106 

CHAPTER  VIL 

Night  and  Morning 

107 

Christ's  Appraisement   of   Believers 

109 

The   Chorus  of   Maidens  praise  the 

The  King's  Garden 

111 

Beauty  of  the  Bride 

165 

Prayer  and  its  Quick  Response 

113 

Dialogue  between  the  King  and  the 

The  Charm  of  True  Beauty 

116 

Bride 

167 

"  Without  Spot " 

116 

Christian  Missions 

171 

Heart  calls  to  Heart 

117 

"  I  am  my  Beloved's "        ...             ... 

171 

The  Garden  and  the  Fountain 

118 

Useful  Service     ...             ... 

171 

The  Response  of  Love 

119 

The  Fairness  of  Love 

176 

The  Sweetness  of  Speech  ... 

176 

The  Desire  of  the  Beloved 

177 

CHAPTER  V. 

Divine  Companionship       ... 

178 

Garnered  Fruits  ...            ... 

178 

Response  to  oh.  iv.   16 :  the  Bride- 

groom accepts  the  Bride's  Invitation 

123 

CHAPTER  Vin. 

The  Second  Dream  of  the  Bride 

124 

The  Bride's  Praise  of  the  Bridegroom 

128 

Wishes  of  the  Bride 

186 

Christ's  Response 

129 

Entire  Union  of  Wedded  Love 

188 

The  Flesh  and  Spirit 

130 

"  Oh  that  Men  would  understand  1" 

193 

The  Dream  of  Gethsemane 

131 

The  Home-ooming 

194 

INDEX. 


THEME 

PAOE 

Love's  Prayer 

.     195 

Love's  Characteristics 

.     195 

The  Little  Sister 

.     196 

"  Gaudeamus  igitur  " 

.     196 

The  Last  Appeal  ... 

.     197 

The  Christian  Pilgrim 

.     198 

Prayer  for  Full  Assurance 

.     200 

THEME 

PAGE 

Stewardship 

..     303 

Sacred  Fellowship 

..     304 

The  Ardour  of  Spiritual  Love 

..     307 

"  Leaning  upon  her  Beloved" 

..     207 

The  Power  and  the  Praise  of  Love    . 

..     308 

The  Reward  of  the  Faithful 

..    209 

The  Longed-for  Voice 

..     209 

