Jeceralescnns 


SEMINARY LIBRARY 


200 NORTH MAIN STREET 


PENNSYLVANIA 19440-2499 


HATEIELD, 


? 


BIBLICAL THEOLOGICAL 


432 


= 


56 


Pa 


The Necessity of Prayer 


BIBLICAL THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY LIBRARY 
200 NORTH MAIN STREET 
HATEIELD, PENNSYLVANIA 19440-2499 


EDITED BY HOMER W. HODGE 


The Spiritual Life Books 
By EDWARD M. BOUNDS 


The Necessity of Prayer . . . . $1.25 
iThe Essentials of Prayer. . . . 1.25 
‘The: Reality: of) Prayer™ 2. ie Rn 1:25 
The Possibilities of Prayer . . 1.25 
Satan, His Personality, His Power, His 
Overthrow . . : 1.25 
Heaven, A Place, A City, A Fore 4 1:25 


MPOrpose INS PIayer’ ios) Men epee 1.25 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
ein 2025 


https://archive.org/details/necessityofprayeO000edwa 


Atlanta, Ga.) 


in 1907 at 


1 
v 


(Photo take) 


Dr. E. M. Bounps 


Hopcr 


Rev. H. W. 


The 
Necessity of Prayer 


By 
EDWARD M. BOUNDS, D.D. 


Author of ‘‘ Purpose in Prayer,’’ ‘‘ The Possibilities 
of Prayer,’’ ‘* Heaven,’’ ‘‘ Satan,’ etc. 


Edited by 
REV. HOMER W. HODGE 


New YorK CHICAGO 
Fleming H. Revell Company 
LonpDon AND EDINBURGH 


BIBLICAL THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY LIBRARY 
200 NORTH MAIN STREET 
HATFIELD, PENNSYLVANIA 19440-2499 


Ah ca 


Geoegud 


Copyright, Mcmxx1x, by 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


. 


New York: 158 Fifth Avenue 
Chicago: 851 Cass Street 
London: 21 Paternoster Square 
Edinburgh: 99 George Street 


FOREWORD 


not merely pray well that he might write 

well about prayer. He prayed because 
the needs of the world were upon him. He prayed, 
for long years, upon subjects which the easy-going 
Christian rarely gives a thought, and for objects 
which men of less thought and faith are always 
ready to call impossible. From his solitary, 
prayer-vigils, year by year, there arose teaching 
equaled by few men in modern Christian history. 
He wrote transcendently about prayer, because he 
was himself, transcendent in its practice. 

As breathing is a physical reality to us so prayer 
was a reality for Bounds. He took the command, 
“Pray without ceasing” almost as literally as 
animate nature takes the law of the reflex nervous 
system, which controls our breathing. 

Prayer-books—real text-books, not forms of 
prayer—were the fruit of this daily spiritual ex- 
ercise. Not brief articles for the religious press 
came from his pen—though he had been experi- 
enced in that field for years—not pamphlets, but 
books were the product and result. He was hin- 
dered by poverty, obscurity, loss of prestige, yet 
his victory was not wholly reserved until his death. 

5 


yn et McKENDREE BOUNDS did 


6 FOREWORD 


In 1907, he gave to the world two small editions. 
One of these was widely circulated in Great 
Britain. The years following up to his death in 
1913 were filled with constant labour and he went 
home to God leaving a collection of manuscripts. 
His letters carry the request that the present edi- 
tor should publish these products of his gifted pen. 

The preservation of the Bounds manuscripts 
to the present time has clearly been providential. 
The work of preparing them for the press has 
been a labour of love, consuming years of effort. 

These books are unfailing wells for a lifetime 
of spiritual water-drawing. They are hidden treas- 
ures, wrought in the darkness of the dawn and 
the heat of the noon, on the anvil of experience, 
and beaten into wondrous form by the mighty 
stroke of the Divine. They are living voices 
whereby he, being dead, yet speaketh. 

C.G, 


The above Foreword was written by Claude 
Chilton, Jr., an ardent admirer of Dr. Bounds, and 
to whom we owe many obligations for suggestions 
in editing the Bounds Spiritual Life Books. We 
buried Claude L. Chilton February 18, 1929. 
What a meeting of these two great saints of God, 
of shining panoply and knightly grace! 

Homer W. Hopce. 

Wilkes-Barre, Pa. 


CONTENTS 


PRAYER AND FAITH 


PRAYER AND FaitH (Continued) 


. PRAYER AND TRUST 


PRAYER AND DESIRE 


PRAYER AND FERVENCY . 


. PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY 
. PRAYER AND ImporTUNITY (Continued) . 
. PRAYER AND CHARACTER AND CONDUCT . 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE . 

PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE (Continued) 
PRAYER AND VIGILANCE . 

PRAYER AND THE Worp or Gop 


. PRayeR AND THE Worp or Gop (Con- 


tinued ) 


. PRAYER AND THE House or Gop 


102 
108 


119 


129 
137 


I 
PRAYER AND FAITH 


“A dear friend of mine who was quite a lover of the 
chase, told me the following story: ‘ Rising early one 
morning,’ he said, ‘I heard the baying of a score of 
deerhounds in pursuit of their quarry. Looking away 
to a broad, open field in front of me, I saw a young 
fawn making its way across, and giving signs, more- 
over, that its race was well-nigh run. Reaching the rails 
of the enclosure, it leaped over and crouched within 
ten feet from where I stood. A moment later two of 
the hounds came over, when the fawn ran in my direc- 
tion and pushed its head between my legs. I lifted the 
little thing to my breast, and, swinging round and 
round, fought off the dogs. I felt, just then, that all 
the dogs in the West could not, and should not cap- 
ture that fawn after its weakness had appealed to my 
strength.’ So is it, when human helplessness appeals 
to Almighty God. Well do I remember when the 
hounds of sin were after my soul, until, at last, I ran 
into the arms of Almighty God.”—A. C. Drxon. 


of prayer, of its activities and enterprises, 

first place, must, of necessity, be given to 

faith. It is the initial quality in the heart of any 

man who essays to talk to the Unseen. He must, 

out of sheer helplessness, stretch forth hands of 

faith. He must believe, where he cannot prove. 
9 


|: any study of the principles, and procedure 


10 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


In the ultimate issue, prayer is simply faith, claim- 
ing its natural yet marvellous prerogatives—faith 
taking possession of its illimitable inheritance. 
True godliness is just as true, steady, and persever- 
ing in the realm of faith as it is in the province of 
prayer. Moreover: when faith ceases to pray, it 
ceases to live. 

Faith does the impossible because it brings God 
to undertake for us, and nothing is impossible 
with God. How great—without qualification or 
limitation—is the power of faith! If doubt be 
banished from the heart, and unbelief made 
stranger there, what we ask of God shall surely 
come to pass, and a believer hath vouchsafed to 
him “ whatsoever he saith.” 

Prayer projects faith on God, and God on the 
world. Only God can move mountains, but faith 
and prayer move God. In His cursing of the fig- 
tree our Lord demonstrated His power. Following 
that, He proceeded to declare, that large powers 
were committed to faith and prayer, not in order 
to kill but to make alive, not to blast but to bless. 

At this point in our study, we turn to a saying 
of our Lord, which there is need to emphasize, 
since it is the very keystone of the arch of faith and 
prayer. 


“Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye 
desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and 
ye shall have them.” 


PRAYER AND FAITH 11 


We should ponder well that statement—“ Be- 
lieve that ye receive them, and ye shall have 
them.” Here is described a faith which realizes, 
which appropriates, which takes. Such faith is a 
consciousness of the Divine, an experienced com- 
munion, a realized certainty. 

Is faith growing or declining as the years go by? 
Does faith stand strong and four square, these 
days, as iniquity abounds and the love of many 
grows cold? Does faith maintain its hold, as re- 
ligion tends to become a mere formality and world- 
liness increasingly prevails? The enquiry of our 
Lord, may, with great appropriateness, be ours. 
“When the Son of Man cometh,” He asks, “ shall 
He find faith on the earth? ” We believe that He 
will, and it is ours, in this our day, to see to it 
that the lamp of faith is. trimmed and burning, 
lest He come who shall come, and that right early. 

Faith is the foundation of Christian character 
and the security of the soul. When Jesus was 
looking forward to Peter’s denial, and cautioning 
him against it, He said unto His disciple: 


“ Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have 
you, to sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, 
that thy faith fail not.” 


Our Lord was declaring a central truth; it was 
Peter’s faith He was seeking to guard; for well 
He knew that when faith is broken down, the 
foundations of spiritual life give way, and the 


12 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


entire structure of religious experience falls. It 
was Peter’s faith which needed guarding. Hence 
Christ’s solicitude for the welfare of His disciple’s 
soul and His determination to fortify Peter’s faith 
by His own all-prevailing prayer. 

In his Second Epistle, Peter has this idea in 
mind when speaking of growth in grace as a 
measure of safety in the Christian life, and as 
implying fruitfulness. 


“And besides this,” he declares, “ giving diligence, 
add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and 
to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; 
and to patience godliness.” 


Of this additioning process, faith was the start- 
ing-point—the basis of the other graces of the 
Spirit. Faith was the foundation on which other 
things were to be built. Peter does not enjoin his 
readers to add to works or gifts or virtues but to 
faith. Much depends on starting right in this 
business of growing in grace. There is a Divine 
order, of which Peter was aware; and so he goes 
on to declare that we are to give diligence to 
making our calling and election sure, which elec- 
tion is rendered certain adding to faith which, in 
turn, is done by constant, earnest praying. Thus 
faith is kept alive by prayer, and every step taken, 
in this adding of grace to grace, is accompanied 
by prayer. 

The faith which creates powerful praying is the 


PRAYER AND FAITH 13 


faith which centres itself on a powerful Person. 
Faith in Christ’s ability to do and to do greatly, 
is the faith which prays greatly. Thus the leper 
lay hold upon the power of Christ. “Lord, if 
Thou wilt,” he cried, “‘ Thou canst make me clean.” 
In this instance, we are shown how faith centered 
in Christ’s ability to do, and how it secured the 
healing power. 

It was concerning this very point, that Jesus 
questioned the blind men who came to Him for 
healing: 


“ Believe ye that I am able to do this?” He asks. 
“They said unto Him, Yea, Lord. Then touched He 
their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto 
you.” 


It was to inspire faith in His ability to do that 
Jesus left behind Him, that last, great statement, 
which, in the final analysis, is a ringing challenge 
to faith. “ All power,” He declared, “is given unto 
Me in heaven and in earth.” 

Again: faith is obedient; it goes when com- 
manded, as did the nobleman, who came to Jesus, 
in the day of His flesh, and whose son was griev- 
ously sick. 

Moreover: such faith acts. Like the man who 
was born blind, it goes to wash in the pool of 
Siloam when fold to wash. Like Peter on Gennes- 
aret it casts the net where Jesus commands, in- 
stantly, without question or doubt. Such faith 


14 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


takes away the stone from the grave of Lazarus 
promptly. A praying faith keeps the command- 
ments of God and does those things which are well 
pleasing in His sight. It asks, “ Lord, what wilt 
Thou have me to do?” and answers quickly, 
“‘ Speak, Lord, Thy servant heareth.” Obedience 
helps faith, and faith, in turn, helps obedience. 
To do God’s will is essential to true faith, and 
faith is necessary to implicit obedience. 

Yet faith is called upon, and that right often to 
wait in patience before God, and is prepared for 
God’s seeming delays in answering prayer. Faith 
does not grow disheartened because prayer is not 
immediately honoured; it takes God at His Word, 
and lets Him take what time He chooses in ful- 
filling His purposes, and in carrying on His work. 
There is bound to be much delay and long days 
of waiting for true faith, but faith accepts the 
conditions—knows there will be delays in answer- 
ing prayer, and regards such delays as times of 
testing, in the which, it is privileged to show its 
mettle, and the stern stuff of which it is made. 

The case of Lazarus was an instance of where 
there was delay, where the faith of two good women 
was sorely tried: Lazarus was critically ill, and 
his sisters sent for Jesus. But, without any known 
reason, our Lord delayed His going to the relief 
of His sick friend. The plea was urgent and 
touching—‘“ Lord, behold, he whom Thou lovest is 
sick,”—but the Master is not moved by it, and 


PRAYER AND FAITH 15 


the women’s earnest request seemed to fall on 
deaf ears. What a trial to faith! Furthermore: 
our Lord’s tardiness appeared to bring about hope- 
less disaster. While Jesus tarried, Lazarus died. 

But the delay of Jesus was exercised in the in- 
terests of a greater good. Finally, He makes His 
way to the home in Bethany. 


“Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is 
dead. And I am glad for your sakes, that I was not 
there, to the intent ye may believe; nevertheless let us 
go unto him.” 


Fear not, O tempted and tried believer, Jesus 
wil come, if patience be exercised, and faith hold 
fast. His delay will serve to make His coming 
the more richly blessed. Pray on. Wait on. 
Thou canst not fail. If Christ delay, wait for 
Him. In His own good time, He will come, and 
will not tarry. 

Delay is often the test and the strength of faith. 
How much patience is required when these times 
of testing come! Yet faith gathers strength 
by waiting and praying. Patience has its perfect 
work in the school of delay. In some instances, 
delay is of the very essence of the prayer. God 
has to do many things, antecedent to giving the 
final answer—things which are essential to the 
lasting good of him who is requesting favour at His 
hands. 

Jacob prayed, with point and ardour, to be de- 


16 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


livered from Esau. But before that prayer could 
be answered, there was much to be’done with, and 
for Jacob. He must be changed, as well as Esau. 
Jacob had to be made into a new man, before Esau 
could be. Jacob had to be converted to God, be- 
fore Esau could be converted to Jacob. 

Among the large and luminous utterances of 
Jesus concerning prayer, none is more arresting 
than this: 


“ Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on 
Me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater 
works than these shall he do; because I go unto My 
Father. And whatsoever ye shall ask in My Name, 
that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the 
Son. If ye shall ask anything in My Name, I will 
do it.” 


How wonderful are these statements of what 
God will do in answer to prayer! Of how great 
importance these ringing words, prefaced, as they 
are, with the most solemn verity! Faith in Christ 
is the basis of all working, and of all praying. 
All wonderful works depend on wonderful praying, 
and all praying is done in the Name of Jesus 
Christ. Amazing lesson, of wondrous simplicity, 
is this praying in the name of the Lord Jesus! 
All other conditions are depreciated, everything 
else is renounced, save Jesus only. The name of 
Christ—the Person of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ—must be supremely sovereign, in the hour 
and article of prayer. 


PRAYER AND FAITH 17 


If Jesus dwell at the fountain of my life; if the 
currents of His life have displaced and superseded 
all self-currents; if implicit obedience to Him be 
the inspiration and force of every movement of my 
life, then He can safely commit the praying to my 
will, and pledge Himself, by an obligation as pro- 
found as His own nature, that whatsoever is asked 
shall be granted. Nothing can be clearer, more 
distinct, more unlimited both in application and 
extent, than the exhortation and urgency of Christ, 
“ Have faith in God.” 

Faith covers temporal as well as spiritual needs. 
Faith dispels all undue anxiety and needless care 
about what shall be eaten, what shall be drunk, 
what shall be worn. Faith lives in the present,| 
and regards the day as being sufficient unto the 
evil thereof. It lives day by day, and dispels all 
fears for the morrow. Faith brings great ease of 
mind and perfect peace of heart. 


“ Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind 
is stayed on Thee: because he trusted in Thee.” 


When we pray, “ Give us this day our daily 
bread,” we are, in a measure, shutting to-morrow 
out of our prayer. We do not live in to-morrow 
but in to-day. We do not seek to-morrow’s grace 
or to-morrow’s bread. They thrive best, and get 
most out of life, who live in the living present. 
They pray best who pray for to-day’s needs, not 


18 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


for to-morrow’s, which may render our prayers un- 
necessary and redundant by not existing at all! 

True prayers are born of present trials and 
present needs. Bread, for to-day, is bread enough. 
Bread given for to-day is the strongest sort of 
pledge that there will be bread to-morrow. Vic- 
tory to-day, is the assurance of victory to-morrow. 
Our prayers need to be focussed upon the present) 
We must trust God to-day, and leave the morrow 
entirely with Him. The present is ours; the fu- 
ture belongs to God. Prayer is the task and duty 
of each recurring day—daily prayer for daily 
needs. 

As every day demands its bread, so every day 
demands its prayer. No amount of praying, done 
to-day, will suffice for to-morrow’s praying. On the 
other hand, no praying for to-morrow is of any 
great value to us to-day. To-day’s manna is what 
we need; to-morrow God will see that our needs are 
supplied. This is the faith which God seeks to 
inspire. So leave to-morrow, with its cares, its 
needs, its troubles, in God’s hands. There is no 
storing to-morrow’s grace or to-morrow’s praying; 
neither is there any laying-up of to-day’s grace, 
to meet to-morrow’s necessities. We cannot have 
to-morrow’s grace, we cannot eat to-morrow’s 
bread, we cannot do to-morrow’s praying. “ Suf- 
ficient unto the day is the evil thereof; ” and, 
most assuredly, if we possess faith, sufficient also, 
will be the good. 


II 
PRAYER AND FAITH (Continued) 


“The guests at a certain hotel were being rendered 
uncomfortable by repeated strumming on a piano, done 
by a little girl who possessed no knowledge of music. 
They complained to the proprietor with a view to 
having the annoyance stopped. ‘I am sorry you are 
annoyed,’ he said. ‘ But the girl is the child of one 
of my very best guests. I can scarcely ask her not 
to touch the piano. But her father, who is away for | 
a day or so, will return to-morrow. You can then ap- 
proach him, and have the matter set right.’ When the 
father returned, he found his daughter in the reception- 
room and, as usual, thumping on the piano. He walked 
up behind the child and, putting his arms over her 
shoulders, took her hands in his, and produced some 
most beautiful music. Thus it may be with us, and thus 
it will be, some coming day. Just now, we can produce 
little but clamour and disharmony; but, one day, the 
Lord Jesus will take hold of our hands of faith and 
prayer, and use them to bring forth the music of the 
skies.” —ANON. 


ENUINE, authentic faith must be definite 
(> and free of doubt. Not simply general 
in character; not a mere belief in the 
being, goodness and power of God, but a faith 
which believes that the things which “he saith, 


19 


20 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


shall come to pass.” As the faith is specific, so 
the answer likewise will be definite: “He shall 
have. whatsoever’ he saith.” Faith and prayer 
select the things, and God commits Himself to do 
the very things which faith and persevering prayer 
nominate, and petition Him to accomplish. 

The American Revised Version renders the 
twenty-fourth verse of the eleventh chapter of 
Mark, thus: ‘“ Therefore I say unto you, All things 
whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye 
receive them, and ye shall have them.” Perfect 
faith has always in its keeping what perfect prayer 
asks for. How large and unqualified is the area 
of operation—the “ All things whatsover! ” How 
definite and specific the promise—“ Ye shall have 
them! ” 

Our chief concern is with our faith—the prob- 
lems of its growth, and the activities of its vigorous 
maturity. A faith which grasps and holds in its 
keeping the very things it asks for, without waver- 
ing, doubt or fear—that is the faith we need— 
faith, such as is a pearl of great price, in the 
process and practise of prayer. 

The statement of our Lord about faith and 
prayer quoted above is of supreme importance. 
Faith must be definite, specific; an unqualified, 
unmistakable request for the things asked for. It 
is not to be a vague, indefinite, shadowy thing; it 
must be something more than an abstract belief in 
God’s willingness and ability to do for us. It is 


PRAYER AND FAITH 21 


to be a definite, specific, asking for, and expecting 
the things for which we ask. Note the reading of 
Mark 11: 23: 


' “And shail not doubt in his heart, but shall believe 
that those things which he saith shall come to pass; 
he shall have whatever he saith.” 


Just so far as the faith and the asking is 
definite, so also will the answer be. The giv- 
ing is not to be something other than the things 
prayed for, but the actual things sought and 
named. ‘“ He shall have whatsoever he saith.” It 
is all imperative, ‘ He shall have.” The granting 
is to be unlimited, both in quality and in quantity. 

Faith and prayer select the subjects for petition, 
thereby determining what God is to do. “He 
shall have whatsoever he saith.” Christ holds 
Himself ready to supply exactly, and fully, all the 
demands of faith and prayer. If the order on God 
be made clear, specific and definite, God will fill 
it, exactly in accordance with the presented terms. 

Faith is not an abstract belief in the Word of 
God, nor a mere mental credence, nor a simple as- 
sent of the understanding and will; nor is it a 
passive acceptance of facts, however sacred or 
thorough. Faith is an operation of God, a Divine 
illumination, a holy energy implanted by the Word 
of God and the Spirit in the human soul—a spiri- 
tual, Divine principle which takes of the Super- 


22 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


natural and makes it a thing apprehendable by the 
faculties of time and sense. ; 

Faith deals with God, and is conscious of God. 
It deals with the Lord Jesus Christ and sees in 
Him a Saviour; it deals with God’s Word, and 
lays hold of the truth; it deals with the Spirit of 
God, and is energized and inspired by its holy fire. 
God is the great objective of faith; for faith rests 
its whole weight on His Word. Faith is not an aim- 
less act of the soul, but a looking to God and a 
resting upon His promises. Just as love and hope 
have always an objective so, also, has faith. Faith 
is not believing just anything; it is believing God, 
resting in Him, trusting His Word. 

Faith gives birth to prayer, and grows stronger, 
strikes deeper, rises higher, in the struggles and 
wrestlings of mighty petitioning. Faith is the sub- 
stance of things hoped for, the assurance and real- 
ization of the inheritance of the saints. Faith, too, 
is humble and persevering. It can wait and pray; 
it can stay on its knees, or lie in the dust. It is 
the one great condition of prayer; the lack of it 
lies at the root of all poor praying, feeble praying, 
little praying, unanswered praying. 

The nature and meaning of faith is more demon- 
strable in what it does, than it is by reason of any 
definition given it. Thus, if we turn to the record 
of faith given us in that great honour roll, which 
constitutes the eleventh chapter of Hebrews, we 
see something of the wonderful results of faith. 


PRAYER AND FAITH ye) 


What a glorious list it is—that of these men and 
women of faith! What marvellous achievements 
are there recorded, and set to the credit of faith! 
The inspired writer, exhausting his resources in 
cataloguing the Old Testament saints, who were 
such notable examples of wonderful faith, finally 
exclaims: 


“ And what shall I more say? For the time would 
fail me to tell of Gideon and Barak, and of Samson, 
and of Jephthe; of David also, and Samuel, and of 
the prophets.” 


And then the writer of Hebrews goes on again, 
in a wonderful strain, telling of the unrecorded ex- 
ploits wrought through the faith of the men of 
old, ‘‘ of whom the world was not worthy.” “ All 
these,” he says, ‘‘ obtained a good report through 
faith.” 

What an era of glorious achievements would 
dawn for the Church and the world, if only there 
could be reproduced a race of saints of like mighty 
faith, of like wonderful praying! It is not the 
intellectually great that the Church needs; nor is 
it men of wealth that the times demand. It is not 
people of great social influence that this day re- 
quires. Above everybody and everything else, it 
is men of faith, men of mighty prayer, men and 
women after the fashion of the saints and heroes 
enumerated in Hebrews, who “ obtained a good re- 


24 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


port through faith,” that the Church and the whole 
wide world of humanity needs. 

Many men, of this day, obtain a good report be- 
cause of their money-giving, their great mental 
gifts and talents, but few there be who obtain a 
“good report” because of their great faith in 
God, or because of the wonderful things which are 
being wrought through their great praying. To- 
day, as much as at any time, we need men of great 
faith and men who are great in prayer. These are 
the two cardinal virtues which make men great in 
the eyes of God, the two things which create con- 
ditions of real spiritual success in the life and work 
of the Church. It is our chief concern to see that 
we maintain a faith of such quality and texture, 
as counts before God; which grasps, and holds in 
its keeping, the things for which it asks, without 
doubt and without fear. 

Doubt and fear are the twin foes of faith. 
Sometimes, they actually usurp the place of faith, 
and although we pray, it is a restless, disquieted 
prayer that we offer, uneasy and often complaining. 
Peter failed to walk on Gennesaret because he per- 
mitted the waves to break over him and swamp 
the power of his faith. Taking his eyes from the 
Lord and regarding the water all about him, he 
began to sink and had to cry for succour—“ Lord, 
save, or I perish! ” 

Doubts should never be cherished, nor fears har- 
boured. Let none cherish the delusion that he is 


PRAYER AND FAITH 25 


a martyr to fear and doubt. It is no credit to 
any man’s mental capacity to cherish doubt of 
God, and no comfort can possibly derive from such 
a thought. Our eyes should be taken off self, re- 
moved from our own weakness and allowed to rest 
implicitly upon God’s strength. “Cast not away 
therefore your confidence, which hath great recom- 
pence of reward.” A simple, confiding faith, living 
day by day, and casting its burden on the Lord, 
each hour of the day, will dissipate fear, drive 
away misgiving and deliver from doubt: 


“ Be careful for nothing, but in everything, by sup- 
plication and prayer, with thanksgiving, let your re- 
quests be made known unto God.” 


That is the Divine cure for all fear, anxiety, and 
undue concern of soul, all of which are closely 
akin to doubt and unbelief. This is the Divine 
prescription for securing the peace which passeth 
all understanding, and keeps the heart and mind in 
quietness and peace. 

All of us need to mark well and heed the cau- 
tion given in Hebrews: “Take heed, brethren, lest 
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in 
departing from the living God.” 

We need, also, to guard against unbelief as we 
would against an enemy. Faith needs to be cul- 
tivated. We need to keep on praying, “ Lord, in- 
crease our faith,” for faith is susceptible of in- 
crease. Paul’s tribute to the Thessalonians was, 


26 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


that their faith grew exceedingly. Faith is in- 
creased by exercise, by being put into use. It is 
nourished by sore trials. 


“That the trial of your faith, being much more 
precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried 
with fire, might be found unto praise and honour and 
glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.” 


Faith grows by reading and meditating upon the 
Word of God. Most, and best of all, faith thrives 
in an atmosphere of prayer. 

It would be well, if all of us were to stop, and 
inquire personally of ourselves: “‘ Have I faith in 
God? Have I real faith,—faith which keeps me 
in perfect peace, about the things of earth and 
the things of heaven?” This is the most im- 
portant question a man can propound and expect 
to be answered. And there is another question, 
closely akin to it in significance and importance— 
“ Do I really pray to God so that He hears me and 
answers my prayers? And do I truly pray unto 
God so that I get direct from God the things I ask 
of Him? ” 

It was claimed for Augustus Cesar that he 
found Rome a city of wood, and left it a city of 
marble. The pastor who succeeds in chang- 
ing his people from a prayerless to a prayerful 
people, has done a greater work than did Augus- 
tus in changing a city from wood to marble. And 
after all, this is the prime work of the preacher. 


PRAYER AND FAITH 27 


Primarily, he is dealing with prayerless people— 
with people of whom it is said, “ God is not in all 
their thoughts.” Such people he meets every- 
where, and all the time. His main business is to 
turn them from being forgetful of God, from being 
devoid of faith, from being prayerless, so that 
they become people who habitually pray, who be- 
lieve in God, remember Him and do His will. 
The preacher is not sent to merely induce men to 
join the Church, nor merely to get them to do 
better. It is to get them to pray, to trust God, 
and to keep God ever before their eyes, that they 
may not sin against Him. 

The work of the ministry is to change unbeliev- 
ing sinners into praying and believing saints. The 
call goes forth by Divine authority, “ Believe on 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.” 
We catch a glimpse of the tremendous importance 
of faith and of the great value God has set upon 
it, when we remember that He has made it the 
one indispensable condition of being saved. ‘“ By 
grace are ye saved, through faith.” Thus, when 
we contemplate the great importance of prayer, we 
find faith standing immediately by its side. By 
faith are we saved, and by faith we stay saved. 
Prayer introduces us to a life of faith. Paul de- 
clared that the life he lived, he lived by faith in the 
Son of God, who loved him and gave Himself for 
him—that he walked by faith and not by sight. 

Prayer is absolutely dependent upon faith. 


‘ 


28 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Virtually, it has no existence apart from it, and ac- 
complishes nothing unless it be its inseparable 
companion. Faith makes prayer effectual, and in 
a certain important sense, must precede it. 


“ For he that cometh to God must believe that He 
is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently 
seek Him.” 


Before prayer ever starts toward God; before 
its petition is preferred, before its requests are 
made known—faith must have gone on ahead; 
must have asserted its belief in the existence of 
God; must have given its assent to the gracious 
truth that “ God is a rewarder of those that dili- 
gently seek His face.” ‘This is the primary step in 
praying. In this regard, while faith does not bring 
the blessing, yet it puts prayer in a position to ask 
for it, and leads to another step toward realiza- 
tion, by aiding the petitioner to believe that God 
is able and willing to bless. 

Faith starts prayer to work—clears the way to 
the mercy-seat. It gives assurance, first of all, 
that there is a mercy-seat, and that there the High 
Priest awaits the pray-ers and the prayers. Faith 
opens the way for prayer to approach God. But 
it does more. It accompanies prayer at every step 
she takes. It is her inseparable companion and 
when requests are made unto God, it is faith which 
turns the asking into obtaining. And faith fol- 
lows prayer, since the spiritual life into which a 


PRAYER AND FAITH 29 


believer is led by prayer, is a life of faith. The 
one prominent characteristic of the experience into 
which believers are brought through prayer, is not 
a life of works, but of faith. 

Faith makes prayer strong, and gives it patience 
to wait on God. Faith believes that God is a re- 
warder. No truth is more clearly revealed in the 
Scriptures than this, while none is more encourag- 
ing. Even the closet has its promised reward, 
“He that seeth in secret, shall reward thee 
openly,” while the most insignificant service ren- 
dered to a disciple in the name of the Lord, surely 
receives its reward. And to this precious truth 
faith gives its hearty assent. 

Yet faith is narrowed down to one particular 
thing—it does not believe that God will reward 
everybody, nor that He is a rewarder of all who 
pray, but that He is a rewarder of them that dili- 
gently seek Him. Faith rests its case on diligence 
in prayer, and gives assurance and encouragement 
to diligent seekers after God, for it is they, alone, 
who are richly rewarded when they pray. 

We need constantly to be reminded that faith 
is the one inseparable condition of successful pray- 
ing. There are other considerations entering into 
the exercise, but faith is the final, the one indis- 
pensable condition of true praying. As it is writ- 
ten in a familiar, primary declaration: “ Without 
faith, it is impossible to please Him.” 

James puts this truth very plainly. 


30 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


“ Tf any of you lack wisdom,” he says, “let him ask 
of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth 
not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in 
faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth (or 
doubteth) is like a wave of the sea, driven with the 
wind and tossed. For let not that man think that he 
shall receive any thing of the Lord.” 


Doubting is always put under the ban, because 
it stands as a foe to faith and hinders effectual 
praying. In the First Epistle to Timothy Paul 
gives us an invaluable truth relative to the condi- 
tions of successful praying, which he thus lays 
down: “TI will therefore that men pray every- 
where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and 
doubting.” 

All questioning must be watched against and 
eschewed. Fear and peradventure have no place 
in true praying. Faith must assert itself and bid 
these foes to prayer depart. 

Too much authority cannot be attributed to 
faith; but prayer is the sceptre by which it signal- 
izes its power. How much of spiritual wisdom 
there is in the following advice written by an 
eminent old divine. 


“Would you be freed from the bondage to corrup- 
tion? ” he asks. ‘ Would you grow in grace in general 
and grow in grace in particular? If you would, your 
way is plain. Ask of God more faith. Beg of Him 
morning, and noon and night, while you walk by the 


PRAYER AND FAITH OL 


way, while you sit in the house, when you lie down and 
when you rise up; beg of Him simply to impress 
Divine things more deeply on your heart, to give you 
more and more of the substance of things hoped for 
and of the evidence of things not seen.” 


Great incentives to pray are furnished in Holy 
Scriptures, and our Lord closes His teaching about 
prayer, with the assurance and promise of heaven. 
The presence of Jesus Christ in heaven, the prep- 
aration for His saints which He is making there, 
and the assurance that He will come again to re- 
ceive them—how all this helps the weariness of 
praying, strengthens its conflicts, sweetens its ardu- 
ous toil! These things are the star of hope to 
prayer, the wiping away of its tears, the putting 
of the odour of heaven into the bitterness of its 
cry. The spirit of a pilgrim greatly facilitates 
praying. An earth-bound, earth-satisfied spirit 
cannot pray. In such a heart, the flame of spir- 
itual desire is either gone out or smouldering in 
faintest glow. The wings of its faith are clipped, 
its eyes are filmed, its tongue silenced. But they, 
who in unswerving faith and unceasing prayer, wait 
continually upon the Lord, do renew their strength, 
do mount up with wings as eagles, do run, and are 
not weary, do walk, and not faint. 


III 
PRAYER AND TRUST 


“One evening I left my office in New York, with a 
bitterly cold wind in my face. I had with me, (as I 
thought) my thick, warm muffler, but when I pro- 
ceeded to button-up against the storm, I found that it 
was gone. I turned back, looked along the streets, 
searched my office, but in vain. I realized, then, that 
I must have dropped it, and prayed God that I might 
find it; for such was the state of the weather, that it 
would be running a great risk to proceed without it. 
I looked, again, up and down the surrounding streets, 
but without success. Suddenly, I saw a man on the 
opposite side of the road holding out something in his 
hand. I crossed over and asked him if that were my 
muffler? He handed it to me saying, ‘ It was blown to 
me by the wind.’ He who rides upon the storm, had 
used the wind as a means of answering prayer.” 

—WILL1aM Horst. 


RAYER does not stand alone. It is not an 
Pp isolated duty and independent principle. 
It lives in association with other Christian 
duties, is wedded to other principles, is a partner 
with other graces. But to faith, prayer is indis- 
solubly joined. Faith gives it colour and tone, 
shapes its character, and secures its results. 
Trust is faith become absolute, ratified, consum- 
32 


PRAYER AND TRUST 33 


mated. There is, when all is said and done, a sort 
of venture in faith and its exercise. But trust is 
firm belief, it is faith in full flower. Trust is a 
conscious act, a fact of which we are sensible. 
According to the Scriptural concept it is the eye 
of the new-born soul, and the ear of the renewed 
soul. It is the feeling of the soul, the spiritual 
eye, the ear, the taste, the feeling—these one and 
all have to do with trust. How luminous, how dis- 
tinct, how conscious, how powerful, and more than 
all, how Scriptural is such a trust! How different 
from many forms of modern belief, so feeble, dry, 
and cold! These new phases of belief bring no 
consciousness of their presence, no “ joy unspeak- 
able and full of glory ” results from their exercise. 
They are, for the most part, adventures in the 
peradventures of the soul. There is no safe, sure 
trust in anything. The whole transaction takes 
place in the realm of Maybe and Perhaps. 

Trust like life, is feeling, though much more than 
feeling. An unfelt life is a contradiction; an unfelt 
trust is a misnomer, a delusion, a contradiction. 
Trust is the most felt of all attributes. It is all 
feeling, and it works only by love. An unfelt love 
is as impossible as an unfelt trust. The trust of 
which we are now speaking is a conviction, An 
unfelt conviction? How absurd! 

Trust sees God doing things here and now. Yea, 
more. It rises to a lofty eminence, and looking 
into the invisible and the eternal, realizes that God 


34 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


has done things, and regards them as being already 
done. Trust brings eternity into the annals and 
happenings of time, transmutes the substance of 
hope into the reality of fruition, and changes 
promise into present possession. We know when 
we trust just as we know when we see, just as we 
are conscious of our sense of touch. Trust sees, 
receives, holds. Trust is its own witness. 

Yet, quite often, faith is too weak to obtain 
God’s greatest good, immediately; so it has to wait 
in loving, strong, prayerful, pressing obedience, 
until it grows in strength, and is able to bring 
down the eternal, into the realms of experience and 
time. 

To this point, trust masses all its forces. Here 
it holds. And in the struggle, trust’s grasp be- 
comes mightier, and grasps, for itself, all that God 
has done for it in His eternal wisdom and pleni- 
tude of grace. 

In the matter of waiting in prayer, mightiest 
prayer, faith rises to its highest plane and becomes 
indeed the gift of God. It becomes the blessed dis- 
position and expression of the soul which is se- 
cured by a constant intercourse with, and un- 
wearied application to God. 

Jesus Christ clearly taught that faith was the 
condition on which prayer was answered. When 
our Lord had cursed the fig-tree, the disciples were 
much surprised that its withering had actually 
taken place, and their remarks indicated their in- 


PRAYER AND TRUST 30 


credulity. It was then that Jesus said to them, 
“Have faith in God.” 


“For verily I say unto you, That whosoever shall 
say unto this mountain, Be thou removed and be thou 
cast into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but 
shall believe that those things which he saith shall come 
to pass, he shall have whatsoever he saith. Therefore, 
I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye 
pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have 
them.” 


Trust grows nowhere so readily and richly as 
in the prayer-chamber. Its unfolding and devel- 
opment are rapid and wholesome when they are 
regularly and well kept. When these engagements 
are hearty and full and free, trust flourishes ex- 
ceedingly. The eye and presence of God give 
vigorous life to trust, just as the eye and the pres- 
ence of the sun make fruit and flower to grow, and 
all things glad and bright with fuller life. 

“Have faith in God,” “ Trust in the Lord” 
form the keynote and foundation of prayer. Pri- 
marily, it is not trust in the Word of God, but 
rather trust in the Person of God. For trust in 
the Person of God must precede trust in the Word 
of God. “ Ye believe in God, believe also in Me,” 
is the demand our Lord makes on the personal 
trust of His disciples. The person of Jesus Christ 
must be central, to the eye of trust. This great 
truth Jesus sought to impress upon Martha, when 


36 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


her brother lay dead, in the home at Bethany. 
Martha asserted her belief in the fact of the resur- 
rection of her brother: 


“Martha saith unto Him, I know that he shall rise 
again in the resurrection at the last day.” 


Jesus lifts her trust clear above the mere fact 
of the resurrection, to His own Person, by saying: 


“T am the resurrection and the life: he that be- 
lieveth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: 
and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me, shall never 
die. Believest thou this? She saith unto Him, Yea, 
Lord: I believe that Thou art the Christ, the Son of 
God, which should come into the world.” 


Trust, in an historical fact or in a mere record 
may be a very passive thing, but trust in a person 
vitalizes the quality, fructifies it, informs it with 
love. The trust which informs prayer centres in a 
Person. 

Trust goes even further than this. The trust 
which inspires our prayer must be not only trust 
in the Person of God, and of Christ, but in their 
ability and willingness to grant the thing prayed 
for. It is not only, “ Trust, ye, in the Lord,” 
but, also, “for in the Lord Jehovah, is everlast- 
ing strength.” 

The trust which our Lord taught as a condition 
of effectual prayer, is not of the head but of the 


PRAYER AND TRUST 37 


heart. It is trust which “ doubteth not in his 
heart.” Such trust has the Divine assurance that 
it shall be honoured with large and satisfying an- 
swers. ‘The strong promise of our Lord brings 
faith down to the present, and counts on a present 
answer. 

Do we believe, without a doubt? When we 
pray, do we believe, not that we shall receive the 
things for which we ask on a future day, but that 
we receive them, then and there? Such is the 
teaching of this inspiring Scripture. How we need 
to pray, “Lord, increase our faith,” until doubt 
be gone, and implicit trust claims the promised 
blessings, as its very own. 

This is no easy condition. It is reached only 
after many a failure, after much praying, after 
many waitings, after much trial of faith. May 
our faith so increase until we realize and receive 
all the fulness there is in that Name which guar- 
antees to do so much. 

Our Lord puts trust as the very foundation of 
praying. The background of prayer is trust. The 
whole issuance of Christ’s ministry and work was 
dependent on implicit trust in His Father. The 
centre of trust is God. Mountains of difficulties, 
and all other hindrances to prayer are moved out 
of the way by trust and his virile henchman, 
faith. When trust is perfect and without doubt, 
prayer is simply the outstretched hand, ready to 
receive. Trust perfected, is prayer perfected. 


38 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Trust looks to receive the thing asked for—and 
gets it. Trust is not a belief that God can bless, 
that He will bless, but that He does bless, here 
and now. ‘Trust always operates in the present 
tense. Hope looks toward the future. Trust 
looks to the present. Hope expects. ‘Trust pos- 
sesses. Trust receives what prayer acquires. So 
that what prayer needs, at all times, is abiding and 
abundant trust. 

Their lamentable lack of trust and resultant 
failure of the disciples to do what they were sent 
out to do, is seen in the case of the lunatic son, who 
was brought by his father to nine of them while 
their Master was on the Mount of Transfiguration. 
A boy, sadly afflicted, was brought to these men 
to be cured of his malady. They had been com- 
missioned to do this very kind of work. This was 
a part of their mission. They attempted to cast 
out the devil from the boy, but had signally failed. 
The devil was too much for them. They were 
humiliated at their failure, and filled with shame, 
while their enemies were in triumph. Amid the 
confusion incident to failure Jesus draws near. He 
is informed of the circumstances, and told of the 
conditions connected therewith. Here is the suc- 
ceeding account: 


“Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and 
perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? 
How long shall I suffer you? Bring him hither to me. 


PRAYER AND TRUST 39 


And Jesus rebuked the devil, and he departed out of 
him and the child was cured from that very hour. And 
when He was come into the house, His disciples asked 
Him privately, Why could not we cast him out? And 
He said unto them, This kind can come forth by noth- 
ing but by prayer and fasting.” 


Wherein lay the difficulty with these men? 
They had been lax in cultivating their faith by 
prayer and, as a consequence, their trust utterly 
failed. They trusted not God, nor Christ, nor 
the authenticity of His mission, or their own. So 
has it been many a time since, in many a crisis in 
the Church of God. Failure has resulted from a 
lack of trust, or from a weakness of faith, and 
this, in turn, from a lack of prayerfulness. Many 
a failure in revival efforts has been traceable to the 
same cause. Faith had not been nurtured and 
made powerful by prayer. Neglect of the inner 
chamber is the solution of most spiritual failure. 
And this is as true of our personal struggles with 
the devil as was the case when we went forth to at- 
tempt to cast out devils. To be much on our 
knees in private communion with God is the only 
surety that we shall have Him with us either in 
our personal struggles, or in our efforts to convert 
sinners. 

Everywhere, in the approaches of the people to 
Him, our Lord put trust in Him, and the divinity 
of His mission, in the forefront. He gave no defi- 
nition of trust, and He furnishes no theological 


40 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


discussion of, or analysis of it; for He knew that 
men would see what faith was by what faith did; 
and from its free exercise trust grew up, spon- 
taneously, in His presence. It was the product of 
His work, His power and His Person. These fur- 
nished and created an atmosphere most favourable 
for its exercise and development. Trust is alto- 
gether too splendidly simple for verbal definition; 
too hearty and spontaneous for theological termi- 
nology. The very simplicity of trust is that which 
staggers many people. They look away for some 
great thing to come to pass, while all the time 
“the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and 
in thy heart.” 

When the saddening news of his daughter’s 
death was brought to Jairus our Lord interposed: 
“ Be not afraid,” He said calmly, “ only believe.” 
To the woman with the issue of blood, who stood 
tremblingly before Him, He said: 


“ Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go 
in peace, and be whole of thy plague.” 


As the two blind men followed Him, pressing 
their way into the house, He said: 


“ According to your faith be it unto you. And their 
eyes were opened.” 


When the paralytic was let down through the 
roof of the house, where Jesus was teaching, and 


PRAYER AND TRUST 41 


placed before Him by four of his friends, it is 
recorded after this fashion: 


“And Jesus seeing their faith, said unto the sick of 
the palsy: Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven 
thee.” 


When Jesus dismissed the centurion whose 
servant was seriously ill, and who had come to 
Jesus with the prayer that He speak the healing 
word, without even going to his house, He did it 
in the manner following: 


“ And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy way; 
and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee. 
And his servant was healed in the selfsame hour.” 


When the poor leper fell at the feet of Jesus 
and cried out for relief, ‘“‘ Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou 
canst make me clean,” Jesus immediately granted 
his request, and the man glorified Him with a loud 
voice. Then Jesus said unto him, “ Arise, go thy 
way; thy faith hath made thee whole.” 

The Syrophenician woman came to Jesus with 
the case of her afflicted daughter, making the case 
her own, with the prayer, ‘“ Lord, help me,” mak- 
ing a fearful and heroic struggle. Jesus honours 
her faith and prayer, saying: 


“© woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even 
as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from 
that very hour.” 


42 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


After the disciples had utterly failed.to cast the 
devil out of the epileptic boy, the father of the 
stricken lad came to Jesus with the plaintive 
and almost despairing cry, “If Thou canst do 
anything, have compassion on us and help us.” 
But Jesus replied, “If thou canst believe, all 
things are possible to him that believeth.” 

Blind Bartimzus sitting by the wayside, hears 
our Lord as He passes by, and cries out pitifully 
and almost despairingly, “ Jesus, Thou son of 
David, have mercy on me.” The keen ears of our 
Lord immediately catch the sound of prayer, 
and He says to the beggar: 


“Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole. And 
immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus 
in the way.” 


To the weeping, penitent woman, washing His 
feet with her tears and wiping them with the hair 
of her head, Jesus speaks cheering, soul-comforting 
words: “ Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.” 

One day Jesus healed ten lepers at one time, in 
answer to their united prayer, “ Jesus, Master, 
have mercy on us,” and He told them to go and 
show themselves to the priests. ‘“ And it came to 
pass as they went, they were cleansed.” 


IV 
PRAYER AND DESIRE 


“There are those who will mock me, and tell me to 
stick to my trade as a cobbler, and not trouble my 
mind with philosophy and theology. But the truth of 
God did so burn in my bones, that I took my pen in 
hand and began to set down what I had seen.” 

—Jacos BEHMEN, 


ESIRE is not merely a simple wish; it is 
ID a deep seated craving; an intense longing, 

for attainment. In the realm of spiritual 
affairs, it is an important adjunct to prayer. So 
important is it, that one might say, almost, that 
desire is an absolute essential of prayer. Desire 
precedes prayer, accompanies it, is followed by it. 
Desire goes before prayer, and by it, created and 
intensified. Prayer is the oral expression of de- 
sire. If prayer is asking God for something, then 
prayer must be expressed. Prayer comes out into 
the open. Desire is silent. Prayer is heard; de- 
sire, unheard. The deeper the desire, the stronger 
the prayer. Without desire, prayer is a meaning- 
less mumble of words. Such perfunctory, formal 
praying, with no heart, no feeling, no real desire 
accompanying it, is to be shunned like a pestilence. 

43 


44 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Its exercise is a waste of precious time, and from 
it, no real blessing accrues. 

And yet even if it be discovered that desire is 
honestly absent, we should pray, anyway. We 
ought to pray. The “ ought ” comes in, in order 
that both desire and expression be cultivated. 
God’s Word commands it. Our judgment tells us 
we ought to pray—to pray whether we feel like it 
or not—and not to allow our feelings to determine 
our habits of prayer. In such circumstance, we 
ought to pray for the desire to pray; for such a 
desire is God-given and heaven-born. We should 
pray for desire; then, when desire has been given, 
we should pray according to its dictates. Lack of 
spiritual desire should grieve us, and lead us to 
lament its absence, to seek earnestly for its be- 
stowal, so that our praying, henceforth, should be 
an expression of “ the soul’s sincere desire.” 

A sense of need creates or should create, earnest 
desire. The stronger the sense of need, before 
God, the greater should be the desire, the more 
earnest the praying. The “poor in spirit” are 
eminently competent to pray. 

Hunger is an active sense of physical need. It 
prompts the request for bread. In like manner, 
the inward consciousness of spiritual need creates 
desire, and desire breaks forth in prayer. Desire 
is an inward longing for something of which we are 
not possessed, of which we stand in need—some- 
thing which God has promised, and which may 


PRAYER AND DESIRE “45 


be secured by an earnest supplication of His 
throne of grace. 

Spiritual desire, carried to a higher degree, is 
the evidence of the new birth. It is born in the 
renewed soul: 


“As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the 
word, that ye may grow thereby.” 


The absence of this holy desire in the heart is 
presumptive proof, either of a decline in spiritual 
ecstasy, or, that the new birth has never taken 
place. 


“ Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness: for they shall be filled.” 


These heaven-given appetites are the proof of a 
renewed heart, the evidence of a stirring spiritual 
life. Physical appetites are the attributes of a liv- 
ing body, not of a corpse, and spiritual desires 
belong to a soul made alive to God. And as the 
renewed soul hungers and thirsts after righteous- 
ness, these holy inward desires break out into earn- 
est, supplicating prayer. 

In prayer, we are shut up to the Name, merit 
and intercessory virtue of Jesus Christ, our great 
High Priest. Probing down, below the accom- 
panying conditions and forces in prayer, we come 
to its vital basis, which is seated in the human 
heart. It is not simply our need; it is the heart’s 


46 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


yearning for what we need, and for which we feel 
impelled to pray. Desire is the will in action; a 
strong, conscious longing, excited in the inner na- 
ture, for some great good. Desire exalts the object 
of its longing, and fixes the mind on it. It has 
choice, and fixedness, and flame in it, and prayer, 
based thereon, is explicit and specific. It knows 
its need, feels and sees the thing that will meet it, 
and hastens to acquire it. 

Holy desire is much helped by devout contem- 
plation. Meditation on our spiritual need, and on 
God’s readiness and ability to correct it, aids de- 
sire to grow. Serious thought engaged in before 
praying, increases desire, makes it more insistent, 
and tends to save us from the menace of private 
Pree We fail much more 
in desire, than in its outward expression. We re- 
tain the form, while the inner life fades and almost 
dies. 

One might well ask, whether the feebleness of 
our desires for God, the Holy Spirit, and for all the 
fulness of Christ, is not the cause of our so little 
praying, and of our languishing in the exercise of 
prayer? Do we really feel these inward pantings 
of desire after heavenly treasures? Do the inbred 
groanings of desire stir our souls to mighty wres- 
tlings? Alas for us! The fire burns altogether 
too low. The flaming heat of soul has been tem- 
pered down to a tepid lukewarmness. This, it 
should be remembered, was the central cause of 


PRAYER AND DESIRE 47 


the sad and desperate condition of the Laodicean 
Christians, of whom the awful condemnation is 
written that they were “rich, and increased in 
goods and had need of nothing,’ and knew not 
that they “were wretched, and miserable, and 
poor, and blind.” 

Again: we might well inquire—have we that de- 
sire which presses us to close communion with 
God, which is filled with unutterable burnings, and 
holds us there through the agony of an intense 
and soul-stirred supplication? Our hearts need 
much to be worked over, not only to get the evil 
out of them, but to get the good into them. And 
the foundation and inspiration to the incoming 
good, is strong, propelling desire. This holy and 
fervid flame in the soul awakens the interest of 
heaven, attracts the attention of God, and places 
at the disposal of those who exercise it, the ex- 
haustless riches of Divine grace. 

The dampening of the flame of holy desire, is 
destructive of the vital and aggressive forces in 
church life. God requires to be represented by a 
fiery Church, or He is not in any proper sense, 
represented at all. God, Himself, is all on fire, 
and His Church, if it is to be like Him, must also 
be at white heat. The great and eternal interests 
of heaven-born, God-given religion are the only 
things about which His Church can afford to be on 
fire. Yet holy zeal need not to be fussy in order 
to be consuming. Our Lord was the incarnate an- 


48 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


tithesis of nervous excitability, the absolute op- 
posite of intolerant or clamorous declamation, yet 
the zeal of God’s house consumed Him; and the 
world is still feeling the glow of His fierce, con- 
suming flame and responding to it, with an ever- 
increasing readiness and an ever-enlarging re- 
sponse. 

A lack of ardour in prayer, is the sure sign of a 
lack of depth and of intensity of desire; and the 
absence of intense desire is a sure sign of God’s 
absence from the heart! To abate fervour is to 
retire from God. He can, and does, tolerate many 
things in the way of infirmity and error in His chil- 
dren. He can, and will pardon sin when the peni- 
tent prays, but two things are intolerable to Him— 
insincerity and lukewarmness. Lack of heart and 
lack of heat are two things He loathes, and to the 
Laodiceans He said, in terms of unmistakable 
severity and condemnation: 


“T would thou wert cold or hot. So then because 
thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will 
spue thee out of My mouth.” 


This was God’s expressed judgment on the lack 
of fire in one of the Seven Churches, and it is 
His indictment against individual Christians for 
the fatal want of sacred zeal. In prayer, fire is the 
motive power. Religious principles which do not 
emerge in flame, have neither force nor effect. 


PRAYER AND DESIRE 49 


Flame is the wing on which faith ascends; fer- 
vency is the soul of prayer. It was the “ fervent, 
effectual prayer” which availed much. Love is 
kindled in a flame, and ardency is its life. Flame 
is the air which true Christian experience 
breathes. It feeds on fire; it can withstand any- 
thing, rather than a feeble flame; and it dies, 
chilled and starved to its vitals, when the sur- 
rounding atmosphere is frigid or lukewarm. 

True prayer, must be aflame. Christian life 
and character need to be all on fire. Lack of 
spiritual heat creates more infidelity than lack of 
faith. Not to be consumingly interested about 
the things of heaven, is not to be interested in 
them at all. The fiery souls are those who con- 
quer in the day of battle, from whom the king- 
dom of heaven suffereth violence, and who take it 
by force. The citadel of God is taken only by 
those, who storm it in dreadful earnestness, who 
besiege it, with fiery, unabated zeal. 

Nothing short of being red hot for God, can 
keep the glow of heaven in our hearts, these chilly 
days. The early Methodists had no heating ap- 
paratus in their churches. They declared that the 
flame in the pew and the fire in the pulpit must 
suffice to keep them warm. And we, of this hour, 
have need to have the live coal from God’s altar 
and the consuming flame from heaven glowing in 
our hearts. This flame is not mental vehemence 
nor fleshy energy. It is Divine fire in the soul, in- 


56 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


tense, dross-consuming—the very essence of the 
Spirit of God. : 

No erudition, no purity of diction, no width of 
mental outlook, no flowers of eloquence, no grace 
of person, can atone for lack of fire. Prayer as- 
cends by fire. Flame gives prayer access as well 
as wings, acceptance as well as energy. ‘There is 
no incense without fire; no prayer without flame. 

Ardent desire is the basis of unceasing prayer. 
It is not a shallow, fickle inclination, but a strong 
yearning, an unquenchable ardour, which impreg- 
nates, glows, burns and fixes the heart. It is the 
flame of a present and active principle mounting 
up to God. It is ardour propelled by desire, that 
burns its way to the Throne of mercy, and gains 
its plea. It is the pertinacity of desire that gives 
triumph to the conflict, in a great struggle of 
prayer. It is the burden of a weighty desire that 
sobers, makes restless, and reduces to quietness 
the soul just emerged from its mighty wrestlings. 
It is the embracing character of desire which arms 
prayer with a thousand pleas, and robes it with 
an invincible courage and an all-conquering power. 

The Syrophenician woman is an object lesson of 
desire, settled to its consistency, but invulnerable 
in its intensity and pertinacious boldness. The im- 
portunate widow represents desire gaining its end, 
through obstacles insuperable to feebler impulses. 

Prayer is not the rehearsal of a mere perform- 
ance; nor is it an indefinite, widespread clamour. 


PRAYER AND DESIRE ae 


Desire, while it kindles the soul, holds it to the ob- 
ject sought. Prayer is an indispensable phase of 
spiritual habit, but it ceases to be prayer when 
carried on by habit alone. It is depth and in- 
tensity of spiritual desire which give intensity and 
depth to prayer. The soul cannot be listless when 

some great desire fires and inflames it. The ur- 
' gency of our desire holds us to the thing desired 
with a tenacity which refuses to be lessened or 
loosened; it stays and pleads and persists, and re- 
fuses to let go until the blessing has been vouch- 
safed. 


“ Lord, I cannot let Thee go, 
Till a blessing Thou bestow; 
Do not turn away Thy face; 
Mine’s an urgent, pressing case.” 


The secret of faint heartedness, lack of impor- 
tunity, want of courage and strength in prayer, lies 
in the weakness of spiritual desire, while the non- 
observance of prayer is the fearful token of that 
desire having ceased to live. That soul has 
turned from God whose desire after Him no 
longer presses it to the inner chamber. There can 
be no successful praying without consuming de- 
sire. Of course there can be much seeming to 
pray, without desire of any kind. 

Many things may be catalogued and much 
ground covered. But does desire compile the 
catalogue? Does desire map out the region to be 


52 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


covered? On the answer, hangs the issue of 
whether our petitioning be prating or prayer. De- 
sire is intense, but narrow; it cannot spread itself 
over a wide area. It wants a few things, and 
wants them badly, so badly, that nothing but God’s 
willingness to answer, can bring it easement or 
content. 

Desire single-shots at its objective. There may 
be many things desired, but they are specifically 
and individually felt and expressed. David did 
not yearn for everything; nor did he allow his de- 
sires to spread out everywhere and hit nothing. 
Here is the way his desires ran and found expres- 
sion: 


“One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I 
seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord 
all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the 
Lord, and to enquire in His temple.” 


It is this singleness of desire, this definiteness of 
yearning, which counts in praying, and which 
drives prayer directly to core and centre of sup- 
ply. 

In the Beatitudes Jesus voiced the words which 
directly bear upon the innate desires of a renewed 
soul, and the promise that they will be granted: 
“ Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, for they shall be filled.” 

This, then, is the basis of prayer which compels 
an answer—that strong inward desire has entered 


PRAYER AND DESIRE 53 


into the spiritual appetite, and clamours to be sat- 
isfied. Alas for us! It is altogether too true and 
frequent, that our prayers operate in the arid re- 
gion of a mere wish, or in the leafless area of 
a memorized prayer. Sometimes, indeed, our 
prayers are merely stereotyped expressions of set 
phrases, and conventional proportions, the fresh- 
ness and life of which have departed long years 
ago. 

Without desire, there is no burden of soul, no 
sense of need, no ardency, no vision, no strength, 
no glow of faith. There is no mighty pressure, no 
holding on to God, with a deathless, despairing 
grasp— I will not let Thee go, except Thou bless 
me.” There is no utter self-abandonment, as there 
was with Moses, when, lost in the throes of a des- 
perate, pertinacious, and all-consuming plea he 
cried: “‘ Yet now, if Thou wilt forgive their sin; 
if not, blot me, I pray Thee, out of Thy book.” 
Or, as there was with John Knox when he pleaded: 
** Give me Scotland, or I die! ” 

God draws mightily near to the praying soul. 
To see God, to know God, and to live for God— 
these form the objective of all true praying. Thus 
praying is, after all, inspired to seek after God. 
Prayer-desire is inflamed to see God, to have 
clearer, fuller, sweeter and richer revelation of 
God. So to those who thus pray, the Bible be- 
comes a mew Bible, and Christ a new Saviour, by 
the light and revelation of the inner chamber. 


54 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


We iterate and reiterate that burning desire— 
enlarged and ever enlarging—for the best, and 
most powerful gifts and graces of the Spirit of 
God, is the legitimate heritage of true and effectual 
praying. Self and service cannot be divorced— 
cannot, possibly, be separated. More than that: 
desire must be made intensely personal, must be 
centered on God with an insatiable hungering and 
thirsting after Him and His righteousness. ‘“ My 
soul thirsteth for God, the living God.” The in- 
dispensable requisite for all true praying is a 
deeply seated desire which seeks after God Him- 
self, and remains unappeased, until the choicest 
gifts in heaven’s bestowal, have been richly and 
abundantly vouchsafed. 


V 
PRAYER AND FERVENCY 


“St. Teresa rose off her deathbed to finish her work. 
She inspected, with all her quickness of eye and love 
of order the whole of the house in which she had been 
carried to die. She saw everything put into its proper 
place, and every one answering to their proper order, 
after which she attended the divine offices of the day. 
She then went back to her bed, summoned her daugh- 
ters around her . . . and, with the most peniten- 
tial of David’s penitential prayers upon her tongue, 
Teresa of Jesus went forth to meet her Bridegroom.” 

—ALEXANDER WHYTE. 


the issue, because it has nothing to stake. 
It comes with empty hands. Hands, too, 
which are listless, as well as empty, which have 
never learned the lesson of clinging to the Cross. 
Fervourless prayer has no heart in it; it is an 
empty thing, an unfit vessel. Heart, soul, and life, 
must find place in all real praying. Heaven must 
be made to feel the force of this crying unto God. 
Paul was a notable example of the man who pos- 
sessed a fervent spirit of prayer. His petitioning 
was all-consuming, centered immovably upon the 
object of his desire, and the God who was able to 
meet it. 


Pee without fervour, stakes nothing on 


a) 


56 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Prayers must be red hot. It is the fervent 
prayer that is effectual and that availeth. Cold- 
ness of spirit hinders praying; prayer cannot live 
in a wintry atmosphere. Chilly surroundings 
freeze out petitioning; and dry up the springs of 
supplication. It takes fire to make prayers go. 
Warmth of soul creates an atmosphere favourable 
to prayer, because it is favourable to fervency. By 
flame, prayer ascends to heaven. Yet fire is not 
fuss, nor heat, noise. Heat is intensity—some- 
thing that glows and burns. Heaven is a mighty 
poor market for ice. 

God wants warm-hearted servants. The Holy 
Spirit comes as a fire, to dwell in us; we are to be 
baptized, with the Holy Ghost and with fire. Fer- 
vency is warmth of soul. A phlegmatic tempera- 
ment is abhorrent to vital experience. If our re- 
ligion does not set us on fire, it is because we have 
frozen hearts. God dwells in a flame; the Holy 
Ghost descends in fire. To be absorbed in God’s 
will, to be so greatly in earnest about doing it 
that our whole being takes fire, is the qualifying 
condition of the man who would engage in ef- 
fectual prayer. 

Our Lord warns us against feeble praying. 
“Men ought always to pray,” He declares, “ and 
not to faint.” That means, that we are to possess 
sufficient fervency to carry us through the severe 
and long periods of pleading prayer. Fire makes 
one alert and vigilant, and brings him off, more 


PRAYER AND FERVENCY 57 


heavily charged with resisting forces for limp or. 


= conqueror. The atmosphere about us is too 


Ves 


languid prayers to make headway. It takes heat, 


and fervency and meteoric fire, to push through, 
to the upper heavens, where God dwells with His 
saints, in light. 

Many of the great Bible characters were notable 
examples of fervency of spirit when seeking God. 
The Psalmist declares with great earnestness: 


“My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto 
Thy judgments at all times.” 


What strong desires of heart are here! What 
earnest soul longings De ae Word of the ee 
God! Wee Bagg 

An even greater aay is expressed ce bite 
in another place: 


“As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so 
panteth my soul after Thee, O God. My soul thirsteth 
for God, for the living God: when shall I come and 
appear before God? ” 


That is the word of a man who lived in a state 
of grace, which had been deeply and supernat- 
urally wrought in his soul. 

Fervency before God counts in the hour of 
prayer, and finds a speedy and rich reward at His 
hands. The Psalmist gives us this statement of 
what God had done for the king, as his heart 
turned toward his Lord: 


= 


58 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


“Thou hast given him his heart’s desire, and hast 
not withholden the request of his lips.” 


At another time, he thus expresses himself di- 
rectly to God in preferring his request: 


“Lord, all my desire is before Thee; and my groan- 
ing is not hid from Thee.” 


What a cheering thought! Our inward groan- 
ings, our secret desires, our heart-longings, are not 
hidden from the eyes of Him with whom we have 
to deal in prayer. 

The incentive to fervency of spirit before God, 
is precisely the same as it is for continued and 
earnest prayer. While fervency is not prayer, yet 
it derives from an earnest soul, and is precious in 
the sight of God. Fervency in prayer is the pre- 
cursor of what God will do by way of answer. 
God stands pledged to give us the desire of our 
hearts in proportion to the fervency of spirit we 
exhibit, when seeking His face in prayer. 

Fervency has its seat in the heart, not in the 
brain, nor in the intellectual faculties of the mind. 
Fervency therefore, is not an expression of the 
intellect. Fervency of spirit is something far 
transcending poetical fancy or sentimental im- 
agery. It is something else besides mere prefer- 
ence, the contrasting of like with dislike. Fer- 
vency is the throb and gesture of the emotional 
nature. 


PRAYER AND FERVENCY 59 


It is not in our power, perhaps, to create fer- 
vency of spirit ag “will, but we can pray God to 
implant it. It is ours, then, to nourish and cher- 
ish it, to guard it mente extinction, to prevent its 
abatement or decline. The process of personal 
salvation is not only to pray, to express our de- 
sires to God, but to acquire a fervent spirit and 
seek, by all proper means, to cultivate it. It is 
never out of place to pray God to beget within us, 
and to keep alive the spirit of fervent prayer. 

’Fervency has to do with God, just as prayer has 
to do with Him. Desire has always an objective. 
If we desire at all, we desire something. The de- 
gree of fervency with which we fashion our spir- 
itual desires, will always serve to determine the 
earnestness of our praying. In this relation, 
Adoniram Judson says: 


“ A travailing spirit, the throes of a great burdened 
desire, belongs to. prayer. A fervency strong enough to 
drive away sleep, which devotes and inflames the spirit, 
and which retires all earthly ties, all this belongs to 
wrestling, prevailing prayer. The Spirit, the power, the 
air, and food of prayer is in such a spirit.” 


Prayer must be clothed with fervency, strength 
and power. It is the force which, centered on 
God, determines the outlay of Himself for earthly 
good. Men who are fervent in spirit are bent on 
attaining to righteousness, truth, grace, and all 
other sublime and powerful graces which adorn 


60 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


the character of the authentic, unquestioned child 
of God. 

God once declared, by the mouth of a brave 
prophet, to a king who, at one time, had been true 
to God, but, by the incoming of success and ma- 
terial prosperity, had lost his faith, the following 
message: 


“The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout 
the whole earth, to shew Himself strong in the behalf 
of them whose heart is perfect toward Him. Herein 
hast thou done foolishly; therefore, from henceforth 
thou shalt have wars.” 


God had heard Asa’s prayer in early life, but 
disaster came and trouble was sent, because he 
had given up the life of prayer and simple faith. 

In Romans 15: 30, we have the word, “ strive,” 
occurring, in the request which Paul made for 
prayerful cooperation. 

In Colossians 4: 12, we have the same word, 
but translated differently: ‘“ Epaphras always 
labouring fervently for you in prayer.” Paul 
charged the Romans to “ strive together with him 
in prayer,” that is, to help him in his struggle of 
prayer. The word means to enter into a contest, 
to fight against adversaries. It means, moreover, 
to engage with fervent zeal to endeavour to ob- 
tain. 

These recorded instances of the exercise and re- 
ward of faith, give us easily to see that, in almost 


PRAYER AND FERVENCY 61 


every instance, faith was blended with trust until 
it is not too much to say that the former was 
swallowed up in the latter. It is hard to properly 
distinguish the specific activities of these two 
qualities, faith and trust. But there is a point, be- 
yond all peradventure, at which faith is relieved of 
its burden, so to speak; where trust comes along 
and says: ‘“ You have done your part, the rest is 
mine! ” 

In the incident of the barren fig tree, our Lord 
transfers the marvellous power of faith to His dis- 
ciples. To their exclamation, ‘“‘ How soon is the 
fig tree withered away! ” He said: 


“Tf ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only 
do this which is done to the fig tree, but also if ye 
shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and 
be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done. And all 
things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye 
shall receive.” 


When a Christian believer attains to faith of 
such magnificent proportions as these, he steps 
into the realm of implicit trust. He stands with- 
out a tremor on the apex of his spiritual outreach- 
ing. He has attained faith’s veritable top stone 
which is unswerving, unalterable, unalienable trust 
in the power of the living God. 


VI 
PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY 


“How glibly we talk of praying without ceasing! 
Yet we are quite apt to quit, if our prayer remained 
unanswered but one week or month! We assume that 
by a stroke of His arm or an action of His will, God 
will give us what we ask. It never seems to dawn on 
us, that He is the Master of nature, as of grace, and 
that, sometimes He chooses one way, and sometimes 
another in which to do His work. It takes years, 
sometimes, to answer a prayer and when it is answered, 
and we look backward we can see that it did. But 
God knows all the time, and it is His will that we pray, 
and pray, and still pray, and so come to know, indeed 
and of a truth, what it is to pray without ceasing.” 

—ANON. 


UR Lord Jesus declared that “ men ought 
6) always to pray and not to faint,” and the 

parable in which His words occur, was 
taught with the intention of saving men from 
faint-heartedness and weakness in prayer. Our 
Lord was seeking to teach that laxity must be 
guarded against, and persistence fostered and en- 
couraged. There can be no two opinions regard- 
ing the importance of the exercise of this indis- 
pensable quality in our praying. 

62 


PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY 63 


Importunate prayer is a mighty movement of 
the soul toward God. It is a stirring of the deep- 
est forces of the soul, toward the throne of 
heavenly grace. It is the ability to hold on, press 
on, and wait. Restless desire, restful patience, and 
strength of grasp are all embraced in it. It is not 
an incident, or a performance, but a passion of 
soul. It is not a want, half-needed, but a sheer 
necessity. 

The wrestling quality in importunate prayer, 
does not spring from physical vehemence or fleshly 
energy. It is not an impulse of energy, not a mere 
earnestness of soul; it is an inwrought force, a 
faculty implanted and aroused by the Holy Spirit. 
Virtually, it is the intercession of the Spirit of 
God, in us; it is, moreover, “‘ the effectual, fervent 
prayer, which availeth much.” The Divine Spirit 
informing every element within us, with the energy 
of His own striving, is the essence of the impor- 
tunity which urges our praying at the mercy-seat, 
to continue until the fire falls and the blessing de- 
scends. This wrestling in prayer may not be bois- 
terous nor vehement, but quiet, tenacious and 
urgent. Silent, it may be, when there are no visi- 
ble outlets for its mighty forces. 

Nothing distinguishes the children of God so 
clearly and strongly as prayer. It is the one in- 
fallible mark and test of being a Christian. Chris- 
tian people are prayerful, the worldly-minded, 
prayerless. Christians call on God; worldlings 


64 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


ignore God, and call not on His Name. But even 
the Christian had need to cultivate continual 
prayer. Prayer must be habitual, but much more 
than a habit. It is duty, yet one which rises far 
above, and goes beyond the ordinary implications 
of the term. It is the expression of a relation to 
God, a yearning for Divine communion. It is the 
outward and upward flow of the inward life 
toward its original fountain. It is an assertion 
of the soul’s paternity, a claiming of the sonship, 
which links man to the Eternal. 

Prayer has everything to do with moulding the 
soul into the image of God, and has everything 
to do with enhancing and enlarging the measure 
of Divine grace. It has everything to do with 
bringing the soul into complete communion with 
God. It has everything to do with enriching, 
broadening and maturing the soul’s experience of 
God. That man cannot possibly be called a Chris- 
tian, who does not pray. By no possible pretext 
can he claim any right to the term, nor its implied 
significance. If he do not pray, he is a sinner, pure 
and simple, for prayer is the only way in which the 
soul of man can enter into fellowship and commu- 
nion with the Source of all Christlike spirit and 
energy. Hence, if he pray not, he is not of the 
household of faith. 

In this study however, we turn our thought to 
one phase of prayer—that of importunity; the 
pressing of our desires upon God with urgency and 


PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY 65 


perseverance; the praying with that tenacity and 
tension which neither relaxes nor ceases until its 
plea is heard, and its cause is won. 

He who has clear views of God, and Scriptural 
conceptions of the Divine character; who appreci- 
ates his privilege of approach unto God; who un- 
derstands his inward need of all that God has for 
him—that man will be solicitous, outspoken and 
importunate. In Holy Writ, the duty of prayer, 
itself, is advocated in terms which are only barely 
stronger than those in which the necessity for its 
importunity is set forth. The praying which in- 
fluences God is declared to be that of the fervent, 
effectual outpouring of a righteous man. That is 
to say, it is prayer on fire, having no feeble, flicker- 
ing flame, no momentary flash, but shining with a 
vigorous and steady glow. 

The repeated intercessions of Abraham for the 
salvation of Sodom and Gomorrah present an early 
example of the necessity for, and benefit deriving 
from importunate praying. Jacob, wrestling all 
night with the angel, gives significant emphasis to 
the power of a dogged perseverance in praying, 
and shows how, in things spiritual, importunity 
succeeds, just as effectively as it does in matters 
relating to time and sense. 

As we have noted, elsewhere, Moses prayed 
forty days and forty nights, seeking to stay the 
wrath of God against Israel, and his example and 
success are a stimulus to present-day faith in its 


66 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


darkest hour. Elijah repeated and urged his 
prayer seven times ere the rain-cloud appeared 
above the horizon, heralding the success of his 
prayer and the victory of his faith. On one oc- 
casion Daniel though faint and weak, pressed his 
case three weeks, ere the answer and the blessing 
came. 

Many nights, during His earthly life did the 
blessed Saviour spend in prayer. In Gethsemane 
He presented the same petition, three times, with 
unabated, urgent, yet submissive importunity, 
which involved every element of His soul, and is- 
sued in tears and bloody sweat. His life crises 
were distinctly marked, his life victories all won, 
in hours of importunate prayer. And the servant 
is not greater than his Lord. 

The Parable of the Importunate Widow is a 
classic of insistent prayer. We shall do well to re- 
fresh our remembrance of it, at this point in our 
study: 


“And He spake a parable unto them to this end, 
that men ought always to pray, and not to faint; saying, 
There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, 
neither regarded man; and there was a widow in that 
city; and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of 
my adversary. And he would not for a while; but 
afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not 
God nor regard man; yet because this widow troubleth 
me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she 
weary me. And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust 


PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY 67 


judge saith. And shall not God avenge His own elect, 
which cry day and night unto Him, though He bear 
long with them? I tell you He will avenge them 
speedily.” 


This parable stresses the central truth of im- 
portunate prayer. The widow presses her case till 
the unjust judge yields. If this parable does not 
teach the necessity for importunity, it has neither 
point nor instruction in it. Take this one thought 
away, and you have nothing left worth recording. 
Beyond all cavil, Christ intended it to stand as an 
evidence of the need that exists, for insistent 
prayer. 

We have the same teaching emphasized in the 
incident of the Syrophenician woman, who came to 
Jesus on behalf of her daughter. Here, impor- 
tunity is demonstrated, not as a stark impertinence, 
but as with the persuasive habiliments of humil- 
ity, sincerity, and fervency. We are given a 
glimpse of a woman’s clinging faith, a woman’s 
bitter grief, and a woman’s spiritual insight. The 
Master went over into that Sidonian country in 
order that this truth might be mirrored for all 
time—there is no plea so efficacious as importu- 
nate prayer, and none to which God surrenders 
Himself so fully and so freely. 

The importunity of this distressed mother, won 
her the victory, and materialized her request. Yet 
instead of being an offence to the Saviour, it drew 


68 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


from Him a word of wonder, and glad surprise. 
“© woman, great is thy faith! Be it unto thee, 
even as thou wilt.” 

He prays not at all, who does not press his 
plea. Cold prayers have no claim on heaven, and 
no hearing in the courts above. Fire is the life of 
prayer, and heaven is reached by flaming impor- 
tunity rising in an ascending scale. 

Reverting to the case of the importunate widow, 
we see that her widowhood, her friendlessness, and 
her weakness counted for nothing with the unjust 
judge. Importunity was everything. ‘‘ Because 
this widow troubleth me,” he said, ‘“‘ I will avenge 
her speedily, lest she weary me.” Solely because 
the widow imposed upon the time and attention of 
the unjust judge, her case was won. 

God waits patiently as, day and night, His elect 
cry unto Him. He is moved by their requests a 
thousand times more than was this unjust judge. 
A limit is set to His tarrying, by the importunate 
praying of His people, and the answer richly given. 
God finds faith in His praying child—the faith 
which stays and cries—and He honours it by per- 
mitting its further exercise, to the end that it is 
strengthened and enriched. Then He rewards it 
by granting the burden of its plea, in plenitude 
and finality. 

The case of the Syrophenician woman previ- 
ously referred to is a notable instance of success- 
ful importunity, one which is eminently encour- 


PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY 69 


aging to all who would pray successfully. It was 
a remarkable instance of insistence and persever- 
ance to ultimate victory, in the face of almost in- 
superable obstacles and hindrances. But the 
woman surmounted them all by heroic faith and 
persistent spirit that were as remarkable as they 
were successful. Jesus had gone over into her 
country, “and would have no man know it.” But 
she breaks through His purpose, violates His 
privacy, attracts His attention, and pours out to 
Him a poignant appeal of need and faith. Her 
heart was in her prayer. 

At first, Jesus appears to pay no attention to 
her agony, and ignores her cry for relief. He 
gives her neither eye, nor ear, nor word. Silence, 
deep and chilling, greets her impassioned cry. But 
she is not turned aside, nor disheartened. She 
holds on. The disciples, offended at her unseemly 
clamour, intercede for her, but are silenced by the 
Lord’s declaring that the woman is entirely outside 
the scope of His mission and His ministry. 

But neither the failure of the disciples to gain 
her a hearing nor the knowledge—despairing in its 
very nature—that she is barred from the benefits 
of His mission, daunt her, and serve only to lend 
intensity and increased boldness to her approach 
to Christ. She came closer, cutting her prayer in 
twain, and falling at His feet, worshipping Him, 
and making her daughter’s case her own cries, 
with pointed brevity—‘ Lord, help me!” This 


70 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


last cry won her case; her daughter was healed in 
the self-same hour. Hopeful, urgent, and un- 
wearied, she stays near the Master, insisting and 
praying until the answer is given. What a study 
in importunity, in earnestness, in persistence, 
promoted and propelled under conditions which 
would have disheartened any but an heroic, a con- 
stant soul. 

In these parables of importunate praying, our 
Lord sets forth, for our information and encour- 
agement, the serious difficulties which stand in the 
way of prayer. At the same time He teaches that 
importunity conquers all untoward circumstances 
and gets to itself a victory over a whole host of 
hindrances. He teaches, moreover, that an answer 
to prayer is conditional upon the amount of faith 
that goes to the petition. To test this, He delays 
the answer. The superficial pray-er subsides into 
silence, when the answer is delayed. But the man 
of prayer hangs on, and on. The Lord recognizes 
and honours his faith, and gives him a rich and 
abundant answer to his faith-evidencing, impor- 
tunate prayer. 


VII 
PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY (Continued) 


“Two-thirds of the praying we do, is for that which 
would give us the greatest possible pleasure to receive. 
It is a sort of spiritual self-indulgence in which we en- 
gage, and as a consequence is the exact opposite of 
self-discipline. God knows all this, and keeps His 
children asking. In process of time—His time—our 
petitions take on another aspect, and we, another 
spiritual approach. God keeps us praying until, in His 
wisdom, He deigns to answer. And no matter how 
long it may be before He speaks, it is, even then, far 
earlier than we have a right to expect or hope to de- 
serve.” —ANON. 


HE tenor of Christ’s teachings, is to de- 

clare that men are to pray earnestly—to 
pray with an earnestness that cannot be 

denied. Heaven has harkening ears only for the 
whole-hearted, and the deeply-earnest. Energy, 
courage, and persistent perseverance must back 
the prayers which heaven respects, and God hears. 
All these qualities of soul, so essential to ef- 
fectual praying, are brought out in the parable of 
the man who went to his friend for bread, at mid- 
night. This man entered on his errand with con- 
fidence. Friendship promised him success. His 
plea was pressing: of a truth, he could not go back 

71 


72 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


empty-handed. The flat refusal chagrined and 
surprised him. Here even friendship failed! But 
there was something to be tried yet—stern resolu- 
tion, set, fixed determination. He would stay and 
press his demand until the door was opened, and 
the request granted. This he proceeded to do, and 
by dint of importunity secured what ordinary 
solicitation had failed to obtain. 

The success of this man, achieved in the face 
of a flat denial, was used by the Saviour to illus- 
trate the necessity for insistence in supplicating 
the throne of heavenly grace. When the answer is 
not immediately given, the praying Christian must 
gather courage at each delay, and advance in 
urgency till the answer comes which is assured, if 
he have but the faith to press his petition with 
vigorous faith. 

Laxity, faint-heartedness, impatience, timidity 
will be fatal to our prayers. Awaiting the onset 
of our importunity and insistence, is the Father’s 
heart, the Father’s hand, the Father’s infinite 
power, the Father’s infinite willingness to hear 
and give to His children. 

Importunate praying is the earnest, inward 
movement of the heart toward God. It is the 
throwing of the entire force of the spiritual man 
into the exercise of prayer. Isaiah lamented that 
no one stirred himself, to take hold of God. Much 
praying was done in Isaiah’s time, but it was too 
easy, indifferent and complacent. There were no 


PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY 73 


mighty movements of souls toward God. There 
was no array of sanctified energies bent on reach- 
ing and grappling with God, to draw from Him the 
treasures of His grace. Forceless prayers have no 
power to overcome difficulties, no power to win 
marked results, or to gain complete victories. We 
must win God, ere we can win our plea. 

Isaiah looked forward with hopeful eyes to the 
day when religion would flourish, when there 
would be times of real praying. When those times 
came, the watchmen would not abate their vigi- 
lance, but cry day and night, and those, who were 
the Lord’s remembrancers, would give Him no 
rest. Their urgent, persistent efforts would keep 
all spiritual interests engaged, and make increas- 
ing drafts on God’s exhaustless treasures. 

Importunate praying never faints nor grows 
weary; it is never discouraged; it never yields to 
cowardice, but is buoyed up and sustained by a 
hope that knows no despair, and a faith which will 
not let go. Importunate praying has patience to 
wait and strength to continue. It never prepares 
itself to quit praying, and declines to rise from 
its knees until an answer is received. 

The familiar, yet heartening words of that great 
missionary, Adoniram Judson, is the testimony of 
a man who was importunate at prayer. He says: 


“‘T was never deeply interested in any object, never 
prayed sincerely and earnestly for it, but that it came 


74 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


at some time, no matter how distant the day. Some- 
how, in some shape, probably the last I would have de- 
vised, it came.” 


“ Ask, and ye shall receive. Seek, and ye shall 
find. Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.” 
These are the ringing challenges of our Lord in 
regard to prayer, and His intimation that true 
praying must stay, and advance in effort and ur- 
gency, till the prayer is answered, and the blessing 
sought, received. 

In the three words ask, seek, knock, in the order 
in which He places them, Jesus urges the neces- 
sity of importunity in prayer. Asking, seeking, 
knocking, are ascending rounds in the ladder of 
successful prayer. No principle is more definitely 
enforced by Christ than that prevailing prayer 
must have in it the quality which waits and per- 
severes, the courage that never surrenders, the pa- 
tience which never grows tired, the resolution that 
never wavers. 

In the parable preceding that of the Friend at 
Midnight, a most significant and instructive les- 
son in this respect is outlined. Indomitable cour- 
age, ceaseless pertinacity, fixity of purpose, chief 
among the qualities included in Christ’s estimate 
of the highest and most successful form of pray- 
ing. 

Importunity is made up of intensity, persever- 
ance, patience and persistence. The seeming de- 


PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY 75 


lay in answering prayer is the ground and the de- 
mand of importunity. In the first recorded in- 
stance of a miracle being wrought upon one who 
was blind, as given by Matthew, we have an illus- 
tration of the way in which our Lord appeared not 
to hearken at once to those who sought Him. 
But the two blind men continue their crying, and 
follow Him with their continual petition, saying, 
“Thou Son of David, have mercy on us.” But 
He answered them not, and passed into the house. 
Yet the needy ones followed Him, and, finally, 
gained their eyesight and their plea. 

The case of blind Bartimzus is a notable one 
in many ways. Especially is it remarkable for 
the show of persistence which this blind man ex- 
hibited in appealing to our Lord. If it be—as it 
seems—that his first crying was done as Jesus 
entered into Jericho, and that he continued it 
until Jesus came out of the place, it is all the 
stronger an illustration of the necessity of impor- 
tunate prayer and the success which comes to 
those who stake their all on Christ, and give Him 
no peace until He grants them their hearts’ desire. 

Mark puts the whole incident graphically before 
us. At first, Jesus seems not to hear. The crowd 
rebukes the noisy clamour of Bartimzus. Despite 
the seeming unconcern of our Lord, however, and 
despite the rebuke of an impatient and quick- 
tempered crowd, the blind beggar still cries, and 
increases the loudness of his cry, until Jesus is 


76 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


impressed and moved. Finally, the crowd, as 
well as Jesus, hearken to the beggar’s plea and 
declare in favour of his cause. He gains his case. 
His importunity avails even in the face of apparent 
neglect on the part of Jesus, and despite opposi- 
tion and rebuke from the surrounding populace. 
His persistence won where half-hearted indiffer- 
ence would surely have failed. 

Faith has its province, in connection with 
prayer, and, of course, has its inseparable associa- 
tion with importunity. But the latter quality 
drives the prayer to the believing point. A per- 
sistent spirit brings a man to the place where faith 
takes hold, claims and appropriates the blessing. 

The imperative necessity of importunate prayer 
is plainly set forth in the Word of God, and needs 
to be stated and re-stated to-day. We are apt to 
overlook this vital truth. Love of ease, spiritual 
indolence, religious slothfulness, all operate against 
this type of petitioning. Our praying, however, 
needs to be pressed and pursued with an 
energy that never tires, a persistency which will 
not be denied, and a courage which never fails. 

We have need, too, to give thought to that 
mysterious fact of prayer—the certainty that there 
will be delays, denials, and seeming failures, in 
connection with its exercise. We are to prepare 
for these, to brook them, and cease not in our 
urgent praying. Like a brave soldier, who, as the 
conflict grows sterner, exhibits a superior courage 


PRAYER AND IMPORTUNITY 77 


than in the earlier stages of the battle; so does the 
praying Christian, when delay and denial face him, 
increase his earnest asking, and ceases not until 
prayer prevail. Moses furnishes an illustrious 
example of importunity in prayer. Instead of 
allowing his nearness to God and his intimacy with 
Him to dispense with the necessity for importunity, 
he regards them as the better fitting him for its 
exercise. When Israel set up the golden calf, the 
wrath of God waxed fierce against them, and Jeho- 
vah, bent on executing justice, said to Moses when 
divulging what He purposed doing, “Let Me 
alone! ” But Moses would zot let Him alone. 
He threw himself down before the Lord in an 
agony of intercession in behalf of the sinning 
Israelites, and for forty days and nights, fasted 
and prayed. What a season of importunate prayer 
was that! 

Jehovah was wroth with Aaron, also, who had 
acted as leader in this idolatrous business of the 
golden calf. But Moses prayed for Aaron as well 
as for the Israelites; had he not, both Israel and 
Aaron had perished, under the consuming fire of 
God’s wrath. 

That long season of pleading before God, left 
its mighty impress on Moses. He had been in 
close relation with God aforetime, but never did 
his character attain the greatness that marked it 
in the days and years following this long season 
of importunate intercession. 


78 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


There can be no question but that importunate 
prayer moves God, and heightens human char- 
acter! If we were more with God in this great 
ordinance of intercession, more brightly would our 
faces shine, more richly endowed would life and 
service be, with the qualities which earn the good- 
will of humanity, and bring glory to the Name of 
God. 


VIII 


PRAYER AND CHARACTER AND 
CONDUCT 


“General Charles James Gordon, the hero of 
Khartum, was a truly Christian soldier. Shut up in 
the Sudanese town he gallantly held out for one year, 
but, finally, was overcome and slain. On his memorial 
in Westminster Abbey are these words, ‘ He gave his 
money to the poor; his sympathy to the sorrowing; his 
life to his country and his soul to God.’ ” 

—Homer W. Honce. 


RAYER governs conduct and _ conduct 
makes character. Conduct, is what we do; 
character, is what we are. Conduct is the 

outward life. Character is the life unseen, hidden 
within, yet evidenced by that which is seen. 
Conduct is external, seen from without; char- 
acter is internal—operating within. In _ the 
economy of grace conduct is the offspring of char- 
acter. Character is the state of the heart, conduct 
its outward expression. Character is the root of 
the tree, conduct, the fruit it bears. 

Prayer is related to all the gifts of grace. To 
character and conduct its relation is that of a 
helper. Prayer helps to establish character and 
fashion conduct, and both for their successful con- 

79 


80 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


tinuance depend on prayer. There may be a cer- 
tain degree of moral character and conduct in- 
dependent of prayer, but there cannot be anything 
like distinctive religious character and Christian 
conduct without it. Prayer helps, where all other 
aids fail. The more we pray, the better we are, 
the purer and better our lives. 

The very end and purpose of the atoning work 
of Christ is to create religious character and to 
make Christian conduct. 

2 

“Who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem 
us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a pe- 
culiar people, zealous of good works.” 


In Christ’s teaching, it is not simply works of 
charity and deeds of mercy upon which He in- 
sists, but inward spiritual character. This much 
is demanded, and nothing short of it, will suffice. 

In the study of Paul’s Epistles, there is one 
thing which stands out, clearly and unmistakably 
—the insistence on holiness of heart, and right- 
eousness of life. Paul does not seek, so much, to 
promote what is termed “ personal work,” nor is 
the leading theme of his letters deeds of charity. 
It is the condition of the human heart and the 
blamelessness of the personal life, which form the 
burden of the writings of St. Paul. 

Elsewhere in the Scriptures, too, it is character 
and conduct which are made preéminent. The 


PRAYER, CHARACTER AND CONDUCT 81 


Christian religion deals with men who are devoid 
of spiritual character, and unholy in life, and aims 
so to change them, that they become holy in heart 
and righteous in life. It aims to change bad men 
into good men; it deals with inward badness, and 
works to change it into inward goodness. And 
it is just here where prayer enters and demon- 
strates its wonderful efficacy and fruit. Prayer 
drives toward this specific end. In fact, without 
prayer, no such supernatural change in moral char- 
acter, can ever be effected. For the change from 
badness to goodness is not wrought “ by works of 
righteousness which we have done,” but accord- 
ing to God’s mercy, which saves us “‘ by the wash- 
ing of regeneration.” And this marvellous 
change is brought to pass through earnest, per- 
sistent, faithful prayer. Any alleged form of 
Christianity, which does not effect this change in 
the hearts of men, is a delusion and a snare. 

The office of prayer is to change the character 
and conduct of men, and in countless instances, 
has been wrought by prayer. At this point, 
prayer, by its credentials, has proved its divinity. 
And just as it is the office of prayer to effect this, 
so it is the prime work of the Church to take hold 
of evil men and make them good. Its mission is 
to change human nature, to change character, in- 
fluence behaviour, to revolutionize conduct. The 
Church is presumed to be righteous, and should be 
engaged in turning men to righteousness. The 


82 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Church is God’s manufactory on earth, and its 
primary duty is to create and foster righteousness 
of character. This is its very first business. 
Primarily, its work is not to acquire members, nor 
amass numbers, nor aim at money-getting, nor 
engage in deeds of charity and works of mercy, 
but to produce righteousness of character, and 
purity of the outward life. 

A product reflects and partakes of the char- 
acter of the manufactory which makes it. A 
righteous Church with a righteous purpose makes 
righteous men. Prayer produces cleanliness of 
heart and purity of life. It can produce nothing 
else. Unrighteous conduct is born of prayerless- 
ness; the two go hand-in-hand. Prayer and sin- 
ning cannot keep company with each other. One, 
or the other, must, of necessity, stop. Get men to 
pray, and they will quit sinning, because prayer 
creates a distaste for sinning, and so works upon 
the heart, that evil-doing becomes repugnant, and 
the entire nature lifted to a reverent contemplation 
of high and holy things. 

Prayer is based on character. What we are 
with God gauges our influence with Him. It was 
the inner character, not the outward seeming, of 
such men as Abraham, Job, David, Moses 
and all others, who had such great influence with 
God in the days of old. And, to-day, it is not so 
much our words, as what we really are, which 
weighs with God. Conduct affects character, of 


PRAYER, CHARACTER AND CONDUCT 83 


course, and counts for much in our praying. At 
the same time, character affects conduct to a far 
greater extent, and has a superior influence over 
prayer. Our inner life not only gives colour to our 
praying, but body, as well. Bad living means bad 
‘praying and, in the end, no praying at all. We 
pray feebly because we live feebly. The stream 
of prayer cannot rise higher than the fountain of 
living. The force of the inner chamber is made 
up of the energy which flows from the confluent 
streams of living. And the weakness of living 
grows out of the shallowness and shoddiness of 
character. 

Feebleness of living reflects its debility and 
langour in the praying hours. We simply cannot 
talk to God, strongly, intimately, and confidently 
unless we are living for Him, faithfully and truly. 
The prayer-closet cannot become sanctified unto 
God, when the life is alien to His precepts and 
purpose. We must learn this lesson well—that 
righteous character and Christlike conduct give 
us a peculiar and preferential standing in prayer 
before God. His holy Word gives special em- 
phasis to the part conduct has in imparting value 
to our praying when it declares: 


“Then shalt thou call and the Lord shall answer; 
thou shalt cry, and He shall say, Here I am; if thou 
take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting 
forth the finger, and speaking vanity.” 


84 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


The wickedness of Israel and their heinous prac- 
tices were definitely cited by Isaiah, as the reason 
why God would turn His ears away from their 
prayers: 


‘“ And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide 
mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many 
prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood.” 


The same sad truth was declared by the Lord 
through the mouth of Jeremiah: 


“Therefore, pray not thou for this people, neither 
lift up a cry or prayer for them; for I will not hear 
them in the time that they cry unto Me for their 
trouble.” 


Here, it is plainly stated, that unholy conduct 
is a bar to successful praying, just as it is clearly 
intimated that, in order to have full access to 
God in prayer, there must be a total abandon- 
ment of conscious and premeditated sin. 

We are enjoined to pray, “ lifting up holy hands, 
without wrath and doubting,” and must pass the 
time of our sojourning here, in a rigorous ab- 
staining from evil if we are to retain our privilege 
of calling upon the Father. We cannot, by any 
process, divorce praying from conduct. 


“Whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him, because 
we keep His commandments, and do those things 
which are pleasing in His sight.” 


PRAYER, CHARACTER AND CONDUCT 85 


And James declares roundly that men ask and re- 
ceive not, because they ask amiss, and seek 
only the gratification of selfish desires. 

Our Lord’s injunction, “ Watch ye, and pray al- 
ways,” is to cover and guard all our conduct, so 
that we may come to our inner chamber with all 
its force secured by a vigilant guard kept over our 
lives. 


“ And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your 
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunken- 
ness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon 
you unawares.” 


Quite often, Christian experience founders on 
the rock of conduct. Beautiful theories are 
marred by ugly lives. The most difficult thing 
about piety, as it is the most impressive, is to be 
able to live it. It is the life which counts, and our 
praying suffers, as do other phases of our religious 
experience, from bad living. 

In primitive times preachers were charged to 
preach by their lives, or not to preach at all. So, 
to-day, Christians, everywhere, ought to be charged 
to pray by their lives, or not to pray at all. The 
most effective preaching, is not that which is heard 
from the pulpit, but that which is proclaimed 
quietly, humbly and consistently; which exhibits 
its excellencies in the home, and in the commu- 
nity. Example preaches a far more effective ser- 
mon than precept. The best preaching, even in 


86 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


the pulpit, is that which is fortified by godly liv- 
ing, in the preacher, himself. The most effective 
work done by the pew is preceded by, and accom- 
panied with, holiness of life, separation from the 
world, severance from sin. Some of the strongest 
appeals are made with mute lips—by godly fathers 
and saintly mothers who, around the fireside, 
feared God, loved His cause, and daily exhibited 
to their children and others about them, the 
beauties and excellencies of Christian life and con- 
duct. 

The best-prepared, most eloquent sermon can 
be marred and rendered ineffective, by question- 
able practices in the preacher. The most active 
church worker can have the labour of his hands 
vitiated by worldliness of spirit and inconsistency 
of life. Men preach by their lives, not by their 
words, and sermons are delivered, not so much in, 
and from a pulpit, as in tempers, actions, and the 
thousand and one incidents which crowd the path- 
way of daily life. 

Of course, the prayer of repentance is accepta- 
ble to God. He delights in hearing the cries of 
penitent sinners. But repentance involves not 
only sorrow for sin, but the turning away from 
wrong-doing, and the learning to do well. A re- 
pentance which does not produce a change in char- 
acter and conduct, is a mere sham, which should 
deceive nobody. Old things must pass away, all 
things must become new. 


PRAYER, CHARACTER AND CONDUCT 87 


Praying, which does not result in right thinking 
and right living, is a farce. We have missed the 
whole office of prayer if it fail to purge character 
and rectify conduct. We have failed entirely to 
apprehend the virtue of prayer, if it bring not 
about the revolutionizing of the life. In the very 
nature of things, we must quit praying, or our bad 
conduct. Cold, formal praying may exist side by 
side, with bad conduct, but such praying, in the 
estimation of God, is no praying at all. Our pray- 
ing advances in power, just, in so far, as it recti- 
fies the life. Growing in purity and devotion to 
God will be a more prayerful life. 

The character of the inner life is a condition of 
effectual praying. As is the life, so will the pray- 
ing be. An inconsistent life obstructs praying and 
neutralizes what little praying we may do. Al- 
ways, it is “ the prayer of the righteous man which 
availeth much.” Indeed, one may go further and 
assert, that it is only the prayer of the righteous 
which avails anything at all—at any time. To 
have an eye to God’s glory; to be possessed by an 
earnest desire to please Him in all our ways; to 
possess hands busy in His service; to have feet 
swift to run in the way of His commandments— 
these give weight and influence and power to 
prayer, and secure an audience with God. The 
incubus of our lives often breaks the force of our 
praying, and, not unfrequently, are as doors of 
brass, in the face of prayer. 


88 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Praying must come out of a cleansed heart and 
be presented and urged with the “lifting up of 
holy hands.” It must be fortified by a life aiming, 
unceasingly, to obey God, to attain conformity to 
the Divine law, and to come into submission to the 
Divine will. 

Let it not be forgotten, that, while life is a con- 
dition of prayer, prayer is also the condition of 
righteous living. Prayer promotes righteous liv- 
ing, and is the one great aid to uprightness of 
heart and life. The fruit of real praying is right 
living. Praying sets him who prays to the great 
business of ‘“ working out his salvation with fear 
and trembling; ” puts him to watching his temper, 
conversation and conduct; causes him to “ walk 
circumspectly, redeeming the time; ” enables him 
to “ walk worthy of the vocation wherewith he is 
called, with all lowliness and meekness; ” gives 
him a high incentive to pursue his pilgrimage con- 
sistently by ‘‘ shunning every evil way, and walk- 
ing in the good.” 


IX 
PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 


“An obedience discovered itself in Fletcher of 
Madeley, which I wish I could describe or imitate. It 
produced in him a ready mind to embrace every cross 
with alacrity and pleasure. He had a singular love for 
the lambs of the flock, and applied himself with the 
greatest diligence to their instruction, for which he had 
a peculiar gift. . . . All his intercourse with me 
was so mingled with prayer and praise, that every em- 
ployment, and every meal was, as it were, perfumed 
therewith.” —JoHN WESLEY. 


NDER the Mosaic law, obedience was 
looked upon as being “ better than sacri- 
fice, and to harken, than the fat of 

lambs.” In Deuteronomy 5: 29, Moses represents 

Almighty God declaring Himself as to this very 

quality in a manner which left no doubt as to the 

importance He laid upon its exercise. Referring 
to the waywardness of His people He cries: 


“© that there were such a heart in them, that they 
would fear Me, and keep all My commandments al- 
ways, that it might be well with them, and with their 
children after them.” 


Unquestionably obedience is a high virtue, a 
89 


90 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


soldier quality. To obey belongs, preéminently, 
to the soldier. It is his first and last lesson, and 
he must learn how to practice it all the time, with- 
out question, uncomplainingly. Obedience, more- 
over, is faith in action, and is the outflow as it is the 
very test of love. ‘He that hath My command- 
ments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me.” 

Furthermore: obedience is the conserver and 
the life of love. 


“If ye keep My commandments,” says Jesus, “ ye 
shall abide in My love, even as I have kept My Father’s 
commandments and abide in His love.” 


What a marvellous statement of the relation- 
ship created and maintained by obedience! The 
Son of God is held in the bosom of the Father’s 
love, by virtue of His obedience! And the factor 
which enables the Son of God to ever abide in His 
Father’s love is revealed in His own statement, 
“ For I do, always, those things that please Him.” 

The gift of the Holy Spirit in full measure and 
in richer experience, depends upon loving obedi- 
ence: 


“Tf ye love Me, keep My commandments,” is the 
Master’s word. ‘“ And I will pray the Father, and He 
shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide 
with you for ever.” 


Obedience to God is a condition of spiritual 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 91 


thrift, inward satisfaction, stability of heart. “ If 
ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the fruit 
of the land.” Obedience opens the gates of the 
Holy City, and gives access to the tree of life. 


“Blessed are they that do His commandments, that 
they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter 
in through the gates, into the city.” 


What is obedience? It is doing God’s will: it is 
keeping His commandments. How many of the 
commandments constitute obedience? To keep 
half of them, and to break the other half—is that 
real obedience? To keep all the commandments 
but one—is that obedience? On this point, James 
the Apostle is most explicit: ‘‘ Whosoever shall 
keep the whole law,” he declares, ‘‘and yet offend 
in one point, he is guilty of all.” 

The spirit which prompts a man to break one 
commandment is the spirit which may move him 
to break them all. God’s commandments are a 
unit, and to break one strikes at the principle 
which underlies and runs through the whole. 
He who hesitates not to break a single com- 
mandment, would—it is more than probable— 
under the same stress, and surrounded by the same 
circumstances, break them all. 

Universal obedience of the race is demanded. 
Nothing short of implicit obedience will satisfy 
God, and the keeping of all His commandments 
is the demonstration of it that God requires. But 


92 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


can we keep all of God’s commandments? Can 
a man receive moral ability such as enables him 
to obey every one of them? Certainly he can. By 
every token, man can, through prayer, obtain abil- 
ity to do this very thing. 

Does God give commandments which men can- 
not obey? Is He so arbitrary, so severe, so un- 
loving, as to issue commandments which cannot be 
obeyed? The answer is that in all the annals of 
Holy Scripture, not a single instance is recorded 
of God having commanded any man to do a thing, 
which was beyond his power. Is God so unjust 
and so inconsiderate as to require of man that 
which he is unable to render? Surely not. To 
infer it, is to slander the character of God. 

Let us ponder this thought, a moment: Do 
earthly parents require of their children duties 
which they cannot perform? Where is the father 
who would think, even, of being so unjust, and 
so tyrannical? Is God less kind and just than 
faulty, earthly parents? Are they better and more 
just than a perfect God? How utterly foolish and 
untenable a thought! 

In principle, obedience to God is the same qual- 
ity as obedience to earthly parents. It implies, in 
general effect, the giving up of one’s own way, and 
following that of another; the surrendering of the 
will to the will of another; the submission of one- 
self to the authority and requirements of a parent. 
Commands, either from our heavenly Father or 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 93 


from our earthly father, are love-directing, and all 
such commands are in the best interests of those 
who are commanded. God’s commands are issued 
neither in severity nor tyranny. They are always 
issued in love and in our interests, and so it be- 
hooves us to heed and obey them. In other words, 
and appraised at its lowest value—God having is- 
sued His commands to us, in order to promote our 
good, it pays, therefore, to be obedient. Obedi- 
ence brings its own reward. God has ordained it 
so, and since He has, even human reason can real- 
ize that He would never demand that which is out 
of our power to render. 

Obedience is love, fulfilling every command, 
love expressing itself. Obedience, therefore, is not 
a hard demand made upon us, any more than is 
the service a husband renders his wife, or a wife 
renders her husband. Love delights to obey, and 
please whom it loves. There are no hardships in 
love. There may be exactions, but no irk. There 
are no impossible tasks for love. 

With what simplicity and in what a matter-of- 
fact way does the Apostle John say: “‘ And what- 
soever we ask, we receive of Him, because we keep 
His commandments, and do those things which are 
pleasing in His sight.” 

This is obedience, running ahead of all. and 
every command. It is love, obeying by anticipa- 
tion. They greatly err, and even sin, who declare 
that men are bound to commit iniquity, either be- 


94 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


cause of environment, or heredity, or tendency. 
God’s commands are not grievous. Their ways 
are ways of pleasantness, and their paths peace. 
The task which falls to obedience is not a hard 
one. “For My yoke is easy, and My burden is 
light.” 

Far be it from our heavenly Father, to demand 
impossibilities of His children. It is possible to 
please Him in all things, for He is not hard to 
please. He is neither a hard master, nor an aus- 
tere lord, “ taking up that which he lays not down, 
and reaping that which he did not sow.” Thank 
God, it is possible for every child of God, to please 
his heavenly Father! It is really much easier to 
please Him than to please men. Moreover, we 
may know when we please Him. This is the wit- 
ness of the Spirit—the inward Divine assurance, 
given to all the children of God that they are 
doing their Father’s will, and that their ways are 
well-pleasing in His sight. 

God’s commandments are righteous and 
founded in justice and wisdom. ‘“ Wherefore the 
law is holy, and the commandment holy and just 
and good.” “ Just and true are Thy ways, Thou 
King of saints.” God’s commandments, then, can 
be obeyed by all who seek supplies of grace which 
enable them to obey. These commandments must 
be obeyed. God’s government is at stake. God’s 
children are under obligation to obey Him; dis- 
obedience cannot be permitted. The spirit of re- 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 95 


bellion is the very essence of sin. It is repudiation 
of God’s authority, which God cannot tolerate. He 
never has done so, and a declaration of His atti- 
tude was part of the reason the Son of the Highest 
was made manifest among men: 


“For what the law could not do, in that it was 
weak through the flesh, God sending His own Son in 
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin 
in the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might 
be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but 
after the Spirit.” 


If any should complain that humanity, under 
the fall, is too weak and helpless to obey these high 
commands of God, the reply is in order that, 
through the atonement of Christ, man is enabled 
to obey. The Atonement is God’s Enabling Act. 
That which God works in us, in regeneration and 
through the agency of the Holy Spirit, bestows en- 
abling grace sufficient for all that is required of us, 
under the Atonement. This grace is furnished 
without measure, in answer to prayer. So that, 
while God commands, He, at the same time, stands 
pledged to give us all necessary strength of will 
and grace of soul to meet His demands. This 
being true, man is without excuse for his disobedi- 
ence and eminently censurable for refusing, or fail- 
ing, to secure requisite grace, whereby he may 
serve the Lord with reverence, and with godly 
fear. 


96 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


There is one important consideration those who 
declare it to be impossible to keep God’s com- 
mandments strangely overlook, and that is the 
vital truth, which declares that through prayer 
and faith, man’s nature is changed, and made par- 
taker of the Divine nature; that there is taken out 
of him all reluctance to obey God, and that his 
natural inability to keep God’s commandments, 
growing out of his fallen and helpless state, is 
gloriously removed. By this radical change which 
is wrought in his moral nature, a man receives 
power to obey God in every way, and to yield full 
and glad allegiance. Then he can say, “I delight 
to do Thy will, O my God.” Not only is the re- 
bellion incident to the natural man removed, but 
a heart which gladly obeys God’s Word, blessedly 
received. 

If it be claimed, that the unrenewed man, with 
all the disabilities of the Fall upon him, cannot 
obey God, there will be no denial. But to declare 
that, after one is renewed by the Holy Spirit, has 
received a new nature, and become a child of the 
King, he cannot obey God, is to assume a ridicu- 
lous attitude, and to display, moreover, a lam- 
entable ignorance of the work and implications 
of the Atonement. 

Implicit and perfect obedience is the state to 
which the man of prayer is called. “ Lifting up 
holy hands, without wrath and doubting,” is the 
condition of obedient praying. Here inward fidel- 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 97 


ity and love, together with outward cleanness are 
put down as concomitants of acceptable praying. 

John gives the reason for answered prayer in 
the passage previously quoted: “ And whatsoever 
we ask we receive of Him because we keep His 
commandments and do those things which are 
pleasing in His sight.” 

Seeing that the keeping of God’s commandments 
is here set forth as the reason why He answers 
prayer, it is to be reasonably assumed that we 
can keep God’s commandments, can do those 
things which are pleasing to Him. Would God 
make the keeping of His commandments a condi- 
tion of effectual prayer, think you, if He knew we 
could not keep His statutes? Surely, surely not! 

Obedience can ask with boldness at the Throne 
of grace, and those who exercise it are the only 
ones who can ask, after that fashion. The dis- 
obedient folk are timid in their approach and hesi- 
tant in their supplication. They are halted by 
reason of their wrong-doing. The requesting yet 
obedient child comes into the presence of his 
father with confidence and boldness. His very 
consciousness of obedience gives him courage and 
frees him from the dread born of disobedience. 

To do God’s will without demur, is the joy as 
it is the privilege of the successful praying-man. 
It is he who has clean hands and a pure heart, that 
can pray with confidence. In the Sermon on the 
Mount, Jesus said: 


98 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


“Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, 
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that 
doeth the will of My Father which is in heaven.” 


To this great deliverance may be added another: 


“Tf ye keep My commandments ye shall abide in 
My love, even as I have kept my Father’s command- 
ments, and abide in His love.” 


“The Christian’s trade,” says Luther, “is 
prayer.” But the Christian has another trade to 
learn, before he proceeds to learn the secrets of the 
trade of prayer. He must learn well the trade of 
perfect obedience to the Father’s will. Obedience 
follows love, and prayer follows obedience. The 
business of real observance of God’s command- 
ments inseparably accompanies the business of 
real praying. 

One who has been disobedient may pray. He 
may pray for pardoning mercy and the peace of 
his soul. He may come to God’s footstool with 
tears, with confession, with penitent heart, and 
God will hear him and answer his prayer. But 
this kind of praying does not belong to the child 
of God, but to the penitent sinner, who has no 
other way by which to approach God. It is the 
possession of the unjustified soul, not of him who 
has been saved and reconciled to God. 

An obedient life helps prayer. It speeds prayer 
to the throne. God cannot help hearing the prayer 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 99 


of an obedient child. He always has heard His 
obedient children when they have prayed. Un- 
questioning obedience counts much in the sight of 
God, at the throne of heavenly grace. It acts like 
the confluent tides of many rivers, and gives 
volume and fulness of flow as well as power to the 
prayer chamber. An obedient life is not simply a 
reformed life. It is not the old life primed and 
painted anew nor a church-going life, nor a good 
veneering of activities. Neither is it an external 
conformation to the dictates of public morality. 
Far more than all this is combined in a truly 
obedient Christian, God-fearing life. 

A life of full obedience; a life settled on the 
most intimate terms with God; where the will is in 
full conformity to God’s will; where the outward 
life shows the fruit of righteousness—such a life 
offers no bar to the inner chamber but rather, like 
Aaron and Hur, it lifts up and sustains the hands 
of prayer. 

If you have an earnest desire to pray well, you 
must learn how to obey well. If you have a de- 
sire to learn to pray, then you must have an earn- 
est desire to learn how to do God’s will. If you 
desire to pray to God, you must first have a con- 
suming desire to obey Him. If you would have 
free access to God in prayer, then every obstacle 
in the nature of sin or disobedience, myst be re- 
moved. God delights in the prayers of obedient 
children. Requests coming from the lips of those 


100 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


who delight to do His will, reach His ears with 
great celerity, and incline Him to answer them 
with promptitude and abundance. In themselves, 
tears are not meritorious. Yet they have their 
uses in prayer. Tears should baptize our place of 
supplication. He who has never wept concerning 
his sins, has never really prayed over his sins. 
Tears, sometimes, is a penitent’s only plea. But 
tears are for the past, for the sin and the wrong- 
doing. There is another step and stage, waiting 
to be taken. It is that of unquestioning.obedience, 
and until it is taken, prayer for blessing and ‘con- 
tinued sustenance, will be of no*avail. = 
Everywhere in Holy Scripture God is repre- 
sented as disapproving of disobedience and con- 
demning sin, and this is as true in the lives of His 
elect as it is in the lives of sinners. Nowhere does 
He countenance sin, or excuse disobedience. Al- 
ways, God puts the emphasis upon obedience to 
His commands. Obedience to them brings bless- 
ing, disobedience meets with disaster. This is 
true, in the Word of God, from its beginning to its 
close. It is because of this, that the men of 
prayer, in Holy Writ, had such influence with 
God. Obedient men, always, have been the clos- 
est to God. These are they who have prayed well 
and have received great things from God, who 
have brought great things to pass. 

Obedience to God counts tremendously in the 
realm of prayer. This fact cannot be emphasized 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 101 


too much or too often. To plead for a religious 
faith which tolerates sinning, is to cut the ground 
from under the feet of effectual praying. To ex- 
cuse sinning by the plea that obedience to God is 
not possible to unregenerate men, is to discount 
the character of the new birth, and to place men 
where effective praying is not possible. At one 
time Jesus broke out with a very pertinent and 
personal question, striking right to the core of dis- 
obedience, when He said: ‘“‘ Why call ye Me, Lord, 
Lord, and do not the things I say? ” 

He who would pray, must obey. He who would 
get anything out of his prayers, must be in perfect 
harmony with God. Prayer puts into those who 
sincerely pray a spirit of obedience, for the spirit 
of disobedience is not of God and belongs not to 
God’s praying hosts. 

An obedient life is a great help to prayer. In 
fact, an obedient life is a necessity to prayer, to 
the sort which accomplishes things. The absence 
of an obedient life makes prayer an empty per- 
formance, a mere misnomer. A penitent sinner 
seeks pardon and salvation and has an answer to 
his prayers even with a life stained and debauched 
with sin. But God’s royal intercessors come be- 
fore Him with royal lives. Holy living promotes 
holy praying. God’s intercessors “lift up holy 
hands,” the symbols of righteous, obedient lives. 


x 
PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE (Continued) 


“ Many exemplary men have I known, holy in heart 
and life, within my four score years. But one equal 
to John Fletcher—one so inwardly and outwardly 
obedient and devoted to God—I have not known.” 

—JOHN WESLEY. 


such transcendent position is given and from 

which great results are attributable, is not 
simply the saying of prayers, but holy praying. It 
is the “ prayers of the saints,” the prayers of the 
holy men of God. Behind such praying, giving to 
it energy and flame are the men and women who 
are wholly devoted to God, who are entirely sepa- 
rated from sin, and fully separated unto God. 
These are they who always give energy, force and 
strength to praying. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ was preéminent in pray- 
ing, because He was preéminent in saintliness. An 
entire dedication to God, a full surrender, which 
carries with it the whole being, in a flame of holy 
consecration—all this gives wings to faith and 
energy to prayer. It opens the door to the throne 
of grace, and brings strong influence to bear on 
Almighty God. 

The “lifting up of holy hands ” is essential to 

102 


I: is worthy of note that the praying to which 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 103 


Christly praying. It is not, however, a holiness 
which only dedicates a closet to God, which sets 
apart merely an hour to Him, but a consecration 
which takes hold of the entire man, which dedi- 
cates the whole life to God. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ, “ holy, harmless, unde- 
filed, separate from sinners,” had full liberty of 
approach and ready access to God in prayer. And 
He had this free and full access because of His 
unquestioning obedience to His Father. Right 
through His earthly life His supreme care and de- 
sire was to do the will of His Father. And this 
fact, coupled with another—the consciousness of 
having so ordered His life—gave Him confidence 
and assurance, which enabled Him to draw near 
to the throne of grace with unbounded confidence, 
born of obedience, and promising acceptance, 
audience, and answer. 

Loving obedience puts us where we can “ ask 
anything in His name,” with the assurance, that 
“‘ He will do it.” Loving obedience brings us into 
the prayer realm, and makes us beneficiaries of the 
wealth of Christ, and of the riches of His grace, 
through the coming of the Holy Spirit who will 
abide with us, and be in us. Cheerful obedience to 
God, qualifies us to pray effectually. 

This obedience which not only qualifies but fore- 
runs prayer, must be loving, constant, always 
doing the Father’s will, and cheerfully following 
the path of God’s commands. 


104 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


In the instance of King Hezekiah, it was a po- 
tent plea which changed God’s decree that he 
should die and not live. The stricken ruler called 
upon God to remember how that he had walked 
before Him in truth, and with a perfect heart. 
With God, this counted. He hearkened to the pe- 
tition, and, as a result, death found his approach 
to Hezekiah barred for fifteen years. 

Jesus learned obedience in the school of suffer- 
ing, and, at the same time, He learned prayer in 
the school of obedience. Just as it is the prayer 
of a righteous man which availeth much, so it is 
righteousness which is obedience to God. A right- 
eous man is an obedient man, and he it is, who can 
pray effectually, who can accomplish great things 
when he betakes himself to his knees. 

True praying, be it remembered, is not mere 
sentiment, nor poetry, nor eloquent utterance. 
Nor does it consist of saying in honeyed cadences, 
“Lord, Lord.” Prayer is not a mere form of 
words; it is not just calling upon a Name. Prayer 
is obedience. It is founded on the adamantine 
rock of obedience to God. Only those who obey 
have the right to pray. Behind the praying must 
be the doing; and it is the constant doing of God’s 
will in daily life which gives prayer its potency, as 
our Lord plainly taught: 


“Not every one which saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, 
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 105 


doeth the will of My Father which is in heaven. Many 
will say unto Me in that day, Lord, have we not 
prophesied in Thy Name, and in Thy Name have cast 
out devils? And in Thy Name done many wonderful 
works? And then will I profess unto them, I never 
knew you; depart from Me, ye that worketh iniquity.” 


No name, however precious and powerful, can 
protect and give efficiency to prayer which is un- 
accompanied by the doing of God’s will. Neither 
can the doing, without the praying, protect from 
Divine disapproval. If the will of God does not 
master the life, the praying will be nothing but 
sickly sentiment. If prayer do not inspire, sanc- 
tify and direct our work, then self-will enters, to 
ruin both work and worker. 

How great and manifold are the misconceptions 
of the true elements and functionings of prayer! 
There are many who earnestly desire to obtain an 
answer to their prayers but who go unrewarded 
and unblest. They fix their minds on some prom- 
ise of God and then endeavour by dint of dogged 
perseverance, to summon faith sufficient to lay 
hold upon, and claim it. This fixing of the mind 
on some great promise may avail in strengthening 
faith, but, to this holding on to the promise must 
be added the persistent and importunate prayer 
that expects, and waits till faith grows exceedingly. 
And who is there that is able and competent to do 
such praying save the man who readily, cheerfully 
and continually, obeys God? 


106 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Faith, in its highest form, is the attitude as well 
as the act of a soul surrendered to God, in whom 
His Word and His Spirit dwells. It is true that 
faith must exist in some form, or another, in order 
to prompt praying; but in its strongest form, and 
in its largest results, faith is the fruit of prayer. 
That faith increases the ability and the efficiency 
of prayer is true; but it is likewise true that prayer 
increases the ability and efficiency of faith. 
Prayer and faith, work, act and react, one upon 
the other. 

Obedience to God helps faith as no other attri- 
bute possibly can. When obedience—implicit 
recognition of the validity, the paramountcy of the 
Divine commands—faith ceases to be an almost 
superhuman task. It requires no straining to ex- 
ercise it. Obedience to God makes it easy to be- 
lieve and trust God. Where the spirit of obedi- 
ence fully impregnates the soul; where the will is 
perfectly surrendered to God; where there is a 
fixed, unalterable purpose to obey God, faith al- 
most believes itself. Faith then becomes almost 
involuntary. After obedience it is, naturally, the 
next step, and it is easily and readily taken. The 
difficulty in prayer is not with faith, but with 
obedience, which is faith’s foundation. 

We. Iust_ look well to our obedience, to the 
secret springs of action, to the loyalty of our heart 
to God, if we would pray well, and desire to get the 
most out of our praying. Obedience is the ground- 


PRAYER AND OBEDIENCE 107 


work of effectual praying; this it is, which brings 
us nigh to God. 
The lack of obedience in our lives.breaks.down 


CiRCA MAR 


our praying. Quite often, the life is in revolt and 
this places us where praying is almost impossible, 
except it be for pardoning mercy. Disobedient 
living produces mighty poor praying. Disobedi- 
ence shuts the door of the inner chamber, and 
bars the way to the Holy of holies. No man can 
pray—treally pray—who does not obey. 

The will must be surrendered to God as a pri- 
mary condition of all successful praying. Every- 
thing about us gets its colouring from our inmost 
character. The secret will makes character and 
controls conduct. The will, therefore, plays an im- 
portant part in all successful praying. There can 
be no praying in its richest implication and truest 
sense, where the will is not wholly and fully sur- 
rendered to God. This unswerving loyalty to God 
is an utterly indispensable condition of the best, 
the truest, the most effectual praying. We have 
“simply got to trust and obey; there’s no other 
way, to be happy in Jesus—but to trust, and 
obey!” 


XI 
PRAYER AND VIGILANCE 


“ David Brainerd was pursued by unearthly ad- 
versaries, who were resolved to rob him of his guerdon. 
He knew he must never quit his armour, but lie down 
to rest, with his corselet laced. The stains that marred 
the perfection of his lustrous dress, the spots of rust on 
his gleaming shield, are imperceptible to us; but they 
were, to him, the source of much sorrow and ardency of 
yearning.” —Lire or DAvip BRAINERD, 


‘4 AHE description of the Christian soldier 

given by Paul in the sixth chapter of the 

Epistle to the Ephesians, is compact and 
comprehensive. He is depicted as being ever in 
the conflict, which has many fluctuating seasons— 
seasons of prosperity and adversity, light and 
darkness, victory and defeat. He is to pray at all 
seasons, and with all prayer, this to be added to 
the armour in which he is to fare forth to battle. 
At all times, he is to have the full panoply of 
prayer. The Christian soldier, if he fight to win, 
must pray much. By this means, only, is he en- 
abled to defeat his inveterate enemy, the devil, to- 
gether with the Evil One’s manifold emissaries. 
“ Praying always, with all prayer,” is the Divine 

108 


PRAYER AND VIGILANCE 109 


direction given him. This covers all seasons, and 
embraces all manner of praying. 

Christian soldiers, fighting the good fight of 
faith, have access to a place of retreat, to which 
they continually repair for prayer. “ Praying al- 
ways, with all prayer,” is a clear statement of the 
imperative need of much praying, and of many 
kinds of praying, by him who, fighting the good 
fight of faith, would win out, in the end, over all 
his foes. 

The Revised Version puts it this way: 


“With all prayer and supplication, praying at all 
seasons in the Spirit, and watching thereunto in all per- 
severance and supplications, for all saints, and on my 
behalf, that utterance may be given unto me, in open- 
ing my mouth to make known with boldness the mys- 
tery of the Gospel, for which I am in bonds.” 


It cannot be stated too frequently that the life 
of a Christian is a warfare, an intense conflict, a 
lifelong contest. It is a battle, moreover, waged 
against invisible foes, who are ever alert, and ever 
seeking to entrap, deceive, and ruin the souls of 
men. The life to which Holy Scripture calls men 
is no picnic, or holiday junketing. It is no pastime, 
no pleasure jaunt. It entails effort, wrestling, 
struggling; it demands the putting forth of the 
full energy of the spirit in order to frustrate the 
foe and to come off, at the last, more than con- 
queror. It is no primrose path, no rose-scented 


110 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


dalliance. From start to finish, it is war. From 
the hour in which he first draws sword, to that in 
which he doffs his harness, the Christian warrior is 
compelled to “endure hardness like a good sol- 
dier.” 

What a misconception many people have of the 
Christian life! How little the average church 
member appears to know of the character of the 
conflict, and of its demands upon him! How 
ignorant he seems to be of the enemies he must 
encounter, if he engage to serve God faithfully 
and so succeed in getting to heaven and receive 
the crown of life! He seems scarcely to realize 
that the world, the flesh and the devil will oppose 
his onward march, and will defeat him utterly, 
unless he give himself to constant. ‘vigil ance and 
unceasing. prayer. 

The Christian soldier wrestles not against flesh 
and blood, but against spiritual wickedness in high 
places. Or, as the Scriptural margin reads, 
“wicked spirits in high places.” What a fearful 
array of forces are set against him who would 
make his way through the wilderness of this world 
to the portals of the Celestial City! It is no sur- 
prise, therefore, to find Paul, who understood the 
character of the Christian life so well, and who 
was so thoroughly informed as to the malignity 
and number of the foes, which the disciple of the 
Lord must encounter, carefully and plainly urging 
him to “put on the whole armour of God,” and 


PRAYER AND VIGILANCE 111 


“to pray with all prayer and supplication in the 
Spirit.” Wise, with a great wisdom, would the 
present generation be if all professors of our faith 
could be induced to realize this all-important and 
vital truth, which is so absolutely indispensable to 
a successful Christian life. 

It is just at this point in much present-day 
Christian profession, that one may find its great- 
est defect. There is little, or nothing, of the sol- 
dier element in it. The discipline, self-denial, 
spirit of hardship, determination, so prominent in, 
and belonging to the military life, are, one and 
all, largely wanting. Yet the Christian life is war- 
fare, all the way. 

How comprehensive, pointed and striking are all 
Paul’s directions to the Christian soldier, who is 
bent on thwarting the devil and saving his soul 
alive! First of all, he must possess a clear idea 
of the character of the life on which he has en- 
tered. Then, he must know something of his 
foes—the adversaries of his immortal soul—their 
strength, their skill, their malignity. Knowing, 
therefore, something of the character of the 
enemy, and realizing the need of preparation to 
overcome them, he is prepared to hear the Apos- 
tle’s decisive conclusion: 


“ Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in 
the power of His might. Put on the whole armour of 
God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles 


112 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


of the devil. Wherefore, take unto you the whole 
armour of God, that ye may be able to stand in the 
evil day, and having done all, to stand.” 


All these directions end in a climax; and that 
climax is prayer. How can the brave warrior for 
Christ be made braver still? How can the strong 
soldier be made stronger still? How can the vic- 
torious battler be made still more victorious? 
Here are Paul’s explicit directions to that end: 


“ Praying always with all prayer and supplication 
in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all per- 
severance and supplication for all saints.” 


Prayer, and more prayer, adds to the fighting 
qualities and the more certain victories of God’s 
good fighting-men. The power of prayer is most 
forceful on the battle-field amid the din and strife 
of the conflict. Paul was preéminently a soldier 
of the Cross. For him, life was no flowery bed 
of ease. He was no dress-parade, holiday soldier, 
whose only business was to don a uniform on set 
occasions. His was a life of intense conflict, the 
facing of many adversaries, the exercise of un- 
sleeping vigilance and constant effort. And, at its 
close—in sight of the end—we hear him chanting 
his final song of victory, “I have fought a good 
fight,” and reading between the lines, we see that 
he is more than conqueror! 

In his Epistle to the Romans, Paul indicates the 


PRAYER AND VIGILANCE 113 


nature of his soldier-life, giving us some views of 
the kind of praying needed for such a career. He 
writes: 


“Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus 
Christ’s sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye 
strive together with me in your prayers to God for 
me, that I may be delivered from them that do not 
believe in Judza.” 


Paul had foes in Judzea—foes who beset and op- 
posed him in the form of “ unbelieving men ” and 
this, added to other weighty reasons, led him to 
urge the Roman Christians to “ strive with him in 
prayer.” That word “ strive ” indicated wrestling, 
the putting forth of great effort. This is the kind 
of effort, and this the sort of spirit, which must 
possess the Christian soldier. 

Here is a great soldier, a captain-general, in the 
great struggle, faced by malignant forces who seek 
his ruin. His force is well-nigh spent. What re- 
inforcements can he count on? What can give 
help and bring success to a warrior in such a 
pressing emergency? It is a critical moment in 
the conflict. What force can be added to the 
energy of his own prayers? The answer is—in 
the prayers of others, even the prayers of his 
brethren who were at Rome. These, he believes, 
will bring him additional aid, so that he can win 
his fight, overcome his adversaries, and, ulti- 
mately, prevail. 


114. THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


The Christian soldier is to pray at all seasons, 
and under all circumstances. His praying must 
be arranged so as to cover his times of peace as 
well as his hours of active conflict. It must be 
available in his marching and his fighting. Prayer 
must diffuse all effort, impregnate all ventures, de- 
cide all issues. The Christian soldier must be as in- 
tense in his praying as in his fighting, for his vic- 
tories will depend very much more on his praying 
than on his fighting. Fervent supplication must be 
added to steady resolve, prayer and supplication 
must supplement the armour of God. The Holy 
Spirit must aid the supplication with His own 
strenuous plea. And the soldier must pray in the 
Spirit. In this, as in other forms of warfare, eter- 
nal vigilance is the price of victory; and thus, 
watchfulness and persistent perseverance, must 
mark the every activity of the Christian warrior. 

The soldier-prayer must reflect its profound 
concern for the success and well-being of the whole 
army. The battle is not altogether a personal mat- 
ter; victory cannot be achieved for self, alone. 
There is a sense, in which the entire army of 
Christ is involved. The cause of God, His saints, 
their woes and trials, their duties and crosses, all 
should find a voice and a pleader in the Christian 
soldier, when he prays. He dare not limit his 
praying to himself. Nothing dries up spiritual se- 
cretions so certainly and completely; nothing 
poisons the fountain of spiritual life so effectively; 


PRAYER AND VIGILANCE 115 


nothing acts in such deadly fashion, as selfish 
praying. 

Note carefully that the Christian’s armour will 
avail him nothing, unless prayer be added. This 
is the pivot, the connecting link of the armour of 
God. This holds it together, and renders it effec- 
tive. God’s true soldier plans his campaigns, ar- 
ranges his battle-forces, and conducts his conflicts, 
with prayer. It is all important and absolutely 
essential to victory, that prayer should so im- 
pregnate the life that every breath will be a pe- 
tition, every sigh a supplication. The Christian 
soldier must needs be always fighting. He should, 
of sheer necessity, be always praying. 

The Christian soldier is compelled to constant 
picket-duty. He must always be on his guard. 
He is faced by a foe who never sleeps, who is al- 
ways alert, and ever prepared to take advantage of 
the fortunes of war. Watchfulness is a cardinal 
principle with Christ’s warrior, ‘‘ watch and pray,” 
forever sounding in his ears. He cannot dare to 
be asleep at his post. Such a lapse brings him 
not only under the displeasure of the Captain of 
his salvation, but exposes him to added danger. 
Watchfulness, therefore, imperatively constitutes 
the duty of the soldier of the Lord. 

In the New Testament, there are three different 
words, which are translated “watch.” The first 
means “absence of sleep,”’ and implies a wakeful 
frame of mind, as opposed to listlessness; it is an 


116 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


enjoinder to keep awake, circumspect, attentive, 
constant, vigilant. The second word means “ fully 
awake,”’—a state induced by some rousing effort, 
which faculty excited to attention and interest, 
active, cautious, lest through carelessness or in- 
dolence, some destructive calamity should sud- 
denly evolve. The third word means “ to be calm 
and collected in spirit,’ dispassionate, untouched 
by slumberous or beclouding influences, a wariness 
against all pitfalls and beguilements. 

All three definitions are used by St. Paul. Two 
of them are employed in connection with prayer. 
Watchfulness intensified, is a requisite for prayer. 
Watchfulness must guard and cover the whole 
spiritual man, and fit him for prayer. Everything 
resembling unpreparedness or non-vigilance, is 
death to prayer. 

In Ephesians, Paul gives prominence to the duty 
of constant watchfulness, ‘“ Watching thereunto 
with all perseverance and supplication.” Watch, 
he says, watch, watcH! ‘“ And what I say unto 
you, I say unto all, Watch.” 

Sleepless wakefulness is the price one must pay 
for victory over his spiritual foes. Rest assured 
that the devil never falls asleep. He is ever 
“walking about, seeking whom he may devour.” 
Just as a shepherd must never be careless and un- 
watchful lest the wolf devour his sheep, so the 
Christian soldier must ever have his eyes wide 
open, implying his possession of a spirit which 


PRAYER AND VIGILANCE 117 


neither slumbers nor grows careless. The insepa- 
rable companions and safeguards of prayer are 
vigilance, watchfulness, and a mounted guard. In 
writing to the Colossians Paul brackets these 
inseparable qualities together: ‘‘ Continue in 
prayer,” he enjoins, “ and watch in the same, with 
thanksgiving.” 

When will Christians more thoroughly learn the 
twofold lesson, that they are called to a great 
warfare, and that in order to get the victory they 
must give themselves to unsleeping watchfulness 
and unceasing prayer? 


“ Be sober, be vigilant,” says Peter, ‘“ because your 
adversary, the devil, walketh about seeking whom he 
may devour.” 


God’s Church is a militant host. Its warfare 
is with unseen forces of evil. God’s people com- 
pose an army fighting to establish His kingdom in 
the earth. Their aim is to destroy the sovereignty 
of Satan, and over its ruins, erect the Kingdom of 
God, which is “righteousness and peace and joy 
in the Holy Ghost.” This militant army is com- 
posed of individual soldiers of the Cross, and the 
armour of God is needed for its defence. Prayer 
must be added as that which crowns the whole. 


“ Stand then in His great might, 
With all His strength endued; 
But take, to arm you for the fight, 
The panoply of God.” 


118 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Prayer is too simple, too evident a duty, to need 
definition. Necessity gives being and shape to 
prayer. Its importance is so absolute, that the 
Christian soldier’s life, in all the breadth and in- 
tensity of it, should be one of prayer. The entire 
life of a Christian soldier—its being, intention, 
implication and action—are all dependent on its 
being a life of prayer. Without prayer—no mat- 
ter what else he have—the Christian soldier’s life 
will be feeble, and ineffective, and constitute him 
an easy prey for his spiritual enemies. 

Christian experience will be sapless, and Chris- 
tian influence will be dry and arid, unless prayer 
has a high place in the life. Without prayer the 
Christian graces will wither and die. Without 
prayer, we may add, preaching is edgeless and a 
vain thing, and the Gospel loses its wings and its 
loins. Christ is the lawgiver of prayer, and Paul 
is His Apostle of prayer. Both declare its primacy 
and importance, and demonstrate the fact of its in- 
dispensability. Their prayer-directions cover all 
places, include all times, and comprehend all 
things. How, then, can the Christian soldier hope 
or dream of victory, unless he be fortified by its 
power? How can he fail, if in addition to putting 
on the armour of God he be, at all times and sea- 
sons, “ watching unto prayer ” ? 


XII 
PRAYER AND THE WORD OF GOD 


“ How constantly, in the Scriptures, do we encounter 
such words as ‘ field,’ ‘ seed,’ ‘ sower,’ ‘ reaper,’ ‘ seed- 
time,’ ‘harvest’! Employing such metaphors inter- 
prets a fact of nature by a parable of grace. The field 
is the world and the good seed is the Word of God. 
Whether the Word be spoken or written, it is the power 
of God unto salvation. In our work of evangelism, the 
whole world is our field, every creature the object of 
effort and every book and tract, a seed of God.” 

—Daviw Fant, Jr. 


OD’S Word is a record of prayer—of pray- 
(5 ing men and their achievements, of the 

Divine warrant of prayer and of the en- 
couragement given to those who pray. No one 
can read the instances, commands, examples, 
multiform statements which concern themselves 
with prayer, without realizing that the cause of 
God, and the success of His work in this world, 
is committed to prayer; that praying men have 
been God’s vicegerents on earth; that prayerless 
men have never been used of Him. 

A reverence for God’s holy Name is closely 
related to a high regard for His Word. This hal- 
lowing of God’s Name; the ability to do His will 

119 


120 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


on earth, as it is done in heaven; the establish- 
ment and glory of God’s kingdom, are as much 
involved in prayer, as when Jesus taught men the 
Universal Prayer. That “men ought always to 
pray and not to faint,” is as fundamental to God’s 
cause, to-day, as when Jesus Christ enshrined that 
great truth in the immortal settings of the Parable 
of the Importunate Widow. 

As God’s house is called ‘‘ the house of prayer,” 
because prayer is the most important of its holy 
offices; so by the same token, the Bible may be 
called the Book of Prayer. Prayer is the great 
theme and content of its message to mankind. 

God’s Word is the basis, as it is the directory of 
the prayer of faith. ‘Let the word of Christ 
dwell in you richly in all wisdom,” says St. Paul, 
“teaching and admonishing one another in psalms 
and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace 
in your hearts to the Lord.” 

As this word of Christ dwelling in us richly is 
transmuted and assimilated, it issues in praying. 
Faith is constructed of the Word and the Spirit, 
and faith is the body and substance of prayer. 

In many of its aspects, prayer is dependent 
upon the Word of God. Jesus says: 


“Tf ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ye 
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.” 


The Word of God is the fulcrum upon which 


PRAYER AND THE WORD OF GOD 121 


the lever of prayer is placed, and by which things 
are mightily moved. God has committed Himself, 
His purpose and His promise to prayer. His Word 
becomes the basis, the inspiration of our praying, 
and there are circumstances under which, by im- 
portunate prayer, we may obtain an addition, or an 
enlargement of His promises. It is said of the old 
saints that they, “through faith obtained prom- 
ises.” There would seem to be in prayer the ca- 
pacity for going even beyond the Word, of getting 
even beyond His promise, into the very presence 
of God, Himself. 

Jacob wrestled, not so much with a promise, as 
with the Promiser. We must take hold of the 
Promiser, lest the promise prove nugatory. Prayer 
may well be defined as that force which vitalizes 
and energizes the Word of God, by taking hold of 
God, Himself. By taking hold of the Promiser, 
prayer reissues, and makes personal the promise. 
“There is none that stirreth up himself to take 
hold of Me,” is God’s sad lament. “ Let him take 
hold of My strength, that he may make peace with 
Me,” is God’s recipe for prayer. 

By Scriptural warrant, prayer may be divided 
into the petition of faith and that of submission. 
The prayer of faith is based on the written Word, 
for “ faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the 
Word of God.” It receives its answer, inevitably 
—the very thing for which it prays. 

The prayer of submission is without a definite 


122 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


word of promise, so to speak, but takes hold of 
God with a lowly and contrite spirit, and asks and 
pleads with Him, for that which the soul desires. 
Abraham had no definite promise that God would 
spare Sodom. Moses had no definite promise that 
God would spare Israel; on the contrary, there was 
the declaration of His wrath, and of His purpose 
to destroy. But the devoted leader gained his 
plea with God, when he interceded for the Israel- 
ites with incessant prayers and many tears. 
Daniel had no definite promise that God would 
reveal to him the meaning of the king’s dream, 
but he prayed specifically, and God answered defi- 
nitely. 

The Word of God is made effectual and opera- 
tive, by the process and practice of prayer. The 
Word of the Lord came to Elijah, “ Go show thy- 
self to Ahab, and I will send rain on the earth.” 
Elijah showed himself to Ahab; but the answer 
to his prayer did not come, until he had pressed 
his fiery prayer upon the Lord seven times. 

Paul had the definite promise from Christ, that 
he “ would be delivered from the people and the 
Gentiles,” but we find him exhorting the Romans 
in the urgent and solemn manner concerning this 
very matter: 


“Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus 
Christ’s sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye 
strive together with me in your prayers to God for me; 


PRAYER AND THE WORD OF GOD © 123 


that I may be delivered from them that do not believe 
in Judea, and that my service which I have for Jeru- 
salem may be accepted of the saints.” 


The Word of God is a great help in prayer. If 
it be lodged and written in our hearts, it will form 
an outflowing current of prayer, full and irresisti- 
ble. Promises, stored in the heart, are to be the 
fuel from which prayer receives life and warmth, 
just as the coal, stored in the earth, ministers to 
our comfort on stormy days and wintry nights. 
The Word of God is the food, by which prayer is 
nourished and made_ strong. Prayer, like man, 
cannot live by bread alone, ‘“ but by every word 
which proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord.” 

Unless the vital forces of prayer are supplied 
by God’s Word, prayer, though earnest, even 
vociferous, in its urgency, is, in reality, flabby, and 
vapid, and void. The absence of vital force in 
praying, can be traced to the absence of a con- 
stant supply of God’s Word, to repair the waste, 
and renew the life. He who would learn to pray 
well, must first study God’s Word, and store it in 
his memory and thought. 

When we consult God’s Word, we find that no 
duty is more binding, more exacting, than that of 
prayer. On the other hand, we discover that no 
privilege is more exalted, no habit more richly 
owned of God. No promises are more radiant, 
more abounding, more explicit, more often reiter- 


124 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


ated, than those which are attached to prayer. 
“ All things, whatsoever ” are received by prayer, 
because “all things whatsoever” are promised. 
There is no limit to the provisions, included in the 
promises to prayer, and no exclusion from its 
promises. ‘“‘ Every one that asketh, receiveth.” 
The word of our Lord is to this all-embracing ef- 
fect: “If ye shall ask anything in My Name, I 
will do it.” 

Here are some of the comprehensive, and ex- 
haustive statements of the Word of God about 
prayer, the things to be taken in by prayer, the 
strong promise made in answer ¢o prayer: 


“Pray without ceasing; ” “continue in prayer; ” 
“continuing instant in prayer; ” “in everything by 
prayer, let your request be made known unto God; ” 
“pray always, pray and not faint; ” “ men should pray 
everywhere; ” “praying always, with all prayer and 
supplication.” 


What clear and strong statements are those 
which are put in the Divine record, to furnish us 
with a sure basis of faith, and to urge, constrain 
and encourage us to pray! How wide the range 
of prayer, as given us, in the Divine Revelation! 
How these Scriptures incite us to seek the God of 
prayer, with all our wants, with all our burdens! 

In addition to these statements left on record 
for our encouragement, the sacred pages teem with 
facts, examples, incidents, and observations, stress- 


PRAYER AND THE WORD OF GOD 125 


ing the importance and the absolute necessity of 
prayer, and putting emphasis on its all-prevailing 
power. 

The utmost reach and full benefit of the rich 
promises of the Word of God, should humbly be 
received by us, and put to the test. The world 
will never receive the full benefits of the Gospel 
until this be done. Neither Christian experience 
nor Christian living will be what they ought to be 
till these Divine promises have been fully tested 
by those who pray. By prayer, we bring these 
promises of God’s holy will into the realm of the 
actual and the real. Prayer is the philosopher’s 
stone which transmutes them into gold. 

If it be asked, what is to be done in order to 
render God’s promises real, the answer is, that we 
must pray, until the words of the promise are 
clothed upon with the rich raiment of fulfilment. 

God’s promises are altogether too large to be 
mastered by desultory praying. When we exam- 
ine ourselves, all too often, we discover that our 
praying does not rise to the demands of the situa- 
tion; is so limited that it is little more than a 
mere oasis amid the waste and desert of the 
world’s sin. Who of us, in our praying, measures 
up to this promise of our Lord: 


“Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth 
on Me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater 
works than these shall he do, because I go to My 
Father.” 


126 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


How comprehensive, how far reaching, how all- 
embracing! How much is here, for the glory of 
God, how much for the good of man! How much 
for the manifestation of Christ’s enthroned power, 
how much for the reward of abundant faith! And 
how great and gracious are the results which can 
be made to accrue from the exercise of commen- 
surate, believing prayer! 

Look, for a moment, at another of God’s great 
promises, and discover how we may be under- 
girded by the Word as we pray, and on what firm 
ground we may stand on which to make our peti- 
tions to our God: 


“Tf ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ye 
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.” 


In these comprehensive words, God turns Him- 
self over to the will of His people. When Christ 
becomes our all-in-all, prayer lays God’s treasures 
at our feet. Primitive Christianity had an easy 
and practical solution of the situation, and got all 
which God had to give. That simple and terse 
solution is recorded in John’s First Epistle: 


“Whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him, because 
we keep His commandments, and do those things which 
are pleasing in His sight.” 


Prayer, coupled with loving obedience, is the 
way to put God to the test, and to make prayer 


PRAYER AND THE WORD OF GOD 127 


answer all ends and all things. Prayer, joined to 
the Word of God, hallows and makes sacred all 
God’s gifts. Prayer is not simply to get things 
from God, but to make those things holy, which 
already have been received from Him. It is not 
merely to get a blessing, but also to be able to give 
a blessing. Prayer makes common things holy 
and secular things, sacred. It receives things from 
God with thanksgiving and hallows them with 
thankful hearts, and devoted service. 

In the First Epistle to Timothy, Paul gives us 
these words: 


“ For every creature of God is good, and nothing to 
be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. For 
it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.” 


That is a statement which gives a negative to 
mere asceticism. God’s good gifts are to be holy, 
not only by God’s creative power, but, also, be- 
cause they are made holy to us by prayer. We 
receive them, appropriate them and sanctify them 
by prayer. 

Doing God’s will, and having His Word abiding 
in us, is an imperative of effectual praying. But, 
it may be asked, how are we to know what God’s 
will is? The answer is, by studying His Word, by 
hiding it in our hearts, and by letting the Word 
dwell in us richly. “The entrance of Thy word, 
giveth light.” 

To know God’s will in prayer, we must be filled 


128 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


with God’s Spirit, who maketh intercession for the 
saints, and in the saints, according to the will of 
God. To be filled with God’s Spirit, to be filled 
with God’s Word, is to know God’s will. It is to 
be put in such a frame of mind, to be found in 
such a state of heart, as will enable us to read 
and interpret aright the purposes of the Infinite. 
Such filling of the heart, with the Word and the 
Spirit, gives us an insight into the will of the 
Father, and enables us to rightly discern His will, 
and puts within us, a disposition of mind and heart 
to make it the guide and compass of our lives. 

Epaphras prayed that the Colossians might 
stand “perfect and complete in all the will of 
God.” This is proof positive that, not only may 
we know the will of God, but that we may know 
all the will of God. And not only may we know 
all the will of God, but we may do all the will of 
God. We may, moreover, do all the will of God, 
not occasionally, or by a mere impulse, but with 
a settled habit of conduct. Still further, it shows 
us that we may not only do the will of God ex- 
ternally, but from the heart, doing it cheerfully, 
without reluctance, or secret disinclination, or any 
drawing or holding back from the intimate pres- 
ence of the Lord. 


XIII 


PRAYER AND THE WORD OF GOD 
(Continued ) 


“Some years ago a man was travelling in the wilds 
of Kentucky. He had with him a large sum of money 
and was well armed. He put up at a log-house one 
night, but was much concerned with the rough appear- 
ance of the men who came and went from this abode. 
He retired early but not to sleep. At midnight he 
heard the dogs barking furiously and the sound of 
someone entering the cabin. Peering through a chink 
_ in the boards of his room, he saw a stranger with a gun 
in his hand. Another man sat before the fire. The 
traveller concluded they were planning to rob him, and 
prepared to defend himself and his property. Presently 
the newcomer took down a copy of the Bible, read a 
chapter aloud, and then knelt down and prayed. The 
traveller dismissed his fears, put his revolver away and 
lay down, to sleep peacefully until morning light. And 
all because a Bible was in the cabin, and its owner a 
man of prayer.”—REv. F. F. SHoup. 


the preaching of the Word. This, Paul 
clearly teaches in that familiar and press- 
ing request he made to the Thessalonians: 


Pie ox has all to do with the success of 


“ Finally, brethren, pray for us that the Word of 
the Lord may have free course, and be glorified.” 
129 


130 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Prayer opens the way for the Word of God to 
run without let or hindrance, and creates the at- 
mosphere which is favourable to the word accom- 
plishing its purpose. Prayer puts wheels under 
God’s Word, and gives wings to the angel of the 
Lord “having the everlasting Gospel to preach 
unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every 
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.” 
Prayer greatly helps the Word of the Lord. 

The Parable of the Sower is a notable study of 
preaching, showing its differing effects and de- 
scribing the diversity of hearers. The wayside 
hearers are legion. The soil lies all unprepared 
either by previous thought or prayer; as a con- 
sequence, the devil easily takes away the seed 
(which is the Word of God) and dissipating all 
good impressions, renders the work of the sower 
futile. No one for a moment believes, that so 
much of present-day sowing would go fruitless if 
only the hearers would prepare the ground of their 
hearts beforehand by prayer and meditation. 

Similarly with the stony-ground hearers, and 
the thorny-ground hearers. Although the word 
lodges in their hearts and begins to sprout, yet all 
is lost, chiefly because there is no prayer or watch- 
fulness or cultivation following. The good-ground 
hearers are profited by the sowing, simply because 
their minds have been prepared for the reception 
of the seed, and that, after hearing, they have cul- 
tivated the seed sown in their hearts, by the exer- 


PRAYER AND THE WORD OF GOD | 131 


cise of prayer. All this gives peculiar emphasis 
to the conclusion of this striking parable: “‘ Take 
heed, therefore, how ye hear.” And in order that 
we may take heed how we hear, it is needful to 
give ourselves continually to prayer. 

We have got to believe that underlying God’s 
Word is prayer, and upon prayer, its final success 
will depend. In the Book of Isaiah we read: 


“So shall My word be that goeth out of My mouth; 
it shall not return unto Me void, but it shall accom- 
plish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the 
thing whereto I sent it.” 


In Psalm 19, David magnifies the Word of God 
in six statements concerning it. It converts the 
soul, makes wise the simple, rejoices the heart, en- 
lightens the eyes, endures eternally, and is true 
and righteous altogether. The Word of God is 
perfect, sure, right, pure. It is heart-searching, 
and at the same time purifying, in its effect. It 
is no surprise therefore that after considering the 
deep spirituality of the Word of God, its power 
to search the inner nature of man, and its deep 
purity, the Psalmist should close his dissertation 
with this passage: 


“ Who can understand his errors? ” And then pray- 
ing after this fashion: “‘ Cleanse Thou me from secret 
- faults. Keep back Thy servant also from presumptuous 
sins. Let them not have dominion over me. Let the 


132 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart 
be acceptable in Thy sight, O Lord, my strength and 
my redeemer.” 


James recognizes the deep spirituality of the 
Word, and its inherent saving power, in the fol- 
lowing exhortation: 


“ Wherefore, lay apart all filthiness and superfluity 
of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted 
word, which is able to save your souls.” 


And Peter talks along the same line, when de- 
scribing the saving power of the Word of God: 


“ Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of in- 
corruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and 
abideth forever.” 


Not only does Peter speak of being born again, 
by the incorruptible Word of God, but he informs 
us that to grow in grace we must be like new-born 
babes, desiring or feeding upon the “ sincere milk 
of the Word.” 

That is not to say, however, that the mere form 
of words as they occur in the Bible have in them 
any saving efficacy. But the Word of God, be it 
remembered, is impregnated with the Holy Spirit. 
And just as there is a Divine element in the words 
of Scripture, so also is the same Divine element to 
be found in all true preaching of the Word, which 
is able to save and convert the soul. 


PRAYER AND THE WORD OF GOD 133 


Prayer invariably begets a love for the Word of 
God, and sets people to the reading of it. Prayer 
leads people to obey the Word of God, and puts 
into the heart which obeys a joy unspeakable. 
Praying people and Bible-reading people are the 
same sort of folk. The God of the Bible and the 
God of prayer are one. God speaks to man 
in the Bible; man speaks to God in prayer. One 
reads the Bible to discover God’s will; he prays 
in order that he may receive power to do that will. 
Bible-reading and praying are the distinguishing 
traits of those who strive to know and please God. 
And just as prayer begets a love for the Scrip- 
tures, and sets people to reading the Bible, so, also, 
does prayer cause men and women to visit the 
house of God, to hear the Scriptures expounded. 
Church-going is closely connected with the Bible, 
not so much because the Bible cautions us against 
“forsaking the assembling of ourselves together 
as the manner of some is,”’ but because in God’s 
house, God’s chosen minister declares His Word to 
dying men, explains the Scriptures, and enforces 
their teachings upon his hearers. And prayer 
germinates a resolve, in those who practise it, not 
to forsake the house of God. 

Prayer begets a church-going conscience, a 
church-loving heart, a church-supporting spirit. 
It is the praying people, who make it a matter of 
conscience, to attend the preaching of the Word; 
who delight in its reading; exposition; who support 


134 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


it with their influence and their means. Prayer 
exalts the Word of God and gives it preéminence in 
the estimation of those who faithfully and whole- 
heartedly call upon the Name of the Lord. 

Prayer draws its very life from the Bible, and 
has no standing ground outside of the warrant of 
the Scriptures. Its very existence and character 
is dependent on revelation made by God to man 
in His holy Word. Prayer, in turn, exalts this 
same revelation, and turns men toward that Word. 
The nature, necessity and all-comprehending char- 
acter of prayer, is based on the Word of God. 

Psalm 119 is a directory of God’s Word. With 
three or four exceptions, each verse contains a 
word which identifies, or locates, the Word of God. 
Quite often, the writer breaks out into supplication, 
several times praying, “‘ Teach me Thy statutes.” 
So deeply impressed is he with the wonders of 
God’s Word, and of the need for Divine illumina- 
tion wherewith to see and understand the wonder- 
ful things recorded therein, that he fervently 
prays: 


“ Open Thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous 
things out of Thy law.” 


From the opening of this wonderful Psalm to 
its close, prayer and God’s Word are intertwined. 
Almost every phase of God’s Word is touched upon 
by this inspired writer. So thoroughly convinced 


PRAYER AND THE WORD OF GOD © 135 


was the Psalmist of the deep spiritual power of 
the Word of God that he makes this declaration: 


“Thy word have I hid in my heart that I might not 
sin against Thee.” 


Here the Psalmist found his protection against 
sinning. By having God’s Word hidden in his 
heart; in having his whole being thoroughly im- 
pregnated with that Word; in being brought com- 
pletely under its benign and gracious influence, he 
was enabled to walk to and fro in the earth, safe 
from the attack of the Evil One, and fortified 
against a proneness to wander out of the way. 

We find, furthermore, the power of prayer to 
create a real love for the Scriptures, and to put 
within men a nature which will take pleasure in 
the Word. In holy ecstasy he cries, ‘““O, how I 
love Thy law! It is my meditation all the day.” 
And again: “ How sweet are Thy words to my 
taste! Yea, sweeter than honey to my taste.” 

Would we have a relish for God’s Word? ‘Then 
let us give ourselves continually to prayer. He 
who would have a heart for the reading of the 
Bible must not—dare not—forget to pray. The 
man of whom it can be said, “ His delight is in the 
law of the Lord,” is the man who can truly say, 
“T delight to visit the place of prayer.” No man 
loves the Bible, who does not love to pray. No 
man loves to pray, who does not delight in the 
law of the Lord. 


136 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Our Lord was a man of prayer, and He magni- 
fied the Word of God, quoting often from the 
Scriptures. Right through His earthly life Jesus 
observed Sabbath-keeping, church-going and the 
reading of the Word of God, and had prayer in- 
termingled with them all: 


“And He came to Nazareth where He had been 
brought up, and as His custom was, He went into the 
synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and stood up to read.” 


Here, let it be said, that no two things are more 
essential to a spirit-filled life than Bible-reading 
and secret prayer; no two things more helpful to 
growth in grace; to getting the largest joy out of 
a Christian life; toward establishing one in the 
ways of eternal peace. The neglect of these all- 
important duties, presages leanness of soul, loss of 
joy, absence of peace, dryness of spirit, decay in 
all that pertains to spiritual life. Neglecting these 
things paves the way for apostasy, and gives the 
Evil One an advantage such as he is not likely to 
ignore. Reading God’s Word regularly, and pray- 
ing habitually in the secret place of the Most High 
puts one where he is absolutely safe from the at- 
_ tacks of the enemy of souls, and guarantees him 
_ salvation and final victory, through the overcom- 

ing power of the Lamb. 


lo 


XIV 
PRAYER AND THE HOUSE OF GOD 


“ And dear to me the loud ‘ Amen,’ 
Which echoes through the blest abode— 
Which swells, and sinks, then swells again, 
Dies on the walls—but lives with God! ” 


occasions and circumstances. It has to do 

with God and with everything which is re- 
lated to God, and it has an intimate and special 
relationship to His house. A church is a sacred 
place, set apart from all unhallowed and secular 
uses, for the worship of God. As worship is 
prayer, the house of God is a place set apart for 
worship. It is no common place; it is where God 
dwells, where He meets with His people, and He 
delights in the worship of His saints. 

Prayer is always in place in the house of God. 
When prayer is a stranger there, then it ceases to 
be God’s house at all. Our Lord put peculiar 
emphasis upon what the Church was when He cast 
out the buyers and sellers in the Temple, repeat- 
ing the words from Isaiah, “It is written, My 
house shall be called the house of prayer.” He 
makes prayer preéminent, that which stands out 
above all else in the house of God. They, who 

137 


Pieces stands related to places, times, 


138 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


sidetrack prayer or seek to minify it, and give it 
a secondary place, pervert the Church of God, and 
make it something less and other than it is or- 
Gained to be. 

Prayer is perfectly at home in the house of God. 
It is no stranger, no mere guest; it belongs there. 
It has a peculiar affinity for the place, and has, 
moreover, a Divine right there, being set, therein, 
by Divine appointment and approval. 

The inner chamber is a sacred place for personal 
worship. The house of God is a holy place for 
united worship. ‘The prayer-closet is for individ- 
ual prayer. The house of God is for mutual 
prayer, concerted prayer, united prayer. Yet 
even in the house of God, there is the element of 
private worship, since God’s people are to wor- 
ship Him and pray to Him, personally, even in 
public worship. The Church is for the united 
prayer of kindred, yet individual believers. 

The life, power and glory of the Church is 
prayer. The life of its members is dependent on 
prayer and the presence of God is secured and re- 
tained by prayer. The very place is made sacred 
by its ministry. Without it, the Church is lifeless 
and powerless. Without it, even the building, it- 
self, is nothing, more or other, than any other 
structure. Prayer converts even the bricks, and 
mortar, and lumber, into a sanctuary, a holy of 
holies, where the Shekinah dwells. It separates 
it, in spirit and in purpose from all other edifices. 


PRAYER AND THE HOUSE OF GOD 139 


Prayer gives a peculiar sacredness to the building, 
sanctifies it, sets it apart for God, conserves it from 
all common and mundane affairs. 

With prayer, though the house of God might be 
supposed to lack everything else, it becomes a 
Divine sanctuary. So the Tabernacle, moving 
about from place to place, became the holy of 
holies, because prayer was there. Without prayer 
the building may be costly, perfect in all its ap- 
pointments, beautiful for situation and attractive 
to the eye, but it comes down to the human, with 
nothing Divine in it, and is on a level with all 
other buildings. 

Without prayer, a church is like a body without 
spirit; it is a dead, inanimate thing. A church 
with prayer in it, has God in it. When prayer is 
set aside, God is outlawed. When prayer becomes 
an unfamiliar exercise, then God Himself is a 
stranger there. 

As God’s house is a house of prayer, the Divine 
intention is that people should leave their homes 
and go to meet Him in His own house. The 
building is set apart for prayer especially, and as 
God has made special promise to meet His people 
there, it is their duty to go there, and for that 
specific end. Prayer should be the chief attrac- 
tion for all spiritually minded church-goers. While 
it is conceded that the preaching of the Word has 
an important place in the house of God, yet prayer 
is its predominating, distinguishing feature. Not 


140 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


that all other places are sinful, or evil, in them- 
selves or in their uses. But they are secular and 
human, having no special conception. of God in 
them. The Church is, essentially, religious and 
Divine. The work belonging to other places is 
done without special reference to God. He is not 
specifically recognized, nor called upon. In the 
Church, however, God is acknowledged, and noth- 
ing is done without Him. Prayer is the one dis- 
tinguishing mark of the house of God. As prayer 
distinguishes Christian from unchristian people, so 
prayer distinguishes God’s house from all other 
houses. It is a place where faithful believers meet 
with their Lord. 

As God’s house is, preéminently, a house of 
prayer, prayer should enter into and underlie 
everything that is undertaken there. Prayer be- 
longs to every sort of work appertaining to the 
Church of God. As God’s house is a house where 
the business of praying is carried on, so is it a 
place where the business of making praying people 
out of prayerless people is done. The house of 
God is a Divine workshop, and there the work of 
prayer goes on. Or the house of God is a Divine 
schoolhouse, in which the lesson of prayer is 
taught; where men and women learn to pray, and 
where they are graduated, in the school of prayer. 

Any church calling itself the house of God, and 
failing to magnify prayer; which does not put 
prayer in the forefront of its activities; which does 


PRAYER AND THE HOUSE OF GOD 141 


not teach the great lesson of prayer, should change 
its teaching to conform to the Divine pattern or 
change the name of its building to something other 
than a house of prayer. 

On an earlier page, we made reference to the 
finding of the Book of the Law of the Lord given 
to Moses. How long that book had been there, we 
do not know. But when tidings of its discovery 
were carried to Josiah, he rent his clothes and was 
greatly disturbed. He lamented the neglect of 
God’s Word and saw, as a natural result, the in- 
iquity which abounded throughout the land. 

And then, Josiah thought of God, and com- 
manded Hilkiah, the priest, to go and make in- 
quiry of the Lord. Such neglect of the Word of 
the Law was too serious a matter to be treated 
lightly, and God must be enquired of, and repent- 
ance shown, by himself, and the nation: 


“ Go enquire of the Lord for me, and for them that 
are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words 
of the book that is found; for great is the wrath of the 
Lord that is poured out upon us, because our fathers 
have not kept the word of the Lord, to do after all that 
is written in this book.” 


But that was not all. Josiah was bent on pro- 
moting a revival of religion in his kingdom, so we 
find him gathering all the elders of Jerusalem and 
Judah together, for that purpose. When they had 
come together, the king went into the house of the 


142 THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


Lord, and himself read in all the words of the 
Book of the Covenant that was found in the house 
of the Lord. : 

With this righteous king, God’s Word was of 
great importance. He esteemed it at its proper 
worth, and counted a knowledge of it to be of 
such grave importance, as to demand his consult- 
ing God in prayer about it, and to warrant the 
gathering together of the notables of his kingdom, 
so that they, together with himself, should be in- 
structed out of God’s Book concerning God’s Law. 

When Ezra, returned from Babylon, was 
seeking the reconstruction of his nation, the people, 
themselves, were alive to the situation, and, on one 
occasion, the priests, Levites and people assembled 
themselves together as one man before the water 
gate. 


“And they spake unto Ezra the scribe, to bring the 
book of the law of Moses, which the Lord had com- 
manded to Israel. And Ezra the priest brought the 
law before the congregation, both of men and women, 
and all that could hear with understanding. And he 
read therein before the street that was before the water 
gate from the morning until midday; and the ears of 
all the people were attentive unto the book of the law.” 


This was Bible-reading Day in Judah—a real 
revival of Scripture-study. The leaders read the 
law before the people, whose ears were keen to 
hear what God had to say to them out of the Book 


PRAYER AND THE HOUSE OF GOD 143 


of the Law. But it was not only a Bible-reading 
day. It was a time when real preaching was done, 
as the following passage indicates: 


“So they read in the book in the law of God dis- 
tinctly and gave the sense, and caused them to under- 
stand the reading.” 


Here then is the Scriptural definition of preach- 
ing. No better definition can be given. To read 
the Word of God distinctly—to read it so that the 
people could hear and understand the words read; 
not to mumble out the words, nor read it in an 
undertone or with indistinctness, but boldly and 
clearly—that was the method followed in Jeru- 
salem, on this auspicious day. Moreover: the 
sense of the words was made clear in the meeting 
held before the water gate; the people were treated 
to a high type of expository preaching. That was 
true preaching—preaching of a sort which is sorely 
needed, to-day, in order that God’s Word may 
have due effect on the hearts of the people. This 
meeting in Jerusalem surely contains a lesson 
which all present-day preachers should learn and 
heed. 

No one having any knowledge of the existing 
facts, will deny the comparative lack of expository 
preaching in the pulpit effort of to-day. And 
none, we should, at least, imagine, will do other 
than lament the lack. Topical preaching, po- 
lemical preaching, historical preaching, and other 


144. THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 


forms of sermonic output have, one supposes, 
their rightful and opportune uses. But expository 
preaching—the prayerful expounding of the Word 
of God is preaching that is preaching—pulpit ef- 
fort par excellence. 

For its successful accomplishment, however, a 
preacher needs must be a man of prayer. For 
every hour spent in his study-chair, he will have to 
spend two upon his knees. For every hour he 
devotes to wrestling with an obscure passage of 
Holy Writ, he must have two in the which to be 
found wrestling with God. Prayer and preach- 
ing: preaching and prayer! They cannot be 
separated. The ancient cry was: “ To your tents, 
O Israel!” The modern cry should be: “To 
your knees, O preachers, to your knees! ” 


Printed in the United States of America 


DATE 


FEB . 
JUNO 6 88 


2) 
. 


4 
= 
e 
rs] 


DUE 


= 
~< 
4 
3 


DEMCO 38-297 


A 


e332 


The Bib. Theo. Sem. 
rg icit co to Aw Y a) 
B 665 


Bounds, Edward McKendree 


The necessity of prayer 


IBLICAL THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY LIBRARY 
| . 200 NORTH MAIN STREET 
HATFIELD, PENNSYLVANIA 19440-2499 


OEMCO 


