4       /*^ 


i^^MUHiM 


(^  -n-nT-ivT/^-cim/^ivr     ivr      x  "* 


I-   ',1,  (ji^ 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


^% 


.S^3Z 


THE    AUTHORIZED    EDITION 


OF  THE 


ENGLISH    BIBLE   (1611). 


aontion:    C.   J.   CLAY,  AND  SON, 

CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS   WAREHOUSE, 
AVE   MARIA   LANE. 


Cambritise:   DEIGHTON,   BELL,   AND   CO. 
ILdpjis:   F.   A.    BROCKHAUS. 


THE 


AUTHORIZED    EDITION 


OF   THE 


ENGLISH    BIBLE  (1611), 

rrs   SUBSEQUENT   REPRINTS 
AND    MODERN    REPRESENTATIVES. 


BY 


F.   H.  A.  SCRIVENER,   M.A.,   D.C.L.,   LL.D. 

PREBENDARY   OF    EXETER   AND   VICAR   OF    HENDON. 


EDITED  FOR    THE   SYNDICS  OF   THE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


CAMBRIDGE: 

AT   THE    UNIVERSITY    PRESS. 

1884 

\^All  Rights  reserved] 


(JTambringc: 


PRINTED    BY    C.    J.    CLAY,     M.A.    &    SON. 
AT    THE    UNIVERSITY    PRESS. 


PREFACE. 


The  following  pages  comprise  in  substance  a 
reprint  of  the  author's  Introduction  to  the  Cambridge 
Paragraph  Bible  of  1873,  with  such  additions  and 
corrections  as  more  recent  studies  have  enabled  him 
to  make.  The  original  work  was  the  result  of  seven 
years'  continuous  labour,  and  has  been  generally 
recognized  as  the  only  attempt  hitherto  made  to 
construct  a  critical  edition  of  the  Authorized  Bible 
of  1611. 

One  interesting  portion  of  his  previous  work,  the 
discussion  of  the  Greek  text  underlying  the  Author- 
ized Bible  and  embodied  in  Appendix  E,  has  been 
virtually  re-written,  in  the  hope  of  attaining  a  higher 
degree  of  accuracy  than  he  or  others  have  reached 
aforetime.  The  author  has  been  blamed  for  stating 
that  Beza,  late  in  life,  and  through  mere  forgetfulness, 


vi  Preface. 

asserted  a  claim  to  the  revision  of  the  Greek  text 
which  appeared  in  parallel  columns  with  his  Latin 
Version  of  1556.  Yet  it  is  hard  to  put  any  other 
construction  on  the  language  of  his  Preface  to  his  own 
latest  edition,  dated  Calendis  Augusti  1598  : 

Annus  agitur  quadragesimus  secundus,  Christiane  lector,  ex 
quo  Novi  Testamenti  Latinam  interpretationem  emendare  sum 
aggressus,  Graeco  contextu,  non  modo  cum  novemdecim  vetus- 
tissimis  quam  plurimis  manuscriptis  et  multis  passim  impressis 
codicibus,  sed  etiam  cum  Syra  interpretatione  collate,  et  quam 
optima  potui  fide  ac  diligentia,  partim  cum  veterum  Grsecorum 
ac  Latinorum  patrum  scriptis,  partim  cum  recentioribus,  tum 
pietate,  tum  eruditione  praestantissimorum  Theologorum  versio- 
nibus,  et  variis  enarrationibus  comparato. 

Hendox,  February,  1884. 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 


Preliminary  explanation        ....... 

Section  I.     History  of  editions  of  the  Authorized  Bible,  1611  — 

1863 

Section  II.     Its  marginal  notes  and  original  texts 

Section  III.     Its  use  of  Italic  type       ..... 

Section  IV.     Its  punctuation        ...... 

Section  V.     Its  orthography  and  grammar  .... 

.Section  VI.      Parallel  references  in  the  margin 

Section  VII.     Miscellaneous  observations    .... 


PAGE 

1 

3 
40 
61 
81 

93 
116 

127 


Appendix  A.     List  of  wrong  readings  of  the  Bible  of  161 1  amend- 
ed in  later  editions         ........     147 

Appendix  B.     Variation  between  the  two  issues,  both  bearing  the 

date  of  1611  .........     203 

Appendix  C.     List  of  original  readings  of  the  Bible  of  161 1  re- 
stored, later  alterations  being  withdrawn        .         .  .         -215 

Appendix  D.     Dr   Blayney's   Report   to   the   Delegates  of  the 

Clarendon  Press  .  .  .         .         .         .         .         .         -238 

Appendix  E.     The  Greek  text  adopted  in  the  Bible  of  16  ri  ex- 
amined and  arranged     .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .243 

Note  on  the  Synod  of  Dort  ........     264 

Original  Epistle  of  the  Translators  to  the  Reader,  with  notes        .     265 

Index  of  Persons  and  Subjects      . 305' 


THE   AUTHORIZED    EDITION    OF   THF. 


CORRIGENDA. 

P.  147,  last  line  but  one:  for  i  Mace  xiii.  15  read  i  Mace.  xiii.  51. 
P.  148,  col.  I :  for  Gen.  xii.  read  Gen.  xli. 

,,  „      :  for  Lev.  xviii.  20  read  Lev.  xviii.  ii. 

P.  159,  I  Chr.  XV.  18,  20  (first  reference):    for  1639  ^^^'^  ^638. 


persons,  who,  in  so  grave  a  matter  as  the  daily  use  of  Holy 
Scripture,  shall  prove  slow  to  adopt  changes  which  yet  they 
will  not  doubt  to  be  made,  on  the  whole,  for  the  better.   With 


s. 


THE   AUTHORIZED    EDITION    OF   THE 
ENGLISH    BIBLE   (1611), 

ITS    SUBSEQUENT   REPRINTS   AND   MODERN 
REPRESENTATIVES. 


A  CRITICAL  edition  of  the  Authorized  Version  of 
the  Enghsh  Bible,  having  reference  to  its  internal 
character  rather  than  to  its  external  history,  and  indicating 
the  changes  for  good  or  ill  introduced  into  the  original  text 
of  161 1  by  subsequent  reprints,  would  have  been  executed 
long  ago,  had  this  Version  been  nothing  more  than  the 
greatest  and  best  known  of  English  Classics.  And  such  a 
design  has  been  rendered  all  the  more  necessary  by  the  fact 
that  a  formal  revision  of  the  Translation  itself  is  now  in 
progress,  having  been  undertaken  about  fourteen  years  ago 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Convocation  of  the  Province  of 
Canterbury.  If  a  judgment  may  be  formed  from  previous 
experience  in  like  cases,  the  revised  and  unrevised  Versions, 
when  the  former  shall  be  at  length  completed,  are  destined 
to  run  together  a  race  of  generous  and  friendly  rivalry  for  the 
space  of  at  least  one  generation,  before  the  elder  of  the  two 
shall  be  superseded  in  the  affections  of  not  a  few  devout 
persons,  who,  in  so  grave  a  matter  as  the  daily  use  of  Holy 
Scripture,  shall  prove  slow  to  adopt  changes  which  yet  they 
will  not  doubt  to  be  made,  on  the  whole,  for  the  better.   With 

s.  I 


2       Sect.  /.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

so  sharp  a  struggle  before  it,  it  is  only  right  that  the  Author- 
ized or  King  James's  Bible  should  be  represented,  as  far  as 
may  be,  in  the  precise  shape  that  it  would  have  assumed,  if 
its  venerable  Translators  had  shewn  themselves  more  exempt 
than  they  were  from  the  failings  incident  to  human  in- 
firmity; or  if  the  same  severe  accuracy,  which  is  now  de- 
manded in  carrying  so  important  a  volume  through  the 
press,  had  been  deemed  requisite  or  was  at  all  usual  in 
their  age.  The  purpose  of  the  present  work  is  to  discuss, 
within  as  moderate  a  compass  as  the  subject  will  permit, 
the  principles  which  have  been  adopted  in  editing  the 
following  pages,  the  reasons  whereon  they  are  grounded, 
and  the  difficulties  which  have  been  encountered  in  the 
prosecution  of  an  arduous  but  by  no  means  a  wearisome 
task.  For  the  reader's  convenience  it  will  be  divided  into 
seven  Sections,  the  chief  contents  of  which  are  here  sub- 
joined. 

Section  I.  On  the  history  of  the  text  of  the  Authorized 
Version,  from  a.  d.  1611  down  to  the  present  time. 

Section  II.  On  its  marginal  notes ;  and  on  the  original 
texts,  both  Greek  and  Hebrew,  employed  by  the  Translators. 

Section  III.  On  the  use  of  the  Italic  type  by  the 
Translators,  and  on  the  extension  of  their  principles  by 
subsequent  editors. 

Section  IV.  On  the  system  of  punctuation  adopted  in 
161 1,  and  modified  in  more  recent  Bibles. 

Section  V.  On  the  orthography,  grammatical  pecu- 
liarities, and  capital  letters  of  the  original,  as  compared 
with  modern  editions. 

Section  VI.  On  the  references  to  parallel  texts  of 
Scripture  which  are  set  in  the  margin. 

Section  VII.  Miscellaneous  observations  relating  to 
the  present  edition,  and  general  Conclusion. 

To  this  short  treatise  is  annexed,  besides  several  other 


History  of  the  Text. 


Appendices,  a  full  Catalogue  of  the  places  in  which  the  text 
of  modern  Bibles  differs  fr6m  that  of  the  standard  of  1611, 
with  the  dates  at  which  the  variations  were  severally  adopted, 
so  far  as  by  diligent  care  they  have  been  ascertained. 

The  Translators'  address  to  the  Reader^  prefixed  to  the 
edition  of  161 1,  is  reprinted  at  the  end  of  this  volume. 

Section  1. 

On  the  history  of  the  text  of  the  Authorized  Version  of  the 
English  Bible,  from  a.d.  161  i  down  to  the  present  time. 

Most  headers  will  be  aware  that  numberless  and  not 
inconsiderable  departures  from  the  original  or  standard 
edition  of  the  Authorized  Translation  as  published  in  t6ii, 
are  to  be  found  in  the  modern  Bibles  which  issue  from  the 
press  by  thousands  every  year.  Some  of  these  differences 
must  be  imputed  to  oversight  and  negligence,  from  which 
no  work  of  man  can  be  entirely  free  ;  but  much  the  greater 
part  of  them  are  deliberate  changes,  introduced  silently  and 
without  authority  by  men  whose  very  names  are  often  un- 
known. Now,  if  such  alterations  had  been  made  irivariably 
for  the  worse,  it  would  have  been  easy  in  future  editions  to 
recall  the  primitive  readings,  and  utterly  to  reject  the  later 
corruptions.  This,  however,  is  far  from  being  the  case. 
Not  a  few  of  these  variations,  es|5ecially  those  first  met  with 
in  Cambridge  folio  Bibles  dated  1629  and  1638,  which 
must  have  been  superintended  with  much  critical  care, 
amend  manifest  faults  of  the  original  Translators  or  editors, 
so  that  it  would  be  most  irijudicious  to  remove  them  from 
the  place  they  have  deservedly  held  in  all  our  copies  for 
the  last  250  years \     A  full  and,  it  may  be  hoped,  a  fairly 

^  On  a  question  of  so  great  made  by  previous  editors  of  the 
importance  as  that  of  retaining  Authorized  Version,  it  is  safe  to 
changes    for    the    better    already       be  fortified  by  the  judgment  of  so 


4       Sect.  /.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

complete  list  of  these  changes  is  given  in  Appendix  A  at  the 
end  of  this  volume,  to  which  the  student  is  referred  once 
for  all :  the  attempt  therein  made  to  assign  the  period  at 
which  they  were  severally  admitted  into  the  text,  although 
great  pains  have  been  bestowed  upon  the  investigation, 
must  be  regarded  as  sometimes  only  approximately  success- 
ful. Other  copies,  of  an  earlier  date  than  that  cited,  may 
occasionally  have  anticipated  it  in  making  the  given  cor- 
rection ;  but  these  inaccuracies  will  hardly  affect  the  general 
results,  or  impair  the  conclusions  to  which  they  lead.  One 
class  of  variations  has  been  advisedly  excluded  from  the 
Catalogue,  as  seeming  rather  curious  than  instructive  or 
important ;  namely,  that  arising  from  errors  which,  having 
crept  into  editions  later  than  that  of  161 1,  after  holding 
a  place  in  a  few  or  in  many  subsequent  issues,  have  long 
since  disappeared  from  the  Bibles  now  in  use.  Of  this 
kind  is  that  notorious  misprint  in  the  Cambridge  folio  of 
1638,  once  falsely  imputed  to  ecclesiastical  bias,  "whom  ye 
may  appoint  over  this  business"  ("ye"  for  "we".j  Acts  vi.  3; 
a  blemish  whicli  obstinately  maintained  its  ground  in  some 
copies,  at  least  as  late  as  1682  \     The  several  editions  of 

cautious  and  well-informed  a  writer  only   commend   the    sound  judg- 

as  Dr  Cardwell :  "There  is  only  ment  which,  after  it  was  generally 

one    case,    perhaps,  in    which    it  adopted,  did  not  hesitate  to  retain 

would   become    the   duty   of   the  it"    {Oxford  Bibles,    1833,   p.    2, 

privileged    editor    to    enter    into  by  Edward  Cardwell,  D.D.,  Prin- 

questions     of    criticism,    without  cipal  of  S.  Alban's  Hall,  Oxford), 

some  express  authority  to  support  ^  Hartwell  Home,  to  whose  In- 

him.     If  a  given  mistake  of  the  trodiiction  all  English  students  of 

Translators  had  already  been  cor-  the  Bible  owe  more  than  they  can 

rected  before  his  time,  if  the  public  ever  duly  acknowledge,  adds  an- 

opinionhad concurred,  eitheravow-  other  instance  of  less  importance 

edly  or  tacitly,  in  the  change,  he  (though   he  does  not  quite  know 

might   reasonably   hope   that  the  its  true  history),  which  shall  serve 

general   acknowledgment    of    the  as    a    sufhcient    specimen   of    the 

truth  would  relieve  him  from  the  whole  class.     In  i  Tim.  iv.  16  for 

obligation  of  returning  into  error.  "  the  doctrine  "  of  the  books  from 

I    say    nothing    of    the    boldness  1611  to  1630,  we  read  "  thy  doc- 

which  first  made  the  alteration;  I  trine"  in  1629  (Camb.)  down   to 


History  of  the  Text. 


the  Authorized  Version  which  have  been  used  in  the 
formation  of  our  Catalogues  and  in  our  suggested  revision 
of  the  text  are  chiefly,  though  not  exclusively,  the  following, 
(i)  The  standard  or  primary  one  pubhshed  in  1611, 
"Imprinted  at  London  by  Robert  Barker^  Printer  to  the 
Kings  most  Excellent  Majestic."  Here,  however,  w^e  are 
met  on  the  threshold  of  our  researches  by  the  perplexing 
fact  that  at  least  two  separate  issues  bear  the  date  of 
that  year,  yet  differ  from  each  other  in  so  many  minute 
particulars,  that  we  cannot  help  raising  the  question  which 
is  the  earlier  or  more  authoritative,  and  consequently  the 
more  suitable  to  be  taken  as  the  model  to  w^iich  subsequent 
reprints  ought  to  be  accommodated.  On  this  subject,  so 
interesting  to  students  of  the  English  Bible,  much  information 
has  been  imparted  by  ]Mr  Fry  of  Bristol,  whose  materials 
will  be  thankfully  used  by  many  that  feel  unable  to  adopt 
his  conclusions,  and  might  desire  a  little  more  scholarlike 
precision  in  the  method  of  his  investigations'.  The  two 
chief  issues  of  161 1  may  be  respectively  represented  by 
a  folio  now  in  the  British  Museum  (3050.  g.  2),  and  another 
in  the  same  Library  (3050.  g.  i)  of  which  Mr  Fry  says  in  a 
manuscript  note  that  "it  is  every  leaf  correct,  and  may  be 
taken  as  a  standard  copy  of  this  issue."  There  is  yet  a  third 
class  of  books,  bearing  date  the  same  year,  containing  (some 
more,  some  less)  sheets  of  six  leaves  or  twelve  pages  each,  or 
occasionally  only  two  or  four  leaves  of  a  sheet,  which  appear 
to  be  reprints  of  portions  of  one  or  the  other  of  the  afore- 
named issues,  the  preliminary  matter  being  made  up  from 
the  foHo  of  161 7  or  elsewhere,  a  circumstance  which  compli- 

1762.      Blayney    (1769)    restored  Bible, le^^^., also  of  the  editions, 

*'the,"  but  Home  has  seen  "thy"  z«  large  folio,   of  the   Azithorized 

in  Bibles  of  the  commencement  of  Version   of  the   Holy   Scriptures, 

the  present  century.    Introduction,  Printed  in  the  years  161 1,   1613, 

Vol.  II.  Pt.  II.  p.  79  note  (1834).  161 7,    1634,    1640.      By   Francis 

^  A    Description  of  the    Great  Fry,  F.S.A.,  folio,  London,  1865. 


6       Sec/.  I.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

cates  the  question  not  a  little,  so  that  in  what  we  have  to  say 
it  will  be  advisable  to  exclude  all  considerations  respecting 
these  reprinted  portions  \  This  may  be  done  the  better, 
inasmuch  as  Mr  Fry's  researches  have  discovered  only  six 
such  leaves  in  the  Pentateuch,  five  in  the  Apocrypha,  none 
in  the  New  Testament.  These  reprints  are  bound  up  with 
and  form  a  complete  book  with  portions  of  each  issue  in  two 
other  Bibles  in  the  Museum  (1276.  1.  4  and  3050.  g.  3)  re- 
spectively. The  textual  differences  between  the  two  original 
issues  have  been  diligently  collected  below  in  Appendix  B, 
from  which  only  very  manifest  misprints  of  both  books  have 
been  excluded:  by  a  careful  examination  of  our  collation, 
in  those  portions  where  there  are  no  known  reprints,  the 
student  can  form  an  independent  judgment  respecting  the 
internal  character  of  each  of  them.  In  preparing  the 
present  volume,  a  Bible  belonging  to  the  Syndics  of  the 
Cambridge  University  Press  (A.  3.  14,  wanting  sheet  A 
containing  the  Title-page,  Dedication,  and  part  of  the 
Translators'  Preface)  has  been  substituted  for  the  Museum 
book  3050.  g.  2,  and  for  3050.  g.  i  the  Oxford  reprint 
of  1833,  as  being  a  well-known  publication  which  exactly 
resembles  it  in  all  places  consulted,  and  was  itself  taken 
verbatim,  with  unusual  care  for  insuring  accuracy,  from  a 
Bible  in  the  Library  of  the  Delegates  of  the  Oxford  Uni- 


1  Gen,  xlvi.  12 — xlix.  27;  Num.  — Ixiii.   i;   Jer,  i.  7 — vii.  26;   xi. 

xxi.  1 — xxvi.  65;  Josh.  x.  9 — xi.  12 — xv.  10;  xxvi.  18 — Ezek.  xiv. 

11;  XV.    13 — xvii.    8;   Judg.   xiv.  22;  xvii.   22 — xx,  44;  Zech.   xiv. 

18— XX.  44;  Euth  i.  9 — 2  Sam.  ix.  9 — Mai.  ii.  13;  i  Esdr.  iv.  37 — v. 

13;  xi.  26 — xiv.  19;  XV.  31 — xvii.  26;  Ecclus.  xvi.  7 — xx.  17;  Baruch 

14;  xix.   39 — xxii.  49;    I  Kin.  i.  iii.  i — iv.  28;  Song,  ver.  20 — Hist. 

17 — xvi.   3;  xvii.   20 — xxii.  34;  2  Susanna,  ver.  15:  in  all  244  leaves 

Kin.  i.  15 — 2  Chr.  xxix.  31;  Ezra  (but  not  so  many  in  any  one  copy), 

ii.  55 — ^Job  xxii.   3;xxv.  4 — xxxi.  distinguished  by  the  comparison  of 

28;  xxxiv.  5 — xli.  31;  Ps.  vi.  3 —  B.  M.   3050.  g.  2  with  44    other 

Prov.  vi.  35  ;  ix.  14 — xiv.  28;  xvii.  copies,  in  respect  to  initial  letters 

3 — Eccles.  ii.  26;  vi.  i — Cant.  vii.  and   minute   typographical  varia- 

i;   Tsai.    i.   i — xxxii.  13;   xli.    13  tions  (/rj',  Table  2). 


History  of  the  Text. 


versity  Press  at  that  time  in  actual  use.  Copies  of  both 
issues  or  recensions  of  1611  survive  in  great  numbers  in 
private  as  well  as  in  public  hands,  since,  when  the  Transla- 
tion was  completed,  every  Church  had  to  be  furnished  with 
at  least  one  without  delay.  Fifteen  copies  of  that  which  it 
followed,  twelve  of  the  other,  are  enumerated  in  the  Adver- 
tisement which  preceded  the  publication  of  the  Oxford 
reprint  (dated  Jan.  14,  1834),  and  Mr  Fry  has  seen  at  least 
seventy,  although  he  seldom  gives  us  information  as  to 
where  they  are  severally  located  ^ 

The  question  which  of  the  two  recensions  is  the  earlier 
must  be  decided  partly  by  external,  partly  by  internal  con- 
siderations. The  latter  will  speak  for  themselves,  and  it 
may  be  taken  for  granted  that  no  one  will  doubt  the  great 
superiority  on  the  whole  of  the  text  of  the  Oxford  reprint  to 
the  other,  or  hesitate  to  mark  in  it  many  designed  improve- 
ments and  corrections  which  betray  a  later  hand  (Appendix 
B  §  II.),  while  the  instances  in  which  the  Syndics'  book  is 
superior  or  not  inferior  to  the  other  (App.  B  §  i.)  are  scanty, 
slight,  and  incapable  of  suggesting  the  converse  inference ^ 


^  Besides    those    named   above  xliv.  29,  where  what  we  call  the 

the  author  has  examined   (not  to  first  issue  treats  the  final  mem  as 

mention   some  in   private  hands)  if   it  were  double;    Amos  vi.    7, 

resembling  Camb.  Synd.  A.  3.  14,  where   the   second   issue   corrects 

S.  John's  Coll.  Cambridge  (T.  ^.  the   wrong   number   of  the   first; 

24);    King's  College    (53);   Jesus  but  1  Mace.  x.  47  seems  conclusive, 

Coll.  Cambridge  (A.  7.  7  with  the  where  our  second  issue,  deeming 

y<z/i-(?  date  of  16 1 3  on  the  title-page  "true  peace"   too   strong   a  ren- 

of  the   O.  T. );    Lambeth   Muni-  dering  of  \67wi'ei/977t'£/ca!j',  banished 

ment  Room:  resembling  the  Ox-  "  ||  True  "  into  the  margin.     There 

ford  reprint,  Brit.  Mus.  (466.  i.  6) ;  are  no   reprints   in  these    leaves. 

Sion  College  Arch.    X.  3  ;    Cam-  It  is  fair  to  add  two  instances  in 

bridge  University  Library  (i.  15,  App.  B  which  we  have  found  tend- 

16) ;  Emmanuel  College  (B.  I.  23),  ing  to  an  opposite  conclusion,  in  the 

and  the  very  fine  copy  in  the  Bod-  false  arrangement  of  the  margins 

leian.  of  Wisd.    iii.    14;    Mark   vii.    4, 

"^  A  few  instances  are  as  good  in  the   Oxford   reprint.     But   the 

as  a  thousand,  if  only  they  be  un-  general  drift  of  the  internal  evi- 

equivocal.    We  would  press  Ezek.  dence  sets  strongly  the  other  way. 


8      Sect.  /.]     Authorized  Ve7'sion  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

Both  contain  innumerable  errors  of  the  press,  some  peculiar 
to  a  single  issued  not  a  few  (including  nearly  all  the  false 
textual  references  in  the  margin,  see  below  Sect,  vi.)  com- 
mon to  both.  It  is  useful  to  remember  one  characteristic 
er?'attim  of  each,  which  will  enable  us  to  determine  at 
a  glance  to  which  recension  a  particular  volume  in  our 
hands  belongs.  The  Syndics'  copy  and  its  fellows  have 
"Judas"  instead  of  "Jesus"  in  Matt.  xxvi.  -T^d  ;  the  Oxford 
reprint  and  its  associates  read  twice  over  the  following  words 
(forming  three  complete  lines)  in  Ex.  xiv.  10  "the  children  of 
Israel  lift  up  their  eyes,  and  behold,  the  Egyptians  marched 
after  them,  and  they  were  sore  afraid:  and"  the  printer's  eye 
wandering  back  from  the  second  "the  children  of  Israel"  in 
the  verse,  to  the  first".  Yet  in  spite  of  this  portentous 
blunder,  the  recension  which  contains  it  is  decidedly  the 
more  correct  of  the  two,  and  irresistibly  forces  on  the  mind 
of  any  one  that  has  minutely  studied  both,  that  whether 
we  regard  emendations  of  the  sense  or  comparative  exemp- 
tion from  typographical  oversights,  it  had  undergone  re- 
vision, fitful  and  superficial  perhaps,  but  not  the  less  real  on 
that  account.  Hence  it  seems  not  quite  reasonable,  in  answer 
to  the  enquiry  "Which  of  the  tw^o  issues  w^as  first  printed?" 
to  say  with  Mr  Fry,  "I  do  not  think  that  any  evidence 
on  this  point  can  be  adduced,  from  the  existence  of  an  error 
in  one,  and  the  absence  of  it  in  another  copy"  (.4  Description^ 
&c.  p.  23).  Not  certainly  from  noting  a  single  error  or  from 
noting  twenty,  for  such  an  argument  is  cumulative  in  its 
weight,  and  can  only  be  appreciated  by  patient  enquirers : 


^  In  compiling  a  list  of  errata  vising  for  the  King's  Printer  his 

in  the  Syndics'    copy  (A.    3.   14)  quarto  edition  of  1806. 

much  aid  was   given  by  the  cor-  ^  It   deserves    notice   that   this 

rections  made  in  that  book  by  Gil-  could  easily  be  done  if  the  type 

bert  Buchanan,  LL.D.,  of  Wood-  were  set  up  from  the  Syndics' copy, 

mansterne,   Surrey,  in  the  winter  where  "the  children  of  Israel  "  be- 

of  1 81 3 — 4,  when  engaged  in  re-  gins  a  line  in  both  parts  of  the  verse. 


History  of  the  Text.  9 

but  if,  out  of  two  books  substantially  the  same,  one  shall 
prove  on  examination  more  free  than  the  other  from 
mechanical  imperfections  and  printers'  errata ,  and  at  the 
same  time  full  of  small  yet  unequivocal  corrections  whether 
of  the  style  or  the  matter  of  the  performance,  we  cannot 
doubt  that,  in  the  absence  of  any  considerable  proof  to  the 
contrary,  the  common  consent  of  mankind  would  pronounce 
that  the  better  executed  volume  must  needs  be  the  later  of 
the  two. 

And  what  considerable  proof  to  the  contrary  has  Mr  Fry 
been  able  to  allege  ?  Direct  evidence  on  the  subject  there 
is  none,  for  never  was  a  great  enterprise  like  the  production 
of  our  Authorized  Version  carried  out  with  less  knowledge 
handed  down  to  posterity  of  the  labourers,  their  method  and 
order  of  working.  There  still  remains  the  bibliographical 
branch  of  this  investigation,  and  it  will  demand  some 
attention.  The  first  point  we  take  up  makes  little  in  favour 
of  Mr  Fry's  view  of  the  priority  of  that  issue  which  the 
Oxford  reprint  follows  with  such  faithful  exactness.  All 
copies  of  the  other  issue,  if  they  have  a  title-page  at  all, 
exhibit  a  respectable  and  elaborate  woodcut  (repeated 
before  the  New  Testament  with  the  necessary  change  in  the 
printed  words)  that  had  often  done  duty  before,  notably  in 
the  Bishops'  Bible  of  1602.  It  represents  the  four  Evan- 
gelists with  their  proper  emblems  at  the  top  and  bottom  of 
the  cut,  the  tents  and  armorial  bearings  of  the  twelve  tribes 
on  the  left  of  the  letter-press,  the  twelve  Apostles  on  the 
right  of  it,  the  Paschal  Lamb  slain  on  the  altar  beneath  it, 
the  Lamb  Triumphant  under  the  Incommunicable  Name 
surmounting  all.  But  in  many  copies  of  the  recension  to 
which  the  Oxford  reprint  belongs  the  title-page  is  of  a 
totally  different  character.  It  is  a  very  elegant  copper-plate 
engraving,  of  whose  refined  beauty  Mr  Fry's  reproduction  on 
stone  (Plate  34)  gives  but  a  poor  idea.     Here  Moses  stands 


TO    Sect.  /]     Authorized   Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

cornutiis  on  the  left  of  the  letter-press  title,  Aaron  on  the 
right,  the  Apostles  and  Evangelists  above  and  below  in 
attitude  and  form  quite  different  from  the  conventional 
manner  of  artists ;  above,  the  Incommunicable  Name, 
the  Dove,  the  Lamb  Triumphant ;  below,  the  Pelican 
and  her  young;  at  the  foot  of  this  masterpiece  the  sub- 
scription C.  Boel  fecit  in  Richmo7it^  Cornelius  Boel  of 
Antwerp  then  working  at  Richmond  in  Surrey.  Now  the 
point  to  be  noted  is  this.  It  is  admitted  by  Mr  Fry  and  by 
every  one  else  that  in  no  copy  of  what  he  calls  the  second 
issue  is  there  an  engraved  title,  whereas  some  copies  of  his 
first  issue  have  the  engraved  plate,  others  the  woodcut,  a  few 
possibly,  though  not  certainly,  both,  prefixed  to  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. The  inference  seems  a  natural  one  that  Boel's  plate 
not  being  ready  when  the  earliest  copies  of  our  Authorized 
Version  were  published,  the  old  woodcut  was  made  to  serve 
in  its  place  for  a  while,  and  that  those  copies  of  Mr  Fry's 
first  and  our  second  issue  which  contain  Boel's  copper-plate, 
are  in  all  probability  the  latest  of  any.  If  there  be  any 
more  simple  solution  of  the  matter,  it  would  be  well  to 
state  it. 

But  that  which  is  most  dwelt  upon  by  such  as  would 
invert  what  internal  evidence  points  out  as  the  true  order  of 
the  two  issues  rests  on  facts  relating  to  the  reprinted  leaves 
which  Mr  Fry  has  demonstrated  with  great  pains  and  inge- 
nuity. Out  of  25  copies  of  his  first  issue  which  he  examined, 
23  were  leaf  for  leaf  alike,  agreeing  entirely  with  each  other  : 
in  one  copy  two  leaves,  in  another  six,  were  of  the  rival 
issue.  Forty-five  copies  of  this  latter  issue  were  then 
collated,  of  which  the  large  number  of  41  were  found 
to  vary  from  each  other  in  some  of  the  reprinted  leaves 
supplied  (see  p.  6  note),  and  only  two  pairs  were  entirely 
identical.  "I  have  now  shewn"  he  proceeds  to  sum  up 
"from  the  actual  comparison  of  a  very  large  number  of  the 


History  of  the  Text.  1 1 

Bibles  of  1611,  as  many  as  seventy,  that  one  issue  is 
unmixed  (with  the  exception  of  eight  leaves  in  two  copies 
out  of  25  examined),  and  that  the  other  issue  is  made  up  in 
a  very  remarkable  manner,  not  only  with  reprints,  but  that 
it  is  often  mixed  with  the  other  issue,  with  the  preliminary 
leaves  of  16 13,  161 7,  and  1634.  Is  not  this  conclusive 
evidence  that  the  Bibles  No.  i  aiid  No.  2  before  alluded  to^ 
are  respectively  of  the  ist  issue  and  of  the  2nd  issue^?" 
{Description^  &c.  p.  25.)  Certainly  not,  if  we  understand 
what  is  meant  by  conclusive  evidence.  The  facts  established 
by  Mr  Fry  (and  we  can  confirm  many  of  them  from  our  own 
experience)  are  suflicient  to  raise  a  strong  presumption  that 
not  very  many  copies  of  the  earliest  printed  issue  were  bound 
up  at  once  and  sent  out  to  Parish  Churches,  for  which 
reservation  their  shameful  inaccuracy  will  abundantly  ac- 
count. After  the  great  and  immediate  demand  was  satisfied 
by  that  better  edition  which  the  Oxford  reprint  exhibits, 
and  after  the  Translators  were  dispersed  and  had  ceased  to 


^  As  usual,  Mr   Fry   does   not  leaves  supplied  at  the  end  of  the 

indicate  what  and  where  are  the  Syndics'  copy  of  his  own  book, 

copies  he  used.     He  only  says  just  and  from  comparing  various  parts 

before,    "I   placed   my  two   best  of  Brit.  Mus.   3050.  g.  i  and  g.  2, 

copies  side  by  side,  the  one  with  quite  an  opposite  conclusion  might 

the  error  of  three  lines  in  Ex.  xiv.  be  drawn  :   but  if  the   difference 

10,  the  No.    r    copy...,    and    the  were  ever  so  great,  it  would  only 

other    with    the    verse    correctly  prove  that  the  lines  were  repaired 

printed.  No.    2    copy...  (p.    22),"  for  a  new  issue.     It  is  even  doubt- 

which  is  vague  enough.     He  tries  ful,  on  close  inspection,  whether 

also  to  make  something  of  "the  the  same  lines  were  used  for  both, 

obvious  difference  in  the  condition  ^  "  Because  those  Bibles  which 

of  the  rules  with  which  the  black  were  printed  and  bound  up  before 

lines  [inclosing  the  letter-pi'ess]  are  the   2nd  Issue  was   printed    (and 

printed.    In  No.  i  they  are  straight  no  doubt  there  were  such)  could 

and  generally  true  at  the  corners;  have  leaves  of  no  other  Issue  or 

in  the  2nd  Issue  they  are  not  so  edition   inserted"   (p.   22).      This 

true,  and  are  more  open,  shewing  consideration  he  calls  "  almost  ab- 

the  effect  of  use"  (p.    25).     The  solute  proof"  of  his  opinion.     It 

difference  will  not  appear  so  con-  shews,   of  course,  that  his  theory 

spicuous  to  every  one  who  inspects  is  self-consistent,  but  nothing  more, 
these  early  Bibles ;  from  the  original 


12    Sect.  /.]     Authorized   Version  of  the  Bible  (i6it). 

have  any  control  over  their  work,  the  printer  seems  to  have 
gradually  put  forth  the  unused  sheets  that  had  been  first 
struck  off  and  deliberately  laid  aside,  supplemented  by  re- 
printed leaves  and  other  portions  of  later  books. 

"Why  these  244  leaves  were  required  to  be  printed  a 
second  time  we  can  only  conjecture"  {ibid.  p.  24).  In  truth 
the  difficulty  presses  equally  upon  every  possible  hypothesis 
that  can  be  maintained.  Almost  the  only  real  informa- 
tion available  which  bears  even  remotely  on  the  matter 
is  Dr  Anthony  Walker's  Life  of  John  Bois^  [1560 — 1643], 
who  was  a  member  first  of  the  fourth,  afterwards  of  the 
second  Company.     Of  him  we  are  told 

"  Four  years  he  spent  in  this  service'-,  at  the  end  thereof  (the  whole 
work  being  finished,  and  three  copies  of  the  whole  Bible  being  sent  to 
London,  one  from  Cambridge,  a  second  fi^om  Oxford,  and  a  third  from 
Westminster),  a  new  choice  was  to  be  made  of  six  in  all,  two  out  of 
each  company,  to  review  the  whole  work,  and  extract  one  out  of  all 
the  three,  to  be  committed  to  the  press.  For  the  despatch  of  this 
business  Mr  Downes^  and  he,  out  of  the  Cambridge  company*,  were 

^  Harleian  MS.    7053,   printed  seventy-two  days  and  more,"  about 

also  in  Peck's  Desiderata  Curiosa,  two   years    and   nine    months,   as 

Vol.   II.    Book  VIII.    1732.     The  Canon    Westcott    notes    {General 

Harleian  manuscript  is  written  by  Vieiv  of  History  of  English  Bible, 

the  hand  which  records  a  list  of  p.    154),    which    The    Translator 

Degrees  conferred  by  George  II.  to  the  Reader    speaks    of.     Else- 

at    Cambridge,    April    25,    1728:  where  Anthony   Walker    says    of 

Peck  derived  his   materials  from  Bois's  labours,   "Five  years  were 

one  of  the  Baker   papers,  which  spent   in   the  Translation,    which 

John   Lewis   also    cited   in    1739.  makes  no  noise,  because  it  carries 

The   two    manuscript    authorities  no  name"  (Peck,  z//^?  j-z//^ra,  p.  53). 

are  independent,  each  preserving  '^  "  Though  Mr  Downes  would 

passages  not  found  in  the  other.  not  go,  till  he  was  either  fetcht 

Both  contain  incidentalstaternents,  or  threatened  with  a  Pursuivant." 

hitherto   unnoticed,  which   might  Walker   in  Peck.     The    Harleian 

lead  to   the   supposition  that  the  copy  does  not  mention  this  story, 

different  Translators  took  to  them-  so  characteristic  of  the  times, 

selves  separate  books  (Harl.   pp.  *  So  that  "  two  out  of  each  com- 

104,  105),   as  was  really  the  case  pany,"mentioned  just  before,  must 

with  the  Bishops'  Bible.  mean  two  out  of  each  place  ;  and 

2  So  that  we  need  not  take  lite-  the  final   Committee  consisted  of 

rally    the     "  twice     seven    times  six  persons,  not  of  twelve,  as  was 


History  of  the  Text. 


13 


sent  for  up  to  London,  where  meeting  their  four  fellow-labourers,  they 
went  daily  to  Stationers'  Hall,  and  in  three  quarters  of  a  year  fulfilled 
their  task.  Whilst  they  were  employed  in  this  last  business,  he,  and 
he  only,  took  notes  of  their  proceedings,  which  he  diligently  kept  to 
his  dying  day." 

Could  these  notes  be  recovered',  they  would  solve,  not 
only  the  problem  discussed  by  Mr  Fry,  but  many  other 
questions  of  great  interest.  If  Dr  Walker  can  be  trusted,  it 
would  seem  that  every  part  of  each  Company's  task  had  in 
some  fiishion  been  revised  by  each  of  the  rest,  a  statement 
which  neither  the  time  employed,  nor  the  results  obtained, 
render  very  likely  (see  Sect.  vii.).  At  all  events  it  is  clear, 
unless  we  reject  his  evidence  altogether,  that  the  printing, 
so  far  as  the  Translators  superintended  it  at  all,  must  have 
been  begun  and  ended  within  the  short  period  of  nine 
months,  which  seems  wholly  inadequate  for  the  accomplish- 
ing of  all  they  had  in  hand^ 


stated  at  the  Synod  of  Dort  (161 8). 
Compare,  however,  Anderson,  An- 
jials  of  the  English  Bible  (1845), 
Vol.  II.  pp.  381 — 2,  and  my  friend 
Dr  John  Eadie's  noble  and  almost 
posthumous  English  Bible ^  Vol.  II. 
p.  201.  Bp  Miles  Smith,  the  au- 
thor of  the  Preface,  and  Bp  Bilson 
of  Winchester,  "whose  name  does 
not  appear  among  the  revisers, 
superintended  the  work  at  press." 
See  below  p.  264. 

1  Harl.  7053  contains  John 
Bois's  will  dated  the  year  he  died 
(1643),  wherein  he  bequeaths  his 
books  and  papers,  on  which  he  set 
great  store,  to  his  daughter,  Anne 
Bois,  ' '  to  her  best  use  and  com- 
modity," and  requests  his  curate, 
John  Killingworth,  to  be  *'  aiding 
and  helpful  in  the  disposing "  of 
the  same.  They  were  no  doubt 
sold,  and  may  yet  be  found  in 
some  private  collection. 

2  A  ray  of  fresh  light  has  been 
thrown  upon   the   history  of  the 


version  by  a  letter  referred  to,  so 
far  as  we  know,  for  the  first  time 
by  Mr  J.  H.  MwnU  Annotated  Bible, 
Introduction-,  p.  xliv.  note  i  (1878). 
The  volume  which  contains  it,  the 
gift  to  the  Bodleian  (Rawlinson, 
C.  849)  of  Archbishop  Ussher's 
grandson,  James  Tyrrell,  consists 
of  large  abstracts  of  learned  books 
in  the  Primate's  cramped  hand- 
writing, one  sheet  being  written, 
after  the  poet  Pope's  fashion,  on 
the  back  of  the  letter  in  question, 
which  has  thus  been  preserved 
for  our  use.  The  writer,  William 
Eyre,  Eyers,  or  Ayers  (the  name 
being  spelt  each  way),  as  the  cour- 
tesy of  Dr  Luard,  the  University 
Registrary,  enabtes  me  to  know, 
was  Fellow  of  Emmanuel  College, 
Cambridge,  B.A.  1595—6,  M.A. 
1599,  B.D.  1606,  and  afterwards 
Prebendary  of  Ely.  Its  chief  purpose 
is  civilly  to  decline  a  proposal  made 
to  him  by  Ussher,  then  Chancellor 
of  S.  Patrick's  Cathedral,  to  accept 


14    Sect.  /.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (i6ii). 


Although  we  have  not  been  able  to  resist  the  pressure  of 
the  internal  evidence  which  assures  us  that  the  issue  repre- 
sented by  Synd.  A.  3.  14  is  the  earlier  of  the  two,  yet 
the  influence  of  our  error  (if  any  shall  still  judge  it  to  be  an 
error)  upon  the  text  of  the  present  volume,  as  given  in  our 
Appendices  A — C,  is  infinitesimally  small.  It  is  strictly 
confined  within  the  limits  indicated  in  Appendix  B,  §  i,  the 
great  majority  of  which  variations  are  either  purely  indif- . 
ferent,  or  would  have  been  received  on  their  own  merits, 
without  reference  to  the  prior  claims  of  the  copy  that  con- 
tains them. 

Respecting  Appendix  C,  wherein  are  registered  the  joint 
readings  of  the  two  issues  of  16 it  which  in  later  times  have 
been  displaced  but  ought  now  to  be  restored,  not  a  few  of 
them  are  quite  insignificant  in  themselves,  but  are  re-esta- 
blished as  a  matter  of  right,  and  as  a  kind  of  protest  against 


a  Fellowship  at  the  infant  College 
in  Dublin.  Dating  from  Emmanuel 
College  Dec.  5,  1608  "W.  Eyre" 
writes  as  follows  :  "Sr  It  pleased 
God  to  bring  us  in  safety  to  Cam- 
bridge before  the  last  day  of  No- 
vember... In  my  absence  there  was 
an  order  taken  from  the  King's 
Majestic  by  the  Arch  B  of  Cantuar 
that  the  translation  of  the  Bible 
shall  be  finished  and  printed  as 
soon  as  may  be,  but  two  of  the 
entire  company  are  chosen  to  re- 
vise and  conform  {sic)  the  whole 
at  London.  Hereupon  I  am  ear- 
nestly requested  to  get  again  that 
copy  of  our  part  which  I  lent  you 
for  D[?]  Daniel  his  use,  for  albeit 
there  be  two  fair  written  copies 
out  of  it :  yet  there  will  be  use  of 
it  because  I  noted  in  the  margent 
by  rashe  tci'otJi  (V^*)  of  the  places 
which  were  doubted  of.  And  this 
^Vy  pn^*  [i.e.  it  wants  conside- 
ration. Cf.  Zanolini,  Lex.  Chald.- 
Rabbin.    Patavii,    1747.       Rashe 


tevoth  seems  to  mean  liead  marks^ 
is  not  in  the  others.  Wherefore 
I  am  to  request  you  so  soon  as 
you  can  after  my  letters  come 
to  your  hands  to  send  that  copy 
forthwith  by  some  that  may 
either  deliver  it  to  myself,  or  send 
me  word  where  I  may  gain  it." 
The  D  [or  G?]  Daniel  to  whose 
judgment  the  revision  had  been 
submitted  must  have  been  William 
Daniel,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College, 
Dublin,  1593,  translator  into  Irish 
of  the  N.T.  (1602),  and  of  the 
book  of  Common  Prayer  (1608), 
Archbishop  of  Tuam  1609 — 28. 
The  name  of  Eyre  is  not  in  the 
list  of  translators,  yet  we  see  that 
the  work  of  the  Cambridge  Com- 
pany was  subjected  to  his  criticism, 
and  by  him  imparted  to  others. 
The  "  two  of  the  entire  company" 
who  were  to  finish  the  work  in 
London,  leaves  that  point  just  as 
ambiguous  as  ever.  See  above, 
p.  12  note  4. 


History  of  the  Text,  15 

the  unnecessary,  the  almost  wanton  changes,  in  which  certain 
editors  of  the  Bible  have  been  pleased  to  indulge.  Examples 
of  this  kind  will  be  seen  in  Judg.  xix.  29;  i  Sam.  xx.  5; 
2  Sam.  vii.  7  marg.;  i  Kin.  xv.  27;  xvi.  19;  2  Kin.  viii.  19; 
Isai.  vi.  8;  Hos.  xiii.  3;  i  Esdr.  viii.  75;  2  Esdr.  xv.  22; 
2  Mace.  viii.  33;  Luke  xix.  13  marg.^ 

We  now  proceed  to  describe  the  principal  editions  of  the 
Authorized  Bible  which  have  appeared  since  161 1,  especially 
those  which  seem  to  have  been  prepared  with  some  degree 
of  care,  or  have  largely  influenced  the  text  of  succeeding 
impressions. 

(2)  The  Holy  Bible  of  i6i2j  copies  of  which  are  in 
the  British  Museum  (1276.  b.  6)  and  at  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge  (x\.  8.  51),  is  beautifully  printed  in  a  small  clear 
Roman  type  in  octavo,  the  woodcut  of  the  first  issue  of 
161 1  (above,  p.  9)  being  reproduced  in  a  reduced  size. 
On  examining  the  collation  we  have  made  of  this  the 
earliest  reprint  of  the  Authorized  Version  (Appendices  A, 
B,  C  below),  it  may  be  considered  to  depart  but  seldom 
from  the  issue  represented  by  the  Oxford  reprint,  except 
to  correct  some  grave  mistake  (e.g.  Mark  vii.  4  inai'g.).  In 
such  a  case  it  is  usually  followed  by  the  edition  of  16 16, 
also  printed  in  Roman  type,  but  rarely  influences  the  black- 
letter  Bibles  of  16 13  or  161 7.  In  i  Kin.  iii.  4;  i  Esdr. 
viii.  39  j  Rev.  xx.  13  viaj'g.  this  edition  stands  alone.     The 

1  Students  should  be  aware  that  sometimes   the   text   follows    our 

the   representation   given    of    the  first  issue,  as  in  Matt.  xiii.  4,  31, 

New  Testament  of   161 1  in  Bag-  45;  xviii.  30;  xxii.  24;  Mark  xv. 

ster's   Hexapla,    1841    cannot    be  46;  Acts  iv.  27;  xvi.  7,    19;  xxi. 

implicitly  relied  upon.     There  are  i\  xxv.  r;   Rom.    vi.   21;  x.   21; 

two  issues  of  that  book,  with  two  xi.  22  ;  Eph.  vi.  21 ;  r  Thess.  i.  9; 

several     Introductions,    and     the  James  v.  4;  2  Pet.  ii.  6:  sometimes 

stereotyped  plates  bear  marks  of  that   which   Mr    Fry   counts    the 

alterations  in  what  seems  the  later  earliest,  as  in  Luke  ii.  24 ;  x.  36  ; 

(Matt.  xiii.  45).     Thus,  for  exam-  John  xiv.  23;  Acts  vi.  12;  xv.  ri; 

pie,  in  John  viii.  4  "  said  "  suits  i  Pet.  i.  22.    In  Rom.  x.  19  "will  I 

neither  form  of  the  Bible  of  i6ri :  anger"Bagsterseemstostandalone. 


1 6     Sect.  /.]     Authorized   Vers io ft  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

following  are  examples  of  improvements  brought  into  it, 
which  immediate  successors  have  overlooked :  Ps.  xcix.  2  ; 
2  Esdr.  ii.  7  inarg.;  Judith  xvi.  24;  i  Mace.  v.  9;  Matt. 
V.  22;  Acts  xiii.  19;  I  Cor.  vii.  32;  2  Cor.  v.  20.  We 
reject  the  grammatical  corrections  in  Dan.  v.  31;  John 
xi.  18  Diarg. 

(3)  The  Holy  Bible  of  16 13  is  the  more  generally  known 
from  a  collation  of  the  smaller  black-letter  folio  copy  of  it 
at  the  University  Press  at  Oxford  with  the  Oxford  reprint 
of  the  book  of  161 1,  annexed  to  that  very  useful  publication  ^ 
This  book  is  readily  distinguished  from  both  issues  of  161 1, 
inasmuch  as  it  contains  72  lines  of  smaller  type  in  a  column, 
to  their  59 ^  It  is  plain  that  no  formal  revision  of  the  text, 
italics,  or  margin,  w^as  attempted  thus  early.  Out  of  the  412 
variations  which  the  Oxford  collation  records,  just  70  arise 
from  the  following  of  the  Syndics'  copy  (A.  3.  14)  in  pre- 
ference to  the  other  issue,  but  this  includes  corrections  of 
some  20  evident  misprints  of  the  Oxford  reprint  issue.  In 
about  four  places  (Ezra  iii.  5;  Ezek.  xxiv.  7;  i  Mace.  iv.  29; 
2  Thess.  ii.  15)  we  find  manifest  improvements  on  the 
standard  editions :  in  Dan.  ix.  1 2  the  reading  of  the  Hebrew 
margin  or  keri  is  adopted  ("word")  against  the  other  books: 


^  We  have  used   for   our   own  "fleshy"  Oxon.     In  Josh,  xii.  11; 

purpose   a   copy  in   the    Syndics'  2  Sam.  xvii.  25  ;  Neh.  xi.  r4war^. ; 

Library,    Cambridge    (A.    3.    13).  1  Esdr.  v.  loviarg.;  Judith  iii.  5 

To  the  variations  recorded  in  the  — vii.  16  (Olofernes),  Proper  names 

Oxford  reprint  we  have  been  able  are  differently  spelt,  but  the  Ox- 

to  add  in  passing  Ruth  iii.  15  "she  ford  collation  does  not  profess  to 

went"  Synd.  (A.  3.  14),  1613,  but  include  these, 

"he  went"  Oxon.;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  60  ^  A  few  copies  of  what  we  re- 

inarg.  "i  Sam."  Synd.  (a  reprint),  gard  as  the  first  issue  of  161 1  are 

161 3,  "  I  King."  Oxon.  ;  Jer.  xl.  said  to  bear  on  the  Old  Testament 

1  "II chains"  1613,  "||captaine"  title-page,  but  not  on  the  New,  a 
Oxon.;  Ezek.  xvi.  16  "Of  thy  genuine  date  of  1613:  that  being 
garments"  1613,  "And  of  thy  no  doubt  the  year  they  were  bound 
garments"  Oxon.;  Wisd.  ix.  15  up.  There  was  at  that  time  no 
"earthly"  1613,  "earthy"  Oxon. ;  inducement  to  antedate  falsely,  but 

2  Cor.    iii.    3     "fleshly"     16 13,  rather  the  contrary. 


History  of  the  Text.  1 7 


nearly  all  the  other  variations  arise  from  the  glaring  mis- 
prints of  this  handsome  but  inaccurate  volume.  Such  are 
the  omissions  of  clauses  by  reason  of  their  having  the 
same  beginning  or  ending  as  those  immediately  preceding 
(i  Kin.  iii.  15 ;  Matt.  xiii.  8;  xvi.  1 1 ;  John  xx,  25),  and  of  two 
whole  verses,  Ecclus.  xvi.  13,  14,  as  also  the  putting  "de- 
lighted" for  "defiled"  Ezek.  xxiii.  7,  the  omission  of  "thou" 
in  Mark  ix.  24,  the  leaving  out  of  "not"  in  2  Tim.  iv.  16, 
and  other  errors  almost  as  gross.  That  this  book  was  set 
up  from  our  first  issue  appears  likely,  as  well  from  many 
other  resemblances  to  be  seen  in  Appendix  B,  as  from  the 
printer's  mistaking  "yt"  in  that  book  for  "the"  in  Acts 
xxi.  T^Z.     The  other  issue  has  "that  Egyptian"  in  full'. 

The  next  two  books  were  used  at  Tregothnan  (R.  4 
and  R.  7),  by  the  kind  permission  of  their  owner,  Viscount 
Falmouth. 

(4)  The  Holy  Bible  in  small  folio  Roman  type  16 16, 
with  the  Prayer  Book  and  Genealogies,  Map,  &c.  prefixed, 
the  metrical  Psalms  with  musical  notes  (dated  16 12)  and 
Private  Prayers  at  the  end,  with  their  first  leaf  lost.  This 
seems  a  somewhat  rare  book,  not  particularly  intended  for 
Church  reading,  is  beautifully  printed,  and  in  a  very  perfect 
state.  It  appears  to  be  the  first  edition  of  the  Authorized 
Version  which  was  submitted  to  any  considerable  revision. 
Its  value  will  be  seen  from  the  study  of  Appendices  K  and 
B,  and  it  should  be  remarked  all  along,  that  improvements  y  • 
brought  in  from  time  to  time  in  Bibles  of  the  Roman  type 
seem  to  have  had  very  slight  influence  with  the  printers  of 
the  black-letter  books  of  161 7,  1634,  1640,  who  continued 
to  set  the  press  from  one  or  the  other  of  the  issues  of  161 1, 
almost   regardless   of  subsequent   changes  for   the   better. 

^  Other    copies,   by  no   means  there,  and  Brit.  Mus.  469.  g,  10, 

rare,  are  from  S.  Luke's  Chapel,  with   Boel's  frontispiece,   and   an 

in  the  Precinct,  Norwich  (bought  inserted  title  page  of  i6rr. 
1 61 8),  now  in  the  Chapter  Library 

S.  2 


1 8     Sect.  /]    Autho7'ized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

Some  of  the  corrections  of  16 16  were  received  into  the 
great  folio  of  16 17,  but  the  following,  among  others,  were 
overlooked:  Gen.  xxii.  7;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  20;  i  Kin.  xx.  3; 
I  Chr.  i.  5,  47;  vii.  13;  xxvi.  5;  xxvii.  2>y,  2  Chr.  xi.  20; 
XXX.  6;  xxxii.  20;  Neh.  viii.  10;  Eccles.  vii.  26;  Cant.  v.  12; 
Jer.  XXXV.  13;  Tobit  iv.  12;  Ecclus.  li.  12;  i  Mace.  viii.  8; 
ix.  35;  xi.  34,  56;  xv.  23;  Matt.  xvi.  19;  Mark  xiv.  32; 
Luke  xxiii.  19;  Acts  iv.  17;  xxvii.  18;  Rom.  vi.  12;  vii.  13; 
xvi.  10.  Dr  Corrie,  Master  of  Jesus  College,  Cambridge, 
has  a  rare  8vo.  in  Roman  type,  dated  16 19. 

(5)  The  Holy  Bible,  large  foho,  black  letter,  161 7,  a 
much  more  pretentious  but  less  valuable  edition  \  As  its 
leaves  have  got  much  mixed  with  those  of  the  other  folios, 
especially  of  our  first  issue  of  t6ii,  it  is  proper  to  apply 
Mr  Fry's  tests  before  using  any  copy  {A  Desc?'iption.,  &c. 
plates  46,  47),  so  far  as  for  critical  purposes  it  is  worth 
using  at  all.  The  large  paper  copies  may  be  expected  to 
be  pure  for  obvious  reasons.  The  Tregothnan  book  does 
not  answer  Fry's  tests  in  three  leaves  up  to  Ps.  xxii\  Among 
its  few  original  corrections  are  Mai.  iv.  2  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19. 
The  Bible  of  161 7,  like  that  of  161 2,  usually  abides  by  the 
issue  of  161 1  represented  by  our  Synd.  A.  3.  14,  while  that 
of  16 16  follows  the  Oxford  reprint  standard,  even  in  such 
obvious  errors  as  Hos.  vi.  5. 

The  public  demand  must  have  been  satisfied  with  these 
several  editions,  especially  of  the  large  size,  which  were 
published  so  near  each  other.  Some  years  elapsed  before 
the  appearance  of  other  chief  Bibles,  whereof  three  several 
pairs  can  most  conveniently  be  discussed  according  to  their 

1  Other   copies   are   numerous:  (T.  6,  26);  Caius  Coll.  (H.  o.  26). 

e.g.   Brit.  Mus.   (T272    h.   4)  and  -  They  are  Xx  3  (Neh.  vii.  11 

(3052.  b.);  a  copy  given  by  "Tho-  — viii.  9),  which  is  taken  from  our 

mas  Hobson,  Carrier  of  Cambridge,  first  issue;  Zz  (Job  i.  17 — iv.  16), 

to  Benet  Parish,"  Trin.  Coll.  Cam-  and  Ccc  2  (Ps.  xix.  2 — xxii.  3r), 

bridge   (A.   12.    34),  large  paper,  whence  derived  Mr  Fry's  list  fails 

very  fine ;  S.  John's  Coll.  Camb.  to  shew. 


History  of  the  Text.  19 

relation   to  each  other,   rather   than   in   the  chronological 
order, — the  two  of  1629,  those  of  1630,  1634,  1638,  1640. 

(6)  The  Holy  Bible,  small  quarto,  1629  "Imprinted 
at  London  by  Bonham  Norton  and  John  Bill  Printers  to 
the  King's  most  excellent  Majestie."  Also  in  folio  with  the 
same  readings  and  the  same  setting  up.  Dr  Newth  tells  me 
of  one  copy  at  New  College,  Hampstead;  another  is  pos- 
sessed by  the  Rev.  W.  L.  Manley,  Vicar  of  Treleigh,  Redruth. 

(7)  The  Holy  Bible,  also  small  quarto,  1630  "Im- 
printed at  London  by  Robert  Barker^  Printer  to  the  King's 
most  Excellent  Majestic:  and  by  the  Assignes  oi John  BillT 

These  two  books  are  of  the  same  size,  have  the  same 
title-page,  though  different  tail-pieces  at  the  end  of  the 
Prophets,  correspond  with  each  other  page  for  page,  line 
for  line,  with  the  closest  exactness,  even  to  the  peculiar 
shape  of  the  letters  used  in  the  same  places  (compare, 
however.  Num.  xxii.  31;  Ezek.  xx.  37  marg.;  Dan.  viii.  18 
marg.),  so  that  the  type  from  which  the  two  were  printed  off 
was,  at  least  in  my  opinion,  set  up  but  once.  The  volume 
of  1629,  however,  is  printed  on  much  worse  paper,  and  does 
not  contain  the  Apocrypha^,  although  APO-  still  remains, 
as  in  its  fellow,  below  the  tail-piece  at  the  end  of  Malachi. 
At  the  end  are  the  metrical  Psalms  with  musical  notes,  and 
the  date  of  1630.  It  would  never  be  suspected,  prior  to 
actual  trial,  that  the  text  in  these  two  books  is  not  absolutely 
identical.  Yet  an  inspection  of  Appendices  A,  B,  C  will 
shew  that  this  is  not  the  case:  e.g.  Gen.  xlvi.  12;  xlvii.  18  ; 
Lev.  xviii.  30;  xxv.  5  marg.;  Num.  v.  20;  i  Kin.  xviii.  28; 

^  Thus  early  began  the  practice  said,    "The  Apocrypha  is  bound 

of  leaving  out  the  Apocrypha,  al-  with  the  Bibles  of  all  churches  that 

though  it  had  been  forbidden  by  have  been  hitherto.     Why  should. 

Archbishop  Abbot  in  161 5  on  pain  we  leave  it  out?"  {Table  Talk,  p. 

of  a  year's  imprisonment  (C.   R.  10).     The  copies  used  by  me  are 

Rivington,   Records  of  Stationers''  also  in  the  Syndics'  Library,  A.  5. 

Company,  p.  21).     It  was  harden-  22  and  25, 
ing  into  fixed  habit  when  Selden 


20     Sect.  /.]    Authorized   Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

XX.  3;  I  Chr.  i.  38;  vii.  27;  xxiv.  11;  2  Chr.  xxvi.  18; 
Esther  viii.  5  inarg.  {devised  1630,  for  the  device))  Ps.  xxiv. 
10;  Jer.  xl.  i;  Ezek.  i.  2;  xvi.  59;  xxxvi.  2;  Dan.  v.  4 
(dranke  1629,  drunke  1630  after  161 1);  Rom.  x.  21;  xvi.  10; 
2  Cor.  vii.  3  (yee  are  1629,  you  are  1630  after  161 1);  ix.  4 
(haply  1629,  happily  1630  after  161 1);  Gal.  i.  6  (removen 
1629);  Eph.  vi.  21,  24;  I  Thess.  i.  9;  i  Pet.  v.  12.  Instances 
such  as  these  help  to  justify  Mr  Fry's  assertion,  which  to  an 
inexperienced  reader  might  appear  somewhat  unlikely,  "The 
absence  of  a  particular  error  in  one  copy,  is  no  proof  that 
^  it  is  of  a  different  edition  from  the  one  with  the  error ;  for 

I  have  observed  many  errors  in  one  copy  corrected  in 
another  of  the  same  edition,  in  other  Bibles  than  those  here 
described"  {A  Description,  &c.  p.  23),  meaning  those  of 
t6ii  and  their  near  contemporaries.  The  Bible  of  1630 
has  some  readings  that  seem  peculiar  to  itself,  e.  g.  i  Mace. 
X.  20  "require  of  thee";  xii.  SZfi^^-  "them"  for  "men." 

Thus  far  the  reprinting  of  the  Authorized  Version  had 
been  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  King's  Printers.  They 
had  made  changes  in  the  text,  slight  indeed  and  far  from 
numerous,  yet  enough  to  shew  that  they  doubted  not  their 
competency  to  make  more  if  they  had  taken  the  trouble. 
The  italic  type  and  textual  references  in  the  margin  they 
left  untouched,  with  all  the  obvious  faults  of  both  uncor- 
rected, only  that  occasionally  a  false  quotation  was  set  right. 
The  next  stage  in  the  history  of  our  Translation  is  more 
interesting,  and  the  Cambridge  University  printers,  Thomas 
and  John  Buck  in  1629,  Thomas  Buck  and  Roger  Daniel 
in  1638,  published  two  important  folios  which  have  largely 
(and  on  the  whole  beneficially)  influenced  our  Bibles  to  this 
day. 

(8)  and  (9)^     The  first  Cambridge  editions  of  the  Holy 

^  These  editions  are  not  at  all       of    1629,    Camb.    University   Li- 
rare.     We  have  used  for  the  one       brary,  I.  14.  12;  for  that  of  1638, 


History  of  the  Text.  21 

Bible  shall  be  considered  together,  inasmuch  as  that  of  1629, 
which  is  the  smaller  of  the  two,  and  has  the  Prayer  Book 
prefixed  to  it,  and  the  metrical  Psalms  with  musical  notes 
bound  up  at  the  end,  inaugurated  that  course  of  systematic 
revision  of  the  text,  of  the  italics,  and  of  the  margin,  which 
nine  years  afterwards  was  more  fully  and  consistently  carried 
out.  It  is  not  a  little  remarkable,  that  the  subject  of  the 
internal  character  of  our  English  Bible,  as  distinct  from  its 
external  history,  had  excited  so  little  attention  for  the  space 
of  two  centuries,  that  the  high  merit  of  these  books  has 
been  understood  only  within  the  last  forty  years.  "For  this 
beautiful  edition,"  Lea  Wilson  writes  most  truly  of  the  elder 
of  the  two,  "the  text  appears  to  have  undergone  a  complete 
revision,  although  I  can  find  no  record  of  such  having  been 
done  by  authority"  {List  of  Bibles,  &c.  4to.  1845).  "So  far 
as  I  can  judge''  says  Bp.  Turton  of  its  compeer  of  1638 
"the  edition  was  carefully  superintended"  {Text  of  the 
English  Bible  considered,  2nd  edition,  1833,  p.  35).  As  he 
becomes  better  acquainted  with  it,  his  language  grows  more 
decided,  as  well  it  might:  "A  revision  of  the  text  of  161 1... 
it  is  now  certain,  was  carried  into  effect,  from  the  beginning 
of  the  Volume  to  the  end,  at  Cambridge,  in  1638"  (p.  126). 
"The  revision  indeed  was  a  work  of  great  labour"  (p.  91), 
but  he  always  speaks  of  it  as  commenced  and  carried  out  in 
the  same  volume.  What  Turton  did  not  know,  but  only 
regarded  as  possible,  that  it  might  "hereafter  appear  that  an 
earHer  revision  had  taken  place"  {ibid.),  is  a  fact  that  no 
one  will  doubt  as  regards  the  text  who  shall  examine  the 
contents  of  our  subjoined  Appendices.  The  task  seems  to 
have  been  executed  between  the  two  sets  of  editors  in  no 
unequal  shares.  What  the  one  party  left  undone,  by  reason 
of  haste  or  human  oversight,  the  others  in  a  good  measure 

Syndics'  Library,   A.   3.  8.     The       page  of  the  New  Testament, 
date  of  the  latter  is  on  the  title 


2  2     Sect.  /.]    Authorized   Versioft  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

supplied,  by  inserting  words  or  clauses,  especially  in  the  Old 
Testament,  overlooked  by  the  editors  of  1611 ;  by  amending 
manifest  errors;  by  rendering  the  italic  notation  at  once 
more  self-consistent,  and  more  agreeable  to  the  design  of 
the  original  Translators  (see  below,  Sect.  iii.).  What  per- 
sons were  concerned  in  the  edition  of  1629,  as  Lea  Wilson 
notices,  we  are  wholly  ignorant,  but  if  similarity  of  plan  and 
spirit  afford  us  any  ground  for  conjecture,  one  at  least  of 
them  must  have  had  a  share  with  others  in  preparing  the 
subsequent  book  of  1638,  and  these  latter,  as  we  learn  from 
a  manuscript  note  in  the  Jesus  College  copy,  in  the  hand- 
writing of  Richard  Sterne,  Master  of  the  College,  and  Vice- 
Chancellor  that  selfsame  year,  were  Dr  Goad  of  Hadley,  Dr 
Ward  (see  below,  p.  264),  Mr  Boyse  \  and  Mr  Mead^:  men 
whose  obscure  diligence  in  a  grave  and  delicate  work  was 
doubtless  rewarded  with  honour  more  excellent  than  fame 
can  give  or  take  away". 

With  this  pair  of  editions  began  the  habit  of  adding  to 
the  parallel  textual  references  in  the  margin :  the  Bible  of 
1638  admits  also  one  or  two  fresh  marginal  notes  (i  -Mace, 
iv.  15;  ix.  36).  We  have  seldom  to  hesitate  about  the  pro- 
priety of  receiving  their  emendations  of  the  text  (see  Ap- 
pendix C,  2  Sam.  xvi.  8;  Ps.  cxix.  42  inarg.),  as  in  the  case 

1  Doubtless  meaning  John  Bois  careless  printers." 
or  Boys,  spoken  of  above  (p.  12,  -  Kilburne    calls   the   book   of 

&c.),    and   the   illustrious   Joseph  1638    "  the    Authentic    corrected 

Mede  (d.  1638)  from  whose  Works  Cambridge   Bible,    revised   Man- 

(p.  767)  Dean  Burgon  supplies  the  dato  Regio"  whatever   that  may 

following  curious  extract :   "Com-  mean  {Daiigcrotis  Errors  in  several 

pare  Acts  ix.  7  (where  it  is  said,  late   Printed  Bibles   to   the  great 

They  heard  Pant s  voice,  )\v\\\\  KzX.%  scandal  and  corriiptio7t   of  sound 

xxii.  9  (where  it  is  said.  They  heard  and  true  religion.     Discovered  by 

not  the  voice  of  him  that  spake  un-  Win.  Kilburne,  Gent.,  8vo.,  Fins- 

to  him)   and    take   heed   here    of  bury,    1659,     p.    6).       His    little 

some  of  our  English  Bibles,  which  pamphlet  of  15  pages  produced  a 

have  put  in  a  \iiot^  where  it  should  great  effect,  and  is  full  of  weighty 

not  be,  as  they  have  done  the  like  matter.     A  copy  is  in  the  British 

in  other  places.     Fie  upon  such  Museum  (1214  a.  9). 


History  of  the  Text,  23 

of  some  of  their  successors  :  their  corrections  command  our 
assent  by  their  simple  truth.  One  of  the  changes  introduced 
in  1638  it  would  have  been  better  to  have  finally  adopted, 
"and  the  truth"  with  the  Greek  in  John  xiv.  6.  The  "and" 
held  its  place  beyond  Blayney's  revision  of  1769,  but  has 
disappeared  in  Bibles  from  D'Oyly  and  Mant  (181 7)  down- 
wards. The  following  errata  have  been  noticed  in  these 
two  admirable  books,  most  of  which  blemishes  have  been 
perpetuated  to  modern  times. 

1629.  2  Chr.  ix.  II  !na}-g.\  Jer.  xxxiv.  16;  Ezck.  xxxi.  14;  Ecclus. 
xvii.  24;  2  Mace.  ix.  18  (see  Appendix  C  for  all  these);  Judith  i.  6 
("Hydaspe:"  so  also  1638  [not  1744],  1762,  1769,  all  moderns  down 
to  our  model  [below,  p.  38],  which  restores  "Ilydaspes"  of  161 1); 
Baruch  vi.  8  ("gold,"  all  the  editions  just  named,  with  1744  added: 
here  again  our  model  restores  "silver"  of  1611);  2  Cor.  viii.  7  ("in 
utterance,"  repeated  in  1638,  1699,  "/«  utterance"  1762:  but  1743, 
1769  and  the  moderns  restored  "and  utterance"  of  161 1);  i  Tim.  iv.  16 
(see  p.  4,  note).  Notice  also  that  this  edition  has  misled  every  sub- 
sequent one  by  placing  the  reference  to  Ps.  xxii.  6  in  Job  xxv.  6  over 
against  the  first  "worm"  instead  of  the  second. 

1638.  Nell.  xii.  3  niarg.  (see  Appendix  A);  Ezek.  xviii.  i;  Hos. 
xiii.  3  (see  for  these  Appendix  C) ;  Acts  vi.  3  (seep.  4);  Rev.  ii.  20 
("Jezabel,"  the  Greek  form,  followed  by  1699,  1743:  but  "Jezebel" 
was  restored  in  1762). 

In  the  matter  of  the  italic  type,  to  which  much  attention 
is  paid  in  these  two  Bibles,  one  or  other  of  them  has  led 
later  copies  wrong  in  the  following  places : 

2  Sam.  xxiv.  12  do  it  (1629),  corrected  in  the  American  (1867)  only; 
Isai.  V.  9  marg.  This  is  (1638);  25  7acre  torn  (1638);  xxxviii.  12  from 
the  thrumme  (1638);  Jer.  xxv.  18  and  the  princes  (1638);  Ezek.  xl.  4 
art  thou  brought  (1629);  Zech.  vi.  3  and  bay  (1638);  i  Esdr.  viii.  58 
is  a  vow  (1629);  Matt.  xv.  k)  for  doctrines  1638,  for  doctrines  1762, 
&c. ;  Eph.  V.  26  cleanse  it  (1629).  All  these  are  merely  uncorrected 
errata^. 

1  Professor  Grote  {MS.  p.  36)  1637,  in  Trinity  College  Library, 
speaks  of  a  small  410.,  Cambridge,        "which  has  none  of  the  additions 


24     Sect.  /.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

--j  The  next  pair  comprises  the  black  letter  folios  of  the 
King's  Printer,  dated  (10)  1634  [B.  M.  1276  1.  5.  i — 2]  and 
(11)  1640  [B.  M.  1276  1.  7].  The  former  is  much  mixed 
with  later  issues  of  the  books  of  1611  and  1617,  and  maybe 
discriminated  by  the  use  of  IVIr  Fry's  elaborate  tests  {A 
Description,,  &c.  Plates  46,  47).  The  latter  is  at  once  de- 
tected by  its  use  of  Roman  letters  instead  of  italics  in  the 
marginal  notes,  nor  does  the  type  run  quite  line  for  line 
with  the  earlier  folios.  Speaking  generally,  these  books 
contain  none  of  the  improvements  found  in  the  two  Cam- 
bridge editions,  although  a  few  changes  for  the  better  may 
be  met  with  here  and  there.  Thus  the  edition  of  1634 
anticipates  the  emendations  of  1638  in  i  Chr.  i.  20;  John 
vii.  16  (see  Appendix  A):  in  Hagg.  i.  12  it  reads  "Joshuah," 
in  Rev.  xxi.  20  "sardonyx."  In  Ecclus.  xxxv.  18;  xlix.  4; 
Acts  iv.  17;  vii.  10  (see  Appendix  A)  that  of  1640,  but  not 
the  other,  adopts  the  readings  of  1629.  A  fuller  examina- 
tion would  no  doubt  make  known  a  few  more  instances, 
equally  insignificant. 

The  volume  of  1640  proved  to  be  the  last  of  the  Bibles 
of  its  class,*  the  Great  Rebellion  leaving  men  neither  incli- 
nation nor  means  for  costly  undertakings  of  this  nature. 
"You  may  well  remember,"  writes  William  Kilburne  (see 
\J  above,  p.  22,  note  2)  in  1659,  to  the  honourable  and  elect 
Christians  whom  he  addresses,  "the  zeal  and  care  of  the  late 
Bishops  (especially  of  reverend  and  learned  Doctor  Usher) 
was  such,  that  for  the  omission  in  one  impression  of  the 

of  lUick,  1638."  From  the  speci-  script  notes  of  Professor  Grote, 
men  Bp.  Lightfoot  gives  of  its  from  which  we  shall  hereafter 
reading  in  i  Cor.  xii.  28  {On  a  make  several  extracts,  though 
Fresh  J\tinsio7i,  &c.  p.  120,  note),  scarcely  in  a  state  suitable  for 
it  does  appear  to  contain  the  publication  in  full,  were  obliging- 
changes  or  improvements  of  Cam-  ly  placed  at  my  disposal  by  his 
bridge,  1629.  Such  is  the  case  rej^resentatives,  and  throw  much 
also  in  Gen.  xxxix.  i ;  Deut.  xxvi.  light  on  the  internal  history  of  the 
I ;  Job  iv.  6.    The  valuable  manu-  printing  of  the  Authorized  Bible. 


History  of  the  Text. 


25 


Negative  word  [not]  in  the  seventh  Commandment,  the 
Printer  was  fined  ;2^2ooo  or  £^Z^oo  in  the  late  King's  time, 
as  I  have  heard ',  which  happened  long  before  the  late  wars 
began:  in  wliich  time,  through  the  absence  of  the  King's 
Printers,  and  cessation  of  Bible-printing  at  London,  many- 
erroneous  English  Bibles  were  printed  in  and  imported  from 
Holland";  which  being  diligently  compared  by  the  late  As- 
sembly of  Divines  were  reported  to  the  Parliament  in  1643 
to  be  corrupt  and  dangerous  to  Religion"  {Dangerous 
Errors^  &c.  p.  5  ■'),  This  importation  indeed  was  expressly 
prohibited  by  statute,  without  much  good  effect;  ''More- 
over, during  the  time  of  the  late  Parliament  great  numbers 
of  Bibles  in  a  large  12"  volume  were  imported  from  Holland 
in  1656  with  this  false  title  {Impriiited  at  Loiido7i  by  Robert 
Barker,  Amio  163 8)... being  contrary  to  the  several  Acts  of 
Parliament  of  20"  Sept.  1649  ^^"^^  7  J^nu.  1652  for  regulating 
of  Printing"  {ibid.  p.  12).     Kilburne  furnishes  a  really  painful 


^  Thie  notorious  ]:)Ook,  referred 
to  by  Addison  {Spectator,  No.  579), 
was  published  by  the  King's  Prin- 
ters, Robert  Barker  and  Martin 
Lucas,  in  1632  :  the  real  fine  was 
;i^300,  to  be  expended  on  a  fount 
of  fair  Greek  type.  It  was  inflicted 
by  Archbishop  Laud  (whom  even 
on  the  eve  of  the  Restoration  Kil- 
burne does  not  care  to  name)  in 
the  High  Commission  Court.  The 
impression  was  of  course  called  in, 
but  a  single  copy  is  said  to  survive 
in  tlie  Library  at  Wolfenbuttel. 
Mr  J.  H.  Blunt  [Annotated  Bible, 
Introduction,  p.  Ivii. ,  note)  finds 
the  same  error  in  a  German  Bible 
of  about  1731.  Mr  Stevens  (y^ ////?- 
7Ja'Hfn,  June  20,  1874)  speaks  of  si- 
milar copies  dated  1632,  possessed 
by  Mr  Lenox  of  New  York  and 
by  the  British  Museum.  I  do  not 
find  this  error   in  B.  M.  1276  k. 


5,  folio,  or  3052  b.  22,  8". 

-  While  on  the  table  before  them 

was  lying  unopened  a  Bible 
Ponderous,  bound  in  leather,  brass- 
studded,  printed  in  Plolland. 
Longfellow,  Aliles  Standish,  iv. 
But     the     Dutch    counterfeit    of 
Field's  edition,  24",    1658  (B.  M. 
3051  a.  7)  is  clearer  and  (I  think) 
more  correct  than  Field's  own  (B. 
M.  1 1 59  b.  12). 

^  This  statement  is  confirmed 
by  Whitelocke  [Mctnorials,  p.  89, 
1732):  "1644,  By  advice  of  the 
Assembly  of  Divines,  an  erroneous 
print  of  the  English  Bible  at  Am- 
sterdam sent  over  hither,  M'as  sup- 
pressed by  order  of  Parliament." 
So  again  (p.  167)  "Aug.  19,  1645. 
Ordered  that  no  foreign  impres- 
sions of  English  Bibles  be  vended 
here,  without  perusal  of  the 
Assembly." 


2  6     Sect.  /.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

list  of  the  inaccuracies  of  these  foreign  Bibles  ("thirty  grand 
faults  in  part  of  Genesis,  a  hundred  in  Isai.  i — xxvii."),  but 
shews  plainly  that  the  privileged  printers,  Henry  Hills  and 
John  Field,  were  scarcely  a  whit  more  careful.  They  had, 
in  truth,  to  pay  for  their  privilege  a  bribe  of  ^500  per  annum 
to  certain  men  in  power,  "whose  names,  out  of  respect  to 
them,  I  forbear  to  mention"  {ibid.  p.  14),  and  reimbursed 
themselves  for  that  shameful  outlay  by  taking  no  measures 
for  the  due  correction  of  the  press.  In  their  Bibles  of  1653, 
1655  (two  editions),  1656  (two  editions),  and  1657  (reputed 
to  be  the  worst  of  all),  Kilburne  computes  that  he  dis- 
covered twenty  thousand  faults,  some  (which  he  parti- 
cularises) being  intolerably  gross.  On  the  other  hand,  he 
praises  several  editions  in  8vo.  and  i2mo.  issued  "by  Autho- 
rity of  Parliament"  in  1646,  1648,  165 1,  &c.,  by  Wm.  Bentley 
of  Finsbury,  based  upon  the  Cambridge  folio  of  1638. 

Of  the  Bibles  pubUshed  during  the  latter  part  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  that  of  Hills  and  Field,  small  8vo.  London, 
1660,  is  remarkable  for  certain  additions  to  the  original 
marginal  notes  of  161 1,  subsequently  improved  upon  in  a 
Cambridge  quarto  of  1682 — 3  (see  Sect.  11.)  bearing  the 
name  of  John  Hayes,  the  University  Printer,  who  had  pre- 
viously put  forth  a  well-known  edition  in  1677.  The  later 
of  Hayes's  two  contains  a  great  number  of  fresh  textual  refer- 
ences, the  reputed  work  of  Dr  Anthony  Scattergood,  and 
mostly  taken  from  his  Bible,  also  published  at  Cambridge  in 
1678.  But  the  most  celebrated  edition  of  the  period  was 
that  undertaken  on  the  motion  of  Archbishop  Tenison,  and 
at  the  alleged  request  of  Convocation  in  1699,  by  the 
eminently  learned  William  Lloyd  [1627 — 1717],  successively 
Bishop  of  S.  Asaph  and  of  Worcester,  under  whose  superin- 
tendence appeared 

(12)  The  Holy  Bible,  large  folio,  3  vol.  "London, 
Printed    by    Charles   Bill  and   the    Executrix   of   Tho7nas 


History  of  the  Text.  27 

Neivco77ib  deceased,  Printers  to  the  King's  most  excellent 
Majesty,  1701." 

This  splendid  but  somewhat  cumbersome  book  is  the 
first  that  contains  the  marginal  dates  (see  Sect,  vii.),  and 
sundry  marginal  annotations,  of  doubtful  merit,  discussing 
chronological  difficulties  and  imparting  other  information 
(Sect.  II.).  Annexed  are  Bp.  Cumberland's  Tables  of  Scrip- 
ture measures,  weights,  and  coins  (first  published  in  1685), 
Tables  of  Kindred,  Time,  and  Offices  and  Conditions  of 
men.  The  textual  references  also  are  increased,  but  not 
very  materially,  and  in  respect  to  punctuation  many  paren- 
theses were  restored,  which  had  been  gradually  removed 
from  the  text  (see  Sect.  iv.).  On  the  whole,  this  hasty 
labour  added  little  to  the  fame  of  the  veteran  Lloyd,  and  in 
1703  the  Lower  House  of  Convocation  made  a  formal 
Representation  to  the  Upper  respecting  the  many  errors  it 
contains  \  Except  in  regard  to  the  dates,  no  principal 
edition  so  little  influenced  succeeding  Bibles  as  this,  not- 
withstanding the  high  auspices  under  which  it  came  forth. 

It  was  doubtless  through  the  care  of  Archbishop  Wake 

(who,  though  himself  not  a  very  powerful  writer,  had  the 

spirit  of  a  true  scholar)  that  persons  from  whom  so  little 

could  be  expected  as  George  L  and  his  great  minister,  were 

induced    to    issue    four    salutary  Rules,   dated    April    24, 

1724,  to  the  King's    Printers^,   with  a  view  to  the  more 

^  Our  authority  for   this  state-  year   are  incomplete.     Those   for 

ment   must   be    Lewis    {Complete  1703    (the   year    then    ending    on 

History    of    Translations    of  the  March  24)  are  all  preserved,  and  in 

Bible,  2nd  ed.   1739,  P*   35°)'  ^'^"  a  long  list  of  G'nz^'aw/wa,  brought 

asmuch     as     on     searching     the  to  the  Upper  House  on  Feb.  11, 

Records    of    the    Proceedings   of  one  article  declares  "  That  in  some 

both  Houses  of  Convocation,  now  late  editions  of  the   Holy  Bible, 

deposited   in   the    Archiepiscopal  and  of  the  Liturgy  of  the  Church 

Library  at  Lambeth,  I  can  find  no  of  England,   several  gross   errors 

trace  of  synodical  action  about  a  have  been  committed."    If  this  be 

new  edition  of  the  Bible  either  in  all,  Lewis  seems  to  have  made  too 

the  Registers  or  in  the  Schedules  much  of  what  actually  occurred, 

for  1699,  which,  however,  for  that  ^  Lewis  [tibi  sup-a,  p.  351). 


28     Sect.  /.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

effectual  removal  of  misprints  from  their  copies  of  the  Au- 
thorized Version.  One  of  these  rules  strikes  at  what  was 
beyond  question  the  root  of  the  mischief  in  the  evil  days  of 
Hills  and  Field,  and  prescribes  that  those  employed  on  so 
grave  a  work  should  receive  competent  salaries  for  their 
pains  and  skill.  In  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century 
the  Bibles  of  the  Basketts,  at  once  the  King's  and  Oxford 
University  Printers,  earned  a  fair  name  both  for  the  beauty 
of  their  typography  and  their  comparative  freedom  from  mis- 
prints. Their  quarto  of  1756  is  particularly  commended, 
and  will  supply  the  student  with  a  knowledge  of  the  exact 
state  of  our  Bibles  just  before  the  commencement  of  the 
kindred  labours  of  Paris  and  Blayney,  which  yet  remain  to 
be  described.  In  preparing  the  present  work  we  have  used 
another  of  their  editions,  in  substance  almost  identical  with 
that  of  1756. 

(13  a.)  The  Holy  Bible,  quarto,  with  "above  two  hun- 
dred historys  curiously  engraved  by  J.  Cole  from  designs  of 
the  best  masters,"  "Oxford,  Printed  by  Thomas  Baskett  and 
Robert  Baskett  Printers  to  the  University  1744"  (Old  Testa- 
ment). For  the  New  Testament:  "London,  Printed  by 
Thomas  Baskett  and  Robert  Baskett.,  Printers  to  the  King's 
most  excellent  Majesty  1743." 

(13  b.)  The  Holy  Bible,  quarto,  London,  "Printed  by 
Thomas  Baskett,  Printer  to  the  King's  more  excellent  Ma- 
jesty, and  by  the  Assigns  of  Robert  Baskett,"  1756  (B.  M. 
464  b.  3). 

We  now  come  to  the  last  two  considerable  efforts  to  im- 
prove and  correct  our  ordinary  editions  of  Holy  Scripture, 
made  in  1762  by  Dr  Paris,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cam- 
bridge, and  still  commemorated  in  the  list  of  the  Benefactors 
of  the  College,  and  by  Dr  Blayney,  whose  labours  were 
published  in  1769,  both  anonymously.  The  latter,  however, 
has  left  a  very  interesting  account  of  his  work  and  the  prin- 


History  of  the  Text.  29 

ciples  upon  which  it  was  executed  in  a  brief  Report  to  the 
Vice-Chancellor  and  Delegates  of  the  Clarendon  Press,  re- 
printed below  (p.  238)  as  Appendix  D,  and  well  deserving  of 
attentive  perusal.  Dr  Paris's  name  is  not  mentioned  therein 
in  such  terms  as  might  have  been  expected  from  the  liberal 
use  made  of  his  materials  by  his  successor:  in  fact  his  book 
is  almost  unknown  even  to  Biblical  students,  although  it  has 
contributed  more  than  that  which  appeared  but  seven  years 
later  towards  bringing  the  text,  the  marginal  annotations, 
the  italics,  and  the  textual  references  of  modern  Bibles  into 
their  actual  condition.  The  truth  is  that  Paris's  edition  had 
no  real  circulation,  partly  because  it  was  so  soon  superseded 
by  Blayney's,  chiefly  by  reason  of  a  large  portion  of  the 
impression  having  been  destroyed  by  fire  in  Dod's  the 
publisher's  warehouse  ^ 

(14)  The  Holy  Bible,  folio  and  quarto,  2  vol.  Cam- 
bridge, "Printed  by  Joseph  Bentham,  Printer  to  the  Univer- 
sity.   Sold  by  Benjamin  Dod,  Bookseller... London,  1762." 

(15)  The  Holy  Bible,  quarto  and  folio ^,  2  vol.  Oxford, 
"Printed  by  T.  Wright  d^nd  W.  Gill,  Printers  to  the  Uni- 
versity: 1769."     With  Prayer  Book  prefixed. 

It  will  be  seen  when  we  come  to  discuss  the  italic  type 
(Sect.  III.)  that  the  use  of  it  was  considerably  extended  in 
these  two  Bibles,  notably  in  the  later  one,  by  a  more  full 
carrying  out   of  the  system  of  the  Translators   than  they 

^  "Only  six  copies  were  pre-  leian,  but  not  in  that  in  the  British 
served  from  a  fire  at  the  printers,"  Museum  (1276  L  9),  the  Apocry- 
MS.  note  in  the  British  Museum  pha  is  bound  up  so  as  to  follow, 
folio  copy.  But  more  than  six  in  not  precede,  the  New  Testament, 
quarto  undoubtedly  survive,  as  may  and  the  signatures  to  the  sheets 
appear  from  the  Catalogues  of  va-  suggest  this  unusual  arrangement, 
rious  booksellers.  The  statement  Those  in  the  Old  Testament  end 
may  be  true  of  the  large  paper  or  with  7  T,  those  in  the  New  Testa- 
folio  issue.  We  have  used  Camb.  ment  begin  on  the  fifth  page  with 
Synd.  A.  4.  '^^  3^=  for  1762;  A.  4.  7  X,  whereas  the  signatures  in  the 
16  for  1769.  Apocrypha  extend  afresh  from  A 

2  In  the  folio  copy  in  the  Bod-  to  O. 


2,0     Serf.  /.]    Authorized   Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

would  probably  have  sanctioned  themselves.  The  marginal 
annotations  also,  which  had  been  growing  in  some  Bibles 
since  1660  but  were  excluded  from  others  (see  Sect.  11.), 
were  finally  received  into  the  place  they  have  occupied  ever 
since,  sundry  new  ones  being  added,  the  great  majority  in 
1762.  Bp.  Lloyd's  dates  and  chronological  notes  were  also 
received  and  added  to  at  the  same  time,  and  the  two  edi- 
tions contributed  largely,  in  about  equal  proportions^  to 
swell  the  catalogue  of  textual  references  to  parallel  passages 
of  Scripture.  An  inspection  of  our  Appendices  A  and  C 
will  shew  how  far  each  of  them  helped  to  amend  or  corrupt 
the  Translators'  text,  and  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  these 
two  editors  are  the  great  modernizers  of  the  diction  of  the 
version,  from  what  it  was  left  in  the  seventeenth  century, 
to  the  state  wherein  it  appears  in  modern  Bibles.  Much  of 
the  labour  described  in  Sect.  v.  has  been  rendered  necessary 
for  the  undoing  of  their  tasteless  and  inconsistent  meddhng 
with  archaic  words  and  grammatical  forms.  On  the  whole, 
Dr  Paris,  who  has  been  kept  so  utterly  out  of  sight,  per- 
formed his  task  with  more  diligence,  exactness,  and  mode- 
ration than  his  Oxford  successor.  Yet,  much  as  they  left 
undone  or  did  amiss,  their  editions  of  the  Bible  are  monu- 
ments of  genuine  industry  and  pious  zeal,  all  the  more  con- 
spicuous in  an  age  when  shallow  superciliousness  was  too 
often  made  a  substitute  for  generous  criticism  and  scholar- 
like precision :  they  might  either  of  them  have  cheered  the 
heart  of  worthy  Archbishop  Seeker,  on  whose  suggestion 
Blayney's  labours  are  believed  to  have  been  undertaken.  In 
point  of  typographical  correctness,  as  is  already  well  known, 
the  quarto  (and  to  a  slightly  less  extent  the  scarce  folio  ^)  of 
1769  are  conspicuously  deficient:  on  one  page  of  the  Apo- 
crypha there  are  no  less  than  three  typographical  errors 

^  Here  again,  as  in  the  case  of       at  the  printers  or  publishers  de- 
the  folio  edition  of  Dr  Paris,  a  fire       stroyed  most  of  the  copies. 


History  of  the  Text.  31 

(Esth.  xi.  2  "Nison;"  8  "upon  earth,"  "the"  being  omitted; 
xii.  6  "the  eunuchs,"  "two"  being  omitted),  so  that  the 
commonly  estimated  number  of  116  such  errata  would  seem 
below  the  truth.  In  Rev.  xviii.  22  occurs  an  omission  of  a 
whole  clause,  for  the  same  cause  as  was  spoken  of  in  regard 
to  the  Bible  of  16 13  (above,  p.  17):  "And  no  craftsman,  of 
whatsoever  craft  he  be,  shall  be  found  any  more  in  thee'." 
Some  of  Blayney's  needless  changes  are  in  Ps.  cxv.  3 ;  cxli.  9 ; 
2  Pet.  i.  9  (see  Appendix  C) :  certain  of  a  better  character 
occur  in  Prov.  vi.  19  (see  App.  A);  Ecclus.  xxix.  17  "[in 
danger]"  for  "in  [danger]"  of  1611,  &c. ;  2  Cor.  iii.  3 
"fleshy"  of  161 1  restored,  for  "fleshly,"  which  had  held  its 
ground  since  1613.  On  the  other  hand,  in  Ezek.  xxiii.  4 
(his  own  margin)  His  tent  should  have  been  Her  tent.  In 
regard  to  italics,  whereof  at  times  he  is  somewhat  lavish,  he 
rightly  prints  in  Ps.  xiii.  3  "the  sleep  ^ death,"  instead  of 
^^ the  steep  of  death,"  as  from  161 1  downwards;  in  i  John  iii. 
16  ^'of  God'^  is  italicised  for  the  first  time:  his  oversights  in 
this  matter  will  be  noticed  hereafter  (p.  34).  In  the  Bible 
of  1762  also  the  following  errors  should  be  noted:  2  Kin.  x. 
31  "for"  instead  of  "/^r"  of  1611 — 1744;  xxv.  4  '^ofwar 
fled"  for  "of  wsLvJled"  of  161 1 — 1744;  Ps.  Ixix.  12  "I  was" 
for  "/  was^'  161 1 — 1744.  The  second  and  grossest  is 
amended  in  the  American  Bible  1867,  otherwise  they 
remain  untouched  to  this  day. 

The  following  list  of  errors  which  we  have  incidentally 
detected  in  Dr  Paris's  edition  of  1762  deserves  the  more 
notice,  because  they  are  nearly  all  repeated  by  Blayney,  as 
we  have  indicated  by  adding  the  date  1769  within  marks  of 
parenthesis.  They  occur  oftenest  in  the  marginal  annota- 
tions added  in  this  pair  of  Bibles,  and  can  be  best  accounted 

^  Three  complete  lines,  as  above       (as  has  been  stated)  in  the  latter 
p.  8.     The  omission  occurs  both       only, 
in  the  folio  and  in  the  quarto,  not 


32     Sect.  /.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

for  by  supposing  that  Blayney's  sheets  were  set  up  by  Paris's, 
used  as  copy. 

Ex.  xxvi.  24  marg.  and  xxxvi.  29  marg.  twined.  See  Appendix  B 
(1769);  Num.  xxvi.  13  (marg.  of  1762)  Zohar  (1769);  Deut.  x.  2 
brakedst  (1769);  Josh.  xvii.  2  (marg.  of  1762)  Jezer  (1769);  Judg.  iii. 
15  7narg.  Gemini  (1769) ;  xviii.  7  (marg.  of  i']()2)  Leshen  {Leshem  1769); 
I  Sam.  xvi.  6  (marg.  of  1762)  13,  called  Elihii.  (13.  Called  Elihu, 
1769);  2  Sam.  vi.  2  (marg.  of  1762)  Baalab  (1769);  2  Kin.  xvi,  7 
(marg.  of  1762)  Tilgath-pileser  (1769);  i  Chr.  i.  51  (marg.  of  1762) 
Avah  {Alvah  1769)  ;  iii.  8  marg.  Becliada  {Beeliada  1769);  Ps.  cxxxv. 
5  "our  Lord"  of  161 1 — 1630  restored  instead  "our  Lord"  of  1629 
Camb.,  1638,  1744  (1769,  but  moderns  from  Oxf.  1835  have  "our 
Lord");  Prov.  xxxi.  14  merchant  (merchants  1769:  see  Appendix  A); 
Jer.  xl.  I  the  word  that  (1769);  xliv.  28  ma7-g.\  or  them  (1769);  Ezek. 
xiii.  9  marg.  council  (1769);  Dan.  ix.  24  (marg.  of  1762)  Axtaxerxes  (not 
1769);  27  marg.  See  Appendix  A;  Nahum  iii.  16  fleeth  (1769);  Hab. 
iii.  19,  see  Appendix  A  (1769);  i  Esdr.  ix.  22  marg.  yosabad  [I'jdg); 
Baruch  i.  i  Checias  (1769,  D'Oyly  and  Mant  1817,  Oxf  1835);  ii.  16 
thine  holy  (1769,  &c.) ;  2  Mace.  iv.  41  next  in  hand  (1769,  &c.) ;  Acts 
vii.  28  "killedst"  for  "diddest, "  a  designed  but  needless  correction, 
rejected  by  1769,  &c,,  as  also  is  *^ things  strangled,"  Acts  xxi.  25,  a  cor- 
rection of  the  same  class.  Blayney  also  refuses  Paris's  "be  ye  warned 
and  be  ji?  filled,"  James  ii.  16  ("be  you  warned  and  filled",  161 1 — 1743), 
though  he  wrongly  italicises  the  first  "ye,"  which  he  retains.  In  Gal. 
ii.  6  1762  recalls  from  the  Bible  of  1683  the  reading  "those  who,"  which 
had  been  afterwards  neglected  for  the  inferior  reading  of  161 1,  "these 
who"  {Grote  MS.  p.  133).  Paris  was  followed  by  Blayney  and  others 
up  to  a  very  recent  period  (Bagster  1846,  American  1867).  Our 
model  (Camb.  1858)  falls  back  upon  "these  who,"  which  we  would 
not  disturb. 

Some  other  emendations  of  Dr  Paris  are  a  little  too  bold 
(e.g.  Ps.  cvii.  19,  see  App.  C  below,  p.  223),  and  one  at  least 
of  his  marginal  notes  is  very  questionable  (Acts  vii.  45).  His 
punctuation  is  often  good :  he  was  the  first  to  substitute  a 
full  stop  and  a  moderate  sj^ace  for  the  colon  of  161 1,  &c., 
at  the  great  break  in  Zech.  xi.  7  "And  I  took  unto  me  two 
staves."  For  a  specimen  of  his  successor's  merits  in  this 
respect  see  Sect.  iv.  (2  Cor.  v.  2). 


History  of  the  Text.  33 

It  is  now  necessary  to  subjoin  an  incomplete,  yet  over- 
long  list  of  the  errors  other  than  bare  misprints  which  have 
met  us  in  habitually  consulting  Blayney's  quarto  of  1769. 
We  must  not  suppress  the  notice  of  faults,  some  of  which 
have  led  his  successors  grievously  wrong,  through  the  vain 
fear  of  detracting  from  the  honour  of  a  learned  and  diligent 
student  of  Holy  Writ.  All  accuracy  is  only  comparative,  as 
every  true  scholar  knows  well;  and  if  we  be  at  a  loss  to 
account  for  the  unusual  number  of  his  oversights,  we  may 
fairly  impute  much  to  the  comparatively  short  time — be- 
tween three  and  four  years — spent  by  him  in  accomplishing, 
or  at  least  in  attempting,  the  burdensome  task  which  his 
Report  describes  (Appendix  D,  below  p.  238).  The  reader 
will  refer  to  our  Appendices  A  and  C  for  further  details. 

Ex.  vi.  21  ;  Josh.  xix.  2,  19;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  37;  i  Kin.  xv.  2  (marg. 
of  1769)  JMichaia ;  i  Chr.  ii.  47;  vii.  i  (an  error  revived);  2  Chr.  iv. 
12  (the  second  "the  top  of"  omitted^):  Job  xli.  6  (see  Appendix  C) : 
Ps.  xviii.  47  "unto"  for  "under^;"  xxiv.  3;  Ix.  4  "feared"  for 
"fear 2;"  Ixxviii.  (>(>  "part"  for  "parts^:"  so  a  Scotch  edition  (Cold- 
stream) as  late  as  1845;  cxlviii.  8;  Prov.  xxv.  24;  Ezek.  v.  6,  the 
comma  placed  before  "and  my  statutes"  in  1629  is  removed,  for  want 
of  looking  at  the  Hebrew;  Hab.  iii.  13  (an  error  revived)  "tby  dis- 
covering" for  "by  fdiscovering;"  i  Esdr.  iv.  29;  v.  13  viarg.\  20 
"Ammidoi"  for  "Ammidioi^;"  vii.  9  "service"  for  "services^;"  viii. 
56  "sixty"  for  "fifty^;"  2  Esdr.  i.  15  "to  you"  for  "for  you^;"  38 
"come"  for  "cometh^;"  iv.  21  "upon  the  heavens"  for  "above  the 
heavens^;"  v.  15  "upon"  for  "up  upon^;"  27  "of people"  for  "of 
peoples^;"  Judith  ii.  20;  Esther  xiv.  i4"help"for  "helper^;"  Wisd. 
vii.  25  marg. ;  Ecclus.  xvii.  5  comma  removed  after  "seventh  3;"  xxvii. 

1  Report  from   the  Select  Com-       1845  under  the  direction  of  Bp. 
mittee  of  the  House  of  Commons  on       Turton.     See  below,  p.  36. 

the  Queen's  Printers' Patent,  \'^-^(^,  ^  These    errata,    after   holding 

Mr  Child's  Evidence,  1859,  p.  28;  their  place  in  the  text  of  D'Oyly 

a  blue-book  full  of  most  interest-  and    Mant   (1817),    Oxford    1835, 

ing  information  on  the  whole  sub-  and  other  Bibles,  are  amended  in 

ject  of  modern  Bibles.  our    model    for  the    Apocrypha, 

2  These  ^rrcr/a  held  their  ground  Carab.  4to.  1863.     See  below,  p. 
until  they  were  corrected   before  38. 

s.  3 


34     S^<^t'  ^-l     Authorized   Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

13  "in"  omitted  before  ''the  wantonness^;"  xlv.  8  marg. ;  Hist,  of 
Susanna,  ver.  37  "was  there"  for  "there  was^;"  Bel  and  Dragon,  ver. 
3  "wasspent"  for  "  were  spent^;"  ver.  6  "a  living  God"  for  "a  living 
god"  (i6ri — 1762),  as  all  in  ver.  24  after  1744;  i  Mace.  ix.  68;  x.  39 
"of  Jerusalem"  for  "at  Jerusalem^;"  John  xi.  34;  Rom.  vii.  20  "Now 
if  do;"  xi.  23  om.  "still"  (thus  many  later  Bibles,  but  not  our  model, 
Camb.  1858:  see  below,  p.  38);  i  Cor.  iv.  13  "the  earth"  for  "the 
world;"  2  Cor.  vii.  16  "con-  |  dence"  for  "confidence;"  xii.  2  "about" 
for  "above,"  repeated  in  later  Bibles  up  to  Bagster,  1846:  but  the 
American  and  our  model  restore  "above;"  this  change  seems  intentional. 
I  Tim.  iv.  10  "thesaviour;"  Rev.  vii.  6,  see  Appendix  A;  Rev.  xviii.  22 
(seep.  31). 

In  regard  to  the  use  of  italic  type  Blayney's  edition  is 
very  careless,  although  he  had  evidently  taken  some  pains 
about  the  subject.     Some  of  his  errors  are: 

Deut.  viii,  17  '"'■mine  hand;"  xv.  20  "eat  zV;"  I  Kin.  xvii.  -24  ^'■and 
that"  for  "and  that;'"  i  Chr.  xviii.  16  ''was'''  1611—1762,  but  "was" 
1769;  2  Chr.  XX.  34  "25  mentioned;"  xxiv.  26  "these  are  they"  for 
"these  are  they"  (1762);  Ps,  viii.  4  "What  is  man"  for  "What  is 
man"ofi6ii — 1762;  xvii.  6  "/^twr my  speech;"  xlix.  7  "his  brother" 
for  "/^zV  brother"  of  1611 — 1762;  Ixxv.  i  "is  near"  for  "zVnear"  of 
161 1 — 1762  ;  ver.  5  ''with  a  stiff  neck;"  Prov.  ix.  8  "wise  man"  and 
Isai.  xxix.  8  "thirsty  man,"  against  his  own  practice,  although  1638 — 
1762  italicise  "man;''''  Eccles.  viii.  11  "sentence  against,"  but  "sen- 
tence against''''  161 1 — 1762;  Isai.  xxxvi.  3  "which  was"  for  "which 
was"  1611 — 1762,  as  even  1769  in  ver.  22;  Jer.  xxxiii.  12  "which  is 
desolate"  (after  Camb.  1629),  "which  is  desolate"  161 1 — 1630,  ^'which 
is  desolate"  1638 — 1762;  xxxvi.  19  "ye  be"  for  "ye  be'^  i6ii — 1762; 
Ezek.  X.  I  "that  was  above"  for  "that  tuas  above"  i6ri — 1762;  Dan. 
viii.  3  [bis),  6,  20  "two  horns,"  though  the  noun  is  dual;  Hab.  i.  10 
"shall  be  a  scorn"  for  "shall  be  a  scorn"  i6ri — 1762;  Hagg.  ii.  19 
"Is  the  seed"  for  "Is  the  seed"  1611 — 1762;  Judith  xiii.  14  "(I  say)" 
161 1 — 1762,  which  is  the  method  employed  in  the  Apocrypha  for  indi- 
cating what  is  omitted  in  the  Greek,  he  regards  as  parenthetical,  and 
accordingly  the  marks  (  )  are  removed  in  1769;  Matt.  xxii.  10  "high- 
ways" for  " hig'hwa.y?,'"  (o5oi)s)  of  1638 — 1762;  Luke  xiv.  4  "let  him 
go"  for  "let  hi ??i  go"  of  1638 — 1762;  Rom.  iii.  I4  "is  full"  [ye/xei); 
I  Cor.  iii.  23  "ye  are  Christ's"  for  "ye  are  Christ's"  of  1638 — 1762; 
Gal.  V.  10  "his  judgment"  for  "/i/j  judgment"  of  161 1 — 1762. 
^  Refer  back  to  p.  33,  note  3.     ' 


History  of  the  Text.  35 

Out  of  this  whole  list  of  blunders  in  regard  to  the  italic 
type,  some  of  them  being  very  palpable,  the  American  Bible 
of  1867  corrects  those  in  Ps.  xvii.  6;  Ixxv.  5,  Professor 
Scholefield  (whose  care  on  this  point  will  be  noticed  again, 
Sect.  III.,  p.  79,  note  i)  the  last  two.  Blayney  is  followed 
in  the  rest  by  the  whole  flock  of  moderns,  without  inquiry 
and  without  suspicion. 

For  many  years  which  followed  the  publication  of  the 
edition  of  1769,  even  after  its  glaring  imperfections  had  be- 
come in  some  measure  known,  the  King's  Printer  and  the 
two  English  Universities  continued  to  reproduce  what  was 
in  substance  Dr  Blayney's  work,  when  the  public  attention 
was  claimed  in  1831  by  Mr  Curtis  of  Islington,  who  com- 
plained that  all  modern  reprints  of  Holy  Scripture  departed 
widely  from  the  original  edition  of  161 1,  to  the  great  dete- 
rioration of  our  Vernacular  Translation  ^  It  is  needless  to 
revive  the  controversy  that  ensued,  in .  which  the  case  of  the 
privileged  presses  was  successfully  maintained  by  Dr  Card- 
well  in  behalf  of  Oxford,  by  Dr  Turton  for  Cambridge,  in 
the  pamphlets  which  have  been  already  cited  in  this  Section. 
The  consequent  publication  of  the  standard  text  in  the 
Oxford  reprint  of  1833,  which  we  have  found  so  useful, 
virtually  settled  the  whole  debate,  by  shewing  to  the  general 
reader  the  obvious  impossibility  of  returning  to  the  Bible  of 
161 1,  with  all  the  defects  which  those  who  superintended 
the  press  had  been  engaged,  for  more  than  two  centuries, 
in  reducing  to  a  more  consistent  and  presentable  shape. 
One  result  of  the  communication  at  that  time  entered  upon 
between  the  Delegates  of  the  Oxford  and  the  Syndics  of  the 
Cambridge  Presses  was  a  letter  written  by  Dr  Cardwell 
to  Dr  Turton  in  1839  respectiiig  a  more  exact  accordance 

1   The  Existing   Monopoly    an       &c.     By  Thomas  Curtis,  London, 
inadequate pj'otection  of  the  Autho-       1833,  8vo. 
rized  Version  of  the  Scripture,  &c., 


/ 


36     Sect.  /.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (161 1). 

between  editions  of  the  Authorized  Version  as  pubHshed  by 
the  two  Universities.  These  learned  men  were  instructed 
to  confer  together  on  the  subject,  ahhough  it  is  not  easy  to 
point  out  any  actual  result  of  their  consultation.  The  only 
papers  at  Cambridge  at  all  bearing  on  the  subject  have 
been  placed  at  my  disposal,  but  they  amount  to  very  little, 
though  it  is  to  them  that  I  am  indebted,  when  in  the 
Appendices  or  elsewhere  I  speak  of  an  alteration  as  having 
been  made  by  the  direction  of  Bp.  Turton\ 

The  revision  of  the  Canonical  Scriptures  projected  (1847 
— 185 1)  by  the  American  Bible  Society  was  a  more  ambitious 
enterprise,  which  until  lately  has  hardly  been  heard  of  in 
England".  A  Committee  of  seven,  on  which  we  recognize 
the  honoured  name  of  Edward  Robinson,  engaging  as  their 
collator  James  W.  McLane,  a  Presbyterian  minister  in  the 
state  of  New  York,  superintended  his  comparison  of  a 
standard  American  Bible  with  recent  copies  published  in 
London,  Oxford,  Cambridge,  and  Edinburgh,  as  also  with 
the  book  of  161 1.  A\niere  the  four  modern  British  volumes 
proved  uniform,  the  new  revision  was  conformed  to  them, 
or,  in  matters  of  punctuation,  to  any  three  united.  Other 
rules  drawn  up  for  McLane's  guidance  shew  laudable  care 
on  the  part  of  the  Committee,  who  felt  and  confessed  that 
some  restraint  (even  though  a  light    one)  was   peculiarly 

^  It  would  be  ungrateful  not  to  far  back  as  1831. 
notice  the  minute  and  unpretending  -  The     only    detailed    account 

diligence  of  those  who    prepared  which    has    reached    England   is 

Bagster's    editions    of   the    Holy  given   in   a   scarce   Tract   in    the 

Bible.     We    have    consulted   the  Libraryof  the  British  and  Foreign 

miniature  quarto  of  1846,  wherein  Bible  Society  (U.  4.  23):  Report 

we  found  anticipated  many  a  small  on  the  History  and  Kceent    Col- 

discovery  we  had  supposed  to  be  lation  of  the  English  Version  of  the 

original.     The  instances  cited  in  Bible:  presented  by  the  Committee 

Appendix  A  will  explain  what  we  of  Versions  to  the  Board  of  JMana- 

mean.     The  revision  seems  due  in  gers  of  the  American  Bible  Society y 

the     main    to    Wm.     Greenfield,  and  adopted,  Jllay  1,  185 1,  pp.  32, 

F.A.S.,  of  the  British  and  Foreign  [New  York]  1851. 
Bible  Society,  although  he  died  as 


History  of  the  Text.  37 

needed  by  their  citizens,  since  "  the  exposure  to  variations 
is  naturally  greater,  wherever  the  printing  of  the  Bible  is  at 
the  option  of  every  one  who  chooses  to  undertake  it,  without 
restriction  and  without  supervision ;  as  in  this  country  since 
the  Revolution  '  {Report^  p.  8).  To  this  task  the  good  men 
devoted  themselves  for  three  years  and  a  half,  and  finally 
presented  their  Report  and  revision  to  the  Board  of  Managers 
which  had  appointed  them.  Ibi  onmis  effiisiis  labor: 
adopted  at  first,  the  work  was  rejected  the  very  next  year 
(1852)  by  a  majority  of  the  same  body,  "on  the  ground  of 
alleged  want  of  constitutional  authority,  and  popular  dis- 
satisfaction with  a  number  of  the  changes  made'."  Some 
small  fruits,  however,  of  their  faithful  toil  remain  in  the 
editions  of  the  Bible  published  by  the  American  Bible 
Society  since  i860,  to  which  reference  is  frequently  made  in 
the  course  of  the  present  treatise  and  its  Appendices ^  It 
is  not  easy  to  persuade  ourselves  that  very  much  has  been 
lost  by  the  failure  of  the  praiseworthy  effort  just  described. 
The  plan  of  operation  was  not  sufficiently  thorough  to  pro- 
duce any  considerable  results.  Between  the  five  recent 
Bibles  that  were  collated  the  differences  would  be  slight  and 
superficial,  but  when  the  standard  of  16 11  came  to  be  taken 
into  account,  it  is  very  credible  that  the  recorded  variations, 
solely  in  the  text  and  punctuation,  amounted  to  24,000 
{Report^  p.  31).  No  attempt  seems  to  have  been  made  to 
bridge  over  the  wide  gulf  between  the  first  issues  of  the 
Authorized  version  and  those  of  modern  times  by  the  use 
of  such  intermediate  editions  as  have  been  examined  in  the 
present  Section ;  nor  does  the  general  tone  of  their  Report 
encourage  the  belief  that  the  previous  studies  of  the  revisers 
had  lain  in  that  direction.     Hence  followed  of  necessity,  or 

1  Philip  Schaff,  D.D.  Revision  -  The  edition  we  have  used  is 

of  the  English    Version,  &.C.  New       the  beautiful  Diamond  Ref.  241110. 
York,  1873,  p.  xxxi.  note.  of  1867. 


38     Sect.  /.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (161 1). 

at  any  rate  in  practice,  so  complete  a  postponement  of 
Bibles  of  the  seventeenth  century  to  those  of  the  nineteenth, 
that  wheresoever  the  latter  agreed  together,  their  very  worst 
faults,  whether  relating  to  the  text  or  to  the  italic  type  (and 
more  especially  to  the  italics),  were  almost  sure  to  escape 
detection,  and  never  did  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
Committee,  save  by  some  happy  accident. 

It  remains  to  state  that  the  model  or  standard  copy 
adopted  for  the  purposes  of  the  present  work  is  the 
Cambridge  8vo  edition,  small  pica  (with  marginal  references) 
1858.  This  standard  may  be  pronounced  to  be  accurately 
printed,  inasmuch  as  close  and  repeated  examination  has 
enabled  us  to  note  only  the  following  errata  in.  the  text  or 
margin. 

I  Chr.  iv.  24  (margin  of  1762)  Zoar  for  Zohar;  2  Chr.  i.  4  Kiriath ; 
Ezra  i.  7  his  god  (presvimably  by  accident,  yet  it  looks  true  :  compare  in 
Hebrew  2  Kin.  xix.  37;  Dan.  i.  2);  Esther  i.  7  gave  them;  Job  xv.  35 
mischiof;  xxi.  26  worm;  Ps.  xxxi.  7  adversity;  xlv.  11  thy  lord;  Hos. 
ii.  I  Ru-hamah;  Jonah  i,  4  was  +like  (see  Appendix  C);  Luke  iv.  7 
marg. /alt  down  (so  Camb.  nonpareil,  1857). 

Since  this  Bible  of  1858  does  not  contain  the  Apocrypha, 
a  Cambridge  4to.  1863  has  been  adopted  for  the  model  of 
that  portion  of  our  work.  Besides  correcting  the  mistakes 
of  Blayney  and  his  successors  in  the  passages  indicated  in 
pp.  33,  34  and  notes,  this  book  alone  (so  far  as  we  know) 
has  the  following  changes  for  the  better : 

I  Esdr.  V.  5  7Harg.  "Or,"  set  before  ^^Joacim ;''^  2  Esdr.  vi.  49 
marg.  "Or,"  set  before  "Behemoth;"  Ecclus.  iv.  16  "generations" 
for  "generation"  of  161 1,  &c.  For  Tobit  iv.  10;  Judith  i.  6;  2  Mace, 
ix.  18,  see  Appendix  C. 

This  book  contains  also  the  following  errata : 

I  Esdr.  V.  72  and  Judith  iv.  7  "straight"  for  "strait;"  i  Esdr.  vi. 
22  "our  Lord"  for  "our  lord;"  viii.  32  marg.  ^^ Shcchanaiah"  for 
"■  Shcchaniah ;""  ix.  4  "bear"  for  "bare;"  26  tfiajg.  Po>-osh  for  Parosh; 
1  Esdr.  vii.  17  "shall"  for  "should;"  Judith  x.  8  and  xiii.  5;  Ecclus. 


History  of  the  Text.  39 

xxxvii.  16;  2  Mace.  xiv.  5  "enterprizes:"  but  "enterprises"  in  i  Mace. 
ix.  55;  Judith  xvi.  ir  l|with  "these,"  instead  of  with  the  first  "they;" 
Wisd.  i.  6  "a  witness"  for  "witness;"  v.  23  "dealings"for  "dealing;" 
vi.  II  "affections"  for  "affection;"  xiii.  11  "Ha  carpenter"  for  "a 
llcarpenter ; "  Ecclus.  iii.  27  "sorrow"  for  "sorrows;"  xlvi.  7  "mur- 
niurings"  for  "murmuring;"  Song,  ver.  5  "upon  us"  (second);  i  Mace, 
iv.  20  "hosts"  for  "host;"  34  "above"  for  "about;"  vii.  45  "i;Then 
they"  for  "Then!|  they;"  x.  54  "son-in-law"  for  "son  inlaw:"  Comp. 
Tobit  X.  12  andch.xi.2;  xiv.  27  "hight  priest;"  ver.  32  "the  I! valiant" 
for  "lithe  valiant ;"  2  Mace.  i.  23  "priest"  for  the  second  "priests;"  xiii. 
23  inarg.  "11  Or,  rebelled''''  over  against  ver.  24;  ibid,  "entreated"  for 
"intreated"  ^as  six  times  before) ;  xiv.  25  "[and"  for  "and||." 

The  Epistle  of  "The  Translators  to  the  Reader  V  which 
follows  the  Dedication  in  all  principal  editions  of  the 
Authorized  Version,  has  been  illustrated  in  this  volume  by 
such  notes  as  seemed  necessary.  The  reputed  author  of 
this  noble  Preface  (for,  in  spite  of  the  quaintness  of  its  style 
and  the  old  fashion  of  its  learning,  it  deserves  no  meaner 
epithet)  is  Dr  Miles  Smith  of  the  first  Oxford  Company, 
who  would  naturally  be  one  of  the  six  final  revisers  (p.  12 
note  4),  and  became  Bishop  of  Gloucester  in  161 2.  The 
Calendar  and  Tables  of  Lessons  usually  annexed  to  this 
Preface  are  no  more  a  part  of  the  Version  than  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  and  the  metrical  Psalms  which  are  some- 
times placed  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  Bible.  The 
Genealogical  charts,  accompanied  with  a  Map  of  Canaan 
and  its  Index,  the  work  of  John  Speed,  were  issued 
separately  in  various  sizes,  that  they  might  be  bound  up 
with  the  Bibles,  without  any  option  of  the  purchaser. 
Mr  Fry  prints  {A  Description.,  &c.  p.  40)  a  patent  granting 
to  him  this  privilege  dated  in  the  eighth  year  of  James  L, 
to  hold  good  "only  during  the  term  of  ten  years  next 
ensuing,"  at  an  additional  charge  of  not  more  than  two 
shillings  for  the  large  folio  size. 

1  See  p.  265. 


40     Sect.  11.^     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 


Section  IL 

On  the  marginal  notes  and  the  original  texts  of  the  Authorized 
Versiofi  of  the  English  Bible. 

Besides  those  references  to  parallel  texts  of  Scripture 
which  will  be  spoken  of  elsewhere  (Section  vi.),  the  margin 
of  most  of  our  English  Bibles,  including  the  Authorized 
Version,  contains  certain  brief  annotations,  the  extent  and 
character  of  which  will  now  be  described.  The  practice 
was  begun  by  Tyndale,  in  whose  earliest  New  Testament  of 
1525,  the  poor  fragments  of  whose  single  known  copy  enrich 
the  Grenville  Library  in  the  British  Museum,  notes  rather 
expository  than  relating  to  interpretation  are  extant  in  the 
margin.  In  some  places,  and  yet  more  in  his  version  of  the 
Pentateuch  (1530  and  subsequent  years),  these  notes  be- 
come strongly  polemical,  and  breathe  a  spirit  which  the 
warmest  admirers  of  their  author  find  it  easier  to  excuse 
than  to  commend.  In  Coverdale's  Bible  (1535),  which  was 
put  forth  in  hot  haste  to  seize  a  fleeting  opportunity,  only 
five  out  of  the  eighteen  notes  found  in  the  New  Testament 
are  explanatory,  the  rest  having  reference  to  the  proper 
rendering :  in  the  earlier  pages  of  his  Bible  they  occur  much 
more  frequently.  Annotations  of  this  kind  are  quite  a 
distinctive  feature  as  well  of  the  Geneva  New  Testament  of 
1557,  as  of  the  Geneva  Bible  of  1560;  and,  mingled  with 
others  which  are  purely  interpretative,  are  strewn  somewhat 
unequally  over  the  pages  of  the  Bishops'  Bible  (1568,  1572). 
One  of  the  most  judicious  of  the  Instructions  to  the  Trans- 
lators laid  down  for  their  guidance  by  King  James  L,  and 
acted  upon  by  them  with  strict  fidelity,  prescribed  that  "No 
marginal  notes  at  all  be  aftixed,  but  only  for  the  explanation 
of  the  Hebrew  or  Greek  words,  which  cannot,  without  some 


Marginal  notes  and  original  texts.  41 

circumlocution,  so  briefly  and  fitly  be  expressed  in  the  text." 
It  had  by  that  time  grown  intolerable,  that  on  the  self-same 
page  with  the  text  of  Holy  Scripture,  should  stand  some 
bitter  pithy  comment,  conceived  in  a  temper  the  very  re- 
verse of  that  which  befits  men  who  profess  to  love  Clod  in 
Christ. 

In  the  Old  Testament  the  marginal  notes  in  our  standard 
Bibles  of  16 11  amount  to  6637,  whereof  41 11  express  the 
more  literal  meaning  of  the  original  Hebrew  or  Chaldee 
(there  are  77  referring  to  the  latter  language):  2156  give 
alternative  renderings  (indicated  by  the  word  "||0r"  prefixed 
to  them)  which  in  the  opinion  of  the  Translators  are  not 
very  less  probable  than  those  in  the  text:  in  d^^  the  meaning 
of  Proper  Names  is  stated  for  the  benefit  of  the  unlearned 
(e.g.  Gen.  xi.  9;  xvi.  11):  in  240  (whereof  108  occur  in  the 
first  Book  of  Chronicles)  necessary  information  is  given  by 
way  of  harmonizing  the  text  with  other  passages  of  Scripture, 
especially  in  regard  to  the  orthography  of  Hebrew  names 
(e.g.  Gen.  xi.  16,  20,  24):  while  the  remaining  67  refer  to 
various  readings  of  the  original,  in  31  of  which  the  marginal 
variation  (technically  called  Kcri)  of  the  Masoretic  revisers 
of  the  Hebrew  is  set  in  competition  with  the  reading  in 
the  text  {Chetii').  Of  this  last  kind  of  marginal  notes  a  list 
is  subjoined,  as  many  of  them  are  not  readily  distinguish- 
able from  the  alternative  renderings,  being  mostly,  like  them, 
preceded  by  "||0r".     They  are 

Deut.  xxviii.  22.  Josh.  viii.  12  {Kcri  in  marg.) ;  xv.  53  {Kcri  in 
marg.).  i  Sam.  vi.  18  (j^X  for  ^QN,  with  the  Targum  and  Septuagint) ; 
xxvii.  8  {Keri  in  text).  2  Sam.  xiii.  37  {Kcri  in  text) ;  xiv.  22  {Kcri  in 
marg.).  i  Kin.  xxii.  48  {Keri  in  text).  2  Kin.  v.  12  {Kcri  in  marg.); 
XX.  4  {Kcri  in  text) ;  xxiii.  33  {Keri  in  text),  i  Chr.  i.  6;  7.  2  Chr.  i. 
5.     Ezra  ii.  33;  46  {Kcri  in  text);  viii.    14  {Kcri  in  marg.);  x.  40 \ 

1  Strangely  enough,  tliis  is  the       various  rcadhigs,   noticed  by  Bp. 
earliest  marginal  note  relating  to       Turton  in  his  Text  of  the  English 


\J 


42     Sect.  /I.]     Authorized   Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

Neh.  iii.  20  {Keri  in  marg.).  Job  vi.  i\  [Keri  in  text);  xxxiii.  28 
(twice  as  Keri  in  text).  Ps.  ix.  12  (Am* in  text);  x.  12  (A^rz  in  text); 
xxiv.  6  (marg.  with  the  Septuagint,  Syriac,  and  Latin  Vulgate) ;  Ixiv.  6; 
Ixviii.  30;  c.  3  [Kcri  in  marg.);  cii,  3;  cxlvii.  19  {Keri  in  marg.). 
Prov.  xvii.  27  (AIt/ in  text);  xx.  30  {Keri  in  marg.);  xxi.  29  {Kej-i  in 
marg.);  xxiv.  19;  xxvi.  17.  Cant.  v.  4.  Isai.x.  13  (A"?;-?' in  marg. ?); 
xiii.  22;  xviii.  2;  xxx.  32  {Keri  in  marg.);  xli.  24;  xlix.  5  {Keri  in 
marg.);  Ixiii.  11  (marg.  with  Aquila  and  the  Vulgate);  Ixv.  4  {Keri  in 
text).     Jer.  ii.  20  {Kerim.  text);  iii.  9  (text  with  the  Septuagint);  vii.  18 

and  xliv.  17  (P5^2P''  ^o^  ^5/?Pi'5  apparently  from  conjecture);  xvi.  7; 
xviii.  4;  xxiii.  31  (probably  a  conjectural  reading,  p?n  for  pH?) ;  xxxiii. 
3;  xlix.  I  and  3  (marg.  with  the  Septuagint);  1.  9  ^  text,  ^  marg.); 
26  (?  text,    7  marg.);  li.  59  (marg.  HNp?  irapa  ZedeKiou,  Septuagint). 

Ezek.  vii.  11;  xxiii.  42  (Al'r/ in  marg.) ;  xxv.  7  {K^eri  in  text);  xxx.  iS 
{'i^  text,  '\^  marg.);  xxxvi.  14  (?tJ^3  Chetiv  in  marg.,  ?D^  in  text,  but 

Keri  is  quite  different,  viz.  1P^) ;  ver.  23  (marg.  with  the  Masora, 
Septuagint,  and  some  Hebrew  manuscripts,  against  the  commonly 
printed  text);  xl,  40;  xlii.  9  (A'm  in  marg.  ''he  that  brought").  Dan. 
ix.  24  {Keri  in  text,  "to  make  an  end").  Amos  iii.  12  (Hebrew  manu- 
scripts varying  between  pt^^^T  of  the  printed  text,  which  is  represented 
by  marg.,  and  the  name  of  the  city  p'^'D"!)..  Zech.  xi.  2  {Keri  in  text). 
Mai.  ii.  15  (marg.  HNC'  "excellency,"  being  the  rendering  of  Cover- 
dale,  "an  excellent  spirit"). 

Where  the  variation  in  the  reading  was  brought  promi- 
nently into  view  by  the  Masoretic  notes,  it  was  only  natural 
that  the  Translators  should  refer  to  it  in  their  margin.  Re- 
specting the  Hebrew  text  which  they  followed,  it  would  be 
hard  to  identify  any  particular  edition,  inasmuch  as  the  dif- 
ferences between  early  printed  Bibles   are  but  few.     The 

Bible  Considered.     He  gives  Ezra  there"    (p.   128,    second    edition). 

x.    40.   Ps.   cii.  3.  Cant.   v.  4  for  But,  in  truth,  his  whole  treatise  is 

the    Old    Testament,    and   eight  a  notable  example  of  what  wary 

references   to   the   New,    adding,  tact  and  dialectic  skill  may  accom- 

"I  will  not  positively  affirm  that  plish,  when  wielded  by  one  who 

no  other  Various    Readings  than  does  not  know   too   much   about 

the  following  are  to  be  found  in  the  matter  at  issue,  and  is  fortu- 

the  Margin,  but  the  impression  of  nate   enough  to   encounter  oppo- 

my  mind  is  that  no  others  do  exist  nents  who  know  considerably  less. 


Marginal  notes  and  original  texts.  43 

Complutensian  Polyglott,  however,  which  afforded  them 
such  important  help  in  the  Apocrypha,  was  of  course  at 
hand,  and  we  seem  to  trace  its  influence  in  some  places, 
e.g.  in  2  Chr.  i.  5,  D^  "there"  of  the  Complutensian  text 
the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  being  accorded  a  place  in  the 
margin;  as  also  in  Job  xxii.  6  T'HX  "thy  brother,"  where 
later  editors  give  the  plural,  as  do  the  Targum,  Syriac,  Sep- 
tuagint, and  Vulgate.  Yet  the  Complutensian  throws  no 
light  on  the  reading  in  many  other  passages,  where  some 
other  text  must  have  been  before  the  Translators:  e.g. 
I  Chr.  vi.  57  ("of  Judah"  added);  Ps.  Ixiv.  6,  where  the 
marginal  rendering  ought  to  be  taken  in  preference.  In 
Job  XXX.  II,  22  the  Authorized  prefers  Ket'i  to  Chetiv. 

It  has  been  sometimes  alleged  that  the  alternative  ren- 
derings (introduced  by  "|IOr")  which  are  set  in  the  margin 
of  the  Authorized  English  Version,  are  superior,  on  the 
whole,  to  those  in  the  text'.  It  would  be  indeed  a  con- 
spicuous instance  of  bad  judgment  on  the  part  of  the  Trans- 
lators, if  it  could  be  justly  alleged  that  where  two  or  more 
senses  of  a  passage  were  brought  fairly  before  them,  they 
mostly,  or  even  frequently,  put  the  worst  into  the  body  of 
their  work.  But  no  competent  scholar  who  has  carefully 
examined  the  matter  will  think  that  they  have  gone  so  far 
wrong.  On  the  other  hand,  he  will  perhaps  feel  disposed 
to  complain  that  so  many  of  these  marginal  notes  assign  a 
sense  to  the  sacred  record  which  cannot  possibly  be  accepted  f 
as  true.  Some  of  these,  no  doubt,  are  taken  either  from 
the  text  or  margin  of  the  Bishops'  Bible,  which  had 
been  read  in  Churches  for  about  forty  years  when  the 
Authorized  Version  was  made,  and  which  King  James  had 

^  "TheTranslators... have  placed  monly  out-voted."     Dr  R.  Cell's 

some  different  significations  in  the  Essay  toward  the  afuendment  of 

Margent;    but    those    most-what  the  last  English  Translation  of  the 

the  better;  because  when  t>'uth  is  Bible,  1659  (Preface,  p.  24). 
tryed  by  fuost  voyces,   it  is  com- 


V 


44     S^y^-  ^^•]     Aufhon'zed   Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

expressly  directed  "to  be  followed,  and  as  little  altered,  as 
the  truth  of  the  original  will  permit/'  But  far  the  greater 
part  must  be  traced  to  another  source,  to  which  adequate 
attention  has  not  hitherto  been  directed.  Of  the  several 
Latin  translations  of  the  Old  Testament  which  were  executed 
in  the  sixteenth  century,  that  which  was  the  joint  work  of 
Immanuel  Tremellius  [15 10 — So],  a  converted  Jew  (the 
proselyte  first  of  Cardinal  Pole,  then  of  Peter  ]Mart}T),  who 
became  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Heidelberg,  and  of  his  son 
in  law  Francis  Junius  [1545 — 1602],  was  at  once  the  latest 
and  the  most  excellent.  Originally  published  in  1575 — 9, 
and  after  the  death  of  Tremellius  revised  in  1590  by  Junius, 
who  added  a  version  of  the  Apocr)-pha  of  which  he  was 
the  sole  author,  a  large  edition  printed  in  London  in  1593 
soon  caused  it  to  become  ver\-  highly  esteemed  in  this 
country  for  its  perspicuity  and  general  faithfulness.  One 
great  fault  it  has,  a  marked  tendency,  in  passages  either 
obscure  in  themselves,  or  suggesting  some  degree  of  diffi- 
culty, to  wander  into  new  paths  of  interpretation,  wherein  it 
ought  to  have  found  few  to  follow  or  commend  it.  This 
version  must  have  lain  open  before  the  Translators  through- 
out the  whole  course  of  their  labours:  it  has  led  them  into 
some  of  the  most  conspicuous  errors  that  occur  in  their  text 
(2  Chr.  XX.  I :  Job  xxxiv.  t^Z),  while  as  regards  the  margin, 
whensoever  a  rendering  is  met  with  violently  harsh,  inverted, 
or  otherwise  unlikely,  its  origin  may  be  sought,  almost  with 
a  moral  certainty  of  finding  it,  in  the  pages  of  Tremellius 
and  Junius.  These  statements  are  made  with  reference  to 
every  part  of  the  Old  Testament  (e.g.  Gen.  xl.  13,  16,  19,  20. 
Ex.  xvii,  16:  xxix.  43.  Judg.  ix.  31.  2  Sam.  i.  9,  iS;  xxi. 
8.     Lam.  iii.  35:  iv.   14;  22'),  but,  for  the  sake  of  brevity, 

^  Dr  Ginsburg  [An  Old  Testa-  margin  in  Lev.  xviii.  18,  but  one 
nuTit  Commentary  for  English  would  doubt  whether  they  were 
KeaJers^  18S2)  would  adopt  their       the  first  to  propose  it.     The  very 


Margbial  Jiotes  and  original  ttwts.  45 

the  proof  of  them  shall  be  drawn  from  one  distinct  portion, 
the  books  of  the  Minor  Prophets.  To  these  authorities 
solely,  so  far  as  the  writer  has  observed,  are  due  the  supply- 
ing oCfor  noug/if'  in  Mai.  i.  10,  and  the  textual  rendering 
of  Mai.  ii.  16:  as  are  also  the  following  marginal  notes, 
scattered  among  others  of  a  widely  different  type:  Hos.  i.  6; 
10  {''instead of  f/uir);  vi.  4  {''kindness'');  x.  10;  xii.  8  {"a// 
my  lahoicrs^'  &c.);  xiv.  2.  Joel  iii.  21.  Amos  iv.  3;  v.  22; 
vii.  2;  Obad.  7  {"of if).  Mic.  vii.  13.  Nah.  i,  12;  iii.  19. 
Hab.  i.  7;  ii.  11  (second).  Zeph.  iii.  i.  Zech.  v.  3;  ix.  15 
(twice);  17  {^'sfeak'^);  x.  2;  xi.  16  (second) ;  xii.  5;  xiv.  5; 
14  (first).  Mai.  i.  13;  ii.  9  (but  iSvaio-n-e'taOe  Trpoawwa 
Symmachus);   11. 

Thus  far  no  marginal  notes  have  been  taken  into  con- 
sideration except  those  given  in  the  primary  issues  of  161 1; 
but  368  others  have  been  subsequently  inserted  by  various 
hands,  which  ought  to  be  distinguished  in  our  Bibles  from 
those  of  earlier  date  by  being  printed  within  brackets.  Of 
these  the  Cambridge  folio  of  1629  contributes  that  on  Jer. 
iii.  19;  the  folio  of  1638  that  on  Ezek.  xlviii.  i:  thirty-one 
others  were  inserted  in  the  course  of  the  century  that  fol- 
lowed, viz.  I  Kin.  xxii.  41,  51.  2  Kin.  i.  17;  viii.  16;  ix.  29; 
xiii.  9, 10;  xiv.  23,29;  XV.  1,8,10,  30  (/w),37;  xvii.  i;  xxiii.  23. 
2Chr.  XX.  36;  xxi.  I,  3,  5,  12,  iS.  Jobi.  i.  Ps.  xi.  6.  Dan.  i. 
21;  xi.  7,  10,  25.  Hos.  vii.  7;  xiii.  16.  As  many  as  269  are 
due  to  Dr  Paris  (1762),  and  66  to  Dr  Blayney  (1769),  who 
is  usually  credited  with  them  all.  Many  of  them  are  not 
destitute  of  a  certain  value  (especially  in  such  explanations 
relating  to  Proper  Names  as  occur  in  Gen.  ii.  23)',  although 
a  persistent  resolution  to  set  right  the  regnal  years  of  the 

improbable  margin  in  T.ev.  xxvii.  nal  notes  that  occurs  in  the  Autho- 

12,  also  derived  from  Tremellius  rized  Bible  (Gen.  i.  20,  +Heb.  /t-/ 

and  Junius,  is  certainly  counten-  fo7vl  fly)  is  taken  from  the  Geneva 

anced  by  2  Kin.  ix.  5.  Bible  (1560),  and  seems  as  good  as 

^  The  first  of  these  later  margi-  most  of  its  date — 1762. 


JS/^ 


46     Sect.  II.'\     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (161 1). 

Jewish  kings,  commenced  in  1701,  and  fully  carried  out  in 
1762,  leads  on  their  authors  to  expedients  which  are  at  times 
rather  daring  than  satisfactory:  e.g.  2  Kin.  xv.  i,  30.  The 
American  revisers  of  1S51  (see  p.  36)  not  unreasonably 
condemned  notes  like  these  and  those  on  Judg.  iii.  31;  xi. 
29;  xii.  8,  II,  13;  xiii.  i;  xv.  20  (all  from  the  Bible  of  1762), 
as  "containing  merely  conjectural  and  unwarranted  com- 
mentary," and  expunged  them  accordingly  from  the  margin 
of  their  book;  but  they  all  came  back  again  with  the  other 
restorations  w^hich  public  opinion  forced  upon  the  New 
York  Bible  Society.  In  one  instance  (Dan.  ix.  27)  Dr  Paris 
has  ventured  to  substitute  a  marginal  rendering  of  his  own 
in  the  place  of  that  of  161 1  ("Or,  linth  the  abomi?iab/e 
ajynies^^),  and  has  been  followed  by  all  modern  Bibles. 

The  marginal  notes  appended  to  the  Apocrypha,  which 
have  next  to  be  examined,  differ  not  inconsiderably  in  tone 
and  character  from  those  annexed  to  the  text  of  the 
Canonical  Scriptures.  They  are  much  more  concerned  with 
various  readings,  as  was  indeed  inevitable  by  reason  of  the 
corrupt  state  of  the  Greek  text  of  these  books,  which  still 
await  and  sadly  need  a  thorough  critical  revision,  chiefly 
by  the  aid  of  materials  that  have  recently  come  to  light. 
Authorities  also  are  sometimes  cited  by  name  in  the  margin, 
a  practice  not  adopted  in  the  Old  Testament  \  Such  are 
Athanasius,  i  Esdr.  iv.  36:  Herodotus,  Judith  ii.  7:  Pliny's 
History,  Benedicite  or  the  Song,  ver.  23:  Josephus,  i  Esdr. 
iv.  29.  Esther  xiii.  i;  xvi.  i.  i  JNIacc.  v.  54;  vi.  49;  vii.  i; 
ix.  4,  35j  49j  50;  X-  I5  Si;  xi.  34;  xii.  7,  8,  19,  28,  31. 
2  Mace.  vi.  2 :  in  the  Maccabees  after  the  example  of 
Coverdale.    Even  Junius,  the  Latin  translator  (above,  p.  44), 

^  The  apparent  exceptions  of  The   reference    to    "Usher"    in 

Josephus,    quoted   Gen.    xxii.    i ;  1  Kin.  xv.  30  forms  part  of  a  note 

2  Kin.  xiv.  8,  are  respectively  due  added  in  1701. 
to  the  editors  of  1701  and  1762. 


Marginal  notes  and  original  texts.  47 

is  appealed  to  eight  times  by  name:   2  Esdr.  xiii.  2,   13, 
Tobit  vii.  8;  ix.  6;  xi.  18;  xiv.  10.     Judith  iii.  9;  vii.  3. 

The  texts  from  which  the  Apocryphal  books  were  trans- 
lated can  be  determined  with  more  precision  than  in  the 
case  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  were  not  the  same  for 
them  all.  The  second  book  of  Esdras,  though  the  style 
is  redolent  of  a  Hebrew  or  Aramaic  origin,  exists  only  in 
the  common  Latin  version  and  in  Junius'  paraphrase,  which 
is  cited  for  the  reading  in  ch.  xiii.  2,  13.  In  this  book  some 
excellent  I^atin  manuscripts  to  which  they  had  access  (ch. 
iv.  51  marg.),  as  also  the  Bishops'  Bible,  must  have  had 
great  weight  with  its  revisers.  The  Prayer  of  Manasses 
had  to  be  drawn  from  the  same  source,  for  the  Greek  was 
first  pubUshed  in  Walton's  Polyglott  (1657)  as  it  appears 
in  the  Codex  Alexandrinus,  the  earliest  that  contains  it, 
which  did  not  reach  England  before  1628.  The  first  book 
of  Esdras  ('O  tcper?  as  the  Greeks  call  it),  is  not  in  the 
Complutensian  Polyglott  (15 17),  so  that  Aldus's  Greek 
Bible  (15 1 8)  was  primarily  resorted  to,  as  is  evident  from 
the  margin  of  ch.  ii.  12,  the  typographical  error  there  de- 
scribed being  that  of  Aldus  {TrapeSodrjaav  dfSaa-crdpoy  for 
7rape^66rj  ^avaf^aacrdpio),  which  had  misled  the  Bishops' 
Bible.  Besides  this  edition,  our  Translators  had  before  them 
the  Roman  Septuagint  of  1586 \  to  which  they  refer,  witli- 
out  as  yet  naming  it,  in  ch.  v.  25 ;  viii.  2.  For  the  remainder 
of  the  Apocrypha  they  had  access  also  to  the  Compluten- 
sian,  which  in  the  books  of  Tobit,  Judith,  Wisdom  and 


1  An  excellent  account  of  this  sentatum:"  yet  both  the  Epistle 

edition  is  contained  in  the  Prole-  of  Cardinal    Carafa,  who   super- 

gojtiena   to  Tischendorfs  Septiia-  intended   it,   and    the   Preface    of 

gint,  pp.  xix. — xxviii.  (1869).    Al-  his  assistant,  Peter  Morinus,   dis- 

though  the  work  itself  is  not  quite  play  an  insight  into  the  true  prin- 

what  it  professes  to  be,  "exemplar  ciples   of  textual  criticism,  quite 

ipsum  "  (the  great  Codex  Vatica-  beyond  their  age. 
nus)  "de  verbo  ad  verbum  repre- 


48     SccL  //.]     AutJior'izcd   J^crsion  of  i lie  Jyiblc  (161 1). 

Ecclcsiasticiis  seems  almost  a  copy  of  Cod.  Vatican.  346 
(Cod.  248  of  Parsons)',  but  they  used  with  it  the  Aldine  and 
Roman  editions'^:  tlie  latter  "cojjy"  tliey  cite  by  name  Tobit 
xiv.  5,  10;  I  Mace.  ix.  9;  xii.  37,  as  tliey  also  do  "the  Latin 
interpreters"  in  2  Mace.  vi.  1.  ]5y  means  of  tliese  Greek 
authorities  they  were  enabled  to  clear  the  text  of  Tobit  of 
the  accretions  brought  into  the  Old  Latin  version,  which 
had  been  over-hastily  revised  by  Jerome.  As  a  small  in- 
stalment of  what  remains  to  be  done  for  the  criticism  of 
that  noble  work,  two  passages  in  l^xclesiasticus  (i.  7 ;  xvii.  5) 
are  inclosed  within  brackets  in  the  books  of  161 1.  The 
former  is  found  in  no  Creek  text  our  Translators  knew 
of,  but  only  in  the  Latin  and  ])ishoi)s'  Bible:  the  latter 
occurs  complete  only  in  some  hite  manuscripts,  though  the 
Complutensian  and  Cod.  248  have  the  last  two  lines  of 
the  triplet.  These  preliminary  statements  will  enable  the 
reader  to  understand  the  marginal  notes  in  the  Apocrypha 
wliich  treat  of  various  readings.  They  are  no  less  than  156 
in  number,  besides  13  of  latter  date. 

I  EsDRAS  i.  II  (ro  Tvpiiiiv'ov  Clrcck,  ^[^2  for  1p3)  ;  12  [iiim  bcncvo- 
loitia  Viilt^. ,  i.e.  ii^T  eiVo/as) ;  24  {Iv  aiaOijcreL:  oni.  ]\.onian);  ii.  12 
(above,  ]).  47);  V.  25  (217  as  Roman  edition  :  Vuly;.  lias  ■227);  v.  46; 
see  l)eIo\v,  p.   19M  note  i;  vi.  i  Ji/i.  (if  this  be  intended  for  a  various 

^  Tin's    manuscript    contained  13;  xliii.    26;  xlvii.   1.      I'el    and 

also  I  I'^sdras,  if  it  be  the  same  as  Dragon,  ver.  38.     2  Mace.  i.   31  ; 

that  for  which  Cardinal  Ximcnes  viii.  23;  xii.  36;  xiv.  36.     On  the 

gave  a  bond  in  15x3  to  the  Libra-  other  hand  the  Roman  is  followed 

rian  of  the  Vatican  (Vercellone,  rather    than    the    Complutensian 

y'n/.  ^0  Mat's  Cod.  Val.  Vol.  i.).  and  Aldine  text  united  in  i  Mace. 

So  that  he  must   have  designedly  iii.  14,  15,  18,   28;  iv.   24;  v.  23, 

kept  back  a  book  which  the  Coun-  48  ;  vi.  24,  43,  57;  vii.  31,  37,  41 

cil  of  Trent  afterwards  refused  to  (Z'/.v),  45  ;  viii.  io;ix.  9  (avowedly) ; 

declare  Canonical.  x.  41,42,  78;  xi.  3,  15,  22,  34,  35, 

■''  Our 'i'ranslation  often  adopts  ike;  xii.  43;  xiii.   22,  25;  xiv.  4, 

the  Aldine  text  in  jireference  to  16,  23,  46  ;  xv.  30;  xvi.  8.    2  Mace, 

those    of  the  Com])lutcnsian  and  viii.  30;  xv.  22.     Aldus  is  followed 

J"voman  editions  jointly:  e.g.  Judith  in  ])reference  to  the  IJishojis'  I'ible 

iii.   9;  viii.    i.    ICcclus.    xvii.   31;  in  i  Esdr.  v.   14:  cf.  i  Esdr.  viii. 

xxxi.  2  ;  xxxvi.  15;  xxxix.  17;  xlii.  39. 


Mari:^inal  votes  and  on't^i/iirl  texts.  49 


reading,  no  (race  of  it  rcniniiis);  i\^  (ro'/to?  AM.,  tottov  Kimi.  Vul},'. 
liisliops') ;  vii.  S  (f/)tAa/»xcC'</  Aid.  Rom.,  tl>v\Q>v  Old  l,;itin,  Vuli;. 
liisliops')  ;  10  (m.-xri^in  as  Cod.  -z^S,  Vid}^.  l?isIio|)s')  ;  viii.  1  ('A^'a/i/ot/ 
Vid};.  ("ovcrdalc  on!));  l  ('Oi/oi'  Koni.,  'Ki(^oi'  Aid.  I'.islmps')  ;  ihul. 
(tlirc-i*  iiaiiK-s  omidcd  in  Koin.  Vulf;;.  C'ovcrdaK',  not  in  Aid.  I'.isliops') ; 
70  (ciWa  Aid.  Vidt;.  Covcrdak',  15islio])s':  l)iit  Old  Latin,  Jiiniiis  a\a, 
as  I'./ra  vii.  11  |niin  lialid  ("od.  Vaticaimsl)  ;  29  (Afxroi''?  Aid.,  'Arronj 
I'loni.,  Acclms  Vul^^  Covcnlalc,  llnlliix  Hisliops',  Cliarliiscli  Junius, 
li'-ltSn  I'l/ia  viii.  7);  ,m  (So  Vul^.  Junius,  ( 'ovcrdalc;  with  I'"./ra  viii.  H, 
against  y\ld.  Isnm.  I'isliops') ;  35  (21?  AM.  Koni.  Vul!^  ( 'ovcrdalc, 
Bishops':  ?iH  Junius,  V.t.xx  viii.  9);  ,\S  ('A/^ardi'  AM.  Koui.  Uisliops', 
Eccctan  Vulg.,  J'lzt'chan  C'ovcrdalc,  Knlan  Junius:  iT.  IC/ra  viii.  17); 
39  (60  Junius,  Ezra  viii.  13  only)  ;  SS  (niarj^in  rr(|uircs  ixy]  6pyi(rfljjs, 
for  whicli  there  is  no  known  atilliority)  ;  96.  Sc(;  Appendix  ( ' ; 
ix.  20  {ayvoias  Koni.  VuI;^  ('overdale,  rratii  [unius,  a^/'flav  Aid. 
Iji.shojjs'). 

1  KsDKAS  i.  22  (margin  fioni  the  I'.ishops'  margin:  so  Junius,  in  tlie 
form  of  a  conjecture);  ii.  15  {rolniiiha  Vulg.  Junius,  (olunina  ( 'overdale, 
Bishops');  16  (text  as  Vidg.  ('overdale,  I'.ishops',  (hougli  l''rilzschc"s 
three  Latin  MSS.  S'i'I)'  read  ///  /7//,v,  the  niar-Mii  is  I'idui  Junius);  ;',: 
(text  asCdementine  Vulg.  Junius,  ('overdale,  I5ishops':  but  margin  with 
Frilzsche's  STD);  3S  (///  r-^//7'/7'/(' Vulg.  ('overdale,  I'ishoiis'  text:  ad 
conviviidit  Junius;  "|l<)i'>  ./'V' "  l'ish()|)s'  nlar;^);  iii.  19  (IcxI  Vulg. 
Coverdale,  Itishops':  margin  is  fashioned  from  Jimius  and  15ishops' 
margin);  31  {iiirniinl  Vulg.,  I*'rit/.sche's  .S'l'D:  pcncivc  ('overdale, 
Bishops':  voiil  III  inriilrni  ]\\\\\\\y',  (Oiiiiirr  \\v.\\v\\\)  \  iv.  11  [:  (>nii/</ii>iir/ii 
Vulg.  Junius,  Coverdale,  l>isho])s':  iiir(>nii/^fioiiriii  l'"ril/sche's  SD,  hut 
the  whole  passage  is  in  confusion)  ;  36  [I  lurid  I''rit/.sche's  '1'  only:  .dl 
the  rest  yrir/iiic/)',  51  (y/z/r/ ^v// Vulg.  Junius,  Coverdale,  I'.ishops':  l>ut 
(juts  cril  l''ril/.sche's  STD,  so  that  our  'I'lanslalors  might  well  ajjpeal  to 
a  '•Manuscript"  here);  vi.   49  {/Citoch  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bisho^js' :  Be- 


^    S   is   Codex   S;mgerin;uiensis  iiirii/   (eh.    vii.    36 — 105)   was  ob- 

at   I'aris   of  the  ninth  ci'iiluty,  T  tained  from  the  lyibliotli^qiic  Coiii- 

at 'I'urin  is  of  the  thirteenlh,  1 )  al  iiiiiiiah'    at    Amiens    (10),    and    a 

Dresden   of  the  fiflei'Uth,  all   col-  transeri])l  of  the  same  passage  was 

lated   afresh    for    ox    l»y   I'ritzschc  made  from  a  manuscript  in  Spain 

[Lifni  Apocry/>lii  V.   '/'.  iSyr,  i)p.  hyj-  I'almer,  i'rof(;ssor  of  Arabic 

xxvii.   xxviii.).     Mr  K.  L.   i'.ensly  at  Cand)ridge  (iHo-i    -I9),anddis- 

also    collated    S    for    his   A/tssinic  covered  in  1H77  among  his  j.ijiers 

Eracrnwni   of  the  fourth    Iwok   of  at  S.  John's  College. 
J:'s(/r<is{iHj^).  'rhisyI//,v,v///^'-/'>vrj,'-- 

s.  4 


50    Sect.  II.]     AiitJwrized   Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

hcmoth  Junius,  Bishops'  margin,  Syriac  and  ^thiopic  in  Fritzsche) ;  vii. 
30  (yV/i/Zf/Zi- Vulg.  Junius,  Coverdale,  Bishops' :  iniciis  Fritzsche's  STD); 
37  {Achaz  Vulg.,  Achas  TD,   Coverdale,  Bishops' :  Hacan  Junius,  jDW 
Josh.   vii.   I,   &c.;  IIDr  Josh.  vii.    26);    52   {tardc  Vulg.,    considerate 
Junius,  fatunt  Coverdale,  Bishops':  but  caste  SD);  53  [sccuritas  Vulg. 
]\xnms:  freedom  Coverdale,  Bishops'  ["Or,  j-a/t'/y "  Bishops'  margin]: 
saturitas    Fritzsche's    SD);    69    {cnrati...co7itention2H)i    Vulg.   Junius, 
Coverdale,  Bishops':  creali...contemptionuvi  Fritzsche's  STD);  viii.   8 
{(juomodo   Vulg.,     like  as    Coverdale:   but    gziafido   Junius,    qiioniam 
Fritzsche's   STD,  when  Bishops') ;  ix.  9  {niiserebiintiir  Vulg.  Junius, 
Bishops';  be  in  carefulness  Qo\tx^Si\&'.  juirahuntur  Y  x\\.z%c^€  ^  STD); 
17 — 19   {qtioniam  teinpiis   erat... mores  eoriim.     The  whole  passage  is 
hopelessly   corrupt,    and  no  English  version  affords  even  a  tolerable 
sense.     In   ver.    19    Coverdale   reads   creator  with  Vulg.,  mense  with 
Fritzsche's  TD  :  creator um  {KTiadevTCJi/)  seems  a  conjecture,  adopted  by 
the  Bishops'  version  and  our  own  :  our  margin  reads  messe,  and  so  pro- 
bably the  text  and  Bishops'  seed:  the  Syriac  must  have  read  mensd) ; 
xii.  42  [poptilis  Vulg.  Junius,  Coverdale,  Bishops' :  prophetis  Fritzsche's 
SD) ;  xiii.  2,13  (Junius  stands  alone  :  see  above,  p.  44) ;  3  {jnillibiis\\x\g. 
Junius,  Bishops' :  mibibus   Fritzsche's    SD,    Coverdale)  ;  20  {in  hiinc 
Vulg.,  in  himc diem  Junius:  but  /«  here  Fritzsche's  D,  the  Syriac  and 
yEthiopic,  in  hac  ST,  in  these  Coverdale,  ijito  these  Bishops',  set  in  their 
substitute  for  italic  type) ;  45  (the  margin  is  only  a  bold  guess  of  Junius^); 
xiv.  44  (904  Fritzsche's  STD:  he  himself  reads  94  from  the  versions); 
47  {fliimcn  all  authorities.     Perhaps  htmen  is  conjectural);  xv.  36  (text 
as  siiffraginem  S,  siiffragmen  D,  fragmen  T  :  avertam  Junius  :  but  siib- 
stramen  Vulg.,  litter  Coverdale,  Bishops') ;  43  (text  exterrent  Coverdale, 
Bishops' :  but  margin  cxterent  Vulg.  Junius) ;  46  {concors  in  spe?n  Vulg. 
Junius  [Coverdale,  Bishops'] :  consors  specie  or  iji  j/tr/6' Fritzsche's  SD); 
xvi.   68  (very  perplexing :  fede  the  ydle  with  Idols  Coverdale :  cibabimt 
idolis  occisos  Vulg.,  shall  slay  yoii  for  meat  to  the  idols  Bishops'.  Fritzsche 
notes  no  variation  of  his  manuscripts).  Three  like  marginal 

notes  (the  first  two  of  importance),  due  to  the  Bible  of  1762,  maybe 
conveniently  added  in  this  place.  2  Esdr.  xii.  32  {venius  Vulg.  Cover- 
dale,  Bishops';  Spiritus  Junius:  Unctus  Fritzsche's  STD);  xiv.  9 
{consilio  Vulg.  Junius,  Coverdale,  Bishops' :  flio  Fritzsche's  STD) ; 
xvi.  46  (/«  captivitatcm  Junius,  but  the  margin  hardly  rests  on  his  sole 
authority). 

^  "Etsi   quid   si  corrupte  est       nice.     Docti  viderint."    Junius  in 
Eretz  Ararat,  id  est,  regio  Arme-       loco. 


Marginal  notes  afid  original  texts.  51 

TOBIT  i.  2  {Kvpiws  Cod.  248.  Compl. :  Ki/St'ws  Aid.  Rom.) ;  5 
(Sura/xei  248.  Compl,:  5a/xd\ei  Aid.  Rom.,  but  Bahall  deo  Junius); 
7  {' Aapwi'  Compl.  Aid.  :  Aefi  Rom.);  14  {kv  dypo7s  ttjs  'Mr]8eLas  Aid.,  iy 
'Fayols  t^j  Mt/S.  Rom.,  in  Rages  civitatem  Medonim  Vulg.  See  Ap- 
pendix A);  17  (errt  ToO  reixoi'^  Compl.  Aid.:  0  7r/<ra;  toO  r.  Rom.);  ii.  10 
(arpovdia  LXX.,  hinindints  Vulg.,  whom  Coverdale  and  the  Bishops' 
follow  closely  throughout  Tobit);  vii.  17  (aTreSe^aro  LXX.:  direpjop- 
^UTo  two  Old  Latin  manuscripts  in  Parsons) ;  ix.  6  (Vulg.  rather  favours 
the  daring  conjecture  of  Junius) ;  xi.  18  (the  margin  is  only  another  guess 
of  Junius^);  xiii.  10  {evcppavrj  Compl.  Aid.,  evcppuvai  Rom.);  xiv.  5  (ety 
irdaas  rets  7€;'eas  tou  aliSwos  Compl.  Aid.  Junius :  omitted  by  Rom. 
Vulg.);  10  {eTn]^au  Comp.  Aid.  Junius;  iirij^ev  Rom.)^;  11  [edaxpev 
Compl.  Junius  :  €da\pav  Aid.  Rom.).  The  b6ok  of  1762  adds, 

ch.  i.  2,  SIiali)iancscr,  from  the  Old  Latin,  Vulg.  Syriac. 

Judith  iii.  9  andiv.  6  {Esdrelom  refers  to  ch.  i.  8,  where  only  LXX. 
has  that  form) ;  iii.  9  (Acorat'as  LXX.  Junius,  Dothan  Syr. :  but  'loi/Sa/as 
Aid.);  iv.  3  (e/c  tt/s  t'ovSatas  248.  Compl.  Aid.,  but  Rom.  omits  eV-) ; 
V.  14  (opos  248.  Compl.  Aid.  Junius,  ohov  Rom.,  dcscrta  Sina  montis 
Vulg.);  vii.  3  (eTTt  LXX.  Vulg.:  Junius  alone  has  a)\  viii.  i  {I,a/xaT]\ 
Aid.,  Za/Jia\irj\  248.  Compl.,  ZaXayUtTjX  Rom.,  SalatJiicl  Vulg.,  ^aw- 
/«/>/ Junius) ;  22  {(pbvov  Rom.,  (p6(3ov  248.  Compl.  Aid.);  xvi.  i  (Kaivov 
Vulg.,  Roman  edition,  against  Cod.  Vaticanus:  Kal  alvov  248.  Compl. 
Aid.);  13  [naivov  Rom.  with  Cod.  Vaticanus,  Vulg.  Junius:  koL  ahov 
Aid.). 

Esther  xiv.  12  {deC)v  Aid.  Rom.  Vulg.:  iOvQjv  Compl.  Junius); 
XV.  7  {'Tpoiropevop.evrjs  Rom.  Compl.  Junius :  iropevo/jiepTjs  Aid. :  wen^ 
with  her  Coverdale,  Bishops'). 

WiSD.  iii.  14  [yaC^  all  authorities:  cf.  Isai.  Ivi.  5.  Whence  came 
Xay  of  margin?);  v.  11  (StaTrrdi'Tos  Compl.  Aid.,  but  duTrrdpTos  Rom. 
Vulg.  Junius);  I4  (xoi^s  Rom.  Coverdale's  and  Bishops'  margins:  x^ovs 
Compl.  Aid.  Vulg.  Junius,  Coverdale,  Bishops') ;  vii.  9  {tl/j.lou  248. 
Compl.  Vulg.  Junius:  aTifiTjTov  of  margin,  Aid.  Rom.);  15  {deduKev 
Compl.  Aid.  Old  Latin,  Vulg.  Junius :  dc^rj  Rom.) ;  id/d.  {Sedofx^vojv 
Rom.  Junius,  8l8o/x€V(i)v  Compl.  Vulg.,  evdojxevwv  Aid.,  XeyofjLepojp 
Fritzsche,  after  the  Syriac  and  other  versions,  Codd.  Sinaiticus  and 
Alexandrinus) ;  ix.  11  (Sfj/d^et  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops'  only,  for  do^rj); 
XV.  5   {6pe^iu  Comp.  Vulg.  Junius :  oveidos  Aid.    Rom.).     The  text  of 

^  "Hunc  locum  sic  legendum  made  by  Junius  in  ch.  xiv.  10,  with 
suspicor,  'Ax^X^pos  6  Kal  Nicr-  a  reference  to  this  place  {Nitzba 
Pds."  Junius  z>/ /c^cf?.    The  change       for  J/az/aj'j't'j-),  is  quite  gratuitous. 

4—2 


52    Sect.  11.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

this  book  is  far  purer  than  that  of  Ecclesiasticus,  which  is  largely  inter- 
polated through  the  influence  of  the  Complutensian  Polyglott  and  its 
prototype,  Cod.  248. 

EcCLUS.  Prolog.  II.  1.  36  {icpodLov  Grabe,  viatiaun  Junius,  whence 
the  margin:  L^qiiolov  LXX.);  ch.  i.  13  (ci'pTjcret  xapti'  Aid.  Rom.: 
^vXoyrjd-qaeTaL  Compl.  Vulg.  Junius,  Coverdale,  Bishops');  vii.  26 
(fxiaovfjiivri  Compl.  [Aid.  Rom.  have  not  the  line]  Vulg.  &c.  No  trace 
of  "light,"  except  it  be  a  euphemistic  paraphrase);  xiii,  8  {ev^poavurf 
LXX.  Junius:  acppoavvrj  Vulg.  Coverdale  [si'mpkftess],  Bishops');  11 
(^Trexe  LXX.,  des  operam  Junius:  direx^  retincas  Vulg.,  withdrmv 
Coverdale,  Bishops');  xiv.  i  {wXridei  248.  Compl.  Junius:  Xuttt?  Aid. 
Rom.  Vulg.,  conscience  Coverdale,  Bishops');  xix.  12  {KoiXia  LXX. 
Junius:  Kapdig,  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops');  xx.  19  {avd pwwos  axo-pis, 
ixvdos  aKaipos'  both  clauses  are  in  LXX.  &c.);  xxii,  9  [rpocpriv  248. 
Compl.,  rex^w  manuscripts  named  by  Arnald  in  his  elaborate  Critical 
Commentajy  on  the  Apocrypha,  the  only  considerable  one  in  English. 
In  Aid.  Rom.  Vulg.  &c.  ver.  9,  10  are  wanting);  17  [toIxov  ^vcttov  Aid. 
Rom.  with  the  margin:  248.  Compl.  prefix  eTvl,  Vulg.  in.  The  render- 
ing of  ^varov  as  a  noun  is  from  zuinfo-  house  Coverdale,  Bishops',  xysti 
Junius);  xxiii.  22,  23  (aXXov  Compl,  Junius:  aWoTpiov  Aid.  Rom. 
Vulg.,  but  Coverdale  and  the  Bishops'  vary  in  the  two  verses) ;  xxiv.  1 1 
{Tjyair 7} fihrj  Aid.  Rom. :  riyiacrfxevri  24S.  Compl.  Vulg.  Junius,  Cover- 
dale,  Bishops');  14  {ev  aiyia\o?s  Aid.  Rom.:  iv  TaSdt  248.  Compl. 
[Syr.  Junius] :  Cades  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops') ;  xxv.  9  {a^nicum  veru7}i 
Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops':  (ppov-qcjiv  i.XX.  Junius,  Bishops'  margin); 
17  {aiKKov  Aid.  Rom.  Bishops':  d'p/cos  248.  Compl.  Vulg.  Junius,  Co- 
verdale); xxx.  2  {evcppauOrjaeTaL  248.  Compl.  Junius,  Coverdale,  Bishops': 
dv^aeraL  Aid.  Rom.);  xxxiv.  18  [dtopT^fMaTa  248.  Compl.  Junius,  fiojfj.r]- 
fxara  Aid.,  /nwKri/jiaTa  Rom.  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops');  xxxvi.  14  (apai 
TO.  'koyia  aov  Compl.  Aid.  Junius,  dpeToKo-ylas  crov  Codd.  Sinaiticus, 
Alexandrinus,  Vaticanus  [cf.  Field,  LXX.  Collatio,  p.  204],  incrrabili- 
biis  verbis  tuis  Vulg.,  thine  unspeakable  virtues  Coverdale,  Bishops') ; 
15  {rrpocpTjTas  248.  Compl.  Vulg.  Junius:  Trpocp-qTelas  Aid.  Rom.  Cover- 
dale,  Bishops');  17  {oiKerQiu  Compl.  Vulg.  Syriac,  Junius,  Coverdale, 
Bishops':  keruSf  Aid.  Rom.);  xxxvii.  20  (rpocpris  Aid.  Rom.,  7-e  Vulg. 
Coverdale,  Bishops' :  (rocplas  248.  Compl.  Junius) ;  26  {do^av  248.  Compl. 
Vulg.  Junius:    iriaTLv   Aid.    Rom.    Coverdale^,    Bishops');    xxxviii.   2 

^  It  is  worthy  of  notice  how  much   on  the  Latin  Vulgate,  fol- 

Coverdale    (1535),   whose  version  lows  Aldus  in  preference  in  these 

of  the    Apocrypha  was    the   first  readings, 
printed  in  English,  though  leaning 


Marginal  jiotes  and  original  texts.  53 

(rifji-^v  248.  Compl.  Junius :  86/xa  Aid.  Rom.  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops'); 
22  {fxov  248.  Compl.  Vulg.,  /;/?  Junius:  avrov  Aid.  Rom,  Coverdale, 
Bishops');  xxxix.  13  {aL-)pod  Aid.  Rom.  Coverdale,  Bishops':  1)7/301! 
248.  Compl.  [Vulg,]  Junius) ;  xlii.  8  [irepl  TTopveias  of  the  margin  is  found 
in  no  edition  or  version,  and  in  only  three  unimportant  manuscripts) ; 
18  [Kvpios  Aid.  Rom.  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops':  v\pLffTos  248.  Compl. 
Junius);  xliii.  5  {Kariwavae  248.  Compl.  only,  for  Karecnrevcre);  xliv.  r2 
(5t  a\)Toi)%  Rom.  and  all  others,  except  /^er'  avrovs  Compl.  Aid.  Junius); 
xlvii.  3  {^irai^ev  A\d.,  lusit  Yn\g.  Coverdale,  Bishops':  eire^evu^aev  248. 
Compl.,  w^hence  peregrimis  convcrsatus  est  Junius:  ^iro.iaei'  Rom.);  11 
(jSacTiX^wj' Aid,  Rom,:  ^aaCkelas  248.  Compl.  Vulg,  Junius,  Coverdale, 
Bishops');  xlviii.  11  {KeKoifirj/uLeuoi  248.  Compl.  Junius:  KeKoap^ri/xevoi 
Aid.  Rom.  Vulg,  Coverdale,  Bishops');  xlix.  9  {KaTU},.6ioa€  248.  Compl., 
corrcxit  Junius :  o.-ya.QQi<yai  Aid.  Rom.  Coverdale,  Bishops'). 

Add  a  various  reading  of  1762;  ch.  xlviii,  8  [thee  Vulg.  Junius, 
Bishops':  avrov  LXX.  Coverdale).  In  ch.  li.  ii  /cat  of  the  Greek  is 
rendered  by  Junius  quod:  hence  because  1762  marg. 

Baruch  i.  5  {rjvxovTo  Rom.  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops' :  but  Compl. 
Aid.  Junius  add  euxcts) ;  vi.  61  (^'at  Truevjj.a  of  text  Aid.  Rom.  Vulg., 
but  Compl,  with  margin  omits  /cat), 

Bel  and  Dragon,  ver.  27  (toe  Compl.  Aid.  Vulg.  Junius,  Cover- 
dale,  Bishops':  t'Sere  Rom.  with  margin). 

Prayer  of  Manasses,  line  38  (dVecrts  Cod.  Alexandr.,  but  the  Latin 
version  [which  is  not  Jerome's]  and  Bishops'  Bible  read  respiratio,  i.  q. 
o.va.TTVtvai.'i). 

I  Macc.  i.  I  {x^TTLel/uL  or  -eLclfj.  LXX.,  Chethim  Vulg.,  CetJiim  Co- 
verdale, Bishops',  Chettim  Bishops'  marg.) ;  4  {Tvpawwv  Rom,  Vulg.  Co- 
verdale, Bishops' :  rvpavvLuv  Compl.  Junius,  TvpavvLKUiv  Aid.) ;  ii.  2  (KaSSt's 
Rom.  Junius,  'laSSt's  Compl.,  FaSot's  Aid.  Old  Latin,  Vulg.  Coverdale, 
Bishops') ;  5  [Avapav  Compl.  Rom. ,  'Avapdv  Aid. , Habaran  Junius,  Abaron 
Vulg. Coverdale,  Bishops');  66 (TroXe/U^cretRom.Vulg. Coverdale, Bishops': 
TToKepLrjcreTe  Compl.  Aid.  Junius);  iii.  29  {cpopoi.  Codd.  vSinaiticus  and 
Alexandrinus,  Old  Latin,  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops':  (popoXoyoL  Compl. 
Aid.  Rom.  Junius);  41  (Tratoas  LXX.:  -rredas  Josephus,  AuL  XII.  7,  3 
and  Syriac);  v.  3  {'AKpa^aTrbriv  Compl.  Aid.  Rom,  Junius,  Aj-abathattc 
Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops');  26  (BoVcropa  Aid.,  Codd.  Alexandrinus  and 
Vaticanus:  Bo'cro/ja  Cod.  Sinaiticus  with  161 1 :  Bocroppa  Compl.,  Abosor 
Vulg.,  Barasa  Coverdale,  Bishops') ;  ibid.  {Xaacpup  Rom.  Vulg.  Cover- 
dale:  XaaKOjp  Compl.  Aid.,  Casbon  Bishops'.  In  ver.  36,  as  the 
margin  of  1762  notes,  Xa<T<puv  is  read  by  Compl.  Aid.   Rom.,  but 


54    S^ct.  II.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

Chasbon  by  Vulg.,  Cashon  by  Coverdale,  Bishops');  28  {^'oaoppa. 
Compl.  Aid. ,  Boo-op  Rom.  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops');  vi.  38  (0aXa7^£j' 
Old  Latin,  Vulg.  Syriac,  Junius,  Coverdale,  Bishops':  0a'pa7^ti' Compl. 
Aid.  Rom.);  vii.  31  {Xa(f)apcraXa/xa  Rom.  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops': 
Kacpapadpafia  Compl.  Aid.,  Capharsama  Old  Latin,  Carphasalama 
Bishops'  margin);  ix.  1  {Galilca  is  a  mere  guess  of  Drusius,  according 
to  Cotton) ;  9  (much  confusion  exists  in  Compl.  Aid.  which  read  dXX' 
77  au^cofxev  ras  eavrwp  i/^uxas.  to  vvv  eirlcXTpe-ipov.  Kal  ol  dde\(pol  rjfiwv 
aireppvrjaav,  koI  irdKeiirjcroixev...  which  Junius  follows:  this  virtually 
agrees  with  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops'.  Our  version  justly  professes  to 
follow  Rom.  dXX'  7}  (Xii^cofJiev  ras  eavri^v  \pvxois  ro  vvv,  /cat  eiTLffTpeypwfxev 
fxera  [ad  Vulg.  &c.]  ruiv  dSeXcpcov  rj/uLuv  kuI  TroXe/^r/a'aj/iej'...);  37  (Na- 
8a^a9  Aid.  Rom.,  Na/3a5d^  Compl.,  Madaba  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops', 
Medeba  ^\VM.y\%)\  dd  {'Odoinrjpa  Compl.  Aid.,  'Odoaapprjv  Rom.,  Odaren 
Vulg.  Coverdale,  Odonieras  Bishops'  text,  Odareb  margin.  Odonarkes 
has  absolutely  no  authority,  as  Canon  Westcott  notices) ;  xi.  63  (x'^pas 
Compl.  Aid.  Bishops' :  xpf''<^^  Rom.  Old  Latin,  Vulg. :  frof?i  meddling 
in  the  realm  Coverdale) ;  xii.  37  (^Trecre  Aid.  Old  Latin,  Vulg.  Cover- 
dale,  Bishops':  rf^^ice  Compl.  Rom.  Junius):  xiv.  9  {de  bonis  term 
Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops'  only:  Trepl  dya^cSi' LXX.);  34  {Gaza  Cover- 
dale,  Bishops'  only:  Gazaris  Bishops'  margin) ;  xv.  22  {'ApLapddT]  Rom. 
Junius,  ^ApdOr]  Compl.  Aid.,  Arabe  Vulg.,  Araba  Coverdale,  Bishops'); 
23  {1,aiJi.\pdfji.ri  Compl.  Rom.  Vulg.,  Samsanes  Coverdale,  Samsames 
Bishops',  (ja.p.^dKr\  Aid.  See  ten  lines  below,  1762);  ibid,  {t^v  BacnXei- 
8av  Cod.  Alexandrinus  only). 

The  Cambridge  Bible  of  1638,  which  very  seldom  adds  to  the  mar- 
ginal notes,  in  this  book  cites  ch.  iv.  15  'Aaaaprjfxud,  the  reading  of 
Compl.  Aid.,  and  ch.  ix.  36  'Ap.j3pl  of  Compl.  The  Bible  of  1762  adds 
(besides  two  rectifications  of  dates)  ch.  iv.  24  {bomis  Vulg.  Junius,  Co- 
verdale, Bishops');  v.  13  {TwjSiov  Rom.,  tou /3tou  Compl.  Aid.,  Ttibin 
Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops');  xiv.  22  (rats  jSovXais  LXX.  Vulg.  Cover- 
dale,  TOis  jSi/SXtois  one  unimportant  Greek  manuscript,  /?7;m  Junius, 
public  records  Bishops');  xv.  23  {Lampsactis  1vixi\\x%,  adding  "sic  placuit 
legere  ex  conjectura.");  39  [Gedor,  a  like  conjecture  of  Junius,  approved 
by  Grotius  and  Dr  Paris). 

2  Macc.  iii.  24  {irvujv  [i.q.  irveviidTiov]  omitting  Kvpios,  Compl.  Syr. 
Junius :  Spirittis  omnipotentis  Dei  Vulg.  Coverdale,  Bishops' :  ivpiav 
[i.  q.  ■Ko.Tepwv'X  Aid.  Rom.);  iv.  40  (Avpdvou  Cod.  Alexandrinus,  Compl. 
Junius:  ^vpdvvov  Aid.  Rom.  Vulg.,  "tyrant"  Coverdale,  Bishops'); 
vi.  I  ^AQtivoXov  LXX.  Bishops'  margin :  Antiocheniuti  Old  Latin,  Vulg. 


Marginal  notes  and  original  texts.  55 

Junius,  Coverdale,  Bishops');  ix.  15  (Junius  stands  alone  here  in  ren- 
dering Antiochenis)  \  xi.  i\  {ALocxKopti'diov  LXX.  Junius,  Coverdale, 
Bishops':  Diosco?-i  Old  Latin,  Vulg.  Syriac);  34  [avdviraToi,  if  that 
word  be  meant  in  the  margin,  has  no  authority :  these  men  were  not 
consuls  at  all,  hut  L'gafi  to  overlook  affairs  in  Syria) ;  xii.  12  (if  the 
margin  represents  a  various  reading,  no  trace  of  it  remains);  39  {rpoirov 
[Aid.]  Rom. :  ■xpovov  Cod.  Alexandrinus,  Compl.  Junius :  but  Vulg. 
Coverdale,  Bishops'  omit  both  words);  xiii.  14  (KrtVry  Compl.  Rom. 
Vulg. :  Kvpiu}  Aid.  with  three  manuscripts  only). 

The  Bible  of  1762  notes  one  various  reading :  ch.  xii.  36  {Vopyiav 
Aid.,  five  manuscripts,  Coverdale,  Bishops'  text  :  "Eadpiv  all  other 
Greek,  Vulg.  Syriac,  Junius,  Bishops'  margin). 

To  these  156  various  readings  indicated  by  the  Trans- 
lators of  161 1  in  the  Apocrypha  we  must  add  138  marginal 
notes,  which  express  the  exact  meaning  of  the  Greek,  and 
three  of  the  Latin  of  2  Esdras.  In  505  places  varied, 
renderings  are  alleged  (the  word  ""Or"  being  prefixed  to 
them),  many  taken  from  Junius  (besides  those  where  he 
is  expressly  named,  p.  46),  from  the  Bishops'  Bible  and 
other  Old  English  versions.  In  174  places  (167  of  them 
in  I  Esdras)  alternative  forms  of  Proper  Names  are  given 
for  the  reader's  guidance,  to  which  must  be  added  42  notes 
containing  more  or  less  useful  information.  Hence  the  sum 
total  of  the  notes  due  to  the  original  Translators  in  the 
Apocrypha  appears  to  be  10 18.  Besides  these,  two  were 
annexed  in  the  Cambridge  Bible  of  1638  (see  above,  p.  54), 
18  in  that  of  1762,  one  (Tobit  iv.  20)  in  1769,  in  all  21. 
To  these  might  very  well  be  added,  set  within  brackets,  at 
Ecclus.  xviii.  30;  xx.  27;  xxiii.  7,  summaries  of  contents, 
extracted  from  the  best  Manuscripts,  resting  on  authority 
quite  as  good  and  nearly  identical  with  any  in  favour  of 
those  inserted  by  the  Authorized  version  in  Ecclus.  xxiv.  i ; 
xxx.  I,  14;  xxxiii.  24;  xxxiv.  i;  xii  v.  i;  li.  i. 

We  come  at  length  to  the  New  Testament,  the  marginal 


56    Serf.  11.^     Authorized   Version  of  the  Bible  (161 1). 

annotations  on  which  in  the  first  edition  amount  to  767, 
so  that  together  with  the  6637  in  the  Old  Testament,  and 
the  10 1 8  in  the  Apocrypha,  the  number  in  the  whole  Bible 
is  no  less  than  8422.  Of  the  767  in  the  New  Testament 
37  relate  to  various  readings,  and  will  be  detailed  presently 
(p.  58);  112  supply  us  with  a  more  literal  rendering  of 
the  Greek  than  was  judged  suitable  for  the  text;  no  less 
than  582  are  alternative  translations,  35  are  explanatory 
notes  or  brief  expositions.  Of  later  notes,  the  Bible  of  1762 
added  96,  that  of  1769  no  more  than  nine.  Taking  in 
therefore  the  368  noted  in  the  Old  Testament  (p.  45), 
and  the  21  in  the  Apocrypha,  these  additional  marginal 
annotations  amount  in  all  to  494,  few  of  them  of  any  great 
value,  some  even  marvellously  trifling,  but  all  of  them 
ought  in  editions  of  the  Bible  to  be  readily  distinguished 
from  the  work  of  the  original  Translators  by  being  placed 
within  brackets.  Those  who  shall  look  almost  at  random 
into  the  multitude  of  Bibles  published  between  1638  and 
1762  (a  branch  of  enquiry  which  our  plan  does  not  lead  to 
the  necessity  of  examining  very  minutely),  will  probably 
find  the  germ  of  some  of  these  later  notes  in  Bibles  of  that 
period,  put  forth  as  it  were  tentatively,  and  withdrawn  in 
later  copies.  Thus  the  later  margins  of  Matt,  xxviii.  19 
(slightly  altered  in  1683,  1701)  and  of  Acts  xiv.  21,  first 
appeared  in  Field's  Bible  of  1660,  then  in  the  Cambridge 
edition  of  1683.  To  the  same  Bibles  may  be  traced  the 
notes  on  Matt.  x.  25;  xiv.  6;  xxi.  19;  xxii.  26.  Mark  xi. 
17.  Luke  xxii.  42.  Acts  vii.  44;  viii.  13.  i  Cor.  vii.  32. 
2  Cor.  viii.  2;  x.  10.  James  iii.  6.  2  John  3.  The  Cam- 
bridge Bible  of  1683  first  gave  those  on  Matt.  i.  20. 
Mark  iii.  3;  vii.  22.  Luke  vii.  8;  xi.  36;  xviii.  2;  xxi.  8. 
Acts  ix.  2;  XV.  5;  xvii.  3;  xviii.  5.  i  Cor.  vii.  16.  Eph.  ii. 
5;  vi.  12.  I  Tim.  iii.  16.  2  T\u\.  postscript.  Heb.  x.  34; 
xii.  10.     James  iv.  2.     2  Peter  i.  i,  8:  many  of  which  were 


Marginal  notes  and  original  texts.  57 

obviously  the  work  of  the  same  mind.  Two  more  appear 
in  Lloyd's  Bible  of  1701,  i  Cor.  xii.  5.  Heb.  i.  6'.  These 
38  notes  at  least  must  accordingly  be  deducted  from  the  96 
imputed  to  ])r  Paris,  and  they  are  among  the  best  of  this 
class.  After  having  been  swept  away  from  the  ordinary 
Bibles  whereof  ours  of  1743 — 4  is  a  type,  he  brought  them 
back  again  into  their  former  places. 

As  Tremellius  had  special  influence  with  the  revisers  of 
the  Old  Testament,  and  Junius  with  those  of  the  Apocrypha, 
so  Bezahad  considerable  weight  with  those  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament. Some  of  their  worst  marginal  renderings  come  from 
his  Latin  version,  such  as  Mark  i.  34.  Luke  iv.  41.  Acts  i. 
8.  Rom.  xi.  17.  I  Cor.  iv.  9,  though  this  last  belongs  to 
1762.  The  earlier  versions  also  often  gave  rise  to  the 
margin.  Thus  2  Cor.  v.  1 7  is  alleged  to  this  effect  by  Bp. 
Turton",  where  the  Genevan  Bible  of  1560  led  the  Trans- 
lators to  insert  a  note  in  opposition  to  their  own  judgment, 
fortified  as  it  was  by  Beza,  and  all  the  English  translations 
save  that  one.  Particular  attention  was  naturally  paid  to 
the  Bishops'  Bible,  which  was  the  basis  of  the  Authorized. 
Sometimes  its  renderings  both  in  text  and  margin  are  re- 
tained unchanged,  e.g.  2  Cor.  viii.  22  :  or  the  margin  alone 
is  kept,  after  the  text  is  changed,  e.g.  Heb.  xii.  2:  or  the 
Bishops'  rendering,  although  removed  from  the  text  where 
it  once  stood,  is  retained  for  a  margin,  e.g.  Gal.  iii.  4. 
Eph.  iv.  I.  2  Thess.  iii.  14.  2  Tim.  iv.  5,  15.  In  that 
primary  passage  Heb.  ii.  16  the  text  and  margin  are  both 
virtually  the   Bishops',  with  their   places   reversed.      It   is 

^  All  these  particulars  (a  little  ing  of  certain  manuscripts  of  the 

revised)  are  derived  from  p.  10  of  Vulgate  a//V/j',i^ra//V?,  seems  due  to 

Professor  Grote's  valuable  Manu-  Scattergood    (see    p.    26),    and    is 

script,  for  which  see  aljove,  p.  23,  suggested  in  that  portion  of  Poll 

note.     He  includes  in  his  list  Acts  Synopsis  of  which  he  is  the  reputed 

xvii.  19,  but  this  is  as  old  as  161  r.  author  (Grote  MS.  p.  41). 
The  note  on  Eph.  ii,  5  '■'■  by  whose  "   Text  of  English  Bible,  p.  71 

gracc'\  taken  from  a  various  read-  note. 


58    Sect.  II.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (161 1). 

needless  to  pursue  this  subject  further,  however  curious 
the  questions  it  suggests,  since,  after  all,  every  rendering 
must  be  judged  upon  its  own  merits,  independently  of  the 
source  from  which  it  was  drawn. 

The  following  marginal  notes  relating  to  various  readings 
occur  in  the  New  Testament  in  the  two  issues  of  161 1. 
They  are  nearly  all  derived  from  Beza's  text  or  notes. 

S.  Matt.  i.  ii;  vii.  14;  ix.  26  (perhaps  avTov  of  Codex  Bezae  [D] 
is  represented  in  the  text:  "the  fame  of  this"  Bishops');  xxiv.  31; 
xxvi.  26.  S.  Mark  ix.  16  (avrovs  Beza  1565,  afterwards  changed  by 
him  to  avTovs).  S.  LuKE  ii.  38;  x,  22  (the  words  in  the  margin  are 
from  the  Comphitensian  edition  and  Stephen's  of  1550);  xvii.  36. 
S.  John  xviii.  13  (the  words  of  this  margin,  except  the  reference 
to  ver.  24,  are  copied  from  the  text  of  the  Bishops'  Bible,  where 
they  are  printed  in.  the- old  substitut:e  for  itialic  type).^  Acts  xiii.  i8; 
XXV.  6.  Rom.  v.  17;  vii,  6;;  viii..  11.  i  Cor.  xv.  31 2.  2  Cor. 
xiii.  4^.  Gal.  iv.  15  (uM  Vulg.  text.,  tls  marg.  with  Greek),  idid.  17 
{u/xds  Compl.  Erasm.  Steph.  Beza  1565,  rj/ias  Beza  1589,  1598).  EPH. 
vi.  9  {v/jLuip  Kal  ai'Tuv  Compl.).  i  TiM.  iv.  15  (om.  ev  text,  with  Vulg.). 
Heb.  iv.  2  {<TvyK€Kpa/ui.evovs  margin,  with  Compl.  Vulg.);  ix.  2  {ayia  text, 
with  Compl.  Erasm.  Beza:  ayla  marg.  with  Steph.):  see  below,  p.  253; 
xi.  4  (XaXe?  text,  with  Erasm.  Aldus,  Vulg.  English  versions :  XaXetrat 
margin,  Compl.,  Stephen,  Beza'*).  James  ii.  18  (xwpts  text,  Colinaeus 
1534,  Beza's  last  three  editions,  Syr.  Vulg.:  €k  margin,  Compl.  Erasm. 
Stephen,  Beza  1565,  all  previous  English  versions),  i  Pet.  i.  4  {■r]/xas 
Steph.);  ii.  21  {v/xQv  Beza  1565,  not  in  his  later  editions:  this  marginal 

^  It  is  doubtful  whether  even  see  Appendix  E. 
in   the  Bishops'    Bible  the  words  ^  But  as  no  early  edition  reads 

are  designed  to  indicate  a  various  (tvv,  the  margin  may  only  suggest 

reading,  or  are  a  simple  comment  a  different  rendering  for  ip.     Beza 

on   the    passage,    compared    with  says  "Sed  ev  pro  avv  positum  esse 

ver.  24.    There  is  Syriac  and  some  vel  illud  declarat,  quod  in  proximo 

other  though  very  slender  autho-  membro  scriptum  est  ai>v  aury, " 

rity  for  inserting  them,  but  that  of  and  so  he  translates  ctt/n   eo,    iv 

Cyril  alone  would  be  known  to  our  ai'ra;. 

Translators,   who   doubtless   took  ^  Beza's  Latin  is  like  the  Vul- 

them  from   Beza's    Latin   version  gate  "loquitur :"  perhaps  XaXerrat 

(1556).  was  not  regarded  by  him  as  pas- 


2 


For  the  last  three  passages       sive. 


Marginal  notes  and  original  texts.  59 

note  is  also  in  the  Bishops'  Bible).  1  Pet,  ii.  2  [acreXyelaLS  marg. 
CompL);  11  (marg.  as  Vulg.  Great  Bible);  18  {oKlyov  Compl.  Vulg.). 
2  John  8  {elpyacraa-Oe . . .diroXdjSrjTe  marg.  Vulg.).  Rev.  iii.  14  (margin 
as  Compl.,  all  previous  English  versions);  vi.  8  (a i'tw  margin,  -whh 
Compl.  Vulg.  Bishops'  Bible) ;  xiii.  i  {ouofiara  margin,  with  Compl. 
Vulg.  Coverdale) ;  5  (margin  adds  or  prefixes  iroKeixov  to  Troc^trat  of  the 
text,  with  Compl.  Colina^us  1534,  but  not  Erasm.,  Beza,  Vulg.  or 
English  Versions);  xiv.  13  (marg.  dirdpTL  Xiyei  val  to  Ilj/eO/xa  with 
Compl.  Colinoeus);  xvii.  5  (marg.  is  from  Vulg.  and  all  previous  Eng- 
lish versions). 

To  these  37  textual  notes  of  16 ii,  the  edition  of  1762 
added  fifteen,  that  of  1769  one. 

1762.  S.  Matt.  vi.  i;  x.  10;  25;  xii.  27  (+ "Or.  Bechebtil:  and 
so  ver.  24")  now  dropped.  S.  Luke  xxii.  42  (incidentally  excluding 
TrapeveyKc).  ACTSviii.  13.  2  CoR.  x.  10.  JJj£B»ji^  (see  Appendix  E) ; 
1 7  (probably  from  the  Philoxenian  Syriac  version,  then  just  becoming 
known).  James  iv.  2,  revived  from  the  Bible  of  1683  {(pdopeXre  Erasm. 
1519,  Luther,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible,  Geneva  1557,  Bishops', 
but  perhaps  no  manuscript).  2  Pet.  i.  i,  (see  Appendix  E).  2  John  12 
(y/xwi/ Vulg.).  Rev.  xv.  3  (d7^wj' text,  after  Erasm.,  English  versions : 
the  alternative  readings  in  the  margin  being  iduQv  of  Compl.,  which  is 
much  the  best  supported,  and  aldovuv  of  the  Clementine  Vulgate,  of  some 
Vulgate  manuscripts,  and  the  later  Syriac) ;  xxi.  7  (margin  ravra  Compl. 
Vulg.  rightly);  xxii.  19  (marg.  IvXov  for  second  ^L(3Xiov  Compl.  Vulg. 
rightly). 

1769.  S.  Matt.  xii.  24  taken  mutatis  77iutandis  from  the  marginal 
note  of  1762  on  ver.  27. 

In  Appendix  E  has  been  brought  together  all  that  can 
throw  light  on  the  critical  resources  at  the  command  of  our 
Translators  in  the  prosecution  of  their  version  of  the  New 
Testament.  That  these  were  very  scanty  is  sufficiently 
well  known,  and,  if  for  this  cause  only,  a  formal  revision  of 
their  work  has  become  a  matter  of  necessity,  after  the  lapse 
of  so  long  a  period.  None  of  the  most  ancient  Greek 
manuscripts  had  then  been  collated,  and  though  Codex 
Beza  (D)  had  been  for  many  years  deposited  in  England, 
little  use  had  been  made  of  it,  and  that  single  document, 


6o    Sect  //]     Authorized   Vers  to  ?i  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

from  its  very  peculiar  character,  would  have  been  more 
likely  to  mislead  than  to  instruct  in  inexperienced  hands. 
It  would  be  unjust  to  allege  that  the  Translators  failed  to 
take  advantage  of  the  materials  which  were  readily  acces- 
sible, nor  did  they  lack  care  or  discernment  in  the  application 
of  them.  Doubtless  they  rested  mainly  on  the  later  editions 
of  Beza's  Greek  Testament,  whereof  his  fourth  (1589)  was 
somewhat  more  highly  esteemed  than  his  fifth  (1598),  the 
production  of  his  extreme  old  age.  But  besides  these,  the 
Complutensian  Polyglott,  together  with  the  several  editions 
of  Erasmus,  and  Stephen's  of  1550,  were  constantly  resorted 
to.  Out  of  the  252  passages  examined  in  Appendix  E, 
wherein  the  differences  between  the  texts  of  these  books 
is  sufficient  to  affect,  however  slightly,  the  language  of  the 
version,  our  Translators  abide  with  Beza  against  Stephen  in 
113  places,  with  Stephen  against  Beza  in  59,  with  the  Com- 
plutensian, Erasmus,  or  the  Vulgate,  against  both  Stephen 
and  Beza  in  80.  The  influence  of  Beza  is  just  as  per- 
ceptible in  the  cases  of  their  choice  between  the  various 
readings  which  have  been  collected  above  (p.  58)  :  the 
form  approved  by  him  is  set  in  the  text,  the  alternative  is 
mostly  banished  to  the  margin.  On  certain  occasions,  it 
may  be,  the  Translators  yielded  too  much  to  Beza's  some- 
what arbitrary  decisions;  but  they  lived  at  a  time  when  his 
name  was  the  very  highest  among  Reformed  theologians, 
when  means  for  arriving  at  an  independent  judgment  were 
few  and  scattered,  and  when  the  first  principles  of  textual 
criticism  had  yet  to  be  gathered  from  a  long  process  of 
painful  induction.  His  most  obvious  and  glaring  errors 
their  good  sense  easily  enabled  them  to  avoid  (cf  Matt.  i.  23; 
John,  xviii.  20). 


The  Italic  type.  6i 


Section  III. 

On  the  use  of  the  Italic  type  by  the  Tra7islators,  a?id  on  the 
extension  of  their  principles  by  subsequent  editors. 

The  practice  of  indicating  by  a  variation  of  type  such 
words  in  a  translation  of  the  Bible  as  have  no  exact  repre- 
sentatives in  the  original  is  believed  to  have  been  first 
employed  by  Sebastian  Munster  in  his  Latin  version  of  the 
Old  Testament  published  in  1534^  Five  years  later  this  di-i 
versify  of  character  ("a  small  letter  in  the  text"  as  the  editors  ^ 
describe  it)  was  resorted  to  in  the  Great  Bible,  in  order 
to  direct  attention  to  clauses  rendered  from  the  Latin  Vul- 
gate which  are  not  extant  in  the  Hebrew  or  Greek  originals. 
A  good  example  of  its  use  occurs  in  Matt.  xxv.  i  where 
"  {and  the  bride) "  is  added  to  the  end  of  the  verse  from 
the  Old  Latin,  not  from  any  Greek  copy  known  in  that 
age.  As  the  readings  of  the  Vulgate  came  to  be  less 
regarded  or  less  familiar  in  England,  subsequent  translators 
applied  the  smaller  type  to  the  purpose  for  which  Munster 
had  fi.rst  designed  it,  the  rather  as  Theodore  Beza  had  so 
used  it  in  his  Latin  New  Testament  of  1556.  Thus  the 
English  New  Testament  published  at  Geneva  in  1557,  and 
the  Genevan  Bible  of  1560,  "put  to  that  word,  which  lacking 
made  the  sentence  obscure,  but  set  it  in  such  letters,  as  may 
easily  be  discerned  from  the  common  text^"  The  same 
expedient  was  adopted  by  the  translators  of  the  Bishops' 
Bible  (1568,   1572),  somewhat  too  freely  indeed   in  parts. 

^    Bp.    Turton's    Text    of  the  the  italics  which  is  only  not  com- 

English  Bible  Considered  (p.  iii,  plete. 

second  edition).     In   this   branch  '^   To   the  Reader,  p.    2,  N.T. 

of  the  subject  the  Bishop  was  quite  1557. 
at  home,  and  has  given  a  view  of 


62    Sect.  III.\    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

It  is  one  of  the  most  considerable  faults  of  this  not  very 
successful  version,  that  its  authors  assumed  a  liberty  of 
running  into  paraphrase,  the  ill  effects  of  which  this  very 
difference  in  the  type  tended  to  conceal  from  themselves. 
From  these  two  preceding  versions,  then  held  in  the  best 
repute,  the  Geneva  and  the  Bishops'  Bibles,  the  small 
Roman  as  distinguished  from  the  black  letter  (now  and  as 
early  as  the  Bible  of  1612  respectively  represented  by  the 
Italic  and  Roman  type)  was  brought  naturally  enough  into 
the  Bible  of  161 1,  and  forms  a  prominent  feature  of  it, 
whether  for  good  or  ill. 

On  this  last  point,  namely,  the  wisdom  or  convenience 
of  printing  different  words  in  the  same  verse  or  line  in  dif- 
ferent kinds  of  type,  with  a  view  to  the  purpose  explained 
above,  it  is  not  necessary  for  an  editor  of  the  Authorized 
Bible  to  express,  or  even  to  hold,  an  opinion.  Italics,  or 
whatever  corresponds  with  them,  may  possibly  be  dispensed 
with  altogether  (though  in  practice  this  abstinence  will  be 
found  hard  to  maintain) ;  or  they  may  be  reserved  for  certain 
extreme  cases,  where  marked  difference  in  idiom  between 
the  two  languages,  or  else  some  obscurity  or  corruption  of 
the  original  text,  seems  to  forbid  a  strict  and  literal  trans- 
lation. It  is  enough  for  the  present  purpose  to  say  that  our 
existing  version  was  plainly  constructed  on  another  prin- 
ciple. Those  who  made  it  saw  no  objection  to  the  free  use 
of  a  typographical  device  which  custom  had  sanctioned,  and 
would  have  doubtless  given  a  different  turn  to  many  a  sen- 
tence had  they  been  debarred  from  indicating  to  the  un- 
learned what  they  had  felt  obliged  to  add  of  their  own 
to  the  actual  words  of  the  original ;  the  addition  being 
always  either  involved  and  implied  in  the  Hebrew  or  Greek, 
or  at  any  rate  being  so  necessary  to  the  sense  that  the 
English  reader  would  be  perplexed  or  go  wrong  without  it. 
Taking  for  granted,  therefore,  the  right  of  the  Translators 


The  Italic  type.  dT^ 

thus  to  resort  to  the  itahc  type,  and  the  general  propriety  of 
their  mode  of  exercising  it,  the  only  enquiry  now  open  to 
us  is  whether  they  were  uniform,  or  reasonably  consistent, 
in  their  use  of  it. 

And  in  the  face  of  patent  and  well  ascertained  facts  it  is 
impossible  to  answer  such  a  question  in  the  affirmative. 
Undue  haste  and  scarcely  venial  carelessness  on  the  part 
of  the  persons  engaged  in  carrying  through  the  press  the 
issues  of  1 6 II,  which  are  only  too  visible  in  other  matters 
(see  above,  p.  8),  are  nowhere  more  conspicuous  than  with 
regard  to  this  difference  in  the  type.  If  it  be  once  conceded 
that  the  Translators  must  have  intended  to  use  or  refrain 
from  using  italics  in  the  selfsame  manner  in  all  cases  that 
are  absolutely  identical  (and  the  contrary  supposition  would 
be  strange  and  unreasonable  indeed),  their  whole  case  in 
this  matter  must  be  given  up  as  indefensible.  There  is 
really  no  serious  attempt  to  avoid  palpable  inconsistencies 
on  the  same  page,  in  the  same  verse  :  and  those  who  have 
gone  over  this  branch  of  their  work  will  be  aware  that  even 
comparative  uniformity  can  be  secured  only  in  one  way,  by 
the  repeated  comparison  of  the  version  with  the  sacred 
originals,  by  unflagging  attention  so  that  nothing  however 
minute  may  pass  unexamined.  This  close  and  critical  ex- 
amination was  evidently  entered  upon,  with  more  or  less 
good  results,  by  those  who  prepared  the  Cambridge  Bibles  of 
1629  ^^^^  more  especially  of  1638  (for  before  these  appeared 
the  italics  of  161 1,  with  all  their  glaring  faults,  were  reprinted 
without  change^),  and  in  the  next  century  by  Dr  Paris  in 
1762,  by  Dr  Blayney  and  his  friends  in  1769  (see  Appendix 
D).  The  rules  to  be  observed  in  such  researches,  and  the 
principles  on  which  they  are  grounded,  must  be  gathered 

^  There   may  be  more  altera-       not   in   later   Bibles  before   1629 
tions,  but  we  can  name  only  Gal.        (Cambridge). 
i.  3,  "<^^"  italicised  in  1613,  but 


64    Sect.  III?\   Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

from  the  study  of  the  standard  of  161 1,  exclusively  of  sub- 
sequent changes,  regard  being  paid  to  what  its  authors  in- 
tended, rather  than  to  their  actual  practice. 

The  cases  in  which  the  italic  character  has  been  em- 
ployed by  the  Translators  of  our  Authorized  Bible  may 
probably  be  brought  under  the  following  heads  : — 

(i)  When  words  quite  or  nearly  necessary  to  complete 
the  sense  of  the  sacred  writers  have  been  introduced  into  the 
text  from  parallel  places  of  Scripture.  Six  such  instances 
occur  in  the  second  book  of  Samuel : 

ch.  V.  8.  "And  David  said  on  that  day,  Whosoever  getteth  up 
to  the  gutter,  and  smiteth  the  Jebusites,  and  the  lame  and  the  blind, 
that  are  hated  of  David's  soul,  he  shall  be  chief  and  captain.''''  The  last 
clause  is  supplied  from  i  Chr.  xi.  6. 

ch.  vi.  6.  "  And  when  they  came  to  Nachon's  threshing-floor, 
Uzzah  put  forth  his  hand  to  the  ark  of  God."  Rather  "/^zV  hand''^ 
(as  in  1638)  from  i  Chr.  xiii.  9. 

ch.  viii.  4.  "  And  David  took  from  him  a  thousand  chariots,  and 
seven  hundred  horsemen,  and  twenty  thousand  footmen."  We  derive 
^'chariots"  from  i  Chr.  xviii.  4. 

ibid.  18.  "And  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  was  over  both  the 
Cherethites  and  the  Pelethites"  {tuas  over  1629).  In  i  Chr.  xviii.  17 
"was  over"  (1611). 

ch.  xxi.  19.  "  ...slew  the  brother  ^_/ Goliath  the  Gittite."  In  i  Chr. 
XX.  5  we  read  "  slew  I.ahmi  the  brother  of  Goliath  the  Gittite." 

ch.  xxiii.  8.  "the  same  was  Adino  the  Eznite :  he  lift  iip  his 
spear  against  eight  hundred,  whom  he  slew  at  one  time."  i  Chr.  xi.  11 
supplies  "he  lift  up,  &c." 

Thus  Num.  xx.  26  is  filled  up  from  ver.  24;  Judg.  ii.  3 
from  Num.  xxxiii.  55  or  Josh,  xxiii.  13;  i  Kin.  ix.  8  from 
2  Chr.  vii.  21  ;  2  Kin.  xxv.  3  from  Jer.  xxxix.  2  and  lii.  6; 
I  Chr.  ix.  41  from  ch.  viii.  35;  i  Chr.  xvii.  25  from  2  Sam. 
vii.  27  ;  I  Chr.  xviii.  6  from  2  Sam.  viii.  6;  2  Chr.  xxv.  24 
from  2  Kin.  xiv.  14;  Ezra  ii.  6,  59  from  Neh.  vii.  ji,  61.  In 
the  Bible  of  1638  Jer.  vi.  14  "-^  of  the  daughter^'  is  italicised, 
as  taken  into  the  text  fromch.  viii.  11.    This  is  the  simplest 


The  Italic  type.  65 


case,  for  the  words  supplied  in  italics  are  doubtless  lost  in 
the  one  ancient  text,  while  they  are  preserved  in  the  other. 

(2)  When  the  extreme  compactness  of  the  Hebrew 
language  produces  a  form  of  expression  intelligible  enough 
to  those  who  are  well  versed  in  it,  yet  hardly  capable  of 
being  transformed  into  a  modern  tongue.  One  or  two  of 
Bp.  Turton's  {Text,  &c.  pp.  50,  51)  examples  will  illustrate 
our  meaning : 

Gen.  xiii.  9.  •'  Separate  thyself,  I  pray  thee,  from  me:  if  the  left 
hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  right;  or  if  the  right  hand,  then  I  will 
go  to  the  left." 

Ex.  xiv.  20.  "And  it  was  a  cloud  and  darkness,  but  it  gave 
light  by  night." 

Every  one  must  feel  that  something  is  wanting  to  render 
these  verses  perspicuous  ;  the  latter  indeed  we  should  hardly 
understand,  without  looking  closely  to  the  context.  It  seems 
quite  right,  therefore,  that  supplementary  words  should  be 
inserted  in  such  places,  and  equally  fit  that  they  should  be 
indicated  by  some  contrivance  which  may  shew  that  they 
form  no  part  of  the  Hebrew  original.  In  our  version  ac- 
cordingly the  verses  stand  as  follows,  except  that,  in  the 
former,  "thou"  (twice  over)  was  not  in  italics  before  1629; 
italicise  also  the  second  "  to  "  : 

"If  thoic  wilt  take  the  left  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  right; 
or  '\ithou  depart  to  the  right  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the  left." 

**It  was  a  cloud  and  darkness  to  them,  but  it  gave  light  by  night 
to  these.'''' 

To  this  class  we  may  most  conveniently  refer  the  nume- 
rous cases  wherein  what  grammarians  call  the  apodosis  (that 
is,  the  consequence  resulting  from  a  supposed  act  or  con- 
dition) is  implied  rather  than  stated,  yet  in  English  requires 
something  to  be  expressed  more  or  less  fully  :  such  are  the 
following  texts : 

Gen.  XXX.  27.     "  If  I  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes,  tarry.'''' 

s.  5 


66   Sect.  III.']    AidJiorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

1  Chr.  ii.  3.  "As  thou  didst  deal  with  David  my  father,  and  didst 
send  him  cedars... ^^^;/  so  deal  zuith  j?ie.^' 

Dan.  iii.  15.  "If  ye  be  ready  that  at  what  time  ye  hear  the 
sound  of  the  cornet,... ye  fall  down  and  worship  the  image  which  I  have 
made,  tcv//." 

Luke  xiii.  9.     "  And  if  it  bear  fruit,  well.'''' 

Occasionally  our  Translators,  with  happy  boldness,  have 
suppressed  the  apodosis  entirely,  as  in  the  original  (Ex.  xxxii. 
32 ;  Luke  xix.  42).  In  some  few  passages  the  seeming 
necessity  for  such  insertion  arises  from  a  misunderstanding 
either  of  the  sense  or  the  construction  :  such  is  probably  the 
case  in  Neh.  iv.  12,  and  unquestionably  so  in  Matt.  xv.  6; 
Mark  vii.  1 1. 

(3)  Just  as  little  objection  will  probably  be  urged 
against  the  custom  of  our  Translators  in  italicising  words 
supplied  to  clear  up  the  use  of  the  grammatical  figure 
known  as  the  zeiig??ia,  whereby,  in  the  Hebrew  no  less  than 
in  the  Greek  and  Latin  languages,  an  expression  which 
strictly  belongs  to  but  one  member  of  a  sentence,  with 
some  violation  of  strict  propriety,  is  made  to  do  duty  in 
another. 

Gen.  iv.  20.  "  And  Adah  bare  Jabal :  he  was  the  father  of  such 
as  dwell  in  tents,  and  cattle."     Supply,  ^^  of  such  as  have  cattle." 

Ex.  iii.  16.  "I  have  surely  visited  you,  and  that  which  is  done 
to  you  in  Egypt."  Our  version  here,  with  less  necessity,  inserts  ^^  seen  " 
after  "and." 

Ex.  XX.  18.  "And  all  the  people  saw  the  thunderings,  and  the 
lightnings,  and  the  noise  of  the  trumpet,  and  the  mountain  smoking." 
Here  the  order  of  the  clauses  renders  it  impossible  to  supply  any  smgle 
word  which  would  not  increase  the  awkwardness  of  the  sentence:  the 
passage  is  accordingly  left  as  it  stands  in  the  original.  Not  so  the 
sharper  language  of  the  parallel  place: 

Deut.  iv.  12.  "Ye  heard  the  voice  of  the  words,  but  saw  no  simili- 
tude, only  a  voice."     After  "only"  insert  with  161 1  ^^ ye  heard.'''' 

1  Kin.  xi.  12  (so  2  Chr.  xxiii.  11).  "And  he  brought  forth  the 
king's  son,  and  put  the  crown  upon  him,  and  the  Testimony."  Insert 
^'■gave  hijii'''  before  "the  Testimony." 


The  Italic  type.  67 


Luke  i.  64.  "And  his  mouth  was  opened  immediately,  and  his 
tongue,"  add  ^^ loosed. ^^ 

I  Cor.  xiv.  34.  "It  is  not  permitted  unto  them  to  speak,  but  to  be 
under  obedience."  After  "but"  insert  ^U/icy  are  co/n>/iauded.'"  So  ^'and 
comviauding^^  before  "  to  abstain "  in  the  exactly  parallel  passage, 
I  Tim.  iv.  3. 

The  following  examples,  taken  from  the  Apocrypha, 
have  been  neglected  by  all  editors  up  to  the  present  date : 

2  Esdr.  ix.  24.  "Taste  no  flesh,  drink  no  wine,  but  eat  flowers 
only." 

xii.  17.  "As  for  the  voice  which  thou  heardest  speak,  and  that 
thoti  sawest  not  to  go  out  from  the  heads."  This  rendering,  taken  from 
the  Coverdale  and  Bishops'  Bible,  is  possibly  incorrect. 

Ecclus.  li.  3.  "According  to  the  multitude  of  thy  mercies  and 
greatness  of  thy  name." 

(4)  Akin  to  the  preceding  is  the  practice  of  inserting 
in  the  Authorized  Version  a  word  or  two,  in  order  to  indicate 
that  abrupt  transition  from  the  oblique  to  the  direct  form  of 
speech,  which  is  so  familiar  to  most  ancient  languages,  but 
so  foreign  to  our  own : 

Gen.  iv.  25.  "And  she  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Seth :  for 
God,  said  she,  hath  appointed  me  another  seed  instead  of  Abel, " 

Ex.  xviii.  4.  "And  the  name  of  the  other  %vas  Eliezer ;  for  the  God 
of  my  Father,  said  he.,  zuas  mine  help." 

1  Sam.  ix.  11.  "As  for  Mephibosheth,  said  the  king,  he  shall  eat 
at  my  table." 

Jer.  xxi.  11.  "And  touching  the  house  of  the  king  of  Judah,  say, 
Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord." 

Judith  V.  23.  "For,  say  they,  we  will  not  be  afraid  of  the  face  of 
the  children  of  Isi-ael." 

Acts  i.  4.     "Which,  saith  he,  ye  have  heard  of  me." 

The  inconvenience  of  a  sudden  change  of  person,  un- 
broken by  any  such  words  supplied,  may  appear  from  Gen. 
xxxii.  30,  "And  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel: 
for  I  have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my  life  is  preserved." 
Just  as  abrupt  is  the  construction  in  Gen.  xli.  52  (compare 

5-2 


6S    Sect.  II].'\    Authorized   Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

ver.  51);  Tobit  viii.  21.     In  2  Mace.  vi.  24  "said  he"  con- 
tinued in  Roman  type  till  1638. 

(5)  Another  use  of  italics  is  to  indicate  that  a  word  or 
clause  is  of  doubtful  authority  as  a  matter  of  textual  criti- 
cism. Of  this  in  the  Authorized  Version  we  can  produce 
only  one  unequivocal  instance  in  the  Canonical  books,  i 
John  ii.  23  (see  Appendix  E,  p.  254);  for  it  is  not  quite  cer- 
tain that  the  change  of  type  in  Judg.  xvi.  2 ;  xx.  9,  employed 
to  point  out  words  borrowed  from  the  Septuagint,  intimates 
any  suspicion  of  a  lacuna  in  the  text.  Some  doubt  also 
hangs  over  i  Cor.  xiv.  10  "none  of  them''''  (see  Appendix  E, 
pp.  245,  251,  where  the  italics  were  removed  in  1638).  In 
subsequent  editions  occur  the  following  instances,  most  of 
them  being  due  to  the  Cambridge  edition  of  1638,  those 
that  are  not  so  having  another  date  affixed  to  them : 

Deut.  xxvii.  26  ("«//").  Josh.  xxii.  34  ("^W).  i  Sam.  ii.  16 
("i^flj"  1629  Camb.)^.  2  Kin.  xix.  31  {^'- of  /losts'y^;  xx.  13  (the 
second  "a//"  appears  in  most  Hebrew  Bibles,  and  we  should  restore  the 
Roman  character).  2  Chr.  v.  i  ("a//");  xvii.  4  {''LORD'').  Job  x. 
20  ("cease  then,  and,''''  161 1  inconsistently  :  we  should  read  with  1638, 
"cease  thai,  and,'"  or  leave  all  in  Roman  as  1629  Camb,,  since  both 
particles  are  found  in  Kcri).  Ps.  xli.  2  ("^;/^/he  shall  be,"  Chetiv,  not 
Keri)\  Ixix.  32  {''and  be  glad").  Prov.  xx.  4  {therefore:  but  1  of 
Keri  is  in  Symmachus  and  the  Vulgate,  so  that  we  should  restore  the 
type  of  161 1).  Jer.  xiii.  16  {"and  make,"  yet  1  of  Keri  is  in  the 
Septuagint  and  Vulgate).  Lam.  v.  7  {"and  are  not;"  "And  have." 
These  two  conjunctions  are  both  wanting  in  Chetiv,  but  present  in  KeH, 
yet  1 769  italicises  the  first,  not  the  second).    Mark  viii.  14  ("  the  disciples^"* 

^    This   is   inevitable,    as    the       ceived   without   italics   where  we 

,.  .  .^,  ;l-i  <i.  I,-  'J  should  not  wish  to  insert  them 
readmg    is    either   v       to   him  -.1  <i<.i       t,-i 

^  now:  e.g.  Judg.  xx.  13  '  the  chil- 

{Chetiz),    or    iO    "Nay"    {Keri),  dren;  "    Ruth  iii.  5,  17  "to  me." 

not    both.     The    two    words   are  In  ver.  37  of  this  chapter  (2  Kin. 

confused   in    18    other   places,    of  xix.)  we  should  italicise  Keri  ''his 

which  Delitzsch  points  out  17.  sons''  for  the  sake  of  consistency. 

-  The  addition  in  this  passage  In  the  parallel  place  Isai.  xxxvii. 

and   others   is   from  the  Hebrew  38  "his  sons"  stands  in  CA(?f/z/,  or 

Kei'i  or  margin ;   but  Keri  is  re-  the  text. 


The  Italic  type.  69 


first  italicised  in  1638).  Mark  ix.  42  (see  Appendix  E).  John  viii.  6 
(1769:  see  Appendix  E).  In  Acts  xxvi.  3  "■  because  I  know,""  zx\A  the 
first  "■and'"  in  ver.  18,  the  itaUcs  are  due  to  1769.  i  John  iii.  16  (see 
Appendix  E,  p.  255). 

Thus  in  the  Apocrypha  1629  italicises  on  me  in  Tobit  xi.  15,  /xe  being 
wanting  in  the  Complutensian,  but  we  had  better  return  to  the  Roman 
type.  For  similar  cases  examine  Ecclus.  iii.  22  (1629  and  1769); 
I  Mace.  iii.  18  (1638);  x.  78  (1638);  xi.  15  (1638,  partim  rede)',  xiv. 
4  (1638). 

To  these  passages  we  may  add  2  Chr.  xv.  8  ''^Oded'," 
to  point  out  the  doubt  hanging  over  the  reading  or  construc- 
tion in  that  place.  Also  in  Ecclus.  i.  7;  xvii.  5,  italics  have 
been  substituted,  as  was  stated  above  (p.  48),  in  the  room 
of  brackets,  as  a  mark  of  probable  spuriousness  in  the  lines 
so  printed.  The  portion  of  i  John  v.  7,  8  which  is  now  for 
the  first  time  set  in  italics  in  the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible, 
is  probably  no  longer  regarded  as  genuine  by  any  one  who 
is  capable  of  forming  an  independent  judgment  on  the 
state  of  the  evidence. 

(6)  The  last  class  to  which  we  may  refer  the  italicised 
words  in  our  version,  is  that  wherein  the  words  supplied  are 
essential  to  the  English  sense,  although  they  may  very  well 
be  dispensed  with  in  the  Hebrew  or  Greek;  nay  more, 
although  very  often  they  could  not  be  received  into  the 
original  without  burdening  the  sentence,  or  marring  all  pro- 
priety of  style.  This  last  head  comprises  a  far  greater  number 
of  cases  than  all  the  rest  put  together,  and  it  may  reasonably 
be  doubted  whether  much  advantage  accrues  from  a  change 
of  type  where  the  sense  is  not  affected  to  an  appreciable 
qxtent.     Whether  we  say  "the  folk  that  are  with  me"  (Gen. 


1  {<93n  niy  nN-U3ni  (contrast  ch.  xvi.  9.  The  Vulgate  has  here 
■  f"  Azarice  jilii  Oded,  as  all  in  ver.  i. 
ch.  ix.  29  n*nS.  ni<-nr:>J?p.  The  -p^us  again  in  Prov.  xv.  22,  by 
absolute  state  of  nN-123n  seems  italicising  "they,"  one  may  in- 
connected  with  a  break  in  the  timate  that  "thoughts"  is  probably 
sense,  such  as  occurs  in  ver.   11 ;  not  the  real  nominative  to  D-ipri. 


70    Sect.  III.^    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

xxxiii.  15)  with  the  Bible  of  161 1,  or  "the  folk  that  are  with 
me"  with  the  Cambridge  edition  of  1629,  could  make  no 
difference  whatever,  except  to  one  who  was  comparing 
English  with  Hebrew  idioms,  and  such  a  person  would 
hardly  need  to  carry  on  his  studies  in  this  fashion.  One 
thing,  however,  is  quite  clear,  that  if  it  be  well  thus  to  mark 
the  idiomatic  or  grammatical  divergences  between  lan- 
guages, all  possible  care  should  be  devoted  to  secure  uni- 
formity of  practice ;  cases  precisely  similar  should  be 
treated  in  a  similar  manner.  Now  this  is  just  the  point  at 
which  our  Authorized  Version  utterly  fails  us;  we  can  never 
be  sure  of  its  consistency  for  two  verses  together.  To  take 
one  or  two  instances  out  of  a  thousand:  why  do  we  find  "// 
be  hid"  in  Levit.  v.  3,  4,  and  ''it  be  hidden"  in  ver.  2,  the 
Hebrew  being  the  same  in  all?  Or  why  should  the  same 
Hebrew  be  represented  by  "upon  all  four"  in  Levit.  xi.  20, 
but  by  "upon  (or  "on")  ^//four"  in  ver.  21,  27,  42?  Even 
in  graver  matters  there  is  little  attempt  at  uniformity.  Thus 
ovTo<i  Heb.  iii.  3  is  "this  man'^  in  161 1,  but  "this  man"  in 
Heb.  viii.  3,  a  variation  retained  to  this  day;  in  i  Pet.  iv.  11 
^Het  him  spealz''''  is  italicised  in  161 1,  but  the  clause  imme- 
diately following  '''■let  him  do  if  not  before  1629.  The 
foregoing  gross  oversights,  with  countless  others,  are  set 
right  by  the  revisers  of  1629  and  1638,  yet  these  later  edi- 
tors have  been  found  liable  to  introduce  into  the  printed 
text  nearly  as  many  inconsistencies  as  they  removed.  Thus, 
for  example,  whereas  "which  were  left"  Lev.  x.  16  ade- 
quately renders  the  Hebrew  article  with  the  participle 
of  the  Niphal  conjugation,  and  so  in  1611  was  printed 
in  ordinary  characters,  the  edition  of  1638  wrongly  italicises 
^^ which  were''  here,  but  leaves  untouched  "that  were  left" 
in  ver.  12,  a  discrepancy  which  still  cleaves  to  our  modern 
Bibles.  The  same  must  be  said  of  "ye  are  to  pass"  ("^r^" 
first  italicised  in  1629)  Deut.  ii.  4  compared  with  "thou  art 


The  Italic  type.  71 


to  pass"  ver.  18:  '■Uven  unto  Azzah"  ver.  23  ("^zwz"  cor- 
rectly italicised  in  1638,  indeed  the  word  is  expressed  in 
ver.  36),  but  ''even  unto  this  day"  left  untouched  in  ver. 
22:  "the  slain  man'''  {^^7na?i^^  first  in  1629)  Deut.  xxi.  6, 
but  *'the  slain  man"  ver.  3:  ^^  their  backs"  (y^their'^  first  in 
1629)  Josh.  vii.  12,  but  "their  backs"  ver.  8\  The  reader 
will  find  as  many  instances  of  this  nature  as  he  cares  to 
search  for  in  any  portion  of  our  modern  Bibles  he  may 
please  to  examine,  and  from  the  whole  matter  it  is  impos- 
sible to  draw  in  the  main  any  other  conclusion  than  this: — 
that  the  changes  introduced  from  time  to  time  have  been 
too  unsystematic,  too  much  the  work  of  the  moment,  exe- 
cuted by  too  many  hands,  and  on  too  unsettled  principles,  to 
hold  out  against  hostile,  or  even  against  friendly  criticism. 

Dr  Blayney  in  his  Report  to  the  Oxford  Delegates  (Ap- 
pendix D)  appeals  to  the  edition  of  Dr  Paris  (1762)  as 
having  "made  large  corrections  in  this  particular,"  adding 
that  "there  still  remained  many  necessary  alterations,  which 
escaped  the  Doctor's  notice"  and  had  to  be  set  right  by 
himself  and  his  friends.  And  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the 
two  Bibles  of  1762  and  1769  between  them  largely  increased 
the  number  of  the  words  printed  in  italics,  although  the 
effect  was  rather  to  add  to  than  to  diminish  the  manifest  in- 
consistencies of  earlier  books.  Thus  Blayney  (and  after  him 
the  moderns)  in  Luke  xvii.  29  (aTravra?)  italicises  "Z/^^//^" 

\In  the  Bible  of  1638,  with  late  nin-1^.*pn  (6Xo;cX7j>j/,  Symma- 

all    its    merits,    we    occasionally  ,  ...  '•  ,  .  -^.  ,        ,^ 

notice  a  strange  want  of  critical  chus :.///... .z;;..^.<w,.  Bishops  ), 

skill.     In  Prov.  iii.  18  our  version  ^^^      ''''''    }^  '^}.  '''  italics,  as  if  it 

happily    changes     "he"    of    the  were  a  conjunction      In  Heb  xi 

Bishops'  version  into  "everyone,"  3^  we  may  retain   yet  not  without 

.  ^        .1       ,       ,        .•  •   1      i.  hesitation,  the  italics  nrst  used  lor 

to  express  the  plural  participle,  to  ,,  , '         7  •       ^r  o      •  n 

,  .  ,^   .,       r   ^-   •      ^  '■        ■  the  word  cruel  m  10^8,  since  all 

which   the   lemmine    pronoun    is  ^,  ,.       -r-     v  t,  • 

re     J        ,.  4.U-    1      1     r  11         11  the  earlier  English  versions  were 
affixed ;  yet  this  book,  followed  by  ^-  c  j      -..i-  rl        1  •         »  7    7- 

,,,,•'.        .11        ^     K  satished  with  "mockings:     luai- 
all  the   rest,  actually  sets   ^^  every  » 

„    .      •,   T  T      r-     <-     •  una,  Vulg. 

one      in   italics.     In    Cant.    iv.  2  »         t> 

"even  shorn"  is  designed  to  trans- 


72    Sect.  III.]    AutJiorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

before  "all,"  yet  leaves  untouched  "them  all"  ver.  27:  in 
Luke  xix.  22  he  reads  ^'■thoiL  wicked  servant,"  retaining 
*' thou  good  servant"  in  ver.  17.  Nor  can  the  correctness 
of  Dr  Paris  be  praised  overmuch.  In  putting  into  Roman 
type  the  ^^good'^  of  161 1,  Eccles.  vii.  i,  he  has  been 
blindly  followed  by  the  rest,  though  a  glance  at  the  Hebrew 
would  have  set  them  right:  yet  some  of  his  errors  in  italics 
were  removed  in  1769,  e.g.  "way-j-^V/^"  Matt.  xiii.  4;  Mark 
X.  46;  Luke  viii.  5.  Hence  it  becomes  manifest  that,  in  pre- 
paring a  critical  edition  of  our  vernacular  Translation,  which 
shall  aim  at  meeting  the  wants  and  satisfying  the  scholarship 
of  the  present  age,  nothing  less  than  a  close  and  repeated 
comparison  of  the  sacred  originals,  line  by  line,  with  the 
English  Bible,  will  enable  us  to  amend  the  mistakes  which 
lack  of  time  and  consideration  has  led  certain  of  the 
most  eminent  of  preceding  editors  to  pass  by  unnoticed, 
or  even  to  exaggerate  while  attempting  to  remedy  them. 

In  the  Apocrypha  indeed  the  work  would  have  to  be 
done  almost  afresh,  inasmuch  as  the  Company  of  Trans- 
lators to  whom  these  books  were  assigned  took  no  sort  of 
pains  to  assimilate  their  portion  of  the  work  to  that  executed 
by  the  others.  They  introduce  this  difference  of  type  only 
54  times  in  the  whole  Apocrypha,  in  fact  only  three  in- 
stances occur  at  all  later  than  Ecclus.  xlv.  4,  after  which 
brackets  [  ],  or  sometimes  (  )  are  substituted  in  their  room. 
No  improvement  worth  mention  seems  to  have  been  at- 
tempted before  1638,  when  96  fresh  instances  of  italics  were 
added  (e.g.  Judith  xiv.  18,  but  Tobit  iv.  13  in  1629),  and 
most  of  tlie  brackets  were  displaced  for  itaHcs,  though  a  few 
yet  survive  in  modern  Bibles  (2  Esdr.  iii.  22.  Wisd.  xii. 
27;  xvii.  2,  3,  4.  Ecclus.  vi.  i,  2;  viii.  ir;  xi.  30;  xii.  5; 
xiv.  I  o ').   About  ten  places  more  were  subsequently  italicised 

1  In  Ecclus.  xliv.  22  the  brack-       marks  of  parenthesis  (  ),  since  no 
ets   [  ]   can  only  be  intended  for       copy  omits  the  enclosed  words. 


The  Italic  type.  73 


(e.g.  Wisd.  V.  17;  viii.  2.  Baruch  iii.  ■^■t^.  2  Mace.  xi.  33 
^^ and,''  all  in  1769),  so  that  the  italics  of  modern  Bibles 
are  but  273  in  all.  Those  that  are  employed  are  of  much 
the  same  character  as  in  the  Canonical  Scriptures;  some  for 
pointing  out  the  zeugma  (above  p.  66),  as  i  Mace.  vii.  19^; 
X.  20,  24;  2  Mace.  xi.  14:  or  for  indicating  a  transition  in 
the  form  of  speech  (Judith  v.  23.  Ecclus.  ii.  18.  i  Mace, 
i.  50;  xvi.  21 ;  so  I  Esdr.  i.  4  in  1629,  and  2  Mace.  vi.  24  in 
1638):  some  for  supplying  a  real  or  seeming  grammatical 
defect  (i  Esdr.  iv.  11.  Tobit  viii.  10.  Ecclus.  xii.  5):  one 
for  calling  attention  to  uncertainty  in  the  reading  (Tobit  x. 
5^;  see  above,  p.  68):  a  few  for  no  reason  that  is  apparent 
(Wisd.  vi.  9  O  kings.  Ecclus.  xl.  4;  xlv.  4"),  it  would  seem  in 
mere  error.  Since  our  version  of  the  Apocrypha  is  so  imper- 
fectly revised  as  to  resemble  the  Bishops'  version  in  other 
respects  more  closely  than  we  find  in  the  inspired  books,  so 
does  it  in  this  over-free  use  of  italic  type  by  way  of  commen- 
tary. The  interpolations  in  Wisd.  ii.  i;  xvi.  10;  i  Mace, 
vii.  32  are  derived  from  this  source;  that  in  Ecclus.  vi.  2 
from  the  note  of  Junius  {ferociens  incerto  et  vago  impetii)-. 
and  too  many  others  are  conceived  in  the  same  spirit,  e.g. 
Wisd.  X.  10;  xiv.  12;  xix.  14.  Ecclus.  viii.  11;  xi.  30;  xlvi. 
6.  I  Mace.  viii.  18.  In  i  Mace.  ix.  35,  after  Coverdale 
and  the  Bishops'  Bible,  our  Translation  actually  brings  a 
Proper  Name  into  the  text    "[John],"    avowedly  on  the 

^  But  we  should  set  in  ordinary  persuades  even  Fritzsche  to  adopt 

character  "[have  they  cast  out]"  o-i)  fxeXei),  from   the  Vulgate   /icu 

of  161 1  in  ver.  17,  inasmuch  as  the  /leu  me,f.li  mi,  2it  quidtc  niiswnts. 

ellipsis  is  only  accidental,  arising  The  italic  type  should  be  changed 

from  the  order  of  the  words  cited  into  Roman,  since  the  passage  may 

from  Ps.  Ixxix.  1,  3  in  the  Septua-  very  well  stand  unaltered, 

gint,  and  indeed  in  the  Hebrew.  ^  In    the   original   edition  the 

2  In    161 1    we   read  ''Nozo  I  first  four  words  of  Ecclus.  viii.  8 

care  for  nothing,  my  son,  since  I  are  italicised  by  a  like  oversight. 

have  let  theego,'"  01)  ix€\eLiJ.oL,TeKvov,  They  were  set  in  Roman  type  in 


oTi  a(f>yJKd  ae,   but   Junius    would        1629. 
have   us   read   ol  for  ov  (Drusius 


74   Sect,  I//.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

authority  of  Josephus,  for  the  slight  evidence  now  alleged 
in  its  favour  (the  Syriac  and  three  recent  Greek  copies)  was 
unknown  to  them. 

After  this  general  survey  of  the  whole  subject,  it  is 
proper  to  state  certain  rules,  applicable  to  particular  cases, 
which  a  careful  study  of  the  Bible  of  161 1  will  shew  that 
our  Translators  laid  down  for  themselves,  but  which  haste 
or  inadvertence  has  caused  them  to  carry  out  very  imper- 
fectly in  practice.  It  will  be  seen  that  many  of  their  omis- 
sions were  supplied  in  one  or  other  of  those  later  editions 
which  display  care  in  the  matter,  while  almost  as  many 
have  remained  to  be  set  right  by  their  successors.  "Whether 
the  Translators,  if  they  had  foreseen  and  fully  considered 
how  far  the  system  of  italics  which  they  adopted,  when 
carried  out,  would  lead,  would  have  adopted  it, ...may  be  a 
question.  And  whether  the  abundance  of  the  italics... does 
not  in  a  measure  defeat  its  own  purpose  by  withdrawing  j 
attention  from  them,  is  perhaps  a  question  also.  But  as  it  i 
was,  the  course  adopted  by  the  editors  of  161 1  having  been 
to  mark  by  italics  not  important  insertions  only,  but  to  aim 
at  marking  in  this  manner  everything,  even  trifling  pronouns 
and  auxiliary  verbs,  not  in  the  originals,  carrying  out  how- 
ever their  intention  very  imperfectly :  the  choice  for  after 
editors  lies  between  adopting  a  different  system,  and  carry- 
ing out  theirs  to  the  fulP."  Between  these  alternatives  few 
perhaps  will  censure  those  who  have  chosen  the  latter  with- 
out much  hesitation. 

The  following  observations,  therefore,  grounded  on  the 
practice  of  our  Translators,  will  guide  us  in  a  vast  number 
of  doubtful  cases. 

(i)     The  English  possessive  pronoun,  when  It  renders 
the  Hebrew  or  Greek  article,  should  be  set  in  italics.    Com- 
pare in  161 1  Judg.  iii.  20.     2  Sam.  vi.  7;  xvii.  23.     2  Kin. 
^  GroteMS.  p.  24.     See  above,  p.  23,  note. 


The  Italic  type.  75 


ix.  35;  xiii.  3.  2  Chr.  xiii.  10.  Job  i.  5;  ii.  13.  i  Cor.  i.  i. 
2  Cor.  i.  I.  Gal.  v.  10.  Eph.  iv.  28.  Phil.  ii.  13.  So  in 
1629,  Gen.  xxvi.  11.  Neh.  xii.  42:  in  1638,  Matt.  viii.  3; 
X.  24;  xii.  10,  33;  xiii.  15  {icr)\  xiv.  19,  31;  xv.  5,  ^q. passim : 
in  1762,  Matt.  xii.  46;  xxi.  31;  xxvi.  23,  51;  xxvii.  24:  in 
1769,  Matt.  XV.  8;  xxv.  32.     Mark  v.  29;  x.  16,  &c. 

(2)  Since  the  definite  article  is  only  the  unemphatic 
form  of  the  demonstrative  'that,'  and  has  itself  a  demon- 
strative force \  it  might  not  appear  necessary  to  set  "that" 
in  italics  when  it  represents  the  Greek  or  Hebrew  article. 
In  161 1,  however,  it  is  thus  printed  so  often  as  to  prove 
that  our  Translators  designed  to  do  so  always  with  "this" 
and  "that."  For  their  practice  compare  Gen.  xviii.  32.  Ex. 
ix.  27;  xxxiv.  I.  Num.  xi.  ■^2.  Josh,  iii,  4.  i  Sam.  xiv.  8; 
xxv.  24.  I  Chr.  xviii.  11;  xxi.  22.  2  Chr.  xx.  29;  xxxvi.  18. 
Ezra  ix.  2;  x.  9.  Eccles.  vi.  12.  Luke  viii.  14.  2  Tim.  ii.  4. 
In  1629  many  more  were  added,  e.g.  Gen.  xxxi.  43  i^'- these''' 
ter);  xliii.  16  {bis)\  in  1638,  i  Chr.  vi.  64;  vii.  21.  2  Chr. 
xxviii.  22.  Ezra  x.  4.  Neh.  viii.  10.  Job  xxxii.  5.  Ps.  Ii. 
4.  Eccles.  viii.  8;  ix.  9.  Isai.  xxxvii.  30  (yet  not  2  Kin. 
xix.  29).  Jer.  ix.  26;  xxxviii.  12.  Ezek.  xliv.  3;  xlvi.  2,  8. 
Hab.  i.  6.  Mark  iv.  11;  ix.  42.  John  v.  13.  Acts  xxiv.  22. 
Rom.  xvi.  22.  I  Cor.  ix.  12;  xi.  27.  2  Cor.  v.  i,  4.  2 
Thess.  i.  II.  i  Tim.  vi.  7,  14.  2  Pet.  i.  14:  a  few  in  1769, 
2  Sam.  xvi.  11;  xviii.  32.  Hos.  ix.  10.  Yet  in  the  New- 
Testament  this  rule  is  even  now  greatly  neglected. 

(3)  The  idioms  of  the  English  and  the  Hebrew  differ 
so  widely  that  no  attempt  has  been  made,  in  the  great 
majority  of  cases,  to  print  the  English  definite  article  in 
italics  when  the  Hebrew  one  is  wanting.  The  only  apparent 
instance  of  such  distinction  being  kept  up  by  our  Translators 
occurs  in  i  Sam.  xxvi.  8,  and  is  a  mere  error,  the  Hebrew 
article  being  present:  hence  "the"  is  put  into  Roman  type 

1  Bain,  English  Grammar^  p.  34. 


76   Sect.  III.']    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

in  i638\  Occasionally,  however,  the  sense  is  so  much 
affected,  perhaps  for  the  worse,  by  the  presence  of  the 
English  article,  that  we  should  be  careful  to  note  its  absence 
in  the  Hebrew:  e.g.  Ps.  xlv.  i.  Ezek.  iv.  i;  x.  20;  xxiii.  45. 
Hos.  ii.  4;  viii.  7;  x.  10;  xii.  4.  Joel  ii.  6.  Amos  vii.  10. 
Jonah  iv.  10  marg.  Mic.  v.  5.  In  thus  deaHng  with  the  Greek 
article  rather  more  freedom  may  be  assumed,  regard  being 
alv/ays  had  to  the  anarthrous  style  of  certain  of  the  sacred 
writers,  and  to  the  licence  which  permits  the  omission  of 
the  article  in  certain  constructions.  Compare  Ecclus.  xliv. 
18.  Rom.  i.  6;  ii.  14.  i  Cor.  ix.  20.  Gal.  iv.  31.  i  Thess. 
ii.  6.  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  Heb.  ii.  5.  i  Pet.  i.  12;  iv.  10.  i  John 
ii.  I.  3  John  3.  Rev.  xiv.  9;  xv.  2;  xxi.  17.  The  EngUsh 
indefinite  article^,  or  none  at  all,  would  better  suit  most  of 
these  places. 

(4)  Annexed  to  proper  and  common  appellations  of 
places  the  Hebrew  n,  the  old  accusative  termination,  is  re- 
garded as  denoting  motion  to,  and  its  absence,  or  that  of  a 
corresponding  preposition,  is  indicated  by  italics  :  e.g.  Job 
XXX.  23;  Ps.  V.  7  in  1611.  But  n  prefixed,  which  may  be 
the  article,  and  sometimes  accompanies  n  annexed  (compare 
2  Sam.  xiii.  10),  is  not  so  regarded.  Prepositions  of  motion 
in  English,  which  have  no  Hebrew  equivalent,  should  be 
systematically  set  in  italics,  the  rather  since  it  is  not  always 
certain  that  the  right  one  is  employed,  e.g.  i  Sam.  xxiii.  25. 
2  Kin.  xvi.  8. 

(5)  When  an  article  is  prefixed  to  a  participle,  but  not 
otherwise,  and  it  is  rendered  by  "which  are,"  "that  is"  &c. 
("such  as  were"  Eccles.  iv.  i),  these  words  are  best  printed 

^  In  Job  xi.  16  also  Synd.  A.  3.  meaning    to   italicise   our   indefi- 

14,  B.  M.  1276. 1.4  and  3050.  g.  3  nite  article,  as  161 1  seems  never 

read    "the  misery,"   but   this    is  to  have  done,  but   only   1638  in 

probably    a     misprint    for    '■^thy  Acts  x.  2,  and  1762  in  Acts  xxiv. 

misery  "  of  the  other  issue.  5. 

^  It  is,   of  course,   quite  un- 


The  Italic  type.  77 


without  italics,  as  in  161 1  they  are  pretty  uniformly,  e.g. 
Lev.  X.  16.  Deut.  xx.  11;  xxv.  6,  i8j  xxix.  29^  In  1638 
italics  came  to  be  employed  in  some  cases  of  this  kind,  e.g. 
^■^that  was  built"  Judg.  vi.  28;  '•^ which  is  shed"  Ps.  Ixxix. 
10;  "she  that  looketh"  Cant.  vi.  10;  '-^one  that  accuseth" 
John  V.  45.  In  Judg.  xi.  30  viarg.  '^that  which  cometh 
forth''^  of  161 1  is  properly  changed  in  1629  into  '"'■that 
which  co77ieth  forthy 

(6)  But  even  if  the  article  be  prefixed  to  an  adjective, 
the  correct  practice  is  to  italicise  the  words  supplied.  Thus 
in  1611  ^^that  are  wise,"  ^''that  a7'e  mighty"  Isai.  v.  21,  22; 
'•''who  is  holy"  Heb.  vii.  26,  in  which  passages  there  is  no 
article.  In  Judg.  viii.  15,  where  the  article  is  found,  we  have 
"that  ^/-^  weary"  in  161 1,  "that  are  weary"  1629,  '■'■that  are 
weary"  1638  correctly.  This  last  edition  is  very  careful  on 
the  point,  having  rightly  put  into  itaHcs  what  had  previously 
been  Roman  in  i  Sam.  xv.  9.  Neh.  iv.  14.  Ps.  Ixxxv.  12. 
Ezek.  xxii.  5.  Yet  in  Judg.  xvii.  6;  xxi.  25  and  such  like 
passages  some  adopt  (not  very  consistently)  ^'■that  which 
was  right,"  to  intimate  the  presence  of  the  article,  as  i  Sam. 
ix.  24  in  1638. 

(7)  In  such  phrases  as  "and  it  came  to  pass... that,"  if 
the  Hebrew  copulative  \  be  not  expressed  at  the  beginning 
of  the  second  clause,  its  absence  is  denoted  by  italicising 
"that,"  which  otherwise  would  stand  in  Roman  type.  This 
nice  distinction  is  observed  by  our  Translators  Avith  as  much 
consistency  as  they  display  in  greater  matters.  Thus  1 6 1 1 
in  Gen.  iv.  14.  Ex.  xxxiii.  8.  Num.  xvi.  7.  2  Kin.  xviii. 
I.  I  Chr.  xiv.  15.  Esther  v.  2.  Isai.  x.  12,  20,  27;  xxiv. 
18.  So  in  1629,  Ex.  xxxiii.  7.  Lev.  ix.  i.  Num.  xvii.  5: 
in  1638,  Neh.  iv.  16:  in  1762,  Matt.  xiii.  53;  xix.  i.  Luke 
XX.  I.     Compare  Luke  v.  i,  17;  vii.  12;  viii.  i,  &:c. 

1  In  the  concise  style  of  poetry       the  absence  of  the  article  before 
we  may  often  willingly  overlook      the  present  participle. 


78   Sect.  IIIP\    Authorized  VersioJi  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

(8)  The  personal  pronoun,  when  omitted  with  the 
Hebrew  infinitive  (occasionally  with  some  risk  of  ambiguity 
in  the  sense)  should  always,  when  supplied  in  the  version,  be 
printed  in  italics.  This  comprehensive  rule  is  abided  by  in 
161 1  at  Gen.  vi.  19,  20  "to  keep  them  alive;"  Ex.  xxx. 
12  (second  case,  but  overlooked  in  the  first),  15;  xxxi.  13. 
Deut.  xxvi.  18.  I  Kin.  xii.  6  ("/"  overlooked  by  1629  and 
later  Bibles),  i  Chr.  xxviii.  4.  2  Chr.  xxxv.  6.  Isai.  1.  4 
("/"  again  overlooked  in  1629  and  its  successors).  Thus 
also  in  1629,  Ex.  xxviii.  28.  Esther  iv.  11:  in  1638,  Gen. 
iii.  6.  Acts  xii.  19.  Rom.  xiii.  5:  in  1769,  Ex.  xxxv.  i. 
Deut.  xxix.  29.     Heb.  xii.  10. 

(9)  Where  in  Hebrew  the  first  of  two  nouns  is  in  the 
state  of  construction,  the  word  "of"  between  them  is  not 
italicised  in  English :  but  if  the  preceding  noun  be  sus- 
ceptible of  a  change  by  reason  of  the  state  of  construction, 
and  yet  be  not  so  changed,  "of"  or  its  equivalent  is  itaficised. 
Compare,  for  example,  Ex.  xxxvii.  24  with  Ex.  xxv.  39. 
The  Masoretic  points  are  necessarily  taken  for  true  under 
this  head. 

(10)  It  would  seem  natural  to  italicise  "own"  in  the 
expression  "your  own,"  "his  own,"  «S:c.  where  the  original 
has  but  the  simple  possessive  pronoun.  Yet  in  161 1  we 
find  it  so  printed  only  in  2  Sam.  xviii.  13.  Job  v.  13;  ix.  20., 
Prov.  i,  iS  {Ins).  Blayney  has  "his  own''''  in  Gen.  i.  27,  and 
in  no  other  place,  as  if  he  shrank  from  making  about  200 
changes  in  respect  to  one  word.  We  should  italicise  "own" 
only  in  Job  xix.  1 7,  where  its  presence  excludes  one  very 
possible  sense,  and  in  Acts  xxi.  11,  where  it  is  important  to 
mark  that  kavrov  is  not  in  the  text. 

(11)  The  Hebrew  preposition  ?  "to,"  with  or  without 
the  verb  "to  be,"  is  considered  as  equivalent,  idiom  for 
idiom,  with  the  English  verb  "to  have."  It  is  so  treated 
in  the  book  of  161 1  usually  (e.g.  Gen.  xii.  20;  xvi.  i),  but 


The  Italic  type.  79 


not  always  (e.g.  Gen.  xi.  6  "they  have,^^  ver.  30  "she  had''). 
But  "pertained"  in  such  phrases  is  ahvays  itaHcised,  as  Judg. 
vi.  II  in  1 6 II.  Hence  we  would  not  follow  Scholefield', 
who  reads  "what  have  I"  i  Cor.  v.  12. 

(12)  We  have  adopted,  with  some  hesitation,  Mr 
Gorle's^  refined  distinction,  confirmed  by  16 11  in  Jer.  xli.  16, 
between  IDN*  "after  thaf'  and  P'^DDN*  "after  that;"  not 
however  with  infinitives,  as  2  Chr.  xxvi.  2.  Jer.  xxxvi.  27; 
xl.  I. 

(13)  When  in  difi'erent  parts  of  Scripture  a  phrase  or 
expression  is  given  with  more  or  less  fulness,  it  is  right  to 
distinguish  the  shorter  form,  by  setting  the  missing  part  of 
it  in  italics.  Examples  are  in  161 1  "dead  metV'  Ex.  xii.  33; 
^^??iighty  man"  Ps.  cxx.  4  viarg.  (compare  Ruth  ii.  i.  i  Sam. 
xiv.  52.  Jer.  xli.  16,  where  "man"  is  expressed):  in  1638, 
Job  xvii.  8,  10.  Isai.  xxix.  8;  xliv.  25:  in  1769,  Isai.  xli.  2. 
Again  in  161 1,  "fill  with'^  Gen.  xliv.  i.  Ps.  Ixxi.  8  {his)', 
Ixxii.  19,  a  preposition  being  supplied  after  the  verb  (^/?^) 
in  Ex.  xvi.  32.  2  Kin.  ix.  24.  Ezra  ix.  11.  Job  xli.  7. 
Ezek.  xxxii.  6.  Care,  however,  should  be  taken  to  put  in 
italics  no  more  than  is  really  wanting :  thus  in  Matt.  viii.  25 
Trpoa-cXOovTc;  ought  to  be  "came  to  him/'  Matt.  x.  i 
7rpocrKaXeadix€vo<;  "called  unto  him,"  as  it  is  given  in  1762, 
not  as  the  same  word  is  represented  by  1769  in  Matt.  xv. 
32  "called  7mto  him."  This  rule  extends  very  widely,  and  is 
difficult  to  be  observed  with  perfect  consistency. 


1  In   the   Greek   and   English  the  Bible  published  since  his  time. 
New     Testament,     published     at  ^  'p^g  Rev.   J.  Gorle,   Rector 

Cambridge  by  Professor  Scholeheld  of    Whatcote,    submitted    to    the 

(new  edition,  1836),  many  words  Syndics  of  the  University  Press, 

were  printed  in  italics  for  the  first  in  or  about    1864,  very  valuable 

time,  chiefly  such  as  bear  on  our  and  elaborate  notes  on  the  use  of 

first  rule,  that  regarding  pronouns.  italics  in  our  Bibles,  which  proved 

The   changes   he   introduced   evi-  of  great  service  in  the  preparation 

dence  great  care,  but  seem  not  to  of  the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible. 
have  influenced  other  editions  of 


So    Sect.  III.']    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

(14)  The  verb  substantive  is  italicised  before  the 
participle  passive  {Paul),  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Niphal 
conjugation  of  the  verb  (e.g.  Gen.  xxix.  31,  33  '^was  hated" 
in  1629  Camb.);  but  more  licence  has  been  granted  to  the 
auxiliaries  that  render  the  active  participle  {Poel).  In  Num. 
X.  29  we  prefer  "we  are  journeying,"  though  in  other  places 
the  present  "is",  "are",  &c.  is  in  Roman  type,  but  not 
^^was^^  or  "tt'(?;'6'." 

Such  are  the  principal  rules  which  the  Translators  of  the 
Authorized  Version  designed  to  follow  in  the  arrangement  of 
italics  for  the  standard  Bible  of  161 1.  How  Httle  what  they 
printed  was  systematically  reviewed  and  corrected  in  the 
preparation  of  later  editions  is  evident  from  the  numerous 
glaring  errors,  committed  by  them,  which  have  remained  un- 
detected down  to  this  day.  The  reader  will  perceive  what 
is  meant  by  comparing  the  original  Hebrew  or  Greek  with 
any  modern  Bible  in  i  Chr.  vii.  6.  2  Chr.  x.  16.  Neh.  v.  19. 
Job  i.  5;  xxii.  24;  XXX.  5;  xxxiv.  14;  xli.  20.  Ps.  Iv.  21. 
Prov,  XV.  26.  Cant.  v.  12.  Isai.  xxii.  18  ("///['(?"  a  little 
doubtful);  Jer.  xi.  4,  7;  xxxvi.  22;  xlvi.  13.  Ezek.  iv.  4, 
9;  xiii.  18 j  xxii.  20  marg.\  xxxix.  11 ;  xHii.  3  marg.  Dan. 
i.  7;  viii.  26;  ix.  23  7narg.  Obad.  6.  Hab.  iii.  9.  i  Esdr. 
viii.  (iT^,  Tobit.  iii.  3.  Wisd.  ii.  i;  xix.  14.  i  Mace.  viii. 
18;  X.  24;  xii.  37.  Tit.  ii.  3.  3  John  12.  Indeed  some 
more  recent  corrections  are  positively  false,  e.g.  2  Chr. 
iii.  II  "one  wing  of  the  one^'  (1638):  Luke  x.  30  '■'■man'^ 
(1762). 

What  Blayney  intended  to  do  and  seems  to  have  lacked 
time  for  (Appendix  D),  has  been  regarded  as  a  matter  of 
imperative  duty  by  the  compiler  of  the  present  work.  He 
has  made  out  a  full  list  of  all  the  changes  with  respect  to 
italics,  in  which  the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible  as  edited 
by  him  differs  from  his  standard,  the  Cambridge  small 
pica  octavo  of  1858  (see  above,  p.  38),  together  with  such 


The  Punctuation.  8i 


reasons  for  them  as  each  case  might  require;  and  has  de- 
posited the  hst  for  future  reference  in  the  Library  of  the 
Syndics  of  the  University  Press. 

Section  IV. 

On  the  system  of  pu7ictuatio7i  adopted  in  1611,  a7id  modified  in 
more  7'ccent  Bibles. 
"The  question  of  punctuation,"  to  employ  the  language 
of  Professor  Grote\  "has  two  parts:  one,  respecting  the 
general  carrying  it  out  for  purposes  of  rhythm  and  dis- 
tinction of  sentences,  independent  of  any  question  as  to  the 
meaning  of  the  words;  the  other  respecting  the  particular 
cases  where  different  punctuation  involves  difference  of 
meaning."  In  regard  to  the  first  of  these  parts,  much 
variety  of  practice  will  always  exist,  according  to  the  age  in 
which  a  writer  lives,  or  the  fashion  which  he  has  adopted 
for  himself  Thus  the  edition  of  161 1  abounds  with  paren- 
theses^ which  are  largely  discarded  in  modern  Bibles, 
wherein  commas  supply  their  place,  unless  indeed  they  are 
left  unrepresented  altogether.  The  note  of  admiration, 
which  is  seldom  met  with  in  the  old  black-letter  copies 
(wherein  the  note  of  interrogation  usually  stands  in  its  room : 
e.g.  Prov.  xix.  7)  is  scattered  more  thickly  over  Blayney's 
pages  than  the  taste  of  the  present  times  would  approve. 
Upon  the  whole,  while  the  system  of  recent  punctuation  is 
heavier  and  more  elaborate  than  necessity  requires,  and 
might  be  lightened  to  advantage  ^,  that  of  the  standard  of 
161 1   is  too  scanty  to  afford  the  guidance  needed  by  the 

^  Grote  MS.  p.  '25.    See  above,  nuteargumentforthepriorityof  the 

p.  23,  note.  Syndic's  copy  (see  above,  pp.  8,  9). 

2    In    Synd.    A.    3.    I4,    these  ^  For  instance,  in  such  expres- 

marks  of  parenthesis  often  seem  to  sions  as  "and  behold,"  "and  lo," 

have  been  inserted  with  a  pen,  in  "for    lo;"    we    should    omit    the 

places  where  the  Oxford  reprinthas  comma  set  by  Blayney,    &c.   be- 

them ;  thus  supplying  another  mi-  tween  the  two  words. 

s.  6 


82     Se^rf. /v.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {idw). 

voice  and  eye  in  the  act  of  public  reading.  "It  is  a  torture 
to  read  aloud  from,  as  those  who  have  had  to  do  it  know\" 
Grote  contrasts  it  in  this  particular  with  a  Cambridge  edition 
of  1683,  into  which  more  changes  in  the  stops  were  admitted 
than  later  books  cared  to  follow,  and  whose  punctuation 
differs  in  fact  but  little  from  that  in  vogue  in  recent  times. 

The  case  in  which  difference  of  punctuation  involves 
difference  of  meaning  cannot  be  thus  summarily  dismissed. 
Since  interpretation  is  now  concerned,  rather  than  arbitrary 
liking  or  convenience,  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  First 
Section  are  strictly  applicable  here  (pp.  3,  14).  The  stops 
found  in  the  original  ought  not  to  be  altered  unless  the 
sense  they  assign  be  not  merely  doubtful,  but  manifestly 
wrong ^  Modern  changes,  if  still  abided  by,  should  be 
scrupulously  recorded,  and  their  retention  can  be  justified 
only  by  the  consideration  that  it  is  at  once  pedantic  and 
improper  to  restore  errors  of  the  standard  Bible  which  have 
once  been  banished  out  of  sight.  The  following  list  will  be 
found  to  contain  all  divergencies  of  punctuation  from  that 
prevailing  in  recent  editions,  not  being  too  insignificant  to 
deserve  special  notice,  which  can  be  supposed  to  influence 
the  sense.  They  naturally  divide  themselves  into  two 
classes,  those  which  are,  and  those  which  are  not,  counte- 
nanced by  the  two  issues  of  161 1. 

I.  The  stops  of  161 1  are  retained  in  preference  to  those 
of  later  Bibles,  there  being  no  strong  reason  to  the  contrary, 
in 

Gen.  xxxi.  40.  "  This  I  was  in  the  day,  the  drought  consumed 
me,"  161  r,  after  Masoretic  stops,  LXX.,  Vulg.,  against  the  Bishops', 
1638 — 1769,  moderns,  who  have  '■'■  Tims  I  was;    (,  1638 — 1762)  in  the 

^  Grote  MS.,  tibi  supra.  Dr  Pusey's  view  seems  very  main- 

^  Thus   no   stronger   stop  than  tainable  {Book  of  Daniel,  p.  300), 

a  colon  (as  in   161 1)  is  proposed  that  quite  another  line  than  Zerub- 

after  Jesaiah,  i  Chr.  iii.  21,  though  babel's  now  follows. 


The  Punctuation.  %7^ 


day  the  drought  consumed  me."  i  Lev.  iv.  2,  '"'' {concerning  things  which 
ought  not  to  be  done)."  Here  1769  and  the  moderns  reject  the 
parenthesis  of  the  earher  books,  which,  though  not  found  in  vv.  13,  22, 
27,  tends  to  reheve  a  hard  construction.  Joshua  iii.  16,  "very  far,  from 
the  city  Adam,"  i6ri — 1630.  In  1629  Camb.  and  subsequent  editions 
the  comma  after  "  far  "  is  removed,  but  the  other  distribution  is  not  less 
probable,  i  Kin.  xii.  32,  "and  hell  offered  upon  the  altar  (so  did  he  in 
Bethel,)  1|  sacrificing."  The  moderns,  after  1769,  punctuate  "and  he|| 
offered  upon  the  altar.  So  did  he  in  Bethel,  ||  sacrificing:  "  against  the 
Hebrew  stops,  Zakeph-katon  standing  over  both  "altar"  and  "Bethel;" 

and  rendering  the  margin  (which  provides  for  7)^X  being  the  Kal  rather 
than  the  Hiphil  conjugation)  quite  unintelligible,  xix.  5,  "behold  then, 
an  angel"  (nrHSni) :  "behold,  then  an  angel,"  1769,  moderns.  Neh. 
ix.  4,  "upon  the  stairs  of  the  Levites,"  (Dh^H  n^J?p"^y) :  "upon 
the  stairs,  of  the  Levites,"  1769,  moderns,  ver.  5,  "Jeshua  and 
Kadmiel,"  (cf.  Ezra  ii.  40) :  "Jeshua,  and  Kadmiel,"  1769,  moderns. 
Job  xix.  28,  "persecute  we  him?... found  in  me."  1611 — 1617.  But  1629 
Lend.,  1630  place  the  interrogative  also  after  "me: "  1629  Camb.,  1638, 
modems,  transfer  the  second  clause  into  the  oratio  obliqtia  "persecute  we 
him,... found  in  me?"  xxxi.  30.  This  verse  is  rightly  set  in  a  parenthesis 
in  1611 — 1744,  which  1762  and  the  moderns  remove,  xxxiii.  5,  "If 
thou  canst,  answer  me,"  as  in  ver.  32.  The  first  comma  is  removed  in 
1629  Camb.  (not  1629  Lond.,  1630)  and  all  modern  books,  xl.  24 
ma7g.,  '■^or  bore,''''  161 1:  "or  bore,''''  1629,  1638,  Bagster  1846.  But 
1744,  1762,  moderns,  "or,  bore,''''  quite  absurdly.  Psalm  ii.  12,  "but  a 
little:  Blessed,"  1611 — 1744,  "but  a  little.  Blessed,"  1762  mod  ;^. 
Ixxix.  5,  "wilt  thou  be  angry,  for  ever?"  Cf.  Ps.  xiii.  i;  Ixxxix.  46. 
The  comma  is  removed  by  1616  (not  161 7,  1630),  1629  Camb.,  &c.  ver. 
II,  "come  before  thee.  According  to  the  greatness  of  thy  power: 
Preserve  thou."  Thus  16 11 — 1744?  following  the  Hebrew  punctuation: 
"come  before  thee;  According  to  the  greatness  of  thy  power  (,  1762 
only)  Preserve  thou"  1769,  moderns,  very  boldly,  though  approved  by 
Dean  Perowne.   Ixxxix.  46,  "How  long.  Lord 2,  wilt  thou  hide  thyself, 

^  The  two  lines  of  the  couplet  xl.    12,  Rebiah  has  tempted  1762 

are     closely    connected,     as     the  to  change  the  comma  after  "head" 

parallelism  shews.     Here,  and  in  into   a   semicolon,   1769  moderns 

some  other  places  (notably  in  Ps.  into  a  colon,  where  we  prefer  the 

iii.    5;     Ixiv.    7),   the    Masoretic  comma  of  1611 — 1744. 
punctuation   is    at  variance   with  -  .So  read  instead  of  "Lord?" 

the  poetical  structure.     So  in  Ps.  of  1769  mod. 

6—2 


84     Sccf.  IF.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {\(>\\). 


for  ever?"  The  third  comma  is  removed  in  1629  London  and  Camb. 
(not  1630),  1638,  1744,  1769  mod.  In  1762  this  comma  is  strengthened 
into  a  semicolon.  Prov.  i.  27.  The  final  colon  of  161 1 — 1630  is  clearly 
preferable  to  the  full  stop  of  1629  Camb.,  moderns,  xix.  1.  Restore 
the  comma  before  "sinneth",  discarded  in  1762  :  also  in  xxi.  28,  that 
before  "speaketh,"  removed  in  1769:  both  these  for  the  sake  of 
perspicuity,  xxx.  i  fin.  The  full  stop  is  changed  into  a  comma  by 
1769  mod.  Eccles.  ii.  3.  "(yet  acquainting  mine  heart  with  wisdom)." 
In  1769  mod.  the  marks  of  parenthesis  are  rejected  and  a  semicolon 
placed  after  '"wisdom."  Cant.  vii.  9,  ",  For  my  beloved,  that"  i6ri, 
&c.  (",  For  my  beloved  that,"  1629  Lond.,  1630:  almost  preferable; 
cf.  Heb.):  "For  my  beloved,  that"  1769,  moderns,  viii.  2,  ",  of  the 
juice"  1611 — 1630:  "of  the  juice"  1629  Camb.,  1638,  &c.  Isai.  xxiv. 
14,  "they  shall  sing",.  The  comma  is  found  only  in  161 1  (Oxford 
reprint,  not  Synd.  A.  3.  14),  and  acknowledged  by  Vulg.  and  Field 
("y«/;z'AT/'//;;/;")  as  representing  the  Hebrew  ^iM;/^7/7/.  xlviii.  12,  *',  O 
Jacob,  and  Israel  my  called;"  1611  — 1630.  But  1629  Camb.,  1638, 
place  commas  after  "Israel,"  1769  and  the  moderns  join  "Jacob  and 
Israel,"  against  the  Hebrew  stops.  Lam.  ii.  4,  "pleasant  to  the  eye," 
(cf.  Heb.  stop) :  1769  mod.  remove  the  comma,  iv.  15,  ",  when  they 
fled  away  and  wandered:"  (  ,  for:  in  1769  mod.).  Hosea  vii.  11,  "a 
silly  dove,  without  heart."  In  1629  Camb.  and  the  moderns,  the 
comma  (which  represents  the  Hebrew  accent)  is  removed,  as  if  "without 
heart"  referred  exclusively  to  the  dove.  Hagg.  i.  i.  12,  14;  ii.  2, 
remove  the  comma  of  1769  mod.  after  "Josedech."     Cf.  Zech.  i.  i. 

2  Esdr.  viii.  39,  "and  the  reward  that  they  shall  have."  {et 
salvationis  ct  merccdis  reccpticmis,  Vulg.,  but  ct  sahitis,  ct  rccipiendcc 
mercedis  Junius):  but  1762  mod.  place  a  comma  after  "reward,"  as  if 
receptionis  of  Vulg.  belonged  also  to  salvationis.  xii.  2,  "and  behold, 
the  head  that  remained,  and  the  four  wings  appeared  no  more."  In 
1762  a  comma  is  inserted  after  "wings:"  in  1769  mod.  both  commas 
are  removed.  There  is  a  pause  in  the  sense  after  "remained," such  as  a 
semicolon  would  perhaps  better  represent,  before  the  vision  in  ch.xi.  18, 
&c.,  is  repeated.  Judith  iv.  6,  "toward  the  open  country  near  to 
Dothaim  (vara  Tvpocro^irov  rod  irebiov  rod  Tr\r)aLov  AooOaifx,  LXX.).  Here 
1629  Camb.,  1630,  &c.,  insert  a  comma  before  "near."  viii.  9,  10.  In 
1769  mod.  the  marks  of  parenthesis  are  withdrawn,  to  the  detriment  of 
perspicuity,  xiv.  17,  "After,  he  went"  (/cat  elarjXdev,  LXX.):  1629 
Camb.  (not  1630),  1638  mod.  remove  the  necessary  comma.  Ecclus. 
xxxvii.  8,  "(For  he  will  counsel  for  himself):"  -1769  mod.  reject  the 


The  Punctuation.  85 


marks  of  parenthesis,  setting  a  semicolon  after  "himself",  ver.  11, 
"  ,  of  finishing"  (Trepi  trvvreXetas,  LXX.) :  1769  mod.  obscure  the  sense 
by  rejecting  the  comma.  Baruch  vi.  40,  "that  they  are  gods?"  In 
1629,  &c.,  "gods,"  the  interrogation  being  thrown  upon  the  end  of  the 
verse.  But  compare  the  refrains  ver.  44,  52,  56,  65,  to  justify  our 
arrangement  of  the  paragraph,  i  INIacc.  vi.  51,  "to  cast  darts,  and 
slings."     The  comma  is  removed  in  1638  mod. 

S.  Matt.  ix.  20 — 22,  are  inclosed  in  a  parenthesis  by  1611  — 1762, 
which  1769  rejects^.     S.  Mark  iii.  17,  and  v.  41.     The  marks  of  paren- 
thesis (of  which  1769  mod.  make  too  clean  a  riddance)  are  to  be  restored 
from  1611 — 1762.    S.  John  ii.  15,  "and  the  sheep  and  the  oxen,"  thus 
keeping  the  animals  distinct  from  Trazras  ("them  all... with  the  sheep 
and  oxen,"  Bishops').     In   1630  (not  1638,  1743),  ^7^^  mod.,  a  comma 
intrudes  after  "sheep."    xviii,-3,  "a  band  of  ?)ien,  and  officers,"  161  r — 
1762,  thus  distinguishing  the  Roman  cohort  from  the  Jewish  vinqperaL 
{Aixhb.    Trench).     In    1769    mod.    the   comma   is  lost.     Acts  xi.  26, 
"taught  much  people,  and  the  disciples  were  called,"  161 1 — 1630:  both 
verbs  depending  on  ^-^evero.     Yet  1638 — 1743  substitute  a  semicolon 
for  the  comma,  while  1762  mod.  begin  a  new  sentence  after  "people," 
as  if  the  editors  had  never  glanced  at   the   Greek,     xviii.  18,    "and 
Aquila:  having  shorn  his  head";  Paul  being  the  person  referred  to  in  , 
K€i.pd/j.€vos.     By  changing  the  colon  into  a  semicolon,  1762  mod.  render 
this  more  doubtful.     Rom.  i.  9,  ",  always  in  my  prayers,"  161 1,  1612, 
1613.     The  first  comma  is  removed  in  1629  Camb.  and  London,  1630, 
&c. :   the  second  changed  into  a  semicolon  by  1769  mod.     Cf.  I  Thess. 
i.  2;    Philem.  4.      iv.  i,   "Abraham  our  father,  as  pertaining  to  the 
flesh,"  161 1 — 1762.     In  1769  mod.  the  comma  is  transferred  from  after 
"father"  to  before  "our."     v.   13 — 17  were  first  inclosed  in  a  paren- 
thesis by  1769,  which  is  followed  by  all  moderns,  even  by  the  American 
Bible  of  1867,   though  the  American  revisers  of  1 851  (see  p.  36)  had 
removed  it.     It  is  worse  than  useless,  inasmuch   as  it  interrupts  the 
course   of  the  argument,     viii.   33  Jin.     The  colon  of  16 11 — 1762  is 
almost  too  great  a  break,  yet  1769  mod.  substitute  a  full  stop.     The 
semicolon  of  The  Five  Clergymen  is  quite  sufficient,     xv.  7,  "received 
us,"  1611 — 1743.     The  comma  is  removed  in  1762  mod.      i  Cor.  vii.  5, 
"prayer,"  161 1— 1630.     But  1638  mod.  substitute  a  .semicolon  for  the 
comma,  as  if  to  drive  us  to  take  the  various  reading  <jvvkpxt]<xde  of  Beza 

^  The  parenthesis  is  absent  in  Luke  viii.  42 — 48,  but  we  may 
from  the  parallel  passage  of  S.  retain  it  from  161 1 — 1743,  though 
Mark.     It  is  not  so  much  wanted       1762  mod.  reject  it.- 


86     Secf.  IK]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {\(ii\). 

1598  (note,  not  text),  and  the  Elzevirs,  viii.  7,  "with  conscience  of  the 
idol  unto  this  hour,"  161 1 — 1762,  as  if  the  reading  ?a>s  apri  rov  ei8u}\ov 
were  accepted  ("with  the  yet  abiding  consciousness  of  the  idol,"),  or 
cf.  Phil.  i.  26,  and  Dr  Moulton's  PFiner,  p.  584.  In  1769  mod.  the 
comma  is  deleted.  2  Cor.  xiii.  2,  "  as  if  I  were  present  the  second 
time,"  1611 — 1762.  In  1769  mod.  a  comma  is  put  in  after  "present," 
through  an  obvious  misconception.  Eph.  iii.  2 — iv.  i,  "of  the  Lord," 
is  wrongly  set  in  a  parenthesis  by  1769  mod.  (not  American,  1867). 
Rather  connect  ch.  iii.  i  with  ver.  14.  Phil.  i.  ir,  "by  Jesus  Christ 
unto  the  glory..."  In  1762  mod.  a  comma  is  inserted  before  "unto." 
Col.  ii.  II,  "of  the  flesh,"  the  two  clauses  beginning  with  iv  ry  being 
parallel  (cf.  var.  kcL),  so  that  1762  mod.  wrongly  remove  the  comma 
after  "flesh."  i  Thess.  iii.  7,  ",  by  your  faith"  1611 — 1630,  but  1629 
London  and  Camb.  and  all  after  them  wrongly  omit  the  comma. 
2  Thess.  i.  8,  "in  flaming  fire,"  1611 — 1762,  connecting  the  words 
with  eV  T-^  aTTOKa\v\p€L,  ver.  7.  In  1769  mod.  the  comma  is  absent. 
Titus  ii.  8,  "sound  speech  that  cannot..."  The  comma  after  "speech" 
in  1769  mod.  obscures,  rather  than  helps,  the  English,  ver.  12,  "teach- 
ing us  that  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts  we  should  live..." 
Thus  the  sentence  runs  in  the  Oxford  reprint  of  161 1  and  in  1612, 
and  this  is  the  safest  plan  in  such  a  construction,  but  Synd.  A.  3.  14 
places  a  comma  after  "lusts,"  and  is  followed  by  1613  and  the  rest.  In 
1629  Camb.,  &c.  another  comma  is  set  after  "us,"  M'hich  1769  mod.  do 
not  improve  upon  by  transposing  it  to  after  "  that."  Heb.  ii.  9,  "lower 
than  the  angels,".  In  1769  mod.  this  comma  is  removed,  so  as  to  compel 
us  to  take  5id  rb  TrdOTjima  tov  davarov  with  the  preceding  clause,  to  which 
it  hardly  seems  to  belong,  iii.  7 — 11.  Reject  the  marks  of  parenthesis 
introduced  into  modern  Bibles  in  1769.  The  American  Bible  of  1867 
has  them  not.  x.  12,  "for  ever,  sat  down."  So  161 1 — 1630,  plainly 
rejecting  "  is  set  down  for  ever  "  of  Bishops'  Bible.  This  arrangement  is 
supported  by  our  standard  Cambridge  edition  of  1858,  and  the  American 
(1867),  by  Bp.  Christ.  Wordsworth,  <S:c.,  and  is  surely  safer  than  "for 
ever  sat  down"  of  1638 — 1769  and  most  moderns,  xii.  23.  Restore  the 
comma  of  1611 — 30  after  "assembly":  see  below,  p.  253.  xiii.  7.  Restore 
the  full  stop  of  161 1  at  the  end  of  this  verse,  which  1762  mod.  change 
to  a  colon,  2  Pet.  ii.  14.  The  Greek  compels  us  to  reject  the  comma 
after  "adultery"  of  1743  and  mod.  Jude  7,  "the  cities  about  them,  in 
like  manner..."  The  comma  after  "them"  is  injudiciously  removed  by 
1638,  1699  (not  1743),  while  1762  mod.  increase  the  error  by  placing  it 
after  "in  like  manner." 


The  Punduatioti.  87 


It  would  be  endless,  and  would  answer  no  good  purpose, 
to  enumerate  all  the  cases  wherein  minute  but  real  improve- 
ments in  the  punctuation,  introduced  into  editions  subse- 
quent to  161 1,  have  been  universally  acquiesced  in  (e.g. 
Jer.  xvii.  3;  Dan.  xi.  18 ;  Bel  &  Drag.  ver.  10;  Matt.  xix.  4; 
Rom.  ii.  13 — 15;  I  Pet.  v.  13).  Some  very  strange  over- 
sights of  the  standard  Bible,  in  this  as  in  other  particulars 
(see  pp.  3,  4),  were  permitted  to  hold  their  place  quite  late. 
Thus  in  John  xii.  20  "And  there  were  certain  Greeks  among 
them,  that  came  up  to  worship  at  the  feast:"  the  intrusive 
comma  lingered  till  1769.  The  comma,  which  originally 
stood  after  "about  midnight,"  Acts  xxvii.  27,  was  removed 
and  set  after  "Adria"  later  than  1638.  In  regard  to 
weightier  matters,  the  comma  put  by  161 1  after  "God"  in 
Titus  ii.  13  is  fitly  removed  by  1769  mod.,  that  "the  great 
God  and  our  Saviour"  may  be  seen  to  be  joint  predicates  of 
the  same  Divine  Person.  Luke  xxiii.  32  affords  us  a  rare 
instance  of  an  important  change  in  the  stops  subsequent  to 
1769  (we  have  not  been  able  to  trace  it  up  earlier  than 
D'Oyly  and  Mant's  Bible  of  181 7)  "And  there  were  also  two 
other  malefactors,"  where  recent  editors  insert  a  comma 
before  "malefactors,"  in  order  to  obviate  the  possibility  of 
mistake  in  the  meaning  of  a  phrase  which  is  rather  Greek 
than  English.  They  were  rightly  unwilling  to  adopt  the 
alternative  of  changing  the  plural  "other"  into  "others,"  as 
the  American  Bible  (1867)  has  unfortunately  done  ^  The 
following  chief  additional  changes  in  punctuation  recom- 
mended  by   us,   like    those   affecting   the   text   itself  (for 


1  Luke  X.  I,  is  exactly  parallel  2   Mace.    vii.  34;   xi.   7,   ir,   20; 

in    this    use   of    other,    but    that  Matt,  xxiii.  23;    Luke  xi.  16,  42; 

antiquated  plural  is  very  common  xviii.  9;   John  xix.  18;    Acts  xvii. 

in  our  version:  Josh.  viii.  22;  xii.  9  (but  others  ver.  34) ;    i  Cor.  xiv. 

19;  2  Sam.  ii.  13;    i  Esdr.  vii.  6;  29;    2  Cor.  xiii.    2;    Phil.  i.   17; 

1  Esdr.  X.  6,  57;   xi.  18;   xvi.  22  ;  ii.  3;   iv.  3,  most  of  which  remain 

Tobit  vi.    14;    Wisd.  xi.   10,    13;  unchanged  in  modern  Bibles. 


88     S^(:f. /v.]     Authorized  Vcrsio7i  of  the  Bible  {\(i\\). 

which  see  Appendix  A),  though  usually  sanctioned  by 
respectable  authority,  occasionally  by  some  recent  Bibles, 
must  ultimately  depend  on  their  own  merits  for  justifica- 
tion. 

11.  Passages  in  which  the  stops,  as  well  of  1611  as  of 
most  later  Bibles,  have  been  altered  in  the  Cambridge  Para- 
graph Bible. 

Ex.  xi.  I — 3  is  placed  within  a  parenthesis,  thus  referring  ver.  4  to 
ch.  X.  29.  Josh,  vi,  I  might  well  be  treated  in  the  same  manner. 
Josh.  XV.  I,  '■^ even  to  the  border  of  Edom"  is  better  followed  by  a 
comma,  as  in  1762,  than  by  the  semicolon  of  i6ri — 1744  :  both  stops 
are  removed  in  1769.  i  Kin.  vii.  19,  and  xxi.  25,  26,  should  be  set  in 
parentheses,  so  as  to  connect  closely  the  preceding  and  following 
verses  in  either  case.  xxi.  20.  "With  16  [7  (only)  place  a  comma  at  the 
end  of  this  verse,  the  protasis  beginning  with  jP^  ver.  20,  the  apodosis 
with  *^y^'\\^  ver.  21,  just  as  in  ch.  xx.  36.     Cf  also  ch.  xx.  42;    xxi.  29. 

2  Kin.  XV.  25.  Set  a  semicolon  after  "Arieh,"  in  place  of  the  comma  of 
1611,  &c.  The  "him"  following  refers  to  "Pekah,"  not  to  "Arieh." 
So  Tremellius  after  Heb.^  Job  iv.  6.  See  Appendix  A.  vi.  10,  "Yea, 
I  would  harden  myself  in  sorrow ;  let  him  not  spare : "  forms  one 
line  in  the  stichometry  {Dditzsch).  This  does  not  appear  in  16 11 — 
1744,  which  set  a  comma  after  "spare,"  or  in  1762  mod.,  which 
punctuate  "  :  let  him  not  spare."  xxviii.  3.  Lighten  the  colon  of 
161 1,  &c.,  after  "perfection"  into  a  comma.  "The  stones"  is  governed 
by  "searcheth  out,"  whether  we  consider  rivri "PD'P  to  be  used  ad- 
verbially, or  no.  Ps.  cv.  6.  "Ye  children  of  Jacob,  his  chosen." 
Unless  the  comma  be  inserted,  "his  chosen"  would  not  be  understood 
as  plural.  In  i  Chr.  xvi.  13,  a  comma  is  inserted  by  1769  mod.  without 
much  need.  Ps.  cvii.  35.  End  in  a  semicolon:  yet  all  our  Bibles  have 
a  full  stop.  Ps.  cviii.  5,  6.  All  our  Bibles  except  that  of  the  Tract 
Society  (1861)  join  these  two  verses,  which  seems  an  impossible  arrange- 
ment [Perowjie).     Substitute  a  full  stop  for  the  colon  of  161 1  (which  is 

^   In  Neh.   xii.    24,    we   would  a    colon.     It   would    seem    from 

substitute  a  semicolon  instead  of  a  i  Chr.  ix.  15 — 17;  ch.  xi.  17 — 19, 

full  stop  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  that  the  list  of  the  singers  ends 

and  perhaps  ought  to  change  the  with  Obadiah,  that  of  the  porters 

comma  after  Obadiah,  ver.  25,  into  begins  with  Meshullam. 


The  Pimctiiation.  89 


made  a  semicolon  by  1629  Camb.  and  the  moderns)  at  the  end  of  ver.  5, 
and  a  semicolon  for  the  colon  after  "delivered,"  as  161 1  has  in  Ps.  Ix.  5. 
Prov.  vi.  2.  Since  this  verse,  as  well  as  ver.  I,  is  plainly  hypothetical 
[Bp.  Christ.  Wordszvorth),  in  spite  of  LXX.,  Vulg.,  and  Tremellius,  a 
comma  must  take  the  place  of  the  full  stop  of  161 1,  &c.  after  "mouth." 
viii.  2,  "high  places  by  the  way."  Transfer  the  comma  of  161 1  from 
after  "place"  to  after  "way."  Eccles.  iv.  i,  "and  behold,"  1629 
Camb. — 1762.  In  1769  mod.  the  comma  is  removed  though  it  is  really 
wanted.  Even  the  Hebrew  has  a  distinctive  mark  (')  here.  Cant.  iii.  2, 
"in  the  streets  and  in  the  broad  ways,".  So  LXX.,  the  Hebrew 
punctuation  and  parallelism.  In  161 1,  &c.,  the  comma  is  transferred  to 
a  place  after  "streets,"  thus  joining  the  second  clause  with  what  follows. 
Isai.  xi.  II,  "his  people,  which  shall  be  left  from  Assyria,".  So  the 
Hebrew  stops,  the  analogy  of  ver.  16  (recognized  by  1611 — 1762,  not 
by  1769  mod.),  LXX.,  Vulg.,  Lowth,  Field  :  "his  people  that  shall  be 
left,  from  Assyria"  161 1  — 1762:  in  1769  mod.  another  comma  follows 
"people."  xxxii.  9.  This  verse  is  a  distich,  the  true  division  of 
which  after  "voice"  is  plainer  in  Hebrew  than  in  English.  It  is 
variously  punctuated  in  our  Bibles,  but  all  agree  in  suggesting  a  false 
division  into  three  lines,  ending  respectively  at  "ease,"  "daughters," 
"speech."  xxxviii.  10,  "I  said,".  All  insert  the  comma  in  ver.  11. 
Jer.  xlviii.  29.  Instead  of  the  parenthesis  which  encloses  "/^^  is 
exceeding  proud"  in  all  our  Bibles,  substitute  a  semicolon  before,  a 
colon  after  the  words,  as  in  Isai.  xvi.  6  in  1762  mod.  Ezek.  v.  6,  "my 
judgments,  and  my  statutes."  The  comma,  imperatively  required  by 
the  Hebrew,  was  inserted  from  1629  (both  editions)  to  1762,  dis- 
carded in  1769  mod.  xxi.  29,  "that  are  slain  of  the  wicked."  The 
comma  after  "slain",  apparently  employed  by  161 1,  &c.  to  aid  the 
voice,  fails  to  represent  the  stahis  constrtcdiis  of  the  Hebrew,  xlvi.  18, 
"by  oppression  to  thrust  them  out"  renders  a  single  Hebrew  word 
{opprcssione  dcHtrbando  eos,  Trem.).  Yet  161 1 — 1630  separate  the 
English  by  placing  a  comma  after  "oppression,"  which  1762  mod. 
restore  after  it  had  been  rejected  by  1629  Camb.,  1744.  xlviii.  30,  "of 
the  city:"  so  the  Hebrew  stops.  The  Bishops'  Bible  and  161 1 — 1630 
have  a  comma  after  "city,"  which  1629  Camb.  and  the  moderns  omit 
altogether  (cf.  Wordsworth).  Hosea  ix.  15,  "inOilgal:"  the  colon  of 
16 1 1  and  the  rest  is  too  strong  for  the  sense  and  the  Hebrew  accent. 
xii.  10.  Remove  the  comma  of  16 11  &c.  after  "similitudes."  Cf. 
Heb.  Micah  vi.  5,  ";  from  Shittim"the  inserted  semicolon  represent- 
ing  the    Hebrew   Athnakh    (cf.     IVoidsworth).     The    Bishops'    Bible 


90     Serf,  /v.]     AiitJiorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

separates  these  words  from  the  preceding,  though  only  by  a 
comma  ^. 

2  Esdr.  ii.  15  marg.  "  ,  as  a  dove,''  with  1629 — 1744.  In  1611  we 
have  "aj-  a  din'c:'''  in  1630  *^  ,  as  a  dove:  "  against  the  Latin.  In  1762 
mod.  ^\  as  a  dove''  but  our  way  seems  safer,  vii.  42,  "is  not  the  end, 
where..."  Without  the  inserted  comma,  our  version  is  hardly  in- 
telligible; in  CO  so.  sirciilo,  not  Jine.  Judith  viii.  21,  "if  we  be  taken, 
so  all..."  Junius  and  i6ri,  &c.  join  ovtws  closely  to  the  preceding 
words.  (Cf.  Moulton's  Winer,  p.  678).  Wisd.  xiii.  13,  "the  very 
refuse  among  those,  which  served  to  no  use,"  [to  bk  i^  avrQv  air6^\rjij.a 
els  ovdh  evxp^cTTov).  If,  with  1611,  &c.,  we  omit  the  comma,  "those" 
will  inevitably  be  taken  as  the  antecedent  to  "which."  xvii.  11 — 13. 
Place  these  verses  within  a  parenthesis.  Prayer  of  Manasses,  11.  17,  18, 
"  :  Thou,  O  Lord,..."  The  very  long  English  sentence  is  so  constructed 
(differently  from  the  Greek,  this  Prayer  having  been  rendered  from  the 
Old  Latin,  see  p.  47),  that  the  apodosis  does  not  begin  before  this  point; 
yet  161 1  and  all  its  successors  put  a  full  stop  before  "Thou."  We 
adopt  a  colon  from  the  Bishops'  Bible,  i  Mace.  vi.  36,  "every  occasion, 
wheresoever  the  beast  was:"  far  preferable  to  "every  occasion: 
wheresoever  the  beast  was,"  of  161  r,  (See.  ix.  }^\iHarg.  ^^  ntidersfood  on 
the  sabbath  day,"  1629 — 1744.  In  1762  mod.  the  false  punctuation  of 
161 1 — 1630  is  revived  {""understood,  on  the  sabbath  day"),  against  the 
Greek,  which  is  not  in  the  same  order  as  in  ver.  43.  We  set  ver.  35 — 
42  in  a  parenthesis,  x.  i,  "Antiochus,  snrnamed  Epiphanes"  6 
iwi^avris,  the  comma  after  "Antiochus"  distinguishing  the  text  from 
that  of  Josephus,  namely  rov  eiricpavovs,  as  mentioned  in  the  margin. 
2  T^Iacc.  X.  29,  "men  upon  horses  with  bridles  of  gold"  {e0'  'iinrosv 
XpvaoxaXivoou  dvdpes).  In  161 1,  &c.,  a  comma,  worse  than  idle,  is  set 
after  "horses."  xiii.  2,  "a  Grecian  power,  of  footmen,  &c."  In  161 1, 
&.C.  we  have  "a  Grecian  power  of  footmen^." 

S.  Matt.  xix.  28,  "which  have  followed  me,  in  the  regeneration,  when 
&c."  So  1630  alone  of  our  old  Bibles,  with  Nourse  {Paragraph 
Bible,  Boston,  1836),  Bagster,  1846,  Scholefield  (English),  Lachmann, 
Tischendorf,  Tregelles.  This  is  at  any  rate  the  safest  course.  The 
second   comma   is   wanting  in    161 1,    1612,    1613,    1616,    161 7,    1629 

1  Tremellius  seems  anxious  that  usque,  dicas...^^ 

no    mistake    should   be  made   as  ^  Yet  it  must  be  confessed  that 

to  his  judgment,  rendering  thus:  the   Roman   edition  reads    linreh 

"et   quid   responderit   ei   Bilham  immediately  afterwards,  while  our 

filius  Behoris ;   ut  agnoscens  juste  punctuation  represents  iinriiov  of 

facta  Jehovce  a  Schittimis  Gilgalem  Codex  Alexandrinus. 


The  Pimctiiation.  gi 


(London),  most  modern  Bibles,  D'Oyly  and  Mant  (1817),  Tract  Society's 
(1861),  Blackadder  (1S64),  American  (1867),  Newberry  (1870),  and 
Alford.  The  first  comma  is  absent  in  the  Bishops'  Bible,  the  books 
from  1629  (Camb.)  to  1769,  and  Scholefield's  Greek  text.  vS.  Luke  i.  55, 
"(as  he  spake  to  our  fathers)".  Thus  with  Nourse,  the  Tract  Society, 
and  Blackadder  {sec  last  note),  indicate  by  a  parenthesis  the  change  of 
construction.  Ver.  70  is  also  parenthetic^.  Acts  xxiii.  8,  "neither 
angel  nor  spirit :".  Even  though  the  true  reading  be  n7]Te.../ii^T€  instead 
of  /j.T)dL../J.'^T€,  angel  and  spirit  comprehend  together  one  class,  resurrec- 
tion the  other,  the  two  classes  together  comprising  ajxcporepa.  The 
comma  after  "  angel "  in  161 1 — 1630,  abolished  from  1629  (both  editions) 
to  1 743,  is  restored  in  1762  mod.  xxvii.  18.  See  below,  p.  190.  Rom. 
viii.  20,  "  ,  in  hope."  We  can  hardly  do  more  in  this  doubtful  passage, 
than  relax  the  connection  of  ^tt'  iXTridi  with  what  precedes,  by  inserting 
the  comma  before  it,  and  lightening  the  stop  after  it  from  a  colon  to  a 
comma,  as  in  1769  mod.,  thus  with  Mr  Moule  {Romans  in  loco)  regard- 
ing "in  hope"  as  forming  a  brief  clause  by  itself,  xi.  8,  from  "ac- 
cording" to  "hear"  is  rightly  set  in  a  parenthesis  in  1769,  as  ap- 
proved by  the  Five  Cla'gyme^t.  i  Cor.  xvi.  22.  See  below,  p.  191, 
Appendix  A.  2  Cor.  i.  14,  ",  in  the  day"  161 1.  But  later  Bibles  rightly 
omit  the  comma,  since  the  clause  that  follows  it  relates  only  to  what 
goes  immediately  before,  v.  2,  "  we  groan,  eai-nestly  desiring..."  The 
adverb  is  doubtless  intended  to  represent  the  intensive  force  of  the  pre- 
position in  ewiirodovvTes  (rendered  coveting  by  Wicklif,  but  simply 
desiring  by  the  later  versions),  so  that  this  punctuation,  first  found  by 
Prof.  Grote  in  Field's  Bible  of  1660,  but  afterwards  lost  sight  of,  is  that 
to  be  received,  although  through  mere  oversight,  rather  than  with  a 
view  to  render  ingemiscimtis  of  the  Vulgate,  the  comma  is  placed  after, 
not  before,  "earnestly"  in  161 1 — 1762,  the  final  correction  being  due  to 
1769,  from  which  the  moderns  adopt  it.  See  p.  191,  note  2.  ver.  19, 
*'God  was  in  Christ  reconciling..."  All  the  Bibles  from  161 1  down- 
wards, except  that  of  1743,  insert  a  comma  after  "Christ."  Eph.  iv.  12, 
"for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints  for  the  work  of  the  ministiy,  for..." 
{irp6$...eh...  els).  The  comma  of  1611,  &c.  after  "saints"  would  be 
tolerable  if  the  three  prepositions  were  truly  parallel.  Phil.  ii.  15,  "the 
sons  of  God  without  rebuke,"  The  comma  set  after  "God"  in  1611,  &c. 
would  inevitably  suggest  a  different  gender  for  dfxwfirjTa  or  dfj-difxa.  Col. 
ii.  2,  "of  God  and  of  the  Father  and  of  Christ."   The  Received  text  can 

1  It  would  be  well  also  to  place  regarded  as  S.  Peter's.  It  is  quite 
Acts  i.  18,  19  within  a  parenthesis,  possible  that  the  citation  in  ver. 
even   though  the  words  be   still       20  is  appealed  to  in  ver.  16. 


92     Sect.  IV.']     Authorized  Versio7i  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

hardly  stand  here,  but  the  translation  (taken  verbatim  from  the  Bishops' 
Bible)  is  unquestionably  very  inferior  to  that  of  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  the 
Great  Bible,  and  Geneva  (1557),  "of  God  the  Father,  and  of  Christ." 
The  Bishops'  and  our  own  Bibles  from  161 1  downwards,  make  bad 
worse  by  adding  a  comma  after  "God."  Titus  ii.  13,  omit  the  comma 
after  "God"  with  some  moderns.  Heb.  iv.  6,  7,  "unbelief,  again..." 
The  apodosis  begins  with' TrctXti'.  This  is  not  so  apparent  if  with  161 1, 
&c.  we  set  a  colon  after  "  unbelief."  vii.  5,  "they  that  are  of  the  sons 
of  Levi  who  receive  the  office  of  the  priesthood..."  The  comma  set 
after  "Levi"  by  161 1,  (S:c.  might  easily  suggest  the  inference  that  all 
Levites  were  priests.  2  Pet.  i.  i — 5.  All  our  Bibles,  following  161 1, 
in  their  arrangement,  place  a  comma  at  the  end  of  ver.  1,  a  full  stop  at 
the  end  of  ver.  4.  Yet  it  seems  evident  that  vv.  i,  3  form  a  separate 
paragraph,  a^  Nourse,  the  Tract  Society,  Blackadder,  Wordsworth,  and 
Tischendorf  represent  them ;  and  if  ver.  3  must  be  connected  with  ver.  5 
(Moulton's  Winer,  p.  771),  a  colon  suffices  at  the  end  of  ver.  4.  ii.  22, 
"and,  The  sow"  a  new  proverb  beginning.  Thus  1638 — 1762,  American 
1867  :  but  1769  mod.  return  to  "and  the  sow"  of  161 1 — 1630.  Rev.  viii. 
12.  Remove  the  stop,  whether  colon  (16 11 — 1630)  or  comma  (1638  mod.), 
after  "darkened,"  since  the  following  verb  also  is  governed  by  iVa. 

As  the  result  of  his  investigations  on  this  subject  Prof. 
Grote  infers  that  "With  respect  to  the  punctuation  in  general, 
independently  of  its  affecting  the  meaning  of  particular 
passages,  it  is,  in  the  editions  before  1638,  comparatively 
little  graduated,  colons  and  semicolons  being  much  fewer  in 

number  than  commas  and  full  stops That  edition  made 

the  punctuation  much  more  graduated,  and  introduced  one 
practice  not  common  in  the  earlier  ones,  that  of  a  full  stop  in 
the  middle  of  a  verse."  "  The  graduation  of  the  punctuation ; 
i.e.  the  placing  of  colons  and  semicolons,  is  not  materially 
different  in  Blayney's  edition  (1769)  from  what  it  w^as  in  that 
of  1683  (see  above,  p.  82).  This  latter  (which  is  pointed, 
as  printers  say,  very  loiti)  improved  greatly  in  this  respect 
upon  1638,  as  1638  had  improved  upon  the  earlier  ones^" 

^  Grote  IMS.  pp.  83 — 85,  where  mediate  purpose,  on  the  gradual 
will  also  be  found  some  interesting  disuse  in  our  Bibles  of  what  the 
matter,  rather  foreign  to  our  im-       writer  calls  "the  cczsural  comma, 


The  Orthography  and  Gra?n?nar.  93 


Section  V. 

On  the  orthography,  gra7nmatical  peculiarities,  and  capital 
letters  of  the  original,  as  cotnpa7'ed  with  modern 
editions. 

One  of  the  salient  points  which  distinguish  the  early 
editions  of  our  Bibles  from  those  of  modern  date,  is  their 
wide  divergency  of  practice  in  regard  to  modes  of  spelling. 
It  would  be  nothing  remarkable,  but  rather  analogous  to 
what  we  observe  in  the  case  of  all  modern  and  probably  of 
some  ancient  languages,  that  the  customary  orthography, 
even  of  very  familiar  words,  should  vary  considerably  at 
different  periods  of  their  literary  history.  But  this  is  not  the 
phenomenon  we  have  mainly  to  account  for  in  regard  to 
English  books  printed  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth 
centuries.  Judged  by  them,  it  would  hardly  be  extravagant 
to  assert  that  our  ancestors  had  no  uniform  system  of  ortho- 
graphy whatsoever,  since  there  are  comparatively  few  words, 
except  a  few  particles  of  perpetual  occurrence,  that  are  not 
spelt  in  several  fashions  in  the  same  book,  on  the  same  page, 
sometimes  even  in  the  same  line\     The  licence  extended, 

a    comma    dividing    any   longish  the  punctuation  of  the  Epistles,  in 

proposition    into    two     balancing  the  course  of  which  that  earnest 

parts,  and  distinguishing  the  main  student    is    frequently    found    to 

members  of  it  from  each  other,  as  advocate  a  return  to  the  practice 

the  voice  very  frequently  does,  so  of  161 1,  luithoiit  being  aware  of  the 

that  the  comma  marks  a  real  vocal  fact. 

pause."     Just    as,     for    instance,  ^  The  American   G.    P.  Marsh 

there  is  a  comma   in  John  v.  23  {Lectures  on  the  English  Lajigiiage, 

after  the  second  "wSon"  in  161  r^ — ■  Lect.    XX.    p.    313),    ascribes   the 

1743,  which  1762  and  the  moderns  variation  of  spelling  in  the   same 

discard.     Nor  ought  I  to  quit  the  line   to  the   mere   convenience  of 

subject    of    the    present    Section  the    printer.      Cardwell     {Oxford 

without  acknowledging  my  obliga-  Bibles,  p.  4),  had  taken  the  same 

tions  to  the  late  Rev.  G.  C.  Waller,  view    before    him.      To    Marsh's 

M.A.,    and  R.N.,  for   the  use  of  example,  tfjcg   sljall  lie  tiobn  to- 

some  acute  and  weighty  notes  on  ptfjcr,   tfjrg   sljal,    Isai.   xlii.    17, 


94      Sect,  v.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {\(i\\). 

as  is  well  known,  even  to  Proper  Names  :  men  of  the  high- 
est culture  (Shakesi^eare  for  a  conspicuous  example,  if  we 
give  credit  to  certain  of  his  biographers,)  varying  the  ortho- 
graphy of  their  own  signatures  in  three  or  four  several 
ways.  This  circumstance  affords  a  conclusive  answer  to  the 
demand  that  has  sometimes  been  urged  by  ill-informed 
persons,  that  our  modern  Bibles  should  be  exact  reprints  of 
the  standard  of  1611 ;  and  it  was  partly  to  silence  such  a 
demand  that  the  Oxford  reprint  of  1833  was  undertaken  (see 
above,  p.  35).  A  glance  at  that  volume  must  have  con- 
vinced any  reasonable  person  that  more  recent  editors  were 
right  in  the  main  in  gradually  clearing  the  sacred  page  of  un- 
couth, obsolete,  and  variable  forms,  which  could  answer  no 
purpose  save  to  perplex  the  ignorant,  and  to  offend  the 
educated  taste.  Whether  the  judgment  of  those  who  are  re- 
sponsible for  the  Bibles  of  1762  and  1769  (for  these  were  the 
great  and  most  thorough  modernizers)  was  always  as  true  as 
might  be  wished  for,  we  shall  have  to  consider  in  the  sequel. 
The  general  rule  laid  down  in  the  preparation  of  the 
Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible  is  a  very  simple  one : — whenso- 
ever an  English  word  is  spelt  in  the  two  issues  of  161 1  in 
two  or  more  different  ways,  to  adopt  in  all  places  that 
method  which  may  best  agree  with  present  usage,  even 
though  it  is  not  so  found  in  the  majority  of  instances  in  the 
older  books.     Thus,  though  charet  is  the  form  employed  in 

many  might  be  added,  e.g.  tljCtEof,  note:    Gififord  in  his  Memoirs   of 

tl}C  locks  tljcrof,    anK    t^C  faarrcs,  Ben  Jonson  complains  of  the  same 

Neh.  iii.  3:   trcati  ixiitlj  sf}OUtincf,  negHgence  in  that  scholarly  author, 

their  sljoiuting  shall,  Jer.  xlviii.  33:  Nor  is  the  date  of  a  writer  any 

Stagcti  front  ticbl,  anti  tljC  rartf}  is  safe  criterion.      The    best   manu- 

Staictt,  Hagg.  i.  10,  without  coming  scripts  of  Chaucer,  and  especially 

nearer  to  a  solution  of  the  problem.  of  Gower,  as  also  the  Paston  let- 

A  word  is  often  differently  spelt  in  ters,  written  about  1470,  approach 

the  text  and  margin,   as  in  Gen.  nearer    our    present    standard    of 

iii.     16,     where     Coverdale     has  speUing   than  the    Bible  of   161 1 

"huszbande"  in  the  body  of  his  (Marsh,  p.  312). 
version,  "husbande"  in  the  foot- 


The  Orthography .  95 


the  vast  majority  of  instances,  that  Bible  has  uniformly- 
taken  chariot  as  in  Ecclus.  xlix.  8 ;  i  Mace,  i-  1 7  ;  viii.  6. 
Kinred  is  probably  the  correct  mode  of  spelling,  and  is  by 
far  the  most  frequent  in  the  standard  Bible,  yet  it  is  best  to 
abide  by  kindred^  as  it  is  found  in  Ecclus.  xiv.  4;  2  Mace.  v. 
9  ;  I  Tim.  v.  8  inaj-g.  We  would  take  caterpillar  from  Joel 
i.  4;  elsewhere  in  161 1  it  is  caterpiller,  Cieled  SLud  deling 
are  due  to  the  Cambridge  Bible  of  1629,  sieled  and  sieling 
being  the  form  of  161 1  in  all  the  eight  places  where  they 
occur :  possibly  the  American  ceiled  and  ceiling  would  be 
better,  as  the  root  seems  to  be  ccelo^  not  del.  Ag^iin,  forrest 
occurs  everywhere  else,  huX.  forest  Isai.  xxi.  13.  Y or  fain , 
the  ordinary  form,  we  ^QQ.feig?t  in  Neh.  vi.  8  only.  Ghest 
occurs  mostly,  as  in  Matt.  xxii.  10,  but  guests  in  ver.  11. 
Iro7t  appears  in  Ecclus.  xxxviii.  28,  instead  of  yrojtj  the 
common  form  in  161 1.  Linen  is  found  in  i  Kin.  x.  28 ; 
I  Esdr.  iii.  6,  but  linnen  elsewhere.  Miter  is  almost  con- 
stant in  i6ii,  yet  we  may  adopt  mitre  from  Ex.  xxxix.  31 ; 
Zech.  iii.  5.  We  find  oake  Josh,  xxi  v.  26,  elsewhere  oke. 
Between  burden^  murder,  household,  and  burthen,  murther, 
houshold,  the  usage  is  more  divided ;  we  prefer  the  former. 
Pedegree  occurs  thrice,  but  pedigree  in  Heb.  vii.  3  7narg., 
6  marg.  Pelican  appears  in  Ps.  cii.  6,  elsewhere /<f///r^;^^  or 
pellica?!.  After  16 11,  in  Ecclus.  xxxviii.  25  we  should  give 
plough  for  the  noun,  but  plow  for  the  verb  and  its  com- 
pounds in  the  26  places  where  it  occurs :  the  American 
(1867)  h^s  plough  always.  Pray  (prseda)  is  almost  always 
used,  but  p?'ey  Job  ix.  26.  Again,  surfeited,  the  modern 
form,  occurs  only  Wisd.  v.  7  marg.,  surfeiting,  Sic.  else- 
where. We  find  profane  in  Ezek.  xxiii.  38,  39;  i  Mace.  iii. 
5 1 ;  2  Mace.  vi.  5 ;  Acts  xxiv.  6  :  elsewhere  the  incorrect 
prophane.  Instead  of  renoitmed  (Num.  i.  16;  Ezek.  xxvi. 
17;  I  Mace.  iii.  9;  v.  (i2)\  vi.  i)  we  oftener  meet  with 
renowmed  (Ecclus.  xliv.  3,  &c.).     Such  examples  might  be 


96      Sect,   v.]     Authorized  Vc7'sio7i  of  the  Bible  {id  w). 

multiplied  indefinitely.  On  the  other  hand,  for  the  modern 
scent^  we  would  boldly  print  sent^  following  the  ordinary,  if  not 
the.  universal  practice  of  the  seventeenth  century,  inasmuch 
as  sent  is  true  to  the  etymology,  and  is  invariably  used  in  all 
the  five  places  where  the  word  occurs,  Job  xiv.  9 ;  Isai.  xi. 
3  ffiarg. ;  Jer.  xlviii.  11;  Hos.  xiv.  7;  Wisd.  xi.  18.  For 
omitting  the  c  in  scythe  we  have  good  authority,  as  well  as 
the  practice  of  our  Translation  in  the  margins  of  Isai.  ii.  4 ; 
Jer.  1.  16;  Joel  iii.  19  ;  Mic.  iv.  3.  We  must  return  to  rye 
of  161 1,  which  occurs  but  twice  (Ex.  ix.  32;  Isai.  xxviii.  25), 
though  7ie  is  in  both  Bibles  of  1629.  Probably,  too,  lancers 
should  be  restored  in  i  Kin.  xviii.  28  :  it  came  from  the 
Bishops'  Bible  {launsc7's),  but  occurs  nowhere  else,  and  was 
not  altered  into  la7icets  before  1762.  For  andi7'ons  Ezek. 
xl.  43  77ia7'g.,  which  is  etymologically  true,  1638,  1769  and 
the  moderns  have  endi7'ons;  e7id  i7'07is  of  1744,  1762  is  a  bad 
guess.  The  Bishops'  margin  has  t7'evets.  Another  word, 
used  but  once,  is  cbeny,  Ezek.  xxvii.  15,  which  is  so  spelt 
both  in  Hebrew  and  Greek  :  ebo7iy  of  the  moderns  is  more 
recent  than  1638.  Thus  too,  tu7'bant,  Dan.  iii.  21  77iarg. 
only,  the  form  adopted  by  Milton  and  Dryden,  was  not 
changed  into  tu7'ba7is  before  1762.  So  i77ibers,  Tobit  vi.  16 
ma7'g.  Since  sailer,  Rev.  xviii.  17,  is  pronounced  by  Johnson 
to  be  more  analogical  than  sailor,  and  held  the  ground  till 
after  1638,  we  may  take  courage  to  revive  it.  In  Nahum  ii.  4 
2\.%o  jiistle  of  161 1  may  be  restored,  instead  oi  jostle  of  some 
moderns.  Of  words  met  with  but  twice,  neither  alleaging 
(Wisd.  xviii.  22)  nor  alleadging  (Acts  xvii.  3)  can  stand;  af7i- 
bassage  Luke  xiv.  32  should  be  adopted  rather  than  C7nbassage 
I  Mace.  xiv.  23;  scrole,  Isai.  xxxiv.  4,  is  to  be  preferred  to 
scrowle,  Rev.  vi.  14;  but  it  is  not  possible  to  take  either 
■champio7i,  Deut.  xi.  30,  or  cha77ipian,  Ezek.  xxxvii.  2  i7iarg.', 
either  7misiiia7t,  Ecclus.  xxxii.  4,  or  77msitio7i,  Rev.  xviii.  22; 
or  scholler,  i  Chr.  xxv.  8;  Mai.  ii.  12.    Nor  would  a7ike7',  bal- 


TJie   Orthography.  97 


lance,  thrced,  suit  the  modern  eye,  although  they  are  never 
met  with  in  what  to  us  appears  the  only  correct  form. 

The  same  liberty  must  be  taken  in  regard  to  soldier  and 
vinegar,  which  the  standard  Bibles,  contrary  to  their  deriva- 
tion, invariably  spell  souldier  and  viueger.  What  is  spelt 
haply  in  live  other  places,  in  161 1  was  happily  2  Cor.  ix.  4 
(tto)?):  though  changed  in  both  books  of  1629,  happily  was 
brought  back  in  1630,  but  can  hardly  hold  its  ground.  The 
particle  of  comparison  thaji  is  uniformly  then  in  the  Bible  of 
161 1,  as  in  many  books  far  into  the  seventeenth  century:  this 
fashion,  of  course,  could  not  be  imitated  now.  Although 
saphir  or  saphire  does  not  vary  in  the  same  Bibles,  the 
original  will  not  dispense  with  pph.  Nor  can  we  retain 
cabbins,  used  but  once,  Jer.  xxxvii.  16:  though  we  might 
venture  M'pon  fa uch in  of  16 11,  Judith  xiii.  6;  xvi.  9.  The 
strange  form  chawes  iox  jaivs  Ezek.  xxix.  4,  suggests  a  ques- 
tionable etymology.  Traffiqiie  (the  verb  used  once,  the 
noun  four  times)  and  traffiquers  Isai.  xxiii.  8  must  also  be 
refused  \ 

Those  English  words  which,  whether  from  custom  or 
difference  of  origin,  vary  in  their  signification  according  to 
the  modes  in  which  they  are  severally  si:)elt,  are  invariably 
confused  in  the  standard  Bible  of  161 1.  Travel  and  travail 
afford  a  familiar  example  of  the  fact,  inasmuch  as  the  fault 
has  not  yet  been  completely  removed  from  modern  editions, 
e.g.  Num.  XX.  14,  where  travel  oi  1629  (Camb.)  and  recent 
Bibles,  though  the  Hebrew  is  HN^J^n^  would  just  make  sense, 
and  has  been  substituted  for  travail  oi  161 1.  In  Wisd.  x. 
10  also  the  latest  Bibles,  after  that  of  1629,  erroneously 
render  ixoxOotq  by  travels,  in  the  room  of  travails  of  161 1. 

1  In  regard  to  the  spelling  of  of    this   would    be    to    keep    up 
Proper  Names,  absolute  uniformity  apparent    inconsistency    in    some 
need  not  be    aimed   at,    but   the  places:    e.g.  Josh.  xiii.    27,    corn- 
Hebrew   should    be   followed    in  pared  with  ch.  xix.  35. 
each  case  as  it  arises.     The  result 


98     Sect,  v.]     Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (161 1). 

In  Lam.  iii.  5  travel  is  given  for  <^^?^,  as  in  Num.  xx.  14, 
in  all  the  books  from  161 1  to  the  American  (1867),  which 
has  travail:  although  many  like  errors  of  the  original  edition 
have  been  corrected  by  its  successors.     The  case  between 
tivined  and  tiviimed  is  stated  below  (Appendix  B,  p.  207  and 
note  3).     The  distinction  between  morter  (Gen.  xi.  3)  and 
mortar  Num.  xi.  8;  Prov.  xxvii.  22,  was  first  taken  in  1638: 
by  spelling  both  morter,  the  Bible  of  161 1  confounds  words 
which  have  only  an  accidental  resemblance.    We  should  also 
discriminate  carefully  between  naught  (V!?)   2   Kin.  ii.   19; 
Prov.  XX.  14,  and  nought  (i.e.  nothing)  Gen.  xxix.   15,  &c. : 
they  were  both  spelt  nought  previously  to  1638  \     In  spite 
of  the  analogy  of  nought,  it  is  probably  right  to  spell  aught  in 
such  places  as  Gen.  xxxix.  6,  as  the  American  revisers  have 
done.     Nor  should  we  venture  on  the  fine  distinction  be- 
tween veil,  an  article  of  dress,  and  the  Vail  of  the  Sanctuary, 
but  retain  in  all  cases  (even  in  Wisd.  xvii.  3 ;  Ecclus.  1.  5 
marg.)  vail  of  161 1  in  preference  to  veil  of  later  editions.    In 
Job  xiv.  17  the  great  oversight  of  161 1  soivest  for  seiifest  was 
left  in  our  Bibles  till  1762.    The  similar  error  j-^^c  for  sew  in 
Eccles.  iii.  7;  Mark  ii.  21,  remained  till  1629;  in  Ezek.  xiii. 
18  it  survived  beyond  1638.     Between  intreat  (to  pray)  and 
entreat  (i.e.  to  treat)  there  is  a  broad  difference  of  sense,  pro- 
perly recognized  in  1762:  yet  in  t6ii  the  former  is  spelt 
i?itreated  ] oh  xix.  16,  but  entreated  in  the  next  verse;  while 
in  Job  xxiv.  21  the  second  is  intreateth.     In  Jer.  xv.  11  text 
and  margin,  intreat  and  entreat  actually  change  places  in 
161 1,  and  are  not  put  right  until  1638.     Between  efiquire 
and  inquire,  on  the  contrary,  the  choice  is  purely  indifferent; 
the  former  is  chiefly  adopted  in  161 1   (but  inquired  Deut. 
xvii.  4  Oxford  reprint;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  34;  Ezekiel  xx.  31  bis; 

1  The  spelling  of  161 1,  &c.  up       2  Esdr.  ii.   33  in  Synd.  A.  3.  14 
to  1638  "at  naught,"  Luke  xxiii.       and  1613,  not  in  Oxford  161 1. 
1 1,  is  a  mere  error.     It  occurs  also 


The    Orthography,  99 

John  iv.  52,  &c. :  ijiquiry  Prov.  xx.  25),  the  latter  is  derived 
from  our  model  (1858:  see  above,  p.  t^"^)  and  the  recent 
Cambridge  Bibles.  Thus  also  we  will  take  informed  with 
161 1  in  Acts  XXV.  2,  rather  than  enformed  :is>  in  2  Mace.  xiv. 
i;  Acts  xxiv.  i;  xxv.  15:  but  enrolled  oi  161 1  in  i  Mace.  x. 
36  in  preference  to  mrolled  of  the  margins  of  Luke  ii.  i ; 
Heb.  xii.  23.  In  Isai.  v.  11  enfiame  is  in  161 1,  but  i7ifia77i' 
ing  in  Isai.  Ivii.  5 ;  modern  Bibles  reverse  this,  yet  all  keep 
inflamed  oi  16 11  in  Hist,  of  Susanna  ver.  8.  Many  words, 
the  exact  orthography  of  which  is  quite  indifferent,  should 
be  carefully  reduced  to  a  uniform  method.  Thus  a?ikles,  the 
usual  modern  practice,  which  may  be  taken  in  all  five 
places,  is  found  in  161 1  only  in  Ps.  xviii.  2>^  marg.,  but 
ancles  in  2  Sam.  xxii.  37  marg.;  Ezek.  xlvii.  3  text  and 
marg.',  Acts  iii.  7:  in  1629  ancles  is  set  in  the  first  place, 
ankles  in  the  third  and  fourth,  later  Bibles  recalling  this  last 
correction,  but  bringing  ankles  into  2  Sam.  xxii.  37  7fiarg. 
Sometimes  the  later  Bibles  issuing  from  different  presses 
exhibit  their  characteristic  varieties  of  spelling.  Instead  of 
inquire,  noticed  above  as  a  peculiarity  of  the  Cambridge 
books,  those  of  Oxford  (1857)  and  London  or  the  Queen's 
Printer  (1859)  read  enquire:  for  axe  (which  word  is  thus 
spelt  ten  times  in  161 1)  these  last,  after  the  example  of 
their  predecessors  from  1629  (Camb.)  downwards,  wrongly 
print  ax,  against  the  modern  Cambridge  editions.  In 
I  Kin.  V.  9;  2  Chr.  ii.  16;  i  Esdr.  v.  55  ^f^^ndiflotesm 
161 1,  but  recent  Cambridge  Bibles  have  needlessly  changed 
it  into  floats.  These  last  are  again  wrong  in  soap,  which, 
after  161 1,  the  Oxford  and  London  Bibles  spell  ^^/i?  in  both 
places  (Jer.  ii.  22;  Mai.  iii.  2).  The  truer  form  rasor  occurs 
seven  times  in  161 1  and  the  Cambridge  text,  while  those  of 
Oxford  and  London  have  razor.  In  Judg.  ix.  53  the  Oxford 
editions,  with  161 1,  adopt  scull,  but  the  Cambridge,  and 
indeed  1 6 1 1  in  all  other  places,  prefer  skull.     The  Cam- 

7—2 


TOO    Stcl.  v.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

bridge  books,  after  t6ii,  have  gray  {greyhoiuid  Prov.  xxx. 
31,  rightly  so  spelt  in  1629  Camb.  and  1630,  has  no  con- 
nection with  it),  the  Oxford  and  London  grey.  With  the 
Cambridge  Bible  we  may  also  spell  counseller  (not  coimsellor 
with  those  of  Oxford  and  London),  as  does  also  that  of  161 1 
except  in  three  places,  where  it  has  eoiinsellours  (Ezra  viii. 
25;  Prov.  xii.  20;  XV.  22).  Council  (variously  spelt  councill^ 
couucel,  councell  in  161 1)  is  ordinarily  distinguished  from 
counsel  or  counsell,  but  the  latter  is  put  for  the  former  in  i 
Esdr.  iii.  15  nia?g.  (xprjiJiaTiaTYjpLio) ;  Matt.  v.  22;  Markxiv.  55, 
all  subsequently  set  right.  Since  ours,  yours,  theirs  are  pos- 
sessive cases  plural  of  the  personal  pronouns,  the  apostrophe 
set  before  s  in  the  editions  of  1762  and  1769,  as  also  in 
the  London  and  Oxford  Bibles  to  this  day,  is  positively 
incorrect:  hence  the  Cambridge  practice,  which  never 
admitted  the  apostrophe,  should  be  followed  in  this  re- 
spect. 

Again,  there  are  forms  not  wholly  banished  from  our 
modern  books,  though  their  number  is  diminished  in  later 
times,  whose  presence  tends  to  lend  richness  and  variety  to 
the  style.  Such  is  vmrish  Ezek.  xlvii.  11;  i  Mace.  ix.  42, 
45,  for  the  more  familiar  marsh:  the  pathetic  astonied,  still 
standing  for  the  more  common-place  astofiished  in  Ezra  ix. 
3,  4;  Job  xvii.  8;  xviii.  20;  Jer.  xiv.  9;  P^zek.  iv.  17;  Dan. 
iii.  24;  iv.  19;  V.  9,  is  restored  to  its  rightful  place  in  the 
great  passage  Isai.  Hi.  14,  whence  a  false  taste  has  removed 
it  subsequently  to  1638.  Stahlish  also  might  be  brought 
again  into  twelve  places  (e.g.  Lev.  xxv.  30;  Deut.  xix.  15) 
instead  of  establish  of  later  books :  griti  or  grinne  (Job  xviii. 
9;  Ps.  cxl.  5;  cxli.  9)  may  be  treated  as  a  legitimate  modifi- 
cation oi gin  or  gi?tne  (Job  xl,  24  marg.;  Isai.  viii.  14;  Amos 
iii.  5),  though  cast  out  in  1762.  Once  only,  it  would  appear, 
a  superficial  difficulty  is  attempted  to  be  concealed  by  a 
slight  change  in  the  spelling.     In  Gen.  1.   23  marg.  borne, 


The    Orthography.  loi 


which  in  1611  was  equivalent  to  born^,  was  sufficiently  cor- 
rect to  convey  no  wrong  impression.  To  ensure  clearness 
the  final  e  was  dropped  in  1629  (Camb.),  but  restored  again 
in  1762,  by  which  time  it  would  be  sure  to  suggest  a  false 
meaning. 

Enougli  has  been  said  of  those  changes  in  orthography 
which  are  due  to  accident  or  the  caprice  of  fashion.  Other 
variations,  more  interesting,  spring  from  grammatical  inflec- 
tions common  in  the  older  stages  of  our  language,  which  have 
been  gradually  withdrawn  from  later  Bibles,  wholly  or  in 
part,  chiefly  by  those  painful  modernizers,  Dr  Paris  (1762) 
and  Dr  Blayney  (1769).  Yet  it  is  not  always  easy  to  distin- 
guish these  from  forms  involving  a  mere  change  in  spelling, 
and  difterent  persons  will  judge  differently  about  them  at 
times.  Thus  we  cannot  well  xetdJm  groiven  1  Kin.  xii.  8,  10, 
while  we  alter /(v/^7r'r;z  i  Kin.  xiv.  2,  &c.  To  reject,  however, 
such  words  as  fet  by  substituting  the  modern  fetched,  is  a 
liberty  far  beyond  what  an  editor  of  our  version  ought  ever 
to  have  assumed:  hence  restore y^'/  in  2  Sam.  ix.  5;  xi.  27; 
T  Kin.  vii.  13;  ix.  28;  2  Kin.  xi.  4;  2  Chr.  xii.  11 ;  Jer.  xxvi. 
23;  xxxvi.  21 ;  Acts  xxviii.  13  :  it  is  full  as  legitimate  as/r/r/// 
of  2  Sam.  xiv.  2;  2  Kin.  iii.  9;  2  Chr.  i.  17,  and  even  of  our 
latest  Bibles  in  Gen.  xviii.  7.  The  editors  of  1762  and  1769 
bestowed  much  evil  diligence  in  clearing  our  English  Trans- 
lation of  this  participle  in  -/,  Blayney  following  in  the  steps 
of  Paris  and  supplying  many  of  his  deficiencies,  yet,  with 
characteristic  negligence,  leaving  not  a  few  untouched. 
Thus  l)iirned  is  substituted  by  them  for  bm-nt  in  some  93 
places  {burnt  being  left  untouched  in  2  Kin.  xvi.  4;  xvii.  11, 
&:c).  For  lift  they  put  lifted  95  times,  once  (Dan.  iv.  34, 
where  lift  is  past  tense  indicative)  with  some  show  of  reason; 
sometimes  (e.g.  Zech.  i.  21,  where  lift  up  is  the  present),  to 

1  So  in  I  Sam.  ii.  5  we  read  in       seven,"   but    "born"    in   modern 
161 1     "the    barren    hath     borne       J3ibles. 


I02    Sect,  v.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {i6ii). 

the  detriment  of  the  sense.     Similar  cases  are  built  Neh.  iil 
I  {builded  vox.  2,  161 1):  dapt  2  Kin.  xi.  12:  dipt  ]tT.  xlviii. 
37:  cropt  Ezek.  xvii.   4:  crusht  Num.  xxii.   2^:  deckt  Vxoy. 
vii.   16;  2  Esdr.  xv.  47;  i   Mace.  iv.   57:  dipt  Lev.  ix.  9; 
I  Sam.  xiv.  27;  2  Kin.  viii.  15;  Rev.  xix.   13  {dipped  dXso  in 
161 1   Gen.  xxxvii,  31):  girt  i  Sam.  ii.  4  {girded  Y&r.  18  in 
161 1):  ieapt  i  Kin.  xviii.  26  (text,  leaped  marg.);  Wisd.  xviii. 
15  {leaped  161 1   in  ch.  xix.  9);  i   Mace.  xiii.  44;  Acts  xix. 
16:  inixt  Prov.  xxiii.  30;  Isai.  i.  22;  Dan.  ii.  41  {sic  161 1, 
not  ver.  43,  the  second  time);  2  Esdr.  xiii.  w.  past  2  Cor. 
v.   27  (so  even  moderns  in  i   Pet.  iv.  3;  in  Eph.  ii.  11  we 
hdiYQ  passed  m  1611,  past  1^6^):  pluckt  1   Chr.  xi.   23;  Ezra 
ix.  3;  Neh.  xiii.  25;  Job  xxix.  17;  Prov.  ii.  22  marg.;  Dan. 
vii.  4,  8;  xi.  4;  Amos  iv.   11;  Zech.  iii.  2;  2  Mace.  xiv.  46 
{plucked  161 1  in  Gal.  iv.   15): ///// Col.  ii.  1 8 : /z/.y/// Ezek. 
xxxiv.   21:  ravisht  Prov.  v.   19,  20  {ravished  1611  in  Zech. 
xiv.  2) :  ript  2  Kin.  xv.  16;  Hos.  xiii.  16;  Amos  i.  13:  slipt  i 
Sam.  xix.  10;  Ps.  Ixxiii.  2;  Ecclus.  xiii.  22;  xiv.  i:  stampt  2 
Kin.  xxiii.  6,  15  :  sta7-t  Tobit  ii.  4  {started  1762,  but  it  might 
be  present,   araTTT^Sr/Vas  dvaXoixrjv) :  stopt  2   Chr.  xxxii.  4 
(stopped  WQX.  30;  Zech,  vii.   11  in  161 1):  stript  Ex.  xxxiii.  6; 
I  Sam.  xviii.  4;  xix.  24;  2  Chr.  xx.  25;  Job  xix.  9;  Mic.  i.  8: 
watcht  Ps.  lix.  title:  wrapt  i  Sam.  xxi.  9;  2  Kin.  ii.  8;  Job 
xl.  17;  Ezek.  xxi.  15;  Jonah  ii.  5.     These  archaic  preterites 
contribute  to  produce  a  pleasing  variety  in  the  style  of  a  ver- 
sion, and  are  grammatically  just  as  accurate  as  the  modern 
forms ;  which,  however,  is  hardly  the  case  with  rent  when  it 
is  used  not  as  a  preterite  only,  but  as  a  present,  as  in  Lev. 
xxi.  10  {sic  161 1);  2  Sam.  iii.  31;  i  Kin.  xi.  31;  Eccles.  iii. 
7;  Isai.  Ixiv.  I  {sic  161 1);  Ezek.  xiii.  11,  13;  xxix.  7;  Hos. 
xiii.  8;  Joel  ii.   13;  Matt.  vii.  6;  John  xix.  24.     Other  anti- 
quated preterites  are  begun  Num.  xxv.  i  {bega7i  161 1  in  Gen. 
iv.  26):  d7'U7ik  Gen.  xliii.  34  (text  not  margin);  Dan.  v.  4: 
shaked  Ecclus.  xxix.  18:  sp7'a7igGtn.  xli.  6  {spnmg  ver.  23): 


The    Orthography.  103 


stale  Qoxi,  xxxi.  20;  2  Kin.  xi.  2  {stole  2  Sam.  xv.  6;  2  Chr. 
xxii.  II  in  1611):  strooke  i  Sam.  ii.  14;  2  Chr.  xiii.  20  {sic 
161 1);  I  Esdr.  iv.  30  i^Mi  stroke  2  Mace.  i.  16;  Matt.  xxvi.  51; 
Luke  xxii.  64;  John  xviii.  22,  also  strake  2  Sam.  xii,  15  ;  xx. 
10,  never  struck):  stunk  Ex.  \\v.  21  {stank  ch.  viii.  14  in 
161 1):  sung  Ezra  iii.  11 :  sunk  Num.  xi.  2  marg.  and  seven 
other  places  {saftk  Ex.  xv.  5,  10):  sivore  1  Mace.  vii.  35: 
wan  I  Mace.  i.  2;  xii.  33  {sic  1611);  2  Mace.  x.  17;  xii.  28 
{won  2  Mace.  xv.  9  in  1611).  Among  past  participles  may 
be  noted  {wast)  begot  Yscclxis.  vii.  28:  {his)  hid  {things)  Obad. 
6:  {have)  sit  Ecclus.  xi.  5.  It  would  be  well  to  retain  lien 
(which  even  modern  Bibles  keep  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  13)  for  lain  in 
Num.  V.  19,  20,  as  also  in  the  three  places,  Judg.  xxi.  11; 
Job  iii,  13;  John  xi.  17.  Other  verbal  forms  deserving 
notice  are  oweth  Lev.  xiv.  35 ;  Acts  xxi.  11,  and  ought  Matt, 
xviii.  24,  28;  Luke  vii.  41,  which  were  not  changed  into 
cwneth  and  <?a:/^// respectively  till  after  1638:  leese  {lose  1762) 
I  Kin.  xviii.  5.  The  ViOMnfiixe  {flix  1629)  was  corrupted 
m\.o  fiux  in  Acts  xxviii.  8  as  early  as  1699.  In  Ex,  xxxv.  19 
modern  Bibles,  after  Blayney,  have  cloths  of  service^  but 
cloathcs  of  161 1  was  rightly  changed  into  clothes  as  early  as 
1629  Camb.  and  retained  up  to  1762  inclusive.  There  is  a 
real  distinction,  as  Dr  Field  notices,  between  cloths  and 
clothes. 

It  is  hard  to  discover  any  intelligible  principle  which 
guided  the  editors  of  1762  and  1769  in  their  vexatious 
changes  of  several  particles  into  their  cognate  forms.  Thus 
for  amongst  they  print  aino?ig  81  times,  for  towards  they 
print  toward  121  times,  for  besides  they  give  beside  44  times', 
yet  keep  so  often  the  forms  they  reject  elsewhere  that  it  is  plain 

^  In  Josh.  xxii.  29  the  change  sense,  as  may  be  seen  from  ver. 

of    besides   of    161 1    to   beside   hy  19,  where  the  Hebrew  is  virtually 

1629  (Lond.),  1630,  1769,  moderns  the    same.     Both    forms    of    the 

(but  not   by   1629   Camb.,    1638,  English  word  then  meant  "except," 

1744,    1762)   will    not   affect   the  which  is  the  signification  here. 


104    ^^'^^-  ^■]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

they  have  no  design  to  disuse  them  altogether.  Such  wanton, 
or  perhaps  merely  careless,  variations  should  be  cancelled 
without  mercy.  Nor  can  there  be  any  good  ground  for 
turning  sith  into  siuee  as  does  Dr  Paris  in  Jer.  xv.  7 ;  Zech. 
iv.  10  marg.)  2  Esdr.  vii.  53,  and  Blayney  in  Jer.  xxiii.  38, 
the  rather  as  sith  is  in  our  modern  Bibles  (Ezek.  xxxv.  6) : 
sithence  in  2  Esdr.  x.  14  was  modernized  into  since  as  early  as 
16 16,  so  that  it  must  have  been  going  out  of  use  even  then. 
All  our  Bibles  preserve  whiles  in  2  Mace.  ix.  9;  x.  36,  yet  in 
Ps.  xlix.  18  ivhile  is  printed  in  1762;  in  Isai.  Ixv.  24  whiles  in 
1769  becomes  while;  ^t'/^/Z^-/ becomes  while  in  Heb.  iii.  15; 
ix.  17  in  the  books  of  1629;  in  2  Mace.  vii.  24  whilst  is 
substituted  for  whiles  in  1629.  The  interchanges  between 
to  and  unto  in  Gen.  xxv.  33  (1629  Lond.);  i  Kin.  xxii.  53 
(1616);  I  Mace.  vii.  20  (1629  Camb.);  Luke  xx.  42  (1616); 
2  Cor.  ix.  9  (1629  Camb.),  are  not  very  intelligible.  Amidst 
all  this  unmeaning  tampering  with  the  text,  the  several  editors, 
especially  those  of  1762  and  1769,  carried  out  to  the  full  at 
least  two  things  on  which  they  had  set  their  minds:  they  got 
rid  of  the  quaint  old  moe  for  more  (spelt  mo  in  the  Bible  of 
1638)  from  the  35  places  in  which  it  occurs  in  the  standard 
copies,  and  in  364  places  (e.g.  i  Cor.  xiv.  18)  they  have  al- 
tered the  nominative  plural  j'^?^  into  ji'^,  besides  that  Blayney 
makes  the  opposite  change  in  Build  y 02c  Num.  xxxii.  24; 
Wash  you  Isai.  i.  16;  Get  you  Zech.  vi.  7;  Tur?i  you  Zech. 
ix.  12.  In  one  particular  the  orthography  of  modern  Bibles 
may  well  be  acquiesced  in.  The  word  midst  is  often  spelt 
in  the  Authorized  Bibles  as  middest ;  about  Ezekiel  and 
some  of  the  later  Prophets  almost  constantly  for  a  time. 
This  form,  however  strange  to  our  eyes,  would  have  the 
advantage  of  suggesting  the  true  character  of  the  word  as 
a  superlative  adjective;  but  the  spelling  varies  so  much 
between  midst ^  middest,  midest  (Judith  vi.  11),  middes  (Ps.^ 
cxvi.  19;  Acts  xxvii.  21;  Phil.  ii.  15),  and  mids  (Jer.  xxxvii. 


The  I/idcJifiitc  Article.  105 

12;  Hist,  of  Susanna  vcr.  34,  48,  &:c.),  that  it  seems  safer  to 
fall  back  on  our  general  rule  of  adopting  that  one  out  of 
several  forms  which  best  suits  the  modern  usage. 

The  practice  of  the  Authorized  Version  with  respect  to 
placing  the  indefinite  article  a  or  an  before  a  word  beginning 
with  It  calls  for  some  consideration,  the  rather  as  modern 
Bibles,  with  the  exception  of  the  American  (see  above,  p.  37) 
which  conforms  to  present  usage,  have  made  no  systematic 
or  important  changes  regarding  it.  It  would  seem  indeed 
as  if  a  were  but  an  abridged  form  of  aii^  the  n  being 
dropped  before  an  initial  consonant  proper,  and  only  sub- 
sequently, under  certain  limitations,  before  h  aspirated. 
Thus  Chaucer's  use  of  a7i  hallc,  an  /larc,  an  Jicrth^  is  uniform, 
and  the  fashion  maintained  its  ground  far  into  the  sixteenth 
century.  In  the  earliest  draft  of  our  English  Litany,  con- 
tained in  the  King's  Primer  of  1545,  we  read,  ^''  an  heart  to 
love  and  dread  thee,''  as  it  still  remains  in  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer;  and  such  cases  as  a  harpe  i  Sam.  x.  5 ; 
a  hert  Ecclus.  xvii.  6  in  Coverdale's  Bible  of  1535  are  quite 
rare,  though  no  doubt  the  custom  of  dropping  the  ?i  had 
already  begun.  In  the  Authorized  Version  of  161 1  we 
mark  a  further  step  in  the  same  direction.  As  a  general 
rule  a7i  is  there  retained  before  the  sounded  //,  though  the 
exceptions  are  more  numerous  than  some  have  supposed, 
and  suggest  to  a  modern  editor  the  propriety  of  conforming 
the  Bible  to  the  now  universal  habit  of  the  best  English 
writers.  The  following  list  will  shew  how  the  matter  stands 
in  the  original  books: 

An  habci-gcoii  Ex.    xxviii.    32;    xxxix.   23^:    an  habit  Heb.    v.   14 
marg. :  a  habitation  Jer.  xxxiii.  12  up  to  1629  Camb.,  1630,  but  an  in  8 

^  This  is  apparently  correct,  if  the    first    syllable,    by   losing    its 

Dean     Alford's     rule     be     true :  accent,  also  loses  some  portion  of 

"When    the    accent    is     on    the  the    strength    of    its    aspiration" 

second,   or  any  following  syllable  {llic  Qtieen^s  English,  p.  43). 
of  the  word ,  we  may  use  a;/,  because 


io6    Sect,  v.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {1611). 

places  :  an  Hachmonite  1  Chr.  xi.  11  :  a  hair  i  Kin.  i.  52^;  Luke  xxi. 
18  up  to  1629  Camb.  and  Lond.,  1630,  an  in  3  places  :  a  hairy  Gen. 
xxvii.  II,  an  twice:  a  half  Ex.  xxv.  10  (ist  and  3rd,  an  in  2nd  until 
1629),  17,  23;  xxxvi.  21;  xxxvii.  i  [ter)^  lo ;  Ezek.  xl.  42  {2nd); 
2  Esdr.  xiii.  45,  but  an  in  16  places  :  a  hammer  ^^r.  xxiii.  29,  a«  -^aw- 
w^r  Judg.  iv.  21  :  a  hand  Ex.  xix.  13  up  to  1638,  but  an  5  times:  an 
handbreadth  7  times  :  an  handful  5  times  :  a  handmaid  Gen  xxix.  24  up 
to  the  two  editions  of  1629,  but  an  twice  :  an  hanging  thrice :  a  happy 
2  Mace.  vii.  24:  a  hard  ^  Kin.  ii.  10;  Ps.  xxxi.  18  marg.\  Ecclus.  xl. 
15,  but  an  4  times:  a  harlot  Joel  iii.  3  up  to  1769,  but  an  in  21  places: 
an  harmless  Wisd.  xviii.  3  :  a  harp  i  Sam.  x.  5 ;  i  Chr.  xxv.  3,  but  an 
4  times :  an  hart  Isai.  xxxv.  6  :  an  harvest  Hos.  vi.  11:  an  hasty 
Ecclus.  xxviii.  1 1  {bis) :  a  hat  1  Mace.  iv.  12:  a  haven  2  Esdr.  xii.  42, 
but  an  thrice  :  a  haughty  Ecclus.  xxiii.  4,  but  an  Prov.  xvi.  18. 

An  he  {lafnb  or  goat)  thrice:  a  head  '^xiiSi'dx  xiv.  18,  an  Josh.  xxii.  14  : 
an  head-tyre  i  Esdr.  iii.  6 :  a7i  healer  Isai.  iii.  7  :  an  healingD^nAv.  27 
marg.  :  a  heap  Isai.  xvii.  11;  Ecclus.  xi.  32,  but  an  in  15  places:  a 
//^«;rr  Wisd.  i.  6;  James  i.  23  :  «  heart  i  Chr.  xii.  33  marg.  {bis)\ 
Ecclus.  xiii.  26;  xvii.  6;  xxii.  17,  but  an  15  times  :  a  hearth  Zech.  xii. 
6  up  to  1762,  an  hearth  Ps.  cii.  3  :  an  heathen  Matt,  xviii.  17  :  a7i  heave 
[pfferi^ig)  II  times:  an  heavenly  Heb.  xi.  16:  a  heavy  Ecclus.  xxv.  23 
up  to  1629,  but  an  5  times:  an  Hebj-eza  10  times:  an  Hebretvess  ^&c. 
xxxiv.  9  :  ati  hedge  4  times  :  an  heifer  9  times :  an  heinous  Job  xxxi.  1 1 : 
an  heir  3  times,  correctly  by  modern  usage :  an  hchnet  5  times :  a  help 
Ps.  xliv.  26  marg.',  Ecclus.  xxxiv.  16  until  1762;  xxxvi.  24,  but  a7i  5 
times :  a  helper  Ps.  xxii.  1 1  marg.,  but  an  thrice  :  a  hen  Matt,  xxiii.  57; 
Luke  xiii.  34:  an  herald  'D^n.  iii.  4:  an  herb  Isai.  Ixvi.  14  is  probably 
right:  att  herd  twice:  an  herdman  Amos  vii.  14:  an  heretick  Tit.  iii. 
10  :  an  heritage  occurs  I4  times,  and  we  should  retain  an,  regarding  the 
h  as  mute;  compare  heir^  herb,  honest,  honour,  honourable,  hour, 
humbW^. 

An  hidden  Job  iii.  16:  a  hiding  Isai.  liii.  3  marg.  up  to  1762,  but 
an  Deut.  xxxii.  38  jnarg. ;  Isai.  xxxii.  2  :  a  high  i  Sam.  xxii.  6  marg. ; 
Isai.  XXX.  13;  2  Esdr.  ii.  43,  but  aji  32  times:  a  highzuay  Isai.  xix.  23; 
xl.  3,  but  an  Isai.  xi.  16;  xxxv.  8:  a  hill  Josh.  xxiv.  33;  Isai.  xxx.  17 
up  to  both  Bibles  of  1629,  but  an  5  times  :  aii  hin  always  (21  times): 

^  Synd.  A.  3.  14,  not  Oxford  but  they  have  all  one  property  in 

reprint.  common,  in  that   they  are   Latin 

^  Of  these  words  whose  initial  words  coming  to  us   through  the 

h     is     unaspirated,    humble    and  French, 
perhaps  herb  are  a  little  doubtful ; 


The  Indefinite   Article.  107 

rt« //z>^  Gen.  XXX.  i"^  7narg.\  an  hired 'j  times:  an hifelinggixxnes:  an 
hissing  6  times:  an  Hittite  Ezek.  xvi.  3,  45. 

An  hold  Judg.  ix.  46;  1  Sara,  xxiii.  14:  a  hole  Ex.  xxxix.  23  up  to 
1769;  2  Kin.  xii.  9;  Jer.  xiii.  4;  Ezek.  viii.  7,  but  an  hole  Ex.  xxviii. 
32  ;  2  Mace.  iv.  14  marg. :  a  hollow  2  Mace.  i.  19  up  to  1762,  an  hollow 
Judg.  XV.  19;  2  Mace.  ii.  5  :  «  holm  tree  Hist,  of  Susanna  ver.  58,  up  to 
1762  :  a  holy  Lev.  xxvii.  23;  Isai.  xxx.  29;  Wisd.  xviii.  9,  but  an  holy 
no  less  than  45  times:  a  home-born  Jer.  ii.  14:  an  homer  always  (10 
times) :  an  honest  5  times,  an  honour  thrice,  an  honourable  4  times,  and 
rightly  (see  heritage  above)  :  an  honeycomb  5  times:  an  hoofY.y..  x.  26: 
an  hook  4  times:  a  horti  Dan.  viii.  5  niarg.,  but  an  horn  i  Kin.  i.  39; 
Luke  i.  69:  an  horrible  always  (6  times):  an  horror  Gen.  xv.  12:  « 
horse  2  Mace.  iii.  25  up  to  1629,  but  an  7  times:  a  horseman  2  Mace, 
xii.  35,  but  an  2  Kin.  ix.  17  :  an  host  15  times  :  an  hostage  I  Mace.  i. 
10  :  an  hostile  Acts  xii.  20  marg. :  a  hot  Lev.  xiii.  24  ;  Ecclus.  xxiii.  16 ; 
1  Tim.  iv.  2,  but  an  hot  ^  Esdr.  iv.  48  :  an  hour  6  times,  and  rightly:  a 
house  Ex.  xii.  30;  Lev.  xiv,  34  (not  ver.  55  before  1769);  2  Sam.  xx.  3 
marg.  {an  1762);  i  Chr.  xvii.  5  {an  both  Bibles  of  1629)  ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  6 
fuaig.;  Ecclus.  xxi.  18;  i  Mace.  vii.  37  ;  Mark  iii.  25;  Luke  xi.  17 
{bis),  but  an  house  84  times  :  an  householder  Matt.  xiii.  52  ;  xx.  i  :  an 
hoiulifigjex.  XXV.  36;  Zeph.  i.  10. 

An  huckster  Ecclus.  xxvi.  29  :  an  humble  Prov.  xvi.  19 ;  Song  ver. 
16,  is  probably  true,  and  is  so  represented  in  the  American  Bible :  a 
hungry  Isai.  xxix.  8  up  to  1762,  2  Esdr.  xvi.  6  up  to  1629,  but  an 
Ecclus.  iv.  2  :  a  husband  Ruth  i.  12  (once  out  of  3  times,  but  an  thrice 
in  1762) ;  Jer.  xxxi.  32  mai-g.  (not  text)  up  to  1629  Camb. ;  Ecclus.  iv. 
10,  but  an  15  times  :  an  husbandman  Gen.  ix.  20;  Zech.  xiii.  5. 

An  hymn  Matt,  xxvi,  30;  Mark  xiv.  26:  an  hypocrite  ^oh  xiii.  16', 
Prov.  xi.  9  ;  Isai.  ix.  17;  Ecclus.  i.  29  ;  xxxiii.  2:  an  hypocritical  Isai.  x.  6. 

This  variable  and  inconsistent  practice  of  the  Authorized 
Bible,  rather  concealed  than  remedied  in  later  editions,  will 
probably  be  allowed  to  justify  the  rejection  of  n  of  the  in- 
definite article,  whensoever  modern  usage  shall  demand  it. 
In  the  case  of  the  word  /mndj-ed  dXonc  this  can  hardly  be  done, 
as  well  because  that  out  of  the  150  places  or  more,  wherein 
hund^-ed  occurs,  a  is  found  before  it  only  in  six  (Ex.  xxxviii. 
9;  Judg.  XX.  10  once;  i  Kin.  vii.  2;  Isai.  xxxvii.  36;  Ecclus. 
xii.  4;  I  Mace.  vii.  41),  whereof  all  but  Isai.  xxxvii.  36  are 


io8    SecL  v.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

corrected  in  subsequent  copies,  as  especially  because  an 
hundred  is  still  found  in  some  recent  writers  conspicuous  for 
purity  of  style.  The  choice  between  an  hungred  (Matt.  iv. 
2;  xii.  I,  3;  XXV.  35,  37,  42,  44;  Mark  ii.  25;  Luke  vi.  3) 
and  a  himgird,  which  latter  does  not  occur  in  161 1,  is  more 
precarious,  inasmuch  as  here  aji  or  a  is  probably  not  the 
article  at  all,  but  a  prefix  expressive  of  a  continued  state,  as 
"  a  building  "  2  Chr.  xvi.  6,  i  Esdr.  vi.  20;  "a  coming  "  Luke 
ix.  42  ;  "a  dying"  Luke  viii.  42,  Heb.  xi.  21  ;  "a  fishing" 
John  xxi.  3;  "a  preparing"  i  Pet.  iii.  20  (where,  however, 
a  might  represent  the  prepositions  at^  or  oii) ;  athirst  Matt. 
xxv.  44,  for  which  thirsty  is  substituted  in  vers.  35,  37,  42, 
where  the  connection  with  an  hungred  is  not  so  closed 
An  is  also  made  to  precede  w  in  three  passages  of  the 
standard  Bibles,  an  wJiole  Num.  x.  2  up  to  1762  (but  not 
in  Num.  xi,  20),  an  whore  Prov.  xxiii.  27  also  up  to  1762  ; 
2  Esdr.  xvi.  49  altered  after  1638.  Such  a  one,  where  the 
sound  is  cognate  to  that  of  7i<,  should  be  of  this  form  if  we 
acquiesce  in  a  before  whole,  &c.,  and  is  adopted  by  our 
Translators  in  Gen.  xli.  38 ;  Ruth  iv.  i  ;  Ps.  1.  21  {an  1762) ; 
Ixviii.  21  {an  1762);  Ecclus.  xxvi.  28  {cm  1638);  i  Cor, 
V.  5  {an  1638),  II  {an  both  books  of  1629);  2  Cor.  x.  11 
{a7i  1629  Camb.);  xii.  2,5  {an  both  books  of  1629);  Gal. 
vi.  I  {an  1629  Camb.);  Philem.  9  {an  1762)  :  but  such  an 
OTIC  Job  xiv.  3;  Ecclus.  vi.  14;  x.  9;  xx.  15  ;  2  Mace.  vi. 
27. 

My  and  mine,  thy  and  thine,  should  of  course  be  used 
respectively  as  a  and  aji  before  a  consonant,  or  vowel,  or  h ; 
but  neither  the  original  Translators  nor  later  editors  have 
shown  any  knowledge  of  the  fact :    thus  in  Rom.  xvi.  23 

^  As  "a  work,"  2  Chr.  ii.  18       "Poor  Tom's  a  cold,"  which  seems 

{'^'y;lrh\,      compare      "await."  exactly  parallel.     So  "His  great- 

^      •-;-:/  ^  ness  is  a  ripenmg     {iienry  VIII. 

Acts  IX.  24  with  Acts  XX.  19.       _  ^(,t  jjj_  S(,gne  2). 
-  Dr  Angus  alleges  Shakespeare  s 


jlfy  or  mi/ie,   6>r.     The  Grammar.  109 


mine  host  occurs  in  all  our  Bibles.  The  changes  introduced 
in  more  recent  books  are  apparently  capricious  or  accidental, 
being  as  often  wrong  as  right.  Thus  if  my  of  161 1  is  turned 
into  mme  before  integrity  Job  xxvii.  5  in  1762,  and  mine 
correctly  changed  into  my  before  head  by  the  same,  Luke 
vii.  46 ;  the  opposite  alterations  of  my  for  mine  before  eye- 
lids Job  xvi.  16  in  16 17,  of  thy  for  thine  before  eyes  Job  xv. 
12  in  1769,  and  of  thine  for  thy  before  hands  i  Mace.  xv.  7 
in  1629,  prove  clearly  that  they  had  no  principle  to  guide 
them  in  the  matter.  Mutations  of  these  forms  made  for  the 
better  in  later  Bibles  will  be  seen  in  Deut.  xvi.  15  and  xviii. 
4  (1769);  Isai.  Ixiv.  8  (1629  Camb.);  Ezek.  xvi.  11  (1762); 
Zech.  viii.  6  (1629  Camb.);  Tobit.  ii.  13  and  v.  14  (1629)  ; 
Wisd.  viii.  17  (1629);  i  Mace.  ii.  18  (1629);  Luke  xiii.  12 
(1616);  2  Cor.  xi.  26  (1629,  both  books).  •  Those  changed 
for  the  worse  are  Deut.  ii.  24  and  xv.  7  (1769) ;  Ruth  ii.  13 
(2nd)  and  I  Sam.  ii.  35  (1629,  both  books);  Job  xxxi.  7 
(1762);  xl.  4  (1629  Camb.);  Ps.  cxvi.  16  (later  than  1638); 
Eccles.  iii.  18  (1629  Lond.);  2  Esdr.  x.  55  and  Ecclus.  v.  8 
(1629);  Ecclus.  Ii.  2  (1629,  1630). 

The  apparent  solecisms  also  and  unusual  grammatical 
constructions  of  our  standard  of  161 1  should  be  scru- 
pulously retained,  without  any  attempt  to  amend  them.  Such 
as  they  are,  they  comprise  an  integral  part  of  the  Transla- 
tion, and  preserve  phrases  once  legitimate  enough,  which 
have  since  grown  obsolete.  Thus  "riches,"  which  is  plural 
in  Ps.  Ixxii.  10,  retains  its  old  use  as  singular  in  Col.  i.  27  ; 
Rev.  xviii.  17.  Later  editors  have  but  ill  spent  their  pains 
in  partial  attempts  to  remove  or  conceal  such  peculiarities. 
Some,  indeed,  violate  the  concord  of  the  verb  with  its  sub- 
ject, as  Ex.  ix.  31  "the  flax  and  the  barley  was  smitten,"  as  ^ 
in  the  Hebrew :  "  tidings  is  brought  "  2  Sam.  xviii.  3 1  marg. : 
"thou  wast  he  that  leddest"  i  Chr.  xi.  2  :  "earth  and  water 
was  wont"  Judith   ii.   7   marg.:    "the   number  of  names 


no    Sect  F.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

together  were"  Acts  i.  15^:  "a  great  company... were 
obedient"  Acts  vi.  7,  as  in  the  Greek.  In  i  Cor.  vii.  32, 
however,  we  acquiesce  in  "  the  things  that  belong "  (see 
Appendix  A),  "  belong  "  being  substituted  for  "  belongeth  " 
as  early  as  1612:  compare  also  i  Cor.  xiv.  10,  below  p.  191. 
These  faults  may  be  imputed  to  venial  carelessness,  to  the 
momentary  relaxing  of  close  attention  which  every  one  is 
sensible  of  in  the  course  of  a  long  task.  At  other  times  our 
version  reminds  the  reader  of  some  racy  idiomatic  expression 
which  once  formed  a  part  of  the  spoken  or  even  of  the  writ- 
ten language  of  our  ancestors.  A  good  example  of  this  kind 
of  archaism,  which  the  best  grammarians  even  now  hesitate 
to  condemn,  is  the  double  genitive  in  such  cases  as  Gen. 
xxxi.  I  and  the  rest,  given  in  Appendix  C,  p.  216  note  i. 
The  opposite  practice  of  suppressing  the  sign  of  the  posses- 
sive altogether,  which  survives  in  modern  Bibles,  Judg.  iii.  16 
"of  a  cubit  length,"  is  found  in  161 1  in  Lev.  vii.  23;  xiv.  54 
(Appendix  C,  p.  216);  xxv.  5  "it^  own  accord";  and  in  one 
issue  at  Esther  i.  13  "the  king  manner^"  (Appendix  B  below, 
pp.  207,  210):  it  was  never  removed  from  Rev.  xviii.  12  {bis). 
It  may  be  stated  here  that  the  habit  of  placing  the  apostro- 
phe before  or  after  s  to  indicate  the  possessive  case,  singular 
or  plural  respectively,  was  first  adopted  by  the  editor  of  1762 
in  part,  more  consistently  by  Blayney,  yet  with  so  little  care 
that  not  very  few  errors  in  the  placing  of  the  apostrophe, 
such  as  one  glance  at  the  original  would  have  detected,  have 


^  Thus  also  Rev.  ix.   16  (and  ^  The  only  place  in  our  version 

viii.  9)  in  all.     In  i  Esdr.  viii.  49  where  "it"  occurs  in  the  possessive 

a  similar  oversight  should  be  cor-  case,    although    much   wanted   in 

rected,  as   also   in    Acts  xxv.   23  Zech.  iv.  2.    See  Mr  Aldis  Wright's 

"was"    amended     into    "were."  full   note   on    "It"   in   his   JBible 

See  Appendix  A.    In  Tobit  iv.  10  Word-Book,    and    Bain,    English 

(see  Appendix  C),  the  text  of  161 1  Grammar,  p.  87. 

is   correct.     Compare   also    Cant.  ^  So  take  Shakespeare's  "  Even 

iv.  2  with  ch.  vi.  6;  Ecclus.  xxxv.  daughter  welcome  ",  {As  You  Like 

15.  Jt,  Act  V.  Scene  4). 


The    Gramma}'.  1 1 1 


clung  to  our  common  Bibles  to  this  day.  These  are  all  noted 
in  Appendix  A  (see  below,  p.  152  note),  and,  being  of  mo- 
dern date,  ought  to  be  distinguished  by  being  placed  within 
brackets  :  e.g.  i  Sam.  ii.  13;  i  Chr.  vii.  2,  40.  Since  there 
exists  no  doubt  that  this  s  represents  the  Old  Enghsh  posses- 
sive ending  -es  or  -is,  it  is  manifest  that  the  pronoun  his 
standing  after  the  possessive  noun  is  a  mere  error.  We 
should  accordingly  adopt  the  changes  of  1762,  "Asa's  heart" 

1  Kin.  XV.  14  for  "Asa  his  heart"  (Bishops');  "  Mordecai's 
matters "  Esther  iii.  4  for  "  Mordecai  his  matters,"  even 
though  we  elsewhere  retain  the  original  form  in  i  Esdr.  ii. 
30;  iii.  7,  8;  Judith  xiii.  9;  xv.  it;  2  Mace.  i.  "t^t^  marg.',  iv. 
38;  xii.  22  (Bishops'),  all  in  the  debased  style  of  the 
Apocrypha.  The  antiquated  singular  for  plural  with  the 
word  "year"  may  be  kept  in  2  Kin.  xxiii.  36;  Jer.  Iii.  i  ; 
Dan.  V.  31;  Amos  i.  i ;  i  Esdr.  i.  39;  i  Mace.  ix.  57;  2  Mace. 
iv.  23;  Rom.  iv.  19  (see  App.  C.  in  locis  citatis).  In  like 
manner  we  have  in  161 1  "two  mile"  John  xi.  18  marg. 
(App.  C):  "three  pound"  i  Kin.  x.  17;  Ezra  ii.  69;  Neh. 
vii.  71,  72;  I  Mace.  xiv.  24;  xv.  18;  John  xix.  39:  "thirty 
change"  Judg.  xiv.  12,  13  :  "thirty  foot"  Ezek.  xli.  6  marg.: 
so  "an  eight  days"  Luke  ix.  28:  these  last  have  never  been 
altered.  The  use  of  the  cardinal  for  the  ordinal  number 
we  would  suppress  only  four  times,  the  earliest  being  Gen. 
viii.  13,  on  which  passage  in  Appendix  A  the  case  is  stated. 
Nor  need  we  meddle  with  a  few  manifest  inaccuracies  of 
other  kinds,  most  of  which  the  hands  even  of  Dr  Blayney 
have  spared.  Such  are  the  pronouns  pleonastic  in  "  which 
pains... they  slack  not"  2  Esdr,  xvi.  38;  "Onias...he  went" 

2  Mace.  iv.  4,  5;  "the  keeper... he  drew"  Acts  xvi.  27^:  as 
also  the  double  negatives  in  "shall  not  leave... neither  name 

1  In  Heb.  ix.  12,  though  "he"  dispensed  with.  The  pleonastic  it 
before  "entered  "  may  be  techni-  in  Isai.  xxviii.  4  (see  Appendix  A) 
cally  wrong,  it  could  not  well  be       mightverywell  have  been  retained. 


TI2    Sect,  v.]    Authorized  Versmt  of  the  Bible  (1611). 

nor..."  2  Sam.  xiv.  7;  "Give  none  offence,  neither... nor... 
nor"  I  Cor.  x.  32  :  but  see  Lev.  xvii.  14  below,  p.  203, 
note  2.  The  objective  in  the  place  of  the  nominative  in 
''him  that  soweth"  Pro  v.  vi.  19  was  corrected  in  1769; 
it  is  less  clear  that  "whom"  is  wrong  in  Matt.  xvi.  13,  15; 
Acts  xiii.  25.  The  use  of  the  adjective  for  the  adverb  is 
not  unfrequent  in  the  Authorized  Version  (Eph.  iv.  i ; 
I  Thess.  ii.  12;  2  Pet.  ii.  6),  and  may  not  be  disturbed 
even  in  so  extreme  a  case  as  "wonderful  great"  2  Chr.  ii,  9. 
Double  superlatives,  "moststraitest"  Actsxxvi.  5;  "chiefest" 
Mark  x.  44,  have  ceased  to  displease  by  reason  of  their  very 
familiarity.  Verbs  transitive  and  intransitive  are  sometimes 
confounded;  e.g.  "  lying  in  wait "  Acts  xx.  19  compared  with 
"  laying  await  "  Acts  ix.  24;  "  to  be  heat"  Dan.  iii.  19;  "  shall 
ripe"  2  Esdr.  xvi.  26;  "will  fat"  Ecclus.  xxvi.  13  (see  Appen- 
dix C  for  the  last  three);  "can  white"  Mark  ix.  3;  compare 
"did  fear"  Wisd.  xvii.  9.  The  following  errors  of  161 1  have 
not  yet  been  touched,  the  first  three  being  imported/rom  the 
Bishops'  Version:  "that  we  should  live  still  in  wickedness  and 
to  suffer,  and  not  to  know  wherefore  "  2  Esdr.  iv.  12  ;  "  if  any 
man  knew  where  he  were"  John  xi.  57;  "or  ever  he  come 
near"  Acts  xxiii.  15;  "to  have  gained"  (with  "should" 
preceding),  ibid,  xxvii.  21,  after  Tyndale  and  all  the  rest, 
only  that  1762  (not  1769)  omits  "to";  "if  we  know  that 
he  hear  us"  i  John  v.  15  (Bishops',  after  Tyndale).  The 
next  instance  seems  to  have  been  influenced  by  the  Greek 
(like  Acts  vii.  39),  "she  took  //,  and  laid  //  on  her  mule; 
and  made  ready  her  carts,  and  laid  them  (a^Va)  thereon" 
Judith  XV.  II. 

A  few  miscellaneous  observations  may  close  this  branch 
of  the  subject. 

The  more  English  prefix  tm-  in  the  place  of  /;;/-  or  in- 
may  be  restored  in  all  the  eleven  passages  where  it  was  given 
in  161 1 ;  even  modern  Bibles  keep  tuiperfect.,  Ps.  cxxxix.  16. 


The  Orthography.  113 


This  form  comes  chiefly  from  the  Bishops'  Version;  and  except 
in  those  cases  cited  on  Matt.  xvii.  20  in  Appendix  C  (below, 
p.  233),  it  is  found  only  in  Wisdom  and  Ecclesiasticus.  To  set 
s  after  the  Hebrew  termination  -im  (Gen.  iii.  24;  Ex.  xxv.  18; 
xxvi.  I,  &c.)  is  a  manifest  inaccuracy,  and  if  the  American 
rule  {Report,  &c.  p.  22)  had  been  adopted  of  rejecting  the 
s  throughout,  no  valid  objection  could  be  raised.  The 
middle  course  taken  in  recent  English  editions,  that  of 
sometimes  making  the  required  change  and  sometimes  not, 
admits  of  no  reasonable  defence.  We  have  simply  to  abide 
by  the  standard  of  161 1  in  every  instance,  not  caring  to 
adopt  even  such  changes  as  that  set  down  in  Appendix  C 
on  Gen.  xxvi.  i.  In  regard  to  the  interjection  O  or  Oh, 
the  American  plan  (see  above,  p.  37)  looks  tempting  from  its 
simplicity,  since  it  limits  0  to  the  pure  vocative,  and  em- 
ploys Oh  for  the  optative,  which  practically  introduces  the 
latter  into  the  great  majority  of  places.  But  Oh  in  English 
is  neither  dignified  nor  pleasing  enough  for  constant  repeti- 
tion, and  after  having  vainly  attempted  to  discover  the  law 
observed  by  our  Translators,  it  may  be  judged  advisable  to 
limit  Oh  to  passages  where  the  optative  sense  is  very  de- 
cided, as  when  it  answers  to  the  Hebrew  ^^^  Gen.  xix.  18, 
20,  or  D5<  I  Chr.  iv.  10,  or  n3X  Ps.  cxvi.  16,  or  ''in  Isai.  xxix.  i 
viarg. :  unless  it  be  deemed  better  to  banish  Oh  altogether. 
The  intensive  forms  of  certain  words  are  occasionally  put 
for  the  weaker,  and  vice  versa,  perhaps  for  euphony:  thus 
bide  Rom.  xi.  23  becomes  abide,  ware  in  Matt.  xxiv.  50 
becomes  aware  (see  App.  C  in  loco),  both  in  1762:  rise  be- 
comes arise  i  Sam.  xxiv.  8  (both  books  of  1629,  1630); 
xxv.  42  (1629  Camb.,  which  makes  the  opposite  change  in 
ch.  xxviii.  25);  2  Sam.  xix.  8  (1629  Lond.);  Tobit  xii.  21 
(1638);  I  Mace.  ix.  23  (1769);  Mark  x.  i  (1629  Camb.); 
Luke  viii.  24  (16 16).  In  Gen.  xi.  3  thoroughly  best  re- 
presents thorowly  of  i6ii,  though  the  latter  has  throughly 

s.  8 


IT4     Sect.  F.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {1611). 

in  Ex.  xxi.  19  (where  thoroiigJily  is  found  in  1762);  2  Kin. 
xi.  18;  Job  vi.  2.  Lastly,  it  ought  to  be  stated  that  the 
diphthongs  ce  and  os  occur  only  in  that  small  Roman  type 
which  in  the  Bibles  of  161 1  answers  to  our  italic,  and  have 
no  corresponding  characters  in  the  black  letter  in  which 
the  text  is  printed.  In  this  way  we  mark  Ccesars  Phil.  i.  13 
7narg.,  choenix  Rev.  vi.  9  piarg.,  the  same  character  being 
set  up  in  both  places.  In  fact,  a  simple  e  represented  both 
these  diphthongs  in  the  ordinary  Bibles  until  after  Blayney's 
time,  when  they  gradually  came  into  use,  though  they  are 
wanting  in  the  latest  copies  for  JVagge  Luke  iii.  25,  Menan 
ver.  31,  Colosse  Col.  i.  2,  nor  do  they  exist  at  all  in  the 
American  book,  except  in  chcenix.  In  161 1  indeed  they 
found  more  favour  than  afterwards,  for  beside  the  margins 
afore-mentioned,  we  meet  with  Codosyria  in  i  Esdr.  ii. 
17,  &c.,  Aenon  John  iii.  23,  which  double  vowels,  after 
having  been  made  real  diphthongs  in  1630,  and  partly  in 
both  books  of  1629,  were  converted  into  simple  e  in  the 
influential  edition  of  1638. 

The  employment  of  capital  letters  was  much  more  free 
in  the  seventeenth  century  than  at  present,  and  in  the 
Authorized  Version  whole  classes  of  words  that  seem  little 
entitled  to  that  distinction  are  constantly  so  represented. 
Such  are  Altar ^  A?-k,  Court,  Hangings  Mercy-seat,  Noble, 
Priest^  Sabbath,  Statutes,  Tabernacle;  even  Cedar-wood, 
Shittim-wood,  &c.  The  tendency  of  later  times  has  been 
to  diminish  such  capitals  very  considerably,  and  in  a  few 
instances  the  moderns  may  have  gone  a  little  too  far. 
Chei'iibims  has  a  capital  now  only  in  Gen.  iii.  24,  and  the 
Americans  seem  right  in  removing  it  thence.  Archbishop 
Trench  would  restore  the  lost  capital  in  "Vengeance"  Acts 
xxviii.  4,  which  is  not  in  the  Bishops'  Bible,  and  was  with- 
drawn as  early  as  1629  (both  editions);  but  then  we  must 
treat  Wisd.  xi.  20  in  the  same  way,  for  the  personification 


Capital  Letters.  115 


is  just  as  strongly  marked,  though  the  initial  v  is  small  in 
161 1.  Ordinary  words  also,  when  pregnant  with  sacred 
associations,  may  wisely  be  distinguished  by  a  cajDital. 
Such  are  Testimony  Ex.  xvi.  34,  &c.,  Witness  Num.  xvii.  7, 
8,  &c.,  especially  in  Acts  vii.  44,  where  in  161 1  the  w  is 
small.  But  indeed  the  practice  of  our  Translators  in  this 
matter  is  little  more  consistent  than  in  certain  others.  Thus 
we  have  "the  city  of  Salt"  Josh.  xv.  62,  but  "the  valley  of 
salt"  2  Sam  viii.  13,  in  all  our  books  from  161 1  downwards. 
With  Mr  Gorle  (see  above,  p.  79  note  2)  we  prefer  no  capital, 
where  the  character  rather  than  the  name  of  the  region  is 
designated.  Sometimes  an  initial  capital  is  useful  to  intimate 
a  change  of  speaker,  as  in  John  iv.  9,  where  "  For"  of  161 1 
("for"  1629  Camb.,  &c.)  shews  that  the  woman's  speech 
is  already  ended  ^ 

But  what  in  most  instances  is  only  a  matter  of  taste  or 
propriety,  becomes  of  real  importance  where  the  Divine 
Persons  are  spoken  of.  The  familiar  rule  that  Spi?-it  should 
have  a  capital  when  the  Holy  Ghost  or  Spirit  Himself  is 
indicated,  while  spirit  ought  to  be  used  in  other  cases,  even 
when  His  power  or  influence  is  referred  to,  may  be  as  safe 
as  any,  yet  in  application  it  gives  rise  to  occasional  per- 
plexity, which  the  inconsistencies  of  the  standard  and  other 
editions  do  little  to  remove.  Thus  in  Gen.  xli.  38  the 
Bible  of  161 1  has  spirit  (changed  as  early  as  16 13,  though 
Spirit  was  not  finally  adopted  before  1767),  while  in  the 
precise  parallel  (Ex.  xxxi.  3)  it  reads  Spirit.  The  original 
edition  is  right  also  in  2  Chr.  xxiv.  20  {s);  Ps.  cxxxix.  7  {s)\ 
Isai.  xi.  2  {S  once,  and  s  three  times);  xxx.  i  (6");  lix.  19  {s)\ 
Matt.  iv.  I  (5);  Mark  i.  12  (6*);  Acts  x.  19  (j-,  as  in  ch.  xi.  12, 
28);  Rom.  i.  4  (.S);  i  John  v.  8  (6",  as  all  in  ver.  6),  against 

^  James  iv.  5  is  less  easy  to  deal  ions)  "  The  spirit  "  has  prevailed, 
with.  In  161 1  we  have  "the  as  if  a  quotation  began  at  this 
spirit,"  liut  from  1629  (both  edit-       point,  which  is  hardly  true. 


1 1 6    Sect.  VI.]    A uthorized  Version  of  the  Bible  ( 1 6 1 1 ) . 

some  or  many  later  Bibles,  but  it  wrongly  has  S  in  Num.  xi. 
17,  25  {bis)^  29.  In  2  Esdr.  vi.  39  Spiritus  calls  for  the  capi- 
tal, when  the  verse  is  compared  with  Gen.  i.  2,  though  none 
hitherto  have  so  printed  it,  whereas  spiramen  2  Esdr.  xvi.  62 
requires  the  opposite.  Thus  every  case  must  be  considered 
on  its  own  merits.  So  again,  while  we  admit  that  "  Son  of 
God  "  or  "  Son  of  man,"  wheresoever  the  word  refers  to  the 
Lord  Christ,  should  invariably  have  a  capital  letter  \  we 
may  legitimately  question  its  propriety  in  Dan.  iii.  25 ;  vii.  13, 
where  it  does  not  appear  in  161 1 :  only  that  the  analogy  of 
Rev.  i.  13  persuades  us  to  receive  -Sfrom  the  books  of  1629 
(Lond.),  1630.  Appellations  derived  from  the  Divine  attri- 
butes should  be  indicated  by  capitals,  whatever  the  variations 
of  editions;  and  we  ought  to  be  more  studious  of  uniformity 
in  such  matters  than  of  following  the  inconsistencies  of 
editors  that  have  preceded  us.  Thus,  when  relating  to  God, 
we  adopt  Author  (Wisd.  xiii.  3),  Father^  the  Most  High,  the 
Holy  One,  Maker^,  Mighty  One,  Redeemer^,  Saviour"^.  As 
regards  Scripture,  we  may  safely  abide  by  the  ordinary  rule 
of  using  the  capital  where  the  whole  body  of  Holy  Writ  is 
meant  (e.g.  John  v.  39;  Acts  xviii.  24;  2  Tim.  iii.  15,  16), 
the  small  s  where  some  particular  portion  is  referred  to^ 

Section  VI. 

On  the  references  to  parallel  texts  of  Scripture  which  are  set  in 

the  margin. 
A  large  proportion  of  the  time  and  labour  bestowed  on 

^  Hence  "Son"  should  stand  in  ri,  comparing  Job  xix.  25. 

John  viii.  36,  but  not  in  ver.  35,  ^  Yet  not  so  with   161 1  in  Ps. 

where  the  reference  is  general.  cvi.  21,  since  temporal  deliverance 

2  As  in  161  r :  but  "maker"  has  seems  to  be  intended  :  cf.  Judg.  iii. 
no  capital  in  Isai.  xlv.  9,  1 1,  where  9  marg. 

a   contrast   is   intended   wdth   the  ^  For    the    small    capitals,   by 

"makers"  of  idols.  w^hich  our  Translation  represents 

3  So    (against   the   standard   of  the    Hebrew  Jehovah,   see   Ap- 
161 1 )  we  will  read  in  Prov.  xxiii.  pendix  A. 


Parallel  Refere7ices.  117 


the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible  has  been  spent  upon  the 
references  to  parallel  texts  which  are  set  in  the  margin. 
The  Authorized  Version  only  followed  the  example  of  earlier 
English  translations  in  providing  these  materials  for  the 
exact  study  of  Holy  Scripture  by  means  of  comparing  one 
portion  of  it  with  others.  In  fact,  more  than  half  the  refer- 
ences contained  in  the  edition  of  161 1  are  derived  from 
manuscript  and  printed  copies  of  the  Vulgate  Latin  Bible, 
and  thus  present  to  us  the  fruits  of  the  researches  of  medi- 
aeval scholars  and  the  traditional  expositions  of  the  Western 
Church.  The  references  found  in  the  standard  of  161 1, 
however,  scarcely  amount  to  a  seventh  part  of  those  printed 
in  modern  Bibles,  and  have  been  computed  not  to  exceed 
nine  thousand';  the  whole  of  which,  inasmuch  as  they  must 
be  regarded  as  an  integral  portion  of  the  Translators'  work, 
have  been  scrupulously  retained  in  all  later  Bibles ;  except 
only  a  few  where  the  reference  given  is  hopelessly  wrong.  Such 
are  ch.  xvi.  1 5  in  the  margin  of  2  Sam.  xix.  1 9 :  Eccles.  v. 
12  in  that  of  Job  xx.  19:  Judg.  xiii.  21  in  that  of  Ps.  cvi.  2: 
Judg.  vii.  19  in  that  of  Ps.  cvi.  6.  Sometimes  they  appear 
to  have  mistaken  the  drift  or  meaning  of  the  passage ;  e.g. 
I  Chr.  ix.  set  over  against  Neh.  xii.  23,  where  our  exist- 
ing books  of  the  Chronicles  are  scarcely  meant  at  all: 
Prov.  XV.  30  as  parallel  to  Eccles.  vii.  i  :  Ps.  cxxxii.  6  as 
parallel  to  Jer.  vii.  14  :  and  2  Mace.  iii.  4  referred  to  in 
Ecclus.  1.  I,  although  quite  a  different  person  is  meant :  the 
last  two  have  disappeared  from  modern  Bibles.  Occasionally, 
indeed,  the  original  reference  has  been  preserved,  where  it 

1  In  the  Old  Testament  6588,  in  than  in  the  Old.     These  figures 

the  Apocrypha  885,   in  the  New  are  taken   from    Hewlett's    Coin- 

Testament   1517.      Comparatively  mentary,Yo\.  I.  p.  45,  4to.,  cited 

few  additions  have  been  made  to  by  Hartwell  Home  [Introduction, 

the  original  parallel  texts  in  the  Vol.  II.  Part  ii.  p.  81,  1834),  who 

Apocrypha— Blayney  has  only  1772  computes  Blayney 's  additions  alone 

in   all— and   many   more   in  pro-  at  30,495  (p.  80),  which  is  probably 

portion  in  the    New    Testament  too  high  a  sum. 


ii8    Sect.  VI.~\    Aiiihorized  Vcrsio7i  of  the  Bible  {\(i\\). 

would  hardly  have  been  accepted  on  its  own  merits  :  such 
is  the  case  of  Ex.  xxxiv^.  6  in  the  margin  of  Nch.  ix.  32: 
Deut.  vii.  i,  (2)  in  that  of  Ps.  cxlix.  9  :  Ps.  1.  9  in  that  of 
Prov.  xxi.  27  :  Isai.  liii.  3  in  that  of  Wisd.  ii.  15  :  2  Cor.  iii. 
17  in  that  of  John  iv.  24  :  Matt,  xxviii.  19  in  that  of  John 
XV.  16:  Mark  ix.  12  (from  the  Vulgate)  in  Isai.  liii.  3  :  Rom. 
vii.  9  in  I  Thess.  iii.  8  \  As  we  cannot  praise  very  highly  the 
typographical  correctness  of  the  Bibles  of  161 1  in  other 
particulars  (see  p.  8),  so  it  must  be  stated  that  no  other 
portion  of  the  work  is  so  carelessly  printed  as  these  parallel 
texts,  each  issue  exhibiting  errors  peculiar  to  itself^,  but 
few  leaves  indeed  being  exempt  from  some  gross  fault  com- 
mon to  them  both.  The  references  to  the  Psalms  direct  us 
constantly  to  the  wrong  verse;  namely,  that  of  the  Latin 
Vulgate  from  which  they  were  first  derived,  not  to  that  of 
the  English  Bible  on  whose  pages  they  stand.  The  marks 
of  reference  from  the  text  to  the  margin  are  so  often  mis- 
placed, that  it  would  be  endless  to  enumerate  glaring  errors 
in  regard  to  them  which  have  long  since  been  removed. 

One*  of  the  main  services  rendered  by  the  revisers  of 
the  Cambridge  folios  of  1629  and  1638  was  the  setting 
right  these  vexatious  inaccuracies  of  the  earlier  books, 
which  toilsome  duty  they  performed  very  thoroughly,  leaving 
to  their  successors  the  more  congenial  employment  of  add- 
ing largely  to  the  original  texts,  a  liberty  which  seems  to 
have   been   taken    by   almost  every  one  who  prepared   a 

^  In  Amos  ii.  i  the  reference  of  Chr.    xxxiv.  4;   xxxvi.    10;    Ezra 

161 1    to  2   Kin.   iii.    27    may   be  viii.  20:  while  the  latter  is  right 

retained,  because  the  heading  to  and  the  former  wrong  in  Ps.  xxxii. 

the  latter  chapter  renders  it  plain  5  ;  xliii.    5  ;    Ixxviii.   60,   where  it 

that    our     Translators     supposed  should  be  stated  that  the  first  and 

(wrongly,   as  it  would  seem)  that  third  examples  are  from  the  revised 

the  king  of  Edom's  son  was  sacri-  sheets  of  Synd.  A.  3.   14   (p.   6). 

ficed.  But    these  are  exceptional   cases. 

^  Thus  the  copy  from  which  the  The  two  issues  ordinarily  coincide 

Oxford  reprint  was  taken  corrects  in  most  manifest  errors. 
Synd.  A.  3.  14  in  i  Kin.  ii.  ir  ;  2 


Parallel  References.  119 


special  edition.  Whensoever  a  reference  had  once  found 
its  way  into  the  margin,  there  it  was  allowed  to  remain, 
unchallenged  and  even  unexamined,  however  frivolous  or 
mistaken  it  might  be.  Moreover,  in  recent  Bibles  which 
do  not  contain  the  Apocryphal  books,  all  references  drawn 
from  them  by  our  Translators  have  been  summarily  re- 
jected, through  the  same  unwarrantable  license  that  led 
certain  of  them  to  expunge  altogether  the  marginal  note  in 
I  Chr.  vii.  28  ("ii(9r,  Adassa,  i  Mace.  vii.  45":  see  below, 
p.  195  note  2),  and  to  mutilate  that  on  Acts  xiii.  18  by 
striking  out  the  reference  to  2  Mace.  vii.  27.  All  such  texts 
from  the  Apocrypha,  together  with  a  few  others  dropped 
through  apparent  inadvertence,  ought  to  be  restored  to  their 
rightful  places.  The  parallel  references  in  the  Apocrypha  re- 
quire to  be  largely  increased,  as  well  for  other  purposes,  as 
with  a  view  to  illustrate  the  style  of  the  Greek  New  Testament. 
The  textual  references  which  have  been  gradually  ac- 
cumulating in  the  margins  of  our  modern  Bibles  have 
been  received  or  expunged  in  the  Cambridge  Paragraph 
Bible  solely  on  their  own  merits  :  they  have  no  such  general 
reception  to  plead  in  their  favour  as  those  in  the  standard 
of  161 1.  Many  of  them  are  excellent,  and  help  much  for 
the  right  understanding  of  Scripture :  these,  after  having 
been  verified  more  than  once,  as  well  in  the  original 
tongues  as  in  the  Authorized  version,  have  of  course  been 
retained.  Of  the  rest,  a  larger  portion  than  might  have 
been  anticipated  have  been  judged  irrelevant,  questionable, 
or  even  untrue.  No  editions  are  more  open  to  criticism 
in  this  particular  than  those  of  Dr  Paris  (1762)  and  of  Dr 
Blayney  (1769),  who  between  them  added  at  least  half  as 
many  references  as  they  found  already  existing.  The 
worst  errors,  because  unlearned  readers  cannot  discover 
or  so  much  as  suspect  them,  relate  to  parallelisms  which 
are  true   in  the  English,   false  in  the   Hebrew  or  Greek. 


I20    Scd.  VL]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {\(i\\). 

Such  are  Judg.  ix.  27  cited  at  Judg.  xvi.  25  (1769):  i  Chr. 
V.  26  cited  at  i  Kin.  xi.  14  (1769):  i  Sam.  xii.  21  (1762) 
and  Isai.  xli.  29  (1769)  cited  at  i  Kin.  xvi.  13:  i  Sam.  ix.  9 
cited  at  i  Chr.  xxi.  9  (1762):  Ruth  i.  21  cited  at  Job  x.  17 
(1769):  Hos.  xi.  12  cited  at  Ps.  cxxxii.  16  (1762):  Ex. 
xxviii.  2i^\  xxix.  6  ;  Lev.  viii.  9  cited  at  Zech.  vi.  11  (1769): 
John  xix.  40  cited  at  Acts  v.  6  and  vice  versa  (1762).  Even 
in  the  Bible  of  161 1  we  have  Gen.  iv.  4  made  to  illustrate 
Num.  xvi.  15,  although  the  resemblance  is  far  less  exact 
than  the  English  might  make  it  appear.  References  ob- 
jectionable on  more  general  grounds,  some  few  being  scarcely 
intelligible,  are  Num.  ii.  3,  10,  18,  25  to  illustrate  Ezek.  i. 

10  (1762):  the  marvellous  comment  implied  by  citing  John 
i.  14;  Col.  ii.  9  in  Rev.  xiii.  6,  and  2  Kin.  xx.  7  in  Rev.  xiii. 
14  (both  due  to  1762):  the  allusions  to  the  Great  Day  of 
Atonement  in  Jer.  xxxvi.  6  (1762  and  1769),  whereas  some 
special  fast  is  obviously  meant  (ver.  9):  the  hopeless  con- 
fusion arising  from  connecting  Acts  xx.  i,  3  with  i  Tim.  i.  3 
(1762):  the  tasteless  quotation  of  i  Sam.  xxi  v.  3  in  Jonah 
i.  5  (1762).     Hardly  less  false  are  John  x.  23  and  Acts  iii. 

11  cited  at  i  Kin.  vii.  12  (1762):  i  Chr.  xxiv.  10  and 
Luke  i.  5  made  parallel  to  Neh.  xii.  4,  17  (1762):  Josh.  xiv. 
10  to  Matt.  iii.  i  (1762):  while  Ex.  xxiii.  2  employed  to 
explain  Job  xxxi.  34  (1769);  Esther  vii.  8  compared  with 
Prov.  X.  6  (1769);  I  Kin.  v.  17,  18  with  Pro  v.  xxiv.  27 
(1769);  Ps.  Ixviii.  4  with  Isai.  xl.  3  (1762);  Dan.  iv.  27 
with  Ecclus.  XXXV.  3  (1762),  will  be  regarded  as  but  slender 
helps  to  the  student  of  Scripture.  In  2  Mace.  ii.  8  the 
allusion  surely  is  to  Ex.  xl.  38,  not  (as  in  1762)  to  Ex.  xxxiv. 
5.  Finally,  the  note  of  interrogation  should  in  fairness  be 
annexed  to  some  over  bold,  though  not  impossible,  sugges- 
tions of  the  more  recent  editors,  as  when  in  Ps.  cxxxiii.  3  the 
reference  to  Deut.  iv.  48  (1762)  would  identify  li^V  with  l'i<T. 

We  can  only  conjecture  that  the   "Scotch  edition"  of 


Parallel  References.  121 

which  Dr  Blayney  speaks  so  vaguely  in  his  Report  to  the 
Delegates  (see  Appendix  D),  was  that  of  Brown  of  Had- 
dington, then  just  pubHshed.  The  parallel  texts  of  Canne 
(1664,  1682),  though  often  surprisingly  wide  of  the  mark, 
are  said  by  those  who  have  patiently  used  them  to  be  at 
times  very  suggestive,  and  to  contain  more  truth  than  might 
appear  on  the  surfaced  The  editor  of  Bagster's  Miniature 
Quarto  Bible  1846,  while  "admitting  without  examination 
the  references  of  Blayney,  Scott  [1822],  Clarke  [1810,  &c.], 
and  the  EngUsh  Version  of  Bagster's  Polyglot...,  from  their 
acknowledged  accuracy,"  held  himself  obliged  "to  verify 
all  that  were  found  in  Canne,  Brown,  and  Wilson  [i.  e.  Crut- 
well,  1785];  the  aggregate  number,  it  is  believed,  being 
nearly  half  a  million"  {Preface^  P- i-)-  ^^  is  plain  that  so 
numerous  a  host  can  prove  little  else  than  an  encumbrance 
to  the  private  Christian,  by  positively  discouraging  him  from 
resorting  to  the  margin  at  all,  and  that  even  earnest  students 
will  often  be  sensible  of  the  danger  incurred  by  such  burden- 
some and  minute  commentaries,  lest,  "after  all,  the  design 

^  "  Canne's  references  are  very  published,    on    the    principle    of 

different  in  character  from  those  of  making  the  Bible  its  own  Inter- 

the  edition  of  1611,  being  more  preter.     In  his  edition  of  1682  he 

for  the  purpose  of  comment  and  says,    "  The  sweetness  and  great 

explanation,    and  less  for  that  of  content  that  I  have  had  all  along 

scholarlike  illustration.    He  refers  in  this  Scripture  work,  hath  caused 

scarcely  at  all  to  quotations.     His  me  to  account  other  studies  and 

references  are  more  suggestive  than  readings  (which  I  formerly  used) 

immediately   striking.     They   are  very  low  in  comparison  of  it.     It 

not  numerous,  but  evidently  care-  is   said    of  Jacob,    that  he  served 

fully  selected.  In  the  edition  I  have  seven  years  for   Rachel,  and  they 

seen  (Edin.    1747)  they  are  most  seemed  but  a  fciv  days,  for  the  love 

incorrectly  printed."     Grote  MS.  he  had  to  her.     I  can  truly  speak 

p.  13  (see  above,  p.  23  note).   John  it,  I  have  served  the  Lord  in  this 

Canne  was  a  Baptist,  and  a  prolific  work  more  than  thrice  seven  years, 

writer  in  the  interest  of  that  sect.  and    the   time   hath    not    seemed 

His   own    small    octavo   editions  long,  neither  hath  the  work  been 

bear  no  mark  of  place  or  printer's  any  way  a  burden  to  me,   for  the 

name,  but  came  from  Amsterdam,  love  I  have  had  to  it  "  {Preface,  p. 

whither  he   went  into  exile  after  1).     His  book  was  often  reprinted 

the  Restoration.    He  had  prepared  in  the  former  half  of  the  eighteenth 

a  larger  work,  which  was  never  century. 


122     Sect.  VI.']    AutJiorizcd  Version  of  the  Bible  {\(>i\). 

and  scope  of  the  whole  may  not  be  understood,  while  the 
reader's  mind  stays  so  long  in  the  several  parts"  (Bp.  Patrick, 
Dedication  to  ParapJwase  of  Job).  Bagster's  publications 
have  been  so  perpetually  consulted  in  cases  of  difficulty  for 
my  purposes,  that  I  may  fairly  express  my  regret  that  what 
is  intrinsically  valuable  in  them  should  be  buried  under  a 
heap  of  irrelevant  matter.  Less  full,  but  on  the  whole 
more  profitable  for  study,  is  the  collection  of  texts  in  the 
Religious  Tract  Society's  "Annotated  Paragraph  Bible"  of 
1 86 1,  but  here  too,  as  in  Bagster's  books,  nearly  all  the 
old  matter  is  adopted  without  any  attempt  at  revision,  or 
apparent  consciousness  of  the  need  of  it.  That  the  additions 
made  in  the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible  to  the  store  of 
already  existing  references  will  by  many  be  deemed  too 
copious,  their  compiler  is  painfully  aware.  He  can  only 
plead  in  self-defence  that  he  has  aimed  at  brevity  through- 
out ;  that  no  single  text  has  been  accepted  as  parallel  which 
did  not  seem  to  him  really  illustrative  either  of  the  sense 
or  language  of  Scripture  ;  and  that  all  the  materials,  whether 
new  or  old,  have  been  digested  into  such  a  shape  as,  it  is 
hoped,  will  prove  convenient  for  practical  use ;  while  the 
form  in  which  they  are  given  will  afford  some  indication  as 
to  their  respective  characters  and  relative  values.  With  this 
last  end  in  view,  the  reader's  attention  is  directed  to  the 
following  simple  rules,  on  which  the  collection  of  textual 
references  in  the  margin  of  that  volume  has  been  constructed 
and  arranged. 

(i)  When  the  parallel  between  the  passage  in  the  text 
and  that  in  the  margin,  whether  it  be  verbal  or  relate  to  the 
general  sense,  is  as  exact  as  the  subject  allows,  the  Scripture 
text  stands  in  the  margin  with  no  prefix:  e.g.  2  Cor.  iv.  6 
cited  in  the  margin  of  Gen.  i.  3. 

(2)     If  "So"  stand  before  the  Scripture  text,  it  indicates 


Parallel  References.  123 


that  the  parallel,  although  real,  is  less  complete,  or  that  the 
language  is  more  or  less  varied  in  the  two  places :  e.  g.  2  Chr. 
xiii.  9  "'no  gods"  being  exactly  like  Jer.  v.  7,  but  less 
closely  akin  to  Deut.  xxxii.  21,  the  marginal  note  is  thus 
expressed  ''\Ter.  5.  7.  So  Deut.  32.  21."  Again,  Job  xi. 
10  "^shut  up,"  being  precisely  identical  with  Lev.  xiii.  4, 
while  in  Job  xii.  14  the  Hebrew  verb  is  of  a  different 
conjugation,  the  margin  runs  "'Lev.  13.  4,  &c.  So  ch. 
12.  14."^ 

(3)  If  instead  of  "So,"  the  word  "Compare"  or  "Comp." 
be  prefixed,  it  is  intimated  that  the  resemblance  is  slighter 
and  less  direct,  or  even  that  there  is  a  seeming  inconsistency 
between  the  two  places :  e.  g.  2  Kin.  ii.  1 1  in  the  margin  of 
Gen.  V.  24,  where  the  events  recorded  are  not  in  all  respects 
analogous.  So  also  "^Comp.  2  Kin.  8.  26  and  ch.  21.  20" 
annexed  to  2  Chr.  xxii.  2,  draws  attention  to  the  numerical 
difficulty.  Such  phrases  as  "Supplied  from"  in  the  margin 
of  2Sam.  xxi.  19;  "Expressed  in"  Ex.  xxiii.  2;  "Expressed" 
Judg.  vii.  18  will  be  understood  at  once  by  consulting  the 
passages  alleged. 

(4)  Much  space  has  been  economised  and  the  constant 
repetition  of  a  body  of  texts,  all  bearing  on  the  same  point, 
has  been  avoided,  by  setting  them  down  once  for  all  in  full, 
and  elsewhere  referring  the  reader  to  that  place  by  means  of 
the  word  "See."  Thus  "See  i  Chr.  29.  14"  in  the  margin  of 
2  Chr.  ii.  6,  directs  the  reader  to  a  place  where  all  extant 
examples  of  a  certain  idiom  had  already  been  brought  to- 
gether. In  Num.  ix.  15,  "See  Ex.  13.  21"  shews  that  the 
latter  place  contains  a  collection  of  the  texts  relating  to  the 
pillars  of  cloud  and  of  fire.     This  method  has  been  much 

^  Occasionally     the     reference  xvi.   12  at  Job  xxxi,  31;  Luke  v. 

assumes  the  character  of  a  brief  7,    10   at   Job   xli.    6.       But   this 

exposition:  e.g.  Heb.  ix.  27  cited  lil)erty  has  been  taken  very  spar- 

at  Job  xxi.   33  (after   1769);  Ex.  ingly. 


124    Sect.   VI.]    Authorized  Ve^'sion  of  the  Bible  {\(i\\). 

employed  in  regard  to  Proper  Names  both  of  places  and 
persons.  It  should  also  be  stated  that  where  passages  of 
the  New  Testament  are  noticed  as  "Cited  from"  the  Old, 
it  has  been  judged  needless  to  repeat  the  textual  references 
previously  set  down  in  the  corresponding  places  from  which 
the  citation  is  made  :  e.g.  Matt.  xxii.  37,  39,  44. 

(5)  When  the  parallelism  extends  to  a  whole  paragraph, 
or  indeed  to  any  portion  of  the  sacred  text  exceeding  a 
single  verse,  the  fact  is  carefully  indicated  by  a  peculiar 
notation.  Thus  in  the  margin  of  Ex.  xxi.  i,  "To  ver.  17, 
Dent.  5.  6 — 21"  (the  name  of  the  book  being  printed  in 
itaHc  type),  intimates  that  Ex.  xx.  i — 17  is  in  substance 
identical  with  Deut.  v.  6 — 21.  Such  instances  occur  very 
frequently,  especially  in  the  books  of  Samuel  and  Kings 
compared  with  Chronicles,  and  in  the  first  three  or  Synoptic 
Gospels.  Here  again  it  has  not  been  thought  advisable  to 
repeat  in  a  later  passage  the  textual  references  already  given 
in  an  earlier  passage  in  great  measure  resembling  it.  Such 
as  are  found  in  the  second  passage  either  belong  to  it  alone, 
or  are  intended  to  direct  attention  to  its  divergencies  from 
the  first  one:  e.g.  "Compare  2  Sam.  10.  18"  in  the  margin 
of  I  Chr.  xix.  18. 

(6)  The  parallel  is  frequently  a  real  one  in  the  original 
tongues,  although  it  appears  faintly  or  not  at  all  in  the 
Authorized  Version.  In  this  case  (Heb.),  (Chald.),  or  (Gk.), 
as  the  case  may  be,  is  annexed  to  the  citation,  to  give 
notice  of  the  fact:  e.g.  Lev.  xi.  17.  "Where  several  texts  are 
cited,  and  this  is  true  of  two  or  more  of  them,  the  expression 
is  varied  to  "in  the  Heb.",  "in  the  Gk.":  e.g.  Deut.  xxxiii. 
27,  where  the  notation  happens  to  relate  to  all  the  three 
places  in  the  Psalms.  Whensoever,  in  the  margin  of  the 
New  Testament,  (Gk.)  is  set  after  a  quotation  from  the  Old, 
it  is  intimated  that  the  Septuagint  version  agrees  with  the 


Parallel  References.  125 

New  Testament:  e.g.  Matt.  xxvi.  12.  In  a  few  instances, 
and  for  special  reasons,  the  word  (Septuagint)  has  been 
printed  at  length. 

(7)  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  resemblance  between  two 
or  more  passages  belong  only  to  the  English,  and  have  no 
respect  to  the  original,  (Eng.)  or  (English)  is  added  to  the 
quotation.  Such  notices  are  designed  to  gather  in  one 
view  words  nearly  obsolete,  or  otherwise  to  throw  light 
upon  the  phraseology  of  the  Authorized  Version  :  e.g.  Gen. 
xlv.  6;  I  Sam.  ix.  5  ;  i  Kin.  xx.  11;  2  Chr.  xxvi.  14;  Dan. 
vi.  3;  2  Esdr.  xvi.  49;  Tobit  iv.  14;  vi.  12;  Matt.  x.  10; 
xiii.  20;  xiv.  8;  xvii.  12,  25;  xx.  11;  xxiv.  48;  xxvi.  67; 
xxvii.  39;  Mark  x.  44;  Luke  i.  54;  vi.  32;  vii.  4;  viii.  23; 
xiv.  32;  I  Tim.  ii.  9.     Compare  Judg.  xii.  14. 

(8)  Lastly,  as  a  note  of  interrogation  (?)  has  been  em- 
ployed to  bring  into  question  the  references  both  of  the 
standard  of  16 11  and  of  its  more  recent  editors  (p.  120), 
so  it  has  been  occasionally  employed  for  the  same  purpose 
with  certain  that  appear  in  the  Paragraph  Bible  either  alone, 
or  with  little  countenance  elsewhere  :  e.g. '''1  Chr.  27.21"  cited 
for  "Iddo"  in  i  Kin.  iv.  14.  Names  of  places  and  persons 
are  frequently  so  marked,  if  the  orthography  be  somewhat 
varied:  e.g.  "Ramah",  Josh,  xviii.  24.  In  Judg.  xviii.  30, 
by  illustrating  "Gershom"  from  "Ex.  2.  22  ?&  18.  3  ?"  atten- 
tion is  directed  to  the  proposed  substitution  of  "Moses" 
instead  of  ''Manasseh",  a  reading  both  probable  in  itself, 
and  supported  by  weighty  and  varied  authorities.  In  the 
same  spirit,  an  attempt  has  frequently  been  made  to  convey 
some  notion  of  the  relative  value  of  the  marginal  renderings 
(see  above,  pp.  41 — 59)  as  compared  with  those  in  the  text, 
by  means  of  passages  cited  to  illustrate  one  or  both  of  them  : 
e.g.  Esther  vi.  i:  Ps.  vi.  6. 

Advantage  has  also  been  taken  of  the  same  opportu- 


126    Sect.   F7.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {\(ii.\). 


nity  to  insert  in  the  margin  a  great  number  of  passages 
tending  to  illustrate  the  internal  connection  and  relative 
dates  of  the  several  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  have 
been  the  most  subjected  in  modern  times  to  criticism  more 
or  less  sober  and  profound.  Such  references  as  are  made  to 
the  Pentateuch  in  Judg.  xix.  7,  8;  2  Sam.  xiv.  7,  are  so 
many  additional  proofs  that  the  diction  of  the  oldest  books 
of  the  Bible  clave  to  the  memory,  and  was  wrought  into  the 
literary  style  even  of  the  earliest  surviving  writers  after  the 
conquest  of  Canaan.  Nothing  short  of  actual  collation  of 
parallel  texts,  undertaken  by  the  student  for  himself,  can 
cause  him  to  realize  the  extent  to  which  the  peculiar  lan- 
guage of  the  book  of  Job  has  influenced  those  which  fol- 
lowed it,  or  can  do  justice  to  its  claim  to  the  most  venerable 
antiquity.  Thus  too  the  resemblances  between  Zech.  i. — 
viii.  and  ix. — xiv.  have  been  diligently  recorded :  while  in 
regard  to  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  it  may  be  confidently 
affirmed  that  no  unprejudiced  scholar,  who  shall  but  faith- 
fully examine  the  numberless  coincidences  both  in  thought 
and  expression  between  the  first  thirty-nine  and  last  twenty- 
seven  chapters  of  his  book  (coincidences  which  are  all  the 
more  instructive  by  reason  of  their  often  being  very  minute 
and  sometimes  even  lying  below  the  surface),  will  ever  again 
admit  into  his  mind  the  faintest  doubt,  whether  the  two 
several  portions  of  that  inspired  volume  are  the  production 
of  one  author  or  of  more. 

The  compilation  of  this  virtually  new  body  of  textual 
references  has  been  greatly  aided  by  Wetstein's  only  too 
copious  collections  from  the  Septuagint  in  the  notes  to  his 
Greek  Testament  (175 1 — 2),  and  yet  more  by  two  laborious 
volumes,  to  which  the  editor  has  been  more  largely  indebted 
than  he  knows  how  to  express; — Canon  Wilson's  accurate 
and  exhaustive  "English,  Hebrew  and  Chaldee  Lexicon  and 
Concordance"  {Second editiofi  1866 :  he  died  1873,  set.  90)  es- 


Bible  Paragraphs.  127 


pecially  valuable  io\  the  attention  paid  therein  to  the  marginal 
notes;  and  Wigram's  "Hebraist's  Vade  Mecum"  (1867), 
which,  answering  as  it  does  many  of  the  purposes  of  that 
great  desideratum  of  sacred  literature,  a  real  Hebrew  Con- 
cordance, has  been  his  hourly  companion  ever  since  it  was 
published.  He  has  also  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  using  for  the 
Poetical  and  Prophetic  books,  that  glory  of  the  Clarendon 
Press,  the  "Origenis  Hexaplorum  quae  supersunt"  (1867 — 
1871)  of  Dr  Field;  whose  Latin  version  of  the  Hebrew 
passages  cited  throughout  the  work,  by  reason  of  its  elegance 
and  precision  no  less  than  from  an  almost  instinctive  per- 
ception of  the  true  sense  of  the  original  in  cases  of  difficulty, 
leaves  us  nothing  to  regret  save  its  fragmentary  character, 
and  begets  in  the  student  an  earnest  longing  for  a  continu- 
ous translation,  at  least  of  these  harder  portions  of  the  Old 
Testament,  from  the  same  able  and  accomplished  hand. 

Section  VIL 

Miscellaneous  observations  relating  to  the  present  woi'k,  and 
general  Conclusion. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  practice  of  printing  the  English 
Bible  in  sections  or  paragraphs  accommodated  to  the  sense 
(the  notation  of  the  chapters  and  verses  being  set  in  the 
margin),  which  Mr  Reeves  the  King's  Printer  introduced 
early  in  the  present  century,  and  in  which  he  has  found  so  i 
many  imitators,  is  in  substance  only  a  return  to  the  fashion  \ 
that  prevailed  in  our  early  versions,  before  the  Genevan 
New  Testament  of  1557  unfortunately  broke  up  the  text 
into  divisions  at  once  so  minute  and  so  arbitrary  as  the 
verses  invented  by  Robert  Stephen.  "The  subdivision  of 
the  books  of  Sacred  Scripture  into  chapters  and  verses, 
without  regard  to  the  sense,  and  frequently  to  its  great 
injury,  has  thrown  a  most  serious  obstacle  in  the  way  of 


128    Seel.  V/I.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {\(i\i). 


common  readers."  It  has  given  rise  to  "a  very  erroneous 
impression,  that  the  Bible  is  rather  a  collection  of  apoph- 
thegms, or  disconnected  sentences,  than  composed  of 
regular  histories  and  treatises  on  religion,  which  have  their 
separate  topics  and  connexions."  "It  is  a  method  peculiar 
to  the  Bible,  and  confined  to  translations  alone.  Yet  the 
word  of  God  is  not  deserving  of  such  an  injurious  peculiarity 
as  this\"  Thus  clearly  is  the  case  stated  by  an  editor  who 
seems  to  have  been  the  first  to  introduce  this  simple  plan 
into  the  United  States  of  America,  and  who  has  certainly 
carried  it  out  with  singular  skill  and  discretion. 

For  indeed  the  division  of  the  sacred  text  into  sections 
suitable  for  general  use  will  not  be  deemed  an  easy  matter 
by  any  one  who  has  essayed  it.  If  we  look  only  to  the 
broad  and  prominent  breaks  in  a  Bible  narrative  or  dis- 
course, they  will  usually  be  found  too  far  apart  for  the 
reader's  convenience:  if  the  subordinate  members  be  sepa- 
rated from  each  other,  the  result  will  often  be  a  virtual  return 
to  the  discarded  verse  divisions.  Something  between  these 
two  extremes  is  to  be  aimed  at,  and  in  this  effort  there  is 
room  as  well  for  much  honest  difference  of  opinion,  as  for 
the  exercise  of  careful  discrimination  and  a  subtil  faculty  of 
analysis.  From  the  marks  of  paragraph  division  (U)  em- 
ployed for  the  first  time  in  the  Authorized  Version,  little 
help  can  be  derived.  They  are  unequally  and  capriciously 
distributed,  and  in  both  issues  of  1611  and  in  the  Bible  of 
1613  they  cease  altogether  after  Acts  xx.  36:  nor  have  they 
any  perceptible  connection  with  the  headings  of  the  chapters, 
hereafter  to  be  mentioned.  The  editor  of  the  Cambridge 
Paragraph  Bible  would  have  been  glad,  in  the  prosecution 
of  this  portion  of  his  task,  if  he  could  have  followed  rather 

^  The  Holy  Bible  with  the  text       Nourse.    Boston  and  Philadelphia, 
of thecommouTranslation arranged       1836.     Preface,  pp.  1,2. 
in   Paragraphs,    &c.      By  James 


Ari'angement  of  Hebrew  Poetry.  129 

than  preceded  the  publication  of  the  new  Church  Lectionary 
of  1 87 1.  It  is,  however,  with  great  satisfaction  that  on  com- 
paring the  paragraphs  in  this  vokime  with  the  beginnings 
and  endings  of  the  Lessons  as  appointed  by  the  Royal 
Commissioners,  he  has  been  able  to  note  a  resemblance 
between  the  two  which  is  quite  remarkable,  due  allowance 
being  always  made  for  the  motives  which  sometimes  cause 
a  Church  Lesson  to  commence  or  leave  off  at  a  certain 
place,  irrespective  of  considerations  suggested  by  the 
sense. 

The  poetical  portions  of  the  Old  Testament  and  Apo- 
crypha, as  well  as  a  very  few  passages  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment^, have  been  arranged  in  the  Paragraph  Bible  accord- 
ing to  the  principles  first  enunciated  by  Bishop  Lowth,  and 
modified  and  improved  upon  by  his  successors.  The  series 
of  couplets  or  triplets  of  parallel  lines  is  furthermore  broken 
everywhere  by  divisions  (similar  to  those  in  the  prose  books) 
suggested  by  the  sense,  which  throughout  Job  (as  repre- 
sented by  Delitzsch),  and  in  some  of  the  Psalms  (e.g.  xHi., 
xliii.;  Ixxxix.;  cvii.)  may  be  regarded  as  stanzas,  often  though 
by  no  means  always  of  uniform  length.  The  thirteen  alpha- 
betical poems ^  are  distinguished  by  Hebrew  letters  at  the 
proper  places,  so  that  an  English  reader  may  form  some 
notion  of  the  grounds  on  which  the  Lowthian  system  of 
Hebrew  parallelism  ultimately  rests.  Here  again  a  difficulty 
often  occurs  which  is  at  times  unavoidable  in  a  version  made 
before  the  true  laws  of  the  poetry  were  ascertained,  in  that 


1  Luke  i.  46—55;   68—79;  ii-  ^^^t^-  ^^^'^-  (co^^P^i^e  Luke   xi.), 

14;    29—32.     Rev.   xviii.   2 — 24.  have  been  set  each  in  a  separate 

Also,  in  imitation  of  some  of  the  paragraph. 

earUest   Greek    manuscripts,    the  2  pg.  jx.;  x.  (imperfect) ;  xxv.  ; 

Beatitudes  (Matt.  v.  3—12  ;  Luke  xxxiv. ;  xxxvii.;  cxi.;  cxii.;  cxix.; 

vi.  20—26),  the  short  parables  of  cxlv.  Prov.  xxxi.  10 — 31.      Lam. 

Matt,  xiii.,  and  the  eight  woes  of  i. ;  ii.;  iii. ;  iv. 

s.  9 


130    Sect.  V/I.]    Autho7-ized  Version  of  the  Bible  {idw). 

the  order  of  the  English,  departing  for  good  reasons  from  that 
of  the  original,  forbids  a  correct  distribution  of  the  verse  into 
its  proper  members.    Instances  may  be  noticed  in  Job  xxxvii. 
13,  21.     Ps.  xxxi.  18;    Ixviii.  23;    Ixxiv.  6;    Ixxv.  8;    xci.  9; 
xcviii,  i;    cxix.   4;   cxx.    i;    cxxix.  5;   cxxxii.  12;    cxxxiv.  3; 
cxxxvii.  2.  Prov.  viii.  2,  3;  xxiv.  11.   Isai.  xxviii.  4.    Mic.  iv.  8. 
Nah.  iii.  3.    Zeph.  iii.  17.    Zech,  ix.  i.    Mal.  i.  3.    Ecclus.  i.  2, 
3;  xviii.   6;  xxvi.  9;  xxxiii.  19;  xl.  29;  xlviii.  22.     Not  that 
we  should  be  over  anxious  to  maintain  an  equable  length 
for  the  lines,  as  Nourse  too  often  does,  dividing  (for  example) 
Mal.  iv.  5  at  the  word  "coming"  instead  of  "prophet,"  in 
violation  of  the   sense,   and  against  the  Masoretic  points, 
which,  through  some  happy  instinct  of  their  authors,  seldom 
lead   us   wrong.     More  considerable  is  the  perplexity,   in 
dealing  with  writers  that  pass  gradually  from  what  might 
well  be  deem^ed  poetry  into  rhetorical  prose,  and  so  back 
again,  to  determine  the  precise  point  at  which  the  poetical 
structure    should   begin    or    terminate.       This   was   found 
especially  the  case  in  Jeremiah  and  the  earlier  chapters  of 
Zechariah,  wherein  another  mind  might  easily  arrive  at  a 
different  result.     Portions  also  of  Ecclesiastes  (ch.  vii.  i — 14; 
X.    I — xii.   7)  and    2   Esdras  xvi.,  are  imperfectly  metrical, 
though  printed  as  prose  ;  v/hile  on  the  other  hand  the  tone 
of  Zephaniah  is  less  elevated  than  is  usual  in  poetry.     We 
notice  a  burst  of  poetic  fervour  in   so  prosaic  a  book  as 
Daniel    (ch.    ii.   20 — 23),   while  the  last  prayer   of  David 
(i  Chr.  xxix.  10 — 19),  which  began  in  the  same  high  strain, 
gradually  sinks  to  a  lower  level.     Passages  of  the  hymn  in 
Neh.  ix.  5  &c.,  are  among  the  latest  breathings  of  an  ex- 
piring literature   of  holy  song.      The  opening  of  Wisdom 
again  is  quite  as  capable  of  being  thrown  into  parallel  lines 
as  Ecclesiasticus,  yet  as  the  book  proceeds  (though  it  is  the 
work  of  a  single  writer  and  composed  on  a  regular  plan),  it 
insensibly  swells  into  the  ornate  periods  of  the  later  Greek 


Ordinary  Chapters  and  Verses. 


i^i 


style \  How  wholly  unsuitable  some  parts  of  it  are  for  re- 
duction into  parallel  lines  may  be  seen  in  the  edition  of 
O.  T.  Fritzsche  {Libri  Apocryphi  V.  T.  187 1),  yet  both  he 
and  W.  J.  Deane,  in  his  valuable  edition  of  the  Book  of 
Wisdom  (18S1),  mostly  follow  the  line  divisions  of  Codex 
Alexandrinus. 

We  are  very  little  concerned  with  the  chapters  and  verses 
of  ordinary  Bibles,  though  they  should  not  be  interfered 
with  needlessly.  In  the  Apocryphal  additions  to  Esther, 
nothing  can  be  more  confused  or  preposterous  than  the 
order  of  the  matter  and  the  numbering  of  the  chapters  in  our 
own  Version,  and  to  some  extent  in  the  Clementine  Vulgate 
and  earlier  English  Bibles.  By  adopting  Jerome's  arrange- 
ment, and  omitting  his  explanatory  notes,  we  have  as  a 
result,  among  other  inconsistencies,  the  interpretation  of 
Mardocheus'  dream  before  the  dream  itself^  In  other  cases 
the  divisions  of  chapters  may  be  disregarded  without  scruple, 
whensoever  they  appear  erroneous  or  unnecessary.  Thus 
with  the  Hebrew  v/e  should  join  Lev.  vi.  i — 7  with  ch.  v. 
Connect  also  Josh.  v.  15  with  ch.  vi. ;  Isai.  ii.  22  with  ch. 
iii. ;  Isai.  x.  i — 4  with  ch.  ix. ;  Jer.  xix.  14,  15  with  ch.  xx.; 
Ezek.  XX.  45 — 50  with  ch.  xxi,  (the  parable  with  its  solution), 
as  in  the  Hebrew  (which  also  rightly  joins  Hos.  xi.  12  with 
ch.  xii.  ;  and  Nah.  i.  15  with  ch,  ii.) ;  Amos  ii.  i — 3,  or  i — 
5  with  ch.  i. ;  Ecclus.  vi.  i  with  ch.  v.  15  ;  Matt.  xv.  39  with 
ch.  xvi. ;  xix.  30  with  ch.  xx. ;  Mark  ix.  i  with  ch.  viii. ;  the  first 
clause  of  Acts  viii.  with  ch.  vii. ;  i  Cor.  xi.  i  with  ch.  x. ;  2  Cor. 
V.  I  with  ch.  iv.;  vii.  i  with  ch.  vi. ;  Col.  iv.  i  with  ch.  iii. ;  Rev. 
viii.  I  with  ch.  vii.  Nor  can  anything  be  worse  than  the  verse 
divisions  at  times,  especially  in  the  Old  Testament,  e.g.  Ps. 

^    "Grandiloquus,    cothurnatus,  SDiith's   Dictionary  of  the  Bible, 

tumidus"  are  Lowth's  expressive  Coverdale  and  the  Bishops'  Bible 

epithets.     Be  Sacra  Focsi.     Prae-  get  rid  of  the  difficulty  by  omitting 

lect.  XXIV.  ch.  X.  4 — xi.  i  altogether. 

2   Bp.   Lord  A.   C.  Hervey  in 


132     Sect.  VII.]    AutJiorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {\(i\\). 


Ixxviii.  30,  31;  xcv.  7,  8;  Isai.  i.  16,  17.  We  may  also 
notice  that  in  the  Song  of  the  Three  Holy  Children  the 
modern  verses  are  from  the  beginning  one  in  advance  of  those 
of  161 1  (see  Appendix  A),  and  that  the  English  verses  in 
Luke  i.  74,  75  ;  vii.  18,  19;  John  i.  38,  39;  Acts  ix.  28,  29; 
xi.  25,  26;  xiii.  32,  33;  xix.  40,  41;  xxiv.  2,  3 ;  2  Cor. 
ii.  12,  13  ;  V.  14,  15  ;  xi.  8,  9  ;  xiii.  12,  13  ;  Eph.  i.  10,  11  : 
iii.  17,  18;  Phil.  iii.  13,  14;  i  Thess.  ii.  11,  12;  Heb.  vii. 
20,  21  (where  Elzevir  1624  agrees  with  the  Engl.);  x.  22,  25 
(widi  Beza);  i  John  ii.  13,  14  (in  some  editions);  3  John 
13,  14;  Apoc.  xii.  18  or  xiii.  i  (butTomson's  Geneva  1606  and 
the  Bishops'  of  1602  are  said  by  Dr  Hort  to  agree  with  the 
Greek);  xviii.  16,  17  differ  slightly  from  those  in  ordinary 
Greek  Testaments  \ 

As  regards  the  headings  of  the  chapters,  as  also  those  set 
over  the  several  columns  of  the  text,  nothing  considerable 
would  be  lost  by  their  omission.  The  column  headings  of 
necessity  varied  more  or  less  for  every  edition  which  did  not 
(like  the  black-letter  books  of  161 7,  1634,  and  that  of  1640 
very  nearly)  correspond  with  the  standard  of  16 11  page  for 
page.  The  headings  summing  up  the  contents  of  each 
chapter  do  not  much  resemble  those  previously  given  either 
in  the  Genevan  or  in  the  Great  and  Bishops'  Bibles  (which 
two  in  this  particular  are  almost  identical),  but  seem  to  be 
quite  original.  In  the  early  chapters  of  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  they  are  inordinately  long.  The  variations  between 
our  present  headings  and  those  of  161 1,  other  than  mere 
corrections  of  the  press,  are  but  twelve  in  number,  that  pre- 
fixed to  Ps.  cxlix.  being  the  only  one  of  importance ^     Dr 

^  We  hardly  know  how  to  recog-  vocant,      versiculos,      opus     dis- 

nise  the  claim  set  up  by  Robert  tinximus,  id,  vetustissima  Graeca 

Stephen,  in  his  Greek  Testament  Latinaque  ipsius  N.T.  exemplaria 

of  155 1,   of  being  the  earliest  to  secuti,  I'ecimus." 

divide  the  sacred  text  into  verses:  -  Where  "that  power  M'hich  he 

"Quod   autem    per   quosdam,  ut  hath  given  to  the  Church  to  rule 


Headings  of  Chapters  and  columns. 


Blayney,  however,  for  his  edition  of  1769,  gcive  what  may  be 
called  "a  New  Version  of  these  headings,  bearing  somewhat 
of  the  same  relation  to  the  Old  that  Tate  and  Brady  does  to 
Sternhold  and  Hopkins.  It  has  been  stigmatized  by  some 
as  a  doctrinal  depravation  of  them,  and  praised  by  others  as 
an  improvement.  It  is  in  fact  a  modernization  or  dilation 
of  them,  with  little  systematic  difference  of  doctrine,  but  with 
less  force  of  it,  giving  however  in  many  cases  a  better  account 
of  the  real  contents  of  the  chapters  than  the  old'."  This 
portion  of  his  labours  Blayney  speaks  of  with  complacency 
in  his  Report  to  the  Delegates  of  the  Clarendon  P^-ess  (see 
below,  Appendix  D) ;  but  whatever  might  be  its  merits,  it 
met  with  no  sort  of  acceptance.  Oxford  Bibles  have  re- 
turned long  since  to  the  headings  of  161 1;  his  changes  were 
never  adopted  at  Cambridge.  It  was  felt,  perhaps,  that 
there  is  much  comment  of  this  kind  in  the  original  edition 
which  long  prescription  alone  has  persuaded  men  to  tolerate, 
and  his  work  was  rejected  not  because  it  was  bad,  but  be- 
cause it  was  new. 

The  chronological  dates  placed  in  the  margin  of  our 
modern  Bibles  are  derived  from  that  of  Bishop  Lloyd  in 
1 701  (see  above,  p.  26,  27)  without  any  pretence  on  the 
part  of  any  one  of  vouching  for  their  correctness.  They  are 
in  substance  taken  from  Archbishop  Ussher's  Annates  V.  et 
N.  Pestame7iti  (1650 — 4),  and  are  beyond  doubt  sufficiently 


the  consciences   of  men"  is  dis-  heading  of  Ecckis.  xxxiv.   18  the 

erectly  curtailed  in  the  edition  of  words   ran   "The    ofifering  of  the 

1762    by    the    omission    of    the  ancient,"  until  Blayney  substituted 

last    six     words,    that     of     1769  "unjust"  for  "ancient."     On  this 

further      amending     by      substi-  subject    the   editor    is    much    in- 

tuting     "his    saints"     for     "the  debted  to  an  obliging  communica- 

Church,"      which     latter      some  tion  from  the  Rev.  C.  K.  Paul,  of 

modern  Bibles  still  retain.   D'Oyly  Bailie,  Wimborne. 

and  Mant  stand  to  the  words  of  ^  Grote  MS.  (see  above,  p.  23 

1611.       Observe    also    (with    Bp,  note),  p.  18. 


Charles  Wordsworth)  that  in  the 


134    '5'^^^.   Z-^//.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {\(i\\). 

exact  to  be  a  real  help  to  the  reader,  the  data  on  which  they 
are  constructed  being  always  assumed  as  true.  In  the 
history  of  the  later  kings  of  Judah  modern  researches  have 
not  been  able  to  suggest  a  variation  from  them  of  more  than 
two  years.  The  dates  according  to  the  Greek  reckoning,  set 
in  the  Paragraph  Bible  under  those  of  the  Hebrew  in  the 
first  six  books  of  the  Bible,  are  grounded  upon  the  well- 
known  differences  in  respect  to  numerals  between  the  text 
of  the  Hebrew  and  that  of  the  Septuagint,  in  the  fifth  and 
eleventh  chapters  of  Genesis.  Bp.  Lloyd's  dates  have  not 
been  materially  tampered  with  since  they  were  first  brought 
into  our  Bibles,  though  in  some  copies  they  are  repeated 
more  frequently  than  in  others.  Lloyd,  and  after  him  the 
books  of  1762  and  1769,  had  assigned  to  the  ninth  chapter 
of  Zechariah  the  date  of  B.C.  587  (being  67  years  earlier 
than  that  of  his  first  chapter),  in  accordance  with  an  opinion, 
more  plausible  than  solid,  to  which  Joseph  Mede  first  lent 
the  weight  of  his  profound  learning,  that  the  last  six  chapters 
of  that  prophecy  are  the  composition  of  some  earlier  writer, 
who  flourished  about  the  period  of  the  Captivity.  Modern 
Bibles  later  than  1835  ^^^^'^  substituted  in  ch.  ix.  the  date  of 
B.C.  517;  in  Bagster's  edition  of  1846  it  is  reduced  to 
B.C.  510,  in  the  American  of  1867  to  B.C.  487,  which  is 
much  too  lov/.  A  mark  of  interrogation  may  simply  be 
placed  after  this  and  some  other  questionable  dates.  The  year 
B.C.  79T,  alleged  for  the  eclipse  referred  to  in  Amos  viii.  9, 
being  now  known  to  be  incorrect,  other  more  possible  dates 
have  been  substituted  within  brackets.  In  Jer.  xxvii.  i,  "b.  c. 
598"  is  omitted  altogether,  as  it  rests  on  the  needless  sup- 
position that  for  "Jehoiakim"  in  the  text  we  ought  to  read 
"Zedekiah."  The  like  remedy  has  been  applied  to  Isai.  ix. 
8  and  x.  i,  which  obviously  belong  to  the  same  idyl  or 
ode,  and  are  connected  by  the  same  refrain  :  yet  the  one 
part  of  it  is  assigned  to  B.C.  738,  the  other  to  B.C.  713.     It 


Marginal  dates.  135 


would  be  well  to  set  a  query  after  the  date  (b.  c.  862) 
of  the  prophecy  of  Jonah,  inasmuch  as  it  is  nearly  certain 
that  the  Twelve  Minor  Prophets  stand  in  the  Canon  in 
chronological  order:  and  certainly  on  comparing  Mic.  vi.  16, 
the  third  chapter  of  that  book  must  have  been  written  before 
the  fall  of  Samaria,  not  eleven  years  after  it  (b.  c.  710).  In 
the  Second  Prologue  to  Ecclesiasticus  "the  eight  and 
thirtieth  year  "  being  seemingly  that  of  the  writer's  life,  not 
of  the  reign  of  Euergetes,  instead  of  B.C.  xt^t^  we  should 
probably  read  some  earlier  time.  The  few  dates  added  in 
the  Paragraph  Bible  are  included  in  brackets,  and  may  per- 
haps be  regarded  as  at  once  convenient  and  certain:  such 
as  that  on  Esther  xi.  i.  It  is  not  easy  to  approve  of  the 
boldness  of  the  editor  of  1762,  who  affixes  to  Ps.  cxx. 
"cir.  1058,"  apparently  on  the  authority  of  the  chapter 
heading  which  assumes  that  Doeg  is  the  enemy  referred  to, 
as  indeed  a  comparison  of  ver.  4  with  Ps.  Hi.  i,  renders  not 
improbable. 

The  present  is  scarcely  a  fit  opportunity  for  discussing  ^ 
at  length  the  merits  and  faults  of  the  Authorized  Version, 
which  "  so  laborious,  so  generally  accurate,  so  close,  so 
abhorrent  of  paraphrase,  so  grave  and  weighty  in  word  and 
rhythm,  so  intimately  bound  up  with  the  religious  convic- 
tions and  associations  of  the  English  people'"  will  never 
yield  its  hard  earned  supremacy,  save  to  some  reverential 
and  well-considered  Revision  of  which  it  has  been  adopted 
as  the  basis,  that  shall  be  happy  enough  to  retain  its  cha- 
racteristic excellencies,  while  amending  its  venial  errors  and 

^  Preface  to    The  Gospel  of  S.  an  expression  as  "that  that"  Ezek. 

yohn  revised  by  Five  Clergymen^  xxxvi.  36;  Dan.  xi.  ^(i\  Jonah,  ii. 

p.  VI.     In  regard  to  the  rhythm  9;    Zech.  xi.  9  ibis),    16 — all  the 

it  may  be  said  that  those  can  best  work  of  one  Company — is  common 

appreciate  the  Translators'  happy  in  so  musical  a  contemporary  wri- 

skill,  who  have  tried  to  improve  ter  as  Fletcher. 
upon   their  version.      Even   such 


y 


136    Sect.  VII.]    AutJiorizcd  Version  of  tJie  Bible  {i()i\). 

supplying  its  unavoidable  defects.  Yet  it  may  not  be  im- 
proper to  touch  briefly  on  one  or  two  particulars,  which 
have  not  been  prominently  noted  by  others,  but  have  im- 
pressed the  writer's  mind  in  the  prosecution  of  his  laborious, 
yet  most  interesting  task. 

First  then  we  mark  great  inequality  in  the  execution 
of  the  several  portions  of  this  version.  The  limits  of  life 
and  human  patience  would  forbid  the  whole  Bible  (includ- 
ing the  Apocrypha),  from  being  committed  to  the  care  of 
a  single  Company,  but  it  was  surely  a  mistake  to  divide 
the  whole  body  of  Translators  into  six  parties.  The  Bishops' 
Bible  indeed  seems  to  have  had  a  fresh  translator  for  al- 
most every  book^,  and  the  inconsistencies  which  such  a 
plan  must  needs  engender  may  have  been  one  of  the  causes 
which  hindered  that  version  from  obtaining  general  accept- 
ance. No  doubt  it  had  been  wisely  provided  by  the 
King's  ninth  and  tenth  Listi'iidions  that  "As  any  one  Com- 
pany hath  despatched  any  book...,  they  shall  send  it  to 
the  rest  to  be  considered  of  seriously  and  judiciously ;  for 
His  Majesty  is  very  careful  in  this  point":  as  also  that 
"If  any  Company  doubt  or  differ  upon  any  place... the 
difference  to  be  compounded  at  the  general  meeting,  which 
is  to  be  of  the  chief  persons  of  each  company  at  the  end 
of  the  work."     But  our  very  meagre  information  respecting 


^  Fourteen  of  the  sacred  books  ployed  nowhere  appear.  But  even 
have  appended  to  them  the  ini-  in  regard  to  the  present  Authorized 
tials  of  their  translators,  eight  of  Translation,  tradition  has  assigned 
these  being  Bishops,  so  far  as  a  share  in  the  final  revision  to  Dr 
they  can  be  identified;  but  "they  Thomas  Bilson,  Bishop  of  Win- 
do  not  indicate  all  the  contribu-  Chester,  "whose  name  appears  in  no 
tors."  Westcott,  General  Viczu  of  list  of  the  six  Companies.  Observe 
the  History  of  the  Ejiglish  Bible,  what  is  said  of  him  and  of  Miles 
p.  135.  This  last  statement  is  Smith  (see  above,  pp.  12  note4,  39) 
plainly  true  both  from  the  manner  in  the  Decrees  of  the  Synod  of 
inwhich  the  initials  are  distributed,  Dort  (below,  p.  264).  William 
and  because  the  names  of  some  Eyre's  review  has  been  mentioned 
persons  known  to  have  been  em-  above,  p.  13  note  2. 


The  six  Companies  of  Revisers.  137 


the  progress  of  the  Translators  gives  us  no  great  reason  to  be- 
lieve that  this  wholesome  device  was  carried  out  in  practice 
(see  above,  p.  13),  while  internal  evidence  points  decidedly 
to  a  contrary  conclusion  \  Certain  it  is  that  the  six  or  twelve 
who  met  at  Stationers'  Hall  during  the  nine  months  which 
immediately  preceded  publication  had  mechanical  work 
enough  on  their  hands  in  carrying  the  sheets  through  the 
press,  without  troubling  themselves  much  about  higher 
matters.  The  first  Westminster  Company  undertook  the 
historical  books  from  Genesis  down  to  the  end  of  2  Kings, 
and  included  the  great  names  of  Andrewes  then  Dean  of 
Westminster,  of  Overall  then  Dean  of  S.  Paul's,  and  of 
Adrian  de  Saravia,  by  birth  a  Fleming,  at  that  time  Pre- 
bendary of  Westminster,  but  best  known  as  the  bosom 
friend  and  spiritual  counsellor  of  saintlike  Richard  Hooker. 
Compared  with  other  portions  of  Holy  Scripture  their  share 
in  the  work  may  seem  an  easy  one,  yet  the  eminent  suc- 
cess of  the  whole  enterprise  is  largely  due  to  the  simple 
dignity  of  their  style,  and  to  the  mingled  prudence  and  bold- 
ness wherewith  they  so  blended  together  the  idioms  of  two 
very  diverse  languages,  that  the  reader  is  almost  tempted 
to  believe  that  the  genius  of  his  native  tongue  must  have 
some  subtil  affinity  with  the  Hebrew.  Not  inferior  to  theirs  A* 
in  merit,  but  far  surpassing  it  in  difficulty,  is  the  work  of 
the    third,    or  first   Oxford    Company,  the    Prophets    from 


1  One  instance  of  this  lack  of  wrongly    or   rightly   matters   not. 

consistency  observable  in  the  dif-  In  Ezek.  xxxiii.  30  we  find  "  still 

ferent   parts   of   our   Translation,  are     talking;"     in    Mai.    iii.    16 

the   more   minute   the   better   for  "spake  often;"    three  verses  be- 

our  purpose,   will  serve  to  illus-  fore    "spoken   so   much,"  where 

trate  a  statement  which  is  notori-  1629  so  little  understands  what  is 

ously    true.      The    Oxford    Com-  intended  as  to  put  ''''so  ?}uich"  in 

pany,  which  revised  the  Prophets,  italics.     This  Niphal  form  occurs 

was  careful  to  render  the  Niphal  only  once  elsewhere,  Ps.  cxix.  23, 

conjugation   of    "121    with    some  where  the  second  Company  simply 

intensity     of    meaning,     whether  has  "  speak." 


138    Sed.   VII.  ]    A uthorized  Version  of  the  Bible  ( 1 6 1 1 ). 

Isaiah  to  Malachi  inclusive.    This  body  was  presided  over 
by  Dr  John  Harding,  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew    [1591 
— 8;    1604 — 10],  in  the  room  of  the   great   Puritan  John 
Rainolds',  President  of  Corpus  Christi  College    [d.  1607], 
who  is  reputed  to  have  first  suggested  the  new  translation 
at   the    Hampton    Court  Conference  (1603 — 4),   full  three 
years  before   it  was    actually  commenced.     This    party  in- 
cluded   Dr    Richard  Kilbye,    Rector    of   Lincoln    College 
[1590 — 1620],  afterwards  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew  [i 610 
— 1620],  whose  testimony  to  the  anxious  pains  devoted  to 
the  version  is  preserved  by  Isaac  Walton,  and  will  be  most 
readily   credited  by    those  whose  privilege   it  has  been  to 
bear  a  part    in  similar   conferences,  directed  to  the  same 
great  end".     It  needs  but  the  comparison  of  a  single  chap- 
ter of  Isaiah,  for  instance,  as  rendered  by  the   Authorized 
Translation,  with   that    in    the    Bishops'    Bible    which  was 
adopted  as  the  ground  of  their  labours,   to   estimate   very 
highly    the    improvements    effected    by    this    third    Com- 
pany.    The  common  notion  that  the  Minor  Prophets  are 
less  felicitously  rendered  than  the  four  Greater,  must   be 
modified  by  the   consideration  that  three    or   four   of  the 
twelve,  as  well  from   their   pregnant    brevity  as  from  the 

^  So  spelt,   as  Dr  Newth  tells  the  Doctor's  friend's  house,  where 

me,  on  the  title  pages  of  his  books,  after   some   other   conference   the 

and  on  his  monument  in  his  Col-  Doctor  told  him,  he  "might  have 

lege  Chapel.  preached    more    useful    doctrine, 

^  "The  Doctor  going  to  a  Pa-  and  not  have  filled  his  auditors' 

rish  Church  in  Derbyshire... found  eai"s     with     needless     exceptions 

the   young   preacher  to   have   no  against  the  late  translation;   and 

more  discretion  than  to  waste  a  for  that  word  for  which  he  offered 

great  part  of  the  hour  allotted  for  to   that  poor   congregation   three 

his  sermon  in  exceptions  against  reasons  why  it  ought  to  have  been 

the    late    translation     of    several  translated  as  he  said,  he  and  others 

words  (not  expecting  such  a  hearer  had  considered   all  of  them,  and 

as  Dr  Kilbye),  and  shewed  three  found  thirteen  more  considerable 

reasons    why   a    particular    word  reasons  why   it  was  translated  as 

should  have  been  otherwise  trans-  printed."     Walton,   Life  of  San- 

lated.    When  Evening  Prayer  was  dcjson,  p.  367  (Zouch,  1807). 
ended,  the  preacher  was  invited  to 


Relative  merits  of  the  Companies  of  Revisers.       139 

obscurity  of  their  allusions,  are  among  the  very  hardest 
books  of  the  Bible  in  the  original,  whose  difficulties  no 
faithful  translator  would  wish  to  dissemble  or  conceal. 
Respecting  the  second,  or  first  Cambridge  Company,  which 
sustained  irreparable  loss  by  the  death  of  Edward  Lively, 
Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew  [1580 — -1606],  before  their  task 
was  fairly  begun,  his  successor  also,  R.  Spalding,  appa- 
rently dying  a  year  after,  it  may  be  confessed  that  its  ver- 
sion of  Job  is  very  unsatisfactory,  nor  indeed  could  it  well 
be  otherwise  before  the  breaking  forth  of  that  flood  of 
light  which  Albert  Schultens  long  afterwards  (1737)  shed 
upon  it  from  the  cognate  languages.  A  more  legitimate 
subject  of  complaint  is  the  prosaic  tone  of  its  translation 
of  the  Psalms,  which,  however  exact  and  elaborate,  is  so 
spiritless  as  to  be  willingly  used  by  but  few  that  are  familiar 
with  the  version  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer;  a  recen- 
sion which,  though  derived  immediately  from  the  Great 
Bible,  is  in  substance  the  work  of  that  consummate  master 
of  rhythmical  prose.  Bishop  Miles  Coverdale\  Of  the 
other  three  Companies  it  will  suffice  to  re-echo  the  general 
verdict,  that  the  Epistles,  entrusted  to  persons  sitting  at 
Westminster  of  whom  little  is  now  known,  are  worse  done  than 
any  other  part  of  the  Canonical  Scriptures,  and  bear  no  com- 
parison with  the  Gospels,  the  Acts  (which  book  is  especially 
good,  as  indeed  is  its  prototype  in  the  preceding  version, 
from  the  hand  of  Bishop  Cox  of  Ely),  and  the  Apocalypse, 


^  Burnet  {History  of  the  Re-  unlawfullet  or  search."  We  learn 
fortnation.  Part  HI.  Book  5)  knows  from  Dr  Eadie  [Ens^Ush  Bible, 
so  little  about  Coverdale  and  his  Vol.  I.  p.  432)  that  Queen  Mary 
English  style  as  to  assert  that  "On  released  Coverdale  at  the  earnest 
the  19th  of  February  [1554 — 5],  and  renewed  entreaty  of  Christian 
some  small  regard  was  had  to  II.,  king  of  Denmark,  whose  chap- 
Miles  Coverdale,  as  being  a  fo-  lain,  J.  M.  Macalpine,  was  mar- 
reigner;  for  he  was  a  Dane:  he  ried  to  the  sister  of  Coverdale's 
had  a  passport  to  go  to  Denmark,  wife, 
with   two   servants,    without   any 


140    Sect.  V//.]     Authorized  Version  of  tJic  Bible  (^i(i\\). 

as  revised  by  the  second  Oxford  Company,  on  which 
served  Sir  Henry  Savile,  then  the  most  famous  Greek  scho- 
lar in  England.  In  the  New  Testament,  as  was  both  right 
and  almost  necessary,  the  renderings  of  the  older  English 
versions  were  more  closely  adhered  to  than  in  the  Old. 
Of  the  performance  of  the  fourth,  or  second  Cambridge 
Company,  to  which  the  Apocrypha  was  consigned,  little 
favourable  can  be  said.  It  was  the  earliest  party  to  com- 
plete its  share,  as  appears  from  the  fact  that  John  Bois  (see 
above,  pp.  12,  22)  was  transferred  to  the  first  Cambridge 
Company  after  his  proper  task  herein  was  completed'.  A 
formal  correction  of  the  text,  often  so  obviously  corrupt, 
might  have  been  impossible  with  the  means  within  their 
reach;  yet  it  required  very  little  critical  discrimination  to 
perceive  the  vast  superiority  of  that  which  they  perpetually 
appeal  to  as  tlie  "Roman  edition"  (see  above,  p.  47)  over  the 
older  recensions  of  the  Complutensian  and  of  Aldus.  For 
the  rest,  they  are  contented  to  leave  many  a  rendering  of 
the  Bishops'  Bible  as  they  found  it,  when  nearly  any  change 
must  have  been  for  the  better;  even  where  their  prede- 
cessor sets  them  a  better  example  they  resort  to  undigni- 
fied, mean,  almost  vulgar  words  and  phrases ";  and  on  the 

^  Yet   John    Selden,    who    was  translation,    the    rest    holding    in 

twenty-seven   years    old    in    i^n,  their  hands  some  Bible,  either  of 

and  must  have  had  means  of  in-  the   learned   tongues,    or   French 

formation  not  open  to  us,  is  repre-  [^Olivcfan  1535,  The  Pastors  1588], 

sented  in  his  I'ahle  Talk  (p.  6)  as  Spanish    \Pind  1553,    De   Reyna 

speaking  thus:    "The  translation  1569,  the  Valencia  Bible  of  1478 

in  King  James'  time  took  an  ex-  revised  by  Dc  Valera  1602],   Ita- 

cellent   way.     That   part   of    the  lian    {Bncccioli    1532?,    or    more 

Bible  was  given  to  him  who  was  probably   Diodati   1607],   &c.     If 

most  excellent  in  such  a  tongue —  they  found  any  fault,  they  spoke; 

as    the    Apocrypha     to    Andrew  if  not,  he  read  on."     We  hear  no- 

Downes"     [Regius    Professor    of  thing  from  him  of  Luther's  German 

Greek,    1585 — 1625].      He    adds  [1522,  &c.],  which,  however,  is  no 

moreover  this  interesting  piece  of  doubt  the  "Dutch"  of  the  Trans- 

information,   to   whatever  part  of  lators''    Preface,     a    passage    that 

thework  it  may  apply  :  "Then  they  Selden  probably  had  in  his  mind, 

met  together,  and   one   read  the  -  Such  are  the  colloquial  forms, 


Purity  and  freedom  of  its  style.  141 

whole  they  convey  to  the  reader's  mind  the  painful  im- 
pression of  having  disparaged  the  importance  of  their  own 
work,  or  of  having  imperfectly  realised  the  truth  that  what 
is  worth  doing  at  all  is  worth  doing  welP. 

Nor  can  the  attentive  student  of  the  Authorized  version 
fail  to  marvel  at  the  perfect  and  easy  command  over  the 
English  language  exhibited  by  its  authors  on  every  page. 
The  fulness  and  variety  of  their  diction,  the  raciness  of 
their  idiomatic  resources,  seem  almost  to  defy  imitation, 
while  they  claim  our  just  and  cheerful  admiration.  We 
need  not  extenuate  that  great  error  of  judgment  which  is 
acknowledged  to  be  the  capital  defect  of  the  Translation, 
especially  in  the  New  Testament,  in  that  the  same  foreign 
word  is  perpetually  translated  by  several  English  ones,  while 
on  the  other  hand  a  single  English  word  is  made  to  repre- 
sent two  or  three  in  the  original,  and  that  too  in  the  same 
context,  where  the  cogency  of  the  argument  or  the  perspi- 
cuity of  the  narrative  absolutely  depends  on  identity  in  the 
rendering.  But  in  avoiding  this  conspicuous  fault  of  the 
men  of  161 1,  some  modern  revisers  whose  efforts  are  already 
before  the  public  have  fallen  into  the  opposite  mistake  of 
forcing  the  same  English  word  to  stand  for  the  same  Hebrew 


"He  sticks  not"  i  Esdr.  iv.  21;  relative  merits  of  the  several  por- 

"  Cocker  thy  child  "  Ecclus.  xxx.  9 ;  tions  of  our  version  differs  only  in 

"a  shrewd  turn"  Ecclus.  viii.  19;  one    particular    from   that   of   its 

"get   the   day"    (yet   the   verbal  sturdy  opponent  Dr  Robert  Cell : 

play  of  the  Greek  is  thus  kept  up)  "  The  further  we  proceed  in  survey 

2  Mace.  V.  6  ;  "he  is  not  for  our  of  the   Scripture,   the  Translation 

turn"   Wisd.  ii.  12;   "sour  beha-  is  the  more  faulty,  as  the  Hagio- 

viour"  2  Mace.  xiv.  30.     Add  the  grapha  more  than  the  Historical 

mere  archaisms  "brickie"  Wisd.  Scripture,  and  the  Prophets  more 

XV.  13;   "the  party"  Tobit  vi.  7;  than  the  Hagiographa  [?],  and  the 

"pensions"  (kXtj^ous)   i  Esdr.  iv.  Apocrypha  most  of  all;  and  gene- 

56    (Bp.);    "liberties"    (opiois)    1  rally  the  New  more  than  the  Old 

Mace.  X.  43   (Bp.).     We  find  no-  Testament."     {An   Essay   tozvard 

thing  like  this  elsewhere   in  our  the  Amendment  of  the  last  English 

version.  Translation   of  the   Bible^     1659. 

^  The  foregoing  estimate  of  the  Preface,  pp.  38,  39.) 


142     Sect.  VII?\    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible,  (161 1). 

or  Greek  one  where  there  is  no  real  need  for  preserving 
such  slavish  uniformity,  thus  at  once  impoverishing  our 
native  tongue  which  is  so  much  more  copious  than  either  of 
the  others,  and  casting  over  the  version  an  air  of  baldness 
very  painful  to  a  cultivated  taste.  Let  us  take  for  an  ex- 
ample of  the  beautiful  flexibility  of  their  English  style  the 
numberless  devices  our  Translators  resort  to  while  endea- 
vouring to  convey  the  intensive  force  of  the  Hebrew  gerun- 
dial  infinitive  when  used  with  some  finite  form  of  the  self- 
same verb,  of  which  the  earliest  example  occurs  in  Gen.  iii. 
4,  "Ye  shall  not  surely  die."  The  passages  are  cited  almost 
at  random  and  might  be  multiplied  indefinitely. 

I  Sam.  ii.  16,  Let  them  not  fail  to  burn  the  fat.  1  Sam.  xiv.  14, 
we  must  needs  die  (after  the  Bishops');  xvii.  10,  shall  utterly  melt; 
16,  speedily  pass  over;  xviii.  2,  I  will  surely  go  forth;  3,  if  we  flee 
away  (with  the  Bishops');  25,  came  apace  (Bishops');  xx.  18,  They 
were  wont  to  speak  (margin,  They  plainly  spake),  i  Kin.  ii.  37,  (42), 
thou  shalt  know  for  certain  that  thou  shalt  surely  die  ;  iii.  26,  27,  in 
no  wise  slay  it  (Bishops');  ix.  6,  If  ye  shall  at  all  turn,  i  Chr.  iv.  10, 
Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed  (Bishops').  Neh.  i.  7,  We 
have  dealt  very  corruptly  against  thee  ("grievously  sinned,"  Bishops'). 
Esther  iv.  14,  If  thou  altogether  holdest  thy  peace.  Job  vi.  2,  Oh 
that  my  grief  were  throughly  weighed  ("truly  weighed"  Bishops'); 
xiii.  17  and  xxi.  2,  Hear  diligently  (Bishops');  xxvii.  22,  he  would 
fain  flee.  Jer.  xxiii.  17,  They  say  still;  32,  profit  at  all;  39,  utterly 
forget;  xxv.  30,  mightily  roar;  xxxi.  20,  earnestly  remember;  xli.  6, 
weeping  all  along ;  1.  34,  throughly  plead.  Ezek.  i.  3,  came  expressly. 
Thus  too  both  versions  even  in  translating  the  Latin  of  2  Esdr.  iii.  33 ; 
iv.  2,  26;  vii.  21,  <S:c.  In  Isai.  xxiv.  19  the  Hebrew  idiom  assumes 
three  different  English  forms:  "the  earth  is  utterly  broken  down,  the 
earth  is  clean  dissolved,  the  earth  is  moved  exceedingly." 

Yet  it  has  been  said  by  one  who  ought  to  know,  that 
"our  Translators  of  the  Bible,  in  their  attempt  to  maintain 
idiom,  have  sometimes  sacrificed  vigour  \" 

^  Dean  Goulburn,    Thoughts  on       iv.  23,  where  he  prefers  the  mar- 
Personal  Religion,    Part  ill.    ch.       ginal  rendering  to  the  text. 
viii.  p.  232.    His  example  is  Prov. 


The  Apocryphal  Books.  143 

The  editor  earnestly  trusts  that  no  apology  is  necessary 
for  the  labour  bestowed  in  the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible 
on  the  English  text  and  marginal  references  of  the  Apocry- 
pha. So  long  as  that  very  miscellaneous  collection  of  books 
shall  comprise  a  part  of  the  Holy  Bible  in  its  largest  form, 
or  lessons  shall  be  selected  from  it  for  the  course  of  Divine 
service,  it  deserves  far  more  regard  than  has  been  paid  to  it 
in  recent  times,  even  by  those  who  have  undertaken  to 
reprint  it.  But  the  frequent  and  exact  study  of  a  large 
portion  of  the  Apocryphal  writings  may  be  vindicated  on 
higher  grounds  by  such  as  most  loyally  accept  the  rule  that 
"the  Church  doth  read  them  for  example  of  life  and  instruc- 
tion of  manners;  but  yet  doth  it  not  apply  them  to  establish 
any  doctrine."  Few  more  conspicuous  instances  can  be 
alleged  of  the  tendency  in  man's  nature  to  rush  into  extremes 
than  the  strong  reaction  to  their  prejudice  which  has  set  in 
since  the  Reformation,  by  way  of  protest  against  the  error 
that  had  placed  the  greater  part  of  them  on  a  level  in  point 
of  authority  with  the  Canonical  books  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Add  to  this  that  by  some  untoward  accident  those  portions 
of  the  Apocrypha  which  deserve  the  least  esteem  had  until 
recently  become  the  best  known,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
History  of  Susanna  (unfit  for  public  reading,  for  all  its 
delicate  touches  of  natural  beauty),  and  of  the  grotesque 
story  of  Bel  and  the  Dragon.  Yet  Ecclesiasticus  and  the 
first  book  of  the  Maccabees,  written  in  the  second  century 
before  the  Christian  era,  are  among  the  noblest  of  uninspired 
compositions;  if  indeed  their  authors,  so  full  of  faith  and 
holy  fear,  can  be  regarded  as  entirely  uninspired.  The 
second  book  of  the  Maccabees  also,  though  greatly  inferior 
to  the  first  in  respect  of  energy,  judgment,  veracity,  and  cor- 
rect taste,  abounds  in  passages  fraught  with  encouragement  to 
those  who  in  every  age  shall  be  called  upon  to  suffer  for  the 
truth's  sake;  not  to  add  that  it  powerfully  illustrates  the 


144    Sect.  VI/.]    Authorized  Version  of  the  Bible  {\6\\). 

eleventh  chapter  and  other  parts  of  Daniel's  prophecies. 
The  Wisdom  of  Solomon  (which  was  not  seriously  intended 
to  be  ascribed  to  the  king  of  Israel)  approximates  in  tone  to 
the  spirit  of  Christ  more  nearly  than  any  book  without  the 
Canon;  the  Epistle  of  S.  James  is  full  of  allusions  to  it,  and 
to  the  first  five  chapters  of  Ecclesiasticus.  Judith  too  is  a 
fine  work;  grave,  elevated,  pious,  chaste  in  thought  and 
expression,  exquisitely  finished.  Were  it  not  buried  where 
it  is,  it  would  long  since  have  attracted  the  admiration  it 
deserves;  but  it  is  not  history,  and  does  not  claim  to  be 
such.  It  is  fable  constructed  with  a  moral  purpose;  and 
must  have  stirred  up  the  heart  of  many  a  Jewish  patriot  in 
that  heroic  struggle  for  liberty  and  religion  whose  details  fill 
the  histories  of  the  Maccabees.  For  the  remaining  books  less 
can  be  said.  Tobit,  probably  the  oldest  of  them  all,  exhibits 
a  pleasing  picture  of  the  prosperity  of  a  religious  household 
in  the  land  of  their  captivity:  the  main  oudines  seem  correct, 
though  sadly  deformed  by  childish  superstitions,  which  are 
more  visible  in  the  Old  Latin  version  followed  by  the 
Bishops'  Bible,  than  in  our  own  which  adhered  to  the  Greek. 
Baruch,  though  of  course  a  pseudonym,  contains  some  ex- 
cellent poetry :  the  Prayer  of  Manasses  and  the  Song  of  the 
Three  Children  need  no  praise.  It  is  difticult  to  determine 
the  precise  relation  of  i  Esdras  to  the  Canonical  books  of 
Ezra  and  Nehemiah :  after  all  the  trouble  bestowed  upon  it, 
we  can  but  conclude  that  it  contains  not  much  intrinsically 
valuable.  ''The  rest  of  the  book  of  Esther"  seems  worth 
little  for  any  purpose,  since  it  is  founded  on  a  radically  false 
conception  of  the  character  of  two  of  the  most  worldly- 
minded  persons  God  ever  employed  in  the  dispensations  of 
His  Providence,  and  rewarded  for  their  obedience  with 
blessings  purely  temporal.  The  remaining  book,  the  second 
of  Esdras,  is  a  curious  composition,  not  very  fitly  placed  in 
the  same  volume  as  the  rest,  and  never  accounted  Canonical 


Co7icliisioJi.  145 


by  any  branch  of  the  Church.  Though  extant  only  in  Latin, 
it  betrays  on  every  page  its  Hebrew  original;  but  since  no 
considerable  portion  of  it  can  be  earlier  than  the  second 
century  after  Christ,  what  it  has  in  common  with  the  Reve- 
lation and  other  books  of  the  New  Testament  is  drawn  from 
them,  not  they  from  it.  It  can  hardly  be  questioned  that 
the  fortunes  of  the  Roman  emperors  during  the  first  century 
are  herein  figuratively  depicted.  The  celebrated  passage 
ch.  vii.  26 — 35  bears  every  appearance  of  interpolation. 

The  reader  is  now  referred  to  the  subjoined  Appendices, 
in  which,  under  their  proper  heads,  the  numerous  variations 
found  in  later  Bibles  from  the  model  of  161 1  have  been 
carefully  arranged.  All  the  more  pains  have  been  bestowed 
upon  this  portion  of  the  work  from  the  conviction  that  the 
task  essayed  in  the  present  volume  would  have  been  accom- 
plished long  since  thoroughly  and  once  for  all,  had  Dr 
Blayney  and  those  who  preceded  him  been  aware  of  the 
necessity  of  avoiding  undue  haste  in  carrying  out  an  enter- 
prise whose  difficulty  they  much  under-rated,  and  which, 
being  intimately  concerned  with  our  best  and  highest  interests, 
demands  to  be  brought  as  near  to  perfection  as  human 
infirmity  will  allow. 


s.  10 


APPENDIX   A. 


(See  above,  pp.  3,  4.) 

Catalogue  of  the  variations  from  the  original  edition  of 
the  Authorized  Version  of  the  Holy  Bible  (161 1),  which, 
being  found  in  all  modern  editions,  have  been  retained  in 
the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible.  Obvious  misprints  and  the 
peculiar  orthography  of  the  original  are  excluded,  and  the 
dates  annexed  are  those  of  the  editions  in  which  the  several 
variations  originated,  so  far  as  these  can  be  ascertained. 


Genesis 

Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 

Variation  of  later 
editions. 

V.    32  ;     vi.    10 ; 

Sem 

Shem,  1629. 

vii.  13 

vi.  5 

God 

GODi,  1629. 

viii.  1^ 

six  hundredth  and  one 

six  hundredth  and  first  ^, 
1629. 

ix.    18,     23,    27; 

Japhet 

Japheth,  1629. 

X.  I,  2,  21 

X.  14 

Philistiim 

Philistim,      161 2      (not 
1613),  1629. 

X.  19 

Sodoma  and  Gomorah 

Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 

' 

(Gomorrah,  1612) 

1629. 

xiv.  15 

Hoba 

Hobah,  1638. 

XV.  7 

Caldees  (Chaldees,  ch. 
xi.  31) 

Chaldees,  1629. 

^  Heb.  Jehovah.  The  words  "Lord"  and  "God"  are  always 
intended  to  be  printed  in  small  capitals  in  the  Authorized  Version, 
when  they  are  employed  to  translate  that  Holy  Name.  Adonai  Je- 
hovah is  represented  by  "Lord  God"  about  a  hundred  times  in  Ezekiel 
alone,  and  Jehovah  Adonai  by  "Lord  God"  only  in  Hab.  iii.  19,  itself 
corrected  (perhaps  wrongly)  in  the  Cambridge  folio  of  1629.  See  Ap- 
pendix B  II.  on  Ps.  xliv.  23. 

-  In  some  places  this  Ijold  archaism  (see  above,  p.  iii)  is  retained 
in  the  text  of  the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible,  e.g.  Ezek.  xliii.  27; 
2  Esdr.  vii.  68;  i  Mace.  xiii.  t>^;  2  Mace.  xi.  21 ;  but  not  in  i  Kin.  vi. 
I ;  xvi.  8,  23.  /^ 

UT)  10 — 2 


148      Appendix  A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


Genesis 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible 

editions. 

XV.  19 

Kenizites 

Kenizzites,  1629. 

xvi.  14;  XX.  I 

Cadesh    (Kadesh, 
xiv.  7) 

ch. 

Kadesh,  1638. 

xix.  21 

this  thing 

this  thing  also,  1638. 

xxii.  7 

and  wood 

and  the  wood,  16 16  (not 
1617). 

xxiii.  10 

gates 

gate,  1762. 

xxxiv.  3  inarg. 

to  her  heart 

to  the  heart  of  the  damsel, 
1744- 

xxxvi.  33 

Bozra 

Bozrah,  161 3. 

xxxix.  16 

her  lord 

his  lord,  1638. 

^N^j^.  40  marg. 

armed 

be  arfned.,  1629. 

Exodus 

xiv.  25    marg. 

made 

and  made,  1629. 

XV.  25 

made  a  statute 

made  for  them  a  sta- 
tute, 1638. 

xxi.  19  marg. 

ceasing 

his  ceasing,  1638. 

xxi.  32 

shekels 

shekels  of  silver,   1638. 

xxiii.  13 

names 

name,  1769. 

xxiii.  27  marg. 

necks   (so   all  in  Josh. 

neck,  1629. 

vii.  8) 

xxvi.  8 

and  the  eleven 

and  the  eleven  curtains, 
1629. 

XXX.  3  marg. 

t  Hebr.   the  roof... 
the  walls 

and 

+  Heb.  roof,  1629. 

xxxiv.  25 

of  Passover 

of  the  passover,  1762. 

XXXV.   II 

and  his  bars 

and  his  boards,  his 
bars,  1638. 

XXXV.  29 

hands  of  Moses 

hand  of  Moses,  1629. 

xxxvii.  19 

Three  bowls  made 

he 

Three  bowls  made  after, 

after 

1629. 

Leviticus 

i.  8 

in  the  fire 

on  the  fire,  1638. 

i.  9 

the  inwards 

his  inwards,  1638. 

ii.  4 

an  unleavened  cake 

unleavened  cakes,  1638. 

vi.  2 

in  II  fellowshij^ . . .  f 

vio- 

II in    t fellowship  ...  vio- 

lence 

lence,  1629  (nearly). 

vi.  5  tnarg. 

+  Heb.  the  day 

tHeb.  in  the  day,  1629. 

,  , 

the  sacrifice 
Moloc 

the  sacrifices,  1629. 
Moloch,  1629. 

x»~-i4 

yi\\\\.^  marg. 

xix.  34 

shall  be 

shall  be  unto  you,  1638. 

XX.    II 

be  put 

surely  be  put,  1638. 

xxiii.  10  marg. 

an  Omer 

omer,  1638. 

of  16 1 1    amended  in  later  editions. 


149 


Leviticus 

iveaaing  01  ine 
Authorized  Bible. 

vaiianoii  01  laier 
editions. 

xxiii.  ao 

for  the  priests 

for  the  priest,  1638. 

xxiii.  22 

the  field 

thy  field,  1638. 

XXV.  5  marg. 

separations 

separation,    1629 
C.\   1630. 

XXV.  6 

the  stranger 

thy  stranger,  1638. 

XXV.  51 

walls 

wall,  1769. 

xxvi.  23 

reformed 

reformed  by  me,  1638. 

XX vi.  40 

the   iniquity    (the    ini- 

their   iniquity    and    the 

quities,  161 3) 

iniquity,  1616. 

Numtiers 

i.  2,  18,  20 

poll 

polls,  1769  (so  all  in 
ver.  22). 

iv.  40 

houses 

house,  1769  (so  all  in 
ver.  42). 

vi.  2 

II  prefixed  to  first  "se- 

II prefixed      to       second 

parate.  " 

"separate,"  1744 
(not  1762),  1769. 

vi.  14 

and  one  lamb 

and  one  ram,  1638. 

vii.  3i>  55 

charger 

charger  of  the  weight, 
1762  (so  all  in  ver. 
4.S). 

vii.  48,  53  &  X.  22 

Ammiud 

Ammihud,  1638  (so  all 
in  ch.  i.  10). 

vii.  54,  59  &  X.  23 

Pedazur 

Pedahzur,  1638  (so  all 
in  ch.  i.  10). 

vii.  61 

a  silver  bowl 

one  silver  bowl,  1638 
(so  all  in  ver.  55, 
&c.). 

xix.  II  marg. 

soul 

soul  of  man,  1638. 

xxi.  20  marg. 

hill 

the  hill,  1638  (Cf. 
Deut.  xxxiv.  i). 

xxi.  24 

Jabok 

Jabbok,  1629,  C.  and 
L.^  (so  all  in  Gen. 
xxxii.  22,  &c.). 

xxii.  31  war^. 

II  Boived 

II  Or,  bowed,  1629. 

xxiv.  3  marg. 

open 

opened. 

xxvi.  6 

Hesron . . .  Hesronites 

Hezron  ...  Hezronites, 
Bagster  1846. 

xxvi.  21 

Hesron. . .  Hesronites  '^ 

Hezron  ...  Hezronites, 
1769. 

1  By  1629,  with  or  without  C.  annexed,  we  indicate  the  Cambridge 
folio  of  that  year  (see  above,  pp.  19 — 21),  but  by  1629  L.,  the  London 
quarto  {ibid.). 

2  Cambr.  Synd.  A.  3.  14  (see  above,  p.  14),  Brit.  Mus.  1276.  1.  4  (not 


150       Appendix   A.\      Wroiig  readi7igs  of  the  Bible 


Reading 

of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Deuteronomy 

Authorize 

d  Bible. 

editions. 

iv.  25 

shalt  have  remained 

ye    shall    have   remain- 

ed, 1762. 

iv.  32 

upon  earth 

upon  the  earth,  1629. 

iv.  49 

of  this  side 

on  this  side,  1617  (not 
1629  L.,  1630),  1629 
C. 

V.  29 

my  commandments 

all  my  commandments, 

1629. 

ix.  10 

of  fire 

of  the  fire,  1762. 

X.  10  viarg. 

fortie 

former,  1629. 

XV.    \\  fill. 

the  land 

thy  land,  1629. 

xvi.  4 

coasts 

coast,  1762. 

xvi.  5 

the  gates 

thy  gates,  161 6  (not 
1617,  1629  L.,  1630), 
1629  C. 

xix.  6  marg. 

third  day 

the  third  day,  161 2, 
1613  (not  1629  C.  and 
L.,  1630),  1638.  Cf. 
ver.  4,  (Sic. 

XX.  7 

in  battle 

in  the  battle,  1769. 
Cf.  vers.  5,  6. 

xxvi.  I 

the  Lord 

the  Lord  thy  God, 
1629,   1637. 

xxviii.  5  marg. 

kneading  troughs 

kneading  trough,    1762. 

Cf.  Ex.  viii.  3. 

xxviii.  23 

the  heaven 

thy  heaven,  1638. 

xxviii.  42 

locusts 

locust,  1612  (not  1613 
•Sec),  1629. 

xxix.  26  /'^^/ 

'\whotn    he 

had     not 

^%vho77i     he      had     not 

given 

t  given. 

marg. 

'\Hebr.     divided:     Or^ 

11  Or,  who  had  not  given 

who    had 

7iot  given 

to   them   any  portion. 

to  them  any  portion 

fHeb.  divided,  1629. 

xxxii,  15  &  xxxiii. 
xxxiv.  I  war^. 

Jesurun 

Jeshurun,  1638  ^. 

Hill 

the     hill,      1638.       Cf. 

Num.  xxi.  20. 

3050.  g.  2  or  g.  3)  have  "Hezronites"  in  ver.  21,  but  "Hesron"  in  the 
same  verse.     Comp.  also  i  Chr.  v.  3. 

^  In  Deut.  xxxiii.  5  alone  "Jeshurun"  is  read  also  in  1629  C  and  L, 
1630.  In  Isaiah  xliv.  2  the  same  form  is  found  in  16 16  alone  of  all  our 
editions. 


of  1 6 1 1   amended  in  later  editions. 


151 


Joshua 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

iii.  lo 

Girgashites 

the  Girgashites,  16 12 
(not  16 1 3),  1629. 

iii.  15 

at  the  time 

all  the  time,  1638. 

vii.  14 

and  the  households 

and  the  household, 
1616,  1617,  1629  C. 
(not  1629  L.,  1630). 

vii.  26 

the  place 

that  place,  1629. 

X.     10    &    xvi. 

Bethoron 

Beth-horon,    1629.      Cf. 

3'  5 

ch.  xviii.  13,  &c. 

xi.  8  jnarg. 

burning  of  waters 

burnings  of  waters, 
1629^. 

xi.  17 

unto  Baal-Gad 

even  unto  Baal-Gad, 
1638. 

xii.  6 

and  Gadites 

and  the  Gadites,  1762. 

xii.  I  r 

Lachis 

Lachish,  1613  (not  16 16, 
1617),  1629  C.  and 
L. 

xii.  18  niarg. 

Saron 

Sharoji,  1629 

xjii.  27 

Cinneroth 

Cinnereth,  1629  — 1762 
(Chinnereth,  1769 
mod.).      Cf.    ch.    xix. 

xiii.  29 

Manasseh,  by 

35- 
the  children  of  Manas- 
seh, by,  1638. 

XV.  33 

Esthaol 

Eshtaol,  1629  (Estha- 
hol,  1630). 

XV.  38 

Dileam  (Diieam  161 2, 
Diliam  16 17) 

Dilean,  1629. 

XV.  42 

Lebnah     (Lebanah, 
1630) 

Libnah,  1638. 

XV.  43 

Jiphta 

Jiphtah,  1638. 

XV.  49 

Kirjath-Sannath 

Kirjath-sannah,  1629. 

XV.  50 

Ashtemoth,  Camb.  Synd. 
A.   3.    14,  but  Ashte- 
moh,  Oxf.  1611,  1612, 
16 1 3,  &c. 

Eshtemoh,  1638 

XV.  57 

Gibbeah 

Gibeah,  1629  C.  and  L., 
1630. 

XV.  59 
xix.  18 

Maarah 

Maarath,  1629. 

Izreel 

Jezreel,    1629.     Cf.   ch. 

xvii.  i6,  &c. 

xix.  22 

Shahazimath 

Shahazimah,  1617. 

xix.  x«i 

Cinnereth 

Chinnereth,  1769. 

xix.  38 

Bethanah 

Beth-anath,  1629. 

Modern  editions  follow  1762,  1769  in  omitting  ''of  waters. 


152      Appendix  A.]      Wro?ig  readings  of  the  Bible 


Joshua 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

xix.  44 

Baalah 

Baalath,  1629. 

xxi.  23 

Gibethon 

Gibbethon,  1629. 

xxi.  31 

Helkah 

Helkath,  1629. 

Judges 

i.  31 

Achzib,    nor   Helbath, 

of  Achzib,  nor  of  Hel- 

nor  Aphik 

bah,  nor  of  Aphik, 
1762  (Helbah,  1629, 
&c.). 

i.  36  marg. 

Maale- 

ATaaleh-,  i62g. 

iv.  21 

ttook  (first) 

ttook  (second),  1629. 

V.    26   text 

tsmote  (first) 

twith  the  hammer. 

marg. 

'\Heb.  hammered 

tHeb.  she  hammered, 
1629. 

V.  29  77iarg. 

words 

her  words,  1638. 

V.  30  marg. 

'\Heb.  for  the  necks 
the  spoil 

of 

Delet  1638. 

xi.  I  marg. 

Jephte  (Jephthah  Heb. 

Jephthae,  1629. 

xi.  32) 

xi.  2 

his  wives  sons 

his  wife's  sons,  1 762  ^ 
(wifes,  1744). 

xi.  31  marg. 

shall  come  forth 

which  shall  cotne  forth, 
1629. 

ibid. 

Or,  /  ivill  offer 

Or,  or  I  zvill  offer, 
1638. 

xiv.  17 

while  the  feast 

while  their  feast,   1638. 

xxi.  19 

Lebanon 

Lebonah,  1629. 

Ruth 

ii.  3  majg. 

WCalled    Math.     i. 

5. 

Brought    up    to   ver.    i 

Booz 

marg.  in  1762. 

^  The  apostrophe  does  not  appear  in  our  Bibles  (see,  however, 
below,  p.  235  note  i)  before  1762,  nor  constantly  before  1769  (e.g.  not 
in  1762,  Ezra  ii.  59.  Neh.  vii.  61.  Ps.  vi.  4 ;  xxxi.  16;  xliv.  26;  Ixxxi. 
12;  cvii.  27;  cxl.  3,  &c.).  Through  the  errors  of  these  books,  it  is  some- 
times misplaced,  as  is  noted  in  this  list  within  brackets.  Cf.  i  Sam.  ii. 
13.  I  Chr.  vii.  2,  40.  Ezra  ii.  59.  Ps.  Ixxxi.  12.  Matt.  xiv.  9.  Mark 
vi.  26,  in  which  places,  unless  the  contrary  be  stated,  the  apostrophe 
is  placed  right  for  the  first  time  in  the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible. 


of  1 6 1 1   amended  in  later  editions. 


153 


1  Samuel 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

i.    20   text 

ttimc 

fwhen,  1638. 

marg. 

revelation     (so      1 6 1 2 , 

revolution,    1616,    161 7, 

1613,  1629  L) 

1629,   1630:    in  revo- 
lution, 1638. 

[ii-  13 

priest's   custom,    1762, 

priests'    custom].       See 

1769 

p.  152  note. 

iv.  21  text 

lllchabod,  saying,  ||The 

II  Ichabod,    saying,   The 

glory 

glory. 

marg. 

II  That  is,  where  is  the 

II  That   is,   zvhere  is  the 

glory  ?  II  Or,  there  is 

glory?     or,    there    is 

no  glory 

no  glory,  1629. 

V.  4  marg. 

the  /l thy  par f^ 

the    fishy    part,     1616, 

1617. 
their  calves,  1629. 

vi.  7 

the  calves 

X.  10 

a  company  of  the  pro- 

a     company     of     pro- 

phets 

phets,   1629. 

X.  23 

the  shoulders 

his  shoulders,  1638. 

xiii    18 

Bethoron 

Beth-horon,  1629. 

xvii.  38  marg. 

clothed 

clothed  David,  1638. 

xviii.  27 

David  arose 

David  arose  and  went, 
1629. 

XXV.   16 

keeping  sheep 

keeping       the       sheep, 
1629. 

xxviii.  7 

And  his  servant  said 

And   his  servants   said, 
1629. 

2  Samuel 

iii.  26 

Siriah 

Sirah,  1629. 

vi.  12 

pertained 

pertaineth,  1638. 

viii.  11 

he  had  dedicate^ 

he  had  dedicated,  161 2 
(not  1613). 

xi.  I 

that  after  the  year  {that 
1638) 

after  the  year,  1762. 

xi.  3  \marg:\ 

Bath-shtiah,  i'j62, 1769 

Bath  -  shiia,         Bagster 
1846,  American  1867. 
Cf.  I  Ch.  iii.5. 

xi.  21 

Jerubesheth 

Jerubbesheth,  1629. 

1  That  this  marginal  rendering  of  i6rr,  1612,  1613  cannot  be  de- 
signed appears  from  the  version  of  Tremellius  and  Junius,  which, 
especially  in  the  margin  (see  above,  p.  44),  our  Translators  closely  follow; 
— quod  referebat  piscem.     See  Card  well,  Oxford  Bibles, '^.  16. 

2  But  these  archaisms  we  have  elsewhere  retained  :  e.g.  2  Kin.  xii.  18. 
See  above,  p.  102.    Compare  i  Chr.  xxvi.  20,  Appendix  C  pp.  220,  221. 


154       Appendix  A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


2  Samuel 


Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


xui.  10  marz- 


XV.  3  marg. 

xvi.  12 

xix.  34  marg. 

XX i.  4  viarg. 

xxiii.  32 

xxiii.  37 


1  Kings 

iv.  10 
vi.  I 

vii.  42  marg. 
vii.  51  marg. 
viii.  6r 
ix.  II 
ibid. 
xi.  I 

xi.  5 

xi-  33 
xiii.  6 
xiv.  4  marg. 


set  not  thine  heart 


none  zvill  hear  you 

requite  good 
+  How  many 

silver  or  gold 

Elihaba 
Berothite 


Heseb,  ?narg.  Bcn-IIe- 

seb 
fourscore^... di.  ch.  xvi. 

8,  23 
iipon    the  face    Cf.    2 

Chr.  iv.  13  marg. 
things  of  David 

the  Lord  your  God 

that  then  Solomon 

Galile  (Tobit  i.  2) 

Sydonians  Camb.Synd. 

A  3.  14  but  Sidonians 

Oxf.    1611,     1612 — 

1638 
Amorites     (Ammorites 

1612) 
Ashtaroth  (pi.  Cf.  Judg. 

X.  6) 
was  restored  again 

stood  for  hoarifiess 


Variation  of  later 
editions. 


set  not  thine  heart  upon. 

So  Bagster  1846.    Cf. 

ch.  xviii.  3  7Jiarg. 
none     will     hear    thee, 

1638. 
requite  me  good,  1629. 
+  Heb.      How      many, 

1616,  1617. 
silver    nor  gold,     1616, 

1617. 
Eliahba,  1629. 
Beerothite,  1629. 


Hesed,      viarg.       Ben- 

Hesed,   1629. 
eightieth,  1762. 

upon  the  face  of  the 
pillars,  1638. 

holy  things  of  David, 
1629. 

the  Lord  our  God, 
1629. 

that  then  king  Solo- 
mon,   1638. 

Galilee,  1629.  Cf.  C. 
and  L, ,  1630. 

Zidonians,  1629.  Cf. 
vers.  5,  33. 


Ammonites,  1629. 

Ashtoreth,     1629.       Cf. 

ver.  5. 
was  restored  him  again, 

1638. 
stood  for  his  hoariness, 

1638. 


^  But   these   archaisms    we   have  elsewhere  retained.     See   above, 
p.  III. 


of  1611   amended  in  later  editio?is. 


155 


1  Kings 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible 

editions. 

XV.  2  [marg-l 

Michaia,  1769 

Michaiah,  Bagster  1846, 
Camb.  1858,  Ameri- 
can 1867.  Cf.  2  Chr. 
xiii.  2. 

XV.  10  marg. 

grandmother 

grandmothers,  1638,  's, 
1762. 

XV.  14 

Asa  his  heart  ^ 

Asa's  heart,  1762. 

XV.  1 9 

break  the  league 

break  thy  league,  1629 
C.  and  L.,  1630. 

xvi.  8 

twentieth      and 

5ixt 

twenty  and  sixth,  1629. 

(sixth  1613) 

Cf.  vers,  10,  15. 

xvi.  23 

the     thirty     and 

Dne 

the  thirty  and  first  year, 

year  ^ 

1769. 

2  Kings 

v.  \  I  marg. 

fHeb.  said 

fHeb.  /  said,  161 7 
(not  1620  C.  and  L., 
1630),  1638. 

viii.  19 

promised 

promised  him,  1629. 

ix.  23 

turned  his  hand  (Vul- 

turned his  hands  (lleb., 

gate) 

LXX.)  1629. 

xi.  10 

the  Temple 

the  temple  of  the  Lord, 
1638. 

xii.  19,  20 

Jehoash 

Joash,  1629. 

xiii.  24 

Hazael     the     king 

of 

Hazael   king   of   Syria, 

Syria 

1612  (not  1613), 
1629. 

XV.  15 

the  conspiracy 

his  conspiracy,  1638. 

xviii.  8 

fenced  cities 

fenced  city,  1629. 

xviii.  18 

Helkiah    (so    ver. 

37 

Hilkiah,  1629. 

Camb.  Synd.  A. 

.3- 

14  alone,  not  being 

a  reprint :  see  above, 

p.  6). 

xix.  37 

Adramelech 

Adrammelech,         1638. 
Cf.  ch.  xvii.  31. 

XX.    I 

Amos 

Amoz,  1629.  Cf.  ch. 
xix.  2,  20. 

XX.  13 

shewed  them  the  house 

shewed    them    all     the 

house,  1638. 

xxi.  21  &  xxii.  2 

all  the  ways 

all  the  way,  1629. 

xxiii.  13 

Milchom 

Milcom,  1638. 

^  For  these  archaisms  see  above,  p.  iii. 


156      Appetidix   A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


2  Kings 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

xxiii.  21 

this  book  of  the  Cove- 

the  book   of  this  cove- 

nant 

nant,  1629-'. 

xxiii.  31 

Hamital 

Hamutal,  1629. 

xxiv.  13 

and  the  treasure 

and  the  treasures,  1629. 

xxiv.  19 

Jehoiachin  (Cf.  LXX.) 

Jehoiakim,  1629. 

XXV.  4,  5,  10,   13, 

Caldees 

Chaldees,  1744. 

24,  25,  26 

1  Chronicles 

i.  9 

Siba 

Seba,  1629. 

i.  20 

Hazermaveth 

Hazarmaveth,  1634, 
1638. 

i-  33 

Ephar 

Epher,  1638. 

1.  39  marg. 

Bcman      161 1 — 1769^ 

Hcmam,    Bagster    1846, 

{Hc?}2ah  161 7) 

Camb.  1858,  Ameri- 
can 1867. 

i.  40  i7ia7-g. 

Sepho 

Shepho,  1629.  Cf.  Gen. 
xxxvi.  23. 

i.  42 

Bilham...Dishon 

Bilhan,  1629  ...  Dishan, 
1638. 

i.  44 

Bosrah 

Bozrah,  1638.  Cf.  Isai. 
Ixiii.  I,  &c. 

ii.  10 

Aminadab  bis 

Amminadab   bis,     1629. 

ii.  13  marg. 

Shanima 

Sha?mnah,  1629.  Cf. 
I  Sam.  xvi.  9. 

ii.  14 

Nathanael 

Nethaneel,  1638. 

ii.  18 

Shobab 

and  Shobab,  1629. 

ii.  25 

Ozen 

Ozem,   1629. 

ii.  27 

Ekar 

Eker,  1638. 

ii.  42 

Maresha 

Mareshah,  1638.  Cf. 
ch.  iv.  21. 

ii.  48 

Maacha.   Cf.  ch.  ix.  35 

Maachah,  1638. 

ii.     52     &     iv.     2 

Haroe 

Haroeh,  1638. 

fnaj'g. 

ii.  54 

Salmah 

Salma,  1638.   Cf.  ver.  51. 

iii.  2 

M  aacha . . .  Adoniah 

Maacha,  1638  ...  Adoni- 
jah,  1629.  Cf.  I  Kin. 
i.  5,  &c. 

^  The  rendering  of  16 11  is  quite  justifiable,  but  the  LXX.  and  Vul- 
gate translate  as  in  1629. 

^  The  editions  of  1629 — 1769  correct  the  discrepancy  with  Gen. 
xxxvi.  22  in  the  wrong  way,  by  putting  "Heman"  in  the  earlier  place. 
The  latter  error  is  corrected  by  some  (e.g.  D'Oyly  and  Mant  181 7,  Ox- 
ford 1835)  that  retain  Heman  in  i  Chr.  i.  39  lyiarg. 


of  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


157 


1  Chronicles 

Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 

Variation  of  later 
editions. 

iii.  3 

Shephatia 

Shephatiah,  1629. 

11  i.  5  7na7-g. 

BetJisabc 

Bath-sheba,  1629. 

!!!•  '' 

Noga 

Nogah,  1638. 

iii.  8  marg. 

Beliada 

Beeiiada,    i^Og     {Becli- 
ada,  1762). 

iii.  1 0  marg. 

Abiam 

Abijam,  1629. 

iii.  1 1  marg. 

and 

or,   jfehoahaz,     2    Chr., 

1762. 
Jehoiakim,  1629. 

iii.  15,  16 

Joakim 

iii.  15  marg. 

yoachaz 

yehoakaz,  1629. 

ibid. 

Mathajiia 

Mattaniah,    1638  {Mat- 
tania,  1629). 

iii.  15 

Sallum 

Shallum,  1629. 

iii.  16 

llZedekiah  his  son 

Zedekiah*      his      son\ 
1629. 

iii.  18 

Hosanna,  Camb.  Synd. 

A.     3.     14,     B.     M. 

1276.  1.  4  only. 
Hosama,     Oxf.     161 1, 

1612 — 1630 

Hoshama,  1638. 

iii.  20 

Hazubah 

Hashubah,    1629. 

iii.  22 

Semaiah,  bis 

Shemaiah,  bis,  1629. 

iv.  6 

Ahusam...Ahashtari 

Ahuzam,       i629...Haa- 
hashtari,  1638. 

iv.  7 

Zoar 

Jezoar,  1638. 

iv.  13 

Saraia  (Saraiah,   1616) 

Seraiah,  1629.  Cf.ver.  14. 

iv.  14 

Charasim 

Charashim,  1629. 

iv.  20 

Simeon 

Shimon,  1629.     Cf.  ver. 

iv.  29 

Bilha,  majg.  Beta 

24. 
Bilhah,       1638,      marg. 
Balah,  1629. 

iv.  31  marg. 

Hazar-Siisa 

Hazar-S2isah,  1629. 

iv-  34 

Amashiah 

Amaziah,  1629. 

iv.  35 

Josibia...Seraia 

Josibiah,  1629...  Seraiah, 
1638. 

iv.  36 

Jehohaiah,Camb.  Synd. 
A.  3.   14  alone,   but 
Jesohaiah,  Oxf.  161 1, 
1612 — 1630 

Jeshohaiah,  1638. 

^  The  references  to  the  margin,  up  to  1629  L.,  1630,  are  in  hopeless 
confusion;  "  jl  Or  Coniah,  Jer.  22.  24"  being  made  a  marginal  note  to 
"Zedekiah,"  instead  of  to  "  Jeconiah,"  and  "*  2  Kin.  24.  17  bei7ig  his 
uncle,''  which  is  the  proper  note  on  "his  son,"  being  misplaced  so  as  to 
stand  after  t  Heb.  Shealtiel,  ver.  17. 


158       Appendix   A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


1  Chronicles 

Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 

Variation  of  later 
editions. 

iv.  37 

Jedaia 

Jedaiah,  1638. 

V.  2 

chief  II  rulers 

Ilchief  ruler,   1629  (place 
of  11  changed  by  Bag- 
ster  1846). 

V.  3 

Ezron 

Hezron,  1629. 

V.  6  marg. 

Tiglath-pilneser 

Tiglath-pileser,  1629. 

V.  8 

Azah  (Aza,  1630) 

Azaz,  16-29. 

vi.  2,  22  7?targ. 

Izahar 

Izhar,    1629.     Cf.   vers. 
18,  38. 

vi.  21  marg. 

Adaia 

Adaiah,  1629.     Cf.  ver. 

vi.  40 

Baasiah . . .  Melchiah 

41. 

Baaseiah...Malchiah, 
1638. 

vi-  57 

Libna 

Libnah,  1638^. 

vi.  60 

Anathoth      (Anathoch, 
1617) 

and  Anathoth,  1629. 

vi.  69  &  viii.  13 

Aialon 

Aijalon,  1629  2. 

vi.  78  marg. 

11  Or,  Bozor,  Josh.  xxi. 

Delet  1629. 

[vii.  2,  40 

35 
father's    house,     1762, 

fathers'   house],    see    p. 

1769 

152  note. 

vii.  18 

Ishad 

Ishod,  1638. 

vii.  18  [marg.l 

yezer,  1762,  1769 

Jeezer,     Bagster     1846, 
Camb.     1858,    Amer. 
1867.    Cf.  Num.  xxvi. 
30- 

vii.  24 

Bethoron 

Beth-horon,   1629. 

vii.  25 

Rezeph 

Resheph,  1638. 

vii.  26  &  ix.  4 

Amihud 

Ammihud,  1629. 

vii.  32 

Shuah 

Shua,  1638. 

viii.  II 

Ahitub 

Abitub,  1629. 

viii.  14 

Jerimoth 

Jeremoth,  1638. 

viii.  31 

Gidor 

Gedor,   1638.      Cf.    ch. 
ix.  37. 

viii.  31  marg. 

Zachariak 

Zechariah,     1629.       Cf. 
ch.  xxiv,  25,  &c. 

viii.  36 

Asmaveth 

Azmaveth,    1638.       Cf. 
ch.  ix.  42. 

^  He  final  is  usually  represented  by  h 
Chr.  iii.  10;  v.  5  (Reaia);  vi.  29. 


yet  not  so  by  any  edition  in 


^  All  editions  retain  the  false  form  "Ajalon"  Josh.  x.  12.     2  Chr. 
xxviii.  18  :  all  have  the  true  form  "Aijalon"  Josh.  xxi.  24.    Judg.  i.  35. 


I  Sam.  xiv.  31.     In  Josh.  xix. 
same  change  as  here. 


42  and  2  Chr.  xi.  10,   1629  makes  the 


of  1611  a77iended  in  later  editmis. 


159 


1  Chronicles 

Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 

Variation  of  later 
editions. 

viii.  37 

Elasa 

Eleasah,      1638.         Cf. 
ch.  ix.  43. 

ix.  12 

Maasia 

Maasiai,  1629. 

ix.  35 

Maacha.     Cf.  ch.  ii.  48 

Maachah,  1629. 

ix.  44 

Ismael 

Ishmael,  1638.      Cf.  ch. 
viii.  38. 

X.  2  marg. 

Icshui 

Ishtii,  1629.    Cf.  I  Sam. 

xiv.  49. 

xi.  15 

to  the  rock 

of  David 

to   the   rock  to   David, 
1629. 

xi.  33 

Elihaba 

Eliahba,  1629. 

xi.  34 

Shageh 

Shage,  1629. 

xi.  43 

Maacah 

Maachah,  1638, 

xi.  45 

Zimri,  inarg.  Zimrite 

Shimri,     marg.      Shim- 

rite,  1629. 

xi.  46 

Elnaan 

Elnaam,  1629. 

xii.  3  7narg. 

Hasmaa 

Hasmaah,  1629. 

xii.  5 

Bealiath 

Bealiah,  1638. 

xii.  6 

Azariel 

Azareel,  1638. 

xii.  7 

Jeroam 

Jeroham,  1613  (not  161 2, 
1616,   1617,    1629  L., 
1630),  1629  C. 

xii.  10 

Mashmannah 

Mishmannah,   1638. 

xii.  II 

Atthai 

Attai,  1629. 

xii.  20 

Jediel 

Jediael,  1638. 

xiii.  1 1 

jnarg. 

Heb. 

That  is,  1629. 

xiv.  6 

Noga 

Nogah,  1638. 

xiv,  7 

Elpalet 

Eliphalet,  1629.      ^ — 

XV.  18, 

20 

Zachariah 

Zechariah,  1636^-""'''^ 

XV.  18 

Jaziel 

Jaaziel,  1638. 

XV.  18, 

20 

Maasiah 

Maaseiah,    1638.       See 
2  Chr.  xxiii.  i. 

XV.  18, 

21 

Eliphaleh 

(Eliphaleb, 

Elipheleh. . .  Mikneiah, 

1612,     ver.      18)  ... 

163S. 

Mikniah 

XV.  18 

Jehiel  [second^ 

Jeiel,  1629^. 

XV.    21 

Azzaziah 

Azaziah,  1638. 

XV.  24 

Nathaneel 

. .  Zachariah 

Nethaneel  ...  Zechariah 

(so  ch.  xvi.  5) 

(so  ch.  xvi.  5),  1638. 

^  To  distinguish  ?N''5^1  (Jeiel)  from  ?i?''n^  (Jehiel)  of  ver.  20.  In 
this  veise  and  ch.  xvi.  5  both  names  occur,  and  are  thus  distinguished 
in  161 1.  "Jeiel"  is  right  in  ver.  21  and  in  ch.  v.  7;  "Jehiel"  in  ch.  xxiii. 
8;  2  Chr.  xxi.  2;  xxix.  14;  xxxi.  13;  xxxv.  8;  Ezra  viii,  9;  x.  2,  21,26. 
See  also  2  Chr.  xx.  14;  xxix.  13. 


i6o       Appendix   A."]      IVroJig  readings  of  the  Bible 


1  Chronicles 

Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 

Variation  of  later 
editions. 

xviii.  8  niarg. 

Beta 

Befah,  1769.  Cf.  2  Sam. 
viii.  8. 

xviii.  1 6  inarg. 

Saraia...Sisa 

Seraiah  ...  Shisha,  1629. 
Cf.  2  Sam.  viii.  17 ; 
I  Kin.  iv.  3. 

xxi.  7  marg. 

+  Aiid  it  was 

flieh.  And  it  was,  1616, 

1617. 
Zizah,  1638. 

xxiii.    lo  marg.   & 

Ziza 

ver.  II 

xxiii.  19 

Jekamiam 

Jekameam,  1629. 

xxiii.  -23 

Jerimoth 

Jeremoth,  1629. 

xxiv.  6 

Nathanael 

Nethaneel,    1638.       Cf. 
ch.  xxvi.  4. 

xxiv.  20 

Jedeiah 

Jehdeiah,  1629. 

XXV.  2  marg. 

by  the  hand 

by  the  hands,  1629.  Cf. 
ver.  6. 

XXV.  4 

Eliatha 

Eliathah,  1638.  Cf. 
ver.  27. 

XXV.  22 

Jerimoth  ^ 

Jeremoth,  1638. 

xxvi.  I  marg. 

Abiasaph 

Ebiasaph,  1629. 

xxvi.  16 

Hosa 

Hosah,  1629.  Cf.  ver. 
10,  ch.  xvi.  38. 

xxvi.  18  init. 

And  Parbar 

At  Parbar,  1638. 

xxvii.  6 

Amizabad 

Ammizabad,  1638. 

xxvii.  20 

Azazziah 

Azaziah,  1629. 

xxvii.  22 

Azariel 

Azareel,  1629. 

xxvii.  27 

Sabdi  (Zabdi  1612)  the 

Zabdi     the    Shiphmite, 

Ziphmite 

1629. 

xxvii.  29 

Shetrai 

Shitrai,  1638. 

xxvii.  33,  34 

Ahitophel 

Ahithophel,  1638.  Cf. 
2  Sam.  XV.  12,  31,  &c. 

xxix.  2 

the  silver  for  things 

and  the  silver  for  things, 
1629. 

xxix.  29 

II  book     of     Samuel... 

II book  of  Samuel... book 

tbook  of  Nathan 

of  Nathan,  1629. 

2  Chronicles 

iii.  10 

most  holy  place 

most  holy  house,  1629. 

iv.  13  marg. 

jipon  the  face 

add  of  the  pillars.  So 
Bagster  1846,  also 
1638  mod.  in  i  Kin. 
vii.  42. 

^  In  ver.  4  the  vowel  points  are  different,  and  "Jerimoth"  correct. 


of  idw  amended  hi  later  editions. 


i6i 


2  Chronicles 

Reading  o"f  the 
Authorized  Bible. 

Variation  of  later 
editions. 

vi.  27 

the  land 

thy  land,  1638. 

xi.  8 

Maresha 

Mareshah,  1638. 

xi.  10 

Aialon 

Aijalon,  1629.  See  p. 
158  note  2. 

xi.  20 

Atthai 

Attai,  1616  (not  1617, 
1629L.,  1630),  1629C. 

xi.  20 — 22 

Maacah 

Maachah,  1629. 

xiii.  2 

Gibea 

Gibeah,  1629. 

xiii.  6 

his  LoRD^ 

his  lord,  1629. 

xvii.  18 

Jehoshabad 

Jehozabad,  1629. 

xviii.  7,  8 

Jimla  (Jimlah,  r63o) 

Imla,  1612,  1638.  But 
cf.  I  Kin.  xxii.  8,  9. 

XX.  14  &  xxix.   13 

Jehiel 

Jeiel,  1638^. 

xxiii.  I  & 

XX vi.  1 1 

Maasiah 

Maaseiah,     1638.       Cf. 

&  xxxW. 

8 

ch.  xxviii.  7.  See 
also  I  Chr.  xv.  18, 
20;  Ezra  x.  18. 

xxiv.  26 

Shimeah 

Shimeath,  1629. 

XXV.   I 

Jehoadan      (Jehoiadan 
1612) 

Jehoaddan,  1638. 

XXV.  23 

Joahaz 

Jehoahaz,  1629.  Cf. 
ver.  25. 

xxvii.  5  viar,^. 

•^Heb.  much 

t  Heb.  this,  1629. 

xxviii.  II 

wrath  of  God 

wrath  of  the  LORD, 
1638. 

xxviii.  22 

this  distress 

his  distress,  1638. 

xxix.  12 

Amashai . . .  Jahalelel 

Amasai,  1629,  Jeha- 
lelel,  1638. 

xxix.  15  marg. 

of  the  Lord^ 

of  the  LORD,  1629. 

xxix.  27 

with  the  t  instruments 

with  t  the  instruments, 
Bagster  1846. 

xxxi.  5  marg. 

brought  forth 

brake  forth,  1629. 

xxxi.  6 

tithes  of  oxen 

tithe  of  oxen,  1638. 

xxxi.  14 

Immah  (Immath  1612) 

Imnah,  1629. 

xxxii.  5 

prepared  Millo 

repaired  Millo,  161 6, 
1617. 

1  A  strange  oversight  (retained  up  to  1630)  in  a  matter  about  which 
our  Translators  are  usually  more  careful  than  later  editors,  viz.  in  repre- 
senting mni  by  Lord  (or  God,  see  p.  147  note  i)  but  ''J^^?  by  "Lord" 
or  "  lord."  In  ch.  xxix.  15  marg.  "  Lord"  is  a  misprint,  the  text  being 
correct.  Compare  also  Neh.  i.  11;  iii.  5;  viii.  10.  Ps.  ii.  4,  and  Ap- 
pend. C,  p.  223  note  3. 

'^  See  above,  p.  159  note. 

S.  II 


1 62       Appendix  A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


2  Chronicles 

Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 

Variation  of  later 
editions. 

xxxii.  20 

For  this  cause 

And  for  this  cause,  1638. 

xxxiv.  12 

Sechariah 

Zechariah,      161 2      (not 
1613),  1629. 

XXXV.  8 

•  Zachariah 

Zechariah,  1638. 

XXXV.  9 

JehieL.Joshabad 

Jeiel  ^,  1638  ...  Jozabad, 
1629. 

xxxvi.  17 

Caldees 

Chaldees,  1638. 

Ezra 

ii.  2 

Saraiah  (Saraioh,  1617) 

Seraiah,  1629.    Cf.  Neh. 

vii.  7  ?}iarg. 

ii.  22 

The  children  of  Neto- 

The  men  of  Netophah, 

phah 

1638. 

ii.  24  niarg. 

Beth-Asmaveth 

Beth-azmavcth,  1629.  Cf. 
Neh.  vii.  28. 

ii.  40 

Hodavia,  marg.  Jiida 

Hodaviah,  viarg.  yudah, 
1629.  Cf.  Neh.  vii. 
43  marg. 

ii.  50 

Nephushim 

Nephusim,  1629. 

[ii-  59 

father's,  1769 

fathers'].  See  above,  p. 
152  note. 

iii.  2  77iarg. 

Josua     (but     Josuah, 

jfoshua,    161 3    (but  Jo- 

Hagg. i.  i) 

suah,  Hagg.  i.  i). 

iii.  5 

that   willingly   offered, 

that     willingly    offered, 

offered 

1613. 

iv.  9 

Apharsathkites 

Apharsathchites,  1629. 

V.  12 

Caldean 

Chaldean,  1638. 

vii.  4 

Zeraiah 

Zerahiah,  1638.  Cf.  ch. 
viii.  4. 

vii.  9  marg. 

•\IIe   {Hee,    1616)   was 

+  Heb.  was  the  founda- 

the foil  ndation ,  1 6 1 1 , 

tion,  1629  C:  was  the 

1612,      1613,      1616, 
1617 
tHeb.  Whatsoever 

/.,  1629  L.,  1630. 

vii.  23  wair^. 

t  Chald.       Whatsoever, 

Bagster  1846. 

viii.  13  &  X.  43 

Jehiel 

Jeiel  1,  1638. 

viii.  16 

and  for  Jarib 

also  for  Joiarib,  1638. 

X,  18,  21,  22,  30 

Maasiah 

Maaseiahj  1638.  So 
Neh.  iii.  23;  viii.  4, 
7_;_  X.  25;  xi.  5,  7; 
xii.  41,  42  in  1611. 
See  2  Chr.  xxiii.  i. 

^  See  above,  p.  159  note. 


of  i6 11  amended  in  later  editions. 


163 


Ezra 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

X.  23 

Kelitah 

Kelita  (N^),  1638. 

X.  25 

Jesiah 

Jeziah,  1638. 

X.  33 

Mattatha 

Mattathah  (n")^  1638. 

X.  35 

Bedaiah 

Bedeiah,  1638. 

X.  38 

Bennui  (Benui, 

1612) 

Binnui,  1638. 

Nehemiah 

i.  II 

0      LORD 

(1611  — 

0     Lord,     Oxf.     1835, 

1769) 

Camb.  1858,  Amer. 
1867.  See  above,  p. 
147  note  I. 

ii.  12 

what  God  had 

put 

what  my  God  had  put, 
1638. 

iii.  4,  21  &  X.   5  & 

Merimoth 

Meremoth. 

xii.  3 

iii.    5,    &   viii.    10 

LORD 

Lord,  1629.    See  above, 

pri?fi. 

p.  147  note  I. 

iii.  6 

Besodaiah 

Besodeiah,  1638 

iii.  15 

Shallum 

Shallun,  1629. 

vi.  10 

Mehetable, 

Camb. 

Mehetabeel,  1638. 

Synd.      A. 

3-     i4> 

B.M.  1276.1 

4  only, 

but 

Mehetabel,  Ox 

f. 

1611 — 1630 

vi.  17  marg. 

multiplied  letters 

imdtiplied  their  letters^ 

1629. 

vii.  7 

Nahum 

Nehum,  1638. 

vii.  24  marg. 

yora 

Joi'ah.  Bagster  1846. 
Cf.  Ezra  ii.  18. 

vii.  31 

Michmash 

Michmas,  1638. 

vii.  38 

Senaa 

Senaah,  1629.  Cf.  Ezra 
ii.  35-    , 

vii.  39 

Jedaia 

Jedaiah,  1629.  Cf.  Ezra 
ii.  36. 

vii.  46 

Tabaoth 

Tabbaoth,  1638.  Cf. 
Ezra  ii.  43. 

vii.  54 

Baslith 

Bazlith,  1629. 

[vii.  61 

father's,  1769 

fathers'].  See  above,  p. 
152  note. 

ix.  7 

Caldees 

Chaldees,  1638. 

ix.  17 

the  wonders 

thy  wonders,  1638. 

X.    II 

Micah 

Micha,  1629.  Cf.  ch. 
xi.  17,  22. 

1 1 


164        Appendix   A.]      IVrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


Nehemiah 

Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 

Variation  of  later 
editions. 

X.  18 

Hodiah     (Hodaiah, 

Hodijah,  1638.    Cf.  ver. 

i6i6) 

13- 

xi.  8 

Gabai 

Gabbai,  1638. 

xi.  13 

Meshilemoth 

Meshillemoth,  1638. 

xi.  24 

Meshezabel 

Meshezabeel,    1612   (not 
1613,  &c.),  1638. 

xi.  27 

Hazer-Shual 

Hazar-shual,  1638. 

xi.  28 

Ziglag 

Ziklag,   1612,    1613  (not 
1629  L.,  1630). 

xii.  3  77iarg. 

Sebaniah 

Shebaniah,     1629      (not 
1638),  1744.     Cf.  ver. 

1   i 

xii.  5 

Madiah 

14. 
Maadiah,  1638. 

xii.  21,  36 

Nethanael 

Nethaneel,  1629. 

xii.  36 

Asarael 

Azarael,  1629. 

xii.  4I 

Zachariah 

Zechariah,  1638. 

Esther 

i.  8 

for  the   king   had    ap- 

for so  the  king  had  ap- 

pointed 

pointed,  1629. 

i.  9,   II,   12,   15— 

Vasthi  (Vulg.) 

Vashti,  1629. 

17,  19;  ii.   I,  4, 

17 

i.  14 

Tarshis 

Tarshish,  1629. 

iii.  I 

Amedatha  (Amm. 

Hammedatha,          1638. 

1629  C.) 

Cf.  ch.  viii.  5;  ix.  10, 

iii.  10 

Ammedatha 

24. 

iii.  4 

Mordecai  his  matters 

Mordecai'smatters,  1762. 
See  above,  p.  11 1. 

iv.  4 

the  sackcloth 

his  sackcloth,  1629. 

Job 

i.  17 

Caldeans 

Chaldeans,  1638. 

iv.  6 

;  the  uprightness  of  thy 

,  thy  hope,  and  the  up- 

ways  (,   1 61 6,    1617) 

rightness  of  thy  ways?^ 

and  thy  hope  ? 

1638. 

^  In  1629,  1637  we  find  ";  and  the  uprightness  of  thy  ways,  thy 
hope?"  Though  this  has  been  noted  as  a  mere  error,  the  changes  botla 
of  1629  and  1638  (which  all  later  editions  have  followed)  are  plainly 
intentional,  and  unique  for  their  boldness.  In  the  Paragraph  Bible  we 
have  changed  the  comma  after  "hope"  into  a  semicolon,  although  the 
Hebrew  has  only  Rebia  and  Athnakh  in  the  word  before.  Cf.  Grote 
MS.  pp.  130,  131. 


of  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


1 6s 


Job 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

iv.  19 

on  them  that 

in  them  that,  1762.  Cf. 
ver.  18. 

XX.  21  marg. 

meats 

meat,  1629. 

xxiv.  19  marg. 

take  it 

take,  1629. 

xxiv.  22 

II  and  no  man 

and  II  no  man,  Bagster 
1846. 

xxxiii.  22 

His  soul  draweth 

Yea,  his  soul  draweth, 
1638. 

xxxix.  30 

there  is  he 

there  wshe,  1616,  1617^. 

xli.  5 

wilt  thou  bind 

or  wilt  thou  bind,  1638. 

xlii.  10  marg. 

added  to  Job 

added  all  that  had  been 
to  Job,  1638. 

Psalms 

ii.  6  &  marg. 

Sion 

Zion,  16382.  Cf.  Ps. 
Ixix.  35. 

xxix.  8,  9 

II  shaketh...to  calve 

shaketh |1  to    calve, 

1629. 
They      looked  . . .  ||  were 

xxxiv.  5 

II  They     looked . . .  were 

lightened 

lightened,  1629,  1638, 
Bagster  1846  only. 

xxxvii.  3  marg. 

in  truth  and  stableness 

ill  truth,  or  stableness 
(1629),  1638. 

xxxix.  6  marg. 

image 

an  image,  1629. 

xlii.  6 

Missar 

Mizar,  1629. 

xlii.  9 

God,    My    (my    16 12, 

God     my     rock,     Why 

1630)  rock,  why 

(1629),  1638. 

xliv.  title 

of  Korah 

of  Korah,  Maschil,  1629. 

liii.  6 

Jaakob  (Jakob,  1630) 

Jacob,  1629,  1638. 

lix.  title  marg. 

II  Or,  to  the  chief  Musi- 

WDestroy, 1638.     Cf.  Ps. 

cian,  destroy 

Iviii.  &  Ixxv.  titles 
marg. 

Ixii.  10 

become  not  vain 

and  become  not  vain, 
1629. 

Ixv.  I 

Sion 

Zion,  Amer.  1867  only. 
See  below,  note  2. 

Ixv.  9 

and  11  waterest  it 

Hand  waterest  it.  Bag- 
ster 1846. 

1  The  "  eagle"  should  have  been  masculine  throughout  vers.  27 — 30, 
but  after  having  regarded  it  as  feminine  thus  far,  it  is  too  late  to  change 
here. 

^  So  Ps.  ix.  II,  14;  xiv.  7;  XX.  2;  xlviii.  2,  11,  i2;  1.  2;  11.  18; 
liii.  6;  Ixxiv.  2;  Ixxvi.  2;  Ixxviii.  68;  xcvii.  8.  Elsewhere  161 1  has 
"Zion,"  except  in  Ps.  Ixv.  i,  where  all  have  "Sion"  except  Amer. 
1867.    Cf.  Ps.  Ixix.  35. 


1 66       Appendix   A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


Psalms 


Ixix.  32 
Ixix.  35 

Ixxv.  title  marg. 


[Ixxxi.  12 

Ixxxix,  4  marg. 

xcix.  2 

cv.  30 
cvii.  43 
cxix.  1 01 
cxxvii.    I    text 


cxxxii.  6 
cxxxix.  7 

[cxl.  3 
cxliii.  9 

Proverbs 

vi.  19 
vii.  21 
x.  23 
xi.  1 
XX.  14 


Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


seek  good 
Sion 

II  Or,  to  the  chief  musi- 
cian destroy  not  (Al- 
taschith,  1616,  1617 
for  \destroy  7iot])  a 
psalm  or  so7ig  for 
Asaph. 

hearts',  1769 

to  generation  and  gene- 
ration 
all  people 

The  land 
those  things 
that  I  may  keep 
thatt   (llCamb.    Synd. 

A.    3.    14;     B.   M. 

1276. 1.  4  only;  1613) 

build* 
tHeb.  are  builders 

Ephrata 

fly,  Camb.  Synd.  A.  3. 
14,  &B.  M.  1276.  1.4 
only,  1612,  1630;  flie, 
Oxf.  161 1,  1613 — 
1629  L. 

adders',  1769 

flie 


and  him  that  soweth 

With  much  fair  speech 

as    a    sport   (a    sport, 

1629  C.) 
A  t  false 

nought  bis 


Variation  of  later 
editions. 


seek  God,  1617. 

Zion,  1762.     Cf.  p.  165 

note  2. 
II  Or,  Destroy  not.     \\  Or, 

for  Asaph,  1638. 


heart's].      See    p.     152 

note. 
Deest  (ver.  4  being  cited 

in  ver.  i  marg.)  1762. 
all  the  people,  161 2  (not 

i6t3,  &c.),  1769. 
Their  land,  1638. 
these  things,  1762. 
that  I  might  keep,  1638. 
tthat  build. 


t  Heb.  that  are  builders, 

1638. 
Ephratah,      1629.       Cf. 

Ruth  iv.  11;  Mic.  v.  2. 
flee,  1629  C.     Cf.  Prov. 

xxviii.  17.   See  2  Esdr. 

xiv.  15. 


adder's].     Cf.   Isai.   lix. 

5  marg. 
flee,    i6i6    (not    1617), 

1629. 


and    he     that    soweth, 

1769. 
With     her     much     fair 

speech,  1638. 
as  sport,  1638. 

+  A  false,  Bagster  1846. 
(So  read.) 
naught  bis,  1638. 


of  i6i I  amended  in  later  editmis. 


167 


Proverbs 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

[xxvi.  3 

the  fool's,  1762 

the  fools'].  See  p.  152 
note. 

xxvii.  26 

thy  field 

the  field,  1638. 

xxviii.  17 

flie 

flee,  161 7  (not  1629 
L.,  1630),  1629.  Cf. 
Ps.  cxxxix.  7. 

[xxxi.  14 

merchants',  1769  (mer- 

merchant's].      Cf.      ch. 

chant,  1762) 

xxx.  28.  See  p.  152 
note. 

Eccles. 

i-  5 

the  place 

his  place,  1638. 

ii.  16 

shall  be  forgotten 

shall  all  be  forgotten, 
1629. 

vii.  26  marg. 

^He  {Hee,    1613)   that 

+  Heb.  he  that  is,  1616 

is,    (t  Heb.    that  is, 

(not  1617),  1629. 

1612,  1629  L.,  1630) 

viii.  17 

seek  it  out 

seek  it  out,  yet  he  shall 
not  find  it  \  1629. 

Canticles 

iv.  6 

mountains  of  myrrh 

mountain  of  myrrh,  1629. 

V.  12 

rivers  of  water 

rivers  of  vi^aters,  161 6 
(not  1617,  1629  L., 
1630),  1629. 

vi.  5 

is  a  flock 

is  as  a  flock,  1616,  1617. 
Cf.  ch.  iv.  I. 

vi.  12  marg. 

tAe  chariot 

the  chariots,  16 2g. 

Isaiah 

viii.  8  marg. 

stretching 

stretchings,  1629. 

ix.  I 

Galile.  See  Tobit  i.  2. 

Galilee,  1629. 

X.  34 

forests 

forest,  1769. 

xxiii.  13  & 

Caldeans 

Chaldeans,   1638    (1630, 

xliii.  14  & 

ch.  xlvii.  5). 

xlvii.  1,  5  & 

xlviii.  14,  20 

xxviii.  4 

seeth  it  (?V,  1638,  1744) 

seeth,  1683  (Grote  MS. 
p.  93),  1762. 

xxviii.  26  ;;zfl!r^. 

as  God 

as  his  God,  1629. 

xxix.  I  text 

Woe... II  the  city 

II  Woe... II  the  city. 

marg. 

God :  Or,  of  the  city 

God.  \\0r, ofthecity,  1629. 

1 68       Appendix   A.]      Wfvug  readings  of  the  Bible 


Isaiah 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

xxxi.  9  text 

he   shall... II his    strong 
(llthis  strong,  1629) 

t  he  shall... II  his  strong. 

ma7-g. 

II  Or,  his  strength:  Heb. 

+  Heb.     his     rock,     &c. 

rocke 

Or,  his  strength,  1638. 

xxxiv.  II 

The  cormorant 

But  the  cormorant, 
1629. 

xxxviii.  17  marg. 

me 

7ny  sold,  1638. 

xliv.  2 

Jesurun 

Jeshurun  161 6,  Amer. 
1867,  only.  See  p. 
150  note. 

xliv.  20 

feedeth  of  ashes 

feedeth  on  ashes,  1762. 

xlvii.  6 

the  yoke 

thy  yoke,  1629. 

xlix.  13 

heaven...  God 

heavens,       1629  ...   the 
LORD,  1638. 

liii.  6  marg. 

he  hath  made 

hath  made,  1629. 

Ivii.  8 

made  a  covenant 

made  thee  a  covenant, 
1638I. 

[lix.  5  marg. 

adders\  1769 

adder's,  Bagster  1846, 
Amer.  1867].  Cf.  Ps. 
cxl.  3. 

Ixii.  8  marg. 

if  he  give 

If  I  give,  1629. 

Ixiv.  I 

rent  the  heavens  (see  p. 
102) 

rend  the  heavens,  1762. 

Ixvi.  9 

II  bring... cause  to  bring 

bring  ...  || cause  to  bring, 
1629. 

Jeremiah 

i-  13 

the  face  thereof  tc^^j- 

the  face  thereof  is,  1762. 

iv.  6 

standards 

standard,  1629. 

xii.  15 

will  bring  again 

will  bring  them  again, 
1629. 

XV.  4  marg. 

a  moving 

a  removing,  1629. 

xix.  II 

no  place  else  to  bury 

no  place  to  bury,  1629  C, 
1638. 

xxi.  4,  9 

Caldeans 

Chaldeans,  1638-. 

xxiii.  30 

my  word 

my  words,  1638. 

xxiv.  5  marg. 

captivity 

the  captivity,  1629. 

^  Cardwell  (^Oxford Bibles,  p.  16)  imputes  this  change  to  Bp.  Lloyd 
in  1701.  But  he  knew  no  more  of  Camb.  1638  than  Bp.  Turton  did  of 
Camb.  1629.     See  above,  p.  41  note. 

2  So  ch.  xxii.  25;  xxiv.  5;  xxv.  12;  xxxii.  4,  5,  24,  25,  28,  29,  43; 
xxxiii.  5;  xxxv.  11;  xxxvii.  5,  8 — 11,  13,  14;  xxxviii.  2,  18,  19,  23; 
xl.  9,  10;  xli.  3,  18;  xliii.  3;  1.  I,  8,  25,  35,  45;  li.  4,  54;  Hi.  7,  8, 
14,  17. 


of  i6ii    amended  in   later  editions. 


169 


_-u 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Jeremifciii 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

XX  vi.  18 

Morashite 

Morasthite,  1629.  Cf. 
Micah  i.  i. 

ibid. 

the  high  places 

as  the  high  places,  1629. 
Cf.  Micah  iii.  12. 

xxviii.  6 

the  words 

thy  words,  1629. 

xxxi.  14 

goodness 

my  goodness,  1629. 

xxxi.  18 

thou  art  the  Lord 

for  thou  art  the  Lord, 
1629. 

xxxiii.  16 

viarg. 

Jch(n>a 

Jehovah,  1629. 

XXXV.  13 

and  inhabitants 

and  the  inhabitants,  1616 
(not  1617),  1629. 

xxxv.     19 

text 

Jonadab. . .  twant(tshall 
not  want,  1629) 

+  Jonadab...  want. 

mar^. 

tHeb.  there  shall  not  a 

+  Heb.  There  shall  not  be 

man  be  cut  off  from. 

cut  off  from  Jonadab 

&c. 

the  son  of  Rechab  to 
stand,  &c.,  1638. 

XXX  vii.  14 

inarg. 

or,  lie 

,  or  a  lie,  1638. 

xxxviii.  16 

So  the  king 

So  Zedekiah  the  king, 
1638. 

xl.  I 

Ramath 

Ramah,  1629  C.  and  L. 
(not  1630),  1638. 

xl.  5 

all  the  cities 

the  cities,  1638. 

9,    10 

text 

ver.  9  t  to  serve 

ver,  10.  +  to  serve. 

mars[. 

tHeb.  to  stand  before. 

+   Heb.   to  stand  before, 

And  so  verse  10^ 

1629 — 1769,  Bagster 
1846,  American  1867. 

xli.  I 

Elishamah 

Elishama,  1638. 

xlii.  16 

after  you  in  Egypt 

after  you  there  in  Egypt, 
1629. 

xlviii.  36 

is  perished 

are  perished,  1762. 

xlix.  I 

inherit  God  (so    1612, 

inherit  Gad,  1616,   1617 

1613) 

...1629  C.  and  L. 

1.  10  &  li. 

24'  35 

Caldea 

Chaldea,  1638. 

li.  12 

watchman 

watchmen,  1629. 

li.  27 

her  horses 

the  horses,  1638. 

li.  30 

their  dwelling  places 

her      dwelling     places, 

1629. 
Jehoiachin    bis    (Jehoia- 

Hi.  31 

Jehoiakim  bis 

kin  1616),  1629. 

1  This  gross  error  of  161 1 — 1630,  though  corrected  long  ago,  is 
revived  in  most  modern  Bibles,  e.g.  D'Oyly  «&:  Mant  181 7,  Oxford 
1835,  Camb.  1858. 


1 70       Appendix   A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


Lament. 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

ii.  ^  marg. 

made  to  couch  ^ 

made  to  touch,  1629. 

Ezekiel 

i.  ^ 

Jehoiakins 

Jehoiachins,  1629  C. 
and  L.  (Jehoiakims 
1617,  1630),  1638. 

i.    3    &  xii.    13    & 

Caldeans 

Chaldeans,   1638  (1612, 

xxiii.  14,  7.3 

ch.  i.  3). 

i.  17 

returned 

turned,  1769.     Cf.  vers. 

iii.  5  marg. 

deep  of  lips 

9,  12. 
deep  of  lip,  1629. 

iii.  6  marg. 

heavy  language 

heavy  of  language,  1629. 

iii.  II 

thy  people 

the  children  of  thy  peo- 
ple, 1638. 

iii.  26  marg. 

II  A  man 

+  Heb.  a  man,  1629. 

V.  i. 

take  the  balances 

take  thee  balances,  1638. 

vi.  8 

that  he  may  have 

that  ye  may  have,  161 3. 

xi.  24  & 

Caldea 

Chaldea,  1638  (1630,  ch. 

xvi.  29  & 

xvi.  29). 

xxiii.  15,  16 

xii.  19 

of  them  that  dwell 

of  all  them  that  dwell, 
1629. 

xxi.  30  marg. 

cause  to  it  to  return 

cause  it  to  return,  1629 
C.  and  L. 

[xxii.  10 

fathers',  1769 

father's].  See  above,  p. 
152  note. 

xxiii.  23 

Shoah 

Shoa,  1629. 

xxiii.  43  marg. 

11  II  Her  zvhoredoms 

+  +  Heb.  her  whoredoms, 

1629  C.  &  L. 
(+    +    Heb.   whordomes^ 

1617). 

xxiv.  5 

let  him  seethe 

let  them  seethe,  1638. 

xxiv.  7 

poured  it 

poured  it  not,  16 13. 

xxiv.  25  marg. 

of  the  sold 

of  their  sotil,  1638. 

xxvi.  14 

they  shall  be  a  place 

thou  shalt  be  aplace,  1 638. 

xxvii.  6  marg. 

made  hatches 

made  thy  hatches,  1629. 

xxvii.  16  war^. 

tuorks 

thy  works,  1638. 

xxvii.  22,  23 

Shebah 

Sheba,  1638. 

xxvii.  27  marg. 

wit  hall,     161 1  —  1630 

with    all,     1629,     1638, 

[withal,  1744) 

1762. 

1  This  rendering  might  possibly  stand,  but  that  Tremellius,  from 
whose  version  our  Translators  mostly  derived  their  margin  in  the  Old 
Testament  (see  above,  p.  44),  has  Heb.  facit  ut  pertineat.  Hence 
"•  couch^^  is  a  mere  misprint. 


of  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


171 


Ezekiel 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

xxxi.  4 

t  Heb.  conduits 

II  Or,  conduits,  1638. 
Cf.  Job  xxxviii.  25. 

xxxii.  22 

Ashur 

Asshur,  1638. 

xxxii.  25 

all  her  multitudes 

all  her  multitude,  1629. 

xxxiv.  28 

beasts  of  the  land 

beast  of  the  land,  1762. 

xxxiv.  31 

my  flock  of  my  pasture 

my  flock  the  flock  of  my 
pasture,  1629. 

xxxvi.  2 

the  enemy  had  said 

the  enemy  hath  said, 
i63o(not  [629C.&L., 
1638,  1744),  1762. 

xxxvi.   15 

the  nations 

thy  nations,  1629. 

xxxix.  1 1 

at  that  day 

in  that  day,  1638. 

xlii.  17 

a  measuring  reed 

the  measuring  reed,  1638. 
Cf.  vers.  16,  18,  19. 

xliii.  3  marg. 

See  chap.  9.  2,  5 

See  ch.  9.  1,  5,  1769. 

xliv.  23 

cause  men 

cause  them,  1629. 

[xliv.  30 

the  priest's,  1769 

the  priests'],  Gorle.  See 
above,  p.  79  note  2, 
and  p.  152  note. 

xlvi.  13  marg. 

of  his  year 

a  son  of  his  year,  1638. 

xlvi.  23 

a  new  btulding 

Sixo-w  of  building,  1638. 

xlviii.  8 

they  shall  offer 

ye  shall  offer,  1638. 

Daniel 

i.  4 

Caldeans 

Chaldeans,  1638^. 

i.  12 

give  t  pulse 

give  us  +  pulse,  1629. 

ii.  5  marg. 

Cal.     (=^  Camb.     Synd. 

Chald.,i638(C/zfl:/.ch.ii. 

A.  3-  14) 

14,  in  Camb.  Synd.  A. 
3.  14:  so  1616  in  ch. 

IT     \ 

ii.    8    marg. 

Cald.2 

v.). 
Chald.,  1638. 

also 

V.    7,   9,    12,     16 

Calde 

Chaldee,  1638. 

jnarg. 

[ii.  41 

potters',  1769 

potter's].  Seep.  1 52 note. 

11.  45  ;;zar^. 

in   hand,    161 1 — 1769, 

in  hands,  Bagster  1846, 

Oxf.      1835,      1857, 

Camb.    1858,    Amer. 

Lond.  1859 

1867.  Cf.  ver.  34 
marg. 

^  So  Dan.  ii.  2,  4,  5,  10  {bis)',  iii.  8;  iv.  7 ;  v.  7,  11,  30;  ix.  i. 

2  So  Cal.  or  Cald.  (the  two  issues  of  161 1  sometimes  varying  between 
these  forms)  Dan.  ii.  8,  14,  18,  25  {bis),  28,  29,  31,  43,  44  {bis),  45  ; 
ch.  iii.  4  {bis),  12,  19,  20,  22,  25,  26,  29  {ter),  30;  iv.  2,  10,  14;  v.  2,  6 
{ter),  20,  31;  vi.  8;  vii.  i,  12,  15,  18,  19. 


172      Appendix   ^.]      Wrong  readings   of  the   Bible 


Daniel 


111.  15 

iii.  18 

iii.  21  inarg. 
V.  17  marg. 
vi.  13 


VI.  27  marg. 

vii.  18  marg. 

viii.  13  marg. 
ix.  13  marg. 


ix.  26  marg. 
ix.  27  marg. 

xi.  13  marg. 

xi.   24  marg. 

ibid. 
xi.  38  /6'x/ 

marg. 


Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


a  fiery  furnace 

thy  golden  image 
mantle... tiirbant 
fee,  as 

the  captivity  of  the 
children 

Heb. 

/.  thittgs  {in  things, 
1630) 

II  The  numbcrer 
t   Heb.    intreated    the 
face 

II  Or,  shall  have  no- 
thing 

II  Or,  with  the  abomin- 
able armies  ^ 


of  times  [,  1744]  of 
years 

peaceable  or  fat 

think  thoughts 

But  in  his  estate... 
II  forces 

II  Or,  mttnitions.  Heb. 
Manzzin,  or,  as  for 
the  Almighty  {Al- 
mightie  161 7)   God 


Variation  of  later 
editions. 


a  burning  fiery  furnace, 
1638. 

the  golden  image,  1629. 

mantles... tnrbants,  1629. 

fee,  Bagster  1846. 

the  children  of  the  cap- 
tivity,    1629    C.    (not 
L.,  1630). 
Chald.      Bagster      1846 

only, 
that  is,  things  1613  (not 
1629  L.),  1629  C. 

II  Or,  the  ntimberer,  1744. 

1^  Heb.  intreated  we  not 
the  face  of  the,  &c., 
1638. 

II  Or,  ajtd  shall  have  no- 
thing, 1629. 

II  Or,  and  npon  the  battle- 
ments shall  be  the  idols 
of  the  desolator,  1762. 


of  times  [,  1769]  even 
years,  1762. 

peaceable  and  fat,  1629. 

tliink  his  thoughts,  1629. 

But  +  in  his  estate  ...  |i  + 
forces. 

t  Heb.  [potitcs,  W  Or)  as 
for  the  Alf?iighty  God 
...II  Or,  mttnitions. 
i  Heb.  Mauzzim,  1638 
(so  1744,  but  in  the 
.same  order  as  161 1). 
To  Mauzzim  1744, 
1762,  1769  add  "  or, 
Gods  {God's  1744, 
xid'i)  protectors  r 


1  This  rendering  of  the  margin  in  1611  comes,  as  usual,  from  Tre- 
mellius  (above,  p.  44),  '•'•  legiones  detestationnm  desolantes.  Heb.  alam 
detestationiim  desolantem :  ala  pro  copiis  metaphorice,  ut  Isai.  viii.  8." 
Whatever  may  be  its  value,  it  ought  not  to  have  been  displaced  by  1762 
(which  1769  and  the  moderns  have  servilely  followed)  for  something  not 
so  very  good  of  its  own.  In  the  Paragraph  Bible,  we  have  retained 
both.     See  above,  p.  46. 


of  i6ii   amended  in  late?-  editions. 


173 


Daniel 


xii.  8 


xii.  13 


Hosea 

iv.  4 

vi.  9  marg. 


X.  5  niarg. 


xiu.  ?. 


lo  \inarg.'\ 


Joel 

i.  16 

iii.  13 


Amos 


Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


O  my  Lord  (so  all 
before  1629  in  ch. 
X.  16,  17,  19-  Zech. 
iv.  4,  5,  13;  vi.  4) 

in  the  lot 


this  people 

Sichcni  {Sychem^  1630) 

flee  away 

II  Chemarims 

dew  it  passeth 
Hosea,  1762,  1769 


your  eyes 

the  wickedness 


Variation  of  later 
editions. 


i.  3  ma)g. 

i.  II 
viii.  3 

ix.  5 

he,  {hee  1616,  161'])  for 

four 
and  kept 
songs  of  the  Temples 

(temples,  1629) 
all  that  dwelleth  ^ 

Jonah 

i.  16  marg. 

a  sacrifice 

O  my  lord  (W&?),  1744 
only  here. 

in  thy  lot,  1638. 


thy  people,  1629. 

Shecheni,  1629,  C.  (not 
L.). 

fly  (flie  1629,  1638) 
away,  1744. 

ii  Or,  Chcniarim  {Che- 
marims, 1629  C.  and 
L.,  1630),  1629,  1638. 

dew  that  passeth,  1638 
(but  not  in  ch.  vi.  4). 

Hoshea,  Oxf.  1835,  &c. 


our  eyes,  1629. 

their  wickedness,  1629. 


yea  for  four,  1629. 

and  he  kept,  1762. 
songs     of    the    temple, 

1638. 
all  that  dwell,  1629. 


a  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord, 
1638. 


1  So  in  Amos  vi.  7  Camb.  Synd.  A.  3.  14  alone  has  "first  that 
goeth"  for  "first  that  go"  of  Oxf.  1611,  1612,  1613,  1616,  1617,  &c. 
See  Appendix  B,  p.  212. 


174        Appendix   A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


Micah 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

V.  2 

Beth-leem 

Beth-lehem,  1629  C.  and 
his  soul,  1629. 

vii.  3  viarg. 

the  soul 

Nahum 

i.  I  ifiarg. 

Lord 

Z  (9^/?,  1638.  See  above, 

i.  4 

floure 

p.  147  note  1. 
flower,     1629.       See    2 
Esdr.  XV.  50. 

ii.  2  marg. 
ii,  3  marg. 
iii.  17 

and  the  pride 
1 1  ^^€0.  fiery 
The  crowned 

as  the  pride,  16 2g. 
II  11  Or,  fiery,  1629. 
Thy  crowned,  1629. 

Habakkuk 

i.  9  war^. 

iii.  I  text 

marg. 
iii.  13 

iii.  19 

init.  t  Heb. 

Sigionoth 
Shigianoth 
+by  discovering 

LORD     God     1611— 

II  Or,  ^  before  the  follow- 
ing Heb.),  1638. 

Shigionoth,  1762. 

Shigionoth,  1629. 

by  +  discovering,  1629 
— 1762,  Bagster  1846 
(not  1769,  mod.). 

Lord    GOD,    1629   C., 

1630,     1762,     1769, 
moderns 

1638,  1744.    Cf.  Zeph. 
i.  7.  Seep.  147 note  i. 

Zephaniah 

iii.  II 

mine  holy 

my  holy,  1629  C.  &  L., 
1630.     Cf.  marg. 

Haggai 

i.  I,  12,  14  & 

Josuah.     Cf.   Ezra   iii. 

Joshua,    1629    (ver.    12, 

ii.  2 

2  marg. 

1629  L.). 

Zechariah 

i.  I,  7 

Barachiah 

Berechiah,  1762^. 

iv.  12  marg. 

by  the  hand 

by  the  hand  of,  Bagster 
1846  :  cf.  ch.  vii.  7,  12 
Jtiarg. 

^  Thus    161 1   reads  in  all  the  other  nine  places  where  the  name 
occurs,  except  in  i  Chr.  vi.  39,  "Berachiah." 


of  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


175 


Zechariah 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

vii.  7 

of  the  plain 

and  the  plain,  1638. 

viii.  19  inarg. 

ttHeb.  solemn 

II  il  Or,  solemn,  1762. 

viii.  21  mai-g. 

the  face 

the  face  of  the  LORD, 
1638. 

xi.  2 

all  the  mighty 

the  mighty,  1638. 

xiv.  lo 

Hananiel 

Hananeel,  1762. 

Malachi 

iii.  4 

offerings 

offering,  1638. 

iv.  2 

and  shall  go  forth 

and  ye  shall  go  forth, 
1617,  1629,  &c. 

1  Esdras 

i.  6,  II 

Moyses 

Moses,  1629. 

i.  8 

Sielus 

Syelus,  1638. 

i.  9,  12  marg. 

Or,  prefixed  to  marginal 
note,  1638.  So  16-29, 
eh.  V.  73;  vi.  31;  viii. 
16,  50,  61,  63. 

i.  25 

Pharao 

Pharaoh,  1629. 

[i.  31 

father's,  1762,  1769 

fathers'  (TrarptKo;)].  Cf.  2 
Chr.  xxvi.  24. 

i.  52 

Caldees 

Chaldees,  1638.  So  ch. 
iv.  45;  vi.  15,  1611, 
1612,  1613  :  not  1629, 
1630. 

ii.  8 

tribes  of  Benjamin 

tribe  of  Benjamin,  1769. 

ii.  9 

very  free 

very  many  free,  1629. 

iii.  15  7narg. 

counsel 

council,  1744  (conncel, 
1638)1. 

iv.  43 

the  kingdom 

thy  kingdom,  1629. 

V.  5 

Joachim. .  .Juda...;/2ar^. 

Joacim,     1629,     1630... 

ytida,  Oxf.  161 1 

Judah,  i62g...marg. 
Jtidah,  Camb.  Synd. 
A.  3.  14,  1616.  &c. 

V.  9  war^. 

Shephatia 

Shephatiah,  1638. 

V.  15  inarg. 

Aler- 

Ater-,  1629  (not  1630), 
1638. 

V.  18  marg. 

Asmaveth 

Azmaveth,  1629,  1630. 

V.  19  war^. 

Kiriashiarim 

Kiriathjarim,  1629  (not 
1630),  1638. 

1  Gk.    %p77/iaTi(rT7;/)t'(^  :     Vulg.    concilio ;   Junius   consilio.      Similar 
confusion  between  the  words  occurs  in  Matt.  v.  22;  Mark  xiv.  55. 


176       Appendix   A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


1  Esdras 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

V.  19 

Pyrai 

Pira,  1629  (not  1630). 
Aldus  iripas. 

V.  20 

Cyrama 

Cirama,  1629.  Aldus  ki- 
pajxa. 

V.  20  ?narg. 

Rama 

Ramah,  161 3  only.  Cf. 
Ezra  ii.  26. 

\.  20  marg. 

Gab  ah 

Gaba,  16 13  (not  161 6, 
1617,  1630),  1629.  Cf. 
Neh.  vii.  30. 

V.  26  marg. 

Hodoviah 

Hodaviah,  162^.  Cf. 
Ezra  ii.  40. 

V.  30  marg. 

Giddes 

Giddel,  1629.  Cf.  Ezra 
ii.  47. 

V.  31  marg.  &  31 

A'mww.-.Asipha 

Mctiimn,  1629  [Mehti- 
nim,  Ezra  ii.  50)... 
Acipha,  1629.     Aldus 

V.  32 

Chareus 

Chareus,     1629.     Aldus 

V.  33 

Joeli 

Jeeli,  1629.   Aldus  i'eT/Xt. 

V-  37 

the  sons  of  Ban 

the  son  of  Ban,  1629. 

V.  38 

marg.  note  Barz-  refer- 

marg. note  Barz  •  referred 

red  to  Addus 

to  Berzelus,  1630  only. 

V.  66 

Juda 

Judah,  161 2  (not  1613), 
1629.     Cf.  ver.  5. 

V.  69  marg. 

Asar-haddon,  ch.  iv.  3 

Esar-haddon,  Ezra  iv.  2, 
1744. 

vi.  3  ;;/«r^. 

Shether- 

Shethar-,  1638.  Cf.  Ezra 

vii.  9  war^. 

Esdr. 

V-  3- 
Ezra,  1629. 

viii.  2 

Eleasar 

Eleazar,  1629,  1630.  Cf. 
vers.  43,  63. 

viii.  6 

of      king      Artaxerxes 
(Bishops'  Bible) 

of  Artaxerxes,  1629. 

viii.  29,  32  marg. 

Shecheiiiah 

Shechaniah,  1638  (1629 
in  ver.  32). 

^  This  word  is  v^'anting  in  the  Roman  edition  (1586 — 7),  the  Alex- 
andrian MS.,  the  Vulgate,  and  Junius.  Our  Translators  (after  the 
Bishops'  Bible)  followed  the  text  of  Aldus  (15 18)  in  this  book,  as 
plainly  appears  above,  p.  47.  i  Esdras  is  not  contained  in  the  Com- 
plutensian  (15 17 — 22).  Yet  how  could  Junius  say,  in  his  Preface  to 
the  Apocryphal  books  (1592)  "Hezrae  libros  duos  me  tacente  evincit 
Veritas  :  quos  neque  Hebraice  neque  Graece  vidi,  aut  fuisse  visos 
memini  legere"?     See  above,  p.  44. 


of  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


^n 


1  Esdras 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

viii.  40 

tBago  in  text,  but  no 

maj'g.     t  Heb.     Bogvai, 

marg. 

1613,  i6i6,  1617. 
tHelj.  Bogiia,  1630. 
fHeb.  Bigvai,  1629, 
1638,  &c.  Cf.  Ezra 
viii.  14. 

viii.  41  nparg. 

A  have 

Ahava,  1629.  Cf.  Ezra 
viii.  15. 

viii.  44  marg. 

11  Or,  these  mens  names 

These  men's  names,  1629 
(not  1630). 

viii.  45 

Saddeus...who     was... 

l|Saddeus...|l  who  was... 

the  treasury 

lithe  treasury,  1629. 

viii.  47  marg. 

Shercbia 

Sherebiah,  16 13  (not 
1616, 1617,1630),  1629, 
&c.    Cf.  Ezra  viii.  18. 

viii.  48  marg. 

Hashabia   (referred    to 

Hashabiah,      1630     (not 

ver.  47) 

1629,  which  sets  the 
reference  right).  Cf. 
Ezra  viii.  19. 

viii.  69 

Chanaanites 

Canaanites,  1629.  See 
Judith  V.  9. 

ix.  4  marg. 

11  utterly  destroyed 

Or,  utterly  destroyed, 
1744  only. 

ix.  5 

Juda 

Judah  1769.    Cf.  ch.  v.  5. 

ix.  21 

Hierel 

Hiereel,     1629.      LXX. 

ix.  22 

Ellionas  {eWiovas  Aid.) 

Elionas,  1629,  1630. 
LXX.  [Fritzsche, 
1 871),  eXiojvats. 

ix.  22  marg.,  23 

Josabad 

Jozabad,  1629  (1630, 
1762,  &c.,  ver.  23 
only),  1638,  1744.  Cf. 
ver.  29. 

ix.  26  wa^^. 

Malchuah   {Malchiath, 

Male  hi  ah,      1629.       Cf. 

1744) 

Ezra  X.  25. 

ix.  28  marg. 

Sabad 

Zabad,   1629.     Cf.  Ezra 

X.  27. 
Mani,  1629. 

ix.  30 

Many 

ix.  31 

Balunus 

Balnuus,  1629.  Aldus 
jSaXi'oi'os. 

ix.  32 

Milchias 

Melchias,  1629.    Cf.  ver. 

ix.  34 

Selenias...Azailus 

44. 
Selemias...Azaelus,i629. 
So  Aldus. 

ibid. 

Josiphus  {lu)(n<pos  Aid.) 

Josephus,  1769. 

ix.  49  marg. 

the  priest  and  scribe 

the  priest  the  scribe,  1762. 
Cf.  Neh.  viii.  9. 

s. 


12 


178        Appetidix  A.]      Wrong  readtJtgs  of  the  Bible 


2  Esdras 


Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


Variation  of  later 
editions. 


1.  10 
i-  13 
1-  31 

ii.  7  jfiarg. 


ii.  8 

ii.  10  &  X.  47 

iii.  16 

iii.  18 

iii.  19  marg. 

iii.  27 

iv.  21  77iarg. 

iv.  36  marg. 

iv.  47 

V.  I  marg. 
V.  12  marg. 

vi.  49  marg. 

vii.  37  war^. 
viii.  31,  32  marg. 

viii.  43 

viii.  53  marg. 

X.  2  marg. 

xiii.  14 
xiv.  15 

XV.  41 
XV.  50 


Pharao 
Moyses 
new  moon 

II  Sacrament 
Gomorrhe 


Hierusalem.   See  Matt. 

ii.  I 
Isahac  {bis) 

depth 
\^  And  to  all 
the  city 
II  The  land 
II  ye  re  mi cl 
unto  you 

Ii  Shall  be 
rejected 

II  Bchc77ioth 

Archor 

II  Are  sick  i|  Be  imllitig 

the  rain 
II  Or,  g7^ave 
coii7itry77ie7t     [,      1630] 

citize7is 
wonders 
flie.      But   cf.   ch.    xv. 

32;  xvi.  41 
fleeing.  Cf.  Rev.  xii.  14 
as  floure  {siait  Jlos)^  so 

1612 


Pharaoh,  1629. 
Moses,  1629,  1630. 
new  moons,  1629  (Vulg., 

Bishops'  Bible). 
II Or,    Sac7'ament,    161 2, 

1613  (not  1616 — 1630), 

1638. 
Gomorrha,     1630    (Go- 

morah,  161 2.   Gomor- 
rah, 1629). 
Jerusalem,    1629    (161 6, 

in  ch.  x.  47). 
Isaac    {bis),    1638.     See 

Mark  xii.  26. 
depths,  1629  (Vulg.). 
II  Or,  and  to  all,  1744. 
thy  city,  1629. 
II  Or,  the  land. 
II  Or,  Jere77iiel,  1629. 
unto    thee,     1638    {tibi, 

Vulg.). 
II  Or,  shall  be,  1638. 
directed,  i62<^{dirige7it7C7', 

Vulg.). 
II  Or,  Behe77toth,  Cambr. 

1863.1 
Achor,  1 61 6,  16 1 7,  &c. 
II Or,  are  sick.     ||0r,    be 

icjilli7ig,  1638. 
thy  rain,  1629. 
II  Or,  the  grave,  1638. 
coimtry77ie7i,  Lat.  citizens, 

1629. 
these  wonders,  1629; 
flee,      1629^     {t7-ans77ii- 

g7'ari). 
flying,  1629  {vola7ttes). 
as  a  floure,  1613,  1617: 

as     a     flowre,     1616, 

1630:     as    a    flower, 

1629,  1638.    See  Nah. 

i.  4. 


1  See  above,  p.  38. 

2  A   like   variation   is   found   in    Ps.  cxxxix. 


Prov.  xxviii.   17. 


Wisd.  i.  5.     Ecclus.  xi.  10. 
ix.  4.      I  Tim.  vi.  11. 


Baruch  vi.  55.     i  Mace.  i.  53.     2  Mace. 


of  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


179 


2  Esdras 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

xvi.  28 

clefts  of  rocks 

clefts  of  the  rocks,  1629. 

xvi.  42 

as   he  that  had  {qui... 
capiat) 

as  he  that  hath,  1769. 

xvi.  52 

yet  a  little  iniquity 

yet  a  little,  and  iniquity, 
1616,  1617. 

Tobit 

i.  2 

Galilei 

Galilee,  1638. 

iv.  12 

Isaak 

Isaac,  1616  (not  1617), 
1629,  1630. 

V.  15 

the  wages 

thy  wages,  1629  (crot  ^7rt 
Tov  fxicrdov). 

vi.  3  marg. 

II  Casi 

II  Or,  cast,  1616. 

viii.  JO 

lest  he 

lest  he  also,  1629. 

xiii.  18 

Halleluiah 

Alleluia,  1638.  Cf.  Rev. 
xix.  I,  3,  4,  6. 

xiv.  10  marg. 

Nitsban 

Nitzba,  1629  (i'zV  Junius). 
See  p.  51  note. 

Judith 

Judith,  title, 

Judeth 

Judith,  1744. 

ch.  viii.  \^  passim 

i.  6 

Elimeans 

Elymeans,  1629. 

i.  8  &  XV.  5 

Galilei 

Galilee,  1638. 

i.  8 

Esdrelon  (Vulg.) 

Esdrelom,  1638.  Cf.  ch. 
iii.  9  marg.;  iv.  6 
marg. 

ii.  7  marg. 

II  Cr,  after  the  manner 

II  After  the  manner,  1629. 

ii.  28 

Aschalon 

Ascalon,  1629. 

V.  6,  7 

Caldeans . . .  Caldea 

Chaldeans  ...  Chaldea, 
1638. 

V.  9,  10,  16 

Chanaan . . .  Chanaanite 

Canaan  Canaanite, 

1629  only  (ver.  3, 
Canaan,  i6n).  Cf. 
I  Esdr.  viii.  69. 

V.  16 

Pheresite 

Pherezite,  1638. 

vii.  7 

fountain 

fountains,  1629. 

vii.  18 

Dotha-em 

Dothaim,  1638.  Cf.  ch. 
viii.  3. 

viii.  5 

on  sackcloth  on 

on  sackcloth  upon,  1629. 

1  So  I  Kin.  ix.  11.  Isa.  ix.  r.  Judith  i.  8;  xv.  5.  i  Mace.  x.  30; 
xii.  47  {bis)\  49.  Mark  xv.  41;  xvi.  7.  Luke  iv.  44.  Acts  xiii.  31 
(Camb.  Synd.  A.  3.  14).  Yet  161  r  often  has  "Galilee,"  e.g.  seven 
times  in  i  Mace.  v. 


12- 


i8o        Appendix  A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


Judith 


Vlll. 

•zg 

X.  5 

maj'g. 

xu. 

II 

xiv. 

lO 

XV. 

4 

XV. 

13 

xvi. 

8  marg. 

XVI. 

24 

Esther 

Esther,  title, 
xi.  I 


Wisdom 

i-  5 

xii.  12 


[xv.  4 

xvi.  II  marg. 

xvi.  29 


Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


all  thy  people 

II  Wrapped 

Ebrewe  (Ebrew   161 2, 

i6i6,  1629) 
the  foreskin  of  his  flesh 

Bethomasthem 

before  the  people 

tGr.  or  miter 


to    all    them 
nearest 


that 


are 


Calde 

Ptolomeus    [ter).      Cf. 
I  Mace.  i.  18 


flie  (0ei;^erat) 
to  be  II revenged^ 


painter's  1762 

\Hcbr.  (tHeb.  1616— 

1630) 
unfaithful  {axo-plarovf 


Valuation  of  later 
editions. 


all  the  people,  1629. 
II  Or,  wrapped,  1638. 
Hebrew,  1630,  1638. 

the  flesh  of  his  foreskin, 

1629. 
Betomasthem,     1638 

(Batr-). 
before    all    the    people, 

1629. 
tGr.  mitre,  1629. 
to    all   them   that   were 

nearest,     1612,    1616, 

1617,  &c. 


Chaldee,  1638. 
Ptolemeus  {fer),  1638. 


flee,  1629^. 

Ilto  be  revenged,  1629 
(not  1630),  1638  (not 
1744),  1762,  1769, 
Oxf.  1835,  not  D'Oyly 
and  Mant  1 8 1 7,  Camb. 
1863. 

painters'    (crKia7pa0wj')]. 

tGr.,  1638. 

unthankful,  1629  (not 
1630),  1638. 


^  See  p.  178  note  2. 

2  The  errors  of  161 1  and  its  earlier  reprints  in  regard  to  these 
marginal  marks  are  numberless.  We  note  only  the  most  important, 
or  those  remarkable  for  other  causes,  adopting  in  silence  the  cor- 
rections made  in  other  places,  chiefly  in  the  editions  of  1629  C.  and 
1638. 

2  Evidently  an  oversight.  Vulg.  and  Junius  have  "ingrati,"  the 
Bishops'  Bible  "unthankful."     Cf.  Luke  vi.  35.     2  Tim.  iii.  2. 


of  i6ii  ajiiended  in  later  editions. 


i«i 


Ecclus. 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

iv.  16 

his   generation   161 1 — 

his   generations,  Camb. 

1769 

1863. 

xi.  10 

flying  (StaJpcts) 

fleeing,  1629^. 

[xiii.  19 

lion's  1762,  1769 

lions'  (\eoi'Ta;i')2]. 

XX.  13 

II  Lost 

II  Or,  lost,  1638. 

xxiii.  27 

commandment 

commandments,  1629. 

xxiv.  25 

Physon 

Phison,  1629. 

XXV.  9 

of  him  that  will  hear 

of  them  that  will  hear, 
1629. 

xxvii.  5 

vessel 

vessels,  1629. 

xxix.  6 

If  he  prevail 

II  If  he  prevail,  16 13, 
1616  (not  1617),  1629. 

XXXV.  15 

Doeth  not  the  tears 
(p.  TIG  note  i) 

Do  not  the  tears,  1638. 

XXXV.    18 

till  he  hath  smitten 

till  he  have  smitten, 
1629,  1640. 

xliii.  5  marg. 

t  Gr.  he  stayed 

II  Or,  he  stayedy  1629. 

xlv.  15 

Moises   (Moyses   1616, 
1617,  1630) 

Moses,  1613, 1629,  1638. 

xlvii.  4 

Goliah 

Goliath,  1629  (roXtd^). 

xlviii.  12 

Elizeus 

Eliseus,  1638. 

xlix.  4 

Ezechias 

Ezekias,  161 3,  1616 
(noti6i7, 1630, 1634), 
1629,  1640.  Cf.  ch. 
xlviii.  17,  22. 

xlix.  8 

Ezechiel 

Ezekiel,  1612  (not  1613, 
1634),  1629,  1640. 

li.  12 

deliverest  (e^etXoy) 

deliveredst,  161 6  (not 
1617,  1634,  1640), 
1629,  1630. 

Baruch 

i.  2 

Caldeans 

Chaldeans,  1638. 

&  Song  ver.  25 

[Baruch  i.  4 

king's  sons  1762,  1769 

kings'  sons  (/SacrtX^wv)]. 
Cf.  I  Mace.  x.  89. 

i.  10  marg. 

a  vieat  offering 

that  is,  a  meat  offerings 
1744. 

iv.  2 

take  heed 

take  hold,   1629  (eTriXa- 

vi.  45 

workman 

workmen,  1762. 

vi.  55 

fly  (flie  1613 — 1630) 

flee,  1629  {(pev^ovrai)'^ . 

^  See  p.  178  note  2. 

^  Ecclus.  xxxviii.  33  judges'  (1769)  may  stand,  since  Cod.  248  and 
the  Complutensian  edition  read  St/caorav,  against  hiKa.(jTo\)  of  Codd.  X  B. 


Vulg.,  hvv6.GT0v  of  Cod.  A, 


1 82        Appendix  A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


Song 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

Title  and  ver.  x 

[And    they 

walked   in 

— fell  down  bound  into 

the  midst  of  the  fire, 

the     midst     of     the 

praising 

God      and 

burning      fiery      fur- 

blessing the  Lord]... 

nace  [1769  adds  ver. 

[Then  Azarias  (Aza- 

23]  —  ...  And     they 

ria   1617) 

stood  up] 

walked  ...  Then  Ne- 

...[And 

Nabucha- 

buchadnezzar,  ver.  24. 

donosor 

(Nabucho- 

1638. 

donosor, 

Oxf.    161 1, 

1612,  [61 

6,  1630)] 

ver.  23  marg. 

napt]ui...c. 

{ca.    1616) 

naphtha  ....  cap.       105, 

105 

1629. 

ver.  ()6  marg. 

grave 

the  grave,  1744  (not 
1762),  1769. 

Hist,  of 

Susanna 

ver.  56 

Chanaan 

Canaan,  1629,  Oster- 
vald  1808  only.  See 
Judith  V.  9. 

Bel  and 

Dragon 

ver.  27 

fat 

and  fat,  1629. 

Prayer  of 

Manasseh 

line  36 

iniquity 

iniquities,  1762. 

1  Maccab. 

i.  18 

Ptolomee  {I 

ns)  [Camb. 

Ptolemee,     1629.       Cf. 

Synd.  A. 

3.  14,  Pot- 

Esther  xi.    1 ;  ch.  iii. 

lomee  secundo  locd\ 

38;    X.    51,    55,    57; 

xi.     3;     XV.     16.       2 

Mace.    i.   10;   iv.  4^, 

46. 

i-  53 

flie 

flee,  1629^  {(fyevyaS^v- 
TTjpiu}),     Cf.  ch.  iv.  5, 

ii.  26,  54 

Phineas 

(Phinehas 

Phinees,     1638.     Cf.  \ 

1616,    & 

1630    ver. 

Esdr.  i.  2. 

26) 

1  See  p.  178  note  2. 


of  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


183 


1  Maccab. 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

ii.  29  marg. 

sit^  abide 

sit,  or  abide,  1638. 

ii.  70 

sepulchre 

sepulchres,     1629      {ra- 

iii.  28  marg. 

t  Gr.  or  at 

+  Gk.  at,  1629. 

iii.  38 

Ptoleme         (Ptolomee 
i6i6,  1630) 

Ptolemee,  1629. 

iv.  9 

Pharao 

Pharaoh,  1629. 

iv.  18 

your  enemies 

our  enemies,  1629. 

iv.  29 

met  with  them 

met    them   with,    161 3, 

&c. 
II  Or,  Arabat/iane,  1629, 

V.  3  marg. 

II  Or,  Arabathene 

Vulg.,  Bishops'  Bible 

(-tthane,  1638,  mod.). 

fin.  Arabettine 

Akrabatline,  1629. 

V.  9 

Galead 

Galaad,  16 12.  Cf.  vers. 
17,  20,  &c. 

V.  65 

townes     thereof    (tti'p- 

towers     (towres,     1638) 

Yous) 

thereof,  1629. 

vi.  I 

Elimais 

Elymais,  1638. 

vi.  5 

brought       in       tidings 

brought     him     tidings, 

(d7ra77eX\ajj'  aury) 

1629. 

vii.  24 

the  coast 

the  coasts,  1629. 

vii.  45 

Gasera  (Aldus  V6.ar\pa) 

Gazera,  1638.  Cf.  ch. 
iv.  15. 

viii.  4 

that  place 

the  place,  1629. 

viii.  8 

Lidia 

Lydia,  1616  (not  161 7), 
1629. 

viii.  17 

Accas 

Accos,  1629. 

viii,  26 

covenant 

covenants,  1769. 

ix.  4  &  35 

Jos.    {Josep.   161 1,   ch. 

Joseph.     (1613,      1616, 

marg.  & 

xi.  34) 

1630),  1629. 

X.  I  &  81  marg. 

, 

ix.  35 

Nabbathites 

Nabathites,  16 16  (not 
1617),  1629.  Cf.  ch. 
V.  25. 

ix.  49  war^. 

a7it.  {anti.  161 7) 

Antiq.,  1762.  Cf.  ch. 
xi.  34. 

ix.  50  marg. 

Techea,    Camb.    Synd. 
A.  3.    T4,  &c.,  1617, 
Techoa,    Oxf.    161 1, 
1612,  1613,  1616 

Tecoa,  1629. 

ix.  68 

travail 

travel,  1629— 1762,  not 
1 769  or  moderns  (^0o- 
5os).    See  above,  p.  97 

X.  25 

unto  him 

unto  them,  1629,  1630. 

X.     30    &    xii.     47 

Galile 

Galilee,  1638.     See  To- 

(/iw),  49 

bit  i.  2. 

184       Appe7idix  A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


1  Maccab. 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

X.  51.  55 

Ptoleme  (Ptolome  ver. 

Ptolemee,      1616      (not 

hi,  1630) 

1620),  1638.  See 
ch.  1  18. 

X.  57 

Ptolome 

Ptolemee,  1638  (Ptole- 
me, 1629). 

X.  58 

gave   unto    him   (1612 

he  gave  unto  him,  1630, 

—  1762),         Camb. 

1769,  Ostervald  1808, 

1863 

D'Oyly  and  Mant 
1817,  Oxf.  1835. 

[X.  89 

the  king's  blood,  1762, 

the  kings'  blood].     Cf. 

1769 

Baruch  i.  4. 

xi.  3,  8,   13,    15— 

Ptolomee      (Ptololmee 

Ptolemee,    1629,    161 7, 

18 

ver.    8,    161 2,    Ptol- 

ver.    4    (Oxf.     161 1, 

mee  ver.  13,  1616) 

ver.  18). 

xi.  34 

Lidda 

Lydda,  1616  (not  1617 
—1630),  1638. 

xi.  56 

Triphon 

Tryphon,  1616  (not 
1617),  1629. 

xi.  62 

the  chief  men 

their  chief  men,  1629. 

xi.  70 

Absolon           (Absalon 

Absalom,     1629    {'A.\pa- 

1630) 

Xcofiov).  Cf.  ch.  xiii.  11. 

xii.  7  ?narg. 

look...  Ant. 

See,      1744   ...    Antiq., 

T  n  T  '> 

xii.  8  marg. 

Jos.  Ant. 

1013. 
Joseph.  (1613  &c.).    An- 
tiq. (1638). 

xii.  19  7narg. 
xii.  31  marg. 

\jos. 

Joseph.,  1629. 

xii.  19 

Omiares 

Oniares,  1629. 

xii.  28  niaig. 

lib.  ant.  13.  9  (Ant.  lib. 

Antiq.   lib.    13.   cap.  9, 

1616,  &c.) 

1762. 

xiii.  II 

Absolom  (Vulg.) 

Absalom,  161 3,  1629. 

xiii.  15  marg. 

officers 

offices,  1629,  1630. 

XV.  16 

Ptolome,  Camb.  Synd. 

Ptolemee,     1638     (Pto- 

A. 3.  14,  &c.,  1617, 

leme,  1629). 

-omee,     Oxf.     161 1, 

1612, 1613,  1616,  also 

xvi.  II 

Ptolomeus 

Ptolemeus,  1629. 

xvi.  16,  18,  21 

Ptolome 

Ptolemee,  1638  (Ptole- 
me, 1629).  Cf.  ch.  i. 
18. 

The  same  things,  1629. 

XV.  22 

The  same  thing 

XV.  23 

Sycion  ...   Phaseilis  ... 

Sicyon    (1629)  ...  Phase- 

Sidee...Gortina 

lis      (1638)     ...    Side 

(1638)    Gortyna, 

i6i6,  1629  (not  1617). 

xvi.  10  marg. 

set  fire 

set  on  fire,  1629. 

xvi.  14 

seventh  year 

seventeenth  year,  1769. 

of  xdw  amended  in  later  editmis. 


185 


2  Maccab. 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

i.  10 

hundreth^...  eight 

hundred... eight,  1629. 

i.  10  &  iv. 

Ptolomeus 

Ptolemeus,  1629  (except 

21  &  ix. 

ch.  i.    10),  1638.     So 

29  &  X.  12 

161 1  in  ch.  viii.  8, 
1630  in  ch.  iv.  21. 
See  I  Mace.  i.  18. 

i.  29  &  ii.  4,  8,  10 

Moises    (Moyses    161 3 

Moses,   1629.     So  161 1 

&  vii.  6 

— 1630  fere) 

in  ch.  vii.  30  and  161 2 
in  ch.  i.  29  &  vii.  6. 

iv.  4 

Appolonius 

Apollonius,  1612,  1613, 
1616  (not  1617),  &c. 

iv.  21 

Manastheus       (Monas- 
theus  1630) 

Menestheus,  1629. 

iv.  30 

Tharsus  (Tharsos  1629) 

Tarsus,  1638. 

iv.  40 

on  Auranus 

one  Auranus,  1629 
(not  1630),  1638. 

iv.  45,  46  &  vi.  8 

Ptolomee         (Ptolome 
1630,  ch.  vi.  8) 

Ptolemee,  1629. 

vi.  2  marg. 

yos....c. 

Joseph.,  1744  ...  cap. 
1613. 

viii.  33 

Calisthenes 

Callisthenes,  1638. 

ix.  4 

flie  (7re0ii7a5€i;/coTWj') 

flee,  1629,  1630.  See 
2  Esdr.  xiv.   15  note. 

xi.  4 

thousand  {bis) 

thousands  of  {bis),  1629. 

xi.  9 

altogether 

all  together,  1629  {oiiov 
8^  iravres). 

xii.  15 

Josua 

Joshua,  1629. 

xii.  26  marg. 

i.  (Or,  1613) 

That  is,  1629,  1630. 

xii.  35  war^. 

11  Flit  by  his  ar77iy 

II  Or  (1638)  pit  by  his 
ann:  or,  1629  (not 
1630),  1638. 

xiv.  16 

Dessaro 

Dessau,  1629  {i!ie(r(Taov). 

XV.  3 

this  most  ungracious 

the  most  ungracious, 
1629. 

^  See  p.  147  note  2.  But  "hundreth  "  is  only  an  old  way  of  spelling 
"hundred"  and  is  often  found  in  161 1,  as  in  Esther  xvi.  i ;  Ecclus.  xvi. 
10 :  especially  in  these  reckonings  by  the  Greek  era,  i  Mace.  i.  10,  20,  54; 
ii.  70;  iii.  37;  iv.  52  ;  vi.  16  (not  vi.  20) ;  vii.  i ;  x.  67  ;  xi.  19.  2  Mace, 
xiii.  I ;  xiv.  4. 


1 86       Appejidix  A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


S.  Matthew 


Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


1-  5 
1.  9 
ii.  I 


^    IV.  13,  15 

S      V.   11 

-     V.   22 


-7    vi.  3 

xii.  41 

[xiv.  9  &  Mark  vi. 
26 
^  xiv.  34 

xvi.  16 
xvi.  19 

xviii.  28  ma7'g. 

XX.  29 

xxvi.  75 
xxvii.  22 
xxvii.  46 


S.  Mark 


/v    11.  4 


V.  6 

vii.  3  marg. 


Boos  (/'/V) 
Achas  (/''zV) 
Hierusalem  passim  ^ 

Nephthali 

Racha 

counsell  (counsel  1744) 


thy  right  doeth 

Nineve  (Ninive  16 16) 
oath's,  1762  &c. 
Genesaret 

Thou  art  Christ 

whatsoever  thou   shalt 
loose 

7.  d.  ob.     Cf.  ch.  XX.  2 

Hiericho 

the  words  of  Jesus 
Pilate  said 
Lamasabachthani 
(Lamm-,  16 13) 


for  press 

he  came 
Theophilact 


Variation  of  later 
editions. 


Booz  {bis\  1629. 
Achaz  {bis),  1629. 
Jerusalem,      1629     (not 

1629  L.,  1630),  1638. 
Nephthalim,  1638. 
Raca,  1638. 
council,    1629  L.,    1630 

(councel    161 2,   1629, 

1638).     See    I    Esdr. 

iii.  15  note, 
thy   right    hand    doeth,  / 

1613  (not  1616,  1617), 

1629,  1630. 
Nineveh,   1629   (not 

Luke  xi.  32). 
oaths'].   See  p.  152 

note. 
Gennesaret,      1629    C., 

1638.      Cf.    Mark  vi. 

53;  Luke  V.  I. 
fThou    art    the    Christ, 

1762.     Cf.  ver.  20. 
r  and     whatsoever     thou 

shalt       loose,       161 6 

(1617),  1629. 
seven    pence    halfpenny^ 

r6i6  (not  1617),  1629. 
Jericho,  i6i6(not  1617), 

1629. 
the  word  of  Jesus,  1762. 
:  Pilate  saith,  1629. 
lama  sabachthani,  1629. 


-^for  the  press,  1743. 

Luke  viii.  19. 
ihe  ran,  1638. 
Theophylact,  1629. 


Cf. 


^  "Hierusalem"  is  the  constant  form  in  the  N.  T.  except  in  Acts 
XXV.  I  (Camb.  Synd.  A.  3.  14,  &c.,  1612,  1613,  1617;  not  Oxf.  1611, 
1616).  I  Cor.  xvi.  3.  Gal.  i.  17,  18  j  ii.  i ;  iv.  25,  26.  Heb.  xii.  22. 
See  2  Esdr.  ii.  10. 


of  i6 1 1  amended  in  later  editions. 


187 


S.  Mark 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

X.   18 

there  is  no  man  good, 

tjthcrc  is  none  good   but 

but  one 

one,  1638  ^ 

X.  46 

high  ways  side 

high-way  side,  1629.  Cf. 
Matt.  xiii.  4. 

xi.  8 

branches  of  the  trees 

X  branches  off  the  trees, 
1638  (e/c). 

xii.  26  & 

Isahac 

Isaac,     161 2     ^1      1 61 7 

Luke  XX.  3 

r 

(Mark),  1629.  So  2 
Esdr.  iii.  r6. 

xiv.  32 

Gethsemani   (Clement- 

Gethsemane,   16 16    (not 

ine  Vulg  ) 

161 7,  1630),  1638,  Cf. 
Matt.  xxvi.  36. 

xiv.  55 

counsel 

councell,  1630,  councel, 
1629  C.  (not  L.),  1638, 
council,  1743.  See  i 
Esdr.  iii.  15  note. 

XV.  34 

lamasabachthani 

lama  sabachthani,  1629. 

XV.  41  &  xvi. 

7& 

Galile 

Galilee,  1629  (1612  ter). 

Luke  iv.  44  & 

See  Tobit  i.  2  note. 

Acts     xiii. 

31 

(Camb.     Synd. 

A.  3.  14,  &c.) 

S.  Luke 

i-  3 

understanding  of  things 

^.understanding  of  all 
things,  1629. 

"-*  '    i-  5,  7.  i3'24> 

36, 

Elizabeth 

Elisabeth,  1638. 

40,  41  {bis), 

57 

i.  74 

out  of  the  hands 

{  out  of  the  hand,  1762. 

ii.  25,  34 

Simeon 

Symeon. 

iii.  21 

and  it  came  to  pass 

it  came  to  pass,  1629. 

iii.  25,  26 

Matthathias 

Mattathias,  1629. 

iii.  30 

vSimeon 

Symeon.  Cf.  Appendix  E 
§  I,  p.  244  and  Acts  xv. 

iii.  31 

Menam    (Mera/x,    Eras- 

14. 
Menan,  1629  (Geneva  N. 

mus      1 5 1 6,      Aldus 

T.,  1557)- 

1518,  Tyndale,  Great 

Bible)  ■•^.  See  Appen- 

dix E,  p.  244. 

1  A  variation  taken  from  Matt.  xix.  17.  A  like  change  might  well 
be  made  in  some  other  places,  e.g.  Matt.  xi.  27  ;  ch.  xiii.  32.  In  John 
X.  28  "  any,"  29  "none"  of  1638 — 1762,  are  rejected  by  1769  and  later 
Bibles  for  "any  man,"  "no  man,"  of  1611 — 1630;  "///aw"  however 
being  printed  in  italic  type. 

2  In  the  same  way  all  our  books  from  Tyndale  downwards  (excep 


Appendix  A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


S.  Luke 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

^"    iii-  35 

Phaleg        (Clementine 
Vulg.) 

Phalec,  1629. 

iv.  27 

Elizeus 

Eliseus^,  1638. 

V.    1 

Genesareth"      (Genn  — 

Gennesaret,  1762.     Cf. 

1638— 1743) 

Matt.  xiv.  34. 

V  '     vii.  1 1 

Nairn    (Nau/i   Erasmus 

Nain,    1638    (Naetv  Er- 

15 16,    Aldus,    Vulg. 

asm.  15 19). 

All  Early  English  ver- 

sions   Naim,    except 

Tynd.  1526  Naym) 

viii.  5 

the  wayes  side 

the  way  side,  1743.  Cf. 
ver.  12.  Matt.  xiii.  4; 
Mark  iv.  4. 

xi.  32 

Nineve.    Cf.  Matt.  xii. 

Nineveh,    1699,    Ameri- 

.41 

can  1867. 

xiii.  4 

Siloe    (Silo,    1629    L., 

Siloam,    1629   (Geneva, 

1630),  Tynd.,  Cover- 

1557)- 

dale,       Great       and 

Bishops'  Bibles 

xvii.  34 

the  other  shall  be  left 

and  the  other  shall  be 
left,  1638.  Cf.  vers. 
35,  36. 

'      xix.  2,  5,  8 

Zacheus 

Zaccheus  1638 — 1769^. 

xix.  9 

the  son  of  Abraham 

,.a  son  of  Abraham,  1762. 

XX.  12 

sent  the  third 

-  sent  a  third,  1762. 

xxiii.  II 

at  naught 

at  nought,  1638.  Cf. 
Acts  xix.  27. 

xxiii.  19 

cast  in  prison 

cast  into  prison ,  1 6 1 6  (not 
1617— 1638),  1743. 

J  ^'   xxiv.  13 

Emaus 

Emmaus,  161 3. 

xxiv.  18 

Cleophas 

Cleopas,  1629. 

Coverdale  and  the  Genevan  version)  read  "Heber"  ver.  35  from  Eras- 
mus's 'E/3ep  (retained  in  Beza  1589,  1598),  though  "  Eber  "  is  the  form 
used  in  the  O.  T.     See  Appendix  E,  p.  249. 

^  Elissceiis  might  be  preferable  here,  as  Zacchams  is  spelt  in  Oxf. 
1835,  Camb.  1858,  and  some  recent  Bibles.  An  English  reader  can 
hardly  fail  to  confound  the  three  separate  terminations  in  -eus,  {i)  eu 
diphthong,   as  Menestheus,  2    Mace.   iv.    21,  Nereus,  Rom.    xvi.    15  : 

(2)  the  dissyllable  e-us,  e  being  short,  as  Timotheus,  i  Thess.  i.  i,  &c.: 

(3)  the  more  usual  dissyllable  -e-us,  e  being  long,  as  here.  Such  are 
Aggeus,  I  Esdr.  vi.  i ;  2  Esdr.  i.  40  :  Asmodeus,  Tobit  iii.  8 :  Cende- 
beus,  I  Mace  xv.  38 :  Channuneus,  i  Esdr.  viii.  48  :  Eliseus,  here  : 
Hymeneus,  i  Tim.  i.  20 :  Maccabeus,  i  Mace.  iii.  i,  &c.  :  Mardocheus, 
Esther  x.  4,  &c. :  Ptolemeus,  Esther  xi.  i,  «&;c.:  Sabbatheus,  i  Esdr.  ix, 
14:  Sabateus,  idi'd.  ver.  48:  Timeus,  Mark  x.  46:  Zaccheus,  Luke  xix. 


of  i6 11   amended  in  later  editions. 


189 


S.  John 


:>      1-45  —  49 
&  xxi.  2 
V.  18 

vii.  16 

i  '^    viii.  30 
xi.  3 
xii.  22 
XV.  20 

xvi.  25 

^  »  xxi.  17  /«//. 

Acts 


IV.  17 


Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


Variation  of  later 
editions. 


vi.  5,  8  &  vii.  59 
&  viii.  2  &  xi. 
19  &  xxii.  20 

vi.  5 

vii.  10,  13 


vii.  16 


vii.  35 

viii.  32 

xiii.  18  marg. 

y ;   xiii.  42  marg. 


Nathaneel 

not  only  because  he 

Jesus  answered  them, 

those  words 

his  sister 

told  Jesus 

than    the    Lord    (lord 

1629— 1743) 
the  time 

He  said  unto  him 


miracles,  wonders 
no  farther 

Steven 


Permenas 
Pharao 


Sichem  [bis)  ...  Emor 
('E/Aop  Erasmus,  Aid., 
Tynd.,  Great  and 
Bishops'  Bibles,  &c.) 

by  the  hands 

the  shearer 

eTpo(po(p6pri<T€v 

II  Or,  in  the  week 


Nathanael,    1629  (1612, 

ver.  47). 
» because    he    not    only, 

1629. 
''Jesus    answered    them, 
and  said,  1634,  1638. 
''  these  words,  1629. 
-'his  sisters,  1629. 
tell  Jesus,  1762. 
than  his  lord,  1762. 

but  the  time,  1756,  1762, 
1769. 
>^He  saithuntohim,  1638. 


s  miracles    and   wonders, 

1638. 
no    further,     161 6    (not 


I6I7,    1634), 

1640.      Cf.    ver. 

1629, 
21  ; 

ch.  xxi.  28. 

Stephen,  1629. 

Parmenas,  1629. 

Pharaoh,      1629, 

1630 

(1640,    ver.    10). 

Cf. 

ver.  21. 

Sychem  {bis)  1638. 
Emmor,  1629. 

■  by  the  hand,  1762. 
*  his  shearer,  1629. 

eTpocpocpopTjcrev    bore,     or 
fed  them,  1743^. 

fGr.  z«  the  zveek,  1629. 


2,  5,  8.  So  also  in  i  Esdr.  ix.  21,  23,  30,  32  (bis),  33.  These  all  repre- 
sent the  termination  -acos.  In  i  Mace.  xii.  7  marg.,  20,  "Apetos  should 
be  rendered  Arius,  not  Areus. 

1  After  Deut.  i.  31  in  this  marginal  note  modern  Bibles  which  do 
not  contain  the  Apocrypha  (e.g.  Camb.  1858)  unwarrantably  omit  the 
reference  to  2  Mace.  vii.  27.     See  above,  p.  119. 


190       Appendix  A.]     Wro?ig  readings  of  the  Bible 


Acts 


"^  '    XV.  14 

xvii.  ■22  7narg. 
xxi.  28  &  xxiv.  4 

xxiv.  24 

7  -     xxiv.  27 
xxvii.  5 

xxvii.  7 
xxvii.  18 


Romans 


111.  24 


IV. 

12 

VI. 

12 

vii. 

13 

ix. 

29 

X. 

16  text 

viarg. 

xi. 

28 

xu. 

2 

xiv 

.6 

xiv 

.  10 

xvi 

.  10 

Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


Variation  of  later 
editions. 


Simeon 

II  Or,  court 

farther.    Cf.  ch.  iv.  17 

which  was  a  Jew 

Fortius 
Lysia 

Gnidus 

And  being  exceedingly 
tossed  with  a  tem- 
pest the  next  day, 


Jesus  Christ  (So  Beza's 

Latin  only) 
but  also  walk 
reign  therefore 

Was  that  then 

Sabboth  (Sabbath  1629 
L.,  1630) 

our  II  t  report 

II  (9r,  before  f  Gr. 


for  your  sake 
that  acceptable 
regardeth  a  day 
we  shall  all  stand 

Appelles 


Symeon.  Cf.  Lukeiii.30. 

II  Or,  the  court,  1638. 

further,  1699,  1762  (ch. 
xxiv.  4,  1629— 1743). 

which  was  a  Jewess, 
1629.    Cf.  ch.  xvi.  I. 

Porcius,  1638. 

Lycia,  1629.  Cf.  i  Mace. 
XV.  23. 

Cnidus,  1638. 

And  we  being  exceed- 
ingly tossed  with  a 
tempest,  the  next  day 
1638I. 


Christ  Jesus,  1762. 

but  who  also  walk,  1762. 
therefore  reign,  161 6  (not 

1617),  1629. 
Was  then  that,  1616  (not 

1617),  1629. 
sabaoth,  1 629 — 1 762  (Sa- 

baoth-,  1769). 
four  II report. 
tGr.  before  ||0r,    1629 

(not    1629   L.,  1630), 

1638. 
for  your  sakes,  1762. 
and  acceptable,  1629. 
regardeth  the  day,  1629. 
for   we   shall   all  stand, 

1638. 
Apelles,  1616  (not  1617, 

1630),  1629  C.  and  L. 


^  In  1616  (not  1617) — 1630  the  stop  is  transferred,  but  riii<2v  is  still 
overlooked. 

-  In  James  v.  4  Sabbaoth,  Camb.  Synd.  A.  3.  14,  &c.,  1613,  1617, 
1629  L.,  1630;  Sabaoth,  Oxf.  161 1,  1612,  1616;  sabaoth,  1629  C, 
1638,  &c. 


of  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


191 


ICor. 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

c,    i.  12  &  iii.  4 — 6, 

Apollo 

Apollos,  1638. 

22  &  iv.  6 

vii.  32 

things  that  belongeth 

things  that  belong,  161 2 
(not  1613),  1616,  &c. 
See  p.  no. 

ix.  9  &  X.  2 

Moyses 

Moses,  1629  (1612,  ch. 
ix.  9). 

X.  28 

The  earth  is 

For  the  earth  is,  1638. 

^  j'  xii.  28 

helps  in  governments 

helps, governments,  1 629. 

xiv.  10 

none  of  them  are 

none  of  them  is^  1638. 
Cf.  pp.  109,  no. 

xiv.  23 

some  place 

one  place,  1629. 

XV.  6 

And  that 

After  that,  161 6  (not 
1617),  1629  C.  &  L. 
Cf.  ver.  7. 

XV.  41 

another  of  the  moon 

and  another  glory  of  the 
moon,  1629. 

XV.   48 

such  are  they  that  are 

such  are  they  also  that 

earthy 

are  earthy,  1638. 

xvi.  22 

Anathema  Maranatha 

anathema,      Maranatha, 

2  Cor. 

1629— 1743I. 

i.  19 

Sylvanus 

Silvanus,  161 3  (not  161 6, 
1617),  1629  C.  (not 
1629  L.,  1630).  Cf. 
I  Peter  v.  12. 

v.  2 

earnestly,  desiring 

,  earnestly  desiring,  1769 

(eTTtTTO^Ol'J'Tes)-. 

V.   20 

that  ye  be  (that  be  ye 

be  ye  reconciled,   161 2, 

Oxf.  161 1)  reconciled 

1616  (not  1613),  1617, 
1629. 

viii.  21 

but  in  the  sight 

but  also  in  the  sight, 
1638. 

ix.  5 

not  of  covetousness 

and  not  as  of  covetous- 
ness, 1638. 

ix.  6 

sparingly. .  .bountifully 

also    sparingly  ...  also 
bountifully,  1638. 

xi.  26 

journeying 

journeyings,  1762. 

^  But  1762  and  American  1867  have  Anathema,  Maran-atha,  and 
1769  even  removes  the  necessary  comma  between  the  words;  and  so 
D'Oyly  and  Mant  18 17,  Oxf.  1835,  Camb.  1858,  and  other  moderns. 

-  Professor  Grote  (MS.  p.  16.  See  above,  p.  23  note)  states  that  this 
punctuation  was  adopted  in  a  small  8vo.  Bible  by  Field  in  1660,  but 
that  in  Field's  i2mo.  N.  T.  of  the  same  year,  and  in  all  later  editions 
of  that  period,  the  change  was  revoked.     See  above,  p.  91. 


192       Appendix  A.]      Wrong  readifigs  of  the  Bible 


2  Cor. 


Reading  of  the 
Authorized  Bible. 


(o  *)    XI.  32 

Subscription 

Galatians 

I  '  "^    iii.  13 

Ephesians 

iv.  24 
vi.  24 


Phil. 

iv.  2 
iv.  6 


2  Thess. 


11.  14 

ii.  15 


ITim. 

i.  4 
vi.  II 

Subscription 

2  Tim. 

'^"     i.  7 
ii.  19 


the  city 
Philippos 


on    tree    (Tynd.  —  Bi- 
shops ') 


that  new  man 
sincerity       ^/  0  i-  Cr 


Syntiche 
request 

the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
or  our  epistle 

edifying 
flie  [(pevye) 


Pacaciana        (Bishops' 
Bible) 


Variation  of  later 
editions. 


of  love 
the  seal 


the  city  of  the  Damas- 
cenes, 1629. 
Philippi,  1629, 


on  a  tree,  1629. 


the  new  man,  16 16  (not 
1617),  1629  C. 

sincerity.  Amen,  1616, 
1617  (not  1629  L.), 
1629,  1630.  See  Ap- 
pendix E,  p.  263. 


Syntyche,     1629, 
(not  1699),  &c. 
requests,  1629. 


1638 


our   Lord  Jesus  Christ, 

1629. 
or  by  our  epistle,  161 3 
only. 


godly     edifying,      1638 

(Tynd.— Bps'). 
flee,     1613    (not     1616, 

1617),    1629  C.  &  L. 

Cf.    2    Esdr.    xiv.    15 

note. 
Pacatiana,  1629. 


and  of  love,  1638. 
this  seal,  161 7,  1629  C. 
&  L.,  1630. 


of  i6 11  amejided  in  later  editions. 


193 


2  Tim. 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

iv.  8 

unto  them  also 

unto  all  them  also,  1629. 

iv.  13 

bring  with  thee, 

bring  ivith  thee,  and  the 
books,  1616,  1617, 
1629  C.  &  L.,  1630. 

Heb. 

^  iii.  10 

their  hearts 

their  heart,  1638. 

'  *'"*  iv.  8  marg. 

Josuah 

Joshua,  1638. 

viii.  8 

and  the  house  of  Judah 

and  with  the  house  of 
Judah,  1638. 

xi.  4 

Kain 

Cain,  1638.  Cf.  i  John 
iii.  12;  Jude  11. 

xi.  23 

and    they    (thy,    161 7) 

and  they  were  not  afraid, 

not  afraid 

1638. 

xi.  32 

Gideon . . .  Jephthah 

Gedeon  ...  lephthae, 
1629.  Cf.  Judg.  xi. 
I  marg. 

xii.  I 

unto  the  race 

the  race,  1629  C.  &  L., 
1630. 

James 

V.   2 

motheaten 

are  motheaten,  1638. 

1  Peter 

ii.  1 

evil  speakings 

all  evil  speakings,  1629  C. 

"•  5 

sacrifice 

sacrifices,  1629. 

ii.  6 

Wherefore 

Wherefore  also,  1638. 

V.  12 

Sylvanus 

Silvanus,  1629  C.  &  L. 
(not  1630),  1638.  Cf. 
2  Cor.  i.  19. 

1  John 

ii.  16 

the  lust  of  the  eyes 

and  the  lust  of  the  eyes, 
1638. 

V.  12 

hath  not  the  Son  ^ 

hath  not  the  Son  of  God, 
1629  C.  (not  1629  L., 
1630),  16382. 

1  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer  (Epistle  for  the  First  Sunday  after 
Easter)  follows  the  reading  of  161  r,  as  does  the  Gospel  for  Palm  Sunday 
in  Matt,  xxvii.  52,  "  of  saints  which  slept,"  not  "the  saints,"  as  in  1762 
and  later  Bibles.     See  Cardwell,  Oxfoj'd  Bibles,  p.  14. 

2  Even  after   1638  this  variation  continued:   "of  God"  is  omitted 


S. 


13 


194       Appendix  A.']      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


Wt 


,s^ 


Jude 

Reading  of  the 

Variation  of  later 

Authorized  Bible. 

editions. 

ver.  II 

Kain 

Cain,  1630,  1638.  See 
Heb.  xi.  4. 

ver.  25 

now  and  ever 

both  now  and  ever,  1638. 

Revelation 

i.  4 

Churches  in  Asia 

Churches  which  are  in 
Asia,  1638. 

i.  II 

Philadelphia 

unto  Philadelphia,  1638. 

V.  13 

honour,  glory, 

and  honour,  and  glory, 
1638. 

vii.  5 

Ruben 

Reuben,  i6i6(not  161 7), 
1629  C.  &  L.,  1630. 

vii.  6 

Nepthali      (Nephthali, 

Nephthalim,       1638  — 

1629  C.) 

1762,  Amer.  1867^. 
Cf.  Matt.  iv.  13,  15. 

ix.  17  &  xxi.  20 

jacinct 

jacinth,  1762. 

xii.  14 

flee    {w^TrjTai).     Cf.     2 

fly    (flie,     1629 — 1699), 

Esdr.  XV.  41 

1743,  1762. 

xiii.  6 

them  that  dwelt 

them  that  dwell,  1629. 

xiii.  16  marg. 

to  give 

to  give  the?n,  1769. 

xviii.  12 

Thine  (Thyne  1629  L.) 

thyine,  1629  C. 

XX.  13  marg. 

II  Or,   hell  (II  Or,   well. 

11   Or,      grave,      161 3 — 

1612) 

1 630  :  II  Or,  the  grave, 
1638. 

xxi.  19 

saphir  ^ 

sapphire,  1638. 

xxi.  20 

sardonix  (even  1699)... 

sardonyx      1634,      1640 

topas 

topaz,  1629. 

Colophon 

FINIS 

THE  END,  1762. 

by  1640 — 39,  1659  (fol.),  1677  (Camb.),  1678,  1679  (fol-)»  1681 ;  the 
words  are  retained  by  1658  (Field)  and  its  Dutch  counterfeit  (see  above, 
p.  25  note  2),  1674,  1677  (4°),  1682,  1 701,  and  by  all  later  Bibles. 

^  1769,  followed  by  our  standard  (Camb.  1858)  and  all  other 
moderns  we  know  of,  reads  "  Nepthalim." 

2  Elsewhere  the  forms  employed  in  161 1  are  saphire  and  saphyre. 
See  above,  p.  97. 


N.B.  All  variations  in  the  foregoing  list,  except  those 
relating  to  the  apostrophe,  have  been  introdticed  into  at  least 
one  previous  edition.  The  changes  described  in  the  subjoined 
list  (which  relates  chiefly  to  the  Apocrypha)  are  peculiar  to  the 
Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible,  and  must  justify  themselves. 


(?/"  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


195 


Genesis 

Reading  of  161 1 
later  editions. 

and 

Correction  made  in  the 
Paragraph  Bible. 

i.  20 

creature  that  hath  +life 

+  creature  that  hath  life. 

X.   16 

Girgasite        (Gerg 
1630) 

asite 

Girgashite,  passvn. 

Numbers 

xxvi.  58 

Korathites 

Korahites.     Cf.    i    Chr. 
ix.  19^.     (Gorle.) 

2  Samuel 

' 

xvii.  25  Imarg.'X 

Isi/taclitc,  1762 

Ishmeelite.     Cf.    i    Chr. 
ii.  17. 

2  Kings 

iii.  9 

xvi.  7  \niarg.'\ 

tthat  followed 
t  H  eb .    Tilgath  -piles  er, 
1762 

that  t  followed. 

t  Heb.  Tiglath-peleser. 

1  Chronicles 

vii.  28 

unto  II  Gaza 

il  unto  Gaza-. 

Ezra 

ix.  8 

a  t  little  space 

a  little  t  space.    Cf.  Isai. 
xxvi.  20. 

Nehemiah 

iii.  12 

Halloesh,    161 1 — 

1630 

Hallohesh.     Cf.    ch.    x. 

(Haloesh,  16 16;  Ha- 
lohesh,  1638,  &c.) 

24. 

^  Less  palpable  is  the  error  in  i  Chr.  xxvi.  19  (cf.  ver.  i),  where 
Kore  (5<lpj  is  put  for  Korhiie  {^Xr)\>^. 

-  The  annexed  marginal  note  (omitted  in  Bibles  which  do  not  con- 
tain the  Apocrypha,  see  above,  p.  119)  is  almost  unintelligible  as  it 
stands  in  161 1,  &c.  Inasmuch  as  the  border  of  Ephraim  did  not 
reach  to  Gaza  (Josh.  xv.  47),  our  Translators  suggest  that  n-Tl)"iy  may 

possibly  mean  Adassa,  the'ASacrd  of  i  Mace.  vii.  40,  45. 

13—2 


196       Appendix  A.]      Wro?ig  readings  of  the  Bible 


Esther 

Reading  of  16 11  and 

Correction  made  in  the 

later  editions. 

Paragraph  Bible. 

viii.  5 

+    the    letters    devised 
(the  t  1.   d.  Bagster 
1846;  in  1630  7narg. 
devised  for  the  device) 

the  letters  t  devised. 

Job 

xxxii.  6  marg. 

I  feared  {feared,  1638, 
&c.) 

I  feared  to. 

Psalms 

vi.    4    &   xxxi.    16 

for   thy   mercies  (mer- 

for       thy         mercy's 

&  xliv.  26 

cies',  1769) 

i}vpyy)'- 

cxxxvi.  8  marg. 

ridings 

ruling.  Compare  ver. 
9  (Heb.). 

Canticles 

iv.  2 

every  one   bear   (bare, 

every  one  beareth.     Cf. 

1629  L.,  1630) 

ch.  vi.  6. 

Isaiah 

vi.  9 

Hear     ye      ||      indeed 
(lit  1629) 

f  Hear  ye  ||  indeed. 

marg. 

II   Or,  zvithoiit  ceasing. 

t  Heb.    precedes   ||  Or,. 

dr=r.     Heb.    hear  ye 

Aliter   sanat   Bagster 

in  hearing,  ofc. 

1846. 

xi.  14 

tand  the  children 

and  +  the  children. 

xxvii.  8  marg. 

reJHOveth  it 

removeth  it  zvith. 

xxix.  I  marg. 

ait  off  the  heads 

cnt  off  the  heads  of 

xliv.  14 

he  II  strengtheneth 

II  he  strengtheneth  {marg. 
from  Tremellius,  qua> 
fortificat  se). 

Ezekiel 

iii.  20 

t   righteousness  primo 

t  righteousness   secundo 

loco 

loco. 

xxxviii.  17  marg. 

by  the  hands  (Bagster 

by  the  hand  of.     Cf.    i 

1846  adds  of) 

Kin.  xvi.  12. 

^  The  noun  in  pansA  is  no  doubt  singular,  and  so  LXX. ,  Vulg.  have 
it  in  Ps.  vi.  4;  xxxi.  16.     Our  translators  may  have  meant  "mercies" 


of  i6 11  amended  in  later  editions. 


197 


Daniel 

Reading  of  161 1  and 

Correction  made  in  the 

later  editions. 

Paragraph  Bible. 

ix 

.  26  text 

but    not    for    himself: 

*  but   not    for    himself: 

II  and  the  people 

II  and  the  people. 

[marg.1 

II    Or,   and  [the   Jews'] 

*  Or,  and  [the  Jews\... 

they  shall  he  no  more 

ch.  ir.  17. 

his  people,  ch.  11.  17, 

II  Or,    and    the   prince's 

or,    and  the  prince's 

[MessiaWsNtx.  i^ fu- 

[Messiah''s,    ver.    25] 

ture  people. 

future  people,  i'j62 

Malachi 

i. 

7 

1  Esdras 

II  ye  offer 

Ye  11  offer  1. 

ii. 

12  tnarg. 

Shash-bazar,  Greek  (Gr. 

t  Sheshbazzar,    Ezra    i. 

Shashbazar :     \  638), 

8.  _   Greek,  (Ezra  i.  8, 

^c. 

being  brought  up  from 
the  end  of  the  mar- 
ginal note). 

iv 

.  14  marg. 

t  Heb.  is  of  force 

t  Gk.  is  of  force  (tVxi^et)* 

V. 

5  marg. 

Joachim  ...  Joachim  ... 

Joacim  ...  Joacim  ...  Je- 

Josedech 

shua. 

V. 

8 

Reesaias          [perjaaiov, 

Aid.) 

Resaias  (Prjaaiov,  LXX.) 

V. 

13  marg. 

Asgad    {Asgar,     1769, 

Azgad {Ezra.  ii.  12  ;  Neh. 

mod.) 

vii.  17). 

V. 

21  marg. 

Maghbis  {Maghis,  1744 
only) 

Magbish  (Ezra  ii.  30). 

V. 

24  marg. 

Imrtiar 

hnmer  (Ezra  ii.  37 ;  Neh. 
vii.  40). 

V. 

26  marg. 

Cadmeel          {Cadmiel, 

Kadmiel   (Ezra    ii.    40; 

1638) 

Neh.  vii.  43). 

V. 

29  marg. 

Zich 

Ziha  (Ezra  ii.  43;  Neh. 
vii.  46). 

V. 

31  marg. 

Necodah  ...   Gazam  ... 

Nekoda . . .  Gazzam . . .  Ne- 

Nephtisin . . .  Hactipa 

phttsi77i  . . .  Hakupha 
(Ezra  ii.  48,  50,  51 ; 
Neh.  vii.  62). 

V. 

32  marg. 

Barcos. . .  Thamai 

Barkos...Thamah  (Ezra 
ii-  53). 

to  be  singular,  as  they  so  spell  "  mercy"  about  four  times  out  of  ten.    In 
that  case  1769  would  be  the  first  to  go  wrong.     vSee  p.  152  note. 

^  The  marginal   "bring  unto"  (b  not  B,    1611 — 1638)  cannot  be 
meant  for  the  imperative,  but  renders  diffey-entes  siiper  of  Tremellius. 


198        Appendix  A.]      Wro?ig  readings  of  the  Bible 


1  Esdras 


Reading  of  161 1  and 
later  editions. 


V.  33  marg. 
V.  34  viarg. 
V.  37  marg. 
V.  38  7narg. 

V.  47 

vii.  9  marg.  &  viii. 

23  viarg. 
viii.  2 


viii.  20  /icx/ 


marg. 


vm.  23  marg. 

viii.  29  marg. 
viii.  39  marg. 
viii.  44 


viu.  49 


viii.  54  wa;-^'. 

viii.  62  viarg. 
ix.  19  viarg. 

ix.  21  viarg. 

viarg. 
ix.  23  viarg. 
ix.  26  marg. 
ix,  29 


&  43 


{Hoboiah 
Cos  . . .  Bar- 


Darcon 

Hatti...Phoceroth  {-eth, 

1629) 
Necodah.     Cf.   ver.   31 

viarg. 
Hobaiah 

1612)  . 

zclai 
of  the  Ij  first  gate  (first 

II  gate,  1629,  &c.) 

II  Ozias  {text),  ||  Azarias 
(;y/ar^.),  _[|1  Ezias 
[text),  II  Ozias  {viarg.) 
1629,  llOziaz  [viarg.) 

1744] 
II cors... other  things 
II  Or,  measures  or  salt 

of  tJiosc  tliat 

Parosh 

Sheviaia 

Joribas...Mosollamon 


catalogue  of  whose 
names  were.  (See 
above,  p.  1 10  note  i) 

Serebias  and  Hassi- 
bias^ 

Mcrimoth 

Maasias 

Maasiah 

Kelitah 

Jesaiah  {fesiaJi,  1629) 

Josabad 


Correction  made  in  the 
Paragraph  Bible. 


Darkoii    (Ezra    ii.    56 ; 

Neh.  vii.  58). 
Hat  til. . .  Fochercth  (Ezra 

ii.  57;  Neh.  vii.  59). 
Nekoda    (Ezra    ii.     60; 

Neh.  vii.  62) 
Habaiah  . . .  Koz  . . .  Bar- 

zillai    (Ezra    ii.     61  ; 

Neh.  vii.  63). 
il  of  the  first  gate^ 

+  Chald. 

t  Ozias  {text)  f  Ezias 
{viarg.) :  i^iov  Aldus 
and  Bishops'  Bible. 


other  thmgs. 

Or, 


II  cors. 

II  Or,    vieasures. 

salt, 
of  all  those  that   (Ezra 

vii.  25). 
Pharosh  (Ezra  viii.  3). 
Shcviaiah  (Ezra  viii.  13). 
Joribus  (ch.  ix.  i9)...Mo- 

sollamus.     Cf.  ch.  ix. 

14. 
catalogue       of       whose 

names  was.     Cf.  Acts 

xxv.  23. 
11  Or,  Sherebiah  and  Ha- 

shabiah  (Ezra  viii.  24). 
Meremoth  (Ezra  viii.  33). 
Maasciah    (Ezra  x.    18, 

21). 
Maaseiah. 

Kelita  (Ezra  x.  23). 
Jeziah  (Ezra  x.  25). 
Jozabad.  ('Iwf.-LXX.). 


^  The  margin  notes  the  various  reading  upheld  by  Vulg.  and  Junius, 
Trpo  Tov  for  tov  irpcjTov. 

2  So  Camb.  Synd.  A.  3.  14,  &c.,  1613,  1617,  &c. :  but  SeremaSy 
Oxf.  161 1,  1612,  1616.     See  below,  p.  205. 


of  i6ii  amended  in  later  editions. 


199 


1  Esdras 


IX.  33  marg. 


2  Esdras 

ii.  23  marg, 
iii.  31  text 

If: 

ix.  17,  18  text 


mare. 


IX.  19  marg. 

X.  13  marg. 

Tobit 

i.  14 

V.  18  marg". 


Judith 

xiv.  16  marg. 
xvi.  II  marg. 


Esther 

xiii.  18 

XV.  5 

Wisdom 

V.  14 


Reading  of  161 1  and 
later  editions. 


Mattithiah  {Mati- 

Camb.   Synd.  A.    3. 
I4»  1617) 


"{  Signing 

II I  do  not  remember 

II  Or,  /  conceive 

:  for  it  was  the  time  of 

the  world.     ||  And 
\\And  now... 
II  Btct  lohen 
\\ But  the  earth... 


lat    Rages    a    city   of 

Media 
Let    not    {no    Camb. 

Synd.      A.     3.     14) 

money 


Then 

The  Assyrians 


most  t  earnestly 

and  very  ||  amiable  (and 
II  very  amiable,  1629) 


a      thin      froth  ...  the 
II  smoke 


Correction  made  in  the 
Paragraph  Bible. 


Matt  at  hah.    Cf.  Ezra  x. 
33:  above,  p.  163. 


+  Lat.  signing. 

I  do  not  II remember'. 

II  Or,  conceive. 

:  II  for  it  was  the  time  of 

the  v/orld.     And 
II Or,  And  7ioui... 
II  Or,  hit  %vhen 
II  Or,  but  the  earth .... 


at  Rages  \\a  city  of  Me- 
dia =^. 

JlGk.  Let  not  money. 


I  Or,  Then  (/cat). 

I  That  is,  the  Assyrians. 


+  most       earnestly      {k^ 

iax^os  avTuv). 
Hand   very   amiable   (ws 


Trpo(X(pi.\es). 


I  a  thin  froth  [Traxvi]). 
the  smoke. 


^  This  must  be  the  intention  of  the  Translators,  since  Vulg.  has 
Nihil  mcmini  of  the  text,  Junius  Nihil  venit  in  mentem  of  the  margin, 
the  Bishops'  Bible  "  I  cannot  perceive." 

^  So  Fritzsche's  text  of  the  LXX. :  Vulg.  has  civitatem.  But  the 
arrangement  of  161 1  might  very  well  stand,  as  the  margin  exactly  repre- 
sents the  reading  of  Aldus,  kv  dypoh  t7J$  Mrfdeias.     See  above,  p.  51. 


200       Appendix  A.]      Wrong  readings  of  the  Bible 


Wisdom 

Reading  of  1611  and 

Correction  made  in  the 

later  editions. 

Paragraph  Bible. 

xii.  12 

to  II  stand  against  thee 

II  to   stand    against   thee 

(to    stand    ||   against 

(et'j  KardaTaaiv  aoi). 

thee,  1629) 

xiv.  2  marg. 

II  Or,  vessel 

II  That  is,  vessel  (eKe^vo). 

xiv.  21  marg. 

II  of  God  (II  Or,  of  God, 

II That  is,  of  God  (t.  no- 

1612,  1629,  &c.,  not 

men  Dei^  Junius). 

D'Oyly    and     Mant 

1817) 

xvi.  5  marg. 

II  Or,  thy  people 

II  That  is,  thy  people. 

xvi.  21  war^. 

II  Or,  7nanna 

II  That  is,  manna. 

Ecclus. 

viii.  II 

to  II  entrap  thee  in  thy 

to   entrap   thee  ||in  thy 

words    (II  to   entrap. 

words. 

1629,  &c.) 

X.  21 

11  the  obtaining   of  au- 

the obtaining  of  ||  autho- 

thority 

rity^. 

xiv.  8 

+  rich  garments 

rich  +  garments. 

xlvii.  II 

of  kings.. .11  of  glory 

||of  kings...  of  glory. 

xlix.  9  marg. 

\\  did  good 

\\did  good  unto  (Bps' 
Bible). 

li.  20 

III  directed  my  soul... 

I  directed  my  soul... 

I  have  had  my  heart 

II I  have  had  my  heart. 

Baruch 

iii,  2 

Chanaan 

Canaan.  Cf.  Judith  v. 
9:  above,  p.  179. 

Song 

Title 

in  the  Hebrew 

in  the  Chaldee. 

1  Maccabees 

ii.  2  7narg. 

II  Gaddis 

II  Or,  Gaddis. 

ii.  35  wa;r^. 

II  Gr.  the  Jetvs  (||  Or, 

II  That  is,  the  Jews.     Cf. 

the  Jews,  1629) 

Wisd.  xvi.  5,  21. 

ii.  42  &  vii.  13 

Assideans 

Asideans  (1630,  ch.  vii. 
13;  1611,  2  Mace.  xiv. 
6). 

^  This  must  be  the  proper  arrangement  even  if  for  -Kpo  X'^i/'ews  dpxrjs 
be  read  irpb  Xrj^ecjs  dpxv  with  the  Complutensian,  or  TrpoXrjrpeios  dpxv 
with  Cod.  106,  or  irpo  \??^ews  dpxv^  with  Grabe.  The  verse  is  wanting 
in  the  best  manuscripts  and  the  Aldine  edition. 


of  i6iL  amenlied  in  later  editions. 


20I 


1  Maccabees 

Reading  of  161 1  and 
later  editions. 

Correction  made  in  the 
Paragraph  Bible. 

V.  4  Jiiarg. 

Haran   {Haron,   1630; 

Akan.     Cf.  Gen.  xxxvi. 

Hakan,  1629,  1638) 

27. 

V.  23  marg. 

II  Or,  captive  Jexvs 

II  That  is,  captive  fetus. 

V.  26 

Bosora,  cf.  ver.  28 

Bossora,  LXX.  (Cora- 
plut.,  Fritzsche).  See 
above,  p.  53. 

V.  27  marg. 

II      Or,      the      heathen, 
(D'Oyly    and    Mant 
omit  1 81 7  Or) 

II  That  is,  the  heathen. 

V.  30  marg. 

11   The  heathen   (||    Or, 
the     heathen,     1629, 
&c.,  not  D'Oyly  and 
Mant  1 81 7) 

II That  is,  the  heathen. 

V.  44  marg. 

II  Judas  and 

llThat  is,  Judas  and. 

V.  54  wa;-^. 

Antiq.  12.  12 

Antiq.  lib.  12,  cap.  12. 
Cf.  ch.  vii.  I,  &c. 

vi.  49 

11  peace city,     (1638 

and  the  moderns  set 
II  after  *'  peace,"   in- 
serting    they    before 
yielded  in  the  margin) 

peace city  ||. 

vi.    52    &    vii.    45 

II  Or,  the  Jews 

II  That  is,  the  Jervs. 

&  ix.  II 

ix.  24  marg. 

Bacchides  and 

II That  is,  Bacchides  and. 

ix.  63  ///^ro-. 

II  Or,  to  such  of 

II  That  is,  to  such  of. 

xiii.  15  marg. 

that  he  had.,  for  {that 
he     had,     or,     1629, 
&c.) 

that  he  had,  ox,  for. 

2  Maccabees 

ii.  17  marg. 

heritage 

heritage  to  all. 

iv.  14 

the  game  of  1|  Discus 

lithe  game  of  Discus. 

V.  8 

an  open  ||  enemy 

an  II  open  enemy. 

xi.  6  marg. 

II  Maccabeus 

11  Or,  Maccabeus. 

xii.  20  marg. 

\\Dositheus  and... 

II  That  is,  Dositheus,  and. 

xiii.  23 

confounded  (crwex^'dv) 

was  confounded  [i.  e. 
Eupator,  Cotton\ 

S.  Matthew 

xxiii.  24 

strain  at  a  gnat 

strain  out  a  gnat^. 

1  So  all  the  early  versions  from  Tyndale  to  the  Bishops'  Bible,  and 
even  T.  Baskett's  8vo.  edition  of  the  Authorized,  London,  8vo.  1754, 
1411. 


Brit.  Mus. 


f. 


202    Appendix  A.]    Wrong  readings  of  earlier  Bibles  ametided. 


S.  Mark 

Reading  of  161 1  and 

Correction  made  in  the 

later  editions. 

Paragraph  Bible. 

vi.  53 

Genesareth     (Gennesa- 

Genesaret.      Cf.     Matt. 

ret,  1638 — 1769) 

xiv.  34  ;  Luke  v.  i. 

S.  Luke 

i.  78  marg. 

Malach.  iv.  2  ;  follcnvs 

Mai.  iv.  I,  follows  sun- 

Isai.  xi.  I 

rising: 

S.  John 

X.  25 

and  ye  believed  not 

and  ye  believe  not. 

Acts 

vii.  1 1  &  xiii.  19 

Chanaan 

Canaan  (161 2  only,  eh. 
xiii.  19).  See  Judith 
V.  9. 

xxi.  I 

Choos      (Coos,     163S, 

Cos.     Cf.    I    Mace.    XV. 

&c.) 

23- 

XXV.  23 

was   entered    (Bishops' 

were  entered  (Tyndale, 

Bible).     Cf.  I   Esdr. 

Great   Bible,   Geneva 

viii.  49 

1557).  See  above,  p. 
1 10  note  I. 

Romans 

xvi.  9 

Urbane 

Urban. 

Philippians 

ii.  7,  8 

II    likeness    of    men... 

likeness     of      men 

fashion  as  a  man 

1!  fashion  as  a  man^. 

Hebrews 

i.  6 

Ii    And     again,     1762, 
whose  margin  it  is 

And  II  again. 

viii.  8 

Judah 

Juda.  Cf.  Matt.  ii.  6; 
ch.  vii.  14;  Rev.  v.  5. 
So  Camb.  1863  iri 
Ecclus.  xlix.  4. 

X.  23 

faith 

hope.      See     Appendix 
E,  p.  247. 

^  That  the  margin,  "  Or,  habit''''  refers  to  ax^l^<^'^i-i  not  to  oixoLwixaTL, 
is  plain  enough  in  itself,  not  to  add  that  for  (rx^ywart  the  Vulg.  has 
habitu,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  and  the  Great  Bible  appard. 


APPENDIX    B. 

(See  above,  pp.  5 — 7.) 

Catalogue  of  variations  (not  being  very  manifest  mis- 
prints^) between  the  two  issues  of  the  Authorized  version 
of  161 1,  represented  by  Camb.  Synd.  A.  3.  14  and  the 
Oxford  reprint  of  1833  respectively.  Wheresoever  the  con- 
trary is  not  stated,  the  British  Museum  copies,  3050.  g.  2, 
3050.  g.  3,  and  1276.  1.  4,  have  been  ascertained  to  agree 
with  Camb.  Synd.  A.  3.  14. 

N.B.  Bp.  denotes  the  Bishops'  Bible  (1572),  Synd.  our 
Cambridge,  Oxf.  our  Oxford  model,  Ainer.  the  New  York 
Bible,  diamond,  24mo.  1867  ^ 

§  I.  The  readings  of  Camb.  Synd.  A.  3.  14  have  been 
preferred  in  forming  the  text  of  the  Cambridge  Paragraph 
Bible  in  the  following  places  : 

Gen.  x.  16  Amorite  161 7,   1634,   1640,  1769,  moderns, 


^  Such,  and  nothing  more,  are  the  following  errors,  noticed  by  Dr 
Schaff  {Companion  to  the  Greek  Testa??ient,  p.  324).  Ex.  ix.  13  "serve 
thee"  Synd.,  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4,  3050.  g.  2  and  3  for  "serve  me"  Oxf., 
B.  M.  3050.  g.  I.  On  the  other  hand  Ox/.,  3050.  g.  i  are  wrong  and 
Synd.,  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4,  3050.  g.  2  and  3  are  right  in  Lev.  xiii.  56 
"plaine"  for  "  plague"  and  in  Lev.  xvii.  14  "  ye  shall  not"  for  "ye 
shall":  but  see  above,  p.  112,  for  this  last. 

-  The  readings  of  the  Bishops'  Bible  are  added  in  some  places,  in 
case  that  any  should  think  that  light  may  be  thrown  upon  the  origin  of 
these  variations  by  the  Bible  from  which,  as  it  would  seem,  our  own 
version  was  set  up  for  the  press.  Inferences  thus  drawn  seem  to  the 
Editor  for  the  most  part  too  slight  to  be  relied  on. 


204   Appendix  B?^    Variations  between  the  two  issues  of 


Amer.  (Emorite  [^A]  ^^^f-  1612,  1613,  1616,  1629  L.  &  C, 
1630,  1638,  1744,  1762,  here  only),  xlvi.  17  Ishui  161 7 
(Isui  Oxf.  161 2,  161 3,  &c.).  xlvii.  27  possessions  [with  B. 
M.  1276.  1.  4  only]  (possessions  Bp.  Oxf.  161 2,  1613,  &c.). 
ExoD.  xxxviii.  11  the  hooks  (hoopes  Oxf.  1612,  but  not 
ver.  10)  of  the  pillars  1613,  &c.,  cf.  Bp.  vers.  10,  ii\  Lev. 
xviii.  30  ye  shall  1630  (shall  ye  Bp.  Oxf.  1612,  1613,  1629 
L.  &  C,  &c.).  Num.  x.  2  thou  shalt  (shalt  thou  Bp.  Oxf 
16 1 2,  1 6 13,  &c.).  xxvi.  21  Hezronites  [with  B.  M.  1276. 
1.  4  only]  (Hesronites  Bp.  Oxf.  161 2,  16 13,  &c.).  Deut. 
viii.  7  the  valleys  (valleys  Bp.  Oxf.  16 12,  1613,  &c.).  xvii.  4 
it  z!f  true^  (it  ^^  true  Bp.  Oxf  1612,  1613,  &c.).  xxxii.  15 
Thou  art  waxed  161 7  (Thou  art  waxen  Oxf.  161 2,  16 13,  &c.). 
2  Sam.  xvii.  25  AbigaP  1612,  161 3,  161 6,  1617  (Abigail  Bp. 
Oxf  1629  C.  and  L.,  &c.,  as  in  i  Chr.  ii.  16).  i  Kin.  iii.  20 
rose  [with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only]  16 13  (arose  Bp.  Oxf.  161 2, 
1616,  1617,  &c.).  ix.  22  bondman  1613  (bondmen  Bp. 
Oxf,  B.  M.  3050.  g.  3,  1612,  1616,  161 7,  &c.).  Job  xix.  15 
maidens  Bp.  16 13  (maides  Oxf.  161 2,  1616,  &c.).  Prov. 
xi.  20  unto  the  Lord  1613  (to  the  Lord  Oxf,  B.  M.  3050. 
g.  3,  1612,  1616,  1617,  &c  ).  Cant.  ii.  7  till  he  please 
[so  all  know7i  editions  except  Oxf^  till  she  please,  here 
only,  not  in  ch.  iii.  5;  viii.  4).     Isai.  xlix.  i  from  afar  161 3, 


^  Since  Bp.  has  "hoops"  in  both  verses  (to,  ii),  though  for  the 
word  rendered  "  fillets"  in  i6ri,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  Oxf.  was  set  up 
from  a  copy  of  Bp.,  and  the  same  inference  might  be  drawn  from  other 
places  where  Bp.  and  Oxf.  minutely  coincide. 

-  The  copy  in  S.  John's  College,  Cambridge  (T.  6.  26)  and  B.  M. 
3050.  g.  5  must  be  earlier  on  this  leaf,  since  they  read  "it  it  true".  See 
above,  p.  8. 

3  Thus  dispensing  with  the  marginal  note  of  1762  "tHeb.  Abigal." 
But  B.  M.  3050.  g.  I  and  466.  i.  6  have  Abigal,  against  Oxf. 

■*  So  B.M.  466.  i.  6  "she,"  but  not  3050.  g.  i  which  is  almost 
identical  with  it.  Bp.  has  "  till  she  be  content  her  self"  in  all  these 
places.  The  original  American  revise  of  1851  (see  above,  p.  36)  reads 
"  she"  uniformly  in  all,  but  Amer.  1867  returned  to  "  he." 


the  Authorized  Bible,  both  beari?ig  the  date  of  1611.    205 


1617  (from  far  Oxf.  1612,  1616,  1629  C.  and  L.,  &c.). 
ver.  20  strait  16 13,  16 17  (straight  Oxf.  16 12,  16 16). 
lix.  21  thy  seed  161 2,  16 13,  1616,  161 7  (the  seed  Oxf). 
Jer.  v.  24  latter  161 2,  1613,  16 17  (later  Oxf  16 16,  not  in  ch. 
iii.  3).  EzEK.  XX.  37  marg.  de/iverifig  16 13,  1630  {a  deliring 
Oxf:  so  1612,  1616,  1617,  1629  C.  &  L.,  &c.).  xxxi.  18 
with  the  sword  Bp.  161 7  (by  the  sword  Oxf  161 2,  1613, 
161 6).  Cf.  ver.  17;  ch.  xxxii.  28,  or  ch.  xxxii.  20,  21,  25, 
26,  29,  30.  xxxix.  9  7narg.  for  them\  16 17  {of  them  Oxf 
161 2,  1613,  16 16,  &c.).  Dan.  ii.  14  jjiarg.  Chald.  {Cald. 
Oxf  161 2 — 1630).  ver.  34  in  pieces  161 7,  1630  (to  pieces 
Bp.  Oxf.  161 2,  16 13,  1616,  &c.),  cf  ver.  40  l?is,  44,  45,  or 
ver.  35.  Hos.  vi.  5  hewed  16 12,  161 3,  161 7,  &c.  (shewed 
Oxf.  1 6 16).  Nah.  i.  10  while  they  be  drunken  161 7  (while 
they  are  drunken  Oxf.  161 2,  161 3,  161 6,  &c.). 

I  EsDR.  V.  5  marg.  Jiidah  161 2,  1616,  1617,  &c.  {Juda 
Oxf.  16 1 3).  ver.  15  7narg.  hezekiah  16 17,  1629,  &c.  {hezekia 
Oxf.  16 1 2,  1613,  1616,  1630).  ver.  16  marg.  Bezai  161 7, 
1629  {Besai  Oxf.  161 2,  1613,  161 6,  1630).  ver.  26  Bannas 
[Bavvov]  (Banua  Bp.,  Banuas  Oxf  1612,  161 3,  moderns), 
vi.  23  Ecbatane  Bp.  1617  (Ecbatana  Oxf.  1612,  1613,  1616, 
moderns).  Cf.  Tobit  iii.  7,  &c.  viii.  54  j?iarg.  Serebias,  161 3, 
161 7,  &c.  {Serenias,  Oxf.  161 2,  Sereuias  161 6).  See  Ap- 
pendix A,  p.  198.  Tobit  xi.  14  thy  holy  161 7  (thine  holy  Oxf. 
1612,1613,  1616,  t&c).  See  above,  p.  108.  Judith  iii. 5 — vii. 
i6  01ofernes  1612,  1613,  1617,  1629,  1630,  &c.,/^^^/;;/,  161 6 
in  ch.  vii.  16  (Holophernes  Bp.  Oxf.  161 6).  See  App.  C,  p. 
229.  WiSD.  iii.  14  text  "in  the  Temple  :  ma7'g.  Or,  amongst 
the  people  1612,  1613,  &c.  {text  in  the  Temple:  marg.,  or 
a?nongst  the  people  after  chosen,  in  the  previous  note,  Oxf). 
EccLUS.  xxi.  24  with  disgrace  (with  the  disgrace  Oxf  161 2, 

^  Dp^:  0/  tJiem,  is  no  alternative  rendering  to  the  text. 


2o6    Appendix  B?\    Variations  between  the  two  issues  of 

1 613,  &c.).  xxiii.  4  marg.  '^^ Or,  giant  like  161 2,  1617  ("Or, 
a  giant  like  in  Oxf.  1613,  1616,  1630:  aliter  sanat  1629). 
xliv.  5  recited  1612,  1613,  &c.  (rejected  Oxf.).  Song  ver.  4 
are  (rather  are)  truth  (truth  Oxf.  1612,  161 3,  &c.).  i  Macc. 
vii.  I  marg.,  lib.  12.  1617,  1630,  &c.  {lib.  10,  12.  Oxf.  1612, 
1613,  1616).  X.  47  true  peace  1612,  1613,  1616,  1617,  &c. 
{text  "peace,  marg.  ^^true,  Oxf).  See  above,  p.  7  note  2. 
2  Macc.  iv.  13  not  high  priest  161 2,  161 6,  161 7,  1629 — 
1762  (no  high  priest  Oxf.  161 3,  1630,  1769  moderns). 

S.  Matt.  xiii.  4  way  side  1613,  1617,  1743  [way-side 
1762],  1769  (wayes  side  Oxf.  1612,  1616,  1629  C.  &  L.,  1630, 
&c.),  as  all  in  ver.  19;  Mark  iv.  4;  Luke  viii.  12;  xviii.  35. 
Cf.  Mark  x.  46;  Luke  viii.  5  (see  Appendix  A,  p.  188),  where 
Syjid.  Oxf.  1612,  1613,  1616,  1617,  have  "ways,"  but  1629 
C.  &  L.,  1630,  1638  vary  between  the  two:  1744,  1762,  1769 
have  "way"  consistently  throughout,  xiii.  31  like  unto  a 
grain  1613,  161 7,  1629  L.,  1630  (like  to  a  grain  Bp.  Oxf. 
1612,  1616,  1629  C,  &c.),  as  all  (including  Bp.)  in  ver.  33, 
44,  45,  47,  52.  S.  Mark  vii.  4  Oxf.  alone  transposes  the 
marginal  notes,  placing  "  Or  beds,  before  "  Sextarius.  Acts 
xxi.  2  Phenicia  1617,  1629,  &c.  (Phenicea  Oxf  1612,  1613, 
1616,  1629  L.,  1630).  XXV.  I  Jerusalem  1612,  1613,  1617, 
1629  C,  &c.  (Hierusalem  Oxf.  1616,  1629  L.,  1630):  cf. 
ver.  3,  and  Appendix  A,  p.  t86  and  note.  Rom.  vi.  21 
had  you  161 7  (had  ye  Oxf.  161 2,  161 3,  161 6,  &c.).  x.  21 
have  I  stretched  Bp.  16 13,  161 7,  1629  L.  (I  have  stretched 
Oxf  1612,  1616,  1629  C,  1630,  &c.).  xi.  22  toward  1613, 
1769  (towards  Bp.  Oxf.  1612,  1616 — 1762).  i  Pet.  ii.  7 
marg.  "he  is  precious  1617  (he  is  "precious  Oxf.  1612,  1613, 
1616,  1629  L.  &  C,  1630:  but  1638,  &c.  retain  "  before 
"  precious,"  and  omit  "  he  is  "  in  the  margin). 


the  Authorized  Bible ^  both  bearing  the  date  of  1611.    207 

§  II.  List  of  variations  between  the  two  issues  of  161 1, 
wherein  the  readings  of  the  Oxford  reprint  have  been  pre- 
ferred in  the  Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible. 

Gen.  xvi.  6  But  Abram  Bp.  161 2,  1613  (And  Abram 
Synd.).  xxvi.  34  Bashemath  1612,  1613  (Bashemah  Syiid.). 
xxxi.  30  longedst  161 2,  1629  C.  &  L.,  1630  (longest  j5/.  Syjid. 
1613,  161 7,  1634,  1640).  xxxvi.  10  Bashemath  1612,  1613 
(Bashamath  6)^;/^/.).  xlvi.  34  an  abomination.^.  1612,  1613 
(abomination  Synd.).  Ex.  xi.  8  all  these  161 2,  1613  (also 
these  Synd.).  xix.  4  eagles  wings  Bp.  1612,  1613  (eagle 
wings  Synd.y.  xxi.  26,  27  let  him  go  1629  C.  (let  them  go 
Bp.  Synd.  [1612,  1613,  1629  L.,  1630  in  ver.  26],  1616, 
161 7)^  xxxvi.  29  nia?'g.,  twinned  1629  C.  &  L.^  {twined^  Synd. 
1612,  1613,  1616,  1617,  1630,  1634,  1640).  Lev.  i.  16  marg., 
thereof  1612,  1613  {there  Synd.).     xxv.  28  until  the  year  Bp. 

1612,  1613  (unto  the  year  Synd.).     Num.  i.  47  tribe  16 12, 

16 1 3,  1629  C.  &  L.  (tribes  Bp.  Synd.  161 7).  xvi.  34  said 
Bp.  161 2,  1613  (say  Synd.).  xxi.  18  direction  161 2,  1613 
(directiofis,  Synd.  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only),  xxxiv.  2  this 
is  the  land  Bp.  1612,  1613  (that  is  the  land  Synd,).  Cf. 
ver.  13.  ver.  11  go  down  Bp.  161 2,  1613  (come  down 
Synd.).  Cf.  ver.  12.  Deut.  i.  18  all  the  things  Bp.  16 12, 
161 3  (all  things  Synd  16 17).     ix.  10  spake  with  you  16 12, 


1  Yet  "eagle  wings"  though  antiquated  is  not  incorrect.  Marsh 
{English  Language,  p.  278)  cites  from  Wyclif  "  unkil  doughter"  Gen. 
xxix.  10.  So  Num.  xxiv.  6  (r6ii);  Esther  i.  13  {Svnd.).  Even 
modern  Bibles  retain  "  a  cubit  length"  Judg.  iii.  16.    See  above,  p.  no. 

2  Several  copies  of  the  issue  represented  by  Ox/.,  agreeing  with 
1612,  1613,  1629  and  1630,  have  "let  them  go"  in  ver.  26.  Such  are 
Brit.  Mus.  466.  i.  6  (not  3050.  g.  i):  Camb.  University  Libr.  i.  15: 
Emmanuel  Coll.  B.  i.  23:  and  one  belonging  to  Mr  James  North  "of 
Liverpool. 

3  So  Syjid.  ch.  xxvi.  24  viarg.,  though  1612,  1613,  1630  have 
'■'■twined''''  there  also,  and  so  even  1629  L.  in  the  earlier  place.  After 
the  error  was  corrected  in  1629 — 1744,  the  Bibles  of  1762,  1769  went 
wrong  again,  misleading  moderns  (even  Bagster  1846),  till  twinned  \\o.s, 
restored  in  Camb.  1858,  Amer.  1867. 


2o8   Appendix  B.]    Variations  between  the  t7vo  issues  of 

1613  (spake  unto  you  Synd.  161 7).  xii.  26  thy  holy  things 
Bp.  1612,  1613  (the  holy  things  Sjnd.  1640).  xiv.  29  widow 
Bp.  161 2,  1613  (widows  Synd.).     xvi.   14  thy  maidservant 

1612,  1613  (the  maidservant  Synd.).  xxxiv.  i  plains  1612, 
1613  (plain  Bp.  Synd.).  Josh.  v.  8  they  abode  Bp.  161 2, 
1613  (all  abode  Synd.).  viii.  32  the  stones  161 2,  1613  (the 
stone  Synd.).  xv.  50.  See  Appendix  A,  p.  151.  xvi.  6 
Taanath  [so  also  B.  M.  3050.  g.  3],  161 3  (Taanah  Synd. 
16 1 2).  xviii.  22  Betharabah  Bp.  161 2,  1613  (Bethabarah 
Synd.).  xix.  5  Hazar-  1612,  1613,  1629  C.  &  L.,  1630  (Hasar- 
Synd.  1 6 16,  161 7,  1634,  1640).  Cf.  i  Chr.  iv.  31  marg. 
Ruth  ii.  11  thou  knewest  Bp.  [B.  M.  3050.  g.  2],  16 12, 16 13 
(thou  knowest  Synd.).  iii.  8  marg:  took  hold  on  [B.  M.  3050. 
g.  2],  161 2  {Synd.  16 1 3  add  him),  ver.  15  he  went^  (she 
^entSynd.  1612,  1613,  1616,  1617,  1629  C.  &L.,  1630,  1634, 
1638,  1640,  1744,  1762,  1769,  all  moderns),  i  Sam.  vii.  i 
Kirjath- [B.  M.  3050.  g.  2],  1612,  1613,  &c.  (Kiriah- 6^^^^.). 
2  Sam.  vi.  9  ark  of  the  Lord  Bp.  1612,  1613,  &c.  (ark  of 
God  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only),  ver.  16  city  of 
David  Bp.  161 2,  16 13,  &c.  (house  of  David  Synd.,  with  B.  M. 
1276.  1.  4  only),     xviii.    31    all  them  that  rose  Bp.    1612, 

161 3,  &c.  (all  that  rose  Synd.).  Cf.  ver.  32  (Heb.).  xxiii.  20 
a  valiant  man,  of  Kabzeel,  1612,  161 6,  1629  C.  &L.,  &c. 
(a  valiant  man  of  Kabzeel  Synd.  16 13,  161 7).  Cf  Heb. 
I  Kin.  xi.  i.  See  Appendix  A,  p.  154.  xx.  3  the  goodliest 
1612,  1616,  1629  L.  &  C.  (thy  goodliest  Synd.  1613,  1617, 
1630).  xxi.  2  my  house  Bp.  161 2,  161 3,  1616  (mine  house 
Synd.  1617).  2  Kin.  v.  12  turned  Bp.  1612,  1616,  1617 
(returned  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only,  161 3).  xvii.  6 
Halah  1612,  1613,  1616,  1629  (Halath  [rr]  Sytid.  1617, 
1629  L.,  1630).     ver.  35  commandment  Bp.  [B.  M.  3050. 

1  American    Report,    p.    19.     Yet   A7?ie}'.    restored   "she"   of  the 
Vulgate  in  1867.     See  above,  p.  37  and  note  2. 


the  Authorized  Bible,  both  bearing  the  date  of  1611.     209 

g.  3],  16 1 2,  1613,  1 61 6,  &c.  (commandments  Synd.  1617). 
xix.  15  before  the  Lord  Bp.  [B.  M.  3050.  g.  3],  16 12,  16 13, 
&:c.  (unto  the  Lord  Sj7id.).  xxiv.  2  Chaldees  Bp.  161 2, 
1630,  1744  (Caldees  Synd.  1613 — 1638).  i  Chr.  i.  5 
Meshech  1612,  1613,  1616,  &c.  (Mesech  Bp.  Synd.  1617). 
vers.  47,  48  Samlah  [B.  M.  3050.  g.  3],  1612,  1616  semel, 
1629,  &c.  (Shamlah  Synd.  1613,  1616  se?net,  1617).  ii.  49 
Sheua  161 2,  161 3,  &c.  (Shua  Synd.,  with  B.  ]\L  1276.  1.  4 
only),  iii.  18  Hosama  Bp.  1612,  1613,  tS:c.  (Hosanna  ^)7/^., 
with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only).  Cf.  Appendix  A,  p.  157.  ver. 
23  marg.  Hiskijah  \Hiskijahu  Amer.],  161 2,  1613,  &:c.  {^His- 
kiah  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only),  iv.  30  and  at 
Hormah  Bp.  1612,  161 6,  161 7,  &c.  (and  Hormah  Synd., 
with  B.  ^L  1276.  1.  4  only,  161 3).  ver.  36  Jesohaiah  161 2, 
1613,  &c.  (Jehohaiah  Synd.).  Cf.  Appendix  A,  p.  157.  vi.  74 
Mashal  1612,  161 3,  &c.  (Machal  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4 
only),  vii.  13  Jezer  Bp.  161 2,  1616,  &c.  (Gezer  Synd.,  with 
B.   M.   1276.   1.    4  only,    16 13,    16 17).     ver.   36   Siiah  Bp. 

1612,  1629  C.  &  L.  (Shuah  Synd.,^N\\\\  B.  M.  1276. 1.  4  only, 
1613, 1616,  1617).  xxvi.  5  Issachar  Bp.  1612,  1616  (Isachar 
Synd.  1613,  1617).  ver.  25  Jeshaiah  1612,  1613  (Jeshiaiah 
Synd.).  Cf.  ch.  xxv.  3.  xxvii.  -^-^  Hushai  [B.  M.  3050,  g. 
3],  1612,  1616  (Hushi  Synd.  1613,  161 7).  2  Chr.  vi.  5  my 
people  Israel  Bp.  161 2,  161 6,  1617  (my  people  of  Israel  Synd. 
1613).  xvi.  \  fin.  Judah  [B.  M.  3050.  g.  3],  1612,  1616, 
1617  (Juda  Bp.  Synd.  1613).  xxi.  15  disease  of  thy  bowels 
Bp.  1612,  1613  (diseases  of  the  bowels  Synd.,  with  B.  M. 
1276.  1.  4  only).  XXX.  6  his  princes  161 2,  1616,  1629  C, 
1630  (the  princes  Synd.  161 3,  1617).  xxxii.  20  Amoz  16 12, 
1616  (Amos  Bp.  Synd.  16 13,  161 7).  Cf.  ver.  32.  xxxiv. 
21  for  them  that  are  left  Bp.  1612,  1613,  &c.  (of  them  that 
are  left  Synd.).     Ezra  ii.  28  two  hundred,  twenty  Bp.  161 2, 

1613,  1616  (two  hundred  and  twenty  Synd.  16 17).  ver.  33 
Hadid  161 2,  16 13,  &c.  (Haddid  Synd.).     ix.  2  hath  been 

s.  14 


2IO     Appendix   ^.]      Variations  hehvecn  the  two  issues  of 

chief   1612,    161 6,    1617    (have   been   chief  Synd.    16 13). 
N.EHEM.   vi.   10  Mehetabel  161 2,   1613  (Mchelable  Synd., 
with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only).     Cf.  Appendix  A,  p.  163.     viii. 
10  unto  our  Lord  £p.  161 2,  1616  (unto  the  Lord  Synd. 
1613,  1617).     ix.  14  thy  holy  sabbath  Bp.  1612,  1613,  &c. 
(the  holy  sabbath  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only),     x.  i 
those  that  sealed  1612,  161 3,  161 6,  &c.  (these  that  sealed 
Synd.  161 7).     ver.   16  Biguai  Bp.   1612,   1613,  &c.  (Bigui 
Synd.,  with  B.  M.   1276.  1.  4  only),     xi.   11   Hilkiah  161 2, 
1613  (Helkiah  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only).     Cf.  ch. 
xii.  7,  21.     Esther  i.   13  king's  manner  Bp.   1612,   161 3, 
&c.  (king  manner  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only).     See 
above,  p.  110.     ix.  6,  11  Shushan  1612,  1613  (Sushan  Synd. 
here  only).     Job  ix.  9  7narg.  Cesii  [B.  M.  3050.  g.  2],  1612, 
161 6,  1617,  &c.  {Ceeii  Synd.   1613).     xi.  16  t/iy  misery  Bp. 
[B.  M.  3050.  g.  2],  1612,  1616,  1617,  Szc.  (t/ie  misery  Synd. 
161 3).     Psalm  xxiv.  8  Who  is  this  king  1612,  161 3,  1617 
(Who  is  the  king  Bp.  Synd.,  with  B.  M.   1276.  1.  4  only, 
1 616,  so  1630  even  in  ver.   10).     xxxiii.   7  gathereth  Bp. 
1612,   161 3,   &c.  (gathered  Synd.,  with  B.   M.    1276.  1.  4 
only).     XXXV.  27  yea  let  them  say  Bp.  16 12,  1613,  &c.  (yet 
let  them  say  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only),     xliv.  23  O 
Lord   1612,    1616  — 1744,  Oxf.    1835,   Camb.    1858,  Amer. 
1867  (O  Lord  Synd.  1613,  1762,  1769,  even  D'Oyly  and 
Mant  181 7,  Bagster  1846).    See  above,  p.  147  note  i.     Ivi. 
6  gather  [B.    M.   3050.  g.   3],    161 2,   161 3,  &c.    (gathered 
Synd.).     Ixxiv.  23  rise  up  1612,  1616,  Szc.  (arise  up  Synd., 
with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only,  1613,  1617).     Ixxx.  9  preparedst 
1612,  1613,  &c.  (preparest  Synd,  with  B.  M.  1276. 1.  4  only), 
civ.  4  his  angels  Bp.   1612,   1613,  &c.  (the  angels  Synd., 
with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only).     Pro  v.  viii.   27  marg.  a  circle 
1612,    1 6 16,  &c.   {circle  Synd.    16 13).     xxiii.    31    upon  the 
wine  Bp.  [B.  AL  3050.  g.  3],  1612,  1613,  &c.  (among  the 
wine  Synd.).     Eccles.  i.    17  spirit  161 2,   161 3,   161 6,  &c. 


the  Authorized  Bil'lc,  both  bearwg  the  date  of  i6ii.     211 


(the  spirit  Sjnd.  161 7,  here  only),  xii.  i  thy  Creator  161 2, 
1613,  &c.  (the  Creator  Sy?id.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only). 
Isaiah  i.  9  Gomorrah  1613,  16 16,  1617  (Gomorah  .S>//^., 
with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  only,  not  in  ver.  10:  1612  in  both),  ix. 
1 8  smoke  1612,1616,  1617  (the  smoke  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276. 
I.  4  only,  1613).  X.  1^  as  if  it  were  1612,  1613,1616,  1617  (t7j- 
it  were  Synd.,  with  B.  .M.  1276.  1.  4  only),     ver.  19  ^7uith  few 

1612,  1616,  1617  i^iuith  write  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4 
only,  1613).     xiii.  i  Amoz  1612,  1629  C,  1630  (Amos  Sy7id. 

1613,  1616,  1617,  1629  L.).     xix.  5  the  river  1612,   1616, 
1629  C.  &  L.,  1630  (the  rivers  Bp.  Synd.,  with  B.  M.  1276. 
1.  4  only,   1 6 13,   16 1 7).     xxiii.   12  have  no  rest  Bp.    1612, 
161 3,   161 6,    1617  (take  no  rest  Synd.,  with  B.  AI.    1276. 
1.  4  only),     ver.  13  founded  1612,  1613,  1616,  1617  (found 
Synd.  with  B.  ]\I.  1276.  1.  4  only).     Ivii.  10  wearied  [B.  M. 
3050.   g.   3],   1612,    1616,    1617,   1629   C.  &  L.  (weary  Bp. 
Synd.  1613).     lix.  14  afar  off  [B.  M.  3050.  g.  3],  1612,  1613, 
1616,  161 7  (far  off  ^/.  Sy7id.).     Ix.  4  from  far  Bp.  [B.  M. 
3050.  g.  3],  16 1 2  (from  afar  Synd.  16 13).     Cf.  ver.  9.     Ixi. 
10  and  as  a  bride  Bp.  1612,  1616,  1617,  1629  C.  &:  L.  (as  a 
bride  Synd.  1613).     Ixv.  2  my  hands  Oxf  161 2,  1613,  1616 
(mine  hands  Synd.  16 17).     See  Jer.  xxv.  15.     Jerem.  v.  15 
upon  you  Bp.  161 2,   161 3,   161 6,  1617  (upon  thee  Synd.). 
xii.  7  hand  1612,  1613,  1616  (hands  Syjid.  1617).     xxv.   15 
my  hand  Bp.  Oxf  1612,  1616,  1617,  1629,  dx.  (mine  hand 
Synd.   1 6 13).     See  above,  p.   108  and  Isai.  Ixv.   2  ;  Ezek. 
vi.  14.      xxvi.   20  Kiriath-  161 2,  161 3,  1616  (Kiriah-  Synd. 
1617).     xl.   12  of  all  places  Bp.   1612,   1613,   1616,   1617 
(of  the    places    Synd.).     xlviii.    34    Elealeh    16 12,    16 13, 
t6i6,   161 7  (Elealeth  Synd.,  with  B.  M.   1276.  1.  4  only). 
Ezek.    v.    5   This  is  Jerusalem    161 2,    161 6,    161 7,    1629 
C.   &  L.    (Thus  is  Jerusalem  Synd.,  with   B.   M.   3050.  g. 
3,   16 13).     vi.  14  my  hand   Oxf  16 12,   16 16,   161 7,   1629, 
&c.   (mine    hand   Bp.  Synd.,  3050.    g.   3  only).     See  Jer. 

14 — 2 


212     Appcfidix   B.'\      Variations  hdiveai  the  hi' o  issues  of 

XXV.  15.  xvi.  16  And  of  thy  garments  161 2,  161 6,  161 7, 
1629  C.  &  L.  (And  thy  garments  Syud.,  Of  thy  garments 
1613).  ver.  59  hast  despised  Bj>.  1612,  1613,  1616,  1617, 
1629  C.  &  L.  (hath  despised  Sy?id.  1630).  xxvii.  10  thy  men 
of  war  1612,  161 3,  161 6,  1617  (the  men  of  war  Synd.). 
xxix.  18,  19  Nebuchadrezzar  1612,  1613,  1616,  1617  (Ne- 
buchadnezzar Synd.).  xxxi.  4  the  field  Bp.  1612,  161 3, 
t6i6,  1617  (the  fields  Synd.).  xxxv.  10  mine  Bp.  161 2, 
161 3,  161 6,  1617  (thine  Synd.).  xxxvi,  10  the  wastes  161 2, 
161 3,   1616  (the  waste  Synd.   16 17).     xlii.   12  directly  Bp. 

161 2,  161 3,  161 6,  1617  (directed  Synd.).  xliv.  29  the 
trespass  offering  161 2,  161 3,  161 6,  1617  (their  trespass 
offering  Synd.).     Dan.  xi,  6  she  shall  be  given  up  16 12, 

161 3,  161 6,  1617  {he... Synd.).  ver.  10  sons  1612,  1613, 
161 6,  1617  (son  Sy/n/.).  Hosea  xiv.  3  Asshur  Bp.  161 2, 
1613,  1616  (Ashur  Synd.  1617).  Amos  vi.  7  that  go  cap- 
tive Bp.  1612,  1613,  1616,  1617  (that  goeth  captive  Synd.). 
Obad.  ver.  7  thy  confederacy  Bp.  161 2,  161 3.  1616  (the 
confederacy  Synd.  161 7).  Micah  i.  5  for  the  sins  161 2, 
161 3,  161 6,  1617  (the  sins  Bp.  Synd.).  Hab.  ii.  15  that 
puttest  1612,  1613,  1616,  1617  (thou  puttest  Synd.).  Zeph. 
i.  7  hath  bid  161 2,  16 13,  1616,  161 7  (had  bid  Synd.). 
Zech.  iii.  7  n/arg.,  wa/l's  161 2, 1613,1616  {ziiaIk,Synd.  161 7). 
X.  3  his  goodly  161 2,  161 3,  161 6,  1617  (the  goodly  Synd.). 

I  EsDRAS  i.  23  his  Lord  161 2,  1613  (the  Lord  Synd.). 
ver.  29  king  Josias  1612,  1613  (Josias  Synd.).  2  Esdr.  ii. 
33  at  nought  1612,  1616,  1629,  1630  (at  naught  Synd.  1613, 
161 7).  Cf.  ch.  iv.  23.  vii.  40  Sennacherib  Bp.  161 2,  16 13, 
1616  (Sannacherib  Synd.  1617).  xiv.  12  the  tenth  j^.  1612, 
1613,  16 1 6  (a  tenth  Synd.  16 17).  Tobit  v.  18  marg.  Let 
not  1612,  1613  {Let  no,  Synd.).  Judith  xvi.  4  stopped 
161 2,  16 1 3,  16 1 6,  &c.  (stoppeth  Synd.  161 7).  Ecclus. 
xxiii.  19  eyes  of  men  Bp.  161 2,  1613  (eyes  of  man  Synd.). 
Baruch  vi.    40    Chaldeans    1612,    1616,    1630    (Caldeans 


the  Authorized  Bible,  both  bearittg  the  date  of  1611.     213 

1613,  1617,  1629  C.)-  Prayer  of  Manasses  1.  3  their 
righteous  1612,  161 3,  161 6,  1629  (the  righteous  Bp.  Synd. 
1617).     I  Macc.  xii.  47  7Jiarg.,  left  1612,  1613  {let^  Synd.). 

Matt.  xiii.  45  goodly  pearls  B_p.  1612,  161 3,  161 6,  &c. 
(good  pearls  ^S)7/^.  1617).  xviii.  30  went  ^.  1612,  1616, 
161 7,  &c.  (went'out  Synd.  1613).  Cf.  ver.  28  (Gk.).  xxii. 
24  a  man  Bp.  1612,  1616,  1629  C.  &  L.  (any  man  Synd. 
1613,  1617,  1630)*.  Mark  xv.  46  unto  the  door  Bp.  1612, 
1613,  (S:c.  (upon  the  door  Synd.).  Luke  ii.  24  offer  a 
sacrifice  1612,  161 3,  &c.  (offer  sacrifice  Synd.).  x.  36 
among  the  thieves  Bp.  161 2,  16 13,  &c.  (among  thieves 
Synd.).  John  xiv.  23  a  man  Bp.  16 12,  16 16,  &c.  (any 
man  Synd.  16 13)'.  Acts  iv.  27  thy  holy  child  Bp.  16 12, 
1 6 13,  &c.  (the  holy  child  Synd.).  vi.  12  came  upon  Bp. 
161 2,  16 1 6,  &c.  (came  unto  Synd.  16 13).  Cf.  Luke  xx.  i; 
ch.  iv.  I.  XV.  II  the  Lord  Bp.  161 2,  1616,  1629  C.  &  L. 
(our  Lord  Sy?id.   1613,   1617).     xvi.    7   suffered  them  Bp. 

1612,  1613  (suffered  him  Synd.).  ver.  19  drew  them  into 
Bp.  1612,  161 3,  &c.  (drew  them  unto  Synd.).  Rom.  xvi. 
Subscription,  of  the  Church  Bp.  1612,  161 6,  &:c.  (to  the 
Church  Synd.  1613).     Eph.  vi.   21  ye  also  may  Bp.  161 2, 

1613,  1616,  1629  C.  &  L.  (ye  may  also  Synd.  1617,  1630). 
I  Thess.  Title,  Paul  the  Apostle  161 2,  16 13,  16 16,  161 7, 
&c.  (the  Apostle  Paul  Synd.  here  only),     ch.  i.  9  turned  Bp. 

1612,  1613,  1616,  1617,  1630,  &c.  (returned  Synd.  1629  L.). 
James  V.  4  Sabaoth   1612,  1616,   1629  C.  (Sabbaoth  Synd. 

1613,  1617,  1630).  I  Pet.  i.  22  your  souls  Bp.  1612,  1616, 
1629,  &c.  (your  selves  Synd.  16 13,  161 7).  2  Pet.  ii.  6 
Gomorrha  161 2,  16 16,  1629  L.,  1630,  1638  (Gomorrah 
Synd.  161 7,  1630;  Gomorra  1629  C). 


1  The  context  must  decide  which  form  is  preferable,  since  the  practice 
varies  in  rendering  ns :  e.g.  John  xv.  13  "a  man;"  John  xvi.  30  "any 
man." 


214  Appendix   B?[     Note. 


Note.  Between  the  two  copies  in  the  British  Museum  which 
resemble  the  Oxford  reprint  {3050.  g.  i  and  466.  i.  6)  the  only  dif- 
ferences in  any  of  the  passages  cited  in  the  foregoing  lists  §  I.  and  §  II. 
occur  in  Ex.  xxi.  26;  Cant.  ii.  7.  Of  the  other  issue,  B.  M.  3050.  g.  1 
being  regarded  as  the  standard,  and  3050.  g.  3,  1276.  1.  4,  and  Synd. 
A.  3.  14  mixed  copies,  the  Syndics'  nowhere  agrees  with  3050.  g.  2 
against  the  other  two,  but  with  3050.  g.  3  alone  in  Ezek.  v.  5;  with 
3050.  g.  2  and  1276.  1.  4  against  3050.  g.  3  in  15  places;  with  3050.  g. 
3  and  1276.  1.  4  against  3050.  g.  i  in  5  places;  with  1276.  1.  4  alone 
(which  is  a  fine  tall  volume,  once  the  property  of  Lea  Wilson)  in  no  less 
than  34  places.  Not  one  of  the  four  is  ever  left  without  one  of  the 
other  copies  to  countenance  it,  except  Synd.  in  2  Kin.  xviii.  37;  i  Chr. 
iv.  36.  Hence  it  is  plain  that  Synd.  A.  3.  14  and  B.  M.  1276.  1.  4  were 
among  the  earliest  and  least  revised  of  the  copies  printed  off.  See  Sect. 
I.  pp.  5—13. 


APPENDIX    C 

(Sec  above,  p.  14.) 

List  of  passages  in  which  the  readings  of  the  edition  of 
the  Authorized  Bible  of  161 1  have  been  restored  in  the 
Cambridge  Paragraph  Bible.  The  date  annexed  is  that  of 
the  later  edition  in  which  each  change  is  supposed  to  have 
originated. 

N.B.  Variations  relating  only  to  English  orthography 
or  grammatical  inflexions  are  not  often  admitted  into  the 
following  list,  since  they  have  been  sufficiently  described  in 
Section  v.  pp.  93 — 105. 


Genesis 

Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

V.  26 

fHa?-g.  +  Heb.  Lcmcch 

omitted  1639,  transfer- 
red to  ver.  25,  1638. 

Vll.    2 

+  by  sevens 

by  tsevens,  1629. 

X.  7 

Sabtecha 

Sabtecah,  1762,  Sabte- 
chah,  1769. 

XIX.  21 

concerning  this  tiling 

concerning  this  thing 
also,  1638^ 

5      XXV.  4 

Abida 

Abidah,  16292. 

xxvi.  I, 

8,  U.  15' 

Philistims 

Philistines,       1629      C, 

18 

(1613  bis,  1629  L. 
tcr). 

^  This  change,  however,  might  have  been  acquiesced  in:  cf. 
Hebrew. 

2  So  all  have  the  word  in  i  Chr.  i.  33,  and  the  final  Ain  is  not 
usually  represented  by /z :  cf.  2  Sam.  v.  14.  r  Chr.  xxiv.  11.  See  how- 
ever h  final  in  Gen.  xxxv.  27;  xxxviii.  2  (but  not  i  Chr.  ii.  3);  Josh. 
xxi.  1 1 . 


2i6  Appendix    C]      Original  readings  of  \(i\\ 


Genesis 


XXXI.    I 

xxxvi.  14 
xxxvii.  36 
xxxix.   I 
xlvi.  12 
xlvii.  6 
xlvii.  18 

Exodus 

vi.  21 
xxiii.  23 


Leviticus 

V.  10 

vii.  23  &  xiv.  54^ 
xi.  3 
xi.   10 


Reading  of  16 n 
restored. 


which  Avas   of  our   fa- 
ther's 
daughter  of  Zibeon 

Medanites,  1612 — 1630 

hand 

Zerah 

any  man    [better   than 

'"''any  man"] 
also  had  our  herds.  Cf. 

ver.  22 


Zichri 

the  Hivites,  1612, 1613, 
1617, 1629  L.,  1769'^ 

consecrations  (as  ver. 
34;  Lev.  viii.  28,  31), 
Heb. 


had  sinned 

manner 

cheweth  cud 

nor  scales  (as  ver.  12) 


Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 


which   was  our   fathers, 

16161. 
the  daughter  of  Zibeon, 

1629. 
Midianites,    1616,    1629 

C.     Cf.  ch.  XXV,  2. 
hands,   1629  C.  and  L., 

1630,  1637. 
Zarah,      1769      (Serah, 

1630)-. 
any     men,     1762:     any 

men,  1769. 
also  hath  our  herds,  1629 

C.  (had  also...  1630). 


Zithri,  1769^. 

and   the   flivites,    1616, 

1629  C.  — 1762    {and, 

1638 — 1762). 
consecration,     1762     (as 

vers.  22,  27,  31  ;  Lev. 

viii.  33). 


hath  sinned,   1762.     Cf. 

ver.  6. 
manner  of,   1762  (as  ch. 

vii.  26,  27,  &c.). 
cheweth    the  cud,    1629 

(as  vers.  4 — 6). 
and  scales,  1 769. 


^  Cf.  Lev.  xxii.  10.  Deut.  xxiii.  25.  i  Cor.  x.  29.  This  double 
possessive  is  sometimes  retained  even  in  modern  Bibles:  e.g.  2  Kin, 
xxii.  12.  2  Chr.  ii.  13;  xxxiv.  20.  Matt,  xxvi.  51  (not  so  Mark  xiv. 
47;  Luke  xxii.  50).     Luke  xv.  17.      See  above,  p.  no. 

^  Yet  so  even  161 1  in  ch.  xxxviii.  30  on  account  of  the  Hebrew 
pause. 

^  Corrected  in  the  Scotch  and  American  (1867)  Bibles  only. 

^  The  re-correction  of  1769  is  followed  by  D'Oyly  and  Mant  1817, 
Oxford  8vo.  1835,  Bagster  1846,  Oxford  4to.  1857,  London  8vo.  1859, 
American  1867,  but  not  by  our  standard  (Cambr.  Svo.  1858)  and  some 
modern  Bibles. 

5  See  above,  p.  no. 


restoi'ed^  later  corrections  being  zait/idraivn. 


217 


Leviticus 

Reading  of  i6n 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

xii.  6  niarg. 

j^«  of  his  year 

a  sofi  of  his  year,  1629. 
Cf.  Gen.  xvii.  12. 

xiii.  29 

hath  a  plague 

have  a  plague,  1769. 
Cf.  ver.  38. 

^^•J>}, 

which  is  unclean 

that  is  unclean,  1769. 

xxii.  10 

a     sojourner     of 

the 

a  sojourner  of  the  priest, 

priest's 

1638I. 

XXV.  5 

it  own  accord 

its  own  accord.  1744". 

XXV.  23 

were    strar.gers. 

1613, 

are  strangers,  1616,  1629 

1617 

C.  and  L.,  1630. 

Numbers 

iii.  13 

they  shall  be 

shall  they  be,  1769. 

"••  lb 

northwards 

northward,  1629.  Cf. 
vers.  23,  29,  38. 

V.  If),  20 

hath  lien^  (lain,  i 

762), 

have  lien,  1629  L.  (lain. 

1613 — 1762 

1769). 

ix.  18 

in  the  tents 

in  their  tents,  1769  (as  in 
vers.  17,  2C,  22). 

XX.  5 

or  vines 

or  of  vines,  1769. 

xxiv.  6 

the    river    side, 

[613, 

the  rivers  (river's,  1762) 

1617^ 

side,  1616,  1629  C. 
and  L.,  1630. 

xxiv.  20  mar"-. 

0 

II  Thefijst  of  the  nations 

II  Or,  the  firs}  of  the  na- 

tions, 1744. 

XXX.  8 

disallow 

disallowed,  1769. 

xxxvi.  3 

whereinto.    Cf.  ch 
24 

.  xiv. 

whereunto,  1629. 

Deuteronomy 

xxii.  9  i?iarg. 

the  seed 

thy  seed,  1629. 

xxiii.  25 

the  standing  corn  c 

)fthy 

the  standing  corn  of  thy 

neighbours 

neighbour,  1769^. 

xxiv,  15  marg. 

he  lifteth 

lifteth,  1638. 

xxvii.  12 

Gerizzim 

Gerizim,  1769.  Cf.  ch. 
xi,  29. 

xxviii.  29 

noon  days 

noon-day,  1762. 

^  See  note  i  p.  216. 

2  See  above,  p.  110  note  2.  Mr  Aldis  Wright  finds  "its"  in  Bibles  of 
about  1 68 J,  but  only  to  be  dropped  again.  In  Ben  Jonson's  Silent 
PVonian,  acted  in  1609,  the  expression  "it  knighthood"  several  times 
occurs  as  an  affected  archaism,  as  though  it  had  already  grown  obsolete 
in  common  speech. 

^  On  this  participial  form  see  above,  p.  103. 

^  See  Appendix  B,  p.  207,  note  on  Ex.  xix.  4. 


2iS  Appendix    C]      Original  readings  of  id  w 


Joshua 

Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

iii.  II 

even  die  Lord,  161 2 — 

of  the  Lord,  1629  (LXX., 

1630 

Vulg.). 

X.  I,  3 

Adoni-zedek  (-ck,  1629 
L.,  ver.  i) 

Adoni-zedec,  1769. 

xi.  2  &  xii.  3 

Cinneroth 

Chinneroth,  1769.  Cf. 
ch.  xiii.  27  (Appendix 
A,  p.  151);  xix.  35. 

xii.  2 

river     of     Arnon     [of, 
1629) 

river  Arnon,  1638. 

xiii.  iS 

Jahazah.     Cf.  ch.   xxi. 

Jahaza,  1629  C.  and  L., 

36 

1630. 

xiii.  23 

villages,     161 2,     161 3, 

the  villages,    1617,  1629 

1616,  1629  L.,  1630 

C. 

xix.  2 

or  Sheba,  1612,   16 13. 

and  Sheba,   16 16 — 1762, 

Cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  33 

Sheba,  1769^. 

xix.  19 

ITapharaim 

Haphraim,  i  769. 

ibid. 

Shion,  1612, 1613, 1616, 
1629  C.  and  L.,  1630 

Shihon,  161 7,  1638. 

xix.  42 

Aijalon 

Ajalon,  1629  C.  (not  L.). 
See  p.  158  note  2. 

xxi.  II  text  & 

Arbah,      161 2  —  1630 

Arba,  1638. 

viarg. 

{text).  Cf.  Gen.  xxxv. 
27 

Judges 

iii.  15  inarg. 

ycmini.  Cf.  i  Sam.ix.  i 

Gemini,  i'j62^. 

vi.  15  &  ix.  9 

11  11  Or,  1612— 1630 

ttHeb.  (1629  C,  ch. 
vi.  15),  1638. 

xix.  29 

coasts 

coast,  1 769,  Bagster  1846: 
not  Oxf.  1857,  Lond. 
1859,  American  1867. 

1  Samuel 

ii.  20  Jfiarg. 

he  asked 

she  asked,  1638. 

iv.  7  f/iarg-. 

or  the  third,  161 2,  1613, 

or  the  third,  16 16,  1629 

1617,  1629  C,  1638, 

L.,  1630:  or,  the  third, 

1769^ 

1744,  1762,  modems. 

xvii.  20  ma}X. 

battle  ray 

battle  array,  1744. 

^  Modern  Bibles  are  divided  between  the  two  wrong  renderings  of 
1616,  1769.     The  American  alone  follows  161 1. 

^  This  gross  error  is  corrected  in  Bagster  1S46,  Camb.  1858, 
Speaker's  Commentary  1872. 

2  So  Oxf.  1835,  Bagster  1846,  Speaker's  Commentary  1872. 


restored,  later  collections  being  withdraw7i. 


219 


1  Samuel 

Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 

xviii.  I 

when  he  made 

XX.  5 
xxxi.  2 

in  the  fields 
INIalchishua.   Cf.  i  Chr. 

viii.  33 ;  IX.  39 ;  X.  2 

2  Samuel 

ii.  9 

IV.  4 

^:.'+ 

vii.  7  maj-g. 

xvi.  8 

Xxi.    21 

xxiii.  20  wa;-^--. 

he  made  him 

feet,  and  was 

Shammua^ 

II  In  the  I  Chr.  xvii.  6, 

any  of  t lie  judges 
to  thy  mischiof- 
Shimea^ 
lion.    Cf.  marg.  of  Isai. 

xxix.  I  ;   Ezck.  xliii. 

xxiii.  37 

15 
Naharai 

1  Kings 

iii.  4 

offer  up  on,  1613,  1617 

iii.  12 

thy  word  (LXX.) 

xiii.  1 1 

his  son  came 

XV.  5 

Urijah    (as    1638,    (Sec. 
Neh.  iii.  4) 

XV.  27 

belongeth 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 


when     he     had     made, 

1629. 
in  the  field,  163S. 
Melchishua,    1769.     Cf. 

ch.  xiv.  49. 


made  him,  1762. 
feet.     He  was,  1762. 
Shammuah,  1638. 
II  I  Chr.  xvii.  6,  a7iy  of  the 

Jtidgcs,  1638. 
in  thy  mischief,  1629. 
Shimeah,  1769. 
lions,  1638. 


Nahari,  1769. 


offeron,i6i2:offerupon, 

1616,  1629    C.    and 
L.,  &c. 

thy  words  (Vulg.),  1629 

C. 
his    sons   came^,    16 16, 

1617,  &c. 

Uriah,    1629  C.  Cnot  L.), 
as   161 1  in  Ezra  viii. 
33 ;  Neh.  iii.  4. 
beloJtged,  1762. 


^  See  p.  215  note  2,  Gen.  xxv.  4,  Ain  is  not  represented  in  ver.  15 
I'is,  16  bis. 

2  Vulg.  \\?L%  premiint  te  juala  tiia.  The  Translators  give  what  they 
hold  to  be  the  general  sense  in  the  text,  reserving  a  more  literal  render- 
ing for  the  margin. 

^  The  reading  of  the  Kcri  and  of  i  Chr.  xx.  7.  The  correction  of 
1769  will  not  suit  the  form  in  the  Chetiv  and  the  Vatican  Septuagint 
(Cf/ueet).      Yet  "Shimeah"  is  correct  in  ch.  xiii.  3. 

■*  A  very  needless  change,  though  upheld  by  LXX.  and  Vulg.  Cf. 
Cardwell,  Oxford  Bibles,  p.  16.  In  1762,  &c.  we  find  the  marginal 
note  t  Heb.  so7t. 


2  20  Appendix    C]      Oi'igmal  ?'eaduigs  of  \6ii 


1  Kings 


XVI.  19 

xviii.  28 


xxii.  25  inarg.  & 
2  Chr.  xviii.  24 
VI  a  IS:. 


2  Kings 


IV. 

35 

VUl 

•  19 

xu. 

18 

xix 

2 

XX.  17 

xxiii.  36 


1  Chronicles 


1. 

-5 

i. 

.^8 

ii. 

47 

u. 

49 

111.  19 

in.  23  inarg. 

V.    II 


Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 


to  make  Israel  sin 

cried  loud,  1612,  161 3, 

1617,  1630 
on  the  third  year 

+  Heb.  chamber  in 


neesed.     Cf.  Jobxli.  18 
to  give  to  him 
had  dedicate 

Esai,  1612,  1613,  1617 
(Esay,  1616,  1629  L., 
1630J 

unto  Babylon 
twenty  and  five  year  old. 
Cf.  I  Esdr,  i.  39 


Kehu 

Ezer.  Cf.  ver.  42.  Gen. 

xxxvi.  21,  27 
Geshan 
Achsah.     Cf.  Josh.  xv. 

17;  Judg.  i.   13 
and  the  son  of  Zcrub- 
babel^ 

Hiskijah.     Cf.  Appen- 
dix B,  p.  209. 
Salchah.  Cf.  Deut .  iii.  i  o 


Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 


to   make    Israel   to   sin, 

1762. 
cried   aloud,  1616,    1629 

C.  and  L. 
in  the  third   year,    1629 

C. 
+  Heb.    a   chamber   ifi, 

163S. 


sneezed,  1762. 

to  give  him,  1629  C. 

had  dedicated,  1762.  Cf. 

App.  A,  p.  153. 
Isaiah     (transferring    to 

ver.    2    the    marginal 

note  of  J  61 1   on  ver. 

6),  1629  C. 
into  Babylon,  1629  C. 
twenty  and  five  years  old, 

1629    C.     See   above, 

p.  III. 


Reu,  1638.    Cf.  Gen.  xi. 

18,  19^. 
Ezar,    1629   C.   and   L. 

(not  1630). 
Gesham,  1769. 
Achsa,  1638. 

and  the  sons  of  Zerub- 
babel,  1629  C.  and 
L.,  1630. 

Ilizkij'ahu,  1629 — 1744, 
Hiskijahii,  1762,  &c. 

Salcah,  1629. 


1  Ain  final  is  usually  mute  (sec  p.  215  note  2),  but  in  the  middle  of 
a  word  the  practice  is  less  fixed. 

-  In  ver.  21  the  first  "sons"  is  also  singular  in  Hebrew,  so  that 
1611  is  inconsistent  in  the  matter.     Cf.  ch.  vii.  35. 


restored,  later  corrections  being  ivitJidra7vn. 


221 


1  Chronicles 

Reading  of  i6n 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

V.  18 

of  t  valiant  men 

fof  valiant  men,  1629^. 

vii.  I 

Shimron 

Shimrom,  1629  C.  and 
L.,  1630  (not  1638 — 
1762),  1769. 

vii.  5 

men  of  might 

valiant  men  of  might, 
1638.     Cf.  ver.  2. 

vii.  19 

Shcmida- 

Shemidah,  1762. 

vii.  27 

Jehoshua"-'.     Cf.   Num. 
xiii.  16 

Jehoshuah,  1630,  1762. 

vii-  35 

And  the  son.  Cf.  ch.  iii. 

And  the  sons,  1744. 

xii.  5 

^9 

Eleuzai 

Eluzai,  1629  C. 

xiii.  9 

li  II  Or,  shook 

t  (II  1762)  t  Heb.  shooli, 
1762,  &c. 

xiii.  I  r  juarg. 

WHcbr.   (That  is,  1629) 

II    That   is,   The  breach, 

breach 

1638. 

xviii.    3    inarg.     & 

Hadad^zer  in 

Iladadezer,  1769. 

ver.  16  7?iarg. 

Ahinidcch    in  . . .  Saraia 

Aliiiiielcch     ...    Scraiah, 

in 

1744.  But  cf.  App. 
A,  p.  160. 

xxiii.  20 

]Michah.     Cf.  ch.  xxiv. 
24>  25 

Micah,  1629. 

xxiv.  1 1 

Jeshua.    Cf.  Ezra  ii.  36 

Jeshuah, 1629  C.  and  L. 
(not  1630). 

xxvi.      -20,      26     & 

dedicate  things 

dedicated  things,    1762. 

xxviii.  12.  2Chr. 

Compare      App.      A, 

xxiv.    7  &  xxxi. 

p.  153  and  note  2. 

12.    Ezek.    xliv. 

?'-> 

xxix.  6 

rulers  over   the  king's 

rulers  of  the  king's  work, 

work 

1762. 

xxix.  17  w^r^. 

t  Ileb.     foiind.        Cf. 
Judg.  XX.  48 

II  OY,Jou!id,  1638. 

2  Chronicles 

ix.  11  niarg. 

stairs  {staires) 

{staies,  i62g  C,  stayes, 
1 6  3  8 ) ,  stays,  1744 — 
17693. 

1  Corrected  only  in  Bagster  1846  of  the  moderns. 

2  See  note  i  p.  219. 

'  This  mere  typographical  error,  whose  adoption  may  have  been 
helped  by  "stayes"  ver.  18,  remains  in  D'Uyly  and  Mant  1817, 
Bagster  1846,  and  some  modern  Bibles,  but  is  corrected  in  Oxford 
1835,  Cambridge  1858,  American  1867,  Speaker's  Commentary  1872. 


2  2  2  Appendix    C.  ]      Original  I'eadings  of  1611 


2  Chronicles 


xvi.  6 
xx.  36 

XXV.  18  inarg. 

xxvi.  18 

xxix.  23 
xxxii.  6  marg. 
xxxiii.  19 
xxxiv.  10 
XXXV.  10 


Ezra 

ii.  1 

iii.  2  marp. 


IV.  24 
vii.  18 
viii.  21 

Nehemiali 

vii.  30 
vii.  59 


Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 


was   a   building.      See 

above,  p.  108. 
Ezion-geber  {sic  Icgcn- 

dum).  Cf.  I  Kin.  xxii. 

48 

ftirrc  Incsh  {fur,  16 12, 
1613,  1630,  1744) 

pertaineth,  1612,  161 3, 
1617,  1630 

and  laid 

he  spake 

all  his  sin 

mend.    Cf.  ch.  xxiv.  12 

Carchemish.  Cf.  Isai. 
X.  9 ;  Jer.  xlvi.  2 


Mispar 

Matt.   i.   12  and  Luke 

iii.   27,    called  Zoro- 

bahel 
Asnappar,   1612,  1613, 

1616,  1629  C. — 1744 

house  of  the  God  which 

the  silver  and  gold 

the  river  Ahava  (Heb. 
not  as  ver.  31) 


Geba  (Gaba,  Ezra  ii.  26) 
Pochereth  {,    1629   L.) 
Zebaim 


Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 


was  building,  176c. 

Ezion-gaber,     1638    {in 

pattsa).      Cf.       Num. 

xxxiii.  35,  36  ;  Deut. 

ii.  8. 
furzc-lnish,    1762:  furze 

bush,  1769. 
apprtaincth,   1616,  1629 

C.  and  L. 
and  they  laid,  1629. 
spake,  1638. 
all  his  sins,  1762. 
amend,  1769. 
Charchemish,  1762. 


Mizpar,  1744- 

Called  Zorobahd,   Matt. 

i.    12 ;    Luke   iii.   27, 

1629. 
Asnapper,     1617,     1629 

L.,  1630,  1763,  1769, 

&c. 
house    of    God    which, 

1616,  &c.^ 
the  silver  and  the  gold, 

1762. 
Ahava.  theriver  of,  1762. 


Gaba,  1638  {inpausd). 
Pochereth   of     Zebaim, 
1629  C.     Cf.  Ezra  ii. 

57^- 


^  This  seems  to  be  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  Translators  (after- 
wards given  over,  as  in  ch.  vii.  18)  to  represent,  whensoever  it  might 
be  possible,  the  status  c/nphatictcs  of  the  Chaldee. 

^  The  passage  is  too  obscure  to  be  worth  altering.  The  Vulgate 
has  f  Hi  Phochcrcth ,  qui  crat  ortus  ex  Sabaiinplio  Amon. 


restored^  later  correctiojis  being  withdrawn. 


223 


Job 

Reading  of  161 1 

Variation  of  later 

restored. 

Bibles. 

iii.  8  marg. 
X.  10 

leviathan 

cruddled  (crudled,  161 3) 

a  leviathan  1659  (Field), 
1674,  1677,  1679, 
1701 — 69. 

curdled,  1762. 

xviii.  9 

grinne,     1612  —  1630  : 
grin,  1629  C. 

gin,  1762.     See  Ps.  cxl. 
5,  and  above,  p.  100. 

XX.  25 

glistering 

glittering,     1762.        Cf. 
Deut.  xxxii.  41. 

xxviii.  1 7  marg. 

vessel 

vessels,  1744' 

xxviii.  27  viaig. 

did  number 

number,  1638. 

xxix.  17  inaig. 

I  cast 

cast,  1638. 

xxx.  3 
xxx.  6 

flying 
cliftsi 

fleeing,  1629  (LXX.). 
cliffs,  1762. 

xli.  6 

xli.  30  ina)g. 

the  companions  2 
of  the  potsherd 

thy  companions,  1769. 
of  potsherd,  1762. 

Psalm 

ii.  4 

the  Lord,  1612 — 1630, 

the    Lord,     1629     C. — 

xxiv.  3 

1762,  1769 
and  who  shall  stand 

17443. 
or  who  shall  stand,  1 7(19. 

xlv.  II 

thy    Lord.      Cf.    Isai. 

thy    lord,    Camb.    8vo. 

li.  22 

1858    (our    standard) 
only.  See  above,  p.  38. 

Ixxxi.  12  marg. 

ijnagination 

imaginations,  1762. 

cvii.  19 

he  saveth 

rt:;/^  he  saveth,  1762.    So 

cxiii.  9 
cxv.  3 

to  be  a  joyful 
whatsoever  he  pleased 

and  to  be  a  joyful,  1 629. 
whatsoever      he       hath 

cxix.  42  marg. 

reproveth 

pleased,  1769. 
reproacheth,  1638. 

cxxxii.  12 

also  shall  sit  [Cf.  Heb.] 

shall  also  sit,  1762. 

^  In  2  Chr.  XX.  16  "cliffe"  of  1611  represents  another  Hebrew 
word.  "  Clift "  in  Ex.  xxxiii.  22;  Isai.  Ivii.  5  is  left  unaltered  in  1762 
and  the  moderns,  the  general  sense,  though  not  the  Hebrew  words,  being 
the  same  as  here. 

2  That  is,  the  partners  in  the  fishery  (Luke  v.  7,  10).  Blayney's 
variation  hardly  looks  accidental,  and  lingers  in  many  later  Bibles,  e.g. 
Ostervald  1808,  Oxford  8vo.  1813,  D'Oyly  and  Mant  181 7,  even  in 
Bagster  1846. 

•*  The  present  text  is  Adonai,  but  Jehovah  is  read  in  at  least  85 
Hebrew  manuscripts  and  five  early  editions,  so  that  the  Translators  (who 
seldom  err  in  this  matter)  probably  intended  to  use  capitals.  Since 
Oxf.  8vo.  1835,  as  also  byBp  Turton's  direction  (Sect.  I.,  above,  p.  36), 
the  capitals  have  been  again  withdrawn,  but  not  in  Bagster  1846. 


2  24  Appendix    C]      Original  t^eadings  of  1611 


Psalm 

Reading  of  161 1 

Variation  of  later 

restored. 

Bibles. 

cxl.  5  &  cxli.  9 

grinnes     (grins,      1613 
scffiei,  1638,  &c.  ^^/j). 
Seejobxviii.9,  p.  223 

gins,  1762. 

cxli.  9 

from  the  snare 

from  the  snares,  1769. 

cxliii.  9  marg. 

hid  me,  16 13  — 1744 

hide  me,  1612,  1630, 
1762,  1769 

cxiviii.  8 

vapour    (so   American, 
1867) 

vapours,  1769. 

Proverbs 

XXV.  24 

a  corner.     Cf.  ch.  xxi.  9 

the  corner,  1769. 

Ecclesiastes 

viii.  8  marg. 

casting  of 

cast i Jig  off^,  1629  C, 
1638  (not  1744),  1762, 
&c. 

viii.  17 

further.     Cf.  ch.  xii.  12 

farther,  1762. 

Canticles 

viii.  4  marg. 

siir  up,  or  {,  161 2)  zahy 

stir  up,  or,  7uhy,  1744. 

Isaiah 

vi.  8 

I  said 

said  I,  1629. 

viii.  6 

For   so   much    (Forso- 
much,  1629) 

Forasmuch,  1762. 

X.  26 

rock  Oreb.     Cf.  Judg. 

rock   of  Oreb,    1629  C 

vii.  25 

and  L.  (not  1630). 
1638. 

xiv.  9  /d?jr/ 

+  chief  ones 

+  1!  chief  ones. 

marg. 

t  Heb.  leaders,  or  great 

t  Heb.   leaders.      "   Or, 

goats 

great  goats,  1629. 

xiv.  17  maig. 

homeward 

homewards,  1762. 

xviii.  7  marg. 

polished.  &c.  {polished, 

polished.   1613,   1629  C, 

&c.  1612,  1616,  1629 

1638,    17^4 ;    but  po- 

L., 1630) 

lished:  1762,  &c. 

xix.  14  marg. 

perversities 

perverscness,  1762. 

xxii.  17  ;//a/^. 

V.     18.     shall    surely. 

shall  stirely,  «S:c.  ver.  18, 

&c. 

1629. 

^  Nee  est  dimissio  in  bello,  Field.  The  sense  given  by  1629  C.  and 
the  moderns  may  be  as  good  as  that  of  161 1,  but  is  not  identical  with  it. 
For  "off"  see  161 1  in  Gen.  xxxviii.  14;  Ex.  iii.  5. 


restored^  later  corrections  being  withdi'awn. 


225 


Isaiah 

Reading  of  161 1 

Variation  of  later 

restored. 

Bibles. 

xxviii.  11  inaj-g. 

/;> 

lips,  1638. 

li.  16 

and  have  covered 

and  I  have  covered, 
1769. 

Ixiii.  19  marg. 

1 1  Heb. 

t  (II  1744).     li  Or,  1638. 

Jeremiah 

xvi.  2 

nor  daughters 

or  daughters,  1769. 

xxxiv.  II  & 

afterwards 

afterward,  1769. 

xlvi.  26 

xxxiv.  16 

whom  ye  had  set 

whom  he  had  set,  1629 
C,  1638,  moderns. 

xxxvii.  9 

your  +  selves 

f  yourselves,  1762. 

xl.  I 

The  word  which 

The  word  that,  1762. 

xliv.  28  marg. 

or   from     them     {men 
1616) 

or  them,  1762. 

lii.  I 

one   and   twenty  year, 

one   and   twenty  years, 

1612  — ■  1638.        See 

1630,  1744. 

above,  p.  iii 

Ezekiel 

vii.  II  text 

II  theirs    (||  their   multi- 
tude, i6ii)i 

their     1|  multitude 

II  theirs. 

marg. 

II  Or,  their  tmtiultuons 

II  Or,  tiunult.  II  Or,  their 

persons.       Heb.     tu- 

ticmnltiiotis      pet'sojts, 

7judt 

1629. 

X.  5 

utter  court 

outer  court,  1762  2.  Cf. 
2  Mace.  xiv.  41. 

xi.  24 

in  vision 

in  a  vision,  1769. 

xiii.  9  marg. 

cotinsel 

council,  1762. 

xviii.  I 

And  the  word 

The  word,  1638. 

xxiii.  23 

all  the  Assyrians 

and  {and,  1638)  all  the 
Assyrians,  16 1 6  (not 
1617),  1629. 

xxvii.  16  marg. 

II  II    Or,        chrysoprase 

+  ll(t  1744)  -^Yi^h.  chry- 

(Ch  rysoph  rase  1 6 1 6 ) . 

soprase,  1638,  1744. 

Cf.  ch.  xxviii.  13 

XXX.  17 

Phi-beseth 

Pi-beseth,  1762. 

^  The  error  of  161 1,  &c.,  which  misplaces  the  reference  mark  in  the 
text  (as  it  so  often  does),  led  to  the  hopeless  confusion  of  1629  and  the 
moderns.  Our  Translators  merely  wish  to  give,  as  an  alternative  ren- 
dering for  "  theirs,"  Tremellius'  ex  ThrasoJiibiis  ipsornm. 

2  In  14  other  places  in  Ezekiel  "  utter"  is  left  unchanged. 


S. 


IS 


2  26  Appefidix  C.\     Original  readings  of  1611 


Ezekiel 

Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

xxxi.  14 

II  their  trees 

their  trees  ||,  1629^. 

xxxvi.  3  viarg. 

come  up  on 

come  upon,  1612,  1616 
(not  1613,  1617),  1629. 

xliii.  27 

eight  day.     See  above, 

eighth    day,     1629     C, 

p.  Ill 

1630. 

xlvii.  3 

+  the  waters 

the  t waters,  1629. 

xlviii.  28 

II  II  Or,  Meribah 

++  Heb.  Meribah,  1638. 

Daniel 

ii.  27 

astrologians 

astrologers,  1638. 

iii.  19 

to  be  heat.    See  above, 
p.  112 

to  be  heated,  1762. 

V.  31 

two  year.     See  above, 

two    years,     161 2     (not 

p.  Ill 

1613,  1616,  1617), 
1629  L.,  1630  (not 
1629  C,  1638),  1744. 

xi.  38  majg. 

or,  as  for  the  Almighty 

t  Heb.    as  for  the   Al- 

(or,   as  for   the   Al- 

mighty,    1638,     1762, 

mighty,      1629      C, 

mod.      Cf.  Appendix 

1744) 

A,  p.  172. 

Hosea 

xiii.  3 

a  whirlwind 

the  whirlwind,  1638. 

Amos 

i.  I 

two  year.     See  above, 

two    years,    16 16,    1630 

p,  III 

(not  1612,  1613,  1617, 
&c.,  1629  C.  and  L., 
_i638),  1744. 

ii.  2 

Kerioth.   Cf.  Jer.  xlviii. 

Kirioth,     1629    C.    and 

24 

L.,  1630.  Kerioh, 
1612. 

Jonah 

i.  4 

t  was  like 

was+  like,  Bagster  1846, 
Camb.Svo.  1 858,  Ame- 
rican 1867. 

1  The  correctors  of  1629  failed  to  perceive  that  the  margin  (following 
Tremellius,  conqtnescant  in  se  ipsis  altiliidine  st/d)  translates  by  "upon 
themselves"  the  word  rendered  "their  trees"  by  the  Bishops'  and 
Authorized  versions. 


restored^  later  corrections  being  withdrawn. 


227 


Nahum 

Reading  of  161 1 

restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

iii.  16 

flieth.     Cf.  Ilab.  i.  8 

fleeth,  1762. 

Zechariah 

iv.  1 

which  were  [were,  1629) 
upon 

which  arc'  upon,  1762. 

Malachi 

i.  14  marg. 

t  +  Heb. 

II  11  Or,  1629. 

ii.  1 

and  will  curse 

and  I  will  curse,  1616 
(not  1617),  1629. 

1  Esdras 

i.  9 

Jechonias 

Jeconias,  1629. 

i.  28,    32,    47,  57 

Jeremie.     Cf.    2   Esdr. 

Jeremy,       1762      (161 2, 

&  ii.  I 

ii.    18;  Ecclus.   xlix. 

1613,  1616,  1629,  c\:c. 

6;  2  Mace.  ii.  i,  5, 

partially). 

7  ;  Matt.  ii.  17 

i-  39 

twenty  year  old.     See 

twenty  years  old,    r6r2 

above,  p.  1 1 1 

(not  1613,  &c.),  1629, 
1630.  Cf.  2  Kin. 
xxiii.  36. 

i.  55 

brake  down... set  fire 

and  breakdown,  1769... 
and  set  fire,  1762. 

iii.  II 

strongest,    1612 — 1630, 

the     strongest,     1629 — 

1769 

1762I. 

iv.  21 

He  sticks.     See  above, 

He  stickcth,  1769.     Cf. 

p.  140  note  2 

Ecclus.  xliv.  12. 

iv.  29  viarg. 

Themashis 

Thcmasits^  1769-. 

V.  14 

Adonican  (Aldus)  ,1612, 

Adonicam,  Bp.^  1613 — 

1630 

1744  :  -kam,  1762, 
1769,  moderns.  Cf. 
ch.  viii.  39. 

V.  29  marg. 

Agabah 

Jgaba,  1629.  Cf.  Nell. 
vii.  48. 

V.  34 

Sabie  {la^i^,  LXX.) 

Saby,  1629;  Sabi,  1744. 

V.  55 

Sidon.     Cf.  2  Esdr.  i. 
11;   I  Mace.  V.  15 

Zidon,  1769. 

1  Most  moderns  here,  with  our  standard  (see  above,  p.  38),   omit 
"the."     Ostervald  (1808)  reads  it  consistently  in  vers.  11,  12. 

2  Blayney  in  the  very  same  note  corrects  the  false  reference  to  Jo- 
sephus  of  i6ri — 1762  from  cap.  4.  to  cap.  3. 

15—2 


2  28  Appendix  C?^     Original  readings  of  \(ii\ 


1  Esdras 

Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

V.  69 

Asbazareth  (1630) 

Azbazareth,  1629. 

vii.  6 

and  other  that  were 

and    others    that    were, 

1762I. 
Meremoth,  1762. 

viii.  -2 

Memeroth  (Aldus) 

viii.  39 

Adonicam  (Aldus  Jicrc) 

Adonican,  1612:  Adoni- 
kam,i762.  Cf.ch.v.14. 

viii.  75  jnarg. 

+  t  Greek 

t+(llll  1638)  Or,  1629. 

viii.  96  ina7'g. 

and  of  all  Isj-ael 

and  all  IsracP ,  1 629. 

ix.  19  viarg. 

Maas- . . .  Jarib . . .  Geda- 

1629  prefixes  "Or,"  to 

liah 

each. 

ix.  48 

Sahateus,    1612,    1613, 

Sabatteas,    1629 — 1762: 

1630  (2a;3raroj,  Vat. 

Sabateas,    1769    (2a- 

Isl'^.^Vercellone^^^a- 

(SaTTalas,  Aldus). 

^ara7os,  Rom.  edit.) 

2  Esdras 

i.  40 

Zacharie . . .  Malachie 

Zachary Malachy, 

1762  (16 16,  &c.  par- 
tially). 

ii.  18 

I  will  send...Jeremie 

will  I  send,  1629... Je- 
remy, 1744. 

iii.  17 

Sina.     Cf.  Acts  vii.  30, 

Sinai,     1762.       Cf.    ch. 

38 

xiv.  4;  Gal.  iv.  24,  25. 

iii.  35 

hath  so  kept 

have  so  kept,  1769. 

vii.  68 

the  ten  thousand  part 

the  ten  thousandth  part, 

(Bishops') 

1638. 

xiii.  12 

saw     I,      1612—16^0, 

I  saw,   1629 — 1762,  Os- 

1769,     D'Oyly     and 

tervald    1808,    Camb. 

Mant  1817,  Oxf.  1835 

4to.  1863.  See  above, 
p.  38. 

xiv.  43 

and  held 

and  I  held,  1629. 

xiv.  47 

fountains 

fountain,  1629,  Vulg., 
Bishops',  Junius. 

XV.   22 

upon  earth.    Cf.  vcr.  29 

upon  the  earth,  1629. 

>^v.  53 

alway.     Cf.  ch.  xvi.  20 

(alwaies,  1629),  always, 
1744. 

xvi.  26 

shall  ripe.     See  above, 
p.  112 

shall  ripen,  1638. 

xvi.  30 

or,  when  as 

or  as  when,  1638. 

^  See  above,  p-  87  and  note. 

^  The  correction  of  1629  represents  el  omnem  Israel  (iravTa  tov 
^laparjX)  of  the  Vulgate  and  (virtually)  of  Junius.  Our  Translators 
seem  to  have  read  somewhere  Kal  iravros  tov  'IcrparjX,  but  Aldus,  with 
the  Vatican  and  Alexandrian  MSS.,  has  no  KaL 


restored,  later  corrections  bciu^  withdi'aivn. 


229 


Tobit 

Reading  of  16 11 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

ii.  4 

I  start  (aVaTTT^STjcras) 

I  started,  1762. 

iii.  17 

belongeth  {eTTL^aXKei) 

belonged,  1629. 

iv.  10 

alms     doth     deliver... 

alms    do    deliver,    1629 

suffereth 

...suffer,  Camb.  4to. 
1863,  after  Bp  Turtoa 
(see  above,  p.  36)  ^ 

vii.  r 

after  that  they  had 

after  they  had,  1629. 

vii.  3 

Nephthali.     Cf.   ch.   i. 

Nephthalim,    1638    (not 

I,  2,  &c. 

1744),  1762,  &c. 

Judith 

ii.  4,  passim 

Olofernes.       See     Ap- 

Holofernes, 1638,  Vulg. ; 

pendix  B,  p.  205 

Holophernes,  Junius, 
Bishops'. 

ii.  20 

A  great  multitude 

A  great  number,  1769. 

V.  3 

Canaan.     Cf.    Appen- 
dix A  (p.  179)  1629, 
in  vers.  9,  10,  16 

Chanaan,  1638. 

vii.  3 

Esdraelon,       Bishops', 

Esdraelom,  i638.Compl ., 

Aldus   i/ere),   LXX. 

Aid.      {/i/c),      LXX. 

(Fritzsche),  Vulg. 

(Rom.,  (to.). 

viii.  6 

the  eves  of  the  sabbath 

the  eves  of  the  sabbaths, 
1629. 

XV.  5 

Choba 

Chobai,  1638.  Cf.  ver. 
4^. 

Wisdom 

iv.  5 

unperfect,        Bishops'. 
See  above,  p.  112 

imperfect,   1762. 

V.  16  viarg. 

unproperly 

improperly,  1744. 

vii.  25  marg. 

stream  [diroppoca) 

dream,  Oxf.  1835,  Camb. 
1863,  not  D'Oyly  and 
Mant  18  [7. 

X.  10 

travails.    Cf.  ch.  vi.  14 

travels,  1612  (not  1613), 
1629  (not  1630),  1638, 
&c.  See  above,  p.  97. 

is  left  as  a  singular  noun  in  ver.  1 1 ;  ch.  xii.  9 ;  Ecclus. 
3,  as  in  Shakespeare  and  the  purest  later  writers. 


1  Yet  "alms" 
xvii.  22  ;  Acts  iii. 

2  Both  the  Aldine  and  Roman  editions  of  the  Septuagint,  which  our 
Translators  much  used  (see  above,  pp.  47,  48)  have  the  same  variation 
in  vers.  4,  5. 


230  Appendix  C.^     Original  readings  of  idw 


Wisdom 

Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

xii.  I 

uncorruptible,  Bishops' 

incorruptible,  1762.  Cf. 
ch.  xviii.  4  marg. 

XV.  13 

brickie.  See  p.  1 40  note  2 

brittle,  1762. 

xvi.  18 

sometimes  (Trore) 

sometime,  1629.  See 
Col.  i.  21  (below, 
p.  236  note). 

xviii.  9 

alike  (6/U.o^wj) 

like,  1629  (not  1630, 
1744),  1638,  1762,  &c. 

xviii.  18 

here,  another 

here,  and  another,  1638. 

Ecclus. 

vi.  15 

unvaluable 

invaluable,  1762. 

vii.  24 

have  care 

have  a  care,  1629. 

xi.  25 

no  remembrance 

no  more  remembrance, 
1629. 

xvii.  23 

Afterward 

Afterwards,  1629. 

xvii.  24 

those   that    fail    (eVXet- 
irovTai) 

those  that  failed,  1629. 

xix.  8 

to  friend,   161 2 — 1630, 

to  a  friend,  1629,  1638, 

1744,     D'Oyly     and 

1762,    &c.,    Ostervald 

Mant    1817,    Camb. 

1808,  Oxf.  1835. 

1863 

xxiii.  13 

untemperate        (unho- 
nest,  Bishoj^s') 

intemperate,  1744. 

XXV.  22 

impudencie          (impu- 
dency,  1638) 

impudence,  1762. 

xxvi.  13 

will  fat.  See  above, p.  1 1 2 

will  fatten,  1762. 

xxvi.  15,25  &  XXXll. 

shamefast 

shamefaced,  1744. 

10  &  xli.  16,  24 

xxvii.  12 

undiscreet,  Bishops' 

indiscreet,  1744. 

xxx. 15 

state  of  body  (eue^ta) 

estate  of  body,  1629. 

xxxii.  I 

(,of  the  feast) 

(of  a  feast),  1629  (not 
1630),  1638. 

xli.  16 

shamefastness.    See  ch. 

shamefacedness,       1744. 

xxvi.  15 

Cf.  I  Tim.  ii.  9. 

xlii.  24 

unperfect          (unperfit, 
1611) 

imperfect,  1744. 

xliii.  5  marg. 

stayed 

stayeth,  1769^. 

xliv.  12 

stands  fast 

standeth  fast,  1 769. 

1  Blayney  wishes  to  render  the  Complutensian  reading  Kardiravce, 
which  the  margin  represents,  in  the  same  tense  as  Kareairevaev  is 
translated  in  the  text,  without  perceiving  that  the  marginal  sense 
refers  to  Josh.  x.  13. 


restored,  later  correct iotis  being  luithdrawn. 


2X\ 


Ecclus. 

Reading  of 
restored 

1611 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

xlv.  8  marg. 

xlvii.  23 
xlviii.  8 

Gr. 

Nabat,  LXX., 
anointed 

Bishops' 

Heb.  1769,  Oxf.  18:55, 
Camb.i863,notD'6y- 
ly  and  Mant  181 7. 

Nebat,  1629,  1630. 

anointedst,  1762.  Cf. 
vers.  7,  9,  and  ver.  8 

xlix.    6    mai-g.     & 
Baruch  vi.  Title, 
bis 

Jeremie.     See 
i.  28 

I   Esdr. 

\_marg.\. 
Jeremy,   1744  (1629,  se- 
tncl). 

Baruch 

iii.  23 
vi.  9,  21 

Merran 
loves...  comes 

Meran^  1638  (not  1744), 

1762. 
loveth...cometh,  i7'59. 

Song 

ver.  17 

burnt  offering 

burnt  offerings-,  1629. 

Hist,  of 
Susanna 

Title 
ver.  22 

in  Hebrew 
I  am  straited 

in  the  Hebrew,  1638. 
I   am   straitened  (strait- 
ned,  1744),  1762. 

Bel  &  Drag 

on 

33— 35>  37>  39 

Habacuc 

Habbacuc,     1629     ('A/;t- 
/3a/coi)/x,  LXX.), 

1  Mace. 

ill.    16,    24    & 
39  &  ix.  50 
V.  25 

V.  26 
ix.  37 

vii. 

Bethoron  (Bat^ojpwi') 

in    peaceable   manner. 

Cf.  ver.  48 
in  Alema  {et  in,  Vulg.) 

Canaan 

Bethhoron,  1769 
(Beth-h.,  1762  his). 

in  a  peaceable  manner, 
1769. 

and    Alema,    1629    (not 
1630),  1638. 

Chanaan,  1638. 

1  Mippav  Aldine  and  Roman  editions,  Mepav  Complutensian. 

2  oXoKavTuiaet  Vulg.,  Bishops',  Roman  edition:  oXoKavrufxaai  Ah]., 
Compl.,  Fritzsche. 


^~J 


232  Appetidix  C.\     Original  readings  of  1611 


1  Mace. 

Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

ix.  57 

two  year.     See  above, 

two     years,     1629    (not 

p.  Ill 

1630),  163S. 

X.  29 

I  do  free 

do  I  free,  1629,  &c.  (I 
free,  1744). 

X.  45 

for  building  [second) 

for  the  building,  1629 
(not  1630),  1638.  Cf. 
vers.  44,  45. 

X.  52  &  xiv.  29 

Forsomuch 

Forasmuch,  1629  (ch. 
xiv.  29,  1744). 

xi.  6 

Joppa 

Joppe,  163S  (as  else- 
where). 

xiii.  51 

seventy  and  one  year 

seventy  and  first  year, 
1769. 

xiii.  53 

,  and  dwelt  ^ 

,  and  he  dwelt,  1762 
(;  1769). 

2  Mace. 

i.  36 

as  much  to  say  as 

as  much  as  (1629  om. 
as)  to  say,  1638. 

ii-  i>  5,  7 

Jeremie 

Jeremy,  1744  (ver.  7, 
1613).  See  I  Esdr. 
i.  28  (above,  p.  227). 

iii.  12 

such  wrong 

such  wrongs,  1629  (not 
1630),  1638. 

iv.  2 

tendred  [Ktjdefxoua) 

tendered,  1638. 

iv.  2  1 

unto  Egypt.     Cf.   ver. 

1  '^ 

into  Egypt,  1638. 

iv.  23 

Three  year  . . .  foresaid. 

Three  years,   1630    (not 

See  above,  p.  1 1 1 

1629,  1638)  ...  afore- 
said, 1629  (not  1630), 
1638. 

iv.  50 

in  power 

of  power,  1629  (not 
1630,  1744),  1638, 
1762. 

the  adversity,  1629  (not 

V.  20 

the  adversities 

1630),  1638. 

viii.  33 

who    was    fled    [ire^ev- 
yoTo) 

who  had  fled,  1769. 

ix.  3 

Ecbatana 

Ecbatane,  1762.  Cf.  To- 
bit  iii.  7. 

^  The  comma  is  from  Synd.  A.  3.  14  (only)  and  \6i^,  not  Oxf. 
161 1  and  161 2.  Notwithstanding  ch.  xvi.  i,  Simon,  not  John,  is  in- 
tended by  the  Translators  to  be  the  subject  of  "  dwelt." 


restored^  later  corrections  be'uig  withdrawn. 


233 


2  Mace. 

Reading  of  i6n 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

ix.  18 

the  letter,  1612 — 1630, 

the  letters,   1629,   1638, 

Camb.  1863 

moderns. 

xi.  21 

eight  ^  and    forty  year, 
the  four  and  twenty 

eight  and  fortieth  year, 
the  four  and  twentieth 

xi.  11  marg 

■• 

day 
Dioscoros 

day,  1638. 
{Dioscorcs,   1630),  Dios- 
corus,  I  "16  2. 

xii.  42 

for  the  sin,  LXX. 

for  the  sins,  Vulg.,  1629 

xiv.  6 

Asideans.     Cf.  r  Mace. 

(not  1630),  1638. 
Assideans,      1629      (not 

xiv,  41 

ii.  42  (above,  p.  200). 
utter  door 

1630),  1638. 
outer  door,    1762.     See 
Ezek.  X.  5. 

ColopJion 

The  end  of  Apocrypha 

The   end   of    the   Apo- 
cr}'pha,  1638. 

S.  Matthew 

ii.  17  &  xxvii.  9 

Jeremie 

Jeremy,   1699    (1629,  in 
ch.     xxvii.     9).       See 

I  Esdr.  i.  28. 

iii,  12 

but  will  burn  up 

but  he  will  burn  up,  1629. 

ix.  34 

casteth  out  the  devils 

casteth  out  devils,  1762. 

xii.  23 

Is  this  the  son 

Is  not  this  the  son,  1638-. 

xiii.  6 

had  not  root.  Cf.  ver.  2 1 

had  no  root,  1762. 

xvii.  20  & 
&    Luke 

xix.  26 

i-  37; 

unpossible     (Bishops'). 
See  above,  p.  112 

impossible,     1 743.      Cf. 
Mark  x.  27. 

xviii.  27 

Matt.  xxiv. 

50   & 

ware.    Cf.  Acts  xiv.  6; 

aware,  1762.    See  above. 

Luke  xii. 

46 

2  Tim.  iv.  15 

p.  113. 

Matt.    xxvi. 

39   ^ 

further 

farther,    1763,    moderns 

Mark  i.  i 

9 

(not  American  1867). 

Matt,  xxvii. 

52 

bodies  of  saints  which 

bodies  of  the  saints  which 

slept 

slept,  1762^. 

1  In  ver.  33  "eight  "  of  161 1 — 1630  (not  1629)  may  be  regarded  as 
another  mode  of  spelling  the  ordinal,  as  161 1  has  it  in  Lev.  xiv.  10,  23; 
Luke  XV.  8  viarg.     Compare  also  2  Kin.  xv.  8  and  Ezek.  xliii.  27,  p.  226. 

^  So,  though  wrongly,  nearly  all  the  moderns,  but  not  Scholefield, 
in  the  Cambridge  Greek  and  English  N.T.  (above,  p.  79  note  i),  and 
the  Tract  Society's  Bible  1868.  Archbishop  Trench  contrasts  the  in- 
sertion of  "not"  in  John  iv.  29  with  its  omission  in  John  viii.  22; 
xviii.  35  ;  Acts  vii.  42  ;  x.  47.     Compare  also  John  vii.  26,  31. 

^  This  change  has  not  been  imported  into  the  Gospel  for  Palm 
Sunday  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.  Cf.  i  John  v.  12  in  Appendix 
A  (p.  193),  and  i  Cor.  xiii.  2  below,  where  in  modern  Prayer-Books  we 


2  34  Appendix  C?^     Original  readings  of  id w 


S.  Mark 

Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 

'  ^  vi.  7 

he  calleth 

xiv.  36 

not    that    I    will,    but 

what 

S.  Luke 

viii.  8 

when  he  said  (Xeyco;/) 

xi.  16  &  xviii.  9 

other.    Cf.  ver.  42;  ch. 

xxiii.  32.  See  above, 

xii.  20  Wrt-ro-. 

p.  87  note 
ttGr. 

z^'    xix.  13  viarg. 

two  shillings  sixpence 

S.  John 

xi.  18  marg. 

two   mile,    16 13,    161 7, 

1629  L.     See  above, 

>^'-  34 

p.  I  ri 
They  say  unto  him 

Acts 

V.  34 

a  doctor  of  law 

X.  9 

upon  the  house  {hi^p-o.) 

•^    xvii.  31 

li  hath  given 

xviii.  5 

pressed  in  spirit 

xix.  19 

also  of  them 

xxiv.  14 
XXV.  6 

and  the  prophets. 
Bishops' 

sitting  in  the  judgment 
seat,  Bishops'  (but 
both  read  "  on,"  ver. 

xxviii.  8 

^7)    . 
flixe  (flix,  1629) 

Fin. 

The  end   of  the    Acts 

of  the  Apostles 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 


he  called,  1769. 
not  what  I  will,  but  what, 
1629. 


when  he  had  said,  1629. 
others,   1744  (ch.    xviii. 
9  in  1629). 

II  II  Or,  1629. 
two    shillini^s    and  six- 
pence, 1769. 


txvo  miles,  161 2,  1616, 
1629  C,  1630. 

They  said  unto  him, 
1769,  moderns  (not 
American  1867). 

a    doctor    of    the    law, 

1762.    Cf.  Luke  V.  17. 
upon  the  house  top, 1629. 

Cf.  Matt.  xxiv.  17^. 
hath    II  given,    1629    C. 

(not  L.,  1630),  1638. 
pressed  in  the  spirit,  1769. 

Cf.  ver.  25. 
of  them  also,  1769. 
and  in  the  prophets,  1 762. 

SeeAppendixE,p.259. 
sitting  on  the  judgment 

seat,  1762. 


flux,  1699.     "^^^  above, 

p.  103. 
omitted,  1629. 


read    "not"  in  the  Epistle  for  Quinquagesima  Sunday.     So  in  John 
iii.    13,  in  the  Gospel  for  Trinity  Sunday,  "which"   of  1611   and  '' 
the  rest  is  changed  into  "who." 

'^  In    Acts   XV.    14   some   modern   editions   have    "Symeon,"    f*. 
"Simeon"  is  the  form  used  from  1611  to  1769  and  its  imitators. 
Appendix  A  (p.  187),  Luke  iii.  30. 


restored,  later  corrections  bc'mo;  luithdrawn. 


235 


Romans 


^       iv.  19 

lb.  &  ix.  9 

vii.  2 
>  ■>     xi.  23 

ICor. 

iv.  9 


Reading  of  r6ii 
restored. 


an  hundred  year,  161 2 
— 1699.  See  above, 
p.  iir 

Saras',  1629,1638,1743 
(chap.  iv.  19,  Saraes, 
1611-1630).  Cf.  lleb. 
xi.  II  ;   I  Pet.  iii.  6 

law  of  the  husband 


bide 


approved      to      death, 
1612,  1613 


X.  29 

of  tlie  other's   (others, 

xiii.  2 

1611  —  1743),       TOZ 
er^pov 
have  no  charity 

xiv.  15 
xiv.  18 

and  will  pray 

than  [then  :  see  above. 

p.  97]  you  all 

2  Cor. 

V.    I 

made  with  hand 

Galatians 

V-  15 

take  heed  ye  be  not 

Ephesians 

i.  9 

had  purposed 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 


an  hundred  years,  1630, 
1743,  &c. 

Sarah's,    1762   (so    1743 
HI  I  Pet.  iii.  6  only). ' 


law  of  her  husband, 
1616  (not  1617,  1629 
L.,  1630),  1629  C,  &c. 

abide,  1762.  See  above, 
p.  113. 


appointed  to  death', 
1616,  1617,  1629  C 
and  L.,  &c. 

of  the  other,  1762,  1769. 
Seeabove,p.2i6noter. 

have  not  charity,    1762. 

See  p.  233  note  3. 
and  I  will  pray,  1638. 
than  ye  all. 


made  with  hands,  161 2 
(not  1613,  1616,  1617), 
1629. 


take  heed  that  ye  l^e  not, 
1629. 


hath  purposed,  1629. 


^  So  always  in  the  Apocrypha.  In  Rom,  iv.  19,  and  not  elsewhere, 
so  far  as  we  know,  1701  has  "  Sara's  ".     See  above,  p.  152  note. 

'■'  A  deliberate  but  needless  correction,  derived  from  Tyndale's, 
Coverdale's,  the  Great,  and  the  Bishops'  Bibles.  The  Geneva  (1557), 
has  '•  destinate  to  death." 


236  Appendix  C?[     Origmal  iradi?igs  of  1611 


Colossians 

Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 

Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 

^>  "i    i.  21 

sometimes 

sometime,  B/>.,  1629'. 

1  Timothy 

{.r  <f    ii.  9 
iv.  16 

shamefastness 

the    doctrine,     161 1  — 
1630,  1769,  moderns 

shamefacedness,  1 743 
(shamefac'dness,  1674, 
1683,  1699).  Cf.  Ec- 
clus.  xli.  16. 

thy  doctrine,  1629  C, 
1638,  1699,  1743, 
1762.  See  above,  p.  4 
note. 

2  Timothy 

i.  12 

and  I  am  persuaded 

and  am  persuaded,  1762. 

James 

V.  4 

which      have      reaped 
down 

who  have  reaped  down, 
1762. 

1  Peter 

V.  10 

called  us  into 

called  us  unto,  1638. 

2  Peter 

V  '    i.  9 

see  far  off 

see  afar  off,  1769. 

IJohn 

ii.  29 
iii.  17 

which      docth      (doth, 
1612,      1613,      1616, 
1630) 

hath  need 

that   doeth   (doth,    1629 

C),  1629  C.  and  L., 

1638. 
have     need,      1629     C 

(not    1629   L.,   1630), 

1638. 

^  So  Wisd.  xvi.  18,  where  the  Bishops'  renders  Trore  "sometimes" 
and  "sometime"  in  consecutive  verses.  The  modern  distinction  be- 
tween the  two  words  did  not  exist  when  these  versions  were  made. 
Hence  all  our  Bibles  have  "sometimes"  Eph.  ii.13;  v.  8;  Titus  iii.  3: 
all  "sometime"  Col.  iii.  7;  i  Pet.  iii.  20,  the  Greek  being  always 
iroTi. 


restored,  later  corrections  beitig  withdratvn. 


237 


Revelation 


ii.  6,  15 

vii.  7 

"S"*  xvii.  2 
xvii.  4 


5  ;  xxii.  2 


Reading  of  161 1 
restored. 


Nicolaitans 
Isachar 


inhabiters.    Cf.  ch.  viii. 

13  ;  xii.  12 
precious  stone 


chrysolite.     Cf.    I'zek. 

xxviii.  13  viarg. 
of  either  side 


Variation  of  later 
Bibles. 


Nicolaitanes,    1638    (not 

1743),  1762. 
Issachar,    1629   C.    and 

L.,    1630    (not     163S 

—  743).  1762. 
inhabitants,  1762. 

precious  stones,  1630 
(not  1629  C.  and  L., 
1743),  1762.  Cf.  ch. 
xviii.  12,  16;  xxi.  19. 

chrysolyte,  1762. 

on  either  side,  1762. 


APPENDIX    D. 

(See  above,  p.  28). 

To  the  Rev.  the  Viee-C/iancello?;  and  the  other  Delegates 
of  the  ChiJ-endon  Press. 

The  Editor  of  the  two  editions  of  the  Bible  lately- 
printed  at  the  Clarendon  Press  thinks  it  his  duty,  now  that 
he  has  completed  the  whole  in  a  course  of  between  three 
and  four  years'  close  application,  to  make  his  report  to  the 
Delegates  of  the  manner  in  which  that  work  has  been 
executed;  and  hopes  for  their  approbation. 

In  the  first  place,  according  to  the  instructions  he  re- 
ceived, the  folio  edition  of  161 1,  that  of  1701,  published 
under  the  direction  of  Bishop  Lloyd  [see  above,  p.  26],  and 
two  Cambridge  editions  of  a  late  date,  one  in  quarto,  the 
other  in  octavo,  have  been  carefully  collated,  whereby  many 
errors  that  were  found  in  former  editions  have  been  corrected, 
and  the  text  reformed  to  such  a  standard  of  purity,  as,  it 
is  presumed,  is  not  to  be  met  with  in  any  other  edition 
hitherto  extant. 

The  punctuation  has  been  carefully  attended  to,  not 
only  with  a  view  to  preserve  the  true  sense,  but  also  to 
uniformity,  as  far  as  was  possible. 

Frequent  recourse  has  been  had  to  the  Hebrew  and 
Greek  Originals;  and  as  on  other  occasions,  so  with  a  special 
regard  to  the  words  not  expressed  in  the  Original  Language, 
but  which  our  Translators  have  thought  fit  to  insert  in  ItaUcs, 
in  order  to  make  out  the  sense  after  the  English  idiom,  or  to 
preserve  the  connexion.  And  though  Dr  Paris  [see  above, 
p.  28]  made  large  corrections  in  this  particular  in  an  edition 


Dr  Blayncfs  Report^  I'jCg.  239 

published  at  Cambridge,  there  still  remained  many  necessary- 
alterations,  which  escaped  the  Doctor's  notice ;  in  making 
which  the  Editor  chose  not  to  rely  on  his  own  judgment 
singly,  but  submitted  them  all  to  the  previous  examination 
of  the  Select  Committee,  and  particularly  of  the  Principal 
of  Hertford  College',  and  Mr  Professor  Wheeler.  A  list  of 
the  above  alterations  was  intended  to  have  been  given  in 
to  the  Vice-Chancellor  at  this  time,  but  the  Editor  has  not 
yet  found  time  to  make  it  completely  out. 

Considerable  alterations  have  been  made  in  the  Heads 
or  Contents  prefixed  to  the  Chapters,  as  will  appear  on 
inspection;  and  though  the  Editor  is  unwilling  to  enlarge 
upon  the  labour  bestowed  by  himself  in  this  particular,  he 
cannot  avoid  taking  notice  of  the  peculiar  obligations,  which 
both  himself  and  the  public  lie  under  to  the  Principal  of 
Hertford  College,  Mr  Griffith  of  Pembroke  College,  Mr 
Wheeler,  Poetry  Professor",  and  the  late  Warden  of  New 
College^  so  long  as  he  lived  to  bear  a  part  in  it;  who 
with  a  prodigious  expence  of  time,  and  inexpressible  fatigue 
to  themselves,  judiciously  corrected  and  improved  the  rude 
and  imperfect  Draughts  of  the  Editor. 

The  running  titles  at  the  top  of  the  columns  in  each 
page,  how  trifling  a  circumstance  soever  it  may  appear, 
required  no  small  degree  of  thought  and  attention. 

Many  of  the  proper  names  being  left  untranslated, 
whose  etymology  was  necessary  to  be  known,  in  order  to 
a  more  perfect  comprehension  of  the  allusions  in  the  text, 
the  translation  of  them,  under  the  inspection  of  the  above 
named  Committee,  has  been  for  the  benefit  of  the  unlearned 
supplied  in  the  margin. 


1  David  Durell,  D.D.,  1757— 1775. 

2  1766 — 1776;  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity,  1776 — 1783. 
^  Thomas  Bayward,  1764 — 1768. 


240         Appendix  D^^     Dr  Blayneys  Report,  1769. 

Some  obvious  and  material  errors  in  the  chronology 
have  been  considered  and  rectified. 

The  marginal  references,  even  in  Bishop  Lloyd's  Bible, 
had  in  many  places  suffered  by  the  inaccuracy  of  the  Press : 
subsequent  editions  had  copied  those  Errata,  and  added 
many  others  of  their  own;  so  that  it  became  absolutely 
necessary  to  turn  to  and  compare  the  several  passages; 
which  has  been  done  in  every  single  instance,  and  by  this 
precaution  several  false  references  brought  to  light,  which 
would  otherwise  have  passed  unsuspected.  It  has  been 
the  care  of  the  Editor  to  rectify  these,  as  far  as  he  could, 
by  critical  conjecture,  where  the  copies  universally  failed 
him,  as  they  did  in  most  of  the  errors  discovered  in 
Bishop  Lloyd's  edition.  In  some  few  instances  he  con- 
fesses himself  to  have  been  at  a  loss  in  finding  out  the 
true  reference,  though  the  corruption  was  manifest  in 
the  want  of  any  the  most  distant  resemblance  between  the 
passages  compared  together.  Cases  of  this  sort  indeed 
did  not  often  occur;  so  that  a  very  small  number  only  of 
the  old  references  are,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Committee, 
omitted,  and  their  places  more  usefully  supplied. 

It  had  been  suggested  by  the  late  Archbishop  of  Can- 
terbury \  that  an  improvement  might  be  made  in  the 
present  editions  of  the  Bible,  by  taking  in  a  number  of 
additional  references,  of  which  many  useful  ones,  as  he 
supposed,  might  be  furnished  from  other  editions  referred 
to  by  him,  and  particularly  from  a  Scotch  edition",  of  which 
the   present  Vice-Chancellor   was  kind  enough  to  lend  a 


1  Thomas  Seeker,  born  1693;  Bishop  of  Bristol,  1735;  of  Oxford, 
1737;  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  1758 — 1768. 

2  In  the  absence  of  a  date  it  seems  impossible  to  identify  this 
"Scotch  edition,"  unless  it  be  Brown's  or  one  of  Canne's  (see  above, 
p.  121  note).  Dr  Eadie  {English  Bible,  Vol.  ii.  p.  ^20)  names  one 
printed  at  Edinburgh  in  1760  which  omits  "not,"  Heb.  ii.  16. 


Dr  B  lay  fiefs  Report^   1769.  241 


Copy.  The  references  found  in  it,  which  were  indeed  very 
numerous,  having  been  severally  turned  to  and  examined, 
such  of  them  were  selected  as  the  Editor  judged  most 
pertinent,  together  with  others  that  occurred  from  his  own 
reading  and  observation.  In  doing  this  he  has  endeavoured 
to  keep  clear  of  mere  fanciful  allusions,  of  which  too  many 
presented  themselves  in  the  before  named  Scotch  edition; 
and  to  adhere  as  near  as  possible  to  the  plan  marked  out 
in  the  former  collection  made  by  Bishop  Lloyd ;  pointing 
out  such  passages  chiefly,  where  the  same  history  or  the 
same  name  was  introduced,  the  same  matter  treated  of, 
or  sentiment  expressed,  or  at  least  where  parallels  might 
fairly  be  drawn ;  and  sometimes  where  a  similar  use  of  a 
particular  word  or  expression  tended  to  illustrate  the  appli- 
cation of  it  on  another  occasion.  The  number  of  Re- 
ferences being  thus  augmented  considerably,  the  Collection 
upon  the  whole  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  regarded  as  useful  in 
the  light  of  a  Concordance,  material  as  well  as  verbal, 
always  at  hand. 

In  this  state  the  quarto  Copy  was  sent  to  press;  and 
the  first  proofs  carefully  collated  with  the  Copy  both  text 
and  margin ;  after  which  the  second  proofs  were  again  read, 
and  generally  speaking,  the  third  likewise ;  not  to  mention 
the  frequent  revisions  of  proofs  besides,  which  are  common 
in  correcting  the  press.  This  proved  indeed  a  very  tire- 
some and  tedious  task;  but  was  not  more  than  was  abso- 
lutely necessary  in  order  to  attain  the  degree  of  accuracy 
that  was  wished.  A  particular  attention  was  required  with 
respect  to  the  figures  belonging  to  the  marginal  References, 
where  errors  were  continually  creeping  in  after  a  manner 
that  would  appear  highly  astonishing  to  those,  who  have 
never  been  concerned  in  correcting  multitudes  of  figures, 
as  they  came  from  the  press. 

When  the  quarto   Sheets  were  printed  off,  the  Forms 
s.  16 


242       Appendix  D?^     Dr  Blayney's  Report^   1769. 

were  lengthened  out  in  order  to  make  up  the  folio 
edition  ;  in  doing  which  the  parts  were  often  so  jumbled 
together,  and  such  Confusion  introduced  by  misplacing  the 
References  and  mistaking  the  Chronology,  that  nothing  else 
would  suffice  than  a  fresh  Collation  of  the  whole  with  the 
quarto  Copy,  and  a  repetition  of  almost  the  same  trouble 
and  care  in  the  revisal,  and  in  making  up  the  running  Titles 
anew,  as  had  been  used  before.  But  the  Editor  thinks  he 
has  just  reason  to  congratulate  himself  on  the  opportunity 
hereby  given  him  of  discovering  and  correcting  some  few 
trivial  inaccuracies,  which  in  spite  of  all  his  vigilance  had 
escaped  his  notice  in  the  quarto  edition.  So  that  the 
folio  edition  is  rendered  by  this  somewhat  the  more 
I)erfect  of  the  two,  and  therefore  more  fit  to  be  recom- 
mended for  a  standard  Copy. 

The  Editor  humbly  hopes  this  Account  of  his  pro- 
ceedings will  not  be  unacceptable  to  the  Board;  and  will 
think  his  time  and  pains  not  ill  bestowed,  if  he  shall  have 
succeeded  in  his  desire  of  giving  satisfaction  to  those  who 
honoured  him  with  the  employment,  and  of  contributing  in 
any  wise  to  God's  honour,  and  the  public  utility. 

B.  Blayney  *. 
Hertfor'd  College, 
Oct.  25,   1769. 

^  Benjamin  Blayney,  D.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew,  1787 — 
1802. 

This  Report  is  reprinted  from  the  GcutlciJiaiis  Magazine  for  1 769 
(Vol.  XXXIX.  p.  517),  to  which  periodical  the  writer  seems  to  have  sent 
it.  Crutwell  republished  it  in  1785  in  his  edition  of  the  Holy  Bible 
with  Bp  Wilson's  notes.  "^ 


APPENDIX    E. 

(See  above,  pp.  59 — 60.) 

The  Greek  text  adopted  by  the  Translators  of  the  Authorized 
Version  of  the  New  Testament. 

N.B.  In  forming  this  list,  that  of  Scrivener  {Stippleviejit 
to  English  Version,  1845,  pp.  7,  8),  that  of  Canon  Westcott 
{Sfnith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  Vol.  11.  p.  524  note),  and  that 
of  Professor  Abbot  of  Harvard  University  (1872)  as  given  by 
Dr  Philip  '$>Qkv'di'^  {Revision  of  English  Version,  1877,  p.  xxix), 
have  been  compared  throughout,  their  errors  corrected,  and 
defects  supplied.  Compl.  indicates  the  Complutensian 
Polyglott  (15 14 — 1522);  Ej-asm.  the  editions  of  Erasmus 
(1516,  1519,  1522,  1527,  1535);  ^/^.  that  of  Aldus  (1518). 

§  I.  Passages  wherein  the  text  of  the  Authorized 
Version  differs  from  those  of  Stephen  (1550)  and  of  Beza 
(1589  and  1598)  jointly. 

S.  Matt.  ii.  11.    Ci^ov  (for  ^v^ov)  Compl.,  Bishops', 
ix.  18.      apyisiv  ets  Compl.,  Vulg. 
X.  10.     pd/3Sov<s  Compl.,  Stephen  1546,  1549. 
X.  25.     BeeX^efSov^  Compl.  (hie  tantuni),  Vulg. 
xi.  21.      Bry^o-aiStt  Compl.,  Vulg. 

xiii.  24.  o-TretpavTt  Compl.,  Colinaeus  1534,  Stephen  1549, 
Vulg. 

S.  Mark  iv.  18.  The  second  ovrol  elcriv  omitted  in  Compl. 
V.  38.     KOL  KXatWra?  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Vulg. 
vi.  45  and  viii.  22.     BT^^o-atSa  Compl.,  Vulg. 

16 — 2 


244     Appendix  ^.]     Passages  wherein  the  text  of  the 

S.  Mark  vi.  53.     V€.vr](jap\Q  Erasm.,  Vulg.  (Clementine). 

ix.  42.  tojv  fjLLKpwv  rovTO)v  Compl.,  Vulg.  ("these" 
161 1,  these  1638). 

xiii.  9.     dxOrja-ecrOe  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Tynd. 

XV.  3.  To  the  end  avT6<i  Se  ovSev  direKpLvaTo  added  by 
Compl.,  Stephen  1546,  1549,  Bishops'. 

S.  Luke  iii.  30.  '^ifxewv  Erasm. :  but  Su/xecoi/  Stephen, 
Beza,  Vulg.     Cf.  2  Pet.  i.  i. 

iii.  31.  Mevdfx  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great 
Bible,  Bishops',  Authorized  before  1629  (Cambridge).  See 
Appendix  A,  p.  187. 

vi.  37.  /////.  Koi  omitted  by  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Vulg., 
Tynd. 

viii.  37.     TvapeKoXovv  Erasm.,  Vulg.,  Beza's  Latin,  Tynd. 

xii.  56.  Tov  ovpavov  Kol  Trj<;  yrjs  Compl.,  Vulg.  (Clem- 
entine), Coverdale,  Great  Bible,  Bishops' :  but  the  reverse 
order  is  found  in  Erasm.,  Tyndale,  Geneva  1557,  Szc 

xvii.  35.  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Tynd.  and  all  English  prefix 
7j  to  /Jiia. 

XX.  31.  Koi  is  inserted  before  ov  KaTeXtTrov  by  Erasm.  and 
all  English. 

xxii.  42.     Aid.,  Vulg.,  Tynd.,  all  English  read  itapiveyKe. 

S.  John  viii.  6.  To  the  end  ixrj  Trpoo-Trotov/xei/o?  added  by 
Compl.,  Stephen  1546,  1549,  Bishops'  ("  as  though  he  heard 
them  not"  italicised  not  earlier  than  1769). 

viii.  42.  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Stephen  1546,  1549,  Tynd. 
omit  ovv. 

xvi.  25.  Erasm.,  iVld.,  Vulg.,  Tynd.  all  English  except 
Coverdale  up  to  1762  omit  a/\/\a. 

xviii.  I.     TOV  KeSptov  apparently.     (Vulg.  Cedron.) 

xviii.  15.     Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Tynd.  prefix  6  to  aXXog. 

xix.  31.  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Vulg.,  Tynd.,  all  EngHsh 
set  €7r€t  7rapa(TK€vy  rjv  after  'lovSatoi,  not  after  aa/S/SaTu). 


Authorized  Bible  differs  from  StepJwi's  and  Bezd's  joifitly.  245 

Acts  iii.  3.  Compl.,  Erasm.  1516,  Aid.,  Stephen  1546, 
1549  omit  Xa(3e2i'. 

vii.  16.  'E/xo/D  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Tyndale,  Great  Bible, 
Geneva,  Bishops',  Authorized  before  1629  (Camb.).  See 
Appendix  A,  p.  189. 

vii.  44.  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Vulg.,  Tyndale  omit  the 
first  iv. 

viii.  13.  8wa/xets  koI  (Tr]ixa^a  ytvo/xa'a  Erasm.,  Aid., 
(SvvdfX€L<;  KOL  arjfxeta  /xeyaXa  yivofxeva  Compl.),  Tyndale, 
(Coverdale),  Great  Bible,  Bishops'.  The  marginal  reading 
is  due  to  1762. 

xxi.  4.  Tovs  before  fxa6r]Ta<;  is  omitted  by  Complut., 
Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Stephen  1546,  1549,  Tynd. 

xxi.  8.     TjXBofx^v  Compl.,  Vulg.,  Beza's  Latin. 

XXvi.  20.      (XTrrfyyeXXov  Compl.,  Vulg. 

xxvii.  3.  Toijs  set  before  <^ikov^  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Aid., 
Col.  is  perhaps  a  little  refined. 

xxvii.  29.  iKTriaoifxev  Compl.,  Stephen  1546,  1549, 
Vulg.,  Tyndale,  Bishops'. 

I  Cor.  xi.  27.  It  does  not  appear  whence  Coverdale 
and  Geneva  1557  render  rj  ttlvt]  as  though  it  were  /cat  TTLvrj. 

xiv.  10.  Col.,  Vulg.  omit  avrwv.  See  above,  p.  68 
and  below,  p.  251. 

Phil.  iv.  12.  koI  (not  8e)  before  Ta-TruvovaOai  Compl., 
Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Stephen  1546,  1549,  Vulg.,  Tynd. 

I  Thess.  i.  9.  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Col.,  Stephen  1546, 
Vulg.,  Tynd.  read  eo-xo/xei/. 

I  Tim.  i.  2.  'Irjcrov  XpLo-Tov  Erasm.,  Aid., Tynd.  The  same 
inversion  is  made  by  Tyndale  and  the  Authorized  Version, 
apparently  through  inadvertence,  in  Rom.  vi.  3  (but  not  in 
Tynd.  1526),  11 ;  i  Cor.  i.  4;  Gal.  ii.  16  (second);  iii.  14. 

Philem.  7.  x'^P^^  Compl.,  Vulg.,  all  English:  X'^P'-^ 
Erasm.,  Stephen,  Beza. 


246     Appe}idix  E.\     Passages  wherein  the  text  of  the 

Heb.  xii.  24.  TO  "A/SeX  Erasm.  (not  his  Latin),  Aid. 
{quam  sanguis  Abel  Erasm.  Lat.,  and  English  versions  up 
to  the  Bishops' :  "that  of"  1611,  not  italicised  before  1638). 

James  ii.  24.  Aid.,  Col.,  Tynd.  end  the  verse  with  a  full 
stop,  not  with  the  interrogative  mark. 

iv.  15.     iyja-ofxiv  Stephen  1546  only.    See  below,  p.  253. 

V.  9.  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Stephen  1546,  1549, 
prefix  o  to  KpiT//9. 

2  Peter  i.  i.  2t/xcov  Compl.,  Vulg.,  all  English  except 
Tyndale  1526,  Geneva  1557  ("Simeon'"):  but  ^v/^ewv 
Erasm.,  &c. 

i.  21.     Compl.  ayiot  without  ol. 

ii.   9.      Compl.  Treipaafxiov. 

I  John  i.  5.     ayyeXta  Col.,  Vulg.,  all  English  ("  tidings"). 

JuDE  12.  vixlv  added  after  awevoixov/xevoL  by  Compl., 
Geneva  1557,  Beza's  Latin,  Bishops'. 

Rev.  i.  11.    Compl.,  Col.,  Vulg.,  Beza's  Latin,  prefix  eTrm 

to   €KKX7](TLaLS. 

vii.  2.      dvajSaivovra  CompL,  Vulg. 

vii.  14.     Compl,    Vulg.,    Tynd.    have  avras   for  o-roXas 


avT(ov. 


viii.  6.     Compl.,  Vulg.,  Tynd.  prefix  ol  to  exovr€<;. 

ix.  19.  t]  yap  l^ovcria  avTuJv  (tcSi/  t-ivn-oiv  Compl.,  Vulg.) 
ev  T(o  arofxaTL  avT(Zv  icTTLy  Kat  iv  rat?  ovpats  avTiov  Compl., 
Vulg.,  Tynd.,  against  Erasm.,  &c. 

ix.  20.  ov  fxeT€v6r](Tav  (not  ovre)  Compl.,  Erasm.  15 16, 
Tynd. 

xi.  4.  ai  prefixed  to  Suo  Xv^yLai  Compl.  [So  perhaps 
vi.  14  o  ovpavos ;  ix.  16  twv  (TTpaTevfiaToiv ;  x.  8  tov 
dyyiXov  ;  xi.  8  riy?  TroA-ecus  ',  xiii.  8  tov  iacf>ayfxevov;  XV.  3 
TOV  SovA.ov  ;  xvi.  14  tov  7ro'A.cjuov;  xvii.  8  to  OrjpLov,  all  with 
Compl.] 


Authorized  Bible  diffet's  from  Stephc?ts  and  Bezd's  joi?itIy.  247 

Rev.  xvii.  4.  rjv  (for  -7)  'n-efuft^fiX-qjiivrj  Comp].,  Vulg., 
all  English. 

xviii.  I.  aXXov  prefixed  to  ayyeXov  Conipl.,  Erasm.,  Aid., 
Vulg.,  all  English. 

xviii.  5.  iKoXXyOrjaav  (for  r/KoXovOrjaav)  Compl.  ("per- 
venerunt"  Vulg.,  "are  gone  up"  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great 
Bible,  Bishops':  "are  commen "  Geneva  1557;  "have 
reached  "  Authorized). 

xix.  14.  TO.  prefixed  to  iu  tw  ovpavQ  Compl.,  Vulg., 
Tynd. 

xix.  16.     TO  omitted  before  oVo/xa  Compl.,  Tynd.  1534. 

xix.  18.  re  added  after  iXevdipwv  Compl.  ("both" 
itahcised  1769). 

XX.  4.  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Stephen  1546,  1549 
omit  TO,  before  ;(tAta. 

xxi.  13  is  perhaps  doubtful:  koI  oltvo  (3oppa...Kal  aVo 
v6tov...ko.I  (xtto  Svuix^u  Compl.,  Vulg.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale, 
Great  Bible,  Bishops'  :  koI  oltto  (ioppa  Geneva  1557  :  koX 
OLTTo  hvaixiov  Geneva  1557,  Authorized.     Total  So. 

The  variation  in  Heb.  x.  23  "faith"  for  "hope"  is  not 
included,  since  it  is  a  mere  oversight  of  our  Translators 
{Tregelles^  Horne^  Vol.  iv.  p.  227  note).  Too  precarious 
to  be  insisted  on  are  Mark  ix.  38  where  Iv  of  Erasm.,  Aid., 
Col.,  Steph.  1546,  1549,  Vulg,,  Tyndale,  and  the  Authorized 
is  omitted  by  Compl.,  Steph.  1550,  1551,  Beza,  Geneva 
1557  ("by").  Luke  ii.  39  eaurcoi/  Compl.,  Vulg.  xx.  32 
where  Erasm.,  Tynd.  and  all  English  omit  8e.  xxii.  45 
Erasm.,  (Aid.),  Col.,  and  all  English  add  avrov  to  /xa^T^ra?. 
John  v.  5  Kttt  oK7<s>  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Vulg.  vii.  12  Compl., 
Tynd.,  all  English  omit  oe.  In  Acts  ix.  29  eXaXet  re 
might  seem  omitted,  but  "spake  boldly"  is  adopted  after 
''spake  frankly"  of  Geneva  1557,  as  adequately  rendering 
7rapp7]crLat,6ix€vo<;...lXdX€i  re. 


248     Appendix  £.]     Passages  wherein  the  text  of  the 


§  II.  Passages  wherein  the  text  of  the  Authorized 
version  agrees  with  Beza  (1589  and  1598)'  against  Stephen 
(1550). 

S.  Matt.  ix.  33.    on  omitted"  Compl.,  Erasm. 

xxi.  7.      iTreKOiOtcrav. 

xxiii.  13,  14  are  transposed  by  Compl.,  Stephen, 

S.  Mark  vi.  9.     ivSvo-aaOat  Erasm. 

vi.  29.     €v  [t(3  Steph.]  ixvr]iJ.cLio^, 

viii,  14.  ot  /xa6r)Tal  inserted  after  iTreXdOovro,  The 
italics  of  modern  Bibles  are  not  earlier  than  1638. 

viii.  24.  oTt  and  opw  omitted  in  CompL,  against  Erasm. 
and  the  earlier  English  versions. 

ix.  40.  tJ/xwi/  [v/xwr  Compl.,  Steph.,  Beza  1565,  "Vuig.] 
twice,  Erasm.,  Aid.,  all  English  except  Tyndale. 

X.  25,     SieX^eiv  (after  pa^iZoi)  with  Vulg. 

xii.  20.     ovv  added  after  eTrra;    so  Coverdale,  Geneva 

1557;^ 

xiii.  28.     tKcfivr],  not  iKcpvij. 

S.  Luke  i.  35.  ifc  aov  added  after  yewwfievov  in  Compl., 
Erasm.  (15 16  only).  Aid.,  Vulg.  (editions),  with  Coverdale 
"(of  the),"  Geneva  1557. 

ii.  22.     avTTJ's  (for  avTwr)  Compl. 

^  Although  Beza,  late  in  life,  reckoned  the  edition  of  1556,  wherein 
his  Latin  version  first  appeared,  as  the  earliest  in  which  he  revised  the 
Greek  text,  and  so  calls  that  of  1565  his  scTond,  it  is  evident  that  the 
Greek  text  of  1556  is  nearly  identical  with  that  of  Stephen  1551,  and 
that  (excluding  reprints,  some  without  authority)  his  principal  editions 
are  but  four,  those  of  1565,  1582,  1589,  and  1598. 

2  This  is  one  of  Canon  Westcott's  examples,  but  he  sees  how 
precarious  it  is.  In  fact  on  is  untranslated  in  ver.  18;  ch.  vi.  5,  16; 
X.  7,  and  numberless  other  places. 

^  All  the  English  have  "a  tomb,"  or  "a  grave,"  but  they  are  so 
careless  in  respect  of  the  definite  article,  that,  but  for  Canon  Westcott's 
authority,  this  instance  too  would  have  been  withheld.  Luke  vii.  12  ; 
X.  6;  xvi.  8;  xvii.  35;  xx.  47;  Rev.  xiii.  3  (all  given  below)  are  also 
not  a  little  doubtful. 


Authorized  Bible  agrees  7vith  Beza's  against  Stephen's.     249 

S.  Luke  ii.  25,  34,     St/xewi/  Erasm.  (not  in  ver.  34,  Beza 

1565). 

iii.  23.     'HXt  Erasm.,  Vulg.,  not  'HA.t:    HXt  Beza  1565. 

iii.  35.  "EyScp  Erasm,,  Beza  1589,  1598,  Tyndale,  Great 
Bible,  Bishops'.     See  Appendix  A,  p.  187  note  2. 

vii.   12.      iKavos  r\v. 

viii.  24.     7rap7/yy£tA.€  Erasm. 

X.  6.     o  inserted  before  vto?  {qiiispiam  Beza's  Latin). 

X.  22.      Koi  o-rpa^ets  vrpos  rov<i  fxadrjTas  cittc  omitled. 

XV.  26.  TratSwv  (without  avTov)  Compl.,  Vulg.,  Coverdale, 
Geneva  1557.     Erasm.  reads  avrov. 

xvi.  8.     Beza  alone  omits  the  second  tt}v. 

xvii.  35.     y  fxta  Erasm.,  all  English. 

xvii.  ;^6.  This  verse,  extant  in  Compl.,  the  Great  Bible 
(though  within  brackets  and  in  another  type),  and  the 
Bishops',  is  omitted  by  Erasm.,  Vulg.,  and  the  other  English 
versions. 

XX.  47.     ixaKpd,  not  fxaKpa  with  Erasm.,  Stephen. 

S.  John  iv.  37.  The  second  6  is  omitted  with  Vulg.,  Tynd., 
English,  and  Erasmus'  Latin,  against  Compl.  and  Erasmus' 
Greek. 

vi.  28.     7rotto/x€v  Compl.,  Vulg.,  Tynd.:  TroLovpev  Erasm. 

viii.  25.     o  Tt  {oTi  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph.). 

xiii.  30,  31.  ?jv  h\  vvi'  ore  ovv  {-^v  8e  iv^  ore.  Compl., 
Steph.)  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Vulg.,  Engl.' 

xvi.  2>?>'  ^^^"^^j  ^01"  which  there  is  very  little  authority,  is 
a  false  correction  by  Beza  of  a  typographical  error  of 
Stephen  1550-.  Even  Tyndale  (not  Coverdale),  the  Great 
Bible,  and  Geneva  1557  have  the  future,  after  Vulg. 


1  But  cvu  is  not  rendered  by  Tyndale  or  Coverdale,  though  they 
pause  after  vv^. 

■-^  ^^€T€,  which  Stephen  himself  corrects  into  ^x^''"^  ^t  the  end  of  his 
volume.     Erasm.,  Stephen  1546,  1549  1^'^^'^  ^X^^^' 


250     Appetidix  E?\     Passages  wherein  the  text  of  the 

S.John  xviii.  24.  ow  added  after  a-rreo-TeiXev,  so  Geneva 
1557,  Bishops'  Bible:  "And  Annas"  Tyndale,  Coverdale, 
Great  Bible,  after  Vulg. 

Acts  i.  4.  In  Beza's  editions  of  1582,  1589,  1598  (not 
1565)  fx^r  avTijiv  follows  o-waXt^o/xei'o?,  being  doubtless 
derived  from  his  own  celebrated  manuscript,  Codex  D. 
The  italics  in  "with  them''''  belong  to  1769:  no  other 
English  have  "  with." 

i.  24.  01^  cVa  (see  Beza's  note)  for  tva.  tv.  Compare 
Erasm.,  Tynd. ;  though  the  order  of  the  other  words  is 
different. 

vii.  16.  2tx€/>(-  twice  with  the  Clementine  Vulgate.  See 
above,  p.  189. 

ix.  35.  adpoiva  with  Geneva  1557  for  daa-apiava  of 
Erasm.,  aapoivdv  of  Compl.,  Stephen. 

xvii.  25.  Kol  rd  irdvra  Vulg.  So  Geneva  alone  of  pre- 
ceding English  versions,  which  have  "  every  where." 

xix.  33.  TrpojSaXXovTwv  Compl.,  Vulg.,  Erasmus'  Latin 
and  all  English  except Wicklif  and  Coverdale:  Trpo/SaXovTiov 
Erasmus'  Greek,  Stephen. 

xxii.  25.  TTpoereuai/ Compl.,  Beza  1589,  1598  (not  1565, 
1582),  Vulg.,  the  other  English;  against  Erasm.,  Stephen, 
Coverdale  Trpoireivev. 

xxiv.  13.     TrapaaTYJaat  (Erasm.,  Steph.  add  /xe)  Compl. 

xxiv.  18.  Ttve?  (Erasm.,  Steph.,  Vulg.,  Tyndale,  Cover- 
dale,  Great  Bible,  Bishops'  add  8e)  Compl. 

xxiv.  19.  eSet  Vulg.,  Geneva  1557:  but  Set  Compl., 
Erasm.,  Steph.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible,  Bishops'. 

xxv.  5.  The  Authorized  is  rather  loose,  but  seems  to 
read  droirov  after  iarlv,  as  do  Compl.,  Bishops'  after  tovt<o, 
and  Vulg.,  Tynd.,  Great  Bible,  Geneva  for  rovrw. 

xxvi.  3.  Beza  1598  (not  1565)  adds  etSo^s  after  ere: 
"because  I  know"  was  not  italicised  in  the  Authorized 
before  1769. 


Authorized  Bible  agrees  with  Beza's  against  Stephen's.     251 

Acts  xxvi.  18.     kox  for  tov  after  iTna-Tpiipai  Beza  only. 
In  the  Authorized  "and"  was  not  itaHcised  before  1769. 
xxvii.    12.      Beza  stands  alone  in  omitting  Kara  before 

xxvii.  13.  acro-ov  Erasm.  (but  his  Latin  Asson,  as  Steph. 
1550,  i55i,Vulg.,Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible,  Bishops'), 
Steph.  1546:  but  aaa-ov  Steph.  1549,  Beza  (propius  'LdXm)^ 
"nearer"  Geneva  1557. 

Rom.  vii.  6.  aTro^avoVro?,  on  no  known  authority  except 
Chrysostom  as  alleged  by  Erasmus.     So  Tomson  1576. 

viii.  II.  Sta  TOV  lvoiKovvTo<i  avrov  7Tv^vjxaro<i  Compl. :  but 
8ta  TO  ivoLKovv  avTov  Trreu/xa  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Steph.,  Vulg.,  all 
English. 

xii.  II.  KvpL(a  Compl.  (Erasm.  1516  KvpLov),  Vulg., 
Geneva  1557,  Bishops':  but  Kutpw  Erasm.  15 19  (and  Latin 
of  15 16),  1535,  Steph.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible. 

xvi.  20.  "KpLrfv  only  in  Bishops' :  omitted  in  other  English, 
after  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Vulg. 

xvi.  27.     Omits  w  with  Compl.  against  Erasm. 

1  Cor.  v.  II.  rj  -TTopvo';  Erasm.  (Latin),  Vulg.,  all  Eng- 
lish.     ^  TTopvc;  Erasm.  (Greek),  Steph. 

xiv.  10.  of  them  is  placed  in  the  type  representing  italics 
in  the  Bishops'  Bible  and  in  ours  of  161 1,  in  deference  to 
Beza,  who,  after  Colinaeus  (1534)  and  Vulg.,  would  fain 
omit  avTCiv.     See  above,  pp.  68,  245. 

XV.  31.  vjx^Tipav  CompL,  Beza  1598,  Vulg.,  Geneva 
1557:  but  TjfxeTepav  Erasm.  and  his  Latin,  Steph.  (even  Beza 
1565  against  his  own  version),  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great 
Bible,  Bishops'. 

2  Cor.  iii.  i.  y  p-y  XRV^^H-^^  Beza  1598,  Vulg.,  Cover- 
dale,  Bishops',  for  ct  /xt}  xp-  of  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph., 
Beza  1565. 


252     Appendix  E?^     Passages  ivhere'm  the  text  of  the 

2  Cor.  v.  4.  c(^'  (S  "for  that"  Compl,  Vulg.,  Geneva 
1557  ("wherein  wJiiles  we  are''')^  but  cttciStJ  Erasm.,  Steph. ; 
"for"  Tyndale,  Coverdale;  "because"  Great  Bible,  Bishops'. 

vi.  15.  BeXiaX  Compl.,  Erasm.  (Lat.),  Vulg.,  all  Eng- 
lish: BeXiap  Erasm.  (Greek),  Steph. 

vii.  12.  Trjv  GTTOv^yjv  ijixuiv  ry]v  virep  vfxwv  Compl.,  Vulg., 
Tyndale,  Geneva  1557:  but  t-^v  cnrovSrjv  vjxojv  tyjv  virkp 
-qixwv  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible,  Bishops'. 

vii.  16.  x^-^P^  ^^^  Geneva  1557:  ovv  is  omitted  by 
Compl.,  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Steph.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great 
Bible,  Bishops'. 

X.  10.  <^acr\  Beza  1582 — 98,  Vulg.,  Dr  Paris  1762, 
marg.  ^770-1  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Beza  1565. 

xi.  10.  (T^payiacTai  (for  (ppayija-eTaL)  is  a  mere  error  of 
Steph.  only. 

xiii.  4.  KOi  yap  KOi.  The  second  koI  only  in  Vulg., 
Wicklif,  the  Rhemish,  but  not  in  Tynd.,  Coverdale,  Great 
Bible,  Geneva  1557. 

Eph.  i.  3.  ev  XptcTTQ  Compl.,  Vulg.,  Geneva  1557, 
Bishops':  but  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Steph.  omit  eV  ("by  Christ," 
Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible). 

vi.  7.  0J9  follows  SovXevovT€'g  in  Compl.,  Beza's  three 
last  editions,  Vulg.,  Tyndale  1526  ("even  as  though  ye 
served  the  lorde"),  but  not  in  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Beza  1565, 
Tyndale  1534  or  the  subsequent  English  versions. 

Col.  i.  2.  KoXoo-o-ats  in  nearly  all:  KoA-ao-o-at?  Erasm., 
Steph. 

i.  24.  OS  is  set  before  vvv  xatpw  in  Beza's  last  three 
editions  (not  in  1565,  though  his  Latin  has  ^in),  Vulg.,  and 
our  Authorized  version  only  among  the  English. 

ii.  13.  vfjiiv  Vulg.,  Geneva  1557  (Bishops'):  but  tjfuv 
Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph.,  other  English  versions. 


Authorized  Bible  agrees  with  BezcCs  against  Stephen's.     253 

Col.  iv.  10.  Bapvd/Sa  Beza  1565,  1598,  no  English 
except  the  Authorized. 

I  Thess.  ii.  15.  7}ixa<i  all  except  Steph.,  which  has 
Vfxds. 

I  Tim.  i.  4.  oiKoSo/xiai/  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Vulg.,  all  English, 
but  olKovofXLav  Compl.,  Steph. 

Titus  ii.  10.     r/fxiov  all  except  Steph.,  who  reads  vfx<Zv. 

Heb.  ix.  I.  a-KTjvrj  omitted  by  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Beza  (even 
in  1565),  Vulg.  ("Testament"  Great  Bible, 'V^zw/^;//"  Geneva 
1557,  Bishops',  Authorized),  but  Compl.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale 
have  it. 

ix.  2.  ay  La  Compl.,  Erasm.  1516,  151 9,  Geneva:  ayta 
Erasm.  1522 — 1535,  Steph.,  Vulg.,  Tynd.,  Great  Bible.  See 
above,  p.  58. 

X.  ID.  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph.,  but  apparently  no  Eng- 
lish version,  prefix  ol  to  Sid. 

xii.  22,  23.  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Vulg.,  wath  all  the 
Enghsh  versions  before  the  Authorized,  and  most  modern 
editors,  join  Travyyvp^t  with  ver.  22.     See  above,  p.  86. 

James  ii.  18.     See  above,  p.  58. 

iv.  13.  "7  auptoi' Compl.,  Vulg.,  Geneva  1557  :  Kalavpiov 
Erasm.,  Steph.,  Tynd.,  Great  Bible,  Bisho^Ds'. 

iv.  13,  15.  The  four  verbs  in  ver.  13  and  TroLtjcroixev  in 
ver.  15  are  futures  in  Vulg.,  Geneva  1557  (the  Authorized, 
as  stated  above,  p.  246,  stands  alone  in  reading  with  Stephen 
1549^  t,'ijarofxev  ver.  15),  but  they  are  aorists  subjunctive 
in  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible, 
Bishops'. 

^  Canon  Westcott  considers  '^-qaofiev  a  conjecture  of  our  Translators: 
if  so,  it  was  a  happy  one,  being  the  reading  of  the  three  great  manu- 
scripts i^AB. 


2  54     Appendix  II.]     Passages  7uJierein  the  text  of  the 

James  v.  12.  cts  viroKpia-iv  of  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph., 
Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible,  was  corrected  into  viro 
Kpta-iv  by  Beza  1565  &c.,  Geneva  1557,  Bishops'  ("sub 
judicio  "  Vulg.). 

I  Pet.  i.  4.  et?  vixG.^  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Beza  1598,  Vulg., 
but  ek  ij/xas  Steph.,  Beza  1565. 

i.  8.  tSoVres  Beza  1589,  1598  (see  his  note),  Vulg.,  but 
eiSores  Compl,  Erasm.,  Col.,  Steph.,  Beza  1565. 

ii.  21.     Beza   (not    1565)    after  Compl.  prefixes  koI  to 

iii.  21.  init.  cS  Compl.,  Aid.,  Geneva  1557,  Bishops': 
but  o  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Vulg.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great 
Bible. 

2  Pet.  i.  i.     Beza  1565 — 98  adds  ry/xojv  after  o-toTT^po?. 

ii.  18.  Iv  ao-eXyeLCLL^  of  Beza  is  certainly  the  reading  of 
the  Authorized  ("through"  was  not  italicised  before  1769), 
possibly  of  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible,  Geneva  1557: 
but  the  Bishops'  ("they  entice  through  lusts  with  the  bait  of 
wantonness  of  the  flesh")  after  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph., 
rightly  omits  Iv. 

iii.  7.  Tw  avTw  Xoyo)  Vulg.,  Tyndale,  Geneva  1557,  but 
avrov  Xoyo)  CompL,  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible, 
Bishops'. 

I  John  i.  4.  x^P^  v/xwv  after  Erasm.  is  rendered  in  all 
English  versions  except  Tyndale  1534,  but  iqfxojv  in  Compl., 
Steph.,  Vulg. 

ii.  23.  o  6[xo\oyo!>v  rov  vlov  Kat  rov  rrarepa  e^et  is  the 
well-known  clause  inserted  in  italics  in  our  own  and  the 
Bishops'  versions,  to  indicate  thereby  a  doubtful  reading 
(see  above,  p.  68).  Though  not  in  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph., 
or  even  in  Beza  1565,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Geneva  1557,  it 
was  brought  in  within  brackets  and  italicised  in  the  Great 
Bible,  doubtless  from  the  Vulgate,  and  rightly  forms  a  part 


Authorized  Bible  agrees  ivifh  Beza's  agai7ist  Stephens.     255 


of  the  text  in    Beza's   last  three    editions.     Wickhf  alone 
prefaces  the  clause  by  "but." 

1  John  iii.  16.  After  dya-n-rjv  Compl.,  Beza  1589,  1598 
(not  1565)  add  rov  @eov:  "of  God"  was  italicised  as  late  as 
1769  in  the  Authorized  Bible.     See  above,  p.  69. 

V.  14.     v/xojv  is  a  mere  erratum  of  Stephen. 

2  John  i,  13.  iKXcKTij^  iKX^Kry?  Erasm.,  but  'EkAckt^, 
'EkAckt^s  Steph.,  Vulg. 

3.  vfxuju  Compl.,  all  English  except  the  Great  Bible: 
77/xcoi/  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Vulg.  (manuscripts,  not  Clementine 
edition). 

5.     y/oa<jf)co  Erasm.,  Steph.  only:  ypdcfiaiv  Compl. 

3  John  7.  avrov  after  oVo/xaro?  of  Compl.,  Vulg.  (Cle- 
mentine), English  versions,  is  omitted  in  Erasm.,  Steph., 
Vulg.  manuscripts. 

JUDE  19.  iavTovg  is  added  after  aTroSto/at^ovre?  in  Vulg., 
Beza,  and  our  own  Version,  against  Compl.,  Erasm.,  and 
the  other  English  ("makers  of  sects"):  compare  Beza's 
note. 

24.  vfjLa<;  Vulg.,  English  versions,  but  avTov<;  Compl, 
Erasm.,  Steph. 

Rev.  ii.  14.  t6v  BaXaK  Compl.,  Vulg,,  but  ^V  rw  Ba- 
AcitK  Erasm.,  Steph. ^ 

ii.  24.  Kol  rot?  Xoj.TTot?  Beza  1598,  A-otTrots  Beza  1565 
(see  his  note),  koI  Xoittois  Steph. 

iii.  I.  cTTTa  is  prefixed  to  irvcv^ara  in  Compl.,  Vulg., 
all  English  except Tynda.le  ("the  spirit");  but  not  in  Erasm., 
Steph.,  Luther. 

1  The  marked  inferiority  of  Stephen's  text  in  the  Apocalypse  will  be 
seen  to  arise  from  his  following  Erasmus  in  preference  to  the  Complu- 
tensian  throughout  that  book. 


256     Appendix  E?^     Passages  wherein  the  text  of  the 

Rev.  v.  II.  Erasm.,  Steph.  omit  koI  tjv  6  api^/xo?  avroiv 
/LtuptctSes  fxvpia^oiv  with  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible, 
Bishops':  /xvptaSe?  ixvptdSwv  is  omitted  in  Vulg.,  Geneva 
1557.  But  Compl,  and  the  Authorized  have  the  whole 
clause. 

vii.  3.  o-^payto-co/xef  Compl.,  English  versions:  cr^payt- 
^iofxev  Erasm.,  Steph. 

vii.  10.  T(J3  Oe(j)  ijfxojv  rep  KaOrj/xivio  iTrlrov  Opovov  Compl., 
Vulg.,  Geneva  1557:  but  tw  KaOrjfxivio  iin  tov  Opovov  Tov 
6eov  tJ/awi/  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible, 
Bishops'. 

viii.  6.  ot  I'xovres  Compl.,  Vulg.,  all  English  :  but 
Erasm.,  Steph.  omit  ot. 

viii.  1 1.  Tioi'  vSdroiv  after  to  rptrovis  omitted  by  Tyndale, 
Great  Bible,  Bishops';  but  not  by  Compl.,  Vulg.,  Coverdale, 
Geneva  1557. 

xi.  I.  Koi  6  ayyeXos  etorr/Kct  before  Aeycov  is  omitted  by 
Erasm.,  Steph.,  Vulg.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great  Bible: 
the  words  are  found,  less  correctly,  in  Compl.,  Geneva 
1557,  Bishops'. 

xi.  2.  eioiOeu  (before  tov  vaov)  Compl.,  Vulg.,  Geneva 
1557,  Bishops';  but  eawOev  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Tyndale,  Cover- 
dale,  Great  Bible. 

xi.  14.  Koi  180V  Beza  1598  (not  1565,  see  his  note), 
Vulg.     The  italics  in  the  Authorized  are  not  earlier  than 

xiii.  3.  eOavfxaaev  oXr]  y  yrj  CompL,  Vulg.,  all  English: 
edavfJidaOr]  eV  oXrj  rfj  yfj  Erasm.,  Steph. 

xiv.  18.  TOL'?  /3oTpras  rrj<;  dixTreXov  Compl.,  Vulg.,  Geneva 
1557,  Bishops':  but  Trj<;  dfnreXov  is  omitted  in  Erasm.  (yet 
not  in  his  Latin  of  15 16),  Steph.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale,  Great 
Bible. 

xvi.  5.     eo-o'/xevos  (for  oortos),  a  bold  variation  of  Beza's 


Authorized  Bible  agrees  with  Stephen'' s  against  Bcza's.    2 1^  7 

last  three  editions  (not  of  that  dated  1565:  see  his  note),  is 
adopted  in  the  Authorized  Version  and  the  Elzevir  text  of 

Rev.  xvi.  14.  a  cV'Tropet'eTat  Compl.,  Vulg.  (Clementine) : 
but  €K7rop€V€a6aL  of  Erasm.,  Steph,,  all  English  versions 
before  the  Authorized,  is  perhaps  preferable. 

xix.  14.  m  is  prefixed  to  iv  tw  ovpavi2  in  Compl.,  Vulg., 
all  English  versions  ("which  were"  not  being  italicised  in 
the  Authorized  before  1769) :  but  rd  is  omitted  by  Erasm., 
Steph.     Total  113. 

§  III.  Passages  in  which  the  text  of  the  Authorized 
version  agrees  with  that  of  Stephen  (1550)  against  Beza 
(1589  and  1598). 

S.  Matt.  i.  23.  KaXeVovo-t  all  English.  Beza's  KaXeVct? 
must  be  derived  from  the  edition  of  1556  containing 
Beza's  Latin  version;  it  is  countenanced  by  Codex  D  (Greek, 
but  its  Latin  version  z'oeah't),  which  in  1565  had  been  in  his 
possession  about  three  years,  and  has  little  other  support. 

XX.  15.  €t  o  6(fi0a\iji6<s  orov  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Vulg.,  English 
versions,  but  rj  (for  el)  Beza. 

S.  Mark  i.  21.  Beza  (1565 — 98)  omits  r-rjv  before  aw- 
aytoyryv. 

xvi.  1 4.  Beza  adds  Se  after  varepov. 

xvi.  20  Jin.  *A[xrjv  of  Compl.,  Vulg.  (manuscripts),  is 
omitted  by  Erasm.,  Vulg.  (Clementine),  and  all  Enghsh 
versions  except  the  Authorized. 

S.  Luke  vii.  12.  avrrj  ^v  x^pa  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Vulg.,  all 
English  except  Geneva  1557  :  but  avT-rj  xVP^  Compl. 

vii.  45.  elarjXOev  Beza  1589,  1598  (see  his  note),  Vulg. 
only,  with  the  Peshito,  but  not  the  Curetonian  Syriac. 

viii.  5.    o  ixlv  Beza,  for  o  /xev. 

ix.  15.    a7ravTe<s  Beza  1589,  1598  only. 

xii.  I.  For  Trpo^Tov,  lipocrix^Tc  of  CompL,  Erasm.,  Aid., 
s.  17 


258      Appendix  E.'\     Passages  wherem  the  text  of  the 

Col.,  Steph.  1546 — 50,  we  have  Ilpcorov  irpoKykyt-T^  in  Steph. 
155 1,  Beza,  Tynd. 

S.  John  iv.  5.  2i^x<^P  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Vulg.,  Bishops', 
but  ^tx^P  other  Enghsh. 

ix.  10.     crov  Compl, ,  Erasm.,  all  English:   o-oi  Vulg. 

xii.  17.  ore  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Steph.,  Vulg., 
Tynd.,  but  on  Beza. 

xviii.  20.  TraVres  of  Erasm.,  Vulg.,  Tyndale,  Coverdale, 
Great  Bible,  Geneva  1557,  Bishops',  is  the  true  reading: 
our  Authorized  version  derives  Travrore  from  Compl.,  Steph.: 
TvavToQ^v  seems  a  mere  conjecture  of  Beza. 

xxi.  12.  Xpto-Tos  for  Kvptos  Beza,  but  not  his  Latin 
version. 

Acts  ii.  36.  K-al  Kvptoj/  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Vulg.,  Geneva 
1557,  Bishops':  Kal,  not  rendered  by  Tyndale,  Coverdale, 
Great  Bible,  is  omitted  by  Beza. 

iv.  25.  Beza  (but  not  in  1565),  Vulg.,  insert  Tlvev/xart 
'Ay to)  before  8ta. 

iv.  27.  iv  Ty  TToAet  ravTy  is  added  after  ctt'  aA-T^^eias  only 
in  Stephen's  1546,  1549,  Beza's  last  three  editions  (not  1565), 
the  Vulgate,  and  Great  Bible,  but  there  in  other  type  and 
within  brackets. 

iv.  36.     'Iojo-tJ^  Beza  (not  1565),  Vulg. 

vii.  2.    v/xwu  Beza  1565 — 98  (but  not  his  Latin)  {ortj/xiov. 

xvi.  7.  Beza  (but  not  in  1565),  Vulg.,  add  "Irjaov  to 
Uvevjjia,  against  Erasm.,  Compl.,  Steph. 

xvi.  17.  yixiv  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Beza  1565,  all  English: 
vjXLv  Beza  1582 — 98,  Vulg.,  &c. 

xxi.  3.  ava(^aj/avTes  Erasm.,  Steph.  1550,  155 1,  perhaps 
Vulg.,  but  dvacliavivT€<s  Compl.,  Aid.,  (Col.),  Steph.  1546, 
1549,  Beza. 

xxi.  II.     Beza  alone  in  1565 — 98  (not  his  Latin)  omits 


Authorized  Bible  agrees  with  StepJieii^ s  against  Beza's.   259 

Acts  xxiv.  8.     Beza  similarly  omits  rovjiiiv. 

xxiv.  14.  rots  Trpo^Ty'rats  (without  Iv)  Compl.,  Erasm., 
Vulg.,  all  English  except  Coverdale.  The  word  "in"  before 
"the  prophets"  in  modern  Bibles  is  as  late  as  1762.  See 
above,  p.  234. 

XXV.  6.  Beza  (1582 — 98,  not  1565),  Vulg.,  Geneva,  with 
the  margin  of  the  Authorized,  insert  ov  before  TrXcLovs. 

xxvi.  8.  TL  a-maTov  Compl.,  Erasm.,  all  English,  rather 
than  Tt;  aTrto-rov  of  Beza. 

Rom.  i.  29.  K-aKta,  TTopi/cta,  irov-qpLa,  TrXeove^la  Beza  (not 
1565),  also  Vulg.,  Tynd.  partly. 

v.  17.  T(u  ei/t  for  TO)  Tov  ei/os  Beza  (not  1565),  margin 
of  Authorized. 

viii.  20.  iir  oWtSf  on  CompL,  Erasm,  1522 — 35,  Aid., 
Col.,  Steph.,  Tynd.,  but  .  eV  e/WtSt  otl  Erasm.  15 16,  15 19, 
Beza.     See  above,  p.  91. 

xi.  28.     Col.,  Beza  1582 — 98  (not  1565),  Vulg.  add  olv 

to  jJilv. 

1  CoR.   ii.   II.     etSev  twice  for  olSev  Beza  1565,  1582, 

i5S9»  1598- 

iii.  3.    -ijfjuv  for  vjxlv,  Beza  1589,  1598  (not  Beza's  Latin). 

vii.  29.  o  Katpo$  (ruvecrraA/xeVos'  to  Xolttov  Icttlv  (omit- 
ting OTL  before  6  i<aipos)  Compl,  Erasm.,  Vulg.,  Tyndale, 
Coverdale,  Great  Bible  (the  Bishops'  renders  6tl  "  because"): 
but  otl  6  Ktttpos  avvedTaXfxivos  to  Xolttov  Icttlv'  Geneva  1557 
with  Beza. 

xi.  22,  -u/xas  €v  TouTO);  ovk  eVati/w  Compl.,  Geneva  1557: 
but  v/xas;  Iv  TovTio  ovk  liraLvoi  Erasm.,  Beza,  Tyndale,  Cover- 
dale,  Great  Bible,  Bishops'. 

2  Cor.  i.  6.  Beza  (not  1565)  sets  €tre  TrapaKaXovixeOa, 
VTrep  Trj<i  v/xiZv  TrapaKXtjaews  (omitting  the  second  Koi  aoiTr]- 
ptas)  before  ttJs  evepyovfxivrjs. 

17 — 2 


26o      Appendix  J^.]     Passages  7vhereiii  the  text  of  the 

2  Cor.  ii.  5.  Beza  alone,  and  that  not  in  his  Latin, 
punctuates  ha  ixrj  iinlSapuj  as  if  the  clause  were  parenthetic. 

iii.  14.  o  Tt  Erasm.  15 19,  Beza  1565,  all  English:  but 
on  Compl.,  Erasm.  15 16,  Beza  1598,  Vulg.  (Compl.,  Erasm. 
have  in  their  Latin  quod). 

viii.  24,  K-at  ets  tt/doo-cottoi'  Erasm.,  Beza  1565,  Cover  dale, 
with  the  Authorized:  kox  is  omitted  in  Compl.,  Beza's  last 
three  editions,  Vulg.,  and  the  other  English  versions. 

X.  6.     77  before  •uVaKo-^  omitted  by  Steph.  155 1,  Beza. 

xi.  I.  TT^  dc()po(Tvvr)  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Aid.,  all  our  English : 
TL  r7J<i  d(}ipo(rvvy]<;  Beza,  Vulg.  ("some  little  of  my  folly" 
Rhemish), 

Gal.  iv.  17.  The  second  vixd<;  becomes  rj/ia?  in  Beza 
(see  his  note)  and  in  the  margin  of  the  Authorized  Bible. 

Phil.  i.  23.  ttoXAw  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Vulg.,  all  English: 
Beza,  &c.  add  yap. 

ii.  24.  Beza  (not  1565),  Vulg.,  add  Trpo?  v/xas  to  iXev- 
co/Aat. 

iii.  20.  Beza  1589,  1598  (not  1565,  see  his  note),  Vulg., 
Tynd.  have  8e  for  yap  with  the  Syriac. 

CoL.  i.  2.    Beza  (not  1565),  Vulg.,  add  'lyjcrov  to  Xptcrro). 

I  Thess.  i.  4.  The  comma  stands  after  yyaTrrjiJLivot  in 
the  later  editions  of  Erasm.,  in  Stephen,  and  in  Beza  1565, 
1582  with  the  Authorized,  but  after  @eov  in  Compl,  Beza 
1589,  1598,  and  Tynd. 

1  Tim.  vi.  15.     Beza  (not  1565)  reads  6V  for  -^v. 

2  Tim.  ii.  22.  Beza  and  his  Latin  version  read  Xpia-rov 
for  Krptoi'. 

Titus  ii.  7.  dcliOapaLav  of  Compl.,  Bishops',  Autho- 
rized, is  omitted  by  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Vulg.,  and  the  other 
English  versions. 

Heb.  ix.  28.  Beza  (not  1565)  with  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Aid., 
Col,  Steph.  1546,  1549,  Vulg.,  Tynd.  adds  koL  to  outco. 


Authorized  Bible  agrees  with  Stephe?i's  against  Beza^s.   261 

Heb.  X.  2.  0VK0.V  l-Kav<ja.vro  7rpoacfi€po/x€vaLj  Erasm.,  Aid., 
Col,  Vulg.  MSS.,  Tyndale,  Great  Bible,  Geneva  1557,  Beza 
1565,  Bishops':  av  iTravcravTO  Trpocrfjiepofxevai,  Compl.,  Beza, 
Clementine  Vulg.,  Coverdale. 

James  iii.  6.  To  r/ys  yei^eo-ews  Beza  1589,  1598,  Vulg. 
add  yiMoiv. 

1  Pet.  v.  10.  Compl,  Beza  1589,  159S  read  vfxa^  after 
KaXcVa?,  but  Erasm.,  Aid.,  Col.,  Steph.,  Beza  1565,  1582, 
Vulg.,  have  tjfxa.?. 

2  John  9.  Beza  (1565—98)  omits  rfj  before  StSaxi?. 
Similarly 

Rev.  ii.  23.     Beza  (1565 — 98)  omits  6  before  ipewaiv. 
vi.   12.      The   same   editions,  after  Vulg.,  add   oXrj   to 

xxii.  20.  For  the  second  vat  Beza  has  koI  and  his  Latin 
igitiir  (see  his  note).     Total  59. 

The  following  variations  of  the  Greek  could  scarcely  be 
represented  in  our  English  versions : 

Acts  vii.  26  &  XV.  32.  T€  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph.  h\ 
Beza. 

xix.  27.  fxeXXetv  Se  Compl.,  Erasm.  15 16,  Steph.,  but 
fxiWetv  re  Erasm.  15 19,  Beza. 

1  Cor.  vii.  5.  G-vvepxqo-Qe  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Beza 
1565,  1589:  avvcpx^aOe  Beza.  1598  (note  and  punctuation, 
not  text),  Vulg.,  Tyndale  1534  (perhaps  also  1526),  Great 
Bible,  Geneva  1557,  Bishops'. 

2  Thess.  ii.  4.  "  all  that  is  called  God  "  is  the  rendering 
of  all  our  versions  from  Tyndale  downwards,  or  it  might  be 
thought  to  represent  Beza's  conjectural  reading  nav  to  for 
iravTa. 


262      Appendix  E?\     Passages  whe7'ein  the  text  of  the 

Rev.  iv.  10.  Since  all  read  Trco-owrat,  no  stress  can  be 
laid  in  the  variation  between  the  present  and  future  in  the 
verbs  that  follow. 

X.  7.  reXeo-Ofj  Compl.,  Erasm.,  Steph.,  Beza  1565  :  "shall 
be  finished  "  other  EngHsh  versions  after  Vulg.  But  Beza's 
last  three  editions  have  reXeaOrjcreTaL,  which  ill  suits  "should 
be  finished"  of  the  Authorized. 


It  may  be  useful  to  subjoin  a  list,  probably  quite  an 
incomplete  one,  of  places  in  which  the  Translators  of  161 1 
have  apparently  followed  the  Latin  Vulgate,  mostly  after 
the  example  of  Tyndale,  sometimes  of  Versions  later  than 
his,  especially  of  the  Rhemish  of  1582,  whereof  the  Epistle 
of  the  Translators  to  the  Reader  speaks  so  contemptuously 
(see  below,  p.  302).  It  is  probable  that  at  least  some  of 
the  passages  collected  in  the  first  section  of  the  present 
Appendix,  wherein  the  text  of  the  Authorized  Version  is 
supported  by  Compl.,  Vulg.  only,  were  derived  from  the 
Vulgate  rather  than  from  the  Complutensian.  In  i  Cor. 
xiv.  10;  I  John  i.  5,  where  Colinceus  (1534)  and  the  Vulgate 
alone  favour  the  rendering  of  161 1,  the  Vulgate  is  almost 
certainly  their  authority,  not  Colinasus. 

Matt.  xii.  24,  27;  Mark  iii.  22;  Luke  xi.  15,  18,  19, 
Beelzebub.  So  Tynd.  (So  also  Compl.  in  Matt.  x.  25).  Mark 
xiii.  370  quod.  xiv.  43  om.  idv.  So  Tynd.  Luke  i.  35  ?ias- 
cetm-.  So  Tynd.  i.  49  //.cyaAa  magna.  So  Tynd.  xx.  35 
habebiintur.  So  Tynd.  xxiii.  34  sortes:  but  sortem  Matt, 
xxvii.  35;  Mark  xv.  24;  John  xix.  24,  the  English  versions 
having  lots  in  all  the  four  places,  save  that  Wickhf  alone 
keeps  up  the  distinction  of  Vulg.  xxiii.  46.  -n-aparW efxai  coin- 
tnendo.  So  Tynd.  John  vii.  9  07n.  Se.  So  Tynd.  x.  16  7i7iiim 
ovile  Vulg.  So  Great  Bible  and  Geneva  1557.  xii.  26  07n. 
Ktti   after  eorat.     So  Rhemish  Version   1582.     xviii.   i  rov 


Authorized  Bible  seems  to  follow  the  Latin  Vulgate.    263 

KeSpoiV,  Cedron.  So  Tynd.  Acts  ii.  22  approbatum.  SoTynd. 
iv.  32  cor  unnm  Vulg.  Clcmcjitine.    So  Tynd.     vi.  3  KaraaT-rj- 
o-co/xei/  coiistituamus.  So  Tynd.     vii.   26  o-ui/T/'/VXao-crei/   recon- 
ciliabat.    So  Tynd.     vii.  44  <?;;/.  o:  loquens.  So  Tynd.     x,  20 
itaque  (aA.\a,).  So  Tynd.     xiii.    i  Sifneon  {%lixwv  Er. :  Simoii 
Vulg.  in  ch.  XV.  14).    xiii.  15  ct  ns  si  quis.    So  Tynd.    xvii.  30 
/^///V/i"  ignora?ilicc.  So  Tynd.  xix.  20  ©eoC  Dei  Vulg.  Clementine. 
So  Tynd.    xxiii.  15  aliquid  certius  {pm.  to).   So  Tynd.    xxiv. 
25  tremef actus  Vulg.  Clement i7te.  So  Tynd.      xxvi.  6  Trar epa? 
■qfxQv patres  7iostros.  So  Tynd.      Rom.  xiv.  2  alius  eni?n.    So 
Rhemish  1582.     xvi.  4  suas  cervices.  SoTynd.     i  Cor.  xiii. 
\  velut ois sonans.  SoTynd.  xvi.  2-^  domini nostri.  So  Geneva 
1557.     Gal.  iv.  15  text:  ubi.  So  Rhemish  1582.     Eph.  vi. 
24  om.  'Aixriv.    Vulg.  MSS.  (A.  V.  161 1):  not  Vulg.  Clemen- 
tine (A.  V.  1616).      Phil.  ii.  21   'I-jycroi)  Xpiarov  JesiL  Christi. 
So  Tynd.     Col.  i.  4  quam  habctis.    So  Tynd.  nearly,     i.  24. 
qui  nunc.  So  Rhemish  1582.       i  Thess.  ii.  12  qui  vocavit. 
So  Tynd.     ii.   13  ov^  oJs  \6yov  non  ut  verbum.    So  Tynd. 
ii.  16  eniju.  So  Tynd.     iv.  i  ut  quemadmodum.  So  Rhemish 
1582.      I  Tim.  i.   17  i7nniortali.  So  Tynd.    iii.   15  oporteat 
te.  So  Tynd.      iv.   15  om.  iv\    ma?iifesfus  sit  omnibus  (A.  V. 
tna?'g.  in  all  things).     2  Tim.  i.  18  SLrjKovrjo-e  jxoi  ministravit 
viihi  Vulg.    Clementine.    So  Tynd.      James  iii.   14  co7-dibus 
vestris.  So  Tynd.      i  Pet.  ii.  13  0771.  ovv.  So  Tynd.     i  John 
iii.  20  0771.  on  s€cu7id.  So  Tynd.     v.  8  hi  t7'es  Vulg.   Cle77ie7i- 
ti7ie.  So  Tynd-     2  John  3  eo-rw  j-//.    So  Tynd.     Rev.  xiii.  10 
qui  i7i    captivitatc77i   duxe7'it,   in   captivitate77i    vadet.     Vulg. 
Cle77ienti7ie.  So  Tynd.      xvi.   1 1    07n.    Ik   secimd.  So   Tynd. 
xvii.  9  et  hie.  So  Tynd.    xviii.   23  ^cLvri  lucebit.  So  Geneva 
1557- 


NOTE   ON   THE   SYNOD    OF   DORT 
(See  above,  p.  12  note.) 

In  that  dreary  folio  Acta  Synodi  Nationalis...Dordecti 
hahitae  (1620)  we  read  (pp.  19,  20)  that  the  seventh  Session 
of  the  Synod  was  spent  in  considering  a  written  Report 
from  the  English  Delegates  (Carleton,  Bp  of  LlandafT,  the 
illustrious  Joseph  Hall,  afterwards  Bp  of  Norwich,  Dr 
Davenant,  afterwards  Bp  of  Salisbury,  and  Dr  Ward,  Master 
of  Sidney  Sussex  College,  1609 — 43^)  on  the  method  em- 
ployed in  executing  our  Authorized  Bible,  wherein  are  made 
the  following  statements :  ''  Post  peractum  a  singulis  pen- 
sum,  ex  hisce  omnibus  duodecim  selecti  viri  in  unum  locum 
convocati  integrum  opus  recognoverunt  ac  recensuerunt." 
"  Postremo,  Reverendissimus  Episcopus  Wintoniensis,  Bilso- 
nus,  una  cum  Doctore  Smitho,  nunc  Episcopo  Glocestriensi, 
viro  eximio  et  ab  initio  in  toto  hoc  opere  versatissimo, 
omnibus  mature  pensitatis  et  examinatis,  extremam  manum 
huic  operi  imposuerunt." 

None  of  these  Delegates  had  any  share  in  the  Trans- 
lation of  161 1,  but  as  seven  years  had  elapsed  since  its 
publication,  it  is  wonderful  that  they  had  not  found  out  by 
that  time  how  very  carelessly  the  last  revise  had  been  carried 
through  the  press. 

^  Dr  Ward  was  one  of  the  revisers  of  the  Cambridge  Bible  of  1638  : 
see  above,  p.  2 2. 


THE 

TRANSLATORS  TO  THE  READER. 


THE 

TRANSLATORS   TO   THE    READER'. 

(See  above,  p.  39.) 


ZEAL  to  promote  the  common  good,  whether  it  be  The  best 
,  ,       .    .  ,   .  ...  things  liave 

by  devising  any  thing  ourselves,  or  revising  that  been  caium- 

which  hath  been  laboured  by  others,  deserveth  cer- 
tainly much  respect  and  esteem,  but  yet  findeth  but 
cold  entertainment  in  the  world.  It  is  welcomed 
with  suspicion  instead  of  love,  and  with  emulation  in- 
stead of  thanks  :  and  if  there  be  any  hole  left  for 
cavil  to  enter,  (and  cavil,  if  it  do  not  find  a  hole,  will 
make  one)  it  is  sure  to  be  misconstrued,  and  in 
danger  to  be  condemned.  This  will  easily  be  granted 
by  as  many  as  know  story,  or  have  any  experience. 
For  was  there  ever  any  thing  projected,  that  savoured 
any  way  of  newness  or  renewing,  but  the  same  en- 
dured many  a  storm  of  gainsaying  or  opposition  ? 
A  man  would  think  that  civility,  wholesome  laws, 
learning   and   eloquence,   synods,  and  Church-main- 

^  The  text  of  the  original  edition  has  been  restored,  except 
where  later  books  have  corrected  manifest  errors.  The  marginal 
references  set  within  brackets  (chiefly  derived  from  Migne's 
Patrolugia),  as  also  the  short  foot-notes,  are  added  in  the  present 
work:  the  rest  are  in  the  Bible  of  161 1.  The  quotations  from 
Scripture  are  somewhat  too  loosely  given,  but  in  test  passages 
(e.g.  I  Kin.  xii.  4;  Neh.  iv.  2,  3;  i  Cor.  xiv.  11)  the  writer 
comes  very  near  the  Genevan  version  of  1560:  sometimes  he 
uses  the  Authorized,  never  the  Bishops'  Bible. 


2  58  The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 

tenance,   (that  we  speak  of  no  more  things  of  this 
0  e^w  i3e'\ov?.  kind)  should  be  as  safe  as  a  sanctuary,  and  Hout  of 

fSteph.   The-  '  i  i  t/-  i        i        i 

j,r«r.,/3e-  shot,  as  they  say,  that  no  man  would  lift  up  the  heel, 
no,  nor  dog  move  his  tongue  against  the  motioners  of 
them.  For  by  the  first  we  are  distinguished  from 
brute  beasts  led  with  sensuality :  by  the  second  we 
are  bridled  and  restrained  from  outrageous  behaviour, 
and  from  doing  of  injuries,  whether  by  fraud  or  by 
violence  :  by  the  third  we  are  enabled  to  inform  and 
reform  others  by  the  light  and  feeling  that  we  have 
attained  unto  ourselves  :  briefly,  by  the  fourth,  being 
brought  together  to  a  parle  face  to  face,  we  sooner 
compose  our  differences  than  by  writings,  which  are 
endless  :  and  lastly,  that  the  Church  be  sufficiently 
provided  for  is  so  agreeable  to  good  reason  and 
conscience,  that  those  mothers  are  holden  to  be  less 
cruel,  that  kill  their  children  as  soon  as  they  are  born, 
than  those  nursing  fathers  and  mothers  (wheresoever 
they  be)  that  withdraw  from  them  who  hang  upon 
their  breasts  (and  upon  whose  breasts  again  them- 
selves do  hang  to  receive  the  spiritual  and  sincere 
milk  of  the  word)  livelihood  and  support  fit  for  their 
estates.  Thus  it  is  apparent,  that  these  things  which 
we  speak  of  are  of  most  necessary  use,  and  therefore 
that  none,  either  without  absurdity  can  speak  against 
them,  or  without  note  of  wickedness  can  spurn  against 
them. 

Anacharsis         Yct   for  all  that,   the  learned  know  that  certain 

26]!^/}/^  '  worthy  men  have  been  brought  to  untimely  death  for 
none   other  fault,    but   for   seeking   to   reduce   their 

Locri.  countrymen  to  good  order  and  discipline  :  and  that  in 

,■  some   Commonweals   it   was  made   a   capital  crime, 

(once    to    motion  the  making   of  a  new  law  for  the 
abrogating   of  an    old,  though   the  same  were  most 


The  Translators  to  tlic  Reader.  269 


pernicious  :  And  that  certain,  which  would  be  count-  Cato  the 

J  Ml  r       ^  r->  i  elder. 

ed   pillars  of  the  State,  and  patterns   of  virtue  and 
prudence,  could  not  be  brought  for  a  long  time  to 
give   way  to  good   letters  and    refined    speech;  but 
bare  themselves  as  averse  from  them,  as  from  rocks 
or  boxes  of  poison  :  And   fourthly,  that  he  was  no  Gregory  the 
babe,  but  a  great  clerk,  that  gave  forth,  (and  in  writing  Geo'Aoyo?^ 
to  remain  to  posterity)  in  passion  peradventurc,  but  "zus  "ix^'^^'^v 
yet  he  gave  forth,   That  he  had  not  seen  any  profit  WA^ee?  ypl'- 
to  come  by  any  synod  or  meeting  of  the  Clergy,  but  t^^lraV^K- 
rather    the    contrary:    And    lastly,    against    Church- JXcvZ'" 
maintenance  and  allowance,  in  such  sort  as  the  am-  "^'^Jjfj'^""^' 
bassadors  and  messengers  of  the  great  King  of  kings  '^^'^"^  ^Z^"" 
should  be  furnished,  it  is  not  unknown  what  a  fiction  ^^Se  auo-iv 

KaKdiV  IJ.o\- 

or  fable  (so  it  is  esteemed,  and  for  no  better  by  the  ^°r  ^<^w- 
reporter  himself,  though  superstitious)  was  devised  :  ^po<T0rJKr,u 

.  Epist.  130. 

namely,    That   at   such   time   as    the  professors  and  Compare 
teachers  of  Christianity  in  the  Church  of  Rome,  then  124.] 
a  true  Church,  were  liberally  endowed,  a  voice  for-  (cT^wJca 
sooth  was  heard  from  heaven,  saying,  Now  is  poison  p^loj/^''^' 
poured   down  into  the  Church,  &c.     Thus  not  only 
as  oft  as  we  speak,  as  one  saith,  but  also  as  oft  as  we 
do  any  thing  of  note  or  consequence,  we  subject  our- 
selves to  every  one's  censure,  and  happy  is  he  that  is 
least  tossed  upon  tongues  ;  for  utterly  to  escape  the 
snatch  of  them  it  is  impossible.     If  any  man  conceit 
that  this  is  the  lot  and  portion   of  the  meaner  sort 
only,  and  that  princes  are  privileged  by  their  high 

estate,  he  is  deceived.     As  t/ie  szvord  devoureth  as  well  2  Sam.  n. 

25. 
one  as  another^  as  it  is  in  Samuel;  nay,  as  the  great 

commander  charged  his   soldiers  in  a  certain  battle 

to  strike  at  no  part  of  the  enemy,  but  at  the  face ; 

and  as  the  king  of  Syria  commanded  his  chief  captains 

to  fight  neither  tvith  small  nor  great,  save  only  agai?tst  i  Kin.  22. 31. 


'70  The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


the  khig  of  Israel:  so  it  is  too  true,  that  envy  striketh 
most   spitefully   at  the  fairest,    and   at   the   chiefest. 
David  was  a  worthy  prince,  and  no  man  to  be  com- 
pared to  him  for  his  first  deeds ;  and  yet  for  as  worthy 
2  Sam.  6.  i5.  an  act  as  ever  he  did,  even  for  bringing  back  the  ark 
of  God  in  solemnity,  he  was  scorned  and  scoffed  at 
by  his  own  wife.     Solomon  was  greater  than  David, 
though  not  in  virtue,  yet  in  power ;  and  by  his  power 
and  wisdom  he  built  a  temple  to  the  Lord,  such  a  one 
as  was  the  glory  of  the  land  of  Israel,  and  the  wonder 
of  the  whole  world.     But  was  that  his  magnificence 
liked  of  by  all  ?     We  doubt  of  it.     Otherwise  why  do 
they  lay  it  in  his   son's  dish,  and  call  unto  him  for 
to-eitrax-       fcaslng  of  the  burden?     Make,  say  they,  the  grievous 
TAesanr.f  '  Servitude  of  thy  father,  and  his  sore  yoke,  lighter,     Be- 
6i*6]!  ''  ^'     like   he   had   charged    them   with  some   levies,    and 
I  Km.  12. 4-  troubled   them  with  some  carriages ;  hereupon  they 
raise  up  a  tragedy,  and  wish  in  their  heart  the  temple 
had  never  been  built.     So  hard  a  thing  it  is  to  please 
all,  even  when  we  please  God  best,  and  do  seek  to 
approve  ourselves  to  every  one's  conscience. 
The  highest         If  wc  will  dcsceud  to  later  times,  we  shall  find 
haveTSr    many  the  like  examples  of  such  kind,  or  rather  un- 
c  ci"LT     kind,    acceptance.     The   first   Roman    Emperor   did 
Plutarch      j^evcr  do  a  more  pleasing  deed  to  the  learned,  nor 

[caj>.  59].  . 

more  profitable  to  posterity,  for  conserving  the  record 
of  times  in  true  supputation,  than  when  he  corrected 
the  Calendar,  and  ordered  the  year  according  to  the 
course  of  the  sun  :  and  yet  this  w\as  imputed  to  him 
for  novelty  and  arrogancy,  and  procured  to  him  great 
Constantinc  obloquy.  So  the  first  Christened  Emperor,  (at  the 
—35]^°^  leastwise,  that  openly  professed  the  faith  himself,  and 
allowed  others  to  do  the  like)  for  strengthening  the 
empire   at  his  great  charges,  and   providing  for  the 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  271 


Church,  as  he  did,  got  for  his  labour  the  name  Pii-  Aurd.  vkt. 

[cap.  XLI, 

ptllus^  as  who  would  say,  a  wasteful  Prince,  that  had  i6j. 
need  of  a  guardian  or  overseer.     So  the  best  Chris-  rhcodosius 

L'^-D-  379 

tened  Emperor,  for  the  love  that  he  bare  unto  peace,  —95]- 
thereby  to  enrich  both  himself  and  his  subjects,  and 
because  he  did  not  seek  war,  but  fmd  it,  was  judged  ^-osimui 
to  be  no  man  at  arms,  (though  in  deed  he  excelled  in  ^^^.^  aVetTreri' 

111  t'-yi/coxei  /cat 

feats  of  chivalry,  and  shewed  so  much  when  he  was  Maxa^?,  ii^'- 
provoked)  and  condemned  for  giving  himself  to  his 
ease,  and  to   his   pleasure.     To   be  short,  the  most 
learned  Emperor  of  former  times,    (at  the  least,  the  J'tstmian 

.   .  [a.u.  527 

greatest  politician)  what  thanks  had  he  for  cutting  off  — ^sJ- 
the  superfluities  of  the  laws,  and  digesting  them  into 
some   order  and  method?     This,  that  he  hath  been 
blotted  by  some  to  be  an  Epitomist,  that  is,  one  that 
extinguished   worthy   whole    volumes,    to    bring   his 
abridgments  into  request.     This  is  the  measure  that 
hath  been   rendered  to    excellent  Princes  in  former 
times,  even,  cum  bciic  facercnt^  male  audi?'e,  for  their 
good  deeds  to   be  evil  spoken  of.     Neither  is  there 
any  likelihood  that  envy  and  malignity  died  and  were 
buried  with  the  ancient.    No,  no,  the  reproof  of  Moses 
taketh  hold  of  most  ages.  You  a?^e  risen  np  in  your  Numb.  32. 
fathers'  stead,  an  increase  of  sinful  men.      What  is  that  Eccies.  i.  9. 
that  hath  been  done?    that  which  shall  be  done:  and 
there  is  no  new  thing  under  the  sun,  saith  the  wise 
man.     And  St.  Stephen,  As  your  fathers  did,  so  do  ye.  Acts  7. 51. 
This,  and  more  to  this  purpose,  his  Majesty  that  now  HjsMajes- 
reigneth  (and  long  and  loner  may  he  reiern,  and  his  stancy,  not- 

°      .  ^  °  to  /  t.    '  withstanding 

offsprinsr  for  ever,  Himself  and  children  and  children's  caiumnia- 

'      ,  ,.  tion,  forthe 

children  ahuays'^)  knew  fall  w^ell,  accordmg   to   the  surveyor  the 

•     1  •  1-1/^1  11  English 

smgular  wisdom  given  unto  him  by  God,  and  the  rare  translations. 
learning  and  experience  that  he  hath  attained  unto ;  ^rc^zseV^ar' 
namely,  that  whosoever  attempteth  any  thing  for  the  joreTaisli^ 


272  The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 

[Compare      publick,  (specially  if  it  pertain  to  religion,  and  to  the 

Iliad,  xx.     opening  and  clearing  of  the  word  of  God)  the  same 

setteth  himself  upon  a  stage  to  be  gloated  upon  by 

every  evil  eye  ;  yea,  he  casteth  himself  headlong  upon 

pikes,  to  be  gored  by  every  sharp  tongue.     For  he 

that  meddleth  with  men's  religion  in  any  part  meddleth 

with  their  custom,  nay,  with  their  freehold ;  and  though 

they  find  no  content  in  that  which  they  have,  yet  they 

cannot  abide  to  hear   of  altering.     Notwithstanding 

Snidas.        his  royal  heart  was  not  daunted  or  discouraged  for 

avSptagaVe-  tliis   or  that  colour,   but  stood  resolute,  as  a  statue 

pLTpiTTTOi  KCU      .  7   7  7  -7  7  7- 

uKfxui'dyyjXa-  tmmovcable,  and  an   anvU  7iot  easy  to  be  beaten  into 
plates.,  as  one  saith ;   he  knew  who  had  chosen  hmi 
to  be  a  soldier,  or  rather  a  captain ;  and  being  assured 
that  the  course  which  he  intended  made  much  for 
the  glory  of  God,  and  the  building  up  of  his  Church, 
he  would  not  suffer  it  to  be  broken  off  for  whatsoever 
speeches  or  practices.     It  doth  certainly  belong  unto 
kings,  yea,   it   doth   specially  belong   unto   them,  to 
have  care  of  religion,  yea,  to  know  it  aright,  yea,  to 
profess  it  zealously,  yea,  to  promote  it  to  the  utter- 
most of  their  power.      This  is  their  glory  before  all 
nations  which  mean  well,   and  this  will   bring   unto 
them  a  far  most  excellent  weight  of  glory  in  the  day 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.     For  the  Scripture  saith  not  in 
I  Sam.  2. 30.  vain,    The?n  that  honour  me  I  will  honour :  neither 
0eoo-e/3eia.     was  it  a  vain  word  that  Ensebius  delivered  long  ago, 
{Hist.  Ecd.^  That  piety  towards  God  was  the  weapon,  and  the  only 
w.  lo.ca  .  .  ^ygg^pQj^^  ^Yia.t  both  preserved  Constantinc^ s  person,  and 
avenged  him  of  his  enemies. 


'& 


The  praise  of        But  now  what  pictv  without  truth?    What  truth, 

the  Holy  . 

Scriptures,  what  saviug  truth,  without  the  word  of  God?  What 
word  of  God,  whereof  we  may  be  sure,  without  the 
Scripture?    The   Scriptures   we   are   commanded   to 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  273 


search.  John  5.  39.  Isaiah  8.  20.  They  are  com- 
mended that  searched  and  studied  them.  Acts  17.  11. 
and  8.  28,  29.  They  are  reproved  that  were  unskilful 
in  them,  or  slow  to  believe  them,  Matth.  22.  29. 
Luke  24.  25.  They  can  make  us  wise  unto  salvation. 
2  Tim.  3.  15.  If  we  be  ignorant,  they  will  instruct 
us  ;  if  out  of  the  way,  they  will  bring  us  home ;  if 
out  of  order,  they  will  reform  us ;  if  in  heaviness, 
comfort  us ;  if  dull,  quicken  us ;  if  cold,  inflame  us. 
Tolle.  les'e:  tolle.  les:e;  Take  up  and  read,  take  up  and  ^-  -"^l^sust 

'      <^    '  >      ^    '  1  '  J-    ^  Confess,  lib. 

read  the  Scriptures,  (for  unto  them  was  the  direction)  8.  cap.  12. 
it  was  said  unto  S.  Augustine  by  a  supernatural  voice. 
Whatsoever  is  in  the  Scriptures.,  believe  me.,  saith  the  '^■-  August. 

De  utilit. 

same  S.  Augusti?te,  is  high  and  divine;  there  is  verily  credejuH, 
truth.,  and  a  doctrine  most  fit  for  the  refreshing  and 
reneuiitig  of  men^s  mi?ids,  and  truly  so  tempered.,  that 
every  07ie  may  draiv  from  thence  that  which  is  sufficient 
for  him,  if  he  come  to  draw  with  a  devout  and  pious 
mind,  as  true  religio?i  requireth.  Thus  St.  Augustine. 
And  S.  Hierome,  Ama  Scripturas,  et  amabit  te  sapientia,  ^^-  Hiero- 

.  .  nyni.  ad  De- 

&c.     Love  the  Scriptures,  and  wisdom  will  love  thee,  ^netriad. 

[cap.  20]. 

And  S.  Cyrill  against  Juliaii,  Even  boys  that  are  bred  s.  Cyriii.  f 
up  in  the  Scriptures,  become  most   religious,  &c.     But  ^foiul^ 
what  mention  we  three  or  four  uses  of  the  Scripture,  '((i^^ii^"" 
whereas  whatsoever  is  to  be   believed,  or   practised,  f^'^oz'^"]'. 
or  hoped  for,  is  contained  in  them  ?  or  three  or  four  ^eepa^MeVa 
sentences  of  the  Fathers,  since  whosoever  is  worthy  vf'j'O'-To  ^v 

"^     ivOv;  TUiV  OTt 

the  name  of  a  Father,  from  Christ's  time  downward,  MaAio-ra 

0eo<fn\ecrTa.- 

hath  likewise  written  not  only  of  the  riches,  but  also  ■^^^l 
of  the  perfection  of  the  Scripture  ?   /  adore  the  fulness  adlers. 
of  the  Scripture,  saith  Tertullian  against  Hermogenes.  22].'^"''' 
And  again,  to  Apelles  a  heretick  of  the  like  stamp  he  ^^''^«^-  De 
saith,  /  do  ?iot  admit  that  which  thou  bringest  in  (or  Christ. 
concludest)  of  thine  own  (head  or  store,  de  tuo)  v/ith- 
s.  18 


2  74  The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 

Justin.        out  Scripture.     So  Saint  Justin  Martyr  before  him ; 

TrporpeTTT. 

Trpbs 'EAA-jji/.    We  must  know  by  all  means  (saith  he)  that  it  is  7iot 

\cap.  38^«.]  laivful  (or  possible)  to  learn  (any  thing)  of  God  or  of 

right  piety.,  save  only  ojit  of  the  Prophets,  ivho  teach  us 

s.  Basil.      by  divine  inspiration.     So  Saint  Basil  after  Tertullian, 

[cap.  I,  /.      //  is  a  manifest  falling  away  from  the  faith.,  and  a 

'Yirep-q^avia-:  fault  of  presumptiou,  either  to  reject  any  of  those  things 

KaTityopta.     ^^^^^  ^^^  written,  or  to  bring  in  (upon  the  head  of  them, 

eTTcto-aycti/)   any  of  those  things  that  are  not  written. 

We  omit  to  cite  to  the  same  effect  S.  Cyrill,  Bishop 

oi  Jerusalem  in  his  4.  Cateches.  Saint  Hierome  against 

Helvidius,  Saint  Augustine  in  his  third  book  against 

the  letters  of  Petilian,  and  in  very  many  other  places 

of  his  works.     Also  we  forbear  to   descend  to  latter 

Fathers,  because  we  will  not  weary  the  reader.     The 

Scriptures  then  being  acknowledged  to  be  so  full  and 

so  perfect,  how  can  we  excuse  ourselves  of  negligence, 

if  we  do  not  study  them?  of  curiosity,  if  we  be  not 

Eipeo-iw'vjj     content  with    them  ?    Men    talk   much    of  etpco-twVry, 

KaiuLola';'''    how  many  sweet  and  goodly  things  it  had   hanging 

^e'I!X'  ITtv-  on   it ;    of  the    Philosopher's    stone,   that   it   turneth 

ov,'&a^  "'    copper   into  gold;    of   Cornu-copia,   that   it    had   all 

bough^^       things  necessary  for  food  in  it ;  of  Panaces  the  herb, 

TboSHvith    ^^^^  i^  ^^^s  good  for  all   diseases ;    of  Catholicon  the 

u^ondld^"^^' ^^^^§'   ^^^^^  ^^  ^^  instead  of  all  "purges;    of   Vulcan's 

^SSd      armour,  that  it  was  an  armour  of  proof  against   all 

and  honey  in  thrusts  and  all  blows,   6-r.      Well,  that  which    they 

a  pot,  and  '  '  •' 

c"^'-  falsely  or  vainly  attributed  to  these  things  for  bodily 

good,  we  may  justly  and  with  full  measure  ascribe 
unto  the  Scripture  for  spiritual.  It  is  not  only  an 
armour,  but  also  a  whole  armoury  of  weapons,  both 
offensive  and  defensive ;  whereby  we  may  save  our- 
selves, and  put  the  enemy  to  flight.      It   is    not   an 

[Rev.  22. 2.]  herb,  but  a  tree,  or  rather  a  whole  paradise  of  trees 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


275 


of  life,  which  bring  forth  fruit  every  month,  and  the 
fruit  thereof  is  for  meat,  and  the  leaves  for  medicine. 
It  is  not  a  pot  of  Manna  or  a  cruse  of  oil,  which 
were  for  memory  only,  or  for  a  meal's  meat  or  two ; 
but  as  it  were  a  shower  of  heavenly  bread  sufficient 
for  a  whole  host,  be  it  never  so  great,  and  as  it  were 
a  whole  cellar  full  of  oil  vessels ;  whereby  all  our 
necessities  may  be  provided  for,  and  our  debts  dis- 
charged. In  a  word,  it  is  a  panary  of  wholesome 
food  against  fenowed  ^  traditions ;  a  physician's  shop  y^owov  la.. 
(Saint  j^^i-// calleth  it)  of  preservatives  against  poisoned  Is^'Basii.  i 
heresies;  a  pandect  of  profitable  laws  against  rebellious  mu>i/^^ 
spirits;  a  treasury  of  most  costly  jewels  against  beg- '^""^^''^' 
garly  rudiments ;  finally,  a  fountain  of  most  pure  water 
springing  up  unto  everlasting  life.  And  what  marvel? 
the  original  thereof  being  from  heaven,  not  from 
earth;  the  author  being  God,  not  man;  the  inditer, 
the  Holy  Spirit,  not  the  wit  of  the  Apostles  or  Pro- 
phets; the  penmen,  such  as  were  sanctified  from  the 
womb,  and  endued  with  a  principal  portion  of  God's 
Spirit ;  the  matter,  verity,  piety,  purity,  uprightness ; 
the  form,  God's  word,  God's  testimony,  God's  oracles, 
the  word  of  truth,  the  word  of  salvation,  d^^. :  the 
effects,  light  of  understanding,  stableness  of  persuasion, 
repentance  from  dead  works,  newness  of  life,  holiness, 
peace,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost;  lastly,  the  end  and 
reward  of  the  study  thereof,  fellowship  with  the  saints, 
participation  of  the  heavenly  nature,  fruition  of  an 
inheritance  immortal,  undefiled,  and  that  never  shall 
fade  away:  Happy  is  the  man  that  delighteth  in  the 


^  "Fenowed,"  i.e.  mouldy.  Richardson  quotes  Dr  Favour, 
Triumph  over  Novelty  (161 9),  "  The  foisty  and  fenowed  festival,  " 
the  word  being  chosen  perhaps  for  the  sake  of  alliteration. 

18—2 


276    '  The  T7'anslato7's  to  the  Reader. 

Scripture,  and  thrice  happy  that  meditateth  in  it  day 

and  night. 

Translation  But  how  shall  men  meditate   in  that  which  they 

necessan.     q^q^-^-^q^  Understand?    How  shall  they  understand  that 

which  is  kept  close  in  an  unknown  tongue?    as  it  is 

iCor.  i4[ii].  written,  Except  I  know  the  power  of  the  voice.,  I  shall 

be  to  him  that  speaketh  a  barbarian.,  and  he  that  speaketh 

shall  be  a  bai'barian  to  me.     The  Apostle  exceptetli 

no  tongue ;  not  Hebrew  the  ancientest,  not  Greek  the 

most  copious,  not  Latin  the  finest.     Nature  taught  a 

natural  man  to  confess,  that  all  of  us  in  those  tongues 

which  we   do   not  understand  are    plainly  deaf;    we 

Clem.  Alex,  may  turn    the   deaf  ear   unto   them.     The   Scythian 

[cap.  XVI.      counted  the  Athenian.,  whom  he  did  not  understand, 

^'  ^^^ '         barbarous  :    so    the  Roman   did   the   Syrian  and  the 

s.  Hie-       Jew:   (even    S.  Hieroine   himself  calleth  the  Hebrew 

Damaso.       tonguc  barbarous ;  belike,  because  it  was  strange  to 

Michael.       SO  many:)  so  the   Emperor  of  Constantinople  calleth 

fii     "  '      the  Latin  tongue  barbarous,  though  Pope  Nicolas  do 

^Concii.  ex     storm  at  it :  so  the  Jews  long  before  Christ  called  all 

^Crab'^^^''    other  nations  Lognazim\  which  is  little  better   than 

barbarous.     Therefore  as  one  complaineth  that  alwa}s 

Cicero  5.  De  vci  the  Senate  of  Rome  there  was  one  or  other  that 

[cap.  XXIX.    called  for  an  interpreter;  so,  lest  the  Church  be  driven 

^  '  to  the  like  exigent,  it  is  necessary  to  have  translations 

in  a  readiness.     Translation    it    is   that  openeth   the 

window,  to  let  in  the  light ;  that  breaketh  the  shell, 

that  we  may  eat  the  kernel ;    that  putteth  aside  the 

curtain,  that  we  may  look  into  the  most  holy  place ; 

that  removeth   the  cover  of  the  well,  that  we   may 

(ien.  29. 10.   come  by  the  water ;  even  as  Jacob   rolled   away  the 

stone  from  the  mouth  of  the  well,  by  which  means 


J  DnyO,  from   vh  Ps. 


CXIV.    I. 


The   Translators  to  the  Reader.  277 


the  flocks  of  Lahaii   were  watered.     Indeed  without 

translation  into  the  vulgar  tongue,  the  unlearned  are 

but  like   children  dX  Jacob' s  well   (which   was    deep)  John  4  n. 

without  a  bucket  or  something  to  draw  with  :    or  as 

that  person  mentioned  by  Esay^  to  whom  when  a  sealed 

book  was  delivered  with  this  motion,  Read  this,  I  pray  isai.  29.  n. 

thee,  he  was  fain  to  make  this  answer,  /  can?tot,for 

it  is  sealed. 

While  God  would  be  known   only  in  Jacob,  and  The  transia- 

,  ,  .  .  _  ,  ,      .  tion  of  the 

nave  his   name  great  m   Israel,   and    m    none    other  oid  Testa- 
place  ;   while   the    dew   lay  on   Gideon's  fleece    only,  the  Hebrew 
and  all  the  earth  besides  was  dry ;  then  for  one  and 
the  same  people,  which  spake  all  of  them    the  Ian- See  6\  yi?^- 
fifuage  of  Canaan,  that  is,  Hebreiv,  one  and  the  same  co7itra 

^   .    .  .  Faust,  cap. 

original  in  Hebrew  was  sufficient.  But  wlien  the  ful-  32. 
ness  of  time  drew  near,  that  the  Sun  of  righteousness, 
the  Son  of  God,  should  come  into  the  world,  whom 
God  ordained  to  be  a  reconciliation  through  faith  in 
his  blood,  not  of  \\^q,  Jem  only,  but  also  of  the  Greek, 
yea,  of  all  them  that  were  scattered  abroad;  then  lo,  it 
pleased  the  Lord  to  stir  up  the  spirit  of  a  Gj'eek  Prince, 
{Greek  for  descent  and  language)  even  of  Ptolemy 
Philadelph  king  of  Egypt,  to  procure  the  translating 
of  the  book  of  God  out  of  Hebrew  into  Greek.  This 
is  the  translation  of  the  Seventy  interpreters,  commonly 
so  called,  which  prepared  the  way  for  our  Saviour 
among  the  Gentiles  by  written  preaching,  as  ^d\x\\.  John 
Baptist  did  among  the  Je^vs  by  vocal.  For  the 
Grecians,  being  desirous  of  learning,  were  not  wont  to 
suffer  books  of  worth  to  lie  moulding  in  kings' libra- 
ries, but  had  many  of  their  servants,  ready  scribes, 
to  copy  them  out,  and  so  they  were  dispersed  and 
made  common.  Again,  the  Greek  tongue  was  well 
known  and  made  familiar  to  most  inhabitants  in  Asia 


278  The  Translatoj's  to  the  Reader. 

by  reason  of  the  conquest  that  there  the  Grecians  had 
made,  as  also  by  the  colonies  which  thither  they  had 
sent.  For  the  same  causes  also  it  was  well  understood 
in  many  places  of  Europe,  yea,  and  of  Africk  too. 
Therefore  the  word  of  God  being  set  forth  in  Greek, 
becometh  hereby  like  a  candle  set  upon  a  candlestick, 
which  giveth  light  to  all  that  are  in  the  house;  or 
like  a  proclamation  sounded  forth  in  the  market-place, 
which  most  men  presently  take  knowledge  of;  and 
therefore  that  language  was  fittest  to  contain  the 
Scriptures,  both  for  the  first  preachers  of  the  Gospel 
to  appeal  unto  for  witness,  and  for  the  learners  also  of 
those  times  to  make  search  and  trial  by.  It  is  cer- 
tain, that  that  translation  was  not  so  sound  and  so 
perfect,  but  that  it  needed  in  many  places  correction  ; 
and  who  had  been  so  sufficient  for  this  work  as  the 
Apostles  or  apostolic  men  ?  Yet  it  seemed  good  to 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  to  them  to  take  that  which  they 
found,  (the  same  being  for  the  greatest  part  true  and 
sufficient)  rather  than  by  making  a  new,  in  that  new 
world  and  green  age  of  the  Church,  to  expose  them- 
selves to  many  exceptions  and  cavillations,  as  though 
they  made  a  translation  to  serve  their  own  turn,  and 
therefore  bearing  witness  to  themselves,  their  witness 
not  to  be  regarded.  This  may  be  supposed  to  be 
some  cause,  why  the  translation  of  the  Seventy  was 
allowed  to  pass  for  current.  Notwithstanding,  though 
it  was  commended  generally,  yet  it  did  not  fully  con- 
tent the  learned,  no  not  of  the  Jews.  For  not  long 
after  Christ,  Aqiiila  fell  in  hand  with  a  new  trans- 
lation, and  after  him  Theodotion,  and  after  him  Sym- 
machics:  yea,  there  w^as  a  fifth  and  a  sixth  edition,  the 
authors  whereof  were  not  known.  These  with  the 
Seventy  made  up  the  Hexapla,  and  were  worthily  and 


The  Tra7islat07's  to  the  Reader.  279 

to  great  purpose  compiled  together  by  Origen.  How- 
beit  the  edition  of  the  Seventy  went  away  with  the 
credit,  and  therefore  not  only  was  placed  in  the  midst 
by  Orige?i,  (for  the  worth  and  excellency  thereof  above  Epiphan.De 

77te7isiiris  et 

the  rest,  as  Epiphanius  gathereth)  but  also  was  used/^«^'''v^wj 

{cap.  17]. 

by  the  Greek  Fathers  for  the  ground  and  foundation  see.v.  ^7<- 
of  their  commentaries.  Yea,  Epiphanius  above-named  f/^f/^f„^^ 
doth  attribute  so  much  unto  it,  that  he  holdeth  the  ^^"'^^^^"- 

c.  15. 

authors  thereof  not  only  for  interpreters,  but  also  for 
prophets  in  some  respect:  2ir\d  Justinian  the  Emperor,  Novel. dia- 
enjoining  the  Jews  his  subjects  to  use  specially  the 
Translation  of  the  Seventy.,  rendereth  this  reason  there-  npo(|)i7Tt/cij? 
of,   Because  they  were,  as   it  were,  enhghtened  with  to?  TrepiAoM- 

xlja.crq<;  av- 

prophetical  grace.     Yet  for  all  that,  as  the  Egyptians  tov's. 
are  said  of  the  Prophet  to  be  men  and  not  God,  and  ^^^''  ^^'^' 
their   horses    flesh    and    not  spirit  :    so  it  is  evident, 
(and  Saint  Hieroine  affirmeth  as  much)  that  the  Seventy  J;^55;w'' 
were  interpreters,  they  were  not  prophets.     They  ^^^^^"Ze/Tad 
many  things  well,  as  learned  men;  but  yet  as  men  "^f-J^jf'^;^. 
they  stumbled  and  fell,  one  while  through  oversie;ht,  •y"'^'  <J/m^ 

-'  _  .  ^'^^  €711111 

another  while  through  ignorance;  yea,  sometimes  they  i'ate77i,aiind 
may  be  noted  to  add  to  the  original,  and  sometimes  esse.  Apoi. 
to  take  from   it:  which   made  the  Apostles  to   lesive  h7>.  u.  cap. 
them  many  times,  when  they  left  the  Hebrew^  and  to 
deliver  the  sense  thereof  according  to  the  truth  of  the 
word,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance.     This  may 
suffice   touching    the    Greek  translations  of  the  Old 
Testament. 

There  were  also  within  a  few  hundred  years  after  Translation 

„,     .  ,      .  •  1  7-     y  r       outofHe- 

Christ  translations  many  into  the  Latin  tongue  :  tor  brew  and 

1  •  1  f  1        1  J  Greek  into 

this  tongue  also  was  very  fit  to  convey  the  law  and  Latin, 
the  Gospel  by,   because  in  those    times  very   many 
countries  of  the  West,   yea  of  the  South,  East,  and 
North,  spake  or  understood  Latin,  being  made  pro- 


28o 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


S.  August, 
de  doctr. 
Christ,  lib, 
2.  cap.  II. 


The  translat' 
ing  of  the 
Scripture 
into  the  vul- 
gar tongues. 

S .  Hieron. 
[A  ni7ma- 
nres]  Mar- 
cell. 
Zositn. 


2  Kin.  7.  9. 


vinces  to  the  Romans.  But  now  the  Latin  translations 
were  too  many  to  be  all  good,  for  they  were  infinite ; 
(Latini  intcrpretes  niillo  modo  niimerari possunt,  saith  S. 
Augustine.)  Again,  they  were  not  out  of  the  Hebrew 
fountain,  (we  speak  of  the  Latin  translations  of  the 
Old  Testament)  but  out  of  the  Greek  stream;  therefore 
the  Greek  being  not  altogether  clear,  the  Latiii  de- 
rived from  it  must  needs  be  muddy.  This  moved 
S.  ILierome,  a  most  learned  Father,  and  the  best  lin- 
guist without  controversy  of  his  age,  or  of  any  that 
went  before  him,  to  undertake  the  translating  of  the 
Old  Testament  out  of  the  very  fountains  themselves; 
which  he  performed  with  that  evidence  of  great  learn- 
ing, judgment,  industry,  and  faithfulness,  that  he  hath 
for  ever  bound  the  Church  unto  him  in  a  debt  of 
special  remembrance  and  thankfulness. 

Now  though  the  Church  were  thus  furnished  with 
Greek  and  Latin  translations,  even  before  the  faith  of 
Christ  was  generally  embraced  in  the  Empire  :  (for 
the  learned  know  that  even  in  S.  Hierome's  time  the 
Consul  of  Rome  and  his  wife  were  both  Ethnicks,  and 
about  the  same  time  the  greatest  part  of  the  Senate 
also)  yet  for  all  that  the  godly  learned  were  not  con- 
tent to  have  the  Scriptures  in  the  language  which 
themselves  understood,  Greek  and  Latin.,  (as  the  good 
lepers  were  not  content  to  fare  well  themselves,  but 
acquainted  their  neighbours  with  the  store  that  God 
had  sent,  that  they  also  might  provide  for  themselves) 
but  also  for  the  behoof  and  edifying  of  the  unlearned 
which  hungered  and  thirsted  after  righteousness,  and 
had  souls  to  be  saved  as  well  as  they,  they  provided 
translations  into  the  vulgar  for  their  countrymen,  inso- 
much that  most  nations  under  heaven  did  shortly 
after  their  conversion  hear   Christ  speaking  unto  them 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


2»I 


in  their  mother  tongue,  not  by  the  voice  of  their  minis- 
ter only,  but  also  by  the  written  word  translated.  If 
any  doubt  hereof,  he  may  be  satisfied  by  examples 
enough,  if  enough  will  serve  the  turn.      First,  S.  Hie-  ^-  Hieron. 

PrCBf.  171  4. 

rome  saith,    Afultaruni  gentm??i  Unguis  Scriptiira  ante  Evangel, 
translata  docet  falsa  esse  quce  addita  sunt,  &c.  i.  e.  The 
Scripture  beijtg  translated  before  in  the  language  of  many 
natio7is  doth  shew  that  those  things  that  weix  added  (by 
Liician  or  Hesychius)  are  false.     So  S.  Hierome  in  that 
place.    The  same  Hie7-oine  elsewhere  afifirmeth  that  he,  s.  Hieron. 
the  time  was,   had  set  forth    the  translation  of  the 
Seventy,  suce  li?iguce  honiinibus ;  i.  e.   for  his  country- 
men of  Dalniatia.     Which  words  not  only  Erasmus 
doth  understand  to  purport,  that  S.  Hierome  translated 
the  Scripture  into  the   Dalmatian   tongue ;  but  also  six.  Sen. 
Sixtus   Senensis,   and   Alphonsus  a    Castro.,    (that  we  ^Aipiwn  a 
speak  of  no  more)  men  not  to  be  excepted  against  by  '^"'1^6'^^^' 
them  of  Rome.,  do  ingenuously  confess  as  much.     So  s.  ckrysost 
S.  Chrysostojne,  that  lived  in  S.  Hierome  s  time,  giveth  ^cajTlwin  i 
evidence  with  him  :   The  doctrine  of  S.  John  (saith  he)  ^^  ^^' 
did  not  in  such  sort  (as  the  Philosophers  did)  vajiish 
away :  but  the  Syi'ia?is,  Egyptians.,  Indians,  Persians, 
Ethiopians,  and  infinite  other  nations,  beiiig  barbarotcs 
people,  translated  it  into  their  {fn other)  tofigue,  and  have 
learned  to  be  {true)  Philosophers,  he  meaneth  Christians. 
To  this  may  be  added  Theodo7'et,  as  next  unto  him  Theodor. 
both  for  antiquity,  and  for  learning.     His  words  be  ^rZZJel). 
these,  Every  country  that  is  under  the  sun  is  full  of_^^^^ 
these  words  (of  the  Apostles  and   Prophets)  and  the 
Hebrew  tongue  (he  meaning  the  Scriptures  in  the  He- 
brew tongue)  is  turned  not  only  ifito  the  language  of 
the  Grecians,  but  also  of  the  Romans,  and  Egyptians, 
and  Persians,  and  Indians,  and  Armenians,  and  Scy- 
thians, and  Sauromatians,   and,    briefly,    into  all  the 


282  The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


languages  which  any  nation   useth.     So  he.     In  like 
p.  Diacon.    manlier  Ulpilas  is  reported  by  Faulus  Diaconiis  and 

lib.  12. 

isid.  in        Isidore.,  and  before  them  by  Sozomen,  to  have  trans- 

ChroH.  Goth.  iiir>-  •  -y  ^      i  ■ 

SozojH.  lib.  lated  the  bcriptures  mto  the  Gothic  tongue :  John 
Fasse?is  in  Bishop  of  SevH  by  Vasseiis,  to  have  turned  them  into 
Hispcin.  Arabick  about  the  year  of  our  Lord  717:  Beda  by 
Cistei'tiensis,  to  have  turned  a  great  part  of  them  into 
Poiydor.  Saxoii :  Efiuird  by  Tritheinius,  to  have  abridged  the 
tor.  Anglo-    French  Psalter  (as  Beda  had  done  the  Hebi-eiv)  about 

'KllDl  tcstcttit')'' 

idem  de  the  year  800 :  King  Alnred  by  the  said  Cistertiensis^  to 

7iostro.  have  turned  the  Psalter  into  Saxon :  Afethodius  by 

lib.  4.  Aventinus  (printed  at  Ingolstad)  to  have  turned  the 

\\circaa7i-  Scrii^tures  into  Sclavonian'^^ :   Valdo  Bishop  of  Frisinsr 

nian  goo.  ^  x  o 

B.  Rhetia7i.   j^y  Bcatiis  Rhcnaniis.  to  have  caused  about  that  time 

rem  in  Ger'        ■^ 

man.  lib.  2.  the  Gospels  to  be  translated  into  Dutch  rhythme,  yet 
extant  in  the  library  of  Corbinian^ :  Valdus  by  divers, 
to  have  turned  them  himself,  or  to  have  gotten  them 
turned  into  French  about  the  year  1160  :  Charles  the 
fifth  of  that  name,  surnamed  The  wise,  to  have  caused 
them  to  be  turned  into  French.,  about  200  years  after 
Valdus  his  time  ;  of  which  translation  there  be  many 

Beroaid.  copies  yet  extant,  as  witnesseth  Beroaldus.  Much 
about  that  time,  even  in  our  King  Richard  \\\q  second's 

[<r/>ra  1387.]  d^iys,  John  Trevisa^  translated  them  into  English.,  and 
many  English  Bibles  in  written  hand  are  yet  to  be 
seen  with  divers;  translated,  as  it  is  very  probable,  in 
that  age.    So  the  Syrian  translation  of  the  New  Testa- 

[1555-]  ment  is  in  most  learned  men's  libraries,  of  VVidmin- 

stadius  his  setting  forth ;  and  the  Psalter  in  Arabick  is 

[1516.]  with  many,  oi  Augustinus  Nebiensis'  setting  forth.     So 

^  S.  Corbinian's  Library  at  Freising  on  the  Isar.  See 
Ussher,  Historia  Dogfuatica,  a.d.  890. 

-  John  Trevisa,  the  Cornishman's  claim,  as  a  Translator  of 
the  Bible,  is  roughly  treated  by  Dr  Eadie  {English  Bible,  Vol. 
I.  p.  60). 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  283 


PosteP  affirmeth.  that  in  his  travel  he  saw  the  Gospels 

in  the  Ethiopian  tongue  :  And  Ambrose  Thesius  alleg- 

eth  the  Psalter  of  the  Indians,  which  he  testifieth  to  [Aethiopic.j 

have  been  set  forth  by  Potken  in  Syrian  characters  ^ 

So  that  to  have  the  Scriptures  in  the  mother  tongue  is  [1513] 

not  a  quaint  conceit  lately  taken  up,  either  by  the 

Lord  Cromivell  in  Endand,  or  by  the  Lord  Radevil  in  [?,538.J 

"  •  ■'  ^  riiua)i. 

Polonie,  or  by  the  Lord  Ungnadius  in  the  Emperor's 
dominion,  but  hath  been  thought  upon,  and  put  in 
practice  of  old,  even  from  the  first  times  of  the  con- 
version of  any  nation ;  no  doubt,  because  it  was  es- 
teemed most  profitable  to  cause  faith  to  grow  in  men's 
hearts  the  sooner,  and  to  make  them  to  be  able  to 
say  with  the  words  of  the  Psalm,  As  we  have  heard.,  so  ps.  48. 8. 
ive  have  seen. 

Now   the    Church  of  Pome  would   seem  at   the  The  unwiu- 
length  to  bear  a  motherly  affection  towards  her  chil-  our  chief  ad- 
dren,  and  to  allow  them  the  Scriptures  in  their  mother  that  the"" 
tongue  :  but  indeed  it  is  a  gift,  not  deserving  to  be  shouKe^di- 
called  a   gift*,  an  unprofitable  gift:    they  must  first  mofher'" ^  ^ 
get  a  license  in  writing  before  they  may  use  them;  l°^|p^;,|J^-. 
and  to   get   that,  they  must  approve  themselves   to  p^J;^^;;"  °'^'- 
their    Confessor,   that   is,  to  be    such  as  are,   if  not  f^f^^'J^ll^^ 
frozen   in  the  dregs,   yet  soured  with  the  leaven  of  665]-^^^ 
their  superstition.     Howbeit,  it  seemed  too  much  to  obj^er^ation 
Cleme7it  the  eisfhth  that  there  should  be  any  license  cieme^it  his 

o  ■'  authority) 

granted   to    have  them    in    the   vulgar    tongue,    and  upon^th^^^th 
therefore  he  overruleth   and  frustrateth  the  grant  of  the  4th  his 

.  making  in 

Pius  the  fourth.     So  much  are  they  afraid  of  the  light  the  index 

lib.  prohib. 
pag.  15. 
ver.  5. 

1  If  the  reference  is  to  the  Linguariun  diiodecim  characteribtis 
differentium  Alphabetum  (1538)  of  the  voluminous  mystic  W. 
Postel  [1510—1581],  the  fact  here  named  is  rather  impUed  than 
stated  in  sheet  F,  de  Indica  lingua. 

2  Walton,  Prolegomena,  xiv.  19,  ill. 


284  The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


Tertid.  de     of  the  Scripturc,  (Lucifucrce  Scripturanun,  as   Tertul- 

rcsicr.  car-  1  '    \  ^     <->  1  1 

nis  Vcap.  47].  lian  speaketh)  that  they  will  not  trust  the  people  with 
it,  no  not  as  it  is  set  forth  by  their  own  sworn  men, 
no   not  with    the  license   of  their  own  Bishops  and 
Inquisitors.     Yea,   so  unwilling  they  are  to  commu- 
nicate the  Scriptures  to  the  people's  understanding  in 
any  sort,  that  they  are  not  ashamed  to  confess   that 
we  forced  them  to  translate  it  into  English  against 
their  wills.     This  seemeth  to  argue  a  bad  cause,  or 
a  bad  conscience,  or  both.     Sure  we  are,  that  it  is 
not   he  that  hath  good  gold,  that  is  afraid  to  bring 
it  to  the  touchstone,  but  he  that  hath  the  counterfeit; 
neither  is  it   the  true  man    that   shunneth  the  light, 
John  3. 20.    but  the  malefactor,  lest  his  deeds  should  be  reproved ; 
neither   is  it  the  plain- dealing  merchant  that  is  un- 
willing to  have  the  weights,  or  the  meteyard,  brought 
in  place,  but  he  that  useth  deceit.     But  we  will  let 
them  alone  for  this  fault,  and  return  to  translation. 
The  speeches        Many  mcn's  mouths  have  been  open  a  good  while 
both'^ofour'  (and  yet  are   not  stopped)  with  speeches  about  the 
and  o7our     translation   so  long  in    hand,    or   rather    perusals    of 
agirnsfthlJ  translations  made  before:  and  ask  what  may  be  the 
^""^  ■  reason,  what  the  necessity,  of  the  employment.    Hath 

the  Church  been  deceived,  say  they,  all  this  while? 
Hath  her  sweet  bread  been  mingled  with  leaven,  her 
silver  with  dross,  her  wine  with  water,  her  milk  with 
6".  ire7i.  lib.  lime?  {lade  gypsum  male  mlscetiir,  saith  S.  Ireney.) 
(cap.  XVII.  We  hoped  that  we  had  been  in  the  right  way,  that 
we  had  had  the  oracles  of  God  delivered  unto  us,  and 
that  though  all  the  world  had  cause  to  be  offended, 
and  to  complain,  yet  that  we  had  none.  Hath  the 
nurse  holden  out  the  breast,  and  nothing  but  wind 
in  it  ?  Hath  the  bread  been  delivered  by  the  Fathers 
of  the  Church,  and  the  same  proved  to  be  lapidosus^ 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  28  c; 

^ : -^ 

as  Seneca  speaketh?  What  is  it  to  handle  the  word 
of  God  deceitfully,  if  this  be  not?  Thus  certain 
brethren.  Also  the  adversaries  of  Jiidah  and  Hie- 
rusaleni,  like  Saiiballat  in  Nehemiah^  mock,  as  we 
hear,  both  at  the  work  and  workmen,  saying,  What  Neh.  4. 1, 3. 
do  these  weak  Jews.,  <S:c.  will  they  make  the  stones  whole 
again  out  of  the  heaps  of  dust  ivhich  are  burnt 'I 
Although  they  build,  yet  if  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  even 
break  doun  their  stony  wall.  Was  their  translation 
good  before?  Why  do  they  now  mend  it?  Was  it 
not  good?  Why  then  was  it  obtruded  to  the  people? 
Yea,  why  did  the  Catholicks  (meaning  Popish  Roniari- 
ists)  always  go  in  jeopardy  for  refusing  to  go  to  hear 
it?  Nay,  if  it  must  be  translated  into  English,  Catho- 
licks are  fittest  to  do  it.  They  have  learning,  and 
they  know  when  a  thing  is  well,  they  can  nianuni  de 
tabula.  We  will  answer  them  both  briefly:  and  the 
former,  being  brethren,  thus  with  St.  Hierome,  Dam-  s.  Hieron. 
namus  veteres  ?  MinitJie,  sed  post  priortim  studia  in  vers'^Ruffin 
domo  Domini  quod possumus  laboramus.  That  is,  Do^s-.'wigvii, 
7ue  condemn  the  ancient  1  In  no  case:  but  after  the^°^'^^'^^°'^' 
endeavours  of  them  that  were  before  us,  we  take  the  best 
pai?is  we  ca?i  in  the  house  of  God.  As  if  he  said, 
Being  provoked  by  the  example  of  the  learned  that 
lived  before  my  time,  I  have  thought  it  my  duty  to 
assay  whether  my  talent  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
tongues  may  be  profitable  in  any  measure  to  God's 
Church,  lest  I  should  seem  to  have  laboured  in  them 
in  vain,  and  lest  I  should  be  thought  to  glory  in  men 
(although  ancient)  above  that  which  was  in  them. 
Thus  S.  Hierome  may  be  thought  to  speak. 

And  to  the  same  effect  say  we,  that  we   are  so  a  satisfac- 
far  off  from   condemning   any  of  their   labours  that  brethren. 
travailed  before  us  in  this  kind,  either  in  this  land. 


286  The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 

or  beyond  sea,  either  in  King  Henry's  time,  or  King 
Edwa^'d's^  (if  there  were  any  translation,  or  correction 
of  a  translation,  in  his  time)  or  Queen  Elizabeths  of 
ever  renowned  memory,  that  we  acknowledge   them 
to  have  been  raised  up  of  God  for  the  building  and 
furnishing  of  his  Church,  and  that  they  deserve  to  be 
had  of  us  and  of  posterity  in  everlasting  remembrance. 
The  judgment  of  Aristotle  is  worthy  and  well  known  : 
Arist.  2        If  Timotheus  had  not  been,  we  had  7iot  had  much  sweet 
KaTToT]  '^  ^°  musick :  Bnt  if  Phryjiis  ( Timotheus  his    master)   had 
crt/.  I  [f  3.]    fiot  been,  we  had  not  had  Timotheus.     Therefore  bless- 
ed be  they,  and  most  honoured  be  their  name,  that 
break  the   ice,  and  give  the  onset  upon  that  which 
helpeth  forward  to  the  saving  of  souls.     Now  what 
can  be  more  available  thereto,  than  to  deliver  God's 
book  unto  God's  people  in  a  tongue  which  they  un- 
^  .  ,      derstand?     Since   of  an   hidden    treasure,  and   of  a 

6".  Epiphaii. 

loco  ante       fountain  that  is  sealed,  there  is  no  profit,  as  Ptolemy 

citato 

[p.  279].        Philadelph  wrote  to   the  Rabbins  or   masters  of  the 
s.Angtcstm.  Tews,  as  witnessetli  Epiphaniiis :  and  as  S.  Auntstine 

lib.  -i.(^.  de       ^  ^    -^  _  "  _ 

civit.  Dei,     saitli,  A  man  had  rather  be  with   his  dog  than   with 

cap.  7.  .  1  •      \ 

a  strajtger  (whose  tongue  is  strange  unto  him).  Yet 
for  all  that,  as  nothing  is  begun  and  perfected  at  the 
same  time,  and  the  latter  thoughts  are  thought  to  be 
the  wiser:  so,  if  we  building  upon  their  foundation 
that  went  before  us,  and  being  holpen  by  their  labours, 
do  endeavour  to  make  that  better  which  they  left 
so  good;  no  man,  we  are  sure,  hath  cause  to  mislike 
us;  they,  we  persuade  ourselves,  if  they  were  alive, 
would  thank  us.  The  vintage  of  Abiezer,  that  strake 
the   stroke  ;   yet  the  gleaning  of  grapes  of  Ephraivi 

judg.  8. 2.     was  not  to   be   despised.     See  Judges  viii.    verse   2. 

2  Kin.  13. 1^,  yoash  the  king  of  Israel  did  not  satisfy  himself  till 
he  had  smitten  the  ground  three  times  ;  and  yet  he 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  287 


offended  the  Prophet  for  giving  over  then.     Aquila^ 
of  whom  we  spake  before,   translated    the   Bible  as 
carefully  and    as  skilfully  as    he  could  ;    and  yet  he 
thought  good  to   go   over  it  again,  and  then  it  got 
the  credit  with  the  Jeivs  to  be  called  Kara  aKpif^eiav,  s.  Hieron. 
that  is,  accurately  done,  as   St.  Hierome  witnesseth.  cnp.\\v'er. 
How   many   books    of  profane    learning    have   been  ^^ " 
gone  over  again  and  again,  by  the  same  translators, 
by  others  ?     Of  one  and  the  same  book  of  Aristotle's 
Ethics  there  are  extant  not  so   few  as   six  or  seven 
several  translations.     Now  if  this  cost  may  be  bestow- 
ed upon  the  gourd,  which  affordeth  us  a  little  shade, 
and  which    to-day  flourisheth,   but  to-morrow  is  cut 
down;  what  may  we  bestow,  nay,  what  ought  we  not 
to  bestow,  upon  the  vine,  the  fruit  whereof  maketh 
glad  the  conscience  of  man,  and  the  stem  whereof 
abideth  for   ever?     And    this  is    the   word    of  God, 
which  we  translate.      What  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat  ?  jer.  23. 28. 
saith   the  Lord.     Tanti  vitretim,  quanti  verum  viar-  Tcrtui.ad 
garitiun  (saith  Tertidlian,)  if  a  toy  of  glass  be  of  that  icap.%'. 
reckoning  with  us,  how  ought  we  to  value  the  true  //Lv" 


iiman 


pearl?     Therefore  let  no  man's  eye  be  evil,  because  ^qnnnupre- 
his  Majesty's  is  good  ;  neither  let  any  be  grieved,  that  MnrgalT'' 
we  have  a  Prince  that    seeketh  the  increase  of  the  ron.'Jd^'^' 
spiritual  wealth  of  Israel ;  (let  Sanballats  and  Tobiahs  '!l^^^""^k^^' 
do  so,  which  therefore  do  bear  their  just  reproof)  but  [Neh.  4. 

I — 3-] 

let  us  rather  bless  God  from  the  ground  of  our  heart 
for  working  this  religious  care  in  him  to  have  the 
translations  of  the  Bible  maturely  considered  of  and 
examined.  For  by  this  means  it  cometh  to  pass, 
that  whatsoever  is  sound  already,  (and  all  is  sound 
for  substance  in  one  or  other  of  our  editions,  and  the 
worst  of  ours  far  better  than  their  authentick  Vulgar) 
the  same   will   shine    as   gold    more    brightly,   being 


288  The  Ti'anslators  to  the  Readei'. 

rubbed  and  polished ;  also,  if  any  thing  be  halting, 
or  superfluous,  or  not  so  agreeable  to  the  original,  the 
same  may  be  corrected,  and  the  truth  set  in  place. 
And  what  can  the  King  command  to  be  done,  that 
will  bring  him  more  true  honour  than  this  ?  And 
wherein  could  they  that  have  been  set  a  work  approve 
their  duty  to  the  King,  yea,  their  obedience  to  God, 
and  love  to  his  Saints,  more,  than  by  yielding  their 
service,  and  all  that  is  within  them,  for  the  furnishing 
of  the  work?  But  besides  all  this,  they  were  the 
principal  motives  of  it,  and  therefore  ought  least  to 
quarrel  it.  For  the  very  historical  truth  is,  that  upon 
the  importunate  petitions  of  the  Puritans  at  his 
Majesty's  coming  to  this  crown,  the  conference  at 
Hampto?i  Court  having  been  appointed  for  hearing 
their  complaints,  when  by  force  of  reason  they  were 
put  from  all  other  grounds,  they  had  recourse  at  the 
last  to  this  shift,  that  they  could  not  with  good 
conscience  subscribe  to  the  Communion  book,  since 
it  maintained  the  Bible  as  it  was  there  translated, 
which  was,  as  they  said,  a  most  corrupted  translation. 
And  although  this  was  judged  to  be  but  a  very  poor 
and  empty  shift,  yet  even  hereupon  did  his  Majesty 
begin  to  bethink  himself  of  the  good  that  might  ensue 
by  a  new  translation,  and  presently  after  gave  order 
for  this  translation  which  is  now  presented  unto  thee. 
Thus  much  to  satisfy  our  scrupulous  brethren. 
An  answer  to        Now  to  the  latter  we  answer,  that  we  do  not  deny, 

the  imputa- 

tionsofour  nay,  we  aiTirm  and  avow,  that  the  very  meanest  trans- 
lation of  the  Bible  in  English  set  forth  by  men  of  our 
profession  (for  we  have  seen  none  of  theirs  of  the 
whole  Bible  as  yet^)  containeth  the  word  of  God,  nay, 

^   The  Holy  Bible  faithfully  translated  into  English   otit  of 
the  Aiitheiitical  Latin:  Douay,   1609 — 1610,  2    vols.  4to.     The 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  289 


is  the  word  of  God :  as  the  King's  speech  which  he 
uttered  in  Parliament,  being  translated  into  French, 
Dutch,  Italian,  and  Latin,  is  still  the  King's  speech, 
though  it  be  not  interpreted  by  every  translator  with 
the  like  grace,  nor  peradventure  so  fitly  for  phrase, 
nor  so   expressly  for  sense,   every  where.     For  it   is 
confessed,  that  things  are  to  take  their  denomination 
of  the  greater  part;   and  a  natural  man  could  say, 
Verutn   nbi  niulta  nitent  in  carmine,    7ion   ego  paucis  Horace, 
offendor  maculis,  &c.     A  man  may  be  counted  a  vir-  pislnes^ 
tuous  man,  though  he  have  made  many  slips  in  his  ^^'^'  ^ 
life,  (else  there  were  none  virtuous,  for  in  many  things  James  3. 2. 
ive  offend  all.)  also  a  comely  man  and  lovely,  though 
he   have  some  warts  upon  his   hand,   yea,  not  only 
freckles    upon  his   face,    but  also    scars.     No   cause 
therefore  why  the  word  translated  should  be  denied  to 
be  the  word,  or  forbidden  to  be  current,  notwithstand- 
ing that  some  imperfections   and  blemishes  may  be 
noted  in  the  setting  forth  of  it.     For  whatever  was 
perfect  under  the  sun,  where  Apostles  or  apostolick 
men,  that  is,  men  endued  with  an  extraordinary  mea- 
sure of  God's  Spirit,  and  privileged  with  the  privilege 
of  infallibility,  had  not  their  hand  ?     The  Romanists 
therefore  in  refusing  to  hear,  and  daring  to  burn  the 
word  translated,  did  no  less  than  despite  the  Spirit  of 
grace,  from  whom  originally  it  proceeded,  and  whose 
sense  and  meaning,  as  well  as  man's  weakness  would 
enable,  it  did  express.     Judge  by  an  example  or  two.  ^^"Jl^JfJ^{^'^l 
Plutarch  writeth,  that  after  that  Roi7ie  had  been  *«/  Terapay- 
burnt  by  the  Gaiils.  they  fell  soon  to  build  it  again  :  <rTe./a>7rors»cai 
but  doing  it  in  haste,   they  did  not  cast  the  streets,  Me*^*'  ^ar? 

"  otAcrjVetrn' 

dvrjyayov  n^v 

writer  must  have  seen  the  first  volume  of  the  Douay  Bible,  "^l^ovS^^l^l 
since  neither  tunike  nor  rational  (see  p.  302)  occur  in  the  raxous.  cap. 
Rhemish  New  Testament.  32]. 

s.  19 


290 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


Ezra  3. 
[Hagg. 


3.] 


nor  proportion  the  houses,  in  such  comely  fashion,  as 
had  been  most  sightly  and  convenient.  Was  Catiline 
therefore  an  honest  man,  or  a  good  patriot,  that 
sought  to  bring  it  to  a  combustion  ?  or  Nero  a  good 
Prince,  that  did  indeed  set  it  on  fire?  So  by  the 
story  of  Ezra  and  the  prophecy  of  Haggai  it  may  be 
gathered,  that  the  temple  built  by  Zeriibbabel  after  the 
return  from  Bahylo?i  was  by  no  means  to  be  com- 
pared to  the  former  built  by  Solomon :  (for  they  that 
remembered  the  former  wept  when  they  considered 
the  latter)  notwithstanding  might  this  latter  either 
have  been  abhorred  and  forsaken  by  the  Jews,  or 
profaned  by  the  Greeks?  The  like  we  are  to  think  of 
translations.  The  translation  of  the  Seventy  dissenteth 
from  the  Original  in  many  places,  neither  doth  it 
come  near  it  for  perspicuity,  gravity,  majesty ;  yet 
which  of  the  Apostles  did  condemn  it?  Condemn  it? 
Nay,  they  used  it,  (as  it  is  apparent,  and  as  Saint 
Hierome  and  most  learned  men  do  confess)  which 
they  would  not  have  done,  nor  by  their  example  of 
using  of  it  so  grace  and  commend  it  to  the  Church, 
if  it  had  been  unworthy  the  appellation  and  name  of 
the  word  of  God.  And  whereas  they  urge  for  their 
second  defence  of  their  vilifying  and  abusing  of  the 
English  Bibles,  or  some  pieces  thereof,  which  they 
meet  with,  for  that  Hereticks  forsooth  were  the  au- 
thors of  the  translations :  (Hereticks  they  call  us  by 
the  same  right  that  they  call  themselves  Catholicks, 
both  being  wrong)  we  marvel  what  divinity  taught 
them  so.  We  are  sure  Tertullian  was  of  another 
mind  :  Ex  personis  p7'obanius  fidein^  an  ex  fide  pcr- 
sonas  ?  Do  we  try  men's  faith  by  their  persons  ?  We 
should  try  their  persons  by  their  faith.     Also  S.  Ait- 

for  he,   lighting  upon 


Tertul.  de 
prescript, 
contra 
hcereses 
[cap.  3]. 


gustine  was  of  another  mind 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  291 


certain  rules  made  by  Tycho?iius  a  Donatist  for  the 
better  understanding  of  the  Word,  was  not  ashamed 
to  make  use  of  them,  yea,  to  insert  them  into  his  own 
book,  with  giving  commendation  to  them  so  far 
forth  as  they  were  worthy  to  be  commended,  as  is  to 
be  seen  in  St.  Augustinis  third  book  De  Dodrina  s.  Angmt. 
Christia7id.  To  be  short,  Origen,  and  the  whole  chHsL^cap. 
Church  of  God  for  certain  hundred  years,  were  of^°' 
another  mind :  for  they  were  so  far  from  treading 
under  foot  (much  more  from  burning)  the  translation 
of  Aqicila  a  proselyte,  that  is,  one  that  had  turned 
Jew,  of  Syvwiachiis,  and  Theodotmi,  both  Ebionites, 
that  is,  most  vile  hereticks,  that  they  joined  them 
together  with  the  Hebrew  original,  and  the  trans- 
lation of  the  Seventy,  (as  hath  been  before  signified 
out  of  Epiphanius)  and  set  them  forth  openly  to  be 
considered  of  and  perused  by  all.  But  we  weary  the 
unlearned,  w^ho  need  not  know  so  much ;  and  trouble 
the  learned,  who  know  it  already. 

Yet  before  we  end,  we  must  answer  a  third  cavil 
and  objection  of  theirs  against  us,   for   altering  and 
amending  our  Translations  so  oft ;  wherein  truly  they 
deal  hardly  and  strangely  with  us.     For  to  whom  ever 
was  it  imputed  for  a  fault  (by  such  as  were  wise)  to 
go  over  that  which  he  had  done,   and  to  amend  it 
where  he  saw  cause?      Saint  Augustine  was  not  afraid  s.  Angjist. 
to  exhort  S.  Hlerome  to  a  Pallnodla  or  recantation. 
The  same  S.  Augustine  was  not  ashamed  to  retractate,  ^.  August. 
we  might  say,  revoke,  many  things  that  had  passed  at'. 
him,  and  doth  even  glory  that  he  seeth  his  infirmities.  i7,terdnvi 
If  we  will  be  sons  of  the  truth,  we  must  consider  what  s.  Aitguk. 
it  speaketh,  and  trample  upon  our  own  credit,  yea, 
and  upon  other  men's  too,   if  either  be  any  way  a 
hinderance  to  it.     This  to  the  cause.     Then  to  the 

19 — 2 


292  The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


persons  we  say,  that  of  all  men  they  ought  to  be  most 
silent  in  this  case.  For  what  varieties  have  they, 
and  what  alterations  have  they  made,  not  only  of 
their  service  books,  portesses^,  and  breviaries,  but 
also  of  their  Latin  translation?  The  service  book 
supposed  to  be  made  by  S.  Ambjvse  {Officium  Am- 
brosianuni)  was  a  great  while  in  special  use  and 
Durafid.  lib.  lequcst :  but  Pope  Adrian^  calling  a  council  with  the 
5.  ca  .  2.  ^.^  ^^  Charles  the  Emperor,  abolished  it,  yea,  burnt 
it,  and  commanded  the  service  book  of  Saint  Gregory 
universally  to  be  used.  Well,  Officium  Gregorianuin 
gets  by  this  means  to  be  in  credit;  but  doth  it  con- 
tinue without  change  or  altering  ?  No,  the  very 
Rojuan  service  was  of  two  fashions ;  the  new  fashion, 
and  the  old,  the  one  used  in  one  Church,  the  other 
in  another ;  as  is  to  be  seen  in  Painelius  a  Romanist 
his  preface  before  Micrologiis.  The  same  Painelius 
reporteth  out  of  Radulphus  de  Rivo,  that  about  the 
year  of  our  Lord  1277  Pope  Nicolas  the  third  re- 
moved out  of  the  churches  of  Rome  the  more  ancient 
books  (of  service)  and  brought  into  use  the  missals  of 
the  Friers  Minorites,  and  commanded  them  to  be 
observed  there ;  insomuch  that  about  an  hundred 
years  after,  when  the  above  named  Radulphus  hap- 
pened to  be  at  Rome,  he  found  all  the  books  to  be 
new,  of  the  new  stamp.  Neither  was  there  this  chop- 
ping and  changing  in  the  more  ancient  times  only, 
but  also  of  late.  Pius  Qiiintus  himself  confesseth, 
that  every  bishoprick  almost  had  a  peculiar  kind  of 
service,  most  unlike  to  that  which  others  had ;  which 


^   ^^  Portesses,^^  i.e.  manuals  of  devotion.     Spelt  dlso  portace, 
porttis^  &c. 

"And  in  his  hand  his  portesse  still  he  bare.'''' 

Spenser,  F.  Q.  i.  4. 


The  Traiislatois  to  the  Reader.  293 


moved  him  to  abolish  all  other  breviaries,  though 
never  so  ancient,  and  privileged  and  published  by 
Bishops  in  their  Dioceses,  and  to  establish  and  ratify 
that  only  which  was  of  his  own  setting  forth  in  the 
year  1568.  Now  when  the  Father  of  their  Church, 
who  gladly  would  heal  the  sore  of  the  daughter  of  his 
people  softly  and  slightly,  and  make  the  best  of  it, 
findeth  so  great  fault  with  them  for  their  odds  and 
jarring ;  we  hope  the  children  have  no  great  cause  to 
vaunt  of  their  uniformity.  But  the  difference  that 
appeareth  between  our  translations,  and  our  often 
correcting  of  them,  is  the  thing  that  we  are  specially 
charged  with ;  let  us  see  therefore  whether  they  them- 
selves be  without  fault  this  way,  (if  it  be  to  be 
counted  a  fault  to  correct)  and  whether  they  be  fit 
men  to  throw  stones  at  us  :  O  tandem  major  parcas  Horat. 
insane  7ninori :  they  that  are  less  sound  themselves  zir.'^sae"/" 
ought  not  to  object  infirmities  to  others.  If  we 
should  tell  them  that  Valla,  Stapulensis,  Eras7nus, 
and  Vives,  found  fault  with  their  vulgar  translation, 
and  consequently  wished  the  same  to  be  mended, 
or  a  new  one  to  be  made ;  they  would  answer  per- 
adventure,  that  we  produced  their  enemies  for  wit- 
nesses against  them ;  albeit  they  were  in  no  other 
sort  enemies,  than  as  S.  Paul  was  to  the  Galatians,  oai.  4. 16. 
for  telling  them  the  truth :  and  it  were  to  be  wished, 
that  they  had  dared  to  tell  it  them  plainlier  and 
oftener.  But  what  will  they  say  to  this.  That  Pope 
Leo  the  tenth  allowed  Erasmus's  translation  of  the 
New  Testament,  so  much  different  from  the  Vulgar, 
by  his  apostoHck  letter  and  bull?  That  the  same  Leo  sixtusSe- 
exhorted  Fagnine  to  translate  the  whole  Bible,  and 
bare  whatsoever  charges  was  necessary  for  the  work? 
Surely,  as  the  Apostle  reasoneth  to  the  Hebi-eivs^  that 


2  94  The    T^-anslators  to  the  Reader. 

Heb.  7.  II.  if  fjie  former  Law  and  Testament  had  been  sufficient^ 
there  had  been  no  7ieed  of  the  latter :  so  we  may  say, 
that  if  the  old  Vulgar  had  been  at  all  points  allow- 
able, to  small  purpose  had  labour  and  charges 
been  undergone  about  framing  of  a  new.  If  they 
say,  it  was  one  Pope's  private  opinion,  and  that  he 
consulted  only  himself ;  then  we  are  able  to  go  further 
with  them,  and  to  aver,  that  more  of  their  chief  men 
of  all  sorts,  even  their  own  Trent  champions,  Paiva 
and  Vega,  and  their  own  Inquisitors,  Hieronymus  ab 
Oleastro,  and  their  own  Bishop  Istdortis  Ciartus,  and 
their  own  Cardinal  Thomas  a  Vio  Cajetan,  do  either 
make  new  translations  themselves,  or  follow  new  ones 
of  other  men's  making,  or  note  the  Vulgar  interpreter 
for  halting,  none  of  them  fear  to  dissent  from  him, 
nor  yet  to  except  against  him.  And  call  they  this  an 
uniform  tenor  of  text  and  judgment  about  the  text, 
so  many  of  their  worthies  disclaiming  the  now  re- 
ceived  conceit?     Nay,  we  will  yet  come  nearer  the 

[158S— 40]     quick.     Doth  not  their  Paris  edition  differ  from  the 

[1547]  Lovaine,  and  Hentenitis  his  from  them  both,  and  yet 

all  of  them  allowed  by  authority?     Nay,   doth   not 

sixtusY.      Sixtus   Oiiintiis   confess,  that  certain  Catholicks  (he 

Prcefat.  ...  . 

fixa  Bibiiis  meancth  certain  of  his  own  side)  were  in  such  a  humour 
[1590].  .  .  . 

of  translatmg  the  Scriptures   mto  Latin,  that  Satan 

taking  occasion  by  them,  though  they  thought  no  such 

matter,  did  strive  what  he  could,  out  of  so  uncertain 

and  manifold  a  variety  of  translations,  so  to  mingle 

all  things,  that  nothing  might  seem  to  be  left  certain 

and   firm    in    them  ?   &c.     Nay  further,  did  not  the 

same  Sixtus  ordain  by  an  inviolable  decree,  and  that 

with  the  counsel  and  consent  of  his  Cardinals,  that 

the  Latin  edition  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament, 

which  the  Council  of  Trent  would  have  to  be  authen- 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  295 

tick,  is  the  same  without  controversy  which  he  then 
set  forth,  being  dihgently  corrected  and  printed  in 
the  printinghouse  of  Vatican^  Thus  Sixtiis  in  his 
Preface  before  his  Bible.  And  yet  Clement  the  eighth, 
his  immediate  successor,  pubHshed  another  edition  of  [1592] 
[1592]  the  Bible, containing  in  it  infinite  differences  from 
that  of  Sixtus,  and  many  of  them  weighty  and  ma- 
terial ;  and  yet  this  must  be  authentick  by  all  means. 
What  is  to  have  the  faith  of  our  glorious  'Lord  Jesus 
Christ  with  yea  and  nay,  if  this  be  not  ?  Again, 
what  is  sweet  harmony  and  consent,  if  this  be  ?  There- 
fore, as  Dcmaratus  of  Corinth  advised  \a  great  King,  [Diodoms, 
before  he  talked  of  the  dissensions  among  the  Grecians,  ^^'"  ^' 
to  compose  his  domestick  broils  ;  (for  at  that  time 
his  queen  and  his  son  and  heir  were  at  deadly  feud 
with  him)  so  all  the  while  that  our  adversaries  do 
make  so  many  and  so  various  editions  themselves, 
and  do  jar  so  much  about  the  worth  and  authority  of 
them,  they  can  with  no  show  of  equity  challenge  us 
for  changing  and  correcting. 

But  it  is  high  time  to   leave  them,  and  to  shew  The  purpose 
in   brief  what  we   proposed  to   ourselves,   and   what  lators,  with 
course  we  held,  in  this  our  perusal  and  survey  of  the  ber'^^fumi- 
Bible.      Truly,    good    Christian    Reader,    we    never  &c.^'  '^^'^^' 
thought  from  the  beginning  that  we  should  need  to 
make  a  new  translation,  nor  yet  to  make  of  a  bad  one 
a  good  one ;  (for  then  the  imputation  of  Sixtus  had 
been  true   in  some  sort,   that   our  people  had  been 
fed  with  gall  of  dragons  instead  of  wine,  with  whey 
instead  of  milk;)  but  to  make  a  good  one  better,  or 
out  of  many  good  ones  one  principal  good  one,  not 
justly  to    be   excepted  against ;  that    hath  been   our 
endeavour,   that  our  mark.     To  that  purpose   there 

^  Xerxes. 


296  The  Tra?islato7-s  to  the  Reader. 

were  many  chosen,  that  were  greater  in  other  men's 
eyes  than  in  their  own,  and  that  sought  the  truth  rather 
than  their  own  praise.  Again,  they  came,  or  were 
thought  to  come,  to  the  work,  not  exe?re7idi  causa, 
(as  one  saith)  but  exej-citati,  that  is,  learned,  not  to 
learn :  For  the  chief  overseer  and  epyoStojKrr/s  under 
his  Majesty,  to  whom  not  only  we,  but  also  our  whole 
Church  was  much  bound  \  knew  by  his  wisdom,  which 
Nazianzeit.  thing  also  Nazianzeji  taught  so  long  ago,  that  it  is  a 
Trapovir.      '  prcpostcrous  order  to  teach  first,  and  to  learn  after, 

\prat.  XLii.  1  \     5  //I  /  /n  '  i  j 

cap.  i].         yea  that  'vo  er  Trtt/o)  Kepa/xtav  ixavuavetv,  to  learn  and 
Apoiogei.      practise  together,  is  neither  commendable  for  the  work- 
c«/!^47].'       man,  nor   safe  for  the  work.     Therefore  such  were 
thought  upon,  as  could  say  modestly  with  S.  Hierome, 
Et  Hebrceum  seruionem  ex  parte  didicmius,  et  in  Latino 
pene  ab  ipsis  incunabidis,  &c.  detriti  sumus;  Both  we 
have  learned  the  Hebrew  tongue   in  part,  and  in  the 
Latin   we   have   been   exercised  almost  from  our  very 
cradle.     S.  Hieronie  maketh  no  mention  of  the  Greek 
tongue^  wherein  yet  he  did  excel ;  because  he  trans- 
lated not  the  Old  Testament  out  of  Gi-eek,  but  out  of 
ILebrew.     And  in  what  sort  did  these  assemble  ?     In 
the  trust  of  their  own  knowledge,  or  of  their  sharpness 
of  wit,  or  deepness  of  judgment,  as  it  were  in  an  arm 
of  flesh  ?     At  no  hand.     They  trusted  in  him  that 
[Rev.  3. 7.]   hath  the  key  oi  David.,  opening,  and  no  man  shutting; 
they  prayed  to  the  Lord,  the  Father  of  our  Lord,  to 
s.  Aug.  lib.   the  effect  that  St.  Augustine  did ;  O  let  thy  Scriptures 

X I  •      Co?t/CSS 

cap.  2.  be  my  pure  delight;  let  me  not  be  deceived  in  them, 

neither  let  me  deceive  by  them.  In  this  confidence,  and 
with  this  devotion,  did  they  assemble  together ;  not 
too  many,  lest  one  should  trouble  another ;  and  yet 

^  Richard  Bancroft,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  died  Nov. 
1,  1610. 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  2i)i 

many,  lest  many  things  haply  might  escape  them.     If 
you  ask  what  they  had  before  them,  truly  it  was  the 
Hebre^v  text  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  Greek  of  the 
New.     These  are    the  two  golden   pipes,    or   rather 
conduits,  wherethrough  the  olive  branches  empty  them-  [Zech.  iv. 
selves  into  the  gold.     Saint  Augustine  calleth  them  ^slij,g„,t 
precedent,  or  original,  tongues;  Saint  Hieronie,  ioMW-'^^^"^^'^"''^^ 
tains.     The  same  Saint  Hieronie  affirmeth,  and  Gratian  ^-^l^eron. 

'  ad  o  nniavi 

hath  not  spared  to  put  it  into  his  decree,  That  as  the  ^i  K^/'-'^- 

S.  Hieron. 

credit  of  the  old  books  (he  meaneth  of  the  Old  Testa-  adLndni- 

ment)  ts  to  be  tried  by  the  Hebreiv  volumes ;  so  of  the  ut  veterum. 

New  by  the  Greek  tongue,  he  meaneth  by  the  original 

Greek.     If  truth  be  to  be  tried  by  these  tongues,  then 

whence  should  a  translation  be  made,  but  out  of  them? 

These  tongues  therefore   (the  Scriptures,  we  say,  in 

those  tongues)  we  set  before   us  to  translate,  being 

the  tongues  wherein  God   was   pleased  to    speak  to 

his   Church  by  his  Prophets  and  Apostles.    Neither 

did  we  run  over  the  work  with  that  posting  haste  that 

the  Septuagint  did,  if  that  be  true  which  is  reported  of  Joseph. 

1  -     .  .     .  .  1  Antiq. 

them,  that  they  finished  it  in  seventy  two  days  ;  neither  ub.  12. 
were  we  barred  or  hindered  from  going  over  it  again, 
having  once  done  it,  like  St  Hieronie,  if  that  be  true  s.  Hieron. 
which   himself  reporteth,    that   he   could   no  sooner^r^/z^. 
write  any  thing,  but  presently  it  was  caught  from  him,  ^j^jinUn. 
and  published,  and  he  could  not  have  leave  to  mend 
it :  neither,  to  be  short,  were  we  the  first  that  fell  in  TrpwTOjreipoi. 
hand  with  translating  the  Scripture  into  English,  and  rkesalr. 
consequently  destitute  of  former  helps,  as  it  is  written  jg^j' '""  ^' 
of  Origen,  that  he  was  the  first  in  a  manner,  that  put 
his  hand  to  write  commentaries  upon  the  Scriptures, 
and  therefore  no  marvel  if  he  overshot  himself  many 
times.      None    of  these   things  :  the   work   hath  not 
been  huddled  up  in  seventy  two  days,  but  hath  cost 


298 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


<I>i\ei  ya.p  ok- 
vtiv  TTpayfx 
dvrjp  npcKT- 
(ToiU  fLeya, 
Sopkocl.  in 
Elect. 
\71er.  320]. 


Reasons 
moving  us  to 
set  diversity' 
of  senses  in 
the  margin, 
where  there 
is  great 
probabiHtj' 
tor  each. 

TTo'i/Ta  Ta 

dva-fKola. 

Srj\a. 

S.  Ckrysost. 

in  2  Thess. 

cap.  2. 

6".  Atig.  2. 

de  doctr. 

Christ,  cap. 

9- 


the  workmen,  as  light  as  it  seemeth,  the  pains  of  twice 
seven  times  seventy  two  days,  and  more.  Matters  of 
such  weight  and  consequence  are  to  be  speeded  with 
maturity  :  for  in  a  business  of  moment  a  man  feareth 
not  the  blame  of  convenient  slackness.  Neither  did 
we  think  much  to  consult  the  translators  or  commen- 
tators, Chaldee.,  Hehrezv,  Syrian.,  Greek,  or  Latin;  no, 
nor  the  Sj>a?iish,  French,  Italian^  or  Dutch^ ;  neither 
did  we  disdain  to  revise  that  which  we  had  done,  and 
to  bring  back  to  the  anvil  that  which  we  had  hammer- 
ed :  but  having  and  using  as  great  helps  as  were  need- 
ful, and  fearing  no  reproach  for  slowness,  nor  coveting 
praise  for  expedition,  we  have  at  the  length,  through 
the  good  hand  of  the  Lord  upon  us,  brought  the  work 
to  that  pass  that  you  see. 

Some  peradventure  would  have  no  variety  of 
senses  to  be  set  in  the  margin,  lest  the  authority  of 
the  Scriptures  for  deciding  of  controversies  by  that 
show  of  uncertainty  should  somewhat  be  shaken.  But 
we  hold  their  judgment  not  to  be  so  sound  in  this 
point.  For  though  whatsoever  things  are  necessary  are 
manifest,  as  S.  Chrysostoine  saith  ;  and,  as  'Si.  Augustine., 
in  those  things  that  are  plainly  set  down  in  the  Scrip- 
tures all  such  jnatters  are  fojind  that  concern  faith,  hope, 
and  charity :  yet  for  all  that  it  cannot  be  dissembled, 
that  partly  to  exercise  and  whet  our  wits,  partly  to 
wean  the  curious  from  loathing  of  them  for  their 
every  where  plainness,  partly  also  to  stir  up  our  de- 
votion to  crave  the  assistance  of  God's  Spirit  by 
prayer,  and' lastly,  that  we  might  be  forward  to  seek 
aid  of  our  brethren  by  conference,  and  never  scorn 
those  that  be  not  in  all  respects  so  complete  as  they 
should  be,  being  to  seek  in   many  things  ourselves, 

^  See  above,  p.  140  note. 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


299 


it  hath  pleased  God  in  his  Divine  Providence  here 
and  there  to  scatter  words  and  sentences  of  that 
difficulty  and  doubtfulness,  not  in  doctrinal  points 
that  concern  salvation,  (for  in  such  it  hath  been 
vouched  that  the  Scriptures  are  plain)  but  in  matters 
of  less  moment,  that  fearfulness  would  better  beseem 
us  than  confidence,  and  if  we  will  resolve,  to  resolve 
upon  modesty  with  S.  Atigustijie,  (though  not  in  this  same  ^S".  August. 

1  1  1  i\     »^  T-  li.Z.de  Ge- 

case  altogether,  yet  upon  the  same  ground)  Melius  est  nes.  aduter. 

cap,  5. 

dubitare  de  occultis,  qiiain  litigare  de  ince7'tis :  It  is 
better  to  make  doubt  of  those  tJwigs  which  are  secret., 
than  to  strive  about  those  things  that  are  unce7'tain. 
There  be  many  words  in  the  Scriptures  which  beo»ra^Aevd- 
never  found  there  but  once,  (having  neither  brother  '*^''*' 
nor  neighbour,  as  the  Hebre^vs  speak)  so  that 
we  cannot  be  holpen  by  conference  of  places. 
Again,  there  be  many  rare  names  of  certain  birds, 
beasts,  and  precious  stones,  &c.  concerning  which 
the  Hebrews  themselves  are  so  divided  among  them- 
selves for  judgment,  that  they  may  seem  to  have 
defined  this  or  that,  rather  because  they  would  say 
something,  than  because  they  were  sure  of  that  which 
they  said,  as  S.  Hiero?ne  somewhere  saith  of  the  Sep- 
tuagint.  Now  in  such  a  case  doth  not  a  margin  do 
well  to  admonish  the  Reader  to  seek  further,  and  not 
to  conclude  or  dogmatize  upon  this  or  that  perempto- 
rily? For  as  it  is  a  fault  of  incredulity,  to  doubt  of 
those  things  that  are  evident ;  so  to  determine  of 
such  things  as  the  Spirit  of  God  hath  left  (even  in  the 
judgment  of  the  judicious)  questionable,  can  be  no 
less  than   presumption.     Therefore   as    S.   Augustine  s.  Aiig.  20. 

(~      1  1       r  .        de  doctr. 

saith,  that  variety  of  translations  is  profitable  for  the  christian. 
finding  out  of  the  sense  of  the  Scriptures  :  so  diver- 
sity of  signification  and  sense  in  the  margin,   where 


300 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


Sixtus  V. 
Prcef.  Bibl. 


Plat,  til 
Paulo  se- 

C7l7uio. 


6)aoio7ra0)}S. 

TpwTos  y  ot 
XPtos  kcm. 
[Compare 
Homer, 
Iliad  S-Xi. 
568.] 

Reasons  in- 
ducing us  not 
to  stand  curi- 
ously upon 
an  identity 
of  phrasing. 


the  text  is  not  so  clear,  must  needs  do  good ;  yea,  is 
necessary,  as  we  are  persuaded.  We  know  that 
Sixtus  Qiiintus  expressly  forbiddeth  that  any  variety 
of  readings  of  their  Vulgar  edition  should  be  put  in 
the  margin';  (which  though  it  be  not  altogether  the 
same  thing  to  that  we  have  in  hand,  yet  it  looketh 
that  way;)  but  we  think  he  hath  not  all  of  his  own 
side  his  favourers  for  this  conceit.  They  that  are 
wise  had  rather  have  their  judgments  at  liberty  in 
differences  of  readings,  than  to  be  captivated  to  one, 
when  it  may  be  the  other.  If  they  were  sure  that 
their  high  priest  had  all  lav;s  shut  up  in  his  breast,  as 
Paul  the  second  bragged,  and  that  he  were  as  free 
from  error  by  special  privilege,  as  the  dictators  of 
Rome  were  made  by  law  inviolable,  it  were  another 
matter ;  then  his  word  were  an  oracle,  his  opinion  a 
decision.  But  the  eyes  of  the  world  are  now  open, 
God  be  thanked,  and  have  been  a  great  while ;  they 
find  that  he  is  subject  to  the  same  affections  and 
infirmities  that  others  be,  that  his  skin  is  penetrable, 
and  therefore  so  much  as  he  proveth,  not  as  much  as 
he  claimeth,  they  grant  and  embrace. 

Another  thing  we  think  good  to  admonish  thee  of, 
gentle  Reader,  that  we  have  not  tied  ourselves  to  an 
uniformity  of  phrasing,  or  to  an  identity  of  words,  as 
some  peradventure  would  wish  that  we  had  done, 
because  they  observe,  that  some  learned  men  some- 
where have  been  as  exact  as  they  could  that  way. 
Truly,  that  we  might  not  vary  from  the  sense  of  that 


^  So  that  even  Vercellone,  as  late  as  i860,  when  publishing 
his  collection  of  VaricE  Lectiones  Vitlg.  Lat.  Bibl.,  probably 
was  prevented  by  this  rule  from  printing  the  text  with  them, 
"  and  so  deprived  them  of  a  great  deal  of  their  value"  (Canon 
Wordsworth,  Gospel fro7n  the  St  German  MS.  (g),  Introduction, 
p.  XVI.  note  3). 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  301 


which  we  had  translated  before,  if  the  word  signified 
the  same  thing  in  both  places,  (for  there  be  some  ^oXvat^iLa. 
words  that  be  not  of  the  same  sense  every  where) 
we  were  especially  careful,  and  made  a  conscience, 
according  to  our  duty.  But  that  we  should  express 
the  same  notion  in  the  same  particular  word ;  as  for 
example,  if  we  translate  the  Hebreiu  or  G7'eek  word 
once  by  purpose,  never  to  call  it  mte/it ;  if  one  where 
Journeying,  never  travelling;  if  one  where  thi7ik,  never 
suppose  ;  if  one  where  pain,  never  ache ;  if  one  where 
joy,  never  gladness,  &c.  thus  to  mince  the  matter,  we 
thought  to  savour  more  of  curiosity  than  wisdom, 
and  that  rather  it  would  breed  scorn  in  the  atheist, 
than  bring  profit  to  the  godly  reader.  For  is  the 
kingdom  of  God  become  words  or  syllables?  Why 
should  we  be  in  bondage  to  them,  if  we  may  be  free  ? 
use  one  precisely,  when  we  may  use  another  no  less 
fit  as  commodiously  ?  A  godly  Father  in  the  primi- 
tive time  shewed  himself  greatly  moved,  that  one  of 
newfangleness  called  Kpd^^arov,  ctklixttovs,  though  the  a  bed. 
difference  be  little  or  none;  and  another  reporteth,  Caitt.'iib. 
that  he  was  much  abused  for  turning  cucurbita  (to  ^  '^HieTon 
which  reading  the  people  had  been  used)  into  hede7'a.  ii'-A-Jona. 

.  '  See  S.  A  ug. 

Now  if  this  happen  in  better  times,  and  upon  so  ''>"^-  Bo- 
snian occasions,  we  might  justly  fear  hard  censure, 
if  generally  we  should  make  verbal  and  unnecessary 
changings.  We  might  also  be  charged  (by  scoffers) 
with  some  unequal  dealing  towards  a  great  number 
of  good  English  words.  For  as  it  is  written  of  a  cer- 
tain great  Philosopher,  that  he  should  say,  that  those 
logs  were  happy  that  were  made  images  to  be  wor- 
shipped ;  for  their  fellows,  as  good  as  they,  lay  for 
blocks  behind  the  fire :  so  if  we  should  say,  as  it 
were,   unto  certain  words.   Stand  up  higher,  have  a 


302 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


place  in  the  Bible  always ;  and  to  others  of  like  qua- 
lity, Get  ye  hence,   be  banished  for  ever;  we  might 
[James  2. 4.]  be   taxcd   peradventure   with    S.  James    his    words, 
namely,   To  be  partial  in  ourselves^  and  judges  of  evil 
AcTTToAovia.    thoughts.     Add  hereunto,  that  niceness  in  words  was 
dSo\e<TxCa.     always  counted  the  next  step  to  trifling;  and  so  was 
SuvJ^iao-""  to  be  curious  about  names  too :  also  that  we  cannot 
irponapaaKev.  folIow  a  better  pattern  for  elocution  than  God  him- 
^piatlrl^      self;  therefore  he  using  divers  words  in  his  holy  writ, 
and  indifferently  for  one  thing  in  nature ;  we,  if  we 
will  not  be  superstitious,  may  use  the  same  liberty  in 
our  English  versions  out  of  Hebrew  and  Greek,  for 
that  copy  or  store  that  he  hath  given  us.     Lastly,  we 
have  on  the  one  side  avoided  the  scrupulosity  of  the 
Puritans,  who  leave  the  old  Ecclesiastical  words,  and 
betake  them  to  other,  as  when  they  put  washing  for 
Baptism,  and  Congregation  instead  of  Church :  as  also 
on  the  other  side  we  have  shunned  the  obscurity  of 
the  Papists,  in  their  Azimes,   Tunike,  Ratiojial,  Holo- 
causts, FrcBpuce,  Pasche,  and  a  number  of  such  like, 
[isai.  19.  18.]  whereof  their  late  translation^  is  full,  and  that  of  pur- 
pose to  darken  the  sense,  that  since  they  must  needs 
translate  the  Bible,  yet  by  the  language  thereof  it  may 
be  kept  from  being  understood.     But  we  desire  that 
the  Scripture  may  speak  like  itself,  as  in  the  language 
of  Canaan,  that  it  may  be  understood  even   of  the 
very  vulgar. 

Many  other  things  we  might  give  thee  warning  of, 
gentle  Reader,  if  we  had  not  exceeded  the  measure 
of  a  preface  already.  It  remaineth  that  we  commend 
thee  to  God,  and  to  the  Spirit  of  his  grace,  which  is 

^  The  New  Testament .. .translated faithfzilly  into  English  ont 
of  the  atUhentical  Latin.  Rbeims,  15S0,  4to.  See  also  p.  288, 
note. 


The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  303 

able  to  build  further  than  we  can  ask  or  think.     He 
removeth  the  scales  from  our  eyes,  the  vail  from  our 
hearts,  opening  our  wits  that  we  may  understand  his 
word,  enlarging  our  hearts,  yea,  correcting  our  affec- 
tions, that  we  may  love  it  above  gold  and  silver,  yea, 
that  we  may   love    it  to  the  end.     Ye  are    brought 
unto  fountains  of  living  water  which  ye  digged  not; 
do   not  cast  earth   into   them,    with  the    Philistines,  Gen.  26. 15. 
neither    prefer    broken    pits   before   them,    with    the  J^''-  =•  ^3- 
wicked  Jews.     Others  have  laboured,   and  you  may  -^^  "  "*'  ^  '^ 
enter   into   their   labours.     O    receive    not   so   great 
things  in  vain  :  O  despise  not  so  great  salvation.     Be 
not  like  swine  to  tread  under  foot  so  precious  things, 
neither  yet  like  dogs  to  tear  and  abuse  holy  things.  [Matt.  7.  e.j 
Say  not  to  our  Saviour  with  the  Ge?'gesites,  Depart  out  Matt.  8. 34. 
of  our  coasts;  neither  yet  with  Esau  sell  your  birth-  Heb.  12.  16. 
right  for  a  mess  of  pottage.     If  light  be  come  into 
the  world,  love  not  darkness  more  than  light :  if  food, 
if  clothing,  be  offered,  go  not  naked,  starve  not  your- 
selves.    Remeniber  the  advice  of  Nazia?izene,  It  is  a  Naziafiz. 
grievous  thing  (or  dangerous)  to  neglect  a  great  fair,  Ja^Vrforat. 
afid  to  seek   to  make   markets   afte7'-wards :    also    the  Atii/b^  ' 
encouragement  of  S.  Chrysosto7tie,  It  is  altogether  ini-  ^a^I^eZ^, 
possible,  that  he  that  is  sober  (and  watchful)  should  at  n'^ayf^artiJ^ 
any  time  be  neglected :  lastly,  the  admonition  and  me-  {s^^jTry'sost. 
nacing  of  S.  Augustine,   They  that  despise  God's  will  "^^^f^^h^^^ 
inviting  them  shall  feel  God's  ivill  takiiig  ve?igeance  of '^L^^^' ^' "' 
them.     It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  T""'''  '^'^°" 
the  living  God;    but  a  blessed  thing  it  is,   and  will  ^""J^^^^^^,^ 
bring  us  to  everlasting  blessedness  in  the  end,  when  "^^^^^^y/J^^ 
God  speaketh  unto  us,  to  hearken;  when  he  settetli  -^^f  16. 

■^  Hel).  10.  31. 

his  word  before  us,  to  read  it;  when  he  stretcheth 
out  his  hand  and  calleth,  to  answer.  Here  am  I,  here 
we  are  to  do  thy  will,  O   God.     The   Lord  work  a 


304  The  Translators  to  the  Reader. 


care  and  conscience  in  us  to  know  him  and  serve 
him,  that  we  may  be  acknowledged  of  him  at  the 
appearing  of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST,  to  whom 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  be  all  praise  and  thanksgiving. 
Amen. 


INDEX 


OF    PERSONS   AND   SUBJECTS. 


N.B. — A.V.  denotes  the  Authorized  Bible  (1611). 


PAGE 

Abbot,  Ezra,  Prof. 243 

Abbot,  G.,  Archp 19  n. 

Accuracy  only  comparative    ^^ 

Addison,  yos 25  n.  i 

Adjectives  used  for  adverbs  n  2 

Adoiiai  yehovah,   how  represented 

in  A.V 147  n.  i 

Aldus,  Greek  Bible  (1518)    47, 

48  and  n.  2,  52  n.,  140,  176  n., 
199  n.  2,  200  n.,  229  n.  2 

Alford,  H.,  Dean  91,  105  n. 

Alternative  renderings  ("|;0r")  al- 
leged  superior   to   those    in    the 

Text  43 

American  failure  of  attempt  at  re- 
vision of  A.V.  (i85i)...36andn.  2, 
37-8,  46,  113,  1 145  ^08  n. 

Anderson,  Chr 12  n.  4 

Andrewes,  Lancelot,  Bp    ,...137 

Angus,  yoseph,  Dr    108  n.  1 

Antedating  books,  fraud  of  ...16  n.  2 
Apocrypha,  omitted  in  Bibles     ...19 
and  n. 

signatures  and  order  as 

bound  in  1769  29  n.  2 

mode    of    representing 

italic  type  in  A.  V 34,  72 

Tremellius'  Latin  ver- 
sion of   44 

marginal  notes  in... 46 — 55 

— Text  used  in  translation 

of    47-8 

S. 


PAGE 

Apocrypha,  first  printed  in  English 
by  Coverdale    52  n. 

resembles  Bishops'  ver- 
sion more  closely  than  Canonical 
Books    73 

parallel  refs.  to,  ex- 
punged     119,  i95n.2 

Translators  of   1 40 

Apodosis  suppressed  in  orig.  texts, 
how  treated  in  A.V 65-6 

Apostrophe,  before  s  in  poss.  cases 
plur.  of  pers.  pronouns 100 

before  or  after  s  to  in- 
dicate poss.  case  sing,  or  plural 
no,  152  n.,  196  n.,  235  n.  1 

Appendices  (A — E)  of  this  work... 3, 
6,  7>  i4>  i5>  17'  i9>  ^ij  22,  23, 
24,  29,  30,  31,  32,  33,  36  and  n.  i, 
38,  49,  51,  58  n.  2,  59,  63,  68,  69, 
71,  80,  88,  91,  98,  no  and  n.  i, 
III  and  n.,  113,  132,  133,  145, 
153  n.  2,  161  n.  I,  173  n.,  187, 
202,  205,  217  n.  4,  233  n.  3, 
234  n. 

Archaic  style  of  A.V.  corrected... 30, 
94,  lOI 

Arnald,  Richard 52 

Article  in  original  Texts,  how  repre- 
sented in  A.V 74-7 

Assembly  of  Divines 25  and  n.  3 

Athanasius,  quoted  in  margin  of 
Apocrypha    46 

20 


3o6 


Index  of  persojis  and  subjects. 


PAGE 

Bagster's  Hexapla  15  n. 

• Polyglott  (1828) 121 

Bain,  Eng.  Grammar,  75,  iion.  2 

Bake}- papers 12  n.  i 

Bancroft,  Rich.,  Archp 13  n.2, 

296  n. 
Basketts,  the,  their  Bibles  (1744 — 56) 
...28,  201  n. 

Bayward,  Thomas 239  and  n.  3 

Bensly,  R.  L 49  n.  i 

Bent  ley,    W/?i.,    his    correct    Bibles 

(1646 — 51)    26 

Beza,  Theodore,  influence  of,  on  Re- 
visers of  N.T....57,  60;  58  nn,  3 
and  4 

his  Greek  Testaments 60, 

243,  248  and  n.  i,  257 

his   Latin    N.T.    (1556)... 61, 


248  n.  I 
Bibles:  English 

A.V.  (1611)  1  passim,  5 — 15 

Bishops'  {1568 — 72)... 9,  12  n.  i, 

40,  43,  47,  48  and  n.  2,  55,  57, 

58  n.  1,61,73,89,  113,  131  n.  2, 

132,    136,    140,    144,    176   n., 

203  n.  2,  267  n. 
Coverdale's  (1535) 40,  52  n., 

73,  92,  93  n.,  105,  131  n.  2 

Douay  (1609 — 10) 288  n. 

Geneva  (1557  N.T.,  1560)     ...40, 

45  n.,  57,  61,  62,  92,  127,  J32, 

267  n. 
Great  (i539)---5  n.,  61,  92,    132, 

139 
Recent  (or  modern)  2 ,  3 

Revised  (1871)    i 

Rhemish     (1582). ..262,    288    n., 

302  n. 
Tyndale's(i52  5— 34)...40,  92,  262 
Wicklif's  (about  1380?)... 207  n.  i, 

250,  252,  255,  262 
French,  R.  P.  Olivetan's  (Geneva, 

1535)  140  n. 

The  Pastors'  (1588)...  140  n. 

German,  Luther's  (1522) 1 40  n. 

6^r^^^',  Aldus (151 8)...4 7,  48  andn.  2, 

52  n.,  140,  176 n.,  199  n.  2,  200  n., 

229  n.  2 

Elzevir  (1624) 132 

Italian,  Bruccioli's  (1532)     ...140  n. 

Diodati's  (1607)   140  n. 


Spanish  (Valencia,  1478)......  140  n. 

Pinel    (Ferrara,    1553)     ... 

140  n. 

C.    de    Reyna's   (1569)  ... 

140  n. 

De  Valera's  revision  of  Va- 
lencia, 1478  (Amsterdam,  1602) ... 

140  n. 
Bilson,    Thomas,   Bp 12  n.  4, 

136  n.,  264 
Blayney,  B....^  n.,  23,  28—35,  38, 

45,  71,  80,  loi,  117  n.,  121,  133, 

145,  242  n. 

his  Report  to  the  Delegates 

of  the  Oxford  Press... 28,  71,  121, 
133'  238—42 

Blnnt,  y.H.  1 3  n.  2,  25  n.  i 

Bodleian  MSS 13  n.2 

Boel,  Corn 10,  17  n. 

Bois,  Anne    13  n.  i 

Bois  (or  Boyse  or  Boys),  y.  ...12,  13 

and  nn.,  22  and  n.  i,  140 

Brady,  Nicholas 133 

British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  . . . 

36  nn.  I  and  2 

British   Mtiseiim,   copies    of   A.V. 

there  5,  203,  214 

of  later  editions 

..25  n.  I,  201  n. 
Grenville  Library 

in    40 

Brown,    y.    (of  Haddington),    his 

Bible    T2I 

Buchanan,  Gilb 8  n.  i 

Bnrgon,  y.  W.,  Dean    22  n.  i 

Bnrnet,  Gilb.,  Bp 139  n. 

*'  Caestiral  comma'"' 92  n. 

Calendar  and  Tables  of  Lessons  no 

part  of  A.V 39 

Cambridge  University  Press 6 

editions   of  A.V.,   their 

merits 20-2 

Canne,  yohn  ...\i\  and  n.,  240  n.  2 
Capital  letters,  employment  of. . .  2, 
.  114 — 6 

intimating  change  of 

speaker   115  and  n. 

representing      JEHO- 


VAH ...116  n.  5,  147  n.  I,  161  n. , 
163,  168,  174,  210,  223  n.  3 


Index  of  persons  and  subjects. 


Z^l 


PAGE 

Carafa,  yohn  Peter,  Cardinal  (Pope 

PaulIV.) 47  n. 

Cardinal  numbeis  used  for  ordinal. . . 

Ill,  147  n.  2,  185  n.,  i},i  n.  i 

Cardivcll,  Edw 3  n.,  35,  93  n., 

168  n.  I,  193  n.  I,  219  n.  4 

Carlcton,  C,  Bp     264 

Changes  (later)  for  the  better  from 

A.V.  should  be  retained... 3,  4,  94 

Chaucer,  Geoffrey    9.',  n.,  105 

Chetiv  or  Hebrew  text    41-2, 

68  and  nn.  i  and  2,  219  n.  3 
Child,  John,  his  evidence  before  a 

Parliamentaiy  Committee  33  n.  i 
CJiristian  II.  of  Denmark  ...139  n. 
Chronology  of  Jewish  Kings,  attempt 

to  set  right    45-6,  134 

Clarke,  Adam     121 

Classics,  English    i 

Codex  Alexandrinus 47,  90  n.  2, 

131,  176  n. 

Bezae    ...59,250,257 

Sangermanensis    49  n. 

Vaticanus...47  n.,  48and  n.  I, 

Common  Prayer  Book  sometimes 
bound  up  with  A.V.   ...17,  21,  39 

Co77iplutensian  Polyglott (1517). .-43? 
47,  48  and  n.  2,  52,  60,  140,  r76n., 
200  n.,  255  n. 

Convocation  of  Province  of  Canter- 
bury  I,  26,  27  and  n.  i 

Copies  of  A. v.,  where  deposited..  5, 
6,  7  and  n.  i,  203,  214 

of  later  editions  15, 

16  and  n.  i,  17  n.,  18  n.,  19  n., 
20  n,,  22,  23  n.,  25  n.  i,  2or  n., 
207  n.  2 

copulative,   absence  of  Hebr.,  how 

noted  by  Translators  77 

Corbinian,  S 282  n.  i 

Corrie,  G.  E 18 

Coverdale's  Bible  (1535). ..40,  52  n., 
93  n.,  131  n.  2,  139  and  n. 

Cox,  Richard,  Bp 139 

Critical  edition  of  Authorized  Bible 

...I 

resources  of  Translators  of 

N.T.  very  scanty 59 

CrutwelP s  e^iXiorv 121,  242  n. 

Cumberland,  R.,  Bp,  his  Tables... 2 7 


Curtis,  Th. 


PAGE 

,35  and  n. 


Dandolini,  Lexicon 13  n.  2 

Daniel,   JVm.,  Archp 13  n.  2 

Dates  in  margin  of  Bibles  ...27,  30, 
45-6,  133-5,  240 

Davenant,  yohn,  Bp     264 

Dcane,  W.  y 131 

Delegates  of  Oxford  University  Press 
•  6,  29,  35 

Delitzsch,  F.  68  n.  i,  88,  129 

Departures  of  modern  Bibles  from 

A.V 3 

Diphthojigs  oe  and  oe  in  A.V.  ...  1 14 
Division    of    this    work    into    sec- 
tions      2 

of  the  Bible  into  chapters 

and  verses 127,  132  n. 

marks  of  paragraph   (IF) 

in  A.V 128 

Dod,  B.,  publisher  29  and  n.  i 

Dort,  Synod  of    1 2  n.  4,  264 

Doubtful  authority,  words  or  clauses 

of,  how  indicated  in  A.V 68, 

73,  254 
Downes,  And.  ...12  and  n.  3,  140  n. 

Dresden,  Latin  MS.  at    49  n.  i 

Drusius 73  n.  2 

Dryden,  yohn 96 

Durell,  David .'239  and  n.  1 

Eadie,  yohn 12  n.  4, 

139  n.,  240  n.  2,  282  n.  2 
Editions  (later)  of  A.  V.  (161 1).,. 

dated  1612  8vo 15 

1613  fol 16,63 

1616  8vo 17 

1617  fol 18 

1619  8vo 18 

1629  4to 19 

^630  4to 19 

Cambridge  1629  fol.    ...3, 

21,  45,  63,  65,  68,  69,  70,  73  n.  3, 
75,  118,  149  n.  I,  164  n.,  264  n. 
Cambridge  1637  4to 

23  n. 

Cambridge  1638  fol.  ...3, 

21,  22  n.  2,  26,  45,  54,  55,  63,  64, 
68,  69,  70,  71  and  n.,  72,  77,  92, 
1 14,  118,  164  n. 


3oJ 


Index  of  persons  and  subjects. 


PAGE 

Editions,  dated  1634  fol 24 

1640  fol 24 

Cambridge  1683  56, 

82,  92 

Large  folio  of  1 70 r    26 

Basketts'(i744— 56)...28, 

201  n. 

Paris,  Cambridge  1762  ... 

29.  45>  54'  55»  56,  59»  63,  71,  94, 
103,  104,  no,  119,  132  n.  2,  134, 
135,  i72n.,  238 

Blayney,    Oxford    1769... 

29'  45»  55>  56,  59'  63,  68,  69,  71, 
78,  79,  81,  92,  94,  103,  104,  no, 
11711.,  119,  132  n.  2,  133,  134 

D'Oyly  and    Mant's  4to. 

1817. ..23,  32,  87,  91,  132  n.  2, 
156  n.  2 

Oxford   reprint,    1833    ... 

6,  7,  16,  18,  35,  86,  94,  203 

1835   32,33 

Coldstream  1845     33 

Bagster  1846 32, 

34,  36  n.  I,  90,  121,  134 

American  1867     23, 

3I'  32,  35,  37  and  n.  2,  87,  91,  92, 
105,  134 

Cambridge  nonpareil  T8'i7 

...38 
Cambridge  1858,  our  mo- 
del ...32,  38,  69,  79  n.  2,  80,  %(i, 
88,  94,  99,  117,  119,  122,  128, 
129,  134,  135,  143,  147  andn.  2, 
164  n.,  172  n.,  194,  215 

Cambridge  1863  4to.,  our 

model  for  Apocrypha 33  n.  3 

"Scotch  Edition,"  ...120, 

121  n.,  240  and  n.  2,  241 

Canne  (Edin.  1747)    

121  n. 
Amsterdam,  8vo.  ...12 in. 

Nourse's  Paragraph  Bible 

(Boston  1836) 90, 

91,  92,  128  n.,  130 

Relig.     Tract      Society's 

"Annotated  Parag.  Bible"  1861 
...88,  91,  92,  122 

Blackadder  1864  ...91,  92 

Newberry  1870    91 

Erasmus,  editions  of  Greek  Test. 
...60,  255  n. 


Ellipsis,  in  original  texts,  how 
treated  in  A.  V 64,79 

Errors,    notable   in   typography   of 

A.  V.  (1611)   8 

and  of  later  editions 4 

and  n.  i,   17,  22  n.   i,   23,  25  n. 

I'  30-I'  32,  33-4,  38-9 
— ■ —      in  the  seventh  command- 
ment (1632)  25  and  n.  i 

many  due  to  Tremellius' 

Version     44 

-ais,  terminations  in     1 88  n. 

Eyre  (or  Eyers  or  Ayers),  W.  ...13 
n.  2,  136  n. 

Falmouth,  Vise 17 

Favour,  Dr     2 75  n. 

'•'•  Fenowed'''' 275  n. 

Field's  Bibles  shamefully  inaccurate 
25  n.  2,  26,  28.     See  Hills. 

—  ...56,  91,  191  n.  2,  193  n.  2 
A,  Dr     ............103,127 

Fine  inflicted  for  misprint  in  Bible 

...   25  n.  I 

^^  Five  Clergyjnen^\  Revision  of  the 

••■   85,91,  135  n. 

Fletcher,  yohn  135  n. 

Fritzsche,  0.  T. 49  n. , 

7311.  2,  131,  199  n.  2 
Fry,  Francis  5 — 

II  and  nil.,  13,  15  11.,  18  andn., 

20,  24,  39 

Gcll,  Robt.,  Dr    43  "-j  141  n. 

Genealogical  charts,  maps,  &c.  at- 
tached to  A.V 39 

Genitive,  double    1 10, 

216  n.  I,  217 

sign    of,  suppressed  

no  and  n.  2,  207  n.  i,  217  n.  2 

George  I.,  his  four  rules  to  secure 
an  accurate  Bible     27 

George  II. ,  degrees  conferred  by  . . . 

12  n.  I 

Gerundial  Infinitive  of  Hebrew, 
different  methods  of  rendering  in 
A.V 142 

Gifford,   William 93  n. 

Ginsburg,  C.  D. ,  Dr  44  n. 

Goad,  y.,  Dr    22 

Gorle,  y 79  and  n.  2,  n 5 


Index  of  persotis  and  subjects. 


309 


Goiilbiim,  E.  M. ,  Dean   r  42  n. 

G(nuer,  John     93  n- 

Grabe,  J.E 200  n. 

Graduation  of  punctuation     92 

Grajnviatical  peculiarities 2,  30, 

109 — 12 

inflections,  old    ...101 

Gravamina  of  Convocation    ...27  n. 

Greenfield,   Win 36  n.  i 

Griffith,  Mr,  Pemb.  Coll.  Oxon.  239 
Grote,y.,  his  MS.  cited    23  n., 

32,  57  n.  I,  74,  81,  82,  91,  92  and 

n.,  121  n.,  133,  191  n.  2 

h  initial,  vise  of  a  or  an  before,  in 

A.V 105—8 

Hall,  yoseph,  Bp    264 

Hampton  Court  Confc?'cnce  (1603-4) 

...138 

Harding,  yohn,  Dr  138 

Harleian  MSS.    12 

nn.  I  and  3,  13  n.  i 
Hayes,  yohn,  his  Cambridge  Bibles, 

1677—83  26 

Headings  of  columns  and  chapters. . . 

132,  239 

Hchmo  Text  used  in  A.  V 42 

compactness  of,  how  treated 

in  A.V 65 

old   accus.   termination  in, 

how  treated  in  A.V 76 

Herodottts,  quoted  in  margin  of  Apo- 
crypha    46 

Hei-z'ey.,  Lord  A.  €.,  Bp   ...131  n.  2 

Hezolelfs  Commentary ir7n. 

High  Com?nission  Conrt 25  n.  i 

Htlls  and  Field  bought  their  privi- 
lege by  a  bribe 26 

their  Bibles  of  1653-7 

veiy  inaccurate    ...25  n.  2,  26,  28 
History  of  text  of  A.  V.    ...2,  3 — 39 

Hobson,  Th i8n. 

Holland,    producer    of    misprinted 

Bibles   25  and  nn.  2  and  3 

Hooker,  Richard    137 

Hopkins,  yohn    133 

Home,  T.  H.    4 n.,  1 1 7  n. 

Hort,  F.  y.  A.,  Prof.   132 

Importation  of  Bibles  forbidden  by 
statute    25  and  n.  3 


PAGE 

Intensive  forms ira 

Isaiah,  single  authorship  of  prophe- 
cies of 126 

Issues  of  A.V.  (161 1)  two  extant... 

5—12,  15 

relative  value  and  priority  of 

each 7  and  n.  2 — 12 

Italic  type  of  Authorized  Bible  ...2, 

23,  29,  31,  38 

very  defectively  represented... 

34 

use  of,  by  Translators... 6 1 — 81 

ya/ncs  I.  curtails  marginal  notes  in 

A.V 40 

orders  the  Bishops'  Bible 

to  be  closely  followed 43-4 

his  I jis/'7'uctions ...^o,  136 

Jehovah,   Hebr.,  how  represented 

in  A.  V 116 

n.  5,  147  n.  I,  161  n.  i,  223  n.  3 

yehovah  Adonai,  how   represented 
in  A.V 147  n.  i 

yei'ome's  Latin  Version 48,  131 

yerusalem,  the  form  "Hierusalem" 

...186  n. 

yob,  book  of,  influence  of  its  diction 
upon  its  successors     126 

unsatisfactory  rendering 

of,  in  A.  V 139 

yohnson,  Samuel     96 

fonson,  Ben    93  i^->  217  n.  2 

yosephus  quoted  in  margin  of  A.  V. 
...46  and  n.,  227  n.  2;  74,  90 

yunius,  Francis 44, 

46;  47,  50  n.,  51  n.,  55,  57,  73 
and  n.  2,  153  n.  i,  176 n.,  198 n.  i, 
199  n.  I 

Keri,  or  Hebrew  margin  16, 

41-2,  68  and  nn.  i  and  2,  219  n.  3 
Kilburne,   IVm 22 

n.  2,  24,  25  and  n.  i,  26 
Kilbye,  Richard,  Dr 138 

and  n.  2 

Killingxoorth,  yohn 13  n.  i 

King  yames''s  Bible  i 

King's  Printers  ...5,  20,  25,  27,  28, 

35»  127 

latin  MSS 49  n.  i 


lO 


Index  of  persons  mid  subjects. 


Latin  translation  of  O.  T.  by  Im- 

manuel  Tremellius 44, 

57,  9011.  I,  i53n.  1, 170  n.,  17211. 

by  Sebastian  Mun- 

ster  (1534)     61 

of  Apociypha   by 


Francis  Junius 44 

of  N.  T.  by  Theo- 
dore Beza  (1556) 57,  248  n.  i 

— —       Version,  Old  ...47,  48,  90, 

144 

Laud,  IVm.,  Archp 25  n .  i 

Leciionary,  New  Church  129 

Lenox,  Mr    25  n.  i 

Lezvis,  John      12 

n.  I,  27  nn.  i  and  2 

Lightfoot,  y.B.,  Bp  23  n. 

Litany,  English      105 

Lively,  Edward     1 39 

Lloyd,  JV/n.,  Bp 26-7 , 

30>57'  133.  134,  168  n.  I,  238,  240 

Longfelloxo,  LL.  IV.  25  n.  2 

Lowth,  Robert,  Bp 129,  131  n.  i 

Lnard,  LL.  R 13  ii-  2 

Macalpinc,  J.  M.     ^Z9^- 

Manley,  W.  L 19 

Marginal  dates     27,  30, 

45-6,  133-5'  240 

marks  of  A.  v.,  errors  in... 

180  n.  2 

notesofA.V 2,27, 

31,  40 — 60 

notes,  additional    26, 


^7'  45 


their    number    and 

character  in  O.  T 41-6 

in  Apocrypha   ...46 

in  N.  T.    ...55—60 


textual  references  of  A.  V. 

...2,  8,  26,  27,  30,  116—27 
in  Epistle  of  "Trans- 
lators to  the  Reader"   267  n. 

Marsh,  G.  P..... 93  n.,  207  n.  i 

Mary,  Queen     ^19'^- 

Masoretic  revisers  of  Hebrew  text 

...41 

points 78,130 

— —      notes     42 

McLanc,  J.  W.   36 


Mead  {ox  Mede),  Jos 22 

and  n.  i,  134 

ALilfon,  yohn    96 

Misprints,  see  Errors. 

Missing  fragmetit  of  4th   book  of 

Esdras  49  n. 

Models    of    Cambridge    Paragraph 

Bible   32,  38,  80,  86,  99 

Modcrnizers  of  diction  of  A.  V 

30,  94,  loi,  133 

ALorinJis,  Peter     47  i^- 

Moses  cornutiis    9 

Mottle,  LL.  C.  G 91 

Alonlton,  W.  F.    90,  92 

ALunster,  Sebastian  61 

Negative,  archaic  double  in 

Neivtli,  ^'.,  Dr  1 9,  1 38  n.  i 

New  York  Bible  Society,     46 

N'orth,  James     207  n.  2 

Nti/nber  of  final  Committee  on  A.  V. 
...12  and  n.  4,  13  n.  2,  39,  264 

O  and  Oh,  distinction  between   ... 

113 

Objective  case  used  for  nominative 

...112 

Omissions  through  same  beginning 
of  clauses  17 

Origen^s  LLexapla,  Dr  Field's  edition 
of 127 

Original  texts  from  which  A.  V.  was 
rendered   2,  42,  47,  57,  60 

"  II  Cr"  the  word  prefixed  to  alter- 
native renderings  41,  55 

Orthography  2,  93 — 109 

Overall,  John,  Bp 137 

"  oivn,^''  use  of  in  A.  V.  representing 
simple  poss.  pron.  of  original 
text    78 

Oxford  University  Press   6,  28, 

29,  35,  127,  133,  238 

Bibles,  see  Editions. 

Pahner,  J. ,  Prof 49  n. 

Paragraphs,  custom  of  printing  the 

Bible  in   127 

marks   (IT)  of  division 

into,  in  A.V 128 

Parentheses,  replaced  by  commas  in 

modern  Bibles 81 


Index  of  persons  and  subjects. 


311 


PAGE 

Pans,  Dr,  28—35,  45.  4^,  57.  7^, 

loi,  238 
Participles  past,  archaic  forms  of. . . 
103,  217  and  n.  3 
Particles,  various  forms  of. . .  103  &  n. 

Paston  letters  (1470)    93  n. 

Patrick,  Simon,  Bp    122 

Paid,  C.  K.     1 32  n.  2 

Peck,  Francis,  '•'■desiderata  curiosa" 
...12  nn.  I — 3 

Perawne,  y .  y .  S.,  Dean 83,  88 

Philoxenian  Syriac  version     59 

Pleonastic  pronouns  in  and  n. 

Pliny,  quoted  in  margin  of  Apo- 
crypha    46 

Plural,  archaic   87  and  n., 

228  and  n.  r 

regarded  as  sing 229  and 

n.  I 
Poetical  portions  of  Bible,  arrange- 
ment of,  in  Camb.  Par.  Bible. . .  1 29 

Polyglot t,  Bagster's  ( 1 8  2  8 )    121 

Complutensian  ( 1 5 1 7)    ... 

43,  47,  48  and  n.  2,  52,  60,   140, 
176  n.,  200  n.,  255  n. 

Walton's  (1657). ..47,  2S3 

...n.2 

'*  Po7iesses^''     292  n. 

Pope,  Alex 13  n.2 

Postel,  William  283  n.  r 

Preterite,  archaic    10 1-3 

Pronoun  pers.,  omission  of  with 
Hebr.  infin. ,  how  indicated  by- 
Translators    78 

Proper  Names  explained  in  the  ad- 
ditional marginal  notes  ...45,  239 
alternative   forms  of 

•••55.  94 

introduced  into  A.V. 

on  authority  of  Josephus 73 

absolute    uniformity 

in  spelling  of,  not  to  be  aimed  at 

...97  n. 
parallel  references  re- 
lating to,  in  Camb.  Par.  Bible  ... 

124 
Psalms,  Pr.-Book  version  of  ...139 
Pjinctuation o{  A.N — 2,  27,  81 — 92 
Pursuivant  fetcht   to   a   reviser  of 

A.V 12  n.  3 

Puscy,  E.  B.,  Canon    82  n.  2 


Kainolds,  John,  Dr 138  and  n.  i 

Rashe  tevotli \n^  n.  2 

Reeves,  John '..127 

References,  parallel    n6 — 27 

Reprinted    leaves     (244)     in     A.V. 

Bibles     5,  6  and  n.,  10,  12 

Revised  version  of  the  Biljle i 

Rheims,  Vulgate  N.T.  of  (1582) 

262,  288  n.,  302  n. 

Richardson,  Charles 27^  n. 

Rivaby,  generous  between  English 

versions  j 

Rivington,  C.  R 19  n. 

Robinson,  Ed ^6 

Rules  laid  down  by  Translators  but 

not  carried  out 74 

the  four,  of  George  1 27 

s  after  Hebrew  termination  -////  ...113 

Saravia,  Adrian  de    137 

Savi/e,  Sir  Henty  r^o 

Scattergood,  Ant.,  Dr 26,  5 7  n.  i 

Schaff,  Phil.  ...37  n.  i,  203  n.  i,  243 

Scholefield,  James,  Prof.  35,  79 

n.  I,  90,  91,  233  n.  2 

Schultens,  Albert    1 30 

Scott,  Thomas     121 

Seeker,  Th.,  Archp 30,  240  n. 

Sections,    this    work    divided     into 

seven    2 

Selden,  John    19  n.,  140  n.  i 

Septuagint   Greek   version   of    Old 

Test 41,  68 

Roman  (1586)  ...47  and 

n.,  48   and    n.  2,   90   n.  2,    140, 
176  n. ,  229  n.  2 
Shakespeare,  different  ways  of  spell- 
ing his  name 94 

— quoted 108  n.  2, 

no  n.3;  229  n.  I 
Singular,  archaic  use  of,  for  plural 

...  in 

Smith,  Miles,  Bp  12  n.  4,  39, 

136  n. ,  264 

Spalding,  R 139 

Speed,   Jo.,    his   patent   for  genea- 
logical charts,  &c 39 

Spenser,  Edmund 292  n. 

Standard  copies  ofA.V.  (i6ii)    ...6 
of  Cambridge  Para- 
graph Bible  38 


;i2 


Index  of  perso7is  and  subjects. 


PAGE 

Status  Eviphatiais  of  Chaldee  

222  n.  I 

Stephen,  Robert,  his  Greek  Test. . .  .60, 
243,  248  and  n.  i,  255  n.,  257 

division  into  verses 

invented  by     127,  132  n.  i 

Sterne,  Rich 22 

Sternhold,  Thomas    133 

Stevens,  H.    25  n.  i 

Superlative,  double \\i 

Syndics  of  the  Cambridge  University- 
Press  6,  35,  79  n.2 

Tables  of  Scripture  Measures,  &€.... 

27 

of  Kindred,  Time,  Offices, 

&c 27 

Targuni,  or  Chaldee  paraphrase... 41 

Tate,  Nahum 133 

Tcnison,  Th.,  Archp 26 

Texts,  original,  used  for  A.  V. ...  2,  42 , 

47'  57>  60 

of  Scripture,  parallel  in  A.V. 

...2,  116 — 27 

Time  spent  in  translating  A.V 

12  and  n.  2 
Tischendorf,  A  en.  F.  C,  his  Scptua- 

gint...^']  n. ;  90,  92 

Tomson,  Latur 132,  251 

Transition  from  oratio  obliqua  to  0. 

directa  in   Hebr.,  how  indicated 

in  A.V 67,  73 

Translators  to  the  Reader   ...12  n.2, 

39,  262,  267 — 304 

Tregelles,  S.  P.,  Dr     90 

Tremellius,  Immanuel 44,  57, 

90  n.  I,  153  n.  T,  170  n.,  172  n. 
Trench,  R.  C,  Archp 85,  114, 

233  n.2 

Trevisa,  John     282  n.2 

Turin,  Latin  ]\IS.  at    49  "•  1 

Turton,  T.,  Bp    21,  33  n.  2, 

35-6,  41  n.,  57,  61  n.  I,  65,  168 

n.i,  223  n.3 
Type,  variation  of  in  Bible,  method 

of  and  reasons  for  employment  . . . 

61,  62 
Tyrrell,  James     13^-2 


tin-  prefix  in  place  of  im-  or  in-  ...112 

Unequal  execution  of  A,  V 1 36 

Uniformity  of  practice  in  marking 
grammatical  divergences  not  fol- 
lowed in  A.V 70 

Ussher  (or  Usher),  James,  Archp 

13  n.2,  24,  46  n.,  133,  282  n.i 

Verbs,  transitive  and  intransitive 
confounded 112 

Vercellone,  C 300  n. 

Vulgate  ...52  n.,  61,  69  n.,  73  n.2, 
117,  118,  176  n.,  262,  300  n. 

IVake,  W.,  Archp.,  his  care  for  an 

accurate  Bible  27 

Walker,  Ant.,  Dr  12  and  nn.  2 

and  3,  13 

Waller,  G.  C 92  n. 

Walpole,  Sir  R 27 

Walton,  Brian,  Bp,   his    Polyglott 

(1657)     47>  283  n.2 

Walton,  Isaac 138  and  n.  2 

Ward,  S.  Dr   22,  264  and  n. 

Westcott,  B.  F.,  Canon  12  n.  2, 

136  n.,  243,  248  nn.  2  and  3,  253  n. 

Wetstein,  J.  J 126 

Wheeler,  Prof. 239  and  n .  ■? 

Wh  itelocke,  Buls 25  n.  3 

Wicklif,  John  ...207  n.i,  250,  252, 

255,  262 
Wigram's    "Hebr.  Vade  Mecum" 

...127 

Wilson,  Lea  21,  22,  214 

Thomas,  Bp    ...121,  242  n. 

William,  Canon  126 

Winer,  G.  B 90,  92 

Wolfenbuttel  Bible    25  n.i 

Wordsworth,  Chr.,  Bp  ...86,  89,  92 

y^p/zw,  Canon... 300  n. 

Charles,  Bp  . . .  1 3  2  n .  2 

Wright,  W.  Aldis 1 1  o  n.  2 , 

217  n.2 

Ximeiu's,  Francisco  de  Cisneros,  Car- 
dinal   48  n.  I 

Zeugma,  Hebraic  use  of,  how  treated 
in  A.V 66,  73 


CAMBRIDGE  :    PRINTED    BV   C.    J.    CLAY,    M.A.    AND   SON,    AT   THE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS. 


University  Press,  Cambridge, 
April,  1892. 

PUBLICATIONS   OF 


THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,  &c. 

HEBREW. 
A  short  Commentary  on  the  Hebrew  and  Aramaic  Text  of  the 

Book  of  Daniel,  by  A.  A.  Bevax,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College. 
Demy  8vo.     8^. 

GREEK. 

The  Old  Testament  in  Greek  according  to  the  Septuagint.    Edited 

by  the  Rev.  Professor  H.  B.  Swete,  D.D.  Crown  8vo.  Vol.  I, 
Genesis — IV  Kings,     is.  6d.     Vol.  II.     I  Chronicles — Tobit.     7^.  6d. 

[Vol.  III.  In  the  Press. 

The  Book  of  Psalms  in  Greek  according  to  the  Septuagint.     Being 

a  portion  of  \'ol.  II.  of  the  above  work.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

The  Parallel    New  Testament  Greek  and  English.     The  New 

Testament,  being  the  Authorised  Version  set  forth  in  1611  Arranged  in 
Parallel  Columns  with  the  Revised  Version  of  1881 ;  and  with  the  original 
Greek,  as  edited  by  the  late  F.  H.  A.  Scrivener,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D. 
Crown  8vo.  12^.  6d.  {The  Revised  Versiov  is  the  joint  Property  of  the 
Universities  of  Cambridge  and  Oxford. ) 

Greek  and  English  Testament,  in  parallel  columns  on  the  same 

page.  Edited  by  J.  SCHOLEFIELD,  M.A.  New  Edition,  with  the  marginal 
references  as  arranged  and  revised  by  Dr  Scrivener,     is.  6d. 

Greek  and  English  Testament.     The  Student's  Edition  of  the 

2i\)oyt  on  large  writing  paper.     4to.     i2s. 

See  also  p.   22,   Cajubridge  Greek   Testament, 

The  New  Testament  in  the  Original  Greek,  according   to  the 

Text  followed  in  the  Authorised  Version,  together  with  the  Variations 
adopted  in  the  Revised  Version.  Edited  by  the  late  F.  H.  A.  Scrivener, 
M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.     Small  Crown  8vo.     6s. 

BibUcal  Fragments  from  Mount  Sinai,  edited  by  J.  Rendel 
Harris,  M.A.     Demy  4to.     \os.  6d. 

Notitia  Codicis  Quattuor  Evangeliorum  Graeci  membranacei  viris 
doctis  hucusque  incogniti  quem  in  museo  suo  asservat  Eduardus  Reuss 
Argentoratensis.     2s. 


Londoti:    Cambridge   Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


1500 
19/4/92 


CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


SYRIAC. 
The  Harklean  Version  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  Chap. 

XI.  28 — XIII.  25.  Now  edited  for  the  first  time  with  Introduction 
and  Notes  on  this  version  of  the  Epistle.  By  Robert  L.  Bensly. 
Demy  8vo.     5J. 

LATIN. 

The  Latin  Heptateuch.  Published  piecemeal  by  the  French  printer 
William  Morel  (1560)  and  the  French  Benedictines  E.  Mart^ne  (1733) 
and  J.  B.  Pitra  (1852 — 88).  Critically  reviewed  by  John  E.  B.  Mayor, 
M.A.     Demy  8vo.     ioj.  dd. 

The  Missing  Fragment  of  the  Latin  Translation  of  the  Fourth 

Book  of  Ezra,  discovered  and  edited  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and 
facsimile  of  the  MS.,  by  Prof.  Bensly,  M.A.    Demy  40.    \os. 

Codex  S.  Ceaddae  Latinus.     Evangelia   SSS.    Matthaei,    Marci, 

Lucae  ad  cap.  III.  9  complectens,  circa  septimum  vel  octavum  saeculum 
scriptvs,  in  Ecclesia  Cathedrali  Lichfieldiensi  servatus.  Cum  codice  ver- 
sionis  Vulgatae  Amiatino  contulit,  prolegomena  conscripsit,  F.  H.  A. 
Scrivener,  A.M.,  LL.D.     Imp.  4to.    ^i.  \s. 

The  Codex  Sangallensis  (A).  A  Study  in  the  Text  of  the  Old 
Latin  Gospels,  by  J.  Rendel  Harris,  M.A.     Royal  Svo.     3^-. 

The  Origin  of  the  Leicester  Codex  of  the  New  Testament.     By 

J.  R.  Harris,  M.A.     With  3  plates.     Demy  4to.     loi-.  dd. 

ANGLO-SAXON. 

The  Four  Gospels  in  Anglo-Saxon  and  Northumbrian  Versions. 
By  Rev.  Prof.  Skeat,  Litt.D.  One  Volume.  Demy  Quarto.  30J. 
Each  Gospel  separately.     10^. 

ENGLISH. 

The  Authorised  Edition  of  the  Enghsh  Bible  (1611),  its  Sub- 
sequent Reprints  and  Modern  Representatives.  By  the  late  F.  H.  A. 
Scrivener,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.     Crovi^n  Svo.     7^.  dd. 

The   Cambridge    Paragraph   Bible   of  the    Authorized   English 

Version,  with  the  Text  revised  by  a  Collation  of  its  Early  and  other 
Principal  Editions,  the  Use  of  the  Italic  Type  made  uniform,  the  Mar- 
ginal References  remodelled,  and  a  Critical  Introduction,  by  the  late 
F.  H.  A.  Scrivener,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Crown  4to.,  cloth  gilt,  21J. 
The  Student's  Edition  of  the  above,  on  good  writing  paper ^  with  one 
column  of  print  and  wide  margin  to  each  page  for  MS.  notes.  Two  Vols. 
Crown  4to.,  cloth,  gilt,  31J.  dd. 

The  Lectionary  Bible,  with  Apocrypha,    divided  into    Sections 

adapted  to  the  Calendar  and  Tables  of  Lessons  of  187 1.    Cr.  Svo.    3^.  6d. 
{^See  also  pp.  21,   22,    Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools.) 


London :    Cambridge   Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


HOLY  SCRIPTURES. 


The  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.    Large  Paper  Edition.     By  the  Very 

Rev,  E.  H.  Plumptre,  late  Dean  of  Wells.    Demy  8vo.     ^s.  6d. 

The  Gospel  History  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  Language 

of  the  Revised  Version,  arranged  in  a  Connected  Narrative,  especially 
for  the  use  of  Teachers  and  Preachers.  By  Rev,  C.  C.  James,  M.A. 
Crown  8vo.     3^'.  6d. 

A  Harmony  of  the  Gospels  in  the  words  of  the  Revised  Version 

with  copious  references,  tables  &c.  Arranged  by  Rev.  C.  C.  Jamp:s,  M.A. 
Crown  Svo.     ^j-. 

Wilson's  Illustration  of  the  Method  of  explaining  the  New  Testa- 
ment, by  the  early  opinions  of  Jews  and  Christians  concerning  Christ. 
Edited  by  T.  Turton,  D.D.     Demy  8vo.     5J. 


SERVICE-BOOKS. 


A  Comparative  Index  to  the  Leonine,  Gelasian,  and  Gregorian 

Sacramentaries   of   Muratori.     By    H.    A.    Wilson,    AI.A.,     Fellow   of 
Magdalen  College,  Oxford.     Demy  Svo.  [Nearly  ready. 

Breviarium  ad  Usum  Sarum.  A  Reprint  of  the  folio  edition  by 
Chevallon  and  Regnault,  Paris,  1531.  Edited  by  F.  Procter,  M.A. 
and  Chr.  Wordsworth,  M.A.     Demy  Svo. 

Vol.  I.     Kalendar  and  Temporale.     18^. 
Vol.  2.     Psalter  &c.     12^. 

Vol.  3.     Sanctorale.     With  an  Introduction,  lists  of  editions  from  the 

papers  of  H.  Bradshaw,  and  complete  Indexes.     i5j-. 
The  three  volumes  together  £1.  is. 

Breviarium  Romanum  a  Francisco  Cardinali  Quignonio  editum 

et  recognitum   iuxta   editionem   Venetiis   a.d.    1535   impressam  curante 
JOHANNE  WiCKHAM  Legg.     Demy  8vo.      \2S. 

The  Greek  Liturgies.  Chiefly  from  original  Authorities.  By  C.  A. 
SWAINSON,  D.D.,  late  Master  of  Christ's  College.    Cr.  4to.    15^. 


The  Pointed  Prayer  Book,  being  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer 

with  the  Psalter  or  Psalms  of  David,  pointed  as  they  are  to  be  sung  or 
said  in  Churches.    Royal  i^mo,  cloth,  \s,  6d. 

The  same  in  square  32mo.  cloth,  6d. 

Wheatly  on  the  Common  Prayer,  edited  by  G.  E.  Corrie,  D.D., 

late  Master  of  Jesus  College.     Demy  Octavo,     yj.  6d. 

The  Cambridge  Psalter,  for  the  use  of  Choirs  and  Organists.  Spe- 
cially adapted  for  Congregations  in  which  the  "Cambridge  Pointed  Prayer 
Book"  is  used.     Demy  Svo.  cloth,  35.  6d.     Cloth  limp  cut  flush,  7S.  dd. 

The  Paragraph  Psalter,  arranged  for  the  use  of  Choirs  by  the  • 

Right  Rev.  B.  F.  Westcott,  D.D.,  Lord  Bp.  of  Durham.    Fcp.  4to.    5J. 

The  same  in  royal  32mo.    Cloth,  \s.    Leather,  u.  6d. 


London :    Cambridge    Warehouse^  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS, 


The  Homilies,  with  Various  Readings,  and  the  Quotations  from 
the  Fathers  given  at  length  in  the  Original  Languages.  Edited  by 
G.  E.  CoRRiE,  D.D.,  late  Master  of  Jesus  College.     Demy  8vo.     'js.  6d. 

Two  Forms  of  Prayer  of  the  time  of  Queen  Elizabeth.    Now  First 

Reprinted.     Demy  Octavo.     6d. 


THEOLOGY. 

Sayings  of  the   Jewish  Fathers,   comprising   Pirqe   Aboth    and 

Pereq  R.  Meir  in  Hebrew  and  English,  with  Critical  Notes.  By  C. 
Taylor,  D.D.,  Master  of  St  John's  College.     [Nrco  Edition.    Preparing. 

The  Palestinian  Mishna.    By  W.  H.  Lowe,  M.A.    Royal  8vo.   2\s. 
Chagigah  from  the  Babylonian  Talmud.     A  Translation  of  the 

Treatise  with  Notes,  etc.  by  A.  \V.  Streane,  B.D.     Demy  8vo.     \os. 

Psalms  of  the  Pharisees,  commonly  known  as  the  Psalms  of 
Solomon,  by  H.  E.  Kyle,  B.D.  and  M.  R.  James,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.    15^. 

Fragments  of  Philo  and  Josephus.    Newly  edited  by  J.  Rendel 

Harris,  M.A.     With  two  Facsimiles.     Demy  4to.     12^.  dd. 

The  Rest  of  the  Words  of  Baruch :   A  Christian  Apocalypse  of 

the  year  136  a. D.     The  Text  revised  with  an  Introduction  by  J.  Rendel 
Harris,  M.A.     Royal  8vo.     5^-. 
The  Teaching  of  the  Apostles.    Newly  edited,  with  Facsimile  Text 

and  Commentary,  by  J.  R.  Harris,  M.A.     Demy  4to.     21^. 

A   Collation  of  the   Athos  Codex  of  the    Shepherd   of  Hermas. 

Together  with  an  Introduction  by  Spyr.  P.  Lambros,  Ph.D.,  translated 
and  edited  with  a  Preface  and  Appendices  by  J.  Armitage  Robinson, 
B.D.     Demy  8vo.     ^s.  6d. 

The  Philocalia  of  Origen.      The   Greek   Text   edited   from   the 

Manuscripts,  with  Critical  Apparatus  and  Indexes,  and  an  Introduction 
on  the  Sources  of  the  Text.     By  J.  Armitage  Robinson,  B.D. 

[In  the  Press. 

Theodore  of  Mopsuestia's  Commentary  on  the  Minor  Epistles  of 

S.  Paul.  The  Latin  Version  with  the  Greek  Fragments,  edited  from  the 
MSS.  with  Notes  and  an  Introduction,  by  Professor  H.  B  Swete,  D.D. 
Vol.  I.,  containing  the  Introduction,  and  the  Commentary  upon  Galatians — 
Colossians.     Demy  Octavo.  12s. 

Volume  II.,  containing  the  Commentary  on  i  Thessalonians— Philemon, 
Appendices  and  Indices.     12^. 

The  Acts  of  the  Martyrdom  of  Perpetua  and  Fehcitas;  the  ori- 
ginal Greek  Text  now  first  edited  from  a  MS.  in  the  Library  of  the 
Convent  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  at  Jerusalem,  by  J.  Rendel  Harris  and 
Seth  K.  Gifford.     Royal  8vo.     55. 

The  Diatessaron  of  Tatian.    By  J.  Rendel  Harris,  M.A.    Royal 

8vo.     i)S. 

London:    Cambridge    IVarehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


THEOLOGY.  5 


TEXTS  AND   STUDIES:  CONTRIBUTIONS   TO   BIBLICAL 
AND  PATRISTIC   LITERATURE. 

Edited  by  J.  Armitage  Robinson,  B.D.,  Pillow  and  Assistant  Tutor 

of  Christ's  College. 

Vol.  I.   No.  1.   The  Apology  of  Aristides  on  behalf  of  the  Christians. 

Edited  from  a  Syriac  MS.,  with  an  Introduction  and  Translation 
by  J.  Renpel  Harris,  M.A.,  and  an  Appendix  containing  the 
chief  part  of  the  Original  (jreek,  by  J.  Armitage  Robinson,  B.D. 
Demy  8vo.     ^.s.  Net. 

No.  2.    The  Passion  of  S.  Perpetua:  the  Latin  Text  freshly 

edited  from  the  Manuscripts  with  an  Introduction  and  Appendix 
containing  the  Original  Latin  Form  of  the  Scillitan  Martyrdom  ; 
by  J.  Armitage  Robinson,  B.D.     4^.  Net. 

No.   3.    The   Lord's  Prayer  in   the  Early  Church:   with 

Special  Notes  on  the  Controverted  Clauses;  by  F.  H.  Chase,  B.D., 
Christ's  College,     ^s.  Net. 

No.  4.    The  Fragments  of  Heracleon :   the   Greek   Text 

with  an  Introduction  by  A.  E.  Brooke,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  King's 
College.    4^-.  Net. 

Vol.  II.  No.  1.   A  Study  of  Codex  Bezae:  by  J.  Rendel  Harris, 

M.A.     7J-.  6^.  Net. 

No.  2.    The  Testament  of  Abraham.     By  M.  R.  James, 

M.A.,  with  an  Appendix  containing  Translations  from  the  Arabic 
of  the  Testaments  of  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  by  W.  E.  Barnes, 
B.D.     Demy  8vo.  \Nearly  ready. 


Tertullianus  de  Corona  Militis,  de  Spectaculis,  de  Idololatria 
with  Analysis  and  English  Notes,  by  G.  Currey,  D.D.    Crown  8vo.    ^s. 

Sancti  Irenaei  Episcopi  Lugdunensis  libros  quinque  adversus 
Haereses,  edidit  W.  Wigan  Harvey,  S.T.B.  Collegii  Regalis  olim 
Socius.     2  Vols.     Demy  Octavo.    iSj. 

Theophili  Episcopi  Antiochensis  Libri  Tres  ad  Autolycum.   Edidit 

Prolegomenis  Versione  Notulis  Indicibus  instruxit  Gulielmus  Gilson 
Humphry,  S.T.B.     Post  Octavo.     5^. 

Tneophylacti  in  Evangelium  S.  Matthsei  Commentarius.    Edited 

by  W.  G.  Humphry,  B.D.     Demy  Octavo,     is.  6d. 
M.  Minucii  Felicis  Octavius.    The  text  newly  revised  from  the 

original  MS.  with  an  English  Commentary,  Analysis,  Introduction,  and 
Copious  Indices.     By  H.  A.  Holden,  LL.D,     Cr.  8vo.     7^.  6d. 


S.  Austin  and  his  place  in  the  History  of  Christian   Thought. 

Being  the   Hulsean   Lectures  for    1885.     By   W.  Cunningham,  D.D. 
Demy  8vo.     Buckram,  \2s.  6d. 


London:    Ca?nbrid^e    Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS, 


Works  of  Isaac  Barrow,  compared  with  the  original  MSS.  A 
new  Edition,  by  A.  Napier,  M.A.    9  Vols.     Demy  8vo.    £1.  %s. 

Treatise  of  the  Pope's  Supremacy,  and  a  Discourse  concerning 
the  Unity  of  the  Church,  by  I.  Barrow.     Demy  8vo.     7^.  dd. 

Select  Discourses,  by  John  Smith,  late  Fellow  of  Queens'  Col- 
lege, Cambridge.  Edited  by  H.  G.  Williams,  B.D.,  late  Professor  of 
Arabic.     Royal  Octavo.     7^.  60'. 

Pearson's  Exposition  of  the  Creed,  edited  by  Temple  Cheval- 
LiER,  B.D.     3rd  Edition  revised  by  R.  Sinker,  D.D.     Demy  8vo.     i2j. 

An  Analysis  of  the  Exposition  of  the  Creed,  written  by  the  Right 
Rev.  Father  in  God,  John  Pearson,  D.D.  Compiled  by  W.  H.  Mill. 
D.D.     Demy  Octavo.     5^. 

De  Obligatione  Conscientiae  Prselectiones  decern  Oxonii  in  Schola 

Theologica  habitae  a  Roberto  Sanderson,  SS.  Theologiae  ibidem 
Professore  Regio.  With  English  Notes,  including  an  abridged  Transla- 
tion, by  W.  Whewell,  D.D.    Demy  Svo.    7j.  6t/. 

Lectures  on  Divinity  delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge. 
By  John  Hey,  D.D.  Third  Edition,  by  T.  Turton,  D.D.,  late  Lord 
Bishop  of  Ely.     2  vols.    Demy  Octavo.     15J. 

Caesar  Morgan's  Investigation  of  the  Trinity  of  Plato,  and  of  Philo 

Judseus.    2nd  Ed.,  revised  by  H.  A.  Holden,  LL.D.     Cr.  Svo.    \s. 

Christ  the  Life  of  Men.  Being  the  Hulsean  Lectures  for  1888. 
By  Rev.  H.  M.  Stephenson,  M.A.     Crown  Svo.     ^s.  6d. 


SYRIAC  AND  ARABIC. 


Lectures  on  the  Comparative  Grammar  of  the  Semitic  Languages 

from  the  Papers  of  the  late  William  Wright,  LL.D.     Demy  Svo.     14^. 
The  History  of  Alexander  the  Great,  being  the  Syriac  version  of 

the  Pseudo-Callisthenes.     Edited  from  Five  Alanusciupts,  with  an  English 
Translation  and  Notes,  by  E.  A.  W.  Budge,  Litt.D.    Demy  Svo.     -25^-. 

The  Chronicle  of  Joshua  the  Styhte  edited  in   Syriac,  with  an 

English  translation  and  notes,  by  W.  Wright,  LL.D.  Demy  Svo.  los.  6d. 

Kalllah  and  Dimnah,  or,  the  Fables  of  Bidpai;   with  an  English 

Translation    of    the    later    Syriac    version,    with    Notes,    by    the    late 
I.  G.  N.  Keith-Falconer,  M.A.     Demy  Svo.     1$.  6d. 

The  Poems  of  Beha  ed  din  Zoheir  of  Egypt.     With   a  Metrical 

Translation,  Notes  and  Introduction,  by  the  late  E.  H.  Palmer,  M.A. 
2  vols.     Crown  Quarto. 

Vol.  I.     The  Arabic  Text.     Paper  covers,     los.  6d. 

Vol.11.    English  Translation.    Paper  covers.     ios.6d. 


London:    Cambridge   Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane, 


SANSKRIT  AND  PERSIAN. 


SANSKRIT   AND  PERSIAN. 

Makdla-i-Shakhsi  Sayylh  ki  dar   Kaziyya-i-Bab  Navishta-Ast  (a 

Traveller's  Narrative  written  to  illustrate  the  Episode  of  the  Bab).  Per- 
sian text,  edited,  translated  and  annotated,  in  two  volumes,  by  E.  G. 
Browne,  M.A.,  M.B.  Crown  8vo.  15J.  net.  Vol.  II.  (containing 
the  Translation  and  Notes)  separately,  los.  6d.  net. 

Nalopakhyanam,  or,  The  Tale  of  Nala;  containing  the  Sanskrit 

Text  in  Roman  Characters,  with  Vocabulary.  By  the  late  Rev.  T. 
Jarrett,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.     loj. 

Notes  on  the  Tale  of  Nala,  for  the  use  of  Classical  Students,  by 
J.  Peile,  Litt.D.,  Master  of  Christ's  College.     Demy  8vo.      12s. 

The  Divyavadana,  a  Collection  of  Early  Buddhist  Legends,  now 
first  edited  from  the  Nepalese  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  Cambridge  and  Paris. 
By  E.  B.  CowELL,  M.A.  and  R.  A.  Neil,  M.A.     Demy  Svo.     rSx. 


GREEK. 

(See  also  "p"^.  23,  74.) 


The  Agamemnon  of  Aeschylus.     With  a  translation  in  English 

Rhythm,   and  Notes  Critical   and    Explanatory.     New   Edition,    Re- 
vised.    By  the  late  B.  H.  Kennedy,  D.D.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

Aeschyh  Fabulae iketiaes  xoh$OPOI  in  libro  Mediceo  men- 
dose  scriptae  ex  vv.  dd.  coniecturis  emendatius  editae  cum  Scholiis  Graecis 
at  brevi  adnotatione  critica,  curante  F.  A.  Paley,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Demy 
Svo.     "js.  6d. 

Aristotle.— IIEPl  ^YXH^.  Aristotle's  Psychology,  in  Greek  and 
English,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  E.Wallace,  M.A.  Demy  Svo.  iSj. 

Aristotle.  The  Rhetoric.  With  a  Commentary  by  the  late 
E.  M.  Cope,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  revised  and 
edited  by  J.  E.  Sandys,  Litt.D.     3  Vols.     Demy  Svo.    21s. 

Demosthenes  against  Androtion  and   against   Timocrates,  with 

Introductions  and   English    Commentary   by   William    Wayte,  M.A. 
Crown  Svo.     7^.  6d. 

Select  Private  Orations  of  Demosthenes  with  Introductions  and 
English  Notes,  by  F.  A.  Paley,  M.A.,  &  J.  E.  Sandys,  Litt.D. 

Part  I.     Contra  Phormionem,  Lacritum,  Pantaenetum,  Boeotum  de  No- 
mine, de  Dote,  Dionysodorum.     Cr.  Svo.     Nezo  Edition.    6s. 

Part  II.    Pro  Phormione,  Contra  Stephanum  I.   11.  ^  Nicostratum,  Cono- 
nem,  Calliclem.     Crown  Svo.     A^ezv  Edition,     js.  6d. 

Demosthenes,  Speech  of,  against  the   Law  of  Leptines.    With 

Introduction   and    Critical   and    Explanatory  Notes,  by  J.   E.   SANDYS, 
Litt.D.     Demy  Svo.     (js. 


London :    Cambridge    Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


Euripides.  Bacchae,  with  Introduction,  Critical  Notes,  and  Archae- 
ological Illustrations,  by  J.  E.  Sandys,  Litt.D.  Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo. 
lis.  6d. 

Euripides.  Ion.  The  Greek  Text  with  a  Translation  into  English 
Verse,  Introduction  and  Notes  by  A.  W.  Verrall,  Litt.D.  Demy  8vo. 
7^.  6d. 

Homer's  Odyssey.  The  text  edited  in  accordance  with  modern 
criticism  by  Arthur  Platt,  M.A.,  late  Eellovv  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge.     Crown  8vo.     4^'.  6d. 

Pindar.  Olympian  and  Pythian  Odes.  With  Notes  Explanatory 
and  Critical,  Introductions  and  Introductory  Essays.  Edited  by  C.  A.  M. 
Fennell,  Litt.  D.     Crown  Svo.     gs. 

—  The  Isthmian  and  Nemean  Odes  by  the  same  Editor,     ^s, 

Plito's  Phaedo,  literally  translated,  by  the  late  E.  M.  Cope,  Fellow 
of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Demy  Octavo.     5J. 

The  Thesetetus  of  Plato,  with  a  Translation  and  Notes  by  the 

late  B.  H.  Kennedy,  D.D.     Crown  Svo.     *]s.  6d. 

The  Nuptial  Number  of  Plato :  its  solution  and  significance,   by 

J.  Adam,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Emmanuel  College,  Cambridge. 
Demy  Svo.     is.  6d.  Net. 

Sophocles :  the  Plays  and  Fragments.  With  Critical  Notes,  Com- 
mentary, and  Translation  in  English  Prose,  by  R.  C.  Jebb,  Litt.  D., 
LL.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University  of  Cambridge. 

Parti.    Oedipus  Tyrannus.    Demy  Svo.   Second  Edit.    12s.  6d. 
Part  II.  Oedipus  Coloneus.     Demy  Svo.     Second  Edit.      12s.  6d. 
Part  III.    Antigone.     Demy  Svo.    Second  Edit.     1 2s.  6d. 
Part  IV.    Philoctetes.     Demy  Svo.     12^.  6d. 
Part  V.     Trachiniae.     Demy  Svo.     12^-.  6^. 

Fragments  of  Zeno  and  Cleanthes,  an  Essay  which  obtained  the 
Hare  Prize  in  the  year  1SS9.  By  A.  C  Pearson,  B.  A.,  Christ's  College, 
Cambridge.     CrowTi  Svo.     ioj". 


Pronunciation  of  Ancient  Greek  translated  from  the  Third  German 

edition  of  Dr  Blass  by  W.  J.  Purton,  B.A.     Demy  Svo.     6s. 

An  Introduction  to  Greek  Epigraphy.  Part  I.  The  Archaic  In- 
scriptions and  the  Greek  Alphabet.  By  E.  S.  Roberts,  M.A.,  Fellow 
and  Tutor  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College.     Demy  Svo.     i%s. 


London :    Cambridge   Warehouse^  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


LATIN.  9 

LATIN. 

{See  also  pp.  24,  25.) 

M.   Tulli   Ciceronis  ad   M.   Brutum   Orator.     A    Revised   Text 

Edited  with    Introductory  Essays   and  Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes 
by  J.  E.  Sandys,  Litt.D.     Demy  8vo.     i6j. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  de  Finibus  Bonorum  Libri  Quinque.    The  Text 

revised  and  explained  by  J.  S.  Reid,  Litt.D.  [/«  the  Press. 

Vol.  III.,  containing  the  Translation.     Demy  8vo.     8j. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  de  Natura  Deorum  Libri  Tres,  with  Introduction 
and  Commentary  by  Joseph  B.  Mayor,  M.A.  Demy  Svo.  Vol.  I.  loj.  td. 
Vol.  II.    \2s.  6d.     Vol.  III.     los. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  de  Officiis  Libri  Tres  with  Marginal  Analysis,  an 

English   Commentary,   and  Indices.     New  Edition,  revised,  by  H.    A. 
HoLDEN,  LL.D.,     Crown  Svo.     qs. 

M.   T.   Ciceronis   de   Officiis    Libri   Tertius,   with    Introduction, 

Analysis  and  Commentary  by  H.  A.  Holden,  LL.D.     Cr.  Svo.     2s. 

M.  Tulli  Ciceronis  pro  C.  Rabirio  [Perduellionis  Reo]  Oratio  ad 
Quirites.  With  Notes,  Introduction  and  Appendices.  By  W.  E.  Heit- 
LAND,  M.A.     Demy  Svo.     "js.  6d. 

P.  Vergili  Maronis  Opera,  cum  Prolegomenis  et  Commentario 
Critico  pro  Syndicis  Preli  Academicl  edidit  Benjamin  Hall  Kennedy, 
S.T.P.     Extra  fcp.  Svo.     3 J.  6d. 


A  Latin-English  Dictionary.     Printed  from  the  (Incomplete)  MS. 
of  the  late  T.  H.  Key,  M.A.,  F.R.S.     Demy  4to.     £1.  \is.  6d. 

Graduated  Passages  from  Greek  and  Latin  Authors  for  First-Sight 

Translation.  Selected  and  supplied  with  short  Notes  for  beginners  by 
H.  Bendall,  M.A.,  Head  Master,  and  C  E.  Laurence,  B.A.,  Assist- 
ant Master,  of  Blackheath  Proprietary  School.  Crown  Svo.  Part  I.  Easy. 
is.  6d.  Part  II.  Moderately  Easy.  2s.  Part  III.  Moderately 
Difficult.  {In  the  Press. 


CAMBRIDGE  PHILOLOGICAL    SOCIETY'S  PUBLICATIONS. 

Transactions.  Vol.  L  1872— 1880.  15^-.  Vol.  XL  1881— 1882. 

With  Index  to  Vols.  I.,  II.  and  Proceedings  for  1882.     \2s.     Vol.  III. 
Pt.  I.  1886.     3^.  dd.      Pt.  II.  1889.     2s.       Pt.  III.  1890.     2s.  6d. 

Proceedings.    I— III.  2s.  dd.  IV— VI.  2s.  6d.    VII— IX.  2s.  6d. 

X— XII.  2s.  6d     XIII— XV.  2s.  6d.     XVI— XVIII.   2s.  6d.     XIX— 

XXI.  2s.  6d.     XXII— XXIV.  1889.    is.     XXV— XXVII.   With  Laws 

and  List  of  Members  for  1891.  is.  net. 

Spelling   Reform  and   English  Literature    by   H.   Sweet.      2d. 

PRONUNCIATION  OF  LATIN  in  the  Augustan  Period.     3^/. 

An  Eighth  Century  Latin- Anglo -Saxon  Glossary  preserved  in  the 

Library  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge,  edited  by  J.  H.  Hessels. 
Demy  8vo.     los.        

London:    Cambridge   Warehouse^  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


lo  CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 

FRENCH. 

Random  Exercises  in  French  Grammar,  Homonyms  and  Synonyms 

for   Advanced    Students,    by   L.    Boquel,   Lecturer   at   Emmanuel   and 
NeAvnham  Colleges.     Crown  8vo.     is.  6d. 

Key  to  the  above  by  the  same.     Crown  8vo.     los.  6d.  (net). 

Exercises  in  French  Composition  for  Advanced  Students.     By  the 

same.     Demy  8vo.     5^.  (>d.  (net). 

CELTIC. 

A  Grammar  of  the  Irish  Language.    By  Prof.  Windisch.    Trans- 
lated by  Dr  NORMAN  Moore.    Crown  8vo.     75.  6d. 


ENGLISH  LITERATURE  AND  LITERARY  HISTORY. 

Chapters  on  English  Metre.    By  Rev.  Joseph  B.  Mayor,  M.A. 

Demy  Svo.     7^.  6d. 

Studies  in  the  Literary  Relations  of  England  with  Germany  in 

the  Sixteenth  Century.     By  C.  H.  Herford,  M.A.     Crown  Svo.     9^. 

From  Shakespeare  to  Pope.  An  Inquiry  into  the  causes  and 
phenomena  of  the  Rise  of  Classical  Poetry  in  England.  By  E.  GosSE, 
M.A.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

Gray  and  his  Friends.  Letters  and  Relics  in  great  part  hitherto 
unpublished.    Edited  by  the  Rev.  D.  C.  Tovey,  M.A.    Crown  Svo.     6s. 


OTHER   MODERN  EUROPEAN  LITERATURE. 

Contributions  to  the  Textual  Criticism  of  the  Divina  Commedia. 

Including  the  complete  collation  throughout  the  Inferno  of  all  the  MSS. 
at  Oxford  and  Cambridge.    By  the  Rev.  E.  Moore,  D.D.   Demy  Svo.    21^. 

The   Literature   of  the  French    Renaissance.    An   Introductory 

Essay.     By  A.  A.  TiLLEY,  M.A.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 


MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICS  AND  CHEMISTRY. 

The  Collected  Mathematical  Papers  of  Arthur  Cayley,  ScD., 

F.R.S.     Demy  4to.     10  vols. 

Vols.  I.,  II.,  III.  and  IV.     25^.  each.  [Vol.  V.  In  the  Press. 

Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers.    By  Sir  G.  G.  Stokes,  Sc.D., 

LL.D.  Reprinted  from  the  Original  Journals  and  Transactions,  with 
additional  Notes  by  the  Author.    Vol.  I.     Demy  Svo.     15J.    Vol.  TI.  15J. 

[Vol.  III.     In  the  Press. 

Mathematical  and  Physical  Papers.    By  Lord  Kelvin  (Sir  W. 

Thomson),  LL.D.,  F.R.S.  Collected  from  different  Scientific  Periodic 
cals  from  May,  1841,  to  the  present  time.  Vol.  I.  Demy  Svo.  iSj-. 
Vol.  II.     15J.     Vol.  III.     iSj-. 


London :    Cambridge   Warehouse^  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


MATHEMATICS,   PHYSICS  AND  CHEMISTRY.      ii 
The  Scientific  Papers  of  the  late  Prof.  J.  Clerk  Maxwell.     Edited 

by  W.  D.  NiVEN,  M.  A.    2  vols.    Royal  4to.    £1.  35.  (net.) 

Scientific   Papers    compiled    by  the    Royal    Society   of  London, 

Catalogue  of.  Vols.  I. — VL,  for  the  years  1800 — 1863,  Royal  4to.  cloth 
(Vol.  I.  in  half-morocco),  £\  (net) ;  half-morocco,  ;^5.  5^.  (net).  Vols. 
VII.— VIII.  for  the  years  1864— 1873,  cloth,  ;^i.  \\s.  6d.  (net);  half- 
morocco,  £2.  5^.  (net).  Single  volumes  cloth,  20s.,  or  half-morocco,  csSj. 
(net).  Vol.  IX.  New  series  for  the  years  1874-1883,  cloth,  -25^.,  half- 
morocco,  32^-.  (net).  [Vol.  X.  In  the  Press, 

A  History  of  the  Study  of  Mathematics  at  Cambridge.  By  W.  VV. 
Rouse  Ball,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.    6^. 

Diophantos  of  Alexandria;  a  Study  in  the  History  of  Greek 
Algebra.     By  T.  L.  Heath,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.     7^.  6d. 

A  History  of  the  Theory  of  Elasticity  and  of  the  Strength  of 

Materials,  from  Galilei  to  the  present  time.     Vol.  I.     Galilei  to  Saint- 
Venant,   i639-r850.     By  the  late  I.  Todhunter,  Sc.D.,  edited  and 
completed  by  Prof.  Karl  Pearson,  M.A.    Demy  8vo.    25J. 
Vol.  II.     By  the  same  Editor.  [In  the  Press. 

The  Elastical  Researches  of  Barre  de  Saint-Venant  (extract  from 

Vol.  II.  of  Todhunter's  History  of  the  Theory  of  Elasticity),  edited  by 
Professor  Karl  Pearson,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.     qj. 

A  Short  History  of  Greek  Mathematics.     By  J.  Gow,  Litt.  D., 

Fellow  of  Trinity  College.    Demy  8vo.     los.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Plane  Trigonometry.     By  E.  W.  Hobson,  Sc.D. 

Demy  Svo.     12^. 

A  Treatise  on  the  Theory  of  Determinants  and  their  Applications 

in  Analysis  and  Geometry.     By  R.  F.  Scott,  M.A.     Demy  Svo.     12s. 

Theory  of  Differential  Equations.  Part  I.  Exact  Equations  and 
Pfaff's  Problem.     By  A.  R.  Forsyth,  Sc.D.,  F.R.S.     Demy  8vo.     12s. 

An  Elementary  Treatise  on  Quaternions.    By  P.  G.  Tait,  M.A. 

Second  Edition.     Demy  Svo.  14J. 

A  Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy.  By  Lord  Kelvin  (Sir  W. 
Thomson),  LL.D.,  and  P.  G.  Tait,  M.A.  Part  I.  Demy  Svo.  i6s. 
Part  II.     iSj. 

Elements   of  Natural  Philosophy.     By  Lord   Kelvin  (Sir  W. 

Thomson),  and  P.  G.  Tait.     Second  Edition.     Demy  8vo.     91. 

A  Treatise  on  Analytical  Statics.     By  E.  J.  Routh,  Sc.D.,  F.R.S. 

Vol.  I.     Demy  Svo.     14J. 

A  Treatise  on  Dynamics.  By  S.  L.  Loney,  M.A.  New  and  En- 
larged Edition.     Crown  Svo.     7^".  6d. 

Solutions  of  the  Examples  in  a  Treatise  on  Elementary  Dynamics. 

By  the  same  Author.    Crown  Svo.     ^s.  6d. 

A  Treatise  on  Geometrical  Optics.     By  R.    S.    Heath,   M.A. 

Demy  Svo.     1 2S.  6d. 

London:  Cambridge   Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


12  CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 

An  Elementary  Treatise  on  Geometrical  Optics.     By  R.  S.  Heath, 

M.A.     Crown  8vo.     5^. 

Hydrodynamics,  a  Treatise  on  the  Mathematical  Theory  of  Fluid 
Motion,  by  Horace  Lamb,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.     \is. 

A  Treatise  on  the  Mathematical  Theory  of  Elasticity.    By  A.  E.  H. 

Love,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St  John's  College.     In  Two  Volumes. 

[Vol.  I.     Nearly  ready. 

An  attempt  to  test  the   Theories  of  Capillary  Action,  by   F. 

Bashforth,  B.D.,  and  the  late  J.  C.  Adams,  M.A.    Demy  4to.    £\.  \s. 
A  Revised  Account  of  the  Experiments  made  with  the  Bashforth 

Chronograph,  to  find  the  resistance  of  the  air  to  the  motion  of  projectiles. 
By  Francis  Bashforth,  B.D.    Demy  8vo.     i^s. 

Astronomical  Observations  made  at  the  Observatory  of  Cambridge 
from  1846  to  i860,  by  the  late  Rev.  J.  Challis,  M.A. 

Astronomical  Observations  from  1861  to  1865.    Vol.  XXI     Royal 

4to.,  15^.     From  1866  to  1869.     Vol.  XXII.     15J. 

[Vol.  XXIII.  In  the  Press. 

The  Mathematical  Works  of  Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.    Edited    by 

W.  Whewell,  D.D.     Demy  Octavo.     7j.  6</. 
The  Analytical  Theory  of  Heat.  By  Joseph  Fourier.    Translated 

with  Notes,  by  A.  Freeman,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.     i2j. 
Elementary  Thermodynamics,   by  J.  Parker,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 

St  John's  College,  Cambridge.     Crown  8vo.     9^. 

The  Electrical  Researches  of  the  Honourable  Henry  Cavendish, 

F.R.S.    Written  between  1771  and  1781.     Edited  by  J.  Clerk  Max- 
well, F.R.S.     Demy  Svo.     \%s. 

Practical  Work  at  the  Cavendish  Laboratory.    Heat.     Edited  by 

W.  N.  Shaw,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.     3^-. 

A  Treatise  on  the  General  Principles  of  Chemistry,  by  M.  M. 

Pattison  Muir,  M.A.    Second  Edition.    Demy  8vo.    15J. 
Elementary  Chemistry.     By  M.  M.  Pattison  Muir,  M.A.,  and 

Charles  Slater.  M.A.,  M.B.     Crown  8vo.     j^s.  6d. 

Practical  Chemistry.    A  Course  of  Laboratory  Work.     By  M.  M. 

Pattison  Muir,  M.A.,  and  D.  J.  Carnegie,  M.A.     Cr.  Svo.     3^. 

Notes  on  Qualitative  Analysis.     Concise  and  Explanatory.     By 
H.  J.  H.  Fenton,  M.A.,  F.C.S.     New  Edit.     Crown  4to.    6s. 
{See  also  p.  2%,  Pitt  Press  Mathematical  Series.') 


BIOLOGY  AND  GEOLOGY. 

Lectures  on  the  Physiology  of  Plants,  by  S.   H.  Vines,  ScD., 

Professor  of  Botany  in  the  University  of  Oxford.     Demy  8vo.     •21  J. 

Studies  from  the  Morphological  Laboratory.    Edited  by  Adam 

Sedgwick,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
Vol.  II.  Part  I.  Royal  Svo.  10^.  Vol.  II.  Part  II.  7J.  ^d'.  Vol.  III. 
Parts  I.  and  II.  is.  6d.  each.  Vol.  IV.  Part  I.  \2s.  6d.  Vol.  IV. 
Part  II.     10^.     Vol.  IV.  Part  HI.     5J.     Vol.  V.  Part  I.     7J.  6d. 

London:    Cmnbridge   Warehouse^  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


BIOLOGY  AND   GEOLOGY.  13 

A  Catalogue  of  Books  and  Papers  on  Protozoa,  Coelenterates, 

Worms,  etc.  published  during  the   years    1861-1883,  by    D'Arcy   W. 
Thompson,  M.A.    Demy  Svo.     izs.dd. 

A  Catalogue  of  the  Collection  of  Birds  formed  by  the  late  Hugh 

Edwin  Strickland,  now  in  the  possession  of  the  University  of  Cam- 
bridge.    By  O.  Salvin,  M.A.,  F.R.S.     £\.  \s. 

Illustrations  of  Comparative  Anatomy,  Vertebrate  and  Inverte- 
brate.   Second  Edition.     Demy  Svo.     u.  td. 

Catalogue  of  Osteological  Specimens  contained  in  the  Anatomical 

Museum  of  the  University  of  Cambridge.     Demy  Svo.     is.  6d, 

Catalogue  of  Tjrpe  Fossils  in  the  Woodwardian  Museum,  Cambridge. 

By  H.  Woods,  B.A.,  F.G.S.,  with  Preface  by  Professor  T.  M<=Kenny 
Hughes.     Demy  Svo.     ']s.  6d. 

A  Catalogue  of  the  Collection  of  Cambrian  and  Silurian  Fossils 

contained  in  the  Geological  Museum  of  the  University  of  Cambridge, 
by  J.  W.  Salter,  F.G.S.     Royal  Quarto,    ^s.  6d. 

A  Catalogue  of  Austrahan  Fossils.    By  R.  Etheridge,  Jun.,  F.G.S. 

Demy  Svo.     10s.  6d. 

The  Fossils  and  Palseontological  Affinities  of  the  Neocomian  Deposits 

of  Upware  and  Brickhill,  being  the  Sedgwick  Prize  Essay  for  1879.    By 
W.  Keeping,  M.A.     Demy  Svo.     los.  6d. 

The  Jurassic  Rocks  of  Cambridge,  being  the  Sedgwick  Prize  Essay 
for  the  year  1886,  by  the  late  T.  Roberts,  M.A.     Demy  Svo. 

[In  the  Press. 

The  Bala  Volcanic  Series  of  Caernarvonshire  and  Associated  Rocks, 

being  the  Sedgwick  Prize  Essay  for  1888,  by  A.  Harker,  M.A.,  F.R.S. 
Demy  Svo.     "js.  6d. 


LAW. 

Digest  XIX.  2.  Locati  Conducti,  with  a  Translation  and  Notes  by 
C.H.  Monro,  M.A.,  Fellow  ofGonville  and  Caius  College.  Crown  Svo.  $s. 

An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Justinian's  Digest.     By  Henry 

John  Roby.     Demy  Svo.     c)s. 
Justinian's  Digest.    Lib.  VII.,  Tit.  I.     De  Usufructu,  with  a  Legal 

and  Philological  Commentary  by  H.  J.  RoBY.     Demy  Svo.    as. 
The  Two  Parts  complete  in  One  Volume.     Demy  Svo.     iSi^. 

Selected  Titles  from  the  Digest,  by  Bryan  Walker,  M.A.,  LL.D. 

Part  I.     Mandati  vel  Contra.     Digest  xvii.  i.     Cr.  Svo.     5J. 

Part  II.    De  Adquirendo  rerum  dominio,  and  De  Adqufrenda  vel 

amittenda  Possessione,  Digest  XLI.  i  and  2.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

Part  III.    De  Condictionibus,  Digest  xii.  i  and  4 — 7  and  Digest 
XIII.  I — 3.     Crown  Svo.     6s. 

The  Commentaries  of  Gains  and  Rules  of  Ulpian.  Translated 
and  Annotated,  by  J.  T.  Abdy,  LL.D.,  and  Bryan  Walker,  M.A., 
LL.D.     New  Edition  by  Bryan  Walker.     Crown  Svo.     i6s. 


Londofi:    Cambridge   Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


14  CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 

The  Institutes  of  Justinian,  translated  with  Notes  by  J.  T.  Abdy, 
LL.D.,  and  Bryan  Walker,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Cr.  8vo.     i6s. 

The  Fragments  of  the  Perpetual  Edict  of  Salvius  Julianus,  Ar- 
ranged, and  Annotated  by  the  late  Bryan  Walker,  LL.D.    Cr.  8vo.  6j. 

Grotius  de  Jure  Belli  et  Pacis,  with  the  Notes  of  Barbeyrac  and 

others;  an  abridged  Translation  of  the  Text,  by  W.  Whewell,  D.D. 
Demy  8vo.      12s.     The  translation  separate,  6s. 

The  Science  of  International  Law.     By  T.  A.   Walker,  M.A., 

LL.M.  of  the  Middle  Temple.     Demy  Svo.  [ATea^-Zj^  ready. 

An  Analysis  of  Criminal  Liability.     By   E.   C.    Clark,   LL.D., 

Regius  Professor  of  Civil  Law.     Crown  Svo.     7^.  dd. 

Practical  Jurisprudence.    A  comment  on  Austin.     By  the  same. 

Crown  Svo.  9^. 

The   Constitution  of   Canada.      By   J.   E.   C.   Munro,   LL.M. 

Demy  Svo.      \os. 

Elements  of  the  Law  of  Torts.    A  Text-book  for  Students.     By 
Melville  M.  Bigelow,  Ph.D.     Crown  Svo.     \os.  6d. 

A  Selection  of  Cases   on  the  English   Law   of   Contract.    By 

Gerard  Brown  Finch,  M.A.     Royal  Svo.     2SJ. 
Bracton's  Note  Book.    A  Collection  of  Cases  decided  in  the  King's 

Courts  during  the  Reign  of  Henry  the  Third,  annotated  by  a  Lawyer  of 
that  time,  seemingly  by  Henry  of  Bratton.  Edited  by  F.  W.  Maitland. 
3  vols.     Demy  Svo.     £1.  ^s.  (net.) 

A  Selection  of  the  State  Trials.    By  J.  W.  Willis-Bund,  M.A., 

LL.B.     Crown  Svo.     Vols.  I.  and  IL     In  3  parts,     ^os. 

Commons  and  Common  Fields,  or  the  History  and  Policy  of  the 

Laws  of  Commons  and  Enclosures  in  England.  Being  the  Yorke  Prize 
Essay  for  1SS6.     By  T.  E.  Scrutton,  M.A.     Demy  Svo.     10s.  6d. 

History  of  Equity  as  administered  in  the  Court  of  Chancery.    Being 

the  Yorke  Prize  Essay  for  1889.  By  D.  M^Kenzie  Kerly,  M.A.,  St  John's 
College.     Demy  Svo.     12s.  6d. 

History  of  Land  Tenure  in  Ireland.     Being  the  Yorke  Prize  Essay 
for  188S.     By  W.  E.  Montgomery,  M.A.,  LL.M.    Demy  Svo.     ioj.  6d. 

History  of  the  Law  of  Tithes  in  England.    Being  the  Yorke  Prize 
Essay  for  1SS7.     By  W.  Easterby,  B.A.,  LL.B.     Demy  Svo.     7^.  6d. 

The  History  of  the  Law  of  Prescription  in  England.     Being  the 

Yorke  Prize  Essay  for  1S90.     By  T.  A.  Herbert,  B.A.,  LL.B.     Demy 

Svo.     los. 

Land  in  Fetters.    Being  the   Yorke   Prize  Essay  for   1885.     By 
T.  E.  Scrutton,  M.A.    Demy  Svo.     7^.  6d. 

Tables  shewing  the  Differences  between  English  and  Indian  Law. 

By  Sir  Roland  Knyvet  ^VILSON,  Bart.,  M.A.,  LL.M.     Demy  4to.     is. 


Lo7ido7i:    Cambridge    Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


HISTORY.  15 

HISTORY. 

Cambridge  Historical  Essays. 

Political  Parties  in  Athens  during  the  Peloponnesian  War, 

by  L.  Whibley,  M.A.    (Prince  Consort  Dissertation,  1888.)  Second 
Edition.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  dd. 

Pope  Gregory  the  Great  and  his  relations  with  Gaul,  by 

F.  W.  Kellett,  M.A.    (Prince  Consort  Dissertation,  1888.)    Crown 
8vo.     2s.  6d. 

The  Constitutional  Experiments  of  the  Commonwealth,  being 

the  Thirlwall  Prize  Essay  for   1889,  by  E.  Jenks,  M.A.,  LL.B. 
Crown  8vo.     is.  6d. 

On  Election  by  Lot  at  Athens,  by  J.  W.  Headlam,  M.A. 

(Prince  Consort  Dissertation,  1890.)     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

The  Influence  and  Development  of  English  Gilds.     (Thirlwall 

Prize  Essay,  1 89 1.)    By  F.  Aidan  Hibbert,  B.A.    Crown  8vo.    3^. 

The  Somerset  Religious  Houses.     By  W.  A.  J.  Archbold, 

B.A.,    LL.B.     (Prince   Consort  Dissertation,    1890.)     Crown  8vo. 
IOJ-.  6d. 

The  Early  History  of  Frisia,  with  special  relation  to  its  Con- 
version. By  W.  E.  Collins,  B.A.  (Prince  Consort  Dissertation, 
1890.)    Cr.  8vo.  [Preparing. 


The  Origin  of  Metallic  Currency  and  Weight  Standards.     By  W. 

RiDGEWAY,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Greek,  Queen's  College,  Cork,  and  late 
Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College.     Demy  8vo.     15^.  Net. 

The  Growth  of  English  Industry  and  Commerce  during  the  Early 
and  Middle  Ages.     By  W.  Cunningham,  D.D.    Demy  8vo.     16s. 

The  Growth  of  English  Industry  and  Commerce  in  Modem  Times. 

By  the  same  Author.  [N'early  ready. 

A  History  of  Epidemics  in  Britain.  From  a.  d.  664  to  the  extinc- 
tion of  the  Plague  in  1666.  By  Charles  Creighton,  M.D.,  M.A., 
formerly  Demonstrator  of  Anatomy  in  the  University  of  Cambridge. 
Demy  8vo.     \%s. 

Two  Unfinished  Papers  by  the  late  Henry  Bradshaw.     i.     The 

Collectio  Canonum  Hibemensis.  2.  On  the  Chartres  and  Tours  MSS. 
of  the  Hibemensis.     (64  pp.)     Demy  8vo.     is.  6d. 

Statutes  of  Lincoln  Cathedral.     Arranged   by  the  late   Henry 

Bradshaw,  wdth  illustrative  Documents.  Edited  by  Chr.  Wordsworth, 
M.A.  Part  I.  containing  the  complete  text  of  '  Liber  Niger '  with  Mr 
Bradshaw's  Memorandums.     Demy  8vo.     12s.  6d. 


Lo7idon :    Cambridge    Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


i6  CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 

Ecclesiae  Londino-Batavae  archivum.      Tomvs  Primvs.      Abra- 

HAMI  Ortelii  et  virorum  eruditorum  ad  eundem  et  ad  Jacobvm 
CoLivM  Ortelianvm  Epistulae,  (1524 — 1628).  Tomvs  Secvndvs. 
EPISTVLAE  ET  TRACTATVS  cum  Reformationis  turn  Ecclesiae 
Londino-Batavae  Historiam  lUustiantes  1544 — 1622.  Ex  autographis 
mandante  Ecclesia  Londino-Batava  edidit  Joannes  Henricvs  Hessels. 
Demy  410.    Each  vol.,  separately,  £1.  \os.    Taken  together  ;,^5.  5J.    Net. 

The  Growth  of  British  Policy,  by  J.  R.  Seeley,  M.A. 

[/«  the  Press. 
The  Despatches  of  Earl  Gower,  English  Ambassador  at  the  court 

of  Versailles,  June  1 790  to  August  1792,  and  the  Despatches  of  Mr  Lindsay 
and  Mr  Monro.     By  O.  Browning,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.     15J. 

Life  and  Tunes  of  Stem,  or  Germany  and  Prussia  in  the  Napoleonic 

Age,  by  J.  R.  Seeley,  M.A.  Portraits  and  Maps.  3  vols.  Demy  Svo.  30J. 

Rhodes  in  Ancient  Times.     By  Cecil  Torr,  M.A.     With   six 

plates.     \os.  6d. 

Rhodes  in  Modem  Times.     By  the  same  Author.     With  three 

plates.     Demy  Svo.     2>s. 

Chronological  Tables  of  Greek  History.  By  Carl  Peter.  Trans- 
lated from  the  German  by  G.  Chawner,  M.A,     Demy  4to.     los. 

History  of  Nepal,  edited  with  an  introductory  sketch  of  the  Country 
and  People  by  Dr  D.  Wright.     Super-royal  Svo.     10^.  6d. 

Kinship  and  Marriage  in  early  Arabia,  by  W.  Robertson  Smith, 

M.A.,  LL.D.     Cro\\Ti  Svo.     7^.  6d. 

Natural  ReUgion  in  India.  The  Rede  Lecture,  delivered  in  the 
Senate-House,  Cambridge,  on  June  17,  1891,  by  Sir  Alfred  Lyall, 
K.C.B.,  K.C.I.E.     Cloth,  2s.     Paper  Covers,  is. 


BIOGRAPHY. 


Erasmus.    The  Rede  Lecture,  delivered  in  the  Senate-House,  Cam- 
bridge, June  II,  1890,  by  R.  C.  Jebb,  Litt.D.   Cloth,  2s.    Paper  Covers,  i^. 

The  Life  and  Letters  of  the  Reverend  Adam  Sedgwick,  LL.D., 

F.R.S.  (Dedicated,  by  special  permission,  to  Her  Majesty  the  Queen.)  By 
John  Willis  Clark,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  and  Thomas  M<=Kenny  Hughes, 
M.A.     2  vols.     Demy  Svo.     36^. 

Memorials  of  the  Life  of  George  Elwes  Corrie,  D.D.,  formerly  Master 

of  Jesus  College.     By  M.  Holroyd.     Demy  Svo.     12s. 


TRAVELS. 


Travels    in    Arabia  Deserta  in   1876   and  1877.    By   Charles 

M.  Doughty.    With  Illustrations.     Demy  Svo.     2  vols.     £^.  y. 

A  Journey  of  Literary  and  Archaeological  Research  in  Nepal  and 

Northern  India,  1884—5.    By  C  Bendall,  M.A.     Demy  Svo.     10s. 


Lotidon :    Cambridge   Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


ART,     &-C.  ly 

ART,  &c. 

Illuminated  Manuscripts  in  Classical  and  Mediaeval  Times,  their 

Art  and  their  Technique,  by  J.  Henry  Middleton,  Slade  Professor  of 
Fine  Art.     Royal  8vo.  [A'early  ready. 

The  Engraved  Gems  of  Classical  Times  with  a  Catalogue  of  the 
Gems  in  the  Fitzwilliam  Museum  by  J.  H.  Middleton,  M.A.  Royal  8vo. 
12S.  6d. 

The  Lewis  Collection  of  Gems  and  Rmgs,  in  the  possession  of 

Corpus    Christi  College,    Cambridge,    with    an    Introductory    Essay   on 
Ancient  Gems  by  J,  H.  Middleton,  M.A.     Royal  8vo.     6s. 

A  Catalogue  of  Ancient  Marbles  in  Great  Britain,  by  Prof.  Adolf 

MiCHAELis.     Translated  by  C.  A.  M.  Fennell,  Litt.D.     Royal  Svo. 
Roxburgh  (Morocco  back).     £2.  is. 

Some  Interesting  Syrian  and  Palestinian  Inscriptions,  by  J.  Rendel 

Harris,  M.A.     Royal  Svo.     4^. 
The  Types  of  Greek  Coins.    By  Percy  Gardner,  Litt.D.,  F.S.A. 

With  16  plates.     Impl.  4to.     Cloth  £1.  iis.  6d.     Roxburgh  (Morocco 
back)  £2.  2s. 

Essays  on  the  Art  of  Pheidias.  By  C.  Waldstein,  Litt.D.,  Phil.D. 

Royal  Svo.     With  Ilhistrations.     I^uckram,  30J. 

The  Woodcutters  of  the  Netherlands  during  the  last  quarter  of 

the  Fifteenth  Century.     By  W.  M.  Conway.     Demy  Svo.     ioj-.  6d. 
The  Literary  remains  of  Albrecht  Durer,  by  VV.  M.  Conway.    With 

Transcripts  from  the  British  Museum  Manuscripts,  and  Notes  upon  them 
by  LiNA  ECKENSTEIN.     Royal  Svo.     21s. 

The  Collected  Papers  of  Henry  Bradshaw,  including  his  Memoranda 

and  Communications  read  before  the  Cambridge   Antiquarian   Society. 
With  II  facsimiles.  Edited  by  F.J.  H.Jenkinson,  M.A.  Demy  Svo.  16s. 


MUSIC. 

Counterpoint.    A  practical  course  of  study.     By  the  late  Prof. 
Sir  G.  A.  Macfarren,  Mus.  D.    5th  Edition,  revised.    Cr.  4to.    7^.  6d. 


EDUCATIONAL  SCIENCE,  &c. 

Eighteen  Years  of  University  Extension.    By  R.  D.  Roberts,  M.  A., 

D.Sc,  Organizing  Secretary  for  Lectures  to  the  Local  Examinations  and 
Lectures  Syndicate.     With  Map  and  Diagrams.     Crown  Svo.      is. 

Occasional  Addresses  on  Educational  Subjects.    By  S.  S.  Laurie, 

M.A.,  F.R.S.E.     Crown  Svo.     5^. 

Lectures  on  Language  and  Linguistic  Method  in  the  School.   By 

S.  S.  Laurie,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Crown  Svo.    4^. 


London :    Cambridge   Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lafie. 


i8  CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


Lectures  on  Teaching,  delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge. 
By  J.  G.  Fitch,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Cr.  8vo.    5J. 

Lectures  on  the  Growth  and  Training  of  the  Mental  Faculty, 

delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.     By  Francis  Warner,  M.D., 
F.R.C.P.     Crown  8vo.     ^s.  6d. 


SHORTHAND. 

A  Primer  of  Cursive  Shorthand.    By  H.  L.  Callendar,  M.A.    6d. 

Essays  from  the   Spectator  in  Cursive   Shorthand,    by   H.  L. 

Callendar,  M.A.    6d. 

Reading  Practice  in  Cursive  Shorthand.  Easy  extracts  for  Begin- 
ners. St  Mark,  Ft.  I.  Vicar  of  Wakefield,  Chaps.  I.— IV.  Alice  in 
Wonderland,  Chap.  VII.     Price  3^.  each. 

A  System  of  Phonetic  Spelling,  adapted  to  English  by  H.  L.  Callen- 
dar, M.A.     Extra  Fcap.  Svo.     6d. 

A  Manual  of  Orthographic  Cursive  Shorthand.  By  H.  L.  Cal- 
lendar, M.A.     IS. 

A  Manual  of  Cursive  Shorthand,  by  H.  L.  Callendar,   M.A. 

Extra  Fcap.  Svo.     2s. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 

Town   and  Gown.      Some  five   years   of  work   in  St  George's, 

Camberwell.  By  J.  Tetley  Rowe,  M.A.,  Trinity  College  Missioner, 
with  a  few  words  of  Preface  by  Rev.  A.  Montagu  Butler,  D.D., 
Master  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Crown  4to.     is. 


CAMBRIDGE. 

The  Architectural  History  of  the  University  of  Cambridge  and 

of  the  Colleges  of  Cambridge  and  Eton,  by  the  late  Professor  Willis, 
M.A.,  F.R.S.  Edited  with  large  Additions  and  a  Continuation  to  the 
present  time  by  J.  W.  Clark,  M.A.  4  Vols.  Super  Royal  Svo.  £6.  6s. 
Also  a  limited  Edition  of  the  same,  consisting  of  1 20  numbered  Copies 
only,  large  paper  Quarto;  the  woodcuts  and  steel  engravings  mounted 
on  India  paper ;  of  which  100  copies  are  now  offered  for  sale,  at  Twenty- 
five  Guineas  net  each  set. 

The  University  of  Cambridge  from  the  Earliest  Tunes  to  the 

Royal  Injunctions  of  1535.    By  J.  B.  Mullinger,  M.A.    Demy  Svo.    lis. 

Part  II.    From  the  Royal  Injunctions  of  1535  to  the  Accession  of  Charles 

the  First.     Demy  Svo.     iSj. 

Scholae  Academicae :  some  Account  of  the  Studies  at  the  English 
Universities  in  the  Eighteenth  Century.  By  Christopher  Words- 
worth, M.A.     Demy  Svo.     los.  6d. 

History  of  the  College  of  St  John  the  Evangelist,  by  Thomas 
Baker,  B.D.,  Ejected  Fellow.  Edited  by  John  E.  B.  Mayor,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  St  John's.    Two  Vols.    Demy  Svo.     24J. 

London :    Cafnbridge   Warehouse^  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


CAMBRIDGE. 


19 


Admissions  to  Gonville  and  Caius  College  in  the  University  of 

Cambridge  March  1558 — 9  to  Jan.  1678 — 9.     Edited  by  J.  Venn,  Sc.D., 
and  S.  C.  Venn.     Demy  Svo.     lOJ. 

A  Chronological  List  of  the  Graces,  etc.  in  the  University  Registry 
which  concern  the  University  Library,     is.  6d. 

Trusts,  Statutes  and  Directions  affecting  (i)  The  Professorships 
of  the  University.  (2)  The  Scholarships  and  Prizes.  (3)  Other  Gifts  and 
Endowments.     Demy  Svo.     5J. 

Graduati  Cantabrigienses :  sive  catalogus  exhibens  nomina  eorum 

quos  gradu  quocunque  ornavit  Academia  Cantabrigiensis  (rSoo — 1884). 
Cura  H.  R.  Luard,  S.T.  P.    Demy  Svo.     12s.  6d. 

Letters  patent  of  Elizabeth  and  James  the  First,  addressed  to  the 

University  of  Cambridge,  with  other  Documents.     Edited  (with  a  trans- 
lation ofthelettersof  Elizabeth)  by  J.  W.Clark,  M.A.  Demy  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Statutes  for  the  University  of  Cambridge  and  for  the  Colleges 

therein,   made,  pubhshed   and   approved   (187S — 1S82)  under  the    Uni- 
versities of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Act,  1877.     Demy  Svo.     i6s. 

Statutes  of  the  University  of  Cambridge.     3J-.  6d. 

Ordinances  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,    yj.  6d.    Supplement 

to  ditto.     IS.     Bound  in  one  vokime.     Si'.  6d. 

A  Compendium  of  University  Regulations.    Demy  Svo.     6d. 

Cambridge  University  Reporter  {Published  by  authority).  Contain- 
ing all  the  Official  Notices  of  the  University  Reports  of  Discussions  in 
the  Schools,  and  Proceedings  of  the  Cambridge  Philosophical,  Antiquarian 
and  Philological  Societies,     yl.  weekly. 


CATALOGUES. 

University  Library. 

A  Catalogue  of  the  Manuscripts.     Demy  Svo.    5  vols.     \os. 

each.     Index  to  Catalogue.     \os. 

A  Catalogue  of  Adversaria   and   printed  books  containing 

MS.  notes.     Demy  Svo.     3J.  6d. 

Catalogus  Bibliothecse  Burckhardtianse.     Demy  Quarto,   ^s. 
A  Catalogue  of  the  Hebrew  Manuscripts.    By  the  late  Dr 

S.  M.   SCHILLER-SZINESSY.      QJ. 

Catalogue  of  the  Buddhist  Sanskrit  Manuscripts.     Edited 

by  C.  Bendall,  M.A.     \2S. 

Bulletin  (weekly),  containing  titles  of  new  books  added  to  the 

Library.     Crown  Svo.     ()S.  a  year,  paid  in  advance. 

Catalogue  of  the  collection  of  books  on  Logic  presented  by 
J.  Venn,  Sc.D.    2s.  6d. 
A  Catalogue  of  the  Portsmouth  Collection  of  Books  and  Papers 

written  by  or  belonging  to  Sir  Isaac  Newton.     Demy  Svo.     5^. 

The  Illuminated  Manuscripts  in  the  Library  of  the  Fitzwilliam 
Museum,  Cambridge,  by  W.  G.  Searle,  M.A.     "js.  6d. 


London :    Cambridge   Warehouse^  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


20  CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 

CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  EXAMINATION  PAPERS. 

These  Papers  are  published  in  occasional  numbers  every  Term,  and  in 
volumes  for  the  Academical  >ear. 

Vol.  XVII.  Papers  for  the  year  1887—88.  Vol.  XVIII.  Papers 
for  the  year  1888 — 89.  Vol.  XIX.  Papers  for  the  year  1889 — 90.  Vol. 
XX.    Papers  for  the  year  1890—91.     i^s.  each. 

COLLEGE  EXAMINATION  PAPERS. 

Examination  Papers  for  Entrance  and  Minor  Scholarships  and 

Exhibitions  in  the  Colleges  of  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Part  I. 
Mathematics  and  Science.  Part  II.  Classics,  Mediaeval  and  Modem 
Languages  and  History  (Michaelmas  Term,  1890).  Part  III.  Mathe- 
matics and  Science.  Part  IV.  Classics,  Law  and  History  (Lent  Term, 
1 891).     2^-.  each.     Parts  V.  and  VI.  {^Nearly  ready. 


CAMBRIDGE  LOCAL  EXAMINATIONS. 

Examination  Papers,  for  various  years,  with  the  Regulations  for 
the  Examination.     Demy  8vo.     is.  each,  or  by  post  is.  id. 

Class  Lists,  for  various  years.     Boys  li".     Girls  6^'. 

Annual  Reports   of  the  Syndicate,   with   Supplementary   Tables 

showing  the  success  and  failure  of  the  Candidates,     is.  each,  by  post 
IS.  3^^. 

CAMBRIDGE  HIGHER  LOCAL  EXAMINATIONS. 

Examination  Papers,  for  various  years,  with  the  Regulations  for 

the  Examination.     Demy  8vo.     is.  each,  by  post  is.  id. 
Class  Lists,  for  various  years,     is.  each.     By  post  i^.  2d. 
Reports  of  the  Syndicate.     Demy  8vo.     i^.,  by  post  is.  2d. 


TEACHERS'  TRAINING  SYNDICATE. 

Examination  Papers  for  various  years  with  the  Regulations  for 

the  Examination.     Demy  8vo.     (-yd.,  by  post  7^/. 


OXFORD  AND  CAMBRIDGE  SCHOOLS  EXAMINATIONS. 

Papers  set  in  the  Examination  for  Certificates,  July,  1891.     2s. 
Papers  set  in  the  Examination  for  Commercial  Certificates,  July, 

1 891.     dd. 

List  of  Candidates  who  obtained  Certificates  at  the  Examination 

held  in  1891 ;  and  Supplementary  Tables,     ^d. 

Regulations  of  the  Board  for  1892.     9^. 

Regulations  for  the  Commercial  Certificate,  1892.     3^. 

Report  of  the  Board  for  the  year  ending  Oct.  31,  1891.     is. 

Londofi :    Ca7tibridge   Warehouse^  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


BIBLE  FOR  SCHOOLS  AND  COLLEGES.  21 


Cbe  Cambriticrf  33ible  for  ^cbooIsJ  anti  CoUtgr^* 

General  Editor  :  J.  J.  S.  PEROWNE,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Worcester. 
"It  is  difficult  to  commend  too  highly  this  excellent  series." — Guardian. 

Now  Ready.    Cloth,  Extra  Fcap.  8vo.    With  Maps. 
Book  of  Joshua.     By  Rev.  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D.     2s.  6d. 
Book  of  Judges.     By  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.    35.  6d. 
First  Book  of  Samuel.    By  Rev.  Prof.  Kirkpatrick,  B.D.    3^.  6d. 
Second  Book  of  Samuel.    By  Rev.  Prof.  Kirkpatrick,  B.D.    3^.  6d. 
First  Book  of  Kings.     By  Rev.  Prof.  Lumby,  D.D.     y.  6d. 
Second  Book  of  Kings.     By  Rev.  Prof.  Lumby,  D.D.     y.  dd. 
Book  of  Job.     By  Rev.  A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.     5^. 
Book  of  Psalms.   Book  L   By  Rev.  Prof.  Kirkpatrick,  B.D.  35-.  dd. 
Book  of  Ecclesiastes.     By  Very  Rev.  E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.   y. 
Book  of  Jeremiah.    By  Rev.  A.  W.  Streane,  B.D.     4^.  dd. 
Book  of  Ezekiel.     By  Rev.  A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.     5^. 
Book  of  Hosea.     By  Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  M.A.,  D.D.     3^. 
Books  of  Obadiah  and  Jonah.    By  Arch.  Perowne.     2s.  6d. 
Book  of  Micah.     By  Rev.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  M.A.,  D.D.     is.  6d. 
Books  of  Haggai,  Zechariah  &  Malachi.  By  Arch.  Perowne.  35.  dd. 
Book  of  Malachi.     By  Archdeacon  Perowne.     is. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Matthew.    By  Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A.    2s.  6d. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Mark.  By  Rev.  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D.  2s.  6d. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Luke.     By  Archdeacon  Farrar.     4^.  6d. 
Gospel  according  to  St  John.    By  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  D.D.    4^.  6d. 
Acts  of  the  Apostles.    By  Prof.  Lumby,  D.D.     4^.  6d. 
Epistle  to  the  Romans.     Rev.  H.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A.     3^.  6d. 
First  Corinthians.     By  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.     2s. 
Second  Corinthians.     By  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.     2s. 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians.    By  Rev.  E.  H.  Perowne,  D.D.     is.  dd. 
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.    Rev.  H.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A.     2s.  6d. 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     By  Archdeacon  Farrar,  D.D.      35.  6d. 
Epistle  to  the  Philippians.    By  Rev.  H.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A.    2s.  6d. 
Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians.    By  Rev.  G.  G.  Findt-ay,  B.A.     2s. 
General  Epistle  of  St  James.   By  Very  Rev.  E.  H.  Plumptre.   is.  6d. 
Epistles  of  St  Peter  and  St  Jude.     By  the  same  Editor.     2s.  6d. 
Epistles  of  St  John.  By  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  M.A.,  D.D.     3J.  6d. 
Book  of  Revelation.    By  Rev.  W.  H.  Simcox,  M.A.    3^. 

Londoft:    Cambridge    Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


22  CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 

Preparing. 
Book  of  Genesis.     By  the  Bishop  of  Worcester. 
Books  of  Exodus,  Numbers  and  Deuteronomy.     By  Rev.  C.  D. 

GiNSBURG,  LL.D. 

First  and  Second  Books  of  Chronicles.     By  Very  Rev.   Dean 

Spence,  D.D. 
Books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.    By  Rev.  Prof.  Ryle,  B.D. 
Book  of  Isaiah.     By  Prof.  W.  Robertson  Smith,  M.A. 
Epistles  to  Colossians  &  Philemon.   By  Rev.  H.  C.  G.  Moule,  M.A. 
Epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus.    By  Rev.  A.  E.  Humphreys,'  M.A. 


C6e  Smaller  ODambnirse  asible  for  ^rboofe. 

"The  notes  elucidate  every  possible  difficulty  with  scholarly  brevity  and  clearness." — 
Saturday  Rcvie-w. 

"We  can  cordially  recommend  this  series  of  text-books,  not  only  to  those  for  vi^hom  it  is 
primarily  intended,  but  also  to  the  clergy  and  other  workers  for  use  in  Bible-classes." — Church 
Revieiv. 

"Accurate  scholarship  is  obviously  a  characteristic  of  their  productions,  and  the  work  of 
simplification  and  condensation  appears  to  have  been  judiciously  and  skilfully  performed." — 
G^iardian. 

Now  ready.     Price  \s.  each. 
Book  of  Joshua.     By  J.  S.  Black,  M.A. 

Book  of  Judges.     By  J.  S.  Black,  M.A.  {Preparing. 

First  and  Second  Books  of  Samuel.    By  Prof.  Kirk  Patrick,  B.D. 
First  and  Second  Books  of  Kings.     By  Rev.  Prof.  Lumby,  D.D. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Matthew.     By  Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Mark.     By  Rev.  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Luke.     By  Archdeacon  Farrar,  D.D. 
Gospel  according  to  St  John.     By  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  D.D. 
Acts  of  the  Apostles.     By  Professor  Lumby,  D.D. 


THE    CAMBRIDGE   GREEK   TESTAMENT 

FOR   SCHOOLS   AND   COLLEGES 
with   a    Revised   Text,    based   on   the   most   recent   critical   authorities,    and 
English  Notes,  prepared  under  the  direction  of  the  General  Editor, 
J.  J.  S.  PEROWNE,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Worcester. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Matthew.    By  Rev.  A.  Carr,  M.A.    45-.  6^. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Mark.  By  Rev.  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.  D.  4^^.  6^/. 
Gospel  according  to  St  Luke.     By  Archdeacon  Farrar.     ds. 
Gospel  according  to  St  John.     By  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  D.D.     ^s. 
Acts  of  the  Apostles.     By  Prof.  Lumby,  D.D.     4  Maps.     6j-. 
First  Corinthians.    By  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  M.A.     ^s. 
Second  Corinthians.    By  Rev.  J.  J.  Ll\s,  M.A.     3^-. 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.    By  Archdeacon  Farrar,  D.D.     33-.  dd. 
Epistles  of  St  John.     By  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  M.A.,  D.D.     a,s. 

London:    Cambridge    Warehouse^  Ave  Maria  Lane, 


PITT  PRESS  SERIES.  23 


THE     PITT     PRESS    SERIES. 

Copies  of  the  Pitt  Press  Series  may  generally  be  obtained  in  tivo  volumes. 
Text  and  Notes  separately. 


I.    GREEK. 

Aristophanes.    Aves— Plutus— Ranae.     By  W.  C.   Green,  M.A., 

late  Assistant  Master  at  Rugby  School,     3^.  6d.  each. 

Euripides.   Heracleidae.     By  E.  A.  Beck,  M.A.     3^.  6d. 
Euripides.     Hercules   Furen&.     By   A.  Gray,   M.A.,  and  J.  T. 

Hutchinson,  M.A.    is. 
Euripides.    Hippolytus.    By  W.  S.  Hadley,  M.A.     2s. 
Euripides.    Iphigeneia  in  Aulis.  By  C.  E.  S.  Headlam,  M.A.  2s.  6d. 
Herodotus.    Book  V.     By  E.  S.  Shuckburgh,  M.A.     3^-. 
Herodotus.    Book  VI.    By  the  same  Editor.     45. 
Herodotus.    Books  VIII.,  IX.     By  the  same  Editor.     4^-.  each. 

\_Nearly  ready. 

Herodotus.    Book  VIII.,  Ch.  1-90.    Book  IX.,  Ch.  1-89.    By  the 

same  Editor.     35-.  6d.  each. 

Homer.    Odyssey,  Book  IX.    Book  X.     By  G.  M.  Edwards,  M.A. 

2s.  6d.  each. 

Homer.    Odyssey,  Book  XXI.    By  the  same  Editor.     2s. 
Homer.    Iliad.    Book  VI.    By  the  same  Editor.     2s. 
Homer.  Iliad.  Books  XXII.,  XXIII.  By  the  same  Editor.    2s.  each. 
Luciani  Somnium   Charon  Piscator  et  De  Luctu.     By  W.   E. 

Heitland,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge,     ^s.  6d. 
Lucian.    Menippus  and  Timon.    By  E.  C.  Mackie,  B.A.     3i-.  6d. 
Platonis  Apologia  Socratis.    By  J.  Adam,  M.A.     3^.  6d. 

Crito.     By  the  same  Editor.     2s.  6d. 

Euthyphro.    By  the  same  Editor.     2s.  6d. 

Plutarch's  Lives  of  the  Gracchi.— Sulla— Timoleon.     By  H.  A. 

Holden,  M.A.,  LL.D.     6s.  each. 

Plutarch's  Life  of  Nicias.     By  the  same  Editor,     ^s. 

Sophocles.— Oedipus  Tyrannus.   School  Edition.     By  R.  C.  Jebb, 
Litt.D.,  LL.D.     4J-.  6d. 

Thucydides.    Book  VII.    By  Rev.  H.  A.  Holden,  M.A.,  LL.D.  5^. 

Xenophon— Agesilaus.    By  H.  Hailstone,  M.A.     2s.  6d. 


London:    Cambridge    Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


24  CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


Xenophon— Anabasis.     By  A.  Pretor,  M.A.     Two  vols.     yi-.  dd. 

Books  I.  III.  IV.  and  V.     By   the   same   Editor. 

Price  ^s.  each.     Books  II.  VI.  and  VII.    -2^.  ^d.  each. 

Xenophon— Cyropaedeia.     Books  I.  II.     By  Rev.  H.  A.  Holden, 

M.A.,  LL.D.     1  vols.     6^. 

Books  III.  IV.  and  V.    By  the  same  Editor.     5^. 

Books  VI.  VII.  and  VIII.     By  the  same  Editor.     5^. 

II.    LATIN. 
Beda's  Ecclesiastical  History,  Books  III.,  IV.    Edited  by  J.  E.  B. 

Mayor,  M.A.,  and  J.  R.  Lumby,  D.D.    Revised  Edit.    is.  6d. 
Books  I.  II.  [I71  the  Press. 

Caesar.    De  Bello  GalUco  Comment.  I.     By  A.  G.  Peskett,  M.A. 
is.6d.    Com.  II.  III.   IS. 

Comment.  I.  II.  III.    y.    Com.  IV.  V.    is.  6d.    Com.  VI.  and 

Com.  VIII.    IS.  6d.  each.    Com.  VII.    -IS. 

De  Bello  Civili.    Comment.  I.     By  the  same  Editor.     35. 


M.  T.  Ciceronis  de  Amicitia.— de  Senectute— pro  Sulla  Oratio.    By 

J.  S-  Reid,  Litt.D.,  Fellovi^  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,    gx.  6d.  each. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  Oratio  pro  Archia  Poeta.    By  the  same.     2s. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  pro  Balbo  Oratio.    By  the  same.     is.  6d. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  in  Gaium  Verrem  Actio  Prima.    By  H.  Cowie, 

M.A.,  Fellow  of  St  John's  College,     is.  6d. 

M.  T.  Ciceronis  in  Q.  Caecilium  Divinatio  et  in  C.  Verrem  Actio, 

By  W.  E.  Heitland,  M.A. ,  and  H.  Cowie,  M.A.    3^. 
M.  T.  Ciceronis  Oratio  pro  Tito  Annio  Milone.    By  John  Smyth 

PuRTON,  B.D.     2S.  6d. 

M.T.  Ciceronis  Oratio  pro  L.Murena.  ByW.E.  Heitland,  M.A.  35. 
M.  T.  Ciceronis  pro  Cn.  Plancio  Oratio,  by  H.  A.  Holden,  LL.D. 

Second  Edition.     4J.  6d. 

M.  Tulli  Ciceronis  Oratio  Philippica  Secunda.     By  A.  G.  Peskett, 

M.A.     3 J.  6d. 
M.  T.  Ciceronis  Somnium  Scipionis.   By  W.  D.  Pearman,  M.A.   2s. 
Horace.    Epistles,  Book  I.    By  E.  S.  Shuckburgh,  M.A.     2s.  6d. 
Livy.    Books  IV.,  IX.    By  H.  M.  Stephenson,  M.A.    2s.  6d.  each. 

Book  V.    By  L.  VVhibley,  M.A.     2s.  6d. 

Book  VI.     By  H.  M.  Stephenson,  M.A.  [In  the  Press. 

Books  XXI.,  XXII.    By  M.  S.  Dimsdale,  M.A.    2s.  6d.  each. 

BookXXVIL     By  H.  M.  Stephenson,  M.A.     2s.  6d. 

M.  Annaei  Lucani  Pharsaliae  Liber  Primusj.    By  W.  E.  Heitland, 
M.A.,  and  C.  E.  Haskins,  M.A.     is.  6d. 


London :    Cambridge   Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


PITT  PRESS  SERIES.  2; 


Lucretius,  Book  V.  By  J.  D.  Duff,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Trinity 
College.     Price  ^s. 

P.  Ovidii  Nasonis  Fastorum  Liber  VI.  By  A.  Sidgwick,  M.  A.  i  j-.  dd. 
Ovidii  Nasonis  Metamorphoseon  Liber  I.     By  L.   D.  Dowdall, 

LL.B.,  B.D.  ]^Ncarly  ready. 

guintus  Curtius.    A  Portion  of  the  History  (Alexander  in  India). 

By  W.  E.  Heitland,  M.A.  and  T.  E.  Raven,  B.A.    y.  6d. 
Vergil.     The  Complete  Works.     By  A.  Sidgwick,   M.A.     Two 

Vols.     Vol.  I.  Intioduclion  and  Text.    y.  6d.    Vol,  II.     Notes.     4^^.  6d. 

P.  Vergili  Maronis  Aeneidos  Libri  I.— XII.    By  the  same  Editor. 

\s.  6d.  each. 

P.  Vergili  Maronis  Bucolica.    By  the  same  Editor,     i^.  6d, 

P.  Vergili  Maronis  Georgicon  Libri  I.  II.     By  the  same  Editor. 

2J.     Libri  III.  IV.     By  the  same  Editor.     2s. 

III.    FRENCH. 

Bataille  de  Dames.  By  Scribe  and  Legouv^.  By  Rev.  H.  A. 
Bull,  M.A.     2^. 

Dix  Annees  d'Exil.  Livre  II.  Chapitres  1—8.  Par  Madame  la 
Baronne  de  Stael-Holstein.  By  the  late  G.  Masson,  B.A.  and 
G.  W.  Prothero,  M.A.     New  Edition,  enlarged.     25. 

Histoire  du  Siecle  de  Louis  XIV.  par  Voltaire.    Chaps.  I.— XIII. 

By  Gustave   Masson,  B.A.   and  G.   W.   Prothero,  M.A.     is.   6d. 
Chaps.  XIV.— XXIV.    is.  6d.     Chap.  XXV.  to  end.    2^.  6d. 

Fredegonde  et  Brunehaut.  A  Tragedy  in  Five  Acts,  by  N.  Le- 
mercier.     By  Gustave  Masson,  B.A.    is, 

Jeanne  D'Arc.     By  A.  de  Lamartine.     By  Rev.  A.  C.  Clapin, 

M.A.     Revised  Edition  by  A.  R.  Ropes,  M.A.     is.  6d. 

La  Canne  de  Jonc.    By  A.  De  Vigny.    By  H.  W.  Eve,  M.A.    is.  6d. 

La  Jeune  Siberienne.  Le  Lepreux  de  la  Cite  D'Aoste.  Tales  by 
Count  Xavier  de  Maistre.    By  Gustave  Masson,  B.A.     is.  6d. 

La  Picciola.   By  X.  B.  Saintine.    By  Rev.  A.  C.  Clapin,  M.A.    2s. 

La  Guerre.      By    MM.    Erckmann-Chatrian.      By  the   same 

Editor.     3^. 
La  Metromanie.    A  Comedy,  by  Piron.   By  G.  Masson,  B.A.  2s. 
Lascaris  ou  Les  Grecs  dn  XV^  Siecle,  Nouvelle  Historique,  par 

A.  F.  Villemain.     By  the  same.     2^. 
La  Suite  du  Menteur.     A  Comedy  by  P.  Corneille.     By  the 

same.     is. 

Lazare  Hoche — Par  Emile  de  Bonnechose.  With  Four  Maps. 
By  C.  COLBECK,  M.A.    is. 

Le  Bourgeois  Gentilhomme,  Comedie-Ballet  en  Cinq  Actes.  Par 
J.-B.  Poquelin  de  MoHere  {1670).    By  Rev.  A.  C.  Clapin,  M.A.    is.  6d. 


LoJtdon :    Cambridge    Warehouse.^  Ave  Maiia  Lane. 


26  CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY  PRESS, 


Le  Directoire.  (Considerations  sur  ia  Revolution  Fran^aise. 
Troisieme  et  quatrieme  parties. ">  Revised  and  enlarged.  By  G.  Masson, 
E.A.  and  G.  W.  rKOTHERO,  IM.A.     :.<•. 

Les  Plaideurs.  Racine.  By  E.  G.  W.  Braunholtz,  i\I.A.,  Ph.D.  2.s\ 

^Abridged  Edition.)      i,v. 

Les  Precieuses  Ridicules.    Moli^^re.    By  E.  G.  W.  Braunholtz, 

M.A.,  rh.D.     :.^-. 
. (Abridged  Edition.)     is. 

L'Ecole  des  Femmes.     :Moliere.    By  George  Saintsbury,  M.A. 
Le  Pliilosophe  sans  le  savoii'.     Sedaine.     By  Rev.  H.  A.  Bull, 

late  Master  at  \Venington  College.     :.^^ 

Lettres  sur  rhistoire  de  France  vXIII-XXIV).     Par  Augustin 

Thierrv.     By  C  Masson,  r>.A.  and  G.  W.  rKoriiERO.     2S.  6d. 

Le  Verre  D'Eau.  A  Comedy,  by  Scribe.  Edited  by  C  Col- 
beck,  M.A.     2s. 

Le  Vieux  Celibataire.  A  Comedy,  by  Collin  D'Harleville. 
\\\\X\  Notes,  by  G.  Masson,  B.A.     is. 

M.  Daru,  par  M.  C.  A.  Sainte-Beuve  (Causeries  dii  Lundi, 
Vol.  IX.).    By  G.  Masson,  B.A.  Univ.  Gallic,     ij. 

Polyeucte.     By  Corneti.le.     By  E.  G.  W.  Braunholtz,  M.A. 

[Xi-ctrly  ready. 

Recits  des  Temps  Merovingiens  I— III.  Thierry.  By  the  late 
G.  Masson,  B.A.  and  A.  R.  Ropes,  M.A.     Map.     ^.n-. 

IV.    GERMAN. 
A  Book  of  Ballads  on  German  History,    By  W.  Wagner,  Ph.D.    2J. 
A  Book  of  German  Dactylic  Poetry.    By  W.  Wagner,  Ph.D.     3^. 
Benedix.     Doctor  Wespe.     Lustspiel  in  fiinf  Aufziigen.    By  Karl 
Hermann  Breul,  M.A.,  Ph.D.     3^. 

Culturgeschichtliche  Novellen,   von   W.   H.    Riehl.     By   H.    J. 

Wolstenholme,  B.A.  (Lend.),     y.  6d. 

Das  Jahr   1813   (The   Year    181 3),   by   F.   Kohlrausch.     By 

Wilhelm  Wagner,  Ph.D.     2^. 
Der  erste  Kreuzzug  (1095— 1099)  nach  Friedrich  von  Raumer. 
The  First  Crusade.     By  W.  Wagner,  Ph.  D.     is. 

Der  Oberhof.  A  Tale  of  Westphalian  Life,  by  Karl  Immer- 
mann.     By  Wilhelm  Wagner,  Ph.D.     3^. 

Der  Staat  Friedrichs  des  Grossen.  By  G.  Freytag.  By  Wilhelm 
Wagner,  Ph.  D.     is. 

Die  Karavane,  von  Wilhelm  Hauff.    By  A.  Schlottmann,  Ph.D. 

Goethe's  Hermann  and  Dorothea.  By  W.  Wagner,  Ph.  D.  Re- 
vised edition  by  J.  W.  Cartmell.     ^s.  6d. 

London :    Cambridge   IVarehouse,  Ave  Maria  Lane. 


PITT  PRESS  SERIES,  27 


Goethe's  Knabenjahre.  (1749— ^  761.)  Goethe's  Boyhood.     By  W. 

Wagner,  Ph.D.     Revised  edition  by  J.  \V.  Cartmell,  M.A.     is. 

Hauff,  Das  Bild  des  Kaisers.     By  Karl  Hermann  Breul,  M  A 
Ph.D.     3^. 

Hauff,  Das  Wirthshaus  im  Spessart.   By  A.  Schlottmann,  Ph.D., 

late  Assistant  Master  at  Uppingham  School,    y.  6d. 

Mendelssohn's  Letters.  Selections  from.   By  James  Sime,  M.A.  3^. 
Schiller.    Wilhelm  Tell.     By  Karl  Hermann  Breul,  M.A.,  Ph.D. 

2s.  6d. 
(Abridged  Edition.)     ij-.  6d. 

Geschichte   des   Dreissigjahrigen   Kriegs.      By   the    same 

Kditor.  [A^i-arly  ready. 

Selected  Fables.  Lessing  and  Gellert.  By  Karl  Hermann 
Breul,  M.A.,  Ph.D.    3^-. 

Uhland.    Ernst,  Herzog  von  Schwaben.      By   H.   J.   Wolsten- 

HOLME,  "R.A.  (Lend.).     3^-.  6d. 

Zopf  und  bchwert.  Lustspiel  in  fiinf  Aufziigen  von  Karl  Gutz- 
KOW.     By  H.  J.  Wolstenholme,  B.A.  (Lond.).     y.  6d. 

V.    ENGLISH. 

An  Apologie  for  Poetrie  by  Sir  Philip  Sidney.  By  E.  S.  Shuck- 
burgh,  M.A.    The  text  is  a  revision  of  that  of  the  first  edition  of  1595.   3^. 

A  Discourse  of  the  Commonwealf  of  thys  Realme  of  Englande. 

First  printed  in  1581,  and  commonly  attributed  to  W.  S.  Edited  from 
the  MSS.  by  the  late  Elizabeth  Lamond.  [/«  the  Press. 

An  Elementary  Commercial  Geography.  A  Sketch  of  the  Com- 
modities and  Countries  of  the  World.  By  H.  R.  Mill,  Sc.  D.,  F.R.S.E.  is. 

An  Atlas  of  Commercial  Geography.  (Companion  to  the  above.) 
By  J.  G.  Bartholomew,  F.R.G.S.  With  an  Introduction  by  Dr  PJ.  R. 
Mill.     3^. 

Ancient  Philosophy  from  Thales  to  Cicero,  A  Sketch  of,  by 
Joseph  B.  Mayor,  M.A.    y.  6d. 

Bacon's  History  of  the  Reign  of  King  Henry  VII.    By  the  Rev. 

Professor  Lumby,  D.D.     3^-. 

British  India,  a  Short  History  of.    By  Rev.  E.  S.  Carlos,  M.A.    i^. 
Cowley's  Essays.     By  Prof.  Lumby,  D.D.     4^-. 
General  Aims  of  the  Teacher,  and  Form  Management.    Two  Lec- 
tures by  F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.  and  R.  B.  Poole,  B.D.    \s.  6d. 

John  Amos  Comenius,  Bishop  of  the  Moravians.  His  Life  and 
Educational  Works,  by  S.  S.  Laurie,  A.M.,  F.R.S.E.     35.  6d. 

Locke  on  Education.     By  the  Rev.  R.  H.  Quick,  M.A.     3^.  6d. 

Milton's  Arcades  and  Comus.     By  A.  W.  Verity,  M.A.     3^. 

Milton's  Ode  on  the  Morning  of  Christ's  Nativity,  L'Allegro,  II  Pen- 

seroso,  and  Lycidas.     By  the  same  Editor.     2J-.  6d. 

Lofidon:    Ca?ribridge   Warehouse,  Ave  Maria  La?ie. 


28  CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


Milton's  Samson  Agonistes.     By  the  same  Editor.     2s.  6d. 
Milton's  Paradise  Lost.    Books  XI.,  XII.     By  the  same  Editor. 

Milton's  Paradise  Lost.    Books  V.,  VI.     By  the  same  Editor. 

[/;/  the  Press, 

Milton's  Tractate  on  Education.    A   facsimile  reprint   from   the 

Edition  of  1673.     Edited  by  O.  Browning,  M.A.     is. 
More's  History  of  King  Richard  III.    By  J.  Rawson  Lumby,  D.D. 

y.  6d, 
On  Stimulus.     A  Lecture   delivered  for  the  Teachers'  Training 

Syndicate  at  Cambridge,  May  1882,  by  A.  SiDGWiCK,  M.A.   New  Ed.  is. 

Outlines  of  the  Philosophy  of  Aristotle.     Compiled   by    Edwin 
Wallace,  M.A.,  LL.D.    Third  Edition,  Enlarged.     4J.  6d. 

Sir  Thomas  More's  Utopia.    By  Prof.  Lumby,  D.D.     2>^.  6d. 

Theory  and  Practice  of  Teaching.    By  E.  Thring,  M.A.    4^-.  6d. 

The  Teaching  of  Modern  Languages  in  Theory   and  Practice. 

By  C.  CoLBECK,  M.A.     2s. 
Tne  Two  Noble  Kinsmen.    By  Professor  Skeat,  Litt.D.    35.  6d. 
Three  Lectures  on  the  Practice  of  Education.     I.    On  Marking, 

by  H.  W.  Eve,  M.A.    II.  On  Stimulus,  by  A.  Sidgwick,  M.A.    III.  On 
the  Teaching  of  Latin  Verse  Composition,  by  E.  A.  Abbott,  D.D.    2s. 

VI.    MATHEMATICS. 
Arithmetic  for  Schools.     By  C.  Smith,  M.A.,  Master  of  Sidney 

Sussex  College,  Cambridge.     3^.  6d. 

Elementary  Algebra  (with  Answers  to  the  Examples).     By  W.  W. 
Rouse  Ball,  M.A.     4^-,  6d. 

Euclid's  Elements  of  Geometry,  Books  I.  and  II.     By   H.    M. 

Taylor,  M.A.    is.  6d.   Books  III.  and  IV.    By  the  same  Editor,    is.  6d. 

Books  I. — IV.  in  one  volume.     31. 

Solutions  to  the  Exercises  m  Euclid,  Books  I.— IV.    By  W.  W. 

Taylor,  M.  A.  {Pi  the  Press. 

Elements  of  Statics  and  Dynamics.    By  S.  L.  Loney,  M.A.    75.  6d. 

Or  in  Two   Parts.     Part  I.     Elements  of  Statics,     ^s.   6d.        Part  IL 
Elements  of  Dynamics.     3^.  6d. 

Elementary  Treatise  on  Plane  Trigonometry  for  the  use  of  Schools. 

By  E.  W.  HOBSON,  Sc.D.,  and  C.  M.  Jessop,  MA.  [/;/  the  Press, 


Uontion:  c.  j.  clay  and  sons, 

CAMBRIDGE   WAREHOUSE,   AVE   MARIA   LANE, 
ffilasgoto:  263,  argyle  street. 

CambriBse:  DEIGHTON,  BELL  AND  CO.     ILripng:   F.  A.  BROCKHAUS. 
i^ehj  gorfe:   MACMILLAN  AND   CO. 


Cambridge:  printed  by  c.  j.  clay,   m.a.   &  sons,    at  the  university  press. 


Date  Due 


BS186.S432 

The  authorized  edition  of  the  English 

1  n M  "n,"  n,?.Il:f °l?,?.'e^.'  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1012  00113  2440 


