(iui TIDOTE to
TRIS TAN SCIENCE


a eee


il


The Library


of the


CLAREMONT |


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711-3199
1/800-626-7820


THE ANTIDOTE TO
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE


By JAMES M. GRAY, D.D.


Synthetic Bible Studies.
8vo, cloth, zez, - . - 1.50


(Enlarged, Revised and Completed); A study
of the whole Bible by bocks, for the use of lay-
men, with numerous illustrations by pulpit ex-
position. Strongly endorsed by the religious
press and by pastors and Christian workers of all
denominations,


Primers of The Faith.
Biblical Introduction and Christian
Evidences. 12mo, cloth, zez, - 1.00


A concise treatise on Biblical Introduction and
Christian Evidences from the popular point of
view, for the aid of Sunday school teachers and
lay workers. It deals with the criticism of each
book of the Bible, and also considers some of the
latest proofs of its truth.


The Antidote to Christian Science.
12mo, cloth, ez, - - - 15


As far as possible from being another of the
virulent and unintelligent attacks of which we
have had too many. Marked by a sweet, for-
bearing spirit, the author tries to show where
Christian Science fails as a religion. Since it
professes to stand on the Bible he shows how
the new faith antagonizes the Bible and how the
Bible antagonizes it, concluding with the anti-
dote for error and a chapter on what the Church
may learn from Christian Science.


G7
9. Gare Antidote to
Christian Science


OR


HOW TO DEAL WITH IT FROM
THE BIBLE AND CHRISTIAN
POINT OF VIEW


BY —


JAMES M. GRAY, D.D.


MINISTER IN THE REFORMED EPISCOPAL CHURCH, DEAN OF THE MOODY
BIBLE INSTITUTE, AUTHOR OF ‘*HOW TO MASTER THE ENGLISH
BIBLE,” ‘‘SYNTHETIC BIBLE sTUDIES,’’ ‘‘ PRIMERS OF THE


FAITH,” ‘‘ HISTORY OF THE HOLY DEAD,’’ ETC.


|


SUN ATUUNNEATTTUU TIEN {UAT ie


New York CHICAGO TORONTO


Fleming H. Revell Company


LoNDON AND EDINBURGH


Copyright, 1907, by
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY


‘| heol ogy Library


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
California


New York: 158 Fifth Avenue
Chicago: 80 Wabash Avenue
Toronto : 25 Richmond St., W.
London : 21 Paternoster Square
Edinburgh : 100 Princes Street


INTRODUCTORY


In what follows on the subject of Christian
Science the writer disclaims any intention of at-
tacking individuals, either the founder of the cult
or other of its representatives. Among the latter
he counts friends who would serve him at per-
sonal sacrifice and for whom he entertains simi-
lar regard. Indeed, to use the language of one
recently withdrawn from its ranks,* “there are
doubtless thousands of - pure-minded, noble-
hearted, self-sacrificing men and women to be
found within them.” He would go even further,
and admit that in not a few cases they are men
and women seeking lofty ideals. Men and women
who, when counted as members of the Christian
Church, were among the most spiritually-
minded (though not the most scripturally-intel-
ligent) of those members, and went out into
Christian Science to obtain that which the Church
appeared impotent to give, and which they be-
lieved it ought to give. The pathos of their
departure, alas! has reached the proportions of a
tragedy, and God alone knows upon which lies
the heavier guilt, those who left or those whose
indifference and worldliness forced them to go.

* “Reasons for Withdrawing from Christian Science,”
Rabbi Wertheimer.


6 Introductory


The writer would further disclaim any inten-
tion to attack Christian Science itself considered
as a system of healing or ethics. Did it content
itself with bettering the bodies and the morals of
men, as admittedly it does in some cases, who
could say it nay? Would not every good man in
such a case bid it Godspeed in the Name of the
Lord?

But Christian Science is nothing if not a re-
ligion, and as such, one that opposes every fun-
damental tenet of the Bible, becoming thus the
most dangerous as it is the most subtle of all the
soul-destroying heresies of the times.

And yet it is not a new religion, but an old one;
as old, at least, as the apostolic era, where it
raised its head as one of the phases of Gnosti-
cism. We find it thus met by the Holy Spirit
in several places in the New Testament, but es-
pecially in the writings of Paul and John.

In dealing with it the writer’s purpose is first,
to show how Christian Science antagonizes the
Bible; secondly, how the Bible antagonizes Chris-
tian Science; thirdly, to set forth the remedy or
antidote for it so far as the Christian Church is
concerned, and finally to set before the Church
what it may learn from Christian Science. The
title of Part Three has been given to the whole
book as best setting forth the idea of its concep-
tion in the author’s mind.


James M. Gray.


TABLE OF CONTENTS


FARE


How CuristTIiaAn ScrENcE ANTAGO-
NIZES THE BIBLE


PAK DCL
How THE BrsteE ANTAGONIZES
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
PART III
Tue Nature oF THE ANTIDOTE TO
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
PART IV


Wuatr tHE CuHurcH May LEARN
FROM CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
"|


PAGE


II


ao


69


I0I


NEW TESTAMENT SCRIPTURES
PARTICULARLY TREATED
Romans VI
GaLaTians V
Epuesians |
Cotossrans III
2 THEssALonians II
Hesrews VI
1 Joun IV


PART ONE


HOW CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
ANTAGONIZES THE BIBLE


THE
ANTIDOTE TO CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE


PART ONE


HOW CHRISTIAN SCIENCE ANTAGONIZES THE BIBLE
I


Christian Science denies the existence of mat-
ter. As this is perhaps the simplest and plainest
of the propositions concerning it, it is stated first.
Its logic is possibly like this: (a) The testimony
of the senses is commonly deceitful, therefore,
they cannot be relied upon when they speak of
the outside world; (b) they say the outside world
exists; (c) since their testimony is not to be re-
_ lied upon, the outside world does not exist. Its
existence is an illusion of mortal mind.* The ap-
proach from this illusionary postulate to the sub-
ject of disease is an easy one. You have no dis-
ease because you have no body, and you have no
body because matter does not exist. You can


*Dr, John W. Churchman in Atlantic Monthly.
II


12 The Antidote to Christian Science


think your disease away because you can think
your body away.

The conception is not entirely new, for we
recall the idealism of Bishop Berkeley and his
Bicheo successors; but these profound think-
Berkeley's ers did not deny the existence of
Idealism matter absolutely, but only distin-
guished between what is called its phenom-
enal existence and its real existence. Their
idealism, indeed, was not far removed from
the teaching of the New Testament that the
Mosaic tabernacle and its ordinances, while
phenomenally existent, were only the shadow
of the heavenly and spiritual substance which
they symbolized.* Christian Science, however,
antagonizes the earliest declaration of the Bible,
that “in the beginning God created the heaven
and the earth,” which, of course, He did not cre-
ate if there is no earth. And there is no earth if
there is no matter. See in this connection, ‘‘Sci-
ence and Health,” p. 335, or give attention to the
following comment of one of its expositors (Hon.
Herbert M. Beck, in the Arkansas Gazette):
“Christian Science does deny the reality of mat-
ter, but not the reality of men and things; 7. e., it
denies the materiality of things, and says that
God, Spirit, created all that was created, that
creation is therefore spiritual and not material.”
The idea seems to be that God created only that


* Hebrews viii, ix, x.


Christian Science Versus the Bible 13


which was in and of His own nature, and as His
nature is not material therefore nothing He cre-
ated is material.

The offence against common sense involved
in this hypothesis is seen in the following


Ne circumstance. Not very long ago an
Slocum awful accident occurred on the East
Disaster


River. The General Slocum, an ex-
cursion steamer, while carrying a load of
passengers, chiefly women and children, to a
picnic resort on Long Island Sound, caught
fire, and before she could be beached some
hundreds of persons were either drowned or
burned to death. When the facts were drawn to
the attention of an educated and intelligent Chris-
tian Scientist, who was asked how they could be
explained on the theory of the non-existence of
pain and its concomitants, the reply was that they
never actually occurred except in the imagina-
tions of the people!

Of course, the ridiculous side of such a reply
will appeal to some, but think of the moral aspect
of it. “If,” as a friend of the writer once said,
“this body of mine does not exist, if it is only a
phantom of a phantom and a shadow of a shadow,
then am I not at liberty to do with it as I please,
without sin?” We would cast no slur or insinua-
tion against any living Christian Scientist whom-
soever in saying this, but is it not desirable that
any who are being tempted in that direction


14. The Antidote to Christian Science


should learn of the road on which they are ex-
pected to travel?


II


This naturally suggests the second considera-
tion, viz.: that Christian Science denies the ex-
istence of sin. The text-book says, that “in real-
ity there is no evil” (p. 311), and “because soul
is immortal, soul cannot sin” (p. 348), and that
“one sacrifice, however great, is insufficient to
pay the debt of sin” (p. 23). Ignoring the in-
consistency and contradiction of these utter-
ances, let us place them side by side with the
declaration of the Bible on the same point: “God
saw that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts
of his heart was only evil continually” (Gen.
vi, 5); “the soul that sinneth it shall die” (Ezek.
xvili, 4); “the blood of Jesus Christ His Son
cleanseth us from all sin” (1 John i, 7).

But, of course, the text-book does not mean
what the Bible means by sin. According to the
Bible, it is primarily an inherent part of our
Sin fallen nature (Ps. li, 5; Rom. vii, 17),
Defined = and secondly, and as the result of that,
the transgression of God’s law (1 John iii, 4).
It requires confession, repentance, restitution,
atonement, cleansing (Prov. xxviii, 13; Acts iii,


i


Christian Science Versus the Bible 15


#9; LK? xix, 185) Lev. xvii) 1£; Ps. li,’2). But
sin according to Christian Science is simply er-
ror, an illusion of mortal mind, and you think it
away as you think disease away, and for the
same reason. You lose sin when you lose the
sense of sin, and this you do by persistently
thinking that there is no sin.* In illustration,
the text-book says that the property of alcohol is
to intoxicate, but if the common thought of the
majority had endowed it with a nourishing
quality like milk, it would produce a similar ef-
fect. “This unique application of the majority
rule,’ says Mr. Erdman, “shows how a man
might get apparently drunk with no sense of sin,
by putting the blame on the common thought of
the unspiritual majority.” +

The formula recalls an incident of a little boy
within the writer’s circle of acquaintance, who
was forbidden by his mother to enter a certain
room of their dwelling which had been newly
papered. Fear was felt that a mischievous dis-
position would move him to tear off the paper
while it was still moist, and he was admonished
that if he did so he would not be a good boy.
Nevertheless, sometime afterward, being missed
from the family presence, he was found in that
very room tearing off the paper as rapidly as he
could, to the accompaniment of the words, mut-


* “Science and Health,” p. 311.
¢ “Why I am Not a Christian Scientist.”


pe


SRS er) ee TCE


nc YC AS EN


16 The Antidote to Christian Science


tered under his breath, “Georgie is a good boy,
Georgie is a good boy!”

With Christian Science, indeed, sin and dis-
ease are practically synonymous, and it is the lat-
ter that is dwelt upon to the exclusion of the for-
mer, until one is led to think that a perfect state
Sin ad of bodily health were one and the same
Disease as a pure soul. As an illustration,
there lies before the writer a newspaper report
of a lecture on Christian Science delivered by one
of its most eminent exponents, covering seven
columns of a leading daily, five of which, how-
ever, discuss the subject of physical healing, and
only two are left to speak of the author of Chris-
tian Science and its tenets. It is true, indeed, as
Christian Science eagerly insists, that Jesus
Christ healed all manner of diseases, and that
much is made of it in the Gospels and Acts of
the Apostles, but this He did as an incident, a
credential of His ministry (Matt. xi, 2-6). He
came into the world to seek and save the lost
(Lk. xix, 10), the morally and spiritually lost,
and He did these other things as testimonies to
His Divine commission and that men might be-
lieve on Him as the Son of God and the Saviour
of the world (Matt. xi, 1-6; John ix, 1-38; ix,
30, 31; Acts ii, 22-41).

Like all natural religions, however, Christian
Science fails to take account of the fallen nature
of man of which physical disease is but a symp-


Christian Science Versus the Bible 17


tom, and not by any means the worst. It men-
tions the new birth sometimes, but, of course, it
is not the new birth of the Holy Scriptures. The
lecturer just alluded to (Judge S. J. H. Hanna,
C. S. D.) insists that “the real spiritual man is
made in the image and likeness of God,’ and
must, “by the necessity of his relationship to
God reflect or image forth the Divine character.”
The “mortal” man, the “unspiritual” man does
not reflect God, according to the same author-
ity,* and is not, therefore, His image and like-
ness. The “real spiritual man” of Christian Sci-
ence, it should be remembered, is he who no
longer believes in a material body, while the
“mortal, unspiritual” man is still hampered by
that illusion(?).

Now the truth is that God did make man in
His own image and likeness (Gen. i, 26, 27), but
Man and the the man God made was the whole man
Divine consisting of soul and body, spirit and
as matter (1 Thess. v, 23). The Divine
image in which this man was made was that of
righteousness and true holiness (Eph. iv, 24).
When sin entered the worid man lost this image
and became by nature a “child of wrath” (Eph.
ii, 3), and in need of renewal and reconciliation
to God (Col. iti, 10; 2 Cor. v, 18, 19).

Christian Science distinguishes, therefore, be-
tween a false and a true man, but the Bible be-

* “Christian Science the Religion of the Bible.”


18 The Antidote to Christian Science


tween an old and a new man. The false man of
Christian Science is he who thinks he has a ma-
terial body, and the true man he who is delivered
from that idea. The old man of the Bible is he
who is dwelling in a state of sin, the new man
he who, having been regenerated, is dwelling in
a state of grace. Christian Science says to the
false man, “become true by thinking there is no
evil, error, sin.” The Bible says to the old man
“Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be
saved” (Acts xvi, 31). The reader who does
not perceive a “great gulf fixed” between these
two conceptions or ideas is earnestly entreated to
consider them again.

Indeed, one is more and more impressed in
reading Christian Science literature and listen-
ing to its exponents, how little thought is given
to the exaltation of God and of Jesus Christ, and
how much is given to man himself. It is a re-
ligion of works throughout, whereas the Bible
says: “Not of works, lest any man should boast”
(Eph, ii, 8, 9).


III


It is almost unnecessary to say that Christian
Science denies the existence of Satan. {The text-
book declares in one place that “the supposition
that there are good and evil spirits is a mistake”


Christian Science Versus the Bible 19


(pp. 70, 71), and in another that “a lie is all the
Satan there is” (pp. 84, 85), declarations which
doubtless cause the greatest satisfaction in the
realms of darkness, for “we may believe that
Satan is more eager to establish his nonentity
than the most miscalled man was ever to estab-
lish the opposite.”*

But if there be no Satan then there was no
garden of Eden and no fall of man, which is, of
course, what Christian Science affirms, regard-
ing Genesis iii “as mythological allegory or his-
tory of error.” If there be no Satan then the
Personality DOOK of Job is to be classed in the
and Power samme category with Genesis iii, and so
ofSatan is a large part of the Old Testament.
If there was no Satan then are we to conclude
that Jesus was never tempted in the wilderness
(Matt. iv)? And what about His teaching as to
His betrayer and betrayal (John xiii, 27)? And
what about the petition in the Lord’s prayer that
we may be delivered from the evil one (Lk. xi,
4, R. V.)? Who sifted Peter, if there be no
Satan (Lk. xxii, 31)? Who will explain the
book of Revelation if Satan is not? And who
will be the chief occupant of the lake of fire
(Rev, xx, 10)?

Although it is somewhat out of order, there
may be no better place to say that Satan is a
mighty enemy of God, and consequently of man

* “Christian Science Tested by Scripture.”


20 The Antidote to Christian Science


who is made in the image of God, and that he
has vast power through his angels and demons in
heaven and on earth, though ultimately Christ
and His church shall overcome him. But as de-
ceit is the chief weapon of Satan, his attacks may
not be understood as readily as might be ex-
pected. He not only insinuates doubts as to the
truth of the more important and vital facts of
revelation (Gen. iii, 1-4), but especially does he
pervert the gospel by counterfeiting it, even
though in order to do so he must array himself
as an angel of light (2 Cor. iv, 45 xy ad, 250
This he has done, there is every reason to be-
lieve, and done with his most consummate skill,
in the case of Christian Science. Here has he
created a church of his own with supernatural
works and the graces and beauties of Christi-
anity as its credentials, so that, if possible, it
would deceive the very elect (Matt. xxiv, 24).
For a striking and impressive outlining of this
truth in the form of a dialogue between Satan
and his angels, the reader is referred to the
“Masterpiece of Satan,” by St. Clements (The
Alliance Press Company, 692 Eighth Avenue,
N. Y., price one cent) ; but for a more extended
and scholarly treatment of the whole question
of Satan and Satanism such larger volumes as
the following are recommended: “The Satan of
Scripture,” by Ormiston; “Satan’s Devices,” by
Parsons; “Lectures on Satan,” by McRea;


Christian Science Versus the Bible 21


“Satanology,” by Matson; “Demon Possession
and Allied Themes,” by Nevius; “The World
and Its God,” by Philip Mauro. Other works
that might be read with profit on the subject
are: “Two Babylons,” Hislop; “Earth’s Earliest
Ages,” Pember; and “Christianity and Anti-
Christianity,’ Andrews.


IV


But more seriously still, Christian Science de-
mies the personality of God. The lecturer re-
ferred to in a previous paragraph says that it
acknowledges “the supremacy and infinity of
God,” and inculcates “the omnipotence, omni-
presence, and omniscience of God,” but it might
do all this and deny His personality. The text-
book of Christian Science sometimes speaks of
God as a Person, but more commonly as a prin-
ciple, and one who was a teacher and healer of
the cult has testified to the writer that none can
become an adept in that sense without absolutely
relinquishing the idea of a Divine personality.
The following extracts from the text-book are
to the point: “The belief that man has a separate
life or soul from God is the error that Jesus came
to destroy” (p. 90) ; “Man is co-eternal and co-
existent with God, and they are inseparable in
Divine Science” (p. 173).


22 The Antidote to Christian Science


Christian Science resents its classification with
pantheism, but what is the foregoing if not pan-
Christian theism? The god of pantheism is not
Scienceand a being above the universe and inde-
Pantheism Hendent of it because of creating it,
but rather the pervading principle or soul of the
universe itself. The god of the pantheist is in
man, but in much the same sense is he in the air
we breathe, the clouds that float in the sky, the
mountains and plains of the earth, the material
of which our houses are built, and the paper on
which these words are printed. All these things
are just so many fleeting modifications of the
pantheist’s god, and, in the last analysis, of the
Christian Scientist’s god as well. No Christian
Scientist can look up into the face of God, and
mean what the devout and intelligent Christian
means when he addresses Him as “Our Father
who art in Heaven.”

A. defender of Christian Science recently de-
clared that “it is foolish to say it denies God
when the whole teaching stands upon the abso-
lute Allness of God,” and that “God’s personality
is not denied, but He is described to be the only
Person.”* In reply it is sufficient to say that the
affirmation of “the absolute Allness of God” is
what identifies Christian Science with pantheism,
and that the affirmation that He is “the only
Person” denies to Him personality altogether.

* Hon. Herbert M. Beck in the Arkansas Gazette.


Christian Science Versus the Bible 23


Vi


The denial of the personality of God carries
with it necessarily the denial of the Person and
work of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is peculiarly
difficult to define just what Christian Science
holds concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, since its
language with reference to Him is even more ab-
struse and contradictory than usual. One ex-
ponent speaks of but one Christ, which sounds
like Christianity; while another uses language
implying that there were Christs before Jesus,
and that there may be others after Him, which
sounds like Buddhism or Theosophy. There is
a prevailing opinion among Christian Scientists
whom the writer has met and of whom
he has heard, that the immaculate con-
ception of Mary was not unique, and
that any other woman of our own times, for ex-
ample, sufficiently holy according to the Canons
of Christian Science, sufficiently real and spir-
itual, might conceive and give birth to another
Christ in the same way. A Boston clergyman is
sponsor for the statement that there are three
women in Massachusetts who affirm to having
given birth to such children. We would avoid
slander, even impersonal slander, but what shall
be said of the moral character and the moral ef-
fects of such teaching? Nor does it become less


Immaculate
Conceptions


24 The Antidote to Christian Science


serious in the light of Christian Science inculca-
tions concerning marriage and the conjugal re-
lation. On page 288 of “Miscellaneous Writ-
ings,” by the founder of that sect, occur these
words: “Is marriage nearer right than celi-
bacy?” To which the answer is given, “Human
knowledge indicates that it is, while science in-
dicates that it is not.’ Consider this teaching
further in the light of a well-understood fact that
husbands and wives under the influence of Chris-
tian Science do not infrequently cease to live to-
gether in the natural relationship. This may
seem to them like the refinement of holiness, but
may it not rather be Satan’s method of leading
into deeper sin? Let the word of God be exam-
ined on this point as given in 1 Corinthians vii,
1-9, and Hebrews xiii, 4, and let it be remem-
bered that the first miracle of our holy Lord was
in connection with, and for the benefit of, a mar-
riage feast (John ii).

But to return to the consideration of His gra-
cious Person, “we must confess the shock it gives
our reverence to hear Him constantly referred
to as a metaphysician and demonstrator of Chris-
tian Science, and the most scientific man that
ever trod the globe; to be told that the cause of
His agony in the garden was His conviction of
the utter error of a belief of life in matter, and
that on the cross He was giving the world an ex-
ample and proof of divine (or Christian) Sci-


Christian Science Versus the Bible 25


ence.”* The latter, by the way, makes a distinc-
tion between Jesus and the Christ. It was only
The Body the former and not the latter who had
and Blood a body, and this, of course, could not
of jesus have been a true or real body since
there is no such thing. He only accommodated
Himself to our crude notions when He described
it as flesh and blood. He never truly suffered on
the cross, He never truly died nor rose again.
The resurrection which the Bible describes is
only a “demonstration” of Christian Science.
Jesus, indeed, was only a “spiritual ideal’ (“Sci-
ence and Health,” p. 513). There is no redemp-
tion in His blood, for there is no blood. This
is the crux of their whole position. Talk with a
Christian Scientist about the Bible, and he will
seem to agree with you on every point because
he is using language in a different sense from
yourself, but approach him on the subject of the
blood of atonement, and he is almost certain to
appear in opposition to you. If he agrees with
you, he can hardly be an intelligent and at the
same time a truthful Christian Scientist. The
text-book says (p. 25): “The material blood of
Jesus was no more efficacious to cleanse from
sin when it was shed upon the accursed tree, than
when it was flowing in His veins.”

Dismiss the childish contradictions in the above
statements and consider seriously this last one of


* “Christian Science Tested by Scripture.”


26 The Antidote to Christian Science


all. Jesus is the antitype of the paschal lamb. Can
any one read the twelfth chapter of Exodus, and
say that the houses of the Hebrews would have
been passed over in the judgment upon Egypt
just as efficaciously if in each case no lamb had
been slain, and no blood sprinkled upon the door-
posts? Jesus is the antitype of the sacrificial
lamb. Can any one read the book of Leviticus,
and say that the sins of Israel would have been
equally atoned for if the lamb had not been slain
and its blood sprinkled upon the altar and the
mercy-seat? And what interpretation are we to
give to these declarations of the New Testa-
ment: “The church of God which He purchased
with His own blood” (Acts xx, 28); “Whom
God hath set forth to be a propitiation through
faith, by His blood” (Rom. iii, 25); ‘“We have
redemption through His blood” (Eph. i, 7) ; “By
His own blood He entered in once into the holy
place, having obtained eternal redemption for
us” (Heb. ix, 12) ; “Unto Him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in His own blood”
(Rev. i, 5)? Have all the fathers of the Chris-
tian Church in all the centuries failed to grasp
the meaning of this word, and the real signifi-
cance of these utterances, and has it been left to
a New England woman of the present century to
do this? Are the creeds of Christendom now to
be set aside for “Science and Health”?

No wonder that a religious system such as this,


Christian Science Versus the Bible 27


even bearing a Christian name, should have no
place for the observance of the sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper.


VI


As a logical sequence, Christian Science de-
mes the reality of prayer. This, to some having
given little attention to the subject, may appear
the most surprising of all our propositions, be-
cause it is popularly believed that Christian Sci-
ence is almost a synonym for prayer. It is
often classed, indeed, with “Divine healing,” and
the prayer of faith that saves the sick (Jas. v,
15), from which, in reality, it is as far removed
as the poles. There are presumably Christian
Scientists who still believe that they pray as they
used to do when they were Christians, but the
divergence from the faith of their fathers is ever
widening on an increasing scale. All engineer-
ing proceeds on the principle of reaching great
heights or depths by almost imperceptible in-
clines, and it is so that the adversary of souls
operates in leading us astray.

A young woman recently become a Christian
Scientist was deeply wounded, even to tears, by
Prayer the seeming insinuation in the ques-
oe eee tion, If she ever prayed? And yet
Christian Scientists do not pray. Prayer is the


28 The Antidote to Christian Science


address of a personal human being to a Personal
God, grounded on the merits and mediation of a
Personal Saviour, and inspired and directed by
a Personal Holy Spirit (Eph. ii, 18), all of which
Christian Science absolutely denies. Neither
God nor man is a person in Christian Science.
What it thinks of the Saviour has been already
seen, in part, and what it thinks of the Holy
Spirit may be gathered from the observation of
its founder that “the Comforter is Divine (1. @.,
Christian) Science’ (“Science and Health,” p.
55).

Indeed, Christian Science plainly decries
prayer, saying that “prayer to a Personal God is
a hindrance,” “a misapprehension of the source
and manner of all good,” and that “petitions only
bring mortals the results of their own beliefs.”
“God is not influenced by man,” says the text-
book (p. 7), and “the habit of pleading with the
Divine mind as one pleads with a human being
perpetuates the belief in God as humanly circum-
scribed—an error that impedes spiritual growth”
(p. 2).

If, after all this, the Christian Scientist insists
that he prays, it is difficult to describe what he
means. Indeed, hypnotism comes nearer the de-
scription of the mental process passing for
prayer in the vocabulary of the Christian Scien-
tist. When, a few years since, at a meeting in
Madison Square Garden, Dr. John Alexander


Christian Science Versus the Bible 29


Dowie attempted to introduce Zionism in New
Hypnotizing YOrk, the Christian Scientists set
Dr. Dowie themselves against him. They said,
“This is a lie, this is error, this cannot be,
this must not be.” And a number of them sta-
tioned themselves at different places in the Gar-
den to “demonstrate” against him, wherein they
were successful, as they claimed, for Dr. Dowie’s
effort was abortive. One of the “demonstrators”
told the writer that the process was hypnotic—
an intense introspection followed by an equally
intense projection of the mind upon the object to
be influenced or the purpose to be attained. It
was the same process, the demonstrator said,
which is exercised by them in the case of physi-
cal healing.

To employ a further illustration: The writer
had addressed a Christian Scientist in a spirit of
kindness, asking him to carefully read certain
Scriptures he had indicated, and pray the God
and Saviour he used to know and serve to bless
them to his deliverance from that awful error.
To this the correspondent replied that he could
not do so, adding, “I believe that it is a prayer
to establish your conclusions or your convictions
in my heart.” What is this but hypnotism, a
kind of wrestling of mind against mind, but it is
not prayer. Certainly it is not a cry to a Per-
sonal and powerful and gracious God for light
and aid in a time of possible crisis or necessity.


30 «©The Antidote to Christian Science


Could anything more plainly show the elimina-
tion of Personality from the God of the Chris-
tian Scientist than this? There is no confidence
in God here, no repose in His love, no nestling
under His feathers for care and protection from
a possibly hostile approach. There is nothing
here but the pitiful condition of a soul on the
broad ocean of existence acting as its own pilot
and unprovided with an anchor.


VII


But finally, that which is fundamental to all the
foregoing is the error of Christian Science with
reference to the interpretation of the Bible. This
fact is all the more deeply impressed upon us by
the title of its text-book, the great “standard of
faith and practice” for all its votaries. ‘Science
and Health, with Key to the Scriptures,” is very
significant. A key has two offices. It may open
a door or effectually close it, and the latter is
what it seems to have done, so far as the under-
standing of the Bible is concerned, to all who are
under its strange influence. Professor Orr is
within bounds in saying that in reality the Scrip-
tures are explained away by it. “In considerable
parts they are declared to be the work of the
spirit of error. The exegesis offered, apart from


Christian Science Versus the Bible 31


the extravagant allegorizing, is that of the mad-
house.’’*

A few illustrations or samples follow, taken in
part from the “Glossary” in Science and Health,
which, it is understood, its votaries commit to
memory.

Adam is divided into two syllables, and means
“a dam, or obstruction, which suggests the
thought of something fluid, or mortal mind in so-
lution.” Benjamin (Jacob’s son) is a “physical
belief as to life, substance, and mind.” Dan
The Chris. (Jacob’s son) is “animal magnetism.”
tian Science Fars are “not organs of the so-called
Glossary corporeal senses, but spiritual under-
standing.” Euphrates (a river) is “divine sci-
ence, encompassing the universe and man.” Gad
(Jacob’s son) is “science, spiritual being under-
stood.” Firmament is “spiritual understanding.”
Gihon (river) is “the rights of woman acknowl-
edged morally, civilly, and socially.” Ham
(Noah’s son) is “corporeal belief; sensuality.”
Hiddekel (river) is “divine science, understood
and acknowledged.” Holy Ghost is also “divine
science; the developments of eternal life.” Issa-
char (Jacob’s son) is “a corporeal belief; the
offspring of error.” Japhet (Noah’s son) is “a
type of spiritual peace, flowing from the under-
standing that God is the divine Principle of all
existence.” Jerusalem is “mortal belief and

* The London Quarterly Review.


32 The Antidote to Christian Science


knowledge, obtained from the five corporeal
senses.” Joseph is “a corporeal mortal.” Judah
is “a corporeal, material belief, progressing and
disappearing.” Levi (Jacob’s son) is “a corporeal
and sensual belief.” Mother is “God.” New
Jerusalem is “divine science.”

On page 19 of “Science and Health” are the
words: “Jesus urged the commandment “Thou
shalt have no other gods before Me,’ which may
be rendered, ‘Thou shalt have no belief of life in
matter.’” The beautiful text, “Let us lay aside
every weight and the sin which doth so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race
that is set before us,” is wrested into “Put away
material self and sense, and seek the divine Prin-
ciple and Science of all healing” (p. 20). The
precious words, “Jesus bore our sins in His own
body,” are wrested into meaning, “He knew the
mortal errors which constitute the material body,
and could destroy those errors; but at the time
when Jesus felt our infirmities He had not con-
quered all the beliefs of the flesh or His sense
of material life” (p. 53). On page 216 we read:
“When you say, ‘Man’s body is material,’ I say
with Paul, ‘Be willing rather to be absent from
the body, and to be present with the Lord.’ Give
up your material belief of mind in matter, and
have but one mind, even God.” But worse than
this, the resurrection of our Lord is flatly denied
in the following words: ‘Paul writes, ‘If Christ


Christian Science Versus the Bible 33


be not risen, then is my preaching vain’; that is:
‘If the idea of the supremacy of Spirit, which is
the true conception of being, come not to your
thought, you cannot be benefited by what I say’ ”
(p. 324).*

The Christian Scientist as a Bible exegete is
the most astonishing spiritual phenomenon of the
times. The gist Psalm is a favorite, beginning
wane with the words, “He that dwelleth in
tian Scien. the secret place of the Most High
tistasan = shall abide under the shadow of the
Exegete ‘ ehete

Almighty,” and containing the prom-
ise, “Thou shalt not be afraid . . . for the
pestilence that walketh in darkness nor for the
destruction that wasteth at noonday.” Devout
Christian scholarship regards this psalm as writ-
ten by Moses during the wilderness journey,
when besides political enemies, Israel had other
evils to encounter from the climate, reptiles, and
wild beasts, and when they were assured that to
commit themselves with full confidence and obedi-
ence to the Almighty would be to share His pro-
tection. It is also applied in an accommodated
sense to the spiritual blessings of true and faith-
ful believers in Jesus Christ, although doubtless
it ultimately belongs to the age to come. But
Christian Science leaves God out of the consid-
eration. “The secret place of the Most High,”


* “How Christian Science Wrests Scripture,’ A. C.
Dixon.


34 The Antidote to Christian Science


is the ego or realm of spiritual thought, into
which the person conversant with the science re-
tires at will. When once ensconced in this tem-
ple of his interior, he realizes the idea of the
psalmist, and all disease and sin gravitates away
from him! He is no longer in danger of the pes-
tilence of destruction.* In like manner Hebrews
ii, 39-40, is pressed into the service. The in-
spired writer is alluding to that “better thing”
for which the Old Testament patriarchs waited,
“not having received the promise,” and the
Church regards it as applying to the coming of
the Messiah, especially His second coming, when
Old and New Testament saints alike shall have
their bodies raised from the grave and enter into
the enjoyment of complete redemption. But
Christian Science arrogates this to itself. It
(i. e., Christian Science) is the better thing for
which the patriarchs waited, and there is no fur-
ther redemption to be expected. Irreverent as
this may sound, it does not shock the spiritual
sensibilities as much as when we hear Christian
Science absolutely putting itself in the place of
Christ in the appropriation of such declarations
and invitations as these: “I am the way, the truth
and the life,” and “Come unto Me, all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest.”

But Christian Science knows how to take the
Scriptures in a sober sense when it is disposed to

* Prof. John D. Quackenbos.


Christian Science Versus the Bible 35


do so, applying what it chooses to its advantage
and discarding the remainder. The distinguished
lecturer already referred to is quoting Jesus’
commission to His twelve disciples in Matthew
X, 5-10:


“Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and
into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not;
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying, The
kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick,
cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out
devils. Freely ye have received, freely give.
Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in
your purses, nor scrip for your journey,
neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet
staves; for the workman is worthy of his
meat.”


“This commandment,” he goes on to say, “is a
unit. It is not two commandments. There is in
Jesus’ Com. this language no warrant for any at-
missionto tempt to separate the commandment by
dd declaring that the part relating to
preaching was to be perpetuated, but the part re-
lating to healing the sick was to be set aside as
having reference only to the time in which and
to those to whom it was given.” Here is a chal-
lenge no intelligent Bible student will desire to ig-
nore. This commission is a unit as the lecturer


36 The Antidote to Christian Science


affirms, nor is there any warrant for separating
one part of it from another. But does not he
perceive that the whole belongs “to the time in
which and to those to whom it was given’? Is
not Jesus very explicit about this (vs. 5, 6)?
Does He not limit both the preaching and the
teaching to Israel? Is not the one as unique as
the other? Why, then, does the lecturer do vio-
lence to this unit? Why does not he limit his
ministrations to Israel? And why does not he do
this freely without gold, or silver, or brass, or
scrip for his journey, without two coats, or shoes,
or staves, for the workman is worthy of his hire?


PART TWO


HOW THE BIBLE ANTAGONIZES
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE


PART. TWO


HOW THE BIBLE ANTAGONIZES CHRISTIAN SCIENCE


I


The Bible reveals the real character or nature
of Christian Science. It does this “at sundry
times and in divers manners,” but very especially
and very tersely in I John iv, 1-3, which, in the
Revised Version, reads thus:


“Beloved, believe not every spirit, but
prove the spirits, whether they are of God;
because many false prophets are gone out
into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit
of God: every spirit which confesseth that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God:
and every spirit that confesseth not Jesus is
not of God: and this is the spirit of the anti-
christ, whereof ye have heard that it cometh,
and now it is in the world already.”


In these words we are warned against cre-
dulity, for there are as many people who believe
too much as there who believe too little. Paul’s
caution to the Athenians is still of value, “In all


39


40 The Antidote to Christian Science


things I perceive that ye are somewhat supersti-
tious.”

When, however, we are warned to believe not
every spirit, the word really signifies teacher, or
prophet, as the context indicates. The false
teacher may be influenced by false spirits, but
practically it is the teacher to whom we listen
and whose teaching we are to “prove.”

Nor let it be supposed that such proving neces-
sarily requires one to become a disciple or devo-
tee of the teaching or teacher to be proved. One
can know Paganism without becoming a pagan,
and Mohammedanism without becoming a Mo-
hammedan, and Unitarianism without becoming a
Unitarian, and Christian Science without becom-
ing a Christian Scientist. The same Holy Word
that inculcates the proving indicates the way in
ae ye a which it shall be done: “To the law and
stonefor to the testimony; if they speak not ac-
5 ea cording to this Word, it is because

there is no light in them” (Isa. viii,
20). This was the method of the Bereans, who
were commended because they “searched the
Scriptures daily whether these things were so”
(Acts xvii, 11). The inspired Word of God is
the only touchstone: to which to bring Christian
Science, the failure to do which patiently, rev-
erently, and intelligently accounts in great meas-
ure for its progress within the ranks of profess-
ing Christians. Christian Science is neither to


The Bible Versus Christian Science 41


be ridiculed nor feared, to be marvelled at nor
tampered with, but examined and classified in
the light of the only divine revelation.

The apostle further says that many false teach-
ings are gone out into the world, every one of
which is to be proven in the same way. ‘Hereby
know ye the Spirit of God: every spirit (teach-
ing) that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh is of God.” The Jesus Christ here re-
ferred to is, of course, THE Jesus Christ of the
Holy Scriptures, and none other. The Greek is
very emphatic here, placing the article before
Jesus, “THE Jesus,” the historical Jesus who is
Christ. He is the Jesus Christ of the Apostles’
Creed, the eternal Son of God, who, as to His
human nature, was “conceived of the Holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried. The third
day He rose from the dead, He ascended into
heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God, the
Father Almighty, from whence He shall come
again to judge the quick and the dead.” Does
Christian Science confess this? Who, in the or-
dinary use of the English tongue, will say that
it does? But if it does not, what then? ‘Every
spirit which confesseth not (THE) Jesus is not
of God.” Christian Science, therefore, is not of
God.

Some ancient manuscripts of the Scriptures
give this verse thus: “Every spirit that annulleth


42 The Antidote to Christian Science


Jesus is not of God.” This is precisely what
Christian Science does. It annulleth Jesus. It
Annulling reduces Him to nothing in comparison
doses with what the Scriptures say He is,
and what the spiritual experience of a regenerated
man knows Him to be. The blind Milton says:


“Light, the prime work of God, to me is extinct,
And all her various objects of delight
Annulled.”


Light existed, but not for Milton. The Jesus
Christ of the Bible exists, but not for Christian
Science. Christian Science is blind to Him and
would blind the eyes of them that see.

(1) It annuls His incarnation. The angel
said to Mary: “The Holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the Highest shall over-
shadow thee; therefore, that which is to be born
shall be called holy, the Son of God” (Lk. i,
35). But Christian Science says, “the concep-
tion of Jesus was spiritual, 7. e., the spirituality
of Mary was the transparency through which
immortal Mind was reflected in that better like-
ness of Truth and Love, the good and pure
Jesus.” (2) It annuls not only His incarnation,
but, logically, His whole life in the flesh. Jesus
was not different from the rest of us, according
to Christian Science, in that He had no flesh, no
material nature, or else He was in bondage to
“error” and “false human beliefs” which would


The Bible Versus Christian Science 43


have prevented Him from being “good and
pure.” (3) It annuls His death and sacrificial
atonement as already shown. (4) It annuls His
resurrection. “Jesus’ students, not sufficiently
advanced to understand their Master’s triumph,
did not perform any wonderful works until they
saw Him after His crucifixion, and learned that
He had not died!’ (“Science and Health,” p. 45).
(5) It annuls His Highpriestly intercession for
His people at the right hand of God, in heaven,
for it declares “heaven is not a locality” (p. 291).
(6) It annuls His second coming to earth, for it
affirms in contradiction to Acts i, 11, that “the
second appearance of Jesus is unquestionably the
spiritual advent of the advancing idea of God
in Christian Science” (“Autobiography of Mrs.
Eddy,” p. 96).

And what is this teaching thus annulling
Jesus? “This is the spirit of the Antichrist
whereof ye have heard that it cometh, and now
it is in the world already.”’ The Antichrist him-
The Anti- Self is a person, a human despot of
Christ some kind, ecclesiastical, political, or
both in one, who is yet to arise among men and
within the limits of Christendom, and whom men
will fall down and worship instead of God and
Christ ; but the spirit of the Antichrist, the teach-
ing that prepares the way for his full develop-
ment, is already in the world. There is much
of this teaching, as other parts of the Scriptures


44 The Antidote to Christian Science


testify. The sacramentalism, the priestcraft, the
Mariolatry of Roman Catholicism is part of this.
The Unitarian heresy denying the Deity of Jesus
is part of it. The destructive Biblical criticism
of the period through which we are passing is
part of it, but the teaching of Christian Science
is pre-eminently that which the Apostle John
has in mind.

When John wrote this epistle the root of that
heresy had already imbedded itself in the church
in the Ebionites, who denied the Deity of Christ,
the Docetists, who denied His proper humanity,
and the Cerinthians, who denied the union of the
two natures, human and divine, prior to His bap-
tism. It was to meet these heresies that John
wrote his epistle, and these are the heresies of
Christian Science. Christian Science, therefore,
is the spirit or the teaching of Antichrist.


IT


The Bible reveals the real explanation of Chris-
tian Science. It is sometimes said, for example,
that if Christian Science be so evil and contrary
to the truth of the Holy Scriptures, how shall we
account for the intelligent and even educated
people who embrace it? The answer is not so
difficult if one is willing to submit himself to the


The Bible Versus Christian Science 45


same Holy Scriptures for a reply. 2 Thessa-
lonians ii, 7-12, in the Revised Version reads
thus :


“For the mystery of lawlessness doth al-
ready work: only there is one that restrain-
eth now, until he be taken out of the way.
And then shall be revealed the lawless one
whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the
breath of His mouth and bring to nought
by the manifestation of His coming. Even
he, whose coming is according to the work-
ing of Satan with all power, and signs and
lying wonders, and with all deceit of un-
righteousness for them that are perishing
because they received not the love of the
truth that they might be saved.

“And for this cause God sendeth them a
working of error, that they should believe
a lie: that they all might be judged who be-
lieved not the truth, but had pleasure in un-
righteousness.”


Here the inspired writer, Paul, is meeting false
teachers who had taught the young Christians at
Thessalonica that “the day of the Lord is now
present” (ii, 2, R. V.). The day of the Lord is,
by many, distinguished from the coming of the
Lord for His Church, of which Paul had treated
in his earlier epistle to this people. The Lord
comes for His Church, so it is thought, and the


46 The Antidote to Christian Science


Church is caught up to meet Him in the air (1
Thess. iv, 13-18), and then the day of the Lord
on this earth begins, a day of “vengeance on
them that know not God and obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ” (2 Thess. i, 7, 8).

Paul intimates that this “day shall not come
except there come a falling away first (an apos-
The Day of tasy in Christendom), and the man of
theLord sin (or the man of lawlessness) be re-
vealed, the son of perdition” (the Antichrist),
whom he proceeds to describe. Something, or
some one, was restraining, holding back the full
development of this apostasy and the man of sin
in whom it would be headed up, and until this
restraining force was taken out of the way the
revelation of the iniquity in its entirety would not
appear. Just what this force was, or is, is not
defined, but it has been generally understood of
the Holy Spirit. His presence on earth in all
the Christian centuries, abiding in the Church, is
the restraining force, and when He shall be taken
away from the earth in the sense that the Church
in which He abides shall be taken away, the apos-
tasy will rapidly increase towards the culminat-
ing period.

The culminating period reached, the apostasy
becoming ripe, the lawless one or the Antichrist
will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus Christ
shall destroy at His coming. This lawless one
is described as possessing the power of Satan,


“yr


The Bible Versus Christian Science 47


and able with signs and lying wonders to deceive
them who have not received the love of the truth
in order that they might be saved. The “truth”
means the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ and
that only—the gospel revealed in the New Testa-
ment. That phrase “the love of the truth” is sig-
nificant. One may receive the truth, shall we
say, but not the love of it? One who marries a
woman, but does not love the woman, is soon
seeking for divorce, and one who knows the truth
in his head, but has never given it lodgment in
his heart, is not difficult to lead away into error.
It is only those who receive the love of the truth
who are saved, for it is only those who receive
the Saviour Himself into their hearts and lives.

But the serious thought for the Christian Sci-
entist, especially him who being once a Chris-
tian has turned his back upon the church and the
gospel of Jesus Christ, is this, that because men
Whatisa receive not the love of the truth God
Delusion? sends upon them as a chastisement, a
“working of error,” a delusion, that they should
believe a lie. A noted alienist has recently dif-
ferentiated a delusion from an hallucination as
“4 misinterpretation of realities,” and this is pre-
cisely the nature of Christian Science as a doc-
trine. It is a misinterpretation of realities. And
God sends these things upon men who receive
not the love of the truth. It is not merely that
He permits them to come, but sends them as “the


Ghia


48 The Antidote to Christian Science


mighty act of the Judge punishing evil by evil.”
Not to believe the truth is sin, and to receive not
the love of the truth after knowing it is still
darker sin, and to have to believe the lie in con-
sequence is a punishment for it of the most aw-
ful kind. Perhaps the Greek should be trans-
lated, not “a lie,” but “the lie,” “the singular with
the article denoting, not a single lie, but the en-
tire force, the entire element of the devilish per-
version of all truth” (Auberlen in loco). Here,
then, is the inspired explanation of Christian
Science, the divinely revealed reason why people
of intelligence and education are carried away by
it, for the principle actuating God at the close of
the present age when men shall be worshipping
the Antichrist is doubtless that on which He op-
erates throughout the whole period, ending in
that climax of iniquity and judgment.

In confirmation of this last opinion, consider
the situation of paganism to-day, and the reason
of it, as set forth in Romans i, 18, et seq.:


“The wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unright-
eousness of men . . .; because that
knowing God, they glorified Him not as God,
neither gave thanks; but became vain in
their reasonings, and their senseless heart
was darkened.

“Professing themselves to be wise, they


The Bible Versus Christian Science 49


became fools, and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God for the likeness of an im-
age of corruptible man, and of birds, and
four-footed beasts and creeping things.

“Wherefore God gave them up in the
lusts of their hearts unto uncleanness . .
for that they exchanged the truth of God for
a lie, and worshipped and served the crea-
ture rather than the Creator who is blessed
POF C¥eroe MEM i>

“And even as they refused to have God
in their knowledge, God gave them up unto
a reprobate mind, to do those things which
are; not: fitting.” CR. V.)


It should always be remembered that the hea-
then of whom Paul here speaks are not con-
why are demmned because they have not known
the Heathen Christ. This would be manifestly un-
ae fair if they have not heard of Christ
(Rom. x, 13-15). But they are condemned be-
cause they have wilfully sinned in the face of
light. The earlier books of the Bible show how
they once knew God, or might have known Him,
and how they deliberately rejected Him. It was
their own “reasonings” that caused them to re-
ject Him, which is the fact with Christian Sci-
ence. Their hearts were judicially darkened in
consequence of this, and their wisdom became
folly. They exchanged the truth of God for a


50 The Antidote to Christian Science


lie. They worshipped the creature more than the
Creator. They refused to have God, the God of
the Bible, in their knowledge. Is not this also
true of Christian Science? And if so, is it to be
marvelled at that its votaries should be given up
to their own mind as these were?

It is the case of Pharaoh over again. Nine-
teen times in the book of Exodus is it said that
his heart was hardened, eleven of which times
God is said to have done the hardening. But it
is not until after the sixth plague that this is said
of God. Up to this point the king is said to have
hardened his own heart. It is plain, therefore,
says another,* that there was no irresistible om-
nipotence, no inscrutable divine decree, no im-
placable purpose bearing down upon him to make
him do this against his will, but unconstrainedly
and freely he resisted the command of God to let
His people go. After this, in seven out of the
eight final instances, it is stated that God did the
hardening. How was it done? God did not
single out Pharaoh; He never singles out any
one, and says, “I will harden his heart,’”’ and then
proceeds to do it. Such a supposition is pagan-
ish and monstrous. The solemn truth is rather
that by the operation of that well-known law,
according to which the soul becomes less and less
susceptible to impressions which have been re-
sisted, God hardens the heart of every man and

* “Alleged Discrepancies of the Bible,’ Bates.


The Bible Versus Christian Science 51


woman that does not yield to Him. Inasmuch
as Pharaoh himself resisted, he hardened his
own heart, but inasmuch as the law under which
he brought himself was God’s law, God hard-
ened his heart. It is thus that God sends the
delusion or working of error upon men who re-
ceive not the love of the truth.

This allusion to Pharaoh, however, suggests
another likeness to the case in hand. The reve-
lation of the Antichrist at the end of this age will
be “according to the working of Satan with all
Lying power, and signs and lying wonders,”
Wonders so that, if possible, he would deceive
the very elect (Matt. xxiv, 24). The rulers of
the darkness of this world have always tried to
keep men in captivity to error by counterfeiting
the works of God. So they withstood Moses be-
fore .t mataoue( 1x) Vil, 11;-2 Tim. ii; 8)... So
they withstood Paul before Sergius Paulus
(Acts xiii, 6-11). So have they withstood the
missionaries in heathen lands in our own time.
So will they withstand the saints in the end of
the age as our text in 2 Thessalonians declares,
and, therefore, should we be surprised if they
so endeavor to withstand us in our own home,
and in our own Church? Nor should we be mis-
led by the allusion to “lying wonders,” as if the
wonders Satan and his emissaries did were not
real. They are real wonders indeed, and
past our ability in many instances to compre-


52 The Antidote to Christian Science


hend, but they are lying wonders at the same
time, in the sense that they are wrought to give
countenance and support to a lie. Christian Sci-
ence has certain of these powers, and performs
signs and wonders as every one is ready to ad-
mit, but he who is deceived by them to refuse
the love of the truth is under the condemnatory
delusion to believe the lie. “Christian Science
healed me, when everything else failed, why,
then, should I not believe in it?” is the argument
of many an unthinking votary of that delusion.
As if a wise man would imperil his immortal soul
for the assuagement of a temporary pain! Well
does Satan know the power of physical healing
to keep a man in spiritual bondage, when he said
of Job, “Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath
will he give for his life’ (Job ii, 4). He was
mistaken in Job, however, who held fast his in-
tegrity in God, even if he retained his bodily dis-
ease; but many another man in these days to be
delivered from the second has been foolish
enough to give up the first. Job got both in the
end, and Jesus Christ, it will be seen further on,
can save the soul and heal the body also if our
trust is placed in Him,


The Bible Versus Christian Science 53


Ill


The Bible reveals the real peril of Christian
Science. It does this in the teachings of the
epistle to the Hebrews, especially chapters v, 12-
vi, 6.

The writer of this epistle is addressing He-
brew Christians who were undergoing a serious
temptation to apostasize, 7. e., to give up Chris-
tianity altogether and return again to Judaism.
It is important to note this, and that their temp-
tation was not that of ordinary backsliding, seri-
ous as that is, but something far more serious
still. “It was not a question of isolated sins, but
of a protracted and habitual condition of mind,
a neglect and disbelief of truths once recognized
and confessed, a confirmed and lasting result of a
series of unfaithful and wilful rejections of spir-
itual influences and privileges.” For backsliding
there has been a remedy provided in 1 John i, 9,
where it is written: “If we confess our sins, He
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness,’ but for
apostasy such as that described, there was no
remedy, nor could there be, in the very nature of
the case.

1. In chapter v, 12-14, there is pointed out the
cause on their part laying them easily open to
this temptation, the same cause precisely which


54 The Antidote to Christian Science


accounts for the progress of Christian Science
among professing Christians and nominal
church-members to-day, viz.: ignorance, inex-
cusable ignorance, heart ignorance of the Word
of God.


“For when by reason of time ye ought to
be teachers, ye have need again that some
one teach you the rudiments of the oracles
of God; and are become such as have need
of milk and not of solid food. For every
one that partaketh of milk is without ex-
perience of the Word of righteousness, for
he is a babe. But solid food is for full-
grown men, even those who by reason of
age have their senses exercised to discern
good and evil” (R. V.).


These Hebrews had professed Christianity for
some time, long enough to have themselves be-
come propagandists not only, but teachers of the
truth, strong promoters of the gospel, men and
women who should have done much to extend
the kingdom of God in the earth. But instead
of that, because of their spiritual inertness and
dulness of hearing they needed to be taught
again the very A B C of Christianity. In this
sense they had need of milk, and not of solid
food.

Now every such an one that partaketh of milk,
the inspired writer says, every such an one that


The Bible Versus Christian Science 55


is in the primary class of the religion of Jesus
Christ, is there because he is “without experi-
ence” of the Word of righteousness, 7. e., the
gospel. It is not necessarily because he is igno-
rant of it in an intellectual sense, but because he
has failed to lay its solemnity to heart and to live
in its power. Growth in the knowledge of God
is heart growth rather than mind growth, though
one follows the other very commonly. And the
Christian whose heart is not growing in the
knowledge of God, whose faith, and love, and
holiness are not increasing, is one who is retro-
grading. He is not standing still. There is no
such thing as a dead level in Christian experience.
When spiritual vigor and spiritual insight fail to
progress in the life of a Christian, earthly-mind-
edness takes their place, and the last state of that
man is apt to be worse than the first. Failing to
“exercise his senses in the discernment of good
and evil,” the latter attains to the ascendency
within him, and he finds himself on the brink of
the precipice where heavenly realities are vague
and dim, and the powers of earth and the nether
world easily deceive and overcome him. The
ae AO great Ruskin is a conspicuous example
ampleof of this, although never becoming a
err Christian Scientist. His earlier vol-
umes, the “Modern Painters,” the “Seven Lamps
of Architecture,” and the “Stones of Venice” all
bear evidence of the evangelical faith in which he


56 The Antidote to Christian Science


had been nurtured, and which had been the basis
of his mental life up until his fortieth year. But
then a crisis came, when, during a visit at Turin,
he seems to have deliberately rejected that faith
and to have concluded, in his own words, that
“to be a first-rate painter, you mustn’t be pious,
but rather a little wicked, and entirely a man of
the world.” From this period dates almost the
last “light-hearted” letter he ever wrote his de-
voted correspondent, Charles Eliot Norton, who,
though no friend of evangelical religion, bears
witness that Ruskin’s life underwent a vital
change, disturbing its deepest currents and turn-
ing them into new and troubled channels. “Youth
came to the close; the props which had supported
it, and the defences which had guarded it, fell
away one after the other, and were leaving him
solitary and exposed.”* The gospel is like the
manna which, if unused, becomes a savour of
death unto death instead of life unto life (2 Cor.
ii, /25;906).

Nothing could better describe the Christian
Scientist of to-day so far as his knowledge and
use of the Bible are concerned than the forego-
ing. That Christian Scientist is meant, of course,
who formerly was a professing Christian and
church-member. Never could he have had a deep
experience of the Word of righteousness, or he


* “Letters of John Ruskin to Charles Eliot Norton,”
Vol. I, p. 49 ef seq.


The Bible Versus Christian Science 57.


would not have been led astray by the so-called
“Key to the Scriptures”; never could his spir-
itual senses have been exercised to discern good
and evil, or he would not have been deceived by
the teachings of “Science and Health.”

2. In chapter vi, 1-3, a remedy is pointed out
for this condition of affairs, as follows:


“Wherefore let us cease to speak of the
first principles of Christ and press on unto
perfection (or full growth); not laying
again a foundation of repentance from dead
works, and of faith toward God, of the
teaching of baptisms and of laying on of
hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and
of eternal judgment.”


This remedy is simply growth, a following on
to know the Lord, a leaving of the first principles
of the Christian religion, not in the sense that
they have lost to us their significance or import-
ance, but that like the foundation of a building,
they are there for the purpose of erecting some-
thing else upon them. Nor is the perfection here
referred to one that presupposes the eradication
of all sin from the human nature of the believer,
but rather the spiritual apprehension by faith of
what his true standing and relation are to God in
Christ Jesus.


58 The Antidote to Christian Science


Six elementary and fundamental doctrines are
here enumerated in which these Hebrew disci-
ples had been initiated, and from which they are
now exhorted to advance. Repentance from
dead works was a turning from the righteousness
they had previously sought through the moral
and ceremonial law; faith toward God was their
acceptance of His way of redemption through
the Messiah Jesus Christ; the teaching of bap-
tisms and laying on of hands was their open con-
fession of their Messiah and Saviour, and their
anointing with the Holy Ghost for service in
His name; the resurrection of the dead speaks of
their hope as to His Second Coming, while the
eternal judgment meant, doubtless, their final
separation from the wicked unto the kingdom of
glory.

But these elementary and fundamental doc-
trines of the apostolic days, while far more com-
prehensive than what is now called the “simple
gospel,” were not yet sufficient to set
before them with proper fulness the
truth of which they stood in need to
keep them from apostasy and to strengthen and
comfort them in their sore trial and temptation.
It was necessary to advance still further, abso-
lutely necessary in the face of their present peril,
just as it is necessary to-day for tempted Chris-
tians to do this in the face of Christian Science.
The only hope of the latter is to have unfolded


How Chris-
tians Grow


The Bible Versus Christian Science 59


to their hearts and understanding the deep things
of God.

But in saying this we should like to add with
Dr. Saphir* that “it is not that there is any
higher truth or life for older than for younger
Christians ; it is not that there are doctrines more
profound than those by which Christ’s salvation
is first proclaimed; it is not that there is any eso-
teric wisdom for the more advanced, but that
there is such a thing as growth in faith and love,
as we have already said, a moral and spiritual
progress which means far more than anything
associated with simple study and research, in-
portant as that is. To know Christ, to know
more and more what we saw and believed at the
first, is the whole progress of the Christian in
time and eternity. False knowledge puffeth up,
is unsubstantial and without value. A man may
possess much knowledge of Scripture truth,
some Christian Scientists seem to do this ; he may
be able to express doctrine and experience in
lucid and glowing language, and even detect er-
ror in a keen and masterly way, and yet he may
be a babe in the true spiritual knowledge of Christ,
in the tone of his mind, in the character of his
daily walk, in the knowledge of his own heart, and
in his skill and wisdom in battling with sin, the
world and Satan.” The child of God grows only

* See “The Epistle to the Hebrews,” Adolph Saphir,
Vol. I, chaps. xii and xiii.


60 The Antidote to Christian Science


by obeying and honoring Him, by meditating on
His Word and moulding his life according to it.
“The secret of the Lord is with them that fear
Him’ ( Psp axvy 14.

3. The peril of the situation now presents it-
self, in verses 4-6. This peril is “the danger of
an entire, continued, wilful, and irrevocable apos-
tasy from the truth,” with the eternal separation
from God necessarily involved in it, and judi-
cially inflicted for it:


“For as touching those who were once
enlightened and tasted of the heavenly gift,
and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost
and tasted the good Word of God, and the
powers of the age to come, and then fell
away, it is impossible to renew them again
unto repentance; seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh and put
Him to an open shame.”


We cannot attempt an interpretation of the
particular phrases employed in these verses, or
the spiritual experiences they represent; nor do
we definitely perceive the distinction between
some of them, but only know that professing
Christians at least are signified. We do not say
truly converted and regenerated Christians, for
such as these having been born again, and united
to Jesus Christ, and indwelt by His Spirit, are


The Bible Versus Christian Science 61


regarded as His “sheep” that shall never perish
(John x, 28, 29). In the case before us, how-
ever, they appeared to be Christians surely, hav-
ing been “enlightened” in some degree; having
“tasted of the heavenly gift” and expressed their
joy in believing the glad tidings; having been
“made partakers of the Holy Ghost” in that they
called Jesus Lord; having “tasted of the good
Word of God and the powers of the age to
come,” in that they were willing to suffer perse-
cution, and lose their worldly goods for the sake
of the eternal reward (x, 32-34). If, therefore,
now they turned their backs upon all this, if they
not only fell, but “fell away,’ if they not only
stumbled, but altogether apostasized, it was “im-
possible to renew them again unto repentance.”
Impossible, because there was “no more sacrifice
for sins” (x, 26). The one sacrifice once offered
(x, 12) they had positively and totally rejected,
to whom then might they go, since He only had
the words of eternal life (John vi, 68)? Hav-
ing, as Dr. Saphir says, entered into the sphere
eee of the New Covenant manifestation,
Christian be Should they wilfully abandon it, they
ieee could only relapse into that phase of
Judaism which had crucified the Son of God at
Golgotha. They would be crucifying Him afresh.
Their state would not be that of the godly Is-
raelites before Pentecost who waited for the
promised redemption; nor that, even, of those for


62 The Antidote to Christian Science


whom Jesus interceded on the cross, saying,
“Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do”; but that of those who had fallen into
wilful and conscious enmity to Christ, rejecting
and putting Him to an open shame.

This is the identical position of the Christian
Scientist—the Christian Scientist, we repeat,
who has been a professing Christian and a
church-member. He has trampled underfoot
the Son of God, and counted the blood of the
covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and done despite unto the Spirit of grace
(Heb. x, 29). We do not say that this is
true of every such Christian Scientist, for there
is a difference among them. There are some
on whom we are to have mercy, who are in
doubt. There are some whom we are to save,
snatching them out of the fire (Jude 22, 23), but
if there are others who fit the description above
stated, there is no other gospel to be preached to
them, and no other power to rescue or restore
them than that gospel and that Saviour upon which
they have forever turned their backs. There re-
maineth for them, therefore, only “a certain
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indig-
nation which shall devour the adversaries” (Heb.
a7).

The writer feels a strong solicitude for the
young and inexperienced Christian living in the
atmosphere or thrown into the society of Chris-


The Bible Versus Christian Science 63


tian Scientists ever plying their subtle arguments
to undermine his faith, There is almost no safety
for such an one except in flight, and as an im-
pulse in that direction he would add the follow-
Herbert Ng account of the action of a friend of
Spencer's Herbert Spencer in the early manhood
cians of that philosopher. This friend he
identifies in his autobiography as E. A. B. It
seems that on a certain occasion when they spent
an evening together, their conversation ended in
a theological discussion in which the rationalistic
views of Spencer were for the first time clearly
disclosed. As a result he subsequently received
the following letter from E. A. B., the italics be-
ing ours:

“My DEAR SPENCER:

“It is now fast drawing towards the close
of the fifth year since I made your acquaint-
ance, and I hope I need not assure you that
your friendship during that period has been
one of my chief sources of pleasure .

“T merely remind you of this to show you
that it could be no ordinary cause which
could induce me to renounce voluntarily a
friendship which has afforded me so very
much gratification as yours has done; that
the necessity has accrued for so doing I shall
ever most deeply regret and it is only after
long and painful thought that I have been
induced to see the necessity of it.


64


The Antidote to Christian Science


“That we have held different opinions
upon many points of more or less import-
ance, I am perfectly aware; but as far as 1
can call to mind, they have been always upon
points upon which such difference has been
to a very considerable extent allowable, or
upon subjects which are, and must remain,
matters of opinion. But the subjects which
we discussed last Saturday (as far as I can
recollect for the first time) do not, I think,
belong to either of these classes. They in-
volve everything in our existence of more
than momentary interest; our principles and
practice, hopes and fears, our happiness or
misery here and hereafter. Such matters
are of no light moment, and it seems to me
Separating (at no two persons holding so
on Religious very different views as you and I
Grounds do upon such vital points can
remain friends to each other. Did I think
that there was the remotest chance of
anything that I could urge by way of ar-
gument or persuasion I should feel that I
was bound to urge it and thus to leave
no means untried to endeavor to bring
you to a true view of the truths of re-
ligion, but I know so well that no argument
on sucha subject ever yet convinced one who
has closed his ears to everything but human
reason, that I feel it would be utterly useless ;


The Bible Versus Christian Science 65


and the only likely consequence that could en-
sue would be to shake my belief that I feel so
very strongly the truth of... . ,. Feeling,
as I do, so very painfully that my faith is so
little the heartfelt faith which should actuate
the true Christian, the danger which might
accrue from my association with one so
talented as yourself, and so well able to
make the worse appear the better reason, I
must, therefore, at however great a sacri-
fice (and believe me I feel it to be a great
one), renounce the pleasure I have received
from your acquaintance and request that
henceforth we meet no more or meet as
strangers. I shall ever remember the past
with pleasure and think of you with kind-
ness, and [J trust that nothing may prevent
your feeling similarly towards myself.”


“Then follows the expression of a hope,’
says Spencer, “that I shall abandon ‘the lamp of
human wisdom’ and come round to ‘wiser views.’
This letter I sent on to , saying that there
was much to be admired in its sincerity if not in
its liberality. His rejoinder was that did he simi-
larly feel any such danger from our association,
he, too, should renounce the friendship.”*


* “An Autobiography,” Herbert Spencer, pp. 316-318.


as |


rae o
Pe ti aah S
Dun ee


PART THREE


THE NATURE OF THE ANTI-
DOTE TO CHRISTIAN SCIENCE


PART THREE


THE NATURE OF THE ANTIDOTE TO CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE


The Church possesses an antidote to Christian
Science which, intelligently and faithfully em-
ployed, would materially limit its influence within
her borders, if it did not effectually destroy it
altogether. It is suggested in Paul’s words to
the Colossians (i, 25 et seg.) where, speaking of
his personal ministry, he refers to it as a special
dispensation of God for the Gentiles, “to fulfil
the Word of God,” or, as the margin puts it
happily, “fully to preach the Word of God.”
There is such a thing as preaching the Word of
God, and another such a thing as fully preaching
it. Some reference was made to this in Part Two
in a general way, but as the sense in which Paul
refers to it is unique, it demands particular con-
sideration because of its bearing on Christian
Science.


I


We will return to this presently, but in the
meantime let us consider the indictment of Chris-
69


70 The Antidote to Christian Science


tian Science against the Church, which consists
principally of two counts, and which gives occa-

es sion for the employment of the antidote.
mnie Now, as heretofore, we speak of Chris-
dictment of tian Scientists who formerly were pro-
ao raady fessing Christians and members of the
Church, and who claim that the latter neither
met their needs nor satisfied their aspirations.
The needs focussed on the question of bodily
healing, and the aspirations touched that of their
moral and spiritual betterment.

To speak first of bodily healing. The eminent
exponent and lecturer referred to in Part One
puts the argument like this: Christ healed the
sick and commanded His followers to do the
same ; Christian Science is obeying this command
and the Christian Church is not obeying it ; there-
fore the former and not the latter is the more
truly following Christ.

We are obliged to deny both the major and the
minor premises here, even at the risk of a seem-
ing paradox. We do not deny that Christ healed
Did christ the sick, of course, but venture to
compen question whether He ever commanded

His followers to do so. We believe
that He equipped, and has continued to equip
or endue them with power to heal the sick and
perform other wonderful works, but this is some-
thing different from saying that He commanded
it. The three quotations from His lips employed


The Nature of the Antidote 71


by the lecturer do not bear out his argument.
The first, Matthew x, 5-10, has already been
shown to be clearly limited in its application;
the second, Matthew xxviii, 19, 20, does not re-
fer to the subject even by implication, while the
third, John xiv, 12, cannot be construed as a com-
mand but as a promise which, by the way, has
been amply fulfilled in the history of the Church
from that day to this.

The promise reads: “He that believeth on Me,
the works that I do, shall he do also; and greater
works than these shall he do, because I go to My
Father.” That these “works” included bodily
healing there can be no question, and we gladly
confess the fact. Moreover, the Church has done
these works and healed the bodies of men as well
as their souls in all the centuries, Christian Sci-
ence itself being the witness. Professor J. R.
Mosley in the Christian Science Sentinel for
Nov. 7, 1903, quoted by the lecturer, bears un-
qualified testimony to this fact, tracing the works
of healing from the earliest history of the Church
down to the time of Wesley. But why should
he have paused there? Why not have continued
until our time? Had he never heard of David
Brainerd and Dorothea Truedel, and pastors
mien Blumhardt and Stockmayer, and
Healingin Charles Cullis, and A. J. Gordon and
the Church AB, Simpson, and a host of others
in the last century and this, too numerous to even


72 The Antidote to Christian Science


name? Had he no acquaintance with modern
missionary annals nor read the lives of such con-
secrated saints as John G. Paton of the New
Hebrides or pastor Hsi of China? The writer
himself has a good confession to bear on this
topic before many witnesses. If he cannot speak
of his own healing, he can of that of members of
his parishes and other friends. He can tell of
the cure of rheumatism, of pneumonia, of ab-
scess, of cancer, of deafness, of paralysis in cases
pronounced by reputable physicians as incurable ;
and he can tell of prayer-meetings over which he
has regularly presided where such testimonies
were too common to excite any particular re-
mark. Nor, as a Christian minister in this twen-
tieth century, does he regard his experience as
by any means singular. There are many who
have a broader and richer testimony than he.
But this brings us again to our starting point
—the Church’s antidote to Christian Science. In
other words, these testimonies about physical
healing have been given, not to refute Christian
Science, but to arouse the Christian Church.
Why allow our opponents thus successfully to
taunt us? Why not bear witness to the things
which we have seen, and heard, and known? We
need not become faddists or fanatics to do this.
We need not take the ground that sickness is al-
ways the direct result of sin to do this. We need
not denounce drugs and doctors, nor refuse to use


The Nature of the Antidote 1


them. We need not declare with some that heal-
ing is in the atonement for this age just as salva-
tion is. We need not put ourselves outside the
pale of evangelical religion, nor disfellowship
ourselves from the Church of our fathers, and yet
we can bear witness that the prayer of faith, not
Christian Science, nor hypnotic influence, nor the
mind cure, nor Satanic demonstration of any
kind, but the prayer of faith, can save the
sick, and that the Lord can raise him up (Jas.
Vad5)s

In conclusion we feel like putting the inquiry
of this Christian Science lecturer, only from an-
other standpoint and a different motive, and ask-
ing: “In view of the plain Bible teaching, and
in view of the history of Christianity since Bible
times, may we not justly and truthfully say that
the modern Church has omitted a vital and essen-
tial part of its duty? If so, can it too soon, or
too earnestly set about retrieving itself and re-
storing this too long neglected part of the Chris-
tian religion?”


II


But this leads naturally to the second count of
the indictment, viz.: that the Church fails to sat-
isfy the higher aspirations of the soul in the di-
rection of moral and spiritual betterment. In-


74 The Antidote to Christian Science


deed, Christian Science couples these two indict-
ments together in the most specious manner and,
with an assumption of piety worthy of the deep-
est mystic, declares that the Church is unable to
perfect cures because of her unbelief and that
her worldliness has shorn her of her power.
Christian Science, in other words, has now taken
her place and become the great teacher and
actual demonstrator in human lives of those vir-
tues and graces hitherto supposed to be the fruit
of the Holy Spirit.

The following editorial from a secular daily is
in point,* only it should not be understood as a
Christian Science daily, however inspired the edi-
torial may have been from that source. It was re-
printed with approval, however, in the Christian
Science Sentinel of December 8, 1906, and reads
thus :


“A local minister in his sermon yesterday
brought out forcefully the fact that ninety
per cent. of present-day Church work is
onaiee merely preparation for Christian
Criticismof service. He said that the build-
the Church ing of church edifices, the pay-
ment of the minister’s salary, the securing
of funds for the various church enterprises,
and even the attendance at the church meet-
ings were but the getting ready. These

*The Duluth News-Tribune.


The Nature of the Antidote 75


were but collecting the tools and taking the
sustenance necessary for real service. He
also, but rather incidentally, pointed out the
fact that Church members do not get, be-
cause they do not demand, the results from
all this work that they insist upon having
from everything else into which they put
their time, effort, and money. Right there
is much of the reason of the ineffectuality
of the Church in reaching those outside the
ie G eee

“But when the minister referred to the
Christian Science Church he might have
used it to point the moral and to amplify the
very argument he was making. The suc-
cess of Christian Science comes from the
very fact that it does give its people some-
thing tangible, something real, which they
have to take into their lives and live in order
to be of that faith. It is not a case of choice,
Superiority but of must. It also avoids what
of Christian in Other churches makes up most
Science? = Of that ninety per cent. of the
work. There is no canvassing among the
general public for funds, no suppers, no
bazaars, no minister, no stated charities.

“When they would help the poor it is by
making them self-supporting. The poor are
sought as members, and membership is
made a relief from anxiety and burdens, and


76 The Antidote to Christian Science


not an added worry and care, nor an added
responsibility.

“The other churches have this to learn,
also, from Christian Science—that it not
only brings them something positive, but it
makes them of necessity kindly, charitable,
even-tempered; not hurried in judgment,
but slow to condemn. It makes them most
lovable as neighbors and fellow-citizens.”


There is much in this editorial which is true,
much that it says in criticism of the Church and
in commendation of Christian Science. The lat-
ter does get something tangible for the price it
pays, for Satan is not a fool. He offered Jesus
all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of
them if He would fall down and worship him
(Matt. iv). There was something tangible in
that, and Satan was able, in a sense, to deliver
what he had promised, but Jesus was not en-
snared, nor are His true followers ensnared un-
der similar circumstances.

However, we question the affirmation that
Christian Science seeks the poor, or that its vota-
ries are necessarily kindly and charitable, and
we deny that they are “most lovable as neigh-
bors and fellow-citizens,” although it is admitted
that they seem to have less care about some
things than other people, and that their temper
is materially benefited. Moreover, these things


The Nature of the Antidote mi


in which they are held up for commendation and
imitation (and we do not begrudge them either),
are not the result of any moral legerdemain on
the one hand, nor supernatural power on the
other. There is nothing occult nor mysterious
about them. They are the effect of a very sim-
Influence of Ple cause, bringing all the more shame
Mind over to other people who may not possess
neg them, viz.: the influence of mind over
matter; and they are the outcome of the most
selfish of motives although a very commendable
one, viz.: the desire to obtain and possess good
health. Christian Scientists have learned and ap-
plied the valuable principle that anger, anxiety,
worry, and their kin are undesirable tenants of
the soul from a therapeutic point of view; that
they are breeders of disease and hinderers of its
cure; and that to be healthy it is well to be calm,
to be outwardly self-denying and self-controlled,
even to be charitable, if you please, and they are
willing to be so for that reason.

But all this, desirable as it is, is not Chris-
tianity, though it is found within it; nor is it the
fruit of the Holy Spirit, though it accompanies
it, but the purely natural result of a natural law.
That it is not Christianity is seen in our main
contention that Christian Science itself is not
Christianity, and a corrupt tree cannot bring
forth good fruit. But that it is not Christianity
is seen again by an intelligent comparison of the


78 The Antidote to Christian Science


fruit. The calmness of demeanor, the meekness
of temper, the charitableness of spirit of the
Christian Scientist is indeed not hypocrisy nor
cant (no such charge of fraud or insincerity is
breathed against them in these pages), but it is
something, nevertheless, which is put on from
without rather than generated from within. It is
fruit tied on to the tree rather than springing
from its sap. There is a superficiality about it,
a forced reality, a kind of necessity to be on one’s
guard lest it fall off, an uncanny background to
it all which to the true believer in Jesus Christ
repels rather than attracts.
Finally, were these virtues of the Christian
Scientist the results of a regenerated life, the
fruit of the Holy Spirit of God, they
oer, would be accompanied by other vir-
Science and tues inseparable from them, and which
constianity Christian Science does not S
Compared POSSESS.
To quote Rabbi Wertheimer again:
“Jesus came to seek and to save that which was
lost, sinners of every kind, harlots, drunkards,
gamblers, high and low; but the Christian Sci-
entist necessarily omits this self-sacrificing mis-
sionary task because he is told and advised that
the lost and sick must personally come to the
Christian Science practitioner before the latter
can aid him.’ The Christian Scientist is not
found in our Rescue Missions, for example, and
if he were he could accomplish nothing. He


The Nature of the Antidote 79


may be a propagandist, but he is not a mission-
ary. It is the testimony also of some who have
tried Christian Science and been delivered from
it that it has a tendency to destroy in them any
real sympathy for the lost and suffering. As one
has said: “When friends were sick, no matter
how severe the pain, I was unmoved, feeling im-
patient if they continued so, after showing them
the unreality of such a state.” The same witness
testifies: “The salvation of those around me I
cared very little about, feeling that every one
must have his or her experience, and if they did
not profit by it here, they would hereafter, as all
eventually would be saved, ‘because God could
not destroy Himself’!” The Pandita Ramabai is
The Panditaa good witness also, since she comes
Ramabai = from the land where the philosophy of
Christian Science has for many centuries been
known as Hinduism, and where she was thor-
oughly indoctrinated in it as a child. “It has
ruined millions of lives,’ she says, ‘and caused
immeasurable suffering in my land, for it is
based on selfishness, and knows no sympathy and
compassion. You feel that when other people
are starving you ought to give them something
to eat, but out in India they do not feel that.
They do not feel for people who are starving or
being killed in war. In our late famine our
philosophers felt no compassion for sufferers,
and did not help the needy. For why should


80 The Antidote to Christian Science


they help when they claimed the suffering
was not real, neither were the dying children
real!” :

Professor James Orr, when recently in this
country, gave some attention to the study of this
subject, and names another defect in Christian
Science which marks it off as separate from
Christianity. To quote his words in the London
Quarterly Review:


“The least satisfactory feature of the
movement is the extent to which it is domi-
nated by the money motive. The trail of the
‘dollar’ is over it all. Nothing in the new
gospel is philanthropic, gratuitous, disinter-
ested. Everything in the way of instruction
and benefit has to be dearly paid for. Every
practitioner and disciple is required to pos-
sess a copy of ‘Science and Health,’ for
which from 14s. to 2Is. is charged. The
host of practitioners—mostly ladies—charge
high fees for their attendance. Mrs. Eddy’s
own fees for instruction in her college were
$300 for twelve lessons, and $200 for the
normal course. In 1897 the extraordinary
injunction was sent out that Christian Sci-
entists in the United States and Canada
were not to teach a student Christian Sci-
ence for a year, commencing March 14,
1897:


The Nature of the Antidote 81


““The Bible,’ ‘Science and Health, with
Key to the Scriptures,’ and my other
Professor Pttblished works, are the only
Orrinthe proper instructors for this
London year. It shall be the duty of
eg all Christian Scientists to cir-

eview

culate and sell as many of
these books as they can. If a member
of the First Church of Christ, Scientist,
shall fail to obey this injunction, it will
render him liable to lose his member-
ship in the church.’


“Can it be wondered at that Judge Arnold
of Philadelphia refused a charter to the
Christian Scientists on the ground that the
so-called church is an association for profit,
organized to enforce the sale of Mrs. Eddy’s
books by its members, which is a matter of
business, and not of religion, and that his
decision was confirmed by the Supreme
Court of Pennsylvania?”


‘A gentleman entered a Christian Science
Reading Room not long ago to purchase a copy
of “Science and Health,” and was told it would
be $3.00. In his estimation it was worth some-
thing less than one-third of that sum, and when
he remonstrated about it, the saleswoman replied
that he should consider the good it had accom-
plished. “Then,” said he, “if that be the case, a
copy of the Bible should be worth about a mil-


89 The Antidote to Christian Science


lion dollars, but you can obtain one for five
cents!’ This little parable itself is almost a suf-
ficient answer to the question as to which of
these religions has descended from above.

But no serious complaint could be made
against Christian Science for doing these things
and asking these prices for its services and its
wares, and no criticism would be offered, if the
The Point Movement were content to regard it-
of Attack  celf as therapeutic merely, and decline
an assumption of religion. It is when it poses
as a teacher of spiritual truth, the bearer of a
new revelation from God, the very Saviour of
men on an equality with, or even superior to, our
Lord Jesus Christ the King of Glory, that we
have a right and a bounden duty to investigate
its character and credentials.

And yet even this is not said just now for the
purpose merely of criticising or condemning
Christian Science, but as in the previous instance
for the purpose of awakening the Christian
Church to a sense of its dereliction and its loss.
Why should the Church play the part of Samson
to Delilah? Why should she lie in the lap of the
world until her strength is gone and be obliged
to make sport for her enemies? Why should
the painted beauty of a false religion be allowed
to masquerade as the healthful vigor of a life
lived in fellowship with God? Why should the
calmness and even temper of the mind-cure or a


The Nature of the Antidote 83


pantheistic philosophy be allowed to palm itself
off as the mind that is in Christ Jesus? The
writer knows at least one Christian to whom this
argument is potent and who has been able to
bless God for the scourge of Christian Science.
It has helped him to see his own inconsistencies,
his lack of spiritual power, and the many little
ways in which, almost unconsciously, he has
been dishonoring Jesus Christ, and it has led him
to a new dedication of his body as a living sacri-
fice unto God (Rom. xii, 1). If the whole
host of Christians could be thus moved, the
Church might well thank God for the uprising or
incoming of Christian Science, just as the nation
of Israel will thank Him some day that ever the
hated Assyrian came into their land


III


But now for the antidote. If Christian Science
says, “we heal the sick,” the Church must show,
that Christ heals the sick through her, when it
pleases Him to do so, just as He has ever done.
If Christian Science says “our followers are
anes calm, even-tempered, and benign,” the
for the Church must show that Christ’s fol-
a to lowers are all this and more, because

Christ dwelleth in them. But how the
Church is to show this is the question. And it is


84 The Antidote to Christian Science


the question that gives the significance to Paul’s
declaration about fully preaching the Word of
God. What was this greater fulness of the
Word of God which had been committed unto
him to preach? He speaks of it as the mystery
which had been hid from all ages and genera-
tions ; does he mean that it had not been revealed
in the Old Testament, nor even in the gospels,
nor to any other inspired writer than he? It is
only “now made manifest to the saints,” he says;
does this mean since his conversion at Damascus
and his preparation in Arabia? The generality
of expositors will take this view, and maintain
that this revelation to Paul was unique, and in-
tended only for the Church age. There is glory
in this mystery, he declares, riches of glory, and
the glory consists in this, that Christ is in the be-
liever, the hope of glory (Col. i, 25-29).

Nor is this the pantheistic conception of the im-
manence of God which makes God and man to
all intents and purposes identical, but it is the
coming of the Holy Spirit, which is the Spirit of

Christ, to take up His abode, as a
vercans separate entity, in the life of the be-
Indwelling liever, making him a member of the
ut Holy mystical body of which Christ is the

Head, and living the life of Christ in
him. This is the offset, the antidote to the false
philosophy of Christian Science, the truth of
which that philosophy is the caricature, and


The Nature of the Antidote 85


which, received into the heart and life, brings
with it a prosperity of soul and body which
Christian Science never knew, nor can
know.

The figure of speech Paul uses to illustrate his
meaning is the human body. Our members are
in us and we are in them; not only do we govern
and control them, but we live in them and they in
us, so that the union between us is vital and in-
dissoluble. It is so with Christ and the true be-
liever. All the spiritual blessings of the believer
are his possession because he is in Christ, just
as all the advantages and opportunities of the
members of our bodies are theirs because they
are in us. The great and fundamental blessings
are election, redemption, inheritance, and seal-
ing in Christ (Eph. i, 3-14), but with these
are accompanied, and out of these arise, other
blessings, both of a physical and moral kind,
which make it true of the believer that Christ is
his “all and in ail.”

To speak of the moral nature first. The Chris-
tian Scientist professes to be free from anxiety
and care, to be kind and charitable and even-
tempered, to be loving and lovable, and he pre-
sents these things as the fruit of his pantheistic
creed. But all this, and more, is normal to the
true Christian and the fruit of the indwelling of
Christ. Indeed, the absence of these things de-
nies him the right to be called a Christian. The


86 The Antidote to Christian Science


Christian, in other words, possesses two natures
—the old Adamic nature received at his physical
mie ae eae generation, and called the flesh, and
in the Chris- the new Christ nature received at his
aes regeneration and called the Spirit.
But by the “Spirit” in this case is not meant the
spirit of the man himself, but the Holy Spirit,
the Spirit of Christ, who dwells in and would
dominate him. “The Spirit warreth against the
flesh and the flesh against the Spirit, and these
two are contrary, the one to the other, so that
ye may not do the things that ye would.” The
Holy Spirit, in other words, is given for the very
purpose of keeping us from living the rest of our
life in the flesh, and enabling us to live it in Him.
To live the old life in the flesh is not Christianity
at all any more than Christian Science is Chris-
tianity, for it is expressly written that “they
which do (practice) such things shall not inherit
the kingdom of God,” and again, “they that are
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with its affec-
tions and lusts.” To put this latter statement in
another way, the old Adam in their case is nailed
to the cross, and they are thus daily dying to
self and to all that made the old Adam a reality
in their lives. On the other hand, “the fruit of
the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gen-
tleness, goodness, meekness, self-control, faith-
fulness,” and the man in whose life these things
are not seen and increasingly seen, has no right


The Nature of the Antidote 87


to call himself a believer on Jesus Christ. (See
Gal. v, 16-25.)

The Christian Scientist reveals the method by
which he accomplishes the results of which he
boasts in himself or others, and this method is
by thinking upon the good rather than the evil.
This thinking includes, of course, the thinking
away of matter altogether, which according to
his teaching is the same as thinking away sin and
error altogether, since the two are synonymous.
ah The first lessons from the “healer”
Methods of are to persuade you that you have no
So" physical disease, because you have no

physical organs to entertain it. Next,
your morals are inquired into with the scrutiny
of the confessional, and you are counselled and
commanded to put away those forms of self-
indulgence which countenance disease. Finally,
the business and social conditions of your life
pass in review, and worry, care, anger, jealousy,
and the like are sought to be eliminated in the
same way. Ere this, the influence of the stronger
mind upon the patient, and, in turn, the concen-
tration of the patient’s mind upon himself in the
direction of the cure begin to effect a cure. Suc-
cess inspires courage. The patient is convinced
of “something tangible” in Christian Science,
and is quite willing to follow his instructor into
further self-denial and self-control.

Christianity also reveals the method by which


88 The Antidote to Christian Science


it accomplishes its results, but this is not to think
away the body, neither is it to think away sin and
error. These things are facts in Christianity,
and cannot be thought away. Your body may be
very sound, and yet you are by nature a sinner.
Your body may be dead and buried, and yet sin
be still abiding with you in your immaterial
and immortal state (Matt. x, 28). Christianity
teaches that you are delivered from the guilt of
sin by believing on Jesus Christ and confessing
Him as your Lord (Acts xvi, 31; Rom. viii, 1;
x, 8-10); and from the power of it by yielding
yourself thereafter to His Spirit who comes in
to abide with you and live His life in you.

The philosophy of it is set before us in Rom.
Wi, Sei, Vee


“Are ye ignorant that all we who were
baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into
The Mathoa 418 deathr -We were buried
of Christi- therefore with Him through bap-
sans tism into (His) death, that like
as Christ was raised from the dead through
the glory of the Father, so we also might
walk in newness of life.


“Even so reckon ye also ourselves to be
dead unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ
Jesus.”


The Nature of the Antidote 89


The meaning of this is that they who believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ are baptized into Him,
1. @., the incoming of His Spirit to them has
made them one with Him and in Him. This is
the baptism of the Spirit (1 Cor. xii, 13). So
real and complete an identification is this that
they are regarded as having died when He died
upon the cross. They were therefore buried
with Him, and also raised again in the sense that
they are now walking in a new life before God.
In this new life they are no longer in bondage to
sin that they should serve it. They have been
justified from sin because in Christ they have
paid the penalty of it by death, and it is their
privilege not only, but their duty to reckon all
this to be true of them.

And what is the practical working of this
Divine philosophy? What is the effect of it in
Christian lives? Hearken to the same Scripture,
in verses 12-14:


“Let not sin therefore reign in your mor-
tal body that ye should obey the lusts
thereof; neither present your members unto
sin as instruments of unrighteousness; but
present yourselves unto God as alive from
the dead, and your members as instruments
of righteousness unto God. For sin shall
not have dominion over you; for ye are not
under law, but under grace.”


go The Antidote to Christian Science


The Christian Scientist strives, prays what he
calls prayer, thinks, and thinks a lie about him-
self in order to be delivered from certain conse-
quences of his evil nature which contribute to
bodily disease. But the Christian yields himself
of God, to the Spirit of God within him, in order
to be delivered from the sin itself, the power of
sin in his life, which is dishonoring to God even
if it brought no evil consequences to himself.
The Christian is alive unto God, because God by
His Spirit lives in him, and as such new being
he yields or presents his members unto God to
be used for righteousness—his eyes, his ears, his
hands, his feet, his brain, his organs external and
internal. God takes what he thus presents, or
yields, and has His way with them. He lives in
them or through them. He fills the man with
His Holy Spirit, in other words, and sin no
longer has dominion over him. This is “fully to
preach the Word of God.’ Why not preach it,
and keep on preaching it, till Christians appre-
hend it, receive it, live in the power of it, bear
witness to it, and defy and nullify the claims of
its unholy and Satanic counterfeit ?

But to speak now of the physical nature.
Who can doubt for a moment that the Christian
Christianity Who thus knows God in Christ, and
and Health who thus yields or surrenders himself
to His Spirit, will show the effect of it in a
healthy body as well as a holy and happy soul?


The Nature of the Antidote gi


We do not say that sickness will never be his
portion, but we speak in general terms of the in-
fluence of his inner upon his outer life. Chris-
tian Science itself bears testimony that “so far
as Christianity has been successful in improv-
ing the world morally and spiritually, just so far
has it reduced the percentage of all sickness
which is the result of sin.”* But in saying this
Christian Science has not: stated the whole case
by any means. The health of the Christian is
not always, or only, the gradual result of a
gradually increasing knowledge of God and a
gradual yielding to His indwelling Spirit, but not
seldom the immediate response of a definite act of
faith. As an illustration, it may be asked if drunk-
enness or any other form of fleshly lust is ever
to be regarded as disease? If so, testimonies are
multitudinous that confirmed inebriates and vic-
tims of bestiality in the very moment of receiving
Jesus Christ have been delivered from the power
of their temptations, never to be subject to them
again. Noxious habits of other varieties have
also been overcome in the same way. A Christian
ee woman, of the writer’s acquaintance
fromthe | was a slave to the coffee habit. For
Coffee Habit twenty or thirty years she had per-
sisted in drinking three or four cups of the liquid
at a meal, notwithstanding its deleterious effects


* “Christian Science—the Religion of the Bible,”
Judge Hanna.


g2 The Antidote to Christian Science


and the persuasions of her friends to discontinue
it. But one day she heard of another Christian
woman who, as an act of consecration to God,
had given up the use of it, and who, in conse-
quence, had received a new and blessed experience
of the Holy Ghost. Twice in the same day, and
from different sources did she learn of this woman
and her new-found blessing, until she concluded
that the event was as a voice of God to her. That
evening on entering her dining-room, she silently
lifted her heart to God, and said: “Lord, Thou
knowest I would rather have the Holy Spirit
than satisfy any desire for coffee,’ and from that
hour, now several years ago, she has never tasted
it, nor experienced the slightest desire to do so.
Previously she could not pour the coffee for her
family without first gratifying her own desire
for it, even the odor having a kind of intoxicat-
ing effect upon her, but that night, and for sev-«
eral days thereafter, the odor was altogether
lost. Often had she said that for her to give up
coffee, if she did, would mean at least a week of
illness in bed, but now it had been given up in
almost an instant of time, and there was no sick-
ness, no reaction, and no regret, but only glad-
ness of heart for what the Lord had done for
her body and her soul.

Organic and functional diseases have been re-
moved in the same way, i. ¢., instantaneously as it
were, through faith in Jesus Christ and the yield-


The Nature of the Antidote 93


ing of the will to His indwelling Spirit. The
Testimony Rev. A. B. Simpson, of New York,
= poe = founder and leader of the Christian

veampson Alliance, has an experience and testi-
mony which the Church at large would do well
to utilize more than it has done. For more than
twenty years he was a sufferer from many physi-
cal infirmities and disabilities. At twenty-one,
the ambitious pastor of a large city church, he
broke down with heart trouble, and was obliged
to go away for months. Several years later a
relapse occurred when the last drops of life
seemed to be ebbing out, and his work had to be
given up altogether for a while. The following
summer found him at Saratoga Springs, and
while there, one Sabbath afternoon, he wandered
out to the camp-ground, where the jubilee sing-
ers were leading the music in an evangelistic
service.


“T was deeply depressed,’ he declares,
“and all things'in life looked dark and with-
ered. Suddenly I heard the chorus:


“My Jesus is the Lord of Lords:
No man can work like Him.”


“Again and again, in the deep bass tones,
and the higher tones that seemed to soar to
heaven, they sang it over and over again:


“No man can work like Him,
No man can work like Him.”


94 The Antidote to Christian Science


“Tt fell upon me like a spell. It fasci-
nated me. It seemed like a voice from
heaven. It possessed my whole being. I
took Him also to be my Lord of Lords, and
to work for me. I knew not how much it all
meant, but I took Him in the dark, and went
forth from that rude, old-fashioned service,
remembering nothing else, but strangely
lifted up forever more.”


A few weeks later he was with his family at
Old Orchard Beach, Maine, and heard a great
number of people testify that they had been
healed by simply trusting the Word of Christ,
just as they would for their salvation:


“Tt drove me to the Bible. I determined
that I must settle this matter one way or
the other. At His feet, alone, with my
Bible open, and with no one to help or guide
me, I became convinced that this was part of
Christ’s glorious gospel for a sinful and suf-
fering world, and the purchase of His
blessed Cross for all who would believe and
receive His Word. And so one afternoon I
went out into the silent pine woods and
there made to God, as if I had seen
Him before me, three great and eternal
pledges.”


The Nature of the Antidote 95


These pledges were that he would accept this
truth as part of the Gospel of Christ, that he
would take Christ as his physical life, and that
he would use the blessing for the glory of God
and the good of others.

Certain tests came to his faith after this, the
third and last of which was the climbing of a
mountain.


“At first it seemed as if it would almost
take my last breath. I felt all the old weak-
ness and physical dread; I found I had in
myself no more strength than ever. But
over against my weakness and suffering I
became conscious that there was another
Presence. There was a divine strength
Contest be. reached out to me if I would have
tween Death it, take it, claim it, hold it, and
ok persevere init. On one side there
seemed to press upon me a weight of Death,
on the other an Infinite Life. And I became
overwhelmed with the one, or uplifted with
the other, just as I shrank or pressed for-
ward, just as I feared or trusted. J seemed
to walk between them and the one that I
touched possessed me. The wolf and the
Shepherd walked on either side, but the
blessed Shepherd did not let me turn away.
I pressed closer, closer to His bosom, and
every step seemed stronger until, when I


f


96 The Antidote to Christian Science


reached that mountain-top, I seemed to be
at the gate of Heaven, and the world of
weakness and fear was lying at my feet.
Thank God, from that time I have had a
new heart in this breast, literally as well as
spiritually, and Christ has been its glorious
life.” *


The writer has never known just this experi-
ence of Dr. Simpson, but he knows the God and
Saviour that Dr. Simpson knows, and can bear
witness that the granting of such an experience
in just such a way is like Him. There is not the
first thing about it unlikely or incredible, as thou-
sands of other witnesses can corroborate. The
writer has never seen eye to eye with Dr. Simp-
son in his doctrine of divine healing, and is not
himself a member of the Christian Alliance, but
this does not in any degree diminish in his eyes
the value of the latter’s testimony as to what he
has seen and felt and known of God’s dealings
with him in his body and his soul on the ground
of the atonement of Jesus Christ.

But this reference to Dr. Simpson and his
work suggests a further way in which the
truth of the indwelling of Christ affects the
physical part of our being. For instance, the


*“The Gospel of Healing,’ A. B. Simpson, Alliance
Press, New York,


The Nature of the Antidote 97


man in whom Christ thus lives will be a man of
The Secret POWer, a man in whom the gifts as
ofPrayer well as the graces of the Holy Spirit
will be seen, and among them those of healing
and the prayer of faith (1 Cor. xii, 4-11). He
will be a man who knows God, who knows how to
pray to God, and who receives the things for
which he asks (John xiv, 13; Rom. viii, 26,
27 Epi. vi, 18; 1 John iti_21, 22; Jude: 20).
He will not be compelled to take lessons of
Christian Science either to care for his own
body or those of other people who are willing to
obey Christ. Where is the Christian Scientist
who by his occultism ever accomplished for him-
self and others what George Mueller, of the Bris-
tol Orphanages, or J. Hudson Taylor, of the
China Inland Mission, or A. B. Simpson, of the
Christian Alliance, accomplished by prayer? The
lives and the services of these men illustrate
what is meant by the antidote to Christian Sci-
ence, as they demonstrate the power of fully
knowing and fully preaching the Word of God.


PART FOUR


WHAT THE CHURCH MAY
LEARN FROM
CHRISTIAN SCIENCE


Det h Gib we ke Pela
1S ah aN a i ae


1
eee ee Unt eye
eect Mh Dc heoae Piety


5
I Ay yr ny


PART FOUR


WHAT THE CHURCH MAY LEARN FROM CHRISTIAN
SCIENCE


The foregoing has suggested many things the
Church may learn from Christian Science, but
there are three or four things that require
strongest emphasis.


I


In the first place, she may learn a lesson of
loyalty to the Bible as the Word of God. One
day the writer, travelling on a Pullman car, dis-
covered a lady fellow passenger reading the
Bible quite early in the morning. The unusual
circumstance elicited a pleasant and appreciative
comment, to which she replied, “Oh, I’m a Chris-
tian Scientist; you will always find a Christian
Scientist reading the Bible in the morning.” To
an inquiry as to the reason for it, she answered,
“The Bible is where we get our healing.” And
when asked how she got her healing from the
Bible, she replied, “Through Mrs. Eddy’s key
and interpretation of it,” whereupon she prof-
fered her copy of the “key” for inspection.

At a later date, the writer was in Boston dur-
ing the dedication of the magnificent Christian

Ior


102 The Antidote to Christian Science


Science temple in that city, and at its close,
Christian journeying westward, again found
Science himself in a Pullman, this time with
Travellers -1most all his travelling companions of
that faith. Once more, in the morning, the same
sight met his eyes, and about every passenger,
man and woman, was engaged with an open
Bible and a copy of their leader’s book, studying
the “Bible lesson” for the coming Sunday. This
lesson consisted of a collection of almost mean-
ingless phrases by the founder of the cult, with
reference to Bible passages they were supposed
to illuminate or explain. Of course, the relation
between the phrases and the Bible passages was
not always apparent to mortal mind, but this cir-
cumstance had no effect upon the votaries except,
if anything, to whet their appetite for the
“study.”

But this interest in the Bible, misguided and
destructive in its results as it is, is nevertheless
a characteristic of Christian Scientists every-
where. One cannot talk long with a representa-
tive of their teaching without being brought face
to face with some inspired statement of Holy
Writ for which an interpretation or application
is volunteered sustaining their peculiar tenets.
Or if, on the other hand, one attempts to contro-
vert those tenets, he may be surprised at the fa-
cility with which Holy Writ will be quoted in
defence of them. Indeed, it were a piece of folly


What the Church May Learn = 103


to attempt to argue in such a case without a
more than ordinary knowledge of the Word of
God.

But how all this rebukes the ignorant indif-
ference of the Christian Church! It may be true,
as another says, that “no age of the world has
exceeded this in extensive devotion to the Word
of God,” but it is also true, as the same observer
The Chris. States, that “the Bible has a multitude
tianand of friends who are so only by tradition
His Bible and hearsay, and not from close ac-
quaintance.”” “The statement has been ventured
that two-thirds or three-fourths of the member-
ship of the average Christian church do not open
the Bible oftener than. once a month.’* It has
been more in the hands of the young people of
this generation than any other, but the methods
of its use have not, as a rule, promoted real inter-
est in its study. It is preéminently the book of
the home, but in how many Christian homes is
it recognized at a family altar? And what of its
place in the Christian pulpit? “Whatever new
elements of strength the pulpit may have dis-
covered, it is evident that its strength is not so
manifestly that of the Word of God as it once
was.’ “The fact plainly stated is,’ says Dr.
Work, “that the church is not interesting the
people enough in the chief instrument of its life.”


* Edgar Whitaker Work, in “The Fascination of the
Book.”


104 The Antidote to Christian Science


To this, of course, there is a most serious side,
since lack of acquaintance with the Scripture
means mental and spiritual atrophy. “The
things that are out of mind are soon out of heart,
and a generation that does not know the Bible
has already a tendency to cease practising it.”
The bearing of all this on our subject is very
plain, and furnishes an abundant reason for the
inroads of Christian Science. May God in His
infinite mercy awaken His Church, and especially
the leaders of it, to a realizing sense of their dere-
liction and their duty with reference to His Holy
Word. :


“Blessed is the man that walketh not in
the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in
the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat
of the scornful. But his delight is in the law
of the Lord; and in His law doth he medi-
Howthe tate day and night. And he shall
Bible Dis- be like a tree planted by the rivers
pels Error of water, that bringeth forth his
fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not
wither, and whatsoever he doeth shall pros-
pero Pa 1-3).

“Thy word have I hid in my heart that
I might not sin against Thee” (cxix, 11).

“Through Thy precepts I get understand-
ing, therefore I hate every false way” (cxix,
104).


What the Church May Learn 105


“These were more noble than those at
Thessalonica, in that they received the Word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the
Scriptures daily whether these things were
so. Therefore many of them believed”
(Acts xvii, II, 12).

“And now, brethren, I commend you to
God, and to the Word of His grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an in-
heritance among all them which are sancti-
hed (xx, 32):

“All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for re-
proof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness ; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good
works” (2 Tim. iii, 16).


II


In the second place the Church may learn a les-
son in the duty of testifying for Jesus Christ.
The Christian Scientist is a propagandist, but
he is something more. He is one who finds a real
pleasure in telling what his belief has done and
is doing for him, and what it can do for others.
The mid-week gathering of Christian Scientists
comes nearer, in this one feature, to the pattern
of the apostolic Church than the average Protes-


106 The Antidote to Christian Science


tant prayer-meeting of these times. Examine 1
Corinthians, chapters xii-xiv, especially the last-
the Chris. Damed, and compare the picture of
tian Science the early Church set before us there
Meeting and with some of the things we see and
the Church 2 ‘29
Prayer hear in the meetings of the Christian
Meeting = Scientists. In the early Church all
the members seem to have taken part in the
public assemblies, exercising their spiritual gifts,
and telling out what the Lord had done for
them. How little is this known in the present
day! The mid-week meeting in many churches
has now fallen to the level of a lecture by the
minister, and one or two formal prayers by indi-
viduals carefully chosen for the purpose, and
called upon by name. When the meeting is
“thrown open” it not infrequently happens that
the same persons do all the talking, and, for that
matter, the same talking they have done, in
the same place and in the same manner, for a
long period. No wonder the church prayer-
meeting is not in good repute, nor very attrac-
tive, nor very helpful for young people. If the
Word of God were fully preached, and if Chris-
tians were daily feeding on its promises, and, as
a result, daily experiencing and manifesting the
life of Christ, when they came together they
would have something to say about Him “whose
they are and whom they serve”’ that would be an
inspiration for every one to hear.


What the Church May Learn 107


The mid-week meeting of the Christian Scien-
tists is a power-house for the promulgation of
their faith. Strangers are welcomed there, and
like to go there to listen to the recital of won-
The Value rous things. Witness is borne to the
a vee ie healing of the body and the cleansing

and refining of the inner life that in
many cases compels conviction. The weary and
heavy-laden find a certain solace in the atmos-
phere of these meetings which they do not find
in their own churches, and it is not surprising
that the inexperienced in Christ and the unin-
structed in His Word are attracted and held by
it. How the gospel of Jesus Christ might be
spread in the same way, and how souls might be
saved and spirits refreshed and hearts comforted
by such testimony! “If all prophesy (testify),
and there come in one unbelieving or unlearned,
he is reproved (convicted) by all, he is judged
by all; the secrets of his heart are made manifest,
and so he will fall down on his face and worship
God, declaring that God is among you indeed”
‘(a Cor, xiv, 24, 25).

But the testimony of Christian Scientists is not
limited to their comfortable and sympathetic as-
semblies, but exercised wherever they have an
opportunity. They are not ashamed of what
they believe, and many of them have an answer
to give with readiness to every one that asketh a
reason for the conviction within them. Nor do


108 The Antidote to Christian Science


they wait to be asked, but volunteer information
on any occasion. It has been seen that a rail-
road car is no barrier to their reading the Bible,
nor is it a barrier to their advertising their faith
in other ways. A lady devotee will hold the at-
tention of her travelling companions, strangers to
her, for a whole afternoon, while she discourses
of its merits to the exclusion of all other topics.
Hotel parlors in the South during the winter, and
in the North during the summer, have their cen-
tres of attraction where the Christian Scientist
presides over her interested auditory, pouring
into eager ears the story of what this thing has
done for her. What a rebuke to the redeemed
Christian, and what a stimulant to his spiritual
duty!

The Christian Scientist knows how to use the
press for the sowing of the seed. He knows how
ey LO te his own press. What a gener-
tianScien- OUS part of the contents of a Christian
Siac the Science journal is devoted to testimo-

nies of people who have been healed.
Here they are from the British Isles, from Brit-
ish Columbia, from Canada, from states east and
west, and north and south: “I came into Chris-
tian Science” in such a way, “Christian Science
came to me when I was a wreck,” “I desire to ex-
press my gratitude for Christian Science,” “I
wish to tell of a wonderful demonstration,” “TI
have been healed of many ills,” etc., etc. There


What the Church May Learn 109


are some of our smaller Christian papers, those
with a very limited circulation, the “Tramp”
periodicals, so to speak, which still devote a part
of their columns to testimonies of salvation, and
the stories of men and women who have been res-
cued from sin and converted to Jesus Christ, or
of Christians who have reached a deeper and
richer experience in Him, but what would be
thought in these days if our great denomina-
tional weeklies were to do this? These weeklies,
many of them, are remarkable enterprises, very
entertaining and very helpful in a way, but how
much true spiritual food do they serve up on
their tables as a rule, and how far do they in any
issue really promote the glory of the Person of
Christ ?

The Christian Scientist knows how to use the
general press. Let any disparaging remark be
made against Christian Science by an editor, a
minister, or other public individual, and observe
the promptness with which a “reply” is furnished
for publication, and the unusual care and tact of
the language in which it is couched. Whole
broadsides of papers are occasionally taken up
with the reports of lectures and addresses of dis-
tinguished Scientists, and if it be insinuated that
these are paid for in dollars and cents, so much
the more is it to their credit who are ready to do
this for the sake of their cause. “The children
of this world are wiser in their generation than


110 The Antidote to Christian Science


the children of light.” When will the children
of God in the midst of this crooked and perverse
generation begin to be seen as lights in the world,
holding forth the Word of life (Phil. ii, 15, 16) ?
When will we begin to talk for Jesus, to use
our pens for Jesus, and to live and work for
Jesus in such a way as to compel that attention to
His Person and His work commensurate with
both?

At the close of a municipal election in one of
our large cities, an editorial appeared in a lead-
Philosophy ing daily* on the “Philosophy of Pub-
of Public lic Opinion,’ in which attention was
Opinion called to that law of psychology that
in ninety-nine cases out of one hundred when a
man discovers that some one else believes as he
does he is thereby confirmed in his own belief.
There was no good reason for it, it was observed,
and yet a man will not only have his own belief
strengthened by that of others, but will some-
times adopt the belief of others when he has none
of his own. The propagation of unbelief follows
the same law. Almost every man is shaken in
his own belief by meeting with some one who dis-
agrees with him. There is a great difference be-
tween men, of course, according to their differ-
ing strength of character, but the great mass of
mankind is absolutely helpless before what ap-
pears to be a universal opinion. This principle

* The Chicago Chronicle.


What the Church May Learn 111


plays a great part in popular elections, the editor
went on to say, and is the philosophy of the cam-
paign lie. Some of the most important elections
have been carried by mere contagion of opinion.
“Tt would be well for humanity, however, if
this were the worst, but destructive views of
morals and religion become epidemic in the same
way, and the world may be ruled for a century
by a philosophy or a scepticism which
How Chris- has spread from one person to another
tian Science ; E ere
Spreads by mere contagion, until now it is so
widespread as to be impossible for cer-
tain minds to resist it.” This is one secret of the
establishment and propagation of Christian Sci-
ence, and should impress every earnest Christian
with the necessity, for a somewhat similar reason,
of preaching the Word, instant in season and
out of season, reproving, rebuking, exhorting
with all long-suffering and teaching. “For the
time will come when they will not endure the
sound teaching; but having itching ears, will
heap to themselves teachers after their own lusts ;
and will turn away their ears from the truth, and
turn aside unto fables” (2 Tim. iv, 2-4, R. V.).


112 The Antidote to Christian Science


ITI


In the third place, the Church may learn a les-
son concerning the value and privilege of prayer.
It was stated in the first part of this work that the
Christian Scientist does not pray, and that state-
ment will stand without qualification if it be re-
membered what we mean by a Christian Scientist.
Every one who has availed himself of the healing
art of Christian Science, or has attended its meet-
ings, or expressed interest in or sympathy with its
cause, or even called himself by its name is not
thereby a Christian Scientist. Christian Science
eee aos philosophic or religious system is
tian Science What we now speak about—that Chris-
Speen: tian Science which was defined in a

measure in the first part of this work.
The Christian Scientist who stands squarely and
intelligently on his own platform does not, and
cannot pray, since, as we have seen, prayer pre-
supposes a Personal God, and if the Bible be true,
a Personal, Living Intercessor. But he does some-
thing which he calls prayer, he thinks and medi-
tates ; “demonstrates,” as he describes it; he hyp-
notizes himself or others, his opponents would
affirm, by which he obtains results. And it is
that thing which he does, and does continuously,
and perseveringly, and confessedly, and expec-
tantly, and often successfully, and which by


What the Church May Learn 113


courtesy is called prayer, that furnishes the ex-
ample to the Christian Church with reference to
the reality of which it is the counterfeit.

What have not the saints of God in all the ages
accomplished through the instrument of prayer?
Read the condensed record of results in the
eleventh chapter of Hebrews. To the true be-
liever in God and in Jesus Christ, prayer is almost
synonymous with faith. What had it wrought
for Abel, for Enoch, for Noah, for Abraham, for
Jacob, for Moses? “By faith they passed through
the Red Sea as by dry land; which the Egyptians
assaying to do were swallowed up. By faith the
walls of Jericho fell down, after they had been
compassed about for seven days.” ‘And what
shall I more say, for the time will fail me if I tell
of” others


“Who through faith subdued kingdoms,

wrought righteousness, obtained promises,
stopped the mouths of lions;
Bande ar “Quenched the power of fire,
Christian escaped the edge of the sword,
AS ade from weakness were made strong,
waxed mighty in war, turned to flight armies
of aliens.

“Women received their dead by a resur-
rection” (Heb. xi, 33-35, R. V.).


Let Christian Science, or any other false reli-
gion that ever lifted up its head, say when it


114. The Antidote to Christian Science


could boast of this? “Let them bring forth their
witnesses that they may be justified; or let them
hear, and say, It is truth” (Isa. xlii, 9).

But why, in the face of all this, is there not a
greater spirit of prayer among Christians, and
more exhibitions of its power? Is the Lord’s
hand shortened that it cannot save, or His ear
heavy that it cannot hear? Why is there none
“that stirreth up himself to take hold” of God?
Are not His promises Yea and Amen in Christ
Jesus? Hath He not said, ‘Call unto Me, and
I will answer thee, and will shew great things and
difficult which thou knowest not” (Jer. xxxiii,
3). “What man is there of you, who, if his son
shall ask him for a loaf, will give him a stone; or
if he shall ask for a fish, will give him a serpent?
If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children, how much more shall your
Father which is in heaven give good things to
them that ask Him (Matt. vii, 9-11)? Yea, does
He not rather find fault with His people for not
asking, saying, “Thou hast not called upon me, O
Jacob; but thou hast been weary of me, O Is-
rael’”’ (Isa. xiii, 22).

The Christian Scientist makes a business of
prayer, or that which he calls prayer. It is in a
TheReat real sense his life. In everything he
Thing God betakes himself to it, not merely when
yes he is in bodily pain, but when he is in
need of other kind, moral as well as physical need.


What the Church May Learn 115


Ts not that the idea of Paul’s “pray without ceas-
ing’ in 1 Thessalonians v, 17, and Christ’s para-
ble of the widow and unjust judge, Luke xviii, 1?
Are we not told “In nothing be anxious, but in
everything, by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known
unto God”? And does not the promise follow,
“The peace of God, which passeth all under-
standing, shall guard your hearts and your
thoughts in Christ Jesus” (Phil. iv, 6, 7) ? Do we
not perceive how God provides and offers the real
thing to us if we will take it? What a shame
that through our ingratitude and indifference we
should have given occasion to Satan to palm off
a substitute upon some of our fellowmen who
know no better than to take it?

Nor is this all. God not only gives us the
promises of prayer, but the power to lay hold of
them aright if we will but exercise it. His Spirit
dwelleth in us if we belong to Christ, and it is
written that “the Spirit also helpeth our infirmity,
for we know not how to pray as we ought; but
the Spirit Himself maketh intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered; and He
The Holy that searcheth the heart knoweth what
Spirit is the mind of the Spirit because He
Praying maketh intercession for the saints ac-
cording to the will of God” (Rom. viii, 26, 27).
Can that prayer ever fall to the ground unan-
swered which is offered in accordance with God’s


116 The Antidote to Christian Science


own mind? More wonderful yet, can that prayer
ever fail which is prayed in us by God Himself?
And such is the teaching of this verse, and such
is what James means when he says, “The effectual
fervent prayer (or the energized prayer) of a
righteous man availeth much in its working” (v,
16). The energized prayer is that which the
Spirit of God energizes within us if our wills are
surrendered to Him to that end.
In the autobiography of the late Senator Hoar,
he tells of a Syrian in his home town of Wor-
cester, Massachusetts, who having be-
Senator o,° Ss
Hoarand come a naturalized citizen and having
President saved a sufficient sum of money, sent
Roosevelt 5 : :
for his wife and children to come to
this country. Their little property was converted
into cash, and the journey undertaken, first to
France, and then to the United States. Arriving
at Castle Garden, the health officers discovered
that the children had contracted a contagious
and incurable disease of the eyes which prohibited
their landing. The wife and mother might land
if she chose, but the children must be deported to
the land of their embarkation. The husband and
father was beside himself with grief. A Worces-
ter lawyer in his name offered a bond to the
health commissioners, indemnifying them against
any loss incurred by the violation of the law if
they would make an exception in this case and
permit the children to land, but in vain. Then


What the Church May Learn 117


the senator was appealed to. He interested him-
self to visit New York and interview the com-
missioners, without avail. He then wrote the
whole story to his colleague, Senator Lodge, at
Washington, who brought it before the Treasury
department, but with the same result. Only
twenty-four hours remained, and the children
must turn their backs upon their father and return
again to the homeland. The senator was not to
be defeated. Inditing a telegram of three to four
hundred words to President Roosevelt detailing
the circumstances, he closed by saying: “If this is
American law, then it is time for a revolution,
and you are the man to head it!” In thirty min-
utes from the time the message was laid before
the President another was laid before the health
commissioners from him, directing them to let the
children land! This is what interested influence
could do, and this is what the Holy Spirit does
for the regenerated soul who yields to Him. The
Syrian had not the knowledge, nor the access, nor
the power, of himself, to reach and move the
President, who alone could reach and move the
obstacle that barred the way to his domestic hap-
piness, but what he could not do there was one
standing by his side who could do. This is the
very meaning of the word Comforter or Para-
clete, one of the names of the Holy Spirit (John
xiv, 26), viz.: one who comes alongside to help.
He helps our infirmity, for we know not how to


118 The Antidote to Christian Science


pray as we ought. He maketh intercession for
us. He knows the will of God better than the
senator knew the will of the President, and His
intercessions are according to that will.

Nor does this exhaust the situation, for the true
believer not only has the Holy Spirit as an Advo-
Jesus Inter- Cate within him, but the Lord Jesus
ceding Christ as an Advocate for him before
the Throne of God. He ever liveth to make inter-
cession for the saints, ““Wherefore He also is able
to save to the uttermost (completely) them that
draw near unto God through Him” (Heb. vii,
25). It is the Divine Intercessor who says to
His elect, “Whatsoever ye shall ask in MY name,
that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in
the Son. If ye shall ask Me anything, that will
I do” (John xiv, 13, 14).

Well may we say in glad and also sad astonish-
ment:

“Lord, what a change within us one short hour

Spent in Thy presence will avail to make!

What heavy burdens from our bosoms take;

What parched grounds revive, as with a shower!

We kneel, and all around us seems to lower;

We rise, and all, the distant and the near,

Stands forth in sunny outline, brave and clear.

We kneel, how weak! we rise, how full of power!

Why, therefore, should we do ourselves this wrong,

Or others,—that we are not always strong;

That we should ever weak or heartless be,

Anxious or troubled, when with us is prayer,

And joy, and strength, and courage are with Thee ?”

—Archbishop Trench.


What the Church May Learn 119


IV


In the fourth place, and finally, the Church may
learn a lesson in practical holiness. The reason
for saying this is the same as in the other in-
stances. Christian Science’ devotion to error
should stimulate our devotion to truth; her testi-
mony to error should stimulate our testimony to
truth; her communion with impersonal mind
should stimulate our communion with a Personal
God; her efforts after a higher standard of living
should stimulate our desire for the highest of all.

But no man will desire holiness who is ignorant
of its nature and source. We need to keep con-
stantly in mind that holiness is not natural but
supernatural. There are virtues which Christian
Science endeavors to maintain or promote, and
sie which are commendable as far as they
andSource go. But pagans have done the same,
of Holiness one farther, and achieved more. The
source of holiness is a Personal God, by His Spirit
regenerating and dwelling within them that have
received His Son Jesus Christ as Saviour and
Lord. It is of grace rather than works. Its na-
ture is life. No man merits it, no man achieves
it, no man secures it by his own energy or effort,
he obtains it by faith (John xvii, 17; Acts xv, 6-9;
Rom. vi, 17-19; 1 Cor. vi, 9-11; Eph. v, 25-27;
Pet. 22, 23; compare also: Ezek. xxxvi,


120 The Antidote to Christian Science


28-28). The usual means by which he obtains
it, however, is the Word of God. This is seen
by even a cursory examination of the foregoing
texts. Christ prayed that His disciples might
be sanctified (made holy) through the truth,
and adds, “Thy Word is truth.” It was because
the Gentiles at Caesarea heard the Word of God
and believed, that God purified their hearts. It
was because the Christians at Rome had obeyed
from the heart the form of doctrine delivered unto
them, that they were made free from sin. Paul
says it was by the Name of Jesus Christ and
through the Spirit of our God that the un-
righteous, licentious, idolatrous, dishonest, covet-
ous, drunken, and reviling Corinthians were
washed and made holy, and Peter bears the same
testimony to the elect of the provinces of Asia
Minor to whom he wrote. All this is as remote
from Christian Science and its teachings as the
east is from the west, and yet it is the first step
of all in the direction of personal or practical
holiness. The man who knows this and desires
holiness yields himself to God’s Spirit in obedi-
ence to God’s Word.

But no man will desire holiness who is igno-
rant of its importance. To be holy in order to be
Importance Well is trifling in comparison with holi-
of Holiness ness in order to see the Lord(Heb. xii,
14). It is not merely that unholiness is contrary
to God’s will as something separate from Him-


What the Church May Learn 121


self, but contrary to His very nature. God is
love, but our God is also a consuming fire (Heb.
xii, 29). The same fire that warms and illu-
mines, burns and consumes, and it is necessary
for us mortals to remember this in the light of
the judgment day.

Sometimes a flash of lightning on a dark night
will illumine a long distance and keep us in the
right path for a good while. In the moral sense,
God has vouchsafed us such a flash, now and
again, in the course of the long centuries. Is it
possible that any of us are among those mockers
of the last days that “wilfully forget that there
were heavens from of old,and an earth compacted
out of water and amidst water, by the Word of
God; by which the world that then was, being
overflowed with water, perished” (2 Pet. iii, 3-
12)? Has that flash of lightning, that visitation
of a just judgment failed to exercise any influ-
ence upon our unholy lives? Have we forgotten
the angels that kept not their first estate, and have
been cast down to hell and committed unto pits
of darkness to be reserved unto judgment? Is
there no lesson for us in the condemnation of
Sodom and Gomorrha which were turned into
ashes (2 Pet. ii, 1-9)?

But to come to the professing people of God.
What of the Israelites who murmured against
God and whose carcases perished in the wilder-
ness, never having set foot upon the promised


122 The Antidote to Christian Science


land (1 Cor. x, 1-12)?. What of Nadab and
Abihu, the consecrated sons of the High-priest
atvine who presumed to offer “strange fire”
Hatredof before the Lord and were consumed
te in His presence (Lev. x)? What
about Achan, who coveted the accursed things of
Jericho, and must be stoned with stones until he
died (Josh. vii)? What about Ananias and
Sapphira in the New Testament times, who for
lying unto the Holy Spirit had their lives taken
away (Acts v)? What about those in the church
of Corinth who for their disorderly lives it was
declared, “For this cause many among you are
weak and sickly, and not a few sleep’ (xi, 30).
Here were physical weakness, disease, and pre-
mature death visited upon professing Christians
because of their inconsistency and worldliness of
conduct. Nor does this say anything about the
day when they must stand before the judgment-
seat of Christ to give account of the deeds done
in the body whether they be good or bad (2
Cor. vi, 10). For them who are in Christ
Jesus, there is indeed now no condemnation
(Rom. viii), but this means only them who
are in Him. Moreover, even in their case, though
thus delivered from the wrath to come, there is
a presentation of themselves before His judgment-
seat that; as disciples, an inquiry may be made
into their fidelity and their place determined in the
kingdom which is to come. No wonder that, in


What the Church May Learn 123


the prospect of this solemn day, we Christians
should be cautioned to pass the time of our
sojourning here in fear (1 Pet. i, 17). Not
servile fear of course, not the fear of a criminal
before a judge, but godly fear, the fear of an
obedient child before a loving Father, the fear
of the Only-begotten and Well-beloved One, Who
said, “My meat is to do the will of Him that sent
Me;” “I do always those things that please Him”
(John iv, 34; John viii, 29).

And in conclusion, no man will desire holiness
who is ignorant of its reward. A healthy body?
Rewardof Yes, we have already shown, in one
Holiness way and another, that “Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come”
(1 Tim. iv, 8). One-half of this book might
be filled with promises from the Bible to this end,
and the other with testimonies to their fulfilment
in the lives of God’s saints in the present time.
A healthy soul? Yes, “Great peace have they
which love Thy law, and they have none occasion
of stumbling” (Ps. cxix, 165). “If any man love
Me, he will keep My word,” said Jesus, “and My
Father will love him, and we will come unto
him and make our abode with him” (John xiv,
23). Is there no reward in this? “If ye abide
in Me, and My words abide in you, ask whatso-
ever ye will, and it shall be done unto you.” Is
there no reward in this?


124 The Antidote to Christian Science


“Oh, that My people would hearken unto
Me, and Israel would walk in My ways!

“T should soon subdue their enemies, and
turn My hand against their adversaries.

“The haters of the Lord should submit
themselves unto Him, but their time (Israel)
should endure forever.

“He should feed them also with the finest
of the wheat, and with honey out of the rock
should I satisfy thee” (Ps. Ixxxi, 13-16).


Is there no reward in this? Israel is in the fore-
ground here of course, but multitudes of Chris-
tians know the spiritual application of these prom-
ises to themselves. ‘When a man’s ways please
the Lord He maketh even his enemies to be at
peace with him.” How often have we proven
this, and is there no reward in it? When our
adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh
about, seeking whom he may devour, what have
we to do but to withstand him steadfast in our
faith, and does not God perfect, stablish,
strengthen us (1 Pet. v, 8-10)? And what is
meant by our being fed “with the finest of the
wheat,” and satisfied with honey out of the
rock? Is it not knowing the sweetness and
strength of God’s secrets for His people? And is
not this the’reward of them that fear Him? Does


not obedience pay? Is it not worth while to be
holy?


‘


What the Church May Learn 126


And yet all this is circumscribed by the limita-
tions of time and space. What of the reward
Jesus Com- When Jesus comes again? Are we not
ing Again looking for His coming? Did He not
say He would return and bring His reward with
Him (Matt. xvi, 27)? Is it not the same
Jesus who was taken up from us into heaven
who will return even as He went (Acts i, 11) ?
And when He comes, shall He not fashion anew
the body of our humiliation that it may be con-
formed to the body of His glory (Phil. iii, 21) ?
Shall we not see Him as He is, because we
shall be like Him? And does not John say, that
every one that hath this hope in Him purifieth
himself even as He is pure?

By the thought of God’s loving purpose toward
us; by the thought of His mighty power in us;
by our desire for a healthy body; by our desire
for a peaceful and joyful soul; by our fear of
just and righteous judgment; by our hope of the
coming of the Lord and our gathering unto Him
in resurrection and eternal glory, let us follow
after holiness. “Let us mortify (make dead) our
members that are upon the earth. Let us put off
anger, wrath, malice, railing, shameful speaking
out of our mouths. Let us put on, as the elect
of God, holy and beloved, a heart of compassion,
kindness, humility, meekness, long-suffering,
forbearing one another and forgiving each
other, if any man have a complaint against


Ld


126 The Antidote to Christian Science


any; even as Christ forgave you so also do


”


ye.


“Wives, be in subjection to your husbands
as is fitting in the Lord.

“Husbands, love your wives, and be not
bitter against them.

“Children, obey your parents in all things,
for this is well-pleasing in the Lord.

“Fathers, provoke not your children, that
they be not discouraged.

“Servants, obey in all things them that are
masters according to the flesh; not with eye-
service as men-pleasers; but in singleness of
heart, fearing the Lord.

“Masters, render unto your servants that
which is just and equal; knowing that ye also
have a Master in heaven” (Col. iii, 4-iv, 1,


R, V3):


Thus shall we put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men. Thus shall we no longer give the
enemy cause to blaspheme. Thus will the subtle-
ties of Christian Science no longer charm us.
Thus will error hang its head. Thus will God
be glorified. Thus shall we become the true wit-
nesses that shall deliver souls.

“And the God of peace, who brought again
from the dead the Great Shepherd of the sheep
with the blood of the Eternal Covenant, even our


What the Church May Learn 127


Lord Jesus, make you perfect in every good thing
to do His will, working in us that which is well-
pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ; to
whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen”
(Heb. xiii, 20, 21).


ions t
ae THEGLORY LIBRARY
Pe gee BY Nice ai eg aes alc

Ub ke ULSREMON ae i: LIE.


a


A a i rat a i hans hat
eet be, vt ey Cie
hy 4 ae


ll A wall 3


sib CN aca Me (James Martin), 1851
e

The antidote to Christian science
Or, How to deal with it from the Bi
and Christian point of view / by Ja
Me Graye — New York =: Fleming He
Revell Coe, ci9S07-

127 Pe 35 20 cme


le Christian Science——-Controversi
literaturee Ie Title


PuUdIwud )


08 SEP 97 9614629 CSIMxce 07-23


Hn


Af


SS
